Praise for

LIMITLESS
“Jim Kwik knows how to get the maximum out of me as a human being.”
— WILL SMITH
“While many authors claim to teach some amazing skill, no skill is as
powerful as learning how to learn. It is the superpower from which all
others grow. . . . I’ve seen with my own eyes what can be done with this
book’s triad of motivation, mindset, and method. Read on and apply what
you learn. You just might amaze yourself.”
— ERIC SCHURENBERG, CEO, Fast Company & Inc.
“My research on Alzheimer’s underlines the importance of not only
protecting your brain from injury but also of challenging yourself through
continued learning. Jim Kwik has lectured, with great feedback, at the
Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health to our staff,
caregivers, and patients; he is the expert on brain fitness and accelerated
learning.”
—JEFFREY L. CUMMINGS, M.D., SC.D.,

Founding Director, Cleveland
Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health; Director, Center for
Neurodegeneration and Translational Neuroscience; Professor and
Vice Chair for Research, Department of Brain Health, University of
Nevada–Las Vegas (UNLV)
“Where I empower women about money matters, Jim Kwik empowers
people to take learning into their own hands. Our mind is our greatest

wealth-building asset. When you read Limitless, you’ll not only get
smarter, you’ll accomplish things you never thought possible.”
— NICOLE LAPIN,

TV news anchor, money expert, and #1 New York
Times best-selling author of Rich Bitch, Boss Bitch and Becoming
Super Woman

“Warriors throughout time prepare and focus. They are unrelenting. Jim
Kwik helps you to conquer your brain and hold your ground against the
forces of distraction and negative thinking. His book Limitless is a mustread for an unstoppable mind.”
— GERARD BUTLER,

award-winning actor and producer

“While I was at GE, Jim Kwik coached our executive team and spoke at
many of our company meetings with high reviews. He is a world-class
expert at delivering the training and tools that high-impact teams need to
elevate their organization.”
— BETH COMSTOCK,

former Chief Marketing Officer and Vice Chair at
General Electric and best-selling author of Imagine It Forward

“I hang on every word out of Jim Kwik’s mouth. . . . He has such a
powerful ability to help people unlock abilities that they never even knew
they had.”
— TOM BILYEU,

CEO of Impact Theory and co-founder of Quest
Nutrition

“Limitless is the perfect companion to anyone who wishes to spark
meaningful change. In this book, Jim will show you how to unleash your
mind, your drive, and your life.”
— LISA NICHOLS,

speaker, CEO, and New York Times best-selling
author of No Matter What!

“When achieving breakthroughs, we must face skepticism and the deeply
held conventional thinking that’s been drilled into so many of us. Limitless

teaches you how to dispel the 7 lies of learning that are holding your true
genius back. . . . Your brain won’t be the same after this book!”
— NICK ORTNER,

New York Times best-selling author of The Tapping
Solution and The Tapping Solution for Manifesting Your Greatest Self
“In Limitless, Jim Kwik shares methods for unlocking your potential. He
guides you, step by step, to become the person you want to be with his
simple-to-start brain-enhancing and learning habits.”
— BJ FOGG,

PH.D., founder of the Behavior Design Lab at Stanford
University and New York Times best-selling author of Tiny Habits

“Jim Kwik is like a personal trainer for your brain. He had coached my
team on accelerated learning strategies to help them sharpen their focus,
productivity, and mental performance. I’ve always believed you win in
your mind first, then step onto the playing field, not the other way around.
Read this book, there are no limits.”
— ALEX RODRIGUEZ,

3-time MVP, 14-time All-Star, World Series
Champion, and CEO of A-Rod Corp

“Transformation begins with preparing your mind for change. By the end
of Limitless, you will believe in your untapped potential. New levels of
success are possible and achievable with Jim Kwik as your guide.”
— JACK CANFIELD,

award-winning speaker, co-creator of the Chicken
Soup for the Soul® series, and New York Times best-selling author of
The Success Principles

“Memory is crucial to happiness, as Jim Kwik so beautifully explained
during one of my most popular podcasts episodes ever. In his book
Limitless, he’’ll challenge you to do some crazy ish, but I swear you’ll
train your mind to conquer your days to live your best life. Best of all?
You’ll realize you are enough.”
— JEANNIE MAI,

Emmy & NAACP award-winning
entertainer/producer, co-host of The Real

“In the same way that I help students and adults overcome their fears
related to numbers and arithmetic, Jim Kwik helps people overcome their
limiting beliefs about learning. Limitless contains the practical and proven
speed-reading, studying, and memory methods we can all count on!”
— SCOTT FLANSBURG,

The Human Calculator®, Guinness World
Record holder, founder of the National Counting Bee, and best-selling
author of Math Magic
“If you think you can’t read faster, remember more, or get unstuck, this
book is for you. It will change your mindset, motivate you, and help you
achieve what you never thought possible.”
— DAVE ASPREY,

CEO, founder of Bulletproof 360, Inc., and New York
Times best-selling author of Super Human

“Sleep has a huge impact on brain health, and so does training your mind
for memory, learning continuously, and defeating negative thoughts.
Limitless gives you the toolkit for long-lasting cognitive health. The 10
recommendations Jim shares for generating limitless brain energy are
worth the price of the book alone.”
— MICHAEL J. BREUS, PH.D.,

Clinical Psychologist, a Diplomate of the
American Board of Sleep Medicine, a Fellow of The American
Academy of Sleep Medicine, and best-selling author of The Power of
When
“The goal of the USC Performance Science Institute is to help students,
entrepreneurs, and organizations compete and excel through applied,
science-based practices. Jim Kwik’s workshop at USC was among our
most valued and highest-rated. Jim’s accelerated learning strategies are
proven and powerful. Limitless is essential reading for anyone who wants
to challenge the limits of mental performance.”
— DAVID BELASCO,

co-founder of the USC Performance Science
Institute, Executive Director, Lloyd Greif Center for Entrepreneurial
Studies, and Adjunct Professor, Entrepreneurship

“When it comes to learning faster and keeping your mental game strong,
Jim Kwik is the guy. Get Limitless for a better brain. Save the brain!”
— STEVE AOKI,

two-time Grammy-nominated artist, musician, DJ,
music producer, entrepreneur, founder of the Aoki Foundation for
brain science and research and author of Blue
“Our organization empowers people to change the world. Engaging 4.5
million change-makers requires focus, discipline, and fast thinking. Jim
Kwik’s three-pronged Limitless model has helped our team upgrade their
minds to better solve challenging problems and create greater social
impact.”
— MARC KIELBURGER,

co-founder of the We Movement, humanitarian
and activist for children’s rights, columnist, and New York Times bestselling author of Me to We
“Exponential change requires a mental toolkit that amplifies creativity,
rapid learning, global thinking, and optimism. Limitless is essential
reading for anyone looking to expand the potential of their mind and
advance beyond what is believed possible.”
— PETER H. DIAMANDIS,

Chairman and founder of XPRIZE
Foundation, co-founder and Chairman of the Singularity University,
and New York Times best-selling author of Abundance
“Taking care of our brains is an integral part of health and well-being.
Limitless gives you the power to train and optimize your mind so you can
realize your full potential.”
— MAIA AND ALEX SHIBUTANI,

two-time Olympic medalist figure
skaters, three-time world medalists, two-time U.S. champions, and
authors of the Kudo Kids series
“Jim Kwik’s methods for learning, memory, and thinking are so
empowering. . . . Producing a record amount of content, globally, requires
incredible attention to detail. Thanks to Jim’s teachings, our hosts are

thinking better, recalling more, and prioritizing brain health for our
success as well as their own. This book is a must-read!”
— MARIA MENOUNOS,

host of the Better Together with Maria podcast,
CEO of @afterbuzztv, Emmy Award–winning journalist and New York
Times best-selling author of The EveryGirl’s Guide to Diet and
Fitness
“As somebody who puts lots of emphasis on exercising the brain and not
just the body, I found Jim Kwik’s work very empowering. Limitless will
take you to incredible places you never expected.”
— NOVAK DJOKOVIC,

professional tennis player, winner of 17 Grand
Slam singles titles

“My research on Alzheimer’s disease has taught me that we must
continually strive to invent new ways to use our brains . . . . Jim Kwik’s
Limitless is a revelation in learning how to learn. You’ll discover new
possibilities to challenge your mind and live your best life.”
— RUDOLPH E. TANZI, PH.D.,

Professor of Neurology at Harvard
University, director of Genetics and Aging Research Unit at
Massachusetts General Hospital, and New York Times best-selling
author of Super Brain
“Achieving your goals in life is as much a mental game as it is physical.
Do you want to grow your skills and improve your focus? Limitless is your
book. Jim Kwik is your coach.”
— APOLO ANTON OHNO,

eight-time Olympic medalist, speaker, and
New York Times best-selling author of Zero Regrets

“As a young girl, I dreamed of traveling to space. Dreaming big is
something I’m passionate about teaching others, especially today’s youth.
Jim shares that same vision that nothing can hold you back once you
realize your limitless potential. Limitless will not only make you smarter,
but help you dream bigger.”

— ANOUSHEH ANSARI,

CEO of XPRIZE Foundation, first female
private space explorer, and first space ambassador

“Jim Kwik is the world’s elite trainer when it comes to your brain. In
Limitless, he lights a path toward a transformation that strengthens your
mental game, makes you think faster, and leaves you smarter than when
you started.”
— TRACY ANDERSON, CEO,

fitness pioneer, and author of Tracy
Anderson’s 30-Day Method

“When my son suffered a life-threatening traumatic brain injury, I learned
that mindset is everything. In Limitless, Jim Kwik shares the mindset and
methods that are essential to thriving in a world of change. Even when the
odds seem stacked against you, this book will show you anything is
possible.”
— JJ VIRGIN,

celebrity nutrition and fitness expert and New York Times
best-selling author of The Virgin Diet

“When you connect to your true self, something magical happens. I help
people express themselves through movement and dance. Jim Kwik’s
Limitless taps into that same reservoir of belief that anything is possible.”
— JULIANNE HOUGH,

Emmy award-winning dancer, actress, singer,
and creator of KINRGY

“In competition and in life, the finest performers stay patient, consistent,
and relentless. Jim Kwik’s Limitless will help you reach a whole new
mindset—one that helps you achieve your dreams.”
— DEREK HOUGH,

two-time Emmy award winner, six-time Dancing
with the Stars champion, and New York Times best-selling author of
Taking the Lead
“Jim Kwik is an expert in achieving mental stamina and clarity of focus.
Limitless will give you sustainable results in whatever you pursue.”

— MIKE BRYAN,

professional tennis player, all-time doubles team
record holder

“We know full well the importance of food as fuel for a healthy brain.
What you do to sharpen your cognitive abilities matters too. In Limitless,
Jim Kwik teaches you the mindset and metalearning strategies that help
you reach genius levels.”
— MAX LUGAVERE,

host of the Genius Life podcast and New York
Times best-selling author of Genius Foods

“I’ve worked with on-screen superheroes throughout my career, and Jim’s
ability to level up your learning and life is one of the world’s great
superpowers. . . . Limitless is for any person or organization looking to
unlock exceptional mental productivity and performance.”
— JIM GIANOPULOS,

Chairman and CEO of Paramount Pictures

“There’s a whole science behind brain fitness, memory enhancement, and
mental acuity, and Jim Kwik is the ultimate guide. This book is a mustread for anyone who wants to maximize their cognitive potential and
learning abilities.”
— LISA MOSCONI, PH.D.,

director of the Women’s Brain Initiative and
associate director of the Alzheimer’s Prevention Clinic at Weill
Cornell Medical College, associate professor of neuroscience in
neurology and radiology, and author of The XX Brain

“There’s no genius pill, but Jim gives you the process for unlocking your
best brain and brightest future.”
— From the foreword by MARK HYMAN, M.D., Head of Strategy and
Innovation for the Cleveland Clinic Center for Functional Medicine
and 12-time New York Times best-selling author
“Jim Kwik is just amazing. In my book Use Your Brain to Change Your
Age, I wrote a whole chapter about him because one of the strategies to
reverse brain aging and prevent Alzheimer’s disease is to work on your

brain. And there is no one that I trust more than Jim Kwik and his
programs to optimize brain functioning.”
— DR. DANIEL AMEN,

physician, double board-certified psychiatrist,
and 10-time New York Times best-selling author

“I’m keenly aware of how important it is to keep your mind and memory
sharp. Jim Kwik’s tools and techniques in Limitless are your brain’s best
friends.”
— MARIA SHRIVER,

Emmy award–winning journalist, founder of the
Women’s Alzheimer’s Movement, and New York Times best-selling
author of I’ve Been Thinking

“As a person who has quested for knowledge his entire life, I fully
embrace what Jim Kwik has to teach in Limitless. When you learn how to
learn, anything is possible, and Jim is the best in the world at showing you
how.”
— QUINCY JONES,

music producer, recipient of Grammy Living
Legend Award, and New York Times best-selling author of Q

“I want to thank my friend Jim Kwik for all his support of the Stan Lee
Foundation’s commitment to literacy and education. I believe there is a
superhero in each of us, and at Kwik Learning you will discover how to
unleash your superhero powers.”
— STAN LEE,

Marvel Chairman Emeritus

“Jim Kwik is by far the world’s best Memory Trainer. Our program with
Jim on Mindvalley became the number one program of the year, and in a
study of almost 1,000 students, the average increase in reading speed was
an astonishing 170% in just 7 days of 10-minute-a-day lessons.”
— VISHEN LAKHIANI,

founder and CEO of Mindvalley and New York
Times best-selling author of The Code of the Extraordinary Mind

“Jim Kwik has the ability to expand your mind and shine a light on your
inner genius. Like my song ‘Unwritten’ says—your life is your story.

Limitless will help you write yours with new possibilities.”
— NATASHA BEDINGFIELD,

Grammy Award–nominated singer and
songwriter

Copyright © 2020 by Jim Kwik
Published in
Published in
Published in
Published in

the United States by: Hay House, Inc.: www.hayhouse.com®
Australia by: Hay House Australia Pty. Ltd.: www.hayhouse.com.au
the United Kingdom by: Hay House UK, Ltd.: www.hayhouse.co.uk
India by: Hay House Publishers India: www.hayhouse.co.in

Cover design by: Rodrigo Corral
Interior design by: Claudine Mansour Design
Photograph on page 39: Used under license from Shutterstock.com
Photograph on page 43: liliegraphie © 123RF.com
Diagrams: Jose Alonso
Other illustrations courtesy of the author
Author photo credit: Nick Onken
Indexer: J S Editorial, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or
electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a retrieval
system, transmitted, or otherwise be copied for public or private use—other than for “fair use” as
brief quotations embodied in articles and reviews—without prior written permission of the
publisher.
The author of this book does not dispense medical advice or prescribe the use of any technique
as a form of treatment for physical, emotional, or medical problems without the advice of a
physician, either directly or indirectly. The intent of the author is only to offer information of a
general nature to help you in your quest for emotional, physical, and spiritual well-being. In the
event you use any of the information in this book for yourself, the author and the publisher
assume no responsibility for your actions.
Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file at the Library of Congress
Hardcover ISBN: 978-1-4019-5823-7
e-book ISBN: 978-1-4019-5824-4
Audiobook ISBN: 978-1-4019-5825-1

For my readers and students
and the limitless heroes inside you.
Thank you for your time and trust.
This one’s for you.

CONTENTS
Foreword
Introduction
Part I FREE YOUR MIND
Chapter 1: Becoming Limitless
Chapter 2: Why This Matters Now
Chapter 3: Your Limitless Brain
Chapter 4: How to Read and Remember This (and Any) Book
Part II LIMITLESS MINDSET: The What
Chapter 5: The Spell of Belief Systems
Chapter 6: The 7 Lies of Learning
Part III LIMITLESS MOTIVATION: The Why
Chapter 7: Purpose
Chapter 8: Energy
Chapter 9: Small Simple Steps
Chapter 10: Flow
Part IV LIMITLESS METHODS: The How
Chapter 11: Focus
Chapter 12: Study

Chapter 13: Memory
Chapter 14: Speed Reading
Chapter 15: Thinking
Afterword
10-Day Kwik Start Plan
Suggested Reading
Acknowledgments
About the Author
Endnotes
Index
eBook Supplemental Material

FOREWORD
Our most precious gift is our brain.
It is what allows us to learn, love, think, create, and even to experience
joy. It is the gateway to our emotions, to our capacity for deeply
experiencing life, to our ability to have lasting intimacy. It allows us to
innovate, grow, and accomplish.
Yet few of us realize that, by applying a handful of practical methods,
we can enhance our brain and supercharge our ability to learn. Most of us
know that we can improve our cardiovascular health through exercise and
diet, but most of us do not realize that we can also greatly improve our
brains, and in doing so, our life.
Unfortunately, our world doesn’t foster a healthy environment for our
brain. Before Jim Kwik provides a road map to become limitless, he
indicts the four growing villains that are challenging our capacity to think,
focus, learn, grow, and be fully human.
The first is digital deluge—the unending flood of information in a
world of finite time and unfair expectations that leads to overwhelm,
anxiety, and sleeplessness. Drowning in data and rapid change, we long for
strategies and tools to regain some semblance of productivity,
performance, and peace of mind.
The second villain is digital distraction. The fleeting ping of digital
dopamine pleasure replaces our ability to sustain the attention necessary
for deep relationship, deep learning, or deep work. I recently sat next to a
friend at a lecture and noticed her picking up her phone multiple times
within a few minutes. I asked for her phone and pulled up the screen time
app. She had picked up her phone more than one thousand times and had
one thousand notifications in one day. Texts, social media notifications, emails, and news alerts, while important in context, can derail our

concentration and train us to be distracted from what matters most in the
moment.
The next villain is digital dementia. Memory is a muscle that we have
allowed to atrophy. While there are benefits to having a supercomputer in
your pocket, think of it like an electric bicycle. It’s fun and easy but
doesn’t get you in shape. Research on dementia proves that the greater our
capacity to learn—the more mental “brainercise” we perform—the lower
our risk of dementia. In many cases, we have outsourced our memory to
our detriment.
The last brain-damaging villain is digital deduction. In a world where
information is abundantly accessible, we’ve perhaps gone too far in how
we use that information, even getting to the point where we are letting
technology do much of our critical thinking and reasoning for us. Online,
there are so many conclusions being drawn by others that we have begun
to surrender our own ability to draw conclusions. We would never let
another person do our thinking for us, but we’ve gotten far too
comfortable with letting devices have that very power.
The cumulative effects of these four digital villains robs us of our focus,
attention, learning, and, most importantly, our ability to truly think. It robs
us of our mental clarity and results in brain fatigue, distraction, inability
to easily learn, and unhappiness. While the technological advances of our
time have the potential to both help and harm, the way we use them in our
society can lead to an epidemic of overload, memory loss, distraction, and
dependency. And it’s only going to get worse.
The message of this book couldn’t be more timely. You were born with
the ultimate technology, and there is nothing more important than the
health and fitness of our brain—it controls everything in life. Learning
how to filter all the data, to develop new methods and skills for thriving in
a distracted world drowning in a flood of information, is what is needed to
thrive in the 21st century. Learning and the ability to learn faster and more
easily makes everything else in life possible, which means that it’s never
been a better time to train your brain the way you do your body. Just like
you want a healthy body, you want a flexible, strong, energized, and fit
brain. That’s what Jim does for a living—he is the personal trainer for the
mind.
The four supervillains are just an example of the limits you’ll learn how
to overcome in this book. The key to living an exceptional life, as Jim

states, is a process of unlimiting ourselves. And he has cracked the code
for personal transformation with his Limitless Model. If you are
struggling to reach a goal in any area, you must first ask: Where is the
limit? Most likely, you’re experiencing a limit in your mindset,
motivation, or methods—which means that it’s not a personal shortcoming
or failure pointing to any perceived lack of ability. And contrary to what
we tend to believe, our barriers are not set. We’re in full control and can
overcome them at any time.
If our mindset is not aligned with our desires or goals, we will never
achieve them. It’s critical to identify your limiting beliefs, stories, and
deeply held beliefs, attitudes, and assumptions about yourself and what’s
possible. Examining, excavating, and expunging those beliefs is the first
step to having a limitless mindset. I was told I could do anything by my
mother, that I was smart, capable, and could be the best at anything I tried.
That deeply held belief allowed me to succeed beyond my wildest dreams.
But I also had the belief that relationships were hard and filled with pain
and drama from witnessing my parents’ divorce and marriages. It took me
nearly 50 years to erase that belief and find real happiness in my marriage.
The second secret to a limitless life is your motivation. Jim outlines
three key elements to motivation. First, your purpose. The reason why
matters. I want to age well and am committed to lifting weights and
getting stronger even though it is not my favorite thing to do. The purpose
supersedes the discomfort.
The second key is the ability to do what you want. This requires energy,
and energy requires something called energy management. The science of
human performance is critical to achieving your purpose—eating whole
unprocessed food, exercise, stress management, quality sleep, and skills at
communication and building healthy relationships (and eliminating toxic
ones). And lastly the tasks must be bite-size, small steps that lead to
success. Floss one tooth, read one page of a book, do one push-up,
meditate for one minute, all of which will lead to confidence, and
ultimately bigger successes.
The last key to being limitless is using the right method. We have been
taught 19th- and 20th-century tools for functioning in the 21st century.
Limitless teaches us the five key methods to achieve whatever we want:
Focus, Study, Memory Enhancement, Speed Reading, and Critical
Thinking. Using these upgraded learning technologies allows us to harness

our mindset and motivation to more easily and effectively reach our
dreams.
Jim is no stranger to limits. After a head injury as a child impaired his
focus, concentration, and ability to learn, an insensitive teacher pointed to
him and said, “There’s the boy with a broken brain.” Jim has spent his life
learning how to overcome and heal from this injury and turn his
challenges into a superpower of learning. We all suffer to some degree or
another from broken brains. Limitless is the prescription for healing our
brains, reframing limiting beliefs, and upgrading our life. Learning how to
learn is the ultimate superpower, the one that makes every other skill and
ability possible, and teaching this to you is this book’s goal.
In Limitless, Jim Kwik provides a road map for doing exactly this. Most
of us are not raised with the tools we need, but Jim is generously sharing
everything he’s learned in this book. Jim has spent three decades working
in the trenches with people from all walks of life—students, teachers,
celebrities, construction workers, politicians, entrepreneurs, scientists. He
has worked with some of the most advanced educational systems around
the world, training educators, superintendents, and students in his
methods. His teachings truly work and can benefit us all.
There is no pill for genius, but there is a process to get there, and you’ll
find it within these pages. Limitless is a blueprint for upgrading your
brain, for not only learning how to learn faster, better, and more
effectively, but also for healing your physical brain through nutrition,
supplements, exercise, meditation, sleep, and more to increase the creation
of new brain cells and the connections between them.
Jim delivers three books in one. If your current mindset, motivation,
and methods are limiting your ability to achieve your dreams, then
Limitless is the owner’s manual to a better, brighter, brilliant brain and
future. Your learning and life will never be the same.
—MARK HYMAN, M.D.
Head of Strategy and Innovation
Cleveland Clinic Center for Functional Medicine
Author of 12 New York Times best-selling books
December 2019

INTRODUCTION
What is your one wish? Seriously, if a genie offered to grant you one wish,
but only one, what would you ask for?
Limitless wishes, of course!
Now, imagine that I’m your learning genie and I can grant you one
learning wish—any one subject or skill. What one thing would you want to
learn? What subject or skill would be the equivalent of asking for infinite
wishes?
To learn how to learn, right?
If you really knew how to learn smarter, faster, and better, then you
could apply that to everything. You could learn to master your mindset or
your motivation, or use the methods to pick up Mandarin, marketing,
music, martial arts, mathematics—there would be no limit! You’d be a
mental superhero! Anything would be possible, because you would be
limitless!
My mission with this book is to grant you this wish in the pages that
follow. Let’s start by saying how much I respect and admire you. By
investing in this book and now reading it, you are far ahead of most of the
population who simply accept their present conditions and constraints.
You are part of a small group of individuals who not only want more for
their lives but also are willing to do what it takes to get results. In other
words, you are the hero of this story; you’ve answered the call to
adventure. I believe the ultimate adventure we are all on is to reveal and
realize our fullest potential and inspire others to do the same.
I have no way of knowing how your life’s journey has taken you to this
book. I’m guessing that at least part of that journey is accepting the
confines put upon you, either by others or by yourself: You can’t read fast
enough to keep up with everything you need to know. Your mind is not

agile enough to succeed at work. You’re not motivated to get things done
or you lack the energy to reach your goals. And so on.
The nature of this of the book is transcending—ending the trance: the
mass hypnosis and lies that we learned from our parents, programing,
media, or marketing, that suggests we are limited. That, somehow, we are
not enough, not capable of being, doing, having, creating, or contributing.
Belief that you are limited might be holding you back from your biggest
dreams as well—at least up until now. But I promise you that none of your
beliefs truly constrain who you are. We all have vast potential inside of us,
untapped levels of strength, intelligence, and focus, and the key to
activating these superpowers is unlimiting yourself. For more than 25
years, I’ve worked with people of all ages, nationalities, races,
socioeconomic statuses, and education levels. What I’ve discovered is that
no matter where you come from, no matter what challenges you face, you
have incredible potential that’s just waiting to be tapped. Every person—
regardless of age, background, education, gender, or personal history—can
advance beyond what they believe they deserve and is possible. And that
includes you. Working together, you’ll come to think of your own
limitations as an outmoded concept.
Now in this book, I refer to superheroes and superpowers. Why is that?
First, I am a bit of a geek that way. Because of my childhood brain injury
and learning challenges, I escaped into comic books and movies to inspire
me during my struggles. I realized that my favorite ones all shared the
same pattern—the Hero’s Journey. Joseph Campbell’s classic plot structure
appears in nearly all famed adventures, including The Wizard of Oz; Star
Wars; Harry Potter; Eat, Pray, Love; The Hunger Games; Rocky; The Lord
of the Rings; Alice in Wonderland; The Matrix, and more.
Think of your favorite story or one of the films or books I just
mentioned. Does this sound familiar? The hero (for example, Harry Potter)
starts out in the ordinary world, the world they’ve always known. The hero
then hears the call to adventure. They have a choice—to ignore and stay in
the ordinary world, where nothing will change, or heed the call and enter
the new world of the unknown. If they heed the call (as Neo did with the
red pill in The Matrix), they meet their guide or mentor (such as Mr.
Miyagi in The Karate Kid), who trains and prepares them to overcome
obstacles and realize new levels of fulfillment. The hero is introduced to
new powers and skills, and encouraged to utilize their current abilities like

never before. They transcend perceived limitations, learn a new way of
being, and eventually face their trials. When they return back to the
ordinary world (like Dorothy going back to Kansas), they take with them
the ultimate boon—the treasure, emotions, strength, clarity, and wisdom
they discovered from their adventure. They then share their lessons and
gifts with others.
The Hero’s Journey is the perfect structure to lend power and purpose to
your personal story. In Limitless, you are the superhero.
One of my core beliefs is that human potential is one of the only infinite
resources we have in the world. Most everything else is finite, but the
human mind is the ultimate superpower—there is no limit to our
creativity, imagination, determination, or ability to think, reason, or learn.
Yet this resource is also among the least tapped. All of us can be the
heroes of our own story, dipping into the well of our potential every single
day and never having that well run dry. But so few of us approach our lives
this way. That’s why I wrote this book—to help you realize that no matter
where you are, or where you’ve been, you absolutely can free yourself and
go from limits to liberation. That might be the only “extra” you need to
transition from the ordinary world to the extraordinary world.
This book is going to provide you with that extra. What you’ll get
within these pages is a series of tools that will help you cast off your
perceived restrictions. You’re going to learn how to unlimit your brain.
You’re going to learn how to unlimit your drive. You’re going to learn how
to unlimit your memory, your focus, and your habits. If I am your mentor
in your hero’s journey, then this book is your map to master your mind,
motivation, and methods to learn how to learn. And once you’ve done that,
you will be limitless.
Here’s the door; you know what’s waiting on the other side. Walk
through it.

PART I

FREE YOUR MIND

1

BECOMING LIMITLESS
“I’m so stupid.”
“I don’t understand.”
“I’m too dumb to learn.”
These were my mantras growing up. There wasn’t a day that went by
that I didn’t tell myself that I was slow, dumb, and that I would never learn
to read, much less amount to anything later in life. If a pill existed that
could supercharge my brain and make me smarter in one swallow (as there
was in the 2011 movie Limitless, starring Bradley Cooper), I would have
given anything to take it.
I wasn’t the only one who felt the way I did about myself. If you’d
asked my teachers when I was a kid, many would have said that I was the
last person they’d expect to be writing this book for you. Back then, they
would have been surprised to know that I was reading a book, let alone
writing one.
This all stems from an incident in kindergarten that completely altered
the course of my life. I was in class one day, and there were sirens outside
the window. Everyone in the classroom took notice, and the teacher looked
out and said she saw fire trucks. The entire class responded to this
information the way kindergarteners do: We immediately rushed to the
windows. I was particularly excited because, by that point, I was already
obsessed with superheroes (I still am). To me, firefighters were the closest
thing to real-life superheroes I knew. I bolted to the window with everyone
else.
The only problem was that I wasn’t tall enough to be able to look down
at the fire trucks. One kid went to grab his chair to stand on, and that

inspired the rest of us to do the same. I ran back to my desk to get mine,
pushing it right up against the huge iron radiator that ran along the bottom
of the windows. I got up on my chair, saw the firefighters, and completely
lit up. This was so exciting! My eyes stared and mouth gasped as I
watched these courageous heroes in action with their seemingly
impenetrable uniforms and their bright red vehicle.
But then one of the other kids grabbed my chair from beneath me, which
caused me to lose balance and go flying head-first into the radiator. I hit
the metal heater extremely hard and I started losing blood. The school
rushed me to the hospital, where doctors tended to my wounds. But they
were candid with my mother afterward; the injury to my brain was not
mild.
My mother said I was never quite the same after that. Where I had been
an energized, confident, and curious child before, now I was noticeably
shut down and had a new difficulty learning; I found it extremely hard to
focus, I couldn’t concentrate, and my memory was awful. As you can
imagine, school became an ordeal for me. Teachers would repeat
themselves until I learned to pretend to understand. And while all the other
kids were learning to read, I couldn’t make any sense out of the letters. Do
you remember getting in those reading circles, passing around the book,
and having to read out loud? For me, that was the worst—nervously
waiting as the book crept closer and closer, only to look at the page and
not understand one word (I think that’s where my crippling fear of public
speaking initially came from). It would take me another three years to be
able to read, and it continued to be a struggle and an uphill battle for a
long time after that.
I’m not sure I ever would have learned to read if it weren’t for the
heroes I met and saw in comic books. Regular books couldn’t hold my
attention at all, but my fascination with comics drove me to keep pushing
myself until I could read their stories without waiting for someone else to
read them to me. I would read them by flashlight under my covers late at
night. Those stories gave me hope that one person could overcome
impossible odds.
My favorite superheroes growing up were the X-Men, not because they
were the strongest, but because they were misunderstood and weirdly
different. I felt I could relate to them. They were mutants, they didn’t fit
into society, and people who didn’t understand them shunned them. That

was me, minus the superpowers. The X-Men were outcasts, and so was I. I
belonged in their world.
I grew up in Westchester County, a suburb of New York City, and I was
super-excited one night to discover that, according to the comic books,
Professor Xavier’s School for Gifted Youngsters was located near me.
When I was nine years old, I would get on my bike nearly every weekend
to ride around my neighborhood looking for the school. I was obsessed. I
thought, if only I could locate it, I would find in that school a place where
I finally fit in, a place where it was safe to be different, a place where I
could discover and develop my own superpowers.

THE BOY WITH THE BROKEN BRAIN
In the real world, life was not very kind. It was around this time that my
grandmother, who lived with us and helped raise me, started showing
advanced signs of dementia. Watching someone you love lose their mind
and memory is hard to describe. It was like losing her over and over until

she passed. She was my world and, combined with my learning challenges,
she is why I am so passionate about brain health and fitness.
Back in school, I was bullied and made fun of, and not just on the
playground but in the classroom, too. I remember one day in elementary
school a teacher, frustrated because I wasn’t getting the lesson, pointed at
me and said, “That’s the boy with the broken brain.” I was just crushed to
realize that this was how she saw me—and that others probably saw me
the same way.

Often when you put a label on someone or something, you create a limit
—the label becomes the limitation. Adults have to be very careful with
their external words because these quickly become a child’s internal
words. That’s what happened with me in that moment. Whenever I
struggled to learn, did badly on a quiz, wasn’t picked for a team in gym
class, or fell behind my other classmates, I would tell myself it was
because my brain was broken. How could I possibly expect to do as well as
others did? I was damaged. My mind didn’t work like everyone else’s.
Even when I studied much harder than my schoolmates, my grades never
reflected the effort I was putting in.

I was too stubborn to give up and managed to move on from grade to
grade, but I was hardly thriving. While I was advanced in math because of
the help of a few of my academically talented friends, I was horrible at
most of the other subjects, especially classes such as English, reading,
foreign languages, and music. Then, in my freshman year of high school,
things got to the point where I was at risk of failing English. My parents
were called in by my teacher to discuss what I could do to muster a
passing grade.
She offered an extra-credit project for me. I was to write a report
comparing the lives and accomplishments of two geniuses: Leonardo da
Vinci and Albert Einstein. She told me that if I did a good job on this
report, she would be able to give me enough points to make sure I passed
the class.
I considered this to be a huge opportunity, a chance to hit the reset
button on what had been a difficult start to my high school career. I
committed everything I had to writing the best report I possibly could. I
spent hours and hours and hours at the library after school, trying to learn
everything I could learn about these two brilliant minds while working on
this paper. Interestingly, during that research I came across multiple
mentions that Albert Einstein and Leonardo da Vinci each struggled with
alleged learning difficulties.
After weeks of effort, I typed up the final report. I was so proud of what
I’d done that I had the pages professionally bound. This report was a
statement for me; it was the way I was going to announce to the world
what I was capable of doing.
The day the report was due, I put it in my backpack, excited about
handing it to my teacher and even more excited about the response I
anticipated she would have to what I’d done. I planned to give it to her at
the end of class, so I sat through whatever we were doing that day, trying
to concentrate but constantly finding my thoughts flitting back to the look
I expected to see on my teacher’s face when I presented her with the
report.
But then she threw me a curveball I was not prepared to hit. About
halfway through the class period, the teacher ended her lesson and told the
students that she had a surprise for them. She said that I had been working
on an extra-credit report and that she would like me to present it to the
class—now.

I had spent most of my school life trying to shrink so small that I
wouldn’t be called on in class; when you are the broken one, you don’t feel
like you have much to offer. I was beyond shy, and I didn’t like to draw
attention to myself. My superpower back then was being invisible. I was
also deathly afraid of speaking in public. I’m not exaggerating here. If you
hooked me up to a heart monitor at that moment, I might have broken the
machine. On top of this, I could barely breathe. There was simply no way I
was going to be able to stand in front of everyone and talk to them about
the work I’d done. So, I took the only option I saw available to me.
“I’m sorry; I didn’t do it,” I stuttered, just barely getting the words out
of my mouth.
The expression of disappointment on my teacher’s face—so different
from the expression I’d fantasized earlier—was so profound that my heart
nearly broke. But I just couldn’t do what she wanted me to do. When class
was over, after everyone had left, I threw my report in the garbage, and
along with it a big part of my self-respect and worth.

YOU ARE CLOSER THAN YOU THINK
Somehow, in spite of all the troubles I had in school, I managed to get into
a local university. I thought being a freshman in college meant a last
opportunity to make a fresh start. I dreamt about making my family proud,
and to showing the world (and, more importantly, myself) that I did have
the potential to succeed. I was in a new environment. College professors
taught differently than high school teachers did, and no one at this college
had any preconceived notions about me. I worked my butt off, but I
actually wound up doing even worse in my college classes than high
school.
A few months into this, I started to face my reality. I couldn’t see the
point of wasting time and money that I did not have. I was ready to quit
school altogether. I told a friend about my plans and he suggested that,
before I made a decision, I go with him to visit his family for the weekend.
He thought that getting me away from the campus might give me some
perspective. When we arrived, his father showed me around their property
before dinner. Along the way, he asked how school was going for me. It
was the worst question anyone could ask me at the time, and I’m sure my

response stunned him. I erupted into tears. Not holding-back-the-tears
crying, but straight up bawling. I could see he was taken aback by this, but
his innocent question had broken the dam holding back so many pent-up
emotions.
I told him the whole “boy with the broken brain” story while he listened
patiently. When I was finished, he looked me directly in the eyes.
“Jim, why are you in school?” he said. “What do you want to be? What
do you want to do? What do you want to have? What do you want to
share?”
I didn’t have immediate answers to any of these questions because no
one had ever asked me them before, but I felt as though I needed to answer
them now. I started to speak, and he stopped me. He tore a couple of pieces
of paper from his pocket diary and told me to write down my answers. (In
this book, I’ll show you how to ask questions to learn and achieve
anything faster.)
I spent the next several minutes writing a bucket list. When I was
finished, I began folding up the papers and preparing to put them in my
pocket. But as I was doing so, my friend’s father grabbed the pages out of
my hand. I freaked out, because I didn’t think what I’d written was going
to be read by anyone else, especially this complete stranger. But he opened
the pages and read while I stewed in my discomfort.
It seemed as though he took hours to read what I’d written, though I’m
sure it was only a minute or two. When he finished, he said, “You’re this
close,” holding the index fingers on his right and left hands about a foot
apart, “to getting every single thing on that list.”
That statement seemed absurd to me. I told him I couldn’t crack this list
if I had 10 lifetimes. But then he took his fingers and, without expanding
the distance between them, placed one on each side of my head. The space
he was describing was my brain.
“That’s the key,” he said. “Come with me; I have something to show
you.”
We walked back to the house where he took me to a room that I’d never
seen before. It was filled wall-to-wall, floor-to-ceiling with books. Now
remember, at that point in my life, I was not a fan of books; it was like
being in a room full of snakes. But what made it even worse was that he
started grabbing snakes from his shelves and handing them to me. I looked

at the titles and realized these were biographies of incredible men and
women throughout history, as well as some early personal-growth books
such as The Magic of Thinking Big, The Power of Positive Thinking, and
Think and Grow Rich.
“Jim, I want you to read one of these books a week.”
My first thought was, Have you not been listening to anything I’ve been
saying? I didn’t ask this out loud, but I did respond: “I don’t know how I
could do that. You know, reading doesn’t come easily to me, and I have so
much schoolwork to do.”
He held up a finger, saying, “Don’t let school interfere with your
education.” I later learned he was paraphrasing a quote often attributed to
Mark Twain.
“Look,” I said. “I understand how reading these books would be really
helpful, but I don’t want to make any promises I can’t keep.”
He paused and then reached into his pocket, pulled out my bucket list,
and started reading each one out loud.
There was something about hearing my dreams in another person’s
voice that messed with my mind and my soul something fierce. Truth be
told, many of the things on the list were things I wanted to do for my
family—things my parents could never afford or would never have done
for themselves even if they could afford them. Hearing this read out loud
moved me in ways I didn’t think possible. It deeply tapped me into my
drive and purpose. (We will unleash your motivation together in Part 3.)
When he was finished, I told him I would do exactly what he suggested,
though secretly I had no idea how I was going to accomplish that feat.

ASKING THE RIGHT QUESTION
I went back to school after the weekend, armed with the books he’d given
me. On my desk were now two piles: one that I had to read for school, and
one that I promised to read. The scale of what I’d agreed to registered with
me. How was I going to make a dent in these piles when reading was such
a labor for me? I was already struggling to get through the first pile—what
was I going to do? Where would I get the time? So I didn’t eat, I didn’t
sleep, I didn’t exercise, I didn’t watch television or spend time with
friends. Instead, I practically lived at the library, until one night when I

passed out from sheer exhaustion and fell down a flight of stairs,
sustaining yet another head injury.
It wasn’t until two days later that I woke up in the hospital. I thought I
had died, and maybe a part of me wished that I had. It was truly a dark and
low point in life. I was wasting away, my weight was down to 117 pounds,
and I was so dehydrated that I was hooked up to IV bags.

As miserable as I was, I said to myself, “There has to be a better way.”
At that moment, a nurse came into my room, carrying a mug of tea with a
picture of Einstein on it, the very same subject of the book report that
inspired me to dig deep and study back in grade school. The quote next to
his image said, “No problem can be solved from the same level of
consciousness that created it.”

That’s when it dawned on me: Maybe I was asking the wrong question. I
started to wonder, what was my real problem? I knew I was a slow learner,
but I had been thinking the same way about it for years. I realized that I
was trying to solve my learning problems by thinking the way I’d been
taught to think—to just work harder. But what if I could teach myself a
better method to learn? What if I could learn in a way that was more
efficient, effective, and even enjoyable? What if I could learn how to learn
faster?
I committed in that very moment to finding that way, and with that
commitment, my mindset began to shift.
I asked the nurse for a course bulletin and flipped through it, page by
page. After a couple hundred pages, I could find nothing but classes on
what to learn—Spanish, history, math, science—but there were no classes
teaching students how to learn.

LEARNING HOW TO LEARN
When I got out of the hospital, I was so intrigued by the idea of learning
how to learn that I set my studies aside and focused only on the books that
my mentor gave me, as well as books I found on adult learning theory,
multiple intelligence theory, neuroscience, personal growth, educational
psychology, speed reading, and even ancient mnemonics (I wanted to know
what older cultures did to pass on knowledge before they had external
storage devices like the printing press and computers). I was obsessed to
solve this riddle: How does my brain work, so I can work my brain?
About a couple months of deep immersion into my new self-directed
studies, a light switch flipped on. My ability to focus was stronger. I
started to understand new concepts because I was able to concentrate—I
was no longer easily distracted. I could better recall information that I had
studied weeks before with little difficulty. I had a new level of energy and
curiosity. For the first time in my life, I could read and comprehend
information in a fraction of the time that it used to take. My newfound
competence gave me a sense of confidence that I’d never felt before. My
daily life changed too—I was clear, I knew what to do to move myself
forward, and I unlocked an empowering and sustainable sense of

motivation. With these results, my mindset changed and I started to
believe that anything was possible.
But I was also upset. It seemed to me all of my years of self-doubt and
suffering could have been avoided if this critical method of meta learning
(learning how to learn) had been taught in school. I remember teachers
telling me constantly to study and concentrate harder. Telling a child to do
things like “concentrate” is like telling them to play the ukulele; it’s very
difficult to do without ever being taught how.
And, following the hero’s journey, I couldn’t help but share the treasure
and lessons I learned. I started tutoring these methods to other students.
The turning point came when I worked with a freshman who wanted to
learn how to read faster, boost comprehension, and retain the information
she was studying. She worked diligently and achieved her goal of reading
30 books in 30 days. I knew how she did it—I taught her the method you’ll
learn in Chapter 14—but I wanted to know why. I discovered that her
motivation was that her mother had been diagnosed with a terminal
cancer, and she was determined to save her by studying books on health,
wellness, and medicine. Months later, she called me, crying tears of joy, to
tell me that her mother’s cancer was in remission.
It was in that moment that I realized that if knowledge is power, then
learning is our superpower. And our capacity to learn is limitless; we
simply need to be shown how to access it. Seeing the way this woman’s
life was changed ignited in me a purpose, allowing me to recognize what
became my life’s mission: to teach the mindset, motivation, and methods
to upgrade your brain and learn anything faster so you can unlock your
exceptional life.
Over the course of more than two decades, I’ve developed a reliable and
proven set of practical methods to enhance learning, many of which appear
in this book. I have not only kept my promise to read a book a week, but
continue to serve and support everyone from children labeled “learning
disabled,” to seniors with brain-aging challenges. Our team, dedicated to
the memory of my grandmother, passionately supports Alzheimer’s
research. And we believe education is every child’s birthright, funding the
creation of schools around the world from Guatemala to Kenya, providing
health care, clean water, and learning for children in need via amazing
organizations such as WE Charity and Pencils of Promise. That’s our
mission—to build better brighter brains. We’re leaving no brain behind.

I’ve taught these techniques to others with astonishing results, leading
me to address more than 150,000 people in live audiences each year in
every field imaginable, to serve as the brain coach to top personalities in
sports and entertainment, to train at many of the world’s leading
companies and universities, to head a large accelerated learning online
platform with students from 195 countries, and to host a top educational
podcast called Kwik Brain, with tens of millions of downloads and to have
my teachings receive hundreds of millions of video views. This book is
filled with lessons and practical advice I’ve learned over the years, along
with wisdom and resources from many of the guest experts who have been
featured on our show.
I say all of this because, having dedicated my life to researching and
teaching this subject, I know what’s inside this book and, more
importantly, I know what’s inside you.

FINDING PROFESSOR X’S SCHOOL
There’s a serendipitous coda to this story. As I mentioned, I regularly offer
brain coaching to CEOs and their teams. A few years ago, Jim Gianopulos,
then CEO and Chairman of 20th Century Fox, invited me to do a coaching
session with his executive team. I went onto the film lot on a Friday
morning and spent several hours with top staff members. They were
particularly open to my message, and they instantly connected with the
techniques.
When the session was over, Jim came up to me and said, “That was
incredible. It was one of the very best training sessions we’ve ever held.” I
was delighted to hear this, of course. Who doesn’t love positive feedback?
Later, during a tour of the lot, my eye landed on a poster for the Wolverine
movie, which was scheduled to come out later that year. I pointed to the
poster and said, “I can’t wait to see that film. I’m a huge fan.”
“Oh, you like superheroes?” Jim said.
“Love ’em. The X-Men have played a major role in my life.” I went on
to tell him about my childhood brain injury, how comic books helped me
learn to read, and my search for Professor X’s school.
He smiled at me. “You know, we have another 30 days of shooting on
the next X-Men movie in Montreal. Why don’t you come along and spend

a week on the set? The actors would love to work with you.”
There was no way I was going to turn this down. I’d never been on a
movie set before, and this wasn’t just any movie set—it was an X-Men
movie set.
The next morning, we got on the plane they called the X-Jet. The other
passengers included most of the mutant cast, and I found myself sitting
between Jennifer Lawrence and Halle Berry. This was turning out to be the
best day ever.
On the plane and the next week on set, I got to share some of my brain
tips for speed-reading scripts and for remembering lines with some of the
extraordinary cast and crew. And guess what? The very first scene I got to
see them shoot took place in Professor X’s school—the very place I’d
spent endless days imagining and searching for when I was a kid. It was
such a surreal moment for me. What’s one of your dreams? One that is
ever present, like a splinter in your brain? Imagine it in vivid detail.
Visualize it. Feel it. Believe it. And work daily for it.
Amazingly, that’s not the best part of this story. When I got back from
the trip, I came home to find a package waiting for me. It was huge, about
the size of a large flat-screen TV. I opened the package and pulled out an
enormous framed photograph of me with the entire X-Men cast. The photo
had a note from the chairman, which read:
Jim, thank you so much for sharing your superpowers with all of
us. I know you’ve been looking for your superhero school ever
since you were a child. Here’s your class photo.
See the actual full-color superhero photo at
LimitlessBook.com/classphoto.

UNLIMITING TOGETHER
unlimiting
un·lim·it·ing (noun)

The act or process of casting aside inaccurate and restrictive
perceptions of one’s potential and embracing the reality that, with the
right mindset, motivation, and methods, there are no limitations.
For so much of my life, I allowed myself to be defined by my perceived
restrictions. I’d gotten what I thought was a terrible break when I was a
kid, and I was convinced that this had set the course for a compromised
future. But, with the help of some key people, I came to discover that my
perceived restrictions were not really restrictions at all. They were merely
obstacles I needed to overcome or limitations I needed to unlearn. And
when I did, what I could learn to be or do each day became limitless.
Becoming limitless is not just about accelerated learning, speedreading, and having an incredible memory. Yes, you will learn how to do
all of that and more. But being limitless is not about being perfect. It’s
about progressing beyond what you currently believe is possible. Just as
you’ve learned limits from your family, culture, and life experiences, you
can unlearn them. These constraints are only temporary obstacles that you
can learn to overcome. What I have come to find over my years of
working with people is that most everyone limits and shrinks their dreams
to fit their current reality. We convince ourselves that the circumstances
we are in, the beliefs we’ve accepted, and the path we are on is who we are
and who we will always be. But there is another choice. You can learn to
unlimit and expand your mindset, your motivation, and your methods to
create a limitless life. When you do what others won’t, you can live how
others can’t. By reading this book, you have taken an important step.
Remember, one step in a better direction can completely change your
destination.
The key when you are taking your steps is to have a map, a model of
success. Armed with this there, is no trial or dragon you can’t overcome.
So here it is:

The Limitless Model

THE LIMITLESS MODEL
You can learn to be, do, have, and share with no constraints. I wrote this
book to prove this to you. If you are not learning or living at your full
potential, if there is a gap between your current reality and your desired
reality, here’s the reason: There is a limit that must be released and
replaced in one of three areas:
A limit in your Mindset—you entertain a low belief in yourself, your
capabilities, what you deserve, or what is possible.
A limit in your Motivation—you lack the drive, purpose, or energy to
take action.
A limit in your Methods—you were taught and are acting on a
process that is not effective to create the results you desire.

This applies to an individual, a family, an organization. We all have our
own unique story of struggles and strengths. Whatever your situation
happens to be, here’s the best part: You’re not alone. I’m going to help you
become limitless in your own way, within the three-part framework you’re
about to learn: Limitless Mindset, Limitless Motivation, and Limitless
Methods. Let me break it down:
Mindset (the WHAT): deeply held beliefs, attitudes, and assumptions
we create about who we are, how the world works, what we are
capable of and deserve, and what is possible.
Motivation (the WHY): the purpose one has for taking action. The
energy required for someone to behave in a particular way.
Method (the HOW): a specific process for accomplishing something,
especially an orderly, logical, or systematic way of instruction.
One other note about the diagram on the previous page. You’ll see that
where mindset crosses over with motivation, I have the word inspiration.
You’re inspired, but you don’t know which methods to employ or where to
channel your energy. Where motivation and method intersect, you have
implementation. In this case, your results are going to be limited to what
you feel you deserve, what you feel you are capable of, and what you
believe is possible because you lack the proper mindset. Where mindset
and method intersect, you have ideation. Your ambitions stay in your
mind, because you lack the energy to do anything about them. Where all
three intersect, you have the limitless state. You then have the fourth I,
which is integration.
Throughout this book, you’ll find exercises, studies, mental tools, and
the results of exciting work being done both on the frontier of cognitive
science and performance as well as ancient wisdom (for example, how
ancient civilizations remembered generations of knowledge before
external storage devices like the printing press). We’ll approach the 3 M’s
in turn:
In Part II, Limitless Mindset, you’ll learn what is possible when you
eradicate limiting beliefs.

In Part III, Limitless Motivation, you’ll discover why your purpose is
your power and keys to unleash your drive and energy.
In Part IV, Limitless Methods, you’ll discover how to learn at your
best with proven processes—the tools and techniques that will propel
you forward toward the life you desire and deserve.
And, at the end of the book, I give you a 10-day plan to jump-start your
progress toward a limitless week and a limitless life.
When you finish this book, you’ll have the ability to be limitless in any
area important to you, whether it’s academic, health, career, relationships,
or personal growth. Since I never truly got to study at the X-Men school, I
created it for you in our online Kwik Learning Academy, where people of
all ages from 195 nations train with us daily to unleash their mental
superpowers. Consider Limitless your textbook. It would be an honor to be
your Professor X, and I’m so excited that you’ve decided to take this
journey with me. Class is now in session. And here’s the best part; your
timing could not be any better.

2

WHY THIS MATTERS NOW
I’m a firm believer that we all have incredible superpowers that are
waiting to be awakened. I’m not talking about the ability to fly, create
iron-clad armor, or shoot lasers from your eyes, but real-life practical
abilities like flying through books, iron-clad memory, laser focus,
boundless creativity, clear thinking, mindfulness, superior mental attitude,
and more. We are all superheroes in one way or another.
Just as every superhero has powers, so do they have arch nemeses. Enter
the supervillain. Think the Joker to Batman, Lex Luthor to Superman. The
villains we face may not look the same as they do in the movies, but
they’re still the bad guys—the ones you, as a superhero, need to vanquish
and hold at bay. Modern-day supervillains get in our way and make life
harder, keeping us from our potential. They hold us back and rob us of our
productivity, prosperity, positivity, and peace of mind. And it’s up to us to
recognize and defeat them.
If you’ve ever read a comic book or watched a superhero movie, you
know that supervillains are often borne of unlikely places. Take Harvey
Dent, also known as Two-Face, for example. He starts out with the greatest
of intentions—he’s a prosecutor helping to uphold the law and put the bad
guys in jail, and he’s an ally of Batman. But through an act of revenge,
Dent’s face is scarred, and he turns angry, bitter, and vengeful. He becomes
what he had spent his life fighting: a duplicitous criminal who gambles
with his victims’ futures. The good in him becomes twisted and used for
sinister ends.
In the same way, the four supervillains of learning started out innocent
—they are being fed by some of the greatest advancements that
humankind has made in the last hundred years. They were given rise by

technology. To be clear, technology is a vital part of progress and being
limitless. It allows us to do everything from connecting to learning,
making our lives that much more convenient. But it is possible that we
consume digital technology at a rate that even its creators would find
extreme. Much of the technology available to us today is so new that we
don’t know the level at which we need to control our interaction with it.
Through our educational platform Kwik Learning, we have students in
195 countries and have generated tens of millions of podcast downloads.
Our community has expressed a growing concern about their overreliance
on technology and they come to us to upgrade their brains to find relief
from these “four horsemen” of our age: digital deluge, digital distraction,
digital dementia, and digital deduction. It’s important to note that
overload, distraction, forgetfulness, and default thinking have been around
for ages. While technology doesn’t cause these conditions, it has great
potential to amplify them. The benefits of the digital age are plentiful, but
let’s take a look at how the advances in technology that help you, can
possibly also hinder you.

DIGITAL DELUGE
Do you have too much to process but not enough time? We’re privileged to
live in a world with so much unfettered access to information. In this age
of connectivity, ignorance is a choice. Compared to the 15th century, we
now consume as much data in a single day as an average person from the
1400s would have absorbed in an entire lifetime. Not so long ago,
information moved glacially through word of mouth, or a newspaper, or a
posted bulletin in a town square. Now we have so much access to
information that it’s taking a toll on our time and our quality of life. The
average person consumes three times as much information as we did in the
1960s;1 a 2015 report indicated that respondents spent eight hours a day
consuming media.
In an NPR interview, New York Times tech reporter Matt Richtel said
that after 20 years of glorifying technology as if all of it were good, “I
think science is beginning to embrace the idea that some technology is
Twinkies and some technology is Brussels sprouts. If we consume too

much technology, just like if we consume too much food, it can have ill
effects.”2
In a University of California, San Francisco, study on the effect of
downtime, researchers gave rats a new experience and measured their
brain waves during and after the activity. Under most circumstances, a new
experience will express new neural activity and new neurons in the brain
—that is, if the rat is allowed to have downtime. With downtime, the
neurons made their way from the gateway of memory to the rest of the
brain, where long-term memory is stored. The rats were able to record
memories of their experiences, which is the basis for learning.3
Doesn’t that make you wonder what happens if you don’t have
downtime? There is a growing body of evidence that suggests that if we
never let our mind wander or be bored for a moment, we pay a price—poor
memory, mental fog, and fatigue.
As far back as the mid-1990s (when digital deluge was a fraction of the
concern it is now), research was beginning to show that there were real
health risks involved with navigating through an always-on world. A
Reuters study, ominously titled “Dying for Information,” showed that,
“Two out of three respondents associated information overload with
tension with colleagues and loss of job satisfaction; 42 percent attributed
ill-health to this stress, 61 percent said that they have to cancel social
activities as a result of information overload and 60 percent that they are
frequently too tired for leisure activities.” The study goes on to add,
“Faced with an onslaught of information and information channels, they
have become unable to develop simple routines for managing
information.”4
What’s more, we also have to contend with the fact that the half-life of
information has decreased. The half-life of information is the amount of
time that passes before that information is replaced by newer or more
accurate information. You can study to your heart’s content; the
information you process now will be outdated sooner than you think.
“Facts” written in articles, books, and documentaries are based on strong
evidence and accepted as truth. But then they are completely reversed
when a new study comes out.
I don’t need to tell you how completely inundated each of us is with
digital details. Even when we try to go “off the grid,” digital information

somehow finds us. While I’m writing this, I’ve shut down all my devices.
But I need to have access to the Internet for research purposes, and a
handful of random notifications and updates still popped up on my
computer (yes, I know I can turn these off as well, but you get my point).
In Chapter 12 (Study) and Chapter 14 (Speed Reading), you will
discover practical ways to catch up, keep up, and get ahead of the digital
deluge of information you must process each day.

KWIK START
Take a moment and schedule 30 minutes of white space in your
calendar for this week. This is time to be spent away from
technology, time dedicated to clear your mind, relax, and be creative.

DIGITAL DISTRACTION
Before mobile devices, we would say “brb” (be right back) all the time
when we were online. We don’t say it anymore. We no longer leave. We
live here now. Because of our always-on, ever-connected devices, we’re
struggling to find connection when we’re with friends and family, and
we’re struggling to stay focused at work. Most of us deal with some kind
of work-life situation where we don’t feel comfortable forgoing digital
connection for large swaths of time every day. So we stay on the grid out
of the fear that if we were unreachable, we would lose out.
The trouble is, we’re wired to enjoy it. Each successive hit of dopamine
we get from the likes we receive on social media, or from the texts we get
from loved ones or friends, only reinforces our behavior. But those
rewards are changing our brains. Instead of relaxing into the downtime
that we might experience when waiting in line, waiting for a bus or an
appointment, etc., we pull out our phones and train our distraction
muscles. What happens when this is our constant way of being, when
every loose moment is filled with shining stimulus?
Staying connected may make us feel more secure, but it doesn’t make
us happier. Ryan Dwyer, MA, of the University of British Columbia, led a
study that showed how our digital habits are affecting our relationships. In

one experiment, more than 300 adults and university students were asked
to keep their phones on the table, easily accessible, while others were
asked to put them on silent and keep them in a container on the table
during a meal. Afterward, participants were asked to respond to a
questionnaire that asked them about their feelings of connectedness,
enjoyment, distraction, and boredom.
The survey also asked them to detail the amount of time they spent on
their phone during the meal. Those whose phones were accessible used
them more often . . . and they described themselves as feeling more
distracted. They also enjoyed the dinner less than the diners who didn’t
have access to their phones. “Modern technology may be wonderful, but it
can easily sidetrack us and take away from the special moments we have
with friends and family in person,” Dwyer says of the study.5
Just as few of us have learned how to learn, not many know how to
process and filter the massive amount of information we are constantly
seeing. We just multitask to get all of it in, and this doesn’t serve us well.
“Asking the brain to shift attention from one activity to another causes the
prefrontal cortex and striatum to burn up oxygenated glucose, the same
fuel they need to stay on task,” notes neuroscientist Daniel J. Levitin in his
book, The Organized Mind: Thinking Straight in the Age of Information
Overload. “And the kind of rapid, continual shifting we do with
multitasking causes the brain to burn through fuel so quickly that we feel
exhausted and disoriented after even a short time. We’ve literally depleted
the nutrients in our brain. This leads to compromises in both cognitive and
physical performance.”6
From app notifications to message alerts, it’s not just adults who deal
with this. With the availability of technology and social pressure to be
online and active on social media, children and teenagers experience the
constant distraction, too.
In Chapter 11 (Focus), you will discover the keys to sustained
concentration and focus development to learn and get things done.

KWIK START
Go to the notification settings of your phone and turn off all
unnecessary and distracting pings and dings. Do this now.

DIGITAL DEMENTIA
When is the last time you had to remember someone’s phone number? I’m
dating myself here, but I’m part of a generation that, when you wanted to
call your friend down the block, you needed to know their number. Can you
still remember some of your best friends’ numbers from childhood? What
about the number of the person you talk or text with every day? You no
longer have to, because your mobile remembers it for you. This is not to
say anyone wants to or should memorize 200 phone numbers, but we’ve
all but lost the ability to remember a new one, or a conversation we just
had, the name of a new potential client, or something important we need to
do.
Neuroscientist Manfred Spitzer uses the term digital dementia to
describe how overuse of digital technology results in the breakdown of
cognitive abilities. He argues that short-term memory pathways will start
to deteriorate from underuse if we overuse technology. It’s the same with
GPS. Move to a new city and see how quickly you become reliant on GPS
to tell you how to get around. Then notice how long it takes you to map
new roads in your mind—probably much longer than when you were
younger, but not because your brain isn’t working as well. With tools like
GPS, we don’t give our minds the chance to work. We rely on technology
to do the memorization for us.
This reliance may be hurting our long-term memory. Maria Wimber of
the University of Birmingham told the BBC that the trend of looking up
information prevents the build-up of long-term memories. In a study that
examined the memory habits of 6,000 adults in the UK, France, Germany,
Italy, Spain, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg, Wimber and her
team found that more than a third of respondents turned to their computer
first to retrieve information. The UK came in the highest—more than half

of the participants searched online first without trying to come up with the
answer themselves.7
Why is this a big deal? Because such instant information can be easily
and immediately forgotten. “Our brain appears to strengthen a memory
each time we recall it, and at the same time forget irrelevant memories
that are distracting us,” said Dr. Wimber. Forcing yourself to recall
information instead of relying on an outside source to supply it for you is a
way of creating and strengthening a permanent memory. When you
contrast that with the reality that most of us have a habit of constantly
looking up information—maybe even the same information—without
bothering to try to remember it, it seems we’re doing ourselves harm.
Is relying on technology always bad? Many researchers disagree. The
argument goes that by outsourcing some menial tasks like memorizing
phone numbers or doing basic math or getting directions to a restaurant
we’ve visited before, we’re saving brain space for something that matters
more to us. There’s research that says our brains are more like a muscle,
rather than a hard drive that fills up. That the more you use it, the stronger
it gets, and the more it can store. The question is: Are we making those
choices consciously, or are we acting out of unconscious habit?
Too often, we outsource our brains to our smart devices, and our smart
devices are making us, well, a little bit stupid. Our brains are the ultimate
adaptation machines, capable of seemingly endless levels of evolution.
And yet we often forget to give it the exercise it needs. Just as there is a
physical price to always relying on the technology of the elevator instead
of taking the stairs, so is there a price for lazy mental muscles. Use it or
lose it.
In Chapter 13 (Memory), I will show you simple tools and techniques to
remember anything from names and speeches to languages, faster and
easier.

KWIK START
Take a minute to exercise your memory: Memorize the phone number
of someone you communicate with regularly.

DIGITAL DEDUCTION
“In a digital-first world, where millennials obtain all their answers to
problems at the click of a mouse or swipe of a finger, the reliance on
technology to solve every question confuses people’s perception of their
own knowledge and intelligence. And that reliance may well lead to
overconfidence and poor decision-making,” says Rony Zarom, founder of
the video collaboration platform newrow.8 The ubiquity of information
about everything also means that there’s a ubiquity of opinion about
everything. If you want to know how to feel about a hot-button issue, you
can just go online and collate the opinions of others. If you want to know
the implications of an event or a trend, a quick online search will provide
endless amounts of analysis. The upshot is that deduction—an amalgam of
critical thinking, problem solving, and creativity that is an essential skill
for being limitless—is becoming automated.
There’s a certain amount of value to this, of course. Before the Internet,
we were limited in our access to the opinions of others. In an ideal world,
being able to get as many perspectives on a topic as possible would be
enormously valuable in helping us to form our own opinions.
Unfortunately, that’s rarely how it plays out in the real world. Instead, we
tend to identify a handful of sources with which we align and then give
those sources extreme influence over our thinking and decision-making. In
the process, the “muscles” we use to think critically and reason effectively
are atrophying. We’re letting technology do the deduction for us. And if
technology is forming our deductions, then we are also ceding much of our
problem-solving ability—something so important and something we will
discuss at length later in this book.
Psychologist Jim Taylor defines thinking as, “The capacity to reflect,
reason, and draw conclusions based on our experiences, knowledge, and
insights. It’s what makes us human and has enabled us to communicate,
create, build, advance, and become civilized.” He then goes on to caution
that there is “a growing body of research that technology can be both
beneficial and harmful to different ways in which children think.”9
Patricia Marks Greenfield, Distinguished Professor of Psychology at
UCLA, has been looking at this issue for more than a decade. In discussing
the impact on education, she wrote, “What is the effect on learning if
college students use their laptops to access the Internet during a classroom

lecture? This was tested in a communication studies class where students
were generally encouraged to use their laptops during lectures, in order to
explore lecture topics in greater detail on the Internet and in library
databases. Half of the students were allowed to keep their laptops open,
while the other half (randomly assigned) had to close their laptops.
Students in the closed laptop condition recalled significantly more
material in a surprise quiz after class than did students in the open laptop
condition.”10 Because they were engaging their minds in the lecture rather
than looking for what the Internet already thought about the subject, they
were much more responsive when it was time to reason for themselves.
Greenfield analyzed another study that showed that college students who
watched a news program without the crawl at the bottom of the screen
remembered significantly more of what the anchors were discussing.
Playwright Richard Foreman fears that this reliance on the Internet to
do much of our thinking is changing our very selves. “I come from a
tradition of Western culture, in which the ideal (my ideal) was the
complex, dense and ‘cathedral-like’ structure of the highly educated and
articulate personality—a man or woman who carried inside themselves a
personally constructed and unique version of the entire heritage of the
West . . . . But today I see within us all (myself included) the replacement
of complex inner density with a new kind of self-evolving under the
pressure of information overload and the technology of the ‘instantly
available.’”11
Do you remember what it was like when you were approaching your
teens and you first started formulating thoughts and opinions independent
of your parents? My guess is that this experience was extremely liberating
for you and that it might have even been the first time in your life when
you truly felt like your own person. What had happened to you, of course,
was that your critical faculties had become refined enough to allow you to
regularly employ reason to navigate through life.
Why, then, would you want to turn this liberating skill over to a device?
Think about it: How do you feel when someone tries to impose their
thinking on you? If a family member, friend, or colleague came up to you
and said, “Don’t think about this; here’s your opinion,” you’d try to get
away from that person as soon as you possibly could. Yet, when we
immediately reach for the Internet to provide us with information, we’re
essentially inviting the same thing.

In Chapter 15, I will provide you with a powerful set of tools that will
allow you to supercharge your thinking and expand your perspective on
any topic or problem.
While these four horsemen are the ones we need to contend with most
vociferously, there’s another digital danger that is worthy of our attention.
I call this digital depression, a result of the comparison culture that
emerges when we let the highlight reels of the social media feeds of others
cause us to perceive ourselves as less than. Now, I enjoy social media. I
love staying connected with our community of students and podcast
listeners and staying updated with the everyday lives of my family and
friends. I appreciate it so much as not only a source of entertainment, but
also education and empowerment. But I only recommend using it
consciously, not mindlessly out of habit, and in a harmonious way so it
doesn’t highjack your productivity and peace of mind.
In the upcoming Part II: Limitless Mindset, I share ideas to mitigate
these feelings of not being enough, as well as fears of looking bad or
missing out. Those are the same limits that stand in the way of personal
growth and learning. In Part III: Limitless Motivation, I will show you
how to add, break, or change these habits.

KWIK START
Think about a decision you need to make. Schedule some time to
work on that decision without the use of any digital devices.

KEEPING THE VILLAINS AT BAY
In the hero’s journey, the heroes need villains just as much as villains need
heroes. The challenges from trials and rivals make us grow and become
better. The power and strength of the villain determines the necessary
power and strength of the hero. If the villain was weak, there would be
nothing to vanquish—and no need for the hero to rise to greatness. In my
podcast interview with Simon Sinek, author of The Infinite Game, Simon
refers to our “worthy rivals,” those who help point out the personal
weaknesses we need to address. That is where your opportunity lies.

As I mentioned, I love the light side of technology—how it can connect
us, educate us, and empower us, make our lives easier. What we’ve just
described are a few potential drawbacks of technology, which is an
inherent part of all the good that it brings into our lives. Like fire,
technology has changed the course of human history. However, fire can
cook your food or burn your home down—it’s all in how you use it. Like
any tool, technology itself isn’t good or bad, but we must consciously
control how it’s used. If we don’t, then who becomes the tool? It’s up to
you to choose how you engage.

KWIK START
Which of the four digital villains do you believe are currently most
disrupting your performance, productivity, and peace of mind? Take a
moment and write the name of this villain down.
Conscious awareness is the first part to solving a problem.

3

YOUR LIMITLESS BRAIN
You may be thinking, Jim, I see what you mean about technology. I
wouldn’t want to live without it, but I do feel more overloaded, distracted,
and forgetful than ever. Here’s the good news: You were born with the
ultimate technology, the greatest superpower.
Let’s take a moment to acknowledge just how extraordinary your brain
is. It generates up to 70,000 thoughts per day. It races with the speed of the
fastest race car. Like your fingerprints, it is uniquely yours—there aren’t
two brains in the universe exactly the same. It processes dramatically
faster than any existing computer, and it has virtually infinite storage
capacity. Even when damaged, it is capable of producing genius, and even
if you only have half a brain, you can still be a fully functioning human
being.
And remarkable stories about it abound. Like the one about the
comatose patient who somehow developed a method of communication
with his doctor. Or the woman who could recall important events by date
going back as far as when she was 12 years old. Or the slacker who
became a mathematical genius after suffering a concussion during a bar
fight. None of this is science fiction or the product of a superhero comic.
They’re just examples of the extraordinary function built into that
remarkable machine between your ears.
We take so much of that function for granted. Let’s think about just what
the average person has accomplished simply by being an “average”
person. By the age of one, you learned how to walk, no simple task
considering how many complex neurological and physiological processes
are required. A year or so after that, you learned how to communicate
through the use of words and language. You learned dozens of new words

and their meanings on a daily basis and kept doing so all the way through
school. And while you were learning to communicate, you were also
learning to reason, to calculate, and to parse an endless number of
complex concepts—and all of that was before you read a single page of a
book or attended one class!
Our brains are what separate us from the rest of the animal kingdom.
Think about it. We can’t fly, we aren’t particularly strong or fast, we can’t
climb with the dexterity of some animals, we can’t breathe underwater. As
far as most physical functions are concerned, we’re just average. But
because of the power of our brains, we are overwhelmingly Earth’s most
dominant species. By harnessing that incredible mental power, we have
created ways to explore the ocean depths like a fish, move tons of weight
like an elephant, and even fly like a bird. Yes, the brain is quite a gift.
The brain is so complex that we know more about our vast universe than
we do about its workings, and we’ve learned more about it in the past
decade than we’d previously learned over the course of human history . . .
and we’ll learn even more about it from the time this book goes to press to
the time it hits the bookshelves. Our understanding of the brain is ever
evolving, and we know that what we’ve learned about it is only a tiny
fraction of what there is to be learned. But what we already know is
staggering. So, let’s take a journey through your limitless brain.
The brain is part of the central nervous system (CNS). Similar to the
control tower at an airport, your brain acts as its control center, directing
all the comings and goings of information, processes, and impulses. The
brain has three major areas: the brain stem, the cerebellum, and the
cerebral cortex (both the cerebellum and cerebral cortex start with cere,
Latin for “wax,” because of its waxy appearance). The brain is made of fat
and water, weighs approximately three pounds, and facilitates incredible
power and ability.1
The brain stem moderates the basic functions we need to live, such as
breathing, maintaining a regular heart rate, impulses to eat or have sex,
and our fight-or-flight responses. It is located at the top of your spine and
the base of your skull, buried deep within the brain. At the back of the
brain, the cerebellum is responsible for moderating movement and
coordination. There’s also increasing evidence that it plays a role in our
decision-making.

The cerebral cortex is the largest part of our brain, where the majority
of our complex thinking, short-term memory, and sensory stimulation take
place. It is made up of the occipital, parietal, temporal, and frontal lobes.
Our frontal lobes are where most of our thinking takes place: where logic
and creativity derive.
The brain is split into two halves that are connected by the corpus
callosum, which acts like a bundle of telephone wires between the lobes,
sending messages back and forth. Right now, you have somewhere around
86 billion neurons (also called brain cells) firing and acting together in
concert as you read these words and assimilate the information on these
pages.2 These neural signals are released into the brain and received by
neurotransmitters, which then pass the message along to other
neurotransmitters or stop the message altogether if that’s the appropriate
response.
We used to think that we reached our neurological peak in late
adolescence, after which our brains never changed—other than to
deteriorate. We now know that this is far from the truth. Our brains have
the capacity for neuroplasticity, which means that it can be changed and
shaped by our actions and by our environments. Your brain is always
changing and molding itself to your surroundings and to the demands you
place on it.
Because our brains are subject to the influence of our genes and
environment, we each possess a brain that is entirely unique to us. They’re
like snowflakes; no two are alike. Each brain adapts to the needs of its
owner. Let’s look at someone raised in an environment that was full of
stressors such as poverty, lack of access to food, or lack of safety. That
person will have a very different brain structure than someone brought up
in a very comfortable, affluent, well-cared-for setting. But before you
jump to the conclusion that one environment is “better” than the other and
breeds a better functioning brain, I challenge you to reconsider.
As I stated earlier, the brain is capable of being molded and shaped,
meaning that at any point anyone can decide to change the way their brain
functions. While it’s easy to assume that the individual who grew up in a
more stressful, unsupportive environment may not wind up reaching their
full potential due to their brain’s development under those circumstances,
growing evidence suggests those people are able to thrive and reach new
levels of success due to the mindset they are forced to develop in such a

situation. Based on the number of successful people who overcame
troubled upbringings, it may be that a difficult childhood or challenging
upbringing breeds resilience among other attributes that lead to success.

UNDERSTANDING NEUROPLASTICITY
What can we learn from the brains of London taxicab drivers?
This is the question neuroscientist Eleanor Maguire of University
College London posed as she considered the vast amount of information
held in the brains of the city’s cab drivers, appropriately called “The
Knowledge.” To earn their licenses, applicants traveled by moped through
a specific section of the city—a 10-kilometer radius of Charing Cross
station—for three to four years, memorizing the maze of 25,000 streets
within as well as the thousands of attractions they supported. Even after
this intense study, only about 50 percent of applicants pass the series of
licensing exams. Perhaps, thought Maguire, those successful had larger
than average hippocampi.
Maguire and her colleagues discovered that London taxi drivers did
indeed have “more gray matter in their posterior hippocampi than people
who were similar in age, education, and intelligence who did not drive
taxis. In other words, taxi drivers had plumper memory centers than their
peers. It seemed that the longer someone had been driving a taxi, the
larger his hippocampus, as though the brain expanded to accommodate the
cognitive demands of navigating London’s streets.”3
The London Taxi Cab Study provides a compelling example of the
brain’s neuroplasticity, or ability to reorganize and transform itself as it is
exposed to learning and new experiences. Having to constantly learn new
routes in the city forced the taxi cab drivers’ brains to create new neural
pathways. These pathways changed the structure and size of the brain, an
amazing example of the limitless brain at work.
Neuroplasticity, also referred to as brain plasticity, means that every
time you learn something new, your brain makes a new synaptic
connection. And each time this happens, your brain physically changes–it
upgrades its hardware to reflect a new level of the mind.
Neuroplasticity is dependent on the ability of our neurons to grow and
make connections with other neurons in other parts of the brain. It works

by making new connections and strengthening (or weakening, as the case
may be) old ties.4
Our brain is malleable. We have the incredible ability to change its
structure and organization over time by forming new neural pathways as
we experience, learn something new, and adapt. Neuroplasticity helps
explain how anything is possible. Researchers hold that all brains are
flexible in that the complex webs of connected neurons can be rewired to
form new connections. Sometimes, that means the brain compensates for
something it has lost, as when one hemisphere learns to function for both.
Just as there are people who have suffered strokes and have been able to
rebuild and regain their brain functions, those that procrastinate, think
excessive negative thoughts, or can’t stop eating junk food may also
rewire and change their behaviors and transform their lives.
If learning is making new connections, then remembering is
maintaining and sustaining those connections. When we struggle with
memory or experience memory impairment, we are likely experiencing a
disconnection between neurons. In learning, when you fail to remember
something, view it as a failure to make a connection between what you’ve
learned and what you already know, and with how you will use it in life.
For example, if you feel that something you’ve learned is valuable in
the moment, but that you’ll never use it again, you are unlikely to create a
memory of it. Similarly, if you learn something but have no higher
reasoning as to why it’s important to you or how it applies to your life or
work, then it’s likely that your brain will not retain the information. It’s
totally normal to have a memory lapse—we’re human, not robots. But if
we respond to this lapse in memory with the attitude that “I have a bad
memory,” or “I’m not smart enough to remember this,” then we negatively
affect our ability to learn and grow. In other words, the belief we might
develop in response to forgetting does far more damage than the lapse in
memory. That kind of self-talk reinforces a limiting belief, rather than
acknowledging the mistake and reacquiring the information.
What does this mean for learning? Plasticity means that you can mold
and shape your brain to suit your desires. That something like your
memory is trainable—when you know how to help your brain receive,
encode, process, and consolidate information. It means that with a few
simple changes to something like your environment, your food, or your

exercise, you can dramatically change the way your brain functions. I will
share these energy tips in detail in Chapter 8.
Here’s the bottom line: Plasticity means that your learning, and indeed
your life, is not fixed. You can be, do, have, and share anything when you
optimize and rewire your brain. There are no limitations when you align
and apply the right mindset, motivation, and methods.

YOUR SECOND BRAIN
My students tell me after they learn about the vastness of their brain, they
have a whole new sense of worth, that their self-esteem grows overnight.
Here’s more good news: You are not limited to just one brain, you have a
second—your gut. Have you ever had a “gut feeling”? That moment when
you just knew? If you’ve ever “gone with your gut” to make a decision or
felt “butterflies in your stomach,” did you ever wonder why that was?
Hidden in the walls of the digestive system, this “brain in your gut” is
revolutionizing medicine’s understanding of the links between digestion,
mood, health, and even the way you think.
Scientists call this little brain the enteric nervous system (ENS). And
it’s not so little. The ENS is two thin layers of more than 100 million nerve
cells lining your gastrointestinal tract from esophagus to rectum. Science
is only beginning to understand the brain-gut axis and how it affects our
brains, our moods, and our behavior. You may hear it referred to as the
“brain-gut connection.” In the last decade, we’ve discovered that the gut
has an outsize effect on the way our brains function. One can liken it to the
way a tree functions. The roots in the ground are drawing up vital nutrients
and water from the soil as well as communicating with other plants. Those
nutrients are then brought up into the body of the tree, fortifying and
building the trunk, and giving the tree what it needs to sprout new leaves
each spring, which in turn gather light, another energy source.
In the same way, the nutrients we take in are absorbed through our
intestines. We rely on those nutrients to fuel our brains. While our brains
take up very little of our total body weight, they use 20 percent of the
energy we take in, so nutrients make a huge difference in the way our
brains function on a day-to-day basis.

The gut is lined with more than a hundred million nerve cells, and it
makes up part of the ENS. When a baby grows in the womb, the ENS and
the CNS develop from the same tissue and remain connected via the vagus
nerve. In many ways, the two systems mirror each other in structure. They
also both use many of the same neurotransmitters to function, including
serotonin, dopamine, and acetylcholine. As with CNS, we used to believe
that we are each born with a certain amount of cells—and that’s it. But like
the brain, we now know the ENS makes new neurons throughout adulthood
and can be repaired when damaged.5 The gut is made up of these neurons
as well as a network of bacteria that form the microbiome, and as with the
brain, each of us has our own unique microbiome.
What’s more, these nerve cells operate through startlingly similar
pathways as the brain. In 2010, neuroscientist Diego Bohórquez of Duke
University discovered that the enteroendocrine cells of the gut had
“footlike protrusions” that resembled the synapses that neurons use to
communicate. This caused Bohórquez to wonder if these cells could “talk”
to the brain using signals similar to the way neurons do. He hypothesized
that if this were happening, they would have to be using the vagus nerve,

which connects the gut and the brain stem.6 After further testing, they
discovered that the cells do in fact use the vagus nerve to take up messages
and send them to the brain, faster than could be done via the bloodstream.

TEAM EFFORT
The connection between the brain and the gut is still being explored, but it
seems that they function in very similar ways and that they function in
tandem. The little brain in conjunction with the big one partly determines
our mental state. When you have a gut feeling that something isn’t right,
or conversely that you should follow a hunch, it’s not just superstition—
your gut has its own way of interpreting events and giving your brain
signals. Furthermore, when you feed your gut with subpar food, you’re
also feeding your brain with subpar fuel.
Right now, your gut is digesting the food you just ate and sending that
fuel to your brain. At the same time, a part of your brain is taking in the
feel of the pages under your fingertips (or your e-reader, if that’s your
preference), sensing the comfort of the chair supporting you, and
monitoring the environment around you to make sure you’re safe. Another
part of your brain is taking in the smells of the environment, maybe
coffee, or perfume, or the scent of the book’s pages. Another part of your
brain is absorbing the word-symbols on the page of this book and turning
them into meaning, which is then processed and stored in short-term
memory, where it will then be sent to long-term memory (under the right
conditions, which we’ll get to in a moment).
All of this is to say that you have the ultimate superpower between your
ears. You also have the ability to hone that superpower and make it greater
—or to let it falter and decay. You get to decide what kind of environment
your superpower lives in: one that supports your mission in life, or one
that distracts you from your greatest dreams.

THE ELUSIVE OBVIOUS
Given that we have this tremendous power of our minds available to us,
why are we struggling? If your brain is indeed so magnificent, why are
overload, distraction, forgetfulness, and feelings of inadequacy affecting

us so much? How do we reconcile the fact that we have so much potential
but have days where we can’t remember a simple name or think our way
out of a paper bag? The answer is so simple, it’s almost the elusive
obvious: We were not taught how.
Give a person an idea, and you enrich their day. Teach a person how to
learn, and they can enrich their entire life.
School is a great place to learn. There, we’re taught what to learn, what
to think, and what to remember. But there are few if any classes on how to
learn, how to think, and how to remember.
In his seminal book on education, Creative Schools, Sir Ken Robinson
says, “One of my deepest concerns is that while education systems around
the world are being reformed, many of these reforms are being driven by
political and commercial interests that misunderstand how real people
learn and how great schools actually work. As a result, they are damaging
the prospects of countless young people. Sooner or later, for better or for
worse, they will affect you or someone you know.”7
My guess is that they have already affected you and everyone close to
you. As you already know, my own experience with the education system
was a complicated one, and I acknowledge that my circumstances were
unusual. In reality, though, even if I’d never had that fateful head trauma
in kindergarten, I would probably have gotten much less out of my school
education than was ideal. That’s because very few schools anywhere in the
world have incorporated learning how to learn into their curriculums.
They’ll fill us with information. They’ll expose us to great works of
literature and to figures who changed the course of civilization. They will
test us—sometimes endlessly—to determine whether we can repeat back
what they’ve taught us. But they won’t get underneath all of this to teach
us how to teach ourselves, to make enriching our minds, discovering new
concepts, and truly absorbing what we learn fundamental to our everyday
lives.

This is not about placing the blame on the teachers who work hard to
teach our children. In my opinion, teachers are some of the most caring,
compassionate, and capable human beings in our society. In fact, my
mother became a teacher after my brain injury because I was struggling so
much and she wanted to help me and others like me. The problem lies in
the outdated system in which teachers work. If Rip Van Winkle woke up
from decades of slumber, the only thing he would recognize today are
classrooms, because they have evolved so little. Education hasn’t changed
enough to prepare us for the world we live in today. In a era of
autonomously driven electric cars and vehicles capable of taking us to
Mars, our education system is the equivalent of a horse and carriage.
And then there’s the matter that how we earn our livings is changing
profoundly and increasingly rapidly. Automation and artificial intelligence
(A.I.) are affecting the future of work, and I’m not speaking only about
factories where laborers are being replaced by robots. In addition, many of
us are facing the need to switch from the structure of an office job to the
volatility of the gig economy. And jobs that few of us might have
imagined even five years ago have gained traction, while others are
emerging this very moment that will affect the workplace in the coming
years.

All of this points us in the same direction: We must take charge of our
own learning. If schools tell us what to learn, but not how to learn, then we
need to do the rest of the work ourselves. If digital overload threatens to

hijack our brains, then we need to use what we know about learning to
reset the ground rules. If the workplace is evolving with so much rapidity
that we can never be sure of what work will mean to us tomorrow, then
only by taking complete control of our learning can we truly be prepared
for an unknowable future.

TURN ON THE POWER
A quick, often-told story: One day at a power plant, everything comes to
an abrupt halt. All of the machines go offline. The silence is deafening.
The people running the plant are frantic and after hours and hours, none of
the workers can track down the problem. The head of operations is
desperate at this point, so he calls the best local help he can find.
The expert technician arrives and glances around the facility. He goes to
one of the numerous beams among all the electrical boxes, opens one of
them, and stares at the various screws and wires inside. He turns one
screw, and, like magic, everything starts working again and the plant
comes back to life.
The head of operations is so relieved. He thanks the technician and asks
him what he owes him. The technician says, “$10,000.” The head of
operations is shocked. “What do you mean, $10,000? You were here for a
few minutes. You turned one single screw. Anyone could have done that. I
need an itemized bill, please.”
The technician reaches into his pocket, pulls out a notepad, scribbles a
few seconds, and hands the other man the bill. The head of operations
reads it and immediately pays him. The bill read: “Turning screw: $1.
Knowing which screw to turn: $9,999.”
What’s the lesson of the story? It’s not that you have a screw loose. The
story illustrates two things.
The first is how much added value a limitless mind can offer you and
others. We’ve entered an expert economy in which brain power trumps
brute strength. Where what you have between your ears is your greatest
wealth-creating asset. There are those who know and those who don’t
know. And that applied knowledge is not just power, it’s profit. Your
ability to think, solve problems, make the right decisions, create, innovate,

and imagine is how we add value. The faster you can learn, the faster you
can earn.
And that takes us to the second lesson. That one screw made all the
difference. I’ve mentored and coached some amazing minds, and you
don’t have to be a genius to see that genius leaves clues. One of those
patterns is that elite mental performers filter and focus for those handful
of “screws” that make all the difference and turn everything else on. This
book is filled with many of the behaviors, tools, and strategies I’ve
discovered to give you the maximum results and rewards for your effort.
The world is throwing more challenges at you than ever before, and
there’s every indication that those challenges will continue to increase. At
the same time, there is more to be gained from having a finely tuned brain
than ever before, and you know now that you have more than enough
potential to meet any challenge. But it’s going to require taking control of
your learning.
It may seem as if it would take superhuman capabilities to keep up with
the demands of our current reality. But you already have a hidden
superpower: your brain. You may not be able to shoot webs from your
hands, but you have something far better, the neural webs in your head.
That superpower plant of a network between your ears is your greatest gift
and greatest advantage. All we have to do is upgrade your brain the same
way you upgrade your phone. How do you install new software into your
brain? One of my favorite ways is what you’re doing right now. It’s called
reading.

4

HOW TO READ AND REMEMBER THIS (AND ANY)
BOOK
Your time is one of your greatest assets. It’s the one thing you can’t get
back.
As your brain coach, I want you to get the greatest results and return on
your attention, so here are some recommendations on how to get the most
out of this book. You can apply this advice toward practically anything you
want to learn and read.
Let’s start with a question: Have you ever read something only to forget
it the next day?
You are not alone. Psychologists refer to this as the “forgetting curve.”
It is the mathematical formula that describes the rate at which information
is forgotten after it is initially learned. Research suggests humans forget
approximately 50 percent of what they learn within an hour, and an
average of 70 percent within 24 hours.1
Below are a handful of recommendations that will help you stay ahead
of the curve. Later, I will share advanced strategies to accelerate your
learning and retention in the sections on study, speed-reading, and memory
improvement.

Research suggests that our natural ability to concentrate wanes between
10 to 40 minutes. If we spend any longer on a given task, we get
diminishing returns on our investment of time because our attention starts
to wander. For that reason, I suggest you use the Pomodoro technique, a
productivity method developed by Francesco Cirillo based on the idea that
the optimal time for a task is 25 minutes, followed by a 5-minute break.2
Each 25-minute chunk is called a “Pomodoro.” As you read this book, I
suggest that you read for one Pomodoro and then take a 5-minute brain
break before continuing.
When it comes to learning, the Pomodoro technique works for reasons
related to memory, specifically the effect of primacy and recency.
The effect of primacy is that you’re more likely to remember what you
learn in the beginning of a learning session, a class, a presentation, or even
a social interaction. If you go to a party, you might meet 30 strangers.
You’re most likely to remember the first few people that you meet (unless
you’ve been trained to remember names with my method, which I’ll teach
you later in this book).
The effect of recency is that you’re also likely to remember the last
thing you learned (more recent). At the same party, this means that you’ll
remember the names of the last few people you met.

We’ve all procrastinated before a test and then, the night before the
exam, sat down to “cram” as much as possible without any breaks.
Primacy and recency are just two of the (many) reasons cram sessions
don’t work. But by taking breaks, you create more beginnings and endings,
and you retain far more of what you’re learning.

If you sit down to read a book over the course of two hours without
taking any breaks, you might remember the first 20 minutes of what you
read, then maybe you’ll experience a dip around the 30-minute mark, and
then you’re likely to remember the end of what you read. This means the
lull in between, with no breaks for assimilation or thinking through what
you just read, results in a dead space for learning. So, take this book one
Pomodoro at a time so you get the most out of what you read. If you still
choose to cram, you’ll learn helpful methods in the book to retain the “inbetween” information.
Did you know that the very act of reading this book will make you
smarter? I realize that’s a big claim, but I’m completely convinced that it’s
true. On one level, it’s going to teach you to be smarter through the tools
and tactics I share here. But on another level, when you actively read it,

you’ll form pictures in your mind, and you’ll make connections between
what you know and what you’re learning. You will think about how this
applies to your current life, and you will imagine how you can use the
knowledge you’re taking in. It promotes neuroplasticity. Oliver Wendell
Holmes said, “Every now and then a man’s mind is stretched by a new idea
or sensation, and never shrinks back to its former dimensions.”3 When you
read any book, you have the opportunity to stretch the range of your mind,
and it will never be the same.

KWIK START
Set a timer for 25 minutes right now and concentrate on what you’re
reading in this book for that amount of time. When your alarm goes
off, bookmark this book and close it. Then write down what you
learned within that 25-minute period.

USE THE FASTER METHOD
To get the most out of this book, here is a simple method for learning
anything quickly. I call it the FASTER Method, and I want you to use this
as you read, starting now.
The acronym FASTER stands for: Forget, Act, State, Teach, Enter,
Review. Here’s the breakdown:
F is for Forget
The key to laser focus is to remove or forget that which distracts you.
There are three things you want to forget (at least temporarily). The first is
what you already know. When learning something new, we tend to assume
we understand more than we do about that subject. What we think we
know about the topic can stand in the way of our ability to absorb new
information. One of the reasons children learn rapidly is because they are
empty vessels; they know they don’t know. Some people who claim to
have twenty years of experience have one year of experience that they’ve
repeated twenty times. To learn beyond your present sense of restraints, I

want you to temporarily suspend what you already know or think you
know about the topic and approach it with what Zen philosophy calls “a
beginner’s mind.” Remember that your mind is like a parachute—it only
works when it’s open.
The second thing is to forget what’s not urgent or important. Contrary to
popular belief, your brain doesn’t multitask (more on this later). If you’re
not fully present, it will be difficult for you to learn when your focus is
split.

KWIK START
As you are reading this book, when your mind inevitably wanders
into something else—and that something else is important but not
urgent—don’t try to not think of it. What you resist persists. Instead,
keep a notebook close by to capture that thought or idea by writing it
down. You can thus release it temporarily, to be addressed after the
task at hand is complete.
And finally, forget about your limitations. These are the preconceived
notions you believe about yourself, such as that your memory isn’t good or
that you’re a slow learner. Suspend (at least temporarily) what you believe
is possible. I know this may sound difficult but keep an open mind to what
you can do. After all, since you are reading this book, some part of you
deep down must believe there’s more to life than what you’ve already
demonstrated. Do your best to keep your self-talk positive. Remember
this: If you fight for your limitations, you get to keep them. Your
capabilities aren’t fixed, and it’s possible to learn anything.
A is for Act
Traditional education has trained many people that learning is a passive
experience. You sit quietly in class, you don’t talk to your neighbor, and
you consume the information. But learning is not a spectator sport. The
human brain does not learn as much by consumption as it does by creation.
Knowing that, I want you to ask yourself how you can become more active

in your learning. Take notes. Do all the Kwik Start exercises. Download
the Kwik Brain app to test and train your limitless abilities. Go to the
resource page at www.LimitlessBook.com/resources for additional free
tools. I recommend you highlight key ideas, but don’t become one of those
highlight junkies who make every page glow in the dark. If you make
everything important, then nothing becomes important. The more active
you are, the better, faster, and more you will learn.

KWIK START
What is one thing you will do to make reading this book a more
active experience? Write it down.

S is for State
All learning is state-dependent. Your state is a current snapshot of your
emotions. It is highly influenced by your thoughts (psychology) and the
physical condition of your body (physiology). Your feelings or lack
thereof about a subject in a specific situation affect the learning process
and ultimately the results. In fact, when you tie a feeling to information,
the information becomes more memorable. To prove this, I’m guessing
there’s a song, fragrance, or food that can take you back to your childhood.
Information times emotion helps create long-term memories. The opposite
is also true. What was the predominant emotional state you felt back in
school? When I ask audiences this question, most people in the room shout
out “boredom!” In all likelihood, you can relate to this.
If your emotional energy at school was low, it’s no wonder you forgot
the periodic table. But, when you take control of your state of mind and
body, you can shift your experience of learning from boredom to
excitement, curiosity, and even fun. To achieve this, you might try shifting
the way your body moves in a learning environment or piquing different
moods before you sit down to learn. Change your posture or the depth of
your breathing. Sit or stand the way you would if you were totally
energized and excited for what was coming. Get excited about how you
will benefit from what you are about to learn and what you will do with

your new knowledge. Remember, all learning is state-dependent.
Consciously choose states of joy, fascination, and curiosity.

KWIK START
How motivated, energized, and focused are you at this moment? Rate
your current state on a scale of 1 to 10. What is one thing you will do
right now to increase that number?

T is for Teach
If you want to cut your learning curve dramatically, learn with the
intention of teaching the information to someone else. Think about it: If
you know you have to give a presentation on what you learn, you will
approach how you learn the topic with the intention of mastering it well
enough to explain it to someone else. You will pay closer attention. Your
notes might be more detailed. And you might even ask better questions.
When you teach something, you get to learn it twice: once on your own,
and then again through educating another person.
Learning isn’t always solo; it can be social. You may enjoy this book
more if you invite someone else to learn with you. Buy a copy for a friend,
or, even better, start a Limitless Book Club that meets weekly so you can
discuss the ideas and concepts in this book. You’ll enjoy learning more
when you’re making memories with a friend or group of friends. Working
with someone else will not only help you stay accountable, but it will give
you someone to practice this method with.

KWIK START
Find a learning buddy to read this book with and hold each other
accountable. Write down the name of that person (or persons).

E is for Enter

What is the simplest and most powerful personal performance tool? Your
calendar. We enter important things on our schedule: work meetings,
parent-teacher gatherings, dentist appointments, taking Fluffy to the vet,
and so on. Do you know what a lot of people don’t schedule? Their
personal growth and development. If it’s not on your calendar, there’s a
good chance it’s not getting done. It’s too easy for the day to slip by with
you “forgetting” to work out your body and brain.

KWIK START
Take out your calendar and enter your Limitless readings for the next
seven days. Label these LIMITLESS ME, GENIUS TIME, BRAIN
TRAINING, CONVERSATIONS WITH JIM, or anything else
provocative enough to guarantee that you’ll keep this date on your
calendar.

R is for Review
One of the best ways to reduce the effects of the forgetting curve is to
actively recall what you learned with spaced repetition. You are better able
to retain information by reviewing in multiple spread-out sessions. Going
over the material at intervals increases our brain’s ability to remember it.
To leverage this principle, before you begin your reading session take a
moment, if only a few minutes, to actively retrieve what you learned the
session before. Your brain will give greater value to the reviewed material
and prime your mind for what’s to come.

KWIK START
Before each reading, take a few minutes to talk about or write what
you remember from the previous reading.

CHOOSE WISELY

The French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre noted that, “Life is C between B
and D,” meaning that the life we live is the choices we make between the
“B” of birth and the “D” of death. The profound simplicity of that
statement is particularly relevant to the journey we’re engaged with here.
Being limitless is a choice, and that choice is entirely yours, regardless of
your circumstances. You can choose to give up this power, but why would
you when you know that you can truly live a life without barriers? But
choosing is an active thing, and the time to make this choice is right now.

So, I want you to resolve and commit. Most people are sincerely
interested in doing something that they know they should do. But they
don’t do it, because they consider it a preference not a promise. There’s
tremendous power in making a real resolution. I want you to write down
your commitment to complete this book. When we write something down,
we’re more likely to do what we promise.
Below, I’ve included a commitment page for you. See eBook
Supplemental Resources for a PDF download. If you want extra points,
take a photo of your signed promise, then post it on social media. This
public resolution will help you stay accountable. Tag me @JimKwik
#LimitlessBook so we can cheer you on!

I, _________________________________, commit to reading this
book in 10- to 25-minute increments until it is finished.
I commit to focusing by forgetting my prior understanding,
distractions, and limiting beliefs of what is possible.
I commit to being active in the process. I will do all the Kwik Start
exercises, take notes, highlight, and practice asking myself relevant
questions as I read.
I commit to manage my state of being as I read, checking in
regularly with my energy levels and being proactive in adjusting my
motivation as needed.
I commit to teaching what I learn to others, so we may all benefit.
I commit to entering my reading time in my calendar, because if
it’s in my schedule I will do it.
I commit to review what I have already learned so I can remember
it better before moving on to something new.
And finally, I commit that even if I “mess up” with any of the
above, I won’t beat myself up. I’ll get back at it and do my best.
Yes! I am ready to be LIMITLESS!
Signed,
___________________________Date: __________

THE QUESTIONS ARE THE ANSWER
Have you ever read a page in a book, arrived at the end, and could not
recall what you just read? You may even reread it, only to forget it again. I

don’t want you to experience this while you are reading this book, so why
do you think it happens? The answer is, you’re not asking the right
questions. Questions, in fact, are the answer.
Every second, your senses gather up to 11 million bits of information
from the world around you. Obviously, if you tried to interpret and
decipher all of them at once, you’d be immediately overwhelmed. That’s
why the brain is primarily a deletion device; it’s designed to keep
information out. The conscious mind typically processes only 50 bits per
second.
What makes it through the filter is determined by the part of the brain
called the reticular activating system, or RAS for short. The RAS is
responsible for a number of functions, including sleep and behavior
modification. It also acts as the gatekeeper of information through a
process called habituation, which allows the brain to ignore meaningless
and repetitive stimuli and remain sensitive to other inputs.
One of the ways to guide the RAS are the questions we ask ourselves.
These tell that part of our brain what is important to us.
Let’s take my younger sister’s birthday as an example. Years ago, my
sister kept sending me postcards, pictures, and e-mails of pug dogs. You
know, the ones with the mushy faces and the bulgy eyes. They’re very
docile; you can dress them up as ballerinas and they won’t care. Of course,
I wondered why she was sending me photos of pugs—and then I
remembered her birthday was coming up, and it became evident she was
leaving clues because she wanted one.

Later that day, I was checking out at the health food store, and I looked
over at the other checkout line. To my surprise, I saw a woman carrying
her pug over her shoulder. Wow, I haven’t seen one of one of those in a long
time—what are the chances of that? I thought. The next day I went running
in my neighborhood, and there was someone walking six pugs.
The question is, where did the pugs come from? Did they just magically
appear? Of course not. They were always there. But in the flood of stimuli,
I had never paid attention to them before. Once pugs broke through my
awareness, I started seeing them all over the place. Have you had an
experience like this? Maybe it was a specific kind of car or outfit that
“magically” began appearing everywhere.
In an interview with media personality Jeannie Mai, we compared this
effect to how your favorite social media platform starts showing you more
posts based on past expressed interest. The site you’re on knows this
because of what you clicked, liked, or watched before. Your RAS is like
that site’s algorithm. It shows you more of what you express interest in,
and it hides the things you don’t engage in.
So often the answers we want are there, but we’re not asking the right
questions to shine a spotlight on them. Instead, we’re asking useless
questions or worse, questions that are disempowering. Why am I not smart
enough? Why am I not good enough? Why can’t I lose weight? Why can’t
I find the person I’m meant to be with? We ask such negative questions,
and then those questions give us evidence—or pugs—as answers. The
human mind is always generalizing in order to make sense of the world.
Here, there, and everywhere, we can find evidence to confirm our beliefs.
Thinking is a process of reasoning through something, during which we
ask and answer questions. You may be asking, is that true? See, you had to
ask a question. While we have tens of thousands of thoughts a day, we
have one, maybe two dominant questions we ask more than others. As you
can imagine, these questions direct our focus, which directs how we feel,
and how we consequently spend our lives. As a thought experiment,
imagine someone whose most frequent question is, “How do I get people
to like me?” You don’t know their age, career, or what they look like. But
you know more than you probably realize. What do you imagine their
personality is like? You don’t need to know much to guess that they’re a
people pleaser, they’re indirect in expressing their needs, and they’re not
authentic about how they feel or think in any given moment. Someone who

is constantly asking themselves how to get people to like them can never
truly be their true self because they will always be molding themselves to
the preferences of the people around them, even if they’re not aware of it.
You know all this information, and you only know one question they ask
themselves. What do you think is your dominant question?

YOUR DOMINANT QUESTION
When I felt my brain was broken, I loved to escape into the world of
superheroes, comic books, Dungeons and Dragons. The world of fantasy
helped me forget my pain. I decided that the superpower that would be
best for me was invisibility, and my dominant question became, “How do I
stay invisible?” Instead of being seen, I was always watching everyone
else, wondering what everyone’s life was like. I wondered why this person
was so popular, and that person was so happy, or what made another
person so smart. I was suffering all the time, so as I watched people and
learned from the world around me, my dominant question changed to,
“How do I make this better?” I wanted to solve this riddle: “How does my
mind work so I can work my mind?” The more and more I asked these new
questions, the more answers I got. This book is the result of two decades
of asking empowering questions.

I first met Will Smith at Quincy Jones’s 80th birthday party. After
hearing about my traumatic brain injury, he invited me to be his guest at
the premiere of the film Concussion, a movie about the concerns of
football-related head trauma. (I’ll talk about brain protection in an
upcoming chapter.) Eventually, Will booked me to come to Toronto to
spend time with him for a week on set. He was shooting a superhero film,
so you can imagine that I was in my glory.
What was interesting to me was the cast and crew were working each
night, from 6 P.M. to 6 A.M., outside in the dead of winter. Not all
Hollywood is glitz and glam; there’s a lot of hurrying up just to wait on
set. During a break, Will and I discovered a few of his dominant questions,
one of which is “How do I make this moment even more magical?” While
we were waiting for Will’s next scene to shoot, his family and friends were
huddled in tents watching the other actors work. At 3 A.M., while I’m sure
everyone was cold and tired, we got to see his dominant question in action.
He was bringing everyone hot cocoa, cracking jokes to make us smile, and
actively playing host when he could have been resting. He was indeed
making the moment even more magical. The result of this question
directed his focus and his behavior, and completely changed the
experience for everyone.

KWIK START
What is one dominant question you ask yourself? Write it down.

PREPARE YOUR MIND
Questions direct your focus, so they play into everything in life—even
reading comprehension. Because people typically don’t ask enough
questions when they read, they compromise their focus, understanding,
and retention. If you prep your mind with the right kinds of questions
before you read, you’ll see answers (pug dogs) everywhere. For that
reason, I place specific key questions throughout the book.
To start you off, here are the three dominant questions to ask on our
journey together. They will help you to take action on what you learn and

turn the knowledge into power.
How can I use this?
Why must I use this?
When will I use this?

KWIK START
These are your three magic questions: How can I use this? Why must
I use this? When will I use this? They will help you integrate the
knowledge from this book into your head, heart, and hands. Ingrain
them. Write these questions down where you can see them—on your
desk or in your phone.
Instead of passively reading, consider these questions as you take in the
knowledge in this book. Remember, questions are the answer. At the
beginning of every chapter for the rest of the book, you will find a series
of questions that are designed to prime your focus as you read. Study the
questions before you read each chapter, and you’ll be better prepared to
understand and remember what you learn.
Along with the questions, do the “Kwik Start” exercises seeded in
strategic places throughout the book. They are specific activities designed
to train you to take immediate action in your learning and life. Most of
these can be done in one or two minutes. Remember the power of
neuroplasticity: Every time you answer a question and do a new activity,
you rewire your brain. I also conclude each chapter with exercises to do
before you move on to the next section, to really set these lessons into
practice.

PART II

LIMITLESS MINDSET
THE WHAT

mindset
mind·set (noun)

The deeply held beliefs, attitudes, and assumptions we create about who
we are, how the world works, what we are capable of and deserve, and
what is possible.

The first element of the three-part Limitless Model is Mindset, which is
the mental attitude or disposition that predetermines a person’s responses
to and interpretations of situations. Mindset is made up of beliefs,
assumptions, and attitudes we hold about ourselves and the world around
us. All behavior is driven by belief, so before we address how to learn, we
must first address the underlying beliefs we hold about what is possible.
We’re not born with pre-installed mindsets about what we’re capable of
achieving—we learn these fixed and limited ways of thinking from the
people in our lives and the culture we experience growing up.
Think of a young elephant tied to a stake in the ground. When it’s a
baby, the elephant isn’t strong enough to pull the stake up, so it eventually
stops trying because it learns the effort is futile. As the elephant grows, it
gains more than enough power and strength to pull out the stake, but it
remains tied up by something as inconsequential as a rope and a flimsy
piece of metal because of what it learned as a baby. In psychology, it’s
called learned helplessness.
Most of us behave like that elephant. At some point, we had an
experience that gave us an impression of what we’re capable of, and our
belief about our potential has been set ever since. But just as helplessness
is learned, it’s just as possible to learn to be limitless. In this section,
you’re going to learn about the seven lies we’ve been taught about our
potential and how to replace them with new beliefs.
I use the term LIE intentionally. In this case, LIE is an acronym for
Limited Idea Entertained. If you are like the vast majority of people out
there, you are entertaining ideas about yourself that define you as
something less than what you truly have the potential to achieve. You’re
giving these ideas energy and allowing them to take residence in your
mind, but they’re really nothing but BS (in this case, an abbreviation for
Belief Systems). Over the coming chapters, you will discover where these
lies come from, how they imprison you, and what you can do about it. And
keep asking yourself this question: How many of my perceived constraints
are nothing more than LIEs and BS? I think you’re going to be stunned
with the answers, and that these answers are going to be liberating.
A quick story before we get going. One of the most cherished
friendships of my life was the one I shared with Stan Lee. As you know,
Stan’s Marvel creations helped me through some of the biggest challenges

of my life when I was younger, and they continue to be a nonstop source of
inspiration to this day. My conversations with Stan were always engaging
and very often illuminating.
I remember one such conversation when we were in a car together on
our way to a dinner. Stan looked resplendent in his suit with a bold
Spiderman tie, and I was inspired to ask him something I’d always wanted
to ask.
“Stan, you’ve created so many great characters over the years, like the
Avengers and X-Men,” I said. “Who’s your favorite character?”
He didn’t even hesitate a second.
“Iron Man,” he said. “And who’s yours?”
I pointed to his tie. “That would be Spiderman.”
Stan nodded and said, “With great power comes great responsibility.”
“That’s so true, Stan. And the opposite is also true: with great
responsibility comes great power.”
He seemed to like that, which tickled me to no end. But while I’d never
phrased it that way before, I realized that I was voicing one of the key
tenets of the limitless mindset. When we take responsibility for
something, we are imbued with great power to make things better.
That’s what a limitless mindset is all about. Our background and
circumstances may have influenced who we are, but we must be
accountable for who we become. It’s about understanding that we are
responsible for our assumptions and attitudes. And when you accept that
all of your potential is entirely within your control, then the power of that
potential grows dramatically.
So, superhero, let’s get started on unlimiting your mindset. As Stan
would say, “Excelsior!”

5

THE SPELL OF BELIEF SYSTEMS
Why do your beliefs have such an effect on your life?
Why do limiting beliefs keep you from your goals?
How do you reject limiting beliefs?

Grab some imaginary popcorn, because we’re going to take a quick side
trip to the movies. The scene goes like this:
A bridge is about to collapse because a supervillain has weakened the
supports to the point where the entire thing is going to go crumbling into
the river. As the bridge creaks and teeters, our superhero learns about the
crisis and races to the scene. She’s the only person with the strength to
avert catastrophe and save hundreds of lives.
Our superhero is less than 10 seconds from the bridge now. But as she
gets closer, a voice in her head reminds her of the time she face-planted
while doing a somersault in elementary school. A couple of seconds later,
she recalls her father telling her that it would be best if she set her sights
low for her future. With the bridge in sight, another vision emerges in
front of her: her former best friend ridiculing her for her delusions of
grandeur.
Rubble from the bridge topples into the water. The creaking gets louder.
The screams of dozens and dozens fill the air.
And our superhero, overwhelmed with doubt, sits down by the side of
the road, covers her face with her hands, and drowns in self-pity.
Wait . . . what?

You’ve never seen that scene in a superhero movie, right? There are
some reasons for that. One is that it would be a terrible story. Another is
that, regardless of the darkness in their pasts or the moral conflicts they
might be facing, superheroes don’t become true superheroes by giving in
to limiting beliefs. Superman doesn’t think that, maybe on a good day, he
might be able to leap a tall building or, maybe, you know, a couple of
stories at least. Tony Stark doesn’t think, “This Iron Man suit is probably
going to fail me at the worst possible time because I’m inherently a screwup.” Captain Marvel doesn’t break through our atmosphere and suddenly
start thinking, “I’m not sure I have the emotional capacity to fly solo
through space.” They have superpowers, and any sense of restriction be
damned.
And you know what? You have superpowers too. How do you realize
them? You begin with your mindset.

FINDING MY ROGER BANNISTER
When I was a kid, maybe 9 or 10 years old, we had a big family reunion.
There were a couple dozen of us around a huge table in a big, busy
restaurant. It was a Saturday night, so the place was packed, with the
waitstaff ping-ponging from table to table as quickly as they could.
A few minutes after we all gathered, our waitress came over to take our
order. As you can imagine, this was a lengthy process. About halfway
through, the waitress came around to ask me what I wanted to eat and
drink. It was then that I realized that she hadn’t been writing down
anything my relatives had ordered. I found this extremely curious. There
was something like 25 of us, and I’d seen her serving other customers, so I
knew we weren’t her only table. How was she possibly going to remember
everything we’d ordered? I told her what I wanted and then watched her
carefully as she made her way around the rest of the table.
I did not have a high level of confidence that my meal was going to
remotely resemble what I’d requested. Even at that age, I had a healthy
amount of skepticism. Not because I was a negative person or because I
didn’t have faith in people, but rather that I needed to see anything out of
the ordinary before I believed it was possible. In this case, I figured that, at
best, the waitress would get most of our orders correct, but she’d wind up

putting them down in the wrong places, and we’d find ourselves trading
plates all across the table.
Well, first our drinks came, and everyone got exactly what they wanted,
even the cousin who wanted no ice in her Coke and another who’d
requested that her drink come with a twist of lemon, a twist of lime, and
two cherries. Okay, I thought, that was pretty good. But there’s a lot more
to come. A few minutes later, the salads came out, and again everything
was perfect. The people who wanted their dressing on the side got it that
way, the people who wanted their dressing tossed with their salads got that,
and everyone got the dressing they’d asked to get. My skepticism was
being tested. And then the main courses were delivered. Not one mistake
—and there were some crazy special requests. Everything was cooked the
way we wanted, and all of the side dishes were the right ones.
I dove into my meal at that point, but I couldn’t stop thinking about
what the waitress had accomplished. At this age, I’d only just begun to
read competently, and my brain injury had caused me all kinds of learning
challenges. And yet here was someone who had shown me that our brains
are capable of far more than I would have imagined.
That waitress was my Roger Bannister. Bannister was a track star in the
1950s. In the early years of Bannister’s career, it was widely assumed that
it was physically impossible for an athlete to run a mile in less than 4
minutes. The feeling was that our bodies would break down from the effort
before the time could be achieved. Then, on May 6, 1954, Bannister ran a
mile in 3 minutes and 59.4 seconds, proving that the 4-minute barrier was
indeed breakable. What is most interesting to me is that less than two
months later someone broke Bannister’s record, and then that record was
broken, and then that one. The times have been dropping ever since.
What Bannister did was show that this barrier wasn’t in fact a barrier at
all. That was what this waitress showed me. Through her, I saw that what
I’d perceived my brain’s capacity to be was so much less than what it
really was. As you know, I continued to struggle with learning for many
years, but from the moment of that dinner I had a model for what was
possible.
The waitress in this way was limitless. She demonstrated something in
front of me that I would never in a million years have thought was
possible. I never got to know her, but I’m forever grateful because what
she did for me personally was to permanently change my perceptions of

my own restrictions. She altered my mindset. It was impossible for me to
buy into the notion that I could expect to accomplish only a modest
amount with my brain when I knew that others could achieve so much
more. I just needed to find a method.
I’m going to share much of that method with you in this book. At its
core is one fundamental concept: unlimiting. The key to making yourself
limitless is unlearning false assumptions. So often, we don’t accomplish
something because we’ve convinced ourselves that we can’t do it. Let’s go
back to Roger Bannister for a moment. Every day before May 6, 1954,
people were absolutely certain that a sub-four-minute mile was beyond the
range of human capabilities. Forty-six days after Bannister did it, someone
else beat his time, and more than 1,400 racers have followed them.
Running a mile in less than four minutes is still an extraordinary feat—but
it is not an impossible feat. Once that “barrier” was broken, many
achieved it.
So, how do you face down limiting beliefs?

WHAT LIMITING BELIEFS DO TO US
Limiting beliefs are often revealed in our self-talk, that inner conversation
that focuses on what you’re convinced you can’t do rather than what you
already excel at and what you’re going to continue to achieve today and
into the future. How often do you stop yourself from attempting to do
something or from pursuing a dream because that voice convinces you that
it is beyond your reach? If this sounds like you, you are very far from
alone, but you’re also not doing yourself any favors.
“We come into this world not knowing if life is hard or easy, if money is
scarce or abundant, if we’re important or unimportant. We look at two
people who know everything: our parents,”1 said belief change expert
Shelly Lefkoe in our podcast interview. Parents are our first teachers, and
although they probably meant us no harm, we still come away from our
childhoods with the limiting beliefs they unconsciously instilled in us.
Limiting beliefs can stop you in your tracks even when you’re doing
something at which you normally excel. Have you ever had the experience
of being in a pressure situation where you need to do something that
typically comes easily to you—writing a memo or doing a quick

calculation, for example—but the intensity causes you to doubt yourself so
much that you fail at this task? That’s a limiting belief setting you back. If
you could just get out of your head, you’d have no trouble getting the job
done, but your inner voice confounds you.
Now, take that situation and extend it to an entire segment of your life.
Your career aspirations, perhaps, or your ability to make friends. If your
limiting beliefs are in control, you could find yourself mired in
underachievement, either wondering why you never really get ahead or
convinced that you don’t deserve it.
Alexis, who cofounded Kwik Learning with me, struggled with learning
as a child much like I did, but for very different reasons. She was born in
South Korea to entrepreneurial parents who struggled in business. They
didn’t have a lot of money, but always worked hard to make ends meet.
While she had a roof over her head, her family of four lived in a one-room
basement in Korea. Their second business had just failed when they
received a letter from the United States saying their visa application had
been approved—they had filed seven years earlier. On the verge of
desperation, her family thought this was a new chance, so they borrowed
the equivalent of $2,000 and left for America.
Alexis didn’t know a word of English when she arrived. It was total
culture shock—she didn’t know what was being said around her, and the
cultural norms were entirely different. Her parents didn’t speak English
either, so they were all struggling to understand their new world.
Alexis enrolled in school near her new home. She was a shy and
introverted student, and, because she didn’t know the language, she often
sat alone at the lunch table or ate in a bathroom stall just to avoid feeling
like an outcast.
It took Alexis six years to be able to truly understand English, and both
the kids and the teachers in her school didn’t understand why she struggled
for so long. After a couple of years, classmates started to criticize her for
being a slow learner. “What’s wrong with you?” “Are you stupid? “You’re
weird,” were phrases she heard frequently as a child.
Her difficulties in school even extended to physical education, the one
area where she ostensibly didn’t need to use many words. She remembers
sitting on the bleachers repeatedly copying out the words, “I will bring my
gym clothes to class.” But she had no idea what she was writing, and no

one managed to communicate to her that she needed to bring a change of
clothing.
By the time she was in her early twenties, Alexis had a hard time
reading a book from front to back. She battled with her internal voices
whenever she attempted to learn. One overarching voice constantly
criticized and doubted her abilities, while another small voice questioned
that critic. Something inside her couldn’t fully accept the notion that she
was “dumb.” Her parents worked hard to give her a second chance, and she
couldn’t let them down. While there were moments where she felt she
wasn’t good enough to do anything special in her life, there were also
moments where she was sure there had to be more to life than merely
accepting her circumstances.
If Alexis allowed those external voices to shape her reality, then it
would’ve stopped her in her tracks. She wouldn’t have searched for
solutions to her problems. Instead, she looked for answers by observing
and learning from others. She started wondering what they were doing
differently to find success and happiness. She wanted to know if it was
sheer luck and genius, or if there was a method behind it. In her quest to
learn how to be successful, she ended up in one of my early classes. She
wasn’t sure what she was getting into, but knew she wanted something
different for herself—she needed to feel a sense of hope.
On day one, we covered memory. It was eight hours of intense training,
but at the end of the session, Alexis felt refreshed and even excited about
what she was learning. “How else can I use my brain?” she wondered. For
the first time in her life, she didn’t feel slow and she felt excited about
learning.
Day two was all about speed reading. She wasn’t initially excited about
this because of her previous challenges. But when Alexis learned the smart
reading habits and went through the speed-reading exercises, a lightbulb
turned on. She suddenly saw the potential—and even the fun—of reading.
She realized she was not too slow or stupid to understand; she was just
never shown how to learn and use the super-computer between her ears. As
she experienced the power of learning, the years of negative self-talk and
limiting beliefs took a backseat in her mind.
After that class, Alexis read a complete book for the first time and was
blown away by how much she understood, how much she remembered, and
how much she liked the experience.

It was a huge turning point in her life. She went from a limited mindset,
believing that “things are the way they are,” to knowing that she could
change and shape her mind to reach her goals. For the first time in her life,
she began to believe in herself and imagine what might be possible.
Today, Alexis doesn’t shy away from learning something new. She
doesn’t feel inadequate if she doesn’t know something. She goes out to
find answers and applies them. Out of her passion for learning, she also
started Kwik Learning Online with me to share the transformation she
experienced with others in every country in the world.
In their book Mequilibrium, authors Jan Bruce, Dr. Andrew Shatté, and
Dr. Adam Perlman call these kinds of beliefs “iceberg beliefs” because of
how many of them lie beneath the surface of our subconscious. “Iceberg
beliefs are deeply rooted and powerful, and they fuel our emotions,” they
say in the book. “The more entrenched an iceberg is, the more havoc it
wreaks on your life. . . creating your schedule chaos, getting in the way of
successfully sticking to a diet, or holding you back from seizing
opportunities.”
And, perhaps most significantly, they say, “If we get a handle on our
icebergs, we gain an enormous amount of control over our feelings and our
lives. Melt an iceberg and all the downstream events it causes get washed
away as well.”2

Dr. Jennice Vilhauer, director of Emory University’s Adult Outpatient
Psychotherapy Program in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Science in the School of Medicine, implores us to come face-to-face with
our inner critic, “the voice in your head that judges you, doubts you,
belittles you, and constantly tells you that you are not good enough. It says
negative hurtful things to you—things that you would never even dream of
saying to anyone else. I am such an idiot; I am a phony; I never do
anything right; I will never succeed.”
She adds: “The inner critic isn’t harmless. It inhibits you, limits you,
and stops you from pursuing the life you truly want to live. It robs you of
peace of mind and emotional well-being and, if left unchecked long
enough, it can even lead to serious mental health problems like depression
or anxiety.”3

Let’s revisit our failed superhero from the beginning of this chapter. She
certainly had the motivation to save the day. And she certainly had the
methods to save the day. But what she didn’t have was the mindset. Her
inner critic convinced her that she wasn’t good enough, so she sat on the
sidelines feeling sorry for herself instead of taking care of business.
Certainly, one takeaway from this story is that our failed superhero blew it.
She flopped at a critical time because she couldn’t get out of her own
head.
But there’s another hugely important component to this story: our
superhero had everything inside of her to succeed. If only she’d been able
to prevail over the beliefs that were holding her back, her extraordinary
talents would have shone through.
That’s how important it is to conquer your limiting beliefs.

WHAT IF I TOLD YOU THAT YOU WERE A
GENIUS?
When you think of geniuses, who are the first people that come to mind?
I’m guessing Einstein and Shakespeare are on your shortlist. Others might
include Stephen Hawking, Bill Gates, Marie Curie, or Ruth Bader
Ginsburg. These names pop into many people’s heads because each of
them was extraordinary in the kinds of intelligence we tend to equate with
genius. But was LeBron James on your list? How about Beyoncé? Or
Oprah? Or you?
It wouldn’t be surprising if you didn’t include the latter names on your
list. Most of us tend to equate genius with one particular measurement of
intelligence: IQ. People with outsize IQs are geniuses, and people with
lesser IQs can be good or even great at something, but they aren’t
considered geniuses.
If this sounds like your kind of thinking, you’re far from alone in
defining genius far, far too narrowly. I would even take this to the point of
suggesting that most people define genius in this way. But there are two
problems with that. One is that it prevents you from appreciating the
genius a wide variety of people hold. The other is that it might prevent you
from identifying the genius in yourself.

There are multiple forms of genius. Various experts differ on the
number, but it is commonly agreed that genius expresses itself in one of
four manners. Here’s a way of looking at it that has been around for
thousands of years:
Dynamo genius: Those who express their genius through creativity
and ideas. Shakespeare was a dynamo genius because of his brilliance
at inventing stories that told us so much about ourselves. Galileo was
a dynamo genius because of the way he could see things that others
couldn’t see when he looked up at the skies. Dynamo geniuses are
those we most commonly think of when we think of geniuses.
Blaze genius: Those whose genius becomes clear through their
interaction with others. Oprah Winfrey is a blaze genius because of
her extraordinary ability to connect with the hearts, minds, and souls
of a wide range of individuals. Malala Yousafzai’s blaze genius
expresses itself through her ability to make her story relatable to
people all around the globe. Blaze geniuses tend to be master
communicators.
Tempo genius: Those whose genius expresses itself through their
ability to see the big picture and stay the course. Nelson Mandela was
a tempo genius because he was capable of seeing the wisdom of his
vision even in the face of overwhelming odds. Mother Teresa’s tempo
genius allowed her to imagine better circumstances for those around
her even at the darkest times. Tempo geniuses tend to understand the
long view in ways that most of those around them cannot.
Steel genius: Those who are brilliant at sweating the small stuff and
doing something with the details that others missed or couldn’t
envision. Sergey Brin used his genius at seeing the potential of large
amounts of data to co-found Google. If you read the book Moneyball,
then you know that Billy Beane and his staff redefined baseball
through their genius at crunching data. Steel geniuses love getting all
the information they can get and have a vision for doing something
with that information that most others miss.

KWIK START
What would you say is your genius? Write it down.
There’s a very good chance that your own genius is a combination of
two or more of these. Very few of us are only data people or are only adept
at being empathetic. But what’s important for you to understand here is
that genius extends far beyond your ability to excel at academics or recite
the periodic table on command—and that you have genius inside of you.
If you find that last statement surprising, you might want to go back and
reread some of the earlier chapters in this book. Making yourself limitless
is all about unleashing your innate genius. Maybe you aren’t the dynamo
of Shakespeare or the blaze of Oprah, but there is some combination of
genius inside of you that is either waiting to express itself or waiting to
express itself more. The key is letting it free.

IT ISN’T ONLY IN YOUR HEAD
Before I give you some tools to help you shift toward a more positive
mindset, let’s just talk for a minute about how important positive thinking
is. There are clear connections between positive thinking and physical
health. In a Johns Hopkins study, Dr. Lisa Yanek found that “positive
people from the general population were 13 percent less likely than their
negative counterparts to have a heart attack or other coronary event.”4
Meanwhile, the Mayo Clinic notes that “The positive thinking that
usually comes with optimism is a key part of effective stress management.
And effective stress management is associated with many health benefits.”
They note that these benefits include:
Increased life span
Lower rates of depression
Lower levels of distress
Greater resistance to the common cold

Better psychological and physical well-being
Better cardiovascular health and reduced risk of death from
cardiovascular disease
Better coping skills during hardships and times of stress5

REFRAMING LIMITING BELIEFS
There’s a metaphor I’ve always found useful when helping people to move
away from limiting beliefs. I tell them that the difference between limiting
beliefs and a limitless mindset is like the difference between a
thermometer and a thermostat. A thermometer has only one function: to
react to the environment. It reads the temperature and nothing more. This
is similar to how people commonly react to limiting beliefs. They read
their sense of restriction, react in a constrained way to that, and conduct
their lives in a limited way.
On the other hand, a thermostat gauges the environment and makes the
environment react to it. If a thermostat notices that a room is too cold or
too hot, it changes the environment to fit the ideal for which it is set.
Similarly, if you encounter external or internal attempts to put constraints
on you, you can act like a thermostat to reject those limiting beliefs and
create an environment that aligns with your most ambitious goals.
So, how do you minimize limiting beliefs and develop a superhero
mindset? To me, there are three keys.
Key 1: Name Your Limiting Beliefs
You’ve seen some examples here of limiting beliefs, but there are many
more where those came from (and we’ll go over the seven most prevalent
limiting beliefs on learning in a moment). They might have to do with
your talents, your character, your relationships, your education, or
anything else that leads to internal whispers that you can’t be what you
want to be. Start paying attention right now to every time you tell yourself
that you’re incapable, even if you think that this particular thing might not
be consequential in your life.
For example, maybe you tell yourself that you’re terrible at telling
jokes. Perhaps this isn’t a big deal to you, because being a good joke-teller

isn’t a personal aspiration. But you might also be telling yourself that you
don’t think you’re entertaining, or good company, or an enjoyable
companion; and that kind of self-talk can ultimately cause you to doubleclutch when you’re in an important social situation or when you need to
speak in front of a group. So, listen carefully every time you find yourself
using phrases like “I can’t,” “I’m not,” or “I don’t.” You’re sending
messages to yourself that are affecting how you think about your life in
general, even if what you’re beating yourself up over is something specific
and seemingly not important to how you define yourself.
At the same time, try also to identify the origin of this sort of self-talk.
Limiting beliefs often start in childhood. That doesn’t automatically mean
that your family is their only source. Early social settings can cause
limiting beliefs, as can early experiences with education. Some might take
hold simply because something didn’t go well for you the first few times
you tried it as a kid.
Being aware of how you’re holding yourself back with your self-talk
and spending some time to get to the source of these beliefs is extremely
liberating, because once you’re aware, you can begin to realize that these
aren’t facts about you, but rather opinions. And there’s a very good chance
that those opinions are wrong.
Once you identify the voices in your head that are focusing on what you
can’t do, start talking back to them. When you find yourself thinking, “I
always screw up this sort of thing,” counter with, “Just because I haven’t
always been good at this in the past doesn’t mean that I can’t be great at it
now. Keep your opinions to yourself.”
Key 2: Get to the Facts
One of the fundamental tyrannies of limiting beliefs is that, in so many
cases, they’re just plain wrong. Are you really terrible at speaking in
public? Are you really bad at leading a group? Are you really the least
interesting person in the room wherever you are? What’s the evidence to
support that? How many times have you actually been in these situations,
and what have the results been?

One of the most pernicious things about limiting beliefs is that they
play so heavily on our emotions. When you come up against a limiting
belief, you’re likely to find those beliefs warring—and usually winning—
against your rational self. But how much of this self-talk has a basis in
reality? Think about your experiences speaking in public (an
extraordinarily common fear, by the way). Rather than focusing on how
you felt in these instances, consider how things went. Were you booed off
the stage? Did people come up to you afterward to laugh at you and tell
you how awful you were? Did your boss sit you down the next day to say
that you might want to consider a career where you never had to utter a
word?
I’m guessing none of these things happened. Instead, it’s likely that your
audience felt connected to what you were saying. If it was in a
professional setting, maybe they were taking notes, and you almost
certainly taught them something. Does this mean that your next speech
should be at TED? Of course not. But it definitely means that you’re likely
much better at conveying information to a group than that voice in your
head is telling you that you are.
And then there’s this question to ask: How much of my perceived poor
performance was because my self-talk just wouldn’t leave me alone? This
is a real issue for many people. They’ll be in the middle of doing
something in which they lack confidence, and the inner critic will become
so distracting that they can’t focus on what they are doing . . . and
therefore don’t do it very well. This is one of the reasons why it’s so
important to learn to face down and quiet your limiting beliefs. The better
you are at this, the better you’ll be at keeping down distractions during
your biggest growth challenges.
So, when you’re examining the facts behind your limiting beliefs, be
sure to consider two things: whether there is in reality any evidence to
prove that you are truly hampered in this area and whether even that
evidence was tainted by the noise in your head.
Key 3: Create a New Belief
Now that you’ve given your limiting beliefs a name and now that you’ve
carefully examined the reality of those beliefs, it’s time to take the most
essential step—to generate a new belief that is both truer than the LIEs

you’ve been accepting and beneficial to the limitless you that you are
creating.
You’re going to see this process at work in the next chapter, but let’s
take it for a spin right now. Let’s say that one of your limiting beliefs is
that you always come up short at the most important moments in your life.
Having identified that as a limiting belief, you’ve then taken the step of
examining the facts. What you realize is that, while you have occasionally
succumbed to nervousness in pressure-packed moments, very few of these
instances have been disastrous for you and, upon examination, you can
think of several times when you “came through in the clutch.” In fact, now
that you really think about it, you’ve succeeded way more often than
you’ve faltered.
So, now it’s time to create a new belief. In this case, your new belief
would be that no one triumphs at the most critical juncture 100 percent of
the time, but that you should be proud of yourself for how many times
you’ve performed at your best when the pressure was highest. This new
belief completely supplants the old belief, is fully supported by the facts,
and gives you a much healthier mindset the next time a critical situation
comes along.
I have one more tool for you to use here. I’ve spoken to many experts
over the years, and the conversation often comes back to the same thing:
as long as you believe that your inner critic is the voice of the true you, the
wisest you, it’s always going to guide you. Many of us even use phrases
like, “I know myself, and . . .” before announcing a limiting belief.
But if you can create a separate persona for your inner critic—one that
is different from the true you—you’ll be considerably more successful at
quieting it. This can be enormously helpful and you can have fun with it at
the same time. Give your inner critic a preposterous name and outrageous
physical attributes. Make it cartoonish and unworthy of even a B-grade
movie. Mock it for its rigid dedication to negativity. Roll your eyes when
it pops into your head. The better you become at distinguishing this voice
from the real you, the better you’ll be at preventing limiting beliefs from
getting in your way.

THE POSSIBILITIES BECOME LIMITLESS

Now that you know how to conquer your limiting beliefs, you can start to
bring your positive mindset to bear on your quest to become limitless.
That might sound like an audacious plan, but there’s lots of evidence to
support the connection between mindset and accomplishment.
One of my podcast guests, James Clear, the New York Times best-selling
author of Atomic Habits who you will meet again later in this book, wrote
about a study performed by Dr. Barbara Fredrickson, a positive psychology
researcher at the University of North Carolina. He prefaced their
conversation by underscoring what negative emotions do to us, using the
example of encountering a tiger in the forest. “Researchers have long
known that negative emotions program your brain to do a specific action,”
he noted. “When that tiger crosses your path, for example, you run. The
rest of the world doesn’t matter. You are focused entirely on the tiger, the
fear it creates, and how you can get away from it.”6 The point that Clear is
making is that negative emotions drive us to narrow the range of what we
are capable of doing. It’s all about getting away from the (metaphorical)
tiger, and nothing else matters. If we let negative emotions (such as
limiting beliefs) control us, we’re regularly operating in survival mode
and therefore confined to a reduced range of possibilities.
What Dr. Fredrickson discovered is that a positive mindset leads to
precisely the opposite result. She created an experiment where participants
were divided into five groups and presented with film clips. The first
group saw clips that elicited joy. The second saw clips that elicited
contentment. The third saw clips that generated fear and the fourth clips
that generated anger. The fifth group was the control group.
After they’d seen the clips, the participants were asked to imagine
similar situations to what they just saw and how they would react to these
situations. They were then asked to fill out a form that had 20 prompts that
began with, “I would like to.” The people who experienced fear and anger
wrote the fewest responses, while those who experienced joy and
contentment listed far more than even the control group. “In other words,”
Clear noted, “when you are experiencing positive emotions like joy,
contentment, and love, you will see more possibilities in your life.”7
What’s also essential to note is that the benefits of a positive mindset
extend well beyond the experience of a positive emotion. Clear offers this
example:

A child who runs around outside, swinging on branches and playing
with friends, develops the ability to move athletically (physical
skills), the ability to play with others and communicate with a team
(social skills), and the ability to explore and examine the world
around them (creative skills). In this way, the positive emotions of
play and joy prompt the child to build skills that are useful and
valuable in everyday life. . . . The happiness that promoted the
exploration and creation of new skills has long since ended, but the
skills themselves live on.8
Fredrickson refers to this as the “broaden and build” theory because
positive emotions broaden your sense of possibilities and open your mind,
which in turn allows you to build new skills and resources that can provide
value in other areas of your life.
The theory, together with the research reviewed here, suggests that
positive emotions: (i) broaden people’s attention and thinking; (ii)
undo lingering negative emotional arousal; (iii) fuel psychological
resilience; (iv) build consequential personal resources; (v) trigger
upward spirals towards greater well-being in the future; and (vi) seed
human flourishing. The theory also carries an important prescriptive
message. People should cultivate positive emotions in their own lives
and in the lives of those around them, not just because doing so
makes them feel good in the moment, but also because doing so
transforms people for the better and sets them on paths toward
flourishing and healthy longevity.9
The new mindset that comes from silencing your inner critic presents
you with a world of possibility. When you’re surging with positive
emotions, you’re seeing—and seizing on—opportunities you might never
have noticed before. And with a high sense of motivation (and, really, how
could you not be motivated by this?) and the right methods, you’re well on
the road to becoming virtually limitless.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON

To learn faster, we must transcend the narrow definition of what we
believe is possible for ourselves. In the following pages, you’ll learn about
the seven learning lies that are the most common limiting beliefs that hold
people back. I’ve seen students and clients cling to these beliefs
throughout my decades of teaching people how to learn. These restrictions
are the only real barrier you face. After all, people can’t learn to read
faster if they believe it isn’t possible. They can’t learn to memorize things
more efficiently if they keep telling themselves they have a bad memory.
Everything else falls into place once you snap out of the trance of these socalled “limitations.” By tackling these lies, you’ll be tackling the core
blocks that keep you from being limitless. Here are a few things to try
before going on to the next chapter.
Think of a time when you saw someone accomplish something that
truly impressed you. Now think about what personal inspiration you
can draw from that.
Reimagine your inner critic. Change the attributes of this voice in
your head so you begin to give it less credence.
Face down one limiting belief right now. What do you regularly tell
yourself you can’t do? Find the evidence that shows you that this
belief isn’t true.

6

THE 7 LIES OF LEARNING
What are the most limiting myths you tell yourself?
How can you overcome the debilitating effect of these myths?
How can you turn these limiting beliefs into positive ones?

You’re being lied to. Constantly. Sometimes by yourself. We are all
subject to an endless stream of misinformation about our constraints to
our capabilities, and we receive this information so often that most of us
have no other choice than to believe it. The problem is that these messages
directly oppose your quest to become limitless. These limited ideas
entertained (LIEs) in our mind can stall us or steer us in a direction we
don’t want. So, let’s bring seven to light, examine them for what they are,
and replace them with something better.

LIE NO. 1: INTELLIGENCE IS FIXED
On the surface, it looked like Rae was a pretty positive person—she ran
her own business, she had a thriving social network, and she loved being
around people with big ideas who could imagine possibilities that most of
us wouldn’t dream of.
When Rae had a daughter, she realized that perhaps she wasn’t as
positive as she thought she was. A different kind of mindset started to
show up in very subtle ways, as these things do. First it was in the way she
reacted to some of the things her little girl did. Rae tended to think that

“that’s just the way she is,” instead of believing that she could have an
effect on the way her daughter behaved. When her partner tried to teach
their daughter new things, Rae noticed she felt a subtle discomfort, as if
she wanted to protect her daughter from disappointment if she wasn’t able
to learn what she was being taught. She became aware of the constant
thought that her daughter was “too young to learn that.”
One day, her partner looked at her and said, “Do you think she can’t
learn, that she’s never going to improve from where she is?” The answer
was of course not—she loved her daughter, and the little girl was bright
and curious and learning something new every day. The opposite was
obviously true . . . and yet, Rae was aware that there was some belief
buried deep inside her that whispered, “No, she is the way she is.” Rae was
struggling with a fixed mindset about her daughter’s intelligence.
These beliefs are incredibly subtle. Few of us consciously think about
our restrictions or the restrictions we believe others have. But it leaks out
in places that deeply affect our happiness—in our work, in our home life,
and with our children. If we believe that it’s not possible to improve, then
in reality it won’t be possible to improve. It’s extremely difficult to
accomplish something when you don’t believe it can be done in the first
place.
Carol Dweck, a professor of psychology at Stanford University,
describes the difference between a fixed and a growth mindset:
In a fixed mindset, students believe their basic abilities, their
intelligence, their talents, are just fixed traits. They have a certain
amount and that’s that, and then their goal becomes to look smart all
the time and never look dumb. In a growth mindset, students
understand that their talents and abilities can be developed through
effort, good teaching and persistence. They don’t necessarily think
everyone’s the same or anyone can be Einstein, but they believe
everyone can get smarter if they work at it.1
Like Rae, most of us don’t think about whether we have a fixed or a
growth mindset. Most of us have carried on thinking in the same patterns
that our family did, without even knowing it. As subtle as this is, the
adoption of one or the other deeply affects the way we approach life. With

the fixed mindset, things are the way they are—we are powerless to
change them. With the growth mindset, we have the ability to improve
anything.
If Rae thinks, even on a very subtle level, that her daughter can’t
improve or grow, what does she do instead of teaching her? Probably a
number of things—placating, giving time-outs, diverting attention. All of
those work to alleviate the stress of the moment, but they don’t contribute
to her child’s growth. In the same way, if as adults we believe that we
don’t have the capacity to learn, what do we do instead of taking the
responsibility to teach ourselves what we want or need to know? We tell
ourselves it isn’t necessary, we make excuses, we blame other people or
circumstances, and then we distract ourselves with things that make us
feel good.
The genesis of this limiting belief is likely one that you either don’t
remember or that came from your early years. And it has a deep effect on
the way you view intelligence and your capacity to learn. IQ scores and
testing were created in the early 1900s to better assess which students
would experience the most difficulty in school. French psychologist
Alfred Binet and his student Theodore Simon were some of the first
scientists to come up with a test that measured intelligence after they were
commissioned to do so for the French government.2 They were able to
devise a test that took into consideration age as it related to competency.
They were also lauded for the fact that the test was easily adaptable to
other languages and cultures.3
More than 100 years later, it’s still hotly debated whether these tests
have the ability to measure intelligence, which is the ability to acquire and
assimilate knowledge and information. Interestingly, Binet himself was
not happy with the way his test was used because it didn’t measure
creativity or emotional intelligence.4 Furthermore, our cultural
understanding of these tests means we give these scores undue weight. We
tend to think of IQ scores as a fixed reflection of our intelligence, but this
isn’t the case. The IQ test actually measures current academic capabilities,
not innate intelligence.5 To this day, IQ tests still don’t measure creativity
or practical intelligence (which you can think of as “street smarts”), and
they certainly don’t measure emotional intelligence6—all three of which
are increasingly more important in the workplace and in life.

The important distinction here is to remember the difference between
test scores and your ability to learn. “Those who claim that IQ is fixed for
life are in fact referring to our IQ test scores, which are relatively stable—
not to our intelligence levels, which are constantly increasing,” says Bryan
Roche of the National University of Ireland.7
David Shenk furthers this idea in his book, The Genius in All of Us. He
writes that everyone has the potential for genius, or at the very least,
greatness. But the reason we prefer to believe that we’re either a genius or
we’re not, or that we’re either talented or not, is because it relieves us
from the responsibility of taking control of our own life. “A belief in
inborn gifts and limits is much gentler on the psyche: The reason you
aren’t a great opera singer is because you can’t be one. That’s simply the
way you were wired. Thinking of talent as innate makes our world more
manageable, more comfortable. It relieves a person of the burden of
expectation.”8
Your intelligence is not only malleable but dependent on your ability to
cultivate a growth mindset. Start looking at your attitude. Listen to the
way you talk; a fixed mindset usually shows up in your language. Maybe
you say to yourself, “I’m not good at reading.” This kind of statement
implies that you believe this is a fixed situation and that your skills can’t
be improved. Instead, try saying something like “This is something I’m
not good at yet.” This shift in language can be applied to anything you
want to improve.
Test scores do not determine your future. They don’t determine what
you’re capable of learning and accomplishing. Take your education into
your own hands.
Here’s the truth: It’s not how smart you are; it’s how you are smart.
There are multiple types of intelligence (more on this later). Like so many
things, intelligence is a combination of attitudes and actions, and is
dependent on context.
New belief: Intelligence is fluid.

LIE NO. 2: WE ONLY USE 10 PERCENT OF
OUR BRAINS

We’ve all heard this myth. Some of us heard it for the first time in a
classroom, some of us heard it from a friend. Some of us heard it through
the media—maybe a documentary, a TV show, or a movie. This myth is
usually used in the context of highlighting longed-for possibilities: If only
we could access the rest of our brains, what could we accomplish?
The story has been traced to a number of different sources, but as so
often happens in the shaping of public opinion, it’s likely built on by
successive events. Some attribute it to author and philosopher William
James, who wrote in The Energies of Men that “We are making use of only
a small part of our possible mental and physical resources.”9 It could have
originated with the work of Pierre Flourens, a French physicist famous for
his discoveries in the late 1800s about how the brain and the nervous
system work and work together.
The myth could also be related to the work of Dr. Karl Lashley in the
1920s; when Lashley removed parts of rats’ cerebral cortex, an area
responsible for higher order cognitive processing, he found the rats could
still relearn some tasks. This led him to hypothesize —incorrectly—that
whole parts of the brain were not necessarily being used.10 Some blame
the earliest neuroimages from PET and fMRI scans, which showed bright
blotches on a screen with simplified explanations like “This is what your
brain does when you pick something up.” These images typically showed
just one portion of the brain lighting up, leading the layperson to conclude
that we only use a small portion of our brains at one time.11
This assumption has also been perpetuated in countless ads and movies
over the last hundred years. The adaption of the book The Dark Fields,
which was produced as Limitless in 2011, says we use 20 percent of our
brain function; the 2014 movie Lucy claimed we use 10 percent at any
given time. In 2017, an episode of Black Mirror, a show known for its
research and well-thought-through use of facts and statistics, touted the
myth, saying, “even on a good day, we only use 40 percent of our brain
capacity.” All of these storylines were focused on the idea of unlocking
our greatest, albeit hidden, potential.
Needless to say, this myth is pervasive, and yet it’s not true.
In a succinct NPR segment, the host plays a clip of Morgan Freeman
posing, in his dramatic bass voice, the what-if scenario upon which Lucy is

based: “What if there was a way of accessing 100 percent of our brain?
What might we be capable of?”
Neuroscientist David Eagleman gives a pointed response: “We would be
capable of exactly what we’re doing now, which is to say, we do use a
hundred percent of our brain.”12
Countless evidence backs this up—too much of it to include it all here
—but Barry Beyerstein, a professor of psychology at Simon Fraser
University in British Columbia, described some of the major scientific
discoveries that refute this myth, which I’ve paraphrased here:13
Studies of damaged brains show that there is no single area of the
brain that can sustain damage without a loss of ability, contrary to
earlier theories. Brain scans have shown that all brain areas are
active, no matter what the activity. Even while we sleep, all parts of
our brains show activity.
Our brains are energy-hogs. The brain takes up only 2 percent of
space by weight, and yet accounts for 20 percent of energy
consumption, more than any other organ. We wouldn’t need such an
incredible amount of energy for an organ that functioned at 40
percent or less.
Scientists have also determined that the brain’s regions have distinct
functions that work together. After extensively mapping the brain
over decades, they’ve concluded that there are no functionless areas
of the brain.
Finally, as we’ve learned, the brain uses a process called synaptic
pruning. If we didn’t use a large portion of our brains, we would
expect to see large areas of degeneration (we don’t—unless brain
diseases are present).14
To sum up, this myth just isn’t true. In an interview with Scientific
American, neurologist Barry Gordon from Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine in Baltimore, said that the idea is “so wrong it is almost
laughable.”15
Here’s the truth: What I want you to take from this is that you have all
the power of your brain available to you now. The utopia that each of these

movies and TV shows depicts is already possible for you. While we use all
of our brain, some people use their brain better than others. Just as most
people use 100 percent of their body, there are some bodies that are faster,
stronger, more flexible, and more energized than others. The key is to
learn how to use your brain as efficiently and effectively as you possibly
can—and by the end of this book, you’ll have the tools to do so.
New belief: I am learning to use my whole brain in the best way
possible.

LIE NO. 3: MISTAKES ARE FAILURES
When we hear the name Einstein, we think of brilliance and intellectual
feats the likes of which most of us believe we’ll never accomplish. The
nearly synonymous relationship is well deserved; Einstein did more to
further the scientific field in general and physics in particular than any
other scientist of our time. His discoveries have made possible some of
our most important modern-day technology.
With such an illustrious reputation, it would be easy to assume Einstein
rarely made mistakes—but that is not the case. To begin with, his
development was described as “slow,” and he was considered to be a
below-average student.16 It was apparent from an early age that his way of
thinking and learning was different from the rest of the students in his
class. He liked working out the more complicated problems in math, for
example, but wasn’t very good at the “easy” problems.17
Later on in his career, Einstein made simple mathematical mistakes that
appeared in some of his most important work. His numerous mistakes
include seven major gaffes on each version of his theory of relativity,
mistakes in clock synchronization related to his experiments, and many
mistakes in the math and physics calculations used to determine the
viscosity of liquids.18
Was Einstein considered a failure because of his mistakes? Hardly. Most
importantly he didn’t let his mistakes stop him. He kept experimenting
and making contributions to his field. He is famously quoted as having
said, “A person who never made a mistake never tried anything new.”
What’s more, no one remembers him for his mistakes—we only remember
him for his contributions.

So, why do we fear mistakes so much? It could be ingrained—as school
children, we were judged on our mistakes, and the number of them on any
given test determined whether we passed or failed. If we were called on in
class and said the wrong answer, most of us were usually too embarrassed
to raise our hands again. Unfortunately, mistakes are not often used as a
tool for learning; they are used as a way of measuring one’s capabilities.
Make too many mistakes and you fail your test or your class.
We need to change that. Too many of us don’t come close to our
capacities because we are too afraid of making a mistake. Instead of
looking at mistakes as proof of failure, take them as proof that you are
trying.
Beth Comstock, former vice chair of General Electric, and her team
learned this when the company had to scrap a new line of products in
which it had invested. Comstock, author of Imagine It Forward: Courage,
Creativity, and the Power of Change, often speaks on the ever-growing
demand on businesses and the people within them to adapt and change
faster.19 She reflects on how she and her team were able to look at the
mistakes they made not as a failure, but as major learning lessons that led
to the development of a new line that moved the company forward.20
Instead of dwelling on the mistakes, they asked themselves what they
learned.
Here’s the truth: Mistakes don’t mean failure. Mistakes are a sign that
you are trying something new. You might think you have to be perfect, but
life is not about comparing yourself to anyone else; it’s about measuring
yourself compared to who you were yesterday. When you learn from your
mistakes, they have the power to turn you into something better than you
were before.
Also, remember that you are not your mistakes. Making a mistake
doesn’t mean anything about you as a person. It’s easy to jump to the
conclusion that you’re inherently worthless, but you make mistakes;
mistakes don’t make you. Place them under your feet and use them as
stepping stones to rise to the next level. It’s not how we make mistakes,
but how we deal with them that defines us.
New belief: There is no such thing as failure. Only failure to learn.

LIE NO. 4: KNOWLEDGE IS POWER
We’ve all heard the phrase “knowledge is power,” usually as a reason for
learning, as if knowledge alone will give us power. You might have also
heard this phrase used with the opposite intent: as a reason to withhold
information or knowledge from another person, say, in a negotiation.
Although the phrase “knowledge is power” is commonly attributed to
Sir Francis Bacon, the first known use of the exact wording was not
penned until Thomas Hobbes, who acted as secretary to Bacon in his
younger years, used the phrase scientia potentia est, Latin for “knowledge
is power,” in Leviathan in 1651. He then expanded on the idea in De
Corpore in 1655. Unfortunately, Hobbes’s original sentiments have been
cut short over the years. In the original, Hobbes says: “The end of
knowledge is power; and the use of theorems is for the construction of
problems; and, lastly, the scope of all speculation is the performing of
some action, or thing to be done.” [Emphasis added.]21
Put another way, knowledge is important, but it is “the performing of
some action” that is required to make it powerful. This is where we get
stuck as a culture. As discussed, we’re deluged with information on a daily
basis. We have more access to knowledge than we have ever had in the
history of humankind, and yet this glut of information makes it more and
more difficult to act.
I used to believe this myth. When I was the “boy with the broken brain,”
I wanted nothing more than to be able to learn like the rest of the kids in
my classroom. But once I was able to do that, I quickly realized that
possession of knowledge wasn’t going to differentiate me from the people
around me—it was how I used my knowledge that would.
Here’s the truth: Knowledge is not power. It only has the potential to
be power. You can read this book and learn everything in it, but if you
don’t take it and apply the knowledge, it will be useless. All the books,
podcasts, seminars, online programs, and inspiring social media posts in
the world won’t work until you put your knowledge into action.
It’s easy to talk about what we learn, but I want to challenge you not to
talk about it, but to show what you learned. It’s better well done than well
said. Don’t promise, prove. Your results will speak for themselves.
New belief: Knowledge × Action = Power

LIE NO. 5: LEARNING NEW THINGS IS VERY
DIFFICULT
When we hear the word learning, we usually think of school. Few of us
have fond memories of school. Even if we did well academically, school is
typically a place associated with the growing pains of youth, where we felt
romantic love for the first time (and probably rejection), and where we
experienced crushing boredom. For those of us who struggled in school,
the added emotions of shame, doubt, and the ever-present feeling that
we’re too dumb to learn anything colors the word. It’s no wonder that
when we think of learning, we think of difficulty and strife.
Carol Greider is an American molecular biologist who won the Nobel
Prize in 2009 for her part in discovering how telomeres change with age,
which has an enormous potential for how we understand and treat cancer.22
Greider has the distinction of being a Bloomberg Distinguished Professor
and a Daniel Nathans Professor, and she is the director of molecular
biology and genetics at John Hopkins University. With such an illustrious
career, one would assume that Greider whizzed through school, but such
was not the case.
“When I was in elementary school, I was considered a poor speller and
somebody who couldn’t sound out words, so I was taken into remedial
classes,” recalls Greider. “I remember having a tutor come down and take
me out of class and bring me to a different room. It certainly felt like I
wasn’t as good as the other kids.”23
It turned out she had dyslexia, a learning disability that affects parts of
the brain that process language. Those who struggle with dyslexia have
problems identifying speech sounds and relating them to letters and words,
which results in difficulty reading and sometimes speaking.24 Greider felt
stupid and describes the situation as hard to overcome, but she didn’t give
up.
I kept thinking of ways to compensate. I learned to memorize
things very well because I just couldn’t spell words. So later when I
got to take classes like chemistry and anatomy where I had to
memorize things, it turned out I was very good at that. I never
planned a career. I had these blinders on that got me through a lot of

things that might have been obstacles. I just went forward. It’s a skill
that I had early on that must have been adaptive.25
Even though school was hard at first, she found other ways to make up
for her disability, and because of her ability to adapt, she became the kind
of problem-solver who could not only learn but could contribute to
research that changed the way we view cancer. Learning was hard for her,
but she figured out how to work around her disability. After all, it’s not
how smart you are, but how you are smart. Because Greider had to
problem-solve her way through learning, she now has a career that is
having an impact on the world.
The truth is that learning won’t always be easy, but the effort pays
dividends. In fact, learning should be at least a little uncomfortable;
otherwise you’re mostly reinforcing what you already know. If you’ve ever
tried to cut wood with a dull blade, you know that it takes far more time
and energy to accomplish the task than it should. In much the same way,
lacking motivation or having inadequate methods will slow you down and
make you feel as if learning is too hard (and we’ll show you how to
address those issues later in this book).
The key is taking small, simple steps. Think about a stonecutter. The
stonecutter may sit there and hammer away at his block of stone for what
feels like an eternity, making only small chips and dents here and there.
But in one moment, the stone will crack open. Was it the one time that did
it? No—it was all the sustained effort that prepared the stone to split.
Approach your learning like a stonecutter. It will require you to
cultivate patience, to have a positive attitude, and to be adaptive to your
own needs. If you are the kind of learner who does best with a book in
your hands, that’s fantastic. But if you already know that doesn’t work for
you, why keep trying the same thing? Look for other ways to learn that do
work for you.
Know that it won’t be hard, but it will require effort—though perhaps
not as much as you think. The key is consistency. You must have the
patience to consistently come back at it again and again. When you do,
you will not only reap the rewards of your hard-earned knowledge, but
you’ll be a better person for having cultivated the tenacity to keep trying.

Here’s the truth: Sometimes it is hard to learn new things. What’s
more accurate is to understand that learning is a set of methods, a process
that can certainly be easier when you know how to learn.
New belief: When you learn new ways how to learn, the challenge of
learning new things can be fun, easier, and more enjoyable.

LIE NO. 6: THE CRITICISM OF OTHER
PEOPLE MATTERS
Years ago I was a keynote speaker at an event hosted by Deepak Chopra.
After my presentation, I sat down in the audience to watch the rest of the
programming. To my surprise, a tall figure approached and loomed over
me, and I looked up to see one of my favorite actors, Jim Carrey.
What followed was a deep conversation in the lobby about creativity. At
one point he said, “Jim, I’m working on Dumb and Dumber 2, and I need
to get really smart to be dumb and dumber.”
A few weeks later, we spent a day together at his home. During one of
our breaks, while making guacamole (one of my favorite brain foods) in
the kitchen, I asked, “Why do you do what you do? You’re such a unique
actor, and you’re a little bit extreme on camera.” Jim said, “I act that way
because I want to give the people who are watching permission to be
themselves. The biggest travesty in the world is people preventing and
limiting themselves from expressing who they really are because they’re
afraid of what other people think.” This sentiment comes close to a
religion for Jim; he calls it “freeing people from concern.” He elaborated
on this during a commencement address at Maharishi International
University:
The purpose of my life had always been to free people from
concern. . . . How will you serve the world? What do they need that
your talent can provide? That’s all you have to figure out. . . . The
effect you have on others is the most valuable currency there is.
Everything you gain in life will rot and fall apart, and all that will be
left of you is what was in your heart.26

The fastest learners on the planet are children, and that’s partly because
they don’t care what others think of them. They have no shame around
failing. They will fall 300 times and get up 300 times in the course of
learning to walk, and don’t feel embarrassed; they just know they want to
walk. As we get older, we have a harder time staying this open. We might
take a singing lesson, or maybe a coding class, and if we hit a flat note or
make a mistake as we learn, we shrink or stop.
Part of being limitless is learning to let go of the fear of criticism from
other people. History is littered with examples of those who overcame the
negative opinions of the people around them. The Wright brothers
accomplished their incredible feat of making a machine fly through the air
—and initially received virtually no acclaim for it. When they returned
home from their inaugural flight on December 17, 1903, they were not met
with brass bands and cigars and streamers. They were met with doubt.
Their biographer, Fred Kelly, wrote that the neighbors had a hard time
believing what had happened. Said one: “I know you boys are truthful and
if you say you flew through the air in the machine, I believe you. But then,
down there on the Carolina coast, you had special conditions to help you.
Of course, you couldn’t do it anywhere else.”27
Hardly the enthusiastic response one would expect, right?
The papers and media didn’t report on their accomplishment, either.
According to Kelly, noted scientists of the time had already explained why
man couldn’t fly, so no newspaper reporter was willing to report on the
story for fear of being humiliated.28 No editor wanted to print a story that
directly refuted a respected scientist’s proclamations that flying was not
scientifically possible. The lack of public recognition didn’t faze the
Wright brothers. They knew they had more work to do and set about
perfecting their flying machine, which eventually did earn the recognition
that it deserved.
Most of us fear the opinions of other people when we simply think
about trying something new. What the Wright’s story shows is that public
imagination is woefully underwhelming, and people have a hard time
reconciling what they believe is possible with what is actually happening.
Here’s the truth: Creating the life you want can be scary. But you know
what’s scarier? Regret. One day we will take our final breaths and not one
of other people’s opinions or your fears will matter. What will matter is

how we lived. Don’t take criticism from someone you wouldn’t take
advice from. People will doubt you and criticize you no matter what you
do. You will never know your true potential until you break the unfair
judgements you place on yourself. Don’t allow other people’s opinions and
expectations to run or ruin your life.
New belief: It’s not your job to like, love, or respect me. It’s mine.

LIE NO. 7: GENIUS IS BORN
Bruce Lee is known today as a film star, philosopher, and one of the most
accomplished martial arts fighters in the history of the sport. And yet,
given his background, you wouldn’t have pegged him as a future icon if
you were under the assumption that genius is born.
Lee’s family moved from San Francisco to Hong Kong shortly after he
was born.29 Not long after they arrived, Hong Kong was occupied by
Japan, making it a politically and socially tumultuous place to grow up. As
a young man, Lee was faced with the difficulty of being the ultimate
outsider. He was not purely Chinese, so the students in his classes made
fun of him. He also wasn’t British like other kids in his private school, so
he was frequently taunted for being “oriental.” The feeling of tension was
ever-present for him—so he turned to fighting to battle his way through.30
Fighting began to define him. His grades were low, and he fought so often
in school that he transferred to a different primary school.
When Lee was 13, he met his teacher Yip Man, who taught him Wing
Chun. He was accepted into this famous teacher’s school and began to
learn this style of Kung Fu. Not unlike the rest of his education, he was
still taunted by the Chinese children who felt he was not enough like them
to be “allowed” to learn the technique. He constantly had to prove himself
and his abilities, and his fighting spilled over into the streets. This internal
tension, coupled with Hong Kong’s slide into gang violence, led to Lee
fighting far more often than learning. He developed a reputation for being
street-tough through his willingness and propensity for battle.
After one particularly bad street fight, a high-ranking police officer
approached Lee’s parents and told them their son would be arrested. The
boy he had beat up the night before was the son of this police officer. Lee’s
father quickly arranged for Lee to go back to America; after all, he still

had citizenship. So, off Lee went with $100 in his pocket. “Like most
Chinese kids who had just gotten off the boat, my first job was washing
and bussing dishes,”31 said Lee in a later interview. He worked to support
himself with odd jobs and eventually started teaching martial arts.
Lee wasn’t just talented—he was also willing to teach other people, and
he accepted everyone who came to him as a student, regardless of their
race or background. This soon ruffled the feathers of the Chinese
community in Oakland, who felt that these techniques should not be taught
to anyone who wasn’t Chinese. Eventually, he was forced to defend his
right to teach. The Chinese traditionalists challenged him to a fight, saying
that if he won, he could keep his school. But if he lost, he would be forced
to shut it down and stop teaching to people outside of their ethnic group.
Lee’s style was different from any one form of martial arts. When he
was still living in Hong Kong, he took dancing lessons, and in 1957 he was
so good he won the cha-cha championship. He added the movements he
learned in dance to his fighting techniques. Where other fighters took a
mostly solitary stance with their feet, he kept his moving constantly, which
fueled his ability to adapt to his opponent’s moves. Lee did this with
everything he learned later in life. Eventually, his style incorporated not
only Wing Chun, but boxing, fencing, and dancing.
It was a major turning point—the old vanguard against the new. Lee’s
wife Linda was eight months pregnant at the time, and she remembers the
scene vividly, almost comically. She recalls it took three minutes for Lee
to get his opponent down to the ground; before this take-down, the
opponent had run around the room, trying to get away from Lee.
After the fight, Linda found Lee with his head in his hands, despite his
victory. He told her that his training didn’t prepare him for this kind of a
battle. As she describes it, this was the beginning of the evolution to his
own way of martial arts.
After this battle, Lee no longer tried to fit his knowledge and teachings
into one box and discarded most of his original training. He openly took
influences from areas of fighting outside of Wing Chun and Kung Fu,
using them to form a philosophy of martial arts. In a later interview, he
said, “I do not believe in styles anymore. I do not believe there is such a
thing as the Chinese way of fighting, Japanese way of fighting.”32 Instead,
Lee’s approach focused on fighting as a way of ultimate self-expression.

“When people come to me to learn, they’re not coming to me to learn to
defend themselves. They want to learn to express themselves through
movement, anger, or determination.” He believed that the individual is
more important than any style or system.
No one remembers Lee for his academic endeavors. Lee is remembered
for his tenacity, his ability to defeat his opponents, his philosophy, and for
the way he managed to break out of the box of orthodox thinking and bring
different styles of fighting together to create an entirely new philosophy.
So was he a natural genius, someone born to achieve outsize physical,
mental, and philosophical feats?
In The Talent Code, author Daniel Coyle delves into whether talent is
innate or whether it can be developed. He argues “greatness isn’t born, it’s
grown.” Through deep practice, ignition, and master coaching, anyone can
develop a talent so deep that it looks like genius.33
Bruce Lee’s daughter Shannon spoke at our annual conference about her
father’s approach to memory and learning. She said that, by the time Lee
was a film star and notable teacher, he had already achieved thousands
upon thousands of hours of deep practice, at least in part because of his
early days in fighting on the streets. Later in life, Lee didn’t master the
famous one-inch punch in a day. That alone took years of hard repetition
and practice. Lee continued to train and condition himself even with a
back injury—it was a daily commitment. Ignition is the motivation, the
fuel to do what you do. It seems Lee’s initial fuel was the tension he felt as
a Chinese American in a place that didn’t accept him as either. Later, his
ignition seems to have been his drive for ultimate self-expression. And
finally, Lee had training from a master teacher, Yip Man, who himself was
trained by several master teachers from the time he was a child. When Lee
became his student, he had been teaching Kung Fu for decades.
Lee’s talent was born of a confluence of experiences and circumstances
that served him well, although they may have defeated someone else. How
many of us would look at a young child with a propensity for fighting and
poor grades and predict that he would become a master teacher and
philosopher?
Here’s the truth: Genius leaves clues. There is always a method behind
what looks like magic.
New belief: Genius is not born; it’s made through deep practice.

KWIK START
How many of the LIEs described above did you believe in before
reading this book? Are there any other ones you would add? Write
them down.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON
Understanding that these commonly held limiting beliefs are nothing more
than myths is an essential part of becoming limitless. When you convince
yourself that any of these are true, you’re giving yourself an unnecessary
burden to carry around. While these seven are among the most common,
keep your radar up for any “conventional wisdom” that has the effect of
putting constraints on your potential and examine that wisdom very
carefully. In most cases, you’re going to find that such constraints don’t
apply to anyone willing to push beyond them. Before going to the next
chapter, give these things a try:
Take a good look at some of the mistakes you’ve made. Have you let
these define you? How have your feelings about these mistakes
changed after reading this chapter?
Find a way to put something you’ve recently learned (even today)
into action. Notice the difference it makes when you turn knowledge
into power.
Think about a situation where you allowed the opinions of others to
sway your actions. How would you approach that same situation
differently if the only opinion that mattered was yours? Get my 4Gs
to a limitless mindset, including more strategies for replacing limited
beliefs, at LimitlessBook.com/resources.

PART III

LIMITLESS MOTIVATION
THE WHY

motivation
mo·ti·va·tion (noun)

The purpose one has for taking action. The energy required for someone to
behave in a particular way.

In the movie Limitless, writer Eddie Morra was completely unmotivated,
unfocused, and had no energy. When he popped the pill that made him
suddenly take action, his life drastically changed for the better because he
was able to make things happen.
Let’s unlimit a few LIEs commonly held around motivation. Contrary to
popular belief, like your mindset, motivation is not fixed. No one has a set
level of motivation. And when people say they are unmotivated, it’s not
completely true. They could have a high level of motivation to stay in bed
and watch television.
Motivation also doesn’t mean you must enjoy something that you need
to do. My friend, entrepreneur Tom Bilyeu, hates working out, but he has a
clear and compelling reason to do so, so he does it every morning. I really
don’t like taking cold showers, but I do it daily (I’ll explain why in
Chapter 8).
Finally, motivation is not something you wake up with or not. We put
ourselves in a trance when we say, “I don’t have any motivation.”
Motivation is not something you have; it’s something you do. And it’s
entirely sustainable. Unlike a warm bath, it’s not something that you
experience for a moment and then lose unless you heat it up again.
Motivation isn’t derived from a seminar that temporarily pumps you up.
It’s a process. And since it’s a strategy, you have control over it and can
create it consistently by following the right recipe.
Here’s the formula: Motivation = Purpose × Energy × S3
When you combine purpose, energy, and small simple steps (S3), you
get sustainable motivation. And the ultimate form of motivation is the
state of flow. Think about it as energy management. Creating it, investing
it, and not wasting it. A clear purpose or reason gives you energy. Practices
you employ will cultivate energy for your brain and the rest of your body,
and small simple steps require little energy.
In this section, we’ll talk about how to cultivate powerful sustainable
motivation around learning and life that lasts. We’ll achieve this by
getting clear on your purpose, fostering the mental and physical energy
that will sustain you, and establishing small simple steps. And tapping
flow states.

Purpose drives us to act, and our purpose must be clear enough that we
know why we’re acting and what we’re hoping to gain. Generating
sufficient energy is vital—if you’re tired or sleepy, or if your brain is
foggy, then you won’t have the fuel to take action. Small simple steps take
minimal effort and keep you from being paralyzed with overwhelm. And
finally, finding flow is the ultimate boon to motivation.

7

PURPOSE
How do certain defining phrases determine who you are?
How do your values define you?
What does your sense of purpose say about who you are?

For the longest time, my kryptonite was lack of sleep. Sleep has never
been easy for me. As a kid for years I was pulling regular all-nighters,
studying long hours trying to compensate for my learning challenges. I
developed bad sleeping problems. I was always tired at school, but I would
plow through the fatigue anyway because I had a strong desire to work
hard and make my family proud. My purpose and reasons were superclear, so I was plenty motivated. Even after I learned accelerated learning
skills at age 18 and I no longer had to put in crazy hours, my sleeplessness
continued into adulthood and has grown steadily worse—two to four hours
total of very interrupted sleep for about 20 years.
The longer you go without sleep, the harder it becomes to maintain a
sense of reality—or motivation, for that matter. Lack of sleep
compromises all of your cognitive skills, your focus, your memory, and
your overall brain health. A common contributing factor for depression
and many mood disorders is lack of sleep. I can attest to the dark places
I’ve found myself in as a result of lack of sleep. My intense speaking and
global travel schedule certainly did not help; one year I was on the road
for 235 days. Time zones, jet lag, unfamiliar stale hotel rooms, you get the

picture. And my brain was feeling it; just imagine a memory expert
forgetting what city he is waking up in.
This puzzled me, because as a long-time meditation student, my mind
was not ruminating or racing at night; it was as calm as could be. It was
only a handful of years ago, when I ended up hospitalized from multiple
nights without rest, that I participated in an overnight sleep study and was
diagnosed with severe obstructive sleep apnea, a physical disorder where
evidently I stopped breathing more than 200 times each and every night.
Today, after multiple treatments, I’m happy to say my sleep is worlds
better. Once I was able to fix the physical obstruction with surgery, I was
then able to optimize my sleep with a number of tools I will cover in
Chapter 8.
During my most difficult moments, I’ve asked myself why I continue to
do what I do. Why struggle when I could easily tell myself I don’t have the
energy for this? As a child, my purpose and motivation (motive for taking
action) was to compensate for my lack of talent with hard work, to prove
to myself I was capable. But once I’d leveled up my learning, why did I
continue to work so hard—despite being exhausted, sleep-deprived, and an
extreme introvert—to make speech after speech, video after video, podcast
after podcast? It’s the same thing that drove me as a child: I have clear and
definite purpose. I don’t want anyone to struggle and suffer the way I did.
The mission that drives me is to unlock better, brighter brains.
Often our greatest struggles lead to our greatest strengths. My two
biggest challenges as a child were learning and public speaking. Life has a
sense of humor because I spend most of my life public speaking on
learning. I couldn’t read, and now I teach people from all over the world
how to read better. I struggled to understand my brain, and now I speak in
front of audiences of thousands to help them understand the amazing tool
they possess. I’ve learned there is a gift in most challenges. In the same
way, decades of lack of sleep has given me two very important lessons.
First, it’s forced me to live everything in this book. I wouldn’t be able to
perform at the level I do without the tools I’ve learned, so I’ve doubled
down on everything I teach. I rarely have to prepare for a speech, because I
use these skills every single day. I live them. It’s who I am.
Second, I’ve had to become really clear on my purpose, my identity, my
values, and my reasons for doing what I do every day. When you don’t
sleep, and you have a very limited amount of energy and focus, you don’t

waste it. You prioritize and get crystal clear about your commitments and
why you are making them. All of those choices have led to inexhaustible
motivation. That’s what we’ll talk about in this chapter.

START WITH WHY
Among my favorite books is Start with Why by Simon Sinek, who I’ve
interviewed multiple times on my show. He often stresses the importance
of being able to convey to others why you do what you do. If, Sinek
explains, you can articulate the belief that is driving you (your why),
people will want what you are offering. Or, as he so often says: “People
don’t buy what you do, they buy why you do it, so it follows that if you
don’t know why you do what you do, how will anyone else?”
There’s a reason why the second of the magic questions is, “Why must I
use this?” (Do you recall the other two questions?) For most children, their
favorite word is why, which they’re asking all the time. Do you know why
it was important to memorize the periodic table or historic dates? If you
don’t, you probably don’t remember them. We hear the words purpose and
goals used frequently in business, but do we really know what they mean
and how they are the same or different? A goal is the point one wishes to
achieve. A purpose is the reason one aims at to achieve a goal.
Whether your goal is to read a book a week, learn another language, get
in shape, or just leave the office on time to see your family, these are all
things that you need to achieve. But how do you do this? One of the
popular ways is setting SMART goals. Yes, this is an acronym:
S is for Specific: Your goal should be well defined. Don’t say you
want to be rich; say you want to make a certain amount of money.
M is for Measurable: If you can’t measure your goal, you can’t
manage it. Getting fit isn’t measurable—running a six-minute mile
is.
A is for Actionable: You wouldn’t drive to a new town without
asking for directions. Develop the action steps to achieve your goal.
R is for Realistic: If you’re living in your parents’ basement, it’s
hard to become a millionaire. Your goals should challenge and stretch

you, but not so much that you give up on them.
T is for Time-based: The phrase, “A goal is a dream with a deadline”
comes to mind. Setting a time to complete your goal makes you that
much more likely to reach it.
The challenge for many people is that this process, while logical, is very
heady. To get your goals out of your head and into your hands, make sure
they fit with your emotions—with your HEART:
H is for Healthy: How can you make sure your goals support your
greater well-being? Your goals should contribute to your mental,
physical, and emotional health.
E is for Enduring: Your goals should inspire and sustain you during
the difficult times when you want to quit.
A is for Alluring: You shouldn’t always have to push yourself to
work on your goals. They should be so exciting, enticing, and
engaging that you’re pulled toward them.
R is for Relevant: Don’t set a goal without knowing why you’re
setting it. Ideally, your goals should relate to a challenge you’re
having, your life’s purpose, or your core values.
T is for Truth: Don’t set a goal just because your neighbor is doing it
or your parents expect it of you. Make sure your goal is something
you want, something that remains true to you. If your goal isn’t true
to you, you’re far more likely to procrastinate and sabotage yourself.

ON PURPOSE AND PASSION
Knowing your purpose in life helps you live with integrity. People who
know their purpose in life know who they are, what they are, and why they
are. And when you know yourself, it becomes easier to live a life that’s
true to your core values.
Your life purpose consists of the central motivating aims of your life—
the reasons you get up in the morning. Purpose can guide life decisions,
influence behavior, shape goals, offer a sense of direction, and create

meaning. For me, my life purpose is to create a world of better, brighter
brains.
The English language is rife with words that get used interchangeably,
as if they mean the same thing. Let’s take the words nice and kind, for
example. These two words are often used in the same way, but their roots
reveal a different story. The origin of nice comes from the Latin word
nescius, which means “ignorant.” Kind, on the other hand, is of Germanic
origin and is related to the word kin. The original sense of the word was
“nature, the natural order,” and “innate character, form, or condition.” It
morphed from the sense of “feeling of relatives with one another,” and
became a word that meant “friendly, deliberately doing good to others.”1
Passion and purpose are in the same camp—they’re often confused with
one another. Both concepts are discussed all over the Internet, in
motivational books, in TED talks. It’s easy to feel as if you must be
lacking if you don’t feel a burning passion or purpose in your life. In my
experience, however, passion and purpose are not the same thing; instead,
one leads to the other.
Finding your passion is not about choosing the right path or finding the
perfect professional destiny. It’s about experimenting to see what ignites
your joy. Passion comes when we rediscover our authentic, alive self, the
one who has been muted and buried beneath a pile of other people’s
expectations. There is not a single right path to be discovered or revealed.
Instead, I believe that when we exchange a fixed mindset for a growth
mindset, as we discussed in Chapter 6 in the section on myths, we learn
that interests can be developed through experience, investment, and
struggle.
Furthermore, different passions can be cultivated simultaneously. You
don’t have to choose one over the other when you’re exploring. Finding
your passion is like finding true love, in that you have to go out on many
dates to get to the perfect match. Once you find that special person, it
doesn’t just magically “work,” because it takes effort to build a
relationship. Finding your passion is no different—it takes
experimentation to see what clicks for you, and it takes effort.
To sum it up, passion is what lights you up inside. My passion to learn
was born out of such a struggle that it became a major part of my life’s
identity.

KWIK START
What are your current passions? List three.
Purpose, however, is about how you relate to other people. Purpose is
what you’re here to share with the world. It’s how you use your passion.
When you get down to it, we all have the same purpose: to help other
people through our passion. The greatest task we have in life is to share
the knowledge and skills we accumulate. It doesn’t have to be more
complex than that.
Your passion might be underwater basket weaving, but your purpose is
to share underwater basket weaving with other people. My passion is
learning, and my purpose is to teach other people to learn. This is so
deeply ingrained that I don’t have to force myself to do it—it comes
naturally. I wake up ready, motivated, and excited to help people learn.
Podcast guest Jonathan Fields, founder of the Good Life Project,
believes that we will naturally have many passions over the course of our
lives. Because you will change, the medium through which you express
your passions will change, too. He believes that if you define yourself by
one very specific passion and your life changes in a way that doesn’t allow
you to pursue that passion any longer, you might feel lost. The key is
finding the underlying meaning in your passions to find a new way of
channeling your expression.

KWIK START
Do you know your life’s purpose? Even if you don’t yet, write down a
little bit about what it could be.

WHO DO YOU THINK YOU ARE?
What often isn’t discussed in the quest for motivation is identity —who
you are . . . and who you think you are at your core. They say the two most

powerful words in the English language are the shortest: “I am.” Whatever
you put after those two words determines your destiny.
Let’s say you want to stop smoking. Maybe you’ve had a few warnings
from your doctor, and you’re finally coming around to the idea that you
should quit. If you identify as a smoker and regularly say, “I am a
smoker,” it’s going to be difficult to quit until you dismantle that identity.
When you say you are defined by a particular action, you are essentially
priming yourself to identify with and justify a certain behavior.
This is so integral to behavior change that it can’t be overstated. A
fascinating study out of Stanford University showed the effects of priming
on participants. Researcher Christopher Bryan separated participants into
two groups. The first group responded to a questionnaire that included
phrases like “to vote” and questions like “How important is it to you to
vote?” The second group’s questionnaire had slightly altered questions,
like “How important is it to you to be a voter [emphasis added]?”2 The
participants were also asked whether they planned to vote in the upcoming
elections. Later, researchers used public voting records to confirm whether
the participants had voted or not. Bryan and his team found that the
participants whose survey included personally identifying statements like
“voter” were 13 percent more likely to vote than those who were simply
asked about the likelihood that they would vote.3
When you consciously decide to identify with the habit or goal you want
to create or achieve, or consciously un-identify with a habit you no longer
want, you will experience enormous power. If you’ve been telling yourself
all of your life that you are a slow learner, or that you can’t learn, you
might start telling yourself “I am a fast and efficient learner” instead. The
highest drive we have is to act consistently with how we perceive
ourselves—it is one of the most powerful forces in the universe. Use it to
your benefit.

KWIK START
Take 60 seconds and, stream of consciousness, write down some “I
am” statements.

A HIERARCHY OF VALUES
Next, we need to consider our values. You can set up the most wellthought-out habits, but if your values are not in alignment with the
ultimate goal, you’re not going to do it. For example, someone who wants
to remember people’s names should value relationships and their
connection to other people. Your behavior has to support your values in
some way, or there is no drive for it.
Our values have a hierarchy to them. If I asked you what’s most
important to you in life, you might tell me family is one of your core
values. I would then ask what family does for you. For me, it provides
love. For you, it might provide belonging. The important distinction here
is that family is a means value—a means to an end. The end value is
actually love or belonging. When we look at our values, we can determine
whether the value we’ve stated is an end or whether it evokes something
else.
Values need to be prioritized. My values are love, growth, contribution,
and adventure, in that order. Each value builds on and contributes to the
next. One’s values tend to not change from year to year unless you
experience life conditions that change them—such as having a kid, losing
a loved one, or ending a relationship, to name just a few.
When we’re unaware of our values and the values of the people closest
to us, it creates a space for conflict to arise; discord usually results from
values conflicting. Let’s say your values include adventure and freedom. If
your partner values safety and security, it’s no surprise that you’ll often be
at odds. It’s not that one set of values is right and the other is wrong—it’s
that they aren’t in alignment. Or let’s say both of you highly value respect,
but what you consider to be respectful or disrespectful differs. There’s still
room for disagreement unless you’ve talked about what constitutes
respect.

FINDING YOUR REASONS
When it comes to doing anything in life, reasons reap rewards. My story is
evidence that feeling good is not required to feel motivated. If I waited
until that day, I would have stopped teaching others to learn better when
my sleeping problems escalated. And besides, how many times have we

felt good on a given day and still not done what we said we would do? You
could feel amazing and still get nothing done if your reasons for doing so
are not strong enough.
Reasons that are tied to your purpose, identity, and values will
sufficiently motivate you to act, even in the face of all of the daily
obstacles that life puts in your way. The healthy 70-year-old doesn’t go to
the gym at 4:35 A.M. because he likes it—he goes because maintaining his
health so he can continue to be with his family is motivation enough to
him, even though he would much rather sleep in. The good student doesn’t
pick up her textbook because she’s in a good mood. She does it because
she wants to ace that test so she has the best chances of landing the
internship that will lead to her dream job.
It’s likely that there’s a good reason behind every task you need to
accomplish, even the unpleasant ones. You don’t love making dinner, but
you want your family to eat well and you understand the dangers of
overreliance on take-out and fast food. You’re uncomfortable giving
speeches, but you know that your team is relying on you to rally the whole
organization behind your project at the conference. You find economics
daunting and a little boring, but you need the class to get your marketing
degree, and you can’t wait to put your marketing skills to work in the real
world.
If you’re struggling to find motivation to learn, or to accomplish
anything else in your life, there is a good chance you haven’t uncovered
the why of the task. Consider your passion, your desired identity, and your
values: How can they create the basis for your reasons? You already know
that you’re much more likely to remember something when you’re
motivated to remember it. Conversely, if you don’t find any motivation in
knowing someone’s name, you’re going to forget it as soon as you move
on to your next conversation. Let’s say your passion is to help people forge
better relationships, you identify as a connector, and one of your values is
love. Your reasons for learning to remember names could be simple to
find: “I want to learn to remember names so that I can better connect with
people in my community and help foster a stronger network of people I
care about.”
Right now, stop and consider three reasons that you want to learn better.
Your reasons should be concrete, like: “I want to learn Spanish so that I
can finally speak to my father-in-law,” or “I want to learn American

history so I can help my kid learn better in school,” or “I want to learn
how to research better so I can finish my business plan and find an
investor for my company.” Write them down.
Having reasons has helped me become crystal clear when it comes to
commitments. A big part of self-love is being protective of your time and
energy. Setting boundaries around your time, emotions, mental health, and
space is incredibly vital at any time, but especially when you don’t sleep.
When you lack any necessary fuel, such as sleep or food, your resources
aren’t as abundant as they are at other times, so protecting what you have
becomes very important. When I make decisions, everything is either a
heaven yes or heaven no (just trying to keep it clean here). If I don’t feel
completely aligned with something, I don’t do it, because I don’t have the
energy to spare. And I can honestly say that I don’t suffer from FOMO
(fear of missing out). In the last few weeks I’ve been invited to a handful
of social and work gatherings but declined because I’m clear about my
purpose and motivation in spending time writing this book. I’d love for
you to join me in celebrating JOMO—the joy of missing out.
Most of us feel tired and fatigued these days. I believe that’s because we
feel like we need to say “yes” to every opportunity, invite, or request that
comes our way. While it’s great to be open-minded and consider options,
when you say yes to something, you need to be careful that you’re not
inadvertently saying no to yourself and your own needs.

WHAT DO YOU HAVE TO LOSE?
What is motivation? Motivation is a set of emotions (painful and
pleasurable) that act as the fuel for our actions. Where does it come from?
Motivation comes from purpose, fully feeling and associating with the
consequences of our actions (or inactions).
Let’s do an exercise. Write down all the disadvantages you have to face
if you do not learn to use the material in this book. What will it cost you
right now and in the future? For example, you could write, “I will have to
keep studying hard and settle for the same mediocre grades or job.” Or, “I
won’t be able to spend time with my loved ones,” or “I won’t get that
raise.” The key is to make sure you feel the emotions. Don’t make this an
intellectual thing. We make decisions based on how we feel. Really feel

the pain that you will have if you don’t do something about it. This is the
only way for you to make a change last and to get you to follow through.
Pain can be your teacher, if you use it and not let it use you. Use pain to
drive you to make things happen. If you are honest, you may write
something like: “I will have to settle for a job I hate, make very little
money, have no free time for myself or anyone else, and I will have to put
up with it for the rest of my life, bored and frustrated.” This will get you to
do something about it! Do this now.
Now, here is the more exciting part. Write down all of the benefits and
advantages you will receive from learning the skills and techniques in this
book. Make a list of things that will really get you excited and motivated.
For instance: “I’ll be able to ace my tests, have more time to be with
family, start that business, and learn new languages to travel the world.”
Or, “I will have more free time to exercise and get healthy, to go away for
spring break, and to spend more time with my boy/girlfriend!” Or maybe
something simple like, “I will finally have some free time to just get
caught up and relax!”
Again, make sure your reasons are compelling enough to be backed with
real emotion. You must really get yourself to see and feel the benefits of
learning this material. Do this now.

TYING IT ALL TOGETHER
Now, let’s apply all of this to learning. As you move through this
“Motivation” section of the book, I want you to consider where learning
fits into your passion, identity, values, and reasons.
It was not until I was an adult that I found my passion and purpose.
Through my struggle to learn, I developed a love of learning because it
helped me become unlimited, and my purpose is teaching other people to
learn so they can unlimit themselves.
As a kid, I forced myself to study, trying to rise to the level of average. I
had a lot of identity issues to resolve; I was the boy with the broken brain,
and I believed that I was stupid. I had to change the way I saw myself and
give up the identity that kept me locked into being unable to learn. Instead
of saying “I am broken,” I had to say, “I am a learner.”

As for values, as I mentioned earlier I value growth and adventure. For
me, learning falls under both of these, because it contributes directly to
my growth and it gives me a sense of adventure, especially when I learn
something novel and challenging. There’s no ambiguity here; learning
directly contributes to the fulfillment of my values.
Every single one of my reasons keeps me motivated so that I can help
more people learn. As any author knows, writing a book is a challenge. But
my reason for writing this book—to teach my methods to a wider audience
around the world that may not have access to my online courses—has kept
me going.
If you’re trying to force motivation, but you haven’t addressed these
invisible, limiting identities, you won’t get very far. When you feel stuck,
come back to the way your goal fits into your values, and then ask yourself
what needs to be brought back into alignment.
Going back to the previous chapter’s list of the seven lies that hold you
back, perhaps the eighth lie is that you have motivation —that you wake
up and feel motivated every day. The reality is that you do motivation.
Ultimately, motivation is a set of habits and routines, guided by your
values and your identity, that you carry out every day.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON
Finding your passion is about giving yourself novelty and putting yourself
in a new environment to see what lights you up. It’s difficult to do that if
you feel limited or if you’re self-conscious about looking bad, so let that
go and enjoy the experience. Those initial moments of discomfort just
might lead you to an entirely new passion and purpose in life. Here are a
few things to try before moving on to the next chapter:
Write down a list of your most common “I am” statements. How do
you feel about the ways in which these statements define you?
Create a list of the things you value the most. Now prioritize that list
and think about how this aligns with your definition of yourself.
Get into the habit of asking the question “why” before you do
anything.

8

ENERGY
How do you make sure your brain is as healthy and energized as it
can be?
What should I make sure to have in my diet if I want my brain to
be at its strongest?
How do I consistently get a good night’s sleep?

You have a clear purpose for doing something, and you’ve broken down
the project or goal into small, simple steps. Does that guarantee
sustainable, limitless motivation?
For example, even if you have a reason to read daily and have a plan to
read for just five minutes a day, what can keep you from doing so is
fatigue. Mental and physical vitality is the fuel needed to drive your
actions. We know the importance of time management. Well, motivation is
all about energy management and optimization.
Here are my 10 recommendations for generating limitless brain energy.
For each tip, please rate, on a scale of 1 to 10, how much attention you are
putting into that specific area. You may be surprised by your answers.

1. A GOOD BRAIN DIET
Resiliency expert Dr. Eva Selhub often likens the brain to a highperformance vehicle. “Like an expensive car,” she writes, “your brain
functions best when it gets only premium fuel. Eating high-quality foods

that contain lots of vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants nourishes the
brain and protects it from oxidative stress—the ‘waste’ (free radicals)
produced when the body uses oxygen, which can damage cells.”1 She goes
on to note that when your brain is forced to run on inferior fuel, it can’t
possibly do everything it was built to do. Refined sugar, for example,
contributes to impaired brain function, leads to inflammation, and can
even cause depression (something you might want to consider the next
time you reach for a tub of ice cream to contend with a tough day).
In my podcast interviews with Dr. Lisa Mosconi, neuroscientist,
integrative nutritionist, and author of Brain Food and The XX Brain, she
explains why the dietary needs of the brain are different from those of
other organs. “The human brain requires 45 distinct nutrients to function
best. While most of these nutrients are created by the brain itself, the rest
are imported from our diet.”2
Since we know for sure that there’s a direct connection between a good
diet and a healthy brain, it’s essential that you feed your brain with the
best food nature has to offer. On the page opposite, you’ll see a list of my
top 10 favorite brain foods. (For a quick video on how to memorize this
list, go to www.LimitlessBook.com/resources.) If you’re the kind of
person who hates hearing you need to eat your vegetables, employing this
list might require a bit of an adjustment. But there’s some good news,
because there’s evidence to show that your brain runs very well with a
little bit of dark chocolate in the mix. Remember, what you eat matters,
especially for your gray matter.

KWIK START
What are your favorite brain foods? How can you incorporate one
more into your daily diet?

THE TOP 10 BRAIN FOODS

Avocados: They provide monounsaturated fat, which helps to
maintain healthy blood flow.

Blueberries: They protect your brain from oxidative stress and
reduce the effects of brain aging. There have also been studies that
show they can help with memory.
Broccoli: A great source of vitamin K, which is known to improve
cognitive function and memory.
Dark chocolate: This helps your focus and your concentration and
stimulates endorphins. Chocolate also has flavonoids, which have
been shown to improve cognitive function. The darker here the better,
as the darkest chocolate has the least sugar, and we’ve already talked
about how sugar is something to eat sparingly.
Eggs: They provide memory-improving and brain-boosting choline.
Green leafy vegetables: These are good sources of vitamin E, which
reduces the effects of brain aging, and folate, which has been shown
to improve memory.
Salmon, Sardines, Caviar: They’re rich in omega-3 essential fatty
acids, which help reduce the effects of brain aging.
Turmeric: It helps reduce inflammation and boost antioxidant levels
while also improving your brain’s oxygen intake. There’s also some
indication that turmeric helps reduce cognitive decay.
Walnuts: These nuts provide high levels of antioxidants and vitamin
E that protect your neurons and protect against brain aging. They also
contain high levels of zinc and magnesium, which are really good for
your mood.
Water: Your brain is about 80 percent water. Dehydration can cause
brain fog, fatigue, and slower reaction and thinking speed. Studies
show that well-hydrated people score better on brainpower tests.
I met Mona Sharma when she was featured on Facebook’s Red Table Talk
as the nutritionist for Will Smith and his family, alongside Dr. Mark
Hyman. She shared with me how “the foods we eat can have a big impact
on our energy, the quality of our health, and the function of our brains.
Focusing on key ingredients like good quality omega-3 rich fats,
vegetables loaded with antioxidants and phytonutrients, and spices to
enhance our digestion and focus, and can support both short- and long-

term brain function.” Here’s a sample day of some of her go-to recipes to
optimize brain power and vitality:
MORNING BRAIN TONIC
Serves 2
Ingredients:
2-inch piece of ginger, peeled and cut into slices
2-inch piece of turmeric, peeled and cut into slices (note: this will stain, so watch clothes
and countertops)
4 cups filtered water
organic green tea (loose or plastic-free tea bags for 2 servings)
½ organic lemon, juiced
Dash of black pepper
Raw honey (optional)

Place the turmeric, ginger, and water into a small saucepan.
Bring to a slow simmer on medium-high heat. Add the green tea and
simmer for at least 5 minutes.
Remove from the heat. Add the lemon juice, dash of black pepper, and
honey (if using).
Strain and serve hot. Avoid eating for 20 minutes after drinking this tonic.
Note: You can also make a large batch of the tonic mix ahead of time.
Simply add a larger quantity of turmeric, ginger, and lemon to a juicer.
Place this juice into the fridge, covered tightly with a lid, for up to 7 days.
When serving, just add to hot water and green tea.
MORNING MAGIC SMOOTHIE
Serves 1
Ingredients:
½ cup frozen wild blueberries
½ cup chopped jicama (peel removed)
Big handful of organic spinach (you can add more, too!)
2 tablespoons hemp seeds

1 teaspoon MCT oil
1 teaspoon organic spirulina powder
½ cup unsweetened coconut water
½ cup unsweetened almond milk
Ice (optional)

Add all ingredients to a blender, blend, and start your day with brain and
body fuel!
BRAIN BOOST SALAD
Serves 2
For the salad:
2 cups organic arugula
2 cups organic spinach
¼ cup pomegranate seeds
¼ cup raw walnuts, chopped
1 avocado, sliced
4 organic eggs, boiled then sliced when cool (if vegan, replace eggs with 2 tablespoons
hemp seeds and 1 tablespoon pumpkin seeds)
For the dressing:
3 tablespoons raw apple cider vinegar
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
½ lemon squeezed
1 tablespoon raw honey
¼ teaspoon Himalayan sea salt
2 tsp black sesame seeds (for garnish)

Place all salad dressing ingredients (except sesame seeds) into a bowl or
mixing container and blend/shake well. Set aside.
Add the arugula, spinach, pomegranate seeds, and walnuts to a large salad
bowl.
Pour salad dressing on top of the salad and mix together.

Transfer the mixed salad onto two plates. Top each salad with ½ sliced
avocado and 2 sliced eggs. Garnish with sesame seeds. Enjoy!
EASY ROASTED SALMON & BROCCOLI WITH SWISS
CHARD
Serves 2
Ingredients:
2
2
5
2
2
1
2
1
1
1

tablespoons of fresh lemon juice
teaspoon of chopped garlic
tablespoons extra virgin olive oil, divided
salmon fillets, preferably wild not farmed (4 to 6 ounces each)
to 4 slices of lemon
large head of organic broccoli, chopped into bite-sized florets (3 to 4 cups)
teaspoons Himalayan sea salt, divided
small shallot, finely chopped
small bunch organic Swiss chard or rainbow chard, finely chopped
teaspoon organic mustard seed powder

Line a large sheet pan with parchment paper and preheat the oven to 400
degrees F.
Mix the lemon juice, chopped garlic, and 2 tablespoons olive oil in a small
bowl.
Lay the salmon down in the middle of the sheet pan and pour the lemon–
garlic–olive oil mixture on top of each fillet evenly. Then place the lemon
slices on top of each fillet.
Mix the broccoli florets, 2 tablespoons olive oil, and 1 teaspoon sea salt
together in a large bowl. Place the mixture around each salmon fillet on
the sheet pan.
Place in the preheated oven and bake for 20 minutes.
While the salmon and broccoli are baking, heat the remaining 1 tablespoon
olive oil on low heat in a skillet. Add the chopped shallot, stirring often
until clear and cooked. Add the Swiss chard with 2 tablespoons water to
the skillet and cook for 3 to 5 minutes, stirring occasionally until the chard
is softened. Remove from heat.

Add the salmon, broccoli, and chard to two serving plates. Sprinkle the
broccoli with mustard seed powder to boost anti-inflammatory benefits.
Serve and enjoy!
COCOA-CINNAMON-GINGER “HOT CHOCOLATE”
Serves 2
Ingredients:
4 cups unsweetened almond or coconut milk
2-inch ginger piece, peeled and sliced lengthwise
3 tablespoons unsweetened raw organic cocoa powder
1 teaspoon organic cinnamon powder
1 to 2 tablespoons coconut sugar (sweeten as desired)
½ teaspoon vanilla extract
Small pinch of sea salt
2 cinnamon sticks, as garnish

Heat the almond milk and ginger slices in a medium saucepan over
medium-high heat, stirring occasionally. Bring to a gentle simmer.
Add the cocoa powder, cinnamon, coconut sugar, vanilla, and sea salt and
whisk until dissolved.
Bring to a gentle simmer once again before removing from the heat. Pour
into two mugs, using a strainer to prevent the ginger from going into the
cups. Add one cinnamon stick to each mug and enjoy!
Note: This drink can be served cooled during the summer months. Also, if
serving as a dessert, add one dollop of coconut cream and blend for a
sweeter, frothier taste.

2. BRAIN NUTRIENTS
As we’ve discussed, diet affects brain function. But what if you aren’t
able, because of your schedule or lifestyle, to regularly eat a rich brainfood diet? Research has shown that particular nutrients have a direct effect
on your cognitive ability. I always prefer getting my nutrients from real,

whole, organic foods. Talk to your qualified health practitioner to learn
what you might be deficient in.
In my podcast episode with Max Lugavere, author of Genius Foods, we
discussed the benefits of supplementing with phospholipid DHA—your
brain uses this to create healthy cell membranes.3 This is important
because our cell membranes form all the receptors involved in mood,
executive functioning, attention, and memory. B vitamins have been
shown to improve women’s memories. Curcumin, the nutrient found in
turmeric, can forestall cognitive decay. You can get a list of nutrients and
their effect on the brain from the National Institutes of Health website.4
There are natural sources for all of these nutrients, but getting all of
them into your diet might not fit your lifestyle or your palate. The good
news is that supplements are readily available for all of these (though not
all supplements are created equal; make sure to do some research). You
can also combine these with the brain foods discussed in this chapter to
give your brain the fuel it needs. For a list and links to my favorite brain
supplements, go to www.LimitlessBook.com/resources.

3. EXERCISE
“Exercise changes the brain in ways that protect memory and thinking
skills,” writes Heidi Godman, the executive editor of the Harvard Health
Letter. “In a study done at the University of British Columbia, researchers
found that regular aerobic exercise, the kind that gets your heart and your
sweat glands pumping, appears to boost the size of the hippocampus, the
brain area involved in verbal memory and learning.”5
I can almost hear some of you complaining or making excuses as you
read that last paragraph: Exercise is boring. You don’t have time for it.
You can’t afford a gym membership. But the simple fact is that exercise is
enormously valuable if you want to unshackle your brain. Think about it:
When you’re active and moving, you feel sharper, right? Some of us even
need to move around in order to get our brains operating at top efficiency.
That’s because there’s a direct correlation between exercise and brain
function. And you don’t need to become an Olympic athlete in order to
keep your brain sharp. There’s lots of evidence to show that even 10
minutes of aerobic exercise a day can have enormous benefits.

As your body moves, your brain grooves. Check out a few of my
favorite exercise videos at www.LimitlessBook.com/resources.

KWIK START
Set your phone alarm to remind yourself to move for a few minutes
every hour.

4. KILLING ANTS
Dr. Daniel Amen, a clinical neuroscientist, author of the bestseller Change
Your Brain, Change Your Life, and a frequent guest of ours, came home
one night after a particularly bad day at the office dealing with suicide
risks, angst-ridden teens, and dysfunctional couples to find thousands of
ants in his kitchen. “It was gross,” he wrote. “As I started to clean them
up, the acronym came to me. I thought of my patients from that day—like
my infested kitchen, my patients’ brains were also infested by the negative
thoughts that were robbing them of their joy and stealing their happiness.
The next day, I brought a can of ant spray to work as a visual aid and have
been working diligently ever since to help my patients eradicate their
ANTs.”6
ANTs are “automatic negative thoughts” and, if you’re like most people,
you place limitations on yourself in the form of these thoughts at least
some of the time. Maybe you tell yourself that you aren’t smart enough to
learn a skill that you’d really like to have. Or perhaps you repeat on an
endless loop how pushing yourself to accomplish something is only going
to lead to disappointment.
ANTs are everywhere, and there isn’t enough ant spray in the world to
get rid of all of them. But eliminating them from your life is an essential
part of unlimiting your brain. The reason for this is simple: If you fight for
your limitations, you get to keep them. If you regularly tell yourself that
you can’t do something, or that you’re too old to do something, or that you
don’t have the smarts to do something, you won’t do that thing. Only when
you move on from this kind of destructive self-talk can you truly
accomplish what you want to accomplish.

KWIK START
What is your biggest ANT? What could you replace it with?

5. A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT
A 2018 piece in the medical journal The Lancet identified that “air
pollution might cause 30 percent of all strokes and thus might be one of
the leading contributors of the global stroke burden.” It went on: “Given
the strong association between stroke, vascular risk factors, and dementia,
the suggested link between air pollution and dementia is to be expected.”7
The air you breathe is critical to the way your brain functions. If you’ve
ever been stuck in a room with a smoker, you know how hard it is to even
think while you’re breathing that toxic air. Conversely, if you’re hiking in
the mountains and take a deep breath from the crisp, clean atmosphere,
you can feel your senses thriving.
If you live in a factory town or a big city with pollutants everywhere,
there isn’t a lot you can do about the air around you. Fortunately, there are
devices available to clean the air in your home and in your office, and you
can make an increased effort to get to cleaner spaces more frequently.
A clean environment goes beyond air quality. Removing clutter and
distractions from your surroundings will make you feel lighter and
improve your ability to focus, so take time to Marie Kondo your mind and
remove any unnecessary stuff.

KWIK START
What is one thing you can do today to clean your environment?

6. A POSITIVE PEER GROUP
Your brain potential is not just related to your biological networks or your
neurological networks; it is also related to your social networks. Who you

spend time with is who you become. Motivational speaker Jim Rohn says
that you are the average of the five people you spend the most time with.
Whether you believe that or not, I don’t think any of us can disagree with
the notion that the people around us have a meaningful influence on our
lives. A recent Temple University study showed that people (specifically
teenagers in this study) act differently when they are alone than they do
when they are with others. In reporting on the study for The New York
Times, Tara Parker-Pope said that “Dr. Steinberg [one of the authors of the
study] notes that the brain system involved in reward processing is also
involved in the processing of social information, explaining why peers can
have such a pronounced effect on decision making.”8
Because of this influence, those you spend time with have a genuine
effect on brain function. Certainly, they affect your self-talk, as most of us
tie at least a part of our beliefs to the beliefs others have about us. But they
can affect everything from what you eat to how much you exercise, to
even how much sleep you get. There are lots of books out there dedicated
to helping you distinguish people who are good for you from people who
are not, but for the purposes of this chapter, just take a few minutes to
think about who your peers are, how much influence they have on your
life, and how this affects your desire to unlimit yourself.

KWIK START
Who is someone you need to spend more time with? Reach out and
make a date with that person now.

7. BRAIN PROTECTION
This probably goes without saying, but protecting your brain is critical if
you’re going to make the most of your brain. You have only one brain. If
you were given only one car to use for the rest of your life, how well
would you treat that car? You would take care of it as if your life depended
on it. Accidents are unavoidable, but putting yourself in situations where
brain injury is less likely improves your chances of avoiding the worst.
Hard-contact or extreme sports are not ideal if you want to make the most

of this precious asset. Driving 20 miles an hour over the speed limit all the
time on your motorcycle isn’t advisable, either. If you love these things
too much to give them up, at the very least take as many precautions and
use as many safety tools as you can.

8. NEW LEARNING
One of the most important things you can do for the health of your brain is
to keep learning. We are all capable of expanding the capacities of our
brains, even as we get older, which we discussed when we talked about
neuroplasticity in Chapter 3.
What this means is that, as long as we keep learning, we continue to
create new pathways in our brains. We keep our brains plastic and supple,
capable of processing new information in relevant ways. This is especially
true if we give ourselves genuine challenges in our learning. Attempting to
master a new skill, to discover a new language, to embrace parts of your
culture or the cultures of others that are new to you all keep those neurons
firing and creating new pathways. By increasing the ways you use your
brain, you increase the capabilities of your brain.

KWIK START
Create an ongoing “To Learn” list. What are some things on that list?
Write two down.

9. STRESS MANAGEMENT
We all experience some level of stress in our everyday lives, sometimes a
great deal of stress. Whenever we experience stress, a hormone known as
cortisol is released to alleviate the physical rigors of stress on our bodies.
If this happens occasionally, it’s not a problem, but if it happens with great
regularity, the buildup of cortisol in our brains can lead it to cease
functioning properly.

But there’s more. “There is evidence that chronic (persistent) stress may
actually rewire your brain,” says a piece on the Harvard Health Blog.
“Scientists have learned that animals that experience prolonged stress
have less activity in the parts of their brain that handle higher-order tasks
—for example, the prefrontal cortex—and more activity in the primitive
parts of their brain that are focused on survival, such as the amygdala. It’s
much like what would happen if you exercised one part of your body and
not another. The part that was activated more often would become
stronger, and the part that got less attention would get weaker. This is what
appears to happen in the brain when it is under continuous stress: it
essentially builds up the part of the brain designed to handle threats, and
the part of the brain tasked with more complex thought takes a back
seat.”9
With such clear evidence that stress can be debilitating to your brain,
finding ways to reduce or avoid stress becomes critical. I’m going to offer
a number of suggestions in this area over the course of this book.

KWIK START
What is your favorite thing to do to cope with stress? When was the
last time you did it?

10. SLEEP
If you want better focus, you need to get good sleep. If you want to be a
clearer thinker, you need to get good sleep. If you want to make better
decisions or have a better memory, you need to get good sleep. According
to the National Institutes of Health:
Quality sleep—and getting enough of it at the right times—is as
essential to survival as food and water. Without sleep you can’t form
or maintain the pathways in your brain that let you learn and create
new memories, and it’s harder to concentrate and respond quickly.
Sleep is important to a number of brain functions, including how
nerve cells (neurons) communicate with each other. In fact, your

brain and body stay remarkably active while you sleep. Recent
findings suggest that sleep plays a housekeeping role that removes
toxins in your brain that build up while you are awake.10
The takeaway: getting enough sleep—and getting enough quality sleep
—is essential if you’re going to make the most of your brain.
Sleep Is Not a Choice
I know there are lots of people out there who say they don’t need a lot of
sleep, or that they don’t have time for sleep, or even consider it a point of
pride that their lives are so full of activity that they “have no choice” but
to sacrifice sleep. That’s a mistake, and, if you’re one of these people, it’s
something I want you to reconsider right now.
“Sleep is crucial to overall health and daily functioning,” writes Dr. Jean
Kim, a psychiatrist and a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at
George Washington University. “Increasing evidence has tied lack of sleep
to a host of mental and physical disorders, including increased depression,
irritability, impulsivity, cardiovascular disease, and more. One study noted
that sleep actually functions as a sort of laundry cycle for the brain, where
during sleep, blood vessels (and lymphatic channels) in the brain
hyperperfuse and flush out metabolic buildup from the day and remove
neurotoxins and distribute components that enhance cellular repair.”11
In his TED talk about sleep, Dr. Jeff Iliff of Oregon Health and Science
University takes the “laundry cycle” metaphor even further. He notes that,
while we’re awake, the brain is so busy doing other things that it doesn’t
have the capacity to clean itself of waste. The buildup of this waste,
amyloid-beta, is now being linked to the development of Alzheimer’s
disease.
“When the brain is awake and is at its most busy, it puts off clearing
away the waste from the spaces between its cells until later, and then,
when it goes to sleep and doesn’t have to be as busy, it shifts into a kind of
cleaning mode to clear away the waste from the spaces between its cells,
the waste that’s accumulated throughout the day.”12
A little later in the talk, Iliff warns against doing something that so
many of us do: sacrificing sleep until we get a chance to catch up. “Like
our housework, it’s a dirty and a thankless job, but it’s also important. In

your house, if you stop cleaning your kitchen for a month, your home will
become completely unlivable very quickly. But in the brain, the
consequences of falling behind may be much greater than the
embarrassment of dirty countertops, because when it comes to cleaning
the brain, it is the very health and function of the mind and the body that’s
at stake, which is why understanding these very basic housekeeping
functions of the brain today may be critical for preventing and treating
diseases of the mind tomorrow.”13
So, if you’re one of the many people who have convinced themselves
that there’s a level of nobility in getting by with minimal sleep, it’s time to
revise your thinking. There’s simply too much to gain from a good night’s
sleep (including what you can learn from your dreams).
Getting through the Night
It’s one thing to say you’re going to get a good night’s sleep. It’s another
thing entirely to accomplish it. About a quarter of all Americans
experience some level of insomnia every year.14
There is, however, very strong evidence connecting exercise to sleep,
even among chronic insomnia sufferers. A study performed by Dr. Kathryn
J. Reid and others found that aerobic exercise had strong positive results
on a group of participants who’d previously regularly encountered sleep
problems. “Results from this study indicate that a sixteen-week program
of moderate intensity aerobic physical activity plus sleep hygiene
education is effective in improving self-reported sleep quality, mood, and
quality of life in older adults with chronic insomnia,” the authors wrote.
“These results highlight the potential of structured physical activity
programs to improve the effectiveness of standard behavioral approaches
for the treatment of insomnia, particularly in a sedentary older adult
population.”15
A group at Northwestern University’s Feinberg School of Medicine built
upon this study by drilling down on the data gleaned and then studying the
interconnection between exercise and sleep. What they found is important
to consider: exercise is not a magic pill. If you’re having trouble sleeping,
you can’t solve the problem with one session at the gym. They found that,
even after two months, the effects of exercise on sleep were minimal. But
by the end of the 16-week study, the results were considerable, with

participants getting as much as an hour-and-a-quarter extra sleep per
night.16
So, there’s a clear connection between exercise and sleep, but you’re
going to need to give it time. But, given the overall benefits of exercise on
your health, committing to an exercise routine is always a good idea, even
if you won’t feel the benefits on your sleep right away.
There are varying ideas about how much exercise is necessary to affect
sleep, but a commonly stated amount is 2.5 hours a week of aerobic
exercise, coupled with some resistance work. “Brisk walking, light biking,
elliptical machine, anything that increases your heart rate so that you can
still talk while exercising but have to catch your breath every few
sentences or so, is considered moderate exercise,” recommends Dr.
Christopher E. Kline of the University of Pittsburgh.17
Giving Your Mind a Break
One of the many reasons why people have trouble sleeping, is not being
able to get your mind to turn off. We’ve all been there: You have a huge
meeting coming up, or something disruptive (either positive or negative)
happened during the day, or you got a phone call just before bedtime that
got you riled up. Your head hits the pillow, but you might as well be
running laps around your house because your mind is busy with this
inciting event. You wind up lying there for hours, and sleep seems as
unapproachable as Everest.
Fortunately, you have a tool available to you at all times that can help
you deal with this: meditation. The benefits of meditation are numerous
(and there are many, many books out there that detail them), including
everything from boosting immune function to decreasing anxiety to
actually increasing your gray matter. One of those many benefits is
helping with insomnia.
In a study performed by Dr. David S. Black and others, a group of older
adults with sleep problems were introduced to mindfulness meditation
through six two-hour sessions. By the end of these sessions, this group
showed meaningful improvement with insomnia.18
If meditation seems foreign to you (and, if that’s the case, you’re in the
vast majority, as less than 15 percent of Americans meditate),19 it’s likely

because you’ve heard that meditation is difficult or that it requires you to
completely blank your mind. Ariel Garten, creator of Muse, a headband
that assists in meditation, clarifies that it isn’t about emptying your mind,
but rather, “training your mind to be aware in the present moment.”20
She told me that you can choose any time and any place to meditate and
that you can feel the benefits from it with as little as three minutes spent
with eyes closed, taking deep breaths and then releasing those breaths,
counting as you go. Another tool she advocates is focused attention, a
super-simple process of placing all your attention on your breathing.
When your mind wanders from your breathing (as it invariably will), just
notice this and bring it back. This technique promises to demystify
meditation for anyone who thinks you need to be a Zen master to get
anything out of it. Few of us are capable of locking our focus on one thing
for an extended period, so it’s good to know refocusing is equally valuable.
When you regain your attention on your breathing, Garten says, “you’re
exerting an important skill—you’re learning to observe your thinking.
You’re not caught up in your thoughts, but you’re in a process of observing
that you’re thinking. You begin to recognize that you can have control over
your thoughts and that you can choose what you are thinking.”21
Meditation can improve your sleep, even with these simple methods.
My meditation coach, Emily Fletcher, author of Stress Less, Accomplish
More has a unique process called Ziva Meditation. You can watch a full
video of us going through her process by going to LimitlessBook.com/reso
urces and we will walk you through it.

KWIK START
What is your top sleep tip? Write it down.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON
Fueling your brain is fundamental to becoming limitless, and we have lots
more to get to in order to make this happen. But first, let’s stop and focus
on a few things from this chapter:

Put a shopping list together for all the brain foods you don’t currently
have in your home. I realize that not all of these foods are going to be
compatible with your palate, but really try to include as many as you
can. Then take this list with you to the store.
Spend some time identifying your ANTs. What limitations are you
placing on yourself? Give yourself a few minutes with this. What are
you telling yourself you can’t do? Write this down.
Think about how you’d like to expand your learning. What have you
always wanted to master that you haven’t found the time to master?
Is it a different language? Computer coding? A new sales or
marketing technique? What can you do to fit that into your life right
now?
Use one of the tools we talked about here to improve the amount and
quality of your sleep. Keep track of this for at least a week.
I made two videos for you on how to easily memorize the top 10
brain foods and my 10 brain energizing recommendations. Go to ww
w.LimitlessBook.com/ resources to watch.

9

SMALL SIMPLE STEPS
What is the smallest simple step I can take now?
How do we start good habits or end bad ones?
What daily routine will help me become limitless?

You have a reason or purpose to do something. You have the necessary
energy to do it. What is missing?
A small simple step (S3). The tiniest action you can take to get you
closer to your goal. One that requires minimal effort or energy. Over time,
these become habits. That’s the reason I’ve filled this book with the small
simple steps called Kwik Starts.
Back in the 1920s, a Russian psychologist, Bluma Zeigarnik, was sitting
in a Viennese restaurant when she noticed that the waiters swirling around
her in the busy eatery were highly efficient at remembering customer
orders while they were in process but tended to forget who had what as
soon as the orders were filled.
Intrigued by this, she ran a study where she had people perform simple
tasks while they were sometimes interrupted. Afterward, she queried
participants about which tasks they remembered and which they did not,
finding that those who’d been interrupted were twice as likely to
remember the things they’d been doing when they’d been interrupted than
the things they’d been able to complete without interruption. She came to
the conclusion—subsequently known as the Zeigarnik effect—that

uncompleted tasks created a level of tension that keeps that task at the
front of our minds until it is completed.
In all likelihood, you’re familiar with this tension from your experience
with procrastination. When you have something you know you need to do
and you keep putting it off, it weighs on you, even making it more difficult
to do anything else well as long as this task goes uncompleted. What you
need to do seems hard, or it seems like less fun than the other things you
could be doing, or it’s going to be uncomfortable, or you’ve simply
convinced yourself that you have plenty of time to get to it later. We still
struggle to complete tasks when we are clear on our vision for our lives
and know who we want to become. Why is it still so hard to act, even when
we have sustained motivation?
One of the most significant reasons that people fail to act is that we feel
overwhelmed by what we need to do. A project or a chore might seem so
big and time-consuming that you can’t imagine how you’re ever going to
get it done. We look at the project in its entirety and immediately feel that
the task at hand is too big, so we shut down or put it off. “Incomplete tasks
and procrastinating often lead to frequent and unhelpful thought patterns,”
says psychologist Hadassah Lipszyc. “These thoughts can impact on sleep,
trigger anxiety symptoms, and further impact on a person’s mental and
emotional resources.”1

BE KIND TO YOURSELF
If you struggle to get something done with some amount of regularity,
there’s a good chance that you feel guilty about this and you beat yourself
up over it. It’s likely you give yourself a much harder time about it than is
helpful. We already know that unfinished tasks create tension in your
brain. If you layer guilt and shame on top of this, you’re making it even
harder to get a task done, and you’re making yourself miserable.
“Feeling guilty when you’re away from work, when you aren’t in a
position to do anything about it, is not helpful, and can be painful,” writes
Dr. Art Markman, a professor of psychology and marketing at University
of Texas, Austin. “It will make you feel worse about your job in general
and spoil time that you could be spending with friends, family, or engaging
in an enjoyable activity. Shame, though, is a different story. There is

evidence that people will explicitly procrastinate to avoid shame. Feeling
shame about work you have not completed is likely to make the problem
worse, not better, making it an emotion that is almost never helpful.”2
Feeling bad about your lack of progress is likely to make it more
difficult for you to stop procrastinating. So, give yourself a break. Beating
yourself up isn’t going to improve anything, and, since you’re reading this
book now, you’re already taking steps to avoid procrastinating in the
future.
In my experience, the best way to deal with this is to find a way to break
the task into bite-size pieces, which lead to habits that lead toward
success. Circling back to the Zeigarnik effect, every time you complete
one of these smaller tasks, you get to take that weight off your mind. And
as each of these subtasks is finished, you’re that much closer to
completing the task overall.

TAKE BABY STEPS
Podcast guest Dr. B. J. Fogg, the founder and director of the Behavior
Design Lab at Stanford University and the author of Tiny Habits, has been
studying human behavior for more than two decades. What he’s learned is
that only three things can change a person’s behavior long term. One is to
have an epiphany, which very few people can summon on demand.
Another is to change your environment, which is possible for nearly
everyone, but not necessarily feasible at any given time. The third is to, as
Dr. Fogg puts it, “take baby steps.”3
I like the way this story illustrates the principle of small, simple steps:
A King was watching a great magician perform his act. The crowd
was enthralled and so was the King. At the end, the audience roared
with approval. And the King said, “What a gift this man has. A Godgiven talent.”
But a wise counsellor said to the King, “My Lord, genius is made,
not born. This magician’s skill is the result of discipline and practice.
These talents have been learned and honed over time with
determination and discipline.”

The King was troubled by this message. The counsellor’s challenge
had spoiled his pleasure in the magician’s arts. “Limited and spiteful
man. How dare you criticize a true genius. As I said, you either have
it or you don’t. And you most certainly don’t.”
The King turned to his bodyguard and said, “Throw this man into
the deepest dungeon.” And, he added for the counselor’s benefit, “So
you won’t be lonely, you can have two of your kind to keep you
company. You shall have two piglets as cellmates.”
From the very first day of his imprisonment, the wise counselor
practiced running up the steps of his cell to the prison door carrying
in each hand a piglet. As the days turned into weeks, and the weeks
into months, the piglets steadily grew into sturdy boars. And with
every day of practice the wise counselor increased his power and
strength.
One day the King remembered the wise counselor and was curious
to see how imprisonment had humbled him. He had the wise
counselor summoned.
When the prisoner appeared, he was a man of powerful physique,
carrying a boar on each arm. The King exclaimed, “What a gift this
man has. A God-given talent.”
The wise counselor replied, “My Lord, genius is made, not born.
My skill is the result of discipline and practice. These talents have
been learned and honed over time with determination and
discipline.”4
One of the only things that is likely to change your behavior is to make
incremental progress. You really don’t want to make dinner? Make
something simple for your family to snack on while you cook dinner later.
You’re having trouble writing that big speech for next month’s
conference? Just write the keynote to the speech now. You’re overwhelmed
by the amount of reading you need to do for your economics class? Set a
goal for yourself of reading the first chapter. Like the wise counselor, you
must take it one step at a time, one day at a time.
What you’ll notice in all of these scenarios is two things. One is that
they present you with something achievable—a win on the way to reaching
the championship of getting this job done. The other is that they all put

you in a situation where you’re likely to get even more accomplished.
You’re already in the kitchen now, so you might as well finish making
dinner. You’ve gotten through the keynote and you’re on a roll, so maybe it
makes sense to draft some more pages. The first chapter of your
economics text wasn’t nearly as dry as it seemed from the outside, and you
already have the book open; you can handle a few more chapters.
By breaking a task that you’re procrastinating about into smaller pieces,
the path to getting it done becomes clear.
The best way to deal with the tension between what you want and what
you’ve done so far to achieve it is to remember what the Zeigarnik effect
teaches us. You’re not going to be able to ease your mind about this task
until you complete it, so get yourself moving toward completion. Start
somewhere. Anywhere. Even if you don’t have the energy or the
motivation to get the entire thing done, get started on getting it done.
You’ll be thankful for the relief.

KWIK START
Think about an important task you’ve been putting off. What is it?
How can you break it down into simpler steps that you can do each
day?

ON AUTOPILOT
Small simple steps repeated lead to habits. Our habits are a core part of
who we are. Various studies have shown that somewhere between 40 and
50 percent of what we do every day is the product of a habit. That means
that half of our lives is governed by what scientists term automaticity. This
percentage might sound high to you—it certainly did to me the first time I
heard it—but consider how many things you do every day without really
thinking about them. You brush your teeth without thinking about it. You
check your phone at predictable intervals. You drive to the office and don’t
particularly recall how you got there. You zip up your jacket, get a glass
out of the cupboard, and click on the TV remote automatically.

This, of course, is essential to how we conduct our lives. Could you
imagine how overwhelming it would be if you had to think about every
single thing you did? If even brushing your teeth required some conscious
level of calculation, you’d be exhausted by 10 in the morning.
“Without habit loops, our brains would shut down, overwhelmed by the
minutiae of daily life,” writes Charles Duhigg in his best-selling book, The
Power of Habit. “People whose basal ganglia are damaged by injury or
disease often become mentally paralyzed. They have trouble performing
basic activities, such as opening a door or deciding what to eat. They lose
the ability to ignore insignificant details—one study, for example, found
that patients with basal ganglia injuries couldn’t recognize facial
expressions, including fear and disgust, because they were perpetually
uncertain about which part of the face to focus on.”5
James Clear, author of the best-selling book Atomic Habits, says, “The
habits you repeat (or don’t repeat) every day largely determine your
health, wealth, and happiness. Knowing how to change your habits means
knowing how to confidently own and manage your days, focus on the
behaviors that have the highest impact, and reverse-engineer the life you
want.”6
“All habits serve you in some way,” Clear told me. “As you go through
life, you face a variety of problems. You need to tie your shoe; your brain
is automating the solution to that problem. That’s what a habit is. It’s the
solution to a recurring problem that you face throughout life, one that
you’ve employed so many times that you can do it without thinking. If the
solution doesn’t work anymore, then your brain will update it.”7
Clear identifies the habit loop as having four components: a cue, a
craving, a response, and a reward. Using the example of turning on a light
when you enter a room, the cue is walking into the room and finding it
dark. The craving is feeling that there would be some value in the room
not being dark. The response is flipping on the light switch, and the reward
is that the room is no longer dark.8 You can apply this loop to any of your
habits, such as getting your mail when you come home from work. The
cue is reaching your driveway or front door at the end of the day. The
craving is hoping there’s something in the mailbox. The response is going
to the mailbox to find out. And the reward is getting the mail out of your

mailbox. You probably didn’t think about any of this until you actually had
the mail in your hands.
The Habit Loop

Creating habits to automate essential parts of our lives is a fundamental
streamlining technique that we do largely unconsciously, often to our
benefit. Of course, we also automate all kinds of things that we’d probably
be much better off not turning into habits. I’m sure you know some
version of this. Perhaps a cue is walking past your kitchen pantry. The
craving comes from the knowledge that your favorite chips are in the
pantry, and your innate desire to eat them. The response is that you go into
the pantry, open the bag of chips, and take out a big handful. And the
reward is crunchy, salty, fatty deliciousness . . . that doesn’t benefit your
health in any way. Our negative habits operate with the same level of
automaticity as our healthy ones. Those chips are in your stomach before

you’ve even had the opportunity to register that you were stuffing them in
your mouth.
Now, because you’re in the process of becoming limitless, you know
that perpetuating negative behaviors is a drain on your superpowers. So,
how do you break bad habits and, just as importantly, how do you create
new habits that will help you?

GETTING IN THE HABIT
Before we get to this, let’s talk for a moment about how long it takes to
form a habit. In a study for University College London, Phillippa Lally,
Cornelia H. M. van Jaarsveld, Henry W. W. Potts, and Jane Wardle took
participants through the process of developing a new healthy eating,
drinking, or exercise habit, such as drinking water with lunch or jogging
before dinner. They were asked to perform this new behavior based on
specific situational cues every day for 84 days. “For the majority of
participants,” they wrote, “automaticity increased steadily over the days of
the study, supporting the assumption that repeating a behavior in a
consistent setting increases automaticity.” By the end of the study, they’d
found that it took an average of 66 days for the new behavior to become a
habit, though it took individual participants as little as 18 days and as
many as 254.9
It is also widely assumed that breaking a bad habit isn’t about ending
that habit, but rather about replacing it with a different, more constructive,
habit. Dr. Elliot Berkman, director of the Social and Affective
Neuroscience Laboratory at the University of Oregon, notes, “It’s much
easier to start doing something new than to stop doing something habitual
without a replacement behavior. That’s one reason why smoking cessation
aids such as nicotine gum or inhalers tend to be more effective than the
nicotine patch.”10
So, if the process of starting a new habit, such as setting aside time to
read every day, is fundamentally the same as the process of ending a
negative habit, such as grabbing those chips every time you pass the
pantry, how does it work?
As with so many of the things we’ve discussed in this book, motivation
plays a key role. Speaking specifically about the effort to break habits, Dr.

Thomas G. Plante, adjunct clinical professor of the Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at Stanford University School of
Medicine, said, “It depends on how much you really want to break the
habit. Many people are ambivalent. They want to lose weight, but they like
the foods they eat. They want to reduce their alcohol consumption but love
their happy hour. They want to stop picking their nails, but it reduces
stress for them. So, one important issue is how strongly you really want to
break the habit in question. Second, how established is the problem habit?
It is easier to break a new habit than an old one. Third, what are the
consequences of not breaking the habit? Will a partner leave you? Will
you lose a job? Will you get sick? Will something really bad happen if you
don’t change?”11

Dr. B. J. Fogg created the Fogg Behavior Model to identify the
circumstances that need to be present for behavior change to occur. “For a
target behavior to happen,” he notes, “a person must have sufficient
motivation, sufficient ability, and an effective prompt. All three factors
must be present at the same instant for the behavior to occur.”12 In other
words, you need three things in place in order to develop a habit: You need
the desire to do it, since it is exceedingly difficult to make habitual
anything you really don’t want to do; you need the skills to do it, since it’s
nearly impossible to make a habit out of anything you don’t have the
capacity to accomplish; and you need something to get the habit loop
started (what James Clear and others refer to as “the cue”). Let’s look at
each element in turn:
Motivation
We’ve talked about motivation already, but it’s worth revisiting the subject
here to see it from Fogg’s perspective. Fogg identifies three key
motivators:
1. Pleasure/pain: This is the most immediate motivator. In this case,
the behavior has a nearly immediate payoff, positive or negative. “I
believe pleasure/pain is a primitive response,” says Fogg, “and it
functions adaptively in hunger, sex, and other activities related to
self-preservation and propagation of our genes.”13
2. Hope/fear: Unlike the immediacy of the previous motivator, this one
is all about anticipation. When you’re hopeful, you’re anticipating
something good happening; when you’re fearful, you’re anticipating
the opposite. “This dimension is at times more powerful than
pleasure/pain, as is evidenced in everyday behavior,” Fogg notes.
“For example, in some situations, people will accept pain (a flu shot)
in order to overcome fear (anticipation of getting the flu).14
3. Social acceptance/rejection: Humans have always desired to be
accepted by their peers, dating back to the time when being ostracized
could mean a death sentence, and this remains an extremely strong
motivator. “The power of social motivation is likely hardwired into us

and perhaps all other creatures that historically depended on living in
groups to survive.”15
Ability
Fogg equates ability with simplicity, noting that when something is simple
for us, we are considerably more likely to do it. He defines six categories
of simplicity:
1. Time: We only perceive something to be simple if we have the time
available to perform the function.
2. Money: Similarly, if something stretches our financial resources, we
do not consider it simple.
3. Physical effort: We consider things that are physically easy for us to
be simple.
4. Brain cycles: Simple things don’t tax our thinking, and we shy away
from things that require us to think too hard.
5. Social deviance: This goes back to the acceptance motivation. A
simple act fits into societal norms.
6. Nonroutine: How far something is out of one’s normal routine will
define its level of simplicity.
Prompts
Finally, Fogg notes three types of prompts:
1. Spark: A spark is a type of prompt that immediately leads to a form
of motivation. For example, if opening your e-mail leads to a level of
fear over what you might find there, you’re likely to adopt a habit
that will change that fear.
2. Facilitator: This type of prompt works when motivation is high, but
ability is low. For example, if you want to use a certain kind of
software on your computer but are tech-averse, a tool that makes that
software easier for you to use is likely to cause you to adopt this
behavior.

3. Signal : In some cases, you’ll have both high motivation and high
ability. The only other thing you need to make a behavior a habit is
some kind of reminder or signal. If you love making brain smoothies,
all you need is to walk into your kitchen in the morning and see the
blender to prompt you to make one.

KWIK START
Can you identify the habits you want to break? What is that one habit
that’s holding you back from doing other important things in your
day? Write it down, then identify the prompts that trigger you to
perform that habit.

CREATING A NEW HABIT
The Fogg Behavior Model shows us everything that needs to be in place
for a particular behavior to become a habit. We know that making habits of
behaviors we consider good for us is important to our growth, and we also
know that the key to breaking bad habits is to replace them with more
constructive ones. But how do you make something a habit? Just
remember WIN:
W is for Want: Make sure you really want it. It’s nearly impossible
to turn something into a habit if you don’t want to do that thing. Does
one of the motivators in the Fogg Model apply to the habit you’re
trying to adopt? If not, is there something close to this habit that
might accomplish something similar for you?
I is for Innate: Does the new habit you’re trying to adopt align well
with your innate abilities? Remember that you’re unlikely to make
something a habit when it is consistently difficult for you to perform.
If the habit you’re trying to adopt is something that you’re good at or
you know you can be good at, you’re well on your way.
N is for Now: Create a prompt for yourself that encourages you to
perform the new habit now. This can be anything from a reminder on

your phone to placing something in your office that makes you
remember to set aside time to do what you’re setting out to do.

GROWING YOUR LIFE ONE HABIT AT A TIME
In case you’re still wondering how much of an effect establishing good
habits can have on your life, let me share a story about one of our clients.
Xiang suffered from schizophrenia and depression. He often heard voices
telling him to hurt himself or others, and he endured several stints in
psychiatric wards because of this. After finding the right medication and
emerging from his latest round of treatment, he discovered my podcast
and learned some of the tactics that I teach in my school. He started
listening on a regular basis and participated in the Kwik Challenge, a
series of exercises I take people through to introduce novelty to their
thinking and therefore keep their brains tuned for learning.
At first, this was hard for Xiang, but he focused on doing just two
particular challenges: brushing his teeth with his opposite hand and taking
a cold shower every morning. He increased his time under the cold water
by one minute each week and, in doing so, discovered that being able to do
something hard, like standing under freezing cold water for several
minutes each morning, made him realize that there were areas in his life in
which he was fighting for his limitations. Building from these Kwik
Challenge experiences, he started applying what he was learning about
habits and behavior change to other areas.
Xiang’s life improved dramatically. He took his driver’s license test and
passed. He changed his diet, cut out sugary drinks, and started taking a
five-minute jog in the park every morning. He started reading books—the
first being Mindset by Carol Dweck—and as he read, he listened to
baroque music to pace his reading and distract himself from
hallucinations. It took him a month to finish the book, but when he did, he
felt a sense of confidence he had never had before. Trips to the library
became a regular thing. Xiang has even taken his learning to the next level
and enrolled in computer science classes at a local college. And the best
part is that he now believes he is a lifelong learner.
You may think that because of all your past failed attempts to change
your habits and routines you’re doomed to failure forever. Xiang’s story

shows that by changing just one or two small habits in your day, incredible
progress can follow. Something as simple as brushing your teeth with the
opposite hand can be the start to an entirely new way of life.

ESTABLISHING A MORNING ROUTINE
Why is your morning routine so important? I strongly believe that if you
jump-start your day by jump-starting your brain with a series of simple
activities, you have a huge advantage. In addition, if you set up winning
routines early in the day, you can benefit from what Tony Robbins calls
“the science of momentum”: the notion that once you set accomplishment
in motion, you can keep it in motion with much less effort than if you
were trying to accomplish something from a standing start.
I have a carefully developed morning routine to help me win the day
that involves priming my mind. I don’t do every single one of these things
every day, especially when I’m traveling, but I always do most of them,
and I know for certain that it gets me mentally prepared and poised for
performance, productivity, and positivity from the minute I get up.
Let me walk you through a typical morning.
Before I even get out of bed, I spend some time reflecting on my
dreams. Dreams are an expression of the work your subconscious is doing
while you’re sleeping, and there’s gold to be mined from them. Many
geniuses throughout history have regularly accessed and often gleaned
their best ideas and made their greatest discoveries from their dreams.
Mary Shelley came up with the idea for Frankenstein in her dreams. A
dream was the source of Paul McCartney’s “Yesterday,” and Einstein’s
theory of relativity.
So, the first thing I do every morning, even before lifting my head from
the pillow, is think back on my dreams to see if there’s an idea or a
perception or a new way of looking at something that can be useful to what
I’m trying to accomplish. I know that some of you have trouble recalling
your dreams, so I’m going to provide you with a quick mnemonic
technique designed to help you do so. Just think of the word DREAMS:
D is for Decide: The night before, make a conscious decision that
you’re going to recall your dreams. If you set the intention, your

chances improve dramatically.
R is for Record: Keep a pen and paper by your bedside, or even have
a recording app readily available on your phone. As soon as you wake
up, record any lingering remembrance of your dreams.
E is for Eyes: Keep your eyes closed right after you awaken. Dreams
can disappear within minutes, and if you keep your eyes closed, this
will help you reflect.
A is for Affirm: Before you go to sleep, affirm that you are going to
remember your dreams, because affirmation is a critical tool in
accomplishment.
M is for Manage: For lots of reasons but specifically here for the
sake of remembering your dreams, it’s important to manage your
sleep and establish good sleep routines.
S is for Share: Talk about your dreams with others. When you do so,
you bring them more and more to the surface, and you develop the
routine of tapping into your dreams so you can discuss them later.
The first thing I do after I get out of bed is make the bed. This is a
success habit, my first accomplishment of the day. It’s an easy win, and it
has the added advantage of making my bedtime more pleasant, because it’s
always nicer to return that night to a bed that is made. It’s why, in the
military, they train you to make your bed first thing in the morning,
because it sets you up to be excellent at everything you do.
After that, I have a tall glass of water. Hydration is so important first
thing in the morning because our bodies lose a lot of water while we sleep
through the simple act of breathing. Remember: Our brains are
approximately 75 percent water, so if we’re going to fire up our brains, we
need to be well hydrated. I also have a glass of celery juice, which boosts
the immune system, helps flush toxins from the liver, and helps restore the
adrenal glands (hat tip to Anthony William, the Medical Medium, for this
idea). Right after this, I’ll take my probiotics to make sure my second
brain is getting what it needs.
Then I brush my teeth with my opposite hand. I do this to train my brain
to do difficult things, because it stimulates a different part of your brain,

and because it forces me to be present. I can’t be doing other things in
order to do this well.
Then I do a three-minute workout. This is not my full workout, but I
want to get my heart rate up first thing in the morning, as it helps with
sleep and weight management, and with oxygenation to the brain.
Once I’m finished with that, I take a cold shower. I’m sure some of you
will cringe at the idea of starting the day pummeling yourself with cold
water, but cold therapies of this type do a great job of resetting the nervous
system and have the added benefit of helping manage any inflammation.
When I’m out of the shower, I go through a series of breathing exercises
to fully oxygenate my body. Then I do about 20 minutes of meditation to
give me a clear mind as I enter the day. The process I use, Ziva
Meditation, was developed by my meditation coach, Emily Fletcher, a
three-step process that involves mindfulness, meditation, and
manifestation. To watch a video of it, go to www.LimitlessBook.com/resou
rces.
Next, I make my “brain tea,” a combination of gotu kola, ginkgo, lion’s
mane, MCT oil, and a few other things. Then I’ll sit down to spend some
time journaling, getting my first thoughts of the day down on the page. My
goal in any given day is to accomplish three things for work and three
things personally, and I set this agenda now. I follow this with about a half
hour of reading. I set a goal to read a minimum of one book a week and
making this a part of my morning routine to keep me on course.
Finally, I drink my “brain smoothie,” a combination of many of the
brain foods we discussed earlier in this chapter (no salmon here, in case
you were wondering).
Now, admittedly, this routine requires a good deal of time. As I
mentioned, I can’t get to all of it every day, and I can appreciate if it seems
like more than you can handle, particularly if you need to get others
started on their day. But if your goal in reading this book is upgrading your
brain, then some variation on a morning routine of this type is an integral
part of the process. Here are the keys:
Check in on your dreams before you get out of bed. There’s so much
gold to mine here, so I strongly recommend that you not skip this
step.

Get yourself hydrated and oxygenated.
Nourish yourself with some of the brain foods mentioned in this
chapter.
Set a plan for the day.
If you do at least these four things, you’ll be well on your way to
revving up your brain to operate at a high-octane level. Build as many of
these things into the start of your day as you can. The most important
thing is having a productive morning routine. I can’t stress enough how
much of an impact getting your day off to the right start has on how the
day goes for you overall.

KWIK START
Create your new morning routine. Remember, it doesn’t have to be a
lot. Even a simple three-step routine can help jump-start your
morning. What are the three things you will always do when you first
wake up to set up your day to win? Write them down.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON
None of us would be able to live without habits, of course, but consciously
working to bring constructive new habits into your life and to replace bad
habits with better ones will take your superpowers to a new level. Before
you move on to the next chapter, here are a few things to do:
Bolster your understanding of the habit loop by thinking about the
four components of some of your most common habits, like making
your breakfast or taking the dog for a walk. What’s the cue, the
craving, the response, and the reward for each of these?
Spend a few minutes thinking about a habit that you’d love to replace
with a more constructive one. Using the Fogg Behavioral Model,
what new behavior can you adopt that fits neatly into the model?

Walk yourself through the process of starting a valuable new habit
using WIN.

10

FLOW
Why is flow so important to becoming limitless?
How do I achieve a flow state?
What are the key enemies of flow?

I’m sure there have been times when you were so completely caught up in
what you were doing that everything else disappeared and it just felt like
the most natural thing you’ve ever done. Time probably melted away for
you during these experiences. People regularly tell me about focusing so
deeply on what they were doing that they had no idea that afternoon had
become night or that they’d missed multiple meals in the process.
This experience is flow.
In his groundbreaking book, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal
Experience, psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi describes flow as “the
state in which people are so involved in an activity that nothing else seems
to matter; the experience itself is so enjoyable that people will do it even
at great cost, for the sheer sake of doing it.” To Csikszentmihalyi, flow is
an expression of “optimal experience.”1
Dr. Csikszentmihalyi describes flow as having eight characteristics:2
1. Absolute concentration
2. Total focus on goals
3. The sense that time is either speeding up or slowing down

4. A feeling of reward from the experience
5. A sense of effortlessness
6. The experience is challenging, but not overly so
7. Your actions almost seem to be happening on their own
8. You feel comfort with what you are doing
As you’ve likely experienced yourself, being in a flow state
dramatically boosts your productivity. Reports have suggested that flow
can make you as much as five times more productive. The people at
McKinsey have even imagined a workforce where flow is commonplace:
When we ask executives during the peak-performance exercise
how much more productive they were at their peak than they were on
average, for example, we get a range of answers, but the most
common at senior levels is an increase of five times. Most report that
they and their employees are in the zone at work less than 10 percent
of the time, though some claim to experience these feelings as much
as 50 percent of it. If employees working in a high-IQ, high-EQ, and
high-MQ environment are five times more productive at their peak
than they are on average, consider what even a relatively modest 20percentage-point increase in peak time would yield in overall
workplace productivity —it would almost double.3

WINNING WITH FLOW
Patrick, a member of our community, struggled constantly with ADHD and
an inability to focus. It had been a problem for him throughout his life. He
was easily distracted, or, in the reverse, he was hyperfocused to the
detriment of everything and everyone around him. He even experienced
this during his Brazilian jujitsu tournaments. He had difficulty deciding
which technique to use with opponents and felt as though he was trying to
use every move at once, even though many of them weren’t appropriate
for the situation. His inability to focus affected his work, his family life,
and his favorite sport, and he felt a high level of stress nearly all the time.

Then one day he started listening to episodes of my podcast, where he
heard about the stages of flow (which we will get to in a moment), as well
as several other high-performance habits. Patrick applied what he was
learning to his everyday life and saw immediate results. He was finally
able to identify and understand what he was struggling with, and he
immersed himself in his pursuits more fully than ever before. Finding
flow was the key.
In his next tournament, Patrick was able to release his intense focus and
take his mind off the problems that had distracted him in the past. He
found his flow quickly . . . and felt like he was in The Matrix; he could see
his opponent’s moves coming before they happened. Even better, he was
able to find flow in other areas of his life too. The better he did in his
martial arts tournaments, the better he did in life. Patrick finally felt a
release from the stress that dogged him endlessly, at last believing that he
could let go and enjoy his life more.

THE FOUR STAGES OF FLOW
The flow state has a predictable arc to it. Our podcast guest, Steven Kotler,
founder of the Flow Research Collective and the author of The Rise of
Superman, has identified the four stages of flow:4
Stage 1: Struggle
This is when you’re digging deep to access whatever it is that you need to
reach the flow state. It could be a workout regimen, extensive research, an
intense bout of brainstorming, or anything else that you are focusing on.
Warning: This often feels like a struggle and, in fact, the opposite of flow.
Stage 2: Relaxation
This is the break you take before fully diving into flow. It is an essential
step, as it keeps you from burning out over the struggle you’ve just been
through. This break—a walk, some breathing, anything that helps you
relax—is decidedly different from a distraction such as moving on to
another task or checking sports scores.

Stage 3: Flow
This is the stage that Kotler describes as “the superman experience.” This
is that flow state that hopefully you’ve experienced at various points in
your life, where you’re doing your absolute best work and it almost seems
to be happening automatically.
Stage 4: Consolidation
In this final stage you pull together everything you accomplished during
the flow stage. Often, this is accompanied by feeling somewhat let down.
All kinds of positive chemicals have been running through your brain
while you’re in flow, and now that high is ending. But another cycle can be
waiting just around the corner.
Kotler believes that finding flow is the “source code” of motivation.
When you find flow, you get “maybe the most potent dose of reward
chemistry” your brain can give you—which is the reason he believes flow
is the most addictive state on Earth. Once we start to feel flow in an
experience, we are motivated to do what it takes to get more. But it’s a
circular relationship—if you have motivation to accomplish a task but you
have no flow, you will eventually burn out. Motivation and flow need to
work together, and they must be coupled with a solid recovery protocol,
like good sleep and nutrition.

KWIK START
Have you ever experienced the flow state? Where were you? What
were you doing? How did it feel? What did you achieve at the end of
it? Visualize that state. Even if you can’t visualize, imagine that you
can.

FINDING FLOW
If you’re going to become limitless, you’re going to want to get yourself
into a flow state as often as possible. So how do you do this? I can offer
five ways:

1. Eliminate Distractions
Earlier, we talked about the importance of keeping distractions to a
minimum. If you’re going to find yourself in a flow state, eliminating
distractions is absolutely essential. It can take you up to 20 minutes to
reconnect with what you’re doing after you’ve been distracted from doing
it. How are you ever going to get into the flow if you’re constantly
rebooting because a text drew away your attention, or because you just
wanted to make a quick check of social media before you got back to
work? So, put everything else aside and concentrate completely on what
you’re doing.
2. Give Yourself Enough Time
Make sure you have a block of time set aside to get into flow. It’s
commonly believed that, when conditions are right, it takes about 15
minutes to achieve a flow state and that you don’t really hit your peak for
closer to 45 minutes. Clearing out only half an hour or so isn’t going to
allow you to accomplish much. Plan to set aside at least 90 minutes, and
ideally a full two hours.
3. Do Something You Love
When we think of flow, we tend to think of people achieving at extremely
high levels: the athlete perfecting her game, the musician crafting the
ideal guitar solo, the writer quickly putting words down on the page as
though taking dictation rather than creating. What’s common among all of
these people is that they are doing something that matters to them a great
deal. They wouldn’t be satisfied with only being moderately competent, as
they aren’t performing a task with which they have a casual relationship.
They’re doing things they love.
I’ve been talking to people about flow for decades, and I don’t think
I’ve ever heard someone mention being in a flow state about something
they were doing only to pass the time. It’s like the difference between
driving an old junker and driving a brand-new Aston Martin. Both might
get you to the office, but you’re only likely to really get into the driving
experience with one of them. If you find certain annoyances in something

you’re doing, or if you find it to be dull much of the time, these negatives
are going to prevent you from truly getting into the flow.
4. Have Clear Goals
One of the most efficient flow preventers is a lack of clarity. If you don’t
know what you’re trying to accomplish, it’s likely that casting around for a
mission will keep flow at bay. A novelist friend of mine separates the
plotting of his novels from the actual writing for precisely this reason. For
him, plotting is an arduous task with lots of fits and starts, whereas he
takes tremendous pleasure in choosing the right words for his stories and
making his characters come alive. By plotting ahead of time, he knows
exactly what he’s going to write about on any given day and regularly
finds himself disappearing into the flow of his work for hours at a stretch.
So, once you’ve carved out the time, give yourself a clear purpose for
how you are going to use that time. If you set yourself on a mission at the
outset, and it is something that you’re excited about achieving, you’re
likely to find yourself deeply immersed in that mission.
5. Challenge Yourself . . . A Little
When I talk to people about flow, I consistently hear that they are most
likely to achieve flow when they’re doing something that is a little bit of a
challenge. In other words, they’re outside of their comfort zone, but not
way outside of it. The logic here is clear. If you do something that you can
do with both hands tied behind your back, you’re probably going to
become bored fairly quickly, and boredom and flow are incompatible.
On the other hand, if you do something that you find extremely
difficult, you’re likely to become frustrated, and that frustration is going
to keep flow from happening. But if you do something that you love that
also has a moderate level of challenge to it—trying to hit a baseball to just
one part of the field, trying a new form of tuning on your guitar, or writing
from the perspective of a new character, for example—this level of
challenge is likely to keep the task exciting for you and therefore engage
you deeply.

CONQUERING THE ENEMIES OF FLOW
Training yourself to achieve flow regularly and even in multiple sessions
in the same day will have you performing like a superhero. But we all
know that superheroes are constantly challenged by supervillains, and a
number of them are lurking around every corner, stalking your flow and
trying to extinguish it. Here are the four supervillains you need to keep at
bay if your flow is going to thrive:
1. Multitasking
We’ve talked about this before, even in this chapter, but it bears repeating.
Being a “master multitasker” is not synonymous with being limitless. In
fact, research repeatedly shows that people who multitask are considerably
less productive than those who focus on one task at a time. Given what you
now know about flow, it should be obvious that multitasking is the mortal
enemy of this feeling. You’re never going get into the flow state to craft
that epic solo or create that jaw-dropping presentation if you’re also
checking in with colleagues, sending off a quick note to a friend, and
reading your company e-mail. The only way to vanquish the supervillain
Multitask is to ignore him completely. Clear your schedule of everything
else and get into the flow.
2. Stress
This is a particularly deadly supervillain and one that sometimes requires
a monumental battle to defeat. If you have lots of outside stressors in your
life—deadlines, relationship issues, family problems, worries about your
job security, etc.—they’re likely to sneak up on you at any given moment.
I’m sure you’ve had the experience of thinking about something entirely
different when you’re suddenly ambushed by an anxious reminder that
you’re facing some troubles at home. Once that thought is in your head,
any opportunities for flow are crushed. Defeating this supervillain requires
two expert moves. The first is to look the supervillain in the eye before
you start and ask yourself if there’s anything that you absolutely must deal
with before you can get into flow. If the answer is yes, address that first.
But in all likelihood, the answer will be no. It isn’t that the stressors aren’t
real, but they often don’t need your immediate attention, and they aren’t

going to be worse two hours from now. If that’s the case, contend with this
supervillain by putting up your force field. Make your space impenetrable
by outside stressors so you can concentrate completely on the task at hand.
3. Fear of Failure
“Perfectionism reduces creativity and innovation,” writes Hara Estroff
Marano, editor at large and the former editor in chief of Psychology Today.
“It is a steady source of negative emotions; rather than reaching toward
something positive, those in its grip are focused on the very thing they
most want to avoid—negative evaluation. Perfectionism, then, is an
endless report card; it keeps people completely self-absorbed, engaged in
perpetual self-evaluation—reaping relentless frustration and doomed to
anxiety and depression.”5 If you go into a task with the belief that you
absolutely must perform this task perfectly and that failure will be
devastating, you’re going to be so focused on not failing that you’ll never
get into a state where you can truly excel.
Remember earlier when we talked about how one of the ideal conditions
for flow is pushing yourself just a little outside of your comfort zone?
When you do this, you increase the odds that you’re not going to get
everything right the first time. If you allow the supervillain of
perfectionism to master you at this point, your flow will be forfeited. To
best this villain, you need to convince yourself that lack of perfection is
not only okay but is a clear sign that you’re pushing yourself in ways that
you must.
4. Lack of Conviction
Nearly as devilish a supervillain as perfectionism is a lack of belief in
what you’re doing. “The brain perceives uncertainty as a threat, which
sparks the release of cortisol, a stress hormone that disrupts memory,
depresses the immune system, and increases the risk of high blood
pressure and depression,” writes Travis Bradberry, president of
TalentSmart.6
If you don’t believe you’re going to accomplish anything of importance,
you’ll guarantee that will be the outcome. If you go into a task doubting
your ability to complete it, ask yourself these questions: Do I have the

necessary skills to do this? Do I have all the information I need to do this?
Do I have enough passion for this project to do this? If the answer to any
of these is no, set the task aside until you can answer each of these
questions in the affirmative. But if the answer to all three of these
questions is yes, take this supervillain down and get into the flow.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON
The flow experience is one of the greatest highs any of us will ever
experience. It is also fundamental to becoming limitless. By this point,
you should have a better sense of what flow is and how to get there. Before
we move on, take a little time to try out the following:
Reflect on a few times you’ve been in the flow. What were you
doing? What was consistent about those experiences? How can you
get back there more often?
Take out your calendar and find a spot in the next few days where you
can carve out 90 minutes to two hours. This needs to be a time when
you can free yourself of all distractions. Now, what are you going to
do with that time to dramatically boost your productivity?
How often do you go into a project with one of the supervillains we
talked about in this chapter stalking you? What can you do right now
to defeat that supervillain before going into your next project?

PART IV

LIMITLESS METHODS
THE HOW

method
meth·od (noun)

A specific process for accomplishing something, especially an orderly,
logical, or systematic way of instruction.

By this point, you’ve discovered how to unleash two of the elements
necessary to become limitless. You’ve learned how to approach every day
with a productive mindset, and you’ve learned how to do so with an
optimal level of motivation. But there’s one more M that differentiates
limitless people from those who are encumbered by their limitations:
method.
Methods are the procedures or processes for accomplishing something.
In this context, method is the process of learning how to learn, also called
meta learning. When we go through the education system, we are taught
very antiquated and inefficient ways of learning, such as sub-vocalization
and rote memorization. As I mentioned at the start of this book, when I
was struggling as “the boy with the broken brain,” I wasn’t incapable of
learning; history has shown that. But I wasn’t succeeding at learning in the
way I was being taught. It wasn’t until I mastered a new way of learning—
a method you will see over the course of the coming chapters—that I
could finally use my brain to excel.
In this section, you’re going to learn the science of accelerated learning
and meta learning in five areas: focus, study, memory, speed reading, and
thinking. These are the five flagship programs that we teach to individuals
and organizations at Kwik Learning. Take special note of the lead-in
questions at the start of these chapters, and make sure to try out all the
exercises I’ve included. Once you start using these tools, I think you’ll
find yourself using them all the time—and I think you’ll be amazed at
what they unlock for you.

11

FOCUS
What can I learn from what I’m like when I’m most focused?
How can I increase my ability to concentrate?
How do I limit my distractions and calm my busy mind?

What’s the difference between someone performing at superhero levels
and someone failing to ever discover their superpowers? In many cases,
it’s a matter of focus. I’m sure you’ve had numerous times in your life
when you’ve really locked in on a task. Maybe it was writing a report that
mattered a great deal to you. Maybe it was having a session with a mentor
you love. Maybe it was attacking a bowl of your favorite ice cream. How
did you do with these tasks? In all likelihood, you crushed them, writing
one of the best reports of your life, learning huge amounts from your
mentor, and devouring that ice cream like it was the last dessert in the
world. This happened because you were able to train your focus on the task
at hand, get right on that task, and not let anything distract you from that
task. So why do most of us have only so much ability to maintain focus?
Simply, I think it’s because we were never taught to do so. Certainly, I
don’t recall having a focus class when I was in elementary school.
Do you remember when you were a kid and you went outside on a sunny
day with a magnifying glass? How cool was it to hover the glass over a
leaf, see an intensely bright spot appear on the leaf, and then watch as the
leaf started to smoke and burn? What you were able to do was focus a
greater level of the sun’s intensity on that leaf. And where the bright spot

appeared, things were at their hottest. Interestingly, when we talk about
someone being intelligent, we often call them “bright.” Going back to our
magnifying glass analogy, maybe what we’re really saying isn’t that this
person is much more intelligent than most other people; maybe that person
is just more focused.
Focus allows us to train our brain power on a particular task to burn
through that task. It’s amazing what we can accomplish when we’re
focused. Conversely, when we’re less focused, we’re less likely to
accomplish what we truly want to do because we’re just not as committed
—both emotionally and physically—to doing it. The primary enemy to
focus is distraction.

KWIK START
Rate your current level of concentration from 0 to 10. Now rate your
desire to increase this level. Your concentration is like a muscle. You
can train to become stronger with practice.

PRACTICING CONCENTRATION
“Concentration is at the crux of all human success and endeavor,” Hindu
priest, entrepreneur, and former monk Dandapani told me during one of
my podcasts. “If you can’t concentrate, you can’t manifest.”1 What
Dandapani is saying is that concentration is a critical component of
anything you want to accomplish. But, like so many other things we’ve
discussed already, we’ve never really been taught how to concentrate.
Sure, our parents and our teachers might have implored us to concentrate
harder, maybe even criticizing our lack of focus with a question such as,
“Why can’t you just concentrate?” But the simple answer to that is that
most of us never learned how.
Dandapani points out that concentration is like a muscle that gets
stronger the more you exercise it. “Concentration is something you can
learn and something you can practice to get better at,” he said.2 However,
what most of us practice instead is distraction. We allow our minds to

jump from thought to thought, often using technology to help us practice
distraction until we’re experts at it—and we should be, because we often
get a dozen or more hours of practice a day. Just imagine what it would be
like if we practiced concentration for even a fraction of that time.
Dandapani has a remarkably clear way of looking at this. “I define
concentration as my ability to keep my awareness on one thing for an
extended period of time. Every time my concentration drifts, I use my will
power to bring my awareness back.”3
Most of us think of lack of concentration as a function of our mind
bouncing from place to place. Dandapani has a different—and more
helpful—metaphor. To him, it isn’t your mind that’s moving; it’s your
awareness. He sees awareness as a glowing ball of light that moves to
different parts of your mind. In order to excel at concentration, you need
to make yourself keep that ball of light trained on one spot in your mind
for an extended period. This won’t be easy at first, but a conscious effort
to exercise your will power in this way is likely to lead to impressive
results.
You can work on this during nearly any pursuit. If you’re having a
conversation with someone, make a concerted effort to pay attention to
nothing other than that conversation. If you notice your awareness drifting
away from the conversation, refocus your glowing ball of light. If you’re
reading a report for work, train your eyes on the words as though nothing
else exists. Again, if you notice the light of your awareness beginning to
shine on something else, bring that ball back to the report. If you make the
commitment to practice concentration an hour or so a day, it will soon
become second nature.
Whenever possible, try to do one thing at a time. We’ve talked a bit
about multitasking already, but for now just remember that multitasking is
a grossly inefficient way to get anything done. If at all feasible, allow
yourself to do whatever you’re doing to the exclusion of everything else. If
you’re on the phone, don’t scroll through social media at the same time. If
you’re making breakfast, don’t also work on your to-do list for the day. By
doing one thing at a time, your concentration “muscle” will become
incredibly strong, and your focus will reach limitless levels.
Another key to boosting your concentration is de-cluttering your
environment. A Princeton University study found that, “Multiple stimuli
present in the visual field at the same time compete for neural

representation by mutually suppressing their evoked activity throughout
the visual cortex, providing a neural correlate for the limited processing
capacity of the visual system.”4 In layperson’s terms, what this means is
that physical clutter in your surroundings competes for your attention,
which results in decreased performance and increased anxiety and stress
levels.
So, if you want to become a master at concentration, divest yourself of
the potential for distraction whenever concentration is critical. If you’re
working on your computer, shut down every application and every open
tab other than the ones you absolutely need to perform the task at hand.
Limit the number of items in your physical workspace as well. While I
think many of us consider a desk piled with books, magazines, papers,
pictures of our kids, and souvenirs from our vacations to be cozy or even
the sign of an active mind, every single one of those items creates a pull
away from your concentration. Family heirlooms are wonderful, and you
already know how I feel about books. Just limit the number of these things
that share residence with the place where you need to be most productive.

CALMING YOUR BUSY MIND
Unlimiting your focus requires more than just getting to the tasks at hand.
As we’ve already discussed, focus requires an ability to set aside
distractions and give all your attention to what you’re doing. But is that
even possible anymore? Most of us are working on multiple devices at the
same time, often with multiple applications running on each of those
devices. We have meetings to attend, e-mails and texts to answer, social
media statuses to update, and multiple projects in play. Yet, precisely
because of this, it’s more important than ever to find ways to bring calm to
your mind.
You might not even realize it, but all the input you’re getting on any
given day is causing you a considerable amount of stress. If you’re like
many people, you might even think of this as a positive thing, because it
means that you’re busy, and by being busy, you’re making a meaningful
contribution to the world. While this might be true, it is in spite of this
anxiety rather than because of it.

“Anxious thoughts can overwhelm you, making it difficult to make
decisions and take action to deal with whatever issue bothers you” writes
psychologist Melanie Greenberg, Ph.D., author of The Stress-Proof Brain.
“Anxiety can also lead to overthinking, which makes you more anxious,
which leads to more overthinking, and so on. How can you get out of this
vicious cycle? Repressing anxious thoughts won’t work; they will just pop
up again, sometimes with more intensity.”5
Juliet Funt is the CEO of the consulting firm WhiteSpace at Work. She
describes whitespace as “the thinking time, the strategic pause that’s in
between the busyness.”6 When she was on my podcast, Juliet called
whitespace “the oxygen that allows everything else to catch fire.”
What both Greenberg and Funt are identifying is the need for all of us to
have more time when our minds aren’t cluttered. It’s obvious how doing
this will positively affect our mental health. But what’s less obvious is
how it will also dramatically improve our focus and our productivity.
Some interesting studies in neuroscience underscore this, showing us how
distraction is actually changing our brains. One, from University College
London, compared the brains of heavy media multitaskers with those of
light media multitaskers and found that the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC), which is involved in focus, was smaller among the former group.
Conversely, a study at the Max Planck Institute found that, among people
going through training exercises to increase attention, their ACCs grew
thicker.7
And distractions can be a serious time sink. A study from University of
California, Irvine, shows how distractions can really disrupt your day.
“You have to completely shift your thinking, it takes you a while to get
into it and it takes you a while to get back and remember where you were,”
said Gloria Mark, lead author of the study. “We found about 82 percent of
all interrupted work is resumed on the same day. But here’s the bad news
—it takes an average of 23 minutes and 15 seconds to get back to the
task.”8 That’s more than 20 minutes every time you’re distracted—and
how often are you distracted every day?
Tools like meditation, yoga, and certain martial arts can be
tremendously valuable in helping you calm your busy mind. But if you’re
in the middle of the day and can’t afford to get away for more than a few
minutes, there are still some things you can do. Three important ones are:

1. Breathe
We’ve already talked about the value of taking deep cleansing breaths as
part of your morning routine. But doing the same thing is valuable
whenever you need to re-center yourself. Holistic health expert Andrew
Weil, M.D., developed a breathing tool that he calls the 4–7–8 Method. It
works like this:
Exhale completely through your mouth, making a whoosh sound.
Close your mouth and inhale quietly through your nose to a mental
count of 4.
Hold your breath for a count of 7.
Exhale completely through your mouth, making a whoosh sound to a
count of 8.
This is one breath. Now inhale again and repeat the cycle three more
times for a total of four breaths.9
2. Do Something That Has Been Causing You Stress
This goes back to what we talked about earlier regarding procrastination.
As we now all know (thanks to Bluma Zeigarnik), things weighing on our
minds are going to continue weighing on our minds until we deal with
them. If you’re having trouble focusing or if your mind is operating on a
dozen planes at the same time, it’s very possible the reason this is
happening is because there’s something that you need to do that you’ve
been avoiding doing. If that’s the case, do a little 4–7–8 breathing, deal
with the stressful task, and then you can get back to everything else you
want to do with increased focus.

KWIK START
What is that one important thing that you’re avoiding that is affecting
your focus?

3. Schedule Time for Distractions
It might be a challenge for you to turn off your phone and your e-mail
when you need to focus, but if you can convince yourself to do these
things, great. They’re relatively easy to do. What’s likely to be
considerably harder is to avoid letting worries and obligations get in the
way of whatever you’re trying to accomplish in that moment. There’s a
reason you’re seeing these things as worries or obligations, and that makes
them much harder to push out of your mind. Addressing one of your
concerns head-on, as we just discussed, is one way to deal with this, but
there are going to be situations where that’s simply not possible. Instead,
what if you set aside a specific time in your schedule to move these
worries and obligations to the forefront of your mind? Simply saying, “I’ll
worry about that later” isn’t likely to keep that worry from creeping back
20 minutes from now. But saying, “I’ll worry about that at 4:15” very well
might.

KWIK START
Schedule your next distraction time.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON
Unlimiting your focus is a key to unleashing your superpowers. When
your mind is truly focused, when you’re completely throwing yourself at a
task, you achieve at levels that are impossible when you’re distracted or
divided in your thoughts. Before we move on from this chapter, let’s try a
few things:
Take a good look at your to-do list and identify the thing (or things)
on it that is likely to invade your thoughts until you get it done.
Formulate a plan for dealing with that task using some of the
antiprocrastination tools you now have.
Do something right now that changes your productivity environment
so you can do a better job of staying on task.

Practice a technique for calming your busy mind. Does it work for
you? If so, commit to using it regularly.

12

STUDY
If I’m going to be a lifelong student,
how can I optimize my study time?
Is cramming the best way to learn something?
How do I become a better note-taker?

One Friday night, after a very busy workweek, I received a call. The
person on the other end of the phone told me that we had a common friend
and that this friend had suggested he reach out to me.
“Sure, how can I help you?” I said.
For the first 30 seconds of our call, this man had seemed entirely calm.
But with that question, his voice became more animated.
“You’ve gotta help me, please. My speaker can’t make it out tomorrow
because of an emergency. He was supposed to give our keynote.”
I told him that I was sorry to hear about his predicament but that I
didn’t take speaking assignments on the spur of the moment. I usually
booked speaking gigs six months in advance, and I always gave myself
time to prepare for them.
That didn’t deter this caller. He said that our mutual friend had raved
about speeches he’d seen me give and that if anyone could deliver a strong
presentation on short notice it was me.
“Please save me,” he said with even more emotion in his voice.
This guy’s plight was starting to get to me. I happened to be free on
Saturday, and the conference he was throwing was in Manhattan, where I

lived. I decided to ask him the topic of the keynote. When he told me, I
stared at the phone as though the caller were speaking to me in an alien
language.
“Why are you calling me about this?” I said. “I know nothing about that
topic.”
“Yes, but the speaker who canceled has a book.”
“I’m not sure how that matters.”
The caller responded so quickly that it was clear he’d already prepared
this argument. “I’ve heard you’re a speed reader. I was thinking you could
come in a little early, study the book, and then give the speech.”
This scenario was so completely outlandish that I did the only thing I
could do under the circumstances: I took the engagement. How could I
turn down a challenge like that? We agreed on the particulars, he told me a
bit more about the audience to whom I’d be speaking, and then I hung up,
asking myself what just happened.
I got to the conference center the next morning at 10 A.M. The man
who’d called the night before handed me a copy of the book and set me up
in a quiet room. I was to deliver the keynote at 1 P.M. Over the next three
hours, I read the book, made a ton of notes, and laid out the basic
parameters of the presentation I was about to give. I then went up on stage
and gave a keynote that turned out to be the most highly rated talk of the
conference. I was exhausted, but I have to admit that the entire experience
was quite the rush.
You are unlikely to ever find yourself in a situation like this. But as
outrageous as the caller’s request had been, I knew I could do this, because
with competence comes confidence. I’m not saying this to to impress you;
I’m saying it to express to you what’s possible. To illustrate to you how
any sense of constraint fades when you’ve learned how to absorb a subject
in a sitting, remember what you’ve learned, have the ability to highlight
the most essential points, and have an understanding of how people learn
—in other words, many of the things we’re discussing in this book.
I never would have been able to deliver that particular keynote if I
hadn’t been a quick study. And just like the other skills we’ve been
addressing here, this isn’t an ability you either do or don’t have. Instead,
it’s an ability you’ve either cultivated or haven’t. You can learn how to

unlimit your studies. And when you do, it’ll be a superpower you’ll
employ the rest of your life.

KWIK START
Think about a topic or subject you’d like to learn this month. How
would you go about studying this topic? What’s your current
approach or process?

THE FOUR LEVELS OF COMPETENCE
Since the sixties, psychologists have noted that there are four levels of
competence or learning. The first, known as “unconscious incompetence,”
is when you don’t know what you don’t know. For example, you might not
even be aware of the fact that something like speed-reading exists. So,
you’re also not aware that you’re currently not capable of doing it.
In the next level, known as “conscious incompetence,” you’re aware of
what you don’t know. For example, you’re aware that people have learned
to read and comprehend much faster through speed-reading techniques,
but you yourself have not had any training in this area, nor do you
understand what tools are necessary to become a speed-reader.
The third level is “conscious competence.” What this means is that
you’re aware of a skill and have the capacity to perform that skill, but only
when you actively put your mind to it. You can do it, but it takes work.
Continuing with speed-reading, this would be akin to speed-reading
successfully, but only when you focus on employing a speed-reading
technique. Similarly at this stage for other activities, like typing or
driving, you can do it, but it requires your conscious attention.
The fourth level—the one any lifelong learner is seeking—is
“unconscious competence.” In this case, you know how to perform a skill,
and it’s second nature to you. With speed-reading, you would reach the
point of unconscious competence when this simply becomes the way you
read. You’re not making yourself read faster; you’re just doing so. You are
typing or driving without your deliberate attention.

Now the key to get from conscious competence to unconscious
competence is obvious. It’s practice. Practice makes progress.
While the model psychologists use ends there, I would add a fifth level:
true mastery. This is a step beyond unconscious competence to where it’s
second nature to perform a skill at an elite level. This is the level of being
limitless. And if you’re going to be a master, you’re going to need to study
like a superhero.

HOW TO STUDY BETTER
Why are most of us restrained in our ability to study? Most people do not
know how to study effectively, because they were never taught. Many
people naturally assume they already know how to learn. The challenge is
that most of the techniques you use now are old and ineffective. Many of
them date back hundreds of years.
We now live in a highly competitive information age where information
is everywhere. Yet we are still using the same methods to absorb and
process it all. Today, our requirements for learning are much different. But
most of us were taught that studying was all about reviewing material over
and over and over so we could spit it back out during a test. We’re going to
talk in a moment about why cramming is such a bad idea but suffice it to
say, the process is far from optimal.
The most successful people in the world are lifelong students. That
means they’re continuously learning new skills, keeping up with the latest
in their chosen fields, and staying apprised of what other fields might be
able to offer to them. As we discussed earlier in this book, there are
enormous benefits to spending a lifetime learning, so if you’re going to
approach your goal of being a limitless learner, you’re going to want to
make study a part of your entire life.
This is something that James, one of our students, discovered —
although it took a little time. James struggled with his education and, after
high school, he spent three years working at a liquor store even though
he’d always dreamed of becoming a successful businessman. He realized
that, in order to fulfill his dream, he was going to have to go to college
but, he told me, “It was like pulling teeth. I eventually got my accounting
degree, then got into an accounting firm, and then went into banking. But

for the longest time, I couldn’t build up to being a wealth manager. I got
into an analyst position, and that required a lot of learning, a lot of
studying, and I was just barely getting by. I had the people skills and I had
the discipline, but the studying part was really hard for me. A lot of the
designations I have now, I failed the tests a few times before I got those
designations. When it was time to take my CFP exam while I was working,
it just became so burdensome.”
James was six weeks away from his big test—a test that normally
requires 12 weeks of study—when he learned about my speed-reading
program. This allowed him to turn the corner, improving his studies,
helping him “keep my brain healthy through the whole process of
intensively studying,” and providing him with a big boost on the day of the
test.
James got his CFP designation, and this allowed him to get a new
position where he works directly with clients as a wealth manager. He
continues to use his newly refined learning skills while going through the
vast number of prospectuses he needs to read and understand.
James could easily have allowed restrictions to stop him in his tracks.
Instead, he learned to unlimit his old ways of studying to overcome the
obstacle in his career.

BUT WHAT ABOUT CRAMMING?
The all-nighter is an age-old study tradition that many people continue
long after their school days are over. Much of this is due to procrastination
and putting off the work that needs to be done for that big test or that big
presentation. But many people also believe that cramming is their most
effective form of preparation. Chances are good, however, that it is not.
“In reality, cramming is associated with emotional, mental and physical
impairments that reduce the body’s ability to cope with its environment,”
wrote journalist Ralph Heibutzki in the Seattle Post-Intelligencer. He cited
a Harvard Medical School study that indicates that cramming leads to
many unwanted side-effects, including impaired mental function.1
In addition, cramming usually requires forgoing all or at least much of
one’s normal amount of sleep, and this can wind up undermining the very
purpose of cramming. UCLA professor of psychiatry Andrew J. Fuligni

coauthored a study on cramming and came away with a clear connection
between this by-product of cramming and the expected results. “No one is
suggesting that students shouldn’t study,” he said, “but an adequate
amount of sleep is also critical for academic success. These results are
consistent with emerging research suggesting that sleep deprivation
impedes learning.”2
In working with students of all ages, I have learned that cramming is
rarely as useful as we would like it to be. Concentrating on one subject for
many, many hours makes it less likely that you’re going to retain the
information. Earlier, we talked about the effect of primacy and recency on
memory. If you tend to remember the first thing and the most recent thing
best, cramming a huge amount of information between that first and most
recent thing is only going to lead to your having more things that you
forget. We’ll talk about a better alternative in a moment.
Whether you’re a high school junior taking five AP classes with the
goal of gaining acceptance to a top college or a corporate head faced with
the need to stay on top of your rapidly changing industry, you’re likely
facing two challenges simultaneously: a mountain of information to scale,
and little time in which to scale it. If this is you, you’re going to want to
make sure you’re studying as efficiently as you can. Over my years of
helping people to learn faster and study better, here are seven of my
favorite simple habits to unlimit your studies.
Habit 1: Employ Active Recall
Active recall is a process through which you review material and then
immediately check to determine how much of it you’ve remembered. This
allows you to draw the distinction between simple recognition (familiarity
with the words on the page) and recollection (making the material an
active part of your memory).
“Most students do not realize how important it is to force themselves to
recall,” writes neurologist Dr. William Klemm of Texas A&M University.
“In part, this is because they are conditioned by multiple-choice tests to
recall passively, that is recognize when a correct answer is presented, as
opposed to generating the correct answer in the first place. Studies of
student learning practices reveal how important to memory formation it is
to retrieve information you are trying to memorize.”3

To employ active recall, do this:
Review the material you are studying.
Then close the book, turn off the video or lecture, and write down or
recite everything you remember from what you just reviewed.
Now, look at the material again. How much did you remember?
Make sure you have enough study time to allow yourself to go through
this process multiple times. As Klemm points out, the studies showed that
“optimal learning occurred when an initial learning session included
repeated study and forced-recall testing of all items at least four times in a
row.”4 This leads me to the next important habit to adopt.
Habit 2: Employ Spaced Repetition
As discussed earlier in this chapter, cramming has many downsides. While
it is natural to procrastinate, leaving yourself in situations where you need
to study a tremendous amount of material all at once makes it likely that
you aren’t going to learn that material at all. The reason is that trying to
work that way puts us in direct opposition to the way our brains work.
Alternatively, if you space out your reviews of the material, focusing
more heavily on information that you haven’t retained in the past, you’re
using your brain to the best of its abilities. “Spaced repetition is simple
but highly effective because it deliberately hacks the way your brain
works,” agrees James Gupta, CEO of the online learning platform Synap.
“It forces learning to be effortful and, like muscles, the brain responds to
that stimulus by strengthening the connections between nerve cells. By
spacing the intervals out, you’re further exercising these connections each
time. It produces long-term, durable retention of knowledge and, in my
experience, once people start using it, they swear by it.”5

Spaced repetition seems to work most effectively when you can review
the material at similar intervals. This is why it’s important to give yourself
enough time. Perhaps you perform the review once in the morning and
again right before dinner for four days in a row, and then move on to other
material you need to study at similar intervals. Use this technique in
concert with active recall. Review the material, test yourself on what you
remember, then take a break before coming back to this particular
material.
Habit 3: Manage the State You’re In
As we talked about earlier in this book, the state you’re in when you
perform any activity will have the greatest impact on your success. For
example, if you had a really bad day and were asked to give a presentation
for your job or take a test, you most likely would not perform to the best
of your ability. This is because your state of mind did not promote optimal
performance. On the other hand, if you’re feeling great, when the same
opportunity arises, you would definitely produce better results. The more

positive and resourceful your state, the greater the results you’ll produce.
Studying is no different.
Your posture also controls the state of your mind. Sit as if you’re about
to learn the most crucial life-changing information. Did you just have to
move? If you did, then notice how you feel more focused after you’ve
changed your posture. When you sit straight, it also facilitates breathing
and the circulation of necessary oxygen to your brain and the rest of your
body. If you are slumped over, it could stifle the breathing process and
make you tired.

KWIK START
While you are sitting in a chair, slump over, look down, take short
breaths, and put a frown on your face. Do this now. How motivated do
you feel to achieve success? How productive do you think you are in
this state? This is the posture a lot of students take while studying. Is
it any wonder they dislike studying and have to work hard to achieve
bare minimum results? Now sit up straight and smile. How much
better do you feel?

Habit 4: Use Your Sense of Smell
I’m sure something like this has happened to you: You walk into a room
and discover the air filled with a particular scent. Maybe it’s the smell of a
specific spice baking in the oven. That scent immediately sends you back
to a day with a childhood friend when she made a joke that was so funny
that milk came out of your nose. Why would the smell of that spice trigger
that memory? Because that smell was in the air when the event that you’re
remembering happened, and smells are especially effective at bringing
memories to the forefront of our brains. The scent of rosemary has been
shown to improve memory. Peppermint and lemon promotes
concentration.
“The answer is likely due to brain anatomy,” writes Jordan Gaines
Lewis, postdoctoral researcher at Penn State College of Medicine.
“Incoming smells are first processed by the olfactory bulb, which starts
inside the nose and runs along the bottom of the brain. The olfactory bulb

has direct connections to two brain areas that are strongly implicated in
emotion and memory: the amygdala and hippocampus. Interestingly,
visual, auditory (sound), and tactile (touch) information do not pass
through these brain areas. This may be why olfaction, more than any other
sense, is so successful at triggering emotions and memories.”6
What this shows us is that smell is an enormously important, yet
underused, memory tool. If a particular scent can rocket us back to our
childhoods, a different scent can be used to accelerate our recall. If you’re
studying for a big test, put a bit of a particular essential oil on your wrist
while you’re studying and then make sure you do the same thing before
you take the test. If you do the same thing in preparing for a big meeting,
the results should be similar. Obviously, you want to take other people into
consideration, so you don’t want to douse yourself with the scent, but just
a touch is enough to heighten your recall.
Habit 5: Music for the Mind
Think about how you did some of your earliest learning. Did you, like so
many people, memorize the alphabet through a song? Or perhaps you
know how a bill gets through Congress because Schoolhouse Rock sang it
to you. Parents have probably been teaching toddlers basic concepts
through music for as long as music has been around. They do it because it
works, and it works because there is strong science behind it.
Numerous studies link music to learning. The arousal-and-mood
hypothesis, introduced by Dr. E. Glenn Schellenberg, identifies a
connection between music and mood and the subsequent connection
between mood and learning, suggesting that music can put us in conditions
that improve our ability to learn.7
Baroque music seems to have some particularly valuable qualities.
“Music stabilizes mental, physical and emotional rhythms to attain a state
of deep concentration and focus in which large amounts of content
information can be processed and learned,” states music and learning
expert Chris Boyd Brewer. “Baroque music, such as that composed by
Bach, Handel or Telemann that is 50 to 80 beats per minute creates an
atmosphere of focus that leads students into deep concentration in the
alpha brain wave state. Learning vocabulary, memorizing facts, or reading
to this music is highly effective.”8

There’s no similar evidence that the results would be the same with, say,
rap or K-pop, but because one’s reaction to music is such a personal thing,
it’s possible that this music would work for you as well. But since
streaming music is so ubiquitous, I’d recommend adding a baroque
playlist as background to your study sessions. Amazon Music, Apple
Music, and Spotify all have baroque playlists and, if you wanted to explore
further, each have classical music playlists (comprised largely of baroque
music) that have been specifically compiled for the purpose of studying.
Habit 6: Listen with Your Whole Brain
If you are going to unlimit your learning, you’re going to want to make
sure your listening skills are fully tuned up. There’s a very strong
connection between listening and learning, and more than a quarter of us
are auditory learners, meaning that the primary way in which we learn is
through hearing something.9
Listening is critical to learning, and we spend a large percentage of our
waking time listening. But most of us are not particularly good at it.
“Plenty of studies examine this phenomenon,” write Bob Sullivan and
Hugh Thompson in their book The Plateau Effect. “While listening is the
core of most of our communications—the average adult listens nearly
twice as much as they talk—most people stink at it. Here’s one typical
result. Test takers were asked to sit through a 10-minute oral presentation
and, later, to describe its content. Half of adults can’t do it even moments
after the talk, and 48 hours later, fully 75 percent of listeners can’t recall
the subject matter.”10
One of the reasons we don’t listen well is that we tend not to apply all
our brainpower to the exercise. Sullivan and Thompson, who conducted a
study with Carnegie Mellon University on the nature of digital
distractions, point out that “the human brain has the capacity to digest as
much as 400 words per minute of information. But even a speaker from
New York City talks at around 125 words per minute. That means threequarters of your brain could very well be doing something else while
someone is speaking to you.”11
To help alleviate this problem, I’ve devised a tool that will help you
listen with your whole brain. Just remember the acronym HEAR:

H is for Halt: In all likelihood, as you’re listening to someone else
speak, there will be other things going on in the same space. Maybe
there are people milling about. Maybe your phone is chirping, telling
you that you’ve just received a text. Maybe there’s music playing in
the room or a television in the background. Meanwhile, you’re
thinking about your to-do list, your next meeting, or what you’re
going to have for dinner that night. Do everything you can to tune all
of this out and to be completely present with whomever you’re
listening to. Remember that listening involves more than just the
words a person is saying; vocal inflection, body language, facial
expressions, and more create additional context and provide
additional information. You can absorb all of this only if you halt
everything else.
E is for Empathy: If you can imagine yourself in the speaker’s
shoes, you’re likely to learn more from this listening experience than
if you do it dispassionately. Trying to understand where the speaker is
coming from and why brings additional substance to what they might
be saying and allows you to feel it from their perspective.
A is for Anticipate: Engage in the experience with a sense of
anticipation. Remember that learning is state-dependent and that what
you can learn from this speaker will become a long-term memory if
you attach emotion to it. Your enthusiasm for what you’re hearing
will greatly increase your potential of truly hearing it.
R is for Review: If you have the opportunity to directly engage with
the speaker, do so. Ask clarifying questions or maybe even for a point
to be repeated. If you’re in the position to take notes, do so. And
afterward, reflect on what the speaker said. Paraphrase it in your
mind and imagine yourself teaching it to someone else. Doing so will
solidify it in your mind.
Habit 7: Take Note of Taking Notes
Studying under the best conditions will likely improve your retention
considerably. And, both in preparation for your studies and in concert with
your studies, upgrading your note-taking ability is invaluable.

The ultimate advantage of taking notes is that they customize the
information you need to retain to your vocabulary and your mode of
thinking. At their best, notes allow you to organize and process
information in a way that makes it most likely that you can use this
information afterward.
But many people take notes ineffectively. Common pitfalls include
concentrating so heavily on writing notes that you’re not actually listening
to the information, trying to write down every single thing you hear, and
writing notes in such a way that they won’t be helpful to you a day later.
It’s easy to avoid all of these pitfalls once you are aware of them, so let’s
put a plan together for upgrading your note-taking ability.
First off, be sure that you understand the purpose for taking these notes.
For example, the goal of taking notes in a midsemester lecture might be
very different from the notes you take in the review class before a big
final. Similarly, what you’re trying to accomplish with the notes you take
in a weekly meeting with your team is likely to be different from the notes
you take in the week leading up to a major client presentation.
By being clear on your intention with your notes, you are able to
distinguish between information that is relevant to you and information
that is not. I have a friend who is a writer and insists on transcribing every
interview he does even though it would be more time-efficient to have a
transcription service do it for him. The reason, he says, is that by doing it
himself he only transcribes the parts of the interview that he knows he’s
going to be able to use, therefore eliminating the possibility that these
quotes will get lost among all the other conversation that might not be
relevant to the book he’s writing. What he’s left with is nearly pure
content. Likewise, if you take notes with a goal in mind, every note you
take will have relevance.
Once you’re clear on your goals, take an active approach to note-taking.
Listen with the intention of getting exactly what you need, and write your
notes in ways that will benefit your recall later. If you’re going to use
abbreviations and shortcuts, use ones that are familiar to you. The last
thing you want is for your own notes to be indecipherable to you later.
Equally important is making sure that you use your own words wherever
possible. As noted earlier, one of the key pitfalls to effective note-taking is
trying to record everything. There are two obvious downsides to this. One
is that it is impossible to write as quickly as most people speak. On

average, people handwrite 10 to 12 words a minute, and the average
speaker speaks at around 100 words a minute. Even if you were typing
your notes (which I don’t recommend; more on this shortly), you’d
probably only be able to get down about half of what the speaker was
saying.
But there’s an even more fundamental downside: If you’re copying what
someone is saying verbatim, you’re probably not processing any of it. That
means that, at the most essential moment of learning, you’re utilizing
most of your brain to the task of taking dictation. When you use your own
words in your notes, you begin to process the information, and that greatly
enhances learning.
And while we’re on the subject of writing, I’d recommend handwriting
your notes. Even if you’re using a tablet computer to store your notes, use
an electronic pen to do so. For one thing, there are readily available
programs that can convert your handwriting to text for later organization.
But most importantly, writing by hand requires you to start processing the
material immediately, and that has proven to be more effective.
“The present research suggests that even when laptops are used solely to
take notes, they may still be impairing learning because their use results in
shallower processing,” write Pam A. Mueller and Daniel M. Oppenheimer
in their study on this topic. “We found that students who took notes on
laptops performed worse on conceptual questions than students who took
notes longhand. We show that whereas taking more notes can be
beneficial, laptop note takers’ tendency to transcribe lectures verbatim
rather than processing information and reframing it in their own words is
detrimental to learning.”12
Most importantly, make sure you are really listening. You’re not there
as a secretary; you’re there as someone who is receiving information for
later use. Therefore, it is important to actually hear what others are saying.
Take note of what’s being emphasized. Make sure you’re understanding
the points the speaker is making and, if the opportunity is available, ask
questions. This can only happen if you’re devoting at least as much
attention to the information being delivered as you are to your recording
of that information.
While you’re taking notes, use a method that I call “capture and create.”
On the left side of the paper, you’re capturing, you’re taking notes; on the
right side, you’re creating, you’re making notes. You’re writing your

impression of what you’re capturing. How can I use this? Why must I use
this? When will I use this?
After your note-taking session is over, review your notes immediately.
This will help you retain the information much more effectively than if
you don’t read your notes for days. As an added benefit, you’ll be able to
supplement your notes with anything you might have missed while taking
them, because the information will still be fresh in your mind.

A TIP FOR UPGRADING YOUR NOTE-TAKING
If you want to make sure you’re always getting the most from your notetaking, remember the mnemonic TIP:
T is for Think: Before you begin any session where you’re going to
be taking notes, think about what you’re hoping to retain most from
this session. This will help you filter the high-value information from
the information that is less relevant to your goal.
I is for Identify: Listen carefully to the information being presented
and identify what is most important in the context of your goal.
Remember that attempting to write down everything is going to make
it impossible to process the information at the time and will probably
make studying harder. Identify what you need the most and write that
down.
P is for Prioritize: As you review your notes after the presentation,
prioritize the information that is most valuable to you, perhaps
adding additional notes as necessary to make the priority information
clearer or making an outline to highlight key points.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON
If you acknowledge that unlimiting yourself means being a student for
life, then how you go about your studies is vitally important. Before we
move on to the next chapter, let’s try a few things:

Take your active recall out for a spin. Introduce yourself to some new
material and immediately assess how much of it you retained.
Find a music playlist that works for you. There are many of them
available, and the right music is likely to enhance your ability to
absorb information, so take some time to find one that you like.
Maybe you’ll even want to have it in the background while you read
the rest of this book.
Try out your new note-taking tools. Maybe go through this chapter
again and take notes about it. Or watch a TED talk and take notes on
that instead. Use the skills you’ve learned here to upgrade this
experience.

13

MEMORY
What can I do to improve my memory right away?
How do I keep a big chunk of information in my memory?
How can I easily access this information when I need it?

A few years back, I walked into our office early in the morning, before anyone else
had come in. The phone started ringing, so I went to answer it. Immediately, a
woman’s effusive voice sang out from the other end.
“I love you, I love you, I love you!”
Trust me that this was not a common response I received to answering a call.
“Whoa,” I said. “Who is this?”
“It’s Anne. I took your course.” She then quickly declared, “I found it!”
Okay, she had me. “What did you find?”
“I don’t know what it is, but I’ve been doing all of these exercises you’ve been
teaching, and I’ve started to remember things. Even when I’m not using the strategy,
I’m remembering names and conversations.”
So, she hadn’t answered that question, either. I realized I was just going to have to
let her tell her story the way she wanted to tell it. Over the next few minutes, I learned
that a few years earlier she’d been given a family heirloom from her grandmother. It
was a necklace that had been passed down from generation to generation, and her
grandmother skipped over her own daughter and her three older sisters to bequeath the
necklace to her. Anne was extremely honored to receive this gift and vowed to be
careful with it. There was only one problem: She’d been so concerned about keeping
the necklace safe that she’d hidden it somewhere that she couldn’t remember. When
she realized she didn’t know where the necklace was, she started searching, but to no
avail. This led to monumental levels of angst and an enormous amount of guilt
compounded by her family.
After three years, she’d come to the conclusion that she’d either misplaced the
heirloom forever or that someone had stolen it. Then, at 2 A.M. the morning of this

call, she woke up out of a dead sleep. She went down two flights of stairs to her
basement, ran over to the boiler, moved behind it, and reached into a crevasse there.
She pulled out the necklace and nearly died from the relief.
“That’s an amazing story, congratulations,” I said to her. “I’m curious, though. I
didn’t teach you how to find misplaced items. That’s not one of the things we’ve
covered in our classes.”
“Yes, but you did something way more valuable. I don’t know what it is, but for the
past few weeks I’m just remembering all kinds of things. Not just in the present, but
stuff I hadn’t thought about for years.
“Jim, thank you for giving me my brain back.”
What Anne was illustrating through her excitement is something I’ve been sharing
with people for a long time. Yes, your brain is an organ. But it acts like a muscle. And
it most significantly resembles a muscle in that it’s a use-it-or-lose-it device. Our
brains stay fit only when we make a concerted effort to keep them fit. If we fail to
keep our brains in shape—either through laziness or being overly dependent on
technology to do our thinking for us or by failing to challenge ourselves with new
learning—it becomes “flabby.” Think about it this way: If you have your arm in a
sling for six months, you don’t come away with a stronger arm. In fact, after you take
the arm out of a sling, you’re likely to have very little function at all. Your brain is the
same way. If you don’t exercise it regularly, it might not be at its best when you need
it the most. But if you make the effort to keep your brain in top shape, you’ll discover
that it’s always ready to do superhero-level work for you, just as it did for this caller.

YOU CAN ALWAYS RELY ON MOM
Memory is arguably the most important part of the learning process. If you could not
remember, then you could not learn anything. There is no knowledge without memory.
But why do most people have less-than-ideal memory skills? I think it’s because of
the way we were taught to memorize things, which was usually through rote
memorization. To this day, most schools teach students to memorize by repeating a
fact or a quote until it is temporarily burned in, even though people tend to forget this
information as soon as they no longer need it and this type of memory rarely leads to
mastery of the material being memorized.
Your memory is also one of your greatest assets. It supports you in every area of
your life. I challenge you to do anything without utilizing your memory. If you did not
have a memory, life would be extremely challenging, to say the least. Imagine waking
up each day and forgetting everything you ever knew. You would have to teach
yourself how to get out of bed, how to get dressed, how to brush your teeth, how to eat
your breakfast, and how to drive a car. That would be quite inconvenient. Luckily you
were born with a great memory; you just need to be shown how to use it.

KWIK START
How would you rate your memory right now? What aspects would you like to
improve? Take our memory assessment at www.LimitlessBook.com/resources to
understand more.
If you’re going to perform a major upgrade on your brain, you’re going to want to
unlimit your memory, as memory is such a fundamental part of most brain function.
Since that’s the case, let me reassure you with a very important fact: There’s no such
thing as a good memory or a bad memory; there is only a trained memory and an
untrained memory. If you have trouble remembering people’s names, making
presentations without notes, or even finding your car keys in the morning, it’s
extremely unlikely that this is because you’re incapable of doing these things. Instead,
you just haven’t gotten the training.
Joshua Foer is proof positive that memory can be trained. In 2005, Joshua was a
journalist who had taken on the assignment of writing about the little-known world of
mental athletes. Fascinated by what he saw in elite memorization contests, he wanted
to discover more about the participants. To his surprise, he learned that almost every
participant he interviewed described themselves as having a poor or average memory
before they learned and practiced the principles of memorization. Now they were
competing at the highest levels of these contests.
It dawned on Foer that there were no restrictions to memory and that memory can
be trained just like athletic skill. He began to practice what he learned. One year later,
he returned to the U.S.A. Memory Championship but this time as a competitor. The
day of the event, we had lunch together between competitions and marveled at the fact
that often what appears to be genius can actually be learned. Later that day, Foer
placed number one and took home the trophy. He went on to write the groundbreaking
book Moonwalking with Einstein: The Art and Science of Remembering Everything.
Why is memory so important if you’re going to unlimit yourself? Because your
memory serves as the foundation for every action you take now and every one you
will take in the future. Imagine what it would be like if your computer had very little
storage or had inconsistent access to what it had stored. Most functions would be
nearly impossible to perform—you’d start to write an e-mail message, and your
computer might or might not have the addressee among your contacts and might or
might not remember how to send the message after you’d written it—and the ones
that it did perform would take excruciatingly long while your computer figured out
how to do it.
While I’ve likened our brains to supercomputers, we all know that they’re so much
more than that. Perhaps the most significant difference is our ability to reason, to
consider the facts or the situation in front of us, and to act, innovate, or navigate
through circumstances based on those facts and situations. The process of reasoning

requires us to shift through our rich store of memories, using tools that have proven
useful in the past to make informed and productive decisions.
“It is impossible to think creatively into the future without a sense of what is
known,” writes Dr. Eve Marder, professor of neuroscience at Brandeis University. “We
commonly say that we are looking for interdisciplinary and synthetic thinkers who
can make connections between disparate fields and see new paths for discovery. I
cannot imagine finding those creative leaders for the future among the legions of
students who forget everything they have learned because they can ‘just look it up.’
How does one know what to look up if one has forgotten so much?”1
Dr. William R. Klemm, who we met in Chapter 12, gives us five reasons why
improving memory is essential:
1. Memorization is discipline for the mind. Much needed in an age when so many
minds are lazy, distracted, have little to think about, or think sloppily.
Memorization helps train the mind to focus and be industrious.
2. No, you can’t always “Google it.” Sometimes you don’t have access to the
Internet. And not everything of importance is on the web (and a great deal of
irrelevant trash will accompany any search). Nor is looking up material helpful
under such situations as when you learn to use a foreign language, must write or
speak extemporaneously, or wish to be an expert.
3. Memorization creates the repertoire of what we think about. Nobody can
think in a vacuum of information. To be an expert in any field requires
knowledge that you already have.
4. We think with the ideas held in working memory, which can only be accessed
at high speed from the brain’s stored memory.Understanding is nourished by
the information you hold in working memory as you think. Without such
knowledge, we have a mind full of mush.
5. The exercise of the memory develops learning and memory schema that
promote improved ability to learn. The more you remember, the more you can
learn.2
I want to emphasize this last point. It’s not accurate that your memory works like a
container, cup, or hard drive in that once it’s full of data no more can fit. It’s more like
a muscle in that the more you train it, the stronger it gets and the more you can store.
In this chapter, we’re going to discuss some tools and techniques designed to train
your memory. You will be applying basic principles of the mind and developing your
memory in such a way that will make learning (remembering) more natural, easy, and
fun. The most fundamental of these, though, is this: always remember MOM, a
mnemonic device I created to kick up your memory instantly:

M is for Motivation: The simple fact is that we are considerably more likely to
remember things that we are motivated to remember. If someone says to you,
“Hey, remember our call tomorrow,” you may or may not remember that you’ve
scheduled a call with that person. If instead he says, “Hey, if you remember our
call tomorrow, I’ll give you $5,000,” you will definitely remember that you’ve
scheduled the call. You are overwhelmingly more likely to remember something
when you have a strong motivation to do so. So, if you want to train yourself to
have a stronger memory, give yourself a stronger motivation to do so. Reasons
reap results, so make remembering personal. If you can convince yourself that
there’s value in retaining a memory, there’s a good chance that you will.
O is for Observation: How often do you forget someone’s name as soon as you
hear it? The reason is likely that you weren’t entirely paying attention when you
heard that name. Maybe you were looking around the room to see who else you
knew. Maybe you were still thinking about a conversation you’d just had. For
whatever reason, you weren’t entirely present. Most of the time, when we fail to
remember something, the issue isn’t retention but rather attention. If you’re
serious about boosting your memory, condition yourself to be truly present in any
situation where you want to remember something.
M is for Methods: Over the course of this chapter, I’m going to provide you
with a set of tools that you’ll be able to use when you want to remember
something. Make sure you’re always carrying these around in your mental
toolkit, and be sure to employ them to the point where they become second
nature.

THE MORE MEMORABLE BAKER
The chances of remembering something increase dramatically if people can attach a
reference point to the thing they are trying to remember. A number of years ago, after
a study testing peoples’ ability to put names to faces, researcher Gillian Cohen coined
the name for what came to be known as the Baker/baker Paradox. In the study,
participants were shown photographs of faces, offered the names and various details
about the people in the photographs, and then asked to later recall the names. The
study showed that people had far more trouble remembering last names than they did
occupations, even when the last name and the occupation was the same word. So, for
example, it turned out to be significantly easier for a participant to remember that
someone was a baker than that their last name was Baker.
Let’s go back to Joshua Foer a moment for an explanation:
When you hear that the man in the photo is a baker, that fact gets embedded in
a whole network of ideas about what it means to be a baker: He cooks bread, he
wears a big white hat, he smells good when he comes home from work.

The name Baker, on the other hand, is tethered only to a memory of the
person’s face. That link is tenuous, and should it dissolve, the name will float off
irretrievably into the netherworld of lost memories. But when it comes to the
man’s profession, there are multiple strings to reel the memory back in.
Even if you don’t at first remember that the man is a baker, perhaps you get
some vague sense of breadiness about him or see some association between his
face and a big white hat, or maybe you conjure up a memory of your own
neighborhood bakery. There are any number of knots in that tangle of
associations that can be traced back to his profession.3
What the Baker/baker Paradox illustrates for us is that creating associations for
ourselves is likely to boost our memories dramatically. The exercises on the following
pages are tools along these lines that I have found particularly effective.

RECALLING A GREAT DEAL OF INFORMATION
One of the things I do regularly when I’m speaking to large groups is ask audience
members to throw out a group of random words—somewhere between thirty and a
hundred—that I will then repeat, backward and forward. It never fails to get an awed
reaction from the crowd, but that isn’t what I’m looking for. Instead, I do this to get
across a key point: that everyone has the capacity to do the same thing.
We’ve already talked about the importance of memory in performing nearly all
brain functions. If you’re going to unlimit your brain and therefore unlimit yourself,
you need to unlimit your memory. This means training your memory to the point
where it can retain a great deal of information and allow you easy access to that
information. What I do on stage with the list of a hundred words might have the
immediate impact of a parlor trick, but how I trained myself to do this is through a
technique that anyone can use to remember and access lots of information. Maybe in
your case it’s the specifications for your entire line of products. Or maybe it’s a long
string of mathematical formulas. Maybe it’s the directions to all the stops on your
swim-practice carpool. Whatever it is, this tool can help.
For the sake of this exercise, let’s talk about how to memorize a list of words. The
technique will be the same regardless, but it’ll be easier to explain it to you if we can
focus on a particular thing.
Below we have provided you with a list of simple words. Your assignment is to
memorize them in the order they are given. Spend no more than 30 seconds looking at
the list, then flip the page over. Good luck!
Fire Hydrant

Diamond

Balloon

Knight

Battery

Ox

Barrel

Toothpaste

Board

Sign

What was the method you used to remember this list? Did you repeat the words in
your head over and over? For instance, were you saying to yourself “fire hydrant,
balloon, battery, fire hydrant, balloon, battery, fire hydrant, balloon, battery, barrel,
etc.” Did you find that you needed to repeatedly say the words over and over again,
until they stayed in your head? Did you try to see the words as pictures in your mind?
Most people use one or a combination of the first two methods described. The process
of repeatedly saying or writing information down to remember it is called repetition
learning, otherwise known as rote learning.
You may have used rote learning in the second grade to remember your
multiplication tables. You would say to yourself “seven times seven is forty-nine,
seven times seven is forty-nine, seven times seven . . . .” Or you may have written it
out “7 × 7 = 49, 7 × 7 = 49, 7 × 7 = 49,” and would continue to fill up your sheet of
paper. This is also most likely the method you used in elementary school to learn how
to spell. Your teacher may have asked you to spell a word like chair 50 times on a
piece of paper. What was happening was your natural learning ability was being
stifled. You bored your mind continually with this method until it finally gave up and
said You win! For the 100th time, Columbus landed in 1492, just no more of this
chanting!
Most people find rote learning to be a very tedious and boring process. It taxes your
mind and is extremely ineffective for remembering most things. We know that as
much as 85 percent of the information you take the time to remember in this fashion
is lost in only 48 hours. That is why some students find the need to cram, because they
know that the material will be lost in a very short period of time.

ELEMENTARY LEARNING
One of the reasons rote learning is inefficient is because it only involves a small part
of your brain. You’re using a more analytical part of your brain to process information
and store what you need to learn. By implementing rote learning, you only engage
part of your mind and an even smaller portion of your potential.
In the traditional education system, you probably learned this way in such topics as:
History: “Calvin Coolidge was the 30th president of the United States, Coolidge
30, 30 Coolidge . . .”
Chemistry: “Glucose C6H12O6, Glucose C6H12O6, Glucose C6H12O6 . . .”

French: “Comment allez-vous means ‘how are you?’ Comment allez-vous means
‘how are you?’ Comment allez-vous is ‘how are you?’ . . .”
The list goes on and on and on and on. The question you must ask yourself now: “Is
the way I learned in elementary school the best method for me to learn today?” The
answer is most likely no. In school, they taught you the three Rs: reading, ’riting, and
’rithmatic (too bad spelling wasn’t one of them). I always thought the fourth R should
have been recall. Your requirements for learning have changed a lot over the years.
Repetition learning had some decent results when you were younger, but in today’s
world, it will leave you drowning in information and mental fatigue. (Note: The word
rote literally means “an unthinking repetition or mechanical memorization.”)
In this section I’m going to show you the skills to remember more effectively than
you ever thought possible. These skills will help you to replace the feeling of hoping
you’ll remember with the feeling of confidence in knowing that the information you
possess will be available, whenever you need it.
Now, take a minute and, without looking back, try to recall the list in the order it
was presented. Write down as much as you can remember. Take a minute and do this
now.

How did you do? If you are like most people, you probably were able to retain a
few of the words on the list.

KWIK START
Now let’s try something else. Take a minute and stretch. Take a few deep breaths.
Clear your mind and relax more with every breath that leaves your body. Just
take a moment and relax. When you are done, continue.
Next, make sure you are comfortable and imagine you’re standing next to a giant
fire hydrant, the biggest one you’ve ever seen. Now, attach a bunch of balloons on top
of the fire hydrant. There are so many balloons that it takes the hydrant out of the
ground so it floats up high in the sky. Then suddenly it is hit with a load of batteries
and explodes. The batteries are being launched into the sky in large barrels. The

barrels are being thrown up with a wooden board like a seesaw. The board is being
balanced by a large diamond, a big brilliant sparkling stone. Then a knight in shining
armor takes the diamond and runs away. He’s quickly stopped by an ox. The only way
to get through is to brush the teeth of the ox with toothpaste. The ox moves aside and
reveals a big neon sign with the word Congratulations on it, and then there is a huge
explosion.
Now take a minute, close your eyes and review this little story. You may read the
story again if you need to. Do this now before continuing.

KWIK START
Without looking back, write the story down.
As you may be aware, we turned your list into a story. Now go through the story in
your mind and list as many of the words as you can remember. Check your answers
and write down the number you got correct.
How did you perform the second time? If you are like most students, you were able
to recall more of the words than you did previously. The amazing thing is that once
you start training your memory in this way, you can use this tool to memorize vast
amounts of information. I’ve used this technique to help actors learn all their lines in
a script, to help students memorize the periodic table, and to help salespeople speak
about a product with a level of granularity that made it seem as though they’d
engineered the item themselves. Remember that there’s no such thing as a good
memory or a bad memory, only a trained memory or an untrained memory. Employing
this tool regularly will give you the kind of training that you can access in all kinds of
situations.

YOUR ACTIVE FOCUS IN MEMORY
This is a very important concept: Most people approach learning as a passive activity.
They encounter information in books, notes, or lectures and if the material is
absorbed, great! But if it is not, they feel that there is nothing they can do. This
passive outlook is the hit-or-miss approach. It holds that if the information sticks, it’s
more a result of luck and repetition than focus and skill. By taking a more active
approach to learning, you will have greater results and the satisfaction that comes
from involvement and personal awareness. Learning passively is weak; active
learning is strong.

Visualization
Your visual memory is very powerful. By seeing the pictures a story paints
and not just the words that represent those pictures, you create a stronger
means by which to remember. Thinking is done through the use of
pictures. Do this now: Think of your bed. What did you visualize? Maybe
you saw a queen-size mattress, with a wooden headboard, navy-blue
sheets, and giant pillows. You probably did not see the words navy-blue
sheets and giant pillows in your mind; you saw pictures of them. This is
how your mind thinks. If you doubt this, then ask yourself, do you
frequently find yourself dreaming in words? Probably not. Remember a
picture is worth a thousand words!
Association
This is the key to memory and all of learning: In order to learn any new
piece of information, it must be associated with something you already
know.
This is worth repeating. To remember any new piece of information, you
must associate it with something you already know. You have done this all
your life; you just might not have been aware of it. Here’s a simple test.
What comes to your mind when you think of a cherry? Perhaps red, sweet,
fruit, pie, round, seeds, etc. These are words and pictures that you have
learned to link to a cherry. You associated something you knew to
something you did not know. You use association to ride a bike, eat your
food, have a conversation, and to learn to do anything. In the same way, by
making a story out of the words on your list, you associated them
consciously, for easier recall. Your mind is constantly making countless
associations every minute, most of them without your conscious
awareness. This is how you learn. Do you have a song that reminds you of
a special person? That memory is an association. Do you have a smell that
reminds you of a time in your childhood? That memory is an association.
Why not use this information and make associations consciously to learn
more effectively?

Emotion
Adding emotion makes something memorable. Information by itself is
forgettable, but information combined with emotion becomes a long-term
memory. When we add emotions to something, we make it adventurous,
we make it action-filled, we make it humorous, and we’re much more
likely to remember it.
Location
We are really good at recalling places because as hunter-gatherers, we
didn’t need to remember numbers and words, but we needed to remember
where things were. We needed to know where the clean water was, where
the fertile soil was, where the food was. If you can associate something
with a place, you’re more likely to remember it.
These are some of the keys to having a great memory; the rest of this
chapter will be dedicated to showing you specific techniques and
applications you can use in different situations. If you did not have much
luck with the memory story, don’t worry. This is understandable, you may
just need a little practice. Most people have not used their imaginations
since they were children. You may want to review the story a few times as
it will be a good workout for your creative mind. Do this now.
Notice that you can also go through the story backward; the associations
can give you the list in any order. Practice this and see for yourself.
You should be truly amazed. For most people, using rote methods, it
takes anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes to memorize this list and with only
very temporary results. However, you’ll find that this story, which took
you no more than a minute to learn, will be available for you to recall days
or even weeks from now without reviewing it once. This is the power of
working smart and not hard. This is the power of your imagination. This is
the power of your mind. Let’s try it again.

A KWIK MEMORY EXERCISE
Ask a friend to give you a list of 10 random words. Or you can make a list
yourself: To make this as random as possible, grab the nearest piece of

printed media available to you, whether it’s a book, a newspaper, a
magazine, or a flyer from your local supermarket. Use the first substantive
words in the first 10 paragraphs you see (in other words, don’t use things
like I, the, when, etc.), making sure not to use any word more than once.
Write these down.
Now flip over the paper you wrote these words on and try to write the
list again, in order. Check what you wrote against the original list. How did
you do? You probably didn’t remember all 10, but you probably didn’t
forget all 10, either. That’s instructive, because genius leaves clues, by
which I mean that your innate intelligence teaches you about your
intelligence. There was a method that allowed you to memorize what you
did, and you can access that to move to the next step.
Tell yourself out loud which of the words you remembered and why you
think you remembered those words. Doing so will help you to understand
how you memorize things. For example, there’s a good chance that you
remembered the first word and the last word. This is that common
phenomenon we discussed back in Chapter 4 known as primacy and
recency, where people tend to remember the first thing as well as the most
recent thing they heard in any given situation. Which other words did you
remember? Do these words have anything in common, such as that they all
start with the same letter or they’re all action words? What does this tell
you? Were the other words you memorized organized in any way? Did
they evoke any kind of emotion in you? Was there something unique about
any of the words you remembered?
What you’ve likely learned by this point is that the words you were able
to remember on your first pass had certain qualities about them. The
words you didn’t remember failed to have any quality that resonated with
you. So, let’s create a process where every word has a memorable quality.
Tell yourself a story using these 10 words, moving from one word to
the next. You’re not trying to win a literary competition with this
story, and it doesn’t matter if the story makes much sense. What’s
important is that you provide some kind of imaginative detail for all
the words on your list (for example, if one of your words is outside,
imagine that you’re in a vast field) and that you “link” your words in
the story in the order in which they appear on your list by creating an

image for each. Remember, the more emotional and exaggerated they
are, the better you will recall.
Now, on a separate piece of paper, write down the list again, using the
story you created to remind you of the words and of the order in
which they appeared. How did you do this time? In all likelihood, you
did better, though there’s a good chance you still didn’t get all of
them.
Now write down the list again (not looking at any previous versions
of the list you created), but this time write it down backward. You’ll
need to access the story you invented in a different way in order to do
this, but this is really going to help lock these words down for you.
At this point, you’ve probably memorized most if not all the words on
your list. At the same time, you’re likely wondering how this is going to
help you remember all the details in a presentation you’re giving.

DELIVERING A GREAT DEAL OF
INFORMATION WITHOUT NOTES
As we’ve discussed, your memory is fundamental to nearly everything you
do. There’s really no way to unlimit yourself without having a well-trained
memory, because memory governs your ability to reason, to calculate
possible outcomes, and to serve as a resource to others. And sometimes
you just need to be able to deliver a significant amount of information to a
person or a group of people at once. This might take the form of delivering
a report to your board, giving a speech to an assemblage, sharing your
expertise in a subject in front of your class, or any number of other
situations. And in many of these cases, it’s critical that you be able to do
this without having any notes in front of you, because the notes would
suggest that you are less well versed in the material than you should be.
I’ve been teaching business executives, students, actors, and others a
time-honored technique for making their presentations without notes. And
when I say time-honored, I mean this quite literally. The method I teach
and that I’m going to share with you now is a version of the loci method,
something that has been around for more than 2,500 years.

The legend behind the loci method is that the Greek poet Simonides of
Ceos survived a building collapse that killed all others in attendance.
When officials tried to identify the victims, Simonides was the only
person who could help them, because he remembered who the victims
were based on where they were standing at the time of the collapse. In the
process, Simonides created a memory tool that is as effective today as it
was in 500 B.C.
Loci is the plural version of the word locus, which means “a particular
point or place.” The loci method, then, is a memory tool that aligns the
things you want to remember with specific points or places that you know
well. Here’s how I teach it:
Identify the 10 major talking points from your presentation. These
can be keywords or phrases or perhaps quotations that you want to
incorporate. They should not, however, be multiple paragraphs long,
as that will make this process cumbersome and your presentation feel
stiff and overly rehearsed. The assumption here is that you know your
topic well and that you have some facility with the material. This
method is designed to help bring each of the key points to the
forefront of your mind when you need them.
Now imagine a place that you know well. This can be a part of your
home, a street that you walk often, a nearby park, or anything else
with which you have a great deal of familiarity and that you can
easily recall vividly.
Now consider a path through that location. If it’s a room in your
house, for example, imagine walking into that room and traveling
through it. Identify 10 spots in this room that you can quickly see in
your mind. Maybe one is the lamp in the corner that you see as you
enter the room. Perhaps another is the chair just to the left of that
lamp. The next might be the side table next to that chair, and so on.
Make this path as procedural as possible. Zig-zagging around the
space is likely to be less productive. Just see yourself walking
through this space clockwise noticing what you always notice as you
pass each item.
Once you’ve picked out your 10 locations, assign a major talking
point to each of these locations. Be sure to make the order of your

talking points match the order in which you walk through the room.
For example, using the room we just described, if the first thing you
want to say is the keynote message to your entire presentation, assign
that to the lamp. If the next major talking point is an essential product
detail or a key historical fact, assign that to the chair, and so on.
Now practice your presentation, using your walk through the location
as a tool for remembering each of the primary messages in the
presentation. Each component of the presentation should come to you
as you need it.
As with all tools, this memory tool might require some time for you to
become expert at it, but it will likely begin to help you immediately. With
practice you should find it possible for you to access large chunks of
information without referring to your notes. Your recall will improve
dramatically, and your speeches and reports will seem more natural. You
can employ this approach whenever you need to memorize in bulk.

BONUS TOOL 1: A QUICK WAY TO
REMEMBER EVERYONE’S NAME
As we discussed earlier, failure to remember something like the name of a
person you’ve just met is often a case of your not being attentive in that
moment. Remembering MOM can be enormously helpful in that regard.
But I also have a technique specifically geared to helping people
remember names that you might find useful. The mnemonic here is BE
SUAVE:
B is for Believe: Believing that you’re going to be able to do this is
the essential first step. If you try hard enough to convince yourself
that you can’t remember names, you’ll succeed.
E is for Exercise: As with the other tools in this book, doing this is
going to take some practice, but you should be able to become very
good at this very quickly.
S is for Say it: When you hear a person’s name for the first time, say
it back. This will both confirm that you heard the name correctly and

offer you the opportunity to hear the name twice.
U is for Use it: During the course of your conversation with this
person, use their name. This will help lock it in.
A is for Ask: Ask where a person’s name came from. This would be a
bit odd if you were asking about a name like “Jim,” but it’s
particularly helpful when meeting someone with a less-common
name.
V is for Visualization: Vision is an incredibly powerful memory
tool, as we already saw with the loci method. Try to attach an image
to a person’s name. For example, if you meet someone named Mary,
you can imagine that person wearing a wedding veil on the day she
gets married.
E is for End: When you part ways with that person, end your
conversation by saying the person’s name.

BONUS TOOL 2: A QUICK WAY TO
REMEMBER VOCABULARY AND
LANGUAGES
Vocabulary is one of the cornerstones of learning. To remember the
meaning of words is easy; just use the very same systems you have been
using. One of the most powerful concepts is word substitution. You
already know how to do this, you just now have a name or a vocabulary
term for it. Word substitution is the process of turning intangible (hard to
picture) information into an image that is more concrete and easy to
visualize.
Here are some examples of word substitutions:
Nitrogen can be a knight
Monroe can be a man rowing
Washington can be by a washing machine
Armstrong can be by a strong arm

The main idea behind word substitution is coming up with a picture (or
series of linked pictures) that sounds similar enough to remind you of the
original word. This abstract word, idea, or concept that was once so
difficult to understand is now not so foreign. By creating a picture of the
word, you now have something more tangible, something you can see.
Remember that we tend to remember that which we create. Some more
examples:
Cytology, the study of cells. You see a towel with a huge “G”
(cytology) on it. You have always wanted one, so you take it, and you
are thrown in a jail cell. Or you sigh, looking at your toe, in a low G
(sigh toe low G), but this is not allowed and you are put in a cell and
forced to study. Even though this is thoroughly bizarre, it is very
memorable, and it works!
Lenient, compassionate, gentle. Picture a leaning ant (an ant leaning).
The ant is leaning on a clean wall and getting it dirty. His mother,
instead of being angry, is compassionate and gentle.
This system can be used for practically anything, including learning
foreign languages, which works the same way as remembering vocabulary.
In fact, some of the vocabulary words you encounter in English might as
well be in another language! For example:
Très bien (French), which sounds like tray bean, means “very good.”
Picture yourself babysitting and rewarding the child a silver tray with
a giant bean on it. The child was very good.
Facile (French), which sounds like face eel, means “easy.” Picture a
friend challenging you to hold an eel close to your face; you do it and
say, “That’s easy!”
Travailler (French), which sounds like traveler, means “to work.”
Picture a traveler coming up to you and inviting you on a vacation,
but you can’t go because you have to work.
Escargot (French), which sounds like scar go, means “snail.” Picture
a snail getting into an S-car (car shaped like an S) and making the car
go.

Merci (French), which sounds like mare sea, means “thank you.”
Picture yourself saving a mare from drowning in the sea. She then
says “thank you.”
Aprender (Spanish), which sounds like a blender, means “to learn.”
Picture yourself taking your books and putting them in a blender.
Escuela (Spanish), which sounds like S-quail, means “school.”
Picture a quail with a giant superman S on its chest going to your
school.
Ayuda (Spanish), which sounds like are-you-the, means “help.”
Picture yourself drowning (in need of help) and someone comes to
rescue you and asks, “Are you the person drowning?”
Mando (Spanish), which sounds like man (or moon) doe, means “to
command.” Picture a man commanding a doe to jump to the moon.
Estrada (Spanish), which sounds like extra day, means “road or
highway.” Picture yourself going on vacation and being stuck in
traffic for an extra day on the highway.
Try these Spanish terms on your own:
Desventaja (handicap)
Pelo (hair)
Bolso (handbag)
Dinero (money)
Leer (read)
I’ve used these examples to better introduce you to the basics. Build
upon them and understand their significance. You can use these skills for
practically anything. These systems are both flexible and universal. For
example, if you want to remember whether a word is masculine or
feminine, simply add the picture of a top hat for masculine words and a
dress for feminine words. There are no rules, so be creative and
outrageous, and have fun with them!

STACK IT
To learn new vocabulary or foreign-language words, combine the strategy
above with methods that you’ve already learned from our chapter on study.
For example, we talked about spaced repetition. That would be extremely
valuable in this application. We talked about using music. Baroque music
is very effective at helping to learn languages. The study techniques
already in your toolkit will serve a bold new purpose here.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON
I hope you can see now that having a well-trained memory is an essential
part of unlimiting yourself. When your memory is finely tuned, you’re
exponentially stronger than if you’re trying to get by with an untrained
memory. This book covers the foundation to jump-start your memory. Visit
www.LimitlessBook.com/resources to get the three-part memory training
videos as my gift to you. Before we move on to the next chapter, try a few
things:
Think about ways to provide yourself with greater motivation to
remember. Simply thinking it would be nice to have a better memory
is probably not enough.
Consider ways in which you can try to be less influenced by
distractions when you’re in a situation where remembering something
might be important. I’m going to give you some tools to help with
this later in this book, but what can you do right now to help you
focus more?
Take each of the tools I’ve provided in this chapter out for a spin.
There’s a good chance you’ll see a noticeable difference in your
memory right away.

14

SPEED READING
Why is it so important to read?
How do I increase my reading focus and comprehension?
How can I get more out of every reading experience?

What do Oprah Winfrey, Thomas Edison, John F. Kennedy, and Bill Gates
all have in common? They were all great readers. Leaders are readers.
Welcome to the age of data. Never in history has there been such an
information surplus. More information has been produced in the past few
decades than in the previous few thousand years. According to Eric
Schmidt, the former CEO of Google, “There were 5 Exabytes of
information created between the dawn of civilization through 2003, but
that much information is now created every 2 days.” And it’s only getting
faster and faster. All of this information makes today’s age extremely
competitive. Those people who can keep up with the latest information
will have the competitive edge needed to succeed, not only academically
and professionally, but in other key areas of life as well.
Studies show that there is a direct relationship between your ability to
read and your success in life. Skilled readers enjoy better jobs, higher
incomes, and greater opportunities for success in all realms of life. Think
about this: If you have average reading skills, then you have the same

understanding that most people have. That doesn’t give you much of a
competitive advantage, does it?
Unfortunately, for most people reading is regarded as a boring task,
something very time-consuming and tedious. Have you ever gone through
a page in a book and found yourself asking, “What on earth did I just
read?” If the answer is yes, you are not alone.
We’ve talked before about the challenges I faced early in my college
career. As you know, those challenges were so great for me that I seriously
considered quitting school altogether. But as I rose to the task of reading a
book every week in addition to the reading I needed to do for my classes, I
started to make considerable progress with my learning. I didn’t realize
how much progress I’d made, though, until one surprising day.
Growing up, I’ve always tried to keep myself out of the spotlight. I was
a shy kid, and I felt more comfortable blending into the scenery than being
front and center. That continued when I went away to school. Big classes
held in lecture halls were especially appealing to me, because I could sit in
the corner and avoid being noticed.
I was in one such classroom one day along with a few hundred other
students. Up front, the professor was lecturing to us and using an overhead
projector to show images. At one point, he put some text up on the
projector, and I instantly burst into laughter. This was an entirely natural
reaction for me; the quote was funny. But it was otherwise completely
quiet in the hall, which caused a huge number of people to swivel their
heads in my direction. I’m guessing most of these people would never
have been able to identify me as one of their classmates before this
moment.
I was hugely embarrassed. I’d made so much effort to be invisible, and
now it was as though I’d stormed the stage to draw attention to myself. I
was blushing so hard that I thought my face was going to combust, and I
shrank back as far as I could.
Then several seconds later, others in the hall started laughing. At first, I
thought they were laughing at me, but as more joined them, I looked out
and noticed that they weren’t staring at me at all; they were reading the
text. And that’s when I realized the source of my embarrassment: I’d read
the words so much faster than my classmates that I’d reacted to it way
sooner than everyone else. I’d known I improved the speed at which I read

and the level at which I comprehended it, but until that moment I had no
idea how rare but learnable an ability it was.
While still feeling a bit awkward about my unintended outburst, I left
that class buoyed by the understanding that my learning had risen to an
entirely new level. Due to the techniques I’d taught myself, reading had
become one of my superpowers, paving the way to enormous
breakthroughs in my learning. While I vowed not to laugh so loudly in the
future, I walked out of that lecture hall with an incredible sense of
excitement about learning and about discovering the other superpowers
that were just emerging.

HOW READING MAKES YOUR BRAIN
LIMITLESS
Any plan to make your learning limitless needs to include reading. Just as
memory is foundational to nearly all brain function, reading is
foundational to nearly all learning. If anyone tells you that they don’t read,
they’re essentially saying, “I’ve stopped trying to learn.” Yes, you can
learn something from watching videos, listening to podcasts, or going to
the movies. Even the silliest network sitcom is likely to teach you
something. But it is nearly impossible to make learning a dynamic and
renewable part of your life without a dedicated approach to reading. Here’s
why this is true:
Reading kicks your brain into gear. When you read, you’re using
your brain for many functions at once—which is a vigorous and
rewarding workout. As Dr. Ken Pugh, president and director of
research at Haskins Laboratories, points out, “Parts of the brain that
have evolved for other functions—such as vision, language, and
associative learning—connect in a specific neural circuit for reading,
which is very challenging. A sentence is shorthand for a lot of
information that must be inferred by the brain.”1 In other words,
reading gives you an incomparable level of mental exercise, and the
brain is always a “muscle” that gets stronger the more you challenge
it.

Reading improves your memory. Because you’re giving your brain
such a great workout when you read, your brain functions at a higher
level. One significant benefit of this is with regard to memory. In a
study conducted by Dr. Robert S. Wilson at Rush University Medical
Center in Chicago, reading was shown to have a meaningful effect on
memory decline. “We shouldn’t underestimate the effects of everyday
activities, such as reading and writing, on our children, ourselves, and
our parents or grandparents,” he noted. “Our study suggests that
exercising your brain by taking part in activities such as these across
a person’s lifetime, from childhood through old age, is important for
brain health in old age.”2
Reading improves your focus. One of the things we do when we sit
down with a book or even spend some dedicated time with a
newspaper is train our focus on this one thing. Unlike when we
browse the Internet or click through YouTube, when we’re reading,
we usually give the vast majority of our attention to what we’re
reading. This practice makes it easier to apply the same level of focus
to other tasks.
Reading improves your vocabulary. Some people just sound
smarter. How do you react when you encounter one of these people?
In all likelihood, you offer them increased respect and even a certain
level of deference. People who sound smart tend to have access to and
a facility with a wider vocabulary than the average person. Reading
allows you to build vocabulary organically. The more you read, the
more you are exposed to an expanded range of language and the use
of that language in a variety of contexts. And because reading is such
a superior focusing tool, you’re absorbing a great deal of this, and it
will be accessible to you as you need it.
Reading improves your imagination. If you were ever given a story
prompt at school or at work, you know that it is often easier to think
creatively when using a tool to get started. Reading is essentially one
story prompt after another. “What would it be like to be in this
person’s shoes?” “How can I use this technique to be more
productive?” “What am I going to do first, once Jim Kwik helps me
become limitless?” A great imagination helps you see more

possibilities in your life, and reading keeps your imagination on high
alert.
Reading improves understanding. Learning comes in many forms,
and learning as a success tool has many elements. And while agile
thinking and mastery of skills are critical to success, empathy and
understanding can’t be overlooked. Reading exposes you to lives
you’d never known before, experiences you’d never imagined, and
modes of thinking far different from your own. All of this builds both
your empathy for others and your understanding of how the world
works beyond yourself.

KWIK START
If you can read faster with greater comprehension and enjoyment,
what books would you start reading this month? Create a list of three
books you want to start reading.

READING SELF-ASSESSMENT
The first thing you must do is discover your present reading speed, also
known as your base rate. This reading rate is measured in words per
minute. In order to measure it, you will need an easy reading novel, a
pencil, and a timer. Then do the following:
1. Set an alarm to go off in two minutes.
2. Read at a comfortable speed and stop when the alarm goes off (put a
mark where you left off).
3. Count the total number of words in three regular lines, and divide that
number by three. This is the average number of words per line.
4. Count the number of lines you just read (only count those lines that at
least make it halfway across the page)
5. Multiply the number of words per line by the number of lines you just
read (multiply your answers from steps 3 and 4).

6. Divide this number by two (because you read for two minutes) and
this is your words per minute. Do this now. It is critical to have this
exercise completed before moving on. Write down your current
reading speed.
The average person’s reading speed can usually be found somewhere
between 150 to 250 words per minute. This range varies with the difficulty
of the material. If you are reading much below 100 words per minute, the
material may be too difficult or you may want to seek remedial help (the
skills you learn here will still be of great value).
Let’s say a person reads at 200 words per minute. This person reads and
studies for four hours a day. A person who reads at 400 words per minute
(twice as fast) needs only to study for half as much time. A faster reader
saves at least two hours each day.

KWIK START
If you can save two hours each day, what would you do with this extra
time? Take a moment to write down how you would spend those extra
two hours daily.

CHALLENGES TO READING
People either don’t read or choose to read very little for a variety of
reasons. You work long hours, and you’re exhausted at the end of the day.
It’s easier to be entertained passively (through television, film, music,
etc.) than to engage in the activity required to read. If you’re going to
work for your entertainment, you’d rather be playing a videogame. I hear
you, but if you’ve absorbed the benefits I just listed above, you know that
you need to fit some time into your day—every day—to read.
Another key reason why people don’t read is that they find it a laborious
process. It can take them five minutes to get through a single page in a
book, making the idea of reading a 300-page book akin to walking from
New York to Georgia. People tend to read slowly for a few reasons. One is
that they stopped learning to read relatively early—maybe second or third

grade—and their reading level (and, more importantly, their reading
technique) never increased much beyond this, even as they continued to
learn in spite of this constraint. The other is that they don’t allow
themselves to focus when they’re reading. They’re listening for the kids,
half-watching television, checking e-mail every few minutes, and so on.
They therefore find themselves reading the same paragraph over and over
again, because they’re not focused enough to comprehend what they’re
reading.
There are a couple of primary reasons why people read slowly. Your
reading efficiency is made up of two main parts: Your reading rate (speed)
and reading comprehension (understanding). Before we look at various
ways to increase your reading efficiency, we first need to look at three of
the barriers and obstacles that prevent us from reading more quickly.
1. Regression
Has this ever happened to you? Have you ever read a line in a book and
found yourself rereading that same line again? Or do you ever find
yourself “wander reading” (going back mindlessly and rereading words)?
Regression is a term used to describe the tendency that your eyes have to
go back and reread certain words. Almost everyone does it to some degree,
and most of the time it is done subconsciously. By doing so, people believe
they will increase their comprehension, but usually they hamper it. By
regressing, or back-skipping, it is very easy to lose the meaning and
essence of your reading. Regression seriously disrupts the reading process
as well as slows down reading speed.
2. Outdated Skills
Reading is not so much a measure of intelligence as it is a skill and with
any skill, it can be learned and improved. When was the last time you took
a class called reading? For most, it was back in the 4th or 5th grade. And if
you’re like most people, your reading skill is probably still the same as it
was back then. Here’s the challenge: Has the amount and difficulty of what
you’re reading changed since? The complexity of material has likely
increased dramatically, yet our reading skill has remained the same.

3. Subvocalization
Subvocalization is a fancy word for your inner voice. Do you notice a
voice inside that is saying the words as you read this? Hopefully, it’s your
own voice. Subvocalization limits your reading speed to only a couple
hundred words per minute. That means your reading speed is limited to
your talking speed, not your thinking speed. In reality, your mind can read
a lot faster.
Where did subvocalization come from? It occurred, for most people,
when you were first learning to read. Then it was necessary for you to read
out loud so that your teacher knew you were doing it correctly. Do you
remember when you would have to get into a circle with the other children
and you each took turns reading aloud? For a lot of us, this was a very
stressful event. There was a lot of pressure on you to say the word
properly. How you pronounced the word was very important. It was then
that your brain made the association: If I want to understand a word when
I am reading, I must be able to correctly say it.
Later on, you were told to no longer read aloud, but rather silently, to
yourself. This is when you internalized that “reading voice,” and most of
us have been doing it ever since. In essence, you believe if you don’t hear
the words, then you won’t understand the words. This is not the case.
Here’s an example: We know that President John F. Kennedy was a very
fast reader, reading somewhere between 500 and 1200 words per minute.
He brought speed-reading instructors to train his staff. He also gave
speeches at approximately 250 words per minute. Clearly, when he was
reading, there were a lot of words he wasn’t saying in his mind. It is not
necessary to say the words in order to understand them.
Take a moment and think about a specific car, yours or someone else’s.
What does it look like? What color is it? Do this now.
What was it that you thought about? You might have said, “It is blue,
has four tires, and brown leather seats.” Question: Did the words blue,
tires, or leather appear in your mind, or did you picture a car with all of
these things? For most of us, our minds think primarily in images, and not
words. As we discussed in the previous chapter on memory, words are just
a tool we use to communicate our thoughts or pictures.
As you are reading, you can greatly increase both your speed and
comprehension by visualizing the material. It is not necessary to “say” all

of the words, as it takes too much time, just as you don’t read and say
“period, comma, question mark,” when you see them in a sentence. You
wouldn’t read a sentence like this: “I just bought some avocados comma
blueberries comma and broccoli period.” You understand that punctuation
marks are just symbols that represent various meanings.
Words are symbols as well. You’ve seen 95 percent of the words you
read before. You don’t need to pronounce those words, just as you don’t
need to pronounce filler words like because, this, or the. You know them
by sight, not by sound. It is the meaning of what the word represents that
is important. And the meaning is usually better described and remembered
in the form of pictures. Understanding this concept is the first step in
reducing subvocalization.

READING MISCONCEPTIONS

Myth 1: Faster Readers Don’t Comprehend Well
This is a rumor spread around by slow readers, and it is not true. In fact,
faster readers often have better comprehension than slower readers. Here’s
an analogy: When you’re taking a slow drive down a quiet street, you can
be doing many things. You may be listening to the radio, drinking a green
juice, waving to a neighbor, and singing your favorite song. Your attention
is not in any one place; it just flows and wanders.
But imagine you’re driving pedal to the metal down a racetrack taking
hairpin turns. Do you have more focus or less? I would bet that you are
very focused on what is in front, behind, and ahead of you. You’re not
thinking about your dry cleaning. The same holds true for reading. The key
to better reading comprehension is focus and concentration. But some
people read so slowly that they completely bore their own minds. A bored
mind doesn’t concentrate well. Your mind can handle vast amounts of
information, and yet most people as they read feed it one . . . word . . . at . .
. a . . . time. This is starving the brain.
If your mind ever wanders and daydreams, this could be the reason. If
you don’t give your brain the stimulus it needs, it’ll seek entertainment
elsewhere in the form of distraction. You may find yourself wondering
what you’ll have for dinner, what to wear on your date tomorrow, or
listening to a conversation out in the hall. We’ve asked before about

reading a page or a paragraph and not remembering what you’ve just read.
It may be because you read so slowly that you bored your brain and it
simply lost interest. Or, you may be using reading as a sedative and you
fall asleep. By reading faster, you keep your mind stimulated, find
yourself more focused, and have better comprehension.
Myth 2: It’s Harder and Takes More Effort to Read Fast
Reading faster requires less effort, primarily because trained readers tend
not to back-skip as much as slower readers. Slow readers stop at words,
reread them, go to another word, regress to a previous one, and so on, and
this continues throughout their reading. This takes a lot more effort and is
extremely draining and boring. Faster readers go through words much
easier and in a lot less time. This makes them more efficient because they
put in less time, and get more out of the process!
Myth 3: Faster Readers Can’t Appreciate Reading
This is not true either. You don’t have to study the individual brushstrokes
of a work of art in order to appreciate it. Likewise, you do not have to
study each and every word in a book, to realize its value. One of the best
things about being a trained reader is flexibility. Faster readers have the
option of speeding through boring/nonessential material and slowing down
or even rereading the exciting/important information. Flexibility is power.
Faster readers appreciate reading most material because they know it will
not take all day.

VISUAL PACER: GIVE YOUR READING THE
FINGER
You were probably told as a child not to use your finger to point to the
words when you’re reading. The traditional belief is that doing so will
slow down your reading. But as children know naturally, using your finger
as a guide keeps your eyes focused and prevents them from wandering.
Using your finger to read actually increases your reading speed because
your eye is attracted to motion.

It is one thing to know this intellectually; it’s another for you to
experience it. Let’s practice using your finger by rereading what you used
for your assessment earlier. Start from the beginning and use your finger
to track the words. End where you originally left off. Do not worry about
comprehension and don’t time this because it is just practice. The purpose
of this exercise is for you to become familiar with using your finger while
reading.
When you are done, set the alarm for two minutes. Start from where you
ended during your first assessment. Continue reading until the alarm goes
off. Figure out your new reading rate (based on the original formula), and
write down your new reading speed.
Studies show that the use of the finger while reading can increase your
reading rate anywhere from 25 percent to 100 percent. The more you
practice using this technique, the better your results will be. It may be a
little awkward at first, just like it was when you first learned how to drive,
but be patient and remember that it always takes more effort to sharpen
your skills first than it does to bulldoze your way through learning later.
Reading with your finger also introduces another one of your senses, the
sense of touch, into the learning process. Much as your sense of smell and
sense of taste are closely tied, your sense of sight and sense of touch are
also very closely linked. Have you ever tried to show something new to a
child? The child’s natural instinct is to want to touch the object.
Using your finger also dramatically decreases regression, and is one of
the reasons why your reading speed increases with this practice. Your eyes
are naturally attracted to motion, so by moving your finger forward, your
eyes are much less likely to regress backward.
Practice reading with your finger, this tool alone will significantly
increase your speed and comprehension and will revolutionize your
learning. If your finger gets tired, practice using your whole arm, moving
it back and forth. It’s a bigger muscle and will not tire as easily.

HOW TO READ EVEN FASTER
Here are some more tools that will help you to become an accelerated
reader:

1. Reading Is Like Exercising
When you go to work out, you cannot expect your muscles to grow if you
pamper them. You need to push your muscles to where they are a little
uncomfortable in order for them to grow. The same applies to reading. If
you push yourself to read faster, your “reading muscles” will become
stronger, and what was once hard, becomes easy. You can read faster,
simply by training yourself to read faster. Those of you who run know this.
When you are running on a treadmill, if you practice regularly, you can
watch yourself run at faster and faster levels. The levels that were once
hard become easy a week later, because you have pushed yourself to a
higher degree of excellence.
To increase your speed, even more, try this exercise: You will need an
easy-reading novel, a pencil, and a watch or timer:
1. Read comfortably (using your finger or a visual pacer) for 4 minutes.
Set the alarm to go off in 4 minutes and read as you normally would
read. Mark the line when your alarm goes off. This is going to be
your “finish line.”
2. Now set your alarm for 3 minutes. The goal here is to reach the finish
line before your alarm goes off. Then read (using your finger) until
the line in step 1 in 3 minutes.
3. Set your alarm for 2 minutes. Don’t worry about comprehension. Try
to get to the finish line before your alarm goes off in 2 minutes. Use a
visual pacer and go through it line by line. Have your eyes follow
your finger as fast as possible.
4. Final stretch. Set your timer for 1 minute. Do your best to get to the
finish line in one minute. Do not skip any line, and don’t worry about
comprehension right now.
5. Now breathe. Set your timer for 2 minutes. Start from your finish line
to read a new section. Read at a comfortable rate with
comprehension. Count the number of lines you read, multiply by the
number of words per line, then divide this number by two. This is
your new reading rate. Write it down.

How did that feel? By doing this exercise, you will notice that your rate
has increased. Here’s an analogy: If you are driving on the highway at 65
mph, and then slow down to 40 mph for some mild traffic, you will notice
quite a bit of difference. This is because you are used to driving at a higher
speed. But in reality, you are not going very slowly, because it is all
relative.
The same principle applies to reading. If you push yourself to read two
or three times faster than what you are used to, when you finally decrease
your rate to a comfortable speed, your original rate feels slow.
You want to practice this 4-minute exercise at least once a day until you
reach a level that you are pleased and satisfied with. Schedule your
reading. Just as with exercising, you cannot expect to work out only one
time and be done for life. You must read on a regular basis, otherwise your
reading muscles will grow weak.
2. Expand Your Peripheral Vision
Your peripheral vision is the span of letters or words that your eyes can see
in a single glance. By increasing your peripheral vision, you will be able to
see and take in more words at a time. Most people were taught to read only
one word at a time. But in fact, you are capable of reading more than that.
When you first learned to read, you were taught that letters made up
larger structures, called words. As a child, you would sound out a word by
its letters. For example, the word report would be broken down into letters
so that you could understand it, R-E-P-O-R-T. Now that you are older, you
are not as aware of the letters as you are reading, you see the larger units,
known as words.
One of the reasons why people have a limited reading speed is because
they read one word at a time. But if you put the word card at the end of the
report, you get REPORT CARD. These two words have their own distinct
meanings, but your mind sees them as one unit. Just as your mind is
capable of seeing these two words together, it is also capable of seeing
groups of words at the same time. By doing so, you will take your reading
speed to even greater heights. Just as you see the words and not the
individual letters, skilled readers see groups of words (or ideas) and not
the individual words. See Additional tips below that you can use to
condition yourself to “see” more.

3. Counting
By using the exercises I’ve outlined, the challenge of subvocalization will
begin to decrease. The process of reading faster naturally makes it more
difficult to say all the words, even inside your head. When you have
passed a certain rate (about 300 to 350 words per minute), it will be
impossible to subvocalize all the words. As you hit this threshold, your
brain will begin to make the shift from saying the words to seeing them
more as images. Reading a book will be more like watching a movie.
Counting is another tool you can use to drown out this inner voice. The
process is deceptively simple: count out loud as you are reading, “one,
two, three . . .” and so on. You’ll find it is very difficult to count out loud
and talk inside (subvocalize) at the same time. Doing this process
conditions you to subvocalize less, allowing you to see the words rather
than say them, thus leading to better speed and comprehension.
People tend to remember and understand what they see, more than what
they hear. This makes sense, as most people can recall someone’s face
they see, more than the name they hear. By practicing these other
exercises, your reading speed will improve because you are no longer
saying every word. Initially, you may be a little confused (and your
comprehension may even decrease), but in a very short time, your mind
will grow bored of counting and will eventually stop. With practice, your
comprehension will soon increase and expand because you will be able to
more fully see and understand the material.

SUCCESS STORIES
I could fill an entire book with speed-reading success stories from
students, and we post them regularly on social media. Here’s one we
received today. Sarah was a very slow reader, had difficulty focusing, and
felt it impossible to remember names and events. After years of struggle
in this arena, she was convinced that there was very little chance she’d
ever be capable of improving her reading ability or her ability to study.
In my programs, I make it a point to reassure my students that we are
not aiming for perfection but for progress, and this resonated with Sarah.
She realized she had been looking for complicated solutions, but that the
tools and techniques we teach—which are easy to ignore or overlook

because they are simple—were the best to use. She decided to show up
with dedication and do her best, no matter what doubts she might have.
The results speak for themselves; Sarah’s reading speed is now three
times faster—she went from reading 253 words per minute to 838 words
per minute. She starts her day by reading, which starts each morning with
positive momentum and makes her feel like she’s already achieved
something for the day.
Lou, another student, also experienced a profound difference in his
reading ability once he learned a technique that could truly help him. Lou
excelled at high-level left-brained topics such as engineering and math and
obtained a bachelor of science in electrical engineering. But he struggled
in every single English class he ever took. Throughout his school years, he
had enormous trouble understanding the words he was reading and
comprehending the lessons behind them. In fact, he’s convinced that he
graduated only because his teachers gave him undeserved Cs out of
sympathy.

ADDITIONAL READING TIPS.

Hold your book upright. If the book is flat on your desk, you
may be doing one of two things, either
1. looking at the print at an angle versus directly, thus putting
unnecessary strain on your eyes, or
2. you will be slouched over in order to see the print clearly,
and this (as you know) disrupts the flow of oxygen through
your body and makes you feel tired.
Read for only 20 to 25 minutes at a time. Remember primacy
and regency. Also, if your eyes ever get tired or feel strained,
take a break. Close your eyes and let them rest.
Make reading a habit. Those who have reached a high degree of
success in life are almost always avid readers. Great readers
read often. The key is to make reading a habit. Give yourself this
gift.

When he was 35, Lou began to take lessons to learn how to read. These
were helpful, but he still found himself at a second-grade reading level
after four years of work. This was a vast improvement from where he had
been, but it wasn’t nearly what he wanted, and he continued to be
frustrated with his inability to master words and concepts. A big part of
the problem was that he had been trying to learn by rote memorization—
reading the same passages over and over in the hope that he would absorb
what he was reading. But he consistently found himself having learned
nothing by the end of the page.
While he had made significant progress, finding programs was the key
for Lou. As our memory program taught him how to absorb the material
he was reading, he began to take a little more time to visualize words as he
read them, and he used his left hand as a pacer to help stimulate the right
side of his brain. Finally, for the first time, he found himself reading books
and understanding them.

KWIK START
Block out at least 15 minutes each day for reading and put it in your
calendar like an important appointment. Commit to making reading
part of your daily habit.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON
Unlimiting your reading and learning will offer you an unparalleled level
of freedom. People who make the most of their capacity to learn find
themselves experiencing the world with a sense of mastery and with the
confidence that no task or challenge will intimidate them. Visit www.Limit
lessBook.com/resources and put what you learned here into practice. You
can watch an hour speed-reading masterclass where I walk you through
these methods. Before we get to the next chapter, try a few things:

Identify a current reading habit that you’d like to change. Any
transformation requires you to acknowledge what’s holding you back
and notice when it shows up during your practice.
Practice reading with a visual pacer each day. Schedule your reading,
for even 10 minutes each day, to build your “reading muscle.”
Make a list of the books you would like to read this month and write
down what can change in your life when you finish reading them.
Take my speed-reading online masterclass (free) at www.jimkwik.co
m/reading.

15

THINKING
Why is it important to think from a variety of perspectives?
What are the various ways people use their intelligence?
What kinds of superpowers can you harness by thinking
differently?

Accomplishing something big often requires new approaches to thinking.
An observation usually attributed to Albert Einstein posits, “We can’t
solve problems by using the same kind of thinking we used when we
created them.” And this of course makes perfect sense. So often, we adopt
a particular perspective at work, in our home lives, and in our studies, and
that outlook effectively walls out any approach that doesn’t fit into that
viewpoint. But there are two key problems with that. One is that all
perspectives should be challenged on a regular basis to confirm that they
are still viable. For example, so often when a company goes out of
business, it’s later shown that it was so completely mired in one approach
to the marketplace that it wasn’t capable of seeing that the audience they
were targeting was no longer as responsive as they once were. The second
problem a fixed perspective faces is that challenges are often the product
of a particular type of thinking, and the answer can be found only by
bringing a fresh approach to the table.
Why do most of us have a restricted range of thinking? I think the
answer is the same as it was when we were discussing focus: because we
somehow missed out on “thinking class” when we were in school.

Fortunately, it’s never too late to attend that class, and I’m going to enroll
you in it right now.

THE THINKING HATS
Dr. Edward de Bono devised the concept of the “six thinking hats” as a
tool for getting out of whatever rut of thinking one might be mired in.1
Regularly used to help groups problem-solve in a more productive way, it
is easily adaptable by any individuals hoping to keep their thinking fresh.
The core notion is to separate thinking into six distinctly defined functions
by progressively donning a series of metaphorical hats:
You put on a white hat when you’re in information-gathering mode.
At this point, your focus is on collecting details and getting all the
facts you’ll need to address whatever issue you’re trying to address.
To help you remember this, think of a white lab coat.
You switch to a yellow hat to bring optimism to your thinking. Here,
you’re trying to identify the positives in any problem or challenge
you’re facing, highlighting the value inherently in place. As your
memory tip here, think of the yellow sun.
Next, you’ll wear a black hat to pivot from looking at the good side
of the challenge to facing its difficulties and pitfalls. This is where
you’ll come face to face with the consequences of failing to
successfully address a problem. Memory tip: Think about a judge’s
robe.
Once you’ve done that, don your red hat to allow emotion to come
into play. This is the point where you can let your feelings about the
problem come to the surface, and maybe even express fears. This is
also where you can allow speculation and intuition to enter into the
conversation. To remember this, think about a red heart.
Now it’s time for the green hat. When you’re wearing this hat, you’re
in creativity mode. You’ve looked at the problem analytically and
you’ve looked at it emotionally. Now ask yourself, what new ideas
can you bring to what you already know about the problem? How can

you come at it in a way you haven’t considered before? Memory tip:
Think about green grass.
Finally, wear the blue hat to be in management mode, and make sure
you’ve addressed your agenda productively and gone through the
process in a way that benefits from all the other hats you’ve worn.
Often, organizations will start with the blue hat to set goals for a
meeting and then put it on again at the end. Even if you’re using the
six hats by yourself, this is something you might want to consider. To
remember this, think about blue skies.
The De Bono approach to problem-solving is an ingenious and elegantly
organized method for getting the most from your thinking. At its core, it is
a neatly defined way of looking at an issue from all sides. First, you make
sure you’re clear on what you need to address. Then, you determine that
you have all the facts in front of you. Next, you make sure you’re dealing
with the issue with a positive perspective. Then, you get real about the
challenges you’re facing, and allow yourself to feel what you’re feeling
about it. After this, you allow yourself to attack the problem from
perspectives you might not have considered before, letting your
imagination run free. And then you circle back to make sure you’ve
addressed what you set out to address during this session.
Look at how many different ways you’ve used your brain for this one
task. You’ve been analytical, you’ve been emotional, and you’ve been
creative. You’ve explored the sunny side and the dark side. And you’ve
almost certainly attacked the issue with tools you don’t automatically use
every single day (though you might from now on). Einstein would be
proud of you.

KWIK START
Think of a problem you need to be solved right now. It can be
anything from “How can I get that job,” to “How can I communicate
better with my family?” Use the Six Thinking Hats model to run
through the different perspectives of looking at the problem you’re
trying to solve.

HOW ARE YOU SMART?
Why is it important for us to have tools to help us think in different ways?
Because people usually have a dominant way of using their intelligence.
Dr. Howard Gardner, professor of cognition and education at the Harvard
Graduate School of Education, has studied intelligence extensively and has
identified eight distinct forms of intelligence:2
1. Spatial : This is someone who usually thinks from the perspective of
the space around them. Airline pilots tend to be spatial thinkers, but
so do people who excel at playing chess, as both require an innate
understanding of how things fit into space. The artist Claude Monet
comes to mind as another example because of his remarkable use of
space in his paintings.
2. Bodily-Kinesthetic: Someone with a dominance of this form of
intelligence uses their body as a form of expression or problemsolving. Gymnasts have refined bodily-kinesthetic intelligence, as do
drummers. The first name that jumps into my head when I think of
this form of intelligence is Venus Williams, who expressed her genius
with her body on a tennis court in ways that very few ever have.
3. Musical : This is a person with a strong “sensitivity to rhythm, pitch,
meter, tone, melody and timbre.”3 Musicians obviously have a
dominance in musical intelligence, but you’ll also find it in poets,
who often use meter and rhythm as effectively as they use words. My
poster child for musical intelligence is Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
4. Linguistic: Someone with a dominance in linguistic intelligence is
particularly attuned to all the implications of words, not just their
strict dictionary definition. Writers of course have this trait, but so do
great orators and lawyers. The first person I think of with linguistic
intelligence is William Shakespeare.
5. Logical-Mathematical: This is a strength in seeing the “logical
relations among actions or symbols.”4 Mathematicians find
themselves very comfortable seeing or seeking the connections
between different numbers. Scientists likewise draw connections

between physical objects or the forces acting on objects. Our friend
Albert Einstein immediately leaps to mind as a prime example.
6. Interpersonal : Someone with a dominance in interpersonal
intelligence has a deep innate ability to connect with other people and
a rich understanding of how others might be feeling at any given
moment. Therapists tend to have strong interpersonal intelligence, as
do schoolteachers. When I think of interpersonal intelligence, I think
of Oprah Winfrey, because of her amazing ability to relate to
whomever she is speaking with.
7. Intrapersonal : If you have dominance in intrapersonal intelligence,
you have a particularly refined sense of what is going on inside of
you. People with strong intrapersonal intelligence do a great job of
“taking their own temperature.” They’re in touch with their feelings,
they know what triggers them, and they have a good sense of how to
manage this. If you know someone who is cool under even difficult
circumstances, it’s likely that this person has strong intrapersonal
intelligence.
8. Naturalistic: This kind of intelligence expresses itself in an ability to
see the world of nature in all its complexities. Where you might see a
field of flowers, someone with this dominance will see four different
kinds of tulips, a couple of varieties of lavender, and a rare grass that
you just thought was a weed. Zoologists tend to have a dominance in
naturalistic intelligence, as do landscape architects. The first person
with this trait who comes to my mind is the remarkable primatologist
Jane Goodall.
Do you see yourself in one of these descriptions? There’s a good chance
you’ll relate to more than one, because people rarely have only one form
of intelligence. It’s likely you have a dominance in one or two, and there
may be a couple of others that you employ with some regularity. At the
same time, you’ll almost certainly find some on the list that you use
rarely, if at all.
But all of these forms of intelligence identify successful ways of
operating in the world, and any one of them might come into play when
you’re facing a particular task or problem. Awareness of all eight, and

considering each while wearing your six thinking hats, is a remarkably
effective way to unlimit your thinking.

WHAT IS YOUR LEARNING STYLE?
Just as types of intelligence vary from person to person, the way one
learns varies. The VAK learning styles model has been in use since the
1920s and is useful in showing you how you prefer to learn new things:
V is for Visual, meaning that you tend to learn through illustrations,
charts, video, and other visual media.
A is for Auditory, meaning that you find yourself most comfortable
learning by listening, either to a lecture, a discussion, a podcast, an
audiobook, etc.
K is for Kinesthetic, meaning that you prefer to learn via physical
interaction. Kinesthetic learners tend to gain more from taking a
hands-on approach to learning.5

Here’s a quick quiz you can take to give you a sense of what kind of
learner you are (see eBook Supplemental Material for a downloadable
PDF version):
1. When you don’t quite understand or remember something:
a. It doesn’t ring a bell or resonate
b. It seems hazy or unclear
c. You can’t get a handle on it or feel it
2. You are about to give a friend directions to your home. Would
you:
a. Draw a map on paper?
b. Tell her the directions?
c. Pick her up in your car?
3. You are staying in a hotel and have a rental car. You would like to
visit a friend whose address you do not know. Would you like them
to:
a. Draw you a map?
b. Tell you directions?
c. Pick you up in their car?
4. Learning technical material is easiest for you when:
a. Someone explains the ideas to you
b. You visualize the concepts and see the whole picture
c. You can learn by doing or get a feel for the ideas
5. You are going to cook a dessert as a special treat for your family.
Do you:

a. Cook something familiar?
b. Look through a cookbook for ideas?
c. Ask for the advice of others?
6. You are about to purchase a new sound system. Other than the
price, what would most influence your decision?
a. A friend speaking about it
b. How it makes you feel
c. Its distinctive look or appearance
7. Recall a time in your life when you learned how to do something
like playing a new board game. Try to avoid choosing a very
physical skill like riding a bike. How did you learn best? By:
a. Looking at the directions, pictures, diagrams, or charts
b. Listening to somebody explain it
c. Doing it
8. Which of these games to you prefer?
a. Pictionary
b. 20 Questions
c. Charades
9. You are about to learn how to use a new program on a computer.
Would you:
a. Read the instructions?
b. Call a friend and ask questions about it?
c. Turn it on and learn by experimentation?
10. You most easily are aware of and notice:

a. The quality of music from a sound system
b. If colors, shapes, or patterns clash
c. If clothes feel uncomfortable
11. You are not sure whether a word should be spelled “separate” or
“seperate.” Do you:
a. See the word in your mind and choose the best way it looks?
b. Sound it out?
c. Write down both versions?
12. A new movie has arrived in town. What would most influence
your decision to go or not go?
a. Friends/family talking about it
b. You have an intuition or sense about it
c. You saw a preview of it
13. You most easily remember directions when you:
a. Repeat them to yourself as you hear them
b. Visualize them
c. Intuitively sense how to get there
14. Do you prefer a teacher or trainer who likes to use:
a. Handouts, flow diagrams, charts, and visuals?
b. Field trips, experiments, and applications?
c. Discussions, guest speakers, and conversations?
15. Once you completely understand a new idea:
a. It is now concrete, or you have a feel for it

b. You have it loud and clear
c. You can envision it
16. You make decisions best when you rely on:
a. Your gut instinct
b. What looks clearest to you
c. What sounds best to you
17. At a party, you are most interested in people who
a. Are interesting and articulate speakers
b. Convey a warm and relaxing feeling
c. Radiate a visual beauty
Once you’ve written down your answers, use this key to see which type of
learning comes most naturally to you:

1: a (A) b (V) c (K),
2: a (V) b (A) c (K),
3: a (V) b (A) c (K),
4: a (A) b (V) c (K),
5: a (K) b (V) c (A),
6: a (A) b (K) c (V),
7: a (V) b (A) c (K),
8: a (V) b (A) c (K),
9: a (V) b (A) c (K),
10: a (A) b (V) c (K),
11: a (V) b (A) c (K),
12: a (A) b (K) c (V),
13: a (A) b (V) c (K),
14: a (V) b (K) c (A),
15: a (K) b (A) c (V),
16: a (K) b (V) c (A),
17: a (A) b (K) c (V)
Your answers will give you a good sense of the kind of learner you are.
In all likelihood, you’ll be some mix of audio (A), visual (V), and
kinesthetic (K). But you might see a real dominance in one of these, and
that can prove to be extremely useful as you embark on unlimiting your
thinking, as you can make a conscious effort to bring the others into the
mix.

MENTAL MODELS
Mental models are constructs for thinking that help us make sense of the
world around us. Think of them as shortcuts. For example, we’ve all heard
of the economic mental model of supply and demand. You’re probably
familiar with the idea that supply is representative of the amount of
something available within a market, whether that’s a service, product, or
commodity. When that is juxtaposed against the demand for that item,

value is determined, and that often dictates the price of the item. This
model is a quick way to understand what’s happening in a market. It’s not
always accurate and doesn’t explain every factor involved, but it serves as
a simple way of evaluating the price or value of an item.
Mental models train your mind to think; after all, you don’t rise to the
level of your expectations, you fall to the level of your training. Models
can act as shortcuts that save you valuable energy and time when you’re
evaluating an idea, making a decision, or problem-solving.
In the following pages, I’m including some of my favorite mental
models for faster and sharper decision-making and for creative problemsolving.
Decision-Making: The 40/70 Rule
One of the greatest barriers to quick decision-making is the ever-present
feeling that we don’t have enough information to make the “right”
decision. Colin Powell, former secretary of state, addresses this with his
40/70 rule.6 His rule is to never make a decision with less than 40 percent
of the information you are likely to get, and to gather no more than 70
percent of the information available. According to Powell, anything less
than 40 percent and you’re just guessing. Anything more than 70 percent
and you’re stalling over making the decision. Of course, this means you
need to be comfortable with the possibility that you’re going to be wrong,
which is necessary in any case.
“When you have about seventy percent of all the information, you
probably ought to decide, because you may lose an opportunity. My own
experience is that you get as much information as you can and then you
pay attention to your intuition, to your informed instinct. Sometimes what
my analytical mind says to me is not what I’ll do,” Powell said.7
Productivity: Create a Not-to-Do List
This one might seem counterintuitive, but sometimes it’s just as important
to know what not to do as what to do. This tactic is used best for directing
your attention to the essentials and avoiding what doesn’t matter in the
moment.

Often at the beginning of a project, or even just a packed day, it can feel
overwhelming to decide what to concentrate on. The power of the not-todo list is that you decide from the very beginning what you will definitely
put aside. When we write down our list of tasks for the day, we usually
don’t prioritize, nor do we assign a value to these tasks. It’s easy for a
conventional to-do list to become a catchall for all the things we know we
have to do that day, instead of the things that must be done first, for the
most value.
Lest you think that the not-to-do list is filled with things like
participating in social media, let’s work out exactly how you should
compile this list:
First, write down tasks that might be important but can’t be done
because of outside circumstances. Maybe you’re waiting for an email from someone else, or you’re waiting for a colleague to finish
their portion of a project.
Next, include tasks that you think need to be done but that don’t add
value to your life; you might also think of these as busywork. You
might ask yourself if you can delegate or hire someone else to do
them. You can also ask if anyone but you will notice whether the task
is left undone. The idea here is that your time is best spent on tasks
that will move your life and goals forward.
Then include current and ongoing tasks that don’t benefit from
additional attention. This might include systems that are already set
up, such as making the kids’ lunches or having a brief meeting with
your team at the start of the work day. These are part of your routine
and shouldn’t be clogging your to-do list on a daily basis.
Last, include urgent tasks that are often to-do lists given to us by
other people, such as getting some background research on a project
or making follow-up calls. These are tasks that might be necessary to
do but perhaps don’t need to be done by you.8
When you’re finished with your don’t-do list, it should read like an antimenu, a list of items that aren’t available for your time. You will then be
able to easily identify what will actually move you forward and do those
activities instead.

KWIK START
Do this right now. Take a moment to create your not-to-do list for
today. What are the things you need to avoid today to focus and
achieve your goals? Be specific and check off that list by not doing it.

Problem-Solving: Study Your Errors
When we take the time to study the mistakes we make, especially those
that have a lasting effect on our lives, we turn every mistake into a
learning opportunity. Use this model to evaluate what went wrong so you
can get a better result next time.
First, get clear on what did or didn’t happen. Often, we confuse cause
with correlation, so be sure you understand what happened and what
led to the mistake or error.
Next, ask yourself why those mistakes happened. Look for the deeper
layers behind the incident. You might ask “why” until you’ve run out
of layers to question.
Then ask how you can best avoid the same mistakes in the future. If
some of the factors that caused the error are out of your control, ask
how you can prevent causes that can’t be eliminated.
Finally, using what you’ve gleaned from this exercise, determine how
you can create the best conditions to support your desired outcomes
in the future.9
To help illustrate this strategy, let’s imagine this scenario: the
fundraising project you orchestrated for your child’s school greatly
underperformed your expectations. First, you need to be clear on what
happened. Did you and your team fail to inspire people to give, or did the
donors fail to show up? In this case, let’s assume that the donors were
available, but they didn’t give as much as you anticipated or sometimes
didn’t give at all.
Now, you need to ask yourself why. Did it have something to do with the
way you presented the need? Did it have something to do with the time of

year? Did it have something to do with the economy? Remember that your
answer here might lead to additional questions. In the scenario we’re
playing out, let’s determine that you decide that you might not have
emphasized the importance of this campaign, because there’d been a
fundraiser at the school only two months prior and you didn’t want to
appear pushy, and that your being overly polite caused potential donors to
think the cause wasn’t critical.
So, how do you avoid this in the future? You decide that the next time
you run the campaign, you’re going to do it earlier in the school year and,
regardless of the proximity of any other fundraiser, you’re going to go out
of your way to stress the value and importance of this one and why donors
need to open up their checkbooks. The upshot of this is that you realize
that you need to improve the way you send out the message about your
campaign, and you determine to take a class on this so you will be much
better prepared when next year’s campaign comes along.
Strategy: Second-Order Thinking
Most of us think about the consequences of our actions, but few of us think
even two steps beyond the immediate effects our actions will have on our
lives. Let’s consider Ryan Holiday’s book, Conspiracy, which describes
how entrepreneur Peter Thiel planned and executed a takedown of one of
America’s most prolific (and disliked) online magazines, Gawker.10
Thiel’s desire to confront Gawker was born after the mag outed him as gay.
But he did not act immediately. Over the course of 10 years, he and a team
strategically made one move after the next based on a plan they had
devised to destroy Gawker for good. Regardless of what you think about
Thiel’s actions, they were definitely not the product of impulsive thinking.
This is an example of second-order thinking, the ability to think
strategically through a series of events.
This model is simple and yet not always easy. To use second-order
thinking when considering future actions:
Always ask yourself, “And then what?”
Think in increments of time. What do the consequences look like in
five days? Five months? Five years?

Draw out the possible courses of action you might take using columns
to organize consequences.11
First-order thinking is easy, but it’s second-order thinking that allows us
to go deeper through time and consequences. Best of all, it allows us to see
what others can’t see.

TAKING GIANT LEAPS
Moving forward incrementally is a significant sign of progress. Every step
you can take in the process of becoming limitless is a step in the right
direction. But what if you could move your genius forward exponentially?
After all, if we take 30 normal steps forward, we’ll wind up somewhere
down the street. But if we took 30 exponential steps, we’d circle the Earth
more than two dozen times. That’s the kind of thinking advocated by
Naveen Jain, winner of the Albert Einstein Technology Medal and founder
of some of the most innovative companies in the world, including Moon
Express (the first private company to be authorized to land on the moon),
World Innovation Institute, iNome, TalentWise, Intelius, and Infospace.
“Exponential thinking is when you start to see things from a different
mindset,” Jain told me. “It’s not about thinking outside the box; it’s about
thinking in a completely different box.”12 This is where normal genius
begins to border on limitless genius. As Jain explains, linear thinking (the
kind of thinking most of us employ) causes us to look at a problem and
seek a solution. We might come at the problem from a number of angles.
We might put on different hats to address the problem in ways that stretch
our thinking. And we might even come up with a solution that addresses
the problem effectively and moves us forward. That’s all meaningful
progress.
But what if we looked at the root cause of the problem and solved that
instead? This would lead to exponential progress, world-changing
progress. Jain uses as an example the lack of fresh water in many parts of
the world. One could attempt to tackle that problem from a number of
viewpoints, including finding ways to improve filtration and creating
systems for moving fresh water from places where it was abundant to
places where it was scarce. But what if instead you identified that, among

the various causes for fresh-water scarcity, the biggest is that so much
fresh water is being used for agriculture rather than drinking? You would
attempt to solve the problem in an entirely different way. What if you
could use significantly less water for agriculture, perhaps through some
combination of aeroponics, aquaponics, or other techniques currently
being experimented with or not yet invented? This would result in such an
abundance of fresh water that the original problem would become
eminently solvable. That’s exponential thinking at work, and the value of
it is obvious.
When Jain started his company Viome, his goal was to attack the
pervasive nature of chronic illness, which he sees as underlying the
world’s health crisis. Understanding that every individual’s immune
system is different and therefore how each person processes the foods they
consume can vary greatly, he and his team developed a tool for analyzing
an individual’s gut microbiome so a person can “Get to the bottom of what
foods are right for your body and discover how optimizing the activity of
your gut can dramatically improve the condition of your health.”13 As I
write this, they’re in the process of collecting information from a huge
number of users, data that will lead to powerful recommendations for
every individual who employs the tool.
Naveen Jain operates at the grandest of scales. He’s a successful
entrepreneur who has never started two companies in the same industry,
and one of his operating principles is that creating a billion-dollar
company is simply a matter of solving a $10-billion problem. Now, most
of us don’t think on such a massive scale, but you can still use exponential
thinking to exercise your mind and unlimit your personal genius. To learn
more about Viome and watch my interview with Naveen Jain, visit www.Ji
mKwik.com/Viome.

THINKING EXPONENTIALLY
So, how does an individual think exponentially? Maybe your goal isn’t to
solve all the world’s problems, invent a new technology, or start a billiondollar company, but you can see how applying exponential thinking might
make a real difference to your school, your business, or your personal

growth. How can thinking less linearly and more exponentially make
dramatic changes in your life?
The first step is having a good understanding of what the exponential
mindset looks like. In a piece for the Harvard Business Review, Mark
Bonchek, founder and chief epiphany officer of Shift Thinking, describes
the linear mindset as a line appearing on a graph that rises gradually over
time. He then juxtaposes this with a second line that curves upward,
slowly at first, and then shooting over the other line before heading far off
the graph. This is his visual depiction of the exponential mindset.
Phase of a Business

“The incremental mindset focuses on making something better, while
the exponential mindset is focused on making something different,” he
notes. “Incremental is satisfied with 10 percent. Exponential is out for
10X.”14
“The incremental mindset draws a straight line from the present to the
future,” Bonchek continues. “A ‘good’ incremental business plan enables
you to see exactly how you will get from here to there. But exponential
models are not straight. They are like a bend in the road that prevents you
from seeing around the corner, except in this case the curve goes up.”
Bonchek is speaking specifically about applying exponential thinking to
business, but the same perception can be brought to bear on thinking in

other parts of life. Imagine, for example, that you were trying to figure out
how to have everyone in your family at the dinner table at least three times
a week. A linear mindset would involve looking at everyone’s work
schedules, school schedules, activities schedules, and social schedules to
try to find a way to clear out some space. But an exponential mindset
would take the approach of turning your family’s harried schedules into
something different.
Maybe “dinner” isn’t the goal at all, but rather finding key moments
during the week when everyone can be in the same place and focus
exclusively on each other. Maybe the issue isn’t your schedules at all but
how each of you has chosen to commit their time. Progress might not
seem much like progress (three months later, you’re barely better off than
when you started), but then the changes you’ve been developing start to
take shape, and suddenly you have lots more time together.
If you want to fire up your exponential thinking ability—and take a
huge step toward unlimiting your genius—consider these four steps the
next time you contemplate a problem or task in need of a solution:
Step 1: Get to the Underlying Problem
As Naveen Jain illustrated when addressing the world’s water problem, the
core issue might not be the surface issue at all. As Jain noted, the
underlying problem behind the shortage of fresh water isn’t the
availability of the water, but rather that so much fresh water is being used
for agricultural purposes. Solving the underlying problem allows for a
much more workable solution to the surface problem.
Let’s go back to our dinner scenario. The surface problem is that the
family rarely eats dinner together because everyone’s schedules are too
busy. The underlying problem might be that your schedules are so busy
because your spouse feels compelled to work long hours at work, your
daughter feels compelled to be an elite athlete, your son feels compelled to
get perfect academic scores so he can attend a college with a 3 percent
acceptance rate, and you feel compelled to sit on three nonprofit boards.
But maybe even that is not the true underlying problem.
Maybe what’s really at issue is that you each feel the pressures you feel
not because you personally aspire to these goals but rather because you

live in a community that looks down on people who don’t have goals of
this sort.
Step 2: Posit a New Approach
One of the keys to exponential thinking is filling your thoughts with whatif statements. Evie Mackie of the Innovation Hub at the John Lewis
Partnership says that “‘What If ’ statements come into play to bring unruly
scenarios into the picture. For example, ‘What if the human race needed to
adapt and live in a world which was 90 percent underwater’ or ‘What if we
could no longer touch things with our hands to interact.’ This helps
conceptualize a WHOLE different array of things we may never have
thought of otherwise and allows us to imagine what we would need to
survive in a future world, which could be a very different place.”15
In our example, if you’ve realized the underlying problem is that the
prevailing notions in your community have forced you into filling your
daily lives with activities that take far too much of your time, you might
ask yourselves, “What if we didn’t care what everyone else thought?” Or
maybe you’d ask, “What if there were only 18 hours in the day instead of
24?” Or you might even ask, “What if we lived somewhere else?”
Step 3: Read about It
As you already know, I am an extremely strong advocate for reading as
much as you possibly can. Reading liberates your brain more than
virtually any other activity. Reading is especially important when it comes
to exponential thinking. You can’t make huge cognitive leaps if you don’t
have a well-rounded view of a subject.
So, now that you’ve gone through the what-if exercise, read up on
alternatives. Maybe your spouse reads a number of books about the
connection between corporate success and happiness. Maybe your
daughter connects with bloggers and influencers on both the odds of
becoming an elite athlete and the lives of elite athletes. Maybe your son
reads a number of studies that look at graduation from ultra-competitive
universities and occupational and emotional success afterward. Maybe you
read books about the causes you’re championing via your nonprofits and
reconsider how important these causes are to you.

Step 4: Extrapolate
You’ve now identified the underlying problem, posed questions that allow
you to imagine a world without the problem, and done your research. Now,
it’s time to try out a scenario. Let’s play one out here: You’re convinced
that you’ve filled your lives with activities because you need these to
maintain your status in your community. You’ve asked the question,
“What if we lived somewhere else?” and found that everyone in your
family is intrigued by this notion. You’ve done your reading and
discovered that you could be happier and more satisfied if your
job/sports/school/philanthropic goals were revised and reconceived.
So, what would happen if you moved a hundred miles away, across the
country, or even to a different country? You know that doing something
this dramatic might not immediately seem like progress. You’ve seen the
straight line and the curved line, and you realize that it might even seem
you’ve taken a huge step backward because of all the adjustments you’d
need to make. But say the four of you play out the scenarios and decide
that making a move is the right thing to do. Two years later, the family is
thriving —and you have dinner together nearly every night.

BEFORE WE MOVE ON
This is the last of the method chapters, and I’m sure you’re itching to put
everything you’ve learned in this book to use. Before we end, I’m going to
give you a vision of how this might work for you and a 10-day plan to
jump-start applying what you’ve learned to your life. But before we get to
that, let’s try a few things:
Review Howard Gardner’s eight forms of intelligence starting on
HOW ARE YOU SMART?. Which forms on this list align most
closely with your own intelligence?
Now that you know what your learning style is, what can you do to
incorporate the other styles into your thinking?
Try on all six thinking hats during a test case. Give yourself a
relatively simple task, and approach it using Edward de Bono’s
method.

AFTERWORD
RETURN OF THE POSSIBLE

If you’re anything like the overwhelming majority of people in the world,
when you started reading this book you were being governed—either
consciously, unconsciously, or both—by a suite of limitations you’d either
imposed on yourself or others had imposed on you.
Maybe you wanted to learn a new ability, but you were sure that you
didn’t have the capacity to do it. Maybe you wanted to throw your hat in
the ring for a big work promotion, but your inner voice kept telling you
that you really didn’t have the competence for it. Maybe you were
convinced that you were always going to leave the house without your
phone, or you were never going to remember all the names of the people at
your next social gathering, or you were forever going to be the boring guy
reading his speech from a piece of paper. If this has ever described you in
any way, now that you’ve come to the end of this book, I hope you’re
ready to wave good-bye to that person.
Instead, let’s meet the new limitless you.
The limitless you has a limitless mindset. You no longer believe that
there are all sorts of things you can’t be, or do. There might be all sorts of
things you haven’t done yet, and there might be all sorts of things that
you’ve had trouble doing in the past, but the limitless you knows your past
doesn’t equal your future. The limitless you understands that your brain is
a much more powerful tool than you might have previously imagined and
that, by setting your mind to learning whatever you want to learn, you can
conquer just about any skill.
The limitless you also has limitless motivation. In the past, maybe you
could conceive of a more ambitious life, but you couldn’t actually get
yourself to take action. Now, though, you know how to align your habits

with your ambitions; you’re capable of making a commitment to lifelong
learning and lifelong improvement and it’s as natural to you as getting
dressed in the morning.
You also know how to fuel your brain with food and sleep and exercise
so that you start your day in the best place, and you’re always ready to
take on new and demanding challenges. And you know how to tap into the
flow so that, once you start a task, you can dive into it completely. And,
perhaps most significantly, the limitless you has unlocked the methods of
learning how to learn. By discovering this, you have become exponentially
more powerful than you were before. Beyond a few physical limitations, if
you can learn it, you can do it. And the tools you now have at your
disposal allow you to learn anything faster. When you couple that with the
skills you’ve gained in unlimiting your focus, your memory, your thinking,
and your reading, you’re in possession of the ultimate superhero toolkit.
A superhero is not just someone who has discovered and developed their
superpowers. Every superhero must eventually return to their world and
serve. They must bring with them the lessons and wisdom they won
through their journey. They must not only integrate their powers into their
lives, but they must learn to use their powers to help others. At the end of
The Matrix, Neo has won the battle and broken free of limits. In his last
phone call to the Matrix, Neo says: “I’m going to hang up this phone, and
then I’m going to show these people what you don’t want them to see. I’m
going to show them a world without you. A world without rules or
controls, borders or boundaries. A world where anything is possible.” He’s
returning to the ordinary world, but with a mission to help inspire others,
to free their minds.
My hope for you is that you not only take what you’ve learned in this
book and make your life better with it, but that you make the lives of those
around you better, too. The formula is: Learn. Earn. Return. No hero’s
journey is exclusively for the benefit of the hero. With your newfound
knowledge, help those around you to learn better and faster and unlimit
themselves.
In the film Lucy, an American student played by Scarlett Johansson
develops superhuman powers after the full potential of her brain is
unleashed. Professor Norman, played by Morgan Freeman, is a neurologist
who helps Lucy cope with the startling changes taking place in her mind

and body. When asked by Lucy what to do with her new gifts, Professor
Norman replied in Morgan Freeman’s unique voice:
You know . . . If you think about the very nature of life—I mean, in
the very beginning, the development of the first cell divided into two
cells—the sole purpose of life has been to pass on what was learned.
There was no higher purpose. So if you’re asking me what to do with
all this knowledge you’re accumulating, I say . . Pass it on.
So, now the question becomes this: What are you going to do with what
you’ve learned? Solve a challenging problem at work so you and your
colleagues have an impact on your industry, and maybe your world? Start a
book club? Make a dent in that huge stack of periodicals on your coffee
table, and then teach your children what you’ve just learned? Connect with
people in more dynamic ways? Throw a brain-food dinner party? Sign up
for the class that is going to open new doors for you? Or maybe sign up to
teach a class yourself? Which would you choose?
That’s what a superhero would do. That’s what the limitless you can do.
Throughout this book, you’ve had the opportunity to take some of your
new skills out for a spin. In the pages that follow, I’ve laid out a program
to get you started. Now is the time to start to use all of what you’ve
learned in concert. Start with one thing, but start somewhere. Anywhere.
And when you do, I think you’re going to be stunned by what you uncover
about yourself. The limitless you is the person you truly are and the person
who, over time, will become things you can’t even conceive of now.
Know yourself. Trust yourself. Love yourself. Be yourself.
And remember, the life you live are the lessons you teach. Be limitless.
With love and learning,
Jim

10-DAY KWIK START PLAN
Congratulations on making it to the end of this book. You are one of the few who
completes the task at hand. I applaud you.
We’ve covered a lot in this book. My advice is to implement everything you
learned. If you’re not sure where to begin, then this 10-day plan is here to help you
jump-start your limitless journey.
You can follow this plan I made for you, or you can handpick three top tips you’d
like to integrate from each main section: Mindset, Motivation, and Methods. In this
way you can focus on the areas where you feel you’re currently lacking and need more
support. You can also download this 10-Day Kwik Start program in video format from
www.LimitlessBook.com/resources.
Thank you for allowing me to be your brain coach through this book. I look forward
to hearing about your progress.

DAY 1: LEARN FASTER
Put this acronym (FASTER) into action on day one:
Forget: The key to laser focus is to remove or forget that which distracts you.
There are three things you want to forget (at least temporarily).
1. What you already know
2. What’s not urgent
3. Your limitations
Act: Traditional education has trained many people to think that learning is a
passive experience. But learning is not a spectator sport. The human brain does
not learn as much by consumption as it does by creation. Knowing that, I want
you to ask yourself how you can become more active in your learning. Take
notes. Do the exercises in this book.
State: Your state of being is a current snapshot of your emotions. It is highly
influenced by your thoughts (psychology) and the physical condition of your

body (physiology). Change your posture or the depth of your breathing.
Consciously choose states of joy, fascination, and curiosity.
Teach: If you want to cut your learning curve dramatically, learn with the
intention of teaching the information to someone else.
Enter: If it’s not on your calendar, there’s a good chance it’s not getting done.
Take out your calendar and enter blocks of time to invest in yourself, even if
that’s only 10 or 15 minutes a day.
Review: You are better able to retain information by reviewing multiple spreadout sessions. Get in the habit of reflecting on your day and do a daily review of
what you’ve learned.
For more on this, reread the section in Chapter 4.

DAY 2: KILL YOUR ANTS
Identify the voices in your head that are focusing on what you can’t do—those
Automatic Negative Thoughts (ANTs). Start talking back to them.
Remember, too, to discount those pesky LIEs: Limiting Ideas Entertained. And
consistently check in with your BS, Belief Systems. When you find yourself thinking,
I always screw up this sort of thing, counter with, Just because I haven’t always been
good at this in the past doesn’t mean that I can’t be great at it now. How can I learn
this?
Don’t shrink what’s possible to fit your mind, expand your mind to fit what’s
possible. For more on this, reread the section in Chapter 8.

DAY 3: QUESTION YOUR QUESTIONS
Reflect on the power of dominant questions. You likely have one question you’re
subconsciously asking yourself throughout the day. Identify this question and think
about how you can change it to change your behavior. Knowledge itself is not power,
it only has that potential when you apply it. Start asking the questions that will help
you get the empowering answers you need throughout the day. For more on this,
reread the section in Chapter 4.

DAY 4: IMAGINE WHAT YOU WANT MOST
Take a moment to write down all the disadvantages you will have when you don’t
apply what you learned in this book. For example, you could write, “I will have to
keep studying hard and settle for the same mediocre results.” “I will continue to doubt

myself.” “I won’t be able to show up at my best for my loved ones” or “I won’t get a
good job.”
Now, write down the advantages you will have when you apply what you learned,
such as: “I’ll be able to learn what I need to learn with confidence, get a great job I
love, and make a lot of money so I can give back to the world.” “I will have more free
time to exercise and get healthy, travel, and spend more time with my significant
other.” Or something simple like, “I will finally have some free time to just get caught
up and relax!”
Get specific. See it, feel it, believe in it, and then work daily for it. Visualize your
celebratory champagne moment. For more on this, reread the section in Chapter 7.

DAY 5: CONSIDER YOUR PURPOSE
Purpose is about how you relate to other people. Purpose is what you’re here to share
with the world. What is your why?
Think about who’s counting on you to be limitless. Is it your family? Your lover?
Your friends? Colleagues? Neighbors? Get specific about who you’re letting down by
setting limits in your life. Now, think about how you can affect the lives of others
when you show up 100 percent. You’ve found your purpose. For more on this, reread
the section in Chapter 7.

DAY 6: START A NEW HEALTHY HABIT
Take small, simple steps to create one new healthy habit that will lead you to success.
Make it a part of your morning routine. You’ll never change your life until you decide
to change something you do daily. Our daily decisions and habits have a huge impact
on both our levels of happiness and success. If you’re persistent you can achieve it, if
you’re consistent you can keep it. Little by little, a little can become a lot. Remember,
every professional was once a beginner.
Pick one new habit you will start doing today. How can you break it down to small,
simple steps that you can do consistently each day? For more on this, reread the
section in Chapter 9.

DAY 7: GIVE YOUR BRAIN SOME ENERGY
Harness your energy to win each day. Eat one or more of these brain foods daily.
Which one is your favorite, and why? Remember, what you eat matters, especially for
your gray matter. Is what you’re eating energizing you or depleting you? Write down
some creative recipes you can make using the brain foods below:
Avocados

Green leafy vegetables

Blueberries

Salmon

Broccoli

Turmeric

Dark chocolate

Walnuts

Eggs

Water

For more on this, reread the section in Chapter 8.

DAY 8: OPTIMIZE YOUR STUDY
Studying isn’t just for people in school. We’re all lifelong learners. Set the optimal
state to study and learn. Remove distractions. Use the HEAR (Halt, Empathy,
Anticipate, Review) method to watch a TED video you’ve never seen before and
practice your listening skills. For more on this, reread the section in Chapter 12.

DAY 9: ALWAYS REMEMBER MOM
Before you begin any task, always check with your MOM (motivation, observation,
methods). Also, check in with your why. What is your motive for remembering that
person’s name? What do you observe? Remember, most of your memory is not a
retention issue; it’s an attention issue. Practice remembering the names of everyone
you meet today by using the association technique. If you forget someone’s name,
write down if it was your motivation, observation, or the method that led you to forget
that name. Then try again with another person.
You can practice this skill even when you’re shopping at a grocery store or walking
through the street or watching television, or anything. Assign names to strangers you
see and test how many you can remember. For more on this, reread the section in
Chapter 13.

DAY 10: EMBRACE THE POWER OF READING
Set a daily reading goal, even if it’s just for 10 minutes a day. There’s power to
reading and these benefits compound over time. The key is consistency. Pick a book
you’ve been wanting to read, set a timer for 10 minutes, put away the distractions, and
practice reading with a visual pacer. Then schedule your reading time for each day;
put it in your calendar as an appointment with yourself.
Leaders are readers. Reading is great exercise for your mind. Remember, you can
download decades of experience by reading just one book. For more on this, reread
the section in Chapter 14.

LIMITLESS CHILDREN
HOW TO AP P LY THIS B OOK TO
PARENTING
“If a child can’t learn the way we teach,
maybe we should teach the way they learn.”
—IGNACIO ESTRADA

It’s not how smart your children are, it’s how are they smart. Traditional education teaches children what to
learn, what to focus on, what to think, what to study, and even what to remember. But not how to learn, how to
focus, how to think, how to study, and how to remember.
Having grown up with my own learning difficulties, one of my passions is teaching our youth about their
mindset, motivation, and methods of learning.
How can you start? I’ve put some of my favorite strategies in a “kwik” bonus chapter.
You can download the chapter at:

L i mi tl essB ook .com/ p aren ti n g

LIMITLESS TEAMS
HOW TO AP P LY THIS B OOK TO
BUSINESS
“An organization’s ability to learn, and translate that learning into action rapidly, is the ultimate
competitive advantage.”
—JACK WELCH

Can you apply the Limitless model to your business? Absolutely! For over two decades, we’ve used these
methods to train organizations of all sizes, from entrepreneurial start-ups to corporate clients, including Google,
Virgin, Nike, GE, Fox Studios, and Zappos.
Human capital (the collective education, skills, knowledge, training) is an organization’s most valuable and
most underutilized asset. For your business to grow, your team’s collective brainpower must grow.
How can you harness your team’s limitless cognitive potential? I wrote a bonus chapter to help you on your
way.
You can download the chapter at:

L i mi tl essB ook .com/ B u si n ess

YOUR BONUS RESOURCES
We’ve assembled the ultimate set of resources that complement this book and will magnify your results.
These include:
Video tutorials of select lessons (as an example: watch me teach you how to quickly memorize the top
brain foods, and demonstrate the remembering names technique in front of a live audience)
Written exercises and assessments to test your skills
Brainpower food recipes from meals to teas
Recommended reading
Special interviews with top experts delving deeper into the topics covered in this book—sleep, exercise,
nutrition, meditation, and others
And so much more!
For your free access, go to:

L i mi tl essB ook .com/ Resou rces

KWIK LEARNING ONLINE

DO YOU WANT TO
DIVE DEEP ER INTO THE
5 L IMIT L E S S
ME T HODS ?
How do you train yourself, your family, or your team the methods of focus, study, memory improvement,
speed reading, and thinking skills?
We’ve created for you the ultimate proven and simple-to-add-into-your-life online training for anyone
looking to uplevel their capabilities.
All you need is 15 minutes a day to build a new learning habit in each area.
Visit KwikLearning.com/Online-Courses and use the code “LIMITLESS” to get 25% off your registration as a
thank you for purchasing this book.
When you do, you will join our community of Kwik Brains from 195 countries. Your success is our success,
every program comes with an unconditional 30-day money-back guarantee.

SUGGESTED READING
Our community is passionate about reading. If someone has decades of
experience and puts that knowledge into a book, and you can read their
book in a few days, you effectively download decades into days.
Leaders are readers. Many of our Kwik Readers commit to finishing
#1bookaweek (52 books each year).
As a bonus for purchasing this book, you can join our one-hour speedreading masterclass as my gift. It will help you tackle your booklist. Get
free access at JimKwik.com/Reading
Here is a “kwik” list of some of my favorite mindset, motivation, and
methods books. They are listed in no particular order. For the extensive
reading list, go to LimitlessBook.com/resources.
The Magic of Thinking Big by David J. Schwartz
Man’s Search for Meaning by Viktor Frankl
Understanding Understanding by Richard Saul Wurman
The Tapping Solution for Manifesting Your Greatest Self by Nick Ortner
Start With Why by Simon Sinek
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen R. Covey
Change Your Brain, Change Your Life by Dr. Daniel Amen
The Motivation Manifesto by Brendon Burchard
Tiny Habits by Dr. BJ Fogg
Brain Food by Lisa Mosconi
Me to We by Marc Kielburger & Craig Kielburger
The Promise of a Pencil by Adam Braun
Miracle Mindset by JJ Virgin
The TB12 Method by Tom Brady
Super Human by Dave Asprey
The Infinite Game by Simon Sinek
The Future Is Faster Than You Think by Steven Kotler & Peter Diamandis

The Code of the Extraordinary Mind by Vishen Lakhiani
The School of Greatness by Lewis Howes
Stress Less, Accomplish More by Emily Fletcher
The Power of When by Dr. Michael Breus
Becoming Super Woman by Nicole Lapin
Chineasy Everyday by Shaolan
#AskGaryVee by Gary Vaynerchuk
Becoming Supernatural by Dr. Joe Dispenza
Moonwalking with Einstein by Joshua Foer
The Brain that Changes Itself by Dr. Norman Doidge
Mindset by Carol Dweck
The Align Method by Aaron Alexander
Super Brain by Deepak Chopra and Rudolph Tanzi
Genius Foods by Max Lugavere
Sleep Smarter by Shawn Stevenson
The UltraMind Solution by Dr. Mark Hyman
Spark by Dr. John Ratey
The 4-Hour Chef by Tim Ferriss
Math Doesn’t Suck by Danica Mckellar
Boundless by Ben Greenfield
Six Thinking Hats by Edward de Bono
Thrive by Arianna Huffington
The Element by Sir Ken Robinson with Lou Aronica
TED Talks by Chris Anderson
Atomic Habits by James Clear
Imagine It Forward by Beth Comstock & Tahl Raz
Belong by Radha Agrawal
Disrupt-Her by Miki Agrawal
The Ripple Effect by Dr. Greg Wells
Exponential Transformation by Salim Ismail, Francisco Palao & Michelle Lapierre
Think Like a Monk by Jay Shetty
The Alter Ego Effect by Todd Herman
How to Live a Good Life by Jonathan Fields
The Mind Map Book by Barry Buzan & Tony Buzan
The Principles by Ray Dalio
Re-Create Your Life by Morty Lefkoe
Emotional First Aid by Dr. Guy Winch
A Higher Branch by Sam Makhoul
Cancer-Free with Food by Liana Werner-Gray
Food Can Fix It by Dr. Mehmet Oz

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This is the hardest part of the book for me to write because it takes a
village to bring a book into the world. One may think it’s a solo adventure
of sorts but in reality, it was a heroic group effort.
In the pages I’m allotted, it would be impossible to thank by name all
those who have led and supported me to this moment. The list is long—
you can say it’s pretty limitless.
I know this because you all have a special place in my heart and I feel
your presence when I do my gratitude exercises.
Let’s start with YOU the reader. Thank you for not only getting this
book but more importantly for reading and using it.
To our podcast guests, listeners, and anyone who has ever watched and
shared one of our videos, thank you for tuning in each week and getting all
brainy with me.
To our online students all over the world, so much appreciation for your
time and trust. Thank you for allowing our team to fulfill our purpose of
building better, brighter brains.
To all our speaking and training clients, gratitude for having me share
with your audiences and teams.
To my private coaching clients, you know who you are, thank you for
your friendship and for teaching me so much in return.
To my longtime business partner Alexis Banc. This book and this
business would not exist without you. You wear every hat imaginable, your
dedication is only matched by your vision for a better brighter world, I am
eternally grateful.
To James Banc, thank you, brother, for being a brain warrior.
Gratitude to my personal assistant Elena, thank you for being my right
hand (and sometimes brain). Appreciate all you do.

To our amazing Kwik Team who works hard every day serving our
community. Thank you for your caring and commitment, Jonie, Sasha,
Brittany, Jade, Iris, Denyce, Nicole, Jessica, Kyle, Dallas, Jen, Zareen,
Jena, Lauren, Louie, Romario, Elizabeth, Miriam, Julia, Matilda, Alex,
Dmitri, Jena, Kristie, LJ, Arthur, Marcin, Angelo, Pawel, Radek, Agata,
Natalia, Katia, Hugo, Michal, Chris, Marta, Drew, Kris, Rusty, and the rest
of our team past, present, and future. (Yes, our team is mostly made up of
incredible females.)
I believe everyone can be your teacher on life’s journey. From my
college friend’s father who got me to read one book a week to the person
who said I had a broken brain, thank you for the lessons.
To my friends Brendon Burchard, Scott Hoffman, Lewis Howes, and
Nick Ortner, who encouraged and kept on me to write this book. Thank
you for inspiring the world, and for inspiring me to transform my mess
into my message.
I am grateful to Reid Tracy and Patty Gift, who saw the potential for
this book. Honored to be part of the Hay House family. Thank you, Anne,
Mary, Margarete, Lindsay, Patricia, Cathy, Alexandra, Sally, Marlene,
Perry, Celeste, Tricia, Julie, Yvette, Diane, John, Karen, Steve, and
everyone else who had a hand in creating the book what it is.
Special thanks to our creative team, who made significant contributions
to this book.
Lou Aronica, thanks for helping me craft these pages and making this
book the best it can be.
Sara Stibitz, you were invaluable. Grateful for all the research,
interviews, wordsmithing and getting us to the finish line.
Clay Hebert, for years of support and for quarterbacking this project
from A to Z. You put the clay in clarity.
Courtney Kenney, thank you for managing and mobilizing so many
moving parts.
Jose Alonso, thanks for the new kwik design. Nick Onken, photographer
extraordinaire.
Rodrigo and Anna Corral for the beautiful book cover art.
Dr. Mark Hyman, thank you for believing in our work and writing the
book’s foreword. Appreciate you and Mia so much for your support on this
book.

Special thanks to Michael Robertson and the entire team at The Beverly
Hilton for hosting me and our events.
To our brain merch team, what we see is what we take care of. Thank
you for bringing brain awareness to the world, Daniel, Tom, Mitchell,
Jakob, Anthony, and our entire team.
Thank you to the legends and luminaries who inspired my imagination
early on this journey—Quincy Jones, Neil Gaiman, Gene Roddenberry,
George Lucas, Joseph Cambell, Oprah Winfrey, Piers Anthony, JK
Rowling, Napoleon Hill, Bruce Lee, Howard Garner, Tony Buzan, Harry
Lorraine, Norman Vincent Peale, Brian Tracy, Jim Rohn, Les Brown,
Arianna Huffington, Sir Ken Robinson, Mister Fred Rogers, and of course
Stan Lee.
To the original accountability group, Michael Fishman, Brian Kurtz, and
Ryan Lee.
Thank you Vishen Lakhian, team, and all our Super Brains at
Mindvalley for helping us share meta-learning with the world.
To my superhero friends and the communities they lead. Giovanni
Marsico and ArchAngels. Tom & Lisa Bilyeu and your Impactivists. Ken
Rutkowski and METal brothers. Elliot Bisnow and Summit. Chris
Winefield & Jen Gottlieb and UAL. Chris Anderson and TED. Roman
Tsunder and PTTOW & WORLDZ. Michael Fishman and CHS. Jack
Canfield and TLC. JJ Virgin and Mindshare. Cole & Sanja Hatter and
Thrive. Dan Fleyshman and Joel Marion and their MME 100 Group. Joe
Polish and your Genius Network. Anthony Tjan and On Cue. Gareb
Shamus and ACE.
To all my friends who have done everything from checking in on me to
helping us share our teachings with the world: Aaron Alexander, Adam
Braun, Alex Banayan, Alex & Mimi Ikonn, Alex Ortner, Amy Jo Martin,
Andres Roemer, Anna Akana, Ari Meisel, Audrey Hagen, Ben Greenfield,
Dr. Ben Lynch, Ben Rawitz, Benny Luo, Beth Comstock, Bing Chen, BJ
Fogg, Bo & Dawn Eason, Bob Proctor, Branden Hampton, Brandon Routh,
Brian Evans, Brian Florio, Brian Grasso, Brooke Burke, Carrie Campbell,
Carlos Gardes, Chalene Johnson, Charles Michael Yim, Chervin, Chloe
Flower, Chris & Lori Harder, Christina Rasmussen, Christopher Lee, Chris
Pan, Claire Zammit, Collin Chung, Craig & Sarah Clemens, Craig
Kielburger, Cynthia Kersey, Cynthia Pasquella, Dr. Daniel Amen, Dan
Caldwell, Dandapani, Danica McKellar, Dan Schawbel, Dave Hollis, Dave

Nurse, David and Lana Asprey, David Bass, David Goggins, David
Meltzer, David Michail, David Wolfe, Dawn Hoang, Dean Graziosi, Derek
Halpern, Derek Hough, Dhru Purohit, Donna Steinhorn, Ed Mylett,
Elizabeth Gilbert, Emily Fletcher, Emily Morse, Erik Logan, Erin
Matlock, Frank & Natalia Kern, Gail Kingsbury, Gary Vaynerchuk, Dr.
Halland Chen, Henk Rogers, Hutch Parker, Ian Clark, IN-Q, Jack Delosa,
Jack Hidary, Jacqueline Schaffer, James Altucher, James Colquhoun, Jason
Stuber, Jayson Gaignard, Jay Shetty, Jeannie Mai, Jeff Krasno, Jeff
Spencer, Jelena & Novak Djokovic, Jesse Itzler, Jessica Ortner, Jim Poole,
Dr. Joe Mercola, Joel & Laurin Seiden, John Assaraf, John Lee, John
Romaniello, Jon Benson, Jonathan Fields, Jon Fine, Jules Hough, Jon
Levy, Kandis Marie, Katie Wells, Keith Ferrazzi, Ken Hertz, Kerwin Rae,
Kevin & Annmarie Gianni, Kevin Pearce, Kevin Rose, Khaled Alwaleed,
Kimberly Moore, Kimberly & James Van Der Beek, Kris Carr, Kute
Blackson, Larry Benet, Larry & Oksana Ostrobsky, Laurel Touby, Leigh
Durst, Liana Werner-Gray, Lisa Garr, Dr. Lisa Mosconi, Lisa Nichols, Liz
Heller, Luke Storey, Manny Goldman, Marc Kielburger, Marie Forleo,
Mariel Hemingway, Mari Smith, Mark Anthony Bates, Mark & Bonita
Thompson, Mary Shenouda, Matt Mullenweg, Max Lugavere, Mel
Abraham, Mel Robbins, Mia Lux, Dr. Michael Breus, Michael Gelb,
Michael Lane, Mike Cline, Mike Koenigs, Mike Wang, Mikkoh Chen,
Miki Agrawal, Mimi Pham, Mindpump Guys, Mona Sharma, Montel
Williams, Naomi Whittel, Natalie & Glen Ledwell, Naveen Jain, Nick
Kuzmich, Nicole Patrice, Nikki Sharp, Nina Sugasawa, Nusa Maal, Ocean
Robbins, Oz Garcia, Paul Hoffman, Penni Thow, Pete Vargas, Peter
Diamandis, Peter Hoppenfeld, Peter Nguyen, Rachel Goldstein, Radha
Agrawal, Ramit Sethi, Randy Gage, Randy Garn, Rene & Akira Chan,
Richard Miller, Richard & Veronica Tan, Richard Saul Wurman, Rick
Barber, Rick Frishman, Robin Farmanfarmaian, Robin Sharma, Rudy
Tanzi, Ryan Holiday, Ryan Kaltman, Ryan Levesque, Sabrina Kay, Sam
Horn, Sandy Grigsby, Sashin Govender, Sazan & Stevie Hendrix, Scooter
Braun, Scott Flansburg, Sean Croxton, Sean & Mindy Stephenson, Dr.
Seeta Narsai, Selena Soo, Shaman Durek, Shannon Elizabeth, Shannon
Lee, Seth Godin, ShaoLan, Shawn & Anne Stevenson, Dr. Shefali, Simon
Kinberg, Simon Mainwaring, Simon Sinek, Sonia Ricotti, Sony
Mordechai, Sophie Chiche, Dr. Stephanie Estima, Stephanie McMahon,
Steven Kotler, Steve Sims, Steven Tyler, Sunny Bates, Susan Cain, Tana

Amen, Tara Mackey, Thomas Bahler, Tim Chang, Tim Larkin, Tim Ryan,
Todd Herman, Tom Ferry, Tony Hsieh, Tracy Anderson, Trent Shelton,
Tucker Max, Vani Hari, Whitney Pratt, Will Eppes, Wim Hof, Yanik
Silver, Yanjaa Wintersoul, Yue-Sai Kan, Yuka Kobayashi, and so many
more.
To the children’s education nonprofits we love and support (including
with part of the proceeds of this book)—WE Charity, Pencils of Promise,
Unstoppable Foundation and others—thank you for the schools you build
and the healthcare and clean water you provide for kids in need.
To the brain health nonprofits who are changing the world funding and
conducting research on Alzheimer’s—Steve Aoki and the Aoki
Foundation, Maria Shriver’s Women’s Alzheimer’s Movement, Dr. Rudy
Tanzi, the Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Dr. Lisa
Mosconi’s Women’s Brain Initiative and Alzheimer’s Prevention Clinic at
Weill Cornell Medical College
To all my school teachers (and teachers everywhere), having worked
with so many educators and my mother recently retired in public
education, I know it’s not easy. Thank you for your caring, compassion,
and commitment. You are the true superheroes, we appreciate the capes
you wear.
To the original geek squad—Dakota, Morris, and Dave. Thank you for
comics, video games, and card play. Not only for your friendship but for
all the long tutoring sessions. I wouldn’t have made it through school
without you.
Sensei Rick for years of martial arts training, wisdom, and friendship.
And Bryan Watanabe, you blow me away with your integrity and ability to
affect those around you so positively.
Thanks, Rocky, for keeping me company all those early mornings
writing, best dog ever!
To my beloved, I’m so lucky to be on this journey with you. Thank you
for living through my obsession with all things brain and superheroes.
Every day with you is an adventure of learning and laughter, I’m in awe of
your limitless love and support. You are the greatest blessing of my life.
To our families, love flows strong and deep, leaving us lifetimes of
memories to treasure and keep.

To my sister and brother, thank you for all you do and are. You inspire
me as people and as parents. Love you biggest.
Thank you to my parents, my original heroes, not only for your
encouragement in this book but also for believing in me from the start.
Anything that I’ve ever become that is decent or done that is good is
because of you. Anything less than that is on me.
And again, thank YOU, the reader. It is our honor to serve you as we
work together to create a brain, a life, and a world without limits.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Jim Kwik (his real name) is a widely recognized world expert in memory
improvement, brain optimization, and accelerated learning. After a
childhood brain injury left him learning-challenged, Kwik created
strategies to dramatically enhance his mental performance. He has since
dedicated his life to helping others unleash their true genius and
brainpower. For more than two decades, he has served as the brain coach to
students, seniors, entrepreneurs, and educators. His work has touched a
who’s who of Hollywood elite, professional athletes, political leaders, and
business magnates, with corporate clients that include Google, Virgin,
Nike, Zappos, SpaceX, GE, Twentieth Century Fox, Cleveland Clinic,
Wordpress, and such institutions as the United Nations, Caltech, Harvard
University, and Singularity University.
Through keynote speeches, he reaches in-person audiences totaling
more than 200,000 every year; his online videos have garnered hundreds
of millions of views. Kwik is regularly featured in media, including
Forbes, HuffPost, Fast Company, Inc., and CNBC. He is the host of the
acclaimed “Kwik Brain” podcast, which is consistently the top educational
training show on iTunes. KwikLearning.com’s online courses are used by
students in 195 countries.
Kwik, an advocate for brain health and global education, is also a
philanthropist funding projects ranging from Alzheimer’s research to the
creation of schools from Guatemala to Kenya, providing health care, clean
water, and learning for children in need. His mission: No brain left behind.
Connect with Jim Kwik at:
JimKwik.com (speaking, coaching, podcast)
KwikLearning.com (online programs)
Twitter: @JimKwik

Facebook: @JimKwik
Instagram: @JimKwik
Text 310-299-9362

ENDNOTES
CHAPTER 2
1. “Digital Overload: Your Brain On Gadgets,” NPR, last modified August 24, 2010, www.npr.o
rg/templates/story/story.php?storyId=129384107.
2. Ibid.
3. Ibid; Matt Richtel, “Attached to Technology and Paying a Price,” New York Times, last
modified June 7, 2010, www.nytimes.com/2010/06/07/technology/07brain.html.
4. Paul Waddington, “Dying for Information? A Report on the Effects of Information Overload
in the UK and Worldwide,” Reuters, accessed December 11, 2019, www.ukoln.ac.uk/service
s/papers/bl/blri078/content/repor~13.htm.
5. “Digital Distraction,” American Psychological Association, last modified August 10, 2018, w
ww.apa.org/news/press/releases/2018/08/digital-distraction.
6. Daniel J. Levitin, The Organized Mind: Thinking Straight in the Age of Information Overload
(New York: Dutton, 2016).
7. Sean Coughlan, “Digital Dependence ‘Eroding Human Memory,’” BBC News, BBC, last
modified October 7, 2015, www.bbc.com/news/education-34454264.
8. Rony Zarom, “Why Technology Is Affecting Critical Thought in the Workplace and How to
Fix It,” Entrepreneur, September 21 2015, www.entrepreneur.com/article/248925.
9. Jim Taylor, “How Technology Is Changing the Way Children Think and Focus,” Psychology
Today, December 4, 2012, www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-power-prime/201212/ho
w-technology-is-changing-the-way-children-think-and-focus.
10. Patricia M. Greenfield, “Technology and Informal Education: What Is Taught, What Is
Learned,” Science, January 2 2009, https://science.sciencemag.org/content/323/5910/69.full.
11. Richard Foreman, “The Pancake People, or, ‘The Gods Are Pounding My Head’,” Edge,
March 8 2005, https://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/foreman05/foreman05_index.html.

CHAPTER 3
1. Tara Swart, The Source: Open Your Mind, Change Your Life (New York: Vermilion, 2019).
2. Suzana Herculano-Houzel, “The Human Brain in Numbers: a Linearly Scaled-up Primate
Brain,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, November 9, 2009, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/a
rticles/PMC2776484/.

3. Ferris Jabr, “Cache Cab: Taxi Drivers’ Brains Grow to Navigate London’s Streets,” Scientific
American, December 8, 2011, www.scientificamerican.com/article/london-taxi-memory/.
4. Courtney E. Ackerman, “What Is Neuroplasticity? A Psychologist Explains [+14 Exercises],”
PositivePsychology.com, last modified September 10, 2019, positivepsychology.com/neurop
lasticity/.
5. Catharine Paddock, Ph.D., “Not Only Does Our Gut Have Brain Cells It Can Also Grow New
Ones, Study,” Medical News Today, last modified August 5, 2009, https://www.medicalnews
today.com/articles/159914.php; Jennifer Wolkin, “Meet Your Second Brain: The Gut,”
Mindful, last modified August 14, 2015, https://www.mindful.org/meet-your-second-brain-th
e-gut/.
6. Emily Underwood, “Your Gut Is Directly Connected to Your Brain, by a Newly Discovered
Neuron Circuit,” Science, last modified September 20, 2018, https://www.sciencemag.org/ne
ws/2018/09/your-gut-directly-connected-your-brain-newly-discovered-neuron-circuit.
7. Ken Robinson and Lou Aronica, Creative Schools: The Grassroots Revolution That’s
Transforming Education (New York: Penguin Books, 2016), xxvii-xxvii.

CHAPTER 4
1. Sonnad, Nikhil. “A Mathematical Model of the ‘Forgetting Curve’ Proves Learning Is Hard.”
Quartz, February 28, 2018, qz.com/1213768/the-forgetting-curve-explains-why-humans-stru
ggle-to-memorize/.
2. Francesco Cirillo, “The Pomodoro Technique,” Cirillo Consulting, francescocirillo.com/page
s/pomodoro-technique.
3. Oliver Wendell Holmes, “The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table,” Atlantic Monthly 2, no. 8
(June 1858): 502.

CHAPTER 5
1. “Kwik Brain with Jim Kwik: Break Through Your Beliefs with Shelly Lefkoe,” Jim Kwik,
May 2, 2019, https://kwikbrain.libsyn.com/114-break-through-your-beliefs-with-shelly-lefko
e/.
2. Jan Bruce, et al., Mequilibrium: 14 Days to Cooler, Calmer, and Happier (New York:
Harmony Books, 2015), 95.
3. Jennice Vilhauer, “4 Ways to Stop Beating Yourself Up, Once and For All,” Psychology
Today, March 18, 2016, www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/living-forward/201603/4-waysstop-beating-yourself-once-and-all.
4. “The Power of Positive Thinking,” Johns Hopkins Medicine, www.hopkinsmedicine.org/heal
th/wellness-and-prevention/the-power-of-positive-thinking.
5. Mayo Clinic Staff, “Positive Thinking: Stop Negative Self-Talk to Reduce Stress,” Mayo
Clinic, last modified February 18, 2017, www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/stress-manage
ment/in-depth/positive-thinking/art-20043950.
6. James Clear, “How Positive Thinking Builds Your Skills, Boosts Your Health, and Improves
Your Work,” James Clear, accessed April 22, 2019, jamesclear.com/positive-thinking.

7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
9. Barbara L. Fredrickson, “The Broaden-and-Build Theory of Positive Emotions,” National
Center for Biotechnology Information, last modified August 17, 2004, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/pmc/articles/PMC1693418/pdf/15347528.pdf.

CHAPTER 6
1. Carol S. Dweck, Mindset: the New Psychology of Success (New York: Random House,
2006).
2. Daphne Martschenko, “The IQ Test Wars: Why Screening for Intelligence Is Still so
Controversial,” The Conversation, accessed August 16, 2019, https://theconversation.com/th
e-iq-test-wars-why-screening-for-intelligence-is-still-so-controversial-81428.
3. Ibid.
4. Ibid.
5. David Shenk, “The Truth About IQ,” The Atlantic, accessed August 4, 2009, https://www.the
atlantic.com/national/archive/2009/07/the-truth-about-iq/22260/.
6. Ibid.
7. Brian Roche, “Your IQ May Not Have Changed, But Are You Any Smarter?”, Psychology
Today, July 15, 2014, www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/iq-boot-camp/201407/your-iq-ma
y-not-have-changed-are-you-any-smarter.
8. David Shenk, The Genius in All Of Us (New York: Anchor Books, 2011) 117.
9. Gabrielle Torre, “The Life and Times of the 10% Neuromyth,” Knowing Neurons, last
modified February 13, 2018, https://knowingneurons.com/2018/02/13/10-neuromyth/.
10. Eric H. Chudler, “Do We Only Use 10% of Our Brains?,” Neuroscience for Kids, https://facul
ty.washington.edu/chudler/tenper.html.
11. Gabrielle Torre, “The Life and Times of the 10% Neuromyth,” Knowing Neurons, last
modified February 13, 2018, https://knowingneurons.com/2018/02/13/10-neuromyth/.
12. Eric Westervelt, “Sorry, Lucy: The Myth of the Misused Brain Is 100 Percent False,” NPR,
July 27, 2014, https://www.npr.org/2014/07/27/335868132/sorry-lucy-the-myth-of-the-misus
ed-brain-is-100-percent-false.
13. Barry L. Beyerstein, “Whence Cometh the Myth that We Only Use 10% of our Brains?,” in
Mind Myths: Exploring Popular Assumptions About the Mind and Brain, ed. Sergio Della
Sala (Wiley, 1999), 3–24.
14. Ibid.
15. Robynne Boyd, “Do People Only Use 10 Percent of Their Brains?” Scientific American, last
modified February 7, 2008, https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/do-people-only-use-1
0-percent-of-their-brains/.
16. Thomas G. West, In the Mind’s Eye: Creative Visual Thinkers, Gifted Dyslexics, and the Rise
of Visual Technologies (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2009).
17. Ibid.
18. “Einstein’s 23 Biggest Mistakes: A New Book Explores the Mistakes of the Legendary
Genius,” Discover, last modified September 1, 2008, http://discovermagazine.com/2008/sep/

01-einsteins-23-biggest-mistakes.
19. “About Page,” Beth Comstock, https://www.bethcomstock.info/.
20. 99U, “Beth Comstock: Make Heroes Out of the Failures,” video, 12:40, September 3, 2015, h
ttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0GpIlOF-UzA.
21. Thomas Hobbes, The English Works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, ed. William
Molesworth (Aalen: Scientia, 1966).
22. “Carol W. Greider,” Wikipedia, accessed July 27, 2019, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carol_
W._Greider.
23. “Carol Greider, Ph.D., Director of Molecular Biology & Genetics at Johns Hopkins
University,” Yale Dyslexia, http://dyslexia.yale.edu/story/carol-greider-ph-d/.
24. Mayo Clinic Staff, “Dyslexia,” Mayo Clinic, last modified July 22, 2017, https://www.mayocl
inic.org/diseases-conditions/dyslexia/symptoms-causes/syc-20353552.
25. Claudia Dreifus, “On Winning a Nobel Prize in Science,” The New York Times, October 12,
2009, Science section, https://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/13/science/13conv.html.
26. Jim Carrey, commencement address, Maharishi International University, Fair-field, Iowa,
May 24, 2014, www.mum.edu/graduation-2014, accessed January 5, 2020.
27. Fred C. Kelly, “They Wouldn’t Believe the Wrights Had Flown: A Study in Human
Incredulity,” Wright Brothers Aeroplane Company, http://www.wright-brothers.org/History_
Wing/Aviations_Attic/They_Wouldnt_Believe/They_Wouldnt_Believe_the_Wrights_Had_Flo
wn.htm.
28. Ibid.
29. “Bruce Lee,” Biography.com, last modified April 16, 2019, www.biography.com/actor/bruce
-lee.
30. Mouse AI, “I Am Bruce Lee,” directed by Pete McCormack, video, 1:30:13, last modified
June 13, 2015, www.youtube.com/watch?v=2qL-WZ_ATTQ.
31. “I Am Bruce Lee,” Leeway Media, 2012, www.youtube.com/watch?v=2qL-WZ_ATTQ.
32. Bruce Lee, Bruce Lee Jeet Kune Do: Bruce Lee’s Commentaries on the Martial Way, ed. John
Little (Tuttle Publishing, 1997).
33. Daniel Coyle, The Talent Code: Greatness Isn’t Born. It’s Grown (London: Arrow, 2010);
“The Talent Code: Grow Your Own Greatness: Here’s How,” Daniel Coyle, http://danielcoyle.
com/the-talent-code/.

CHAPTER 7
1. “Kind (n.),” Index, www.etymonline.com/word/kind.
2. Christopher J. Bryan, et al., “Motivating Voter Turnout by Invoking the Self,” PNAS, last
modified August 2, 2011, https://www.pnas.org/content/108/31/12653.
3. Adam Gorlick, “Stanford Researchers Find That a Simple Change in Phrasing Can Increase
Voter Turnout,” Stanford University, last modified July 19, 2011, https://news.stanford.edu/n
ews/2011/july/increasing-voter-turnout-071911.html.

CHAPTER 8
1. Eva Selhub, “Nutritional Psychiatry: Your Brain on Food,” Harvard Health (blog), Harvard
Health Publishing, last modified April 5, 2018, www.health.harvard.edu/blog/nutritional-psy
chiatry-your-brain-on-food-201511168626.
2. Jim Kwik, “Kwik Brain with Jim Kwik: Eating for Your Brain with Dr. Lisa Mosconi,” Jim
Kwik, last modified January 4, 2019, https://jimkwik.com/kwik-brain-088-eating-for-your-br
ain-with-dr-lisa-mosconi/.
3. Jim Kwik, “Kwik Brain with Jim Kwik: When to Eat for Optimal Brain Function with Max
Lugavere,” Jim Kwik, last modified July 19, 2018, https://jimkwik.com/kwik-brain-066-whe
n-to-eat-for-optimal-brain-function-with-max-lugavere/.
4. “Table 1: Select Nutrients that Affect Cognitive Function,” National Institutes of Health, ww
w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2805706/table/T1/?report=objectonly, accessed June 1,
2019.
5. Heidi Godman, “Regular Exercise Changes the Brain to Improve Memory, Thinking Skills,”
Harvard Health (blog), Harvard Health Publishing, April 5, 2018, www.health.harvard.edu/bl
og/regular-exercise-changes-brain-improve-memory-thinking-skills-201404097110.
6. Daniel G. Amen, Change Your Brain, Change Your Life: the Breakthrough Program for
Conquering Anxiety, Depression, Obsessiveness, Lack of Focus, Anger, and Memory
Problems (New York: Harmony Books, 2015), 109–110.
7. The Lancet Neurology, “Air Pollution and Brain Health: an Emerging Issue,” The Lancet 17,
no. 2 (February 2018): 103, www.thelancet.com/journals/laneur/article/PIIS1474-4422(17)30
462-3/fulltext.
8. Tara Parker-Pope, “Teenagers, Friends and Bad Decisions,” Well (blog), The New York
Times, February 3, 2011, well.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/02/03/teenagers-friends-and-bad-dec
isions/?scp=6&sq=tara%2Bparker%2Bpope&st=cse.
9. “Protect Your Brain from Stress,” Harvard Health (blog), Harvard Health Publishing, last
modified August 2018, www.health.harvard.edu/mind-and-mood/protect-your-brain-from-str
ess.
10. “Brain Basics: Understanding Sleep,” National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, last modified August 13, 2019, www.ninds.
nih.gov/Disorders/Patient-Caregiver-Education/Understanding-Sleep.
11. Jean Kim, “The Importance of Sleep: The Brain’s Laundry Cycle,” Psychology Today, June
28, 2017, www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/culture-shrink/201706/the-importance-sleep-th
e-brains-laundry-cycle.
12. Jeff Iliff, “Transcript of ‘One More Reason to Get a Good Night’s Sleep,’” TED, last modified
September 2014, www.ted.com/talks/jeff_iliff_one_more_reason_to_get_a_good_night_s_sle
ep/transcript.
13. Ibid.
14. Sandee LaMotte, “One in Four Americans Develop Insomnia Each Year: 75 Percent of Those
with Insomnia Recover,” Science Daily, June 5, 2018, https://www.sciencedaily.com/release
s/2018/06/180605154114.htm.
15. Kathryn J. Reid, et al., “Aerobic Exercise Improves Self-Reported Sleep and Quality of Life
in Older Adults with Insomnia,” Sleep Medicine, U.S. National Library of Medicine, last
modified October 2010, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2992829/.

16. Michael J. Breus, “Better Sleep Found by Exercising on a Regular Basis,” Psychology Today,
September 6, 2013, www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/sleep-newzzz/201309/better-sleep-fo
und-exercising-regular-basis-0.
17. Sandee LaMotte, “The Healthiest Way to Improve Your Sleep: Exercise,” CNN, last modified
May 30, 2017, www.cnn.com/2017/05/29/health/exercise-sleep-tips/index.html.
18. David S. Black, et al., “Mindfulness Meditation in Sleep-Disturbed Adults,” JAMA Internal
Medicine 5 (April 2015): 494–501, jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticl
e/2110998.
19. Karen Kaplan, “A Lot More Americans are Meditating Now than Just Five Years Ago,” Los
Angeles Times, November 8, 2018, www.latimes.com/science/sciencenow/la-sci-sn-american
s-meditating-more-20181108-story.html.
20. Jim Kwik, “Kwik Brain with Jim Kwik: How to Make Meditation Easy with Ariel Garten,”
Jim Kwik, last modified November 8, 2018, https://jimkwik.com/kwik-brain-080-your-brainon-meditation-with-ariel-garten/.
21. Ibid.

CHAPTER 9
1. Sarah Young, “This Bizarre Phenomenon Can Stop You from Procrastinating,” The
Independent, last modified March 9, 2018, www.independent.co.uk/life-style/procrastinating
-how-to-stop-zeigarnik-effect-phenomenon-at-work-now-a8247076.html.
2. Art Markman, “How to Overcome Procrastination Guilt and Turn It Into Motivation,” HBR
Ascend, January 7, 2019, hbrascend.org/topics/turn-your-procrastination-guilt-into-motivatio
n/.
3. B. J. Fogg, “When you learn the Tiny Habits method, you can change your life forever,”
Tiny Habits, last modified 2019, www.tinyhabits.com/.
4. Deepak Agarwal, Discover the Genius in Your Child (Delhi: AIETS.com Pvt.Ltd., 2012), 2728.
5. Charles Duhigg, The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business (New
York: Random House, 2012), 20–21.
6. James Clear, “The Habits Academy,” The Habits Academy, habitsacademy.com/.
7. Jim Kwik, “Kwik Brain with Jim Kwik: Understanding Habit Triggers with James Clear,” Jim
Kwik, October 18, 2018, https://jimkwik.com/kwik-brain-075-understanding-habit-triggerswith-james-clear/.
8. Ibid.
9. Phillippa Lally, et al., “How Are Habits Formed: Modelling Habit Formation in the Real
World,” European Journal of Social Psychology, vol. 40, no. 6 (July 2009): 998–1009,
doi:10.1002/ejsp.674.
10. Alison Nastasi, “How Long Does It Really Take to Break a Habit?” Hopes&Fears, accessed
November 20, 2015, www.hopesandfears.com/hopes/now/question/216479-how-long-does-it
-really-take-to-break-a-habit.
11. Ibid.

12. B. J. Fogg, “A Behavior Model for Persuasive Design,” Persuasive ’09: Proceedings of the
4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology, no. 40 (April 26, 2009),
doi:10.1145/1541948.1541999.
13. Ibid.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid.

CHAPTER 10
1. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: the Psychology of Optimal Experience (New York: Harper
Row, 2009).
2. Mike Oppland, “8 Ways To Create Flow According to Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi,” PositivePsy
chology.com, accessed February 19, 2019, positivepsychologyprogram.com/mihaly-csiksze
ntmihalyi-father-of-flow/.
3. Susie Cranston and Scott Keller, “Increasing the ‘Meaning Quotient’ of Work,” McKinsey
Quarterly, January 2013, www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/i
ncreasing-the-meaning-quotient-of-work.
4. Entrepreneurs Institute Team, “A Genius Insight: The Four Stages of Flow,” Entrepreneurs
Institute, last modified February 12, 2015, entrepreneursinstitute.org/updates/a-genius-insight
-the-four-stages-of-flow.
5. Hara Estroff Marano, “Pitfalls of Perfectionism,” Psychology Today, March 1, 2008, www.ps
ychologytoday.com/us/articles/200803/pitfalls-perfectionism.
6. Travis Bradberry, “Why the Best Leaders Have Conviction,” World Economic Forum, last
modified December 7, 2015, www.weforum.org/agenda/2015/12/why-the-best-leaders-haveconviction/.

CHAPTER 11
1. Jim Kwik, “Kwik Brain with Jim Kwik: How to Concentrate with Dandapani,” Jim Kwik,
October 8, 2019, https://jimkwik.com/kwik-brain-149-how-to-concentrate-with-dandapani/.
2. Ibid.
3. Ibid.
4. “A Clean Well-Lighted Place,” BeWell, accessed January 7, 2020, https://bewell.stanford.edu/
a-clean-well-lighted-place/.
5. Melanie Greenberg, “9 Ways to Calm Your Anxious Mind,” Psychology Today, June 28,
2015, www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-mindful-self-express/201506/9-ways-calm-yo
ur-anxious-mind.
6. Donald Miller, “The Brutal Cost of Overload and How to Reclaim the Rest You Need,”
Building a StoryBrand, buildingastorybrand.com/episode-40/.
7. Markham Heid, “The Brains of Highly Distracted People Look Smaller,” VICE, October 12,
2017, tonic.vice.com/en_us/article/wjxmpx/constant-tech-distractions-are-like-feeding-yourbrain-junk-food.

8. Kristin Wong, “How Long It Takes to Get Back on Track After a Distraction,” Lifehacker,
July 29, 2015, lifehacker.com/how-long-it-takes-to-get-back-on-track-after-a-distract-172070
8353.
9. “4-7-8 Breath Relaxation Exercise,” Council of Residency Directors in Emergency Medicine,
February 2010, www.cordem.org/globalassets/files/academic-assembly/2017-aa/handouts/da
y-three/biofeedback-exercises-for-stress-2---fernances-j.pdf.

CHAPTER 12
1. Ralph Heibutzki, “The Effects of Cramming for a Test,” Education, November 21, 2017, edu
cation.seattlepi.com/effects-cramming-test-2719.html.
2. Mark Wheeler, “Cramming for a Test? Don’t Do It, Say UCLA Researchers,” UCLA
Newsroom, August 22, 2012, newsroom.ucla.edu/releases/cramming-for-a-test-don-t-do-it-2
37733.
3. William R. Klemm, “Strategic Studying: The Value of Forced Recall,” Psychology Today,
October 9, 2016, www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/memory-medic/201610/strategic-study
ing-the-value-forced-recall.
4. Ibid.
5. James Gupta, “Spaced Repetition: a Hack to Make Your Brain Store Information,” The
Guardian, January 23, 2016, www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/23/spaced-repetitio
n-a-hack-to-make-your-brain-store-information.
6. Jordan Gaines Lewis, “Smells Ring Bells: How Smell Triggers Memories and Emotions,”
Psychology Today, January 12, 2015, www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/brain-babble/201
501/smells-ring-bells-how-smell-triggers-memories-and-emotions.
7. Wu-Jing He, et al., “Emotional Reactions Mediate the Effect of Music Listening on Creative
Thinking: Perspective of the Arousal-and-Mood Hypothesis,” Frontiers in Psychology 8
(September 26, 2017): 1680, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5622952/.
8. Claire Kirsch, “If It’s Not Baroque Don’t Fix It,” The Belltower, January 25, 2017, http://bellt
ower.mtaloy.edu/2017/01/if-its-not-baroque-dont-fix-it/.
9. Alina-Mihaela Busan, “Learning Styles of Medical Students—Implications in Education,”
Current Health Sciences Journal 40, no. 2 (April–June 2014): 104–110, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC4340450/.
10. Bob Sullivan and Hugh Thompson, “Now Hear This! Most People Stink at Listening
[Excerpt],” Scientific American, May 3, 2013, www.scientificamerican.com/article/plateau-eff
ect-digital-gadget-distraction-attention/.
11. Ibid.
12. Cindi May, “A Learning Secret: Don’t Take Notes with a Laptop,” Scientific American, June
3, 2014, www.scientificamerican.com/article/a-learning-secret-don-t-take-notes-with-a-laptop/

CHAPTER 13
1. Eve Marder, “The Importance of Remembering,” eLife 6 (August 14, 2017), https://www.ncb
i.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5577906/.

2. William R. Klemm, “Five Reasons That Memory Matters,” Psychology Today, January 13,
2013, www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/memory-medic/201301/five-reasons-memory-mat
ters.
3. Joshua Foer, “How to Train Your Mind to Remember Anything,” CNN, 11 June 2012, www.
cnn.com/2012/06/10/opinion/foer-ted-memory/index.html.

CHAPTER 14
1. Lauren Duzbow, “Watch This. No. Read It!” Oprah.com, June 2008, www.oprah.com/health/
how-reading-can-improve-your-memory#ixzz2VYPyX3uU.
2. “Keep Reading to Keep Alzheimer’s at Bay,” Fisher Center for Alzheimer’s Research
Foundation, last modified November 12, 2014, www.alzinfo.org/articles/reading-alzheimersbay/.

CHAPTER 15
1. “Six Thinking Hats,” the De Bono Group, www.debonogroup.com/six_thinking_hats.php.
2. “The Components of MI,” MI Oasis, www.multipleintelligencesoasis.org/the-components-ofmi, accessed April 10, 2019.
3. Ibid.
4. Ibid.
5. The Mind Tools Content Team, “VAK Learning Styles: Understanding How Team Members
Learn,” Mind Tools, www.mindtools.com/pages/article/vak-learning-styles.htm, accessed
April 10, 2019.
6. Matt Callen, “The 40/70 Rule and How It Applies to You,” Digital Kickstart, last modified
May 3, 2016, https://digitalkickstart.com/the-4070-rule-and-how-it-applies-to-you/.
7. Ibid.
8. Rimm, Allison, “Taming the Epic To-Do List.” Harvard Business Review, June 14, 2018, http
s://hbr.org/2018/03/taming-the-epic-to-do-list.
9. Peter Bevelin, Seeking Wisdom: from Darwin to Munger (PCA Publications LLC, 2018).
10. Ryan Holiday, Conspiracy: The True Story of Power, Sex, and a Billionaire’s Secret Plot to
Destroy a Media Empire (New York: Portfolio, 2018).
11. “Second-Order Thinking: What Smart People Use to Outperform,” Farnam Street, accessed
January 22, 2019, https://fs.blog/2016/04/second-order-thinking/.
12. “Kwik Brain with Jim Kwik: Exponential Thinking with Naveen Jain,” Jim Kwik, May 4,
2018, https://jimkwik.com/kwik-brain-059-exponential-thinking-with-naveen-jain/.
13. Viome.com Home Page, Viome, Inc., accessed February 5, 2020, www.viome.com.
14. Mark Bonchek, “How to Create an Exponential Mindset,” Harvard Business Review, October
4, 2017, hbr.org/2016/07/how-to-create-an-exponential-mindset.
15. Evie Mackie, “Exponential Thinking,” Medium, Room Y, last modified August 30, 2018, me
dium.com/room-y/exponential-thinking-8d7cbb8aaf8a.

INDEX
A
Ability, in Fogg Behavior Model, 160
Accelerated learning
focus, 183–190
memory, 211–221
science of, 180
speed reading, 237–253
studying, 193–209
thinking, 255–275
Active recall, 54, 199, 208
Alexis (Kwik Learning online partner), 73–75
Alzheimer’s disease, 143
Ambivalence, 159
Amen, Daniel, 137
Answers
asking right questions and, 59
generalization and, 60
looking for, 74–75
neuroplasticity and, 63
questions and, 56–60, 61, 63
Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), 187
ANTs (automatic negative thoughts), 137–138, 146, 282
Anxiety, 187
Association, 224–226
Attention
brain nutrients and, 136
calming mind and, 186
conscious, 196

focused, 145
memory and, 217, 223
paying, 59, 81, 185
positive emotions and, 86
shifting, 25
supervillains and, xv, xvi
wandering, 48
Auditory learners, 260
Aureliu, Marcus, 192
“Automaticity,” 153, 157
Automatic negative thoughts (ANTs), 137–138, 146, 282
Autopilot, 153–157
Avocados, 131, 133, 134, 245, 284

B
Bad habits, 157, 159
Baker/baker Paradox, 217–218
Bannister, Roger, 71–72
Baroque music, 203, 235
Barriers, moving through, 71–72
“Beginner’s mind,” 50
Behavior change, 159
Beliefs
accepted, 16
core, xviii
iceberg, 75–76
intelligence is fixed, 90
limiting, xvii, xviii, xxii, 19, 72–85
mindset and, 66
new, creating, 84
as not constraining, xxii
Belief systems, 66
BE SUAVE mnemonic, 231–232
Beyerstein, Barry, 94–95
Binet, Alfred, 91–92
Black, David S., 145

Black hat, 256
Blaze genius, 78
Blueberries, 131, 133, 245, 284
Blue hat, 257
Bohórquez, Diego, 40
Bonchek, Mark, 271–272
“Boy with the broken brain,” 5–8, 9
Bradberry, Travis, 177
Brain
about, 34–35
blueprint for upgrading, xviii
broken, boy with, 5–8, 9
cerebral cortex, 35
connections, 40
as deletion device, 56
as energy hog, 94
environment influence on, 35–36
evolving understanding about, 34
exercising, 213
gene influence on, 35–36
health and fitness of, xvi
limited knowledge about, 34
limited use LIE, 93–95
limitless, 33–45
listening with, 203–205
memory and, 27
as muscle, 27, 212–213
neurological peak and, 35
neuroplasticity, 35, 36–38
outsourcing, 27–28
regions and functions, 94
reticular activating system (RAS), 56–59
space description as, 9
supervillains, xvi–xvii
upgrading through reading, 45
Brain Boost Salad, 133–134
Brain coaching, 14

Brain cycles, 160
Brain diet
foods in, 130, 131
recipes, 132–135
Brain energy
ANTs, killing and, 137–138
brain protection and, 140
clean environment and, 138–139
diet for, 130–135
exercise and, 136–137
limitless, generating, 129–146
in motivation, 111
new learning and, 140
nutrients, 136
positive peer group and, 139
sleep and, 141–146
stress management and, 141
in 10-Day Kwik Start program, 284
Brain foods, 130, 131, 146, 147
Brain function
air quality and, 138
changing, 36, 38
diet and, 130, 132, 136
exercise and, 137
limited use assumption, 93–95
memory as fundamental in, 214, 239
positive peer group and, 139
sleep and, 142
Brain nutrients, 136
Brain protection, 140
Brain stem, 35
Breathing, 52, 114, 138, 145–146, 166, 172, 188–189, 201
Broccoli, 131, 134–135, 245, 284
Brown, Les, 82
Bruce, Jan, 75–76
Bryan, Christopher, 120

C
Calendar use, 53–54
“Capture and create” method, 207
Carrey, Jim, 100–101
Central nervous system (CNS), 34, 39
Cerebral cortex, 35
Challenging yourself, flow and, 174–175
Chocolate, dark, 131, 135, 284
Cirillo, Francesco, 48
Clean environment, 138–139
Clear, James, 155
Cocoa-Cinnamon-ginger “Hot Chocolate,” 135
Coelho, Paulo, 182
Cohen, Gillian, 217
Commitment page, 56, 57
Commitments, 115, 123
Competence, four levels of, 195–196
Comprehension, reading, 245–246
Comstock, Beth, 96
Concentration
ability research, 48
de-cluttering environment and, 186
defined, 185
in learning how to learn, 12
as a muscle, 185, 186
practicing, 184–186
in reading comprehension, 246
success and, 184
Connection, 25, 37
Conscious awareness, 31
Conscious competence, 195–196
Conscious incompetence, 195
Consolidation stage, flow, 172
“Conventional wisdom,” 106
Conviction, lack of, 176–177
Cortisol, 141, 176
Counting, reading and, 250–251

Coyle, Daniel, 105
Cramming, 197–198, 199. See also study
Creighton, Mandell (Bishop), 58
Criticism of others matters LIE, 100–102
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 169–170

D
Dandapani, 184, 185
Da Vinci, Leonardo, 7
De Bono, Edward, 256–257
Decision-making
cerebellum and, 35
digital deduction and, 28
mental model for, 265–266
De-cluttering environment, 186
Deduction, 28. See also digital deduction
Dementia, xvi, 5, 138. See also digital
dementia
Depression
cortisol and, 177
fear of failure and, 176
lack of sleep and, 114, 142
refined sugar and, 130
Diet, brain, 130–135
Digital deduction. See also supervillains
about, 28–31
defined, xvi, 30
Kwik Start, 31
technology and, 28–29
Digital deluge. See also supervillains
about, 22–24
defined, xvi
half-life of information and, 24
health risks, 23–24
Kwik Start, 24
Digital dementia. See also supervillains

about, 26–28
defined, xvi, 26
Kwik Start, 28
outsourcing brain and, 27–28
Digital depression, 30
Digital distraction. See also supervillains about, 24–26
defined, xv
information processing and, 25
Kwik Start, 26
multitasking and, 26
Distractions
de-cluttering environment and, 186
eliminating, 173, 177
focus and, 186
learning how to learn and, 12
memory and, 235
time and, 187–188, 189
Dopamine, 25
Doughtie, Lynne, 108
DREAMS mnemonic, 164–165
Dreams, remembering, 164–165
Drucker, Peter, 20
Dryden, John, 148
Duhigg, Charles, 155
Dweck, Carol, 90–91, 163
Dwyer, Ryan, 25
Dyer, Wayne, 88
Dynamo genius, 78
Dyslexia, 99

E
Eagleman, David, 94
Easy Roasted Salmon & Broccoli with Swiss
Chard, 134–135
Edison, Thomas, 210
Education

questions and, 58
system, 41–43
taking into own hands, 92
Edwards, Tyron, 223
Eggs, 131, 133, 134, 284
Einstein, Albert, 7, 11, 64, 95–96, 258, 259
Eliot, T. S., 276
Emmons, Nathaniel, 158
Emotional energy, 52
Emotions
goals fitting with, 116–117
limiting beliefs and, 83
memory and, 226, 228
motivation and, 124
negative, 85
positive, 86
red thinking hat and, 256–257
End value, 121
Energy. See brain energy
Energy management, xvii
Enteric nervous system (ENS), 38–39, 40
Environment, clean, 138–139
Errors, studying your, 267–268
Exercise
brain energy and, 136–137
sleep and, 143–144
Exponential mindset, 271–272
Exponential thinking. See also thinking
about, 271–272
defined, 270
extrapolate and, 274
posit a new approach and, 273
read about it and, 274
steps for, 272–274
underlying problem and, 272–273

F
Facilitator (prompt), 161
Facts, 81–83, 84
Failure
fear of, flow and, 176
to learn, 97
to make connection, 37
mistakes as LIE, 95–97
FASTER acronym, 281–282
Fields, Jonathan, 119
Finger, in reading, 247–248
Fixed mindset, 90–91, 92, 118
Flow
about, 169–170
challenge and, 174–175
characterization of, 170
clear goals and, 174
consolidation stage in, 172
defined, 169
eliminating distractions and, 173, 177
enemies of, 175–177
fear of failure and, 176
finding, 173–175
flow stage in, 172
as fundamental to limitless, 177
Kwik Start, 172
lack of conviction and, 176–177
motivation and, 111
multitasking, 175
productivity and, 170
relaxation stage in, 172
something you love and, 173–174
as “source code” of motivation, 172
stages of, 171–172
stress and, 175–176
struggle stage in, 171
time and, 173

winning with, 170–171
in the workplace, 170
Focus. See also accelerated learning
about, 183–184
anxiety and, 187
calming mind and, 186–189
concentration, 184
distractions and, 186
importance of, 183
in learning how to learn, 12
reading and, 240, 243
in reading comprehension, 246
unlimiting, 190
Foer, Joshua, 214, 218
Fogg Behavior Model
ability, 160
changing behaviors with, 167
defined, 159
motivators, 159–160
prompts, 160
Fogg, B. J., 151, 159–161
FOMO (fear of missing out), 123
Foods, brain, 130, 131, 146, 147
Ford, Debbie, 154
Ford, Henry, 254
Foreman, Richard, 29
Forgetting curve, 47, 48, 54
40/70 rule, 265–266
Fredrickson, Barbara, 85–87
Frost, Robert, 225
Funt, Juliet, 187

G
Gardner, Howard, 258, 275
Generalization, 60
Genius

blaze, 78
dynamo, 78
as grown, 105
is born LIE, 102–105
Kwik Start, 79
multiple forms of, 77–79
steel, 78–79
tempo, 78
you as, 77–79
Gig economy, 44
Goals
breaking down into small steps, 129
fitting with emotions, 116–117
flow and, 174
mindset alignment to, xvii
note-taking, 206
SMART, 116
Goodall, Jane, 260
Gordon, Barry, 95
Greenberg, Melanie, 187
Greenfield, Patricia Marks, 29
Green hat, 257
Green leafy vegetables, 131, 284
Greider, Carol, 98–99
Growth mindset, 90–91, 92, 118
Guilt, 150–151
Gupta, James, 200

H
Habit loop, 155, 156, 167
Habits
bad, 157, 159
creating, 156, 157, 161–162
Kwik Start, 161
morning routine, 163–167
negative, 156

new, in 10-Day Kwik Start program, 284
new, WIN acronym for, 162, 167
old, confronting, 154
one at a time, growing life and, 162–163
power of, 155
Habituation, 56–59
HEAR acronym, 204–205
HEART acronym, 116
Hero’s Journey, xxii, xxiii
Hierarchy of values, 120–121
Hobbes, Thomas, 97
Hope/fear motivator, 160
Human potential, xxiii
Hydration, 165. See also water

I
“I am” statements, 120, 126
Iceberg beliefs, 75–76
Identity, 119–120, 125
Iliff, Jeff, 142–143
Imagination and reading, 241
Incremental mindset, 272
Information
delivering great deal of, 229–231
half-life of, 24
intention of teaching, 53
processing and filtering, 25
recalling great deal of, 218–220
Inner critic, 76, 77, 83, 84–85
Insomnia, 143, 144. See also sleep
Inspiration, 18, 87
Intelligence
bodily-kinesthetic, 258
as fluid, 93
growth mindset and, 92
interpersonal, 259

intrapersonal, 259
linguistic, 259
logical-mathematical, 259
musical, 258–259
naturalistic, 260
spatial, 258
types of, 93, 258–260
Intelligence is fixed LIE, 89–93
Internet, reliance on, 29, 30, 240
IQ
defined, 77
scores, 91, 92
tests, 92

J
Jain, Naveen, 269–271, 272–273
James, William, 93
Jobs, changing nature of, 43–44
JOMO (joy of missing out), 123

K
Kaku, Michio, 32
Kelly, Fred, 101–102
Kennedy, John F., 244–245
Kim, Jean, 142
Kinesthetic learners, 260
Klemm, William, 199, 215–216
Kline, Christopher E., 144
Knowledge
as potential to be power, 98
as power, 13, 97–98
in promoting neuroplasticity, 50
trying to fit in a box, 104
“The Knowledge,” 36

Kotler, Steven, 168, 171, 172
Kwik Brain app, 51
Kwik Brain podcast, 14
Kwik Challenge, 162, 163
Kwik Learning community, 22
Kwik Start exercises
ANTs (automatic negative thoughts), 138
asking questions, 62, 63
books to read, 241
brain foods, 130
calendar use, 54
clean environment, 139
concentration, 184
digital deduction, 31
digital deluge, 24
digital dementia, 28
digital distraction, 26
distraction time, 189
doing, 63
flow, 172
focus, 189
genius, 79
habits, 161
“I am,” 120
learning as social, 53
“To Learn” list, 140
LIEs of learning, 105
memory, 213
morning routine, 167
movement, 137
passions, 118
positive peer group, 139
problem solving, 258
purpose, 119
reading and remembering, 50
reading as active experience, 52
reading time, 253

recall, 222
relaxation, 221
review, 54
sleep, 146
as small simple steps, 149
small simple steps (S3), 153
spending extra time, 242
state-dependency of learning, 52–53
state of mind, F
stress management, 141
study, 195
supervillains, 31
writing down extraneous thoughts, 51

L
Languages. See also vocabulary
baroque music and, 235
remembering, 232–235
spaced repetition and, 235
word substitutions, 233–234
Lashley, Karl, 93
“Laundry cycle” metaphor, 142–143
Learning. See also accelerated learning
active approach to, 224–227
benefits of, xvi
better, reasons for, 122–123
capacity, as limitless, 13
consistency in, 100
criticism matters LIE, 100–102
as difficult LIE, 98–100
elementary, 220–223
as empty vessel, 50–51
expanding, 146–147
genius is born LIE, 102–105
how to learn, 12–14
intelligence is fixed LIE, 89–93

knowledge is power LIE, 97–98
as lifelong process, 20
limited brain use LIE, 93–95
listening and, 203–205
as making new connections, 37
mistakes are failures LIE, 95–97
music and, 202–203, 208–209
neuroplasticity and, 38
new, brain energy and, 140
primacy and, 48, 49, 198, 227
problem-solving through, 99
recency and, 48, 49, 198, 227
small steps in, 100
as social, 53
state-dependency, 52–53
supervillains of, 21–22
taking charge of, 44
Learning curve, 53
Learning disabilities, 99
“Learning disabled,” 13
Learning environment, 52
Learning styles
auditory, 260
determination quiz, 262–264
kinesthetic, 260
mix of, 265
other, incorporating, 275
visual, 260
Lee, Bruce, 102–104, 105
Lee, Stan, 67
Lefkoe, Shelly, 73
Levitin, Daniel J., 25–26
Lewis, Jordan Gaines, 202
LIEs of learning
criticism of other people matter, 100–102
genius is born, 102–105
intelligence is fixed, 89–93

knowledge is power, 97–98
Kwik Start, 105
learning new things is difficult, 98–100
limited brain use, 93–95
mistakes are failures, 95–97
LIEs of motivation, 110
Life purpose, 117
Limited ideas entertained (LIEs), 66, 89
Limiting beliefs. See also LIEs of learning
commonly held, 106
effects of, 73
emotions and, 83
facts and, 81–83, 84
fixed mindset, 91
inner critic and, 83, 84–85
limitless mindset versus, 80
minimizing, 80–85
most common, 87
naming, 80–81
reframing, 80–85
as self-talk, 72–73
source of, 81
as starting in childhood, 73, 81
as wrong, 81–83
Limitless
becoming, 3–19
as a choice, 54–56
as progressing beyond, 16
you as, 277–278
Limitless Model, 17–18
Limitless (movie), 3, 93, 110
Limitless secrets, xvii–xviii. See also methods; mindset; motivation
Limits
belief in, xxii
as growth and learning obstruction, 30–31
as preconceived notions, 51
Lipszyc, Hadassah, 150

Listening
HEAR acronym, 204–205
importance of, 203
learning and, 203–205
note-taking and, 207
with whole brain, 203–205
Location, 226, 230, 231
Loci method, 229–231

M
Mackie, Evie, 273
Maguire, Eleanor, 36
Mai, Jeannie, 59
Marano, Hara Estroff, 176
Marder, Eve, 215
Mark, Gloria, 188
Markman, Art, 151
Means value, 121
Meditation, 145–146
Memorization, 215, 216, 219–220, 222, 228
Memory. See also accelerated learning
active focus in, 224–227
association and, 224–226
attention and, 217, 223
Baker/baker Paradox and, 217–218
brain strengthening and, 27
delivering a great deal of information and, 229–231
digital dementia and, 27
distractions and, 235
emotion and, 226, 228
exercise of, 28, 216
as foundation for every action, 214–215
as fundamental brain function, 214
great, keys for, 224–227
as greatest asset, 213
importance of, 213, 214–215

Kwik exercise, 227–229
Kwik Start, 213
of languages, 232–235
location and, 226–227
loci method and, 229–231
long-term, 41
methods, 217
MOM mnemonic, 216–217, 285
motivation and, 216–217
of names, 231–232
not-to-do list, 267
observation and, 217
reading and, 240
recall of a great deal of information and, 218–220
reference points, 217–218
short-term, 41
trained, 222, 229, 235
training videos, 235
visualization and, 224
vocabulary and, 232–235
working, 216
Memory lapses, 38
Mental models
for decision-making, 265–266
defined, 265
40/70 rule, 265–266
not-to-do list, 266–267
for problem-solving, 267–268
for productivity, 266–267
second-order thinking, 269
for strategy, 269
study your errors, 267–268
as thinking constructs, 265
Meta-learning, 180
Methods. See also focus; memory; motivation; speed reading; study
defined, 18, 179
key, xviii

limit in, 19
in Limitless Model, 17–18
mastering, xxi
memory, 217
as process of learning how to learn, 180
right, using, xviii
Mind
broadening, 192
calming, 186–189
calming techniques, 188–189, 190
memorization and, 215
preparing, 62–63
wandering and daydreaming, 246
Mindset
alignment to desires and goals, xvii
beliefs and, 66
characterization of, 66
defined, 18, 65
exponential, 271–272
fixed, 90–91, 92, 118
growth, 90–91, 92, 118
incremental, 272
intersection with motivation, 18
limit in, 17
limitless, 17–18, 67, 80, 277
in Limitless Model, 17–18
mastering, xxi
positive, building, 85
shifting, 12
silencing the inner critic and, 87
Mistakes
as failures LIE, 95–97
feelings about, 106
as signs of trying something new, 96
studying, 267–268
you as a person and, 97
MOM mnemonic, 216–217, 285

Monet, Claude, 258
Money, simplicity and, 160
Morning Brain Tonic, 132
Morning Magic Smoothie, 133
Morning routine. See also habits
“brain smoothie,” 166
“brain tea,” 166
breathing exercises, 166
brushing teeth with opposite hand, 165
celery juice, 165
cold shower, 165–166
DREAMS assessment, 164–165
establishing, 163–167
hydration, 165
importance of, 163, 167
keys to, 166
Kwik Start, 167
making bed, 165
three-minute workout, 165
Morpheus, 55
Morris, Eddie, 110
Mosconi, Lisa, 130
Motivation. See also energy; purpose
culture as nourished by, 108
defined, 18, 109
empowering sense of, 12
enjoyment and, 110
finding flow and, 111
flow as “source code” of, 172
in Fogg Behavior Model, 159–160
forcing, 126
formula, 110
hope/fear, 160
identity and, 119–120
intersection with mindset, 18
LIEs of, 110
limit in, 18

limitless, 277–278
in Limitless Model, 17–18
as limitless secret, xvii-xviii
mastering, xxi
memory and, 216–217
as not fixed, 110
passions and, 117–119
pleasure/pain, 159–160
reasons and, 122
as set of emotions, 124
as set of habits and routines, 126
social acceptance/rejection, 160
as something you do, 110
sustainable, 110
tapping into, 10
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 259
Mueller, Pam A., 207
Multitasking, 26, 175, 185, 187
Music and learning, 202–203, 208–209, 235

N
Names, remembering, 231–232
Negative habits, 156
Neurological peak, 35
Neurons, 23, 32, 35, 37, 40, 140
Neuroplasticity
answers and, 63
defined, 35, 37
dependency, 37
knowledge promotion of, 50
learning and, 38
understanding, 36–38
Neurotransmitters, 35
Nonroutine, simplicity and, 160
Note-taking. See also study
ability, upgrading, 205–208

“capture and create” method, 207
goals, 206
impaired learning and, 206–207
ineffective, 205
intention, clarity of, 206
listening and, 207
own words in, 206
practicing, 209
purpose of, 205–206
reviewing notes after, 207–208
TIP mnemonic, 208
tips, 208
writing and, 206–207
Not-to-do list, 266–267
Nutrients, brain, 136

O
Obama, Michelle, 128
Observation, 217, 255, 285
Opinions, 81
Oppenheimer, Daniel M., 207
Organization, this book, 19

P
Pain, 124
Passion(s)
finding, 117–118, 126
Kwik Start, 118
learning and, 125
purpose and, 117–118
reasons and, 122
simultaneous cultivation of, 118
underlying meaning in, 119
Peer group, positive, 139

Peripheral vision, vision and, 249–250
Perlman, Adam, 75–76
Phospholipid DHA, 136
Physical effort, simplicity and, 160
Plante, Thomas G., 157–159
Plato, 260
Pleasure/pain motivator, 159–160
Pomodoro technique, 48, 49
Positive mindset, 85
Positive peer group, 139
Positive thinking, 79–80
Posture, 52, 201, 282
Powell, Colin, 265
Power, knowledge is LIE, 97–98
Presentations, delivering without notes, 229–231
Primacy, 48, 49, 198, 227
Priming, 120
Problem-solving
in adding value, 45
Kwik Start, 258
study your errors and, 267–268
technology and, 28–29
thinking hats for, 256–257
Procrastination, 151, 197, 199
Productivity
environment, changing, 190
flow state and, 170, 177
mental model for, 266–267
Pomodoro technique for, 48
Promise, 56
Prompts, 161, 162
Protection, brain, 140
Pugh, Ken, 239
Purpose
becoming clear on, 115
as driver to act, 111
in guiding decisions, 117

Kwik Start, 119
life, 117
passion and, 117–118
reasons and, 121–123
in 10-Day Kwik Start program, 283
values and, 120–121

Q
Questions
as the answer, 56–60, 61, 63
asking, 60, 62–63
dominant, 60–63
education and, 58
in guiding RAS, 59
for priming focus, 63
questioning, 283
right, asking, 10–12
this book, 63
wrong, asking, 11

R
Reading. See also speed reading
about, 237–239
appreciation, 246–247
average speed, 242
barriers and obstacles, 243–245
books, 10
as boring task, 238, 243
challenges to, 242–245
comprehension, 245–246
efficiency, 243
in exponential thinking, 274
focus and, 240, 243
as foundation for learning, 239

fun of, 75
imagination and, 241
Kwik Start, 253
for limitless brain, 239–241
in memory improvement, 240
methods for increasing speed of, 248–251
outdated skills, 244
power of, embracing, 285
regression and, 243, 248
self-assessment, 241–242
slow, reasons for, 243
speed, limited, 250
subvocalization and, 244–245, 250
tips, 252
understanding and, 241
in upgrading your brain, 45
visual pacer, 253
in vocabulary improvement, 240
wander, 243
words as symbols and, 245
writing down extraneous thoughts while, 51
with your finger, 247–248
Reading circles, 4
Reality, facing, 8
Reasoning, 215
Reasons
commitments and, 123
finding, 121–123
learning and, 122–123, 125
for learning skills and techniques, this book, 124–125
motivation and, 122
passion and, 122
results and, 112
values and, 122
Recall, 221, 222
Recency, 48, 49, 198, 227
Recipes, brain

Brain Boost Salad, 133–134
Cocoa-Cinnamon-ginger “Hot Chocolate,” 135
Easy Roasted Salmon & Broccoli with Swiss Chard, 134–135
Morning Brain Tonic, 132
Morning Magic Smoothie, 133
Red hat, 256–257
Regression, 243, 248
Regret, 102
Reid, Kathryn J., 143–144
Relaxation stage, flow, 172
Resistance, persistence and, 51
Reticular activating system (RAS), 56–59
Review, 54
Richtel, Matt, 23
Ries, Eric, 42
Robbins, Tony, 163
Robinson, Ken, 41
Roche, Bryan, 92
Rowling, J. K., 2

S
Salmon, 131, 134–135, 284
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 54
Schellenberg, E. Glenn, 262–263
“Science of momentum,” 163
Second-order thinking, 269
Self-talk, 38, 51, 72–73, 81, 83, 138
Shame, 151
Sharma, Mona, 132
Shatté, Andrew, 75–76
Shenk, David, 92
Signal (prompt), 161
Simon, Theodore, 91
Simplicity, categories of, 160
Sinek, Simon, 31, 115
Sleep

brain energy and, 141–146
“catch-up” mentality, 143
DREAMS assessment, 164–165
exercise and, 143–144
good, accomplishing, 143–144
improving, 147
insomnia and, 143, 144
Kwik Start, 146
lack of, 113, 114, 142
meditation and, 145–146
as not a choice, 142–143
quality, 142
turning off mind and, 145–146
Small simple steps (S3)
autopilot and, 153–157
baby steps and, 151–153
behavior change and, 152–153
be kind to yourself and, 150–151
defined, 149
Kwik Start, 149, 153
overwhelm and, 150
Zeigarnik effect and, 150, 151, 153
SMART goals, 116
Smell, sense of, 201–202
Smith, Will, 62
Social acceptance/rejection motivator, 160
Social deviance, simplicity and, 160
Social media, xv, 25–26, 30, 56, 59, 98, 186, 251
Spaced repetition, 199–200, 235
Spark (prompt), 161
Speed reading. See also accelerated learning; reading
comprehension misconception, 245–246
counting and, 250–251
effort misconception, 246
as exercising, 248–251
finger use in, 247–248
John F. Kennedy and, 244–245

masterclass, 253
misconceptions, 245–247
peripheral vision and, 249–250
progress as aim in, 251
reading appreciation misconception, 246–247
speed, increasing, 248–251
success stories, 251–253
tips, 252
Spitzer, Manfred, 26
Start with Why (Sinek), 115
State of mind
Kwik Start, 201
learning and, 52–53
managing, 201
posture and, 201
Steel genius, 78–79
Stress
cluttered environment and, 186
doing something that causes, 188–189
flow and, 175–176
ill-health and, 23
oxidative, brain, 130, 131
prolonged, 141
Stress management, 79, 141
Struggle stage, flow, 171
Study. See also accelerated learning
active recall and, 199, 208
better, 196–197
competence and, 195–196
cramming and, 197–198
habits, 199–208
importance of, 193–195
Kwik Start, 195
listening with whole brain and, 203–205
music and, 202–203, 208–209
note-taking and, 205–208
note-taking tips, 208

optimizing, in 10-Day Kwik Start program, 284
procrastination and, 197, 199
sense of smell and, 201–202
spaced repetition and, 199–200
state of mind and, 201
success and, 196–197
time, 199
Subvocalization, 244–245, 250
Superheroes, xix, 3, 5, 14–15, 21, 69–70, 175, 278–279
Superpowers, xxi, 5, 15, 21, 70, 167, 239, 278
Supervillains
about, xvi–xvii
cumulative effects of, xvi
defined, xv–xvi
digital deduction, xvii, 28–31
digital deluge, xvi, 22–24
digital dementia, xvii, 26–28
digital distraction, xvii, 24–26
keeping at bay, 31
Kwik Start, 31
learning and, 21–22
limits of, xv
Synaptic pruning, 95

T
Taylor, Jim, 29
Teaching, learning with intention and, 53
Technology, 22, 27, 28–29, 31, 33
Tempo genius, 78
10-Day Kwik Start program
about, 279, 281
brain energy, 284
FASTER acronym, 281–282
kill your ANTs, 282
MOM mnemonic, 285
new healthy habit, 284

power of reading, 285
purpose, 283
question your questions, 283
study optimization, 284
what you want most, 283
Thinking. See also accelerated learning
exponential, 269–274
incorporating other learning styles into, 275
intelligence types and, 258–260
learning styles and, 260–265
mental models and, 265–269
as process of reasoning, 60
second-order, 269
supercharging, 30
with thinking hats, 256–257
Thinking hats, 256–257, 275
Time
distractions and, 187–188, 189
flow and, 173
as important asset, 47
simplicity and, 160
study, 199
with uncluttered mind, 187
TIP mnemonic, 208
Toffler, Alvin, 178
Trained memory, 222, 229
Trained readers, 246–247. See also reading; speed reading
Transcending, this book as, xxii
Turmeric, 131, 132, 136, 284
Twain, Mark, 68, 236

U
Unconscious competence, 196
Unconscious incompetence, 195
Underlying problem, getting to, 272–273
Unlimiting together, 16–17

V
Values
core, 117
creating list of, 127
hierarchy of, 120–121
in iceberg model, 76
learning and, 125, 126
prioritization of, 121
reasons and, 122
unawareness of, 121
Vilhauer, Jennice, 76
Visualization, 224, 229–231, 232, 283
Visual learners, 260
Vocabulary
as cornerstone of learning, 232
masculine or feminine, 235
reading and, 240
remembering, 232–235
spaced repetition and, 235
word substitutions, 232–233

W
Walnuts, 131, 133–134, 284
“Wander reading,” 243
Water, 131, 132, 142, 157, 165, 270, 272–273, 284
Weil, Andrew, 188
What-if-statements, 273
White hat, 256
Whitespace, 187
“Why” question, 127, 268
William, Anthony, 165
Williams, Venus, 260
Wilson, Woodrow, 46
Wimber, Maria, 27
Win acronym (habits), 162, 167

Winfrey, Oprah, 78, 79, 237, 259
Words as symbols, 245
Word substitutions, 232–233
Work, changing nature of, 43–44
Working memory, 216
“Worthy rivals,” 31
Wright brothers, 101–102

X
X-Men cast, 15

Y
Yanek, Lisa, 79
Yellow hat, 256
Yip Man, 103, 105
Yourself, knowing, 60–63

Z
Zarom, Rony, 28
Zeigarnik, Bluma, 149–150
Zeigarnik effect, 150, 151, 153
Ziva Meditation, 166

We hope you enjoyed this Hay House book. If you’d like to receive our online catalog
featuring additional information on Hay House books and products, or if you’d like to
find out more about the Hay Foundation, please contact:

Hay House, Inc., P.O. Box 5100, Carlsbad, CA 92018-5100
(760) 431-7695 or (800) 654-5126
(760) 431-6948 (fax) or (800) 650-5115 (fax)
www.hayhouse.com® • www.hayfoundation.org
***
Published in Australia by: Hay House Australia Pty. Ltd.,
18/36 Ralph St., Alexandria NSW 2015
Phone: 612-9669-4299 • Fax: 612-9669-4144
www.hayhouse.com.au
Published in the United Kingdom by: Hay House UK, Ltd.,
The Sixth Floor, Watson House, 54 Baker Street, London W1U 7BU
Phone: +44 (0)20 3927 7290 • Fax: +44 (0)20 3927 7291
www.hayhouse.co.uk
Published in India by: Hay House Publishers India,
Muskaan Complex, Plot No. 3, B-2, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 110 070
Phone: 91-11-4176-1620 • Fax: 91-11-4176-1630
www.hayhouse.co.in
***
Access New Knowledge.
Anytime. Anywhere.
Learn and evolve at your own pace
with the world’s leading experts.

www.hayhouseU.com

eBook Supplemental Material
Thank you for purchasing the Limitless eBook
by Jim Kwik. This eBook includes supplementary material!
To access this content, please visit www.hayhouse.com/ebookdownloads
and enter the Product ID and Download Codes as they appear below.

For further assistance, please contact Hay House Customer Care by phone:
US (800) 654-5126 or INTL CC+(760) 431-7695 or visit www.hayhouse.com/contact.
Thank you again for your Hay House eBook purchase. Enjoy!
Hay House, Inc. P.O. Box 5100 Carlsbad, CA 92018-5100 (800) 654-5126

