2
 
 
 

3
                              Copyright © 2020 Maggie O’Farrell

  The right of Maggie O’Farrell  to be identified as the Author of the Work
   has been asserted by her in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and
                                             Patents Act 1988.

Apart from any use permitted under UK copyright law, this publication may
  only be reproduced, stored, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means,
       with prior  permission in writing of the publishers or, in the case of
reprographic production, in accordance with the terms of licences issued by
                                 the Copyright Licensing Agency.

                  First published as an Ebook in 2020 by Tinder Press
                          An imprint  of Headline Publishing Group

      All  characters in this publication – other than the obvious historical
   characters – are fictitious and any resemblance to real persons, living or
                                    dead, is purely coincidental.

     Cataloguing in Publication Data is available from the British Library

                                     eISBN:  978 1 4722 2381 4

                               Cover illustration ©  Cally Conway
                                      Design © Yeti Lambregts

                             HEADLINE   PUBLISHING  GROUP
                                     An  Hachette UK Company
                                             Carmelite House
                                       50 Victoria Embankment
                                           London EC4Y 0DZ

                                        www.tinderpress.co.uk
                                          www.headline.co.uk
                                           www.hachette.co.uk

4
Contents

Title Page
Copyright Page
About the Author
Praise
Also By Maggie O’Farrell
About the Book
Dedication
Historical note
Epigraph

I
       A  boy is . . .
       If  you were . . .
       Hamnet climbs the . . .
       There is suddenly . . .
       Hamnet starts awake, . . .
       Eliza says to . . .
       Agnes moves across . . .
       It  is past . . .
       Three heavy knocks . . .
       On a morning . . .
       For the pestilence . . .
       On an afternoon . . .
       Agnes is sitting . . .
       Susanna, shortly before . . .
       Eliza’s letter is . . .
       Towards the end . . .
       Agnes startles awake, . . .

II
       A  room. Long . . .

Author’s Note
Acknowledgements

5
                                    About    the   Author























    Maggie O’Farrell is the author of eight novels: After You’d Gone, My
      Lover’s Lover, The Distance Between Us, which won the Somerset
Maugham Award, The Vanishing Act of Esme Lennox, The Hand That First
       Held Mine, which won the Costa Novel Award, Instructions for a
  Heatwave, This Must Be the Place and Hamnet. She lives in Edinburgh.

6
                         Praise    for   Maggie     O’Farrell:


‘Unputdownable’ Guardian

‘Impossible not to love’ Irish Times

‘O’Farrell is hard to beat’ Scotsman

‘Deliciously insightful’ Independent

‘Masterful . . . holds you on an exquisite knife-edge’ Marie Claire

‘I was entranced . . . what a brilliant storyteller she is’ Esther Freud, Daily
Telegraph

‘Terrific’ Audrey Niffenegger

‘Exquisitely sensual’ Emma Donoghue

‘Beautifully written and thought-provoking’ Grazia Magazine

‘A masterful gift for storytelling’ Observer

‘An entirely encompassing and beautiful read’ Heat

‘Spellbinding’ Barbara Trapido

7
     By  Maggie    O’Farrell      and   available    from   Tinder
                                              Press


                                              Fiction
                                       After You’d Gone
                                       My Lover’s Lover
                                 The Distance Between Us
                           The Vanishing Act of Esme Lennox
                              The Hand That First Held Mine
                                Instructions For a Heatwave
                                   This Must Be the Place
                                              Hamnet
 
 
                                           Non-Fiction
                                       I Am, I Am, I Am

8
                                         About      the   Book


On a summer’s day in 1596, a young  girl in  Stratford-upon-Avon takes to
her  bed  with    a  sudden  fever.   Her  twin    brother,  Hamnet,  searches
everywhere for help. Why is nobody at home?

Their mother, Agnes, is over a  mile away, in  the garden where she grows
medicinal herbs. Their father is working in London.

Neither parent knows that Hamnet will not survive the week.

Hamnet is a novel inspired by  the lost son of a famous playwright.  It  is a
story of the bond between twins, and of a marriage pushed to the brink by
grief.

It is also the story of a flea that boards a ship in Alexandria; a kestrel and its
mistress; and a glovemaker’s son who flouts  convention in  pursuit of  the
woman he loves. Above all, it  is a tender reimagining of  a boy whose life
has been all but forgotten, but whose name was given to  one of the  most
celebrated plays ever written.

9
For Will

10
                                     Historical          note





In the 1580s, a couple living in Henley Street, Stratford, had three children:
Susanna, then Hamnet and Judith, who were twins.
   The boy, Hamnet, died in 1596, aged eleven.
   Four years or so later, the father wrote a play called Hamlet.

11
                                   He is dead and gone, lady,
                                   He is dead and gone;
                                   At his head a grass-green turf,
                                   At his heels a stone.

                                                                                                         Hamlet, Act IV, scene v



Hamnet   and  Hamlet   are  in  fact  the  same  name,  entirely    interchangeable    in
Stratford   records  in  the  late sixteenth   and  early  seventeenth   centuries.

Steven  Greenblatt,    ‘The   death  of  Hamnet   and  the  making   of  Hamlet’,    New
York Review   of Books  (21  October   2004)

12
I

13
           boy is coming down a flight of stairs.
   The  passage is narrow  and twists  back  on itself.  He  takes each step
slowly, sliding  himself along the wall,  his boots meeting each tread with a
thud.
   Near the bottom,  he pauses for a moment, looking back the way he has
come. Then, suddenly resolute, he leaps the final three stairs, as is his habit.
He stumbles as he lands, falling to his knees on the flagstone floor.
   It  is  a close, windless day in  late summer, and the downstairs room  is
slashed by long strips of  light.  The sun glowers at  him from  outside, the
windows latticed slabs of yellow, set into the plaster.
   He gets up, rubbing his legs. He looks one way, up the stairs; he looks the
other, unable to decide which way he should turn.
   The room is empty, the fire ruminating  in its grate, orange embers below
soft,  spiralling   smoke.  His   injured  kneecaps  throb  in   time  with   his
heartbeat. He stands with one hand resting on the latch of the door  to the
stairs, the scuffed leather tip of his boot raised, poised for motion, for flight.
His hair, light-coloured, almost gold, rises up from his brow in tufts.
   There is no one here.
   He  sighs, drawing in the  warm, dusty air and moves through the room,
out of  the front  door and  on to  the street. The noise of  barrows, horses,
vendors, people calling to each other, a man hurling a sack from an upper
window doesn’t  reach him. He  wanders along the front  of the  house and
into the neighbouring doorway.
   The  smell  of  his  grandparents’ home  is  always  the same:  a mix   of
woodsmoke, polish,  leather, wool.  It  is  similar  yet  indefinably  different
from  the adjoining  two-roomed  apartment, built  by  his grandfather in  a
narrow gap next to  the larger house, where he lives  with  his mother and
sisters. Sometimes he  cannot  understand why  this  might  be.  The  two
dwellings are, after all, separated by only a thin wattled wall  but the air in
each place is of a different ilk, a different scent, a different temperature.
   This house whistles with draughts and eddies of air, with the tapping and
hammering of   his  grandfather’s workshop,  with   the  raps and  calls  of
customers at the window, with the noise and welter of the courtyard out the
back, with the sound of his uncles coming and going.

14
   But  not today. The boy  stands in the passageway, listening for signs of
occupation. He can see from here that the workshop, to his right, is empty,
the stools at the benches vacant, the tools idle  on the  counters, a tray of
abandoned gloves, like  handprints, left   out for   all  to  see. The  vending
window is  shut and bolted tight. There is  no one in the dining  hall, to  his
left. A stack of napkins is piled on the long table, an unlit candle, a heap of
feathers. Nothing more.
   He  calls  out, a  cry  of  greeting, a questioning  sound. Once, twice,  he
makes this noise. Then he cocks his head, listening for a response.
   Nothing.  Just the creaking of beams expanding gently in the sun, the sigh
of air  passing under doors, between rooms, the swish of linen drapes, the
crack of the fire, the indefinable noise of a house at rest, empty.
   His  fingers tighten  around the iron of  the door  handle. The heat of the
day, even this late, causes sweat to express itself from the skin of his brow,
down his back. The pain in his knees sharpens, twinges, then fades again.
   The  boy opens his  mouth. He  calls the  names, one by one, of  all  the
people who live here, in this house. His grandmother. The maid. His uncles.
His aunt. The apprentice. His grandfather. The boy tries them all, one after
another. For a moment, it crosses his mind to call his father’s name, to shout
for him, but his father is miles and hours and days away, in London, where
the boy has never been.
   But  where, he would  like  to know,  are his mother, his  older sister, his
grandmother, his uncles? Where is the maid? Where is his grandfather, who
tends not to  leave the  house by day, who  is  usually  to be  found in  the
workshop, harrying  his apprentice or  reckoning  his takings  in  a ledger?
Where is everyone? How can both houses be empty?
   He moves along the passageway. At the door to the workshop, he stops.
He throws a quick glance over his shoulder, to make sure nobody is there,
then steps inside.
   His  grandfather’s glove workshop is a place he is rarely allowed to enter.
Even to pause in  the doorway is  forbidden.  Don’t  stand there idling,  his
grandfather will roar. Can’t a man do an honest day’s work without  people
stopping to gawk at  him? Have you  nothing better to do  than loiter  there
catching flies?
   Hamnet’s   mind   is    quick:   he   has  no   trouble    understanding  the
schoolmasters’ lessons. He can grasp the  logic  and sense of what  he is
being told, and he can memorise readily. Recalling verbs and grammar and

15
tenses and rhetoric and numbers and calculations comes to him with an ease
that can, on occasion, attract the envy of other boys. But his is a mind also
easily distracted. A cart going past in the street during a Greek lesson will
draw his attention away from  his slate to wonderings as to where the cart
might be going and what it  could be carrying and how  about that time his
uncle gave him and his sisters a ride on a haycart, how wonderful that was,
the scent and prick of new-cut hay, the wheels tugged along to the rhythm
of the  tired mare’s  hoofs. More  than twice  in  recent weeks he has been
whipped at school for  not paying attention (his  grandmother has said if it
happens once more, just once, she will send word of it  to his  father). The
schoolmasters cannot understand it. Hamnet learns quickly, can recite  by
rote, but he will not keep his mind on his work.
   The  noise  of  a bird   in  the sky  can  make him   cease speaking, mid-
utterance, as if the very heavens have struck him deaf and dumb at a stroke.
The sight of  a person entering a  room, out  of the  corner of  his eye, can
make him break off whatever he is doing – eating, reading, copying out his
schoolwork – and gaze at them as if they have some important message just
for him.  He has a tendency to slip  the bounds of  the real, tangible world
around him and enter another place. He will sit in a room in body, but in his
head he is somewhere else, someone else, in a place known only to  him.
Wake up, child,  his grandmother will  shout, snapping her fingers  at him.
Come back,  his  older  sister,  Susanna, will   hiss,  flicking   his  ear.  Pay
attention, his schoolmasters will  yell.  Where  did  you go?  Judith will   be
whispering to him, when he finally  re-enters the world, when he comes to,
when he glances around to find that he is  back, in his  house, at his table,
surrounded by his family,  his  mother eyeing  him, half  smiling,  as if  she
knows exactly where he’s been.
   In  the  same way, now, walking  into  the  forbidden space of  the glove
workshop, Hamnet has lost track of what he is  meant to be doing. He has
momentarily slipped free of  his moorings, of the fact  that Judith is unwell
and needs someone to care for  her, that  he is  meant to be  finding  their
mother or grandmother or anyone else who might know what to do.
   Skins hang from  a rail. Hamnet knows enough to recognise the rust-red
spotted hide of a deer, the delicate and supple kidskin, the smaller pelts of
squirrels, the coarse and bristling boarskin. As he moves nearer to them, the
skins start to rustle and stir on their hangings, as if some life  might yet  be
left in them, just a little,  just enough for them to hear him coming. Hamnet

16
extends a finger and touches the goat hide. It is unaccountably soft, like the
brush of river weed against his legs when he swims on hot  days. It sways
gently to and fro, legs splayed, stretched out, as if in flight, like  a bird or a
ghoul.
   Hamnet turns, surveys the two seats at the workbench: the padded leather
one worn smooth  by the  rub of  his grandfather’s breeches, and the hard
wooden stool for  Ned, the apprentice. He sees the tools, suspended from
hooks on the wall  above the workbench.  He is  able to identify  those for
cutting, those for stretching, those for pinning and stitching. He sees that the
narrower of the glove stretchers – used for women – is out of place, left on
the bench where  Ned  works  with  bent  head and curved  shoulders and
anxious, nimble  fingers. Hamnet  knows  that his  grandfather needs little
provocation to  yell  at the  boy, perhaps worse, so he  picks up  the glove
stretcher, weighing its warm wooden heft, and replaces it on its hook.
   He  is just  about to slide  out the drawer  where the twists of  thread are
kept, and the boxes of buttons – carefully, carefully, because he knows the
drawer will squeak – when a noise, a slight shifting or scraping, reaches his
ears.
   Within  seconds, Hamnet has darted out, along the passageway and into
the yard.  His   task  returns to   him.  What  is  he  doing,  fiddling   in   the
workshop? His sister is unwell: he is meant to be finding someone to help.
   He  bangs open, one by one, the doors to the cookhouse, the brewhouse,
the washhouse. All of  them empty, their interiors  dark and cool.  He calls
out again, slightly hoarse this time, his throat scraped with the shouting. He
leans against  the  cookhouse wall   and  kicks  at  a  nutshell,  sending  it
skittering across the yard. He is utterly confounded to be so alone. Someone
ought to be here; someone always is here. Where can they be? What must
he do? How can they all be out? How can his mother and grandmother not
be in the house, as they usually  are, heaving open the doors of the oven,
stirring a pot over the fire? He stands in the yard, looking about himself, at
the door to the passageway, at the door to the brewhouse, at the door to their
apartment. Where should he go? Whom should  he call on  for  help? And
where is everyone?

Every life has its kernel, its hub, its epicentre, from which everything flows
out, to which  everything returns. This moment is  the absent mother’s: the
boy, the empty  house, the deserted yard, the  unheard cry. Him  standing

17
here, at the back  of  the house, calling  for  the people who  had fed  him,
swaddled him, rocked him to sleep, held his hand as he took his first steps,
taught him to  use a spoon, to blow on broth  before he ate it, to  take care
crossing the  street, to  let  sleeping  dogs lie,  to  swill   out  a  cup  before
drinking, to stay away from deep water.
   It  will  lie at her very core, for the rest of her life.

Hamnet scuffs his boots in the grit of the yard. He can see the remains of a
game he and Judith had been playing not long ago: the lengths of twine tied
to pine cones to be  pulled and swung for  the kitchen  cat’s kittens. Small
creatures they are, with faces like pansies and soft pads on their paws. The
cat went  into  a barrel  in  the storeroom to  have them  and hid  there for
weeks. Hamnet’s grandmother looked everywhere for the litter, intending to
drown them  all,  as is her  custom, but  the cat thwarted  her, keeping her
babies secret, safe, and now they  are half  grown,  two  of  them, running
about the place, climbing  up sacks, chasing feathers and wool scraps and
stray leaves. Judith cannot be parted from them for  long. She usually has
one in her apron pocket, a tell-tale bulge, a pair  of peaked ears giving her
away, making their grandmother shout and threaten the waterbutt. Hamnet’s
mother, however, whispers to  them that  the kittens  are too  big for  their
grandmother to drown.  ‘She  couldn’t  do  it,  now,’  she says  to them,  in
private, wiping  tears from Judith’s  horrified  face. ‘She wouldn’t  have the
stomach for it – they would struggle, you see, they would fight.’
   Hamnet wanders over to  the abandoned pine cones, their strings trailed
into the trodden earth of the yard. The  kittens are nowhere to be seen. He
nudges a pine cone with his toe  and it rolls  away from  him in  an uneven
arch.
   He looks up at the houses, the many windows of the big one and the dark
doorway of  his own. Normally,  he and Judith  would  be delighted to find
themselves alone. He would, this very moment, be trying to persuade her to
climb  on to  the cookhouse roof  with  him,  so  that they  might  reach the
boughs of the  plum  tree just over  the neighbour’s  wall.  They are  filled,
crammed, with plums, their red-gold jackets near to bursting with ripeness;
Hamnet has eyed them from an upper window in his grandparents’ house. If
this were a normal day, he would be giving Judith a boost on to the roof so
that she could  fill   her pockets with  stolen  fruit,  despite her  qualms and
protestations. She doesn’t like  to do  anything dishonest or  forbidden, so

18
guileless is her nature, but can usually be persuaded with a few words from
Hamnet.
   Today, though,  as they  played with  the  kittens  who escaped an early
demise, she said she had a headache, a pain in her throat, she felt cold, then
she felt hot, and she has gone into the house to lie down.
   Hamnet  goes back through the  door to  the main  house and along  the
passage. He is just about to go out into the street when he hears a noise. It is
a click  or  a shift,  a minute  sound, but it  is  the definite  noise of  another
human being.
   ‘Hello?’   Hamnet calls. He  waits. Nothing.  Silence presses back at him
from the dining hall and the parlour beyond. ‘Who’s there?’
   For  a moment, and  just for  a moment,  he entertains the notion  that it
might  be  his  father, returned  from  London,  to  surprise  them  –  it  has
happened before. His father will be there, beyond that door, perhaps hiding
as a game, as a ruse. If Hamnet walks into the room, his father will leap out;
he will have gifts stowed in his bag, in his purse; he will smell of horses, of
hay, of many  days on the road;  he will  put  his arms around his  son and
Hamnet will press his cheek to the rough, chafing fastenings of his father’s
jerkin.
   He knows  it won’t  be his father. He knows it, he does. His father would
respond to a repeated call,  would  never hide  himself away  in  an empty
house. Even so, when Hamnet walks into the parlour, he feels the  falling,
filtering sensation of disappointment to see his grandfather there, beside the
low table.
   The  room   is  filled   with  gloom,   coverings pulled   over  most  of  the
windows.  His  grandfather is  standing with   his  back towards  him,  in  a
crouched position, fumbling with  something: papers, a cloth bag, counters
of some sort. There is a pitcher on  the table, and a cup. His grandfather’s
hand meanders through these objects, his head bent, his breath coming in
wheezing bursts.
   Hamnet gives a polite cough.
   His  grandfather wheels around, his  face wild,  furious,  his arm  flailing
through the air, as if warding off an assailant. ‘Who’s there?’ he cries. ‘Who
is that?’
   ‘It’s  me.’
   ‘Who?’

19
   ‘Me.’   Hamnet steps towards the narrow shaft of light slanting in through
the window. ‘Hamnet.’
   His  grandfather sits down with  a thud. ‘You  scared the wits out  of me,
boy,’ he cries. ‘Whatever do you mean, creeping about like that?’
   ‘I’m   sorry,’ Hamnet says. ‘I was calling and calling but no one answered.
Judith is—’
   ‘They’ve  gone out,’ his grandfather speaks over him, with a curt flick  of
his wrist. ‘What do you want with  all those women anyway?’ He seizes the
neck of the pitcher and aims it  towards the cup. The liquid  – ale, Hamnet
thinks –  slops out  precipitously,  some into  the cup  and some on  to the
papers on the table, causing his grandfather to curse, then dab at them with
his sleeve. For the first time, it occurs to Hamnet that his grandfather might
be drunk.
   ‘Do  you know where they have gone?’ Hamnet asks.
   ‘Eh?’  his  grandfather says, still  mopping his papers. His  anger at their
spoiling seems to unsheathe itself and stretch out from  him, like  a rapier.
Hamnet can feel the tip of it  wander about the room, seeking an opponent,
and he thinks for a moment of his mother’s hazel strip, and the way it pulls
itself  towards  water, except  he  is  not  an  underground stream  and his
grandfather’s anger is not like the quivering divining rod at all. It is cutting,
sharp, unpredictable. Hamnet has no idea what will happen next, or what he
should do.
   ‘Don’t  stand there gawping,’ his grandfather hisses. ‘Help me.’
   Hamnet  shuffles forward  a step, then another. He  is wary,  his father’s
words circling his mind: Stay away from your grandfather when he is in one
of his black humours. Be sure to stand clear of him. Stay well back, do you
hear?
   His  father  had said this  to  him  on his  last visit,  when  they had  been
helping unload a cart from the tannery. John, his grandfather, had dropped a
bundle of skins into  the mud and, in  a sudden fit of  temper, had hurled a
paring-knife at  the yard wall.  His  father had immediately  pulled  Hamnet
back, behind him, out of  the way, but John had barged past them into the
house without a word.  His father  had taken Hamnet’s face in  both of  his
hands, fingers  curled  in  at  the nape  of  his  neck,  his  gaze steady and
searching. He’ll  not  touch your  sisters but  it’s  you  I  worry  for,  he  had
muttered, his brow puckering.  You know  the humour I  mean, don’t  you?
Hamnet had nodded but wanted the moment to be prolonged, for his father

20
to keep holding his head like  that: it gave him  a sensation of lightness, of
safety, of being  entirely known  and treasured. At  the same time, he  was
aware of  a  curdling  unease swilling  about  inside  him,  like  a  meal his
stomach didn’t   want.  He  thought of   the  snip  and snap  of  words  that
punctured the air  between his father  and grandfather, the way  his father
continually  reached to  loosen his  collar   when seated at  table  with  his
parents. Swear to me, his father had said, as they stood in the yard, his voice
hoarse. Swear it. I need to know you’ll be safe when I’m not here to see to
it.
   Hamnet believes he is  keeping his word.  He is  well  back. He is  at the
other side of the fireplace. His grandfather couldn’t reach him here, even if
he tried.
   His  grandfather is draining his cup with one hand and shaking the drops
off a sheet of paper with  the other. ‘Take this,’  he orders, holding out  the
page.
   Hamnet bends forward,  not moving  his feet, and takes it  with  the very
tips of his  fingers. His  grandfather’s eyes are slitted, watchful; his  tongue
pokes out of the side of his mouth. He sits in his chair, hunched: an old, sad
toad on a stone.
   ‘And  this.’ His  grandfather holds out another paper.
   Hamnet bends forward in the same way, keeping the necessary distance.
He thinks of  his father, how he would  be proud of him,  how he would  be
pleased.
   Quick  as a fox,  his  grandfather makes a lunge. Everything happens so
fast that, afterwards, Hamnet won’t be sure in what sequence it all occurred:
the page swings to the floor  between them, his  grandfather’s hand seizes
him by  the wrist,  then the elbow,  hauling him  forward,  into the  gap, the
space his father had told  him  to observe, and his other  hand, which  still
holds the cup, is coming up, fast. Hamnet is aware of streaks in his vision –
red, orange, the colours of fire,  streaming in from  the corner of  his eye –
before he feels the pain. It is a sharp, clubbed, jabbing pain. The rim of the
cup has struck him just below the eyebrow.
   ‘That’ll   teach you,’ his  grandfather is saying, in a calm voice,  ‘to creep
up on people.’
   Tears burst forth from  Hamnet’s eyes, both of them, not just the injured
one.

21
   ‘Crying   are you? Like  a little  maid? You’re  as bad as your father,’  his
grandfather says, with disgust, releasing him. Hamnet springs backwards,
thwacking his  shin  on the  side of  the  parlour  bed. ‘Always   crying  and
whining  and  complaining,’  his  grandfather  mutters. ‘No   backbone. No
sense. That was always his problem. Couldn’t stick at anything.’
   Hamnet  is  running back  outside, along  the street, wiping  at  his  face,
dabbing the blood with his sleeve. He lets himself in through his own front
door, up the stairs, to the upper room, where a figure lies on the pallet next
to their parents’ big curtained bed. The figure is dressed – a brown smock, a
white bonnet, the strings of which are untied and straggle down her neck –
and is lying  on top of  the sheets. She has kicked off her shoes, which lie,
inverted, like a pair of empty pods, beside her.
   ‘Judith,’   the  boy  says, and  touches her  hand.  ‘Are  you  feeling   any
better?’
   The girl’s  lids  lift.  She stares at her brother, for a moment, as if from  a
great distance, then shuts her eyes again. ‘I’m sleeping,’ she murmurs.
   She has the same heart-shaped face as him, the same peaked brow, where
the same corn-coloured hair grows upwards. The eyes that fixed so briefly
on his face are the same colour – a  warm amber, flecked with  gold –  the
same set as his own. There is a reason for this: they share a birthday, just as
they shared their  mother’s womb.  The  boy and  the girl   are twins,  born
within minutes of  each other. They are as alike as if they had been born in
the same caul.
   He  closes his  fingers  about  hers –  the  same nails, the  same shaped
knuckles, although his are bigger, wider, grimier – and he tries to flatten the
thought that hers feel slick and hot.
   ‘How  are you?’ he says. ‘Better?’
   She stirs. Her fingers curl into  his. Her chin lifts,  then dips. There is, the
boy sees, a  swelling  at  the base of  her  throat. And   another where her
shoulder meets her neck. He stares at them. A pair of  quail’s eggs, under
Judith’s skin. Pale, ovoid, nestled there, as if waiting  to  hatch. One at her
neck, one at her shoulder.
   She is saying something, her lips  parting, her tongue moving inside her
mouth.
   ‘What  did you say?’ he asks, bending nearer.
   ‘Your  face,’ she is saying. ‘What happened to your face?’

22
   He  puts a hand to his  brow, feeling  the swelling there, the  wet of  new
blood. ‘Nothing,’  he says. ‘It was nothing. Listen,’  he says, more urgently,
‘I’m  going to find the physician. I won’t be long.’
   She says something else.
   ‘Mamma?’  he repeats. ‘She – she is coming. She is not far away.’

She is, in fact, more than a mile away.
   Agnes  has  a  patch  of  land   at  Hewlands,  leased from   her  brother,
stretching from the house where she was born to the forest. She keeps bees
here, in hemp-woven skeps, which hum with industrious and absorbed life;
there are rows  of  herbs, flowers,  plants, stems that  wind  up  supporting
twigs. Agnes’s witch garden, her stepmother calls it, with a roll of her eyes.
   Agnes can be seen, most weeks, moving up and down the rows of these
plants, pulling up weeds, laying her hand to the coils of her hives, pruning
stems here and there, secreting certain blooms, leaves, pods, petals, seeds in
a leather bag at her hip.
   Today  she has been  called there  by  her brother,  who  dispatched the
shepherd’s boy to tell  her that something was amiss with  the bees – they
have left the hive and are massing in the trees.
   Agnes  is circling  the  skeps, listening for  whatever the bees are telling
her; she  is  eyeing  the  swarm  in  the  orchard,  a  blackish  stain  spread
throughout the branches that vibrates and quivers with outrage. Something
has upset them. The  weather, a change in  temperature, or  has someone
disturbed  the  hive?   One  of   the  children,   some  escaped  sheep, her
stepmother?
   She slides her hand up and under, into the skep, past its lip, through the
remaining coating  of bees. She is  cool  in  a shift,  under the  dark, river-
coloured shade of the trees, her thick braid of hair pinned to the top of her
head, hidden under a white coif. No bee-keeper veil covers her face – she
never wears one. If you came close enough, you would see that her lips are
moving, murmuring  small sounds and clicks  to the insects that circle  her
head, alight on her sleeve, blunder into her face.
   She brings  a honeycomb out of  the  skep and squats to examine it.  Its
surface is covered, teeming, with something that appears to be one moving
entity:  brown,  banded  with  gold,  wings   shaped like  tiny   hearts. It   is
hundreds of bees, crowded together, clinging to their comb, their prize, their
work.

23
   She lifts  a bundle of smouldering rosemary and waves it gently over the
comb, the smoke leaving  a trail  in  the  still  August  air. The  bees lift,  in
unison, to swarm above her head, a cloud with  no  edges, an airborne net
that keeps casting and casting itself.
   The  pale wax  is scraped, carefully,  carefully, into  a basket; the  honey
leaves the comb with a cautious, near reluctant drop. Slow as sap, orange-
gold, scented with  the  sharp tang of  thyme  and the  floral  sweetness of
lavender, it falls into  the pot Agnes holds out. A  thread of honey stretches
from comb to pot, widening, twisting.
   There is a sensation of change, an agitation of air, as if a bird has passed
silently overhead. Agnes, still  crouching, looks up.  The movement causes
her hand to waver and honey drips to her wrist, trails over her fingers, down
the side of the pot.  Agnes frowns, puts down the honeycomb, and stands,
licking her fingertips.
   She takes in the thatched eaves of Hewlands, to her right, the white scree
of cloud overhead, the restless branches of the forest, to her left, the swarm
of bees in the apple trees. In  the distance, her second-youngest brother is
driving sheep along the bridle  path, a switch  in his  hand, the dog darting
towards and away  from  the flock.  Everything  is  as it  should  be. Agnes
stares for a moment at the jerky  stream of sheep, the skitter of  their feet,
their draggled, mud-crusted fleeces. A bee lands on her cheek; she fans it
away.
   Later, and for  the rest of her life, she will  think  that if she had left there
and then, if she had gathered her bags, her plants, her honey, and taken the
path home, if she had heeded her abrupt, nameless unease, she might have
changed what happened next. If she had left her swarming bees to their own
devices, their own ends, instead of  working  to coax them  back into  their
hives, she might have headed off what was coming.
   She doesn’t, however. She dabs at the sweat on her brow, her neck, tells
herself not to be foolish. She places a lid on the full  pot, she wraps up the
honeycomb in a leaf, she presses her hands to the next skep, to read it, to
understand it. She leans against it, feeling its rumbling,  vibrating  interior;
she senses its power, its potency, like an incoming storm.

The boy, Hamnet, is  trotting along  the street, around a corner, dodging a
horse that stands, patient, between the shafts of a cart, around a group of
men gathered outside the guildhall, leaning towards each other with serious

24
faces. He passes a woman with a baby in her arms, imploring an older child
to walk  faster, to keep up, a man hitting  the haunches of a donkey, a dog
that glances up from whatever it is eating to watch Hamnet as he runs. The
dog barks once, in sharp admonishment, then returns to its gnawing.
   Hamnet arrives  at the house of the physician –  he has asked directions
from the woman  with the  baby – and he bangs on the door. He  registers,
momentarily, the shape of his fingers, his nails, and looking at them brings
Judith’s to mind; he bangs harder. He thuds, he thunders, he shouts.
   The door is swung open and the narrow, vexed face of a woman appears
around it. ‘Whatever are you doing?’ she cries, shaking a cloth at him, as if
to waft him  away, like an insect. ‘That’s a racket loud enough to wake the
dead. Be off with you.’
   She  goes to shut  the door  but  Hamnet leaps  forward.  ‘No,’  he  says.
‘Please. I’m sorry, madam. I need the physician. We need him. My sister –
she is unwell. Can he come to us? Can he come now?’
   The  woman  holds  the door  firm   in  her  reddened hand but  looks  at
Hamnet with   care, with   attention, as  if  reading  the  seriousness of the
problem in his  features. ‘He’s not here,’ she says eventually. ‘He’s with  a
patient.’
   Hamnet has to swallow, hard. ‘When will he be back, if you please?’
   The pressure on the door is lessening. He steps one foot into the house,
leaving the other behind him.
   ‘I  couldn’t  say.’ She looks him up  and down, at the encroaching foot in
her hallway. ‘What ails your sister?’
   ‘I  don’t know.’  He tries to think back to Judith, the way she looked as she
lay on the blankets, her eyes closed, her skin flushed and yet pale. ‘She has
a fever. She has taken to her bed.’
   The woman frowns. ‘A  fever? Has she buboes?’
   ‘Buboes?’
   ‘Lumps.  Under the skin. On her neck, under her arms.’
   Hamnet stares at her, at the small pleat of skin between her brows, at the
rim of  her cap, how it  has rubbed a raw patch beside her ear, at the wiry
coils of   hair escaping at  the back.  He  thinks  of  the word  ‘buboes’,  its
vaguely vegetal  overtones, how  its   bulging  sound mimics   the thing   it
describes. A cold fear rinses down through his chest, encasing his heart in
an instant, crackling frost.

25
   The  woman’s  frown   deepens. She places her  hand  in  the  centre of
Hamnet’s chest and propels him back, out of her house.
   ‘Go,’   she says, her face pinched. ‘Go home. Now. Leave.’  She goes to
close the door but then, through the narrowest crack, says, not unkindly, ‘I
will  ask the physician to call. I know who you are. You’re the glover’s boy,
aren’t you? The grandson. From Henley Street. I will  ask him  to come by
your house, when he returns. Go now. Don’t stop on the way back.’ As an
afterthought, she adds, ‘God speed to you.’
   He  runs  back. The  world  seems more glaring,  the people  louder, the
streets longer, the colour of the sky  an invasive, glancing blue. The horse
still stands at its cart; the dog  is now curled up  on a doorstep. Buboes, he
thinks again. He has heard the word before. He knows what it means, what
it denotes.
   Surely  not,  he is  thinking,  as he turns  into his  street. It  cannot be.  It
cannot. That – he will not name it, he will not allow  the word to form, even
inside his head – hasn’t been known in this town for years.
   Someone will  be home, he knows, by the time he gets to the front door.
By the time he opens it. By  the time he crosses the threshold. By the time
he calls out, to someone, anyone. There will be an answer. Someone will be
there.

Unbeknown to him, he passed the maid, both his grandparents and his older
sister on his trip to the physician’s house.
   His  grandmother, Mary, had been coming along an alleyway, down near
the river, making deliveries, her stick held out to ward off the advances of a
particularly  peevish  cockerel,  Susanna behind  her.  Susanna had  been
brought along to carry Mary’s basket of gloves – deerskin, kidskin, squirrel-
lined, wool-lined, embroidered, plain. ‘I don’t for  the life of me know why,’
Mary had been saying, as Hamnet flashed unseen past the end of the alley,
‘you cannot at the very  least look people in  the eye when they greet you.
These are some of your grandfather’s highest paying customers and a shred
of courtesy wouldn’t  go amiss. Now I  do really  believe that . . .’  Susanna
had trailed  in  her wake, rolling   her eyes, lugging  the  basket filled  with
gloves. Like severed hands, she was thinking, as she let her grandmother’s
voice be blotted out by the sound of her own sigh, by the sight of a slice of
sky cutting through the building tops.

26
   John,  Hamnet’s  grandfather,  had  been among  the  men  outside  the
guildhall.  He had left  the parlour  and his calculations  while Hamnet  had
been upstairs with Judith, and had been standing with his back to Hamnet as
the boy ran for the physician. If  the boy had turned his head as he passed,
he would have seen his grandfather pushing his way into this group, leaning
towards the other men, gripping their  reluctant arms, urging them, teasing
them, exhorting them to come with him to a tavern.
   John  hadn’t  been invited   to  this  meeting but  had  heard that  it   was
happening so had come along in the hope of catching the men before they
dispersed. He wants nothing  more than to  reinstate himself  as a man of
consequence and influence, to regain the status he once had. He can do it,
he knows he can. All he needs is the ear of these men, whom he has known
for years, who know him,  who could vouch  for his industry, his  loyalty to
this town. Or, if nothing else, a pardon or a blind eye from the guild and the
town authorities. He was once bailiff, and then a high alderman; he used to
sit in the front  pew of the church and wear a scarlet robe. Have these men
forgotten that? How can they not have invited him to this meeting? He used
to have influence – he used to rule over them all.  He used to be someone.
And now he is reduced to living on whatever coin his eldest can send back
from London (and what an infuriating youth he had been, hanging about the
market square, squandering his time; who  would  have thought he would
amount to anything?).
   John’s business still thrives, after  a fashion, because people will always
need gloves, and if these men know of his secret dealings in the wool trade,
his summons for not attending church and fines for  dumping waste in  the
street, so be it. John can take in his stride their disapproval, their fines and
their demands, their snide mutterings about the ruination of his family, the
exclusion from guild  meetings. His house is one of the finest in  the town:
there is always that. What John cannot bear is that not one of them will take
a drink with him,  will  break bread at his table, will warm themselves at his
hearth. Outside  the   guildhall,   the  men  avoid  his   eye,  continue  their
conversation. They don’t listen to his  prepared speech about the reliability
of the  glove trade, about his  successes, his triumphs, his invitations  to a
tavern, to eat dinner at his house. They nod distantly; they turn away. One
pats his arm, says, aye, John, aye.
   So he goes to the  tavern alone. Just for a while.  Nothing wrong  with  a
man’s own company. He will  sit here, in the half-light,  like  that of dusk, a

27
candle stub on the table before him, and watch as stray flies circle and circle
in its light.

Judith is lying on the bed and the walls appear to be bulging inwards, then
flexing  back. In,  out,  in, out.  The  posts around her parents’  bed, in  the
corner, writhe and twist like serpents; the ceiling above her ripples, like the
surface of a lake; her hands seem at once too close and then very far away.
The line  where the white  of the  plasterwork meets the dark wood  of  the
joists shimmers and refracts. Her face and chest are hot, burning, covered
with slick  sweat, but her feet are ice-cold. She shivers, once, twice, a full
convulsion, and sees the walls bend towards her, closing  in,  then pulling
away. To block out the walls,  the serpentine bedposts, the moving ceiling,
she shuts her eyes.
   As  soon as she does so, she is elsewhere. In many places at once. She is
walking through  a meadow, holding tight  to a hand. The hand belongs to
her sister, Susanna. It has long fingers and a mole on the fourth knuckle. It
does not want to be held: the fingers aren’t curled around Judith’s, but kept
stiff and straight. Judith has to grip with all her might for it not to slide from
her. Susanna takes great steps through the long grass of the meadow and
with  each one her hand jerks in  Judith’s. If   Judith lets go,  she may sink
beneath the surface of the grass. She may be lost, never to be found. It is
important – crucial – for  her to keep hold of  this hand. She must never let
go. Ahead of them, she knows, is her brother. Hamnet’s head bobs in and
out of the grass. His hair is the colour of ripe wheat. He bounds through the
meadow, ahead of them, like a hare, like a comet.
   Then  Judith is  in  a crowd. It  is  night-time,  cold;  the glow  of  lanterns
punctuates the freezing dark. She thinks it is the Candlemas fair. She is in
and also above a crowd, on a pair of strong shoulders. Her father. Her legs
grip his neck and he holds her by  each ankle; she has buried her hands in
his hair. Thick dark hair he has, like Susanna’s. She uses the smallest of her
fingers to tap the silver hoop in his left ear. He laughs at this – she feels the
rumble of it, like  thunder, pass from his body to hers – and shakes his head
to make the earring rattle  against her fingernail. Her  mother is there, and
Hamnet and Susanna, and her grandmother. Judith is the one her father has
chosen to ride on his shoulders: just her.
   There is  a great flaring of  light.  Braziers are bright and fierce  around a
wooden platform,   raised to  the  level  of  herself,  there,  on  her father’s

28
shoulders. On the platform are two men, dressed in gold and red clothing,
with many tassels and ribbons; they have tall hats on their heads and their
faces are white as chalk with  blackened eyebrows and reddened lips. One
lets out a high,  keening cry  and hurls a golden ball  at the  other; he flips
himself on to his hands and catches the ball in his feet. Her father lets go of
her ankles to applaud and Judith clutches at his head. She is terrified  she
might fall,  tip  back, off his  shoulders and into the seething, restive crowd
that smells of  potato  peelings, of  wet  dog, of  sweat and  chestnuts. The
man’s cry has set fear in her heart. She doesn’t like the braziers; she doesn’t
like  the men’s jagged eyebrows; she  doesn’t like  any of  this  at all.  She
begins, quietly, to  weep, the  tears coursing from  her  cheeks to rest like
pearls in her father’s hair.

Susanna and her grandmother, Mary, are not yet home. Mary has stopped to
talk to a woman of  the parish: they barter compliments and demurrals, pat
each other on the arm but Susanna isn’t fooled. She knows the woman does
not like  her grandmother; the woman can’t stop  looking around, over  her
shoulder, wondering if anyone is observing her in conversation with Mary,
wife of  the disgraced glover. There are many in the town, Susanna knows,
who were once their friends and now cross the street to avoid them. It has
been going on for  years, but ever since her grandfather was fined for  not
attending church,  many of  the  townsfolk  have  dropped the  pretence of
civility  and will  walk past without acknowledging them. Susanna sees how
her grandmother plants herself in the woman’s way, so that she cannot get
past, cannot avoid talking to them. She sees all of this. The knowledge of it
burns the inside of her head, leaving black scorch marks.

Judith lies  alone on  her bed,  opening and closing  her eyes. She  cannot
comprehend what has happened to this day. One moment, she and Hamnet
were pulling bits of  thread for the cat’s new kittens – keeping an eye open
for their grandmother, because Judith had been told to chop the kindling and
polish the  table  while  Hamnet did  his  schoolwork  –  and  then she had
suddenly felt a weakness in her arms, an ache in her back, a prickling in her
throat. I  don’t feel  well,  she’d said to  her brother, and he had looked  up
from the kittens, at  her, and his eyes had travelled all over her  face. Now
she is on this bed and she has no idea how she got here or where Hamnet
has gone or when her mother is coming back or why no one is there.

29
The maid is taking a long time to make her selection from the late milking
at the market, flirting  with  the dairyman behind his stall.  Well, well,  he is
saying, not letting go  of the pail.  Oh, the maid  is replying,  tugging at the
handle. Will you not let me have it? Have what? the dairyman says, raising
his eyebrows.

Agnes has finished collecting  her honey and has taken up a sack and the
burning rosemary and is  making  for the  swarm of  bees. She will  sweep
them into the sack and return them to the hive, but gently, ever so gently.

The father is two days’ ride  away, in London, and is, at this very moment,
striding through Bishopsgate towards the river, where he aims to buy one of
the flat, unleavened griddle cakes that sell on stalls there. He has a terrible
hunger in him today; he woke with it,  and his breakfast of ale and porridge
and his lunch of pie has not sated it. He is careful with his money, keeping
it close to his person, never spending more than he has to. It is the subject
of much ribbing  from  those he works with. People say of him  that he has
gold stored in bags under the boards of his lodging:  he has heard this and
smiled. It  is,  of  course, not true:  everything he  earns he sends home to
Stratford, or takes with him, wrapped and stowed in his saddlebags, if he is
making the journey. But,  still,  he doesn’t spend a groat  unless absolutely
necessary. And this  day  the  griddle  cake,  in  mid-afternoon,  is  such  a
necessity.
   Alongside him  walks a man, the son-in-law of his landlord. This man has
been talking  since they left  the  house. Hamnet’s father is  listening  only
intermittently  to  what  the  man  is  saying  –  something about  a  grudge
towards his father-in-law,  a dowry  unfulfilled,   a promise not  kept. He is
thinking instead of the way the sun reaches down, like ladders, through the
narrow gaps in buildings to illuminate  the rain-glazed street, of the griddle
cake that awaits him  near the river,  of the  flap and soap-tang of  laundry
hanging above  his  head, of   his  wife,  fleetingly,   the  way  her  twinned
shoulder-blades flex together and apart as she pins up the weight of her hair,
of the stitching in the toe of his boot that seems to have worked itself loose
and how he must now pay a visit to the cobbler, perhaps after he has eaten
his griddle cake, as soon as he has rid himself of the landlord’s son-in-law
and his querulous babbling.

30
And Hamnet? He is re-entering the narrow house, built in a gap, a vacancy.
He is sure, now, that other people will be back. He and Judith will no longer
be alone. There will   be  someone here now who  will   know  what to  do,
someone to assume charge of this, someone who will  tell  him  that all  is
well. He steps in, letting the door swing closed behind him. He calls, to say
he is  back, he  is home.  He pauses, waiting  for  an answer, but  there is
nothing: only silence.

31
           f you were to stand at the window in Hewlands and crane your neck
sideways, it would be possible to see the edge of the forest.
   You might  find it  a restless, verdant, inconstant sight: the wind caresses,
ruffles, disturbs  the mass of   leaves; each tree answers to  the weather’s
ministrations at a slightly  different tempo from  its neighbour, bending and
shuddering and tossing its branches, as if trying to  get away from the  air,
from the very soil that nourishes it.
   On  a morning in early spring,  fifteen years or so before Hamnet runs to
the house of  the physician, a  Latin  tutor  is standing in  this  place at the
window, absently tugging on the hoop through his left  ear. He is watching
the trees. Their collective presence, lined up as they are, fringing the edge
of the farm, brings to his mind the backdrop of a theatre, the kind of painted
trickery that is  unrolled, quickly,  into place to  let the audience know they
are now in a sylvan setting, that the city or streets of the previous scene are
gone, that they are now on wooded, uncultivated, perhaps unstable ground.
   A   slight  frown  appears on  his  face. He  remains  at the  window,  the
fingertips of one hand pressed white to the glass. The boys are behind him;
they are conjugating verbs, temporarily unheard by the tutor, who is intent
on the startling contrast between the sharply blue spring sky and the new-
leaf green of  the forest. The  colours seem to fight,  vying  for  supremacy,
vibrancy: the green versus the blue,  one against the other. The children’s
Latin verbs wash over  him, through him,  like  the wind  through the trees.
Somewhere in the  farmhouse a bell  is  rung, first  briefly   and then more
insistently. There  are footfalls   along  the passage, the  sound of  a  door
banging into its frame. One of the boys – the younger one, James, the tutor
knows, without  turning – sighs, coughs, clears his throat, then rejoins  the
intoning. The tutor readjusts his collar, smooths his hair.
   The Latin  verbs roll  on and on, around him, like  a fenland fog, through
his feet, up and over his shoulders, past his ears, to seep out of the cracks in
the window lead. He allows the chanted words to merge into an aural blur
that fills  the room, right  to its high,  blackened rafters. It collects up there,
along with  the  curls and  veils  of  smoke from  the chimneyless  fire  that
smoulders in the grate. He  has instructed the boys  to conjugate the  verb
‘incarcerare’: the repeated hard c sound seems to scrape at the walls of the
room, as if the very words themselves are seeking escape.

32
   The tutor  is forced to  come here twice a week by his father, the glover,
who  is  in  some manner of   debt to  Hewlands,  after  the  souring of   an
agreement or deal with the yeoman who used to own the farm. The yeoman
had been a broad-backed man who carried through his belt  a sheep-hook
shaped like a cudgel, and there was something about his open, candid face
that the tutor had rather liked. But the yeoman had died suddenly last year,
leaving all his acres and flocks, along with a wife and eight or nine children
(the tutor is unsure exactly how many). It was an event his own father had
greeted with barely concealed glee. Only he knew of the nature of the loan:
the tutor had overheard his father crowing, late at night, when he thought no
one could overhear (the tutor is very  good at clandestine listening): Don’t
you see? The widow will   not know or,  if  she does, will not  dare to come
and ask me to make good on it, or that overgrown dullard of an eldest son.
   It  appears, however, that the widow  or  son has done just that and this
arrangement (the tutor has gleaned, from listening in to conversations going
on behind the door of his  parents’ chamber) is something to do with what
his father did  with  a consignment of the yeoman’s sheepskins. His father
had told the yeoman that the hides were to be sent for whittawing  and the
yeoman had believed him. But  then his  father had insisted that  the wool
should be left on, which had aroused the suspicion of the yeoman, which for
some reason has caused all this trouble. The  tutor is  unclear on this  last
point as his mother  was called away from  the whispered conversation by
the querulous, creaking cry of Edmond, her youngest child.
   The tutor’s  glover father has some new, slightly illicit   venture that none
of them are supposed to know about: this much the tutor can tell. They were
to  make out,   their  parents told   them,  to  anyone who   asked, that  the
sheepskins were for gloves. He and his siblings had been baffled as it had
not occurred to  them that the  skins were for  anything  other than gloves.
Whatever else could his father, the most successful glover in town, possibly
want them for?
   There is a debt or a fine and their father cannot – will not? – pay, and the
yeoman’s widow or son will  not let  it drop so it  appears that he himself is
the payment. His  time,  his Latin  grammar, his  brain. Twice  a week,  his
father told him, he must walk the mile  or so out of town, along the stream,
to this low-lying  hall, surrounded by sheep, where he must run the younger
boys through their lessons.

33
   He had had no warning of this plan, this web being spun around him. His
father had called him into the workshop one evening, as the household was
preparing for  bed,  to tell   him  that he  was to  go  to  Hewlands to  ‘start
drumming some education into the boys there’. The tutor had stood in  the
doorway and stared hard at his father. When, he asked, was this arranged?
His  father   and  mother  had  been  wiping   and  polishing   the  tools   in
preparation for the next day. Doesn’t concern you, his father said. All  you
need to know is that you are going. What, the son replied, if I don’t care to?
The father fitted a long knife back into its leather sleeve, seemingly without
hearing this response. His mother had glanced at her husband, then at her
son, giving  him  a  minute shake of  her  head. You’ll   go, his  father  said
eventually, laying down his rag, and there’s an end to it.
   The desire to push himself  away from these two people, to stride out of
the room, to wrench open the front door and run into  the street rose in the
son, like sap in a tree. And, yes, to strike his father, to do some harm to that
body, to take his own fists and arms and fingers and give back to this man
all that had been dealt to him. They had, all six of them, from time to time,
received the  blows  and grips  and  slaps that  resulted from   the father’s
temper, but with nothing like the regularity  and brutality of  this eldest son.
He didn’t   know  why   but  something about  him  had  always drawn  his
father’s anger and  frustration  to him,  like  a  horseshoe to a  magnet. He
carried within  him,  always,  the sensation of  his  father’s calloused  hand
enclosing the soft skin of his upper arm, the inescapable grip that kept him
there so his father could rain down blows with his other, stronger, hand. The
shock of a slap landing, sudden and sharp, from above; the flensing sting of
a wooden instrument on the back of the legs. How hard were the bones in
the hand of an adult, how tender and soft the flesh of a child,  how easy to
bend and  strain  those young,  unfinished  bones. The  doused, drenched
feeling of fury, of impotent humiliation, in  the long minutes of a beating.
   His  father’s rages arrived from  nowhere, like a  gale, then blew quickly
on. There was no pattern, no warning, no rationale; it  was never the same
thing twice that tipped him over. The son learnt, at a young age, to sense the
onset of  these eruptions and a  series of  feints  and dodges to  avoid  his
father’s fists. As an astronomer reads the minuscule shifts and alterations in
the alignment of the planets and spheres, to see what lies in store, this eldest
son became an expert in reading his  father’s moods and expressions. He
could tell, from the sound the front door made when his father entered from

34
the street, from the rhythm of his footsteps on the flagstones, whether or not
he was in for a beating. A spilt ladle of water, a boot left in the wrong place
on the floor,  a facial expression deemed insufficiently  respectful – any of
these might be the excuse the father sought.
   In  the last year or so, the son has grown tall, taller than the father: he is
stronger, younger, faster. His walks  to various  local markets, to  outlying
farms, to and from the tannery, with sacks of skins or finished gloves on his
back, have brought muscle and weight to his shoulders and neck. It has not
eluded the son’s notice that his father’s blows have, of late, tailed off. There
was a  moment,  several months  ago, when  the  father  came out  of  his
workshop late  in  the  evening  and, finding   the  son in  the  passageway,
without a word, bore down on him and, lifting the wineskin he was holding,
lashed the son about the face. The pain was of the stinging sort, not aching,
not bruising, not pressing: it had a sharp, whipped, lacerating quality. There
would, the son knew, be a red, broken mark  on his face. The sight  of the
mark seemed to enrage the father further because he lifted his arm again,
for a second blow, but the son reached up. He seized his father’s arm. He
pushed, with all his might,  against him and found, to  his surprise, that his
father’s body yielded under his. He could push this man, this leviathan, this
monster of his childhood,  back against the wall with  very  little  effort. He
did so. He kept his  father there with the  point of  his elbow. He shook his
father’s arm, like that of a puppet, and the wineskin dropped to the floor. He
leant his face into his, noticing at the same time that he was looking down
on him. That, he said to him, is the last time you will ever hit me.
   As  he stands at Hewlands’ window, the need to leave, to rebel, to escape
is so great it fills   him to his  very outer edge: he can eat nothing from  the
plate the farmer’s widow  left  for  him, so crammed is he  with the  urge to
leave, to get away, to  move his feet  and legs to some other  place, as far
away from here as he can manage.
   The Latin  rolls on, the verbs coming around again, from pluperfect tense
to present. He is just about to turn and face his pupils  when he sees, from
the trees, a figure emerge.
   For  a moment, the tutor believes it to  be a young man. He is wearing a
cap, a leather jerkin, gauntlets; he moves out of  the trees with  a brand of
masculine insouciance or  entitlement,  covering  the ground  with  booted
strides. There is some kind of bird on his outstretched fist: chestnut-brown
with a  creamy white breast, its wings  spotted with black.  It  sits hunched,

35
subdued, its  body  swaying   with  the  movement  of   its  companion,  its
familiar.
   The tutor is  imagining this person, this hawk-taming youth, is some kind
of  factotum  to  the farm.  Or  a  relative  to  the  family,  a  visiting  cousin
perhaps. Then  he  registers the  long  plait,   hanging  over  the  shoulder,
reaching past the waist,  the jerkin  laced tight  around a form  that  curves
suspiciously inwards around the middle. He sees the skirts, which had been
bunched up, now hastily being dragged down around the stockings. He sees
a pale, oval face under the cap, an arched brow, a full red mouth.
   He  moves closer to  the  glass, leaning on  the sill,  and watches as the
woman moves from  the  right  to the  left  of  the window  frame,  her bird
riding on her fist, her skirts swishing around her boots. Then she enters the
farmyard, moves through the  chickens and geese, around the side of  the
house, and is gone.
   He  straightens, his  frown  vanished,  a smile  forming   under his  scant
beard. Behind  him,  the  room  has fallen  silent.  He  recalls  himself:  the
lesson, the boys, the verb conjugation.
   He turns. He  arches his fingers together, as he imagines a tutor ought to
do, as his own masters did at school not so long ago.
   ‘Excellent,’  he says to them.
   They look  towards him, plants turning to the sun. He smiles at their soft,
unformed faces, pale as unrisen dough in  the light  from  the window.  He
pretends not to see that the younger brother is being poked under the table
with  a peeled stick,  that  the elder  has filled  his  slate with   a pattern  of
repeated loops.
   ‘Now,’  he says to them, ‘I would  like you to work  on a translation of the
following sentence: “I thank you, sir, for your kind letter.”’
   They  begin to labour over their slates, the elder (and stupidest, the tutor
knows) breathing through his mouth, the younger laying his head down on
his arm. And, really,  what sense is there in giving the boys these lessons?
Aren’t they destined to be farmers, like their father and older brothers? But,
then, what use has it been to him? Years and years at the grammar school
and look where it has got him – a smoke-hazed hall, coaxing the sons of a
sheep famer to learn conjugation and word order.
   He  waits until  the boys have half  finished this exercise before he says:
‘What is the name of that serving girl? The one with the bird?’

36
   The  younger brother looks  at him  with  a direct,  frank  gaze. The tutor
smiles back. He is, he prides himself, adept at dissembling, at reading the
thoughts of others, at guessing which way they will jump, what they will do
next. Life  with  a quick-tempered parent will  hone these skills at  an early
age. The tutor knows the elder will not guess the intent behind his question
but that the younger one, all of nine years old, will.
   ‘Bird?’   the elder one says. ‘She doesn’t have a bird.’  He glances at his
brother. ‘Does she?’
   ‘No?’  The  tutor gathers their blank looks. He sees again, for a moment,
the mottled tawny feathers of the hawk. ‘Perhaps I am mistaken.’
   The younger brother says, in a rush, ‘There’s Hettie, who looks after the
pigs and hens.’ He creases his brow. ‘Hens are birds, aren’t they?’
   The tutor nods at him. ‘Indeed they are.’
   He turns again to the window. Looks out. All  is  as before. The wind, the
trees, the leaves, the filthy ewes in a huddle, the stretch of tamed, cultivated
land meeting the hem of the forest. No girl to be seen. Could it have been a
hen on her outstretched arm? He doubts it.

Later that day, after the lesson is finished, the tutor steps around the back of
the house. He ought to be taking the path to town, beginning the long walk
home, but he wants to  see the girl  one more time,  wants to  observe her,
perhaps exchange some words with her. He has an urge to examine that bird
up close, to hear what kind of voice will emerge from that mouth. He would
like to  weigh that plait  in his  hand, feel the silken ridged weave of  it slip
between his fingers. He glances up at the house’s windows as he makes his
way around the walls. There is, of course, no excuse for him being here in
the farmyard.  The  boys’  mother might   divine  in  an instant  what  he is
seeking and send him off. He might lose his position here, might jeopardise
whatever tenuous agreement his father  has brokered  with  the  yeoman’s
widow. Not even this thought gives the tutor pause.
   He  steps through the farmyard, avoiding  puddles and clods of  dung. It
rained earlier, as he was trying to teach the subjunctive: he heard the tick-
tick of  it  on the high  thatch of  the hall. The  sky is  beginning to drain  of
light; the sun is fading for the day; there is still the chill grip of winter in the
air. A chicken scratches diligently in the earth, groaning quietly to itself.
   He is  thinking of  the girl, her braid, her hawk. A way  to lighten the load
of these indentured visits  now  presents itself to  him. This  position,  with

37
these children, in this drear and awful  place, might become tolerable after
all. He is imagining  liaisons after tutoring, a walk  in the woods, a meeting
behind one of these sheds or outhouses.
   He does not, even for one moment, entertain the idea that the woman he
saw is in fact the eldest daughter of the house.
   She has a certain notoriety  in  these parts. It is said  that she is strange,
touched, peculiar, perhaps mad. He has heard that she wanders the back
roads and forest at will, unaccompanied, collecting plants to make dubious
potions. It is wise not to cross her for people say she learnt her crafts from
an old crone who used to make medicines and spin, and could kill  a baby
with a single glance. It is said that the stepmother lives in terror of  the girl
putting hexes on her, especially now the yeoman is dead. Her father must
have loved her, though, because he left her a sizeable dowry in his will. Not
that anyone, of course, would want to wed her. She is said to be too wild for
any man. Her mother, God rest her soul, had been a gypsy or a sorceress or
a forest sprite: the tutor has heard many of these fanciful tales about her. His
own  mother  shakes  her  head  and  tuts  when   this  girl   comes  up  in
conversation.
   The tutor  has never seen her but he pictures a half-woman, half-animal:
thick-browed, hobbling, hair streaked with grey, clothing  clotted with  mud
and foliage. The daughter of a dead forest witch. She will walk with a limp,
muttering to herself as she fumbles in her bag of curses and cures.
   He casts a glance around him, at the shadow in the lee of the pig-pen, at
the bare branches of apple trees bending over the fence at the perimeter of
the farmyard. He wouldn’t want to come across this daughter unawares. He
goes through a gate in the fence and out along a track. He glances over his
shoulder at the windows  of  the house, into  the doors of  the barn, where
cattle chew and nod in their stalls. Where might she be?
   He   is  distracted  from  thinking   about  the  mad,  witchy   sister  by   a
movement to his left:  a door  opening, the swirl  of  skirts, the  squeal of a
hinge. It  is  the girl  with  the  bird!  The very  same. Emerging from  some
roughly built  outhouse, closing the door behind her. Right here, in front of
him, as if he had summoned her presence by thought alone.
   He coughs into his fist.
   ‘Good  day to you,’ he says.
   She turns.  She looks at  him  for  a moment,  raises her eyebrows, very
slightly,  as if  she has  seen the spool  of  his  thoughts, as if   his head is

38
transparent as water. She looks all  the way  down  to his  boots and back
again.
   ‘Sir,’   she replies, after a while,  with  the merest hint of  a curtsy. ‘What
brings you to Hewlands?’
   Her  voice  is clear, modulated,  articulate. It  has an instant  effect upon
him: a quickening of his pulse, a heat in his chest.
   ‘I  am tutoring the boys here,’ he says. ‘In Latin.’
   He expects her to be impressed, to nod deferentially. A learned man is he;
a man of  letters,  of  education. No  rustic stands before you,  madam, he
wishes he could say, no mere peasant.
   But  the girl’s  expression is unchanged. ‘Ah,’ she says. ‘The Latin  tutor.
Of course.’
   He is  puzzled by the flatness of her reply. She is an altogether confusing
person: her age is hard to guess, as is her standing in the household. She is
perhaps a little older than him. She is dressed like a servant, in coarse and
dirty  clothes, but speaks like  a lady.  She is erect in  stature, almost  of a
height with  him,  her hair  dark as  his own.  She meets his eye as a  man
would,  but her  figure  and form   fill   out that  jerkin  in  a  manner that  is
distinctly female.
   The tutor  decides that boldness is the best course of action here. ‘May I
see your . . . your bird?’
   She frowns. ‘My  bird?’
   ‘I   saw you earlier, emerging from  the forest, did  I not?  With a  bird on
your arm? A hawk. A most intriguing—’
   For  the  first   time,  her  face betrays  an  emotion:  concern, worry,  an
element of fear. ‘You won’t tell  them,’ she gestures towards the farm, ‘will
you? I was forbidden to take her out today, you see, but she was so restless,
so hungry, I couldn’t bear to shut her up all afternoon. You won’t  say, will
you, that you saw me? That I was out?’
   The tutor  smiles. He steps towards her. ‘I shall never speak of it,’   he is
able to say, grandly,  consolingly. He  puts his  hand on her  arm. ‘Do  not
concern yourself.’
   She  flicks  her  gaze up to  meet  his. They  regard each  other at  close
quarters. He sees eyes almost gold in colour, with a deep amber ring around
their centres. Flecks of green. Long dark lashes. Pale skin with freckles over
the nose and along the cheekbones. She does a strange thing: she puts her
hand to his, where it  is resting on her forearm. She takes hold of  the skin

39
and muscle between his thumb and forefinger and presses. The grip is firm,
insistent, oddly intimate, on the edge of  painful. It  makes him draw in  his
breath. It makes his head swim. The certainty of it. He doesn’t think anyone
has ever touched him there, in that way, before. He could not take his hand
away without a sharp tug, even if  he wanted to. Her strength is surprising
and, he finds, peculiarly arousing.
   ‘I  .  . .’ he begins, without any idea where that sentence will go, what he
wants to say. ‘Do you . . .’
   All  at once, she drops his hand; she moves her arm away from him. His
hand, where she gripped  him,  feels hot  and very  naked. He  rubs at his
forehead with it, as if to make it right again.
   ‘You  wanted to see my bird,’ she said, all business and competence now,
taking a  key from   a chain hidden  in  her skirts,  unlocking  the door  and
pushing it open. She steps inside and, dazed, he follows.
   It  is a small, dim, narrow space, with a desiccated and familiar smell to it.
He inhales: the aroma of  wood, of  lime, of  something sweet and fibrous.
Also a chalky, musky undertone. And the woman beside him: he can smell
her hair and skin, one of which carries the faint scent of rosemary. He is just
about to reach out for her again – her  shoulder, her waist are tantalisingly
close to him, and why else would she bring him in here, really, if she didn’t
also have in mind—
   ‘There she is,’ she whispers, urgent and low. ‘Can you see her?’
   ‘Who?’  he says, distracted by the waist, the rosemary, the shelves around
him, which  are becoming clearer in  the  gloom, as his  eyes adjust to the
dark. ‘What?’
   ‘My  falcon,’  she says, and steps forward, and the tutor sees, at the far end
of the outhouse, a tall wooden stake on which perches a bird of prey.
   It   is  hooded, wings  folded  back  on  themselves, scaled ochre  talons
gripping the stand. Its stance is hunched, shrugged, as if assailed by rain.
The feathers of its wings are dark but its breast is pale and rippled like the
bark of a tree. It seems extraordinary to him to be in such close proximity to
a creature which is so emphatically from another element, from wind or sky
or perhaps even myth.
   ‘Good  God,’  he hears himself say, and she turns and, for the first time,
she smiles.
   ‘She’s  a kestrel,’ she murmurs. ‘A   friend of  my father’s,  a priest, gave
her to me as a chick. I take her out to fly  most days. I won’t take her hood

40
off now but she knows you’re here. She’ll remember you.’
   The tutor doesn’t doubt it. Although  the bird’s eyes and beak are covered
with  a  miniature  hood, fashioned  from  leather –  sheep or  perhaps kid
leather, he catches himself wondering, to his irritation  –  its head twitches
and swivels with  every word they  speak, every movement they make. He
would like,  he finds, to  look into  the bird’s  face, to see that eye, to know
what lies behind that hood.
   ‘She  caught two mice today,’  the woman says. ‘And  a vole. She flies,’
she says, turning to him, ‘entirely in silence. They cannot hear her come.’
   The tutor,  emboldened by her stare, puts out a hand. He encounters her
sleeve, her jerkin and, finally,  her waist. He  curves his hand around it, as
firmly as she had touched him, attempting to draw her towards him.
   ‘What’s  your name?’ he says.
   She pulls away but he grips her more tightly.
   ‘I  shan’t tell you.’
   ‘You  shall.’
   ‘Let  me go.’
   ‘Tell  me first.’
   ‘And  then will  you let me go?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘How  do I know you’ll  keep your promise, Master Tutor?’
   ‘I  always keep my promises. I am a man of my word.’
   ‘As  well as a man of hands. Let me go, I tell you.’
   ‘Your  name, first.’
   ‘And  then you will  release me?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘Very  well.’
   ‘You  will  tell me?’
   ‘Yes, it’s . . .’
   ‘What  is it?’
   ‘Anne,’   she says, or seems to say, at the same time as he is saying:  ‘I
must know.’
   ‘Anne?’  he  repeats, thrown, the word at  once familiar  yet queer in  his
mouth. It was the name of his sister, who died not quite two years ago. He
has not, he realises, spoken the name since the day she was buried. He sees
again, and for a moment, the wet  churchyard, the dripping  yew trees, the

41
dark maw of the ground, ripped open to accept the white-wrapped body, so
slight and small. Too small, it seemed, to go into the earth like that, alone.
   The  falconer girl  takes advantage of his  momentary confusion to  push
him away from  her; he topples into the  shelves that run around the walls.
There is a strange, echoey sound, like a  thousand game counters or balls
finding  their  place.  He  gropes around himself  and  finds  several round
objects, tight-skinned, cool,  a spike  at their  centre. Suddenly he  realises
what the familiar smell in here is.
   ‘Apples,’  he says.
   She gives a short laugh, across the space from him, her hands resting on
the shelf behind her, the falcon beside her. ‘It’s the apple store.’
   He brings one up to his face and inhales the scent, sharp, specific, acidic.
It  brings a  slew of  distant  images to  mind:  fallen  leaves, sodden grass,
woodsmoke, his mother’s kitchen.
   ‘Anne,’  he says, biting into the apple’s flesh.
   She smiles, her lips curving in  a way that maddens and delights him, all
at the same time. ‘That is not my name,’ she says.
   He  lowers the apple, in  mock-outrage, in partial  relief. ‘You  told  me it
was.’
   ‘I  didn’t.’
   ‘You  did.’
   ‘You  weren’t listening, then.’
   He  flings  aside the  half-eaten apple and comes towards her.  ‘Tell  me
now.’
   ‘I  won’t.’
   ‘You  will.’
   He puts his hands to her shoulders, then lets his fingertips skip down her
arms, watching her shiver at his touch.
   ‘You’ll   tell me,’ he says, ‘when we kiss.’
   She puts  her head to one side.  ‘Presumptuous,’ she says. ‘What  if  we
never kiss?’
   ‘But  we shall.’
   Again,  her hand finds his;  her fingers grip  the flesh between his thumb
and forefinger. He  raises his brows and  looks into  her face. She has the
expression of a woman reading a particularly hard piece of text,  a woman
trying to decipher something, to work something out.
   ‘Hmm,’  she says.

42
   ‘What  are you doing?’ he asks. ‘Why do you hold my hand like that?’
   She frowns; she looks at him directly, searchingly.
   ‘What   is  it?’   he  says, suddenly  disquieted  by  her,  her silence,  her
concentration, her grip on his hand. The apples rest in their grooves around
them. The bird sits immobile on its perch, listening in.
   The woman leans towards him. She releases his hand, which again feels
raw, peeled, ravaged. Without warning, she presses her mouth to  his. He
feels the  twin   plushness of  her  lips,  the  hard  press of   her  teeth, the
impossible smoothness of the skin of her face. Then she pulls back.
   ‘It’s   Agnes,’ she says. And  this name, too, he  knows, although he has
never met anyone with  it.  Agnes. Said  differently  from  how it  might  be
written on a page, with that near-hidden, secret g. The tongue curls towards
it  yet barely  touches it.  Ann-yis.  Agn-yez.  One must  lean into  the  first
syllable, then skip over the next.
   She is slipping  out of  the space between his body and the shelves. She
opens the door and the light beyond is dazzling white, overwhelming. Then
the door bangs behind her and he is alone, with the falcon, with the apples,
with the smell of  wood and autumn, and the dry, feathered, meaty smell of
the bird.
   He is so stupefied, by the kiss, by the apple store, by the remembered feel
of  her shoulders, by  plans  of  what  he will   do  next  time  he is  sent to
Hewlands, schemes to get that maid on her own again, that he is  halfway
back to town  before a thought hits  him.  Isn’t it  said that  the household’s
eldest daughter keeps a hawk?

There used to be a story in these parts about a girl who lived at the edge of a
forest.
   People would say these words, to each other, Did you ever hear about the
girl who lived  at the edge of a forest? as they sat around the fire at night, as
they kneaded dough, as they  carded wool  for  spinning.  Such stories, of
course, make the night pass more quickly, soothe a fractious child, distract
others from their cares.
   At  the edge of a forest, a girl.
   There is a promise, from teller to listener, concealed in that opening, like
a note  tucked into  a  pocket, a  hint  that  something is  about to  happen.
Anyone in the vicinity would  turn their head and prick their ears, their mind

43
already forming a picture of the girl, perhaps picking her way through trees,
or standing beside the green wall of a forest.
   And  what  a  forest it  was.  Dense, verdant, crazily  cross-stitched with
brambles and ivy, the trees so closely packed that there were whole swathes,
it was said, that received no light at all. Not a place to get lost, then. There
were paths that went round and back on themselves, paths that led travellers
from their  route, their intentions. Breezes that whipped up  from nowhere.
Certain clearings where you might hear music or  whispers or murmurs of
your name, saying, Here, come here, come this way.
   The  children who  lived near the  forest were instructed from  the cradle
never to venture in alone. Maidens were exhorted to stay away, warned of
what might lurk  in those green and brambled depths. There were creatures
in there who resembled humans – wood-dwellers, they were called – who
walked and talked, but had never set foot  outside the forest, had lived  all
their lives  in its  leafish light,  its  encircling  branches, its wet and tangled
interior. It was said that a hunting hound, a marvellous creature it was, with
sleek flanks and gleaming fangs, had dived into the bushes in pursuit of  a
deer, and was not seen again. It followed the white flash of the animal and
the forest closed around it, never to release it.
   People who needed to go through the forest would stop to pray; there was
an altar, a cross, where you could pause and put your safety in the hands of
the Lord, hope that He had heard you, trust that He  would watch for  you,
that He wouldn’t let  your path intersect with those of the wood-dwellers or
the forest sprites or the creatures of the leaves. The cross became covered,
choked, some said, with tight skeins of ivy. Other travellers put their faith in
darker powers: all around the fringes of the forest there were shrines where
people tied shreds of their clothing to  branches, left cups of ale, loaves of
bread, scraps of crackling, strings of bright beads in the hope that the spirits
of the trees might be appeased and give them safe passage.
   So, in  a house right at the edge of the forest, dwelt the girl and her little
brother. The  trees could  be seen from  the  back  windows,  tossing their
restless heads on windy days, shaking their bare and twisted fists in winter.
The girl   and  her  brother were  born  feeling  the  pull   of  the  forest,  its
beckoning power.
   People who  had lived in  the village  a long time  believed that the girl’s
mother had come out of this  wood. From where, no one knew. She might

44
have been a wood-dweller who got lost, who became separated from those
of her kind, or she might have been something other.
   Nobody knew. The story went that she had appeared one day, parting the
brambles, stepping out of  the  green, twilit   world,  and from  then  on the
farmer, who happened to be standing there, watching his sheep, could never
look away from her. He picked the leaves from her hair and the snails from
her skirts. He brushed the twigs and moss from her sleeves, bathed the mud
from her feet. He took her into  his house, fed her, clothed her, married her
and, not long after, a baby girl was born to them.
   At  this point  in the story, the tellers would  usually make it clear that no
woman had ever doted on a child like this  one. She bound the baby to her
back and carried it wherever she went, walking about the farmhouse on her
bare feet, even on the coldest winter days. She would not lay the child in a
cradle, even at night,  but  kept her  close, the way  an animal  might.  She
disappeared for hours on end into the forest, with  the baby, coming home
after dark, with perhaps an apronful of unpeeled chestnuts, to a house with
no fire,   no  food,  nothing  ready for   her husband  to  eat. The  wives  in
neighbouring houses began to whisper, asking each other how the man put
up with   it.  And,   knowing  the  new  mother  was  herself motherless,  or
appeared so, those women came to the farm, to give her their  wisdom on
housekeeping, weaning, the avoidance of  illness,  the best  way to  stitch
cloth, how the woman must wear a coif to cover her hair, now that she was
married.
   The woman nodded at them all, with  a distant smile. She was frequently
seen in the road with her hair uncovered and loose about her shoulders. She
had dug a patch of ground outside the farmhouse and was growing strange
plants in it  –  woodland ferns and clambering worts,  peppery flowers and
ugly, low-lying  bushes. The only person she seemed to talk to was an old
widow-woman who lived  at the far end of the village. They could  often be
seen in conversation in the widow’s small walled garden, the older woman
leaning on her stick as the younger, baby bound to her back, still barefoot,
still with her hair on display, stooped to tend the widow’s herbs.
   It  wasn’t  long  before the  woman was brought  to bed  again, this  time
giving birth to  a boy, who was strong from the moment he drew breath. He
was an enormous child, with  wide hands and feet big enough to walk  on.
The woman did as before, tying the baby to  her, but a day or two after  he
was born, she took off into the forest, the girl child toddling beside her.

45
   When her belly was swollen for the third time, the woman’s luck ran out.
She took to bed, to birth  her third  child, but this  time, she did not  rise up
from it again. The village women came to wash and lay her out, prepare her
for the next  world.  They wept as they  did so, not  because they had been
fond of the woman, who had appeared out of the forest and married one of
their own, who went by the name of a tree, who had so little to say to them,
who had rebuffed their  attempts at companionship, but because her death
reminded them of the possibility  of their own.  They cried together as they
cleaned and combed  her  hair,  as they  peeled the  dirt   from  under  her
fingernails, as they pulled a white shift  over her head, as they wrapped up
the tiny pod of the stillborn child and placed it in the corpse’s arms.
   The little  girl  sat watching, her back to the wall,  legs crossed under her,
not uttering a sound. She did not sob, she did not weep; she said not a word.
Her gaze did not waver from  the body of  her mother. In her lap,  she held
her little brother, who sobbed and snivelled and wiped his eyes on her dress.
If  any of  those well-meaning neighbours approached, the girl  would  spit
and claw, like  a cat. She would  not let  go of  her brother, no matter  how
many people tried to prise him from her. Hard to help a child like that, they
said, hard to feel anything for her.
   The only  person she would let near her was the widow-woman, who had
been a particular friend of her mother’s. The widow sat on a chair near the
children, quite motionless, a bowl of meal in her lap. Every now and again,
the girl would permit the woman to spoon some pap into the boy’s mouth.
   One of  the neighbours remembered her unmarried sister, Joan, who was
young but had had care of many smaller siblings, as well as pigs, and was
used to hard work.  Why  not engage her at  the farmer’s place? Someone
would have to keep house, to mind the children, to tend the fire and stir the
pot. Who knew what might ensue? The farmer was, everyone knew, a man
of means, with a fine hall  and acres of land; the children could be brought
to heel, with the right handling.
   Now,  it may or  may not be true that before Joan had passed a month at
the farm she was complaining about the girl  to  anyone who would  listen.
The child was driving  her to distraction. She had twice woken in the night
to find  the girl  standing above her, gripping her hand. She had caught her
sliding  into  her pocket  something which,  on  inspection, appeared to  be
twigs bound  up with  a  chicken’s feather. She had discovered ivy   leaves
under her pillow, and who else would have put them there?

46
   The women of  the village didn’t know  what to say or whether to believe
her, but it was noticed by many that Joan’s skin became spotted and pocked.
That her hands grew warts. That her spinning was tangled and frayed, that
her bread refused to rise. But the girl was only a child, a very young child,
so how could it be that she was capable of such deeds?
   You  might think  that Joan would  be put off,  would  leave the farm and
return home to her  family. Joan was not  so easily deterred by a  naughty,
wayward  child.   She held   on  grimly,   rubbing  pig  fat   into   her  warts,
scrubbing her face with a cloth dipped in ash.
   In   time,  as is  often  the way  of   these things,  Joan’s persistence was
rewarded. The farmer took her for his wife and she went on to bear him six
children, all of them fair and rosy and round, like herself, like the father.
   After  her wedding, Joan stopped complaining to people about the girl, as
abruptly as if someone had sewn up her mouth. There was nothing unusual
about her, she would say tartly. Nothing at all. It was nonsense and gossip to
say that the girl could  see into people’s souls. There was nothing amiss in
her family, in her farmhouse, nothing at all.
   Word  spread, of course, about the girl’s  unusual abilities.  People came
under cover of darkness. The girl, as she grew older, found a way  for  her
path to coincide with those of the people who needed her. It was known, in
the area, that she walked the perimeter of the forest, the fringes of the trees,
in late afternoon, in  early evening, her falcon  swooping into the  branches
and back to land on her leather gauntlet. She took out this bird at dusk so, if
you were of a mind, you could arrange to be walking in the area.
   If  asked, the girl  – a woman, now –  would remove the falconer’s glove
and hold your hand, just  for a moment, pressing the flesh between thumb
and forefinger where all your hand’s strength lay, and tell you what she felt.
The sensation, some said, was dizzying, draining, as if she was drawing all
the strength out of you;  others said it  was invigorating, enlivening,  like  a
shower of rain. Her bird circled  the sky above, feathers spread, calling out,
as if in warning.
   People said the girl’s name was Agnes.

This is the  story, the myth of  Agnes’s childhood. She herself might  tell  a
different story.
   Outside  were the  sheep and they must  be fed,  watered, cared for,  no
matter what. They must be brought in and out and from one field to another.

47
   Inside was the fire and it must never be left to go out. It  must be fed and
fed and tended and poked, and sometimes her mother must blow on it, with
pursed lips.
   And  the mother herself  was a slippery thing,  because there had been a
mother, and she’d had slender, strong ankles above bare feet. Those feet had
blackened soles and walked one way then the other over the patterns of the
flagstones, and sometimes they walked out of the house and past the sheep
and into  the  forest,  where  they  stepped through leaves  and twigs   and
mosses. There was a hand, too, that held Agnes’s, to stop her falling, and it
was warm  and  firm.  If   Agnes was  lifted  from   the forest  floor   to  that
mother’s back, she could nestle under the cloak of hair. The trees appeared
then, to her, through the dark skeins, like a lantern show. Look, the mother
said, a squirrel, and a reddish flourish of  tail disappeared up a trunk, as if
she herself had  conjured it  from  the  bark.  Look,  a kingfisher:  a  jewel-
backed arrow  piercing  the silver  skin  of  a  brook.  Look,  hazelnuts: the
mother clambering into the boughs, shaking them with her strong arms and
down came clusters of dun-jacketed pearls.
   Her brother, Bartholomew, with  the wide, surprised eyes and fingers that
opened into white stars, rode on their mother’s  front and the two  of  them
could stare into each other’s faces as they went along, interlace their fingers
over the round bones of their  mother’s shoulders. Their mother  cut green
rushes for them,  which  she dried, then  wove into  dolls.  The  dolls  were
identical, and Agnes and Bartholomew tucked them side by side into a box,
their blank green faces gazing trustingly up at the roof.
   Then this mother was gone and another was there in her place beside the
fire,  stoking it  with   wood, blowing   at the  flames, hauling  the pot  from
hearthstone to grating, saying, Don’t touch, mind, hot. This second mother
was wider, her hair pale, screwed up in a knot, hidden under a coif grimed
by sweat. She smelt of mutton and oil. She had reddened skin covered with
freckles, as if   splashed by a  cart going  through  mud. She had  a name,
‘Joan’, that  made Agnes  think  of  a howling  dog.  She took  a knife  and
lopped off Agnes’s hair, saying she hadn’t the time  to be attending to that
every day. She picked up the rush babies, declared them devilish poppets,
and fed them to the fire.  When Agnes burnt  her fingers trying  to pull  out
their  scorched forms,  she  laughed  and said  Agnes  had  got  what  she
deserved. She had shoes tied over her feet. Those feet never went from farm
to forest. If Agnes went alone, without asking, this mother removed one of

48
the shoes and lifted Agnes’s skirt and brought the shoe down on the back of
her legs, whack, crack, and the pain was so  surprising, so unfamiliar  that
Agnes forgot to cry out. She stared instead at the beams, high above, where
the other mother had tied  a bundle of  herbs to a  stone with  a hole at its
centre. To keep away bad luck, she had said. Agnes remembered her doing
this. She bit her lip. She ordered herself not to cry. She looked at the black
eye of the stone. She wondered when this mother would come back. She did
not weep.
   This  new mother would also remove her shoe if Agnes said, You are not
my mother, or if  Bartholomew trod  on the dog’s tail,  or if  Agnes spilt the
soup, or let the geese out into the road, or didn’t lift the pig-pail all the way
to the slop trough. Agnes learnt to be agile, quick. She learnt the advantages
of invisibility,   how  to  pass through a room  without  drawing  notice. She
learnt that what is  hidden within  a person may be brought forth  if,  say, a
sprinkling of  bladderwort were to find  its  way into  that person’s cup. She
learnt that creepers disentangled from an  oak trunk,  brushed against bed
linen, will  ensure no sleep for whoever lies there. She learnt that if she took
her father  by  the hand  and led  him  to  the  back door,  where Joan had
uprooted all  the forest  plants, her father  would  go silent,  and then Joan
would wail  and tell him  she hadn’t meant any harm, she’d taken them for
weeds. And she learnt that, afterwards, Joan would  reach under the table
and pinch her, leaving purple blotches on her skin.
   It  was a time of confusion, of the seasons following hard upon each other.
Of rooms dim with smoke. Of the constant bleat and groan of sheep. Of her
father away from  the hearth for  most of the  day, tending the animals. Of
trying to stop the mud of  the outside reaching the clean inside. Of keeping
Bartholomew away from the fire, away from Joan, away from the millpond
and the carts in the road and the trampling hoofs of horses and the stream
and the swinge of the scythe. Ailing lambs were put in a basket by the fire,
fed from milk-soaked rags, their reedy cries sawing through the room. Her
father in   the yard,  ewes gripped  between  his knees,  their  eyes rolling
heavenwards in terror,  him  guiding  the  shears through their  wool.   The
fleeces fell like  storm  clouds to  the ground and out  of  each rose quite a
different creature – thin, milk-skinned, gaunt.
   Everyone told  Agnes that there had been no other mother. Whatever are
you talking  about? they cried. When she insisted, they changed tack. You
won’t remember your real  mother – you couldn’t  possibly remember. She

49
told  them this  wasn’t  true;  she stamped her  foot;  she banged her  fists
against the table; she screeched at them like a fowl. What did it mean? Why
did they  persist with  these lies,  these falsehoods? She remembered. She
remembered everything. She said this to the apothecary’s widow who lived
at the edge of  the village,  a woman  who took  in  wool  for spinning;  she
continued to  work  her treadle, as if   Agnes hadn’t  spoken, but then  had
nodded. Your mother, she said, was pure of heart. There was more kindness
in her little  finger  –  and she held up her own  gnarled hand – than in  the
whole of any of those others.
   She remembered everything. Everything except where she had gone, why
she had left.
   At  night, Agnes whispered to Bartholomew about the woman who liked
to walk with  them through the forest, who tied a stone with a hole to herbs,
who made them rush babies, who had a garden of plants at the back door.
She remembered it all. Almost all.
   Then one day she came upon her father behind the pig-pen, his knee on
the neck of a lamb, bringing down his knife. The smell, the sight, the colour
took her back to a  bed soaked red and a room of carnage, of violence, of
appalling crimson. She stared at her father, stared and stared, yet did not see
him at all. Instead, she saw a bed with a red bloom at its centre and then a
narrow box. In it,  she knew, was her mother, but not as she had been. This
mother was different again. She was waxy and chill  and silent, and in her
arms was a wrapped bundle with the sad, wizened face of a doll. The priest
had had to come at night because it was a secret, and he was a priest Agnes
had never seen before. He had long robes and a burning bowl that he swung
over the box, muttering strange, song-like words. Agnes must never tell, her
father had said, between sobs, never tell the neighbours or anyone that the
priest came and spoke magic words over the wax woman and the sad baby.
Before he left, the priest had touched Agnes once, lightly, on the head, his
thumb pressing into  her brow, and he  had said, looking  straight into  her
eyes, in language familiar to her, Poor lamb.
   Agnes says all this to her father, as he kneels there on this other lamb, red
pumping from the line  drawn in its  neck. She shouts it – she yells it  from
the base of her lungs, the core of her heart. She says, I remember, I know all
that.
   Hush, maidy, he says, turning to her. You cannot remember. Hush, now.
Don’t say these things. There was no priest in the night.  He did not  touch

50
your head. Don’t ever let anyone hear you say that. Don’t  let your mother
hear.
   Agnes doesn’t know  if  he means Joan, the woman in the house, or her
own mother, up in Heaven. It feels to her as though the world  has cracked
open, like an egg. The sky above her could, at any moment, split  and rain
down fire and ash upon them all.  At the  edges of her sight seem to hover
dark, nebulous shapes. The farmhouse, the pig-pen, her brothers and sisters
in the  yard, all  seem at once far  away and unbearably close. She knows
there had  been  a  priest.  How  can  her  father  pretend  otherwise? She
remembers the cross around his neck that he brought to his lips to kiss, the
way his bowl  left  feather smoke in the air  over her mother and the  baby,
that he  spoke her  mother’s  name, over  and over,  in  the middle  of   his
mysterious prayers: Rowan, Rowan.  She remembers. Poor lamb, he  had
said to her. Her  father says, Hush, never say that, so she runs from  him,
from the lamb,  slack and empty of  blood  now, little  more than a  sack of
gizzard and bone, and into the forest where she screams these things to the
trees, to the leaves, to the branches, where no one can hear. She grips the
thorned stems of brambles until they pierce her skin and she shouts to the
God of the church they  walk to  every Sunday, in neat formation, carrying
the babies on their backs, where there is no smoke, no bowls, no speaking
in tongues. She calls on him, she bawls his  name. You, she says, you, do
you hear me,  I  am finished  with  you. After  this  time,  I  will  go  to  your
church because I must but I shan’t say a word there because there is nothing
after you die.  There is the  soil and  there is the body  and it  all  comes to
nothing.
   She tells  this to  the apothecary’s widow and these words make the old
woman look  up.  The  wheel  whirs  more  slowly,  winding  down,  as  the
woman stares at the child. Never say this to anyone else, she says to Agnes,
in her creaking voice. Never. You’ll  bring  seven kinds of trouble down on
your head, otherwise.
   She grows up  watching the mother with  the shoes hug and pet her fair,
chubby children.  She watches her place the freshest breads, the choicest
meat on their plates. Agnes must live with a sense of herself as second-tier,
deficient in some way, unwanted. She is the one who must sweep the floors,
change the babies’ napkins, rock them to sleep, rake out the grate and coax
the fire to life. She sees, she recognises, that any accident or misfortune – a
dropped platter, a broken jug, some ravelled knitting, unrisen bread – will

51
somehow be her fault.  She grows up  knowing  that she must protect and
defend Bartholomew from all of  life’s  blows, because no one else will. He
is of  her blood, wholly  and completely, in  a way that  no one else is. She
grows up with a hidden, private flame inside her: it licks at her, warms her,
warns her. You need to get away, the flame tells her. You must.
   Agnes will   rarely – if  ever – be touched. She will  grow up  craving just
that: a hand on hers, on her hair, on her shoulder, the brush of fingers on her
arm. A  human print of  kindness, of fellow   feeling. Her  stepmother never
comes near her. Her siblings paw and claw at her but that doesn’t count.
   She grows up fascinated by the hands of others, drawn always to  touch
them, to feel them in hers. That muscle between thumb and forefinger is, to
her, irresistible. It can be shut and opened like the beak of a bird and all the
strength of  the grip   can be found  there,  all  the power  of  the  grasp. A
person’s ability, their reach, their essence can be gleaned. All that they have
held, kept, and all they long to grip is there in that place. It  is possible, she
realises, to find  out everything you  need to know  about a person just  by
pressing it.
   When  she is no more than seven or eight, a visitor  lets Agnes hold  her
hand in  this way  and Agnes  says, You will   meet your  death within  the
month, and doesn’t it come true, just like that, the visitor being struck down
with  an ague  the very  next  week?  She says that  the shepherd will   be
knocked off  his feet  and hurt his  leg, that her  father will   be caught in  a
storm, that the baby will fall ill  on its second birthday, that the man offering
to buy her father’s sheepskins is a liar, that the pedlar at the back door has
intentions towards the kitchen maid.
   Joan and the father worry. It is not Christian, this ability. They beg her to
stop, not to touch people’s hands, to hide this odd gift. No good will  come
of it,  her father says, standing over Agnes as she crouches by the fire, no
good at all. When she reaches up to take his hand, he snatches it away.
   She grows up feeling  wrong, out of  place, too dark, too tall,  too unruly,
too opinionated, too silent,  too strange. She grows up with  the awareness
that she is merely tolerated, an irritant,  useless, that she does not deserve
love, that she will  need to change herself substantially, crush herself down
if she is to be married. She grows up, too, with the memory of what it meant
to be properly loved, for what you are, not what you ought to be.
   There is just enough of this recollection alive, she hopes, to enable her to
recognise it if she meets it again. And if  she does, she won’t hesitate. She

52
will  seize it with both hands, as a means of escape, a means of survival. She
won’t listen to  the protestations of others, their objections, their reasoning.
This will  be her chance, her way through the narrow hole at the heart of the
stone, and nothing will stand in her way.

53
           amnet climbs  the stairs,  breathing hard after  his  run  through the
town. It  seems to drain his strength, putting  one leg in front  of  the other,
lifting each foot to each stair. He uses the handrail to haul himself along.
   He is sure, he is certain, that when he reaches the upper floor, he will see
his mother. She will be leaning over the bed where Judith is lying, her body
curved like a bow. Judith will  be tucked into  fresh sheets; her face will be
pale but awake, alert, trusting. Agnes will   be giving her a  tincture; Judith
will  be wincing at its bitterness but swallowing it all the same. His mother’s
potions can cure anything  – everyone knows  that. People come from  all
over town,  all  over Warwickshire  and beyond, to  speak with  his mother
through the window of  the narrow cottage, to describe their symptoms, to
tell her what they suffer, what they endure. Some of these people she invites
in. They  are women, mostly, and she seats them by the  fire,  in the  good
chair, while  she takes their hands and holds  them in  her own, while  she
grinds some roots, some plant  leaves, a sprinkling  of  petals. They  leave
with a cloth parcel or a tiny bottle, stoppered with paper and beeswax, their
faces easier, lightened.
   His  mother will   be here. She will  bring  Judith back to health. She can
drive away any illness, any malady. She will know what to do.
   Hamnet comes into  the top room. There  is just his  sister, alone, on the
bed.
   She has, he sees, as he steps towards her, become paler, weaker, in the
time it took him to go for  the physician. The skin around her eyes is bluish-
grey, as if  bruised. Her breaths are shallow  and quick, her  eyes, beneath
their lids, flick back and forth, as if she is seeing something he cannot.
   Hamnet’s legs fold under him. He sits down on the side of the pallet. He
can hear the suck and draw of her breath. There is, for him, some comfort in
this. He  hooks his smallest finger  into  the corresponding one of  hers. A
single tear leaks from his eye and drops onto the sheet, then into the rushes
beneath.
   Another tear falls. Hamnet has failed. He sees this. He needed to summon
someone, a parent, a grandparent, a grown-up, a physician. He has failed on
all counts. He shuts his eyes, to keep the tears in, and lets his head fall to his
knees.

54
Half  an hour  or so  later, Susanna comes in through  the back  door. She
dumps her basket on a chair and slumps down at the table. She looks one
way, disconsolately, she looks the other. The fire is out; no one is here. Her
mother had promised  she’d be  back and she isn’t.   Her mother  is  never
where she says she will be.
   Susanna removes her cap and tosses it to the bench beside her. It slides
off  and on  to the  floor.  Susanna thinks about bending  to retrieve  it  but
doesn’t. Instead, she finds it  with  her  toe and kicks  it  further away.  She
sighs. She is nearly fourteen. Everything – the sight of the pots stacked on
the table, the herbs and flowers tied to the rafters, her sister’s corn doll on a
cushion, the  jug  set  by  the  hearth –  provokes  in  her  a  profound  and
fathomless irritation.
   She gets up. She pushes open a window, to let in a little air, but the street
smells of horse, of ordure, of something rank and rotting. She shuts it with a
bang. Just for a moment, she believes she hears something from upstairs. Is
someone here? She stands for a moment, listening.  But  no. There  is no
further sound.
   She sits herself in  the good chair, the one her mother’s visitors  use, the
people who creep in  at  the door, usually  late at  night,  to whisper  about
pains, bleeding, lack of bleeding, dreams, portents, aches, difficulties, loves
inconvenient, loves importunate, augurs, moon cycles, a hare across their
path, a bird inside the house, a loss of feeling in  a limb,  too much feeling
elsewhere, a rash, a cough, a sore, a pain here or there or in the ear or the
leg or the lungs or the heart. Their mother bends her head to listen, giving a
nod, a sympathetic click  of the tongue. Then she takes their hand and, as
she does so, she lets her gaze float upwards, to the ceiling, to the  air, her
eyes unfocused, half closed.
   Some have asked Susanna how her mother does it. They have sidled up
to her in the market or out in the streets to demand how Agnes divines what
a body needs or lacks or bursts with, how she can tell if a soul is restive or
hankering, how she knows what a person or a heart hides.
   It  makes Susanna want to sigh and throw something. She can tell now if
someone is about to enquire into her mother’s unusual abilities and she tries
to head them off,  to excuse herself or  begin to ask them  questions about
their  family,  the weather,  the crops.  There is,  she has  learnt, a  certain
hesitancy, a particular facial  expression – half  curiosity,  half suspicion  –
which prefaces these conversations. Why do  people not see that there  is

55
nothing Susanna is less happy to talk about? How can it not be plain that it
is nothing  to do  with  her –  the herbs, the weeds, the jars  and bottles of
powders and roots and petals that make the room stink like a dung heap, the
murmuring people, the weeping, the hand-holding? Susanna, when she was
younger, used to answer truthfully: that  she did not know, that it  was like
magic, that it was a gift.  These days, however, she is curt: I have no idea,
she will say, of what you speak, her head held high, her nose tipped up, as if
sniffing the air.
   And  where is her mother now? Susanna crosses and recrosses her ankles
over each other. Traipsing about the countryside, most likely, wading  into
ponds, gathering weeds, climbing over fences to reach some plant or other,
tearing her clothes, muddying her boots. Other mothers of the town will be
buttering bread or ladling  out stew for  their children.  But Susanna’s? She
will  be making a spectacle of herself, as ever, stopping to gaze up into the
clouds, to whisper something in the ear of a mule,  to gather dandelions in
her skirts.
   Susanna is startled by  a knock  at the window.  She sits  for a  moment,
frozen in the chair. There it comes again. She pushes herself to her feet and
walks towards the  pane. Through the criss-crossing lead  and the blurred
glass, she can make out the pale arch of a coif, a dark-red bodice: someone
of  means,  then.  The  woman  knocks  again,  seeing  Susanna, with   an
imperious, commanding gesture.
   Susanna makes no move to open the window. ‘She’s not here,’ she calls
instead, drawing herself up. ‘You’ll have to come back later.’
   She turns on her heel and walks away, retreating to the chair. The woman
raps twice more  on the pane and  then Susanna hears her footsteps walk
away.
   People, people, always people, coming and going, arriving and departing.
Susanna and the twins and her mother might sit down at table to take some
broth and before they have lifted their spoons, there will be a knock and up
her mother will  start, putting aside her broth, as if  Susanna hadn’t taken a
deal of  trouble to  make it,  from  chicken bones and carrots that  required
washing and more washing, and then peeling, not to mention the hours of
stirring and straining in  the heat of the cookhouse. Sometimes it seems to
Susanna that Agnes isn’t just mother to her – and the twins, of course – but
mother to the whole town, the entire county. Will it ever end, this stream of
people through their house? Will they ever just leave them in peace to live

56
their lives?  Susanna has overheard her grandmother say that she doesn’t
know why Agnes carries on with this business because it’s not as if she has
need of money, these days. Not, her grandmother added, that it ever brought
in a great deal. Her mother had said nothing, not raising her head from her
sewing.
   Susanna curls her fingers around the carved ends of the chair arms, which
are worn apple-smooth with the touch of a hundred palms. She shuffles her
body backwards until her  spine meets the chair’s back. It  is the chair  her
father likes to sit in,  when he comes home. Twice, three, four, five times a
year. Sometimes for a week, sometimes more. During the day, he will carry
the chair upstairs, where he leans over a table to work; come the evening,
he will carry it back downstairs, to sit by the fire. I come whenever I can, he
told her, the last time  he was here, touching the tips  of his  fingers to  her
cheek. You know this to be true, he had said. He had been packing to leave,
again – rolls of paper, close with writing, a spare shirt, a book he had bound
with  cat gut  and a  cover of  pigskin.  Her  mother gone, vanished, off   to
wherever she went, for she hated to see him leave.
   He writes them letters, which their mother reads, painstakingly, her finger
moving from word  to word, her lips  forming the sounds. Their mother can
read a little  but is only  able to write  in  a rudimentary fashion. Their  aunt
Eliza used to write their replies for them – she possesses a fine hand – but,
these days, Hamnet does it. He goes to school, six days a week, from dawn
until dusk; he can write as fast as you can speak, and read Latin and Greek,
and make columns of figures. The scratch of the quill  is like  the sound of
hens’ feet in the dirt.  Their grandfather says, with pride,  that Hamnet will
be the one to take over the glove business, when he is gone, that the boy has
a fine head on his shoulders, that he is a scholar, a born businessman, the
only one of them with any sense. Hamnet leans over his school books, gives
no sign of having heard, the top of his head towards them all as they sit by
the fire, the parting of his hair meandering like a stream over his scalp.
   The letters from  their father speak of contracts, of long  days, of crowds
who hurl rotten matter if  they do not like  what they hear, of the great river
in London,  of a  rival  playhouse owner who released a bag of  rats at the
climax of their new play, of  memorising lines, lines, more lines, of the loss
of costumes, of fire, of rehearsing a scene where the players are lowered to
the stage on ropes, of the difficulty of finding food when they are out on the
road, of scenery that falls, of props that are mislaid or stolen, of carts losing

57
their wheels and pitching all into the mud, taverns that refuse them beds, of
the money he has saved, of what he needs their mother to  do, whom  she
must speak to in the town, about a tract of land he would like to purchase, a
house he has heard is for sale, a field  they should buy  and then lease, of
how he misses them, how he sends his love, how he wishes he could kiss
their faces, one by one, how he cannot wait until he is home again.
   If  the  plague comes to London, he can be back with  them  for months.
The playhouses are all shut, by order of the Queen, and no one is allowed to
gather in public.  It  is wrong to  wish for  plague, her mother has said, but
Susanna has done this a few times under her breath, at night, after she has
said her prayers. She always crosses herself afterwards. But still she wishes
it. Her father home, for  months, with them. She sometimes wonders if her
mother secretly wishes it too.
   The  latch of  the back door  clatters open and into  the room  comes her
grandmother, Mary. She  is puffing,   red in  the  face, dark  half-circles  of
sweat under her arms.
   ‘What  are you doing, sitting there like that?’ Mary says. There is no more
serious affront to her than an idle person.
   Susanna shrugs. She rubs her fingertips  against the worn  joints  of the
chair.
   Mary  casts her eyes about the room. ‘Where are the twins?’ she demands.
   Susanna raises one shoulder, lets it drop.
   ‘Haven’t    you  seen  them?’  Mary   says,  mopping  her   brow  with   a
handkerchief.
   ‘No.’
   ‘I   told  them,’ Mary  mutters,  bending to pick  up  Susanna’s fallen cap,
placing it  on the  table, ‘to  chop  the kindling  and to  light  the fire  in  the
cookhouse. And have they done it? No, they have not. They are both in for
a hiding when they come in.’
   She returns to  stand in front  of  Susanna, hands on hips. ‘And  where’s
your mother?’
   ‘Don’t  know.’
   Mary   sighs. Almost   says something. But  doesn’t.  Susanna sees this,
senses the unsaid words rippling  out  like  pennants into  the air  between
them.
   ‘Well,  come on, then,’ Mary says instead, flapping her apron at Susanna,
‘stir yourself. The supper won’t cook itself.  Come and help us, girl, instead

58
of sitting there like a brood hen.’
   Mary  takes Susanna’s arm and hauls her to her feet. They go out of the
back door, which slams shut behind them.
   Upstairs, Hamnet wakes with a start.

59
           here is suddenly nothing so excellent as teaching Latin. On the days
he is due at Hewlands, the tutor is up at first call, folding his bedclothes and
washing himself vigorously  at the pail. He  combs his hair and beard with
careful strokes. He fills his breakfast plate but leaves the table before he has
finished. He  helps his  brothers find  their  books and escorts them to  the
door, as they leave for school, waving them off. He has been known to hum,
even to yield a polite nod to his father. His sister eyes him, sideways, as he
whistles to himself,  fastening his jerkin  one way then the  other, checking
his reflection in the window  pane before leaving, tucking and retucking his
hair behind his ears, banging the door after him.
   On the days when he is not at Hewlands, he lies in his bed until his father
threatens to tan his hide unless he stirs himself. Once upright, he will slope
about the house, sighing, not answering if spoken to, chewing absently on a
crust of bread, picking things up, putting them down again. He is observed
in the  workshop, leaning  on  the counter, turning  over  pair  after pair  of
ladies’ gloves, as if searching for some meaning hidden in their seams, their
inert fingers.  He then  sighs once more and pushes them all  haphazardly
back into their box. He stands over Ned, watching as he stitches a falconer’s
belt, so closely that the boy is quite put off his work, causing John to roar at
the boy about how there’s only the door between him and the street.
   ‘And   you,’  John turns on  his  son, ‘get  out of  here. Find  some useful
occupation. If you can.’ John shakes his head, turning his attention back to
the cutting of a squirrel skin into useful, narrow strips. ‘All  that education,’
he mutters, to himself, to the slippery lengths of pelt, ‘and  not an ounce of
sense.’

His sister, Eliza, is sent later by her mother to find him. After wandering the
ground floor, the yard, she takes the stairs and goes from the boys’ chamber
to hers, to her parents’ and back; she calls his name.
   The  reply  takes a while  to  come and, when it  does, it  is  flat  in  tone,
annoyed, displeased.
   ‘Where  are you?’  she asks wonderingly, turning  her head from side  to
side.
   Again, the long, reluctant pause. Then: ‘Up here.’
   ‘Where?’  she asks, mystified.
   ‘Here.’

60
   Eliza  moves from her parents’ chamber, to stand at the foot of the ladder
to the attic. She calls his name again.
   A  sigh. A mysterious rustle. ‘What do you want?’
   For a moment, Eliza thinks he might be doing the thing that boys – young
men –  do  sometimes. She  has enough  brothers to  know   that  there is
something that happens in private, and they are ill-tempered if interrupted.
She hesitates at the bottom of the ladder, one hand on a rung.
   ‘May  I . . . come up?’
   A  silence.
   ‘Are  you sick?’
   Another sigh. ‘No.’
   ‘Mother  says, can you go to the tannery and then to the—’
   There is a strangled, inarticulate cry from above, the sound of something
weighty being thrown against the wall, a boot perhaps or a loaf of bread, a
movement, then a thud, not unlike  someone standing up and hitting  their
head on a rafter. ‘Ow,’  he screams, and lets out a volley  of  curses, some
startling, some Eliza has never heard before but will   ask him  about later,
when he is in a better humour.
   ‘I’m   coming up,’ she says, and begins to climb the ladder.
   She rises, head first, into a warm and dusty space, the only light coming
from two candles propped on a bale. Her brother is sitting collapsed on the
floor, his head cradled in his hands.
   ‘Let  me see,’ she says.
   He  mutters something inaudible, possibly  heretical, but the meaning is
clear: he wants her to go away and leave him alone.
   She puts her hands on his, peels back his fingers.  With her  other hand,
she lifts  the candle and examines the place of  pain. There  is a swelling,
reddened and bruised, just under his hairline. She presses its outer edges,
making him wince.
   ‘Hmm,’  she says. ‘You’ve had worse.’
   He  lifts  his eyes to  hers and they regard each other for  a moment. He
gives a half-smile. ‘That is true,’ he says.
   She lets her hand drop and, still holding the candle, sits herself down on
one of the wool  bales that are crammed into the space between floor and
roof. They  have been up here for  several years. Once, last winter, in  the
yard, as they were wrapping gloves in  linen,  to be placed finger  to wrist,
finger to wrist, in baskets on a cart, her brother spoke up and asked why the

61
attic was filled with wool  bales, and what was their intended purpose? Their
father leant across the cart and seized a fistful of his son’s jerkin. There are
no wool bales in this house, he said, giving his son a shake with each word.
Is that clear? Eliza’s brother had stared steadily back into his father’s eyes,
without blinking.  Clear enough, he had replied, eventually. Their father had
held on, fist clenched around his son’s clothing, as if considering whether or
not he was being insolent, then released him. Don’t speak of what doesn’t
concern you, he had muttered, as he returned to his wrapping, and everyone
in the yard let out the breath they had been holding.
   Eliza   allows  herself to   bounce up  and down   on the  wool   bale, the
existence of which they are bound always to deny. Her brother watches her
for a  moment but  says nothing. He  tips  his head back and  stares at the
rafters.
   She wonders if he is recalling that this attic was always their space – hers
and his, and also Anne’s, before she died. The three of them would retreat
here in the afternoons, when he got back from school, pulling the ladder up
after them, despite the wails and entreaties of their younger siblings. It was
mostly empty then, save for a few spoilt  hides that their father was saving
for some unspecified reason. Nobody could reach them there; it was just her
and him and Anne, until they were called by their  mother to perform some
task or to take over the care of one of the younger children.
   Eliza  hadn’t realised her brother still came up here; she hadn’t known he
still sought this  place as a refuge from the household. She hasn’t climbed
the ladder since Anne died. She lets her gaze rove over the room: slanted
ceilings, the undersides of the roof tiles, the bales and bales of wool, which
are to be kept here, out of sight. She sees old candle stubs, a folding knife, a
bottle of ink. There are, scattered over the floor, several curls of paper with
words scrawled on  them, crossed out,  rewritten, crossed out  again, then
crumpled and tossed aside. Her brother’s thumb and finger, the rims of his
nails, she sees, are stained black.  What  can he be  studying up  here, in
secret?
   ‘What  is the matter?’ she says.
   ‘Nothing,’  he answers, without looking at her. ‘Not a thing.’
   ‘What  is ailing you?’
   ‘Nothing.’
   ‘Then  what are you doing up here?’
   ‘Nothing.’

62
   She looks at the curls of paper. She sees the words ‘never’ and ‘fire’, and
something that might be ‘fly’  or  ‘try’.  When she raises her eyes again, she
sees that he is looking  at her, eyebrows raised. She gives an  involuntary
quick smile. He is the only person in this house – indeed, this whole town –
who knows  that she has her letters, that she can read. And  how  does he
know  this?  Because he  is  the  one  who  taught  her  and  Anne.  Every
afternoon, here, after he returned from school. He would trace a letter in the
dust, on the floor, and say, Look, Eliza, look, Anne, this is a d, this is an o,
and if you  put a g at the end, it  says ‘dog’. Do  you see that? You need to
blend the sounds, run them together, until the sense of the word arrives in
your head.
   ‘Is  “nothing”  the only thing you’re willing  to say?’ she says.
   She sees his mouth twitch and knows that he is drawing on all his lessons
in rhetoric  and argument to find  a way  to  answer this question with  that
very word.
   ‘You  can’t  do it,’   she says, with  glee. ‘You  can’t  find  a way  to reply
“nothing”, can you, however hard you try? You can’t do it. Admit it.’
   ‘I  admit nothing,’ he says triumphantly.
   They sit  for a moment, eyeing each other. Eliza balances the heel of one
shoe on the toe of the other.
   ‘People  are saying,’ she says carefully, ‘that you’ve  been seen with the
girl from Hewlands.’
   She doesn’t say some of the coarser or more defamatory things she has
heard against her brother, who is  penniless and tradeless, not to mention
rather young to be courting such a woman, who is of age and would come
with a  large dowry. What a  way out it  would  be for  the boy, she heard a
woman at the market whisper, behind her back. You can see why he’d want
to marry into money and get away from that father.
   She tells herself to refrain  from mentioning what people say of this  girl.
That she is fierce and savage, that she puts curses on people, that she can
cure anything  but also  cause anything. Those wens on  the stepmother’s
cheeks, she overheard someone say the other day, she gave her those when
the stepmother took away her falcon. She can sour the milk just by touching
it with her fingers.
   When  Eliza hears these claims, made in her  presence by people in the
street, by  neighbours, by  those  to  whom  she sells  gloves,  she doesn’t
pretend not to have heard. She stops in her tracks. She holds the eye of the

63
gossip in question (she has an unnerving stare: this she knows – her brother
has told her often enough; it is, he says, something to do with the purity of
her eye-colour, the way she can open her eyes wide enough for the whole
iris to  be seen). She is only thirteen but  she is tall for  her age. She holds
their gaze long enough for them to drop their stare, for them to shuffle off,
chastised by her boldness, her silent severity. There is, she has found, great
power to  be had in  silence. Which  is something this  brother of  hers has
never learnt.
   ‘I’ve   heard,’  she  continues, with  great  control,  ‘that  you  take  walks
together. After the lessons. Is that true?’
   He doesn’t look at her when he says, ‘And what of it?’
   ‘Into  the woods?’
   He shrugs, neither yes nor no.
   ‘Does her mother know?’
   ‘Yes,’  he replies, quickly, too quickly, then amends this to ‘I don’t know.’
   ‘But  what if  . .  .?’ Eliza  finds the question she would like to  put to him
almost too unwieldy  to ask; she has only the vaguest grasp of its content,
the deeds involved, the matters at stake. She tries again: ‘What if  you are
caught? While taking one of these walks?’
   He lifts  a shoulder, then lets it drop. ‘Then we are caught.’
   ‘Does the thought not give you pause?’
   ‘Why  would it?’
   ‘The  brother . .  .’ she begins ‘.  . . the sheep farmer. Have you not seen
him? He is a giant of a man. What if he were to—’
   Eliza’s  brother waves his hand. ‘You worry  too much.  He is always off
with his sheep. I have never encountered him at Hewlands, in all the times I
have been there.’
   She folds her hands together, squints again at the curls of paper, but can
make no sense of what is  written  there. ‘I  don’t  know if  you  know,’  she
says, timidly, ‘what people say of her but—’
   ‘I  know what is said of her,’ he snaps.
   ‘There are many who claim she is—’
   He  straightens, his colour suddenly high. ‘None of it  is true. None of  it.
I’m surprised that you would attend to such idle gabble.’
   ‘I’m   sorry,’ Eliza cries, crestfallen. ‘I’m merely –’
   ‘It  is all  falsehoods,’ he continues, as if she hasn’t spoken, ‘spread by her
stepmother. She is so jealous of her it twists her like a snake and—’

64
   ‘–  frightened for you!’
   He regards her, taken aback. ‘For me? Why?’
   ‘Because . . .’ Eliza  tries to order her thoughts, to sift through all she has
heard ‘. . . because our father will never agree to this. You must know that.
We are in debt to that family. Father will never even speak their name. And
because of what is said of her. I don’t believe it,’ she adds hastily, ‘of course
I don’t. But, still,  it is troubling. People are saying that no good can come of
this attachment of yours.’
   He  slumps back to the wool bales, as if  defeated, shutting his eyes. His
whole body is quivering, with  anger or something else. Eliza doesn’t know.
There is a long silence. Eliza  folds the fabric  of her  smock into tiny  tight
pleats. Then she remembers something else she wanted to  ask him,  and
leans forward.
   ‘Does she really have a hawk?’ she whispers, in a new voice.
   He opens his eyes, lifts his head. Brother and sister regard each other for
a moment.
   ‘She does,’ he says.
   ‘Really?  I had heard that but did not know if it was—’
   ‘It’s  a  kestrel, not a hawk,’ he says, in a rush. ‘She  trained it herself. A
priest taught her. She has a gauntlet and the bird takes off, like an arrow, up
through the trees. You have never seen anything like  it.  It  is so  different
when it  flies  – it  is  almost, you  might  think,  two  creatures. One on the
ground and another in the air. When she calls, it returns to her, circling  in
these great wheels in the sky, and it lands with such force upon the glove,
such determination.’
   ‘She has let you do this? Wear her glove and catch the hawk?’
   ‘Kestrel,’   he corrects, then nods, and the pride of  it  makes him almost
glow. ‘She has.’
   ‘I  should love,’ Eliza breathes, ‘to see that.’
   He  looks at  her, rubs his chin  with  his stained fingertips.  ‘Maybe,’  he
says, almost to himself, ‘I’ll take you with me one day.’
   Eliza lets go of her dress, the pleats falling from the fabric. She is thrilled
and terrified, all at once. ‘You will?’
   ‘Of  course.’
   ‘And  you think she will  let me fly the hawk? The kestrel?’
   ‘I  see no reason why not.’ He considers his sister for a moment. ‘You will
like her, I think. You and she are not dissimilar, in some ways.’

65
   Eliza  is shocked by this revelation. She is not dissimilar to the woman of
whom people say such terrible things? Only  the other day, at church, she
had an opportunity to observe the complexion of the mistress of Hewlands
– those boils and blotches and wens – and the idea that a person might be
able to do that to another is deeply disturbing to her. She doesn’t say this to
her brother, though, and, in truth, there is a part of her that longs to see the
girl up close, to look into  her eyes. So Eliza says nothing. Her brother does
not  appreciate being  pressed or  rushed. He  is  someone who   must be
approached sideways, with caution, as with a restive horse. She must gently
probe him and, in that way, she will likely find out more.
   ‘What  manner of person is she, then?’ Eliza asks.
   Her  brother thinks before he answers. ‘She is like no one you have ever
met. She cares not what people may think of her. She follows entirely  her
own course.’ He sits forward, placing his elbows on his knees, dropping his
voice to a whisper. ‘She can look  at a person and see right into their very
soul. There is not a drop of harshness in her. She will take a person for who
they are, not what they are not or ought to be.’ He glances at Eliza. ‘Those
are rare qualities, are they not?’
   Eliza  feels her head nodding and nodding. She is amazed at the detail in
this speech, honoured at being its recipient. ‘She sounds . . .’ she gropes for
the right word,  recalling one he taught her himself, a few  weeks ago ‘. .  .
peerless.’
   He smiles and she knows he remembers teaching it to her. ‘That’s exactly
what she is, Eliza. Peerless.’
   ‘It  also sounds,’ she begins carefully, ever so carefully, so as not to alarm
him, not to make him retreat into silence again – she cannot believe he has
already said as much as he has, ‘as though you are . . . decided. That you
are fixed. On her.’
   He  doesn’t say anything,  just stretches out to  tap his palm  against the
wool bale next to him. For a moment, she believes she has gone too far, that
he will refuse to be drawn any further, that he will get up and leave, with no
more confidences.
   ‘Have  you spoken to her family?’ she ventures.
   He shakes his head and shrugs.
   ‘Are  you going to speak to them?’
   ‘I  would,’  he mutters, head lowered, ‘but I  am in no doubt that my  case
would be refused. They would not view me as a good prospect for her.’

66
   ‘Perhaps if   you –  waited,’  Eliza  says, faltering,  laying  a hand  on his
sleeve, ‘a year or so. Then you’d be of  age. And more established in your
position. Maybe Father’s business will have seen some improvement and he
might regain some of  his  standing in the  town, and perhaps he could  be
persuaded to stop this wool—’
   He jerks his arm away, pulling himself upright. ‘And  when,’ he demands,
‘have you ever known  him to listen  to persuasion, to sense? When has he
ever changed his mind, even when he was wrong?’
   Eliza stands up from the bale. ‘I just think—’
   ‘When,’  continues her brother, ‘has  he ever exerted himself to give  me
something I want or need? When have you known him to act in my favour?
When have you known him not to go  deliberately out of his way to  thwart
me?’
   Eliza clears her throat. ‘Perhaps if you waited, then—’
   ‘The  problem is,’ her brother says, striding through the attic, through the
words scattered on the floor,  making  the curls of  paper skitter  and swirl
around his boots, ‘that I have no talent for it. I cannot abide waiting.’
   He  turns, steps on to the ladder and disappears from view. She watches
the two points of the ladder judder with his every step, then fall still.

The lines and lines of apples are moving, jolting,  rocking on their shelves.
Each apple is centred in a special groove, carved into the wooden racks that
run around the walls of this small storeroom.
   Rock, rock, jolt,  jolt.
   The  fruit  has been placed with care, just so: the woody stem down and
the star of the calyx up. The skin mustn’t touch that of  its neighbour. They
must sit like  this, lightly  held  by the wooden groove, a finger  width  from
each other, over the winter or they will spoil. If  they touch each other, they
will  brown and sag and moulder and rot. They must be preserved in rows,
like this, separate, stems down, in airy isolation.
   The children of  the house were given this duty: to pluck the apples from
the twisted branches of the  trees, to stack them together in  baskets, then
bring them here, to the apple store, and line them up on these racks, spaced
evenly and carefully, to air, to preserve, to last the winter and spring, until
the trees bring forth fruit again.
   Except that something is moving the apples. Again and again and again,
over and over, with a shunting, nudging, insistent motion.

67
   The  kestrel, on  her perch, is  hooded but alert,  always alert.  Her head
rotates within  its  ruff  of  flecked feathers, to  ascertain the source of  this
repetitive, distracting  noise. Her  ears, tuned so  acutely that  they can,  if
required, discern the heartbeat of a mouse a hundred feet  away, a stoat’s
footfall across the forest, the wingbeat of a wren over a field, pick up on the
following:  twenty   score apples being  nudged, jostled,  bothered in  their
cradles. The breathing of mammals, of a size too large to elicit the interest
of her appetite, increasing in pace. The hollow of a palm landing lightly on
muscle and bone. The click and slither of a tongue against teeth. Two planes
of fabric, of differing  texture, moving over each other in obverse direction.
   The   apples are  turning   on  their   heads;  stalks  are  appearing from
undersides, calyxes are facing  sideways, then  back, then  upwards, then
down. The pace of the knocking varies: it pauses; it slows; it builds; it pulls
back again.
   Agnes’s knees are raised, splayed open like butterfly wings. Her feet, still
in  their  boots, rest  on  the  opposite shelf;  her  hands brace  against the
whitewashed wall. Her  back straightens and bows,  seemingly of  its own
accord, and low, near-growls are being pulled out of her throat. This takes
her by surprise: her body asserting itself in this way. How it knows what to
do, how to react, how to be, where to put itself, her legs white and folded in
the dim light,  her  rear resting on the  shelf edge, her fingers gripping  the
stones of the wall.
   In  the narrow space between her and the opposite shelf is the Latin tutor.
He stands in the pale V of  her legs. His eyes are shut; his fingers grip the
curve of her back. It was his hands that undid the bows at her neckline, that
pulled down her shift, that brought out her breasts into the light – and how
startled and how white they had looked, in  the air like  that, in daytime, in
front of  another; their  pink-brown  eyes stared back in  shock. It  was her
hands, however, that lifted  her skirts, that  pushed herself back on to  this
shelf, that drew the body of the Latin tutor towards her. You, the hands said
to him, I choose you.
   And  now there is  this – this  fit. It  is  altogether unlike anything she has
felt before.  It  makes her think  of a  hand drawing on  a glove,  of  a lamb
slithering wet from  a ewe, an axe splitting open a log, a key  turning in an
oiled lock.  How, she wonders, as she looks into the face of  the tutor, can
anything fit so well, so exactly, with such a sense of rightness?

68
   The apples, stretching away from  her one way and the other, rotate and
jostle in their grooves.
   The Latin tutor opens his eyes for a moment, the black of his pupils wide,
almost unseeing. He smiles, places his  hands on either  side of  her face,
murmurs something,  she isn’t   sure what,  but  it   doesn’t  matter at  this
particular moment.  Their  foreheads touch.  Strange, she thinks,  to  have
another at such proximity: the overwhelming scale of lash, of folded eyelid,
of the hairs of the brow, all facing the same way. She doesn’t take his hand,
not even out of habit: she doesn’t need to.
   When she had taken his hand that day, the first time she had met him, she
had felt   –  what? Something  of  which   she had  never known   the like.
Something she would never have expected to find in  the hand of a clean-
booted grammar-school boy from town. It was far-reaching: this much she
knew. It  had layers  and strata, like  a  landscape. There were spaces and
vacancies, dense patches, underground caves, rises and descents. There
wasn’t enough time  for  her to get  a sense of it  all  – it  was  too big,  too
complex. It  eluded her, mostly.  She knew there was more  of  it  than she
could  grasp, that  it  was  bigger  than both  of   them. A   sense, too, that
something was tethering him, holding him back; there was a tie somewhere,
a bond, that needed to be loosened or broken, before he could fully inhabit
this landscape, before he could take command.
   She watches an apple turn its red-stained flesh towards her, then away, a
pitted tree-mark appearing, then the flash of the navel-like end.
   Last time he came to the farm, they had walked together after his lesson,
up to the furthest  field,  as dusk settled on the land, dimming  the trees to
black, as  the  furrows  of  the  new-cut  hayfields  seemed to  deepen into
valleys, and come upon Joan, stepping between the springy flanks of their
flocks. She liked to check on Bartholomew’s work, or liked Bartholomew to
know she was checking. One of the two. She had seen them coming, Agnes
knew. She had seen Joan’s head turn towards  them, take a  long look  at
them, as they walked up  the path together. She would have realised why
they were coming, would  have seen their joined hands. Agnes had sensed
the anxiety of the tutor: all at once, his fingers were cold and she could feel
them tremble. She pressed his  hand once, twice,  before releasing it  and
letting him go ahead of her, through the gate.
   Never, was what Joan had said. You? Then she laughed, a harsh trill that
startled the sheep around her, making them lift their  blunt heads and shift

69
their cloven feet. Never, she said again. What age are you? She didn’t wait
for a reply but answered herself: Not old enough. I know your family, Joan
had said, screwing up her  face into a  contemptuous pout, pointing at  the
tutor.  Everyone knows  them.  Your  father  and  his  shady  dealings,  his
disgrace. He was bailiff,   she said, spitting  out  the word  ‘was’.   How  he
loved to lord  it  over us all,  swanning about in his  red robes. But not any
more. Have you  any idea how  much your  father owes around the  town?
How much he owes us? You could tutor  my sons until  they are all grown
men and it wouldn’t come close to clearing his debt here. So, no, she said,
looking round him at her, you cannot marry her. Agnes will marry a farmer,
by and by  –  someone with prospects, someone to provide for  her. She’s
been brought up for that life.  Her father left  her a dowry in  his will  –  I’m
sure you know that, don’t  you? She’ll  not marry  a feckless, tradeless boy
like you.
   And  she had turned away, as if  that had been an end to it.  But  I don’t
want to marry  a farmer, Agnes had cried. Joan had laughed again. Is that
so? You want to marry him? Yes, she said. I do. Very much. And Joan had
laughed again, shaking her head.
   But  we are handfasted, the tutor said. I asked her and she answered and
so we are bound.
   No, you are not, said Joan. Not unless I say so.
   The tutor  had left the field,  marched down the path and off  through the
woods,  his  face  dark  and  thunderous,  and  Agnes  was  left   with   her
stepmother, who told her to stop standing there like a simpleton, go back to
the hall and mind the children.  The next time he came to the farm,  Agnes
beckoned to him. I  know a  way, she said. I have an answer. We can, she
said, take matters into our own hands. Come. Come with me.
   Each apple, to her, at this  moment, seems toweringly different, distinct,
unique, each one streaked with variations of crimson, gold and green. All of
them turning their single eye upon her, then away, then back. It is too much,
all too  much, it  is overwhelming,  how many of  them there are, the noise
they are all  making,  the tapping,  rhythmic,  rocking  sound, on and on  it
goes, faster and faster. It steals her breath, makes her heart trip and race in
her chest, she cannot take  it  much more,  she cannot, she cannot. Some
apples rock right out of  their places, on to the floor,  and perhaps the tutor
has trodden on them because the air is filled  with  a sweetish, acrid smell
and she grips his shoulders. She knows, she feels, that all will be well, that

70
everything will   go their  way.  He holds  her to  him  and she can feel  the
breath leave him, enter him, leave him again.

Joan is not an idle woman. She has six children (eight, if you count the half-
mad step-girl  and the idiot  brother  she was forced  to take  on when  she
married). She  is a  widow,  as of   last year. The  farmer  left  the  farm  to
Bartholomew, of course, but the terms of the will allow her, Joan, to remain
living  here to oversee matters. And oversee she will. She doesn’t trust that
Bartholomew to  look   further  than his  nose. She has  told  him  she will
continue to run the kitchen, the yard  and the orchard, with the help of  the
girls. Bartholomew will  see to the flocks and the fields, with the help of the
boys, and she will walk the land with him, once a week, to make sure all is
as it should be. So Joan has the chickens and pigs to  see to, the cows to
milk, food  for the men, the farmhand and the shepherd to prepare, day in,
day out. Two younger boys to  educate as best she can – and Lord knows
they will  need an education as the farm will not be coming down  to them,
more’s the pity. She has three daughters (four, if you count the other, which
Joan usually doesn’t) to keep under her eye. She has bread to bake, cattle to
milk,  berries to bottle,  beer to  brew, clothes to  mend, stockings to  darn,
floors to  scrub, dishes to  wash, beds to air,  carpets to beat,  windows to
polish, tables to scour, hair to brush, passages to sweep, steps to scrub.
   Forgive  her, then, if  it  is almost three months before she notices that a
number of monthly cloths are missing from the wash.
   At  first, she believes she has made a mistake. The washing is done once a
fortnight,  early on a  Monday morning,  which  allows  time for  airing  and
pressing. There is always a day with a small number of the monthly cloths;
she and her daughters bleed at the same time; the other one keeps to her
own time, of course, as she does with everything else. She and the girls all
know the rhythm: there is the fortnight’s  wash with her and her daughters’
cloths, heaps of them, dried to rust, and there is the wash with the smaller
number of Agnes’s. Joan tends to toss them into the pot with wooden tongs,
holding her breath, covering them with salt.
   On  a morning  in  late  October, Joan is  sifting  through the  mounds of
laundry in the washhouse. A pile  of shifts and cuffs  and caps, ready for a
dousing in  scalding water and salt;  a pile  of  stockings, for  a cooler  tub;
breeches, caked with filth and mud, a spattered kirtle, a cloak that had borne

71
the brunt of a puddle. The pile Joan thinks of as ‘the dirties’ is smaller than
usual.
   Joan lifts a piece of soiled cloth, one hand over her nose, a bedsheet with
the tang of urine (her youngest son, William,  is still  not wholly  reliable in
that respect, despite threats and cajolings, though  he is  only three,  bless
him). A  shirt  smeared with some manner of dung is  stuck to a  cap. Joan
frowns, looks about her. She stands for a moment, considering.
   She goes outside, where her  daughters, Caterina, Joanie and Margaret,
are twisting   a  sheet  between them.  Caterina  has  tied  a  rope  around
William’s  middle, the end of which  is looped around her waist. He strains
and tugs at the end, grumbling in a low  murmur, holding  fistfuls  of grass.
He is trying to get to the pig-pen but Joan has heard too many stories about
swine trampling children or  eating them or crushing them. She will not  let
her young ones wander at will.
   ‘Where are the monthlies?’ she says, standing in the doorway.
   They  turn  to  look  at  her, her  daughters, separated and linked by  the
tortured sheet, which  is dripping  water  to  the ground. They  shrug, their
faces blank and innocent.
   Joan goes back into the washhouse. She must have made a mistake. They
must be here somewhere. She lifts pile after pile  from  the floor.  She sifts
through shifts and caps and stockings. She marches out, past her daughters,
into the  house and straight to  the cupboard. There,  she counts the thick
cloths, folded  and laundered, on  the upper shelf.  She knows  how many
there are in this house and that exact number is right there in front of her.
   Joan stamps down the passage, out through the door and slams it behind
her. She stands for a moment on the step, her breath streaming in and out of
her nostrils. The air is cool, with  the crisp edge that denotes the tipping of
autumn into winter.  A chicken  struts up the ladder into  the henhouse; the
goat, at the end  of  its rope, chews  ruminatively  on a mouthful  of  grass,
eyeing her. Joan’s mind is clear, tolling with one single thought: which one,
which one, which one?
   Perhaps she already knows but, still, she marches down the steps, across
the farmyard and up to the washhouse where her girls are still twisting wet
sheets, giggling together about something. She seizes Caterina, first, by the
arm and presses her hand to the girl’s belly, looking into her eyes, ignoring
her cries. The sheet falls to the wet, leafy ground, trodden on by her and the
frightened girl. Joan feels: a flat stomach, the nudge of a hipbone, an empty

72
pod. She lets Caterina go and gets hold of Joanie who is young, still a girl,
for pity’s  sake, and if it  is her, if  someone has done this to her, Joan will,
she will,  do something  terrible, something bad and  fearful and  vengeful,
and that man will  rue the day he ever set foot in  Hewlands, ever took her
daughter wherever it was he took her and she will—
   Joan lets her hand drop. Joanie’s belly is flat, almost hollow. Perhaps, she
finds herself thinking,  she should  feed up these girls  of  hers a bit  more,
encourage them to take a larger share of meat. Is she underfeeding them? Is
she? Is she allowing the boys to take more than their due?
   She shakes her head to banish that line of thought. Margaret, she thinks,
surveying her youngest daughter’s smooth and anxious face. No. It cannot
be. She is still a child.
   ‘Where is Agnes?’ she says.
   Joanie is  staring  at  her, aghast, glancing  down  at the  muddied sheet
beneath their feet; Caterina, Joan notes, looks away, looks sideways, as if
she understands what this means.
   ‘I   don’t know,’  says Caterina, stooping to  pick up  the sheet. ‘She may
have—’
   ‘She’s milking  the cow,’ blurts out Margaret.
   Joan is screeching even before she reaches the byre. The words fly out of
her mouth, like hornets, words she didn’t even know she knew, words that
dart and crackle and maim, words that twist and mangle her tongue.
   ‘You,’  she is  yelling, as she comes into the warmth of  the byre, ‘where
are you?’
   Agnes’s head is pressed against the smooth flank of the cow as she milks.
Joan hears the psht-psht-u-psht of milk jetting into the pail. At the sound of
Joan’s cry, the cow shifts and Agnes lifts her cheek and turns to look at her
stepmother, a wary expression on her face. Here it comes now, she seems to
be thinking.
   Joan grabs her by the arm, yanks her off the milking stool, and pushes her
up against the stall partition.  Too late, she sees her son James standing in
the next stall: he must have been helping Agnes with the milking. Joan has
to fumble through the girl’s kirtle, the fastenings of her gown, and the girl is
struggling, pushing her fingers away, trying to break free, but Joan gets her
hand through, just  for  a moment, and feels  – what? A  swelling,  hard  in
texture, and hot. A quickening mound, risen like a loaf.
   ‘Whore,’  Joan spits, as Agnes pushes her away. ‘Slut.’

73
   Joan is propelled backwards, towards the cow, which is  tossing its head
now, uneasy at this change in atmosphere, at this unexplained hiatus in the
milking. She falls  against the cow’s rump and stumbles slightly and Agnes
is off,  away, running through the  byre, past the dozing ewes, through the
door, and Joan is not going to let her get away. She rights herself, goes after
her stepdaughter, and her fury   propels her to  a  new speed because she
catches up with her easily.
   Her  hand reaches out, closes over a lock of  Agnes’s hair. So simple to
yank it, to pull the girl  to a stop, to feel her head jerked back by her grip, as
if pulled up by a bridle. The ease of it astonishes and fuels her: Agnes drops
to the ground, falling  awkwardly on  her back and Joan can keep her there
by winding the hair round and round her fist.
   In  this way, the two  of them by  the fence to the farmyard, Joan can get
Agnes to listen to anything she says.
   ‘Who,’   she screams at the girl,   ‘did  this? Who  put  that child  in  your
belly?’
   Joan is  running through  the not  inconsiderable number of  suitors who
have sought Agnes’s hand, ever since the details of the dowry in her father’s
will   became known.  Could  it  have  been one of   them? There  was the
wheelwright, the farmer from  the other side of  Shottery, that blacksmith’s
apprentice. But the girl  hadn’t seemed to take to any  of them. Who  else?
Agnes is reaching round, trying to prise Joan’s fingers off her hair. Her face
– that haughty, high-cheekboned pale face of hers of which she is so proud
– is contorted by  pain, by thwarted anger. There are tears streaking down
her cheeks, pooling in her eye sockets.
   ‘Tell  me,’  Joan says, into this face, which she has had to see, every day,
looking  back at her  with  indifference,  with  insolence, since the day  she
came here. This face, which Joan knows resembles that of the first wife, the
beloved wife, the woman her husband would never speak of, whose hair he
had kept pressed in a kerchief in a shirt pocket, next to his heart – she had
discovered this as she was laying him out for burial. It must have been there
all along, all the years she had washed and cleaned for him, fed him, borne
his children, and there it was, the hair of the first wife. She, Joan, will never
get over the smart and sting of that insult.
   ‘Was  it the  shepherd?’ Joan says and she sees that, despite everything,
this suggestion makes Agnes grin.
   ‘No,’  Agnes gets out, ‘not the shepherd.’

74
   ‘Who,   then?’ Joan demands and is  just about  to name  the son at  the
neighbouring farm when Agnes twists around and lands a kick on her shin,
a kick  of  such force  that  Joan staggers backwards, her hands springing
open.
   Agnes is up, off,  away, scrambling to her feet, gathering her skirts. Joan
gets up unsteadily, and goes after her. They are in the farmyard when Joan
catches up with her. She grabs her by the wrist, swings her round, lands a
slap on the girl’s face.
   ‘You  will   tell  me  who—’  she begins,  but never  finishes the  sentence
because there is a noise at the left side of her head: a deafening explosion,
like  a clap of  thunder. For  a moment,  she cannot comprehend what has
happened, what the noise means. Then she feels the pain, the smart of skin,
the deeper ache of bone, and she realises that Agnes has struck her.
   Joan puts a hand to her face, aghast. ‘How dare you?’ she shrieks. ‘How
dare you hit me? A girl raising a hand to her mother, someone who—’
   Agnes’s lip  is swollen, bleeding, so her words are slurred, indistinct, but
Joan still manages to hear her say: ‘You are not my mother.’
   Enraged,  Joan   slaps  her  again.   Agnes,  unbelievably   and  without
hesitation, slaps her back. Joan lifts  her hand again but  it  is seized from
behind.  Someone has  her  around  the  waist   –  it   is   that  great  brute
Bartholomew and he is lifting her up and away, forcing down her hands and
holding them fast with the effortless grip of his fingers. Her son, Thomas, is
there too, standing now between her and Agnes, holding up a sheep crook,
and Bartholomew is telling her to  stop, to calm herself. Her other children
stand by  the  henhouse, open-mouthed, amazed. Caterina has  her  arms
around Joanie, who is crying. Margaret holds little William, who is burying
his face in her neck.
   Joan feels herself carried to the other side of the yard and Bartholomew is
restraining her, asking what is amiss, what has brought this on, and she is
telling  him, pointing  a finger  at Agnes,  now being  helped to her  feet by
Thomas.
   Bartholomew’s  face falls  as he listens. He closes his eyes, breathes in,
breathes out. He rubs a hand over the bristles of his beard and examines his
feet for a moment.
   ‘The  Latin tutor,’ he says, and looks across at Agnes.
   Agnes doesn’t reply but lifts her chin a notch.

75
   Joan looks  from  stepson to stepdaughter, to sons, to daughters. All  of
them, save the stepdaughter, drop their gaze and she realises that they all,
every one of them, saw what she did not. ‘The Latin tutor?’ she repeats. She
pictures him suddenly, standing at a gate in the furthest field, asking her for
Agnes’s hand, in a faltering voice. She had almost forgotten. ‘Him? That –
that boy? That wastrel? That wageless, useless, beardless—’ She breaks off
to laugh, a harsh, mirthless sound that leaves her chest feeling emptied and
hot. She remembers it all, now, the lad  standing there as she told him no;
she remembers feeling a brief stab of pity for him, that young lad, his face
so crestfallen, and  with  such a  father, too.  But  Joan had  dismissed the
thought of him, as soon as he had left her sight.
   Joan shakes off Bartholomew’s hand. She becomes focused, ruthless. She
marches into the house, past Agnes, past her children,  past the chickens.
She bangs open the door and, once inside, is fast and thorough. She moves
through the room, collecting  anything that belongs to  her stepdaughter. A
pair of shifts, a spare cap, an apron. A wooden comb, a stone with a hole, a
belt.
   The family  is  still gathered in the farmyard when Joan comes out of the
house and hurls a bundle at Agnes’s feet.
   ‘You,’  she cries, ‘are banished from this house for ever more.’
   Bartholomew  shifts  his gaze from  Agnes  to Joan and  back again. He
folds his arms and steps forward. ‘This is my house,’ he says, ‘left to me, in
my father’s will. And  I say that Agnes may stay.’
   Joan stares at him, wordless, the colour rising in her cheeks. ‘But . . .’ she
blusters, trying to rally her thoughts ‘. . . but . . . the terms of the will stated
that I may stay in the house until such time—’
   ‘You  may stay,’ Bartholomew says, ‘but the house is mine.’
   ‘But   I   was  given  the  running  of  the  house!’  She  seizes upon  this
triumphantly, desperately. ‘And you the care of the farm. So by that fact, I
am within my rights  to send her away, for this is a matter of the house, not
of the farm and—’
   ‘The  house is mine,’ Bartholomew repeats softly. ‘And she stays.’
   ‘She cannot stay,’ Joan shrieks, infuriated, powerless. ‘You need to think
about –  about your  brothers and  sisters, this family’s   reputation, not  to
mention your own, our standing in—’
   ‘She stays,’ Bartholomew says.

76
   ‘She  has to go, she must.’ Joan tries to  think  fast, scrabbling about for
something to  make him  change his  mind.  ‘Think   of  your  father.  What
would he have said? It would have broken his heart. He would never—’
   ‘She will  stay. Unless it comes to pass that—’
   Agnes puts a hand on her brother’s sleeve. They look at each other for a
long moment, without speaking. Then Bartholomew spits into  the dirt  and
lifts a hand to  her shoulder. Agnes smiles at him crookedly, with  her split
and bleeding mouth. Bartholomew nods in  reply. She sweeps a sleeve up
and over her face; she unpicks the knot of the bundle, ties and reties it.
   Bartholomew watches as she shoulders the bundle. ‘I’ll see to it,’ he says,
to her, touching her hand. ‘Not to worry.’
   ‘I  shan’t,’ Agnes says.
   She walks,  only  a little  unsteadily, across the farmyard. She enters the
apple store and, after a few moments, emerges with her kestrel on her glove.
The bird is hooded, wings folded, but its head pivots and twitches, as if it is
acquainting itself with its new circumstances.
   Agnes  shoulders  her  pack   and,  without  saying   goodbye, exits   the
farmyard, taking the path around the side of the house, and is gone.

He is behind his father’s  stall in  the market, lounging against the counter.
The day  is crisp,  with  the  startling  metallic  cold of  early  winter.  He  is
watching his  breath leave  his  body in   a visible,  vanishing  stream, half
listening to  a woman  debate squirrel-lined versus rabbit-trimmed  gloves,
when Eliza materialises beside him.
   She gives him an odd, wide-eyed, teeth-gritted smile.
   ‘You  need to go home,’ she says, in a low voice, without letting her fixed
expression falter. She then turns to  the browsing  woman and says, ‘Yes,
madam?’
   He pushes himself upright. ‘Why  do I need to go home? Father told me I
should—’
   ‘Just go,’  she hisses, ‘now,’ and addresses the customer, in a louder tone:
‘I believe the rabbit trim to be the very warmest.’
   He  lopes across the market, weaving in and out of the stalls, dodging  a
cart laden with  cabbages, a boy carrying a  bundle of  thatch. He is  in no
hurry: it  will   be some complaint of  his  father’s about his  conduct or  his
chores or  his forgetfulness  or  his laziness or  his  inability   to  remember
important things or his reluctance to put in what his father has the temerity

77
to call ‘an honest day’s work’. He will  have forgotten to take an order or to
pick up skin from  the tanners or omitted to chop the wood for  his mother.
He wends his way up the wide  thoroughfare of Henley Street, stopping to
pass remarks with  various  neighbours, to  pat a  child  on  the  head and,
finally, he turns into the door of his house.
   He wipes his boots against the matting, letting the door close behind him,
and casts a glance into his father’s workshop. His  father’s chair is  empty,
pushed back, as if in  haste. The thin shoulders of the  apprentice are bent
over something at the workbench. At  the sound of  the latch hooking  into
itself, the boy turns his head and looks at him, with round, frightened eyes.
   ‘Hello,  Ned,’ he says. ‘How goes it?’
   Ned looks  as if he might speak but closes his mouth. He gives a gesture
with  his  head that  is halfway   between a nod  and  a shake, then  points
towards the parlour.
   He smiles at the apprentice, then steps through the door from the passage,
across the squared flags of the hall,  past the dining table,  past the empty
grate, and into the parlour.
   The scene that greets him is so unaccountable, so confusing, that it takes
him a  moment to catch up,  to assess what is happening. He stops in  his
tracks, framed by the doorway. What is immediately clear to him is that his
life has taken a new turn.
   Agnes is  sitting on  a low stool,  a ragged bundle at her feet, his mother
opposite her, next to the fire;  his  father is at  the window, his  back to the
room. The kestrel  is perched on the  topmost rung of  a  ladderback chair,
claws curled around the wood, its jesses and bell hanging down. Part of him
wants to turn and run. The other part wants to burst into laughter: the idea
of a falcon, of  Agnes, in his mother’s parlour, surrounded by the curlicued
and painted wall hangings of which she is so proud.
   ‘Ah,’   he says, attempting to  gather himself,  and all  three turn towards
him. ‘Now . . .’
   The words shrivel in  his mouth because he catches sight of Agnes’s face.
Her left eye is  swollen shut, reddened, bruised; the skin under the brow is
split and bleeding.
   He  steps towards her, closing  the gap between them.  ‘Good  God,’ he
says, placing  a hand  on her  shoulder, feeling  the  flex  and  pull  of   her
shoulder-blade, as if she might fly, take to the air, like her bird, if  only  she
could. ‘What happened? Who did this to you?’

78
   There  are vivid   marks on  her  cheek, a  cut on  her  lip,  the  tracks of
fingernails, raw patches on her wrist.
   Mary  clears her throat. ‘Her mother,’ she says, ‘has banished her from the
house.’
   Agnes shakes her head. ‘Stepmother,’ she says.
   ‘Joan,’  he puts in, ‘is Agnes’s stepmother, not—’
   ‘I  know that,’ Mary  snaps. ‘I used the word merely as a—’
   ‘And    she didn’t   banish  me,’   Agnes  says. ‘It    isn’t   her  house. It’s
Bartholomew’s. I chose to leave.’
   Mary  inhales, shutting her eyes for  a moment, as if  mustering the final
shreds of her patience. ‘Agnes,’ she says, opening her eyes and fixing them
on her son, ‘is with child. Says it’s yours.’
   He gives a nod and a shrug, all at the same time, eyeing the broad back of
his father,  who  looms  behind his  mother, still   facing  the  street. He  is,
despite himself, despite the fact that he is clutching the hand of the woman
he has vowed to marry, despite everything, working out which way he will
have to duck  to avoid  the inevitable fist,  to  feint,  to parry, and to  shield
Agnes from the blows he knows will  come. Such a thing has no precedent
in  their  family.  He  can  only  imagine  what his  father  will   do,  what  is
fermenting in that balding, lumpen head of his. And then he realises, with a
deep undertow of shame, Agnes will  see how matters stand between him
and his father; she will see the tumult and struggle of it all; she will see him
for what he is, a man with his leg caught in the jaws of  a trap; she will see
and know all, in only a moment.
   ‘Is  it?’ his mother says, her face white, stretched.
   ‘Is  it what?’  he says, feeling skittish and a little mad, therefore unable to
keep himself from lapsing into verbal sparring.
   ‘Yours.’
   ‘Is  what mine?’ he returns, almost gleefully.
   Mary  presses her lips together. ‘Did you put it there?’
   ‘Did  I put what where?’
   At  this point  he is aware of Agnes turning her head to look  at him –  he
can imagine her dark eyes on him, assessing, gathering information, like a
spool gathers thread – but he still can’t stop. He wants whatever is coming
his way to  come soon: he wants to  goad, to tip  his father into  action; he
wants to have done with it,  once and for  all. Enough creeping around the
matter. Let the truth of who his father is come out. Let Agnes see.

79
   ‘The  child.’  Mary speaks in a slow, loud voice, as if to someone simple-
headed. ‘In her belly. Did you put it there?’
   He feels his face curling  into a smile. A  child. Made by him  and Agnes,
among the apples in  the storehouse. How can they not  be married  now?
Nothing can be done to stop it, in such circumstances. It will be, just as she
said it would. They will  be married. He will  be a husband and a father, and
his life will   begin and he can leave behind this, all of this,  this house, this
father, this  mother, the  workshop, the  gloves, this  life  as  their  son, the
drudgery and tedium of  working  in the business. What a thought,  what a
thing. This child, in Agnes’s belly, will  change everything for him, will  free
him from  the life  he hates, from  the father he cannot live  with,  from  the
house he can no  longer bear. He  and Agnes will   take flight:   to another
house, another town, another life.
   ‘I  did,’  he says, feeling a smile broaden across his face.
   Several things happen at once. His mother launches herself from her seat,
towards him, peppering him with her fists; he feels the blows make contact
with his chest and shoulders, like taps on a drum. He hears Agnes’s voice,
saying, Enough, stop,  and another voice,  his  own,  saying that  they  are
handfasted, that there is no sin in it, they will wed, they must. His mother is
shrieking that he is not of age, that he will need their consent and they will
never give it, something about how he has been bewitched, what ruination
this is, she will send him away, she would rather he went to sea than marry
this wench, what a catastrophe. Behind him, he is aware of the bird shifting
uneasily on its chair, shrugging its feathers, the flap and flutter of  its open
wings, the jangling of its bell. And then the dark broad shape of his father is
near, and where is Agnes in all this chaos, is she behind him, is she safely
out of his  father’s reach because, by God, he will  kill  him,  he will,  if  the
man so much as lays a finger on her.
   His  father is stretching out  an arm and he is ready, muscles tensed, but
the meaty hand doesn’t strike him,  doesn’t curl into  a ball,  doesn’t injure
him. Instead, it lands on his shoulder. He can feel all five fingertips denting
his flesh,  through the  cloth  of  his shirt,  can catch  the familiar  whiff   of
leather, of whittawing – acrid, smarting, uric – off them.
   There is the unfamiliar sensation of his father’s hand pressing him down,
into a chair. ‘Sit,’ his father says, his voice even. He gestures to Agnes, who
is behind them, soothing her bird. ‘Sit down, lass.’

80
   After   a  moment,  he  complies.   Agnes  comes to   stand beside  him,
smoothing the feathers on the kestrel’s neck with the back of her fingers. He
sees his mother examining her  with  an expression of disbelief,  of  naked
amazement. It makes him want to laugh, again. Then his father speaks and
his attention is pulled back.
   ‘I’m    in  no  doubt,’   his  father  is  saying,  ‘we  can  .  .  .   come to   an
arrangement.’
   The expression on his father’s face is an odd one. He stares at it, struck
by  its  peculiarity.  John’s lips  are  pulled  back  from  his  teeth, his  eyes
strangely alight. It takes him several seconds to realise that John is, in fact,
smiling.
   ‘But,  John,’  his mother is exclaiming, ‘there  is no possible way that we
can agree to such—’
   ‘Hush,  woman,’ John says. ‘The boy said they were handfasted. Did you
not hear him? No son of mine will   go back on his promises, will  shirk his
responsibilities. The lad has got this girl with child. He has a responsibility,
a—’
   ‘He’s  eighteen years of age! He has no trade! How can you think—’
   ‘I   told you to  hush.’ His  father speaks with his accustomed rough fury,
just for a moment, before reassuming the odd, almost wheedling tone. ‘My
son made you a promise, did  he?’ he says, looking  at Agnes. ‘Before  he
took you to the woods?’
   Agnes strokes her bird. She looks at John, with a level gaze. ‘We made a
promise to each other.’
   ‘And  what does your mother – your, ah, stepmother – say to the match?’
   ‘She .  . . was not in  favour. Before. And now,’  she gestures towards her
belly, ‘I cannot say.’
   ‘I  see.’ His father pauses for a moment, his mind working. And  there is,
to the son, something familiar in this silence of his father’s, and just as he is
staring at him, frowning,  wondering, he realises what it is. This is the face
his father wears when he is contemplating a business deal, an advantageous
one. The expression is the same as when a cheap lot of skins has come his
way, or a  couple of  extra bales of  wool,  to be hidden  in the  attic, or  an
inexperienced merchant  has  been  sent  to  barter  with   him.   It   is  the
expression he assumes when he is trying not to let on to the other party that
he will come out of the deal better off.

81
   It  is covetous. It is gleeful.  It is suppressed. It chills the son, right down
to the  marrow of  his  bones. It  makes him clutch  the edges of  the chair
beneath him with both hands.
   This   marriage, the  son  suddenly  sees, with   a  choking  sensation of
disbelief, will  be beneficial to  his father, to whatever dealings he has with
the sheep farmer’s widow.  His  father is  about to  turn all  this  – Agnes’s
bleeding face, her arrival here, the kestrel, the baby growing in her belly –
to his own good.
   He  cannot believe it.  He cannot. That he and Agnes  have, unwittingly,
played into his father’s hands. The thought makes him want to run from the
room. That what happened between them both at Hewlands, in the forest,
the kestrel diving like a needle through the fabric of leaves above them, can
be twisted  into  a rope  with  which  his father  will   tether him  ever  more
closely to this house, to this  place. It is insupportable. It  cannot be borne.
Will  he never get away? Will he never be free of this man, this house, this
trade?
   John begins to talk again, in the same honeyed voice, saying how he will
go out  to Hewlands  directly, to  talk  to  the yeoman’s widow,  to  Agnes’s
brother. He is sure, he tells them, he can broker an agreement, can draw up
terms beneficial to all. The boy wants to marry the girl, he says to his wife,
the girl wants to marry the boy: who are they to forbid this union? The baby
must be born in wedlock, cannot be delivered into this world on the wrong
side of  the  sheet. It  is  their  grandchild,  is  it  not?  Many  weddings are
brought about thus. It is nature’s way.
   At  this point, he turns to his wife and gives a laugh, reaches out a hand to
grab at her hip, and the son must look at the floor, so queasy does he feel.
   John leaps to his  feet, his face flushed, all  eagerness and fervour. ‘It is
settled, then. I will go out to Hewlands, to set out my terms . . . our terms . .
. to . . . to seal this most . . . sudden . . . and, it must be said, blessed union
between our families. The girl will  remain here.’ He beckons to his son. ‘A
word with you, in private, if you please.’
   Out  in the passage, John lets the pretence at geniality drop. He grips his
son by the collar, his fingers cold against his skin; he pushes his face right
up to his.
   ‘Tell  me,’ he says, with low, grizzled menace, ‘there are no more.’
   ‘No  more what?’
   ‘Say it.  There are no more. Are there?’

82
   The  son feels the wall  pressing into his back, his  shoulder. The fingers
grip his collar with such force that they stop the air in his throat.
   ‘Are  there?’  his father hisses into his  face. His breath is vaguely  fishy,
loamy. ‘Will  there be other Warwickshire doxies lolloping up to my door to
tell me that you  swelled their bellies with  a child? Must  I be dealing with
others? Tell me the truth, now. Because, by God, if there are others and her
family hear of it, there’ll be trouble. For you and for all of us. Understand?’
   He  gasps, pushes back against his father but there is an elbow  pressed
into his  shoulder, a forearm across his  throat. He tries  to say, no,  never,
there is only  her, she is no doxy, how  dare you say such a thing,  but the
words cannot make it to his mouth.
   ‘Because if  you have ploughed and planted another one – just one – I’ll
kill you. And  if I don’t, her brother will.  Do you hear me? I swear I will part
you from your life, with  God as my witness. Remember that.’
   His  father gives one final shove to his  windpipe, then moves off, out of
the door, letting it clang shut behind him.
   The  son bends over, drawing  in air,  rubbing at  his neck. As  he draws
himself upright, he sees Ned, the apprentice, looking at him. The two stare
at each other for a moment, then Ned turns away, back to the bench, leaning
in to examine his work.

John walks directly   to Hewlands.  He doesn’t  stop at  his stall  to  chivvy
Eliza, to mete out criticisms  and judgements, or to check on the stock. He
doesn’t pause to exchange words  with  a guildsman he  meets on Rother
Street. He takes the path to Shottery and hurries along it,  almost as if the
girl   might  have   the  baby  at  any   minute  and  somehow  nullify    this
opportunity. His   steps are quick  and,  he is  pleased to  think,   sprightly,
especially for a man of  his years. He feels the anticipation of  a good deal
ahead of him, senses that particular pleasure run through his veins, like  a
cup of  wine. John knows  this is  the moment, that  a deal must  be struck
without delay, lest things change and the advantage slip away from him, as
well it might.  He has the upper hand, yes, he does. He has possession of the
girl, in  his house; he has the boy, who will require a special licence to wed
because of his youth,  the signed permission  of  his parents. There is  the
matter of the old debt between them, but their  most pressing issue will be
the girl. They need her to be married, in her state, and no marriage can take
place unless he, John, agrees to it. It is the perfect position. He holds every

83
card. He allows himself,  as he walks the path, to whistle  out loud,  an old
dancing tune from his youth.
   He finds  the brother in a distant field;  he must pick his way through the
filth to reach him, the brother leaning on his crook, watching him approach,
without moving.
   Groups  of sheep shift  around him,  turning  their  bulging eyes on  him,
veering from  him,  as if  he is  a large and  terrifying  predator. Gloves, he
mutters to them, under his breath, without letting his smile  drop, you’ll  all
be  gloves  before  ye  know   it.   You’ll   be  worn   on  the  hands  of  the
Warwickshire gentry before the year is out, if I have anything to do with it.
It is difficult,  as he steps over the field, to prevent the glee from showing on
his face.
   The puddles, beneath his town boots, are frozen white clouds, solidified
into the ridges and furrows of mud.
   John  reaches the sheep-farming brother.  He  holds out  his  hand. The
brother looks at it  for a moment. He is  a huge man, with a look  of Agnes
about the eyes, with black hair tied  back from his face. He is  dressed in a
sheepskin cape, like the father used to wear, and carries a carved cudgel.
Another fairer, younger lad,  also with  a crook, hovers in  the background,
watchful, and for a moment, John feels a slight qualm. What if  these men,
these brothers, these people, mean to harm him, to wreak vengeance on him
for his wastrel son who has taken the maidenhead of their sister? What if he
has misread the situation and it is not, after all, to his advantage, and he has
made a grave mistake in  coming? He  sees, for a fleeting  moment, death
coming for him,  here, in a frosty  Shottery field.  Sees his corpse, the head
stoved in by a shepherd’s crook, his brain spattered and spent, steaming in
the frozen earth. His Mary a widow, his young children,  little Edmond and
Richard, fatherless. All the fault of his errant son.
   The farmer  shifts his cudgel to his  opposite hand, spits emphatically on
the  ground,  and takes  John’s  fingers,  giving   them  a  painfully   strong
squeeze. John hears himself give a high, almost girlish cry.
   ‘Well,’   John says, with  the deepest, manliest chuckle he can muster, ‘I
believe, Bartholomew, we have matters to discuss.’
   The brother looks at him  for a long moment. Then he nods, looking past
him at something over John’s shoulder.
   ‘That  we do,’  he says and, points. ‘Here  comes Joan. She will want  to
have her say, I’ll warrant.’

84
   Joan comes hurrying over  the fields, flanked by  daughters, a small boy
perched on her hip.
   ‘You,’  she calls, as though he were one of her farm-boys. ‘A  word with
you, if you please.’
   John waves his hand at her cordially, then turns to include Bartholomew
in a smile  and a head tilt.  It  is a knowing,  sideways, male nod that  John
offers him, one that says, Women, eh? Always wanting their way. We men
must let them feel included.
   Bartholomew  holds his gaze for a  moment, his flecked eyes so like  his
sister’s, but  expressionless, cold. Then  he  drops his  gaze and,  with  an
imperceptible gesture, bids his brother to leave, to open the gate for Joan,
whistling for the dogs to go with them.
   They stand in the field for  a long time, Bartholomew, Joan and John. The
other children  watch, unseen, hidden behind  a wall.  After  a  while,  they
begin to ask  each other, Is it  settled, is it  done, has Agnes gone  to their
house, will  she be wed, is she never to come  back? The smallest brother
tires of  this game of  standing at a wall  and whines  to be put  down. The
sisters’ eyes never leave the three figures standing among the sheep. The
dogs scuffle and yawn, dropping their heads on to their paws, raising them,
every now and again, to check with Thomas, awaiting his orders.
   Their brother is seen to shake his head, to turn sideways, as if to leave the
talk. The glover seems to make an entreaty, uncurling first one hand, then
the other. He counts something off  on the fingers  of  his right  hand. Joan
speaks animatedly for a long time, waving  her arms, pointing towards the
house, gripping her apron. Bartholomew looks long and hard at the sheep,
before reaching out to touch the back of one, turning his face to look at the
glover, as if proving a point  about the animal to the other man. The glover
nods vigorously,   gives  a  long   speech, then  smiles  as  if   in   triumph.
Bartholomew  taps his  cudgel  against  his  boot,  a sure  sign  that  he  is
unhappy. The glover steps closer; Joan holds her ground. The glover puts a
hand on Bartholomew’s shoulder; the farmer lets it remain.
   Then   they   shake  hands.   The  glover   with    Joan,  and   then   with
Bartholomew. Oh, says one of the girls. The sons let out their  breath. It is
done, whispers Caterina.

85
           amnet starts awake, the mattress rustling  beneath him. Something
has woken him – a noise, a bang, a shout – but he doesn’t know what. He
can tell,  by  the long  reaches of the  sun into  the  room, it  must  be near
evening. What is he doing here, asleep on the bed?
   He  twists his head and then he remembers everything. A form  lies flat,
next to him,  head twisted to  one side. Judith’s  face is waxen  and still,  a
sheen of sweat making it  glimmer  like  glass. Her chest rises and falls  at
uneven intervals.
   Hamnet  swallows, his  throat closed and tight.  His  tongue feels furred,
ungainly, too  large to  fit  in  his  mouth.  He scrambles upright,  the room
blurring around him. A pain enters the back of his head and crouches there,
snarling, like a cornered rat.
   Downstairs,  humming to  herself, Agnes comes through  the front  door.
She places upon the table the following items: two bundles of rosemary, her
leather bag, the jar  of honey, a  hunk of  beeswax, wrapped in a leaf,  her
straw hat, a tied posy of comfrey, which she intends to pluck and dry, then
steep in warmed oil.
   She  walks  through  the  room,  straightening  the chair  by   the hearth,
moving a cap of  Susanna’s from the table to a hook behind the door. She
opens the window to  the street, in case any customers come for  her. She
unties her kirtle and shrugs it off.  Then she opens the back door and goes
down the path towards the cookhouse.
   The heat can be felt  from the distance of several paces. Inside, she sees
Mary, stirring  water in  a pot,  and beside her Susanna, seated on a stool,
rubbing mud from some onions.
   ‘There you are,’ Mary  says, turning, her face reddened by heat. ‘You took
your time.’
   Agnes  gives  a noncommittal  smile.  ‘The  bees were  swarming in  the
orchard. I had to coax them back.’
   ‘Hmm,’   Mary says, hurling a handful  of meal into the water. She hasn’t
the patience for bees. Tricky creatures. ‘And how are all at Hewlands?’
   ‘Well,  I  believe,’ replies Agnes, touching the hair of her daughter’s head
briefly  in greeting,  taking up a  loaf of  bread she made that morning  and
putting it  on to the counter. ‘Bartholomew’s  leg is still  troubling  him, I’m
afraid, although he will  not admit it. I  see him limping. He says it aches in

86
damp weather and that is all but I  told him  he needs—’ Agnes breaks off,
bread knife in hand. ‘Where are the twins?’
   Neither Mary  nor Susanna looks up from her task.
   ‘Hamnet and Judith,’ Agnes says. ‘Where are they?’
   ‘No  idea,’ Mary  says, lifting a spoon to her lips to taste, ‘but when I find
them, they’re in for  a hiding. None of  my kindling  chopped. The table not
laid. The pair of them off,  God knows where. It’ll  be supper time soon and
still no sign of either of them.’
   Agnes  guides the serrated edge of the  knife  down through  the loaf  of
bread, once, twice, the slices falling on to each other. She is about to make
an incision in the crust for the third time when she lets the knife slide from
her hand.
   ‘I’ll   just go and . . .’ She trails away, moving through the cookhouse door,
up the path and into the big house. She checks the workshop, where John is
leaning over the bench in  a do-not-bother-me posture. She walks through
the dining hall and the parlour. She calls their names up the stairs. Nothing.
She comes out of the front door, into Henley Street. The heat of the day is
passing, the dust of  the  street settling,  people retreating  back into  their
homes to take their supper.
   Agnes goes in at the front door of her own house, for the second time that
evening.
   And  she sees, standing at the foot of the stair, her son. He is stock still,
his face white, his fingers gripping the stair rail. He has a swelling, a cut on
his brow that she is sure wasn’t there this morning.
   She moves towards him swiftly, covering the room in a few paces.
   ‘What?’   she  says, taking  him   by  the  shoulders. ‘What   is  it?  What
happened to your face?’
   He  does not speak. He  shakes his head. He points  towards the  stairs.
Agnes takes them, two at a time.

87
           liza says to  Agnes that she will   make the wedding  crown. If,  she
adds, that is what Agnes would like.
   It  is an offer made shyly, in a tentative voice, early one morning. Eliza is
lying  back to  back  with  the woman  who  has come into  their  house so
unexpectedly, so dramatically. It is just after dawn and it is possible to hear
the first carts and footfalls out on the street.
   Eliza  must, Mary has said, share her bed with Agnes, until such time as
the wedding can be arranged. Her mother told her this with tight, rigid lips,
not meeting Eliza’s eye, flapping  out an extra blanket  over the bed. Eliza
had looked down at  the half  of the  pallet nearest the window, which  has
remained empty since her sister Anne died. She had glanced up to see that
her mother was doing the same and she wanted to say, Do you think of her,
do you still  catch yourself listening for her footsteps, for her voice,  for the
sound of her breathing at night, because I do, all the time. I still  think  that
one day I might  wake and she will  be there, next to me, again; there will
have been some wrinkle or pleat in time and we will  be back to where we
were, when she was living and breathing.
   Instead, though, Eliza wakes alone in the bed, every day.
   But  now  here  is  this  woman who  will   marry  her  brother: an  Agnes
instead of an Anne. It has all been a rush and a bother to arrange, with her
brother needing a special licence and – Eliza  isn’t  clear on this point  – a
protracted discussion  (heated) about  money.  Some  friends  of  Agnes’s
brother have put up surety:  this much she knows.  There is a baby  in her
belly, Eliza  has heard, but only through doors. No  one has explicitly  told
her this. Just as no  one has thought to  tell  her that  the wedding  will  be
tomorrow, in the morning: her brother and Agnes will walk to the church in
Temple Grafton, where a  priest has agreed to marry them.  It  is not  their
priest, and it  is not the  church they attend every Sunday. Agnes says she
knows this priest well. He is a particular friend of her family. It  was him, in
fact, who gave her  the kestrel. He reared it  himself, from  an egg, and he
once taught her how to cure lung rot  in a  falcon; he will  marry  them, she
said airily, as she worked the treadle of Mary’s spinning wheel, because he
has known her since she was a child and has always been kind to her. She
once traded some jesses for a barrel of ale with him. He is, she explained,
gathering wool  in  her spare hand,  an expert  in  matters of  falconry  and

88
brewing and bee-keeping, and has shared with her his great knowledge of
all three.
   When Agnes made this speech, from her place at the spinning, by the fire
in the parlour, Eliza’s mother let her knitting needles fall, as if she could not
believe what  she  was  hearing, which   had  made Eliza’s  brother  laugh
immoderately into his cup, which in turn had made their father angry. Eliza,
however, had listened, rapt, to every word. Never had she heard such things
said, never had anyone spoken in such a way  in their  house before, with
such unselfconscious flow, such frank cheer.
   Either  way,  the  wedding  is  set. The  hawking,  honey-producing,  ale-
trading priest will  marry  them early the next day, in  a ceremony arranged
quickly, furtively, secretively.
   When  Eliza  gets married, she wants to  walk  down Henley  Street in  a
crown of flowers,  in bright  sunshine, so that all may see her. She does not
want some ceremony miles from  town,  in  a small  church with  a strange
priest sneaking her and her groom in  through the door;  she will  hold  her
head high and marry in town. She is sure of it. She will have her banns read
loudly at the church door. But her father and Agnes’s brother cooked this up
between them so nothing more can be said.
   She would, however, like to make the flower crown for  Agnes. Who else
will  do it?  Not  Agnes’s stepmother, Eliza is sure, or  her sisters: they are
keeping themselves to themselves, back in Shottery. They may come to the
wedding, Agnes has shrugged, or they may not.
   But  Agnes must have a crown. She cannot be married without one, baby
or no baby. So Eliza asks her. She clears her throat. She laces her fingers
together, as if about to pray.
   ‘May   I  . .  .’  she begins, speaking into  the icy  air  of the  room ‘.  .  . I
wondered if  you  would  like  it   if  I  .  .  .  made your  flower  crown?  For
tomorrow?’
   She feels  Agnes behind  her, listening.  Eliza  hears her inhale  and she
thinks for  a moment  that she will  refuse, she will   say no, that  Eliza has
spoken out of turn.
   The pallet rustles and judders as Agnes turns over to face her.
   ‘A   crown?’  Agnes  says, and Eliza  can  hear in  her  voice  that she is
smiling. ‘I  would like that very much indeed. Thank you.’
   Eliza  rolls over and the two of them stare into each other’s faces, sudden
conspirators.

89
   ‘I  don’t  know,’ Eliza  says, ‘what flowers we will   find, this time  of year.
Maybe some berries or—’
   ‘Juniper,’  Agnes cuts in. ‘Or holly. Some fern. Or pine.’
   ‘There’s ivy.’
   ‘Or  hazel flowers. We could go down to the river, you and I,’ Agnes says,
catching hold of Eliza’s hand, ‘later today, and see what we can find.’
   ‘I  saw some monkshood there last week. Maybe—’
   ‘Poisonous,’  Agnes says, turning on to her back, keeping hold of Eliza’s
hand and placing it square on her belly. ‘Do you want to feel the baby? She
moves about in the early morning. She’ll be needing her breakfast.’
   ‘She?’   says Eliza,   amazed at  this  abrupt  intimacy,  the  heat  of  the
woman’s taut, hard skin, the strong grip of her hand.
   ‘I  think it  will  be a girl,’ Agnes says, with a yawn, neat and quick.
   Eliza’s  hand is being  pressed between Agnes’s fingers. It is the  oddest
sensation, as if something is being drawn from her, like a splinter in the skin
or infection  from  a wound,  at the  same time as something else is  being
poured into her. She cannot work out if she is being made to give or receive
something. She wants to withdraw her hand, at the same time as wanting it
to remain.
   ‘Your  sister,’ Agnes says softly. ‘She was younger than you?’
   Eliza  stares at the smooth brow, the white temples and black hair of her
soon-to-be sister-in-law. How does she know that Eliza had been thinking
of Anne?
   ‘Yes,’  Eliza says. ‘By almost two years.’
   ‘And  she was how old when she died?’
   ‘Eight.’
   Agnes clicks her tongue in sympathy. ‘I am sorry,’ she murmurs, ‘for this
loss.’
   Eliza  doesn’t  say  that she  worries  about Anne,  all  alone,  so young,
without her, wherever she may be. That  for a long  time she lay  awake at
night, whispering her name, just in  case she was listening, from wherever
she was, in case the sound of Eliza’s voice was a comfort to her. The pain of
wondering if   Anne  was distressed somewhere and that  she, Eliza,  was
unable to hear her, unable to reach her.
   Agnes pats the back of  Eliza’s hand and speaks in a rush: ‘She has her
other sisters with her, remember. The two who died before you were born.
They all look  after each other. She doesn’t want you to  worry. She wants

90
you . . .’ Agnes pauses, looks at Eliza, who is shivering with the cold or the
shock or both. ‘I mean,’ she says, in a new, careful voice, ‘I expect that she
wouldn’t want you to worry. She would want you to rest easy.’
   They are silent for a moment. The clop-clop of a horse’s hoofs passes by
the window, heading north up the street.
   ‘How   did  you  know,’  Eliza whispers,  ‘about  the other two  girls  who
died?’
   Agnes  seems to think for  a moment. ‘Your  brother  told me,’  she says,
without looking at Eliza.
   ‘One  of them,’ Eliza breathes, ‘was called Eliza. The first child. Did  you
know that?’
   Agnes starts to nod and then shrugs.
   ‘Gilbert   says sometimes that  .  . .’   Eliza  has to  cast a  look  over her
shoulder before she speaks ‘. . . that she might come, in the middle of  the
night, to stand at my bed, wanting her name back from  me. That she’ll be
angry because I took it.’
   ‘Nonsense,’  Agnes says crisply. ‘Gilbert’s  talking  nonsense. Don’t you
listen to him. Your sister is happy for you to have her name, for you to carry
it on. Remember that. If  I hear Gilbert  saying that to you, again, ever, I’ll
put nettles in his breeches.’
   Eliza bursts out laughing. ‘You will  not.’
   ‘I  most certainly will.  And that will  teach him not to go about frightening
people.’ Agnes releases Eliza’s hand and pushes herself upright. ‘Now then.
Time to start the day.’
   Eliza  looks down at her hand. There is a dent in her skin, from the press
of Agnes’s thumbnail, a rose-red bloom all around it. She rubs at it with her
opposite hand, surprised at its heat, as if it has been held near a candle.

The crown Eliza makes is of fern, larch and Michaelmas daisies. She sits at
the dining  table  to  do  it.  She has been  given  the task  of  minding  her
youngest brother, Edmond,  as she works,  so she  gives him  some larch
leaves and daisy petals. He sits on the floor, legs outstretched, and drops the
leaves, one by one, solemnly, into a wooden bowl, where he stirs them with
a spoon. She listens to  the  string of  sounds that comes from  his  mouth
breathily, as he stirs: ‘eef’  is in there, for  ‘leaf’,  and ‘ize’,  for  ‘Eliza’,  and
‘oop’, for ‘soup’.  The words exist, if you know how to listen.

91
   Her  fingers  – strong,  slender, more used to  the  stitching of  leather  –
weave the stems together in a circlet. Edmond gets to his feet. He toddles to
the window, then back, then to the fireplace, admonishing himself as he gets
closer: ‘Na-na-na-na-na.’  Eliza  smiles and says, ‘Nay,   Edmond, not  the
fire.’  He turns a  delighted face towards her, thrilled  at  being understood.
The fire, the heat, no, don’t touch. He knows he is not allowed near it but it
fills him  with a great and irresistible longing, the bright, leaping colour, the
blast of warmth to his face, the array of fascinating implements to stoke and
poke and grip.
   She can hear, at the back of the house, her mother banging pots and pans
in the cookhouse. She is in a filthy temper and has already caused the maid
to cry. Mary  is pouring all  her ire  and fury into  the food. The joint  won’t
cook. The  pastry for  the  pie  will   crumble. The  dough hasn’t  risen  fast
enough. The sweetmeats taste grainy. It seems to Eliza that the cookhouse is
at the centre of  a whirlwind   and she must stay  here, away from  it,  with
Edmond, where they are safe.
   Tuck, tuck, go her fingertips, severed stem ends into the weave; the palm
of the opposite hand turns the circle of the crown as she works.
   Above  her, she can hear the thud and clatter of her brothers’ feet. They
are wrestling at the top of  the stair, by  the sound of it.  A  grunt, a gust of
laughter, Richard’s plaintive plea to be let go, Gilbert’s false reassurances, a
thud, a creak of floorboard, then the smothered ‘Ow!’
   ‘Boys!’   comes the roar from  the glove shop. ‘Stop  that this instant!  Or
I’ll  come up  there and give you  something to wail  about, wedding  or no
wedding.’
   The three brothers appear in the doorway, jostling  each other out of the
way. Eliza’s eldest brother, the bridegroom,  skids across the room, seizes
her, kisses the top of her head, then whirls around to lift Edmond high in the
air. Edmond is still gripping  his wooden spoon in one hand and a fistful of
leaves in  the  other. His   eldest brother  spins  him  around, once,  twice.
Edmond quirks his  eyebrows and smiles, the air  lifting  the hair  from  his
forehead. He tries to cram the spoon sideways into his mouth. Then he is set
down and all three bigger brothers promptly disappear out of the door into
the street. Edmond lets his spoon drop, looking after them, forlorn,  unable
to understand this sudden desertion.
   Eliza  laughs. ‘They’ll   be back, Ed,’  she says. ‘By  and by. When  he is
wed. You’ll see.’

92
   Agnes appears in the doorway. Her hair is all unravelled and brushed. It
spreads down her back  and over  her shoulders like  black  water. She  is
wearing a gown Eliza  hasn’t seen before, in a pale primrose,  the front of
which is ever so slightly pushed out.
   ‘Oh,’   says Eliza, clasping her hands together. ‘The yellow will  pick  out
the hearts of  the daisies.’  She leaps to  her feet,  holding  out the  crown.
Agnes ducks down so that Eliza can place it on her head.

Frost has descended overnight. Each leaf, each blade, each twig on the road
to the church  has encased itself, replicated itself,  in frost.  The ground  is
crisp and hard underfoot. The groom and his men are up ahead: the noise
from their  group is of  hooting, yelling,  breaks of song, the trill   of a pipe,
played by  a friend  who  skips  half  on, half  off   the verge. Bartholomew
brings up  the  rear, his  height  obscuring  those ahead of  him,   his  head
lowered.
   The bride  walks in a straight line,  not looking left  or right.  With her are
Eliza, Edmond  riding  on  her hip,  Mary,  several of  Agnes’s  friends, the
baker’s wife.  Off   to the  side are  Joan and her  three daughters. Joan is
pulling her youngest son by the hand. The sisters walk  in tight  formation,
arm-in-arm, three  abreast, giggling  and whispering  to  each other.  Eliza
glances sideways at them, several times, before turning her head away.
   Agnes sees this, sees Eliza’s sadness gather about her, like fog. She sees
everything. The rosehips on the hedgerow that are turning to brown at their
tips; unpicked blackberries, too high to reach; the swoop and dip of a thrush
from the branches of an oak by  the side of  the track; the white  stream of
breath from the mouth of her stepmother as she carries the youngest boy on
her  back,  the  strands of   strangely  colourless  hair  escaping from   her
kerchief, the  wide  swing  of  her hips.  Agnes sees that  Caterina has her
mother’s nose, flat  and broad across the bridge, Joanie her mother’s  low
hairline and Margaret the thick neck and elongated earlobes. She sees that
Caterina has the gift or  ability  to make her life  happy, and Margaret, to a
lesser degree, but that Joanie does not. She sees her father in the youngest
boy, walking now,  and holding Caterina’s hand: his fair  hair, the squarish
set of his head, the upturned ends of his mouth. She feels the ribbons tied
about her stockings, tightening  and releasing  as the muscles of  her legs
work beneath her. She feels the prickle  and shift of  the herbs and berries
and flowers of her crown, feels the minute trickle of  water within the veins

93
of their stems and leaves. She feels a corresponding motion within herself,
in time with  the plants, a flow or current or tide, the passage of blood from
her to the child  within.  She is  leaving one life;  she is  beginning another.
Anything may happen.
   She senses, too, somewhere off to the left, her own mother. She would be
here with her had life taken a different turn.  She would be the one holding
her hand  as  Agnes  walked  to  her  wedding,  her  fingers  encasing  her
daughter’s. Her footsteps would  have followed  her  beat. They would  be
walking this path together, side by side. It would have been her making the
crown, affixing   it  to Agnes’s  head, brushing the hair  so that  it  hung all
around her. She would have taken the blue ribbons and wound them around
her stockings, woven them into  the hanks of her hair. It  would  have been
her.
   So it  follows, of  course, that she will be here now, in whatever form she
can manage. Agnes does  not  need to  turn  her head,  does not  want to
frighten her away. It is enough to know that she is there, manifest, hovering,
insubstantial. I see you, she thinks. I know you are here.
   She looks  ahead instead, along the road, where her  father would  have
been, up ahead with the men, and sees her husband-to-be. The dark worsted
wool of his cap, the motion of his walk, springier than that of the other men
around him – his brothers, his father, his friends, her brothers. Look  back,
she wills him, as she walks, look back at me.
   She is unsurprised when he does exactly that, his head turning, his face
revealing itself to her as he pushes back his hair to look at her. He holds her
gaze for a moment, pausing in the road, then smiles. He makes a gesture,
holding up  one hand and moving the  other towards it.  She tilts  her head
quizzically. He does it  again, still smiling.  She thinks he is miming  a ring
going on to a finger – something like that. Then one of his brothers, Gilbert,
Agnes thinks, but can’t be sure, launches himself at him sideways, seizing
him around the shoulders and shoving him. He responds in kind, wrestling
Gilbert into a headlock, making the boy howl in outrage.
   The priest is waiting  at the church door, his cassock a dark shape against
the frost-whitened stone. The men and boys fall silent as they move up the
path. They gather in a cluster near him, nervous, silent, their faces flushed
in the morning air. As Agnes comes up the church path, the priest smiles at
her, then breathes in.

94
   He  closes his eyes and  speaks: ‘I  declare the banns for  this  marriage
between this man and this woman.’ A stillness falls  over all of  them, even
the children. But Agnes is  making an internal plea of  her own:  If  you are
here, she thinks, show me now, make yourself  known,  now, please, I am
waiting  for  you,  I  am  here.  ‘If   any of   ye  know  of  any  cause or  just
impediment  why  these persons should  not  be  joined   together in   holy
matrimony, ye are to declare it. This is for the first time of asking.’
   The  lids  of  his eyes open and he  looks around them  all,  one by  one.
Thomas is poking James’s neck with a holly  leaf; Bartholomew  cuffs him
quickly, efficiently, on the back of the head. Richard is jigging from  foot to
foot, looking  very  much  as if  he  needs to relieve  himself. Caterina  and
Margaret are covertly eyeing  the groom’s brothers, assessing their worth.
John is grinning, thumbs slotted into the straining ties of his doublet. Mary
stares at the ground, her face immobile, almost stricken.
   The  priest inhales again. He says his words for the second time. Agnes
breathes in, once, twice, and the baby turns inside her, as if it has heard a
noise, a cry, as if  it  has heard its name for  the first  time. Show me  now,
Agnes thinks again, forming the words in her head with deliberate, delicate
care. Joan bends to hear something her son is mouthing; she shushes him
with a finger at her lips. John shifts to the other foot and barges accidentally
into  his wife.   Mary  drops the  gloves she  is  holding  and must  bend to
retrieve them, but not before glaring at him.
   The  banns are said for the third time,  the priest holding  them all in  his
gaze, his hands parted, as if  he  would embrace them  all. Before  he has
finished speaking the final words, the groom steps forward, into the church
porch, taking up his place beside the priest, as if to say, Let’s get this under
way. There is a ripple of laughter throughout the group, a release of tension,
and Agnes sees a flash to her right,  in  the corner of  her eyes, a burst  of
colour, like  the fall  of a  hair across her face, like the  motion of  a bird  in
flight.  Something is dropping from a tree above them. It lands on Agnes’s
shoulder, on the yellow  stuff  of  her gown,  and then on her  chest, to the
gentle swell of  her stomach. She catches it neatly, cupping  it  against her
body. It is a spray of rowan berries, fire-red, still with several narrow silver-
backed leaves attached.
   She holds it in her fingers for  a moment. Then her brother steps forward.
He takes in the berries, held in Agnes’s palm. He looks up at the tree above

95
them.  Brother  and  sister  regard  each other.  Then  Agnes  reaches  for
Bartholomew’s hand.
   His  grip is strong, perhaps too strong; he has never known or recognised
his own  extraordinary strength. His  fingers  are cold, the  skin  rough and
grainy. He  walks   her towards  the  church  door.  The  groom  is  already
reaching out  for   her,  his  arm  eagerly  extended. Bartholomew  pauses,
pulling Agnes to a stop. The groom waits, hand outstretched, a smile on his
face. Bartholomew leans forward, still holding Agnes back by the hand. He
reaches out his other  hand and grips  the husband-to-be by the  shoulder.
Agnes knows he  doesn’t intend her  to hear but  she does: her hearing  is
sharp as a hawk’s. Bartholomew leans in and whispers in her husband-to-
be’s ear: ‘Take good care of her, Latin  boy, very  good care, and no harm
will come to you.’
   When Bartholomew  leans back again, towards his sister, he is grinning,
teeth bared, facing  the  crowd;  he releases Agnes’s  hand and  she steps
towards her groom, who is looking a little pale.
   The priest dips the ring in holy water, murmuring a blessing, and then the
groom takes it. In  nomine Patris, he says, in a  clear voice, audible to  all,
even those at the back, sliding the ring on to her thumb and then off again,
in nomine Filii,  the ring is  pushed on to her first finger, in nomine Spiritus
Sancti, her  middle  finger.  At  Amen,  the ring  encircles  her  third  finger
where, the groom told her the other day, as they were hiding in the orchard,
runs a vein that  travels straight to  her heart. It  feels cold,  for a  moment,
against her skin, and damp  with  holy  water, but then the  blood, flowing
straight from  her heart, warms  it,  brings it  up  to  the temperature of her
body.
   She steps into the  church, conscious of the three things she is  holding.
The ring on her finger, the spray of rowan berries, curled into her palm, the
hand of her husband. They walk down the aisle together, a surge of people
behind them, their  feet clattering  on the stone, taking  their  places in the
pews. Agnes kneels at the altar, at the left side of her husband, to hear Mass.
They bow their  heads in unison and the  priest places linen over them,  to
protect them  from   demons, from   the  devil,  from   all  that  is   bad  and
undesirable in the world.

96
           gnes moves across the upstairs room, through the converging shafts
of light,  where dust motes swarm and  drift.  Her daughter is lying  on  the
rush pallet, still in her dress, her shoes shed beside her.
   She is breathing, Agnes is telling  herself, telling her fluttering  heart, her
thumping pulse, as she gets nearer, and that is good, is it not? There is her
chest, going up and going down and, look, her cheeks are flushed, her hands
resting beside her, fingers curled. All is not so bad. Surely. She is here and
Hamnet is here.
   Agnes reaches the bed and crouches down, her skirts inflating around her.
   ‘Judith?’   she says, and puts a hand to  the girl’s  forehead, then  to her
wrist, then back to the cheek.
   Aware that Hamnet is in the room, just behind her, Agnes bows her head
while she thinks.  Fever, she tells herself, in  a silent  voice that sounds so
calm, so cool. Then she corrects herself: a high  fever, the skin  damp and
fire-hot. Breathing rapid and shallow. Pulse weak, erratic and fast.
   ‘How  long has she been like this?’ She speaks aloud, without turning.
   ‘Since I  returned from school,’ says Hamnet, his voice pitched high. ‘We
were playing with  the kittens and Jude said . . . that is, Grandmamma had
asked us to chop the wood and we were about to start, on the wood, but we
were having a game with  the  kittens and a bit  of  ribbon. The  wood was
there and I—’
   ‘Never  mind  the wood,’ she says, with  control. ‘It  matters not. Tell  me
about Judith.’
   ‘She said her throat was hurting her but we played a bit longer and then I
said that I would  chop the wood and she said that she was feeling ever so
tired, so she came up here and lay down on the bed. So I did some of  the
wood – not all  of it  – and then I  came up to see her and she wasn’t at all
well.  And  then I  looked for  you  and Grandmamma and everybody,’  his
voice is rising now, ‘but there was no one here. I went all over, looking for
you and calling  for  you. And  I  ran for  the physician but  he wasn’t there
either and I didn’t know what to do. I didn’t  know how to . . . I didn’t  know
. . .’
   Agnes  straightens,  comes towards  her   son. ‘There   now,’   she says,
reaching out for him. She tucks his smooth, fair head to her shoulder, feels

97
the shake of his body, the shudder of his breaths. ‘You did well. Very well.
None of this is your—’
   He  wrenches away from  her,  his face  stricken and  wet. ‘Where  were
you?’ he yells, fear becoming anger, his voice wavering, as it has begun to
do, of late, deepening on the second word, then rising again for the third. ‘I
looked everywhere!’
   She gazes at him steadily, then back at Judith.  ‘I  was out at Hewlands.
Bartholomew sent for  me because the bees were swarming. I was longer
than I’d planned. I’m sorry,’ she says. ‘I’m sorry I wasn’t here.’ She reaches
out again for him, but he ducks away from her hand and moves towards the
bed.
   Together, they kneel next to the girl. Agnes takes her hand.
   ‘She’s got . . . it,’  Hamnet says, in a hoarse whisper. ‘Hasn’t she?’
   Agnes doesn’t look  at him. His  is a mind  so quick, so attuned to others
that she knows he can read her thoughts, like words written on a page. So
she must keep  them to  herself,  her head  bowed. She is  checking  each
fingertip  for  a  change in  colour,  for  a  creeping tide  of   grey or  black.
Nothing. Each finger is rosy pink, each nail pale, with an emerging crescent
moon. Agnes examines the feet, each toe, the round and vulnerable bones of
the ankle.
   ‘She’s got  . . . the pestilence,’ Hamnet whispers. ‘Hasn’t  she? Mamma?
Hasn’t she? That’s what you think, isn’t it?’
   She is gripping  Judith’s wrist; the pulse is fluttering,  inconstant, surging
up and down, fading  then galloping.  Agnes’s eye falls  on the swelling  at
Judith’s neck. The  size of  a hen’s  egg, newly  laid. She reaches out  and
touches it gently, with  the tip of  her finger. It  feels damp and watery, like
marshy ground. She loosens the  tie  of  Judith’s shift  and eases it  down.
There are other eggs, forming in her armpits,  some small, some large and
hideous, bulbous, straining at the skin.
   She has seen these before; there are few in the town, or even the county,
who haven’t at some time or other in their lives. They are what people most
dread, what everyone hopes they will never find, on their own bodies or on
those of   the  people  they  love.  They   occupy  such  a  potent  place  in
everyone’s fears that she cannot quite believe she is actually seeing them,
that they are not some figment or spectre summoned by her imagination.
   And  yet  here  they are.  Round swellings,  pushing up  from  under  her
daughter’s skin.

98
   Agnes seems to split in two. Part of her gasps at the sight of the buboes.
The other part hears the gasp, observes it, notes it: a gasp, very well. Tears
spring into the eyes of the first  Agnes, and her heart gives a great thud in
her chest, an  animal hurling   itself  against its  cage of  bones. The  other
Agnes is ticking off  the signs: buboes, fever, deep sleep. The first Agnes is
kissing her daughter, on the forehead, on the cheeks, at the place where hair
meets skin on her temple; the other is thinking, a poultice of crumbed bread
and roasted onion and boiled  milk  and mutton  fat, a  cordial of  hips  and
powdered rue, borage and woodbine.
   She stands, she moves through the room and down  the stairs. There is
something strangely familiar,  almost recognisable, about her movements.
What she has always dreaded is here. It  has come. The moment  she has
feared most, the event she has thought about, mulled over, turned this way
and that,  rehearsed and  re-rehearsed in  her  mind,  during  the  dark  of
sleepless nights, at moments of idleness, when she is alone. The pestilence
has reached her house. It has made its mark around her child’s neck.
   She hears herself telling Hamnet to find  his grandmother, his sister, yes,
they are back, they are in the cookhouse, go and bid them come, go now,
yes, directly.  And then  she is  in front  of  her  shelves and her hands are
reaching out to find the stoppered pots. There is rue and there is cinnamon,
and that is good for  drawing  out the heat, and here is bindweed root  and
thyme.
   She drops her gaze to her shelves. Rhubarb? She holds the dried stalk in
her hand for a moment. Yes, rhubarb, to purge the stomach, to drive out the
pestilence.
   At  the word, she is aware of letting out a small noise, like the whimper of
a dog.  She leans her head into  the  plaster of  the  wall.  She thinks:  My
daughter. She thinks: Those swellings. She thinks: This cannot be, I will not
have it, I will not permit it.
   She seizes her pestle and brings it  down with  a thump into  the mortar,
scattering powders and leaves and roots over the table.
   Hamnet is  out, down the path, into  the backyard and at the door of  the
cookhouse, where his grandmother is fossicking in a  barrel of onions and
the maid is standing beside her, apron held out, ready to receive whatever
Mary will   see fit to toss into it.  The fire  blasts and cracks in the grate, its
flames reaching  up  to  bait  and  caress the  undersides of  several  pots.

99
Susanna is standing by the butter churn, one listless hand curled around the
handle.
   She is  the first   to see him.  Hamnet looks  at her;  she looks  back, her
mouth slightly open at the sight of him.  She frowns, as if she might speak,
might  remonstrate with  him  about something.  Then she  turns her  head
towards her grandmother, who is instructing the maid to peel the onions and
chop them small. The heat in the  room is unbearable to Hamnet – he can
feel it, breathing at him, like fumes from  the gates of Hell. It almost blocks
the doorway, filling the space, pressing its fierce mass against the walls. He
doesn’t know how the women stand it. He passes a hand over his brow and
its outer edges seem to shimmer and he sees, or seems to see, just for  a
moment, a thousand candles in the dark, their flames guttering and flaring,
wisp lights, goblin  candles. He blinks and they are gone; the scene before
him is as before. His grandmother, the maid, the onions, his sister, the butter
churn, the headless pheasant on the table, scaled legs fastidiously drawn up,
as if the bird is worried about getting its feet muddy, even though it happens
to be decapitated and very much dead.
   ‘Grandmamma?’  Susanna says uncertainly, still   with  her eyes  on her
brother. Later,  this   moment  will   return  to  Susanna, again  and  again,
particularly in  the early  morning,  when she wakes. Her brother, standing
there, framed by the doorway. She will  remember thinking that  he looked
white-faced, shocked, quite unlike himself, a cut under his eyebrow. Would
it   have  made  a   difference  if    she  had  remarked  upon   this   to  her
grandmother? If she had drawn the attention of her mother or grandmother
to it? Would it have changed anything? She will never know because all she
says at the time is: ‘Grandmamma?’
   Mary  is in  the middle of  saying to the maid, ‘And  mind you  don’t burn
them this time, not even a little at the edges – as soon as they begin to catch,
you lift   the  pot off  the  fire,  do  you  hear?’ She turns,  first  towards her
granddaughter, and then, following  Susanna’s gaze, towards the doorway
and Hamnet.
   She  jumps,  her  hand  travelling   to  her  heart.  ‘Oh,’   she says.  ‘You
frightened me!   Whatever are  you  doing,  boy?  You  look  like   a ghost,
standing there like that.’
   Mary  will  tell herself, in the days and weeks to come, that she never said
these words. She couldn’t have done. She would never have said ‘ghost’ to
him,  would  never  have  told  him   that  there was  anything  frightening,

100
anything amiss about  his  appearance. He had looked  entirely  well.  She
never said such a thing.
   With  trembling  hands, Agnes is sweeping the scattered petals and roots
back into the mortar  and begins to grind,  her wrist  twisting, twisting,  her
knuckles whitening, her fingernails  gripping the wooden pestle. The dried
rhubarb stalk,  the  rue,  the cinnamon  are mashed together,  their  scents
mingling, the sweet, the sharp and the bitter.
   As she grinds, she counts off to herself the people this mixture has saved.
There was the wife  of the miller,  who  had been raving and tearing at her
clothes. The very next day, after drinking  two draughts of this  potion, she
was sitting up in bed, quiet as a lamb, supping soup. There was the nephew
of the landowner at Snitterfield:  Agnes had been taken there in the middle
of the night,  after the landowner  had sent for her. The  lad had recovered
well with  this  medicine and a poultice.  The blacksmith from  Copton, the
spinster from Bishopton. They had all  recovered, hadn’t they? It is  not an
impossibility.
   She is concentrating so hard that she jumps when someone touches her
elbow. The pestle falls  from  her  fingers to  the table. Her  mother-in-law,
Mary, is next to her, her cheeks red from the cookhouse, her sleeves rolled
back, a frown pinching together her brow.
   ‘Is  it true?’ she says.
   Agnes takes a breath, her tongue registering the dusky tang of cinnamon,
the acid of the powdered rhubarb and, realising she might cry if she speaks,
she nods.
   ‘She has buboes? A fever? It’s true?’
   Agnes nods again, once. Mary’s face is clenched, her eyes blazing. You
might think she was angry, but Agnes knows better. The two women look at
one another and Agnes sees that Mary is thinking  of  her daughter, Anne,
who died of the pestilence, aged eight, covered with swellings and hot with
fever, her fingers black and odorous and rotting off  her hands. She knows
this because Eliza  told  her once  but, then,  she knew  it  anyway. Agnes
doesn’t turn her head, doesn’t break her gaze with Mary, but she knows that
little  Anne  will   be there in  the  room  with  them, over  by  the door,  her
winding sheet caught over her shoulder, her hair unravelled, her fingers sore
and useless, her neck swollen and choking. Agnes makes herself form the
thought, Anne, we know you are there, you are not forgotten. How frail, to
Agnes, is the  veil  between their world  and hers. For  her, the worlds  are

101
indistinct from  each other, rubbing up against each other, allowing passage
between them. She will not let Judith cross over.
   Mary  mutters a string  of words  under her breath, a prayer, of  sorts, an
entreaty, then pulls Agnes to  her. Her  touch is  almost rough, her fingers
gripping  Agnes’s  elbow,  her  forearm  pressing down   hard on   Agnes’s
shoulder. Agnes’s face is pressed to Mary’s coif; she smells the soap in it,
soap she herself made –  with  ashes and tallow  and the  narrow buds of
lavender – she hears the rasp of hair against cloth, underneath. Before she
shuts her eyes, submitting  herself to  the embrace, she sees Susanna and
Hamnet step in through the back door.
   Then  Mary has released her and is turning,  the moment between them
over, done. She is all business now, brushing down her apron, inspecting the
contents of the mortar, going  to the fireplace, saying she will   build it  up,
telling Hamnet to bring wood, quickly,  boy, we shall build a great blaze for
there is nothing so efficacious to the driving out of fever as a hot fire. She is
clearing a space before the hearth and Agnes knows that Mary  will  bring
down the rush mattress; she will bring  clean blankets, she will  make up a
bed there, by the fire, and Judith will be brought down before the blaze.
   Whatever  differences Agnes and Mary  have –  and there are  many, of
course, living at such close quarters, with so much to do, so many children,
so many mouths, the meals to cook and the clothes to wash and mend, the
men to watch and assess, soothe and guide – dissolve in the face of tasks.
The two  of them can  gripe and prickle  and rub each other up  the wrong
way; they can argue and bicker and sigh; they  can throw into  the pig-pen
food the  other  has cooked because it  is too  salted or  not  milled  finely
enough or too spiced; they can raise an eyebrow at each other’s darning or
stitching or embroidery. In  a time such as this, however, they can operate
like two hands of the same person.
   Look.  Agnes is pouring water into  a pan and sprinkling the powder into
it. Mary  is working the bellows, taking  the wood from Hamnet, instructing
Susanna to go to the coffer next door and bring out sheets. She is lighting
the candles now, the flames flaring  and  lengthening, spreading circles of
light into  the dark corners of the room. Agnes is handing the pan to Mary,
who is setting it to warm over the flames. They are both climbing the stairs
now, without conferring, and Agnes knows that Mary will  greet Judith with
a smiling face, will call out some rousing and unconcerned words. Together,

102
they will  see to the girl,  lift  down  the pallet, give  her the medicine. They
will take this matter in hand.

103
           t is past midnight  on Agnes’s wedding night; it  might even be near
dawn. It is cold  enough for her breath to be visible  with every exhalation,
for it to collect in droplets on the blanket she has wrapped about her.
   Henley  Street, when she looks through the windows, is drenched in the
darkest black. No one is abroad. An owl  can be heard intermittently, from
somewhere behind the house, sending its shivering cry out into the night.
   Some,  Agnes reflects,  as she stands at  the window,  blanket  clutched
around her, might take this  as a bad omen, the owl’s  cry  being a sign of
death. But Agnes isn’t  afraid  of the  creatures. She likes them, likes their
eyes, which  resemble the centre of  marigolds,  their  overlapped, flecked
feathers, their inscrutable expressions. They seem, to her, to exist in some
doubled state, half spirit, half bird.
   Agnes has risen from her marriage bed and is walking about the rooms of
her new house. Because sleep won’t seem to come for her and fold her in its
plumes. Because the thoughts  in  her  head are too  many,  too crowded,
jostling for space. Because there is too much to take in, too much of the day
to go over. Because this is the first time she has ever been expected to sleep
either in a bed or on an upstairs floor.
   And  so she is drifting through the apartment, touching things as she goes:
the back of a chair, an empty shelf, the fire irons, the door handle, the stair
rail. She moves to the front of the house, to the back, and again to the front;
she goes down the stairs, she comes up again. She runs a hand down the
curtains surrounding  the  bed, given  to  them  as a  wedding  gift  by   his
parents. She pulls aside the curtain and contemplates the form of the man
within, her husband, ocean-deep in sleep, sprawled in the middle of the bed,
arms outstretched, as if drifting  on a current.  She looks up at the  ceiling,
beyond which is a small, slope-roofed attic.
   This  apartment, now  her  home, has been  built  on  to the  side  of  the
family’s house. It has two storeys: downstairs there is the fireplace and the
settle, the table and the plate, up here the bed. John had been using it for
storage – for what exactly has never been mentioned but Agnes, sniffing the
air, the first time they came in here, caught the unmistakable scent of fleece,
of baled wool,  rolled up and left  for  several years. Whatever it was it has
been removed and taken elsewhere.

104
   Agnes has a strong sense that this arrangement has something to do with
her  brother,  and   was  perhaps  part   of   his  terms   for   the  marriage.
Bartholomew had been there when they first  came over the threshold. He
had looked over the  narrow rooms, going  up the stairs  and coming back
down,  walking  from   wall   to  wall,   before  nodding  at  John,  who  had
remained standing at the door.
   Bartholomew  had had to nod at  him twice  before John turned over the
key to his son. It  had been an odd moment, interesting to Agnes. She had
watched as father  slowly,  slowly,  held out  the  key to  son. The  father’s
reluctance to relinquish it  was matched – perhaps outdone – by the son’s
unwillingness to accept it. His fingers had been listless, slack; he hesitated,
examining the iron key in his  father’s hand, as if unsure what it was. Then
he plucked it  from him  with  only  finger and thumb,  and held it,  at arm’s
length, as if deciding whether or not it might harm him.
   John had attempted to smooth over the awkwardness, making a remark
about hearths and happiness and wives, reaching forward to slap the son on
the back. It was  a gesture intended to be kind, in  a gruff,  fatherly sort  of
way, but was there not, Agnes would think later, something uneasy about it?
Something unnatural? The slap had had a little too much force, a little  too
much intent. The son wasn’t expecting it and it made him stagger sideways,
lose his balance. He had righted himself, quickly, almost too quickly, like a
boxer or a fencer, raising himself  on his toes. They looked for  a moment,
the pair of them, as if they might begin to exchange blows, not keys.
   She and Bartholomew  had observed this  from either  end of  the room.
When the son turned away and instead of putting the key into the purse at
his waist,  placed it  on  the tabletop, with   a dull,  metallic  click,  she  and
Bartholomew   had   looked   at   each   other.   Her   brother’s   face   was
expressionless, except for a minor inflection of one eyebrow. To Agnes, this
spoke a great deal. You see now, she knew her brother was saying, what you
are marrying  into? You  see now, that  eyebrow movement meant, why  I
insisted upon a separate dwelling?
   Agnes leans towards the glass panes, allowing her breath to collect upon
them. They remind her, these rooms, of the initial letter of her name, a letter
her father  taught  her  to  recognise,  scratching it   into  the  mud  with   a
sharpened stick: ‘A’.  (She can recall this  so clearly, sitting  with  both her
parents on the ground between her mother’s shins, her head leaning against
the muscle of her knee; she could reach down and grip  her mother’s feet.

105
She can summon  the sensation of  the  fall  of  her  mother’s  hair on  her
shoulder as she leant forward  to  see the movements of  Agnes’s father’s
stick, saying, ‘Here, Agnes, look.’  The letter manifesting itself  from under
the blackened point, hardened to charcoal in the kitchen fire: ‘A’. Her letter,
always hers.)
   The apartment is formed like the letter, sloping together at the top, with a
floor across its middle. Agnes takes this as her sign – the letter etched in the
dirt, the memory of her mother’s strong feet, the brush of her hair – not the
owl, not the long,  pained looks of her  mother-in-law, not the youth of  her
husband, not the narrow feel of this house, its atmosphere of emptiness and
inertia, that hard back slap of her father-in-law, none of this.
   She is untying  a cloth  bundle and laying out items  on the floor  when a
voice from the bed makes her start.
   ‘Where  are you?’ His voice, deep anyway, is made deeper still by sleep,
by the muffled layer of curtain.
   ‘Here,’  she says, still crouched on the floor, holding a purse, a book, her
crown –  wilting  now  and dishevelled, but  she will   tie it  up  and dry  the
flowers and none will be lost.
   ‘Come back.’
   She stands and, still   holding her  possessions, moves towards the bed,
pushes aside the curtains and looks down at him. ‘You’re awake,’ she says.
   ‘And  you’re  very far  away,’ he says, squinting up at her. ‘What are you
doing all  the way over  there when you should be here?’ He  points at the
space next to him.
   ‘I  can’t sleep.’
   ‘Why  not?’
   ‘The  house is an A.’
   There  is  a pause and she wonders  if  he heard  her. ‘Hmm?’   he says,
raising himself on one elbow.
   ‘An  A,’  she repeats, shuffling everything she is holding into one hand so
that she can inscribe the letter in the chill winter air between them. ‘That is
an A, is it not?’
   He nods at her gravely. ‘It is. But what has it to do with the house?’
   She cannot believe he can’t see it as she does. ‘The house slopes together
at the top and has a floor across its middle. I do not know  that I shall ever
be able to sleep up here.’
   ‘Up  where?’ he asks.

106
   ‘Here.’  She gestures around them. ‘In this room.’
   ‘Why  ever not?’
   ‘Because the floor  is floating  in  mid-air, like  the cross stroke of  the A.
There is no ground underneath it. Just empty space and more empty space.’
   His  face breaks into a smile, his eyes examining her intently, and he flops
back to the  bed. ‘Do  you know,’  he says, addressing the covering above
him, ‘that this is the foremost reason I love you?’
   ‘That  I cannot sleep in the air?’
   ‘No.  That you see the world as no one else does.’ He holds out his arms.
‘Come back to  bed. Enough of this. I  put  it to  you that we  shall have no
need of sleep for a while.’
   ‘Is  that so?’
   ‘Yes, it is.’
   He  gets to his feet, lifts  her and places her carefully in  the bed. ‘I  shall
have my Agnes,’  he says, climbing  in beside her, ‘in  our  A.  And  I shall
have her again and again and again.’
   He  is kissing her for  emphasis, with each word and she is laughing and
her hair is  spilling  all  over them, between them, catching  in his  lips, his
beard, his fingers.
   ‘There  shall not  be much sleeping in this  bed,’ he is  saying, ‘not  for a
while.’  And: ‘Why  in  God’s name are you holding  all these things? What
are they for? I don’t think we need any of them at this moment.’
   He is taking  all the things, one by one – her gloves, her crown, her purse
– out of  her hands and placing  them on the  floor. He  removes the Bible
from her hand and then another book, but before he puts it down, he pauses,
looking at it.
   ‘What  is this?’ he asks, turning it over.
   ‘I   was left it  by  a neighbour when she died,’ Agnes says, touching her
fingertip to  the frontispiece. ‘She  used to do spinning for  us and I  would
take the wool  to her, then collect  it  when she was done. She was always
kind to me and wrote in her will that I was to have it. It had belonged to her
husband, who had been an apothecary. I used to help her with her garden
when I was a child. She told me once . . .’ and here she pauses ‘. . . that she
and my mother used to consult it together.’
   He  has taken his arm from  around her and is holding  the book in  both
hands, parting the pages. ‘And you’ve had it since you were young?’ he is
saying, his eyes raking the closely  printed words. ‘It’s   in Latin,’   he says,

107
frowning. ‘It’s  about plants. Their uses. How to recognise them. How they
heal certain illnesses and distempers.’
   Agnes looks over  his shoulder. She sees the picture of a plant with tear-
shaped petals and a long, dark tangle of  roots, an illustration  of  a bough
with heavy berries. ‘I  know that,’ she says. ‘I have looked through it  often
enough, although I cannot read it, of  course. Will  you read it  to me?’ she
asks.
   He seems to recall himself. He puts down the book; he looks her over. ‘I
will  indeed,’ he says, his fingers working  at the ties on her shift.  ‘But  not
now.’

It seems strange to Agnes, during this time, that she has, in the space of a
month, exchanged country for town, a farm for an apartment, a stepmother
for a mother-in-law, one family for another.
   One house, she is learning, runs very differently from another. Instead of
the sprawl of  generations, all working  together to  look after  animals and
land, the  house in  Henley  Street has  a distinct  structure:  there are  the
parents, then the sons, then the daughter, then the pigs in the pig-pen and
the hens in the henhouse, then the apprentice and then, right at the bottom,
the serving maids. Agnes believes her position, as new daughter-in-law, to
be ambiguous, somewhere between apprentice and hen.
   Agnes watches people come and people go. She is a gatherer, during this
time, of information,  of  confidences, of the daily routines, of  personalities
and interactions. She is like a  painting on the wall,  eyes missing nothing.
She has her own house, the small, narrow apartment, but she can go out of
her back door and there is  the communal yard: she and her husband will
share the  kitchen   garden,  the  cookhouse, the   piggery,  the  hens,  the
washhouse, the brewhouse. So she can withdraw into  her own  place but
also mix and mingle with the others. She is at once observer and participant.
   The maids rise early, as early as Agnes does: town people lie in their beds
much  longer  than  those of   the  country,  and Agnes  is  accustomed  to
beginning the day before sunrise. These girls bring in the firewood, light the
fires in the hall  and the cookhouse. They let out the hens and scatter seed
and grain for  them in  the yard. They  take the slops to the  pig-pen. They
bring ale from the brewhouse. They take the dough, proved overnight in the
cookhouse jar, and beat it into shape, leaving it beside the warming oven.
It’s a good hour or so before any of the family emerges from their chamber.

108
   Here, in  town, there are no fences to mend; there is no mud to clean off
boots. Clothes do not acquire streaks of soil, hair, dung. No men return  at
midday, ravenous of appetite and cold of bone. There are no lambs to warm
by the  hearth, no  beasts with  colic   or  worm  or  foot-rot.  There are  no
animals to feed, early  in the  morning, and no  kestrel either: her  bird has
gone to live  with  the priest who  conducted the wedding. Agnes can visit
whenever she likes, he says. No sheep trying to escape through fences. No
ravens or pigeons or woodcocks landing on the thatch and calling down the
chimney.
   Instead,  there are  carts  going  up  and  down  outside all   day, people
shouting to each other in the  street, crowds and groups passing by. There
are deliveries, to be made and to receive. There is a storehouse at the back
for  the glove  workshop,  where  the empty  skins  of  forest  creatures are
stretched out like penitents on racks. There are the serving maids who skulk
in and out of the hall,  shoes flapping and slapping on the flags. They look
Agnes up and down, as if assessing her worth and finding her lacking. They
sigh, ever so slightly, if she happens to be standing in their way, but if Mary
appears, they stand upright, straighten their caps and say, Yes, mistress, no,
mistress, I do not know, mistress.
   In  the country, people are too taken up with their  livestock and crops to
make calls but in this house people come at all hours of the day, expecting
to find  company: Mary’s relatives, John’s business associates. The former
are to be brought  to the parlour;  the latter  are to be  shown first  into  the
workshop, where John will decide to which room they  will  be taken. Mary
is mostly in the house, keeping her eye on the servants and the apprentice or
sitting at her needlework, unless out on calls. John is often  nowhere to be
seen. The younger boys are at school. Agnes’s  husband is sometimes in,
sometimes out: he teaches, he goes out to  taverns in the  evenings, he is
sometimes sent on errands for  his father. The  remainder of  the time,  he
skulks upstairs in their apartment, reading or staring out of the window.
   Customers come  at all  hours  to the  workshop  window,  to peruse the
gloves, to ask questions; sometimes John lets them in  and they  can look
around the whole workshop and perhaps order a special pair to be made.
   Agnes watches it  all  for three or  four days. On  the fifth  day, she is up
before the serving girls and out of  the apartment’s back door, which leads
into the shared yard. By the time they appear, she has fired the oven in the

109
cookhouse and coaxed the dough into rounds, adding a handful of ground
herbs from the kitchen garden. The serving girls exchange worried looks.
   At  the breakfast table, the family seize the bread rolls, which seem softer,
flatter, with   a burnished glaze. The  butter  is arranged in  a  swirl.  When
broken, the bread gives  off  the hot  fragrance of  thyme,  of  marjoram. It
brings, to the  mind of  John, a recollection  of  his grandmother, a woman
who kept  a posy  of  herbs tied  to  her belt.  It  makes Mary  think  of  the
squared, walled kitchen garden at the door of the farm where she grew up,
of  the time  her  mother had had  to  shoo away  the geese with  a  broom
because they had broken in and eaten the thyme bushes. She smiles at the
recollection, at the memory of her mother’s skirts, wet  with dew and mud,
at the offended honking of  the geese, and takes another slice, dipping the
knife into the butter.
   Agnes glances at the face of her father-in-law and that of her mother-in-
law and then her husband. He catches her eye and gives a barely perceptible
nod towards the bread, raising his eyebrows.
   It  takes Mary   a week or  so  to notice  that the  house is different.  The
candlewicks are trimmed, without  Mary  having to remind  the maids. The
table linens are changed, again without asking, the wall drapes free of dust.
The plateware is spotless and shining. She sees these things individually,
without adding them up. It’s only when she smells the distinct, pollen-heavy
scent of   beeswax in  the  parlour  one  day  when  she  is  entertaining  a
neighbour that she begins to wonder.
   After  the  neighbour has taken her leave, she walks through  her house.
There are holly branches in a jar in the hall. Cloves studded into sweetmeats
in the  cookhouse, a pot  of  fragrant  leaves that Mary  doesn’t  recognise.
There  are  gnarled  and  soil-heavy   roots  drying   in   the  eaves  of  the
brewhouse, and berries in a tray. A pile of starched and pressed collars lies
waiting on the landing. The pigs in their pen look suspiciously scrubbed and
pink, the hens’ trough is clean and filled with water.
   At  the sound of voices, Mary goes along the path towards the washhouse.
   ‘Yes, like  that,’ she hears Agnes’s low voice say, ‘as if you were rubbing
salt between your palms. Gently. Just the smallest movement. That way the
flowerheads will be preserved.’
   There is another voice – inaudible to Mary – and then a burst of laughter.
   She pushes at the door: Agnes, Eliza and the two maids are all crammed
into the washhouse, aprons tied around them, the air hot and filled with the

110
acrid, stinging smell of lye.  Edmond has been placed in a tub on the floor,
with a number of pebbles.
   ‘Ma,’  he exclaims at the sight of her, ‘Ma-ma-ma!’
   ‘Oh,’   says Eliza, turning,  her face flushed  with  heat and laughter, ‘we
were . . . well,  we were . . .’  She dissolves into laughter again, brushing a
hair from  her face with  her forearm. ‘Agnes  was showing us how to  mix
lavender into the soap and then she . . . then we . . .’ Eliza begins to laugh
again, setting off one of  the maids into giggles most inappropriate for  her
station.
   ‘You’re  making soap?’ Mary asks.
   Agnes  glides forward.  She is poised, unruffled,  not  at all  flushed. She
looks as if she has just raised herself from a parlour chair,  not melted and
stirred a batch of soap in a sweltering,  moist washhouse. The front of her
apron is dented outwards with the swell  of  her stomach. Mary looks,  and
looks away. Not for the first time,  it strikes her that she will never feel that
again, that it is an experience now closed to her, at her age, at her stage in
life. The loss of that possibility sears her sometimes: it is hard for a woman
to let go of; harder still if  another woman in your household is just entering
that state. The sight of this girl’s stomach, every time, makes Mary think of
the emptiness, the quiet of her own.
   ‘We  are,’ Agnes says, revealing her small, sharpish teeth as she smiles.
‘With lavender. I thought it  might be a nice change. I hope that’s agreeable
to you?’
   ‘Of  course,’  Mary snaps. She bends down and snatches Edmond out of
the tub. He is so startled that he starts to sob. ‘Agreeable indeed,’ she says,
and goes out, clutching her inconsolable son, letting the door slam behind
her.

In the early weeks of her  marriage, Agnes collects impressions as a wool-
gatherer hoards wool: a tuft  from  here, a scrap from there, a few  strands
from  a fence, a  bit  from  a  branch, until,  until,  until   you have  a whole
armful, enough to spin into yarn.
   She sees that John loves  Gilbert  the best of  the boys  – because he is
strong and likes to set people against each other for sport – but that Mary
favours Richard. Her head jerks up if  he speaks; she shushes the others in
order to hear him. Agnes sees that Mary harbours a deep love for Edmond
but is resigned to the fact that most of his care falls to Eliza. Agnes sees that

111
Edmond watches her husband, his  eldest brother, all  the  time.  His  eyes
follow  him wherever he goes in the room; he reaches up for him when  he
passes. Edmond will,  Agnes sees, grow up  sanguine and happy; he will
follow  his eldest brother, inevitably, unasked, largely unnoticed. He won’t
live long but  will  live  well: women will   like him;  he will  father numerous
children during his short life. The last person he will think of, just before he
dies, will be Eliza.  Agnes’s husband will pay for his funeral and will  weep
at his graveside. Agnes sees this but doesn’t say it.
   She sees, too, that all six children flinch if John gets suddenly to his feet,
like  animals  sensing the approach  of  a  predator. She sees Mary   blink
slowly, as if closing her eyes to what might occur.
   There is a dinner when Edmond is tired,  fractious, hungry but somehow
unable to eat, unable to see the connection between the food on the plate
and the nameless discomfort in his belly. He grizzles and moans, thrashing
his head from side to side. Agnes sits beside him, slipping morsels into his
mouth. His gums are red and sore, the peaks of new teeth poking through,
his cheeks livid and hot. He fusses, he squeezes pie between his fingers, he
tips over his cup, he leans on Agnes’s shoulder, he grabs at her napkin and
drops it to  the floor. Agnes’s husband, on the other side of  her, puts on a
mock-rueful face  and asks, Not  happy today, eh? Their  father, however,
looks blacker and blacker,  muttering, What  ails the  child, can’t  you  take
him away? When Edmond, losing patience with  the meal, hurls a piecrust
across the table, hitting John on the sleeve, leaving a brown stain, there is a
long, stretched moment of silence. Mary bows her head, as if interested by
something in her lap, Eliza’s eyes begin to fill  with tears, and John lurches
from his stool, yelling, By God, that boy, I will—
   Agnes’s husband springs to his feet and is around the table before Agnes
realises what is happening. He is putting himself between his father and the
boy,  who  is  wailing   now,   mouth  wide,  as  if   sensing  the  change in
atmosphere. There is a scuffle, her husband holding back his father, some
oaths, a shove of chest against chest, a restraining hand on an arm. Agnes
can’t quite see because she is lifting the child away from  the table, easing
his feet out of the bench, holding him to her as she runs with him from the
room.
   After  a while,  her husband comes and finds her. She has Edmond in the
yard, her shawl wrapped twice around his short frame, and he is restored to
good humour, feeding grain to the chickens. She holds the grain  bowl for

112
him, saying just  a little,  just  enough, the hens dart-darting at the ground.
Her husband comes to stand next to her, watching. Then he leans his head
against hers, sliding his arms about her. She thinks, as she holds the grain,
of that landscape of caverns and hollows she sensed within him. She thinks
of the seams of a glove, running up and down and over each finger, keeping
close the skin that does not belong to the wearer. How a glove covers and
fits and restrains the hand. She thinks of the skins in the storeroom, pulled
and stretched almost – but  not  quite –  to tearing  or breaking  point. She
thinks of  the tools in  the workshop, for  cutting  and shaping, pinning and
piercing. She thinks of what must be discarded and stolen from the animal
in order to make it  useful to a glove-maker: the heart, the bones, the soul,
the spirit, the blood, the viscera. A glover will  only  ever want the skin, the
surface, the outer layer. Everything  else is  useless, an inconvenience, an
unnecessary mess. She thinks of the private cruelty  behind something as
beautiful and perfect as a glove. She thinks that if  she took  his hand now
and pressed her fingers to it, she might see the landscape she found before
but she would  also see a dark and looming  presence there, with tools  to
eviscerate and flay  and thieve  the essence of  a creature. She thinks,  as
Edmond scatters food for the hens, that they will  perhaps not live  long in
this apartment: soon it will be necessary for them to leave, to take flight, to
find a different place.
   Eliza  comes out into the yard, signalling that the dinner is at an end. Her
face is set, her eyes damp. She picks up Edmond and takes him back into
the house. Agnes and her husband look at each other, then walk towards the
back door of their apartment.
   It  is evident to  Agnes now, as they enter the kitchen, as he stirs the fire
and throws on a log, that her husband is split in two. He is one man in their
house and quite another in that of  his parents. In the apartment, he is the
person she knows and recognises, the one she married.
   Take him  next door, to  the big  house, and he is sullen, sallow  of face,
irritable, tetchy. He is  all tinder  and flint,  sending out sparks to ignite and
kindle. Why?  he challenges his  mother. Whatever for?  he snaps. I don’t
want to, he retorts to his father. She had never understood why this was so
but the coiled  fury  she witnessed in  John, as he raised himself  from  his
stool, told her everything she needs to know.
   In  their apartment, he lets her take his hand, lets her lead him  from the
fire to a chair, lets his  eyes lose focus, lets her rub her fingers through his

113
hair, and she can feel him  switch  from one character to  another; she can
sense that other, big-house, self melt off  him,  like  wax sliding  from  a lit
candle, revealing the man within.

114
           hree heavy knocks to the door of the apartment: boom, boom, boom.
   Hamnet is closest so he goes to answer it. As it swings open, he cringes
and yelps: on the doorstep is a terrifying sight, a creature from a nightmare,
from Hell,  from the devil.  It is  tall, cloaked in  black, and in the place of a
face is a hideous, featureless mask, pointed like the beak of a gigantic bird.
   ‘No,’   Hamnet cries, ‘get away.’ He tries to shut the door but the creature
puts out a hand and  presses it back, with  horrible, preternatural strength.
‘Get away,’ Hamnet screams again, kicking out.
   Then  his grandmother  is there, pushing  him  aside, apologising to  the
spectre, as if there is nothing out of the ordinary about it, inviting it  to step
into the house, to examine the patient.
   The spectre is speaking without a mouth, saying he will  not come in, he
cannot, and they, the inhabitants, are hereby ordered not to go out, not  to
take to the streets, but to remain indoors until the pestilence is past.
   Hamnet takes a step backwards and another. He collides with his mother,
who is going to  the window and opening her hatch to the street. She leans
out to examine this person.
   Hamnet darts to her side and, for the first  time in  years, takes her hand.
His mother squeezes his fingers, without looking at him. ‘Don’t  be afraid,’
she whispers. ‘It is only the physician.’
   ‘The  . . .?’ Hamnet stares at him, still there on the doorstep, talking with
his grandmother. ‘But why is he . . .?’ Hamnet gestures to his face, his nose.
   ‘He  wears that mask because he thinks it will protect him,’ she says.
   ‘From  the pestilence?’
   His mother nods.
   ‘And  will  it?’
   His  mother purses her lips, then shakes her head. ‘I don’t think  so. Not
coming into  the house, however, refusing  to see or  examine the patient,
might,’ she mutters.
   Hamnet  places his  other  hand inside  the  strong,  long  fingers  of  his
mother, as if her touch  might keep him  safe. He sees the physician reach
into a bag and hand his grandmother a wrapped parcel.
   ‘Tie  it  to  the stomach of  the girl  with  linen,’  he is  intoning, accepting
some coins from Mary in  his pale hand, ‘and leave it  there for three days.
Then you may take an onion and soak it in—’

115
   ‘What  is that?’ his mother interrupts, leaning out of her hatch.
   The  physician turns to  look  at her, his  horrible pointed  beak swinging
towards them. Hamnet shrinks into her side. He  doesn’t want this man to
look at him;  he doesn’t want  to fall  into  his sights. He is  seized with the
notion that to be seen by his eye, to be noted or recorded by him would be a
terrible omen, that some dreadful fate will befall them all. He wants to run,
to drag his mother away, to seal shut the doors and windows so that the man
will not get in, so that his gaze will not fall on any of them.
   But  his mother is not in the least frightened. The physician and Hamnet’s
mother regard each other for a moment, through the hatch, from which his
mother sells cures. Hamnet realises, he sees, with the cutting  clarity of  a
child poised to  enter manhood, that this man  doesn’t like  his mother. He
resents her: she sells  cures, she grows  her own  medicines, she collects
leaves and petals, bark and juices and knows how to help people. This man,
Hamnet suddenly  sees, wishes  his  mother  ill.   She  takes  his  patients,
trespasses on his revenue, his work. How baffling the adult world seems to
Hamnet at that  moment, how  complex,  how  slippery. How  can he  ever
navigate his way in it? How will he manage?
   The  physician  inclines  his  beak,  once, then  turns  back to  Hamnet’s
grandmother, as if his mother hadn’t spoken.
   ‘Is  it  a dried toad?’ Agnes says, in a clear, carrying voice. ‘Because if it
is, we don’t want it.’
   Hamnet  fastens  his  arms  around  his  mother’s  waist;   he  wishes  to
communicate to her the urgency, the necessity of ending this conversation,
of getting away from this person. She doesn’t move but brings a hand down
to his wrist, as if to say, I acknowledge you, I am here.
   ‘Madam,’  the  physician says, and again his beak swings towards them,
‘you may trust that I  know much more about these matters than you do. A
dried toad, applied  to the  abdomen for several days, has proven to  have
great efficacy in cases such as these. If your daughter is suffering from the
pestilence, I regret to say that there is very little that may—’
   The rest of the speech is cut off, curtailed, lost because Agnes has banged
the hatch shut. Hamnet watches as her fingers fumble to lock it. Her face is
furious, desperate, flushed. She is muttering something under her breath: he
catches the word ‘man’, and ‘dare’ and ‘fool’.
   He  unfastens  his  arms and  watches as  she  walks  across the  room,
agitatedly straightening a chair, picking up and putting  down a bowl,  then

116
coming to crouch  by the pallet  where Judith has been placed, next to the
fire.
   ‘A   toad, indeed,’  his mother  is murmuring,  as she dabs Judith’s brow
with a wet cloth.
   Across  the room, his  grandmother closes the front  door and slides the
bolt into  place. Hamnet sees her place the parcel with the dried toad on a
high shelf.
   She mouths something incomprehensible to Hamnet, with a nod.

117
           n a morning in the spring of 1583, if they had risen early enough, the
residents of Henley Street would have seen the new daughter-in-law of John
and Mary  exit the  door of  the little  narrow  cottage where the newlywed
couple live.  They would  have seen her shoulder  a basket, straighten her
kirtle, and set off in a north-westerly direction.
   Upstairs,  her young husband turns over  in  bed. He sleeps deeply, and
always has. He does not notice that her side of the bed is vacant and rapidly
cooling. His head presses further into the pillow, an arm is tucked about the
coverlet, his  hair  fallen  over  most  of  his  face. He  is  in  the  profound,
untroubled slumber of  the  young;  if  undisturbed, he  could sleep  on for
hours. His mouth  opens slightly, drawing  in air,  and he begins, softly,  to
snore.
   Agnes continues on her way across Rother Market, where stallholders are
beginning to arrive. A man selling bundles of lavender; a woman with a cart
of willow  strips. Agnes pauses to speak to her friend, the baker’s wife. They
exchange words about the fairness of the day, the threat of rain, the heat of
the ovens in the bakery, the progress of Agnes’s pregnancy and how low the
baby feels in her bones. The baker’s wife tries to press a bun into Agnes’s
hand. Agnes  refuses. The  baker’s  wife  insists,  lifting   the  covering  on
Agnes’s basket and pushing it inside. She catches sight of cloths, clean and
neatly folded, a  pair of  scissors, a stoppered jar, but thinks nothing  of it.
Agnes nods to her, smiles, says she needs to go.
   The  baker’s wife  stands for  a  moment before her  empty market  stall,
watching her friend walk  away. Agnes pauses momentarily, at the edge of
the market, putting one hand up to the wall. The baker’s wife frowns and is
just about to call out, but Agnes straightens and continues on her way.
   During  the night, Agnes dreamt of her mother, as she does from time to
time. Agnes had been standing in the farmyard at Hewlands and her skirts
had been dragging in the dirt; there was a heavy feeling around her, as if her
gown was waterlogged. When she looked down, there were birds standing
and trampling on the hem of her dress: ducks, hens, partridges, doves, tiny
wrens. They were struggling and pushing each other, wings  unfolded and
awkward, trying to remain standing on her skirts. Agnes was trying to shoo
them away, trying   to free  herself, when  she became aware of  someone
approaching. She turned and saw her mother passing by: her hair in a braid

118
down her back, a red shawl knotted over a blue smock. Her mother smiled
but didn’t pause, her hips swaying as she walked past.
   Agnes  had  felt  an  unravelling  deep  within   her, a  profound  longing
starting up, like the whir of a wheel. ‘Mother,’  she said, ‘wait, wait for me.’
She tried to  step forward,  to  follow  her  mother, but the  birds were  still
stepping on her skirt,  their  low-slung feathered bellies, their  webbed and
clawed feet trampling  it  down. ‘Wait!’   Agnes cried,  in the  dream, at her
mother’s receding back.
   Her  mother didn’t  stop but turned her head and said, or seemed to say:
‘The branches of the forest are so dense you cannot feel the rain.’ Then she
continued to walk towards the forest.
   Agnes called after her again, stumbling forward, tripping over the massed
bodies of the insistent, flapping birds, falling to the mud. Just as she hit the
ground, she woke, with a start and a gasp, sitting up, and suddenly she was
no longer at Hewlands, in  the yard, calling  to her mother. She was in her
house, in bed, her shift slipping off her shoulder, the baby curled inside her
skin, her husband next to her, reaching out in sleep to pincer her closer with
his arm.
   She had lain down,  fitting  herself into his  form; he had nestled his face
into her back. She had found a skein of  his hair and smoothed it, twisting
and twisting  it  between her fingers; she had pictured  the thoughts in  his
head drawing upwards, along  his hair,  into  her fingers,  as a reed draws
water up its hollow stem.
   He  was, she could  sense, worrying about her,  as men will   when their
wives approach childbirth.  His mind  circled and circled  the thought, Will
she survive? Will she come through? His limbs tightened about her, as if he
wanted to keep her there, in the safety of their  bed. She wished she could
say to him, You must not fret. You and I are to have two children and they
will  live long lives. But she remained silent: people do not like to hear such
things.
   After  a while she rose, parting the curtains around the bed, stepping out.
She walked to the window, spread her hand to the glass. The branches are
so dense, she thought. The branches. You cannot feel the rain.
   She went to the small table by the fireplace, where her husband kept his
papers and a quill. She lifted the lid of  the ink pot and dipped the quill,  its
claw-like  point holding  the ink.  She can write, after  a fashion, the letters
coming out small and cramped, and perhaps not in an order legible to most

119
(unlike her husband, who has been to the grammar school, and oratory after
that, and can produce a looping, continuous flow of letters, like  a skein of
embroidery, from the tip of his quill. He stays up late into the night, writing,
at his  desk. What, she does not  know.  He writes  so fast  and with  such
concentration that Agnes  cannot keep up,  cannot make  it  out).  But  she
knows enough to be able to record an approximation of this sentence: The
branches of the forest are so dense you cannot feel the rain.
   Agnes has riddled  the fire,  thrown on logs  to revive  it, placed a jug  of
cream and a loaf of bread upon the table. She has taken up her basket and
let herself out of the front door. She has spoken with her friend, the baker’s
wife, and now she is taking a path beside a stream, her basket straining her
arm.
   It  is mid-May. Sunlight brightens the ground in glancing, shifting shapes;
Agnes notices,  despite everything,  because she cannot  not  notice such
things, what  is flowering  along  the verges. Valerian, campion,  dog rose,
wood sorrel, wild  garlic, river  flags. Any  other time, she would  be on her
hands and knees, plucking their heads and blooms. Not today.
   Even though it  is still  early, she skirts the boundary fence of Hewlands.
She doesn’t want  to  risk  meeting anyone along  the way.  Not  Joan, not
Bartholomew, not  any of  her  brothers and sisters. If  they  saw her,  they
would raise the alarm, they  would call  someone, they would send for her
husband, they would force her  indoors, into the  farmhouse. It is  the very
last place she would  want to  be for  this. The  branches of the forest, her
mother had said to her.
   She catches sight, in the distance, as she steps along the bridleway, of her
brother Thomas, moving from house to yard, and she hears Bartholomew’s
piercing whistle to  his dogs. There is the thatch of  the hall; there the pig-
pen; there the rear of the apple store, the sight of which makes her smile.
   She enters the wood half a mile  or so from  Hewlands. By this time,  the
pains are coming regularly.  She can just  about catch her breath between
them, ready herself, steady herself for the next. She has to wait by a huge
elm, pressing her palm to its rough, ridged bark as the sensation begins in
her lower back, deep between her legs, and surges upwards, seizing her in
its grip, shaking her with its force.
   Once  she is  able,  she shoulders  her burden  and  continues. She  has
reached the part of the forest she was aiming for. Fight  through the dense
tangle of branches and brambles and juniper bushes. Go over the stream,

120
past a thicket  of   holly  trees, which  give  the  only  colour  in  the  winter
months. And then there is  a clearing,  of sorts, where sunlight  penetrates,
creating a thick fleece of green grass, in circular patterns, the curved fronds
of ferns. There is an almost horizontal tree here, an immense fir, felled like
a giant in  a  story, its  roots splayed out, its  reddish trunk  held  up in  the
forked branches of other trees, supported by its lesser neighbours.
   And  underneath its end, where it once stood in  the earth, is a hollow  –
dry, sheltered, big enough for several people. Agnes and Bartholomew used
to come here when they were children, if Joan had been shouting or if she
gave them too  many tasks. They would  bring  a cloth  sack of  bread and
cheese, crawling in under the tree  roots and say to one another that  they
would stay there for ever, live in the forest like  elves; they would never go
back.
   Agnes lowers  herself to the ground. It  is dry, in  the lee of the  uprooted
tree, with a carpet of pine needles. She feels another pain coming, driving
towards her, getting closer, like  thunder over  a landscape. She turns, she
crouches, she pants through it, as she knows she must, holding tight  to a
tree root. Even in the  throes of it,  when it has her in  its clutches, when it
drives everything from her mind but the narrow focus of when it might end,
she recognises that it is getting stronger. It means business, this pain. It will
not leave her be. Soon it will  not let  her rest or gather herself. It means to
force her out of herself, to turn what is inside outside.
   She has seen women go through this. She remembers her mother’s time:
she saw it from the doorway; she heard it from outside the house, where she
and Bartholomew  were sent. She  attended Joan at each of  her  labours,
catching her brothers and sisters in her hands as they made their entry into
the world, wiping  the grease and blood from  their mouths and noses. She
has seen neighbouring women do it, has heard their cries rise into screams,
smelt the rusty coin scent of new birth.  She has seen the pig, the cow, the
ewes birth their  young; she has been the one called  on by her  father, by
Bartholomew, when lambs were stuck. Her female fingers, slender, tapered,
were required to enter that narrow, heated, slick canal, and hook out the soft
hoofs, the gluey nose, the plastered-back ears. And she knows, in the way
she always does, that she will reach the other side of birth, that she and this
baby will live.
   Nothing,  however, could have prepared her for the relentlessness of it. It
is like trying  to stand in a gale, like trying  to swim against the current of a

121
flooded river,  like  trying  to  lift   a fallen  tree.  Never has she  been more
sensible of her weakness, of her inadequacy. She has always felt herself to
be a strong person: she can push a cow into milking position, she can douse
and stir a load of laundry, she can lift and carry her small siblings, a bale of
skins, a  bucket  of  water,  an  armful  of  firewood.   Her  body  is  one  of
resilience, of  power: she is  all  muscle beneath smooth  skin. But  this  is
something else. Something other. It laughs at her attempts to master it, to
subdue it, to rise above it. It will, Agnes fears, overtake her. It will seize her
by the scruff  of  her neck and plunge  her down, under the  surface of the
water.
   She raises her head and sees, across the clearing, the silvery trunk and
delicate leaves of a rowan tree. Despite everything, she smiles. She says the
word to herself –  rowan, rowan – pulling  out the two  syllables. Reddened
berries in autumn, used for stomach pains, if boiled, and wheezing chests; if
planted by the door of a house, it will repel evil spirits from the inhabitants.
People say the first woman was made from its branches. It was her mother’s
name, although her father never let it  past his lips;  the shepherd had told
her, when she’d asked him. The branches of the forest.
   Agnes  plants her hands in  front  of  her, on  all  fours, like  a  wolf,  and
submits to another pain.

In Henley  Street, he wakes. He spends a while staring up at  the dark red
curtain above him. Then he gets up, walks to the window  and gazes down
into the street, absently scratching at his beard. He has two Latin tutorials
this afternoon, at houses in  town; he is  aware of  the stifling  boredom of
them, as you might be of the stench of a nearby carcass. The drowsing boys,
the squeal of slates, the flutter  and crease of the primers,  the intoning  of
verbs and conjunctions. This morning he is meant to be helping  his father
with  deliveries and collections.  He yawns,  leans his head into  the wood
frame of  the window,  glares at a  man yanking a  donkey by  its bridle,  a
woman pulling a wailing  child  by its jacket, a boy  running in the opposite
direction with a bundle of firewood under his arm.
   Is  it to be, he asks himself, that they remain here, in this town, for ever?
Is he  never to  see any  other place,  never to  live  elsewhere? He wants
nothing more than to take hold of Agnes and the baby and run with them, as
far as they are able to go. When  he married, he had thought that a larger,
freer life  might  begin, the life  of  a man, and yet  here he is, a mere wall

122
separating him  from  his  boyhood home,  his family,   his  father, and  the
vagaries and flashes of his inconstant tempers. He knew, of course, that they
had to wait for the baby, that nothing could be achieved until the safe arrival
of their child. But now that time is near and he is no further on in his plan to
leave. How can he ever get  away? Are they to  live  like this,  in  a narrow
appendage to his parents’ house? Is there to be no escape for them? Agnes
says that he must—
   At  the thought of  Agnes, he straightens up. He looks at  her side of the
bed, where the straw still  holds the indent,  the shape of her. He calls her
name. Nothing. He calls it again. Still  nothing. His mind is  traversed, for a
moment, by an image of her body in its current astonishing shape, as he saw
it last night:  limbs, neat ribcage, the spine a long indent down  the back, a
cart-track through snow, and then this perfectly rounded sphere at the front.
Like a woman who had swallowed the moon.
   He lifts  his clothes from the chair beside the window and shrugs himself
into  them. He  makes  his  way  across the room  in   his stockinged  feet,
shaking his hair out  of his collar.  Hunger growls in  his stomach, low  and
menacing, like a dog  crouched inside his body. Downstairs  will  be bread
and milk,  oats and eggs, if the hens have laid.  He almost smiles to  think
this. As he passes his desk in the corner, it seems to him, from the corner of
his eye, that something  has altered about it.  Something has changed. He
pauses. The quill rests in the inkwell, point  down, fronded feathers up. He
frowns.  This  is   something he  never  does:  to  leave  a  quill   like   that,
overnight, in the damp dark of a well. What a waste, what profligacy. It will
be quite spoilt.
   He steps forward and lifts it out, giving it a gentle shake, so that the drops
don’t fall  to  the curled  pages. He notices, then, that something has been
added to what he had been writing the night before.
   It  is  a string of  letters, written  in  a slanted fashion; the words seem to
slide down the page, as if they weigh more at the end of the sentence than at
the beginning. He bends to look. There is no punctuation, no indication  of
the start or finish. He can make out the words ‘branches’ and ‘rain’ (written
as ‘rayne’); there is  another word beginning with  a capital  B and another
with an F or possibly an S.
   The  branches of the something are something something . . . rayne. He
cannot follow  it.  His  fingers hold  flat  the page. With  his  other hand, he
scuffs the end of the quill against his cheek. The branches, the branches.

123
   His   wife  has  never  done this   before, taken  up  a  quill   and  written
something at his  desk. Is  it  a  message for him?  Is it   important that  he
understand it? What does it mean?
   He  lays  down  the  quill.  He  turns.  He  calls  her name  again, with   a
questioning lilt. He descends the narrow stairs.
   She is not in the downstairs room or outside on the street. Could she have
gone to the priest to fly her kestrel, as she does sometimes? But surely she
wouldn’t undertake to walk  that far, so close to her confinement? He goes
through the back door, into  the yard,  where he finds his  mother standing
over Eliza, who is dipping cloth in and out of red dye.
   ‘Have  you seen Agnes?’
   ‘Not  like  that,’ his mother is scolding. ‘The way I showed you yesterday,
with  light   fingers. Light,   I  said.’  She  raises her  head to  look   at him.
‘Agnes?’ she repeats.

The baby is alive: Agnes doesn’t realise, despite her intimations, how much
she feared that this might not be until she sees it twist its head, scrunch up
its features into a yell of  outrage. Her daughter’s face is wet, greyish, with
an expression of dismay. She holds her fists up on either side of  her head
and lets out a cry – surprisingly loud and emphatic for so small  a creature.
Agnes turns her on to  her side, as her father  always did with  lambs, and
watches as the water – from that other place where she has been, these long
months – leaks out of her mouth. Her lips become tinged with pink and then
the colour  spreads to her  cheeks, her chin,  her  eyes, her forehead. She
looks, suddenly and completely, human. No longer aquatic, a mer-child, as
she did when she emerged, but a small person, very much herself, with her
father’s high forehead, his bottom lip, his  swirl of  hair at the crown of  her
head, and Agnes’s sharp cheekbones and wide eyes.
   She reaches out with her spare hand and brings the blanket and scissors
out of the basket. She lays the baby on the blanket and works  at the cord
with the scissors. Who would ever think it could be so thick, so strong, still
pulsing like a long, striped heart? The colours of birth assail Agnes: the red,
the blue, the white.
   She tugs on her shift, baring her breast, lifting the baby to it, watching in
something close to awe as her daughter’s mouth opens wide, as she clamps
down and begins to suck. Agnes  lets out a laugh.  Everything works.  The
baby knows what to do, better than her.

124
In the house and, shortly  afterwards, in the whole  town, there follows  an
enormous hue and cry,  a panic and  a lament.  Eliza is  in  tears; Mary  is
screeching, running up and down the stairs in  the narrow apartment, as if
Agnes has been hiding in a cupboard. I had it  all ready for  her, she keeps
shouting, the birthing room, everything she needs, right here. John thunders
in and out of the workshop, alternately roaring that he can’t  possibly work
with all this racket, and then, where the devil has she got to?
   Ned,  the apprentice, is dispatched to Hewlands, to see if they have any
news of  her. No  one can find   Bartholomew, who  went out  early  in  the
morning, but soon all the sisters and Joan, neighbours and villagers are out,
searching for Agnes. Have you seen a woman, greatly with child, carrying a
basket? The sisters have been up and down the lane, asking anyone they
meet. But no  one has seen her, save the wife of  the baker, who said  she
went in the direction of  the Shottery path. She wrung her hands, threw her
apron over  her head, saying,  Why  did  I  let  her go,  why, when  I  knew
something wasn’t right? Gilbert and Richard are sent out into the streets, to
apprehend passers-by, to see if anyone has any news at all.
   And  the husband? He is the one to find Bartholomew.
   When Bartholomew spies him on the path that runs along the outer edge
of his  land, he  throws down  the bale  of straw  he is  holding  and strides
towards him. The lad – Bartholomew cannot think of him as anything other
than a lad, soft-handed towns-boy that he is, hair all smoothed back, a ring
through his ear – blanches to see him coming over the field. The dogs reach
him first and they bound and bark around him.
   ‘What?’   Bartholomew  demands, as he  comes within  earshot. ‘Is   she
brought to bed? Is all well?’
   ‘Eh,’   the husband says, ‘the situation, such as it is, if  indeed one might
call it that, is—’
   Bartholomew’s  fingers  seize the front  of  the  husband’s jerkin. ‘Speak
plainly,’ he says. ‘Now.’
   ‘She’s disappeared. We don’t know where she is. Someone saw her, early
this morning, heading in this  direction. Have you seen her? Have you any
clue as to where she—’
   ‘You  don’t  know where she is?’ Bartholomew  repeats. He stares at him
for a long moment, his grip tightening on the jerkin,  then speaks in a quiet,
menacing voice: ‘I thought I made myself very clear. I told you to look after

125
her. Didn’t  I? I  said that  you were to  take good care of  her. The best of
care.’
   ‘I  have! I  do!’  The husband struggles in his grasp but he is a good head
and shoulders shorter than Bartholomew, who is a colossus of a man, with
hands like bowls and shoulders like an oak tree.
   From  nowhere, and without  warning, a bee drones between them; they
feel  the   movement  of    it   on   their   faces.  Bartholomew   reaches up
instinctively, to flick  it away, and the husband takes the opportunity to wrest
himself from Bartholomew’s grasp.
   He darts sideways, agile, ready, up on his toes.
   ‘Listen,’  he says, from his new distance, holding up his hands, bouncing
from foot to foot, ‘I  don’t want to fight you—’
   Despite everything, Bartholomew wants to laugh. The idea of this pasty-
faced scholar engaging in bare-knuckled combat with him is preposterous.
‘Damn right you don’t,’  he says.
   ‘We  have the same end in mind here,’  the husband says, stepping back
and forth, ‘you and I. Wouldn’t you say?’
   ‘What  end would that be?’
   ‘We  both want to find  her. Don’t  we? To make sure she’s safe. And the
baby.’
   At  the thought of Agnes’s safety – and the baby’s – Bartholomew’s anger
rises again, like a pot left on the boil.
   ‘You  know,’  he mutters, ‘I  have never really understood why  my sister
chose you, above all others. “What do you want to go marrying him for?” I
said to her. “What use is he?”’  Bartholomew takes his crook and places it
squarely between his feet. ‘You know what she said to me?’
   The  husband, standing straight as a reed now, arms folded, lips pressed
together, shakes his head. ‘What did she say?’
   ‘That  you had more hidden away inside you than anyone else she’d ever
met.’
   The husband stares, as if he can’t believe what he is hearing. His face is
anguished, pained, astonished. ‘She said that?’
   Bartholomew  nods. ‘Now,  I  can’t pretend to  understand her choice, in
marrying you, but I  do know one thing about my sister. You want to know
what it is?’
   ‘Yes.’

126
   ‘She is rarely wrong.  About anything. It’s a gift  or a curse, depending on
who you ask. So if she thinks that about you, there’s a possibility it’s true.’
   ‘I  cannot divine,’ the husband puts in, ‘whether—’
   Bartholomew  continues,  speaking over  him,  ‘It   is  of  no  importance,
either way, at this present moment. Our task now is to find her.’
   The husband says nothing, but lowers himself to the ground, his head in
his hands. When he speaks, his voice is muffled. ‘She wrote something on a
page before she left. It was perhaps some manner of message for me.’
   ‘What  did it say?’
   ‘Something  about rain.  And branches. But  I couldn’t  properly  make it
out.’
   Bartholomew  regards him for a second or two, turning these words over
and over in his mind. Rain and branches. Branches. Rain. Then he lifts his
crook and tucks it into his belt.
   ‘Get  up,’ he says.
   The husband is still speaking, more to himself than anyone else. ‘She was
there this  morning and  then she wasn’t,’   he is  saying. ‘The  Fates have
intervened and swept her away from me, as if on a tide, and I have no idea
how to find her, no idea where to look and –’
   ‘I  do.’
   ‘–  I shall not rest until I find  her, until we are—’ The husband stops short
and raises his head. ‘You do?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘How?’  he demands. ‘How can you know her mind so quickly  and yet I,
who am married to her, cannot begin—’
   Bartholomew  has had enough of this. He nudges the husband’s leg with
his boot. ‘Up, I tell you,’  he says. ‘Come.’
   The  lad  springs  upright  and  regards  Bartholomew  with  a  wary  air.
‘Where?’
   ‘The  forest.’
   Bartholomew  puts two  fingers  into  his mouth  and, without  taking  his
eyes off the lad’s face, whistles for his dogs.

Agnes is  dozing, somewhere between awake  and asleep, with  the  baby
tucked at her breast, when Bartholomew finds them.
   He has walked over the fields, his dogs at his heels, the husband trailing
in his  wake, still  moaning and  whining,  and he has found her, here, just

127
where he suspected she might be.
   ‘There now,’  he says to her, bending to hoist her into his arms – the mess
and stink and matter of  birth  are of  no consequence to him. ‘You  cannot
stay here.’
   She protests, lightly, drowsily,  but then leans her head into her brother’s
chest. The baby, he notices, is alive and its cheeks are drawing in and out.
At suck, then. Bartholomew nods to himself.
   The husband has caught up with them now, making a fuss and bother of
the moment, gesturing, clutching  his  hair, his  voice  still  churning  away,
throwing out words  and words and more words into the greenery. He will
carry her, he is saying, and what is the baby, a girl or a boy, and what was
she thinking, running off like that, she’s had them all frantic, he had no idea
where she had gone. Bartholomew considers giving him a kick, to shut him
up, to fell  him  to the  fecund, leaf-damp ground, but resists. The husband
tries to  take Agnes  from  him,  but Bartholomew  brushes him  off,  as he
might a bothersome fly.
   ‘You  get the basket,’ he says to the lad. Then adds, over his shoulder, as
he strides away: ‘If it’s not too heavy for you.’

128
           or the pestilence to reach Warwickshire, England, in the summer of
1596, two events need to occur in the lives of two separate people, and then
these people need to meet.
   The  first is  a glassmaker on the island of Murano  in the principality   of
Venice; the second is a cabin boy on a merchant ship sailing for Alexandria
on an unseasonably warm morning with an easterly wind.
   Several months  before the day  Judith takes to  her bed,  as the year is
turning from  1595 to  1596, the  master glassmaker, who is skilled  in  the
layering of five  or six colours to produce the star or flower-patterned glass
beads known as millefiori, is momentarily distracted by a fight breaking out
between the stokers across the glassworks. His hand slips and two of  his
fingers enter the roaring white flame that was, a moment earlier, heating the
bulb of  glass to stretchable, malleable gum. The  pain is  so severe that it
goes beyond sensation and at first he cannot feel it at all;  he cannot think
what has happened, why everyone is  staring, then  running towards him.
There is a smell of roasting meat, a yelling almost canine in its intensity, a
flurry around him.
   The result, later in the day, is two amputations.
   One  of  his  fellow  workers,  then, is  the one  to pack  up  the tiny  red,
yellow, blue, green and purple beads into boxes the following day. This man
doesn’t know  that the  master glassmaker – now at  home, bandaged and
dosed into a stupor with  poppy syrup – usually  pads and packs the beads
with  wood  shavings and sand  to  prevent breakage. He  grabs instead a
handful of rags from the glassworks floor and tucks them in and around the
beads, which look like  hundreds of tiny, alert,  accusing eyes staring up at
him.
   In   Alexandria,  at  exactly  the  same moment, all   the  way  across the
Mediterranean Sea, the cabin boy must leave his ship, for Judith to contract
the pestilence and for  a tragedy  to be set  in motion,  halfway  across the
world. He must receive orders to go  ashore and find some victuals for his
hungry and overworked shipmates.
   So he does.
   He  goes down the gangplank, clutching  the purse given  to him  by the
midshipman, along with  a short, sharp kick in  the backside, which  would
explain the boy’s listing, limping gait.

129
   His  crewmates are hauling crates of Malaysian cloves and Indian indigo
off the ship, before taking on sacks of coffee beans and bales of textiles.
   The  dockside, under the  cabin boy’s  feet,  is disconcertingly  firm  and
solid after weeks at sea. Nevertheless, he staggers off towards what looks to
him like  a tavern, passing a stall  selling  spiced nuts, a woman holding  a
snake about her neck. He  pauses to look  at a man  with  a monkey  on a
golden chain. Why? Because he has never seen a monkey before. Because
he loves animals of all kinds. Because he is, after all, not much older than
Hamnet, who is, at this very moment, sitting  in a cold  wintry  schoolroom,
watching the schoolmaster hand out horn books of Greek poetry.
   The monkey at the port of  Alexandria is wearing a little  red jacket and a
matching hat; its back is curved and soft, like that of a puppy, but its face is
expressive, oddly human, as it peers up at the boy.
   The cabin boy – a young lad from  a Manx family  – looks at the monkey
and the monkey looks at the boy. The animal puts its head on one side, eyes
bead-bright, and chatters softly, a slight judder of sound, its voice light and
fluting. It  reminds the boy of an instrument his uncle plays at gatherings on
the Isle of Man, and for a moment he is back at his sister’s churching, at his
cousin’s wedding,  back in  the safety  of  his kitchen  at  home, where his
mother would be gutting  a fish, telling  him to  mind his boots, to wipe  his
shirt front, to  eat up now. Where his uncle would  be playing his flute  and
everyone speaking the language he had grown up with, and no one would
be yelling at him or kicking him or telling him  what to do, and later on there
might be dancing and singing.
   Tears prick the eyes of the cabin boy and the monkey, still regarding him,
with a sentient and understanding gaze, reaches out its hand.
   The fingers on the monkey’s hand are familiar and strange, to the boy, all
at once. Black and shiny,  like  boot leather, with  nails like  apple pips. Its
palm, though, is striated, just like the boy’s and there passes between them,
there, under the palm trees that line the wharf, the confluence of sympathy
that can flow between human and beast. The boy feels the golden chain, as
if it is  around his own neck; the monkey sees the boy’s sadness, his longing
for his home, the bruises on his legs, the blisters and calluses on his fingers,
the peeling skin on his shoulders from the relentless scorch of months in the
ocean sun.
   The  boy holds out his  hand to the monkey and the monkey takes it.  Its
grip is surprisingly strong: it speaks of urgency, of maltreatment, of need, of

130
craving for kind  company. The monkey climbs up the boy’s arm, using all
four of  its feet,  across his shoulders and up on to his  head, where it sits,
paws buried in the boy’s hair.
   Laughing,  the boy puts up a hand to be sure of what is  happening. Yes,
there is a monkey sitting on his head. He feels himself fill   with numerous,
warring urges: to run about the dockside, shouting to his crewmates, Look
at me, look;  to  tell  his  little  sister this,  to  say, You’ll  never  guess what
happened to me, a monkey sat on my head; to keep the monkey for himself,
to dart  away, to  jerk  the  chain from  the  man’s hand  and sprint  up  the
gangplank and disappear into the  ship; and to  cradle this  creature in his
arms, for ever, never let it go.
   The  man is getting to  his feet, gesturing at the boy. He  has skin that is
pocked and scarred, a mouthful of blackened teeth, an eye that doesn’t quite
match its pair, in either direction or colour. He is rubbing the fingers of  his
hand together, in the universal language that means: money.
   The boy shakes his head. The monkey clings tighter, curling its tail about
the boy’s neck.
   The  man with  the scarred, pocked skin bears down, gripping  the boy’s
arm. He repeats his gestures. Money, he is insisting, money. He points at the
monkey, then makes the gesture again.
   Again,  the boy shakes his head, presses his lips together, puts a protective
hand over the purse tied to his belt. He knows what will happen to him if he
returns to the ship without food,  without ale. He will   carry the memory of
the midshipman’s lash – given to  him twelve  times in Malacca and seven
times in Galle, ten in Mogadishu – for ever.
   ‘No,’  says the boy. ‘No.’
   The  man lets  out  a stream  of  angry words,  into  the  boy’s face.  The
language they speak in this place called Alexandria is jabbing, nicking, like
the point  of  a  knife.  The  man  reaches up to  seize the  monkey, which
chatters and then shrieks, a piercing high cry of distress, gripping the boy’s
hair, the collar of his shirt, the tiny black nails scoring the skin of his neck.
   The  boy, almost sobbing now, tries to  hold on to  his new friend.  For a
moment, he has him, by the forelimb, the warm fur of the elbow fitted  into
his palm, but then the man jerks the chain and the monkey falls, screaming,
from the boy’s  grasp, to the cobbled dock, where it  rights itself  and then,
tugged again, scrambles after the man, whimpering.

131
   Aghast,  the boy  watches the animal  leave, the  hunch of  its  back, the
workings of its haunches, trying to keep up with its master. He swipes at his
face, at his eyes, his head feeling  bare and empty, wishing that  he might
bring the moment back, that he could have somehow persuaded the man to
let him keep it. The monkey belonged to him: surely anyone could see that?
   What  the boy doesn’t know – can’t  know – was that the monkey leaves
part of itself behind. In the scuffle, it has shed three of its fleas.
   One  of  these fleas  falls,  unseen, to  the  ground,  where the  boy  will
unwittingly crush it with  the sole of his foot. The second stays for a while in
the sandy hair of the boy, making its way to the front of his crown. When he
is paying for a flagon of  the local brew in  the tavern, it will  make a leap –
an agile,   arching  spring  –  from   his  forehead  to  the  shoulder  of  the
innkeeper.
   The third  of  the monkey’s fleas will  remain where it  fell,  in the fold  of
the red cloth tied around the boy’s neck, given to him  by his sweetheart at
home.
   Later, when the boy has returned to the ship for the night, having eaten a
dinner of some of the spiced nuts and a curious patty of bread, shaped like a
pancake, he will pick  up his favourite of  the ship’s cats, an animal mostly
white but with a striped tail, and nuzzle it against his neck. The flea, alert to
the presence of a new host, will transfer itself from the boy’s neckerchief, to
the thick, milk-white fur  of the cat’s neck.
   This  cat, feeling unwell, and with the feline’s unerring eye for those who
dislike  it,  will   take up  residence, the next  day, in  the  hammock of  the
midshipman. When he, that night, comes to his hammock, he will  curse at
the now-dead animal he finds there, turn it unceremoniously out, kicking it
across the room.
   Four  or  five  fleas,  one of  which  once  belonged to  the monkey,  will
remain where the cat lay. The monkey’s flea  is a clever  one, intent on its
survival  and success in  the  world.  It  makes its  way,  by  springing  and
leaping,  to   the   fecund  and   damp   armpit   of   the  sleeping,   snoring
midshipman, there to gorge itself on rich, alcohol-laced sailor blood.
   Three   days   out,   past   Damascus  and   heading   for    Aleppo,   the
quartermaster enters the captain’s cabin to report  that the midshipman  is
unwell and confined below. The captain nods, still examining his charts and
sextant, and thinks nothing more of it.

132
   The next day, he receives word, as he stands on the upper deck, that the
midshipman  is  raving,  foaming   at  the  mouth,  his  head  quite  pushed
sideways by a tumour in his neck. The captain frowns as the quartermaster
speaks these words into his ear, then gives orders for the ship’s physician to
visit the man. Oh, the quartermaster then adds, and several of the ship’s cats
seem to have expired.
   The captain turns his face to regard the quartermaster. The expression on
his face is  one of  distaste, bafflement. Cats, you say? The  quartermaster
nods, respectfully, eyes cast down. How very peculiar.
   The  captain thinks for a  moment longer, then flicks  his fingers towards
the sea. Throw ’em overboard.
   The deceased cats, three in all, are taken by their striped tails and flung
into the Mediterranean. The cabin boy watches, from  a hatch in the deck,
wiping his eyes with his red scarf.
   Shortly  afterwards, they dock at Aleppo, where they offload more of the
cloves and a portion of the coffee and several score rats, which make a dash
for  the shore. The  ship’s physician  knocks on  the door  of  the captain’s
cabin, where  he is  conferring  about  weather and  sails with   his second
officer.
   ‘Ah,’   says the captain, ‘how is the man . . . the, well, midshipman?’
   The physician scratches under his wig and smothers a belch. ‘Dead, sir.’
   The  captain frowns, surveying  the man, taking in  his crooked  wig, the
potent smell of rum off him. ‘By what cause?’
   The physician,  a man more suited to setting bones and extracting teeth,
looks up, as if the answer might be found on the low, planked ceiling of the
cabin. ‘A fever, sir,’ he says, with a drunkard’s decisiveness.
   ‘A  fever?’
   ‘An  Afric  fever would  be,’ the physician slurs, ‘my opinion.  He’s turned
all black, you  see, in patches, around the limbs and also in other  places I
will  refrain  from  mentioning  here, in  this  salubrious place, and  so it  is
necessary for me to conclude that he must have taken ill and—’
   ‘I  see.’ The captain cuts him off  by turning  away from him, towards his
charts, the matter dealt with, as far as he is concerned.
   The  second officer clears his throat. ‘We  shall, sir,’  he says, ‘arrange a
sea burial.’
   The  midshipman is  wrapped in  a  sheet and brought up  on deck.  The
sailors nearby  cover  their  noses and  mouths with   cloth:  the  corpse is

133
excessively odorous. The captain gives a short reading from the Bible; he,
too, is struggling with the dead man’s smell, despite twenty-five years at sea
and more watery funerals than he can recall.
   ‘In   the name  of  the Father,’  the captain enunciates, raising  his voice
above the sounds of discreet retching at the  back, ‘the Son  and the Holy
Ghost we commend this body unto the waves.
   ‘You,’  he gestures at the two sailors nearest him, ‘take the . . . do the . . .
ah . . . yes . . . overboard.’
   They  dart forward and, with  green faces, lift the corpse up and over the
side.
   The choppy, pleated surface of the Mediterranean folds over the body of
the midshipman.
   By   the  time  they  reach  Constantinople, with   an  order  to  collect   a
consignment of  furs  from  the  north,  the  cats are  all  dead  and the  rat
population is becoming a problem. They are eating through the crates and
getting at the dried-meat rations, the second officer tells the captain. There
were fifteen or sixteen of them in the cook’s quarters this morning. The men
are demoralised, he says, keeping his eyes on the line of horizon out of the
window, and several more have fallen ill overnight.
   Two  more men die, then a third,  and a fourth.  All  with  the same Afric
fever that swells the neck and turns the skin red and blistered and black in
places. The captain is forced  to make an unscheduled stop in  Ragusa, to
take on more sailors, for whom he has no references or recommendations,
which is the kind of hasty, slipshod seamanship he likes to avoid.
   These  new   sailors  are   shifty-eyed,  snaggle-toothed;  they   keep  to
themselves and speak very little, and only in some kind of Polack language.
The Manx  crew  distrusts them on  sight and  will  not  communicate with
them, or willingly  share quarters.
   The  Polacks, however, are skilled at killing   rats. They approach it as a
sport, baiting  a  string  with  food,  then lying   in  wait  with   an enormous
shovel. When the creature appears – sleek, with drooping belly, gorged as it
is on the sailors’ rations – the Polacks leap on it, shouting, singing, and beat
it to  death, rat brains and entrails sprayed on the walls and ceilings. They
then cut off  the tails and string them to  their belts, passing around a clear
liquid in a bottle, from which they all drink.
   Turns  your  stomach, one of  the  Manx  sailors  says to  the cabin  boy,
watching from across the cabin. Doesn’t it? Then he swats at his neck, his

134
shoulder; the place is overrun with fleas. Damned rats, he growls to himself
and turns over in his hammock.
   At  Venice, they don’t plan to dock for long – the captain is keen to get his
cargo back to England, to  recoup his fee,  to get this  hellish voyage over
with – but while  the unloading and loading take place, he gives an order to
the cabin boy to find  some cats for  the ship. The cabin boy leaps eagerly
down to the dockside; he is more than keen to leave the ship, its cramped,
low ceilings and stink of  rat and fever and death. Today two more men are
confined to  their  quarters with  fever, one  a Manxman,  like  himself,  the
other one of the Polacks, his rat-tail adorned belt hung up beside him.
   The boy  has been in Venice once before, on his first voyage, and it is as
he remembers it: a strange, hybrid place, half of sea, half of land, where the
steps of houses are lapped by jade-green waters, and windows are lit by the
guttering flares of candles, where there are no streets but narrow alleyways,
leading off each other in a dizzying  labyrinth,  and arch-backed bridges. A
place where you might  very easily lose  your way  among the fog and the
angled squares and the high buildings and tolling church bells.
   For  a moment he  watches the crew, who  are hauling crates and sacks
between them, shouting in a mixture  of Manx  and Polack and English. A
Venetian man pushes a cart towards them, loaded with boxes; he too starts
shouting, in  Venetian. He is  gesturing to the  sailors, to  his boxes, while
gripping his cart, and the boy sees that the first two fingers of his hand are
missing and the  rest of  the  hand is  of  a strange, puckered texture,  like
melted candlewax. He is calling to the sailors, gesturing at the ship with his
good hand, at his boxes, and the boy can see that the cart is about to lurch
sideways, that the boxes will soon be spilt all over the dockside.
   He  leaps forward, rights the cart, grins  at the surprised face of the man
with the mangled hand, then darts away because he has seen, underneath a
stall selling fish, the whiskered, triangular faces of several cats.
   Unbeknown  to  them  both,  the  flea  that  came from   the Alexandrian
monkey –  which has, for  the  last week  or so,  been living  on  a rat, and
before that the cook,  who died  near Aleppo –  leaps from  the boy  to the
sleeve of the master glassmaker, whereupon it makes its way up to his left
ear, and it bites him there, behind the lobe. He doesn’t feel it as the cool air
of  the misty  canal has rendered his  extremities  sensationless, and he is
intent only  on getting these boxes of beads aboard the ship, receiving his

135
payment, then returning to Murano, where he has many orders to fulfil and
the fire stokers are sure to be fighting again, during his brief absence.
   By  the time the ship is rounding the heel of Sicily, the second officer has
fallen ill  with  the Afric  fever, his fingers purple and black, his body so hot
that the sweat drips through the knots of his  hammock to the floor  below.
They bury him at sea, along with two Polacks, outside Naples.
   The  Venetian  cats, when  not  killing   rats,  stay  true  to  their  origins,
choosing to sleep in the hold, on the boxes of beads from Murano. There is
something about their  wooden surfaces, their  knotted  ties, their  chalked
markings in Venetian on the side that evidently appeals to them.
   Because not many people go into the hold during a voyage, when the cats
die – and they do, in succession, one by one – their bodies remain unfound,
on top of  these boxes. The fleas that  leapt from  the dying  rats into their
striped fur crawl  down into  these boxes and take up residence in the rags
padding the hundreds of tiny, multi-coloured millefiori beads (the same rags
put  there  by  the  fellow   worker   of  the   master glassmaker;  the  same
glassmaker who is now in Murano, where the glassworks is at a standstill,
because so many  of  the workers  are  falling  ill   with   a mysterious  and
virulent fever).
   At   Barcelona, the remaining  Polacks jump ship,  disappearing into  the
melee of the port. The captain sets his teeth and tells the men they will carry
on, depleted as they are. They will deliver their crates of cloves and fabric
and coffee and they will set sail.
   The men do as they are told. The ship docks at Cádiz, then Porto, then La
Rochelle,  with  more  men  lost   along  the  way,  then  north,  finally,   to
Cornwall. When they sail into London, they are down to a crew of five.
   The  cabin boy  goes off to  find  a ship  heading to the Isle  of  Man, the
once-red scarf still tied around his neck, the sole surviving female Venetian
cat tucked under his arm; the other three men head to a tavern at the furthest
end of London Bridge;  the captain orders a horse to take him home to his
wife and family.
   The   cargo,  unloaded  and  stacked  in   Custom  House,  is   gradually
distributed throughout London: the cloves and spices and textiles and coffee
to merchants, to be sold on, the silks to the Palace, the glassware to a dealer
in  Bermondsey, the  textile   bales to   clothworkers  and  haberdashers in
Aldgate.

136
   The  boxes of  glass beads, crafted by  the glassmaker on the  island of
Murano, just before he injured his hand, lie on the shelf in a warehouse for
almost a month.  Then one is  dispatched to a dressmaker in  Shrewsbury,
another in York, a jeweller in Oxford. The final  box, the smallest of the lot,
still wrapped in  rags from the floor  of  the Venetian glassworks, is sent by
messenger to an inn at the north  edge of the city,  where it  remains for  a
week. It is then carried outside by the innkeeper and, along with a parcel of
letters and a packet of lace, is given to a man heading into Warwickshire on
horseback.
   His  leather saddlebag gives off a rhythmic  click-click-click   as he rides,
the beads jostling together with the movement of the horse, turning their six
colours around and around, rubbing against each other. For the two days of
the journey, he idly wonders to himself what could be in  the wrapped box:
what could give off such a minute, clean sound?
   Two of  the beads break, crushed by the weight of their replicas. Five are
scratched irreparably on their  surfaces. The heavier ones work their  way
gradually, with each jolt of the horse, to the bottom.
   The fleas in the rags crawl out, hungry and depleted by their hostless stay
in  the   wharfhouse.  Soon,  however,  they   are  recovered,  rejuvenated,
springing from  horse to  man and back again, then  out on  to the  various
people the rider encounters on the way – a woman who gives him a quart of
milk, a child who comes to pat his horse, a young man at a roadside tavern.
   By  the time  the rider reaches Stratford, the fleas have laid  eggs: in the
seams of his doublet, in the mane of the horse, in the stitching of the saddle,
in the  filigree  and weave of  the lace, in  the  rags surrounding the beads.
These eggs are the great-grandchildren of the monkey flea.
   He  delivers the letters, the packet of lace and the box  of beads into the
hands of an innkeeper on the outskirts of the town. The letters are delivered,
one by  one,  to  their  recipients, by  a  boy,  in  return  for  a  penny (one,
incidentally, arrives at Henley Street, for the husband in London has written
to his family,  telling  them how  he has sprained his wrist by  falling  down
some steps, about a dog owned by his landlord, the play they are about to
take on tour, all the way into Kent).  The packet of lace is collected, after a
day or two, by a woman from Evesham.
   The   rider  turns  his   horse back  towards  London,   noticing   that  the
movement causes him some discomfort: there seems to be some painful,
tender spot in his armpit. But he ignores it and continues on his way.

137
   The box  of beads is taken, by the same delivery boy, to a seamstress in
Ely Street. She has an order for a new gown  for the wife  of  a guildsman,
who will   wear  it  at the  harvest fair.  It  is  said that  the wife  has  visited
London and also Bath, in  her time,  so has refined ideas about dress. She
told the  seamstress that she must have a bodice decorated with Venetian
beads, or else the dress will be worth nothing to her. Nothing.
   And  so the seamstress sent to London, who in turn  sent to Venice, and
they waited and they waited, and the wife of the guildsman fretted that the
beads might not arrive in time, and they sent a second letter to London, and
heard nothing back, but here they are.
   The seamstress reaches through the hatch and takes the box from the boy.
She is about to open it, when her neighbour’s child, Judith, who helps with
the stitching  and the tidying  of  coloured  twists and the  cutting  of cloth,
comes through the door.
   The  seamstress holds aloft the box. ‘Look,’  she says to the girl, who  is
small for her age, and fair as an angel, with a nature to match.
   The  girl  clasps her hands together. ‘The beads from  Venice? Are they
here?’
   The seamstress laughs. ‘I believe so.’
   ‘Can I  look? Can I see? I cannot wait.’
   The seamstress puts the box on her counter. ‘You may do more than that.
You may be the one to open them. You’ll need to cut away all  these nasty
old rags. Take up the scissors there.’
   She hands the  girl  the box  of millefiori   beads and Judith  takes it, her
hands eager and quick, her face lit with a smile.

138
           n an afternoon in the summer of Susanna’s first year, Agnes notices
a new smell in the house.
   She is spooning meal into the waiting  mouth of Susanna, saying, Here’s
one for you, here’s another, the spoon going in laden with meal and coming
out streaked and shining. Susanna is seated at the corner of the table on a
chair piled  high  with  cushions. Agnes has fastened her  in  place on this
throne with a knotted shawl. The child is rapt, miniature hands scrolled into
themselves, like the shells of  snails, eyes fixed on the  spoon as it travels
from bowl to mouth and back again.
   ‘Dat,’   shouts Susanna, her mouth pitted with four blue-white teeth, in  a
row, on her lower gum.
   Agnes repeats the sound back to her. She finds herself frequently unable
to look away from  her child, to remove her gaze from her daughter’s face.
Why  would  she ever want  to  behold anything  else, when  she could be
taking  in  the sight  of  Susanna’s ears, like  the  pale  folds  of  roses, the
winglike  sweep of  her tiny  eyebrows, the dark  hair, which  clings  to her
crown as if painted there with  a brush? There is nothing more exquisite to
her than her  child:  the world  could  not  possibly contain  a more  perfect
being, anywhere, ever.
   ‘Deet,’  Susanna exclaims, and, with a deft and determined lunge, grabs at
the spoon, causing meal to be splattered to  the table, to  her front,  to her
face, to Agnes’s gown.
   Agnes   is  finding   a  cloth,   wiping   the  table,   the  chairs,  Susanna’s
disbelieving face, trying to  quell the outraged roaring, when she raises her
head and sniffs the air.
   It  is a damp, heavy, acrid scent, like food gone off or  unaired linen. She
has never smelt it before. If it had a colour, it would be greyish green.
   Cloth  still in  hand, she turns to look at her daughter. Susanna is gripping
the spoon, banging it rhythmically on the table, blinking  with  each impact,
her lips  pursed together, as if  this  percussion is an  act that requires  the
fullest concentration.
   Agnes  sniffs the  cloth;  she sniffs  the air. She  presses her nose to her
sleeve, then to Susanna’s smock. She walks about the room. What is it? It
smells like dying flowers,  like plants left  too long in  water, like a stagnant
pond, like wet lichen. Is there something damp and rotting in the house?

139
   She checks under the table, in case one of Gilbert’s dogs has dragged in
something. She kneels down to peer under the coffer. She puts her hands on
her hips, standing in the middle of the room, and draws in a deep breath.
   Suddenly she knows two things. She doesn’t know how she knows them:
she just does. Agnes never questions these moments of  insight,  the way
information  arrives in  her head. She accepts them as a  person might an
unexpected gift, with a gracious smile and a feeling of benign surprise.
   She is with  child,  she feels. There will be another baby in  the house by
the end of  winter. Agnes has always known  how  many children she will
have. She has foreknowledge of this: she knows there will be two children
of hers standing at the  bed where she dies. And  here is the second child
now, its first sign, its very beginning.
   She also knows that this smell, this rotten scent, is not a physical thing. It
means something. It is  a sign  of something –  something bad, something
amiss, something out of  kilter  in  her  house. She can feel it  somewhere,
growing, burgeoning, like the black mould  that creeps out of the plaster in
winter.
   The  opposing  natures of  these two  sensations perplex her.  She feels
herself stretching in two directions: the baby, good; the smell, bad.
   Agnes walks back to the table. Her first and only thought is her daughter.
Is this scent of sadness, of dark matter, coming from her? Agnes buries her
face in the child’s  warm neck and inhales. Is it  her? Is her child,  her girl,
under threat from some dark, gathering force?
   Susanna squeals, surprised at this attention, saying,  Mamma, Mamma,
fastening her arms around Agnes’s neck. Her arms, Agnes can feel, are not
long enough to go right around her, so they grip with their fierce fingers to
Agnes’s shoulders.
   Agnes sniffs her as a dog follows a trail,  with both nostrils, as if sucking
up her daughter’s essence. She smells the pear-blossom hint of Susanna’s
skin, the warm hair, the scent of bedclothes and meal. Nothing else.
   She lifts  her daughter’s diminutive  round form,  saying, will  they find  a
slice of bread, a cup of milk, and she is thinking about the new baby, curled
small as a nut inside her, and how Susanna will love it, how they will  play
together, how it will be a Bartholomew for her, a friend and companion and
ally, always. Will  it  be a boy or  a girl? Agnes asks herself and, strangely,
can locate no sense of the answer.

140
   With  Susanna at her feet, she cuts a slice of  bread and slathers it with
honey. Susanna sits on her lap now, at the table, because Agnes wants her
close, wants her right there, in case this smell, this darkness, should try to
come near. And Agnes talks, to  keep her daughter distracted, to keep her
safe from the world. The child is listening to the stream of talk coming from
Agnes’s mouth, hooking  out  the words  she knows,  to  shout them loud:
bread, cup, foot, eye.
   They are singing a song together, about birds nesting and bees humming,
when Susanna’s father comes down  the  stairs, into  the  room. Agnes  is
aware of him  lifting   a cup, filling   it  with  water from  the pitcher, of  him
drinking  it, then  another and another. He walks around them and  slumps
into a chair opposite.
   Agnes looks at him.  She feels herself breathe in, then out, in, out, like a
tree filling with  wind. The sour, damp smell is back. It is stronger. It is right
here before them. It drifts off him, like  smoke, collecting above his head in
a grey-green cloud. He pulls it with him, this odour, as if he is enveloped in
its mist. It seems to exude from his skin.
   Agnes examines her husband. He looks the same. Or does he? His face,
under his beard, is sallow, parchment pale. His eyes seem hooded and have
purplish shadows under them. He stares out of the window, and yet doesn’t.
He seems not to see anything before him.  His  other hand, resting on  the
table between them, is filled with empty air. He is like the picture of a man,
canvas thin, with nothing behind it; he is like a person whose soul has been
sucked out of him or stolen away in the night.
   How  can this  have happened, right under her  nose? How can he have
fallen into  this state, without warning,  without her seeing the signs? Were
there signs? She tries to think. He has been sleeping more than usual, it is
true, and  spending more  time  out  in  the  evenings, at  taverns with  his
friends. It has been a long time since he read to her, at night, by candlelight,
in their bed – she cannot remember the last time he did this. Have they been
speaking together, as they used to, beside the fire at night? She thinks they
have, perhaps less than usual. But  she is  busy, with  the  child,  with  the
house, with  her  garden,  with  callers  at  the  window,  and he  has  been
carrying on with his afternoons of tutoring and mornings of running errands
for his father. Life  has been sweeping them all along together, in step, she
had thought. And now this.

141
   Susanna is still  singing,  clapping her hands together. Her knuckles  are
dimpled, each one, indented on the bone. The song goes round and round,
the same  four  notes,  the same  drone  of  sounds, round  and  round.  It
evidently does not please him because he winces and covers one ear with a
hand.
   Agnes  frowns. She thinks  about the baby, there in  her belly,  curled in
water, listening to all that is  going on, breathing in this foul  air; she thinks
about the warm weight of Susanna on her lap; she thinks about this cloud of
grey and rot coming off her husband.
   Is  this marriage, this child,  their  life  together causing his malaise? Is it
their home in this apartment that is draining the life out of him in this way?
She has no idea. The thought  fills  her with  panic. How  can she tell  him
about the new child  in  her  belly while  he  is in  this  state? It might  only
worsen his melancholy and she cannot bear to see her news greeted with
sorrow, with anything less than rapture.
   She says his name. No response. She says it again. He raises his chin and
looks at her: his  face is horrifying  to  her. Grey, puffy, beard straggly  and
unkempt. How did  he get like this?  How did  it happen? How can she not
have noticed this change coming? What is it she has not seen, or chosen not
to see?
   ‘Are  you ill?’  she asks him.
   ‘Me?’   he says, and  it  seems to take  him  a long  time  to  hear her, to
articulate a response. ‘No. Why do you ask?’
   ‘You  do not look well.’
   He sighs. He rubs a hand over his brow, his eyes. ‘Do I not?’ he says.
   She stands, shifting Susanna to her hip. She touches his forehead, which
feels clammy and cool, like the skin of a frog. He twists irritably  out of her
grasp, waving away her hand.
   ‘All’s   well,’   he says, and his  words are heavy, as if  he  is spitting  out
pebbles as he speaks. ‘Don’t fuss.’
   ‘What  ails you?’ she says. Susanna is kicking her legs, trying to turn her
mother’s face towards her, telling her she needs to sing.
   ‘Nothing,’   he says. ‘I’m  tired. That is all.’  He  stands, scraping the chair
against the floor. ‘I’m going back to bed.’
   ‘Why  don’t  you eat?’ Agnes asks, trying to shush Susanna, bouncing her
up and down. ‘Some bread? Honey?’
   He shakes his head. ‘I’m not hungry.’

142
   ‘Remember your father wanted you to go early to—’
   He interrupts her, with a curt wave of his hand. ‘Tell him to send Gilbert.
I’ll  not go anywhere today.’ He heads for the stairs, dragging his feet across
the floor, pulling  the misty  smell after  him, like  a ream of  old, unwashed
cloth. ‘I need to sleep,’ he says.
   Agnes watches him go  up the stairs, pulling himself  up by the rail.  She
turns to look into the round, dark, wise eyes of her daughter.
   ‘Sing,  Mamma,’ is Susanna’s advice.

In the still of  the night, she whispers to him, asks him what is wrong, what
is on his mind, can she help him? She puts her hand to his chest, where she
feels his heart  tap against her palm,  over and over,  over and  over, as if
asking the same question and getting no answer.
   ‘Nothing,’  is what he replies.
   ‘It  must be something,’ she says. ‘Can you not say?’
   He sighs, his chest lifting and falling  under her hand. He fidgets with the
sheet edge, rearranges his legs. She feels the scrape of his shin against hers,
the restless tug  of   the sheet. The  bed-curtains  are close  around them,
forming a cave where the two of them lie together, with Susanna asleep on
the pallet, arms flung wide, her mouth pursed, hair plastered to her cheeks.
   ‘Is  it . .  .’ she begins, ‘. . . are you . . . do you wish we had not . . . wed?
Is that it?’
   He  turns to her, for  what feels like  the first time  in many  days, and his
face is pained, aghast. He presses his hand down on top of hers. ‘No,’  he
says. ‘Never. How could you  say such a thing? You and Susanna are all I
live for. Nothing else matters.’
   ‘What  is it, then?’ she says.
   He  lifts  her fingers,  one by one, to  his lips,  kissing  their tips.  ‘I  don’t
know,’ he says. ‘Nothing. A heaviness of spirit. A melancholy. It’s nothing.’
   She is just falling  into sleep, when he says, or seems to say, ‘I am lost. I
have lost my way.’
   He  moves towards her, then, and grips her round the waist, as if  she is
drifting away from him, into huge, tidal waters.

Over the next while, she observes him carefully, in the manner of a doctor
watching a patient. She sees how he cannot sleep at night but then cannot
rouse himself in the morning. How he rises at midday, groggy, whey-faced,

143
his mood flat and grey. The smell off him is worse then, the sour, rank scent
soaked into his clothing, his hair. His father comes to the door, shouting and
bawling, telling  him  to stir himself,  to put  in a day’s work.  She sees how
she, Agnes, must remain calm, steady, must make herself bigger, in a way,
to keep the house on an even keel, not to allow it to  be taken over by this
darkness, to square up to it, to shield Susanna from it, to seal off  her own
cracks, not to let it in.
   She sees how he drags his feet and sighs when he goes off to teach his
pupils. She watches him stare out of the window when his brother Richard
returns from school. She sees the way he sits  at table with  his parents, a
scowl on his face, his  hand toying with  the food, with  the plate. She sees
him reach for the ale pitcher when his father praises Gilbert’s handling of a
certain worker at the tannery. She sees Edmond come and stand at his side
and lay his head on his  sleeve; the boy has to butt him  with  his forehead
several times before his brother  realises he is there. She sees the absent,
weary way he lifts the child  to his lap. She sees Edmond stare intently into
his brother’s face, a small  hand pressed to each stubbled cheek. She sees
that Edmond, alone, is the only other person who notices that something is
amiss with him.
   She sees how her husband starts in his seat if the cat leaps on the table, if
the door slams in a breeze, if a plate is put down too roughly. She sees the
way John snaps at him, sneers, invites Gilbert to join in with  this. You are
useless, she hears John say to him, when he  spills ale  on the tablecloth.
Can’t even pour your own ale, eh, eh, Gilbert, did you see?
   She  sees the cloud  above  him  grow  darker,  gather its  horrible  rank
strength. She wants to reach across the table then, to lay her hand on  his
arm. She wants to say, I am here. But  what if  her words are not enough?
What if she is not enough of a salve for his nameless pain? For the first time
in her life, she finds she does not know how to help someone. She does not
know what to  do. And, anyway, she cannot take his hand, not here, not at
this table. There are plates and cups and candlesticks between them, and
Eliza is  standing now  to clear  the meat dish  and Mary  is trying  to  feed
Susanna cuts of meat that are too large for her. There is so much to do in a
family  of this  size, so much to  see to, so many  people needing so many
different things. How easy is it, Agnes thinks, as she lifts the plates, to miss
the pain and anguish of one person, if that person keeps quiet, if he keeps it

144
all in,  like  a bottle stoppered too tightly,  the pressure inside building  and
building, until – what?
   Agnes doesn’t know.

He drinks too much, late into the night, not out with  his friends, but sitting
at the table in the bedchamber. He cuts feather after feather into quills, but
none is quite right, he says. One is too long, another too short, a third  too
thin for his fingers. They split  or scratch the page or blur and spot. Is it too
much to ask for a man to have a working quill?  Agnes wakes one night to
hear him  shout this,  hurling  the  whole lot  at  the  wall,  ink  pot  and all,
making  Susanna wail.   She  doesn’t  recognise  him,  then,   holding  her
screaming child to her side: his livid  face, his  dishevelled hair, his yelling
mouth, the splash of ink, like a black island, on the wall.
   In  the  morning, as he  lies sleeping, she ties  Susanna to her back  and
walks the path  to Hewlands, stopping  on the way  to  gather feathers, the
heads of poppies, sprays of nettles.
   She finds Bartholomew by following  a noise of repetitive thudding. He is
at the nearest fold, swinging a hammer on to the top of a fence post, driving
it into the earth: thwack, crack. He is making enclosures for the new lambs.
She knows that he could have told one of the others to do this job but he is a
good  fencer:  his   height,   his  extraordinary   strength,  his   unswerving,
unstinting approach to a task.
   As she approaches, he lets the hammer fall to his feet. He waits, mopping
at his face, watching her as she walks towards him.
   ‘I   brought you  this,’  Agnes  says, holding  out a  hunk  of  bread and a
packet of the cheese she makes herself, in the outhouse in Henley Street,
straining ewe’s milk through muslin.
   Bartholomew  nods, accepts the food, takes a bite and chews, all without
taking his eyes from Agnes’s face. He lifts  the corner of Susanna’s bonnet
and passes a finger over her sleeping cheek. Then his eyes are pulled back
to Agnes. She smiles at him; he continues to chew.
   ‘Well?’  is the first thing he says.
   ‘It  is,’  Agnes begins, ‘no great matter.’
   Bartholomew rips the crust off the bread with his teeth. ‘Tell me.’
   ‘It   is merely  . .  .’ Agnes  shifts the weight  of  Susanna ‘. . .  he doesn’t
sleep. He stays awake all night and then cannot rise. He is sad and sullen.

145
He will   not  speak, except  to  argue with  his  father.  There is  a  terrible
heaviness about him. I do not know what to do.’
   Bartholomew  considers her words, just as she knew he would, his head
on one side, his gaze focused on something in the distance. He chews, on
and on, the muscles in his cheeks and temples tensing and tensing. He slides
the remainder of the bread and cheese into his mouth, still saying nothing.
When he has swallowed, he exhales. He bends. He picks up his  hammer.
Agnes stands to one side, out of range of his swing.
   He sends two blows down on top of  the post, both true and straight. The
post seems to shudder and flinch, drawing into itself. ‘A man,’ he says, then
strikes another blow, ‘needs work.’ He swings the hammer again, brings it
down on the post. ‘Proper work.’
   Bartholomew  tests the post with  a hand and finds  it  steady. He moves
along to the next, already loosely dug into the soil. ‘He is all head,’ he says,
swinging his hammer, ‘that one. All  head, with  not much sense. He needs
work  to steady him,  to  give  him  purpose. He  can’t go  on  this way,  an
errand-boy for his father, tutoring here and there. A head like his, he’ll run
mad.’
   He puts a hand to the post, which doesn’t seem to his liking, because he
takes the hammer to it again, once, twice, and the post is driven further in.
   ‘I   hear it  said,’  Bartholomew mutters, ‘that  the  father is  free with  his
fists, particularly with your Latin Boy. Is that true?’
   Agnes sighs. ‘I have not seen it with my own eyes but I don’t doubt it.’
   Bartholomew  is about to swing the hammer but checks himself. ‘Has he
ever lost his temper with you?’
   ‘Never.’
   ‘And  the child?’
   ‘No.’
   ‘If   he ever raises a hand to either  of you,’  Bartholomew  begins, ‘if  he
even tries, then—’
   ‘I  know,’ Agnes cuts in, with a smile. ‘I don’t  think he would dare.’
   ‘Hmm,’   Bartholomew mutters. ‘I  should hope not.’  He flings  down the
hammer and walks over to his pile  of posts, stacked in a heap. He selects
one, weighs it in his hand, holds it up and looks along it, to check its line.
   ‘It  would  be hard,’ he says, without looking  at her, ‘for a man to live  in
the shadow of a brute like that. Even if it  was in the house next door. Hard
to draw breath. Hard to find your path in life.’

146
   Agnes nods, unable to speak. ‘I had not,’ she whispers, ‘realised how bad
it was.’
   ‘He   needs work,’  Bartholomew  says again. He  hoists the  post to  his
shoulder and comes up to her. ‘And perhaps a distance between him and his
father.’
   Agnes looks away, down the path, at the dog, lying in the shade, pink rag
of a tongue unrolled.
   ‘I  have been thinking,’  she begins, ‘that it  might interest John to set up
elsewhere. In London.’
   Bartholomew  raises his  head, narrows his eyes. ‘London,’   he repeats,
rolling the word over his tongue.
   ‘To  extend his business there.’
   Her brother pauses, rubs at his chin. ‘I see,’ he says. ‘You mean that John
might send someone to  the city,  for  a  while.  Someone he trusts. A  son
perhaps.’
   Agnes nods. ‘Just for a while,’ she says.
   ‘You  would go with him?’
   ‘Of  course.’
   ‘You  would leave Stratford?’
   ‘Not  at first.  I  would wait  until he was settled, with  a house, and then I
would follow  him, with Susanna.’
   Brother  and sister  regard each other. Susanna, on Agnes’s back, stirs,
gives a small sob, then settles back to sleep.
   ‘London  is not so far away,’ Bartholomew says.
   ‘True.’
   ‘Many  go there, to find work.’
   ‘Again,  true.’
   ‘There might  be opportunities to be found there.’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘For  him. For the business.’
   ‘I  think so.’
   ‘He  might find a position for himself. Away from  his father.’
   Agnes reaches out and touches the cut end of  the post Bartholomew is
holding, tracing a finger around and around the circles there.
   ‘I  don’t think  John would listen to a woman in this matter. If an associate
were to put the idea in his head – someone with an interest in his business,

147
with a stake – so as to make it look like John’s idea in the first place, then . .
.’
   ‘The  notion would take hold.’  Bartholomew finishes for her. He rests his
hand on her arm. ‘What about you?’ he says in a low voice. ‘You would not
mind if  he  . .  .  went ahead of you?  It  could take  some time for  him  to
establish himself.’
   ‘I  would mind,’  she says. ‘Very much. But what else can I do? He cannot
continue like this. If  London  could save him from  this misery, it is  what I
want.’
   ‘You  would come back here,’ he jerks his thumb  towards Hewlands, ‘in
the meantime, you and Susanna, so that—’
   Agnes  shakes her head. ‘Joan would never take to  the idea. And  there
will be more of us soon.’
   Bartholomew  frowns.   ‘What  are  you  saying? There  will   be  another
child?’
   ‘Yes. By winter’s  end.’
   ‘Have  you told him?’
   ‘Not  yet. I will  hold off, until  all is arranged.’
   Bartholomew  nods at her, then  gives her one of  his rare,  wide smiles,
putting his  powerful  arm around her  shoulders. ‘I  shall  seek out John. I
know where he drinks. I’ll go there tonight.’

148
           gnes is sitting on the floor by the pallet, next to Judith, a cloth in her
hand. She has been there all night: she will  not rise, she will   not eat, she
will not sleep or rest. It is everything Mary can do to get her to drink a little.
The heat from  the fire  is so great  that Agnes’s cheeks have scarlet spots
upon them; strands of hair have escaped from her coif to write themselves
in damp scribbles on her neck.
   As  Mary watches, Agnes dips the cloth into the bowl of water and wipes
Judith’s  brow,  her  arms,  her  neck. She  murmurs  some  words  to  her
daughter, something soft and soothing.
   Mary  wonders if  the child hears her. Judith’s fever has not broken. The
bubo in her neck is so large, so taut, it may burst. And then all will  be lost.
The girl will   die. Mary  knows this. It  may be tonight, in  the deepest dark,
because that is the most dangerous time for the sick. It may be tomorrow or
even the day after. But come it will.
   There  is nothing  they can do  now. Just as three of  her own  daughters
were taken, two when they were just babies, Judith will go from them. They
will not have her any more.
   Agnes is gripping  the child’s  limp fingers, Mary  sees, as if she is trying
to tether her to life. She would keep her here, haul her back, by will alone,
if she could. Mary knows this  urge – she feels it; she has lived it; she is it,
now and for ever. She has been the mother on the pallet, too many times,
the woman trying to hold on, to keep a grip on her child. All  in  vain. What
is given may be taken away, at any time. Cruelty  and devastation wait for
you around corners, inside coffers, behind doors: they can leap out at you at
any moment, like  a thief  or brigand.  The trick  is never to  let  down your
guard. Never think you are safe. Never take for granted that your children’s
hearts beat, that they sup milk,  that they draw  breath, that they walk  and
speak and smile and argue and play. Never for a moment forget they may be
gone, snatched from you, in the blink of an eye, borne away from you like
thistledown.
   Mary  feels tears gathering in her eyes, feels her throat closing over. The
sight of Judith’s hair, still  plaited, the line of  her jaw and neck. How can it
be that she will no longer exist? That, before too long, she and Agnes will
be washing this body, combing out that plait, readying her for burial? Mary

149
turns briskly, taking up a pitcher, a cloth, a plate, anything, moving them to
the table and back again.
   Eliza, who  is seated at the table, her chin in her hand, whispers, ‘I should
write. Don’t you think so, Mamma?’
   Mary  glances at the pallet, where Agnes has her head bowed, almost as if
in prayer. All day, Agnes has refused to let Eliza write to Judith’s father. All
will  be well, she has kept saying, as she ground up herbs, with increasingly
frantic  movements, as she  tried  to get  Judith  to  swallow  tinctures  and
tisanes, as she rubbed ointments into her skin. We mustn’t alarm him. It is
not necessary.
   Mary  turns back to Eliza and gives her a quick, single nod. She watches
as Eliza goes to a cupboard and takes out ink, paper and quill; her brother
keeps them there for when he is at home. She sits down at the table and dips
her quill into the ink and, hesitating for just a moment, writes.

               Dear Brother,
                   I am sorrie  to tel you  that Judith, your daughter, is verie sick.
               We belief she has not manie hours left to her. Pleaƒe come bak to
               us, if you can. And make hast.
                   God ƒpeed to you, dearest brother.
                   Your loving sister,
                   Eliza

Mary melts the sealing-wax over a candle; she sees Agnes watching as they
drip  it  on to  the  folded  page. Eliza  writes  the address of  her  brother’s
lodgings on the front, then Mary takes up the letter and goes next door with
it, to her own house. She will find a coin, open a window, call to whoever is
in the street to  take it to  the inn  on the road out  of Stratford  and ask the
innkeeper to convey it, fast as he can, to London, to her son.

Not long after Mary leaves to find a coin, to hail a passer-by, Hamnet drifts
to the surface of sleep. He lies for a while under the sheet, wondering why
nothing feels right,  why  the world  feels as though it  has slanted slightly,
why he feels so dry of mouth, so heavy of heart, so sore in the head.
   He looks one way in  the dark room and sees his parents’ bed: empty. He
looks the other and sees the pallet where his sisters sleep. Only one body is

150
under the covers and then he remembers: Judith is sick. How could he have
forgotten?
   He  lurches  upright,  pulling  the  bedclothes with  him,  and makes  two
discoveries. His head is filled   with  pain, like  a bowl  brimful   of scalding
water. It is a strange, confusing kind of pain  – it drives out  all thought, all
sense of action. It  saturates his head, spreading itself to the  muscles and
focus of his eyes; it tinkers  with the roots of  his teeth, with the byways of
his ears, the paths of his nose, the very shafts of his hair. It feels enormous,
significant, bigger than him.
   Hamnet crawls from the bed, dragging the sheet with him, but no matter.
He needs to find his mother: amazing how strong this instinct is, even now,
as a great lad of eleven. He  recalls this sensation, this urge – just  – from
when he was much younger: the driving need to be with  his mother, to be
under her gaze, to be by her side, close enough to be able to reach out and
touch her, because no one else would do.
   It  must be  near dawn because the new light of  day is  seeping into the
rooms, thin and pale as milk. He  makes it down the stairs, which  seem to
lurch and sway in front of him, one step at a time. He has to turn to face the
wall because everything around him is in motion.
   Downstairs  is the following   scene: his aunt Eliza is asleep at the table,
her head resting on her arms. The candles have burnt out, drowned in pools
of themselves. The fire is reduced to a heap of idling  ashes. His mother is
bent forward, her head on  the pallet, asleep, a cloth gripped  in her  hand.
And Judith is looking right at him.
   ‘Jude,’  he  says, or tries  to  say, because his voice doesn’t  seem to be
working. It  rasps; it prickles; it  seems unable to get out of his dry and raw
throat.
   He drops to his knees and crawls along the straw to reach her.
   Her eyes glitter with a strange, silvery light. She is worse: he can see this.
Her cheeks are sunken, white, her lips cracked and bloodless, the swellings
in her neck red and shining. He  comes to crouch next to his  twin, careful
not to wake his mother. His hand finds hers; their fingers twine together.
   He sees Judith’s eyes roll back in her head, once, twice. Then they open
wide and slide towards him. It seems to take her a great deal of effort.
   Her  lips curve upwards in what might be a smile. He feels a pressure on
his fingers. ‘Don’t cry,’ she whispers.

151
   He  feels again the sensation he has had all his life: that she is the other
side to him, that they fit together, him and her, like two halves of a walnut.
That without her he is incomplete, lost. He will carry an open wound, down
his side, for the rest of his life,  where she had been ripped from him. How
can he live without her? He cannot. It is like asking the heart to live without
the lungs, like tearing the moon out of the sky and asking the stars to do its
work, like expecting the barley to grow without rain. Tears are appearing on
her cheeks now, like silver  seeds, as if by magic. He  knows they are his,
falling  from his eyes on to  her face, but they could  just as easily be hers.
They are one and the same.
   ‘You  shall be well,’ she murmurs.
   He grips her fingers in  anger. ‘I shall not.’ He passes his tongue over his
lips, tasting salt. ‘I’ll  come with you. We’ll go together.’
   Again,  the flicker of  a smile, the pressure of her fingers. ‘Nay,’ she says,
his tears glistening on her face. ‘You shall stay. They need you.’
   He  can feel  Death  in  the room,  hovering  in  the shadows, over  there
beside the door, head averted, but watching all the same, always watching.
It  is waiting,  biding  its  time. It  will   slide  forward on  skinless feet, with
breath of damp ashes, to take her, to clasp her in its cold embrace, and he,
Hamnet, will not be able to wrest her free. Should he insist it takes him too?
Should they go together, just as they always have?
   Then the idea strikes him. He  doesn’t know why he hadn’t  thought of it
before. It occurs to Hamnet, as he crouches there, next to her, that it might
be possible to hoodwink Death, to pull off the trick he and Judith have been
playing on people since they were young: to exchange places and clothes,
leading people to believe that each was the other. Their faces are the same.
People remark on this all  the time,  at least once a day. All  it  takes is for
Hamnet to put on Judith’s shawl or for her to don his hat; they will sit at the
table like that, eyes lowered, smiles concealed, and their mother will place a
hand on Judith’s shoulder and say, Hamnet, can you bring in the wood? Or
their father  might  come into  a room  and see what  he thinks  is his  son,
dressed in a  jerkin,  and ask  him  to  conjugate a  verb in  Latin,   only  to
discover it is his daughter, hiding her laughter, revelling in the illusion, and
she will push aside the door to reveal the real son, hidden away.
   Could he pull off  their trick, their  joke, just once more? He thinks he can.
He thinks he will. He glances over his shoulder at the tunnel of dark beside

152
the door. The blackness is depthless, soft, absolute. Turn away, he says to
Death. Close your eyes. Just for a moment.
   He slides his hands underneath Judith, one palm under her shoulders, the
other under her hips, and he shunts her sideways, towards the fireplace. She
is lighter than he expected; she rolls to her side and her eyes open a crack as
she rights herself. She watches, frowning, as he lays himself  down in  the
dip her body has made, as he takes her place, as he smooths his hair down,
on either side of his face, as he pulls the sheet up over both of them, tucking
it under their chins.
   They will  look,  he is sure, the same. No one will know which is which. It
will be easy for Death to make a mistake, to take him in her place.
   She is  stirring  beside him, trying  to  sit up.  ‘Nay,’  she is saying again.
‘Hamnet, nay.’
   He knew  she would know straight away what he was doing. She always
does. She is shaking her head, but  is too  weak to  raise herself from  the
pallet. Hamnet holds the sheet fast over both of them.
   He breathes in. He breathes out. He turns his head and breathes into the
whorls of  her ear; he breathes in his strength, his health, his all.  You will
stay, is what he whispers, and I will   go. He sends these words into her: I
want you to take my life. It shall be yours. I give it to you.
   They cannot both live: he sees this and she sees this. There is not enough
life, enough air, enough blood for  both of  them. Perhaps there never was.
And if  either  of them  is to  live, it  must be  her. He wills  it.  He grips  the
sheet, tight, in both hands. He, Hamnet, decrees it. It shall be.

153
          usanna, shortly  before her second birthday, sits in  a basket on the
floor of her grandmother’s parlour, her legs crossed, her skirts billowing up
around her, filled with air. She holds a wooden spoon in each hand and with
these she paddles as fast as she can. She is sculling down the  river. The
current is fast and weaving. Weeds waft and unravel. She has to paddle and
paddle to stay afloat – if  she stops, who knows what may  happen? Ducks
and swans drift alongside her, seemingly serene and unruffled, but Susanna
knows that their webbed feet are working,  working  beneath the water. No
one but  she can see these  animals. Not  her  mother, who  stands at  the
window,  her  back  to   the  room,  scattering  seed on  the   sill.  Not   her
grandmother, who sits at the table, her workbox  open in front  of her. Not
her father, who is a pair of legs, encased in dark stockings, pacing from one
wall  to another. The soles of  his  shoes scuff and thud  on the surface of
Susanna’s river. He walks past a duck,  through a swan, across a bank of
reeds. Susanna wants to tell him to be careful, to check if he can swim. She
has a vision of  her father’s head – dark, like  his stockings – disappearing
beneath the brownish-green lapping waters. She feels her throat clutch, her
eyes sting at the thought.
   She looks up at her father and sees that he has stopped pacing. His legs
are still, straight, a pair of tree trunks. He is standing in front of his mother,
who is  still  sewing, her needle disappearing and reappearing through the
fabric.  It  looks  to  Susanna like a  fish,  a  slender silver  one, a  minnow
perhaps or a  grayling,  leaping out  of  the  water and  diving  back down,
leaping out, diving  down, and she is  thinking about her  river again when
she realises that her grandmother has slammed down her sewing, has stood
up, has begun to shout at Susanna’s father, right up into his face. Susanna
watches, aghast, spoon-paddles poised. She takes in  this  unusual sight,
presses it into her mind: her grandmother, face distorted by anger, her hand
gripping the  arm of  her  son; her father  wresting his  arm  from her  grip,
speaking in  a  low  and menacing  tone; then  her  grandmother gesturing
towards Susanna’s mother, rapping out her name – said by her grandmother
so that it sounds like Annis – making her mother turn around. Her mother’s
dress is stuffed out at the  front with  another baby. A  brother or sister for
you, she has been told. Her mother is  also holding a squirrel  on her arm.
Can this be true? Susanna knows it is. The animal’s tail flares red as a flame

154
in  the sunlight  coming  through  the  glass. It  scampers up  her mother’s
sleeve, to nestle under her cap, next to the hair, which Susanna is sometimes
permitted to unravel, to brush, to plait.
   Her   mother’s   face   is   serene.  She  contemplates  the   parlour,  the
grandmother, the  man,  the  child   in   the  boat-basket. She  strokes  the
squirrel’s tail;   Susanna feels a pull,   a longing  to  do  the  same, but  the
squirrel will  never let her come near. Her mother strokes the tail and shrugs
at whatever is being said to her. She gives a vague smile  and turns away,
lifting  the squirrel down from  her shoulder and letting it  escape out of the
open casement.
   Susanna watches all this. The ducks and swans swim closer and closer,
crowding in.

Mary stitches and stitches, the needle rising from the seam and falling into
it. She hardly knows what she is doing but she can see that, as she listens to
what her son is  saying, her stitches are getting  bigger, clumsier, and this
annoys her in a specific way because she is known for her needlework – she
is, she knows it. She tries to keep her head, tries to remain calm, but her son
is saying that he has no doubt this  plan will  work,  that he will  be able to
expand John’s business in London. Mary can barely contain her  rage, her
scorn. Her  daughter-in-law is  contributing  nothing  to this  discussion, of
course, but merely standing at the window, making half-witted  noises into
the air.
   There is a reddish, rat-faced squirrel that lives in a tree outside the house:
Agnes likes to feed and pet it, from time to time. Mary cannot for the life of
her understand why, and she has told her daughter-in-law that it must  not
enter the house, heaven knows what diseases and plagues it might carry, but
Agnes will not listen. Agnes never listens. Not even now, when her husband
is proposing to leave the house, to run away, to hide, when what he really
ought to be doing is falling on his  knees and begging forgiveness, from his
mother, who took  him  and his bride  and her swollen  belly  into  her own
house not three years ago, from his father who, with God as their witness,
has his faults but always tries to do his best by his family.  Not-listening  is
Agnes’s customary state.
   She  cannot look  at  her  son; she  cannot look  at  her  daughter-in-law,
standing there, her belly swollen once more, fussing over that damn squirrel
in her hands, as if nothing of any consequence is happening here.

155
   John  treats Agnes as a simpleton,  a rural  idiot.  He  nods at  her, if  he
passes her in the house or sees her at table. How are we today, Agnes? he
will  say, as if to a child. He will look upon her mildly, if  she brings a tangle
of  filthy   roots out  of  her  pocket,  or  opens her hands to  show  them  a
collection of  shining acorns. He tolerates her eccentricities, her night-time
wanderings, her sometimes dishevelled appearance, the daft imaginings and
predictions she on occasion comes out with, the various animals and other
creatures she brings into  the house (a newt,  which  she put in  the  water
pitcher, a featherless dove, which she nursed back to full health). If  Mary
complains to him as they lie in bed at night, he pats her hand and says, Let
the girl  alone. She’s from  the country, remember, not  from the  town. At
which Mary  could say three things: Agnes is no girl. She is a woman who
enticed a much younger boy, our boy, into marriage for the worst  possible
reason. And: You forgive her too much, and only because of that dowry of
hers. Don’t think I  don’t see this. And: I am also from the country, brought
up on  a farm,  but do  I  run  about the place in  the  night  and bring  wild
animals into  the house? No, I  do  not. Some of  us,  she will  sniff  to  her
husband, know how to conduct ourselves.
   ‘It   would help matters,’ her son is  saying, airily, insistently, ‘help  all  of
us, to expand Father’s business like this. It’s  an inspired idea of  his. God
knows things in this town  have become difficult enough for him.  If I  were
to take the trade to London, I am certain I might be able to—’
   Before  even realising that her patience has slipped out from  under her,
like ice from  under her feet, she is up, she is standing, she is gripping her
son by the arm, she is shaking it, she is saying to him, ‘This whole scheme
is nothing  but foolishness. I  have no idea what  put this  notion into  your
father’s head.  When  have you  ever  shown the  slightest  interest in   his
business? When  have   you  proved   yourself   worthy   of   this  kind   of
responsibility? London, indeed! Remember when we sent you to fetch those
deerskins in Charlecote and you lost them  on the way  back? Or the time
you traded a dozen gloves for  a book? Remember? How can you  and he
even consider taking business to London? You think there are no glovers in
London? They’ll eat you alive, soon as look at you.’
   What  she really wants to say is, Don’t  go. What  she really wants is for
him to be able to unpick this marriage to this scullion with wildness running
in her veins,  for him  never to  have seen her, this woman from  the forest
whom everybody said was a strange, unmarriageable sort. Why would she

156
have set her sights on Mary’s son, who had no job, no property? She wishes
she had never come up with the scheme to send her son as tutor to that farm
by the forest: if  she could  go back and undo that, she would.  Mary hates
having this  woman  in  her  house, the way  she can  appear in  the room
without being heard, the way she looks at you, right into you, right through
you, as if you are nothing but water and air to her, the way she croons and
sings to the child.  What she really wants is  for her son never to  have got
wind of John’s plan to branch out into  London. The thought of the city, its
crowds, its diseases, stops the breath in her chest.
   ‘Agnes,’  she says, as her son irritably   pulls away his  arm, ‘surely  you
agree with me. He cannot go. He cannot just walk away like this.’
   Agnes  turns  at last,  from  the  window.  She  is  still  holding,  Mary   is
incensed to see, the squirrel in her hands. Its tail slides and slips through her
fingers; its  eyes, gold beads pierced with  black, fix  themselves on Mary.
Beautiful  fingers, Agnes has, Mary   is pained to  notice.  Tapering, white,
slender. Agnes is, Mary is forced  to admit, a striking  woman. But  it is  an
unsettling, wrong  sort  of  beauty:  the  dark hair  is  ill-matched   with  the
golden-green eyes, the skin whiter than milk,  the teeth evenly  spaced but
pointed, like a fox’s. Mary  finds she cannot look at her daughter-in-law for
long, she cannot hold  her  gaze. This creature, this  woman, this  elf,  this
sorceress, this forest sprite – because she is that, everyone says so, Mary
knows it  to  be true –  bewitched and ensnared her boy, lured  him  into a
union. This, Mary can never forgive.
   Mary  appeals to Agnes now. Surely, on this, they may be united. Surely,
her daughter-in-law will  come down on her side in  this matter, the task of
keeping him with them, at home, safe, where they can see him.
   ‘Agnes,’  Mary  says, ‘we are in agreement, are we not? These are foolish
plans with no basis in sense. He must stay here, with us. He should be here,
when this baby is born. His  place is with  you, with  the children. He  must
get down to work,  here, in Stratford. He cannot take off like  this. Can he?
Agnes?’
   Agnes lifts   her head and her face is visible  for  a moment, beneath her
cap. She smiles, her most enigmatic, maddening smile,  and Mary  feels a
falling in  her chest, sees her mistake, sees that Agnes is never going to side
with her.
   ‘I   see no reason,’ Agnes says, in her light,  fluting  voice,  ‘to  keep him
against his will.’

157
   Fury  swarms into Mary’s  throat. She could strike the woman, no matter
that she is with child. She could take this needle and drive it into the white
flesh of   her, flesh  that  her son  has touched  and taken  and kissed  and
everything else. The thought  of  it  makes Mary  sick, makes her  stomach
heave, the idea of her boy, her child, and this creature.
   She  gives an  inarticulate  noise, half  sob,  half  scream. She hurls  her
needlework to the  floor  and stamps away from  the table, away from  her
work, away from her son, stepping over the child, who is sitting in a basket
by the hearth, two kitchen spoons in her hands.
   It  does not escape her notice, as she makes her way towards the passage,
that Agnes and  her son  start to  laugh, softly   at first,  then  more loudly,
shushing each other, their footsteps sounding on the flags, walking towards
each other, no doubt.

Weeks later, Agnes walks through the streets of Stratford, her hand hooked
into  her  husband’s arm. The  greatness of  her  belly  prevents  her  from
walking too fast; she cannot draw enough breath into her chest because the
baby is taking up more and more room. She can sense her husband trying to
move slowly  for  her, can sense his muscles quivering  with  the  effort of
suppressing his innate need for exertion,  for  motion, for  speed. It  is, for
him, like trying  to hold off from  drinking when you are ravaged with thirst.
He is ready  to be gone: she sees this. There has been much preparation,
much argument, many arrangements to be made, letters to write,  bags to
pack, clothes that Mary must wash and wash again herself; nobody else is
allowed. There are samples of gloves that John must oversee, then package
and unpack and repackage.
   And  now the  moment has arrived. Agnes conjugates it: he is  going, he
will  be gone, he will go. She has put these circumstances together; she has
set it in motion, as if she were the puppeteer, hidden behind a screen, gently
pulling on  the strings of  her wooden people, easing and guiding them on
where to go. She asked Bartholomew to speak to John, then waited for John
to speak to her husband. None of this would  have happened if she hadn’t
got Bartholomew  to  plant the  idea in  John’s head. She  has created this
moment – no one else – and yet,  now it  is happening, she finds that it  is
entirely at odds with what she desires.
   What  she desires is for him to stay at her side, for his hand to remain in
hers. For him to be there, in the house, when she brings this baby into the

158
world. For them to  be together. What she desires, though, does not matter.
He is going. She is, however secretly, sending him away.
   His  pack is bound and tied upon his back. More boxes of  goods will be
sent after him when he is  settled. His boots are cleaned and polished; she
has massaged grease into their seams, to keep out  the damp  of London
streets.
   Agnes  casts a  sideways glance  at  him.  His  profile  is  set,  his  beard
trimmed and oiled  (she did this herself, too,  last night, stroking  the blade
against the leather  strop, then  taking  its  lethal  edge to  the skin  of  her
beloved – such trust, such submission). His  eyes are lowered: he doesn’t
want to greet people or talk for long. His hand is tight over hers, his fingers
pressing down hard. He  is  eager to get under  way. To  get this  over. To
embark.
   He is  talking about a cousin he will  visit in  London, how the cousin has
secured a room for him.
   ‘Is  it  by  the river?’   she hears herself say, even though she knows the
answer: he has told her all  this before. It  seems important that they  keep
talking, about nothing of great significance. The people of Stratford are all
around them. Watching, observing, listening.  It  is important,  for him,  for
her, for the family, for the business, that they appear harmonious, in step, in
accord. That  their  very  bearing  refute the  rumours  going  around: they
cannot live together;  John’s business is failing;  he is  leaving for  London
because of some kind of disgrace.
   Agnes  lifts   her  chin  a  little   higher.  There  is  no  disgrace, says  the
straightness of her back.  There is  no problem  in  our marriage,  says the
proud, outward curve of her middle. There is no failing in the business, say
her husband’s shining boots.
   ‘It   is,’ he says. ‘And  not far  from the tanneries, I believe. So I  shall be
able to view them, for Father, and establish which is the best.’
   ‘I  see,’ she says, even though she has a distinct feeling that he shall not
be in the gloving business for long.
   ‘The  river,’ he continues, ‘is said to have dangerous tides.’
   ‘Oh?’  she says, even though she has heard him telling this to his mother.
   ‘It    is  crucial,   my  cousin  says,  each  time  you   cross to   secure an
experienced boatman.’
   ‘Indeed.’

159
   He  talks on, about  the different shores of  the river,  the landing stages,
how certain times of  day are safer than others. She pictures a thick, wide
river, twisted with lethal  currents, studded with tiny vessels, like a garment
sewn with beads. She pictures one of these vessels, containing her husband,
swept downstream, his dark head uncovered, his clothes filled  with river-
drink, streaked with mud, his boots brimming with silt. She has to shake her
head, grip her fingers to the solidity  of  his arm, to rid  herself of this.  It is
not true, it will not be true; it is just her mind playing tricks on her.
   She walks  with  him  as far  as the posting  inn, him  talking  now  about
lodgings, about how he will be back before she knows it, how he will think
of her, of  Susanna, every day. He will   secure a dwelling  for  all of  them
there, in London, as soon as he can and they may all live together again, by
and by. There,  by  the milestone with   one arrow  towards ‘London’   (she
knows this word, the large, confident stroke of the L, the rounded os, like a
pair of eyes, the repeated arch of the n), they stop.
   ‘You  will   write?’  he  says, his face creasing. ‘When  the  time comes?’
Both his hands reach towards her and cup the lower curve of her stomach.
   ‘Of  course,’ she says.
   ‘My  father,’ he gives a rueful smile, ‘is hoping for a boy.’
   ‘I  know.’
   ‘But  I  do not mind. Boy or girl.  Maid or  lad. It is all  one to me. As soon
as I get word,  I shall  make arrangements to come and fetch you all.  And
then we shall be together, in London.’
   He holds her close, as close as he can, with the swell of the child between
them, his arms around her. ‘Do you have no feeling?’ he whispers into her
ear. ‘No sense this time? Of what it will be?’
   She leans her head into him, close to the opening of  his shirt. ‘No,’  she
says, and she is aware of  the puzzlement in  her voice.  It  has come as a
surprise to her that she has been unable to picture or divine the child she is
carrying: girl or boy, she cannot tell. She is receiving no definite signs. She
dropped a knife from the table the other day and it fell pointing towards the
fire. A  girl,   then, she thought. But  later  the same day she found  herself
spooning the pap of an apple, sharp, pleasingly crisp,  into her mouth  and
she thought: A boy. It is  altogether confusing. Her hair is dry and crackles
when she brushes it,  which  means a girl,  but  her skin  is  soft, her  nails
strong, which means a boy. A male peewit flew into her path the other day
but then a female pheasant came squawking out of the bushes.

160
   ‘I  cannot tell,’ she says. ‘And I don’t know why. It—’
   ‘You  must not worry,’  he says, putting a hand on either side of her face
and lifting it  up so that they are looking into each other’s eyes. ‘All shall be
well.’
   She nods, dropping her gaze.
   ‘Have  you not always said you will have two children?’
   ‘I  have,’ she says.
   ‘Well,  then. Here,’ he rests a palm against her, ‘is the second. Ready and
waiting. All  shall be well,’ he says again. ‘I know it.’
   He kisses her, full on the mouth, then draws back to regard her. She pulls
her face into a smile, catching herself hoping that some of the town may be
watching. There, she thinks, as she cups her hand against his  cheek, and
there, as she touches her fingers to his hair. He kisses her again, for longer
this time. Then he sighs, cradling  the back of her head, his face buried in
her neck.
   ‘I  shan’t go,’  he mutters, but she feels the pull and stretch of the words,
how he  says them, but  at  the same time  they  peel away  from  his  real
feelings.
   ‘You  shall,’ she says.
   ‘I  shan’t.’
   ‘You  must.’
   He  sighs again, his breath rustling  in the  starch of her coif.  ‘Perhaps I
shouldn’t be leaving you now, while you are . . . I think perhaps—’
   ‘It  must be,’  she says, and touches her fingers to the canvas of his pack
from which,  she knows,  he has removed some of  the glove  samples his
father has given him, and replaced them with books and papers. She gives
him a wry half-smile. Perhaps he catches her knowledge of this act, perhaps
not.
   ‘I  have your mother and your sister,’ she continues, pressing her hand to
his luggage, ‘and your whole family. Not  to mention my own. You  need to
go. You will  find us a new home in London  and we will  join you  there, as
soon as we can.’
   ‘I  don’t know,’  he murmurs. ‘I hate to leave you. And what if I fail?’
   ‘Fail?’
   ‘What  if  I  can’t  find work  there? What if  I  can’t  expand the business?
What if—’
   ‘You  won’t fail,’  she says. ‘I know it.’

161
   He  frowns and looks at her more carefully. ‘You  know it?  What do you
know? Tell me. Have you a sense of something? Have you—’
   ‘Never  mind what I know. You must go.’ She pushes at his chest, putting
air and space between them, feeling his  arms slide off  her, disentangling
them. His face is crumpled, tense, uncertain. She smiles at him, drawing in
breath.
   ‘I  won’t  say goodbye,’ she says, keeping her voice steady.
   ‘Neither  will  I.’
   ‘I  won’t  watch you walk away.’
   ‘I’ll   walk  backwards,’ he says, backing away, ‘so I can keep you in  my
sights.’
   ‘All   the way to London?’
   ‘If  I  have to.’
   She laughs. ‘You’ll fall  into a ditch. You’ll  crash into a cart.’
   ‘So be it.’
   He  darts forward,  catches her to  him and  kisses her once. ‘That’s  for
you,’ he says, then kisses her again. ‘That’s for Susanna.’ And again, ‘And
that’s for the baby.’
   ‘I   shall be sure to deliver  it,’  she says, trying to  keep the smile on  her
face, ‘when the time comes. Now go.’
   ‘I’m   going,’  he says, walking away from her, still  facing her. ‘It  doesn’t
feel like leaving, if I walk  like this.’
   She flaps her hands. ‘Go,’ she tells him.
   ‘I’m   going. But I shall be back before you know it to fetch you all.’
   She turns away before he reaches the bend in the road. It will   take him
four days  to reach London,  less if   he is  picked up  along the  way  by a
willing  farmer with  a cart. She will   encourage him to go but she will   not
watch him leave.
   She walks  back, more slowly,  the way  she came. How odd  it feels,  to
move along  the same streets, the  route in  reverse, like  inking   over old
words, her feet the quill, going back over work, rewriting, erasing. Partings
are strange. It seems so simple: one minute ago, four, five, he was here, at
her side;  now,  he is  gone.  She was with   him;  she is  alone.  She feels
exposed, chill, peeled like an onion.
   There is  the stall they passed earlier, piled high with  tin  pots and cedar
shavings. There is the woman they saw, still making her decision, holding
two pots in her hands, weighing them, and how can she still be there, how

162
can she still  be engaged in the  same activity,  in the  choosing of  a pot,  when
such a change, such a transformation  has occurred in  Agnes’s  life? Her  very
world  has cloven   in  two,  and here  is the  same dog,  dozing  in  a  doorway.
Here is  a  young  woman,   tying  up  clothing   into  bundles,  just   as she was
doing  when  they  passed. Here  is her  neighbour,  a  man with   grizzled  hair
and a  yellowish    tinge  to  his  thin   face  (he  will   not  last  the  year,  Agnes
thinks,  the  fact   flitting    through  her  mind   like   a  swallow   across  a  sky),
giving  her a grave  nod as he walks  by.  Can he not  see, can he not read that
life as she knows  it is over,  that he is gone?
    The baby  gives  a swift,  shrugging   movement,  pressing a palm,  a  foot,  a
shoulder against  the wall  of  skin.  She places a hand there  – a hand outside,
next to the  hand inside –  as if nothing  has changed, as if  the world  is  just as
it was.

163
           liza’s letter is taken by a lad from a few houses along: he was up and
out, walking down Henley Street before dawn because he has been sent by
his father to see to a cow in calf on the far side of the river. Mary hailed him
from the  window,  gave him  the letter, with  instructions  to take  it  to the
posting inn, pressing a coin into his hands.
   The boy tucks it  into his sleeve, not before examining the slanted scrawl
on the front. He has never learnt to read so it is meaningless to him but, all
the same, he likes the loops, the shapes, the dark cross-hatchings of ink, like
the  marks   made   when   branches  are  shaken   against  an   iced-over
windowpane.
   He takes it to the inn near the bridge, then continues on to his cow, which
still  hasn’t calved and stares at him with  large and what  seem to the boy
frightened eyes, jaws grinding cud. Later that morning the innkeeper hands
it, with others, to a grain merchant, who is riding that day to London.
   Eliza’s  letter  to  her brother  travels in  the  leather satchel of  the grain
merchant as far as Banbury. From there, it is taken by cart to Stokenchurch,
and it lands at the door of the lodgings. The landlord squints at it, holding it
up to the sunlight, which  enters his passageway at a slant. His eyesight is
poor. He sees the name of  his  lodger, who  yesterday left  for  Kent.  The
theatres are closed, because of the plague, by order of the court, and so the
lodger and his company of players have taken themselves off to tour nearby
towns, places where it is permitted to gather in a crowd.
   The landlord  must wait for  his son to come back from some business in
Cheapside. When he does – grumpily, because the person he was due to
meet did not arrive and it rained heavily and the son is wet to the skin – it is
several hours before he gets  out ink  and  quill,  takes the letter  from  the
mantel, and painstakingly, tongue wedged in the corner of his mouth, writes
the address of the inn  in  Kent, where  the lodger told  them  he would  be
staying.
   The letter is  then passed from hand to hand, to an inn in the outskirts of
the city, where it waits for  someone travelling to Kent –  in this instance, a
man pushing a cart, sat upon by a woman and a dog and a chicken.
   When  the letter reaches him, he – lodger,  brother, husband, father and,
here, player –  is  standing in  a guildhall  in  a  small town  on  the eastern
fringes of Kent.  The hall  smells of cured meat, of  boiled beets; there is a

164
heap of farming  implements and sacking in  the corner; narrow  blades of
light enter the space from high, mildew-spotted windows.
   He  is leaning back,  regarding these weak beams of light,  reflecting on
how they  meet each other halfway  across the hall,  creating archways of
light, and how  they give the whole  space an underwater feel, as if he and
the rest of the company are fish, swimming about in the gloomy depths of a
greenish pond.
   A   small child  –  a  boy, he  supposes – darts in,  barefoot, bareheaded,
ragged of smock, scrofulous of complexion, and calls out an approximation
of his name, in an assertive, reedy voice, waving a letter aloft, as if it were a
flag.
   ‘It   is I,’  he says wearily, holding  out his  hand. It will   be a demand for
money, a complaint,  an edict  from  a patron.  ‘Hear  this,’  he says to  his
colleagues, who are milling  aimlessly on  the raised dais, as if,  he thinks,
they aren’t putting on a performance in less than three hours, as if nothing
in particular  is happening here in this dusty  hall. ‘You  will  need to  count
your paces from left to right, like so,’ he demonstrates, walking towards the
shoeless child, ‘or else one of you will fall offstage and into the audience. It
is smaller than we are used to, but used to it  we must be.’ He  comes to a
halt in front of the child. Strangely colourless hair and wide-set eyes. A sore
on the bottom lip. Fingernails rimmed with  filth. Six  or seven years of age,
perhaps more.
   He tweaks the letter from  the child’s grip. ‘For  me?’ he says, sliding his
fingers into his purse and extracting a coin. ‘And for you.’ He flips the coin
into the air between them. Instantly, the child is animated, his scrawny body
leaping into life.
   He  laughs, turning on his heel, pulling  at  the red seal, stamped slightly
off-centre with his family’s  insignia. He registers his sister’s hand before he
lifts  his head. Onstage, the young  lad is  pacing stiffly  towards  the older
actor, edging around the rim of the dais, as if the floor beneath were awash
with boiling lead.
   ‘Good  God,’ he roars, his voice stretching at the wooden struts, the skin
of plaster on the walls. He knows how to throw his voice, how to expand it
so it becomes the sound of a giant. The actors freeze, mouths agape. ‘We
have only a few hours before this hall will be filled with  the good people of
Kent. Are you meaning to give them a circus? Do we intend to make them

165
laugh or are  we putting  on a  tragedy? Look to  it  or we  won’t  be eating
tomorrow.’
   He cracks the page he is holding against the air, stares at them a moment
longer, for effect. It  seems to have worked. The young lad looks  to be on
the verge of tears, twisting his fingers into his costume. He turns, to hide his
smile, then glances down at the letter.
   ‘Dear  brother,’  he sees. And ‘verie  sick’,  and ‘your  daughter’. ‘Pleaƒe
come bak to us,’ it says: ‘not manie hours left to her.’
   It  seems hard to  breathe, suddenly. The air  in  the  hall  is as hot  as a
furnace, with particles of chaff. He feels his chest labouring in and out, but
no air seems to be reaching him. He stares at the page, reading the words
once, twice. The whiteness of the paper seems to pulse, stark and glaring,
one moment, then recede behind the black strokes of the letters. He sees for
a moment his daughter, her face lifted up to look at him, her hands clasped
together, her eyes fixed on his. He wants to loosen his clothes; he wants to
tear off his fastenings. He must get out, he must leave this building.
   With  the letter gripped in his fist, he rushes at the door, pushes his weight
against it. Outside, the colours accost his eyes: the glancing lapis sky, the
virulent green of the verge, the creamy blossoms of a tree, the pink kirtle of
a woman leading a nag along the road. On either side of the animal’s flanks
are woven baskets. It is immediately obvious to him that one basket is much
heavier than the other: the baskets are uneven, dragging down on one side.
   Even up  that load, he wants to yell  at her, much as he just yelled at the
players inside the hall. But  he doesn’t have the breath. His  lungs are still
heaving in and out,  his heart hammering now  in his  ribcage, hammering,
hesitating, hammering once more. His vision seems to shimmer at its edges,
the pale tree blossoms wavering, as if seen through a fire’s heat.
   Verie sick, he thinks, not manie hours left.
   He  wants to tear down the sky, he wants to rip every blossom from that
tree, he wishes to take a burning branch and drive that pink-clad girl and her
nag over a cliff, just  to be rid of  them, to clear them all out of  his way. So
many miles, so much road stands between him and his  child, and so  few
hours left.
   He is  conscious of a hand on his shoulder, a face near his, another hand
gripping his  arm. Two of  his  friends are there, saying, What, what  is the
matter, what has happened? One of them, Heminge, is  trying  to take the
letter from his  hand, peeling back his fingers, and he will  not let  it go, he

166
will  not. For someone else to read those words might make them true, make
them come to pass. He is shrugging the men off, both of them, all of them,
because here are more  of  them,  his  players, crowding  round  him,  but
somehow he feels the gritted ground under his knees and the voice of  his
friend, Heminge, is reading the words of the letter aloud. Hands are patting
his shoulders now;  he  is  being  assisted to his  feet.  Someone is telling
someone else to run  for  a  horse, any  horse, that they  must  get him  to
Stratford as soon as possible. Go, Heminge is urging  the young boy  who
was, not so long ago, nervous of the drop at the edge of the stage, go and
fetch a horse. The young boy takes off down the road, dirt  flying  up from
his heels, his costume – a ridiculous thing of  brocade and velvet, made to
cast the illusion of a woman on the form of a lad – flapping about him.
   He watches him go, peering through the thicket of legs surrounding him.

167
           owards the end of Agnes’s second pregnancy, Mary is watchful. She
doesn’t let  Agnes alone  for  long. She  has noticed her  daughter-in-law’s
middle getting larger and larger, rounder than seems possible. She has seen
Agnes secreting certain items  in a  sack under the  table: cloths, scissors,
twine, packets of herbs and dried rinds. Her appearance is astonishing, as if
she is smuggling pumpkins inside her gown.  I don’t  know  how she’s still
walking, John mumbled one night,  as they lay, curtained tight inside  their
bed. How does she stay standing?
   Mary  keeps an eye on her, and instructs Eliza and the servants to do the
same. She will not permit this grandchild  – a boy, they are all hoping – to
be born in  a bush, like  poor Susanna. But that, she consoles herself, was
before they fully understood the extent of Agnes’s eccentricities and ways.
   ‘The  minute she asks you to take care of Susanna, the minute you see her
reaching for that sack, let me know,’  Mary hisses to the serving girl.  ‘The
very minute. Do you hear me?’
   The girl  nods, eyes wide.

Agnes is warming honey over the fire, into which she plans to stir extract of
valerian and tincture of  chickweed. She dips a spoon into it  and pushes it
one way, then the other, watching it slide over and around the wooden tip. It
is  beginning  to  surrender to   the  heat, losing   its  stiffness,  easing and
loosening into liquid, changing one form for  another. She is thinking about
the letter that arrived from  her husband earlier in the week. She has asked
Eliza to read it to her twice and she wants to ask her to read it again today,
as soon as she can find  her. In  it,  he told  Agnes that  he has obtained a
contract to make gloves for players at a theatre: Agnes had to ask Eliza to
go back and read these words again, so that she was sure she understood, to
point  them out  on  the paper, so  she could  recognise them again,  later.
Players. Theatre. Gloves. Such gloves they need, Eliza had read haltingly, a
frown on her face, as she made out the unfamiliar words. Long gauntlets for
fighting, fine gloves with  jewels and beads for kings and queens and scenes
in court, soft  gloves for  ladies but the size must  necessarily be bigger on
these for they are to fit the hands of young stage boys.
   So much to mull  over in this letter. It  has taken Agnes days to absorb all
the detail; she has run  the words over  and over inside  her head, she has
traced them with a finger, and now she has them down to memory. Jewels

168
and beads. Scenes in court. The hands of young stage boys. And soft gloves
for ladies. There is  something in  the way he  has written all  this, in  such
lingering detail, in  the long passage about these gloves for the players that
alerts Agnes to something. She is not yet sure what. Some kind of change in
him, some alteration  or turning.  Never has he  written  so much about so
little: a glove  contract. It is just a contract, like  many others, so why, then,
does she feel like a small animal, hearing something far off?
   She is leaning over to pick up the chickweed tincture and is about to add
it  to the  honey, drop by  slow  drop,  when she feels  an odd yet  familiar
tensing in  her lower  abdomen. A  drawing  down,  a  clenching: insistent,
particular. She pauses. It cannot be that. It is too soon. There is still at least
another moon to reach fullness before the baby will  be born. It  must be a
false pain,  one of  those  that warns  the  body of   what is  to  come.  She
straightens up, using the fireplace for support. Her belly is so big – so much
bigger than last time – that she is in danger of toppling into the flames.
   She grips the mantel, watching with an unaccustomed detachment as her
knuckles turn  white.  What is  happening? She had meant to  ask Eliza  –
today or tomorrow  –  to write  to  him,  to ask him  to  return to  them. She
would like  him  here for the birth,  she has decided. She would like  to lay
eyes on him  again, to  take his hand,  before this  child  makes it into  the
world. She wants to look into his face, to find  out what is happening in his
life, to  ask him about these gloves for  kings and queens and players. She
wants, she realises, as she stands at the fire, to check that he is the same as
he ever was, whether London has altered him unrecognisably.
   She  pulls  in  a breath: the  sweet, floral   scent of  the honey, the  acrid
valerian, the  sour musk  of  chickweed.  The pain,  instead of  easing  off,
intensifies. She is aware of her centre tightening, as if an iron band is being
placed around her. No false pain, this. It will  squeeze her and squeeze her,
until her body yields up this baby. It may be hours, it may be days: she finds
she cannot get a  sense of how  long.  Agnes lets  out  her breath, slowly,
slowly, one hand on the fireplace. She was not expecting this. There was no
sign.
   She’d thought she had time to get word to him. But now there is no time.
This is too  soon. She knows this. Yet she also knows that a pain like  this
cannot be argued with, cannot be got around.
   Agnes  turns to  face  the room.  Everything  around her looks  suddenly
different, as if she has never seen it before, as if she doesn’t daily wipe and

169
polish this  table, those chairs, sweep these flagstones, beat the dust from
that wall  hanging and the rug. Who  lives here, in  this narrow room,  with
leaded windows at the end and long shelves of pots and powders? Who put
those wands of hazel into a jug, so that their tight buds would yield up early
their bright, creased leaves?
   Certainties have  deserted her. Nothing is  as she thought it  was. She’d
thought she had more time; she’d thought this baby would come much later,
but it  seems not. She, who  has always known,  always sensed what will
happen before it happens, who has moved serenely through a world utterly
transparent, has been wrongfooted, caught off guard. How can this be?
   Agnes touches her stomach, as if to communicate with  the child  inside.
Very well, she wants to say to it, what must be shall be. You shall be heard.
I will  get ready for you.
   She has to hurry. She has to get out of this house as quickly as she can.
She will not birth  this baby here, under this roof. Mary has her eye on her,
she knows. She will  need to be quick, quiet,  wily.  She will  need to leave
now.
   Beside her, Susanna is crouching on the floor, holding her doll by its leg,
exclaiming to herself.
   ‘Come,’  Agnes says to her, aiming  for a  tone of brisk  cheer. She holds
out her hand. ‘Let’s go and find Eliza, shall we?’
   Susanna, lost in her game with the upside-down doll, is astonished to see
the hand of an adult drop down from above. One moment, there was a doll
and the doll  was a person who  could fly,  except her wings  could  not be
seen, and she, Susanna, could also fly and she and the doll were taking to
the skies, among the birds,  up above the  trees. And now  there is this:  a
hand.
   She tips back her face and sees her mother looming over her, all stomach,
with a faraway face, saying something about Eliza, about going.
   Susanna’s face pulls  in  and  she frowns.  ‘No,’   she says, curling  both
hands around the leg of her doll.
   ‘Please,’ says her mother, and her voice doesn’t sound as it usually does.
It is pinched and tight, like an outgrown smock.
   ‘No,’   Susanna says again, angry now, because her sense of the game is
evaporating, drifting away, with all this talking from above. ‘No-no-no!’
   ‘Yes,’  Agnes is saying, and Susanna is astonished to feel herself lifted off
her feet, the hearthrug falling away from her, the fire whisking  past her, as

170
she is carried,  without  ceremony, out of  the  room, away  from  her doll,
which has fallen  to the  floor, through  the door and down  the path to  the
washhouse, where the maid is standing, scrubbing at something in a bowl.
   ‘Here,’  Agnes says, thrusting the roaring  child  into her arms. ‘Can  you
take her to Eliza?’ She leans in and kisses Susanna on the cheek, then the
forehead, then the cheek again. ‘Sorry, my darling. I’ll be back. Very soon.’
   Agnes goes quickly, very quickly, up the path, reaching her hearth just as
the next pain comes. There is no question, now, of what is happening. She
remembers it all from  last time,  except somehow this feels different. It  is
fast, it is  early, it is  insistent. She is not yet where she needs to be, in the
forest, alone, with the trees over her head. She is not alone. She is still here,
in the town, in the apartment. There is not a moment to lose. Ah-ah-ah, she
hears herself pant. She grips the back of a  chair until  it  passes. Then she
makes her way across the room to the table, where she has left her bag.
   She hooks her fingers around the strap and is at her front door in seconds,
manoeuvring herself through,  stepping out.  Just before she shuts  it,  she
listens for  a moment, then nods, satisfied: Susanna’s wails have stopped,
which means she must be in the presence of her aunt.
   She is setting out across the street, pausing to let a horse pass by, when
someone falls into step beside her. She turns to see Gilbert, her brother-in-
law, next to her, grinning.
   ‘Going  somewhere?’ he says, raising his eyebrows.
   ‘No,’   Agnes says, panic beating, like a pulse, against her brow. She has
to get to the forest, she must. If she is made to stay here, she doesn’t know
what will  happen. It won’t  bode well. Something will  go wrong.  She is so
certain of this fact, while  unable to explain why. ‘I  mean, yes. To . . .’ She
tries to focus on Gilbert but his face, his beard, looks blurry  and indistinct.
She is struck, once again, by how unlike his brother he is. ‘To . . .’ she casts
around for a plausible place ‘. . . the bakery.’
   He clamps his hand around her elbow. ‘Come,’ he says.
   ‘Where?’
   ‘Back  to the house.’
   ‘No,’  she says, pulling her elbow away. ‘I won’t. I’m  going to the bakery
and you – you must let me go. You mustn’t stop me.’
   ‘Yes, I must.’
   ‘No,  you must not.’

171
   At  this point, Mary  comes hurrying up, out of breath. ‘Agnes,’  she says,
taking  her  other arm,  ‘you   are  to  come back  to  the  house. We  have
everything ready. You needn’t worry.’  And  then, out  of the corner  of her
mouth, to Gilbert: ‘Go for the midwife.’
   ‘No,’   Agnes is shouting now, ‘let me go.’  How  can she explain to these
people that she cannot remain here, she cannot birth the child in this way?
How can she make them understand the dread that has been filling her, ever
since she heard the words of that letter?
   Agnes is taken, half carried, half dragged, not to her own narrow slip of a
house, but to theirs, through their wide door, down the passage and up the
narrow stairs. A door is pushed open, and through she sails, her ankles held
together, like a criminal, like a lunatic.
   She can hear a voice saying, No, no, no; she can sense a pain coming for
her, the way it’s  possible to feel a raincloud  approaching before seeing it.
She wants to stand, to crouch, so that she is ready for it, prepared, able to
face it down, but someone is pressing her shoulders back to a bed. Another
person is gripping  her forehead. The  midwife  is  there, lifting   her skirts,
saying she must look, that the men must leave, that only  the women may
stay.
   All  Agnes wants is the green of a forest. She craves the dappled, animate
pattern of light   on ground, the  merciful  shade of a  leaf-canopy, the not-
quite-quiet, the repeating seclusion of trunks, disappearing into the distance.
She will not make it to the forest. There is not enough time now. The doors
of this house are too many, she knows this.
   If  only  he had been here. He would have been able to hold them off. He
would have listened to  her pleas, in  that way  he has, of  leaning towards
someone, as if  drinking  in  their  words.  He  would  have made sure  she
reached the forest, that she wasn’t forced to  come in  here. What has she
done? Why did she send him away? What will  become of them, separated
in  this way,  with  him  dealing  and bargaining for   theatre silver, making
gloves for the hands of lads to  give the illusion  of  ladies, with her locked
and barred in this room, so far away, with no one to take her part? What has
she done?
   Agnes pushes them off  her, climbs out  of  bed. She walks, instead of a
stitched, lapsing path through trees, from wall to wall, and back again. It is
hard to  order and  command her thoughts. She  would  like  a moment  to
herself, alone, without pain, so that she can think clearly about everything.

172
She wrings her hands. She can hear herself, or someone, wailing, Why did I
do it? She doesn’t know what ‘it’ refers to. This room, she knows, is where
her husband was born – and his brothers and sisters, even those little dead
ones. He took his first breath here, within these drapes, near this window.
   It  is  to  him she speaks, in  her disordered mind,  not the  trees, not the
magic cross,  not  the patterns and  markings  of  lichen,  not  even to  her
mother, who died while  trying to  give birth  to a child.  Please, she says to
him, inside the chamber of her skull, please come back. I need you. Please.
I should never have schemed to send you away. Make sure this  child has
safe passage; make sure it lives; make sure I survive to care for it.  Let us
both come through this. Please. Let me not die. Let me not end up cold and
stiff in a bloodied bed.
   Something is wrong,  off, out of  place. She doesn’t know what. It is like
listening to an instrument with one untuned string: the grating sense that all
is not as it  should be. It is all  too fast, too  soon. She had no sense of this
coming. She is in the wrong place. He is  in the wrong place. She may not
make it, she may not. Her mother may, this very moment, be calling her to
that place from which people never return.
   The midwife  and Mary have their hands on her now: they are guiding her
to a stool, except it’s not a proper stool. It  is blackened oiled wood, three-
legged, splay-footed, with a basin beneath and an empty seat – just a gaping
hole. Agnes doesn’t like it, doesn’t take to that absent seat, that vacancy, so
she rears back, she wrenches her arms from their grasp. She will not sit on
the black stool.
   That  letter. What was different  about that letter? It  wasn’t  the detail, it
wasn’t the  list  of  gloves needed. Was it  the mention  of long  gloves  for
ladies? Is she bothered, hooked by the mention of ladies? She doesn’t think
so. It  was the feeling  that came off  the page. The glee that rose up,  like
steam, between the words he had written.  It  feels wrong  that the  two of
them are so far away from  each other, so separated. While he is deciding
what length of glove, what manner of beading, what embroidery would best
suit a player king, she is clenched by agony and about to die.
   She will  die, she thinks. What other reason can there be for her having no
sign that any of this would happen? That she is about to die, to pass on, to
leave this world. She will never see him, never see Susanna again.
   Agnes takes to  the floor,  felled by  this presentiment. Never again. She
braces herself with her palms flat to the boards, her legs folded either side

173
of her, crouched. If death is to come, let it be quick, she prays. Let the child
within her live.  Let him come back and be with his children. Let  him think
kindly of her, always.
   The midwife  is plucking  at her sleeve, but Mary seems to have given up
trying to entice her to the stool. Agnes will  not  be led; she feels that Mary
knows this by  now. Mary  sits down  on the  hateful stool and holds  out a
muslin cloth, ready to catch the baby.
   The theatre, he had written,  was in a place called Shoreditch; Eliza had
had to sound out the word, letter by letter, to get the sense of it. ‘Shore’, she
had said, and then ‘ditch’.  Shore-ditch? Agnes had repeated. She pictured
the bank of  a river,  silted, reed-frilled,  a place where yellow  flags  might
grow, and  birds  would  nest, and  then a  ditch,  a  treacherously slippery
sloped hole, with muddy water in the bottom. ‘Shore’ and then ‘ditch’.  The
first part of  the word a nice-sounding sort of place, the latter part horrible.
How can there be a ditch at a shore? She had started to ask Eliza, but Eliza
was reading on, describing a play he had watched there, while waiting for
the man with  the glove  contract, about an envious duke and his  faithless
sons.
   The midwife  is huffing, getting down on the floor, fussing with  her skirts
and apron, saying she will need extra pay, that her knees aren’t up to this.
She near-flattens herself to the rug and peers upwards.
   ‘It’ll    soon  be  over,’  is  her  verdict.  ‘Bear  down,’   she says,  a touch
brusquely.
   Mary  puts a hand to Agnes’s shoulder, the other to her arm. ‘There now,’
she mutters. ‘Soon be over.’
   Agnes  hears their words from  a  great distance. Her thoughts are brief
now, snipped short, pared back to the bone. Husband, she thinks. Gloves.
Players. Beads. Theatre. Envious duke. Death. Think kindly. She is able to
form  the realisation,  not  in  words, perhaps, but  in  a  sensation, that he
sounded not different in that letter but returned. Back to himself. Restored.
Better. Returned.
   She watches, with  a kind  of detached fascination, as something domed
appears between her legs. She curls her head under, into herself, to see it.
The crown of a head easing from her, turning, twisting,  slick,  like a water
creature, a shoulder, a long back, beaded with spine. The midwife and Mary
catch it  between them, Mary   saying, a  boy, a  boy, and Agnes  sees her
husband’s chin, his mouth in  a pout;  she sees her father’s fair  hair, once

174
again, growing in a peak on this brow; she sees the long, delicate fingers of
her mother; she sees her son.

Agnes and the boy  are on the bed,  the child  feeding, his tiny  fist  curled
possessively at his mother’s breast. She would feed him  before anything,
before washing herself, she said. She has insisted that the cord and caul be
wrapped and bound in cloth; she raised her head to watch, as Mary and the
midwife carried out  this task. She will,  she tells them, bury it under a tree
when the child  has passed his first month.  The midwife  is  collecting her
tools, packing her sack, folding a sheet, emptying a bowl from the window.
Mary is sitting on the bed, saying to Agnes that she must let her swaddle the
baby, it is the right thing  to do, that all her babies were swaddled and look
how they turned out, great strong lads, all of them, and Eliza too, and Agnes
is shaking her head. No swaddle, thank you, she is saying, and the midwife
is smiling  to herself  in the  corner, because she attended Mary in her last
three births and found her a great deal more pleased with herself than she
ought to be.
   The  midwife,   swirling  a  cloth  around  a bowl,   has to  bow  her  head
because this daughter-in-law, a strange girl by all accounts, is a match for
Mary. She  can see that.  She would  be  prepared to  bet all   her pennies
(hidden in an earthen jar  behind the daub of her  cottage, which no living
person knows) that this baby will wear no swaddling clothes.
   Something makes her  turn, wet  cloth in  hand. When  she is telling  the
story, to a dozen or so townspeople later, she will say that she doesn’t know
why she turned: she just did. Midwife’s intuition, she will  say later, tapping
her finger to her nose.
   Agnes is upright  in bed, one hand pressed to her middle; with the other,
she still holds the baby to her breast.
   ‘What  is it?’ Mary says, rising from the bed.
   Agnes shakes her head, then doubles up again, with a low moan.
   ‘Give  me the boy,’ Mary says, holding out her arms. Her face is alarmed,
but tender.  She wants  that child,   the midwife   sees, despite everything,
despite her own eight children, despite her age. She wants that baby, wants
to feel it up against her, to hold its parcelled, dense warmth.
   ‘No,’  Agnes says, through clenched teeth, her body curled into itself. Her
expression is bewildered, stretched, frightened. ‘What  is happening?’ she
whispers, in the hoarse, fearful voice of a child.

175
   The midwife  steps forward. She puts a hand to the girl’s belly and presses
down. She feels the skin tightening,  pulling  into itself.  She lifts  the skirts
and peers upwards.  There it  is:  the  wet  curve  of  a  second head. It  is
unmistakable.
   ‘It’s  starting again,’ she says.
   ‘What  do you mean?’ Mary asks, with her slightly imperious air.
   ‘She’s starting again,’ the midwife repeats. ‘There’s another one coming.’
She pats Agnes’s leg. ‘You’re having twins, my girl.’
   Agnes takes this news in silence. She lies back in the bed, clutching her
son, exhausted, grey-faced, her limbs slack, her head bowed. The only sign
of the pains is  a whitening  of  her face, a pursing of  her lips.  She allows
them to take the baby and to tuck it into the cradle by the fire.
   Mary  and the midwife stand on either side of the bed. Agnes stares up at
them, her eyes wide and glassy, her face ghastly white. She raises a finger
and points, first at Mary, then at the midwife.
   ‘Two  of you,’ she rasps out.
   ‘What  did she say?’ the midwife says to Mary.
   Mary   shakes her head.  ‘I’m   not  sure.’  Then  she addresses the girl:
‘Agnes, come to the stool. It is ready. It is here. We shall help you. The time
has come.’
   Agnes is gripped by a pain, her body twisting first one way, then the next.
Her fingers snatch at the sheet, pulling it from the mattress, and she presses
it to her mouth. The cry that escapes her is ragged and muffled.
   ‘Two   of  you,’   she mutters  again.  ‘Always   thought  it  would  be  my
children, standing at the bed, but it turns out that it was you.’
   ‘What  was that?’  the midwife  says, disappearing once again under the
hem of Agnes’s shift.
   ‘I’ve  no idea,’ Mary  says, more brightly than she feels.
   ‘She’s raving,’  the midwife says, with a shrug. ‘Doesn’t know  where she
is. It  takes some like  that. Well,’  she says, hauling herself upright  again,
‘this baby is coming, so we need to get her up off that bed.’
   Between  them, gripping  her under  each arm, they  get Agnes  up. She
permits them to lead her out of bed to the stool and she slumps down on it
without a murmur. Mary stands behind Agnes, propping up her limp form.
   After  a while, Agnes begins to speak, if the sounds and disjointed words
could be called that. ‘I  should never . . .’  she mutters, and her voice is no

176
more than a whisper, gulping for air ‘. . . I should never . . . I got it wrong . .
. He’s not here . . . I cannot—’
   ‘You  can,’  the midwife  says, from  her position on  the floor.  ‘And  you
will.’
   ‘I   cannot .  . .’  Agnes  grips Mary’s  arm, her  face wet,  her eyes wide,
glittering, unseeing, willing her to understand ‘. . . you see, my mother died
. . . and . . . and I sent him away . . . I cannot—’
   ‘You—’  the midwife  begins, but Mary interrupts her.
   ‘Hold  your tongue,’ she snaps. ‘Attend to your work.’  She cups her hand
around Agnes’s bloodless face. ‘What is it?’ she whispers.
   Agnes looks  at her and her flecked eyes are pleading, scared. Mary has
never seen this look on her face before.
   ‘The  thing is .  . .’  she whispers ‘. . . it  was me . . . I sent him  away . . .
and then my mother died.’
   ‘I  know she did,’  Mary says, moved. ‘You won’t, though. I am sure of it.
You are strong.’
   ‘She . . . she was strong.’
   Mary  grips her hand. ‘You will be fine, you’ll  see.’
   ‘But  the problem  . . .’  Agnes says ‘. . .  is that . .  . I should never .  . . I
should never have . . .’
   ‘What? What should you never have done?’
   ‘I  should never have sent him . . . to . . . to London . . . It was wrong . . . I
should—’
   ‘It  wasn’t you,’  Mary says soothingly. ‘It was John.’
   Agnes’s head, lolling  on  its neck, snaps round to face her. ‘It  was me,’
she mutters, teeth clenched.
   ‘It  was John,’ Mary insists.
   Agnes shakes her head. ‘I shan’t make it  through,’ she gasps. She grips
Mary by  the hand, her fingers  pressing painful spots into  the flesh. ‘Will
you take care of them? You and Eliza. Will you?’
   ‘Take care of who?’
   ‘The  children. Will you?’
   ‘Of  course, but—’
   ‘Don’t  let my stepmother take them.’
   ‘Certainly  not. I would never—’
   ‘Not  Joan. Anyone but Joan. Promise me.’ Her expression is maddened,
drained, her fingers  clamped into Mary’s  hand.  ‘Promise me you’ll   look

177
after them.’
   ‘I  promise,’ Mary says, frowning, staring into the face of her daughter-in-
law.  What   has  she  seen?  What   does  she  know?   Mary   is   chilled,
discomforted, her skin crawling with horror. She refuses, for the main part,
to believe what people say about Agnes, that she can see people’s futures,
she can read their palms, or whatever it is she does. But now, for the first
time, she has a sense of what people mean. Agnes is of another world. She
does not quite belong here. The thought, however, of Agnes dying, in front
of her, fills  her with  despair. She cannot let that happen. What would she
say to her son?
   ‘I  promise,’  she says again, looking her daughter-in-law right in the eye.
Agnes lets go of  her hand. Together, they look  down at  the dome of  her
belly, at the shoulders of the midwife, below.
   The  second labour is short,  fast and difficult.   The pains come without
interval, on and  on, and Mary  can see that Agnes, like  a swimmer going
under, cannot catch her breath in  between. Her screams, by the  end, are
ragged, hoarse, desperate. Mary holds her, her own face wet with tears. She
begins to form, in her head, the words she will say to her son. We tried our
best. We did everything we could. In the end, we couldn’t save her.
   When  the baby emerges, it is clear to them all  that the death they have
been dreading is not Agnes’s after all. The baby is grey in colour, the cord
tight around its neck.
   No  one says anything as the midwife eases the body out with one hand
and catches it in the other. A girl child, half  the size of the first, and silent.
Eyes shut tight, fists curled, lips pursed, as if in apology.
   The  midwife  unloops the  cord quickly,  deftly,  and turns the  little  doll
upside-down. She lands a slap on its bottom, once, twice, but nothing. No
noise, no cry, no flicker of life. The midwife raises her hand a third time.
   ‘Enough,’  says Agnes, holding out her arms. ‘Let me have her.’
   The midwife  mumbles about how she should not look on it, how it is bad
luck. It  is best, she says, you don’t see it. She will  take it  away, she says,
and make sure it gets a decent burial.
   ‘Give  her to me,’ Agnes says, and goes to rise from the stool.
   Mary  steps forward  and  takes the child  from  the  midwife.  Its  face is
perfect, she thinks, and the image of its brother’s – the same brow, the same
line of jaw and cheek. It has eyelashes and fingernails and is still warm.

178
   Mary  hands the  tiny  form to  Agnes, who  takes it  and holds  it  to her,
cradling the head in her palm.
   The room is silent.
   ‘You  have  a beautiful  boy,’  the midwife   says, after a  moment. ‘Let’s
bring him here and you may feed him.’
   ‘I  will  fetch him,’  Mary says, starting towards the cradle.
   ‘No,  I will,’   says the midwife, crossing before her, stepping into her path.
   Annoyed, Mary  pushes at her shoulder. ‘Out of my way. I will   fetch my
grandson.’
   ‘Mistress, I  need to say that—’ The midwife is squaring up to her, but she
never finishes  her  sentence because from   behind  them  comes a  thin,
spiralling cry.
   They both turn, in unison.
   The child  in  Agnes’s arms, the girl, is  wailing, arms rigid  with  outrage,
her minute form rinsing itself pink as she draws in air.

Two babies,  then, not  one.  Agnes tells  herself  this  as she lies  in  bed,
curtains drawn against the sharp draughts.
   It  is by no means certain, in those first few weeks, whether the girl-child
will  survive. Agnes knows this. She knows it in  her mind, in her bones, in
her skin, right down to  her heart. She knows in the way her mother-in-law
tiptoes into the room and peers at the children, sometimes putting a quick
hand to their  chests. She sees it in the way  Mary  urges John to take the
babies to  be churched:  she and  John wrap  the  infants in   blanket after
blanket, then tuck  them into  their clothing  and hurry  to  the priest. Mary
bursts back into the house a while later, with  the air of  a woman who has
completed a race, outrun an enemy, holding  out the  smaller of  the twins
towards her, saying, There, it is done, here she is.
   Agnes may not sleep, it seems. She may not rise from the bed. She may
not have a hand spare or empty. One or both of the babies will need to be
held at any given moment. She will  feed one, then the other, then the first
again; she will feed them both at  once, heads meeting in the centre of her
chest, their bodies podded under each of her arms. She feeds and feeds and
feeds.
   The  boy, Hamnet, is strong. This  she has known since the moment she
first saw him.  He  latches on with  a definite and sure force,  sucking with
great concentration. The  girl,  Judith,  needs to  be encouraged on to  the

179
breast. Sometimes, when her mouth is opened for her and the breast placed
inside it, she looks confused, as if  unsure what she is meant to do. Agnes
must stroke her cheek, tap her chin, run a finger  along her jaw, to remind
her to suck, to sup, to live.
   Agnes’s concept of death has, for a long time, taken the form of a single
room, lit  from  within,  perhaps in the  middle of  an expanse of moorland.
The living  inhabit the  room; the dead mill  about outside it,  pressing their
palms and faces and fingertips  to  the window,  desperate to get back,  to
reach their people. Some inside the room can hear and see those outside;
some can speak through the walls; most cannot.
   The idea that this tiny  child might have to live  out there, on the cold and
misted moor, without her, is unthinkable. She will not let her pass over. It is
always the smaller twin who is taken: everybody knows this. Everyone, she
can tell, is waiting,  breath held, for this to  happen. She knows that for the
girl child, the door leading out of the room of the living  is ajar; she can feel
the chill  of the draught, scent that icy  air. She knows that she is meant to
have only two children but she will not accept this. She tells herself this, in
the darkest hours of the night.  She will  not let  it happen; not tonight,  not
tomorrow, not any day. She will find that door and slam it shut.
   She keeps the twins tucked into  bed, on either side of  her; she has one
breathing in  one ear and one  in the  other. When Hamnet  wakes, with  a
creaking cry, to feed, Agnes rouses Judith. Feed, little one, she whispers to
her, time to feed.
   She fears her foresight; she does. She remembers with ice-cold clarity the
image she had of two figures at the foot of the bed where she will meet her
end. She now knows that it’s possible, more than possible, that one of her
children will  die, because children do, all the time. But she will not have it.
She will not. She will  fill  this child, these children, with life. She will  place
herself between them and the door  leading out, and she will   stand there,
teeth bared, blocking the way. She will  defend her three babes against all
that lies beyond this world. She will not rest, not sleep, until she knows they
are safe. She will   push  back, fight   against, undo  the foresight  she has
always had, about having two children. She will. She knows she can.
   When her husband comes, there is a moment when he doesn’t recognise
her. He is looking for  his handsome, full-lipped wife,  standing by her pots
and pestle, but he finds  instead, prostrate on the bed, a waif,  half  crazed
with sleeplessness and determination and single-minded purpose. He finds a

180
woman worn thin with feeding, with grey-ringed eyes, with a face desperate
and focused. He  finds  two   babies with  the  same inscrutable  face, one
double the size of the other.
   He  takes them in his  hands; he meets their steady gazes; he looks into
their identical  eyes;  he arranges them, head to  foot,  upon  his  knee; he
watches as one takes the thumb of the other into its mouth and sucks upon
it; he sees that the pair have led a life together that began before anything
else. He touches their heads with both of his palms. You, he says, and you.
   She can tell, even through her dazed exhaustion, even before she can take
his hand, that he has found it, he is fitting it, he is inhabiting it – that life he
was meant to live,  that work  he was  intended to do. It  makes her smile,
there on the bed, to see him stand so tall,  his chest thrown wide, his  face
clear of worry and frustration, to inhale his scent of satisfaction.
   They  still believe, as they sit together in the birthing  room, that she will
join him  in London  soon, that she will  bring the three children to  the city
and they will live there together. They believe that this is shortly to happen.
She is already planning  what to  pack and take  with  them. She is  telling
Susanna that soon they will live  in a big  city  and she will see houses and
boats and bears and palaces. Will the babies come with us? Susanna asks,
with a sidelong glance at the cradle. Yes, Agnes says, hiding her smile.
   He  has already looked at houses; he is saving money to buy a place for
them. He has envisaged taking Susanna on his shoulders to look at the river,
bringing  them  all  to  the  playhouse. He  has  imagined  his  new friends
looking with  wistful envy at his wife’s  dark eyes and slender gloved wrists,
at the pretty heads of his children. He pictures a kitchen with  two  cradles,
his wife  bending over the fire,  a yard at  the back where they might  keep
hens or rabbits. It will   just be the five  of  them, perhaps more in time:  he
permits himself this thought. No one else. No family next door. No brothers
or parents or in-laws  bursting into  the place at odd hours. Nobody  at all.
Just them, this kitchen, these cradles. He can almost smell this kitchen: the
beeswax on the  table surface, the  curdled-milk  smell  of  the babies, the
starch of the laundry. His wife will   hum to herself as she works, the babes
will  gurgle  and chatter, Susanna will   be out  at the  back, talking  to  the
rabbits, examining their  liquid  eyes, their sleek fur,  and he will  sit  at his
hearth, surrounded by his family, not cramped into a lodging room, writing
letters that take four days to reach them. He will no longer lead this double
life, this split  existence. They will  be there, with him; he will  need only to

181
raise his head to see them. He will be alone no more in the big city: he will
have a firmer foothold  there, a wife, a family,  a house. With Agnes there,
beside him, who knows what may be possible for him?
   Neither  he nor his  wife,  as they sit  in the room  with  their tiny  babies,
knows that this plan will  never come off. She will  never bring the children
to join him in London. He will  never buy a house there.
   The girl  child will  live.  She will grow from a baby to an infant to a child,
but her hold  on life  will   remain tenuous, frail,  indefinite.  She will  suffer
convulsions, her limbs  shaking  and trembling,  fevers, congestion  of  the
chest. Her skin will flush with rashes, her lungs will labour to draw in air. If
the other two children get a head cold, she will be seized by an ague. If they
have a cough,  she will   be racked  by  wheezing. Agnes  will  delay  their
departure for London by a few months: until  she is well,  she asks Eliza to
write to him.  Until  spring comes. Until  the heat of summer is over. When
the winds of autumn are past. When the snow has melted.
   Judith  is two,  her mother staying  awake with her  each night, steaming
bowls of pine and clove inside the bed-curtains, so that she may breathe, so
that the blue fades from her lips, and she might sleep, before it is apparent
to everyone that  the move to  London  will  never  take place. The  child’s
health is too fragile. She would never survive the city.
   The father will  visit them, during plague season, when the playhouses are
closed. He has given up selling gloves, hawking his father’s wares, severing
himself entirely  from the business. He now works only  in  the playhouses.
He watches one night as his wife  walks the  floor  with the  girl;  she has a
distemper of the stomach.
   She is a preternaturally beautiful  child, even to  the indifferent observer,
with clear blue  eyes and soft, celestial curls. She fixes her gaze, over her
mother’s shoulder as they walk from one side of the room  to the other, on
her father. Silent tears edge down  her cheeks and she grips her mother’s
shift in  both hands. He looks back at her steadily. He clears his throat. He
tells his wife that he has decided to spend the money he has saved, not on a
house in London but  on some land just  outside Stratford. It  will  bring  in
good rent, he tells her. He stands, as if to square up to this decision, to this
new future.
   In  the birthing room, with the tiny  twins on his lap, a hand curled around
each of their  heads, he says to Agnes that  he believes her foresight,  her
prophecy about two children was false. Or, rather, that it was a sense of the

182
twins’ coming.  It meant, he says, still gazing at his pair of  babies, that she
would have twins. Susanna and then twins.
   His wife  is silent. When he looks at the bed, he sees she has fallen asleep,
as if all she was waiting for  was for him  to arrive, to take the babies on to
his lap, to cradle their heads in his hands.

183
           gnes startles awake, her head jerking up, her lips and tongue in the
middle of forming  a word; she isn’t sure what it would have been. She had
been dreaming about wind, a great invisible force  whipping her  hair from
side to side, tugging at the clothes on her body, hurling dust and grit into her
face.
   She looks down  at herself. She isn’t in bed but seems to be half sitting,
half slumped on the edge of a pallet,  still  in her gown.  She has a cloth in
one hand. It is damp, creased, warmed in the cradle of her palm. Why is she
holding it? Why is she sitting like this, asleep?
   It  comes to her in a rush, as if a gust of wind from her dream is crossing
the room. Judith, the fever, the night.
   Agnes lurches to  her feet. Has she been sleeping? How could she have
slept? She shakes her  head, once,  twice,  as if   trying  to  rid  herself  of
slumber, of the dream. The room is profoundly dark: it is the deepest part of
the night, the most lethal hour. The fire  is almost out,  just a rubble of  red
embers, the candle spent. She feels about her desperately, blindly: there is a
limb, under a sheet, a knee, an ankle. Agnes gropes upwards and encounters
a wrist and two hands clasped together. The flesh, under her touch, is hot.
Which, she tells herself, as she turns and begins scrabbling in the coffer for
a candle, is good, very good, because it means that Judith is still alive.
   It  is good, she is telling  herself, it  is good, as she seizes the cool waxy
column of a candle and holds its wick  to an ember. If there is life,  there is
hope.
   The  candlewick  catches,  the flame   guttering,  nearly  vanishing,  then
gathering strength. A  circle of  light  appears around Agnes’s outstretched
arm, and widens out, pushing back the darkness.
   There  is the  fireplace, the  mantel. There are Agnes’s  slippers and her
shawl, fallen  to the  floor.  There is the  pallet and  there are Judith’s feet,
poking up under the  sheet; there are her legs, her knees, and there is her
face.
   Agnes covers her mouth  when she sees it. The skin is  so pale as to be
almost colourless; the eyelids are half open, with the eyes rolled up  under
the lids. Her lips,  white and cracked, are open and she is taking tiny half-
sips of air.

184
   Still  with her hand over her mouth, Agnes looks down upon her daughter.
The part of her that has attended the sick, the ailing, the convalescents, the
malingerers, the grieving, the mad, thinks: It will not be long. The other part
of her, which nursed and tended and cared and petted and fed and clothed
and embraced and kissed this  child,  thinks:  This  cannot be, this  cannot
happen, please, not her.
   Agnes bends to touch her forehead, to take her pulse, to try  to give  her
some ease, and as she does so, the candle reveals a sight so peculiar, so
unexpected that it  takes a moment for  Agnes  to  understand what she is
seeing.
   The  first  thing  she  registers is  that Judith’s  hand is  not,  as she first
thought, clasping her other  hand. It  is  entwined with  another’s. There is
someone on the pallet with Judith, another body, another – as strange as it
seems – Judith. There are two Judiths, curled up  together, in front  of  the
dying fire.
   She blinks.  She shakes herself. It  is  Hamnet, of  course. He has come
down in  the night and squeezed himself on to the  pallet next to  his twin.
And there he lies, in peaceful, deep sleep, next to her, holding her hand.
   Agnes  regards the scene, candle held aloft. She will  think  back to  this
moment later, and ask herself when she knew all was not as she’d thought it
was. When did she notice? What was it that alerted her?
   There  is  her daughter, very  sick  indeed, lying   on her  back, her  face
blanched by fever, and there is her son, curled next to her, his arm around
her. And yet there is something not right about that arm. Agnes stares at it,
mesmerised. It is Hamnet’s arm and yet it is not.
   She switches her gaze to the hand it  holds, Judith’s hand, and sees that
the fingernails of  this  one are stained with  something black. Almost  like
ink.
   And  when, Agnes asks herself, does Judith use ink?
   A  strange, dementing confusion starts up inside her, like  the  buzz of a
hundred bees. She darts forward and, pushing the candle into a stick on the
hearth, places her hands on her children.
   Her  son, a healthy colour, is next to the fire,  and her daughter is on the
other side of  the pallet. But  here, tucked into  Hamnet’s neck, her fingers
find  the long  plait   belonging to  Judith.  And  here  are Hamnet’s wrists,
protruding from Judith’s smock, with the crescent-shaped scar he got from a
sickle when he was young. It is Hamnet’s shorter hair that is dark with  the

185
sweat of Judith’s fever; it is  Judith who is sleeping the untroubled sleep of
the well.
   Agnes  cannot understand what she sees. Can she be dreaming? Is this
some nightly apparition? She yanks back the sheet covering them and looks
at them,  lying  there. The  feet  of  the sick  child  reach further  down  the
mattress. The taller child is the one who is sick.
   It  is Hamnet, not Judith.
   At  that moment, perhaps feeling the cold air, the eyes of the smaller twin
open and fix themselves on her, standing there above them with the sheet in
her hands.
   ‘Mamma?’  the child says.
   ‘Judith?’  Agnes whispers, because she still cannot believe what her eyes
are telling her.
   ‘Yes,’  the child says.

Hamnet cannot know  about the horse hired  for his  father. He  will  never
know that his father’s friend secured a mare for him, a beast with a temper,
a fiery eye, a muscled shoulder and a coat that shone like a conker.
   He has no idea that his father is, even now, making his way as fast as this
ill-tempered mare will carry him, stopping only for  water and as much food
as he  can  find  in  the  minutes  he  allows  himself.  From  Tunbridge  to
Weybridge, then on to Thame. He swaps horses in Banbury. He is thinking
only of his daughter, how he must narrow down the miles between them, he
must make it home, he must hold  her in his  arms, he must look upon her
once more, before she passes into that other realm, before she breathes her
last.
   His  son, though, knows nothing of this. None of them does. Not Susanna,
who has been sent to her mother’s physick garden at the back of the house
to collect  roots of  gentian  and lovage for  a  poultice.  Not  Mary, who  is
scolding the maid in the cookhouse because the girl has been weeping and
wailing all  afternoon about how she wants to  go home, how she needs to
see her mother. Not Eliza, who is explaining to a woman who has come to
the window hatch that Agnes cannot speak with her today, or tomorrow, but
perhaps come back next week. And not Agnes herself, who crouches by the
pallet with her back to the window.
   Judith,  her child,  her daughter, her youngest born, is  seated in a chair.
Agnes still cannot believe it.  Her face is pallid  but her eyes are bright and

186
alert. She is thin and weak, but she opens her mouth for broth, she fixes her
gaze on her mother.
   Agnes  is pulled  in  two,  as she sits  beside her son, holding  on  to  his
shivering body. Her daughter has been spared; she has been delivered back
to them, once again. But, in exchange, it seems that Hamnet may be taken.
   She has given  him a  purgative, she has fed him  jelly  of  rosemary and
mint. She has given him all that she gave Judith, and more. She has placed a
stone with a hole beneath his pillow. Several hours ago, she called for Mary
to bring the toad and she has bound it to his stomach with linen.
   None of it  has pulled him back; none of it has restored him. She feels her
hope for him  begin to leak  from her, like  water from  a punctured bucket.
She is a  fool,  a blind  idiot,  the  worst kind  of  simpleton. All   along, she
thought she needed to protect Judith, when it was Hamnet who was destined
to be taken. How could Fate be so cruel in setting her such a trap? To make
her concentrate on the wrong child so that it could reach out, while she was
distracted, and snatch the other?
   She thinks  of  her  garden, of  her shelves of  powders, potions,  leaves,
liquids, with  incredulity, with  rage. What good has any of that been? What
point was  there to  any of  it?  All   those years and  years of  tending and
weeding and pruning and gathering. She would like to go outside and rip up
those plants by their  roots and fling  them  into the  fire. She is  a fool,  an
ineffectual, prideful fool.  How  could she ever have thought that her plants
might be a match for this?
   Her  son’s body  is in  a place of  torture, of  hell.  It  writhes, it  twists,  it
buckles and strains. Agnes holds him by the shoulders, by the chest, to keep
him still.  There is, she is starting to see, nothing more she can do. She can
stay beside him, comfort him as best she can, but this pestilence is too great,
too strong, too vicious. It is an enemy too powerful for her. It has wreathed
and tightened its tendrils about her son, and is refusing to surrender him. It
has a musky, dank, salty smell. It has come to them, Agnes thinks, from a
long way  off,  from a  place of  rot and wet  and confinement. It  has cut a
swingeing path for  itself  through humans and beasts and insects alike; it
feeds on pain and unhappiness and grief. It is  insatiable, unstoppable, the
worst, blackest kind of evil.
   Agnes does not  leave his side. She swabs his brow, his  limbs with  the
damp cloth. She packs salt in the bed with him. She lays a posy of valerian
and swans’ feathers on his chest, for  comfort, for  solace. Hamnet’s fever

187
climbs and climbs, the buboes swell tighter and tighter. She lifts  his hand,
which is  a grim blue-grey  along its side, and presses it to her  cheek. She
would try anything, she would do anything. She would open her own veins,
her own body  cavity, and give  him  her blood, her heart, her  organs, if it
would do the slightest good.
   His  body sweats, its humours expressing outwards through the skin, as if
emptying itself.
   Hamnet’s mind,  however, is in another place. For a long time,  he could
hear his mother and his sisters, his aunt and his grandmother. He was aware
of them, around him, giving  him medicines, speaking to him, touching his
skin. Now, though, they  have receded. He is elsewhere, in a landscape he
doesn’t recognise. It is cool  here, and quiet. He is  alone. Snow is falling,
softly,  irrevocably,  on  and on.  It   piles  up  on the  ground  around  him,
covering paths and steps and rocks; it weighs down the branches of trees; it
transforms everything  into  whiteness, blankness, stasis. The silence, the
cool, the altered silver light  of  it is  something more than soothing to him.
He wants only to  lie down in  this snow, to rest himself;  his legs are tired,
his arms ache. To lie, to surrender himself, to stretch out in this glistening,
thick white blanket: what relief it  would give him. Something is telling him
that he must not lie down, he must not give in to this  desire. What could it
be? Why shouldn’t he rest?
   Outside his body, Agnes is speaking. She is trying to apply the poultice to
the swellings in his neck and armpits but he is  trembling so much that the
mixture will  not stay in place. She is saying his name, over and over again.
Eliza is scooping up Judith in her arms and taking her to the opposite end of
the room. Judith is letting out a hoarse whistling noise, kicking  against the
clutches of  her aunt. Anyone,  Eliza  is  thinking,  who describes dying  as
‘slipping  away’   or  ‘peaceful’  has  never witnessed  it  happen. Death  is
violent, death is a struggle. The body clings to life, as ivy to a wall, and will
not easily let go, will not surrender its grip without a fight.
   Susanna watches her  brother,  convulsing  by  the hearth,  watches her
mother fussing around with her useless paste and bandages. She would like
to snatch them from her hands and hurl them at the wall and say, Stop, leave
him be,  let  him alone.  Can you  not see it  is  too  late for  that?  Susanna
presses fierce fists to her eyes. She cannot look any more; she cannot bear
it.

188
   Agnes  is  whispering,  Please, please, Hamnet, please, don’t  leave  us,
don’t go. Near the window, Judith is struggling, asking to be placed next to
him on the pallet, saying she needs him, she must speak to him, let her go.
Eliza holds her, saying, There, there, to her, but has no idea what she means
by that. Mary is  kneeling at the end of the pallet, holding  on to one of  his
ankles. Susanna is leaning her forehead into  the  plaster of  the wall,  her
hands over her ears.
   All   at once, he  stops shaking and a great soundlessness falls over the
room. His body is suddenly motionless, his gaze focused on something far
above him.
   Hamnet, in  his place of  snow and ice, is  lowering himself  down to  the
ground, allowing his knees to fold under him. He is placing  first one palm,
then the other, on to the crisp, crystalline skin of snow, and how welcoming
it feels, how right. It  is not too cold, not too hard. He lies down; he presses
his cheek to the softness of the snow. The whiteness of it is glaring, jarring
to his eyes, so he closes them, just for a moment, just  enough, so he may
rest and gather his strength. He is not going to sleep, he is not. He will carry
on. But  he needs to  rest, for  a moment.  He opens his  eyes, to  reassure
himself the world is still there, and then lets them close. Just for now.
   Eliza  rocks Judith, tucking the child’s head under her chin, and mutters a
prayer. Susanna’s face is turned towards her brother, her wet cheek to the
wall.   Mary  crosses  herself,  gripping   Agnes’s  shoulder.  Agnes  bends
forward to touch her lips to his forehead.
   And  there, by  the fire,  held in  the arms of  his  mother, in  the room in
which he learnt  to crawl,  to eat, to  walk, to  speak, Hamnet takes his last
breath.
   He draws it in, he lets it out.
   Then there is silence, stillness. Nothing more.

189
II

190
I am dead:
Thou livest;
. . . draw thy breath in pain,
To tell my story

                                                                            Hamlet, Act V, scene ii

191
             room. Long  and  thin,  with  flags  fitted  together,  smoothed to  a
mirror. A group of  people are standing in a cluster near the window, turned
towards each other, in hushed conference. Cloths have been draped over the
panes, so there is little light,  but  someone has propped open the window,
just a crack. A  breeze threads through the room, stirring  the air  inside it,
toying with  the wall  drapes, the mantel-cloth, carrying with it  the scent of
the street, dust from the dry road, a hint of a pie baking somewhere nearby,
the acrid sweetness of caramelising apple. Every now and again the voices
of people  passing by outside catapult  odd words  into the  room, severed
from sense, small bubbles of sound released into the silence.
   Chairs are tucked into place around the table. Flowers stand upright in a
jar, petals turned back, pollen dusting the table beneath. A dog asleep on a
cushion wakes with a start, begins to lick its paw, then thinks better of it and
subsides back into slumber. There is a pitcher of water on the table, tailed
by a cluster of cups. No one drinks. The people by the window continue to
murmur to each other; one reaches out and clasps the hand of another; this
person inclines their head, the white, starched top of their coif displayed to
the rest.
   They  glance towards the end of the room,  where the fireplace is, again
and again, then turn back to each other.
   A  door has been lifted from  its hinges and placed on two barrels by the
fireplace. A woman is  sitting beside it. She is motionless, back bent, head
lowered. It is not  immediately apparent that she even breathes. Her hair is
disarrayed and falls in  strands around her shoulders. Her  body is  curved
over, her feet  tucked under, her arms  outstretched, the nape of her  neck
exposed.
   Before her is the body of  a child. His bared feet splay outwards, his toes
curled. The soles and nails still bear the dirt so recently accrued from life:
grit from the road, soil  from the garden, mud from the riverbank, where he
swam not a week ago with his friends. His  arms are by his sides, his head
turned slightly towards his mother. His skin is losing the appearance of the
living,  becoming parchment white, stiff and sunken. He is dressed, still, in
his nightshirt. His uncles were the ones to unhinge the door and bring it into
the room.  They lifted   him, gently,  gently, with   careful hands, with  held

192
breath, from the  pallet where he  died to  the hard wooden  surface of the
door.
   The  younger uncle, Edmond, had wept,  tears blurring  his sight,  which
was, for him,  a relief because he found it too  painful to  look into  the still
features of his brother’s dead son. This is a child whom he has known and
seen every day of his short life, a child whom he taught to catch a wooden
ball, to pick fleas from a dog, to whittle a pipe from a reed. The older uncle,
Richard, did  not cry:  instead his sadness passed over into anger – at the
grim task they had been bidden to do, at the world, at Fate, at the fact that a
child could fall ill  and then be lying there dead. The anger made him snap at
Edmond whom he thought wasn’t  taking enough of  the boy’s weight,  not
holding the legs as firmly as he should have done, by the knees and not the
ankles, fumbling the job, messing it up.
   Both  uncles leave  soon afterwards, exchanging a  few  words with  the
people in  the room, then  finding  excuses of work,  of  errands to  run, of
places they must go.
   In  the room there are mostly women: the boy’s grandmother, the baker’s
wife, who is godmother to the boy, the boy’s aunt. They have done all they
can. Burnt the bedding and the mattress and the straw and the linens. Aired
the room. Put the twin girl to bed upstairs, for she is still weak, still unwell,
although making a good recovery. They have cleaned the room, sprinkling
lavender water around it, letting in the air. They have brought a white sheet,
strong thread, sharp needles. They have said, in respectful and quiet voices,
that they will  help with the laying out, that they are here, that they will  not
leave, that they are ready to  begin. The boy  must be prepared for burial:
there is no time to lose. The town decrees that any who die of the pestilence
must be buried quickly, within  a day. The women have communicated this
to the mother, in case she is not aware of the ruling, or has forgotten it, in
her grief.  They have  placed bowls of  warm  water and  cloths beside the
mother and cleared their throats.
   But  nothing. She does not respond. She does not raise her head. She does
not listen  or  even seem to  hear suggestions to  start the  laying  out, the
washing of the body, the  stitching of  the shroud. She will  not look  at the
bowls of water, instead letting them cool  beside her. She did not glance at
the white bolt  of the sheet, folded into a neat square, placed at the foot of
the door.

193
   She will  only sit, her head bent, one hand touching the boy’s inert, curled
fingers, the other his hair.
   Inside  Agnes’s  head, her  thoughts are  widening  out,  then  narrowing
down, widening, narrowing,  over and over again. She thinks, This  cannot
happen, it cannot, how will  we live, what will   we do, how can Judith bear
it, what will   I tell  people, how can we continue, what should I  have done,
where is my husband, what will  he say, how could I have saved him, why
didn’t I  save him, why  didn’t  I realise it  was he who was in danger? And
then, the focus narrows, and she thinks: He is dead, he is dead, he is dead.
   The three words  contain no sense for her. She cannot bend her mind to
their meaning. It is an impossible idea that her son, her child,  her boy, the
healthiest and most robust of her children, should, within days, sicken and
die.
   She, like all  mothers, constantly casts out her thoughts, like fishing lines,
towards her children, reminding  herself of  where they are, what  they are
doing, how  they fare. From  habit, while  she sits there near the fireplace,
some part of  her mind  is  tabulating them and  their whereabouts: Judith,
upstairs. Susanna, next door. And Hamnet? Her  unconscious mind casts,
again and again, puzzled by the lack of bite, by the answer she keeps giving
it: he is dead, he is gone. And Hamnet? The mind will ask again. At school,
at play, out at the river? And Hamnet? And Hamnet? Where is he?
   Here,  she tries to tell  herself. Cold  and lifeless, on  this board, right  in
front of you. Look, here, see.
   And  Hamnet? Where is he?
   With  her back  to the door, she faces the fireplace,  which is  filled  only
with ashes, held in the fragile shape of the log they once were.
   She is aware of people arriving and leaving, via the door to the street, and
the door out  to the  yard. Her  mother-in-law, Eliza,  the baker’s  wife,  the
neighbour, John, some other people she cannot place.
   They  speak to her, these people. She hears words and voices, murmured
mostly, but  she doesn’t  turn  around. She doesn’t  raise her  head. These
people, walking  in  and out of  her  house, pushing speech and utterances
towards her ears, are nothing to do with her. They offer nothing she wants
or needs.
   One of  her hands rests on her son’s hair; the other still grips his fingers.
These are the only parts of him  that are familiar,  that still  look  the same.
She allows herself to think this.

194
   His  body is  different. Increasingly so, as the day wears on.  It is  as if a
strong wind – the one from her dream, she believes – has lifted her son off
the ground, battered him against rocks, whirled him around a cliff, then set
him back down. He is misused, abused, marked, maltreated: the illness has
ravaged him. For a while after he died, the bruises and black marks spread
and widened. Then they stopped. His skin  has turned to waxy  tallow, the
bones standing up beneath. The cut above his eye, the one she has no idea
how he came by, is still livid and red.
   She regards the face of her son, or the face that used to belong to her son,
the vessel that held his  mind, produced his speech, contained all  that his
eyes saw. The lips are dry, sealed. She would like to dampen them, to allow
them a little water. The cheeks are stretched, hollowed by fever. The eyelids
are a delicate  purplish-grey, like  the  petals of  early  spring flowers.  She
closed them herself. With her own hands, her own fingers, and how hot and
slippery her fingers  had felt, how  unmanageable the task, how difficult  it
had been to put her fingers – trembling and wet – over those lids, so dear, so
known, she could draw them from memory if  someone were to put a stick
of charcoal in her hand. How is  anyone ever to shut the eyes of their dead
child? How is it possible to find two  pennies and rest them there, in the eye
sockets, to hold down the lids? How  can anyone do this? It is not right.  It
cannot be.
   She grips his hand in hers. The heat from her own skin is giving itself  to
his. She can almost believe that the hand is as it was, that he still  lives, if
she keeps her eyes away from that face, from that never-rising chest and the
inexorable stiffness invading this body. She must grip the hand tighter. She
must keep her hand on the hair, which  feels as it always did:  silken, soft,
ragged at the ends where he tugs it as he studies.
   Her   fingers   press  into   the  muscle  between  Hamnet’s   thumb  and
forefinger. She kneads the muscle there, gently, in  a circular motion,  and
waits, listens,  concentrates. She is  like  her old   kestrel, reading  the air,
listening out, waiting for a signal, a sound.
   Nothing  comes. Nothing at  all. Never  has she felt this before. There is
always something, even with  the most mysterious  and private of  people;
with  her  own  children,  she found  always  a  clamour of   images, noise,
secrets, information. Susanna has begun to hold her hands behind her back
when near to her mother, so aware is she that Agnes can find out whatever
she wants in this way.

195
   But  Hamnet’s hand is silent. Agnes listens; she strains. She tries to hear
what might be under the silence, behind it. Could there be a distant murmur,
some sound, a message, perhaps, from her son? A sign where he is, a place
she might find him? But there is nothing. A high whine  of nothing, like the
absence of noise when a church bell falls silent.
   Someone, she is aware, has arrived next to her, crouching down, touching
her arm. She doesn’t need to look to know  it’s Bartholomew. The  breadth
and weight of that hand. The heavy tread and shuffle of his boots. The clean
scent of hay and wool.
   Her  brother touches her dry cheek. He  says her name, once, twice. He
says he is sorry, he is heart sore. He says no one would have expected this.
He says he wishes it  could have been otherwise, that  he was the best of
boys, the very best, that it is a terrible loss. He places his hand over hers.
   ‘I  will  see to the arrangements,’ he murmurs. ‘I’ve dispatched Richard to
the church. He will  make sure that all is prepared.’ He breathes in and she
can hear, in that breath, all that has been said around her. ‘The women are
here, to help you.’
   Agnes  shakes her head, mute. She curls a single finger into  the dip  of
Hamnet’s palm. She remembers examining his  palm,  and Judith’s, when
they were babes, lying together in the crib. She had uncurled their miniature
fingers and traced the  lines she found.  How  remarkable had seemed the
creases of their hands: just like  hers, only smaller. Hamnet had a definite
deep groove through the  middle of  his  palm, like  the  stroke of  a brush,
denoting a long life;  Judith’s  had been faint, uncertain, petering out, then
restarting in another place. It had made her frown, made her raise the curled
fingers to her lips,  where she kissed them, again and again, with a fierce,
almost angry love.
   ‘They  can . . .’  Bartholomew is saying ‘.  . . lay  him out. Or  they can be
with you while you do it. Whichever you prefer.’
   She holds herself very still.
   ‘Agnes,’  he says.
   She uncurls  the fingers  of  Hamnet’s hand and peers at the  palm. The
fingers are not noticeably stiffer than before, most definitely not. There it is,
the long,  strong line  of  life,  coursing  from  the wrist  to  the  base of the
fingers. It is  a beautiful line,  a perfect line,  a stream through a landscape.
Look, she wants to say to Bartholomew. Do you see that? Can you explain
this?

196
   ‘We must prepare him,’ Bartholomew says, tightening his grip on hers.
   She presses her lips together. If they were alone, she and Bartholomew,
maybe then she could risk letting  out some of  the words jamming  up her
throat. But as it is, the room so full of silent people, she cannot.
   ‘He  must be buried. You know this. The town will come to take him if we
do not.’
   ‘No,’  she says. ‘Not yet.’
   ‘Then  when?’
   She bows her head, turning away from him, back to her son.
   Bartholomew  shifts his weight. ‘Agnes,’  he says, in a low voice  so that,
maybe, no one else can hear them, although they will  be listening, Agnes
knows. ‘It is possible that word may not have reached him. He would come,
if he knew. I know  he would. But he would  not find it  amiss if we were to
go ahead. He would understand the necessity of it. What we must do is send
another letter and in the meantime—’
   ‘We  will  wait,’ she gets out. ‘Until tomorrow. You may tell the town that.
And I will  lay him out. No one else.’
   ‘Very   well,’   he says, and  stands up.  She sees him  look   at Hamnet,
watches his eyes travel from the bare and blackened feet of his nephew, all
the way to his  ravaged face. Her brother’s mouth presses itself into a line
and he closes his eyes briefly. He makes the sign  of the cross. Before he
turns away, he reaches out and rests his hand on the boy’s chest, just above
where his heart used to beat.

A task to be done, and she will do it alone.
   She waits until  evening, until everyone has left, until  most people are in
bed.
   She will   have the water  at her right  hand and she will   sprinkle  a few
drops of oil into it. The oil  will  resist, refuse to mix with the water, and will
instead resolve itself into  golden circles  on the surface. She will  dip  and
rinse the cloth.
   She begins at the face, at the top of him. He has a wide forehead and his
hair grows  up  from  the  brow.  He had,  of  late,  begun to  wet  it  in  the
morning, to try to get it  to lie flat,  but the hair would not listen. She wets it
now but it still  does not listen, even in death. You see, she says to him, you
cannot change what you are given, cannot bend or alter what is dealt to you.
   He gives no answer.

197
   She wets her hands in the water and then draws her fingers through his
hair; she finds flecks  of lint,  a teasel, a leaf from  a plum  tree. These, she
lays aside, on a plate: flotsam  from  her boy. She combs with  her fingers
until the hair  is clean. May  I, she asks him, take a lock  from you? Would
you mind?
   He gives no answer.
   She takes a knife,  the one she finds  so useful for  prising  kernels from
fruit – she bought it from a gypsy she met in the lane one day – and takes a
skein of hair at the back of his head. The knife severs the strands easily, as
she knew it would. She holds up the hair. Light yellow at the end, bleached
by  the summer  sun, darkening  to  near-brown at  the  roots. She  lays  it
carefully next to the plate.
   She wipes  his forehead, his closed eyes, his  cheeks, his lips, the  open
wound on his brow. She clears the shell-whorls of both ears, the soft stem
of neck. She would wash the fever from  him, draw it  from his  skin, if  she
could. The nightshirt must be cut  from him,  so she runs the gypsy’s knife
down each arm, along the chest.
   She is dabbing the cloth, gently, so gently, over the bruised and swollen
armpits, when Mary comes in.
   She stands in the doorway, looking down at the boy. Her face is wet, her
eyes swollen. ‘I  saw  the light,’   she says, in a  cracked voice. ‘I   was not
sleeping.’
   Agnes nods towards a chair. Mary was with her when Hamnet came into
the world; she may stay to see him out of it.
   The  candle  is  flaring  and  burning  high,  illuminating  the  ceiling  and
leaving the edges of the room in shadow. Mary sits in the chair; Agnes can
see the white of her nightgown hem.
   She dips the cloth, she washes, she dips it again. A repetitive motion. She
runs her fingers over the scar on Hamnet’s arm where he fell from a fence at
Hewlands, over the puckered knot  from  a dog bite  at a harvest fair.  The
third finger  of his right  hand is calloused from  gripping a quill.  There are
small pits in the skin  of his stomach from  when he had a spotted pox as a
small child.
   She washes his legs, his ankles, his feet. Mary  takes the bowl, changes
the water. Agnes washes the feet again, and dries them.
   The two women look at each other for a moment, then Mary picks up the
folded sheet, holding a corner in each hand. The sheet unravels, opens like

198
an enormous flower, its petals wide,  and Agnes is faced with  its  startling
blank white expanse. The brightness of it  is star-like,  unavoidable, in this
dark room.
   She takes it. She presses her face to it. It  smells of juniper, of  cedar, of
soap. Its nap is soft, enveloping, forgiving.
   Mary  helps her to lift Hamnet’s legs and then his torso, to slide the sheet
under him.
   Hard  to  fold  him  in.  Hard  to  lift   the sheet’s corners and  cover him,
smother him in  its whiteness. Hard to  think, to  know, that  she will  never
again see these arms,  these knuckles,  these shins, that  thumbnail,  that
callus, this face, after this.
   She cannot cover  him the  first  time. She cannot do  it the  second. She
takes the sheet, she drapes it   over him,  she  removes it.  Does it  again.
Removes it again. The boy lies, unclothed, washed clean, in the  centre of
the sheet, hands folded on his chest, chin tilted upwards, eyes shut fast.
   Agnes leans on the edge of the board, breathing hard, the fabric gripped
in her hands.
   Mary  watches. She reaches over the body of  the boy to  touch Agnes’s
hand.
   Agnes  looks at  her son.  The birdcage  ribs, the  interlaced fingers,  the
round bones of the knees, the still face, the corn-coloured hair,  which has
dried now,  standing up  from  his  brow,  as it  always  does. His  physical
presence has always been so strong, so definite, unlike Judith’s. Agnes has
always known if he enters a room, or leaves it: that unmistakable clatter of
feet, that passage of air, the heavy thud as he sits down on a chair. And now
she must give up this body, submit it to the earth, never to be seen again.
   ‘I  cannot do it,’ she says.
   Mary  takes the sheet from her. She tucks it one way, over his legs, then
the other, over his chest. Some part of Agnes registers, in the deft way she
performs this task, that she has done it before, many times.
   Then, together, they reach up to the rafters. Agnes selects rue, comfrey,
yellow-eyed chamomile. She takes purple lavender and thyme, a handful of
rosemary. Not heartsease, because Hamnet disliked the smell. Not angelica,
because it is too late for that and it did not help, did not perform its task, did
not save him, did not break the fever. Not valerian, for the same reason. Not
milk thistle, for the leaves are so spiny and sharp, enough to pierce the skin,
to bring forth drops of blood.

199
   She tucks the dried  plants into the sheet, nestles them next to his body,
where they whisper their comfort to him.
   Next  is the needle. Agnes threads it with  thick twine.  She begins at the
feet.
   The point  is sharp; it punctures the weave of the cloth and slides out the
other side. She keeps her eyes on her  work, the  drawing together of  the
sheet, to make a shroud. She is a sailor, stitching a sail, preparing a boat that
will carry her son into the next world.
   She has reached the shins when something makes her lift her head. There
is a figure standing at the bottom of the stairs. Agnes’s heart clenches like a
fist, she almost cries out, There you are, have you come back, but then she
sees it is,  in  fact, Judith.  The same face, but  this  one is  alive, stricken,
trembling.
   Mary  starts up from her chair, saying, Back to bed, now, come, you must
sleep, but Agnes says, No, let her stay.
   She puts down the needle, carefully, because it must not prick him, even
now, and holds  out her  arms. Judith leaves the stairs,  she steps into the
room, she hurls herself against her mother, pressing her face into her apron,
saying something about kittens, and something else about sickness, about
changing places, about it being her  fault, and then  sobs tear through her,
gale winds through a tree.
   Agnes says to her: It is no fault of yours. None at all. The fever came for
him and there was nothing we could do.  We must bear it the best we can.
Then she says: Do you want to see him?
   Mary   arranges the sheet so  that  Hamnet’s  face is  uncovered. Judith
comes to stand beside him, looking  down, her hands drawn up,  clenched
into themselves. Her expression melds from disbelief to timidity  to pity  to
grief and back again.
   ‘Oh,’  she says, drawing in breath. ‘It is really him?’
   Agnes, standing next to her, nods.
   ‘It  doesn’t look like him.’
   Agnes nods again. ‘Well, he is gone.’
   ‘Gone where?’
   ‘To  . . .’ she inhales a deep, almost steady breath ‘. . . to . . . Heaven. And
his body is left behind. We have to take care of it the best we can.’
   Judith  puts out a hand and touches the cheek of her twin.  Tears course
down her face,  chasing each other. She has always cried such enormous

200
tears, like heavy pearls, quite at odds with the slightness of her frame. She
shakes her head, hard, once or twice. Then she says, ‘Will he never come
back?’
   And  Agnes finds she can bear anything except her child’s pain. She can
bear separation, sickness, blows,   birth,  deprivation,  hunger, unfairness,
seclusion, but not this: her child, looking down at her dead twin. Her child,
sobbing for her lost brother. Her child, racked with grief.
   For  the first  time, the tears come for Agnes. They  fill  her eyes without
warning, blur  her  vision,  pouring forth  to  run  down her  face, her  neck,
soaking her apron, running between her clothes and her skin. They seem to
come not just from  her eyes but from  every pore of  her body. Her whole
being longs for, grieves for her son, her daughters, her absent husband, for
all of them, when she says, ‘No, my love, he will never come again.’

The milky,  uncertain  light  of  dawn is  reaching into  the room.  Agnes is
making  the final   stitches in   the  shroud, tucking  it   in  at  his  shoulder,
neatening the edges near his knees. Mary has emptied the bowls, wrung out
the cloths, swept the loose leaves and buds from the floor.  Judith has her
cheek against the cloth near his shoulder. Susanna has come in from next
door and she sits next to her sister, head lowered.
   They have made him ready, between them. He is clean and set for burial,
parcelled in white cloth.
   Agnes finds that her mind rears back, like a horse refusing a ditch, when
she thinks of  the  grave. She can  think  forward  to  walking  with  him  to
church – Bartholomew  and perhaps Gilbert and John will   carry him;  she
can picture the priest blessing the body. But  the lowering  of him  into  the
ground, into a dark pit, never to be seen again, she cannot think about. She
cannot imagine. She cannot possibly permit this to happen to her child.
   She is, for the third or fourth time, trying  to thread her needle – she needs
to stitch  the sheet over his face, she must, it  needs to be  done – but  the
twine is thicker than she is used to, and frayed, and will not go through the
eye of the needle, however many times she aims. She is wetting the end in
her mouth when there comes a thudding at the door.
   She raises her  head. Judith whimpers,  looks  up. Mary  turns  from  the
fireplace.
   ‘Who  could that be?’ she says.

201
   Agnes puts down the needle. All four of them stand. The knocking comes
again: a row of sharp raps.
   For  a  wild  moment,  Agnes believes  that something has  come to  her
house, again, to take her other children, to take her boy, before she is ready,
before she has him fully prepared. It is too early in the morning for it to be a
mourner or a neighbour, come to pay  their final  respects, or for  the town
officials  to snatch away the body.  It  must be some spectre, some wraith,
come calling at their door. But for whom?
   Again,  the sound comes: a  thudding, a  rapping. The door  leaps on its
hinges.
   ‘Who’s  there?’ Agnes calls out, her voice bolder than she feels.
   The latch lifts,  the door swings open, and there, suddenly, is her husband,
stepping in under the lintel,  his clothes and head all wetted and dark with
rain, his hair streaked to his cheeks. His face is sleepless, crazed, his skin
pale. ‘Am I too late?’ he says.
   Then his eye falls upon Judith, who is standing by the candle, and a smile
breaks out across his features.
   ‘You,’  he says, striding across the room, holding out  his arms. ‘You are
here, you are well.  I was worried  – I  couldn’t  rest – I  came as soon as I
heard but now I see that—’
   He stops, pulled up short. He has seen the board, the shroud, the bundled
figure.
   He looks around at them, one by one. His face is fearful, confused. Agnes
can see him ticking them off.  His wife,  his mother, his elder daughter, his
younger daughter.
   ‘No,’  he says. ‘Not . . .? Is it . . .?’
   Agnes  looks  at him  and he  looks  back at  her. She wants, more  than
anything, to stretch this  moment, to expand the time  before he knows, to
shield him from what has happened for as long as she can. Then she gives a
swift, single, downward nod.
   The sound that comes out of him is choked and smothered, like that of an
animal forced to bear a great weight. It  is a noise of disbelief,  of anguish.
Agnes will  never forget  it.  At  the end of  her life,  when her husband has
been dead for years, she will  still  be able to  summon its  exact pitch and
timbre.
   He moves quickly  across the room and pulls back the cloth. And there is
his son’s face before him,  a blue-white  lily-flower,   eyes sealed shut, lips

202
pursed, as if the boy is displeased, unimpressed by what has taken place.
   The  father  cups  a hand  to  the  son’s chill   cheek. His  fingers  hover,
trembling, over the bruise on his brow. He says, No, no, no. He says, God in
Heaven. And, then, crouching low, over the boy, he whispers: How did this
happen to you?
   His  women  gather round, putting  their  arms around  him, pulling   him
close.

So it is the father who carries Hamnet for burial. He hoists the board aloft,
balanced on his outstretched arms, his son held before him, wrapped in  a
white shroud, with flowers and blooms around his body.
   Behind  him is Agnes, holding  Susanna’s hand on one side, and Judith’s
on the other. Judith is carried by Bartholomew; she tucks her face into his
neck and her tears run down to soak his shirt. Mary and John, Eliza and the
brothers follow after, along with  Joan, Agnes’s siblings, and the baker and
his wife.
   The  father  bears him,  unaided, along  Henley  Street, tears and  sweat
streaming down his face. Towards the crossroads, Edmond breaks free of
the mourners and goes to his brother’s side. Together, they take the board
between them, the father the head and Edmond the feet.
   The neighbours, the townsfolk, the people on the streets step aside when
they see the silent procession. They put down their tools, their bundles, their
baskets. They edge backwards, to the sides of the streets, clearing the way.
They take off  their  hats. If  they are holding  children, they  clutch them a
little  closer, when  they see the glover’s  son  walk  by with   his dead and
shrouded boy. They cross themselves. They call out words of  comfort, of
sorrow. They send up a prayer – for the boy, for the family, for themselves.
Some of them weep. Some exchange whispers about the family, the glover,
the airs his  wife  puts on,  how everyone thought  the glover’s  son would
amount to nothing, what a wastrel he had always seemed, and now look at
him – a man of consequence in London, it is  said, and there he goes, with
his richly embroidered sleeves and shining leather boots. Who would have
thought  it?  Is  it   really   true  that  he  makes  all  that  money  from   the
playhouse? How can that be? All of them, though, look with sadness at the
covered body, at  the  stricken face  of  the  mother, walking  between  her
daughters.

203
   For  Agnes, the walk to the graveyard is both too  slow and too fast. She
cannot bear the rows and rows of peering eyes, raking over them, sealing an
image of her son’s shrouded body inside their lids, thieving that essence of
him. These are  people who  saw him  every day,  passing by their  doors,
below their  windows.  They exchanged words with   him, ruffled   his hair,
exhorted him to hurry if he was late for the school bell. He played with their
children, darted in and out of their  houses and shops. He carried messages
for them, petted their dogs, stroked the backs of their cats as they slept on
sunny windowsills.  And now  their lives  are carrying on, unchanged, their
dogs still yawning by the fireplaces, their children  still whining  for supper,
while he is no more.
   So she cannot bear their gaze, cannot meet their eyes. She doesn’t want
their sympathy and their prayers and their murmured words. She hates the
way the people part to let them past and then, behind them, regroup, erasing
their passage, as if it were nothing, as if it never were. She wishes to scratch
the ground, perhaps with a hoe, to score the streets beneath her, so that there
will  forever  be a mark, for  it  always to  be known  that this  way Hamnet
came. He was here.
   Too soon, too  quickly, they are nearing the graveyard, they are through
the gate, they are walking between the lines of yew trees, studded with their
soft, scarlet berries.
   The  grave is a shock. A  deep, dark rip  in  the earth, as if  made by the
careless slash of a giant claw. It is over at the far side of the graveyard. Just
beyond it, the river is taking a slow, wide bend, turning its waters in another
direction. Its surface is  opaque today, braided like a rope, rushing always
onwards.
   How   Hamnet would   have loved  this  patch  of  ground.  She observes
herself forming this thought. If  he could have chosen, if he were here, next
to her, if  she could  turn to  him  and ask him,  she is sure he would  have
pointed at this very spot: next to the river.  He was ever one for water. She
has always had a terrible time  keeping him from  weed-filled  banks, from
the dank mouths of wells, from stinking  drains, from sheep-soiled puddles.
And, now, here he will be, sealed in the earth for eternity, by the river.
   His father is lowering him  in. How can he do that, how is it possible? She
knows that it has to be, that he is only doing what he must, but Agnes feels
she could not  perform this  task. She would  never, could never, send his
body into the earth like that, alone, cold, to be covered over. Agnes cannot

204
watch, she  cannot, her  husband’s arms  straining,  his  face  twisted  and
clenched and gleaming,  Bartholomew  and Edmond  stepping forward  to
help. Someone is sobbing somewhere. Is it Eliza? Is it Bartholomew’s wife,
who lost  a baby herself not  so long  ago? Judith is whimpering,  Susanna
clutching her by the hand, so Agnes misses the moment, she misses seeing
her son, the shroud she sewed for him, disappearing from view, entering the
dark black river-sodden earth. It was there one moment, then she dipped her
head to look at Judith, and then it was gone. Never to be seen again.
   It  is even more difficult,  Agnes finds, to leave the graveyard, than it was
to enter it.  So many  graves to walk  past, so many sad and  angry ghosts
tugging at her  skirts, touching  her with  their  cold fingers,  pulling  at her,
naggingly, piteously, saying, Don’t go, wait for us, don’t leave us here. She
has to clutch her hem to her, fold  her hands inwards. A strangely difficult
idea, too, that she entered this place with  three children and she leaves it
with two. She is, she tells herself, meant to be leaving one behind here, but
how can she? In this  place of  wailing  spirits and dripping  yew  trees and
cold, pawing hands?
   Her husband takes her arm as they reach the gate; she turns to look at him
and it is as if she has never seen him before, so odd and distorted and old do
his features seem. Is it their long separation, is it grief, is it all the tears? she
wonders, as she regards him. Who is this person next to her, claiming her
arm, holding it to him? She can see, in his face, the cheekbones of her dead
son, the set of his brow, but nothing else. Just life, just blood, just evidence
of  a pumping,  resilient  heart, an  eye that  is  bright  with  tears, a  cheek
flushed with feeling.
   She  is  hollowed  out,  her edges blurred  and  insubstantial. She might
disintegrate, break apart, like a raindrop hitting a leaf. She cannot leave this
place, she cannot pass through this gate. She cannot leave him here.
   She  gets hold  of  the  wooden gatepost and  grips it   with  both  hands.
Everything is shattered but holding on to this post feels like the best course
of action, the  only thing  to do.  If  she can stay here, at the gate, with her
daughters on one  side  of  her  and her  son  on the  other,  she can  hold
everything together.
   It  takes her husband, her brother and both of her daughters to unpeel her
hands, to pull her away.

205
Agnes is a woman broken into pieces, crumbled and scattered around. She
would not be surprised to look down, one of these days, and see a foot over
in the corner, an arm left  on the ground, a hand dropped to the floor.  Her
daughters are  the same.  Susanna’s face  is  set,  her  brows  lowered  in
something like anger. Judith just  cries, on and on,  silently;  the tears leak
from her and will, it seems, never stop.

How were they  to know  that Hamnet was the pin holding  them together?
That  without  him  they   would  all  fragment  and  fall   apart, like   a  cup
shattered on the floor?

The husband, the father, paces the room downstairs, that first night, and the
one after. Agnes hears him from  the bedroom upstairs. There is  no other
sound. No crying, no sobbing, no sighing. Just the scuff-thud, scuff-thud of
his restless feet, walking,  walking,  like someone trying  to find  their  way
back to a place for which they have lost the map.

‘I did not see it,’ she whispers, into the dark space between them.
   He turns his head; she cannot see him do this, but she can hear the rustle
and crackle of the sheets. The bed-curtains are drawn around them, in spite
of the relentless summer heat.
   ‘No  one did,’ he says.
   ‘But  I did not,’  she whispers. ‘And I should have. I should have known. I
should have seen it. I  should have understood that it  was a terrible trick,
making me fear for Judith, when all along—’
   ‘Ssh,’  he says, turning over, laying an arm over her. ‘You did everything
you could. There is nothing anyone could have done to save him. You tried
your best and—’
   ‘Of   course I  did,’  she  hisses, suddenly furious,  sitting  up, wrenching
herself from his touch. ‘I  would have cut out my heart and given it to him,
if it would  have made any difference, I would have—’
   ‘I  know.’
   ‘You  don’t  know,’  she says, thumping  her fist  into  the mattress. ‘You
weren’t here. Judith,’  she whispers, and tears are slipping from  her eyes,
now, down her cheeks, dripping through her hair, ‘Judith was so ill. I . . . I .
. . was so intent on her that I wasn’t  thinking .  . . I  should have paid more
attention to him . . . I never saw what was coming . . . I always thought she

206
was the one who would  be taken. I cannot believe that I  was so blind, so
stupid to—’
   ‘Agnes,  you did  everything, you  tried everything,’  he repeats, trying to
ease her back into the bed. ‘The sickness was too strong.’
   She resists him, curling into herself, wrapping her arms around her knees.
‘You weren’t here,’ she says again.

He goes out into the town, two days after they buried him. He must speak to
a man who leases fields from him, must remind him of the debt.
   He  steps out  from  the  front  door  and finds  that  the  street is  full  of
sunlight, full of  children. Walking along, calling to each other, holding their
parents’ hands,  laughing,  crying,  sleeping  on  a  shoulder, having  their
mantles buttoned.
   It  is  a sight past bearing. Their  skin, their  skulls, their ribs,  their clear,
wide eyes: how frail they are. Don’t you see that? he wants to shout to their
mothers, their fathers. How can you let them out of your houses?
   He  gets as far as the market, and then he stops. He turns  on his heels,
ignoring the greeting, the outstretched hand of a cousin, and goes back.

At the house, his Judith is sitting by the back door. She has been set the task
of peeling a basket of apples. He sits down beside her. After a moment, he
reaches into the basket and hands her the next apple. She has a paring knife
in her left  hand – always her left –  and she peels the skin from it. It  drips
from the blade in long, green curls, like the hair of a mermaid.

When the twins were very small, perhaps around their first birthday, he had
turned to his wife and said, Watch.
   Agnes had lifted her head from her workbench.
   He  pushed two slivers of apple across the table to them. At  exactly the
same moment, Hamnet reached out with  his  right  hand and  gripped the
apple and Judith reached out with her left.
   In  unison, they raised the apple slices to their lips, Hamnet with his right,
Judith with her left.
   They  put them down, as if with  some silent signal between them, at the
same moment, then looked at each other, then picked them up again, Judith
with her left hand, Hamnet with his right.

207
   It’s  like a mirror,  he had said. Or that they are one person split down the
middle.
   Their two  heads uncovered, shining like spun gold.

He meets his father, John, in the passageway, just as his father is stepping
out of the workshop.
   The two men pause, each staring at the other.
   His  father puts up a hand to rub  at the bristles on his chin. His  Adam’s
apple bobs uncomfortably  up  and down  as he swallows.  Then he  gives
something halfway  between a grunt and  a cough, sidesteps his son,  and
retreats back into the workshop.

Everywhere he looks: Hamnet. Aged two, gripping the edges of the window
ledge, straining to see out into the street, his finger outstretched, pointing to
a horse passing by. As a baby, tucked with Judith into a cradle, neat as two
loaves. Pushing open the front door with too much force as he returns from
school, leaving a mark on the plaster that makes Mary exclaim  and scold.
Catching a ball in  its hoop, over and over  again, just outside the window.
Lifting  his face from  his  schoolwork to his  father to ask about a  tense in
Greek, his cheek stained with a smear of chalk in the shape of a comma, a
pause. The sound of  his voice,  calling  from  the back yard,  asking, Will
someone come and look because a bird has landed on the back of the pig.
   And  his  wife so  still  and silent and pale, his  elder daughter so furious
with the world,  lashing and lashing at them with an angry tongue. And his
younger girl just  cries; she puts her head down on the table or stands in a
doorway or lies in bed and weeps and weeps, until he or her mother, putting
their arms about her, beg her to leave off or she will make herself sick.
   And  the smell of leather, of whittawing, of hides, of singed fur: he cannot
get away from it. How  did he spend all those years in this house? He finds
he cannot breathe the sour air  here, now. The  knock at  the window,  the
demands of people wanting to buy gloves, to look  at them, to try  them on
their  hands,  to  endlessly  discuss beading  and  buttons  and  lace.  The
ceaseless conversation, back and forth, over this  merchant and that,  this
whittawer, that farmer, that  nobleman, the price of  silk, the  cost of wool,
who is at the guild meetings and who isn’t, who will be alderman next year.
   It  is  intolerable. All  of  it.  He feels as though he  is caught in  a web of
absence, its strings and tendrils ready to stick and cling to him, whichever

208
way he turns. Here he is, back in this town, in this house, and all of it makes
him fearful  that he might never get  away; this grief,  this loss, might  keep
him  here, might   destroy all   he has  made for   himself  in  London.  His
company will  descend into chaos and disorder without him; they will  lose
all their money and disband; they might find another to take his place; they
won’t prepare a new play for the coming season, or they will and it will  be
better than anything he  could ever write,  and that  person’s name will  be
across the playbills and not his, and then he will be kicked out, replaced, not
wanted any more. He might lose his hold on all that he has built there. It is
so tenuous, so fragile, the life of the playhouses. He often thinks that, more
than anything, it   is like  the  embroidery on  his  father’s gloves:  only  the
beautiful shows, only the smallest part, while underneath is a cross-hatching
of labour and skill  and frustration and sweat. He needs to be there, all the
time, to ensure that what is underneath happens, that all goes to plan. And
he longs, it is true, for the four close walls of his lodging, where no one else
ever comes, where no one looks for him or asks for him or speaks to him or
bothers him, where there is just a bed, a coffer, a desk. Nowhere else can he
escape the noise and life and people around him; nowhere else is he able to
let the world recede, the sense of himself dissolve, so that he is just a hand,
holding an ink-dipped feather, and he may watch as words unfurl  from its
tip. And as these words come, one after another, it is possible for him to slip
away from himself  and find a peace so absorbing, so soothing, so private,
so joyous that nothing else will do.
   He  cannot give this up, cannot stay here, in this house, in this  town, on
the edges of the glove business, not even for his wife. He sees how he may
become mired in Stratford for ever, a creature with its leg in the jaws of an
iron trap, with his father next door, and his son, cold and decaying, beneath
the churchyard sod.

He comes to her  and says he must leave. He cannot stay  away from  his
company for  long.  They  will   need him:  they will   be  returning  soon to
London  and  they  must  ready  themselves  for   the  new  season. Other
playhouses would be only too glad to see theirs go under; the competition,
especially at the start of the season, is fierce. There are many preparations
to be made and he needs to be there to see all is done right. He cannot leave
it to the other men. No one else can be relied upon. He has to leave. He is
sorry. He hopes she understands.

209
   Agnes says nothing as he delivers this speech. She lets the words wash
over and around her. She continues to let the slops fall from a basin into the
pig trough. Such a simple task: to hold aloft a basin and let its contents fall.
Nothing more is  required of  her than to  stand here, leaning on the swine
wall.
   ‘I   will  send word,’  he says, behind her, and she starts. She had almost
forgotten he was there. What was it he had been saying?
   ‘Send word?’ she repeats. ‘To whom?’
   ‘To  you.’
   ‘To  me? Why?’ She gestures down at herself. ‘I am here, before you.’
   ‘I  meant I will  send word when I have reached London.’
   Agnes frowns, letting the last of the slops fall. She recalls, yes, a moment
ago, he had been talking of London. Of his friends there. ‘Preparations’ had
been the word he used, she believes. And ‘leave’.
   ‘London?’  she says.
   ‘I  must leave,’ he says, with a hint of crispness.
   She almost smiles, so ridiculous, so fanciful is the notion.
   ‘You  cannot leave,’ she says.
   ‘But  I must.’
   ‘But  you cannot.’
   ‘Agnes,’   he says, with  full-blown   irritation  now.  ‘The  world  does not
stand still. There are people waiting  for me. The  season is about to begin
and my company will return from Kent any day now and I must—’
   ‘How  can you think of leaving?’  she says, puzzled. What must she say to
make him  understand? ‘Hamnet,’ she says, feeling  the roundness of  the
word, his name, inside her mouth, the shape of a ripe pear. ‘Hamnet died.’
   The words make him  flinch.  He cannot look at her after she has spoken
them; he bows his head, fixing his gaze on his boots.
   To  her, it  is  simple. Their  boy, their  child,  is dead, barely  cold in  his
grave. There will be no leaving. There will be staying. There will be closing
of the doors, the four of them drawing together, like dancers at the end of a
reel. He will   remain here, with  her, with  Judith, with   Susanna. How can
there be any such talk of leaving? It makes no sense.
   She follows  his gaze, down to his boots, and sees there, beside his feet,
his travelling bag. It is stuffed, filled, like the belly of an expectant woman.
   She points at it, mutely, unable to speak.

210
   ‘I  must go . .  . now,’ he mutters, stumbling over his words, this husband
of hers who always speaks in the way  a stream runs fast and clear over a
steep bed of pebbles. ‘There is . . . a trade party leaving today for London . .
. and they have . . . a spare horse. It is . . . I need to . . . that is, I mean . . . I
shall take your leave . . . and will, in good time, or rather, shall—’
   ‘You  will  leave now? Today?’ She is incredulous, turning from  the wall
to face him. ‘We need you here.’
   ‘The  trade party . . . I . . . that is . . . It is not possible for them to wait and
. . . it is a good opportunity . . . so that I may not be travelling alone . . . You
don’t like  me to make the journey alone, remember . . . You yourself have
said so . . . many times . . . so then—’
   ‘You  mean to go now?’
   He takes the swine bowl from her and puts it on the wall, taking both her
hands in his. ‘There are many who rely  on me in London.  It is imperative
that I return. I cannot just abandon these men who—’
   ‘But  you may abandon us?’
   ‘No,  of course not. I—’
   She pushes her face right up to his. ‘Why are you going?’ she hisses.
   He averts his eyes from hers but does not let go of her hands. ‘I told you,’
he mutters. ‘The company, the other players, I—’
   ‘Why?’  she demands. ‘Is it your father? Did something happen? Tell me.’
   ‘There is nothing to tell.’
   ‘I  don’t  believe you.’ She tries to withdraw her hands from his grasp but
he will not let go. She twists her wrists one way and then the other.
   ‘You  speak of  your  company,’  she says, into the  space between their
faces, which is so narrow they must be breathing each other’s breath, ‘you
speak of your season and your preparation, but none of these is the proper
reason.’ She struggles to free her hands, her fingers, so that she may grip his
hand; he knows this and will   not let  her. That he prevents her makes her
livid,  incensed, red-hot with such fury  as she has not felt since she was a
child.
   ‘It   is no  matter,’ she pants, as they struggle there,  beside the guzzling
swine. ‘I know. You are caught by that place, like a hooked fish.’
   ‘What  place? You mean London?
   ‘No,   the place in  your  head. I  saw it  once, a long  time  ago, a whole
country in  there, a landscape. You have gone to that place  and it  is now
more real to you  than anywhere else. Nothing can keep you  from  it. Not

211
even the death of your own child.  I see this,’ she says to him, as he binds
her wrists together with one of his hands, reaching down for the bag at his
feet with the other. ‘Don’t think I don’t.’
   Only  when  he has shouldered his bag  does he let  go. She shakes her
hands, the wrists  scored  and reddened, rubbing  her  fingers  against the
marks of his grip.
   He  is breathing hard as he stands two paces away from her. He crushes
his cap in his hand, avoiding her eye.
   ‘You  will   not bid  me farewell?’  she says to him. ‘You  will   walk away
without bidding  me goodbye? The woman who  bore your children?  Who
nursed your son through his final breath? Who laid him out for burial? You
will walk  away from me, without a word?’
   ‘Look  after  the girls,’  is all he says, and this smarts like the slender but
sharp prick of  a needle. ‘I  will   send word,’  he says again. ‘And  hope to
return to you again before Christmas.’
   She turns away from him towards the swine. She sees their bristly backs,
their flapping ears, hears their satisfied gruntings.
   He  is  suddenly there, behind  her. His  arms circle  her  waist, turn  her
around, pull  her  towards him.  His  head is  next  to hers:  she smells the
leather of his  gloves, the salt  of  his tears. They stand like  this,  together,
unified, for  a moment, and she feels the pull towards him  that she always
does and always has, as if there is an invisible rope that circles her heart and
ties it to his. Our boy was made, is what she thinks, of him and of her. They
made him together; they  buried him  together. He will  never come  again.
There is a part of her that would  like  to wind  up time, to gather it  in, like
yarn. She would  like  to spin  the wheel  backwards, unmake the skein of
Hamnet’s death, his boyhood,  his infancy,  his  birth, right  back  until  the
moment she and her  husband cleaved together in  that bed to  create the
twins. She would  like   to unspool  it  all,  render it  all  back down  to  raw
fleece, to find her way  back, to that moment, and she would stand up, she
would turn up her face to the stars, to the heavens, to the moon, and appeal
to them to change what lay in wait for  him, to plead with  them to devise a
different outcome for him,  please, please. She would do anything for this,
give anything, yield up whatever the heavens wanted.
   Her  husband holds her close as she clasps him with both  arms, despite
everything, just as she did that night, his body fitted to hers. He breathes in
and out, into  the  curved side of  her  coif,  as if  he  might speak, but  she

212
doesn’t want the words, has no need of them. She sees, over his shoulder,
that travelling bag of his, at his feet.
   There will  be no going back. No undoing of  what was laid out for them.
The boy has gone and the husband will leave and she will stay and the pigs
will need to be fed every day and time runs only one way.
   ‘Go,  then,’  she says, turning from  him,  pushing him away, ‘if   you  are
going. Return when you can.’

She discovers that it is possible to cry all  day and all night. That  there are
many different  ways  to  cry:  the  sudden outpouring  of  tears,  the deep,
racking sobs, the soundless and endless leaking of  water  from  the eyes.
That sore skin  around  the eyes may  be treated  with  oil  infused  with  a
tincture of  eyebright and chamomile.  That it  is  possible to comfort  your
daughters with assurances about places in Heaven and eternal joy and how
they may all be reunited after  death and how he will  be waiting  for them,
while not believing any of it. That people don’t always know what to say to
a woman whose child has died. That some will cross the street to avoid her
merely because of this. That people not considered to be good friends will
come, without warning, to the fore, will  leave bread and cakes on your sill,
will say a kind and apt word to you after church, will ruffle Judith’s hair and
pinch her wan cheek.

It is hard to know what to do with his clothes.
   For  weeks, Agnes cannot move them from the chair where he left them
before taking to bed.
   A  month or  so after burial  she lifts the breeches, then puts them down.
She fingers the collar of his shirt. She nudges the toe of his boot so that the
pair are lined up, side by side.
   Then  she buries her  face in  the shirt;  she presses the breeches to her
heart; she inserts a hand into each boot, feeling the empty shapes of his feet;
she ties and unties  the necklines; she pushes buttons into  holes and  out
again. She folds the clothes, unfolds them, refolds them.
   As  the fabric runs through her fingers, as she puts each seam together, as
she flaps out the creases in the air, her body remembers this task. It takes
her back to the before. Folding his clothes, tending to them, breathing in his
scent, she can almost persuade herself that he is still here, just about to get
dressed, that he will walk through the door at  any moment, asking, Where

213
are my stockings,  where is  my shirt?,  worrying  about being  late for  the
school bell.

She and Judith and Susanna sleep together in the curtained  bed, without
discussing the matter:  the girls’  truckle  is  never pulled  out  but  remains
tucked away. She draws the curtains tight  around the three of  them. She
tells herself that  nothing can get them,  nothing will   come in  through the
windows or down the chimney. She stays awake most of the night, listening
for the knock and keen of bad spirits trying  to find  a way in.  She puts her
arms around her slumbering daughters. She wakes often, during the night,
to check them  for  fevers, swellings, strange colorations  of  the skin.  She
switches sides, from  time to  time,  throughout the  night, so  that she lies
between Judith and the outside world, and then Susanna. Nothing will get
past her this  time.  She will   be  waiting.  Nothing  will   come to  take her
children. Never again.

Susanna says she will pass the night  next door,  with  her grandparents. I
cannot sleep here, she says, avoiding her mother’s eye. There’s too much
shifting about.
   She  gathers her nightcap,  her gown,  and  leaves the  room, her  skirts
gathering the dust mice that have collected on the floor.

Agnes cannot see the point of sweeping the floor.  It  just gets dirty  again.
Cooking food seems similarly pointless. She cooks it, they eat it  and then,
later on, they eat more.

The girls go next door for their meals; Agnes doesn’t stop them.

To walk by his grave every Sunday is both a pain and a pleasure. She wants
to lie there so that her body covers it. She wants to dig down with her bare
hands. She wants to  strike  it  with  a  tree branch.  She wants to  build  a
structure over it, to shield it from the wind  and the rain. Perhaps she would
come to live in it, there, with him.

God had need of him, the priest says to her, taking her hand after the service
one day.
   She turns on him, almost snarling, filled with the urge to strike him. I had
need of him, she wants to say, and your God should have bided His time.

214
   She says nothing. She takes her daughters’ arms and walks away.

She has a dream that she is in  the fields at  Hewlands. It  is dusk and the
earth is  bare and  dug  into  deep furrows.  Ahead  of  her  is  her mother,
bending to the soil and straightening up. When Agnes gets closer she sees
that her mother is sowing tiny  pearl-white teeth in the ground. Her mother
doesn’t turn or pause as Agnes approaches, just smiles at her, then carries
on dropping milk teeth into the ground, one after another.

Summer is an assault. The long evenings, the warm air wafting through the
windows, the  slow progress of  the river  through the  town, the  shouts of
children playing late in the street, the horses flicking flies from their flanks,
the hedgerows heavy with flowers and berries.
   Agnes would like to tear it all down, rip  it up, hurl it to the wind.

Autumn, when it  comes, is terrible too.  The sharpness on the air, early in
the  morning.  The  mist   gathering  in  the  yard.   The  hens fussing   and
murmuring in  their pen, refusing to come out. The  leaves crisping at their
edges. Here is a season Hamnet has not known or touched. Here is a world
moving on without him.

Letters come, from  London. Susanna reads them aloud. They are briefer,
Agnes notices, when she examines them later, not quite covering one page,
his script looser, as if written in haste. They don’t speak of the playhouse, of
the audiences, of the performances, of the  plays he writes.  None of  this.
Instead, he tells them of the rain in London and how it soaked his stockings
last week, how his landlord’s  horse is lame, how he  met a lace-seller and
bought them all a handkerchief, each with a different edging.

She knows better than to look out of the window at the hour school begins
and ends. She keeps herself busy, head averted. She will not go out at this
time.
   Every  golden-haired child  in the  street puts on his gait,  his aspect, his
character, making her heart leap, like a deer. Some days, the streets are full
of Hamnets. They walk about. They jump  and run. They jostle each other.
They walk  towards her, they walk  away from  her, they disappear around
corners.
   Some days she doesn’t go out at all.

215
The lock of his hair is kept in a small earthenware jar above the fire. Judith
has sewn a silk pouch for it. She drags a chair to the mantel when she thinks
no one is looking and gets it down.
   The hair  is the same colour as her own; it might have been cut from her
own head; it slips like water through her fingers.

What is the word, Judith asks her mother, for someone who was a twin but
is no longer a twin?
   Her  mother, dipping  a folded, doubled  wick  into heated tallow,  pauses
but doesn’t turn around.
   If  you were a wife, Judith continues, and your husband dies, then you are
a widow. And if  its parents die, a child becomes an orphan. But what is the
word for what I am?
   I  don’t know, her mother says.
   Judith  watches the liquid slide  off  the ends of the wicks,  into the bowl
below.
   Maybe there isn’t one, she suggests.
   Maybe not, says her mother.

Agnes is   upstairs. She  is  sitting   at  the  desk where  Hamnet  kept  his
collection of pebbles in four pots. He liked to tip  them out periodically and
sort them in different ways. She is peering into each pot, observing that the
last time he arranged them, he did so by colour, not size and—
   She looks  up to  see her daughters standing before her. Susanna has a
basket in one hand, a knife in the other. Judith stands behind her, holding a
second basket. They are both wearing a rather severe expression.
   ‘It  is time,’  Susanna says, ‘to gather rosehips.’
   It   is something  they do  every year,  at this  time,  just  as summer tips
towards autumn, scouring the hedgerows, filling their baskets with the hips
that swell and grow  in the wake of  the petals. She has taught them, these
daughters of hers, how to find the best ones, to split them with  a knife,  to
boil them up, to  make a syrup for coughs and chest colds, to see them all
through the winter.
   This year, though, the hips’ ripeness and their brazen colour are an insult,
as are the blackberries turning purple, the elder tree’s darkening berries.
   Agnes’s  hands, curled around the  pebble pots, feel  enfeebled, useless.
She doesn’t think she is able to grip the knife, to grasp the thorned stems, to

216
pluck the waxy-skinned hips.  The idea of  harvesting them, bringing them
home, stripping off their leaves and stems, then boiling them over a fire: she
doesn’t think she can do that at all.  She would rather lie  down in  her bed
and pull the blankets over her head.
   ‘Come,’  says Susanna.
   ‘Please, Mamma,’ says Judith.
   Her daughters press their hands to her face, to her arms; they haul her to
her feet; they lead  her down the  stairs, out into  the street, talking  all the
while of the place they have seen, filled with rosehips, they tell her, simply
filled. She must come with them, they say; they will show her the way.

The hedgerows are constellations, studded with fire-red hips.

When they were first married, he took her out one night into the street and it
was passing strange, to be there, the place so quiet, so black, so empty.
   Look  up,  he had said to her, standing behind  her and putting  his arms
around her, his hands coming to rest on the curve of her stomach. She leant
back her head so that it lay propped on his shoulder.
   Balanced on  the  tops of  the  houses was a sky  scattered with  jewels,
pierced with silver holes. He had whispered into her ear names and stories,
his finger outstretched, pulling shapes and people and animals and families
out of the stars.
   Constellations, he had said. That was the word.
   The baby that was Susanna turning over in her belly, as if listening.

Judith’s father writes to  say that business is good, that he sends his love,
that he won’t be home until after winter because the roads are bad.
   Susanna reads the letter aloud.
   His  company are having a great success with a new comedy. They took it
to the Palace and the word was that the Queen was much diverted by it. The
river in London is frozen over. He is looking  to buy more land in Stratford,
she finishes. He has been to the wedding of his  friend Condell;  there had
been a wonderful wedding breakfast.
   There is a silence. Judith looks from her mother, to her sister, to the letter.
   A  comedy? her mother asks.

It is not easy to be alone in a house like this, Judith finds. There will always
be someone bustling in on  you, someone calling your  name, a person on

217
your heels.
   There  is a  place that was always  hers and Hamnet’s, when  they were
small, a wedge-shaped gap between the wall of the cookhouse and that of
the pig-pen: a narrow opening, just possible to squeeze yourself through, if
you  turned  sideways, and  then  a  widening   three-corner space. Room
enough for two children to sit, legs outstretched, backs to the stone wall.
   Judith  takes rushes from the floor  of  the workshop,  one by  one, hides
them in the  folds of  her skirt.  She slips  through the gap when no  one is
looking and weaves the rushes into a roof. The kittens, who  are cats now,
slink in after her, two of them, with identical striped faces and white-socked
feet.
   Then she may sit there, hands folded, and let him come, if he will.
   She sings to  herself, to the cats, to the  rush roof above her, a string  of
notes and words, toora-loora-tirra-lirra-ay-ay-ayee, sings on  and on, until
the sound finds the hollow place within her, finds it and pours into it, filling
it and filling,  but of course it will  never be full  because it has no shape and
no edge.
   The cats watch her, with their implacable green eyes.

Agnes stands in the market with four other women, a tray of honeycombs in
her  hands.  Her  stepmother,  Joan,  is  among   them.  One  of   them   is
complaining, telling of  how her son refuses to accept an apprenticeship she
and her husband have arranged for him, how he shouts if they try to talk to
him about  it,  how he  says he will   not go,  they cannot make  him. Even
when, the woman says, her eyes popping wide, his father beats him.
   Joan leans forward to  tell of  how her youngest son refuses to rise from
his bed in  the morning.  The other  women nod and  grumble. And  in  the
evening, she says, her face in a grimace, he will  not  get into it,  stamping
around the house, stirring the fire, demanding food, keeping everyone else
awake.
   Another  woman answers with a story  about how her son will  not  stack
the firewood in the way she likes, and her daughter has refused an offer of
marriage, and what is she to do with children like that?
   Fools, Agnes thinks,  you fools.  She keeps several hand-widths between
herself and her stepmother. She stares down into the repeating shapes of the
honeycomb. She would like to shrink herself down to the size of a bee and
lose herself among them.

218
‘Do  you  think,’  Judith  says to  Susanna, as they  push shirts, shifts  and
stockings under the surface of the water, ‘that  Father doesn’t come home
because of . . . my face?’
   The washhouse is hot, airless, full  of steam and soap bubbles. Susanna,
who hates laundry more than any other task, snaps, ‘What are you talking
about? He does come home. He comes home all the  time. And  what has
your face to do with anything?’
   Judith  stirs the  laundry pot,  poking at  a sleeve, a hem, a  stray cap. ‘I
mean,’ she says quietly, without looking  at her sister, ‘because I resemble
him so closely. Perhaps it is hard for Father to let his eye rest upon me.’
   Susanna is  speechless. She tries  to  say, in  her  usual  tone, don’t  be
ridiculous, what  utter nonsense. It is true, though, that  it has been a long
time since their father came to them. Not since the funeral. No one says this
aloud, however; no one mentions it. The letters come, she reads them. Her
mother keeps them on the mantel for a few days, taking them down every
now and again, when she thinks no one is watching. And then they vanish.
What she does with them after that, Susanna doesn’t know.
   She looks at her sister, looks at her carefully. She lets the laundry plunger
fall  into  the  pot, and  puts a  hand on  each of  Judith’s  small  shoulders.
‘People who don’t know you so well,’ Susanna says, examining her, ‘would
say you look the same as him. And the resemblance between you both is . . .
was . . . remarkable. It was hard to believe, at times. But we who live with
you see differences.’
   Judith looks up at her, wonderingly.
   Susanna touches  her  cheek  with   a  trembling  finger.   ‘Your   face  is
narrower than his. Your chin is smaller. And your  eyes are a lighter shade.
His were  more flecked.  He  had more  freckles than  you. Your  teeth are
straighter.’ Susanna swallows painfully. ‘Father will  know all  these things,
too.’
   ‘Do  you think so?’
   Susanna nods. ‘I  never . .  . I  never confused the two  of you.  I  always
knew which  was which,  even when you  were babies. When you used to
play those games, the two of you, swapping clothes or hats, I always knew.’
   There are tears now, sliding out of Judith’s eyes. Susanna lifts a corner of
her apron and wipes them away. She sniffs and turns back to the pot, seizing
the plunger. ‘We should get back to this. I think I hear someone coming.’

219
Agnes searches for   him.  Of  course she  does. In  the nights  and  nights  and
weeks and months  after  he dies. She  expects him.  Sits up  nights,  a blanket
around her shoulders,  a candle burning  itself  up beside her. She waits  where
his bed used to be. She seats herself  in his  father’s  chair, placed  on the very
spot he  died. She  goes out  into  the frost-gilded    yard and  stands under  the
bare plum tree and speaks aloud:  Hamnet, Hamnet,  are you there?
    Nothing.  No one.
    She cannot understand  it.  She, who  can hear the dead,  the unspoken,  the
unknown,  who  can touch  a person  and listen  to  the creep  of  disease along
the veins,  can sense the dark  velvet  press of  a tumour  on  a lung  or a liver,
can read a  person’s  eye and  heart like   some can  read a  book.  She cannot
find, cannot  locate the spirit  of  her own child.
    She waits  in  these places, she keeps  her ear tuned,  she sifts  through  the
sounds and  wants  and  disgruntlements   of   other,  noisier,  beings,   but  she
cannot  hear him,   the  only  one  she  wants  to  hear. There  is  nothing.   Just
silence.

Judith, though,  hears him in  the swish  of a broom  against the floor.  She sees
him in  the winged  dip  of a bird  over  the wall.  She finds  him  in the shake of
a pony’s   mane,  in  the   smattering  of   hail  against  the   pane, in   the  wind
reaching its  arm down  the chimney,  in  the rustle  of the rushes that  make up
her den’s roof.
    She says nothing,   of  course.  She folds  the  knowledge  into   herself.  She
closes her eyes, allows   herself to  say silently,   inside  her mind,  I  see you, I
hear you, where are you?

Susanna finds  it   hard to  be  in  the  apartment.  The  unused  pallet  propped
against the  wall.   The clothes  kept  on  the  chair,  the  empty  boots  beneath.
The pots  of his  stones that  no one is  allowed  to  touch. The  curl  of  his hair
kept on the mantel.
    She moves her comb,  her shift,  her gown  next  door. She takes up the  bed
that was once  her aunts’.  Nothing   is said.  She leaves her mother  and  sister
to their grief  and moves  in above the workshop.

Agnes  is not  the  person  she used  to  be.  She is  utterly   changed.  She can
recall  being someone  who  felt  sure of  life  and  what it  would   hold  for  her;
she had her children,  she had her  husband, she had her home.  She was able

220
to peer into people and see what would befall them. She knew how to help
them. Her feet moved over the earth with confidence and grace.
   This  person is now lost to her for ever. She is someone adrift in her life,
who doesn’t recognise it. She is unmoored, at a loss. She is someone who
weeps if she cannot find  a shoe or overboils the soup or  trips over a pot.
Small things undo her. Nothing is certain any more.

Agnes bolts her casement, closes her door. She doesn’t answer the knocks
that come in the evening or the early morning.
   If   people  stop  her  in   the  street,  with   questions  about  sores, gum
swellings, deafness, a rash on the legs, heartache, coughs, she shakes her
head and walks on.
   She lets  the herbs grow  grey  and crisp, no  longer waters her  physick
garden. The pots and jars on her shelf become covered in  a layer of  pale
dust.
   It’s  Susanna who gets a damp rag and wipes the jars, who takes down the
desiccated and useless herbs from the rafters and feeds them into the fire.
She doesn’t fetch the water herself but Agnes hears her instructing Judith to
carry a pot, once a day, to the small patch of earth, on the other side of the
henhouse, where the medicinal plants grow. Ensure all are watered, Susanna
calls  after  Judith’s  retreating  back.  Agnes  listens,  realising  that  she’s
adopting her grandmother’s voice, the one Mary uses for the serving girls.
   Susanna is the one to shred the marigold petals into vinegar, to mash and
add honey. She is the one to ensure the mixture is shaken every day.
   Judith  begins to lift   the window  latch when  people knock. She speaks
with the  person outside, standing on tiptoe to  hear them. Mamma, Judith
will  say, it is a washerwoman from down by the river. A man from  outside
town. A child  on behalf of  his mother. An old woman from  the dairy. Will
you see them?
   Susanna won’t answer the knocks, but watches and listens and gestures to
Judith if someone comes to the window.
   Agnes  refuses for  a  while.  She  shakes her head. She waves  off  her
daughters’ entreaties. She turns back to the fire. But when the old woman
from the dairy  comes for a third time,  Agnes nods. The woman comes in,
takes up her place in the big wooden chair with the worn arms, and Agnes
listens to her tales of aching joints, a phlegmy chest, a mind that skids and
slips, forgetting names, days, tasks.

221
   Agnes rises and goes to her worktable. She brings her pestle and mortar
out of the cupboard. She does not allow herself to think  that last time  she
used this it was for him; the last time she held this pestle in her fingers, felt
its cold weight, was then, just before, and how useless it was, that it did no
good. She doesn’t think these things at all, as she breaks up sharp stems of
rosemary, for blood to the head, comfrey and hyssop.
   She hands the old  dairywoman the packet. Three times a day, she tells
her: a sprinkling in hot water. Drink when cool.
   She  will  not  take  the coins  the woman  tries  to give  her,  fumblingly,
hesitatingly, but she pretends not to see the wrapped cheese left on the table,
the bowl of thick cream.
   Her  daughters show the woman out,  saying goodbye. Their  voices are
like bright  birds, taking wing,  swooping around the room and out into  the
skies.

How is it these children, these young women came from her? What relation
do they bear to the small beings she once nursed and dandled and washed?
More and more, her own life seems strange and unrecognisable to her.

Sometime past midnight, Agnes stands in the street, a shawl around her. She
was woken by footsteps, light, fast ones, with a familiar tittuping rhythm.
   She was pulled from sleep by a sense of feet approaching her window, by
a definite feeling that someone was outside. And so here she is, alone in the
street, waiting.
   ‘I’m   here,’ she says aloud, turning her head first one way, then the other.
‘Are you?’

At that very  moment her husband is sitting under the same sky, in  a skiff
rounding a bend in the river. They are travelling upstream but he can sense
that the tide is turning; the river  seems confused, almost hesitant, trying to
flow in two directions at once.
   He shivers, pulling his cloak around himself more tightly  (he will catch a
chill, he hears a voice inside his  head chide, a soft voice, a caring voice).
The sweat from earlier has cooled, sitting  uneasily and clammily between
his skin and the wool of his clothes.
   Most  of the company are asleep, stretching themselves out in the bottom
of the boat and lowering  their hats over their faces. He does not sleep; he

222
never can on these evenings, the blood still hurtling through his  veins, his
heart still  galloping, his  ears still hearing the sounds and roars and gasps
and pauses. He longs for his bed, for  the enclosed space of his room, for
that moment when his mind will  fall  silent, when his body will  realise it is
over and that sleep must come.
   He huddles into himself as he sits on the hard board of the boat, watching
the river, the sliding  by of the houses, the dip and sway of  lights on other
vessels, the shoulders of  the  boatman as  he wrestles  the craft   through
trickier currents, the dripping lift   of the oars, the white scarf of breath that
streams from his mouth.
   The Thames has thawed now (he had told them it was frozen in  his last
letter); they can reach the Palace once more. He sees, again, for a moment,
the vista  of  eyes beyond  the edge of  the  stage, beyond  the world  that
encases him and his friends, blurred by candle flames. The faces watching
him, at these moments, are colours smeared with a wet brush. Their shouts,
their applause, their  avid  expressions, their  open mouths, their  rows  of
teeth, their gazes that would drink him  up (if  they could,  but they cannot,
for he is covered, protected in a costume, like a whelk in a shell – they may
never see the real him).
   He  and his friends  have just performed a historical  play, about a long-
dead king, at the Palace. It has proved, he has found, a subject safe for him
to grapple with.  There are,  in such a  story, no pitfalls,  no  reminders, no
unstable ground to stumble upon. When he is enacting old battles, ancient
court scenes, when he is putting  words into  the mouths of  distant rulers,
there is nothing that will ambush him, tie him up and drag him back to look
on things he cannot think about (a wrapped form, a chair of empty clothes,
a woman weeping at a piggery wall, a child peeling apples in a doorway, a
curl of yellow  hair in a pot). He can manage these: histories and comedies.
He can carry  on. Only  with  them can he forget  who  he is and what  has
happened. They are safe places to stow his mind (and no one else on stage
with him, not one of the other players, his closest friends, will know that he
finds  himself  looking  out,  every  evening, over  the  watching  crowd,  in
search of  a particular  face,  a boy  with   a slightly   crooked smile  and  a
perpetually surprised expression; he scans the audience minutely, carefully,
because he still cannot fathom that his son could just have gone; he must be
somewhere; all he has to do is find him).

223
   He  covers first one eye, then the other, turning to regard the city. It  is a
game he can play. One of his eyes can only see what is at  a distance, the
other what is close by. Together they work so that he may see most things,
but separated; each eye sees only what it can: the first, far away, the second,
close up.
   Close up: the interlocking  stitches of Condell’s cape, the lapped wooden
rim of the boat, the whirlpool  drag of the oars. Far away: the frozen glitter
of stars, shattered glass on black silk, Orion forever hunting, a barge cutting
stolidly  through the water, a  group of  people crouching at  the edge of  a
wharf – a woman, with several children, one almost as tall as the mother (as
tall as Susanna now?), the smallest a baby in a cap (three, he’d had, such
pretty babies, but now there are only two).
   He  switches eyes, with a  quick movement, so that  the woman and her
children, night-fishing (so close to the water, too close, surely), are no more
than indistinct shapes, meaningless strokes of a nib.
   He yawns, his jaw cracking with a sound like a breaking nutshell. He will
write  to them,  perhaps tomorrow. If  he has time.  For  there are the  new
pages to be done, the man from across the river to see; the landlord must be
paid; there is a new boy to try out for the other has grown too tall, his voice
trembling, his beard coming in (and such a secret, private pain it is, to see a
boy growing  like  that, from  lad to  man, effortlessly, without  care, but he
would never say that, never let on to  anyone else how he avoids this boy,
never speaks to him, how he hates to look upon him).
   He  throws off  his  cloak, suddenly hot, and  shuts both eyes. The roads
will  be clear now. He knows he should go. But something holds him back,
as if his ankles are tethered. The speed of his work here – from writing  to
rehearsing to  staging and  back to  writing   again  –  is  so breathless, so
seamless, it is quite possible for three or  four months to  slip past without
him noticing.  And there is the ever-present fear that if he were to  step off
this whirling wheel, he might never be able to get on it again. He might lose
his place; he has seen it happen to others. But the magnitude, the depth of
his wife’s grief for  their son exerts a fatal pull. It is like a dangerous current
that, if he were to swim too close, might suck him in, plunge him under. He
would  never surface  again; he  must  hold  himself  separate in  order  to
survive. If he were to go under, he would drag them all with him.
   If  he keeps himself at the hub of  this life  in London,  nothing can touch
him. Here,  in this  skiff,  in  this  city, in  this  life,  he can almost  persuade

224
himself  that  if  he  were  to  return,  he  would  find   them  as they  were,
unchanged, untrammelled, three children asleep in their beds.
   He  uncovers his eyes, lifts  them  to the  jumbled roofs  of  houses, dark
shapes above the flexing, restless surface of the river.  He shuts his long-
sighted eye and stares down the city with an imperfect, watery gaze.

Susanna and her grandmother sit in the parlour, cutting up bed sheets and
hemming  them  into  washcloths.  The  afternoon  drags  by;   with   every
piercing of  the cloth  and the  easing through of  the thread, Susanna tells
herself she is a  few  seconds closer to the end of  the  day. The needle is
slippery in her fingers; the fire  is burning low; she feels slumber approach,
then back off, approach again.
   Is  this what it  feels like  to die,  to sense the nearness of something you
can’t avoid? The thought falls  into her head from  nowhere, like a drop of
wine into water, colouring her mind with its dark, spreading stain.
   She shifts in her seat, clears her throat, bends closer over her needle.
   ‘Are  you quite well?’ her grandmother asks.
   ‘Yes,  thank you,’  Susanna says, without looking  up. She wonders how
much longer they will be hemming cloths: they have been at it since midday
and there seems to be no end in sight. Her mother was here, for a while, and
Judith, too,  but her  mother disappeared next door  with  a customer who
wanted a cure for ulcers, and Judith had drifted off to do whatever it is she
does. Talk to  stones. Draw  indecipherable shapes with her  left  hand, in
chalk, on  the  floors.  Collect  the  feathers fallen  from  the  dovecote and
weave them together with string.
   Agnes steps into the room behind them.
   ‘Did  you give him a cure?’ Mary asks her.
   ‘I  did.’
   ‘And  did he pay you?’
   Without  moving her head, Susanna sees, from the corner of her eye, her
mother shrug and turn towards the window. Mary sighs and stabs her needle
through the cloth she is holding.
   Agnes  remains at the window,  one hand on  her hip.  The gown  she is
wearing is loose on her this spring, her wrists narrow, her fingernails bitten
down.
   Mary,  Susanna knows, is  of  the opinion  that  grief  is all  very  well  in
moderation, but there comes a time when it is necessary to make an effort.

225
She is of the opinion that some people make too much of things. That life
goes on.
   Susanna sews. She sews and sews. Her grandmother asks her mother,
Where is Judith, how are the serving girls getting along with the washing, is
it raining, doesn’t it seem that the days are getting longer, was it not kind of
their neighbour to return that runaway fowl?
   Agnes says nothing, just keeps on looking out of the window.
   Mary  talks on, of  the letter they received from Susanna’s father, how he
is about to take the company on tour again, that he had a chest cold – caught
from river fumes – but is now recovered.
   Agnes  gives a  sharp intake of  breath, turning  to  them, her  face alert,
strained.
   ‘Oh,’   Mary  says, putting  her  hand to  her cheek, ‘you   frightened me.
Whatever is—’
   ‘Do  you hear that?’ Agnes says.
   All  three pause, listen, their heads cocked.
   ‘Hear what?’  Mary asks, her brows beginning to knit.
   ‘That  . . .’ Agnes holds up a finger ‘. . . There! Do you hear it?’
   ‘I  hear nothing,’ Mary snaps.
   ‘A  tapping.’  Agnes strides to the fireplace, presses a hand to the chimney
breast. ‘A rustling.’ She leaves the fireplace and moves to the settle, looking
up. ‘A definite noise. Can’t you hear it?’
   Mary  allows a long pause. ‘No,’ she says. ‘It’s likely nothing more than a
jackdaw come down the chimney.’
   Agnes leaves the room.
   Susanna grips the cloth in  one hand, the needle in the other. If  she just
keeps on making stitches, over and over, of equal size, perhaps all this will
pass.

Judith is in the street. She has Edmond’s dog with her; it lies in the sun, one
paw raised up, while she weaves green ribbon into the long hair of its neck.
It looks up at her trustingly, patiently.
   The sun is hot on her skin, the light in her eyes, which is perhaps why she
doesn’t notice  the  figure  coming  down  Henley  Street: a  man, walking
towards her, hat in his hand, a sack slung on his back.
   He calls her name. She lifts her head. He waves. She is running towards
him before she even says his name to herself, and the dog is leaping along

226
beside her, thinking that this is much more fun that the ribbon game, and the
man has caught her in his arms and swung her off the ground, saying, My
little maid, my little  Jude, and she cannot catch her breath for laughing, and
then she thinks she has not seen him since—
   ‘Where  have you been?’ she is saying to him, suddenly furious, pushing
him away from  her, and somehow she is crying  now. ‘You’ve  been gone
such a long time.’
   If  he sees her anger, he doesn’t show it. He is  lifting  his sack from  the
ground, scratching the  dog behind  his ears, taking  her by  the  hand and
pulling her towards the house.
   ‘Where is everyone?’ he booms, in his biggest, loudest voice.

A dinner. His  brothers, his parents, Eliza and her husband, Agnes and the
girls all squeezed together around the table. Mary has beheaded one of the
geese, in his honour – the honking and shrieking were terrible to hear – and
now its carcass lies, dismantled and torn, between them all.
   He is  telling a story involving  an innkeeper, a horse and a millpond. His
brothers are laughing, his father is pounding the table with his fist; Edmond
is tickling   Judith,  making her  squeal; Mary  is  remonstrating with   Eliza
about something; the dog  is leaping  for  scraps thrown to  it  by  Richard,
barking in between. The story  reaches a climax – something to do with  a
gate left open, Agnes isn’t sure what – and everybody roars. And Agnes is
looking at her husband, across the table.
   There is  something about him, something different.  She cannot put her
finger on what. His hair is longer, but that’s not it.  He has a second earring
in his other ear, but that’s not it. His  skin shows signs of the sun and he is
wearing a shirt  she hasn’t seen before, with  long, trailing  cuffs.  But it  is
none of these things.
   Eliza  is talking  now and Agnes glances towards her for a moment, then
back at her husband. He is listening to whatever Eliza is saying. His fingers,
shining with   goose fat,  toy  with   a  crust on  his  plate.  How  the  goose
complained and then shrieked, Agnes thinks, and then ran  for a moment,
headless, as if sure it could get away, could change its fate. Her husband’s
face is eager as he listens to his sister; he is leaning forward slightly. He has
one arm around Judith’s chair.
   It’s  a whole year, almost, that he’s been away. Summer has come again
and it is almost the anniversary of their son’s death. She does not know how

227
this can be, but it is so.
   She stares at  him,  stares and stares. He has come back  among them,
embracing them all,  shouting  for  them, pulling   gifts  from  his  bag: hair
combs, pipes, handkerchiefs, a hank of bright  wool, a  bracelet for her, in
hammered silver, a ruby at the clasp.
   The  bracelet is finer  than anything she has ever owned. It  has intricate
circling  etchings in its  slippery surface and a raised setting for  the stone.
She cannot imagine what it  must have cost him. Or  why he would  spend
money on it, he who never wastes a penny, who has been so careful with his
purse ever since his father lost his fortune. She fiddles with  it,  spinning it
round and round, as she sits at the table, across from her husband.
   The bracelet, she realises, has something bad coming off it, like steam. It
was too cold,  at first,  gripping  her skin  with  an icy, indifferent  embrace.
Now, though, it  is too  hot, too  tight. Its  single red eye glowers  up at her
with  baleful intent.  Someone unhappy, she knows, has worn it,  someone
who dislikes or resents her. It is steeped in bad luck, bad feeling, polished
with it to a dull lustre. Whoever it used to belong to wishes her harm.
   Eliza  sits,  smiling  now, as she finishes  speaking. The dog  has settled
itself beside the open window. John is seizing the ale and refilling his cup.
   Agnes looks  at her husband and suddenly she sees it, feels it, scents it.
All  over his  body, all over  his skin,  his hair, his  face, his hands, as if  an
animal has run over him,  again and again, leaving tiny  pawmarks. He is,
Agnes realises, covered in the touches of other women.
   She looks down at her plate, at her own  hands, her own fingers, at their
roughened tips, at the whorls and loops of her fingerprints, at the knuckles
and scars and veins of them, at the nails she cannot stop herself gnawing the
minute they emerge. For a moment, she believes she may vomit.
   Grasping the bracelet, she draws it  off her wrist.  She looks at the ruby,
holds it close to  her face, wondering what  it has seen, where it has come
from, how it came into her husband’s possession. It is a deep interior red, a
drop of   frozen blood.  She  raises her eyes  and her  husband is  looking
straight at her.
   She puts the bracelet down on the table, holding his gaze. For a moment,
he seems confused. He glances at the bracelet, then at her, then back; he
half rises, as if he might speak. Then the blood rushes to his face, his neck.
He lifts a hand, as if to reach out for her, then lets it drop.
   She stands, without speaking, and leaves the room.

228
He  comes to  find   her  that  evening, just  before  sunset. She  is  out  at
Hewlands, tending  her  bees, pulling  up  weeds, cutting   the blooms  off
chamomile flowers.
   She sees him approach along the path. He has taken off his fine shirt, his
braided hat, and is wearing an old jerkin that he keeps hanging on the back
of their door.
   She  doesn’t watch  him  as he walks  towards her;  she keeps her  head
averted. Her fingers continue to pluck at the yellow-faced flowers,  picking
them, then dropping them into a woven basket at her feet.
   He stands at the end of the row of bee skeps.
   ‘I  brought you this,’ he says. He holds out a shawl in his hands.
   She turns her head to look at it for a moment, but doesn’t say anything.
   ‘In  case you were cold.’
   ‘I’m   not.’
   ‘Well,’   he says, and he places it carefully on top of the nearest skep. ‘It’s
here if you need it.’
   She  turns back  to  her  flowers.  Picks  one bloom,  two  blooms,  three
blooms, four.
   His  feet come nearer, scuffing through the grass, until he stands over her,
looking down. She can see his boots out of the corner of her eye. She finds
herself seized by a passing urge to pierce their toes. Over and over, with the
tip of  her knife,  until  the skin beneath is nicked and sore. How  he would
howl and leap about.
   ‘Comfrey?’  he says.
   She cannot think what he means, what he is talking about. How  dare he
come here and speak to her of flowers? Take your ignorance, she wants to
say to  him,  and  your  bracelets and  your  shining,  fancy  boots back  to
London and stay there. Never come back.
   He  is  gesturing,  now,  at  the flowers   in  her  basket, asking  are they
comfrey, are they violas, are they—
   ‘Chamomile,’  she manages to say, and her voice, to her ears, sounds dull
and heavy.
   ‘Ah.  Of course. Those are comfrey, are they not?’ He points at a clump of
feverfew.
   She shakes her head and she is struck by how dizzy it makes her feel, as
if the slight movement might topple her over into the grass.
   ‘No,’  she gestures with fingers stained a greenish-yellow, ‘those.’

229
   He nods vigorously, seizes a spear of lavender in his fingers, rubs it, then
lifts his hand to his nose, making exaggerated appreciation noises.
   ‘The  bees are thriving?’
   She gives a single, downward nod.
   ‘Yielding  much honey?’
   ‘We’ve  yet to find out.’
   ‘And   . .  .’  he sweeps an arm towards Hewlands  farmhouse ‘. .  .  your
brother? He is well?’
   She lifts  her face to look  at him, for  the first  time since he arrived. She
cannot continue this conversation for a single moment longer. If he says one
more thing to her  about flowers, about Hewlands, about bees, she doesn’t
know what she will do. Invert her knife into  his boots. Push him backwards
into the bee skep. Run from  him, to  Hewlands, to Bartholomew  or to the
dark green haven of the forest and refuse to come out again.
   He  holds her frank  gaze for the count of  a breath, then his eyes skitter
away.
   ‘Can’t  look me in the eye?’ she says.
   He  rubs at his chin,  sighs, lowers himself  shakily to  the ground beside
her, and holds his  head in  his hands. Agnes lets  the knife  slip  from  her
hands. She doesn’t think she can trust herself to keep holding it.
   They  sit like  that, together, but facing  away from  each other, for some
time. She will  not,  she tells herself, be the first  to  speak. Let him  decide
what should be said, since he is so skilled with words, since he is so fêted
and celebrated for his pretty speeches. She will keep her counsel. He is the
one who has caused this problem, this breach in their marriage: he can be
the one to address it.
   The  silence swells  between them; it   expands and wraps itself  around
them; it acquires shape and form and tendrils, which wave off into  the air,
like the  threads trailing from  a broken  web. She senses each breath as it
enters and leaves him, each shift as he crosses his arms, as he scratches an
elbow, as he brushes a hair from his brow.
   She stays quite still, with  her legs folded beneath her, feeling as if a fire
smoulders within her, consuming and hollowing out what  is left there. For
the first time, she feels no urge to touch him, to put her hands on him: quite
the opposite. His body seems to give off  a pressure that pushes her away,
makes her draw into herself. She cannot imagine how she will ever put her
hand where another woman’s has been. How could he have done it? How

230
could he leave, after the death of their son, and seek solace in others? How
could he return to her, with these prints on him?
   She wonders how he could  go from her to  another. She cannot imagine
another man in her bed, a different body, different skin, different voice; the
thought would sicken her. She wonders, as they sit  there, if she will   ever
touch him  again, if   perhaps they shall  always be  apart now,  if  there is
someone in London who has ensnared his heart and keeps it for her own.
She wonders how he will tell her all this, what words he will choose.
   Beside her, he clears his throat. She hears him inhale, about to speak, and
she readies herself. Here it comes.
   ‘How  often do you think of him?’  he says.
   For a moment, she is taken aback. She had been expecting an account, an
explanation, perhaps an apology, for what she knows has occurred. She was
bracing herself for him to say, We cannot go on like this, my heart belongs
to another, I shall not return again from London. Him? How often does she
think of him? She cannot think to whom he refers.
   Then she realises what he means and she turns to look at him. His face is
obscured by his folded  arms, his head hanging down.  It  is an attitude  of
abject grief, of sorrow, of such utter sadness that she almost rises to go and
put her arms around him, to comfort him. But she recalls that she may not,
she cannot.
   Instead, she  watches a swallow  swoop  down to  skim  the tops  of  the
plants, searching for insects, then lift up towards the trees. Beside them, the
trees inflate and exhale, their leaf-heavy branches shuddering in the breeze.
   ‘All    the time,’  she says. ‘He   is always  here and  yet, of  course,’  she
presses a fist against her breastbone, ‘he is not.’
   He  doesn’t reply  but  when she steals a glance  at him,  she sees he is
nodding.
   ‘I  find,’  he says, his voice still  muffled, ‘that  I am constantly wondering
where he is. Where he has gone. It is like a wheel ceaselessly turning at the
back of  my mind.  Whatever I  am  doing, wherever I  am,  I  am thinking:
Where is  he,  where  is  he? He  can’t   have just  vanished.  He  must be
somewhere. All  I have to  do  is find  him.  I  look  for  him everywhere, in
every street, in every  crowd, in  every audience. That’s what  I  am doing,
when I look out at them all: I try to find him, or a version of him.’
   Agnes  nods. The swallow  circles around  and comes back, as if  it  has
something of  importance to tell  them,  if  only  they could  understand. Its

231
cheek flashes scarlet, its head purple-blue, as it passes. Across the surface
of the  pot of  water beside her, a series of  clouds roll  by,  indifferent  and
slow.
   He says something in a subdued, hoarse voice.
   ‘What  was that?’ she says.
   He says it again.
   ‘I  didn’t  hear you.’
   ‘I   said,’ he says, lifting  his head – she sees that his face is scored with
tears, ‘that I may run mad with it. Even now, a year on.’
   ‘A  year is nothing,’  she says, picking up a fallen chamomile bloom. ‘It’s
an hour or a day. We may never stop looking for him. I don’t think I would
want to.’
   He  reaches out  across the space between them  and seizes her  hand,
crushing the flower between their palms. The dusty, pollen-heavy scent fills
the air. She tries to pull away but he holds her fast.
   ‘I  am sorry,’ he says.
   She pulls at her wrist,  trying to wrest it  from his grasp. His strength, his
insistence surprises her.
   He says her name, with a questioning lilt. ‘Did you hear me? I am sorry.’
   ‘For  what?’ she mutters, giving her arm one last, futile tug, before letting
it fall limp  in his grasp.
   ‘For  everything.’  He  sighs unevenly, shakily. ‘Will   you  never come to
live in London?’
   Agnes looks at him, this man who has imprisoned her hand, this father of
her children, and shakes her head. ‘We cannot. Judith would never survive
it. You know that.’
   ‘She might.’
   There is  a distant sound of bleating, carried  on the wind.  Both of  them
turn their heads towards it.
   ‘Would  you take that risk?’ Agnes says.
   He says nothing, but holds her hand between both of his. She twists her
hand inside his until it is facing  upwards and she grips the muscle between
his thumb and forefinger, looking  right  at him. He  gives a faint  smile but
doesn’t pull away. His eyes are wet, lashes drawn into spikes.
   She presses the muscle, presses and presses, as if she might draw juice
from it.  She senses mostly noise, at first: numerous voices, calling in loud
and soft and threatening and entreating tones. His mind is crammed with a

232
cacophony, with strife,  with   overlapping speech and cries and  yells  and
yelps and whispers, and she doesn’t know how he stands it, and there are
the other women, she can feel them, their loosened hair, their sweat-marked
handprints, and it sickens her but she keeps holding on, despite wanting to
let go, to  push him away, and there is also fear, a  great deal of fear, of  a
journey, something about water, perhaps a sea, a desire to seek a faraway
horizon, to stretch his eyes to it, and beneath all this, behind it all, she finds
something, a gap, a vacancy, an abyss, which is  dark and whistling  with
emptiness, and at the bottom of it  she finds  something she has never felt
before: his  heart,  that great,  scarlet muscle,  banging  away, frantic  and
urgent in its  constancy, inside his chest. It  feels so close,  so present, it’s
almost as if she could reach out and touch it.
   He  is still  looking  at her when  she releases her grip. Her hand nestles,
inactive, inside his.
   ‘What  did you find?’ he says to her.
   ‘Nothing,’  she replies. ‘Your heart.’
   ‘That’s  nothing?’  he  says, pretending to  be outraged. ‘Nothing?   How
could you say such a thing?’
   She smiles at him, a faint smile, but he snatches her hand to his chest.
   ‘And  it’s your heart,’ he says, ‘not mine.’

He wakes her that night  as she is dreaming of an egg, a large egg, at the
bottom of a clear stream; she is standing on a bridge, looking down at it, at
the currents, which are forced around its contours.
   The  dream is so vivid  that  it  takes her a minute to  come to, to  realise
what is happening, that her husband is gripping her tightly, his head buried
in her hair, his  arms wound about her waist, that he  is saying he is sorry,
over and over again.
   She doesn’t reply  for a while,  doesn’t respond to or return his caresses.
He cannot stop. The words flow from him, like water. Like the egg, she lies
unmoving in their currents.
   Then  she brings up a  hand to his  shoulder. She senses the hollow, the
cave, made by her palm as it rests there. He takes the other hand and presses
it to  his face; she feels the resisting spring  of his  beard, his insistent and
assertive kisses.
   He will  not be stopped, diverted; he is a man intent on one destination, on
one action. He yanks and pulls at her shift, bunching its folds and lengths in

233
his hand, swearing and blaspheming with the effort, until he has parted her
from it,  until  she is laughing at him,  then he covers her with  himself  and
will  not  let  her go;  she feels  herself as a  separate being, a body  apart,
dissolve, until she has no idea, no sense of whose skin is whose, which limb
belongs to whom, whose hair it  is in  her mouth, whose breath leaves and
enters whose lips.
   ‘I  have a proposal,’ he says afterwards, when he has shifted himself to lie
beside her.
   She has a strand of his hair between her fingers and she twists and twists
it. The knowledge  of the other women  had receded during the act, pulled
away from  her,  but  now  they  are back,  standing just  outside  the bed-
curtains, jostling  for  space, brushing their  hands and  bodies against the
fabric, sweeping their skirts on the floor.
   ‘A  marriage proposal?’ she says.
   ‘It   is,’ he says, kissing her neck, her shoulder, her chest, ‘I  fear, a little
late for that and besides – ow! My hair, woman. Do you mean to separate it
from my head?’
   ‘Perhaps.’ She gives it a further tweak. ‘You would  do well to remember
your marriage. From time to time.’
   He raises his head from her and sighs. ‘I do. I will. I do.’  He smooths the
skin of her face with his fingers. ‘Do you wish to hear my proposal or not?’
   ‘Not,’   she says. She has a perverse desire to thwart whatever it is he is
about to say. She will not let him off so easily, will not let him think  it is all
as meaningless to her as it is to him.
   ‘Well,  stop your  ears if you  don’t  want to hear it  because I’m going to
speak whether I have your permission or not. Now—’
   She begins to move her hands to her ears but he holds them fast, in one of
his.
   ‘Let  go,’ she hisses.
   ‘I  shan’t.’
   ‘Let  go, I tell you.’
   ‘I  want you to listen.’
   ‘But  I don’t want to.’
   ‘I   thought,’ he says, releasing her hands and drawing her close to him,
‘that I would buy a house.’
   She  turns to  look  at  him  but  they are  enclosed in  darkness, a thick,
absolute, impenetrable dark. ‘A house?’

234
   ‘For  you. For us.’
   ‘In  London?’
   ‘No,’   he  says impatiently,  ‘Stratford,  of  course. You  said  you would
rather stay here, with the girls.’
   ‘A  house?’ she repeats.
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘Here?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘Have  you money for a house?’
   She hears him  smile beside her, hears his lips  cleaving away  from his
teeth. He takes her hand  and kisses it  between each word. ‘I  have.  And
more besides.’
   ‘What?’  She pulls her hand away. ‘Is this true?’
   ‘It  is.’
   ‘How  can that be?’
   ‘You   know,’  he  says, flopping  back  on the  mattress, ‘it   is  always a
pleasure for me to be able to surprise you. An unaccustomed, rare pleasure.’
   ‘What  do you mean?’
   ‘I  mean,’ he says, ‘that I don’t  think you  have any idea what it is like to
be married to someone like you.’
   ‘Like  me?’
   ‘Someone who  knows everything  about you,  before you  even know it
yourself.  Someone who  can just  look   at  you  and divine   your  deepest
secrets, just with a glance. Someone who can tell what you are about to say
– and what you might not – before you say it. It is,’ he says, ‘both a joy and
a curse.’
   She shrugs. ‘None of these things I can help. I never—’
   ‘I  have money,’ he interrupts, with a whisper, his lips brushing her ear. ‘A
lot of money.’
   ‘You  have?’ She sits up in amazement. She had grasped that his business
was flourishing  but this  is  still  news to  her. She thinks  fleetingly  of  the
costly bracelet, which she has since covered with ashes and bone fragments,
wrapped in hide, and buried by the henhouse. ‘How did  you come by this
money?’
   ‘Don’t  tell  my father.’
   ‘Your  father?’ she repeats. ‘I – I won’t, of course, but—’

235
   ‘Could  you  leave this  place?’ he asks. His  hand comes to  rest on her
spine. ‘I want to take you and the girls out of  here, to lift you  all up and to
plant you somewhere else. I want you away from all . . . this . . . I want you
somewhere new. But could you leave here?’
   Agnes considers the thought. She turns it this way and that. She pictures
herself in a new house, a cottage perhaps, a room or two, somewhere on the
edge of town,  with  her  daughters. A patch  of land,  for  a garden; a  few
windows looking out over it.
   ‘He  is not here,’ she says eventually. This stills the hand on her back. She
tries to keep her voice even but the anguish leaks out of the gaps between
words. ‘I  have looked everywhere. I have waited. I  have watched. I don’t
know where he is but he isn’t here.’
   He pulls her back towards him, gently, carefully, as if she is something he
might break, and draws the blankets over her.
   ‘I  will  see to it,’ he says.

The person he asks to broker the purchase is Bartholomew. He cannot, he
writes in  a letter  to him,  ask any of  his brothers as they  might bring  his
father into it. Will  Bartholomew help him in this?
   Bartholomew  considers the letter. He  places it  on his  mantelpiece and
glances at it, now and then, as he eats his breakfast.
   Joan, agitated by  the letter’s  appearance at their door, walks back  and
forth across the room,  asking what  is in  it,  is it  from  ‘that  man’,  as she
refers to Agnes’s husband? She demands to know, it is only right. Does he
want to borrow  money? Does he? Has he come to a bad end in  London?
She always knew he would. She had him pegged for a bad sort from the day
she first laid  eyes on him.  It  still  grieves her that Agnes  threw away her
chance on a good-for-nothing like him. Is he asking to borrow money from
Bartholomew? She  hopes Bartholomew   isn’t  for   a minute   considering
lending him anything at  all. He has the farm to  think of,  and the children,
not to mention  all his  brothers and sisters. He really  should listen to  her,
Joan, on this matter. Is he listening? Is he?
   Bartholomew  continues to eat his porridge in silence, as if he can’t hear
her, his spoon dipping  and rising,  dipping  and rising.  His  wife  becomes
nervous and spills the milk, half on the floor  and half on the fire,  and Joan
scolds her, getting down on  her hands and knees to mop up  the mess. A
child starts to cry. The wife tries to fan the fire back to life.

236
   Bartholomew  pushes the remainder of his breakfast away from him. He
stands, Joan’s voice still twittering  away behind him,  like  a starling’s. He
claps his hat to his head and leaves the farmhouse.
   He  walks over the  land to the east of  Hewlands, where the ground has
become boggy of late. Then he comes back.
   His  wife, his stepmother and his children gather round him again, asking,
Is it bad news from London? Has something happened? Joan has, of course,
examined the  letter, which   has been passed from  hand  to  hand in  the
farmhouse, but neither she nor Bartholomew’s wife can read. Some of the
children can but they cannot decipher the script of their mysterious uncle.
   Bartholomew, still  ignoring  the women’s questions, takes out a sheet of
paper and a quill. Painstakingly, he dips into  the ink  and, with his  tongue
held firmly between his teeth, he writes back to his brother-in-law and says,
yes, he will help.

Several weeks later, he goes to find his sister. He looks for her first  at the
house, then at the market,  and then at  a cottage where  the baker’s wife
directs him – a small dark place on the road out by the mill.
   When Bartholomew  pushes open the door, she is applying a poultice to
the chest of an elderly man lying  on a rush mat. The room  is dim; he can
see his sister’s apron, the white  shape of her cap; he can smell  the acrid
stink  of  the clay,  the  damp of  the  dirt  floor  and  something else  – the
overripe stench of sickness.
   ‘Wait  outside,’ she says to him softly. ‘I’ll be there in a moment.’
   He  stands in the  street, slapping his gloves  against his leg.  When she
appears at his side, he begins to walk away from the door of the sick man.
   Agnes looks  at him  as they proceed towards the town;  he can feel her
reading him, assessing his mood. After a moment or two, he reaches across
and takes the basket from her  arm. A  brief  glance into it  reveals a cloth
parcel, with some kind of dried plant sticking  out of it, a bottle with  a seal,
some mushrooms and  a half-burnt   candle. He  suppresses a sigh.  ‘You
shouldn’t  go   into   places  like   that,’   he  says,  as  they   approach  the
marketplace.
   She straightens her sleeves but says nothing.
   ‘You  shouldn’t,’  he says again, knowing all the while  that he is wasting
his breath. ‘You need to look to your own health.’

237
   ‘He’s  dying,  Bartholomew,’  she says simply. ‘And  he  has no one. His
wife, his children. All  dead.’
   ‘If  he’s dying, why are you trying to cure him?’
   ‘I’m   not.’ Her eyes flash as she looks at him. ‘But I can ease his passage,
take away his pain. Isn’t that what we all deserve, in our final hour?’
   She puts out a  hand and tries to take back her basket but Bartholomew
won’t let go.
   ‘Why  are you in such an ill humour today?’ she says.
   ‘What  do you mean?’
   ‘It’s  Joan,’ she says, finally giving up her pointless struggle for the basket
and fixing him with a gimlet gaze, ‘is it not?’
   Bartholomew  inhales, moving the basket to his other hand so it is out of
Agnes’s reach, once and for all. He hasn’t come here to talk about Joan but
it was foolish of  him to think  that Agnes wouldn’t notice his  gloom. There
had been an argument over  breakfast with  his  stepmother. He has been
saving money for years to extend the farmhouse, to put on  an upper floor
and further  rooms at  the back –  he  is weary  of  sleeping in  a hall  with
endless children, a gurning stepmother and various beasts. Joan has been
obstructive about the plan from the start. This  place was good enough for
your father, she cried, as she served the porridge this morning, why isn’t it
good enough for you? Why  must you raise the thatch, take the  roof from
over our heads?
   ‘Do  you want my advice?’ Agnes asks.
   Bartholomew shrugs, his mouth set.
   ‘With  Joan, you must pretend,’ Agnes says, as they come in sight of the
first stalls of  the marketplace, ‘that what you  want isn’t  what you want at
all.’
   ‘Eh?’
   Agnes pauses to examine a row of cheeses, to greet a woman in a yellow
shawl, before walking on.
   ‘Let   her believe you’ve  changed your  mind,’  she says, as she weaves
ahead of him, in  and out  of  the market crowds. ‘That  you  don’t  want to
rebuild the  hall. That  you  think it’s  too  much bother, too  costly.’  Agnes
throws him a look  from over  her shoulder. ‘I promise you, within  a week,
she will  be saying that  she thinks the hall  has become too crowded, that
more rooms are needed, that the only  reason you aren’t building  them is
because you’re too lazy.’

238
   Bartholomew considers this as they reach the far side of the market. ‘You
think that will work?’
   Agnes  allows  him  to  catch up  with  her, so  that  they are  once again
walking side by  side. ‘Joan is  never content and she cannot rest if others
are. The only thing that pleases her is making others as unhappy as she is.
She likes company in her perpetual dissatisfaction. So hide what will make
you happy. Make her believe you want its opposite. Then all will be as you
wish. You’ll see.’
   Agnes  is just  about to turn  towards Henley Street, when  Bartholomew
catches her elbow and tucks her arm into his, easing her down a different
street, towards the Guildhall and the river.
   ‘Let  us walk this way,’ he says.
   She hesitates for  a moment, giving  him  a quizzical  look,  then silently
relents.
   They  pass by the windows of the grammar school. It is  possible to hear
the pupils chanting a lesson. A mathematical formula, a verb construction, a
verse of poetry, Bartholomew cannot tell what it  is. The noise is rhythmic,
fluting, like  the cries of distant marsh birds. When he glances at his sister,
he sees her  head is  bent,  her shoulders hunched  inwards, as  if  she  is
protecting herself from hail. The grip on his arm tells him that she wishes to
cross the street, so they do.
   ‘Your   husband,’ Bartholomew  says, as they wait  for   a horse to  pass,
‘wrote to me.’
   Agnes raises her head. ‘He did? When?’
   ‘He  instructed me to buy a house for him and—’
   ‘Why  didn’t  you tell me?’
   ‘I’m   telling you now.’
   ‘But  why didn’t  you tell me before now, before I—’
   ‘Do  you want to see it?’
   She presses her lips together. He can tell that she wants to say no, but is
simultaneously filled with curiosity.
   She opts to shrug, affecting indifference. ‘If you like.’
   ‘No,’  Bartholomew says, ‘if you like.’
   She shrugs again. ‘Perhaps another day, when—’
   Bartholomew  reaches out with  his  free hand  and points  to a  building
across the road from where they are standing. It is an enormous place, the
biggest in the town, with  a wide central doorway, three storeys stacked on

239
top of  each other, and arranged on a corner, so  that the front  of  it  faces
them, the side stretching away from them.
   Agnes follows  the direction of his pointing finger. He watches her look at
the house. He watches her glance at either side of it. He watches her frown.
   ‘Where?’  she says.
   ‘There.’
   ‘That  place?’
   ‘Yes.’
   Her  face  is  puckered with   confusion.  ‘But  which  part  of   it?  Which
rooms?’
   Bartholomew  puts down the basket he is holding and rocks back on his
heels before he says, ‘All of them.’
   ‘What  are you saying?’
   ‘The  whole house,’ he says, ‘is yours.’

The new house is a place of sound. It is never quiet. At night Agnes walks
the corridors  and  stairs and  chambers and  passageways, her feet bare,
listening out.
   In  the new house, the windows shudder in their frames. A breath of wind
turns a chimney into a flute,  blowing a long,  mournful note down  into the
hall. The click of wooden wainscots settling for the night. Dogs turning and
sighing in their baskets. The small, clawed feet of mice skittering unseen in
the walls. The thrashing of branches in the long garden at the back.
   In  the new house, Susanna sleeps at the furthest end of the corridor; she
locks her door  against her mother’s nocturnal wanderings. Judith  has the
chamber next to Agnes’s; she skims over the surface of sleep, waking often,
never quite reaching the depths. If Agnes opens the door, just the sound of
the hinges is enough to make her sit up, say, Who’s there? The cats sleep on
her blankets, one on either side of her.
   In  the new house, Agnes is able to believe that if she were to walk down
the street, across the marketplace, up Henley Street and in through the door
of the apartment, she would find them all as they were: a woman with two
daughters and a son. It would  not be  inhabited by Eliza  and her milliner
husband, not at all, but by them, as they ought to be, as they would be now.
The son would be older now, taller, broader, his voice deeper and more sure
of itself. He would be sitting at the table, his boots on a chair, and he would
be talking to  her – how he loved  to talk  – about his day at school, things

240
that the master had said, who was whipped, who was praised. He would be
sitting there and his cap would  be hanging behind the door and he would
say he was hungry and what was there to eat?
   Agnes can let  this idea suffuse her. She can hold it  within  herself, like
wrapped and hidden treasure, to  be taken out  and polished and admired
when she is alone, when she walks the new, enormous house at night.

She sees the garden as her terrain, her domain;  the house is so  large an
entity, attracting  so much  comment and  admiration and  envy, questions
about her husband and what he does, how is his business and is it true he is
often at court? People are attracted and repelled by the house, all at once.
Since her husband bought it, people have been unable to stop talking about
it. They express surprise to her face, but behind her back, she knows what is
said: how could he have done it, he always was such a useless hare-brain,
soft in  the head, his gaze up in  the clouds, where  did such money come
from, was he dealing illegally  out  there in London,  no surprise if  he was,
given what manner of a man his father was, how can money like that have
come from working in a playhouse? It’s not possible.
   Agnes has heard it all. The new house is a jam pot, pulling flies  towards
it. She will live in  it but it will  never be hers.
   Outside its back door, though, she can breathe. She plants a row of apple
trees along the high brick wall. Two pairs of pear trees on either side of the
main path, plums, elder, birch, gooseberry bushes, blush-stemmed rhubarb.
She takes a cutting from a dog-rose growing by  the river and cultivates it
against the warm wall of  the malthouse. She puts in a rowan sapling near
the back door. She fills the soil with chamomile and marigold, with  hyssop
and sage, borage and angelica, with wormwort  and feverfew. She installs
seven skeps at the furthest edge of  the  garden; on warm  July  days it  is
possible to hear the restless rumble of the bees from the house.
   She turns  the old  brewhouse into  a  room where  she dries her  plants,
where she mixes them, where people come, in through the side gate, to ask
for cures. She orders a larger brewhouse, the biggest in town, to be built at
the back of the house. She clears the old well in the courtyard. She makes a
knot garden, with box hedges in an interlocking grid, their  vacancies filled
with purple-headed lavender.

241
The father comes home to the new  house twice, sometimes three times a
year. He is home  for a  month in  the second year they live  in  the house.
There have been  food riots  in   the city,  he  tells  them, with   apprentices
marching on Southwark and pillaging shops. It is also plague season again
in London and the playhouses are shut. This is never said aloud.
   Judith notes the absence of this word during his visits. She notes that her
father loves the new house. He walks around it, with slow, lingering  steps,
looking up at  the chimneys and lintels, shutting and opening each door. If
he were a dog, his tail would be constantly wagging. He is to be seen out in
the courtyard, early in the morning, where he likes to pull up the first water
from the well and take a drink. The water here, he says, is the freshest, most
delicious he has ever tasted.
   Judith  sees, too, that for the first  few  days her mother will   not look  at
him. She steps aside if he comes close; she leaves the room if he enters.
   He  trails her, though, when he is  not shut inside his chamber, working.
Into the brewhouse, around the garden. He hooks a finger into her cuff. He
comes to stand next to her  in the  outhouse while she works, ducking  his
head to see under her cap. Judith, crouching in the chamomile path, on the
pretext of weeding, sees him pick a basket of apples and offer them, with a
smile, to her mother. Agnes takes it without a word and puts it aside.
   After  a few  days, however, there will be a kind  of thawing. Her  mother
will  permit his hand to drop to her shoulder as he passes her chair. She will
humour him, in  the garden, answering his constant enquiries as to what is
this flower,  and this,  and what is  it  used for?  She listens as, holding  an
ancient-looking book,  he compares her names for  the  plants to  those in
Latin. She will prepare a sage elixir for him, a tea of lovage and broom. She
will  carry  it up  the stairs, into  the room  where he is  bent over his  desk,
shutting the door after her. She will  take his arm when they walk  together
out in the street. Judith will hear laughter and talk from the outhouses.
   It’s  as if her mother needs London, and all that he does there, to rub off
him before she can accept him back.

Gardens don’t stand still: they are always in flux. The apple trees stretch out
their limbs until their crowns reach higher than the wall. The pear trees fruit
the first year, but not the second, then again the third. The marigolds unfold
their bright petals, unfailingly, every year, and the bees leave their skeps to
skim over  the carpet of  blooms, dipping  into  and out  of  the petals. The

242
lavender bushes in the knot garden grow leggy and woody, but Agnes will
not pull  them up; she cuts them back, saving  the stems, her hands heavy
with fragrance.
   Judith’s  cats have kittens and,  in time,  those kittens  have kittens. The
cook tries to seize them for drowning but Judith will  have none of it. Some
are  taken  to  live   at   Hewlands,  others  at  Henley   Street,  and  others
throughout the town, but even so, the garden is filled  with  cats of various
sizes and ages, all with a long, slender tail, a white ruff and leaf-green eyes,
all lithe and sinewy and strong.
   The  house has  no  mice. Even  the  cook  has to  admit  that  there are
advantages to living alongside a dynasty of cats.
   Susanna grows taller than her mother. She assumes charge of the house
keys; she wears them on a hook at her waist. She keeps the account book,
pays the servants, oversees what goes in and out of her mother’s cure trade
and the burgeoning brewing and malt  business. If  people fail  to pay, she
sends one of her uncles round to their door. She corresponds with her father
about income, investment, rent accruing from his properties, which tenants
have not paid up and which are late with payment. She advises him on how
much money to send and how much to keep in London; she lets him know
if she hears of a field or a house or a plot of land for sale. She takes it upon
herself, at her father’s bidding, to  buy furniture  for the new house: chairs,
pallets, linen  chests, wall   hangings, a  new  bed.  Her  mother, however,
refuses to give up her bed, saying it was the bed she was married in and she
will not have another, so the new, grander bed is put in the room for guests.
   Judith stays close to her mother, keeping in  her orbit, as if  proximity  to
her guarantees something. Susanna doesn’t know what. Safety? Survival?
Purpose?
   Judith weeds the garden, runs errands, tidies her mother’s workbench. If
her mother  asks her to  run  and fetch  three leaves of  bay  or  a head of
marjoram, Judith  will  know  exactly  where they  are. All   plants look  the
same to  Susanna. Judith  spends hours  with  her  cats,  grooming  them,
communicating  with    them  in   a   language  of   crooning,   high-pitched
entreaties. Every spring she has kittens to sell;  they are, she tells people,
excellent mousers. She has the kind of  face, Susanna thinks, that  people
believe: those wide-set eyes, the sweet, quick smile, the alert yet guileless
gaze.

243
   All   this activity  in  the  garden sets Susanna’s teeth on edge; she keeps
mostly to  the house. The plants that require endless weeding and tending
and watering, the infernal  bees that drone and  sting and zoom  into your
face; the callers  who arrive  and depart all  day, through  the side  gate: it
drives her to distraction.
   She  makes an effort,  once a  day, to  teach Judith her  letters. She has
promised her father that she will  do  this. Dutifully,   she calls her sister in
from the back and makes her sit in the parlour, with an old slate in front of
them. It  is a  thankless task. Judith squirms in  her  seat, stares out of the
window, refuses to use her right hand, saying it feels all  wrong, picks at a
loose thread in her hem, doesn’t listen to what Susanna is saying and, when
she does, becomes distracted halfway through  by  a man  shouting about
cakes in the street. Judith refuses to grasp the letters, to see how they merge
together into sense, wonders if there could be a trace of something Hamnet
wrote on this  slate, cannot remember from day to  day which  is an a  and
which a c, and how is she to tell the difference between a d and a b, for they
look entirely  the same to her, and how dull  it  all is,  how impossible. She
draws eyes and mouths in  all  the  gaps in  the letters,  making them  into
different creatures, some sad, some happy, some winsome. It takes a year
for Judith to reliably produce a signature: it is a squiggled initial, but upside
down and curled like a pig’s tail. Eventually, Susanna gives up.
   When she complains to their  mother, about how Judith will  not learn to
write, will  not help with  the accounts, will not take some responsibility for
the running of the house, Agnes gives a slight smile and says, Judith’s skills
are different from yours but they are skills just the same.
   Why,  Susanna thinks, stamping back inside the house, does no one see
how difficult   life  is for  her? Her father away  and never here, her brother
dead, the whole house to see to, the servants to watch. And she must take
all this  on while  living  with  two .  . . Susanna hesitates at the word ‘half-
wits’.  Her   mother  is  not  a  half-wit,   just  not   like  other  people.  Old-
fashioned. A countrywoman. Set in her ways. She lives in this place as if it
were the house she was born  in,  a single hall  surrounded by  sheep; she
behaves, still, like  the daughter of a farmer, traipsing  about the lanes and
fields, gathering weeds in  a basket, her  skirts wet  and filthy,  her  cheeks
flushed and sunburnt.
   Nobody ever considers her, Susanna thinks, as she climbs the stairs to her
chamber. Nobody ever sees her trials and tribulations. Her mother out in the

244
garden, up to her elbows  in leaf  mulch, her  father in  London, acting  out
plays that people say are extremely bawdy, and her sister somewhere in the
house, singing a winding  song of  her own  devising  in her  breathy, fluty
voice. Who  will  come to  court her, she demands of the air,  as she flings
open the door and lets it slam behind her, with a family like this? How will
she ever escape this house? Who would want to be associated with any of
them?

Agnes watches the child drop from her younger daughter, as a cloak from a
shoulder. She is taller, slender as a willow  strip, her  figure filling   out her
gowns. She loses the urge to skip, to move quickly, deftly, to skitter across a
room  or  a  yard;  she acquires the  freighted  tread  of  womanhood.  Her
features become more defined, the cheekbones rising, the nose sharpening,
the mouth turning into the mouth it needs to be.
   Agnes looks at this  face; she looks and looks. She tries to see Judith for
who she is,  for  who she will   be, but there  are moments when all  she is
asking herself is: Is this the face he would  have had, how would  this face
have been different on a boy, how would it look  with a beard, with  a male
jaw, on a strapping lad?

Night-time in  the town. A  deep, black silence lies over the streets, broken
only  by  the hollow   lilt  of   an owl,  calling   for  its  mate. A  breeze slips
invisibly, insistently  through the streets, like a burglar seeking an entrance.
It plays with  the tops of the trees, tipping them one way, then the other. It
shivers inside the church bell,  making the brass vibrate with  a single low
note. It ruffles  the feathers of the lonely owl,  sitting  on a rooftop near the
church. It trembles a loose casement a few doors along, making the people
inside turn  over in  their  beds, their  dreams intruded upon by  images of
shaking bones, of nearing footsteps, of drumming hoofs.
   A  fox  darts out from  behind an empty cart, moving sideways along the
dark and deserted street. It  pauses for  a moment,  one foot  held  off  the
ground, outside the Guildhall, near the school where Hamnet studied, and
his father before him, as if it  has heard something. Then it trots on, before
swerving left and vanishing into a gap between two houses.
   The land here was once a marsh – damp, watery, half river and half earth.
To build houses, the people had first to drain the land, then lay down a bed
of rushes and branches to buoy up the buildings, like ships on a sea. In wet

245
weather, the houses remember. They creak downwards, pulled by ancient
recall;  wainscots crack,  chimney  breasts fracture, doorways  loosen and
rupture. Nothing goes away.
   The town is quiet, its  breath held. In an hour or so, the dark will begin to
weaken, light will  rise and people will wake in  their beds, ready – or not –
to face another day. Now, though, the townspeople are asleep.
   Except for Judith. She is coming along the street, wrapped in a cloak, the
hood covering her head. She goes past the school, where the fox was until a
moment ago; she doesn’t see it but it sees her, from its hiding  place in an
alleyway. It watches her with  widened pupils, alarmed by  this unexpected
creature sharing  its  nocturnal  world,  taking   in  her  mantle,  her  quick-
stepping feet, the hurry in her gait.
   She crosses the market square quickly,  keeping close to  the buildings,
and turns into Henley Street.
   A  woman had come to see her mother in the autumn, seeking something
for her swollen knuckles and painful wrists. She was, she told Judith when
she opened the side gate to her, the midwife. Her mother seemed to know
the woman;  she gave her a  long  look,  then a  smile. She had  taken the
woman’s hands in her own,  turning them gently  over. Her  knuckles were
lumpen, purple,  disfigured.  Agnes  had wrapped  comfrey  leaves around
them, binding them with  cloth, then left  the room, saying she would fetch
some ointment.
   The  woman had placed  her bandaged hands on her lap.  She stared at
them for a moment, then spoke, without looking up.
   ‘Sometimes,’  she  had said, apparently  to  her hands, ‘I   have to  walk
through the town late at night. Babies come when they come, you see.’
   Judith nodded politely.
   The woman  smiled at her. ‘I  remember when you came. We all thought
you wouldn’t live. But here you are.’
   ‘Here I  am,’ Judith murmured.
   ‘Many   a time,’  she continued, ‘I’ve  been coming  along Henley  Street,
past the house where you were born, and I’ve seen something.’
   Judith  stared at her  for  a moment.  She wanted to  ask what,  but  also
dreaded the answer. ‘What have you seen?’ she blurted out.
   ‘Something, or perhaps I should say someone.’
   ‘Who?’  Judith asked, but she knew, she knew already.
   ‘Running,  he is.’

246
   ‘Running?’
   The old  midwife nodded. ‘From  the door of the big house to the door of
that dear little narrow one. As clear as anything. A figure, it is, running like
the wind, as if the devil himself is at its back.’
   Judith  felt her heart speed up, as if she were the one condemned to run
for eternity along Henley Street, not him.
   ‘Always   at night,’   the woman was  saying, passing one hand over  the
other. ‘Never during the day.’
   And  so Judith has come, every night since, slipping out  of the house in
the dark hours, to stand here, waiting, watching. She has said nothing of this
to her mother or Susanna. The midwife chose to tell her, and her only. It is
her secret, her connection, her twin. There are mornings when she can feel
her mother looking at her, observing her tired, drawn face, and she wonders
if  she knows. It  wouldn’t  surprise her. But  she doesn’t want  to speak to
anyone else about it, in case it never comes true, in case she can’t find him,
in case he doesn’t appear to her.
   In  the narrow house, these days, in the room where Hamnet died, shaking
and convulsing all over, the fever’s poison coursing through him, there are
many millinery   heads, all  facing  the  door,  a  crowd  of  silent,  wooden,
featureless observers. Judith watches this door; she stares and stares at it.
   Please, is what she is thinking.  Please come. Just once. Don’t leave me
here like this, alone, please. I know you took my place, but I am only half a
person without you. Let me see you, even if only for the last time.
   She cannot imagine how  it  might be, to  see him again. He would  be a
child and she is now grown, almost a woman. What would he think? Would
he recognise her now, if he were to pass her in the street, this boy who will
for ever remain a boy?
   Several streets away, the owl leaves its perch, surrendering itself to a cool
draught, its wings silently  breasting the air,  its eyes alert. To it,  the town
appears as a series of rooftops, with gullies of streets in between, a place to
be navigated. The massed leaves of trees present themselves as it flies, the
stray wisps of smoke from idle fires. It sees the progress of the fox, which is
now crossing the street; it sees a rodent, possibly a rat, traversing a yard and
disappearing down into a pit;  it  sees a man, sleeping in the doorway of a
tavern, scratching at a fleabite on his shin;  it sees coneys in a cage at the
back of someone’s house; horses standing in a paddock near the inn; and it
sees Judith, stepping into the street.

247
   She  is unaware of   the owl,  skimming  the  sky  above her. Her  breath
comes into her body in ragged, shallow bursts. She has seen something. A
flicker, a hint, a motion,  imperceptible, but there, unmistakably. It was like
the passage of a breeze through corn, like the glancing of a reflection off a
pane, when you pull the window  towards you  – that unexpected streak of
light passing through the room.
   Judith  crosses the  road, her  hood  falling  from   her head.  She stands
outside  her  former   home;  she  paces  from   its   door  to   that   of   her
grandparents. The very air  feels coalescent, charged, as it  does before a
thunderstorm. She shuts her eyes. She can feel him. She is so sure of this.
The skin on her arms and neck shrinks and she is desperate to reach out, to
touch him, to take his hand in hers, but she dares not. She listens to the roar
of her pulse, her ragged breathing and she knows, she hears, underneath her
own, another’s breathing. She does. She really does.
   She is shaking now, her head bowed, her eyes shut tight. The thought that
forms inside her head is: I miss you,  I miss you, I  would give  anything to
have you back, anything at all.
   Then it  is  over, the moment passing. The pressure drops like a curtain.
She opens her eyes, puts her hand up to  the wall  of  the house to steady
herself. He is gone, all over again.

Mary, early in  the day, opening the front door  to let  out the dogs into the
street, finds a person in front of the house, slumped and crouched, head on
knees. For a moment, she believes it is a drunkard, collapsed there during
the night.  Then she recognises the boots and hem  of her  granddaughter,
Judith.
   She fusses and clucks around her, brings the half-frozen child in, calling
for blankets and hot broth, for Lord’s sake.

Agnes is out the back, bending over her plant  beds, when the serving girl
appears, saying that her stepmother, Joan, has come to call.
   It  is  a  wild  and  stormy day, the  wind  gusting  down into  the  garden,
finding a way up and over the high walls to blast down on them all, hurling
handfuls of rain and hail, as if enraged by something they have done. Agnes
has been out there since dawn, tying the frailer plants to sticks, to buttress
them against the onslaught.

248
   She pauses, clutching the knife and twine, and peers at the girl. ‘What did
you say?’
   ‘Mistress   Joan,’ says  the girl   again, her  face  screwed up,  one hand
holding on her cap, which the wind seems determined to rip from her head,
‘is waiting in the parlour.’
   Susanna is running along the path, head down, barrelling towards them.
She is shouting something at  her mother but  the words  are lost, whirled
away, up to the skies. She gestures towards the house, first with one hand,
then the other.
   Agnes sighs, considers the situation for a moment longer, then slides the
knife into her pocket. It  will  be something to do with Bartholomew, or one
of  the children,  the farm,  these improvements  to the  hall;  Joan will   be
wanting her to intercede and Agnes will have to be firm. She doesn’t like to
get involved in  things that go  on at Hewlands. Doesn’t she have her own
house and family to see to?
   The minute she gets inside the house, Susanna starts to pluck at her cap,
at her apron, at the  hair that  has escaped its moorings. Agnes waves her
away. Susanna trails her along the passage and through the hall, whispering
that she can’t possibly  receive visitors  looking  like  that, and doesn’t she
want to  go  and  restore her  appearance, Susanna will  see to  Joan, she
promises.
   Agnes  ignores her. She  crosses the hall  with  a firm,   quick  tread and
pushes open the door.
   She is met by the sight of her stepmother, sitting very upright in Agnes’s
husband’s chair. Opposite her is Judith, who has placed herself on the floor.
There are two cats in her lap and three others circling her, lavishly rubbing
themselves along  her sides  and  back  and hands.  She is  talking,   with
uncharacteristic fluency, about the different cats and their names, their food
preferences and where they elect to sleep.
   Agnes happens to know that Joan has a particular dislike  of cats – they
steal her  breath  and make  her  itch,  she  has always  said  –  so  she is
suppressing a smile as she comes into the room.
   ‘.  . . and, most surprising of all,’  Judith is saying, ‘this one is the brother
of that  one, which you  wouldn’t  think,  would  you, if  you  saw them at a
distance, but up close, you’ll see that their eyes are exactly the same colour.
Exactly. Do you see?’

249
   ‘Mmm,’   says Joan, her hand pressed over her mouth, standing to greet
Agnes.
   The  two   women  meet  in  the  middle   of  the  room.   Joan takes  her
stepdaughter by the upper arms with a grip that is  resolute and swift. Her
eyes flutter closed as she plants a kiss on her cheek; Agnes resists the urge
to pull herself away. They ask each other how do they do, are they well, are
the families well?
   ‘I  fear,’ Joan says, as she returns to her seat, ‘I have interrupted you in . .
. some task or other?’ She looks pointedly down at Agnes’s muddied apron,
her dirt-encrusted hem.
   ‘Not   at  all,’  Agnes  replies,  taking a  seat, putting  a  hand to  Judith’s
shoulder, in passing. ‘I’ve been at work in  the garden, trying to save some
of the plants. Whatever brings you to town in such fearsome weather?’
   Joan seems momentarily wrong-footed by the question, as if  she hadn’t
been prepared to be asked. She smooths the folds of her gown, presses her
lips together. ‘A visit to a . . . a friend. A friend who is unwell.’
   ‘Oh? I  am sorry to hear that. What is the matter?’
   Joan waves her  hand. ‘It  is  but a trifle   . .  . a  mere cold on  the chest.
Nothing to be—’
   ‘I  would  gladly give your friend a tincture of pine and elder. I have some
freshly made. Very good for the lungs, especially over the winter and—’
   ‘No  need,’ Joan says hastily. ‘I thank you, but no.’ She clears her throat,
looking  around the room.  Agnes  sees her eyes light  on  the ceiling,  the
mantel, the  fire-irons,  the painted  drapes on the  walls,  which  feature  a
design of forests, leaves, dense branches punctuated by leaping deer: a gift
from her husband, who had them made up in London.  Agnes’s recent and
unexpected wealth bothers  Joan. There is  something  unbearable to  her
about the sight of her stepdaughter living in so fine a house.
   As   if  following   her  train  of   thought, Joan  says, ‘And   how  is  your
husband?’
   Agnes  regards her stepmother for a  moment, before replying:  ‘Well,  I
believe.’
   ‘The  theatre still keeps him in London?’
   Agnes laces her hands together in her lap and gives Joan a smile before
she nods.
   ‘He  writes to you often, I suppose?’

250
   Agnes  feels a slight  adjustment inside her,  a minute sensation, as if  a
small, anxious animal is turning itself around. ‘Naturally,’ she says.
   Judith  and Susanna, however, give her away. They  turn their  heads to
look  at her, quickly,  too  quickly,  like  dogs awaiting  a  signal from  their
master.
   Joan, of  course, doesn’t miss this.  Agnes sees her stepmother lick  her
lips, as if  tasting  something good, something sweet on  them. She thinks
again of what she said to Bartholomew, years ago, in the marketplace: that
Joan likes company in her perpetual dissatisfaction. How is Joan hoping to
bring her down now? What  information has she that she will  wield, like  a
sword, to   slash though  this  house,  this  room,  this  place  she and  her
daughters inhabit, trying  to live  as best they can in  the presence of such
enormous, distracting absences? What does Joan know?
   The truth is that Agnes’s husband hasn’t written for several months, save
a short letter assuring them he is well, and another, addressed to Susanna,
asking her to secure the purchase of another field. Agnes has told herself,
and the girls,  that nothing  is amiss, that he  will  be busy, that  sometimes
letters go astray on the road, that he is working hard, that he will  be home
before they know it, but still the thought has gnawed at her. Where is he and
what is he doing and why has he not written?
   Agnes crosses her fingers, burying  them in the folds  of  her apron. ‘We
heard from him a  week or so ago. He was telling  us that he is  very busy,
they are preparing a new comedy and—’
   ‘His  new play is of  course not a comedy,’ Joan cuts across her. ‘But you
knew that, I expect.’
   Agnes  is silent.  The animal  inside her  flexes itself  restlessly, starts to
scrape at her innards with its needling claws.
   ‘It’s   a tragedy,’ Joan continues, baring her teeth in  a smile. ‘And   I am
certain he will have told you the name of it. In his letters. Because of course
he would never call it that without telling  you first,  would he, without your
by-your-leave? I’m sure you’ve seen the playbill. He probably sent you one.
Everyone in  town  is talking  about  it.  My  cousin,  who came  back from
London yesterday, brought it. I’m  sure you  have one but I  carried it with
me, just the same, for you.’
   Joan stands and crosses the room, a ship in full sail. She drops a curled
paper into Agnes’s lap.

251
   Agnes eyes it,  then takes it  with  two fingers  and flattens it  against her
mud-splattered apron. For a moment, she cannot tell what she is looking at.
It is a printed page. There are many letters, so many, in rows, grouped into
words. There is her  husband’s name, at the top, and the  word ‘tragedie’.
And there, right in the middle, in the largest letters of all, is the name of her
son, her boy, the name spoken aloud in church when he was baptised, the
name on his gravestone, the name she herself gave him, shortly  after the
twins’ birth, before her husband returned to hold the babies on his lap.
   Agnes cannot understand what this means, what has happened. How can
her son’s name be on a London playbill? There has been some odd, strange
mistake. He died. This name is her son’s and he died, not four years ago. He
was a child and he would have been a man but he died. He is himself, not a
play, not a piece of paper, not something to be spoken of or  performed or
displayed. He died. Her husband knows this, Joan knows this. She cannot
understand.
   She is  aware of Judith  leaning over her shoulder, of  her saying, What,
what is  it? and of  course she cannot read the  letters, cannot string them
together to make sense to her – strange that she cannot recognise the name
of her own twin – and she is aware of Susanna holding steady the corner of
the playbill;  her own fingers  are trembling, as if  caught in  the wind from
outside, just long enough for her to  read it. Susanna tries to tweak it from
her grasp but Agnes isn’t letting go, there is no way she’s letting go, not of
that piece of paper, not of that name. Joan is looking at her, open-mouthed,
taken  aback   at   the  turn    her  visit    has   taken.  She   was  evidently
underestimating the effect of the playbill, had no idea it might produce such
a reaction. Agnes’s daughters are ushering Joan from the room, saying that
their mother isn’t quite herself, Joan should return another time, and Agnes
is able, despite the playbill, despite the name, despite everything, to hear the
false concern in Joan’s voice as she bids them all goodbye.

Agnes takes to  her  bed, for  the  first  time  in  her  life.  She  goes to  her
chamber and she lies  down and  will   not get  up, not  for  meals, not  for
callers, not for sick people who knock at the side door. She doesn’t undress
but lies there, on top of  the blankets. Light streams in through the latticed
windows,  pushing itself   into  cracks in  the  bed-curtains. She  keeps the
playbill folded between her hands.

252
   The sounds of the street outside, the noises of the house, the footsteps of
the servants coming up  and down  the corridor,  the  hushed tones of  her
daughters all reach her. It is as if she is underwater and they are all up there,
in the air, looking down on her.
   At  night,  she rises from her bed and goes outside. She sits between the
woven, rough  sides of  her  skeps. The  humming,  vibrating  noises from
within, beginning just after dawn, seem to her the most eloquent, articulate,
perfect language there is.

Susanna, scorched with rage, sits down at her desk-box with a blank sheet
of paper. How could  you? she writes to  her father. Why  would you,  how
could you not tell us?

Judith carries bowls of soup to her mother’s bed, a posy of lavender, a rose
in a vase, a basket of fresh walnuts, their shells sealed up.

The baker’s wife comes. She brings rolls, a honey cake. She affects not to
notice Agnes’s appearance, her untended hair, her etched and sleepless face.
She sits on the edge of the bed, settling her skirts around her, takes Agnes’s
hand in her warm, dry grip and says: he always was an odd one, you know
that. Agnes says nothing but stares up at the tapestry roof of her bed. More
trees, some with apples studding their branches.
   ‘Do  you  not wonder what  is in  it?’ the  baker’s wife  asks, ripping off  a
hunk of the bread and offering it to Agnes.
   ‘In  what?’ Agnes says, ignoring the bread, barely listening.
   The baker’s wife pushes the strip of bread between her own teeth, chews,
swallows, tears off another shred before answering: ‘The play.’
   Agnes looks at her, for the first time.

To London, then.
   She will  take no one with  her, not her daughters, not her friend, not her
sisters, none of her in-laws, not even Bartholomew.
   Mary  declares it  madness, says Agnes will  be attacked on the road  or
murdered in her bed at an inn along the way. Judith begins to cry at this and
Susanna tries to hush her, but looks worried all the same. John shakes his
head and tells  Agnes not  to be  a fool.  Agnes  sits at  her in-laws’  table,
composed, hands in her lap, as if she can’t hear these words.
   ‘I  will  go,’ is all she says.

253
   Bartholomew  is  sent for. He  and Agnes  take several turns around the
garden. Past the apple trees, past the espaliered pears, through the skeps,
past the marigold  beds, and round  again. Susanna and Judith and  Mary
watch from the window of Susanna’s chamber.
   Agnes’s hand is  tucked into  the crook of  her brother’s  arm. Both  their
heads are bowed. They pause, briefly, beside the brewhouse for a moment,
as if examining something on the path, then continue on their way.
   ‘She  will   listen to  him,’  says Mary,  her voice  more decisive than  she
feels. ‘He will never permit her to go.’
   Judith brings her fingers up to the watery pane of glass. How easy it is to
obliterate them both with a thumb.
   When  the  back  door  slams,  they  rush downstairs  but  there  is  only
Bartholomew in the passage, placing his hat on his head, preparing to leave.
   ‘Well?’  Mary says.
   Bartholomew lifts  his face to look at them on the stairs.
   ‘Did  you persuade her?’
   ‘Persuade her in what?’
   ‘Not  to go to London. To give up this madness.’
   Bartholomew  straightens the crown of his hat. ‘We  leave tomorrow,’ he
says. ‘I am to secure horses for us.’
   Mary  is saying, ‘I beg your pardon?’ and Judith is starting to weep again
and Susanna clasping her hands together, saying, ‘Us? You  will  go  with
her?’
   ‘I  shall.’
   The  three  women surround  him,  a  cloud  wrapping  itself  around  the
moon,   peppering   him    with     objections,   questions,   entreaties,   but
Bartholomew breaks free, steps towards the door. ‘I will see you tomorrow,
early,’ he says, then steps out into the street.

Agnes is a competent if  not committed  horsewoman. She likes the beasts
well enough but finds  being aloft a not altogether comfortable experience.
The ground rushing by makes her feel giddy; the shift and heave of another
being beneath her,  the  squeak and squeal  of  saddle leather, the  dusty,
parched scent of the mane mean she is counting down the hours she must
spend on horseback, before she reaches London.
   Bartholomew  insists that the road via Oxford  is safer and faster; a man
who trades in mutton has told  him this. They  ride through the gentle dips

254
and heights of the Chiltern  Hills,  through a rainstorm and a smattering of
hail. In  Kidlington,  her  horse becomes lame so she changes to a piebald
mare with  narrow hips  and a  flighty  way  of  high-stepping if  they  come
across a bird. They pass the night at an inn in Oxford; Agnes barely sleeps
for the sound of mice  in the walls  and the snores of someone in the room
next door.
   Towards mid-morning on the third day of riding, she sees first the smoke,
a grey cloth thrown over a hollow. There it is, she says to Bartholomew, and
he nods. As they move closer, they hear the peal of bells, catch the scent of
it –  wet vegetable, animal, lime,  some other things Agnes cannot name –
and see its vast sprawl, a broken clutter of a city, the river winding through
it, clouds pulling up threads of smoke from it.
   They  ride through  the village  of  Shepherd’s Bush, the name of  which
makes Bartholomew smile, and past the gravel pits of Kensington and over
the brook at  Maryburne. At  the Tyburn  hanging-tree, Bartholomew leans
down  from  his  saddle to  ask  the  way  to  the parish  of  St  Helen’s,  in
Bishopsgate. Several people walk by without answering him, a young man
laughs, skittering off into a doorway on bare, cut feet.
   On  towards Holborn, where the streets are narrower and blacker; Agnes
cannot believe the noise and the stench. All around are shops and yards and
taverns and crowded doorways. Traders approach them, holding out their
wares – potatoes, cakes, hard crab-apples, a bowl of chestnuts. People shout
and yell  at each other  across the street; Agnes  sees, she is sure, a man
coupling with  a woman in  a narrow gap between buildings. Further  on, a
man relieves himself  into a  ditch; Agnes  catches sight of his  appendage,
wrinkled and pale, before she averts her gaze. Young men, apprentices, she
supposes, stand outside shops, entreating passers-by to enter. Children still
with  first  teeth  are wheeling  barrows  along  the  road, calling  out  their
contents, and ancient men and women sit with gnarled carrots, shelled nuts,
loaves laid out around them.
   The  scent of  cabbage-heads and burnt hide and bread dough and filth
from the street fills  her nose as she guides her horse, both hands gripping
the reins. Bartholomew reaches over to seize the bridle, so that they won’t
become separated.
   Thoughts  begin to  cram  into  Agnes’s head  as she rides  close to  her
brother: what if we can’t find him, what if  we get lost, what if we don’t find
his lodgings by nightfall,  what shall  we do, where should we go, shall we

255
secure rooms now, why did we come, this was madness, my madness, it is
all my fault.
   When  they reach what  they believe is  his parish,  Bartholomew asks a
cake-seller to direct them  to his  lodgings. They have it  written  out,  on a
piece of  paper, but the cake-seller waves  it  away from  her, with  a  gap-
toothed smile, telling them to  go that way, then this, then straight on, then
sharp sideways past the church.
   Agnes grips  the reins of  her horse, sitting  straighter in  her saddle. She
would do anything to be able to get down, for their journey to be at an end.
Her back aches, her feet,  her hands, her shoulders. She is  thirsty, she is
hungry, and yet now she is here, now she is about to see him, she wants to
pull on  the bridle  of  her horse, turn it  around, and head directly  back to
Stratford. What had she been thinking? How can she and Bartholomew just
arrive on his doorstep? This was a terrible idea, a dreadful plan.
   ‘Bartholomew,’   she says, but he is  ahead of her, already  dismounting,
tying his horse to a post, and walking up to a door.
   She says his name again, but he doesn’t hear her because he is knocking
at the door. She feels her heart pound against her bones. What will she say
to him? What will he say to them? She can’t remember now what it was she
wanted to ask him.  She feels again for  the playbill   in her  saddlebag and
glances up at the house: three or four  storeys, with  windows uneven and
stained in places. The  street is  narrow, the houses leaning towards  each
other. A woman is propped against her doorway, staring at them with naked
curiosity. Further down, two  children are playing  a game with a length  of
rope.
   Strange to think that these people must see him every day, as he comes to
and fro, as he leaves the house in the morning. Does he exchange a word
with them? Does he ever eat at their homes?
   A  window  opens above them; Agnes and Bartholomew look  up. It  is a
girl of  nine or ten, her hair neatly parted on either side of  her sallow face,
carrying an infant on her hip.
   Bartholomew   speaks the name  of  her  husband  and the  girl   shrugs,
jiggling  the now  crying infant.  ‘Push the  door,’ she says, ‘and go  up the
stairs. He’s up in the attic.’
   Bartholomew  indicates, with a jerk of  his head, that she must go and he
will stay in the street. He takes the bridle of her horse as she slides down.

256
   The stairs are narrow and her legs tremble as she climbs, from  the long
ride or the peculiarity of it all,  she doesn’t know, but she has to haul herself
up by the rail.
   At  the top, she waits for  a moment, to catch her breath. There is a door
before her. Panelled wood with knots flowing through it.  She reaches out a
hand and taps it. She says his name. She says it again.
   Nothing.  No answer. She turns to look  down the stairs and almost goes
down them. Perhaps she doesn’t want to  see what lies beyond  this door.
Might  there be signs  of  his other  life,  his  other women? There may  be
things here she does not want to know.
   She turns back, lifts  the latch  and steps in. The room has a low  ceiling
slanting inwards at all  angles. There is  a low  bed, pushed up against the
wall, a small rug, a cupboard. She recognises a hat, left on top of a coffer,
the jerkin lying  on the bed. Under the light of the window there is a square
table, with a chair tucked beneath. The desk-box on top of it is open and she
can see a pen-case, inkwell and pen-knife. A collection of quills is lined up
next to three or  four  table-books, bound by his  hand. She recognises the
knots and stitching he favours. There is a single sheet of paper in front  of
the chair.
   She doesn’t know  what  she expected but it wasn’t  this: such austerity,
such plainness. It is a monk’s cell, a scholar’s study. There is a strong sense
in the air, to her, that no one else ever comes here, that no one else ever sees
this room. How  can the man who owns the largest house in Stratford, and
much land besides, be living here?
   Agnes touches her hand to  the jerkin,  the pillow  on the  bed. She turns
around, to take it  all  in.  She walks towards the  desk and bends over the
sheet of paper, the blood hammering at her head. At the top,  she sees the
words:
   My dear one –
   She almost rears back, as if burnt, then she sees, on the next line:
   Agnes
   There is nothing more, just four words, then a blank.
   What would  he have written to her? She presses her fingers to the empty
space on the page, as if trying  to  glean what he might  have said, had he
been able. She feels the grain of  the paper, the sun-warmed wood of  the
table; she runs her thumb across the letters forming her name, feeling  the
minute indentations of his quill.

257
   She is startled by a call,  a cry. She straightens up, lifting her hand from
the page. It is Bartholomew, shouting her name.
   She crosses the room,  she moves through  the door,  and descends the
stairs. Her brother  is waiting   for  her at the  open door. He  says that the
woman in the house over the street has told him  they won’t  find  Agnes’s
husband at home, that he won’t be back until nightfall.
   Agnes  glances over  at  the  woman,  who  is  still   leaning  against her
doorframe. She shakes her head at Agnes. ‘You won’t find him here, I tell
you. Look for  him at the playhouse, if you  want him.’  She points with her
arm. ‘Over the river. Yonder. That’s where he’ll be.’
   She ducks back inside her house and bangs the door.
   Agnes   and  Bartholomew   regard  each  other   for   a  moment.  Then
Bartholomew goes to fetch the horses.

The neighbour  in  the  doorway  is  right:  he is,  as  she predicted,  at the
playhouse.
   He is standing in the tiring  house, just behind the musicians’ gallery, at a
small opening that gives out over the whole theatre. The other actors know
this habit of his and never store their costumes or props there, never take up
the space around that window.
   They  think  he  stands there to  watch the  people as they  arrive.  They
believe he likes to assess how many are coming, how big the audience will
be, how much the takings.
   But   that  is  not  why.  To  him,   it  is   the  best place  to  be,  before  a
performance: the stage below him, the audience filling the circular  hollow
in  a   steady trickle,   and  the   other  players  behind  him,   transforming
themselves from men to sprites or princes or soldiers or ladies or monsters.
It is the only  place to be alone in such a crowd. He feels like a bird, above
the ground, resting on nothing but air. He is not  of this place but above it,
apart from it,  observing it.  It  brings to  mind,  for him,  the wind-hovering
kestrel his  wife  used to  keep, and the  way  it  would  hold itself   in  high
currents, far above the tree tops, wings outstretched, looking  down on all
around it.
   He  waits, with  both hands on the lintel.  Beneath him, far  beneath him,
people are gathering. He can hear their calls, their murmurings, the shouts,
the greetings, demands for  nuts or  sweetmeats, arguments that brew up
quickly, then die away.

258
   From  behind him comes a crash, a curse, a burst of  laughter. Someone
has tripped on  someone else’s feet. There is  a ribald  joke  about falling,
about maidenheads. More laughter. Someone else comes running up  the
stairs, asking, Has anyone seen my sword, I’ve lost my sword, which of you
whoreson dogs have taken it?
   Soon, he will  need to disrobe, to take off the clothes of daily  life,  of the
street, of ordinariness, and put on his costume. He will need to confront his
image in a glass and make it  into something else. He will   take a paste of
chalk and lime and spread it over his cheeks, his nose, his beard. Charcoal
to darken the eye sockets and the brows.  Armour to  strap to  his chest, a
helmet to slot over his head, a winding  sheet to place about his shoulders.
And then he will  wait, listening, following  the lines, until  he hears his cue,
and then he will  step out, into the light,  to inhabit the form  of another; he
will inhale; he will  say his words.
   He  cannot tell, as he stands there, whether or not this new play is good.
Sometimes, as he listens to his company speak the lines, he thinks he has
come close to what he wanted it to be; other times, he feels he has entirely
missed the mark. It is good, it is bad, it is somewhere in between. How does
a person ever tell? All he can do is inscribe strokes on a page – for weeks
and weeks, this was all he did, barely leaving his room, barely eating, never
speaking to anyone else – and hope that at least some of these arrows will
hit  their  targets. The  play,  the complete  length  of  it,  fills   his  head. It
balances there, like a laden platter on a single fingertip.  It  moves through
him – this one, more than any other he has ever written – as blood through
his veins.
   The river  is casting its frail net of  mist. He can scent it on the breeze, its
dank and weed-filled fumes wafting towards him.
   Perhaps it is  this fog, this  river-heavy air, he doesn’t know, but  the day
feels ill   to  him.  He is  filled   with  an  unease, a slight  foreboding,  as if
something is coming for him. Is it the performance? Does he feel something
will  be amiss with  it? He  frowns, thinking,  running  over in  his head any
moments that might  feel  un-rehearsed or ill-prepared.  There is  not  one.
They are ready and waiting. He knows this because he himself pushed them
through it, over and over again.
   What   is  it,   then?  Why   does  he  have  this  feeling   that  something
approaches him, that some kind of reckoning awaits him, so that he must be
constantly glancing over his shoulder?

259
   He  shivers, despite the heat and closeness of the  room. He  moves his
hands through his hair, tugs on the hoops through his ears.
   Tonight,  he decides, out of nowhere, he will return to  his room, straight
away. He will  not go  drinking  with his  friends. He will   go directly  to his
lodgings. He will light  a candle, he will sharpen a quill. He will refuse to go
to a tavern with  the rest of the company. He will  be firm.  He will  remove
their hands from his  arms, if they  try to  drag him. He  will  cross over the
river, go back to Bishopsgate and write to his wife, as he has been trying to,
for a long time. He will  not avoid the matter in hand. He will  tell her about
this play. He will tell her all. Tonight. He is certain of it.

Halfway across the bridge, Agnes thinks  she cannot go on. She isn’t sure
what she expected – a simple arch, perhaps, of wood, over some water – but
it  wasn’t  this.  London  Bridge  is  like  a  town  in   itself,  and a  noxious,
oppressive one at that. There are  houses and shops on either side, some
jutting out  over the river;  these buildings overhang the passage so that, at
times, it is  completely dark, as if  they have been plunged into  night. The
river appears to  them in  flashes, between the buildings,  and it  is  wider,
deeper, more dangerous than she had ever imagined. It flows beneath their
feet, beneath the horses’ hoofs, even now, as they make their way through
this crowd.
   From every doorway and shop, vendors call and yell at them, running up
with fabric  or bread or  beads or roasted pigs’ trotters. Bartholomew pulls
his bridle away from them, with a curt gesture. His face, when Agnes looks
at it, is as expressionless as ever, but she can tell he is as disquieted by all
this as she is.
   ‘Perhaps,’ she mutters to him, as they pass what appears to be a heap of
excrement, ‘we should have taken a boat.’
   Bartholomew  grunts. ‘Maybe, but then we might have—’  He breaks off,
the words disappearing before he can speak them. ‘Don’t   look,’  he says,
glancing upwards, then back at her.
   Agnes  widens her  eyes, keeping  them on  his  face. ‘What  is  it?’  she
whispers. ‘Is it him? Have you seen him? Is he with someone?’
   ‘No,’  Bartholomew says, stealing another glance at whatever it is. ‘It’s . .
. Never mind. Just don’t look.’
   Agnes  cannot help herself. She turns  in her  saddle and sees: drooping
grey clouds  pierced by  long poles,  shuddering in  the breeze, topped by

260
things that look, for  a moment, like stones or turnips. She squints at them.
They are blackened, ragged, oddly lumpish. They  give off,  to her, a thin,
soundless wail, like trapped animals. Whatever can they be? Then she sees
that the one nearest her seems to have a row of teeth set into it. They have
mouths, she realises, and nostrils, and pitted sockets where eyes once were.
   She lets out a cry, turns back to her brother, her hand over her mouth.
   Bartholomew shrugs. ‘I told you not to look.’

When they reach the other side of the river, Agnes leans into her saddlebag
and pulls out the playbill Joan gave her.
   There, again, is  the name of  her son and the black  letters, arranged in
their sequence, shocking as it was the first time she saw it.
   She turns it away from her, gripping it tightly  in her hand, and waves it at
the next person who comes near the flank of her horse. The person – a man
with a  pointed brushed beard and cape thrown back from his  shoulders –
indicates a side-street. Go that way, he says, then left, then left again, and
you shall see it.
   She recognises the playhouse from  her husband’s description: a  round
wooden place next  to  the  river.  She slides  from  her horse’s  back, and
Bartholomew takes the reins,  and her legs feel  as if  they  have lost their
bones somewhere along the way. The  scene around her – the  street, the
riverbank, the horses, the playhouse – seems to waver and swing, coming in
and out of focus. Bartholomew is speaking. He will, he says to her, wait for
her here; he will  not move from  this spot until  she comes back. Does she
understand? His face is  pushed up very  close to hers.  He appears to be
waiting for  some response, so Agnes nods. She steps away from him,  in
through the large doors, paying her penny.
   As  she comes through the high doorway, she is greeted by the sight  of
row upon row of faces, hundreds of them, all talking and shouting. She is in
a tall-sided enclosure, which is filling  with  people. There is a stage jutting
out into the gathering crowd, and above them all, a ceiling  of sky, a circle
containing fast-moving clouds, the shapes of birds, darting from one edge to
the next.
   Agnes slides between shoulders and bodies, men and women, someone
holding a chicken  beneath their arm, a woman with  a baby at  her breast,
half-hidden by  a shawl, a man selling  pies from  a tray. She turns  herself

261
sideways, steps between people, until she gets herself as close as she can to
the stage.
   On all  sides, bodies and elbows and arms press in. More and more people
are pouring  through  the doors.  Some on  the  ground  are gesturing  and
shouting to others in the higher balconies. The crowd thickens and heaves,
first one way,  then the next; Agnes is  pushed backwards and forward but
she keeps her footing; the trick seems to be to move with the current, rather
than resist it.  It is,  she thinks, like  standing in  a river:  you  have to bend
yourself to  its  flow,  not  fight  it.  A  group  in  the highest tier  of  seats is
making much of  the lowering  of  a length of  rope. There is  shouting and
hooting and laughter. The pie-man  ties to  its end a  laden basket and the
people above begin to  haul it  up  towards them. Several members of  the
crowd leap to snatch it, in a playful or perhaps hungry fashion; the pie-man
deals each of them a swift,  cracking blow. A  coin  is thrown down  by the
people above and the pie-man lunges to catch it. One of the men he has just
hit gets to  it  first  and the pie-man grabs him  around the throat;  the man
lands a punch on the pie-man’s chin. They go down, hard, swallowed by the
crowd, amid much cheering and noise.
   The  woman  next  to  Agnes  shrugs and grins  at  her  with  blackened,
crooked teeth. She has a small boy on  her shoulders. With one hand, the
child grips  his mother’s hair,  and with  the other, he holds what to  Agnes
looks  like   a   lamb’s  shank  bone,   gnawing  at   it   with   sated,  glazed
indifference. He  regards her with   impassive eyes, the bone between his
small, sharp teeth.
   A  sudden, blaring noise makes Agnes jump. Trumpets are sounding from
somewhere. The babble of the crowd surges and gathers into a ragged cheer.
People raise their arms; there  is a scattering  of applause, several cheers,
some piercing whistles. From behind Agnes, comes a rude noise, a curse, a
yelled exhortation to hurry up, for Lord’s sake.
   The trumpets repeat their tune, a circling refrain, the final  note stretched
and held. A hush falls over the crowd and two men walk on to the stage.
   Agnes  blinks. The  fact that  she has come to  see a play has somehow
drifted away from her. But here she is, in her husband’s playhouse, and here
is the play.
   A  pair of actors stand upon a wooden stage and speak to each other, as if
no one is watching, as if they are completely alone.

262
   She takes them in, listening, attentive. They are nervous, jittery, glancing
about themselves, gripping their swords. Who’s there? one of them shouts
to the other. Unfold yourself,  the other shouts back. More actors arrive on
the stage, all nervous, all watchful.
   The crowd around her, she cannot help but notice, is entirely still. No one
speaks. No one moves. Everyone is entirely  focused on  these actors and
what they are saying. Gone is the jostling, whistling, brawling, pie-chewing
mass and in its place a silent, awed congregation. It is as if  a magician or
sorcerer has waved his staff over the place and turned them all to stone.
   Now   that  she is  here  and  the play   has begun,  the strangeness and
detachment she felt during the journey, and while she stood in his lodgings,
rinses off her, like grime. She feels ready, she feels furious. Come on then,
she thinks. Show me what you’ve done.
   The players on the stage mouth speeches to each other. They gesture and
point and mince back and forth,  gripping  their weapons. One says a line,
then another, then  it  is  the  first’s   turn.  She watches, baffled.  She  had
expected something familiar, something about her son. What else would the
play be about? But this is people in a castle, on a battlement, debating with
each other over nothing.
   She alone, it  seems, is exempt from the sorcerer’s spell. The magic has
not touched her. She feels  like  heckling  or scoffing.  Her  husband wrote
these words, these exchanges, but what has any of this to do with their boy?
She wants to shout to the people on the stage. You, she would say, and you:
you are all  nothing, this is  nothing, compared to what  he was. Don’t  you
dare pronounce his name.
   A  great weariness seizes her. She is conscious of an ache in her legs and
hips, from the many hours on horseback, of her lack of  sleep, of the light,
which seems to sting her eyes. She hasn’t the strength or the inclination to
put up with this press of bodies around her, with these long speeches, these
floods of  words. She won’t stand here any longer. She will  leave and her
husband will never be any the wiser.
   Suddenly, the actor on stage says something about a dreaded sight, and a
realisation  creeps over  her.  What   these men  are  seeking,  discussing,
expecting is a ghost, an apparition. They want it, and yet they fear it, too, all
at the same time.
   She holds herself very still,  watching their movements, listening to their
words. She crosses her arms so that no one around her may touch or brush

263
against her, distracting her. She needs to concentrate. She doesn’t want to
miss a sound.
   When  the  ghost appears, a collective  gasp  passes over the audience.
Agnes doesn’t flinch. She stares at the ghost. It is in full  armour, the visor
of the helmet drawn  down, its form  half-hidden by  a shroud. She doesn’t
listen to the bluster and bleating of frightened men on the battlements of the
castle. She watches it through narrowed lids.
   She has her eye on that ghost: the height, that movement of the arm, hand
upturned, a particular curl of the fingers, that roll of  the shoulder. When he
raises the visor, she feels not surprise, not recognition, but a kind of hollow
confirmation. His face is painted a ghastly white, his beard made grey; he is
dressed as if for  battle, in  armour and  helmet, but she isn’t  fooled  for  a
moment. She knows exactly who is underneath that costume, that disguise.
   She thinks: Well, now. There you are. What are you up to?
   As  if   her thoughts have  been beamed to  him,  from  her mind  to  his,
through the crowds – calling out now, shouting warnings to the men on the
battlements – the ghost’s head snaps around. The helmet is open and the
eyes peer out over the heads of the audience.
   Yes, Agnes tells him, here I am. Now what?
   The  ghost leaves. It seems not to have found  whatever it  was seeking.
There is a disappointed murmur from the audience. The men onstage keep
talking,  on   and  on.  Agnes  shifts  her   feet,  raising  herself  on   tiptoe,
wondering when the ghost will return. She wants to keep him in her sights,
wants him to come back; she wants him to explain himself.
   She is  craning past the head and shoulders of a man in front  when she
accidentally treads on the toes of the woman next to  her. The woman lets
out a small yelp and lurches sideways, the child on her shoulders dropping
his lamb bone. Agnes is apologising, catching the elbow  of the woman to
steady her, and bending to retrieve the bone, when she hears a word from
the stage that  makes her  straighten up,  makes the bone  slide from   her
fingers.
   Hamlet, one of the actors said.
   She heard it, as clear and resonant as the strike of a distant bell.
   There it is again: Hamlet.
   Agnes bites her lip  until  she tastes the tang of her own blood. She grips
her hands together.

264
   They  are saying it, these men up there on the stage, passing it between
them, like a counter in a game. Hamlet, Hamlet, Hamlet. It seems to refer to
the ghost, the dead man, the departed form.
   To hear that name, out of the mouths of people she has never known and
will  never know, and used for an old dead king:  Agnes cannot understand
this. Why  would  her  husband have done it?  Why  pretend that it  means
nothing to him, just a collection of  letters? How could he thieve this name,
then strip and flense it  of  all it  embodies, discarding the very life  it  once
contained? How could he take up his pen and write it  on a page, breaking
its connection with   their son? It  makes no  sense. It pierces her  heart, it
eviscerates her, it  threatens to  sever her  from  herself,  from  him,  from
everything they had, everything they were. She thinks of those poor heads,
their bared teeth, their vulnerable necks, their frozen expressions of fear, on
the bridge, and it is as if she is one of them. She can feel the shiver of the
river, their bodiless sway and dip, their voiceless and useless regret.
   She will  go. She will leave this place. She will find  Bartholomew, mount
that exhausted horse,  ride  back  to  Stratford  and  write  a  letter  to   her
husband, saying, Don’t come home, don’t ever come back, stay in London,
we are done with  you. She has seen all she needs to see. It is just as she
feared: he has taken that most sacred and tender of names and tossed it in
among a jumble of other words, in the midst of a theatrical pageant.
   She  had thought  that  coming  here,  watching  this,  might  give  her  a
glimpse into her husband’s heart. It might  have offered her a way back to
him. She thought the name on the playbill might have been a means for him
to communicate something to her. A sign, of sorts, a signal, an outstretched
hand, a summons. As she rode to London, she had thought that perhaps now
she might understand his distance, his silence, since their son’s death. She
has the sense now that there is nothing in her husband’s heart to understand.
It is  filled  only with  this:  a wooden stage, declaiming players, memorised
speeches, adoring  crowds,  costumed  fools.   She  has  been  chasing  a
phantasm, a will-o’-the-wisp, all this time.
   She is gathering her skirts, pulling  her shawl about her, getting ready to
turn her back on her husband and his company, when her attention is drawn
by  a boy  walking   on  to  the stage.  A  boy,  she thinks,  unknotting  and
reknotting her shawl. Then, no, a man. Then, no, a lad – halfway  between
man and boy.

265
   It  is as if a whip has been snapped hard upon the skin. He has yellow hair
which stands up at the brow, a tripping, buoyant tread, an impatient toss to
his head. Agnes lets her hands fall. The shawl slips from her shoulders but
she doesn’t stoop to pick it up. She fixes her gaze upon this boy; she stares
and stares as if she may never look  away from  him. She feels the  breath
empty from her chest, feels the blood curdle in  her veins. The disc of  sky
above her seems at once to press down on her head, on all of them, like the
lid of  a cauldron. She is freezing; she is stiflingly  hot; she must leave; she
will stand here for ever, on this spot.
   When  the King addresses him as ‘Hamlet, my son,’  the words carry no
surprise for her. Of course this is who he is. Of  course. Who else would it
be? She has looked for  her  son everywhere, ceaselessly, these past four
years, and here he is.
   It  is him. It  is not him. It  is him. It  is not him. The thought swings like a
hammer through her. Her son, her Hamnet or Hamlet, is dead, buried in the
churchyard. He  died while  he  was still   a child.  He  is  now  only  white,
stripped bones in a grave.  Yet this is  him,  grown into  a near-man, as he
would be  now, had  he lived,  on  the stage, walking  with  her  son’s gait,
talking  in her  son’s voice,  speaking words written  for  him  by  her son’s
father.
   She presses a hand to either side of her head. It is too much: she isn’t sure
how to bear it, how to explain this to herself. It is too much. For a moment,
she thinks she may fall, disappear beneath this sea of heads and bodies, to
lie on the compacted earth, to be trampled under a hundred feet.
   But  then the ghost returns and the boy Hamlet is speaking with it:  he is
terrified,  he is  furious,  he is  distraught,  and Agnes  is filled   by  an old,
familiar  urge, like  water gushing into  a dry  streambed. She wants to lay
hands on that boy; she wants to fold him in her arms, comfort and console
him – she has to, if it is the last thing she does.
   The  young  Hamlet on  stage is  listening  as old  Hamlet,  the ghost,  is
telling a story about how he died, a poison coursing through his body, ‘like
quicksilver’,  and how like  her Hamnet he listens. The very same lean and
tilt of the head, the gesture of pressing a knuckle to the mouth when hearing
something he doesn’t immediately comprehend. How can it be? She doesn’t
understand it, she doesn’t understand any of it.  How  can this player, this
young man, know  how to  be her Hamnet when he  never saw or met  the
boy?

266
   The knowledge settles on her like  a fine covering  of rain, as she moves
towards the players,  threading her  way through  the packed  crowds: her
husband has pulled  off   a manner  of  alchemy. He  has  found  this  boy,
instructed him, shown him, how to speak, how to stand, how to lift his chin,
like this, like  that. He has rehearsed and primed and prepared him. He has
written  words for  him  to  speak and to  hear. She tries  to  imagine these
rehearsals, how  her  husband could  have  schooled him   so  exactly,  so
precisely, and how it might have felt when the boy got it right, when he first
got the walk, that heartbreaking turn of the head. Did  her husband have to
say, Make sure your doublet  is undone, with  the ties  hanging down, and
your boots should be scuffed, and now wet your hair so it stands up, just so?
   Hamlet, here, on this stage, is two people, the young man, alive, and the
father, dead. He is both alive and dead. Her husband has brought him back
to life, in the only way he can. As the ghost talks, she sees that her husband,
in writing  this, in  taking the role of the ghost, has changed places with his
son. He has taken his son’s death and made it his own; he has put himself in
death’s clutches, resurrecting the boy in his place. ‘O horrible! O  horrible!
Most horrible!’  murmurs her husband’s ghoulish voice, recalling the agony
of his death. He has, Agnes sees, done what any father would wish to do, to
exchange his child’s suffering for his own, to take his place, to offer himself
up in his child’s stead so that the boy might live.
   She will  say all this  to her husband, later, after the play has ended, after
the final silence has fallen, after the dead have sprung up to take their places
in the line of players at the edge of the stage. After her husband and the boy,
their hands joined, bow and bow, facing  into the storm  of applause. After
the stage is left deserted, no longer a battlement, no longer a graveyard, no
longer a castle. After he has come to find her, forcing his  way through the
crowds, his face still streaked with traces of paste. After he has taken her by
the hand and held her against the buckles and leather of his armour. After
they have stood together in the open circle of the playhouse, until it was as
empty as the sky above it.
   For  now, she is right at the front  of the crowd,  at the edge of the stage;
she is gripping its wooden lip in both hands. An arm’s length away, perhaps
two, is Hamlet,  her Hamlet, as he might have been, had he lived,  and the
ghost, who has her husband’s hands, her husband’s beard, who speaks in her
husband’s voice.

267
    She stretches out  a hand, as if  to  acknowledge  them,  as if  to  feel the  air
between the  three  of  them,  as if  wishing   to  pierce  the  boundary  between
audience and players, between real  life  and play.
    The ghost turns  his head towards  her, as he prepares to exit  the scene. He
is looking  straight  at her, meeting her gaze, as he speaks his final  words:
    ‘Remember  me.’

268
                                         Author’s          Note







           his is a work of  fiction,  inspired by the short life of  a boy who died
in Stratford,  Warwickshire,  in  the summer  of  1596. I  have tried,  where
possible, to stick to the scant historical facts known about the real Hamnet
and his family, but a few details – names, in particular – have been altered
or elided over.
   Most  people will  know his mother as ‘Anne’  but she was named by her
father, Richard Hathaway, in his will, as ‘Agnes’ and I decided to follow his
example. Some believe  that Joan Hathaway  was Agnes’s  mother, while
others argue she was her stepmother; there is little evidence to support or
discredit either theory.
   Hamnet’s sole surviving  paternal aunt was called not Eliza but  Joan (as
was the eldest sister who predeceased her); I took the liberty of changing it
because the doubling up of names, while common in parish records of the
time, can be confusing for readers of a novel.
   There were  guides at Shakespeare’s Birthplace Trust who told  me that
Hamnet, Judith and Susanna grew up in their grandparents’ house in Henley
Street; others  seemed certain  that  they  would  have  lived  in   the  little
adjoining property. Either way, the two households would have been closely
linked but I chose to opt for the latter.
   Lastly, it  is not known why Hamnet Shakespeare died: his burial is listed
but not the cause of his death. The Black Death or ‘pestilence’, as it would
have been known in  the late sixteenth century, is  not mentioned once by
Shakespeare, in any of his plays or poetry. I have always wondered about
this absence and its possible significance; this novel is the result of my idle
speculation.

269
                                  Acknowledgements





Thank you, Mary-Anne Harrington.
   Thank you, Victoria Hobbs.
   Thank you, Jordan Pavlin.
   Thank you, Georgina Moore.
   Thank  you, Hazel  Orme, Yeti Lambregts, Amy  Perkins, Vicky   Abbott,
and all at Tinder Press.
   Thank you  to the staff at Shakespeare’s Birthplace Trust, and the guides
at Holy   Trinity   Church,  Stratford,  who  were  unfailingly   generous and
patient in the face of numerous questions.
   Thank you, Bridget O’Farrell,  for the loan of a kitchen table.
   Thank you, Charlotte Mendelson and Jules Bradbury, for herbal and plant
advice.
   The  following  books were  invaluable during  the writing  of  this  novel:
The Herball or General Historie of Plantes by John Gerard, 1597 (arranged
by  Marcus  Woodward, ©   Bodley  Head,  1927);  Shakespeare’s Restless
World by Neil  McGregor (Allen  Lane, 2012); A Shakespeare Botanical by
Margaret Willes   (Bodleian  Library,  2015);  The  Book  of  Faulconrie  or
Hauking  by George  Turberville  (London,  1575);  Shakespeare’s Wife by
Germaine Greer (Bloomsbury, 2007); Shakespeare by Bill Bryson (Harper
Press, 2007); Shakespeare: The Biography  by   Peter Ackroyd  (Vintage,
2006); How  To Be a Tudor  by Ruth  Goodman (Penguin, 2015); 1599:  A
Year in the Life of William  Shakespeare by James Shapiro (Faber & Faber,
2005);        and         the         website         Shakespeare       Documented,
shakespearedocumented.folger.edu/
   Special thanks are due to Mr Henderson, in whose English class, in 1989,
I first heard about the existence of Hamnet. I hope he will rate this book as
‘not bad’.
   Thank you, SS, IZ and JA.

270
And thank you, Will Sutcliffe,  for everything.

271
You are invited to  join us behind  the scenes at Tinder Press













                  To meet our authors, browse our books
                   and discover exclusive content on our
                                     blog visit us at


                       www.tinderpress.co.uk



              For the latest news and views from the team
                                Follow us on Twitter

                                    @TinderPress

272
                                      Table     of   Contents

Title Page
Copyright Page
Contents
About the Author
Praise
Also By Maggie O’Farrell
About the Book
Dedication
Historical note
Epigraph
I
               A boy is . . .
               If you were . . .
               Hamnet climbs the . . .
               There is suddenly . . .
               Hamnet starts awake, . . .
               Eliza says to . . .
               Agnes moves across . . .
               It is past . . .
               Three heavy knocks . . .
               On a morning . . .
               For the pestilence . . .
               On an afternoon . . .
               Agnes is sitting . . .
               Susanna, shortly before . . .
               Eliza’s letter is . . .
               Towards the end . . .
               Agnes startles awake, . . .
II
               A room. Long . . .
Author’s Note
Acknowledgements

