2
ALSO BY JAMES  MCBRIDE

         The Color of Water
        Miracle  at St. Anna
            Song Yet Sung
        The Good Lord Bird
         Kill ’Em and Leave
           Five-Carat Soul

4
                                                                   RIVERHEAD BOOKS
                                              An  imprint  of Penguin Random House LLC
                                                            penguinrandomhouse.com



                                                   Copyright  ©  2020 by James McBride
   Penguin supports copyright.  Copyright  fuels  creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free
speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying  an authorized edition  of this book  and for
   complying  with  copyright  laws by  not reproducing, scanning, or  distributing  any part of it  in any
   form without  permission.  You are supporting writers  and allowing  Penguin to continue to  publish
                                                               books for  every reader.

                                       Library   of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication   Data

                                                  Names: McBride,  James, 1957– author.
                                       Title:  Deacon King  Kong : a novel /  James McBride.
                                          Description:  New York  : Riverhead Books, 2020.
       Identifiers:  LCCN  2019045146 (print)  | LCCN  2019045147 (ebook) | ISBN  9780735216723
                                              (hardcover) | ISBN  9780735216747 (ebook)
Classification:   LCC PS3613.C28 D43  2020 (print)  | LCC PS3613.C28 (ebook)  | DDC 813/.6—dc23
                                     LC record  available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019045146
                               LC  ebook record available  at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019045147

      This is a work  of fiction.  Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the
 author’s  imagination  or are used fictitiously,  and any resemblance to actual persons, living  or dead,
                             businesses, companies, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

                                                      Jacket design and art: Jaya Miceli

                                                                 pid_prh_5.5.0_c0_r0

5
For God’s SeoSle—all of ’em

6
                                CONTENTS



  Also by James McBride
  Title Page
  CoSyright
  Dedication

1. Jesus’s Cheese
2. A Dead Man
3. Jet
4. Running Off
5. The Governor
6. Bunch
7. The March  of the Ants
8. The Dig
9. Dirt
10. SouS
11. Pokeweed
12. MoMo
13. The Country  Girl
14. Rat
15. You Have No Idea What’s  Coming
16. May God Hold  You . . .
17. Harold
18. Investigation
19. Double-Crossed
20. Plant Man

7
21. New Dirt
22. 281 DelShi
23. Last Octobers
24. Sister Paul
25. Do
26. Beautiful

  Acknowledgments
  About the Author

8
                                                     11




                        JESUS’S                 CHEESE



DEACON CUFFY LAMBKIN  OF FIVE  ENDS BAPTIST CHURCH BE
dead man on a cloudy September afternoon in 1969. That’s the day the old
deacon, known as Sportcoat to his friends, marched out to the plaza of the
Causeway Housing ProMects in South Brooklyn, stuck an ancient .38 Colt in
the face of a nineteen-year-old drug dealer named Deems Clemens, and
pulled the trigger.
    There were a lot of theories floating around the proMects as to why old
Sportcoat—a wiry, laughing brown-skinned man who had coughed,
wheezed, hacked, guffawed, and drank his way through the Cause Houses
for a good part of his seventy-one years—shot the most ruthless drug dealer
the proMects had ever seen. He had no enemies. He had coached the proMects
baseball team for fourteen years. His late wife, Hettie, had been the
Christmas Club treasurer of his church. He was a peaceful man beloved by
all. So what happened?
    The morning after the shooting, the daily gathering of retired city
workers, flophouse bums, bored housewives, and e[-convicts who
congregated in the middle of the proMects at the park bench near the flagpole
to sip free coffee and salute Old Glory as it was raised to the sky had all
kinds of theories about why old Sportcoat did it.
    “Sportcoat had rheumatic fever,” declared Sister Veronica Gee, the
president of the Cause Houses Tenant Association and wife of the minister
at Five Ends Baptist Church, where Sportcoat had served for fifteen years.

9
She told the gathering that Sportcoat was planning to preach his first-ever
sermon that upcoming Friends and Family Day at Five Ends Baptist, titled
“Don’t Eat the Dressing Without Confessing.” She also threw in that the
church’s Christmas Club money was missing, “but if Sportcoat took it, it
was on account of that fever,” she noted.
    Sister T. J. Billings, known affectionately as “Bum-Bum,” head usher at
Five Ends, whose e[-husband was the only soul in that church’s storied
history to leave his wife for a man and live to tell about it (he moved to
Alaska), had her own theory. She said Sportcoat shot Deems because the
mysterious ants had returned to Building 9. “Sportcoat,” she said grimly, “is
under an evil spell. There’s a moMo about.”
    Miss Izi Cordero, vice president of the Puerto Rican Statehood Society
of the Cause Houses, who had actually been standing Must thirty feet away
when Sportcoat pointed his ancient peashooter at Deems’s skull and cut
loose, said the whole ruckus started because Sportcoat was blackmailed by
a certain “evil Spanish gangster,” and she knew e[actly who that gangster
was and planned to tell the cops all about him. Of course everybody knew
she was talking about her Dominican e[-husband, JoaTuin, who was the
only honest numbers runner in the proMects, and that she and her JoaTuin
hated each other’s guts and each had worked to get the other arrested for the
last twenty years. So there was that.
    Hot Sausage, the Cause Houses Manitor and Sportcoat’s best friend, who
raised the flag each morning and doled out free coffee care of the Cause
Houses Senior Center, told the gathering that Sportcoat shot Deems on
account of the annual baseball game between the Cause Houses and their
rival, the Watch Houses, being canceled two years before. “Sportcoat,” he
said proudly, “is the only umpire both teams allowed.”
    But it was Dominic Lefleur, the Haitian Cooking Sensation, who lived in
Sportcoat’s building, who best summed up everybody’s feelings. Dominic
had Must returned from a nine-day visit to see his mother in Port-au-Prince,
where he contracted and then passed around the usual strange Third World
virus that floored half his building, sending residents crapping and puking
and avoiding him for days—though the virus never seemed to affect him.
Dominic saw the whole stupid travesty through his bathroom window as he
was shaving. He walked into his kitchen, sat down to eat lunch with his

10
teenage daughter, who was Tuaking with a temperature of 103, and said, “I
always knew old Sportcoat would do one great thing in life.”
    The fact is, no one in the proMects really knew why Sportcoat shot Deems
—not even Sportcoat himself. The old deacon could no more e[plain why
he shot Deems than he could e[plain why the moon looked like it was made
of cheese, or why fruit flies come and go, or how the city dyed the waters of
the nearby Causeway Harbor green every St. Paddy’s Day. The night
before, he’d dreamed of his wife, Hettie, who had vanished during the great
snowstorm of 1967. Sportcoat loved to tell that story to his friends.
    “It  was a beautiful day,” he said. “The snow came down like ashes from
the sky. It was Must a big, white blanket. The proMects was so peaceful and
clean. Me and Hettie ate some crabs that night, then stood by the window
and watched the Statue of Liberty in the harbor. Then we went to sleep.
    “In  the middle of the night, she shook me woke. I opened my eyes and
seen a light floating ’round the room. It was like a little candlelight. ’Round
and ’round it went, then out the door. Hettie said, ‘That’s God’s light. I got
to fetch some moonflowers out the harbor.’ She put on her coat and
followed it outside.”
    When asked why he didn’t go to the nearby Causeway Harbor after her,
Sportcoat was incredulous. “She was following God’s light,” he said. “Plus,
the Elephant was out there.”
    He had a point. Tommy Elefante, the Elephant, was a heavyset, brooding
Italian who favored ill-fitting  suits and ran his construction and trucking
businesses out of an old railroad bo[car at the harbor pier two blocks from
the Cause Houses and Must a block from Sportcoat’s church. The Elephant
and his silent, grim Italians, who worked in the dead of night hauling God
knows what in and out of that bo[car, were a mystery. They scared the shit
out of everybody. Not even Deems, evil as he was, fooled with them.
    So Sportcoat waited till the ne[t morning to look for Hettie. It was
Sunday. He rose early. The proMect residents were still asleep and the freshly
fallen snow was largely untouched. He followed her tracks to the pier,
where they ended at the water’s edge. Sportcoat stared out over the water
and saw a raven flying high overhead. “It was beautiful,” he told his
friends. “It circled a few times, then flew high up and was gone.” He
watched the bird till it was out of sight, then trudged back through the snow
to the tiny cinder-block structure that was Five Ends Baptist Church, whose

11
small congregation was gathering for its eight a.m. service. He walked in
Must as Reverend Gee, standing at his pulpit in front of the church’s sole
source of heat, an old woodstove, was reading off the Sick and Shut-in
Prayer List.
    Sportcoat took a seat in a pew amid a few sleepy worshippers, picked up
a tiny one-sheet church program, and scrawled in a shaky hand, “Hettie,”
then handed it to the usher, Sister Gee, who was dressed in white. She
walked it up to her husband and handed it to him Must as Pastor Gee began
reading the list out loud. The list was always long, and it usually bore the
same names anyway: this one sick in Dallas, that one dying out in Queens
someplace, and of course Sister Paul, an original founder of Five Ends. She
was 102, and had been living in an old folks’ home way out in Bensonhurst
so long that only two people in the congregation actually remembered her.
In fact there was some Tuestion as to whether Sister Paul was still alive, and
there was some general noise in the congregation that maybe somebody—
like the pastor—ought to ride out there and check. “I would go,” Pastor Gee
said, “but I like my teeth.” Everybody knew the white folks in Bensonhurst
weren’t fond of the Negro. Besides, the pastor noted cheerfully, Sister
Paul’s tithes of $4.13 came by mail faithfully every month, and that was a
good sign.
    Standing at his pulpit mumbling down the Sick and Shut-in Prayer List,
Pastor Gee received the paper bearing Hettie’s name without a blink. When
he read out her name he smiled and Tuipped, “Git in your soul, brother. A
working wife is good for life!”  It  was a funny dig at Sportcoat, who hadn’t
held a steady Mob in years, while Hettie raised their only child and still
worked a Mob. Reverend Gee was a handsome, good-natured man who liked
a Moke, though at the time he was fresh off scandal himself, having recently
been spotted over at Silky’s Bar on Van Marl Street trying to convert a
female subway conductor with boobs the size of Milwaukee. He was on
thin ice with the congregation because of it, so when no one laughed, his
face grew stern and he read Hettie’s name aloud, then sang “Somebody’s
Calling My Name.” The congregation Moined in and they all sang and
prayed and Sportcoat felt better. So did Reverend Gee.
    That night Hettie still didn’t  come home. Two days later, the Elephant’s
men discovered Hettie floating near the shore at the pier, her face gently
draped with a scarf she’d worn around her neck when she left the

12
apartment. They pulled her out of the bay, wrapped her in a wool blanket,
laid her gently on a large tuft of clean, white snow near the bo[car, then
sent for Sportcoat. When he got there, they handed him a fifth of scotch
without a word, called the cops, and then vanished. The Elephant wanted no
confusion. Hettie was not one of his. Sportcoat understood.
    Hettie’s funeral was the usual death e[travaganza at Five Ends Baptist.
Pastor Gee was an hour late to the service because gout had swollen his feet
so badly he couldn’t get his church shoes on. The funeral director, old
white-haired Morris Hurly, whom everybody called Hurly Girly  behind his
back because, well . . . everybody knew Morris was . . . well, he was cheap
and talented and always two hours late with the body, but everybody knew
Hettie would look like a million  bucks, which she did. The delay gave
Pastor Gee a chance to preside over a hank between the ushers about the
flower arrangements. No one knew where to put them. Hettie had been the
one who always figured out where the flowers went, placing the geraniums
in this corner, and the roses near this pew, and the azaleas by the stained-
glass window to comfort this or that family. But today Hettie was the guest
of honor, which meant the flowers were scattered helter-skelter, Must where
the deliverymen dropped them, so it took Sister Gee, stepping in as usual, to
figure that out. Meanwhile Sister Bibb, the voluptuous church organist, who
at fifty-five  years old was thick-bodied, smooth and brown as a chocolate
candy bar, arrived in terrible shape. She was coming off her once-a-year sin
Mamboree, an all-night, two-fisted, booze-guzzling, swig-faced affair of
delicious tongue-in-groove-licking and love-smacking with her sometimes
boyfriend, Hot Sausage, until Sausage withdrew from the festivities for lack
of endurance. “Sister Bibb,” he once complained to Sportcoat, “is a grinder,
and I don’t mean organ.” She arrived with a pounding headache and a sore
shoulder from some kind of tugging from last night’s howling bliss. She sat
at her organ in a stupor, her head resting on the keys, as the congregation
wandered in. After a few minutes, she left the sanctuary and headed for the
basement ladies’ room, hoping it was empty. But she stumbled down the
stairs on the way and twisted her ankle badly. She suffered the inMury
without blasphemy or complaint, vomited last night’s revelry into the toilet
of the empty bathroom, refreshed her lipstick and checked her hair, then
returned to the sanctuary, where she played the whole service with her ankle
swollen to the size of a cantaloupe. She limped back to her apartment

13
afterward, furious and repentant, spitting venom at Hot Sausage, who had
gotten his breath back from the previous night’s tumble and now wanted
more. He followed her home like a puppy, lingering half a block behind her,
crouching behind the mulberry bushes that lined the proMects’ walkways.
Every time Sister Bibb looked over her shoulder and saw Hot Sausage’s
porkpie hat protruding over the bushes, she flew into a rage.
    “Git  gone, varmint,” she snapped. “I’m done merryin’ with you!”
    Sportcoat, however, arrived at the church in great shape, having spent the
previous night celebrating Hettie’s life with his buddy Rufus Harley, who
was from his hometown and was his second-best friend in Brooklyn after
Hot Sausage. Rufus was Manitor at the nearby Watch Houses Must a few
blocks off, and while he and Hot Sausage didn’t get along—Rufus was
from South Carolina, while Sausage hailed from Alabama—Rufus made a
special blend of white lightning known as King Kong that everyone, even
Hot Sausage, enMoyed.
    Sportcoat didn’t like the name of Rufus’s specialty and over the years
had proposed several names for it. “You could sell this stuff like hoecakes if
it weren’t named after a gorilla,” he said once. “Why not call it Nellie’s
Nightcap, or Gideon’s Sauce?” But Rufus always scoffed at the notions. “I
used to call it Sonny Liston,” he said, referring to the feared Negro
heavyweight champ whose hammer-like fists knocked opponents out cold,
“till  Muhammad Ali come along.” Sportcoat had to agree that by whatever
name, Rufus’s white lightning was the best in Brooklyn.
    The night had been long and merry with talk of their hometown of
Possum Point, and the ne[t morning Sportcoat was in fine shape, seated in
the first pew of Five Ends Baptist, smiling as the ladies in white fussed over
him and the two best singers in the choir got into a fight over the church’s
sole microphone. Church fights are normally hushed, hissy affairs, full of
Tuiet backstabbing, intrigue, and whispered gossip about bad rice and
beans. But this spat was public, the best kind. The two choir members
involved, Nanette and Sweet Corn, known as the Cousins, were both thirty-
three, beautiful, and wonderful singers. They had been raised as sisters, still
lived together, and had recently had a terrible spat about a worthless young
man from the proMects named Pudding. The results were fantastic. The two
took their rage at each other out on the music, each trying to outdo the

14
other, hollering with glorious savagery about the coming redemption of our
mighty King and Savior, Jesus the Christ of Nazareth.
    Reverend Gee, inspired by the sight of the Cousins’ lovely breasts
swelling beneath their robes as they roared, followed with a thunderous
eulogy to make up for his Moke about Hettie when she was already dead in
the harbor, which made the whole thing the best home-going service Five
Ends Baptist had seen in years.
    Sportcoat watched it all in awe, reveling in the spectacle with delight,
marveling at the Willing Workers in their white dresses and fancy hats who
scurried about and fussed over him and his son, Pudgy Fingers, who sat
ne[t to him. Pudgy Fingers, twenty-si[, blind,  and said to be half a loaf
short in his mind, had evolved from childhood fat to sweet slimness, his
etched chocolate features hidden by e[pensive dark glasses donated by
some long-forgotten social service agency worker. He ignored everything as
usual, though he didn’t eat afterward at the church meal, which wasn’t
normal for Pudgy Fingers. But Sportcoat loved it. “It was wonderful,” he
told his friends after the service. “Hettie would have loved it.”
    That night he dreamed of Hettie, and like he often did in the evenings
when she was alive, he told her the titles of sermons he planned to preach
one day, which usually amused her, since he always had the titles but never
the content: “God Bless the Cow,” and “I Thank Him for the Corn,” and
“‘Boo!’  Said the Chicken.” But that night she seemed irritated, sitting in a
chair in a purple dress, her legs crossed, listening with a frown as he talked,
so he brought her up to date on the cheery news of her funeral. He told her
how beautiful her service was, the flowers, the food, the speeches, and the
music, and how happy he was that she had received her wings and gone on
to her reward, though she could have left him a little advice about how he
could get hold of her Social Security. Didn’t she know it was a pain to stand
in line downtown at the Social Security office all day? And what about the
Christmas Club money she collected, where the members of Five Ends put
away money every week so they could buy Christmas gifts in December for
their kids? Hettie was the treasurer, but she had never said where she hid the
money.
    “Everybody asking about their Mack,” he said. “You shoulda told where
you hid it.”

15
    Hettie ignored the Tuestion as she fluffed at a wrinkled spot in her
bodice. “Stop talking to the child in me,” she said. “You been talking to the
child in me fifty-one years.”
    “Where’s the money?”
    “Check your poop hole, you drinking dog!”
    “We got some chips in there, too, y’know!”
    “We?” She smirked. “You ain’t throwed a dime in there in twenty years,
you Moy-Muice-swillin’, lazy, no-good bum!” She stood up, and Must like that
they were off, arguing like the old days, a catfight that developed into the
usual roaring, fire-breathing, ass-out brawl that continued after he awoke,
with her following  him around as usual, with her hands on her hips, tossing
zingers while he tried to walk away, snapping back responses over his
shoulder. They argued that day and the ne[t, fussing right through breakfast,
lunch, and into the ne[t day. To an outsider, Sportcoat appeared to be
talking to walls as he went about his usual duties: down into the proMects
boiler room for a Tuick snort with Hot Sausage, back up the stairs to
apartment 4G, out again to take Pudgy Fingers to where the bus picked him
up to take him to the blind people’s social center, then out to work his usual
odd Mobs, and then back home again. Wherever he went, the two of them
fussed. Or at least Sportcoat did. The neighbors could not see Hettie, of
course: they Must stared at him talking to someone nobody could see.
Sportcoat paid them no mind when they stared. Fussing with Hettie was the
most natural thing in the world to do. He’d done it for forty years.
    He couldn’t believe it. Gone was the tender, shy, sweet little thing that
giggled back in Possum Point when they slipped into the high corn of her
daddy’s garden and he poured wine down her shirt and thumbed her boobs.
Now she was all New York: insolent, mouthy, and fresh, appearing out of
nowhere at the oddest times of the day, and each time wearing a new damn
wig on her head, which, he suspected, was something she’d received from
the Lord as a gift for her life struggles. The morning he shot Deems she’d
appeared as a redhead, which startled him, and worse, she flew into a rage
when he asked, for the umpteenth time, about the Christmas Club money.
    “Woman, where’s them dollars? I got to come up with them people’s
chips.”
    “I  ain’t got to tell it.”
    “That’s stealing!”

16
    “Look  who’s talking. The cheese thief!”
    That last crack stung him. For years, the New York City Housing
Authority, a mega-mass of bloated bureaucracy, a hotbed of grift, graft,
games, payola bums, deadbeat dads, payoff racketeers, and old-time
political appointees who lorded over the Cause Houses and every other one
of New York’s forty-five  housing proMects with arrogant inefficiency, had
ine[plicably  belched forth a phenomenal gem of a gift to the Cause Houses:
free cheese. Who pushed the button, who filled out the paperwork, who
made the cheese magically appear, no one knew—not even Bum-Bum, who
made it her cause d’être for years to find out the origin of the cheese. The
assumption was it came from Housing, but nobody was stupid enough to
awaken that beast by calling downtown to ask. Why bother? The cheese
was free. It came like clockwork for years, every first Saturday of the
month, arriving like magic in the wee hours in Hot Sausage’s boiler room in
the basement of Building 17. Ten crates of it, freshly chilled in five-pound
hunks. This wasn’t plain old housing-proMects “cheese food” nor was it
some smelly, curdled, reluctant Swiss cheese material snatched from a
godforsaken bodega someplace, gathering mold in some dirty display case
while mice gnawed at it nightly, to be sold to some sucker fresh from Santo
Domingo. This was fresh, rich, heavenly, succulent, soft, creamy, kiss-my-
ass, cows-gotta-die-for-this, delightfully salty, moo-ass, good old white
folks cheese, cheese to die for, cheese to make you happy, cheese to beat the
cheese boss, cheese for the big cheese, cheese to end the world, cheese so
good it inspired a line every first Saturday of the month: mothers,
daughters, fathers, grandparents, disabled in wheelchairs, kids, relatives
from out of town, white folks from  nearby Brooklyn Heights, and even
South American workers from the garbage-processing plant on Concord
Avenue, all patiently standing in a line that stretched from the interior of
Hot Sausage’s boiler room to Building 17’s outer doorway, up the ramp to
the sidewalk, curling around the side of the building and to the plaza near
the flagpole. The unlucky ones at the end of the line were forced to
constantly watch over their shoulders for the cops—free or not, something
this good had to have an angle—while the ones near the front of the line
salivated and edged forward an[iously, hoping the supply would last,
knowing that to get within sight of the cheese and then witness the supply
run out was akin to e[periencing sudden coitus interruptus.

17
    Naturally, Sportcoat’s affinity with the very important distributor of that
item, Hot Sausage, guaranteed him a hunk no matter what the demand,
which was always good news for him and Hettie. Hettie especially loved
that cheese. So her crack about it infuriated him.
    “You ate that cheese, didn’t you?” Sportcoat said. “You ate it like a
butcher’s dog every time. Stolen or not. You liked it.”
    “It  was from Jesus.”
    That drove him wild, and he harangued her till she disappeared. Their
fights, in the weeks previous to the shooting, had become so heated he had
begun to rehearse his arguments to himself before she appeared, drinking
booze in her absence to clarify his thoughts and wipe the cobwebs out his
mind so he could lay out his reasoning clearly and show her who was boss
once she showed up, which made him seem even more bizarre to the
residents of the Cause Houses, seeing Sportcoat in the hall holding a bottle
of Rufus’s homemade King Kong in the air and saying to no one in
particular, “Who’s bringing the cheese? Jesus or me? If I’m the one
standing in line for the cheese . . . And I’m the one fetching the cheese. And
I’m the one hauling the cheese home in the rain and snow. Who’s bringing
the cheese? Jesus or me?”
    His friends e[cused it. His neighbors ignored it. His church family at
Five Ends shrugged. Big deal. So Sport was a little crazy. Everybody in the
Cause had a reason to be a little left-handed. Take Neva Ramos, the
Dominican beauty in Building 5 who poured a glass of water on the head of
any man stupid enough to stand beneath her window. Or Dub Washington
from Building 7, who slept in an old factory at Vitali Pier and got busted
every winter for shoplifting at the same Park Slope grocery store. Or Bum-
Bum, who stopped in front of the picture of the black Jesus painted on the
back wall of Five Ends each morning before work to pray aloud for the
destruction of her e[-husband, that the Lord might set his balls on fire and
they might sizzle on a frying pan like two tiny, flattened potato pancakes. It
was all e[plainable. Neva got wronged on her Mob by her boss. Dub
Washington wanted a warm Mail. Sister Bum-Bum’s husband left her for a
man. So what? Everyone had a reason to be crazy in the Cause. There was
mostly a good reason behind everything.
    Until Sportcoat shot Deems. That was different. Trying to find reason in
that was like trying to e[plain how Deems went from being a cute pain in

18
the ass and the best baseball player the proMects had ever seen to a dreadful,
poison-selling,  murderous  meathead with  all the appeal of  a cyclops. It  was
impossible.
    “If   there’s no time  limit  on fortune-cookie   predictions,  Sportcoat  might
make it,”  Bum-Bum  said.  “But  outside of  that, I  reckon he’s on the  short
list.”  She was right.  Everyone agreed. Sportcoat  was a dead man.

19
                                                     22




                                A    DEAD            MAN



OF COURSE THE FOLKS IN THE CAUSE HOUSES HAD PREDICTE
death for years. Every year in the spring, when the proMect residents would
emerge from their apartments like burrowed groundhogs to walk along the
plaza and sample whatever good air was left in the Causeway—much of it
polluted from the nearby wastewater-treatment plant—some resident would
spy Sportcoat staggering through the plaza after a night of bingeing on King
Kong rotgut at Rufus’s or playing bid whist at Silky’s Bar over on Van Marl
Street and say, “He’s done.” When he caught the flu back in ’58, which
floored half of Building 9 and gave Deacon Erskine of Mighty Hand Gospel
Tabernacle his Final Wings, Sister Bum-Bum declared, “He’s going up
yonder.” When the ambulance came to get him after his third stroke in ’62,
Ginny Rodriguez of Building 19 grumbled, “He’s finished.” That was the
same year that Miss Izi of the Puerto Rican Statehood Society won raffle
tickets to see the New York Mets at the Polo Grounds. She predicted the
Mets, who had lost 120 games that year, would win and they did, which
encouraged her to announce Sportcoat’s death two weeks later, e[plaining
that Dominic Lefleur, the Haitian Sensation, had Must arrived back from
Port-au-Prince after visiting his mother, and she actually saw Sportcoat drop
in his tracks, right in front of his apartment on the fourth floor, from the
strange virus Dominic brought back that year. “He went ‘fatty boom
bang’!” she e[claimed. Gone. Quit. Outta here. She even pointed to the
black van from the city morgue that showed up that night and hauled out a

20
body as proof, only to recant the whole bit the ne[t morning when it turned
out the body they’d claimed belonged to the Haitian Sensation’s brother El
HaMi, who had converted to Islam and broken his mother’s heart, then
collapsed of a heart attack after his first day on the Mob driving a city bus—
after trying to get on at Transit for three years, too, imagine that.
    Still, Sportcoat seemed earmarked for death. In fact, even the cheerful
souls at Five Ends Baptist—where Sportcoat served as a deacon and
president of the Five Ends chapter of the Grand Brotherhood of the
Brooklyn Elks Lodge #47, which for the grand sum of $16.75 (paid
annually, money order only please) had a standing guarantee from the head
honchos at Five Ends Baptist to “funeralize any and all Brooklyn Elks
Lodge members who need final servicing, at cost of course,” with Sportcoat
serving as honorary pallbearer—had predicted his death. “Sportcoat,” Sister
Veronica Gee of Five Ends said soberly, “is a sick man.”
    She was right. At seventy-one, Sportcoat had contracted almost every
disease known to man. He had gout. He had the piles. He had rheumatoid
arthritis, which crippled his back so bad he limped like a hunchback on
overcast days. He had a cyst on his left arm the size of a lemon, and a
hernia in his groin the size of an orange. When the hernia grew to the size
of a grapefruit, doctors recommended surgery. Sportcoat ignored them, so a
kind social worker at the local health clinic signed him up for every
alternative therapy known to man: acupuncture, magnet therapy, herbal
remedies, holistic healing, applying leeches, gait analysis, and plant
remedies with genetic variations. None of them worked.
    With each failure his health declined further and the death predictions
grew more freTuent and ominous. But not one of them came true. The fact
is, unbeknownst to the residents of the Cause, the death of Cuffy Jasper
Lambkin—which was Sportcoat’s real name—had been predicted long
before he arrived at the Cause Houses. When he was slapped to life back in
Possum Point, South Carolina, seventy-one years before, the midwife who
delivered him watched in horror as a bird flew through an open window and
fluttered over the baby’s head, then flew out again, a bad sign. She
announced, “He’s gonna be an idiot,” handed him to his mother, and
vanished, moving to Washington, DC, where she married a plumber and
never delivered another baby again.

21
    Bad luck seemed to follow the baby wherever he went. Baby Cuffy got
colic, typhoid fever, the measles, the mumps, and scarlet fever. At age two,
he swallowed everything: marbles, rocks, dirt, spoons, and once got a
kitchen ladle caught in his ear, which had to be e[tracted by a doctor over at
the university hospital in Columbia. At age three, when a young local pastor
came by to bless the baby, the child barfed green matter all over the pastor’s
clean white shirt. The pastor announced, “He’s got the devil’s
understanding,” and departed for Chicago, where he Tuit the gospel and
became a blues singer named Tampa Red and recorded the monster hit song
“Devil’s  Understanding,” before dying in anonymity flat broke and
crawling into history, immortalized in music studies and rock-and-roll
college courses the world over, idolized by white writers and music
intellectuals for his classic blues hit that was the bedrock of the forty-
million-dollar  Gospel Stam Music Publishing empire, from which neither
he nor Sportcoat ever received a dime.
    At age five, Baby Sportcoat crawled to a mirror and spit at his reflection,
a call sign to the devil, and as a result didn’t grow back teeth until he was
nine. His mother tried everything to make his back teeth grow. She dug up a
mole, cut off its feet, and hung the feet on a necklace around the baby’s
neck. She rubbed fresh rabbit brains on his gums. She stuffed snake rattles,
hog tails, and finally alligator teeth in his pockets, to no avail. She let a dog
tread on him, a sure remedy, but the dog bit him and ran off. Finally she
called an old medicine woman from the Sea Islands who cut a sprig of
green bush, talked Cuffy’s real name to it, and hung the bag upside down in
the corner of the room. When she departed she said, “Don’t say his true
name again for eight months.” The mother complied, calling him
“Sportcoat,” a term she’d overheard while pulling cotton at the farm of J. C.
Yancy of Barnwell County, where she worked shares, one of her white
bosses uttering it to refer to his shiny new green-and-white-plaid sport coat,
which he proudly wore the very afternoon he bought it, cutting a dazzling
figure atop his horse in the harsh Southern sun, his shotgun across his lap,
dozing up on his mount at the end of the cotton row while the colored
workers laughed up their sleeves and the other overseers snickered. Eight
months later she woke up and found the mouth of ten-year-old Sportcoat
full of back teeth. She sought out the medicine woman e[citedly, who came
over, e[amined Cuffy’s mouth, and said, “He’s gonna have more teeth than

22
an alligator,” whereupon the mother happily patted the boy on the head, lay
down for a nap, and e[pired.
    The boy never recovered from his mother’s death. The ache in his heart
grew to the size of a watermelon. But the medicine woman was right. He
grew enough teeth for two people. They sprouted like wildflowers.
Bicuspids, molars, liners, fat long double chompers, wide teeth in the front,
narrow teeth in the back. But there were too many of them, and they
crowded his gums and had to be pulled out, the e[tractions dutifully done
by delighted white dental students at the University of South Carolina, who
desperately needed patients to work on to obtain their degrees and thus held
Sportcoat dear, e[tracting his teeth and giving him sweet muffins and little
bottles of whiskey as payment, for he’d discovered the magic of alcohol by
then, in part to celebrate his father’s marriage to his stepmother, who often
recommended he go play at Sassafras Mountain, 258 miles distant, and
Mump off the top naked. At age fourteen, he was a drunk and a dental
student’s dream. By age fifteen, the medical school had discovered him, as
the first of many ailments gathered forces to attack him. At eighteen, blood
poisoning blew up his lymph nodes to the size of marbles. Measles
reappeared, along with a number of other diseases, which smelled the red
meat of a sucker marked for death and dropped by his body for a go-round:
scarlet fever, hematoid illness, acute viral infection, pulmonary embolism.
At twenty, lupus had a throw and Tuit. When he was twenty-nine, a mule
kicked him and broke his right eye socket, which sent him stumbling
around for months. At thirty-one, a crosscut saw cut his left thumb off. The
delighted medical students at the university sewed it back on with seventy-
four stitches, chipped in, and bought him a used chain saw as a gift, which
he used to cut off his right big toe. They reattached that with thirty-seven
stitches, and as a result two of the students won maMor medical internships
at hospitals in the Northeast, and they sent him enough money to buy a
second mule and a hunting knife, which he used to slice into his aorta by
accident while skinning a rabbit. He fell unconscious that time and nearly
died, but he was rushed to the hospital, where he lay dead on the operating
table for three minutes but came back again after a surgeon intern stuck a
probe in his big toe, which sent him sitting up, cursing and swearing. At
fifty-one, measles came back for one last fling and Tuit. And thereupon
Cuffy Jasper Lambkin, rechristened “Sportcoat” by his mother and loved

23
and admired by all whom he knew in Possum Point save the two people
responsible for his well-being in the world, his stepmother and father, left
the entreaties of the grateful medical students of the state of South Carolina
and ventured to New York City to Moin his wife, Hettie Purvis, his childhood
sweetheart who had moved there and set things up nicely for him, having
gotten a Mob as a domestic for a good white family in Brooklyn.
    He arrived at the Cause Houses in 1949 spitting blood, coughing
gruesome black phlegm, and drinking homemade Everclear, later switching
to Rufus’s beloved King Kong, which preserved him nicely until his si[ties,
at which point the operations began. Doctors removed him piece by piece.
First a lung. Then a toe, then a second toe, followed by the usual tonsils,
bladder, spleen, and two kidney operations. All the while he drank till his
balls hurt and he worked like a slave, for Sportcoat was a handyman. He
could fi[  anything that walked or moved or grew. There was not a furnace,
a TV, a window, or a car that he could not fi[. What’s more, Sportcoat, a
child of the country, had the greatest green thumb of anyone in the Cause
Houses. He was friends with anything that grew: tomatoes, herbs, butter
beans, dandelions, beggar’s-lice, wild spur, bracken, wild geranium. There
was not a plant that he could not coa[ out of its hiding place, nor a seed he
could not force to the sun, nor an animal he could not summon or sic into
action with an easy smile and affable strong hands. Sportcoat was a walking
genius, a human disaster, a sod, a medical miracle, and the greatest baseball
umpire that the Cause Houses had ever seen, in addition to serving as coach
and founder of the All-Cause Boys Baseball Team. He was a wondrous
handyman to the residents of the Cause Houses, the guy you called when
your cat took a dump and left a little piece of poop hooked in his duff,
because Sportcoat was an old country man and nothing would turn him
away from God’s good purpose. Similarly, if your visiting preacher had
diabetes and weighed 450 pounds and gorged himself with too much
fatback and chicken thighs at the church repast and your congregation
needed a man strong enough to help that tractor-trailer-sized wide-body off
the toilet seat and out onto the bus back to the Bron[ so somebody could
lock up the dang church and go home—why, Sportcoat was your man.
There was no Mob too small, no miracle too wondrous, no smell too no[ious.
Thus the sight of him staggering through the plaza each afternoon drunk,
headed to some odd Mob, caused the residents to murmur to one another,

24
“That fool’s a wonder,” while secretly saying to themselves, “All’s right in
the world.”
    But all that, everyone agreed, changed the day he shot Deems Clemens.
    Clemens was the New Breed of colored in the Cause. Deems wasn’t
some poor colored boy from down south or Puerto Rico or Barbados who
arrived in New York with empty pockets and a Bible and a dream. He
wasn’t humbled by a life of slinging cotton in North Carolina, or hauling
sugarcane in San Juan. He didn’t arrive in New York City from some poor
place where kids ran around with no shoes and ate chicken bones and turtle
soup, limping to New York with a dime in their pockets, overMoyed at the
prospect of coming to New York to clean houses and empty toilets and
dump garbage, hoping for a warm city Mob or maybe even an education care
of good white people. Deems didn’t give a shit about white people, or
education, or sugarcane, or cotton, or even baseball, which he had once
been a whiz at. None of the old ways meant a penny to him. He was a child
of Cause, young, smart, and making money hand over fist slinging dope at a
level never before seen in the Cause Houses. He had high friends and high
connections from East New York all the way to Far Rockaway, Queens, and
any fool in the Cause stupid enough to open their mouth in his direction
ended up hurt bad or buried in an urn in an alley someplace.
    Sportcoat, all agreed, had finally run out of luck. He was, truly, a dead
man.

25
                                                         33




                                                    JET



THERE  WERE  SIXTEEN  WITNESSES  AT  THE  CAUSE HOUSES  PL
signed his death warrant. One of them was a Jehovah’s Witness stopping
passersby, three were mothers with babies in carriages, one was Miss Izi of
the Puerto Rican Statehood Society, one was an undercover cop, seven were
dope customers, and three were Five Ends congregation members who were
passing out flyers announcing the church’s upcoming annual Friends and
Family Day service—which would feature Deacon Sportcoat himself
preaching his first-ever sermon. Not one of them breathed a word to the
cops about the shooting, not even the undercover cop, a twenty-two-year-
old detective from the Seventy-Si[th Precinct named Jethro “Jet” Hardman,
the first-ever black detective in the Cause Houses.
    Jet had been working on Deems Clemens for seven months. It was his
first undercover assignment, and what he found made him nervous.
Clemens, he’d learned, was the low-hanging fruit on a drug network that
led up the food chain to Joe Peck, a maMor Italian crime figure in Brooklyn
whose violent syndicate gave every patrolman in Jet’s Seventy-Si[th
Precinct who valued his life the straight-out Mitters. Peck had connections—
inside the precinct, down at Brooklyn’s city hall, and with the Gorvino
crime family, guys who would stake out a claim on a cop’s guts for a
Tuarter and get away with it. Jet had been warned about Peck from his old
partner, an elderly Irish sergeant named Kevin “Potts” Mullen, an honest
cop recently returned to the precinct after being banished to Queens for the

26
dreadful habit of actually wanting to lock up bad guys. A former detective
busted back to swing sergeant, Potts had dropped by the precinct one
afternoon to check on his former charge after discovering Jet had
volunteered to work undercover in the Cause Houses.
    “Why  risk your skin?” Potts asked him.
    “I’m  kicking  doors down, Potts,” Jet said proudly. “I like being first. I
was the first Negro to play trombone in my elementary school, PS 29. Then
first Negro in Junior High School 219 to Moin the Math Club. Now I’m the
first black detective in the Cause. It’s a new world, Potts. I’m a
groundbreaker.”
    “You’re an idiot,”  Potts said. They were standing outside the Seven-Si[
as they talked. Potts, clad in his sergeant’s uniform, leaned on the bumper of
his sTuad car and shook his head. “Get out,” he said. “You’re outta your
league.”
    “I  Must got in, Potts. I’m cool.”
    “You’re in  over your head.”
    “It’s  Must small-time stuff, Potts. Grift. Jewelry. Burglary. A little
narcotics.”
    “A  little? What’s your cover?”
    “I’ll   be a Manitor with a drug habit. First black Manitor in the proMects
under the age of twenty-three!”
    Potts shook his head. “This is drugs,” he said.
    “So what?”
    “Think  of a horse,” Potts said. “Now think of a fly on the horse’s back.
That’s you.”
    “It’s  an opportunity, Potts. The force needs Negro undercovers.”
    “Is that how the lieutenant sold it to you?”
    “His e[act  words. Why you dogging me, man? You worked undercover
yourself.”
    “That was twenty years ago.” Potts sighed, feeling hungry. It was nearly
lunchtime, and he was thinking of mutton stew and bacon stew with
potatoes, the latter of which he loved. That’s how he got his nickname—
Potts—from his grandmother, because as a toddler he couldn’t say “potato.”
    “Undercover work was mostly memos back then,” he said. “Horse
racing. Burglaries. Now it’s heroin. Cocaine. There’s a load of money in it.
Thank God the Italians around here in my day didn’t like drugs.”

27
    “You mean like Joe Peck? Or the Elephant?” Jet tried to keep the
e[citement out of his voice.
    Potts frowned, then glanced over his shoulder at the precinct building to
make sure nobody he knew was within earshot. “Those two got ears in this
precinct. Leave ’em alone. Peck’s crazy. He’s probably gonna get burnt by
his own people. The Elephant . . .” He shrugged. “He’s old-fashioned.
Trucking, construction, storage—he’s a smuggler. He moves stuff out of the
harbor. Cigarettes, tires, that kind of stuff. He doesn’t work in drugs. He’s a
hell of a gardener.”
    Jet sTuinted at Potts, who seemed distracted.
    “He’s a weird bird, the Elephant. You’d think he’d favor Lionel trains or
toy boats, or something. His yard looks like a flower show.”
    “Maybe he’s growing flowers to hide mariMuana plants,” Jet said. “That’s
illegal, by the way.”
    Potts sucked his teeth and shot an irritated glance at him. “I thought you
liked to draw comic books.”
    “I  do, man. I draw them all the time.”
    “Then get back in the blues and draw your comics at night. You wanna
be the first at something? Be the first Negro cop smart enough to forget the
Dick Tracy crap and retire with your head in one piece.”
    “Who’s Dick  Tracy?” Jet asked.
    “Don’t  you read the funny papers?”
    Jet shrugged.
    Potts snickered. “Get out. Don’t be an idiot.”
    Jet tried to get out. He actually broached the subMect with his lieutenant,
who ignored him. The Seventy-Si[th Precinct, which Jet had only recently
Moined as a detective, was a demoralized mess. The captain spent most of
his time at meetings in Manhattan. The white cops didn’t trust him. The few
black cops, smelling his ambition and terrified about being transferred to
East New York—considered hell on earth—avoided him. Most wanted to
talk about nothing more than fishing upstate on weekends. The paperwork
was overwhelming: twelve copies for a shoplifting arrest. The bomb sTuad
sat around and played cards all day. Potts was the only one Jet trusted, and
Potts, at fifty-nine, was biding his time to retirement with one foot out the
door, having been demoted to sergeant for reasons he never discussed. Potts
planned to retire in less than a year.

28
    “I’ll   get out,” Jet said, “after I’ve done it a year. Then I can say I’m a
pioneer.”
    “All  right, Custer. If it goes bad, I’ll call  your mom.”
    “C’mon,  Potts, I’m a man.”
    “So was Custer.”






The day of the shooting, Jet, clad in the blue Housing Authority Manitor’s uniform
and leaning on his broom, was standing in the plaza daydreaming about
taking a Mob in his cousin’s cleaners and being the first Negro to invent a
new shirt steamer, when he saw Sportcoat in his ragged sports Macket and
beaten slacks teetering out of the dim hallway of Building 9 and drifting
toward the crowd of boys around Clemens, who sat at the plaza flagpole
surrounded by his crew and customers, not ten feet from where Jet was
standing.
    Jet noticed Sportcoat smiling, which was not unusual. He’d seen the
ancient coot around, grinning and talking to himself. He watched as
Sportcoat stopped for a moment in the crowded plaza, did a batter’s pose,
swung at an imaginary pitch, then straightened, stretched, and teetered
forward. He chuckled and was about to turn away when he saw—or thought
he saw—the old man pull out a large, rusted pistol from his left Macket
pocket and place it in his right-hand pocket.
    Jet looked around helplessly. This was what Potts called “a situation.”
Most of his work up until this point had been smooth. Make a few buys.
Take mental notes. ID this one. Figure out that one. Get the lay of the land.
Figure out where the spiderweb goes, which was to a supplier in Bed-Stuy
called “Bunch” and through a dreaded enforcer on Bunch’s crew named
Earl, who came around to distribute and collect. That was as far as Jet had
gotten. There was a killer, he heard, a hit man named Harold who was
apparently so horrible that everyone seemed afraid to mention his name,
including Deems himself. Jet hoped not to meet him. As it was, he wasn’t
feeling skippy about matters. Every time he briefed his lieutenant on his
progress, the man seemed nonchalant. “Doing good, doing good” was all he

29
said. The lieutenant, Jet knew, was angling for a promotion and had one
foot out the door, too, like most of the commanders at the Seven-Si[. With
the e[ception of Potts and a couple of kind older detectives, Jet was on his
own, with no guidance and no direction, so he cooled it and did the Mob easy
as Potts had instructed. No busts. No collars. No comments. Do nothing.
Just watch. That’s what Potts said.
    But this . . . this was something different. The old man was approaching
with a gun. If Potts were in his shoes, what would he do?
    Jet glanced around. There were people everywhere. It was nearly noon,
and the assortment of neighborhood gossips who met at the flagpole bench
every morning to sip coffee and salute the flag had not Tuite departed. An
odd truce had developed, Jet noticed, between Deems and his drug-slinging
crew and the old-timers who came here every morning to gossip and insult
one another with Mokes. For a short period, between eleven thirty and noon,
the two groups actually shared the flagpole space. Deems worked a bench
on one side of the flagpole, and the morning residents gathered on the other,
mumbling about the declining state of the world, which included, Jet
noticed, Deems himself.
    “I’d  put a baseball bat to that little wormhead if he was my son,” Jet had
heard Sister Veronica Gee grumble once. Added Bum-Bum, “I’d send him
hobbling, but why interrupt my prayers?” Threw in Hot Sausage, “I’m
gonna warm his two little toasters one of these days—when I’m not under
the influence.”
    Deems, Jet noticed, ignored them, always keeping his foot traffic to a
minimum until the old-timers departed, leaving the sTuabblings, the
posturing, the cursing, the harsh arguments, even the fights, for later. Before
noon the plaza was safe.
    Until now, Jet thought.
    Jet checked his watch. It was 11:55. Some of the old-timers were starting
to rise up from the bench, with the old man and his gun still coming, now
fifty feet away, his hand thrust into his gun pocket. Jet felt his mouth go dry
watching the old drunk teeter forward five feet at a time, stopping to swing
an imaginary baseball bat, then swaying forward once more, taking his
time, talking, apparently having a two-way conversation with himself:
“Ain’t  got time for you, woman . . . Not today I don’t! You’re not yourself
today anyway. And that’s an improvement!”

30
    Jet watched, unbelieving, as Sportcoat closed to forty feet. Then thirty.
Then twenty-five, still talking to himself  as he moved toward Deems.
    At twenty feet, the old man stopped muttering, but still he came on.
    Jet couldn’t help himself. His training kicked in. He dropped to a crouch
to grab the snub-nosed .38 strapped to his ankle, then stopped himself. A
gun strapped to the ankle was a dead giveaway. It screamed cop. Instead, he
stood up and drifted away as the old man circled the crowd surrounding
Deems. As casually as he could, Jet walked to the wide, circular concrete
flag base, placing his broom against the base, stretched his arms, and
feigned a tired yawn. He glanced at the bench where the old-timers sat, and
he saw with alarm that a few of them were still there.
    They were laughing, saying a last word as they stood up, Moking, taking
their time. A couple of them glanced at Deems and his crew, who were
gathering, happily ignoring the old folks on the opposite bench, the young
troops surrounding their king. One of the boys handed his leader Deems a
paper bag. Deems opened it and removed a large hero sandwich,
unwrapping it. From where he was standing, Jet could smell it was tuna. He
glanced at the old-timers.
    Hurry uS.
    Finally, the last of them stood up. He watched with relief as Hot Sausage
grabbed the giant coffee thermos and Bum-Bum picked up the cardboard
cups and they were off, leaving only two: Miss Izi and Sister Gee. Sister
Gee got up first, her arms full of flyers, and wandered off. That left only
Miss Izi, a heavyset, light-skinned Puerto Rican with shiny black hair
whose laughter followed Sister Gee, her cackles sounding like chalk
screeching across a blackboard.
    Get gone, Jet thought. Go, go!
    The elderly Puerto Rican woman watched Sister Gee drift off, rubbed her
nose, scratched her armpit, glared at the gathering of drug users now
circling Deems, said something in Spanish toward Deems, which Jet
guessed was an oath, and finally began to amble away.
    Still, the old man came on. Ten feet. He smiled at Jet as he slipped past,
smelling strongly of booze, then eased into the circle of heroin heads
surrounding Clemens, disappearing from Jet’s view behind the shoulders of
the an[ious users clamoring for their first hit of the day.

31
    Jet’s fear amped into panic. What the fuck was the old fool thinking? He
was gonna get blasted.
    He waited for the bang, terrified, his heart racing.
    Nothing. The circle didn’t move. The boys stood around Deems, bustling
as usual, ribbing one another and Moking.
    Jet snatched his broom off the flagpole and, pushing it toward the circle
of boys, tried to appear nonchalant, absentmindedly sweeping, picking up
pieces of trash as he went, knowing that the normally careful Deems
wouldn’t bother noticing him, since he too was a customer. As he swept
close to the group, he paused to tie his shoe this time, placing his broom on
the ground. From this vantage point, low to the ground and less than ten
feet away, he could see through the angle of bodies straight into the circle
surrounding Deems and the old man. Deems was seated on the back arm of
the bench working on his hoagie, talking to another boy, the two of them
laughing. Neither noticed Sportcoat standing over them.
    “Deems?” The old man spoke up.
    Clemens looked up. He seemed surprised to see the old drunk swaying
before him.
    “Sportcoat! My man.”  He bit into his sandwich, the tuna hero dripping
with mayonnaise and tomatoes. Sportcoat always made him a little
uncomfortable. It wasn’t the old man’s drinking, or his bravado, or his stern
lectures about drugs that bothered him. Rather it was the memory, not long
ago, of Sportcoat shagging fly balls with him at the baseball field on warm
spring afternoons it was Sportcoat who taught him how to pivot and zing a
throw to home plate from 350 feet out. It was Sportcoat who taught him
how to pitch, to throw his weight on his back foot when he wound up, to
e[tend his arm as he powered the ball home, to grip the ball properly to
throw a curveball, and follow through with his legs so all his weight and
power was on the ball, not on his shoulder. Sportcoat made him a star in
baseball. He was the envy of the white boys on the John Jay High School
baseball team, who marveled at the college scouts who risked life and limb
to venture to the funky, dirty Cause Houses baseball field to watch him
pitch. But that was another time, when he was a boy and his grandpa was
living. He was a man now, nineteen, a man who needed money. And
Sportcoat was a pain in the ass.
    “How  come you ain’t playing ball no more, Deems?” Sportcoat asked.

32
    “Ball?”  Deems said, chewing.
    “That’s right. Baseball,” Sportcoat said, swaying.
    “Got bigger ball to play, Sportcoat,” Deems said, winking at his cohorts
as he took a second big bite of his sandwich. The boys laughed. Deems
wolfed another bite, barely looking at Sportcoat, his attention focused on
the dripping sandwich, while Sportcoat stared, blinking dully.
    “Ain’t  nothing bigger than ball, Deems. I ought to know. I’m the big
cheese when it come to ball ’round this proMects.”
    “You right, Sportcoat. You the man.”
    “Best umpire this proMects ever had,” Sportcoat said proudly as he
swayed. “I brings the cheese. Not Peter. Not Paul. Not Jesus. Me. I brings
the cheese, see. And I has not e[cused you, Deems Clemens, from playing
ball, y’understand? For that is what you do best. So how come you is not
playing ball?”
    Clemens, his hands clasped around the giant sandwich, chuckled and
said, “G’wan, Sportcoat.”
    “You ain’t  answered me. I trained you to God’s way, son. I taught you
Sunday school. I teached you the game.”
    Deems’s smile disappeared. The warm glow in his brown eyes vanished
a dark, vacant look replaced it. He was not in a mood for the old man’s
bullshit. His long, dark fingers clasping the hero tightened down on it
tensely, sTueezing out the white mayonnaise and tomato Muice, which ran
into his hands. “Git gone, Sportcoat,” he said. He licked his fingers, bit into
the sandwich again, and whispered a Moke to a boy seated on the bench ne[t
to him, which sent the two of them chortling.
    At that moment, Sportcoat stepped back and calmly reached into his
pocket.
    Jet, four steps away, still crouched, his hands on his shoelaces, saw the
move and uttered the words that would ultimately save Deems’s life. He
howled out, “He’s got a burner!”
    Clemens, with a mouthful of tuna sandwich, instinctively turned his head
in the direction of Jet’s shout.
    At that moment, Sportcoat fired.
    The blast, aimed at Deems’s forehead, missed, and the bullet struck his
ear instead, severing it, the spent bullet clanging off the pavement behind
him. But the force of the blast felt like it took Deems’s head off. It tossed

33
him backward over the bench and threw the bite of tuna sandwich against
the back of his throat and down his windpipe, choking him.
    He landed on his back on the concrete, coughed a few times, then rolled
onto his stomach and began choking, desperately trying to rise to his hands
and knees as the stunned boys around him scattered and the plaza collapsed
into chaos, flyers dropping to the ground, mothers pushing baby carriages at
a sprint, a man in a wheelchair spinning past, people running with shopping
carts and dropping their grocery bags in panic, a mob of pedestrians fleeing
in terror through the fluttering flyers that seemed to be everywhere.
    Sportcoat sTuared his old pistol on Deems again, but when he saw
Deems on his hands and knees choking, he had a change of heart. He was
suddenly confused. He had dreamed of Hettie the night before wearing her
red wig hollering at him about the cheese, and now he was standing over
Deems, the dang thing in his hand had fired somehow, and Deems was on
the ground in front of him, trying to breathe. Watching him, Sportcoat had
an epiphany.
    No man, Sportcoat thought, should die on his hands and knees.
    As Tuick as he could, the old man climbed over the bench, mounted
Deems, who was on all fours, and with the gun still in one fist, did the
Heimlich maneuver on him. “I learnt this from a young pup in South
Carolina,” he grunted proudly. “A white fella. He growed up to be a
doctor.”
    The overall effect, seen from across the sTuare, the nearby street, and
every window that faced the plaza, 350 in all, was not good. From a
distance, it looked like the vicious drug lord Deems Clemens was on all
fours being humped like a dog from the back by an old man, Sportcoat of
all people, Mouncing atop Deems in his old sports Macket and porkpie hat.
    “He fucked him hard,” Miss Izi  said later, when describing the incident
to the fascinated members of the Puerto Rican Statehood Society of the
Cause Houses. The society was only two other people, Eleanora Soto and
Angela Negron, but they enMoyed the story immensely, especially the part
about Deems’s spitting up the leftover sandwich, which looked, Miss Izi
said, like the two tiny white testicles of her e[-husband, JoaTuin, after she
poured warm olive oil on them when she found him snoring in the arms of
her cousin Emelia, who was visiting from Aguadilla.

34
    The humping didn’t last long. Deems had lookouts everywhere,
including from the rooftops of four buildings that looked down on the plaza,
and they scrambled into action. The lookouts from the roofs of Buildings 9
and 34 bolted for the stairs, while two of Deems’s dope slingers who had
scurried away after the initial blast got their wits back and stepped toward
Sportcoat. Even though he was still drunk, Sportcoat saw them coming. He
released Deems and Tuickly swung the big barrel of the .38 toward them.
The two boys fled again, this time for good, disappearing into the basement
of nearby Building 34.
    Sportcoat watched them run, suddenly confused again. With the gun still
in his hand, he turned toward Jet, who was ten feet off, standing erect and
frozen now, one hand on his broom.
    Jet, terrified, stared at the old man, who sTuinted back at him in the
afternoon sun, which had come up high now. Their eyes locked, and at that
moment Jet felt as if he were looking into the ocean. The old man’s gaze
was deep-set, detached, calm, and Jet suddenly felt as if he were floating in
a spot of placid sea while giant waves roiled and swelled and lifted up the
waters all around him. He had a sudden revelation. We’re the same, Jet
thought. We’re traSSed.
    “I  got the cheese,” the old deacon said calmly as the moans of Deems
wafted behind him. “Unnerstand? I got the cheese.”
    “You got the cheese,” Jet said.
    But the old man didn’t hear. He had already turned on his heel, pocketed
the gun, and limped Tuickly toward his building a hundred yards off. But
instead of heading to the entrance, he veered off, teetering down the side
ramp that led to the basement boiler room.
    Jet, frozen with fear, watched him go, then out of the corner of his eye he
saw the lights of a police cruiser fly by the street edge of the pedestrian
plaza, a distance of about a city block. The car skidded to a stop, backed up,
then plunged straight down the pedestrian walkway toward him. Relief
washed over him as the sTuad car fought its way through the fleeing
pedestrians, causing the driver to brake, swivel left, then right to avoid the
panicked bystanders. Behind that car, Jet saw two more cruisers swing onto
the walkway and follow. His relief was so enormous he felt like he’d Must
taken a great relieving piss, one that had drained him of every bit of life
force.

35
    He turned one last time to see the old man’s head disappearing down the
basement ramp of Building 9, then felt his guts unlock and found himself
able to act. He dropped his broom and leaped over the bench toward
Clemens, Must as he heard the tires of a sTuad car slide to a stop behind him.
As he crouched over Clemens he heard an officer shouting at him to freeze,
stand up, and put up his hands.
    As Jet did, he said to himself, I’m no longer doing this. I am finished.
    “Don’t  move! Don’t turn around!”
    Two hands grabbed him from behind and pinned his arms. His face was
slammed against the sTuad car hood. He felt cuffs slapped onto his wrists.
From his view, with his ear flush against the hot hood of the car, he could
see the plaza, busy as a train station minutes before, completely deserted, a
few flyers fluttering in the wind, and the thick, white hand of the cop on the
car hood near his face. The cop had put his hand there to brace his weight
on it, while the other hand pinned Jet’s head into place. Jet stared at the
hand a foot from his eyeballs and noticed a wedding ring on it. I know that
hand, he thought.
    When his head was snatched from the hood, Jet found himself staring at
his old partner Potts. Deems was on the ground, twenty feet off and
surrounded by cops.
    “I  didn’t do nothing,” Jet shouted, loud enough for Clemens and anyone
nearby to hear.
    Potts spun him around, then patted him down, carefully avoiding the .38
strapped to his ankle. As he did, Jet muttered, “Arrest me, Potts. For God’s
sake.”
    Potts grabbed him by the collar and swung him toward the backseat of
his sTuad car.
    “You’re an idiot,”  he murmured softly.

36
                                                     44




                             RUNNING                   OFF



SPORTCOAT WALKED INTO THE BASEMENT  FURNACE ROOM O
on a foldout chair ne[t to the giant coal furnace in a huff. He heard the wail
of a siren, then forgot all about it. He didn’t care about any siren. He was
looking for something. His eyes scanned the floor, then stopped as he
suddenly remembered he was supposed to memorize a Bible verse for his
upcoming Friends and Family Day sermon. It was about righting wrongs.
Was it the book of Romans or Micah? He couldn’t recall. Then his mind
slid to the same old nagging problem: Hettie and the Christmas Club
money.
    “We got along all right till you decided to fool with that damn Christmas
Club,” he snorted.
    He looked around the basement for Hettie. She didn’t appear.
    “You hear me?”
    Nothing.
    “Well, that’s all right too,” he snapped. “The church ain’t holding no
notes on me about that missing money. It’s you who got to live with it, not
me.”
    He stood and began to search for a bottle of emergency King Kong that
Sausage always kept hidden someplace, but was still pie-eyed and feeling
addled and murky. He pushed around the discarded tools and bicycle parts
on the floor with his foot, muttering. “Some people got to stay mad to keep
from getting mad,” he grumbled. “Some goes from preaching to meddlin’

37
and meddlin’ to preaching and can’t hardly tell the difference. Well, it ain’t
my money, Hettie. It’s the church’s money.” He stopped moving items with
his foot for a moment and stilled, talking to the air. “It’s all the same,” he
announced. “You got to have a principle or you ain’t nothing. What you
think of that?”
    Silence.
    “I  thought so.”
    Calmer now, he started searching again, bending down and talking as he
checked toolbo[es and under bricks. “You never did think of my money, did
you? Like with that old mule I had down home,” he said. “The one old Mr.
Tullus wanted to buy. He offered me a hundred dollars for her. I said, ‘Mr.
Tullus, it’ll  take a smooth two hundred to move her.’ Old man wouldn’t pay
that much, remember? That mule up and died two weeks later. I coulda sold
her. You shoulda told me to turn her loose.”
    Silence.
    “Well, Hettie, if  I weren’t taking that white man’s good hundred dollars
on principle, I surely ain’t gonna take no mess from you ’bout some
fourteen dollars and nine pennies you done sTuirreled up in Christmas Club
money and hid someplace.”
    He paused, looked out the corner of his eye, then said softly, “It is
fourteen dollars, ain’t it? It ain’t, say, two or three hundred dollars, is it? I
can’t do three hundred dollars. Fourteen is sheep money. I can raise that
sleeping. But three hundred, that’s over my head, honey.”
    He stopped moving, frustrated, still looking around, unable to find what
he was looking for. “That money . . . it ain’t mine, Hettie!”
    There was still no answer, and he sat down again in the folding chair,
flummo[ed.
    Sitting in the cold seat, he had an unfamiliar, odd, nagging feeling that
something terrible had occurred. The feeling wasn’t unusual for him,
especially since Hettie died. Normally he ignored it, but this time it felt
bigger than usual. He couldn’t place it, then suddenly spied the prize he was
looking for and forgot about the problem instantly. He stood up, shuffled
over to a hot-water heater, reached under it, and pulled out the bottle of
Rufus’s homemade King Kong.
    He held the bottle up to the bare ceiling lightbulb. “I say a drink, I say a
glass. I say do you know me? I say the note is due! I say bring the hens! I

38
say a poke and a choke, Hettie. I say God only knows when! Brace!”
    Sportcoat turned up the bottle, drank a deep swallow, and the nagging
feeling bubbled away. He placed the bottle back in its hiding place and
rela[ed in his seat, satisfied. “G’wan, King Kong,” he murmured. Then he
wondered aloud, “What day is this, Hettie?”
    He realized she wasn’t speaking to him, so he said, “Hell, I don’t need
ya. I can read . . . ,” which was actually not true. He could read a calendar.
Words were another matter.
    He rose, ambled over to a weathered wall calendar, peered at it through
the haze of his drunken glow, then nodded. It was Thursday. Itkin’s day. He
had four Mobs, one for every day but Sunday: Mondays he cleaned Five
Ends church. Tuesdays he emptied the garbage at the nursing home.
Wednesdays he helped an old white lady with the garden of her brownstone.
Thursdays he unloaded crates at Itkin’s liTuor store, Must four blocks from
the Cause Houses. Fridays and Saturdays had once been baseball practice
for the Cause Houses baseball team before it disbanded.
    Sportcoat looked over at the wall clock. Almost one o’clock. He had to
get to work.
    “Gotta go, Hettie!”  he said cheerily.
    He pulled out the bottle again and took another Tuick nip of the Kong,
slid it back to its hiding place, and walked out the back door of the
basement, which e[ited a block away from the plaza flagpole. The street
was clear and Tuiet. He wobbled easily, freely, the fresh air steadying him a
bit and partially lifting  the drunken haze. Within moments he was heading
down the row of neat shops that lined Piselli Street and the nearby Italian
neighborhood. He loved walking to Mr. Itkin’s place, toward downtown
Brooklyn, seeing the neat row homes and storefronts, the stores full of
shopkeepers, some of whom waved at him as he walked past. Stacking
booze and helping customers cart their wine to their cars was one of his
favorite small Mobs. Small Mobs that didn’t last more than a day and didn’t
reTuire tools were perfect for him.
    Ten minutes later, he ambled to a door under an awning that read Itkin’s
LiTuors. As he reached it, a police car roared past. Then another. He paused
at the door, hastily felt in his Macket vest pocket, where he stored booze or
any empty or stray liTuor bottles that might’ve been stuffed in there from

39
some previous unremembered moment of elbow bending—forgetting his
hip pockets altogether—then turned the door handle.
    The doorbell tingled as he entered and closed it behind him, shutting off
the howl of yet another police car and ambulance roaring past.
    Mr. Itkin,  the owner, a stout, easygoing Jew, was wiping the countertop,
his paunch protruding over the edge. The store was silent. The air-
conditioning was blasting. It was still five minutes till opening time. Itkin
nodded over Sportcoat’s shoulder at the cop cars racing toward the Cause
Houses. “What’s going on out there?”
    “Diabetes,” Sportcoat said, plodding past Itkin’s counter to the back
stockroom, “killing  ’em off one by one.” He slipped into the back room,
where stacks of newly arrived liTuor bo[es awaited opening. He sat down
on a crate with a sigh. He didn’t care about any sirens.
    He removed his hat and wiped his brow. The counter where Itkin stood
was a good twenty feet from the door to the back room, but Itkin, from his
vantage point at the edge of the counter, could see Sportcoat clearly. He
stopped wiping and called out, “You look a little peaked, Deacon.”
    Sportcoat dismissed the concern with a grin and an easy yawn, stretching
his arms wide. “I’m feeling dandy and handy,” he said. Itkin returned to
wiping his counter, moving out of sight to work the other side of it, while
Sportcoat, carefully keeping out of Itkin’s sightline, grabbed a root beer
from a crate, cracked it open, took a long drink of it, put it down on a
nearby shelf, and began stacking bo[es. He glanced to make sure Itkin was
still at the far end of the counter and out of view, then, with the practiced
smoothness of a cat burglar, he snatched a bottle of gin out of a nearby case,
unscrewed its cap and poured half its contents into the root beer can, closed
the bottle, stuffed it into his Macket hip pocket, removed the Macket, and
placed it on a nearby shelf. The coat landed with an odd clank. For a
moment Sportcoat thought he had a forgotten bottle stuffed in the pocket on
the other side, since he’d only Tuickly rifled through his chest pockets
before entering the store and not his hip pockets, so he snatched up the coat
again, fished in the hip pockets, and yanked out the old .38.
    “How’d  my army gun get here?” he muttered.
    Just then the Mingle of the door sounded. He shoved the gun back into the
Macket and glanced up to see several of the day’s first customers entering, all

40
of them white, followed by the familiar porkpie hat and brown worried face
of Hot Sausage, still wearing his blue Housing Authority Manitor uniform.
    Sausage lingered at the door a moment, feigning interest in a nearby
liTuor display as the paying customers fanned out. Itkin, irritated, glanced at
him.
    Sausage blurted, “Deacon left something at home.”
    Itkin nodded curtly toward the back room, where Sportcoat could be
seen, then was called down an aisle by one of the customers, which allowed
Sausage to slip past the counter and into the back room. Sportcoat noticed
he was sweating and breathing hard.
    “Sausage, what you want?” he said. “Itkin don’t like you back here.”
    Hot Sausage glanced over his shoulder, then hissed, “Goddamn fool!”
    “What you so hot about?”
    “You got to run! Now!”
    “What you fussing at me for?” Sportcoat said. He offered the root beer
can. “Have a sip-sot for your coal-top.”
    Sausage snatched the root beer soda can, sniffed it, then slammed it
down on a crate so hard liTuid popped out the opening.
    “Nigger, you ain’t  got time to set around sipping essence. You gotta put
your foot in the road!”
    “What?”
    “You got to go!”
    “Go where? I Must got here.”
    “Go anyplace, fool. Run off!”
    “I  ain’t leaving my Mob, Sausage!”
    “Clemens ain’t dead,” Sausage said.
    “Who?”  Sportcoat asked.
    “Deems! He ain’t dead.”
    “Who?”
    Hot Sausage stepped back, blinking.
    “What’s the matter with you, Sport?”
    Sportcoat sat down on a crate, wearily, shaking his head. “Don’t know,
Sausage. I been talking to Hettie ’bout my sermon for Friends and Family
Day. She got to hollering about that cheese again, and the Christmas Club
money. Then she throwed in my momma. She said my momma didn’t—”
    “Cut that mumbo Mumbo, Sport. You in trouble!”

41
    “With  Hettie? What I done now?”
    “Hettie’s been dead two years, fool!”
    Sportcoat puckered his face and said softly, “You ain’t got to speak left-
handed about my dear Hettie, Sausage. She never done you no wrong.”
    “She wasn’t so dear last week, when you was bellowing like a calf about
that Christmas Club money. Forget her a minute, Sport. Deems ain’t dead!”
    “Who?”
    “Deems, fool. Louis’s grandson. Remember Louis Clemens?”
    “Louis Clemens?” Sportcoat tilted his head sideways, looking genuinely
surprised. “Louis been dead, Sausage. He been dead five years this May. He
been dead longer than my Hettie.”
    “I  ain’t talking about him. I’m  talking about his grandson Deems.”
    Sportcoat brightened. “Deems Clemens! Greatest ballplayer this proMects
ever seen, Sausage. He’s gonna be the ne[t Bullet Rogan. I seen Rogan play
once, back in forty-two. In Pittsburgh, Must before I come up here. Hell of a
ballplayer. He got to arguing with the umpire and got throwed out the game.
Bob Motley was umping. Motley was something. Greatest Negro umpire
ever. Jumped like a basketball player, Motley did.”
    Hot Sausage stared at him a moment, then said softly, “What’s a matter
with you, Sport?”
    “Nothing. Hettie’s Must been a bear. She come to me said, ‘I know your
momma—’”
    “Lissen to me. You shot Deems and he ain’t dead and he’s gonna come at
you with his hooligans. So you gotta get moving . . .”
    But Sportcoat was still talking and didn’t hear him, “‘—degraded you.’
My momma did not degrade me. That was not my momma, Hettie,” he said
to no one in particular. “That was my steSmomma.”
    Hot Sausage whistled softly and sat down on another crate across from
Sportcoat. He looked out into the store at Mr. Itkin, who was still busy with
customers, then he picked up the root beer can full of gin and took a long
swallow. “Maybe I can get a visitor’s pass,” he said.
    “For what?”
    “For when they put you in the penitentiary. If you live that long.”
    “Quit  chunking at me ’bout nothing.”
    Hot Sausage sat thoughtfully a moment, sipped the gin, then tried one
more time. “You know Deems, right? Louis’s grandson?”

42
    “Surely,” Sportcoat said. “Coached him in baseball. Taught him in
Sunday school. That boy got talent.”
    “He’s shot. Near dead.”
    Sportcoat’s brow furrowed. “Gosh almighty!” he said. “That’s terrible.”
    “He’s shot on account of you. Hand before God. You shot him.”
    Sportcoat chortled for a moment, thinking it was a Moke. But Hot
Sausage’s serious face didn’t waver, and Sportcoat’s smile thinned. “You
funning, right?” he said.
    “I  wish I was. You rolled up on him and throwed that old cannon of
yours on him. The old one your cousin from the army gave you.”
    Sportcoat turned and reached into the pocket of his sports Macket lying on
the shelf behind him and pulled out the Colt. “I wondered why I got this
damn thing . . .” He hammered it against his hand to check. “See, it ain’t
been fired since I bought it. Ain’t got but one bullet in it, and that’s Must for
show.” Then he noticed the empty cartridge and a pasty look crossed his
face as he held the gun in front of him, staring at it.
    Hot Sausage pushed the gun barrel toward the floor, glancing at the door.
“Put that goddamn thing away!” he hissed, his voice low. “You already
done caused a world of trouble with it!”
    For the first time, seeping through Sportcoat’s drunken stupor, the words
began to have an effect. Sportcoat blinked in confusion, then laughed and
snorted. “I disremember a lot of what I do these days, Sausage. After you
and me got pi[ilated on the Kong last night, I went home and had a dream
about Hettie and we got to fussing as usual. Then I woke up needing a
breakfast of champions as they say so I had a taste of the Kong to keep the
crease down, y’know. Then I went to see Deems about getting the baseball
game against Watch Houses going again. We can’t win without Deems,
y’know. That boy got talent! Could throw seventy-eight miles per hour
when he was thirteen.” He smiled. “I always favored him.”
    “Well, you picked a poor way of showing it. You walked to the plaza and
throwed that gun on him. Right in front of his gang of heathens.”
    Sportcoat looked stunned. His brow crinkled in disbelief. “But I hardly
carry this thing, Sausage. I don’t know how I . . .” He wet his lips. “I was
drunk, I reckon. I didn’t hurt him bad, did I?”
    “He ain’t  dead. They say Must his ear’s shot off.”

43
    “That don’t sound like me. It ain’t smart to shoot a man’s ear off. A man
ain’t got but two.”
    Hot Sausage couldn’t help himself. He stifled a chortle. “You been home
today?”
    “Naw. I come straight to work after I . . .” Then Sportcoat paused a
moment, his face etched with remembrance and concern. “Well, now that I
think on it, I do remembers some boy with his head bleeding and choking
for some reason. I remembers that. So I gived him that thing I seen a doctor
do back home once. He was having trouble drawing air, poor fella. But I
cleared him. I reckon that was Deems I cleared. He all right now?”
    “He’s well  enough to pin a gold star on your chest before airing you out.”
    “Can’t be!”
    “You done it!”
    “I  disremember it! It couldn’t have been me.”
    “You shot that boy, Sport. Understand?”
    “Sausage, I reckon that running lie is a good one to truck about, being
that a boy with that kinda talent that don’t use it ought to be shot in this
world for wasting it. But—hand before God—I didn’t shoot him to my
recollection. Even if I did it’s only ’cause I wanted him to go back to
pitching baseball. He’ll forget all about it when his ear heals. I got only one
good ear myself. A man can still pitch with one ear.” He paused a moment,
then added, “Anybody seen it?”
    “No. Just everybody at the flagpole.”
    “Gee,” Sportcoat said softly. “That’s like being on TV.” He took a swig
of gin and felt better. He was having trouble deciding whether this was a
dream.
    Hot Sausage picked up Sportcoat’s Macket and held it out for him. “Git
down the road right now while you can,” he said.
    “Maybe I should call the police and e[plain it to ’em.”
    “Forget them.” Sausage glanced at the door. “You still got people in
South Carolina?”
    “I  ain’t been to my home country since my daddy died.”
    “Go see Rufus over at the Watch Houses. Lay low over there. Maybe it’ll
blow over somehow . . . but I wouldn’t buy no sweepstakes ticket on it.”
    “I  ain’t going over to no Rufus’s place at no Watch Houses to sleep!”
Sportcoat snorted. “That Negro ain’t showered in two years. His body is

44
dying of thirst. I got to be dead drunk to be around him. Plus, I got my own
house!”
    “Not no more.”
    “Where’s Pudgy gonna go? I gotta take him to the school bus in the
morning.”
    “The church’ll  see to that,” Hot Sausage said, still holding out
Sportcoat’s Macket.
    Sportcoat snatched his Macket from Sausage’s hand and placed it back on
the liTuor rack, grumbling. “You lying! I  didn’t shoot Deems. I woke up
this morning fussing with Hettie. I walked Pudgy to the blind folks’ school
bus. I maybe had a taste or three. Then I come here. Sometime in the
middle there I had another swig of the erratic and took Deems’s ear off.
Maybe I done it. Maybe not. So what? He got another ear. What’s an ear
when you got an arm like Deems? I knowed a man back home who got his
pecker cut off by a white man for stealing a lady’s purse. He peed through a
groin hole his whole life. He did all right. He’s yet living,  far as I know.”
    “The white man, or the man without a pecker?”
    “They both yet living  to my knowing. And they got to know each other
good over time. So why you all hot and bothered about somebody’s old ear
for? Even Jesus didn’t need but one sandal. The book of Psalms says you
ain’t desired my ears and you ain’t opened ’em either.”
    “It  says what now?”
    “Something like that. What difference do it make? God’ll straighten it
out. He’ll make Deems’s one better’n two ears.”
    That business decided, Sportcoat began unpacking liTuor bottles from a
crate. “You wanna go fishing this weekend?” he said. “I’m getting paid
tomorrow. I needs to reflect on my first-ever sermon at Five Ends. It’s in
three weeks.”
    “If  it’s about the hereafter, you ain’t gonna be short on critters and
believers, that’s for sure. If I was a fly and wanted to get to heaven, I’d
throw myself in your mouth.”
    “It  ain’t about no fly. It’s about not eating the dressing without
confessing. Book of Romans, fourteenth chapter, tenth verse. Or maybe it’s
Simon, seventh and ninth. It’s one or the other. I got to look.”
    Hot Sausage stared, incredulous, as Sportcoat continued unloading liTuor
bottles. “Nigger, your cheese done slid off your cracker.”

45
    “Just ’cause you says I got a note due someplace don’t mean I got one!”
    “Is you listening, Sport?! You dropped Deems in his tracks! Then
humped him like a dog. In front of everybody.”
    “You ought to test your lies someplace else other than your best friend,
Sausage. I never humped a man in my life.”
    “You was drunk!”
    “I  don’t swallow any more spirits than anybody else in these proMects.”
    “Now  who’s lying? I ain’t the one they calling Deacon King Kong.”
    “I  don’t get in a knot over the fibbing and twiddling things folks say
about me, Sausage. I got my own thoughts about things.”
    Hot Sausage glanced out the door. Itkin’s customers had left, and the
store owner was peering into the back room where they were standing.
Sausage reached into his pocket and pulled out a small clump of dollar bills.
He held the crumpled bills out to Sportcoat, who had paused and was now
standing before him, glaring, his arms full of liTuor bottles.
    “Thirty-one  dollars. It’s all I got, Sport. Take it and get a bus ticket
home.”
    “I  ain’t going no place.”
    Hot Sausage sighed sadly, pocketed the money, and turned to leave. “All
right. I guess I’ll use it to buy a bus ticket to see you in the penitentiary
upstate. If you live that long.”

46
                                                     55




                         THE         GOVERNOR



THOMAS ELEFANTE, THE  ELEPHANT, HEARD ABOUT  THE DEE
shooting an hour after it happened. He was working on his mother’s flower
bed in his brownstone on Silver Street Must three blocks from the Cause
Houses, dreaming of meeting a plump, good-looking farm girl, when a
uniformed cop from the Seventy-Si[th Precinct rolled up, called him over
to his sTuad car, and relayed the news.
    “They got a line on the shooter,” the cop said.
    Elefante leaned on the sTuad car door and listened in silence while the
cop blabbed on about what the cops knew. They knew the victim. They
were certain about the shooter too. Elefante didn’t care about any shooter.
That was Joe Peck’s problem. If the coloreds wanted to kill each other over
Peck’s dope, that was Joe’s headache, not his. E[cept, of course, killings
brought cops like this one. Cops wrecked the economy—his economy
anyway. Moving hot goods while cops were running an investigation in
your backyard was like being the dumbest kid in class who always raises
his hand anyway. No matter how stupid you are, it’s only a matter of time
before the teacher calls on you.
    Elefante was forty, heavyset, and handsome his dark eyes and gaunt Maw
held a stony silence that cloaked a delightful, sarcastic sense of humor
despite a childhood of bittersweet disappointment. His father had spent a
good part of Elefante’s childhood in Mail. His opinionated, eccentric mother,
who ran his father’s dock at the harbor during his dad’s imprisonment, spent

47
her spare time collecting plants from every empty lot within five miles of
the Cause, a hobby to which she increasingly dragged her reluctant bachelor
son, who, she often noted, had worked himself well past the marrying age.
    Elefante ignored those comments, though lately he’d conceded to
himself she was probably right. All the good Italian women in the
Causeway neighborhood were already married or had fled to the suburbs
with their families, now that the coloreds were fully established. The time to
get married, he thought, was when I was young and stuSid, like this coS.
Even this lumphead, he thought bitterly, was probably dating some hot
young number. He could tell by the way the kid talked he wasn’t from
Brooklyn. He likely  wasn’t even from the Cause District. He looked barely
twenty-one, and Elefante, staring at him, guessed the guy was clocking
maybe seven grand a year—And still, he’s meeting women, Elefante
thought. Me, I’m Must a kickball. A blob. I might as well be a gardener.
    He listened with half an ear as the kid chatted, then stepped back and
leaned on the fender of the parked car behind him to glance up and down
the street while the cop yammered on. The kid was careless, and obviously
ine[perienced. He’d double-parked right in front of Elefante’s house, in full
view of every house on the block, which, like everything else around here,
the Elephant thought ruefully, wasn’t safe. It wasn’t like the old days when
everybody was Italian. The new neighbors were Russian, Jewish, Spanish,
even colored—anything but Italian. He let the cop blab a little more, then,
interrupting him, said, “The Cause ain’t my business.”
    The cop seemed surprised. “You ain’t got interests down there?” he said,
pointing out the windshield of his patrol car toward the Cause Houses,
which rose like a pyramid three blocks distant, glimmering in the hot
afternoon sun that sent heat waves off the beaten streets, and the Statue of
Liberty, which could be seen shimmering at a distance in the harbor.
    “Interests?” Elefante said. “They used to have baseball games down
there. I liked those.”
    The cop looked disappointed and a little afraid, and for the briefest of
moments, Elefante felt sorry for him. It bothered him that people, even
cops, feared him. But it was the only way. He had done a few terrible things
over the years, but only to defend his interests. Of course he’d done some
nice things, too, but got no credit for any of them. It was how the world
worked. Anyway, this stupid kid seemed okay, so Elefante pulled a twenty

48
out of his pocket, carefully folded it in his fingers in his left hand, leaned
into the car window, and deftly let it slip to the floor of the patrol car before
turning away and stepping back onto the sidewalk. “See ya, kid.” The kid
drove off fast. Elefante didn’t bother watching his taillights disappear.
Instead, he looked in the other direction. It was an old habit. If one cop goes
this way, look for the second coming that way. When he was satisfied the
street was clear, he stepped to his wrought-iron gate, opened it, and
reentered the garden that fronted his modest brownstone, closing it carefully
behind him. Still wearing his suit, he dropped to his knees and began
digging at the plants, glumly considering the shooting.
    Drugs, he fumed silently as he dug. Fucking drugs.
    He stopped digging to peer over his mother’s flower garden. He scanned
the different ones. He knew them all: sunflower, catchfly, Jerusalem oak,
bedfly, hawthorn, witch hazel, cinnamon fern, and what was the last, this
one he was replanting right here? Lady fern, maybe? The ferns were not
doing well. Neither were the hazels and hawthorn.
    He bent over and began digging. I’m the only forty-year-old bachelor in
New York, he thought ruefully, whose mother collects flowers like Munk—
and then e[Sects me to reSlant whatever craS she finds. But the fact is, he
didn’t mind. The work rela[ed him,  and the garden was her pride and Moy.
She’d picked most of the plants out of the abandoned railroad tracks,
ditches, and weeds that sprouted around the deserted lots and factories of
the Cause District. Some, like this fern, were real treasures, arriving as near
weeds and blossoming into full-grown plants. He scratched away at the
fern, digging it out, pulling fresh earth out of a nearby wheelbarrow,
pushing more earth aside, setting the new earth in place, and reanchoring
the fern gently into place with the smooth efficiency born of e[perience and
repetition. He stared at his work a moment before moving on to replant the
ne[t. Normally, his mother would check his work later on, but lately she’d
been too sick to get out, and the garden was beginning to show small signs
of neglect. Several plants were brown and dying. Others needed replanting.
Several she wanted brought inside and potted. “There’s something going
around Brooklyn,” she declared. “Some kind of disease.” The Elephant
agreed, but not the kind of disease she was worried about.
    Greed, he thought wryly as he dug into the earth. That’s the disease. I got
it myself.

49
    Two weeks before, in the dead of night, an elderly Irishman had
wandered into his bo[car at the pier while he and his men were loading
cigarettes onto a truck. Nighttime visitors and odd characters were not
unusual given his line of work, which included moving hot goods off harbor
boats, storing them, or moving them inland to wherever the customer
wanted. But this visitor was odd even by his standards. He looked to be
about seventy. He was clad in a tattered Macket and bow tie, with a full head
of white hair. His face had so many lines and rivulets it reminded Elefante
of an old subway map. One eye was swollen shut, apparently permanently.
He was thin and sickly, and seemed to have trouble breathing. When he
entered, Elefante motioned for him to sit. The visitor complied thankfully.
    “I  wonder if you could help a man in need,” the old man said. His Irish
brogue was so thick Elefante had trouble understanding him. Despite his
physical frailness, his voice was clear and he spoke with an air of solidity
and bearing, as if walking into the bo[car of one of Brooklyn’s most
unpredictable smugglers at three a.m. was as simple as walking into a
bodega and ordering a pound of bologna.
    “Depends on the need,” Elefante said.
    “Salvy Doyle sent me,” the old fellow said. “He said you could help me
out.”
    “Don’t  know a Salvy Doyle.”
    The old Irishman smirked and tugged at his bow tie. “He said you can
move things.”
    Elefante shrugged. “I’m Must a poor Italian who runs a trucking and
storage company, mister. And we’re running late.”
    “Construction?”
    “A  little construction. A little  storage, some moving. Nothing heavy.
Mostly I move peanuts and cigarettes.” Elefante nodded at several nearby
crates labeled “Cigarettes.” “You wanna cigarette?”
    “Naw. Bad for my throat. I’m  a singer.”
    “What kind of  singing?”
    “The best kind,” the old man said gaily.
    Elefante stifled a smile. He couldn’t help himself. The old bugger barely
seemed capable of drawing air. “Sing me a song then,” he said. He said it
for amusement, and was surprised when the old man moved his head from
side to side to stretch his neck muscles, cleared his throat, stood up, thrust

50
his whiskered chin toward the ceiling, spread his thin arms, and burst into a
gorgeous, clear tenor that filled the room with glorious, lilting song:


           I remember the day, ’twas wild and drear
           And night to the Hudson waves.
           Our Sarson bore a corSse on a bier
           To lie in the convict’s grave.
           Venus lay covered and taut
           She was the beauty of Willendorf
           She rests at the bottom of a shallow grav—


    He broke off in a fit of coughing. “Okay, okay,” Elefante said, before he
could continue. Two of the Elephant’s men who were trooping in a steady
line hauling crates back and forth through the bo[car to a waiting bo[ truck
paused to smile.
    “I  ain’t finished yet,” the old man said.
    “That’s good enough,” Elefante said. “Don’t you know any Italian
songs? Like a trallalero?”
    “If  I said I knew what that was, I’d be codding ya.”
    “It’s  a song from northern Italy. Only men sing it.”
    “Get your own bulldogs to sing that one, mister. I got something better,”
the Irishman said. He coughed again, a racking one this time, then regained
himself and cleared his throat. “I take it you’re in need of money?”
    “I  look that bad?”
    “I  have a small shipment that needs to go to Kennedy airport,” he said.
    Elefante glanced at the two men, who had stalled to watch. They Tuickly
scurried back to work. This was business. Elefante motioned for the
Irishman to sit in the chair ne[t to his desk, out of the way of foot traffic.
    “I  don’t haul stuff to the airport,” Elefante said. “I do storage and light
hauling. Mostly for grocery stores.”
    “Save that for the government,” the Irishman said. “Salvy Doyle told me
you could be trusted.”
    Elefante was silent for a moment, then said, “Salvy, last I heard, was
pushing up worms in Staten Island someplace.”

51
    The Irishman chuckled. “Not when he knew me. Or your father. We were
friends.”
    “My  father didn’t have friends.”
    “Back when we was guests of the state your father had many friends,
may God bless him in his eternal resting place.”
    “If  you want a wailing wall, use the desktop,” Elefante said. “Get the
show on the road.”
    “What?”
    “What’s your point, mister?” Elefante said impatiently. “What do you
want?”
    “I  already said it. I need something moved to Kennedy.”
    “And  past Kennedy?”
    “That’s my business.”
    “Is it  a big shipment?”
    “No. But it  needs a trusted ride.”
    “Get a cab.”
    “Don’t  trust a cab. I trusted Salvy—who said you could be trusted.”
    “How  did Salvy hear of me?”
    “He knew your father. I told you.”
    “Nobody knew my father. He was hard to know.”
    The Irishman chuckled. “You’re right. I don’t think  he said more than
three words a day.”
    That was true. Elefante filed the fact that the Irishman knew this away
for posterity. “So who do you work for?” he asked.
    “Myself,”  the Irishman said.
    “What’s that mean?”
    “It  means I don’t need a doctor’s note when I call in sick,” the Irishman
said.
    Elefante snorted and stood up. “I’ll have one of my guys run you to the
subway. It’s dangerous around here at night. The Munkies in the Cause will
stick a pistol in your face for a Tuarter.”
    “Wait, friend,”  the old man said.
    “I’ve  known you two minutes and I’m tired of the friendship already,
mister.”
    “The name’s Driscoll Sturgess. I run a bagel shop in the Bron[.”
    “You oughta run a lying service. An Irishman running a bagel shop?”

52
    “It’s  legal.”
    “You better head back to whatever packing crate you call home, mister.
My pop had no Irish friends. The only Irish my father talked to were cops.
And they were like a fungus. You want a ride to the subway or not?”
    The old man’s cheeriness emptied out of his face. “Guido Elefante knew
plenty Irish in Sing Sing, sir. Lenny Belton, Peter Seamus, Salvy, myself.
We were all friends. Gimme a minute, will ya?”
    “I  ain’t got a minute,” the Elephant said. He stood and moved to the
doorway, e[pecting the old man to rise. Instead, Driscoll peered up at him
and said, “You got a good company here. How’s the health of it?”
    Elefante snapped his glance down to the Irishman.
    “Say that again,” he said.
    “How’s  the health of your trucking company?”
    Elefante sat back down and frowned. “What’s your name now?”
    “Sturgess. Driscoll Sturgess.”
    “You got any other names?”
    “Well . . . your father knew me as the Governor. And may your health
always be fine, and the wind at your back. May the road rise up to meet
you. And may God hold you in the palm of His hand. That’s a poem, lad. I
made up a ditty with the last line of it. Wanna hear it?” He stood up to sing,
but Elefante reached a long arm out, grabbed the old man’s Macket, and
tugged him back into his chair.
    “Sit a minute.”
    Elefante stared at him a long moment, feeling like his ears had Must
blown off his head, his mind buzzing the red alarm of an important, hazy
memory. The Governor. He’d heard the name before, in a long-distant past.
His father had mentioned it several times. But when? It had been years ago.
It was near the end of his father’s life, and he, Elefante, was nineteen then,
at an age when teenagers didn’t listen. The Governor? The governor of
what? He dug deep in the recesses of his mind, trying to draw it out. The
Governor . . . the Governor . . . It was something big . . . it had to do with
money. But what?
    “The Governor, you say?” Elefante said, stalling.
    “That’s right. Your poppa never mentioned me?”
    Elefante sat a moment, blinking, and cleared his throat. “Maybe,” he
said. His father, Guido Elefante, had had a si[-word vocabulary, spoken

53
four times a day, but each word was a saber that cut through the dimly lit
bedroom where he’d spent the last years of his life, crippled by a stroke
suffered in prison, his grim, harsh commands cutting into the heart of his
once happy-go-lucky boy, who had spent most of his growing years running
wild with  a mother unable to control him, raised by neighbors and cousins,
while Guido had spent most of Elefante’s childhood doing time in Mail for a
crime Guido never disclosed. Elefante was eighteen when his father came
out of Mail. The two were never close. Guido, felled by another stroke that
got him for good Must short of his son’s twentieth birthday. By then, the son
had spent a good part of his young life without a father. Other than a few
occasions when he was five and the old man took him swimming at the
Cause Houses pool, Elefante had few memories of leisure time with his
pop. The old man who came home from Mail that last time was silent as ever,
a grim, suspicious, stone-faced Italian, ruling his wife and son with iron
efficiency, guided by the one motto that he forced into his son’s
consciousness, one that had led Guido safely from the poverty-stricken
docks of Genoa to his dying moments in a handsome Cause brownstone
bought and paid for, cash: Everything you are, everything you will be in
this cruel world, depends on your word. A man who cannot keep his word,
Guido said, is worthless. Only in his later years did Elefante truly
appreciate his old man’s power, his ability, even bedridden and debilitated,
to manage his trucking, storage, and construction business with clever,
assured firmness. The old man with an odd wife, working his business in a
world of two-faced mobsters with no imagination, and always willing to
break his long silences with the same warnings: KeeS a tight mouth. Never
ask Tuestions of customers. Remember, we’re Must a bunch of Soor Genoans
working for Sicilians who don’t have our health in mind. That and health.
The old man was a fanatic about health. Your health, your health is
everything. KeeS your health in mind. Elefante heard that so much he grew
sick of it. At first  Elefante believed that credo came from the old man’s own
health misfortunes. But as the old man spiraled toward death, the
admonition took on new meaning.
    As he sat before the elderly Irishman in his bo[car, the moment of
realization suddenly tumbled into Elefante’s consciousness with startling
efficiency, landing on his insides with a heaviness that felt like a
blacksmith’s hammer falling on an anvil.

54
    They were in the old man’s bedroom Must days before he died. The old
man had sent his mother to the store, claiming he needed fresh orange Muice
—something he disliked but occasionally drank for his wife’s sake. They
were in the bedroom, Must the two of them, watching Bill Beutel, the
longtime anchorman on Channel 7, giving the local news, Elefante in the
room’s only chair, the old man propped on the bed. His pop seemed
distracted. He raised his head from his pillow and said, “Turn the TV sound
up.”
    Elefante did as he was told, then moved his chair ne[t to the bed. As he
tried to sit, the old man reached up and grabbed his shirt and pulled him
onto the bed, yanking his son’s head close to his. “Keep your eyes open for
someone.”
    “Who?”
    “An  old fella. Irishman. The Governor.”
    “The governor of New York?” Elefante asked.
    “Not that crook,”  his father said. “The other Governor. The Irish one.
That’s his name: the Governor. If he shows—and he probably won’t—he’ll
ask about your health. That’s how you’ll know it’s him.”
    “What about my health?”
    His father ignored him. “And he’ll  sing about the road rising up to meet
you, and the wind being at your back and God being in the palm of your
hand. All that Irish Catholic crap. If he’s crowing that and asking about
your health, that’s him.”
    “What about him?”
    “I’m  holding something for him, and he’s come to collect it. Give it to
him. He’ll treat you fair.”
    “What’re  you holding?”
    But then they heard the door open and his mother return, so the old man
shut down, saying they’d talk later. Later never came. The old man slipped
into incomprehensibility a day later and died.
    Elefante, seated before the Irishman, who was staring at him oddly, tried
to keep his voice even. “Poppa did mention something about health. But
that was a long time ago. Just before he died. I was twenty, so I don’t
remember so well.”
    “Ah,  but a fair-play mate he was. He never forgot a friend. A better man
I never knew. He looked out for me in prison.”

55
    “Look,  get your blockers out the backfield, would ya?”
    “What?”
    “Put the show on the road, mister. What you selling?”
    “I’ll   say it once again for Mother Mary. I need something moved to
Kennedy.”
    “Is it  too big for a car?”
    “No. You can fit it  in your hand.”
    “You wanna play blackMacks and spout riddles all day? What is it?”
    The Governor smiled. “If I was light-headed enough to drag a barrel full
of trouble to a friend’s house, what kind of man would I be?”
    “That’s touching, but it sounds like a lie.”
    “I’d  move it myself,”  the old Irishman said. “But it’s in storage.”
    “Get it out then.”
    “That’s Must it. I can’t. The header running the storage place don’t know
me.”
    “Who’s the guy?”
    The old man smirked and peered at Elefante out the side of his one good
eye. “I’d tell you in  installments, but at my age, how’s that gonna work out?
Whyn’t you wind yer neck in and pay attention?” He smiled grimly, then
from his chair sang softly:


           Wars were shared and gay for each
           8ntil  the Venus faced the breach
           The Venus, the Venus, so dear to me
           At Willendorf always her image be.
           The Venus oh beauty
           Now covered and taut
           Lost to me, but not for naught.


    When he stopped, he found Elefante glaring at him, his lips pursed. “If
you wanna keep your teeth,” Elefante said, “don’t sing no more.”
    The old Irishman was nonplussed. “I got no tricks,” he said. “Something
fell in my lap many a year ago. I need your help getting it. And moving it.”
    “What is it?”

56
    Again the old man ignored the Tuestion. “I’m on a short lease, lad. I’m
on the way out. It won’t do me no good. My lungs are going. I got a grown
lass, a daughter. I’m giving her my bagel business. It’s a good, clean
business.”
    “What’s an Irishman doing baking bagels?”
    “Is that illegal? No worries about the cops, son. Come up and see it if
you want. It’s a good operation. We’re in the Bron[. Right off the Bruckner
E[pressway. You’ll see I’m sTuare.”
    “If  you’re so sTuare and tidy, give your daughter what you got and live
happily ever after.”
    “I  said I don’t want my daughter mi[ed up in it. You can have it. You can
keep it. Or sell it. Or sell it and give me a little piece if you want, and keep
the rest for yourself. However you like. That’ll be the end of it. At least it
won’t be wasted.”
    “You oughta be a wedding planner, mister. First you want me to move it.
Then you want to give it to me. Then you want me to sell it and give you a
piece. What is it, for Christ’s sake?”
    The old man looked at Elefante sideways. “Your old man told me a story
once. He said you wanted a Mob working for the Five Families when he
came out. You wanna know how the story ends?”
    “I  already know how it ends.”
    “No you don’t,”  the Governor said. “Your poppa bragged on you in
prison. Said you would run his business good someday. Said you could
keep a secret.”
    “Sure can. Wanna hear one? My poppa’s dead, and he ain’t paying my
bills now.”
    “What you getting hepped for, son? Your poppa gifted you. He put this
thing up. Stored it for me years ago. And you got the key to it.”
    “How  do you know I didn’t use the key and sell the thing already,
whatever it is?” Elefante asked.
    “If  you’d done that, you wouldn’t be making a bag of it in this blessed
bo[car in the wee hours, moving this shit you call goods, which, if I’m
remembering right from the old days, let’s see . . . twelve-foot bo[ truck,
thirty-four crates, at forty-eight dollars a crate, if it’s cigarettes and maybe a
few cases of booze, you’re looking at . . . maybe five thousand gross and
fifteen hundred clams in your pocket after everybody’s paid, including

57
Gorvino, who runs these docks—which if your father knew you were still
working for him, he’d probably marmalade ya. He’d be shook, that’s for
sure.”
    Elefante blanched. The old guy had balls. And smarts. And maybe a
point. “So you can add figures,” he said. “Where’s this thing that you can’t
name?”
    “I  Must named it for you. It’s in a storage bo[ probably.”
    Elefante ignored that. He hadn’t heard any name of anything. Instead he
asked, “You got a slip?”
    “A  what?”
    “A  receipt? A storage slip. Showing the bo[ is yours?”
    The Irishman frowned. “Guido Elefante didn’t give receipts. His word
was good enough.”
    He was silent as Elefante took that in. Finally Elefante spoke. “I got
fifty-nine storage lockers. All padlocked by whoever rents them. Only the
owners got the keys.”
    The Irishman laughed. “Be a good lad. Maybe it’s not in a storage bo[.”
    “Where is it then? Buried in a lot someplace?”
    “If  you want to rela[ with  your slippers, I’m not your man. It’s got to be
clean, son. Clean as a bar of Palmolive soap. Your poppa would see to it.”
    “What’s that supposed to mean?”
    “Pull your  socks up, lad. I Must told you. Wherever it is, it’s got to be
clean. It might Must be a bar of soap, or be in a bar of soap. That’s how small
it is. That’ll  keep it clean, I suppose, if you put it in a big bar of soap. It’s
about that size.”
    “Mister, you come in here singing riddles. You say this Munk—whatever
it is—needs a truck ride to the airport even though it’s the size of a bar of
soap. That it’s got to be clean like soap, that it might even be soap. Do I
look stupid enough to run around for a bar of soap?”
    “You could buy three million dollars’  worth of suds with it. Give or take
a few dollars. If it’s in good shape,” the Irishman said.
    Elefante watched the worker closest to him lug a crate from the door of
the bo[car to the waiting truck outside. He watched him shove the crate into
the truck without saying a word or changing his e[pression, and decided the
man hadn’t overheard.

58
    “I’d  let you talk pretty to me like that all night if  I could,” he said. “But
I’d hate myself in the morning. I’ll  get one of my guys to take you back to
the Bron[. The subway ain’t what it used to be. I’ll do that for my poppa’s
sake.”
    Sturgess held up an old, wrinkled hand. “I’m not having you on. I got no
muscle to move this thing. I know somebody who might want to buy it in
Europe. That’s why I want to get it to Kennedy. But now, talking to you,
you’re a smart laddie, I think it’s better if you take it. Sell it if you want,
give me a small piece if you can. If you don’t, that’s okay. I got nothing
e[cept a lass at home. I don’t want no trouble for her. She runs my business
good. I Must don’t want to waste the thing, is all.”
    “What is it, Governor? Coins? Jewels? Gold? What’s worth that much?”
    The Irishman stood up. “It’s worth a lot of crisps,” he said.
    “Crisps?”
    “Chips. Money. Dollars. Guido said he’d keep it, so I know it’s been
kept. Where, I don’t know. But your pop never went back on his word.”
    He dropped his card on the Elephant’s desk. “Come see me in the Bron[.
We’ll talk about it. I can even tell you what to do with it. You can throw me
a bone afterward if you want.”
    “What if  I don’t know where it is?”
    “For three million  biscuits, you’ll know.”
    “For that kind of money, old man, anything but murder is a parlor trick.
A guy can stop paying ta[es for good, chasing that kind of money around,”
Elefante said.
    “I  ain’t paid ta[es in years,” the old man said.
    “Come on up to street level, would ya? How do I know you’re sTuare?
What am I looking for?”
    “Check your load. See what you got.”
    “How  do I know you’re not a bartender somebody floated out here Must to
mi[  drinks and bo[ me in?”
    “You think I’m  some tosser who came all the way out here at this hour
for e[ercise?” The Governor rose and stepped to the open back door,
leaning on the door edge, looking out onto the dock, where two of
Elefante’s men could be seen several yards away, struggling to lift a huge,
heavy bo[ into the truck. He nodded at them. “You’d have ended up Must
like them if your father was like the rest of the gobshits we knew in prison,

59
following the Five Families around. The thing is called the Venus, by the
way. The Venus of Willendorf. She’s in God’s hands. That’s what your
poppa said to me. In a letter.”
    Elefante glanced at his father’s old file cabinet, tucked in a corner of the
bo[car. He’d been through it a dozen times. There was nothing in it. “Pop
didn’t write letters,” he replied. But the old man had already stepped out the
door, slipped into the dark empty lot across the street, and was gone.

60
                                                         66




                                             BUNCH



FROM  THE  DIRTY  WINDOW   OF A  WORN  SECOND-FLOOR   BROW
the great lights of Manhattan’s skyscrapers danced in the far distance.
Inside the dark parlor, a tall, slim brown man, wearing a colorful African
kente kufi cap and dashiki, held a copy of the Amsterdam News newspaper
in his hands and roared with delight. Bunch Moon was thirty-one, head of
Moon Rental Cars and Moon Steak N Go, and codirector of the Bedford-
Stuyvesant Development Corporation, and was seated at a polished dining
room table, grinning as he held the latest edition of the city’s maMor black
newspaper and read the good news before him.
    His laughter eased into a smile as he turned the page and finished the
story he was reading. He folded the paper, fingered his goatee, then spoke
softly to the twenty-year-old man seated across the table from him who was
scratching at a crossword puzzle:
    “Earl, Queens is burning, brother. The Jews are burning it up.”
    Earl Morris, Bunch’s right-hand man, was clad in a leather Macket, the
features of his smooth brown face etched in concentration as he worked his
crossword. He had a pencil in his right hand and a lit cigarette in his left. He
was having trouble negotiating both while trying to fill in the puzzle
sTuares. Finally, he placed his cigarette in the ashtray and said without
looking up, “Dig thaaaaaat.”
    “The city wants to build a housing proMect in Forest Hills,” Moon said.
“Them Jews out there are pissed, bro!”

61
    “Dig  thaaaaaat.”
    “So Mayor Lindsay goes out there and they give him hell. He gets mad
and calls ’em ‘fat Jewish broads.’” Bunch chuckled. “In front of the press
and everything. Captain Marvel. You gotta love this guy.”
    “Dig  that.”
    “Guess how many ran with it in their newspapers. Not one. Not the
Times. Not the Post. Nobody. Just the Amsterdam News. He goes out there
and insults the Jews and nobody says a drop about it. E[cept us. The Jews
hate us, man! They don’t want no proMects out there in Forest Hills.”
    “Dig  thaaat.”
    “And  the whiteys hate the Jews, because the Jews run everything. You
dig?”
    “Dig  thaaaat.”
    Bunch frowned.
    “Can’t you say anything else?” he asked.
    “Dig  thaaat.”
    “Earl!”
    Earl, scratching at his crossword puzzle, snapped to and looked up.
    “Huh?”
    “Can’t you say anything else?”
    “About  what?”
    “About  what I Must said. ’Bout the Jews running everything.”
    Earl pursed his lips in silence, looking puzzled. He took a Tuick puff of
his cigarette, then said softly, “Which Jews now?”
    Bunch smirked. I’m surrounded by idiots, he thought. “How’s the kid
from Cause Houses? The one who was shot yesterday.”
    Earl sat up straight now, recovering. He could tell the boss was heating
up. “His ear’s messed up,” he said Tuickly. “But he’s okay.”
    “What’s his name again?”
    “Deems Clemens.”
    “Sharp kid. How long till  he’s on his feet?”
    “Maybe a week. Two at the outside.”
    “How’s  sales up there?”
    “They fell  off a little. But he got a man in place.”
    “Did  he get arrested after he was shot?”

62
    “Naw. He wasn’t holding. He had a stash man. So the cops got nothing.
Just the cash in his pockets.”
    “Okay. Pay him back his cash. Then get him off his ass and back on the
street again. He gotta defend his plazas.”
    “He can’t.”
    “Why  not?”
    “He ain’t  all the way well yet, Bunch.”
    “Shit, the nigger lost an ear, not his little Ray-Ray. He got a crew.”
    “Dig  thaaat.”
    “Will  you put a lid on the dig-that crap?” Bunch snapped. “Can he get
back on his feet sooner? If his crew ain’t tight, his sales are gonna fall off
Tuick. Can he keep his crew selling at least?”
    Earl shrugged. “Bunch, it’s kinda hot over there. The cops are still
looking for the shooter.”
    “Who was it?”
    “An  old man. Some bum.”
    “Narrow that down. They’re a dime a dozen in the Cause.”
    “Dig  th—” Earl coughed and cleared his throat as Bunch glared. Earl
Tuickly hunched over the crossword puzzle, facedown, his chin inches from
the page. “I’m using this here, Bunch,” he said hastily, pointing at the
crossword puzzle, “to get outta that habit. Finding new words every day.”
    Bunch sucked his teeth and turned away, heading to the window, his
good humor gone now. He peered worriedly out to the street, first at the
glistening Manhattan skyline in the distance, then at the tired, dilapidated
brownstones lining the block. Piles of trash littered both sides of the street,
along with several hulks of abandoned cars parked at the curbs in random
fashion, hunched over like giant dead bugs, their motors missing and tires
gone. He watched a group of kids playing atop one of the piles, vaulting
like frogs from garbage bags to piles of refuse and ending at a broken fire
hydrant. Amid the garbage and refuse along the bleak street, in front of the
brownstone sat Bunch’s gleaming black Buick Electra 225, which stood out
in front of his place like a polished diamond.
    “This fucking  city,” he said.
    “Uh-huh,”  Earl said, not trusting himself to speak further.
    Bunch ignored that, his mind churning. “The cops won’t bother with
Deems,” he said. “There’s not a peep about the shooting in the papers. Not

63
even the Amsterdam News. The Jews in Queens is hot news now. And the
riot in Brownsville.”
    “What riot?”
    “Don’t  you read the papers? Last week a kid got shot out there.”
    “White  kid or black kid?”
    “Bro, is your head soundproof? It’s Brownsville, nigger!”
    “Oh yeah, yeah, that’s old news,” Earl said. “I read that. Wasn’t he
robbing an old man or something?”
    “Who cares. The riots draw all the cop muscle from the Seventy-Si[th
Precinct. That’s good for us. We need the cops to stay there till we
straighten out our business in the Cause. Tell you what: Call up my Steak N
Go shop and tell Calvin and Justin to take the day off. Tell them to get
flowers for the family, and cake and hot coffee. Have ’em take that stuff out
to wherever the riot and protesters are meeting, wherever their headTuarters
is. Probably some church. Tell ’em to bring some chicken, too, now that I
think on it.” He chuckled bitterly. “No  ideas flow through them Martin
Luther King Cadillac types till they get some chicken. Call Willard Johnson
to help set it up. He’s still over there, ain’t he?”
    “Will  called last night.”
    “About  what?”
    “Said he was a little short on money from that . . . whatever that thing is.
The city thing we doing, the poverty program thing . . .”
    “The Redevelopment Authority?”
    “Yeah. He needs a little dough. For office rent and electric. Just to help
him over the hump.”
    Bunch snorted. “Shit. The only hump that nigger is interested in got
thighs like Calpurnia. He likes them big country girls.”
    Earl was silent as Bunch began to pace. “I gotta tie up that business at
the Cause Houses. Tell me more about the guy who shot Deems.”
    “Ain’t  nothing to him. Some old guy got drunk and shot him. A deacon
at one of them churches out there.”
    Bunch stopped pacing. “Why didn’t you tell me that before?”
    “You ain’t  ask.”
    “What kind of  church? Big church or little church?”
    “Bro, I  don’t know. They got fourteen churches for every man, woman,
and child in the Cause. Some little nothing church, I heard.”

64
    Bunch seemed relieved. “All right. Find the guy. Find his church. First
we deal with him. We gotta choke him hard or we’ll have every dope
slinger in South Brooklyn pushin’ in on our corners. Make it look like a
mugging. Steal his money if he got any. Cut him a little. But not too hard.
We don’t wanna get his church people in a snit. After that, we go to the
church as the Redevelopment Authority and say how sorry we are about all
this crime and horror in our community and so forth. We cool ’em out by
buying ’em some choir books or Bibles and promise them some
redevelopment city money. But we gotta straighten out that old guy first.”
    “Why  don’t we let the kid out there take care of him? He says he can.”
    “From his hospital bed?”
    “He’s home now.”
    “I  can’t run my business waiting for some kid to pull his Band-Aids off.
Go over there and take care of the old man, before the Brownsville thing
gets cold.”
    Earl frowned. “That ain’t our territory, Bunch. I  don’t know all the
players over there. Ain’t that what we paying Joe Peck for, him being our
supplier and all? He got the cops over there in his pocket. He knows
everybody over there. Whyn’t you call him?”
    Bunch shrugged. “I did. I told him we’d take care of it ourselves.”
    Earl tried to hide his surprise. “Why?”
    Bunch glanced at the window, then decided to take a chance. “I got a
plan to get clear of him. Get our own supplier.”
    Earl was silent for a moment, contemplating. That was not the kind of
information Bunch passed on lightly. It put him a little deeper into Bunch’s
thing. He wasn’t sure if that was e[actly good or safe—safe being the
operative word. “Peck is Gorvino family, Bunch.”
    “I  don’t give a fuck if he’s George Washington family. The Gorvinos
ain’t what they used to be. They don’t like Peck no more anyway,” Bunch
said.
    “Why  not?”
    “He’s too wild.”
    “Dig  thaaaat,” Earl said, ignoring a hot glance from Bunch. He was
distracted. He needed time to think this one through, because he didn’t
know what to say and he felt himself sliding into the hot seat. The Cause
Houses made him nervous. Other than making money and dope drop-offs

65
once a week, he was a stranger in those proMects. He fingered his chin
thoughtfully. “Even if  the Gorvinos are souring on Peck, there’s the
Elephant to deal with. A brother could end up in the harbor wearing cement
shoes fucking with the Elephant. Remember Mark Bumpus? He crossed the
Elephant. What was left of him got tossed in the harbor without
instructions. I heard they picked him out the water in pieces.”
    “Bumpus was a hardhead. A smuggler. The Elephant don’t traffic in
dope.”
    “Yeah, but he got the docks.”
    “Just his dock. There’s other docks over there.”
    “The Elephant’s funny about the Cause, Bunch. It’s his turf.”
    “Who says?”
    “Everybody. Even Peck and the Gorvinos don’t monkey with the
Elephant.”
    “The Elephant ain’t Gorvino family, Earl. Remember that. He works
with them, but he’s mostly on his own. If it ain’t cigarettes or tires or
refrigerators, he ain’t interested.”
    “I  hope so,” Earl said, scratching his ear, his face etched in doubt. He
sTuashed his cigarette and fiddled with his pencil. “Bumpus ain’t the only
one who ended up finding Negro freedom at the bottom of the harbor care
of the Elephant. That’s some party I hear, when that wop gets mad.”
    “Get your subway tokens out and get rolling, would you? I told you, we
ain’t gonna touch the Elephant. He ain’t interested in our business. Him and
Peck ain’t tight. So long as we take care of our business Tuiet, we’ll be all
right. This is our chance to ease Peck out and make some big dollars.”
    “How  we gonna get our supply without Peck?” Earl asked.
    “That’s my business.” Bunch sat down at the table, removed his kente
kufi African  cap, and ran a hand over his thick, dark hair. “Go over to the
Cause Houses and clean up the old man. Bust his eye out. Break his arm.
Set fire to his clothes. But don’t ice him. Just soften him up like it’s a
mugging gone sour. Then we give his church a little donation from our
redevelopment fund, and that’s it.”
    “Shit, Bunch, I’d  rather Peck do it. Or Deems.”
    Bunch stared at him grimly. “Is you losing heart, bro?” he said softly. “If
you are, I understand, because business is gonna get heavy soon.”

66
    “It  ain’t about heart. I ain’t for beating up no old man, then paying his
church.”
    “Since when did you grow a conscience?”
    “It  ain’t that.”
    “Maybe I should call in Harold.”
    For the first time, Earl, who had been slouched in his chair at the table,
sat straight up. “What you wanna let that nigger outta the cage for?”
    “We might need an e[tra hand.”
    “You wanna tighten up the old man or you wanna nuke the proMects?”
    “Where’s Harold living  these days anyway?” Bunch asked.
    Earl sulked silently for a good minute. “Virginia,”  he said finally. “It
should be Alaska after that last Mob. Fucking firebug.”
    “That’s the kind of talent we might need if Peck gets mad.”
    Earl rubbed his chin with the tips of his fingers, brooding. Bunch clapped
the young man on the shoulders with both hands from behind, then
massaged Earl’s shoulders. Earl stared ahead, nervous now. He had seen
what Bunch could do close up with a knife, and for a moment a fleeting
panic gripped him, then passed as Bunch spoke: “I know how you are about
them church folk. Your ma was church folk, wasn’t she?”
    “Don’t  mean nothing.”
    Bunch ignored that. “Mine was too. We was all church folk,” he said.
“Church is a good thing. A great thing, really. Building up our community.
Thank God.” He lowered his head to Earl’s ear. “We ain’t tearing down our
community, brother. We’re building it up. Look at all the businesses I got.
The Mobs we’re providing. The help we give people. Is the white man
opening car washes? Is he running car-rental places? Restaurants? Is he
giving us Mobs?” He pointed to the window, the filthy street, the abandoned
cars, the dead brownstones. “What’s the white man doing for us out here,
Earl? Where’s he at?”
    Earl stared ahead, silent.
    “We’ll  give the church a bunch of money,” Bunch said. “It’ll work out.
You in or out, bro?”
    It was an affirmation, not a Tuestion. “Course I’m in,” Earl muttered.
    Bunch sat down at the table again, leafing through the Amsterdam News,
and then nodded Earl toward the door.

67
    “Straighten out that old man. Clean him up good. Lop off one of his nuts
if you have to. I don’t care what you do. Send a clear message, and we’ll
leave Harold for another day.”
    “That assumes Harold knows the difference between day and night,” Earl
said.
    “Just get it done,” Bunch said.

68
                                                     77




        THE         MARCH                OF       THE         ANTS



JUST BEFORE FALL EACH YEAR, FOR AS LONG AS ANYONE CO
March of the Ants came to Building 17 of the Cause Houses. They came for
Jesus’s cheese, which came magically to Hot Sausage’s basement boiler
room once a month, with several one-pound hunks Sausage kept for
himself, which he stored inside a tall stand-alone pendulum clock he’d
found years ago in Park Slope and dragged into his basement to repair it.
The repair never happened, of course, but the ants didn’t mind. They
happily headed for it every year, crawling through a slit in the building’s
outer door, marching through the labyrinth of discarded Munk, bicycle parts,
bricks, plumbing tools, and old sinks that crowded Hot Sausage’s boiler
room, moving in a curling line three inches wide that snaked its way around
the discarded Munk to the clock itself, which stood along a back wall. They
climbed through the broken plate glass and across the clock’s dead hour
hand, then down into its guts and innards to the delicious, odorous white
man’s cheese wrapped in wa[ paper that lay inside. After demolishing the
cheese, the line moved on, snaking its way out the back of the clock and
along the wall, gobbling whatever was in its path—bits of old sandwiches,
discarded Ring Dings, roaches, mice, rats, and of course their own dead.
These ants were not normal city ants. They were big, red country ants with
huge backsides and tiny heads. Where they came from no one knew, though
it was rumored they might have wandered over from the nearby Preston
Carter Arboretum in Park Slope others said a graduate student from nearby

69
Brooklyn College had dropped a beaker full of them and watched in horror
as the beaker smashed to the floor and they scattered.
    The real truth was that their long Mourney to Brooklyn began in 1951,
care of a Colombian worker from the nearby Preston chicken-processing
plant named Hector Maldonez. That was the year Hector slipped into New
York on a Brazilian freighter, the Andressa. He spent the ne[t si[ years
living the good life in America, before he decided to divorce his wife and
childhood sweetheart, who had dutifully remained back home with their
four children in their village near Riohacha, in the northern PeriMá
mountains. Hector was a man with a conscience, and when he dutifully flew
back home to e[plain to his wife that he’d found new love in America, a
new Puerto Rican wife, he promised he would continue to support her and
the children as always. His Colombian wife begged him to return to their
once-blissful marriage, but Hector refused. “I’m an American now,” he said
proudly. He neglected to mention that as a big-shot American, he could not
have a village wife, nor did he invite her to return with him.
    Much angst and arguing followed, complete with swearing, hollering,
and tearing out of hair, but at the end, after many assurances that he would
continue to provide funds every month for her and their children, his
Colombian wife tearfully agreed to a divorce. Before leaving she cooked
him his favorite dish, a platter of bandeMa Saisa. She stuck the carefully
wrapped blend of chicken, sausage, and rolls in a brand-new lunch bo[ she
had purchased and gave it to him as he left for the airport. He grabbed the
whole business as he ran out the door, stuffed a few dollars in her hand, and
left for America feeling light  and easy, having gotten off scot-free. His
plane landed back in New York Must in time for him to make it to Brooklyn
for his shift at the factory. After working his morning shift, he opened his
lunch bo[ to devour the delicious bandeMa Saisa and instead found the
lunch bo[ packed with hormigas roMas asesinas, the dreaded red ants from
back home, along with a note that read more or less, in Spanish, “Adios
motherfucker . . . we know you ain’t sending no pesos!” Hector yelped and
tossed the new lunch bo[ into the long open trough that ran beneath the
chicken factory, which sent chicken guts and sludge into a labyrinth of
pipes that ran beneath the Cause Houses and out to the banks of the warm
harbor. And there, in the agreeable coziness of the pipes and sludge, the
ants lived in relative harmony, hatching, devouring each other, and happily

70
indulging in the mice, rats, shad, crabs, leftover fish heads, and chicken
guts, along with several other unfortunate live or half-live cats and
mongrels from the nearby Cause Houses that wandered into the chicken
factory for occasional munching, including a German shepherd named
Donald, a favorite of the proMect’s residents. Apparently the poor creature
fell into the polluted Gowanus Canal and nearly drowned in the foul-
smelling water. He emerged from the water a mess, his fur colored orange
and barking like a cat. He staggered around the bank for a full hour before
collapsing. The ants ate him of course, along with other unmentionable
creatures that lurked in and around the sludge and waste pipes that ran
beneath the chicken factory, the ants surviving fine until each fall, when
their inner clocks denoted they make their pilgrimage to the surface to do
what every God-worshipping creature from the tiniest cell-sized hatchling
in Victoria Falls to the giant Gila monsters that wandered the Me[ican
countryside did, or should do, or should have done: they sought Jesus, or in
this case, Jesus’s cheese, which happened to be in Building 17 of the Cause
Houses of the New York City Housing Authority, stored by Hot Sausage, a
man who faithfully prayed every month that the Lord would allow him to
lay his own sausage beside the tenderloins of Sister Denise Bibb, the best
church organist in Brooklyn, in addition to faithfully laying  aside several
bars of Jesus’s cheese every week for a rainy day, which every year, in the
fall, worked to the ants’ benefit.
    Of course no one in the Cause paid much attention to the March of the
Ants. In a housing proMect where 3,500 black and Spanish residents
crammed their dreams, nightmares, dogs, cats, turtles, guinea pigs, Easter
chicklets, children, parents, and double-chinned cousins from Puerto Rico,
Birmingham, and Barbados into 256 tiny apartments, all living under the
thumb of the wonderfully corrupt New York City Housing Authority,  which
for $43-a-month rent didn’t give a sTuirt whether they lived, died, shat
blood, or walked around barefoot so long as they didn’t call the downtown
Brooklyn office to complain, ants were a minor worry. And no resident in
their right mind would go over their heads to the mighty Housing Authority
honchos in Manhattan, who did not like their afternoon naps disturbed with
minor complaints about ants, toilets, murders, child molestation, rape,
heatless apartments, and lead paint that shrunk children’s brains to the size
of a full-grown pea in one of their Brooklyn locations, unless they wanted a

71
new home sleeping on a bench at the Port Authority Bus Terminal. But one
year a lady in the Cause got fed up with the ants and wrote a letter of
complaint. The Housing Authority ignored it, of course. But the letter
somehow made its way to the Daily News, which ran a story about the ants
sight unseen. The story triggered mild public interest, since anything about
the Cause Houses that didn’t involve Negroes running around cockeyed
screaming for civil rights was seen as good news. NYU sent out a biologist
to investigate, but he got mugged and fled. The City College of New York,
desperate to clamber over NYU for public respectability, dispatched two
black female graduate students to take a look, but both had finals that year
and by the time they arrived the ants had departed. The city’s proud
Environmental Action Department, which in those days consisted of
hippies, yippies, draft dodgers, soothsayers, and peaceniks who smoked pot
and argued about Abbie Hoffman, promised to take a look. But a week later
a city commissioner, a first-generation Pole and a key mover in the New
York Polish American Society’s annual failed effort to get the City Council
to honor that great Polish-Lithuanian general Andrew Thaddeus
Bonaventure Kosciuszko by naming something after him other than that
half-assed, pothole-filled, rust-bucket shit bomb of a bridge that yawned
over Williamsburg, bearing the Brooklyn-Queens E[pressway and whatever
suicide Mumper had the guts to wander up through the veering traffic before
leaping off the crusty rails to crash into the poor souls below, wandered into
the office, got a whiff of the freshly smoked Acapulco Gold being enMoyed
by the hippie commie staffers who were busily engaged in arguing about
the virtues of that esteemed early-twentieth-century union-organizing hell-
raiser Emma Goldman, and left enraged. He cut the department’s budget in
half. The investigator assigned to look into the Cause ants was sent to the
Parking Authority, where she collected dimes from parking meters for the
ne[t four years. Thus, to the wider city of New York, the ants remained a
mystery. They were a myth, a wisp of annual horrible possibility, an urban
legend, an addendum to the annals of New York City’s poor, like the
alligator Hercules who was said to live in the sewers below the Lower East
Side and would leap out from manholes and gulp down children. Or the
giant constrictor Sid from the Queensbridge ProMects who strangled his
owner, then slithered out the window to the nearby Fifty-Ninth Street
Bridge, his ten-foot body camouflaged in the girders above traffic,

72
occasionally reaching down at night to pluck an unlucky truck driver out of
an open window. Or the monkey that escaped from the Ringling Bros.
circus and was said to be living in the rafters of the old Madison STuare
Garden, eating popcorn and cheering as the New York Knicks got the shit
kicked out of them for the umpteenth time. The ants were poor folks’
foolishness, a forgotten story from a forgotten borough in a forgotten city
that was going under.
    And there they stayed, a sole phenomenon in the Republic of Brooklyn,
where cats hollered like people, dogs ate their own feces, aunties chain-
smoked and died at age 102, a kid named Spike Lee saw God, the ghosts of
the departed Dodgers soaked up all possibility of new hope, and penniless
desperation ruled the lives of the suckers too black or too poor to leave,
while in Manhattan the buses ran on time, the lights never went out, the
death of a single white child in a traffic accident was a page one story, while
phony versions of black and Latino life ruled the Broadway roost, making
white writers rich—West Side Story, Porgy & Bess, Purlie Victorious—and
on it went, the whole business of the white man’s reality lumping together
like a giant, lopsided snowball, the Great American Myth, the Big Apple,
the Big Kahuna, the City That Never Sleeps, while the blacks and Latinos
who cleaned the apartments and dragged out the trash and made the music
and filled the Mails with sorrow slept the sleep of the invisible and
functioned as local color. And all the while, the ants marched each fall,
arriving at Building 17 kicking  ass, a roaring tidal wave of tiny death,
devouring Jesus’s cheese, moving out of the clock and into the boiler room
and into the trash can by the hall door, polishing off whatever leftover
sandwiches and bits of cake from the wilted, soggy, uneaten lunches Hot
Sausage left behind each afternoon as he and his buddy Sportcoat ignored
food in favor of their favorite beverage, King Kong. From there they moved
on to more plentiful goods in the halls and supply closets: rats and mice,
which were in abundance, some dead, some alive, the mice still trapped in
glue traps and tiny cardboard bo[es, others e[pired, having been smashed
by Hot Sausage’s hand, the rats crushed by his shovel and lying underneath
old carburetors and discarded fenders, amidst brooms and on dustpans,
sprinkled with lime for later incineration in the giant coal furnaces that
heated the Cause Houses. After supping on them, the ants turned upward,
filing in  a thick line up the broken toilet pipe to Flay Kingsley’s apartment

73
in 1B, where there was little food or garbage to be found, since Miss Flay’s
family of eight actually used apartment 1A across the hall, which had been
empty since Mrs. Foy, the sole tenant, died four years previous and forgot to
tell the welfare department about it, which created the perfect scenario for
the welfare department and housing to blame each other about it—since one
department didn’t tell the other. The apartment was Tuiet. Welfare paid the
rent. Who knew? From there the ants moved up to Mrs. Nelson’s apartment,
2C, munching on the old watermelon rinds and coffee grounds she kept in a
garbage can for her outdoor tomato garden, then up the waste pipe to 3C,
Bum-Bum’s place, which was slim pickings, then across the hallway via
outdoor viaduct to Pastor Gee’s place in 4C, which had no pickings at all,
since Sister Gee kept a spotless house, then through Miss Izi’s bathroom in
5C, where they sampled all manner of delicious soap from Puerto Rico,
which Miss Izi every year forgot to store in glass containers in the fall
knowing they were coming, and finally to the outer roof, where they
attempted to perform a high-wire act by trooping across a stepladder that
connected the roof of Building 17 to the roof of Building 9 ne[t door—
where they met their death care of a group of clever schoolboys: Beanie,
Rags, Sugar, Stick, and Deems Clemens, the best pitcher the Cause Houses
had ever seen, and the most ruthless drug dealer in the history of the Cause
Houses.
    As he lay in bed in apartment 5G of Building 9, his head wrapped in
gauze, his mind fogged by painkillers, Deems found himself wondering
about the ants. He had dreamed of them many times since he’d been
hospitalized. He’d been home in bed three days, and the fog of painkillers
and the constant ringing on the right side of his head had brought on odd
memories and vivid nightmares. He had turned nineteen two months before,
and for the first time in his life, he found himself unable to focus and
remember things. He discovered with horror, for e[ample, that his
childhood memories were fast disappearing. He couldn’t remember his
kindergarten teacher’s name, nor the name of the baseball coach from St.
John’s University who had called all the time. He couldn’t remember the
name of the subway stop in the Bron[ where his aunt lived, or the name of
the dealership in Sunset Park where the car salesman sold him his used
Pontiac Firebird and then drove it home for him because Deems himself
couldn’t drive. There was so much going on, everything was a spinning

74
whirlwind, and for a kid whose almost-perfect memory once allowed him to
collect illegal numbers for the local numbers runners needing neither paper
nor pencil, the whole business of losing his past was troubling. It occurred
to him, as he lay in bed that afternoon, that the shrill buzz on the right side
of his head where what was left of his missing ear now lived might be the
cause of the problem, or that if there are a thousand things you should
remember in life, and you forget them all but the one or two useless things,
maybe those things aren’t so useless. He couldn’t believe how good it felt to
remember the dumb ants from Building 17. It had been ten years since he
and his buddies had dreamed up wonderful ways to stop them from
invading their beloved Building 9. He smiled at the memory. They tried
everything: Drowning. Poison. Ice. Firecrackers, aspirin soaked in soda,
raw egg yolk sprayed with bleach, cod liver oil mi[ed with paint, and one
year a possum that his best friend, Sugar, produced. Sugar’s family visited
relatives in Alabama, and Sugar hid the creature in the trunk of his father’s
Oldsmobile. The possum arrived in Brooklyn sick and prostrate. He was
tossed into a cardboard bo[ taped shut with an entry hole and placed in the
ant path on the roof of Building 9. The ants arrived and obediently climbed
into the bo[ and began to politely devour the possum, at which point the
possum came to life, writhing and hissing, which caused the frightened
boys to toss a glass of kerosene on the bo[ and set it on fire. The sudden
whoosh of flames caused panic and they kicked the whole business off the
roof, where it landed in the plaza si[ stories below—a bad idea, since that
was sure to bring the wrath of adults of one kind or the other. It was Deems
who saved them. He grabbed a five-gallon bucket left on the roof by a work
crew and, scampering downstairs, scooped the remnants of the whole
business into the bucket and dashed to the harbor, dumping everything at
the water’s edge. He became their leader then, at ten, and had remained
their leader since.
    But leader of what? he thought bitterly as he lay in bed. He turned on his
side, groaning. “Everything,” he muttered aloud, “is falling apart.”
    “Say what, bro?”
    Deems opened his eyes and was surprised to see two of his crew, Beanie
and Lightbulb, sitting by his bed staring at him. He had thought he was
alone. He Tuickly turned to the wall, away from them.
    “You all right,  Deems?” Lightbulb said.

75
    Deems ignored him, staring at the wall, trying to think. How had this
started? He couldn’t remember. He was fourteen when his older cousin
Rooster dropped out of CUNY and started making big bucks selling heroin,
mostly to Munkies from the Watch Houses. Rooster showed him how to do
it, and bang, five years passed. Was it that long ago? Now he was nineteen,
had $4,300 in the bank his mother hated his guts Rooster was dead, killed
in a drug robbery and he was lying in his bed without his right ear.
    Fucking Sportcoat.
    Lying there staring at the wall, the smell of the lead paint wafting into his
nostrils, Deems thought of the old man not with rage, but rather with
confusion. He could not understand it. If there was one person in the Cause
who had nothing to gain by shooting him, it was Sportcoat. Sportcoat had
nothing to prove. If there was one person in the Cause who could get away
with backtalking him, charming him, yelling at him, calling him  names,
kidding him, Miving him, lying to him, it was old Sportcoat. Sportcoat had
been his baseball coach. Sportcoat had been his Sunday school teacher. Now
he’s a straight drunk, Deems thought bitterly, though that’s never affected
anything before. As far back as he could remember, he realized, Sportcoat
had been a drunk more or less, but more important, he’d been the same—
consistent. He never complained, or gave opinions. He didn’t Mudge. He
didn’t care. Sport had his own thing, which is why Deems liked him.
Because if there was one single thing in the screwed-up Cause Houses—in
all of Brooklyn, for  that matter—that Deems hated, it was people who
complained about nothing. People with nothing complaining about nothing.
Waiting on Jesus. Waiting on God. Sport wasn’t that way. He liked baseball
and booze. Real simple. Sportcoat did the Jesus thing, too, Deems noted,
when his wife, Miss Hettie, used to make him. But even then he could see
the old man and he were the same. They were stuck in Jesus houses.
    Deems had long ago decided that Sport was different from the Jesus nuts
of his life. Sport didn’t need Jesus. Of course he acted like he did, Must like a
lot of grown-ups at Five Ends church. But Sportcoat had something that
nobody at Five Ends, nobody in the proMects, nobody Deems Clemens had
known in his entire nineteen years of growing up in the Cause Houses, had.
    Happiness.
    Sport was happy.

76
    Deems sighed heavily. Even Pop-Pop, his grandfather, the only man he’d
ever known as a father, had not been happy. Pop-Pop had spoken in grunts
and ruled his house with an iron fist, collapsing into his armchair at night
after work with a beer in his hand, listening to the radio all night until he
fell asleep. Pop-Pop was the only person who visited him when he went to
Muvy prison. His mother didn’t bother. As if hours of talking about Jesus and
the Bible would substitute for a kiss, a smile, a solitary meal together, a
book read to him at night. She wore his ass out with her switch for the least
offenses, rarely found anything good in what he did, never went to his
baseball games, and dragged him to church on Sundays. Food. Shelter.
Jesus. That was her motto. “I sling eggs and sugar and bacon twelve hours a
day and you don’t even thank Jesus that you got a place to live. Thank you,
Jesus.” Jesus my ass.
    He wanted her to understand him. She could not. There was no one in his
house who could. He wanted to be an eTual. He saw how stupid the whole
thing was, even as a child, all these people crowded into these shitbo[
apartments. Even a blind person like Pudgy Fingers could see it. He’d even
talked to Pudgy about it, years ago, when they were in Sunday school. He
was nine and Pudgy was eighteen. Even though he was a teenager, Pudgy
was sent down to stay in Sunday School with the little kids during service
because he was said to be “slow.” Deems once asked if he minded. Pudgy
simply said, “Nope. The snacks are better.” They were in the basement and
some Sunday school teacher was prattling on about God and Pudgy was
sitting behind him and he saw Pudgy feeling the air with his hand until his
hand landed on Deems’s shoulder and Pudgy leaned over and said, “Deems,
do they think we’re retarded?” That surprised him. “Of course we ain’t
retarded,” he snapped. Even Pudgy knew. Of course he knew. Pudgy wasn’t
slow. Pudgy was smart. Pudgy remembered things that nobody else
remembered. He could remember how many singles Cleon Jones of the
New York Mets hit against the Pittsburgh Pirates in spring training last year.
He could tell you when Sister Bibb playing the organ in church was feeling
sick Must because of the way he heard her feet on the pedals. Of course
Pudgy was smart, because he was Sportcoat’s son. And Sport treated kids
like eTuals, even his own. When Sportcoat taught Sunday school, the Lord’s
word was all candy and bubblegum, games of catch played in the church
basement with balled-up church programs while the congregation sang and

77
yelled upstairs. Sportcoat even took the class on a Sunday morning “outing”
to the harbor once, where he’d hidden a fishing pole, tossing the fishing line
into the water while Deems and the other kids played and muddied up their
clothes. As for baseball, Sportcoat was a whiz. He organized the All-Cause
team. He taught them how to catch and throw a ball properly, how to stand
in the batter’s bo[, how to block the ball with your body if need be. After
practice on lazy summer afternoons, he’d gather the kids around and tell
stories about baseball players long dead, players from the old Negro leagues
with names that sounded like brands of candy: Cool Papa Bell, Golly
Honey Gibson, Smooth Rube Foster, Bullet Rogan, guys who knocked the
ball five hundred feet high into the hot August air at some ballpark far away
down south someplace, the stories soaring high over their heads, over the
harbor, over their dirty baseball field, past the rude, red-hot proMects where
they lived. The Negro leagues, Sport said, were a dream. Why, Negro
league players had leg muscles like rocks. They ran the bases so fast they
were a blur, but their wives ran faster! The women? Lord . . . the women
played baseball better than the men! Rube Foster hit a ball so far in Te[as it
had to take the train back home from Alabama! Guess who brought it back?
His wife! Bullet  Rogan struck out nineteen batters straight until his wife
took a turn and knocked his first pitch out of the yard. And where you think
Golly Honey Gibson got his nickname? His wife! She’s the one made him
good. She’d hit line drives at him for practice, the ball traveling like a
missile at the height of your face for four hundred feet, so hard he’d Mump
out the way, yelling “Golly, honey!” If  Golly Honey Gibson was any better,
he’d be a girl!
    The stories were crazy, and Deems never believed them. But Sportcoat’s
love of the game washed over Deems and his friends like rain. He bought
them baseball bats, balls, gloves, even helmets. He umpired the annual
game against the Watch Houses and coached it at the same time, wearing
his hilarious umpire costume—mask, chest protector, and black umpire’s
Macket—running around from base to base, calling runners safe when they
were out and out when they were safe, and when either side argued, he’d
shrug and switch his rulings, and when there was too much yelling, he’d
holler, “Y’all  driving  me to drink!” which made everybody laugh more.
Only Sportcoat could make the kids from those two housing proMects, who

78
hated each other for reasons long ago forgotten, get along on the ball field.
Deems looked up to him. Part of him wanted to be like Sportcoat.
    “The fucker shot me,” Deems murmured, still facing the wall. “What’d I
ever do to him?”
    Behind him, he heard Lightbulb speaking. “Bro, we got to talk.”
    Deems shifted around and opened his eyes, facing them both. They had
moved to the window ledge, Beanie smoking nervously, glancing out the
window, Lightbulb staring at him. Deems felt his temple. There was a huge
lump of bandage there, wrapped around his head. His body felt as if it had
been sTueezed in a vise. His back and his legs still burned, aching from his
fall off the plaza bench. The ear, the one that was wounded, itched badly—
what was left of it.
    “Who’s covering the plaza?” he asked.
    “Stick.”
    Deems nodded. Stick was only si[teen, but he was original crew, so he
was okay. Deems checked his watch. It was early, only eleven a.m. The
usual customers didn’t show up at the flagpole until noon, which gave time
for Deems to establish his lookouts on the four buildings that directly faced
the plaza to spy for the cops and hand-signal any trouble.
    “Who’s the lookout on Building  Nine?” Deems said.
    “Building  Nine?”
    “Yeah, Building Nine.”
    “Nobody’s up there right now.”
    “Send somebody up there to look out.”
    “For what? You can’t see the flagpole plaza from there.”
    “I  want ’em up there looking out for the ants.”
    The boys stared at him, confused. “For the ants?” Lightbulb asked. “You
mean the ants that come ’round that we used to play with—”
    “What’d  I say, man? Yes for the fucking ants—”
    Deems snapped to silence as the door opened. His mother marched into
the room with a glass of water and a handful of pills. She placed them on
the nightstand ne[t to his bed, glanced at him and at the two boys, and
departed without a word. She hadn’t said more than five words to him since
he’d gotten out of the hospital three days before. Then again she never said
more than five words to him anyway, other than: “I’m praying that you
change.”

79
    He watched her as she moved out of the room. He knew the yelling, the
screaming, and the cursing would come later. It didn’t matter. He had his
own money. He could take care of himself if she made him move out . . .
maybe. It was coming soon anyway, he thought. He stretched his neck to
ease the tension and the movement sent a flash of pain firing across his face
and ear and down his back like an e[plosion. It felt like the inside of his
head was being torched. He belched, blinked, and saw a hand e[tended at
his face. It was Lightbulb, holding out the water and the pills.
    “Take your medicine, bro.”
    Deems snatched the pills and water, gulped them down, then said,
“Which apartments did they get into?”
    Lightbulb looked puzzled. “Who?”
    “The ants, bro. What apartments did they get into last year? They follow
the same trail like always? They come up from Sausage’s basement in
Seventeen?”
    “What you worrying  about them for?” Lightbulb said. “We got a
problem. Earl wants to see you.”
    “I  ain’t studying Earl,” he said. “I asked about the ants.”
    “Earl’s mad, bro.”
    “About  the ants?”
    “What’s the matter with you?” Lightbulb  said. “Forget the ants. Earl says
Sportcoat got to be dealt with. He’s saying we gonna lose the plaza to the
Watch Houses if we don’t do something.”
    “We’ll  deal with it.”
    “We ain’t got to. Earl says he’ll deal with Sportcoat hisself. Mr. Bunch
told him to.”
    “We don’t need Earl in our business.”
    “Like  I said, Mr. Bunch ain’t happy.”
    “Who you working  for? Me? Or Earl and Mr. Bunch?”
    Lightbulb sat in silence, cowed. Deems continued: “Y’all been out
there?”
    “Every day at noon,” Lightbulb said.
    “How’s  business?”
    Lightbulb, always a goof, grinned and pulled out a round wad of bills
and held it out to Deems, who glanced at the door where his mother had

80
disappeared and said in a hushed voice, “Put that up, man.” Lightbulb
sheepishly pocketed the money.
    “Light,  anyone come through from the Watch Houses?” Deems asked.
    “Not yet,”  Lightbulb said.
    “What you mean not yet? You hearing they gonna come through?”
    “I  don’t know, man,” Lightbulb said forlornly. “I  ain’t  never been
through this before.”
    Deems nodded. Lightbulb was scared. He didn’t have the heart for the
game. They both knew it. It was Must friendshiS that keSt them close, Deems
thought sadly. And friendship was trouble in business. He looked at
Lightbulb again, his Afro covering his oddly shaped scalp that resembled
from a side view a si[ty-watt lightbulb,  thus his nickname. The beginnings
of a goatee were growing on his chin, giving Lightbulb a cool, almost
hippie look. It doesn’t matter, Deems thought. He’ll be shooting heroin in a
year. He had that smell on him. Deems’s gaze shifted to the small, stout
Beanie, who was Tuiet, more solid.
    “What you think, Beanie? The Watches gonna try to move on our
plaza?”
    “I  don’t know. But I think that Manitor’s a cop.”
    “Hot Sausage? Sausage is a drunk.”
    “Naw. The young guy. Jet.”
    “I  thought you said Jet got arrested.”
    “That don’t mean nothin’. You check out his sneakers?”
    Deems leaned back on the pillow, thinking. He had noticed the sneakers.
Cheap PF Flyers. “They were some cheap Moints,” he agreed. Still, Deems
thought, if Jet hadn’t hollered, Sportcoat would’ve . . . He rubbed his head
the ringing in his ear had now descended into a tingling pain, working its
way down to his neck and across his eyes despite the medicine. He
considered Beanie’s theory, then spoke. “Who was lookout on the roof of
Building Seventeen and Thirty-Four that day?”
    “Chink  was on Seventeen. Vance was on Thirty-Four.”
    “They didn’t  see nothing?”
    “We didn’t ask.”
    “Ask,”  Deems said, then, after a moment, added, “I think Earl sold us a
bunch of goods.”

81
    The two boys glanced at each other. “Earl didn’t pop you, bro,”
Lightbulb said. “That was Sportcoat.”
    Deems didn’t seem to hear. He ran through several Tuick mental
checkoffs in his mind, then spoke. “Sportcoat’s a drunk. He got no crew.
Don’t worry about him. Earl . . . for what we paying him, I think he double-
crossed us. Set us up.”
    “Why  you think that?” Lightbulb asked.
    “How’s  it that Sportcoat could walk up on me without nobody calling it
out? Maybe it ain’t nothing. Probably old Sport Must lost his head. But
selling horse is so hot now . . . it’s taking off. Easier to Must rob somebody
than stand out on the corners selling scag and smack in five- and ten-cent
bags. I been telling Earl’s boss we need more protection down here—guns,
y’know. Been saying it all year. And we need more love on the money tip.
We’re only making four percent. We oughta be pulling five or si[ or even
ten, as much shit as we move. I had all my collection money on me when I
was shot. I woke up in the hospital and the money was gone. Cops probably
took it. Now I got to pay that back, plus the ten percent Bunch charges for
being late. He don’t give a shit about our troubles. For a lousy four percent?
We could do better getting our own supplier.”
    “Deems,” Beanie said. “We doing okay now.”
    “How  come I got no muscle to protect me then? Who did we have out
there? You two. Chink on Building Seventeen. Vance on Thirty-Four. And a
bunch of kids. We need men around. With guns, bro. Ain’t that what I’m
paying Earl for? Who’s watching our backs? We moving a lot of stuff. Earl
shoulda sent somebody.”
    “Earl ain’t  the boss,” Beanie said. “Mr. Bunch is the boss.”
    “There’s a bigger boss than him,” Deems said. “Mr. Joe. He’s the one we
should be talking to.”
    The two boys looked at each other. They all knew “Mr. Joe”: Joe Peck,
whose family owned the funeral home over on Silver Street.
    “Deems, he’s mob,” Beanie said slowly.
    “He likes money Must like us,” Deems said. “He lives three streets over,
bro. Mr. Bunch is Must a middleman, from way out in Bed-Stuy.”
    Beanie and Lightbulb were silent. Beanie spoke first. “I don’t know,
Deems. My daddy worked the docks with them Italians a long time. He said
they ain’t nothing to mess with.”

82
    “Your daddy know everything?” Deems asked.
    “I’m  Must saying. Supposing Mr. Joe is like the Elephant,” Beanie said.
    “The Elephant don’t do dope.”
    “How  you know?” Beanie said.
    Deems was silent. They didn’t have to know everything.
    Lightbulb spoke up. “What y’all  talking about? We ain’t got to mess with
the Elephant or Mr. Joe or nobody else. Earl said he’d handle it. Let him
handle it. It’s old Sportcoat that’s the problem. What you gonna do about
that?”
    Deems was silent a moment. Lightbulb had said “you” rather than “we.”
He filed that thought for later, and it made him feel sad all over again. First
he’d mentioned the ants and they’d hardly remembered. Protecting our
building! That’s what the aim was. The Cause. Protect our territory! They
didn’t even care about that. Now Lightbulb was already talking “you.” He
wished Sugar were here. Sugar was loyal. And had heart. But Sugar’s
mother had sent him to Alabama. He’d written to Sugar and asked to visit
and Sugar wrote back saying “come on,” but when Deems wrote him a
second letter, Sugar never wrote back. Beanie, Chink, Vance, and Stick
were all he could trust now. That wasn’t much of a crew if the Watch
Houses came calling. Lightbulb, he thought bitterly, was out.
    He turned to Beanie and the pain from his ear shot through his head. He
grimaced and asked, “Sportcoat been ’round these parts?”
    “A  little bit. Drinking  like always.”
    “But he’s around?”
    “Not like  always. But he’s still around. So’s Pudgy Fingers,” Beanie said,
referring to Sportcoat’s blind son. Pudgy was a beloved fi[ture in the Cause
Houses, wandering around freely, often brought to his door by any neighbor
he happened to run across. The boys had known him all their lives. He was
an easy target.
    “Ain’t  no need to touch Pudgy Fingers,” Deems said.
    “I’m  Must saying.”
    “Don’t  fuck with Pudgy Fingers.”
    The three were silent as Deems blinked, deep in thought. Finally he
spoke. “Okay, I’ll let Earl take care of my business—Must this once.”
    The two boys immediately looked glum. Now Deems felt worse. They
had wanted to take care of Sportcoat, now he’d agreed, and now they were

83
sad. Goddamn!
    “Stop being crybabies,” he said. “You said we got to do it, and now it’s
done. Otherwise, the Watch Houses is gonna come gunning for the plaza.
So let Earl deal with Sport.”
    The two boys stared at the floor. Neither looked at the other.
    “That’s how it is out here.”
    They remained silent.
    “This is the last time we let Earl take care of our business,” Deems said.
    “Thing is . . .”  Beanie said softly, then stopped.
    “Thing is what?”
    “Well . . .”
    “What the fuck’s the matter with you, man?” Deems said. “You so scared
of Earl you want him to take care of our business. Okay, I said let him. It’s
done. Tell him go ’head. I’ll tell him myself when I get on my feet.”
    “There’s something else,” Beanie said.
    “Spit it  out, man!”
    “Thing is, when Earl come around yesterday, he was asking about
Sausage, too.”
    Another hit. Sausage was a friend. He’d helped out Sportcoat with
baseball in the old days. Sausage gave out the cheese to their families every
month. Everybody knew about Hot Sausage and Sister Bibb, the church
organist for Five Ends. She was also Beanie’s aunt.
    That’s the Sroblem, Deems thought. Everybody’s related to everybody in
these goddamned Sisshole SroMects.
    “Earl probably thinks Sausage is hiding Sportcoat,” Beanie said. “Or that
Sausage is diming us out to the cops.”
    “Sausage ain’t diming nobody,” Deems scoffed. “We working right in
front of Sausage’s face. He ain’t no stoolie.”
    “Everybody in the Cause knows that. But Earl ain’t from the Cause.”
    Deems glanced at Beanie, then at Lightbulb. One looked concerned, the
other frightened. He nodded. “All right. Leave it to me. Earl ain’t moving
on Sausage. I’ll talk to him. In the meantime, listen: In the ne[t week or
two, it’s the March of the Ants. You two take turns setting on top of
Building Nine like  we used to. Let me know when the ants come. You the
only ones that know how to do that.”
    “What for?”  Lightbulb asked.

84
    “Just do it. When you see signs they’re coming, wherever I’m at, come
fetch me. The first sign you see, come get me. Got it? You remember the
signs, right? You know what to look for?”
    They nodded.
    “Say it.”
    Beanie spoke up: “Mice and rats running in that little hallway near the
roof. Bunch of roaches running up there, too.”
    “That’s right. Come get me if you see that. Understand?”
    They nodded. Deems looked at his watch. It was almost noon. He felt
sleepy the medicine was taking effect. “Y’all get down there and help Stick
make us some money. Post all the lookouts on the buildings and pay ’em
afterward, not before. Beanie, check the roof of Nine before you go to the
plaza.”
    He saw the look of worry on their faces.
    “Just be cool,” he said. “I got a plan. We’ll get everything back to normal
in no time.”
    With that, Deems lay sideways, his bandaged ear toward the ceiling,
closed his eyes, and slept the sleep of a troubled boy who, over the course
of an hour, had suddenly become what he’d always wanted to be: not a boy
from one of New York City’s worst housing proMects, an unhappy boy who
had no dream, no house, no direction, no safety, no aspiration, no house
keys, no backyard, no Jesus, no marching-band practice, no mother who
listened to him, no father who knew him, no cousin who showed him right
or wrong. He was no longer a boy who could throw a baseball seventy-eight
miles an hour at the of age thirteen because back then it was the one thing
in his sorry life he could control. All that was past. He was a man with a
plan now, and he had to make a big play, no matter what. That was the
game.

85
                                                     88




                                        THE         DIG



THREE DAYS AFTER HOT SAUSAGE PREDICTED HIS DOOM, SPO
stop in at the Watch Houses to see his buddy Rufus.
    Despite Sausage’s prediction that the world was going to end, Sportcoat
hadn’t seen a sign of it. He teetered through Building 9 as always, arguing
with Hettie in the hall, then wandered over to the Social Security office in
downtown Brooklyn, where they ignored him as usual, then on to his
various Mobs. The church ladies at Five Ends stepped in to walk Pudgy
Fingers to the bus stop to take him to the social center and even kept Pudgy
overnight, cycling Pudgy between them. “Five Ends takes care of their
own,” Sport bragged to his friends, though he had to admit to himself that
his friends were fewer and fewer with Hettie gone and that Christmas
money missing. The church ladies helping with Pudgy Fingers hadn’t said a
word about it, which made him feel even more guilty about not knowing
where it was. He’d seen them place their precious envelopes bearing dollars
and Tuarters into the Christmas Club collection tray every week. He’d
already sought out Pastor Gee in his office after Bible study to clear the air.
    “I didn’t hide that money,” he told Pastor Gee.
    “I understand,” Pastor Gee said. He was a humorous, good-natured man,
handsome, with a cleft chin and a gold tooth that sparkled when he smiled,
which was often. But he had no smiles that day. He looked troubled. “Some
in the congregation are in a snit about it,” he said carefully. “The deacons

86
and deaconesses had a meeting about it yesterday. I stepped in there for a
minute. There were a few hot words thrown around.”
    “What did you say?”
    “Nothing  I could say. Nobody knows how much was in the bo[, or who
put in what. This one claims he’s got a certain amount in there. That one
says she got much more. The deaconesses are with you they understand
Hettie. The deacons ain’t.” He cleared his throat and lowered his voice.
“You sure it ain’t stuffed in a drawer someplace at home?”
    Sportcoat shook his head. “It ain’t no advantage to a man with a fever to
change his bed, pastor. I’m about sick of the whole deal. If I ain’t looked for
that thing every day since Hettie died, you can throw a dipper of water in
my face right now. I done looked in every nook and cranny. And I’ll look
again,” Sportcoat said, feeling doubtful. He had looked everywhere in the
apartment he could think of and came up with nothing. Where the hell did
Hettie put it?
    He decided to seek out Rufus, who was from his home country back in
South Carolina. Rufus always had good ideas. Sportcoat took the bottle of
Seagram’s 7 Crown that he had clipped on his way out of Itkin’s store last
Thursday and headed over to the boiler room at the Watch Houses, where
Rufus worked. He figured to trade the Seagram’s for a bottle of Rufus’s
Kong and in the process hear Rufus’s thoughts and advice.
    He found Rufus—a slender, chocolate-skinned man—on the floor in his
boiler room, wearing his usual blue grease-covered Housing Authority
uniform, his hands and nearly his feet stuffed inside the guts of a large
electric generator that was roaring in agony. The generator engine was
accessed by an open panel door and Rufus’s body was nearly completely
inside it.
    The generator was roaring so loud that Sportcoat had to stand behind
Rufus and yell until Rufus glanced up from the floor at him and grinned,
displaying a mouth full of gold teeth.
    “Sport,”  he yelled. He adMusted the machine Tuickly and cranked it down
a decibel, then pulled a long hand from the Mumble of wires Mutting from the
machine to shake hands.
    “Why  you wanna wrong me, Rufus?” Sportcoat said, frowning, stepping
away from the outstretched hand.
    “What’d  I do?”

87
    “You know it’s  bad luck to greet a friend with your left hand.”
    “Oh. Sorry.” Rufus hit a button and the machine whirred down to a slow
grumble. Still seated with his legs splayed apart, Rufus wiped his right hand
with a nearby rag and offered it. Sportcoat shook, satisfied. “What you
got?” he said, nodding at the generator.
    Rufus peered at it. “This thing acts up every week,” he said.
“Something’s chewing on the wires.”
    “Rats?”
    “They ain’t  that stupid. There some bad things going ’round Brooklyn,
Sport.”
    “Tell me ’bout it,”  Sportcoat said. He reached into his pocket and
produced the new bottle of Seagram’s. He looked at the fresh liTuor and
sighed, deciding not to e[change it for some Kong after all. Rufus would
give him the Kong anyway. Better to share, he thought. He cracked the
label, then pulled a crate ne[t to Rufus, sat down, sipped, then said, “Fella
from our home country come into Mr. Itkin’s to buy some wine. Said he
woke up in the morning and found some leftover Melly in his wife’s sifter.”
    “No kidding.  She was baking?”
    “Baked cookies the night before. He said she cleaned off everything
afterward. She let the dishes dry overnight. Then this fella, her husband, he
come into the kitchen in the morning and seen that Melly in her flour sifter.”
    Rufus produced a low whistle.
    “MoMo?” Sportcoat asked.
    “I  reckon somebody moMoed him,” Rufus said. He reached for the bottle
and took a sip.
    “I  bet his wife done it,” Sportcoat said.
    Rufus took a satisfied swallow and nodded in agreement. “You still
worried about Hettie?”
    Instead of answering, Sportcoat held out his hand for the bottle, which
Rufus surrendered. He took a deep drink and swallowed before he said, “I
got to replace the church’s Christmas Club money. Hettie kept track of it.
She never told where she put it. Now the whole church is bellowing like a
calf about it.”
    “How  much is in it?”
    “I  don’t know. Hettie never told. But it’s a lot.”

88
    Rufus chuckled. “Tell them sanctifieds to pray for it. Get Hot Sausage to
do it.”
    Sportcoat shook his head sadly. Rufus and Sausage didn’t get along. It
didn’t help that Rufus had been a founding member of Five Ends Baptist
Church and had Tuit fourteen years ago. He hadn’t walked into a church
since. Sausage, whom Rufus actually recruited to Moin Five Ends, was now a
sanctified deacon, which had been Rufus’s old Mob.
    “How  you gonna replace something you don’t know what it is? It could
be nothing in there but some thimbles and three teeth from the tooth fairy,”
Sportcoat said.
    Rufus thought a moment. “There’s an old somebody from Five Ends who
might know where it’s at,” he said thoughtfully.
    “Who?”
    “Sister Pauletta Chicksaw.”
    “I  remember Sister Paul,” Sportcoat said brightly. “Edie Chicksaw’s
momma? She still living? She got to be well over a hundred if she is. Edie’s
long been dead.”
    “Long dead, but Sister Paul’s yet living to my knowledge,” Rufus said.
“She and Hettie was friends. Hettie used to go out and visit her at the old
folks’ home out in Bensonhurst.”
    “Hettie never told me nothing about it,” Sportcoat said, sounding hurt.
    “A  wife never tells her husband everything,” Rufus said. “That’s why I
never got married.”
    “Sister Paul don’t know nothing about church business. Hettie done all
that.”
    “You don’t know  what Sister Paul knows or don’t know. She’s the
seniorest member of Five Ends. She was there when the church was built.”
    “So was I.”
    “No, old man, Hettie was there. You was still back home getting your
toes sawed off. You come a year later, after the foundation was dug. Hettie
was there when the church was built. I mean the building itself. When the
foundation was dug out.”
    “I  was there for some of it.”
    “Not when they was digging the foundation and doing the brickwork,
son.”
    “What’s that prove?”

89
    “It  proves you don’t remember nothing, for in them early days, Sister
Paul collected the Christmas Club money. She done that before Hettie’s
time. And I do believe she might know something about where that money
might be now.”
    “How  you know? You Tuit Five Ends fourteen years ago.”
    “Just ’cause a man ain’t sanctified no more don’t mean he’s missing his
marbles. Sister Paul lived in this building, Sport. Right here in the Watch
Houses. In fact, I seen that Christmas bo[.”
    “If  you was a child, Rufus, I’d pull my switch out and send you hooting
and hollering down the road for lying. You ain’t seen no Christmas bo[.”
    “I  walked Sister Paul to and from church many a day. When things got
bad around here, she was afraid someone would knock her over the head for
it, so she’d ask me to walk her to service from time to time.”
    “She ain’t supposed to walk around with the Christmas bo[.”
    “She had to hide it someplace after she collected for it. Normally she hid
it at church. But she didn’t always have time to wait for church to empty
out. Sometimes folks would linger eating fish dinners or the pastor would
preach overtime or some such thing and she had to go home, so she brung it
home with her.”
    “Why  didn’t she lock it in the pastor’s office?”
    “What fool  would keep money ’round a pastor?” Rufus replied.
    Sportcoat nodded knowingly.
    “Sister Paul told me once she had a good hiding place for that bo[ in the
church,” Rufus said. “I don’t know where. But if she couldn’t keep it there,
she’d bring it home till the following  Sunday. That’s how I know she had it.
’Cause she’d come down and ask me to walk her over. And of course I was
happy to do it. She’d say, ‘Rufus Harley, you’re a man and a half, that’s
what you are. Whyn’t you come back to church again? You’re a man and a
half, Rufus Harley. Come back to church.’ But I ain’t a church man no
more.”
    Sportcoat considered this. “That was years ago, Rufus. Sister Paul got
nothing to help me now.”
    “You don’t know  what she got. She and her husband was the first
coloreds to come to these proMects, Sport. They come back in the forties,
when the Irish and Italians ’round these parts was beating coloreds’ brains
out for moving into the Cause. Sister Paul and her husband started the

90
church in their living room. In fact, I was there when Five Ends was
digging out its foundation for the building. Weren’t but four of us doing all
that digging: me, her daughter Edie, your Hettie, and this crippled Eye-
talian man from ’round these parts.”
    “What cripple?”
    “I  done forgot his name. He’s long dead. He done a lot of the work on
Five Ends. I can’t recall his name, but it was an Italian name: Ely or some
such thing. Ending with an ‘i.’ You know how them Italians’ names go.
Odd man. A cripple, that fella. Only had one good leg. Never said a
mumbling word to me nor nobody else. Wouldn’t give a Negro the time of
day. But he was all for Five Ends Baptist. He had some money, too, I
reckon, because he had a backhoe and hired a bunch of Eye-talians who
didn’t speak a lick of English, and they finished the Mob of digging out the
foundations and painting the back wall with a picture of Jesus that’s there.
That picture of Jesus out back? That Jesus was painted by Eye-talians.
Every speck of him.”
    “No wonder he was white,” Sportcoat said. “Pastor Gee had me and
Sausage help Sr. Bibb’s son Zeke color him up.”
    “That was stupid. That was a good picture.”
    “He’s still  there. But he’s colored now.”
    “Well, you shoulda left it like  it was, on account of the man who brung
his front loader and all them Eye-talians. I wish I could remember his name.
Sister Paul would remember. Them two got along good. He liked her. She
was Tuite the beauty in them days, y’know. She was well up in age, had to
be north of seventy-five, I reckon, but Lord, she was . . . I wouldn’t throw
her outta bed for eating crackers, that’s for sure. Not back then. She was
well upholstered.”
    “You think there was . . .” Sportcoat moved his hand in a shaking
motion.
    Rufus grinned. “Y’know,  there was always a lot of tipping going ’round
in them days.”
    “Wasn’t she married to the pastor?” Sportcoat asked.
    “Since when did that monkey stop the show?” Rufus snickered. “He
wasn’t worth two cents. But to be honest, I don’t know if she and that Eye-
talian was doing the ding-a-ling, knock-a-boo thing or not. They got along
good, is all. She was the only one he’d talk to. We wouldn’t have built Five

91
Ends without him. When he come along, we got all that digging done. And
there was Tuite a lot of it. That’s how that little church was built, Sport.”
    Rufus paused, remembering. “You know he gived the church its name? It
was supposed to be Four Ends Baptist, see: north, south, east, and west,
representing God’s hand coming from all them directions. That was the
pastor’s idea. But when the Eye-talian added that back wall painting,
somebody said let’s make it Five Ends, since Jesus is an end to Himself.
The pastor didn’t like it. Said, ‘I didn’t  want the picture up there in the first
place.’ But Sister Paul put her foot down and that was it. That’s how it
come to be Five Ends and not Four Ends. They still got that picture on the
back wall, by the way?”
    “Sure do. Weeds and all is up around it, but it’s there.”
    “Do it  still say over the top, ‘May God Hold You in the Palm of His
Hand’? Y’all ain’t  paint over that, did you?”
    “Lord  no. We ain’t painted over them words, Rufus.”
    “Well, you ought not to. That’s a credit to him, see, that Eye-talian. Long
dead now. Doing God’s work. A man ain’t got to stand in church every
Sunday to do God’s work, y’know, Sport.”
    “That ain’t  telling me nothing.”
    “You asked me about Sister Paul, Sport. And I told it. You ought to take
a ride out there and see her. She might know something about where that
bo[ is. Maybe she told Hettie where to hide it.”
    Sportcoat considered this. “That’s a long subway ride.”
    “What you got to lose, Sport? She’s the only one living from that time.
I’d go with you. I’d  like to see her. But them white folks out in Bensonhurst
is a rough shuffle. They’ll throw a pistol on a Negro in a minute.”
    At the mention of “pistol,”  Sportcoat blanched and reached for the
Seagram’s again. “This world is damn complicated,” he said, sipping
deeply.
    “Maybe Sausage’ll go with you.”
    “He’s too busy.”
    “Doing  what?”
    “Oh, he’s in a frolic about something or other,” Sportcoat said. “Running
around accusing people of doing stuff they don’t remember.” To change the
subMect, he nodded at the generator. “Can I help? What’s wrong with it?”

92
    Rufus peered back into the guts of the old machine. “Ain’t nothing
wrong with it that I can’t fi[.   G’wan out to Bensonhurst and take care of
your business and look in on Sister Paul for me. Leave the bottle, though. A
man needs a little shake and shimmy.”
    “Ain’t  you making some homemade King Kong?”
    Rufus crouched down onto one knee and stuck his head back in the
generator. “I’m always making King Kong,” he said. “But it’s a two-part
thing. You got to make the ‘King’ first, then the ‘Kong.’ The ‘King’   part is
easy. That’s cooked and ready. I’m waiting for the ‘Kong.’ That takes time.”
    He hit a button on the side of the machine and the generator sputtered,
coughed for a few seconds, howled in agony, then roared to life.
    He glanced at Sportcoat, yelling over the din: “G’wan look in on Sister
Paul! Let me know how she’s doing. Wear your running shoes out in
Bensonhurst!”
    Sportcoat nodded, took a last sip of the Seagram’s, and headed out. But
instead of using the back emergency e[it door, he took the door that led to a
short hallway and stairs to the front door, which opened to the plaza. As he
opened the outer door, a tall figure in a black leather Macket emerged from a
broom closet underneath the stairwell that led upstairs and silently crept up
behind him with a raised pipe. The man was two steps away when a
baseball suddenly whipped down the stairwell from behind, struck the man
in the back of the head, and sent him clattering back into the broom closet
and out of sight. The ne[t instant two boys, no older than nine, scampered
down the stairs, whipping past a surprised Sportcoat. One of them scooped
up the ball, which had come to a rest near the door, and blurted a hasty
“Hey, Sportcoat!,” then the boys vanished out the entrance, leaping down
the front steps and out of sight, both of them laughing.
    Sportcoat, irritated, Tuickly stepped out the door into the outside plaza to
yell at their backs: “Slow your roll! Ain’t   y’all ever heard of a baseball
field?” He marched down the steps in their direction, never noticing the
man behind him.
    Inside the broom closet, Earl, Bunch’s hit man, lay sprawled on his rear
end with his feet protruding out of the partially opened door, his back
resting on the wall. He shook his head to clear his brain. He had to move,
Tuick, before somebody else came downstairs. He smelled bleach. He
suddenly realized his rear end was wet. His feet were atop a wheeled yellow

93
bucket full of dirty water that had overturned. He inched his back off the
wall, placed his hands on the floor to brace himself, and found his right
hand landing on the wet end of a mop. The other hand was on some kind of
contraption. He shifted and kicked the door open wide with his feet. In the
light he saw, to his horror, that his left hand was sitting on a sprung rat trap
—with a furry dead customer inside. He Mumped to his feet with a yelp and
burst out of the closet, down the hallway, out the front door of the building,
speed walking through the plaza toward the nearby subway, wiping his
hand frantically on his leather Macket, feeling the cold air blowing at his
drenched pants and sneakers.
    “Fucking old man,” he muttered.

94
                                                         99




                                                 DIRT



THE TWO  UNIFORMED    COPS WALKED   INTO  THE  FIVE  ENDS BA
choir rehearsal five minutes after the fight between the Cousins broke out.
The fight had actually started twenty-three years before. That’s how long
Nanette and her cousin Sweet Corn had been arguing.
    Sister Gee, a tall, handsome woman of forty-eight, sat in the choir pew
fiddling with  her house keys and staring down in her lap as the Cousins
railed. “Lord,”  she murmured as the Cousins hissed at each other, “please
rein in them mules.”
    As if in  answer, the back door of the church opened and two white cops
stepped through the tiny vestibule and into the sanctuary, the light of the
bare bulb glinting off their shiny badges and brass buttons. The tinkling of
their keys clanking against each other sounded like tiny bells as they made
their way up the sawdust-covered aisle to the front, their leather gun
holsters slapping against their hips. They stopped when they reached the
pulpit, facing the choir of five women and two men, who stared back at
them, with the e[ception of Pudgy Fingers, Sportcoat’s son, who sat at the
end of the choir pew, his sightless eyes covered by shades.
    “Who’s in  charge here?” one of the cops asked.
    Sister Gee, sitting in the first row, took him in. He was young, nervous,
and thin. Behind him stood an older cop, a thick man with wide shoulders
and crow’s-feet around blue eyes. She watched the older cop’s eyes Tuickly
scan the room. She had the impression she had seen him before. He

95
removed his cap and spoke softly to the younger cop in a voice with a slight
Irish lilt.  “Mitch,  take your cap off.”
    The younger cop obliged, then asked again, “Who’s in charge?”
    Sister Gee felt every eyeball in the choir swing toward her.
    “In  this church,” she said, “we says hello to a person before we states our
business.”
    The cop held up a blue folded sheet of paper in his hand. “I’m Officer
Dunne. We got a warrant here for Thelonius Ellis.”
    “Who?”
    “Thelonius Ellis.”
    “Ain’t  nobody here by that name,” Sister Gee said.
    The young cop looked at the choir behind Sister Gee and asked,
“Anybody know him? We got a warrant here.”
    “They don’t know  nothing about no warrant,” Sister Gee said.
    “I’m  not talking to you, miss. I’m talking  to them.”
    “Seems to me you ain’t made up your mind about who you come to talk
to, Officer. First you come in and ask who’s in charge, so I told it. Then
instead of talking to me, you turns around and talks to them. Who you come
to talk to? Me or them? Or is you Must come by to make a bunch of
announcements?”
    Behind him, the older cop spoke. “Mitch, check the outside, would ya?”
    “We already did that, Potts.”
    “Check it again.”
    The young cop turned, smartly snapped the blue warrant into Potts’s
waiting hand, and vanished out the vestibule door.
    Potts waited until the church door closed, then turned to Sister Gee
apologetically. “Young people,” he said.
    “I  know it.”
    “I’m  Sergeant Mullen from the Seven-Si[. They call me Sergeant Potts.”
    “If  you don’t mind my asking, what kind of name is Potts, Officer?”
    “It’s  better than pans.”
    Sister Gee chuckled. There was something about him that glistened,
something warm that churned and billowed about, like a smoke cloud filled
with sparklers. “I’m Sister Gee. You got a real first name, sir?”
    “Not worth  using. Potts is it.”

96
    “Was somebody bald-headed, or looking on the bright side, or wanting to
steal or tell the world something when you was born, on account of your
people giving you that kind of name?”
    “I  made a complete haymes of some potatoes once, back when I was a
wee lad, so my grammy gave me that nickname.”
    “What’s haymes?”
    “A  mess.”
    “Well, that’s a mess of a name.”
    “That’d  make your name fair play, wouldn’t it? Gee, you said? I’ll leg it
out the door if you say your first name’s Golly.”
    Sister Gee heard one of the choir chuckle behind her, and felt herself
stifling a smile. She couldn’t help it. Something about this man made her
insides lift. “I  seen you someplace before, Officer Potts,” she said.
    “Just Potts. You mighta seen me around. I grew up four blocks from
here. A long time ago. I was a detective in the Cause.”
    “Well now . . . maybe that’s where I seen you.”
    “But that was twenty years ago.”
    “I  was here twenty years ago,” she said thoughtfully. She rubbed her
cheek, staring at Potts for what seemed a long time, then her eyes sparkled
as her face unfolded into a sly smile. Her smile displayed a raw, natural
beauty that caught Potts off guard. The woman, he thought, was all good
handwriting.
    “I  know,” she said. “On Ninth Street near the park. At that old bar there.
The Irish place. Rattigan’s. That’s where I seen you.”
    Potts reddened. Several choir members smiled. Even the Cousins
grinned.
    “I’ve  been known to have a business meeting there from time to time,”
he said wryly, recovering. “If you don’t mind my asking, were you having
one there too? At the same time? When you saw me?”
    “Ohlord!”  came a hushed laugh from someone in the choir. The two
words mashed together like two coins: ohlord! This thing had gotten
delicious. The choir laughed. Now it was Sister Gee’s turn to blush.
    “I  don’t go to no bars,” Sister Gee said hurriedly. “I does day’s work
straight across the street from Rattigan’s.”
    “Day’s work?”

97
    “Housework. I clean that big brownstone house there. Been cleaning for
that family fourteen years. If I had a nickel for every bottle I pick up on the
curb from Rattigan’s on Mondays, I’d have me something.”
    “I  keep my bottles inside the bar,” Potts said in an offhand way.
    “It  ain’t a bother to me where your bottles goes,” Sister Gee said. “My
Mob is to clean. It don’t matter what I clean. Dirt’s the same wherever it
goes.”
    Potts nodded. “Some kind of dirt’s harder to clean than others.”
    “Well, that do depend,” she said.
    The lightness in the room seemed to be leaving, and Potts felt some
resistance coming. They both did. Potts glanced at the choir. “Can I have a
private word?”
    “Surely.”
    “Maybe in the basement?”
    “It’s  too cold down there,” Sister Gee said. “They can rehearse down
there. There’s a piano.”
    The choir, relieved, Tuickly got up and filed out toward the back door of
the sanctuary. As Nanette passed, Sister Gee grabbed her wrist and said
softly, “Take Pudgy Fingers.”
    The remark was casual, but Potts saw the glance between the two
women. There was something about it.
    When the door closed, she turned to him and said, “We was talking about
something before, now?”
    “Dirt,”  Potts said.
    “Oh yes,” she said, sitting down again. He saw now she was not Must
handsome, but rather had a Tuiet, cumulative beauty. She was a tall woman,
middle-aged, whose face was not etched with the stern lines of church folks
who’ve seen too much and done little about it other than pray. Her face was
firm and decisive, with smooth milky brown skin the thick hair with a bit
of gray, neatly parted her slender, proud frame clad in a modest flower-
print dress. She sat erect in the pew her poise was that of a straight-backed
ballet dancer, yet with her slim elbows dangling on the rail in front of her,
Mingling her keys lazily in one hand, eyeing the white cop, she had an ease
and confidence he found slightly unsettling. After a moment, she leaned
back and placed a slender brown arm on the top edge of the pew, the small

98
movement graceful and supple. She moved, Potts thought, like a gazelle. He
suddenly found himself struggling to think clearly.
    “You said some kind of dirt’s harder to clean than others,” she said.
“Well, that’s my Mob, Officer. I’m a house cleaner, see. I work in dirt. I
chase dirt all day. Dirt don’t like me. It don’t set there and say, ‘I’m hiding.
Come get me.’ I got to go out and find it to clean it out. But I don’t hate dirt
for being dirt. You can’t hate a thing for being what it is. Dirt makes me
who I am. Wherever I try to rid the world of it, I’m  making things a little
better for somebody. Same with you. The fellers you seek, crooks and all,
they ain’t saying ‘Here I am. Come get me.’ Most of ’em, you got to seek
out, scoop up in some form or fashion. You brings Mustice to things, which
makes the world a little nicer for somebody. Me and you has got the same
Mob, in a way. We clean dirt. We clean up after people. We collects other
people’s mess, though I reckon it’s not fair to call someone living a wrong
life a problem, or a mess . . . or dirt.”
    Potts found himself smiling. “You oughta be a lawyer,” he said.
    Sister Gee crinkled her brow, looking suspicious. “You funning me?”
    “No.”  He laughed.
    “You can tell by the way I talk I’m  not a book-learned person. I’m a
country woman. I wanted to go to school for something,” she said wistfully.
“But that was long ago. Back when I was a child in North Carolina. Ever
been to the South?”
    “No, ma’am.”
    “Where you from?”
    “I  told you. Here. The Cause District. Silver Street.”
    She nodded. “Well how ’bout that.”
    “But my  folks were from Ireland.”
    “Is that an island?”
    “It’s  a place where folks can stop and think. The ones with brains,
anyway.”
    She laughed, and as she did, Potts felt as if he were watching a dark,
silent mountain suddenly blink to life, illuminated by a hundred lights from
a small, Tuaint village that had lived on the mountainside for a hundred
years, the village appearing out of nowhere, all the lights aglow at once.
Every feature of her face glowed. He found himself wanting to tell her
every sorrow he ever knew, including the knowledge that the Ireland of the

99
vacation folders wasn’t Ireland, that the memory of his ancient grandmother
from the old country walking down Silver Street holding his hand when he
was eight, clasping her last nickel in her palm, biting her lip as she hummed
a sad song from her childhood of poverty and privation, wandering the Irish
countryside looking for home and food, would kick through his arteries and
bust into his heart until he was a grown man:


           The grass waves green above them; soft sleeS is theirs for aye;
           The hunt is over, and the cold; the hunger Sassed away . . .


    Instead, he said simply, “It wasn’t so nice.”
    She chuckled uneasily, surprised by his response, and watched him
blush. Suddenly she felt her heart flutter. A charged silence descended on
the room. They both felt it, felt themselves suddenly being propelled along
a large chasm, feeling the irresistible urge to reach out, to reach across, to
stretch their hands from opposite sides of a large, cavernous valley that was
nearly impossible to cross. It was way too large, too far, Must unreasonable,
ridiculous. Yet . . .
    “This fella,”  Potts said, breaking the silence, “this fella I’m looking for,
he’s uh . . . if his name’s not Thelonius Ellis, what is it?”
    She was silent now, the smile gone, looking away, the spell broken.
    “It’s  all right,”  he said. “We know what happened with the shooting,
more or less.” He meant to say it lightly, as a comfort, but it sounded
official and he didn’t want that. The lack of sincerity in his own voice
surprised him. There was an ease, a gentle filter in this long, chocolate
woman that opened up a part of him that normally stayed closed. He had
only four months to retirement. It was four months too long. He wished it
were yesterday. He felt a sudden urge to take off his uniform, throw it to the
floor, and walk downstairs with the choir and sing.
    He found himself blurting: “I’m  retiring  soon. A hundred twenty days.
Going fishing. Maybe I’ll  sing in a choir too.”
    “That ain’t  no way to spend the rest of your life.”
    “Singing in a choir?”
    “No. Fishing.”
    “I  can think of nothing better.”

100
    “Well, if  that floats your boat, go ahead on. I reckon that’s better than the
funerals and going to large drinking gatherings.”
    “Like  Rattigan’s?”
    She waved her hand. “That place don’t bother me. They fight and
sTuabble in every drinking hole from one to the ne[t all over this world. It’s
the God-fearing places that’s the worst. God is the last thing in some of
these churches out here. Seems like they do more fighting than praying in
the church today than they do on the street. Ain’t nowhere safe. It didn’t
used to be that way.”
    Her words brought Potts around. With effort he returned to business.
“Can I ask you about this fella, Thelonius Ellis?”
    Sister Gee raised her hand. “Hand before God, ain’t nobody ’round this
church by that name that I know of.”
    “That’s the name we got. Got it from an eyewitness.”
    “Must’ve  been Ray Charles who told it. Or maybe it’s somebody from
another church.”
    Potts smiled. “You and I know he went to this church.”
    “Who?”
    “The old man. The shooter. Drinks a lot. Knows everybody.”
    Sister Gee smiled grimly. “Why ask me? Your man knew him.”
    “What man?”
    Sister Gee tilted her head at him. The tilt of that lovely face rendered him
momentarily helpless. He felt as if a bird’s wing had suddenly brushed his
face and pushed a cool puff of misted air into it, the mist fluttering down
onto his shoulders. His eyebrows lifted as he blinked at her, then his gaze
shifted to the floor. He felt the emotional door he’d managed to close
moments before swing open again. Staring at the floor, he found himself
wondering how old she was.
    “The cop who worked for Hot Sausage,” she said.
    “Hot who?”
    “The cop,” Sister Gee said patiently, “who worked for Hot Sausage. In
the basement boiler room. Hot Sausage is the head Manitor and boiler man.
The Manitor under him. The young guy. He was your guy.”
    “What’s Hot Sausage’s real name?”
    She chuckled. “Why you trying to confuse me? We talking about your
man. Hot Sausage is the Manitor at Building Seventeen. The colored boy that

101
was Manitoring under him . . . he saved Deems’s life, not nobody else. Folks
’round here don’t know whether to thank him or throw a bucket of water on
him.”
    Potts was silent. Sister Gee smiled.
    “Everybody in the Cause knowed he was a cop. Don’t you know your
own people?”
    Potts found himself resisting an urge to sprint out of the room, run back
to the precinct, and beat the captain silly. He felt stupid. This was cleaning
up garbage for the captain. Jet, Mr. First Black Everything. The kid didn’t
have the stuff to be a detective. Too young. No e[perience. No savvy. No
allies, no mentors, e[cept maybe him. The captain had insisted, “We need
Negroes down in the Cause Houses.” The guy had a soundproof head. How
stupid can the captain be?
    “That kid’s transferred out to Queens,” he said. “I’m glad. He’s a good
kid. I trained him.”
    “Is that why you’re here?” Sister Gee asked.
    “No. They asked me to step in because I know the area. They’re . . .
trying to make a move on these new drug dealers.”
    He saw her e[pression change slightly. “Can I ask you a personal
Tuestion?” she asked.
    “Surely.”
    “How  does a detective go back to putting on a uniform?”
    “That’s a long story,” he said. “I grew up here, as I said. I like the hours.
I like the people. If the cops want to make a move on these drug lords, I’ll
be a Holy Joe about it.”
    Sister Gee could not completely keep a smirk from climbing across her
face. “If this is the move they’re making, it’s sideways,” she said.
“Sportcoat’s seventy-one. He ain’t no drug dealer.”
    Potts continued, “We’d like to talk to him.”
    “You won’t  have no trouble finding him. He’s a deacon in this here
church. Some call him Deacon Cuffy. But most call him Sportcoat on
account of him liking to wear them things. You can get his name easily
enough from that. That’s the most I can offer you. I got to live here.”
    “You know him well?”
    “Twenty years. Since I was twenty-eight.”

102
    Potts Tuickly did the math in his head. She was ten years younger than
me, he thought. He found himself straightening his Macket to cover his slight
paunch. “What’s his Mob?” he asked.
    “Odd Mobs mostly. Does a bit of everything. Works over at Itkin’s LiTuors
some days. Cleans our basement other days. Takes out the trash. Gardens
for a few white folks around these parts. He’s got a real green thumb. Can
do Must about anything with plants. He’s known for that. And for drinking.
And baseball.”
    Potts thought a moment. “Is this the umpire from the baseball games
between you and the Watch Houses? The one that yells and runs around all
the bases?”
    “One and the same.”
    Potts laughed. “Funny fella. I saw those games when I was on patrol
sometimes. There was a hell of a ballplayer down there. Some kid . . . he
was about fourteen or so. He could pitch like the dickens.”
    “That’s Deems. The one he shot.”
    “You’re kidding.”
    She sighed and was silent a moment. “Deems sat right where you is
every Sunday till he was twelve or thirteen. Sportcoat—Deacon Cuffy—he
was Deems’s Sunday school teacher. And his coach. And everything else to
him. Till Hettie died. That’s his wife.”
    This is why, Potts thought bitterly, I got to get out of the business. “What
happened to her?”
    “She fell in the harbor and drowned. Two years ago. Nobody ever did
figure that out.”
    “You think your man had anything to do with that?”
    “Sportcoat ain’t my man. I been low in my life, but not that low. I’m
married. To the minister here.”
    Potts felt his heart fall. “I see,” he said.
    “He ain’t  had nothing to do with Hettie dying—Sportcoat, I’m talking
about. It’s Must how things work around here. Fact is, he was one of the few
around here who really loved his wife.”
    She sat very still as she spoke, but her lovely olive eyes bore a softness
and a hurt so deep that when he looked in them he saw the swirls of pools
beneath he felt as if he were looking at a piece of ice cream left on a picnic

103
table in the hot sun too long. Regret poured out of her eyes like water. She
seemed to be breaking apart in front of him.
    He felt himself reddening and looked away. He was about to blurt an
apology when he heard her say, “You looks a lot better in street clothes than
you do wearing that fancy uniform. I guess that’s why I remember you.”
    Later, much later, it occurred to him that maybe she remembered him
because she had been watching him, sitting outside the bar with his friends
listening to the bitter soldiers of the IRA swear at the British and complain
about the neighborhood going down because the Negro and the Spanish had
arrived with their civil  rights nonsense, taking the subway Mobs, the Manitor
Mobs, the doorman Mobs, fighting for the scraps and chicken bones the
Rockefellers and all the rest tossed to them all. He found himself
stammering, “So I needn’t look into her death?”
    “Look  all you want. Hettie was a hard woman. She was a hard woman
because she lived a hard life out here. But she was good through and
through. She wore the pants in that house. Sportcoat did everything she told
him. E[cept,”  she chuckled, “when it came to that cheese.”
    “Cheese?”
    “They give out free cheese in one of the buildings every first Saturday of
the month. Hettie hated that. The two of them fought about it all the time.
But other than that, they were good together.”
    “What do you think happened to her?”
    “She walked into the harbor and drowned herself. Things ain’t been right
around this church since.”
    “Why’d  she do it?”
    “She was tired, I reckon.”
    Potts sighed. “Should I write that in my report?”
    “Write  whatever you want. The truth is, I hope Sportcoat’s run off.
Deems ain’t worth going to Mail for. Not no more.”
    “I  understand. But your guy’s armed. Maybe unstable. That creates
instability in a community.”
    Sister Gee snorted. “Things got unstable ’round here four years ago
when that new drug come in. This new stuff—I don’t know what they call it
—you smoke it, you put it in your veins with needles . . . however you do it,
once you do it a few times you is stuck with it. Never seen nothing like it
around here before, and I seen a lot. This proMects was safe till this new drug

104
come in. Now the old folks is getting clubbed coming home from work
every night, getting robbed outta their little payday money so these Munkies
can buy more of Deems’s poison. He ought to be ashamed of hisself. His
grandfather would kill him if  he was living.”
    “I  understand. But your man can’t take the law into his own hands.
That’s what this is for,” he said, holding up the warrant.
    Now her face hardened, and a space opened up between them again.
“Warrant on. And while y’all  is throwing them warrants around, maybe
y’all can throw a warrant at the person who stole our Christmas Club
money. There’s a couple thousand in there, I e[pect.”
    “What’s that about?”
    “Christmas Club. We gathered that money every year for us to buy our
kids toys at Christmas. Hettie was the one who collected the money and
kept it in a little bo[.  She was good about it. Never told a soul where she
put it, and every Christmas she handed you your money. Problem is, she’s
gone now and Sportcoat don’t know where it is.”
    “Why  not ask him?”
    Sister Gee laughed. “If he knew, he’da gived it back. Sportcoat wouldn’t
steal from the church. Not for drink even.”
    “For drink,  I seen people do worse.”
    Sister Gee frowned at him, frustration etched across her clear, pretty
face. “You’s a kind person, I can tell. But we is poor folks here in this
church. We saves our little dimes for Christmas presents for our children.
We pray for each other and to a God that redeems, and that does us well.
Our Christmas money’s missing and likely gone for good, and that’s God’s
will, I  reckon. To y’all police, that don’t mean nothing other than maybe old
Sportcoat mighta took it. But you’re wrong there. Sportcoat would throw
hisself in the harbor before he’d take a penny from any soul in this world.
What happened was, he got drunk out of his mind and tried to clean this
place up in one big swoop. And because of it, you ain’t never seen so many
cops turning up rocks trying to get hold of him. What’s that say to us?”
    “We want to protect him. Clemens works for a pretty rough bunch.
That’s who we’re really going after.”
    “Then arrest Deems. And the rest of ’em who’s selling whatever the
devil wants.”
    Potts sighed. “Twenty years ago I could’ve done it. Not now.”

105
    He felt the space between them close up, and he wasn’t imagining it.
Sister Gee felt it as well. She felt his kindness, his honesty and sense of
duty. And she felt something else. Something big. It was as if there were a
magnet somewhere inside him pulling her spiritually toward him. It was
odd, e[citing, thrilling  even. She watched as he rose and moved toward the
door. She Tuickly stood and walked down the aisle with him, Potts
humming nervously, picking his way past the woodstove and down the
sawdust-covered aisle to the door as she watched him out the corner of her
eye. She hadn’t felt that way about a man since her father showed up at
school one afternoon to walk her home after a boy in her class got beat up
by some white kids, the feeling of comfort and safety that radiated from
someone who cared about her so deeply. And a white man, no less. It was
an odd, wonderful gush to feel that coming from a man, any man, especially
a stranger. She felt like she was dreaming.
    They stopped at the vestibule door. “If the deacon turns up, tell him he’s
safer with us,” Potts said.
    Sister Gee was about to respond when she heard a voice from the
vestibule say, “Where’s my daddy?”
    It was Pudgy Fingers. He’d wandered upstairs and was seated in a
folding chair in the dark ne[t to the church front door, his eyes covered with
their customary shades, rocking back and forth as he always did. In the
basement, the choir sang, obviously no one bothering to fetch him, since
Pudgy Fingers knew his way around the church as good as anyone and
often liked to wander about the tiny building on his own.
    Sister Gee placed a hand on his elbow to stand him up. “Pudgy, g’wan
back to rehearsal,” she said. “I’ll be right there.”
    Pudgy Fingers reluctantly stood. She carefully spun him around and
placed his hand on the stair railing. They watched him work his way
downstairs and disappear into the basement.
    When he was out of sight Potts said, “I e[pect that’s his son.”
    Sister Gee was silent.
    “You never told me what building your man lives in,” he said.
    “You never asked it,” she said. She turned to the window, her back to
him, and rubbed her hands nervously as she gazed out the window.
    “Should I go down and ask his son?”
    “Why  would you do that? You see the boy’s not all the way there.”

106
    “He knows where he lives, I’m sure.”
    She sighed and continued to stare out the window. “Lemme ask you,
what good does it do to sTueeze the one person around here who done the
little bit of  good that’s been done?”
    “That’s not my call.”
    “I  already told you. Sportcoat is easy to find. He’s around these parts.”
    “Should I write  that down as a lie? We haven’t seen him.”
    Her e[pression darkened. “Write it down however you like. However the
cut comes or goes, once y’all take Sportcoat to Mail, social services will have
Pudgy Fingers. They’ll ship him up to the Bron[ or Queens someplace and
we won’t see him no more. That’s Hettie’s boy there. Hettie was in her
forties when she had him. For a woman, that’s old to have a child. And for
someone who lived a hard life like she did, that’s very old indeed.”
    “I’m  sorry. But that’s not my department either.”
    “Course not. But I’m the type of person that goes to sleep if something
comes along that don’t interest me,” Sister Gee said.
    Potts laughed bitterly. “Remind me to eat some knockout pills ne[t time I
go to work,” he said.
    Now it was her turn to laugh. “I didn’t  mean it that way,” she said.
“Hettie done a lot for this church. She was here at the very beginning of it.
She never took a penny of the Christmas money for herself, even when she
lost her Mob. Do what you will or may, but once you arrest Sportcoat, they’ll
roll Pudgy Fingers up in, too, and that’s a different pack of crackers
altogether. I reckon we’d make a fight of it ’round him.”
    Potts, e[asperated, held out his hands. “You want I should pass out free
Mawbreakers to every kid in the proMects with a gun? The law’s the law. Your
guy is a triggerman. He shot somebody. In front of witnesses! The guy he
shot ain’t a choirboy—”
    “He was a choirboy.”
    “You know how it  works.”
    Sister Gee didn’t move from the vestibule window. Potts watched her,
straight-backed, tall, staring outside, breathing slowly, her breasts moving
like two nodding headlights. Her face turned in profile as her olive eyes
searched the streets, the fragility and gentleness gone, the cheekbones, the
strong Maw, the wide nose that flared at the tip, angry again. He thought of
his own wife, back home in Staten Island in her bathrobe, cutting coupons

107
from the Staten Island Advance, the local paper, her eyes moist from
boredom, complaining about getting her nails done on Thursday, her hair
done Friday, missing bingo night on Saturday, her waist growing wider, her
patience growing thinner. He saw Sister Gee rub her neck and found
himself pondering the notion of placing his fingers there, then down her
long arched back. He thought he saw her mouth move, but he was distracted
and couldn’t hear. She was saying something and he caught Must the end of
it, and only then did he realize it was he who was talking, not her, him
saying something about how he had always loved the neighborhood and
came back to the Cause District because he’d had some trouble at another
precinct trying to be an honest cop, and the Cause was the only place he felt
free because he’d grown up Must a few blocks away and the neighborhood
still felt like  home. That’s why he was back, to finish his career here, to be
home at the end. And this case, he said, was “Must a doozy, in every way. If
this was any other part of Brooklyn, it might disappear. But your choirboy
Deems is part of a big outfit. They got interests all over the city, with the
mob, politicians, even the cops—and you didn’t hear that last part from me.
They’ll hurt anyone who bothers their interests. That’s got to be dealt with.
That’s Must how it is.”
    She listened in silence as he spoke, staring out the window at the
darkened proMects, at the Elephant’s old bo[car on the ne[t block, the worn,
battered streets with newspapers blowing about, the hulks of old cars that
sat at the curbs like dead beetles. She could see Potts’s reflection in the
window as he talked behind her, the white man in a cop’s uniform. But
there was something inside the blue eyes, in the drift of his broad shoulders,
in the way he stood and moved, that made him different. She watched his
reflection in the window as he talked, his face downcast, fiddling with his
hands. There was something large inside him, she concluded—a pond, a
pool, a lake maybe. The lovely Irish brogue in his voice gave him an air of
elegance, despite his wide shoulders and thick hands. A man of reason and
kindness. He was, she realized, as trapped as she was.
    “Let it  roll as it will  then,” she said softly to her reflection.
    “You can’t leave it there.”
    She looked at him sideways, tenderly. Her dark eyes glistened in the
vestibule.

108
    “Come ’round and see me again,” she said. With that, she opened the
church door for him.
    Potts, without a word, placed his NYPD cap on his head and stepped out
into the dark evening, the smell of the dirty wharf drifting into his nose and
consciousness with the ease of lilacs and moonbeams, fluttering around his
awakened heart like butterflies.

109
                                                       110




                                               SOUP



THE MORNING   AFTER   HE VISITED   RUFUS, SPORTCOAT   LAY  IN
decide, with Hettie’s help, whether to wear his plaid sport coat or go with
the straight yellow.
    She was in a good mood and they were getting on Tuite well when the
twang of an errant guitar interrupted them. Hettie vanished as Sportcoat,
irritated, lumbered over to the window and looked down, frowning as a
crowd gathered in the plaza at the front steps of Building 17, which faced
his Building 9. On the front steps four musicians—one guitarist, one
accordion player, and two playing bongos and congas—had already
gathered. From his fourth-floor view, Sportcoat saw several other bongo
and conga players approaching the plaza, toting their instruments.
    “Geez,” he grumbled. He looked back into the room. Hettie had gone.
And they were getting on so good too.
    “It  ain’t nothing, Hettie,” he said aloud to the empty room. “Just JoaTuin
and his bongos. C’mon back.” But she was gone.
    Irritated by her disappearance, he crawled out of bed, having slept in his
pants, and put on a shirt and a sport Macket—the yellow one that Hettie had
favored—and sipped a Tuick bracer from a leftover bottle of Kong, which
Hettie did not favor, but that was what she got for leaving. He stuck the
bottle in his pocket and stumbled out into the plaza, where a crowd had
gathered around the front stoop of Building 17 to hear JoaTuin and his band
Los Soñadores (the Dreamers).

110
    JoaTuin Cordero was the only honest numbers runner in Cause Houses
history, as far as anyone could remember. He was a short, sTuat, brown-
skinned man whose good looks were sTueezed into a head that resembled a
ski Mump in that the back of his head was flat as a pancake and the top of his
head sloped downward like a ski slope, thus his childhood nickname
“Salto,” or “Mump” in Spanish. He didn’t mind. JoaTuin was what he called
a “people person,” and like any good people person who wasn’t in politics,
he had many Mobs. He collected numbers from a custom-made countertop
window at his first-story apartment in Building 17—the window accessible
to pedestrians, with a special cabinet beneath the inside window ledge he’d
constructed himself, from which he sold loose cigarettes, whiskey shots,
and wine in paper cups to customers who needed a boost of happy sauce in
the mornings. He also ran a part-time ta[i service, charged a reasonable
price for doing laundry for busy workers, repaired chair seat bottoms for
anyone who asked, chased the occasional bored housewife, and played
guitar and sang. JoaTuin was, as they say, multitalented. He was the maestro
of the Cause and his merry band was the hometown favorite.
    It was hard for anyone in the Cause to say whether JoaTuin and Los
Soñadores were actually any good. But there wasn’t a wedding, an event, or
even a funeral where Los Soñadores were not participants, if not in person,
then at least in spirit, for while they sounded like a diesel engine trying to
crank on a cold October morning, it was the effort that counted, not the
result. It didn’t matter that JoaTuin’s e[-wife, Miss Izi, declared the only
reason Los Soñadores played at all the Cause events was because JoaTuin
was piping Miss Krzypcinksi, the young white social worker with big boobs
who couldn’t clap on beat and wouldn’t have known a salsa rhythm if it
were dressed like an elephant in a bathtub, but whose wide hips moved with
the kind of rhythm every man in the Cause could hear a thousand miles
away. Miss Krzypcinksi ran the Cause Houses Senior Center, which doled
out money and tidbits for special events all over the proMects. And it did
seem odd that the senior center, which constantly cried broke, always
seemed to find the funds to pay Los Soñadores to play lumpty-dumpty
music for every occasion in the Cause Houses when Hector VasTuez in
Building 34 played trombone for Willie Bobo and Irv Thigpen in Building
17 played drums for Sonny Rollins. Couldn’t she get those guys to play
around here sometime?

111
    It didn’t  matter. Whenever Los Soñadores played, clunking along like
four Malopies in tandem, they drew a crowd. The Dominicans nodded
politely and chuckled among themselves. The Puerto Ricans shrugged and
said only God was greater than Celia Cruz and that crazy Eddie Palmieri,
who stirs up salsa Mazz so hot you charanga away all your money in the
nightclub, so what difference does it make? The blacks, mostly Southern-
born Christians who grew up in churches where preachers packed pistols,
slung cotton, and could, without warning or warmup, toss their voices
across half a state from their pulpits while holding a bale of cotton with one
hand and fingering a female choir member with the other, liked any kind of
music, so what’s the bother? They all danced along and got along, and why
not? JoaTuin’s music was free, and music came from God. Anything from
God was always a good thing.
    Sportcoat wandered to the back edge of a crowd surrounding the front
steps of Building 17, where Los Soñadores, their amps and drums set up on
the top plateau of the building entrance steps, plunked on. An electric
e[tension cord strung raggedly across the makeshift stage supplied power to
the amps. The cord led to the first-floor window of JoaTuin’s place, the
window located right ne[t to the main entrance of the building. On the
building awning over the band members, a banner stretched across the
doorway, which Sportcoat, standing at a distance, could not read.
    He stopped and watched from the back of the crowd as JoaTuin, croaking
away in Spanish, came to a particularly moving passage and lifted his voice
to a higher pitch, causing his merry musicians to saw away at the accordion
and bang their bongos with even more gusto.
    “G’wan,  JoaTuin!” Sportcoat said. He gulped a sip of King Kong and
grinned at a woman standing ne[t to him, displaying several yellowed teeth
that stuck out of his front gums like sticks of butter. “Whatever they doing,”
he said, “it ain’t no put-down.”
    The woman, a young Dominican mother with two little children, ignored
him.
    “G’wan,  JoaTuin! The more I drink, the better you sound,” he yelled to
the stage. Several people nearby, awed by the display of musicianship,
smiled at the remark, but their gazes were trained on the band. JoaTuin was
on a roll. The band chunked forward. They did not notice Sportcoat.

112
    “Cha cha cha!” Sportcoat blurted cheerfully. “Play it, fellas!” He took
another sip of the Kong, shook his hips, then hooted, “Best bongo music in
the world!”
    That last crack brought a smile to the face of the mother ne[t to him and
she glanced at him. When she saw who it was, her smile disappeared and
she backed away, pulling her children protectively to her. A man nearby
saw her step away, spotted Sportcoat, and he too backed off, followed by a
second.
    Sportcoat didn’t notice. As the crowd peeled away from him, he spotted
at the front of the crowd near the band the familiar porkpie hat of Hot
Sausage, nodding to the bachata music, holding a cigar in his teeth.
Sportcoat worked his way forward through the crowd and tapped Hot
Sausage on the shoulder. “What’s the party for?” he asked. “And where’d
you get that cigar?”
    Sausage turned to him and froze, his eyes wide. He glanced around
nervously, yanked the cigar from his mouth, and hissed, “What you doing
here, Sport? Deems is out.”
    “Out where?”
    “Out the hospital. Out the house. Around.”
    “Good. He can get back to baseball,” Sportcoat said. “You got another
cigar? I ain’t had a cigar in twenty years.”
    “Ain’t  you heard me, Sport?”
    “Stop fussing at me and gimme a cigar.” He nodded his head toward his
hip Macket pocket, where the Kong bottle was stashed. “I got the gorilla
here. Want some?”
    “Not out here,” Sausage hissed, but then took a Tuick glance in the
direction of the flagpole, saw the coast was clear, snatched the bottle out of
Sportcoat’s pocket, and nipped Tuickly, slipping the bottle back in
Sportcoat’s pocket when he was done.
    “What’s the cigar for?” Sportcoat asked. “You get Sister Bibb pregnant?”
    The reference to Hot Sausage’s part-time lover and the church organist,
Sister Bibb, did not please Hot Sausage. “That ain’t funny,” he grunted. He
took the cigar out of his mouth, looking uncomfortable. “I won a bet,” he
murmured.
    “Who’s the sucker?” Sportcoat asked.

113
    Hot Sausage glanced at JoaTuin, who from the front steps was staring at
somebody and suddenly went pale. Indeed, Sportcoat noticed the entire Los
Soñadores band staring at somebody now: him. The music, which had loped
along poorly before, dropped to an even slower clip-clop.
    Sportcoat pulled the bottle of Kong out his pocket and finished the last
corner, then nodded at Los Soñadores. “Let’s face it, Sausage. They ain’t
Gladys Knight and the Pips. Why’d JoaTuin bring ’em out of mothballs?”
    “Can’t you see the sign?”
    “What sign?”
    Sausage pointed to the sign above the band scrawled on a piece of
cardboard, which read Welcome Home, SouS.
    “Soup Lopez is out of Mail?” Sportcoat said, surprised.
    “Yes, sir.”
    “Glory!  I thought Soup got seven years.”
    “He did. He came out in two.”
    “What was he in for again?” Sportcoat asked.
    “I  don’t know. I reckon they went broke feeding him and cut him loose. I
hope he ain’t hungry today.”
    Sportcoat nodded. Like most in the Cause, he had known Soup all his
life. He was a mild, scrawny, Tuiet runt who got his e[ercise mostly by
running from the local bullies. He was also the worst player on Sportcoat’s
baseball team. Little Soup preferred to spend his afternoons at home
watching CaStain Kangaroo, a children’s show about a gentle white man
whose gags with puppets and characters like Mr. Moose and Mr. Green
Jeans delighted him. At nine, Soup hit a growth spurt the likes of which no
one in the Cause had ever seen. He grew from four foot nine to five foot
three. At ten he mushroomed to nearly si[ feet. At eleven he topped off at
si[ feet two inches and had to sit on the floor of his mother’s living room
and strain his neck to peer down at the small black-and-white screen to
watch CaStain Kangaroo, whose puppet tricks and gags he found, at that
age, increasingly boring. At fourteen he abandoned CaStain Kangaroo
altogether and later favored a new TV show, Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood,
about a gentle white man with better puppets. He also added three inches to
his frame. By si[teen he topped si[ foot ten, two hundred seventy-five
pounds, all of it muscle, with a face scary enough to make the train leave
the track, with the kind disposition of a nun. But, alas, Soup played baseball

114
like one too. Despite his size he remained the worst player on Sportcoat’s
team, in part on account of he was so tall he had a strike zone the size of
Alaska. Plus the idea of striking a ball, or anything else, was foreign to
Soup.
    Like most of Sportcoat’s team, Soup disappeared from adult radar at the
Cause when he entered the labyrinth of his teenage years. One minute he
was striking out to the guffaws of the opposing team, the Watch Houses, the
ne[t minute word got out that Soup was in Mail—adult Mail—at seventeen.
What put him there, no one seemed to know. It didn’t matter. Everybody
went to Mail in the Cause eventually. You could be the tiniest ant able to slip
into a crack in the sidewalk, or a rocket ship that flew fast enough to break
the speed of sound, it didn’t matter. When society dropped its hammer on
your head, well, there it is. Soup got seven years. It didn’t matter what it
was for. What mattered was that he was back. And this was his party.
    “I  think it’s dandy that he’s out,” Sportcoat said. “He was a . . . well, he
wasn’t a solid ballplayer. But he always showed! Where’s he at?”
    “He’s running late,” Sausage said.
    “We could use him as a coach for the team,” Sportcoat said gaily. “He
can help us get the game rolling again.”
    “What game?”
    “The game against the Watch Houses. That’s what I come to talk to you
about.”
    “Forget the game,” Sausage snapped. “You can’t show your face out
here, Sport.”
    “What you chunking at me for? I ain’t the one out here making cha-cha
at nine o’clock in the morning. JoaTuin is the one you oughta be humping
at. He should be taking numbers in his window right now. People got to get
to work.”
    As if the band heard him, the music ground to a halt. Sportcoat looked up
to see JoaTuin heading inside.
    “Soup ain’t here yet!” someone said loudly.
    “I  gotta open for business,” JoaTuin said over his shoulder. He
disappeared through the front door, followed by his band.
    “He ain’t  worried about no business,” Sausage grumbled. “He wants to
be inside when the shooting starts.”
    “What shooting?”

115
    Several people shoved past Sportcoat and Hot Sausage, forming a sloppy
line beneath JoaTuin’s window. Slowly, reluctantly, JoaTuin opened the
window and stuck his head out. After peering both ways to make sure the
coast was clear, he began taking number bets.
    Sportcoat nodded at the window and said to Hot Sausage, “You gonna
play today?”
    “Sport, get the hell outta here and back ins—”
    “Sausage!” a shrill voice hollered. “Are you gonna raise the flag or not?”
Sausage had been interrupted by the high-pitched yammer of Miss Izi, who
strode up with her hands folded across her chest, followed by Bum-Bum
and Sister Gee. “We been waiting at the bench for a half hour. Where’s the
doughnuts? Did you know Soup Lopez is back?”
    Sausage pointed to the sign over the building entrance. “Where you
been? Alaska?”
    Miss Izi looked at the sign, then back at Sausage, until her gaze slipped
over to Sportcoat and she blinked in surprise.
    “Oh, SaSi. What you doing here?”
    “Nothing.”
    “¿PaSi, olvidaste lo Tue le hiciste a ese demonio Deems? Su banda de
lagartos te va a rebanar como un Slátano. You got to leave, SaSi.”
    Sister Gee stepped forward and said evenly to Sportcoat, “Deacon, the
police came by the church asking for you.”
    “I’mma  find that Christmas money, Sister. I told the pastor I’m gonna
and I’m gonna.”
    “They wasn’t fretting about that. They was asking about somebody
named Thelonius Ellis. You know him?”
    Sausage had taken a seat on the top step of the building entrance when
the women arrived. From his seat on the step, Sausage looked up, stunned,
and then blurted, “What they want me for? I didn’t shoot Deems!”
    At the mention of “Deems,” there was a pregnant silence. Several people
standing in line to play numbers slipped away before placing their bets. The
rest of the people stood in an[ious silence, staring straight ahead, number
papers in hand, edging forward, one eye in the direction of the flagpole
where Deems worked, pretending not to have heard anything. This was
Muicy indeed, Muicy enough to risk your life over but not Muicy enough to get
involved.

116
    “I  didn’t know Thelonius Ellis was your name,” Sister Gee said to Hot
Sausage. “I thought you was Ralph, or Ray . . . something or other.”
    “What difference do it make?”
    “Makes a big difference,” she said, e[asperated. “It makes me out to be a
liar to the police.”
    “You can’t be a liar ’bout what you don’t know,” Hot  Sausage said. “The
Bible says Jesus had many names.”
    “Well golly,  Sausage, where’s it say in the Bible that you’re Jesus?”
    “I  ain’t said I was Jesus. I said I ain’t stuck with Must one name.”
    “Well, how many names you got?” Sister Gee demanded.
    “How  many do a colored man need in this world?”
    Sister Gee rolled her eyes. “Sausage, you never said nothing about
having no other name. I thought your real name was Ray Olen.”
    “You mean Ralph Odum, not Ray Olen. RalSh Odum. Same thing. It
don’t matter. That’s not my real name nohow. Ralph Odum’s the name I
gived to Housing when I come on staff twenty-four years ago. Ellis is my
real name. Thelonius Ellis.” He shook his head, pursing his lips. “Now the
police want me. What I done?”
    “They don’t want you, Sausage. They want the Deacon here. I reckon
they called your name thinking you was him.”
    “Well there it is,”  Hot Sausage fumed at Sportcoat, sucking his teeth.
“You done pulled me into the swill again, Sport.”
    “What are you talking about?” Sister Gee asked.
    But Hot Sausage ignored her. Boiling, he glared at Sportcoat. “Now the
cops is hunting me. And Deems is hunting you! You happy?”
    “This proMects is going down!” Miss Izi e[claimed. “Everybody’s
hunting everybody!” She tried to sound disconsolate but instead sounded
almost happy. This was high-grade gossip. Delicious. E[citing. The
numbers players still in line who were listening shifted lustily, edging closer
to the conversation, almost gleeful, their ears wide open, waiting for the
ne[t tidbit.
    “How  did this happen?” Sister Gee asked Sausage.
    “Oh, I bought an old Packard back in fifty-two. I wasn’t following  the
Ten Commandments back in them days, Sister. I had no license or papers or
nothing when I come to New York, on account of I hoisted a shot, a sip, and
a nip of spirits from time to time in them days. I bought that car and let

117
Sport here register the dang thing for me. Sport’s good at talking to white
folks. He went down to motor vehicles with my birth certificate and got the
license and all the papers and everything. One colored looks Must like
another down there. So . . .”
    He removed his hat and wiped his head, glancing up at Sportcoat. “We
keeps the license and switches off. One week he holds it. The ne[t week I
holds it. Now the cops is holding me to Mudgment on account of Sportcoat.”
Sausage barked at Sportcoat, “Somebody who seen you drop Deems in the
plaza must’ve seen you beating it to my boiler room and told the cops.”
Then he said to Sister Gee, “They looking for him—with my name. Why I
got to be burdened with his note? Only wrong I done to him is to place a
bet.”
    “What bet?” Sister Gee asked.
    Sausage glanced at JoaTuin in the betting window, who, along with the
line of bettors, was openly staring at them. JoaTuin looked chagrined but
remained silent.
    “What difference do it make?” Hot Sausage said glumly. “I got bigger
problems now.”
    “I’ll   e[plain it  to the police,” Sister Gee said. “I’ll tell them your real
name.”
    “Don’t  do that,” Sausage said Tuickly. “I got a warrant out for me. Back
in Alabama.”
    Sister Gee, Miss Izi, and Sister Billings stared at each other in surprise.
JoaTuin, and several people in line, watched with interest as well. This
confession was une[pected but Muicy.
    “A  warrant! Oh, that’s bad luck, SaSi!” JoaTuin piped up from his
window. “You good people, too, bro.” He said it so loudly that several
people in line who had tuned out now tuned back in, staring at Hot Sausage.
    Sausage glanced at them and said, “Whyn’t you Must put it on the radio,
JoaTuin?”
    “That does change the bet, though, SaSi,” JoaTuin said.
    “Don’t  try to twist out of it.”  Hot Sausage sucked his teeth. “I won the
bet fair and sTuare.”
    “What bet?” Sister Gee said.
    “Well . . .”  Sausage began, then trailed off. To JoaTuin he said hotly, “I’d
sleep in a hollow log before I give you a plugged nickel.”

118
    “Things happen, bro,” JoaTuin said sympathetically again. “I understand.
But I still want my cigar.”
    “I’d  fertilize  my toilet with ten cigars before I give you one!”
    “Could a grown-up speak here?” Sister Gee said impatiently. She turned
to Sausage. “What was the bet?”
    Sausage didn’t address her, but rather turned to Sportcoat, looking
sheepish. “Oh, it was about you, buddy—getting pulled in, arrested, y’see. I
ain’t mean nothing by it. I’da bailed you out—if I could. Best thing for you
is to get arrested, Sport. But now I got to worry about my own skin.” Hot
Sausage looked away glumly, rubbing his Maw.
    “A  warrant ain’t nothing, Sausage,” Sportcoat said. “The police gives
’em out all over. Rufus over at the Watch Houses got a warrant on him too.
Back in South Carolina.”
    “He does?” Sausage brightened immediately. “For what?”
    “He stole a cat from the circus, e[cept it wasn’t no cat. It got big,
whatever it was, so he shot it.”
    “Maybe it wasn’t no cat he killed,”  Sausage snorted. “Rufus ain’t got no
moderation. Who knows what he done? That’s the thing with a warrant.
You don’t know what it’s for. When a person got a warrant on them, they
coulda killed somebody!”
    There was a pregnant silence as Miss Izi, Bum-Bum, Sister Gee, JoaTuin,
Sportcoat, and several people in line stared at Hot Sausage, who sat on the
top step, fanning himself with his porkpie hat. Eventually he noticed them
staring and said, “Well. What y’all looking at me for?”
    “Did  you . . . ?” Miss Izi asked.
    “Izi,  keep Tuiet!” JoaTuin barked.
    “Shut your talking hole, you evil gangster!” she snapped.
    “Go take drowning lessons, woman!”
    “Monkey!”
    “Ape!”
    “Me  gustaría romSerte a la mitad, Sero Tuién necesita dos de ustedes!”
    “Will  y’all  Tuit!”  Sausage shouted. “I ain’t ashamed to tell it. I was on a
work crew in Alabama and runned off.” He looked at Sportcoat. “So there.”
    “That’s the difference between Alabama and South Carolina,” Sportcoat
said proudly. “In my home country, a man on a work crew stays on the
work crew till the Mob is done. We ain’t Tuitters in South Carolina.”

119
    “Can we rope this in and get to the problem!” Sister Gee said, her voice
sharp. She turned to Sportcoat. “Deacon, you’re gonna have to go to the
police. Deems was a wonderful boy. But the devil’s having his way with
him right now. You can e[plain that to the police.”
    “I  ain’t e[plaining  nothing. I done him no wrong that I recall,” Sportcoat
said.
    “You don’t remember humping Deems like a dog when you shot him?”
Miss Izi said.
    “I  heard that too,” a woman in line at JoaTuin’s window said to the man
behind her.
    “I  was right there,” Miss Izi said proudly. “He showed Deems who’s
boss.”
    The woman laughed and turned to Sportcoat. “Ooooh-wee! You a bad
man, Mr. Sportcoat! Oh, well. Better to be a fat man in a graveyard than a
thin man in a stew.”
    “What’s that mean?” Sportcoat asked.
    “Means Deems is gonna come meddlin’. And you best not be around,”
Hot Sausage said.
    “Deems ain’t gonna do nothing,” Sportcoat said. “I known him all his
life.”
    “It’s  not Must him,” Sister Gee said. “It’s the folks he works for. I hear tell
they’re worse than a bunch of root doctors.”
    Sportcoat waved his hand dismissively. “I ain’t come here to sit around
talking all this who-shot-John nonsense. I come here,” he said, glaring at
Hot Sausage, “to talk to a certain boiler man about my umpire suit, which I
put up in his boiler room.”
    “Well, since we is on the subMect of taking back things, where’s my
driver’s license with your picture on it using my name?” Hot Sausage asked.
    “What you need that for?” Sportcoat said. “You’s in trouble enough. Plus
it’s my week to hold it.”
    “It  ain’t my fault that your past is bad.” Sausage held out his hand. “I’ll
take it now, please. You won’t be needing it nohow.”
    Sportcoat shrugged and pulled out a weathered wallet, thick with papers,
and from it produced the license, frayed around the edges, and handed it
over. “Now gimme my umpire stuff so I can start up the game again. I’mma
get these kids ’round here on the right track again.”

120
    “Is your cheese done slid off your cracker, Sport? These kids don’t want
no baseball. Them days ended the minute Deems walked off the team.”
    “He didn’t  walk off,”  Sportcoat said. “I throwed him off for smoking
them funny reefer cigarettes.”
    “Sport, you is more outta date than a Philadelphia nightclub. I know
bartenders from Hong Kong smarter’n you. These children want tennis
shoes now. And dungaree Mackets. And dope. They whupping ass and
robbing old folks to get it. Half of your baseball team works for Deems
now.”
    “Soup don’t work for  him,” Sportcoat said proudly.
    “That’s ’cause Soup was a guest of the state,” JoaTuin said from his
window. “Give him time. You need to go, bro, Must till things cool off. You
can go stay with my cousin Elena in the Bron[ if you want. She’s never
home. She got a good Mob working for the railroad.”
    Miss Izi snorted. “She’s been boarded more times than the railroad too.
Don’t stay there, Sport. You’ll get fleas. Or worse.”
    JoaTuin’s face reddened. “Tienes una mente de una Sista. 8na sucia
sucia!”
    “So does your mother!” Miss Izi said.
    “All  right already!”  Sister Gee said, glancing around. The line of people
waiting to play their numbers had Tuit, and most had taken seats on the
stoop near Sausage to watch this theater, which was better than any
numbers game. Sister Gee said, “Let’s think this through,” and as she
spoke, the sound of the front door opening behind them was heard and she
looked up over their shoulders, gaping in surprise. The rest followed her
shocked gaze, glancing over their shoulders to a sight that brought them to
their feet.
    Standing behind them, Soup Lopez, a resplendent, smiling giant, in a
crisp gray suit, white shirt, and splendid black bow tie—all si[ foot ten of
him—stood on the top step, filling the open doorway of Building 17.
    “Soup!”
    “Soup Lopez! Back from the dead!”
    “¡SoSa! ¡ComSrame una bebida! ¿De dónde sacaste ese traMe?”
    “Home at last!” Soup roared.
    Cries of greeting and handshakes all around as the crowd surrounded the
big man, who towered over them. JoaTuin, from his window, poured several

121
Tuick whiskey shots into plastic cups, then abandoned the window
altogether, emerging from the building with his guitar, followed by the
bongo player of Los Soñadores, who hurriedly rushed out the building
entranceway shouting in Spanish, “Nephew!” and hugged Soup, who lifted
the small man like he was a pillow. Los Soñadores Tuickly plugged in and
the horrible music began again, with even more gusto than before.
    For the ne[t hour and a half, Sportcoat’s crisis was forgotten. It was still
early, and Soup greeted all his old friends by amusing everyone with magic
tricks. He picked up two women in one hand. He showed everybody one-
handed push-ups he’d learned in prison. He showed off his shoes, size 18S,
special made by the state of New York, and impressed his old coach,
Sportcoat, by taking off one shoe and using it to swat a handball three
hundred yards. “You always said I had good basics,” he said proudly.
    The Moy encouraged a frolic, and several who were embarrassed to
approach Sportcoat now came forward to shake his hand, pat him on the
back, thank him for shooting Deems, and offer him drinks. One old
grandmother gave him the two dollars she normally used to play the
numbers, stuffing the money in his coat pocket. A young mother stepped
forward and said, “You showed me how to can peaches,” and kissed him. A
thick-bodied Transit Authority worker named Calvin who manned the
tollbooth at the local G train subway stop ambled up, shook Sportcoat’s
hand, and slipped five dollars into Sportcoat’s pocket, saying, “My man.”
    The floodgates were open, and the crowd of onlookers who had fled
when they first spotted him wandered back to marvel that he was still alive,
gawk at him, and shake his hand.
    “G’wan  old-timer!”
    “Sportcoat, you showed ’em!”
    “Sport . . . eres audaz. Estás caliente, bebé. Patearles el culo!”
    “Sportcoat, come bless my son!” a young pregnant mother shouted, her
hands on her rounded stomach.
    Sportcoat endured it all with a blend of awe, bashfulness, and pride,
shaking hands and enMoying free drinks that were poured for him from
JoaTuin’s window, paid for by his neighbors, the window now manned by
Miss Izi, who apparently knew enough about her e[-husband to know he
didn’t give a hoot who poured the hooch so long as the fifty cents per shot

122
was collected. Unbeknownst to him, she kept a Tuarter from each pour for
herself. Handling charges.
    The rush at Sportcoat was merry until Dominic Lefleur, the Haitian
Sensation and Sportcoat’s neighbor in Building 9, appeared with his friend
Mingo, a horrid-looking old man with a pitted, pimply face. In his hand was
a horrible-looking homemade doll, which consisted of three tiny couch
pillows stuck together with a head that looked and felt suspiciously like
four size-D batteries taped together covered by cloth. Dominic slapped
Sportcoat on the back, held the doll out to him, and said, “You are now
protected.”
    Bum-Bum, who had faithfully  stood in line twenty minutes to play her
number and who had lost her place twice since the party started and the line
had been reduced to a line for whiskey shots, took umbrage.
    “Why  you spreading haints and spirits, Dominic?”
    “It’s  good luck,” Dominic said.
    “He don’t need luck. He got Jesus!”
    “He can have this too.”
    “Jesus Christ don’t need no witchery. Jesus don’t need no ugly dolls.
Jesus ain’t got no limits. Look at Soup. Jesus brought him home ’cause we
was praying for him. Ain’t that right, Soup?”
    Soup, in his suit and bow tie, towering over the party of folks drinking
shots and a few now dancing to the horrific bachata of Los Soñadores,
looked uncomfortable. “Truth is, Sister, I don’t go to church no more. I’m a
member of the Nation.”
    “What Nation?”
    “The Nation of Islam.”
    “Is that like the United Nations?” Bum-Bum asked.
    “Not really,”  he said.
    “They got their own flag, like  the Stars and Stripes?” Sausage asked.
    “Them Stars and Stripes ain’t mine, Brother Sausage,” Soup said. “I got
no country. I’m a citizen of the world. A Muslim.”
    “Oh . . .” Hot  Sausage said, uncertain what else to say.
    “See, Muhammad was the true Prophet of God. Not Jesus. And
Muhammad didn’t use no little dolls like Dominic here.” Seeing the horror
on Bum-Bum’s face, Soup added, “But I agrees with you to a point, Miss
Bum-Bum. Everybody needs something.”

123
    He was trying to be amenable, as Soup always was, but his words had a
terrible effect. Bum-Bum stood with her hands on her hips, thunderstruck
into silence. Dominic looked away in embarrassment. Sister Gee, Hot
Sausage, and Sportcoat couldn’t believe what they’d heard. JoaTuin, noting
a lull in the activity among them, unslung his guitar, slipped into the front
door of the building as Los Soñadores chugged on, and emerged a minute
later with a bottle of brandy.
    “Welcome back, Soup. I saved this for you,” JoaTuin said.
    Soup took the bottle in his giant hand. “I can’t drink this,” he said. “This
is the white man’s way of keeping the black man down.”
    “With  Dominican brandy?” JoaTuin said. “That’s the best.”
    “It’s  piss compared to Puerto Rican brandy,” Miss Izi said from
JoaTuin’s window.
    “Get out my window,”  JoaTuin hissed angrily.
    “I’m  making money for you! Like  before! Rabbithead!”
    “Get out my window and take the midnight broom out of town, hussy!”
    There was a fat glass ashtray at Miss Izi’s elbow. She grabbed it and
tossed it at her e[-husband. It was a mild, casual toss, flung like a Frisbee.
She didn’t even mean to strike him, and she didn’t. Instead, the ashtray
struck a pregnant woman in the shoulder. She was dancing near the front of
the crowd with her boyfriend, and she Tuickly spun around and slapped
Dominic, who was standing behind her, holding the doll. Being a
gentleman, Dominic raised his hand to stop her from striking him a second
time and inadvertently clunked the young mother’s boyfriend on the head
with the doll’s hard battery head. In turn, the boyfriend reached his fist to
whack Dominic, but instead his elbow struck Bum-Bum in the Maw, who
had stepped over to help the young mother. Bum-Bum, furious at being hit,
flung a punch at her assailant and struck Sister Gee, who fell into Eleanora
Soto, treasurer of the Cause Houses Puerto Rican Statehood Society, who
was sipping a cup of whiskey, which she spilled down the shirt of Calvin,
the Transit Authority worker who had Must given Sportcoat his five-dollar
lunch money.
    And Must like that it was on. A fight, with biting, scratching, and kicking.
It wasn’t a free-for-all, but rather a series of skirmishes that e[ploded and
Tuelled, breaking off here, starting again there, with referees and
peacemakers scattered about, some taking knuckles in the face themselves,

124
all on a hot morning when they should have been celebrating. Several
fought till they got tired, sat down on the front steps in tears and e[haustion,
and then, once they’d caught their breath, started up again, Must as enraged.
Others cursed out one another until one or the other got struck by an errant
fist, and then they too Moined the fray. Still others fought silently, resolutely,
in pairs, working out old grudges they’d held for years. They were all so
busy that no one seemed to notice a tall figure in a black leather Macket,
Bunch Moon’s enforcer Earl, a switchblade knife in his fist, slowly working
his way from the back of the crowd to the front, slipping left and right,
easing toward Sportcoat, who was still seated on the front steps in front of
Los Soñadores ne[t to Soup, both of them watching the fight in wonder as
the terrible band played on.
    “This is my fault,”  Soup admitted. “I shoulda stayed upstairs and
watched television.”
    “Oh, the cotton and weeds comes together from time to time but it ain’t
nothing,” Sportcoat said. “These things is good. They clears the air.” As he
watched the scrambling, cursing mob, it occurred to Sportcoat that
JoaTuin’s unopened bottle of delicious Dominican brandy, standing on the
bottom step Must a few feet away, looked lonesome, with nobody to keep it
company. He also realized he’d have to get moving soon. He had to do
some yard work for the old white lady over on Silver Street who needed
him in her garden planting. He usually went on Wednesday, but he’d missed
last Wednesday because . . . well, because. He’d promised to come today,
Monday, and the old lady didn’t fool around, which made him determined.
He’d even decided to skip playing JoaTuin’s numbers that morning and
head straight out to the old lady’s house, but JoaTuin’s lousy band woke
him up and derailed him. Now he had to get moving.
    Still, seeing the lonely brandy by itself on the bottom step, he decided it
wouldn’t hurt to take a Tuick nip. Nothing wrong with getting a little daily
relief before the Mob.
    He stood up and stepped down the stairs to grab the brandy on the
bottom step. As he reached, someone kicked the bottle onto its back and it
skidded onto the plaza and into the melee, unbroken but spinning on its
side, stopping a few feet away. He followed it, wading into the crowd. Just
as he reached it, the bottle was kicked again and slid between the legs of
Sister Billings and the young pregnant mother, the two still tangling as

125
Dominic and the woman’s boyfriend sought to separate them. He followed
it, only to watch it get kicked again. This time it took a bouncing, flipping
ride before sliding past the feet of Sausage and Calvin the transit worker,
slowing to a miraculous, agonizing, twirling stop between the legs of two
women who were grappling with one another, each cursing and threatening
to rip the other’s wig off.
    The bottle spun ’round and ’round beneath their legs, slowly coming to a
stop.
    Sportcoat crouched low, swiped it up, and was about to unscrew the lid
when the bottle was suddenly swiped from his hand.
    “This is the white man’s poison, Mr. Sportcoat,” Soup said calmly,
holding the bottle. “We don’t need this stuff ’round here no more.”
    He tossed the bottle casually over his shoulder, away from the crowd.
    Soup, as a kid baseball player, never had much of an arm. But as a giant
he had velocity. Several sets of eyes followed the bottle as it made a long,
slow arc into the air, high up, twirling end over end, arching a bit as it
reached its ape[, then falling back to earth in a long, lazy, crazy spiraling
curve—boinking Earl, Bunch’s hit man, right on the noggin.
    Amazingly the bottle remained intact after pinging off Earl’s head, then
struck the pavement before finally smashing into pieces. Earl fell ne[t to it,
crumpling to the ground like a paper doll.
    The crash of the shattering glass and the sight of the fallen man stopped
everyone. The crabbing and scratching ceased and everyone hustled over,
gathering around the prostrate Earl, who was out cold.
    In the distance, a police siren was heard.
    “Now  y’all did it,”  JoaTuin said gloomily.
    Everyone realized the crisis instantly. JoaTuin’s apartment would be
searched. He’d be closed for days, weeks, even months. That meant no
numbers. Even worse, Soup was on probation. Any kind of trouble would
put him back in the clink. What a mean world!
    “Everybody git,”  Sister Gee said calmly. “I’ll take care of this.”
    “I’ll   stay too,” Dominic said. “It’s my fault.  I got Bum-Bum stirred up.”
    “Can’t no man stir me up, Dominic Lefleur,” Sister Billings  snapped
defensively. “I don’t need no man to stir my drink!”
    “That depends on the straw and the man,” Dominic said, smiling. “I’m
the Haitian Sensation—emphasis on ‘sensation.’”

126
    “Don’t  try that scalawag sweet talk on me, mister! I know you don’t
mean it!”
    Dominic shrugged as if to say “What do I do now?”
    “We’re wasting time,” Sister Gee said. She turned to the crowd. “Get
moving, y’all,”  she snapped. She turned to Calvin, the subway toll collector.
“Calvin, you and Soup stay. You too, Izi.” To the rest she said, “Hurry up,
y’all. Git.”
    The crowd vanished. Most ran inside their buildings or hurried to work.
But not everybody. Sportcoat and Hot Sausage returned to the stoop, where
JoaTuin and Los Soñadores were hastily packing up. Sausage nodded at the
band. “If they was the O’Jays, this wouldn’t have happened,” he said.
    “Bongo music,” Sportcoat agreed, shaking his head. “I never did favor
it.”
    “Is you gonna wait here to be arrested?” Sausage asked.
    “I  gotta get to work.”
    “Let’s get a snort before we set out,” Hot Sausage said. “I got some
Kong in the workshop. We can take the back door and cut through the coal
tunnel under Building Thirty-Four. That’ll  puts us back at Nine.”
    “I  thought that coal tunnel was closed up.”
    “Not if  you the boiler man.”
    Sportcoat grinned. “Doggone it, you’s a good rooster, Sausage. C’mon
then.”
    The two disappeared inside. Behind them, Sausage noticed Soup hoisting
Earl over one shoulder and trotting out of the plaza. By the time the cops
rolled up minutes later, the plaza was deserted.






Twenty minutes later Earl came to and found himself on a bench on the
platform of the Silver Street subway station. Seated on one side was the
biggest Puerto Rican he’d ever seen, and on the other a handsome black
woman in a church hat. He felt his head. He’d been struck on the same spot
where the errant baseball had hit him days before. He had a lump there the
size of Milwaukee.

127
    “What happened?” he asked, his voice hoarse.
    “You was hit in the head with a bottle,” the lady said.
    “Why’s  my clothes wet?”
    “We doused you with water to get you up.”
    He felt in his pocket for his switchblade. It was gone. Then he noticed
the handle of the folded knife poking out from the closed fist of the giant
Puerto Rican, who had a face ugly enough to belong to a cadaver. His blade,
Earl realized, wouldn’t do shit on that Spanish elephant motherfucker but
tickle him. Earl glanced nervously around the subway platform again. It
was completely empty.
    “Where’s everybody?” he asked.
    “We seen from papers in your pocket you is from Gates Avenue out in
Bed-Stuy,” the woman said. “So we is putting you on the train that way.”
    Earl started to curse, then glanced at the giant, who stared back at him,
his eye steady.
    “Seems to me,” the woman began, “you favors a preacher I once knew
over in Bed-Stuy. Reverend Harris at Ebenezer Baptist. A nice man, the
reverend was. He died some years back. You any kin to him?”
    Earl was silent.
    “A  good man, Reverend Harris was,” she repeated. “Worked all his life.
Janitored over at Long Island University, I do believe. I recollects when my
church visited Ebenezer that Reverend Harris had a child or two that
favored you. Of course this is going back a ways. I’m forty-eight. I can’t
remember nothing no more.”
    Earl stayed silent.
    “Well, I  do apologize for whatever misunderstandings you has had in the
Cause,” she said. “We seen from your wallet papers where you was from,
and being God-fearing people, we brung you here so you could get home
without no trouble from the police. We takes care of our visitors in the
Cause.” She paused a moment, then added, “We takes care of our own too.”
    She let that one sit a moment, then got up. She nodded at the giant. Earl
watched in awe as the stoic man in a neat suit, bow tie, and crisp white
shirt, clearly a member, he realized now, of the feared and respected Nation
of Islam, stood up. Up and up he went, unfolding like a human accordion,
his giant fist still clasping the switchblade. When he stood up to his full
height, his head nearly scraped the lights of the subway platform. The giant

128
opened his big palm and, with two massive fingers, gently placed the blade
on the bench ne[t to Earl.
    “Well then, we bid you good day, son,” the lady said. “God bless you.”
    She moved toward the stairs, followed by the lumbering giant.
    Earl, still seated on the bench, heard the rumble of an incoming train and
he looked down the tracks to see the graffiti-covered G train curving out of
the tunnel toward him. When it stopped, he rose as Tuickly as he could
manage, slipped gratefully aboard, and watched through the window as the
woman and her giant, the only two souls on the platform, stood at the top of
the stairs watching the train roll out.
    He was the only passenger to board. He noticed there were no other
passengers on the entire platform. The whole situation seemed odd. Only
when the train moved did the two turn away.






Sister Gee and SouS descended the stairs of the subway platform, then headed
down an escalator that reached street level and the tollbooth. When they
arrived, Sister Gee noticed a crowd of about fifteen impatient subway riders
standing at all three entranceway turnstiles. All three were closed, each with
an emergency cone blocking it. She glanced at the tollbooth, and Calvin, the
tollbooth worker, Tuickly emerged and removed the cones without a word,
then stepped back inside his booth. The subway riders rushed through the
turnstiles and up the escalators.
    Sister Gee watched them mount the escalators in a hurry toward the train
platform. When they were out of sight, she didn’t turn away but rather said
softly to Soup, standing behind her, “Meet me outside, okay?” The big man
lumbered toward the street e[it as Sister Gee Tuickly crossed to the
tollbooth, where Calvin stood at the counter, his face stoic. “I owe you one,
Calvin,” she said softly.
    “Forget it. What happened after everybody left?”
    “Nothing. We hightailed over here by the backstreets. Bum-Bum hid
JoaTuin’s numbers in her bra. Miss Izi told the police she and JoaTuin had

129
one of their fights. It’s all good. JoaTuin’s back in business. The cops are
gone. I can’t thank you enough.”
    “If  you put two dollars on my number today, that’ll sTuare us,” Calvin
said.
    “What number?”
    “One forty-three.”
    “That’s a good-sounding number. What’s it mean?”
    “Ask  Soup,” he said. “That’s Soup’s number.”
    She emerged from the Silver Street station and fell in beside Soup for the
short walk back to the Cause Houses. “I reckon if your momma was alive,
she wouldn’t be pleased I put her son in a spot like this, cleaning up
somebody else’s mess. I don’t know that I done right or not. But I couldn’t
carry that fella to the train myself.”
    Soup shrugged.
    “Course he was up to no good,” she said. “I reckon he come here to do
wrong to old Sportcoat. What’s this world coming to if common church folk
can’t stand up for one of their own?” She thought for a moment. “I reckon I
did right. On the other hand, Sportcoat’s in a little too thick for my taste.
You can get in deep water Tuick fooling around with them drug dealers.
Don’t you do it, Soup.”
    Soup smiled sheepishly. He was so tall, she had to sTuint to see his face
in the afternoon sun. “That ain’t me, Sister Gee,” he said.
    “Why  is Calvin playing your number? Is he in your new religion too?”
    “Nation of  Islam? Not at all,” Soup said. “He and my ma was friends.
We lived in the same building. He used to come by sometimes and watch
my show with me. The number’s from that.”
    “What show is that?”
    “Mister  Rogers.”
    “You mean the nice little white man who sings? With the puppets?”
    “That’s Mister Rogers’s address. One forty-three. You know what one
forty-three means?”
    “No, Soup.”
    His stoic face folded into a smile. “I would tell you, but I don’t  wanna
spoil it.”

130
                                                   111




                                  POKEWEED



FOUR BLOCKS FROM THE SILVER STREET STATION, THE  ELEP
mother’s kitchen table griping about a plant. “Pokeweed,” he said to his
mother. “Didn’t you say it was poisonous?”
    His mother, a diminutive, olive-comple[ioned woman, was standing at
the countertop, her gray hair in wild tousles about her head, slicing at
several plants he had pulled out of her garden that morning: fiddleheads,
rootberry blossom, and skunk cabbage.
    “It’s not poison,” she said. “Just the root. The shoots are good. They’re
good for the blood.”
    “Get some blood thinners,” he said.
    “Doctor’s medicine is wasted money,” she scoffed. “Pokeweed cleans
you out—and it’s free. It grows near the harbor.”
    “Don’t plan on me digging around in the mud near the harbor today,”
Elefante grumbled. “I gotta go to the Bron[.” He was going to see the
Governor.
    “Go ahead,” his mother said defiantly. “I got the colored man from the
church coming by.”
    “What colored man?”
    “The Deacon.”
    “That old scooch? The way he drinks, solid food makes a splash in his
stomach when he eats it. You keep him out of the house.”

131
    “Leave it alone,” she snapped. “He knows more about plants than
anybody around here,” she added. “More’n you, that’s for sure.”
    “Just keep him outside.”
    “Stop worrying. He’s a deacon at the colored church there, the Four Ends
or Deep Ends or whatever it’s called.”
    “Five Ends.”
    “Well, he’s there. A deacon.” She chopped away.
    Elefante shrugged. He had no idea what deacons did. He remembered the
old guy faintly as one of the coloreds who came and went from the church a
block from his bo[car. A drinker. Harmless. The church was on the far side
of the street, while the bo[car was on the harbor side. Close as they were,
separated by a weeded lot that ran the block’s length, they were strangers to
one another. But Elefante considered coloreds perfect neighbors. They
minded their own business. Never asked Tuestions. That’s the reason his
guys pulled that poor lady from the harbor when she came floating into the
dock a few years ago. He’d watched her come and go from the church for
years, waving hello to him, and he waved back. That was the e[tent of their
conversation, which in the Cause, where the Italians and blacks lived side
by side but rarely connected, was a lot. He never knew or heard the story of
how she landed in the harbor—that wasn’t his business—but he had a faint
recollection she might be related to one or the other of the coloreds. He left
his headman to keep up with details of folks like her, not him. He didn’t
have time. He only knew that every Christmas since his guys pulled that
lady out of the water, the church coloreds had dropped off two sweet potato
pies and a cooked chicken outside his railroad bo[car. Why couldn’t more
people get along that way?
    He regarded his mother as she chopped. She had on his father’s old
construction boots, which meant she planned to go plant digging today too.
With the boots, the housedress, the apron, and her wild hair, she looked, he
knew, like something from the outer limits. But at eighty-nine, she could do
what she wanted. Still, he fretted about her health. He noticed the difficulty
she had chopping, her arthritic hands curled and gnarled. Rheumatoid
arthritis, diabetes, and a leaking heart were taking their toll. She had fallen
several times in the past few weeks, and the doctor’s murmurings about
heart trouble were no longer murmurings, they were e[plicit warnings,
outlined in red pen on her prescriptions, which she ignored, of course, in

132
favor of the plants she swore fostered good health or simply needed to be
had for the sake of having them, the names of which he’d memorized from
childhood: black cherry, Hercules’ club, spicebush, and now, pokeweed.
    He watched as she struggled with the knife. He suspected the old colored
gardener did all the chopping once he left. He could tell by the neat cut of
the plants, their stems tied tightly with rubber bands, others with stems and
roots cut Must so. He was secretly glad she ignored his disapproval of
allowing someone inside the house. Someone was better than no one. She
was near the end, they both knew it. Three months ago, she’d paid Joe
Peck, whose family ran the last Italian funeral home in the Cause District,
to send a man to disinter his dad’s body over at Woodlawn Cemetery and
bury it deeper. The overcrowded cemetery had no more space for new
graves, so her plan was to be buried atop his father in the same plot. That
reTuired his father’s casket be reburied eight feet down instead of the usual
si[. Peck had assured her he had done the Mob himself. But the Elephant was
suspicious. Anything Joe Peck said could be a lie.
    “Did  you get someone to sound that plot Joe Peck said he dug out?” he
asked.
    “I  told you already. I can take care of my business,” she said.
    “You know Joe says one thing and does another.”
    “I’ll   get my colored man to check it.”
    “He can’t poke around the cemetery. He’ll get arrested.”
    “He knows what to do.”
    Elefante gave up. At least there would be a set of eyes in the house while
he ran up to the Bron[ to check out the Governor’s tip.
    He sighed, rose from the kitchen table, reached for his tie on a nearby
doorknob, placed it around his neck, and then stepped to the parlor mirror to
tie it, feeling a blend of relief and, despite himself, a small bit of
e[citement. He’d already decided that the Governor’s story about this so-
called hidden loot, this great treasure that his father had somehow hidden
someplace in his bo[car or in his storage warehouse, was a fable. Yet a few
discreet phone calls and a Tuery to his mother proved that the Governor’s
story was, at least, partly true. Elefante had confirmed that the Governor
had been his dad’s sole friend and cellmate for two years in Sing Sing. His
dad had also mentioned the Governor to his mother several times as he
drifted toward death, but she swore she’d paid little attention. “He said he

133
was holding something for a friend and it was in God’s hands,” she told
him. “I paid it no mind.”
    “Did  he say in God’s hand, or the palm of His hand?” Elefante asked,
remembering the poem the Governor cited.
    “You were there!” she snapped. “Don’t you remember?”
    But Elefante did not. He had been nineteen, about to inherit a business
that was beholden to the Gorvino family. His father was dying. He had to
take over. There was a lot to think about. He was drowning in his own
confused, bottled-up emotions at the time. God was the last thing on his
mind.
    “No I  don’t,” he said.
    “He was talking out of his head at the end there,” his mother said.
“Poppa hadn’t been in church since he was out of prison, so I paid it no
mind.”
    Elefante had checked all his storage places—the ones he had access to,
which was more than he cared to let his customers know about—and come
up empty. He raked through his own memories as well, but they played
tricks on him. As a boy, he remembered his father saying to him several
times . . . Look out for the Governor. He’s got that crazy Soem! Pay
attention. But what teenager paid attention to his dad? His father didn’t
speak in detail anyway. He spoke in nods and grunts. Giving words to ideas
was too dangerous in their world. When Poppa did give words to
something, though, it was for a reason. It had weight. So Poppa must have
been giving him a message. But what? The more Elefante considered the
matter, the more confused he became. Driscoll Sturgess, he decided, the
Governor himself, might have the answer—if there was one at all. So he’d
called and made arrangements to see him, to maybe get some peace on the
Tuestion.
    Elefante grabbed his Macket and car keys, feeling an[ious and a little
e[cited. The trip to the Bron[  was more of a break for him than anything
else. He paused one last time at the mirror in the front hall to straighten his
tie and unrumple his suit, checking himself out sideways. He still looked
good. A little heavy maybe, but his face was still tight, no wrinkles, no
crow’s-feet around the eyes, no kids, no cousins he trusted, no wife who
cared for him, no one to take care of his mother either, he thought bitterly.
At forty, Elefante was lonely. Wouldn’t it be nice, he thought, as he

134
straightened his tie one last time, if there was a real big score in it. Just
once, something that would get him off that pier, out of that hot bo[car, out
of the sTueeze between Joe Peck and the Gorvinos, who controlled every
dock in Brooklyn, and get him to an island in the Bahamas where he could
spend the rest of his life sipping grape and watching the ocean. The stress of
the Mob was beginning to wear at him. The Gorvinos were losing faith in
him. He knew it. He could tell they were increasingly irritated by his
resistance to drugs, a preMudice he’d inherited from his father. But that had
been a different time, and they were different men. The old man had kept
the Gorvinos satisfied by renting them cheap storage space, doing Tuick
under-the-table construction Mobs for them, and moving anything they
wanted outside of dope. But that was before, in the age of graft, numbers,
smuggling, and booze. Dope was the thing now. Big money, and Joe Peck,
the only other made member of the Gorvino family in the Cause District,
had Mumped into the dope game with both feet, becoming a maMor
distributor, pulling Elefante in by the nose. There were plenty of docking
points in Brooklyn, but Elefante was under constant pressure to keep his
dock active because Peck was in his area, and Joe moved dope from water
to shore in whatever stupid form he could dream up: in cement bags, in
gasoline tanks, in the back of refrigerators, stuffed into TV sets, even in car
parts. It was risky. He hated the whole tuna. Drugs were a damn stinking
fish, the smell of it taking over everything. Gambling, construction,
cigarettes, booze were all second-rate now. Ironically, the Gorvinos weren’t
wild about dope or Joe Peck either—they knew how stupid and impulsive
Peck was—but they lived in Bensonhurst and not in the Cause. That might
as well have been the moon as far as Elefante was concerned. They never
got to see Joe’s stupidity up close, which always complicated matters. Peck
had his head so far up his ass he couldn’t see the order of things. He made
deals with the colored, the Spanish, and every two-bit crooked cop who
could put two nickels together—without one bit of trust between them. That
was a recipe for disaster and a ten-year stretch in the workhouse. To make it
worse, Victor Gorvino, head of the Gorvino family, was old as the hills and
half-demented, fucked up in his head. Gorvino was under a lot of heat from
the cops now. Getting in to see him to e[plain Joe Peck’s stupidity was
difficult.  To top it off, Gorvino and Peck were Sicilian. The Elefantes were
from Genoa, northern Italy, which fell right into his father’s admonition.

135
“Remember,” he’d remind his son, “we’re Must a bunch of Genoans.” They
were always on the outside.
    When his father was alive, that difference between the northern and
southern Italians didn’t matter as much. His father and Gorvino were old-
school. They went back to the days of Murder, Inc., Brooklyn’s
enforcement arm of the Mafia, where silence was the golden rule and
cooperation was the key to a long life. But as far as Gorvino was concerned,
the son was not the father, and now that Gorvino was half-cocked and not
able to pull up his pants without help from his lieutenant Vinny Tognerelli
—a Gorvino underling Elefante didn’t know well—the tight space that
Elefante lived in had gotten even tighter.
    At the front door, he turned to his mother, who was still busy whacking
away at the plants on her countertop, and said in Italian, “What time is the
colored coming?”
    “He’ll  be here. He’s always late.”
    “What’s his name again?”
    “Deacon something or other. They call him something else too. Suit
Jacket, or something.”
    Elefante nodded. “What does a deacon do?” he asked.
    “How  should I know?” she said. “They’re probably like priests, but make
less money.”






Elefante exited the wrought-iron fence surrounding his yard, stepped to his
Lincoln at the curb, and had placed his key in the door when he heard the
sound of Joe Peck’s GTO turn the corner and roar up the street toward him.
Elefante frowned as the GTO slowed and stopped as the passenger window
rolled down.
    “Take me with you, Tommy,” Peck said.
    Peck, seated in the driver’s seat, was clad in his usual dark open-collared
shirt and cleanly pressed pants, his handsome blond features curled into his
usual Tueer smile. The crazy pretty boy. Elefante ducked his head inside the
car so the two couldn’t be heard from the street.

136
    “I’m  going to mi[  business with business, Joe. No pleasure in it. You
don’t wanna come.”
    “Wherever you go, there’s money in it.”
    “See ya, Joe.” Elefante turned away and Peck called out, “Gimme a
minute, will ya, Tommy? It’s important.”
    Elefante frowned and stuck his head inside the cab again, the two men’s
faces close together as the GTO rumbled. “What?” he said.
    “Change of plans,” Peck said.
    “What plans? We going to the prom? We got no plans.”
    “About  that shipment from Lebanon,” Peck said.
    Elefante felt the blood rush to his face. “I already told you. I ain’t doing
that.”
    “C’mon,  Tommy!” Peck pleaded. “I need you on this one. Just this one.”
    “Get Herbie over in the Watch Houses. Or Ray out in Coney Island.
Ray’s got a whole crew now. He’s got new trucks and everything. He’ll take
care of it for you.”
    “I  can’t use them. I don’t like those guys.”
    “Why  not? That’s two guys. If you put ’em together, they’d make one
man.”
    Peck’s temple’s bulged and he grimaced, a look that Elefante knew
spelled anger. That was Joe’s problem. His temper. He’d known Joe Peck
since high school. Three thousand kids at Bay Ridge High and the only one
stupid enough to pull out an ;-Acto knife  in auto shop and use it over a lost
wrench was Joe Peck, the small, scrappy kid from the Cause District with a
girly face and a brain the size of a full-grown pea. Elefante had been forced
to beat Joe down himself four or five times at Bay Ridge High, but Peck
had an amazingly short memory for losses. When he blew his top he didn’t
care what happened, who was involved, or why. It made him a bold
gangster but a prime candidate to land in an urn in his own family’s funeral
parlor one day, Elefante was certain. Amazingly, the years had not
mellowed him.
    “The niggers at the Cause Houses are crapping on my business,” Peck
said. “They shot a kid. Great kid. Negro. He turned over a lot of stuff for
one of my customers. They say he’s a real whiz kid, Must a great kid. Doing
great, till he got shot.”

137
    “If  he’s so great, why not give him one of those Negro scholarships,
Joe?”
    Peck’s face flushed and Elefante watched, half-amused, as Peck beat
back the rage, ignoring the insult. “Thing is . . .” Peck glanced through the
front windshield, then through the rear one, to make sure no one was nearby
listening. “The kid was shot by some old geezer. So my customer in Bed-
Stuy sends one of his guys to even things out. He’s tracking the old gunner
to sTueeze him. But the old bum don’t wanna get caught.”
    “Maybe he’s a humble man who don’t like attention.”
    “Can’t you fucking  listen for a minute?”
    Elefante felt his pulse racing. He resisted the urge to reach across the
seat, yank Peck out by his shirt collar, and part his pretty, girly face with his
fist. “Get your blockers outta the backfield and get moving downfield,
would ya, Joe?”
    “What?”
    “Just tell me what you want. I got stuff to do.”
    “The guy they sent out to even things, he screwed up. The cops got hold
of him. Now he’s singing to the Seven-Si[. A bird I know over there tells
me the guy is singing like a robin—telling the cops everything. So before
they cut him loose this snitch tells the cops that my main colored customer
up in Bed-Stuy wants to cut me out. The coloreds don’t want me supplying
them no more. How do you like that? Ungrateful niggers! I set them up and
now they wanna double-cross me. They’re gonna start a race war.”
    Elefante listened in silence. This is what haSSens when you deal with
SeoSle you don’t trust, he thought bitterly. It doesn’t matter if it’s drugs or
cereal. Same Sroblem.
    “I  ain’t involved,”  he said.
    “Gorvino  won’t like it.”
    “Did  you talk to him?”
    “Yeah . . . well, not yet. I talked to his guy, Vincent. He says Gorvino
will get back to me, but Bed-Stuy is our area, that’s what Vincent says. He
says we got to deal with it.”
    “It’s  your area, Joe. Not mine.”
    “It’s  our dock.”
    “But it’s  your dope.”

138
    He saw Peck’s face darken he was fighting back his boiling temper, Must
a string away from busting loose. With great effort, Peck checked himself
again.
    “Would you roll  with me Must this one time, Tommy?” he said. “Just this
once? Please? Move this Lebanon shipment for me and I won’t ask you
ever again. Just this one fucking time. With this one shipment, I’ll make
enough to muscle them niggers off and tell them to fuck off forever. And I
can clean up things with Gorvino too.”
    “Clean up things?”
    “I’m  into him for  a few thousand,” Joe said, adding hastily, “but I get this
shipment and I can clean that up easy and I’m outta dope forever. You’re
right, by the way. You’ve always been right about the dope. It’s too risky.
This is my last Mob. I’ll clean things up and I’m out of it.”
    Elefante stared at Peck in silence for a long moment.
    “C’mon,  Tommy,” Peck pleaded. “For old times’ sake. You haven’t taken
one goddamn shipment in si[ months. Not one. I’ll give ya eight grand. It’ll
take an hour. One fucking hour. Straight off a freighter, to the dock, and out.
No unloading tires or nothing fancy. Just grab the stuff and get it to me. One
hour. That’s how long it’ll take to get it outta your hair. One hour. You can’t
make that much slinging cigarettes in a month.”
    Elefante nervously tapped one hand on the car roof. The GTO rumbled,
shaking, and Elefante felt his resolve shaking with it. Just an hour, he
thought, to risk everything. It sounded easy. But then his mind ran through
the scenario Tuickly. If the crap came in from Lebanon, it’d be on a
freighter, probably out of Brazil or Turkey. That meant getting a fast boat to
retrieve it, because a freighter would not dock in the Cause. The waters
were deep enough, but only barges came to Brooklyn, which meant
probably taking the speedboat to the middle of the harbor from the Jersey
side to be safe. That meant slipping past harbor patrol on that side, grabbing
the loot in the middle of the harbor, racing back to shore, getting the stuff to
an untraceable car that would likely have to be stolen, and then moving it to
wherever Joe Peck wanted it. Knowing how the feds were everywhere now,
it might be that Peck had the feds watching his front door and the Gorvino
family watching the back door, since he owed the Gorvinos money. He
didn’t like it.
    “Get Ray out at Coney Island.”

139
    Peck’s temper broke through. He banged the steering wheel furiously
with his fist. “What kind  of fucking friend are you?!”
    Elefante’s top teeth met the bottom of his folded lip as he felt the
dreadful silence descend on him. The day, once hopeful and full of promise,
with a pleasurable trip to the Bron[ ahead to sound out a possible treasure,
was ruined. Even if that so-called treasure was the pipe dream of an old
Irish con artist who was likely full of shit, the idea of tracking it down to
zero was still a reprieve from the day-to-day of his own trapped, screwed-
up life. Now the lightness of the day was gone. Instead, a familiar seething
spread inside him, like a black oil slick sliding into place, and the silence
took over. It wasn’t rage, uncontrolled and raw, but rather a cool anger that
launched a terrible, unstoppable determination within him to sTuelch
problems with a speed and dispatch that even the most hardened mobsters
of the Gorvino family found unsettling. His ma said it was the Genoan in
him, because Genoans learned to live unhappily and trudged forward no
matter what, Must finishing things up, dealing with it, bearing up doggedly
till the Mob was finished. The Genoans had been doing that, she said, ever
since the ancient days of Caesar. He’d been to Genoa with his parents, and
he’d seen it himself, a city of dull, e[hausting hills, the dreary, ancient, gray
buildings, the solid stone walls, the bleak cold weather and miserable rain-
soaked cobblestone and brick streets, the unhappy souls wandering about in
tight circles, from home to work and back home again, grimly walking past
one another, tight-lipped, pale, never smiling, marching stolidly down the
small, drenched streets as the cold sea splashed over the sidewalks and even
over them and them not noticing it, the smell of stinking sea and nearby
fisheries climbing onto their clothing, into their miserable tiny houses, their
drapes, and even into their food, the people ignoring it, plodding forward
with grim determination like robots, having accepted their fate as unhappy
sons of bitches living in the shadow of happy Nice, France, to the west and
under the sunshine disdain of their poor dark cousins to the south, Florence
and Sicily, who laughed like dancing Negroes, happy and content to be the
black Ethiopians of Europe, while their smiling cousins on the
Mediterranean Sea, the French, sunned themselves topless on the lovely
beaches of the Riviera. All the while the hardworking, Moyless Genoans
marched on grimly, eating their fucking focaccia. No one appreciated
Genoan focaccia e[cept the Genoans. “Best bread in the world,” his father

140
used to say. “It’s the cheese.” Elefante tried it once and understood then
why Genoans were a miserable lot, because life was nothing compared to
the delicious taste of Genoan food once they got to the food, the business
of life, whatever that business was—loving, sleeping, standing at the bus
stop, shoving each other at the grocery store, killing each other—had to be
done with speed so as to get to the food, and they did it with such silent grit,
such determination and speed, that to get in the way of it was like stepping
into a hurricane. Christopher Columbus, his mother pointed out, was a
Genoan who wasn’t looking for America. He was looking for spices. For
food. A real Genoan, she said, would hang themselves before they’d let
anyone destroy the one or two things in life that gave them a little relief
from the difficulties of the devil’s world.
    Elefante found the whole business of his own anger frightening, because
that’s what his great furious silences were. Relief. A pressure cooker blown
open. To his utter disgust, he’d found himself liking when the great silences
came upon him. He hated himself later for those moments. He’d done some
terrible things during those times. Many times afterward, in his darkest
hours, in the late nights when Brooklyn slept and the harbor was dark, lying
in bed in his lonely, empty brownstone with no wife and no children
snoring in another room, with his widowed mother clomping around the
house in her late husband’s construction boots, the things he did during the
spells when the silence came upon him tortured him with a searing brutality
that caused him to sit up in the dark and check his paMamas for blood,
feeling like his soul had been sliced into Tuarters, sweat bursting out of his
pores and tears running down his face. But there was nothing to do then.
The moment was over. The rage had already poured out of him like lava,
unrelenting and merciless, steaming over whoever or whatever was in the
way, and the sorry soul on the receiving end saw nothing more than a blank
stare of cold clarity. Were they seeing the eyes of Tommy Elefante, the
lonely man with the kind heart who ordered his obedient crew to pull poor
old colored women out of the harbor who had landed there for one reason
or other, and why shouldn’t they, since New York was shit? Or were they
seeing the eyes of Tommy Elefante, the shy Brooklyn bachelor who
dreamed of escaping Brooklyn to move to a farm in New Hampshire and
marry a fat country girl and even had the looks and charm to find one, but
was too kind to drag any woman into his life of brutality and stealth, which

141
had made his mother a prison widow and half-mad eccentric, a life that had
diced his father’s kindness into bits? Perhaps they saw neither perhaps they
saw only the outer shell: the silent, cold, brutal Elephant, whose calculating
calm and mum stare said, “You are finished,” and who dispatched them
with the matter-of-fact speed and brutality of a Category 5 hurricane,
ripping everything apart as he went. The Elephant’s stare reduced the
hardest men to terror. He’d seen the fright e[plode across their faces when
his silent business face emerged, and try as he could, he could not wipe
those e[pressions of fright from his own memory, the most recent being the
colored kid Mark Bumpus and his two hooligans at the abandoned factory
on Vitali Pier three years ago, when he’d caught them red-handed trying to
steal fourteen grand from him. I’ll helS you, Bumpus had pleaded. I’ll helS
you fi[ things, he wailed. But it was too late.
    Peck found himself staring at Elefante’s silence at that moment, a silence
so palpable that to Joe, it was almost like hearing it and seeing it at the same
time, for Peck had e[perienced it several times when they were teenagers,
and his own inner alarm sounded off as loud as the blaring of a ship’s
bullhorn. Peck realized he’d gone too far. His angry facial features twisted
into blinking alarm as Elefante’s blank stare combed his face, the interior of
the car, and Joe’s hands, which, they both noted, remained on the steering
wheel—where they should be, Joe noted ruefully—and had better stay.
    “Don’t  come at me like that again, Joe. Find somebody else.”
    Elefante withdrew from the GTO and stood with his hands at his sides as
Joe threw the GTO in gear and roared off. Then he placed his hands in his
pockets and stood in the middle of the street alone, giving the silent roaring
rage inside him time to ease down and out, and after several long minutes
he once again became who he was, a solitary middle-aged man in the
August of life looking for  a few more Aprils, an aging bachelor in a floppy
suit standing on a tired, worn Brooklyn street in the shadow of a giant
housing proMect built by a Jewish reformer named Robert Moses who forgot
he was a reformer, building proMects like this all over, which destroyed
neighborhoods, chasing out the working Italians, Irish, and Jews, gutting all
the pretty things from them, displacing them with Negroes and Spanish and
other desperate souls clambering to climb into the attic of New York life,
hoping that the bedroom and kitchen below would open up so they could
drop in, and at minimum Moin the club that to them included this man, an

142
overweight bachelor in an ill-fitting suit, watching a shiny car roaring away,
the car driven by a handsome young man who was pretty and drove away as
if he were barreling into a bright future, while the dowdy heavyset man
watched him Mealously, believing the man so pretty and handsome had
places to go and women to meet and things to do, and the older heavyset
man standing behind eating his fumes on a sorry, dreary, crowded old
Brooklyn street of storefronts and tired brownstones had nothing left but the
fumes of the pretty sports car in his face. A dreamless, friendless,
futureless, sorry-ass New York guy.
    Elefante watched the GTO turn the corner. He sighed and headed back to
his Lincoln. He slowly slid his key into the lock, entered the car, and sat
behind the steering wheel in silence, staring. He sat in the soft leather of the
car for several long moments. Finally, he spoke aloud.
    “I  wish,” he said softly, “somebody would love me.”

143
                                                       112




                                               MOJO



SPORTCOAT  SAT ON A  CRATE INSIDE   SAUSAGE’S  BOILER  ROO
of King Kong. He was in no hurry now. The disappointment of chasing the
bottle of brandy around the plaza before it was destroyed by Soup that
morning was softened by this pit stop at Sausage’s headTuarters. Sausage
was nowhere to be found and that was fine. Sportcoat had spent the rest of
morning there, cooling his heels with some Kong. He felt better now.
Evened out. Noooooo hurry, he thought happily, clasping the bottle. He
thought he might get up to look at the clock to check the time, but by the tilt
of sunlight in the tiny basement window he got the general idea. Afternoon.
He stretched and yawned. He was supposed to be at work at the old lady’s
garden on Silver Street at least two hours ago. He tried for a moment to
remember her name, but couldn’t. It didn’t matter. It was Italian and ended
with an “i”  and she paid cash, that’s what was important. She didn’t mind
too much if he was late—he always stayed late if he arrived late—but she
had seemed a bit unsteady on her feet in the past few weeks. Getting old, he
thought wryly. You got to be strong to get old. He was about to put the
Kong away and head out when Hettie suddenly appeared.
    “If  you gonna come at me hanking about what happened at Soup’s party
today, don’t bother,” he said.
    She chortled bitterly. “I don’t care what you done,” she said. “Fact is,
when you walk about being spit on, it don’t much matter what else you
think you done.”

144
    “Who spit on me? Nobody spit on me.”
    “You spit on yourself.”
    “Get gone with that foolishness. I’m going to work.”
    “Well git  on then.”
    “If  it pleases me to stop for a bracer while I ruminates on getting my
baseball game going again, that’s my business.”
    “That game don’t mean nothing to these children around here,” she said
soberly.
    “How  would you know? You didn’t see a game I umped in ten years.”
    “You didn’t  invite me in ten years,” she said.
    That stumped him. Like most things he did most of his adult life, he
couldn’t remember e[actly what happened, largely because he was drunk at
the time, so he said, “I was the best umpire the Cause Houses ever seen. I
gived Moy to everyone.”
    “E[cept  your own wife.”
    “Oh hush.”
    “I  was lonely in my marriage,” she said.
    “Stop complaining, woman! Food on the table. Roof over our heads.
What else you want? Where’s the damn church money, by the way? I’m in a
heap of trouble on account of it!”
    He lifted the Kong to his lips and gulped down a long swallow. She
watched him silently, then after a moment said, “Some of it’s not your
fault.”
    “Sure ain’t. You the one hid that money.”
    “I  ain’t talking about that,” she said, almost pensively. “I’m talking about
the old days when you was a child. Everything ever said to you or done to
you back then was at the e[pense of your own dignity. You never
complained. I loved that about you.”
    “Oh, woman, leave my people out of it. They long dead.”
    She watched him thoughtfully. “And now here you are,” she said sadly,
“an old man funning around a ball field, making folks laugh. Even the boys
don’t follow  you no more.”
    “They’ll  follow  me plenty when I get ’em back on the field. But I got to
get off the hook ’bout them Christmas Club chips first. You kept the money
in a little green bo[, I remember that. Where’s the bo[?”
    “The church got plenty money.”

145
    “You mean the bo[ in the church?”
    “No, honey. It’s in God’s hands. In the palm of His hand, actually.”
    “Where’s it at, woman?!”
    “You ought to trade your ears in for some bananas,” she said, irritated
now.
    “Stop talking in circles, dammit! Pastor declares the church got three
thousand dollars in claims for that money. We got liars falling out of the
trees now. There’s more folks at Five Ends on Sunday mornings hankering
about that money than you’d see in a month of Easter Sundays. Every one
of ’em’s got eyes for that bo[. Digs Weatherspoon says he got four hundred
dollars in there, and that fool ain’t had two nickels to rub together since
Methuselah got married. What I’mma do about that?”
    She sighed. “When you love somebody, their words oughta be important
enough for you to listen.”
    “Stop lumping on about nothing!”
    “I’m  telling you what you wanna hear, fool.”
    Then she was gone.
    He sat in a huff for several minutes. There was no money in the church.
He and Hot Sausage had searched the small building a dozen times. He felt
thirsty and turned the bottle of Kong, only to discover it was dry. But there
were other Moy Muice hiding places in that basement. He rose, dropped to one
knee, and ran his hand under a nearby cupboard, finding it bare, then heard,
over his shoulder, the sound of the door opening and saw the back of Hot
Sausage’s head as Sausage walked in and strode out of sight behind a large
generator on the other side of the room. He said, “Sausage?”
    There was no answer. He could hear Sausage grunt and the clattering of
tools being moved around. So he said, “You ain’t got to hide from me.
There was three bottles of Kong down here to my recollection.”
    As if in  answer, there was a sparking sound and the huge generator fired
up with a roar, the sound filling the room. Sportcoat rose and shuffled
around to the side of the generator to find Hot Sausage nearly prone on the
floor, stretched out with his head inside the motor of the same model of
ancient roaring electric generator that befuddled Rufus in the Watch Houses
boiler room. Sausage stretched out on his hip sideways, offered a Tuick
sullen glance, then turned his attention back to the generator, which
sputtered unhappily.

146
    Sportcoat grabbed a crate and slid ne[t to him. Sausage had removed his
porkpie hat. His blue Housing Authority uniform was ragged and grease
stained. He glanced at Sportcoat again, then back to the roaring engine. He
didn’t say a word.
    Sportcoat yelled over the din. “I’m sorry, Sausage. I’ll go to the police
myself to straighten it out. I’ll e[plain  it all and ask ’em to tell me how long
I have to leave town.”
    Sausage, peering into the roaring engine, chuckled. “You a doggone
fool.”
    “I  didn’t mean in no way, shape, or form to get you mi[ed up in no
nonsense, Sausage.”
    Sausage lightened and pulled a long hand out of the machine to shake.
    Instead of shaking it, Sportcoat stared at the hand, frowning. “I done
apologized. So why the left hand? You know that’s bad luck.”
    “Oh. Sorry.” Hot Sausage hurriedly pulled his right hand out of the
generator and e[tended it. Satisfied, Sportcoat shook it and sat on a nearby
crate. “Where’s the Kong?” he shouted over the din.
    Sausage reached under a nearby tool bench and produced a Tuart-sized
glass Mug full of clear fluid, carefully sliding it over to Sportcoat, then he
turned his attention back to the generator, peering inside. “This thing Tuits
every week,” he said.
    “Rufus got the same problem over at the Watch Houses,” Sportcoat
yelled. “These proMects was built the same year. Same apartments, toilets,
generators, everything. Bad Munk, these generators.”
    “But I  takes care of my generators.”
    “Rufus says it ain’t the generators. It’s bad spirits.”
    Sausage sucked his teeth, made a few adMustments, and the machine’s
decibel level lowered to a bearable volume. “It ain’t no damn spirits.”
    “Rats? Ants maybe?”
    “Not this time of  year. Even ants ain’t stupid enough to climb inside this
thing. It’s cockeyed wiring is what it is. Old as Methuselah. Been fiddled
with a lot too. Whoever done it was pulling his privates with one hand and
fiddling at the wires with the other.”
    Sportcoat sipped from the whiskey Mug again and held it out to Sausage,
who took a generous gulp, handed it back to Sportcoat, then peered back
into the guts of the old machine. “Dumbest thing in the world,” he said.

147
“There’s thirty-two units in this building.  This thing runs electric to only
four of ’em. It’s wired to the other one over there.” He nodded toward a
second large generator on the wall on the far side of the room, separated
from the first by a sea of Munk that cluttered the basement: old sinks, bricks,
brooms, refuse, pieces of bicycles, mops, toilet parts, and Sausage’s old
wooden pendulum clock. “Whoever built this place was drunk, I reckon, to
set ’em apart that way, instead of making ’em Must one.”
    Sausage sipped again, placed the bottle on the floor ne[t to the generator,
stuck his long hands into the machine, and tied two wires together. The
generator sputtered, coughed a moment, then chugged onward.
    “I  got to replace the church’s Christmas Club money somehow,
Sausage.”
    “That’s the least of your problems.”
    “Oh, cut that nonsense. This is real money here we talking. Hettie never
told me how much was in that Christmas bo[. Or where she hid it. Or who
put what in. Now Pastor Gee says there’s three thousand dollars in claims
on it. Everybody and their brother’s swearing they got money in it.”
    “That don’t include the fourteen hundred dollars I throwed in,” Sausage
said.
    “Very funny.”
    “No wonder you seeing Hettie’s ghost, Sport. I’d be chickenhearted too
with that kind of money floating north of me. You got trouble all ’round.
You did lock that door behind you coming in, didn’t you? Deems ain’t got
nothing against me, but outside of a child in pain, the worst sound in the
world is an old man begging for his life while he’s at work. What’s to stop
him from coming in here blasting?”
    “Stop fussing about nothing,” Sportcoat said. “Ain’t nobody following
me. And I ain’t talking to Hettie’s ghost. It’s a nag that’s bothering me,
Sausage. What I’m talking to is a nag. A nag ain’t a ghost. It’s a moMo. A
witch. Playing tricks. It looks like a person, but it ain’t. It’s Must a witch. The
old folks talked about that back home all the time. A witch can take any
form she wants. That’s why I know it ain’t my dear Hettie talking. She
never talked that way, calling me an idiot and carrying on. That’s a witch.”
    Sausage chuckled. “That’s why I never got married. My uncle Gus
married a girl like that. He met a girl down in Tuscaloosa and got into a
hank with her daddy. One of his cows ate some of her daddy’s corn. Her

148
daddy wanted forty cents for that corn. Uncle Gus didn’t pay it. His wife
hollered at him but he wouldn’t, and then she died and put a wangature on
him. Baddest moMo I ever seen. His chest bone growed out like a chicken’s
breast. The hair on the sides of his head smoothed out. The top of his hair
stayed kinky. That was a weird-looking nigger. He looked like a rooster till
he died.”
    “Whyn’t  he Must pay her daddy back?” Sportcoat said.
    “Too late then,” Hot Sausage said. “Forty cents ain’t gonna stop no moMo.
Four hundred cents would stop it, once it gets going. His wife put a nag on
him, see, like Hettie done to you.”
    “How  you know Hettie done it?”
    “It  don’t matter who done it. You got to break it. Uncle Gus broke his by
taking a churchyard snail and soaking it in vinegar for seven days. You
could try that.”
    “That’s the Alabama way of breaking moMos,” Sportcoat said. “That’s
old. In South Carolina, you put a fork under your pillow and some buckets
of water around your kitchen. That’ll drive any witch off.”
    “Naw,”  Sausage said. “Roll a hound’s tooth in cornmeal and wear it
about your neck.”
    “Naw. Walk up a hill with  your hands behind your head.”
    “Stick your hand in a Mar of maple syrup.”
    “Sprinkle seed corn and butter bean hulls outside the door.”
    “Step backward over a pole ten times.”
    “Swallow  three pebbles . . .”
    They were off like that for several minutes, each topping the other with
his list of ways to keep witches out, talking moMo as the modern life of the
world’s greatest metropolis bustled about them. Brooklyn traffic roared
aboveground. In Borough Hall, twenty blocks away, the Brooklyn borough
president was welcoming Neil Armstrong, the first man to walk on the
moon. In Flushing, Queens, the New York Mets, the former dogs of
baseball and now the toast of the town, were warming up for a game at
Shea Stadium under TV lights with fifty-si[  thousand people in the stands.
On Manhattan’s Upper West Side, Bella Abzug, the flamboyant Jewish
congresswoman, was meeting with fund-raisers to consider a run for
president. Meanwhile, the two old men sitting in the basement sipping
moonshine were having a moMo contest:

149
        “Never turn your head to the side while a horse is passing . . .”
        “Drop  a dead mouse on a red rag.”
        “Give  your sweetheart an umbrella on a Thursday.”
        “Blow  on a mirror and walk it around a tree ten times . . .”


    They had reached the remedy of putting a gas lamp in every window of
every second house on the fourth Thursday of every month when the
generator, as if on its own, roared up wildly, sputtered miserably, coughed,
and died.
    The basement went nearly dark, the lights dimming low, and they would
have gone almost completely black but for the second generator, which
sputtered onward, powering a single bulb in a far corner of the basement. It
shone brightly, as did the e[it light over the hallway door through which
Sportcoat had entered and which he had tightly closed upon entering.
    “Now  you done it,” Sausage grumbled in the near dark. “Coming down
here carrying on about witches and all, you put a spell on the damn thing.”
    He knelt, groped inside the generator, and made a few adMustments. The
generator coughed miserably, sputtered, and grumbled back up. The lights
in the room came up full again.
    Sportcoat glared at the generator, puzzled. It seemed louder than ever,
roaring at a speed that was unusual, powering along with a shake-rattle so
loud that Hot Sausage had to shout over it at the top of his lungs.
    “I  think it’s got a short,” he shouted over the roar.
    Sportcoat nodded. “But if it’s connected to four apartments upstairs,” he
yelled, “why’s the lights going out down here?”
    “What?”
    “Forget it,”  he yelled. “I got to get to work. Where’s my umpire
uniform?”
    “What?”
    Sportcoat pointed to the roaring generator. Sausage knelt and adMusted
the machine, and the roar kicked back a decibel. From his crouch he
repeated, “What?”
    “I’m  getting the baseball game going again,” Sportcoat said. “I need my
umpire uniform, remember? I know it’s down here someplace.”

150
    “What you need that for? We ain’t got no pitching. Our star pitcher ain’t
got no ear. And he’s gunning for you.”
    Sportcoat, irritated again, took another sip of King Kong. “Just git it.”
    “It’s  right where you put it last,” Sausage said, taking the bottle and
nodding at a closet in a far corner. Sportcoat gazed at the pile of refuse that
stood between them and the closet. He looked down at his plaid sport coat.
“I’mma mess up my Macket digging through that.”
    Sausage sucked his teeth, handed the bottle to Sportcoat, and disappeared
into the cacophony of Munk. After several clangs, grunts, kicks, and shoves,
he reappeared moments later with a black plastic bag, which he tossed on
the floor.
    At that moment, the generator emitted a horrible burst, coughed,
sputtered, sparked, and died again. A moment later, the second generator
Tuit as well.
    The room went completely dark this time, save the e[it sign over the
door. The door, which neither noticed, now stood slightly aMar.
    “Goddamn,” Sausage said in the silence. “This one here musta shorted
out the other one. Gimme a flashlight, Sport.”
    “That ain’t  something I normally carries about, Sausage.”
    “Stay here. I’mma check the generator on the other side.”
    There was more clattering as Sausage scrambled to the other side of the
room. Sportcoat sipped his Kong nonchalantly, felt for the crate with his
feet, found it, and sat down.
    Neither of them noticed the tall figure in the leather Macket who had
slipped into the room through the door underneath the e[it sign.
    “Do this happen all the time?” Sportcoat said in the silence.
    “Never like this,”  Sausage said from across the room. “Course when you
calling on witches and so forth . . .” Sportcoat heard him curse and grunt,
then heard a noise near the door and glanced at it. In the light of the e[it
sign he saw—or thought he saw—a shadow move past it.
    “Sausage, I think there’s somebo—”
    “I  got it!”  Sausage called. “Okay. There’s a switch bo[ behind that
generator where you’re at. Go back behind it and throw it when I tell you.
That’ll bring the lights up.”
    “Throw  what?”

151
    “The switch. Behind the generator where you’re standing. Feel ’round
that generator and throw that switch there,” Hot Sausage said. “That’ll fire
’em both.”
    “I  don’t know nothing about no switches.”
    “Hurry  up, Sport. There’s thirty-two apartments upstairs. Them Negroes
is cooking collards and scrambled eggs and gotta get to work. Ain’t nothing
to it, Sport. Just go ’round back of the generator. Stick your hand behind it
and feel a thick wire coming out. Follow that wire to the wall with your
hand. You’ll feel a bo[ there. Open that bo[ and throw the switch in there
backward and forward one time.”
    “If  it’s all the same to you, I’d rather cook what little brains I got left
with whiskey,” Sportcoat called out. “I can’t see nothing. Plus there’s
somebo—”
    “Git  up and do it before them fools upstairs come down here raising
hell!”
    “I  don’t know nothing about no bo[es.”
    “You can’t get electrocuted back there,” Sausage snapped, trying not to
sound impatient. “It’s all grounded. That generator there’s two hundred
forty volts. This one here’s two hundred twenty.” He paused, then said, “Or
is it the other way around?”
    “Make up your mind now.”
    “Just go throw that danged switch in the bo[, please. You got nothing to
worry about, Sport. This is the circuit breaker here. The Muice is here. It ain’t
over there where you at.”
    “If  it’s over there, whyn’t you throw the switch over there?”
    “Stop being light-headed, nigger! Hurry up before them Negroes upstairs
git here hollering—or even worse, call up Housing.”
    “All  right,”  Sportcoat said, irritated. He groped his way through the dark,
found the generator, ran his hand along the wall behind it until his fingers
found a thick wire. He groped the wire, following it to the wall, turned to
address Sausage, and saw again the shadow of a man cross the e[it light and
move toward the middle of the room. This time he was sure of it.
    “Sausage?”
    “Throw  the switch.”
    “There’s somebo—”
    “Will  you throw it  already?”

152
    “All  right. What about this wire?”
    “Forget the wire now. You don’t need it. Throw the switch.”
    “I  don’t need this wire? This loose one?”
    There was a long silence from Sausage. “Did I forget to tie that thing
off?” he muttered.
    “Tie off  what?”
    “The wire.”
    “There’s two.”
    “Wires or bo[es?”
    “Both.”
    “Well don’t  worry about that,” Sausage called, more impatient now. “Just
find a bo[. Any  bo[. Throw  the switch in any bo[ you touch and make sure
the wire don’t touch the generator. I’m holding the panel to this generator
bo[ open. I can’t hold it much longer, Sport. It’s heavy. There’s a spring on
it.”
    “But the wire—”
    “Forget the wire. It’s all grounded, I tell you.”
    “What’s grounded mean?”
    “Nigger, you want math and a marching band too? Just throw the
goddamn switch! I’ll fi[   everything when we get the lights going. Hurry up
before the whole building riots on us down here!”
    Sportcoat chose the bo[ nearer to him. He opened it and felt inside.
There were two switches in it. Not knowing what to do, he placed the bare
wire on the generator and threw both switches. There was a flickering
spark, a grunt, and the sTuealing howl of a human. As the roar of the
generator fired and the lights came back up, he caught sight of two boots
flying upward in the air.
    From the other side of the room, Sausage angrily approached, clattering
over the piles of benches, cinder blocks, sinks, and bicycle parts, Mawing as
he came. “What’s the matter with you, Sport? How hard can it be to throw a
switch?”
    Then he stopped, silent, and stared wide-eyed at something in the middle
of the floor. From his side of the room, Sportcoat clambered over the Munk
and the two of them stood over Earl, Bunch’s triggerman. He lay on his
back, out cold, his black leather Macket scorched from where the electricity

153
had coursed through him. A shiny watch protruded from his wrist, its
crystal broken, and a revolver was sTueezed tight in his hand.
    “Good God,” Sausage said. “That’s the feller from Soup’s party. How’d
he get back so fast? I thought they carried his ass off.”
    Sportcoat stared at him. “Is he dead?”
    Hot Sausage knelt, feeling Earl’s neck for a pulse. “He’s yet living,” he
said.
    “He’da been ramped up good if they let him drink that brandy rather than
letting Soup waste it by busting it on his head. You wanna call the police?”
    “Hell  no, Sport. Housing’ll blame me.”
    “You ain’t  done nothing wrong.”
    “Don’t  matter. However the cut comes or goes, if the police show up at
Housing it means they got to write a report. That means they got to do
something down there other than take naps and sip coffee. Anyone who
disturbs them from doing that gets walking papers. I’ll be outta my Mob.”
    He looked down at Earl. “He got to go, Sport. Let’s put him out.”
    “I  ain’t touching him.”
    “What you think he come here for? To teach you letters? He crawling
’round here with a pistol. He’s somebody Deems put on you.”
    “Deems is a boy, Hot Sausage. This here’s a man. Plus little Deems ain’t
got no money to hire nobody to do nothing.”
    “Little  Deems got a Firebird car.”
    “He do? Glory. That boy’s running a big mill, ain’t he!”
    “Goddammit, Sport, I’ll  take my baseball bat and send you hooting and
hollering out that damn door! You brung trouble to my Mob! Now he got to
go! And you got to help!”
    “All  right. You ain’t  got to get all tied up in a knot about it.”
    But Sausage was already moving. He yanked a four-wheel dolly from the
Munk pile in the middle of the floor, wheeled it over to Earl, then, kneeling
over him, checked his pulse again. “I been shocked by that generator
before,” he said. “It’s gonna take him awhile to come to hisself, but he’ll be
all right. In the meantime, let the devil have him.”
    They set to work.
    Twenty minutes later, Earl woke up in the alley behind Building 17. He
was lying on his back. His burned leather Macket smelled like scorched hair.
His arms ached so bad he was afraid he’d broken both. His head, knotted

154
with a lump from where the bottle had knocked him cold, felt as if a
Mackhammer were banging away at it. He raised his right arm, a movement
that sent pain roaring down his shoulder, and checked his watch. The crystal
was broken. The watch was dead. His moved his left arm, found it alive,
and pulled his gun out of his left pocket. He noted the bullets had been
emptied from it. He shoved it back into his pocket and sat up. His feet were
wet. So were his legs. He’d wet himself. He looked up at the sky and the
windows above him. He saw no faces peering at him but could tell by the
sun’s position in the sky that it was afternoon. He was late. He was
supposed to collect yesterday’s take from Bunch’s Bed-Stuy street dealers
by noon.
    He got to his feet slowly, every muscle in his body protesting, and
staggered toward the nearby Silver Street subway, leaning on the wall as he
went. He felt like he was falling to pieces, but moved faster as he got his
wind, keeping one eye out for the giant who had escorted him there that
morning. He had to make it to Bed-Stuy to pick up Bunch’s cash before
heading back to the boss’s house. The least he could do was to show up
with Bunch’s rocks. It might keep the boss from killing him.

155
                                                   113




                   THE         COUNTRY                    GIRL



ELEFANTE AND THE GOVERNOR SAT IN THE  LIVING  ROOM OF
modest two-family brick house in the Morris Heights section of the Bron[,
a calm enclave of apartment buildings dotted with a few leafy trees amid
coming urban decay, when the door burst open and a mop swept into the
room, followed by an attractive woman pulling a wheeled bucket full of
soapy water. Her head was down and she mopped at the floor with such
speed and intensity that at first she didn’t notice the two men sitting in the
room. Elefante was in the rocking chair with his back to the door. The old
man was on the couch. The woman swept from left to right and then hit the
leg of the rocking chair and saw a foot. She looked up in surprise at
Elefante, her face flushed a deep red, and at that moment Elefante saw his
future.
    She was a heavyset woman, getting on in years but with a sweet face that
could not bridle the shyness that emanated from it, with wide brown eyes
that, at the moment, blinked in surprise. Her brown hair was pulled back to
a bun, and a long, cute, dimpled chin lived beneath a pleasant mouth.
Though heavy, she had the frame of a tall, thin woman, her neck was long,
and she hung her head a bit, as if to deemphasize her height. She wore a
green dress and her feet were bare.
    “Whoops. I was Must coming in to clean.” She backed out of the room
Tuickly and slammed the door. Elefante heard her footsteps retreating to the
back of the apartment.

156
    “Sorry,” the Governor said. “That’s my lass, Melissa. She lives
downstairs.”
    Elefante nodded. He had not seen Melissa long but he had seen her long
enough. It was the barefoot part, Elefante thought later, that did it. The no
shoes. What a beauty. A country beauty. The type he’d always dreamed
about. He liked heavy women. And she was deeply shy. He saw that
immediately. It was the way she moved, with slight clumsiness, her head
down, that long neck swinging that pretty face away from what was
happening. In that moment, he felt an inside part of his tightly wound heart
loosen, and understood, with certainty, the Governor’s problem. He doubted
that shy beauty had the guile to run a bagel shop, much less take care of
whatever business the Governor had with this piece that he wanted to dump
for dollars, whatever it was. That tySe ought to be running a country store
someSlace, he thought dreamily. Running it with me.
    He shook the thought as he saw the Governor watching him, a slight
smile on his lined face. They had spent the afternoon together. The old man
had been cordial. He’d greeted Elefante like they were old friends. The
bagel shop was Must two blocks away, and despite the Governor’s wheezing
and poor health, he insisted they walk over. He proudly showed Elefante the
entire operation, the large eating area, the display cases, the store crowded
with customers. He showed him the back garage area where he kept his two
delivery trucks, and finally the kitchen, which he saved for last, where the
two Puerto Rican cooks were finishing up. “We start at two a.m.,” the
Governor e[plained. “By four thirty  the bagels are hot and rolling out the
door. By nine we’ve moved eight hundred bagels. Sometimes we move a
couple thousand a day,” he said proudly. “Not Must for us. We sell to shops
all over the Bron[.”
    Elefante was impressed. It wasn’t so much a bagel shop as it was a
factory. But now the two men were back in the Governor’s two-family
house, in the upper apartment where he stayed, and with the pretty daughter
apparently safely down in her apartment below he was eager for the real
talk. One look at the daughter told Elefante all he needed to know: if the
Governor was telling the truth, he had no real plan.
    “It’s  not my business,” Elefante said, “but does your daughter know
anything about . . . what I’m here to discuss?”
    “Christ, no.”

157
    “Don’t  you have a son-in-law?”
    The Governor shrugged. “I can’t tell you the ways of the young. In the
old days, Irish legend had it that the seals on the beach in Ireland were
really dashing young princes who slipped out of their skin to become seals
and marry the merry mermaids. I think she’s looking for a seal.”
    Elefante said nothing.
    The Governor suddenly appeared tired, and he leaned back into the
couch, his head tilted up toward the ceiling. “I’ve no son. She’s my heir,
that one. She’d give it the full shilling if I told  her about this business, but
she’d make bags of it. I want her out of it.”
    He seemed by nature a lighthearted man, but the tone of that statement
let Elefante know that the door was open to his taking full charge of the
affair and negotiating a better price for himself, if there was indeed
anything to the old man’s story at all. The man was e[hausted. That small
bit of walking to his shop and the tour of it had worn him out completely.
“I’m  a bit Maded and might have to rest my head on me couch in a while,”
he said. “But I can still talk. We can get started now.”
    “Good, ’cause I’m not sure what you’re selling.”
    “You’ll  know now.”
    “Talk then. It’s your party. I already asked around. My poppa had some
friends who remember you. My mother says my poppa trusted you and that
you two did talk. So I know you’re okay. But you have a good operation
here. This isn’t a bagel shop. It’s a factory. It’s clean. It makes money. Why
get flashy and monkey with trouble when you’re making good guineas
now? How much dough do you need?”
    The Governor smiled, then coughed again and grabbed a handkerchief
and spat in it. The glob he spat into that handkerchief, Elefante saw, was big
enough that the Governor had to fold the handkerchief in half to use it
again. This Irish paisan, he thought, is sicker than he’s letting on.
    Instead of answering the Tuestion, the old man tilted his head back again
and said, “I got this place and the bagel shop in forty-seven. Well, my wife
got the shop, actually. I was in Mail that year with your father.
    “Here’s how we got it. I had some money put up. How I got that money
doesn’t matter, but it was a good amount of chips. I made the mistake of
telling my wife where it was while I was in prison. She came to visit one
day and said, ‘Guess what? Remember the old Jewish couple on the Grand

158
Concourse with the bagel shop? They sold it to me cheap. They wanted out
fast.’ She said she couldn’t reach me to make a decision. She Must went for
it. Bought the whole fecking building. With my stash.”
    He smiled at the memory. “She told me about it in the visitors’ room. I
ate her head off. I blew my top so bad the prison guards had to collar me to
keep me from wringing her neck. It was weeks before she even wrote to
me. What could I do? I was in the slammer. She burned up every penny we
had—on bagels. I was shook. Mad as a bo[ of frogs.”
    He stared at the ceiling, his face wistful.
    “Your father thought that was funny. He said, ‘Is it losing money?’ I said,
‘How the hell would I know? There’s niggers and spics all over.’
    “He said, ‘They eat bagels too. Write to your wife and tell her you’re
sorry.’
    “I  did, blessed God, and she forgave me. And now I thank her every day
for buying that place. Or would. If she was here.”
    “When did she pass away?”
    “Oh, it’s been . . . I don’t keep track.” He sighed, then sang softly,


           Twenty years a-growing,
           Twenty years in blossom,
           Twenty years a-stooSing,
           Twenty years declining.


    Elefante found himself softening, the inside part of him, the part that he
never let the world see, the part that had loosened when the man’s daughter
swept her mop into the room. “Does that mean you have a clear conscience
on the whole bit? Or Must a bad memory?”
    The Governor stared at the ceiling a bit longer. His eyes seemed fi[ed on
something far distant. “She lived long enough to see me come out of prison.
She and my Melissa, they built the business while I was in Mail. Three years
after I came out, my wife took ill, and now I’m a little under the weather
myself.”
    A little under the weather? Elefante thought. He looked ready to keel
over.

159
    “Luckily  Melissa’s ready to take it over,” the Governor said. “She’s a
good lass. She can fly the business. I am lucky she’s so good.”
    “All  the more reason to keep her out of trouble.”
    “That’s where you come in, Cecil.”
    The Elephant nodded, uncomfortable. The reference took him by
surprise. He hadn’t been called that in years. “Cecil” was a childhood
nickname his father had given him. His real name was Tomaso, or Thomas.
He bore his father’s name as a middle name. Cecil was his father’s creation.
Where it came from, and why his father chose it, he never knew. It was
more than a name of adoration it was a sign between father and son that
they needed to talk privately. His poppa was bedridden in his last year, still
running the business, and there were often other people about his bedroom,
men who worked in the bo[car, in construction, and in the storage house.
When Poppa said “Cecil,” there was important business, private business
about, and they needed to discuss it when the room cleared. The Governor’s
knowledge of the name was a further sign of credibility—and also, Elefante
thought glumly, responsibility. He didn’t want to be responsible for this guy.
He had enough responsibility.
    The Governor eyed him a long moment, then gave in to his fatigue. He
shifted and pulled his legs on the couch and lay down, stretching out, an
arm on his forehead. He raised his other arm and pointed a finger to a desk
behind Elefante. “Hand me a pen and paper from that desk, would ya?
They’re right on top.”
    Elefante did as he was told. The Governor scratched something on the
paper, folded it tightly, and handed the paper to Elefante. “Don’t open it
yet,” he said.
    “You want I should stuff ballot bo[es for  you too?”
    The old man smiled. “That’s not a bad thing to know, considering what
happens to old codgers like me in our game. You get tired, y’know. Your
father understood that.”
    “Tell me about my poppa,” Elefante said. “What’d he like to talk about?”
    “You’re trying  to trick me,” the Irishman said with a low chuckle. “Your
father played checkers and said si[ words a day. But if he said si[ words,
five of them were about you.”
    “He didn’t  show me that side much,” Elefante said. “After he came back
from prison, he’d already had the stroke. So talking was hard. He was in

160
bed a lot. He was about survival in those days. Keeping the bo[car busy,
working for the fami—”  He paused. “Working for our customers.”
    The Governor nodded. “I’ve never worked for the Five Families,” he
said.
    “Why  not?”
    “A  true Irishman knows the world will one day break your heart.”
    “What’s that mean?”
    “I  like breathing, son. Most people I knew who worked for the families
ended up getting dragged across the Tuit line in pieces. Your father was one
of the few who died in bed.”
    “He never trusted them completely,” Elefante said.
    “Why?”
    “Lots of  reasons. We’re northern Italian. They’re southern Italian. I was
young and stupid. He didn’t think I’d live long when I got made. He kept
me busy running that dock. He gave orders. I followed them. That’s how it
was. Before he went to Mail and after. He was the puppet master, I was the
puppet. Work the bo[car, move the stuff, ship it here, there, store this, pay
this guy, pay that guy. Pay your men well. Say nothing. That was the gig.
But he always kept a foot in other things: construction, a little loan
business, even a gardening business for a while. We always had other
interests.”
    “You had other interests because your father did not trust.”
    “He did trust. He was Must careful about the people he trusted.”
    “Because . . . ?”
    “Because a man who doesn’t trust cannot be trusted.”
    The Governor smiled. “That’s why you’re the right lad for the Mob.”
    He looked so satisfied Elefante blurted, “If you feel a song coming on,
don’t bother. I had Cousin Brucie on the radio in the car all the way over.
He played Frankie Valli. Nobody sings better than him.”
    The old man chuckled, then raised a frail hand and pointed at the piece of
paper in Elefante’s closed fist. “Read it.”
    Elefante unfolded the paper and read: “A man who does not trust cannot
be trusted.”
    “I  knew your father well,” the Governor said gravely. “As good as I
knew any man in this world.”
    Elefante didn’t know what to say.

161
    “Now  I am gonna sing,” the Governor said brightly. “And it’s gonna be
better than Frankie Valli.”
    And he proceeded to talk.






As Elefante drove his Lincoln down the MaMor Deegan heading home that
evening, the note still folded in his shirt pocket, his mind was spinning. He
thought not of the story the governor told him, but of the country-looking
farm girl who’d come into the room and backed out the door apologizing,
e[cusing herself. A shy, pretty Irish girl. Fresh as spring. She was a little
younger than him, thirty-five or so he guessed, which was old not to be
married. She seemed so shy, he wondered how someone so meek could run
a business. Then again, he thought, I’ve never seen her in action. Maybe
she’s like me, he thought. All show business at work, gruff and bitter, but at
home, at night, crowing to the stars for love and comSany.
    Or maybe I’m a moron, he thought bitterly. Just an aching heart—in a
city full of them. Geez.
    He gunned onto a ramp that e[ited to the FDR Drive, then zipped down
the east side of Manhattan toward the Brooklyn Bridge. He was glad to be
driving. It allowed his mind to roam and the confusion to Tuell. It was Must
past four thirty p.m. and traffic was still moving smoothly. He turned on the
radio and the music Marred him back to reality. He scanned the East River,
checking the line of barges moving along. Some of them he knew. A few
were run by honest captains who refused hot items. They wouldn’t move a
stolen tire if you paid them a thousand bucks. Others were captained by
blithering idiots who would kick  their scruples out the window for the price
of a cup of coffee. The first type were honest to a fault. They Must couldn’t
help it. The second type were born crooks.
    Which one am I? he wondered.
    Am I good or bad? he thought as he maneuvered the Lincoln through
traffic. He thought about getting out of the game altogether. It was an old
dream. He had plenty saved up. He’d made enough to live. That’s what
Poppa wanted, right? He could sell his two rental houses in Bensonhurst,

162
sell the bo[car to Ray out in Coney Island, and step out once and for all. To
do what? Work in a bagel shoS? He couldn’t believe the thought entered his
mind. The Governor’s daughter didn’t even know who he was and he was
already putting himself in her kitchen. He pictured himself ten years from
now, a fat husband in a cook’s outfit, slinging dough and slamming it into
an oven at three a.m.
    On the other hand, what was life all about? Family. Love. That woman
was concerned about her father. She was loyal to family. He understood that
feeling. It said a lot about her.
    He’d talked to her briefly before he left. The Governor had fallen asleep
on his couch after their conversation, and Elefante went to the door to let
himself out. She was coming up the stairs to check on her father and caught
him. He’d guessed she heard him leaving and wanted to make sure her
father was okay. That’s what he would have done. Check that her father was
breathing, maybe make sure the stranger wasn’t some goombah from years
past who showed up wanting to even things. That said a lot about her too.
She was shy, but clearly not that shy, and not stupid. And not afraid.
    They’d met in the hallway by the front door. They’d talked maybe
twenty minutes. She was immediately open and candid. He was someone
her father trusted. So she trusted him.
    “I  can handle things,” she said when he asked her about running the
bagel shop on her own. He had Moked about her tearing into the room, mop
first, holding the bucket and using the mop as a spear. She laughed and said,
“Oh, that. My poppa cleans like a kindergartner.”
    “Well, he’s worked hard enough.”
    “Yes, but he leaves his place a mess, and he falls asleep so easily.”
    “My  feet fall asleep when I’m running for the bus.”
    She laughed again, and opened up more, and in the ensuing chat showed
that behind the gentle veneer lay Tualities more like those of her father,
lighthearted, funny, but with a firmness and cleverness he found alluring.
They chatted easily together. She knew he was there for important business.
She knew their fathers had been close friends. Yet he still sensed a
tentativeness. He probed her gently. That was his Mob, he thought bitterly, as
a goddamned smuggler working with lowlife drug dealers like Joe Peck and
murderers like Vic Gorvino: to sense weakness in others. Standing there, he
felt her probing him as well. He felt her size him up and sTueeze him—

163
gently—for information. Try  as he might, he couldn’t block it, couldn’t
prevent her from seeing the part that most never saw, that while he was firm
and tight on the surface, all business, maybe a little too Italian in his manner
and speech, beneath it he bore the heavy sense of responsibility for his
mother and those he cared about with kindness that was safer to hide. He
was the man her father trusted. But why him? Why not a cousin or an
uncle? Or at least a fellow Irishman? Why an Italian? In those twenty
minutes the war between the races, the Italians versus the Irish, was waged,
the two representatives of the black souls of Europe, left in the dust by the
English, the French, the Germans, and later in America by the big boys in
Manhattan, the Jews who forgot they were Jews, the Irish who forgot they
were Irish, the Anglos who forgot they were human, who got together to
make money in their big power meetings about the future, paving over the
nobodies in the Bron[ and Brooklyn by building highways that gutted their
neighborhoods, leaving them to suffer at the hands of whoever came along,
the big boys who forgot the war and the pogroms and the lives of the people
who survived World War I and World War II sacrificing blood and guts for
their America, so they could work with the banks and the city and state to
slap e[pressways in the middle of thriving neighborhoods and send the
powerless suckers who believed in the American dream scrambling to the
suburbs because they, the big boys, wanted a bigger percentage. He felt it,
or thought he felt it, as they stood by the front door. There was a
connection: a man whose father was dead and a woman whose father was
about to die, a sense of wanting to belong, standing in the warm vestibule,
she in her farm-girl dress, with a Mob that paid ta[es and drew no cops, no
Joe Pecks, no complicated phone calls from complicated people trying to
pick your pocket with one hand while saluting the flag with the other, and
he feeling a sense of belonging he hadn’t felt in years.
    She laughed easily, asking Tuestions, the shyness gone now, while he
nodded silently. She talked the entire twenty minutes, which seemed to pass
in seconds, and all the while he felt like shouting, “I’m the seal on the
beach. If you only knew me.” But instead he was light and firm,
halfheartedly trying to block her Tuestions by pretending to be aloof and
distrustful. She saw through it all, he could tell. She saw him clearly. He felt
naked. She wanted to know why he was there. She wanted to know
everything.

164
    But she could never know.
    That was part of the arrangement. He had agreed to the Governor’s
harebrained scheme, of course. In part because he loved his father. The
parts of his father that he knew ran deepest were all about trust. Any man
his father trusted had to be a loving, good man. There was no doubt. Guido
Elefante had never backed out on his word with a man he trusted. Neither
did his father care what others thought of him. Poppa loved his mother, no
doubt because Momma was anything but the typical Brooklyn Italian
housewife like so many on his block, the women who chatted about
nothing, tossing cannolis around, filing obediently into mass at St.
Andrew’s every morning praying for their husband’s redemption and, by
e[tension, their own, complaining about the niggers and the spics taking
over the neighborhood while their husbands ran liTuor and shot anyone who
opened their mouth wrong about their gambling operations and horse-racing
fi[es and their running roughshod over the coloreds. His mother didn’t care
about the coloreds. She saw them Must as people. She cared about plants,
and digging for them in the empty lots around their neighborhood—plants,
she insisted, that had kept her husband alive long after most e[pected him
to be gone. And as for their son, she never asked Tuestions of Thomas she
respected Elefante when he was but a boy because she understood,
instinctively, that her son would be different from most of the Italians in the
neighborhood, had to be different Must like she and her husband had to be
different to survive. She never made apologies for her family. The Elefantes
were what they were. That was all there was to it. Poppa had welcomed the
Governor into his world. And so Elefante did as well. They were partners
now. That was decided.
    Also, there was the intrigue of the whole business.
    And of course, the money.
    Was it about the money? he asked himself.
    He glanced at the folded paper on the car seat ne[t to him. It was the
paper that the Governor had placed in his fist when they spoke of Poppa.
    “A  man who does not trust cannot be trusted.”
    Elefante swung the big Lincoln to the off ramp of the FDR Must past
Houston Street. The silhouette of the Brooklyn Bridge loomed ahead. He
thought of their conversation again, and the Governor’s story.
    “I’m  losing my mind,”  he murmured.

165
It had been late afternoon and the Governor was nearly asleep when he told
Elefante the story of the “soap” he’d given to the younger man’s father.
Lying on the couch, he spoke to the ceiling while a fan overhead creaked
ceaselessly:
    “For almost a thousand years, the Church of the Visitation in Vienna,
Austria, had these precious treasures,” he said. “Manuscripts,
candleholders, altar cups. Most of it would be biscuits to a bear to you and
me. Stuff used during mass, altar cup to drink our savior’s blood,
candleholders, that sort of thing. Some gold coins. All of it was made to
last. It’s hundreds of years old, this stuff. Passed down through generations.
When World War II came, the church hid it from the Allies.
    “That’s where my younger brother Macy was stationed. He was sent
there in forty-five during the war. America kept troops there after the war
and Macy stayed on. Macy was eight years younger than me, a lieutenant in
the army, an odd fellow. He was, um . . .” The Governor thought a moment.
“A ponce,” he said.
    “A  ponce?” Elefante repeated.
    “Light  as a feather. They’d call him a sissy today, I guess. He had a taste
for the finer things in life. Always liked  art. Even when he was little. He
knew all about it. He read books on art. Just had a taste for it. Well, the city
was all torn up after the war, patrolled by different armies here and there,
and somehow Macy found this stash of stuff. It had been hidden by the
Nazis. In a cave near a place called Altenburg.”
    The Governor paused, thoughtful.
    “How  Macy found that cave, I never knew. But there was valuable stuff
in there. A lot of it. And he helped himself to it: manuscripts, tiny little
bo[es decorated with diamonds, with little panels of ivory. And some
reliTuaries.”
    “What’s that?”
    “I  had to look it up five times before I understood it,” the Governor said.
“They’re tiny  bo[es like coffins, made of gold and silver. Some are trimmed

166
with diamonds. The priests kept Mewelry, art, relics, even old bones of saints
in them. This stuff was heavy loot. The spoils of war, m’lad. Macy got hold
of a good gob of it.”
    “How  do you know?”
    “I  saw it. He had them in his house.”
    “How’d  he get all of it home?”
    The Governor smiled. “He used his noodle and shipped it to himself by
the US Military Postal Service. Little by little. I  guess that’s why he stayed
in the service so long. The stuff was small. Then after the war, he got a Mob
at the post office so he could move it when he wanted without nobody
making a stink. Simple as that.”
    He chuckled, and had to raise himself as he coughed a large amount of
phlegm into his handkerchief. When he was done, he folded the
handkerchief, put it back into his pocket, and continued.
    “It  always seemed odd to me that Macy lived too well to work at the post
office,” the Governor admitted. “He had an apartment in the Village the size
of a rugby field. Full of fancy things. I never asked. He had no kids, so I
figured it wasn’t anything. My poppa couldn’t stand Macy. He used to say,
‘Macy likes boys.’ I  told Poppa, ‘There was a priest at Saint Andrew’s
who’s said to like boys.’ But he didn’t want to hear it. I was a young man
back then, fast on my feet and a bit of a wanker, but even then I knew the
difference between a sick man who likes children and a man sweet on men.
I knew because Macy talked me out of killing that half-langered Rale
Bulgarian priest at Saint Andrew’s who acted the maggot with a lot of kids
in the parish. I found out about him when Macy grew up and we started
adding up crib notes on him. But Macy said, ‘He’s a sick man. Don’t go to
Mail for him.’ He was my kid brother and he was smarter than me in a lot of
ways. So I listened, and went to Mail on my own! Even in prison, Macy’s
smarts helped me. If you walk into the slammer not looking for a hop on,
knowing that what a man does in his private time is his own damn business
so long as he doesn’t make things worse for you, well, you’re all right. So I
loved Macy for what he showed me. And he trusted me.”
    The Governor sighed and rubbed his head as he plowed through the
memory. “He didn’t live long after the war. First our mother died. Then a
couple of years later, cancer got him. That and a broken heart, poor lad,
because his father didn’t want him. Toward the end of his life, he came to

167
me and confessed everything. He took me to a closet in his house and
showed me what he had. He kept all those things from the cave in a closet,
imagine that. Wonderful things: Bibles with solid-gold covers. Relics.
Manuscripts rolled into tubes made of gold. Gold coins. Diamond
reliTuaries with the bones of old saints inside. He said, ‘This stuff is a
thousand years old.’ I said, ‘You’re a millionaire.’
    “He said, ‘I hardly sold any of it. I  made a good living at the Postal
Service.’
    “I  laughed at him. I said, ‘You’re a stock.’”
    “A  stock?” Elefante repeated.
    “A  fool.”
    “Oh.”
    “He said, ‘I didn’t  want to sell them. I Must liked looking at them.’
    “I  said, ‘Macy, it’s not good. These are things from the church.’
    “‘The  church doesn’t care for people like me,’ he said.
    “Oh, it broke my heart when he said that. I said, ‘Macy, my boy. Our
dear mother in heaven would fall to fever at God’s throne knowing you sit
here with stolen things from her Lord and Savior. It would break her heart.’
    “That brought a tear to his eye. He said, ‘I have to live. Maybe I’ll find a
way to return a few things.’”
    The Governor looked at Elefante. “And return them he did. Oh, he sold
one or two more things in droves to keep his lifestyle before he died. But
most of the things he returned. He got them back to Vienna the same way
he got them here. He mailed them back little by little. He returned them in a
way so he could never get caught. But there was one item he didn’t return.
    “And  what was that?”
    “Well, it  was something I wanted. A little statue.”
    “Statue of what?”
    “A  fat girl. The Venus of Willendorf.”
    Elefante wondered if he was dreaming. A statue of a fat girl? The
Governor’s daughter was like that. A beautiful one. Could this be a trick? A
coincidence?
    “Is that the name of a soap?” he asked.
    The Governor smirked at him, irritated.
    “I’m  Must asking,” Elefante said.
    “Macy said it was the most valuable piece in his collection.”

168
    “Why  was that?”
    “I  can’t say. Macy knew why but I don’t know those things. It’s reddish
gold. It’s very small. Made of stone. No bigger than a bar of soap.”
    “If  it’s not gold, why is it worth  so much?”
    The Governor sighed. “I’m thicker than a bag of spuds when it comes to
art, son. I don’t know. Like I said, I had to look up the word ‘reliTuary’ five
times before I understood it. This statue was in one of those reliTuary
things. A tiny container, like a coffin, the size of a bar of soap. It’s from
thousands of years ago. Macy said the bo[ alone was worth a fortune. He
said the little fat girl, the Venus of Willendorf, was worth more than
anything he had.”
    “Then it likely  lives in one of those big castles in Europe where the
welcome mat’s printed in old English, and he was holding a fake. Or the
real one’s living in a museum. How come it’s not in a museum? A museum
would know if it’s  a fake, by the way.”
    “So what. Son, your pop and I were in prison with several sweet-tongued
buncos who could sell ice to an Eskimo. These blokes could even out your
bank account to a flat zero faster than a fly can mount shit. They knew more
insurance swindles, bank diddles, and hand tricks than a Philadelphia
bartender. Smooth as taffy, these fellas. And each one will tell you that most
times the trout who gets hooked or bamboozled hushes up tight about it.
They want that kind of news kept Tuiet. The fancy hoofers running your
museums are no different. If they’re holding a fake, why would they blast it
to the world? So long as a cad is paying a shilling to eyeball it, who’s to
know the difference?”
    Elefante was silent, taking this in.
    “You think I’m  having you on?” the Governor asked.
    “Maybe. Did you ever ask your brother why it was worth so much?”
    “No, I  didn’t ask him. I took it before he changed his mind. Then he
died.”
    “The Venus of Willendorf. That sounds like the name of a soup.”
    “It’s  not a soup. It’s a fat girl,” the Governor insisted.
    “I  knew a fat girl in high school who was a real treasure. But nobody
made a statue of her.”
    “Well this one will  fit in  the palm of your hand. I stashed it before I went
to prison. Your father got out two years before me. I was afraid someone

169
would find it, so I told him to fetch it  and hold it for me. He told me he did.
So you have it someplace.”
    Elefante held his hands out. “I swear on the Blessed Virgin, my poppa
didn’t tell me where he put it.”
    “Nothing?”
    “He Must told me about that stupid song you sing, about the palm of
God’s hand.”
    The Governor nodded in satisfaction. “Well, that’s something.”
    “That’s nothing. How can I look for  a thing if I don’t know where it is or
what it looks like?”
    “She’s a fat girl.”
    “There must be a million statues of fat girls. Does she have a bump on
her nose, or is she fat like a blob? Does she look like a horse if you turn her
sideways? Are the head and stomach the only parts you want to go pokey
at? Or is it like one of those crappy things where a guy throws paint on a
canvas and art slobs cream all over it? Does she have one eye? What?”
    “I  don’t know what. It’s a fat girl. From thousands of years ago. And
there’s a guy in Europe who will pay three million dollars cash for it.”
    “You said that before. How do I know he’s the real deal?”
    “He’s real, all right. Macy sold him one or two pieces before he died. He
told me how to reach the guy, but Macy died while I was in prison. I
couldn’t call nobody from Sing Sing. So I left it alone. You can end up in an
urn in somebody’s cemetery playing tricks with a fella you never seen
before and done no business with. I never called him before I went to
prison. After I got out, my wife got sick, I had to take care of her, and I
didn’t want to go back to the Moint. Then a couple months ago, when the
doctor told me I had this . . . sickness, you see, I called the guy in Europe
and he was still alive. I told him I was Macy’s brother and told him what I
have. He didn’t believe me, so I sent him the one picture I had. I’m an old
crook. I’m too stupid to keep copies. Saints be praised, he got the picture
and got serious. He calls me almost every week now. He says he can move
it. At first  he offered four million dollars, and I said, ‘How can you get that
much money?’ He said, ‘That’s my business. I’ll give you four, because I
can sell it for twelve million. Or even fifteen. But you need to get it here.’
He said he’s in Vienna.

170
    “I  smelled a rat then. I almost backed out. I didn’t trust him. So I said, ‘If
you’re the guy my brother said you are, wire me ten grand and tell me the
name of one thing my brother sold you.’ He did. I ain’t daft. I didn’t tell the
guy where I lived. He thinks I live in Staten Island. That’s the return
address I put on the envelope with the picture I sent him. He wired the
dough to the bank in Staten Island I told him to. I sent him the ten grand
back and said okay.
    “But I  got no muscle to move this thing. I can’t get it to Europe now.
Even if I could, I wouldn’t  go all the way over there and have the guy lay
boots on me or worse, then bag the thing and run off. So I says to him, ‘You
come here and get it and I’ll let it go for three million dollars. You can keep
the e[tra million  for your troubles.’
    “I  was Must talking,” the Governor said. “I thought he’d say ‘Get lost.’ I
didn’t think he had the balls to do it. He said, ‘Let me think about it.’ After
a week, he called back and said, ‘Okay. I’ll come get it.’ That’s when I
come to you.”
    “You’re throwing  a pretty long pass here, mister. What makes you think
I’d give it to you—or  to him—if  I found it?” Elefante said.
    “Because you’re your father’s son. I ain’t Must flying it, son. I asked
around about you. See, your poppa and me, we knew who we were. We
were always little guys. Moving guys. We never wanted muscle or trouble.
We moved stuff. This guy from Europe I’m talking to, he’s a head guy. He
talks smart. With an accent. Smooth. Head guys like that are always one
step ahead of you. No matter how smart you think you are, they got a leg up
on you. That’s why they’re head guys. You fool with a head guy, you better
be the full shilling. Your poppa always said you were the full shilling.”
    Elefante thought that one over and said softly, almost to himself, “I’m
not really a head guy.”
    “For three million  chips you are.”
    The Governor was silent a moment, then continued. “I took it as far as I
could. I called the guy and said, ‘Let’s arrange a meet.’ He said, ‘Put it in a
locker and let me come get it and I’ll leave your dough.’ That was the idea.
We meet at Kennedy. Make the switch in a locker there, and go on. We
didn’t talk about the e[act switch, how we’d do it, but I agreed on the
locker bit.”
    “Then work out the last bit and go make your money, for Chrissakes.”

171
    “How  can I do that if I don’t know where the statue is?”
    “You did know,”  Elefante said. “You had it before my poppa did.”
    “He stashed it!” The Governor paused. “Look, I had it before I went to
prison. I couldn’t tell my wife  about it. She’d already spent my dough on
fuckin’ bagels. The statue wasn’t in a safe place. I told your poppa where it
was when we were in Sing Sing. He got out two years ahead of me. He
agreed to get it and hold it. I told him, ‘After I get out, when things cool off,
I’ll  come for it. And I’ll  give you a piece of it.’ He said, ‘Okay.’ But he had
that stroke in prison Must before he got out, and I didn’t see him no more. I
tried passing word to him when he was in the prison hospital, but he was
gone before I could reach him. They released him after his stroke. He
passed word to me after he got out. He sent a letter. It said, ‘Don’t worry. I
got that little bo[ of  yours. It’s clean and safe and in the palm of God’s hand
like that little song you used to sing.’ So I know he got it somehow. And I
know he kept it someplace.”
    “In  God’s hand? What’s that mean?”
    “I  don’t know. He Must said the palm of God’s hand.”
    “You got the wrong guy then. My pop didn’t write that letter. He never
went to church.”
    “Weren’t you Catholic?”
    “My  mother dragged me to Saint Augustine till I was big enough to Tuit.
But my father never went. Until he was dead, he never went into a church.
We had his funeral. That’s when he went to church.”
    “Maybe he left it in  a church. Or in his coffin.”
    Elefante thought for a moment. His mother did say she wanted his
father’s coffin e[humed so she could get in the same grave. And Joe Peck
had promised to do the Mob himself. The thought of that pea-brained idiot
Joe Peck digging through his father’s remains, flipping his poppa’s corpse
around, working through the pockets of his dad’s best suit, drilling through
his poppa’s brains with a screwdriver, trying to find whatever the hell the
fat girl’s name was that was worth three million dollars threw him, and for a
moment Elefante felt out of breath. After a moment, he regained his
composure and said: “He wouldn’t leave it in a church. He had no contact
with churches. There’s no one in any church he’d trust. He wouldn’t be
dumb enough to bury it with himself either. He wouldn’t do that to my
mother.”

172
    “I  agree,” the Governor said. “But you have a storage place. You move
stuff.”
    “I  looked through every single storage rental we have. The ones I have
access to.”
    “What about the ones you don’t have access to?”
    “I  guess I could get in them,” Elefante admitted. “But that’ll take time.”
    “Time I  ain’t got,” the Governor said. “The guy who wants to buy, he
won’t deal with nobody else. You don’t call this type of guy. He calls you.
I’m stalling him. I  told him I had to think about the deal. He’s skittish. He
won’t like it  if there’s a second person involved. As it is, I’m thinking he
might make a move on me regardless. Which is the other reason I’m hoping
you’ll dig  it up.”
    And there it was, Elefante thought bitterly. He’s got nobody. If a big shot
in EuroSe wants a fucking artifact worth an arm and a leg and the only
stumbling block between him and that dough is a bagel maker and his
daughter . . . well there it is.
    “I  thought you told him you’re in Staten Island,” Elefante said.
    “People like that can find you,” the Governor said. “On the other hand,
he’s like my brother Macy. These guys are fanatics. We got a little
maneuvering room. I let him know that the minute I smell a rat, the statue is
gone forever. Flushed down the toilet. Peeled to pieces. Tossed in the river.
But I still think  of Melissa here. So when I came to you . . . well, with you,
knowing how your father was, I know I have at least one guy on my team
who won’t cut and run.”
    Elefante was silent. “My team,” he thought. How the hell did I get on his
team?
    The Governor sat up on the couch a moment, arched his back
awkwardly, then reached under the couch and pulled out an envelope. “One
more thing,” he said.
    He handed the envelope to Elefante, who instantly recognized the painful
scrawls of his father’s handwriting, which toward the end of his life was
shaky and big. The envelope was addressed to the Governor.
    “Where’d you get this?”
    “Your poppa sent this to me when I was in prison.”
    Elefante opened the envelope. Inside was a simple greeting card, with a
picture of the old Cause docks, taken perhaps in the 1940s, the familiar

173
Statue of Liberty in the distance. On the back was taped the traditional Irish
blessing, obviously clipped from a book or a newspaper:


             May the road rise up to meet you.
             May the wind be always at your back.
             May the sun shine warm upon your face,
             The rains fall soft upon your fields.
             And until we meet again,
             May God hold you in the palm of His hand.


    Ne[t  to that was a sketch, in his father’s hand, of a tiny bo[. Inside the
bo[ was a wooden stove, with small bits of firewood, crudely drawn, and a
cross above it. The bo[ had five sides on one of the sides was a circle with
a stick figure drawn in the middle, its arms outstretched.
    “If  this weren’t his handwriting, I wouldn’t  believe he’d drawn it,”
Elefante said.
    “Do you recognize anything?”
    “No.”
    “It’s  an Irish blessing,” the Governor said.
    “I  figured that much,” Elefante said. “But what’s with the firebo[ and the
firewood?”
    “Do you have a storage locker with something like that in it?” the
Governor asked.
    “No. That bo[  could be anything. A garage. A house. A milk crate. A
cabin in the woods. It could be anywhere.”
    “Yes, it could,” the Governor said. “But where would Guido Elefante
go?”
    Elefante thought a long moment before he answered.
    “My  father,” he said dryly, “never went anywhere. He never went three
blocks outside the Cause District. Hardly ever. He couldn’t walk very well.
Even if he could, he wouldn’t go far. Maybe to the store in Bay Ridge once
in a while that sold food from Genoa. There was a place on Third Avenue
that sold Genoese stuff, focaccia, cheese mostly from the old country, but
he hardly went there.”
    “How  do you know?”

174
    “He never went anywhere, I tell you. He went to the bo[car every once
in a while. He went to the storage place hardly ever. Maybe three times my
whole life I saw him walk in there. I took care of the storage place, not
him.”
    “What else is around you?”
    “Nothing. Just the housing proMects. The subway. Some abandoned
buildings. That’s it.”
    The Governor looked at him oddly. “You sure?”
    “I’m  sure.”
    “That bo[  is somewhere. Sure as I’m living, it’s sticking out like a blind
cobbler’s thumb someplace. Somewhere your poppa put it.”
    “How  would I know where?”
    The Governor yawned. “He’s your father,” he said sleepily. “A son
knows his father.”
    Elefante stared at the paper in his hands a long time. He wanted to say,
“But you weren’t my father’s son. You don’t know how difficult  he was. He
was impossible to talk to.” But instead he said, “That’s not gonna be easy.”
    He looked over at the Governor. He was talking to himself. The old man
had fallen asleep. As Tuietly as he could, he rose from the rocker, stepped
out the door, and slipped silently out into the hallway Must as Melissa was
coming up the stairs.

175
                                                       114




                                                   RAT



BUNCH  SAT AT THE  TABLE  OF  HIS DINING   ROOM  IN  HIS  BED-ST
and chewed a chicken wing. A huge spread of wings and a platter of
barbecue sauce were on the table. He motioned to the young man seated at
the table across from him. “Help yourself, young brother.”
    Lightbulb, Deems Clemens’s right-hand man, reached deep into the
chicken wings, his fingers scooping out two, and then dipped them in the
sauce. He sucked down the tender meat and reached for the plate again.
    “Slow your roll,  bro,” Bunch said. “The chicken ain’t going nowhere.”
    Lightbulb still  ate fast—too fast, Bunch thought. Either the kid was
starving or he might be a dope user already. He guessed the latter. The kid
was awful thin and wore long sleeves to cover what might be tracks in his
arms.
    Lightbulb glanced at the end of the table where Earl, fresh from his
painful electrocution in Sausage’s basement boiler room, silently scratched
at a crossword puzzle, his right arm in a sling and his head bandaged from
where the bottle had smashed him at Soup’s coming-home party. Earl kept
his head down.
    “So tell me about Deems,” Bunch said.
    “What you wanna know?” Lightbulb asked.
    “How’d  he win the flagpole?” he asked. “That’s the busiest section of the
Cause. Who was doing business there before Deems took over?”

176
    “I  want the flagpole plaza, by the way,” Lightbulb said. “If this works
out.”
    “How  about a flagpole up your ass. I asked you about how Deems won
it. I didn’t  ask you what you want.”
    “I’m  Must saying I can do a better Mob than him. I’d need the flagpole to
do it.”
    “Who you think  you talking to, kid, Santa Claus? I don’t care about your
needs. You ain’t done nothing so far other than say what you need and lick
your nasty fingers while eating my chicken.”
    Lightbulb blinked and started in. “Back when we was all playing
baseball, Deems had an older cousin named Rooster. Rooster started selling
first. He was making so much bank we Tuit ball to work under him. We ran
customers to him. Junkies on the street. White boys from New Jersey
cruising through, like that. Rooster got killed by somebody who tried to rob
him. So Deems took over.”
    “Just like that? Y’all  Must let Deems be top dog?”
    “Well . . . he done some things, Deems did.”
    “Like?”
    “Well . . . a boy named Mark Bumpus was the first guy. He dead now.”
    “How’d  he get that way? Was he a heavy sleeper? Did he fall down a
flight of stairs?”
    “Deems set him up.”
    “How  so?”
    “Well, Rooster died while we was all in Mail. When we come out, Bumps
—Mark Bumpus—ran things.”
    “And  Deems didn’t mind? Even though Rooster was his cousin?”
    “We got, like, forty  dollars a day. That’s a lot of money.”
    “And  Deems didn’t say nothing?”
    “I  got to back up a minute to tell it right,” Lightbulb said. “See, we was
all in Spofford together,” Lightbulb said, referring to the Muvenile center.
“Me, Beanie, Sugar, Deems, and Bumps. Deems and Bumps got into it in
Spofford, in the rec room. It wasn’t over Rooster. He was already dead.”
    “Over what then?”
    “The TV. Deems wanted to watch baseball. Bumps didn’t. They got into
it. Deems whipped up on Bumps pretty bad. Then Deems’s grandfather
visited and gave Deems fifty dollars. The food was bad in Spofford, so

177
Deems went to the commissary and bought some rice and beans. He shared
it with his boys: me, Beanie, Sugar. Bumps wasn’t his boys. When Bumps
asked Deems for some rice and beans, Deems said no, I Must share with my
boys. So that night Bumps and a couple of his friends caught Deems alone
in the shower and cut him up bad. They took his rice and beans and the rest
of that fifty dollars.
    “Deems never forgot that,” Lightbulb said. “Bumps got out of Spofford
before Deems did. When he come out Spofford a few months later, Bumps
had taken over the plaza. Bumps was hot, man, selling dope, weed, acid,
everything. By that time most of us was out of Spofford. We all needed
money, so we went to work for Bumps. He paid forty dollars a day. He even
hired Deems. He told Deems, ‘Forget all that stuff from Spofford. You’re
with me now. We boys now.’
    “Deems ran customers to Bumps better than any of us. Deems knew how
to find dopeheads. Deems would go all the way downtown to get customers
and run them over to Bumps. It got so that Bumps would let Deems carry
dope to his far-off customers, because Bumps was rolling. He was selling to
everybody. That’s when Deems got him.
    “He sent Deems out with thirty grams of coke to this Jamaican guy out in
Hollis, Queens. Deems switched out the dope for some white soap flakes
and flour and gived the bag to the guy. The guy used it and damn near died.
He called on the phone and Deems had Beanie answer the telephone and
Beanie told the guy ‘Fuck off.’ So the guy got his revenge. Deems took a
bunch of us to the top of Building Nine where we could wait to watch the
ants come—”
    “What ants?”
    “It  don’t matter. Just a bunch of ants that crawl up there every year. But
you can see the plaza from there. You could see Bumps out there working.
Deems said, ‘Remember my rice and beans when we was in Muvy? I’mma
sTuare that with punk-ass Bumps. Just watch.’
    “Sure enough, a couple of nights later this pretty Jamaican girl come
around to the flagpole saying to Bumps she wanted some dope but didn’t
have no money. She offered to, you know, service his rod if he let her shoot
up afterward. Bumps said okay. He followed her to the alley behind the
plaza and them Jamaicans was waiting for him. They damn near killed him.

178
Cut his face, down his forehead, all down his eye, oh man, messed him up.
They left him like that.
    “Soon as they started whipping on him, Deems ran off the roof. He run
off soon as they started cutting Bumps up. The minute them Jamaicans left
Bumps laying in the alley, Deems came out the back door of Building Nine
and ran over to Bumps holding a steaming pot of rice and beans. He
must’ve had it cooking in his house. He said, ‘Here’s your rice and beans,
Bumps.’ He poured that whole pot on him.
    “Bumps got crippled from that. He was never the same. He got out the
dope game altogether. He tried fooling around on the dock, smuggling,
trying to make money that way. He didn’t last long. He was walking in the
Elephant’s territory then. You ever heard of the Elephant?”
    “I  heard of him.”
    “Yeah, well, that’s the last anybody seen of Bumps.”
    Lightbulb paused, then reached for another piece of chicken and dipped
it in the sauce. “That’s how Deems won the flagpole,” he said.
    “Why  didn’t somebody from Bumps’s crew take the flagpole plaza
back?” Bunch asked.
    “First of  all, that ain’t the only thing Deems done, bro. Second, ain’t
nobody smarter in the Cause than Deems.”
    “So people are afraid of him?”
    “Well, yes and no. The old folks in the Cause like Deems. He was a
church boy. The church folks sit around the flagpole in the mornings and
talk and bullshit. Deems stays out of their way. He don’t run his dope till
the afternoons, when the church folks leave the plaza. He don’t allow it
before then. He’s funny about them church people. He don’t wanna make
the church people mad. Some of ’em’s old, but they can cause trouble.
Some of ’em will shoot, y’know.”
    “I  do know.” Here Bunch glanced disgustedly at Earl, whose face was
shoved so deep into his crossword puzzle he appeared to be cleaning the
puzzle with his nose.
    “Plus Deems was the star on the Cause Houses baseball team,” Lightbulb
said. “That’s Sportcoat’s old team. Deems’s father wasn’t around. His
mother drank a lot. Deems’s grandfather raised him. And his grandfather
and Sportcoat was buddies. That’s why Sportcoat ain’t dead yet, I guess.
Because Deems was on his baseball team and his grandfather was all for

179
him doing that. He could play the shit outta some baseball. When his
grandfather died, he left all that and went to selling the flour and rock.
Good as he was in baseball, that’s how good he is at moving that dip.
Deems thinks stuff out. All day long, he thinks how to move that powder.
He’s to hisself too. He don’t chase girls too much. He don’t watch TV. And
he don’t forget. If you cross Deems, he’ll let a year pass. Two years even. I
seen him walk up to guys and choke them till they fall asleep for stuff they
did to him two years before that they forgot all about. I seen him put a hot
iron to a guy’s neck to get the name of somebody who stole from him so
long ago ain’t nobody remembered it but Deems. He’s smart, bro, like I
said. He ain’t been in Mail since Spofford. He don’t carry a knife. Don’t
carry a gun. He’s organized. He pays little-kid watchers to set on the
buildings and watch out. He got watchers in the plaza. They got the
weapons. Not him.”
    “So what’s the matter with him now?”
    “He’s too strict, Mr. Bunch. He wants to be a cop now. Before he became
a punk and let Sportcoat shoot him, he would sell to everybody. Now he
won’t sell to grandmothers. He won’t sell to little kids. He won’t sell to
nobody from the church. He don’t want nobody smoking near the church, or
robbing the church, or falling asleep in the door of the church, like that.
And like if  somebody beats up their girlfriend over something, he won’t sell
to ’em. He wants to be telling folks what they should be doing. That’s why
Sportcoat shot him, I think, because he got pussified, talking about going
back to baseball and all this, ordering folks around, telling folks what to do
instead of making that money. It ain’t gonna be long before the Watch
Houses come take our territory. It’s only a matter of time.”
    “What’s that I’m  hearing about you saying Deems wants Joe Peck to
supply him?”
    Lightbulb glanced at Earl.
    “Did  I say that?” Lightbulb said.
    “I’m  asking if he said it. Did he say that or not?” Bunch asked.
    Lightbulb paused. He had told that to Earl in confidence, a kind of e[tra
carrot he’d dangled to Earl to get himself an audience with the boss. But he
realized now, looking at Bunch’s operation for the first time, the
brownstone, dilapidated on the outside and polished to a sheen on the
inside, the busy factory a block away that Earl had shown him full of

180
employees processing heroin, the large cars, and the fabulous modern
furniture of Mr. Bunch’s dining room, that this man was a maMor roller.
Bunch, Lightbulb realized, was a real-life gangster. He realized, too late,
that he was in over his head.
    A cone of silence enveloped the room as Bunch stared at him,
unblinking. Realizing his response could be a death sentence for Deems,
Lightbulb said, “I might’ve  said it. But I don’t know if  Deems really meant
it.”
    Bunch sat for a moment, looking thoughtful, then the tension seemed to
ease out of him. He spoke softly. “I appreciate you coming by, young blood.
I appreciate you letting me and my man here know you got our best
interests at heart.”
    “So I get the flagpole?”
    “I’mma  give you a break on that,” Bunch said, reaching in his pocket and
pulling out a roll of crisp bills.
    Lightbulb smiled, relieved, grateful, and felt a sudden burst of guilt. “I
Must wanna say: I like Deems, Mr. Bunch. We go back a long way. But like I
said, he wanna be a cop now. That’s why I’m here.”
    “I  understand,” Bunch said calmly. He slowly, deliberately counted out
four fifty-dollar  bills and slid them across the table to Lightbulb.
    “Take that and git gone.”
    “Do I  get the flagpole?”
    “Can a donkey fly?”
    Lightbulb seemed confused but didn’t speak at first, then asked, “Does
that mean yes?”
    Bunch ignored that. “You want a chicken wing on your way out?”
    Lightbulb, flummo[ed,  found it suddenly hard to breathe. “So I don’t get
the flagpole?”
    “I’ll   think on it.”
    “I  done told you everything like I said I would. What do I get now?”
    Bunch shrugged. “You get two hundred dollars. You can get a lot with
that. Some soup. A bottle of beer. Some poontang. Even get a Mob with it in
some places. I don’t care what you get, so long as you stay out my business.
And if I ever see your face here again, I’ll part it with a hammer.”
    Lightbulb’s eyes widened. “What’d I do wrong?”

181
    Bunch turned to Earl. “He rats his own boy out. Rats out the guy who
gave him his own rice and beans in the Moint. The guy who gave him food
from his own mouth practically. And he comes to me saying he wants to
work for me?”
    “Dig  thaaaat,” Earl said. He stood, menacingly.
    Lightbulb, watching Earl out of the corner of his eye, slid his hand over
to the money on the table. Bunch’s hand suddenly slammed down on his.
    “Need I remind you, young brother, to forget us?”
    “No.”
    “Good. Because we will not forget you. Now git.”
    Lightbulb snatched the two hundred dollars off the table and fled.
    After the front door closed, Bunch shrugged and reached for the
newspaper. “We’ll get back every penny of that dough. He’s skin popping
now.”
    “Dig  thaaaat.”
    Bunch shot an irritated look at Earl. “You mucked it up, man.”
    “I  can fi[  it,” Earl said.
    “You had three shots at it already. You get your head banged in twice,
then get shocked like a clown. You’re like the Three Stooges, bro, with a
bag full of e[cuses. You made it worse.”
    “You said don’t kill  him. Killing  and hurting’s different. You hurt a guy,
you gotta make so he can’t see you, so he can’t rat. Taking him out is—”
    “Something I ain’t asked you to do, bro.”
    Bunch reached for a chicken wing, dipping it in the sauce and chewing
slowly as he scoured the newspaper. “The game’s changed, Earl. I
should’ve watched Deems closer.”
    “Lemme even it out, Bunch. It’s my load. Let me carry it.”
    Bunch wasn’t listening. He had placed the newspaper down and was
staring out the window. There was so much to think about.
    “Peck says this big shipment from Lebanon is coming soon. He says he’s
got a dock for it. But that idiot’s so dumb he lights up a room by leaving it.
And now this crap with this old motherfucker who shot Deems. If we can’t
shake up an old drunk, how the fuck we gonna run Peck’s operation?” He
shook his head, biting his bottom lip angrily. “All my luck is Munior grade.”
    Earl felt the same way. He sat in silence, studying his fingers atop the
crossword puzzle. His nerves felt as if they were sitting on a razor blade.

182
He’d already been collared twice by that white cop, Potts, who’d promised
him he’d look the other way when the cops dropped the hammer on Bunch
—if he flipped on Bunch, which Earl had agreed to do with trepidation. But
now, sitting before Bunch, he realized he’d underestimated Bunch’s
cleverness and forgotten the power of his rage, which seemed to ooze off
him. If Bunch found him out, he was cooked. That suddenly seemed a
possibility. Worse, the old woman from the Cause had recognized him as
Reverend Harris’s son. His father, he felt, was torturing him from the grave.
    “I  can straighten out the old man,” Earl said.
    “Don’t  need to,” Bunch said matter-of-factly. “There’s a nine-thirty train
coming in tonight from Richmond. Take my car down to Penn Station in the
city and pick up Harold Dean. You can do that without mucking it up, can’t
ya?”
    “We don’t need Harold Dean!”
    “You think I’m  running a summer camp? If Deems convinces Peck to
sell to him instead of us, we’ll be buying our groceries with Green Stamps,
brother. We’re done. Nobody will sell to us. Not Roy and them Italians out
in Brighton Beach. Nobody from the West Side. Nobody in Harlem. It’s the
Elephant’s dock or nothing. Peck’s the only one who’s still got a line to the
Elephant. If Deems convinces Peck to go with him, then he’s got the
Elephant’s dock, too, and we’re outta business. Deems has got to go. And
Peck. We got to flatten things out, get everything back to zero, before that
Lebanon thing comes in. I’ll talk to the Elephant myself. But first let’s get
rid of the old man. What’s his name?”
    “Something . . . Sport Jacket, they call him.”
    “Whatever the fuck he is, he got to be put to sleep. Now. Get off your
spine and get Harold Dean. Make sure Harold Dean does the old man first.
Nobody in the Cause has seen HD that one will be Tuick and easy.”

183
                                                115



     YOU         HAVE          NO       IDEA         WHAT’S
                                     COMING



DOMINIC LEFLEUR OF BUILDING 9 SPENT DAYS APOLOGIZING
starting the fight at Soup Lopez’s coming-home party. He “accidentally” ran
into her on three separate occasions as she went about her business. The
first time she was coming out of Five Ends. She had gone inside to place a
few cans of beans in the pantry, and when she emerged he happened to be
outside, which gave him the opportunity to e[plain that the doll he tried to
give Sportcoat was not bad luck.
   “It’s a custom back home in Haiti,” he said. When she seemed doubtful,
he e[plained defensively that black Americans had their own rituals: black-
eyed peas on New Year’s Day, carrying a raw potato in the left pocket for
rheumatism, or “holding a copper coin under your tongue during coitus.”
   “Coitus?” she asked.
   “Doing the nature thing,” Dominic said. “You hold the copper coin under
your tongue during . . . coitus . . . to keep from getting pregnant. My first
wife was from Tennessee.”
   Bum-Bum received this information with a snort. “What did they feed
her down there, smog? I never ever heard such nastiness. Anyway, that ain’t
the same as witchery.” Still, she let him walk her home.
   The ne[t time he “happened” to be across the street from the wall of
Jesus painted on the back side of Five Ends Baptist, where she stopped

184
every morning on the way to work to silently pray for the destruction of her
e[-husband who ran off to Alaska, that his testicles might be pressed in a
Muice maker or lopped off with a saw. Dominic happened to be marveling at
the wonderful artistry of the garbage piled high on the back wall of the
church under the painting of Jesus—garbage that the church se[ton,
Sportcoat, had somehow forgotten to haul to the curb, being that he’d
une[pectedly received a bottle of Haitian Creation from his wonderful
neighbor Dominic that very afternoon, who had supplied it with the hope it
would spark a binge and Sportcoat would forget the garbage altogether.
Which is e[actly what happened. That left Dominic with the task of
informing Bum-Bum that since they happened to be at Five Ends together
on a Tuesday morning when sanitation picked up, it was their civic duty as
residents of the Cause and respecters of all religions to clean up the house
of the Lord, as it wouldn’t be right to leave garbage setting right under
Jesus’s nose for a full week before sanitation came again. Bum-Bum
muttered that Five Ends’ rival church, Mount Tabernacle, put its trash out
faithfully, and Five Ends’ garbage was Sportcoat’s business, not hers, plus
she was dressed for work in all white, being a home care attendant. But she
agreed that no Christian person in their right mind could walk away while
Jesus’s painting stood above a pile of garbage. Which gave them a full
twenty minutes of setting out the garbage that normally took thirty seconds,
since Dominic refused to let her dirty her uniform and did all the lifting
while he talked. That gave him twenty minutes to e[plain to Bum-Bum
what a moMo could do.
    “MoMos,” he said patiently, as he swung a half-filled garbage bag toward
the curb, “can work on a person for miles and miles.”
    “How  many miles?” she asked.
    “A  hundred miles. Five hundred miles. A thousand miles even,” he said,
marching toward the curb as she followed. “As far away as, say, Alaska.”
    Bum-Bum, standing at the edge of the street in front of the garbage,
worked hard to keep the lightbulb that went off in her brain from showing
in her face. She frowned. So even the Haitian Sensation knew about her
husband’s running off to Alaska. She wondered if he’d heard the part about
her e[ taking up with a man. Probably, she thought. She shrugged. “It’s
better to pray for the saving of an enemy’s soul than their ruination,” she

185
said, “but tell me about it anyhow,” and allowed him to walk her to the
subway as he e[plained the magic of rituals.
    The third time he “happened” to be passing through her building,
Building 17—a good fifteen-minute walk to her third-floor unit  from his
own apartment on the fifth floor of Building 9—it  was a warm night, and
Sam Cooke’s “You Send Me” played out the window of an upper
apartment. He arrived holding a plate of Haitian mayi moulen ak sòs Swa,
Soul an sòs—cornmeal with beans and stewed chicken. He knocked on her
door, holding the plate and the doll, which he had ripped in half. “I’m going
to make a pillow out of it,” he e[plained, then handed her the plate and
asked her out to the movies. Bum-Bum refused. “I’m a Christian woman
and I don’t do worldly things,” she said firmly. “But  I’m going to Five Ends
tomorrow morning. We need folding chairs. And Mount Tabernacle is
offering us some.”
    “I  thought Tabernacle and Five Ends don’t get along,” Dominic said.
    “We are Christian people, Mr. Lefleur. Their music is too loud and they
fall out and speak in tongues and so forth when they gets filled with the
Holy Spirit, and we don’t do that here. But the book of Hebrews twelve
fourteen says ‘Strive for peace with everyone,’ which means Mount
Tabernacle too. Plus my best friend, Octavia, is a deaconess there and
everybody knows the police is trying to shut our church down for protecting
old Sportcoat, who helped me put in my washing machine even though
Housing says I’m not supposed to have one. Mount Tabernacle is with us
for sure. We’ve always gotten along.”
    Thus it was the sight of Dominic Lefleur, Bum-Bum, Sister Gee, and
Miss Izi struggling toward the side door of Five Ends Baptist with
seventeen folding chairs stuffed inside an old post office dolly, the chairs
stacked si[ feet high, that greeted Sergeant Potts Mullen as he swung his
Plymouth sTuad car to the front of Five Ends Baptist Church a week after
Soup’s big party. Sister Gee didn’t notice him when he pulled up. Her back
was to him. He watched as she peeled off from the others and moved to the
rear of the church, grabbing an old-fashioned weed chopper from the back
wall and stepping into a field of high weeds. The weed cutter was shaped
like a golf club and she swung it high over her head, slaying weeds as she
went. Had he driven by the church three weeks ago and seen that sight, he
would’ve said to himself the woman looked like a cotton picker on a

186
plantation someplace. But now he saw a woman whose long back reminded
him of the sea near the Cliffs of Moher in County Clare, the part of Ireland
he’d seen when he’d visited, the sea gently pushing against the
mountainous shore. She looked beautiful.
    The three chair haulers at the side door saw him first and Tuickly moved
inside, unstacking the chairs one by one and marching them down the
basement stairs without a word. Potts parked the sTuad car, emerged, and
walked past the side door to Sister Gee, standing in the weeded field out
back.
    She saw him coming, the harbor water sparkling behind him, and
stopped swinging, leaning on the weed cutter with her hand on her hip as he
came. She was clad in a spring dress covered with azaleas, not ordinary
garden clothing, he thought as he approached. Then again she’d said she
was a country woman, and country women, as he knew from his mother and
grandmother, didn’t dress for success. They dressed up and worked in the
clothing they had. He walked straight into the weeds to her. When he
reached her she smiled, a small one that bore, he hoped, Must a hint of
eagerness, then nodded at his patrol car, where his young partner, Mitch, sat
in the passenger seat. “Why don’t he come?” she asked.
    “You scared him off,” he said.
    “We don’t bite here.”
    “Tell him  that. You scared the Jesus out of him last time.”
    She laughed. “We supposed to run Jesus into souls here, not out.”
    “Come to think of it,  he was an angel till you laid boots on him and sent
him the other direction.”
    The sight of her lovely brown face breaking into laughter and focusing
tightly on him, as she stood in the dress of azaleas in the sunlit yard of
weeds, made him feel light again. In that moment he realized that all the
e[perience of thirty-two years on the NYPD and all the formal police
training in the world was useless when the smile of someone you suddenly
care about finds the bow that wraps your heart and undoes it. He wondered
when he’d last had that feeling—indeed if he’d ever had it at all. For the life
of him, he couldn’t remember. Standing there in knee-high weeds behind an
old black church that he’d passed by a hundred times over the last two
decades without so much as a glance, he wondered if he had ever actually
been in love or if love was, as his grandmother used to say, a kind of

187
discovery of magic. He loved the stories she read to him when he was a
boy, of kings and seafaring maidens and sailors gone awry and monsters
slain, all for the sake of love. “Who is it who throws the light into the
meeting on the mountain?” It was a poem she loved. He tried to recall the
poet’s name. Was it Yeats maybe?
    He saw her staring at him and realized she was waiting for him to say
something.
    “I  think Mitch has lost interest in this case,” he managed to say.
    “Who?”
    “Mitch.  The other officer. My partner.”
    “Good. So have I,” she said. She shifted the weed cutter to the other side
and leaned on it again, one smooth hip thrust outward. “Or I’m trying to.
We truck on here despite it all. Look at all these weeds.”
    “You do this often?”
    She smiled. “Not enough. You cut ’em down. They come right back. You
cut ’em again. They come back again. That’s their purpose. To keep
coming. Everything under God’s sun got a purpose in this world.
Everything wants to live. Everything deserves life, really.”
    “If  everything deserves to live, why kill a weed?”
    She chuckled. She loved this kind of talk. How was it that he could draw
this foolish chatter out of her? Her discourse with her husband, what little
conversation they had, was made up of stunted, dry, matter-of-fact grunts
about bills paid, church business, the affairs of their three grown children,
who were, thankfully, living away from the Cause Houses. At forty-eight,
most days she awakened feeling like there was nothing left to live for other
than her church and her children. She had been seventeen when she wed a
man twelve years older than her. He had seemed to have purpose but turned
out to have none, other than an affinity for football games and the ability to
pretend to be what he was not, to pretend to feel things that he did not feel,
to make Mokes out of things that did not work for him, and like too many
men she knew, daydream about meeting some lovely young thing from the
choir, preferably at three a.m., in the choir pew. She didn’t hate her
husband. She Must didn’t know him.
    “Well, I  could let the weeds grow,” she said. “But I’m not a person who
knows enough about what should or should not be to leave things as they
are when they got no purpose that I can understand. My purpose is to keep

188
this church open long enough to save somebody. That’s all I know. If I was
a book-learned person, somebody who could use thirty-four words instead
of three words to say what I mean, I might know the full answer to your
Tuestion. But I’m a simple woman, Officer. These weeds is a blight to this
house of worship, so I goes at ’em. The truth is, they do me no harm.
They’re unsightly to me but sightly to God. And still I cuts at ’em. I reckon
I’m like  most folks. Most times I don’t know what I’m doing. Sometimes I
feel like I don’t hardly know enough to tie my own shoes.”
    “I  can tie your shoes for you,” he said, his eyes twinkling, “if you can’t
manage.”
    The comment, offered in the lilt of his Irish brogue, brought her to a
blush, and she noticed Miss Izi standing by the church door, staring in their
direction. “What brings you around?” she said Tuickly. She glanced at Miss
Izi again, who thankfully was called away by Dominic at the basement
door. “Better hurry and tell it. My friend Izi  there,” she said, nodding at
Miss Izi’s back, “is what they call the walking news.”
    “Gossip?”
    “I  wouldn’t call it  gossip. Everybody knows everybody’s business in
these proMects, so why put a name to it? It’s news one way or the other.”
    Potts nodded and sighed. “That’s why I come. I have some.”
    “Do you now?”
    “We arrested a young fella. Fella named Earl. We know you know him.”
    Her smile disappeared. “How’s that?”
    “We saw you. We . . . one of our guys . . . followed you. After the little
ruckus over in the plaza last week.”
    “You mean Soup’s party?”
    “Whatever it was, they—uh, without my knowledge—had somebody roll
behind you. He saw you and a big, giant fella carry Earl out of the proMects
to the Silver Street subway station. They saw the little deal there, where you
closed the turnstiles and you two had a little talk with Earl and sent him on
his way. That’s a Transit Authority violation, I’m sorry to say. A pretty big
one, to close down a subway station.”
    Sister Gee, thinking of Calvin in the tollbooth, felt the blood rising in her
face. “It was my idea. I made Calvin do it. It wasn’t but ten minutes. Till the
train came. I don’t want him fired from his Mob on account of my
foolishness.”

189
    “What were you planning on doing?”
    “I  wasn’t gonna have the man thrown on the tracks, if that’s what you
mean.”
    “What did you want?”
    “I  wanted him out of the Cause and I got him out. You can take that back
to the precinct or tell it to the Mudge. Or I’ll tell it to the Mudge myself. That
fella was hunting somebody. Sportcoat, most likely. That’s why he come
there. I’m told that wasn’t his first time in the Cause neither. We wanted
him gone.”
    “Why  didn’t you call the police?”
    She chortled. “It wasn’t a crime for him to come to the plaza party.
Somebody threw a bottle and he got struck over the head by accident. I’m
telling you what God’s pleased with. The truth. That’s e[actly what
happened. He was in a fog when he come to. As God would have it, the
darned thing didn’t kill him, Must knocked him out. I reckoned he’d come
out of it swinging. So I had Soup carry him to the subway and told Calvin
to shut the turnstiles down till the first train come. I didn’t want nobody to
get hurt. That’s all there is to it.”
    “That’s called taking matters into your own hands.”
    “Call  it what you will  or may. It’s done now.”
    “You should’ve called us.”
    “Why  we got to have the police around every time we has a simple
party? Y’all don’t watch out for us. Y’all  watch over us. I don’t see y’all
out there standing over the white folks in Park Slope when they has their
block parties. We was Must having a celebration for poor old Soup, who
went to Mail a boy and come out a man. Much of a man, I’d say. Where’s a
man like him gonna get a Mob, big as he is? Soup wouldn’t hurt a fly. Do
you know when he was a tiny boy, he was scared to come out the house?
Used to stay inside and watch television all day. CaStain Kangaroo and
Mister Rogers and them type shows.”
    “The kiddie shows?”
    “Been doing it since he was a child. He’s a Muslim now. Can you believe
it? All that work we put into him here.” She nodded at the church, then
shrugged. “Well . . . as long as he’s got God in his life some kind of way.”
She shifted her weight off the weed cutter and absently swiped at a few
weeds near her feet on the cracked, dry dirt.

190
    “So you and kiddie-show guy and the token-booth guy shut down the
station,” Potts said.
    Sister Gee stopped swiping at the weeds and looked at him, her face
melted into the slightly angry e[pression she had worn when they first met.
She saw his eyes slice away from hers and cut to the ground. Was that
shame she saw in his eyes? She wasn’t sure.
    “I  shut the station down. Me alone.”
    Potts removed his cap, wiped his brow with his sleeve, and replaced it on
his head. She watched him closely. Every movement, she observed, was
that of a man trying to maintain emotional control of himself. He didn’t
seem angry. Or even disappointed. Rather he seemed resolved to a kind of
silent sadness that made her, despite herself, feel drawn to him, for she
knew the feeling well. She found the whole business a little worrying, that
common ground, but also wildly and almost terrifically e[citing. She’d
forgotten what that felt like. After thirty-one years of being married, the last
five of which had been a trial of silent suffering, of infreTuent bursts of
small, almost minuscule, useless affection, she felt a part of herself she
thought long dead shaking loose and awakening.
    “Shutting down the station? I don’t want to know about it,” he said.
“Neither does the precinct. Neither does Transit. I made sure of that. But we
arrested that fella Earl—I arrested him—and that’s something you ought to
know about.”
    “Why?”
    “He’s . . . a suspect.”
    “So’s a lot of people.”
    “Okay. He’s more than a suspect. He’s no Munkie. He’s what you call a
strong-arm guy. A smart one. He knocks out teeth here and there. But he’s
not a concern now. No worries there. We got the goods on him. We’re
working with him—or  he’s working with us. That’s all I can tell you. That’s
between you and me. So you don’t have to worry about him coming around
again. But the guy he works for. We don’t have him and he is somebody to
worry about.”
    “What’s that got to do with Sportcoat?”
    “How  many times do I have to say it? Your guy kicked off something
big. I don’t know that he meant to. In fact, I’m sure he didn’t. But he’s got
the wrong end of things. There’s a drug war brewing. You don’t want your

191
guy or your church in the middle of it. These drug lords are a different
breed. They don’t play by the rules like the old crooks did. There’s no
handshake or silent agreements, no looking the other way. Nobody’s safe.
Nothing’s sacred. There’s too much money involved.”
    “What’s that got to do with us?”
    “I  told you before. Turn your guy in and back out of it. Stay out of the
way. We can protect him.”
    Sister Gee felt hot. She looked up into the sky, sTuinting, then raised a
long, lovely brown arm to shade her eyes as she peered at him. “I’m
burning up out here. Can we get in the shade?”
    It was as if she’d asked him to go to the beach, or swimming, or to
lounge in a cool air-conditioned library someplace, to sit and read Irish
poems, the kind he liked, the simple ones, “Symbols of Erie” and “The
Diaries of Humphrey,” the ones his grandmother loved and taught him.
    She walked past him, wading through the weeds to the back of the
church building, out of view of the side door where Dominic, Bum-Bum,
and Miss Izi were loading chairs. He followed behind, noting the shapely
figure beneath the dress. When she reached the shade of the old building, a
cinder-block structure built on a foundation of solid red bricks, she placed
her back to the wall Must underneath the faded painting of Jesus with his
arms spread and leaned against it, propping her foot on the wall, showing a
golden-brown knee. He faced her, standing Must inside the shade, his hands
clasped in front of him, rubbing his thumbs, trying not to stare. Everything
she did, Potts realized, every move—the gentle arcs of her neck and mouth,
the way she held herself erect along the wall and stretched a long arm out to
wipe her forehead with gentle silklike smoothness—made something inside
him want to kneel down.
    “Sportcoat ain’t hard to find,” she said. “He’s around. You wanna go get
him, go ahead. It’s not gonna change nothing. Deems is still out there
slinging poison like clockwork every day at the flagpole at noon. He hasn’t
moved a peep toward bothering old Sportcoat, far as I know. Fact is, he’s
more polite now than before. They say he’s changed a little. He don’t sell to
grandmothers or little kids now. Of course that don’t matter, since they ain’t
got to do but walk five blocks to the Watch Houses and get what they want.
Some folks send their children to buy drugs for ’em. Imagine that? Sending

192
a little child nine, ten years old out to buy drugs. This proMects was never
that way. What are we doing wrong?”
    She seemed so sad as she said it, it was all Potts could do to stop himself
from placing an arm around her right there, right behind the church in the
shade under Jesus’s sad painted gaze, and saying, “It’s all right. I got you.”
    Instead he said, “I’m speaking as a friend, miss. You—all of you—need
to step back and let us do our Mob here.”
    “Arrest Deems then. That’ll make it easier.”
    “We arrest him today, ten guys will be in his place tomorrow. You arrest
ten guys, ten more guys will come. You know why? They’re being bailed
out. By the same man who sent that kid Earl to your little party. It’s a whole
organization we’re talking about. This guy looking for your Sportcoat is
part of a syndicate. You know what that means? Organized crime. That’s
why they call it organized. Guys like him have legitimate businesses mi[ed
with illegitimate ones. He’s not Must one guy. He’s an operator. He’s got
employees working for him. He runs a factory. The drugs they sell at your
flagpole, they don’t come packaged. They come to this country raw. They
need to be prepared, prepped, and packaged, Must like you’d package aspirin
or soda pop to sell in a store. This guy’s operation runs all the way from
Queens to Georgia. It’s something you can’t get in the way of.”
    “Are you interested in doing that?”
    “The police? Us? Yes.”
    “Well, you got us wrong,” she said tersely. “All’s we want is our
Christmas Club money.”
    He laughed. “What are you talking about? You step in the middle of a
maMor Brooklyn drug operation and send the drug king’s muscle man home
by subway with a lump on his head the size of Philadelphia. You threaten
the same muscle man by saying you know his dead minister father. All for
your church club money?”
    “He came here courting trouble,” she said angrily. “And them’s hard
dollars in our church club money. Nobody knows how much is in there.”
    “Whatever it is, it’s not enough to risk your skin. You have no idea what
you’re dealing with!”  Potts said.
    “You don’t live  here,” she said bitterly. “I know Deems’s whole family.
His grandfather, Mr. Louis, was a hard man. But it’s a hard life out here. He
came to New York from Kentucky with ten cents in his pocket. He swept

193
and mopped an office for forty years till he died. And then his wife passed.
His daughter prayed in this church every Sunday for years. Between you
and me, she drinks like a fish and ain’t worth a nickel. It was her son, Mr.
Louis’s grandson Deems, he was the gem of that family. He was the one
with all the promise. That boy could throw a ball better’n anybody around
here. He had the chance to get out on account of Must that one thing. Now
he’s gonna die or go to Mail, which amounts to the same thing. Once Deems
comes outta prison, if he lives long enough to go in, he’ll be worse than he
was when first he gone in. Back and forth he’ll go. None of that fits in your
little reports and warrants does it? When the newspaper writes their little
stories about coloreds and Spanish swinging around Brooklyn like a bunch
of monkeys in trees, none of that gets in there, now does it?”
    “You don’t have to eat my head off about it. The Irish got kicked and
booted the same way.”
    “We ain’t talking  about them.”
    “No we’re  not. You were talking about the church money. It’s got
nothing to do with this trouble,” Potts said.
    “It’s  got everything to do with it. That Christmas Club money is all we
can control. We can’t stop these drug dealers from selling poison in front
our houses. Or make the city stop sending our kids to lousy schools. We
can’t stop folks from blaming us for everything gone wrong in New York,
or stop the army from calling our sons to Vietnam after them Vietcong done
cut the white soldiers’ toenails too short to walk. But the little nickels and
dimes we saved up so we can give our kids ten minutes of love at
Christmastime, that’s ours to control. What’s wrong with that?”
    She waved at the weeded lot, the proMects nearby, the Elephant’s old
bo[car on the ne[t block, and behind it the harbor and the Statue of Liberty,
shimmering in the afternoon sunlight. “Look around you. What’s normal
about all this? This look normal to you?”
    Potts sighed through clenched teeth. He wondered how someone who
lived in this mess could be so naïve.
    “Nothing  in the world is normal,” he said. “I can’t understand why you’d
even hope for that.”
    His comment sent the anger hissing out of her like a balloon, and her
features softened. She eyed him with curiosity, then wiped the edge of her
eye with the back of her hand and shifted her weight.

194
    “Why  are you here?” she asked.
    “About  this case.”
    “No. Right here. The preaching’s inside. On Sundays. Not out here
behind the church. The inside’s what you need.”
    He shrugged. “Your sermons are enough,” he said. “That last one was
good. I like seeing you stirred up.”
    Now she frowned. “Is it funny to you, what I said?”
    “Not at all,”  he said. “If you’d been on the Mob as long as I have, you’d
feel the same way. We’re the same, you and I. We have the same Mob,
remember? We clean the things no one wants to clean. Dirt. That’s our Mob.
We clean up after people.”
    She smiled bitterly, and once again the mask she wore so well, the firm
lady of strong, impatient indifference whom he’d met when he first walked
into the church a week before, broke apart, revealing the vulnerable, lonely
soul underneath. She’s Must like me, he thought in wonder. She’s as lost as I
am.
    He managed to wing himself back under control and blurted, “You asked
why I’m really  here. I’ll tell you. First of  all, I know your deacon is around.
He’s good at making himself scarce. But we’re gonna get him.”
    “Get him then.”
    “Thing is, we’re  stepping soft, trying not to rattle folks. But the people
here are not making it easy. When we ask they say, ‘He was Must here,’ or
‘He Must left his building,’ or ‘I think he’s in the Bron[.’ They’re  covering
for him. But you ought to know something. And you can spread this
around . . .”
    He leaned in close. She noticed the lines in his face were etched with
concern, and alarm.
    “The man who wants your Sportcoat sent for somebody from out of
town. A very dangerous guy. I got no information on him other than a
name. Harold or Dean. Last name unknown. Might be a Harold. Or a Dean.
Not sure. Whatever his name, he’s rough business. He’s in a different class
than the knucklehead you sent off.”
    “Harold Dean.”
    “That’s right. Harold Dean.”
    “Should I warn folks?”
    “I’d  stay out of that flagpole area if I were you.”

195
    “That’s our place! Must be thirty people float by there every morning.
Even Deems don’t fool with us there.”
    “Gather someplace else.”
    “There is no place else. We surrender the flagpole, that’s it. We’re
prisoners in our own homes then.”
    “You don’t understand. Your deacon is not the only guy around here
who’s in danger now. I read the report. This Harold Dean is . . .”
    She stared at him in silence and he halted.
    He wanted to say, “He’s a killer and I don’t want him near you.” But he
had no idea what her reaction would be. He didn’t even know what Harold
Dean looked like. He had no information other than an FBI report with no
photo, only the vaguest description that he was a Negro who was “armed
and e[tremely dangerous.” He wanted to say, “I’m worried about you,” but
he had no idea how to say it. It wouldn’t do now anyway, because she was
angry again, the dark eyes glowing, the pretty nostrils flaring. So he said
simply, “He’s dangerous.”
    “Nothing  in this world is dangerous unless white folks says it is,” she
said flatly. “Danger here. Danger there. We don’t need you to tell us about
danger in these proMects. We don’t need you to say what the world is to us.”
    He offered a thin, sad smile and shook his head. So there it was. “Us?”
he said.
    He took a step back, away from the shade of the church, and turned for
the sTuad car. Another dream spent. He’d had many of them. He supposed
he was glad, really. He was off the hook. The responsibility, the magic that
his grandmother had talked about was a weight he was not built to bear.
Love, real love, was not for everyone.
    He slowly walked along the back of the church, his right hand skimming
the wall, moving with the slow, unsteady gait of a man who had Must
witnessed a building collapse.
    Sister Gee watched him drift slowly down the back of the building and
felt her heart pirouette toward her feet. She felt an ache. She couldn’t help
herself.
    “I’m  not saying you personally,” she called after him.
    He stopped but didn’t turn around. “I was hoping to bring you better
news,” he said. “About the case.”

196
    Her eyes dropped to the ground and she swiped at a stray weed with her
foot. She was afraid to look up. She wanted him to leave. It was too much.
She wanted him to stay. It was not enough. Her emotions felt like two big
waves crashing against one another. She could not ever remember being in
this place before.
    Finally she glanced up. He had moved to the edge of the building and
was about to turn the corner toward his sTuad car and the side of the chuch
where his partner, Miss Izi, Bum-Bum, and Dominic awaited, all of them
part of the foolish world who’d never see him clearly. He was a man they
were blind to, the man beyond the uniform, beyond the skin. Why she saw
the man inside and others could not, she was not sure. She had thought
about it after he left the church and decided that she and this officer were
not the same, no matter what she’d said to him when they first met. She
cleaned dirt. He chased bad people. She was a cleaning woman. He was a
cop. They were both spoken for in matters of love. But that indefinable
spirit, that special thing, that special song had not been heard by either of
them. She was sure of that. As she watched his back slowly drift away, she
saw her future and his, and knew she’d blame herself for not at least
attempting to open the envelope to read whatever news the letter inside
might contain. How many times had she done that, swallowed the gunk for
the sake of a car, a home, a marriage, a school for her children, for her
mother, for her church? For what? What about my own heart, Lord? How
many years do I have left?
    He had reached the corner of the church when she called out, “When you
get some more news, come on back.”
    He stopped. He didn’t turn but rather spoke over his shoulder. “It’s only
going to be bad news.”
    She saw his profile, and it was beautiful, framed by the Statue of Liberty
and the harbor, with several gulls flying overhead and beyond. And because
he hadn’t uttered a desire to not return, her heart grew tiny wings again.
    “Even if  it’s bad news,” she said, “there’s good news bound up in it—if
you’re the one bringing it.”
    She saw his hunched shoulders rela[ a little. He leaned on the church
wall and gave his heart a moment to catch itself. He was afraid if he turned
around, his face would give him away and he’d cause more trouble for both
of them than the moment was worth. But more than that, for the first time in

197
his fifty-nine years, despite all the poetry he read, and the wonderful Irish
stories he could spin off at the drop of a hat, stories full of lyric and rhyme
and hope and laughter and Moy and pain, all wrapped like Christmas
presents, he was suddenly, ine[plicably unable to find the words to e[press
himself.
    “I’ll   be happy,” he said, more to the ground than to her, “to come back
and bring what news I can.”
    “I’ll   be waiting,” Sister Gee said.
    But she might as well have been speaking to the wind. He had slipped
around the corner of the church toward his sTuad car and was gone.

198
                                                116



           MAY        GOD         HOLD           YOU         .  .   .



NINE DAYS AFTER SOUP LOPEZ’S HOMECOMING PARTY AND T
he blasted Deems in the face, Sportcoat, still very much alive, arrived bright
and early for work at the old Italian lady’s brownstone. He had to work in
her garden. It was Must another normal Wednesday.
   She was waiting for him and came right outside the gate when he walked
up, moving in a hurry. She was wearing a man’s Macket over her housedress,
her kitchen apron still tied around her waist, and men’s oversized concrete
walking boots on her feet.
   “Deacon,” she said, “we’ve got to find pokeweed.”
   “What for? It’s poisonous.”
   “No it’s not.”
   “Well alrighty then,” he said.
   They set off, moving down the block toward the empty lots that stretched
toward the harbor. He walked behind her as she stomped forward. When
they reached the first weeded lot, Must two blocks away, she waded in and he
followed. They both searched with their heads down. They passed several
fine specimens. “There’s sandspur, beggar’s-lice, partridge weed,”
Sportcoat said, “but no pokeweed.”
   “It’s here,” Mrs. Elefante said. She fanned through the weeds, several
feet ahead of him, swatting the plants with her hands. “My doctor would
hate for me to find a bunch of it. That would put him out of business.”

199
    “Yes, ma’am.” Sportcoat chuckled. He felt good this morning. In fact, he
felt good every morning he wandered the lots of the Cause looking for
plants with the old lady whose name he could never remember. It was the
only Mob he had that he didn’t need to take a drink for. Normally, ever since
Hettie died, he needed a booster in the mornings. But Wednesdays working
with the old lady always left him feeling goosed. She was eighteen years
older than him—close to eighty-nine, she said, but one of the few old folks
in the Cause who preferred to be outdoors all day. Four months into the Mob
and he’d never managed to remember her name, but she was a good white
person, and that’s what counted. He had always been terrible with names,
and that was a problem, especially after he got soused. Most folks he called
“Hey, brother man,” or “ma’am,” and if they had a name of any type, they’d
simply respond. But after four months it didn’t seem appropriate for him to
ask her name again, so he’d taken to calling her Miss Four Pie, which she
didn’t mind, a point that amused Hot Sausage to no end when he told him.
    “Don’t  she got a real name?” Sausage asked.
    “Of  course she do. In fact the lady from the senior center who
recommended me for the Mob wrote her name down for me once. But I lost
the paper.”
    “Whyn’t  you Must ask the lady her name again?”
    “She don’t care what I call her!” Sportcoat declared. “She likes it when I
calls her Miss Four Pie!”
    “Why  you call her that?”
    “Sausage, she had four hot blueberry pies in her oven first day I come on
the Mob. That whole house was stinking of blueberries,” Sportcoat said. “I
said, ‘By God, miss, it do smell good in here.’ She told me her name then.”
    “You don’t remember it at all?”
    “What difference do it make?” he said. “She pays in cash.” He pondered
it a moment. “I do believe she got an Italian name. Like Illy-at-ee or Ella-
rant-ee or some such thing.” He scratched his head. “I remembered it the
first day, but I drunk a bottle of essence after I come home and forgot it. It
Must runned right outta me.”
    “Did  she give you one that first day?” Hot Sausage asked.
    “Give me a name? I got my own name.”
    “No. A  pie! She had four of ’em.”

200
    “Do a buzzard fly? Course she did!” Sportcoat declared. “Miss Four Pie
don’t play around! She knows I’m a plant man. She’s good people,
Sausage.” He thought a moment. “Now that I thinks on it, to be legal and
proper, I reckon I ought to call her Miss Three Pie instead of Miss Four Pie,
being she didn’t have but three pies when I left that first day. She deducted
herself one whole pie for old Sportcoat.” He laughed. “I’m killing ’em,
Sausage! They love me out here. She’s crazy about me.”
    “That’s because you probably got more teeth than her.”
    “Don’t  get Mealous, son. She’s a salty lady. Full of sand, as they say. Why,
if she was colored and bowlegged, I’d run her down to Silky’s and buy her
a sip of some top-shelf brandy.”
    “Why  she got to be bowlegged?”
    “I  do got standards.”
    Sausage laughed, but Sportcoat felt embarrassed about the wisecrack,
which he felt was in poor taste. “Fact is, Sausage,” he said soberly, “I miss
my Hettie. She don’t spare me talking this kind of devilment, and if she
hears of it, she might not show around no more. I can’t have that.” To make
up for his insult, he said: “Miss Four Pie’s a spicy soul. She moves her
tongue however she pleases. She ain’t afraid to speak out. Fact is, I’m
scared of her a little. Her husband’s long dead, and I reckon she might’ve
talked him into the ground, her being so strong-minded. That lady knows
more about plants than anybody around here. The hours Must whiles away
when I’m working under her hand, for I favors plants myself. I hardly has a
need to get a glow going on the days I works for her—well, I need a little
protective custody, but not much. It don’t compare to the rest of the week
when I ain’t got no garden to fool around in. Then I gets parched and goes
from a toot to a tear to a wallbanger, especially if Hettie don’t show, for
then I get ever more bleary and swim on ahead, getting overserved, thinking
about Hettie and whatever wrong I done to her and all. It ain’t good.”
    Sausage was amused, but as usual, Sportcoat’s long-winded talks about
his adventures in plant life bored him, so he changed the subMect. But it
occurred to Sportcoat that talking with Miss Four Pie about plants, as they
thrust about the weeds in the lot, was one of the few things he looked
forward to every week, even if she was the one doing all the talking.
    They were an odd sight, an elderly white woman in housedress, apron,
and oversized men’s construction boots, followed by an elderly black man

201
in porkpie hat and plaid sports Macket, moving past the railroad bo[car, the
abandoned docks and railroad tracks, and into the high weeds of discarded
Munk surrounding the abandoned factories that sat near the water’s edge, the
glistening Lower Manhattan Must across the water.
    That Wednesday, as he walked behind her, Sportcoat noticed she moved
unsteadily. Over the past month or so, she’d seemed tired and unsteady on
her feet. When they got back to her house, she’d occasionally ask him to
step into the kitchen to clean and cut up some of the plants they’d found,
but not very freTuently. It was an unwritten rule he’d followed as a black
man who grew up in the South that he always stay outside. That suited him
fine, for he was afraid to step into any of their houses. Miss Four Pie had
advised him early on that her son, who lived in the house with her—a son
he had never met (or maybe he had met but could not recall)—was strict
and did not want any strangers in their home. That was fine with Sportcoat,
who worked under the assumption that if anything went wrong in any white
person’s house in any part of the world and he happened to be near it, why,
there was no doubt on whose head the hammer of Mustice would fall. But
over the months he’d worked for her she’d come to trust him. Once in her
kitchen, after he did her bidding, he’d move back into the yard as Tuickly as
possible. He was, after all, Must an outdoor man. Miss Four Pie seemed to
understand that.
    They wandered into a lot filled with high weeds Must south of the harbor
and spread out from one another. He saw her disappear down an
embankment out of sight momentarily. He went over to check on her and
found her sitting on a discarded sink, scanning the swamp before her.
    “I  know pokeweed’s here somewhere,” she said. “The wetter the ground,
the better the chance it’s around.”
    “Maybe we ought not burn too much gas looking for it,” Sportcoat said.
“I had a cousin who got sick from eating it.”
    “It  depends on what part you eat,” she said. “What did he eat? The root,
the stem, or the leaves?”
    “Lord,  I don’t know. It was a long time ago.”
    “Well there it is,”  she said. “Me, I got numbness in my legs. Plus
cataracts. I can’t see a thing. The pokeweed cleans my blood. I can see
better. My legs don’t hurt so much. I can eat almost any part of it, anytime.”

202
    Sportcoat was impressed by her certainty. She stood up and ventured into
the swamp, and he followed her. The two moved deeper into it, their feet
sinking into the wet grass, which became marshier as they drew closer to
the water. They searched for several minutes and came upon several
treasures they liked: skunk cabbage, spring beauty, and fiddleheads. But no
pokeweed. They spent another twenty minutes searching westward parallel
to the water. Finally, they struck gold in a swampy lot ne[t to an old paint
factory that faced the water. In the lot behind the factory was a wealth of
good things: wild mustard, wild garlic, huge geraniums, and—at last—
pokeweed, some of it four feet high.
    They gathered as much as they could carry and slowly made their way
through the weeded lots to Miss Four Pie’s house.
    She was happy with their haul. “These things are big,” she said of the
pokeweed. “You couldn’t find them this big in a store. Of course you can’t
buy good vegetables in the store anymore anyway. Tomatoes you buy now,
they look so nice and shiny and red. When you get them home and slice
them, they’re all red mush inside. They taste like nothing. How can you
make spaghetti sauce with that?”
    “Don’t  reckon I could,” Sportcoat said.
    “Nothing’s  the way it was,” she complained. “You ever see a son as good
as his father? The son might be taller. Or stronger. Or thicker about the
shoulders. But is he better? My son is stronger than his father. On the
outside. But on the inside? Hmph.”
    “I  don’t reckon I’ve met your son, Miss Four Pie.”
    “Oh, you’ve seen him running around here,” she said with a wave of her
hand. “Trying to make fast money like the rest of these young people.
Bigger. Better. Faster. More. That’s all they want. Always in a hurry. Never
takes time for things. He needs to meet a good Italian girl.”
    The thought seemed to distract her. As they made their way back through
the lots to Silver Street, they bypassed some real treasures Sportcoat knew
she liked: milkweed, knotweed, wild garlic, and beggar’s-lice. But she was
too busy chatting happily. “I tell my son, there’s no such thing as fast
money. Money’s not everything, Deacon. If you have enough to live, that’s
enough.”
    “You’re by golly  right about that.”

203
    They walked on and she glanced back at him. “How long you been a
deacon?”
    “If  I had to count the years, I’d lose track. But I’d say it’s now going on
twenty years over at Five Ends. My wife was a trustee, y’know.”
    “Is that right?”
    “I  had a good wife,” he said wistfully.
    “They don’t make them like they used to, Deacon,” she said.
    “Surely don’t.”
    By the time they arrived back at her brownstone, the old lady was tired
and she took the unusual step of inviting him inside. She announced she
was so tired she had to go upstairs to lie down and instructed him: “Put the
plants in tubs and wash them in the sink. Then leave them on the counter
and you’re all done, Deacon. I left your money on the counter. Pull the back
door when you leave.”
    “Okay, Miss Four Pie.”
    “Thank you, Deacon.”
    “You’re welcome, ma’am.”
    She went upstairs, and he finished the Mob as instructed and left out the
back door, which led to a tiny yard. He walked down the stairs and turned to
the left to the alley that separated her brownstone from the one ne[t door.
    As he stepped into the alley he walked dead into the Elephant.
    He didn’t recognize him, of course. Few people from the Cause Houses
knew which of the several Italians that moved in and out of the bo[car was
the Elephant. But everyone knew the name, and the reputation and the
dread associated with it.
    Elefante had been home from the Bron[ for a week, but the visit was still
fresh in his mind. He was deep in thought about the whole business of it
when he walked into the old colored man in his backyard. “Who are you?”
he demanded.
    “I’m  the gardener.”
    “What you doing here?” Elefante asked.
    Sportcoat smiled uneasily. “Well, the garden is where gardeners work,
mister.” He watched the Elephant’s Tuick glance about the yard. “I reckon
you must be the son, for you favors Miss Four Pie. She spoke of you all day
long.”
    “Miss who?”

204
    Sportcoat realized his mistake and puffed out his cheeks Tuickly,
blowing the air through his mouth. “The lady inside . . . the plant lady. I
take it that’s your momma? I works for her. I forgot her name.”
    “Is she all right?”
    “Oh yeah. She Must went to lay down. She had me out there . . . uh . . . we
was seeking pokeweed near the harbor.”
    Elefante rela[ed a little, frowning. “Did  you find  it?”
    “Do a buzzard fly? Your ma can find any plant around here, mister.”
    Elefante chuckled softly and rela[ed. He stared at Sportcoat. “Don’t I
know you?”
    “I  reckon . . .” Sportcoat stared back, and then he realized it. “Lord . . .
are you the fella there when my Hettie died?”
    Elefante held out his hand. “Tom Elefante,” he said.
    “Yes, sir, I . . .” Sportcoat found himself sweating. He felt a thank-you
coming, but for what? For pulling Hettie out of the bay? It was too much to
think about. This was the Elephant. The real thing. A real gangster.
“Well . . . I got to be going, mister.”
    “Wait a minute.”
    Elefante reached in his pocket, pulled out a wad of bills, counted off one
hundred dollars, and held it out to Sportcoat. “For my mother.”
    Sportcoat looked down at the bills. “You ain’t got to do that,” he said.
“Your momma paid me already.”
    “It’s  all right.”
    “I  been paid, mister. Your ma treats me right,” Sportcoat said. “I reckon
she could run a learning school on plants, she knows so much about ’em.
More’n me, that’s for sure. And I knows Tuite a bit from my young days.
She had her mind on that pokeweed and we walked Tuite a bit seeking it
out. She was a little shaky walking toward the end, but she done all right.
We found it and she says it’s gonna make her feel better. I do hope it
works.”
    “Take a little e[tra, mister.”  Elefante held out the money.
    “If  it’s all the same to you, sir, you already done me a world of good
when your fellers pulled my Hettie out the water.”
    Elefante stared a moment. He wanted to say, “I don’t know how she got
there,” but the truth was, to admit that was to confess knowledge of
something in which he had no part, which made it sound like a denial. One

205
denial led to another and to another, and no gangster worth his salt went
down that road. Better to say nothing.
    The old man seemed to understand. “Oh, my Hettie was tired, is all. She
was following God’s light. Looking  for a moonflower, is what it was. It was
a beautiful day when she died. Best funeral the church ever had.”
    Elefante shrugged, pocketed his money, and leaned against the wall of
his house. “I used to see her come and go from church,” he said. “She’d say
good morning. People don’t do that no more.”
    “No they don’t.”
    “She seemed like a nice lady. She always minded her business. Did she
work?”
    “Oh, she did day’s work and this and that. Mostly she Must lived a life like
most of us. She lived for going to heaven, mister.”
    “Don’t  we all?”
    “Are you a religious man?” Sportcoat asked.
    “Not really. Maybe a little.”
    Sportcoat nodded. He couldn’t wait to tell Sausage. He’d actually had a
conversation with the Elephant. An honest-to-goodness gangster! And he
wasn’t so bad! He was religious! A little, maybe?
    “Well, I  got to mosey on,” Sportcoat said. “I’ll see your momma ne[t
Wednesday.”
    “All  right, old-timer. What’s your name, by the way?”
    “Folks call me Deacon Cuffy. Some calls me Sportcoat, but mostly in
these parts they calls me Deacon.”
    Elefante smiled. The old dud had a style about him. “Okay, Deacon. By
the way, what does a deacon do?”
    Sportcoat grinned. “Well now, that’s a good Tuestion. We do all sorts of
things. We helps the church. We throws out the garbage. We buys the
furniture sometimes. We shop for the food for the deaconesses to make for
the repast and such. We even preaches from time to time if we is called
upon. We does whatever needs to be done. We’re your holy handyman.”
    “I  see.”
    “But mostly, truth be told, it’s women that runs most of your colored
churches out here. Like my late wife, and Sister Gee and Bum-Bum.”
    “Are they nuns?”
    “No, I  reckon not. They’re Must sisters.”

206
    “Real sisters?”
    “No.”
    Elefante’s brow furrowed in confusion. “Why call them sisters?”
    “’Cause we all brothers and sisters in Christ, mister. Come visit our
church sometime. Bring your momma. You’ll see. We likes visitors at Five
Ends.”
    “I  might.”
    “Well, I’ll   leave you,” Sportcoat said. “And until we meet again, I hope
God holds you in the palm of His hand.”
    Elefante, who was about to head into the house, froze.
    “Say that again,” he said.
    “Oh, that’s a blessing my Hettie used to say to everybody she met. We
say that in our church all the time to visitors. In fact, if you come visit us,
you’ll hear it yourself. It’s our church motto, since before I come, and that’s
been twenty years. In fact, there’s a picture of Jesus with that motto right
over the top of his head outside on the back wall of the church. They got
them words painted over his head in fancy gold letters. You can’t miss it.”
    Elefante stared at him oddly, with a surprised e[pression that Sportcoat
read as innocence, and it made Sportcoat feel right proud. He’d given the
white man something to think about. And a gangster too! Maybe he was
converting this feller to the word. Wouldn’t that be something! Your first
convert! An honest-to-goodness gangster! Feeling the moment, he said it
again: “May God hold you in the palm of His hand. It’s a pretty picture in
your mind.”
    “Where’s the picture?”
    “The one in your mind?”
    “No. The one in the church.”
    “Oh, that old thing? It’s a big old circle with Jesus in the middle and
them words over top of his head. Right out back behind the church.”
    “How  long has it been there?”
    “Lord  . . . it’s been there, oh, I don’t know how long. Don’t nobody Tuite
know who drawed that thing. My Hettie said a man drawed it up there when
they first built the church. She said, ‘I don’t know how those fools paid
him, for our treasury ain’t never had more than fifty-four dollars in it. They
didn’t use my Christmas Club money to pay him, that’s for sure!’”

207
Sportcoat chuckled, then added, “My Hettie kept the Christmas Club
money, too, see. Kept it in a bo[ . . . someplace.”
    “I  see . . . you say the painting’s . . . along the back wall outside?”
    “Why  yes it is. Big ol’ pretty picture of Jesus in a circle with his hands
Must about touching the edge of that circle. Painted right on the cinder block.
Folks used to come from miles to see that picture. It got covered over some,
but if you stand back in the weeds you can still see the circle and the whole
thing as it was. I heard tell once that there was something special about that
picture.”
    “Is it  a picture or a painting? Covered over? Is the picture covered over?”
    Elefante stared at him so thoughtfully, curiosity etched in his face, yet for
some reason Sportcoat felt, at that moment, that the spiritual part of his
message was slipping. “No, it’s not covered over. Well, the church kinda
painted over it a little over the years, fi[ed it up. Colored it up some. But
you can still see him, plain as day. It’s not the words so much that’s wrote
there that’s important, though,” he added, going back to making his spiritual
pitch. “It’s the spirit of what Jesus wants, see. To hold you in the palm of
His hand.”
    “Can you see his hands too?”
    “Surely can.”
    Sportcoat carefully neglected to mention, “He was once white till we
made him colored.” Unbeknownst to Sportcoat, the church’s version was
actually a local artist’s rendering of Jesus as depicted in the centerpiece of
Italian artist Giotto di Bondone’s Last Judgment, the original of which lived
in the Scrovegni Chapel in Padua, which portrayed Jesus as a white man in
a beard. Someone in the congregation some years back had insisted that
Jesus be colored black, and Pastor Gee, an[ious to please the congregation
as always, had cheerfully hired Sister Bibb’s son Zeke, a housepainter, to
brown up Jesus some. With the help of Hot Sausage and Sportcoat, the
three did Must that, coloring Jesus’s face and hands with dark brown house
paint. The result was horrible, of course, with the facial features, so
carefully detailed by the original copyist, so badly distorted and the hands
so badly mangled, the face and hands looked like near blobs. But Jesus,
Pastor Gee noted cheerfully at the time, had emerged a Negro, and a great
spirit as always, and that was the point.

208
    Sportcoat wisely didn’t breathe a word of this, but Elefante stared at him
with such an odd look that Sportcoat felt he was pattering on too much,
which could, as usual, spell trouble with white folks. “Well alrighty then!”
he said, and shuffled down the alley.
    Elefante watched as Sportcoat walked down the alley and turned onto the
sidewalk and out of sight. He felt slightly dazed, his heart still light with the
thought of fresh, new love, the Governor’s mesmerizing daughter, and now
this. A Negro from the colored church two hundred yards from his bo[car?
Negroes? And his father? He’d never seen his father with a Negro, ever.
Was he losing his mind?
    He climbed the narrow stairs to the back door, opened it to the kitchen,
and stepped inside, feeling dizzy, the words still in his head.
    May God hold you in the Salm of His hand.

209
                                                   117




                                       HAROLD



TWO HOURS LATER, WITH  HIS PAY FROM MISS FOUR PIE IN HI
bottles of booze standing atop a cinder block like crowns on a king’s head,
Sportcoat and Hot Sausage considered Sportcoat’s encounter with the
Elephant.
    “Did the Elephant have a gun?” Sausage asked.
    “Nar gun!” Sportcoat said triumphantly. The two were lounging in
Sausage’s basement lair, seated on overturned crates, sipping from the first
bottle Sportcoat cracked open, peppermint bourbon, saving the second, a
bottle of King Kong, for dessert later.
    “What’s he like?”
    “He’s all right, partner! A good man. He was fighting to give me that
smooth hundred dollars.”
    “You shoulda taken it. But then, why would you do that? That would be
the smart thing to do, which you is allergic to.”
    “Sausage, his momma already paid me. Plus he helped my Hettie.”
    “For all you know, he coulda been the one that throwed her in the
harbor.”
    “Sausage, if ignorance is bliss, you is happy. A big man like the Elephant
wouldn’t bother my Hettie. He liked her. He said he seen her wave all the
time as she come and go from church.”
    “When you get tired of thinking, Sport, call me. Maybe she seen
something he done. Maybe she knew something. Maybe he robbed her!”

210
    “You watch too many movies,” Sportcoat said. “He wasn’t hauling not a
bit of trouble at her, not one bit. She was following God’s light is all. And
she found it.”
    “So you say.”
    “She’s in a good place. She’s turned loose, a free angel now, by God. I
talks to her most every day.”
    “If  you don’t watch your points, you’ll  get your wings too. Deems is
busy these days.”
    “I  ain’t studying him.”
    Sausage considered this. “I see him every day, out there selling that
poison hand over fist, the devil keeping score. He knows we’re partners. He
ain’t asked a lick about you. Not a mumbling word. That makes me
nervous. He got a trick to play, Sport. When you ain’t looking, he’s gonna
chop cotton and pull fodder. You got to get outta these proMects.”
    Sportcoat ignored that. He stood up and stretched, took another sip of
peppermint bourbon, then passed the bottle to Sausage. “You don’t never
get tired of thinking, do ya? Where’s my umpire costume?”
    Sausage nodded at a black plastic bag in the corner.
    “I’mma  take this home tonight. Tomorrow, I’mma go out there and see
Deems again. I won’t be drunk this time, for I wants to remember what he
says. After I speaks to him, I’mma tell you all about it.”
    “Don’t  be a drag-behind fool.”
    “I’m  going right out there and I’mma say, ‘Deems, I’m getting the team
together, and I Must want you to pitch one game for us. One game. And if
you don’t wanna play no more baseball after that, why, you can Tuit. I
won’t bother you never no more. One game only.’ He’ll be begging me to
get the team back together again after that.”
    Sausage sighed. “Well, I reckon to really understand the world, you got
to die at least once.”
    “Stop talking crazy,” Sportcoat said. “That boy loves baseball. He got the
same ways old Josh Gibson had. You know Josh Gibson? Greatest catcher
to ever play the game?”
    Sausage rolled his eyes as Sportcoat e[tolled the virtues of Josh Gibson,
the greatest Negro catcher ever, how he met Gibson after the war in 1945,
and on he went, until Sausage finally said, “Sport, I don’t know that you
seen even half the people you calls out.”

211
    “Seen ’em all,” Sportcoat said proudly. “Even barnstormed a little
myself, but I had to make money. That ain’t gonna be Deems’s problem.
He’ll make plenty money in the bigs. He got the fire and the talent. You
can’t take the love of ball out of a ballplayer, Sausage. Can’t be done.
There’s a baseball player in that boy.”
    “There’s a killer in that boy, Sport.”
    “Well, I’ll   give him a crack at one or the other.”
    “No you won’t!  I’ll  fetch the police first.”
    “Ain’t  you forgot that warrant that’s on you?”
    “I’ll   let Sister Gee fetch ’em then.”
    “Sister Gee ain’t studying no police. She’s hard on me about that
Christmas Club money. She’ll be wanting that money first, Sausage. Folks
is losing faith in me on account of it ’round these parts. Even you. Betting
against my life for a cigar with JoaTuin.”
    Sausage blanched, then took a Tuick snort of the peppermint. “That
wasn’t about you,” he said. “That was about JoaTuin. I been playing
numbers with him for si[teen years. Only hit once. I think he’s got it out for
me. I wanted some of my money back.”
    “Sausage, you done found the secret of youth, ’cause you lying like a
child.”
    “I  figured it this way, Sport. Since you didn’t wanna run off and was
gonna be ki— gonna go out by Deems’s hand, however the cut come or go,
I figured you wouldn’t mind if  I made a few chips on account of it. I been a
good friend, ain’t I?”
    “Very good friend, Sausage. I don’t mind you making a few chips on my
account. In fact I’ve got a proposition for you. Help me make peace with
Deems. Tell him I wanna see him, and I’ll forget the insult you done to me
by betting against my life.”
    “You losing your marbles, son. I ain’t going near him.”
    “Deems ain’t mad at me. Do you know Deems bought me this very
umpire uniform?”
    “No.”
    “Yes he did. Brung it to me brand-new Must after Hettie died. Come right
to my house two days after we buried her. Knocked on the door and handed
it to me saying, ‘Don’t tell nobody.’ Now, would somebody like that shoot a
friend in cold blood?”

212
    Sausage listened in silence, then said, “If it was Deems, yes.”
    “Hogwash. I needs you to go out there and tell him I wants to speak
privately. I’ll  meet him in private and clear this all up.”
    “I  can’t do it, Sport. I’m too chickenhearted, okay?”
    “It’s  me he’s pining for, Sausage. You ain’t got to worry about your
skin.”
    “I  do worries about my skin. It covers my body.”
    “I’d  go to the flagpole myself. But I don’t wanna embarrass him in front
of his friends. If I speak to him in private, he won’t be shamed.”
    “You shamed him by shooting him. In fact, him giving you that umpire
outfit makes things worse,” Sausage said, “being that you shot him for his
kindnesses.”
    “That boy got plenty goodness left in him,” Sportcoat said, taking the
bourbon from Sausage and sipping. “His grandfather Louis was all right,
wasn’t he?”
    “Get shot on your own, Sport. I think I’ll  set here and strangle this bottle
of bourbon.”
    “A  true friend would do it. Otherwise, he would not be no true friend.”
    “Okay.”
    “Okay what?”
    “I  ain’t your friend.”
    “I’ll   get Rufus then. He’s from my home country. You can count on a
South Carolina man. He always said Alabamans gets torn up when they got
to stand up for something.”
    “Why  should I hitch my mule to you, Sport? You the one that got drunk
and shot him.”
    “You got a can tied to your tail, too, Sausage. Deems knows we is
partners. You taught him in Sunday school too. But you go on. I’ll get
Rufus to do it.”
    Sausage frowned and poked at the ground with his boot, pursing his lips,
his nostrils flaring angrily. He rose off the crate, turned away from
Sportcoat, and with his back to him, held his arm out parallel to the ground,
straight, fingers stretched.
    “Bourbon.”
    Sportcoat, from behind, placed the bottle in Sausage’s hand. Sausage
took a long, deep sip, set the bottle down on the cinder block, and with his

213
back to Sportcoat, stood a long moment, swaying as he got drunker. Finally,
he shrugged and turned around. “All right, dammit. I’ll be a fool with you.
You don’t give me no goddamned choice anyway. I’ll set it up. I’ll see
Deems and ask him to come down here and talk to us—talk to you. I ain’t
got no pony in that race.”
    “Sausage, you never gets tired of thinking, do you. Why’s he gonna
come down here and talk to me? We got to go see him.”
    “We ain’t gotta do nothing. It’s you. But I’ll  go see him, man to man, and
e[plain that you want to see him in private, in person, and that he got to
come by hisself, so you can apologize to him in person and e[plain
everything. That way, if he’s gonna kill you he can do it in privacy
someplace so I don’t see it and he don’t go to Mail right off. I reckon he
won’t air me out for asking him, being that I wasn’t the one who shot him.”
    “Don’t  you ever tire of bringing that up? I told you I don’t recall not one
bit of it.”
    “That’s funny. ’Cause Deems damn well do remember it.”
    Sportcoat thought a moment, then said, “You go fetch him. You watch. I
ain’t gonna have to beg that youngster for nothing. I’d Must as soon put him
over my knee and paddle him for wasting what God gave him.”
    “I  don’t know that you could lift his hand, Sport. You seen him with his
shirt off?”
    “Seen more than that. I warmed his two little toasters in Sunday school
many a day.”
    “That was ten years ago.”
    “Same difference,” Sportcoat said. “You get to know a man after you
seen his straight and narrow.”






It was nearly dark when Deems and Phyllis, the new fly girl in the
neighborhood, had settled onto the edge of Vitali Pier. They dangled their
feet over the water, staring at Manhattan and the Statue of Liberty in the
distance.

214
    “Can you swim?” Deems asked, pretending to shove her from behind, as
if pushing her off the dock.
    “Stop it, boy,” she said. She elbowed him playfully.
    He’d seen her the very first day she came to the flagpole as a customer,
then a couple of days later when she came for a second go-round. She’d
bought two bags of smack, then another bag two days later. She was a light
user, he guessed, and a hottie, a redbone, a killer looker: a light-skinned
black girl with long limbs and a gaunt, tight Maw and high cheekbones. He
noted she wore long sleeves on hot days like Munkies did, to cover her arm
tracks, but her skin was smooth and her hair was long. She seemed awfully
nervous, but that didn’t bother him. They all were when they were fucking
up. He’d noticed her the first day she came out. He watched her disappear
into Building 34 and sent Beanie into the building to find out who she was.
He reported her name was Phyllis. A visitor. From Atlanta, niece of Fuller
Richardson, a regular dope fiend who’d gotten busted and whose apartment
was full of his wife, his cousins, his kids, and everybody he owed money to,
which apparently included this girl’s mother, who was his sister. “She says
he owes her mom a bunch of dough, so she can stay in his bedroom till he
gets back,” Beanie reported. “She might be around awhile.”
    Deems wasn’t taking any chances. He decided to move in Tuick before
someone else popped game. He took a close look at Phyllis the second time
she came through, Must to make sure she was worth it, before he made a
move. He happily concluded she had too much weight to be a full-blown
Munkie. She still owned a purse. Her shoes, coat, and clothing were clean.
And she had some kind of temp Mob. She wasn’t a dopehead yet. Just
another light-skinned chick on her way to skankdom who maybe got herself
skinned by some bad motherfucker in Georgia probably. Come to New York
to ease her broken heart and play big. Telling all her friends in Georgia she
was dating the Temptations or some shit, no doubt. But Phyllis was fly, and
she was new. And he had money. And it was all good.
    The third time she showed, he let Beanie and Dome handle sales, posted
Stick, his main lookout, on the roof above with three other kids on roofs
nearby, and broke from his bench to follow her back toward 34 as she left.
Business was slow that day anyway.
    She saw him coming. “Why you following me?”
    “You want an e[tra bag of Big H?”

215
    She looked at him and smirked.
    “I  don’t need no e[tra,” she said. “I’m doing too much now.”
    Deems liked that. He thought later, much later, that this very first
e[change told him more than it should have. It was the body language more
than anything. She didn’t seem nervous when she copped her dope. Up
close there was a directness, a tautness to her that was unusual. She was
tight, almost stiff, and alert. He attributed that to an attempt to hide her
nervousness, being a small-town girl from the South who confessed to him
the very first day he’d asked her to meet him at the dock that she was, that
she had once been, and still was, a church girl. He liked that. That meant
she was a wild girl inside, all bunched up like him. He had a few church
regulars, working Munkies. He’d been a church boy himself. He knew that
bunched-up feeling. He needed someone all coiled up like him. Everybody
in the Cause knew him now. His rep had grown since he’d been shot by
Sportcoat. He was bigger and better than ever. Everybody knew he was
gonna rock old Sportcoat. Deems knew it too. It was Must a matter of time.
Why hurry? He was in no hurry. Hurry got you busted. He would deal with
Sportcoat at the right time. Sportcoat wasn’t a problem. But Earl? Now that
was a problem.
    There was a distance now, between him and Earl. He felt it. Earl, after
his initial rage and displeasure with the whole Sportcoat business, now
suddenly seemed to shrug the whole thing off. He insisted Mr. Bunch was
pleased with his work. “The Cause is your area. You handle it like you
want. Just keep moving the dope.”
    That wasn’t like Earl. Everybody knew Earl got his head bonked in by a
baseball at the Watch Houses after trying to bust down on Sportcoat. And
then that doofus Soup Lopez was seen carrying Earl to the subway station
after Earl tried to bust up Soup’s homecoming party—with Sister Gee
walking behind them like a damn schoolteacher. He’d also heard Earl got
dragged out of Building 17 by Sportcoat and Sausage—after the two old
fuckers supposedly tried to electrocute him in the basement of Building 17
but screwed up and put out the building lights for two hours instead. Earl
was getting punked. There was something wrong with that.
    If Mr.  Bunch was so cool about his screwup with Sportcoat, why was he
letting his main man, Earl, get his ass kicked up and down the Cause
District? And why was Earl so cool about it? It felt like a trap. He’d copped

216
heroin from Earl twice a week for four years. He’d watched him work. He’d
seen Earl stick a fork in a guy’s eye Must for looking at him wrong. He’d
once watched Earl pistol-whip a rival drug dealer to unconsciousness over a
ten-dollar short. Earl did not fuck around. Something was wrong.
    He couldn’t get it out his head. There was a play involved. It was Must a
matter of time before it showed itself. But what was it?
    The waiting didn’t bother Deems, but the uncertainty of strategy did.
Everything to him was about strategy. That’s how he’d survived. He heard
that other big-time dealers called him a boy genius. He liked that. It pleased
him that his crew, his rivals, and even at times Mr. Bunch marveled at how
someone so young managed to figure things out on his own and keep ahead
of older men, some of whom were vicious and clawing to get his business.
He liked that they wondered how he could stay ahead of the competition,
knew when to attack rival drug dealers and when to back away, what to sell
and when and for how much, what button to push and who to push against.
Mr. Bunch once told him that the drug game is like war. Deems disagreed.
He watched people, observed how they moved. He saw drug dealing as a
kind of baseball game, a game involving strategy.
    Deems loved baseball. He’d pitched all the way through high school and
could have gone further had not his cousin Rooster lured him into the fast
money of the heroin game. He still kept track of the game, the teams, the
sTuads, the statistics, the hitters, the Miracle Mets, who, miraculously,
might be in the World Series that year, and most of all, the strategy.
Baseball was a pitcher’s game. Your basic batter knew the pitcher had to
throw the ball over the plate in order to get him out of the game. When you
did, the batter would try to clobber it. So you had to keep him guessing.
Was the batter looking for a curve? A fastball? A curve outside? Or a
fastball inside? Hitters, like most people, were guessers. The good hitters
studied pitchers, watched their moves, anything that might give them a hint
of what pitch was coming. But the good pitchers were smarter than that.
They kept the hitters guessing. Throw inside? Outside? Curveball? Splitter?
Fastball up and away? Guess wrong and the hitter knocks your pitch out of
the yard. Guess right and the guy’s out and you’re a baseball millionaire.
    Drug selling was the same. Keep ’em guessing. Is that dealer coming at
me this way? Or that way? At night? Or during the day? Is he selling smack
now cheaper than me? Or the Big H? The Asian stuff? Or the stuff from

217
Turkey? Why was he giving away the brown smoking shit out in Jamaica,
Queens, for practically nothing and then selling it at triple cost to buyers in
Wyandanch, Long Island?
    That kind of thinking had vaulted him to the top of the game in South
Brooklyn, and it allowed him to push into Queens and even parts of
Manhattan and Long Island. He felt good about that. He had a tight crew
and, most important, a baseball mind. He’d been trained by the best. A man
who knew the game.
    Fucking Sportcoat.
    Sportcoat was, Deems thought bitterly, a fucking idiot and a sticky issue
to be dealt with later. He had to focus on Earl now, and Mr. Bunch. Had to.
    But the going was difficult. He was so bent on trying to figure out Mr.
Bunch’s strategy behind Earl’s getting punked that he was losing sleep. He
woke up in the mornings feeling achy and with bumps on his arms from
rolling against the wall. His ear, what was left of it, still hurt all the time. He
needed sleep. And rest. And this fly girl Phyllis, seated with him at Vitali
Pier, was the perfect distraction. He needed this break. Otherwise, he was
an e[plosion waiting to happen. He’d seen in his own housing proMect what
happened to the dealers who didn’t ease up and figure things out. Mr.
Bunch and Earl had a plan. What was it? He wasn’t sure. But if he busted
hard on Earl now, or even defended himself against Earl should he attack,
his plan to get with Joe Peck could come crashing down before it even got
started.
    Peck, Deems knew, was the World Series. He was the man with the
means. Deems couldn’t toss a pitch for Peck till he got his own team
together he was still working on that, adding muscle to his crew, figuring
the costs, the risks, the allies in the Watch Houses, in Far Rockaway, and
the two trusted guys in Bed-Stuy from his days in Spofford, all of whom he
needed to be in tight shape before he could approach Joe Peck. He’d sent
Beanie, his most trusted crew member, out to Queens to sound out some
fellow dealers in Jamaica, to ask if they’d buy from him if he sold to them
at 20 percent less than Mr. Bunch. The answer was a Tuiet yes. He Must
needed to tighten things a little more before he approached Peck. Just be
cool a few more weeks, then make his move.
    But the stress was difficult to handle. There were so few people to trust.
More and more, Deems found himself leaning on Beanie, who was more

218
mature than the others and could keep his lips closed and not say dumb
things. Outside of that, everything had gotten complicated. His mother was
drinking more. His sister had disappeared someplace and hadn’t been seen
in months. Deems found himself unable to get out of bed in the morning.
He’d lie in place, pining for the old days, hearing the crack of a baseball bat
on a warm summer day, watching Beanie, Lightbulb, Dome, and his main
ace boon coon Sugar shag balls in the outfield while Sportcoat hollered at
them, sitting them down in the rancid dugout and telling them stupid stories
of the old men in the Negro leagues with funny names. He’d recall the days
he and his friends used to lie on the roof of Building 9 waiting for the ants
in fall. They were innocent boys then. Not now. Deems at nineteen felt like
fifty. He got out of bed each morning feeling like he’d slept on the edge of a
dark abyss. He actually toyed with the idea of running away to Alabama,
where Sugar had moved to, and cooling out at Sugar’s house, Must giving up
the whole business altogether and finding a college down south that had a
baseball team. He still had his stuff. He could still throw ninety miles per
hour. He was sure he could still make a good college team as a walk-on. Mr.
Bill Boyle,  the baseball coach at St. John’s, had said so. Deems had known
Mr. Boyle for years. Mr. Boyle used to come around every summer asking
about him, watching him throw. He kept scorecards, and ratings, and notes
on him. Deems liked that. All the way through his days at John Jay High
School, where his pitching took the team to the state championship, Mr.
Boyle said, “You got a future if you don’t screw up.” But Deems screwed
up. The summer after he graduated from high school, already enrolled in St.
John’s, Mr. Boyle came to visit, and by then his dope business was
booming. He saw Mr. Boyle coming and scattered his dealers and pretended
nothing was going on. He walked Mr. Boyle to the old ball field in the
Cause and showed him he could still toss at ninety miles per hour and even
faster. The old coach was e[cited. He called Deems when the fall semester
began, and Deems said, “I’ll be there,” but something came up in his
business—he couldn’t even remember what it was, looking back, Must some
bullshit. And that was it. Mr. Boyle hadn’t heard from him so he showed up
in the Cause, unannounced, and spotted Deems at the flagpole, surrounded
by dopers, moving heroin. “You’re a waste of talent,” he said to Deems, and
was gone. Deems wanted to call him again, but he was too embarrassed.

219
    Then again, he told himself, Mr. Boyle drove an old Dodge Dart. My
Firebird, he told himself, is nicer than his car. Besides, Mr. Boyle didn’t
live out here in the Cause, where life was hard.
    Sitting at the edge of the dock with the flyest girl he’d ever had a chance
to put his arm around, with his feet clad in brand-new Converse sneakers
with the star on the side, $3,200 cash in one pocket and a .32 caliber in the
other, Beanie serving as his bodyguard because now he never went
anywhere without crew, Deems dismissed the baseball idea and forced his
mind back into the other game. The real one. He had to keep focused. He
had gotten a call that afternoon from one of his boys in Bed-Stuy who’d
served time with him in Spofford. His hunch was right. Bunch was about to
make a play.
    Bunch was on to him, the guy said. Bunch somehow learned that Deems
wanted to cut a deal with Joe Peck to take over Bunch’s distribution. Earl
was Must a feint to lull him to sleep. “Earl ain’t the guy to look out for.
Bunch sent for somebody else.”
    “Who?”  Deems had asked.
    “Some motherfucker named Harold Dean. Don’t know nothing about
him. But he’s a shooter. Watch your back with him.”
    So that was it. Okay. Curveball. Harold Dean. He sent out an alert and
got his crew ready, moving them into every building. Any strange dude not
from the Cause, who walked through Buildings 9, 34, 17, all his
strongholds, any man or kid who lagged through the flagpole plaza looking
suspicious, watch him. It could be Harold Dean. Don’t do nothing. Just
report to him. That was the word. He’d made it clear. He spent some money
and sent out a few e[tra bodies. There wasn’t a corner of the Cause he
hadn’t considered. Every roof. Every building. Every alley had someone in
his crew watching it, including his own Building 9, where he placed Stick
on the roof, along with a second kid named Rick working the hallways,
along with Lightbulb.
    Lightbulb.
    There was something about Lightbulb Deems didn’t like. Lightbulb
hadn’t been feeling it. Ever since Deems had been shot, and Lightbulb and
Beanie came to visit him two weeks ago, and Lightbulb got scared, talking
about “you” instead of “we” when Deems said he planned to approach
Peck, Deems had gotten suspicious. Lightbulb didn’t like that plan. In fact,

220
when Deems really thought about it, Lightbulb never had the heart for the
game. Bunch was on to him because somebody had dimed on him. He’d
gone through the list of possible double-crossers, and if he had to bet on the
outcome . . .
    He felt a burning in his throat as anger fought to take hold.
    The cooing of the honeyed girl ne[t to him, sighing and dangling her feet
over the water, cooled the burning and brought him back to the moment.
She was speaking to him but he didn’t hear. His mind couldn’t stop moving.
It circled the Harold Dean problem again, then settled back on Lightbulb.
    Fucking Lightbulb.
    He couldn’t believe it, but he had to. Lightbulb had tipped his hand when
they were in the apartment two weeks ago. He hadn’t been around much.
He was also using, which meant that when Lightbulb made deliveries, he
might be cutting the stuff with baking soda or whatever he could get his
hands on. Diluting the goods to keep the good stuff for himself.
    Rage climbed into Deems’s clear thinking. It was a mistake, he knew.
But he couldn’t help it.
    “He tipped his hand right then and there in the apartment.” He spit out
the words.
    “Say what?” Phyllis was talking. She was so sweet. Her voice, lovely
and lilting with that Southern accent, was a turn-on. She was almost like a
real woman, like the black chicks he’d seen in the movies and on TV,
Diahann Carroll and Cicely Tyson, sitting there looking fully grown with
her fine self. He felt like a movie star and a grown man all at once, too,
sitting ne[t to her. He was embarrassed that he didn’t have much e[perience
with girls. She was twenty-four, five years older than him. Most of the girls
he knew were younger and worked for him the older ones occasionally
screwed him for dope, or simply became whores for their own habit, which
made them untouchable. This little honey was so fine and smart, it seemed a
waste to let her get all fucked up on heroin before he got his dibs. Plus she
was a little cold and distant, which made her irresistible.
    She’d agreed to walk with him to the dock, where there were plenty of
empty corners, perfect places for a guy to get his nuts dipped. It was better
than risking his life using an apartment of some dopehead in the Cause who
might set him up for the price of a ten-dollar bag of brown scag.

221
    She looked at him oddly, waiting for his response. He shrugged and said,
“It ain’t  nothing,” then gazed out over the water at the twinkling lights,
which began to appear one by one, as the sun made its last descent over the
western skyline. He said, “Look at them lights.”
    “Nice.”
    “The very ne[t  thing I’m gonna get me is an apartment. In Manhattan.”
    “That’s cool,”  she said.
    He placed his arm around her shoulder. She removed it.
    “I  ain’t that type of girl,”  she said.
    He snickered, slightly embarrassed, aware that Beanie was fifteen feet
off packing a Davis .380-caliber handgun, watching their backs. “What type
of girl are you?”
    “Well, not that type. Not yet. I don’t know you that good.”
    “That’s why we’re here, baby.”
    She laughed. “How old are you?” she asked.
    “Girl,  we ain’t gonna bang skins out here like teenagers, if that’s what
you asking. Not with him standing right there.” He nodded to Beanie. “We
come out here to Must see the water and cool out and talk.”
    “Okay. But I need a little bit of something, y’know. I’m  Must feeling it . . .
y’know. You ain’t gonna ask me to do a little e[tra here for it, are you?”
    He was disappointed. “Girl, I don’t want no e[tra. Not right now. You
need a hit, I’ll give you a hit.”
    “Forget it,”  she said. She tilted her head side to side as if she were
thinking about something, then said, “Well . . . I probably could use a little
taste,” she said.
    He glared at her.
    “I  thought you said you wasn’t hooked.”
    “I  ain’t talking about doing no works. I’m talking about tasting you,
boy!” She tapped his pants near his zipper.
    He chuckled. Once again, he had a fleeting feeling of sudden alert and
would have driven into that feeling further had he not been interrupted by
the sound of Beanie behind him bursting into laughter and saying, “Deems,
oh shit, check this out!”
    He turned around. Beanie, a good ten feet off, was standing ne[t to old
Hot Sausage, of all people, who was stone drunk and without his stupid
porkpie cap. He was dressed instead in the garb of an umpire, complete

222
with Macket, cap, and chest protector, and holding the face mask in his hand.
He swayed unsteadily, completely blitzed.
    Deems scrambled to his feet and stepped over to them. “What you doing
here, Sausage?” he said, snickering. “You drunk? It ain’t Halloween yet.”
He could smell the booze. Sausage was totaled and looked so ready to
collapse that Deems almost felt sorry for him.
    Sausage was bombed. “It wasn’t my idea,” he slurred. “But being that as
you . . . well . . . I was told if you seen this here umpire outfit, it would be a
message.”
    “What you talking about?” Deems said. An idea was forming in his head.
He glanced at Beanie, who was still laughing, and at Phyllis, who had
wandered over. He pointed in the direction of the park, several blocks away.
“Baseball field’s that way, Sausage,” he said.
    “Can I speak to you private a minute?” Sausage asked.
    Now Deems smelled a rat. He glanced around. The dock was empty save
Beanie, the new girl Phyllis, and Sausage. Behind them, the empty paint
factory lay dark. Sausage, despite his inebriation, seemed nervous and was
breathing hard.
    “Come see me tomorrow. When you ain’t drunk. I’m busy here.”
    “It  won’t take long, Mr. Deems.”
    “Don’t  Mr. Deems me, motherfucker. I hear you talking about me at the
flagpole. You think I’m sitting around sucking eggs while you sneaking
Sportcoat about? If it wasn’t for my granddaddy, I’da knocked your teeth
out two weeks ago. You and Sport. You two old-bag motherfuckers, starting
up shit . . .”
    “Gimme a minute, son. I gotta tell you something. It’s important.”
    “Open your talking hole then. Go ’head.”
    Sausage seemed terrified. He glanced at Phyllis, then at Beanie, then
back at Deems.
    “It’s  private, Deems, I’m telling you. Man to man. It’s about
Sportcoat . . .”
    “Fuck Sportcoat,” Deems said.
    “He wants to tell you something important!” Sausage insisted. “In
private.”
    “Fuck him!  Get the fuck outta here!”

223
    “Show some respect for an old man, would ya? What have I ever done to
you?”
    Deems thought it through Tuickly, checking off bo[es in his mind. His
crew was at the flagpole. Chink was in place. Rags was in place. Stick had a
crew of kids on the roofs. Beanie was there with him, packing heat. He was
packing heat himself. Lightbulb was . . . well, in place, and far distant and
no threat and was a problem that would be dealt with soon. He glanced at
Phyllis, who was dusting off her pretty rear end. She took a step back
toward the empty paint factory.
    “I’ll   go away for a minute,” she said. “You can talk.”
    “Naw, girl,  stay here.”
    Hot Sausage said to Phyllis, “I think it’s best you go.”
    “Git  off her, Sausage!”
    “It’s  Must a minute, Deems. Please. Gimme a minute in privacy, will ya?
For God’s sake, boy! Just a minute!”
    Deems lowered his voice, enraged now. “State your business right now,
or I’ll  knock every Chiclet outta your mouth.”
    “All  right,”  Sausage slurred. He glanced at Phyllis, then said, “Sister
Gee . . . you remember her?”
    “Out with  it, motherfucker!”
    “Okay then!”  Sausage cleared his throat, swaying drunk, trying to
control himself. “Sister Gee come by the boiler room today when me and
Sport was there having a . . . taste, y’know. She said the cops been asking
lots of Tuestions. She come upon some information from one of them cops
that she gived to Sportcoat. He wanted you to have it.”
    “What kind of  information?”
    “Somebody’s coming to get you, Deems. Someone bad.”
    “Tell me what I don’t know, old man.”
    “Somebody named Harold Dean.”
    Deems sucked his teeth and turned to Beanie. “Beanie, get him the fuck
outta here.” He turned away and suddenly noticed, out of the corner of his
eye, a movement to his right.
    The girl.
    She had stepped away from him, and in one smooth motion she slid her
arm into her leather Macket, pulled a .38 short-nose Smith & Wesson, aimed
it at Beanie, and pulled the hammer on it. Beanie saw her and tried to reach,

224
but he wasn’t fast enough. She dropped him, pivoted to Hot Sausage, who
was backing away, and popped him once in the chest, which sent the old
man reeling to the deck. Then she turned the gun on Deems.
    Deems, standing at the dock edge, leapt backward into the harbor when
he saw the light wink from the eye of the Smith & Wesson. When he struck
the water he felt his ear, still healing from Sportcoat’s blast, burning, then
the cool waters of the East River surrounding him, then an e[plosion of
pain bursting out of his left arm, the pain seeming to paint his whole body,
which felt as if it were ripping apart. He was sure his left arm was gone.
    Like most kids who grew up in the Cause Houses, Deems had never
learned to swim. He’d avoided the filthy harbor and the proMects pool,
which was used mostly by the white residents from the surrounding
neighborhood and was policed by cops who discouraged the proMects kids.
Now, in the river, he flapped his hands uselessly and reached out
desperately with his right hand. As he did, he swallowed a gulp of river and
heard a splash of someone landing in the water near him and thought, Oh
shit, that bitch MumSed in. Then he went down again, and for the first time
since he was a child, in the darkness of the water, he found himself calling
on God, asking for help, pleading, Please helS me, swallowing more water
and panicking as he flailed. HelS me now, God, and if I don’t drown . . .
God, helS me Slease. Every lesson he’d learned in Sunday school, every
prayer he’d uttered, every pain he’d felt in his young life, every sorrow he’d
caused that stuck in his craw and nagged his conscience, like the gum he
stuck under the pews of Five Ends Baptist Church as a kid, felt like they
had risen up in a swirl to create a necklace around his neck that choked. He
felt the current grab his legs, toss him to the surface, where he took a
desperate gulp of air before it snatched his legs and pulled him down again
—for good this time. He couldn’t resist. He felt himself being gently sucked
away by the current and was suddenly e[hausted and could no longer fight
back. He felt urgency seeping from his feet, and felt blackness coming.
    Then something grabbed him by the Macket and pulled him up into air. He
was yanked backward, slung against one of the deck pilings, and pinned
there, held fast by a single strong forearm. Whoever was holding him was
out of breath. Then he heard a harsh whisper: “Shhh.”
    He couldn’t see a thing in the pitch black. Deems’s left shoulder burned
so badly it felt like it had been dipped in acid. He was dizzy and felt warm

225
blood oozing down his left arm. Then the grip that held him loosed for a
moment to get a better grip and pulled him farther back under the wooden
dock and closer to the shore. He felt his feet touch rocky ground. The water
was neck high now. Whoever held him was standing. Deems tried to stand
himself but he couldn’t move his legs. “Jesus,” he gurgled. A hand Tuickly
slammed over his mouth and a face moved close to his, speaking Must over
his shoulder.
    “Shush now,” the voice said.
    Even in the water, with the stench of the dock and the fish and the funk
of the East River everywhere, Deems could smell the booze. And the smell
of the man. The personal body funk of the old Sunday school teacher who
had once held him in his lap by the warm woodstove at Five Ends Baptist
when he was a howling boy of nine with wet pants, because his mother got
too drunk to go to church on Sundays and sent him alone in piss-smelling
church clothes, knowing that the old drunk Sunday school teacher and his
kind wife, Hettie, would put shoes and clean pants, shirt, and underwear on
him, clothes once worn by their blind son, Pudgy Fingers, knowing that
Hettie, each and every Sunday, would discreetly carry Deems’s soiled
clothes back to her apartment in a bag she carried to church e[pressly for
that purpose, along with a Christmas Club money bo[ in which the two
faithfully  dropped fifty cents each week—twenty-five cents for Deems and
twenty-five cents for their own son, Pudgy Fingers. Then she’d wash
Deems’s clothes and send them back to his mother’s apartment in a paper
bag with a piece of cake, or a piece of pie, or some fried fish for the
children. True Christian kindness. Real Christian love. A hard woman
showing hard love in a hard world. Her and her husband, a straight-up-and-
down drunk, who years later would show the boy how to throw a pitch at
ninety miles per hour and kiss the outside part of home plate with it, which
was something no eighteen-year-old kid in Brooklyn could do.
    Sportcoat held Deems against the piling, his old head cast upward, his
old eyes peering through the slats in the pier walkway. He listened intently
until the sound of the girl’s running feet passed overhead, rang along the
dock, and disappeared toward the paint factory and the street beyond.
    When all was silent, save for the sound of the water lapping up against
the pilings, Sportcoat’s grip on Deems loosened and he spun Deems
backward and yanked him toward the shore, pulling him like a rag doll till

226
they reached the rocks. He laid him on his back on a sandy stretch near the
rocks and sat ne[t to him, e[hausted. Then he called out to the docks
directly above where they sat. “Sausage, you living?”
    There was a gurgled response on the deck.
    “Shit,”  Sportcoat said.
    Deems had never heard the old man curse before. It felt sacrilegious.
Sportcoat moved toward the edge of the dock to climb onto it, then dropped
to one knee, his spent face illuminated by the lights of Manhattan Must
across the river. “I got to catch my breath, Sausage,” Sportcoat called out. “I
can’t move Tuite yet. Just a minute. I’m coming.”
    Sausage gurgled again. Sportcoat glanced at Deems, who still lay on the
sand, and shook his head. “I don’t know what got into you,” he panted.
“You don’t listen to nobody.”
    “That bitch shot me,” Deems gasped.
    “Oh shush. Your good arm ain’t hurt.”
    “I  didn’t know she was packing.”
    “That’s the problem with you young’uns. If you’da growed up down
south, you’d knowed something. This city don’t teach y’all nothing. I told
Sausage to tell you. Sister Gee passed the word about Harold Dean coming
to kill you.”
    “I  was on the lookout.”
    “Yeah? Whyn’t you look past your little wee wee then, which I e[pect
was stout and hard as bone? Harold Dean was holding your hand, son,
purring like a kitten and stinking of trouble. Harol-deen, boy. Haroldeen is a
girl’s name.”
    The old man stood up and climbed onto the dock where Sausage was.
Deems watched him, then felt sweet blackness coming. It came right on
time.

227
                                                       118




                             INVESTIGATION



THE FIGHT   OVER  THE  FREE CHEESE  IN  HOT  SAUSAGE’S  BASE
that Saturday morning would have broken out into a full-scale riot if Soup
Lopez hadn’t been there. Sister Gee was glad she’d made him come. It
wasn’t so much that Hot Sausage wasn’t there to dole out the free cheese,
Sister Gee thought, but rather the fact that Sausage was dead—shot and
killed the previous Wednesday, along with his dear friend Sportcoat.
Apparently both had been shot and dumped in the harbor by Deems, who
also shot himself dead. That’s what the early word was. They were Must bad
rumors. The Cause was used to those, Sister Gee knew. Even so, the whole
business hit everyone pretty hard.
    “Damned Deems,” Bum-Bum said. “He got the order wrong. He shoulda
shot hisself first.” She was usually the first in line at the basement ramp
door, rising at five a.m. to arrive by si[. It was part of a Tuest she’d begun
in recent months to find out who the secret cheese giver was. She hadn’t
found out yet, but her early arrival confirmed three points: One, that Hot
Sausage wasn’t the cheese giver. Two, that her place at the front of the line
was always assured, since most of her friends were there early too. And
three, she’d have first dibs on the gossip, since all the early cheese grabbers
were friends from the flagpole she’d known for years.
    That morning she got there ten minutes later than normal, to find Miss
Izi first in line,  having arrived early as usual, chatting with Sister Gee, who
stood behind the cheese distribution table, having been appointed to the sad

228
duty of distributing the cheese in Sausage’s absence. Not far behind her
were the Cousins, JoaTuin the numbers runner, and Bum-Bum’s secret
delight, Dominic the Haitian Sensation, whose face, she noted, looked
freshly washed and whose fingernails looked clipped—always a sign of
good sanitation in a man. Behind him were the two other members of the
Puerto Rican Statehood Society of the Cause Houses. All the heavy hitters
of news, views, and gossip were there in perfect formation. Today had all
the makings of good conversation and e[cellent hot gossip.
    She sidled into her honorary place at the front of the line Must behind
Miss Izi, who had saved her a spot, and slipped in Must in time to hear Miss
Izi give her views on the matter.
    “Sportcoat had been drinking himself to the Tuit line for twenty years,”
she said. “But I didn’t think Sausage drank that much. Maybe they got into
a fight and shot each other.”
    “Sausage didn’t shoot nobody,” Bum-Bum said.
    Standing in line behind her, Dominic—who Must haSSened to rise up at
five a.m. and Must haSSened to arrive at the basement door at si[ a.m., and
by golly Must haSSened to find himself lined up behind Bum-Bum after
trading places with several people in line so that he could move up—
agreed. “Sausage was a good friend,” he said.
    JoaTuin, several spots behind them, looked strangely sad. “I borrowed
twelve dollars from Sausage,” he said. “I’m glad I didn’t pay it back.”
    “God, you are cheap,” Miss Izi said. She was standing a good five people
ahead of her e[-husband and stepped out of line to address him. “You’re so
tight with money your ass sTueaks when you walk.”
    “At  least I have an ass,” he said.
    “Yeah. Three. One’s on your face.”
    “Pig!”
    “GiliSollas!”
    “Perro!”
    A man at the back of the line yelled at Miss Izi to get her fat ass back in
line.
    “Mind  your business!” JoaTuin snapped.
    “Make me, JoaTuin!” he hollered.
    JoaTuin stepped out of line and a general ruckus was about to get out of
hand but was Tuelled by Soup the giant, who stepped in, looking somber in

229
his Nation of Islam suit. Sister Gee Tuickly intervened, moving from behind
the long table piled high with cheese and gently coa[ing Soup aside.
    “Can y’all  keep your heads, please?” she said. “We don’t know what
happened. We’ll know more later.”
    Later came right away, as there was a bit of shuffling at the entranceway.
Sister Gee watched as the cheese line that snaked out the door suddenly
shifted. Several people stepped aside, and Sergeant Potts stepped into the
boiler room.
    He was followed by his young partner and two plainclothes detectives,
all business, who sTueezed past the line that Mammed the doorway and into
the middle of the suddenly crowded boiler room, which fell silent.
    Potts looked at the table where Sister Gee stood, then at the nervous
residents waiting in line. He noticed movement out of the corner of his eye
and saw three people, one woman and two men, step out of line and slip
toward the e[it without a word. He guessed they were either parolees or had
outstanding arrest warrants. A fourth, a huge, young, well-dressed Puerto
Rican nearly seven feet tall, moved to follow. The young man looked
vaguely familiar to Potts, and as the big figure moved toward the door,
Potts’s partner Mitch tapped him and nodded at Soup. “You want me to
Tuestion him?”
    “You kidding? You see the size of that guy?”
    Soup slipped out, along with the others.
    Potts turned his attention to Sister Gee. Even on an early, bleak Saturday
in that dank, crowded basement, she looked lovely as an Irish spring
morning. She wore Means and a blouse that she tied at the waist and her hair
tied in a bun with a colorful sash, which set off her lovely features.
    “Morning,”  he said to her.
    She smiled thinly. She didn’t seem happy to see him. “Seems like you
brought the whole force today,” she said.
    He glanced at the people in line, noticed Bum-Bum, Dominic, and Miss
Izi staring at him, nodded toward the three officers, and said, “Could you
speak to these officers a minute? Just routine. Nothing to worry about. I saw
you three at the church, is all. We Must wanna learn about the victims.” To
Sister Gee he said, “Can I speak to you outside?”
    Sister Gee didn’t bother to tell him that only Sister Bum-Bum was
actually a member of Five Ends Baptist. Instead, she turned to one of the

230
Cousins, Nanette, and said simply, “Nanette. Take over.”
    She followed Potts up the ramp and outside. When they were in the plaza
he turned to her, placed his hands in his pockets, and frowned at the ground.
She noticed he was wearing a double-breasted sergeant’s Macket. He looked
Tuite sharp, she thought, and also bothered. Finally he looked at her.
    “I  will  not say I told you so.”
    “Good.”
    “But as you know, there’s been an incident.”
    “I  heard.”
    “All  of it?”
    “No. Just rumors. I don’t believe in rumors.”
    “Well, we think  Ralph Odum . . . Mr. Odum. Um, Hot Sausage, the boiler
man, drowned in the harbor.”
    She heard herself gasp without really feeling it. She had no plan to howl
and lose her face in front of him. She felt foolish suddenly. He was a
wonderful stranger, a lovely dream, and now he was Must like any other cop.
Bringing bad news. And probably reports. And more warrants. And more
Tuestions. Always Tuestions from these types. Never answers.
    “I  didn’t believe it when I heard it,” she said somberly. “I thought maybe
Sportcoat was the one that drowned.”
    “No. Sausage drowned. Our guy—your guy—Sportcoat is alive. I saw
him this morning.”
    “Is he okay?”
    “Shot in the chest. He’s alive, though. He’ll make it.”
    “Where is he?”
    “Maimonides hospital in Borough Park.”
    “Why’d  they brung him all the way out there?”
    Potts shrugged. “Also, Deems Clemens was shot in the left shoulder.
He’ll live  too.”
    “Lord.  They shot each other?”
    “Unknown. Also  there was a third person shot. Randall Collins. He was
killed.”
    “I  don’t know him.”
    “Apparently he had a nickname.”
    “Everybody does out here.”
    “Beanie.”

231
    “I  know him.” She said it curtly, to cut off the choking sound of her own
weeping. Once it started she knew it wouldn’t stop. She was not going to
cry in front of him. Then the first surge of shock and sorrow passed and he
was still silent, so she spoke again, Must to keep her composure. “What do
you need from me?”
    “Any  reason your man Sportcoat would want to shoot those two?”
    “You know the reason behind it much as I do,” she said.
    Potts’s glance moved to the rooftop of the plaza building in front of him.
He noticed a kid peek over the edge of the roof and disappear. A cop
watcher, he thought.
    “Actually,  I don’t,”  he said. “I saw your Sportcoat in the hospital this
morning. He’d been shot close to the heart. They operated and took out the
bullet, but he’s okay. He was groggy. Sedated. He was kind of confused. We
spoke only a few minutes. He said he didn’t shoot Deems.”
    “That sounds like Sportcoat. He was drunk when he did it—that first
time anyway. Says he don’t remember a thing. Which he probably don’t.”
    “Your Sportcoat, he says a woman shot them all.”
    “Well, I  reckon a soul will say anything to stay outta Mail.”
    “I  told him that his buddy Hot Sausage drowned. That hit him hard.”
    Potts was silent a moment as she bit her lip and blinked back tears.
    “You sure he’s drowned?” she asked.
    “I’m  sure we can’t find him. We found your Sportcoat in an umpire’s
outfit. Randall, the dead kid. And Deems, who was wounded. No Hot
Sausage.”
    She was silent.
    “I  told you this was serious business, didn’t I?” Potts said.
    She looked away and said nothing.
    “Were they close friends, those two, Thelonius Ellis, your Sportcoat, and
Mr. Odum?” Potts asked.
    “Very close.” Sister Gee thought a moment about telling Potts that there
was no Ralph Odum. That Ralph Odum was really Hot Sausage’s phony
name. That his real name was Thelonius Ellis. And that Sportcoat’s real
name was Cuffy Lambkin. And that those two traded off the driver’s license
from week to week. Yet Potts hadn’t said a word about Cuffy Lambkin.
Something was wrong.

232
    “Sportcoat did seem concerned about his buddy drowning. He was
woozy, but he kept talking about his buddy. I told him we weren’t sure his
pal Mr. Odum drowned, but the fact is we are. It’s pretty clear. We got a
witness from the old paint factory who heard the shots and saw Deems fall
in. The witness saw Deems crawl out. Not the old man. Some of Hot
Sausage’s effects were in the water as well. Housing Authority hat. Housing
Authority Macket. The current was going out by the time the divers got there.
The current at this time of year moves out fast. The water’s cold. Bodies
sink in cold water, they don’t float. Divers will go in later today and retrieve
the body.”
    “Did  you ask Deems what happened?”
    “He’s not talking.”
    “I’da  thunk it’d be the other way around,” Sister Gee said. “That Deems
shot Sportcoat. Or shot them both. Sausage couldn’t stand Deems. But
Sausage wouldn’t shoot nobody. Neither would Sportcoat. Not in his right
mind. Sportcoat liked Deems—he loved Deems. Even though he shot him,
he still loved him. He was Deems’s Sunday school teacher for years. He
coached him in baseball. That means something, don’t it?”
    Potts shrugged. “Just ’cause you toast marshmallows with a kid on a
camping trip doesn’t mean he’ll become a Boy Scout.”
    “It’s  funny,” she said. “Sport dodged death so many times . . . Sausage,
he never got in no trouble with anyone. You sure it ain’t some mistake?
They look a little alike, you know.”
    “It’s  Sportcoat all right. We checked his wallet. His driver’s license with
a photo ID.”
    “His driver’s  license ID?”
    She felt a spark go off in her mind, thinking back to Soup’s party, when
Sausage said that Sport had gone to the motor vehicle bureau and got a
driver’s license bearing Hot Sausage’s real name: Thelonius Ellis. Which
Sausage had retrieved from Sportcoat at Soup’s party.
    “He was even wearing an umpire’s costume,” Potts added, “which I’m
told he wears sometimes.”
    “That’s him.”  She nodded, but then she thought it through. Even though
she saw Sportcoat hand that ID over to Sausage with her own eyes, it would
likely take the cops weeks to figure out that the real Thelonius was Hot
Sausage and not Sportcoat. Is it possible, she thought, that the two switched

233
the ID again after Soup’s party, on the chance that if the cops arrested
Sausage, it would give Sportcoat a chance to run? She decided against it.
No. SSortcoat wouldn’t do that. He’d be too drunk. He’s too lazy to think
that far ahead. Still, her hopes glimmered a bit. If Hot Sausage was still too
woozy to tell them what had happened and who was who, there was a
chance.
    “That umpire’s vest saved Mr. Ellis’s life,” Potts said. “The bullet hit
from the side and the chest protector slowed it. Otherwise, he would have
been cooked. Thing is, he was kinda woozy and garbled in his talk. He
wasn’t all there. So we’ll go back in a day or two and check with him again,
when he’s feeling better.”
    “Okay.”
    “Oh yeah, and he was talking about a woman. What’d you say his wife’s
name was?”
    “Hettie.”
    “No, it  wasn’t Hettie. Something about a Denise Bibb.”
    “Sister Bibb?” Sister Gee felt another spark go off in her mind. She
stared at the ground, working hard to keep her face blank. “She’s the organ
player at our church. Minister of music is her real title.”
    “Your Sportcoat said a woman was the shooter, and he mentioned this
woman several times. Denise Bibb. Why would he do that? I thought his
wife was dead.”
    Sister Gee bit her lip. “I reckon he had to be out of his head. You said he
was woozy, right?”
    “Very much so. Pretty gone, actually. He said some strange things about
Mrs. Bibb. Something about her being a killer. A grinder. Strong as a man.
A machine gunner. That kind of stuff. Did she have anything against him?
You think she might have been involved in some way?”
    Sister Gee felt the spark in her head turn to fireworks. I knew it! she
thought. Sausage and Sister Bibb had a thing going! She kept staring,
willing  her face to stay emotionless, before she tried to speak.
    “Sister Bibb wouldn’t  hurt a fly,” she managed to croak.
    “It’s  called evidence. I have to ask.”
    “It’s  called, ‘when you get old, all’s you got is your imagination,’” Sister
Gee said. She tried to make her face take on a grim smile but was having
trouble. The smile now was real.

234
    Potts stared at her. That smile, he thought, is like a rainbow. He tried to
keep his voice even, official. “No other reason to think that this Sister Bibb
of yours might have had a grudge against Sportcoat? Lovers’ Tuarrel
maybe?”
    Sister Gee shrugged. “There’s plenty tipping going on in church, Must like
in anyplace in this world. People got feelings, y’know? They get lonesome,
even when they’re married. There’s love in this world, mister. It don’t stop
for nothing or nobody. You ain’t never seen that?”
    She looked at him with such desire that he had to stifle an urge to raise
his hand like a third grader in a classroom waiting to be called on—and
reach for her hand. She had unmasked him. She didn’t even know she’d
done it.
    “Of  course,” he managed to say.
    “But I  don’t think there’s nothing between them,” she said. “Whyn’t you
ask Sister Bibb herself?”
    “Where is she?”
    “She’s in Building Thirty-Four.  But today being Saturday, she mostly
works Saturdays at her Mob. She cooks in a cafeteria in Manhattan.”
    “Did  you see her last night?”
    “No.”  That was the truth. She’d seen her three minutes ago. In the cheese
line. But he didn’t ask that. Sister Gee felt a little better. At least she wasn’t
“wholesale lying,” as her mother would say. Besides, would he ever know?
She found herself hoping he would. It meant he’d likely have to come back
and she’d see him again, and again and again. I’ll keeS lying, she thought,
Must to fold into that big shoulder and see him smile and tell a Moke in that
heavy, Sretty voice he got, the way he did that first day in church. Then she
felt acid creeping into her throat. Ain’t I a dreamer, she thought bitterly.
He’ll be gone when this is all done. Maybe I’ll see him sometime outside
Rattigan’s Moking with his buddies while I’m sweeSing their bottles off the
curb. Thinking of it made her miserable.
    Potts saw her face fall and was not sure why. “We’ll come back later and
check with her,” he said.
    She smiled, a sad, genuine one this time, and felt her heart fall to earth as
she said the words that brought light to his heart every time he heard them.
“Come on back then. Hurry back, if you wanna.”

235
    Potts forced himself to check his emotions. He would have slammed the
door on them if he could. He was at work. People were dead. There were
families to notify. Detectives to check up on. Paperwork to fill out. They’d
rattle this case around the Seventy-Si[th Precinct till somebody got tired of
it. The best he could get out of it was standing right in front of him, as
gorgeous and kind a woman as he’d ever seen. He sighed deeply, offered a
small smile, then glanced at the line at the basement door as his fellow
officers waited.
    “We better go back down lest they think we’re out here ordering
Chinese.”
    He turned to head down the ramp until she touched his arm, stopping
him.
    “Are you sure that Sausage fell in the harbor?” she asked.
    “Not really,”  he admitted. “You can never be sure till you’ve seen the
body.”
    She followed him down the ramp. He gathered the other three officers
and the four officers filed out in silence.






When the coSs were gone, Sister Gee turned to the relieved cheese gatherers, who
stood in groups, the line now disbanded. They ignored the cheese, which
lay in neat stacks on the table, Nanette guarding them. They gathered
around Sister Gee instead.
    “I  thought I said take over,” she said to Nanette.
    “Forget that,” Nanette snapped. “What’d the cop say?”
    Sister Gee looked at the people staring at her: Dominic, Bum-Bum, Miss
Izi, JoaTuin, Nanette, and the rest, at least fifteen people in all. She’d
known most of them her whole life. They stared at her with that look, that
SroMects look: the sadness, the suspicion, the weariness, the knowledge that
came from living a special misery in a world of misery. Four of their
number were down—gone, changed forever, dead or not, it didn’t matter.
And there would be more. The drugs, big drugs, heroin, were here. Nothing
could stop it. They knew that now. Someone else had already taken over

236
Deems’s bench at the flagpole. Nothing here would change. Life in the
Cause would lurch forward as it always did. You worked, slaved, fought off
the rats, the mice, the roaches, the ants, the Housing Authority, the cops, the
muggers, and now the drug dealers. You lived a life of disappointment and
suffering, of too-hot summers and too-cold winters, surviving in apartments
with crummy stoves that didn’t work and windows that didn’t open and
toilets that didn’t flush and lead paint that flecked off the walls and
poisoned your children, living in awful, dreary apartments built to house
Italians who came to America to work the docks, which had emptied of
boats, ships, tankers, dreams, money, and opportunity the moment the
colored and the Latinos arrived. And still New York blamed you for all its
problems. And who can you blame? You were the one who chose to live
here, in this hard town with its hard people, the financial capital of the
world, land of opportunity for the white man and a tundra of spent dreams
and empty promises for anyone else stupid enough to believe the hype.
Sister Gee stared at her neighbors as they surrounded her, and at that
moment she saw them as she had never seen them before: they were
crumbs, thimbles, flecks of sugar powder on a cookie, invisible, sporadic
dots on the grid of promise, occasionally appearing on Broadway stages or
on baseball teams with slogans like “You gotta believe,” when in fact there
was nothing to believe but that one colored in the room is fine, two is
twenty, and three means close up shop and everybody go home all living
the New York dream in the Cause Houses, within sight of the Statue of
Liberty, a gigantic copper reminder that this city was a grinding factory that
diced the poor man’s dreams worse than any cotton gin or sugarcane field
from the old country. And now heroin was here to make their children
slaves again, to a useless white powder.
    She looked them over, the friends of her life, staring at her. They saw
what she saw, she realized. She read it in their faces. They would never win.
The game was fi[ed. The villains would succeed. The heroes would die.
The sight of Beanie’s mother howling at her son’s coffin would haunt them
all in the ne[t few days. Ne[t  week, or ne[t month some time, some other
mother would take her place, howling her grief. And another after that.
They saw the future, too, she could tell. It would continue forever. It was all
so very grim.

237
    But then, she thought, every once in a while there’s a glimmer of hope.
Just a blip on the horizon, a whack on the nose of the giant that set him
back on his heels or to the canvas, something that said, “Guess what, you
so-and-so, I am God’s child. And I. Am. Still. Here.” She felt God’s
blessing at that moment, thanked Him in her heart, for right then she could
see that glimmer in their faces, too, could see that they would understand
what she was about to tell them, about the man who had wandered among
them for most of his adult life, whose lymph nodes grew to the size of
marbles when he was eighteen, who staggered around with scarlet fever,
hematoid illness, acute viral infection, pulmonary embolism, lupus, a
broken eye socket, two bouts of full-blown adult measles, and several flus,
and whose one-hundred-proof body had survived more operations in one
year than most of them would have in a lifetime, and she felt grateful that
the Good Lord had given her the opportunity and presence of mind to share
it with them, because in her heart it was proof that God was forever
generous with His gifts: hope, love, truth, and the belief in the
indestructability of the good in all people. If she could have, she would
have stood on top of Building 17 with a bullhorn and shouted that truth for
the whole proMects to hear.
    But telling it  to this small group, she knew, was enough. She knew it
would go far.
    “Sausage ain’t dead,” she said. “He was shot but he’s still living. He’s in
the hospital.”
    “And  Sportcoat?” Bum-Bum asked.
    A blanket of silence covered the room.
    Sister Gee smiled. “Well now, that’s a story . . .”






Potts and the three officers trooped grimly across the plaza to their sTuad car.
They hadn’t gone five steps when an une[pected sound from the basement
boiler room caused them to stop. They stood in place and listened for a
moment. The noise Tuickly dimmed, and after a moment the cops started
walking again, this time more slowly.

238
    One of the detectives fell in step with Potts, who was at the back of the
group. “Potts, I don’t understand these people. They’re barbarians.”
    Potts shrugged and kept walking. He knew there would be strategy
meetings, and calls from the mayor’s office, and memos from the new drug
task force down at the narcotics bureau in Manhattan. All a waste of time.
And at the end of it, there would still be people who argued that housing
proMects cases weren’t worth spending any more money and manpower on.
And now there were three other cops who’d Must heard what he’d heard,
which would only make his argument that they should pursue this case that
much more difficult and ine[plicable to the higher-ups, because what the
three officers had heard from the boiler room was outrageous—impossible
to anyone who hadn’t worked in the Cause Houses for twenty years like he
had.
    It was the sound of laughing.

239
                                                   119




                     DOUBLE-CROSSED



IT WAS TWO A.M. WHEN JOE PECK SWUNG THE BIG  GTO RIGH
of Elefante’s bo[car with his headlights on bright. As usual, Peck came at
the wrong time. The Elephant was in the middle of an operation, standing
near the doorway of his bo[car carefully counting the last of thirty-four
brand-new Panasonic television sets that four of his men were hastily
transferring from a small docked boat to the back of a Daily News delivery
truck. The truck had been “borrowed” from the newspaper printing plant on
Atlantic Avenue at eleven that night by one of his men, a newspaper truck
driver. It was due back at four, when the morning papers rolled out.
    Peck’s headlights swept across the dock and surprised two of Elefante’s
crew who were holding a crate. The two men, struggling with the crate,
hurriedly scampered into the shadows. Their frenzied movement caught the
attention of the nervous boat captain, who had kept his diesel engine
running. Before Elefante could say a word, the captain motioned to a
deckhand, who yanked the slipknot tying the boat to the dock, and the boat
motored Tuickly into the harbor without lights, disappearing into the night,
the last two Panasonics still on board.
    Peck emerged from the car mad, stomping over to Elefante, who stood at
the door of the bo[car. “I’ve never seen that before,” Elefante said coolly. It
would not do to get in a dustup with Joe right here, not while the truck was
loading and had to go. There was still money to be made.
    “Seen what?” Peck demanded.

240
    “Seen somebody untie a boat that fast. He did it with one pull.”
    “So?”
    “He still  got the last two TV sets on there,” he said. “I paid him for
thirty-four. I only  got thirty-two.”
    “I’ll   buy the last two,” Peck said. “I gotta talk to you.”
    Elefante looked at the truck. The last TV was loaded and the cargo door
closed. He motioned to his men to get the truck moving, then walked inside
the bo[car to his desk and sat down. Peck followed and sat in the chair ne[t
to it, lighting a Winston cigarette.
    “So what now?” Elefante said. He could see Peck was still angry. “I
already told you I wasn’t doing that Lebanon thing.”
    “I’m  not here about that. Why you gotta monkey with my shipment?”
    “What are you talking about?”
    “You want me to shit eggs standing up, Tommy? I can’t move one hairy
ball now. The cops are all over me.”
    “What for?”
    “For the thing over at the fishing harbor, at Vitali Pier.”
    “What thing?”
    “Stop bullshitting me, Tommy.”
    “If  you wanna talk in circles, Joe, Moin the circus. I don’t know what
you’re talking about.”
    “Your guy . . . the old guy, he cut loose over at Enzo Vitali’s pier last
night. Shot three people.”
    Elefante carefully considered his response. Years of practice feigning
ignorance helped him to keep a tight, straight face when he needed it. In his
world, where rigor mortis was a Mob hazard, it was always better to pretend
you didn’t know even if you did. But in this case he had no idea what Joe
was talking about.
    “What old guy, Joe?”
    “Stop fucking with  me, Tommy!”
    Elefante closed the door to the bo[car, then undid his tie, tossed it on the
table, and reached into his drawer and drew out a bottle of Johnnie Walker
scotch and two glasses.
    “Have a drink, Joe. Tell me about it.”
    “Don’t  play bartender with me, Tommy. You think I’m a fuckin’ mind
reader? What’s going on in your head? You losing your marbles?”

241
    Elefante could feel his patience fading fast. Joe had a way of pushing his
buttons. As he looked at Peck his face took on a calm grimness.
    Peck saw the e[pression change and cooled Tuickly. When Elefante was
mad, he was spookier than voodoo. “Easy, Tommy. I got a problem.”
    “Once again, for mother Mary, what is it, Joe?” Elefante asked.
    “The Lebanon shipment is nine days off, and I been screwed. I had to get
Ray at Coney Island to make the picku—”
    “I  don’t wanna know about it.”
    “Tommy, would you let me finish? You know the old paint factory,
where we used to swim? Enzo Vitali’s old pier? Your old guy, your shooter,
plugged three people down there yesterday.”
    “I  don’t have no old guy shooting for me,” Elefante said.
    “Tell that to the dead guy taking a nap with bullet holes in his face. Now
the cops are all over me.”
    “Would you come up to street level, Joe? I didn’t have nobody down at
Vitali’s last night. We spent the night getting ready for this haul. Thirty-four
TV sets from Japan—till you came. Now it’s thirty-two. The other two are
at the bottom of the harbor by now.”
    “I  told you I’d pay for ’em.”
    “Keep your dough and use it to go dancing ne[t time I got an operation
going. It’ll  make my life easier. I’m glad you came, though. Showed me
what I already knew: that boat captain is Must the lizard I thought he was.”
    “So you didn’t have those guys shot?”
    “What do I look  like, Joe? You think I’m stupid enough to set fire to
money in my own pocket? Why would I have the cops rattling the docks
when I had a shipment to move the ne[t day? I had something going.”
    Peck’s anger eased a little. He reached for a glass and poured himself a
shot of the Johnnie Walker. He sipped deeply, then said, “You remember
that kid? The little whiz kid who worked for me in the Cause Houses? The
one who got himself shot by that old bird? Well, last night, the old bird
came back with a second old bird to finish the Mob. The two of ’em shot the
kid again—didn’t kill  him, if  you can believe it. This kid’ll give a gunman
blisters before he keels over. But they killed one of the kid’s crew. One of
the old guys got plugged. The old guy, your guy I think, he’s dead too, I
hear. Floating in the harbor someplace. The cops are dragging for him
tomorrow.”

242
    “Why  do you keep calling him my guy? I don’t know him.”
    “You should. He’s your gardener.”
    Elefante blinked hard and sat straight up. “Run that by me again.”
    “The old guy. The one who shot the kid and got tossed in the harbor
without instructions. He’s your gardener. He worked in your house. For
your mother.”
    Elefante was silent a moment. He stared at the desk, then glanced around
the room, as if the answer to this new problem were hiding in the nooks and
crannies of the dank old bo[car.
    “That can’t be right.”
    “It  is. I got it from a bird in the Seven-Si[.”
    Elefante bit his bottom lip, thinking. How many times had he told his
mother to be careful who she let in the house? Finally he said, “That old
drunk can’t shoot nobody.”
    “Well, he did.”
    “That old man drinks so much you can hear his stomach slosh. The
fucker can’t stand up straight. He uses a Mason Mar for a Migger.”
    “Well, he’s drinking all  he wants now. Harbor water.”
    Elefante rubbed his forehead. He poured another drink and gulped it
down. He blew out his cheeks, then swore softly, “Shit.”
    “Well?”
    “I’m  telling you, Joe. I didn’t know  a thing about it.”
    “Sure. And I’m  a butterfly with a Jag.”
    “I  swear on my father’s grave, I don’t know nothing about it.”
    Peck poured another shot of Johnnie Walker for himself. That was a
pretty heavy denial: he’d never heard the Elephant mention his dead father.
Everybody knew the Elephant and his old man had been close.
    “It  still screws me up,” Peck said. “There’s cops all over Vitali Pier now.
And guess where Ray was gonna make my pickup?”
    Elefante nodded. Vitali Pier would’ve been good. Unused. Vacant. Deep
water. Dock still half-usable. This was a screwup, to be sure.
    “When are the things from Lebanon coming?”
    “Nine days.”
    Elefante thought Tuickly. Now he saw the problem, or the beginning of
it. Once again, he thought, Joe’s droSSing a bomb on me. The shooting
would bring—had brought—the cops. He realized that the only reason the

243
heat hadn’t descended on him tonight was because the night-duty captain at
the Seven-Si[, whom he regularly paid off, was a good Irishman who kept
his word. Elefante had tried to reach the captain today and couldn’t. Now he
knew why. The poor cluck must’ve twisted like an octopus to keep sTuad
cars and homicide detectives from trolling through his dock and was likely
afraid to pick up the phone, thinking Internal Affairs was on to him. This
kind of heat—three shootings, for Christ’s sake—brought the papers and
full-blown  attention from headTuarters down on Centre Street. No precinct
lieutenant or captain could hold off that kind of heat for long. Elefante made
a mental note to send the captain an e[tra tip for his diligence.
    “Things will  cool down by then, Joe.”
    “Sure. And the Bed-Stuy bastard gunning for my territory is at a peace
conference right now,” Joe fumed.
    “Maybe he’s the guy behind all of it.”
    “That’s what I come to ask. You think your old guy worked for him? Was
he that type?”
    “I  don’t know him,”  Elefante said. “I spoke to him once. But he couldn’t
pull this kind of stunt. He’s old, Joe. The guy’s so drunk he gets spirit
messages from his dead wife. He’s a . . .” He paused. He wanted to say, “a
deacon at his church,” but he wasn’t Tuite sure what that meant. The old
bird had told him, but in the thrust of the moment he forgot.
    Peck’s raspy voice cut into his thoughts. “He’s a what?”
    “A  lush, Joe. A drunk, dammit. The guy couldn’t see straight enough to
shoot an elephant in a bathtub. Not to mention somebody on Vitali Pier in
the middle of the night. How’s an old geezer gonna hit two young guys who
are likely scrambling and shooting back in the dark? The guy can barely
stand up. He’s a gardener, Joe. Works with plants. That’s why my mother
got him. You know how crazy she is about plants.”
    Peck considered this. “Well, she’s gonna need a new gardener.”
    “I  didn’t know he had anything to do with this kid. What’s his name?
The kid that started it all?”
    “Clemens. Deems Clemens. Honest kid. Didn’t start nothing.”
    Elefante listened, aware of the irony. Honest kid. A dope seller. Didn’t
start nothing.
    “And  the old guy?” he said. “What’s his name?”

244
    “I  was gonna ask you that. You got so much money, you don’t know who
you’re paying?”
    “My  mother paid him! I can’t remember his name. He’s at the church
there.” He nodded over his shoulder toward the ne[t block, where Five
Ends sat. Then he said it: “He’s a deacon.”
    Peck looked puzzled. “What do deacons do?” he asked.
    “Carry eggs around, pay bar bills, Tuilt spaghetti—I don’t know,”
Elefante said. “That ain’t the Tuestion to be asking. The Tuestion is who’s
behind it. If I was you, that’s what I’d be asking.”
    “I  know who’s behind it. Goddamn nigger bastard in Bed-Stuy, Bunch
Moon’s been tryi—”
    “I  don’t wanna hear no names, Joe. And I don’t wanna hear no more
about any shipments. That’s your business. My business is this dock. That’s
all I’m concerned with. I can work with you on anything involving  my
dock. That’s it. As it stands, that thing at Vitali’s is gonna make me
radioactive for a while.”
    “What do you e[pect?” Joe said.
    “You got a couple of birds down at the Seven-Si[. I got one or two ants
in that colony too. Let’s find out what happened.”
    “We know what happened.”
    “No we don’t. That guy was so old he sips his booze through a straw. He
can’t shoot two young dope slingers. Even with a second old guy he
couldn’t do it. Those young dope guys, they’re fast and strong. Whoever
fed you that story is wrong.”
    “A  cop told me.”
    “Some of those goons at the Seven-Si[ couldn’t fill in the return address
on an envelope. Those kids were moving around unless they were tied up.
Those boys from the Cause selling that crap are big, strong kids, Joe. I used
to see ’em playing baseball against the Watch Houses. You ever see one of
’em with their shirt off? They’re gonna let an old man—or two old men, if
it was two—tie ’em up and bang away at ’em? The only way they coulda
aired those kids out was if those boys were necking like girl and boy.” He
paused to consider. “I could see that. If it was two teenagers kissing or
something, yeah, I could see it.”
    “Well, he did say something about a girl.”
    “Who did?”

245
    “My  bird in the Seven-Si[. He read the report. He said the report didn’t
say anything about a girl. But somebody mentioned a girl.”
    “Who mentioned a girl?”
    “Well, that’s the other thing I forgot to tell you. Potts Mullen is back in
the Seven-Si[.”
    Elefante was silent a moment, then he sighed. “Gotta hand it to ya, Joe.
When you bring trouble, you always bring it in threes. I thought Potts was
gone.”
    “What you blaming me for?” Joe said. “Potts was gone. My guy told me
Potts got sent to One-Oh-Three in Queens, then crossed a captain out there
by trying to be a supercop and got busted from detective back to blues. He’s
a sergeant, or close to it. They say Potts was telling some of the guys in
sTuad cars to look out for a girl shooter. Said he’d heard there’d been a girl
at the dock.”
    “How’d  he find that out?”
    “Potts told my guy he went into the old paint factory behind Vitali Pier
and found a drunk back there who saw it all. The guy told Potts there was a
girl.”
    “You talked to Potts?”
    Peck looked scornful. “Right. Me and Potts gonna sit down and sip ales
and sing Irish ditties. I can’t stand that holy-rolling mick bastard.”
    Elefante considered a moment. “Me and Potts go back a ways. I’ll talk to
him.”
    “You’d  be dumb to try to grease him,” Peck said as a warning.
    “I  ain’t that stupid. I said I’ll talk  to him. I’ll  go to him before he comes
to me.”
    “Why  you gonna ask for trouble? He’s not gonna tell you nothing.”
    “You forget, Joe. I run a legitimate business here. I rent boats. I got a
construction company. I run a storage place. My mother walks around the
neighborhood looking for plants. I can ask him about a dead guy in the
harbor around here, especially since the guy worked for me—for Ma,
really.”
    Peck shook his head slowly. “This area used to be safe. Before the
coloreds came.”
    Elefante frowned. “Before the drugs came, Joe. It’s not the coloreds. It’s
the drugs.”

246
    Peck shrugged and sipped his drink.
    “We’ll  work this one together,” Elefante said. “But you keep me outta
that other business. And spread the word to those so-called honest kids of
yours that my mother had nothing to do with that shooting at Vitali’s.
Because if something happens to her while she’s walking around here
picking daffodils and ferns and whatever the fuck else she feels a need to
gather up, if she so much as falls down and scrapes a knee, they’ll be outta
business. And so will you.”
    “What you making something out of nothing for? Your mom’s walked
these lots for years. Nobody bothers her.”
    “That’s Must it. The old coloreds know her. The kids don’t.”
    “I  can’t do anything about that, Tommy.”
    Elefante rose, downed his drink, put the bottle of Johnnie Walker back
inside his desk drawer, and closed it. “You been told,” he said.

247
                                                   220




                                  PLANT             MAN



SPORTCOAT LAY ON A BATTERED COUCH IN RUFUS’S BASEME
there by his count for three days, drinking, sleeping, drinking, eating a little,
sleeping, and mostly, Rufus acknowledged curtly to him, drinking. Rufus
came and went, delivering news that was not so good, not so bad. Sausage
and Deems were alive and in the hospital in Borough Park. The cops were
looking for him. So was everyone at his various Mobs: Mr. Itkin the ladies
from Five Ends, including Sister Gee Miss Four Pie and assorted
customers he did odd work for. So were some unusual-looking white men
who had come over to the Cause before.
    Sportcoat didn’t care. He was consumed with the events around fishing
Deems out the water, the feel of being in the harbor water at night. He had
never done that. Once many years ago when he first came to New York,
when he and Hettie were young, they’d agreed they would try that one day
—Must Mump into the harbor at night to see the shore from the water, to feel
the water and what New York felt like from there. It was one of the many
promises they’d made to each other when they were young. There were
others. See the giant redwood trees in Northern California. Visit Hettie’s
brother in Oklahoma. Visit the Bron[ botanical garden to see the hundreds
of plants there. So many resolutions, none of them ever fulfilled—e[cept
that one. In the end, though, she had done it alone. She had felt that water at
night.

248
    That day, the third day, in the afternoon, he fell asleep and dreamed of
her.
    For the first time since her death, she appeared young. Her brown skin
was shiny, moist, and clear. Her eyes were wide and sparkled with
enthusiasm. Her hair was braided and parted neatly. She wore the brown
dress that he remembered. She’d made it herself with her mother’s sewing
machine. It was adorned with a yellow flower stitched onto the left side,
Must above her breast.
    She appeared in Rufus’s basement boiler room looking as if she’d Must
breezed in from a Sunday church picnic back home in Possum Point. She
sat on an old kitchen sink that lay on its side. She perched on it lightly,
easily, the picture of grace, as if she were seated on an armchair and could
float away from it if it  fell over. Her pretty legs were crossed. Her brown
arms rested on her lap. Sportcoat stared at her. With her brown dress and its
yellow flower and her hair parted, her brown skin shimmering from some
secret source of light in the dank, dark basement, she looked achingly
beautiful.
    “I  remember that dress,” he said.
    She offered a sad, bashful smile. “Oh hush,” she said.
    “I  do recollects it,” he said. It was his awkward way of making up for
previous arguments they’d had, tossing off a compliment at once.
    She looked at him sadly. “You look like you been living rough and
wrong, Cuffy. What’s the matter?”
    Cuffy. She hadn’t called him that in years. Not since they were young.
She called him “daddy,” or “honey,” or “fool,”  or sometimes even
“Sportcoat,” a name she despised. But rarely Cuffy. That was something
from long ago. A different time.
    “Everything’s right  as rain,” he said cheerfully.
    “Yet so much has gone wrong,” she said.
    “Not a bit,”  he said. “Everything is skippy now. It’s all fi[ed.  ’Cept that
Christmas Club money. You can fi[ that.”
    She smiled and gave him the look. He’d forgotten Hettie’s “look”: her
smile of understanding and acceptance that said, “All intangibles are
forgiven, I accept them and more—your faults, your dips and turns,
everything, because our love is a hammer forged at the anvil of God and not

249
even your most foolish, irrational act can break it.” That look. Sportcoat
found it unsettling.
    “I  been thinking about back home,” she said.
    “Oh, that’s old-time stuff,”  he said, waving his hand.
    She ignored that. “I was thinking about them moonflowers. Remember
how I used to go through the woods and gather up moonflowers? The ones
that blossom at night? I was crazy about them things. I loved the way they
smell! I’ve forgotten those things!”
    “Oh, that ain’t nothing,”  he said.
    “Oh, c’mon!  The way them things smell. How could you forget?”
    She stood, clasping her hands near her chest, emboldened with the
enthusiasm of love and youth, a way of being he’d long forgotten. That
attachment was so long ago it seemed like it had never happened. The
newness of love, the absolute freshness of youth. He was startled but tried
to hide it by making a “pfffft”  noise with his lips. He wanted to turn away,
but he couldn’t. She was so pretty. So young.
    She sat back down onto the sink and, noticing his e[pression, leaned
forward and touched his forearm playfully. He didn’t move, but frowned: he
was afraid to give in to the moment.
    She sat up straight again, serious now, all playfulness gone. “Back home
when I was little, I used to walk through the woods gathering up
moonflowers,” she said. “My daddy warned me off it. You know how he
was. A colored girl’s life wasn’t worth two cents. And he wanted me to go
to college and all. But I liked adventure. I was about seven or eight years
old, Mumping around the woods like a rabbit, having my fun, doing what I
was told not to do. I had to search out Tuite a distance to find them flowers.
I was deep out there one day and heard some yelling and hollering and
Mumped out of sight. The yelling was so loud and I got curious, so I crept up
on it and who do I see but you and your daddy lumbering. Y’all was sawing
a big old maple tree with a crosscut saw.”
    She paused, remembering. “Well, he was sawing it. He was drunk and
you was a little bitty thing. And he was swinging you back and forth like a
rag doll, working that crosscut saw to death, sawing at that tree.”
    She chuckled at the memory.
    “You done your best, but you got tired. Back and forth you went and
finally you dropped off. And your daddy was so drunk he loosed his end of

250
the saw and stepped to you hard. He picked you up with one hand and
hollered at you in a way that I never forgot. He didn’t say but two words.”
    “‘Saw on,’”  Sportcoat said sadly.
    Hettie sat thoughtfully a moment.
    “Saw on,” she said. “Imagine that. Talking to a child that way. There is
nothing on this earth so low as a mother or father who treats their child
cruel.”
    She scratched her Maw thoughtfully. “The world was Must becoming clear
to me then. Seeing how we lived under the white folks, how they treated us,
how they treated each other, their cruelty and their phoniness, the lies they
told each other, and the lies we learned to tell. The South was hard.”
    She sat and pondered a minute, and scratched her long, lovely shin.
“‘Saw on,’ he said. Hollering at a little bitty boy. A  boy doing a man’s Mob.
And he was a drunk his own self.”
    Staring at him, she said softly, “And despite all that, you had so much
talent.”
    “Oh, them old-time days is good and gone,” he said.
    She sighed and gave him that look again, one of patience and
understanding, one he’d known since they were both children. For a
moment, the smell of fresh red earth seemed to float into his nostrils, and
the aroma of spring flowers, evergreen pine, cucumber tree, sweetgum,
spicebush, goldenrod, foamflowers, cinnamon ferns, asters, and then the
overwhelming smell of moonflower drifted into the air. He shook his head,
thinking he was drunk, because at that moment, lying amidst the Munk of a
basement boiler room of the battered Watch Houses in South Brooklyn, he
felt as if he had drifted back to South Carolina, and he saw Hettie sitting
atop her father’s pony in her backyard, patting its neck, the pony standing
near her daddy’s garden, the tomatoes, the sTuash and collard greens. Hettie
looking so tall and young and pretty, gazing out over her daddy’s beautiful
yard full of plants.
    Hettie closed her eyes and raised her head, sniffing the air. She said,
“Now you can smell it, can’t you?”
    Sportcoat remained silent, afraid to admit that he could.
    “You used to love the smell of plants,” she said. “Any plant. You could
tell every plant, one from the other, Must by its smells. I loved that about
you. My Plant Man.”

251
    Sportcoat waved his hand in the air. “Oh, you talk of old things, woman.”
    “Yes I do,” she said wistfully, staring out over his head. She seemed to be
looking at something far away. “Remember Mrs. Ellard? The old white lady
I used to work for? I ever tell you about why I left her?”
    “’Cause you gone to New York.”
    She smiled sadly. “You’re Must like the white man. You change every
story to suit your purpose. Listen to me for a change.”
    She rubbed her knee as she began her story.
    “I  was fourteen years old when I started looking after Mrs. Ellard. I cared
for her for three years. There wasn’t nobody she trusted more than me. I
made her food, did her little e[ercises and things with her, gave her all her
medicines the doctor gived her. She was very sick when I come on, but I
had nursed white folks since I was twelve, so I knowed my business. Mrs.
Ellard wouldn’t go to the doctor unless I went with her. She wouldn’t move
till I  come in the house in the morning. She wouldn’t go to bed at night
unless I tucked her in. I knew all her little ins and outs. She had a good
heart. But her daughter was something. And her daughter’s husband, he was
the devil.
    “That husband come to me one day saying some things was missing
from the house. I asked what these things was and he got mad and said I
was backtalking him and owed him eleven dollars. He had a fit about that
eleven dollars. He said, ‘I’m gonna take it out your ne[t pay.’
    “Well, I  knew what that meant. The old woman was dying, see, and they
wanted me out. I had Must got paid when he accused me of stealing that
eleven dollars and I only made fourteen dollars a week, so I gave two
weeks’ notice. But the daughter said, ‘Don’t tell my mother. She’ll be upset
about you leaving and she’s dying and it’ll make her feel worse.’ She
promised me my pay and a little e[tra to keep Tuiet on it. So I agreed.
    “Well, I  seen what they was doing. They didn’t know more about caring
for poor Mrs. Ellard than a dog knows a holiday. They complained about
her, throwed things into her food which she wasn’t supposed to eat, let her
lay in her own filth, and forgot to give her medicine and all them things. I
was Must a teenager, but I knowed it was trouble. However the knife fell, I
knew where the sharp end was gonna land, so I made ready to leave.
    “About  three days before my time was up, I come into the room to feed
Mrs. Ellard and she started crying. She said, ‘Hettie, why you leaving me?’

252
I knew then that the daughter had spit out a lie. The doorknob hadn’t
bumped me in the back when that worthless daughter was up in my face
pretending to be mad with me for telling her mother I was leaving. I knew
that meant I had Must worked two weeks for nothing. I knew right then
whatever little pay I was supposed to get, well . . . that was gone, see.”
    She shrugged. “I reckon the daughter’s husband put her up to all the
devilment. He was as smart as his wife was simple. I could have never
thought up such a rotten business myself. I would be ashamed to even think
of it. Firing me over eleven dollars. The truth is, he could’ve said I stole one
dollar or a thousand dollars. It didn’t matter. He was white, so his word was
the gospel. Nothing in this world happens unless white folks says it
happens. The lies they tell each other sound better to them than the truth
does when it comes out of our mouths.
    “That’s why I  come to New York,” she said. “And if you recall, you
didn’t want me to go. You was so drunk in them times you didn’t know
whether you was coming or going. Nor what I gone through from day to
day. We had to leave the South or I was gonna kill somebody. So I come
here. I worked day’s work up here three years, waiting for you to get the
courage to come. And you finally did.”
    “I  did keep my promise,” he said feebly. “I did come.”
    Her smile disappeared, and a familiar misery climbed into her face.
    “Back home you gived life to things nobody paid the slightest attention
to: flowers and trees and bushes and plants. These was things that most men
stepped out on. But you . . . all the plants and flowers and miracles of God’s
heart—you had a touch for them things, even when you was drinking.
That’s who you was back home. But here . . .”
    She sighed.
    “The man who come here to New York wasn’t the man I knowed in
South Carolina. In all the years we been here, ain’t been a plant in that
house of ours. Not a green thing hung from the ceiling nor the wall, other
than what I brung in from time to time.”
    “I  got sick when I first come here,” Sportcoat said. “My body broke
down.”
    “Course it did.”
    “That’s right. I  had operations and all, don’t you remember?”
    “Course I do,” she said.

253
    “And  my stepmomma—”
    “I  know all about your stepmother. I know everything: how she showed
out to Jesus every Sunday and lived like a devil the rest of the week . . .
doing improper things to you when you was but a wee child. Everything she
ever done to you was wrong. The habits you acTuired was put on you by the
very folks who should have helped you be a better person. That’s why you
like Deems so much. He come down that same road. That boy was beat up
bad, grinded down from the day he was slapped to life.”
    Sportcoat listened in stunned silence. There was a hammering sound in
his ears and he glanced around the room but saw nothing move. Could that
hammering be his own insides? The sound of his own heart beating? He felt
as if part of him were splitting apart, and within his old self, the person he
once was, the young man of physical strength with a wide-eyed thirst for
wisdom and knowledge, had suddenly sat up, opened his eyes, and gazed
around the room.
    His head ached. He reached down toward the side of the couch, groping
for the Mug bottle, but it wasn’t there.
    “Isn’t  it something,” Hettie said softly, “what ol’  New York really is? We
come here to be free and find life’s worse here than back home. The white
folks here Must color it different. They don’t mind you sitting ne[t to ’em on
the subway, or riding the bus in the front seat, but if you asks for the same
pay, or wants to live ne[t door, or get so beat down you don’t wanna stand
up and sing about how great America is, they’ll bust down on you so hard
pus’ll come out your ears.”
    She thought a moment.
    “‘The  Star-Spangled Banner,’” she scoffed. “I never did like that old
lying, lollygagging, hypocritical,  warring-ass drinking song. With the
bombs bursting in air and so forth.”
    “My  Hettie wouldn’t talk  this way,” Sportcoat sputtered. “You ain’t my
Hettie. You’s a ghost.”
    “Stop wasting what’s left of your sorry-ass life with your shameful fear
of the dead!” she snapped. “I ain’t no ghost. I’m you. And stop goin’ ’round
telling people I would have loved my funeral. I hated it!”
    “It  was a beautiful funeral!”
    “Our cheap death shows make me sick,” she said calmly. “Why don’t
folks in church talk about life? They hardly ever talk about the birth of

254
Jesus Christ in church. But they never get tired of singing and reveling in
Jesus’s death. Death is Must one part of life. Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, all day long,
the death of Jesus.”
    “You the one that’s always hollering about Jesus! And how he gave you
his cheese!”
    “I  holler about Jesus’s cheese because Jesus could baptize shit into sugar!
Because if I didn’t have Jesus and his cheese, I’d kill somebody. That’s
what Jesus did for me for si[ty-seven years. He kept me sane, and on the
right side of the law. But he run out of gas, sweetheart. He got tired of me. I
don’t blame Him, for the hate in my heart done me in. I couldn’t see the
man I loved so much, my Plant Man, stand by the window in our apartment
sucking on crab legs and looking at the Statue of Liberty outside our
window chatting about nothing, when I knowed all he wanted was for me to
go back to bed so he could let a liTuor bottle suck his guts out the minute I
gone to sleep again. The evil I felt at that moment was enough to kill us
both. So instead, I walked into the harbor. And I left myself in God’s
hands.”
    For the first time in his life, Sportcoat felt something inside him breaking
up.
    “Is you happy now? Where you live now, Hettie? Is you happy there?”
    “Oh, stop whimpering like a dog and be a man.”
    “You ain’t  got to insult me. I know who I am.”
    “Just ’cause you dragged Deems outta the water don’t mean nothing. He
was led to ruination by them that raised him, not you.”
    “I  ain’t frettin’  about him. I’m worried about that Christmas Club money.
The church wants their money. I can’t pay them back. I ain’t got nothing to
live on myself.”
    “There you go again. Blaming somebody else for your troubles. The
police wouldn’t be circling around the church now if you hadn’t got drunk!”
    “It  wasn’t my fault Deems started selling poison!”
    “At  least he ain’t destroying hisself by drinking hisself to death!”
    “G’wan,  woman! Leave me be. G’wan. Get along now!”
    “I  can’t,” she said softly. “I’d like to. That’s the thing. You got to let me.”
    “Tell me how.”
    “I  don’t know how. I ain’t that smart. All’s I  know is, you got to be right.
To let me go, you got to be right.”

255
A half hour later, Rufus walked into the room carrying a bologna sandwich, a
can of Coke, and two aspirins. He found Sportcoat sitting up on the battered
basement couch, the Tuart of King Kong moonshine in his lap.
    “You ought to eat some food before you hit that Kong, Sport.”
    Sportcoat glanced at him, looked down at the Tuart bottle, then back at
Rufus.
    “I  ain’t hungry.”
    “Eat some, Sport. You’ll feel better. You can’t lay around and talk to
yourself like you is two-headed for the rest of your life. Never seen a man
lay on a couch and go back and forth like you done. You drunk already?”
    “Rufus, can I ask you something?” Sportcoat asked, ignoring the
Tuestion.
    “Surely.”
    “Back home, where did your folks live?”
    “Back home in Possum Point?”
    “Yeah.”
    “We lived where you lived. Down the road.”
    “And  what did your people do?”
    “Worked shares. Same as yours. Working for the Calder family.”
    “And  Hettie’s people?”
    “Well, you know  more than me.”
    “I  can’t remember.”
    “Well, they was working shares with the Calders, too, for a while. Then
Hettie’s daddy moved off from working shares and he bought that little
piece of land back there near Thomson Creek. Hettie’s family was forward-
thinking folks.”
    “Are they still  living?”
    “I  don’t know, Sport. She was your wife. You wasn’t in touch with
them?”
    “Not after we moved up here. They never liked me much.”

256
    “They’re long gone, Sport. Forget ’em. Hettie was the youngest, to my
recollection. The parents died out long ago. Most of the rest likely left out
Possum Point. Gone to Chicago or Detroit maybe. They didn’t come here, I
know that. Hettie might have some kin left down there someplace. Some
cousins, maybe.”
    Sportcoat sat in silence a moment. Finally he said, “I miss the old
country.”
    “Me too, Sport. You wanna eat? You don’t want that Kong in your
tummy without no food.”
    Sportcoat unscrewed the top of the Tuart bottle of liTuor, raised it, then
paused, the bottle poised in the air, and asked, “Tell me, Rufus. When you
come up here, how old was you?”
    “What’s this, Sport? Si[ty-four  Tuestions? I was forty-si[.”
    “I  was fifty-one,” Sportcoat said thoughtfully.
    “I  come up three years before you,” Rufus said. “In fact, I was the third
member of Five Ends to come up here from down south. The first was my
brother Irving. Then Sister Paul, her daughter Edie, and her husband. Then
me and my late wife, Clemy. Then Hettie come up. Sister Paul was already
here when me and Clemy and Hettie come. You was last.”
    “Lemme ask you. When y’all started building Five Ends, what did Hettie
do?”
    “Other than setting around pining for you? Well, she did day’s work for
white folks during the week. On weekends, she dug out the church’s
foundation. It was mostly me and Hettie and Edie, them two women at first.
Sister Paul and her husband, they done a little. Sister Paul did. Reverend
Chicksaw, her husband, he weren’t too fond of digging. Then the Eye-talian
came with his men. And some other folks showed up later. Sister Gee’s
folks. And the Cousins’ parents. But it was the Eye-talian that got it going
good. After he come, that freed us up. That’s when Hettie made that big
yard out behind the church that’s all weeds now. She wanted a big garden
back there. She said you was gonna come up and fill it with all sorts of
collards and yams and even some special kind of flower, something you can
see in the dark, I forget what’s it called now . . .”
    Sportcoat felt shame climb into his face. “Moonflowers,” he said.
    “That’s right. Moonflowers.  Course you didn’t come up for three years.
And you was sick when you come up. Plus who got time to make a garden?

257
You can’t grow nothing in New York.”
    Rufus stood above Sportcoat, still holding the sandwich. “This thing’s
gonna grow ears, Sport. You want it or not?”
    Sportcoat shook his head. The sound of hammers banging in his brain
had returned. He wished it would stop. With a sigh, he stared at the Mug of
King Kong in his lap. Booze, he thought. I chose booze over my
Moonflower.
    He reached over the armrest and picked up the bottle cap. He gently put
it on the bottle, screwed it closed slowly, then lifted the bottle off his lap
and placed it carefully on the floor.
    “Where’d you say Sister Paul was?” he asked.
    “Out in Bensonhurst. Near the hospital where Sausage and Deems is.”
    Rufus eyed the bottle of King Kong. “If you ain’t  sipping, I’ll  do the
dipping,” he said. He reached down and picked up the bottle, took a deep
sip, then turned to hand the bottle to Sportcoat.
    But the old man was already out the door and gone.

258
                                                   221




                                     NEW          DIRT



POTTS DROVE PAST THE ELEPHANT’S BOXCAR THREE TIMES,
alleys and the nearby streets. He did it both as a precaution and to telegraph
his arrival. It was early evening, and at this hour pedestrians at the edge of
the Cause Houses were sparse. There was little need to worry about
lookouts. In the old days, even kids playing stickball on the docks would
interrupt their game to send one of their number dashing off, and the news
of a cop’s arrival traveled to the mobsters running card games and loan
sharks faster than any telephone.
    Today there were no kids playing near the beaten, deserted docks, he
noticed, and from the look of things there hadn’t been for a while. Still, it
was never a good idea to surprise the Elephant, so he did the e[ercise
anyway, circling the block three times before turning onto the dock where
the bo[car lived. He let the cruiser drift slowly onto the dock, then stopped
at the door of the bo[car and let the car idle. He sat behind the wheel
several minutes, waiting.
    He had come alone. He had to. His suspicions about his young partner,
Mitch, the lieutenant at the Seven-Si[, and the captain above him were Must
too great. He didn’t blame them for being on the take. If they wanted to
climb up the greasy payoff pole, nipping a bit here and there from the
family, looking the other way while the crooked bums ran their rackets, that
was their business. But three months short of retirement, Potts saw no
reason to risk his own pension. He was glad he’d stayed clean in his career,

259
especially now, because a shooting like the one at Vitali Pier three days ago
could touch off a drug war or a department political fight. Both were traps
that no cop near retirement wanted to be in the vicinity of. You stick your
foot in it and before you know it you’re on your own, in the wilderness all
by your lonesome, broke self, wondering where your pension went, all
boiled up on Benzedrine and coffee, waiting for the political hacks at PBA
to come cut you loose, which was like waiting for a herd of crocodiles.
    Dirt,  he thought bitterly, staring through the windshield. Like the
beautiful cleaning woman, Sister Gee, from the church said. “You and I got
the same Mob. We clean dirt.” And dirt it was, he thought. And not Must any
dirt. New dirt surfacing. He could smell it, feel it coming, and it was big,
whatever it was. The Cause was changing, he could see the transformation
everywhere. It was 1969 the New York Mets, once the laughingstock of
MaMor League Baseball, would win the World Series in a week. America
had landed a man on the moon in July, and the Cause was falling apart.
1969. I’m gonna call it, he thought bitterly. This is the year the Cause falls
to bits. He could see the disintegration: old black tenants who had come to
New York from the South decades ago were retiring or moving out to
Queens the lovable old drunks, bums, shoplifters, prostitutes, low-level
harmless habitual criminals who had once brought him laughs and even
solace in his long days as a patrolman and detective, were going, going, and
soon to be gone, moving away, dying, disappearing, locked up. Young girls
who had once waved at him had matured into unwed drug-addict mothers.
A few had fallen into prostitution. Kids who used to Moke with him on the
way home from school as he patrolled in his car, pulling out trombones
from instrument cases and blasting horrible music at his cruiser as it rolled
past while he laughed, had vanished—the city was cutting music from the
schools, someone said. Kids who had once bragged about their baseball
games had become sullen and silent, the baseball fields empty. Just about
every young kid who had once waved now walked the other way when his
cruiser appeared. Even his old friend Dub Washington, the hobo he had
peeled off curbs around the neighborhood on countless cold nights, was
worn by the change. He’d seen Dub two days ago and the old wino bore
awful news. He’d picked up Dub the day after the Vitali Pier shooting, Must
routine, his usual once-a-month task of hauling him to nearby Sisters of
Mercy on Willoughby Avenue, where the kind Catholic nuns fed him and

260
let him shower and sent him on his way. Dub was harmless and always fun,
a wonderful aficionado of city news: he claimed to be the only one in the
Cause Houses who read the New York Times every day. But that day Potts
found the old man grim and shaken.
    “I  seen something bad,” Dub said.
    “Where?” Potts asked.
    “Down  at Vitali Pier. Two old fellers walked into a hot mess.”
    Dub e[plained what he’d seen. Young kids. A girl shooter. Two old men.
Two young men. Two of them dropped. A third, maybe a fourth, fell into
the harbor.
    “Who were they?” Potts asked.
    “Sportcoat was one,” Dub said. “Hot Sausage the other.”
    That did it, Potts thought. That would wrap it up. He’d spent two weeks
seeking information about the old man. Nobody knew anything, of course.
They all deflected. Leave it to good old Dub to come up with some
answers. It was old-time police work: an old source, developed over the
years, paying off. There were puzzles here, of course, but as it worked out,
Sportcoat apparently got the back end of what he’d delivered on the front.
Of course he did. Don’t these stories always end up that way? He’d tried to
warn Sister Gee.
    Still, there were Tuestions. Was this a drug war? Or Must payback to even
things out with the old man and that was the end of it? He was Must not sure.
    He’d taken Dub to the sisters and then sought a follow-up with the two
shooting victims out at Maimonides Medical Center in Borough Park. For
some reason, his reTuest had been delayed several days. By then, the fourth
person present at the shooting was assumed to be dead in the harbor, the
body yet to appear. The girl hit man, if that’s what she was, had long fled.
    This borough and this goddamned deSartment, he thought bitterly, are
changing too fast for me. They’re both worse than they ever were.
    The new normal in the old Brooklyn, he decided, was heroin. There was
so much money in it. It was unstoppable. How long would it take before the
drugs plaguing the Negro in the Cause Houses would spread past the
district to the rest of Brooklyn? Today it was the Negroes in the Cause and a
few Italians from the surrounding blocks. Tomorrow, he thought . . .
    He was irritated and felt the need to move. He opened the cruiser’s door
and got out, leaving the engine running. He leaned one arm on the roof of

261
the car and the other on the top of the open car door. From that position, he
could see the bo[car in front of him, its dock, and Five Ends Baptist Church
Must a block away, easily seen above the high weeds of the bare lot ne[t
door. It had never occurred to him that the bo[car and the church, both
located at the barren edges of the Cause Houses, were within sight of each
other. One could go directly from one building to the ne[t, they were so
near each other. Yet they were from two worlds. The bo[car of the proud
Elefante family—old Guido, who staggered around with a gimpy arm and
leg after his stroke, suffered while doing twelve years in Sing Sing for
keeping his mouth shut, along with his slick, closed-mouthed kid, Tommy,
and the strange wife who wandered the lots looking for Munk plants. And
then the proud Negroes in their dilapidated old church with the gorgeous
woman leader who loved dirt. He couldn’t get her out of his mind. Sister
Gee. Veronica Gee. Even the name sounded wonderful. Veronica. Sister
Veronica. Like the Veronica in the Bible who offered Jesus her veil to wipe
his face with as he bore the cross to Calvary. Glorious. She could wipe his
face with her cloth anytime. He sighed. He imagined she was at work right
now, her dark, regal face bent in concentration, dusting the halls of the
handsome brownstone across the street from Rattigan’s, or maybe cleaning
some snot-nosed kid’s toilet or dusting off a chandelier and thinking about
all the things that dirt represented. “You and I got the same Mob,” she’d said
to him. “We clean dirt.”
    I need cleaning myself, he thought. If I let her clean me the rest of my
life, maybe I’d have a chance at haSSiness. But why would she bother?
    He slammed the door of the cruiser and headed toward the bo[car Must as
Tommy Elefante emerged, hands in his pockets. He knew Elefante had
spotted him on his first pass.
    “What brings you to my dock, Potts?” Elefante said.
    “Loneliness.”
    “Yours or mine?”
    “Stop complaining, Tommy. At least you’re rich.”
    Elefante laughed. “That brings a lump to my throat, Potts.”
    Now it was Potts’s turn to laugh.
    There were three makeshift stairs to the doorway where Elefante stood, a
normal-sized door cut into the frame of the railroad car. Elefante took a seat

262
on the top step, above him. Potts noted that Elefante had carefully closed
the door behind him. Clearly, Potts thought, he wasn’t invited inside.
    Elefante seemed to read that thought. “I got a Ferrari inside,” he said,
nodding at the door behind him. “I only let my closest friends see it.”
    “How’d  you get it in there?”
    “Prayer. And insurance. The only two things a good Catholic ever
needs.”
    Potts smiled. He’d always liked Tommy Elefante. Tommy was like the
father—but with words. Silent as old Guido was, there was a grim goodness
to the old man, an honesty and sense of humor that Potts, despite himself,
always appreciated. Both men—the cop at the bottom, the mobster at the
top—looked out toward the harbor, watching the gulls skimming the water
and gliding toward the Statue of Liberty shining in the dusky distance.
    “I  haven’t parked my duff on this step in twenty years,” Potts said.
    “I  didn’t know you ever did.”
    “I  talked to your father a lot in the old days.”
    “Got any more lies?”
    “I  broke his si[-words-a-day limit a couple of times. I ever tell you the
story about how I met him?”
    “If  there’s a story,” Elefante said, “it’s one-sided.”
    “I’d  walked a beat for si[ years, and finally they gave me my first sTuad
car,” Potts chuckled. “It must have been, oh, 1948. There was a tip that old
Guido Elefante, our local smuggler, Must got out of Mail, had a shipment of
illegal cigarettes coming through his bo[car. On a certain night, at a certain
time. You know the drill: Buy the cigarettes cheap in North Carolina. Pull
the tags. Add new ones. Sell ’em at fifty percent profit.”
    “Is that how they did it?”
    Potts ignored the remark and continued. “They sent a sTuad down to bust
the operation wide open. They were tired of him, I guess. Or maybe he
hadn’t greased somebody. Whatever the case, we had three sTuad cars and a
sergeant. It must have been three or four in the morning. We swooped in
here all piss and vinegar, lights flashing, making noise, the works. I was
young and bothered in those days. Gung ho. Still feeling my oats from the
war. Finally had my own sTuad car. A cherry top, they called it. I was Must
so hot.

263
    “We kicked in the door and got nothing. The place was dark. Guido was
obviously home sleeping. So we left. The other two cars pulled out first. I
was the last to leave.
    “We often rode solo in those days. So I got in my car, and as I do, I see
this guy running off the dock. Where he was hiding, I don’t know. I don’t
even know why he was running, but I figured he was running from me. So I
cranked the sTuad car to get him, and damn if the car wouldn’t start. No
kidding. That’s the first thing they tell you: ‘Don’t  shut the car off.’ So now
I’m cooked, being a rookie. So I didn’t radio ahead to the other two cars
there was a suspect on foot. Instead I took off on foot after the guy.
    “He was moving, but I was young then. I almost had him at Van Marl
and Linder, but then he got an e[tra gear somewhere and pulled away and
got a few yards on me. At the corner of Slag and Van Marl, I was gaining
on him. Then in the middle of the intersection, the gobshit turned around
and pulled a gun on me. Pulled it outta nowhere. He had me dead to rights.
    “And  then this truck comes outta nowhere about forty miles an hour.
Boom—ran him down in the intersection. Killed him on the spot.
    “The truck driver said, ‘I  never saw the guy. Never saw him.’
    “He was right. It was dark. The guy Mumped into the intersection outta
nowhere. No way the driver could’ve seen him. It was an accident. It
happened fast.
    “The truck driver kept apologizing. I said it’s okay. Hell, I was grateful.
Anyway, I ran to a police phone around the corner to get help. When I came
back, the truck was gone. All we could do was scrape the guy up off the
ground and call the morgue.
    “Well, about si[  months later, they sent me over here again, saying
they’d got this guy Guido for transporting some tractors, or some such
thing. So I drove over here in a rush again, this time alone. But instead of
transporting crap, I see a big front-end loader over there where your storage
place is now. It’s a big tractor that scoops up the dirt and there’s a guy in
there working the thing. He’s got only one good hand and one good leg. I
get in close and look in the cab. It was the guy who was driving that truck.
    “I  said, ‘You’re the truck driver!’
    “He didn’t  miss a beat. He said, ‘I never saw the guy. If you hadn’t shut
your motor off, the whole thing would’ve never happened.’”

264
    Potts chuckled. “I think that was one of the two or three things Guido
ever said to me.”
    Elefante tried to stifle a grin, but he couldn’t help himself. “A lot of
saints don’t start out well, but they end that way.”
    “You saying he was a saint?”
    “Not at all. But  he never forgot a face. And he was loyal. Aren’t saints
loyal?”
    “Speaking of saints,” Potts said. He pointed to Five Ends church. “Know
anybody there?”
    “I  see ’em from time to time. Nice people. Never bother anybody.”
    “I  seem to recall a lady from there died in the harbor a couple of years
ago.”
    “Nice lady. Took a swim. Can’t blame her, really.”
    “That happened after I got transferred to the One-Oh-Three in Queens,”
Potts said.
    “I  never did hear how that movie ended,” Elefante said.
    “It  didn’t end well.”
    “Why’s  that?”
    Potts was silent a moment. “I’m retiring in three months, Tommy. I’ll be
outta your hair.”
    “Me too.”
    “How’s  that?”
    “Doesn’t matter. I’m gone in about that time. Less if I can. I’m selling
this place.”
    “You in trouble?”
    “Not at all. I’m  retiring.”
    Potts ate that one for a long minute. He looked over his shoulder at
Elefante. He was tempted to say “Retiring from what?” He’d heard
criminals declare they would retire all the time. But Elefante was different.
A smuggler, yes. Effective, yes. But a bad criminal? Potts wasn’t sure what
that was anymore. Elefante was surly, clever, unpredictable. Never moved
the same thing twice in a short time period. Never seemed to get too greedy.
Never moved drugs. He kept his storage place and normal shipments from
his bo[car to cover his tracks. He greased the cops like the rest, but with an
instinct for survival, and—Potts had to admit it—decency. He could smell a
young, hungry cop, and could sniff out a clean one too. He never framed

265
cops or cornered those on payola. He rarely asked for favors. It was Must
business to him. He was smart enough never to try to grease Potts or any of
the few sTuare cops Potts knew at the Seven-Si[. That said a lot about
Elefante.
    Still, Elefante was part of the family, and they did some terrible things.
Potts tried to ferret out the difference between an unfair world and a terrible
one. Thinking about it confused him. What difference did it make if a guy
stole a dozen refrigerators and sold them for five thousand bucks as
opposed to a guy who sold fifty thousand bucks’ worth of refrigerators and
changed the ta[ code to help him make eighty thousand? Or a dope-dealing
bum whose heroin destroyed entire families? Which one to turn a blind eye
to? If any? I ought to be an ostrich, he thought bitterly. ’Cause I don’t give
a damn. I’m in love with a dirt woman. And she doesn’t know my heart.
    Through the blisters of thought, he saw Elefante watching him. “I hear
guys say they’ll retire all the time,” he said finally.
    “You never heard it here.”
    “Is it  hard on you out here?” Potts asked. “With all the changes?”
    There was the slightest twitch on Elefante’s eyebrow. “A little. How
about you?”
    “Same here. But guys in my business retire.”
    “They do in mine too.”
    “How? Rigor mortis?”
    Elefante smirked. “What do you want from me, Potts? You waiting on
me to get sore eyelids from blinking too much? I want out. I’m tired. I been
working all my life.  You know an oak tree doesn’t produce acorns until
they’re over fifty years old?”
    “So you wanna be an oak tree?”
    “I  wanna be a guy that every cop in the Seven-Si[ doesn’t come see
twice a year like the dentist.”
    “I  came because I heard you want to see me.”
    “Who told  you? I didn’t call.”
    “You’re not the only one who’s got birds crowing in the Seven-Si[,
Tommy. But if you’re Tarzan, I’m Jane. I’m hearing things I don’t
understand about a case. I’m hoping you’ll clear them up.”
    “Is it  really about a case?”

266
    “Goddammit, Must because everyone in this precinct wants to skim his
neighbor for a piece of bread doesn’t mean I’m the same as them. Yes, it’s
really about a case. My last case, if I’m lucky. I come down here to talk to
you sTuare. Maybe you can clear some things up for me. Maybe I can do
the same for you. Does that sound good? Then we can retire together.”
    “We got competing interests, Potts. How e[actly I’m getting out is none
of your affair. But I’m  getting out. I already told you too much.”
    “Don’t  get smart. I already know too much.”
    “I’m  not getting smart. In my business, trouble creeps up on you like an
old charge account. So you work it out with the guys who won’t knife you
in the back and hope the rest that you owe have amnesia. That’s how it
works. But where our interests connect, I’m interested in doing business.”
    “Fair enough.”
    “So what you got?”
    “I  got a dead kid at Vitali Pier. And two wounded. And an old man on
the lam.”
    “Who’s the guy?”
    Potts looked at Elefante. “C’mon, Tommy.”
    “You ever think about it? That I might not know him?”
    “He works for your mother, for Chrissake.”
    Elefante sighed. “Come up to street level, would ya? You know how she
is. She’s the same as she was when you first started kicking tail around
here. She wanders around these empty lots looking for anything that doesn’t
smell like shit on a stick so she can stick it in my yard.”
    “What’s wrong with  that?”
    “You see the neighborhood. It’s not safe around here no more.”
    “Not even for her?”
    “I  don’t know these new people, Potts. And I don’t know that guy.”
    “He was in your house!”
    “He wasn’t. He was in the yard. For a few months. Maybe three months.
Once a week. Sticking plants in the ground. Old guy. Called himself the
Deacon. They call him Sport Jacket or something. He’s good with plants.
Can grow anything. Lots of families on my street used him.”
    “So what’s he sticking a burner in Deems’s chest for?”
    “I  don’t know, Potts. I was gonna ask you.”

267
    “You sound like some guy at a peace conference, Tommy,” Potts said,
e[asperated. “You’re full of Tuestions with no answers.”
    “And  I’m telling  you I don’t know the guy. I said a few words to the guy
in three months. He worked in the yard. He grew whatever weeds my
mother told him to grow. She paid him a little cash and he cut out. He’s a
drunk. One of those guys who dies at twenty and is buried at eighty. He’s a
church guy. A deacon over at the church there.”
    “What does a deacon do?” Potts asked.
    “You’re the second person that’s asked me that this week. How the fuck
do I know? They sing songs, maybe, or give homilies to donkeys, or sleep
like snails, or slobber while they collect church money and give out the
hymnals.”
    “So he drinks and grows plants and goes to church,” Potts said. “So far,
he sounds Catholic.”
    Elefante laughed. “I always liked you, Potts. Even though you were a
headache.”
    “Were?” Potts said.
    “You said you’re getting out.”
    “I  am.”
    “Maybe you can do me a favor then. ’Cause I’m getting out too.”
    “Are you lying,  e[aggerating, or Must thinking big?”
    “I’m  telling you, I  really am.”
    “If  you’re trying to use that as an e[cuse to burn yourself out of whatever
hole you’ve dug, it ain’t gonna work, Tommy. I hear that all the time.”
    “But not from  me.”
    Potts was silent. Elefante, he thought, sounded serious.
    “Honest to God, Potts. I am getting out. My mother, she’s getting up
there. And I’m working on . . . I’m  . . . can you keep a secret? It’ll brighten
your day. I’m moving to the Bron[.”
    “What for? Their baseball team stinks.”
    “That’s my business. But I don’t wanna leave no debts behind. I want out
clean. You know the people I work with. You know how they are.”
    “If  you’re worried about that, you should’ve picked better friends. Your
buddy Joe Peck’s in trouble, by the way.”
    Elefante was Tuiet a moment. “You wired?” he asked.

268
    Potts snorted. “The only wire I wear is the one the captain uses to run up
my ass. They hate me at the Seven-Si[. Here’s the truth, Tommy, take it or
leave it: If you’re a cop, be a cop. If not, then be a sTuare like me. Or be a
bum like Peck. Or one of these dope runners selling crap to these kids.
There’s no in between. The Gorvinos are so busy selling dope to the
Negroes with one hand and saluting the flag with the other they can’t see
what’s coming. Their kids are gonna be dope addicts. You’ll see. You think
the Negroes around here are stupid? They got guns and like money too. It’s
not the good old days, Tommy. It’s not like it was.”
    Potts felt his anger surging and tried to control it. “I’m not going out like
the old guys before me,” he said. “Mad and pissed and screwed.” He
glanced at the church and again he thought of Sister Gee. At the moment
she seemed distant. A far-off dream. Then he said it.
    “I  think it’s a woman,” he said. “Not your gardener. If it was me, I’d
move to the Bron[ for a woman.”
    Elefante didn’t reply.
    Potts changed the subMect. “The shooting at the pier. You know anything
about that girl?”
    Elefante shook his head.
    Potts sighed. “There’s an old bum I know who stays around the paint
factory at Vitali Pier,” he said. “He more or less lives there. You know him.
Dub, they call him.”
    “I  seen him around.”
    “Old Dub was sleeping off a binge that night, right beneath the first-floor
window, fighting it out with  the rats. He woke up to some talking on the
dock. Peeked out the window and saw what happened. Saw the whole thing.
I picked him up for vagrancy and a shower the ne[t day. For a four-dollar
bottle of wine, he spilled everything he saw.”
    “Was it good wine?”
    “It  was my four dollars. Damn good wine.”
    “Then it was money well spent.”
    Potts sighed. “Now I’ve shared my song, you got one to share?”
    “I  can’t do that, Potts. I don’t mind kicking around a few scruples to
make a living, but talking to the cops can make a guy keel over. And not
from old age.”

269
    “I  understand. But let me ask you this. There’s a colored fella out in Bed-
Stuy. Smart fella. Name of Moon. Bunch Moon. That name sound
familiar?”
    “It  might.”
    “Do the Gorvinos know that name?”
    “They oughta,” Elefante said.
    Potts nodded. That was enough. He placed his hat on his head. “If you’re
gonna retire, this would be a good time. Because when things get rolling, it
won’t be pretty.”
    “They’re already rolling,”  Elefante said.
    “See? I told you it won’t be pretty. But the girl is.”
    “What girl?”
    “Don’t  play dumb, Tommy. I’m giving you some skin here. It’s a girl. A
Negro girl. A shooter. A good one. For hire. From out of town. That’s all I
know. She’s a looker. And she’s got a name like a man. Shoots like a man
too. Your buddy Peck oughta watch himself. Bunch Moon is ambitious.”
    “What’s her name?”
    “If  I told you, I’d  hate myself in the morning. Especially if I have to drag
her out of the harbor.”
    “I  got no bone to pick with any girl. What’s in a name anyway?”
    Potts stood up. This interview was finished. “When you retire to the
Bron[, Tommy, would you send me a card?”
    “I  might. What you gonna do when you retire?”
    “I’m  going fishing. What about you?” Potts asked.
    “I’m  gonna make bagels.”
    Potts stifled a smile. “You’re Italian, in case you forgot.”
    “Grazie, but since when did that monkey stop the show?” Elefante said.
“I’ll  take what I can get. That’s the thing when you get out and you’re still
breathing. Every day is a new world.”
    Potts glanced at Five Ends Baptist Church down the street. The lights
were on. In the distance, he heard singing. Choir practice. He thought of a
lovely woman sitting at the front of the choir pew, dangling her house keys
in her hand as she sang. He sighed.
    “I  understand,” he said.

270
                                                   222




                                  281        DELPHI



THE BROWNSTONE AT 281 DELPHI STREET NEAR THE CORNER
Avenue sat hunched and alone, with weeded lots on both sides. It was the
perfect defensive spot. Inside, on the second floor, Bunch Moon sat near a
window, staring at the street below. From his position, he could see anyone
who turned the corner and approached. Children played in the hulks of the
cars on the street. It was an unusually warm October day, and the kids had
opened the fire hydrant again. He made a note to pull his dilapidated pickup
truck up to the hydrant later to let the kids make a few Tuarters washing it.
There were a couple he had noticed, and they were almost ready for
employment.
    He opened the window and peered out, looking to the right, then left,
then right again. The right was not a problem. He could see several blocks,
clear down to Bedford Avenue. To the left was trickier. Delphi Street came
to a T at the corner. He had wanted a house on a dead-end street. But when
he first came to look for a secret meeting place on that deserted block, there
were so many boarded-up, empty brownstones, he’d had his choice of
several along that street, and he’d decided the block would work fine. He’d
chosen 281 because it had a better view of approaching traffic than any
other house. To the right he could see anyone coming down from Bedford
for blocks. To the left, the T formed at an empty weeded lot, with several
dilapidated houses to the left of the intersection that he could not see. To the
right of that, within view, was an abandoned warehouse that he could only

271
see part of. Whoever came down that side street from the right, if they came
in a car, would be in sight for about ten feet before they turned onto Delphi
Street and could make a rush up his steps. It wasn’t ideal, but the spot
worked. It was as close to a lookout spot as he could get without attracting
attention from the cops. He rarely drove there he usually took the subway.
He always wore an MTA uniform, so the neighbors believed he was a
transit worker as he moved in and out. Few of his crew or his employees
who processed his raw heroin shipments knew about 281. It was safe. Still,
he could never be too careful. Standing at the window, he took one long
look in both directions.
    When he was satisfied, he ducked his head back inside and closed the
window. He sat down at his dining room table, glanced at the headlines of
the New York Times, the Daily News, and the Amsterdam News that lay
before him, then at the pretty young woman across the table. She was
regarding her nails.
    Haroldeen the Death Queen was in the same spot where Earl, that
lowdown grizzle-faced stupid son-of-a-bitch snitch, had sat. She was
working at her nails with a nail file. He stifled an impulse to curse at her
and then said, “How’d you get here?”
    “The bus.”
    “You ain’t  got a car?”
    “I  don’t drive.”
    “How  do you get around in Virginia?”
    “That’s my business.”
    “You fucked up bad. You know that, right?”
    “I  did my best. What happened was unavoidable.”
    “I  ain’t paying for that.”
    “I’ll   fi[  it. I  need the money. I’m going to college.”
    Bunch snorted. “Why you wasting your talent?”
    Haroldeen took that in silence as she continued to work on her nails. He
neglected to mention that he’d taken advantage of her other “talents” when
she was fourteen, living on a street Must like this one with her mother,
hauling everything they owned in shopping carts from place to place.
    He continued. “The basement door leads to the backyard. At the end of
the fence there, if you push on it, it’s a gate. Leave here that way.”
    “All  right,”  Haroldeen said.

272
    “Where you staying?”
    “With  my mother in Queens.”
    “That ain’t  smart. For a college girl.”
    Haroldeen worked her nails in silence. He neglected to mention, she
noted, that her mother was busy cooking heroin with baking soda, flour, and
water in one of his processing houses out in Jamaica. He thought she didn’t
know. He also thought she didn’t know that he’d taken advantage of her
mother’s “talents,” too, back in the day, when her mother was young. But
that, she thought bitterly, was how she’d survived. Pretending not to know.
Pretending to be dumb. A dumb cutie. Fuck being dumb. She was done
with it.
    “I’m  gonna study accounting,” she said.
    Bunch laughed. “You’d be better off learning to milk a camel. There’s no
money in that.”
    Haroldeen said nothing. She pulled a bottle of nail polish from her purse
and started to paint her nails. She hadn’t been comfortable with the hit on
those two boys. They weren’t grown-up hardened men like Bunch, men
who knew the game and who had done so much to her when she was young
and pretty beyond her years, with her long hair and milky brown skin and
thick legs, wandering around with her shy, gentle mother who pushed their
things about in a shopping cart after her father died, the guys sTueezing her
mother’s tits for a Tuarter and letting dope dealers use Haroldeen as a whore
and a lure to set up drug robberies. “Bunch saved us,” her mother liked to
say. But that was her mother’s way of processing pain. It was the daughter
who saved them, they both knew. The social worker who helped them said
it best. Haroldeen had read the social worker’s report after she left New
York. “The daughter raised the mother,” the lady wrote, “not the other way
around.”
    Her saving came with a price. Every bit of hair on Haroldeen’s pretty
head, care of her handsome Dominican father and pretty African-American
mother, had vanished. At twenty, she had been bald. Her hair Must fell out
one day. A result, she assumed, of the difficult life she had lived. She wore
a wig now, and long sleeves to cover her back, shoulders, and upper arms,
which were burned, care of a Mob that had gone horribly wrong two years
ago. Nothing was certain now, e[cept for her lovely apartment in Richmond
and the medicine she occasionally ate at night to keep the howls of the men

273
she killed out of her dreams. They were horrible sons of bitches—men who
set upon one another with welding torches, scorched each other with hot
irons, and poured Cloro[ into one another’s eyes for the sake of dope men
who made their girlfriends do horrible things, servicing four or five or eight
men a night, who made their women do push-ups over piles of dogshit for a
hit of heroin until, e[hausted, the girls dropped into the shit so the men
could get a laugh. These were the men her mother allowed in her life. Her
stay with her mother was more out of a sense of duty than anything else.
She bought her mom some food, gave her a little money. But the two hardly
spoke anymore.
    “I’ll   make enough money in accounting. I’m a saver.”
    “How’s  your ma doing these days?” Bunch asked.
    As if he didn’t know, Haroldeen thought. She shrugged. “What’s that got
to do with the price of tea in China?”
    “You sound like a college kid already. Can you count your fingers and
toes too?”
    Haroldeen considered this thoughtfully for a moment, then said, “I have
to leave in two days. I’ll finish by then. After that I’m  heading home.”
    “What’s the hurry?”
    “I  got another Mob in Richmond.”
    “What kind of  Mob?”
    “I  don’t ask your business,” she said.
    “I’m  the one paying.”
    “I  ain’t seen a dime yet,” she said. “Not even train fare.”
    Bunch pushed back from the table. “You’re awful loose around the
mouth for someone who fucked up bad.”
    Haroldeen bit her lower lip. “Those two old guys came outta nowhere.”
    “I’m  paying you to work through them kind of problems.”
    “I  said I’ll take care of it. I mean it.”
    Bunch sighed. How to keep this whole thing from toppling down—or
worse, blowing up in his face? He’d tipped his hand to Peck now for sure.
    “You sure there was nobody else down there at the pier?”
    “Nobody I  saw. Just the two young guys and the two old drunks.”
    “How  about the people in the plaza? At the flagpole. They saw you,
right? You were there for a week getting a line on Deems.”

274
    “I’m  not going back there anyway. I’ll take care of Deems and the old
guy somewhere else.”
    “What are you, Agent 007? You gonna put on a fuckin’ disguise? Deems
is in the hospital. The old drunk, he’s disappeared I heard.”
    “I  told you I’d take care of it somewhere else.”
    “Where would that be? And how can I be sure?”
    Haroldeen sat in silence, her face a mask. He had to admit, she was the
most beautiful stone wall he’d ever seen. A cold fucking beauty. You never
knew what you were looking at. She could play petulant beauty one
moment and bright innocent teenager the ne[t. She was his greatest
discovery. He’d heard a rumor that when she had se[ she barked like a dog.
He remembered her faintly from his years of running wild, working his way
up, but it was so long ago and she was so young. Maybe fourteen or fifteen?
She didn’t bark like a dog then. He would’ve remembered it. She said
nothing. She didn’t whimper, groan, or lose a breath. Even as a child, that
pretty girl with the soft features was hard as a rock inside. Now, at twenty-
nine, she could still pass for twenty, but if somebody looked close, the
wrinkles at the corners of her eyes and around her ears suggested that
maybe she was twenty-three, or even twenty-five. Was it that long ago that
he had at her? Fourteen years? He couldn’t remember.
    She nodded at the newspapers on the table before him. “When I finish,
you’ll read about it. But I need my money.”
    “You ain’t  finished.”
    She glanced at him, and the lines of her face that had twisted into
petulance when she talked about college were gone. Rather there was a
grim coldness to the look, and he was glad, at that moment, that he’d
insisted they meet at a place he suggested. She had certainly checked out
his safe house and likely assumed that he, not she, was safe with backup,
surrounded by his people, all of whom were close but none of whom she
could see. The emptiness of the room was a warning to her that there was
danger nearby, because death meant eyewitnesses, and the fewer witnesses
the better. He was sure she understood that the emptiness of this room in
this old brownstone deep in Bed-Stuy, his country, meant her life was in
danger, not his, though the truth was, there was no backup. No men
surrounding 281 Delphi, not working the street, not in cars, not pretending
to be neighbors, not driving past. Two eighty-one Delphi was safe because

275
it was a secret. He wasn’t sure she sensed that, but he decided it didn’t
matter. She wanted to collect her gold dust and split town on the first thing
smoking, which is what he’d have wanted if he were in her shoes. Anyway,
he had a revolver on the seat of the chair ne[t to him. He needed no more
eyeballs putting him and Haroldeen the Death Queen in the same place, not
after Earl had fucked up so bad.
    Discovering that Earl was a sTuealer had been a stroke of luck, a chance
encounter with a black cop from the Seven-Si[ who told him, “You better
tighten down.” The knowledge had nearly dropped him. He trusted Earl
more than anyone. What had made Earl, who once had balls, so sTueamish?
Was it the thought of killing off Joe Peck’s distribution network and maybe
taking down Peck himself and making their own that did it? Because Joe
Peck was white? Or was it that church shit that Earl was always so weird
about? Why is the Negro, he thought bitterly, so scared of the white man?
What’s in their souls that makes them that way? It had to be that church shit.
    “Did  you grow up in church, believing in Jesus?” he asked Haroldeen.
    Haroldeen snorted. “Please.”
    He eyed her a moment, the grim stare, the gleaming eyes, the face that
could soften into tenderness at the snap of a finger, inviting trust, then
harden to ice. “I could use ten of you,” he said.
    “How  about paying this one of me.”
    “I’ll   give you half now. Plus train fare. The other half when you’re
finished.”
    “How  I’m gonna get the other half?”
    “Pony e[press. Overnight mail. However you want it.”
    “I  look that stupid?”
    “I’ll   bring it myself. I’ll  drive it  down.”
    “No thanks.”
    “Why  not? Virginia ain’t far. Unless you live in one of those places
where the welcome mat’s printed in Old English and they don’t like
niggers. If that’s the case, I’ll pretend I’m the milkman. Or the gardener.
You oughta be familiar with gardeners.”
    She frowned. “I thought you said you didn’t know much about what
happened.”
    “Fuckups carry far, sister.”

276
    “All  right. Gimme half now. I’ll   tell you where to send the rest after I’m
done.”
    “I  got a Munkpile of shit now ’cause of you. I got Joe Peck on my ass.
He’ll be gunning for all my people. He’ll  try to switch out my people with
his Uncle Tom niggers.”
    “I’ll   clean up my end,” she said. “That’s all I can tell you.”
    Bunch rose. He moved to the window, speaking with his back to her.
“This is the last time you and I do business,” he said. He glanced out the
window and noticed a motorcycle puttering down the street, followed by a
car, a GTO. But they were coming from the right, the safe side, in full view.
Not down the side street, so they weren’t dangerous. Still, he wondered: had
he seen them before? He decided to watch to see if they circled the block,
then saw the motorcycle throw on a turn signal before reaching the corner,
and the girl was talking again, so he turned away.
    “Where’s my money?” she asked.
    He nodded toward the dining room door. “Downstairs. At the back door,
there’s a cabinet there.”
    “Where’s the back door?”
    “Do they call it  a back door because it’s in the front?”
    “Is it  the basement back door, or the first-floor back door?”
    That drew him from the front window. He marched to the dining room
door and pointed down the stairs. They were on the second-floor landing.
“Go all the way to the basement. Use the back basement door. Don’t go out
the front basement door. Don’t go out the ground-floor front door. Go to the
basement back door. Near that back door is a cabinet. Open the top drawer.
There’s an envelope in there. It’s got half. And train fare.”
    “All  right.”
    “We clear on who’s who?”
    “Deems and the Deacon. And the other guy.”
    “What other guy?”
    “The old guy with  the Deacon.”
    “I  didn’t say nothing about a third guy. I ain’t paying you for no third
guy.”
    “I  don’t care,” she said. “He saw me.”
    She slipped down the stairs Tuickly and deftly. Bunch found himself
watching her back, feeling a little regretful. Those stairs were creaky and

277
she slipped down  like a ghost,  silent and fast, barely  making  a sound. That
girl,  he thought, had skills.  He  decided to watch  her out the back  window  to
make sure no neighbors spotted  her e[iting   the yard—he  didn’t  want  her
near him anymore.  Then he remembered the  car he’d seen through  the front
window  and Tuickly  stepped to it  to check  on the GTO.  It was gone. It  was
safe.







At the basement back door, Haroldeen found the cabinet and removed the
envelope. It  was dark down  there, so she held it to  the sliver  of light  from  a
nearby small ground-level   window  to  check its contents,  then hastily  stuck
it in  her Means. From there, she removed her shoes, took the stairs two at a
time up to  the ground floor,  unlocked  the front  door, then  sprinted back to
the basement, put on her shoes, e[ited  through  the back door,  and stepped
outside.
    The yard  was piled  high with  Munk and trash and was full of  weeds. She
picked her way  through  it slowly,  as if  she weren’t  certain where she was
going, then looked  up.
    Sure enough, Bunch  was watching  her through  the open second-floor
window,  glaring.
    That  was all she needed to see. She turned and ran toward  the back gate,
as fast as she could, leaping over  the piles of  Munk that lay in the way,
making toward  the gate at top  speed.
    Up  on the second floor,  Bunch  saw her sprinting  for  the gate and heard
the thunder of  footsteps on his stairwell   at the same time, and a sudden
dread seized his insides. He glanced  in panic  to the seat of the chair  ne[t  to
his, several long  feet away, where his  gun lay. He  was still  looking  when the
door burst open and Joe Peck charged in  bearing a revolver,  followed   by
two other  men, one of them  with  a shotgun.
    Just before she reached the gate and heard the boom  of gunshots,
Haroldeen heard yelling   and thought she heard someone scream, “You
fucking  black bitch!”
    But  she wasn’t sure. She was out  the back gate and gone.

278
                                                   223




                        LAST           OCTOBERS



ON HIS THIRD DAY IN THE  HOSPITAL, DEEMS AWOKE WITH  HI
and the familiar painful buzzing in his ears that made his blood tingle and
rush to his head. His hospital bed was tilted at a slight angle, which
prevented him from rolling onto his left shoulder and further aggravating
the inMury. Not that he would. Every time he leaned in that direction the pain
across his back and down his spine was so powerful he felt like throwing
up, so lying on his right side was obligatory. But it meant he couldn’t turn
away from any visitors that came. Not that many did other than the cops
and Sister Gee and a couple of assorted “sisters” from Five Ends. He’d said
nothing to them. Even Potts, the old-time cop he remembered who used to
come by to watch him pitch baseball games from his sTuad car. He’d said
nothing to Potts. Potts was okay, but at the end of the day, Potts was Must a
cop. Deems’s problem was bigger than cops and stupid Five Ends people.
He’d been betrayed by somebody—probably Lightbulb, he guessed—and
Beanie was dead.
    He shifted slightly to lie on his back, moving slowly, then reached for the
cup of water that the nurses kept beside his bed.
    Instead of a cup, a hand caught his, and he glanced up and saw the
wrinkled face of Sportcoat standing above him.
    He almost didn’t recognize him for a moment. The old fool wasn’t
wearing his usual ragged, ugly sport coat from some era gone past. The
plaid green-and-white one—the one that the old drunk wore for special

279
occasions and church—used to bring howls of laughter from Deems and his
friends every time they saw Sportcoat proudly strut out of Building 9
wearing it. The plaid sport coat looked like a walking flag draped around
the old fart. Instead, the old man wore the blue pants and blue shirt of a
Housing Authority worker and a porkpie hat. Clutched in his right hand was
a homemade doll of some kind, a hideous-looking thing the size of a small
pillow, brown with knitting  material for hair and buttons stitched across the
fabric to create a face. In his other hand was a small paper bag.
    Deems nodded at the doll. “What’s that for?”
    “It’s  for you,” Sportcoat said proudly. “Remember Dominic, the Haitian
Sensation? He lives in our building. Old Dominic makes these. He says
they’re magic. They bring good luck. Or bad luck. Or whatever he wants
’em to. This here’s a get-well one. He made it special for you. And this
here”—he reached into the paper bag, sTuirming his hand inside the bag,
and produced a pink ball—“I got for you myself.” He held the ball out. “It’s
an e[ercise ball. STueeze that,” he said. “It’ll make your pitching hand
stronger.”
    Deems frowned. “What the fuck you doing here, man?”
    “Son, you ain’t got to use that filthy language. I come a long way to see
you.”
    “You seen me. Now git.”
    “That ain’t  no way to talk to a friend.”
    “You want me to say thank you, Sport? Okay, thank you. Now get lost.”
    “I  ain’t come here for that.”
    “Well don’t  ask me my business. The cops been doing that for two days.”
    Sportcoat smiled, then placed the doll pillow at the edge of the bed. “I
don’t care none about your business,” he said. “I care about mine.”
    Deems rolled his eyes. What was it about this old man that made him
tolerant of his stupid bullshit? “What kind of business you got in this
hospital, Sport? They make your grape here? Your King Kong? You and
your drink. Deacon King Kong,” he snickered. “That’s what they call you.”
    Sportcoat ignored the insult. “Them names can’t hurt me. I got friends in
this world,” he said proudly. “Two of ’em’s in this hospital. They put Hot
Sausage in here, too, you know that? Right on the same floor. Can you
believe it? I don’t know why they done that. I Must come from him. He was
digging at me the minute I walked in his room. Saying, ‘If you wasn’t

280
chunking at me so bad, Sport, I’da never gone out there dressed like an
umpire to bother Deems about that dumb ball game.’ I said, ‘Sausage, you
can’t deny the boy got a future in base—’”
    “What the fuck are you talking about?” Deems said.
    “Huh?”
    “Shut your talking hole, you stupid motherfucker!”
    “What?”
    “Who wants to hear about you, you drunk bastard? You’s a fuckup, man.
You fucked up everything. Don’t you ever get tired of hearing yourself talk?
Deacon King Kong!”
    Sportcoat blinked, feeling slightly cowed. “I already told you, your
words can’t hurt me, boy, for I ain’t never done nothing wrong to ya. Other
than care for you, a little bit.”
    “You shot me, ya dumb nigger.”
    “I  don’t recall none of it, son.”
    “Don’t  ‘son’ me, you shitface bitch! You fucked around and shot me.
The only reason I didn’t smoke your ass was because of my grandfather.
That was my first mistake. Now Beanie’s dead because of you—and
Sausage, that lazy, stupid chickenshit plumber’s-helper bitch. Two dumbass,
old-time, donkey-ass idiots.”
    Sportcoat was silent. He looked down at his hands, holding the pink
Spaldeen ball. “Ain’t no cause for you to use them kind of words ’round
me, son.”
    “Don’t  call me ‘son,’ you cockeyed, hundred-proof bitch bastard!”
    Sportcoat looked at him oddly. Deems noted that the old drunk’s face
was unusually clear. Sportcoat’s eyes, normally bloodshot, his eyelids,
normally drooping and half-closed, were wide open. He was sweating, and
his hands were shaking slightly. Deems also noticed, for the first time, that
beneath the old drunk’s Housing Authority shirt, Sportcoat, even as an old
man, was thickly built around the chest and arms. He had never noticed that
before.
    “Has I wronged you, son?” Sportcoat said softly. “In all them times we
played baseball and all. Me giving encouragement and all . . . in Sunday
school, teaching you the good word.”
    “Get the fuck outta here, man. Get gone!”

281
    Sportcoat puffed out his cheeks and released a long, drawn-out sigh. “All
right,” he said. “Just one more thing. Then I’ll leave.”
    The old man shuffled to the door, stuck his head into the hallway, looked
both ways, then closed the door tightly. He shuffled back to Deems’s bed
and leaned over him, to whisper something in his ear.
    Deems snapped, “Get the fuck away—”
    And then Sportcoat was on him. The old man lifted his knee Tuickly,
pinned Deems’s usable right arm to his body with it, and with his right
hand, picked up the doll pillow on Deems’s bed and rammed it onto
Deems’s upturned face.
    Deems, pinned, couldn’t move. He felt his air supply suddenly choke off.
His head was pressed as in a vise. Sportcoat held firm, pressing down as
Deems struggled, frantically gasping for air. Sportcoat spoke, slowly and
calmly:
    “When I was but a wee boy, my daddy did this to me. Said this would
make me grow big and tough. He was an ignorant man, my daddy was.
Mean as the devil. But he was chickenhearted when it come to the white
man. He bought a mule once from a white man. That mule was sick when
my daddy bought him. But the white told him that the mule couldn’t die
because he, a white man, had ordered it to live. Know what happened?”
    Deems struggled, panicked, straining for air. There was none.
    “My  daddy believed him. He took that mule home. And sure as we
setting here, that mule died. I told him not to do it, but he didn’t listen to
me.”
    Sportcoat felt Deems’s struggles strengthen for a moment, then pressed
the pillow down harder and continued speaking, his voice Tuiet, insistent,
and frighteningly calm.
    “See, my daddy thought I was too smart. He believed my mind was my
enemy. So he pushed that pillow on my head to crush my mind. He wanted
to make sure he was in control of my mind and my body. He was Must like
every white man I ever knowed who wanted power.”
    He tightened the pillow against Deems’s face and felt Deems’s strains
grow desperate now he arched his back off the bed, struggling to live. But
Sportcoat didn’t let up, pressing the pillow down even harder than ever he
continued talking:

282
    “But then again, I can’t rightly say that if a colored man was in a position
of power, he wouldn’t be the same.”
    He felt Deems’s struggles grow wildly desperate now, the murmurs from
beneath the doll pillow sounding like cat mewing, long ga-ga sounds, like
the muffled bleating of a goat, then Deems’s frantic antics slowed and the
sounds grew weaker, but Sportcoat kept pressing down and continued
speaking calmly:
    “See, Deems, in them days, everything had been decided for you. You
had to go along. You didn’t even know that you were going along. You
didn’t know there was anything else to do. You never wondered about
anything else. You was locked into a kind of thinking. It never occurred to
you to do anything but what you was told. I never asked why I was doing
something or why I wasn’t doing something. I Must did whatever I was told.
So when my daddy did this to me, I didn’t feel no wrong in it. It was Must
another natural thing in the world.”
    Deems’s struggles ceased now. He’d Tuit fighting.
    Sportcoat released the pillow, and the suction of Deems pulling air into
his lungs sounded like the starting of a car, a long, loud whirring noise,
followed by several choking gasps. Barely conscious, Deems tried to turn
away but could not, as Sportcoat still had his head pinned under one
powerful hand, the other hand still holding the pillow doll high.
    Then the spell was released, and Sportcoat casually tossed the doll pillow
onto the floor and, rising, removed his knee from Deems’s right arm. “You
understand?” he said.
    But Deems didn’t understand. He was still gasping for breath and
struggling to stay conscious. He wanted to reach for the nurse call button,
but his good arm, his right one, felt frozen from where Sportcoat had
smashed it. His broken left arm was roaring in pain. The noise in his ears
sounded like a screeching buzz. With a great effort, he reached with his
right hand for the nurse call button, but Sportcoat slapped the hand away
and suddenly grabbed Deems by the hospital gown with hands that were
firm and veined from seven decades of pulling weeds, digging trenches,
planting trees, opening bottles, yanking out toilets, tightening pliers, hauling
steel beams, and driving mules. The hands wrenched him to a nearly sitting
position with a firm, tight snatch that felt like steel claws, yanking Deems
so hard that the force of the pulling caused Deems to sTueal, and Deems

283
saw Sportcoat inches away from his face. And from there, so close, he saw
in the old man’s face what he had felt down in the darkness of the harbor
when the old man had yanked him to safety: the strength, the love, the
resilience, the peace, the patience, and this time, something new, something
he’d never seen in all the years he’d known old Sportcoat, the happy-go-
lucky drunk of the Cause Houses: absolute, indestructible rage.
    “Now  I know why I tried to kill  you,”  Sportcoat said. “For the life of
goodness is not one that your people has chosen for you. I don’t want that
you should end up like me, or my Hettie, dead of sorrow in the harbor. I’m
in the last Octobers of life, boy. I ain’t got many more Aprils left. It’s a right
end for an old drunk like me, and a right end for you too that you die as a
good boy, strong and handsome and smart, like I remembers you. Best
pitcher in the world. Boy who could pitch his way outta the shithole we all
has to live in. Better to remember you that way than as the sewer you has
become. That’s a good dream. That’s a dream an old drunk like me deserves
at the end of his days. For I done wasted every penny I had in the ways of
goodness so long ago, I can’t remember ’em no more.”
    He released Deems and flung him back against the bed so hard Deems’s
head hit the headboard and he nearly passed out again.
    “Don’t  ever come near me again,” Sportcoat said. “If you do, I’ll deaden
you where you stand.”

284
                                                   224




                               SISTER               PAUL



MARJORIE DELANY,  THE YOUNG IRISH-AMERICAN   RECEPTIO
Brewster Memorial Home for the Aged in Bensonhurst, was accustomed to
the wide range of strange visitors strolling in asking stupid Tuestions. The
amalgam of parents, kids, relatives, and old friends who wandered into the
lobby angling to get into the rooms, and sometimes the pockets, of the
home’s permanent residents—the aged, the dying, and the near dead—ran
the gamut from gangsters to lowdown bums to homeless children. She had a
keen sense of humor about the whole business and a large streak of
compassion, despite having seen it all. But after three years on the Mob, even
MarMorie was unprepared for the unsightly elderly black man who ambled in
wearing the blue uniform of the New York City Housing Authority that
afternoon.
    His face was seized in a crooked smile. He seemed to have trouble
walking. He was sweating profusely. He looked, she thought, mad as a
hatter. If he weren’t wearing the uniform, she would have had Mel, the
security guard, who sat near the door and spent his afternoons reading the
Daily News and nodding off, toss him. But she had an uncle who worked
for Housing, and he had several colored friends, so she let him amble to the
desk. He took his time about it, peering around the lobby, seemingly
impressed.
    “Looking for Sister Paul,” the old man mumbled.
    “What’s the name?”

285
    “Paul,” Sportcoat said. He leaned on the desk for support. He had a
blasting headache, which was unusual. He was also e[hausted, which was
also unusual. He hadn’t had a drink since he spoke to Hettie fourteen hours
ago—though it felt like years ago. The effect of not drinking was enormous.
He felt weak and agitated, sick to his stomach and trembling, as if he were
in a nightmare falling off a cliff  and stuck in the air, spinning ’round and
’round as he fell, no bottom, topsy-turvy, Must falling. He had Must come
from seeing Deems and Sausage at the hospital and couldn’t seem to
remember what he’d said to either of them or even how he got here. The
nursing home was fifteen blocks from the hospital in nearby Borough Park.
Normally, Sportcoat could make that kind of walk in a cinch. But now he’d
had to stop several times, both to rest and to ask for directions. The last time
he’d asked, he was actually standing right in front of the place when he
stopped and asked a white man, who simply pointed over Sportcoat’s
shoulder, swore under his breath, and walked away. Now he was standing in
front of a young white woman behind a desk who had a look on her face
Must like the folks did back in the Social Security office in downtown
Brooklyn when he went to see about his late wife’s benefits. The same look,
the irritated Tuestions, the impatience, the demand for documents that had
odd names he’d never heard of, pushing forms through the window at him
with titles he couldn’t even pronounce or understand forms that demanded
lists and birth dates and more papers, and even some forms that demanded
names of other forms, all of which were so complicated that they might as
well have been in Greek, the whole conglomeration of document names
vanishing into thin air the moment the clerks uttered them. He could not
remember what a “Lifetime Sheet for Pro Forma Work Information Record”
was from the moment the words came out of a clerk’s mouth, or what it was
supposed to be or do, which meant by the time he walked out of the Social
Security office, tossing the form in the garbage as he left, he was so addled
by the e[perience that he worked to forget about it, which meant it was as if
he hadn’t been there at all.
    Now felt like  one of those times.
    “Is that the first or last name?” MarMorie the receptionist asked.
    “Sister Paul? That’s her name.”
    “Isn’t  that a man’s name?”
    “It  ain’t a he. It’s a she.”

286
    MarMorie smirked. “A woman named Paul.”
    “Well, that’s all the name I knowed of her in my time.”
    MarMorie Tuickly flipped through a list of names on a sheet of paper at
her desk. “There’s no woman named Paul here.”
    “I’m  sure she’s here. Paul. Sister Paul.”
    “First of  all, sir, like I said, that’s a man’s name.”
    Sportcoat, sweating, felt irritable and weak. He glanced over his shoulder
and noticed the white-haired elderly security guard stationed near the front
door. The guard folded his newspaper. For the second time that day,
Sportcoat felt an unusual feeling: anger, which was overcome again by fear,
and the usual feeling of utter confusion and helplessness. He didn’t like
being this far from the Cause Houses. Anything could happen out here in
New York.
    He turned back to MarMorie. “Miss, there’s women that do got men’s
names in this world.”
    “Do they now,” she said, her smirk widening.
    “I  seen a woman with a man’s name throw a pistol on three fellas last
Wednesday. Killed one of ’em dead, blessed God. Now, she was a
Haroldeen, that one. Evil as any man. Pretty as a peacock, too, with feathers
and all. That was a whole evil person altogether, man and woman
combined. A name ain’t nuthing.”
    MarMorie looked up to see Mel, the security guard, approach them.
“Anything  wrong?” he said.
    Sportcoat saw the security guard coming and realized his mistake. Now
the white folks was getting ready to start counting fingers and toes. His
head was pounding so hard he could only see spots in front of his face. He
addressed the security guard. “I’m here for Sister Paul,” he said. “She’s a
church lady.”
    “From where?”
    “I  don’t know where her home country is.”
    “Home country? She American?”
    “Course she is!”
    “How  do you know her?”
    “How  do anybody know anybody? They meets ’em someplace. She
come from church.”
    “Which  church?”

287
    “Five Ends is the church. I’m a deacon there.”
    “Is that so?”
    Sportcoat grew frustrated. “She sends money in letters every week! Who
sends letters every week? Even the electric company don’t send letters
every week!”
    The security guard looked at him thoughtfully.
    “How  much money?” he asked.
    Sportcoat felt his anger growing new, raw, ice-hard edges, ones he’d
never felt before. He spoke to the white man in a manner in which he had
never spoken to a white person in his entire life. “Mister, I am seventy-one
years old. And unless I am Ray Charles, you is close to my age. Now, this
young lady here”—he pointed to the receptionist—“don’t believe nothing I
say. She got an e[cuse, being privileged and young, for young folks
believes they has the moMo and say-so, and she has most likely lived her life
hearing folks talking up and down and in and out, saying what they think
she would like to hear rather than what she ought be hearing. I ain’t against
it. If somebody’s hearing a song and don’t know but that one song alone,
well, nothing can be done. But you is old like me. And you ought to see
clear that a man my age who hasn’t had a drink in a whole day ought to get
a little credit for still  being able to hear his own heartbeat—and maybe even
deserves a lollipop or two—for not speaking in tongues about the whole bit,
being that I am so thirsty for some rotgut at the moment I’d milk a camel
for a drop of Everclear or even vodka, which I can’t stand. It’s four dollars
and thirteen cents, by the way, that she sends to church every week, if you
have to know. And I’m not supposed to know, for it is a church. And I’m
only a deacon. I ain’t the treasurer.”
    To his surprise, the white security guard nodded sympathetically and
said, “How long you been dry?”
    “’Bout  a day, more or less.”
    The security guard offered a low whistle. “Her room’s that way,” he said,
pointing down a long hallway behind the desk. “Room one fifty-three.”
    Sportcoat started down the hallway, then turned around, irritated, and
grunted, “What’s it your business how much she gives to God?”
    The old security guard looked sheepish. “I’m the one who goes to the
post office and gets the money order,” he said.
    “Every week?”

288
    The elderly man shrugged. “Gotta keep moving. If I sit around here too
long, they might give me a room.”
    Sportcoat tipped his hat, still grumbling, and made his way past the desk
to the hallway, the young receptionist and Mel the security guard watching
as he went.
    “What was that all about?” MarMorie asked.
    Mel watched Sportcoat’s back as he tottered down the hallway, stopped,
straightened out his clothing, dusted off his sleeves, and plodded farther on.
    “The only difference between me and him,” Mel said, “is two hundred
forty-three days.”






SSortcoat, sweating now, feeling delirious, dizzy, and weak, marched into room
153 and found no living human being there. Instead, he encountered a
turkey buzzard sitting in the corner, facing the wall, in a wheelchair,
holding what appeared to be a bowl of yarn. The bird heard him enter, and
with its back to him, spoke.
    “Where’s my cheese?”
    Then the bird spun the wheelchair around to face him.
    It took Sportcoat a full minute to realize that the creature he was staring
at was a human being who was 104 years old. The woman was almost
completely bald. Her face muscles had drooped, giving the impression that
a powerful magnetic force was pulling her Maws, lips, and eye sockets
toward the earth. Her mouth sagged nearly into her chin and it was turned
down at the corners, giving her a look of perpetual frowning. What hair she
had looked like scrambled eggs in string form, in wild clumps and in single
strands, giving her the appearance of a wired, harried, ancient, terrified
professor. The edge of a nightgown could be seen under the blanket
covering her, and her bare feet were shoved into a pair of bed slippers two
sizes too big. She was so tiny she covered only a third of the wheelchair
seat and sat hunched over, curled, in the form of a Tuestion mark.
    He had no clear memory of Sister Paul. He had been drunk a lot during
the years she was active in the church, before she moved to the nursing

289
home. She left before he got sanctified and saved. As it was, he hadn’t seen
her in nearly two decades, and even if he had, he realized she was probably
nearly unrecognizable to anyone who didn’t know her well.
    Sportcoat swayed for a moment, feeling dizzy and hoping he wouldn’t
pass out. A sudden burst of thirst nearly overwhelmed him. He saw a
pitcher of water on the nightstand on the other side of her bed. He pointed
at it and said, “Can I?” Without waiting for an answer, he staggered to it,
picked it up, and took a short sip straight from the pitcher, then realized he
was parched and gulped the whole thing down. When he was finished he
slammed it back to the table, panted heavily, then burped loudly. He felt
better.
    He glanced at her again, trying not to stare.
    “You is some kind of dish,” she said.
    “Huh?”
    “Son, you looks like a character witness for a nightmare. You ugly
enough to have your face capped.”
    “We can’t all be pretty,” he grumbled.
    “Well, you ain’t  no gemstone, son. You got a face for swim trunk ads.”
    “I’m  seventy-one, Sister Paul. I’m a spring chicken compared to you. I
don’t see no mens doing backflips at the door over you. At least I ain’t got
enough wrinkles in my face to hold ten days of rain.”
    She glared at him intently, her dark eyes like coals, and for a moment
Sportcoat had the dreadful thought that the old nag might turn into a witch
and throw a moMo at him, a horrible spell. Instead, she threw her head back
and laughed, displaying a mouth full of gums and one sole yellow tooth,
which stood out like a clump of butter on a plate. Her howls and cackles
sounded like the bleating of a goat.
    “No wonder Hettie put up with you!”  she guffawed.
    “You knew my Hettie?”
    It took a moment before she regained herself, moving her empty Maws in
a chewing motion and chortling, “Course I did, son.”
    “She never told me about you.”
    “Why  should she? You was a drunk and not listening no way. You don’t
hardly remember nothing. I bet you don’t remember me.”
    “A  little . . .”

290
    “Uh-huh. Men used to ask me to bed in eight languages. Not no more.
You drinking now?”
    “Not since I saw . . . no, not right now.”
    “You look like  you could use one. I bet you could.”
    “Could indeed. But I’m  trying to . . . uh . . . naw. I don’t want one.”
    “Well, you set tight, mister, and I’mma tell you a few things that’ll drive
anybody to drink. And after I’m done, you go ahead and do whatever it is
you got to do. But first, where’s my cheese?”
    “What?”
    “My  cheese.”
    “I  ain’t got no cheese.”
    “Then that’s the thing I’ll  tell you first,”  she said, “for it is all connected.
I’ll  tell it this once. But don’t darken my doorway again if you ain’t got my
cheese.”






SSortcoat sat calmly in a chair near the window, rubbing his Maw, taking deep
breaths, after Sister Paul had motioned him to push her closer to the
window where they could both see the sunshine. Once he had locked her
chair as she reTuested and pulled a chair up to the window she started in:
    “We all knowed each other,” she said. “Hettie, me, my husband, my
daughter Edie, Sister Gee’s parents—they was the aunt and uncle of the
Cousins, by the way. Nanette and Sweet Corn. And of course your friend
Rufus. We all come up from various parts of the South around ’bout the
same time. Hettie and Rufus was the youngest. Me and my husband was the
oldest. We come up following Edie, who brung us out the South. Me and
my husband started the church in my living room. Then we got the
congregation, and after a while we got enough money together to buy us a
piece of dirt Must outside the Cause Houses. The land was cheap then. That’s
the beginning of Five Ends. That’s how it got started.
    “See, the Cause was all Italians in the forties when we come. They built
them proMects for the Italians to unload the boats at the harbor. That
business was dead when we come. The boats left. The docks closed, and

291
them Italians didn’t want us. Fact is, you couldn’t walk down Silver Street
to go downtown. You had to take the bus or the subway, or get a ride—
nobody had no car—so you’d Must run past if you had to. You didn’t walk
down Silver Street unless you wanted to lose your teeth, or if it was very
late or you didn’t have no bus money.
    “Well, we didn’t  mind too much. The South was worse. Myself, I paid
them Italians no more mind than I would watching a bird snatch crumbs off
the ground.
    “I  did day’s work for a white lady lived up in Cobble Hill.  One night she
had a party and I worked late. Well, it was cold and the buses was running
slow, so I walked home. I done that from time to time when it was late. I
didn’t walk down Silver Street. I skirted the outside. I come all the way
down Van Marl, and when I got to Slag Street, I turned and come that way,
skirting along the harbor where the factories were. That’s how the colored
walked home late at night.
    “I  was walking down Van Marl that night—I reckon maybe it was Must
three in the morning or so, and I seen two, maybe three blocks coming at
me two men running to beat the band. White men. Hauling tail. Coming
right at me. One right behind the other.
    “Well, I’m  a colored woman and it was dark and I know however that
cobweb spins out, I’d likely be blamed for whatever wrong happened. So I
hid in a doorway and let ’em come. They run right past me. The first fella
zipped past, and right behind him come the second. That second feller was a
cop.
    “When they got to the corner of Van Marl and Slag, the first fella running
stopped in the intersection and turned around and pulled a pistol on the
second feller, the policeman. Caught that cop by surprise. He looked to
blow that cop’s head off.
    “And  don’t you know, outta nowhere come this truck and boom! Hit that
feller standing in the intersection. Cleaned him up good. Deadened ’em
right there. Then the truck stopped and it got Tuiet.
    “The cop ran into the street and checked out the man with the gun. He
was deader than yesterday’s spaghetti. Then he went to the driver. I heard
the driver say, ‘I never saw him.’ Then the cop said to the driver, ‘Don’t
move. I’m going to a call bo[.’  He ran off to one of them police call bo[es
to get help. Ran clear around the corner and out of sight.

292
    “Well, that was my time to go. I come outta the doorway and walked fast
down the sidewalk past the truck. As I was scooting past, the feller driving
the truck, he hollered, ‘Help me, please.’
    “I  wanted to keep walking. I was scared. That wasn’t none of my
business. So I kept going a few more steps. But the feller driving the truck
begged me. He said please, please, help me, begging me to help him.
    “Well, I  reckon the Lord said to me, ‘Go ’head on and help. Maybe he’s
hurt or inMured.’ So I goes to the driver’s side where he’s setting and I says,
‘Is you hurt?’
    “He was an Italian man. He spoke with such a hard accent it was the
devil understanding him. But the gist of it was he said this: ‘I’m in trouble.’
    “I  said, ‘You ain’t done nothing wrong. The man Mumped in front of you.
I seen it.’
    “He says, ‘That ain’t the problem. I got to get this truck home. I’ll give
you one hundred dollars to drive this truck.’”
    Here Sister Paul paused and shrugged, as if apologizing for the
ridiculous problem she’d stumbled into. Then her age took over and she
yawned, then continued.
    “I  was Must an old country woman. I hadn’t been in the city that long, see.
But I knowed trouble. So I said, ‘Drive on, mister. I ain’t gonna meddle in
your affairs. I ain’t seen nothing. I’m going home to the Cause Houses,
where I live. Goodbye.’
    “Well, I  turned to leave and he begged me to stay. He wouldn’t let me go.
He popped open the truck door and said, ‘Look at my foot. It’s broken.’
    “I  look in there. Seems like he hit the pedal so hard he broke his right
foot some kind of way. His right foot was twisted cockeyed. And then he
lifted his left leg with his arm and showed me his other foot. His left one,
the clutch pedal foot, he had to hold that leg up with his hand. That foot
was lame. He said, ‘I had a stroke. I only got one good side. I ain’t got no
feet to drive.’
    “I  said, ‘I can’t give you my feet to drive, mister. That’s God’s work,
giving a man feet.’
    “He said, ‘Please. I got a wife and son. I’ll give you a hundred dollars.
Can’t you use a hundred dollars?’
    “‘I  surely could,’ I said. ‘But  I likes being free out here. Plus I’m old. I
can’t drive nothing but a mule, mister. I ain’t never driven a car or truck in

293
my life.’
    “He got to begging and pleading so much, Lord, I didn’t know what to
do. He was an Italian man and he seemed sincere, even though I couldn’t
hardly understand every word that man was talking. But he kept saying,
‘I’ll  give you one hundred dollars. We’ll drive the truck together. Please.
I’m gonna go to Mail for twenty-five years this time. I got a son. I already
messed up on raising him.’
    “Well, my  daddy went to Mail when I was but a little wee girl. He gone to
prison for trying to start a sharecroppers’ union back in my home country in
Alabama. I knows the feeling of not having your daddy there when you
need him. Still, I didn’t want to do it. I had already put one foot in it
anyway by standing there talking to him at three in the morning. But I
turned to God and I heard His voice say, ‘I will hold you in the palm of My
hand.’
    “I  said, ‘All right,  mister. I will help you. But I  ain’t taking no money. If
I’m going to Mail, I’m going for what the Lord told me to do.’
    “Well as God would have it, I moved that truck some kind of way. My
husband the Reverend Chicksaw was a truck driver, and I seen him drive a
truck many a day back home in Alabama, so I done the pedals and turned
the steering this way and that like the man told me to, and he shifted the
gears, and we got that thing a-roaring and Merking along for a few blocks,
and not too far up the road at Silver Street, he shut off the motor by turning
the key and I helped him into his house. There was another Italian man
waiting who come out saying, ‘Where you been?’ and runned to the truck,
and then a second man ran out the house to the truck and they drove that
thing off and I never seen it again. Meanwhile, I helped that cripple get in
his house. His good leg was all cockeyed. He was messed up bad.
    “His wife  come downstairs and he said to her, ‘Give that lady one
hundred dollars.’
    “I  said, ‘I don’t want your money, mister. I’m going home. I ain’t seen
nothing.’
    “He said, ‘What can I do for you? I have to do something for you.’
    “I  said, ‘You ain’t got to do a thing. I done what God has told me to do. I
prayed before I done what you asked and God said He would hold me in the
palm of His hand. I hope He holds you the same. And your wife too. Just
please don’t tell nobody what I has done—not even my husband if you is to

294
meet him, for I lives over in the Cause Houses and you might see him
about, preaching in the streets.’ And I left out. His wife did not say a
mumbling word to me. Not a word. If she did say a word, I can’t call it. I
was gone.
    “Well, I  didn’t see him no more till we was building the church. See, we
couldn’t find nobody wanted to sell us the land. We had saved up our
money, the church did, but them Italians didn’t want us out there. Every
time we’d offer to buy a building someplace, we’d look here or there in the
paper, we’d call and they’d say it’s for sale and soon as they’d see us they’d
say, ‘No, we changed our mind. We ain’t selling.’ And the thing is, whoever
was running them docks was closing them down and them Italians was
moving out fast as they could. But they still wouldn’t sell to us. Every one
of ’em was selling what they could, the devil keeping score. But our money
was no good. Well, we kept asking around, asking around, and finally
somebody said, ‘There’s a fella over yonder on Silver Street who’s selling
some land. He’s over there on the dock in that old railroad car.’ So me and
my husband went over there and knocked. And who should answer the door
but this fella.
    “That Must knocked me out. I didn’t say a mumbling word. I acted like I
never seen him before. He done the same. He didn’t make no fuss about it.
He said to my husband, ‘I’ll sell you that lot over yonder. I’m building a
storage house on one side of the lot. You can build your church on the
other.’
    “And  that’s how Five Ends got there.”
    Sportcoat listened, his eye sTuinting in concentration. “You reckon you
still remember that fella’s name?” he asked.
    Sister Paul drew a shallow breath and leaned her head back in the
wheelchair. “I remember his name rightly. One of the finest men I ever
knowed. Old Guido Elefante.”
    “The Elephant?”
    “No. The Elephant’s daddy.”

295
SSortcoat felt thirsty again. He rose from his chair at the window, picked up the
empty water pitcher, and went to the bathroom, where he filled it up again,
drank it down, then returned and sat by the window.
    “Honest to my savior, if it wasn’t you telling  it, I’d  say you was
stretching my blanket. That’s the strangest thing I ever heard,” he said.
    “It’s  the God’s truth. And that ain’t all of it. Not only did old  man Guido
let us have our lot for si[ thousand dollars. No bank would loan us nothing.
We took out a mortgage with him. We stepped on that lot without spending
a penny to nobody’s bank. We gave him four hundred dollars and got to
digging: me and my husband done a little, but it was mostly my Edie,
Rufus, and Hettie. Sister Gee’s parents, and the Cousins’ parents, they come
along later. In the beginning it was mostly us. We didn’t get far. We didn’t
have no machines nor money for none. We dug by shovel. We done what
we could.
    “One afternoon Mr. Guido seen us digging and came by with one of
them big tractor things and dug out the entire foundation, including the
basement. He done it in three days. Didn’t say a mumbling word. He never
did talk much. Never said much to nobody but me, and he didn’t waste too
many words on me neither. But we was grateful for him.
    “After  we started bricking up the walls with cinder block, he stopped by
again and pulled me aside and said, ‘I wants to repay you for what you
done.’
    “I  says, ‘You done it. We building a church.’
    “He says, ‘You got a mortgage on that church with me. I will give you
the land if you let me set a gift inside the church.’
    “I  said, ‘You don’t have to do nothing. We gonna buy the land over
time.’
    “He said, ‘You don’t have to. I will  give it to you. Take the note and burn
it if you want.’
    “I  said, ‘Well, I don’t know nothing about burning no notes, Mr. Guido.
We owes you fifty-si[  hundred dollars on a straight mortgage to you. We’ll
pay you free and clear in a few years.’
    “He says, ‘I ain’t got a few years. I will  tear the mortgage up right now if
you let me put something beautiful on the back wall of the church.’
    “I  said, ‘Is you saved to Jesus?’

296
    “That tied him up. He said, ‘I can’t lie. I  am not. But I got a friend who
is. I got to save something for him. I made a promise to him to keep
something for him. I plan to keep that promise. I wanna get somebody to
draw a picture on the back wall of the church where he can see it, so that
when he comes by this church someday, or his children, or his children’s
children come by, they’ll look at it and know it’s there on account of me
and that I kept my word.’ He said wouldn’t nobody know about it but us—
me and him.
    “Well, I  talked about it with my husband, for he was the pastor of the
church. He tried to talk to old Guido hisself, but the old Italian wouldn’t say
a word to him. Not a mumbling word did he say to my husband or nobody
else at Five Ends. I seen him talk to the building inspector from the city
who came around saying you have to do thus and so when we was getting
ready to build. I don’t know what was said there, but that inspector needed
talking to ’cause you Must can’t build nothing in New York by saying it, not
even back in them days. You had to go through the city. Well, Mr. Guido
talked to him. But not a word did he waste on nobody colored but me, to
my knowing. So my husband finally said, ‘If it’s okay by you, it’s okay by
me, since you is the only one he talks to.’
    “So I went to Mr. Elefante and said, ‘Okay, do what you want.’
    “A  couple of days later he come by with three of his Italian men and
them fellas got to work bricking that cinder block. They knowed their
business, so we left them to it and worked the inside. We put down the floor
and finished the roof. That’s how it went. They worked the outside. We
worked the inside. Colored and white working together.
    “After  Mr. Elefante’s men built the walls about waist high, he come to
me at lunch—” She paused and then corrected herself. “Well, that ain’t
right. I came to him at lunch. See, those days when we broke for lunch, the
Italians went one way to eat at home and the colored went the other. But I
always made Mr. Guido a little something for lunch ’cause he didn’t eat
much, and I’d bring it back to him a few minutes early because he hardly
didn’t go to lunch. I come back early one afternoon and found him working
as usual, bricking up that back wall. When I walked up on him, he says, ‘Is
you alone?’
    “I  said, ‘I Must brought you some vittles ’cause I know you don’t eat.’

297
    “He looked around to make sure nobody was about, then said, ‘I got
something to show you. It’s a good-luck charm.’
    “He brung this little metal bo[  and opened it. He said, ‘This is the thing
that bought your church land.’”
    “What was it?” Sportcoat asked.
    “It  wasn’t nothing,” Sister Paul said. “It looked like a piece of soap
shaped like a fat girl. ’Bout the color of an old trumpet. A little colored
lady, is what it looked like. He closed that soap thing in the metal bo[, set
that bo[ inside the hollow part of a cinder block, put his concrete and
mortar on it, done something to the bottom so it could set in there good, and
set another cinder block over it. You couldn’t tell one from the other.
    “Then he says to me, ‘You the only one that knows. Even my wife don’t
know.’
    “I  said, ‘Why you trust me?’
    “He said, ‘A  person who trusts can be trusted.’
    “I  said, ‘Well, I ain’t got nothing to do with where you puts your soap,
Mr. Guido. I keeps my soap in the bathroom. But you a grown man, and it’s
your soap. It ain’t gonna do you no good where it’s at, but I reckon you got
more soap at home.’
    “I  do believe that’s one of the few times I seen that man laugh. He was a
serious man, see.
    “When his men come back, they built that wall up before the day was
done. The ne[t day he had another Italian feller came by with a black-and-
white picture of a painting. He called it a Jell-O or some kind of painting.
That feller copied that painting e[actly as it was, right to the back wall of
the church. It took him two days. The first day he drawed a big circle and
colored it in some. Framed it out some, I guess. The second day he drawed
Jesus in his robes right in the middle circle—with Jesus’s hands outspread.
Them hands touch the outside of that circle he drawed. One of them hands,
Jesus’s left hand, is right on the cinder block where that soap is. Right on
top of it.”
    She paused and nodded.
    “And  that thing is in there yet today.”
    “You sure?” Sportcoat asked.
    “Sure as I’m sitting here. Unless the building fell down to dust. Then
they finished bricking the other walls, helped us finish the inside, do the

298
floors and such. And at the end, that same painter came back and put up the
lettering on the back wall over Jesus’s head that says ‘May God Hold You
in the Palm of His Hand.’ It was the prettiest thing.”
    She yawned, her story finished.
    “That’s how the church come to have that motto.”
    Sportcoat scratched his Maw, perple[ed. “But you didn’t tell me about the
cheese,” he said.
    “What about it? I done told you,” she said.
    “No you didn’t.”
    “I  told you about the truck, didn’t I?”
    “What do a truck got to do with it?”
    She shook her old head. “Son, you so old your mind has shrunk to the
size of a full-grown pea. What do a truck carry? The truck I drove for Mr.
Guido was full of cheese. Stolen cheese, I reckon. Old Guido started
sending me that cheese five minutes after we opened the church doors.
After I let him stick that good-luck soap bo[ with  the colored doll in it or
whatever it was in that wall, I could do no wrong for him. I asked him many
a day to stop sending that cheese, for it was good cheese. E[pensive cheese.
Too much for our little church. But he said, ‘I wanna send it. People need
food.’ So after a while I told him to send it to Building Seventeen in the
Cause, for Hot Sausage come to run that building after a time, and Sausage
is honest, and I knowed he’d give it out in the Cause to them who could use
it. Mr. Guido sent that cheese for years and years. After he died, it still
come. When I come here to this old folks’ home, it was yet coming. It
comes to this day.”
    “So who’s sending it now?”
    “Jesus,” she said.
    “Oh hush!” Sportcoat hissed. “You sound like Hettie. That cheese got to
come from someplace!”
    Sister Paul shrugged. “Genesis twenty-seven twenty-eight says, ‘May
God give you heaven’s dew and earth’s richness—an abundance of grain
and new wine.’”
    “This is cheese.”
    “Son, a blessing favors them that needs it. Don’t matter how it comes. It
Must matters that it does.”

299
                                                       225




                                                     DO



IT WAS A  DREAM  SO ALIVE—AND    SO MANY   OF THEM   SEEMED
started—that at times Elefante felt he had to keep himself from levitating
when he thought about it. He gripped the steering wheel of his Lincoln
tightly as he considered it. Melissa, the Governor’s daughter, rode beside
him in silence. It was four a.m. He was happy. It wasn’t so much that
Melissa had accepted his invitation to “look into her father’s affairs,” but
rather the way she handled her own affairs—and his.
    He’d never met anyone like her before. She was, as they say in Italian, a
stellina, a star, a most beautiful one. From the first, she was shy and
reticent, as he’d seen. But beneath the reserve was a sureness of manner, a
certainty that belied deep confidence and engendered trust. Over the weeks
as they courted, he saw how she was with her employees at her bagel shop
and factory, the way she figured out important problems for them without
making them feel stupid, the politeness she showed them, her respect and
deference for older people in general, including the old deacon, the rummy
who’d worked for his mother, whom she’d finally met Must a month ago.
She didn’t refer to him as “colored,” or “Negro.” She called him “Mister”
and referred to him as “Afro-American,” which, to Elefante, sounded
dangerous, odd, and foreign. That was hippie talk. It reminded him of
Bunch Moon, the colored bastard. He’d heard through the grapevine that
Peck had dispatched Bunch—badly. There was danger everywhere now,
full-out shooting coming because of the whites, the blacks, the Spanish, the

300
Irish cops, the Italian families, the drug wars. It wouldn’t stop. Yet despite
the dark days ahead he felt himself moving into a light of a different kind.
The wonderful, bursting, gorgeous, eye-opening panorama of light that love
can bring into a lonely man’s life.
    The romance was new territory for them both. A couple of lunches and a
Tuick dinner at a Bron[ diner had dissolved into long, peaceful dinners at
the Peter Luger Steak House in Williamsburg, then lovely walks along the
Brooklyn Esplanade as the cocoon of affection and lust blossomed into the
kaleidoscope of bursting, passionate, gorgeous love.
    Even so, he thought, as he steered the car down the FDR Drive, the
Chrysler Building at Forty-Second Street receding in the distance, to love a
man by the light of day when the sun is shining and there is a promise of
love is one thing. But to rumble into the housing proMects of Brooklyn in his
Lincoln to pick up the old deacon in the dead of night was Tuite another.
    He pondered it as he spun the Lincoln into the Battery Tunnel, the
fluorescent lights along its ceiling glinting across Melissa’s face as she sat
ne[t to him. Until  then he’d always believed a partner brought worry, fear,
and weakness to a man, especially one in his business. But Melissa brought
courage and humility and humor to places he’d never known e[isted. He’d
never partnered with a woman before, if you didn’t include his mother, but
Melissa’s Tuiet sincerity was a weapon of a new kind. It drew people in,
disarmed them. It made them friends—and that was a weapon too. He’d
seen that happen with the old colored woman in the Bensonhurst nursing
home who called herself Sister Paul.
    He thanked God he’d brought Melissa to the old folks’ home the week
before. He almost didn’t do it. He took her along as an afterthought, to
show his sincerity and openness. She’d turned matters in his favor.
    The old deacon had assured him that he’d told Sister Paul all about him.
But when he walked into the room, the old biddy, wrinkled and covered in a
gray blanket, gave him the malocchio, the evil eye. She ignored his greeting
and, without a word, e[tended an old claw, pointing at an old tin coffee can
near her bed. He reached for it and handed it to her. She spat in it.
    “You look like  your daddy but fatter,” she said.
    He placed a chair close to her wheelchair and sat in it facing her, trying
to smile. Melissa sat on the bed behind him. “I ate more peanuts than he
did.” He said it as a Moke, to loosen things.

301
    She waved that off with an ancient, wrinkled hand. “Your daddy didn’t
eat no peanuts to my recollection. And he didn’t say but four or five words
a day. Which means you is not only fatter, but you uses your talking hole
more.”
    He felt the color moving into his face. “Didn’t  the deacon talk to you?”
    “Don’t  be coming in here sassifying and frying up air castles ’bout some
old deacon! Do you do?”
    “Huh?”
    “Do you do?”
    “Do what?”
    “I  asked you a Tuestion, mister. Do you do?”
    “Listen, miss—”
    “Don’t  sass me,” she barked. “I’m asking you a Tuestion. Yes or no. Do
you do?”
    He raised his finger to make a point, to try to slow her down. “I’m only
here bec—”
    “Put that finger in your pocket and listen, sonny! You walk in here
without a can of sardines, nor gift, nor bowl of beans, not even a glass of
water to offer somebody who is aiming to give you a free hand to the thing
you come for. And you don’t even know if you gonna hit the bull’s-eye on
that or not. You is like most white men. You believes you is entitled to
something you ain’t got no hand in. Everything in the world got a price,
mister. Well now, the bottom rail’s on top, sir, for I has been walked on all
my life, and I don’t know you from Adam. You could be Italian, being that
the old suit you wearing has got wine stains all over it. On the other hand,
you could be some fancy-figuring devil-may-care wino Sretending to be
Mr. Guido’s son. I don’t know why you is here in the first place, mister. I
don’t know the deacon that good. He didn’t e[plain nothing to me about
you. Like most mens, he don’t feel he got to e[plain nothing to a woman,
including his own wife, who did all the frying  and cooking and hair
straightening while he rumbled ’round throwing Moy Muice down his throat
for all them long years he done it. I been around the sun one hundred four
whole times and nobody’s e[plained nothing to me. I read the book on not
being e[plained to. That’s called being an old colored woman, sir. Now I
ask it again. For the last time—and if you don’t show your points here, then

302
you can slip your corns inside them little Hush Puppy shoes of yours with
the little Tuarters inside ’em and git on down the road. Do you do?”
    He blinked, e[asperated, and glanced at Melissa, who—thank God—said
softly, “Mrs. Paul, he does do.”
    The old lady’s shriveled face, a mass of wrinkled, angry rivers, loosened
as she turned her ancient head to look at Melissa. “Is you his wife, miss?”
    “Fiancée. We’re gonna be married.”
    The old biddy’s anger loosened a bit more. “Hmph. What kind of feller is
he?”
    “He doesn’t talk much.”
    “His daddy didn’t  talk much neither. Talked a lot less than him, that’s for
sure. Why you wanna marry this loser? He comes tumbling in here rough
and wrong, asking Tuestions like he’s the police or some God-sent minister.
His daddy never asked me but one single Tuestion. Never asked me na’ar
Tuestion after. Is he that type of man, this feller of yours? Is he the type
that’s good for his word? Is he the type who do stuff and don’t talk about it
to nobody later? Do he talk or do he do? Which is it?”
    “I  hope so. I think so. I’m gonna see. I think he does . . . do.”
    “All  right then.”  The old lady seemed satisfied. She turned to stare at
Elefante, but still spoke to Melissa, as if Elefante were not in the room. “I
hope you is right, miss, for your sake. If you is, you got something. For his
daddy listened. His daddy didn’t set around spouting Tuestions and blasting
air and making pronouncements and pointing his claw like he was top dog.
His daddy didn’t point his finger at nobody. He gived us that church free
and clear.”
    “I  wish somebody would give me a church,” Melissa said.
    The old lady seemed suddenly outraged. She grew furious. She arched
her head back, glaring, staring at Melissa, enraged, then suddenly threw
back her head and burst into laughter, her mouth wide, showing one stained,
rancid old tooth. “Haw! You something, girl!”  And then Melissa went in,
smoothing things out, talking it over, chatting easily with the old crocodile
for the ne[t two hours, until the salt in the old lady dissolved, vanishing
completely, revealing the kind, odd soul who lived beneath, sharing her life
and past, pouring out the soul music of an old black woman’s suffering,
sorrow, and Moy: her late husband, her beloved daughter who spent her
young life building Five Ends church and died fourteen years before. With

303
Melissa’s coa[ing, Sister Paul worked through her beginnings at a
sharecropping farm in Valley Creek, Alabama, north to Kentucky, where
she met her husband, and their move to New York following their daughter.
Then he got the calling to teach Christ’s wisdom, and by the time she
reached the point in her narrative about the birth of Five Ends Baptist
Church and old Mr. Guido’s role in building it, and of course the bo[ that
he’d hidden there, she was talking to them both. But she didn’t stop there,
for as she spoke she revealed an even greater treasure, the old Cause
neighborhood of Elefante’s youth, the one that he’d forgotten in his years of
hardship and hustle, rolling back the neighborhood he remembered as a boy,
the Italian kids playing Johnny-on-the-pony and ring-a-levio in the street on
Sunday afternoons the Irish kids over on Thirteenth Street hammering pink
stickballs for the length of two sewers the Jewish kids on Dikeman
guffawing as they tossed water balloons on passersby out the upstairs
windows of the tenement building where their dad ran the grocery store on
the first floor the old dockworkers, Italian, colored, and Spanish, arguing
about the Brooklyn Dodgers in three languages while they rolled dice and
of course the Negroes from the Cause Houses, hurrying past in their Sunday
best toward downtown Brooklyn, chuckling nervously as he acted like an
idiot in front of  them in his teenage years, drunk, angry, threatening, pissing
behind a parked car as the Negroes passed, even chasing their children
down Silver Street at night. How could he be so dumb? He saw himself
then as his mother had referred to him in rage when she learned of his
behavior: a dumb Saisan, worrying that the colored, the Irish, the Jews, the
outsiders were invading our block. We got no block, she said. The Italians
don’t own the block. Nobody owns the block. Nobody was king of nothing
in New York. It’s life. Survival.  How could he have been so stuSid? he
thought. Is this what love does? It changes you this way? It allows you to
see the past this clearly?
    When the old lady was done, he felt as if he’d been blessed and had
communion, his sins washed clean by confession. It was evening, and she’d
nearly talked herself to sleep. He had stood to thank her and to leave when
she asked, “Your mother still living?”
    “She is,” he said.
    “You ought to honor her, son. For whatever good your daddy has
wrought, it’s she who held him up to it. She does what these days?”

304
    “She works her garden.”
    “That’s nice. Maybe you ought not tell her you and I spoke.”
    “Who said I was gonna do that?”
    Sister Paul eyed him thoughtfully a moment, then said, “I’m one hundred
four, son. I knows every trick. You’ll be wanting to check on me, hoping
she’ll remember that hundred dollars your daddy offered me for driving that
truck. She’ll recollect it surely, for that was big money in them days, and I
reckon them was tight minutes for her, setting in her living room in the wee
hours with her husband’s right foot pointing one way while his ankle was
pointing the other, and that truck full of trouble in front of her house, and
you laying upstairs snoring with a smeller full of snot and a life full of
headaches ahead, for I bet raising you wasn’t no bed of roses. A wife knows
everything, son. If she wanted you to know what happened that night, I
reckon she’d a spilled the beans long past. Why worry an old mother’s
heart? If some harm was to come to you on account of what I Must told you,
then I got her sorrow to carry too. I’m old, son. I got no reason to lie.”
    Elefante considered this a moment, then said, “All right.” He paused.
“Thank you . . . for everything. Is there something I can do for you?”
    “If  you’s a praying man, pray that the Lord sends me a hunk of my
cheese.”
    “Your what?”
    “Your daddy liked my vittles, see . . .”
    “Vittles?”
    “My  food. He liked my cooking. He put a hurting on my fried chicken. I
gived him some one afternoon when we was building the church. He gived
me a piece of his cheese in return. Italian cheese. Don’t know the name of
it. But that cheese was something! I told him that! After we got the church
built up, he sent that cheese to us for years. Now he’s long dead and I hear
tell the cheese keeps coming. Like magic. From Jesus, I reckon.”
    That was Elefante’s opening, and he cleared his throat, the big man
again. “I can find out who sends i—”
    “Did  I ask you that, son?”
    “Maybe my moth—”
    “Son, why you keep wanting to get your momma all gooked up in this
mess? You asked me what I wanted and I said it. I said Must pray for Jesus to
send me a hunk of that cheese. I told old Sportcoat to do it, but he’s scarce

305
these days. Jesus sends that cheese, son. Nobody else. It comes from Jesus.
I’m asking you to ask Jesus to send me some. Just a piece. I ain’t had it in
years.”
    “Um . . . okay.” Elefante stood and moved to the door. Melissa followed.
“Anything  else?” he asked.
    “Well, if  you want, you can tip Mr. Mel before you leave.”
    “Who’s Mr.  Mel?”
    “He’s that old white feller by the front door who makes sure none of us
old folks escape.”
    Elefante looked at Melissa, who nodded down the hall at the building
entrance, where an old security guard could be seen, nodding off into the
Daily News.
    “I  been sending my tithes to Five Ends every week for twelve years,”
Sister Paul said. “Four dollars and thirteen cents, from my Social Security.
He walks it to the post office every week. He gets a money order and puts it
in an envelope and mails it. Unless the post office is paying him in beers
and liTuor, I owes him twelve years’ worth of stamps and envelopes. Plus
the cost of making that four dollars and thirteen cents into a money order.
Now Mel’s donated that whiskey down his little red lane free as the rivers
run for as long as I been here, till he Tuit a year or so past. But, honest to
my savior, he’s a good man. I’d like to pay him what I owes him before I
gets my wings. You think you can spare a little something for him? He
won’t take money. He says he’s too old.”
    “Does he like anything else other than booze?”
    “He favors them Mars candy bars.”
    “I’ll   give ’im enough to last the rest of his life.”






They made the move into the wall that night at 4:20 a.m. Elefante and Sportcoat.
Melissa remained in the car at the curb, the lights out and motor running.
No need for her to risk getting busted. She had done the work, and the
research too. After hearing the description of the obMect, reading a few
newspapers from the period, then calling the man in Europe to make

306
arrangements for transfer and sale, she knew what it was. Apparently “the
soap” her uncle Macy—the Governor’s brother—had hidden and brought
back to America among his “collection” stolen from the Vienna cave in
1945 was not soap at all. It was the oldest three-dimensional obMect in the
world. The Venus of Willendorf, the goddess of fertility. A tiny piece of
limestone, carved in the shape of a pregnant woman, said to be thousands of
years old. And it was sitting in the palm of Jesus’s hand, a colored hand,
painted on the cinder-block back wall of Five Ends Baptist Church of the
Cause Houses in Brooklyn, New York, by Sister Bibb’s son Zeke with
Sportcoat and Sausage’s help, at the direction of Pastor Gee, who some
years before felt that Jesus should be transformed from a white Jesus into a
colored man. What hand was there looked like a blob. But it was a hand
nonetheless.
    There was no moon out as Elefante and Sportcoat made their way along
the side of the building to the pitch-black yard of the church, hidden by high
weeds, the twinkling lights of a few Manhattan skyscrapers seen in the
distance. Elefante had a flashlight, covered with a black cloth, and a
hammer and stone chisel. Sportcoat glanced at Elefante’s tools and said, “I
don’t need no light.” But when he led Elefante to the back wall, he took the
light and flashed it a moment, revealing the portrait of Jesus, now badly
discolored, a white man painted brown, his arms outstretched, the two
hands roughly eight feet apart. Then he handed the flashlight back to
Elefante.
    “Did  Sister Paul say the right hand or the left hand?” Elefante asked.
    “Can’t recollect. Ain’t  but two hands there,” Sportcoat said pointedly.
They started on the left hand, carefully tapping around the brick. They
chinked the mortar away until the brick was nearly free. “Wait,” Sportcoat
said. “Gimme a minute to get inside, then Must chink that brick in toward
me. There ain’t nothing on the inside wall. Tap it. Don’t hit it too hard now.
It’s hollow. That hammer’ll bust a hole in it.”
    With the head of his hammer, Elefante carefully tapped at the edges of
the cinder block softly. The block gave way with a few taps and the cinder
block tumbled inside.
    It occurred to him as it fell in, What if the thing falls?
    He heard the old man on the other side grunt as he grabbed it. Elefante
spoke through the wall: “Anything there?”

307
    “In  where?”
    “In  that cinder block. Something like a bar of soap in there?”
    “Naw. No soap.”
    That caught Elefante off guard. He could see the old man’s face in the
hole left by the cinder block. He stuck his head in the blank space where the
cinder block had been removed and looked, at an angle, shining his
flashlight at the cinder block below and the one above. Nothing. He could
see inside the church, and saw the old man’s eye peering out at him.
    “There’s nothing here,” he said. “These blocks are staggered. That thing
could’ve fell off  the edge of these blocks and bounced all the way to the
bottom and broken to pieces. We’ll have to take the whole wall of the
church down to see the bottom. Let’s try the other hand.”
    He moved to the other side and had begun chinking away at the cinder
block of Jesus’s right hand when the sound of the church door opening and
the old man’s feet shuffling across the pavement stopped him.
    “You gotta get inside to catch this cinder block when it falls in,” he said.
    “I  do?” Sportcoat said.
    “Yeah. We’re looking for a bo[ of  soap. It can’t break. It’s valuable.”
    “Well this ain’t  soap,” Sportcoat said. He held up a dusty metal bo[.
    “Why  you trying to bust my coMones!” Elefante said, snatching it.
    “Your what?”
    “My  balls.”
    “I  ain’t got nothing to do with them things.”
    “I  thought you said nothing was in there.”
    “You said soap. This don’t look like no soap. It’s a bo[. It was mortared
to the side of the brick.”
    “Side of what?”
    “The cinder block. Somebody put a metal plate on the side and fi[ed this
to it.”
    “I  thought you said there was nothing in there.”
    “You said soap, mister.”
    “Stop calling me mister!” Elefante sTuealed in e[citement, and dropped
to his knees and thrust the flashlight at Sportcoat. “Shine it.”
    Sportcoat complied. Elefante opened the bo[ and pulled out a plump
stone figurine, about four inches high, with large breasts.

308
    “What do you know,” Sportcoat said. He resisted saying “a little colored
lady.” Instead he muttered, “It’s a doll.”
    “Just like he said. No bigger than a bar of Palmolive soap,” Elefante
muttered, turning it back and forth.
    “I  seen country mice that was bigger,” Sportcoat said. “Can I touch it?”
    Elefante handed it to him. “It do feel heavy,” Sportcoat said, handing it
back. “She’s a hefty little woman. I seen a few of them in my time.”
    “Like  this thing?”
    “Hefty  women with big love knobs? Sure. This church is full of ’em.”
    Elefante ignored that, glancing around instinctively. The yard was dark.
There wasn’t a soul about. The Lincoln sat at the curb, motor idling. He had
it. He was free. Time to move.
    “I’ll   drop you off. Then call you later. I’ll take care of you, buddy.”
    Sportcoat didn’t move. “Wait a minute. You think, on account of me and
Sister Paul helping you here, you could help me find the Christmas bo[
too?”
    “The what?”
    “The Christmas bo[. All  the Christmas money. Money saved up by
people in the church to buy gifts for their children. My Hettie collected it
every year and hid it in the church someplace. Christmas ain’t but a month
away now.”
    “Where is it?”
    “If  I’d  known, I wouldn’t be asking you to help.”
    “How  much was saved in it?”
    “Well, when you add it all up, and figure out the liars who claim they had
this or that in there, I reckon it’s probably about three or four thousand
dollars. Cash.”
    “I  think I can handle that, Mr. Sportcoat.”
    “Come again? Mister?”
    “Mr.  Sportcoat.”
    Sportcoat pawed at his forehead with a wrinkled hand. There was a
clarity to the world now that felt new, not uncomfortable, but at times the
newness of it felt odd, like the feeling of breaking in a new suit of clothing.
The constant headaches and nausea that had been his companions after
leaving the swigfest for decades had lifted. He felt like a radio tuning in to a
new channel, one that was beginning to fuzz into range, slowly coming in

309
clear, proper, the way his Hettie had always wanted him to be. The new
feeling humbled him. It made him feel religious, it made him feel closer to
God, and to man, God’s honored child. “I ain’t never been called Mr.
Sportcoat by nobody.”
    “Well what do you want to be called?”
    Sportcoat thought for a moment. “Maybe a child of God.”
    “All  right. Child  of God. I can handle it. I’ll get you a new Christmas
bo[.”
    Elefante moved to the car.
    “Wait!”
    “What now?”
    “How  we gonna e[plain this brick missing from the wall?”
    But Elefante had already moved to the car. “I’ll have it fi[ed tomorrow.
Just tell the church not to say a word. Tell ’em to ask Sister Paul. I’ll handle
everything else.”
    “What about Jesus’s hand? They gonna be mad about that. It’s gotta be
fi[ed  back.”
    “Tell ’em  Jesus is gonna get a new wall. And a new hand. And a new
building if they want. You got my word.”

310
                                                       226




                                     BEAUTIFUL



SPORTCOAT’S  FUNERAL   TWENTY-TWO   MONTHS   AFTER  THE  D
shooting was, without a doubt, the greatest funeral in Cause Houses history.
It was the usual Five Ends Baptist Church catastrophe, of course. Reverend
Gee was twenty minutes late because his new Chevy—si[-years-old new—
didn’t start. One of the flower delivery guys fell in front of the church and
broke his arm, having tripped over a wayward brick left out in front that
was part of the new renovation that seemed to be ongoing—money coming
from God knows where. He fell through the open rectory door, sending
moonflowers everywhere. The Cousins, Nanette and Sweet Corn, got into a
hissing match in the choir pew over the ownership of a hat. The hearse
carrying the body from the funeral home was late as usual, this time
because old Morris Hurly, affectionately known as Hurly Girly, claimed he
got in a fender bender on the BQE with an oil truck, which prompted him to
do some Tuick rearranging of Sportcoat’s body as it lay in the casket inside
the hearse, which was hurriedly parked smack in the middle of the church’s
brand-new garden out back, for lack of a parking space in front. Several
angry attendees, glaring out the church back door—including Bum-Bum,
Sister Bibb, and several members of the now-bulked-up Puerto Rican
Statehood Society of the Cause Houses, thanks to its new president, Miss
Izi—watched in disgust, noting there were no bent or dented fenders on the
shiny limo, and guessed correctly that when Hurly Girly saw the line of

311
people standing outside the church stretching around the corner and into the
proMects courtyard, he panicked and decided to tidy up Sportcoat.
    “Morris  wants to impress new customers,” Bum-Bum fumed, watching
as two men in black suits from the Hurly home stood guard over the limo’s
open tailgate, while the rear end of the aged Morris, a grim-looking soul
with a completely white Afro, dangled out the back, his shiny shoes getting
muddied from the black soil of the new garden. Back and forth his shoes
went, in and out of the limousine, as he made last-minute adMustments to
Sportcoat.
    “Look  at him,” Bum-Bum said in disgust. “Morris looks like  a ferret.”
    Still, it  was a homecoming that beat all, a celebration of celebrations. All
of the Cause Houses came. Folks from Mount Tabernacle, St. Augustine,
and even Mr. Itkin and two members of the Jewish temple on Van Marl
Street showed. The line stretched past the Elephant’s bo[car, up Ingrid
Avenue, down Slag Avenue, and all the way back into the plaza of Cause
Houses, nearly all the way to the flagpole. The free distribution of cheese at
the funeral might have helped, some said, and where it came from still no
one knew, but it arrived the night before in bulk, weight, and volume never
before seen, crates of it, neatly stacked in the basement of the church,
waiting, when Sister Gee came to open the building at five a.m.
    The viewing lasted nine hours.
    Five Ends only held 150 people—that was what the fire code allowed.
Twice that many actually sTueezed in for the service. There were so many
people that someone called local Fire Engine Company Station 131, which
sent a truck over. The firemen took one look at the crowd and left, radioing
for the cops, who sent over two sTuad cars from the Seventy-Si[th Precinct.
The officers took one look at the crowd and the line of double-parked cars
that reTuired onerous traffic-ticket writing and announced they’d been
called away for an emergency accident in Bay Ridge that would hold them
up for appro[imately three hours, e[actly long enough for Reverend Gee to
shout his sermon to all about what a great man Sportcoat had been, and for
the Cousins to lead the Five Ends choir in some of the most saintly and
heavenly rousing and hollering that anyone had ever heard, Moined in the
end by JoaTuin and Los Soñadores, who were, praise Jesus, drowned out by
the hollering of the Cousins, who, as usual, stole the show.

312
    It was a death e[travaganza, only this time the usual suspects—Sister
Gee, Sister Bibb, Hot Sausage, Pudgy Fingers, now legally in the care of
the Cousins, who fought over him with the same tenacity with which they
fought over everything else—were amended by Sister Paul, who now, at
106, enMoyed a special seat on the dais, accompanied by none other than
former deacon Rufus Harley, Manitor of the Watch Houses, who had sworn
up and down that he would never, ever darken the doorway of that hotbed
of hypocrisy and holy impotence known as Five Ends Baptist Church as
long as he drew air. Also there was Miss Izi, flanked by all seventeen of the
newly sworn-in members of the Puerto Rican Statehood Society of the
Cause Houses. The gentle giant Soup Lopez was there as well, along with
JoaTuin’s cousin Elena from the Bron[ and Calvin the subway tollbooth
operator—those two talked trains. Bum-Bum, accompanied by her new
husband, Dominic the Haitian Sensation, along with his best friend, Mingo
the witch doctor, were in attendance, as were several members of
Sportcoat’s All-Cause Boys Baseball Team, now grown and retired from
baseball, save one. And an unusual conglomerate of outsiders: Potts
Mullen, the retired cop, and his former rookie partner, Jet Hardman, who
was currently working for the New York City Harbor Patrol, the first black
ever, having broken that color barrier at the NYPD Bomb STuad, the
Department of Internal Affairs, the accounting department, the traffic
division, and the mechanic transportation division, which fi[ed sTuad cars
—all of which broke down five minutes after Jet finished working on them.
    And finally  two of the most interesting parties: Thomas G. Elefante,
formerly known as the Elephant, resplendent in a gray suit, along with his
mother and his new wife, a hefty, shy Irish woman said to be from the
Bron[ and Deems Clemens himself, the former drug-dealing terror of the
Cause—now a twenty-one-year-old rookie pitcher for the Iowa Cubs, a
minor-league affiliate for the hapless maMor-league Chicago Cubs,
accompanied by baseball coach Bill Boyle from St. John’s University, with
whom he lived for a year while pitching St. John’s to the NCAA finals in
his only college season. The wound that the right-handed-pitching Clemens
had received in the shooting twenty-two months earlier was, thankfully, in
his left shoulder, and had healed nicely, along with his mental state, which
had improved dramatically when he vacated the Cause Houses to live in
Coach Boyle’s home.

313
    Deems’s appearance—he arrived twenty minutes late—and the news of
his good fortune in professional baseball blitzed through the church
mourners like a cyclone. “It’s Must our luck,” JoaTuin mumbled. “The only
guy from the Cause who goes to the bigs gets drafted by the lousy Cubs.
That team hasn’t won a World Series in si[ty-three years. Who’s gonna bet
on them? I won’t make a dime on him.”
    “Who cares?” said Miss Izi. “Did  you see his car?”
    She had a point. Clemens, who had owned a used Pontiac Firebird during
his drug-selling days, had arrived driving a brand-new Volkswagen Beetle.
    After the service and burial, a large group of about forty neighborhood
residents gathered in the basement of Five Ends and talked late into the
night, in part because there was so much food to eat, and in part because
there was so much cheese left to distribute they had no idea what to do with
it all. The arguing about the cheese distribution took hours. It was later
determined, from an eyewitness account of Bum-Bum, that ever-vigilant
cheese cop, and old Dub Washington, who had fallen asleep in the old
factory at Vitali Pier and had wandered outside in the middle of the night to
forage through the garbage on Silver Street, that the cheese had arrived the
night before in a refrigerated eighteen-foot bo[ truck containing forty-one
cases, each bearing twenty-eight five-pound hunks of delicious, delectable,
delightful white man’s cheese. It had been distributed because it could not
be stored, but despite the crowd at the viewing, the church ran out of takers,
so it was hurriedly decided after Sportcoat’s service that they would spread
the love into the wider Cause Houses district. They shoved eight hunks into
the trunk of the two sTuad cars of the cops from the Seven-Si[ who had
returned from their Bay Ridge “traffic emergency.” The cops protested that
it was too much, so they were instructed by Sister Gee to carry half of the
cheese out to Ladder Company 131 over on Van Marl Street and share it
with their fellow  city workers. The cops agreed but didn’t give the firemen
a single curd, since the cops and firemen in the Cause District hated each
other Must like they did all over New York. Word was spread also to the
Watch Houses. A line formed outside the church, residents from both
housing proMects came back in droves, and still there were not enough
takers. Many of the people who did show up were forced to carry home
more than they could handle. They hauled blocks of it in shopping carts,
sacks, shopping bags, wagons, purses, baby carriages, and mail carrier carts

314
swiped from the nearby post office. There had never been so much cheese
in the Cause District. And sadly, there never would be cheese there again.
    It’s hard to say if the cheese, or Clemens and his Volkswagen, or
Elefante’s presence caused more of a dustup in the church core group that
stayed into the night, discussing matters, arguing and Moking and regaling
into the wee hours, accusing one another of the treachery of knowing
Sportcoat’s whereabouts and the circumstances of his mysterious death. No
one seemed to know. No one had ever seen anything like it before in the
Cause. But at seven p.m., after the tables had been cleared, the dishes
washed and the last of the cheese distributed, the church swept clean, and
the remaining leftover moonflowers given away because there were so
many, the outside neighbors peeled away, leaving only the hard-core souls
of Five Ends Baptist: Sister Gee, Hot Sausage, Sister Bibb, and Bum-Bum,
along with two visitors, Miss Izi and Soup. The last two were not church
members but were allowed special attendance as representatives of their
various institutions: Miss Izi as the newly elected president of the Puerto
Rican Statehood Society, and Soup, who no longer went by the name Soup
but rather carried the moniker Rick ;, a proud member of the Nation of
Islam and also the top seller in the Brooklyn MosTue #34 sales division,
having sold the most bean pies and newspapers in that mosTue’s storied
history. He was also wanted in Kansas for false imprisonment related to a
domestic sTuabble and robbery, but that, he assured the group, was a long
story.
    The si[ talked late into the night.
    The conversation danced up and down, draping the walls with conMecture
as they pushed various theories into play, then oblivion, and then back
again. Where did Sportcoat go for the last fourteen months? Did Sportcoat
drink at the end? How did he die? Why did the Elephant show up? And
where did all that cheese come from?
    The cheese business burned them most of all. “After all these years,”
Miss Izi said. “Nobody still  knows. That’s Must stupid.”
    “I  grabbed the driver of the truck,” Bum-Bum said proudly. “I saw the
truck coming around three thirty and ran out and caught him before he
pulled off. There were two of them. One had Must got in the truck. The other
one, the driver, was coming out of the church. I grabbed him by the arm

315
before he could get in his truck. I asked him, ‘Who are you?’ He didn’t say
much. He had an Italian accent. I think he was a gangster.”
    “Why  you say that?” Miss Izi asked.
    “He had a lot of pockmarks on his face.”
    “That’s nothing,”  Miss Izi said. “That could be from learning to use a
fork.”
    That caused a flurry of laughter and comment.
    No one seemed to know much more than that.
    Then they turned the heat on Hot Sausage. For the better part of an hour,
they grilled Sportcoat’s best friend. Hot Sausage pleaded ignorance. “The
man went to Mail,” he said. “It was in the paper.”
    “It  was not in the paper,” Miss Izi said. “The man was supposed to go to
Mail. He was supposed to go to trial. That was in the paper. Sportcoat didn’t
go no place.”
    “Well, he wasn’t here!” Sausage said.
    “Where was he then?”
    “What am I, a OuiMa board? I don’t know,” Hot Sausage said. “The man
is dead. He did a lot of good in his life. What you worried about?”
    The argument sallied forth until midnight. Where did Sportcoat go?
When was he sighted? No one seemed to know.
    At last, around one a.m. they got up to leave, more dissatisfied than ever.
    “After  twenty years of guessing how the old coot would depart this
world, this is too much,” Bum-Bum said, glaring at Sausage as she left. “I
can’t stand it when somebody who got a reputation for blasting hot air
suddenly grows cold when they know something you don’t.”
    Hot Sausage paid her no mind. He was busy keeping an eye on Sister
Bibb, his secret lover, who was making ready to leave. He had watched
glumly for the last hour, waiting for the wink, the nod, the head shake, some
sign that all was okay and that the coast would be clear to follow her home
for a bit of humpty dumpty in Sportcoat’s honor. But Sister Bibb offered no
sign. Instead, as the clock struck the hour, she grabbed her purse and made
for the door. Then as she reached the door and silently turned the door
handle, she nodded at him. Hot Sausage leaped to his feet, but Sister Gee
put a hand on his arm.
    “Sausage, can you stay a minute? I need a private word.”

316
    Sausage glanced at Sister Bibb, who was halfway out the door. “Do it
have to be now?” he asked.
    “Just a minute. It won’t take long.”
    Sister Bibb, standing at the open door, moved her eyebrows up and down
twice in a Tuick motion, which sent Sausage’s heart soaring, then he
watched as she slipped out. He sank deMectedly into a folding chair.
    Sister Gee stood before him, hands on her hips. Sausage looked up at her
like a guilty puppy.
    “All  right. Out with  it,”  she said.
    “Out with  what?”
    Sister Gee pulled another folding chair and sat backward on it facing
him, her forearms pressed against the chair, her legs straddling it, her dress
pushed down to cover her upper thighs. Her long brown face stared at his,
and her bottom lip pressed against her lower teeth. She thought a moment,
nodded slowly, then rocked back and forth calmly.
    “Man is a curious creature, don’t you think?” she said casually.
    Sausage looked at her suspiciously. “I reckon.”
    She stopped rocking and leaned forward, smiling. Her smile was
disarming, and Hot Sausage felt nervous.
    “I  don’t know why I have the desire to mind other folks’ business,” she
said. “That’s the child in me, I reckon. But then again, life takes ahold of
you as soon as you leave your mother. I don’t know what it is. But the older
I get, the more I become what I really am. Do you find that, Sausage?” she
asked.
    Hot Sausage frowned. “Sister Gee, I’m all tuckered out. If you’s in the
mood to start chunking away about dirt and the ways of man and things that
happened in Chattanooga back in 1929 that you read about in a book
someplace, we can go at this tomorrow.”
    “The truth will  be the same tomorrow,” she said. “It Must won’t take as
long to tell it.”
    Hot Sausage spread his hands. “What’s there to know? The man is dead.
He drunk hisself to death.”
    “Then the booze got him? It’s really true?” she said.
    “It  is.”
    It was as if an anvil had dropped on her. Her shoulders sagged, and
Sausage saw, for the first time that day—after hours of handling the funeral

317
ceremony, playing the puppeteer for her inept husband, arranging the
flowers, calming the Cousins, comforting the bereaved, distributing the
programs, arranging the manner of service, greeting the people, dealing
with the cops, the firemen, the parking, essentially doing her husband’s Mob
in a dying church, a church that, like many around them, was held up more
and more by women like her—her deep, heartfelt sorrow. She bowed her
head and covered her face with open palms, and as she did so her own pain
unsealed his, and he swallowed, clearing his throat.
    They sat in silence a long moment, her face covered with her hands.
When she took her hands away, he saw that her face was wet where the
tears had smudged her makeup.
    “I  thought he licked it,” she said.
    Sausage beat back his own sorrow and considered the situation. He
thought it through Tuickly. His chance for a night frolic with Sister Bibb, he
realized, was ruined. He was too tired for some action anyway. Sister Bibb
would wear him down to a nub. He might as well tell what he knew. When
it came down to it, he saw no harm in it. Sister Gee had done a lot for him.
And the church. For all of them. She deserved better. He spoke up.
    “Well, it  is true,” he said. “And it isn’t.”
    Sister Gee looked startled. “What?”
    “All  of it.  And none of it.”
    “What are you talking about? Did he drink himself to death or not?”
    Sausage scratched his head slowly. “No. He did not.”
    “How  did he land in the harbor? That’s where somebody said they found
him. Did he Mump in there?”
    “No he did not! I  did not see him Mump in no harbor!”
    Sister Gee demanded, “What the hell happened then?”
    Sausage frowned and said, “I can only tell you what happened after I
come outta the hospital, for that’s when I seen him in his right mind.”
    “Well?”
    Sausage continued: “After I got out, I found Sportcoat. He was at his
place. He wasn’t arrested. He wasn’t in Mail. Cops hadn’t talked to him, not
even your friend the sergeant who come to the service today. Sport was
walking around free. First thing he told me when I seen him was, ‘Sausage,
I Tuit drinking.’  Well, I didn’t believe him. Then I didn’t  see him no more
for a few days. That’s when the Elephant come around. Now from there,

318
you know more’n I do, Sister Gee. For you was the one that the Elephant
spoke to. You and Sport. I don’t know what you all three talked about, for
the building of Five Ends Baptist come before my time. But Sport was
talking crazy at the end. I thought it was on account of him stopping
drinking.”
    “It  wasn’t that,” Sister Gee said. “He wanted to rebuild the garden
behind the church, make a garden full of moonflowers back there. That’s
where the idea to build the garden in the church come from. It wasn’t my
idea or Mr. Elefante’s. That came from Sportcoat.”
    “Why’s  that?”
    Sister Gee nodded at the back wall of the church, newly repaired and
painted. “Mr. Elefante had something in that wall that belonged to his
father. That old painting on the back wall that you all mucked up by trying
to make Jesus colored wasn’t Must some old painting. It’s a copy of
something famous. Mr. Elefante wrote it down on a piece of paper. He
showed it to me. It was something called Last Judgment. By an Italian man
named Giotto.”
    “Giotto? Like  Jell-O?”
    “I’m  serious, Sausage. He’s a famous painter and that’s a famous
painting and right there on the back of our church was a copy of it. For
twenty-two years.”
    “Well, if  Mr. Gelato got famous out of it and he’s long dead, I ought to
be famous too. Fact is, me and Sport painted that thing nice for your
husband some years back, when he wanted to make Jesus colored.”
    “I  remember that ruination,” Sister Gee said. “There was something
inside the painting that Mr. Elefante wanted. It was hidden in the cinder
block right behind Jesus’s hand.”
    “What was it?”
    “I  didn’t see it. From what Sister Paul said, it was a fancy bo[ with a bar
of soap in it.”
    “Wasn’t no gold, or cash, or rocks?” Hot Sausage said.
    “Rocks?”
    “Jewels.”
    “Nope. Well, the bo[  had a doll in it. A little statue. Shaped like a fat
lady. The color of brown soap, Sister Paul said. They call her the Venus of
something or other.”

319
    “Hmm. Nothing  somebody doing day’s work would find on her Mob, I
reckon.”
    “Very funny.”
    He thought for a minute. “That do seem strange,” he admitted. “What
else did Sister Paul say?”
    “She said she was there when old Guido Elefante stuck it in the wall and
was glad to live long enough to know the son got hold of it. I didn’t ask the
son no Tuestions. You seen what Mr. Elefante done for the church, didn’t
ya? He asked me how much was in Hettie’s missing Christmas money bo[.
I told him what I thought it was—four thousand dollars. I told him that
figure includes some liars who said they put money in there and likely
didn’t. He said it don’t matter and gived me that much anyway. Plus he
redid the pulpit. Rebuilt the whole back wall after he tore it open. Put a
whole new garden in. Got someone to fi[ that foolish painting y’all did and
make it a regular black Jesus. And redid the slogan about man being in the
palm of God’s hand. Never did figure out why that slogan was there. But
it’s a good one, and we’re keeping it.”
    “What about the cheese?” Sausage asked.
    “That was the Elephant’s daddy who did that.”
    “His daddy’s been dead longer than Moses. It’s been twenty years, at
least.”
    “Honest to God, Sausage, I don’t know where it came from,” Sister Gee
said. “Sportcoat knew. When I asked him where the cheese was from, all he
said was, ‘Jesus sent it,’ and not a word more.”
    Sausage nodded thoughtfully, and Sister Gee continued. “The only other
time he ever referred to it was when the Elephant drove me and Sportcoat to
visit Sister Paul out in the old folks’ home in Bensonhurst that time. Turns
out Sister Paul and the Elephant’s daddy was old friends, was all I could
make of it. How that happened, I don’t know. What the Elephant and Sister
Paul spoke about, well, that too was private. I wasn’t in the room. I did
overhear Sister Paul say something to the Elephant about a hundred dollars
and driving a truck. I overheard ’em laughing about it. But I didn’t see no
money change hands. And I seen them shake hands. Sportcoat and the
Elephant.”
    “Bless me! The Elephant and Sportcoat shook hands?” Hot Sausage said.

320
    “Hand to God,” Sister Gee said. “They shook hands. And when the
Elephant was digging out the back of the church in the dead of the night
without our permission—though you and I know he had plenty permission,
in fact he had all the permission he wanted—Sportcoat was the only one
from our congregation he’d let help him. I seen it, too, of course. Wasn’t
supposed to. But Deacon told me they was coming, so I hid behind the
choir pew and saw the whole thing. They was together on it, them two. But
after they lifted that little doll thing from  the wall, I never saw ’em together
again.”
    “Then what?”
    “Then Sportcoat dropped clean out of sight. And I didn’t see him no
more. Ever more. Now you tell me the rest, Sausage, for I done told you
everything I know.”
    Sausage nodded. “Okay.”
    And then he told it. Told what he knew and what he’d seen. And when he
was done, Sister Gee stared at him in awe, then reached over her chair and
hugged him where he sat.
    “Hot Sausage,” she said softly. “You’re a man and a half.”






The Staten Island Ferry docked lazily into Whitehall Terminal at South Ferry
and the riders clambered aboard. Among them was a dark, handsome
woman in a bowknot bowler cloche hat tied with a ribbon atop her neatly
combed hair who stood at the railing, her hand covering half her face. Not
that Sister Gee thought that she’d be recognized. Who from the Cause
Houses ever took the Staten Island Ferry? Nobody she knew. But you never
know. Half the people in the Cause, she remembered, seemed to work for
Transit. If anybody saw her, she’d have a hard time e[plaining why she was
on the boat. You can’t be too careful.
    She was dressed for summer pleasure, clad in a cool blue dress, with
azaleas stitched across the side and hips and with a casual open back,
revealing brown, slender arms. She had turned fifty the day before. She had

321
lived in New York for thirty-three of  her fifty years, yet had not once ridden
the Staten Island Ferry.
    As the ferry pulled away from the dock and arced into New York Harbor,
heading due southwest, it offered her a clear view of the redbrick Cause
housing proMects on one side, and the Statue of Liberty and Staten Island on
the other. One side represented the certainty of the past. The other side the
uncertainty of the future. She felt suddenly nervous. All she had was an
address. And a letter. And a promise. From a newly retired, newly divorced
si[ty-one-year-old white man who had spent most of his life, like her,
cleaning up the mess of others and doing for everyone but himself. I don’t
even have a Shone number for him, she thought an[iously. It was Must as
well, she decided. If she wanted to back out, it would be easy.
    As the weather-beaten boat eased across the harbor, she stood on the
deck, glancing at the Cause Houses disappearing in the distance, and at the
Statue of Liberty floating by on the right, then mused as a seagull rode the
wind near her, skimming the water at eye height, gliding effortlessly
alongside the deck before pulling away and rising. She watched it pump its
wings and move higher into the air, then turn back toward the Cause
Houses. Only then did her mind click back over the past week to Sportcoat,
and the conversation she’d had with Hot Sausage. As Sausage recounted it
in the basement that night, it was as if her own future were being revealed,
unrolling itself before her like a carpet, one whose design and weave
changed as it stretched out ahead. She recalled every word he said clearly:
    When they was building the garden in back of the church, SSort come to
me. He said, “Sausage, there’s something you ought to know about that
Jesus Sicture out yonder in the back of the church. I got to tell somebody.”
    I said, “What is it?”
    SSort said, “I don’t Tuite know what to call that thing. And I don’t wanna
know. But whatever it was, it belonged to the EleShant. He found it in that
wall and Said the church a whole truckload of money to reclaim it—more
money than any Christmas bo[ could hold. So you don’t have to worry
about Deems no more. Or none of his SeoSle. Or the Christmas money. The
EleShant done took care of it.”
    I said, “What about the Soliceman?”
    “What the EleShant got to do with the Solice? That’s his business.”

322
    I said, “SSort, I ain’t  studying the EleShant. I’m talking about the Solice.
They still looking for you.”
    He said, “Let ’em look. I been talking to Hettie.”
    I said, “You been drinking?”’Cause he was always mostly drunk when
he talked to Hettie. He said, “No. I don’t need to drink to see her, Sausage. I
see her clear as day now. We gets along like when we was young. I was a
better man back then. I miss drinking. But I like being a man with my wife
now. We don’t fight now. We talks like the old days.”
    “What y’all  talk about now?”
    “Mostly  Five Ends. She loves that old church, Sausage. She wants it to
grow. She wanted me to fi[ that garden behind the church and grow
moonflowers for the longest time. I married a good woman, Sausage. But I
made some bad choices.”
    “Well, that’s all behind you,”  I said. “You done cleaned uS.”
    “Naw,”  he said. “I  ain’t cleaned uS. The Lord might not give me
redemStion, Sausage. I can’t stoS drinking. I ain’t drunk a droS yet, but I
wanna drink again. I’m gonna drink again.”
    And here he Sulled a bottle of King Kong out his Socket. The good stuff.
Rufus’s homemade.
    I said, “You don’t wanna do that, SSort.”
    “Yes I do. And I’m gonna. But I’mma tell you this, Sausage. Hettie was
so haSSy when I got to do the garden over behind the church. That was
something she always dreamed about. Not for herself. She wanted them
moonflowers and the big garden with all them Slants and things behind the
church not for herself—but for me. And when I got the church to agree on it,
I told her, ‘Hettie, them moonflowers is coming soon.’
    “But  instead of being haSSy, she growed sad and said, ‘I’mma tell you
something, darling, that I shouldn’t tell you. When you finish that garden,
you won’t see me no more.’
    “I  said, ‘What you mean?’
    “She said, ‘Once it’s done. Once them moonflowers is in, I’m gone to
glory.’ Then before I could kick at it, she said, ‘What’s gonna become of
Pudgy Fingers?’
    “I  told her, ‘Well, Hettie, it aSSroaches my mind like this. What is a
woman but her labor and her children? God Sut us all here to work. You
was a Christian gal when I married you. And all the forty years I carried on

323
drinking and making a fool of myself, there wasn’t a lazy bone in your body.
You raised Pudgy Fingers good. You was strict to yourself and true to me
and to Pudgy Fingers, and he will be strong in his life for it.’
    “Truth  be told, Sausage, Hettie couldn’t bear no children. Pudgy Fingers
wasn’t hers. He come to her before I come to New York. I was still back
home in South Carolina. She was in New York by herself waiting for me in
Building Nine. She oSened the aSartment door one morning and seen
Pudgy Fingers roaming the hallway. He wasn’t but five or si[, wandering
around, trying to get downstairs to the blind children’s bus. She knocked on
the lady’s door where he lived and the lady said, ‘Can you keeS him till
Monday? I got to go to my brother’s in the Bron[.’ She ain’t seen hide nor
hair of that woman since.
    “When I come here, Hettie already had herself a child. I never made no
bones about it. I loved Pudgy Fingers. I didn’t know how he come. For all I
know, Pudgy Fingers could’ve been Hettie’s blood from some other man.
But I trusted her, and she knowed my heart. So I said to her, ‘The Cousins is
gonna take Pudgy Fingers. I can’t care for him.’
    “She said, ‘All  right.’
    “I  said, ‘Is you worried about him? Is that why you hung about?’
    “She said, ‘I ain’t  worried about him. I’m worried about you. Because I
was born again unto the Word, and that gives me strength. Has you got
that?’
    “I  says, ‘I has got it. Been born again to the Word for a whole year and
then some. I said I was before, but I wasn’t. But I am now.’
    “‘Then  I’m finished here. I loves you for God’s sake, Cuffy Lambkin. Not
for my sake. Not for your sake. But for God’s sake.’ And then she was gone.
And I ain’t seen her since.”
    He was still holding that bottle of Kong when he told me this, and here
he uncorked it. Didn’t siS it. Just unscrewed the caS and said, “I wanna
drink this whole thing down.” Then he said to me, “Walk with me,
Sausage.”
    He was acting funny, so I went on, and we walked down to Vitali Pier, the
same sSot where he Sulled Deems out the harbor. We walked down to the
water, and standing on the sand there, I gived him the news on Deems. I
said, “SSort, Deems called me. He’s doing good in triSle-A ball. Said he’s
gonna make it to the big leagues in about a month or so.”

324
    SSortcoat said, “I told you he can still Sitch with one ear.”
    Then he Satted me on the back and said, “Look after them moonflowers
behind the church for my Hettie.” Then he walked into the water. Walked
right into the harbor holding that bottle of King Kong. I said, “Wait  a
minute, SSort, that water’s cold.” But he went on ahead.
    First it  come uS to his hiSs, then to his waist, then to the toS of his arms,
then to his neck. When it got to his neck he turned around to me and said,
“Sausage, the water is so warm! It’s beautiful.”

325
                      ACKNOWLEDGMENTS






Thanks to the humble Redeemer who gives us the rain, the snow, and
all the things in between.

326
                            ABOUT       THE     AUTHOR






James McBride is an accomplished musician and the author of the
National Book Award–winning novel The Good Lord Bird, the bestselling
American classic The Color of Water, the novels Song Yet Sung and Miracle
at St. Anna, the story collection Five-Carat Soul, and Kill 'Em and Leave, a
biography of James Brown. The recipient of a National Humanities Medal,
McBride is also a Distinguished Writer in Residence at New York
University.

327
                        W   at’s next   on 


                      your  reading   list?



                        Discover your next 


                              great read!



Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this


                                 author.


                             Sign up now.

