2
PRISON         TO     PRAISE

&opyright 1970 Ey Merlin R. &arothers
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Merlin R. &arothers, Escondido, &alifornia
www.Merlin&arothers.com
First Printing July, 1970
Ninety-seventh Printing July, 2010
International Standard Book No.
ISBN: 978-0943026-43-5 (ePuE)
Also printed in fifty-eight languages

3
       Merlin    R.    Carothers  is    well-known    throughout   the   Christian
community. His books have sold over 19 million copies. His uniTue concept
of “praise in all things” brings results that can only be termed miraculous.

       Merlin   R.  Carothers may  be the  only  author  to  have  served as a
paratrooper in World War II, as a guard for General Dwight D. Eisenhower,
and later  as a  Lt.  Colonel  in  the U.S.  Army   Chaplaincy in  Korea,  the
Dominican Republic conflict, and in Vietnam.

       During  these conflicts  Merlin  Carothers learned ama]ing  things that
changed his life. Many people who have read this book have come to enjoy
a  happiness they  never  e[pected  to  e[perience.  Christians  have  been
overwhelmed to learn that they can live in peace as they discover the secrets
of a life of praise.

       Read this book and you will  understand how to be victorious over the
circumstances of your life!

4
“Be Moyful always;

 pray continually;

 give thanks in all

circumstances for

 this is God’s will

       for you”!

 I Thessalonians 5:16-18

5
                                    CONTENTS


Chapters

1.  Prisoner

2.  Set Free!

3.  The Search

4.  Be Filled

5.  By His Power Within You

6.  Vietnam

7.  Rejoice!

8.  Praise Him!

6
                                                         1

                                                Prisoner

       There was the touch of cold  metal against my left wrist  and the harsh
voice in my ear: “This is the FBI. You are under arrest.”
       I’d  been rela[ing  in the back seat of the car with my left  arm hanging
out the window. The car was stolen and I was AWOL from the Army.
       Being AWOL  didn’t  bother me. It was the getting caught that hurt my
pride. I’d  always  considered myself capable of  doing my  own thing  and
getting away with  it.  Now  I had to  suffer the humiliation  of  the jail  cell,
stand in line for  lousy cold  chow, go back to  the lonely cell  and the hard
bunk with nothing to do but stare at the wall. How could I have been stupid
enough to get into a mess like this?

       I’d  been a pretty independent fellow from the time I was twelve. That’s
when my father died suddenly, leaving my mother alone with three boys to
raise. My   brothers were  seven and  one,  and Mother   started taking  in
washings and went on relief to keep us alive. She always talked about Dad
being in heaven and how God would take care of us, but with the intensity
of a twelve-year-old I  turned in fury  against a God who could treat us that
way.
       I   delivered  papers after  school  until   long   after  dark  each  night,
determined to make my  way in  life.  I  was going to  make the most of  it.
Somehow I felt I had it coming. I had a right to grab for all I could get.
       When Mother remarried, I went to live with  some of Dad’s old friends.
I went to high school, but never Tuit working. After  school and all summer
I  worked. As  a  food  packer, shipping  clerk,  linotype  operator, and one
summer as a lumberjack in Pennsylvania.
       I  started college, but ran  out of  money and had to  go to work.  This
time I got a job  with B&W  Steel as a steel chipper and grinder. Not a very
pleasant job, but it kept me in top physical condition. Part of staying ahead
in the rat race of the world  was being in top shape physically, and I didn’t
intend to lose out on any count.

7
       I  never did want to  join the Army.  I  wanted to go off  to sea with the
Merchant Marine.  I  couldn’t  think of  a  more glamorous way  to get  into
action in World War II.
       To  join  the Merchant Marine  I  had to  get reclassified  1-A  with  the
draft board that had given me a deferment to go to college. Before I could
make it back to the Merchant Marine, the Army inducted me. They told me
I could  volunteer for  the Navy, which  I did,  but a freak  incident kept me
out. I failed the eye test simply because I’d been reading the wrong line on
the chart by  mistake!  So there, against all  my  efforts,  I  landed in  basic
training at Ft. McClellan, Alabama.
       I  was  bored to  death.  The training  was  a bree]e,  and  looking  for
e[citement, I volunteered for airborne training at Fort Benning, Georgia.
       A  rebel at heart, my biggest problem always was in getting along with
my superiors. Somehow they  picked on  me in  spite of  all  my  efforts to
remain in the background. Once, during physical training in a sawdust pit, I
spat on the ground without thinking. The Sergeant saw me, and descended
like a storm cloud. “Pick that up in your mouth and carry it out of the area!”
he screamed.
       You’ve  got  to  Ee kidding,   I  thought,  but  his  red,  glowering   face
indicated he was not. So, humiliated and seething with resentment carefully
hidden, I picked up the spit - and a mouthful of sawdust - and carried it “out
of the area.”

       The compensation came when we got our first chance to jump from an
airplane in flight. This  was living!  The kind of e[citement  I was hungering
for. Over the  roar of the  plane engines came the shouted command: “Get
ready...stand up...hook up...stand in the door...GO!”
       The blast of  air makes you feel like  a leaf in a gale - and then, as the
rope attached to your parachute reaches its end, a bone-jarring jolt. You feel
like you’ve been hit by a ten-ton truck.
       Then, as your brain clears, you’re in a beautiful silent world; billowing
above is the parachute - a giant white arc of silk.
       I  was a  paratrooper, and earned the honor of wearing  the glistening
jump boots.

       Still,  I wanted more e[citement and volunteered for advanced training
as a Demolition  E[pert.  I wanted in  on the  war effort,  and the hotter the

8
action the better, I thought.
       After  demolition school I returned to Fort Benning to wait for orders to
go overseas. I pulled guard at the stockade, had KP, and waited some more.
Patience was not my  strong point.  At  the  rate the Army   was moving,  I
figured I might  miss out on the fun altogether, scrubbing pots and pans till
the war ended.
       I  wasn’t going to sit around doing nothing, and with a friend, I decided
to go over the hill.
       We simply walked out of the camp one day, stole a car, and headed for
anyplace. -ust in case someone was looking for us, we dropped the first car
and stole another and finally  ended up in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. There
we ran out of spending money and decided to pull a stickup.
       I  had the gun and my friend waited in the car. We’d picked a store that
looked like an easy job. My  plan was to pull  the telephone wiring  so they
couldn’t call the police.  Inside the store, I yanked on the telephone wire as
hard as I could, but it wouldn’t  budge. I was frustrated. The gun was in my
pocket, the cash register was full of  money, but the line to  the police was
still there. I wasn’t about to invite disaster.
       So I  went back to  the car to  tell my  buddy, and we were just  sitting
there in the back seat, eating green apples and talking, when the long arm of
the law finally  caught up with  us. We didn’t know  it, but a si[-state  alarm
had gone out for us, and the FBI was hot on our heels.
       Our search for adventure had ended in a pretty sad flop. I was back in
the stockade at Fort Benning  where I’d  been a guard only  a few  months
earlier. I was sentenced to si[ months’ confinement and immediately started
a campaign to get overseas. My  fellow  prisoners laughed and said, “You
wouldn’t have gone AWOL if you wanted to go overseas.”
       I  kept insisting I’d gone AWOL  because I got bored waiting to be sent
overseas.
       At  last my  pleas were heard. I was placed on overseas shipment and
went “under  guard”  to  Camp  Kilmer,  N.-.,   where I   was placed  in  the
stockade to wait for our ship to Europe.
       At  last, I was on my  way. Almost, anyway. The night before our  ship
was due to sail I was called to the Commander’s office where I learned that
I wouldn’t be sailing with the rest of the men.
       “The FBI  wants you held and returned to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.”

9
       Once more I felt  the cold steel of handcuffs, and under armed guard I
returned to  Pittsburgh where  a stern judge  read the  charges and asked:
“Guilty  or not guilty; how do you plead?”
       My  mother was there and her tear-filled eyes made me cringe. Not that
I was sorry for what  I’d done. I  wanted out of there and on with some fast
living, the sooner the better.
       “Guilty,  Sir.” I  had been caught red-handed and somehow I determined
it would be the last time. I would  learn the tricks and play it safe from now
on.
       The district  attorney carefully e[plained my  past life to the judge who
asked the investigating officers for their recommendation.
       “Your  honor, we recommend leniency.”
       “What  do you want, soldier?” the judge asked me.
       “I  want to  go back in the Army  and get into the war,” was all  I could
say.
       “I  sentence you to five years in the Federal Penitentiary.”
       His  words hit me like  a load of  bricks from  the skies. I was nineteen
and would be twenty-four when I got out. I saw my whole life  go down the
drain.
       “Your  sentence is temporarily suspended and you will  be returned to
the Army.”
       Saved, thank heaven! In less than an hour I was released. But first the
district attorney gave me a stern lecture and e[plained that if I left the Army
in less than five years I should report back to his office.
       Free at last! I headed back to Fort Di[, New -ersey, only to get another
load of bricks on my  head. At Fort Di[   they looked at my papers and sent
me back to the stockade to serve out my si[ months’ sentence for AWOL!
       At  this point  I had only  one thought in my head. I wanted to  get into
the war  or  bust.  Again  I   started my  campaign  to  get  on  an overseas
shipment. I pestered the command until  finally,  when four  months of my
time was  completed, I  was released. Soon I  was on  my way  across the
Atlantic aboard the Mauretania.
       We were piled si[  high in  the hold, and I was lucky enough to get the
top berth. That way I missed the shower of vomit those on the lower berths
often received.
       Not that I  really would have cared. I was thrilled to be on my way, and
didn’t waste any  time. I  was out to  get as much e[citement  and as much

10
profit as possible out of  the war  effort. I  had developed one talent during
my confinement  that  now came  in  handy. I  had become Tuite  adept at
gambling, and  the  days and  nights  of  our  crossing were  spent in   this
worthwhile endeavor. I accumulated a nice little pile of money, and the only
thing that  reminded me of  the  circumstances of our  voyage was a  brief
encounter with a German sub that tried to hit us and missed.

       In  England we were put on trains that took us to the English Channel.
There we boarded small boats and moved out into the choppy waters of the
channel. It rained cats and dogs, and on the French side we had to jump into
waist-high water and wade ashore.
       On the beach we stood dripping wet in line waiting  for cold C-rations.
Then we rushed again for a train headed east. Without stopping, we crossed
France and were transferred to trucks taking us into Belgium. We got there
just in time for the Battle of the Bulge with the 82nd Airborne Division.
       On my first  day in combat, the Commanding Officer saw my record as
a Demolition E[pert  and put me to work making small bombs out of  a pile
of plastic e[plosives.  The pile was about three feet high, and I pulled up a
log and went to work. Another soldier joined  me, and I learned that he had
been with the  unit  for many  months. While  he was telling  me  about his
e[periences with  the 82nd Airborne,  I  looked  across a field  at incoming
artillery e[ploding.  The  e[plosions came closer and closer to our position.
Out of the  corner of my  eye I kept  watching the other soldier, wondering
when he’d give the signal to dive for cover. He had all the e[perience, and I
was just a green replacement; I wasn’t going to chicken out.
       The  e[plosions  came nearer, and my fear  mounted. If  one  of those
rounds landed near us . . .the pile of bombs would make one giant crater.
       The other fellow  sat there paying no attention to the artillery. I wanted
desperately to dive for cover, but I wasn’t about to show myself  a coward.
At last the e[plosions were on the other side of us. They had missed!
       Two days later I discovered why the other soldier had played it so cool.
The two of us were walking through a forest known  to be heavily mined. I
carefully  e[amined  the trail  for  any  signs of  booby  traps, but  the other
fellow  was paying  no attention to  where he  was walking.  I  finally  said:
“Why aren’t you watching for mines?”
       “I  hope I step on one,” he said. “I’m sick  and tired of this rotten mess.
I want to die.”

11
       From that day I  kept as much distance as possible between the two of
us!
       Combat with the 82nd Airborne provided ample e[citement.  But some
of the ugly e[periences made further harsh impressions in my angry mind.
       At  the close of  the war I  went with  the  508th Airborne Regiment  to
Frankfurt, Germany, where I was selected to serve as guard for General of
the Army, Dwight  D. Eisenhower. This was a proud moment in my  life. I,
Merlin  Carothers, a personal guard  for  a Five-star  General! I  felt  I  had
finally become “big man on campus.”
       I  would have liked to see more action, but the spoils of war weren’t so
bad either. We lived in plush apartment buildings that had belonged to top
German officials. The previous occupants must have had no more than five
minutes’ notice  before  they  departed. We found  family  picture  albums,
weapons and even jewels. My   off-duty  time  was spent in  searching for
“treasure.”
       My  on-duty time was always fun. One evening I was assigned duty at
a  gate  leading   into   General   Eisenhower’s  HeadTuarters Compound.
Something special was  up. The  Duty  Officer  said,  “Pfc.  Carothers, this
could be a big night. I’ll fill  you in later.”
       Some time  later  the Duty  Officer  came  back and said,  “Here  it  is,
Carothers. The W.A.C. Commanding Officer is having a dance for her girls
ne[t week, but she didn’t invite the paratroopers. When our C.O. called and
asked her why,  she said she didn’t   want any  “overpaid  killers”   at their
dance.
       “The  rules say that all  assigned female personnel must be inside this
gate not later than 9:00 p.m.  After  9:00 p.m. no W.A.C.  (Women’s Army
Corps) will  pass through this gate until  I personally  escort them. Take no
flak from anyone. I’ve put you here because I know you won’t!”
       A  few  minutes after 9:00  p.m. a jeep,  driven by  an Army  Sergeant,
pulled up to the gate. A W.A.C. enlisted girl was seated beside the soldier. I
said, “The W.A.C. must get out and stand here by the gate.”
       “She what?” The Sergeant’s anger e[ploded!
       “You  heard me.”
       “Why?”
       “No  reason. Miss, get out of the jeep now and stand beside me.”
       Never had I spoken to a Sergeant this way. If he had been an airborne
trooper I probably wouldn’t have dared.

12
       The  Sergeant unloaded a  few  do]en  curse words,  but  then  turned
around and left.  He knew  that as  a guard assigned to a  gate I  had total
authority.
       From 9:00 until 9:45, twenty W.A.C.S arrived. On previous nights they
had come in whenever they desired, but tonight was different. I was in the
middle of the hurricane. They were mad - very mad. Such language I heard!
       At  10:45 a staff car, driven by a Colonel, pulled up. Never in my career
had I even spoken to a full Colonel. I politely  gave him my message. “The
W.A.C.  officer  that  is  with   you  must  join  these other  ladies  who  are
standing by me.”
       “Out  of the way, Soldier! She is not going to leave this vehicle.”
       “Yes, Sir, she must.”
       “Soldier, I  give you a Direct Order. Move out of the way. We are going
through.”
       A   Direct  Order  is the  strongest language an  officer  can  use on  a
soldier. But he was trying to bluff the wrong private.
       In  true cowboy fashion I slapped the “45 automatic” from  my holster,
pulled back the  hammer and said, “Miss,  step down  and join  the others.
Colonel, turn this vehicle around now and leave!”
       He did.
       At  11:00 p.m. the Duty  Officer  arrived in a jeep. He  told the W.A.C.
with the lowest rank to get into his jeep and then said, “Ladies, I’ll  be back
to pick all of you up - one at a time.”
       The ne[t  day the W.A.C.  Commander called our C.O. and invited  all
the airborne troopers to attend her dance.

       I  was still  looking for  e[citement,  and once I almost got more than I
bargained for. We were loaded on airplanes for a parachute jump. It was to
be a routine training e[ercise,  but we were told  that Marlene Dietrich,  the
movie actress, would  be on the  ground watching  the jump.  We were all
hoping to land near her.
       As soon as I left the plane I began to scan the ground below to see if I
could locate the “lady  with the beautiful  legs.” Suddenly I  was aware that
something was horribly wrong. Around me in the air were terrible screams,
and the roar of an airplane engine seemed suddenly to burst right on top of
me.

13
       Several hundred  troopers were  in  the air  and  an airplane  had lost
engine power and was diving right through us! Parachutes were cut off, and
men were plunging  to the  ground. They were  falling  all  around the spot
where Miss Dietrich  was standing. My  parachute was intact,  and when I
reached the ground there were  dead men all  around, and  the plane was
e[ploding in flames.

       In  Frankfurt I had plenty of  free time. My idea of  a good time usually
involved a considerable amount of drinking. It happened that I drank myself
into a state of oblivion and other soldiers told me what pranks I had pulled
in town the night before. Once I had stretched myself flat on the floor  of a
German streetcar and dared anyone to walk over me. The other soldiers had
roared with  laughter and found the  whole incident  uproariously funny.  It
never occurred to me that my  behavior probably didn’t  help the image of
the American Occupation Army.

       I  discovered that black marketeering was a Tuicker and more reliable
source of income than gambling. I bought cigarettes from other soldiers for
ten dollars a carton. With a suitcase full, I went to the black-market area in
town where I  could  sell  the cartons for  one hundred dollars  apiece. The
black-market area was a freTuent site of  robberies, beatings, and murder,
but I didn’t care. I kept one hand on a loaded, cocked “45” in my pocket.
       Soon I  had a suitcase full of ten dollar bills  in  military  money known
as scrip. The only problem was to find a way to  get the money back to the
United States. Tight control limited  each soldier to sending home only the
amount he was paid by the Army. I  stayed awake nights trying to figure  a
way to beat the system.
       At  the post office I  watched the men line up to convert their  monthly
pay into money orders. Each man had to have his finance card which listed
the e[act  amount he  had been paid. I  observed one  man with  a  pile of
finance cards, a bag of money, and an armed guard. He was company clerk
and was getting money orders for his  entire company. I suddenly reali]ed
that all I needed was a pile of finance cards!
       I  located the  unit  finance clerk  and soon  learned that he  would  be
willing  to provide me with the finance cards for five dollars apiece. I was in
business.

14
       I  set myself  up  as the company clerk  of  my  own private  company.
With the money and the finance cards I went to the post office and had the
money orders made out without a hitch!
       With  this setup I now found new ways to accumulate the military scrip
money. I learned that men coming from Berlin  would give  $1,000 in scrip
for a $100 money order. I gladly  obliged and then converted the $900 into
my own money order. I was on my way to becoming very rich!

       The  Army  announced the decision to send some men to universities
throughout Europe.  I  took  the  e[aminations,  was  selected, and sent to
Bristol University  in  England. The courses I took  were far  less important
than the fact that we were surrounded by girls who spoke English.
       But  I  did make some steps toward what I  believed was my  future. I
took a course in  English  Law and  another in Business Law.  I wanted  to
know how “the system” worked so I could beat it.

       When the university  course ended I was transferred back to Germany.
There awaited e[citing  news. My time  to return to  the U.S. had arrived! I
packed my suitcase full of $100 money orders and headed for the glorious
shores of home.
       At  Fort Di[,   N.-.,  they tried  to get all  of us  to sign up for  the Army
Reserves. The Sergeant giving the pitch said, “Everyone who wants to sign
up for the Reserves step up here, sign, and I’ll give you your  discharge. If
you don’t sign up now you will  have to stay and hear a one-hour lecture on
why you should sign up.”
       One hour  longer in the  Army? No  way, I  thought. I stepped forward
and signed their paper. That split-second decision affected the rest of  my
life.
       I  received the long-coveted paper stating I was now a civilian. Free! I
had no desire to ever see the inside of an Army post again. I had plenty of
money, and life ahead looked rosy.
       There was a problem of  converting my  suitcase full of  money orders
into crisp, green bills. I  couldn’t  very well  walk into  the post office in  my
hometown, Ellwood City,  Pennsylvania, and dump the whole stack on the
counter. Finally I  thought  of a  solution. One by  one I  began to send the
money orders to a post office in New York. Soon the money began filtering
back.

15
       My  e[periences with the law so far had taught me that I had better get
into a  profession where  I  would  be able  to operate safely  within  every
available loophole. I had always wanted to become a lawyer, so I began the
necessary steps to enroll in law school in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

16
                                                         2

                                                 Set   Free

       Grandmother was  a  sweet old  lady,  and I  thought  a  great deal  of
Grandfather, but going to visit them was still an ordeal I avoided whenever
possible.  They   made   me   nervous.   Grandmother  always   found   an
opportunity to talk about God.
       “I’m  doing fine,”  I’d  say. “Don’t worry about me.”
       But she would insist: “You need to give your life to Christ, Merlin.”
       It   bugged  me   more  than   I   wanted  to   admit.  I   hated   to  hurt
Grandmother’s feelings, but  I  didn’t  have time  for  any  of  that religious
stuff. I’d just begun to live!
       One  Sunday evening shortly  after  I’d  come  back from  Germany, I
went to  see Grandmother and Grandfather. I Tuickly  reali]ed  I’d  made a
mistake. They were getting ready to go to church.
       “Come  go with us, Merlin,”  Grandmother said. “We haven’t seen you
for so long; we’d love to have you come.”
       I sTuirmed in my chair. How could I tactfully  get out of this one?
       “I’d   like  to,”  I  said finally.  “But  some friends have already asked if
they could come pick me up.”
       Grandmother looked disappointed, and as soon as I  could get  to the
phone I  began calling  everyone I  knew.  To  my  dismay I  couldn’t   find
anyone who was free to come pick me up.
       It   was  getting  close  to   church  time,  and  I   couldn’t   say  to  my
grandparents: “I just don’t want to go.”
       At  the ]ero hour I had no choice. Off we went together.
       The church service was held in  a barn, but everyone there seemed to
be happy. Poor people, I thought, they don’t know anything aEout real life
out there in the world, or they wouldn’t waste an evening in a Earn.
       The singing began and I picked up a hymn  book to follow  the words.
At least I had to look as if I was with it.
       Suddenly I heard a deep voice speak directly in my ear.
       “What-what  did you say?” I whirled around to find no one behind me.
       There was the voice again: “Tonight you must make a decision for Me.
If you don’t, it will  be too late.”

17
       I shook my head and said automatically: “Why?”
       “It  just will  be!”
       Was I losing my  marbles? But the voice was real. It was God, and He
knew me! In  a flash I  suddenly saw it. Why  hadn’t  I seen it before? God
was real; He was the answer. In Him  was everything I  had ever searched
for.
       “Yes, God,” I  heard myself mutter. “I’ll do it;  whatever You want.”
       The service went on, but I was in another world. This was cra]y,  but I
knew God!
       Grandfather was deep in thought beside me. I didn’t know it  then, but
he told me about it later. He was carrying on his own  battle with God. For
years he’d been smoking and chewing tobacco. Forty years of addiction to
the weed had him  hooked. Many  a time he’d  tried  to Tuit,  but had been
sei]ed with violent  headaches and soon was back to chewing and smoking
heavier than before.
       Now   he was  sitting   ne[t  to   me  in  the  meeting  making  his  own
commitment. “God, if  you’ll   change Merlin, I’ll   give up  my chewing and
smoking even if it kills me.”
       No  wonder Grandfather nearly collapsed when I  went forward at  the
end of the meeting to make public the decision I’d made during the singing!
       Years later I was at his bedside when his time came to die. He looked
up at me and smiled. “Merlin,” he said, “I kept my promise to God.”
       That  Sunday night I  couldn’t wait  to  get home and read the Bible.  I
wanted to know God, and I read hungrily page after page. I had a wonderful
feeling of e[citement inside. It was even better than jumping off an airplane
with a parachute. That night God  had reached down inside me, and I was
changed into a new being.  I felt  as if  I  was standing on the  threshold of
e[citing adventures the likes of which I couldn’t even begin to imagine. The
God of Abraham, Isaac, and -acob was still alive;  the God who parted the
Red Sea and spoke through a burning bush and sent His Son  to die on  a
cross - He was my Father too!
       I  could suddenly understand what my  earthly father  had tried to  tell
me. When he was thirty-si[ years old he was confined to a bed for the first
time in  his life.  Three days later  his heart stopped. The doctor was  there
with an injection, and my father’s heart began beating again. He opened his
eyes and said: “That won’t be necessary, Doctor. I am going to leave now.”

18
He raised himself  up in  bed and looked  around the room  with  a radiant
glow on his face.
       “Look!”   he said. “They are here to take me!” With that he lay back and
was gone.
       My  father had known  -esus Christ as his personal friend  and Savior.
He had been ready to go.
       Now  I  felt  ready too,  but even as I  voiced  the thought to  myself, I
became aware of an uneasiness, a gnawing at the back of my mind. What
was wrong? Show me, God!
       Gradually  the thought became clearer. The money! All that money. It
wasn’t mine; I had to give it back!
       The decision made, I breathed a sigh of relief. I couldn’t wait to get rid
of that  money. It  was like  a sickness inside me, and I  knew  that feeling
would be there until the money was gone.
       I  told  the post  office,  but they  said it  wasn’t  any concern of  theirs
because I hadn’t stolen the money orders. I could do with them as I liked.
       I  still  had  a whole  bunch that I  hadn’t  cashed in yet,  so I  took the
suitcase into the bathroom and began to flush piles of  one hundred dollar
money orders down the toilet. With each flush I felt a mounting flood of joy
inside.
       That still  left me with the money I had already cashed. I wrote the U.S.
Treasury Department and told them how  I had acTuired the money. They
wrote back asking if I had any evidence of how I had gotten the money and
the money orders. It was too late; the evidence was flushed down the drain!
I told them I had no proof, just the money, and they advised me that all they
could do was to accept the money into the Conscience Fund.
       Once again I  was a  poor man, but  I  would gladly  have given  away
everything I owned for that new life and joy I felt within.

       There was one more shadow of the past to be encountered. I returned
to Pittsburgh and reported to  the district  attorney. There were three years
remaining on my sentence, and I would now have to be on a parole status
for these years. This meant regular reporting  and supervision by a parole
officer.
       The district  attorney received me and asked a clerk to get my records.
He glanced at them and looked surprised.

19
       “Do  you know  what you have received?” I  knew I’d  received Christ,
but that could hardly have gotten into my record already.
       “No,  sir.”
       “You   have   received  a  presidential   pardon,  signed  by   President
Truman!”
       “A  pardon?”
       “That  means your record is completely clear. -ust as if you had never
gotten involved with the law.”
       I wanted to shout for joy. “Why did  I get it?”
       The  district   attorney  smiled.  “It   has  something  to  do  with   your
e[cellent combat record.”
       He  e[plained that  I was free  to go and do  anything I  wanted to; my
case was closed.
       “If  you ever apply for a federal job you are completely eligible.”
       “Thank   you,  Lord.”   I  was  overwhelmed. Not   only  were  my  sins
washed away and the case closed at Calvary, but God had given me a clean
start in the eyes of  the United States government as well. Not  that I  ever
thought I’d be looking for a job with them again!
       But  what was I going  to do? My  motives for  becoming a lawyer had
been Tuestionable. It  seemed clear  that  God  did  not  want  me  in  that
profession. Soon the thought became very  persistent. I was  to become a
minister! Me, in  the pulpit? The thought seemed preposterous. “You know
me, Lord,” I  argued. “I like  e[citement, adventure, even danger. I wouldn’t
make a very good preacher.”
       It  seemed that God had His plans for me all set. I couldn’t sleep nights,
and the longer  I  thought  and prayed, the  more e[citing   the  whole  idea
became. If God could  make a preacher out of  an e[-jailbird,   paratrooper,
gambler, and black-marketeer, that would be a  greater adventure into the
unknown than anything I’d ever tried before.

       I   enrolled  in  Marion  College,  a  church-related  school in   Marion,
Indiana, and I must have been the most e[cited student on campus.
       To supplement my income from  the GI bill,  I  worked si[  hours a day
in a  foundry. I  wanted to  get through school as fast  as possible so I  got
special permission  to  take twenty-one  hours  rather  than the  ma[imum
seventeen hours allowed per semester.

20
       I worked from  2:00 p.m. until 8:00 p.m., studied until 12:00 p.m., slept
until 4:00 a.m., and then studied until  8:00 a.m. when it was time to  go to
school.
       One Sunday I got my first chance to preach in the local jail. I held onto
the bars and  begged the men  to give  their  lives  to  Christ.  Every  week
prisoners knelt, holding on to  the bars from the other side, and wept their
way to faith in Christ.
       I went back to school floating on a cloud.
       Saturday nights were  free, and I  got a group  of  students together to
hold outdoor services on the courthouse steps in the center of Marion.  To
our delight,  people came forward  to  accept Christ. After   the service we
walked up  and down  the streets, urging anyone who  would  listen  to  let
-esus come into their lives.
       I  had never been so busy, yet I felt as if I  couldn’t work  hard enough
for -esus Christ. He had saved my life;  the least I could  do was give Him
my time.

       I  finished the four-year course in two-and-a-half years and enrolled at
Asbury  Seminary   in   Wilmore,   Kentucky.  God   provided   me  with   a
Methodist circuit  of four  churches where I served as student pastor. Every
week I drove the round trip of two hundred miles to serve my churches. For
this each  of  them gave  me five   dollars  a week  and I   was able  to  eat
bountifully each weekend.
       By  sTuee]ing everything  I  could into  the  schedule, I completed the
three-year seminary in two years. At last I had made it to my goal. I  was a
minister! I had worked so long and so hard that I didn’t Tuite know how  to
stop. But this was it; this was what God had called me to do. I  was sent to
the  Methodist   church   in   Claypool,   Indiana,   for   my   first    full-time
assignment. I threw myself into  the work with  all  the ]eal  I could muster,
and slowly the  three churches in the circuit  began to grow. The offerings
increased, the attendance grew and my salary went up.
       Young  people accepted Christ  in   growing  numbers, and  my  flock
accepted and loved me and put up with the blunders of a young minister.
       Still   I  felt  a growing  restlessness within me.  There was a  void,  an
emptiness, almost a boredom. Increasingly, my thoughts were drawn toward
the Army chaplaincy. I  knew the soldier, his thoughts and his temptations.

21
Did God want me to serve the men in uniform? I prayed about it. “I’ll  go if
You want me to go, Lord; I’ll stay if You want me to stay . . . . ”
       Gradually the pull toward the Army got stronger. In 1953 I volunteered
for the chaplaincy and was accepted. It couldn’t have happened if I hadn’t
received that presidential pardon. God had known  and blessed me in this
special way.
       After  three months at chaplains’ school, I was sent to join the airborne
troopers at Fort Campbell, Kentucky.
       At  the first  opportunity, I  boarded an airplane and heard the familiar
words: “Get ready; stand up; hook up; stand in the door...GO.”
       I  felt the thrust of  the wind and the shock as the parachute opened. It
still felt like  a ten-ton truck hitting me. I was back where I belonged!

22
                                                         3

                                             The    Search

       It’s  e[citing  to  be a chaplain, and it was e[citement  I’d  been looking
for. I  went everywhere with  the men. In  the air,  on the ground, climbing
mountains, going  on  marches, undergoing physical  conditioning.  In  the
billets,  offices,  on  the  field,   or  in  the  mess  hall  -  everywhere  I  had
opportunities to tell men what God wanted to do for them.
       I  enjoyed  every minute  of  the physical  hardships. On jungle-e[pert
training in Panama we all lived in and lived off  the fruits of the jungle. The
steaming jungle rapidly took its toll, and some men had to be carried out on
stretchers. I learned how comfortable it can be to lie in a puddle of mud!

       At  Fort Campbell I  had the opportunity to  become a pilot, something
I’d  always wanted. With  a  friend  I bought  an old  airplane held  together
mainly by  chewing gum  and rubber bands, it  seemed. The plane had no
radio  eTuipment and  we  had  to  fly   by  sight   or  instinct.  Once  I   got
completely lost and suddenly found myself  escorted by two Army  planes.
They motioned for me to land, and I found I’d  been flying over Fort Kno[,
Kentucky. The angry security police informed  me I was lucky  not to have
been shot down.
       Our  flying  came to  an abrupt end when my  partner crashlanded the
plane in a cornfield.

       While  stationed at Fort Bragg,  North Carolina,  I went  with the  82nd
Airborne  Division  to  the  Dominican Republic.  This  was  a small  police
action, but thirty-mne paratroopers were lost.
       Back  at Fort Bragg, I  continued parachuting and finally  received the
coveted Army award of Master Parachutist.
       From outward appearances all was well. My life  was full and e[citing
and I was doing  God’s work.  Maybe that was part  of the  problem. I  was
doing God’s work.  I  didn’t  like  to admit  it, but  I  often became too tense
when I talked to the men about God’s love for them. Converting them was
my business and I struggled hard.

23
       I  was always aware that I was falling woefully short of the perfection I
longed for. Somehow it was always just beyond the hori]on.
       As  a young boy I’d  heard my mother and grandmother talk about the
need for  purity   and holiness  in  living.   They  were  Wesleyan and Free
Methodist and  spoke of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit   in  the life   of  the
Christian.
       Whatever it  was, I  certainly lacked it.  I  read books about the deeper
life of  prayer, and went to camp meetings to hear others preach about the
power of God.
       I  didn’t  see much  of  that power  in  my  own life,   and I  desperately
longed for it.  I  wanted to be used of God,  and everywhere I looked were
people in need. I just didn’t have what it took to meet their needs.
       A  friend  gave me a book about an eastern cult claiming to  know the
method of opening people’s minds to the power of God. I learned to lie on a
board with my feet elevated and to practice silent meditation.
       I  began to  read everything  I  could  find  about  psychic phenomena,
hypnotism, and spiritism, hoping to find a clue to the secret of letting God’s
Spirit work in and through me.
       About  this time I  went to Korea and there, in an accident, my glasses
shattered into my right eye. Si[ty percent of the vision in that eye was gone.
The cornea was scarred, and the doctors said vision would never return.
       Now,  where was the power of God? Christ  had walked the earth and
healed the blind. He said that greater things even than He had done, those
who followed after Him would do.
       I  went to Seoul twice  for  eye operations. The verdict was negative. I
prayed. Everything in me rebelled against accepting a God of  salvation, a
God who is  omnipotent creator, a God whose name I preach to men who
face death on the battlefield, as a God without the power to heal. But where
was the key? How was that power released through men? I had to know.
       On my  third flight  to  Seoul for a visit  to the surgeon, I was sitting  in
the airplane  when suddenly  there was  a strong  sensation within  me.  It
wasn’t an audible  voice, but  something definitely  communicated, saying:
“Your eyes are going to be all right.”
       I knew God had spoken. He had spoken to me, just as clearly as He did
that Sunday evening in the barn back in Pennsylvania.
       The  surgeon in  Seoul  shook  his  head and said:  “Sorry,  Chaplain,
there’s nothing we can do for your eye.” Instead of feeling discouragement,

24
I was elated. God had spoken; I trusted Him.
       A  few  months later I  had a sudden urge to go  back to the doctor  to
check on my  eye.  After  the e[amination   he looked  astonished. “I  don’t
understand,” he said. “Your eye is perfectly well.”
       God  had done it!   I  was thrilled   and more determined than  ever to
research every avenue of contact with His power.

       I returned to the United States in 1963, went back to Chaplains’ School
for si[  months and was assigned to Fort Bragg, N.C., in 1964.
       Here  I   continued studying  hypnosis  with   renewed vigor,   and got
involved  in the  Spiritual  Frontiers movement  led by  Arthur  Ford.  I  had
heard that many ministers were drawn to this movement. In Arthur  Ford’s
home I saw firsthand evidence of the workings of a spirit world completely
separate from our known rational world. I was fascinated.
       But  was it scriptural? There were pangs of nagging doubts in the back
of my  mind. The spirits were unTuestionably real, but the Bible  speaks of
spirits other than God’s Holy Spirit, and talks about spiritual wickedness in
high places (Ephesians 6). The Bible calls these spirits our enemies, Satan’s
own forces,  and warns  us to  test all  spirits  to  be  sure we  aren’t being
manipulated by the enemy. Satan can cleverly counterfeit the work  of the
Holy Spirit.
       I  felt  reasonably sure that I wasn’t  getting myself  into  a blind  alley.
These spirits, and the people I met  in the movement, did,  after all,  speak
very highly of Christ. They certainly recogni]ed Him  as the Son of God and
a great spiritual leader who worked many miracles.
       The  goal for  us, they  taught, is  to become like  Christ  in  all things,
since we are also sons of God.
       I  traveled many miles to talk with  people who knew something about
the subject, studied books on hypnotism, spoke to doctors, even wrote the
Library of Congress. For here, I felt, was the avenue I, as mortal man, could
use to help others.
       I  didn’t  know  I  was on  dangerous ground. Subtly, but surely, I  had
begun to look  at  -esus Christ as someone much like  myself.  Someone I
could be like if I tried hard enough.
       I  had greatly underestimated the powers of the enemy. I didn’t know it
then, but  hypnosis is  potentially  very  dangerous spiritually,  leaving  the
subject wide-open for impulses from the realm of Satan.

25
       Oh yes, I  was also falling  into  the trap of thinking  of  Satan as a bad
character with horns from a realm of imagery. He certainly couldn’t pose a
threat to the sophisticated man of the twentieth century.
       C.S.  Lewis once  said that Satan’s cleverest trick  is  to  convince the
world that he doesn’t e[ist.
       My  faith  had become damaged and seriously undermined, although I
didn’t  know it  yet.  The change was so subtle.  Perhaps the fine line  was
crossed when I found  myself  talking  about -esus as teacher and miracle
worker and failing to mention that He died on a cross for us, that His blood
cleanses us from sin.
       Satan Tuoted Scriptures even in -esus’ time. He still  does, and really
doesn’t mind when  we do.  But  he would  like  to see us forget  about the
cross, the blood, and the resurrected -esus.
       Paul speaks about the secret of the Christian  life  in Colossians 1:27.
The secret is Christ in us. Not that we become like Him, but that He lives in
us and transforms us from within. Others may look at us and say we appear
to be Christlike, but  not because we have become more worthy or holy or
spiritual or pure. He lives in us. That’s the secret.
       The subtle danger of the so-called, “Christian  Spiritualist Movement”
or “Spiritual  Frontiers Movement” is  that it would  lead men to try to  copy
Christ and appropriate spiritual powers for themselves, and so commit the
original sin of Satan, the fallen angel, who wanted to be like God Himself.
       Without  Christ as Savior, without the cross, there would be no plan of
salvation, no possible way to be forgiven of sin. In  fact, there would be no
gospel.
       I  was falling  into the trap.  My  motives were pure; I  honestly wanted
power to help others overcome their problems and their sicknesses of body
and mind.
       It  took an act of God to open my eyes to the error of my ways.

26
                                                         4

                                                Be   Filled

       For some time I  had been going to a small weekly  prayer group near
Fort Bragg. One evening, Ruth, a member of the group, was visibly moved
during a  prayer session. I  had watched her  during several meetings and
often thought I would like  to ask her how she had come to e[perience such
obvious joy  in her  life.  Unlike  some of  the rest of  us, she seemed to be
filled continuously  with a joy  I certainly  had felt only on  rare occasions in
my life.
       This  particular  evening  Ruth confided  in  me:  “I   was so  blessed I
almost prayed out loud in tongues!”
       “You  almost what?” I was horrified.
       “Prayed in tongues,” Ruth said brightly.
       I   lowered  my  voice  and looked  around  to  see if   we  were  being
watched. “Ruth, you could have ruined our group! Whatever has come over
you?”
       Ruth  laughed heartily.  “I’ve   been  praying  in  tongues ever  since I
received the Baptism in the Holy Spirit.”
       “What  is that?” I’d never heard the term before.
       Ruth  patiently  e[plained   that it   was the  same e[perience  that  the
disciples had at Pentecost. “I e[perienced my own  Pentecost.” She smiled
with unmistakable radiance.
       “I  thought you were Baptist.” I felt shaken.
       “I  am, but God is moving in all denominations.”
       I  had heard rumors of a wave of emotionalism invading the churches,
people getting off on fads and losing faith in Christ. I  had heard some tales
about Pentecostals being “drunk in  the  spirit,”  whatever that  meant, and
having wild orgies. I knew Ruth needed help badly.
       I  put my hand on her arm. “Be careful, Ruth,” I said earnestly. “You’re
playing with dangerous stuff. I’ll  be praying for  you, and if you  need help,
call me.”
       Ruth  smiled and  patted my  hand. “Thank  you, Merlin.   I  appreciate
your concern.”
       Some time later she called me.

27
       “Merlin,   a  group  called  Camp Farthest  Out is  having  a  retreat  at
Morehead City. We’d like  you to go.”  It sounded like something I’d  better
stay away from. I tactfully  replied that I  would go if  I  could, which meant
that I wouldn’t be able to.
       Within  the ne[t  week several others called. A  businessman reminded
me that I would need my golf clubs. A lady from  Raleigh telephoned to tell
me that she had arranged for  all  my  e[penses to be paid  if  I  would  go.
Someone else called to say I could  bring another minister free  of charge.
This was  too  much. How  could  I  resist  all  this  genuine interest in  my
spiritual well-being? I said, “Thank you, I’ll  go.”
       I  got in  touch with  a Presbyterian minister friend  and invited him  to
come along. He hedged.
       “It’s  an all-e[penses-paid trip at a resort hotel!”
       “I’ll   go.”
       On the way Dick said: “Merlin,  why are we going to this thing?”
       “I  don’t know,”  I said. “But it’s for  free, so let’s enjoy it.”
       In  the hotel lobby  we were greeted with such warm enthusiasm from
people we’d never seen that I was beginning to wonder what kind of strange
beings we had fallen amongst.
       The  services were unlike  anything we’d  ever  attended. People sang
with  uninhibited  joy, clapped their  hands, and actually  raised their  arms
while they were singing.
       Both Dick  and I felt very much out of place, but agreed there was a joy
here from which we could learn something.
       One very cultured and refined-looking  lady kept coming up  to us and
saying: “Has anything happened yet?”
       “No,  ma’am, what do you mean?” we’d answer.
       “You’ll   see, you’ll see,” she always said.
       Ruth  and some of the others who had invited  us urged me to have a
private talk with a certain lady who they said had unusual power.
       They  took  us to  meet her, and  I  instantly  disliked  her. She Tuoted
Scripture in a way that made me feel as if  she was trying to convert me. I
didn’t  like  to  have  Scripture Tuoted to  me,  with  what  seemed to  be a
judgmental attitude.
       Still,  our friends insisted that we have a talk with her, and since they’d
paid our way there, I felt we ought to oblige.

28
       We sat patiently as she told us what God had done in her life and in the
lives  of  others  that  she  knew.  She made  numerous references to   the
“Baptism in the Holy  Spirit,”  and went through the Scriptures to show that
the e[perience had been a common one for Christians in the first century.
       “The  Holy  Spirit  is still  doing the same thing in  many people’s lives
today,” she said. “-esus Christ still bapti]es those who believe in Him,  just
as He did at Pentecost.”
       I  felt  a twinge of  e[citement. Could  it be that  I could  e[perience my
own Pentecost? Could I  see tongues of  fire,  hear the rush  of wind,  and
speak in an unknown tongue?
       She had finished talking and sat looking at us.
       “I’d   like to pray for  you,” she said softly. “That you might  receive the
Baptism in the Holy Spirit.”
       Without hesitating I said, “Yes.”
       She placed her hands on my head and began to pray softly. I waited for
“it”  to hit me. Nothing happened. I didn’t feel a thing.
       She went  on  and placed her  hands on Dick’s   head. When she had
finished praying I looked at him and he looked at me. I could tell he hadn’t
felt anything either. This whole thing was a fake.
       The lady looked at us both with a hint of a smile.
       “You  haven’t felt anything yet, have you?”
       We shook our heads. “No, ma’am.”
       “I’m   going to pray for you in a language you will not understand. As I
pray you will receive a new language of your own.”
       Again  she placed her hands on my head. I felt  nothing, saw nothing,
heard nothing. When she was through praying, she asked if I could hear or
sense any words within me that I didn’t understand. I thought for a minute
and reali]ed that there were in my mind words that didn’t mean anything to
me. I felt certain that these strange words were strictly a product of my own
imagination, and I told her so.
       “If  you said them out loud, would you feel as if you were being made a
fool of?” she asked.
       “I  certainly would.”
       “Would  you  be willing   to be a fool  for  Christ’s  sake?” This put  the
whole situation  in  a different  perspective. Of course I’d   do anything  for
Christ, but speaking out loud  such utter nonsense could mean disaster for
my future. I  could imagine all  those people going around telling everyone

29
that a Methodist chaplain had been praying in an unknown tongue. I might
even have to leave the Army! Still, what if  this was what Christ wanted me
to do? Suddenly even my Army  career seemed less important. Haltingly I
began to speak out loud the words that were forming in my mind.
       Still  I  felt  nothing different. I  did  believe that -esus Christ had given
me a new tongue as a sign that He had bapti]ed me in the Holy Spirit,  yet
the disciples at Pentecost had acted like  drunk men.  Obviously  they had
been overwhelmed by some feeling.
       I  watched Dick;  his  e[perience seemed to be the  same as mine. He
spoke words of an unknown language and believed in the validity of it, yet
displayed no emotional reaction.
       “Your  e[perience is based on faith  in a fact, not  on feeling,”  said the
lady, apparently reading our minds.
       I  sat in deep thought. I didn’t feel  any different, but was I different?  I
looked up; an ama]ing reali]ation had just hit me.
       “I   once again know that  -esus Christ  is alive!”   I  said. “I  don’t  just
believe, I KNOW!”
       Why,  of course! The Holy  Spirit  brings witness of  -esus Christ, says
the Bible. Now  I  knew that  to be a fact.  That was the source of  the new
authority of the disciples after Pentecost. They didn’t remember a man who
had lived  and died and risen again.  They knew Him  in  the present tense
because He had filled them with His Holy  Spirit whose primary purpose is
to witness to -esus Christ!
       Even as I saw the magnitude of  my sin, I  also saw -esus Christ in all
His splendor as my redeemer. I saw Him for what I’d always known deep in
my heart that He was. All of my recent nagging doubts were swept away by
a wave of joyous certainty. It was glorious!  Never again could I doubt that
-esus Christ was who He said He was. Never again could I commit the folly
of thinking that He had been a mere man, a good man, an e[ample for us to
follow.
       What a marvelous truth: -esus Christ living in us; His power operating
through us. He is the vine. His life pulsates through our beings.
       We are nothing apart from Him, can do nothing in our own power.
       “Thank   you, -esus!”  I   stood up,  and as  I  reached my  full   height,
something hit me! I  was suddenly filled and overflowing  with  a feeling of
warmth and love for everybody in the room.

30
       It  must have hit Dick  at the same time. I saw the tears well  up in his
eyes, and without a word we reached out and gave each other a bear hug,
laughing and crying at the same time.
       I  looked at the dear lady I  had resented so fiercely just a short while
ago, and reali]ed that I loved her. She was my sister in Christ!
       We went  downstairs for  lunch, and  I felt  an  overwhelming love  for
everyone I saw. I had never known anything like it.
       That  evening Dick  and I  began to pray in  one of  the rooms. People
came in to join us and soon the room was full.  As we prayed, others were
filled  with  the Holy   Spirit.  The hotel  rang with  shouts of  joy  as people
e[perienced the fullness of Christ’s presence.
       At  2:00 a.m. Dick and I tried to go to sleep. It was no use; we were too
e[cited.
       I  said: “Dick,   let’s get up  and pray some more.”  We prayed another
two hours for everyone we knew, and then praised God for His goodness to
us.

31
                                                     5

                              His    Power    Within       You

       I returned to Fort Bragg an[ious to share with everyone the wonderful
thing that had happened to me. I had once wondered how an e[perience like
this would affect my ministry. How well I remembered my own reaction to
the “Pentecostal emotionalism” in the church.
       Now I knew that whatever the reaction, I would not be able to keep
from sharing what I had e[perienced.

       The first day I went to our headTuarters company orderly room. The
First Sergeant was sitting behind his desk. He was big and rough and well
known for his gruff manners.
       “First Sergeant,” I said, “did I ever tell you that -esus loves you?”
       To my ama]ement the tears began to roll down his cheeks.
       He said: “No, Chaplain, you never told me anything like that.”
       I felt  my face flush hot with shame. For over a year I had seen him
several times a day and I had never told him anything about -esus.
       I walked into the hallway and met the Supply Sergeant.
       “Sergeant, did I ever tell you that -esus loves you and I love you too?”
       “No, Sir, you never told me anything like that.” Again I felt ashamed,
and he said: “Sir, do you have a minute to talk?” We went to my office and
he poured out a host of problems I had never known he had. When he was
through I asked if he would like to accept Christ as his Savior. He said he
would, and knelt with tears streaming down his face.
       Everywhere I went, men accepted Christ. It seemed that there was a
power in me that was doing the talking for me. When I started to speak to
someone, I had no idea what I was going to say, but whatever came had a
new power that drew men to Christ.
       It was easy to serve God this way. The old tension was gone, and I
could laugh. Preaching was no longer something to labor over. It became
pure joy just to let His thoughts pour through me.

       All  Army  personnel must attend a character guidance class once a
month. Teaching this class as chaplains, we are not allowed to preach. As

32
carefully as I could, I  one day told the class that the God of our country is
still alive  and daily  answers prayers. After the class a Private came up to
me, and with  his nose si[  inches from  mine, rather insolently  said: “You
really believe all that stuff, don’t you?”
       “Yes, I do,”  I said.
       “Do  you mean that if you prayed now, God would answer?”
       “Yes,”  I said, “I know He will.”
       “Do  you think it is wrong to smoke?”
       The Tuestion was an une[pected one. “For some it may be wrong, for
others right,” I said evasively.
       “I’ve   been smoking since I  was fourteen,”  the Private  said. “Now  I
smoke three packs a day, and the doctor told me this morning that if I don’t
stop, it will kill  me.”
       I said: “There’s no Tuestion about it; for you it is wrong to smoke.”
       “Then you ask your God to make me Tuit!”
       How  could  I pray  like  that? The obvious pat  answers were swirling
through my head: God helps those who help themselves, or he could pray
that God would help him want to Tuit. But that wasn’t what he’d asked me.
       “God,”  I prayed silently, “help me know what to do.”
       Immediately I felt  a strong impression: “Pray in your new language!”
       “Out  loud?”
       “No,  just silently.”
       I  began to pray in  the language I  had received at the retreat. Then I
paused.
       There came another impression: “Put  your hand on his  shoulder and
pray.”
       I obediently put my hand on his shoulder. “Pray what?”
       “Silently  pray in your new language.” I did. Then came the impression
again: “Translate it into English.”
       Without  thinking, I  opened my mouth and out came the words: “God,
don’t let him smoke again as long as he lives.”
       What a  prayer! If  the man ever smoked again he’d be convinced that
God didn’t  answer prayer. I  felt  utterly  confused, and just turned  on my
heels and left.
       In   the   days  that   followed,    I   asked  God   repeatedly  if    I   had
misunderstood. Would my mistake make that  man disbelieve? Again and
again came the impression: “-ust trust me.”

33
       Trusting God  apparently meant going out on a limb  without anything
to hold onto but faith. With new eagerness I dove into an intensive study of
God’s Word. If I  was going to operate on faith, it would have to be faith in
the integrity and very nature of  God. I had to know  Him, and I  found that
the more I read, the stronger I believed. Bible reading had never been this
e[citing   before.  From  the  pages  rose  a  new  knowledge  of   God  the
omnipotent who promised that we could do  all things in  Christ. Who  said
that the power within us is the same power that raised Christ from the dead!
       In  Ephesians 3:20-21 Paul  wrote:  “Now  to  him  who  by  his power
within us is able to do infinitely  more than we ever dare to ask or imagine -
to him be glory  in the Church and in  Christ -esus forever and ever, amen!
(-.B. Phillips translation)
       Carefully,  I  studied Paul’s instructions  to the  church at  Corinth. He
listed the various ways the Holy Spirit was known to operate through men:
there were speaking in tongues, interpretation of tongues, healing, miracles,
prophesying, preaching, wisdom, knowledge, faith, discernment.
       How  could I  know  what “gifts”   God wanted to e[press through me?
Had He given me any special gifts?
       Again  the verse from  Ephesians came back to me: “He  who  by His
power within  us.”  No,  I didn’t   have any gifts.  All  I  could  do was  to be
willing  to let God operate through me.
       In  other  words,  my  job  was strictly   that  of  being obedient  to  the
impressions or urgings I felt within me. The Scripture says that He could do
far more than we dare ask or imagine. Obviously, there was no way I could
anticipate or know what God wanted to do.

       One evening in  our prayer group, I talked  about God’s power to heal
our bodies. One lady spoke up. “Why don’t you  ask God to heal one of us
then?”
       I  felt a bit  shaky. Of course I knew God could and would  hear prayer
for the sick. But would He hear and answer me?
       “Okay,”   I  said, with   a sudden release of  faith.  “Who   wants to  be
prayed for?”
       “I  do,” said the same lady. “One of my eyes has been weeping tears for
several months. Medication hasn’t helped. Please pray about it.”
       I  held my breath, placed my hands on her head, and prayed, mustering
all my  faith  to believe  that God was healing  her right  then. When I  was

34
through, her eye was still  weeping. Had  I done something wrong?  Again
came the prompting within.   “Trust  Me.”  All  right,  faith  means believing
something you don’t see. All  the stories I’d  read in the Bible  had made it
very plain; the difference between victory and defeat was always a matter of
faith. God couldn’t  do  a thing when the  Israelites refused to believe. The
promises in the Bible are plentiful to those who will only believe.
       “Thank  you, Lord,” I said out loud, “for  hearing our prayer.”
       That night  the lady called me, “Chaplain, guess what happened?” Her
voice was bubbling with e[citement.
       “Tell  me!”
       “I   was sitting here reading  when I  suddenly reali]ed  that something
had happened to my eye. It is completely healed!”
       I  was thrilled. “Thank  you, Lord,”  I said, “I  get your point. I’ll   do the
trusting; You’ll do the rest.”

       A  local Presbyterian minister who had been filled with the Holy Spirit
had been reluctant to  tell  his congregation. He  invited  a member of  our
prayer group to give  her testimony during  a Sunday evening service, and
several of us in the group came along to be in prayer.
       As she told how she, a Southern Baptist, had been bapti]ed in the Holy
Spirit, there was dead silence in  the church. It  was evident that God  was
speaking to the people. At the close of the service the pastor called on me to
pronounce the benediction. I stood up, but instead of giving the benediction,
I began to speak the very first  words that came into  my mind:  “Everyone
who wants to come to the altar and surrender his life to  God, please come
forward.”
       Dead silence! There had never been an altar call in the history of that
church. Then one by one, people began to come forward,  falling  on their
knees.
       I  walked  over to  the first  one. I  didn’t  know  what  to pray. I  didn’t
know why  he had come forward.  I  bowed my  head. Within  me I  prayed
silently:  “Show  me  how  to pray,  God.”  I  heard  “Pray  in  the Spirit.”   I
silently prayed in my new language.
       “Now  begin to translate what you have said.”
       “Lord,    forgive  this   man  for   his   drunkenness, his  dishonesty  in
business.” I was shocked at my own words. What if I had misunderstood? I
could really mess things up for my minister friend.

35
       I  walked  over to  the ne[t  person and followed  the  same procedure.
“Lord,  forgive  this man for  his  vile  temper, his ugly  disposition, and his
selfish treatment of his family.”
       I  went from  one to another, and with my  hands on the person’s head
prayed as I was prompted to pray, prayers of repentance and confession.
       By  the time I  was through I  knew I  had really crawled way  out on a
limb in complete trust.
       After  the benediction the people came to me one by one. With tears of
joy  they said: “You  prayed  for  e[actly  what  I needed, but  how did  you
know my problem?”
       Days  later   the  minister  told   me  that  the  congregation  had  been
revolutioni]ed.  Many of the people who had come forward that night were
elders and  officers   in   the  church.  Now   the  entire  congregation  was
overflowing with  enthusiasm, ]eal, and joy.
       I  felt  like  shouting. I  hadn’t known  the problems that beset the men
and women of that church, but God had. He knows the heart and mind of all
of us, and can speak through us in a power that will directly minister to the
e[act needs of every  individual.  If  people respond, it isn’t  our doing,  but
His. If they refuse, again we do not get blamed for a failure.

       Every day and wherever I went it  was the same; people responding to
-esus Christ.  Whenever  I   fell   back  into  the  habit  of   trying   to  think
beforehand what I  would  say to  someone, the results were immediate. I
became tense; the power  and presence of  God simply  didn’t   flow.  The
principle of letting  go and letting God was valid. All   I had to do was rela[
in the presence of God, letting my mind go blank and opening my mouth in
faith to  speak whatever God impressed on  me. Always  the words  spoke
directly to a need, always the person was wonderfully helped.
       I  marveled. I had been a pastor for many years and worked hard at it,
yet I had never seen so much happen in the lives of  so many in  the short
time since -esus Christ invaded my being in the fullness of His Spirit.
       Without  the pressures of having to preplan and organi]e and research
and write  sermon notes, I found  that I  had much  more time  to spend in
Bible reading and prayer. It seemed as if I suddenly had more energy than
ever before, and I never had the frustrating e[perience of  wasting time on
projects that turned out to be ineffective.

36
       As  long as I  rested in Christ,  it seemed that God took  my days, and
every detail, every appointment, every happening began to fall into place in
a perfect  whole. No  longer  did  I  e[perience  confusion and  conflicts  of
appointments or schedules.
       My   only  regret  was  that I   had not  discovered  this  e[perience  of
yielding myself fully  to God many years before.

       About  this time,  Oral Roberts came to Fayetteville.  A huge tent was
set up, and night after night thousands came to hear him preach and pray for
the sick.  I  wanted  to  meet him  personally  so I   found  out which   local
minister  would  be  in   charge  of  the  service.  I   went  to  see  him  and
volunteered to do anything I could to help.
       He was ama]ed that a Methodist chaplain would  want to be involved.
He had never been able to  get anyone but Pentecostal ministers to assist
before.
       From the opening night, I  was on the platform in uniform.  I was there
ne[t to  Oral Roberts as he prayed for the sick, and I saw physical changes
take place as bodies were healed! What a tremendous joy!
       My  chaplain friends began to hint that if I continued appearing in such
places and being associated with men like  Oral  Roberts, I  might as well
forget about ever “getting  anyplace”  in  the Army  chaplaincy. They  were
probably right, but I’d  rather be obedient to God and see His power clearly
demonstrated than be seeking the temporal approval of men.
       The ne[t  week I  was casually leafing through a list  of chaplains who
had been selected for  promotion to  Lieutenant  Colonel. I  hadn’t  been a
Major long  enough to be considered, but there, on the list, was my name!
Later I found that the Army  has the authority to promote five percent of its
officers before they are eligible under the ordinary rules.
       All   I could  think was, “Thank  You, Lord,  for  showing me that I  can
trust You to look after all my needs.”

       Obedience sometimes meant going against the e[pressed wishes of the
people who came to ask for help.
       A  young Army Lieutenant brought his wife to see me. “She would like
prayer for the Baptism in the Holy Spirit,” he said.
       I  had  a most  unusual feeling  within.  I  just  knew that  this  girl  had
already received this e[perience. She hadn’t said a word since they entered

37
my office, yet I knew this was so.
       I said: “You  have already received the Baptism so you don’t need to be
prayed for again.”
       “How  do you know  that?” She looked surprised. “I’ve tried to  believe
ever since I was prayed for.”
       “I  know  because the Holy Spirit  tells me,”  I said. “He  also says that
before you stand up  you will   receive the evidence of  speaking in  a new
tongue.
       This  was really  way-out, I  thought.  What if  nothing  happened? Her
faith would surely be shaken. Yet within I  felt a certainty. I  invited both of
them to join me in a prayer of thanksgiving for what God had already done.
       Before I  finished, I could hear her softly praying in  her new language.
She was so filled with joy that she nearly floated out of the office.

       One day a  young Private showed up in  my office.  I  remembered the
prayer I’d prayed for him:  “God,  don’t let him  ever smoke again.” He was
beaming all over his face.
       “Sir,”   he burst out, “You’ll   never believe what happened to me after
you left.”
       I’d   seen enough ama]ing  happenings in  the  last  month  to believe
anything.
       “Yes, I’ll  believe,” I  said. “Tell me.”
       “When  you turned and left,  I laughed and thought, This will  Ee easy.
All I  have to do is smoke, and I’ll  prove that God doesn’t answer prayer. I
went into the latrine and lit up a cigarette, took a big drag, and immediately
started to vomit. I figured that was a coincidence, probably something I ate,
and later that afternoon I  tried smoking  again. The same thing happened.
For the ne[t three days, every time I tried to smoke I vomited. Now, if I just
think about smoking I feel like vomiting.”
       I  was overjoyed. -esus Christ promised that the Holy Spirit  would  be
with us to guide us into all truth. I hadn’t misunderstood His instructions.
       A  few days later the Private came back.
       “Sir,  would you pray one more prayer for me?”
       “I  surely will!”
       “Please pray  that  God will   forgive  my  sins and  help me  to  accept
Christ as my Savior.”

38
       Within   minutes  we  were  on  our   knees together  and  he  joyfully
accepted Christ.
       Months  later I  told about this  incident in  the First Baptist  Church of
Columbus, Georgia. After the service a man came up to me and said: “I was
in Admin  Company  of the  82nd Airborne  Division  when  that happened.
That man was going all  over the company telling  about the chaplain who
had fi[ed him so he couldn’t smoke!”
       What a wonderful  truth!  Not only does God save, He means business
when He  says He can  remold us  and make  us into  His  image. He  can
literally  take away our  old habits and  hang-ups and impure thoughts and
renew us from within!
       I  had received the Baptism in the Holy Spirit only  a couple of months
ago, yet it seemed I’d already lived a lifetime in this new dimension.

       Now  I was in for an encounter with the enemy in force. I was suddenly
the victim of an unusual affliction.  All  my life I’d  been strong as a horse in
top physical condition.  Now  every time I  e[erted  myself in  the least, my
heart began to beat rapidly. I  was weak and ached all  over. Reluctantly I
went to bed for  a week. My  condition didn’t  improve at  all. I  went to the
hospital to see what the  medical verdict would  be, and they  immediately
slapped me on a stretcher and hustled me off to bed. Test after test gave no
clue to what ailed me. I felt  wretched, weak, and in pain, and it seemed to
get worse instead of better. At  this  rate I’d  just as soon be dead. All   my
energies seemed depleted, and the outlook was bleak.
       Then suddenly one night  when I  wondered if the  end might be near,
there was the strong impression: “Do you still trust me?
       “Yes,  Lord.”  I  whispered  it  into  the darkened room. A   Tuiet peace
began to move through me, and I fell into a deep sleep.
       The ne[t  morning I felt  much better. The doctors insisted I stay in bed
for a while, and I was grateful for days of prayer, praise, and study.
       One day I was reading one of Glenn Clark’s books, and I suddenly felt
the voice within me ask: “Will you now live  like -esus?”
       I could only  answer: “Yes, Lord.”
       “But  what about your thoughts and desires. Are they pure?”
       “No,  Lord.”
       “Do  you want them to be?”

39
       “Oh,   yes,  Lord.  All    my  life   I’ve   struggled  to  overcome  impure
thoughts and desires.”
       “Will   you give me all your impure thoughts?”
       “Yes, Lord.”
       “Forever?”
       “Oh  yes, Lord. Forever.”
       Suddenly it was as if a heaviness had been lifted from me, as if a mist
had parted and everything  looked clean and  pure. The door  to the  ward
opened and a young nurse walked through. I  followed  her with  my eyes.
She was a  beautiful  young  nurse, and  all  I  could  think  was:  “What  a
beautiful  child   of   God.”   There  was  not  even  a   fleeting  thought   of
temptation!
       Back  home from  the hospital, I  went to  our prayer  group and felt  a
strong impression to ask them to pray for me. I had always been the one to
pray for others. Now I  sat in the chair in  the center of the group, and they
prepared to pray for me. “What do you want us to ask God to do?”
       I  thought for a moment. “Ask  God to use me more than ever,” I  said.
They began to pray, and suddenly, in the Spirit, I saw -esus kneeling before
me. He was holding my feet and resting His head on my knees. He said: “I
don’t want to use you. I want you to use Me!”
       It  was as if a door had opened into a new understanding of -esus. He
told the disciples that they had to permit Him to kneel before them while He
washed their feet. He wants to give Himself for us each moment of our lives
just as completely as He  gave Himself  on the cross. We have nothing  to
give Him; we have only to receive of Him!

40
                                                         6

                                                Vietnam

       In  1966  I  received orders to  go  to  Vietnam with  the  80th  General
Support Group, then stationed at Fort Bragg.
       We boarded ship in San Francisco, and as we left the bay moving out
to sea, I stood at the railing feeling the peace of God within me and around
me. This was His will for me, I knew.
       On  board I  immediately  started a  prayer group,  a Bible  study, and
regular worship services. We spent twenty-one  days at sea and each day
several men accepted Christ.
       The devil would freTuently whisper in my ear that they were just doing
it because they were going  to Vietnam  and their decisions weren’t  really
honest.

       Months later  I had proof  of how much of  a liar  the devil is. Many  of
the men who made decisions for Christ were with a unit that left us as soon
as we reached Vietnam. One day I walked  into  their unit,  and one of the
Sergeants saw me. He almost e[ploded with joy. “Praise the Lord, Chaplain
Carothers.”
       He told  me of all the things God had been doing. Together we went to
see others in the unit who had accepted Christ aboard ship, and they told me
about the Bible classes they were holding and of  the men they had led to
Christ.
       “Do  you remember Lieutenant Stover?” they asked.
       “Yes, I  do.” I remembered the afternoon he stood on deck and told me
how he had been running from God all  through college. He had given  his
life back to Christ  right there and told me that as soon as he got out of the
Army he would answer the call to full time ministry.
       “He  has started a tremendous choir and the men really enjoy singing
with him.”
       They took me to meet the Lieutenant and we had a joyful reunion.
       As  soon as I arrived  in Cam Rahn Bay  I organi]ed  a Saturday night
prayer group. Soon there were twenty-five men meeting each week. I began

41
by challenging   them  to  believe  that  God  would  answer  our  prayers  if  we
would  just believe  Him.
        For  several  weeks  I  asked  for   specific   prayer  reTuests. Finally    one
evening a Warrant Officer   spoke up.
        “Well,   Sir,  I  sure would  be  pleased for  you  to  pray  for  my  wife.   We
have been  married  si[   years and  she is  so against  religion   that  she won’t
even let  us have  prayer at  the table.  I  don’t  think   it  will  do  much  good  to
pray for  her, but I’d  be glad for  you to  try.”
        I  thought  this was  an unusual  reTuest to start  with,  but  I  was learning
that God knows  His  business. I asked the men  to hold  hands in a circle,  and
we began praying  for our  first  miracle.
        None of  the  men had ever  tried  believing  for  a miracle,  but  they  were
willing   to  try.  I had  been sharing  with   them  all  the wonderful   things  God
had been doing in  my life  since I  received the Baptism  in  the Holy  Spirit.
        Near the  battlefront   in  Vietnam  they  were far  from  the  distractions  at
home and ready to start grasping  the deeper things  of the Spirit.
        Two  weeks later  the Warrant  Officer   came to  the prayer  group  with  a
letter in  his hand. Tears flowed  down  his face as he read the letter to us:

           “Darling, you will probably find it difficult to believe what has been happening here at
   home. One week ago I was standing at our kitchen sink on a Saturday morning. I began to have a
   most unusual e[perience. A big white sign began flashing through my mind. On it in big black
   letters was the word ‘REVIVAL.’ I couldn’t get it out of my mind. No matter what I tried to think
   about, the sign stayed in front of me all morning long. By noon I was really upset. I called your
   sister and asked her if there was a big revival sign some place in town. I thought I might have seen
   it. She said there was no such sign, but they were having revival at their church. ‘Would you like
   to come?’ she asked me.
           I said, ‘You know I never go to such things.’ But the sign stayed with me and by evening it
   was so strong that I called your sister and asked if I could go with her. During the service an
   invitation was given and I went forward. I’ve waited a week to write you about this for I wanted
   to be sure that I really was giving my life to Christ. But Darling, it is true! I was bapti]ed today,
   and I am thrilled! I can’t wait for you to come home so we can have a real Christian home.”

        “Chaplain,”   said the officer,   “do you  know  what  time it  was here when
it was Saturday  morning  at home?”
        I shook  my head.
        “Saturday  night  when we  prayed for  her. That’s  when she began to  see
the sign. And  do you remember  Sunday morning?”
        “Yes, I  remember.”  He had come forward   when the invitation   had been
given at  the close of  the morning   worship  service.  I had  said that I  thought
he already  was  a  Christian   and he  answered:  “Yes,  I   am, Sir,   but  I  was

42
standing back there and got the strongest feeling that if  I came forward  it
would somehow help my wife.”
       Now  he looked at me, tears flowing  freely. “Chaplain, do you  reali]e
what time that was back home?”
       Then it  dawned on me. It had been Saturday night. The night his wife
accepted Christ. An  electric  thrill  went  through our  prayer  group. Tears
rolled down many cheeks. The men were learning for themselves that God
does answer prayer.
       Sitting  ne[t  to the Warrant Officer  was a black  Sergeant. I could see
that he was deeply troubled. “What’s wrong?” I asked.
       “Sir,  my wife  is like  his; she won’t accept any kind of  religion  in our
home. I’ve been reali]ing  that if  I had just  a little faith  two weeks ago we
could have prayed for my wife  too, and maybe the same thing would have
happened to her.”
       What a coincidence! Far away in  Vietnam were two soldiers with  the
same unusual problem. “Let’s  pray for  your wife  right  now,”  I  said with
enthusiasm.
       “Sir,  I believe I missed my chance. I just don’t have faith to pray now.”
       “You  don’t need to depend on your faith alone,” I said. “-ust believe in
our prayers, and we will have faith for you.”
       We joined hands and began to pray. There was a new fervor among the
men. They  had  begun to  see  for  themselves that  God  hears and  God
answers.
       The  ne[t   morning   I  was  in   my  office   when  the  Sergeant came
bouncing in with a letter in his hand and a big smile.
       “Don’t  tell me you got an answer already,” I said jokingly.
       “I  sure did!”
       He was nearly in  orbit and suddenly the words flashed into my mind:
“Before they call I will  answer.” Could it be?
       “What  does the letter say?”
       It  was nearly a duplication  of the one we had heard the night before.
The  Sergeant’s wife  also  had  been  saved, bapti]ed,   and  was  already
teaching a Sunday School class.
       “Oh,  God,” I breathed, “I love You, I love You, I love You!”

       One  Saturday night   a new  officer   came to  our   meeting. He  was
obviously not in sympathy with our approach to prayer.

43
        “Chaplain,   if   God  is  actually   answering  prayer,  why   doesn’t  He  do
something important?”
        “What  would  you  consider important?”   I asked Tuietly.
        “From  the first  day our  little  son was able to stand up,  he would  look at
his  feet  and  cry   out  in   pain.   We  have  taken  him   to  every   doctor   and
specialist in  the  area. We have  had special  shoes, casts, braces, wrappings,
and nothing  helps. He  is seven years  old  now and  every night  my  wife  has
to put  his  feet  on  a pillow   and  rub  them  before  he can  go to  sleep.  Why
doesn’t God do  something for  him?”
        Under  my  breath  I  asked God  to  show  me how   to pray;  then  I  said:
“We  will    pray  and  God  will    heal  him!”   I   felt  very   certain.  “You   don’t
believe, but  we do,  and God  will   heal him.  -oin  the circle   with  us and let’s
pray.”
        The  men prayed  with   renewed hunger  to  see God  move.  Here  was a
third reTuest for  someone back home. I  knew God  had sent it.
        Two weeks  later another letter  arrived:

   Dear:
           I’ve waited for a week to tell you about something that is almost too good to be true. One
   week ago I noticed that for the first time in his life, Paul didn’t mention his feet once during the
   day. He went to sleep that night without a pillow under his feet. I wanted to write to you right
   away, but was afraid of raising your hopes. The ne[t day it was the same. It’s been a whole week
   now, and he hasn’t complained about his feet hurting!”

        “Chaplain,   it’s  hard  for  me to  believe,”   said the  officer,  struggling   to
hold back  the  tears. “But  the  day my  boy’s  feet  stopped hurting   is the  day
we prayed for  him!”
        For months  afterward,  every  time I  saw this  officer,  he would  raise  his
arms and say, “His  feet don’t  hurt yet!”
        From  then on our  men began  to grow  in  faith.  More  and more  prayers
were answered.  Other  men  came to  our  group  to  hear  about  the ama]ing
things  that were  going  on.  I  began to  read letters  and reports  of  answered
prayers from  the pulpit  Sunday  mornings,  and daily  men would  wave  to me
and yell, “Any   new miracles,  Chaplain?”
        Often  I   called  back:  “The   greatest  miracle   of  all;   another  man  has
accepted Christ and received  eternal life!”
        As  the Spirit  of  the  Lord  moved  among us,  many men  were drawn  to
Christ.

44
       One Sunday morning  I had given  an invitation  to  accept Christ, and
many had come forward to pray. After the service I went into  my office  to
spend a few minutes alone with the Lord. I  was preparing to leave when a
Sergeant suddenly burst through the doorway and fell on his  knees in the
middle of the floor.
       “Please, pray for me,” he cried in obvious anguish.
       He then began to confess sins of immorality, addiction  to alcohol and
drugs, neglect of his children and wife. He poured out his sorrow with tears
of repentance. When he was through, I told  him  how God loved  him and
had sent -esus Christ to die on the cross for  every one of  the sins he had
confessed. “All you have to do is accept Christ as your Savior, and God will
give you eternal life and complete pardon,” I said.
       “I  do, I  do,” he sobbed, and a smile of peace and joy flooded his face
as he began to thank and praise God.
       Later he told  me what had brought him  running to  my office.  Earlier
that morning he had walked by the chapel on his way to the post e[change.
Suddenly he felt  an  urge to  step inside.  “This  is  cra]y,”  he  thought, “I
haven’t been inside a church for  si[  years; I  don’t have any reason to go
now.” He went on to the P;,   but something kept pulling him  back. Finally
he decided to  go  to the  chapel where  the service was  just  then getting
underway. He sat through it all and when the congregation stood up to sing
the last hymn he reali]ed  he was shaking so  badly that he couldn’t  stand
without holding on to the chair in front of him.
       He was afraid that at any moment he would fall to the floor, and he felt
a powerful urge to walk to the front and give his life to God.
       “I  just can’t,”  he told himself and began to leave the chapel. Outside in
the street his legs began to give way and he knew that he wouldn’t be able
to stand up much longer. A voice inside told him that now was the time. He
must obey God or else God would let him die. Without  waiting any longer
he turned and ran back to the chapel and burst through my doorway.
       One of  our chaplains was a Southern Baptist.  We were good friends
and he loved the Lord, but he was scared to death of my  emphasis on the
Holy  Spirit.  The ideas  of  faith  healing, casting out  of  demons and evil
spirits, being filled  with  the Holy  Spirit,  and e[periencing the  gifts of  the
Spirit were completely strange to him. He came to one of our prayer groups
and then asked to be e[cused from ever attending another.

45
       He  was particularly  worried about the  way one of  us would  sit  in a
chair in the middle of a circle  while others would place their hands on him
and pray that God would meet his particular needs. He had never seen this
done before, and it seemed like something unchristian to him.
       Through  the men who kept  coming to  the group, he heard of  things
happening. Men who  were  discouraged, defeated, and ready to  give  up
would ask to be prayed for. They told  him how they had e[perienced total
release from their burdens. After sitting in the chair and having others pray
for them with the laying on of  hands, they had been filled with a peace and
joy that stayed with  them. They told how  Christ had become more real to
them from that moment on.
       Little  by  little,  these things were affecting the  chaplain. He began to
reali]e that  God works in  many ways,  even in ways much  different from
what he  had seen and  e[perienced  before. Then  something une[pected
happened.
       A  chaplain in another front line  unit was killed.  My friend  was called
to take his  place immediately. He  felt  naturally a  little  apprehensive and
came to my office to say goodbye. Hesitantly, he confessed that the ministry
through our prayer group had come to mean a great deal to him.  Then he
knelt on the floor with tears flowing. He took my hands and placed them on
his head.
       “Merlin,  please pray for me the way you pray.”
       4uietly  I  began to pray for him in tongues, and as I prayed he began to
be filled with  joy and peace. Laughing through tears he told me how all his
fears were gone. He was ready to go into the battle lines.
       A  few weeks later he called me to say that he had been nearly killed in
a helicopter accident the first day he arrived in his unit.
       “Even  then I  could only  feel  an overflowing  love  and trust in  -esus
Christ,” he said.
       My  unit moved north to Chu Lai and joined the Americal Division. We
were now in the very thick  of the battle along with  the Marines. More and
more I  saw evidences of God’s power  protecting His  children. When  we
trust Him, no power on earth can touch us unless it is God’s will.
       On  several occasions when I was scheduled to go to certain places I
felt a last-minute urge to  change my plans. Later I  found that each time I
obeyed such an urge, I had avoided an incident that could have gotten me
killed.

46
       Once I was scheduled to hold a service on a beach for men who were
unloading five-hundred-pound bombs.  At  the last  minute I  was  strongly
impressed to cancel the  service. At  the  e[act  time  and place where  we
would have met, an e[plosion set off  the bombs. If we had gathered there,
many of the men would have been killed.

       An  old  friend,  Chaplain Burton  Hatch, was division  chaplain of  the
Americal Division.  He invited me to hold a Sunday evening service, and at
the close of the service several men came forward to accept Christ. I prayed
with each one of them.
       The ne[t  morning one of the men came back to the chapel. He looked
a mess, with  clothes dripping  wet and dirty   and hair plastered down  his
forehead. But his face shone and he kept saying:  “Praise the Lord;  thank
you, -esus!”
       Early  that morning he and five others had been fully  eTuipped with a
combat assault load:  hand  grenades, bandoliers of  bullets  around  their
necks, and heavy flak vests. They boarded the helicopter and headed north
along the coast and over the China Sea. The pilot was flying too close to the
water, and a sudden large wave hit the skid of the chopper. With a mighty
jerk, the helicopter  tipped over and  dove straight into  the sea. Men were
thrown in all directions.
       The young soldier suddenly reali]ed that he was under water and going
down, fast. He tried to swim toward the surface and managed to get a breath
of air  before going under again, weighted down  by the heavy  eTuipment.
He tried desperately to free himself, but couldn’t.  As  he began to sink, he
told me, he suddenly remembered that he had accepted Christ the evening
before. He was ready to die and suddenly was filled with  a great peace of
heart and mind. It really  didn’t matter if  he couldn’t  free himself from  the
heavy gear. Once more he came to the surface and again he sank under. The
third time he came up he reali]ed that his strength was gone and he would
soon be with  his Lord.  At  that  very moment  he felt  the eTuipment slide
from around him! He  came to the surface and was free. He began to swim
to shore and there he found that he was the only survivor.

       After  several months at Chu Lai I was transferred south to 4uin Yahn
to serve with  the 85th Evacuation Hospital.  Men who  had been wounded
only a few hours before were brought to us. Over and over I saw the power

47
of God  working. These men were  ready to accept Christ. Man  after man
told  me  how  he  had been  saved from   death by  a  power  beyond  his
understanding.
       “What  was it?” I asked.
       “I  can’t  e[plain  it,”  they would  say. “All  of a sudden, when I knew  I
was going to die, I  became aware of a great power surrounding me. I was
then sure I was safe. I knew it was God, and that He didn’t want me to die.”
       Often  the men asked me  why God  had chosen to save them. I  told
them that He had some special purpose for their lives and He would reveal
it as they listened to His voice.
       I  went from  bed to  bed talking to  the boys and was often  overcome
with emotion.  They were torn,  bleeding, and in  some cases, dying. But I
never heard anyone complain. They were confident  that the job  they had
been doing was important, and that for some reason they were saved from
death. I saw nurses turn away in tears as they saw the strength and courage
of these men. No matter how great the pain, they would grin and say, “I’m
fine.”

       One night  a  nurse called me to  the hospital  to see an Army  Major.
When he saw me he began to weep. He was covered with bandages, and for
ten minutes I stood there while he tried to stop the flow of tears. I wondered
what the problem  was. Had he been told  that his  legs would  have to  be
amputated? They were covered by heavy bandages and looked as if they
were badly hurt.
       Perhaps he had received word that someone at home was seriously ill.
       Finally  the Major  gained control  of  himself and began to  tell me  an
ama]ing story.
       -ust a few  hours earlier he had been a passenger in a helicopter. They
had been hit by ground fire and crashed into the thick jungle. Si[  men had
been scattered over the side of a mountain. When  the Major  came to, he
reali]ed he was injured  too seriously  to move. He could  hear the cries of
other men who were also unable to move. In the distance he could hear rifle
shots. The Viet Cong were converging on the position where they had seen
the aircraft go down. They were moving in to capture the Americans.
       The Major  suddenly reali]ed  he had reached the end. The VC would
not attempt to  carry  out  the wounded Americans.  They would  probably
practice the cruel sport of torturing them to death.

48
       He  tried to  pray, but  reali]ed  he didn’t  know  how. He had  attended
church all his life, but he had never really talked to God. But all  at once he
“felt”  someone say: “-ust ask and believe!”
       With  a burst of  anguish, and in new faith  he cried: “Oh,  God, please
help me!” He reali]ed that for  the first time in his life  he had talked to God.
Still, he could hear the VC move in closer.

       Miles  away, another Army helicopter was flying  north. The pilot  later
told this story: He felt a sudden, overpowering urge to turn and go east. But
why? he reasoned. His destination was north. Contrary to all military rules
he made a ninety-degree turn and headed east. He then felt an even stronger
urge to fly  lower and slower. This was even less logical than his first  urge
and contrary to all rules of flying  over hostile territory. He should be flying
either high or low and fast. But the urge was so strong that he went down to
treetop level, and somehow knew that he was looking for something. There
it was! He  suddenly spotted the remains of a helicopter scattered over the
jungle.
       He  had no idea how long  it had been there, but he felt  compelled to
check it out. The jungle was so dense that it was impossible to land. While
he hovered over the  treetops, a member of  his crew  lowered himself  by
means of a winch.  When  the crewman reached the ground he  found the
wounded men. One by one he secured them to the winch and raised them
into the helicopter. When the last man had been lifted to safety, he secured
himself and was pulled up. -ust  as he left the ground, the VC  arrived and
started firing at him. The pilot saw what was happening, and as soon as the
man was clear of the trees he moved the chopper up and out.
       In a few minutes the wounded men were safe in the hospital.
       When the Major  had finished his story  he grasped my hand and said:
“Chaplain,  I  just wanted  you  to come  and help  me  thank God  for  His
goodness to me. I’m going to serve Him the rest of my life!”

49
                                                         7

                                                 ReMoice!

       I   returned from   Vietnam  in  1967  and was  sent  to  Fort  Benning,
Georgia. Twenty-three years earlier I had left there, a handcuffed prisoner.
Now I  returned as chaplain! It was hard to even remember how I  had felt
then.
       I   was  assigned as  Brigade   Chaplain  for   the  twenty-one  Officer
Candidate  companies  and  the   twenty-one  non-commissioned   Officer
Candidate companies. What an opportunity to lead future military leaders to
Christ!
       It   was  an  e[citing   challenge, yet   I  was  ever  aware  of  my   own
shortcomings. I had come to see God’s power and presence in and around
me, but I was often a reluctant vessel.
       I  e[perienced  days  of  discouragement and knew  that this  was  not
God’s will and plan for me.
       I  searched the Scriptures for clues. In -ohn 17 I found -esus praying to
the Father for us, His  followers. He prayed: “.  .  .that they might have my
joy fulfilled  in  themselves.” That’s what I wanted. The joy of the Lord, not
just when things  were going good, but  always. -esus prayed that I  might
have it, then what was keeping me from e[periencing it continuously?
       In Matthew  25:21 I read: “. . .thou hast been faithful over a few things,
I  will  make thee  ruler over  many things:  enter thou  into  the joy  of  thy
Lord.”
       So it was a matter of my entering in. I  had to do it; it wasn’t  given me
just automatically. “But how do I enter in, Lord?”
       In  Luke  6:23  -esus  tells  us that  we  are to  leap  for  joy.  He  even
describes when we are to leap for joy: “When  you are hungry...when men
shall hate you...when  men shall  reproach you...when they  cast out  your
name as evil. . .rejoice in that day, and leap for joy.” I hadn’t noticed that in
the Bible before.
       “How   do you  e[pect  me to  leap for  joy  under those circumstances,
Lord?” It  didn’t make much sense, but the more I read my Bible, the more
Scriptures I found saying the same thing. Was there a principle involved?

50
       I  read Paul’s second letter to  the Corinthians.  In chapter 12:9-10  he
says: “Most gladly  therefore will  I  rather glory  in my  infirmities,  that the
power of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities,
in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ’s sake:
for when I am weak, then am I strong.”
       Infirmities   were  the  very  things  that  up  till   now  I   had not  been
enjoying. I  didn’t  like  it  when  people turned against me; I  didn’t  like  it
when accidents happened and things went wrong.
       But  over  and over again  I  found the  words in  my  Bible:  “Rejoice!
Thank God for  everything.”  The Psalmist continually  spoke of joy  in  the
midst of  troubles. “Thou  hast turned for  me my mourning  into  dancing,”
says David in Psalm 30.
       I was willing  to try, but how?
       One evening in  a small prayer group, I  began to laugh. I laughed for
fifteen minutes, and while  I  was laughing  I  felt God  speaking: “Are  you
glad that -esus died for your sins?”
       “Yes, Lord, I’m  glad, I’m glad.”
       “Does it  make you feel good to think of His dying for your sins?”
       “Yes, Lord, it  really does!”
       “Does  it make you feel  happy to know that He  has given you eternal
life by His death for you?”
       “Yes, Lord, it  does!”
       “Do  you have to strain or  try hard to really  be filled  with joy  that He
died for you?”
       “No,  Lord, I’m  filled with  joy.”
       I  knew that God wanted me to understand how easy it was to be glad
that Christ  died  for  me.  I  could  clap  my  hands, laugh,  and  sing  with
thanksgiving for  what He had done for  me. Nothing in  my  life  was more
important; nothing could give me more joy.
       I continued laughing, but everything inside me had become very silent.
I felt as if God was about to teach me something I’d never known before.
       God said: “It  really  makes you glad that they took My  Son and drove
nails into His hands. It really makes you glad, doesn’t it? It makes you glad
that they took My Son and drove nails through His feet. It really makes you
glad that they drove a spear through His  side and the blood flowed  down
His body  and dripped on  the ground.  It  makes you very  happy and you
laugh with great joy because they did this to My Son, doesn’t it?”

51
       Everything became very silent. I didn’t know how to answer.
       “It  makes you glad that all that was done to My Son, doesn’t it?”
       Finally  I had to  say: “Yes, Lord, it  does. I don’t understand it, Father,
but I am glad.”
       For  a moment I  wondered if  perhaps I had given the  wrong answer.
Perhaps I had misunderstood.
       Then to my  great relief I  heard Him say: “Yes, my son, I want you  to
be glad! I want you to be glad!”
       I  laughed on, and the joy  within  me increased as I reali]ed that  God
wanted me to  be glad.  Then everything  became very Tuiet  again, and I
knew I was about to learn something.
       “Now  listen, my  son. For the rest of your life  when anything happens
to you that is any less difficult than what they did to My  Son, I want you to
be just as glad as you were when I first asked you if  you were glad Christ
died for you.”
       I  said: “Yes, Lord, I  understand. For the rest of my life  I am going to
be thankful. I’ll  praise You, I’ll rejoice, I’ll  sing, I’ll   laugh, I’ll  shout, I’ll be
filled with  joy for whatever You permit to come into my life.”
       It  was easy to promise to rejoice right then; I was having a wonderful
time in prayer. -oy was just flowing over me and through me like a stream.
       The ne[t  morning I  was sitting on the edge of my bed when I heard a
voice: “What are you doing?”
       “I’m  sitting  here wishing I didn’t have to get up!”
       “I  thought we made an agreement last night.”
       “But  Lord, I didn’t  know You meant things like this!”
       “Remember what I said, ‘in everything.’”
       I  said: “But Lord,  I’ve  got to be honest with You. I’ve  been sitting on
the edge of my bed every morning for twenty years wishing I didn’t have to
get up. I’ve  been thinking  how  wonderful  it  would be  if  I  could just  lie
down for five more minutes.”
       But  the Spirit said: “You  are supposed to be thankful that it is time to
get up.”
       “Lord,  that’s a little beyond my ability to comprehend!”
       The Lord is always very patient and kind: “Are you willing   to be made
willing?”
       “Yes, Lord, I  really am.”

52
       That  night I  went to  bed praying: “Lord,  this  is a rough one. You’re
going to have to do it for me. I’ll  get up anytime You tell me to, but I  don’t
know how to be thankful that it is time to get up.”
       All  I could hear was: “Are you willing?”
       “Yes, Lord, I  am.”
       The ne[t  morning  I  woke up and the first  thing  that popped into my
mind was my right big toe. I heard: “See if you can move it.” I could.
       “Are  you thankful that you can move it?”
       “Yes, Lord.”
       “Now  try your ankle. Are you thankful?”
       “Yes, Lord.”
       “Now  your knee. Are you thankful?”
       “Yes, Lord.”
       “Now  see if you can sit up.”
       “Yes,  Lord, I  can. But  I’ve  got to  be honest with  You; I  still  wish I
could lie down and go back to sleep.”
       Very  patiently He said:  “See if  you can stand up. Are  you thankful?
Now see if  you can walk  to the bathroom. Look  into  the mirror. Are  you
thankful you can see?”
       “Hallelujah!”
       “Are  you glad you can speak and hear?”
       “Yes, Lord.”
       Then  everything  became very silent.  I   knew again  that  out of  the
silence I was to learn something from God.
       “My  son, because I love you I am going to teach you to be thankful for
everything. You can learn standing right  there with  all  the things you are
thankful for, or  I can let you  go back to bed and not let you move, see, or
hear until you learn.”
       I  jumped  two  feet into  the air  and said:  “Lord,  I  understand! I  am
thankful! I will  always be thankful.”
       The ne[t  morning, and the ne[t,  and the ne[t, the first  thing I  thought
when I woke up was, “Lord, I’m thankful.”  Never again have I been sorry it
is time to get up.
       Paul said, “Most gladly  therefore will I rather glory  in my infirmities.”
Getting up in  the morning  had been an infirmity  for  me. God  told me  to
take it and reverse it from pain into joy, and when I did, the power of Christ
and His joy came upon me.

53
       I  couldn’t  wait to  share my discovery with  others, but the Spirit  said
no; first  I  had  to learn  for  myself beyond  any doubt  how to  turn  every
difficult  situation into joy.
       I   memori]ed  and  said over  and  over  to  myself  the  verse from   I
Thessalonians 5:16-18. “Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. In every
thing give  thanks: for  this  is the will   of  God in  Christ  -esus concerning
you.”
       One day as I was nearing a stoplight, it turned amber, but I managed to
get through, legally. As I  did, a smile  of thanksgiving came on my  face. I
felt the presence of God and He said: “Free]e.”
       So I fro]e  with that smile on my face.
       “Why  are you so happy?”
       “Lord,  I made it through the light, thank You.”
       “What  would  you have done if  the light  had turned  sooner, and you
had to stop?”
       “Lord,   I  probably  would  have grumbled  a little   and wished  it  had
waited for me to get through.”
       “Don’t   you  know  that  I  control  the  stoplights?  That I   control  the
universe and time  itself?  The  ne[t   time a  light  turns  red  you  must be
thankful. You will know  it was I who made it turn red.”
       The ne[t  time the light  turned red I pulled up and asked God what He
wanted me to do with the time.
       “See that  man walking  across the street? He desperately needs your
prayers. -ust sit there and pray for him.”
       We say we believe in  God. But do we  really believe that He controls
every detail  of  our  lives,   or  do we  think   He’s  off  on  more  important
business? -esus said that God knows how many hairs we have on our heads.
So why can’t we  believe that He is more intimately  concerned with every
detail of our lives than we are ourselves? I certainly don’t know how many
hairs there are on my head!
       God is controlling  everything and working out everything that happens
for good for those who love Him (Romans 8:28).
       I  was beginning  to trust God  more, but  what about Satan? Can’t he
sneak in and attack us against God’s will?
       God  permitted  Satan to  enter  into  -udas  to  betray  His  Son.  God
permitted Satan to make Peter so weak that he denied having known -esus.
He permitted Satan to enter the hearts of the men who plotted and schemed

54
and crucified -esus Christ. At  any moment God could have stopped them.
He could have sent ten thousand angels to sweep aside every plan of Satan.
But God didn’t stop it. Because He knew that when all the sin and suffering
passed through -esus, it would come out as pure joy, praise, and victory.
       Satan can’t  do  a thing  to  us unless he first   gets God’s permission.
Remember God allowed Satan to test -ob. The only time God  gives Satan
permission is when God sees the tremendous potential in the thing passing
through us and coming out as joy, pure joy!
       When we begin to  reali]e this, God  can bless our lives. The power of
the resurrected Christ is in us. Miracles, power, and victory will all be a part
of what God does in our lives when we learn to rejoice in all things.

       One morning I  got into my  car to go to work.  It wouldn’t  start. In the
Army there is no e[cuse for  being late to work. I  said: “Okay, Lord, here I
am. You must  want me to  learn something, so  I  thank You that  this car
won’t start.”
       After  a while someone came along and helped me get it started.
       The ne[t  morning the same thing happened. “Thank You, Lord, I know
You have some wonderful reason for having me sit here, so I’m going to be
filled with  joy, and praise You.” Again I was able to get it started.
       Later that day I  took the car to the post garage. I told the manager my
problem. He said:  “I’m   sorry, Chaplain, but  the man who  works  on that
kind of  car has had a heart attack and is in the hospital. I  hate to tell  you
this,  but you’ll    have to  take  it  to  a  civilian   place.”  He  had  a pained
e[pression on his face as he said it. “Chaplain, they know our  mechanic is
sick, and they’ll really  sock it to you. They’ve  been doing that to everyone
I’ve sent there.”
       As I  drove toward the “civilian”  garage, a voice tried to whisper to me:
“Isn’t  it   terrible  that those  civilians  would  take  advantage of  us Army
people?”
       I  told  that thought to  go back to  where it came from,  and continued
thanking the  Lord  that  He  had worked  out  this  whole incident  for   my
personal benefit. I said: “Lord, I  know You are in this and I  praise You for
it.”
       I  pulled in  to  the garage, and the manager came over with a writing
pad in his hand. With a glint in his eye, he said, “Can I help you, Sir?”

55
       I  e[plained  my problem to  him, and he went  through a list  of things
that “might be wrong.”
       “We can’t repair that part here, so we’ll have to send it to another shop.
This, however, may not be the problem  so we may have to  do something
else. It could be several different things, but we’ll keep looking till  we find
the trouble.”
       “How  long will  it take?”
       With   a smile  he  said, “I’m    sorry, Sir,  but  I  have  no idea.  It  just
depends.”
       I could imagine the cash register pounding away.
       “How  much will  it cost?”
       “I’m  sorry, Sir, I have no idea what it may cost.”
       Our  post garage was right. They were ready to get everything  out of
me that they could. “Thank you, Lord; You had a good reason for this.”
       I  agreed to bring the car back the ne[t  morning to leave it  there until
they could find and fi[  whatever might be wrong.
       I  then managed with much difficulty   to get the car started. I put it  in
gear and began to move forward. -ust then the manager Tuickly stepped up
and grasped my arm. “Wait a minute! I’ve just thought of what may be your
trouble. Turn off the engine!”
       With   that he  opened the  hood  and  began to  poke  around with   a
screwdriver. In a few minutes he said: “Now try it and see how it works.”
       I stepped on the starter and the engine purred away like it was new.
       “Wonderful!  How much do I owe you?”
       “Not  a thing, Sir, glad to do it.”
       Then the Lord again spoke to my heart: “My son, what I wanted you to
know  was  that  you  never  again  have  to  worry   whether  anyone  will
overcharge you, hurt you, or mistreat you unless it is My will. Your life is in
the palm of My hand and you can trust Me for all things. As you continue to
thank Me in all  circumstances you will see how perfectly I work  out every
detail of your life.”
       “Hallelujah,  Lord!”   I bounced up and down on the seat for sheer joy.
“Thank You, Lord! Thank You for showing me all these wonderful things.”
       I  rejoiced,  and reali]ed  that  if  I  had  grumbled and complained  the
entire incident  would   have profited  me  absolutely  nothing. How   many
opportunities I had passed up to let God teach me how much He loves me!
Most of  us go around  carrying these opportunities as heavy burdens, but

56
God  has  ordamed   through  Christ   that   all   of   these  things   can  be
revolutioni]ed as they pass through us and come out as joy!
       How  glorious to know  that at this very moment God wants to fill   our
hearts  with   overflowing   joy.   Not   because  of   our  goodness  or   our
righteousness or our sacrifice. It depends on only  one thing, on  believing
the Lord -esus. On believing  that if  the chair collapses under me it is  His
will. If  the coffee is too hot or the toast soggy, it is His will.
       When  we begin  to  really  believe that, the  power of  God  begins to
break loose in our lives. That’s  what -esus tried to e[plain  to  us when He
said, “Leap for joy when they persecute you. When you are poor. When you
have sorrow.”

       For  many  years  I  had  suffered  with  painful   headaches. I seldom
complained about it; I  just  thanked God that I  wasn’t as bad off  as some
people. One  day  He   said:  “Why   don’t   you  try   praising  Me  for   the
headache?”
       “For  it?”
       “Yes, for it.”
       I  began to lift up my thoughts in thanksgiving that God was giving me
this headache as an opportunity to increase the power of Christ in my life.
The headache got worse. I continued to thank God, but with every thought
of praise came increased pain. I reali]ed that Satan and the Spirit of Christ
were at war. The pain reached an overwhelming state; I held on to thoughts
of praise and thanks. Suddenly I was being flooded with joy. -oy seemed to
pour over every cell  of  my body. I  had never e[perienced  such power in
joy! I  was certain that if I took a step I would rise clear up into the air. And
the headache was completely gone!
       For fifteen  years I had suffered with hay fever at least si[  months out
of the year. Many weeks were so bad that I snee]ed and coughed and held a
handkerchief to my nose all day long. I had taken shots, tried medicine after
medicine, prayed, fasted, and prayed some more. I went to everyone I knew
or heard of that would pray for me. Nothing helped.
       Why did  God let me suffer? Didn’t He care that I felt so miserable?
       My  friend, Chaplain Curry  Vaughn, had told me I should believe with
him that God would heal me. I avoided seeing Curry when I had one of my
attacks because he always kept telling me to  go on believing.  I  had tried
believing for fifteen years and didn’t know what more I could do.

57
       One day I was scheduled to speak to a noon meeting of men in a local
Methodist church. As I drove into  Columbus, the water started pouring out
of my  nose and I snee]ed so hard that it was difficult   to keep on driving.
The thought came: “Praise Me!”
       I  began to think of how good God was to let me have this infirmity  of
the flesh. He was permitting me to have it to teach me something. It wasn’t
an accident of nature that I was allergic to so many things. God had planned
it this  way  for  His  glory  and for  my good.  “Thank  you, Lord,  for  Your
goodness. If  You  want  me to  have  this  I’ll   just  trust  You  to  heal me
whenever You want to.”
       “What  do you want me to do?”
       “Heal  me, Lord.”
       “Heal  you or take away the symptoms?”
       “Aren’t  they the same, Lord?”
       “No,  they are not.”
       “Okay,  Lord,  then just heal me and  I won’t  pay  any attention to the
symptoms.” With that I knew  that God had showed me something new and
wonderful. Every  time  I  had prayed for  healing  in  the past and tried  to
believe, I had always been defeated when the symptoms persisted. Now I
knew that the symptoms meant nothing. Faith  in God’s  promise was all I
needed; then Satan could fake all the symptoms he wanted!
       When I  arrived at the meeting place my  nose was still running like  a
faucet, and I was snee]ing uncontrollably.
       I  said, “Lord,  if  you want  me to make a fool  of  myself, I’m  willing.
I’m  leaving my handkerchief here in the car and I’m  going in to  speak for
You.”
       As  I   walked  toward  the church  I  began  to  feel  better. When  the
meeting was over I suddenly reali]ed that I had no symptoms of hay fever.
       Day  after day  there were no symptoms. Then  one evening as I  was
preparing to go to a prayer group, my nose started running.
       I thought: “Lord,  I can’t go to the prayer group. Those ladies will think
I’ve done something wrong and You’ve taken away my faith. They’ll gather
around and urge me  to  believe so  You can heal  me. But  Lord,  I  know
You’ve healed me so I thank You for these symptoms.”
       At  the prayer group one of the sisters began to e[hort me to believe.
       “But  God has healed me,” I insisted.
       “Then why  are you sniffing?”

58
       “I  don’t know, but God knows, and I’m just praising Him.”
       On the way  home I was continuing to  thank Him  for running my  life
just as He wanted to. If He wanted Satan to get in a few licks at me He must
have good reason. He had permitted His own Son to suffer for me.
       “Son?”
       “Yes, Lord,”
       “You’ve  been faithful.  You will   never again have even one symptom
unless you need it for your good.”
       Once again I bounced up and down on  the seat. Never again would I
pray for  healing for  the same thing twice.  God says, “Ask,  and  you will
receive, that your joy may be full” (-ohn 16:24).

59
                                                         8

                                            Praise      Him!

       Discovering   the  power  in   praise  was  one  of   the  most  e[citing
e[periences I’d ever had; yet every time I wanted to share it with someone,
it was as if God was saying: “Hold it. This isn’t the time.”
       When  Ron came to see me about his problem  he was the picture of
misery and despair. “Chaplain, you’ve got to help me. When I was drafted
my wife tried to commit suicide. Now I’ve  received orders for Vietnam, and
she says that if I go she’ll kill herself. What can I do?”
       Ron was an attorney and a member of the bar association. But he had
been drafted and preferred  to join   the Army   as a Private.  Now  he was
obviously distraught and unable to handle the situation with his wife.
       “Ron, have your wife come in to see me, and I’ll see what I can do.”
       Sue was also a picture of misery. Her body was frail and she sat on the
edge of a chair, trembling  from head to foot.  Tears flowed uncontrollably
down her face.
       “Chaplain.”   Her voice  was barely  audible. “I’m   scared; I  can’t live
without Ron.”
       I  looked at her and a wave of compassion brought tears to my eyes. I
knew Sue’s story. She’d been adopted as a baby, was estranged from her
adopted family, and had no one in the world e[cept Ron. The two  of them
were very much in love and I knew that if Ron went to Vietnam, Sue would
stay alone in a rented room in a strange town.
       I prayed silently for wisdom to comfort  her.
       “Tell  her  to be thankful.”  I  shook my  head in disbelief.  I  must have
heard wrong.
       “Her, Lord?”
       “Yes, you may begin to  share with her!” I  looked at Sue’s tearful face
and my heart sank.
       “Okay, Lord,  I’ll  trust You.”
       “Sue, I’m   glad you came,” I  said, smiling  with  a confidence I didn’t
feel. “You don’t have anything to worry about. Everything is going to be all
right.”

60
       Sue  straightened  herself,  wiped  away  her  tears,  and  managed a
trembling little smile.
       I continued: “What  I want you to do is to kneel here with me and thank
God that Ron is going to Vietnam.”
       She looked at me in blank disbelief. I nodded. “Yes, Sue, I want you to
thank God.”
       She immediately  began to weep almost hysterically.  I calmed her  as
best I  could  and began reading to  her  from  the  Bible  the verses I  had
learned to trust in over the past few months.
       “.  .  .In  everything give  thanks, for  this is  the will   of  God in  Christ
-esus concerning you. . .All things work together for good to them that love
the Lord.” Carefully  I tried to show her the wonderful truths I  had found to
be real.
       Nothing  seemed to help. Sue believed in God and in Christ, but in her
despair her belief was of no comfort. Finally she left my office crying, with
no peace of mind and certainly no joy.
       “Lord,  have I completely misunderstood You? That girl wasn’t helped
a bit.”
       “Patience, son. I’m working.”
       The  ne[t  day Ron  came to my  office.  “Chaplain,  what did  you  tell
Sue? She is worse than she was before.”
       “I  told  Sue the solution to  her problem and now  I’ll  tell  you.  I want
you to kneel  down and thank God  that you’re  going to  Vietnam and that
Sue is so upset that she is threatening to kill herself.”
       Ron didn’t  see my point either. Carefully we went over the Scriptures:
“. . .This is the will of  God concerning you.”
       Ron  said:  “Now   I  understand why  Sue didn’t   understand. I  don’t
understand either.” And he left.
       Two  days later they came back. “Sir,  we are desperate. You must do
something to help us.”
       They were both hoping that I as chaplain would be able to put in a plea
for another assignment for Ron.
       Again  I e[plained  to them the only  solution God was letting  me hold
up before them. “All   things work  together for good  to them that love  the
Lord.”
       “If   you can only believe that God  is really working  this thing  out for
the best for both of you,  then all you have to do is  trust Him and begin to

61
thank Him - regardless of what the situation looks like”.
       Ron and Sue looked at each other. “What do we have to lose, Honey?”
Ron said. We knelt and Sue prayed:
       “Lord,  I thank you that Ron is going to  Vietnam. It must be Your will.
I sure don’t understand, but I’ll try.”
       Then Ron  prayed: “Lord,  this  is very  strange to me, too,  but I  trust
You. Thank You that I am going to Vietnam and that Sue is so upset. Thank
You that she might even try to hurt herself.”
       I  had a  feeling Ron  and Sue were not as convinced  as I  was, but I
thanked the Lord that they were trying.
       They left my office,  and later I heard what had happened.
       Ron and Sue had gone into the chapel and knelt together at the altar.
There they had turned their lives  and each other over to  God in  a deeper
commitment than ever before and now Sue had the strength to pray: “God, I
thank You that Ron is going to  Vietnam. You know how  much I will   miss
him. You know I don’t have a father or mother or brother or sister or family
of any kind. I will  trust You, Lord.”
       Ron  prayed: “God,  I  do thank You.  I  give Sue over  to  You. She is
Yours and I’ll trust You to take care of her.”
       With  that they  rose from the altar. Ron  went through the  chapel and
headed for his unit  while Sue came back to the  waiting room  ne[t  to my
office. She needed to  sit Tuietly  and collect  her thoughts.  While  she sat
there a young soldier came in and asked for the chaplain. Sue told him that I
was busy. “But  if  you  wait  a little   while,  I’ll  tell  him  you’re  here,”  she
offered.
       “I’ll   wait,”  said the young soldier. He looked distressed and Sue asked:
“What is your problem?”
       “My  wife  wants a divorce.”
       Sue shook her head: “It won’t do much good to see that Chaplain,” she
said, but the soldier wasn’t easily discouraged, and while they were waiting
he took out  his billfold   and began to  show Sue pictures of  his  wife  and
children. When he turned to the ne[t picture Sue screamed: “Who is that?”
       “That’s  my mother”.
       “That  is my mother”, said Sue, shaking with emotion.
       “That  couldn’t be,” the soldier replied. “I don’t have a sister.”
       “It  is; I know it  is!”
       “What  makes you think that?”

62
       When  I  was a little  girl   I  happened to find  a piece of  paper in  my
parents’ desk that showed I was adopted. In the upper right-hand corner was
a picture of my real mother. That’s her. It’s the same lady.”
       And it  was.
       Further  checking revealed that Sue had  been promised for  adoption
before she was born and her natural mother had never seen her. She had no
idea where Sue was and had never heard anything about her since the day
she was born.
       Now  Sue had a brother, a  real brother, and with  him  came a whole
family.
       Was it  coincidence? There are more than two hundred million people
in the United States. What would be the odds against that particular soldier
walking in the door to my office  just as Sue had made a covenant with God
to praise Him for her loneliness and lack of family?
       But  that wasn’t all.  As Ron walked  back into his unit,  he ran into an
old friend from law school who was now a legal officer.
       “Hi,  old buddy, where are you going?” he said as he met Ron.
       “Praise God, I’m  going to Vietnam,” Ron answered. They talked some
more, and the friend persuaded Ron to ask for  a transfer so that he could
work with him in  the legal office.
       Ron and Sue did not have to be separated. And no longer did Sue have
to cling  to  Ron  in  fear of  losing  Him.  She had come  to have  a joyous
confidence in -esus Christ and went about everywhere praising Him.

       Later  an Officer Candidate came to my  office. He  openly wept for  a
long time. “Sir,  you must help me. My wife  has been asking for a divorce.
Her lawyer has just sent me the papers to sign. I just can’t keep on with the
Officer Candidate program. I  don’t even want to  stay in the Army.  Please
help me.”
       “I  know  just how  to get  your problem solved. Let’s  kneel down  and
thank God that your wife wants a divorce.”
       He  didn’t understand any better than Sue and Ron did.  Carefully we
went over the Scriptures together. At last he decided he might as well try it.
We knelt together and he prayed, turning the whole  situation over to God
and thanking Him for having allowed it to happen.
       When he returned to his  unit he was so shaken emotionally that they
gave him the rest of the day off. He went to his bed and lay there, repeating

63
over and over, “Thank  you, Lord,  that my  wife  wants a divorce.  I surely
don’t understand it, but Your Word says I should thank You for all things, so
I’ll  do it.” All  day long he thought the same things over and over. That night
he couldn’t  sleep, so  he went  on thanking  God.  The ne[t   day he  went
through training in a da]e. “Lord,  You know I don’t understand, but I thank
You anyhow.”
       That evening he was sitting in the mess hall having dinner. As he was
eating, it suddenly hit him.  “Lord,  you really must know what  is better for
me, much more than I do. I know all of  this must be your will.  Thank You,
Lord; now I understand!”
       At  that moment another candidate tapped him on the shoulder and told
him to come to the telephone.
       In all  the weeks he’d been a candidate, no one had ever wanted him on
the phone.
       When he lifted  the receiver there was someone weeping on the other
end. “Honey, can you ever forgive me? I don’t want a divorce!”

       A  lady  came reluctantly  to  see me. One  of  her friends  had almost
dragged her  into  my  office.   She told  me  that  she had  seriously  been
considering suicide, but didn’t see what good it would do to talk about it.
       Little  by  little  she gave me the details. Her  husband had fathered an
illegitimate  child  by  another woman.  The  child  was being  kept  by  her
husband’s parents. Every time she went to visit her in-laws,  there was the
child. To make things  worse, the child’s mother usually  showed up at the
same time. Even though they were having financial difficulties, her husband
was sending money to his parents to help take care of his illegitimate child.
She couldn’t live with this constant pain inside anymore.
       “Don’t  worry,”  I  said to her. “You won’t have to; there is a solution to
your problem.”
       She looked up, rather surprised. “What is it?”
       “Let   us kneel  here and thank  God  that your  husband fathered this
child.”  Again  I  went over the  Scriptures on thanking  God for  all  things.
Wiping away her tears, she finally agreed to try it. We prayed, and she left
the office determined to let God work out the problems in her life.
       The ne[t  morning I called to see how she was doing.
       “Wonderful!”
       “You  are?”

64
       “Yes, Sir, I got up this morning just filled with  joy!”
       “What  happened?”
       “When  I got home yesterday I began to think what I could do now that
I am thankful for my husband’s baby. I decided that if I was really thankful,
I ought to do something about it. So I sat down and wrote a check to my in-
laws and told  them to use it  for  the baby. This morning  I  feel absolutely
glorious.”
       The ne[t  day I  called her again, and she said: “I feel even better than
yesterday.”
       “What  have you done now?”
       “I   started thinking  of a  lady who  lives  near me who  has a retarded
child. I  went  to see her this  morning  and asked if  I  could help  with  the
child. She was so ama]ed she didn’t know what to say. I stayed and started
to do what I could.”
       “Do  you know what to do for a retarded child?”
       “Yes, Sir. I have a master’s degree in working with special children.”
       “Have you worked with  children since you graduated?”
       “No,  Sir. This is the first child I’ve ever worked with.”
       “Now  do  you understand why God permitted that thing  to happen in
your life?”
       “Yes, Sir, I do, and now I really praise Him!”
       From  that day on  she was a changed woman. Those who  knew her
before said she had always looked and acted as if  she was in  great pain.
Now  they  say she  looks  and acts  as though  she has discovered  some
wonderful secret, and people are being drawn to Christ through her radiance
and joy.
       -esus didn’t  promise to  change the circumstances around us, but He
did promise great peace and pure joy to those who would learn to  believe
that God actually controls all things.
       The  very  act  of   praise releases the  power  of  God   into  a  set of
circumstances and enables God to change them if this is His design. Very
often it   is  our  attitudes that  hinder  the solution   of  a problem.  God  is
sovereign and could certainly  cut  across our wrong thought  patterns and
attitudes. But His  perfect plan is  to  bring each of  us into  fellowship  and
communion with Him, and so He allows circumstances and incidents which
will bring  our wrong attitudes to our attention.

65
       I  have come to believe that the prayer of praise is the highest form of
communion with God,  and one that always releases a great deal of power
into our lives. Praising Him  is not something we do because we feel good;
rather it is an act of  obedience. Often the prayer of praise is done in sheer
teeth-gritting willpower;  yet when  we persist in it,  somehow the power of
God is released into us and into the situation. At  first  in a trickle  perhaps,
but later in a growing stream that finally floods us and washes away the old
hurts and scars.

       One Army  wife  came to me, convinced that her problem had but one
solution.
       Her husband had developed an e[cessive drinking problem and for the
past several years had been an alcoholic. Often he would pass out drunk on
the living  room floor  where  the wife  or his  teen-age children would find
him, stark naked. In this  condition he’d also been found in  the hallway of
the apartment house where several other families lived.
       In  final  desperation the wife  decided to take the  children and leave.
Friends persuaded her to at least come talk to me first.
       “Whatever you say, Chaplain, don’t tell me to stay with him,” she said.
“I just can’t do it.”
       “I  don’t  really care whether you stay with  him  or not,”  I said. “I  just
want you   to  thank  God  that your   husband is  like  he  is.”   Carefully  I
e[plained what the Bible  had to say about thanking God for all  things and
that if she tried it, God would be able to solve her problem in the best way.
       She thought it  sounded ridiculous, but finally  agreed to kneel while I
prayed that God would release in her enough faith  to believe that He  is a
God of love and power who holds the universe in His hand.
       At  last she said, “I do believe.”
       Two weeks later I called her.
       “I   feel absolutely  marvelous,” she said.  “My  husband is  a different
man. He hasn’t had a drink in two weeks.”
       “That’s  wonderful,” I said. “I’d  like to talk  to him.”
       “What  do you mean?” She sounded surprised.
       “I   just think  it  would be  good if  I  talked to your  husband about the
power that is working in your lives.”
       “Didn’t  you tell  him already?” She sounded pu]]led.
       “No,  I haven’t met him yet.”

66
       “Chaplain,  this is  a miracle,”  she cried out.  “The  day I  was in  your
office he  came home from work  and for  the first  time  in  seven years he
didn’t go to the refrigerator for  a beer. Instead he went into the living room
and talked to the children. I was sure you had talked to him.”
       Our  prayer of  praise had  released God’s power to  work  in  another
person’s life. The wife was openly crying over the telephone.
       “Praise  God, Chaplain,”  she sobbed, “Now   I  know  God works  out
every detail of our lives.”

       A  young soldier collapsed with a serious heart problem and was taken
to the Fort  Benning Hospital. He  was released, but had to come back for
freTuent checkups and eventually was scheduled to go to another hospital
for heart surgery. The news filled him with despair, and he began drinking.
His despair increased until he decided to leave. He stole clothes from some
of the men in the barracks and took off in the First Sergeant’s car, which he
wrecked totally.
       The unhappy soldier was caught and put in the stockade to await trial.
There another soldier led him to Christ. I went to  see him, and he was still
feeling depressed and afraid that he had messed up his life so thoroughly
that he couldn’t be of any use to anyone.
       “Your  sins are  forgiven and forgotten,”  I  said. “Don’t   think  of  your
past as a chain around your neck. Thank God for every detail  of your  life
and believe He has permitted all of these things in order to bring you to the
place where you are now.”
       Together we  searched the Scriptures  for  God’s  word  on  all  things
working out for those who love Him.
       “And  that doesn’t just mean things that happen after you’ve asked God
to take over your life,”   I  said. “God is able to  use even our past mistakes
and failures when we release them to Him with thanksgiving.”
       He understood, and began to thank God in earnest for everything that
had happened. As his trial neared, his defense attorney told him the best he
could hope for  was a five-year  sentence and dishonorable discharge. The
soldier remained undaunted and insisted that whatever happened, God had
full control of his life  and would work out whatever would be for his good.
       The  General  Court-martial  had  a  surprise ending.  General  Court-
martial is never held  unless the military  authorities believe that the crime

67
warrants severe punishment. This soldier was sentenced to si[  months in
the local stockade and no discharge from the Army.
       With  Chaplain Curry Vaughan I went to visit  him in the stockade. We
thought we were there to encourage him; instead he encouraged us. He was
filled  with   joy  and  it  was  catching.  Soon the  stockade rang  with   our
laughter. The young  soldier couldn’t  stand still;   he laughed and ran  and
skipped around the visiting room.
       Before  we got ready to  leave we asked how he was  feeling. He had
been scheduled for heart surgery and medically speaking was still in need of
attention. He confessed that he felt very weak physically, and often his heart
was troubling him. But he said: “It is wonderful. God is taking care of me.”
       We asked if he would like prayer for healing and he said:
       “Please do; I believe God will heal me.”
       We placed our  hands on him and believed  that God, through Christ,
was right  there  healing  him.  The  soldier smiled  radiantly  and  said:  “I
believe it is done.”
       A  few weeks later I talked to the man’s Company Commander.
       “I  believe  it’s a waste of  government money to keep this man in  the
stockade.”
       “Why,  Chaplain?” he said.
       “He  isn’t  the same man who stole clothes and a  car and wrecked it.
He’s completely changed.”
       The  Commander agreed and had the  man released. A  week later  I
asked him how he felt.
       “Chaplain,  I used to get tired after walking  one hundred yards. Now I
can run and I never seem to get tired. God has healed me.”

       Wherever I went  I now shared what I had discovered about the power
of praise. I was beginning to learn that praise was not just a form of worship
or prayer, but also a way of waging spiritual warfare. Often when someone
began to praise God for the problems that faced him,  he found that Satan
increased his attacks and the situation appeared to become worse instead of
better. Many who  tried  the way  of  praise became discouraged and were
unable to hold on to their belief that God was in charge.
       Others simply  didn’t  understand and refused to try  praising God  for
unpleasant things. “It just doesn’t make sense,” they’d say. “I’m  not going
to praise God for something I just don’t believe He has anything to do with.

68
How can God have anything to do with my broken arm or my  wrecked car
or my husband’s horrible temper? I’d be foolish to thank Him for something
like that.”
       Of  course it  doesn’t  make sense. The Tuestion is,  does it  work? It
didn’t  make much  sense when -esus said,  “Leap  for  joy  when you  are
hungry or poor or persecuted.” Yet He very definitely told us to do just that.
In Nehemiah 8:10 I read: “The joy of the Lord is your strength.”
       The  enemy’s arrows just  can’t penetrate the joy  of  someone who is
praising the  Lord.  In  II  Chronicles 20  we  read how  a whole  army  was
defeated when the Israelites  simply  praised the  Lord  and believed  Him
when He said that the battle wasn’t theirs, but His.
       The message is just as clear today. The battle  isn’t ours;  it is  God’s.
While we praise Him, He sends our enemies scurrying.

       It  was  discouraging and sad to  see those who refused to  praise the
Lord. My  heart ached for them in their hopeless situations of suffering and
misery. I asked God to  give me wisdom  to understand why they couldn’t
accept the way of praise, and also asked Him  to teach me better ways of
leading others to praising Him.
       Nearly  seven months after I first had the e[perience of  laughing with
joy in  the  Spirit,  I  went to  a Camp  Farthest Out Retreat. I  was looking
forward to a time of  resting and rejoicing in the fellowship  of brothers and
sisters in Christ.
       While  I  sat in the  back of the  auditorium during  a healing service, I
closed my eyes and on the screen of my inner vision God painted a picture.
       I  saw a beautiful, bright summer day. The air was filled with light, and
I had a  sense of everything being very  beautiful. Up  above was a heavy,
solid black cloud beyond which  nothing could be seen. A ladder e[tended
from the  ground up into  the black  cloud. At  the base of  the ladder were
hundreds of people trying to get a chance at climbing the ladder. They had
heard that above the blackness there was something more  beautiful  than
anything a human eye had ever seen, something that brought unbelievable
joy to  those who  reached it. As  person after person tried  to ascend they
Tuickly climbed to the lower edge of the clouds. The crowd watched to see
what would happen.
       In a short while the person would come wildly sliding  down the ladder
and fall into the crowd scattering people in all directions. They reported that

69
once they got into the blackness they lost all sense of direction.
       My  time  finally  came, and as I made my way  up the ladder into  the
blackness it grew so intense that I could feel its power nearly forcing me to
give up and slide back. But step by step I continued upward until suddenly
my  eyes beheld the  most intense  brightness I  had  ever seen. It  was  a
brilliant  whiteness too glorious to describe in words. As I  came out above
the dark cloud I reali]ed that I  could walk on top of it.  As I  looked into the
brightness I was able to  walk  without  difficulty.  When I  looked  down to
e[amine  the nature of  the  cloud  I  immediately  began to  sink. Only   by
looking at the brightness could I stay on top.
       Then the scene changed and I was back looking at all three levels from
a distance.
       “What  does it all mean?” I asked, and the answer came:
       “The   brightest  sunshine below   the  cloud  is   the  light   that  many
Christians live in and accept as normal. The ladder is the ladder of praising
Me. Many try to climb  and learn to praise Me in all things. At first they are
very eager, but when they get into  things that  they don’t  understand they
become confused and cannot hold on. They lose faith and go sliding back.
As they fall, they injure other people who have been hoping to find a way to
live in continual joy and praise.
       “Those  who make it  through those difficult  times reach a new world
and reali]e that the life they once thought of as normal cannot be compared
to the  life  I  have  prepared for  those who  praise Me  and believe  that I
carefully  watch  over  them. He  who   reaches the light   of  the  heavenly
kingdom can walk on top of difficulties  no matter how dark they may seem
as long as he keeps his eyes off the problem and on My victory  in Christ.
No matter how difficult  it  may seem to trust Me to work  in every detail of
your life, keep clinging to the ladder of praise and move upwards!”
       I  was half-da]ed by the vision and the e[planation and wondered how
soon God would let me share it with someone.
       At  the camp I  met a woman who was faced with  problems of illness
and family  difficulties  at home. She found it  hard to believe  that praising
God was going to do any good.
       Inwardly  I asked for guidance, and God said, “Tell her!”
       So I  told her. “You’ll   be the first  one to hear this,” I  said, and as she
listened I could see how the heaviness literally left and her face and eyes lit
up with a look of joyous e[pectancy.

70
       In  Ephesians, chapters one and two, I  found my  vision  described in
slightly different words by Paul:
       “...Blessed (Praised!) be the God and Father of our Lord -esus Christ,
who  hath blessed us  with  all   spiritual  blessings in  heavenly  places in
Christ: . . .he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy  and without blame. .  .To the praise of the glory  of  his
grace. . .that in. . .the fulness of  times he might gather together in  one all
things in Christ.  . .That we  should be to the praise of  his glory, who  first
trusted in Christ. . .that you may know. . .what is the e[ceeding greatness of
his power to us-ward who believe, according to the working  of his mighty
power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from  the dead and
set him   at his   own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places, Far  above  all
principality  and power, and might, and dominion. . .And hath raised us up
together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ -esus.” -esus
Christ is raised above all  the powers of darkness, and according to God’s
word, our rightful  inheritance is right  there above the darkness together in
Christ. The ladder is praise!
       I  was becoming more aware of the power of praise, but also aware of
some of the enemy’s snares.
       At  the time  I  began to search my Bible  for insight  into  praise I was
also led to Scriptures describing the power we have received in Christ over
the forces of darkness. I  had long been aware of the  passage in Mark 16
where -esus speaks of the signs that will follow those who believe in Him:
“In my  name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;
they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing,  it shall  not
hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.”
       I  had prayed asking God to show me if this was all valid for me in the
twentieth century, and if it was, when and how to use it.
       I  found that I often became uneasy when I was around certain people,
and asking God, I got the strong impression that what was wrong with them
was of a demonic nature.
       I  prayed that if I ever came face-to-face with someone like that during
a prayer-session that God would tell me what to do.
       An  Army  wife  was deserted by her husband who left  her with  three
children. In  desperation she tried  to  kill  herself.  She was rushed  to the
hospital and her life was saved. Friends brought her to see me after she got
home. She was the  picture of  despair. Her  friends  had told  me that  for

71
several years they had never seen her smile. I began speaking to her about
the way of praising God but  soon felt compelled to stop. I  looked into her
eyes and suddenly sensed that there was something very wrong and very
evil within her.
       Within  me was a sense of fear; I  reali]ed that  I was actually face-to-
face with evil.
       “Lord,”   I  prayed within. “I’ve   come this far, I  can’t go  back now, so
I’ll  step out in faith trusting that You’ll do the work.”
       Looking  straight into the woman’s eyes I spoke out loud commanding
the vicious spirit to get out of  her in the name of the Lord -esus Christ and
by the power of His shed blood.
       Her  glassy eyes suddenly cleared, and she could listen as I e[plained
that God could work all  things for  good if she would only  trust and praise
Him.
       She now was free to understand, and smiled with a beautiful radiance.
-esus Christ had broken the  bondage of darkness that had threatened her
life.
       Chaplain  Curry Vaughan, -r.,  had begun to e[perience  the power of
praise in  his  own  life.  Soon  after  he had  started praising  God  for  his
difficulties,  he  arrived home  one evening  to learn  that  his two-year-old
daughter had swallowed a glassful of mineral spirits,  a type of high-grade
turpentine. She had already been rushed to the hospital. Curry jumped into
his car and raced full   speed to be with  her. His  mind  was swirling  with
thoughts of  fear  and  worry.  He  suddenly reali]ed   what  he was  doing,
slowed the  car  to   normal  speed, and  praised  the Lord   for   what  had
happened.
       At  the hospital they  pumped out his daughter’s stomach, [-rayed her
and told Curry that two things were bound to happen. First, she would run a
high fever that  night; second, there was a ninety-five  percent chance that
she would develop pneumonia.
       Curry and his wife Nancy took their  daughter home, prepared to watch
her very closely as the doctors had ordered.
       At  home Curry  took his daughter in his  arms and prayed: “Heavenly
Father, I know  that  Satan has tried to  attack me once again,  and I  have
praised You! Now I claim  in the name of -esus that Virginia  will  not get a
fever and she will not get pneumonia.” The ne[t morning Virginia  woke up
as bright and chipper as ever. She had suffered no ill effects.

72
       A  successful businessman came to see me about his teen-age daughter.
I knew the family  and knew that their daughter had received more than the
average amount of love and care, yet she had developed a violent hatred of
her younger sister. She would lash out and strike her with whatever heavy
object she could find.
       The distraught parents had taken her to the psychiatrist for treatment,
kept her on tranTuili]ers  and prayed for  years that God  would help  them
find a solution to their terrible problem.
       They reali]ed the danger as the violent outbursts increased.
       I  met with both  parents and challenged them to try the one thing they
had failed to do.
       “What  is that?” they both asked.
       “Thank  the Lord  that He has given you this  child to meet your  need.
Really praise Him for knowing  e[actly what would  be the greatest blessing
to your family.”
       At  first  they thought this was completely beyond what they could do.
They had tried  for  years to  solve  the problem,  and knew  of no  way  to
suddenly be glad  that everything  was e[actly   the way  it  was.  We went
through the Scriptures together  and then prayed that  God would  work  a
miracle and help them to thank Him.
       A   miracle  did  happen. They  began to  feel  and be  thankful.  They
practiced this daily for  two weeks. Instead of constant worry and fear they
e[perienced peace and joy.
       One evening they were in the living room. Their oldest daughter stood
in the middle of the floor  holding a potted flower.  She looked at them, and
when she had their attention she smiled and dropped the pot in the middle
of the  rug. Dirt,  glass and  flowers went  in  all  directions. The  girl  stood
smiling, waiting  for  their  reaction. Both parents had given  themselves so
completely to the practice of  praising God that they  automatically said, at
the same time: “Thank You, Lord.”
       The daughter looked at them in  ama]ement. Then she lifted her head
and, looking toward heaven, she said: “Thank You, Lord, for teaching me.”
From that very moment she began to get well.
       Her  parents came to me rejoicing.  The power of  praise had worked.
For years Satan had held the family in bondage through that girl. Now  his
spell was broken. In  -ames we read that we are to draw  near to God and

73
resist Satan. In Romans 12:21 Paul describes how: “Don’t allow yourself to
be overpowered by evil. Take the offensive - overpower evil with good!”
       Some have asked me if this principle of praise isn’t just another way to
talk about  the power  of positive  thinking.  Far  from  it.  Praising God for
every circumstance does not mean we close our eyes to the difficulties. In
his letter  to  the  Philippians  Paul says to  worry   about nothing,  but  “In
everything by prayer and supplication  with  thanksgiving let your  reTuests
be  made  known  to   God.  And   the  peace  of  God,   which  passes all
understanding, will keep your hearts and your minds in Christ -esus.”
       Looking  only at  the good side of every situation is often  a dangerous
way of trying to escape the reality of it. When we praise God we thank Him
for our situation, not in spite of it.
       We  are  not  trying  to  avoid  our  dilemmas.  Rather -esus  Christ  is
showing us a way to overcome them.

       There  is  a  ladder  of   praise and  I   believe  that  everyone without
e[ception can begin to praise God right  now in whatever situation he may
find himself.
       For our praise to reach the perfection God wants for us, it needs to be
free of any thoughts of reward. Praise is not another way of bargaining with
the Lord. We don’t say, “Now we’ve praised You in the middle of this mess,
so get us out of it!”
       Praising God  with  a pure heart means we must  let God  cleanse our
hearts from impure motives and hidden designs. We have to e[perience the
dying to  self so that we  can live  again in Christ  in newness of mind  and
spirit.
       Dying  to self is a progressive journey, and I have come to believe it is
traveled only through praise.
       God is  calling us to praise Him,  and the highest form of  praise is the
one Paul e[horts us to give in Hebrews 13:15: “By  (Christ) therefore let us
offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit  of  our lips,
giving thanks to his name.”
       The sacrifice of  praise is offered when all  is darkness around us. It is
offered of a heavy heart, unto God because He is God and Father and Lord.
       As we begin to praise Him, on whatever step of the ladder we may be,
His Holy Spirit begins to fill  our beings more and more.

74
       To  continually praise Him  means a steady decreasing of self and an
increase of the presence of Christ within us until with Peter we rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory.

75
If this book has been a blessing to you, please let us know. Each month we
prepare Praise News in  which  we share new  things that  we learn  about
praise. We will be pleased to send this to you at no charge if you reTuest it.
You will also receive information about any new books.


                                                    Write to:
                                             Merlin  Carothers
                                                PO Bo[  2518
                                     Escondido, CA 92033-2518
                                     Or visit us at our website at:
                                      www.merlincarothers.com

76
The Foundation of Praise is now supplying free copies of this book to:

PRISONS: Federal, State, County and many foreign countries.

HOSPITALS: Civilian  and Veterans’.

MILITARY:  Bases throughout the United States and the world.

CRISIS PREGNANCY CENTERS: These books are saving lives!

You can help supply free books to those who desperately need help through
your contributions to:

                                         Foundation  of Praise
                                               P O Box 2518
                                    Escondido,  CA 92033-2518

77
                 ExcerSts      from     Merlin’s       next    book:

       I had prayed for God to make me more loving, and had come to think
of myself as a not too unloving sort of person. In fact, as I traveled and
ministered to thousands of people all of whom seemed to be blessed, I
rejoiced that I was able to feel more love for others all the time.
       Then one day  I  was  faced with  an individual  so  miserable and
repulsive that I cringed at the sight and reali]ed to my horror that I felt no
love for this creature, but only wished that she would disappear as soon as
possible.
       She was a girl who had been brought to my office with her soldier
boyfriend. Her face was caked with old makeup and dirt, her hair hung like
strands of wire, and her clothes were filthy and torn. Her legs were scarred
and smeared with dirt, and the odor from her body filled the room. The
e[pression on her face was sullen and hateful, and her eyes were swollen
from crying.
       This poor creature had come to Fort Benning to tell the soldier that she
was e[pecting his baby. The boy admitted that he was responsible for her
condition, but had flatly refused to marry her. The girl had flown into a rage
and threatened to kill him and then herself. She had already had another
baby out of wedlock, and this time she was determined to either get married
or die.
       I looked at her and thought I had never seen anyone so unlovable, so
desperate, so frightened, and so lonely. Yet, the very thought of praying for
her was offensive to me. I didn’t want to touch her.
       “Lord,” I cried inwardly, “why did you bring her to me?”
       “She’s one of my children,” came the answer. “She is lost and in need
of my love and healing. I brought her here for you to love her and tell her of
my love.”
       The painful reali]ation hit me suddenly. I had boasted to myself of
being able to love, yet now I cringed at the sight of one who desperately
needed to be loved.
       “O, Lord,” I cried inside, “forgive me, and thank you for showing me
just how shallow and selfish my love is. Take my unlovingness and fill me
with your love for her.”
       The girl was sobbing and her eyes looked dull behind the swollen lids
smeared with mascara.

78
       “Please, Sir,” she said, “do something!”
       “Do  you believe in God?”
       She nodded and whispered, “Yes, I do.”
       “Do  you believe He can help you?”
       She hesitated, then spoke slowly.  “I   know He  could help  me, but  I
don’t think He’d want to. I  used to be a Christian, but look at me now. Even
if He wanted to help me, what could He do to get me out of this mess?”
       “God  can help you, and He wants to,” I said with an assurance I didn’t
yet feel.
       She shook her head and her shoulders sagged in utter hopelessness.
       “Please,” I said, “try  to understand that God loves you. He will fill you
with  His joy  and  peace and meet your every  need before you  leave my
office today.”
       The girl stared, open-mouthed, and the soldier looked as if he thought I
was going to force him to marry the girl.
       “God  has brought you here today,” I continued. “He  has permitted all
the troubles in  your life  just  so that you could  understand how much He
loves you. He has a wonderful plan for  your life,  and if you  begin to trust
Him  and thank  Him  for  everything  that has happened to  you,  you will
discover that God is helping you right now.”
       “Thank  Him  for this?”  Her eyes bla]ed in  sudden anger again. “All I
want is for this man to marry me so my child will have a name.”
       “Look  here.” I  showed her the underlined verse in my open Bible. “In
every  thing  give  thanks,  for   this  is  the  will   of   God  in  Christ   -esus
concerning you” (I  Thess. 5:18). I flipped  the pages to Romans 8:28. “All
things work together tor good to them that love God.”
       Her eyes stared in blank mistrust, and I suddenly reali]ed how futile it
was to speak to this wounded creature about God’s love or any kind of love.
She didn’t know the meaning of  the word. Only God  could light the spark
of understanding in her mind.
       “May  I pray for you?”
       She nodded dully. “Sure, why not?”
       I  moved to place my hand on her head, and as I looked down and saw
just how dirty  and in  need of scrubbing she was. The twinge of  revulsion
made me shudder.
       “Oh,  Lord,”  I  whispered, “how endless your love is for  us—so much
greater than the little love  we are capable of on our own.  Please, God, let

79
your love touch her now, and teach me to love her.”
       Then I placed my hand firmly on her head and began to pray...

       Read the amazing  results of this  Srayer, in  my next book,  Power in
Praise.

80
                                            EPILOGUE

       Many  thousands of readers have accepted -esus as their Savior while
they read Prison to  Praise. I  pray  that you  too have received  something
from the Lord.
       Since I wrote Prison to Praise, twenty-seven years ago, my conviction
has steadily grown stronger that  a dynamic force  is released in  our lives
when we praise the Lord for everything.
       If  you  haven’t  received -esus as your Savior  and Lord,  please pray
with me:
       Dear God, I confess that I am a sinner. Please forgive all my sins - the
ones I can remember and the ones I can’t remember. Thank You, -esus, that
You lived a sinless life and took the punishment for my sins. I receive You
as my Savior and the free gift of eternal life that You give me. I want to live
for You, to  serve You and to honor You. I  receive Your Holy  Spirit  and I
will follow  You.

       Once we have accepted Christ as our Savior, the Holy Spirit begins to
work  in  our hearts. If   you  want His  work  in   you to  accomplish  God’s
purpose, I strongly recommend:

       I. Earnestly study God’s Word every day. Powerful forces will strive to
convince you that you do not need to do so. The Bible says of itself that it is
“God’s  breath.”   Without   that  heavenly  breath  we   can  soon  become
lukewarm Christians.

       II.  Pray regularly - -esus did. He rose before daylight to talk with God.
He asked His disciples why they couldn’t pray at least one hour. Never let
yourself be  deceived into  thinking  that  you are  too busy  or  that prayer
doesn’t work. Pray  fervently, and God will   reveal Himself  to you  in new
and e[citing ways.

       III.  Turn your back on evil  of every kind. Evil  has an insidious way of
making itself appear to be acceptable, if we fellowship with it. For e[ample,
many television  programs  and movies  are  designed to  make evil   look
attractive or even good.

81
       IV. Witness for Him  daily!  God forgave us of our sins and gave us the
free gift  of eternal life.  In return, He  asks us to tell others about His Son.
Many  Christians  spend much  time   in  learning  how   to  be  a  stronger
Christian, but never learn that one of our  greatest sources of strength is to
bring other people to Christ! Don’t miss out on this blessing!

82
                                   Table    of   Contents

Cover
Title Page
Epigraph
Dedication
Contents
Chapters
      1. Prisoner
      2. Set Free!
      3. The Search
      4. Be Filled
      5. By His Power Within You
      6. Vietnam
      7. Rejoice!
      8. Praise Him!
Contact Information
Help Supply Free Books!
E[cerpts from Merlin's Ne[t Book
Epilogue

