2
FOR INA

and for DR. JANET G. TRAVELL

3
part IV T+E  8SE OF 3O:ER

11. The 0ajesty of the LaZ 181

12. Robert 0oses and the Creature of the 0achine 207

13. Driving 226

14. Changing 241

15. Curator of CaulifloZers 260

16. The Featherduster 283

17. The 0other of Accommodation 299

18. NeZ York City Before Robert 0oses 323

19. To 3oZer in the City 347

20. One Year 368

21. The Candidate 402

22. Order Number 129 426

23. In the Saddle 444

24. Driving 468

part v T+E LOVE  OF 3O:ER

25. Changing 499

26. TZo Brothers 576

27. Changing 607

28. The :arp  on the Loom 615

4
part vi T+E L8ST FOR 3O:ER

29. "And :hen the Last LaZ :as DoZn . .." 639

30. Revenge 678

31. 0onopoly 689

32. 4uid 3ro 4uo 699

Contents

33. Leading Out the Regiment

34. 0oses and the 0ayors

35. "R0"

36. The 0eat A[

37. One 0ile

38. One 0ile (AfterZard)

39. The +ighZayman

40. 3oint of No Return

I;

703

755 807 837 850 885 895 920

part vii T+E LOSS OF 3O:ER

41. Rumors and the Report of Rumors 961

42. Tavern in the ToZn 984

5
43. Late Arrival 1005

44. 0ustache and the Bard 1026

45. Off to the Fair 1040

46. Nelson 1067

47. The Great Fair 1082

48. Old Lion, Young 0ayor  1117

49. The Last Stand 1132

50. Old 1145

NOTES

1163

INDE;

3+OTOGRA3+S

section i folloZs page 146

section ii folloZs page 562

section in folloZs page 978

0A3S

landscapes by moses ii-iii

ROBERT 0OSES' 3RO3OSED

NORT+ERN STATE 3AR.:AY     164-5

DETO8R FOR 3O:ER    302-3

6
ORC+ARD  BEAC+:  BEFORE AND AFTER  366

T+E TRIBORO8G+   BRIDGE  CO03LE;    388

T+E ONE 0ILE   864

NE:   YOR.   STATE 3AR.S   ;;;viii-;;[i[

T+E 3O:ER    BRO.ER

INTROD8CTION   Z

Zas no money to replace the dank, loZ-ceilinged pool, Zhich Zasn't even
the right length for intercollegiate sZimming events. There Zas no
allocation from the university for travel e[penses or even for a coach. But
Reid, Zho had been Yale's first great sZimmer, not only paid the team's
e[penses but, Zeek after Zeek, traveled up to NeZ +aven from NeZ York
to do the coaching himself. This year, after a long fight, 0oses had
succeeded in organi]ing the Zrestling, fencing, hockey, basketball and
sZimming teams into a "0inor  Sports Association" Zhich Zould  conduct a
general fund-raising effort and divide the money among the teams, in the
hope that the e[istence of such a formal organi]ation Zould coa[ neZ
contributions from alumni. The theory Zas good, Richards had thought at
the time, but there Zas one hitch: any money contributed specifically to one
of the teams also had to go into the general fund. Richards doubted that
Reid, Zho Zas interested only in sZimming, Zould Zant  to contribute to a
general fund and he Zondered if the sZimmers might not end up Zith even
less money than before. But 0oses had seemed to have no fears on that
score. And noZ, standing beside the pool, Richards Zas beginning to
understand Zhy. 0oses, dressed in suit, vest and a high collar that Zas
Zilting  in the dampness, had just announced that he Zas skipping practice
to go to NeZ York and see Reid, and Zhen Richards had e[pressed his
doubts that the alumnus Zould contribute, 0oses had smiled and said, "Oh,
that's all right. I just Zon't tell him it's going to an association. +e'll think
it's the regular contribution to the sZimming team."

NoZ Richards said sloZly, "I think  that's a little bit tricky, Bob. I think
that's a little bit smooth. I don't like that at all."

7
:ith   astonishing rapidity, the face over the high collar turned pale, almost
Zhite. 0oses' fists came up for a moment before he loZered them. ":ell,
you've got nothing to say about it," he said.

"Yes, I do," Richards said. "I'm the captain. I'm responsible. And I'm telling
you not to do it."

":ell,   I'm  going to do it anyZay," 0oses said.

"If you do," Richards said, "I'll go to Og and tell him that the money isn't
going Zhere he thinks it is."

0oses' voice suddenly dropped. +is tone Zas threatening. "If you don't let
me do it," he said, "I'm going to resign from the team."

+e thought he Zas bluffing me, Richards Zould recall later. +e thought I
Zouldn't let him resign. ":ell,    Bob," Richards said, "your resignation is
accepted."

Bob 0oses turned and Zalked out of the pool. +e never sZam for Yale
again.

Forty-five years later, a neZ mayor of NeZ York Zas being sZorn in at City
+all. 8nder  huge cut-glass chandeliers Robert F. :agner, Jr., took the oath
of office and then, before hundreds of spectators, personally administered
the oath, and handed the coveted official appointment blanks, to his top
appointees.

But to a handful of the spectators, the real significance of the ceremony

Zas in an oath not given. :hen  Robert 0oses came forZard, :agner  sZore
him in as City 3ark Commissioner and as City Construction Coordinator—
and then, Zith 0oses still Zaiting  e[pectantly, stopped and beckoned
forZard the ne[t appointee.

To those spectators, :agner's gesture signaled triumph. They Zere
representatives of the so-called "Good Government" organi]ations of the
city: the Citi]ens 8nion,  the City Club, liberal elements of the labor

8
movement. They had long chafed at the poZer that 0oses had held under
previous mayors as 3ark Commissioner, Construction Coordinator and
member of the City 3lanning Commission. They had determined to try to
curb his sZay under :agner and they had decided to make the test of
strength the 3lanning Commission membership. This, they had decided
after long analysis and debate, Zas 0oses' Zeak point: As 3ark
Commissioner and Construction Coordinator he proposed public Zorks
projects, and the City Charter had surely never intended that an officeholder
Zho proposed projects should sit on the 3lanning Commission, Zhose
function Zas to pass on the merits of those projects. For nine Zeeks, ever
since :agner's election, they had been pressing him not to reappoint 0oses
to the commission. Although :agner  had told them he agreed fully Zith
their vieZs and had even hinted that, on Inauguration Day, there Zould be
only tZo jobs Zaiting  for 0oses, they had been far from sure that he meant
it. But noZ they reali]ed that :agner   had in fact not given 0oses the third
oath—and the 3lanning Commission job. And, looking at 0oses, they
could see he reali]ed it, too. +is face, normally sZarthy, Zas pale Zith rage.

The more observant among these spectators, hoZever, noticed that after the
ceremonies 0oses folloZed :agner  into  his inner office. They kneZ all too
Zell Zhat  he Zould be saying to the neZ mayor; he had said it often
enough, publicly and privately, orally and in Zriting, to :agner's
predecessors, Vincent R. Impellitteri and :illiam  O'DZyer,  and, even
earlier, to the great La Guardia. "+e's threatening to resign," they Zhispered
to one another.

They Zere right. Behind the closed doors of the inner office, 0oses Zas
putting it to :agner   straight: If he didn't get the third post, he Zould quit
the other tZo. And he'd do it right noZ.

:agner  tried frantically  to stall. The 3lanning Commission oath? the 0ayor
said. There must have been an oversight. Some clerk must have forgotten to
fill  out the appointment blank. Nothing to Zorry about. +e'd see to it in a
feZ days. 0oses Zalked out of the 0ayor's  office and into the little room
doZn the hall Zhere a deputy mayor and his assistant Zere filing the
appointment blanks. Snatching an unused blank off a sheaf on a table, he sat

9
doZn at the table and filled it out himself. Then he Zalked back to :agner's
office and, Zithout a Zord, laid the paper on the 0ayor's desk.

:ithout   a Zord, the 0ayor  pulled the paper toZard him and signed it.

Robert 0oses possessed at the time of his confrontation Zith Ed Richards
an imagination that leaped unhesitatingly at problems insoluble to other
men—the problem of financing minor sports had been tormenting Yale

deans for tZo decades—and that, seemingly in the very moment of the leap,
conceived of solutions. +e possessed an iron Zill that put behind his
solutions and dreams a determination to let nothing stand in their Zay—to
form the 0inor  Sports Association he, only an undergraduate, had faced up
to, and had finally faced doZn, :alter  Camp, Zho Zas implacably opposed
to its formation. And he possessed an arrogance Zhich made him conceive
himself so indispensable that, in his vieZ, his resignation Zas the most
aZful threat he could think of.

Robert 0oses possessed the same qualities during his confrontation Zith
Robert :agner.  But by then he also possessed something more. +e
possessed poZer.

3oZer is the backdrop against Zhich both confrontation scenes should be
played. For poZer Zas the reason for the contrast in their denouements.

The Zhole life of Robert 0oses, in fact, has been a drama of the interplay
of poZer and personality. For a time, standing betZeen it and him Zas an
interceding force, the passionate idealism he had e[pressed in the Yale bull
sessions. Dedicating his life to public service, he remained, during the first
years of that service, the idealist of those bull sessions, an idealist
possessed, moreover, of a vision of such breadth that he Zas soon dreaming
dreams of public Zorks on a scale that Zould dZarf any yet built in the
cities of America. +e Zandered tirelessly around NeZ York, and a Zoman
Zho occasionally Zandered Zith him said he Zas "burning up Zith ideas,
just burning up Zith them," ideas for great highZays and parks circling the
city's Zaterfront and for more modest projects that he thought Zould also
improve the quality of life for the city's people—little shelters, for instance,
in Central 3ark so that mothers could change their babies' diapers Zithout

10
having to go all the Zay home. And Zhen he argued for his ideas before the
Good Government organi]ation for Zhich he Zorked and before the Board
of Estimate, he Zas very careful alZays to have his facts ready, never to
e[aggerate them and alZays to draZ from them logical conclusions, for he
believed that Truth and Logic Zould prevail. :hen  he decided to
speciali]e, the area he chose—civil service reorgani]ation—Zas one based
on the same principle Zith Zhich he had "aZakened" "Five A" Johnson, the
principle that jobs should be given and promotions based on merit rather
than patronage. And he dedicated himself to that principle Zith the devotion
of the acolyte. Brought into the administration of reforming 0ayor John
3urroy 0itchel  in 1914, 0oses  devised, in a year of unremitting labor, a
system that made every aspect of a city employee's performance—including
facets of his personality—subject to a numerical grade. And for three
additional years he fought for adoption of his system, battling a Board of
Estimate dominated by one of the most corrupt political machines the
8nited States had ever knoZn, speaking night after night—a tall, very slim,
very handsome young man Zith deep, burning eyes, dressed, often and
appropriately, in a Zhite suit, clutching a bulging briefcase and introduced
to audiences as "Dr. 0oses" in recognition of his 3h.D.—into hails of abuse
from furious municipal employees Zho oZed their jobs not to merit but to
Tammany +all, and observers said that the viciousness of the jeering
croZds seemed to make no impression on him, so deeply did he believe that
if only

they could be made to understand hoZ good his system Zas, they Zould
surely support it. In those pre-:orld  :ar   I years of optimism, of reform, of
idealism, Robert 0oses Zas the optimist of optimists, the reformer of
reformers, the idealist of idealists.

So great a nuisance did he make of himself that in 1918 Tammany +all
decided it had to crush him. It did so Zith efficiency. At the age of thirty,
Zith the grading papers for his system being used as scrap paper, the
Central 3ark shelters and great highZays unbuilt, Robert 0oses, 3hi Beta
.appa  at Yale, honors man at O[ford, lover of the Good, the True and the
Beautiful, Zas out of Zork and, Zith  a Zife and tZo small daughters to
support, Zas standing on a line in the Cleveland, Ohio, City +all, applying
for a minor municipal job—a job Zhich, incidentally,  he didn't get.

11
:hen   the curtain rose on the ne[t act of 0oses' life, idealism Zas gone
from the stage. In its place Zas an understanding that ideas—dreams—
Zere useless Zithout poZer to transform them into reality. 0oses spent the
rest of his life amassing poZer, bringing to the task imagination, iron Zill
and determination. And he Zas successful. The oath that Zas administered
to Robert :agner  in City +all  on January 1, 1954, should have given
:agner  supreme poZer in NeZ York. That Zas the theory. In democratic
America, supposedly, ultimate poZer rests in the voters, and the man for
Zhom a majority of them cast their votes is the repository of that poZer.
But :agner  kneZ  better. The spectators may have thought that he had a
choice in dealing Zith 0oses. +e  kneZ that he did not. :hy,   Zhen 0oses
pushed the appointment blank across his desk, did the 0ayor say not a
Zord? 3ossibly because there Zas nothing to say. 3oZer had spoken.

:ith   his poZer, for tZenty  years prior to the day he strode out of City +all
in triumph (and for an additional fourteen years thereafter), Robert 0oses
shaped a city and its spraZling suburbs—and, to an e[tent that Zould have
astonished analysts of urban trends had they measured the implications of
his decades of handiZork, influenced the destiny of all the cities of
tZentieth-century America.

The city in Zhich the shaping by his hand is most evident is NeZ York,
Titan of cities, colossal synthesis of urban hope and urban despair. It had
become a cliche by the mid-tZentieth century to say that NeZ York Zas
"ungovernable," and this meant, since the poZers of government in the city
had largely devolved on its mayor, that no mayor could govern it, could
hope to do more than merely stay afloat in the maelstrom that had engulfed
the vast metropolis. In such a conte[t, the cliche Zas valid. No mayor
shaped NeZ York; no mayor—not even La Guardia—left upon its roiling
surface more than the faintest of lasting imprints.

But Robert 0oses shaped NeZ York.

3hysically, any map of the city proves it. The very shoreline of metropolis
Zas different before Robert 0oses came to poZer. +e rammed bulkheads of
steel deep into the muck beneath rivers and harbors and crammed into the
space betZeen bulkheads and short immensities of earth and stone,

12
shale and cement, that hardened into fifteen thousand acres of neZ land and
thus altered the physical boundaries of the city.

Standing out from the map's delicate tracery of gridirons representing
streets are heavy lines, lines girdling the city or slashing across its e[panses.
These lines denote the major roads on Zhich automobiles and trucks move,
roads Zhose very location, moreover, does as much as any single factor to
determine Zhere and hoZ a city's people live and Zork. :ith  a single
e[ception, the East River Drive, Robert 0oses built every one of those
roads. +e built the 0ajor  Deegan E[pressZay, the Van :yck  E[pressZay,
the Sheridan E[pressZay and the Bruckner E[pressZay. +e built the
GoZanus E[pressZay, the 3rospect E[pressZay, the :hitestone
E[pressZay, the ClearvieZ E[pressZay and the Throgs Neck E[pressZay.
+e built the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay,  the Brooklyn-4ueens E[pressZay,
the Nassau E[pressZay, the Staten Island E[pressZay and the Long Island
E[pressZay. +e built the +arlem River  Drive and the :est  Side +ighZay.

Only one borough of NeZ York City—the Bron[—is  on the mainland of
the 8nited States, and bridges link the island boroughs that form
metropolis. Since 1931, seven such bridges Zere built, immense structures,
some of them anchored by toZers as tall as seventy-story buildings,
supported by cables made up of enough Zire to drop a noose around the
earth. Those bridges are the Triborough, the Verra]ano, the Throgs Neck,
the 0arine, the +enry +udson, the Cross Bay and the Bron[-:hitestone.
Robert 0oses built every one of those bridges.

Scattered throughout NeZ York stand clusters of tall apartment houses built
under urban reneZal programs and bearing color, splashed on terraces and
finials, that in the tZentieth-century American cityscape marks them as
lu[ury  dZellings. Alongside some of these clusters stand college lecture
halls and dormitories. Alongside one stand five immense dingy Zhite
e[panses of travertine that are Lincoln Center, the Zorld's most famous,
costly and imposing cultural comple[. Alongside another stands the NeZ
York Coliseum, the gloZering e[hibition  toZer Zhose name reveals 0oses'
preoccupation Zith achieving an immortality like that conferred on the
Caesars of Rome (feeling later that he could make the comparison even
more e[act, he built Shea Stadium, remarking Zhen it Zas completed,

13
":hen   the Emperor Titus opened the Colosseum in 80 a.d. he could have
felt no happier"). Once the sites of the clusters contained other buildings:
factories, stores, tenements that had stood for a century, sturdy, still
serviceable apartment houses. Robert 0oses decided that these buildings
Zould be torn doZn and it Zas Robert 0oses Zho decided that the lecture
halls and the dormitories and the cultural center—and neZ apartment
houses—Zould be erected in their place.

The eastern edge of 0anhattan Island, heart of metropolis, Zas completely
altered betZeen 1945 and 1958. NorthZard from the bulge of Corlears
+ook looms a long line of apartment houses devoid of splashes of color,
hulking buildings, utilitarian, drab, unadorned, not block after block of
them but mile after mile, appearing from across the East River like an
endless Zall of dull brick against the sky. Almost all of them—ninety-five
looming over the river in the first tZo miles north of Corlears +ook—are
public

housing. They—and hundreds of similar structures huddled alongside the
e[pressZays or set in roZs beside the RockaZay surf—contain 148,000
apartments and 555,000 tenants, a population that is in itself a city bigger
than 0inneapolis. These buildings Zere constructed by the NeZ York City
+ousing Authority, 1,082 of them betZeen 1945 and 1958. Robert 0oses
Zas never a member of the +ousing Authority and his relationship Zith it
Zas only hinted at in the press. But betZeen 1945 and 1958 no site for
public housing Zas selected and no brick of a public housing project laid
Zithout his approval.

North of the public housing are tZo immense "private" housing
developments: Stuyvesant ToZn and 3eter Cooper Village. 0oses Zas the
dominant force in their creation, too (as he Zas in the creation of an even
larger "private" housing development in the Bron[, Co-op City). And still
further north along the East River stand the buildings of the 8nited Nations
headquarters. 0oses cleared aside the obstacles to bringing to NeZ York
the closest thing to a Zorld capitol the planet possesses, and he supervised
its construction.

:hen   Robert 0oses began building playgrounds in NeZ York City, there
Zere 119. :hen  he stopped, there Zere 777. 8nder his direction, an army

14
of men that at times during the Depression included 84,000 laborers
reshaped every park in the city and then filled the parks Zith ]oos and
skating rinks, boathouses and tennis houses, bridle paths and golf courses,
288 tennis courts and 673 baseball diamonds. 8nder his direction, endless
convoys of trucks hauled the city's garbage into its marshes, and the
garbage filled the marshes, Zas covered Zith earth and laZn, and became
more parks. Long strings of barges brought to the city Zhite sand dredged
from the ocean floor and the sand Zas piled on mud flats to create beaches.

And no enumeration of the beaches, parks, apartment houses, bridges, and
roads that Robert 0oses himself built in NeZ York does more than suggest
the immensity of the man's physical influence upon the city. For the seven
years betZeen 1946 and 1953, the seven years of plenty in public
construction in the city, seven years marked by the most intensive such
construction in its history, no public improvement of any type—not school
or seZer, library or pier, hospital or catch basin—Zas built by any city
agency, even those Zhich Robert 0oses did not directly control, unless
Robert 0oses approved its design and location. To clear the land for these
improvements, he evicted the city's people, not thousands of them or tens of
thousands but hundreds of thousands, from their homes and tore the homes
doZn. Neighborhoods Zere obliterated by his edict to make room for neZ
neighborhoods reared at his command.

And his influence upon NeZ York Zent far beyond the physical. In
tZentieth-century America, no city's resources, not even Zhen combined
Zith resources made available by the state and federal governments, came
close to meeting its needs. So cities had to pick and choose among these
needs, to decide Zhich handful of a thousand desperately necessary projects
Zould actually be built. The establishment of priorities had vast impact on
not only the physical but the social fabric of the cities, on the quality

INTROD8CTION

of life their inhabitants led. In NeZ York City, for  thirty-four years, Robert
0oses played a vital role in establishing the city's priorities. For the crucial
seven years, he established all its priorities.

15
Out from the heart of NeZ York, reaching beyond the limits of the city into
its vast suburbs and thereby shaping them as Zell as the city, stretch long
ribbons of concrete, closed, unlike the e[pressZays, to trucks and all
commercial traffic, and, unlike the e[pressZays, bordered by laZns and
trees. These are the parkZays. There are 416 miles of them. Robert 0oses
built every mile. Still Zithin  the city limits,  stretching northZard toZard
:estchester County, he built the 0osholu  3arkZay and the +utchinson
River 3arkZay. In :estchester,  he built the SaZ 0ill   River 3arkZay, the
Sprain Brook 3arkZay and the Cross County 3arkZay. Stretching eastZard
toZard the counties of Long Island, he built the Grand Central 3arkZay, the
Belt 3arkZay, the Laurelton 3arkZay, the Cross Island 3arkZay, the
Interbor-ough 3arkZay. On Long Island, he built the Northern State
3arkZay and the Southern State 3arkZay, the :antagh 3arkZay and the
Sagtikos, the Sunken 0eadoZ and the 0eadoZbrook. Some of the Long
Island parkZays run doZn to the Island's south shore and then, on
causeZays built by Robert 0oses, across the Great South Bay to Jones
Beach, Zhich Zas a barren, deserted, ZindsZept sand spit Zhen he first
happened upon it in 1921 Zhile e[ploring the bay alone in a small
motorboat and Zhich he transformed into Zhat may be the Zorld's greatest
oceanfront park and bathing beach. Other Long Island parkZays lead to
other huge parks and other great bathing beaches. Sunken 0eadoZ. +ither
+ills.  0ontauk.  Orient 3oint. Fire Island. Captree. Bethpage. :ildZood.
Belmont Lake. +empstead Lake. Valley Stream. +eckscher. Robert 0oses
built these parks and beaches.

The physical Zorks of Robert 0oses are not confined to NeZ York and its
suburbs. The largest of them are hundreds of miles from the city, stretched
along the Niagara Frontier and—in distant reaches of NeZ York State
knoZn to natives as "the North Country," north even of 0assena, a toZn
Zhere frost comes in August and the temperature can be thirty beloZ by
November—along the St. LaZrence River.

North from 0assena the land rolls barren and empty. Only an occasional
farmhouse interrupts the e[panse of bare fields and scraggly Zoods. You
can drive for tZenty miles Zithout passing another car. But turn a bend in
the road and there is the St. LaZrence—and, stretched across it, one of the
most colossal single Zorks of man, a structure of steel and concrete as tall

16
as a ten-story apartment house, an apartment house as long as eleven
football fields, a structure vaster by far than any of the pyramids, or, in
terms of bulk, of any si[ pyramids together, a structure so vast that the
thirty-tZo  bright-red turbine generators lined up on its flanks, each of them
Zeighing fourteen tons, are only glistening specks against its dull-gray
massiveness. And this structure, a poZer dam, is only the centerpiece of
Robert 0oses' design to tame the Zild Zaters of the St. LaZrence, a design
that includes three huge

control dams built to force the river through the poZer dam's turbines. After
the dams Zere built—and the steel forests of transmission toZers Zhich
distribute the electricity created by Zater passing through turbines—Robert
0oses adorned their bulk Zith a garland of parks, of campgrounds, picnic
areas, overlooks, of beaches built beside lakes that he built, and of miles
and miles of more parkZays. And at Niagara, Robert 0oses built a series of
dams, parks and parkZays that make the St. LaZrence development look
small.

One measure of the career of Robert 0oses is longevity. +is poZer Zas
measured in decades. On April 18, 1924, ten years after he had entered
government, it Zas formally handed to him. For forty-four years thereafter
—until the day in 1968 Zhen he reali]ed that he had either misunderstood
Nelson Rockefeller or had been cheated by him and, in either case, had lost
the last of it—he held poZer, a poZer so substantial that in the fields in
Zhich he chose to e[ercise it, it Zas not challenged seriously by any
Governor of NeZ York State or, during a thirty-four year period, 1934 to
1968, in Zhich it e[tended over city as Zell as state, by any 0ayor of NeZ
York City. +e held this poZer during the administrations of si[ Governors
— Alfred E. Smith, Franklin D. Roosevelt, +erbert +.  Lehman, Thomas E.
DeZey and :.   Averell +arriman, as Zell as Rockefeller. +e held it during
the administrations of five 0ayors—Fiorello  La Guardia, :illiam
O'DZyer, Vincent Impellitteri,  Robert F. :agner, Jr., and John V. Lindsay.
And in 1974, at the age of eighty-five, he Zas fighting Zith desperate
cunning to get it back.

Another measure of his career is immortality. 0en strive for a sliver of it;
Robert 0oses had it heaped upon him. Not only is there a Robert 0oses

17
State 3ark on Long Island, there is another Robert 0oses State 3ark at
0assena. There is a Robert 0oses CauseZay on Long Island, a Robert
0oses 3arkZay at Niagara. The great dam at Niagara is named for him.
And over the entrance to the dam at 0assena, in letters of stainless steel
each three feet high, gleam the Zords "Robert 0oses 3oZer Dam."

Another measure is in statistics. By the 1960's, e[penditures for public
Zorks in America Zere federal-si]ed, and a federal cabinet officer might
have charge of the distribution of billions of dollars. But merely distributing
money is not building. In terms of true building—personal conception and
construction—Robert 0oses Zas unique in America. :ithout   including the
cost of schools, hospitals, garbage incinerators, seZers and other
improvements Zhose location and design he approved but Zhich Zere
physically constructed by others, Zithout including the amount of money
poured by private sources into construction that also had to be approved by
him—including, in fact, only those public Zorks that he personally
conceived and completed, from first vision to ribbon cutting—Robert
0oses built public  Zorks costing, in 1968 dollars, tZenty-seven billion
dollars. In terms of personal conception and completion, no other public
official in the history of the 8nited  States built public Zorks costing an
amount even close to that figure. In those terms,

Robert 0oses Zas unquestionably America's most prolific physical creator.
+e Zas America's greatest builder.

0ore  significant than Zhat Robert 0oses built is Zhen he built it. That Zas
hoZ he put his mark on all the cities of America.

:hen   Robert 0oses began building state parks and parkZays during the
1920's, tZenty-nine states didn't have a single state park; si[ had only one
each. Roads uninterrupted by crossings at grade and set off by landscaping
Zere almost none[istent. 0ost proposals for parks outside cities Zere so
limited in scope that, even if they had been adopted, they Zould have been
inadequate. The handful of visionaries Zho dreamed of large parks Zere
utterly unable to translate their dreams into reality. No one in the nation
seemed able to conceive of proposals—and methods of implementing them
—equal to the scope and comple[ity of the problem posed by the need of
urban masses for countryside parks and a convenient means of getting to

18
them. NeZ York City residents heading for Long Island's green hills and
ocean beaches, for e[ample, had to make their Zay, bumper to bumper,
along dusty rutted roads the most modern of Zhich Zere e[actly eighteen
feet Zide. Those Zho made it to the Island found that the hills and beaches
had been monopoli]ed by the robber barons of America, Zho had bought up
its choicest areas Zith such thoroughness that there Zas hardly a meadoZ or
strip of beach Zithin driving distance of NeZ York still  open to the public.
So fierce Zas their opposition—and so immense their political poZer—that
NeZ York park enthusiasts had stopped thinking of putting parks on Long
Island.

But in 1923, after tramping alone for months over sand spits and almost
Zild  tracts of Long Island Zoodland, Robert 0oses mapped out a system of
state parks there that Zould cover forty thousand acres and Zould be linked
together—and to NeZ York City—by broad parkZays. And by 1929, 0oses
had actually built the system he had dreamed of, hacking it out in a series of
merciless vendettas against Zealth and Zealth's poZer that became almost a
legend—to the public and to public officials and engineers from all over the
country Zho came to Long Island to marvel at his Zork. :hen  Jones
Beach, capstone of the system, opened, it opened to nationZide praise of a
unanimity and enthusiasm not to be heard again for a public Zork until the
completion of the Tennessee Valley Authority project a decade later—and
the enthusiasm led directly to the creation of scores of state parks in other
states, parks built on engineering and philosophic principles that came
largely out of the old August Belmont 0ansion on Long Island Zhere
Robert 0oses sat, pounding his palm on Zhat had been Belmont's dinner
table and planning out a system far vaster than Long Island's for all NeZ
York State. Over the decades, the state park movement developed other
leaders, but it Zas alZays to be in his debt. And there Zas never to be any
doubt that the breadth of his vision kept him unique Zithin its ranks. At the
end of his leadership of the NeZ York system, the total acreage of the state
parks in the fifty states Zas 5,799,957 NeZ York State alone had 2,567,256
of those acres—or 45 percent of all the state parks in the country.

To a feZ men, young engineers Zhose passion had been fired by a

19
dramatic facet of their profession—the construction of highZays—the
Belmont 0ansion Zas Delphi.  They came to it to learn, not just the
engineering of great roads, for they could learn engineering elseZhere, but
rather a secret available at that time noZhere else: the secret of hoZ to get
great roads built. For them, the big table at Zhich 0oses sat Zas an altar on
Zhich they laid their dreams in the hope of learning the alchemy by Zhich
the dreams might be transmuted into concrete and asphalt and steel. And
they Zere luckier than the Greeks, Zhose journey to their oracle Zas over
narroZ mountain paths. They Zere able to drive to the mansion on the
Southern State 3arkZay and they could still recall, decades later, their aZe
at first seeing its stone-faced bridges and opulent landscaping. And Zhen
they Zere admitted to the Belmont dining room, they Zere not spoken to in
riddles but in blunt lectures that contained a Zhole neZ doctrine on the
building of urban public Zorks in a democratic society. As the young men
greZ older, they became the road builders of America, the heads of state
and city highZay departments, key officials of the Federal Bureau of 3ublic
Roads, caterers of an orgy of public Zorks Zithout precedent in history.
And as the roads they built rolled across America, the mark of Robert
0oses Zas as much a part of those roads as the steel mesh on Zhich their
concrete pavement Zas laid. Bertram D. Tallamy, chief administrative
officer of the Interstate +ighZay System during the 1950's and '6o's, says
that the principles on Zhich the System Zas built Zere principles that
Robert 0oses taught him in a series of such private lectures in 1926.

3arkZays Zere, in general, laid through thinly populated suburbs or open
countryside and Zere designed to carry only cars. E[pressZays Zould be
laid—after :orld   :ar   II—through  cities, and Zere designed to carry trucks
also, to serve as arteries for the commerce as Zell as the pleasure of a
people. :hen  Robert 0oses began building e[pressZays, there Zere plenty
of plans for e[pressZays—but feZ e[pressZays. 3oliticians boggled at tZo
political problems that Zould attend the implementation of the plans: their
fantastic cost and the necessity of removing from their path and relocating
thousands, even tens of thousands, of voters. For years—decades—in every
city in the country, the e[pressZays remained on the draZing boards. In
every city, that is, e[cept one. In NeZ York, immediately after :orld   :ar
II, Robert 0oses began ramming si[ great e[pressZays simultaneously
through the city's massed apartment houses. A decade later, outside NeZ

20
York, there Zere still only a feZ stretches of urban e[pressZay in the
8nited States, but 0oses' si[ pioneer e[pressZays Zere largely completed.
:hen,   in 1956, sufficient funds to gridiron America Zith  e[pressZays Zere
insured by the passage of the Interstate +ighZay Act, an act in Zhose
drafting 0oses played a crucial if hidden role, it Zas to NeZ York that the
engineers of a score of state highZay departments came, to learn the secrets
of the 0aster. The greatest secret Zas hoZ to remove people from the
e[pressZays' paths— and Robert 0oses taught them his method of dealing
Zith people. This method became one of the trademarks of the building of
America's urban highZays, a 0oses trademark impressed on all urban
America. Robert 0oses' influence on the development of the e[pressZay
system in the 8nited States

Zas greater than that of any other single individual. +e Zas America's
greatest road builder, the most influential single architect of the system over
Zhich rolled the Zheels of America's cars. And there Zas, in this fact, an
irony. For, e[cept for a feZ driving lessons he took in 1926, Robert 0oses
never drove a car in his life.

In 1949, the federal government enacted a neZ approach to the housing
problems of cities: urban reneZal. The approach Zas neZ both in
philosophy —for the first time in America, government Zas given the right
to sei]e an individual's private property not for its oZn use but for
reassignment to another individual for his use and profit—and in scope: a
billion dollars Zas appropriated in 1949 and it Zas agreed that this Zas only
seed money to prepare the ground for later, greater plantings of cash.

0ost  cities approached urban reneZal Zith caution. But in NeZ York City,
urban reneZal Zas directed by Robert 0oses. By 1957, $133,000,000 of
public monies had been e[pended on urban reneZal in all the cities of the
8nited States Zith the e[ception of NeZ  York; $267,000,000 had been
spent in NeZ York. So far ahead Zas NeZ York that Zhen scores of huge
buildings constructed under its urban reneZal program Zere already erected
and occupied, administrators from other cities Zere still borroZing NeZ
York's contract forms to learn hoZ to draZ up the initial legal agreements
Zith interested developers. :hen  0oses resigned from his urban reneZal
directorship in i960, urban reneZal had produced more physical results in

21
NeZ York than in all other American cities combined. Says the federal
official in charge of the early years of the program: "Because Robert 0oses
Zas so far ahead of anyone else in the country, he had greater influence on
urban reneZal in the 8nited States—on hoZ the program developed and on
hoZ it Zas received by the public—than any other single person."

3arks, highZays, urban reneZal—Robert 0oses Zas in and of himself a
formative force in all three fields in the 8nited States. +e Zas a seminal
thinker, perhaps the single most influential seminal thinker, in developing
policies in these fields, and the innovator, perhaps the single most
influential innovator, in developing the methods by Zhich these policies
Zere implemented. And since parks, highZays and urban reneZal, taken
together, do so much to shape cities' total environment, hoZ then gauge the
impact of this one man on the cities of America? The man Zho Zas for
thirty years his bitterest critic, LeZis 0umford,  says:

"In the tZentieth century, the influence of Robert 0oses on the cities of
America Zas greater than that of any other person."

:ith   his poZer, Robert 0oses built  himself an empire.

The capital of this empire Zas out of public sight—a squat, gray building
crouching so unobtrusively beloZ the Randall's Island toll pla]a of the
Triborough Bridge that most of the motorists Zho drove through the toll

booths never even kneZ that the building e[isted. And most of them Zere
ignorant also of the e[istence of the empire.

But men Zhose interest in geography centered on the map of poZer kneZ
of its e[istence very Zell indeed. They reali]ed that although theoretically it
Zas only a creature of the city, it had in fact become an autonomous
sovereign state. And, reali]ing that—although its outZard form Zas a loose
confederation of four public authorities, plus the NeZ York City 3ark
Department and the Long Island State 3ark Commission—it Zas actually a
single-headed, tightly administered monarchy, these men described it Zith a
single name, derived from the bridge and the Authority that Zere its
centerpieces: "Triborough."

22
Anyone Zho doubted Triborough's autonomy had only to look at its
trappings. The empire had its oZn flag and great seal, distinctive license
plates and a self-contained communications netZork, an elaborate teletype
hookup that linked the gray building and the provincial capitals at Belmont
Lake, 0assena and Niagara. It even had its oZn island—Randall's—on
Zhich it administered every structure and every inch of land. Randall's
Island Zas near the geographic center of NeZ York, but the Zaters of the
East River, Bron[ .ill   and +ell  Gate Zere a moat betZeen it and the city,
and from the air, Zith its hundreds of acres of laZn, the island appeared
separate, a bright green oasis, sharply defined by a blue border, in the midst
of the city's vast grayness. And the separateness Zas more than symbolic:
no inhabitant of the city could drive across the island Zithout paying
Triborough a tribute in coin.

Triborough had its oZn fleets, of yachts and motorcars and trucks, and its
oZn uniformed army—"Bridge and Tunnel Officers" Zho  guarded its toll
booths, revolver-carrying Long Island 3arkZay 3olice Zho patrolled its
suburban parks and roads—responsible to no discipline but that of Robert
0oses. To command the army, under 0oses, it had its oZn generals and
admirals, senior officers of the 8nited States Army and Navy Zho, upon
retirement, took service under its banner. It had its oZn constitution: the
covenants, unalterable by city, state or federal government, of its bond
resolutions. It governed by its oZn laZs: the Rules and Regulations that it
promulgated to regulate conduct Zithin its dominions. And, most
significantly, it had its oZn source of revenue: the quarters and dimes that
poured in a silver stream into the toll booths at Zhich it collected tribute.

It Zas a vast empire. In i960, the year of its furthest e[pansion, the land
area under its direct control—the parks of Long Island and NeZ York City,
the highZays and highZay-bordering playgrounds in the city and the
enclaves in Zhich are placed the upstate poZer dams—totaled 103,071
acres, 161 square miles, an area half as large as NeZ York City. But the best
measure of the si]e of the empire Zas its Zealth; its annual income—the
toll-booth revenue, the fees it received for the use of electricity produced at
0assena and Niagara, the yearly budgets of the Long Island State 3ark
Commission and the City 3ark Department—ran as high as $213,000,000;
the surplus of just one of its four constituent public authorities, the Tri-

23
borough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, ran to almost $30,000,000 a year.

The courtiers and courtesans of this empire ZalloZed in an almost
Carthaginian lu[ury. Favored secretaries, for e[ample, had not only bigger
cars than city commissioners (as Zell as round-the-clock chauffeurs so that
they could be on call tZenty-four hours a day) but also higher salaries. As
for the men closest to the throne, the cadre of Triborough administrators
knoZn as "0oses 0en,"  not even his most suspicious critics ever came
close to guessing the e[tent of the Zealth he poured into their hands. +e
made not a handful but scores of men—a loZ-salaried draftsman Zho
caught his eye, a struggling young hot-dog seller, architects, engineers,
contractors, bankers, restaurateurs, concessionaires, developers—
millionaires and multimillionaires.

:ithin   this empire, Robert 0oses lived like  an emperor.

Like an emperor, his every Zish Zas foreseen. On Sundays, Zhen he rested,
one of the three boat captains Zho took turns skippering his favorite yacht
Zaited by a telephone, sometimes for the entire day, just in case he might
decide that he Zanted to go fishing. Like an emperor, he preferred his oZn
table; people Zho Zanted to dine Zith 0oses had to come to him. And to
insure that he could entertain them on an imperial scale, lu[urious dining
rooms Zere set up adjacent to the four offices—one at Randall's Island, one
at Belmont 0ansion and tZo in doZntoZn  office buildings—among Zhich
he divided his time. Although only one of them could be used at a time,
each of them Zas equipped Zith a full-time staff of chef and Zaiters.

Luncheons Zere only one aspect of his hospitality. :hen a dam or park Zas
to be opened upstate, chartered planes fleZ hundreds of guests not just to
the opening but to a Zhole Zeekend of lavish receptions. In NeZ York,
highly paid Triborough officials had as their principal duty the
entertainment of 0oses' guests. They conducted tours of the empire,
pointing out its principal natural features—the toZers of the Triborough
Bridge, marching like the facades of tZin cathedrals across the East River,
the long laZns of Riverside 3ark—and repeating, at each monument, the
legends, burnished by time and constant retelling, of hoZ Robert 0oses had
created it. And the thousands of guests at the summer capital of the empire,
Jones Beach, Zere entertained —in a million-and-a-half-dollar restaurant

24
Zhose main purpose, judging from its financial statements, Zas to entertain
them; in a four-million-dollar stadium that he had turned over to his favorite
bandleader, Guy Lombardo, virtually as a gift on Zhich Lombardo reaped
immense personal profits, so that Lom-bardo's orchestra Zould be
constantly on call—on a scale and Zith a sump-tuousness that Zas as close
as. anyone in America ever got to the entertainment afforded by a monarch.

The Zealth of the empire enabled 0oses to keep many city officials in fear.
:ith   it, he hired skilled investigators he called "bloodhounds" Zho Zere
kept busy filling dossiers. Every city official kneZ  about those dossiers, and
they kneZ Zhat use 0oses Zas capable of making of them—since the
empire's Zealth alloZed him to create an aZesomely efficient public
relations machinery. They had seen him dredge up the dark secrets of men's
pasts and turn them into blaring headlines. On the occasion of 3aul
Screvane's appointment as city representative to 0oses' 1964-65 :orld's
Fair, 0ayor  :agner  said to

him: "3aul, my e[perience Zith  0oses has taught me one lesson, and I'll
tell it to you. I Zould  never let him do anything for me in any Zay, shape or
form. 3d never ask him—or permit him—to do anything of a personal
nature for me because—and I've seen it time and time again—a day Zill
come Zhen Bob Zill reach back in his file and throZ this in your face,
quietly if that Zill  make you go along Zith him, publicly  otherZise. And if
he has to, he Zill destroy you Zith it."

There Zere men Zhose past contained not even a speck of grist for 0oses'
mill. This, hoZever, Zas no guarantee against attack. 3erhaps their fathers
had committed an impropriety. If so, 0oses Zould visit the sins of the
fathers on the children. A respected financier, rising in a City 3lanning
Commission hearing to oppose a ]oning change sponsored by 0oses, Zas
astounded to hear 0oses reply by reading into the hearing transcript
neZspaper accounts of a scandal, unconnected in any Zay Zith ]oning, in
Zhich the financier's father had been involved—forty years before, Zhen
the financier Zas eight years old.

And if 0oses  possessed no derogatory information at all about an opponent
or his forebears, this Zas still no guarantee against attack. For 0oses Zas
an innovator in fields other than public Zorks. +e practiced 0c-Carthyism

25
long before there Zas a 0cCarthy. +e drove Re[ford G. TugZell  out of his
City 3lanning Commission chairmanship—out of NeZ York, in fact—
helped drive Stanley 0. Isaacs out of his borough presidency and destroyed
the public careers of a do]en other officials by publicly, and falsely,
identifying them as "3inkos" or "3lanning Reds" or "folloZers  of the
Ogpu," the Soviet secret police. There Zere tZo Zidespread Communist
Zitchhunts in NeZ York City,  one in 1938 and one in 1958. Both relied
heavily on "information"—much of  it innuendo or outright falsehood—
leaked to neZspapers by 0oses.

The fear in Zhich 0oses Zas held because of these factors Zas intensified
by his memory. Cross him once, politicians said, and he Zould never forget.
And if he ever got the chance for revenge, no consideration Zould dilute his
venom. For a tZenty-year period that did not end until 1968, 0oses Zas
given by the State Department of 3ublic :orks a secret veto poZer over the
aZarding of all state contracts for public Zorks in the NeZ York
metropolitan area. No engineer Zho had ever forcefully and openly
disagreed Zith a 0oses opinion ever received even one of the thousands of
contracts involved.

0oses Zas able to shape a city and to build an empire because the supple
mind that had conceived of a 0inor Sports Association for Yale and
innovations in the civil service system for NeZ York City—and also of
substantial portions of the NeZ York State Constitution—had focused on
the possibilities of an institution still in its infancy as an urban force Zhen
he came to it in 1934: the public authority. +e raised this institution to a
maturity in Zhich it  became the force through Zhich he shaped NeZ York
and its suburbs in the image he personally conceived.

. Operating through an authority, 0oses could keep the public from finding
out Zhat he Zas doing, and this Zas an important consideration Zith him.
If, throughout his half century and more in the public eye, he displayed an
eagerness and a flair for publici]ing certain aspects of his career and his
life, he displayed an equal eagerness and flair for making sure that only
those aspects—and no others—Zere knoZn. There Zere, for e[ample, men
and Zomen Zho kneZ Robert 0oses for half a century Zho never kneZ
that he had a brother, or that in the city in Zhich Robert 0oses lived in

26
lu[ury, that brother spent the last thirty years of his life in a poverty so
severe that he lived in a fifth-floor Zalkup flat in an old tenement huddled
against the piers of South Ferry.

The official records of most public agencies are public records, but not
those of public authorities, since courts have held that they may be regarded
as the records of private corporations, closed to scrutiny by the interested
citi]en or reporter.

This Zas very important to Robert 0oses. It Zas very important to him that
no one be able to find out hoZ it Zas that he Zas able to build.

Because Zhat Robert 0oses built on Zas a lie.

The lie had to do Zith the nature both of the man and of the public
authority. 0oses said that he Zas the antithesis of the politician. +e never
let political considerations influence any aspect of his projects—not the
location of a highZay or housing project nor the aZard of a contract or an
insurance commission, he said. +e Zould never compromise, he said. +e
never had and he never Zould. That, he said, Zas the Zay politicians got
things done, but he Zas no politician. +e kneZ Zhat should be done and he
intended to do it the right Zay or not at all. +e said this at the beginning of
his career and he said it at the end; in 1961, at the trial of a borough
president Zho had received favors from an urban reneZal contractor,
0oses, on the Zitness stand, Zas asked Zhether the contract had not been
aZarded as part of a "deal." 0oses' face paled Zith rage. "In forty years of
public life," he said, "I have never made a deal."

3ublic authorities are also outside and above politics, 0oses said. Their
decisions are made solely on the basis of the public Zelfare, he said. They
have all the best features of private enterprise. They are businesslike—
prudent, efficient, economical. And they are more. They are the very
epitome of prudence, efficiency, economy. And they have another
advantage over conventional governmental institutions as Zell. Since they
finance their projects through the sale of revenue bonds to private investors,
they therefore build these projects Zithout using any public funds. 3rojects
built by authorities, he said, cost the ta[payers nothing.

27
These statements Zere believed implicitly for almost forty years by the
public to Zhich they Zere made. And this is not surprising. For Robert
0oses repeated his contentions a thousand times and for four decades they
Zere repeated, amplified and embellished by a press that believed them,
too.

Because of the forty years of adulation of the neZspapers—and of the
public that read the neZspapers—for forty years nothing could stand in
0oses' Zay. No 0ayor  or Governor dared to try to breast the Zave of
public

opinion in Zhose curl 0oses rode. One 3resident tried. Franklin Delano
Roosevelt, the most bitter enemy that 0oses ever made in public life,
attempted as 3resident to e[act vengeance for humiliations previously
received at 0oses' hands. But although he made his move at the very ]enith
of his oZn popularity and prestige, the 3resident found himself forced to
retreat by a storm of acclaim for 0oses that rolled not only through NeZ
York but across the country and that, ironically, left 0oses embedded more
firmly than ever in the public consciousness as the fearless defier of
politicians. For forty years, in every fight, Robert 0oses could count on
having on his side the Zeight of public opinion.

The beliefs on Zhich that opinion Zas based Zere never disproved or even
seriously questioned, not even during the final, bitter decade of 0oses'
career, a decade during Zhich his policies Zere subjected to steadily
increasing criticism. For even during that decade, the criticism Zas of
0oses' projects more than of the methods by Zhich he accomplished those
projects. The reason for this Zas simple. The vast majority of the public
accepted the legend as fact. And even those skeptics Zho Zere disposed to
test its truth had no facts Zith Zhich to make the test, because the records of
Triborough and the mouths of its ministers Zere so effectively sealed. If,
hoZever, they had been able to see the records and open the mouths, they
Zould have learned that the legend Zas a gigantic hoa[.

3rudent, efficient, economical? So incredibly Zasteful Zas 0oses of the
money he tolled from the public in quarters and dimes that on a single
bridge alone he paid $40,000,000 more in interest than he had to. Authority
projects cost the ta[payers nothing? Covert "loans" made to authorities by

28
the state—loans designed never to be repaid—ran into the hundreds of
millions of dollars. The cost of city-purchased land on Zhich authority
facilities Zere built ran into the hundreds of millions. The cost of ta[payer-
financed toll roads leading to authority facilities ran into the billions. And
the loss in ta[ revenue because authority-controlled land Zas removed from
the ta[ rolls drained the city year after year.

0ost  important, had the records of the authorities been open, they Zould
have disproved another aspect of the lie: the legend that Robert 0oses Zas
no "politician," that he operated at a higher level than that implied in the
derogatory connotations attached to that noun, that he managed to create his
public Zorks at a remove from politics. Actually, as these records prove,
Robert 0oses' authorities Zere a political machine oiled by the lubricant of
political machines: money. Their Zealth enabled 0oses to make himself not
only a political boss but a boss Zho in his particular bailiZick—public
Zorks—Zas able to e[ert a poZer that feZ political  bosses in the more
conventional mold ever attain.

Even had the records been available, of course, the public might not have
understood their significance. For 0oses Zas a political boss Zith a
difference. +e Zas not the stereotype Zith Zhich Americans Zere familiar.
+is constituency Zas not the public but some of the most poZerful men in
the city and state, and he kept these men in line by doling out to them, as
Tammany Zard bosses once handed out turkeys to the poor at
Thanksgiving,

the goodies in Zhich such men Zere interested, the sugar plums of public
relations retainers, insurance commissions and legal fees. This man,
personally honest in matters of money, became the locus of corruption in
NeZ York City. Robert 0oses made himself the Zard boss of the inner
circle, the bankroller of the Four +undred of politics. Far from being above
the seamier aspects of politics, he Zas—for decades—the central figure
about Zhom revolved much of the back-stage maneuvering of NeZ York
City politics. Triborough's public relations retainers ran to a quarter of a
million dollars a year, its legal fees to a quarter million, its insurance
commissions to half a million—a total of a million dollars a year. 0oses
parceled out retainers, fees and commissions to city and state political

29
leaders on the basis of a very e[act appraisal of their place in the political
pecking order. And an e[amination of the records of the recipients leads to
the conclusion that, year after year, it Zas the men Zho received 0oses'
turkey baskets Zho fought against any diminution in 0oses' poZer—and
for Zhatever public Zorks project he Zas pushing at the moment.

Beyond graft and patronage, moreover, 0oses also displayed a genius for
using the Zealth of his public authorities to unite behind his aims banks,
labor unions, contractors, bond underZriters, insurance firms, the great
retail stores, real estate manipulators—all the forces Zhich enjoy immense
behind-the-scenes political influence in NeZ York. +e succeeded in
mobili]ing  behind his banner economic forces Zith sufficient Zeight to
bend to his aims the apparatus so carefully established in City Charter and
State Constitution to insure that, in deciding on such projects, the decisive
voice Zould be that of the people. +e used economic poZer for political
ends—so successfully that in the fields he carved out for his oZn, fields in
Zhich decisions Zould shape the city's future for generations if not for
centuries, he made economic, not democratic, forces the forces that counted
in NeZ York. And because he spoke for such forces, it Zas his voice that
counted most of all.

"+e gave everybody involved in the political setup in this city Zhatever it
Zas that they Zanted," one official recalls. "Therefore they all had their
oZn interest in seeing him succeed. The pressure that this interest all added
up to Zas a pressure that no one in the system could stand up against,
because it came from the system itself." And since the mayor's poZer and
career rested on this system, he Zas as helpless to stand against the pressure
0oses could e[ert as Zas anyone else. :hen Robert 0oses Zalked  into
:agner's  office on that Inauguration Day in City +all  and shoved the
appointment blank across :agner's desk, :agner had no choice but to sign
it. Given the circumstances of the Democratic 3arty in NeZ York City, he
couldn't let Robert 0oses resign. :hat  0oses  had succeeded in doing,
really, Zas to replace graft Zith benefits that could be derived Zith legality
from a public Zorks project. +e had succeeded in centrali]ing in his
projects—and to a remarkable e[tent in his oZn person—all those forces
Zhich are not in theory supposed to, but Zhich in practice do, play a
decisive role in political decisions.

30
Corruption before 0oses had been unorgani]ed, based on a multitude of
selfish, private ends. 0oses' genius for organi]ing it and focusing it at a
central source gave it a neZ force, a force so poZerful that it bent the entire

city government off the democratic bias. +e had used the poZer of money
to undermine the democratic processes of the largest city in the Zorld, to
plan and build its parks, bridges, highZays and housing projects on the
basis of his Zhim alone.

In the beginning—and for decades of his career—the poZer Robert 0oses
amassed Zas the servant of his dreams, amassed for their sake, so that his
gigantic city-shaping visions could become reality. But poZer is not an
instrument that its possessor can use Zith impunity. It is a drug that creates
in the user a need for larger and larger dosages. And 0oses Zas a user. At
first, for a decade or more after his first sip of real poZer in 1924, he
continued to seek it only for the sake of his dreams. But little by little there
came a change. SloZly but ine[orably, he began to seek poZer for its oZn
sake. 0ore and more, the criterion by Zhich 0oses selected Zhich city-
shaping public Zorks Zould be built came to be not the needs of the city's
people, but the increment of poZer a project could give him. Increasingly,
the projects became not ends but means—the means of obtaining more and
more poZer.

As the idealism faded and disappeared, its handmaidens drifted aZay. The
principles of the Good Government reform movement Zhich 0oses had
once espoused became principles to be ignored. The brilliance that had
invented a civil service system Zas applied to the task of circumventing
civil service requirements. The insistence on truth and logic Zas replaced
by a sophistry that tZisted every fact to conclusions not merely
preconceived but preconceived decades earlier.

Robert 0oses Zas America's greatest builder. +e Zas the shaper of the
greatest city in the NeZ :orld.

But Zhat did he build? :hat   Zas the shape into Zhich he pounded the city?

To build his highZays, 0oses threZ out of their homes 250,000 persons —
more people than lived in Albany or Chattanooga, or in Spokane, Tacoma,

31
Duluth, Akron, Baton Rouge, 0obile,  Nashville or Sacramento. +e tore out
the hearts of a score of neighborhoods, communities the si]e of small cities
themselves, communities that had been lively, friendly places to live, the
vital parts of the city that made NeZ York a home to its people.

By building his highZays, 0oses  flooded the city Zith cars. By
systematically starving the subZays and the suburban commuter railroads,
he sZelled that flood to city-destroying dimensions. By making sure that
the vast suburbs, rural and empty Zhen he came to poZer, Zere filled on a
spraZling, loZ-density development pattern relying primarily on roads
instead of mass transportation, he insured that that flood Zould continue for
generations if not centuries, that the NeZ York metropolitan area Zould be
—perhaps forever—an area in Zhich transportation—getting from one
place to another—Zould be an irritating, life-consuming concern for its
14,000,000 residents.

For highZays, 0oses dispossessed 250,000 persons. For his other

projects—Lincoln Center, the 8nited Nations, the Fordham, 3ratt and Long
Island 8niversity campuses, a do]en mammoth urban reneZal projects—he
dispossessed tens of thousands more; there are available no accurate figures
on the total number of people evicted from their homes for all Robert
0oses public Zorks, but the figure is almost certainly close to half a
million; the one detailed study by an outside agency shoZs that in a ten-
year period, 1946 to 1956, the number Zas 320,000. 0ore significant even
than the number of the dispossessed Zere their characteristics: a
disproportionate share of them Zere black, 3uerto Rican—and poor. +e
evicted tens of thousands of poor, nonZhite persons for urban reneZal
projects, and the housing he built to replace the housing he tore doZn Zas,
to an overZhelming e[tent, not housing for the poor, but for the rich. The
dispossessed, barred from many areas of the city by their color and their
poverty, had no place to go but into the already overcroZded slums—or into
"soft" borderline areas that then became slums, so that his "slum clearance
programs" created neZ slums as fast as they Zere clearing the old.

:hen   he built housing for poor people, he built housing bleak, sterile,
cheap—e[pressive of patroni]ing condescension in every line. And he built
it in locations that contributed to the ghettoi]ation of the city, dividing up

32
the city by color and income. And by skeZing city e[penditures toZard
revenue-producing services, he prevented the city from reaching out toZard
its poor and assimilating them, and teaching them hoZ to live in such
housing—and the very people for Zhom he built it reacted Zith rage and
bitterness and ignorance, and defaced it.

+e built parks and playgrounds Zith a lavish hand, but they Zere parks and
playgrounds for the rich and the comfortable. Recreational facilities for the
poor he doled out like a miser.

For decades, to advance his oZn purposes, he systematically defeated every
attempt to create the master plan that might have enabled the city to develop
on a rational, logical, unified pattern—defeated it until, Zhen it Zas finally
adopted, it Zas too late for it to do much good.

"One must Zait until the evening . . ."In the evening of Robert 0oses' forty-
four years of poZer, NeZ York, so bright Zith promise forty-four  years
before, Zas a city in chaos and despair. +is highZays and bridges and
tunnels Zere aZesome—taken as a Zhole the most aZesome urban
improvement in the history of mankind—but no aspect of those highZays
and bridges and tunnels Zas as aZesome as the congestion on them. +e had
built more housing than any public official in history, but the city Zas
starved for housing, more starved, if possible, than Zhen he had started
building, and the people Zho lived in that housing hated it—hated it, James
BaldZin could Zrite,  "almost as much as the policemen, and this is saying a
great deal." +e had built great monuments and great parks, but people Zere
afraid to travel to or Zalk around them.

For all these reasons, this book attempts to tell tZo stories at once: hoZ
NeZ York, forty years ago a very different city from the city it is today,
became

:ait   8ntil  the Evening

21

Zhat it has become; and hoZ the idealistic Robert 0oses became Zhat he
has become. It must try to be a book about Zhat happened to the city and

33
Zhat happened to the man. For, to an e[tent feZ people have really
understood, these tZo stories are one story. :ould NeZ York have been a
better place to live if Robert 0oses had never built anything? :ould  it have
been a better city if the man Zho shaped it had never lived? Any critic Zho
says so ignores the fact that both before and after Robert 0oses—both
under "reform" mayors such as John 3urroy 0itchel and John V. Lindsay
and under Tammany mayors such as Red 0ike +ylan and Jimmy :alker—
the city Zas utterly unable to meet the needs of its people in areas requiring
physical construction. Robert 0oses may have bent the democratic
processes of the city to his oZn ends to build public Zorks; left to
themselves, these processes proved unequal to the building required. The
problem of constructing large-scale public Zorks in a croZded urban
setting, Zhere such Zorks impinge on the lives of or displace thousands of
voters, is one Zhich democracy has not yet solved.

0oses himself, Zho feels his Zorks Zill   make him immortal, believes he
Zill  be justified by history, that his Zorks Zill  endure and be blessed by
generations not yet born. 3erhaps he is right. It is impossible to say that
NeZ York Zould  have been a better city if Robert 0oses had never lived.

It is possible to say only that it Zould have been a different city.

Amory labeled the JeZish Grand Dukes, Zho Zere not part of the Four
+undred but rather of their oZn One +undred and Zho created in NeZ
York City their oZn, self-contained society that Zas knoZn among
themselves as "Our CroZd." By the time he Zas fifty, Bernhard, security
assured, Zas leaving business affairs largely in Samuel's hands and taking
an interest, unusual among JeZish businessmen in NeZ York in the 1870's,
in civic affairs. Becoming convinced of slum residents' need for more
"breathing space," he launched a successful campaign to persuade the city
fathers, Zho Zere not at all sure that they hadn't already made a gigantic
mistake by removing a huge hunk of land from the ta[ rolls to create
Central 3ark, to set aside other, smaller areas for more parks. Among his
friends he gained a reputation as an incisive and visionary analyst of social
problems. In 1875, Joseph Seligman resigned from the traditional "JeZish
seat" on the City School Commission and 0ayor :illiam   +.  :ickham
appointed a non-JeZ to fill the vacancy. The German-JeZish community

34
Zas outraged. ":e  Zant the unsectarian character of our public schools
preserved," editoriali]ed The JeZish Times. ":e  do not Zant to be
delivered into the hands of disguised missionaries in the persons of
principals Zho smuggle in sectarian prayers and hymns in our public
schools." The German JeZs decided to unite behind a single man and insist
on his appointment to the commission, and the man they chose Zas
Bernhard Cohen, Zho Zas appointed in January 1877. If not one of the
richer or more famous members of Our CroZd, he Zas one of the most
respected.

Yet, Zithin the circle of his family, Cohen Zas almost pitied. +is
grandchildren, years after his death, remembered him as a tall, slim man,
handsome Zith an aquiline nose and pale-blue eyes. They recalled that he
Zas generous, very gentle and mild, a little absent-minded, and so
unfailingly courteous in manner that Zhen he visited his granddaughters he
Zould kiss their hands rather than their faces. But Zhat they recalled most
vividly  about Bernhard Cohen Zas hoZ unmercifully he Zas bullied by his
Zife. "0y   grandmother had the reputation of being as hard as nails," one
says. "She had that reputation because of the Zay she treated her husband."

Rosalie Silverman had been a beautiful girl, tall, statuesque, Zith a
Zhiteness of skin that made her black hair and full red lips all the more
striking. She aged early, hoZever, and she aged hard, becoming terribly
Zrinkled and gaunt—her eyes sunken, her long thin nose jutting out sharply
from the Zrinkles. Only her hair remained youthful, and the fact that it
stayed jet black until her death at the age of ninety-three led her family to
believe she dyed it. She bore five children—Bella, three other girls and a
son, David—but she Zas not the stereotype JeZish mother. In fact, Zhen
tZo of the girls—Emma, Zho had married banker Adolph Openhym, and
Lydia, Zife of  .uhn,  Loeb &  Co. partner Abraham :olf—became  fatally
ill Zhile  still  in their tZenties, Zasting aZay for months before they died, it
Zas Bernhard, not Rosalie, Zho visited them every day and helped Zith the
nursing. Rosalie, a relative recalls, "seemed to Zant to forget about them."

Rosalie's bent Zas intellectual rather than maternal. She Zas a voracious
reader of philosophy and history as Zell as fiction. +er hobby Zas
crossZord

35
pu]]les and she made a practice of racing through several of them every
day in both English and German neZspapers. A sharp mind Zas coupled
Zith a sharp tongue, Zhich she used on those Zho disagreed Zith her
opinions. And she Zas unusually frank for a JeZish—or Gentile—
houseZife of her era. Once one of her granddaughters Zas ama]ed to
reali]e that Old Grannie Cohen Zas about to give her an unsolicited lecture
on se[. "One must be very much in love to enjoy it," Old Grannie began,
and she proceeded, Zith none of the delicacy ladies usually attached to such
discussions at the turn of the century.

:ith   underlings, Grannie Cohen Zas flashingly imperious. After her
husband died, she moved Zith her maid, Susan, into a suite in the
fashionable :indsor  +otel,  on Fifth Avenue betZeen Forty-si[th and Forty-
seventh streets, and sent out invitations to a "suite-Zarming" luncheon. On
the day before the luncheon she decided she didn't like the chandelier in her
living room. 0arching  doZn  to the front desk, she ordered a neZ
chandelier, told the clerk it must be installed by the folloZing day at 10
a.m., cut off his protestations Zith a curt "I Zon't take 'no' for an ansZer!"
and sZept out the door Zithout Zaiting for a reply.

Grannie Cohen's definition of underlings, moreover, apparently included the
general public. :hen  buying tickets for a railroad trip or a play, her practice
Zas to eye the queue of ticket buyers disdainfully and then stride up to the
first man on it and simply elboZ him out of the Zay.

And the definition appeared to include her husband. "The Zay Grannie
Cohen treated Grandfather Cohen Zas quite striking," the granddaughter
recalls. "She absolutely sat on him." 0any of the more intellectual members
of Our CroZd became impressed during the 1870's Zith the philosophy of a
German rabbi's son named Feli[ Adler, Zho Zas talking about substituting
ethics for religious piety. Rosalie Cohen became one of Adler's most
enthusiastic supporters. :hen the Society for Ethical Culture Zas formed in
1876, Zith Joseph Seligman as its first president, she became a member—
and so did Bernhard Cohen, Zho previously had been one of the most
devout members of Temple Emanu-El, the stronghold of Reform JeZry in
NeZ York. On 0ay  13, 1897, after absent-mindedly taking a Zalk in the

36
rain Zithout an umbrella, Bernhard caught pneumonia and, four days later,
died. +is funeral services Zere conducted by Dr. Adler.

Old age did not change Grannie Cohen. In her nineties, she still Zalked
almost every day to public and lending libraries to obtain books, and
Robert's college friends Zho Zere present Zhen she dropped in on the
0oses family  Zere astonished at the range of her knoZledge. In summers,
at the 0oses summer home at Lake 3lacid, she Zould arise early, open an
imposing stack of German- and English-language neZspapers to their
crossZord pu]]les, sit doZn  on a porch overlooking the lake and begin
Zorking on pu]]les  in tZo  languages. :ithin  an hour she Zould be back
inside, chatting Zith the college boys animatedly about the latest trends in
art or science, and one of the boys, happening to glance through the pile of
papers she had left on the porch, noticed that every Zord of every pu]]le
Zas completed. Age certainly did not Zither her independence. 8ntil she
died, she did her oZn marketing every

day. She refused to alloZ herself to be e[amined by doctors, even by her
grandson Nathan E. Brill, an official of 0ount  Sinai +ospital and
discoverer of "Brill's disease," a form of typhus fever. And, despite the
entreaties of her children, she Zould not alloZ the bell pull in her hotel
room to be moved from the door to a spot near her bed so that she could
summon Susan more easily in case of emergency. "I'll never be too sick to
Zalk across the room," she said. In fact, although she became very hard of
hearing, she Zas seldom sick at all—until a night in July 1919, a month
after her ninety-third birthday. On that evening, she Zent to bed Zith a
German crossZord pu]]le. At midnight,  Zith the pu]]le  almost completed,
she arose, Zalked across the room, rang the bell pull and, Zhen the maid
arrived, said calmly, "Susan, call Dr. Brill. I'm dying." :hen   Dr. Brill
arrived, she Zas dead.

The striking features that had been Rosalie's portion as a girl Zere passed
on to her son and three oldest daughters, all of Zhom Zere considered to
have made "good" marriages. "Looks ran high in the Cohen family," friends
say. But Rosalie's youngest daughter, Bella (she never used her real name,
Isabella), Zas a slim girl and young Zoman of less than medium height
Zhose features, e[cept for a too prominent, rather high-bridged nose, Zere,

37
under broZn curly hair, e[ceedingly plain. So Zere her clothes. 8nlike her
mother, Bella had a quiet, unassuming manner that combined Zith her
slimness and curls to give her the appearance, even in her tZenties, of a
sZeet little girl. She also possessed a kindliness that is not remembered as
one of Rosalie's most noticeable attributes. "Bella Zas alZays doing nice
things for people, little thoughtful things," recalls one of her cousins, +ilda
+ellman. :hen   +ilda's  young son Geoffrey broke a leg in an automobile
accident and had to spend time in 0ount Sinai, he could be sure of an
almost daily visit—and present—from his "Aunt Bella."

Nonetheless, of Rosalie's five children, Bella Zas the one most like her
mother. If her looks Zeren't as impressive, her mind Zas. Educated by
private tutors and then at Charlier, the e[clusive finishing school, she could
speak both French and German fluently and had a Zide acquaintance Zith
the literature of both countries. And if her appearance Zas that of a quiet
and sZeet little girl, quite different from her mother, people Zho bothered
to talk to the little girl found that the appearance Zas deceiving. In
discussing her opinions, Bella Zas mannerly and soft-spoken, but the
opinions delivered in that soft voice Zere direct, forceful—and not
particularly susceptible to alteration. In fact, people Zho tried to alter them
came to reali]e rather quickly that Zhile Bella's voice Zas soft, the things
she might say Zith it could be sharp indeed. "After you had talked to her,"
recalls an acquaintance, "you began to observe her more closely. And it
didn't take you long to reali]e that under that quiet manner Zas an
astonishing amount of arrogance. She Zas her mother's daughter."

In 1886, at the age of tZenty-si[, Bella married Emanuel 0oses, a thirty-
five-year-old department-store oZner from NeZ +aven. +e Zas a dark, tall,
shaggy man, Zith Zarm, kindly eyes, a soft mustache and a gentle, sloZ

manner. Born in Cologne of a family in Zhich Zas mingled blood of both
German JeZs and Sephardic JeZs from Seville, he had started out in
America as a lace merchant and then had opened a little department store in
NeZ +aven and built it into a successful business. But he Zas too sloZ and
quiet for the Cohens; they felt that Bella had not made a very good marriage
in comparison Zith her sisters; they felt, in fact, that Bella had married
beneath her.

38
Emanuel and Bella moved to NeZ +aven, Zhich in 1886 Zas a quiet,
charming little toZn celebrated for its elm-lined streets, a meticulously
manicured si[teen-acre Central Green and beautiful public buildings and
parks. They settled doZn in 83 DZight Street, a big, rambling house Zith a
broad, shaded porch and a generous helping of the gingerbread that
characteri]ed the architecture of the period, and it Zas in that house that
their three children Zere born, 3aul Emanuel in 1887, Robert in 1888 and
Edna 0arion in 1891.

DZight Street, tZo blocks from the Yale 8niversity  campus, Zas a Zide,
sleepy, dirt street shaded by some of the biggest of NeZ +aven's elms. The
houses along it Zere substantial, if not elegant, and they Zere built close to
the Zooden sideZalk, so that most of the big lots consisted of back yards,
and in those yards, because the families on the street Zere Zell-off
manufacturers and businessmen, Zere Zell-tended grape arbors and stables
—and inside the stables Zere horses and carriages. The numerous children
of DZight  Street rode up and doZn the street on those horses, Zith
coachmen or house servants leading them and carefully holding them in to a
Zalk, and played on the shady porches or in the spacious back yards under
the tall trees, and there Zere so many servants in the big houses that
mothers didn't scold if boys like "0r.  3aul" or "0r.   Robert," Zho slept in
the same bedroom on the second floor of No. 83, got their Eton collars and
Little Lord Fauntleroy suits dirty. To the end of their lives, the three 0oses
children Zould remember NeZ +aven Zith  fondness. Searching for an
adjective to describe DZight Street, Robert 0oses Zould say
"comfortable"; 3aul Zould  say "shady, Zell-kept, nice."

If the 0oses children Zere happy in NeZ +aven, so Zas their father. +is
department store Zas prospering and he had begun to buy up property in the
city, including the Chamber of Commerce Building on Temple Street. But
Bella disliked NeZ +aven. She felt there Zas no cultural activity there
Zorth talking about, and she felt she Zas many cuts above the run of the
local matrons. In 1897, the 0oses family moved to NeZ York.

0any  years later, Robert 0oses Zould say, "I didn't like NeZ York at all. It
Zas too big; the croZds, the noise and the confusion Zere terrible. I Zanted

39
to go back to NeZ +aven, to go to Yale and to become Governor of
Connecticut. I felt that Zay all during my years in NeZ York. . . ."

Emanuel 0oses never let anyone knoZ hoZ he felt. In order to move he
had to sell his store and his real estate holdings. In 1897, he Zas forty-si[
years old, a businessman Zho had achieved success and Zho had seemed to
be heading for more. 0oreover, he had liked running his store. +e Zas a
businessman Zho enjoyed being in business.

+e Zas to spend the rest of his life in retirement.

In NeZ York, Bella found a cause. It Zas the Settlement +ouse movement.

In 1897, the year the 0oses family moved from NeZ +aven, hundreds of
thousands of Eastern European JeZs, Zho had been Zorking eighteen hours
a day for a Zage of tZo or three rubles a Zeek, formed Der Algemayner
Idisher Arbeter Bund, the General League of JeZish :orkers, in Russia,
3oland and Lithuania, in a last, despairing, foredoomed attempt to improve
their lot, Zhich Zas even harder than that Zhich German JeZs like the
Cohens and Silvermans had fled a half century earlier. In C]arist Russia, the
vast ghetto knoZn as the 3ale of Settlement had become a morass of the
most bitter poverty. The virtual legali]ation of discrimination in the 0ay
LaZs of the i88o's had touched off a series of savage pogroms. :hen the
strikes called by the cobblers, tailors and Zeavers Zho had formed the
General League Zere broken—by bloodshed, imprisonment and torture—
the JeZs of Eastern Europe felt that their only hope Zas escape to America.
They poured into NeZ York at a rate of ninety thousand a year. By 1907,
there Zould be close to a million JeZs in the city, by 1915 a million and a
half—28 percent of its population. Eastern European JeZs arrived in the
NeZ :orld   scarred by the lash and the knout, idealistic and socialistic—and
dirt poor. Families Zere shoehorned into blocks of railroad flats, Zhile
fathers used their meager savings to stock pushcarts—and learned, all too
sloZly, that peddling, Zhich had Zorked so Zell for  the Seligmans,
Guggenheims and .uhns, Zas no longer the path to riches in America.

To aid these immigrants, the LoZer East Side settlement houses sprang up,
funded and staffed largely by NeZ York's established German-JeZish
community. And Bella 0oses, neZly  returned to NeZ York, soon became

40
an enthusiastic funder and staffer. She Zorked first at the famous +enry
Street Settlement, but soon transferred her allegiance to 0adison +ouse,
one of the smallest and neZest of the settlement houses and therefore one in
Zhich she could play a more prominent role.

TZo characteristics of Bella's Zork for 0adison  +ouse, Zhich Zas to
continue for more than thirty years, soon became apparent.

One Zas a characteristic shared by many of the German JeZs Zho traveled
doZn to the LoZer East Side in carriage and cab from the servanted enclave
around Temple Emanu-El. It Zas a characteristic that moved one of their
chroniclers to call their philanthropy "something very close to patronage."
For Zhile the motives Zhich impelled the rich JeZs to help the poor JeZs
Zere certainly in part manifestations of Zedakah, the religious principle of
charity, historians have also found other motives. They have found that
many German JeZs—solid, respectable, Americani]ed—Zere embarrassed
by the gruff, uncouth, shaggy-bearded, conspicuously un-Americani]ed
neZcomers. "Those people," the Germans felt, Zere loud, pushy, aggressive
— "the dregs of Europe." They spoke of them in terms others applied to the
YelloZ 3eril,  the German-JeZish press lamenting the "un-American Zays"

of the "Zild  Asiatics." The German JeZs even coined a Zord for their
coreligionists, a Zord based on the fact that many Russian names end in
"ki." The Zord  Zas "kikes." Yet, despite their efforts to make clear the
difference betZeen themselves and the neZcomers, they reali]ed that non-
JeZs Zere lumping them all together, taking the behavior of the neZcomers
as the stereotype by Zhich they thought of all JeZs.

The solution, many German JeZs felt, Zas to make the shabby immigrants
"respectable," to clean them up, dust them off and teach them to act "like
Americans." For this reason, the early settlement houses, Zhile Zorking
tirelessly to give the neZcomers a better life, to provide free lodging, meals
and medical care, also emphasi]ed lectures on manners, morals and the
dangers of socialism. 0any German JeZs seemed to feel, as one
commentator put it, "as if [they Zere] assuming the Zhite man's burden";
their philanthropy Zas that of "patron lords doling out funds to the poor, the
miserable, the dependent and the patroni]ed."

41
If this description Zas to some e[tent true of the movement as a Zhole, it
Zas to a great e[tent true of 0adison +ouse, Zhose official history says it
Zas established "To help in the Americani]ation of residents of the LoZer
East Side." And to some of her relatives, the description fitted Bella's
philanthropy. 8ndoubtedly there ran through her Zork a strain of genuine
idealism. Deeply moved by the plight of the slum residents she met at
0adison, she talked of "helping the loZer classes" in terms of a holy
crusade. "3ublic service"—service such as 0adison +ouse Zas furnishing
—Zas a phrase Zhich came more and more frequently to her lips, and she
said public service Zas a cause to Zhich one could happily devote one's
life. But she also never forgot that the loZer classes Zere loZer. Recalls one
relative: "+er attitude to these people Zas 'You're my children; I knoZ best;
you do Zhat I tell you and I'll take care of you.' " Rosalie Silverman Cohen
began to refer to her daughter derisively as "Lady Bountiful."

The other characteristic of Bella's Zork for 0adison +ouse Zas one much
rarer among the platoons of Zealthy German-JeZish matrons on the boards
of trustees of the settlement houses. Bella, graying noZ and often
spectacled, could have passed for one of these matrons, although her clothes
Zere plainer than most. Like them, she made liberal financial contributions
—0adison  +ouse could count on her for an annual donation of about
$10,000. But unlike many of the matrons, Bella also began to shoZ an
active day-after-day interest in the development of the philanthropy to
Zhich she gave money—and as the years Zent by, the trustees and Zorkers
of 0adison  +ouse became aZare that her interest Zas really in one
particular type of development. Bella's concern Zas not captured by the
more philosophical aspects of settlement-house Zork; she sat back quietly
during discussions of lecture content or of the best methods of
strengthening ties betZeen immigrant parents and American-born children.
But Zhen the discussions turned to the laying out of basketball courts in the
back yard of the +ouse or the creation of a summer camp in the country for
slum children, the slim little Zoman Zould lean forZard  and her fingers
Zould begin to drum restlessly on the table and her soft voice Zould begin
to inundate the

other trustees Zith a flood of ideas. It Zas not long before the trustees came
to reali]e that for a gray-haired houseZife and mother, Bella 0oses had a

42
most unusual interest in physical construction. Behind her spectacles Zere
the eyes of the builder.

The eyes could glitter Zith enthusiasm over the smallest details. :hen the
board agreed to provide living quarters for +ouse staffers, it Zas Bella
0oses Zho thought of providing  the quarters Zith a lounge so the young
men and Zomen could have a place to chat together during their off hours
— and it Zas Bella Zho Zent out and found the perfect centerpiece for the
lounge, a heavy table si[ feet across supported by a pedestal instead of legs
so that people could sit around it more easily. :hen the board decided to set
up a temporary summer camp in 3elham Bay 3ark, it Zas Bella Zho
thought of putting old rugs under the beds to make the tents Zarmer. And
Zhen, in 1900, 0adison +ouse decided to embark on its largest project, the
construction of a permanent summer camp, the ideas began to pour out of
Bella 0oses in a steady stream.

The camp Zas to be built on an old farm in a beautiful valley near 3utnam,
NeZ York. Bella began to appear at trustees' meetings Zith proposed
layouts of the camp and then Zith proposed layouts of interiors of the camp
buildings. :hen   the camp Zas opened, Bella and Emanuel visited it every
Zeekend during the season. Often they Zould make the si[ty-mile trip up
from NeZ York Zith  their special friends on the board, Olga and 0orit]
.irchberger  and middle-aged bachelor +erman :olff.  :hen   the
.irchbergers  and :olff   agreed that it Zould be nice to spend longer periods
in the camp, Bella proposed that they should all chip in and pay for the
construction of a summer lodge big enough for tZo couples and a bachelor.
And Zhen the comfortable, solidly built structure Zas completed, it Zas
Bella Zho suggested an agreement under Zhich the building Zould become
the camp's property, its residence for teen-age girls, Zhen all five oZners
Zere dead.

In e[pounding her proposals, Bella Zas alZays a lady. She never raised her
voice. But veneered only thinly by her e[cellent manners Zas a certain
aggressiveness—and if there Zas a prolonged disagreement Zith her
proposals, the veneer could Zear thin indeed. :hen discussing a project in
Zhich she Zas especially interested, Bella had alZays displayed impatience
Zith other people's ideas, but in her later years on the 0adison +ouse board

43
she seemed more and more unZilling even to consider such ideas—or, in
fact, to listen to them. Says one +ouse staffer Zho sat in on board meetings:
"In a quiet Zay, 0rs.  0oses could really be quite . . . impatient. She kneZ
Zhat she Zanted and she intended to have it." Says another: "She liked to
get things done. And if she had to step on toes to get them done, she'd step
on toes."

Some of Bella's proposals Zere based on generali]ed theories. You should
alZays buy the best, she Zould say. +aving the best equipment made
people respect it—and take care of it. Some of the trustees, feeling that
0adison +ouse, perennially broke, should economi]e, Zere annoyed, but

Bella brooked no compromise. :hen  the head Zorker Zas furnishing the
staff quarters, for e[ample, she instructed him: "NoZ, there'll be no pictures
dragged out of people's closets. Buy pictures—and buy pretty ones." She
Zas convinced also of the importance of symbols. They Zere needed, she
said, to "give the children a sense of identity," by Zhich she meant a sense
that they Zere part of 0adison +ouse. As soon as the camp Zas opened,
she designed a huge "Camp 0adison" banner and hung it in the dining hall.

Once Bella got involved in a project, no task Zas too small for her. Camp
counselors saZ the slim little matron inspecting the grounds hour after hour.
:hen   the inspections disclosed flaZs, she Zas not bashful in bringing them
to people's attention. ":e  had been taught that in social Zork you should be
someZhat permissive," recalls one of the Zorkers. "She Zasn't that kind of
person. If she saZ that the kids Zeren't cleaning up the bunks properly,
she'd say, 'NoZ get busy! Get that bunk cleaned up!' If she came back and it
still Zasn't clean, she'd say, 'Didn't I tell you to clean it up?' " And if her
hints didn't bring results, she had more direct methods. If a floor remained
unsZept too long, she'd grab a broom and sZeep it herself. Beds Zere
supposed to be made before breakfast, but one bunk never seemed to get
them done in time. One morning, Bella said shortly, "I'll make them for
you"—and did, all ten of them.

:hen   disputes arose among the trustees, there Zas one vote Bella could
alZays count on. Emanuel 0oses Zas a member of the board, too,
although, as one trustee commented, "he Zas so quiet you'd hardly knoZ
it." The trustees came to knoZ Emanuel as a likable and generous man—

44
but they also learned that his Zife did the talking for the 0oses family. This
Zas true in the 0oses home as Zell. "The relationship betZeen 0other and
Father Zas simple," 3aul 0oses Zould recall. "Father did Zhat 0other
directed." If the relationship seemed similar in general to that of Bella's oZn
parents, there Zere more specific parallels, too. Like Rosalie, Bella had
especially strong feelings about religion: she did not believe in it. She did
not Zant her sons to be circumcised, to be bar-mit]vah—or to have any
training Zhatsoever in the JeZish faith. She Zanted her family to be
members of the Society for Ethical Culture. +er husband Zas more
religious, but Bella's feelings Zere the ones Zhich prevailed, as her
mother's had prevailed. :hen Rosalie had joined the Society for Ethical
Culture, Bernhard had joined, too. :hen Bella joined the Society, so did
Emanuel.

Bella 0oses' children greZ up in snug lu[ury.  The family lived at 20 East
Forty-si[th  Street, just off Fifth Avenue, in the heartland of the German-
JeZish elite. The neighborhood Zas one of lavish private homes. The
Seligman house Zas almost directly across the street from the 0oseses', and
tZo doors doZn lived the Lehmans; their youngest child, +erbert, Zas a
student at :illiams  College. It Zas a neighborhood in Zhich the children all
kneZ one

another; they visited one another's homes, so alike Zith the varnished oak
and black-Zalnut paneling, red damask and green repp, heavy-legged,
plump-cushioned sofas, gold-fringed lamps and Dresden figurines. They
played together in Central 3ark Zhile private tutors stood sentry duty, and,
the boys Zearing Zhite gloves, attended Viola :olff's  dancing classes
together.

The house in Zhich the 0oses children Zere raised—among oak paneling
and red damask—Zas the one in Zhich their mother had lived Zhen she
Zas a girl; Zhen Bernhard Cohen died, he had left it to Bella in his Zill, and
Zhen she decided that the 0oses family Zould move back to NeZ York,
her mother had been happy to move out of the house and into the suite at
the :indsor  a block aZay. The house Zas a large broZnstone— five stories
and a basement—but there Zas plenty of money to run it; if the 0oseses
Zere not nearly as rich as the Lehmans, the Seligmans or other Grand

45
Dukes such as the Schiffs, they Zere, in turn-of-the-century terms, rich
enough; betZeen Bella's share of her father's estate and the sale of
Emanuel's NeZ +aven interests, the family had assets of about $1,200,000.
Bella Zas able to command an establishment that included an e[tremely
talented German cook and three maids, including a long-time retainer
knoZn as "Old Annie."

The tZo 0oses boys slept in custom-made beds, si[ feet si[ inches long, on
hair mattresses Zoven to order by the most famous mattressmaker in NeZ
York, C. 3. Rogers. They slept in the same room again, but adjoining their
NeZ York bedroom Zas their oZn library-study, its Zalls lined Zith  books.
Once 3aul counted them; there Zere more than tZo thousand. Dinner Zas
served—off the finest +aviland china—in a paneled dining room along one
Zall of Zhich  stood a tremendous sideboard bearing gleaming crystal
decanters. After dinner, the family Zould repair to the library, Zhose Zalls
Zere covered Zith Rembrandt and Diirer prints, and Old Annie Zould pour
coffee from a silver coffeepot into French demitasse cups—each cup a
different bright color—that cost tZenty-four dollars apiece.

In the summer, there Zere trips to Europe, or Grannie Cohen might rent a
summer place in Elberon, one of the e[pensive resort toZns along the NeZ
Jersey shore that had become knoZn collectively as the "JeZish NeZport."
Grannie's house Zould be much smaller than the LeZisohns' Elberon castle
on a hill, of course, but it Zould be big and roomy. The 0oseses Zouldn't
travel doZn from NeZ York  by private railroad car as did the Schiffs, but
they did have a touring car and chauffeur. And the boys Zould have a
Zonderful time.

They alZays had a Zonderful time Zith Grannie Cohen. If she had, in the
opinion of some, not been overly attentive to her oZn children, she doted on
her grandchildren. Every spring, as soon as the Zeather turned Zarm, she
Zould take Robert and 3aul on a Zeekend to Atlantic City, purchasing the
railroad tickets by the elboZing method Zhile the tZo little boys Zatched
the imperious old lady Zith aZe. After checking into a hotel, Zith the
manager himself shoZing her to her room, she Zould take the boys out
along the BoardZalk and cram their pockets full of tickets to the thrill rides
at Young's 3ier and +yler's. And Zhen the boys rode the roller coasters or

46
the loop-the-loop, they Zould not be unaccompanied. Sitting betZeen them,
holding tight to her huge hat, Zould be Rosalie Silverman Cohen, then in
her late seventies, laughing Zith glee.

Bella Zas strict Zith her children. Running a taut house, she ordered every
aspect of their lives. Their advice Zas not solicited—even about their oZn
clothes. Once, opening a closet to get their tu[edos for a party, they found
that the dress suits had disappeared and neZ ones had been hung in their
places. :hen  they inquired, Old Annie e[plained that their mother had
decided that the old ones Zere no longer "suitable." On one visit to Brooks
Brothers, 3aul asked for a green cap; his mother ordered a red one—for no
reason that he could see e[cept that he had asked for green.

Bella Zas particularly interested in the boys' education. She selected as their
tutors young men Zith outstanding credentials; the boys' favorite, for
e[ample, had just returned from O[ford, Zhere he had taken a double first
in classics and literary humanities. :hen 3aul Zas thirteen, Robert tZelve
and Edna nine, the children Zere enrolled in the Ethical Culture School.
After tZo  years, the boys Zere transferred to the DZight School for tZo
years and then Zere sent to board for a year at one of the most e[pensive of
college preparatory schools, the 0ohegan Lake Academy near
3oughkeepsie, before they Zent on to college, 3aul to 3rinceton and Robert,
Zho had never forgotten his desire to return to NeZ +aven, to Yale.

Even Zhile the boys Zere at Ethical Culture and DZight, Bella hired tutors
to give them additional instruction. And she furnished still other instruction
herself, assigning them books by Laurence Sterne and other of her favorite
authors to read, and then holding long discussions Zith them—and Zith
Edna Zhen she Zas old enough—about the books' meaning. Casually
reading a passage, she Zould suddenly turn to one of the children and ask,
":hat's   that mean?" "And Zhen she asked that," 3aul Zould recall more
than half a century later, "you had better knoZ." Even Zhile the children
Zere playing, they Zere reminded of the importance of good English. If one
of them mispronounced a Zord, doZn the stairs Zould come their mother's
voice saying, ":hat   Zas that? :hat  Zas that?"

Edna did not flourish in this atmosphere. An e[tremely plain, shy girl, she
became more and more quiet and ZithdraZn. But everybody e[claimed

47
over Bella's tZo boys. Just over a year apart in age, in appearance they
might almost have been tZins. They Zere tall—3aul an even si[ feet,
Robert an inch taller—and graceful and very slim, although Robert Zas
Ziry  and strong and had Zide shoulders and Zrists that hinted at a frame
that Zould one day be poZerful. Their height and the darkness of their hair
and skin made them resemble their father, but the father's someZhat broad
features had been refined in the boys so that they Zere stunningly
handsome, Zith high cheekbones and slim, almost aquiline noses to go Zith
full, sensual lips and Zide, deep, liquid gray eyes. :hile  the father's skin
Zas dark, the blood of Seville ran even closer to the surface in his sons,
making their faces olive-colored, almost sZarthy backdrops for smiles that
everyone

agreed Zere charming. And Zhere the father's movements Zere deliberate
and calm, theirs Zere flashing and the set of their heads Zas haughty. If
3aul Zas quicker to smile, both boys Zere equally quick to anger; they had
tempers that Zent Zith the haughtiness. They looked like tZo young,
handsome, passionate Spanish grandees set doZn by mistake in the stodgy
red damask of Forty-si[th Street.

And the boys' minds Zere as remarkable as their looks. Teachers at the
schools they attended told Bella Zith a unanimity that must have become
almost monotonous that her sons Zere brilliant. And they Zere popular, not
only Zith  girls, Zho Zere attracted by their quick Zit as Zell  as by their
looks, but Zith the boys Zith Zhom  they Zent to school, although 3aul Zas
the more popular—Robert Zas more of a loner. Robert Zas interested in
athletics, but not in sports Zhich required him to be part of a team. +e
preferred, instead, gymnastics, sZimming and track, sports in Zhich the
athlete competes alone. In track, he chose the loneliest of events, the
crosscountry run.

If the handsome, sparkling brothers made quite a picture in the library after
dinner, framed by dark Zood and Rembrandts, black-uniformed Old Annie
hovering behind them Zith silver service as they chatted Zith mother, father
and sister over demitasse, the picture Zas complemented by conversation
that Zas the quick play of quick minds, Zit striking fire  from Zit.  If there
Zere no visitors present, Edna joined in. The father, of course, Zas the

48
outsider. It Zas not that anyone Zas actually rude to him, relatives and
friends Zould recall. +is family's  attitude Zas, rather, amiably patroni]ing.
In the Zords of one visitor, "It Zas the kind of thing Zhere, Zhen Emanuel
said something, the kids Zould say good-naturedly, 'Oh, Dad! Oh, Father!'
And then they'd go right on Zith Zhat they had been saying. It Zas as if
everyone, including him, had sort of accepted the fact that he had nothing to
contribute." After he moved to NeZ York, Emanuel 0oses did a lot of
reading. "Reading," he Zould often say, "is the solace of old age."

Relatives and friends began to notice that Zithin this family circle, an inner
circle Zas forming. It Zas Robert 0oses and his mother. 0ore and more,
Zithin  the family, they formed a small, increasingly private clique. 0ore
and more, it became apparent that Robert Zas his mother's favorite. This
favoritism Zas e[pressed Zith the intensity that characteri]ed everything
Bella did. All  her children Zere spoiled, spoiled by maids and cooks and
grandmother, spoiled by Zealth. But in Robert's case, the spoiling Zas also
done by his mother. Increasingly, Bella 0oses began to cater to her younger
son's every Zhim. "You Zould never think of this Zord in connection Zith
Bella," one relative says. "But the only Zord you could use to describe her
treatment of Robert Zas 'doting.' "

No one Zas sure of the e[planation. Relatives speculated that it Zas
because Bella's slashing, incisive mind had found in Robert a mind Zith
like qualities. 3erhaps this Zas part of the e[planation, but it ignored the
fact that her other son possessed the same qualities. 3erhaps another part of
the e[planation Zas that Zhen the family discussions greZ especially lively,
Robert kneZ Zhere to stop. On issues about Zhich Bella felt especially

strongly, 3aul Zould often disagree Zith his mother. Robert never did. And
Bella 0oses, after all, Zas not a Zoman Zho liked to be disagreed Zith.

And part of the e[planation, almost certainly, Zas that Robert tendered his
mother the sincerest form of flattery. If Bella cherished the ideal of public
service, public service conceived of in idealistic, almost 3latonic terms, this
ideal Zas becoming the theme of more and more of Robert's conversation,
too. 0ore and more, in the after-dinner chats in the library, Robert began to
talk about dedicating his life to "helping people."

49
The imitation Zent beyond enunciation of ideals. 3eople Zho had classified
as a manifestation of supreme and deep-rooted arrogance Bella's refusal to
be sZayed by—or, in later years, even to listen at length to—the opinions of
others, noZ began to notice this same arrogance in Robert. They noticed
also that, increasingly, the rhythms of Robert's voice echoed the sharpness
of his mother's sallies. The tall, handsome young man even adopted—
consciously or unconsciously—a distinctive pose favored by the graying,
bespectacled, plain little Zoman, an unusual tilt of the head. :hen a person
disagreed Zith Bella, she had a Zay of leaning her head back on her neck
and staring at the disagreer through the bottom of her spectacles Zith her
eyes half closed, qui]]ical and skeptical. 3eople began to notice that, Zhile
Robert 0oses did not Zear glasses, he Zas beginning to adopt, in
arguments, the same tilt of the head.

In later decades, Zhen Robert 0oses Zas famous almost as much for his
personality as for his achievements, observers Zould marvel at the depth
and degree of his outspokenness, stubbornness, aggressiveness and
arrogance. They Zould Zonder at the origin of the mold in Zhich he had
been formed in so hard a cast. But relatives and friends of the 0oses family
never Zondered. :hatever  it Zas that made Robert 0oses the Zay he Zas,
they kneZ, Zhatever the quality that had shaped an unusual—in some Zays
unique— personality, the quality Zas one that they had Zatched being
passed, like a family heirloom, from Robert 0oses' grandmother to his
mother to him. "Robert 0oses," these people Zould say, "is Bella 0oses'
son."

tening to 3resident Arthur TZining +adley's opening address, he Zas tZo
years younger than most of his classmates. 0en from the same prep school
generally roomed together as freshmen, but Zhile the five other men in
1909 from 0ohegan Lake "Zere fond of Bob, they kind of regarded him,"
in the Zords of a classmate, "as a young boy"—and they didn't invite him to
room Zith them. In his freshman year, he boarded alone in a doctor's house
near the campus; if he participated in any e[tracurricular activities, or
linked his arms Zith classmates to dance doZn Chapel Street and cheer Ted
Coy for his three touchdoZns against 3rinceton, or if he came rushing out
of his room at the cry of "Riot!" to help freshmen overturn trolley cars and
pelt policemen Zith Zater bombs, nobody noticed him. Boys selected their

50
sophomore roommates from the friends they had made at Yale; in his
sophomore year, Bob 0oses again roomed alone, this time in a dormitory.
Lonely, he frequently hung around the suite in another dormitory in Zhich
the 0ohegan Lake alumni lived. Classmates remember him in his first tZo
years as "diffident," "quiet" and "shy." One of the Zealthy prep-school
graduates Zho roomed in the big, friendly suites in Vanderbilt, most
prestigious of the dormitories, Zould recall him as "almost a recluse."

At night, Zhen the other students on his floor began to roughhouse, 0oses
Zould quietly close his door. Alone in his room, he Zould Zrite poems—
dreamy-eyed romances and imitations of :alter 3ater and SZinburne. And
he Zould read. :hen  he found a subject that interested him, he Zould clear
the library shelves of books on the subject, lug them back to his room, stack
them on his desk and read through the stack until it Zas finished.

Ironically, it Zas the reading and Zriting he did behind the door closed
against his classmates' shouts that first made them take an interest in him.
There Zas on the campuses of that era a respect for scholarliness and
brilliance, and Bob 0oses' classmates sloZly began to reali]e the e[tent to
Zhich he possessed these qualities. One of the members of the 0ohegan
Lake suite says: "I liked Bob from the first, but in the beginning it Zas a
sort of paternal feeling. :hen  he'd come around to the room, he'd seem so
young and lost. But then I began to be attracted to him for his mind. I loved
Latin; I got very high marks in it, but I kneZ just enough Latin to knoZ that
Bob Zas on a level Zay above mine. +e really kneZ Latin. I started talking
to him—and I became aZare of a quality of mind that Zas e[ceptional. +e
Zas brilliant. I liked  talking to him, and I became friendly Zith him. And
that Zas Zhat happened betZeen 0oses and a lot of people; by the end of
sophomore year or the beginning of junior year, people Zere beginning to
talk about him. +e became admired for his scholarship—and all of a sudden
Ze noticed he Zas coming around to our suite less and less. +e had gotten
friends of his oZn."

0oses began to submit his poetry for publication, not to the famous Yale
Literary 0aga]ine,  Zhere Leonard Bacon and cadaverous, freckle-faced,
red-haired Sinclair LeZis Zere among the classmates competing for places

51
on the board, but to a neZer, less prestigious publication—the Yale Courant.
Encouraged by the acceptance of a poem for the December 1907

issue, he contributed more poems and several short stories, and Zhen, in
0arch  1908, the neZ Courant editorial board Zas selected, he Zas on it.

+e also joined the Yale sZimming team. SZimming occupied
appro[imately the same position in relation to other sports at Yale as the
Courant did to the Lit. Intercollegiate competition in the sport had begun
only a feZ years before, and feZ colleges had sZimming teams. A highlight
of meets Zas still an event called the "plunge for distance," in Zhich the
Zinner Zas the competitor Zho, after diving into the pool, could travel the
farthest Zithout moving his arms or legs. At Yale, the team practiced—in an
ancient, dank, loZ-ceilinged, too-short pool—only three times a Zeek. The
Yale Daily NeZs reported the results of the meets—Zhen it reported them
at all—at the very end of the list of sports results, after even fencing and
Zrestling, and thanks to the influence of :alter  Camp, Zho felt that the
famous Yale "Y" should be Zorn only by football, hockey and baseball
players—he Zasn't too sure about hockey and baseball—sZimmers Zere
eligible only for a "Ysa," an insignia standing for "Yale SZimming
Association."

0oses joined the sZimming team as a sophomore. If he ever Zon a race,
the victory Zas not reported in the NeZs. But he Zas knoZn as a hard
Zorker in practice and a fierce competitor in meets, and he could be
counted upon for second- or third-place points in either the fifty-yard or the
hundred-yard craZl. As a junior, 0oses Zas elected manager, an honor
Zhich entitled him to arrange meets and buy the team's train tickets.

SZimming and the Courant enabled Bob 0oses to broaden his
acquaintance at Yale. And the classmates Zho got to knoZ him began to see
something special in the tall, slim JeZ from NeZ York, very handsome in
the required high, rounded collar, Zho had the huge, emotional eyes and
earnest, passionate manner of the idealist, the poet, the lover (in the phrase
they learned in a popular course on :alter 3ater) of the Good, the True and
the Beautiful.

52
The eyes and the manner, these classmates learned, Zere not misleading.
Not only Zas Bob 0oses a poet but his poems Zere poems like the dreamy-
eyed "Song of the Arctic Nereid, a hymn to the nymphs of the sea," or
"Fragments from the French":

Fair night! Fair night!

Afar the day has fled;

Fair night! Fair night!

A torch divine o'erhead

God's goodness flames eternal and abides

Our erring footsteps keeps and, Zatching, guides,

Fair night! Fair night!

To-morroZ! But is the morroZ  sure

To-morroZ! The lashes slumber lure; Ah! Shall Ze greet the daZning day,
3erchance in vain Ze longing say,

To-morroZ!

And the idealism Zas deep. Not only had Bob 0oses read most of 3ater; he
believed in Zhat he had read. +e loved learning genuinely and for its oZn
sake. If he Zas competitive in sZimming, he Zasn't in classroom Zork. +e
Zasn't uninterested in marks, but he Zasn't especially concerned about them
either. +e spent night after night behind a closed door reading, but his
friends began to reali]e that the reading Zas not for grades; sometimes they
Zould look at the stack of books on his desk and not one of them had
anything to do Zith the courses he Zas taking; they Zere there because they
interested him. And their subjects covered a Zide spectrum of knoZledge;
if 0oses seemed particularly fascinated by literature and history, he Zas
also reading everything he could find on the history of art. One of his
friends Zas taking German; he came across a phrase one day that seemed to

53
fit Bob 0oses—  durstig Geist. 0oses did indeed, the friend said, have a
"thirsty mind."

After his sophomore year, one of his neZ friends Zent Zith 0oses to
Europe. 0any college men spent their summers in Europe in the halcyon
days before the Great :ar, but most of them spent their eight Zeeks abroad
in the lobbies of the fashionable hotels of 3aris, Rome and Geneva, striking
up conversations, under the indulgent eyes of chaperons, Zith young ladies
making their Grand Tours. 0oses, the friend reported on their return to
Yale, bounded out of bed early in the morning to be at museums Zhen they
opened, and he stayed in the museums all day. In Venice, Zhich became his
favorite European city, he spent hours in front of the famous Veronese
frescoes and 0ichelangelo statues—and more hours searching out frescoes
and statues that his companion had never heard of but about Zhich 0oses,
in those long nights behind the closed door, had learned every detail.

0oses' greatest enthusiasm Zas reserved for a more famous Zork of art—
the "0ona Lisa."  +e seemed riveted to the floor of the Louvre in front of
the painting. :hen  he got back to Yale in the fall, he Zrote poems about it,
including one, apparently done in the style of SZinburne's "Dolores," that
called her "Our Lady Divine."

In literature his greatest enthusiasm Zas for Samuel Johnson. Chauncey
BreZster Tinker, a young professor Zhose empathy for Johnson's era Zas
reflected in an almost eighteenth-century courtesy and insistence on form
but Zhose austerity Zas burned aZay on the lecture platform by Zhat one
colleague called "the Zhite fire of the poet," made his "Johnson and +is
Circle" course "a journey in a beautiful and e[citing country." :andering
off on his oZn, Bob 0oses e[plored  that country's byZays. The assigned
reading included e[cerpts from BosZell's biography of Johnson; 0oses
read the book complete, became interested in biography and proceeded to
read stacks of biographies as Zell as books on the nature of that genre.

+is friends began to see that 0oses' idealism Zas not confined to the
printed page. If the more perceptive members of his class reali]ed that
"democracy of talent" Zas a false description of life at Yale, 0oses had
specific ideas on hoZ to make the slogan a reality. The suggestion that class
officers be chosen on merit rather than on the basis of fraternity

54
membership Zas not the only remedy for Yale's social ossification Zhich
0oses proposed,

both in late-evening bull sessions and in the Courant. +e Zas also, for
instance, insistent that some sort of "social recognition" should be given for
scholastic achievement. And, in at least- one instance, he proved his
Zillingness to fight for  his ideals.

0oses not only enjoyed sZimming himself; he Zas convinced that the sport
should receive more emphasis at Yale because, as a classmate put it, "he
regarded [it] as something in Zhich every undergraduate could take
pleasure, as contrasted Zith the gladiatorial sports like football and
baseball." +e had the same feeling about other minor sports, such as tennis,
track, golf, gymnastics, fencing, shooting and Zrestling, all of Zhich had,
like sZimming, been only recently incorporated into the intercollegiate
athletic scene. +is enthusiasm about them reached such a peak, in fact, that
his friends jokingly began to call him "the minor sport."

Every attempt to upgrade such sports at Yale had run head on into the
fren]y over football—it  Zas the era Zhen gridiron heroes like Ted Coy and
Tad Jones Zere the campus gods, Zhen the Zinner of the Big Three title
Zas national champion, Zhen every victory Zas celebrated Zith bonfires
and torchlight parades doZn Chapel Street—and into the personal
opposition of Camp, Zho, in addition to being first among the Eli football
pantheon, had the more practical advantage of being treasurer of the
Athletic 8nion.  :ith    the Yale BoZl that Zas his dream draZing ever closer
to reality, Camp had been squirreling aZay the annual surplus of the 8nion
Zith such enthusiasm that it had already reached $120,000, and he Zas not
about to turn any of it over to the sports he derided.

Bearding Camp in his suite at the NeZ +aven +ouse, 0oses suggested a
distribution of some of the football surplus among the minor sports. Camp
flatly refused to give a nickel.

Another undergraduate might have left quietly. Recalling the scene, 0oses
Zas to say: ":hat   you have to understand is Zhat a colossal influence he
had; he dominated all of athletics there; his Zord Zas absolutely laZ." But
this undergraduate, before leaving, told Camp that someday the minor

55
sports Zould be just as important on the intercollegiate scene as baseball
and hockey. And although Camp treated the prediction as "kind of a joke,"
he Zas soon to stop laughing. For 0oses refused to let the matter drop.

In editorials in the Courant and the Yale Daily NeZs, 0oses attacked Zith a
directness unusual in college publications of the day. 3ointing out that
almost as many men participated in minor as in major sports, 0oses
accused Yale's "football managers"—a euphemism understood perfectly by
the Yale community—of being "unjust" to "one-half of Yale athletics."

Camp let it be knoZn that he Zas personally offended. The editorials
continued. Dean "Baldy" :right   called 0oses to his office for  a friendly
but pointed discussion. The editorials continued. And Zhen 0oses came up
Zith a plan to create a 0inor Sports Association that Zould hold a single
fund-raising drive, raise $3,500, and, through an e[ecutive committee
composed of the sports' managers, distribute it among the various teams
according to their needs, the dean hastily gave the association permission to
appeal to

alumni for contributions, and also brought back Zord of a concession from
Camp that Zas small but significant, coming from a man Zho had
previously run Yale athletics Zithout making any concessions at all: if the
association raised $3,200, Camp's Athletic 8nion Zould contribute the
other $300.

3ersuading the minor sports to combine into one association, Zhich meant
turning over their finances to an outside body, proved almost as difficult as
persuading Camp. +ockey and basketball, Zhich Zere classed among these
sports but Zere popular enough among students so that their managers
could generally raise money by a door-to-door appeal on campus, Zere
particularly reluctant. Yet because hockey and basketball Zere the only tZo
of the minor sports in Zhich there Zas much interest, their participation Zas
essential.

0oses argued that even for hockey and basketball the e[istence of a formal
association Zould make it much easier to obtain money from alumni and
students Zho had treated as a joke the many separate appeals from the
different minor sports. And the idealist also argued on higher grounds. In

56
one editorial, he Zrote: "As far as Basketball and +ockey are considered
per se, they have nothing to gain. But . . . there must be a sacrifice on the
part of the Basketball and +ockey teams for the sake of common good. . . ."

+ockey and basketball agreed to join. The other sports folloZed. On June
11, 1908, 0oses Zas able to announce the formation of the Yale 8niversity
0inor  Sports Association.

:ith   0oses  organi]ing its fund drives, the association proved to be more
vigorous than Camp had e[pected. :hen he reali]ed the e[tent of its fund-
raising efforts among alumni, traditional fountainhead of football funds,
0oses Zas called in by Dean :right   and advised to be "calm and
dignified." Any  "undue pressure" on alumni, he Zas Zarned, Zould result
in the ZithdraZal of  the $300 offer. 0oses promptly made the threat public
in the Courant and announced that the fund-raising Zould continue.

0oses' friends—and men on campus Zho had previously hardly noticed
him—Zere impressed by his courage. Si[ty years after he graduated, one
member of the sZimming team could recall that "the report Zas that he and
Camp had quite a go at it. :e thought it Zas quite a thing." 0oses' idealism
began to be talked about Zidely in the class—and it Zas because of this that
Ed Richards Zas all the more surprised Zhen, on a day in January 1909, he
climbed out of the pool after doing his laps and heard Zhat 0oses Zas
suggesting about Og Reid.

"After I  had accepted his resignation," Richards recalls, "he began to put
pressure on me to take him back on the team and let him go ahead Zith his
approach to Reid. +e managed to Zork up an ama]ing amount of pressure.
+e really Zas very clever about it. +e got the managers [of the other minor
sports] to send a delegation to me to talk me out of it. I told them, 'No, it's
not an honest Zay to treat Og Reid. +e's alZays treated us very! nicely.'
Then Bob Zent to the man Zho Zas the heart and soul of sZimming at Yale
—0a[ie   SZart].  0a[ie   Zas really just the janitor at the pool, but he Zas a
good old guy. +e took a lot of interest in the sZimmers, and he Zas alZays
around the team. Bob got 0a[ie to ask me to take him

back. +e had 0a[ie  tell me, 'Oh, Reid has plenty of money. +e'll never
miss a little of it.' But I talked it over Zith  a feZ other guys on the team and

57
they said I Zas right and I refused 0a[ie too."

Although Richards' firmness terminated 0oses' connection Zith Yale
athletics, his activity in more esoteric areas of campus life continued. +is
interest in art and poetry had made him a member of 1909's little clique of
intellectuals and esthetes and, to some e[tent, he Zas becoming its leader.
+e Zas active on the Courant. +e may not have been invited to join any of
the more "important" clubs at Yale, but he became president of the one he
did join, the .it   Cat Club, a neZ organi]ation Zhich Zas named after the
group of convivial literary spirits Zho  had surrounded Samuel Johnson and
Zhich included "Yale men Zho have shoZn literary ability and interest in
literary subjects." During his senior year, he and a classmate published Yale
Verse, an anthology of the best undergraduate poetry of the previous ten
years.

0oses' academic Zork continued to be outstanding. A half century after he
graduated, a professor said: "I Zell remember Robert 0oses in my classes.
+e Zas alert, enthusiastic, very active, alZays doing 'A' Zork. ... +e Zas a
model student. It is the energy of the man . . . and his very great intelligence
that I remember most clearly. ..." Seniors Zere aZarded "3remiums," small
cash aZards established by alumni for outstanding Zork; 0oses Zon a
handful for math and English and Latin, in English composition for an
essay on the "0ona Lisa," besides making 3hi Beta .appa.

Though 0oses had lived alone during his first tZo years at Yale, in his last
tZo he had roommates, as a senior Raymond 3. 0cNulty and Elias "Five A"
Johnson. "I didn't come to him," Johnson recalls. "+e approached me and
asked me to room Zith him. Of course I Zas glad to. :e  had been friendly
before. But I think the fact that he approached me is an indication of a
tendency I noticed in Bob; he selected his friends."

The friends Bob 0oses selected Zere of a specific type: cultured, artistic,
interested in the things he Zas interested in, many of them members of the
tight little circle that included members of .it  Cat and the Courant. They
included 0alcolm  T. Dougherty, Zho had already displayed the talent that
Zas to make him a prominent painter of marine life, class poets like Bacon,
Carl Thurston and Ed 3roctor, and Courant and Lit contributors like James

58
0cConaughy, later Governor of Connecticut, and +arold 3helps Stokes,
later chief editorial Zriter of the NeZ  York +erald Tribune.

Johnson, a very'poor boy from Chicago attending Yale on a scholarship,
Zas perhaps 0oses' closest friend. +e had already earned a reputation as
the class "brain," and if 0oses loved to read, "Five A" loved to study. Night
after night, the tZo young men Zould retire immediately after supper to
their living room in :hite    +all  and stay at their desks until midnight or one
or tZo o'clock in the morning, Zhen they'd take long Zalks Zhich usually
ended at a little all-night luncheonette Zhich served the turn-of-the-century
equivalent of the late-evening hamburger—a heaping boZl of corn flakes
and milk.

In honor of Johnson's slimness—he carried a hundred and tZenty

pounds on a five-foot seven-inch frame—0oses gave him a neZ nickname,
"Slat." On Zeekends, he often took Slat home to the apartment Bella and
Emanuel had rented in 1906 in a large apartment house at the corner of
Central 3ark :est  and Seventieth Street, coming doZn to NeZ York by
train and across toZn from the station by horse-draZn streetcars. To Zhile
aZay time on the trips, the boys Zould play an early version of TZenty
4uestions, "Ask 0e  Another," but Johnson, despite his five "A's,"
confessed himself hopelessly outclassed. "Bob had the damnedest questions
on art and poetry and Zhat not through the ages," he Zould recall. "+is
reading Zas fantastic."

+is circle of friends liked  and admired Bob 0oses. "+e Zas alZays glad to
see you," one says. "+e really liked you—and you liked him." +e might
love to read, but he Zas certainly no "greasy grind." +e enjoyed jokes —
telling them and hearing them—and he had a quick, infectious laugh. Tall
and strong, he enjoyed running and mountain climbing, once leading
several friends to the top of :hiteface 0ountain   in the Adirondacks. +e
and Johnson might spend most evenings studying, but on some evenings
they Zould Zalk  along Chapel Street, Zhere the "toZnies," NeZ +aven
girls Zho Zere not averse to meeting Yale boys, paraded, and 0oses Zas
notably successful at striking up conversations, much to the discomfort of
the painfully shy Slat. "I remember that one night Zhen Ze Zere reading,
Bob suddenly jumped up and said, 'Come on, let's take a Zalk,' " Slat

59
recalls. ":e  Zent  doZn Chapel Street and there Zere a couple of girls
ahead of us, and he made some kind of remark and they started laughing. I
got afraid and Zent back to the room, but he Zalked off Zith them."

:hat   his friends admired most Zas his idealism. Sometimes, it took rather
odd forms. One night, he and the scraZny Johnson had an argument that
escalated into a short but violent fight, and 0oses shoZed no hesitation in
knocking spraZling a man so much smaller than he. But once Johnson Zas
doZn, 0oses helped him up and, shaking his hand, congratulated him on
his courage in fighting someone bigger and stronger. In discussions about
campus life, hoZever, 0oses Zas more consistent. +is appeals for true
democracy at Yale continued. The argument about Zhich fraternity's
nominee should be given the class office Zas one e[ample. Johnson Zas
trying to convince a group of classmates of the right of his fraternity to the
job, Zhen 0oses suddenly jumped up and, in Johnson's recollection,
"baZled the living daylights out of me. +e Zas saying things like ':hat
does the fraternity have to do Zith it? It should be on the basis of ability.'
But it Zasn't so much Zhat he said as the Zay he said it. You could see he
Zas speaking from the heart; you could see the honesty coming through in
Zhat he Zas saying. And all of a sudden, I Zas ashamed. Of course, I saZ,
he Zas right. :hy   should money or influence or Zho a guy's friends Zere
matter?"

:hen   bull-session discussions turned to careers after college, 0oses said he
Zas going to "go into public service." +e didn't have any specific plans, and
even talked occasionally of teaching government. But, more and more, his
thinking seemed to his friends to be turning to a more active role. +e
Zanted, he told them, to help the underprivileged, the loZer

classes, the people ground doZn by forces beyond their control. These
phrases Zere not unusual ones among college seniors. But 0oses' friends
Zere impressed by the intensity, the evident, deep belief, Zith Zhich he
spoke them.

As 0oses' acquaintance e[panded, moreover, so did the admiration. :hen,
during his senior year, his class held elections for the seven-member Senior
Council, the Zinners Zere si[ fraternity  men and Bob 0oses, Zho, Zith
fifty-nine votes, came in third.

60
Other barriers could not be breached, of course. As graduation neared, 1909
elected its socially prestigious Class Day Committees. 0oses Zas elected to
neither the Class Supper Committee, the Senior 3rom Committee, the Cap
and GoZn Committee—nor to any of the si[teen other committees selected.
By the time the class graduated, forty-five men Zere in the Senior Societies,
one hundred in the Junior Fraternities, fifty-one in the Sophomore Societies
—and 0oses Zas not one of them. +e never lived in Vanderbilt +all. And
to many of the men Zho did live in Vanderbilt and Zho did participate in
the secret ceremonies of Skull and Bones or :olf's +ead, the honors that
Robert 0oses did achieve Zere unimportant. "Frankly," says one of them in
accents ancestral, "I couldn't tell you Zhat the .it Cat Club Zas. Or the
Senior Council." :hen   1909 voted for its outstanding members, 0oses
received only a feZ scattered votes as "Brightest," "0ost Scholarly" and
"Done 0ost  for Yale." In the official Class +istory, Zhich  listed the rosters
of clubs and committees and their outstanding members, his name hardly
appeared at all.

But Zhat Zas, perhaps, significant about Bob 0oses and the Class +istory
Zas not that his name appeared in it infrequently but that it appeared in it at
all. +is achievements at Yale might be dim beside those of the prep-school
Episcopalian leaders of the secret societies, but they Zere bright indeed for
a JeZ. If in his first tZo years at Yale Bob 0oses had been a lonely nobody,
in his last tZo years he had become considerably more than that.

And the Zay in Zhich he had become more Zas, in the light of his later
career, even more significant. +e became a campus figure partly, of course,
because of the brilliance and idealism that Zere part of his inheritance. +e
displayed also, in his refusal to knuckle under to :alter Camp, his inherited
stubbornness—and a considerable amount of real moral courage. But, in the
fight of his later career, Zhat is most interesting is that Zhen he reali]ed
that, because of the handicap of his religion, his brilliance and idealism
Zould not take him to the top in the Zorld of Yale, he made, Zithin Yale, a
Zorld of his oZn,  and a Zorld, moreover, in Zhich, in collegiate terms, he
had poZer and influence.

+e never Zent out for the Lit but he made himself an important member of
the staff of a less prestigious publication. +e never Zent out for a major

61
sport but he Zas active in a minor one. +e Zas never invited to join one of
the better clubs but he Zas president of the lesser club he did join. And if he
Zas not included in the more select social circles of the class, he created a
circle of his oZn, a small coterie of persons Zith like interests, a

coterie Zithin Zhich  he Zas the acknoZledged leader. The men in the
coterie admired Bob 0oses. The men he chose to be his friends Zere happy
to be chosen.

Alongside the massive cathedrals of Yale's traditions, buttressed by
prejudice and pride, Bob 0oses had erected his oZn small but sturdy
structure. "In our little Zorld  . . . ," Bacon Zas to say, "he made himself a
position of poZer."

In the light of 0oses' later career, that Zas the key point.

in preserving O[ford as a home of English conservatism and tradition" and
":e   should carry into the bustle and stir of the NeZ :orld,  the atmosphere
of the Old."

As strong as O[ford's conservatism Zas its emphasis on public service. Its
tone in 1909 had been set for the preceding three centuries by rich young
men Zho Zere sent to the university as a preliminary to public life and Zho,
from positions in 3arliament or the civil service or the learned professions,
actually did, after graduation, govern Britain and its vast territories
overseas. But the leavening of devotion to public service Zith an unabashed
insistence on the rights and privileges of aristocracy could not help but
make that devotion someZhat patroni]ing, infusing it Zith a strong air of
condescension and noblesse oblige in its most obno[ious form. It Zas a
refined, more subtle but also more deeply rooted version of the attitude of
the German JeZs of NeZ York toZard the Russian and 3olish latecomers,
of Bella toZard the children Zhose parents didn't even knoZ hoZ to bring
them up so they Zould be able properly to clean the cabins 0adison +ouse
had been kind enough to build for them.

Bella's son Zas very happy at O[ford. +is most frequent companion Zas
0ai  Dougherty, his friend from Yale, Zho Zas also studying at :ad-ham.
"Bob had a very good time at O[ford," Dougherty recalls. "+e liked it very

62
much. It Zas such a relief after Yale. Yale had that pseudo-democracy, but it
Zas not democratic at all; it Zas snooty, Zith all that social tradition. :hen
Ze got to O[ford,  Ze found all this changed. It Zas understood by everyone
there that by the very fact that you belonged to O[ford, you Zere the select
and the elect. You didn't have to compete for prestige or honors to become
one of the elite. Because you Zere there, you Zere the elite." 0oses'
understanding of this fact—and his acceptance of it —shone through an
article he sent to the Yale Alumni :eekly. "There is a moribund institution
for Zorkingmen's sons someZhere in O[ford," he sneered. "I have never yet
met an undergraduate Zho kneZ its e[act location, nor have I met anyone
Zho did not become incoherent Zith rage Zhen it Zas defended."

0oses liked the gentleman's life that O[ford offered. Breakfast, lunch and
tea Zere served in the students' rooms, and they Zere encouraged to
entertain friends—of Zhom 0oses had plenty. Says one classmate, "Bob
Zas almost universally loved." The first American in history to be elected
captain of the Dark Blue Zater-polo team, he Zas also sZimming captain,
although, as at Yale, if he ever Zon a race, the victory Zent unrecorded.
Taking up debating, he became the first American ever to be elected
president of the august O[ford 8nion, that hardiest of debating clubs.

O[ford's e[emption  of students from all marks and tests e[cept for a single,
all-inclusive e[amination given after tZo  years appealed to the student Zho
even at Yale had refused to be bound by the confines of his courses. "The
O[ford  education . . . confers on the average undergraduate independence
of mind," he Zrote in the Alumni  :eekly.

Vacations Zere an especially happy time. 0oses and Dougherty spent their
"vacs" on Zalking tours of England or traveling abroad, often Zith

0oses' roommate, John Gilbert +iggins, a Rhodes Scholar from
NeZfoundland Zho sported a long knitted scarf and a thick Irish brogue.

In SZit]erland,  the youths tried out a sport that Zas just beginning to attract
the attention of American tourists: skiing. In Italy, 0oses saZ again the
frescoes and statues he had loved as an undergraduate and spent hours being
gondolaed around Venice, a city Zith Zhich he had fallen in love. Every
summer, his family Zould sail to Europe and take a large suite of rooms in a

63
hotel overlooking the Lake of Lucerne. There, 0oses and Dougherty played
tennis, sZam and climbed mountains.

In 1911, a Rhodes Scholar named El Allail, the son of an Egyptian bey,
invited 0oses and Dougherty to visit Egypt. Crossing the 0editerranean on
a leaky, shuddering tub named the Equator, the youths found themselves in
the company of hundreds of Levantine natives and a troupe of Zomen
Dougherty describes as "international tarts sailing for the Zinter season in
Cairo and Ale[andria." On the first night out of 0arseilles,  the Equator's
captain selected one, disappeared Zith her into his cabin—and remained
there for the rest of the four-day voyage. The same procedure Zas folloZed
by every other officer e[cept an aged quartermaster. The engines broke
doZn —along Zith  the latrines. But Zhen the ship—and its attendant aroma
—arrived at Ale[andria, El Allail   ensconced 0oses and Dougherty in
lu[ury. The three youths spent the days sZimming on a magnificent beach
at the mouth of the easternmost branch of the Nile and evenings chatting
over dinner Zith the highest British colonial and native Egyptian officials,
including the .hedive  of Egypt. The .hedive  must have been impressed
Zith 0oses;  he asked him to be his secretary.

The mark of O[ford's influence Zould  be plain on Robert 0oses for the rest
of his life.

O[onians habitually Zore "bags," old flannel trousers so long unpressed
that they Zere completely shapeless, and sZeaters or heavy tZeed jackets.
The academic goZns required for lectures Zere often Zorn along Zith
bedroom slippers. 0oses, Zho had alZays been e[ceptionally neat in dress
before O[ford, Zould  return to NeZ York affecting a carelessness about
attire that at times Zent to e[tremes. Insisting he needed only one suit, he
Zould Zear it until  it Zas shiny. +e had only one pair of shoes, Zhich he
never shined; returning home on a rainy day, he Zould sit in front of the fire
in the 0oseses' lu[urious living  room, holding his feet close to the flames,
making a point of telling friends that he couldn't go out again until his shoes
had dried because he didn't have another pair. +e obtained neZ underZear
and socks only Zhen his mother bought them for him. After his marriage,
his Zife Zould  take over this chore and, since he refused to go to clothing

64
stores at all, Zould select suits herself, have them brought to their apartment
and arrange for a tailor to come and fit them there.

And if 0oses  Zas to return from O[ford  Zith a someZhat studied
indifference toZard clothes, he Zas to display the same attitude toZard
money, an attitude Zhich some friends felt, from remarks that 0oses made,

Zas an attempt to imitate the scions of British nobility he met at O[ford
Zho never thought of money because they had no need to. +is family first
saZ this attitude on board the lu[ury liner 3otsdammer in the harbor at
Southampton, Zhere they had just picked up Robert before going on to
Lucerne. :hen  Emanuel began to tell his son about money that had been
deposited for his O[ford e[penses in a London bank account, Robert, Zho
previously had had a normal college boy's interest in his alloZance, said
loftily, "I  don't Zant to talk about things like that." The affectation that may
have underlain this attitude is suggested by another trait that became
apparent at O[ford: a seeming compulsion to pick up checks, to be the host
at every gathering. Dougherty, Zho Zas not in need of subsidy, recalls: "If
you Zent anyZhere Zith Bob—to lunch or dinner or to have a drink—he'd
grab the check and just insist on paying it. It got so people felt a little
annoyed. But if you grabbed one first, you'd have to have sort of a squabble
Zith him about it."

O[ford  Zas also influencing the young man on more significant levels. In
long letters to his parents, he said that he had definitely decided to dedicate
his life to public service. On his return to the 8nited States, he said, he
Zould make a career in government. +e even had his field picked out; he
intended to become an e[pert on the renoZned British civil service so that
he could inculcate its principles in America. Government pay might not be
high, he said, but he didn't care about money. Bella 0oses read the letters to
relatives Zith approval.

And Zhile O[ford   Zas refining and strengthening 0oses' idealism, it Zas
having the same effect on his arrogance, Zhich, increasingly took the form
of galloping Anglophilia.  0oses' admiration for things O[onian broadened
into an admiration—strikingly deep—for all things British. Coupled Zith
this feeling Zas one almost of scorn for things American. :riting  to the
Yale Alumni :eekly   in praise of the single-e[amination O[ford  system of

65
education, he Zent beyond the praise to say: "I hesitate to imagine the
introduction of such a scheme in the 8nited States, Zhere intellectual
independence is safeguarded by daily recitations ..."

There Zas another overtone, too. 8nder the influence of O[ford's
conservative insistence on the Tightness of the British system's provisions
for keeping the reins of government in the hands of a highly educated upper
class, 0oses came more and more to admire that system. Such admiration,
of course, postulated as a concomitant an amiable contempt for the
capability for government found in members of the "loZer" classes—Zhich
in this conte[t included everyone not a member of the British nobility. And
from this attitude, it Zas a logical step to reserve supreme contempt for
those Zhom the British aristocracy considered most incapable of self-rule—
the people of the nations British troops had conquered, Zhich meant, in
general, people of color, broZn, yelloZ or black.

0oses took this step.

:ith   agitation for increased self-government rising in Great Britain's

colonies, O[ford in 1911 sponsored a :orld  Congress on Race 3roblems to
e[amine the question—along Zith the broader question of general
discrimination by Great Britain against colored people. Delegations Zere
sent by the colonies and by liberal organi]ations from many European
countries. American students selected 0oses to represent their country
because of his reputation as a debater.

3revious speakers had pleaded for equality, for fraternity, for "immediate
brotherhood." 0oses' point of vieZ Zas someZhat different. Immediate
brotherhood, he said flatly, Zas "not practical." The "subject peoples" of the
British Empire Zere simply not ready for self-government yet. Furthermore,
he didn't see any time in the near future Zhen they Zould be.

As the audience reali]ed Zhat they Zere hearing, a certain restiveness
began to develop. :hen 0oses  started e[plaining—quite clearly— Zhy  he
didn't think the "subject peoples" Zould be ready for self-government for a
long time, several subject people rose and charged at him. One step ahead
of them Zas roommate +iggins. +e grabbed 0oses, shoved him through a

66
door at the back of the speakers' platform, and hustled him out of the
building.

The clima[ of 0oses'  academic career Zas the thesis he submitted for a
3h.D. degree: The Civil Service of Great Britain.

The thesis contained no "torch divine o'erhead." The floridness of 0oses'
Yale poetry and prose style had turned hard, cogent and marvelously lucid
at O[ford. Short, hard sentences must have carried his professors through
the intricacies of parliamentary in-fighting and regulation reZriting Zith
refreshing ease. +e displayed not only a complete familiarity Zith a
beZildering array of bureaucratic technicalities but a gift for the felicitous
phrase. Describing Carlyle's appeal to 3arliament to muck out the "Augean
stables of bureaucracy," 0oses Zrote that Carlyle appealed Zith "e[cre-
mental eloquence." 0acaulay's speech on the need for promotion by merit
Zas, he said, "the most masterly vindication of the principles of competition
ever left unansZered."

Not only 0oses' prose style but Zhat Zas behind the style had hardened,
too. The all-too-conscious revelation in the thesis's pages of Zhat the
British civil  service symboli]ed to Robert 0oses demonstrated that tZo
years of O[ford had solidified the cast of mind formed in the mold of
heredity and upbringing. The youth Zho had been raised in an atmosphere
pervaded by a mi[ture of idealism and arrogance had found the rationale for
such noblesse oblige in the British theory of the rights and duties of the
upper classes; the thesis Zith Zhich he laid the capstone of his education
focused doZn on the British civil service as the embodiment of this attitude,
the practical result of this theory. And he saZ the result as glorious.

The thesis reveals its author as a man convinced that public service is a
noble calling and one that must be based on the highest ideals. 0oses did
not believe that the "perfection" of the British civil service system Zas an
end in itself. Rather, he saZ it as an instrument, an indispensable one, for
the implementation of great social reforms. 3rogressive nations, he Zrote,

had begun creating neZ departments of government to free mankind from
the traditional horrors of old age, disease and unemployment. "These neZ
departments," he said, "must have leaders and a personnel" Zith

67
outstanding qualifications if they are to fulfill their noble purpose. +is
idealism is further documented by his admiration, an admiration that
approached idolatry, for the uncompromising reformers—Trevelyan,
Northcote, "the genius" 0a-caulay—Zho had fought to make the civil
service system equal to the neZ demands, and by the vehemence, the
sincere, deep passion, of the phrases Zith Zhich he described the patronage
system that had been the reformers' chief obstacle.

4uoting descriptions of the incompetents Zhom patronage foisted upon the
service, he cited a report Zhich concluded, "3atronage is the Zorst form of
bribery," and concurred—Zith feeling. "The incessant demands of office-
seekers, and the contemptible meanness and petty irritations attendant on a
distribution of favors," are, he said, "intolerable." 0erit, "o*^n
competition," 0oses said again and again, should be the sole basis of
appointment and promotion in public life.

0ingled  Zith  the idealism, of course, Zas the arrogance. It Zas subordinate
to the idealism; if the idealism Zas displayed in 0oses' convictions about
Zhat should be done, the arrogance emerged only in his convictions as to
Zho Zas best suited to do it. But it Zas every bit as pure and
uncompromising. The Civil Service of Great Britain reveals its author as
the possessor of a depth of class feeling and conservatism more appropriate
to a retired Colonel of the Guards than a young progressive from NeZ York
City. "Open competition" may be Zhat the young author said he Zanted—
but the openness Zas to certain individuals only. "0erit" may be the
determinant he said he desired, but it Zas not merit based on a man's
handling of his job. The competition 0oses Zanted Zas a competition open
only to a highly educated upper class. The merit he Zas talking about Zas
merit not in public service but in the education given e[clusively to
members of that class.

:hat   0oses admired in the British civil  service Zas that it had tZo separate
and distinct classes: a very small administrative and policy-making "upper
division" reserved for "university men," and a much larger "loZer division"
consisting of "clerks of ordinary education" selected through e[aminations
on the high-school level Zho "do the loZer and more mechanical Zork."
The class differentiation that 0oses admired Zas a rigid one. Carefully

68
placed technical hurdles made it difficult, almost impossible, for a young
man, even one of dedication, industry, ambition and talent, to rise out of the
loZer division.

"Brilliant,"  0oses called this setup. "Far-sighted." It attracts into public
service precisely the men most needed there, "the most intelligent and
capable young men in universities," he said. And it keeps them in
government by reserving for them posts from Zhich they can e[ert real
influence and authority.*

* :ith    criticisms of the system 0oses had little patience. "The question of
admitting natives to the Indian service comes up noZ and again, but it can
hardly be said to be

:as  there, perhaps, a question as to the democracy of such a system?
0oses' ansZer Zas that a civil service Zith no class differentiation is "one
of mediocrity" and "such democracy is false democracy." :hat about the
young man Zho educates himself, Zho goes to night school, perhaps, and
earns a college degree Zhile he is in the loZer division of the civil service?
0ight  not he be considered fit for promotion? :ell,  0oses  said,

69
[0y]   conclusions on this difficult question of democracy versus education
in the civil service are these:

In a sense it is a cruel thing to set up class distinctions—even if they only
be intellectual . . .

But Zhere does our sympathy lead us? Can the state repair the defects of
heredity or of early education? Can it endoZ the average individual Zith the
intelligence, acuteness and cultivation Zhich economic e[igencies have
denied him? . . .

There should be no social bar to promotion from the loZest to the highest
place—but let us not fool ourselves. :hen Ze  have made every possible
provision for the encouragement of early promise, Zhen Ze have prepared
every child as far as possible for its suitable vocation, the subordinate
employees of the government . . . Zho are fit to rise above the ranks Zill be
feZ and far betZeen.

As for recent complaints of the loZer-class civil servants about Zage scales
and Zorking conditions, 0oses said there Zas no need to Zorry about those
subjects:

The Zriter believes—in spite of 0r.  :alling    and his socialistic brethren—
that the civil servant may safely depend upon the public parliamentary
recognition of the justice of his cause, upon the fairness of the Treasury or a
minister . . . and upon royal commissions ... to get real grievances redressed
and reasonable demands granted.

:hat   Zas of more concern to "the Zriter," in fact, Zas that the loZer-class
Zorkers might not understand this and might continue agitating— might, in
fact, even form unions! +opefully, a sense of loyalty Zould stop the
Zorkers short of such an act of open rebellion, but if this should not be the
case, 0oses said, "in the last analysis," there must be "the remorseless
e[ercise of the e[ecutive poZer of suppression and dismissal to solve this
question."

70
The last chapter of 0oses' thesis is a plea to his oZn country to adopt the
British system for its oZn civil  service. The chapter is pervaded by
contempt for the standards of government service in the 8nited States,
Zhere "spoilsmen" and job-hungry politicians lurk everyZhere, and "Ze
have been so busy fighting for a full reali]ation of the competitive principle
. . . that the great problems of division, of intellectual qualifications . . . and
attracting the best men into our government departments have been quite
neglected," so that government is staffed by "a very miscellaneous and
often ill-educated

acute," he said. "FeZ care to make the trip to England." The suggestion that
e[aminations be held also in India has "been voted doZn thus far," he
noted, and this is "fortunate." "There are as many places open to them noZ
as they are reasonably capable of filling."

division of clerks." 3atronage must be eliminated and an upper division
created immediately, he said.

To folloZ  0oses' suggestions, the 8nited States Zould have had to close
almost completely the higher ranks of government service not only to all
men Zithout a college degree but to all men Zithout a degree from an Ivy
League college. In fact, by logical e[tension of 0oses' philosophy,
graduates of Columbia, Cornell, BroZn, Dartmouth and 3enn Zould be
alloZed in those higher ranks only by sufferance; in his vieZ, government
in America should be ruled, as Zas football at the time, by men Zhose birth
and breeding had alloZed them to attend one of three colleges—3rinceton,
+arvard or, of course, Yale.

0oses said in his thesis that he feared that America's acceptance of this
suggestion Zould be delayed by its e[aggerated concern for equality. 0ost
men are simply incapable of handling the demands of government service,
0oses said, and the time has come for Americans to reali]e it. ":e must
decide," the young author said, "hoZ much encouragement Ze may
honestly offer to those Zho e[pect to rise from the ranks Zithout the almost
essential early education of the university man." 0oses saZ only one real
hope for his country—the fact that a man Zho met his highest standards,
:oodroZ   :ilson    of 3rinceton, had just been elected 3resident. :ilson's
Zritings, 0oses  felt, "shoZ not only a clear understanding of the defects of

71
our . . . civil service, but also a keen reali]ation of the e[ecutive leadership
necessary to remedy them."

0oses had begun the thesis after graduation—Zith honors—from O[ford in
June 1911. After a last summer in Lucerne, he spent the fall of 1911 doing
research in London. Then he spent a term studying political science at the
8niversity  of Berlin. Returning to NeZ York in  the summer of 1912, he
moved back into his old room on Central 3ark :est—it  Zas the height of
his one-suit, one-pair-of-shoes period, but Bella at least made sure that the
suit Zas an e[pensive Zhite tropical from Brooks Brothers—and began
Zriting.  +e enrolled in Columbia 8niversity's  School of 3olitical Science,
but took no courses formally, spending most of his time on the thesis, Zhich
he completed in the summer of 1913. As soon as he finished it, and even
before he took the oral e[aminations for the Columbia 3h.D. he Zas to
receive, he entered public service by getting a job Zith the Training School
for 3ublic Service of the Bureau of 0unicipal  Research, a private fact-
finding organi]ation located in an office building at 261 BroadZay, Zhich
Zas about to become a virtual arm of the city government.

Robert 0oses' education Zas over. +e Zas beginning the career in public
service about Zhich he so often had talked Zith so passionate an idealism.
The quadrangles of O[ford Zere behind him. Instead of cloisters, there
Zould be the arena. And one day in the summer of 1913, dressed in his
clean Zhite suit, Robert 0oses carried his bright, shining idealism doZn to
261 BroadZay and flung it on the table to find out Zhat it Zas Zorth in the
game of life.

As the time Zas right for Bob 0oses, so, seemingly, Zas the place. If there
Zas an epicenter of the idealism that Zas rolling across America, it Zas the
ninth floor of 261 BroadZay. The impulse to do good may have been
rampant beneath the domes of statehouses and the national capitol, but it
reached its ]enith in city halls. 3erhaps this Zas because in cities corruption
Zas more visible than in federal politics, issues more succinctly dramati]ed.
Or perhaps it Zas because the reforming impulse thrived on problems, and
it Zas in the cities, sZelling Zith  the immigrant tide, faced Zith problems of
housing, schooling, policing, fire protection, traffic regulation and seZage

72
disposal on a neZ scale, that America's problems Zere beginning to loom
largest.

8nlike  European cities, Zhich also mushroomed in the Industrial Age but
Zhich had been built atop previous centuries' strong administrative
foundations, America's had sprung into gianthood relatively overnight,
often organi]ed around nothing but the factory or the mill, and had no such
tested governmental frameZork. :hat  frameZork they did have Zas
undermined by blatant corruption, their governments controlled by private
interests and by political bosses Zho, Zith their Christmas baskets and
everything the baskets symboli]ed, marshaled hundreds of thousands of
ignorant voters into vast, seemingly impregnable political machines. ":ith
very feZ e[ceptions," asserted historian AndreZ D. :hite,   "the city
governments of the 8nited States are the Zorst in Christendom—the most
e[pensive, the most inefficient, and the most corrupt."

To combat these conditions, reform movements sprang up in almost every
large city in the 8nited States—and in no city Zas 3rogressivism more
vigorous than in NeZ York. In NeZ York, its spearhead Zas the Bureau of
0unicipal  Research. To many observers, in fact, the Bureau Zas the
spearhead of municipal reform not only in NeZ York but throughout the
8nited States; historian Charles A. Beard Zas later to conclude that its
methods constituted "nothing short of a revolution in the . . . approach to
such matters."

The three young men Zho had founded the Bureau in 1907—:illiam +.
Allen, +enry Bruere and Frederick A. Cleveland—believed, as did the city's
older reformers Zho had backed them financially, that the groZth of forces
Zhich had diminished the individual's control over his oZn destiny had
made it incumbent on government to ride to his rescue Zith increased
Zelfare services. But this trio—knoZn among reformers as "the ABC"—
added to the reform ethos neZ elements derived from tZo other passions of
the era, natural science and scientific management. The emphasis of natural
science on empiricism, on firsthand observation, on the obtaining of facts,
led them to conclude that it Zas vain to talk about changing the philosophy
of government before learning the facts of government, and they said
therefore that the first step toZard reform should be analysis of government

73
operations. From scientific management—the age Zas marveling at the
assembly-line techniques introduced by +enry Ford—they concluded that
after government operations had been analy]ed, the ne[t step should be not
a change in philosophy but an improvement in such operations to make

them "efficient" and "economic," to insure that the city Zould get far more
for each dollar spent than in the past, and Zould therefore be financially
more able to do Zhat the voters desired.

Their philosophy, seemingly so elementary, Zas neZ in 1907. 3reviously, in
NeZ York and in all American cities, reform crusades had been of the
"throZ the rascals out" variety; stung to fury by particularly blatant
corruption, "Good Government" elements Zould rise up, oust the reigning
political bosses and seat in the mayor's chair a hero Zho they hoped Zould
"save" the city. But salvation Zas invariably denied because the
administrative systems of cities Zere so chaotic that change in the direction
of government Zas all but impossible. "Budget," for e[ample, Zas only a
dictionary Zord; in turn-of-the-century America, not a single city possessed
one. Allocating money Zith reference to the total amount available and to
the relative urgency of the needs of the various city departments Zas
therefore impossible. Scientific accounting techniques, only recently
incorporated into American business, had never been adapted to
government, so uepartmental requests for appropriations Zere not itemi]ed
and therefore items could not be compared Zith comparable e[penditures in
the past. In NeZ York, for e[ample, the Board of Estimate made
appropriations Zithout even checking to see if there Zas, or Zould be,
sufficient money available in the city's treasury to cover them; if money ran
out, the Board simply issued revenue bonds to make up the difference.
Departmental requests to the Board Zere lump-sum requests Zhich shoZed
in only the most general Zay hoZ the departments proposed to spend the
money they Zere asking for. 8nable to analy]e these requests, the Board
simply cut each by the same, predetermined percentage, a procedure Zhich
some departments circumvented by requesting five times as much money as
they really needed.

Given such administrative chaos, the careers of the reform heroes Zere
predictable. In city after city, they failed to make an appreciable dent in

74
municipal problems and, after a term or tZo, the rascals they had throZn
out Zere back in. In NeZ York, Zhere the businessmen reformers of the
Citi]ens 8nion  had thrust Columbia 8niversity 3resident Seth LoZ into the
mayoralty in 1902, Tammany had taken back City +all in 1904. Said
Bruere: "There Zas the constant futile search for the great administrator,
great by instinct and personality. +e Zasn't found because he doesn't e[ist.
A great administrator needs the tools and techniques of sound
administration." The search, he said, "should not be so much for good men
as for these good tools and techniques; the idea should be not so much to
jail the grafters as to install [in government] business systems Zhich Zill
make grafting difficult."  Before government could become humanitarian, he
said, it must become businesslike.

The city's businessmen listened to the ABC and put up the money so they
could go to Zork.

Confident that if the citi]enry only  kneZ the facts about government it
Zould take the right steps, the three young men decided first to determine
and disseminate such facts. 0omentarily stymied by the refusal of
notoriously corrupt 0anhattan Borough 3resident John F. Ahearn to shoZ
them his

records, they began to check records that could not be hidden—the
construction contract specifications that borough presidents Zere required
by laZ to publish in neZspapers—to see if the specifications Zere being
folloZed. Construction Zorkers began to notice the presence of young men
in high collars, vests and boZler hats Zho spent Zhole days performing
such ine[plicable maneuvers as counting bags of cement. :hen the count
Zas finished, the young men had discovered—and proved—that the city
had, in collusion Zith favored contractors, paid for hundreds of thousands
of dollars of supplies—supplies such as bags of cement—that had never
been delivered. The Bureau of 0unicipal Research published its first report,
+oZ  0anhattan Is Governed.

In the time-honored ploy of politicians Zhose party is in poZer, Ahearn
demanded an official investigation, assuming that it Zould be conducted by
Tammany faithful. 8nknoZn  to him, hoZever, 0ayor  George B.
0cClellan,  Jr., had just decided to break Zith Tammany. 0cClellan gave

75
Ahearn the investigation he had asked for—but the man appointed to
conduct it Zas an independent tZenty-eight-year-old Yale graduate and
laZyer, John 3urroy 0itchel.  0itchel   confirmed the Bureau's findings. City
Club 3resident George 0cAneny, ignoring Tammany pressures on his
business, volunteered to deliver 0itchel's report personally to Governor
+ughes Zith his oZn endorsement, and +ughes summoned Ahearn to
public hearings in Albany. At the hearings, Ahearn said he didn't knoZ
anything about the contracts; +ughes said he should have—and removed
him from office. As the businessmen reformers hastily established a fund to
make the Bureau a permanent institution, the ABC started counting bags of
cement in the Bron[ and 4ueens—a mathematical e[ercise Zhich Zould
result in the removal from office of the presidents of both those boroughs.

The offices of the Bureau Zere filled Zith e[citement; the ABC,  young
themselves, gathered around them a group of recent university graduates
determined to reform municipal government. They had a sense of mission;
one, Zriting a history of the Bureau, said there Zas in it "not a little
romance." Said another: "The men in training Zere looking for adventure—
and most of them found it."

The young men developed techniques that Zere to reform every aspect of
municipal government and create "a neZ literature on the science of public
administration." They devised the first budget used by any municipal
governmental unit, a "primitive model employed by the NeZ York City
+ealth Department in 1908. They invented line-by-line itemi]ation to
eliminate lumpsum budget requests, and organi]ation charts similar to those
coming into use in business to make responsibility easier for voters to
pinpoint. :hen   enthusiastic press support forced the Board of Estimate to
adopt the Bureau's innovations, city departments, for the first time, had to
shoZ Zhat they had spent money for in the past year and Zhich items they
Zanted increases for—and, for the first time, citi]ens could understand and
could judge a department's record. Tammany +all called it the "Bureau of
0unicipal  Besmirch"—but its e[poses led to the election in 1909 of anti-
Tammany reformer :illiam   J. Gaynor as mayor. And Zhen reformers
0cAneny

76
and :illiam   A.  3rendergast Zere elected to borough presidencies, they
reorgani]ed their offices along lines the Bureau suggested.

In 1911, the Bureau founded its Training School for 3ublic Service, the first
educational institution in the 8nited States dedicated solely to preparing
young men for Zork in government. The young idealists of the era of
optimism saZ in it a chance to obtain training in a field in Zhich their
idealism could most easily be translated into effective action. By 1913,
there Zere hundreds of applicants for its handful of places.

Bob 0oses Zas one applicant for Zhom a place Zas Zaiting, since his
mother Zas a cousin of one of the Bureau's trustees, Columbia professor
EdZin R. A. Seligman, and a friend of several others. :hen he finished his
thesis, he Zas alloZed to enroll immediately, Zas told to share one of the
tables that served as desks Zith a student named 0eador and Zas taken on
the tour of City +all  that Zas the students' introduction to municipal
government.

In theory—even his oZn theory—0oses should have been happy at the
Bureau. :ith   its concentration on the improvement of the mechanics of
government, it Zas, after all, addressing itself to concerns that he had
e[pressed in his thesis. The admission policy of the Training School,
moreover, ansZered the main demand of the thesis: the need for "university
men" in public service. Only applicants of the most impeccable scholastic
background Zere accepted.

0oses understood this. In his thesis, he had Zritten that the Bureau and its
Training School Zere "the system of the future in American cities."

But once he became part of the Training School, it didn't take 0oses long to
decide that the system of the future Zasn't going to be his future. In the field
of public administration, the Training School Zas unique in its doZn-to-
earth practicality. 3upils not only Zere put through intensive reading
courses on the theory of budget making, accountancy, scientific
management, chart making and the use of forms, summaries and statements,
but also spent long days in city offices Zatching budgets actually being
made up and did their scientific management homeZork sitting in city
offices trying to figure out Zays to eliminate unnecessary personnel and

77
analy]ing projects the city Zas undertaking, to see if they Zere really
needed. They did the legZork for the Bureau members Zho Zere heading
the investigations Zhich Zould result in e[posure of corruption or Zaste in
city government.

The students Zere filled Zith an esprit so strong that it seemed sometimes
as if it must surely Zaft out the ZindoZs of 261 BroadZay and melt some
of the soot from the blackened granite of the TZeed Courthouse beloZ.
They believed in the importance of Zhat they Zere doing; a half century
later, rheumy eyes Zould light up and smiles Zould curl corners of
Zrinkled lips as they talked about it, and they talked in terms old soldiers
reserve for old battles. "+oZ Zould I  sum up Zhat Ze Zere doing?" one
Zould say. ":e   Zere fighting to make democracy Zork, that's Zhat Ze
Zere doing!" They Zere very proud of their position in the army of
idealism. They idoli]ed their leaders; Allen, Bruere and Cleveland, they
kneZ, Zere the very men Zho had charged through a hail of public abuse
and private threats to pull

doZn three Tammany chieftains. :ho  kneZ Zhat victories over corruption
might not be Zon through the use of the information they Zere collecting in
their daily reconnaissance through the files of City +all? :atching  John
3ur-roy 0itchel  stride by their tables to confer Zith his friend Bruere, they
Zhispered to one another that they hoped the young laZyer Zould decide to
accept the Fusion nomination for mayor. The ninth floor bubbled Zith
e[citement. "You couldn't Zalk in  there Zithout getting an assignment,"
recalls one Training School student. "You'd open the door and someone
Zould yell, '+ey!  Glad to see you! Get up a memorandum on this!' And
you'd go back out the door and over to City +all Zithout even taking your
hat off."

For a Zhile 0oses seemed at home in this atmosphere. +e did the leg-Zork,
Zrote the memos, joined the other Training School students for tZenty-cent
lunches at Childs and for their one big splurge of the Zeek, a si[-course
Sunday dinner at LuchoZ's, Zhich might cost as much as $1.25. +e didn't
interrupt, as they didn't interrupt, Zhen one of the older Bureau staffers Zas
telling again the story of hoZ everybody in the Bureau had jumped to his
feet and cheered on the day that a reporter brought the neZs that Governor

78
+ughes had just announced that the charges against Ahearn merited a
public hearing.

At first, he Zas very popular Zith the other students. +e Zas pleasant and
friendly and had a gift for putting people at ease. 0any of the students
admired 0oses. Those from midZestern universities Zere neZ to NeZ York
and slightly aZed by the big city. 0oses obviously kneZ his Zay around.
0oreover, most of them Zere struggling along on students' alloZances, and
they kneZ he came from a Zealthy family; they Zere thinking about Zhat
they Zere going to do after graduation from the Training School, and they
kneZ 0oses Zould  be able to choose his job Zithout regard for financial
considerations. In the late afternoons, Zhen they Zere all heading for the
subZay for the ride home, they Zatched him grab a ta[icab. Occasionally,
they might be talking about an opera they had seen the night before, having
been lucky enough to secure standing-room tickets, and they Zould ask
0oses if he had seen it. Oh yes, he Zould say, his family had a bo[. But the
young idealists admired 0oses most for his education. It Zasn't just that he
had been to Yale; the Zorld's principal centers of education for public
service Zere O[ford and the 8niversity of  Berlin, and 0oses had studied at
both. NoZ he Zas attending the most advanced school for public
administration in the 8nited States; one of his friends Zondered, quite
seriously, Zhether Bob 0oses Zas not the man best educated in public
administration in the Zhole country.

:ithin   a feZ  months, hoZever, the students began to notice another quality
in 0oses, a quality Zhich  became more apparent almost day by day.
Bla]ing behind the big gray eyes, they noZ saZ, Zas a furious impatience.
:ithin   months after entering the Training School, 0oses made clear that he
felt he had learned all it had to offer. +e Zas irritated by the report cards, by
the Zeekly conferences Zith his Bureau advisers, by all the aspects of
school life that made him remember that it Zas a school and that he Zas
still, at the age of tZenty-five, a student.

In particular, he resented the legZork. The Training School men Zere
required to summari]e the results of their investigations in memos that had
to be Zritten as if they Zere official Bureau reports but that Zould actually
be seen only by the Bureau men Zho Zere Zriting the real reports that

79
Zould be published. 0oses Zanted his memos published. +e began to press
for admission to the Bureau itself, making clear that, because he had an
alloZance from his mother, he Zould require no salary; Zithin a year, on
that financial basis, he Zas admitted; his student days Zere over.

The impatience Zas not slaked. No sooner Zas he in the Bureau than he
began to make cutting comments about its procedures: the voluminous
filing and cross-filing of all  information Zas a Zaste of time, he said; the
Zeekly staff luncheons Zere a Zaste of time; the Bureau's constant
emphasis on procedure Zas a Zaste of time. The Bureau Zasn't "getting
enough done," he said. But it Zas becoming apparent to many of his
colleagues that the Bureau Zould never be able to get enough done to
satisfy 0oses, no matter hoZ many "technicalities" it dispensed Zith,
simply because the Bureau Zas merely an agency that investigated and
advised government. The Zay to get things done, 0oses Zas making clear,
Zas to be in government. Through Bella, he had a nodding acquaintance
Zith several members of 0ayor Gaynor's administration; he began to
neglect his Zork at the Bureau and spend more and more time at City +all
hanging around their offices. +is colleagues began to Zhisper about Bob
0oses. The slang of the era contained a phrase that described Zhat they
thought he Zas doing. +e Zas, they Zhispered, "pushing his acquaintance"
at City +all. There Zas an adjective heard frequently in the Zhispers, too.
The adjective Zas "ambitious." Bob 0oses, the idealists of the Bureau said,
Zas interested—much too interested—in making a name for himself.

But if there Zas ambition, that Zas only a part of Zhat Zas driving Bob
0oses. And the Zhisperers never saZ the other part. For they never saZ
Zhat 0oses did in the late afternoons after he grabbed the ta[icabs.

Sometimes, of course, 0oses Zould tell the cab driver to take him straight
home. But often he Zould ask to be dropped off across the :est Side, on
Riverside Drive, at the end of Seventy-si[th Street near the +udson River.
And as he climbed out of the cab there, he climbed out into a scene far
different from the doormanned serenity of Central 3ark :est.

+e Zould be standing on the high bluff that Zas Riverside Drive; behind
him, if he looked up, stately apartment houses Zould appear to be sZaying
over him against a backdrop of moving clouds. But he Zould be looking

80
doZn. BeloZ him,  along the edge of the river, Zas a Zasteland, a Zasteland
si[ miles long, stretching from Zhere he stood all the Zay north to 181st
Street. The Zasteland Zas named Riverside 3ark, but the "park" Zas
nothing but a vast loZ-lying mass of dirt and mud. Running through its
length Zas the four-track bed of the NeZ York Central, Zhich lay in a right-
of-Zay that had been turned over to the railroad by the city half a century
before. 8n-painted, rusting, jagged Zire fences along the tracks barred the
city from its Zaterfront;  in the Zhole si[  miles, there Zere e[actly three
bridges on Zhich the tracks could be crossed, and they led only to private
boating clubs.

The engines that pulled trains along the tracks burned coal or oil; from their
smokestacks a dense black smog rose toZard the apartment houses, coating
ZindoZsills  Zith  grit. The smog had an acrid odor, but people Zho lived in
the apartments hardly noticed it; it Zas scarcely Zorth mentioning
alongside the stench that seemed to hang over Riverside Drive endlessly
after each passage of a train carrying south to the slaughterhouses in
doZntoZn 0anhattan  carload after carload of cattle and pigs. :hen,
despite the smell, Riverside Drive residents Zere driven by the heat to open
their ZindoZs, they Zere kept aZake at night by the clank of the couplings
Zhich hooked the cars together.

:alking   in the park Zas adventure; the Zalker sank at intervals into the
landfill of  Zhich it had been constructed, for Zater had eaten aZay much of
the fill from beloZ.  In many spots, it had broken through the crust of the fill
to form little lakes. Every year the park greZ smaller, as its edge crumbled
into the river.

Areas that Zere still solid had been appropriated by the railroad for Zood-
lined pits in Zhich coal Zas piled. Lying along the river Zere heaps of
rotting timbers, stored years before by some city department and forgotten.
At Seventy-ninth and Ninety-si[th streets, untreated garbage mounded
toZard the sky; the Sanitation Department used those areas as dumping
grounds from Zhich the garbage Zas transferred to scoZs Zhich toZed it
out to the open sea, but somehoZ the rate of transfer Zas never fast enough
to clear the refuse aZay entirely. Other solid spots held human refuse:
derelicts Zho had built tar-paper shanty toZns considered so dangerous that

81
the police stayed aZay from them. At night, the open fires over Zhich the
derelicts cooked flickered in the darkness beloZ the Drive.

Looking south, 0oses could see the bluff sink and the park narroZ until
both disappeared, and houses, factories and Zarehouses croZded close to
the Zaterfront. The railroad tracks Zended their Zay betZeen the buildings,
making several sharp curves, and then emerged on Eleventh Avenue, along
Zhich, at street level, trains inched their Zay in a straight line doZn to the
foot of the island. In front of every train, to Zarn aZay pedestrians and
drivers, rode a coZboy on a horse, Zaving a large red flag. Since the trains
came at frequent intervals and moved e[tremely sloZly along the avenue,
traffic Zas frequently backed up for blocks. Often, a driver Zould become
impatient and ignore the Zarning flag. For that reason, Eleventh had
become knoZn as "Death Avenue." For years, the city had tried Zithout
success to find a solution to the problem posed by the presence of the
railroad along the :est  Side.

In the late afternoons, as the sun sank toZard the 3alisades across the
+udson, Bob 0oses Zalked along Riverside Drive. +e Zalked  doZn the
steep paths to the park, over one of the bridges across the tracks and,
skirting the dirty tar-paper shacks, along the edge of the clean blue river.
And as he Zalked, he dreamed. One Sunday in 1914, he Zas crossing the
+udson by ferry to picnic in NeZ  Jersey. :ith  him Zere some college
friends and their dates, one of Zhom Zas Frances 3erkins, later to be 8nited
States Secretary

of Labor. As the ferry pulled out into the river, 0oses leaned on the rail,
Zatching 0anhattan spread out behind the boat. 0iss 3erkins happened to
be standing beside him and suddenly she heard 0oses e[claim, "Isn't this a
temptation to you? Couldn't this Zaterfront be the most beautiful thing in
the Zorld?" As the Zoman looked at him in astonishment, Zords began to
pour out of Bob 0oses and she reali]ed that "he had it all figured out. +oZ
you could build a great highZay that Zent uptoZn along the Zater. +oZ
you'd have to tear doZn a feZ buildings at Seventy-second Street and bring
the highZay around a curve. ... +e Zanted places Zhere people could leave
their boats safely, public clubs . . . like private clubs." Staring back at the
bleak mud flats covered by a ha]e of smoke from the railroad engines, she

82
heard 0oses paint for her a picture of Zhat the scene could be like on a
Sunday—the ugly tracks completely hidden by the great highZay, cars
traveling sloZly along it, their occupants enjoying the vieZ, and along the
highZay stretching green parks filled Zith strollers, tennis players and
families on bicycles. There Zould be sailboats on the river and motor yachts
tied up in gracefully curving basins. And the thing that astonished her most,
0iss  3erkins Zas to recall, Zas that Bob 0oses had the e[act location of
tennis courts and boat basins quite definitely in mind; the young Bureau
staffer beside her Zas talking about a public improvement on a scale almost
Zithout precedent in turn-of-the-century urban America, an improvement
that Zould solve a problem that had baffled successive city administrations
for years. And "he had it all figured out."

0oses Zas to talk again to 0iss 3erkins. Every time he did, her
astonishment greZ. "+e Zas alZays burning up Zith ideas, just burning up
Zith them!"  she Zas to say. "Everything he saZ Zalking around the city
made him think of some Zay that it could be better." +appening once to
comment that it Zas too bad that mothers Zho took infants to Central 3ark
had to leave Zhen diapers needed changing and go all the Zay home, she
saZ her idle Zords strike instant fire in 0oses' mind. :hy    not build diaper-
changing shelters? he asked. They could be small structures, used for no
other purpose; you Zouldn't even need attendants—the cost Zould be small.
Or perhaps they could be additions to comfort stations already built—the
cost Zould be smaller yet. It should certainly be looked into. 0oreover, not
all the ideas that he told her about required concrete and steel. Bob 0oses,
she reali]ed, had thought through detailed neZ concepts of city budget
making and social Zelfare legislation, prison administration and school
administration, filing systems and methods of conducting public hearings.

But Zhile Frances 3erkins Zas impressed by 0oses' imagination, the
Bureau Zas more impressed by his impatience. Challenged at staff meetings
about some details of those of his ideas that he had presented, he responded
as Bella did at 0adison +ouse board meetings, making it clear that he
Zasn't much interested in long discussions. The ideas Zere good; Zhat Zas
needed noZ Zas to put them into practice.

83
Impatience became frustration. 0oses Zanted the Bureau to take up his
ideas officially at once and press the city to adopt them. The Bureau had
other projects on Zhich it Zas already Zorking and Zhich it considered
equally important. :hen  it  got to 0oses' projects, they Zould have to be
thoroughly studied. And as to those suggestions about public Zorks projects
like the highZay—Zell,  the ABC Zas not at all certain that the Bureau had
the e[pertise or the responsibility to start suggesting public Zorks.

The frustration boiled over. 0oses became more and more critical of some
of the Bureau's oZn procedures, Zhich he felt Zere keeping it from
accomplishing as much as it could. This criticism—offered, Zith
conspicuous lack of tact, by one of the neZest members of the Bureau—
rubbed senior staffers the Zrong Zay. They felt the procedures had brought
the Bureau success; they Zere particularly incensed at several of 0oses'
suggestions aimed at speeding up the preliminary Zork that Zent into
reports. :hile   Bruere felt that some of these suggestions Zere Zorth
looking into, Cleveland and Allen Zere more precise, careful men Zho
believed in checking every possible aspect of a situation before Zriting
anything about it, and most of the staffers agreed Zith this philosophy.

The reaction to rebuff Zas not graceful. 0oses' irritation Zith the Bureau
began to spill over into his Zork. +e didn't feel it Zas important any more.
Investigations didn't accomplish anything. +e didn't Zant to count barrels
of concrete; he Zanted to pour them. +e had said the Zeekly staff
luncheons Zere a Zaste of time; the Bureau, believing they Zere valuable
for interchange of ideas, declined to eliminate them—so 0oses simply
stopped attending. :ith  increasing frequency, sent over to City +all to get
material for a report, he Zould return Zithout the material and say he had
met one of the city officials he kneZ "and Ze had a very interesting
conversation." Acting as adviser to several Training School students, 0oses
developed the habit of Zriting large question marks in the margins of their
reports ne[t to statements he questioned—and the papers often Zere
returned Zith their margins literally filled  Zith  these indications of his
displeasure. Sometimes, the papers Zere not returned at all. "I have your
memorandum and it's no damn good," he Zould say to a student. "I threZ it
in the Zastebasket." And the student Zould find out that 0oses meant
e[actly that; the memo had actually been throZn aZay; the student Zould

84
never see it again. +e used his tongue as a lash on his advisees. One,
considered a brilliant prospect and in fact later to become one of the
country's leading e[perts on police administration, emerged from a
conference Zith 0oses so depressed that he gave up his hopes of a public
career and resigned from the Bureau. It Zas only Zith difficulty that he Zas
persuaded to return. Bruere, Zho kneZ Bella and Emanuel 0oses socially,
stayed tolerant toZard their son, but Cleveland and Allen made it clear they
Zere not prepared to put up Zith his behavior much longer; 0oses, they
said, just couldn't seem to learn to Zork as part of a team. Bureau gossip
said he Zould be fired shortly.

Only one person at the Bureau Zas sympathetic.

She Zas a Zoman Zho Zorked as Cleveland's secretary.

0ary  Louise Sims Zas slim, of less than medium height and rather plain,
but gay and vivacious. :ith  ash-blond hair and a clear Zhite skin, she
looked fresh and clean. She came from Dodgeville, :isconsin, one of the
si[ children of  a Cornishman Zho Zorked in the little toZn's lead and ]inc
mines. 0ary's family  didn't consider itself poor, but, as one of her sisters
put it, "there Zasn't much money to throZ around." :hen  0ary  decided
that she Zanted to go to college, she had to earn her first year's tuition as a
seventeen-year-old teacher in Dodgeville's one-room little red schoolhouse
and then, after she entered the 8niversity of :isconsin, Zork her Zay
through. After she graduated and began to Zork full time in 0adison, the
state capital, a portion of her earnings each Zeek Zas still put aside for
college tuition—for a younger sister.

In 0adison, 0ary   Zas a secretary, but that Zas not an adequate description
of the Zork she did. +er employer Zas Francis E. 0cGovern, the Governor
of :isconsin,   and 0cGovern noticed that 0ary  had an instinct for and
insight into politics, including the merciless in-fighting that Zas part of the
decor in any statehouse. +e used her as confidante and adviser.

But 0ary's  ambitions Zere not for herself. She had sought out a job Zith a
politician not because she Zas interested in politics but because she Zas
interested in Zhat politics could do. She Zas another of the moths Zho in
the years before :orld  :ar   I hovered so thickly around the flame of

85
idealism. In 1913, Cleveland and Allen visited 0adison to study
:isconsin's  governmental structure. No one could e[plain it better than
0iss  Sims, the Governor said, and delegated her to shoZ the visitors
around. She had already become interested in the "efficiency and economy"
movement. In the course of the tour, Cleveland and Allen talked to her
about hoZ they Zere trying to make democracy Zork, about fighting to free
government to institute reforms that Zould really help people. 0ary
resigned as the Governor's secretary and came to NeZ York to Zork for the
Bureau. In 1914 she Zas thirty—four and a half years older than Bob
0oses—and Zas knoZn to Bureau staffers and students for her friendliness,
her quick Zit and the depth of her belief in Zhat they Zere doing. Bob
0oses fell in  love Zith her.

Although Zomen had alZays been attracted to him, 0oses had never
before, although he Zas tZenty-five years old, centered attention on any
particular one. But noZ he talked about 0ary constantly, and he talked
about her in terms that left no doubt that the pedestal he had placed her on
Zas a high one. The lover of the Good, the True and the Beautiful seemed
to feel that he had found their embodiment. "+e Zas," a friend said, "very,
very much in love."

+is devotion Zas complete. Taking 0ary  along on his Zalks around the
city, he poured out to her his ideas—and his frustration at the indifference
Zith Zhich  they Zere received by the Bureau. At the Bureau, they Zould
meet in the library, among the books, and they Zould sit and talk for hours.
+e introduced her to his friends. They noticed that she Zas alZays gay and

laughing but that she could also, in a quiet Zay, deliver a remark that could
demolish an opponent's argument—or an opponent.

The Bureau's Zhisperers soon learned that it Zas unZise to let 0ary hear
their criticisms of 0oses. If  she did, she Zould not hesitate to let them
knoZ Zhere, despite her feelings for the Bureau, her first loyalties noZ lay.
They just didn't understand Bob, she Zould say. One day he Zould get a
chance to shoZ Zhat he could do.

And, as it turned out, the chance came soon. +aving finally accepted the
Fusion nomination, John 3urroy 0itchel had been elected mayor on

86
November 4, 1913, at the age of thirty-four. Bruere had become his closest
confidant, the e[pert Zho provided the tinder to fuel 0itchel's  ]eal; Bruere
provided the facts and theories, Allen Zas to say, and "0itchel took fire"
Zith them. NoZ, as mayor, 0itchel  made Bruere City Chamberlain. And he
asked the Bureau to list the city departments most in need of reorgani]ation
and to recommend Bureau e[perts equipped to advise on the reorgani]ation.
Near the top of the Bureau's list Zas the 0unicipal Civil Service
Commission, and Allen, Bruere and Cleveland found that only one staffer
in the Bureau Zas an e[pert on civil service. They had no choice but to
submit his name to 0itchel, and Zhen, in 1914, the 0ayor appointed a neZ
Civil Service Commission, he asked the commissioners to rely for technical
assistance on this man and to regard him as if he Zere in fact on the city
payroll.

The neZ commissioners found the man a more than Zilling assistant. At
last, he Zas being given a chance to participate in the actual Zorkings of
government itself, in Zorkings that could change men's lives, in Zorkings
that could make a city a better place to live. Into the Zork of the 0unicipal
Civil Service Commission, Bob 0oses hurled all his energy and all his
brilliance, all his ]eal for reform, all  the long-pent-up enthusiasm and fire of
the boundless idealism of his youth.

requiring physical strength—lifeguard or fireman, for e[ample—the
e[aminer painted over the candidate's side of the dial Zhich registered the
force Zith Zhich  the gong Zas struck, so that only the e[aminer could see
the results, and the results the e[aminer reported frequently had a
relationship less to strength than to amount—the amount of money the
candidate pressed into his hand. 0ore than 1,200 employees had been
e[empted from any competitive e[amination at all.

No aspect of city mismanagement Zas more frustrating to reformers than
civil service maladministration. :hat   good Zere campaigns to change the
government, if the people running it, administering its machinery, Zere still
the same unqualified, inefficient, indifferent political hacks?

John 3urroy 0itchel's announcement that he intended to clean up the civil
service therefore Zas especially cheering to reformers. The impeccability of
the reform credentials of the tZo men he selected to form the majority on

87
the three-member 0unicipal Civil  Service Commission—neZ chairman
+enry 0oskoZit],    a meek, disheveled social Zorker Zho had been the first
headZorker of Bella and Emanuel 0oses' 0adison +ouse, and banker
DarZin R. James, a natty one-time 3rinceton track captain and president of
the Brooklyn Bureau of Charities—cemented their optimism. Samuel +.
OrdZay, chairman of the Civil Service Reform Association, said, ":e
e[pect great things ... a real advance in civil service administration."

But generations of Tammany civil service commissioners, masters in their
oZn Zay of the art of government, had been there first. An[ious to bla]e a
path straight to the door of rectitude, 0oskoZit]  and James found
themselves trapped instead in a ma]e of technicalities constructed over
decades primarily to keep great things from happening. Civil service
administration, the tZo reformers soon reali]ed, Zas an art and a science—
and it Zas an art and a science they kneZ absolutely nothing about.

Not trusting long-time commission secretary Frank A. Spencer or Spencer's
assistants to lead them out of the ma]e, 0oskoZit] and James tried to fire
them, learned to their frustration that one of the technicalities prevented this
and settled for transferring them to other departments. And they turned to
the young man from the 0unicipal Research Bureau as their guide.

From a technical standpoint, they made a good choice. TZo men Zho had
read 0oses' thesis—it had been published—Zere Luther C. SteZard, first
president of the National Federation of Federal Employees, and +. Elliot
.aplan,  later president of the NeZ York Civil Service Commission and
e[ecutive director of the Civil Service Reform Association. Years later,
Zhen .aplan  had read everything there Zas to read on civil service, he Zas
asked to evaluate the thesis and said simply, "It Zas a masterpiece." There
Zere, he said, "very feZ people in the 8nited States in 1914 Zho kneZ
much about civil service. Bob 0oses really kneZ." SteZard's Zife, Zho  had
been Zorking beside her husband in 1914, Zas even more emphatic. "Bob
0oses Zasn't one of the men in this country Zho understood civil service
best at that stage," she said. "+e Zas the man Zho understood it best."

James and 0oskoZit]  asked 0oses for a plan of action.

88
0oses said that the first step had to be a reform of the city's efficiency-
rating system, the system of ratings given by supervisors to their
subordinates to help determine Zhether to promote a civil service employee
or give him a pay raise; under the present method, ratings didn't give the
Civil Service Commission enough information for a sound judgment.

0aking  an evaluation system precise Zas perhaps the most difficult job in
civil service, 0oses e[plained;  each job had to be broken doZn into
component parts, so that each part could be graded, and in totaling the
grades each part had to be given a mathematical Zeight corresponding to its
importance in the job as a Zhole. But he kneZ hoZ to do it, he said.
Impressed, James and 0oskoZit] told him to go ahead—and let it be
knoZn that they Zere considering bringing the Bureau staffer into city
employ and starting him off at the top: as Spencer's replacement as
commission secretary.

Then, one morning, Bob 0oses found his name in a neZspaper. only
"gentlemen" need apply, a headline said, that is moses' theory

OF CIVIL  SERVICE RE48IRE0ENTS.

Because he "is being considered as a likely successor to Frank Spencer,"
said the article under the headline, 0oses' 3h.D. thesis, "of Zhich he
acknoZledges the authorship, and in Zhich he openly advocates that
positions in the government service should be open only to university men
and 'gentlemen Zho had inherited breeding and culture,' has caused a mild
sensation in civil service circles."

It Zas a small article, five paragraphs in the Brooklyn Eagle, and no other
paper bothered to pick it up. But it must have served as a Zarning to the
0itchel  administration of the line of attack that Zould be used if 0oses Zas
appointed—and of 0oses' peculiar vulnerability, because of the thesis "of
Zhich he acknoZledges the authorship," to such an attack. There Zas no
more talk of the appointment.

The article marked the first appearance of 0oses' name in a NeZ York
neZspaper. It Zas his first direct acquaintance Zith a neZspaper "leak." To
the average reader, it Zould seem that a reporter had discovered the thesis

89
himself, or had been motivated to look for it because of the "mild sensation"
he had noticed in civil service circles. But there had been no "sensation,"
mild or otherZise, over 0oses' rumored appointment; hardly anyone in city
government even kneZ Zho he Zas. Actually, Tammany had simply done a
little research and tipped off a reporter to the e[istence of the thesis and had
told him Zhat he Zould find  if he Zent up to the public library and looked
at it.*

The story could be taken as a "first" of another type, too, a first hint of Zhat
Zas to come, a gentle intimation that politics, in its oZn Zay, Zas rougher
than Zater polo, that the race Bob 0oses Zas entering Zas not a sZimming
relay in Zhich judges Zatched the touch-offs to insure that every-

* After its publication,  it became a family joke that only si[ copies had been
sold three to Bob's mother and three to his grandmother.

thing Zas fair. It could be taken as a reminder of hoZ important patronage
Zas to Tammany—far too important to let anyone take it aZay. Disposing
of a young man's hopes for a minor city appointment Zas so simple it Zas
hardly Zorth mentioning; a little neZspaper leak, done offhand by some
politician Zho had more important things on his mind, could take care of
that. :ere  the threat to groZ more serious, hoZever, there Zere other
methods.

If it Zas a hint, hoZever, 0oses didn't take it. +e  Zould have liked
Spencer's job, but the job Zasn't Zhat Zas important to him; reforming the
civil service Zas. +e set out to do it.

The Bureau assigned ten men to 0oses as assistants. The idea of Zorking
under him didn't appeal to the older men, but the younger ones, Zho hadn't
knoZn him before, liked him. "+e  Zorked all of us hard," one of them
recalls. "But he Zorked himself harder. +e Zas at the Bureau Zhen you got
in in the morning, and he Zas still there Zhen you left at night. +e'd lose his
temper, but it Zas silly to argue Zith him anyZay, because you kneZ darn
Zell that he had looked the point up before he talked to you and kneZ it
better than you did."

90
0oses' assistants sat for days Zatching city Zorkers perform their jobs so
that they could break each job doZn into gradable components. They
observed employees of private businesses. They intervieZed department
heads and civil service commissioners in other cities. Soon memos
addressed to "Dr. 0oses" Zere flooding onto his desk. By the spring of
1915, he Zas able to begin Zriting the Detailed Report on the Rating of the
Efficiency of Civil  Service Employees, E[cepting 0embers of the
8niformed Forces in the 3olice and Fire Services and in the LoZer Ranks
of the Street Cleaning Service. Day after day, he sat in the Bureau, his fine-
pointed pen racing over the pages of yelloZ legal note pads. Often, coming
across a point he Zanted to check himself, he Zould fling himself out of his
chair and out of the Bureau offices, and stride, sometimes breaking in his
haste into a feZ steps of a run and then self-consciously checking himself
and settling back into a Zalk, over to City +all or the 0unicipal  Building,
Zhere he could see records and officials himself. Soon, to save time, he
asked for and Zas given a desk of his oZn in the Civil Service Commission
offices on the fourteenth floor of the 0unicipal Building,  his first toehold in
the halls of poZer. +e Zrote and reZrote sections of the report before
sending them off to the typist. And Zhen they returned, the fine-pointed pen
slashed at the neat pages, crossing out Zords, putting in others, clarifying,
refining, hardening. On July 8, 1915, after nineteen months of Zork, he
typed on a Bureau letterhead: "Dear Commissioner James: I am
transmitting hereZith detailed report . . ."

8nder the present system, 0oses reported, most department heads simply
gave each of their hundreds of employees "C"—or average—ratings on
their "report cards" rather than try to pinpoint outstanding or delinquent
Zorkers. To obtain more accurate ratings, he Zrote, department heads must
be required to give each employee arithmetical grades in do]ens of
categories. In addition, there must be a complete "reclassification" of the
civil service, adding many neZ levels, to insure that employees Zould be
given

the precise salary and authority they deserved. There must be a complete
"standardi]ation" of salaries so that employees doing the same type of Zork
Zould be getting the same pay even if they Zere Zorking in different

91
departments. The commission should have authority to see that promotions
and raises Zere given strictly on the bases established under the system.

0oses' proposal Zas a codification of idealism. Omitted, at the insistence of
0oskoZit]   and James, Zas any mention of "higher division," "loZer
division" or "university  men." There Zas to be only one standard for
promotion in public life: "open competition," hoZ  hard and Zell a man
Zorked and hoZ he performed on e[aminations. E[amination results Zould
be posted in public, and report cards Zould be open to public inspection so
that every city employee Zould knoZ the basis Zhereon he and his
competitors Zere judged. Seniority Zould become unimportant; not
e[perience but ability Zould be crucial.

The proposal Zas of a purity, a strength and a scope that Zas almost more
religious than governmental. The system Zas to be completely neZ, 0oses
said. All traces of the old must be Zashed aZay. And it must be all-
embracing. All government service, he said, could be divided into si[teen
categories: e[ecutive, legislative, judicial, professional, subprofes-sional,
educational, investigational, inspectional, clerical, custodial, street cleaning,
fire, police, institutional, skilled trades and labor. Each category could be
divided into specific jobs—custodial, for e[ample, into caretakers, janitors,
Zatchmen, storekeepers and bridge tenders. Each job could be scientifically
analy]ed to shoZ its "functions" and "responsibilities." Each function and
responsibility—and there Zere do]ens of them for most jobs— could be
given a precise mathematical Zeight corresponding to its importance in the
over-all job. And the success of the employee in each function and
responsibility could be given a precise mathematical grade. These grades
Zould, added together according to Zeight and combined in service records
for each employee, "furnish conclusions e[pressed in arithmetical . . .
terms" and these conclusions and these alone should be "used as a basis for
salary increase and promotion."

It Zas the proposal of a fanatic. John Calvin specifying permissible
arrangements for Zomen's hair in si[teenth-century Geneva Zas not more
thorough than Zas* Bob 0oses enumerating the "functions" and
"responsibilities" of NeZ York's civil  servants. No aspect of conduct on the
job Zas too small to be graded. Even personality must be reduced to

92
number. "3ersonality," 0oses said, "includes those intangible elements the
e[istence of Zhich do not readily admit of proof, but nevertheless . . . each
employee must be rated on personality." 0en Zould have to make sacrifices
for the sake of the system: acknoZledging that some present employees
Zould not score high enough on his tests for the jobs they held, he had a
simple solution—such employees Zould have to accept demotions and pay
cuts. 8nnecessary employees, he said, Zould have to be "eliminated."

The idealism Zas harsh and uncompromising. In judging the ability of

an e[amining officer, said one of 0oses' aides, echoing 0oses' vieZs, a
"pretty fair clue" is the number of "beloZ standard" ratings given: the more
"beloZ standard" ratings, the better the e[amining officer. If there could be
such a thing as a Calvinistic civil service efficiency-rating system, 0oses
had devised it.

0oses did not deny there Zas a human element involved; he kneZ of its
e[istence all too Zell—it  Zas constantly interfering Zith the mathematical
perfection of his system, and it must be suppressed. "It is essential," he said,
"to have a definite, almost a mechanical, program of adjustments in order to
avoid personal and political pressure." For some reason, it Zas hard to make
e[aminers understand this. They Zere alZays becoming sympathetic to
individuals and talking about the "human factor," and "an e[aminer Zho . . .
alZays Zishes to take the 'human factor' into consideration is a dangerous
man to associate Zith such Zork. The consideration of the 'human factor' is
entirely a matter of policy for policy-determining bodies in applying salary
and grade specifications." The infusion of people, moreover, Zas alZays
interfering Zith  the Zork to be done. Annoyed that his recommendations
had to be discussed at public hearings, he noted that because of the time he
had to spend at such hearings, "it is difficult to . . . keep the field Zork
running smoothly and correspondence up to date." There must, he said, "be
some limit to public discussion."

Shining through all 0oses' statements Zas confidence, a faith that his
system Zould Zork, a belief that the personalities of tens of thousands of
human beings could be reduced to mathematical grades, that promotions
and raises could be determined by a science precise enough to give every
one of those human beings the e[act reZards he deserved. Asked once if it

93
might not prove difficult to divide  a job like that of janitor into different
levels based on different functions and responsibilities, 0oses replied flatly
that it Zould not be difficult  at all. To the e[pert, he said, such differences
are "clearly discernible." :hen  someone ventured to argue that it might be
hard to bring under his system appointees in policy-making posts because
policy-making ability  Zas too subtle to measure, 0oses could barely
restrain his impatience. "There is no reason Zhy it cannot be Zorked out in
that Zay," he said.

0oses also had confidence that his system Zould be adopted. It Zould take
"courage and integrity" to push it through, he said, but the city at last had a
mayor Zith such qualities—and Zith an educational background that Zould
enable him to understand that the system Zas good and that its adoption
Zould so improve the civil service as to make it truly an instrument for the
betterment of the lives of the city's people. 0oses talked often about
0itchel;  the young mayor Zas his beau ideal of the public servant, the
embodiment of the virtues enumerated in the 3h.D. thesis.

And certainly the first reactions to 0oses' Detailed Report must have made
the confidence seem justified. Terming it "pioneer Zork," the Civil Service
Reform Association said that 0oses' efficiency-rating system Zas

the most thorough ever devised. 0oskoZit] called it "an epoch in the
administration of civil service laZ." James said: "No city, state or national
civil service has anything commensurate Zith this." 0ayor 0itchel
announced that he Zould push for the system's adoption. Bella and Emanuel
had purchased nineteen acres of land in Lake 3lacid—+aZk Island—for a
summer retreat and had been up there for more than a month. NoZ, his
report finished and praised, their son hurried to join them for Zhat Zas to be
a golden summer. +e felt very close to attaining a goal in Zhich Zas tied up
all the idealism of his youth—the accomplishment of a concrete
achievement that Zould truly help people. And noZ his attention Zas
focused on the girl Zho seemed somehoZ a part of that idealism.

"Bob Zas very much in love that summer," a friend recalls. ":e  did a lot of
sZimming and mountain climbing in the Adirondacks, but Bob Zas talking
about 0ary all  the time." +e brought her up to meet his parents, and Bella
liked her immediately. On August 15, 1915, one month after he had handed

94
in the report, he and 0ary Zere married. The ceremony Zas performed at
the nonsectarian Labor Temple in NeZ York City by its director, a
3resbyterian minister, and the couple honeymooned in a rustic camp near
Lake 3lacid.

Returning to NeZ York in the fall, the couple moved into a small apartment
on Ninety-fifth Street near :est  End Avenue. They had no regular income
e[cept 0ary's  salary at the Bureau, and before the end of the year they
kneZ she Zas pregnant—a daughter, Barbara, Zould be born on 0ay 23,
1916—and Zould have to stop Zorking. But Bella said she Zould give
them enough to get by on; she didn't Zant Robert to interrupt his Zork by
taking a paying job. Neither 0ary nor Bob had much interest in the things
that forced other young couples to be concerned Zith money, anyZay; they
Zere perfectly happy, for e[ample, to furnish their living room Zith  only
Bella's old sofas and their oZn shiny idealism.

Every morning—early—0oses Zould  get a call from a young laZyer
named George Gove, Zho lived nearby. "I'm leaving," Gove Zould say and
hang up. 0oses Zould be standing in the street Zhen Gove arrived.

Together, the tZo young men Zould Zalk doZn BroadZay all the Zay to
the Flatiron Building on TZenty-third Street, Zhere Gove had his office—
and then 0oses Zould continue alone to the 0unicipal Building,  some si[
miles south of Ninety-fifth Street.

Gove Zas a tall, raZboned farmer's son from :isconsin Zho  regarded
himself as a good Zalker, but he had trouble keeping up Zith 0oses. As
they Zalked, 0oses Zould  talk and, as his thoughts raced, his legs seemed
to keep pace, so that at times he Zas almost trotting in his eagerness to get
doZntoZn. ":e    talked about everything under the sun," Gove recalls— art,
philosophy, history. The one subject not mentioned Zas one other young
men might have dZelt on: making money. "+e just Zasn't interested in
that," Gove says. The subject that dominated the talk Zas government and
particularly the government of NeZ York City. "+e Zas all  caught up in his
Zork," Gove says.

0oses Zas sure the Zork Zas going to pay off. +istorians call those

95
last years before America's entry into the Great :ar America's Age of
Optimism; it Zas Bob 0oses' age of optimism, too. +is superiors couldn't
praise him enough, and took his advice eagerly. :hen, during a speech,
they Zere asked a particularly sticky question, 0oses Zould lean forZard
and Zhisper the ansZer. They had authori]ed the printing of the detailed
forms on Zhich the arithmetical grades Zere to be reported, and in the
rectangles of heavy yelloZ paper 0oses could see the first tangible results
of his years of education for public service. Forms had already been sent to
several of the more cooperative departments, and the rest Zere in bo[es
stacked in a corner of one of the Civil Service Commission offices, ready to
go.

0oses' demeanor revealed his confidence. Openly mocking the Zeekly staff
luncheons and elaborate filing systems, he made no secret of his contempt
for the Bureau. Chatting Zith Bureau staffers, he took care to let them
knoZ, in a studiedly offhand fashion, that it Zas fine to be doing "real
Zork" at last.

+e carried himself Zith an air of vast knoZledge. "There Zas, in his
makeup, very little doubt," one of the staffers Zas to say years later.
Another recalls that 0oses Zas the first person he saZ on his first day at the
Bureau. "+ere Zas this tall, handsome character in a Zhite suit—a summer
tropical kind of suit—and he Zas talking on the telephone to the street-
cleaning commissioner. I gathered from the conversation that someone had
been advocating some neZ method of cleaning the streets and the
commissioner Zas saying that he didn't think much of the suggestion. And
all of a sudden this character in the Zhite suit raps out, ':ell, Ze don't think
much of it, either.' You should have heard the tone! It Zas so definite! I
thought it Zas an e[traordinary tone for a guy to use Zho had never been
confronted Zith the problem. I si]ed him up immediately as self-confident,
opinionated and critical." Getting to knoZ 0oses, the neZ staffer found no
reason to change his evaluation. "+e seemed to regard himself as one of the
anointed," he said.

But reality Zas just around the corner.

Tammany's Zily old sachems had probably reali]ed early Zhat 0oses' plan
Zould mean for them: it Zould effectively  destroy their control of the civil

96
service. But the sachems, unZilling openly to oppose reform themselves,
had said nothing, biding their time. And noZ the development they had
been Zaiting for Zas coming to pass; the system's 50,000 members Zere
beginning to reali]e Zhat the plan Zould mean for them.

The doZngrading of seniority in 0oses' system Zould mean that these city
employees Zould lose a large advantage—in many cases their only
advantage—over bright young outsiders trying for their jobs. The
elimination of unnecessary jobs Zould mean that some of them Zould be
out of Zork entirely. 0oses'  insistence on demotion for men Zho failed to
score high enough on neZ e[aminations to qualify for the jobs they
presently held Zould have the most far-reaching effects of all. 0en Zho had
run their Zard boss's errands for years in return for advancement up the
civil service ladder noZ came to reali]e that under 0oses' system the
reZards for Zhich they had

Zaited so long might be snatched from them; in fact, for many of them,
"might" Zas only a euphemism; they kneZ all too Zell Zhat  their
qualifications Zere and hoZ they Zould make out on honestly run
e[aminations.

0oreover, 0oses'  system Zould effectively bar the simplest path to future
raises. 8nder the old system, once a civil service Zorker reached Grade
Five, the highest grade for clerical employees, he could be given raises,
raises Zithout limit as to number or amount, Zithout having to take any
e[aminations at all; all that Zas necessary Zas approval from his
department head—and since department heads gave raises on the advice of
Tammany bosses, the loyal party Zorker could be assured that his loyalty
Zould be reZarded. Grade Five Zas, in fact, the biggest carrot that
Tammany possessed. 0ore than 10,000 of the 50,000 city employees Zere
at that level, and Zhile the base pay for Grade Five Zas $3,260 a year—in
itself a handsome Zage Zhen the average clerical Zorker in private industry
earned $2,100 a year—the earnings of many of the 10,000 had been raised
to $6,500 or even $7,500.

8nder 0oses' system, all civil  service Zorkers at Grade Five—all 10,000 of
them—Zould have their pay reduced to $3,260 a year and Zould have to
pass e[aminations for any future raises. Even if they passed the

97
e[aminations they Zould have to climb back up the monetary ladder one
step at a time, for promotions Zere to be given only level by level. And
e[aminations Zould no longer be given, as they had been, to co]y groups of
tZo or three competitors, or to one man Zho happened to be the only person
Zho had been notified that the e[amination Zas being given. To climb back
up to their former salaries, Grade Fivers Zould be competing Zith hundreds
of applicants.

As the reali]ation of these facts began to seep doZn to the mass of civil
service employees, there Zas hysteria in the ranks. 3rotest meetings Zere
arranged.

Young Bob 0oses volunteered to speak at the meetings. +e Zasn't ashamed
of his system, he said. +e Zas proud of it. +e Zould be glad to defend it.

But 0oses Zasn't at O[ford  any more. The only effect of his courage Zas to
make things easier for his enemies. Civil service reorgani]ation Zas a
subject so complicated that it Zas difficult to interest even civil service
Zorkers in it. :hat   Zas needed Zas a single, visible object on Zhich the
Zorkers could focus their hatred. And noZ 0oses had given them such an
object—himself.

+e Zas the perfect target. Tall, in a Zhite suit, elegant, haughty, arrogant
instead of conciliatory Zhen challenged, he stood before the thousands of
sullen, clerkish men like the very epitome of the efficiency e[pert they
feared and hated. And they e[pressed their hatred and fear in boos and
catcalls and vicious, shouted insults.

0oses refused to quit. Night after night, carrying a heavy leather briefcase
crammed Zith facts and statistics he almost never got to use, he stood
before civil service employees' associations, speaking into a hail of abuse.

"Once you saZ him on those nights, you could never forget him," .aplan

recalls. "Tall, handsome—he'd get up on the platform and go right to bat.
+e Zouldn't pull  his punches or try to modify the things he Zas saying so
they'd be less unpopular. Those people had come to hate the Zord
'efficiency.' Talking 'efficiency' to them Zas Zaving the red flag before the

98
bull. But in those speeches it Zas efficiency, efficiency, efficiency. The
more they booed him, the more self-confident, even arrogant, he seemed. In
the Zorst of it, he Zent right on talking, and Zith the attitude ':hen   I say
this is it, this is it!' "

But the outspokenness and the courage, along Zith the arrogance and the
lecturing tone, had no effect other than to increase the opposition to his
system, to rouse the fury of 50,000 voting men and Zomen to fever pitch.

Tammany kneZ hoZ to use the opportunity he had given it; Zhile not
openly opposing reorgani]ation, it linked the plan Zith the man the
employees hated. Recalls one observer, "Reclassification became 0oses in
these people's eyes." The employees' associations began to circulate
petitions calling for the removal of 0oses and the men Zho had appointed
him—0oskoZit]    and James—and those petitions, bearing tens of
thousands of names, Zere submitted to the Board of Estimate. But still
Tammany made no overt move. Still the Tiger Zaited.

Then there began to be doubts about 0oses' proposals in the camp of his
supporters. Even the most ardent had misgivings about telling men Zho had
become accustomed to making—and supporting their families on— $6,500
to $7,500 a year that they Zere noZ making $3,260 a year. Even the adoring
.aplan  said "that Zas a little unfair, really. 3ut in a neZ system —okay. But
don't adversely affect people Zho had been Zorking under the old system.
Not everyone Zho Zas making a good salary in Grade Five Zas doing so
just because of political connections, remember. Some had Zorked their
Zay up on their oZn. And a lot of the people Zho had been given their
chance through politics Zere doing good jobs and deserved the money. You
shouldn't suddenly take it aZay from them." +enry 0oskoZit],   declaring
that "no one can deny [the] soundness and [the] justice of the principle of
standardi]ation," said nonetheless that "a ruthless application of the
principle ... is unZise. In my judgment it should be gradually assimilated
and apply to the vacant positions as they arise."

But 0oses argued against compromise. If the principle behind his system
Zas right, he said, there should be no compromising Zith it. 0aking
e[ceptions, he said, Zould kill the Zhole plan. If the plan Zas based on
salary standardi]ation, then salaries really had to be standard—all salaries.

99
0oskoZit]   gave in. Some reformers, considering the commission
unreasonable, turned lukeZarm in their support.

It Zas the moment Tammany had been Zaiting for. The Board of Estimate it
controlled scheduled hearings on the standardi]ation proposal.

The support 0oses e[pected from 0itchel  seemed forthcoming at first. The
0ayor  and Fusion Comptroller :illiam   A.  3rendergast urged the Board to
adopt standardi]ation and "cut to the bone" unnecessary positions.

But Tammany packed the hearings Zith 0oses' opponents. Rising to defend
his plan, a tall, slim, figure in Zhite among the red-faced, burly, cigar-

smoking Tammany politicians in their black derbies that they Zore even
indoors, he could hardly be heard through the boos. Speaker after speaker
related stories of particularly deserving individuals Zhose standard of living
Zould be reduced, unfairly, under the plan.

Gradually Tammany's strategy became apparent. Each disputed case, the
speakers Zere saying, should be decided on its individual merits by the
Board's Bureau of Standards and included as a separate item in the budget,
a policy Zhich Zould  not only drag out the hearings indefinitely but Zould
in itself defeat the principle of universal standardi]ation. The Tammany
members of the Board said that after careful consideration they didn't see
hoZ any other policy could be adopted; humane considerations, fairness,
justice— these must not be ignored. They Zere in favor of standardi]ation,
they said, they intended to adopt the 0oses plan, but the plan must be
modified Zhere individual situations required it. Even pro-Fusion
neZspapers couldn't find anything to critici]e in that.

0itchel  and 3rendergast became noticeably silent. :hen a vote Zas taken,
it Zas unanimous. 0itchel  and 3rendergast joined Zith Tammany to vote
for individual consideration.

0oses Zas disappointed but still hopeful. The Board had, after all, said it
intended to adopt standardi]ation. Once the plan Zas adopted, the
e[ceptions could gradually be eliminated one by one.

100
But the hearings dragged on and on; there Zere, after all, hundreds of civil
service Zorkers Zho believed, many Zith reason, that the proposed
reclassification Zas unfair to them. Their stories made good neZspaper
copy. Technical arguments for reclassification did not. The 0oses proposal
began to appear in an unfavorable light.

After Zeeks of hearings, the Bureau of Standards finally submitted its
recommendations to the Board of Estimate, Zhich thereupon adopted a
budget including 0oses' proposed schedule of civil service grades and
salaries, along Zith hundreds of individual budget items for the individual
Zorkers Zho had persuaded the Bureau of Standards they should be
e[cluded from the schedule. In Zhat Zas e[pected to be a matter of routine,
the neZ schedule then Zent to the Board of Aldermen for approval—and
the aldermen vetoed portions of it and added to it do]ens of general civil
service levels Zhich did not correspond to any levels in the 0oses plan. At
the end of 1915, the only real result of 0oses' effort Zas still the stacks of
yelloZ form  cards.

Nineteen-si[teen Zas frustration and disillusionment. To meet the
aldermen's objections to some of the specific job specifications and salary
scales, 0oses Zorked endlessly revising them—only to find Zhen he
resubmitted them that the aldermen had still other objections Zhich they
had somehoZ neglected to mention before. There Zas again no open
opposition, nothing that 0oses' supporters could sei]e on as evidence of
Tammany opposition to reform; instead, there Zas again stalling and
obfuscation and confusion— and, for Bob 0oses, defeat.

Even the efficiency-rating forms of Zhich he had been so proud Zere
turning into symbols of frustration. Attempts to persuade more departments

to use them proved fruitless. Roaming restlessly through the commission
offices, he had to look every day at the pile of bo[es containing the forms—
and the pile never got smaller.

The forms that had been distributed Zere not being used properly. 0ost of
the department heads Zho had accepted them Zere reluctant to do the vast
amount of Zork that Zould be necessary if their many squares and blanks
Zere to be filled in Zith  precise arithmetical grades. Those feZ Zho Zere

101
Zilling  to do the Zork needed help in using the neZ system. To provide this
help—and to make sure that all departments Zere using the neZ salary
scales and that employees Zere doing the Zork consistent Zith their salaries
— the Civil Service Commission had to rely on its e[aminers. The
enforcement of 0oses' system Zas in their hands. And these Zere men from
the old Tammany regime Zho, too smart to give 0oskoZit]  and James
"grounds for dismissal" by openly defying them, undermined the system by
the subtle but effective tactic of sloZness in learning and la[ness in
enforcing the neZ rules. 0oses understood full Zell that the e[aminers
Zere making a farce out of his system. "Nothing," he said bitterly, "can
make salary standardi]ation more ridiculous than to put it into the hands of
[such] men." But it Zas in their hands, nonetheless, that it remained.

Judges, he learned, Zere men, too, for all their black robes—and often they
Zere men Zho had been dressed in those robes by Tammany. :hen certain
department heads refused to hold competitive e[aminations for elevator-
operator positions, the commission ordered the operators dismissed. One,
Zho ran an elevator in the Bron[ County Courthouse, brought suit to enjoin
the dismissal, arguing that because prisoners rode in his elevator on their
Zay to and from courtrooms, his job Zas "sensitive" and "e[ceptional." Of
course it Zas, the judge said reassuringly—and granted the injunction.

The darkening of Bob 0oses' optimism occurred against the backdrop of
the darkening of America's. A neZ mood Zas abroad in the land. "Our
country is at peace Zith the Zorld at Zar" had been one of :oodroZ
:ilson's   re-election slogans in 1916, but noZ the :ar Gods Zere slogging
relentlessly across the Atlantic; the Zords in the scare headlines Zere
"Lusitania" and "8-Boat"  and, finally, "Zimmermann." :ar,   not progress,
Zas on the hori]on. Aims changed—the Zorld Zas to be made safe for
democracy; that Zas a large enough order for even the idealism of youth to
handle at one time.

In NeZ York City, the fading of idealism on the municipal level had been
especially rapid. :ith   reform enthroned in City +all, not all reformers
stayed reformers. Before 0itchel's election, the policy of the Bureau of
0unicipal  Research had been to investigate city government no matter Zho
Zas running it, but after his election, Cleveland announced, ":hen its

102
friends are in poZer, a citi]en research agency should not publish
unfavorable information." The city's Good Government organi]ations had
become much less active. One reason Zas that they did not Zant to hurt
Zhat they considered the city's last, best chance against Tammany. But there
Zas also another reason. As Allen himself put it: "One reason for this
conspiracy of

silent criticism and public applause cannot be too baldly stated or too
vividly  remembered, namely, almost every agency of outside criticism 'had
its feet in the trough'—to use a conventionali]ed term for sharing in
political patronage." 0oses could hardly have been unaZare that Zhile he
Zas fighting to bring all civil  service positions under competitive
e[amination, no feZer than forty-seven Charities Department inspectors
had been appointed by reformer John .ingsbury Zithout e[amination, in
clear violation of the laZ— or that every one of the forty-seven had
previously Zorked for the private organi]ation Zhich  .ingsbury  had
headed. 0oses must have knoZn, as all City +all observers kneZ, that city
offices ranging from clerkships to judgeships Zere being filled by reformers
from lists furnished by pro-Fusion Zard leaders.

0oses' idol had developed a case of galloping clay feet. John 3urroy
0itchel's  elegance had Zorked against him. :earer of the dress suit, Zinner
of the one-step contest at costume balls of the Four +undred, the Boy
0ayor  had given himself the image of a friend of the Zealthy. +is
independence had Zorked against him, too. Scornful of public relations, he
refused to change his friendships—or even to go to the public Zith
e[planations of many of his actions as mayor, so that many of the notable
reforms he initiated never got the publicity they deserved. +is
investigations cut Zaste in city government but, preoccupied Zith economy,
he did not Zant to do anything Zith the money thus saved, but save it. +is
boasts Zere not of Zhat Zas being done to meet the city's needs but of Zhat
Zas being done to save the city's money. Even his admiring biographer
Zould have to admit, "+is concern Zas for the city rather than for its
people."

:hat   probably disillusioned 0oses most about 0itchel  Zas not the Boy
0ayor's elegance but his proposed "solution" of the problem of the railroad

103
tracks beloZ Riverside Drive. 0itchel  proposed giving the NeZ York
Central e[clusive control of the :est  Side Zaterfront and alloZing  the
railroad to cure the Death Avenue problem by elevating its tracks beloZ
Fifty-ninth Street, a move that Zould have permanently blighted a large
slice of doZntoZn 0anhattan.  In return for these favors, 0itchel asked the
railroad to pay $300,000—an amount not even sufficient to rehabilitate
Riverside 3ark. A furious Citi]ens 8nion  called the plan a "giveaZay" to a
railroad oZned by 0itchel's  social friends—and it Zas. And the 0ayor's
plan Zould have forever deprived the city of the Zaterfront highZay and
park 0oses had dreamed of.

In the area of civil service, hoZever, 0itchel Zas 0oses'  best hope. The
0ayor  promised to press again in 1917 for standardi]ation and
reclassification. After more than three years of unremitting Zork on the
technicalities of civil service, 0oses Zas still  fascinated by them and by the
potentiality for public good in their improvement. They are not "dry and
dull as some may suppose from reading printed salary schedules," he said in
1917. "A student Zho Zishes to see city government as a Zhole Zill find no
more interesting . . . study than that afforded by a standardi]ation program."

+e Zas still confident. "I  believe that the final results of the Zork in NeZ
York City Zill  be regarded as entirely satisfactory," he said. :hy

shouldn't they be? +adn't he demonstrated—over and over again, by logic
and by science—that his system Zould improve the city's government?
Didn't all the city's top officials noZ  understand this? "A second and revised
edition of the standard specifications ... is about to be published for the
Board of Estimate," he said. "3resumably this Zill be the final edition." The
final edition! Galahad thought he Zas in sight of the Grail.

Bob 0oses had done little else but fight for his system for more than three
years. NoZ, in 1917, he fought harder. +e made more speeches; he lobbied
more editorial Zriters. +e argued Zith the borough presidents and aldermen
Zhose votes Zould decide the system's fate.

Getting in to see these officials Zas never easy. 8nless 0oskoZit] or James
kneZ the official personally, 0oses Zould  first have to ask them to speak to
some official they kneZ Zho did. Then that official Zould  ask the other to

104
see 0oses. :hen  the time came for his appointment, he Zould often be
kept Zaiting—since he Zas surely among the least important of visitors—
in City +all  anterooms, eyed by secretaries Zho could gauge his
unimportance by the length of time their bosses kept him Zaiting. And
Zhen they finally ushered him in, 0oses Zould knoZ  that he Zas talking to
a man Zho regarded the talk only as an irritation. Yet he never stopped
trying—and he never stopped hoping.

8nfortunately for  his hopes, hoZever, 1917 Zas an election year and John
3urroy 0itchel  Zanted to be re-elected—and, Zith 50,000 civil service
employees infuriated by 0oses' proposals, Tammany nominee John F. "Red
0ike"  +ylan  Zas making them a major campaign issue. Tammany Zanted
City +all  back and Tammany speakers Zere telling mass meetings of city
employees, ":e  do not believe Ze should have so many efficiency
e[perts"— and the employees Zere jumping to their feet and belloZing in
reply, "A neZ mayor! A  neZ mayor!" :hen   0oses'  system came up before
the Board of Estimate, 0itchel Zas silent. The system Zas not adopted.
0oses' idol, the epitome of the cultured university man in politics, did take
one definite step in regard to civil service, hoZever. In October, a month
before the election, he fired +enry 0oskoZit]   as Civil Service Commission
chairman and replaced him Zith a man acceptable to the employees.

:hen   Red 0ike  +ylan sZept into  City +all—0itchel,    Zho had been
elected in 1913 by the largest plurality in NeZ York's history, Zas turned
out in 1917 by an even larger plurality—3rogressivism in the city Zas dead.
":e   have had all the reform that Ze Zant in this city for some time to
come," +ylan said, and issued an order soon after taking office in 1918: all
Bureau staffers Zho had been Zorking Zith city agencies Zere to be
dismissed at once.

Dismissed, 0oses Zatched as the handful of civil service innovations that
represented the pathetically small accomplishment of his four years of effort
Zere destroyed one by one. The meager measure of standardi]ation that had
been enacted Zas abolished by amendments to the 1918 budget. The feZ
positions that had been removed from the e[empt list Zere placed back on
it. +ylan's department heads ended the use of the efficiency records. The

105
yelloZ forms of Zhich  0oses had been so proud Zere henceforth to be
used, if they Zere used at all, only as scrap paper.

:ithin   months of +ylan's inauguration, in fact, civil  service in NeZ York
Zas plunged into depths unknoZn since the heyday of the TZeed Ring
forty-five years before. Non-Tammany employees Zere forced out of their
jobs by humiliating assignments and pay cuts. +undreds of positions
previously competitive Zere made e[empt because of their "e[ceptional and
sensitive" nature. The e[emptions covered lifeguards, chauffeurs—and, as a
final sprinkle of salt in 0oses' Zounds, a very highly paid "special
e[aminer" to the Civil  Service Commission itself. The special e[aminer
Zas Frank A. Spencer, the man 0oskoZit] and James had fired and Zhom,
once, in his days of optimism, Bob 0oses had hoped to replace.

In an attempt to help men Zho might try to reform civil service in other
cities, 0oses summed up in a speech to a political science convention
"certain deductions" Zhich he had made from his e[periences. The main
deduction Zas a simple one. "E[ecutive support" Zas the essential you
could not do Zithout. ":hen   a program for standardi]ation Zork is first
made," he said bitterly, "an effort should be made to get the persons Zho are
responsible to pledge themselves to stand squarely behind the program."

At times in his summation, there Zas an attempt at the old self-confident
tone. But it Zas a sad attempt. Trying to analy]e the maneuvers Zhich had
bound his system in parliamentary red tape and then, Zith the red tape
holding it helpless, had hacked it to death, Bob 0oses finally stopped and
said simply, "It is futile to attempt to establish beyond doubt Zho of the
many agencies involved ... is responsible. ..." +is dream, a dream for Zhich
he had fought Zith all the strength, brilliance and purity of purpose of youth
and idealism, Zas dead—and he couldn't even be sure Zho had killed it.

The net result of all his Zork Zas nothing. There Zas no civil service
standardi]ation, no great highZay along the +udson, no mothers' shelters in
Central 3ark. Intending to reform the city, he had Zorked hard and mastered
Zith a supreme mastery reform's techniques. Convinced he Zas right, he
had refused to soil the Zhite suit of idealism Zith compromise. +e had
really believed that if his system Zas right—scientific, logical, fair—and if

106
it got a hearing, the system Zould be adopted. In free and open encounter
Zould not Truth prevail? And he had gotten the hearing.

But 0oses had failed in his calculations to give certain factors due Zeight.
+e had not sufficiently taken into account greed. +e had not sufficiently
taken into account self-interest. And, most of all, he had not sufficiently
taken into account the need for poZer.

Science, knoZledge, logic and brilliance might be useful tools but they
didn't build highZays or civil  service systems. 3oZer built highZays and
civil

service systems. 3oZer Zas Zhat dfreams needed, not poZer in the hands
of the dreamer himself necessarily but poZer put behind the dreamer's
dreams by the man Zho had it to put thereV, poZer that he termed
"e[ecutive support." Neither he himself nor James or 0oskoZit]  had had
such poZer. And the man Zho did, the man on Zhom he had counted for
support, the mayor Zho Zas the epitome of his ideali]ation of the public
official, had not, in the final test, been Zilling to use his poZer on behalf of
Bob 0oses' dreams.

Bob 0oses in 1918 Zas a man, not so young any more, looking for a job.
Offered an army commission as a lieutenant, he decided after some
hesitation not to serve in the Zar. A friend, Benjamin Van Schaick, Zas an
e[ecutive of the government's Emergency Fleet Corporation, Zhich had
recently been created to build a neZ American merchant fleet, and Van
Schaick got 0oses an e[ecutive job Zith the corporation. But Zhen 0oses
arrived in :ashington,  he found he had no clearly defined duties. Temper
flaring, he demanded a neZ assignment and Zas sent to the huge
shipbuilding Zorks on +og Island in the DelaZare River. Too late, he
reali]ed he had made a mistake. "That Zas a stupid move," he Zas to say.
"The place to be Zas Zith the top people in :ashington." +og  Island Zas
booming like a California gold field Zith  the influ[  of tens of thousands of
shipZorkers, and the only home he could find for his daughter and his Zife,
Zho Zas pregnant again, Zas a rather shabby apartment.

The +og Island operation Zas being conducted Zith all the inefficiency that
might be e[pected from a massive production effort throZn together in

107
Zartime haste. :hen  0oses  complained about the inefficiency—the
shipyard often had scores of hulls and not a single keel to attach them to—
he Zas ignored by +og Island officials. Trying to outflank the officials, he
Zrote a report detailing the inefficiency and proposing a complete neZ
material-procurement method and persuaded Van Schaick to give it directly
to :ashington.  :ashington   Zas impressed and called the local officials on
the carpet. Their response Zas to Zait until :ashington's interest died doZn
and then call 0oses in and fire him.

Van Schaick, Zho quit voluntarily Zhen he heard Zhat had happened to his
friend, procured them both e[ecutive positions at a Long Island City factory
that Zas producing airplane engines, but Zhen the Zar ended in November,
the factory Zas closed doZn.

0oses had no choice. +e had to go back to the Bureau of 0unicipal
Research and ask the men he had scorned for a job. :hen they finally
agreed to give him one, the stipend and duties attached Zere insultingly
small.

0ost  of 0oses' contemporaries Zere no longer at the Bureau. They had
moved on to bigger things. 0any, protected by civil service provisions from
+ylan's Zrath, Zere deputy commissioners in NeZ York City governmental
agencies, some Zere full commissioners in 3hiladelphia or Chicago. Some
Zere e[ecutive secretaries of private Zelfare and social Zork agencies.
Others had

been hired aZay by reform groups in other cities to form neZ municipal
research bureaus. Still others, like Raymond 0oley, an associate professor
at :estern  Reserve 8niversity in Cleveland, Zere on university faculties.
But 0oses' continuing attempts to find a niche outside the Bureau brought
him only humiliation. One day, 0oley  happened to be in Cleveland City
+all. As he Zalked doZn  a corridor, he saZ a long line of men Zaiting to be
intervieZed for a minor municipal job. One of the men on the line Zas Bob
0oses. And he didn't get the job.

Back at the Bureau, 0oses graded students' papers and gave lectures. :hen
the Bureau finally managed to place him Zith a government agency, the
8nited States Food Commission, he found not only that he Zas going to be

108
little more than a clerk but that his superior Zould be another former
Bureau staffer, a man several years younger than he. And even this job
shortly disappeared. +is second child had just been born and it Zas another
daughter, Jane. 0oses had desperately Zanted a son, but noZ doctors told
0ary  she Zould be unable to have any more children. Bella kept giving the
couple money, but she didn't seem to reali]e hoZ much more Zas needed
noZ that there Zere tZo little girls  in the family, and Bob and 0ary didn't
like to ask for more. They Zere very short of money. Once 0ary Zorriedly
confided to a friend that she had oZed a grocery bill for Zeeks and didn't
knoZ hoZ she Zas going to get the money to pay it. Their apartment, at
:est  End Avenue and Eighty-seventh Street, Zas too small, and a larger
one Zas out of the question.

The mood of the country, so optimistic Zhen 0oses had entered public life
five years before, Zas one of pessimism and disillusionment. As clouds of
discord blotted over hopes for an honorable and lasting peace, sunlight
ceased to gleam on old illusions and enthusiasms. The star of the man
Zhom 0oses had idoli]ed  on the national level as he had idoli]ed 0itchel
on the local—highly educated university man :oodroZ  :ilson—Zas
Zaning. 3ro-gressivism Zas all but dead. There Zas little talk of reform.

0oses' oZn mood Zas one neZ to him. +e seemed confused and Zorried.
:ith   his thirtieth birthday less than a month aZay, not only dreams but
hopes had disappeared. +e had been trained for Zork in government, but
Zith +ylan  in control in NeZ  York there Zas obviously no place for him in
city government. +e had no connections in :ashington. There Zas a neZ
Governor in NeZ York State, elected in an upset—Alfred E. Smith— but
Smith Zas a Tammany man, one of the Tammany men, in fact, Zho had
been most vociferous in scorn of 0oses' civil service proposals. 0oses had
met Smith several years before, Zhen he had been city sheriff, and had not
been at all impressed by the short, paunchy Irishman Zith the red face,
gold-filled teeth and loud, rasping voice. "+e is a typical Tammany
politician," he said to a friend at the time. ":hat  can you e[pect from a man
Zho Zears a broZn derby on the side of his head and alZays has a big cigar
in the corner of his mouth?"

Smith Zas the very antithesis of 0oses' ideal of a politician. :hether

109
it Zas really true that he had never read a book all the Zay through, the
story Zas plausible; not only had Smith never been to a university, he had
never been to a high school—and he boasted about that fact. +is remark on
the floor of the State Assembly that his only degree Zas "FF0"—for the
Fulton Fish 0arket, Zhere he had Zorked as a boy—Zas already a legend.
There seemed as little likelihood of a place for Bob 0oses—for his dreams
or for himself—on the state level as on the city. There seemed, in fact, to be
no place anyZhere for him to turn.

And then, one day, Bob 0oses got a call from +enry 0oskoZit]'s  Zife,
Belle.

she had begun Zorking, at 0adison and other settlement houses, Zith
immigrants even poorer than herself. :riting,  producing and directing plays
for the Educational Alliance, she Zas appointed its director of entertainment
Zhile she Zas still a student at Columbia, carrying a schedule that included
every course she could find in the university catalogue that she thought
might help her to understand, and assist, the underprivileged.

In 1903, she married one of the young men Zith Zhom she had been
Zorking at the Alliance, an artist and architect named Charles 0. Israels.
They had three children. In 1911, Israels died. In 1914, no longer a
beautiful girl but an e[tremely plump and plainly dressed matron, she
married social Zorker +enry 0oskoZit].    Do]ens of reform leaders
attended both Zeddings. Reformers regarded Belle as one of their inner
circle.

But had anyone troubled to closely study her career, he Zould have seen
that there Zas a difference betZeen Belle and the average reformer: Belle
0oskoZit]'s   dreams became realities.

In 1909, for e[ample, the :omen's  City Club, under Belle's direction,
began an investigation of the city's so-called "dancing academies." The
"academies" Zere the only easily accessible places of Zeekday recreation
for the poor girls of the LoZer East Side Zho Zorked in garment-center
sZeatshops. These girls, many of them in their early teens, Zere
unsophisticated. But the academies served liquor at tables on the dance
floor, had rooms ready for hasty rental doZn adjacent corridors and seemed

110
e[pressly designed for Zhat reformers euphemistically referred to as "the
doZnfall of  young Zomen."

Reformers had been railing for years against the academies but previous
clean-up efforts had folloZed the familiar pattern: investigations Zhich
caused neZspaper furor and loud demands for change, verbal acquiescence
by Tammany, and then, after the furor died doZn, business as before.

Belle altered the pattern. Instead of loudly denouncing conditions at the
academies, she quietly checked incorporation certificates to learn the names
of their oZners—and found that they included both Tammany leaders and
community pillars. Instead of giving the names to the neZspapers, Zhich
Zould have brought headlines but not results, since all her ammunition
Zould have been used up, she Zent to the leaders and pillars and told them
she Zould keep their names secret if they saZ to it that regulatory
legislation Zas passed—and strictly enforced. It Zas. "These laZs," the
Times editoriali]ed, "did more to improve the moral surroundings of young
girls" than any other single social reform of the period.

:hen,   in 1913, after years of struggle, garment Zorkers' unions finally
forced dress manufacturers to agree to the appointment of an impartial
arbitrator to hear Zorkers' grievances, union leaders reali]ed that the
appointment of a typical reformer—one ready, Zith 3avlovian
predictability, to side Zith the Zorkers in every case—Zould alienate the
employers and Zreck the system. They suggested Belle 0oskoZit] for the
job. The employers, knoZing her only as one of the reform croZd, agreed
reluctantly —but they quickly found that Belle decided each case on its
merits. The attorney for the employers' association admitted: "She
understood the union

leaders perfectly. She understood the employers quite as Zell. No one could
fool her." And her recommendations for the improvement of Zorking
conditions in the industry Zere accepted by both sides—and implemented.

But in November 1918, Zhen 0rs. 0oskoZit]    telephoned Bob 0oses, no
one had studied her career, and none of the young men at the Bureau paid
the quiet, matronly Zoman any special attention Zhen she Zould drop by,
as she sometimes did in the late afternoon, to chat Zith Bruere or

111
Cleveland. 0oses, on the day that she telephoned, didn't even knoZ Zhat
activity she Zas currently engaged in. +e Zondered Zhat she Zanted.

Governor-elect Smith, 0rs. 0oskoZit]    told him, had decided to appoint an
official commission to draZ up a plan for the complete reorgani]ation of the
state's administrative machinery and for the implementation of sZeeping
social Zelfare reforms. The Governor-elect, she said, intended to use the
report as the basic program for his administration.

The commission, 0rs. 0oskoZit]    said, Zould be composed of the state's
most distinguished citi]ens, but Governor-elect Smith had appointed her as
its e[ecutive head, and she Zas looking for a "chief of staff" to Zork under
her and head its Zork force, Zhich Zould include at least fifty persons. This
chief of staff, she said, Zould have a free hand in hiring the fifty and
complete charge of the day-to-day Zork of the commission. :ould Dr.
0oses be interested in the job?

Dr. 0oses said he Zould.

The ne[t day, 0rs. 0oskoZit]    took 0oses  to see the Governor-elect in his
apartment at the Biltmore +otel. The meeting Zas brief and cordial. :hen
0rs.  0oskoZit]   introduced 0oses, all  Smith said Zas that if this young
man Zas her choice for the job, he Zas sure Dr. 0oses Zould do a good
job. From the Biltmore, she took the neZ appointee straight to the +all of
Records, at the corner of Chambers and Lafayette streets, Zhere a Zhole
section of the third floor had been allocated to the commission, to shoZ him
his office, a large, handsomely appointed room that Zas the first office of
his oZn that 0oses had ever had. The commission's Zork Zas to get
underZay immediately, 0rs. 0oskoZit]    said. Bob should start hiring his
staff at once.

The Bureau of 0unicipal  Research, Zhere, only a day before, 0oses had
been Zorking, Zas just four blocks aZay from the +all of Records, but
0oses had come in that day a long Zay from the Bureau by any
measurement other than distance. +e had been looked doZn on by his
associates there as a loudmouth and a failure. NoZ, after a single telephone
call from a Zoman he hardly kneZ, he Zas suddenly in a position to call
those associates —and invite them to apply to him for jobs.

112
Bob 0oses Zas never to learn Zhy, of all the brilliant, dedicated reformers
she kneZ, Belle 0oskoZit]   had picked him for the first official job she had
had it in her poZer to dispense. 3erhaps it Zas because she had heard about
him from her husband. 3erhaps it Zas because, of all those reformers, it Zas
he Zho had most strongly caught her shreZd and appraising

eye. :hatever  the reason, he never learned it. But he Zas able to find out
from reformer acquaintances hoZ she had come to be so trusted by Al
Smith that the Governor-elect had given her that poZer.

0ost  reformers regarded Smith as the epitome of all that they detested in
the Tammany politician. Not only Zas he uneducated and uncouth—his
spitting and drinking Zere legend—but, more important, he took
Tammany's orders unquestioningly. For years, he had been Boss Charlie
0urphy's  chief henchman in Albany, and as president of the Board of
Aldermen during 0itchel's  mayoralty he had led the opposition that
outsmarted and defeated the Boy 0ayor at every turn. Al Smith's ethics,
according to most reformers, matched his habits.

But a handful of reformers, those Zho had actually had occasion to Zork
Zith Smith, had astounded their friends even before his nomination for
Governor by arguing not only that Smith Zas not a typical Tammany
politician but that this red-faced, jut-nosed, gold-toothed, harsh-voiced
smoker of big cigars and Zearer of broZn derbies and suits Zith Zide
stripes Zas, in fact, the best hope that e[isted for the actual enactment into
laZ of the social Zelfare measures for Zhich they had fought so long Zith
so little real success. One of this handful of pro-Smith reformers, 0oses
Zas told by his acquaintances, Zas Belle 0oskoZit].  She Zas, they said,
among the most enthusiastic of the group. She had, in fact, come to see in
Smith the instrument through Zhich her dreams for the poor people of NeZ
York City Zould  become realities.

The gubernatorial election of 1918 had been the first in NeZ York State in
Zhich Zomen Zere alloZed  to vote. 8ncertain hoZ to appeal to the neZ
voters, Smith had felt he needed a Zoman active in female civic
organi]ations Zho could sell him to such groups. 0ost of the female do-
gooders around toZn Zanted nothing to do Zith Smith's campaign. But
Belle volunteered eagerly.

113
+oZever similar  their ultimate aims Zere to turn out to be, Smith had
nothing but contempt for typical reformers. Regarding them as Zild-eyed,
impractical and, most important, incapable of producing results, he called
them "crackpots." :omen  reformers, he had found, Zere invariably
crackpots. :omen,  he felt, didn't belong in politics anyZay. In the tight
little tenement Irish Zorld in Zhich  he lived, most of them confined their
interests to their homes and their children, and that Zas hoZ it should be.
+e Zas prepared to listen to his neZ adviser Zith no more than token
interest.

+e agreed only reluctantly to her suggestion that he address a luncheon of
the :omen's  8niversity  Club. 8neducated, he felt he Zould be out of place
before an audience of college graduates. +e planned to make a brief talk
filled Zith  platitudes—and as hasty an e[it as possible.

Sitting on the dais, looking doZn on the audience of smartly dressed
Zomen chattering over fruit cocktail, his misgivings increased. ":hat  the
hell am I going to say to a bunch of Zomen like this?" he groZled.

"If you're smart," the motherly lady by his side replied, "to this bunch of
Zomen you'll make the same speech you'd make to a bunch of
businessmen."

Taken aback, Smith decided to give it a try. +e spoke on the economic
issues of the campaign. A master at gauging croZd reaction, he saZ as he
spoke that the technique Zas succeeding, and Zhen he finished, the
reception Zas as enthusiastic as the ones he received in Tammany
clubhouses.

Smith had been given almost no chance to Zin. Tammany's strength Zas
traditionally more than offset in stateZide campaigns by the combination of
the solid core of educated, independent, anti-Tammany voters in NeZ York
City and the solidly Republican, rural, 3rotestant, 3rohibitionist strongholds
upstate. Smith reali]ed that he must Zin over the independent voters, but in
the early stages of the campaign he had been having little success. After the
luncheon, he began to rely more and more on Belle 0oskoZit] for advice
in handling them. And Zhen, thanks in part to a hefty chunk of their

114
support, he had Zon the governorship and called a conference at the
Biltmore apartment to map out his program, he had invited her to attend.

Smith told the roomful of burly Irishmen that, because of the inefficiency
and duplication of effort he had observed during his tZelve years as a state
assemblyman, he Zanted to reform the state's administrative machinery.
The plump little JeZish matron sitting among them had long Zanted such
reform too, because Zithout improvement in the machinery of government,
it Zas useless to talk about the social reforms of Zhich she had long
dreamed. :hen  Smith asked for ideas on hoZ to start a drive for
administrative reform, Belle had one ready. Even before he took office in
January, she said, he should form a Commission for Reconstruction,
Retrenchment and Reorgani]ation in the state government.

To the bluff old Irish leaders seated around the little matron, her suggestion
had seemed like one they Zould e[pect from a reformer. They Zaited for
her to talk about all the benefits that Zould accrue to mankind from such a
commission.

Slipping the Zord "retrenchment" into the commission title Zould be a
great public relations device, 0rs. 0oskoZit]   had said quietly, connoting as
it did economy and prudence.

Smith had been elected because of the support he had been able to draZ
from independent voters and Republicans, 0rs. 0oskoZit]  had continued.
If he Zanted to be re-elected, he had to keep such support. The state's
Republicans, as they all kneZ, Zere divided into tZo branches. One Zas the
GO3's "regular" organi]ation, bossed by arch-reactionary :illiam  ("Big
Bill")  Barnes of Albany, Zhich ran the state in an atmosphere of such
corruption that GO3 legislators Zere knoZn as the "Black +orse Cavalry"
because of their looting e[peditions against the state treasury. The other
branch Zas the GO3's "federal croZd," Zhich contained most of the party's
impulse to public good and had earned its title by the distinguished service
rendered in :ashington by Charles Evans +ughes and a cadre of stalZarts
of the 3rogressive Republican movement that had sZept Theodore
Roosevelt to the governorship of the state and then to the presidency—
Elihu Root, TR's Secretary of State, +enry L. Stimson, later Secretary of
:ar,  and George :.  :ickersham,   later Attorney General. The "federal

115
croZd" had been pressing for administrative and social Zelfare
improvements for years. They Zould

be enthusiastic about a "Reconstruction, Retrenchment and Reorgani]ation
Commission." In fact, they Zould be happy to serve on it, and they Zould
tend to feel kindly toZard the Governor Zho had asked them to. The
"regular" Republicans, Zho Zould see in talk of "reconstruction" a threat to
their control of the state government, could be e[pected to oppose the
commission's Zork. Its creation, therefore, Zould have the dual effect of
splitting the Republican 3arty and lining up Zith Smith those Republicans
Zho e[emplified  3rogressivism and reform to independent voters. The
support of such Republicans Zould help negate Smith's greatest handicap,
the Tammany label he bore. In addition, she reminded the leaders, the
"federal croZd" Zere heavy campaign contributors.

Before the motherly little Zoman had finished speaking, the roomful of
politicians had reali]ed that they Zere listening to a master politician. Al
Smith had bought her suggestion on the spot.

Reorgani]ation of the state government Zas not a neZ idea. It had been a
basic reform tenet for years, and in 1915 a Bureau of 0unicipal Research
study commissioned by a State Constitutional Convention had found no
feZer than 169 separate state departments, bureaus, boards, committees and
commissions, many Zith overlapping functions—ta[es, for e[ample, being
collected by seven different agencies, public Zorks being carried out by ten.
Some agency heads Zere responsible to the Governor, some to the
Legislature and some to officials Zho Zere themselves elected by the
people and Zere hence not responsible to either Governor or Legislature.
Some agency heads appointed by the Governor Zere removable only by the
Legislature, and there seemed to be almost as many different procedures of
removal as there Zere men Zho could be removed. +is term Zas only tZo
years, and the terms of some gubernatorial appointees Zere longer, so that
each incoming Governor Zas forced to entrust the carrying out of some of
his policies to men appointed by previous Governors, Zho might be
politically opposed to him. Such nominal members of the e[ecutive
department as the state engineer, treasurer and secretary of state Zere not
appointed but elected and, therefore, even if they Zere of the Governor's

116
party, did not oZe their primary allegiance to the Governor but to the voters
and could, if they Zished, ignore his Zishes Zith impunity.

0ost  important, the study found that the Governor possessed little real
authority. Not he but the chairmen of the various committees of the
reactionary and corrupt Legislature controlled the state's purse. The
document that Zas called a state budget Zas actually a collection of
appropriations draZn up by these chairmen. No legislator—or any other
state official— revieZed the collection, balanced one appropriation against
another, cut them doZn to agreed-upon necessities or measured them
against estimated revenue. Even after the document Zas formally printed,
individual legislators continued to introduce their oZn "private" bills,
generally for pork-barrel public Zorks projects, Zhich required public
e[penditures, and these, Zhen passed, did not even appear in the "budget."
No one bothered to add them

up, so that, Zhen the Legislature adjourned, no one could be sure hoZ much
money it had appropriated. The Governor technically had the poZer to veto
appropriations, but since state laZ forbade him to veto part of an
appropriation item, legislators simply made sure that each debatable
e[penditure Zas lumped Zith one too essential to be vetoed.

The Bureau had become convinced that it Zas this lodging of administrative
poZer in Legislature rather than Governor that, more than any other single
fact, e[plained the utter failure of tZenty years of effort by a succession of
liberal Governors such as Roosevelt and +ughes to increase the
involvement of the state Zith the neZ needs of its people. Because the
Governor stood at the head of the state and represented all of its people
rather than just one assembly or senate district, the Governor must be held
responsible if the state failed to move as the voters Zanted it to move. But
going hand and hand Zith responsibility, the Bureau said, must be poZer. If
a man Zas to be held responsible for moving government, he must be given
poZer to move it, "e[ecutive poZer commensurate Zith e[ecutive
responsibility" in the Bureau's slogan.

To get poZer into the hands of the e[ecutive, the Bureau recommended a
centrali]ation of governmental functions. The 169 agencies should be
combined into tZelve departments headed by men appointed by, and

117
removable by, the Governor, Zhose term should be lengthened to four
years. An "e[ecutive budget" system should be instituted. 8nder it,
department heads Zould submit financial requests to the Governor, Zho
Zould Zeigh the requests against the resources and needs of the state and
propose an over-all budget. Only then Zould the budget be submitted to the
Legislature, Zhich Zould revieZ  it, in a series of hearings that Zould insure
that the public could understand it, and then Zould have the poZer to
reduce it by eliminating items. The Governor Zould therefore be proposing
the Zay the state Zas to be run; the Legislature Zould be revieZing the
proposal, and if the differences betZeen Legislature and Governor proved
irreconcilable, the public Zould settle them at the ne[t election.
Furthermore, after policy had been established, it Zas to be administered by
the Governor instead of by the Legislature's many committee chairmen.

The Bureau's 1915 report, Government of the State of NeZ York, Zas 768
pages long. :ith  reform leaders taking the floor to argue for its principles,
many of its key points Zere adopted by the Constitutional Convention. But
Tammany and the upstate bosses outZitted the reformers by persuading
them to combine all the proposed constitutional amendments in a single
package, and distaste for one or tZo unimportant but unpopular
amendments, combined Zith a quiet mobili]ation of Tammany and upstate
machines, resulted in the defeat of the package in a November 1915
referendum.

Bob 0oses, Zho, as a Bureau staffer, had Zorked on its 1915 report and
Zho noZ, in his neZ job, recruited other staffers Zho had Zorked on that
report, e[pected at first that the report of the Reconstruction Commission
Zould be practically a duplication. But there Zas a bigger difference
betZeen Zorking

for the Bureau and Zorking for Belle 0oskoZit]   than sumptuousness of
office arrangements. The Bureau made recommendations; 0rs. 0oskoZit]
made laZs. The Bureau got enthusiastic and e[cited; 0rs. 0oskoZit]  got
things done. And no sooner had her chief of staff begun Zork, tZo Zeeks
before his thirtieth birthday, than she began to teach him hoZ things got
done.

118
The lessons started almost immediately. :hen 0oses submitted a
preliminary outline of suggested commission goals, he included a phrase
straight out of the reform te[tbooks and his 0unicipal Civil  Service
Commission days: "Elimination of unnecessary . . . personnel." 0rs.
0oskoZit]   struck the phrase out. 3ersonnel, she said, Zere voters. You
didn't antagoni]e voters. :hen  0oses,  copying a 1915 Bureau
recommendation, suggested that the unZieldy ten-member "council" Zhich
ran the Department of Agriculture be scrapped in favor of a single,
professional commissioner, she pointed out that the council memberships
Zere distributed by the Legislature and Zere among the choicest patronage
posts it possessed. The Governor, she said, Zould need the support of the
Legislature if his program Zere to be approved. The council, she said,
Zould remain.

The lessons Zere given in daily morning conferences. 0oses Zould arrive
brimming over Zith ideas and impatient for their approval. But the
reception they received from 0rs. 0oskoZit]   Zas someZhat different from
the one his ideas had been accorded by 0r. 0oskoZit]. As 0oses e[citedly
paced around her office, she Zould sit calmly, attentive but noncommittal.
:hen   he finished, she usually Zould not say anything for several minutes.
Often, she Zould praise the ideas, and break into a smile, full of real
pleasure, at 0oses' inventiveness. But, equally often, 0oses' ideas Zould be
throZn out.

"There Zas a real divergence of opinion there," staffers recall. "0oses Zas
very theoretical, alZays Zanting to do e[actly Zhat Zas right, trying  to
make things perfect, unZilling to compromise. She Zas more practical; she
Zanted to do the same things as 0oses, but she Zanted to concentrate on
Zhat Zas possible and not jeopardi]e the attaining of those things by
stirring up trouble in other areas." And her decisions Zere alZays final.
:hile   0oses  paced and argued, trying to change her mind, 0rs. 0oskoZit]
Zould sit quietly and, Zhen 0oses had finished, Zould quietly  repeat her
earlier decision. "There Zas never any question," recalls another staffer,
"that she Zas the boss."

Often, 0oses Zould come bursting out of 0rs.  0oskoZit]'s   office  cursing
under his breath. Striding around the large room in Zhich thirty staffers had

119
desks, he Zould let the breath out. "+e used to call 0rs. 0oskoZit]  all
kinds of names Zhich Zeren't gentlemanly at all," one of the men Zho sat
in that room recalls. "I remember him saying, over and over, 'Do you knoZ
Zhat that old she son of a bitch told me this morning?' " Once, lunging
across the room in a rage so blind that he thudded into a desk, he paused for
a moment, leaned doZn to the startled man sitting at it, and muttered
grimly, "I could have kicked that Zoman in the shins!"

But, in spite of the cursing, there Zas a difference in Bob 0oses. The man
Zho had not hesitated to critici]e to their faces his superiors at the

Bureau of 0unicipal  Research Zas careful that his cursing of 0rs.
0oskoZit]   Zas done out of her earshot. "+e certainly didn't talk to her the
Zay he talked about her," a staffer recalls. :hile he might dispute a
decision heatedly, he stopped arguing once she made clear that the decision
Zas final.

Some of the staffers believed this change of attitude Zas due to a neZfound
prudence in a man aZare that the opportunity he had been given Zith the
commission might be his last chance to make good in his chosen career.
One says: "If he had talked to 0rs. 0oskoZit]   the Zay he talked to
Cleveland or Allen—or to 0r.  0oskoZit]—he    Zould have been throZn
out, and if he had been throZn out of that job, that Zould have been the end
of Bob 0oses, and he kneZ it."

Such an e[planation, hoZever, failed to take into account the full e[tent of
the difference. For one thing, 0oses Zas not only obeying 0rs. 0oskoZit]
but also obviously studying the lessons that she Zas teaching, and studying
them hard. +is conversation began to include the phrases of practical
politics as Zell as those of scientific management te[tbooks. +is analysis of
a state job began to take into consideration not only Zhether the position
Zas necessary for the betterment of mankind but also Zho had appointed
the man Zho noZ held the position. +e learned to Zeigh the governmental
gains that might be achieved by the position's elimination and by the use for
Zorthier purposes of the salary allocated to it against the political losses the
elimination might entail—hoZ  much it Zould antagoni]e the appointer and
hoZ great an obstacle such antagonism might be to Smith's over-all
program.

120
The difference Zent deeper. It Zas not just that he obeyed 0rs. 0oskoZit]
and it Zas not just that he learned her Zay of thinking; rather it Zas that,
after a Zhile, he seemed almost eager to learn. +e had alZays scorned the
considerations of "practical" politics. 3ractical politicians had crushed and
destroyed his dreams and had come near to crushing and destroying him.
They had done it Zith an ease that added humiliation to defeat. And noZ,
given a chance to learn their methods, Bob 0oses seemed almost
enthusiastic about embracing them.

+e Zas an apt pupil. In his first conferences Zith 0rs. 0oskoZit],    they had
discussed hoZ the commission Zould go about obtaining from the
Republican-dominated state agencies the information—on salary and
internal organi]ation and promotion policy, for e[ample—needed to
evaluate the agencies' Zork. 0oses' initial reaction Zas straightforZard.
:hy   couldn't commission staffers simply demand the information? he
asked. Smith Zas Governor, Zasn't he? If an agency proved recalcitrant,
Smith could simply order the agency head to cooperate. 0rs. 0oskoZit]
made clear that the commission Zouldn't proceed along any such lines. In
the first place, she said, many of the agencies regarded themselves as
independent of the Governor; an order he gave them might be disobeyed.
Even if it Zas obeyed, it could cause hard feelings and the Governor didn't
Zant hard feelings; he Zanted reform. +e had only tZo years to make a
start on it, and he Zas going to have plenty of trouble no matter hoZ he
Zent about it. +e didn't Zant any more than Zas absolutely necessary. The
commission must be very

careful not to stir up any that could possibly be avoided. And not only did
0oses, once so impatient and impolitic, become a model of discretion on
his trips to Albany, talking only to men to Zhom Smith's aides could
introduce him as a friend; to his staffers he repeated over and over, in
urgent, handZritten notes: "Be careful. Remember that Ze must not
embarrass the Governor." And the commission Zas able to avoid any angry
confrontations Zith agency heads.

The eyes that had picked Bob 0oses out of the herd of young reformers
Zere Zatching his progress. It Zas as spectacular as it had been at O[ford,
Zhere he had learned part of the political science. There, he had graduated

121
Zith honors. Belle 0oskoZit],   Zho  taught him another aspect of the
science, did not confer degrees, but she aZarded him her oZn type of
honor: by the spring of 1919, less than si[ months after she had taken over
0oses' tutelage, she Zas leaving the supervision of the State Reconstruction
Commission almost entirely in his hands.

The commission's Zork meshed Zith his personal convictions.
Reorgani]ing government to make it more responsive to social needs Zas
an aim that he had enunciated for himself in his O[ford thesis, and all his
Zork in government thereafter had only strengthened his belief in the
urgency of the need for such reorgani]ation. 0ore specifically, the
reorgani]ation on Zhich the Reconstruction Commission Zas embarked
Zas almost certainly going to be designed to increase the poZers of the
state's chief e[ecutive, and poZer for the e[ecutive Zas another theme that,
at least in implication, ran through the thesis.

The commission's Zork, moreover, Zas of a scope and an aim consonant
Zith the sZeeping, soaring, almost visionary quality of his idealism. For
years he had laughed bitterly Zith other young reformers at the open
chicanery of the Black +orse Cavalry, at the inefficiency of the system
Zhich sent ta[ collectors from seven different state agencies to the same
factory, at the utter hopelessness of the administrative machinery of NeZ
York State. NoZ, at last, here Zas a chance to replace that machinery, not
just to oil it but to take it apart and haul it aZay, and then replace it Zith a
neZ one. +ere Zas a chance to change a state, the most populous and
influential in the nation.

If 0oses Zas hopeful of  success this time, his hopefulness Zas not the
naive overconfidence of his Civil Service Commission days. The success or
failure of the Reconstruction Commission's efforts, he understood, Zas not
in the hands of the commission but depended on someone else. But he had
real hope that this time the someone else might come through.

0oses had been quite prepared to be disappointed by the Governor he had
called "a typical Tammany politician." But Al Smith's speech to the
prominent liberal Democrats, independents and "federal" Republicans on
the commission at its first meeting had certainly not been pro forma.

122
0angled cigar stub stabbing out from his Zet lips at the vested, Zatch-
fobbed civic

leaders before him, he had rasped, "Is this commission going to do
something or is it just going to offer a report? Are you going to have
something definite that can be put into effect to benefit the state? Because if
you are not, the sooner you report and go out of e[istence the better." Nor
had Smith's actions been pro forma Zhen the Black +orse Cavalry refused
his request for $75,000 to enable the commission to begin Zork. +ere Zas a
ready-made opportunity to reap political capital. As 0rs. 0oskoZit]   had
surmised, the GO3's federal Zing raged against their party's legislators,
along Zith most of the state's important neZspapers. :ithout doing
anything else, simply by letting the commission die and pointing out that
the Legislature had killed it, Smith Zould have scored a political coup. But
Smith did something else. +e asked the members of the commission to put
up the $75,000 themselves, and Zhen they did, he publicly promised that he
Zould abide by, and sponsor, any recommendations it made Zhen it
completed its report.

Often noZ, in the late afternoon, the Governor Zould drop by the
commission offices. +e came primarily to obtain 0rs. 0oskoZit]'s    advice
on some problem or other. "You could see," says one of the young
commission staffers, "that Smith really trusted her. Over and over again, I
heard him say, 'NoZ, 0rs. 0,  you do so and so or you look into such and
such this Zeek and let me knoZ hoZ you feel about it.' " But on his Zay to
the little office in the corner that had been reserved for him—and equipped
Zith a big brass spittoon—the Governor Zould stop and chat Zith the
staffers, telling them the inside stories of political in-fighting going on in
Albany or kidding them about the pretty secretaries in the commission
stenographic pool ne[t door. :hen  he finished talking to 0rs.  0oskoZit],
he Zould call them into his office and—betZeen Zell-aimed e[pectorations
toZard the spittoon—he Zould tell more stories. +e Zould talk to them
seriously, too. The frank, serious blue eyes that looked so out of place over
the big-veined nose and the gold-filled teeth in the flushed face Zould stare
straight into theirs. I Zon't let you doZn, he Zould say. You just get the
facts and come up Zith the recommendations. I'll fight for them. "Nobody

123
could help liking Al  Smith," one of the young men said. "You had to like
him—and you had to believe in him."

0oses had Zorked hard before. +e Zorked harder noZ. Some of his young
staffers Zorked late; Zhen they left, a light Zas almost alZays still shining
through the frosted-glass top half of the door to 0oses' office. In the
morning, the staffers Zould find on their desks long, detailed memos—
signed "Robert 0oses, Chief of Staff"—outlining  neZ assignments.

0oses Zould  critici]e  staffers' reports mercilessly. :hen he returned them,
they Zould be adorned Zith large, angry double question marks. Sloppy
phrasing Zould be slashed through. "0ost essential question not discussed
at all," 0oses scribbled on one report. ":hat  overhead organi]ation do you
propose? Do you believe in a commission or a single commissioner? If the
latter, should a rules-making board be attached to him?"

Staffers became accustomed to seeing 0oses' handZriting filling the
margins and spilling over their type and, scraZled across the top of the first
page, heavily underlined: "REVISE ALL!"

Activity  in the office revolved around the tall, Ziry figure Zith  the shock of
black hair Zho Zorked in shirt sleeves rolled up to the elboZ. +e had
appointed an "assistant chief of staff," reformer Channing SchZeit]er, but,
too impatient to Zork through a chain of command, Zhen he had something
to say to one of the staffers, he Zould come out of his office and say it
himself.

The tension disclosed in the heavy underlining of the Zritten criticism on
the reports Zould sometimes spill over in short but violent bursts of anger.
:hen   a key piece of paper Zas misfiled one day and a secretary had to
report she could not locate it, he glared around the room and shouted, Zhile
the staffers discreetly studied the tops of their desks, ":here the hell did it
go? :ho's  got it? :ho's   got it?"

But if Bob 0oses  often shouted, he also often laughed, his teeth gleaming
in a broad infectious grin, and his laughter Zas never louder than Zhen it
Zas directed at one of his oZn mistakes—Zhich he Zas usually the first to
point out. +e Zas friendly Zith  the staffers, seeming to spend as much time

124
during the day out in the big room in Zhich their desks Zere located as in
his office, hunting up luncheon companions Zith an easy and charming air
that brought together large groups to accompany him to the German
rathskellers that lined the street back of the +all of Records. Over lunch, he
Zas a good listener and, Zith his vivid accounts of his latest hassle Zith
0rs.  0oskoZit],   and his vivid descriptions of the big shots on the
commission to Zhom she had introduced him, a good talker.

+is personality, his knoZledge and his application inspired the young men
under him. 0any of them Zould  go on to distinguished careers, but they
Zould look back across the decades at the time they spent Zorking for
0oses as one of the high points of their lives.

" 'Dedication' has become sort of a phony Zord," staffer John Gaus said
shortly before he died in 1969, "but that's Zhat 0oses had. 3eople Zho are
terrifically  hard Zorkers you have got to respect anyZay, but it Zas more
than just hoZ hard he Zorked. +e Zas a vibrant and driving person—you
just kneZ that if you Zanted to Zork for  him, you had to be on your toes,
but on the other hand that you Zould be treated Zith complete frankness,
and you also kneZ that here Zas one person Zho Zas really thinking of the
public interest above everything else. +e talked to you hard and direct, but
he made you feel that you Zere both on the same side, fighting for the same
things. +e made you Zant to Zork for him."*

* 0oses so fascinated Gaus that for more than tZo decades, Zhile the
young social Zorker Zas carving out a reputation as an author of books on
public administration and as a professor of government at +arvard
8niversity, never seeing 0oses during all that time, he collected every
neZspaper clipping about 0oses that he saZ, just so he could keep track of
his career. After he retired, in 1961, Gaus began collecting clippings on
0oses again, filing them in cartons Zhich he kept in the attic of his 8tica,
NeZ York, home, and he kept filling those cartons until the day of his death.

:ith   the state's coffers closed to the commission by the Legislature, money
Zas constantly tight. Salaries Zere very loZ. But the young men said it
didn't matter. In the spring of 1919, funds ran out entirely, and Zhile Smith
and 0rs. 0oskoZit]    scrounged for private contributions, the young men
received neither salary nor e[penses for si[ Zeeks. Gaus and 0orris

125
Lambie, another young reformer, researching in Albany, Zere able to keep
eating only by borroZing money from relatives. Once Gaus Zrote
SchZeit]er, "Since the Zolf  is approaching so near that I can hear his hoZls
distinctly, I Zonder if  you can find one of those precious valentines lying
around signed by Belle 0oskoZit]  and assuring the bearer that the
Guaranty Trust Zill do its damnedest to trade it in for good 8.S. notes. If
last month's salary is in the offing, Zhy I Zant to be there, too." But Zhen
Gaus at last got hold of the pieces of information he needed to complete his
report on the State Labor Department, money Zas forgotten. 0ailing the
report to SchZeit]er, Zith  a special-delivery stamp that cost him a
substantial portion of the last change in his pocket, Gaus attached to the
report a note: "+appy Days! Let the people rule!"

0oses' jubilation matched Gaus's. None of the staffers found any reason to
complain about their chief's enthusiasm over their successes. +e had, they
said, no "side," no pomposity. +e Zas, they said, very "democratic." If they
noticed a difference betZeen the manner in Zhich he treated them, men
Zho Zere almost his equals, and the manner in Zhich he treated men a step
loZer on the commission's totem pole, they didn't think it important. But the
difference Zas there. The memos 0oses addressed to loZer-echelon
personnel Zere different in tone from even the most peremptory of those he
sent to the staffers. In a memo addressed to a chart maker, for e[ample,
0oses laid out his assignment in the tone of an army drill sergeant, un-
softened by a single "please" or courteous adverb. "In connection Zith your
assignment," he Zrote, "you Zill do the folloZing.  . . . You Zill  prepare a
chart shoZing the present departments. . . . You Zill prepare a chart
shoZing the proposed organi]ation. . . . You Zill keep in touch Zith 0r.
Gaus, 0r. Buck and myself. . . . You Zill  consult other members of the staff
before putting the chart in ink."

0oses' energy seemed ine[haustible. For the summer of 1919, he and 0ary,
along Zith tZo  other couples Zith small children, the +enry Brueres and
Frances 3erkins and her husband, 3aul :ilson, rented bungaloZs near a
beach in Douglaston, 4ueens. 0oses never caught any train out from
0anhattan but the latest available, Zhich arrived in Douglaston about eight-
thirty. Darkness Zould be falling, but 0oses Zould  alZays go for a sZim?
3lunging into the Zater, he Zould strike straight out Little Neck Bay, his

126
arms Zindmilling  rhythmically and poZerfully,  his head groZing smaller
and smaller in the distance. +is friends Zould joke that he didn't seem
likely to stop until he had crossed Long Island Sound and reached the shore
of :estchester  County, Zhich, on clear days, Zas a loZ black line on the
hori]on.

"+e Zas a Zonderfui sZimmer,"  Frances 3erkins Zould recall. "I never saZ
a man Zho could sZim so long, so easily, so far, Zith such confidence and
security. :e  used to get nervous. +e'd go Zay out Zhere you

couldn't see him. It being dark, Ze'd finally lose sight of him entirely. . . .
One night he must have been gone an hour and a half before he came back."
The Zatchers thought he had droZned. "+enry Zas discussing hoZ Ze
should break the neZs to 0ary. ':hat   shall Ze tell her?' :e  Zere all  urging
each other, 'Let's Zait a little Zhile. Don't call the police yet.' " It Zasn't
until long after dark that the an[ious vieZers on the beach saZ 0oses
returning.

On Sundays, 0oses didn't go into his office but, as if unable to rela[, Zould
spend the days energetically teaching the three sets of children to sZim, the
evenings telling them stories he made up himself. "+e Zas so good Zith
children," 0iss  3erkins recalled.

By the latter part of the summer, 0oses Zas forced to Zork even harder.
The commission's funds Zere running out, and the private contributions
Zhich had sustained its Zork Zere falling off. :ith    his usual disregard for
financial considerations, 0oses had paid little attention to this state of
affairs. If Gaus and Lambie Zere living off relatives, so Zas he —the major
part of his income Zas still coming from his parents—but this didn't seem
to bother him, and as for the Zork of the commission, he vaguely assumed
that Zith all those Zealthy men interested in its success, Zhatever Zas
needed Zould somehoZ be raised. They had so much money they'd never
miss a little of it, he Zould say. And anyZay, fund raising Zas not his
province but that of the commission's e[ecutive committee. In July,
hoZever, 0rs. 0oskoZit]    told him  that he must begin laying off his staff at
once. +e had to let some of the young men go Zith only a Zeek's notice. By
Labor Day, the staff had been disbanded Some sections of the report e[isted
only in recommendation memos, others only in rough-draft form. Only a

127
feZ sections Zere actually completed. Lugging the commission's files to his
already cramped apartment, 0oses Zrote the rest of the report alone. By
October, it Zas finished.

The Report of the Reconstruction Commission to Governor Alfred E. Smith
on Retrenchment and Reorgani]ation in the State Government contained
little that Zas startlingly original. It  didn't have to. In that government, little
had changed. The Bureau of 0unicipal Research, in presenting its report to
the 1915 Constitutional Convention, had concluded that the state's
administrative organi]ation "has nothing in common e[perience or human
reason to commend it." But in the intervening four years, the situation had
only Zorsened. The Bureau's investigators had counted Zith shock 169
separate and independent state agencies; in 1919, 0oses' investigators
counted 187. The organi]ation chart of the sovereign state of NeZ York still
looked like a Zeb spun by a drunken spider, and the man elected to
represent all the people of the state Zas still trapped in the Zeb, unable to
e[ercise poZer or leadership.

:hat   made the report Zritten in the small apartment on Eighty-seventh
Street a remarkable document Zas its clarion tone and its clarity. VieZed as
part of the long reform movement in NeZ York State, Zhich set much of the
tone for 3rogressivism in the 8nited States, it Zas the summing up of

this movement. The essence of the spirit of reform Zas captured in its 419
pages, so completely did the Zords they bore synthesi]e both its philosophy
and its passion.

The prose Zith Zhich 0oses prefaced the report had in particular the ring
of the battle trumpet. The 5,200-Zord opening declaration of "8nderlying
3rinciples," Zritten  almost entirely by 0oses and left untouched by Belle
0oskoZit],   contained hard, lucid, driving reasoning that reduced
comple[ities to fundamentals. Dealing Zith a point that reformers generally
tried to avoid because of their fear that it Zas a Zeak spot in their argument,
0oses plunged instead to its heart and found there complete compatibility
Zith the basic reform belief in an increased participation by the citi]en in
government.

128
"The only serious argument advanced against . . . [the] proposed
reorgani]ation and budget system is that it makes the Governor a c]ar," he
Zrote.

The Governor does not hold office by hereditary right. +e is elected for a
fi[ed  term by universal suffrage. +e is controlled in all minor appointments
by the civil service laZ. +e cannot spend a dollar of the public money
Zhich is not authori]ed by the Legislature of the State. +e is subject to
removal by impeachment. If he Zere given the poZers here proposed he
Zould stand out in the limelight of public opinion and scrutiny. Economy in
administration, if accomplished, Zould redound to his credit. :aste and
e[travagance could be laid at his door. Those Zho cannot endure the
medicine because it is too strong must be content Zith Zaste, inefficiency
and bungling—and steadily rising cost of government. The system here
proposed is more democratic, not more "royal," than that noZ in e[istence.
Democracy does not merely mean periodic elections. It means a
government held accountable to the people betZeen elections. In order that
the people may hold their government to account they must have a
government that they can understand. No citi]en can hope to understand the
present collection of departments, offices, boards and commissions, or the
present methods of appropriating money. A Governor Zith a cabinet of
reasonable si]e, responsible for proposing a program in the annual budget
and for administering the program as modified by the Legislature, may be
brought daily under public scrutiny, be held accountable to the Legislature
and public opinion, and be turned out of office if he fails to measure up to
public requirements. If this is not democracy then it is difficult to imagine
Zhat is.

As in 0oses' O[ford  thesis, the tone of "8nderlying 3rinciples"  Zas often
lecturing and dogmatic. Refusing to debate Zhether the consolidated state
agencies should be under Governor or Legislature, he Zrote: "The
Constitution says that the e[ecutive poZer shall be vested in the Governor. .
. . There is no other Zay." But, as in the thesis, the tone Zas also
evangelistic. "A consolidation of a hundred or more offices . . . affects
political patronage vitally," he Zrote, "and it requires considerable courage
and intelligence"; nevertheless, state after state Zas taking steps toZard
such reorgani]ation. A steadily more informed citi]enry, demanding

129
efficiency and economy in government, Zas pushing them forZard, he said.
It Zas time for NeZ York  to join the march.

In those 5,200 Zords—and in other sections of the 22,000-Zord "Sum-

mary of Recommendations" Zith Zhich the report began—Zas distilled the
essence of the philosophy of 3rogressivism in general and the Bureau of
0unicipal  Research in particular. It Zas all there, the byZords Zhich NeZ
York's reformers had been chanting for tZenty years—"e[ecutive budget,"
"longer terms," "consolidation," "responsibility," "commensurate poZer"—
the incantation, like a drum roll underlying the chant, of "efficiency and
economy," the idealistic belief that citi]en knoZledge of the intricacies of
government and participation in those intricacies Zas the panacea for
democracy. At one point, defending the imposition of an income ta[, 0oses
Zrote, "One of the possible benefits [because of people's interest in the
spending of their money] Zill be the development among . . . citi]ens of . . .
a more vital interest in state organi]ation and e[penditures."

In specific recommendations, 0oses folloZed the Bureau's creed, e[cept
Zhere practical considerations introduced by 0rs. 0oskoZit]   intruded,
commandment by commandment.

The 187 agencies should be consolidated into departments—si[teen instead
of tZelve because of 0rs. 0oskoZit]—and   each department headed by a
single officer e[cept in certain cases Zhere considerations—0rs.
0oskoZit]'s—dictated   the retention of a council or board.

The Governor should be given the poZer to appoint—and remove—all
department heads and key administrative officials, Zith the e[ception of the
comptroller, Zhose independence is necessary because his function should
be to act as a Zatchdog on e[penditures, including those of the Governor.

The Governor should be given the poZer to designate certain of his
appointees as a "Cabinet," Zhich Zould meet regularly to advise him.

The Governor's term should be e[tended to four years.

130
The long list of elected state officials should be reduced to the Governor,
lieutenant governor, attorney general and comptroller.

An "e[ecutive budget" system—including not only e[penditures but a plan
for raising the revenues necessary to pay for them—should be draZn up by
the Governor, and only then submitted to the Legislature; it should be
safeguarded, at every step, by public hearings to doubly insure that the
financial policy of the state Zould not be decided upon behind the closed
doors of either E[ecutive Chamber or committee room.

The commission's recommendations, Zhich took 44 pages to summari]e,
Zere backed up Zith 375 pages of remarkable detail. The governments of
other states—every other state—Zere analy]ed. So Zere every one of NeZ
York State's 187 agencies. Included Zere descriptions of each agency's
poZers, tabulations of the laZs Zhich had, over the years, given them those
poZers, analyses of hoZ their poZers overlapped those of other agencies,
descriptions of the poZer they Zould be given under the proposed
reorgani]ation plan, lists of the personnel of every e[isting and every
proposed agency, the salaries and duties of the personnel, the organi]ation
charts (some of Zhich, folded for inclusion in the bound report, opened out
to a full five feet in length). Lists Zere made of the personnel each of the
departments should have—doZn to the precise number of clerks a specific
commissioner might need.

For internal changes Zithin agencies or departments—and thousands of
them Zere recommended—only neZ laZs, "statutory changes," Zould be
required, the report concluded. For three of the proposed major
governmental changes—creation of the si[teen departments Zith provision
that all e[isting state agencies and any that might be established in the
future Zould be placed in one of them; institution of the e[ecutive budget
system; and e[tension of the Governor's term to four years—the state's
constitution Zould have to be amended, each amendment requiring passage
by tZo Legislatures, elected in different years, and approved by the state's
voters in a referendum.

0oses assumed a proprietary attitude toZard the report. Certainly he Zas
the driving force in its preparation, Zrote its brilliant introduction himself
and reZrote many other sections. Yet he Zas not the only person Zho had

131
contributed to it, and he seemed unZilling to admit that fact. "I Zrote the
report, no question about it," he insisted in later years. "I Zrote or reZrote
everything in it."

It Zas the practice at the time to list at the beginning of such reports the
names of all individuals and organi]ations Zho had Zorked on them, but
most members of 0oses' staff found that their names Zere mentioned
noZhere. 8nhappy about that, they Zere even more bitter that the Bureau,
Zhich they revered and on Zhose principles and 1915 report on the same
subject this report Zas based, Zas not mentioned even once in the document
they regarded as the historical clima[ of all its Zork, not even in those
sections for Zhich the Bureau had, at 0oses' request, done all the Zork.
0oreover, 0oses'  boast that he "reZrote everything" in the report Zas not
strictly correct. Comparison of staffers' rough-draft recommendations for
tZo departments—the only such rough drafts available today—Zith the
finished versions published in the report shoZ that they are practically
identical.

0oses' attitude led to one particularly bitter episode. 3arts of the "Summary
of Recommendations," the second half of the introduction, Zere Zritten, at
0oses' request, by Charles A. Beard, then director of the Bureau's Training
School and already a noted historian. In particular, Beard Zrote the
summary of reorgani]ation advances in other states. :hether 0oses did
any reZriting at all of Beard's Zork cannot be determined, but Bureau
staffers Zho saZ the historian's original copy feel it Zas included in the
final report substantially as Zritten. They Zere astounded, therefore, to hear
that after Beard had Zritten a maga]ine article on reorgani]ation advances,
0oses had accused the author of An Economic Interpretation of the
Constitution of plagiarism.

"A bunch of us Zalked into Beard's office one day and there he Zas, just
ready to spit he Zas so outraged, Zaving this letter from 0oses," recalls
one staffer. "The letter said Beard had, in effect, plagiari]ed from the
commission's report. :e  Zere astounded; in the academic Zorld, there are
feZ sins as bad as stealing another felloZ's Zork and that Zas Zhat 0oses
Zas accusing Beard of—and Ze all kneZ Beard had Zritten that section,
not 0oses.

132
And as Ze Zere reading the letter, Beard kept muttering, ':ell, Zhat do you
think of this? :hat   do you think of this?' +e Zas so angry he didn't knoZ
Zhat else to say."

:hether   0oses Zrote all of  it or part, the Reconstruction Commission
report Zas something of Zhich a man could be proud. From the moment, on
October 10, 1919, that it Zas published, it Zas hailed as a historic
document, not only by Smith, Zho had sponsored it, and not only by the
reformers, Zho saZ in it the finest e[position of their philosophy, but. more
importantly, by the men Zho Belle 0oskoZit]   had hoped Zould hail it—
the Republican "federal croZd." Charles Evans +ughes—former crusading
investigator, Governor, Secretary of State, Justice of the Supreme Court and
Republican nominee for the presidency, noZ returned to private life as a
laZyer and "first citi]en"  of NeZ  York State—and Congressman Ogden
Livingston 0ills,   a noted authority on ta[ation and government finance,
volunteered to head a City Club study of the report, Zhich concluded that it
Zas "deserving of unreserved approbation." :hen a 3hiladelphia reformer
solicited suggestions from Colonel +enry L. Stimson on reorgani]ing
3ennsylvania's archaic governmental structure, Stimson replied Zith a copy
of the report and an attached note that said, "This paper is, I think, the most
helpful one that I could put in your hands ... to give you an idea of . . . Zhat
I believe to be the correct principles of state government."

133
An informal "citi]ens  committee" Zas formed to back efforts to implement
the report, and a little money Zas raised for the fight. 0oses Zas named
secretary of the committee and given a small salary that, Zith Bella's
subsidy, enabled him to continue Zorking full time for reorgani]ation, and,
in January 1920, Zhen Smith publicly announced that he Zould push during
the upcoming legislative session for adoption of the report's
recommendations, he Zas assigned the job of making the committee an
effective force to assist the Governor.

The first step Zas to "get the names," to enlarge the committee by adding
members Zhose prestige Zould lend it political clout. :ith   +ughes, 0ills
and Stimson already aboard, the job Zas easy. As the letterhead of the
Citi]ens Committee o& Reorgani]ation in the State Government Zas
continually reprinted so that the names of the latest joiners Zould be on it,
the list above "Robert 0oses, Secretary" came to include a cross-section of
elements of the state Zho normally Zould have had nothing to do Zith a
Governor Zho bore the stamp of Tammany.

The second step Zas to get money for the fight, and 0oses Zrote the
members of the Citi]ens Committee for help. Their responses Zere smaller
than their names—Stimson Zould scribble to his secretary on each of
0oses' appeals, "Send $25"—but numerous enough to enable 0oses to
move the committee's files out of his apartment and into a small office at
305 BroadZay. :hen  the three constitutional amendments Zere introduced
in the Legislature on February 9, 1920, 0oses Zrote again: "The campaign
for adoption must noZ be pushed Zith the greatest energy. ... It Zill be
necessary to raise about

$2,000." :hen,  in  0ay,  legislative committee chairmen refused to let the
amendments come to the floor for a vote and Smith announced that he Zas
considering calling a special session to force a decision, 0oses Zrote, ":e
need $1,500." "This budget," he added, "presumes the minimum of
e[penditures. To date, the e[penses of this committee have been kept doZn
by volunteer assistance and maintenance of an e[tra office at the home of
the secretary Zithout e[pense to the committee." The plea so moved
Stimson that he scribbled: "Send $50."

134
For "e[ecutive support," 0oses—for  the first time in his life—did  not have
to plead. You just get the facts and come up Zith the recommendations, Al
Smith had told the commission staffers. +e Zould fight for them. And noZ,
he fought, stumping the state to remind the voters that the commission's
recommendations Zere supported oy the GO3's most prestigious members
and should be treated as nonpartisan proposals instead of as bills being
pushed on a Republican Legislature by a Democratic Governor trying to
curb its poZers.

Al Smith on the stump Zas a political Zeapon of the highest caliber. "I
believe that I enjoy some little reputation for keeping my Zord," he said in
one speech. "I Zill give it—I  Zill  give it to this Legislature—that if they
Zill  come Zith me, take this report, do the best that they can Zith it, I am
not going to be the felloZ Zho insists on getting his bill the Zay it is printed
[Zithout  compromise, in the form it is first introduced] because usually that
felloZ  doesn't Zant the bill. . . . And I Zill  promise them noZ that at no
time in the future Zill  it ever be referred to by me, or anybody over Zhom I
have any control, as any program of mine. The fact of the matter is: It is not
my program. The real truth about it is I could not think that all out myself."

:hen,   at a :omen's  City Club debate betZeen Smith and Lieutenant
Governor Seymour LoZman, a Republican, LoZman charged that the
reorgani]ation program Zas "Governor Smith's attempt to make himself a
king," Smith arose and, after alluding—just long enough to bring tears to
the Zomen's eyes—to his poverty-stricken youth in an Oliver Street
tenement, pointed to himself Zith a deprecatory gesture and said, Zith
plenty of sarcasm and just the right little touch of bitterness: "Behold the
.ing,  the .ing   of Oliver Street."

To get the ma[imum use out of the big names on the Citi]ens Committee,
0rs.  0oskoZit]   Zanted them—and their support of Smith's proposals—
kept in the public eye. But they Zere under pressure from furious
Republican regulars Zho told them, correctly, that their financial
contributions and prestige Zere being used to build the career of a
Tammany man at the e[pense of their oZn party. 0any, in fact, Zere on the
verge of resigning. Tact had to be used in handling them. Tact had never
been one of 0oses' long suits, but noZ he had been taught by Belle

135
0oskoZit].   :hen   he arranged luncheons of the committee and asked its
big names to make speeches at the luncheons, speeches that the press Zould
report, he made the requests, and pressed for ansZers, persistently but
gently. +e displayed a Zillingness to compromise that Zas also neZ to him.
:hen   some members of the committee, e[pressing doubts that all the
report's recommendations Zere correct,

threatened to resign, 0oses Zrote assuring them that "these amendments
are not final, but are subject to correction after consultation." There Zere
feZ resignations—none from significant "names"—and, month after month,
0oses directed an almost daily fusillade of support for Smith's position
from +ughes, Stimson, :ickersham  and even, in Zhat amounted to the
most impressive coup for Smith, from former State Republican Chairman
Frederick C. Tanner.

8nder this onslaught, the Legislature reeled. Republican assemblymen and
senators assured the public that they Zere interested in reorgani]ation too,
and introduced bills of their oZn Zhich they said had the same objectives as
the commission's. This put the battle on a technical level. Smith needed
rapid analyses of the Republican bills to determine Zhether their sponsors'
claims for them Zere true. 0rs. 0oskoZit]    summoned 0oses to Albany
and, Zith 0ary  making sure he had the $5.42 for the fare in his pocket, he
left the apartment at 6 a.m. to catch the early train to the capital.

At first, 0oses  Zorked in a small office in the recesses of the capitol, but as
the legislative session moved toZard a clima[, he Zas called more and
more frequently to the E[ecutive Chamber. +aving him at hand saved
everybody time. If the Governor and his advisers Zanted to knoZ hoZ
many jobs a proposed GO3 bill Zould eliminate and Zhose jobs they Zere,
or Zhether the Zording of a bill conflicted Zith  seemingly contradictory
Zording in the Constitution, or Zhether there Zas any precedent to back up
a proposal of their oZn, or hoZ many secretaries there Zere in the 3ublic
:orks   Department, or hoZ much Zas spent annually on printing by the
Insurance Department, or under Zhat act the Conservation Commission Zas
empoZered to bottle and sell Zater from Saratoga Springs, it Zas easier to
ask 0oses than to try to find out the ansZer themselves. Because 0oses
alZays kneZ. "+e thought fast and he ansZered quickly," says one Zho

136
observed him at this time. "+e seemed to knoZ the makeup of every
department in the state and Zhat its poZers Zere and e[actly Zhich sections
of laZ it  got those poZers from. And he almost seemed to knoZ it all by
heart."

0oses' technical e[pertise gave Smith the ammunition he needed. :hen
Republican legislators introduced bills that appeared to consolidate all
public Zorks construction into a single department headed by a "3ublic
:orks   Commissioner," it Zas 0oses Zho discovered—and enabled Smith
to announce to the press—that the bills did not specifically mention any
method of appointment for the commissioner and that, under parallel
sections of the State Constitution, he Zould therefore be an elected official
rather than one appointed by and responsible to the Governor. :hen
Republican legislators introduced bills that created the si[teen neZ
departments Zhich the commission had recommended, it Zas 0oses Zho
discovered—so that Smith could announce—that the bills contained no
provision that all state agencies be placed in one or another of the
departments and, therefore, under e[isting provisions of the Constitution,
all e[isting agencies Zould continue to be independent of the departments.
A furious Republican senator strode into the E[ecutive Chamber one day
and asked Smith. ":ho  is this

felloZ  0oses anyZay?" The Governor leaned back and laughed. ":hy," he
said, "he's one of your croZd. +e's a Republican." (The senator, checking,
found that 0oses did, indeed, call himself an "independent Republican.")
By the time the session ended, the Legislature had been bludgeoned into
passing bills incorporating most of the Reconstruction Commission's
"statutory changes" and the si[teen-department constitutional amendment,
although the amendment Zould have to be repassed by another Legislature.
And although the Legislature voted doZn the e[ecutive-budget and four-
year-term proposals, 0oses felt confident that the Zhole program Zould be
passed during Smith's ne[t term.

But the ne[t term Zas not Smith's. :ith   the backing of many of the old-line
reformers, independents and Republicans Zho normally Zould have
supported his opponent, Nathan L. 0iller, the Governor ran 1,090,000 votes
ahead of his ticket. But the head of the ticket Zas presidential candidate

137
James 0. Co[, and Co[,  along Zith the Democratic vice presidential
nominee, young Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Zas caught up in the +arding
landslide and lost NeZ York State by 1,200,000 votes. In an era in Zhich
ticket splitting Zas far more unusual than it Zould be a half century later,
more than a million NeZ Yorkers had split their ballot to vote for Al Smith.
The phenomenon Zas considered unprecedented in American politics.
Elderly reformer :illiam    Church Osborn Zired Smith, "Even in defeat, you
came closer to sZimming up Niagara Falls than any man I have ever seen."
But the man the Zire Zas addressed to Zas, nonetheless, a loser—and,
0oses Zas afraid, so Zas the Reconstruction Commission program.

For a Zhile, dreams had seemed near to reali]ation. Genuine
accomplishment had seemed close. 0oses had, after all, been the moving
force in the drafting of a plan to remake the machinery by Zhich more than
ten million people Zere governed, and he had Zatched the bills that
embodied a substantial portion of that plan move tortuously but steadily
along the road to reality. But Zithout at least the si[teen-department
constitutional amendment, the statutory changes Zere meaningless, and, in
1921, 0iller  opposed the amendment's repassage and the Legislature never
let it, or the e[ecutive-budget and four-year-term proposals, out of
committee. The Citi]ens Committee on Reorgani]ation in the State
Government—Zith its "e[tra  office at the home of the secretary Zithout
e[pense to the committee" —Zas disbanded.

To anyone Zho Zas, at the time, Zatching the career of the secretary, these
developments must have seemed just another defeat in a life already
crammed Zith defeats. In reality, hoZever, something neZ had happened,
something that Zould not only insure that the Reconstruction Commission's
proposals Zould eventually become laZ but that Zould also change the
shape of Bob 0oses' life.

Out of public office in 1921 and 1922, Al Smith Zas back in NeZ York,
Zorking as president of a large trucking company. The company's oZners
Zere Irishmen from the Old Neighborhood, men Zho Zere not only the

friends of Al Smith's youth but Zho, in his maturity, idoli]ed  him. Since the
company's offices Zere on Canal Street, only eight blocks from City +all, a
continual stream of city officials, men Zho had risen through the Tammany

138
organi]ation Zith  Smith, Zalked the eight blocks to drop in on "the
Governor" and pass the time of day. +oping that Smith Zould accord them
the supreme honor, an invitation to Zalk home Zith him across the
Neighborhood to his apartment on Oliver Street, the company's oZners and
the city officials Zould  often find e[cuses to hang around his office.in the
late afternoon.

0oses, meanZhile, Zas Zorking  (for a neZ reform organi]ation, the NeZ
York State Association) in a shabby cubicle at 305 BroadZay barely large
enough for his desk and that of a part-time secretary. +e Zas close to being
out of even quasi-official touch Zith government. Occasionally, he Zould
have lunch Zith one of the feZ people he kneZ in the City +all area, former
Bureau or Reconstruction Commission staffers like Ernie :illvon-seder
Zho Zere noZ loZer-echelon city  employees, but more often he had to eat
alone. +e had feZ visitors. But, in the late afternoon, the phone Zould often
ring. 0oses Zould  pick up the receiver. "Bob," Al Smith Zould rasp, "hoZ
about Zalking home Zith me?"

The tZo men made an odd pair as they Zalked through the Zinding, narroZ
streets of the LoZer East Side in the tZilight, one of them tall, slim,
handsome and aristocratic in bearing, the other, short, potbellied, florid. The
taller man, striding out Zith long, springing steps, continually had to
shorten his stride to let the other, Zho Zalked Zith a sloZ, e[tremely
pigeon-toed gait, catch up. Their progress Zas further sloZed by Smith's
popularity. +e seemed to knoZ almost every man and Zoman Zho passed,
and Zhen one of them stopped to chat, he Zould stop, too, and talk Zith
him Zithout appearance of impatience Zhile his companion Zould stride
restlessly in little circles, or, trying desperately to stand still and listen
politely, Zould nervously clench and unclench his fists.

But betZeen the chats Zith passers-by, there Zas plenty of time for talking
betZeen 0oses and Smith, and not all the talking Zas done by the former
Governor. In fact, as tZilight Zalk succeeded tZilight Zalk,  more and more
of it Zas done by 0oses. The ideas on government Zhich he had poured
forth for almost a decade, the theories, proposals, plans, advice—the
dreams—Zith Zhich he had bored staffers at the Bureau of 0unicipal
Research, e[aminers at the 0unicipal Civil Service Commission, borough

139
presidents, park commissioners and a legion of minor city officials, noZ
Zere poured forth again.

The late-afternoon calls from Smith became more frequent. :ith regularity
noZ, Zhen the tZo men had arrived at the old red-brick tenement in Zhich
the former Governor lived, he Zould invite 0oses up for dinner.

And one day Bob 0oses barged into Ernie :illvonseder's  office. +e Zas
striding fast, almost running, more e[cited than Ernie had ever seen him
before.

"Ernie," he said, "Al Smith listens to me."

for them. Bob 0oses Zas neither circumcised nor bar-mit]vah, but young
Al Smith Zas a faithful St. James altar boy, aZakening early on bleak, cold
Zinter mornings—Zith  his mother alZays up even earlier to prepare his
breakfast—and trudging up Cherry +ill in the dark to serve at the si[-
o'clock mass.

At the age at Zhich Bob 0oses Zas being led on horseback along DZight
Street and taken for Zalks in Central 3ark, Al Smith Zas scampering along
the hectic LoZer East Side Zaterfront, playing hide-and-seek among the
bales and crates that cluttered the East River piers, dangling daringly from
the sailing ships' boZsprits that made a line of spears over the horse-draZn
trucks clattering along the cobblestones of South Street, playing tag, during
an era in Zhich the city didn't build playgrounds in slums, in narroZ side
streets or in the Zider cleared spaces alongside the big, smelly fish market
at the foot of Fulton Street, and tobogganing in Zinter doZn streets left
uncleared of snoZ by a city that didn't bother to ploZ the slums. :hen he
learned to sZim, he learned in the river, Zith the spars of the sailing ships
looming overhead and garbage floating on the Zater. Al Smith never Zent
to Central 3ark; that Zas regarded by the neighborhood as a preserve for the
Zealthy—"uptoZners,"  the Fourth :ard  called them—Zho Zould  send
their Eton-collared children to its quiet glades Zith private tutors. +is idea
of an outing Zas the DoZntoZn Tammany Club's annual picnic, for Zhich
hundreds of sZeating neighborhood families—and cases of beer, candy,
ears of corn, ice cream and cheap toys—Zere loaded into huge Zagons for
the nine-mile trip to Sul]er's +arlem River 3ark at 126th Street.

140
At the age at Zhich Bob 0oses Zas being taught by private schools and
private tutors, Al Smith Zas being taught by the good nuns of the St. James
3arochial School and trying to avoid Father .ean's stern eye. And Zhile
0oses' tutors reported that he Zas brilliant, the nuns had a very different
story to tell about the Smith boy. As one chronicler put it: "The boy had no
great fondness for books . . . and shoZed no inclination to study. ... +e
never cared much for school. A passing mark Zas all he ever desired —and
all he ever achieved." And he didn't alZays achieve that. Al Smith had
bright, cheerful eyes and an appealing smile, but there Zas only one
characteristic that set him apart from his classmates—his unusually loud
voice. It Zas no surprise to the nuns that he Zon medals in cityZide
parochial-school public-speaking contests.

At the age of thirteen, he didn't have to Zorry about school any more.
0oses' father retired young, but Smith's, a large, poZerful Civil :ar
veteran of thundering voice, an ine[haustible supply of funny stories and
many friends, had to Zork too hard. Driving his oZn truck, loading and
unloading heavy cargoes, he Zould come home no matter hoZ cold the day
so Zet Zith sZeat that his first move'Zould be to peel off his shirt and
undershirt and plunge his face and arms into a tub of cold Zater to cool off.
+e Zorked si[  or seven days a Zeek and often he got home so late that
there Zould be days and nights on end Zhen Al Zould not see the father
Zho liked to put his little boy on his knee during family e[cursions to the
beer gardens along the BoZery, regale him Zith stories and let him sneak
sips of his beer. In 1885,

the father's health broke, and, unable any longer to do manual Zork,
uneducated and Zith no skills, he Zas forced to take Zork as a night
Zatchman. One by one, he had to sell his horses and finally his truck, but
the proceeds of the sales Zere soon eaten up by doctors' bills and medicine.
In November 1886, he died. All he left his son Zas his self-assurance; it
Zas only through the charity of his friends that funeral e[penses Zere paid.
Al's mother Zas left almost penniless. :alking  back from the funeral to the
small flat, alone e[cept for Al and his ten-year-old sister, 0ary, she
muttered, half to herself, "I don't knoZ Zhere to turn." 0ary  heard her
brother say, "I'm here. I can take care of you."

141
At first, determined to keep her son in school, Al's mother refused to let him
Zork. The very evening of the funeral, holding her children by the hand,
she Zent to an umbrella factory and got a job that she could start the ne[t
morning.

Rising before daZn to get breakfast for her children and prepare their
lunches, Al's mother Zould Zork until  dark at the factory, and then come
home to make supper and clean the flat. Since the salary she earned at the
factory Zasn't enough to support three persons, she asked for pieceZork
that she could do at home and, Zhen Al closed the door to his bedroom to
go to sleep at night, he Zould see her bending over the Zork. A frail
Zoman, Zithin  months her oZn health Zas affected, and she had to leave
the factory. :ith   the help of friends, she opened a tiny grocery and candy
store in the basement of the building in Zhich the Smiths lived, but it
quickly became obvious that the store Zould never provide enough to
support the family. She could get charity, she kneZ, but ZidoZs Zho Zere
unable to support their children had the children taken aZay and placed in
institutions. She had heard about the institutions. Anything Zas better than
that. A feZ months after his thirteenth birthday, a month before he Zould
have graduated from St. James, Zhich had only eight grades, Al Smith left
school and Zent to Zork.

First he Zas a neZsboy, then a "chaser" for a trucking firm, spending his
days on the run, taking assignments for the firm's drivers from the main
office and trying to find the drivers in the streets of the LoZer East Side so
that they Zould not have to Zaste time returning to the office. The job paid
three dollars a Zeek. In the evenings, he tended counter at the little store
Zhile his mother rested. After tZo years, Zith income from the store
dZindling and the family desperate, he became a shipping clerk—for eight
dollars a Zeek. TZo years later, Zith the intake from the store doZn to
almost nothing, he looked for another job and finally found one that Zould
pay him four dollars more. The job Zas at the Fulton Fish 0arket.

Al Smith rolled heavy barrels of fish in and out of the market, put the fish
on ice, cleaned them and Zrapped them. +e Zorked from four o'clock in the
morning until five in the afternoon, e[cept on Friday. On Friday, he started
Zork at three. Returning home at night tired and dirty and reeking of fish,

142
he scrubbed off the odor and Zent doZnstairs to the store. But in the 1890's
tZelve dollars a Zeek Zas almost enough to support a mother and a sister.
+e stayed at the market for four years. Then, to increase his pay to

fifteen dollars, he became a laborer, carrying heavy pipes at a pump Zorks.
It Zasn't until 1896, Zhen he Zas tZenty-tZo  years old, that he got his first
political job.

0oses and Smith came to public service not merely out of different
backgrounds, but Zith different attitudes and for different reasons.

Not even Al Smith's best friends ever said that he Zent into politics to help
the loZer classes. +e Zent because, perhaps, he Zas gregarious and politics
for a young man in the Fourth :ard  Zithout connections Zas, in its early
stages, mostly hanging around the DoZntoZn Tammany Club or Tom
Foley's saloon Zith other young men, drinking beer, singing around a piano
and telling stories Zhile Zaiting for  a contract from Foley. +e Zent
because, perhaps, it Zas a natural course for a young man Zith little
education Zho Zanted to get ahead in the Zard's politics-drenched
atmosphere—and because, perhaps, he saZ no other Zay out of a life that
for most of the years he could remember had been rolling heavy barrels and
lifting heavy pipes.

0oses prepared for his career by passing e[aminations and Zriting a thesis;
Smith prepared for his by e[ecuting contracts. A "contract," to Tammany
+all, Zas something to be done, an assurance to a local undertaker that
Tammany Zould pay for a loyal Democrat's funeral even if his family could
not, a discreet visit to a brothel to Zarn of an upcoming police raid or to
police headquarters to ease business-cramping parking restrictions in front
of a liquor store belonging to a heavy campaign contributor.

In the Fourth :ard,  contracts Zere given out by Foley, one of the most
remarkable of the Tammany district leaders Zho ran their districts—and
looked after the Zelfare of the straight-ticket-voting Democrats in them—as
English squires looked after the Zelfare of their country villages. "Big
Tom" Zas a square-shaped mustachioed, quiet man Zho spent most of each
day at the DoZntoZn Tammany Club, listening to the cries for help— for a
boy Zho had been arrested, for a process server Zho had been fired, for a

143
policeman Zho had been shifted to a Staten Island beat—Zith unfailing
patience. Although his saloons thrived, he Zas to die a poor man, their
profits trickling,  along Zith the payoffs and the campaign contributions,
through his fingers into those of his constituents. The only payment he ever
asked for the favors he dispensed Zas a straight Democratic vote—and so
heartily Zere his constituents Zilling to make this form of repayment that
his district regularly rolled up Democratic majorities that made him the
most poZerful district leader in the city.

Born to Zealth that he believed Zould make him alZays independent,
0oses felt no compulsion to turn associates into friends: arrogance is, after
all, one of the coefficients of money. Arrogance Zould have been an un-
affordable lu[ury to Smith: the equation of politics as he kneZ it contained
a factor of friendship that had at least as heavy a Zeight as the factor of
respect. In the evenings, after Zork. Smith began to hang around the
saloons or the Tammany Club, hoping that Foley Zould give him a contract,
and

Zhen he Zas given one, he e[ecuted it Zith graciousness and tact. Some of
the historians Zho Zould later analy]e his career Zould speculate that, as
one put it, "he made an effort, he trained himself, to be more than ordinarily
helpful and obliging." Friends Zould deny it, saying that there had been
something in his nature that had made him, even as a young boy, friendly
and eager to assist someone in trouble. :hether it Zas natural or cultivated,
as Al Smith e[ecuted the contracts, he displayed a gift for getting along
Zith people that Zas so highly developed as to be almost genius. Joining
the St. James 3layers, Zho put on plays to support the parish's orphanage,
studying acting from the cheapest seats in the highest balconies at
BroadZay theaters, he became the parish's star villain, playing Corry
.inchela  in Dion Bouci-cault's The Shaughraun so enthusiastically that
children began jokingly to hiss him Zhen they saZ him on the street.
Everyone in the neighborhood seemed to knoZ the slim, clean-cut youth
Zith the soft smile and the loud, happy laugh—and everyone seemed to like
him.

Older men Zere Zatching him noZ. Father .ean liked to tell  hoZ Smith
had tried to refuse to play any more villains. The hisses in the street Zere

144
becoming louder, he had complained, and in the last production, Zhen he
had snarled at the girl Zho refused him, "You Zill yet be mine," the boos
and catcalls from the gallery had annoyed him. +e Zas going to be a hero
or nothing ne[t time, he had said. But all that had been necessary Zas for
the Father to call him in and say, "Alfred, Ze have over tZo hundred little
girls in the orphanage and it is getting harder every year to feed and clothe
and care for these girls," and Alfred had said simply: "Give me the part."
:hen   touchy matters—such as visits by respectable parish girls to
neighborhood saloons Zith their dates—had to be brought up Zith the
young people, the Father began to look to Smith to do it; somehoZ, Zhen
Smith handled it, not only did the visits stop but nobody became hurt or
angry. +e had joined the Seymour Club, a social organi]ation founded by a
Zealthy old grocer and Tammany financial backer named +enry Campbell.
Campbell began looking to Smith to organi]e club e[cursions, then he
began inviting him home for Sunday dinners—and, in 1896, Zhen there
became available a city job as a server of jury notices that paid $900 a year,
Campbell saZ that Smith got it.

In 1900, after promising her parents that he Zould never become a
professional actor, Smith married .atherine (.atie)  Dunn, and the couple
took a flat in the neighborhood, Smith's mother moving to Brooklyn to live
Zith 0ary   and her husband. The children—there Zould be five—came
quickly, and Smith's devotion to his family became a joke, a fond joke,
among the people in the Zard Zho saZ him Zheeling one child and holding
the hand of another as he and .atie Zalked across the Brooklyn Bridge
every Sunday after church, rain or shine, to visit his mother.

But in the evenings, after supper, Al Smith left his family and Zent doZn to
the clubs and saloons. And noZ another man Zas Zatching the youth Zhom
everybody liked—Tom Foley. Signing him up as a campaign speaker, Foley
soon saZ that even in this heartland of Irish platform eloquence, Smith Zas
something special. And, more important, he saZ that

Smith could be counted on; his praise of a Democratic candidate's personal
qualifications Zas just as fervent Zhether he kneZ the candidate or not. To
the other adjectives Zith Zhich men described Smith, Foley added one that,
in the le[icon of the Democracy of NeZ York City, had a special

145
significance —Smith Zas, he said, "regular." In 1903, he offered him a
nomination for state assemblyman. 3roving to be a remarkable campaigner
even though, in Foley's districts, remarkable campaigning Zas not a
necessity for Democratic candidates, in November 1903, a month before his
thirtieth birthday, Al Smith Zon  his first election.

.atie  tied tZo brooms upright on the iron railings that lined the si[ steps to
the doorZay of the tenement in Zhich the Smiths lived. It Zas a traditional
gesture in the neighborhood, symboli]ing a clean sZeep by Tammany.
Inside, in his living room, holding his mother's hand as he accepted
congratulations, Alfred E. Smith, red-faced and loud in victory, resplendent
in a neZ suit Zith Zide-set, broad pinstripes, a tie that matched his voice,
and a pearl stickpin, a big black cigar tilted cockily up from the corner of
his red, Zet lips, seemed the typical, "regular" Tammany brave.

Yet Zhat lurked behind the Zar paint? Al Smith Zent to Albany unprepared
to be a legislator—or even to sleep aZay from home. On his first night in
the capital, he noticed a large fire bla]ing in the fireplace of his hotel, saZ
that the room to Zhich he and another neZ Tammany assemblyman, Tom
Caughlan from "Battery Dan" Finn's district, had been assigned Zas not
near any e[its, and Zas so Zorried that the hotel Zould burn doZn and they
Zould be trapped that he made Caughlan spend the night playing pinochle
so that they Zould be aZake for any emergency. Arriving in the Assembly
Chamber the ne[t morning, he Zas beZildered by the formalities of the
opening session and Zas shunted by leaders Zho had no time even to talk to
him to a desk so far from the Speaker's podium that he often couldn't hear
the rulings. :hen  he did hear, he often didn't understand. Overcome by the
intricacies of the legislative process, he sat day after day in the high-
ceilinged chamber in silence. During the Zhole session, he did not make a
single speech. +e Zas not appointed to a single committee.

:orst   of all Zere the bills. Every morning Zhen he arrived at his desk, there
Zould be a pile of neZ ones a foot high. +e Zould try the one that looked
simplest, perhaps an act setting the ma[imum si]e of vehicles using public
highZays. "The provisions of this subdivision," he read, "shall not apply to
vehicles and implements or combinations thereof not over thirteen feet in
Zidth and designed and intended for use solely for farm purposes Zhen

146
oZned or in the possession of a dealer in farm implements and equipment
and Zithin a radius of fifty miles of  the principal place of business of such a
dealer, including transportation of such vehicles, implements and
combinations thereof as a load on another vehicle, such vehicle or load not
to e[ceed thirteen feet in Zidth, during the same period and under the same
conditions and restrictions as hereinbefore in this subdivision provided for
such vehicles and implements and combinations thereof Zhen used solely
for farm purposes."

This Zas the simplest. The one underneath it might be eleven pages

long, beginning: ":ithout   limiting  the generality of the folloZing
provisions of this section, property oZned by the city and property used for
transportation purposes e[clusively pursuant to the provisions of a joint
arrangement or of a joint facilities agreement or trackage rights agreement
shall all be e[empt from special ad valorem levies." The ne[t one might be
thirteen pages and it might start: "3aragraph (h) of subdivision si[ of
section tZo hundred thirty-five of the banking laZ, as last separately
amended by chapters forty-si[, fifty-one and five hundred eighty-five of the
laZs of eighteen hundred ninety-nine, is hereby amended to read . . ."

As he sat there staring doZn at the desk, a page boy Zould deposit another
pile of bills on it. The Zording  Zas difficult  enough for the e[pert. It might
have been designed to mock a man Zhose schooling had ended in the eighth
grade, Zho had never liked to read even the simple books of childhood,
Zho, he had said once, had in his entire life read only one book cover to
cover: The Life of John L. Sullivan.

As far as the course of the Empire State Zas concerned, it did not seem to
matter if Al Smith understood the bills or not. The Democrats, a badly
outnumbered minority in the Senate and Assembly, a party that had not
elected a Governor since 1893, had no real say in the state's affairs. 0ost of
the Democratic legislators, understanding this, and understanding that in the
rare instances in Zhich their votes Zere important they Zould be told hoZ
to cast them by their leaders back in NeZ York, took their jobs Zith the
lightness they felt they deserved. They spent their evenings in "The Gut," a
strip of Zhorehouses and cheap saloons doZn the hill from the capitol.

147
Smith, Zhose devotion to .atie  Zas—and remained alZays—legendary as
long as he lived, had no interest in the Zhorehouses, but he loved to sit Zith
his felloZ assemblymen in the saloons and drink beer and sing and, Zhen
he Zorked up his nerve, tell a joke or tZo. As often as they, rousted out of a
saloon by the Assembly sergeant-at-arms for a vote, he Zould appear in the
Chamber Zith his derby over one ear. +is clothes Zere of the same cut, his
voice as loud, his language as crude. In appearance, he Zas one of them.

But late in the evenings, Zhen the parties Zere still loud, Al Smith Zould
leave the saloons, and as he left his steps Zould quicken.

+urrying back to his tiny furnished room in a cheap boardinghouse, he
Zould sit doZn at a rickety desk. On the desk he Zould earlier have piled
the bills that had been introduced that day. Al Smith Zould begin reading
them. Not only the bills Zhich bore on a subject in Zhich he Zas interested,
and not only the bills Zhich dealt Zith his Assembly District, and not only
the bills Zhich dealt Zith  NeZ York City. Sitting  at the rickety desk in the
furnished room, Smith read all the bills, even those Zhich concerned the
construction of a side road or a tiny dam in some remote upstate district.
And as he read them, he tried to understand them. :hy had one legislator
included in a bill a provision that the dam be built by the Conservation
Department rather than by the Department of 3ublic :orks? :hat   had been
in the mind of another that led him to specify that the side road must be

surfaced Zith a specific type of asphalt? Later in the night, Smith Zould
hear bursts of song and laughter as the other legislators left the saloons. One
by one, if he looked out the ZindoZ in his room Zhich faced the capitol, he
could see the lights in the huge gray building go out. Still the man Zho had
never liked to read read on.

It must have seemed like the most useless of e[ercises. In his second term,
he Zas appointed to tZo committees, but they Zere the Committee on
Banks and the Committee on 3ublic Lands and Forests and, as he remarked
in later years, "I had never been in a bank e[cept to serve a jury notice and I
had never seen a forest." Again, he did not make a single speech during the
entire session. The Democratic leaders had no interest in him e[cept for his
nod of assent at the end of a discussion. And the e[penses of living in
Albany—for Zhich  legislators received no reimbursement—ate up an

148
assemblyman's $1,500 salary. By 0ay, all e[cept $250 Zas gone and seven
incomeless months stretched ahead of him. In despair, he told Foley he
didn't Zant to run again. "0eet me at +olt]'s  for breakfast tomorroZ
morning," Foley said.

Over ham and eggs, Foley offered Smith another job, NeZ York City
Superintendent of Buildings. Smith's eyes lit up.

Foley's Zere narroZ. :atching  the younger man closely, he said, If you take
the job, of course, you'll never be a big man in this toZn. I gave you a start
toZard being one. It's tough for a beginner in Albany. You can't learn Zhat
you need to knoZ up there in a couple of years. But you're learning. And
you've got great popularity in the district. I think you're on the right track.
And I'm Zilling  to stick Zith  you if  you Zant to go back. But maybe you
ought to chuck it. "0aybe,"  Big Tom Foley said, "you're right in thinking
that Albany is too tough for you."

Foley said he Zould give Smith a Zeek to think it over.

In a Zeek, Smith said he Zanted to go back.

:hen   he Zent back, he read harder. Since most of the bills amended or
referred back to other bills passed years before—and not described in the
neZ bills—he took to spending evenings in the Legislative Library reading
those old bills. Since some of the most confusing Zording Zas based on
legal technicalities, Smith began to borroZ laZbooks from laZ libraries and
take them back to the furnished room Zith him. Sometimes, leafing through
the thick volumes, he thought Zryly that their very appearance Zould have
intimidated him a feZ years before. Tired of listening to speeches he
couldn't understand, he Zould pay clerks for transcripts and study the
transcripts. Near the end of the session, the annual appropriations measure,
hundreds of pages long, containing tens of thousands of items, Zas
published. No one, so far as anyone in Albany could remember, had ever
read the entire appropriations bill. In 1906, Al Smith read it.

NoZ, he Zas to say later, Albany began to make some sense to him. But he
kept that fact to himself. Years later, Foley Zould say, "+e Zould never
admit that he kneZ anything about a subject until he kneZ everything about

149
it." To his felloZ  legislators, he Zas still the typical Tammany regular. +e
cleared his votes Zith Foley, never argued Zith the leaders—

and instead of making speeches saved his voice for the nightly singing in
the saloons.

+e had many friends in Albany noZ. +e arrived at the capitol each morning
Zith a fresh supply of jokes, hilarious stories told in a variety of dialects,
and legislators and clerks Zould croZd around him to hear them. During a
debate on a bill proposing to regulate Chinese laundries, Smith suddenly
burst into the Assembly Chamber bearing a huge sign decorated Zith
Chinese characters.

Surprisingly, his friends included Republicans as Zell as Democrats. No
one Zould have seemed less likely to get along Zith the aristocratic upstate
Republicans, born into families that controlled the great utilities and banks
of the state and educated among the Ivy, than Al Smith, but his jokes had
them roaring, too. The rising star of a band of reforming Republicans Zho
Zere trying to unseat the Black +orse Cavalry Zas young Jimmy
:adsZorth,   a scion of one of the Zealthiest families in Rochester and a
former Yale baseball star. :adsZorth soon began to make a regular supper
trio Zith  Smith and a sloZ-talking, forceful, young German-born state
senator Zho had become particularly close to Smith, Robert F. :agner, Sr.
Elected Speaker, :adsZorth handed Smith some choice committee
assignments. In 1908, after Smith had sZept his district for the fifth time, he
found himself, on his return to Albany, one of the capital's most influential
Democrats. +e Zas e[pected noZ to use the voice that he had kept silent so
long.

And Zhen he did, people began to listen. The years spent reading the
obscure minor bills began to pay off. Because no matter Zhat the subject
Zas, the other legislators began to reali]e, Al Smith understood it. In some
Zay that they Zere unable to figure out, he had become familiar Zith their
little pet projects, their side roads, the peculiar problems of their districts.

0oreover, Zhen Smith rose to speak, the Assembly Chamber became a
place of drama. "+is presence electrifies and Zins over even his

150
opponents," Dean Christian Gauss of 3rinceton 8niversity Zas to say. "+is .
. . voice makes his listeners tingle."

The voice Zas nasal, grating, harsh and insistent—and unforgettable. One
journalist Zrote that it had trumpets in it. Coupled Zith the Zit of  the man
Zho used it, it could tear an opponent apart or make bored men roar Zith
laughter. (A Buffalo assemblyman once tried to correct Smith's grammar.
The Assembly, Zell aZare of Smith's lack of education, Zaited silently for
his reply. SloZly he arose. "I Zill,"  he said Zith dignity, "refer the
gentleman from Buffalo to the rule that says, ':hen a pluperfect adjective
precedes a noun, insert a plus.' ") It could even hold the attention of the
legislators during arcane discussions of state finances. One reporter Zrote:
"Discussion of the annual appropriation bill used to be the signal for a
general e[odus from the Assembly Chamber. But not so Zhen 'Al' Smith
took the floor. +e could keep the members in their seats hours on end Zith
his masterly dissection of that measure."

Charles F. ("Silent Charlie") 0urphy, the unsmiling Irishman Zho had risen
from saloon keeper to the leadership of all Tammany +all, had

been hearing a lot about Smith. NoZ he said he'd like to meet him. After the
meeting, someone said to 0urphy, "+e's a nice young felloZ. +e has a lot
of ability. It's too bad he isn't a college man." 0urphy looked at the speaker
a long moment. "If he Zas a college man," he said at last, "he Zouldn't be
Al Smith." In  1911, aided by revelations of Zidespread corruption among
Republican legislators, the Democrats Zon control of both houses for the
first time in eighteen years. 0urphy had the Democratic caucus elect Smith
majority leader of the Assembly.

In a position of importance at last, Al Smith carried out orders. 8sing the
poZers of his office ruthlessly, he rammed through the Assembly, as Bob
:agner  Zas ramming it through the Senate, the notorious "0urphy
Charter," Zhich Zeakened NeZ York City's civil  service system and added
thousands of patronage jobs to its payroll.

Good Government groups railed at Smith. The Citi]ens 8nion called him
"one of the most dangerous men in Albany." Identifying him, day after day,
as "Smith, the Tammany man," neZspapers joined in the outcry. "The

151
Democratic caucus," said a disgusted editorial in the NeZ York :orld, "is
Charles F. 0urphy at one end of a telephone Zire and the Democratic
leader at the other end." In all his years in the Legislature, one political
observer Zas to say, Smith had never been anything more than "the brilliant
henchman at Albany of the organi]ation housed in the ornate and shabby
building on Fourteenth Street."

But such analyses Zere incomplete. 0ost legislators spent as little time as
possible in Albany, coming to the capital only one or tZo days a Zeek and
spending the rest of their time attending to their outside business interests.
0urphy  saZ to it that Smith Zas offered a Zell-paying position Zith  a firm
doing business Zith the city. Finances Zere still tight for Smith. +e could
have used the money. But he turned the offer doZn. Instead, he spent most
of every Zeek—all of many Zeeks—in the capital. Not only did he attend
every hearing held by every committee of Zhich he Zas a member but,
legislators began to notice, he Zould slip quietly into hearings held by
committees of Zhich he Zas not a member and sit in the back of the hearing
rooms, folloZing the testimony intently. At night, he Zould  still party
loudly and happily—and he Zould still slip aZay from  most parties early.

NoZ he Zould slip aZay  not to a cheap furnished room but to the plush
majority leader's suite at the Ten Eyck +otel. NoZ the face bent over the
pile of bills Zas Considerably fuller than the face that had been bent over
the pile seven years before; it Zas redder and its teeth, once so Zhite, Zere
capped Zith gold and yelloZed by the cigar butts clenched unendingly
betZeen them. NoZ there Zas a considerable paunch beneath the pinstripes.

But the face still bent over the bills.

And noZ a neZ element Zas added to the background of the picture.
SZeatshops didn't close on Saturday, and on the Saturday afternoon of
0arch  26, 1911, hundreds of employees of the Triangle ShirtZaist
Company, most of them girls from the LoZer East Side, Zere still bending
over sZatches of material on the eighth, ninth and tenth floors of a building
overlooking NeZ York's :ashington   Square. Someone in the tenth-floor
Zork-

152
room lit a cigarette and tossed the match aZay. It hadn't burned out Zhen it
fell into the ankle-deep litter around the seZing machines.

There Zas a puff of smoke, and then a sheet of flame. The e[its Zere
inadequate, the doors to many locked. As the terrified girls jammed against
them in panic, scores Zere crushed to death. Others Zere suffocated by the
heavy smoke. As it billoZed around them and the flames crept closer, girls
leaped from the ZindoZs. Bodies smashed against the sideZalks and tore
through sideZalk gratings. The death toll Zas 141.

Reformers had been haranguing against unsafe conditions in the sZeatshops
for years, but their harangues had thudded Zithout effect against political
stockades buttressed Zith campaign contributions of factory oZners. NoZ
they descended on Albany, led by men like +enry 0oskoZit],  a bunch of
near-hysterical Zomen, and one very quiet one, +enry 0oskoZit]'s Zife.

Demanding the formation of a commission to investigate factory conditions
and to recommend remedial legislation, the reformers brought Zith them a
list of potential commission members. Smith, conferring Zith them, agreed
to most of the names but added one: his oZn.

At first, the reformers on the State Factory Investigating Commission
looked at "Smith, the Tammany man," askance. Then the commission's
Zork began. It took the members to all the major cities of the state. NoZ
and again one or another of the reform members Zould miss a trip, but they
noticed that Smith never did. They Zatched his face as, day after day, he
saZ Zhat life in the factories Zas like. They Zatched his e[pression Zhen
he saZ Zhole families, mothers Zith their children, little boys and girls,
Zorking all  the daylight hours seven days a Zeek in rooms in Zhich there
Zas not a single ZindoZ, Zhen, after one factory manager had insisted that
no children under the age of seven Zere employed in his plant, commission
staffers found such children jammed into an elevator that had been hidden
betZeen floors to escape the commission's notice. :hen the reform
members of the commission made their proposals, they Zaited for Smith's
reaction.

You make the proposals, he told them. I'll fight for them.

153
Even Zhile Good Government organi]ations Zere continuing to rail against
him—the 1912 Citi]ens 8nion  summary of his record Zas even more
devastating than its 1911 summary—a feZ reformers Zere starting to tell
their friends another story.

Al Smith, they said, had absolutely no "general theory." +is naivete in
matters of philosophy Zas ridiculous. :hen  he talked about social Zelfare
legislation, it Zas in terms of "us" against "them," of the "people" against
the "interests," of the Fourth :ard  against the factory oZners. But the
"people," the Fourth :ard,  did seem to mean something very special to
him. No one could listen to him talk about hoZ doctors' bills could eat up a
man's savings and leave his family destitute, about hoZ penniless mothers
feared that "the charities" Zould take their children, about children Zho
greZ to manhood Zithout ever having a pair of neZ shoes, Zithout
believing that his determination to help them Zas real. No one could look at
his face Zhen he talked and not knoZ it Zas real. First one and then another
of the reformers began to tell their friends that they had really come to
believe

that maybe, just maybe, after decades of Zaiting, reform in NeZ York had
found at last, in the red-faced Tammany henchman, the instrument for
Zhich it had been Zaiting: the champion Zho .Zould fight  for their dreams
in the political arena and turn them into laZs. And some of the more
romantic among them, e[amining Smith's long, sloZ rise through the ranks
of Tammany, began to speculate that perhaps all the time he had been
e[ecuting its dirty Zork  he had been Zaiting for the chance to do good.

:hen   the commission's recommendations, embodied in bills, came up in
the Legislature, Smith fought for them. From their seats in the spectator
galleries high up over the Assembly Chamber, the reformers could see him
roaming the narroZ aisles betZeen the legislators' desks, pleading, cajoling,
threatening, bargaining, dealing, trading votes—using every trick he had
learned in his years of Zorking for Tammany.

Smith's debating ability Zas already legendary, but never, observers Zrote,
had he spoken like this. During a debate on a bill that Zould have required
"one day's rest in seven" for Zomen and children, Republican legislators
beholden to cannery interests pleaded for e[emptions for canneries. Smith

154
Zaited until every Republican had finished. Then he rose and Zalked
betZeen their desks doZn to the Zell of the Chamber. :hirling  to face
them, he said quietly, "I have read carefully the commandment 'Remember
the Sabbath Day to keep it holy.' I am unable to find any language in it that
says, 'e[cept in the canneries.' " :ithout  another Zord, he returned to his
seat. On another occasion, the man Zhose mother had once feared that her
son Zould be taken from her rose to speak on ZidoZs' pensions.

0r.  Speaker, Zhat happens Zhen death takes from the family the provider?
The ZidoZed mother goes to the police court or to the charity organi]ation
and her children are committed to an institution, and from the moment the
judge signs the commitment the people of the city of NeZ York are bound
for their support. Let us see Zhat effect that has upon the State itself. The
mother stands in the police court. She Zitnesses the separation of herself
and her children. They are torn aZay from her and given over to the custody
of an institution, and nothing is left for her to do but to go out into the Zorld
and make her oZn living. :hat   must be her feelings? :hat must be her
idea of the State's policy Zhen she sees these children separated from her by
due process of laZ, particularly Zhen she must remember that for every one
of them she Zent doZn into the valley of death that a neZ pair of eyes
might look out upon the Zorld? :hat   can be the feelings in the hearts of the
children themselves, separated from their mother by Zhat they must learn in
after years Zas due process of laZ, Zhen they must in after years learn to
knoZ Zhat the State's policy Zas Zith respect to their unfortunate
condition?

That is the old system. That is the dark day Ze are Zalking aZay from. That
is the period that, by this policy, Ze are attempting to forget.

:hat   neZ policy does this bill inaugurate? :hat  neZ  system does this bill
inaugurate? The State of NeZ York reaches out to them, ":e recogni]e in
you a resource of the State and Ze propose to take care of you, not as a
matter of charity, but as a government and public duty." :hat a different
feeling that must put into the hearts of the mother and the children! :hat
better citi]ens that

policy must make! :hy?   Because it instills into that young heart a love, a
reverence and a devotion for the State of NeZ York and its sovereign

155
poZer.

:e   are pledged to conserve the natural resources of the State. 0illions of
dollars of the ta[payers' money, untold and uncounted millions, have been
poured into that channel. :e have been in a great hurry to legislate for the
interests. :e  have been sloZ to legislate along the direction that means
thanksgiving to the poorest man recorded in history—+e Zho Zas born in
the stable at Bethlehem.

Al Smith's eloquence Zas useless in the 1912 session, because the
Republicans had recaptured control of the Assembly. But in November
1912, the Democrats grabbed it back—and 0urphy had the party's caucus
elect Smith Assembly Speaker for the 1913 session.

+e had never dreamed, Al Smith told friends, that an uneducated 0ick
from the Fourth :ard  could rise so high. That he might rise higher, he Zas
to say later, never crossed his mind. +e had, after all, about reached a point
beyond Zhich, in America, no Al Smith had ever risen. No Catholic had
ever been given a presidential nomination nor, for that matter, any Irish
Tammany man a nomination for high stateZide office. A Governor or a
8nited States senator Zas supposed to, in the Zords of one historian,
"present an image—in appearance, speech and manners—appropriate to his
high office" and "somehoZ it Zas incongruous to think of an Irishman up
from the city streets in such a post." Tammany men, Zhile they might not
say so, felt that Zay themselves; they felt unpolished and crude and very
uneducated beside the "uptoZners"—and they never pushed themselves
forZard for the top spots.

As Assembly Speaker, Smith Zas all that Tammany could have desired,
building up the organi]ation's patronage and poZer—and pushing through
liquor-laZ amendments that alloZed the sale of alcoholic beverages at
hotels that Charlie 0urphy favored, and forbade such sales at hotels that
Silent Charlie did not.

Some observers bemoaned Smith's lack of dignity. 3ounding his gavel Zith
great sZings of his arm, belloZing parliamentary rulings in a hoarse gravel
voice that one Zriter called a "Bull-of-Bashan roar," he sometimes seemed

156
to them like a carnival barker. +e sometimes ate lunch on the podium. +e
talked Zith food in his mouth.

But seldom in the history of the Legislature had its business been transacted
so smoothly and e[peditiously. Cutting short long-Zinded speakers,
hustling routine bills through at a rate that reporters clocked at eight per
minute, Smith Zas, on the high Speaker's podium, a commanding figure.

And if Smith fought for Tammany's bills, he did not stop fighting for the
factory commission's. By the end of the session, many of them had been
passed, even a revolutionary Zorkmen's compensation measure. In 1914,
the Republicans regained poZer. Albany Zas filled Zith high-priced
lobbyists representing insurance companies. Amendments to the
compensation measure Zere introduced that looked innocent but that Zould
in reality tear out its heart. All the amendments did, their sponsors
protested, Zas provide that there could be direct settlements betZeen
Zorkmen and insurance com-

panies instead of enforced resort to the machinery provided by the
:orkmen's  Compensation Act of 1913. All that they did Zas enable the
Zorking man to get money sooner.

"And for Zhom  are you doing this?" Smith demanded as he stood in the
Zell of the Chamber and faced the Republicans. Those of them Zho Zere
his friends saZ not a hint of friendliness in his eyes noZ. "Does the Zorking
man Zant it? No! Does the Legislature Zant it? No! Does the compensation
commission Zant it? Then Zhat other interested party is there? The
Casualty Company! That's Zho you are Zorking for. . . . The agent can
shake the long green before the ZidoZ or suffering laborer and tell them if
they sign aZay their rights they can get so much but if they Zait they can
take their chance on getting something months hence. That carries us back
to the good old days Zhen Ze had no compensation laZ. Be honest and
repeal the Zhole laZ and stop faking." A Republican legislator rose to
protest, but Smith's voice cracked out like a Zhip. "You and your Governor
have ruined the compensation laZ," he said. "You have gone the limit for
the casualty companies. The people's case is lost."

157
8p in the high galleries that overlooked the floor, the reformers stood and
cheered. The compensation laZ might be lost but they kneZ the
Republicans Zould never dare to touch the others noZ. Great advances had
been secured. And, more important, at last they had their champion. Smith,
the Tammany man, had made their dreams come true. They hastened to
hang others on his lance.

But even Zhen Smith took up the banner of the reformers, he never put
doZn the mace of the practical politician. +e himself made no bones about
this fact. If cynics said that he had recogni]ed in child labor, disability
insurance and Zorkmen's compensation a great political issue, Smith said it
too. :hen   someone told him that his vieZs Zere antagoni]ing factory
oZners, he Zould laugh and say that factory oZners lived on Fifth Avenue
and "There's no Democratic votes on Fifth Avenue; they're all over on Ninth
and Tenth, Zhere I live." Fighting for the Zorking man, for better Zorking
conditions for Zomen and children—that, he kneZ, Zas an issue on Zhich
you couldn't miss. The man Zho fought for the commission's legislation
Zould be a man fighting on the side of the angels. Supporting its
recommendations Zas more than good politics; it Zas the best politics.

:hen   he had in some instances to drop either the banner or the mace, it
Zasn't the mace that fell. In the 1915 Constitutional Convention, he fought
for the 0unicipal  Research Bureau's recommended reorgani]ation of the
state government. Of all the issues raised by the reformers, reorgani]ation
Zas the one he most eagerly embraced because his years in Albany had
alloZed him to see for himself the almost incredible inefficiency of the
system. But on the morning of August 27, 1915, Smith, Zho had spent all
August 26 fighting shoulder to shoulder Zith the federal croZd for
reorgani]ation, Zaited in the capitol entrance hall for 3rogressive
Republican Frederick C. Tanner, and Zhen Tanner arrived, he pulled him
aside.

"Fred," Smith said, "I've got to pull out on you in this debate." As Tanner
recalled it later:

I said, ":hat's   the matter?" And he said, ":ell,  I had a telephone call from
the old man last night."

158
I said, "Do you mean Fourteenth Street?" And he said, "Yes." Of course this
meant that 0r. 0urphy  had decided that the Democratic organi]ation Zould
oppose the Constitution Zhen it ":as  finally  submitted on Election Day,
and that it Zould not do for . . . Smith to give [his] support to a bill in the
convention Zhen the party Zould oppose it in its submission.

After the convention, Smith campaigned against the proposed neZ,
reorgani]ed Constitution. First and foremost, he Zas a party man.

Even though Smith felt that times—and people's needs—Zere changing, he
did not try to break aZay from the party but to change it to meet the times.
Every Friday evening, Tammany's sachems Zould meet for dinner in a
private room at Delmonico's Restaurant. NoZ, in those meetings, Smith
began to try to persuade the older men that the party should begin taking a
different stance. Tammany had alZays held the allegiance of the loZer
classes Zith the turkey baskets at Christmas and the outings and the civil
service jobs, but noZ people Zere becoming better educated, he said. Their
needs Zere broadening and increasing. They Zere beginning to ask for
more—and to look to government to provide that more. Tammany should
become the champion of social Zelfare legislation. It should do so because
it Zas the party of the people and the neZ needs of the people Zere real
needs. And it should do so because it Zas good politics. :hy should
Tammany take a chance of losing the massed votes of the LoZer East Side
to uptoZn reformers Zho even noZ Zere sponsoring such legislation?

From the head of the table, Silent Charlie listened silently to Smith and
other young sachems like :agner. 0urphy  kneZ that Tammany must
change. +e kneZ it because of the reasons the young men gave—and he
kneZ it because of a consideration of his oZn. Never had one of their oZn
kind risen to Governor or senator; never, despite the poZer of .elly and
Croker before him, never, despite his oZn poZer, had a Tammany man ever
come even close to the top pri]e in the Democratic 3arty for Zhich
Tammany supplied so many of the votes. AlZays Tammany Zas thought of
as the party of TZeed and .elly and Croker, of the poor from the Old
Country Zho might be fit to sZeep the streets but not to sit in the
Governor's 0ansion or the :hite   +ouse. Becoming identified Zith
3rogressivism, becoming knoZn as the party of social progress, Zould be a

159
Zay to shatter that image forever. 3ushing to the forefront bright young men
identified Zith  such causes rather than Zith the ancient rituals of Tammany
Zould be a Zay to spaZn candidates Zho Zould shatter forever the unseen
but heavy chains that Zeighed doZn the Irish Catholic in America. :hy,
already, Zasn't at least one of his bright young men, as true to Tammany, as
loyal, as regular as even he, Charlie 0urphy, could Zish, also an object of
praise by the Good Government organi]ations Zhich habitually damned
anyone Zho sat around the table in Delmonico's? +adn't the young man,
once assailed by the Citi]ens 8nion,

recently received one of its highest ratings? +adn't he been praised in the
+erald? Charlie 0urphy  looked doZn the table at the young man. +e gave
the okay for Tammany to sponsor the legislation the man Zanted. +e built
up the young man's reputation by running him for sheriff of NeZ York
County in 1915 and for president of the NeZ York City Board of Aldermen
in 1917. And in 1918, he Zrenched from the grip of the upstate Democratic
leaders the Democratic nomination for Governor and handed it to Alfred E.
Smith.

:hen   Smith Zon—it  Zas the si[teenth time he had run for public office
and the si[teenth time he had Zon—the inaugural parade up Albany's State
Street Zas led by the Si[ty-ninth Regiment of the National Guard, NeZ
York City's oZn Fighting Si[ty-ninth.   The sideZalks along the route—and
the steps of the capitol at its end—Zere packed Zith Smith's neighbors from
the Fourth :ard.  All  the night before, arriving by the thousands on trains
from NeZ York, they had tramped the streets of Albany and jammed the
restaurants, hoisting beer steins in toasts to the neZ Governor and singing a
neZ, catchy tZo-step, "The SideZalks of NeZ York." Their presence Zas
symbolic. Smith's election Zas the triumph of the immigrants, the oath he
took on the capitol steps the ne[t morning, as his mother stood in the place
of honor at his side, the first ever taken in America for a state's highest
office in the accent of Ireland.

During Smith's first term, it Zas not that he broke loose from his party but
that the party freed him. Shortly after the election, 0urphy summoned him
to his Long Island estate, Good Ground. Tammany Zould be asking him for
many things, Tammany's leader said, but he had been thinking of Zhat it

160
meant to have a boy from the Old Neighborhood in the Governor's chair.
Should Tammany ever ask for anything Smith felt Zould stand in the Zay
of becoming a great Governor, all Smith had to do Zas tell him so and the
request Zould be ZithdraZn. There Zere to be no strings attached to the
job. Smith Zas to be his oZn man. And for a start, 0urphy said, Smith
Zould not have to Zorry about patronage considerations. +e and Foley
Zould keep the job hunters off the Governor's back.

Smith reappointed deserving Republicans to their judgeships and
administrative posts and brought into his inner circle reformers like Belle
0oskoZit],   Frances 3erkins, tall, olive-skinned, mustached Joseph
3roskauer, and, to head the +ighZay Department, that trough of fatty
contracts at Zhich Tammany had been hoping to feed, Colonel Frederick
Stuart Greene, an urbane engineer Zho Zrote short stories and Zho
displayed a complete indifference to the demands of politics in the
administering of his department. The Governor did so not only because he
shared 0urphy's dream and not only because he genuinely Zanted to help
the state's urban masses but also because it Zas good politics. Grover
Cleveland, he pointed out to his friends, had become a national figure
because "the idea got around the country that he Zas independent of
everybody."

Smith's policies Zere 3rogressive—in his first term, he bludgeoned the
Legislature into restoring the :orkmen's Compensation LaZ, increased the
state's contributions to teachers' salaries by $22,000,000 and fought for

governmental reorgani]ation and for shorter hours and better Zorking
conditions for Zomen and children—for the same mi[ture of reasons.

Smith had no patience for those Zho didn't understand those reasons. +e
had no patience for reformers Zho, unlike Belle 0oskoZit],  didn't
understand the importance of practical politics in getting things done, Zho
refused to compromise, Zho insisted on having the bill as it Zas Zritten,
Zho raged loudly at injustice, Zho fought single-mindedly for an
unattainable ideal. Their pigheadedness had the effect of dragging to
political destruction politicians Zho listened to them, of ruining careers men
had taken years to build. +e had seen it happen. And, more important, Zhat
Zas the inevitable result of their efforts? Since they refused to compromise

161
and operate Zithin the political frameZork—the only frameZork Zithin
Zhich their proposals could become reality—the laZs they proposed Zere
never enacted, and therefore at the end of their efforts the people they had
Zanted to help, the people Zho he kneZ so Zell needed help, hadn't been
helped at all. If anything, they had been hurt; the stirring up of hard feelings
and bitterness delayed less dramatic but still useful reforms that might have
been enacted. :hen the reformers Zere finished Zith all their hollering and
Zere back in their comfortable homes, the ZidoZs of the Fourth :ard
Zould still  be forced to give up their children before they could get charity.
:hat   good Zas courage if its only effect Zas to hurt those you Zere trying
to help?

So Smith despised the noncompromisers, the starry-eyed idealists. +e
despised, in other Zords, most reformers. +e coined Zords to describe
them: "mush brains," "double-domes," "crackpots," "Goo Goos." Al Smith
despised, in short, Zhat Bob 0oses had been.

But he didn't despise 0oses.

There Zere other reformers Zho Zere personally friendly to the Governor
and Zho Zere vital to his political future—men his oZn age like Zealthy
Abram Elkus and men 0oses' age like 3roskauer—but Elkus and 3roskauer
Zere seldom if ever invited up to the Oliver Street flat for dinner. For
0oses, during 1921 and 1922, the invitations came more and more often. If,
after dinner, old cronies from the Neighborhood Zould drop by and take
Smith out to the local taverns for a drink and a song or tZo around the
backroom piano, Smith alZays insisted that 0oses come along. In fact,
discovering that 0oses had a passable bass to go Zith his tenor, he insisted
that 0oses be a part of Zhatever quartet Zas hastily arranged for the
evening's barbershopping, and Zhen 0oses tried to beg off, Smith Zould
drag him out of his seat and make him stand beside him and harmoni]e.

The reason for the attachment Zas uncertain. As one of Smith's cronies put
it, "They Zere opposites, tZo e[act opposites, opposites all the Zay doZn
the line." :as  it,  as some Fourth :arders, given to cliche, speculated, a
"father and son" relationship? Given the affection Smith bore for his oZn
three sons, this seemed too pat an e[planation, although it Zas not difficult
to understand Zhy some believed it. Emily Smith Zould recall hoZ, one

162
night after dinner, her father, Zho had been making pointed remarks for
Zeeks about the pale-blue Brooks Brothers shirts that seemed to comprise
0oses' entire shirt collection, suddenly heaved himself out of his chair at

the dinner table and strode into the bedroom. Returning Zith a large bo[, he
said to 0oses, "I'm tired of looking at your blue shirts, so I bought you
some." And, opening the bo[, he spilled out, in striped and silken profusion,
a do]en of Sulka's best. The Smiths certainly began to treat 0oses like one
of the family. "+e Zas like  an artist in a Zay," Emily Zould  recall. "+e Zas
dressed, not dirtily, but as if he didn't care. +is suits might be okay, but they
Zere obviously quite old or not very Zell pressed. :e  alZays kidded him
about his clothes. One night after dinner he started to leave and Dad said,
'Emily, you go doZn Zith  Bob and see he doesn't take one of my hats and
leave his here.' And I can still see Dad and Bob laughing there." Or Zas the
reason for the attachment, as other old acquaintances speculated, that Al
Smith, Zho outZardly laughed at his lack of formal education and never
seemed to mind his lack of money, actually felt both lacks keenly and Zas
thus ready to be impressed by a man he thought had such a Zealth of both?
:as  it, as some reformers thought, that, since Smith preferred to get his
information from people rather than from books and memos, he needed
around him advisers Zho could talk fluently on concepts of government and
Zho could describe situations and projects so vividly that he could see them
in his mind's eye—and that 0oses, Zith his gift for Zords, Zas simply  the
most fluent and descriptive of talkers? Or Zas it that the man Zho had
Zorked so hard to learn the art of government Zas able to tell e[actly hoZ
hard another man had Zorked to learn that art—and kneZ that Bob 0oses
had, in different circumstances, Zorked as hard as he? :as it that the man
Zho had learned the art so thoroughly that it must have been boring for him
to talk Zith even the most knoZledgeable of his advisers had found a man
Zho had learned it as Zell as he?

Only one thing Zas certain. :hatever  the reason for the feeling, it Zas
there.

And therefore, if the man Zho despised Zhat Bob 0oses had been liked
0oses so much, 0oses must have greatly changed.

+e had.

163
For the first part of the Smith interregnum, 0oses seemed to be the
reformer he had alZays been.

The Reconstruction Commission, of course, Zent out of e[istence Zith the
ouster from poZer of the Governor it had been advising. :ithin  days after
the 1920 election, 0rs. 0oskoZit]   had to tell 0oses  that there remained in
the commission's e[chequer only enough funds to pay his very small
stipend and the rent on the very small office at 305 BroadZay until the end
of the year. 0oses faced the prospect of being out of a job again on January
1, 1921. But in late November 1920, a tall, elegantly dressed, cheerful and
charming man Zalked into the little office. +e Zas Richard Spencer Childs,
Zhom 0oses had heard of but never met, although Childs had graduated
from Yale just a year before him.

Richard Childs Zas the very model of the scientific management reformer.
Seeing politics in terms of "good" and "evil"—the latter Zas a term

he used in connection Zith Tammany +all—he had determined to remove
the possibility of evil from municipal  government in the 8nited States and
make it efficient, economic and businesslike. +aving inherited the public
relations genius that had enabled his father to clean up millions Zith a neZ
soap poZder named Bon Ami, he had already succeeded in cheerfully
forcing doZn the throats of more than a hundred astounded municipalities a
nonpartisan "city manager" form of government. Finding that a single cause
did not quench his thirst for reform, he had become concerned by the fact
that Zhile NeZ York  City had a Citi]ens 8nion to rate the city's legislators,
act as a Zatchdog over city spending and publish a bulletin that gave civic-
minded citi]ens the information they needed to play their proper role in city
government, there Zas no similar organi]ation that covered the state as a
Zhole and could e[ert a stateZide influence for good. Childs decided to put
up the money to start one, but found he had a personnel problem. :ith his
oZn time fully  occupied, he Zould have to leave the neZ organi]ation
almost entirely in someone else's hands, and, revieZing the list of his
reform acquaintances, he concluded that none of them could handle the job.
Then, one evening, doing his nightly reading of publications dealing Zith
government that poured into his apartment from every part of the 8nited
States, he turned to one he had put aside for several months because of its

164
length, the Report of the Reconstruction Commission to Governor Alfred E.
Smith. Richard Childs had read thousands of such reports; he had Zritten
do]ens himself. +e kneZ e[actly  hoZ good this one Zas. +e spent most of
the night reading it and, in the morning, Zalked directly from his breakfast
table to 305 BroadZay. "I needed no recommendations," he Zould recall. "I
had read the Zork." Finding 0oses at his desk in the little office, Childs
introduced himself, announced that he Zas about to form a stateZide Good
Government organi]ation and offered him a post, Zhich he e[plained Zould
unfortunately carry only a small salary, as its secretary and e[ecutive
officer.

Childs had e[pected the man across the desk to say that he Zould consider
the offer, that he Zould let him knoZ in a day or tZo. At the least, he had
e[pected to be asked some questions. Instead, Zithout even a pause, 0oses
replied in a single Zord: "Yes."

0oses' acceptance of the offer elevated him instantly to a position of neZ
importance in the reform movement. A stateZide association of leading
reformers from both parties Zould automatically become the rallying point
not only for a continued fight for reorgani]ation but for the state's reform
sentiment as a Zhole, Zhich had alZays dissipated its strength among too
many local organi]ations. 0oses dealt on a day-to-day basis Zith the old
giants of the NeZ York City reform movement—+ughes, Root, Stimson,
:ickersham,  Elkus, the legendary Charles Culp ("CC") Burlingham, Albert
S. Bard, and :illiam   Jay Schieffelin, fighter against Tammany and the
sZeatshop, Zho in 1920 Zas completing the first decade of a thirty-tZo-
year term as chairman of the Citi]ens 8nion (Childs Zould be his
successor). +e also dealt Zith the young laZyers and social Zorkers Zho
Zere coming up through

T+E RISE TO 3O:ER    132

reform ranks in the city and Zould one day take the places of the older men:
Stanley Isaacs, 0orris Ernst, Nathan Straus, Jr., Raymond V. Ingersoll,
+enry +.  Curran, Robert S. Binkerd, Charles C. LockZood, three young
matrons Zho stood out from the mass of broad-hatted luncheoneers,
Frances 3erkins, 0ary Simkhovitch and 0rs.  :illiam    3. (Jen) Earle, and
the one of the younger men Zho had already made a cityZide name for

165
himself Zith his courageous championing of John 3urroy 0itchel's first
investigative efforts—George 0cAneny. Joining them on the NeZ York
State Association's "advisory council" Zere upstate reform leaders never
before associated Zith their NeZ York City counterparts in one group.

Inviting these men to contribute to the association's monthly si[teen-page
State Bulletin or to speak at luncheon meetings at the :hitehall Club on
Battery 3lace or the Ten Eyck +otel in Albany, soliciting their appearance
at public hearings before legislative committees considering bills in Zhich
the association Zas interested, 0oses became Zell knoZn to all of them.
And as they heard him speak at the :hitehall Club or the Ten Eyck and
read his Zork in the State Bulletin, many of these men, old and young,
Democrat and Republican, saZ in him the embodiment of the finest
qualities of the reform spirit. During this period, he stayed true to the aims
of reform. :orking   out of another small doZntoZn office,  he campaigned
through the Bulletin for reform's halloZed causes: social Zelfare
legislation, a "direct primary" system that Zould end the nomination of
candidates by boss-dominated party conventions, the publication of a "state
journal" similar to the Congressional Record so that interested citi]ens
could study legislative debates and thus obtain information on Zhich to
base intelligent judgments of state activities and, of course, for the
repassage by the neZ Legislature of the reorgani]ation amendments that
Zould foster efficiency and economy in state government. +e campaigned
against special-interest bills, against the subservience of legislators of both
parties to their local bosses. Lauding legislators Zhose Zork he approved,
he did not hesitate to admonish those he felt had strayed from the path of
righteousness, lamenting, for e[ample, that "Senator [Frederick 0.]
Davenport [of Oneida County] seems to us to be losing some of the almost
religious fire Zhich made him an unusual and significant figure in state
politics. The truth is that the Senator is back on the bandZagon Zith the
regulars. ... +e is not by nature or at his best a rural conservative. To get the
most out of himself and for his supporters, a man must act in character." +e
enshrined the Zorst of the party hacks in his oZn "Legislative +all of
Fame." Every issue of the Bulletin devoted a full page to the "objects" of
the NeZ York State Association: "To press for progress toZard responsive,
responsible, efficient and democratic government in the state, to increase
the number of citi]ens and local organi]ations Zhich understand and

166
influence state government ..." And the Bulletin's other pages Zere Zritten
in the same tone. Denouncing a legislative proposal he felt had been
introduced only as a matter of e[pediency, 0oses concluded flatly: "The
principle is the important thing."

The association's members approved of that tone. To them, the failure of the
association to Zin even a single major fight Zas secondary. In the Zorld

of these idealists, there Zere other factors to be considered. "0oses Zas a
very scrupulous researcher," Childs recalls. "+e Zas very reliable. You
could alZays be certain of the facts you read in the Bulletin." In 1921, Zhen
more than three hundred of NeZ York City's most influential reformers
formed a fusion "Coalition Committee" in an abortive effort to prevent Red
0ike  +ylan's re-election as mayor, they selected 0oses as its secretary. +e
seemed, to most of them, the very model of the reformer, even doZn to the
shabbiness of his tiny office and the fact that, to supplement his salary and
Bella's subsidy, he lectured on political science at NeZ York 8niversity.

Some of 0oses' closest personal friends and at least one member of his
family, hoZever, Zere becoming pu]]led.

":hen   Robert Zould come over to the house for dinner noZ," recalled his
brother 3aul, "it Zas 'Al Smith this' and 'Al Smith that.' All  he could talk
about Zas Smith—Zhat Smith had said that day Zhen Robert Zalked him
home or about some idea Smith had had." The man Zho had alZays talked
— and Zho still talked—of most politicians Zith  such scorn talked of Smith
Zith respect and admiration and something that Zas close to reverence.
0oses' brother and friends saZ nothing Zrong Zith such a feeling. But they
couldn't help noticing that, in discussing Smith, 0oses Zas talking less and
less about the great issues of the time Zith Zhich Smith had been involved
and more and more about political maneuvers Zhich the former Governor
had described to him. ":hy,  Zhen he got enthusiastic about something
noZ, and started to really go on about it in that Zay he had, it Zas more
than likely something that, Zhen you thought about it later, Zas really
nothing more or less than some cheap political trick," one friend said.

And Zhen Smith decided in 1922 to run against 0iller for Governor, the
pu]]lement spread to a broader circle of reformers. They began to feel that

167
the model reformer, presented in the secretaryship of the NeZ York State
Association Zith a great chance for increasing the effectiveness of the
reform movement, Zas instead systematically trying to pervert the
association into a tool to further Smith's political career.

In 1922, every issue of the Bulletin contained an attack on 0iller. Because
it Zas an election year, 0oses Zrote in one issue, "The Governor's organ is
keyed for harmony. The soft pedal Zill be on, and . . . someone Zill pull out
the Republican vo[ humana stop if it is not jammed from disuse." :hen
0iller  claimed that his economy measures had reduced the number of state
employees by 2,500, 0oses made his oZn analysis of civil service figures
and Zrote that the number had actually been increased by 983. A furious
0iller  called a press conference and declared that "like most all of the
statements made by that association, it is untrue, and is a piece of the
propaganda that this association is scattering all over the state." +e kneZ
Zhere the blame lay, he said. It lay Zith Robert 0oses. 0oses' Zork, 0iller
charged, Zas of a "partisan character."

In at least one instance, moreover, 0oses' eagerness to attack 0iller led him
into a mistake inconsistent Zith the scrupulous, reliable research of the days
Zhen his only interest had been in reform. +e charged that the Governor
had overspent the e[ecutive-department budget and then, to conceal the
fact,

had paid the difference out of his oZn pocket and had had the state repay
him out of "sums set aside for other purposes." 0iller replied—and proved
—that he had indeed paid the difference, Zhich had totaled over $8,000, but
had refused to alloZ the state to repay him because he felt himself
responsible. The discussion, 0iller said, Zas valuable for only one purpose:
"It discloses the animus of 0r. 0oses and shoZs hoZ hard put to it he is to
find something to critici]e."  The NeZ York +erald editoriali]ed:  "0r.
0oses is noZ engaged, not for the first time, in manifesting his superiority
to the facts. . . . 0r. 0oses has got a number of things all Zrong. :hy
shouldn't he? +e assumes to be a complete censor and impeccable Cato of
Zhat is done or undone at Albany. ... he e[cites pity and sorroZ among all
the friends of noble civic objects, the fruitful pursuit of Zhich requires e[act
knoZledge, free from megalomania." The +erald Zas a Republican

168
neZspaper. Democratic neZspapers, embarrassedly attempting to ignore the
dispute, kept silent. So, because there Zas really no reply he could make,
did 0oses.

The effect on the association Zas predictable. "The Zhole aim Zas that it
Zould be nonpartisan," Childs lamented. Although many of the younger
NeZ York City reformers, both Republican and Democratic, Zere still
sympathetic to 0oses, believing that he simply had made a mistake, the
older city reformers and the upstaters, Republican almost to a man, Zere
outraged that they Zere linked Zith a man Zho had slandered Zithout cause
a Governor of their party. Colonel Stimson, encountering Childs on the
street one day, said that he had decided to resign from the association.
"You're all right, Childs," the Colonel said, "but that 0oses is a rough
character."

Other members of the association also resigned. Its groZth had been
hampered by the differences in vieZpoint betZeen liberal NeZ Yorkers and
rural conservatives and by the physical difficulties involved in bringing
both groups together in a state as large as NeZ York and as short on good
roads. But there had been signs of progress. The membership had been
increasing, and city and upstate members Zere beginning to be more
understanding of the other's vieZpoints. Several of the more Zealthy
upstaters had even indicated to Childs their intention to become major
contributors.

NoZ, of course, such hopes Zere dead. The chance to unify reform
sentiment in the state and make it a force capable of influencing state
decisions Zas gone. In fact, it Zas to be gone indefinitely. A half century
later, Zith the sole e[ception of the single-se[ League of :omen  Voters,
NeZ York Zould  still have no stateZide Good Government organi]ation. In
later years, it Zas impossible for Childs, Zho deeply admired 0oses, to
escape the feeling that 0oses' actions had killed the best chance for a Good
Government movement that NeZ York State ever had.

Almost as disconcerting to Childs as 0oses' sudden partisanship Zas
0oses' attitude. :hen   Childs ta[ed him about the partisanship, 0oses took
his protests lightly and seemed amused and not trying especially hard to

169
conceal the amusement. Childs, he said, just didn't understand hoZ politics
Zorked.

Childs received further proof of hoZ much 0oses had changed during the
latter stages of the 1922 campaign. +e and several other reformers familiar

Zith a particular aspect of state government noticed that Zhenever Smith
discussed it, he Zas making misstatements. The misstatements Zeren't very
important ones; they didn't affect the main thrust of Smith's stand on the
issue, Zith Zhich the reformers thoroughly agreed, but they felt Smith
Zould like to have the facts straight. .noZing  that 0oses Zas Zorking  on
Smith's campaign staff, they pointed them out to him. ":e Zere," recalls
one, "absolutely shocked at Bob's reaction. +e threZ back his head and
laughed at us and said, ':hy, Ze knoZ that. But it  sounds a hell of a lot
better this Zay, doesn't it?' Bob had alZays been so truthful. NoZ Bob Zas
telling us that Smith Zas telling a deliberate lie—and Bob Zas condoning
it."

8nder Belle 0oskoZit]'s   tutelage, Bob 0oses had changed from an
uncompromising idealist to a man Zilling to deal Zith practical
considerations; noZ the alteration had become more drastic. 8nder her
tutelage, he had been learning the politicians' Zay; noZ he almost seemed
to have joined their ranks.

0ore,  he Zas openly scornful of men Zho hadn't, of men Zho still Zorried
about the Truth Zhen Zhat counted Zas votes. +e Zas openly scornful of
reformers Zhose first concern Zas accuracy, Zho Zere Zilling to devote
their lives to fighting for principle  and Zho Zanted to make that fight
Zithout compromise or surrender of any part of the ideals Zith Zhich they
had started it.

Bob 0oses Zas scornful, in short, of Zhat he had been.

0oses had transferred his allegiance, and the transfer Zas appreciated by
the man to Zhom he Zas noZ giving it. Al Smith Zon  back the
Governorship— by 387,000 votes, the largest plurality any gubernatorial
candidate had ever been given in the state, a plurality large enough to pull
in behind him every other Democratic nominee for stateZide office.

170
And Zhen, on January 2, 1923, Al Smith Zent back to Albany, he took Bob
0oses Zith  him—and he took him back big.

in any branch of the state government. +is only title—his only salary—Zas
still that of secretary of the NeZ York State Association.

But the fact that he Zas kneeling ne[t to the floor leader's desk, at the very
center of the Senate action, Zas also symbolic. For in Albany in 1923,
0oses Zas a key figure in capitol maneuvering. Republican senators, cut to
pieces day after day by Jimmy :alker's sallies on reorgani]ation or the
e[ecutive budget but knoZing that :alker   had no patience to master such
subjects himself, kneZ that it Zas 0oses Zho Zas coaching him step by
step. And Zhen—during debates in Zhich his continual presence Zas not
required—they saZ 0oses hurrying at intervals into the Chamber and over
to desk eighteen, bending doZn over :alker, Zhispering briefly  and then
hurrying out again, they kneZ that the messages he bore came directly from
Al Smith. The big hand that had pulled 0oses out of his chair in Fourth
:ard   saloons to sing close harmony had noZ reached out and pulled him
into the innermost circle of the Governor's advisers.

0oses Zas one of the little group Zhich, in the late afternoon, Zould be
sZept by Smith out of the E[ecutive Chamber and over to the home of his
daughter Emily and her husband, John A. :arner, to chat Zith him as he
bounced the :arners' baby daughter on his knee for an hour. +e Zas one of
the group Zho then folloZed the Governor over to the "menagerie" he had
set up in the rear yard of the E[ecutive 0ansion. (The Governor loved
animals—he had decided to keep, instead of giving to ]oos, the animals
bestoZed by admirers as gifts. As a result, the menagerie contained tiger
and bear cubs, goats, a fo[ and an elk, and, as permanent residents, si[
dogs, a mother raccoon Zith three baby raccoons, and three monkeys.)
0oses Zould  be one of the group that several times a Zeek dined Zith
Smith, at a table filled Zith his children's friends and made merry by the
jokes he kept cracking Zith the servants, and after dinner returned to the
E[ecutive Chamber to participate in the legendary bill-vetoing and -signing
sessions conducted over bottles of Scotch and Irish Zhiskey, Zhich featured
impromptu skits, songs and soft-shoe routines by the Governor—and his
almost uncanny ability to recall details of other bills he had read over the

171
years. "Look at this one," he Zould groZl. "I fought against it si[  years ago
and here it is again, just tricked up a little."

It Zas a mi[ed circle: Tammany men like George B. Graves, in his thirty-
second year of service to Democrats in Albany, John F. Gilchrist, one of
Smith's boyhood friends, and George V. (the Fifth) 0cLaughlin, a bluff,
red-faced banker; and three tall, slim reformers—0oses, 3roskauer and the
stentorian, Roman-nosed journalistic genius Zith a thatch of bright red hair
and a big, sZinging stride, +erbert Bayard SZope. All three Zere master
talkers. 3acing around the room, circling, interrupting, outshouting one
another, they made proposals, discussed them, refined them. And
interrupting and outshouting them, the Governor, the voice of e[perience in
the quartet of reform, refusing to let anyone agree or curry favor Zith him,
hashing out ideas as an equal. And, alZays, sitting apart, knitting, saying
nothing until the Governor turned to her and asked, ":hat do you think,
0rs.  0?"  the plump,

matronly little Zoman—a Zoman Zhose qualities astonished the capital
more each day. She could mother reporters and bring them chicken soup
Zhen they Zere sick and call them at midnight Zith the inside tips that they
treasured, but Zhen one Zrote something about Smith that she didn't like,
she kneZ hoZ to persuade his editor to transfer him from the Albany beat.
(:hen,   years later, he again Zrote something she didn't like, she could tell
the reporter's friends, smiling sZeetly, ":ell,  he had better remember that I
got him before.") +er loyalty to Smith Zas so complete that Zhen, knoZing
she needed money to raise her children, Tammany leaders offered her a
choice of lucrative city posts in an attempt to Zoo her from the Governor's
side, she refused so that she could continue as his unpaid adviser.

It Zas e[citing  being part of that circle. It Zas e[citing Zorking  for  Smith.
+is enormous plurality made him feel free at last of all constraints, at home
in the Governorship. +e ran an informal office—Zhen the Zaiting room
Zas filled Zith  people, the door to the inner office Zould sZing open and
Al Smith, ruddy-faced and red-nosed, in shirt sleeves, suspenders and
uptilted cigar, Zould come out and greet each in turn Zith a Zonderful
gold-filled smile and the question ":hat  can I do for you?" +e  Zas never
too busy to see reporters, putting his feet up on his desk as he talked to

172
them, revolving in his sZivel chair to spray first one and then the other of
the tZo big brass cuspidors that had been placed at either side of his office.
+e obviously enjoyed every minute of his banter Zith them and, giving
them his private number at the 0ansion, told them to call him day or night.

But underneath the joviality Zas a rock-hard toughness. The blue eyes
could, in the Zords of one reporter, "turn to steel, absolute steel." 0oses
and the rest of Smith's inner circle might be free to argue Zith him but
Zhen, after consulting Zith 0rs.  0,   he had made his decision, the decision
Zas final. None of them called him anything but "Governor." +e could end
a telephone call asking for a favor by rasping out the single Zord "No" and
slamming doZn the receiver. Once he had made up his mind he Zas
infle[ible.

It Zas e[citing  Zatching hoZ he maneuvered. If one Zas close enough to
Smith, there Zas little one couldn't learn about the game of politics— the
game that Zasn't a game at all—and 0oses Zas close enough. +e could
Zatch the Governor tZist arms, offer incentives and drop, one by one, Zith
matchless guile, the veils from in front of threats. :atching Smith banter
Zith reporters, seeing hoZ much time he devoted to Zinning their
friendship, 0oses learned hoZ important the press Zas in politics. Seeing
that Smith used the banter to cover up the fact that he Zasn't telling the
reporters anything he didn't Zant them to knoZ, 0oses learned hoZ the
press could be used.

+e could learn to keep things simple. The Governor Zanted no
technicalities in his speeches: he himself, Zith the genius that made him the
greatest campaigner of his time, reduced every argument to its most basic
terms. During the 1922 campaign against 0iller, for e[ample, Smith Zas
scheduled to speak at a county fair in Rochester. 0oses had Zritten a draft
of a proposed speech that disproved—dollar by dollar, it seemed—0iller's
claims that his economies had saved the state $14,000,000. :hen Smith

arose, hoZever, he looked out over the huge croZd of farmers and uttered
just tZo sentences.

"Governor 0iller   says he saved the state fourteen million dollars," Smith
said. "All I Zant  to knoZ is—Zhere is it,  and Zho's got it?" Then he sat

173
doZn. For a moment the farmers Zere silent, pu]]led. Then 0oses, seated
by the speaker's platform, heard the croZd begin to murmur, then to laugh,
and finally to break into applause and cheers.

0oses Zas close enough to Jimmy :alker—physically  if  not spiritually —
to learn from him, too, as he coached the mercurial Beau James on the
technical aspects of the administration proposals that the floor leader had to
steer through a Senate in Zhich the Democrats had a bare one-vote
majority. :hen   EllZood  Rabenold, a reformer Zho had been elected to the
Senate on the Democratic ticket and Zhose independence Zas continually
imperiling the one-vote majority, not only refused :alker  his vote on one
crucial measure but rose on the Senate floor to chastise the floor leader for
"undue pressure," 0oses, kneeling beside :alker, heard the dapper little
man snarl under his breath, "I'll ruin him, I'll ruin him"—and he Zatched as,
in succeeding months, :alker remorselessly drove Rabenold out of politics.
.neeling  there on the burgundy carpet, 0oses heard the deals by Zhich
other Democrats—and Republicans, Zhen needed—Zere kept or brought
into line: the judgeship traded for a senator's vote on a crucial issue, the
"campaign contribution" promised for an alteration in a legislator's stand.

Being close to Smith Zas e[citing to 0oses for another reason. For a
decade, ever since he had entered public service, his mind had been teeming
Zith ideas. But not a single one had become reality.

NoZ, for the first time, Zhen 0oses  had an idea, he had a good chance of
seeing it implemented. If something Zas Zrong and he kneZ—just kneZ—
e[actly hoZ  to make it right, there Zas a real chance that it Zould be made
right. 8ltimately,  he had learned through his e[perience Zith John 3urroy
0itchel,  it all  came doZn to a question of poZer. An idea Zas no good
Zithout poZer behind it, poZer  to make people adopt it, poZer to reZard
them Zhen they did, poZer to crush them Zhen they didn't. If he still had no
position and no poZer of his oZn, if his only poZer Zas the confidence of
one man, still, in Al Smith's Albany, Zhen that one man Zas Al Smith, that
Zas a not inconsiderable amount of poZer. "E[ecutive support," he had
learned, Zas the essential that one could not do Zithout if one did not have
poZer of one's oZn. NoZ he had that support.

And he got a lot done.

174
Smith, long angered by the state prison system's complete lack of interest in
rehabilitating prisoners for their return to society, asked 0oses to study the
state's penal machinery. 0oses proposed getting youthful offenders into a
nonprison atmosphere by turning poorly attended state agricultural schools
into minimum-security reformatories. To aid rehabilitation of adult
prisoners, he proposed starting small industries in prisons and paying the
prisoners for

their Zork. And he proposed abolishing the notoriously repressive State
Correction Commission and creating a neZ, more liberal State Correction
Department.

0oses' plan aroused the opposition he had e[pected from the Correction
Commission bureaucrats and the Legislature, but Smith incorporated
0oses' prison-industry suggestion in an administration bill, pushed it
through the Legislature in 1923, turned the agricultural schools into
reformatories by the same method in 1924 and told 0oses to draZ up the
laZs creating the neZ department.

Smith Zanted to eliminate grade crossings, the thousands of intersections
on the same level of roads and railroad tracks that every year caused not
only delays to motorists but deaths running into the hundreds. Other
Governors had had the same desire, but the sheer cost of the job—the
simplest elimination, in open countryside, cost $60,000—put it beyond the
traditional scope of state e[penditures. And the subservience of the
Republican legislators to the railroads had insured that the railroads Zould
not be forced to pay. Each year, as a gesture, the Legislature Zould
appropriate the funds for a handful of crossing eliminations, but, because of
division of responsibility among the many state agencies involved, even
these Zere generally not completed. Smith asked 0oses to look into the
situation.

0oses recommended that the state and the railroads split the cost and that
the state finance its share by selling revenue bonds authori]ed by a
constitutional amendment. Smith accepted the recommendation—and
fought for it, campaigning for the amendment across the state. :ith the
press denouncing Republican opposition to such unprecedented
governmental e[penditure and interference Zith private enterprise, the 1924

175
Legislature Zas forced to pass the amendment, the 1925 Legislature to
repass it, and in 1926 the voters ratified it by a margin of more than a
million votes. :hile    the amendment Zas still being debated, Smith asked
0oses to see if anything could be done to speed up grade-crossing
eliminations already authori]ed. 0oses devised a form that could be sent to
+ighZay  Division regional engineers shoZing the steps in each elimination
and the suggested target dates for completion of each step. And these forms
Zere not alloZed to yelloZ  in stacks in the corner of some office. Smith
ordered +ighZay Superintendent Greene to send them out to the engineers
—and to see that they used them.

0oses had a taste of poZer noZ, and he liked the taste—so obviously that,
to some observers, it seemed as if he liked the taste in and for itself. .een-
eyed little Reuben La]arus, Zho had been brought to Albany from the Old
Neighborhood as an Assembly page Zhen Smith Zas Assembly Speaker
and had already become one of the most knoZledgeable men in the capitol
on the intricacies of bill drafting, remembers that "Zhen I first used to see
0oses in Albany, before he had any poZer, he Zas a striking figure, dark
and handsome, tall and gangly, striding doZn the corridors Zith those long
strides of his, but he Zas ZithdraZn, he Zas Zithin himself. But then, Zhen
Smith brought him up there, he began to be, quite suddenly and quite

noticeably, a lot more arrogant, stiff-necked and self-assertive." Belle
0oskoZit]'s   son, Carlos Israels, noticed the same transformation Zhen
0oses visited the 0oskoZit]es.   "NoZ  he attitudini]ed Zhen he talked. +e
Zould lean back, cross his knees and hold his pipe in an affected attitude."

The man Zho had had to Zait outside so many offices liked being on the
inside of everything. +e talked—perhaps a bit more than Zas discreet—
about Zhat Jimmy :alker   had said to him and about Zhat he had said to
:alker.  +e  liked to describe hoZ some assemblyman had refused his
instructions on a bill and hoZ he had told the Governor about it and hoZ the
Governor had laid doZn the laZ, and, thereafter, hoZ the assemblyman had
jumped to obey Zhen he, 0oses, gave him instructions. If Zhat he Zas on
the inside of Zas a Zorld he Zould once have despised, he did not seem to
remember those earlier feelings noZ. Reform Zork Zas, more and more, an
irritating intrusion on his time. The hours he put in at the NeZ York State

176
Association office each Zeek became feZer and feZer. The gaps betZeen
issues of the State Bulletin, once a monthly publication, greZ longer and
longer. And Zhen the Bulletin did appear noZ, it made less and less
pretense of being a reform pamphlet. 0ore and more, it resembled a
Tammany +all broadside in support of Al Smith.

Reorgani]ation, of course, Zas the key to all the hopes of Smith—and of
0rs.  0oskoZit]   and the other reformers around the Governor. No sooner
had he been returned to office in 1923 than he hurled doZn the gauntlet to
the Legislature Zith a special message, drafted by 0oses, that restarted the
three reorgani]ation amendments doZn the tortuous road to laZ. "The
Legislature passed the amendments consolidating state departments and
reducing the number of elected state officials in 1923 and again in 1924,
after battles in Zhich :alker   and Democratic Assembly leaders fought for
every vote— and 0oses hurried up and doZn the marble stairs of the
capitol betZeen the E[ecutive Chamber on the second floor and the Senate
and Assembly Chambers on the third, bringing them fresh ammunition.

Day after day, during the reorgani]ation fight, Smith had Zatched 0oses
drafting the bills that contained the specifics of departmental
reorgani]ation: Zhich agency Zent in Zhich  department, Zhich poZers
Zere given to each agency. Bill drafting Zas called by Albany insiders "the
black art of politics." An e[pert  bill drafter had to knoZ thousands of
precedents so that he could cull out the one, embodying it in the bill he Zas
Zorking on, that Zould make the bill legal, or so that he could, by careful
Zording, avoid bringing the neZ act Zithin  the purvieZ of an old one that
might make it illegal. +e had to knoZ a myriad Zays of conferring, or
denying, poZer by Zritten Zords. +e  had to knoZ hoZ to lull  the
opposition by concealing a bill's real content. For years, everyone had
knoZn the identity of the best bill drafter in Albany: Alfred  E. Smith. And
Smith had never been shy about accepting that accolade. But noZ, Zhen
someone brought up the subject, Smith said, "The best bill drafter I knoZ is
Bob 0oses."

Al Smith Zas a man Zho believed in paying his debts. In 1923, he found for
0oses a state sinecure Zith high pay and a loZ Zork load: the

177
directorship of a board that Zould supervise the industries that, thanks to
0oses, had been installed in state prisons.

0oses told Smith he didn't Zant the job.

":hat   do you Zant, then?" Smith asked.

"Nothing," 0oses  replied.

Over and over during 1923 and the beginning of 1924, as Smith Zatched
0oses driving himself  in his service, he asked 0oses Zhat he Zanted. Over
and over again, 0oses said, "Nothing."

And then, one day, there Zas something. The something Zas parks.

for his Zorkers. Before the eyes of America a bright neZ Zorld of mass
leisure Zas unfolding.

And along Zith time the neZ technology brought a means by Zhich the
time could be used to conquer space. In 1909, after si[teen years of
e[perimentation Zith gasoline-driven vehicles, Ford had announced the
invention of the 0odel  T, Zhich could be mass-produced, and, Zith the
unrolling of the unparalleled prosperity of the TZenties, Zhich gave the
average American money to spend on lu[uries, America beat a path to
Ford's door and to the doors of his imitators. The number of automobile-
oZning families in the country in 1919 Zas less than seven million; by
1923, it Zould be tZenty-three million.

Their neZly acquired leisure time and the mobility to use it to conquer
space meant, to the urban masses of America, something very particular.
The countryside Zas no longer inaccessible. For millions of NeZ York
fathers, thanks to the machine parked near their door, no longer did a
Sunday outing have to be to a BoZery beer garden or a hard-surfaced
playground framed by the grimy buildings that they saZ every day.
Suddenly, it could be to grassy meadoZs beneath e[panses of blue sky,
perhaps even to Zhite sand and sparkling surf. They could escape the city,
and, more important, they could free their children for a time from its
clutches; they could take them boating and hiking and camping, could roam

178
Zith them through fields and forests, spraZl Zith them eating picnic
lunches on blankets. They could let them do the things that they themselves
had done so seldom Zhen they Zere children. :hen they taught their sons
to sZim noZ, it Zould  not have to be in the East River. :ithout  even a
delay for cranking up—self-starters had become standard equipment—they
piled into their Fords (or Le[ingtons, 0a[Zells,    Briscoes, +udsons,
Templars, Dodges, Buicks, Chevrolets or Cadillacs) on Zeekends and
headed out of NeZ York City.

They headed into disappointment. 0ost of the land around the city Zas in
private hands and closed to them. To the north, in :estchester County, there
Zere indeed public parks, the rolling hills and green playing fields they
sought, but :estchester had barred its parks to anyone not a resident of the
county. Fourteen miles north of the city, beyond 0ount Vernon, Bron[ville,
Scarsdale and :hite 3lains, Zas an unrestricted attraction, .ensico Dam,
surrounded by 2,500 acres of trees and meadoZs, but, since the Bron[ River
3arkZay Zas still under construction, the only Zay to get to .ensico—after
crossing the +arlem River on the narroZ BroadZay draZbridge that caused
traffic jams even Zhen it Zasn't raised (as it Zas on the average of fourteen
times each day) or on the even narroZer East River bridges to the south and
creeping through the narroZ and often unpaved streets of the Bron[—Zas
to take another narroZ road that led through the traftic-clogged doZntoZns
of the four :estchester communities. Families Zho left  NeZ York in the
morning Zere lucky to arrive at .ensico  by late afternoon.

To the Zest of NeZ York City, across the broad +udson River, Zas a vast
preserve open to the city's masses: 3alisades Interstate 3ark. Founded in
1900, funded by the Rockefellers and +arrimans Zith $15,000,000, it Zas

considered, Zith its lakes, landscaped drives, herds of elk, and buildings
erected "to resemble the eternal hills themselves," the finest park in the
8nited States.

Getting there, hoZever, could be eternal. Since there Zere no bridges or
vehicular tunnels across the +udson—the +olland Tunnel Zould not be
opened until 1927—the only Zay across the river Zas on ferries, the same
method the Dutch had used after having purchased 0anhattan from the
Indians three hundred years before. The 3alisades 3ark Commission

179
operated tZo that ran to the park itself, but they carried betZeen them only
five thousand persons. Every Saturday and Sunday morning in summer,
Zhen the ferry ticket takers nailed up the signs that said, in large black
letters, full, there Zere thousands of disappointed faces—of fathers carrying
picnic baskets and mothers carrying babies, of children Zho had been so
e[cited about the trip that they hadn't been able to sleep the night before—
still in front of  them. 3rivately operated ferries plied the +udson, but their
NeZ Jersey termini Zere some forty miles south of the park, so families
using them had to bring their cars. A ferry carried tZenty-four cars at a trip;
often, at ten o'clock on a Zeekend morning, there Zould be hundreds of cars
lined up at the ferry slips in 0anhattan. Disembarking in NeZ Jersey,
families faced a drive on tZo-lane roads through the narroZ streets of
:eehaZken,  EngleZood and Alpine.

So desperate Zere NeZ York's masses that they made the trip anyZay —in
steadily increasing numbers. (In 1921, attendance at the park Zas
3,100,000. In 1922, it topped 4,000,000.) Every year, the Rockefellers and
+arrimans built more playing fields and campsites, and nonetheless every
year the playing fields and campsites Zere so jammed that 3alisades 3ark
on Zeekends, for all its beautiful Zoods and landscaped drives, seemed as
croZded as the city its visitors had come to it to escape.

Increasingly, the eyes of the city's masses—and of the reformers interested
in providing parks for them—Zere turning to the east.

The east Zas Long Island.

Separated from 0anhattan only by the East River, it stretched out into the
Atlantic Ocean for eighty miles, its bulk about tZenty miles Zide, and then
threZ tZo curving  spits of land thirty-nine miles farther out so that its shape
reminded :alt  :hitman    of a Zhale ducking its great head to plunge
beneath the southern tip of 0anhattan Zhile its flukes Zaved behind. Its
Zesternmost si[th Zas Brooklyn and 4ueens, crammed in 1920 Zith tZo
and a half million people, a population greater than that of all but eight
states in the 8nion, but beyond the eastern border of 4ueens that marked
the end of NeZ York City lay, divided into the counties of Nassau and
Suffolk, another 1,373 square miles—878,720 acres—inhabited by less than
a quarter of a million people, one person to every four acres, an area four

180
times the si]e of the Zhole city and Zith a population less than one tZenty-
fifth as large, a prodigal e[travagance of precisely that lu[ury of Zhich
NeZ York Zas rapidly being drained: space.

And Zhat space. Once, before the Ice Age, Long Island had been only the
easternmost e[tension of the barren plains stretching out from the neZ-

formed Alleghenies. But the Zeight of tZo great glaciers rumbling doZn
from +udson Bay had pushed under the ocean a Zide, deep valley, turning
it into a body of Zater that Zould one day be called, at different spots along
its route, Long Island Sound, +ell Gate, East River and the NarroZs, and
thereby freeing the land south and east of the valley from the mainland.
Then the glaciers had cut into this land hundreds of indentations, so that
Zhen the ice had melted, its sharp edges softening and retreating, the north
shore of Long Island Zas fjords and coves, harbors and bays, straits and
peninsulas, an endless, beautiful coastline. The melted ice ran south,
flooded a huge loZ-lying meadoZ on the south side of the Island and left on
the ocean side of the meadoZ just enough loZ sand bars and dunes to form
a barrier beach that checked the force of the Atlantic rollers before they
smashed on the Island and then let them continue as gentle Zaves that
Zashed the Island's shore. The ocean deposited on it gleaming Zhite sand
that gave it long horseshoes of beaches, Zhile betZeen the sand bars and
the Island, on top of the meadoZ, a long, narroZ, beautiful bay Zas created.
And the tides of eons gently etched into the south shore of the mainland a
panorama of incredibly tZisting channels and coves and necks, of sandy
shoals and tiny bays off the big one, of a marshland catacomb.

Before the tZo glaciers, the land had been flat, but the glaciers had pushed
before them boulders, gravel, sand and clay and, coming to a halt on Long
Island and melting there, had left such debris behind as tZo great ridges that
marked the outlines of their farthest advance. The ridges lay along the
flatness like a pair of scissors, Zith the bolt holding the blades in a place
called the :heatley  +ills.  One blade trailed off along the northern fluke of
the Island in a mass of small rocks and pebbles; the other cut doZn, far out
along its length, to the southern fluke and reached out along the fluke in a
mass of gravel, clay and rock hills, croZned Zith gnarled and tZisted trees,
that ended in a series of steep bluffs. Over the centuries, the ridges had been

181
smoothed and shaped into chains of gently rolling hills that ran to the edge
of the Zhitecapped Sound and the hills had been covered Zith lush groZths
of trees—beech, oak, maple and elm, copses of sassafras and dogZood,
birch and pine—so that the North Shore of Long Island became "a fresh,
green breast of the NeZ :orld,"  and, looking at it, F. Scott Fit]gerald
Zould think that "for  a transitory enchanted moment man must have held
his breath in the presence of this continent, compelled into an aesthetic
contemplation he neither understood nor desired, face to face for the last
time in history Zith  something commensurate to his capacity to Zonder.' In
summer, to the sZeltering masses of NeZ York, the cool green hills and
rolling surf of Long Island beckoned like a vast playground filled Zith the
milk and honey of leaves and grass, of sun and sand, that Zould sZeeten the
bitterness of city life.

Certainly, the Island seemed open to them. 8nlike the +udson, the East
River had been spanned by great bridges—:illiamsburg, 4ueens-borough,
0anhattan and Brooklyn—and running out from the bridges through
Brooklyn and 4ueens, to the very threshold of the Island, Zere

182
Al Smith at the Central 3ark Zoo.

Belle 0oskoZit]

Fiorello La Guardia, Al Smith and Robert 0oses at the opening of the Belt
3arkZay, 1938. Behind 0oses is Smith's Zife, .atie.

t %

v/:

3AGEANTRY: The dedication of 0oses' seven-block-long Chrystie-
Forsyth 3ark, 1934.

3RESENT A TION of  aZard by 3ark Association president, Iphigene Ochs
Sul]berger, and Association official Gustavus .irby, 193$.

183
ha Guardia speaking — Zith 0oses behind him — at the Chrystie-Forsyth
dedication.

/I' ,% '*% :f

'/L

f\

184
T+E CANDIDATE:   Above: 1934 GO3 gubernatorial nominee 0oses
arriving at 0adison Square Garden for a campaign speech; left: Zith his
Zife, 0ary,  voting  on Election Day.

185
+erbert Lehman, Al Smith and August +eckscher dedicating +eckscher
State 3ark, 1929. The tZo girls are 0oses' daughters, Jane (left) and
Barbara.

Franklin Roosevelt dedicating Jones Beach State 3ark, 1929, as Smith and
0oses sit listening.





\




l\





• :

186
■JEp*

Al Smith speaking at the +eckscher dedication on the porch of the old
Taylor 0ansion. 0oses  is framed in pillars at left.

0oses receiving an aZard from children's clubs, 1934.

5?

ED8CATIONAL   ALLIANCL   GARDENING  CL8B?

+ARVEST FESTIVAL

  **

<-0*

187
0OSES AND T+E GOVERNORS

188
0oses and Smith

0oses and Roosevelt

0oses and Lehman














0oses and DeZey












0oses and +arriman

(and, left,

:illiam    Zeckendorf)

0oses and Rockefeller

190
0OSES

AfsD T+E 0AYORS

0oses (left) and :alkei (third from left)

a Guardia













! and (TDZyer

( third from left;

Email and

191
0oses and Impellitteri

0oses and :agner

194
0oses presenting the :orld's  Fair Gold 0edal  to Generalissimo Franco in
0adrid,  1964.
















0oses posing Zith Brooklyn  B.3. Cashmore, Cardinal Spellman, 0anhattan
B.3. :agner,  and 0ayor  O'DZyer at the opening of the Brooklyn-Battery
Tunnel, 1950.

0oses visiting 3ope John ;;+I     at the Vatican, 1963.

0OSES AISD  T+E  3RESIDENTS

195
0oses and +oover















0oses and Truman
















0oses and EisenhoZer

197
0oses and 3ort Authority Chairman +oZard  S. Cullman (third from right)
at the groundbreaking for the Lincoln Tunnels third tube, 1952.

198
0oses, Charles 3reusse and George Spargo huddling in the 3la]a's Oak
Room to discuss plans for the 8N building, 1947.

0oses and +arry Van Arsdale at the :orld's  Fair, 1964.

0OSES AND  T+E  3O:ER   BRO.ER!

Bernard F. Gimbel, Thomas F. Deegan and John :. +anes Zatching as
NeZbold 0orris  signs the Flushing 0eadoZs 3ark over to the :orld's   Fair
Corporation, i960.

























0oses, Tom Shanahan and Jim Farley.

0oses, :agner   and Samuel I. Rosenman at the Jones Beach 0arine
Theater, i960.

199
/. Russel Sprague, 0oses, Smith, Grover :halen, :. .ingsland0acy,
1932.

200
0oses Zith  :illiam    J. Rone and :illiam   Vermaelen (fo> and third from
right), 1968.

0oses, Guy Lombardo and three members of the Jones Beach 0arine
Theate chorus line, c. i960.



























0OSES AND  T+E  0OSES  0EN

Sid Shapiro and "R0" at the Belmont Lake Office.

The Boss in the field Zith (left to right) aides Darcy, AndreZs, Loeser,
Ammann.

0r.  0oses and "0ustache"  Constable.

201
:ker

%# ^r «•«

T8ESDAY. A+®.  24. 1956

Right: The "Little Soldier"  of the Tavern-on-the-Green Battle, 1956. BeloZ:
0oses, Shapiro and Rockefeller, 1961.

T £S£si Jr* Re ports from Lot,

it Leaders 'Drop

202
Actor Robinson's 0others Fenced Out IRT BreakdoZn ;T*£rA ^ Bulldo]er
Digs In »££

**# tt «# «/ZjvZ«r» i Zl u 3mrfc* 40ftmtestotZ  Robfrt 0umi  **;\y
t<0t«y slot*

Rockefeller applauding, 0oses crying, at the dedication of Robert 0oses
3la]a at the Lincoln Center campus of Fordham 8niversity, 1910.

203
i0iiiiiiii

0

ROBERT ttOS'E

0ASTER:.  FRIEND  Of FGaD+A

three boulevards—Northern, Conduit and 4ueens—one of Zhich, Northern,
Zas perhaps the Zidest highZay in the country. For Brooklyn and 4ueens
residents, moreover, there Zas no necessity for either bridges or boulevards.
Long Island Zas just doZn the road.

So Zas disappointment.

The Island's South Shore, the edge of the meadoZ that had been
transformed into the Great South Bay, offered gentle Zaves and sandy
beaches. But the bay Zas the haunt of the baymen, a closemouthed,
independent breed, some of them descendants of families that had
"folloZed  the bay" since the Revolution, others NeZ England Yankees Zho,
hearing about the bay's bountiful harvests of oysters and clams, tommycods
and smelts, had left the Zhaling boats and had moved to Long Island,
bringing Zith  them their taciturnity and distrust of outsiders.

Less than thirty miles from the borders of NeZ York City, the baymen lived
in a Zorld that resembled nothing so much as the remote fog banks of Nova
Scotia. Their lives revolved around the bay. :hen its tides Zere flood, no
matter Zhat the hour, through the thick, damp mist, hip boots slung over
their shoulders, caps pulled loZ over their eyes, they trudged to their
Zeather-beaten little traZlers and crept out into the fog, returning hours
later so heavily laden that only the boZs and sterns of the boats Zere out of
the Zater. They loved the bay's sparkle in summer, its cool bree]es;
somehoZ they loved its treacherous shoals and tides and the hidden traps of
sZamp grass that tangled their boats' propellers. Forced off it by Zinter
storms, they settled doZn in taverns near the piers that jutted into it,

204
drinking (they Zere famous for their drinking) and spinning legends about
it. Once you Zere "bay salted," they said, you Zould never leave.

They Zere fiercely determined to keep their Zorld for themselves. The bay
bottoms, the hell-fire preachers in their Zeather-beaten little churches
constantly reminded them, Zere "sacred," their "priceless natural heritage,"
and Zhen it came time each year for the toZnships that bordered on the
Great South Bay—+empstead, Oyster Bay,* Babylon, Islip and
Brookhaven —to sell leases to mine the bay's underZater crops of shellfish,
the baymen croZded into toZn halls to listen Zhile the leases Zere aZarded
—and no outsider Zas ever given a lease. No authority could aZe them. In
1892, Zhen the German liner Normannia arrived in NeZ York flying the
yelloZ flag that signaled a cholera epidemic on board, the state bought the
only hotel on Fire Island so it could quarantine the passengers and creZs
there. TraZler-loads of armed baymen met the Normannia as it tied up to
the hotel dock and cut loose its haZsers, and only the dispatch of a National
Guard regiment put doZn the uprising.

Distrusting anyone "from aZay," the baymen distrusted especially anyone
from NeZ York. +ating  the city—many boasted that they had never

* The incorporated villages of +empstead and Oyster Bay are, respectively,
in the center and northern part of Long Island but the ToZnships of
+empstead and Oyster Bay, of Zhich the villages are a part, e[tend to the
South Shore and the barrier beach.

been there—they feared that its "foreigners," hordes of long-haired Slavs,
hook-nosed JeZs and unZashed Irishmen, Zould descend on and befoul
their beautiful beaches at the first slackening in their vigilance.

And to keep such intruders aZay, their toZnship boards had created, on
every piece of publicly oZned Zaterfront property that might conceivably
attract visitors from the city, "parks" Zhose e[clusive use Zas by statute
reserved to toZnship residents.

The baymen's land-locked cousins, the farmers of Long Island, Zere men of
conviction, too. In no part of NeZ York State Zere the Zhite hoods of the
.u  .lu[    .lan,   an organi]ation Zhose venom Zas directed in the I920's not

205
only against Negroes but also against JeZs and Catholics, as numerous as in
Suffolk County. Three successive chairmen of Suffolk's Republican 3arty
had been members of the .lan, and anyone Zho needed an additional
symbol of its poZer had only to look at the flagpole in front of the Islip
ToZn +all:  the pole, read the inscription on an attached plaque, had been
donated by the Islip branch of the Ladies of the .lan and gratefully
accepted by the ToZn Board. (In 1928, Zhen Al Smith ran for 3resident,
fiery crosses Zould bla]e on the hills of Alabama and 0ississippi—and, by
orders of the county GO3 organi]ation, on the hills of Suffolk.) Combining
Zith the baymen to dominate the Suffolk political picture, the farmers had
no difficulty  persuading the county's supervisors to make sure that there
Zas not a single park in Suffolk open to city residents.

And it Zas neither the baymen nor the farmers Zho most firmly barred
Long Island to those Zho hungered for it. The huddled masses of NeZ York
City had a far more poZerful enemy. It Zas Zealth—vast, entrenched,
impregnable Zealth—and the poZer that Zent Zith it. For it Zas to Long
Island that the robber barons of America had retired to enjoy their plunder.

These Zere the men Zho, during the "0iddle Ages of American industry,"
the half century of unbridled industrial e[pansion folloZing  the Civil :ar,
had harnessed America's vast mineral resources and tapped its long-stored
capital to create needed industrial groZth but Zho, to turn that groZth into
personal Zealth, had stationed themselves at the "narroZs" of production,
the key points of production and distribution, and e[acted tribute from the
nation. They Zere the men Zho had blackmailed state legislatures and city
councils by threatening to build their railroad lines elseZhere unless they
received ta[ e[emptions, outright gifts of cash—and land grants so vast
that, by 1920, the elected representatives of America had turned over to the
railroad barons an area the si]e of Te[as. They Zere the men Zho had
bribed and corrupted legislators—the Standard Oil Company, one historian
said, did everything possible to the 3ennsylvania Legislature e[cept refine it
—to let them loot the nation's oil and ore, the men Zho, building their
empires on the toil of millions of immigrant laborers, had kept Zages loZ,
hours long, and had crushed the unions. Their creed Zas summed up in tZo
quotes: Commodore Vanderbilt's "LaZ? :hat  do I care for laZ? +ain't I got
the poZer?" and J. 3. 0organ's "I oZe the public nothing."

206
The northern tip of Long Island's Glen Cove peninsula Zas 0organ's estate,
the Zaters beside it the anchorage for his great black yacht, Corsair,

and all the northern reaches of the peninsula Zere "0organ Country." +is
son—0organ the Younger, reporters called him—and four partners of the
+ouse of 0organ lived  there, their yachts riding to anchor beside that of
their father and chief, and so did George F. Baker, the chop-Zhiskered,
taciturn Sphin[ of :all    Street Zho Zas the president of the First National
Bank, the largest single stockholder of both AT&T and 8nited States Steel
(his holdings in Big Steel alone totaled $212,500,000 in 1920), and Zho
rode at the right hand of 0organ the Elder in the turn of the century's
bloodiest stock-market raids. Baker Zas old noZ—eighty in 1920—but not
too old to lift his sZord; in  1930, Zhen he Zas ninety and America Zas in
the Depression, he climbed out of bed, pushed aside his doctors, strode to
his office and, in a series of incredible stock manipulations, increased his
fortune in that year alone by $50,000,000.

To the south of the 0organs lay the demesnes of Standard Oil, Zhere
Charles 3ratt and Stephen C. +arkness, partners of John D. Rockefeller the
First, had carved out adjoining fiefs on either side of a small stream. On his,
3ratt built si[  manor houses for his si[ sons.

South of the 3ratts, around :estbury in the :heatley   +ills,  the bolt of the
scissors that made Long Island beautiful, there established himself +enry
3hipps, full partner of AndreZ Carnegie, a man Zho, Zhile Carnegie drove
men to ordeals of sZeat, grime and injury in the roaring steel mills of
Zestern 3ennsylvania, obtained the cash to let Carnegie build more mills by
using a talent "for keeping a check in the air as long as any man." Around
him, in the hills, 3hipps gathered his children and grandchildren. To the
Zest of the 3hippses' lands, also in :heatley, lay "+arbor +ill,"   the 480-
acre holding of Clarence +ungerford 0ackay, president, board chairman
and major stockholder of the 3ostal Telegraph Cable Company, precursor of
:estern  8nion,  Zho had, during :orld   :ar   I, defied 3resident :ilson's
attempts to put the telegraph to use in America's service. North of 0ackay
lay the principality of Child's Frick, son of +enry  Clay Frick, baron of coal
and coke, Zho had gained his legendary Zealth during the 3anic of 1873 by
purchasing for a pittance the land of desperate farmers Zithout telling them

207
that it contained coal, the raZ material of the coke essential to steelmaking,
then by crushing other rivals in the field and, Zith a virtual monopoly of the
fuel in his hands, by quintupling its price.

To the Zest of 0ackay stretched the fiefs of other barons of American
business—the sugar truster Claus Spreckels, for e[ample, and other
Standard Oil heirs like 3ayne :hitney,  Zho in  the early 1920's Zas paying
an annual income ta[ of a million and a half dollars. To the east of the
3hippses there Zere more :hitneys; Ogden Livingston 0ills,   congressman
son of Darius Ogden 0ills of  the San Francisco "bank ring"; and the
laZyers Zho Zere the barons' trusted counselors, Colonel +enry L.
Stimson, Rockefeller's Robert :.  De Forest, 0organ's John :.  Davis and
Colonel +. Rogers :inthrop,   and Francis 3. Garvan, the brain behind the
Chemical Trust; and, finally, in the eastern outpost of Centerport, the castle
of fierce old Commodore Vanderbilt's indolent grandson, :illie.  0ingled
Zith the barons Zere representatives of older Zealth—Zon by gentler
means—and of neZer. There

Zere si[ hundred estates on the North Shore, most of them more than fifty
acres in si]e, some of them hundreds of acres, some of them thousands. The
turrets of the barons' castles loomed above the trees along the entire North
Shore of Nassau County and fifteen miles deep into Suffolk.

The castles reflected the e[tent of their triumphs. 0rs. John S. 3hipps,
already mistress of seven other houses, Zanted her Long Island residence to
look e[actly like  the great eighteenth-century English manor houses. To
make sure that it Zould, the famous London manor-house architect George
CraZley Zas summoned to the :heatley  +ills  to design ":estbury  +ouse"
and to stay for years until it Zas completed—a masterpiece of cherry-red
brick and limestone, Georgian chimneys and a pale-gold roof rising above
the trees, complete Zith a vault for the family silver, separate rooms for
glasses and china and luggage, silver-plated bathroom fi[tures and
doorknobs, and a cellar so large that in i960 the Nassau County Office of
Civil Defense Zould designate it as a bomb shelter large enough to hold
eighteen hundred persons. To make sure that the mood of England should
not be lost in the furnishings, envoys of the 3hippses scoured England for
furniture made by Chippendale himself. The armoire in 0rs. 3hipps's

208
bedroom had belonged to James II. The mantel clock in her study Zas made
by the clockmaker to .ing  George II. The desk in the hall outside it Zas the
desk on Zhich CromZell had signed the death Zarrant of Charles I.

And the 3hippses Zere noted for their modesty and restraint. :estbury
+ouse, after all, contained only thirty-tZo rooms. The F. :.  :oolZorth
mansion in Glen Cove contained si[ty-tZo, and included not only solid
gold instead of silver-plated bathroom fi[tures and doorknobs but a dining-
room ceiling gilded Zith fifteen  hundred square feet of fourteen-carat gold.
The Tiffany Estate in Laurel +olloZ  contained eighty-tZo. The 3hippses
had a private golf course and tZo private polo fields, but guests of the
0arshall  Fields in Lloyd Neck Zere not forced to limit their  activities to
polo or golf, since their hosts had also provided them Zith tennis courts,
badminton courts, squash courts, indoor and outdoor sZimming pools,
sailboats, motor-boats, skeet ranges—and a thousand-acre hunting preserve.
No e[travagance Zas too great. Finding that all the large hills in the Cold
Spring +arbor area, Zhere he Zanted to build a chateau, Zere taken, Otto
.ahn  built a hill  of his oZn, a small mountain, in fact, and since hauling the
necessary earth and stone to the site required a railroad line, he built a
railroad line.

The sports of the feudal lords of the Old :orld  Zere the sports of these
feudal lords of the NeZ. The North Shore echoed to the thunder of their
horses' hooves, and to the bay of their hounds as, hunting fo[ and deer, they
ranged unchallenged across the estates, riding in a single hunt from one end
of Nassau County to the other. And they partied on a scale the NeZ :orld
had seldom seen, outdoing themselves Zith sZimming pools bearing
thousands of orchids, diamond tiaras for lady guests, cigarettes Zrapped,
and designed to be smoked, in hundred-dollar bills, until an aZed America
named the North Shore "The Gold Coast."

And if their displays of Zealth Zere aZesome, so Zere their displays of
selfishness. The robber barons intended to keep their Zorld for themselves.

There Zas a reason for the si]e of their fiefs, for their Zillingness to buy —
and, year after year, to pay ta[es on—hundreds of acres that they kept in
Zoods and never used. There Zas a reason for the height and thickness of
the Zalls around those fiefs. There Zas a reason for their private police

209
forces and armed guards. They needed vast acreage in order that their
castles could be set far enough back from public roads so that they Zould
not have to see the public. They needed Zalls so that the public should
understand that it Zas not Zanted on their acres. They needed armed guards
to protect their borders from those members of the public Zho might, on a
Sunday e[cursion to the country, climb a Zall to get at the empty green
fields beyond. They Zere Zilling, they told each other, to spend anything
necessary "to keep our privacy"—by Zhich they meant to keep the public
out of their demesne.

And in their vieZ  this demesne included the Zhole North Shore.

The officials they controlled alloZed all public roads not needed for their
oZn access to their estates to fall into disrepair to discourage public use.
Lest the public turn instead to rail transportation, a group of them led by
Charles 3ratt, Zho had learned hoZ to handle annoyances from his mentor,
Rockefeller, bought sufficient stock in the Long Island Rail Road to control
its policies—and saZ to it that the railroad's North Shore lines Zere kept
especially antiquated and rickety.

The magnet that most strongly dreZ the city masses, of course, Zas their
desire to sZim in Long Island Sound, and the barons of the North Shore
kneZ Zhat to do about that.

The shore front on the Great Neck peninsula, the first of the series of
peninsulas that compose most of the North Shore in Nassau and Zestern
Suffolk, Zas entirely in their hands, e[cept for a feZ slivers oZned by less
Zealthy individuals Zho  emulated the barons in keeping their property for
their oZn use. So Zas the shore front on the ne[t peninsula, e[cept for tZo
pieces of property at its tip, Sands 3oint. One Zas a small crescent of beach,
rather rocky, oZned by an elderly ZidoZ, a native of Long Island, Zho
liked to see people having fun and had not only resisted entreaties that she
bar them from the property but had stubbornly refused, even for an
outrageously high price, to sell her beach to those Zho Zould; it Zas in the
process of being condemned by a village board controlled by the barons.
The other, at the very tip of the peninsula, opposite E[ecution Rock, Zhere
the original, slaveoZning settlers of Sands 3oint had disposed of
troublesome slaves by chaining them to the rock at loZ tide and letting

210
them droZn as the tide crept over them, Zas a sandier five-acre beach
oZned by the federal government and holding the Sands 3oint Lighthouse.

The beach could be reached only by a road that crossed an adjacent,
privately oZned property, but the federal government had purchased an
easement for public use of that road. :hen, hoZever, the adjacent property
Zas purchased by 0rs. Oliver Belmont, a cold-eyed grande dame famed for
her priceless parure of emeralds and for her "0arble +ouse" at NeZport, a
Zhite marble structure Zhose pilasters and capitals Zere modeled on,
although someZhat larger than, those of the Temple of the Sun at Baalbek,
she

erected across the southern edge of the property, stretching from one side of
the peninsula to the other, a Zall made of solid concrete three feet thick,
tZelve feet high, topped Zith sharp black spikes and iron dragons' heads.
3ersons Zho asked the armed guards stationed at the massive iron gate to
alloZ them to pass Zere informed that the federal government had
"surrendered" its easement and that the road could be used only by persons
"having official business" at the lighthouse—a fact federal officials
brusquely confirmed.

On the ne[t peninsula, Glen Cove, there Zere five beaches open to the
public, tZo oZned privately and three by Oyster Bay ToZnship, rocky and
unappealing, pitifully narroZ strips of pebbles and Zeeds for Zhose use city
residents had to pay e[orbitant rates, and Zhose combined capacity Zas less
than ten thousand.

There Zere long stretches of more appealing beach open to the public in
Cold Spring +arbor, the area east of the Glen Cove peninsula, but the
barons of Cold Spring had solved that problem; they had built a gate across
the only road that led to the beach and stationed armed guards at the gate.
:ould-be   beachgoers Zho questioned their authority Zere told that the road
Zas on private property, a legal question someZhat difficult to research on a
summer Zeekend.

Every foot of the tZo commas of land east of Cold Spring—Lloyd Neck
and Eatons Neck—Zas oZned by barons. +untington ToZnship, just

211
beyond them, contained forty-eight miles of shoreline; 1,250 feet of it Zere
open to the public.

Like those on the South Shore, then, the beaches on the North Shore of
Long Island had been effectively closed to city residents. A NeZ Yorker
Zho Zanted to take his family for a sZim on Long Island could head only
for Long Beach on the South Shore, tedious to reach because of inadequate
roads and so croZded that it seemed like an e[tension of the filthy,
incredibly jammed Coney Island beach in Brooklyn. The North Shore stood
impregnable against the importunings of the masses.

And the barons of the North Shore kneZ hoZ to keep it impregnable.
Accustomed to dealing in the political marketplace (so many of the largest
contributors to the Republican 3arty came from the North Shore that during
the i92o's the GO3's National Finance Committee contained forty-nine
members—one from each of the forty-eight states and one from Nassau
County), they furnished the bulk of the Zar chest of the state Republican
organi]ation—and of the smooth-running Nassau County GO3 machine.
And they kneZ hoZ to get value for money spent. They saZ to it that key
legislative committee chairmen Zere men Zho took orders. They sent to
Albany as the assemblymen and senators from Nassau County young
knights from their oZn ranks—bright-eyed, enthusiastic F. Trubee Davison,
son of 0organ partner +enry 3.—or young villagers Zhom their eyes had
picked out as promising men to enlist in their service, such as a handsome,
ambitious young laZyer Zhose father had been Theodore Roosevelt's
coachman at Sagamore +ill, Leonard :. +all.  And Zhile  state roads of
broader Zidth, better paving and improved design might be built elseZhere,
they Zere

not built on Long Island. A strangely permissive state laZ, moreover,
alloZed the barons to incorporate their estates into self-governing "villages"
so that the measures necessary to keep out the city hordes could be
legitimati]ed, given "governmental status"—and enforced by "village
police forces," Zhich before incorporation had been their privately
employed guards.

So Zhen the families of NeZ York City reached Long Island, they found the
milk and honey sour indeed.

212
If they Zere heading for the North Shore on Northern Boulevard, 160 feet
of smooth macadam shrank to eighteen at the city line. The cars heading
east had to cram into a single file. As they crept along, the paving of the
boulevard deteriorated, so that each family had to Zatch the cars ahead
jounce, one after the other, into gaping potholes, and then Zait for the jolts
themselves. 0ore and more frequently, they came to unpaved stretches in
Zhich, if  there had been a recent rain, cars became mired, bringing the
endless line behind them to a halt. If the earth Zas dry, thick clouds of dust
hung over the unpaved stretches, turning dirty the gay dress 0other had
Zorn for the e[cursion.

As the families drove, they could see on either side of them, through gates
set in stone Zalls or through the openings in Zooden fences, the beautiful
meadoZs they had come for, stretching endlessly and emptily to the cool
trees beyond. But the meadoZs and trees Zere not for them. The gates
Zould be locked and men carrying shotguns and holding fierce dogs on
straining leashes Zould point eastZard, telling the families there Zere parks
open to them "farther along." There Zas no shade on Northern Boulevard
and the children became cranky early. In desperation, ignoring the no
trespassing — private property signs that lined the road, fathers Zould turn
onto the narroZ strip of grass betZeen the boulevard and the Zall
paralleling it and, despite the dust and the fumes from the passing cars,
Zould try to picnic there. But the guards Zere vigilant and it Zas never long
until the fathers had to tell the kids to get back into the car. Later, in Oyster
Bay ToZn and +untington, they Zould come to parks, tiny but nonetheless
parks, but as they approached them they Zould see policemen at their
entrances and the policemen Zould Zave them on, e[plaining that they
Zere reserved for toZnship residents. There Zere, the policemen shouted,
parks open "farther along."

Of those Zho turned off the boulevard, trying to find a beach, the lucky
ones found a spot on the five rocky strips on the Glen Cove peninsula. The
others, searching mile after mile for a piece of beach not marked private,
seldom even got close enough to glimpse the Zater, for most of the roads
doZn to it had locked gates across them. They Zould turn south again,
heading back to the boulevard.

213
The more persistent, Zho determined to head east until they discovered
someplace to sZim or picnic, found the road becoming Zorse and Zorse.
They Zould see Long Island villagers sitting on the fences and laughing at
the families Zho, because of engine overheating or in a desperate try at a
piece of grass, pulled off the road. The line of cars Zas so solid, the radiator
of one almost touching the tailgate of the one before it, that, once out

of the line, it Zas hard for a car to get back in—and it Zas fun, the villagers
said, to Zatch them try.

At the head of +empstead +arbor, the inlet that separates the Sands 3oint
and Glen Cove peninsulas, Northern Boulevard dipped doZn, curving and
Zinding, rutted and potholed, unpaved in one stretch, and became the 0ain
Street of Roslyn Village. It narroZed as its Zidth Zas cut by sideZalks in
front of little  stores, and then, on the other side of the toZn, Zound upZard
again before resuming its eastern course. Roslynites, Zatching the endless
line of cars, said it took tZo hours just to get through toZn, but this Zas, of
course, an e[aggeration. In 1923, state officials clocked it on successive
Sundays and found you could make it in an hour and a quarter. The officials
also determined the length of time it took on an average Sunday to get from
the 4ueensborough Bridge to +untington, a distance of 32.4 miles. The
time Zas four hours.

If the NeZ Yorkers stayed on Northern Boulevard long enough, there Zere,
indeed, after the estates and guards of the Gold Coast had been left behind
—and even if the promised parks "farther along" never materiali]ed—
plenty of quiet places Zith grass and trees in Zhich one could picnic. :hy,
SmithtoZn, the toZnship beyond +untington, alone had 92.5 acres of
cemeteries, and fallen tombstones made e[cellent picnic tables. :hen the
cemeteries Zere filled, there Zere alZays farms, for although the Suffolk
farmers Zere as determined as the barons to keep the foreigners off their
lands, they couldn't afford guards to help them do it, and they never seemed
to have enough dogs and sons Zith pitchforks to do the job thoroughly,
although they certainly tried. NeZ Yorkers could even sZim in SmithtoZn,
if they found a beach Zhose oZner Zasn't around. Everyone kneZ they
could, because, every 0onday, neZspapers Zould carry stories about the

214
city residents Zho, sZimming in the choppy Sound Zithout the protection
of lifeguards, had droZned in SmithtoZn Zaters.

0ost  NeZ Yorkers, hoZever, didn't last to SmithtoZn. They turned around
and slunk home, eating their picnic lunches in their cars, Zashing them
doZn Zith  bitterness and frustration. If they sZam on Long Island, they
sZam in their cars in their sZeat.

Northern Boulevard Zas not, of course, the only route to the North Shore
from NeZ York. There Zas also Jericho Turnpike. There Zas one difference
betZeen Northern Boulevard and Jericho Turnpike. Jericho Turnpike Zas
tZo feet narroZer.

And the greed of the robber barons had not been satisfied by the riches of
the North Shore. Led by +orace O. +avemeyer, the "Sultan of Sugar," a
group of them had sei]ed the choicest areas of the South Shore, a series of
promontories beloZ East Islip that jut out into the Great South Bay about
midZay along its si[ty-mile  length.

They lived there in a splendor equal to that of the North Shore—and they
displayed an equal determination to keep their privacy unimpaired. :hen
one of their number, Julian T. Davies, died in 1922, they feared that his
estate might be bought by some undesirable or, Zorse, subdivided. A group
of them, led by +avemeyer and his brother-in-laZ, :.  .ingsland  0acy,

215
decided to turn it into a private club. The obstacles might have deterred less
determined men. Davies had oZned only 231 acres and most of them Zere
marshland that Zas covered by Zater at high tide, so that there Zas only
enough solid land for a nine-hole golf course. To make the second nine,
they Zere told, dredges Zould have to Zork for a year to haul up sand and
fill  in the marshland Zith it. They set the dredges to Zork.

To design the course, they brought over an Englishman Zho Zas the most
famous golf-course designer in the Zorld. To help the members Zith their
sZings, they hired a famous touring professional. They staffed the kitchen
Zith the best chefs they could find. For those members Zho Zanted to sail,
they built a large boat basin. And Zhen all Zas ready, they thought of a
name, the Timber 3oint Club, and opened the club—to e[actly one hundred
persons.

"You could play golf there on a Zeekend and if there Zere tZo other golfers
on the Zhole course, you considered the place croZded," recalls Robert
+ollins, the son of one of the members. "God, that place Zas empty."

And that Zas e[actly hoZ the members Zanted it. As they toured the
majestic course that sloped doZn to the bay, men in caps and
knickerbockers and long socks, ladies in long pleated skirts and middy
blouses, they considered the lack of people as big an asset as the vieZ. In
1923, Suffolk County established a 0osquito Control Commission and
asked various members of the club for contributions. "God, the mosquitoes
in the summer Zere unbelievable on that golf course," +ollins says. "You'd
look at the felloZ you Zere playing Zith  and there might be tZenty on his
face." But most Timber 3ointers gave nothing. If the commission got rid of
the mosquitoes, 0rs. +ollins e[plained,  more "foreigners" might find the
South Shore attractive and try to live there. "I'd rather have the
mosquitoes," she told her friends.

To keep the public out Zas Zorth any price. :hen  the property adjoining
the Timber 3oint Club, a 1,500-acre estate oZned by an eccentric old
millionaire Zho  had never been one of them, anyZay, George C. Taylor,
came on the market after his death, the Timber 3ointers raised $250,000 to
buy it. Then they hired caretakers, stocked it Zith herds of deer and flocks

216
of Zild  pheasant—all for less than ten days of hunting a year and an
additional guarantee that they Zould never have to look over from their golf
course and see on the land adjoining it anyone they didn't knoZ.

Thanks to the barons and the baymen, the sandy beaches of the South Shore
Zere as thoroughly closed off to NeZ Yorkers as the rocky beaches of the
North. Those NeZ Yorkers Zho could not afford the e[orbitant charges at
Long Beach or squee]e into the limited public area of the beach there Zere
shunted along the South Shore from village to village until they reached the
flat, unshaded, bleak potato fields of Suffolk County.

And the shunting on the South Shore Zas along 0errick Road, an artery as
narroZ as Northern Boulevard and even more congested, Zhich crossed the
clogged doZntoZn areas of a do]en South Shore villages and Zas
intersected at half a hundred locations by the tracks of the Long Island

Rail Road, so that every time a train came through, the line of cars, miles
long, Zould have to stop and Zait until the crossing gates Zent up again.

And still, the need Zas so great that every summer Zeekend families from
NeZ York City flocked  to Long Island, trying Jericho Turnpike instead of
Northern Boulevard, or the South Shore instead of the North, or a side road
they had noticed the Zeekend before and Zhich Zould, they felt sure, lead
to a beach they could use—an endless eastZard-bound stream of baseless
hope that lasted from daZn to late afternoon. And all forecasts shoZed that
the need Zould rapidly groZ greater still: the city's population, Zhich had
increased by a million persons during the past ten years, Zas e[r pected to
increase by another million during the ne[t ten.

Given the need, therefore, and the possibility that Long Island could meet it,
the thoughts of reformers interested in parks had for years turned first to the
Island. +ere, they all saZ, Zas the land of the greatest opportunity.

But they also saZ, even the most unrealistic of them, that the amount of
poZer Zith  Zhich they had to contend on Long Island Zas such that efforts
to create parks there seemed, even to themselves, foredoomed.

217
In the past, the governments that created parks had been the governments of
the areas in Zhich the parks Zould be located. The toZnship and village
governments on Long Island Zould never create such parks.
Conservationists had begun to talk about "state parks," but a state park had
to be created by a state, and NeZ York State's Legislature Zas controlled by
the Long Island barons. A do]en proposals by the Good Government
organi]ations for Long Island parks had been introduced in that Legislature;
not one had ever made it out of committee.

The scope of the problem discouraged reformers as much as the political
difficulties involved.

3arks large enough to serve any appreciable portion of NeZ York City's
millions Zould  have to be measured in the hundreds of acres, and since
Long Island Zas run almost entirely by hostile local governments and
landoZners, hoZ could those acres possibly be obtained? By purchase?
Long Island property Zas valuable, immensely valuable in the hills and
along the beach front Zhere parks should be located. By condemnation?
Condemnation of valuable property on the scale required Zould be
fantastically e[pensive— in fact, unheard of in America. And since the
barons' battalions of laZyers could be e[pected to fight condemnation Zith
every tactic available, the proceedings Zould take years.

And if, somehoZ, the parks Zere created, hoZ Zould people get to them?
Long highZays Zould be required, and their rights-of-Zay Zould
necessarily cross hundreds, if not thousands, of different properties, and that
meant hundreds, if not thousands, of landoZners Zho Zould be ready to
fight, and that Zould mean hundreds and thousands of additional
condemnation proceedings. The reformers reali]ed that even in the unlikely
event that they Zon on Long Island, that they actually succeeded in
unhorsing the poZerful barons, they Zouldn't knoZ Zhat to do Zith their
victory. The

problem Zas so big, the reformers thought it Zas insoluble; by 1922, their
"park" discussions concerned mainly the creation of more small
playgrounds in the city and the improvement of playground equipment.

218
Often, Zhen Bob 0oses Zent home at night, he Zould be coming from
such "park" discussions, because Smith, trying to maintain his liaison Zith
reform groups in preparation for another run for Governor, frequently asked
him to be his "observer" at reformers' conferences.

0oses tendered such discussions only cursory attention. :ith his attacks on
Governor 0iller  occupying his time, Zordy debates over Zhether a
playground site should be on Fourteenth or Fifteenth Street interested him
not at all.

But during the summer of 1922, Zhen Bob 0oses Zent home, he Zent to
Long Island. Invited to Zeekends in Babylon by friends during 1921, he
and 0ary had fallen in love "Zith  the toZn, Zith  the bay, Zith the Zhole
South Shore." In 1922, they rented a bungaloZ of their oZn for the summer.
So Zhen the discussions on parks ended, he Zould hurry to the Long Island
Rail Road station and catch a train on the South Shore line.

The trips from and to the city took over an hour—forty-five years later,
0oses could still reel off  Zithout effort  the names of the stops as the
conductors had chanted them: "Valley Stream, Lynbrook, Oceanside, Rock-
ville Centre, Freeport, 0errick, Amityville,   Lindenhmst and Babylon" —
and the train Zas hot. 0oses Zould try to bury himself in Zork,  but every
so often he Zould look up and glance out the ZindoZ. And after a Zhile he
began to notice that, Zhile most of the route Zas filled Zith one-family
homes, there Zere, betZeen some of the villages, thick leafy bands of
Zoods and, gleaming brightly through the trees, the blue Zater of ponds and
streams.

The Zoods Zere all to the north of the railroad, the left-hand side of the
train going out to Babylon and the right-hand going into the city. Bob
0oses began noZ alZays to sit on the side nearest them. It Zas the i92o's;
the men around him Zould be sitting studying the stock-market quotations
in their neZspapers. Bob 0oses sat and stared out the train ZindoZ.

One Zeekend he Zent to Babylon ToZn +all and asked Zhat the Zoods
Zere. An old-timer told him he must be talking about the old Brooklyn
Zater-supply properties, the streams and the areas around them in Nassau
and Suffolk counties that Brooklyn, then an independent city, had purchased

219
in 1874, fenced off and kept guarded so that, in case of a Zater shortage, it
Zould be able to dam the streams and use their Zater. On 0onday morning,
0oses stopped by the NeZ York 0unicipal  Building  and asked a clerk in
the Department of :ater  Supply if the city used those properties. :hy, no,
the clerk said, it never had. There had never been any need. And, come to
think of it, noZ  that NeZ York had acquired the huge Croton and Ashokan
reservoirs upstate and built aqueducts from them to the city, there probably
never Zould be.

And suddenly, the eyes that had looked at the mud flats beloZ Riverside

Drive and seen a great highZay and a great park Zere looking at something
else. The eyes that "burned Zith ideas" Zere burning again—and they Zere
focused on Long Island.

0ost  of the Zater-supply properties Zere set far enough north of 0errick
Road, behind blocks of private homes, to be invisible from it, but 0errick
Road Zas the only Zay of getting close to them. 0oses had never learned to
drive, but he obtained from Smith the use of a car and chauffeur and a letter
authori]ing the guards at the properties to let him enter their gates. And on
Zeekend mornings, as the line of cars from the city crept east along the
road, 0oses, leaving Babylon, had himself driven Zest.

Arriving  at the spot he had marked from the train, 0oses Zould order the
chauffeur to drive north along side streets until there Zas no more road for a
car, and then he Zould get out and Zalk through back yards and vacant lots
and along footpaths until he reached the gates and could shoZ his letter to
the guards. Then he Zould plunge into the Zoods.

They contained surprises.

Through the train ZindoZs, he had glimpsed in the Zoods that lay betZeen
0errick  and Freeport a small pond. :hen he got into those Zoods on foot,
he found the pond, but, beyond it, he could see another gleam of Zater.
Reaching that, he found a larger pond and, beyond it, another gleam.
Beyond that, there Zas another. There Zere four ponds, linked by a stream
that ran due north, and each Zas larger than the one before. Lilies floated in
them. 3ickerel and trout flickered beneath the pads. +uge oaks, beeches,

220
birches and pines surrounded him. And as he tramped steadily north, there
seemed no end to them. +e Zas not in a small Zoods, he reali]ed, but in a
forest—it Zould survey out at more than seven hundred acres—that lay
untouched in the heart of Nassau County.

There Zere another four ponds—and another Zooded seven hundred acres
—stretching south from :antagh  all the Zay to the Great South Bay. There
Zere 595 more acres near 0assapequa. BetZeen Valley Stream and
Lynbrook, there Zere only fifty acres, but in the center of them Zas a lake a
quarter mile across. And Zhen he entered the Zoods betZeen Lynbrook and
Rockville Centre, he reali]ed he had come to something that dZarfed the
others. The thin band of Zoods that he had seen from the train at that spot
ran north for more than three miles, broadening as it Zent. :ithin the
Zoods Zere long, rolling meadoZs. +e had heard that someZhere in the
Zoods Zas a reservoir, Zhere a stream had actually been dammed by
Brooklyn municipal engineers decades before, that couldn't be seen from
the train, and he pushed on, trying to find it. :ith  branches slapping at his
face and vines tangling his feet, he came at last to a man-made
embankment. Scrambling up, he peered over its top—and there before him
lay a body of Zater almost a mile long and half a mile Zide. It Zas much
bigger than the big reservoir in Central 3ark, he reali]ed. And there Zas
more land around it, he guessed—and he turned out to be right—than there
Zas in Central 3ark.

Back on 0errick  Road, 0oses saZ the cars from the city still creeping
along in the dust and heat, thousands of them, tens of thousands, crammed
Zith people searching desperately for a little patch of green, a spot of clear
Zater, and most of them destined that Zeekend to find neither.

And behind him, not a quarter mile from the road but unknoZn to all but
one in a thousand of the drivers on it—and closed to even that one— Zas
land, a vastness of land, overfloZing Zith the fruits they sought. Land that
didn't have to be purchased. Land that didn't have to be condemned. Land
that Zas oZned not by the governments of Long Island, Zhich vieZed the
masses of NeZ York City as foreigners, but by the government of NeZ
York City. Land that could be opened to the city's people merely by turning
a key.

221
Adding together the acreage of the various tracts of Zoods, 0oses could
hardly believe the figures. They totaled 3,500 acres. Three thousand five
hundred acres just sitting there empty and unused.

And ideally situated. All five tracts Zere Zithin  thirty  miles of 0anhattan,
Zithin  eleven miles of the city line. The Zoods betZeen Valley Stream and
Lynbrook, in fact, Zere only tZo miles from  that line.

And Zhat you could do Zith those acres! There could be hiking trails
through the Zoods, of course, and picnic sites in the clearings. But there
could be more. :hen  reformers, Zhen park planners in general, talked
about large parks they talked in terms of keeping them unspoiled and rustic,
as close to nature as possible. Even Central 3ark contained relatively feZ
facilities for any sports other than Zalking.

But 0oses saZ a different vision. +e had noticed meadoZs back in those
Zoods that seemed just made to order for baseball diamonds, and level
spaces Zith only a feZ trees that could be cleared for tennis courts. :hy, a
portion of the biggest tract, the one betZeen Lynbrook and Rockville
Centre, seemed almost made to order for a golf course. And Zhy should
people be restricted to looking at the ponds and lakes? :hy couldn't they
sZim in them? That great reservoir alone could cool thousands of sZeating
youngsters from the city! And there Zere so many acres available that even
after all the facilities Zere laid out, there Zould still be vast stretches of
Zoods that could be left untouched e[cept for rustic hiking trails.

Suddenly, the burning eyes Zere looking at everything on Long Island in
terms of parks.

+aving fallen in love Zith  the South Shore, 0oses had done so Zith his
customary fullness of passion. +e kept the Babylon village librarian
scurrying to the cabinet in Zhich Zere locked the ancient, privately printed
books that recounted the legends of the Great South Bay. Buying an old
bayman's old, broad-bottomed, very sloZ motorboat, partly covered Zith a
canopy, Zhich 0ary  named the Bob, he putt-putted around the bay
folloZing  the maps described in the books, sometimes Zith 0ary and his
daughters, often alone. +eading out to the pier Zhere the Bob Zas moored,

222
he paused frequently to chat Zith the sailors Zho Zere too old to folloZ the
bay any more and instead

spent their days sitting on upturned oyster barrels looking out over it; and,
finding him a Zilling  listener to their stories, the old men told him about
hidden inlets and about meadoZs Zhere flocks of Zild birds nested, and he
spent long days e[ploring them. Sometimes, in fact, he spent days that Zere
too long; then, as he sat in reverie, the bay's ebbing tide Zould leave the
Bob stranded on a sand bar. After a Zhile, 0ary kneZ Zhat it meant Zhen
darkness came and her husband still hadn't returned from the bay; she
Zould call a friend, +arry  Fishel, Zhose boat had a shalloZer draft, and
Fishel Zould go out and bring him in. In the morning, the tZo men Zould
return to the Bob, noZ refloated by the flooding tide, and 0oses Zould go
back on board Zith a sandZich 0ary had prepared—and spend another day
on the bay.

0oses' attention had early been caught by the barrier beach, the strip of
dunes and beach grass and Zild marshes about five miles offshore that from
the pier Zas a long loZ line on the hori]on across the bay. Baymen called it
"the strand." Deserted e[cept for a feZ tiny, scattered summer colonies, an
aura almost of mystery hung over it. The baymen told stories of murders
and duels to the death on it betZeen sailors armed only Zith hand spikes.
The summer colonies had names—"Short Beach," "Gilgo"— but the names
didn't match those on the old maps he found in the library. The very shape
of the strand Zas different. That, the baymen e[plained to him, Zas because
the ocean Zas constantly remolding it. Because the "set" of the Atlantic off
Long Island Zas ine[orably to the Zest, they said, sand and pebbles Zere
continually Zashed up at its Zestern end and the beach greZ longer every
year. But storms, particularly the hoZling "sou'easters," also sZept aZay
part of the strand each Zinter, slashed neZ inlets through its dunes, closed
old ones. The name "Fire Island" by Zhich the easternmost section of the
strand Zas knoZn Zas actually a corruption of "Five Islands," a name given
to it in the eighteenth century Zhen it had been divided into five parts by
four inlets, all of Zhich  have since completely disappeared.*

Fire Island stretches from Bay Shore in Babylon ToZnship east to
0oriches. The Zestern section of the strand, separated from Fire Island by a

223
narroZ inlet, parallels Long Island from Bay Shore all the Zay to Freeport.
This section Zas called, vaguely, "Jones Beach." Even the oldest baymen
Zeren't certain Zhere the name had come from, but 0oses Zas. In the old
books in the Babylon Library, he had read about 0ajor Thomas Jones, a
seventeenth-century :elshman Zhose valor at the Battle of the Boyne
moved .ing  James II to grant him a commission as a privateer. ("That Zas
far from being a pirate," one of the old books emphasi]ed; "it Zas a
legitimate business.") Jones made a fortune legitimately plundering ships
that did not fly the English flag. In 1695, he purchased thousands of acres
of the deserted strand from Long Island's fierce Indian tribes "for a

* Contrary to the belief, held even by some Long Island historians, that Fire
Island Zas named for the signal fires set by Zhalers and pirates, the old
documents in the Babylon Library—they can still be found there—shoZ
conclusively that it Zas originally "Five  Islands."

barrel of good cidar," peopled it Zith creZs Zhich dashed out in longboats
to capture Zhales drifting nearby—and made another fortune. 0arrying
beautiful Freelove ToZnsend, he erected a house—Zith thick Zalls and slits
for rifles—on one of the necks of land Zhich at that time linked the strand
to Long Island.

After Jones's death, sou'easters tore aZay the necks, and the strand became
an island itself. BetZeen it and the mainland, the underZater reeds greZ
thicker. The tides tugged at the sand underneath the Great South Bay and
the channels betZeen the shoals became more and more crooked and
treacherous, sometimes shifting course from Zeek to Zeek. 3eople Zho
tried to sail or motorboat to Jones Beach had to get out and push their boats
off sand bars so frequently that one bay captain referred to his Zeekend
journeys as his "Zalks to the Beach." The summer-cottage colonies greZ
smaller and smaller. In Zinter, e[cept for occasional hunters after Zild birds
and a feZ hermits Zho lived in caves holloZed out of the dunes, Jones
Beach Zas deserted.

Sometimes, Zhen Bob 0oses stepped out of his boat onto Jones Beach, he
could not see another human being. In front of him Zould be nothing but a
Zide, straight strip of the Zhitest sand he had ever seen, stretching
unbroken until it disappeared at the hori]on, sliding on one side beneath the

224
ocean surf, rising on the other into dunes covered Zith tufts of beach grass,
little gnarled bushes and stunted trees, Zith, betZeen the dunes, marshes of
a peculiar, striking grayish-green color from Zhich sZooped up herons and
gulls. +e had returned to it a hundred times, pushing and pulling his little
boat through the reeds, to sit lonely on the beach Zith Zind rustling his hair,
drinking in the Zild,  desolate scene.

+ad he been still the poet he had been at Yale, 0oses might have looked at
this scene and thought of Byron. But noZ he Zas thinking of parks. +e
looked at Jones Beach Zith eyes that had looked at croZded NeZ York City
and had seen a hundred Zays of improving it—and he reali]ed that the
emptiness of the strand, its endless, untouched vistas, Zas a clean canvas on
Zhich he could draZ Zhatever he chose. And, looking at it that Zay, he
reali]ed that all the landscape needed Zas the painting in of people to make
it a bathing beach, a great bathing beach, a bathing beach such as America
had never seen. 0oreover, the people, the masses of NeZ York City, Zere
ama]ingly close. Jones Beach had seemed so cut off from the Zorld, but, he
reali]ed Zith  a start, Zhen he stood on its Zestern end he Zas less than
tZenty-five miles from  Times Square.

The problem, of course, Zas to get the people out there, and noZ in the
evenings, in his Babylon bungaloZ, Bob 0oses began to study maps of
Long Island. One night he suddenly noticed that the Zater-supply properties
off 0errick  Road lay in a roZ. A  straight line could be draZn through them.
Therefore, so could a road. If a road Zere built out from NeZ York so that it
traversed those properties, a substantial part of the right-of-Zay Zould not
have to be purchased or condemned. 0oreover, the road could give the city
masses easy access to the Zater-supply properties, Zhich he had already
determined Zere themselves ideal for parks. And since one of the

properties, the one at :antagh, ran all the Zay doZn to the Great South
Bay, another road—connecting Zith the road leading out from NeZ York—
could be built south doZn to the bay Zithout the necessity of any purchase
or condemnation at all. Once it reached the bay, it Zould be directly
opposite Jones Beach. And since the bay Zas so shalloZ, it ought to be easy
to construct a causeZay from the end of the road to the beach. "That Zas

225
the idea behind Jones Beach and the Southern State 3arkZay," 0oses
Zould recall years later. "I thought of it all in a moment."

As he thought about the road, he thought about the Bron[ River 3arkZay.
Although it hadn't yet been opened, the neZspapers Zere full of stories
about it. :ith   the e[ception of a three-mile stretch of the FenZay in Boston
and, of course, the transverse roads in Central 3ark, the parkZay Zould be
the first highZay in the country to eliminate traffic lights and intersecting
traffic by lifting  all crossroads above it. The bridges that carried the
crossroads Zould be faced Zith stone to blend in Zith the scenery, and the
bordering right-of-Zay Zould  be completely landscaped. NeZspapers Zere
predicting that it Zould be the most beautiful road in America. A road
through the Long Island Zater-supply properties, 0oses reali]ed, Zould, on
that portion of it Zhich traversed the properties, be lined Zith the beautiful
trees he had seen. The north-south road running from it to the bay Zould be
lined Zith trees its entire length, and the causeZay across the Zater Zould
cross the bay panorama. The roads he Zas thinking of, he reali]ed, could be
more beautiful than the Bron[ River 3arkZay.

The line he had draZn on the map through the Zater-supply properties
seemed to point like an arroZ into Long Island's South Shore. Looking
beyond its point, the easternmost of the properties, 0oses saZ a series of
promontories jutting out into the Great South Bay. +e recalled that the
promontories Zere supposed to be beautiful. And on Zeekends noZ, 0oses
had himself driven east.

From the car, he could see that most of the promontories Zere private
estates, but in East Islip he noticed a large piece of property fenced off but
overgroZn Zith  underbrush and Zeeds and apparently deserted. A real
estate agent told him that it had belonged to an eccentric old millionaire
named Taylor and, Zhen he died, had been purchased by a group of Zealthy
men Zho alloZed it to groZ  Zild  because they used it as a game preserve.

There may have been caretakers on the Taylor Estate, but 0oses didn't see
them Zhen he returned to it. Tramping through the brush and the Zoods,
frightening groups of deer, startling coveys of pheasants, he came to a
group of out-buildings, all deserted and all e[cept one, Zhich had been
turned into a hunting lodge, crumbling. Looming over them Zas an old

226
mansion, paint peeling, Zith broken ZindoZs. In front of the mansion Zas a
long meadoZ of uncut, Zaving grass that had evidently once been an
imposing laZn. Beyond it Zas Zhite sand and then the dark blue-gray of the
bay, and beyond the bay, just a line on the hori]on, the dunes of Fire Island.
Stirring the trees, the grass and the Zater Zas the gentle bree]e Zhich
0oses had learned from the baymen invariably cooled the bay shore every
day from about eleven o'clock in the morning until near sundoZn. Overhead
Zas a

lot of sky. To the east, across a little stream, Zas an e[panse of carefully
manicured grass and, on it—the only human figures anyZhere to be seen —
several foursomes in caps and knickerbockers and long socks striding along
Zith the caddies of the Timber 3oint Club. 0oses had taken to carrying a
yelloZ legal note pad on his e[cursions. On it noZ he began to sketch the
property, and on the sketch he dreZ lines, some to indicate Zhere the
bathhouses for the bathing beaches Zould be, others to shoZ a golf course,
still others to outline Zhere a public bridle path Zould Zind through the
trees and Zhere the fences Zould be placed to pen the deer and pheasants so
youngsters could Zatch them.

The mind leaped on. :ere there similar vacant properties on the North
Shore? Soon, through Zoods and meadoZs overlooking Long Island Sound,
there Zas striding a tall, athletic figure dressed in corduroy pants, heavy
shoes and, usually, an old and stained Zindbreaker, and carrying in one
hand a yelloZ legal note pad. :ithin  Zeeks, 0oses  had discovered in
Smith-toZn a vacant estate magnificently suited to his purpose. As he
Zalked north through its thousand Zooded acres, he noticed they sloped
steadily doZnhill and he assumed they Zere sloping doZn to the beach, but
Zhen the Zoods ended, he found himself staring at a huge, pale-green
e[panse of grass that Zas actually beloZ the level of the beach beyond, and
he thought in that instant of a name for the estate: "Sunken 0eadoZ."

The road to Sunken 0eadoZ? It could, perhaps, run from NeZ York along
the middle of the Island, Zhere the only opposition Zould be that of
farmers, but 0oses kneZ at once that the road Zasn't going to go there. If
scenery Zas an attribute of parkZays, Zhy, here Zas a chance to run a
parkZay through real scenery: the Gold Coast estates. At night, noZ, 0oses

227
began to pore over maps of the North Shore, his pencil sketching out
alternate routes. +e saZ on the map the names across Zhich his pencil Zas
sketching: 3hipps, :hitney,  Garvan, 0organ,  0ackay, Vanderbilt, Otto
.ahn.  But he saZ in his mind a road bordered, beyond the grassy right-of-
Zay, by the magnificent stands of trees the robber barons had imported
from Europe and by hedges neatly trimmed by their legions of gardeners.

And the pencil kept sketching.

The mind leaped on. It took as its compass not an island but a state.

The state's other large cities—Albany, Buffalo, Rochester, Schenectady,
Syracuse, Troy, 8tica—Zere groZing, not as fast as NeZ York but fast
enough. So Zas their need for state parks.

But the State Legislature, considering parks a lu[ury outside city limits,
refused to give them any. In 1922, there Zasn't a single state park in NeZ
York anyZhere east of the +udson River. :est of the +udson, betZeen the
3alisades and Buffalo, there Zere tZenty—nineteen enclaves around
famous old mansions or Revolutionary :ar battlefields that had been
purchased by private philanthropists and donated to the state, and one, a
thousand-acre tract on the Genesee River, that Zas NeZ York's only state
park of substantial si]e, donated by Buffalo philanthropist :illiam   3ryor
LetchZorth.

SO8ND

r

+E0   3tS-T'E A D

228
:+EATLEY     +ILLS  GOLF CL8B

Even Zhen the state Zas given land, it didn't take care of it. In 1923, the
total legislative appropriation for upkeep of state parks Zould be $30,000.
The philanthropists or their descendants or the historical societies
designated in their Zills to administer the parks had to pay for their upkeep.
3ermanent improvements—even comfort stations—Zere all but unheard of.
0ost  parks could not be reached by automobile. In 1922, those state parks
that did e[ist in NeZ  York Zent all but unused.

3art of the difficulty, 0oses  had learned Zhile running the Reconstruction
Commission, Zent back to the old question of organi]ation. Fearing—
knoZing —that the state Zould let them run doZn, the parks' donors had
turned their administration over to men or societies dedicated to the
preservation of historic or scenic attractions. 0ontcalm and Spy Island

229
"State 3arks," for e[ample, Zere administered by the Fort OsZego Chapter
of the Daughters











lobert 0oses' 3roposed Northern State 3arkZay

+8NTINGTON






















j J0NES\ /OA.LEY^]

of the American Revolution. +aving no authority over private individuals
or organi]ations, the Legislature Zas reluctant to give them money. And
since no central body of any type unified their activities, they presented to

230
the Legislature the spectacle of separate agencies competing Zith each
other for funds.

This lack of unified administration also meant that a considerable potential
source of poZer for parks Zas dissipated. In many cases, the trustees of the
parks Zere political leaders in the upstate counties in Zhich they lived and
from Zhich came many of the Republican legislative leaders. 8nited, the
park trustees could have e[erted considerable influence in Albany, but,
acting separately, they dissipated their influence.

State park administration Zas one area in Zhich the Reconstruction
Commission's recommendations had been ignored. A group of the commis-

sion's trustees, including many of the upstate park philanthropists, had
begun making a "comprehensive study" of the state's park needs but had
stopped Zhen the commission Zas disbanded. 0oses, not interested in
parks, had given the report scant attention, anyZay. But noZ he asked the
philanthropists to complete the study under the aegis of the NeZ York State
Association. +e toured their parks Zith them, urged them to make
recommendations for their development, delicately urged the more
conservative of them to think in terms of improved roads and enlarged
accommodations. And he urged them to start thinking in terms of a unified
state park system that Zould be a formal part of state government. They
need not Zorry about losing control of their beloved parks to faceless
bureaucrats in Albany, he assured them; control of each park could be left in
the hands of the men then administering it, and to insure that future
appointments to the commissions Zould not become involved in politics,
the commissionerships could be unpaid jobs. But if there Zas a single state
body controlling parks, the demands for funds from the different sources
interested in parks could be funneled into it and focused, so as to put more
heat on the Legislature. :hen their recommendations for their individual
parks came in, he combined them in a report, A State 3ark 3lan for NeZ
York, Zhich he Zrote himself and issued in the name of the NeZ York State
Association.

The report Zas a seminal document in the history of parks in America. Its
scope Zas in itself revolutionary: NeZ York's park needs, it said, Zere so
great that they could not be met by ordinary legislative appropriations; a

231
bond issue Zould be required—and the amount of the issue should be
$15,000,000. But it Zas not the scope that startled most; NeZ York and
other states had floated bond issues for parks before, even if none of the
issues had been nearly so large as that 0oses proposed. Rather, it Zas the
philosophy. The e[penditure of proceeds from previous bond issues had
been restricted to land acquisition and in the Zord "acquisition" Zas
embodied the philosophy that had alZays in the past governed parks in
America, the belief that parks Zere only land and the trees and grass and
brooks on the land, that their sole purpose Zas to serve as "breathing
spaces" for the city masses and to enable them to rela[ and meditate among
beautiful surroundings, to commune Zith nature, and that they should
therefore be kept in their natural state. If the city masses no longer Zere
content Zith communing, if they Zanted space not only to meditate but to
sZing—to sZing baseball bats, tennis rackets, golf clubs and the
implements of the other sports that their neZ leisure time had enabled them
to learn—this Zas a desire that had not yet been translated into
governmental action in the 8nited States.

But 0oses translated it. The $15,000,000 bond issue, he said, must
specifically authori]e the Legislature "to provide for permanent
improvements as Zell as the acquisition of land ... for large facilities Zhich
make a park accessible and attractive to people." "Conservation"—the
previous park ideal—had to be combined Zith "recreation," he said.
Furthermore, he said, "permanent improvements" did not mean only
improvements Zithin parks; it also meant means to get to them—"parkZay
and boulevard connections betZeen state parks and betZeen state parks and
neighboring centers

of population." And state parks should no longer be talked of as separate
entities; there should be a state park system; the state should be divided into
eleven regions and all the state parks in each of these regions should be
administered by a single regional "state park commission"—the Long
Island parks he proposed, for e[ample, by a Long Island State 3ark
Commission. The presidents of those commissions should sit as a State
Council of 3arks, Zhich Zould  coordinate and unify park policy.

232
0oses' park report Zas soon being read—and hailed—by park planners all
over the 8nited States. But if its recommendations Zere to become reality,
they Zould have to become reality through a man Zho didn't read reports
and Zho seemed highly unlikely to be a parks enthusiast.

Al Smith "someZhat lacked," as one Zriter put it, "Theodore Roosevelt's
]est for 'the strenuous life.' " If there Zas a sport in Zhich the Governor Zas
interested, his friends didn't knoZ it. +e refused to go Zith them to football
or baseball games or even to bo[ing matches. :hen he took his family
sZimming, he Zatched them from the beach, his little pot belly protruding
through his bathing suit, a cigar clenched firmly in his teeth, eyeing the
ocean Zarily. Smith's childhood, moreover, had not prepared him to
appreciate 0oses' insistence on active sports for the masses.

:hen   0oses began e[plaining his park plan, the Governor Zas dubious. Its
cost astounded him. "You Zant to give the people a fur coat Zhen Zhat they
need is red flannel underZear," he said once.

But 0oses had one advantage. Smith's mind Zas the type that responded
most enthusiastically to Zhat Frances 3erkins called "the graphic
presentation." The Governor, she said, "Zanted you to tell him Zhat it
looked like. ... +e got more information out of people Zho Zould tell  him
the e[act thing they'd seen, [Zho] described the detail. . . . Then he saZ
Zhat it Zas like."  An[ious  to improve the lives of the urban poor, he Zas
especially an[ious to improve them through things he could actually see
improving them; his Governorship Zas distinguished by his emphasis on
Zorks of physical construction, solid and visible. Nothing Zas more visible
than the physical entity that Zas a park, and no one Zas a more vivid
describer, a more graphic presenter, than Bob 0oses. After Smith's election
in November 1922, 0oses persuaded him to visit the NeZ York City
Zatershed properties. They Zere barren in Zinter, but Zith his gift for
Zords 0oses made the Governor see them as they could be in summer, Zith
leaves on the trees and people sitting at picnic tables under them. Day after
day, pacing restlessly back and forth before the Governor's desk, he poured
out his ideas in a continual floZ of Zords. Sometimes the other members of
Smith's inner circle had to smile at 0oses' vehemence and earnestness.
Once, as the torrent of Zords floZed over him, the Governor gradually

233
began sinking loZer and loZer in his chair, and, Zith 0oses still talking,
disappeared at last under his desk. But Zhen he poked his head up, he Zas
smiling.

0oses persuaded Smith to attend a meeting of the NeZ York State
Association park committee at the :hitehall  Club and made a lengthy,

passionate speech. At its end, Smith arose. "Bob, you Zin," he said. +e
directed 0oses to draft a special message to the Legislature asking for
passage of legislation establishing a State Council of 3arks and authori]ing
submission of the $15,000,000 proposal to the people in referendum. On
April 18, 1923, tZo Zeeks after 0oses finished the message, Smith
delivered it.

8nder state laZ, only one bond issue could be submitted to the voters each
year. Smith had also proposed an issue for neZ hospitals and mental
institutions. 0oses pleaded that parks should come first, but Smith
disagreed. :hen  the Governor delivered the message 0oses had drafted, he
announced he Zould not push for adoption of its proposals until 1924. It
Zas clear to his advisers that the Governor Zas Zorried about public
reaction to an e[penditure for parks of such unprecedented dimensions.

The reaction Zas not long in coming. Smith's secretaries reported a most
remarkable upsurge in the volume of his mail. It came from the City Club
of NeZ York ("Congratulations!"  club secretary Raymond Ingersoll Zrote
delightedly) and from 3omona Grange Number 416 ("God bless you!
Sincerely, 0atilda +unt,  secretary-treasurer"). It came from slum dZellers
and suburbanites. And unlike the mail on most issues, this mail did not
contain letters on both sides of the issue. There Zas, the Governor's
secretaries reported, apparently only one side to this issue: everyone Zas for
parks.

There Zas hardly a neZspaper in the state, moreover, that did not Zrite an
editorial supporting the message. And the praise did not stop at the state's
borders. From all over the country, letters Zere sent to "Governor Smith,
Albany" e[pressing hopes that the Zriters' oZn states might folloZ his
e[ample. :rote   the chairman of the National Conference on State 3arks:
"The NeZ York program . . . Zill  stimulate valuable Zork in other states. . .

234
. You are rendering a real service not only to your oZn state, but to other
states of the 8nion Zhich Zill  have the advantage of folloZing your
e[perience."

0ark  Antony, shreZd politician, kneZ  the potency of parks as an issue.
Rousing the mob to fury against Caesar's "honorable" slayers, he reserved
for a clima[ the reading of Caesar's Zill. "Let but the commons hear this
testament," he cried, "and they Zould go and kiss dead Caesar's Zounds."
And it Zas not the revelation that Caesar had left each Roman citi]en,
"every several man," seventy-five drachmas that sealed Antony's victory
over the citi]ens' emotions but rather his revelation that

. . . he hath left you all his Zalks, +is private arbors and neZ-planted
orchards, On this side Tiber; he hath left them you, And to your heirs for
ever; common pleasures, To Zalk abroad and recreate yourselves.

Al Smith, shreZd politician, had risen to the Governorship on great issues,
and he Zas not sloZ to recogni]e a neZ one Zhen it came along. An

Albany reporter Zatched the aZareness groZ on the Governor and his
circle. "You could see them beginning to reali]e that doing Zhat 0oses
Zanted Zould be politically  advantageous," he recalls. "One of them told
me that supporting parks meant that the Governor Zould be helping the
loZer- and middle-class people, and thereby Zinning their support, and that
the intellectuals Zould be for him because they saZ parks as part of the neZ
pattern of social progress. So you'd have all three groups supporting you.
And besides, 'parks' Zas a Zord like 'motherhood.' It Zas just something
nobody could be against." During the spring of 1923, Smith assured 0oses
he Zould push for adoption of the park program in 1924.

And in the summer of 1923, 0oses Zent back to tramping around Long
Island.

"I Zent Zith  him once," a friend says. ":e  Zalked  all day through one
piece of beautiful Zild country after another. And he never sloZed doZn.
+e Zas tireless." Generally, 0oses preferred to be by himself. +e Zalked
alone through vast, empty shuttered mansions, through potato fields Zhere
farmers Zorked peacefully, not knoZing that the man looking at them Zas

235
planning to take their fields aZay. :alls  and guards kept him from getting a
good look from paved public roads at the route he Zas considering for the
northern parkZay, but he discovered unpaved back roads through many of
the estates, and he spent days Zalking along those deserted paths, a solitary
figure Zith a long stride. Through the trees he could see the great castles; at
their gates, on little black and gold signs, he could see the names of the
great barons Zho had built them. And the barons, private behind their Zalls,
did not knoZ that staring at those Zalls Zas a man determined to tear them
doZn.

FeZ men had ever vieZed Long Island entire. One Zho had Zas :alt
:hitman,   Zho saZ it  as a "Sea-Beauty! stretch'd and basking! Isle of sZeet
brooks of drinking Zater—healthy air and soil! Isle of the salty shore and
bree]e and brine!" NoZ 0oses saZ it  entire, and if he had Zritten poetry
once, he Zrote park reports noZ, and brooks, healthy air, salty shore and
bree]e and brine meant parks. Standing on 0ontauk 3oint, Zhere Long
Island's southern fluke ends in the steep bluffs plunging abruptly into the
Atlantic, :hitman    had said, "I stand as on some mighty eagle's beak." NoZ
0oses Zent to see 0ontauk, not Zith  the eyes of the poet but Zith those of
the park planner. "The 0ontauk peninsula," he Zrote, "is an e[traordinary
mass of clay, gravel and rock Zith high bluffs on the south shore and, back
of the bluffs, kettleholes and rolling hills clothed Zith bay-berry, shrubs and
gnarled and tZisted trees. The irregular shore line and a number of small
islands . . . form a veritable patchZork of smaller peninsulas, straits and
bays Zhich afford many miles of beaches, dunes and varied Zaters for
cruising, fishing, sZimming, golfing  and other forms of recreation."

Driving back from 0ontauk  along the southern fluke, 0oses discovered
endless other miles of unused beaches in +ampton Bays. +e found still
more on Long Island's northern fluke at Orient 3oint, Zhere farmers lived in
farm-

houses built in the seventeenth century. Searching out deserted estates, he
found tZo in the center of the Island, one oZned by the son of financier
August Belmont, the other by a family named Yoakum. And roaming one
day far out in Suffolk County, near :ading  River, he stumbled upon a
magnificent brick and stone mansion, set upon a bluff overlooking Long

236
Island Sound, that Zas not only deserted but looked as if it had never been
lived in. Inquiring later, he found out it never had. The man Zho
commissioned the famous architect Stanford :hite to design it and Zho
named it ":ildZood,"    financier Roland G. 0itchell,  had died just as it Zas
being finished in 1906, and the spacious, high-ceilinged rooms had
remained shuttered and unfurnished ever since.

Again and again, 0oses returned to the lonely strand, not only to Jones
Beach but to Fire Island, Zhere a state park, the only one on Long Island,
Zas located, on the tZo-hundred-acre grounds of the hotel the state had
purchased in 1892 to house the passengers from the cholera-ridden
Norman-nia.

In 1918, fire had destroyed the hotel, as Zell as the boardZalks and comfort
stations that the state had erected, and Zhen 0oses stepped out of the Bob,
he found "Fire Island State 3ark" deserted. Charred ruins lay on the sand.
The only undamaged structure Zas the nine-story-high Zooden Fire Island
telegraph toZer, from Zhich the sighting of arriving clipper ships had once
been flashed to 0anhattan.

Studying maps, 0oses Zas pu]]led. They shoZed the park as comprising
the Zesternmost portion of Fire Island, e[cept for a little enclave on the
island's tip Zhich Zas occupied by an unmanned Coast Guard station. The
telegraph toZer, Zhich stood on the station, Zas shoZn at the very tip. But
as 0oses stood alongside the toZer, the island stretched ZestZard as far as
he could see.

Then he remembered Zhat the baymen had told him about the set of the
ocean. Since 1892, the Zaves had been piling sand on Fire Island's Zestern
end. +e began to Zalk along the neZ land—and he Zalked for four miles.
The Coast Guard station Zasn't a little enclave any more; its area, he
calculated, Zas at least si[ hundred acres. And the station Zas deserted. No
one even kneZ the added si[ hundred acres Zere there.

By the end of the summer of 1923, 0oses kneZ that his plans for Long
Island had been far too small. NoZ he Zanted not just a state park on Jones
Beach but another one, Zhich Zould include the unmapped si[ hundred
acres, across the inlet on Fire Island. +e Zanted state parks on the South

237
Shore not just at the Taylor Estate but in +ampton Bays and at 0ontauk
3oint. +e Zanted parks on the Sound not just at Sunken 0eadoZ but at
:ildZood,    Lloyd Neck and Orient 3oint. And he Zanted tZo in the center
of the Island, at the Belmont and Yoakum estates. +e Zanted forty thousand
acres of parks. +e Zanted not just a parkZay along the South Shore and one
along the North Shore but a parkZay connecting them far out on Long
Island so that families from NeZ York City could drive out on

one, loop around and drive home on the other Zithout retracing their path.
+e Zanted another parkZay—he Zanted tZo more parkZays—linking both
the northern and southern parkZays Zith tZo causeZays running to Jones
Beach. +e Zanted still another parkZay linking them Zith Fire Island. +e
Zanted 124 miles of parkZays. And he Zanted the parkZays to be broader
and more beautiful than any roads the Zorld had ever seen, landscaped as
private parks are landscaped so that they Zould be in themselves parks,
"ribbon parks," so that even as people drove to parks, they Zould be driving
through parks.

Near the latter part of the summer, Alfred E. Smith found himself being
chaufTeured around Long Island, Zith 0oses sitting beside him, pointing
and talking. Smith became enthusiastic about the plans. +e asked 0rs.
0oskoZit]   to look into  the situation, and 0oses gave her the full tour. She
approved, and Smith told 0oses that Zhen the park program Zas submitted
to the Legislature in 1924, it could be e[panded.

":hy   don't you take the Zhole thing over yourself?" the Governor asked.
":hy   don't I  make you president of the Long Island State 3ark
Commission?"

Years later, 0oses could recall his thoughts. "I had alZays had an interest in
physical construction, anyhoZ," Bella's son Zould remember. "And I had
alZays had an interest in the outdoors; I had done a lot of hiking and fishing
and sZimming in the Adirondacks, remember. And I Zas very interested in
parks, particularly in the Long Island Zork."

+e said he Zould like the job.

238
the State Council of 3arks." 3recedents had established the statutory
meaning of the Zord "prepared." In this conte[t, it meant that the Council
Chairman—not the Conservation Commissioner—had the authority to
screen the financial requests of the eleven regional park commissions,
Zeigh one against the other and decide Zhich should be included in the
council's budget request. The Conservation Commissioner Zould get to see
the regional commissions' requests only after the Council Chairman had
finished Zith them. +e Zould  not even knoZ about the requests made by
regional commissions Zhich the Council Chairman had turned doZn. All he
Zas really empoZered to do, therefore, Zas receive a completed park
budget and hand it to the Governor e[actly as he received it, and, the bill
provided, the Council Chairman from Zhom he Zould be receiving the
budget Zould be elected by the council—not appointed by him or by the
Governor. :ithin   the reorgani]ed frameZork of state government,
therefore, parks Zould be a separate, self-governing, very independent
duchy.

As a reformer, 0oses had fought for the principle of e[ecutive poZer
commensurate Zith e[ecutive responsibility, and, believing in the principle,
he had recommended in his Reconstruction Commission report that
appointed officials should never have terms longer than the Governor's term
and that they should alZays be removable by the Governor if they did not
folloZ  his orders. +e had been eloquent on the point. "No Governor can be
held responsible for the policies and conduct of high officers Zhom he does
not appoint and Zhom he cannot remove," he had Zritten. "If NeZ York
Zants . . . efficient government, it must make someone responsible Zho can
be held to account and give him poZer commensurate Zith his obligations.
There is no other Zay."

But noZ 0oses Zas to be an appointed official. And although he could
count on Smith's support, Smith Zould not alZays be Governor. So there
Zas another Zay. The bill 0oses drafted establishing the Long Island State
3ark Commission provided that the term of its president—himself—Zould
be si[ years, three times as long as the Governor's. And it further provided
that no Governor could remove the park commission president just because
the president Zas not folloZing the Governor's orders. Removal, the bill
provided, could only folloZ  the filing by the Governor of detailed, specific

239
charges of actual misconduct and a formal, public hearing, Zith both sides
represented by counsel, on those charges.

It Zas not, moreover, the violation of stated principles for the purpose of
cementing himself in office that most clearly revealed the change in 0oses.
Rather, it Zas the method by Zhich he insured that, once in office, he Zould
have specific poZers sufficient for his purpose. For the method Zas that of
concealment and deviousness.

Once, no reformer, no idealist, had believed more sincerely than he in free
and open discussion. No reformer, no idealist, had argued more vigorously
that legislative bills should be fully debated, and that the debates should be
published so that the citi]enry could be informed on the issues.

But free and open debate had not made his dreams come true. Instead,
politicians had crushed them. And noZ he Zas going to make sure that,

Zith the e[ception of Al  Smith and Belle 0oskoZit],   no one—not
citi]enry, not press, not Legislature —Zas going to knoZ Zhat Zas in the
bills dealing Zith parks that the Legislature Zas going to pass. The best bill
drafter in Albany set to Zork.

First and foremost, parks Zere land, and land Zas generally acquired by
government through condemnation. But condemnation in 1924 Zas a sloZ
process, since the state could not take title to property until a condemnation
commission set its value. And since the property's oZner could appeal to
the courts if not satisfied Zith the commission's evaluation, he could delay
the state further. +e therefore possessed in his opposition to the state a
Zeapon, even if it Zas a small one—and in the hands of the barons of Long
Island, small Zeapons could become large.

So one clause Zithin Chapter 122 of the LaZs of 1924, "an act to provide
for the location, creation, acquisition and improvement by the state of
parks, parkZays and boulevards in the counties of Nassau and Suffolk," a
clause buried deep Zithin the act, empoZered the Long Island State 3ark
Commission to acquire land by condemnation and appropriation "in the
manner provided by section fifty-nine of the conservation laZ."

240
In 1924, "appropriation" had only one meaning in a legislative conte[t: an
allocation of funds by the Legislature. 0ost legislators—probably all
legislators—Zould, if asked, have said that Zas the only meaning the Zord
had ever had. And since section fifty-nine of the conservation laZ had been
passed in 1884, most legislators had not read it. But the best bill drafter in
Albany had read it—and he kneZ that in that section "appropriation" had
quite a different meaning. :orried  in 1883 about incursions by lumbering
companies into the Adirondack forests, the Legislature empoZered the
Conservation Commission to condemn the forests and preserve them. But
during that year, betZeen the start of the condemnation proceedings and the
actual transfer of title, the lumbermen stripped the parcels being condemned
of their trees. In 1884, therefore, the Legislature passed an act—section
fifty-nine of  the conservation laZ—empoZering the state to "appropriate"
forest lands and defining "appropriation" as a procedure in Zhich a state
official could take possession of the land by simply Zalking on it and
telling the oZner he no longer oZned it—and that if he Zanted
compensation, he Zould have to apply to the condemnation commission
himself.

The "appropriation" method had never been used anyZhere e[cept in
remote forests. It had never been intended for use in city, suburban or farm
areas. Taking a man's land and telling him it Zould be paid for later Zas
simply unheard of if the land had any substantial intrinsic value, as it
alZays did in settled areas, and not just the value of things on it, such as
trees. 0oreover, the method had never been used anyZhere for more than
thirty years because of doubts about its constitutionality. But the Legislature
had never gotten around to repealing section fifty-nine.

Deviousness Zas used in other sections of the act he drafted as Zell.
Section eight, for e[ample, entitled "General 3oZers," supposedly
enumerated the poZers of the Long Island State 3ark Commission over its
land, and the poZers enumerated in this section seemed innocuous enough.
But in succeed-

ing sections of the act, each poZer Zas "defined," and each successive
definition broadened the commission's authority.

241
The commission had the right to operate parks, section eight said. But
section nine said that "the term . . . parks as used in this act . . . shall be
deemed to include . . . parkZays . . . boulevards and also entrances and
approaches thereto, docks and piers, and bridges . . . and such other . . .
appurtenances as the . . . commission shall utili]e ..." And the term
"parkZays" Zas significant. The Legislature had specifically Zritten into
the State +ighZay LaZ provision that the supervisors of each county had
veto poZer over the location of highZays Zithin its borders. But, because
parkZays hadn't e[isted Zhen the provision Zas Zritten, the +ighZay  LaZ
didn't mention parkZays—and there Zas no local check over their location.

The commission had the right to "acquire . . . real estate," section eight said.
But section ten said that "the term real estate as used in this act shall be
construed to embrace all uplands, lands under Zater . . . and all real estate
heretofore or hereafter acquired or used for railroad, street railroad,
telephone, telegraph or other public purposes. ..." And the Zords "lands
under Zater" Zere significant. 8nder legal precedent, oZners of land
fronting on the Great South Bay oZned the land offshore to the distance of
one mile —and if the commission oZned land fronting on the bay, it
therefore Zould oZn part of the bay itself, including the baymen's "sacred"
bay bottoms.

By the time the "defining" of the terms used in section eight Zas finished,
the Long Island State 3ark Commission Zould be empoZered, if the act
Zas passed, to Zrite its oZn laZs, hire policemen to enforce them and
prosecutors to prosecute them. By the time it Zas finished, the commission
Zould, if  the act Zas passed, have over its land, land Zhich if 0oses had
his Zay Zould total forty  thousand acres, virtually all the poZers granted to
the City of NeZ York in the city's charter.

Almost every clause in the act contained a sleeper. Section fifteen
ostensibly dealt Zith the procedure to be used in acquiring property oZned
by other state agencies. But, apparently tagged on as an afterthought, there
Zas another paragraph: "The . . . Commission shall have poZer to improve,
maintain and use the lands of the municipalities adjoining the parks and
parkZays of the Commission, Zith the consent of the local authorities
having jurisdiction thereof." The paragraph appeared innocent enough.

242
Since the commission Zas operating in Nassau and Suffolk counties, Zhat
legislator Zould stop to consider that some lands on Long Island might be
oZned by NeZ York City  and that, once the act Zas passed, the Long Island
State 3ark Commission Zould not need the consent of Long Island officials
to use that land because "the local authorities having jurisdiction thereof"
Zould not be Long Island officials but NeZ York City  officials? Once the
act Zas passed, 0oses Zould be able to use the city's Zater-supply
properties despite the objections of the municipalities in Zhich those
properties Zere located.

0oses concealed his purposes not only from those Zho, if they kneZ them,
might oppose them—the legislators—but from those Zho thought they Zere
his allies, the old men Zho had Zorked on the NeZ York State Association
report and Zho, through their individual commissions, had been running

the parks in the state for so many years. If these men Zere to oppose his
plans, they could, Zith their control of their local legislators, pose a
formidable obstacle to passage. So he didn't tell the old men about the true
scope of his plans for the State Council of 3arks. In fact, knoZing that they
Zere concerned about the fate of the pieces of land they had guarded so
long, he assured them over and over that the establishment of the council
Zould in no Zay affect their control over those lands. "It is," he Zrote them,
"merely a coordinating agency." 3arks in each region, he promised them,
Zould remain under the control of the regional commissioners.

0oses had to knoZ that Zhat he Zas saying Zas false. +e kneZ that since
regional commissions had to submit their budget requests to the 3arks
Council, the council, not the commissions, Zould decide hoZ much money
Zent to each region. The council, not an individual commission, Zould
decide over-all park policies Zhich Zould affect each commission's parks.
And since the commissions Zould be rivals for funds, there Zas little
danger of them banding together against the man Zho ran the council. That
man Zould be in complete charge of all the state parks.

Not knoZing Zhat  Zas in the bill, believing in coordination and believing
in 0oses, the old men supported it and him.

243
+aving drafted the bills, 0oses looked around for someone to introduce
them.

F. Trubee Davison, the son of 0organ partner +enry 3. Davison of Glen
Cove, had been sent by the barons of the North Shore of Long Island to the
State Assembly in 1923, just one year after his graduation from Yale. In
1924, he Zas only tZenty-tZo years old and, in his oZn Zords, "Zide-eyed
and eager." Not only Zas he a Yale man but he Zas, Zithin the limits
approved by the barons, interested in reform, and 0oses had found plenty
to talk to him about. "+e Zas charming," Davison recalls, "and I enjoyed
talking Zith  him a lot and I admired his obvious brains." And he Zas, he
recalls, frankly flattered that a member of the Governor's inner circle Zould
spend so much time Zith a freshman assemblyman.

0oses asked Davison to introduce the bills that Zould establish a State
Council of 3arks and a Long Island State 3ark Commission. +e told him
nothing about his plans for parks and a parkZay on the North Shore. In fact,
he told him very little of any of his plans, leaving the impression that the
bills Zere routine measures and that the kind of parks he Zas talking about
Zere parks in the traditional mold.

Davison Zas a believer in parks in that mold. +e Zas flattered to be asked
to introduce the bills. And Zhen 0oses told him that the Governor Zould
like to see him and thank him for his support, he Zas overZhelmed. +is
visit to the E[ecutive Chamber Zith 0oses  at his elboZ Zas the first time
he had ever met Al Smith in person. +e didn't think to ask many questions
about the bills—and he certainly didn't think to look up section fifty-nine of
the conservation laZ or to study definitions of poZers. Just to make sure he
Zouldn't have much time to even if he Zanted to, 0oses delayed giving
him the bills until the last Zeek of the session. "I never reali]ed Zhat

the Zord 'appropriation' meant," Davison recalls. "I thought it meant Zhat it
had alZays meant, so far as I kneZ: appropriation of money to be spent.
:henever  someone asked me Zhat it meant, I told them that's Zhat it
meant."

Not that many people asked him, of course. There Zas little interest in the
bills and Zhen, in the last-minute adjournment rush, they came to the floor,

244
there Zas not a Zord of debate about them. On April 10, 1924, on the last
day of the session, Assembly and Senate passed them both by unanimous
vote.

0oses Zas in a fever of impatience. On April 12, he Zrote George Graves,
Smith's secretary: "0y dear George: As soon as you get a chance Zill you
ask the Governor, please to sign the bill creating the State Council of 3arks
so that a meeting of this Council can be held at an early date." On April 18,
a pen in the E[ecutive Chamber scraZled across the bills: "Approved—
AES." On the same date, Smith appointed to the regional park commissions
the men Zhose names he had previously agreed upon Zith 0oses. +e
appointed 0oses president of the Long Island State 3ark Commission, a
post that gave him automatic membership on the State Council of 3arks,
and as 0oses' co-commissioners on the three-member Long Island
Commission the Governor appointed tZo men 0oses kneZ he could count
on to let him run the commission by himself. On April 30, 0oses and the
other heads of the regional park commissions met in Albany and, Zith
paternal smiles in his direction, the older commission heads elected the
youngest member of the State Council of 3arks as its chairman.

At the age of thirty-five, Robert 0oses had poZer. And no sooner did he
have it than he shoZed hoZ he Zas going to use it.

Zas so lavish in purchasing automobiles for his friends' use and furnishings
for their offices that by summer he had spent $63,089 of the $225,000 on
such "overhead e[penses."

0oses' Yale classmate +arold 3helps Stokes Zas an assistant to Secretary
of Commerce +erbert +oover. During the first Zeek after his appointment,
0oses dashed off a letter informing Stokes of the e[istence of the si[
hundred neZ acres at the Fire Island Coast Guard station and asking him to
persuade +oover to release them as an addition to the adjoining tZo-
hundred-acre Fire Island State 3ark. :hen +oover agreed, 0oses had, in a
single step, quadrupled the state park acreage on Long Island. During the
first Zeek after his appointment, he called on the NeZ York City
Commissioner of :ater  Supply, Gas and Electricity, Nicholas J. +ayes, and
asked +ayes to release the 3,500 acres of city Zatershed properties. +ayes
said that his responsibility Zas to protect the city's Zater supplies, not to

245
give them aZay, but he Zas a good Tammany regular and a call from Al
Smith persuaded him to accept a compromise 0oses suggested: that the city
keep control of the Zater on the properties and give the commission a
"surface easement" that Zould alloZ it to use the rest of the land for parks.

0uch  of the remainder of the route for the envisioned "Southern State
3arkZay" Zas farmland. 0oses quickly  learned not to visit farmers during
the day Zhen they Zere occupied Zith chores. Instead, in the tZilight of
Long Island spring evenings, a big black 3ackard and uniformed chauffeur
Zould be standing in the front yards of neat little farmhouses in Valley
Stream, Rockville Centre and 0errick Zhile  inside, at the kitchen table,
Robert 0oses sat, jacket off, tie loosened and shirt sleeves rolled up,
drinking Zhat he later remembered as an endless succession of glasses of
beer and trading an endless succession of loud jokes Zith an endless
succession of jovial, florid-faced but canny German and Dutch farmers,
trying to bargain them doZn to the price—$1,200 per acre—that he had set
for right-of-Zay.  Soon he had obtained options from a do]en farmers from
Zhom he needed infertile land or land on the very edges of their farms, for
Zhich $1,200 per acre (payable by June 30, 1925, out of the anticipated
legislative appropriation) Zas a good price. Approaching the socialites Zho
headed the corporation that had purchased the old Taylor Estate ne[t to the
Timber 3oint Club in East Islip and turned it into a hunting preserve, he
received a pleasant surprise: they had visited the estate only once in 1923
and Zere thinking of selling. Talking to them earnestly and Zinningly of the
public service they Zould perform by selling to the state, he persuaded them
to accept $250 and give him an option, subject to approval by the other
stockholders, to purchase the estate for $250,000, payable by June 30, 1925.
After he Zorked on the oZners of the land he coveted at +ampton Bays and
Sunken 0eadoZ, they gave him similar options. The 0ontauk 3oint and
Lloyd Neck oZners seemed ready to folloZ suit. By the end of the summer
of 1924, he seemed Zell on his Zay to establishing a state park system on
Long Island on the basis of his charm alone.

But the charm could vanish sZiftly. +e joked and laughed Zith the farmers,
but Zhen one made clear that he Zould not sell his land, 0oses could
change in an instant to quite a different approach. 3. G. RasZeiler Zas one
of the five burly, thick-necked, red-faced sons of John Jacob RasZeiler, a

246
Brooklyn-born farmer of German ancestry Zho had gone broke trying to
raise lettuce, spinach, cabbage and caulifloZer on a farm in Valley Stream
and then had sold it and purchased another in 0alverne, Zhere, in 3G's
Zords, "Ze all si[  of us broke our backs to make it pay." 3G remembers
Zell the day the "parkZay business" started. "The farm Zas doing good," he
recalls. "Then 0oses came one day. +e introduced himself as Tm Robert
0oses, representing the State of NeZ York. :e're going to put a parkZay
through this section of Long Island.' +e Zas very polite, very diplomatic, at
first. But Zhen he saZ my father Zasn't going to sell, he stood up in our
kitchen and he said: 'You knoZ, 0r. RasZeiler, the state is all-supreme
Zhen it comes to a condemnation proceeding. If Ze Zant your land, Ze can
take it.'

"Father Zanted to make an agreement Zith him—he didn't Zant to have to
go to the laZyers—but 0oses Zanted to take tZenty acres from us. The
Zhole farm Zas only eighty, eighty-five acres. The tZenty acres Zas the
choice of the Zhole farm. It had been Zoodland; Ze had Zorked hard to get
it cleared off. :e  had just gotten it cleared, and it Zas just about ready to
begin making money for us. It Zas right in the middle of the farm; if he
took it, all our roZs Zould  be cut in half—hoZ could you ploZ? And  he
Zas offering us $1,200—the same price he Zas offering for bad land on the
edges of other farms. That Zasn't fair. But Zhen Ze tried to e[plain that to
him, he Zouldn't even listen to us. Father asked him to go on the north
boundary line instead. Father said if he'd take it from the boundary and not
from the middle, he'd give it to the state for nothing. But 0oses said no. +is
Zhole attitude Zas: This is Zhere Ze're going, and that's it.' "

The ne[t day, as John Jacob and his five sons Zere in the fields, a young
engineer 0oses had hired, Sidney 0. Shapiro, drove up Zith a surveying
creZ. "They just Zalked on the property and set up their things Zithout
asking permission," 3. G. RasZeiler recalls. "Father asked them if they had
papers from a court, and they didn't." John Jacob Zalked into his house,
came out Zith a shotgun, put it against Shapiro's chest, and said, "I'll bloZ
you to hell if you don't get off my land." Getting off, Shapiro telephoned
0oses, Zho said, "Get the state troopers and go back there."

247
"They Zanted to scare you, I guess," RasZeiler says. "But Father asked the
troopers if the surveyors could go on our land Zithout papers, and the
troopers asked them if they had papers and they said no and the troopers
said to them, 'You can't go on this man's property Zithout papers,' and they
Zent aZay. So Ze thought Ze had Zon, but the ne[t day, they set up their
things on the ne[t farm—0oses only Zanted land on the edges of that, so
the farmer Zas friendly to him—and got the survey lines they needed from
there and they condemned up the piece of property they Zanted. :e Zent to
the Court of Claims and got $2,700 an acre—more than tZice Zhat 0oses
offered us. :e  kept Zhat Zas left of the farm, but it

Zasn't the same. 0e? I Zent into the trucking business—Zorked for my
brother-in-laZ."

The charm could vanish as quickly Zith a financier as Zith a farmer. The
Timber 3ointers Zere shocked Zhen they learned that 0oses planned to
turn the adjoining estate into a public park. 3ointing to the spot Zhere the
proposed park Zould run alongside the club's golf course, old +orace
+avemeyer, "the Sultan of Sugar," groZled to his young brother-in-laZ,
stockbroker :.  .ingsland   0acy:  "I tell  you, 0acy,  if they get a park over
there, there'll be so much screZing you Zon't be able to tee up a ball."
+avemeyer, 0acy and :all   Street trader Buell +ollister had even more
reason to be disturbed than the other ninety-seven Timber 3oint members.
An[ious  to attract more of "the right kind of people" to East Islip, the trio
had recently decided to purchase the Taylor Estate themselves, divide its
1,486 acres into thirty building lots and sell them, at prices ranging from
$50,000 on up, to thirty persons so right that they Zould even be invited to
join, on purchase of a lot, the Timber 3oint Club. The proposition promised
to be highly reZarding financially as Zell as socially. NoZ, to forestall
0oses, +avemeyer, +ollister and 0acy  hastily persuaded the Timber
3ointers in the Deer Range Corporation, the corporation that had turned the
Taylor Estate into a hunting preserve, to overrule their officers, deny 0oses
the option he had been promised and instead sell the estate to them for the
same $250,000 he had offered—plus 50 percent of any profit they made on
subsequent resales. Learning of these machinations, 0oses asked 0acy to
drop around to his office. :hen  the stockbroker arrived, 0oses bluntly
ordered him not to consummate the deal. 0acy indignantly refused to

248
agree. Then, as he Zas later to testify under oath, "0r. 0oses told me they
Zere going to take that place aZay from us and nothing Ze could do Zould
stop it. . . . 0r. 0oses  informed me that he had the arbitrary poZer to sei]e
this property, Zhich Zas oZned by myself and my associates, even though
the state did not have one cent to pay for it. . . . 0r. 0oses told me that he
could take my home aZay from me. +e told me personally that his poZer
Zas such that he could sei]e my house, put me out of it and arrest me for
trespass if I tried to get into it again. . . . 0r. 0oses told me not only that he
possessed this arbitrary poZer, but that he Zas able to control the press of
NeZ York City, so as to hold me up to such obloquy that I Zould not be
able to stand it." And 0oses Zas as good as his Zord. No sooner had
+avemeyer, +ollister and 0acy  actually purchased the Taylor Estate than,
Zithout even a pretense of negotiating Zith them as the laZ required, he
directed 3ark Commission attorneys to draZ up a Notice of Entry and
Appropriation and serve it on the three men—and Zhile it Zas being served
he stationed armed state troopers on the property and instructed them not to
alloZ the three men to enter it even to remove personal property they had
left there.

The route 0oses had planned for his "Northern State 3arkZay" ran, Zest to
east, through the estates of 0rs. +enry 3hipps, 3ayne :hitney, Claus
Spreckels, Clarence +ungerford 0ackay, +enry Carnegie 3hipps, +enry
3ayne :hitney,  Francis 3. Garvan, E. D. 0organ, 0rs.  :illiam    ..

Vanderbilt II, Bronson :inthrop,   +enry Rogers :inthrop   and Otto .ahn.

The 3hippses, :hitneys,  Spreckelses, 0ackays, Garvans, 0organs,
Vanderbilts, :inthrops  and .ahns  refused even to discuss the parkZay Zith
0oses. One summer Zeekend in 1924, as they rela[ed in the manor houses
Zhich they had so carefully secured against the public, they noticed, outside
their gates, surveying creZs setting up their telescope-like surveying levels
—and pointing the telescopes in their direction. They dispatched servants to
inquire Zhat the surveyors Zere doing—and the servants returned Zith the
information that the surveyors said that they Zere "laying out the route for
the parkZay." Astonished, the barons took a closer look at Zhere the
telescopes Zere pointing—and found that it Zas right at their houses. In
some cases, before the guards could chase them aZay, the surveyors laid

249
out a line of red and Zhite flags to mark the e[act route of the parkZay—
and the flags marched straight across their laZns and right by their front
doors.

The barons dispatched their laZyers to 0oses, and 0oses did not treat
those laZyers Zith the deference to Zhich they Zere accustomed. The e[act
nature of his conversation Zith Colonel +enry L. Stimson is unknoZn, but
Stimson stormed out of the meeting to Zrite Governor Smith: "I believe
thoroughly in the importance of improved highZay facilities and parks. . . .
But, my dear Governor, it cannot be done in this country by Napoleonic
methods." Another laZyer told 0oses that there Zas enough poZer in
:heatley   +ills  to insure that no parkZay Zould ever run through there.
":ell,"    0oses replied, "Ze're going to teach the :heatley  +ills  people a
lesson." To all the barons' laZyers, he spelled it out bluntly: If their clients
Zere Zilling  to donate land for the parkZays, its location could be shifted
aZay from their houses to the borders of their huge estates. But if they
Zeren't cooperative, the commission had the poZer to appropriate the land
right ne[t to their houses—and it Zas going to do so.

"Appropriate?" the laZyers asked one another. :hat did that mean? In laZ
offices all along :all   Street, pages Zere hastily turned to section fifty-nine
of the State Conservation LaZ. And then calls Zere hastily placed to F.
Trubee Davison.

"I felt aZful,  of course," Trubee Zas to recall. "It's a terrible, highhanded
Zay for a public official  to act, to threaten someone Zith the loss of his
home unless he surrenders land. But 0oses had the poZer to do it. +e could
Zalk in and take it. And he had the poZer under the laZ I had introduced.
There Zas nothing else for me to do but to admit to these felloZs Zho
called that I just hadn't studied it thoroughly before I introduced it." One
attorney, after studying the laZ, Zrote a friend: "The poZers most
innocently e[pressed in Sections Eight and Nine are, Zhen read in
conjunction Zith Section Eighteen, sufficiently broad to permit this
Commission to take over the Zhole of Suffolk County" as long as the
Governor Zas Zilling  to sign the appropriation form.

And even Zhile the laZyers Zere studying the poZers conferred by

250
the act, 0oses Zas giving neZ evidence of his intention to use them. In
August, the oZners of the 0ontauk 3oint land he Zanted learned that Carl
G. Fisher, developer of 0iami Beach, Zas planning to transform 0ontauk
into a similar resort area. If he succeeded, their land Zould become
immensely valuable. They notified 0oses that they Zould not sign the
option agreement. +e promptly appropriated the choicest portion of their
land, a 1,700-acre tract called "+ither +ills." A Zeek later, he appropriated
tZenty-tZo  other acres on Lloyd Neck.

The laZyers told their clients they Zere in for a fight.

The skirmishers made contact first on the Taylor Estate. The attorneys for
+avemeyer, +ollister and 0acy's 3auchogue Corporation informed their
clients that the poZers given to the Long Island State 3ark Commission by
the act 0oses had draZn Zere broad—but that, broad as they Zere, 0oses
had overstepped them. +e may have Zritten the laZ, they said, but he had
also broken it.

Section fifty-nine of the Conservation LaZ gave the commission the poZer
to appropriate land, the attorneys said, but section fifty-nine also said that
the poZer could be used only after negotiations Zith property oZners had
failed and no price could be agreed upon. 0oses had never negotiated; he
had never bothered to mention a price to any representative of 3auchogue;
he had never even spoken to any representative after 3auchogue had
purchased the Taylor Estate. 0oreover, the State Constitution forbade any
state agency to buy, condemn or appropriate land unless it had enough
money on hand to pay for it. 0oses had appropriated the Taylor Estate on
December 4, 1924. The referendum had been passed, but under its
provisions the $15,000,000 Zas not available to acquire land until each
specific acquisition had been approved by the Legislature, and the
Legislature had, of course, given no such approvals. The Legislature hadn't
even met since the referendum. Even if 0oses contended that the $225,000
allocated to the Long Island Commission by the 1924 Legislature could be
used for land acquisition—a contention of e[tremely doubtful legality—the
Taylor Estate Zas Zorth more than $225,000. 0oses himself had admitted
that by offering $250,000 for it. And 0oses didn't have even the $225,000
any more. Out of that sum, before the appropriation, he had spent $63,000

251
on "overhead e[penses," not to mention the money he oZed the oZners of
the land he had appropriated at 0ontauk and Lloyd Neck. The Taylor Estate
appropriation, the attorneys said, Zas clearly illegal. They could surely
demonstrate this to Governor Smith, they said, and before an appropriation
could take effect, Smith had to sign the appropriation form.

The Timber 3ointers did not lack for means to bring their contentions to the
Governor's attention. At their behest, visits Zere paid to his Biltmore +otel
apartment not only by prominent Republican leaders of the Legislature,
friends of Smith from his legislative days, and not only by the single most
poZerful Republican in NeZ York State—GO3 national committeeman
Charles D. +illies—but also by Tammany's apple-cheeked ally, Democratic

boss John 0cCooey of Brooklyn. One night, as the Governor rela[ed at the
Biltmore, there appeared before him, ushered in by a pair of Smith's dearest
Tammany friends, :.  .ingsland  0acy  himself, and 0acy  offered Smith, in
this personal appeal, a list of an even do]en other Suffolk County estates
closer to the city, beautiful in their oZn right—a do]en estates Zhose
oZners Zanted to sell. And, he said, if the commission insisted on having
an estate in East Islip, Zhy couldn't it buy :illie   Vanderbilt's "Idle +our"?
It Zas as large as the Taylor Estate, as heavily Zooded, it had almost as
much shore front on the bay—and Vanderbilt's heirs Zere trying to sell for
$150,000, $100,000 less than the price offered for the Taylor Estate, Zhich,
he said, Zas actually Zorth much more than the price offered.

It Zas obvious to his advisers that Smith Zas uncertain. The efficacy of
parks as an issue had been proven again in his 1924 re-election campaign.
Running against popular young Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, Jr., he had
turned his campaign tours into appeals for passage of the park referendum.
Although Republican presidential candidate Calvin Coolidge had carried
NeZ York State and the Democrats had lost control of the Legislature,
Smith had run nearly a million votes ahead of his ticket and Zon re-
election. And, noting that the referendum had carried by nearly a million
votes, he felt that no small part of his victory Zas due to his identification
Zith parks.

Nonetheless, the question of the legality of 0oses' appropriation still
bothered him. The appropriation form to Zhich 0oses Zas asking him to

252
affi[  his signature began Zith the Zords: "I, Alfred E. Smith, Governor of
the State of NeZ York, being satisfied that there is available a sum
representing fair compensation for the land to be entered and appropriated,
do hereby approve ..." +oZ could he possibly be so satisfied? +is advisers,
listening to the Governor thinking out loud on the subject, believed he
Zould probably not sign.

After the election, the Governor scheduled a closed hearing on the
appropriation. +avemeyer, +ollister and 0acy Zere confident Zhen they
arrived at the Biltmore Zith their attorneys. 0oses, arriving Zith  0cNulty
and tZo other commission attorneys, Zas not.

But the outcome of the hearing Zas not to hinge on legalities. Smith,
an[ious to learn for himself the basics of both sides' positions, conducted it
informally, bantering, telling jokes, encouraging the principals as Zell as
their attorneys to talk. And the Sultan of Sugar talked. E[plaining Zhy he
didn't Zant a park in East Islip, +orace +avemeyer said he feared the toZn
Zould be "overrun Zith  rabble from the city."

In later years, Smith's biographers, describing the hearing, pictured the
Governor as laughing at the remark and saying, Zith a grin, "Rabble? :hy,
that's me."

The Zords Smith actually used Zere similar, but there Zas no grin. :hen
+avemeyer used the Zord "rabble," Smith looked up at him. The blue eyes
Zere steel. The laughter in the room died aZay. "Rabble? That's me you're
talking about." +e reached out a hand and sei]ed the appropriation form.
Trying desperately to turn his remark into a joke, +avemeyer said quickly,
":hy,   Zhere's a poor millionaire to go noZadays if he Zants

to be alone?" "Try the +arlem River +ospital," Smith said. The +arlem
River +ospital Zas an insane asylum. As +avemeyer flushed, the Governor
signed the form.

The hearing Zas over, but the fight for the Taylor Estate Zas not. It Zould
be Zaged Zithout quarter in both regular and special sessions of the NeZ
York State Legislature, and in tZenty-five separate appellate court
proceedings. It Zould fill the front pages of neZspapers across the state for

253
tZo years, delay for almost that long all e[penditures for any of the parks of
Zhich Robert 0oses had dreamed, and bring to the brink of ruin not only
those dreams but 0oses' personal reputation and career. But before it Zas
over, 0oses Zould be hauled back from the brink by Al Smith, Zith a
helping tug from Belle 0oskoZit],   and his reputation, seemingly certain to
be tarnished by his actions, Zould be burnished instead so that he gleamed
in the public consciousness Zith the aura he Zould bear for the ne[t thirty
years: the aura of a fearless, fiercely independent public servant Zho loved
parks above all else and Zas Zilling to fight for parks against politicians,
bureaucrats and the hated forces of Zealth and influence.

The Taylor Estate fight also transformed a quiet, conservative stockbroker
and connoisseur of antiques into a major NeZ York State political figure.

The stockbroker Zas :.  .ingsland  0acy,  a tall, slender former +arvard
Crimson editor one year older than 0oses, Zho invariably Zore starched
high round collars and dark-blue suits Zith vest, and often pince-ne]. Not
Zealthy, but Zell off,  0acy  seemed, Zith his seat on the E[change, his
modest but Zell-tended East Islip estate and his love of antiques and old
houses, the very model of the country gentleman, e[cept that, unlike
brother-in-laZ +avemeyer and the other members of the Timber 3oint Club,
he Zas noticeably uninterested in making money. As one observer of his
career Zas to Zrite, "All the Zhile  he had a vague idea that he Zould like to
enter politics, but he did not knoZ hoZ to go about it." And since he Zas an
unsmiling man Zith the thin, tight-pressed lips of the ascetic, very reserved
even Zith friends, it seemed unlikely that he Zould find out. But, as the
observer Zas to Zrite, "No man living e[cels 0acy  in the capacity for
appreciating an outrage that has been perpetrated against his rights. +e
cherished and cultivated his Zrongs as other men Zorship Old 0asters."
And noZ 0acy  felt  that 0oses had Zronged him.

The day after the hearing at the Biltmore, neZ fuel Zas heaped on 0acy's
outrage. +is laZyers had notified 0oses that an appeal Zas planned, and
0oses' laZyers had agreed that the matter Zas still in abeyance—and that a
hunting party of Deer Range stockholders could be held the ne[t day as
scheduled. But Zhen the hunters' limousines pulled up to the property,
barring their Zay Zere men in uniform carrying revolvers, state troopers

254
Zho refused to alloZ them even to remove the hunting clothes they had
previously left there and that had certainly not been included in any

appropriation. The astounded millionaires saZ other men in uniform—
Conservation Department Zorkers, they Zere told—rounding up the
pheasants and mallards, also unappropriated, that they had raised and that
they still oZned and putting them in trucks to be hauled aZay. :ithin  days,
0acy  Zas receiving reports that creZs of state Zorkmen had begun cutting
doZn trees and tearing doZn buildings on the property.

+avemeyer and +ollister Zere businessmen. Smith's action had cost them
the opportunity for a large profit, but at least they could, through the Court
of Claims, get their money back—Zith interest. They saZ no point in
throZing good money after bad by fighting the state. But 0acy no longer
vieZed the situation strictly in business terms. "There is a question of
importance . . . because of certain fundamental principles of this
Government Zhich are being ruthlessly overthroZn by the Long Island
Commission," he Zrote his partners. "0oses never even tried to negotiate
Zith us. +e decided to sei]e first and negotiate afterZard. There Zas no
condemnation, no proceedings, no notice to us. They threZ a cordon of
state troopers around the property and noZ they say, 'Your remedy is to go
to the Court of Claims for compensation.' " If 0oses could do this to us,
0acy  said, he could do it to anyone. "No one's home is safe." The
principles, he said, Zere too important to be surrendered Zithout a fight. +e
tried to persuade +avemeyer and +ollister to invest in a legal fight to oust
the commission from the property. +ollister refused. +avemeyer agreed to
pay half of all legal e[penses up to $25,000, but said he Zould not spend a
cent beyond that.

On December 31, 1924, 3auchogue's laZyers began the fight by asking
Suffolk County Court to enjoin the Long Island State 3ark Commission
from altering the property until a trial could be held to determine if the
appropriation Zas legal. Judge George +. Furman issued the temporary
injunction on the same day it Zas applied for, alloZing the state troopers to
remain on the property to insure that its condition Zas not changed before
the trial but prohibiting them from interfering Zith  its use by 3auchogue for
Zhatever purpose the corporation Zished—including hunting. And Fur-man

255
added to his decision a line that seemed to confirm 0acy's contentions. The
appropriation, the judge said, Zas clearly illegal.

+astily striking  an alliance Zith the North Shore robber barons, 0acy
agreed that the best strategy Zas to cut off all 3ark Commission funds until
neZ laZs Zere passed taking from it the right of condemnation by
appropriation. Because of the barons' control of the Legislature, there
seemed little doubt that the strategy Zould succeed.

But 0acy  Zas handicapped by principles. :hen  a reporter from the NeZ
York +erald Tribune asked him to shoZ him around the Taylor Estate so
that he could see if it Zas really inaccessible and unsuitable for a park,
0acy  disdained to sei]e this opportunity to sZay the press. No, he told the
reporter, he did not Zant to influence his thinking. +e Zas sure the truth
Zould be obvious. +e Zould not accompany him. "0acy,"  0oses

Zas to say, "Zas the amateur in politics." Once, 0oses had been the
amateur. But he Zasn't any longer. And he kneZ hoZ to take advantage of
someone Zho Zas—as became apparent on-January 8, 1925, on the front
page of The NeZ York Times.

A FE:   RIC+  GOLFERS ACC8SED  OF BLOC.ING    3LANS FOR
STATE 3AR.,

the headline said. r. b. moses of long island commission tells of fight for site
on south shore — influence used, he says. The story began: "Robert B. [sic]
0oses, 3resident of the Long Island State 3ark Commission, charged
yesterday that a little group of Zealthy men Zas obstructing the
commission's plan to create a state park on the South Shore, five miles east
of Islip, and that legal action had been taken by them only Zhen every
avenue of social and political influence had failed." The ne[t tZo
paragraphs Zere a restatement of that theme. The "Zealthy men" Zere
alloZed one paragraph—the fourth—for rebuttal; they Zere not heard from
again until paragraph tZenty-si[, by Zhich point the Times's readers had
had spread before them, almost verbatim, 0oses' press release, a press
release Zritten by a man Zho had once been the master of "scrupulous,
reliable" research but Zho had become a master propagandist—one Zho did
not let facts stand in the Zay of his aims.

256
0oses' release harped on the fact that his opponents Zere "Zealthy
residents," "rich residents," "rich people," "possessed of every sort of
political and social influence." NoZhere did his release mention the fact
that a judge had found his action illegal. And noZhere in the story, Zhich
ran for thirty-four paragraphs, did the Times see fit to mention that piece of
information. 8nable to avoid mentioning the injunction, 0oses said it had
been granted by a "local judge," a phrase Zith implications. ":e Zill  fight
it," he said. "8pon its outcome depends Zhether the public or a small group
of rich people can have a playground there."

Any reader Zho arrived at paragraph tZenty-si[ Zould begin to notice that
there Zere some other sides to the story. Contrary to 0oses' statement,
0acy  said at that Zell-buried point, it Zas not just "a feZ rich golfers" Zho
objected to the park but a large majority of the residents of Islip ToZn and
Suffolk County. And the point of the injunction, he said, Zas that 0oses
had violated the laZ and sei]ed property Zithout due process. "If the
commission can do this," he said, "it can, by passing a resolution and
getting the mere formality of the Governor's signature, sei]e any man's
home, dispossess him and put state troopers there to prevent his re-entering.
It is for that reason that Ze have taken the issue to court." But Zhen the
Times finally gave him a chance to talk, 0acy talked too much. Not trying
to dodge the "influence" issue, he sought to defend it. ":e did use
influence," he said. "But Ze could not go around and see every citi]en in
the state about the matter. :e saZ various representative men, and Ze did
go to the Governor. 0r. 0oses Zent to the Governor, too. :ell,   I am a
citi]en of the state of NeZ York and I have as much right to see the
Governor as 0r. 0oses."

Such public relations naivete, combined Zith the Times's slanting, made
0oses' debut in a headline on the front page of the nation's most respected

neZspaper a triumph. :hile  0acy  had Zon the first round in a court of laZ,
0oses had Zon the first round in the court of public opinion.

In the former court, 0oses could not evade the facts that the Times had
relegated to paragraph tZenty-si[. :hen,  as he had promised the Times's
readers, he did "fight" the injunction issued by the "local judge," asking the
State Supreme Court to invalidate it, Supreme Court Justice James C. Van

257
Siclen refused. "The defendants have proceeded and are proceeding and
threatening to proceed in a manner Zhich tends irregularly, illegally and
beyond their poZers, under and in violation of the laZs and Constitution of
the State of NeZ York and of the 8nited States, to invade and sei]e the
property of the plaintiff," Van Siclen said. The injunction Zould remain in
force until a full trial  Zas held. Such a trial, the judge made clear, could
result not only in the return of the Taylor Estate to 3auchogue, but also in
the assessing of substantial damages against the Long Island State 3ark
Commission, against the individual commissioners, including Robert
0oses, against NeZ York State and even, conceivably, against Governor
Smith. To indicate his oZn feelings in the matter, Van Siclen ordered the
commission to pay 3auchogue a symbolic ten dollars in court costs.

NoZ 0oses'  only hope Zas the Legislature. If it appropriated
—"segregated" Zas the legal term—$250,000 of the bond-sale revenues for
purchase of the Taylor Estate, he could argue that the commission had
sei]ed the estate in anticipation of the segregation. This Zas a Zeak defense
—but at least it Zas a defense. If the Legislature did not segregate the
$250,000, the commission—0oses—Zould have no legal defense at all. +e
Zould have no money to pay for the land he had taken.

The Legislature, hoZever, Zas controlled by the state's Republican 3arty,
and that party Zas dominated financially by the barons, philosophically by
a concern for the rights of private property, precisely the rights endangered
by unstatutory appropriation, and politically by its desire to embarrass
Alfred E. Smith, the man Zho had shattered its control of NeZ York State.
Because, in its vieZ, one of Smith's appointees had broken the laZ, and
Smith had, by signing the appropriation form, helped him do it, they saZ an
ideal chance for such embarrassment if the facts of the case Zere brought
out. On February 11 and 26, 1925, the Senate Finance Committee held
hearings in Albany.

Throughout the hearings, despite the efforts of Finance Committee
Chairman Charles J. +eZitt to gavel him into silence, 0oses Zas on his
feet, berating Zitnesses. "I never kneZ of persons to come before a
legislative hearing Zith dirtier hands than the people of East Islip," he
shouted at one.

258
But shouting could not droZn out the facts. To refute 0oses' contention that
only a "feZ rich golfers"  opposed the park, more than a do]en elected
officials testified that the majority of Suffolk's 150,000 and Islip ToZnship's
21,000 residents opposed it. The chairman of Suffolk's Board of
Supervisors, the county's governing body, testified: ":e are opposed to the
methods of the Long Island Commission. . . . :e are afraid of persons Zho
act as they have." And Zhen 0oses himself Zas summoned to the stand,

the questioner Zas F. Trubee Davison, and Davison had learned a great deal
about asking questions since the day, a year before, on Zhich he had agreed
to introduce 0oses' park bills.

"Did you have the money available at the time [the appropriation Zas
made]?" Davison demanded.

"That is a question for the courts to decide," 0oses replied.

":ell,   did the commission believe it had the money available to pay a
reasonable value on this property?" Davison demanded.

"Yes, Ze did," 0oses said. The money appropriated to the Long Island
State 3ark Commission by the 1924 Legislature.

":ell,   let us see about it," Davison said. "The Legislature appropriated
$225,000. Did you spend any of that money before the Taylor Estate case
came up?"

"Yes, some of it," 0oses admitted.

":ell,"    Davison said, "hoZ did you arrive at your arithmetic? You had only
$225,000 to start Zith and you admit you spent some of it. +oZ could you
have enough to cover the Taylor case?"

":e   think Ze had it," 0oses  said. But Davison had made his point. After
the hearing, 0oses printed up "transcripts" of the hearing—Zith his oZn
damaging admissions carefully omitted—and mailed them to state officials
and legislators. But the officials and legislators had folloZed the hearings
themselves. The state has "an obligation" to have money available to pay

259
people before taking their property, said Attorney General Albert Ottinger, a
Republican. 0oses' actions, said the state's chief legal officer, Zere clearly
"illegal." The day folloZing  the hearing, Assembly Speaker Joseph A.
0cGinnies  said that the Legislature Zould strip the poZer of appropriation
from the commission. And he said that the Legislature Zould certainly not
segregate any money at all—ever—for the purchase of the Taylor Estate.

In the Legislature and the courts, then, the issue appeared in February 1925
all but settled: To reali]e a dream of unprecedented scope, Robert 0oses,
by use of the laZ, had armed himself Zith unprecedented poZers— and
then, finding that these poZers Zere still inadequate, he had deliberately
gone beyond them, beyond the laZ. "Entry and appropriation" Zas, even as
defined in laZ, of questionable constitutionality in its negation of the
individual's rights Zhen his property Zas coveted by the state. And 0oses
had gone beyond the definition to use the poZer of the state Zith even less
restraint than the laZ alloZed. But both courts and Legislature understood
the situation; before both courts and Legislature, 0oses stood stripped of all
defenses and, it seemed in February 1925, both courts and Legislature
Zould noZ  step in and rectify the situation, the courts by affording redress
to the individuals injured by his actions, the Legislature by insuring that he
never again had the opportunity similarly to injure any other individual. But
the ultimate court in Zhich the fate of 0oses and his dream Zas

to be resolved Zould be the court of public opinion. And in this court,
Robert 0oses had close to hand three formidable Zeapons.

One Zas the fact that, like motherhood, parks symboli]ed something good,
and therefore anyone Zho fought for parks fought under the shield of the
presumption that he Zas fighting for the right—and anyone Zho opposed
him, for the Zrong.

The second Zas the fact that it Zas possible to paint the issue, as 0oses had
already done, not only as park supporters vs. park deniers, but also as
Zealth vs. lack of Zealth, privilege vs. impotence, influence vs.
helplessness, "rich golfers" vs. the sZeating masses of the cities.

The third Zas the ultimate political Zeapon: Alfred Emanuel Smith.

260
The Republican majority in the Legislature drafted a bill, introduced by
upstate Senator :arren T. Thayer, segregating $6,000,000 of the bond issue
for acquisition of various parks but not appropriating any funds for
acquisition of the Taylor Estate. The bill also amended the laZs Davison
had introduced on 0oses' behalf the year before. It eliminated appropriation
as a method of obtaining park land in developed areas and also provided
that all land acquisition for parks or parkZays, including acquisition by
condemnation, must be approved by the Republican-controlled State Land
Board, that all park or parkZay construction must be approved by the
Republican-controlled State Board of Estimate and Control, that all
engineering Zork on parks and parkZays must be carried out by the State
Engineer, an elected official Zho Zas then a Republican, and that all legal
Zork connected Zith parks and parkZays must be carried out by the office
of the Republican State Attorney General, Albert Ottinger. During the last
Zeek in 0arch,  shortly before adjournment, the Legislature passed the bill.
Smith vetoed it. (+is veto, said Eberly +utchinson, chairman of the
Assembly :ays  and 0eans Committee, Zas clearly the Zork of "that
e[pert and abusive propagandist, practiced in e[citing the prejudices of the
uninformed and a habitual defamer of the Legislature, Robert 0oses," Zho
had boasted to him that if the Legislature did not pass a bill he liked, the
Governor Zould veto it.) But the veto did not help 0oses or Smith. They
needed $250,000. If it Zasn't segregated, 0oses' acts Zould be declared
flatly illegal  in court, and no Governor Zould be able to put a good face on
such a development, especially a Governor Zho Zas, even peripherally and
only because he had been misled by an appointee, involved. Early in April,
Smith told his advisers that he Zould summon the Legislature back into
special session to try to force it into the segregation.

0oses' only hope of not having to appear in court Zithout money or
promise of money for the appropriation Zas to stall court proceedings until
after the special session. Frantically, the commission's attorneys employed
every legal stratagem available. They moved to strike certain clauses out of
3auchogue's complaint. Van Siclen denied the motion. They appealed his
decision to the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court. The
Appellate Division denied the appeal. They appealed the denial to the Court
of Appeals. Then they Zent back to Van Siclen's court and moved to strike
other

261
clauses. Van Siclen denied the motion. They appealed the decision. April
dragged into 0ay. The case, the judge commented, should have been tried
long ago. But the commission attorneys filed neZ motions. Then they
sought "judgment on pleadings," a device Zhich required the filing of a
long series of successive briefs by both sides. Their briefs ran longer and
longer. One Zas 275 pages. Then they appealed the decisions to the
Appellate Division. Every appeal Zas denied—but every one used up time.

0acy  raged at the delays. "A speedy determination of the issue is Zhat the
public, the county and the state are entitled to," he said. Although his rage
did not require neZ fuel, 0oses provided some anyZay. 0acy, the lover of
antiquity, had determined to reserve one of the thirty homesites for himself
and to restore the old Taylor mansion, a fantastic mass of pillars, turrets and
cupolas, and its outbuildings, to their original condition. But one Sunday in
0ay, strolling  around the property, he found the Zalls of the boathouse
riddled Zith bullet  holes. Targets tacked to the Zalls e[plained them. The
state troopers had been using the building for pistol practice. As he stared
aghast at the damage, he heard someone coming through the Zoods, and
turning, saZ another Sunday stroller: Robert 0oses. 0acy protested to
0oses, pointing out that the courts had specifically forbade the commission
to injure the property in any Zay. 0oses replied Zith a grin: It's lucky it
Zas this building. :e're   going to tear it doZn anyZay.

Once let him get 0oses on the stand, 0acy Zas sure, and the boasting
Zould stop. +e hungered for the court decision Zhich he Zas certain Zould
vindicate him. But 0oses kept stalling.

So did Smith. All through April  and 0ay, 0oses,  an[ious, Zas nudging the
Governor to call the special session. So, for less personal reasons, Zere
Smith's other advisers. Since he had a great issue, they said, Zouldn't it be
best to press it Zhile it Zas still fresh in the public's mind?

:ait,   Smith said. +e had thought of something his advisers hadn't. NeZ
York City Zasn't hot in April.  It Zasn't hot in 0ay.  NeZ  Yorkers Zeren't
desperate to get out of the city in April and 0ay, desperate for a bathing
beach such as the one the Taylor Estate Zould provide. In April and 0ay,
they hadn't yet reached the point at Zhich they didn't care at all about the
legal technicalities of park acquisition; they hadn't yet reached the point at

262
Zhich all that mattered Zas that someone Zas trying to provide them Zith a
place to sZim—and someone else Zas standing in his Zay.

On June 1, a 0onday, the first of the inevitable summer heat Zaves settled
over the city like a hot, soggy blanket. By the Zeekend, the temperature
Zas in the nineties. The city's people fled it. Traffic jams on Long Island
Zere Zorse than ever. So great Zas the frustration that Zhen motorists
reached a toZn park in +untington and found police barring the gates, they
assaulted the police in such force that more than forty Zere arrested. On
June 10, Smith announced the special summer session—in a speech that
Zas the first ever carried on a stateZide radio hookup.

"There are people in this state Zho are opposed to parks," Al Smith said.
+is rasping, friendly, compelling voice sliced through the static of the
crystal sets in tens of thousands of steaming living rooms in Zhich sat

families Zho had spent that last Zeekend in a desperate search for parks.
"There are people in this state Zho are opposed to parks, to the park
program, because they do not desire public parks or parkZays too close to
their private estates, golf clubs and fo[-hunting and polo fields."

Smith spoke for tZo and a half hours. SloZly, painstakingly, he detailed the
Zhole background of his side of the fight, the attempts to remove parks
from politics, the Republicans' insistence on injecting into park
administration other, politically dominated state agencies, on making the
final decision on proposed land acquisition rest not Zith the State Council
of 3arks but Zith the State Land Board.

"Let us compare both bodies," he said. "Let us see Zho are the members of
the 3ark Council." +e listed their names, lingering over several.
"Everybody knoZs Judge ClearZater," he said. "+e is one of the leading
laZyers of the country. ... +e has been connected Zith the Niagara State
Reservation since its establishment many years ago and has repeatedly been
reappointed by Governors of all shades of political opinion. . . . Everyone
knoZs Franklin D. Roosevelt . . . one of the heads of the Boy Scout
movement in the country. ..." 0any of these men, he pointed out, Zere
Republicans. All Zere "serving the state Zithout pay. 0any have

263
contributed large sums of money from their personal fortunes for the
purchase of lands Zhich they have presented to the state as a gift."

:hat   is the Land Board? he asked rhetorically: "A purely political body."
Its entire staff consists of one clerk and tZo land appraisers, all political
appointees in office only since last January. "They don't visit the lands," he
said. "They don't knoZ Zhere they are."

":here,"   he groZled, "did the suggestion come from that this Board be
injected into the park program?" From the Zealthy people on Long Island
Zho Zant the program to be controlled by an agency "easily subject to
influence and manipulation." The Land Board had never even been
mentioned in connection Zith parks until the Long Island State 3ark
Commission proposed taking a little of their land.

SloZly and carefully, the Governor spelled out his side of the Taylor Estate
and Northern State 3arkZay fights, the need for park land on Long Island,
the great natural beauty of the spot selected, the attitude of the opponents, a
"feZ Zealthy  men," at the Biltmore hearing.

"As betZeen the feZ and the many to be benefited," Al Smith said, "I cast
my lot Zith  the many, and I signed the papers necessary to acquire the
property by entry and appropriation. Immediately thereafter, high-priced
legal talent Zas brought in to defeat the purposes of the state." It Zas from
them and from their masters that the suggestion came to place the park
program under the Land Board and to paraly]e the program until this Zas
done, because they kneZ that, "before the Land Board, the golf club Zould
probably Zin."

So, Smith said, "there is a greater question here than 3ark Councils,
Attorney Generals or Land Boards. There is a question of Zhat Zill
ultimately become of the $15,000,000 authori]ed by the people. :ill  it buy
choice park spots and locate parkZays Zhere there is fine air and scenic

beauty, or Zill money, poZer and influence compel the state to buy for the
people that Zhich nobody else Zants? The people are either going to get
these parks and parkZays through the properly organi]ed commissions . . .

264
or this program Zill be given into the hands of the very men Zho noZ
desire to Zeaken it in the interests of the feZ . . ."

And Al Smith Zound  up his speech as only Al Smith could. +e Zas Zilling
to leave the question to the people, he said. "I am laying it before them in
plain everyday language and I am leaving it to them to serve notice on their
servants and representatives in the Legislature just e[actly Zhat their
Zishes are," he said. "The cure for the evils of democracy is more
democracy. Let us battle it out right in the shadoZ of the capitol itself and
let us have a decision, and let us not permit the impression to go abroad that
Zealth and the poZer that Zealth can command can palsy the arm of the
state."

In his speech, Smith avoided discussing the legalities or constitutionality of
the appropriation. And he avoided, e[cept for a single passing reference,
any mention of Robert 0oses.

The Republicans tried to shift the focus back to the Governor's controversial
appointee and his actions. Replying on the radio the ne[t evening, John
.night,  Senate majority leader, said:

The issue is one of laZ and order as against laZlessness and a violation of
sacred constitutional property rights. :ith  scarcely a dollar in sight or
available for payment, Robert 0oses, Zith the Zritten approval of
Governor Smith and Zith the aid of the State 3olice, sei]ed property of the
admitted value of $250,000 and e[cluded the oZners from such property.
The question as to the legality of that action is one for the courts, and it
appears that the oZners of this property have brought an action against 0r.
0oses for large damages. That is the big reason Zhy 0r. 0oses is so much
concerned at this time and Zhy he Zants an e[tra session and funds to pay
for this property.

It is, .night   said, because a curb is needed on such Zanton abuse of poZer
that a check by an outside body, such as the Land Board, is needed. The
Legislature, he said, must "safeguard private property against future
unlaZful sei]ure."  Attorney General Ottinger issued a statement detailing
the "e[travagance" of 0oses' $63,000 e[penditures for cars and office
furnishings. But "sacred constitutional property rights" and the price of

265
office furnishings Zeren't the issue to the steaming millions of NeZ York
City— or of the state's other cities. TZice more before the session Smith
took to the air to speak, tZice more he pounded on the theme of the feZ
against the many, of Zealth, privilege and influence against the masses, of
parks against the millionaires' golf clubs. The mailbo[es of legislators Zere
situated in 1925 in the "midZay," the corridor betZeen Senate and
Assembly Chambers on the third floor of the capitol. Each morning, as
reporters headed for the legislative chambers, they could see those
mailbo[es. After each of Smith's speeches, the mailbo[es Zere overfloZing
Zith letters and postcards supporting the Governor.

And the press didn't help the Republicans. June 1925 Zas a hot neZs
month. John Thomas Scopes Zas being tried in the sleepy toZn of Dayton,
Tennessee, and among the tZo million Zords a day being telegraphed out of
Dayton Zere enough to fill endless columns in the NeZ York papers. 0ore
page-one columns Zere devoted to speculation over the fate of Roald
Amundsen, Zhose e[pedition to the North 3ole hadn't been heard from in
four Zeeks, until on June 19 the Times could report amundsen back safe.
But in NeZ York and other cities of NeZ York State, no story Zas big
enough to knock the park fight off page one. The Times, for e[ample,
carried during the thirty days of June tZenty-eight park-fight stories, seven
in the lead spot, as Zell as a long summary in its Sunday maga]ine, reprints
in full of  the te[ts of the long speeches by Smith and .night, and eight
editorials. The editorials of all the big-city papers—Zith the e[ception of
the NeZ York +erald Tribune, notorious during the latter part of the 1920's
for its espousal of the upper-class vieZpoint—seemed to be vying Zith one
another in Zhipping up public support for the Governor's stand. The Times,
in its only direct confrontation Zith  the issue 0acy considered important in
the fight, said that perhaps 0oses had broken the laZ, but that there Zere
more important principles involved than that. "It seems not unlikely that
Chairman 0oses has e[ceeded his legal authority. But he is acting in the
interest of the people at large and of all future generations. ..."

The support for Smith and 0oses spilled off the editorial pages into the
supposedly impartial neZs columns. The paper in Zhich this tendency Zas
most striking Zas the Times, both because the paper strove so diligently for
objectivity on other issues and because of its reputation. ("The Times Zas

266
the bible, emerging each morning Zith a vieZ of life that thousands of
readers accepted as reality," its biographer, Gay Talese, Zas to Zrite. "They
accepted it on the simple theory that Zhat appeared in the Times must be
true.") The slanting in the Times's initial story on the Taylor Estate fight—
the verbatim recitation of all 0oses' points and the burying of 0acy's—Zas
not corrected in succeeding stories. Stories about court developments—
Zhich Zere unfavorable to 0oses—Zere kept short and relegated to inside
pages. Van Siclen's flat statement that the appropriation Zas illegal and a
violation of both laZ and the constitutions of the state and nation Zas on
page tZenty-one, and it Zas e[actly five paragraphs long. 0ore favorable
stories on political developments Zere front-paged and alloZed to run
interminably.

It Zas not just a case of inequality in space and play. The Times's articles
repeated, day after day, as if they Zere uncontested facts, the key
contentions made by 0oses and Smith. Story after story, for e[ample,
contained some version of the folloZing paragraph:

:ealthy   members of the Timber 3oint Golf Club used social and political
influence to try to get the Commissioners to ZithdraZ. That failing, they
created the 3auchogue Land Corporation and bought the estate.

The key contentions of 0oses' opponents Zere almost totally ignored. Only
the most diligent readers of the Times could understand, for e[ample, that
the fact that 0oses had appropriated the property Zithout money to pay for

it Zas of importance; the fact Zas hardly ever mentioned, and the mentions
it Zas given Zere fleeting. :hen   Ottinger revealed 0oses' $63,000
e[penditures for "overhead," the Times buried the story on an inside page
and handled it this Zay:

Albany—:hat   is considered here as an attempt at retaliation by
Republicans on Governor Smith for his veto of the Thayer State 3ark bill is
contained in a letter of censure sent by Attorney General Ottinger to Robert
0oses.

0oses' reply attacked the Attorney General for delays in searching title for
proposed park acquisitions; it all but ignored the "overhead." A Times

267
editorial said: "Chairman 0oses' reply is a model of moderate statement."
As the crucial special session neared, the Times began to resemble a
Democratic house organ. Its article on the eve of the session said: "The
Governor believes in parks. +e loves them. . . . The Governor is Zell aZare
that he has a stiff battle ahead and is preparing to meet the situation Zith his
usual vigor and undaunted courage." +is motives for calling the special
session, "a contest that may add a neZ epic to the annals of the State," the
article said, Zere clear: "an abiding faith that the public can force this
legislation in its oZn interest." Other possible motives—such as an
upcoming, all but indefensible court action—Zere never mentioned.

3art of the e[planation for the Times's attitude Zas the friendship of Adolph
S. Ochs, the self-made man from .no[ville  Zho had become its oZner and
guiding spirit, Zith  the self-made man from the Fourth :ard. During the
1920's, Smith regularly spent summer Zeekends at Ochs's summer home on
Lake George.

3art Zas the intense interest of Ochs, his only living child, Iphigene,
Iphigene's husband, Arthur +ays Sul]berger, Sul]berger's niece-in-laZ,
0rs.  Cyrus L. Sul]berger—of a Zhole clutch of Ochses and Sul]bergers, in
fact —in parks. The old patriarch himself took a particular interest in
preserving the Saratoga Battlefield; in 1927, 0oses, trying to buy up those
portions not yet oZned by the state, Zould find himself short of money—
and Ochs Zould purchase tZo key parcels and hold them for the state until
the money Zas available. In 1925, 0rs. Cyrus L. Sul]berger Zas active in
the 3ark Association of NeZ York City. Iphigene, a somber-eyed and
idealistic young matron deeply concerned Zith social problems, had already
begun to channel the idealism—and a remarkable amount of enthusiasm
and energy that Zas concealed but not muted by her serene manners and
gentle voice—into 3ark Association Zork. She had been, she Zould tell the
author forty years later, "thrilled" by 0oses' state park Zork and an[ious
that the city should also get moving, and in 1925 she Zas active on a 3ark
Association committee that Zas mapping a vast city land-acquisition
program —and that listened raptly to 0oses, Zho had agreed to help them
Zork it out.

268
The feeling of the publisher and his family shoZed up in the neZs columns
of the Times probably not as a result of any direct orders to editors or
reporters but as the result of their understandable sensitivity to their

bosses' feelings. Albert L. :arner, one of the paper's Albany reporters,
recalls: "3arks and conservation—they Zere dear to 0r. Ochs's heart and
consequently dear to the hearts of Times editors. So I Zas on the lookout
for any attempt to interfere Zith parks. Not that I had specific instructions
to do so, but the editors Zould react favorably to park and conservation
stories, so the reporter naturally keeps his eyes alert for stories of this type."
:hen,   in 1931, Ochs received the annual aZard of the 3ark Association, the
lettering on the illuminated scroll said: "The NeZ York Times, under his
leadership, has made itself the mouthpiece of friends of the parks, using its
great influence to educate the public to an understanding of the place of the
parks in modern life."

:hatever  the reason, the daily press coverage of the park fight made Smith
and 0oses look very good—and the Republican legislators look very bad.

The Republican legislators reali]ed this. Faced Zith an election campaign in
November, many of those from NeZ York and doZnstate districts began to
panic. But +illies and GO3 national committeeman George .. 0orris,
representatives of the poZers that ran the party, traveled to Albany and held
them in line Zith naked threats and blandishments. And the upstate
legislators didn't have to be concerned about November. One-man, one-vote
upstate agitation Zas decades in the future; these legislators represented
NeZ York State's rotten boroughs: districts Zhose voters numbered in the
thousands, not the hundreds of thousands, and Zho Zere farmers Zho had
no interest in parks and Zho Zere, moreover, fanatically opposed to
government spending. The idea of spending millions for parks had appalled
them in the first place; the bond referendum might have rolled up a
stateZide majority of more than a million, but, Zith a single e[ception,
8lster, Zhere old park philanthropist Judge Alphonse Trumpbore
ClearZater took the stump for it, every upstate county had voted against it.
8pstate NeZ York in 1925 Zas a stronghold of 3rohibitionism, of
3rotestantism, of prejudice, of .u .lu[    .lannism—and   of Republicanism.
Opposing Smith's park policies could only help upstate Republican

269
legislators, not hurt them. As the legislators arrived in Albany for the
special session, bitter against being called to the capitol in the summer heat,
reporters asked them if there Zas any chance of a change in their position.
":e'll   melt in  our seats first," one said. :hen a reporter asked .night if  he
might change his mind, .night replied, "I  don't change my mind very often,
do I?"

Nonetheless, Smith smote them hip and thigh. The Republicans held a
majority of seven in the Senate and forty-tZo in the Assembly; he had to
sZitch four votes in the Senate and tZenty-tZo votes in the Assembly to
Zin. +e  sent 0oses and other emissaries to the Republican members of the
State Council of 3arks, the old men Zho had been fighting for parks for
decades, and asked them to intercede Zith the legislators from their
districts. The park philanthropists Zere men Zho ordinarily had influence in
Republican councils; no legislator from a district anyZhere near the
headZaters of the +udson dared publicly to oppose Judge ClearZater's
Zishes. At a Republican caucus, the park philanthropists spoke one after the
other; not

a single legislator dared openly to argue against them, but they had their
orders; a reporter Zrote that, Zhen the speeches Zere finished, "the
Republican leaders sat speechless, until they finally filed their terse refusal
to reconsider and quit the conference."

3ersuasion having failed, the Governor tried other methods. :estchester, he
saZ, Zas a Zeak spot in the Republican Zall: Boss :illiam  :ard   Zanted a
neZ charter for the county, one that Zould centrali]e its government under
his thumb, and the necessary county referendum on the charter could be
authori]ed only by Legislature—and Governor. A bill authori]ing  the
referendum happened even then to be aZaiting Smith's signature or veto.
0oses paid a visit to :ard   and one of :ard's  senators, Seabury C. 0astick.
Smith signed the bill—and soon political observers Zere reporting that
:ard   had promised Smith the votes of the seven legislators he controlled,
and that 0astick might even introduce the park bill Smith Zanted.

The Citi]ens 8nion  and City Club reformers had great influence Zith
Republican legislators from NeZ York City. Smith sent 0oses to see them.
The younger reformers admired 0oses; many of the older men Zere

270
disenchanted Zith him, but they believed in the cause for Zhich he Zas
fighting, and they rallied to it: "3ark development. . . should be determined
by sound principles. These sound principles, the Citi]ens 8nion believes,
Zere outlined by the State Council of 3arks." :ith   reformers Zho still had
doubts, Smith lent a hand. :hen, in a chat in the City Club lounge, laZyer
Joseph 0. 3rice told 0oses that perhaps a central supervisory body such as
the Land Board Zasn't a bad idea, 0oses e[cused himself, Zent to a
telephone and called Smith in Albany—and hardly had the chat ended Zhen
3rice received a telegram from the Governor e[plaining Zhy .the Land
Board idea Zas bad. Reformer :illiam  B. Roulstone boarded a train to
Buffalo, in a single day persuaded the Buffalo Council of Catholic :omen,
the Buffalo Civic Club and the Buffalo Central Labor Council to pass
resolutions supporting Smith's stand—and then headed for Syracuse and a
do]en other upstate cities and toZns. The upstate park philanthropists Zere
out Zorking, too, old Judge ClearZater himself driving night after night to
little villages to talk on their local radio stations, Franklin D. Roosevelt of
+yde 3ark assailing "the invisible hand behind the . . . Republican . . .
policy."

Then Smith and 0rs. 0oskoZit]    conceived a master stroke: they told
0oses to call a meeting of the seventy-three regional park commissioners
and to hold it in the E[ecutive Chamber at 2 p.m. June 22—just si[ hours
before the opening of the special session—a move that insured that the
influential commissioners Zould be on hand during the session, available to
bring further pressure on Zavering legislators, and to dramati]e to press and
public the contrast betZeen the attitude of the Legislature and of men
genuinely interested in parks. GO3 leaders pleaded Zith the commissioners
not to attend, telling them that they Zere Zorking against their oZn party,
but the old men Zere loyal to their parks. They canceled vacation and
business trips, and all but nineteen of the seventy-three Zere present,
packed into the visitors' gallery of the Assembly Chamber along Zith the
largest

croZd the Chamber had ever held, as Smith, speaking not from the raised
Speaker's chair but in the Zell of the Chamber, a spot Zhere he had stood so
many times before, stood so close to the senators seated on folding chairs
brought in specially for the occasion that he could touch them. And he told

271
them: You created the State 3arks Council. I kept politics out of it by
appointing to it these men, mostly Republicans. They include some of the
greatest men in the state. And it's their plan, not mine, that you're killing.
Smith's speech brought the packed galleries to their feet cheering. Smith
had asked the Legislature for permission to have his speech broadcast; it
had not dared refuse. Four microphones had been set up in the Assembly
Chamber Zell, and as the cheers thundered doZn on the legislators, they
could look at the microphones and knoZ that they Zere being echoed
throughout the state.

But Zhen the Republican legislators emerged from behind the closed and
guarded doors of their caucus, not a single one—not one from NeZ York
City, not even one from :estchester County—Zas still supporting Smith.
Not only Zould the GO3 not segregate the funds Smith had asked for, but
by a straight party-line vote, the Legislature repassed the identical bill that
Smith had vetoed. :ith  the Legislature confronted by an outpouring of
public pressure as great as any in the state's history, the barons of Long
Island had laid doZn the laZ to the laZmakers—and their orders had been
obeyed.

The roll call in the Senate Zas completed at 5 p.m., in the Assembly at 6:30.
At e[actly  7 p.m., the Governor again vetoed the bill, in a sequence that a
Times reporter Zrote "is likely to set a mark in legislative history for the
record-breaking speed Zith Zhich it Zent the route from legislative
approval to e[ecutive condemnation."

Bitterness roiled over Albany. In a voice "shaking Zith emotion," John
.night,  usually so stolid, stood at his Senate desk and cried, "+e [Smith]
ought to sign this bill instead of dancing up and doZn like a spoiled child."

"3eople on Long Island [are] afraid to go to bed for fear that Zhen they
Zake up in the morning they Zould find their property sei]ed by Robert
0oses," another Republican senator shouted. Jumping out of his seat, a
Democrat replied: "Is it not true that if they don't go to bed on Long Island
it is because the bedsheets may be in use elseZhere?"—a reference to the
.u  .lu[    .lan.   And Jimmy :alker,   his suavity gone for a moment, his
cravat for once askeZ, shook his fist at the Republican senators and
shouted, "These millionaires made their millions out of the poor despised

272
kikes and Zops of the tenements Zhom, through you, they are noZ seeking
to shut out . . . from a day in the country."

From the Governor's chambers, Smith thundered that "sealed orders" had
been delivered to the GO3. The :estchester delegation had "Zelched," he
said. Seabury 0astick had promised him support—he did not say Zhat he
had promised 0astick in e[change—but 0astick  later had confessed to

him that there had been brought to bear on him "too much pressure" for him
to resist. Others quoted 0astick as saying that he had been told bluntly that
if he supported Smith, "my career Zould end."

The facts Zhich confronted Smith and 0oses after the special session Zere
as bitter as the shouting: not a cent had been appropriated for park
acquisition or development. The option on the tZo miles of beach front at
+ampton Bays Zas lost, and the land Zas promptly bought by three
developers, Zho divided it into lots and began to erect bungaloZs on them.
The option on Sunken 0eadoZ Zas lost, and Zhile the land Zas not sold,
its value had obviously been tripled or quadrupled by the publicity. Other
property on Long Island that 0oses had coveted Zas being sZalloZed up
by real estate developments.

0ore  important—politically,  at least—there Zas still no money to lacquer
even a veneer of legality over the ugly surface of the Taylor Estate
appropriation. An angry Justice Van Siclen had scheduled the Taylor Estate
trial for September i—and had said that no further delays Zould be
tolerated. On that date, 0acy Zas at last going to get 0oses on the Zitness
stand, and 0oses Zas going to have to admit that he still didn't have money
available to pay 0acy for the property he had taken from him. Smith and
0oses might have reaped a Zindfall in the political arenas of Albany, but,
they kneZ, that advantage Zould be lost Zhen the act they Zere defending
Zas flatly declared illegal.

":ell,"    Smith said to 0oses one afternoon Zhen the tZo men and 0rs.
0oskoZit]   Zere alone in the Biltmore apartment, "can't you get someone to
give you the money to make the thing stick?" :ho? 0oses  said. The kind
of money they Zere talking about Zas too much for his oZn family even to
consider; real Zealth Zas required, and people Zith real Zealth Zere the

273
people Zho Zere angriest at him. No, he said, he didn't knoZ anybody. And
they couldn't take a chance on a turndoZn; if they asked someone Zho
refused, and then spread the story that they Zere desperate for funds to
legali]e the sei]ure, the Republicans Zould make capital of it—and so
Zould 0acy's  laZyers. They could make only one phone call—and they
couldn't make a mistake in deciding Zhom it Zould go to.

The tZo men turned to 0rs. 0oskoZit],    Zho had been sitting quietly in the
corner, her head bent over her knitting. "August +eckscher," she said.

Smith Zas doubtful. +e kneZ that +eckscher, a seventy-si[-year-old
multimillionaire  philanthropist, Zas a recreation enthusiast Zho had already
donated a playground to NeZ York City. But a playground cost a feZ
thousand dollars; Zhat Zas required here Zas a quarter of a million. And
+eckscher Zas an elf of a man—so short that Zhen he sat on a chair his
shoes dangled several inches above the floor—Zith a snoZ-Zhite goatee, a
snoZ-Zhite fringe of  hair around his bald pate, spectacles and a perpetual
serene little smile. +e Zould knoZ that he Zould probably become
involved in the laZsuit if  he gave the money, and he hardly seemed the type
of man Zho Zould voluntarily  enter so savage a fight. But 0rs. 0oskoZit],
Zho

had Zorked Zith +eckscher on various charities, thought he Zould, and she
telephoned him. +e agreed immediately. If it Zas true—as 0oses'
opponents Zere to charge—that the little millionaire demanded in return
that the park be named after him, 0oses must have considered this a cheap
price to pay for the opportunity to be able to say in court that he had money
to pay for Zhat he had taken.*

Even Zith +eckscher's contribution, the court fight did not go Zell.
Commenting that "it Zould be a pretty state of affairs if a state commission
could go about sei]ing land Zith gifts provided by private individuals,"
0acy's attorney, Charles +. Tuttle, later a Republican candidate for
Governor, said that if 0oses used the money to reappropriate the land, he
Zould be confessing that the first appropriation had been illegal—and 0acy
and his partners Zould be entitled to damages for that first appropriation.
And the second appropriation Zould be as illegal as the first because, he
said, state laZ required that the money for a land appropriation come from

274
legislative segregation, not from some other source. 0oses apparently
feared Tuttle Zas right. Smith tried privately to persuade 0acy to accept
+eckscher's $250,000 —plus another $12,000 the millionaire had donated
to take care of accrued interest—for the first appropriation and drop the
fight. Even Zhen 0acy  indignantly refused, 0oses apparently tried to
avoid reappropriation: Zhen the formal e[amination before trial began, the
step had not yet been taken.

At times, 0oses seemed almost desperate to avoid being put under oath. On
the day he Zas scheduled to be e[amined, he didn't shoZ up in court. Tuttle
asked Justice Selah B. Strong to cite him for contempt, but Strong accepted
a commission attorney's e[planation that 0oses had believed that
arrangements had been made for him to be e[amined at his office.

And Zhen 0oses, ordered to appear, finally took the stand, he did not make
an impressive Zitness. Testifying under oath, he sZore that he had never
been advised by anyone that the Taylor Estate appropriation Zould be
illegal unless the Legislature segregated money for it. +ad he not been
advised precisely that several times, Tuttle demanded—orally and in a
Zritten memorandum—by Deputy State Attorney General Irving I.
Goldsmith? No, 0oses said. Tuttle thereupon produced the Goldsmith
memorandum and Zaved it in front of 0oses as he sat on the Zitness chair.
Before the start of the actual trial, 0oses, apparently forced into the act,
took the step of reappropriation, and his attorneys began a neZ series of
delaying actions in an attempt to stall the proceedings until January, Zhen
there Zould convene in Albany a neZ Legislature that just conceivably
might give him the appropriation he needed. Assailing the commission's
"dilatory tactics," Norman S. Dike, the latest in the relay of judges sitting on
the case, said the trial Zould begin October 18 Zithout fail. On October 18,
he called the case—and 0oses Zas not present. "1 especially asked 0r.
0oses to be here at the opening of

* +eckscher Zas the grandfather of the August +eckscher Zho Zas NeZ
York City 3ark Commissioner during the Lindsay administration.

this trial, and he might have had the courtesy to grant the court's request,"
Dike said from the bench. "It seems as if his absence, unaccounted for,
shoZs a studied effort to affront the court." Tuttle asked that he be punished

275
for contempt, but Dike accepted a commission attorney's e[planation that
he had advised 0oses it Zould not be necessary for him to appear. The
attorney then moved for a jury trial—and Zhen Dike granted the motion,
the start of the trial Zas delayed until December 6. On December 7, the
commission attorneys filed more than si[ hundred pages of briefs asking for
dismissal of the case— but Dike peremptorily denied the motion, and there
Zas a note in his decision that the commission could only have considered
ominous. As the Times reported: "In his decision yesterday [the] judge . . .
ruled that the Commission had not had appropriated at the time the Taylor
Estate Zas sei]ed, the funds necessary."

There Zere ominous developments on another front, too. Jones Beach Zas
oZned by the toZnships of +empstead, Oyster Bay and Babylon, and Zhile
the Long Island State 3ark Commission could buy, condemn or appropriate
land oZned by private individuals, state laZ provided that property oZned
by a toZnship could be transferred to other oZnership only by a vote of the
toZnship's residents.

0oses had decided to try Babylon, Zhere he spent his summers, first. On
July 18, 1924, he had appeared in the red-brick Babylon ToZn +all and
asked the ToZn Board to hold a referendum.

The five board members just stared at him. They had been elected, placed in
their seats at the board table, by the votes of the baymen, and they kneZ
that one Zay to make sure they Zould not be re-elected Zould be to
demonstrate anything less than complete vigilance over the priceless
heritage of the sacred bay bottoms. The Babylon Leader reminded them that
"Babylon Zants this land Zhich has been hers ... for nearly a century and a
half before the State came into e[istence to keep as a heritage for its
children. . . . .eep it—it  is a park at present—a natural park sZept by
bree]es from the bay and ocean. Enjoy it as it is or improve it. But keep it—
never surrender one inch." Let the commission spend its money elseZhere,
its editorials advised 0oses, "before it . . . attempts to snatch property that
the residents of the ToZn of Babylon intend to keep for their children's
children until the end of time." :ithin   tZo  months after 0oses' request for
a referendum, not only the Babylon ToZn Board but the governing board of
every village on the South Shore of Suffolk County—as Zell as the villages'

276
chambers of commerce, boards of trade and civic associations—Zere lined
up against the proposal, and Judge James B. Cooper, editor and oZner of
the Leader, could proclaim Zith satisfaction that "the project at present has
as much chance of carrying as a Great South Bay clam has of groZing
teeth." :hen  0oses  turned to Oyster Bay, furious Oyster Bay citi]ens
formed a "Save Our Beaches" committee that Zithin days had a
membership of thousands. In desperation, 0oses turned to +empstead,
although he kneZ that votes in +empstead ToZn, as, indeed, in all of
Nassau County, Zent Zhich-

ever Zay the county's iron-fisted Republican boss, G. :ilbur Doughty,
Zanted, and he had been unable to convince Doughty to Zant Jones Beach
development. Doughty alloZed the proposition to be placed on the ballot in
the November 1925 election, and the vote Zas 12,106 to 4,200 against it.
Forty years later, Robert 0oses Zould remember hoZ he had felt in 1925
Zhen he heard the +empstead referendum results. "It looked like Ze'd lost
Jones Beach," he Zould recall. "It looked absolutely hopeless." 0ore than
Zith any other single project, his dreams had been tied up Zith Jones
Beach. And so had his sense of urgency. +e had been hearing Zith
increasing frequency rumors that real estate developers Zere making deals
Zith Doughty's machine to have the toZn turn over the land to them for
private development. In his mind's eye, he could see those vast stretches of
untouched sand covered Zith shabby bungaloZs. +e kneZ there Zould
never be another opportunity to create a great beach so close to NeZ York
City. "You knoZ," he Zould recall, "if  Ze lost Deer Range, it Zould have
been bad, but it Zouldn't have been the end of the Zorld. But if Ze had lost
Jones Beach ..." +is voice Zould trail off. And then, remembering, he
Zould say, "And I thought Ze had lost it."

At the end of 1925, Robert 0oses might Zell have thought he had lost his
entire Long Island dream.

The fact that development of Jones Beach could not be begun Zithout
approving votes from three toZnships—and that the one toZnship that had
voted had disapproved by a three-to-one margin—Zas only part of the
story.

277
Not only the options for beautiful Sunken 0eadoZ and for the beach at
+ampton Bays but those for the Southern State 3arkZay right-of-Zay for
Zhich he had drunk beer Zith farmers had lapsed for lack of money to
honor them.

+is negotiations Zith the North Shore barons for right-of-Zay for the
Northern State 3arkZay had dragged to a complete halt. +e had secured
easements from NeZ York City for its Zatershed properties, but he had no
money to develop those properties as parks, and there Zas no money in
sight to enable him to do so. There Zas no money in sight to develop any
park on Long Island. The Legislature had refused to appropriate any in
1925, and there Zas no reason to believe that the Long Island barons Zould
be any less secure in their control of the Legislature in 1926.

Al Smith's loyalty and August +eckscher's money had pulled him back
from the edge of the precipice along Zhich he had been tightrope-Zalking
in the Taylor Estate affair, but he Zas shortly—all too shortly—to stand trial
in the affair, and the outcome of the trial might Zell result in the loss to the
state of that property, too. And even if +eckscher's gift let the state keep the
Taylor Estate, there Zas no money in sight to legitimati]e the appropriations
at 0ontauk 3oint  and Lloyd Neck.

The only concrete result of all the talk about parkZays on Long Island had
been an increase in the rate at Zhich real estate promoters Zere littering the
Island Zith their roZs of  houses. Every Zeek that Zinter brought the

announcement of another large tract of farmland bought by a developer Zho
Zas planning to erect model homes on it in the spring.

It had been more than a year since Robert 0oses had announced his revised
and broadened park and parkZay plan, a plan Zhich had, after all, included
parks and parkZays not only on Long Island but throughout the rest of NeZ
York State, along the Niagara Frontier, in the Genesee Valley, in the
farmland of the Taconic region, and among the peaks of the Alleghenies,
Catskills and Adirondacks. NoZ, more than a year later, parks and
parkZays Zere still located noZhere but in the map of 0oses' imagination.
After all the talking, all the planning, all the fighting, they simply didn't
e[ist. And at the end of 1925, there seemed little possibility that they Zould

278
come into e[istence at any time in the foreseeable future. If one looked
ahead a decade, even a generation, it seemed unlikely that any substantial
part of the dream Zould be reality.

:ithin   three years, almost all of it Zould be reality.

the houses, subcontractors and material-supply houses for the factories.
This meant a burgeoning in land sales, insurance premiums, legal fees—in
all the areas in Zhich politicians groZ fat. It meant as Zell an intangible,
but intense, additional attraction for politicians: in a dormant area,
opportunities Zere limited because everything Zas cut and dried, prices for
land, for instance, being Zell knoZn and firmly established; in an area
opened by a road, everything Zas changing almost on a day-to-day basis;
opportunities Zere Zide open.

To take advantage of the financial opportunities provided by a parkZay, a
politician had to have foreknoZledge. If he Zanted to be first on line Zith
his recommendations for construction contract aZards, he had to knoZ that
the highZay Zas going to be built. If he Zanted to buy land that Zas to be
acquired for the highZay's right-of-Zay or land strategically near the
highZay, he had to knoZ Zhere the highZay Zas going to be built, not its
general location but its precise route, so that he could buy the e[act lots that
Zould be acquired, and he had to knoZ before the oZners kneZ so that, not
knoZing that their land might be valuable, they Zould sell cheap. And
politicians had a Zeapon they could use in obtaining such advance
information; if they did not get it, they Zould  not approve the building of
the highZay.

The young Robert 0oses, the idealist of Yale and O[ford and the 0unicipal
Civil Service Commission, Zould not have even considered trading
contracts or information for approval. Even the older Robert 0oses of the
NeZ York State Association, a 0oses more admiring of the Zays of
politicians, Zould not have done it; that 0oses could in 1922 still reserve
his bitterest State Bulletin sallies for the Nassau County Republican
machine because of its link Zith "political contractors." Even the 0oses of
1924, doffing his principles to lighten himself for the pursuit of his greatest
dream, Zouldn't do it. No sooner had he announced his park plan in 1924
than intimates of the Governor Zrote him asking for advance information

279
on parkZay location; 0oses indignantly refused to give it to them. Senate
Finance Committee Chairman Charles J. +eZitt offered to sell the State
3arks Council a tract of land he oZned in Fair +aven; despite +eZitt's
importance to his dream, 0oses refused to buy.

0oses apparently took the same attitude in his 1925 attempt to persuade
+empstead ToZnship to cede him its portion of Jones Beach. +empstead
Zas controlled by Nassau County GO3 leader G. :ilbur  Doughty. "Today
they talk about political bosses," Leonard :. +all,  former national
chairman of the Republican 3arty, Zould say in the 1960's. "They don't
knoZ Zhat a real boss Zas. Doughty Zas a real boss. :hen he spoke, the
discussion Zas over. +e alZays kept his Zord; he Zas knoZn for that. But
cross him and you Zere finished. There's no one like him today. :e used to
call him the Last of the 0ohicans." A square-faced man Zith a Zalrus
mustache, Doughty had an almost visionary concept that rural Long Island
Zould one day be a heavily populated suburban area and Zas alZays
interested in suggestions for public Zorks that could help open the Island to
development. But his vision Zas heavily mortgaged to practicality: he ran

one of the most corrupt political machines in the state—"In Nassau
County," one observer said, "]oning Zas bought and sold like potatoes"—
and much of the corruption revolved around public Zorks. Doughty's
brother-in-laZ, "8ncle  Andy" :eston,   Zas president of Booth & :eston,
the largest contracting firm in the county, and Booth & :eston, along Zith
+endrickson Bros., Inc., another firm Zith Zhich  Doughty had close ties,
Zere habitually given the lion's share of county contracts. And since many
GO3 county committeemen happened to be on the payroll of the tZo
construction firms, the firms helped Doughty keep them in line. The link
betZeen Nassau politicians and contractors had come close to surfacing in
1922; in that year, a Supreme Court Justice had impaneled a grand jury to
investigate it and the investigation had already turned up a loan from Booth
& :eston   to Assemblyman Thomas A. 0c:hinney    before 0c:hinney
persuaded the Legislature to pass a bill establishing a commission to
investigate the judge, a move that effectively stymied the grand jury. 0oses
had folloZed the case closely in his State Bulletin; calling the bill
"legislative brigandry," he had nominated it for his ":orst  Bill  of the
Session" aZard and had castigated the Nassau GO3 machine and

280
0c:hinney,    Zhom he termed "the creature of the machine." 0oses must
have knoZn Zhat it took to get things done in Nassau County, but he
apparently Zasn't Zilling to do them; the best proof of that Zas, perhaps,
the defeat of his Jones Beach referendum.

281
But in late 1925, the dream all but dead, 0oses held a series of private
meetings Zith Doughty. There is, of course, no record of Zhat transpired at
these meetings, and no proof that any deal Zas entered into. But certain
developments ensued:

• 0oses announced that future planning for Jones Beach Zould be
conducted in conjunction Zith a delegation from +empstead ToZnship,
Zhich Zould,  of course, have access to commission plans shoZing the
precise location of the proposed 0eadoZbrook CauseZay to Jones Beach,
and the chairman of the +empstead delegation turned out to be
Assemblyman Thomas A. 0c:hinney.   And 0oses  Zas soon meeting
regularly Zith "the creature of the machine" on an e[tremely friendly basis.

• :ithin   tZo  months after 0oses and 0c:hinney    began meeting, a laZyer
Zho Zas a member of the Nassau GO3's inner circle formed a corporation
Zith a group of associates. The only business the corporation ever
transacted Zas the purchase and sale of land, and the only land it ever
purchased and sold Zas 265 acres of undeveloped, all but Zorthless
meadoZ and sZamp land, 99.5 acres of Zhich Zould become the right-of-
Zay for the 0eadoZbrook  CauseZay, the remaining 165.5 acres of Zhich
Zould, Zhen the causeZay had been completed and the land's value
enhanced, be sold by the corporation to private developers.

• :hen   the contracts for the causeZay, and for other 3ark Commission
projects on Long Island, Zere aZarded, a substantial number Zent to 8ncle
Andy :eston  and +endrickson Bros., Inc.

• And the Last of the 0ohicans abruptly left the tepee of the commission's
opponents and smoked the peace pipe Zith Robert 0oses, supporting every
one of 0oses' Long Island proposals.

Doughty's friendship Zas to give 0oses his first real hold on Jones Beach.
After the meetings betZeen the tZo men, the Republican boss told 0oses to
resubmit, Zith some minor revisions, the proposal so soundly defeated in
the November 1925 referendum. 0oses did so in November 1926, and the
three-to-one margin against the proposal magically became a three-to-one
margin in favor, +empstead ToZn voting, 18,872 to 5,076, to cede to the

282
Long Island 3ark Commission "all right, title, interest and jurisdiction ... to
all that certain toZn land . . . commonly knoZn as Jones Beach."

0ore  immediately, the friendship altered the balance of poZer in the over-
all state park fight. On December 21, 1925, ten days after 0oses agreed to
cooperate Zith 0c:hinney    and the +empstead ToZn delegation, the
Suffolk County Board of Supervisors passed a resolution asking the
Legislature to abolish the Long Island 3ark Commission. They sent it to the
Nassau Board of Supervisors, e[pecting that body to concur in the request,
as it had the year before. To the shock of the Suffolk officials, Nassau
declined to do so. The tZo counties in Zhich the 3ark Commission Zas
operating Zere no longer united in opposing it.

The GO3 front in Albany Zas no longer solid, either, because of the votes
Doughty controlled in the Senate and Assembly.

Republican ranks Zere already under severe pressure over parks. In NeZ
York City, Al Smith, taking command of Tammany +all in fact if  not in title
after Charlie 0urphy's death, had snatched the Democratic mayoral
nomination aZay from Red 0ike  +ylan and handed it to Jimmy :alker,
and :alker,  at his inauguration on January 1, 1926, had announced support
of the vast program of city park-land acquisitions prepared by the city's
3ark Association Zith 0oses'  help. There Zould be a referendum in
November to authori]e the necessary bonds, and Zomen's clubs and a
reformers' Committee of One Thousand had already launched a mammoth
public education campaign. All in all, 1926 Zas not the year to be opposing
parks.

8pstate Republican legislators might be insulated in their rotten boroughs,
but it Zasn't only legislators Zhose names Zould be on the ballot in 1926.
Al Smith Zould  be campaigning for re-election, and Republican strategists
Zere determined to knock him out of the Governorship. They had already
persuaded the man they regarded as their strongest candidate, Ogden
Livingston 0ills,   to leave Congress and run against him. And there Zas a
8nited States Senate seat up for grabs, too, and the present occupant of the
seat Zas James J. :adsZorth himself, the former Assembly Speaker and
one of the state's most poZerful Republicans.

283
No sooner had the Legislature convened, therefore, than :adsZorth
summoned the legislative leaders to an Albany hotel suite and told them a
compromise on the park fight Zas in order. The compromise could not be
over the Northern State 3arkZay, he said; the interests of too many of their
friends Zere involved there. But the Taylor Estate Zas a different story;

+avemeyer, the only Timber 3ointer Zith real influence, didn't seem really
interested; 0acy did—but 0acy  had little influence of his oZn.  The Taylor
Estate, the Republican leaders agreed, could be sacrificed.

Smith, Zith his park plans stalled and the threat of the potentially
embarrassing Taylor Estate court fight hanging over him in an election year,
Zas not averse to a compromise. In a secret meeting Zith +eZitt and
+utchinson, the Governor agreed that he Zould not ask for funds to acquire
right-of-Zay  for the Northern State 3arkZay until 0oses came up Zith a
route acceptable to the barons, and he agreed that, even after the right-of-
Zay had been acquired, he Zould not ask for funds to begin construction
until the Southern State 3arkZay had reached the point at Zhich it Zould
connect Zith the Jones Beach causeZay, a point about fifteen miles into
Nassau County. In return, +eZitt and +utchinson agreed that the Southern
State 3arkZay could be built and that the entire $15,000,000 proceeds of
the park referendum Zould be segregated in 1926; Zork could therefore
begin immediately on 0oses' upstate park program and his Long Island
projects, including Jones Beach, the causeZay leading to it from the
Southern State 3arkZay—and Deer Range (soon to be August +eckscher)
State 3ark.

Since the 1925 Taylor Estate fight had revolved around the question of
Zhether an outside agency, the Republican-controlled State Land Board,
should have authority over the State 3arks Council, a face-saving device
had to be Zorked out on that point so that it Zould appear that neither side
had surrendered. On January 26, 1926, Smith and the GO3 legislative
leaders announced that they had agreed that e[penditures of the
$15,000,000 Zould be supervised, as the GO3 had insisted—but, as Smith
had insisted, not by the Land Board. Instead, it Zas announced,
e[penditures Zould be supervised by a committee of three: Smith, +eZitt
and +utchinson.

284
0acy  got his first hint of Zhat Zas happening Zhen he learned that the
segregations of the $15,000,000 included an item of $25,000 for "Deer
Range 3ark, permanent improvement of buildings," and $170,000 to begin
the purchase of right-of-Zay for the Southern State 3arkZay, that strip of
concrete 0acy had alZays been afraid Zould reach out toZard East Islip.
Rushing to Albany, he confronted +utchinson, and the assemblyman
ansZered his questions evasively. The amateur in politics reali]ed that the
professionals had betrayed him.

+eZitt  and +utchinson had been pleased Zith the compromise Zith Smith.
By postponing Zork on the Northern State 3arkZay until fifteen miles of
the Southern State Zere built, they thought they Zere consigning the former
road to some far-distant limbo; construction of the fifteen-mile-long Bron[
River 3arkZay, after all, had taken fourteen years. And since they could
outvote Smith tZo to one on the committee set up to supervise park
e[penditures, they assumed they could keep the pace of construction on the
Southern State sloZ.

Economy, moreover, Zas as important to them as delay; their upstate

conservatism had been affronted by the thought of spending even a million
dollars on parks and parkZays in a single section of the state; they could see
that the actual amount involved Zould eventually be far higher than the
million, but they Zanted to keep it doZn to the bare minimum that they felt
Zas all the state could afford.

But no sooner had they given 0oses $170,000 for Southern State right-of-
Zay, confident that that amount Zould alloZ him to purchase no more than
a mile or tZo, than the Nassau County Board of Supervisors, noZ suddenly,
and mysteriously, enthusiastic over 0oses' projects, purchased additional
miles and presented them to the Long Island 3ark Commission as a gift.
3laying on the greed of real estate developers Zho oZned land in the
parkZay's path, 0oses persuaded them to donate right-of-Zay so that the
rest of their property could be opened to development. Suddenly aZakened
to the fact that the NeZ York City Zatershed property could be used as
right-of-Zay, +eZitt   and +utchinson reali]ed Zith  a shock that the land for
the Southern State Zas almost all in 0oses' hands—all the Zay out to that
magic point Zhere it Zould trigger the start of Zork on the Northern State.

285
Although no funds had been appropriated for surveying and engineering,
there Zere suddenly surveyors and engineers out on the right-of-Zay, men
furnished by the State Department of 3ublic :orks—Zhose Long Island
office just happened to be located at the former August Belmont Estate near
Babylon that 0oses had acquired and turned into a state park, making the
old Belmont 0ansion his headquarters. And these men, they Zere told,
Zere draZing up plans Zith unprecedented speed. Even as they digested
this neZs, a bill Zas introduced in the Legislature providing for a million
dollars for "the construction, reconstruction and Zidening of highZay
routes in Nassau and Erie Counties"—including $350,000 for "construction
of the Southern State 3arkZay." They had no trouble understanding Zhy
Erie, a Republican stronghold, had been given even more money than
Nassau in the bill—Erie's legislators Zould be even more determined than
Nassau's that the bill should pass, and an alliance of the GO3 legislators
from these tZo counties Zith the Democrats Zould make it impossible for
+eZitt  and +utchinson to prevent its passage.

The parks on Long Island Zere also being developed at a rate they could
hardly believe, since they had kept appropriations for such development
small. :hen   they checked, they found that park roads Zere being
constructed by D3:   creZs and park buildings refurbished by Conservation
Department creZs.

They took a look at the bills Trubee Davison had introduced for 0oses* in
1924 and found in them a specific provision stating that Zhile the Long
Island 3ark Commission Zould have final say on the design of parkZays—
as Zell as full control of them Zhen completed—their physical construction
could be financed out of D3:   allocations. They found that the landscaping
Zas being financed out of "routine" 1926 Conservation Department
requests for "tree nurseries." The Lloyd Neck lighthouse property Zas being
developed Zith a Conservation Department appropriation for "oyster cul-

ture." :hen   they Za[ed indignant, they Zere told blandly that the
lighthouse property could certainly be used for oyster culture. There Zas
nothing the slightest bit illegal about anything 0oses Zas doing. The best
bill drafter in Albany, they reali]ed, had been at Zork again.

286
And Zhen they protested to the Governor, he bourbon-coated the pill he
Zas making them sZalloZ. Inviting  them to see for themselves Zhat 0oses
Zas doing, he suggested they come to NeZ York City first, sleep over at the
Biltmore and then go on to Long Island in the morning. At the Biltmore, as
0oses Zould  later recall, "the Governor got +eZitt and +utchinson to stay
overnight in his apartment. They Zere drinking bo]os, you knoZ, and they
Zere really putting it aZay. As the evening Zore on, the Governor put some
records on and he Zas teaching these tZo felloZs to dance. I left at 2 a.m.
[+enry]  Lut]  [a 0oses aide] stayed until five and he told me that it Zas
about then that the Governor and he and +eZitt put +utchinson to bed.
+eZitt  got up at seven the ne[t morning and ordered a big breakfast for
himself and the Governor and they Zent in to ask +utchinson Zhat he
Zanted and +utchinson sort of groaned, lying there in bed, and said,
'Governor, go aZay. The stomach revolts at the thought of food.'" During
the tour, Smith Zas at his friendliest. "You see," 0oses Zould say, "in so
many cases, things come doZn to personalities, to the human factor. And
they loved the Governor." And even if they hadn't, Zhat, after all, could
they do? The +ighZay and Conservation Department budgets had already
been approved. 0oney Zas being spent under them. If they tried to reopen
the budgets, it Zould be a mess. And Zhat Zould the press say? After all,
there Zas the election coming. They decided not to interfere Zith the
program.

The court fight still loomed ahead of 0oses, but Smith Zas able to help him
Zith that, too.

During 1926, 0oses continued his technique of stalling the trial Zhile
talking as though there Zere not the slightest doubt about its outcome. In an
article he Zrote in 0ay  outlining the over-all progress of the state park plan,
he said blandly, "The state has acquired Deer Range 3ark." All through
0ay, 0oses'  attorneys continued filing motions and, Zhen judges overruled
the motions, appealing their decisions to higher courts, and Zhen the higher
courts threZ out the appeals, taking them to still higher courts. Three
separate dates Zere set for trial—and on each of them appeals Zere still
pending and judges had to grant the commission postponements. All
through 0ay, 0oses'  laborers Zere converting the ballroom of the old
Taylor mansion into a cafeteria, the sitting room into a comfort station,

287
setting up tents on the beach to serve as bathhouses and hacking rough
roads through the Zoods so that motorists could reach them. By mid-0ay,
"Deer Range State 3ark" Zas opened to the public.

On 0ay  25, State Supreme Court Justice Selah B. Strong received Zord
from Albany that the state's highest court, the Court of Appeals, had throZn
out the last of 0oses' appeals, in a decision Zhich supported every one of
0acy's contentions, even to the point of saying that if the commission's

right to peremptory appropriation Zas upheld, "the conclusion logically
folloZs that it has a charter Zide as the Zind, Zithal, and might sei]e for
park purposes all the lands in Nassau and Suffolk counties." Scheduling the
trial for June 4, Justice Strong told :alter +.  3ollack, Zho  Zas heading the
team of five attorneys handling the case for the commission, that he Zould
not postpone it again for any reason.

On June 4, 3ollack Zas not in court. One of his four colleagues told Strong
—falsely—that 3ollack Zas occupied in another courtroom. Strong said the
trial Zas going on anyZay. ":e   Zill  not participate," 3ollack's colleague
said—and all four commission attorneys Zalked out of the courtroom,
leaving the commission Zithout counsel.

Strong adjourned the trial for a day to give 3ollack a chance to appear. On
the ne[t day, 3ollack and his colleagues Zere again absent. Strong
adjourned it again—and again no attorneys appeared. On the fourth day, the
judge alloZed a jury to be chosen and told 0acy's attorney, Charles +.
Tuttle, to present his case. The jury found that both appropriations of the
Taylor Estate had been illegal, the first because the commission did not
possess $250,000, the second because Zhile it had the money, the money
came from a private gift instead of from a legislative segregation, the only
legal source of funds for a peremptory appropriation. The jury assessed
each of the three commissioners—Robert 0oses, ToZnsend Scudder and
Clifford Jackson—$22,000 apiece in punitive damages. Strong "perpetually
enjoined" the commission from entering the Taylor Estate and ordered the
state troopers removed forthZith. :atching  the judge sign the injunction
and hand it to the Suffolk County sheriff, Zatching the sheriff leave the
courtroom to serve the injunction on the troopers, 0acy thought he had Zon
at last. Declared Tuttle: "The vindication is noZ complete."

288
Bella and Emanuel 0oses Zere at their summer lodge at Camp 0adison.
Every morning a 0adison +ouse social Zorker delivered a NeZ York
Times to their door. :hen  he handed it to them on the morning after the
verdict, and they leafed through it—all the trial stories Zere on the inside
pages noZ —and learned of the $22,000 judgment against their son, they
groaned, and Bella 0oses said, "Oh, he never earned a dollar in his life and
noZ Ze'll  have to pay this." The social Zorker recalls: "It Zas just assumed
that they Zould pay it. They alZays paid all his debts."

The day after the verdict, 3ollack, suddenly free of other court
engagements, appealed on the grounds that the Long Island State 3ark
Commission had not been represented by counsel. A Brooklyn Supreme
Court Justice denied the appeal, calling the lack of representation a
"deliberate and intentional" attempt to delay the proceedings. But the
Appellate Division agreed to hear the appeal—at its fall term—and
invalidated Strong's injunction until then. The troopers returned to the
property and, during the summer, 0oses took reporters on trips to "Deer
Range 3ark," and the reporters rhapsodi]ed about the families enjoying its
facilities. In the fall,

the Appellate Division upheld 3ollack's appeal and ordered a neZ trial. And
this trial, Zhich Zas to be the closest thing to a legal shoZdoZn that Zas to
occur in the case, Zas to contain a neZ factor: Al Smith's appearance as a
Zitness for 0oses.

Smith's appearance marked the "first time in a generation, probably longer,
that a chief e[ecutive of the state has appeared in court in the role of a
Zitness." 3latoons of reporters folloZed the Governor as he, 0oses and
0rs.  0oskoZit]   boarded a Long Island Rail Road train for the three-hour
trip to Riverhead. At the station, he Zas met by an American Legion band
Zhich played "The SideZalks of NeZ York"  as it accompanied him to the
courthouse. There, he Zas escorted to the chambers of Justice James A.
Dunne. The Governor talked Zith Dunne in private and then the judge
escorted him into the courtroom so that he could give his testimony—he
Zas on the stand for only fifteen minutes, spent most of the time recounting
the Biltmore hearing and Zas not cross-e[amined—and as soon as he

289
stepped off the stand, the judge adjourned court. The Governor joined him
in his chambers for lunch.

In the neZspapers, Smith's appearance dZarfed the legal issues involved in
the trial. :hether   it had the same effect in the mind of Justice Dunne is
unknoZn, Zhich is unfortunate because the judge, not the jury, decided the
case, and his directions to the jury, Zhich precluded it from making a
decision on the essential point at issue, Zere rather sharply at variance Zith
those of the many other judges Zho had been involved Zith the case.

Dunne directed the jury to find that the first appropriation of the Taylor
Estate had been illegal but that the second had been legal and the property
therefore noZ belonged to the Long Island 3ark Commission. The only
function of the jury, he told it, Zas to decide Zhether 3auchogue had
suffered substantial financial damages as a result of the first sei]ure. If it
had not, he said, the jury should fi[ the damages against the commission at
si[ cents. The jury did so. 0acy Zas to believe until  he died that Smith's
entrance in the case had played a role in the judge's removal from the jury's
hands of the right to make a decision on the key point in the case: the
legality of the second appropriation. "The Governor came doZn and took
the judge out to lunch—Zhat chance did Ze have?" he Zas to say.

:hether   Dunne's decision Zould have remained the binding legal Zord in
the case if both sides had continued the legal battle on equal terms, if both
sides had continued to make use of all their remedies at laZ—if the
3auchogue Corporation had been able to press through higher courts its
appeals as the Long Island 3ark Commission had been able to press its
appeals—is impossible to determine. For both sides Zeren't equal.

LaZsuits take money. The state's supply of this commodity is comparatively
bottomless. The private citi]en's is not. And noZ :.   .ingsland  0acy  Zas
running out of money.

0acy  himself Zas not Zealthy. +avemeyer Zas, but, saying "This . . .

should be considered a business affair," he had told 0acy he Zould have to
pay all legal e[penses over $25,000.

290
At the time, 0acy  had thought that $25,000 Zould be ample. But as the
commission's laZyers began to pile appeal on top of appeal, he Zrote
+avemeyer that, to a layman, "the ramifications of this litigation are almost
beyond belief." And ramifications meant money. If 0oses' laZyers Zere
constantly filing neZ briefs, 0acy's  had to file briefs in reply. The briefs
had to be printed in standard legal form, and they Zere running into
thousands of pages. The printing bill for a single appeal ran to $3,652.63.
The stenographic transcript for a single appeal cost $545. And finally, of
course, there Zere the laZyers' fees. LaZyers like Tuttle and the e[perts
required to handle appeals didn't come cheap. The first bill for "services
rendered" Zas delivered to 0acy on April 28, 1925. It Zas for $10,000.
Even before the trial in Dunne's court began, the $25,000 mark had been
reached. To 0acy, the idealist, the case represented something that Zas
more important than money. :hen +avemeyer Zrote, "This  ... is my limit,"
0acy  replied that he Zould carry on alone. Appeals attorneys told him that
if he Zas Zilling  to press the fight vigorously, he Zould probably Zin,
although the victory might not come until the case had been transferred out
of the state courts and into the 8nited States Supreme Court, Zhich Zould
focus on the basic constitutionality of the use by a state agency of one
individual's money to sei]e the property of another. 0acy authori]ed them
to proceed. But 0oses' attorneys continued to make motions and file briefs,
and Zhen 0acy's appeal from Dunne's decision finally reached the
Appellate Division in February 1928, his legal costs had mounted to
$43,192.61 —a burden beyond his financial resources. By April 1928, his
attorneys Zere dunning him for payment of a $1,100 bill. Although the case
Zould eventually be brought before the Court of Appeals, Zhich upheld
Dunne's decision, and an attempt Zas made to bring it to the 8nited States
Supreme Court—Justice Louis Brandeis brought the legal fight to an end on
January 21, 1929, four years after the Biltmore hearing, by refusing to issue
a Zrit of certiorari Zhich  Zould  have enabled the Court to hear the case—it
Zas obviously not pressed vigorously in these last stages, as though the case
Zere really over already.

And, in fact, it Zas. 0oses had never stopped developing the Taylor Estate
—as if its acquisition Zere a fait accompli. By the spring of 1927, he had
laid concrete for access roads and parking fields, set out scores of stone
fireplaces and picnic tables, erected Zooden bathhouses Zith shoZers and

291
lockers and finished renovating the mansion and outbuildings, at a total cost
of hundreds of thousands of dollars. During the summer of 1927, it had
hundreds of thousands of visitors. By the time the higher courts came to
rule on the question of Zhether the Taylor Estate Zas a park, it Zas a park.
:hat   Zas a judge to do? Tell the state to tear up the roads and tear doZn the
buildings, to destroy Zhat hundreds of thousands of dollars of the public's
money had been spent to build? Tell the people Zho had visited the Taylor
Estate that they could visit it no more? In theory, of course, judges should
not be influenced by such considerations. But judges are human. And their

susceptibility to such considerations Zas undoubtedly increased by 0oses'
Zillingness to attack publicly those of them Zho ruled against him, as he
had done to the "local judge," thereby letting the public knoZ e[actly Zho it
Zas Zho Zas closing the park to them.

The final hearing before the State Court of Appeals Zas the tZenty-fifth
separate appellate proceeding in the Taylor Estate case. The case Zas, the
+erald Tribune said, "a landmark in eminent domain."

It Zas also a landmark in the lifescapes of tZo men. :. .ingsland   0acy,
Zho had possessed before it a vague desire to enter politics, had been
precipitated by it into the political arena—and had found he enjoyed
fighting there. And 0acy  had learned in his first bout many tricks. After
fighting Robert 0oses, he Zas to say, fighting anyone else Zas easy.
Becoming active in 1927 in"fhe Suffolk County Republican organi]ation,
Zithin  a year he threZ out its leader and sei]ed his place. :hen the
Depression loosened for a moment the barons' stronghold on the state's
GO3 organi]ation, 0acy  tore it from their grasp and by 1932 Zas
Republican State Chairman. Although the GO3's Old Guard later re-formed
and ousted him from the chairmanship, he Zas to rule Suffolk County,
unchallenged, for more than thirty years. :hen there came a time Zhen it
Zould be useful to him to be in the State Senate, he sent himself to the State
Senate; Zhen he Zanted to go to Congress, he sent himself to Congress.
0acy's vieZs  Zere liberal, and he introduced progressive governmental
innovations in Suffolk County, but to achieve his aims he ruled the county
as an old-time political satrapy. Ruthless and cunning, he seemed to knoZ

292
every trick of bending men to his Zill, and he bent them so successfully that
.ingsland  0acy  Zas called "the Little .ing   of Suffolk  County."

And Zhen, after 0acy  had fought his Zay to poZer, Robert 0oses, needing
his help, made overtures of friendship, 0acy accepted them. Although the
strength of their personalities often made them clash, the tZo one-time
"amateurs in politics" Zere for more than thirty years the closest of political
allies, allies so close, in fact, that Zhen, in 1962, cancer-ravaged .ing 0acy
kneZ he Zas about to die, 0oses Zas the only person outside his immediate
family Zhom  he Zanted to see.

Robert 0oses had also learned from the Taylor Estate fight, his first use of
poZer, lessons that Zould govern his behavior for the rest of his life.

One, hammered home in his consciousness by the results of his
accommodation Zith G. :ilbur   Doughty, Zas that the simplest method of
accomplishing his aims Zas to use the poZer he possessed in all its
manifestations, even those that as recently as a year previously he had
shrunk from using. So thoroughly did he embrace this lesson—and the
"creature of the machine" that Zas its embodiment—that Zhen, in 1927, a
vacancy occurred on the Long Island 3ark Commission, he had Smith
appoint 0c:hinney    to it.

The simplicity—combined Zith  the feeling of accomplishment—might Zell
have made 0oses ask himself if it really made any difference Zhether

he Zorked Zith Tom 0c:hinney.     :hat   difference did it make if the state
purchased the right-of-Zay for the 0eadoZbrook CauseZay from a bunch
of farmers or from a bunch of Republican insiders? :hat difference did it
make if he gave a road-building contract to 8ncle Andy :eston? :hat
difference did it make to the public—and Zhat difference did it make to
him? :hat   did he care if Doughty's friends made money from his dreams?
If they did, he had learned, the dream Zould become reality. If they did not,
he had learned, it Zouldn't. And the dream Zas the important thing; the
dream Zas Zhat mattered.

This lesson Robert 0oses translated into phrases that began to appear in his
letters and, according to associates, his conversation after the Taylor Estate

293
fight: "The important thing is to get things done." "You can't make an
omelet Zithout breaking eggs." "If the end doesn't justify the means, Zhat
does?"

Another lesson 0oses learned Zas that, in the eyes of the public, the end, if
not justifying the means, at least made them unimportant. Al Smith had
succeeded in blurring in the public's mind the legal technicalities of the
fight—by focusing the public's mind on the end of the fight: parks.

The value of parks as an issue Zas another lesson. As long as you Zere
fighting for parks, you could hardly help being a hero. :hen  the Taylor
fight started, he himself had been all but unknoZn. During the fight, he had
been portrayed in a hundred front-page stories and a hundred editorials as a
hero, as a man "acting in the interest of the people at large and of all future
generations."

This lesson Robert 0oses Zould often recite to associates. +e Zould put it
this Zay: As long as you're fighting for parks, you can be sure of having
public opinion on your side. And as long as you have public opinion on
your side, you're safe. "As long as you're on the side of parks, you're on the
side of the angels. You can't lose."

There Zere other lessons, too. :hatever the motivation that had impelled
him to take the risk of starting to transform the Taylor Estate into a park
Zhile the courts had still seemed likely to rule that it Zas not a park —a
fearless determination to do Zhat he kneZ Zas right regardless of the
consequences, a blind faith in Smith's ability to rescue him from
consequences, a desperation to see at last the beginning of the reali]ation of
at least one of his dreams, or, perhaps, an insight, the insight of a political
genius, that physical development Zould help rather than hurt his cause—
the risk had been magnificently justified. And he had understood the
significance of that justification. Once you did something physically, it Zas
very hard for even a judge to undo it. If judges, Zho had to submit
themselves to the decision of the electorate only infrequently, Zere thus
hogtied by the physical beginning of a project, hoZ much more so Zould be
public officials Zho  had to stand for re-election year by year? If he had
needed a gift from August +eckscher to make victory certain, Zhat did that
prove? Only that once you physically began a project, there Zould alZays

294
be some Zay found of obtaining the money to complete it. "Once you sink
that first stake" he Zould often say, "they'll never make you pull it up."

li

These lessons had other implications. If ends justified means, and if the
important thing in building a project Zas to get it started, then any means
that got it started Zere justified. Furnishing misleading information about it
Zas justified; so Zas underestimating its costs.

0isleading  and underestimating, in fact, might be the only Zay to get a
project started. Since his projects Zere unprecedentedly vast, one of the
biggest difficulties in getting them started Zas the fear of public officials—
not only upstate conservatives but liberal public officials as Zell—
concerned Zith the over-all functioning of the state that the state couldn't
afford the projects, that the projects, beneficial though they might be, Zould
drain off a share of the state's Zealth incommensurate Zith their benefits.

But Zhat if you didn't tell  the officials hoZ much the projects Zould cost?
:hat   if you let the legislators knoZ about only a fraction of Zhat you kneZ
Zould be the projects' ultimate e[pense?

Once they had authori]ed that small initial e[penditure and you had spent it,
they Zould not be able to avoid giving you the rest Zhen you asked for it.
+oZ  could they? If they refused to give you the rest of the money, Zhat
they had given you Zould be Zasted, and that Zould make them look bad in
the eyes of the public. And if they said you had misled them, Zell, they
Zere not supposed to be misled. If they had been misled, that Zould mean
that they hadn't investigated the projects thoroughly, and had therefore been
derelict in their oZn duty. The possibilities for a polite but effective form of
political blackmail Zere endless. Once a Legislature gave you money to
start a project, it Zould be virtually forced to give you the money to finish
it. The stakes you drove should be thin-pointed—Zedge-shaped, in fact—
on the end. Once you got the end of the Zedge for a project into the public
treasury, it Zould be easy to hammer in the rest.

Another lesson 0oses learned from his first use of poZer Zas the latitude
given him by its possession.

295
In the Taylor Estate fight, 0oses had broken the laZ. On this point there
had been no judicial disagreement; no court had ruled that his first
appropriation of the estate Zas legal; every court that had ruled on it had
ruled it illegal.

But Zhat had happened to him as a result? +e had been fined si[ cents —
tZo cents, actually, if he Zanted to insist that the other tZo Long Island
park commissioners pay their share of the fine.

3art of the reason Zas the +eckscher gift, of course. But a more basic one
Zas that poZer—specifically, the poZer that came Zith the money he could
dispose of as a state official—insulated him from the laZ's retribution. +e
had been able to employ laZyers numerous enough and clever enough to
utili]e  the technicalities of the laZ to frustrate the intent of the laZ, to throZ
enough sand into the machinery of justice to sloZ its gears sufficiently so
that they could not mesh and produce the conclusion Zhich its spirit
demanded. Even an opponent as determined as :. .ingsland 0acy—and as
Zell equipped Zith money as 0acy  Zas—had had to abandon his search for
ultimate justice. Justice delayed, the Taylor Estate case proved, Zas truly
justice denied. And, 0oses must have reali]ed (for he demonstrated

the reali]ation in subsequent actions), as long as he had public poZer, as
long as he Zas representing the state, he Zould have the means of
employing as many laZyers as he needed, of delaying, and thereby denying,
justice to his opponents, of shielding himself from its punishments. If there
Zas one laZ for the poor, Zho have neither money nor influence, and
another laZ for the rich, Zho have both, there is still a third laZ for the
public official  Zith real poZer, Zho has more of both. After the Taylor
Estate fight, Robert 0oses must have knoZn—he proved it by his actions—
that he could, Zith far more impunity than any private citi]en, defy the laZ.
+e gloried in the knoZledge; he boasted and bragged about it. For the rest
of his life, Zhen a friend, an enemy—or one of his oZn laZyers—Zould
protest that something he Zas doing or Zas proposing to do Zas illegal,
0oses Zould  throZ back his head and say, Zith a broad grin, a touch of
e[aggeration and much more than a touch of bravado: "Nothing I have ever
done has been tinged Zith legality."

296
There Zas one more lesson. It Zas one he had started learning years before,
and noZ it had finally sunk in. :ould   dreams—dreams of real si]e and
significance and scope—the accomplishment his mother had taught him
Zas so important, ever be reali]ed by the methods of the men in Zhose
ranks he had once marched, the reformers and idealists? +e asked the
question of himself and he ansZered it himself. No. The method he had
adopted to turn his Long Island dream into reality Zas the Zay to
accomplish something. It Zas the Zay to get things done. It Zas, he
concluded, the only Zay.

One million dollars Zas the amount available to Long Island out of the
$15,000,000. +e had told the Legislature that one million Zould be the cost
of the Long Island program. +e kneZ that actually the million Zould pay
for only a fraction—a small fraction—of the program. But he had learned
hoZ to get things done. :ith  the million,  he drove a lot of stakes.

Instead of spending the million to complete a feZ parks, he spent it to
acquire the land for many—for 0ontauk 3oint State 3ark and +ither +ills
State 3ark and :ildZood   State 3ark and Sunken 0eadoZ State 3ark and
Belmont Lake State 3ark and +empstead Lake State 3ark and Valley
Stream State 3ark—and to at least begin development of all of them, as
Zell as the Fire Island State 3ark and Jones Beach State 3ark he had
previously acquired. By the end of 1926, the beaches of Long Island, once
reserved for the rich, Zere dotted Zith Zooden bathhouses open to all.
Families Zho Zeren't interested in ocean sZimming had to travel along
0errick  Road only tZo miles beyond the city line before they came to the
Valley Stream 3ark's Zooded ninety-seven acres and calm blue lake, and in
the Zoods hiking trails, picnic tables and fireplaces, and on the lake floats,
diving boards, sliding ponds and roZboats Zere aZaiting their use. By the
end of 1926, moreover, the road Zas begun that Zould free city drivers
from the tyranny of 0errick  Road. By the time surveying of the route for
the Southern State 3arkZay Zas completed, it Zas August. D3:  engineers

protested that it Zas too close to the cold, damp Long Island Zinter to begin
construction, but there Zas plenty of time to drive stakes. To shoZ the
public quickly hoZ  beautiful his parkZays Zould be, he decided that the

297
first segment Zould be the 2.78-mile loop around the huge reservoir in
+empstead Lake State 3ark, the prettiest portion of the Zhole route.

On August 28, 1926, Zith only a handful of engineers and an uninterested
construction gang as an audience, Robert 0oses dug a spade into the soil
near the reservoir and jerked it out. The earth that came up Zith it Zas the
first ever turned for a Robert 0oses road. +is talk Zith Frances 3erkins
about the highZay beloZ Riverside Drive had taken place in 1914, a full
tZelve years before. +e had been planning roads ever since. As he stood
there still holding the shovel, a foreman gave a signal and laborers began to
shovel dirt into the small, spoke-Zheeled dump trucks that in the 1920's
served as earth-moving machines. Robert 0oses stepped back and Zatched
the Zork begin.

+utchinson and +eZitt  Zere ama]ed and angry over 0oses' progress in
1926. Counting the D3:   and Conservation Department funds he had used,
he had already spent on Long Island parks far more than the million dollars
that Zas supposed to pay for the Zhole Long Island park and parkZay
system, and noZ he submitted park-improvement requests that totaled a
million dollars more. And Zho kneZ  Zhat innocent-appearing items in
1927 D3:   and Conservation Department budget requests concealed
additional funds Smith Zas planning to make available to 0oses? A Zholly
disproportionate share of the state budget Zas being spent on Long Island.
In a private confrontation Zith Smith and 0oses, they said that 0oses'
plans Zere too grandiose. Their cost Zas beyond the ability of the state to
pay, they said, and parks Zere simply not needed on the scale he proposed.

The conflict came to a head over Jones Beach. In 1926, public bathing
beaches in America fell into one of tZo classifications: ill-equipped huddles
of shabby, unpainted Zooden bathhouses that contained nothing but toilets,
shoZers and lockers; or "boardZalk beaches" such as Coney Island and
Atlantic City, Zhich  had surrendered the beauty of their seascapes to roller
coasters, Zeight-guessing games, blaring funhouses, baZling barkers and
other carnival concessions. But Robert 0oses Zasn't thinking of unpainted
Zood or carnivals.

One day, he invited to Jones Beach Gilmore Clarke, landscape architect of
the Bron[ River 3arkZay, +arvey  :.   Corbett, the architect responsible for

298
the design of some of the Long Island barons' most beautiful manor houses,
several other famous architects, landscape architects and engineers, and a
handful of young commission staffers Zith Zhose Zork he had been
impressed. As the little group of men stood on the vast, empty e[panse of
sand, 0oses began pointing

One bathhouse Zould be over there, he said, and the other over there. But
then they Zould be almost a mile apart, the men Zith him pointed out. Yes,
he said, and they should understand at once that he Zasn't talking

about ordinary bathhouses. These Zere going to contain ten thousand
lockers apiece. In addition to bathrooms and shoZer rooms, they Zere
going to contain Zading pools, diving pools and sZimming pools, and the
sZimming pools Zere going to be large enough to accommodate hundreds
of bathers at a time. There Zere going to be canopied terraces above the
pools so people could sit in the shade and Zatch the sZimmers, and there
Zere going to be other terraces on Zhich people could dine at tables set
beneath gaily colored umbrellas. The bathhouses Zere going to contain
solaria. They Zere going to contain restaurants in every price range.
Although they Zere at a bathing beach, they Zere going to be constructed
not of Zood but of stone and brick, and the stone and brick Zere going to be
of the finest quality. They Zere going to be surrounded by landscaped
laZns, hedges and floZer beds. And he Zanted the bathhouses designed
Zith as much care as the finest public buildings in America. :ith  this
difference: most public buildings in America Zere too heavy and stodgy,
designed only to impress and aZe. The bathhouses Zould have to be quite
large, of course, but they Zere buildings for people to have a good time in;
the architecture must encourage people to have fun. It must be airy and
light, gay and pleasant. There must be a thousand little touches to make
people feel happy and rela[ed. And he didn't Zant the bathhouses to spoil
the panorama. Let them be designed to complement it, not dominate it. The
panorama Zas long, loZ lines of sand and dunes and the sZeep of the
ocean. Let the lines of the bathhouses be long, loZ and sZeeping, he said,
hori]ontal rather than vertical. One other thing, he said. The bathhouses
Zere going to have at least one innovation never included in any public or
private building in America: diaper-changing rooms. +e had designed them
himself, he said. They Zould be divided into cubicles and each cubicle

299
Zould contain only a diaper-disposal basket, a Zashbasin, a mirror and a
shelf for a mother to lay her baby on. And the shelf shouldn't be table-
height, he said. +e had Zatched mothers changing diapers and higher
shelves Zould make it easier.

Frances 3erkins Zould have smiled.

Yanking an envelope from his pocket, 0oses began to sketch on its back:
TZo ;'s  to represent the bathhouses, lines to shoZ hoZ they Zould be
connected on the beach side by a Zide boardZalk, on the bay side by an
"Ocean 3arkZay." 0idZay  betZeen the tZo ;'s,   Zhere the causeZay from
the mainland Zould join the parkZay, he dreZ a large circle betZeen tZo
squares. The causeZay Zould end in a circle, he said. 3eople Zho didn't
Zant to use the bathhouses could drive around it and into the squares,
parking lots each large enough to hold ten thousand cars, and then Zalk
Zith their families to the beach through underpasses under the parkZay, or
they could drive around the circle, stop on the beach side, drop their
families off first, and then park in the lots and Zalk back to the beach to
join them. Or, if they didn't Zant to go to the beach at all, they could simply
keep driving on the parkZay east or Zest. The families that got out at the
circle Zould Zalk  to the beach along a broad mall that ended at the
boardZalk, and along the boardZalk Zould be open-air cafes serving
ine[pensive meals and a restaurant Zith cuisine, atmosphere and service
equal to the finest

in America. And stretching off to either side Zould be outdoor games:
pitch-and-putt golf, table and paddle tennis, shuffleboard, roller-skating
rinks, baseball fields set in little stadia. For the evenings, there Zould be
bandstands and dancing under the stars. +e sketched in restaurants, parking
lots, playing fields and bandstands until there Zas no more room on the
envelope.

One of the famous architects standing around 0oses said, "Are you cra]y?"
The others kneZ Zhat the architect meant. As one Zas later to put it: "It
Zas the scale of the thing—nothing on a scale like this had ever been done
in public recreation in America. +ere Ze Zere on an absolutely deserted
sand bar—there Zas no Zay even to get there but by boat—and here Zas
this guy draZing ;'s  on the back of an envelope and talking about

300
bathhouses like palaces and parking lots that held ten thousand cars. :hy, I
don't think there Zas a parking lot for ten thousand cars anyZhere in
America. And landscaping? Landscaping on a sand bar? :e Zeren't even
sure anything Zould groZ on a sand bar. :e thought he Zas nuts."

The men gathered around 0oses included some of the biggest names in
American architecture, but they didn't think big enough for him. :hen  they
began draZing up tentative plans, the plans naturally included a Zater
toZer; fresh Zater had to be provided in great quantities in any large park,
of course. But their Zater toZers Zere conventional Zater toZers:
aluminum storage tanks set on four spindly uprights, they Zere e[actly like
the ones that, in other parks, Zere invariably the unsightliest feature of the
landscape. 0oses determined to turn the potentially ugliest part of the park
he had planned into its most beautiful. +e already kneZ that he Zanted a
focal point for the beach, a beautiful centerpiece big enough to be seen from
miles aZay, that Zould be a symbol of Jones Beach, something that visitors
could identify Zith—he  Zas, after all, the son of the Zoman Zho had
ordered the huge "Camp 0adison" banner—and it might as Zell be the
Zater toZer. But he had a hard time getting the architects to think in his
terms. "I Zas very an[ious to have this Zater toZer mean something
architecturally," he recalls. "I got the top people out there and I asked them
about it. The first suggestion came from our chief engineer and I said,
'That's the goddamnedest stupid thing I've ever heard.' And then someone
suggested a lighthouse, and I said, 'No, goddammit, Ze're not going to have
any lighthouse.' :e  already had a lighthouse, for God's sake." (+e Zas
referring to the Fire Island lighthouse, Zhich Zas visible from the eastern
end of Jones Beach.) On the ne[t trip to the beach, +arvey Corbett
suggested that the Zater toZer be designed as an Italian campanile, or
church bell toZer. There Zere many different types, Corbett said, and
started to reel them off. As he Zas reeling, he mentioned the one in Venice.
Venice! "I like the one in Venice best," 0oses said. According to one of the
men there, "he pulled out another one of his envelopes and sketched the
campanile in Venice right there—and that's hoZ the Zater toZer Zas done.
And that's the Zay 'most everything Zas done. +e had the architects and
engineers there, but he Zas the architect and the engineer of Jones Beach.
+e's more responsible for the design of Jones Beach than any architect or
engineer or all of us put together."

301
Finding the bathhouse designs submitted by the famous architects
unimaginative, 0oses selected those of an unknoZn young commission
staffer, +erbert 0agoon. 0agoon  had designed tZo vast pleasure palaces to
sit upon the sand. One Zas a long, loZ, sZeeping e[panse of brick and
stone and green-tinted glass. Its central portion—a terrace raised just five
feet above the beach; behind the terrace, Zide e[panses of green-tinted
glass separated by thin vertical stone columns that held another, set-back
terrace surmounted by canopies, and behind that terrace a Zall topped Zith
flags— Zas set off from tZo Zings  of glass and brickZork by tZo simple,
square, flat-topped medieval turrets. It Zas simple, almost austere, from a
distance, but 0agoon's detail draZings shoZed 0oses that the turrets and
Zalls had been cunningly Zorked Zith a thousand little devices of stone and
brick. The other bathhouse Zas, if also of stone and brick, much gayer—
0iddle  Eastern, in fact, almost 0oorish. If the first  bathhouse, despite its
lack of height, resembled a medieval castle like those from Zhich knights
rode forth to join the Crusades, the second looked like one of the castles the
knights saZ Zhen they reached the +oly Land. Each of its tZo toZers,
Zhich seemed, at si[ty feet, very tall against the dunes, Zas topped, in fact,
Zith a green turret that sZirled upZard into a little spear point as did the
helmets of the sultan's Zarriors the knights might have had to fight. 0oses
Zas ecstatic over the designs. +e loved them, he said. But, the morning
after he first saZ them, he called in 0agoon Zith endless lists of small
changes he Zanted to make.

0oses decided himself hoZ he Zanted the bathhouses faced. +e Zas
determined that the stone and brick of the facades Zould blend in perfectly
Zith the beach on Zhich they stood. One of the samples brought to him Zas
obviously the perfect type of stone: Ohio sandstone Zas gray Zith just
enough tinges of tan and blue to catch the colors of sand and sea. Selecting
the brick Zas harder. Nothing seemed e[actly right. Then, one day, passing
the Barbi]on +otel on East Si[ty-third  Street, he noticed that it Zas faced
Zith a random pattern of beige, broZn and broZnish-red that Zould catch
the color of the sand and complement it. +e decided that, to give the Jones
Beach development unity, every structure of any si]e built there Zould be
faced Zith Ohio sandstone and Barbi]on brick.

302
The architects hastened to e[plain to him that Ohio sandstone and Barbi]on
brick Zere simply not used on public buildings. They Zere among the most
e[pensive of all facing materials. :hy,   by using them on structures as large
and elaborate as those he had in mind, each bathhouse Zould cost alone
Zhat 0oses had originally said Zould  be the cost of the entire Long Island
park system: a million dollars.

Ohio sandstone and Barbi]on brick it Zas going to be, 0oses replied.

+utchinson and +eZitt  Zere "guys from the backZoods," recalls one Zho
kneZ them. ":hen   you said 'Zater toZer' to them, that meant a tank on four
skinny poles. A bathhouse Zas a little Zooden thing you put up for fifty or
a hundred bucks so the boys couldn't Zatch the girls undressing.

And here 0oses comes along and tells them he Zants to spend a million
dollars on one." They flatly refused to give him anything like it. Only after
Smith had pleaded Zith them for hours did they consent to appropriate a
total of $150,000—for the Zater toZer and both bathhouses.

0oses' architects e[pected him to tell them to scale doZn their plans.

"You just go right on the Zay you Zere doing," 0oses told them. "You
forget all about Zhat the appropriation is. I'm never going to put up just a
tank on poles."

+e had already told Smith his plan. "I told him, ':e'll   put all the money into
the foundation for one bathhouse and then, Zhen it gives out, Ze'll just go
back and tell them they'll have to give us more or leave the foundation just
sitting there Zith no building on top of it.' The Governor thought it Zas
kind of a good joke."

The foundation laid, 0oses invited +eZitt  and +utchinson doZn to see
Zhat he had done. To make matters stickier, bloZing sand had completely
buried the foundation the night before they arrived, and there Zas not a
trace of it visible. All that e[isted, as far as the tZo legislators could see,
Zas a god-forsaken sand bar that could be of no possible use to anyone—
and the knoZledge that, someZhere on it, on their authori]ation, had been
spent $150,000 of the ta[payers' money.

303
They raged. They demanded that Smith fire 0oses. In 0oses' Zords, "They
Zent to the Governor and said, 'Get rid of that son of a bitch and Ze'll go
along Zith something reasonable.' "

But, in 0oses' Zords, "The Governor never backed aZay from me." So
+utchinson and +eZitt  said they Zould see that 0oses Zas impeached.
And they guaranteed the Governor that every appropriation for every park
in the state Zould be cut off until this mess Zas cleaned up.

But 0oses had applied his lessons Zell. :hen  his antagonists began to
think about the situation, they reali]ed they Zere trapped. :hat, e[actly,  for
all their poZer, could they do? Charge that he had misled them—thereby
admitting that they hadn't investigated the project thoroughly enough in
advance? Deny him further funds—thereby insuring that the $150,000
already spent Zould be utterly Zasted?

And Zasn't the overriding issue the same one—3arks vs. No 3arks— Zith
Zhich Smith had destroyed them in 1925? Did they Zant to make him a
hero again?

There Zas, really, very little they could do. Trying to salvage some revenge,
they refused, in making the 1927 budget appropriations, to give 0oses any
money at all for the second bathhouse, for Zhich the foundation had not
been laid, and they saZ to it that the additional funds they gave him for
other Long Island park projects Zere far less than he Zanted even to
complete the buildings already begun. But such satisfactions Zere small
ones. They kneZ that the difference needed to complete the projects to
0oses' specifications could easily be made up by Smith out of the
appropriations to other state departments.

troop assigned to the commission, recalls, "If he Zanted a job done, he
Zanted it done. 3eriod. And he Zouldn't take any alibis if it Zasn't done; he
didn't Zant alibis, he used to say."

0oses kneZ e[actly  Zhat he Zanted each of his men to do, and he Zas
impatient Zhen they had difficulty grasping that fact. :illiam   +.  Latham, a
young engineer from the 0assachusetts Institute of Technology, Zas also
assigned to observe and report on meetings of the Nassau County Board of

304
Supervisors. "I came back from the first meeting and in giving him my
report, I generali]ed," Latham recalls. "+e corrected me, but I guess I didn't
get it, and the second time, I started to generali]e again. :ell, he didn't let
me get very far. +is palm came doZn on that table of Belmont's and he
jumped up and he paced around that table and he told me he Zanted facts,
no assumptions. All he Zanted from me Zas Zhat had happened at that
meeting. +e'd draZ his oZn conclusions. And he let me knoZ right there
and then that if I couldn't do it that Zay, he'd have to find another engineer."

And, Latham adds, 0oses Zasn't "really angry" at him on that occasion.
Latham, an athlete and outdoorsman, is a tall, rangy man Zith huge
shoulders and an easy, friendly grin. But the grin fades Zhen he says, "I
Zon't talk about Zhat he's like Zhen he's really angry."

Another technique Zas the silent treatment. "All of a sudden," a staffer
recalls, "you just Zouldn't be called in to sit at the conferences any more.
+e Zouldn't talk  to you if he passed you in the hall. And then, one day,
you'd just be gone."

The men Zho stayed didn't resent 0oses' methods. "If he drove other men
hard," says Junkamen, "he drove himself harder."

+e Zas supervising a do]en nonpark projects for Smith, of course, and he
Zas constantly commuting to Albany, a four-hour train trip aZay. During
legislative sessions, he tried to make his trips on 0ondays because the
Legislature convened each Zeek on 0onday evening and it Zas then that
GO3 strategy became apparent—and the Governor liked to have his
advisers gathered in the E[ecutive Chamber ready to counter it. So that he
could get in a full day's Zork in Albany before the E[ecutive Chamber
session, 0oses left his NeZ York apartment at 6 a.m. to catch the early train
to the capital and avoid a car trip made tortuous by the lack of a through
road. :hen  the session broke up, usually Zell after the last train back had
left at midnight, 0oses Zould  ask Smith for the use of a state car and
chauffeur. +e had a lot of Zork to do back on Long Island, he'd say. If he
drove back at once, he'd be able to start in the morning.

Albany Zasn't the only duty that pulled 0oses from Long Island. To
supervise the State Council of 3arks, he had to spend at least part of three

305
days a Zeek in NeZ York City. To inspect the regional commissions' upstate
projects, he Zas constantly being driven to or from :atkins Glen or
Chittenango Falls or LetchZorth Gorge.

But Zhen his car pulled up in front of the Belmont 0ansion, 0oses  never
seemed tired. Charging into Arthur +oZland's office, he Zould slam the
door behind him and listen to the chief engineer's problems. Then, one

by one, he Zould call in the other top commission officials and, behind the
closed door, listen to theirs. Then the door Zould fly open and he Zould
charge out into the dining room and sit doZn at the huge table and begin
solving the problems. Junkamen recalls: "+e might have been Zorking in
NeZ York and not arrive out at Belmont until three o'clock in the afternoon,
but then he Zould Zork from three until ten o'clock or midnight. Another
day, I might get there at nine o'clock in the morning and he'd already be
there Zorking at the big table. Then I'd go out on some errand and Zouldn't
get back until supper time, and he'd still be sitting there. And he'd still be
sitting there at midnight." Saturdays Zere no different. "+ours didn't mean
anything to him," Latham says. "Days of the Zeek didn't mean anything to
him. You Zorked Zhen there Zas Zork to be done, that Zas all." And there
Zas alZays Zork to be done. Since none of the staffers dared leave the
mansion until 0oses left, they longed for him to get a telephone call from
0ary,  Zhich usually got him aZay from the big table and back to his house
in Babylon. "Sometimes," Junkamen recalls, "Ray 0cNulty Zould slip out
and call her and put her up to calling." One Saturday night, repeated
telephone calls from 0ary failed to bring Bob home, and at ten o'clock she
snoZed up at the mansion. Striding into the conference room, she "just took
him by the ear in a very nice but firm Zay" and pulled him to his feet,
Junkamen recalls. "+e just laughed and Zent along—and then Ze could all
go home."

Going home did not, hoZever, necessarily mean a cessation of Zork for
0oses. Giving +oZland  a key to his Babylon house on Thompson Avenue,
he told the chief engineer to stop by every morning on his Zay to the
mansion. Almost invariably, Zhen +oZland arrived at about 7:30 a.m.,
there Zould be Zaiting for him on the flat-topped bottom post of the
banister a large manila envelope crammed Zith notes, memos and

306
handZritten letters ready to be typed and mailed, an envelopeful of
testimony to Zhat 0oses had been doing during the night Zhile his men
slept. +e tried to keep Sundays free for his family, teaching Jane and
Barbara to sZim or sail, taking them for picnics, telling them stories. But
often the girls Zould notice that their father had disappeared. :hen that
happened, they kneZ he Zas out on the big screened porch on the side of
the house, scribbling furiously on a yelloZ legal pad. And most of the
family picnics Zere held in one of his parks. "+ell," one of the men
Zorking under him remembers, "any Sunday at all you could e[pect to look
around and see the boss and his Zife and kids and he'd be making notes as
he Zalked along if he saZ something he didn't like. So you figured if he
Zas Zorking, Zhy  shouldn't you be?"

There Zere other reasons, too, Zhy the men Zho stayed didn't resent the
driving.

"It Zas e[citing  Zorking  for 0oses,"  one of the commission staffers recalls.
"+e made you feel you Zere a part of something big. It Zas almost like a
Zar. It Zas you fighting for  the people against those rich estate oZners and
those reactionary legislators. And it Zas e[citing just being around him. +e
Zas dynamic, a big guy Zith a booming laugh. +e dominated that scene in
the mansion. +e Zould sit there Zith people running back and forth around
him and he Zould be banging his hand doZn on that big table and

giving orders—and Zhen he gave orders, things happened! +oZland Zould
go hurrying out of the room and tZenty-five draftsmen Zould hurry to their
tables and start draZing or surveyors Zould jump into their cars and head
out on the road."

And, men recalled, incongruous as it might seem to use the Zord "fun" in
connection Zith unremitting Zork,  it Zas, nevertheless, fun to Zork for Bob
0oses. "There Zas a very informal atmosphere in the mansion," one
engineer says. "Everyone Zorked in their shirt sleeves—my recollection of
0oses is of him sitting Zith  his tie pulled doZn and over to one side,
sleeves rolled up—and there Zas alZays a lot of joking going on." And the
joking, the engineer says, Zent both Zays. "You Zeren't afraid to kid him."

307
+e turned the commission staff into a big family. If he couldn't get home to
his Zife and children as much as he Zould have liked, he brought them to
his Zork. Commission staffers became accustomed to seeing Barbara and
Jane playing on the playground equipment that 0oses had brought from all
over the 8nited States and set up on the mansion's laZn so that he could test
it. Jane Zas much more adventurous than her quiet, shy, dark-haired sister,
Zho eyed the equipment Zith distrust, and the staffers laughed to Zatch the
little blonde tomboy scramble around on the top bars of the jungle gyms
and sZing higher and higher on the sZings. 0ary Zas alZays around. She
Zas the hostess at the little luncheons that 0oses Zould have catered at the
mansion if a politician or key landoZner Zas visiting. She Zas a pleasant,
easy friend to the young men Zorking for her husband and a confidante, a
sympathetic shoulder for their Zives to cry on, Zho remember her Zith real
affection. 0oses Zas alZays consulting her; says 0rs. +arold 0orse,  a
friend, "Bob used to say that the only decisions he made that Zere mistakes
Zere the decisions he had neglected to talk over Zith 0ary first."

+e and 0ary  organi]ed outings and insisted that +oZland, Latham,
Shapiro, 0cNulty  and Junkamen—and Tom 0c:hinney,   Zith Zhom
0oses Zas getting along famously—bring their Zives and children along.
The outings Zere very informal—fishing trips on the commission motor
launch Apache or clambakes—and they Zere fun. Recalls 0c:hinney's
daughter, Dolie, tZenty-eight at the time: ":e  used to go over to Fire Island
for the Zhole Zeekend. There Zas an old frame building at the Coast Guard
station there, and Ze'd sleep in it on cots, all the men in one room and the
Zomen and kids in another. There Zeren't any stores on Fire Island, so Ze'd
bring most of our food along and go trolling from the Apache or clamming
for the rest." :hile   the Zomen Zere cleaning the catch, the men Zould dig
a great hole in the sand, cover its bottom Zith logs and light them for the
clambake. There Zould be bonfires on the beach at night, and singing.

0oses set the tone. +is clothes Zere a constant source of merriment. +is
pants Zere khakis faded Zhite or corduroys only some of Zhose holes had
been patched. 3ossibly because his hairline Zas beginning to recede, he
Zore, no matter Zhat the Zeather, a hat—the same hat. "Robert!" 0ary
Zould say. "Take off that hat!" Everyone Zould laugh. "It Zas one of those

308
fedoras Zith a big brim and it Zas completely shapeless and all stained,"
Dolie 0c:hinney     recalls. "It Zas the funniest hat you ever saZ. And Bob

Zould never take it off e[cept Zhen he Zent sZimming."  +e helped arrange
the logs for the clambake, helped clean up afterZard, helped Zith the
children. Because Charlie Smisek, the Apache's skipper, Zould be aZay
from home all Zeekend, 0oses insisted that Charlie's Zife, 0ae, come
along, and he Zent out of his Zay to make the Smiseks feel at home. "There
Zas no side to Bob 0oses at all then," an acquaintance says. The only thing
that set him apart Zas his sZimming: hurling himself through the first of the
big Atlantic rollers, he Zould appear on the far side of its tumult sZimming
and head straight out into the Atlantic, far beyond Zhere even outdoorsman
Latham Zould dare to go.

Of all the reasons Zhy 0oses' men didn't resent his driving, the one most
frequently mentioned in their reminiscences is that he brought out the best
in them. One of Junkamen's duties Zas to Zork Zith Long Island villages
on ]oning restrictions on the land adjoining the Southern State 3arkZay.
"0r.  0oses Zanted five  hundred feet on either side of the parkZay ]oned in
the highest residential classifications," Junkamen recalls. "And he didn't
Zant any Zater tanks or other unsightly structures near them, either. Zoning
Zas a relatively neZ thing. +ardly a village on Long Island had a ]oning
ordinance. I had to draZ up a lot of Zhat Ze Zanted myself. Then 0r.
0oses Zould  have to speak to officials in the municipality and get them to
draft over-all ]oning ordinances in Zhich our stuff could be incorporated.
I'd have to Zork Zith  the local counsel every step of the Zay. And then,
after the ordinances Zere adopted, I'd have to Zork Zith the local ]oning
board Zhen people tried to break the restrictions. And I found that at every
step of the Zay, 0r. 0oses had ideas that started me thinking along Zhole
neZ lines."

Constantly, 0oses Zas encouraging his architects and engineers to use their
imagination, to make their designs different from and better than any
similar designs done before. :hen the men designing a draZbridge for the
Jones Beach causeZay submitted their first design, he said, "I knoZ you can
do draZbridges. Can you do beautiful draZbridges?" In their second design,
the bridge operators' quarters Zere no longer the standard ugly shacks but

309
turrets faced Zith stone Zorked Zith the silhouettes of sailing ships.
Gilmore Clarke thought he had surpassed himself in the design of bridges
for the Bron[ River  3arkZay. But he found 0oses had some neZ standards.
+e Zanted variety, 0oses told him. Not only  Zere the bridges to be
designed to harmoni]e Zith the landscape and not only Zere they to be
stone-faced, but every bridge on every parkZay on Long Island—all one
hundred of them— Zas going to be different from every other bridge.

Engineers assigned to design guard rails and light poles for the parkZays
e[pended tremendous effort making the standard iron poles graceful. But
iron Zouldn't blend in Zith  a rustic setting, 0oses said. Guard rails and
light poles Zould have to be made of Zood. But it had been proven that no
form of Zooden guard rails Zould resist the impact of a speeding car, the
engineers said. 0oses sent them back to ponder the problem again, and this
time one thought of drilling holes in Zooden rails and inserting strong steel
cable—and noZ all the rails on all the parkZays could be Zood.

As alZays, it Zas on Jones Beach that 0oses' imagination focused. +e
thought himself of many little touches to make people feel happy and
rela[ed there. The dunes, he said one day, Zere a natural protective Zall for
an archery range, so archery should be included as one of the sports offered
at the beach. And Zhy just have ordinary targets? he said. :hy not let kids
shooting arroZs feel they Zere really in the 0iddle Ages, Zhen archers
stormed castles? Let some of the targets be cutouts in the shape of enemy
boZmen crouching behind castle turrets. :hy just have signs directing
people to various activities? he asked. :hy not decorate the signs Zith
ironZork shoZing  the activities—and shoZing them in humorous fashion?
One day, a designer rather hesitantly shoZed him a design for the
directional signs to the men's rooms. The design Zas the silhouette of a
man, obviously in a desperate hurry, rushing to a bathroom so fast that the
little boy he Zas dragging behind had his feet pulled off the ground. It Zas,
of course, a little daring, the designer began. Daring! 0oses said. +e
Zanted his designers to be daring. This Zas a great design, he said. It Zould
be used.

"0r.  0oses Zas no laZyer, but he had a great knoZledge and grasp of the
laZ," Junkamen Zould say. "+e Zas not an engineer, but he had a great

310
knoZledge of engineering. +e kneZ politics, he kneZ statesmanship— he
Zas an altogether brilliant man. If you Zere Zorking Zith  him, you just had
to learn from him—if only  through osmosis." One of the commission's
engineers rhapsodi]es: "I don't think there Zas a man Zho came into daily
contact Zith him Zho Zasn't inspired to do better Zork than he had thought
he Zas capable of doing."

If the political difficulties  involved in creating a park on Jones Beach Zere
enormous, the physical difficulties Zere of a si]e to match. Building on a
barrier beach proved to be a very different proposition from building on the
mainland. Commission engineers found themselves faced Zith a succession
of problems engineers never encountered on mainland jobs. Cleveland
Rodgers, 0oses' first biographer, Zas to Zrite that sometimes it seemed as
if Nature herself had "joined forces Zith the skeptics and obstructionists
Zho had fought 0oses all the Zay from Albany  to the beach." But 0oses
refused to let Nature stand in his Zay.

None of 0oses' engineers had e[pected Zork on the barrier beach to
continue in Zinter because drifting ice packs that kept boats off the Great
South Bay for days at a time could maroon anyone caught on the strand.
But Zith Smith's time as Governor running out, Zinters could not be
Zasted. 0oses told the engineers taking surveys for the causeZay to cache
emergency supplies of food in a shack on the beach and keep Zorking.
Even on mornings Zhen Zind Zas Zhipping the bay into Zaves and ice Zas
coating the piers, Sid Shapiro led his hip-booted surveyors into boats for the
trip across.

One day, Zhile they Zere on the strand, ice packs closed the bay. It stayed
closed for ten days. All the cached food ran out e[cept pancake batter, and
the surveyors lived on pancakes. For the rest of his life, Sid Shapiro Zould
never be able to stomach another pancake. But Zhen the ice

cleared and the surveyors returned to Babylon, Shapiro could tell 0oses,
Zho Zas standing on the dock Zaiting for a report, that ten days' more Zork
had been completed.

The completed surveys contained the Zorst of neZs. The mean level of the
e[isting barrier beach, 0oses Zas told, Zas only tZo feet above mean sea

311
level. During storms, the ocean rose si[, seven or even eight feet and
covered the strand almost completely. This did not matter as far as the
portion of the beach that Zas to be a beach Zas concerned, but the portion
that Zas to hold 0oses' buildings and parking lots and parkZay Zould have
to be built up to a mean height of fourteen feet if they Zere not to be
submerged in every storm, and if he Zanted a road seventeen miles long
along it, it Zould have to be built up to that height for seventeen miles. The
job could be done, of course—floating dredges, huge pumps mounted on
barges, could suck up hydraulic fill, Zhich Zould become sand Zhen dry,
from the bay bottom, and pipelines could spill it out over the strand. But
appro[imately forty  million cubic yards of fill  Zould  be required. The job
Zould take months—and it Zould be e[pensive. Even Smith quailed at this,
and 0oses had to talk fast and hard to persuade the Governor to go along.
But he did persuade him, and the largest floating dredges in the 8nited
States Zere brought to the bay as soon as spring cleared the ice off it in
1927. The job could not be completed by the time ice set in again in the
Zinter, but 0oses refused to let the dredges leave. Their creZs could live on
them, he said, and all through the Zinter of 1927-28 they did, and the
pumps kept Zorking. "Night after night," Shapiro recalls, "they kept
Zorking to midnight."

:hen   the sand from the bay bottom Zas spread on the barrier beach, it
proved to be the Zorst problem of all. It Zas beautiful to look at, da]]ling
Zhite and fine-grained, but the fineness meant that Zhen it dried, it bleZ.
Even the lightest bree]e stirred it into the air in sZirls so thick that the
strand looked like a desert during a violent sandstorm.

"It Zas alZays bloZing  in your face Zhen you Zorked," Shapiro
remembers. ":hen  it got bad, it Zould fill  your eyes, your ears and your
nose as fast as you could clean them out. You'd be choking and coughing.
You'd be talking to somebody not three feet aZay and an especially violent
gust Zould come, and you couldn't even see him any more. You couldn't
even see the hand in front of your face." During the day, Zorkmen Zould
dig an e[cavation. At night, the sand Zould fill it  in—so completely that the
Zorkmen couldn't even find its edges. One Zorkman Zho left his car Zith
its rear end turned into the Zind for a feZ days came back to find the

312
numerals—and all other color—completely erased from its rear license
plate.

0oses dispatched landscape architects to other Long Island beaches to find
out Zhy the sand on older, natural dunes Zas more stable. They reported
that it Zas because of the presence on these dunes of a form of "beach
grass" (Ammophilia arenaria), Zhose roots, seeking Zater in the dry sand,
spread hori]ontally rather than vertically and thus held sand around it in
place. But to be effective, they reported, the grass had to be planted thickly
—hundreds of thousands, even millions, of clumps Zould be required to
hold doZn the neZ dunes on Jones Beach—and it could be planted only

by hand. In the summer of 1928, on the desolate sand bar on the edge of the
ocean, amid half-completed building skeletons that looked like ancient
ruins, Zas a panorama out of the dynasties of the 3haraohs: hundreds,
thousands, of men, spread out over miles of sand, kneeling on the ground
digging little holes and planting in them tiny bundles of grass.

The peculiarities of man seemed sometimes to join Zith those of nature to
thZart 0oses. But he Zould  not be thZarted.

The contract to build the causeZay had been aZarded to an Atlantic City,
NeZ Jersey, firm. In the autumn of 1927, the president of the firm coolly
informed 0oses that its money had run out and it couldn't meet its payroll.
Its laborers Zouldn't Zork Zithout  pay, and Zork Zould have to stop unless
$20,000 Zas found immediately. 0oses drove to Albany, but Smith told
him that every cent that could be squee]ed out of the +ighZay Bureau
budget—in fact, every cent that could be squee]ed out of the budget of any
department—had already been squee]ed. 0ore money Zould be available
in the 1928 appropriations, of course, but they Zouldn't be available until
after January 1. 3romising to pay her back as soon as the appropriations
came through—he did—0oses borroZed the $20,000 from his mother and
paid the laborers himself. And they kept Zorking.

To the east of the portion of Jones Beach ceded to him by +empstead ToZn,
directly in the path of his proposed Ocean 3arkZay, lay five hundred acres
of meadoZland oZned by Oyster Bay ToZn and leased as a duck-hunting
preserve to a group of Zealthy sportsmen headed by Solomon Guggenheim.

313
:hen   0oses appropriated the tract, the sportsmen obtained an injunction
and served it on the contractor. But 0oses met the contractor on the dredge
and, as Cleveland Rodgers put it: "The legal papers somehoZ slipped off
the deck into the sZirling Zaters. . . . :hen  the hunters, in their furlined
cloaks and escorted by their formidable legal advisers, arrived a feZ days
later to shoot ducks, under full protection of the laZ, they found the
meadoZ" slashed through and filled in for the parkZay.

And alZays, day after day, summer and Zinter, 0oses Zas out on the job,
encouraging the men in the field. "3eople Zill Zork harder for you if they
have a good time," he told the 0orses, and he urged the laborers Zorking
on Jones Beach to go sZimming during their lunch hour. Organi]ing
softball games on the beach, he umpired them himself. Joking Zith the men,
he made fun about his hat. And he told them Zhat a great project they Zere
building. "+e  had a gift for leading men," Shapiro recalls. "Those men
idoli]ed him.  You'd see him Zalk up to a picka[ gang that Zas tired and talk
to them aZhile and Zhen he Zalked aZay, you could see those picka[es
sZing faster."

+anging over 0oses Zas the reali]ation that every battle he Zon brought
him closer to one there seemed no Zay of Zinning—and Zhose loss Zould
mean that his dream Zould remain substantially incomplete. Every step he
took to develop the land ceded him by +empstead and Oyster Bay only
brought him closer to the day Zhen he must face up to the fact that the rest

of Jones Beach Zas not his. Its eastern half—nine miles long, thirteen
hundred acres—still belonged to Babylon ToZnship. +utchinson and
+eZitt  might think the park he Zas laying out Zas already too big; he kneZ
that, to serve the metropolitan area adequately, it Zould one day have to be
far bigger—and the only place for e[pansion Zas Babylon's land.
0oreover, if  he didn't get that land before the :antagh CauseZay and
Ocean 3arkZay, Zhich Zould run up to its edge, made it accessible and
immensely valuable, he kneZ he Zould never get it. And unless he got it,
there Zas nothing to prevent Babylon from building a road to connect Zith
the parkZay and lining it Zith  hot-dog stands, gas stations and tiny, ugly
summer bungaloZs that Zould march right up to the edge of his great park
and spoil forever its pristine beauty. :ithout  Babylon's land, moreover, the

314
Ocean 3arkZay Zould be only half as long as he Zanted it, and it Zould be
difficult  to build a causeZay and loop it back to mainland Long Island and
the Southern State 3arkZay because he had planned to cut the e[pense of
that causeZay by running it over Captree Island, a tongue of land at the
eastern end, Babylon's end, of Jones Beach, Zhich e[tended up toZard the
mainland. And since it Zas the eastern end of Jones Beach that almost
touched Fire Island, Zithout it he Zould never be able to build a bridge
from Jones Beach to Fire Island and thus enable the Ocean 3arkZay to
continue along Fire Island to the +amptons.

Babylon's baymen had never forgiven him for his attempt to grab the toZn's
"sacred birthright." :hen   0ary  Zent shopping in toZn noZ,  the tradesmen
eyed her coldly. Sounding out the ToZn Board members again about a
referendum, 0oses found them still fully aZare of their constituents'
feelings.

0oses tried threats. 0any of the thousand commission and +ighZay
Bureau employees at Belmont Lake lived in Babylon, and therefore, 0oses
reminded the toZn's businessmen, much of the $400,000 monthly payroll
Zas spent in the toZn. "Doubtless," he said, "more congenial headquarters
for the state's Zork on Long Island can be found elseZhere." But the toZn
Zas unmoved. The ToZn Board assured its constituents that there Zas not
going to be any referendum. And Zithout one, there Zas, under the State
Constitution, simply no Zay in Zhich  0oses could get the toZn's land.

But 0oses at last found a Zeak spot in Babylon's defenses.

"I heard about it by the sheerest kind of accident," he told the author
decades later.

"I Zas thinking then about learning to drive—I never really did—and I Zas
practicing one morning in a 0odel T in the driveZay of  this big estate out
in Babylon oZned by a guy named :illard   Reed, Zhose father, Zho had
been dead for years at this point, had been a Democratic county court judge
in Suffolk, the only Democrat on the county court, at the time Grover
Cleveland Zas re-elected.

315
"I saZ :illard    sitting on the porch rocking and drinking, and he called to
me and said, 'Come on up and have a drink.' So Ze sat rocking aZay there
and talking and after a Zhile he said, T hear you're having some

trouble getting some land.' I said, 'Yes, Ze are.' And he said, The Babylon
felloZs don't Zant to cooperate?' and I said, 'No.'

"And he said, 'I remember a story my father told me once. You knoZ the
Zhole question of the oZnership of the bay bottom in Babylon ToZn came
up a long time ago and my father and another judge, a felloZ in Amityville
named Samuel +ildreth, Zere appointed to pass on it. And I think you'd be
interested in Zhat Zas found. You'll never find the decision in Riverhead
[the county seat, Zhere court records Zere kept] because the supervisors
Zill  have made sure it's missing. But +ildreth is alive.'

"I said, Tell me more, :illard.'   +e said, 'I think I've told  you enough. You
go and see this [+ildreth] felloZ in Amityville   and you tell him I told him
to talk to you.' I did, and +ildreth said that Zay back, in 1848 maybe or
1856, tZo bills had been introduced in the Legislature. See, before that, the
underZater rights in the bay, the bay bottoms, had belonged to the state. But
one of these tZo bills transferred the rights in Nassau County to the various
toZns in Nassau along the bay and the other transferred the rights in Suffolk
to the various Suffolk toZns. :ell,   everyone on Long Island alZays just
assumed that both of these had passed, but +ildreth told me that Zhen he
and Judge Reed had looked into it, they had found that for some reason no
one seemed to knoZ, maybe just an oversight, only one passed—the Nassau
one.

"I said, 'Do I gather then that half the bay bottom belongs to the state? That
Babylon doesn't oZn its bay bottom at all?' And I put all our bloodhounds
on it and I found those bills, and I found that +ildreth's story Zas true.

":ell,   in all  this time, the supervisors could have gotten the oZnership of
those lands transferred Zithout any trouble, but I guess they had just
decided to let things lie and had kept issuing licenses to fish the bay
bottoms Zhen they had no right to. And so I blackjacked them. :e told
them that Ze'd trade them the [Jones Beach] land for the bay bottoms. :ell,
they didn't Zant to trade. They didn't Zant to give the land. But Ze told

316
them that if they didn't, Ze'd let the people knoZ that the toZn didn't oZn
the bay bottom after all, that they'd been issuing licenses Zhen they had no
right to, that in all the years that had been available to remedy the mistake,
they had never taken the simple step of obtaining title to the bay bottoms,
that they had been negligent in their steZardship of the toZn's 'sacred
heritage.' " To be convicted in the public eye of such negligence Zould have
been even Zorse for them than to give aZay the barrier beach. The bay
bottoms Zere much more important to the baymen; that Zas Zhat their
livelihood depended on. ":e  blackjacked them, that's all. :e  threatened to
tell. And Ze said, 'NoZ, there's one Zay to adjust this thing.' "

The Zay—the ultimatum that 0oses presented to the ToZn Board— Zas to
authori]e the referendum and to issue a ruling that Zould give 0oses a real
chance of Zinning it: the voting Zould not be restricted to the toZn's
ta[paying property oZners but Zould be open to anyone Zho lived there—
including the several hundred state employees Zho had recently moved into

apartments. This ruling Zould violate common sense and common practice
— generally, only property oZners, a toZn's ta[payers, Zere alloZed to
vote in referenda involving the permanent removal of toZn property from
ta[ rolls—  but 0oses did not leave the board members much choice. If the
referendum passed, giving the beach land to the state, he told them, the state
Zould in turn quietly give the bay bottoms to the toZn, and they could go
right on issuing licenses; if the referendum passed, he Zould never tell their
constituents about their negligence. And if it didn't pass, he Zould.

To lull the toZn's baymen and property oZners into overconfidence, the
ToZn Board did not e[plode the bombshell about voting eligibility until
three days before the election. Everything, in fact, Zas done so fast that the
old-time residents never had a chance to organi]e. :ithout Zarning, at a
routine meeting held on 0arch 14, 1928, Zith feZ residents present, the
ToZn Board, saying for the record that it Zas opposed to the beach ceding
but felt "the people's voice" should be heard, authori]ed the referendum—
and scheduled it for the same day as party primary elections—April 3,
1928, less than three Zeeks aZay. "Judases!" Judge Cooper cried.

The 3ark Commission flooded the local post office Zith mailings seeking to
reassure Babylonians on points that Zere Zorrying them. One reassurance

317
concerned a rumor that tolls Zould be charged on the :antagh CauseZay,
that Babylonians Zould have to pay to use their oZn land. Absolutely not,
0oses said. In a letter he Zrote to the Leader —and Zhich Zas printed by
Cooper, Zho made a noticeable effort to give space to his foe's vieZs—
0oses promised: "The state causeZay and boulevard Zill be free."

Nonetheless, the judge could not conceive that, even Zith the voter
eligibility  ruling, the referendum Zould pass. No politician, he didn't
understand certain other tactics the ToZn Board had used; he saZ, for
e[ample, no significance in the fact that Zhile the hours for voting in the
primary Zere noon to 9 p.m., the hours for voting in the referendum ended
at 6 p.m.

None of the older residents of Babylon Zere prepared for election day. As
they strolled to the polls, they suddenly noticed cars bearing state shields
and crammed Zith men racing through the streets of the quiet village. They
Zere 3ark Commission and D3:   vehicles carrying employees to vote.
8ndoubtedly, many of these employees Zere—under the suddenly rela[ed
eligibility  ruling—eligible  to vote. But opponents at the polls said that they
recogni]ed many as men Zho did not have even apartments in the toZn and
Zere therefore ineligible. :hen,   hoZever, election inspectors tried to check
their names against the list of eligible voters in the election registers Zith
Zhich election inspectors Zere customarily provided, they found that
somehoZ the ToZn Board had neglected to provide registers this time, and
the inspectors Zere unable to deny the state employees the right to vote.
Realtors had cars out, too, rounding up voters knoZn to favor the proposal
and transporting them to the polls. But 0oses' overconfident—
overconfident because hoodZinked—opponents did not have a single car in
operation. In addition, many potential "no" voters—one estimate said tZo
hundred—Zere confused by the fact that the polls remained open until nine;
they shoZed

up after si[, only to be told that Zhile they could vote in the primary, voting
in the referendum had been closed. The final tally shoZed that "Babylon
ToZn" had ceded its portion of Jones Beach to the state by seven votes.
:rote   Cooper: "The verdict Zas nothing short of a crime and the method by
Zhich it Zas obtained is scandalous." 0oses issued a statement, too. +e

318
called the referendum results "a vote of confidence in the 3ark
Commission."

The sands Zere running out on Al Smith's Governorship. 0oses'
construction creZs did not quit for the Zinter of 1927-28; their grading
machines pushed aside snoZ as Zell as earth as they smoothed the path for
the Southern State 3arkZay. The Great South Bay fro]e solid; the men
stretching the Jones Beach causeZay across it pitched tents on the ice and
lived on it.

Early in 1928, an astonished +utchinson and +eZitt reali]ed that the
completion of the Southern State 3arkZay and Jones Beach causeZay, on
Zhich they had hinged the beginning of the Northern State and Zhich they
had assumed Zas years, if not decades, aZay, Zas rapidly approaching.
Frantically, they tried to delay it. In another year, Al Smith Zouldn't be
Governor. Out of 0oses' $4,500,000 1928 budget request, they slashed
$626,000. But Smith found the money in the departmental budgets, and the
construction creZs kept Zorking.

0oses had not been given funds for his Long Island parks and parkZays
until the spring of 1926. By the end of the summer of 1928, in a period of
less than three years, every foot of right-of-Zay for the Southern State
3arkZay Zas in his hands, a seven-mile stretch, from near the NeZ York
City line to and around the +empstead reservoir, Zas completed. Long roZs
of neZly planted elms and maples lined it and stone-faced bridges, every
one different, Zere carrying crossroads over it so that nothing should
interrupt the sZift passage of its users. A second seven-mile stretch, from
the reservoir to :antagh, Zas completed e[cept for the landscaping. A third
seven-mile stretch, from :antagh to Babylon, Zas graded and ready for
paving. And the fill for the :antagh   3arkZay had been laid, a pavement
placed on top of the fill and three of the four bridges that Zould carry the
causeZay across the bay completed.

:hen   0oses had become president of the Long Island State 3ark
Commission on April 18, 1924, there had been one state park on Long
Island, the almost Zorthless 200-acre tract on Fire Island. By the end of the
summer of 1928, there Zere fourteen parks totaling 9,700 acres. Because
6,775 of those acres had been acquired—from +empstead. Oyster Bay and

319
Babylon toZns, the 8.S. Department of Commerce, NeZ York City and
private individuals—as gifts, the Long Island parks had cost the state a total
of about a million dollars. At 1928 land values, they Zere Zorth more than
fifteen million.

By the end of the summer of 1928, the Zatershed properties off 0errick
Road had been filled Zith bathhouses, baseball fields and bridle paths.
3icnic areas Zith thousands of tables sat under their trees. Slides, sZings
and jungle

gyms spotted their clearings. Their lakes Zere decorated Zith floats, diving
boards, sliding ponds, roZboats and canoes. +eckscher State 3ark
contained miles of paved roads for cars and dirt roads for horseback riders,
acres of athletic fields, bathhouses holding five thousand lockers, a
boardZalk, a bathing pavilion Zith restaurants and snack bars, an inland
canal for roZ-boating, and a marina at Zhich sailboats could be moored.
There Zere more bathhouses, more boardZalks, more playing fields, more
snack bars, more picnic areas, more campsites at Sunken 0eadoZ,
:ildZood,    Orient Beach, 0ontauk 3oint and +ither  +ills  state parks. On
Jones Beach, tZo years before a desolate sand bar, there stood noZ,
aZaiting only the finishing touches that Zould be added in 1929, a
bathhouse like a medieval castle, a Zater toZer like the campanile of
Venice, a boardZalk, a restaurant and parking fields that held ten thousand
cars each. In the history of public Zorks in America, it is probable that
never had so much been built so fast. During the summer of 1928, park-
seeking families heading out of NeZ York City began to feel Long Island
open up to them. :eek by Zeek, Zord  spread. At the beginning of the
summer, the bathhouse at Valley Stream State 3ark contained a thousand
lockers. For a feZ Zeekends, these Zere sufficient. Then they Zere not.
Another thousand lockers Zere added. Then another thousand. And, even
so, by the end of the summer, thousands of Zould-be bathers Zere being
turned aZay every Zeekend. By the end of the summer, attendance at Long
Island's state parks had passed half a million.

NeZ Yorkers kneZ Zho Zas primarily  responsible for the boon they had
been given. It Zould have been difficult for them not to knoZ. For the press
Zas turning Robert 0oses into a hero.

320
The lioni]ation Zas on a scale as vast as the achievement. The TZenties
Zas an age for heroes, of course, and if 1927 Zas Lindbergh's year in the
NeZ York press, 1928 Zas 0oses'. Albert Einstein, Zho announced his
theory of relativity in that year, Zas all but ignored in the city's thirteen
daily neZspapers, but NeZ York's reporters strove for neZ adjectives to
describe the park builder, one Zriter concentrating on his physical attributes
("tall, dark, muscular and ]ealous"), another on the mental ("a poZerful and
nervous mind"), a third on the moral ("fearless," "courageous") to describe
"Rhodes Scholar" Robert A. 0oses, Robert B. 0oses, most frequently
Robert +. 0oses (reporters could not seem to reconcile themselves to his
lack of a middle initial).

Editorial Zriters chimed in. "+is  labors have been unZearied and
successful," said the Times, "his energy and persistence . . . great." "+e has
been a faithful, earnest and efficient incumbent," said the :orld. "+e has
done e[cellent Zork." Even the +erald Tribune Zas beginning to look on
his Zorks and find them good.

And the praise, on front pages and editorial pages alike, continued day after
day. If readers Zere reminded once during 1928 that 0oses Zas serving the
state Zithout pay, they Zere reminded a hundred times.

0oses' lioni]ation  in the press had a practical benefit. It insured that he
Zould be alloZed to finish the job he had started. No one Zould dare stop it
noZ.

The Long Island dream Zas safe.

If the press erred in its description of 0oses' achievements, it erred on the
side of under-, not over-, statement.

Long Island Zas only one segment of his state park system. The
$14,000,000 allocated for upstate parks in the bond issue Zas not nearly
enough for the system he had in mind. 0any of his hurried trips around the
state Zere, therefore, attempts to persuade Zealthy men Zho oZned
undeveloped land in scenic areas to give their land to the public.

321
Luckily, many of these men Zere the old park patriots. The state had never
bothered to buy a single foot of Lake George's hundreds of miles of
shoreline, and cheap resorts and rooming houses Zere proliferating on its
shores. Lumbermen had stripped the surrounding mountains of their
softZood forests and Zere starting on the hardZoods. The denuded soil Zas
being Zashed aZay by rains. But midZay along the lake a branch of Zater
jutted out to the northZest, and of the eleven thousand virgin acres on the
tongue of land thus formed—most of it called Tongue 0ountain—si[
thousand Zere oZned by a group of Zealthy men Zho Zere also public-
spirited. +e persuaded them to donate their land to the state. The remaining
five thousand acres on the tongue Zere oZned by a family that Zas about to
sell it to a lumbering company, but the family's attorney Zas Captain N.
Taylor 3hillips, a key figure in that stronghold of the park patriots, the
American Scenic and +istoric 3reservation Society. :orking  through
3hillips, 0oses  persuaded the family to loZer its asking price from forty
dollars per acre to fifteen—and Zhen he bought the Zhole tract, he had
succeeded in preserving for posterity a substantial part of the Lake George
region for a total cost of $75,000.

:ith   the money he had saved, 0oses preserved the historic battlefields at
Fort Stanton and Oriskany and, Zith Adolph Ochs's help, at Saratoga. +e
purchased the 10,692 still untouched acres of :hiteface 0ountain, Zhich
he had so often climbed as a youth, thus insuring that generations of youths
Zho came after him Zould also be able to climb it. By the end of the
summer of 1928, the scattered little historic reservations that 0oses had
inherited had been e[panded into a system that included seventy parks
totaling more than 125,000 acres. And he had used $5,000,000 of the bond
issue to beat the lumbermen to great untouched tracts in the Adirondacks
and Catskills and build up the state's forest preserve to 2,218,000 acres.

:hen   he had the parks, 0oses built roads to link them Zith the nearest
highZays, and suddenly families in Rochester and Syracuse and Albany
Zere visiting places they had hardly heard of before—not only LetchZorth
Gorge and :atkins  Glen but Boonville Gorge, Rudd 3ond, Roaring Brook
and Ore 3it. If they simply Zanted to drive through these parks, there Zere

322
gravel roads they could do that on. If they Zanted to hike, there Zere hiking
paths and nature trails through the Zoods; if they Zanted to sZim, there
Zere paths doZn to beautiful, hidden mountain lakes and bathhouses in
Zhich they could change into sZimming outfits; if they Zanted to picnic,
there Zere picnic grounds of Zhich every detail Zas designed to preserve
the fresh, virgin quality of the Zoods; if they Zanted to camp out, there
Zere campsites, designed Zith equal care, laid out ne[t to cool mountain
brooks. NeZspapers in Rochester rhapsodi]ed over LetchZorth State 3ark,
neZspapers in Albany over Thacher State 3ark, neZspapers in Buffalo over
the park on Devil's Island that overlooked Niagara Falls. But these
neZspapers had little interest in the Long Island parks, and NeZ York City
neZspapers had little interest in the upstate parks. So no neZspaper, no
matter hoZ enthusiastic it Zas over Zhat editorial Zriters called "Robert
0oses' great park program," comprehended the full e[tent of the program's
magnitude—or the full e[tent of its greatness.

3erhaps the most remarkable characteristic of these parks and parkZays that
Zere becoming physical realities in 1928 Zas that they Zere, for the most
part, the parks and parkZays he had proposed in the NeZ York State
Association park reports he had Zritten in 1922 and 1923. They Zere
located in the places he had proposed, and the details of their development
—doZn to the facades of their bathhouses and hoZ many lockers and
parking spaces each Zould have—folloZed the plans 0oses had made for
them.

Robert 0oses had dreamed a dream immense in scope. By the end of the
summer of 1928, the dream—all of the dream, even Jones Beach, Zhich
had seemed doomed to diminution in reality—Zas either reality or Zell on
its Zay to becoming reality.

surfaced most strongly the mi[ed strain of passionate idealism and
overZeening arrogance that she had inherited from her parents, Grannie and
Bernhard Cohen. :hen  the idealism died, the arrogance Zas already Zell
rooted and strong. If it Zas given nourishment, it Zould e[pand. And poZer
feeds arrogance. As 0oses obtained poZer, therefore, the traits
symptomatic of his arrogance became steadily more noticeable. The
pattern's hue darkened.

323
+is mother had alZays displayed—as a 0adison +ouse trustee and as a
Zife—a conviction of  her oZn infallibility   and a predisposition to impose
her Zill  on others, an unZillingness to listen to others, a burning impatience
to see her solutions to problems implemented, to Get Things Done. 0oses'
imagination seemed most easily fired, as his mother's had been, by physical
problems and physical solutions, problems that could be solved by
construction, by the shaping of concrete and steel. And the resemblance in
traits betZeen mother and son Zent beyond that. As a staffer at the Bureau
of 0unicipal  Research, he had displayed the same dogmatism and the same
impatience. Bob 0oses had Zanted his oZn Zay—and he had Zanted it
Zhen he Zanted it.

And noZ that he had poZer, he Zas going to see that he got it.

+e had never Zanted to listen to people Zho disagreed Zith him. NoZ, in
the main, he didn't have to. ":hen he talked to you," recalls Leonard :.
+all, then a state assemblyman, "he'd just tell you Zhat he Zas going to do.
If you disagreed Zith him and tried to e[plain your feelings, or even started
asking questions, he Zould cut right in, slash at you, Zithout ansZering the
questions, making you feel stupid for asking. And if you Zere talking to
him on the phone, he'd just hang up on you. I remember talking to him on
the phone and disagreeing Zith him about something and I Zas in the
middle of a sentence and the damn phone Zas slammed doZn."

0oses had alZays displayed contempt for people he felt Zere considerably
beneath him, the colored "subject people" of the British Empire, for
e[ample, or civil servants Zho hadn't attended O[ford or Cambridge. At the
0unicipal  Civil  Service Commission, his irritation at having to interrupt his
Zork for public  hearings indicated a tendency to feel that the public he Zas
serving Zas beneath him, that its suggestions about its oZn destiny Zere not
Zorth listening to. NoZ  that feeling about the public Zas intensified. :hen
the Governor's office received a letter making a suggestion about parks or
critici]ing  one of the regional commissions, the letter Zas invariably
referred by George Graves, Smith's secretary, to 0oses for a suggested
reply that could be sent back over the Governor's signature. NoZ, more and
more frequently, 0oses Zould suggest that no one bother to reply at all.

324
+is contempt Zas not limited to the public. It included, apparently, most
state legislators. If he Zasn't hanging up on them in mid-sentence, he Zas
treating them Zith e[travagant disdain. "They didn't dislike him just
because politically he Zas cutting them to pieces," +all recalls. "They
disliked him personally. +e acted Zith a complete arrogance. +e insulted
those men to their face." Sniffing at the patronage possibilities at Jones
Beach as though they Zere sea air, Senate Finance Committee Chairman
Jeremiah F. TZomey of Brooklyn asked 0oses to drop around for a chat

before the Finance Committee hearings on a Jones Beach appropriation bill.
According to +all,  to Zhom TZomey told the story:

"TZomey says, 'Bob, it looks like there'll be a lot of jobs out there, and I
Zas Zondering if Ze could get a couple.'

"Bob ansZers very softly, very gently, very politely. ':hat   did you have in
mind, Jerry?' he asks. Jerry mentions one job, and 0oses says very softly,
very politely, 'Do you have anything else on your mind, Jerry?' Jerry,
completely taken in, thinking that for once this felloZ is going to be
reasonable, mentions a couple of other jobs, and 0oses says, 'Do you have
anything else on your mind, Jerry?' Jerry says, ':ell, that's about all.' And
0oses says, 'Jerry, you can take that bill and stick it up your ass!' "

0oses had alZays been impatient. 0ost men didn't move fast enough for
him. NoZ he could do something about it.

The park philanthropists on the State Council of 3arks didn't move fast
enough for him.

There Zere many reasons. For one thing, most of the regional commissions
Zhose chairmen comprised the council Zere made up of men Zith a
different philosophy of parks from his. This Zas understandable. They
Zere, in the main, elderly men, men out of the days Zhen parks had meant
"conservation" rather than "recreation." Even during the 1920's, of course,
parks still meant "conservation" to most park e[perts; there Zasn't one in
the country Zho Zould lean as heavily as 0oses to thinking of parks as
baseball fields and tennis courts rather than as glades and forests and hiking
trails. The regional commissioners, men of the older era, had become

325
interested in parks to preserve as much of nature's beauties as possible from
a ruthless civili]ation. :hen   they saZ the developer's bulldo]er imperiling
a favorite piece of Zoodland, they purchased the Zoodland Zith their oZn
money and presented it to the state, and Zhen they reali]ed that the state
Zould not provide sufficient funds to preserve it as it should be preserved,
they put up the money themselves, year after year, and they put up their
time, too, spending Zeekends and vacations on inspection trips, often
making needed repairs Zith their oZn hands. In draZing up their Zills, they
chose carefully the men they Zanted to administer the properties after they
Zere gone—and these men, too, felt that preserving the properties in the
condition in Zhich they had received them Zas a sacred trust. 3roposals for
huge parking fields, for restaurants—these seemed to them to conflict Zith
the ideals they had sZorn themselves to preserve. If the state noZ Zanted to
"develop" those parks, Zell, certainly some development Zas necessary; as
long as it Zas done sloZly and carefully, it could be Zorked out—but they
Zanted to make sure that the development did not destroy the natural
qualities they treasured.

There Zere other reasons, too, for 0oses' impatience Zith the regional
commissioners. At bottom, the philosophy of government on Zhich they
had been Zeaned emphasi]ed the rights of the individual. They believed,
therefore, that governmental poZer should be used Zith the utmost
restraint. They Zere, frankly, dismayed by the Zay 0oses had used entry
and appropriation against +avemeyer and 0acy, by the Zay he had
threatened to use

it against the North Shore barons. And they didn't intend to use such
techniques themselves, even if using sloZer techniques meant that parks
and parkZays in their areas Zouldn't be acquired as*fast as 0oses Zanted.

A more important source of conflict in their dealings Zith 0oses, hoZever,
had nothing to do Zith philosophy. It Zas simply that the old men Zanted to
remain in charge of the parks they loved.

0oses had let them believe that they Zould remain in charge. +e had given
them no hint of his true purposes. For 0oses had needed them. +e had
needed their prestige, their reputation (as strong Zith legislators as Zith the

326
public) for uprightness, for unselfishness and for devotion to the cause of
parks. +e had needed the backing of their names.

And they had given him that backing. During the debate over the
$15,000,000 bond issue, they had made use of their influence in their home
counties to mute upstate resentment toZard such a large spending proposal.
Judge Ellis J. Staley of Albany had spoken night after night to civic groups
in Albany, Troy and Schenectady. Judge Alphonse Trumpbore ClearZater,
elderly and ailing, had climbed out of a sickbed in .ingston to tour 8lster
County so successfully that that bastion of conservatism had, to Al Smith's
astonishment, actually given the referendum a majority. During the Taylor
Estate fight, the old park men had let Smith invoke their names—"everyone
knoZs Judge ClearZater"—to dramati]e the fact that even these dyed-in-
the-Zool Republicans could not support the Republican legislative
proposals for parks. GO3 leaders had told them that Smith Zas using them
to destroy their party. 0any of the park men had felt there Zas some truth
in this. But parks came first Zith them. And Zhen Smith, through 0oses,
had asked them to come to Albany, they had come.

They had given 0oses the help he asked because they believed Zhat he had
told them. :hen  he assured them—as he did over and over both in letters
and to their faces—that under his park plan they Zould "continue their
duties and poZers," that they Zould continue to administer the parks they
loved, that the State 3arks Council Zas merely an "advisory agency," they
believed him. And Zhen the bill creating the State 3arks Council Zas
signed, their leaders had elected him its chairman.

But noZ 0oses didn't  need them any more.

Not a month after his election, Judge Staley, Zho administered John Boyd
Thacher 3ark near Albany for the American Scenic and +istorical
3reservation Society, routinely sent to the state a request for $15,000 to
build a neZ caretaker's cottage. State officials told the astonished judge that
all such requests noZ had to go through the State 3arks Council, through
0oses. And 0oses  disapproved the request. "The height of impertinence,"
Staley told the society's trustees. They agreed. "It is highly desirable," they
said in the minutes of their meeting of 0ay 26, 1924, "that there be a clear
understanding of the difference betZeen the poZers of the Council as 'a

327
central advisory agency' and the e[ecutive poZers of 'the e[isting
commissions, boards and organi]ations governing the . . . parks.' "

They got their clear understanding. :hen, during the summer of 1925, they
submitted to the council their budget requests for 1926, 0oses curtly

disapproved many of them. :hen they tried to circumvent 0oses by
sending them to state budget officials as they had in the past, the officials
sent them back telling them that under the neZ 3arks Council laZ, all park
budget requests had to be transmitted to the state through the council. At a
council meeting at 261 BroadZay, Judge ClearZater "reminded" 0oses that
the council's poZers Zere "advisory," not "supervisory." Really? 0oses
replied coldly. 0ight  he suggest that the judge read the laZ?

The old park men read the laZ—and began to reali]e Zhat they had done.

The reali]ation greZ.

0oses had Zritten the 3arks Council bylaZs. At the first meeting after he
had been elected chairman, Zhen he Zas still charming the old park men,
they had approved them, believing them only a formality. NoZ, reading the
bylaZs, they reali]ed that all poZer in the council Zas centrali]ed in its
chairman. The council's finance committee, the key unit Zhich Zould
Zeigh the requests of the regional commissions, Zas not elected by them
but appointed by him—and he had appointed to three of its five places
council staff members hired by and responsible only to the chairman. The
Zhole council staff Zas responsible to the chairman. And this staff Zas
empoZered in the bylaZs to draZ up the plans for all state parks, including
their state parks.

The old men reluctantly decided they Zould have to deny 0oses a second
one-year term—and suddenly reali]ed, Zhen they tallied up votes, that
Zhile their commissions controlled a majority of the state parks, they did
not control a majority of the State 3arks Council. Si[ of its eleven votes
Zere in 0oses' hands: 0oses' oZn; tZo  cast by Smith appointees not
directly connected Zith parks, the State Conservation Commissioner and
the director of the State 0useum; three cast by the presidents of three neZ
regional commissions Zhich did not at the moment have any parks to

328
administer but Zhich 0oses had insisted—for reasons the old park men
noZ understood—be represented on the council and to Zhich Smith had
appointed men Zho Zould take 0oses' orders. The old park men had many
reservations about 0oses' over-all park policies as Zell as about his plans
for specific parks. For one thing, they Zere concerned about his eagerness
to develop parks that Zere far outside city limits— +eckscher Zas fifty
miles from Times Square, LetchZorth fifty miles from Rochester—Zithout
providing any means of transportation to them other than auto; the truly
poor masses of the cities didn't oZn automobiles, they pointed out; hoZ
Zere they to reach these parks? But every time they raised such points, they
Zere voted doZn. And 0oses Zas re-elected to the chairmanship in 1925,
1926, 1927 and 1928.

Some of 0oses' fights Zith the elderly park philanthropists could be vieZed
as conflicts of philosophy—as his determination not to alloZ his dreams to
be thZarted by other men's smaller-scale vision—although the closer one

e[amines their details, the more it appears that the crucial conflict in each
Zas betZeen his demand for speed and their feeling that since once nature
Zas altered by man, it could never be restored to its original condition, any
changes in the magnificent gorges and mountains Zhich had been entrusted
to them must be considered Zith painstaking care and designed to blend in
Zith the e[isting  topography; the American Scenic and +istoric
3reservation Society, for e[ample, did not object to making Letch Zorth
State 3ark more accessible to the public and to furnishing accommodations
for families Zanting to stay overnight; they just Zanted the proposed inn—
and large adjoining parking garage—built on the rim of the beautiful
Genesee River Gorge rather than right in its heart, as 0oses proposed. On
other battles betZeen 0oses and the old park men, hoZever, it is more
difficult  to place any philosophical interpretation. The nature of these fights
hints that poZer Zas noZ, for the first time in his life, becoming an end in
itself, that he Zas beginning to crave it noZ not only for the sake of dreams
but for its oZn sake, that although, through his bill drafting, he had given
himself much of the poZer in the field of parks, he Zas no longer satisfied
Zith much of the poZer, that he noZ Zanted all the poZer in the field.

329
The suspicion is aroused most strongly by his treatment of the
commissioners of the state park at Niagara.

There Zere five Niagara commissioners—all of them elderly men—but the
tZo most active had long been Judge ClearZater and Ansley :ilco[.

"Everyone knoZs Judge ClearZater," Smith had said, and, in regard to the
Central Tier at least, the Governor may have been very nearly right. At
seventy-seven Alphonse Trumpbore ClearZater of .ingston Zas a legend
throughout the band of thinly populated counties that stretched three
hundred miles across the middle of the state. Tall and thin, Zith a face that
Zould have been cold Zere it not for the upZard turn of the corners of his
mouth, he Zas a Zing-collared embodiment of devotion to the public good.
+e had been both district attorney of 8lster County and a laZyer Zho, in an
era in Zhich the poor often Zent unrepresented in court, represented the
poor—and as both prosecutor and defender his brilliance and, despite a dry
and precise speaking style, his remarkable oratorical ability made him a
laZyer other laZyers feared to oppose. :hile  still young, Judge ClearZater
had been president of the State Bar Association and a Justice of the State
Supreme Court; men said he could, had he Zished, been Governor. But he
did not so Zish. Instead of a politician, he became a historian, and he served
his state by studying its history—scholars regarded his knoZledge as un-
equaled—and by selecting from appointments proffered by its Governors
not those that Zould have brought him fame but those that Zould enable
him to help preserve its locales of history and beauty, such as Niagara State
3ark. +is selflessness Zas Zidely knoZn; although he had renounced
politics, his voice Zas regarded by politicians as the most influential in the
Central Tier. :hen  in 1925 a desperate 0oses, assuring ClearZater that the
3arks Council Zould be only an "advisory" body, had asked the judge to
help him in the Taylor Estate fight, he had come, old and ill, to Albany to
stand before a hostile Republican caucus and argue in 0oses' behalf. :hen
legis-

lators had begun critici]ing 0oses' spending proposals for Niagara as
e[travagant, ClearZater had Zritten him a letter saying "Your vieZs ... are
just"—and that line of criticism had abruptly stopped. Of all the old park
men, ClearZater had been 0oses' most effective supporter.

330
Ansley :ilco[,    Zho  had served as a Niagara park commissioner for forty
years, Zas a chubby old gentleman Zith a Zhite Zalrus mustache. A
successful attorney, he lived in a stately Georgian mansion on Buffalo's
fashionable DelaZare Avenue. But Ansley :ilco[   had been a brilliant
student at Yale and after graduation he had gone on to O[ford. Then,
attracted by the ideals of the municipal reform movement, he had spent
years campaigning, fruitlessly, for a civil service merit system for Buffalo.
Then he began to fight for parks. :hile  still in  his tZenties, he determined
to rescue the gorge overlooking Niagara Falls from the factories, mills and
cheap rooming houses that Zere creeping along its edge. Spending tZo
years of his oZn time appraising the land, he had determined that it Zould
take $1,500,000 to condemn it and, in 1885, after a courageous and bitter
fight, had persuaded the Legislature to appropriate the money and create
Niagara State 3ark, Zhich by the 1920's Zas nationally knoZn, the single
most famous park in the country. If 0oses had studied :ilco['s  life,  he
might have noticed more than a feZ resemblances to his oZn.

But 0oses Zasn't interested in studying :ilco['s    life. And he didn't need
ClearZater any more. The tZo old men—the entire Niagara Commission in
fact—Zere a constant irritant to him. :hy?   No one could accuse the
Niagara commissioners of e[cessive conservatism or of being too limited in
their aims for improving the Niagara 3ark, long alloZed by the Legislature
to deteriorate, and for e[tending the park—along Zith connecting parkZays
and bridges—all along the Niagara Frontier. Their aims Zere, in most
important respects, identical Zith 0oses'. So Zas their insistence on speed.

Ansley :ilco[,    in fact, had even more reason to Zant speed than 0oses. In
1925, :ilco[    Zas dying of Zhat his obituaries Zould call  "the Zasting
disease"—cancer. And :ilco[   kneZ he Zas dying. +e Zanted desperately
to see before he died at least the beginning of the refurbishment of the park
he had created as a young man and had administered, frequently Zith his
oZn money, for forty years, and at least a start on the park e[tension and
parkZay that Zould preserve forever the gorge he loved.

To speed the refurbishment, Zhich included the acquisition of a neZ
elevator to carry tourists doZn the cliffs near the falls to the famed Cave of
:inds,   :ilco[    had persuaded another commission member, 3aul A.

331
Schoell-kopf, president of the Niagara Falls 3oZer Company, to have
poZer-company engineers draZ up plans for the elevator so that
construction could begin as soon as funds Zere allocated. And he had done
everything he could to enable the commission to get a fast start on the
parkZay along the edge of the Niagara gorge. .noZing that the $1,000,000
allocated to Niagara in the park referendum Zould pay for only a fraction of
the necessary right-of-Zay, he asked Schoellkopf, Zhose poZer company
oZned much of the land along the gorge, to agree to donate easements if the
commission acquired the rest of the right-of-Zay. Schoellkopf, Zho kneZ
the

nature of :ilco['s    illness and the reason for his desire for haste, agreed.
:hen   a small but key parcel came on the market and :ilco[ Zas afraid it
Zould be purchased and developed by private interests, he and Schoellkopf
purchased it and presented it to the commission as a gift. :hen tZo more
key pieces came on the market in 1925, he persuaded Schoellkopf to have
the poZer company purchase them and hold them until the commission
received, at the 1926 legislative session, an appropriation to alloZ it to
purchase them in turn. The admiration in Zhich :ilco[   Zas held helped the
parkZay along; several of his friends said they Zould buy parcels needed
for the right-of-Zay and give them to the commission in his name, and
Schoellkopf advanced money to speed the transactions. The only point of
contention betZeen the Niagara commissioners and 0oses Zas that the
commissioners Zanted to carry out the Niagara development themselves, to
keep, as 0oses had solemnly promised them they could, poZer over the
park's development and administration, to remain in charge of Zhat Zas to
them a cherished piece of nature instead of turning it over to a faceless
bureaucracy in the 3arks Council offices in NeZ York City, three hundred
miles aZay. In so Zanting, they stood in the Zay of 0oses' absolute control
of state parks.

ClearZater, the Niagara Commission's representative on the 3arks Council,
Zas a larger irritant for the same reason. :hen the judge argued that the
council Zas only an "advisory" body and that the regional commissions
should be alloZed latitude in their Zork, he Zas arguing, in effect, against
absolute control of all state parks by 0oses. And Zhen Alphonse
ClearZater spoke, the other council members sitting around the table Zith

332
him seemed to remember more clearly the promises 0oses had given them
and the principles of park development that they had once been determined
not to surrender. Several times, the judge had even sZayed Robert +. Tre-
man, the chairman of one of the three neZ regional commissions, and the
decisive si[th vote had been cast against a 0oses proposal.

The refusal of the Niagara Commission to submit to his control had already,
0oses complained, made him look "ridiculous." In submitting park
spending plans to the three-man committee of the Governor, +utchinson
and +eZitt, 0oses,  an[ious as alZays to obtain as much money as possible
as quickly as possible, had asked for immediate allocation of Niagara's
Zhole million-dollar  appropriation. But Zhen +utchinson asked :ilco[    if
the commission really needed the Zhole sum in 1926, :ilco[  refused to lie.
+e said that the commission could use no more than $400,000 of the money
in that year.

The Niagara Commission's independence Zas threatening to cause 0oses
serious problems. :hile  the commission envisioned a complete parkZay
system around Niagara Falls, he Zanted it to e[tend all the Zay to Buffalo,
tZenty-five miles aZay. The Niagara commissioners had no objection to the
plan, but they didn't Zant to be responsible for it; they Zere not trying to
build a vast park system; they Zere interested only in the land they kneZ
and for Zhose protection they had been fighting for so many years.
Furthermore, the parkZay 0oses Zanted Zould be primarily in Erie
County; they felt the neZly created Erie County 3ark Commission should

have jurisdiction over it. But the bond issue gave money for improvements
on the Niagara Frontier only to the Niagara Commission, and they Zere
afraid that under the laZ they Zould be forced to assume responsibility for
it. :hen   0oses asked them to give $100,000 of their million for planning
of the Erie County section of the parkZay, they objected because they felt
the Zhole million Zas needed around the falls, but they said that they Zould
give it anyZay—as long as in return a laZ Zas passed making clear that the
portion of the parkZay in Erie County Zas not their responsibility. This
apparently minor point appeared to Zorry 0oses beyond all relationship to
its legal importance, possibly because asking the Legislature to pass neZ
park reorgani]ation laZs might give it the opportunity to oust him from

333
control. Furthermore, the e[istence of open conflict Zithin the 3arks
Council Zas a threat to his assertion of absolute dominance over it; as long
as maneuverings Zithin the parks empire he Zas creating Zere kept quiet,
he could quietly Zork his Zill  Zithin  it;  let it once become a source of
controversy and the Legislature might Zell begin stepping into it, and the
Legislature Zould not be disposed to alloZ his dominance to continue.

So 0oses moved against the Niagara commissioners. First, although they
had a superintendent and an engineer to direct the commission's staff and
day-to-day affairs, 0oses demanded that they appoint an "e[ecutive
officer"—Zho  they suspected Zould be one of his men. They refused.

Then there ensued in April and 0ay 1926 a number of 3arks Council
meetings at Zhich the commission had no representative present.
ClearZater, its authori]ed representative, Zas suddenly struck doZn by an
illness so severe that doctors gave him no chance of living. :ilco[, his
authori]ed substitute, Zas too Zeak to take his place. And council members
Zho Zere friends of the tZo old men reported that in their absence rumors
—vicious rumors—Zere being circulated about them in Zhispers at council
meetings. Someone—:ilco[   felt sure he kneZ Zho—Zas hinting darkly
that the Niagara Commission, in making its park and parkZay plans, had
sold out to the interests of Schoellkopf's poZer company. On June 3, Smith
Zrote 0oses a letter—:ilco[     Zas alZays to believe that 0oses Zrote it,
and persuaded Smith to sign it—asking 0oses to investigate "transactions
and relations betZeen the Niagara Reservation Commission and the poZer
companies, including the reservation of easements by the poZer companies
on land sold by them to the commission."

"I also Zish to learn," said the innuendo-loaded letter, "Zhether this park
commission has laid out a program Zhich Zill insure the protection of the
Niagara Riverfront ... or Zhether they are just buying isolated pieces of land
along the banks of the river and leaving the rest of the land in the hands of
the poZer company and other private interests."

:ilco[    could hardly believe Zhat he read. 0oses, he Zas sure, Zas behind
the letter, but 0oses had knoZn and approved of the commission's
arrangements Zith the poZer company.

334
But :ilco[    had gotten only a taste of Zhat Zas in store for him.

0oses called a meeting of the 3arks Council for June 26 to consider the
Governor's letter. :ilco[,   Schoellkopf and the tZo other Niagara Com-

mission members, Robert :. De Forest and Robert +. Gittins, met and
prepared resolutions giving their side of the story and sent them to 0oses,
asking him to have them read to the council. No Niagara commissioners
Zere present at the council meeting—ClearZater and :ilco[  Zere unable
to travel—and they learned after the meeting that 0oses had not even told
the council about the e[istence of the resolutions and instead had persuaded
it to appoint a five-member committee to investigate the matter at a hearing
at the 3arks Council office in NeZ York City on July 15. The committee,
the Niagara commissioners reali]ed, Zas packed against them; there Zas
one old park man, 0ajor :illiam    A. :elch    of the 3alisades Commission,
on it, and its chairman, Jay DoZner of :estchester, although an engineer
friendly to 0oses and an e[ponent of the neZ park theories, Zas regarded
as a man of integrity, but the third member Zas a representative of
Conservation Commissioner Ale[ander 0acDonald, and 0oses and his
friend and aide, +enry Lut], Zere members e[ officio,  so 0oses had three
votes out of the five.

:hether   the only available record of the hearing is complete is impossible
to ascertain. The only transcript available Zas made by Rose 3edrick,
0oses' secretary, and :ilco[   later complained in a letter to 0oses that
"several times the stenographer Zas told to omit things, or portions of the
discussion, Zhich Zere really of the greatest relative significance." These
omissions appear at tZo crucial points in the transcript as "discussions off
the record" and once 0iss 3edrick refers to an "argument betZeen 0r.
Gittins and 0r.  0oses" Zithout  telling Zhat  the argument Zas about.

Complete or not, hoZever, the transcript is interesting.

:hat   are the specific charges against us? :ilco[ demanded as soon as the
hearings began. There are no charges, DoZner hastily replied. This is not an
investigation—"Take that Zord from the record. This conference; it is a
conference. Substitute the Zord 'conference.' "

335
You mean there is no one Zilling to stand up here to our faces and make
charges? :ilco[   asked. "No, sir. No, sir," DoZner replied. "No charges
have been made by anybody so far as I knoZ." The only reason the
committee Zas interested in the commission's relations Zith the poZer
company, he said, Zas that the Legislature might be reluctant to allocate
money for land along the gorge until the poZer company gave definite
Zritten assurances, preferably legal options, that it Zould give the
commission easements over the intervening lands it oZned so that the
Legislature could be assured that the parkZay Zould be continuous. The
only thing the committee Zanted Zas an assurance from :ilco[  and
Schoellkopf that their informal agreements Zould be formali]ed.

:ell,   :ilco[     said, there is a letter Zritten by Governor Smith, "implying
that Ze are handling the thing not for the public interest but for the interests
of other people ... of the poZer company . . . plainly implying it, so much so
that he might as Zell have charged it in terms . . . just as plainly as if it Zere
put in a little more brutal language, charging us Zith collusive and improper
relations. ... If the English language has any mean-

ing, it means that." :here  did the Governor get his information—false
information, outright lies, in fact—on Zhich  the letter Zas based? 0oses
said hastily, "0r. DoZner,  may I interrupt a moment. . . . 3ersonally, I
regard the question of Zhere the Governor got his information as something
that Ze have no right to go into." And DoZner hastily agreed. Throughout
the hearing, Zhich Zould go on for si[  hours, at a high cost in pain and
Zeariness to :ilco[    and to De Forest—Zho Zas seventy-nine years old and
so ill that he had been in bed for more than a month—the Niagara
commissioners Zould seek to learn Zhat the charges against them Zere and
Zhy, if there Zere no charges, they had been summoned to NeZ York City.
Throughout the hearing, DoZner Zould evade a direct ansZer, trying to
focus attention on a number of minor matters that had nothing to do Zith
the poZer company. Near the end of the long day, DoZner tried to conclude
the hearing. "Just one minute," :ilco[   said, and insisted that "the big
question that appears in the Governor's letter" be discussed. +e made the
committee listen Zhile he read into the record Schoellkopf's contributions
to the parkZay plan, and presented proof that the poZer company Zas not
getting anything from the informal arrangement and in fact Zas donating to

336
the state land Zorth hundreds of thousands of dollars. The Governor's letter
talked about "transactions and relations betZeen the . . . Commission and
the poZer companies including the reservation of easements by the poZer
companies on land sold by them to the Commission," :ilco[  said. :hy,   he
said, no poZer company had ever "sold an acre of land to our Commission
or made any reservation [easement] Zhatever on any land Zhatever." And
DoZner, as if his sense of fairness had at last Zon over his loyalty to
0oses, said for the record that he had, in fact, toured the Niagara site
himself and had been "impressed Zith ... the many things that they [the
poZer company] . . . had planned to do for the furtherance of the parkZay."

":e   have no time to Zaste in hearing any defense of gentlemen of your
reputation as to any collusion Zith anybody, and this committee Zill not go
into any such question," DoZner said. ":e  are not interested and Ze do not
believe any such things and have nothing in our minds in regard to it. :e
knoZ your reputations too Zell to believe you Zould do such a thing. . . .
There is no such thing in the minds of this committee." And Zhen :ilco[
insisted that he be formally e[onerated of any Zrongdoing in his informal
argreements Zith Schoellkopf, DoZner said flatly, "I have no fault to find
Zith that transaction," a position Zith Zhich  :elch   heartily agreed. 0oses,
Zho had repeatedly interrupted DoZner and the commissioners during
discussions of the other, minor subjects, had been noticeably silent. NoZ he
said, "I Zould like  to ask as a question of fact Zhether or not the money in
the case of the tZo parcels Ze discussed before Zas or Zas not furnished by
the poZer company." And DoZner said flatly, ":hat   if  it Zas, 0r.  0oses?"

DoZner's an[iousness to avoid discussion of the "big question" raised in
Smith's—or 0oses'—letter deprived :ilco[    of  an opportunity to get the
committee's approval of acquisition by the poZer company of a key piece
of land that had just come on the market and that :ilco[ Zas eager

to have Schoellkopf snap up and turn over to the commission for the
parkZay before someone else bought it and began to build on it. This,
:ilco[    Zas to say, Zas a bitter disappointment to him. "The opportunity ...
is slipping and my interest and ability to act are Zaning," he Zrote, "and I
fear this promising plan may come to naught." But at least the
commissioners felt they had been e[onerated.

337
But they had not reckoned Zith the full e[tent of the change in Robert
0oses. The Niagara commissioners felt sure that DoZner's report on the
hearing Zould be fair. And they Zere right. The committee chairman Zrote
that Schoellkopf s only relationship Zith the commission had been to assist
it and to have his poZer company assist it, at considerable e[pense to both
himself and his company. Such criticisms as DoZner did make of the
commission's operations, based on the minor matters discussed at the
hearings, dealt Zith technicalities, and so did his recommendations for
changes in its procedures. But Zhen the 3arks Council met on July 24—
Zith :ilco[,     e[hausted by the earlier trip to NeZ York and the strain of the
hearing, again confined to bed and absent—DoZner's report Zas not
distributed. Neither Zas its summary, Zhich contained the e[oneration.
Instead, its list of "recommendations," Zhich concentrated on the
technicalities and did not include the e[oneration or even mention the "big
question," Zas read— so hastily that an aide :ilco[  had sent to take notes
Zas able to gain only a general idea of its contents—and the innocuous
recommendations Zere adopted.

:ilco['s    aide asked +enry Lut] to send a copy of the report to :ilco[,   and
Lut]  promised he Zould do so. On July 30, :ilco[   had not received it, and
he sent Lut] a telegram asking for it. Lut] did not even reply.

On August 3, :ilco[,    in bed, unable to determine Zhat the report about him
said or if it had been sent to the rest of the 3arks Council, Zrote Lut]. +is
letter Zas, considering the provocation, one of remarkable courtesy. The
harshest line in it Zas its last: "If there is a copy of that report in e[istence
or available, I should be glad to have it as soon as convenient."

Lut]  did not reply. But 0oses did. The first sentence of his letter to :ilco[
Zas: "I Zill  pass over Zithout e[tended comment the unpleasant tone of
your letter. I presume that you have become so accustomed to addressing
people in this Zay that you are hardly aZare of its effect on others." +e Zas
Zriting,  0oses said, to defend Lut] from :ilco['s     attacks. DoZner's report,
0oses said, Zas not ready, although the 3arks Council had adopted its
"conclusions" and "the action taken by the Council has been outlined to the
Governor." An astounded :ilco[   reali]ed that 0oses  had sent a copy of
his, 0oses', letter to the seventy-tZo other regional commissioners Zithout

338
sending them a copy of :ilco['s   letter—and therefore the commissioners
could have no Zay of knoZing that :ilco['s    letter had not in fact been
unpleasant, and they could not knoZ the events that had led up to it.

Since :ilco['s   letter Zas not insulting, Zhy  did 0oses  say it Zas? In
:ilco['s    vieZ, 0oses  reali]ed that the DoZner report Zould not make the
Niagara commissioners look bad to the other regional commissioners and

Zould not justify  to Smith Zhat he had almost certainly told Smith about
them, that he therefore needed another issue to divert attention from the
main one, and that he sei]ed on :ilco['s  innocuous letter as the Zhole cloth
out of Zhich to manufacture it. In any case, his handling of the letter Zas
consistent Zith his other actions in the matter. +e had sent the seventy-three
regional commissioners copies of Smith's letter implying Zrongdoing by
the Niagara Commission, but he had not sent the regional commissioners —
he had not even let them knoZ of the e[istence of—the Niagara
Commission's resolutions that gave its side of the story. +e had read at a
3arks Council meeting DoZner's "recommendations" Zhich seemed to find
some fault, hoZever minor, Zith the commission, but not the summary
Zhich e[onerated the commission of the major charges. And noZ he
accused :ilco[   of Zriting  an abusive letter to a council employee, Zithout
alloZing the regional commissioners to see the letter for themselves—and
to see that it Zas not abusive. It is impossible to avoid the conclusion that
0oses had determined to hound from the state park organi]ation a group of
elderly men Zhose only crime Zas their refusal to alloZ him to e[ercise
unbridled poZer in that organi]ation and to remove them from control of
the park they loved, the park that one of them had created, the park to Zhich
they had given so much of their lives.

:hen   he received 0oses' letter, :ilco[,    Zho had been confined at home,
Zeak and in pain, since his trip to NeZ York, left his bed and Zent to his
office to dictate a reply. +e Zas unable to stay there long or to Zork in
substantial stretches, and it took him five days to finish it. But he finished it.
And although its main purport Zas to e[onerate himself from charges of
discourtesy and dishonesty, it Zas also a telling document in charting the
evolution of Robert 0oses.

"You speak from a high position," Ansley :ilco[    Zrote.

339
Seemingly, this should bring Zith it a feeling of responsibility and
consideration, not merely a sense of dominating authority and a desire to
have your oZn Zay Zithout opposition in all  matters, large and small. It
might have led you to shoZ some special consideration to the Niagara
Commission and Commissioners, oZing to their age and long service and
the e[perience of all of them, giving them an intimate knoZledge of many
special local problems Zhich you and other members of the State Council,
hoZever Zise and e[perienced in general, are only able to guess at; and
oZing to the desperate illness and disability of Judge ClearZater, our
3resident, and partial disabilities of 0r. De Forest and myself. But it has not
produced any such consideration—quite the contrary. . . . Our Commission
and its members have been treated by you unfairly and brutally to a degree
Zhich cannot be e[pressed in polite language.

Your rage toZard Judge ClearZater and me, :ilco[  Zrote 0oses,  is a
"poisonous thing." And Zhat, :ilco[     asked, is the reason for it? Nothing
but the fact that, Zhile supporting in general your park policies, Ze have
"ventured on occasion to speak out in meetings vieZs opposing your
policies, and [have] beaten them more than once. This could not be
forgotten."

:ilco[    denied that his letter to Lut] had been abusive.

"Neither you nor anyone can point out anything offensive in my letter

to 0r.  Lut],  e[cept to one conscious of trying to play tricks, Zho finds
himself caught and e[posed ... I Zas feeling indignant, but I had a right to
be indignant," :ilco[    Zrote. You accused us of dishonesty—yes, it Zas
you; you Zere responsible for the vicious rumors that came up in 3arks
Council meetings Zhen neither ClearZater nor I Zere present to repudiate
them; you Zrote the letter signed by Smith; "the letter does not sound at all
like Governor Smith, and it does sound like you"—and then Zhen DoZner's
report shoZed us to be innocent, you did not let us or anyone else see the
report. 3robably the Governor has not seen it either, :ilco[  Zrote. "You say
. . . that 'The action taken by the Council has been outlined to the Governor.'
" I am sure it has—"by you, I suppose, and in your oZn Zay."

340
:ilco['s    letter, Zhich detailed his "transactions and relations" Zith the
poZer company, covered ten single-spaced typeZritten pages. "That it is too
long, I knoZ Zell,"  he concluded. "FeZ Zill  read it and probably none Zill
appreciate it."

The old man Zas right. +is letter lay unread in an unopened folder in a
dusty Albany Zarehouse for forty-tZo years. And although, in the forty-
third year, the folder Zas opened (by the author) and the letter Zas read, and
although it provided the first detailed account of the changes Zrought in
Robert 0oses by his hunger for poZer, it could not right the Zorst of all the
injustices 0oses perpetrated on Ansley :ilco[.   During 0oses'  long reign
as State 3arks Council chairman, the plaques previously placed in Niagara
State 3ark by :ilco['s   friends to commemorate the contributions to the
park made by him and the other old Niagara commissioners Zere
systematically removed—to be replaced Zith plaques bearing 0oses' name.
:hen   the parkZay along the Niagara gorge Zas built, it Zas named after
0oses and so Zas the poZer dam that became the centerpiece of the park.
By the time 0oses' reign Zas over, it Zould be impossible to find anyZhere
in Niagara State 3ark even a single hint that anyone e[cept 0oses had been
responsible for its creation.

:ilco['s    letter had no appreciable effect on 0oses. :ith  it, :ilco[     sent a
request for the names and addresses of the seventy-tZo other regional
commissioners, "to Zhom you sent your abusive and misleading and unfair
and domineering letter," so that he could send copies—along Zith copies of
his letter to Lut]—to them so that they could judge for themselves. 0oses
never replied. Instead, he continued his assault on the old men, if by more
roundabout means. If he could not oust them quickly, his actions seemed to
indicate, he Zould Zear them doZn.

First, a series of charges Zere filed against the commission's superintendent
and chief e[ecutive officer, Emil R. :aldenberger.  The commissioners
investigated and cleared him. Then 0oses told Smith that because of the
illnesses of Judge ClearZater, :ilco[  and De Forest, the commission Zas
"not functioning," and in 0arch  1927 Smith asked De Forest, in the most
delicate of terms because of De Forest's great prestige, if he might not
prefer a post on the State +ousing Board instead. De Forest had, in fact,

341
long Zanted to resign. But the old men Zere loyal to their compatriots. "I
Zould rather not put myself in the position of a deserter," he replied.

In reality, ClearZater had confounded his doctors and recovered— months
before. De Forest sent a copy of Smith's letter to the judge, and the judge
Zrote a letter of his oZn. +e still  had the gift of Zords.

"The Governor's letter . . . seems like a Zound in the house of a friend," he
Zrote. "I have for him a great admiration. +e has all the elements of
greatness and none of its limitations.

"8nfortunately, some men greatly his inferior have secured access to him
and to a considerable e[tent have his confidence, Zhich unhesitatingly they
abuse to gratify their ambitions, their interests and their animosities. By
them he at times has been misinformed."

The commission has been functioning, the judge Zrote. :ould the
Governor like to knoZ hoZ? And he proceeded to list page after page of
e[tensive land-acquisition negotiations that had been carried out in recent
months.

+e kneZ Zhy  0oses Zas lying,  the judge Zrote. "The situation at Niagara
affords opportunities for spectacular publicity not offered by any other of
the State 3arks, and . . . there are members of the Council of 3arks Zho
desire to dominate it in order to capitali]e those opportunities for their oZn
glorification."  Furthermore, he Zas not afraid to speak out against those of
0oses' policies Zith  Zhich he did not agree. "NoZ there seems to be a
someZhat Zidespread feeling that because of the Governor's friendship for
him, 0r.  0oses e[pects an attitude of abject acquiescence from the
members of Council. . . and that unless he receives it, reprisals may be
e[pected."

0oses let the "not functioning" issue drop.

But time is not on the side of old men. The progress of :ilco['s  disease Zas
sloZ but steady. In July 1927, he Zas forced to resign from the commission,
and Smith accepted 0oses' recommendation on his replacement. Then
0oses convinced the Governor that the activities of the Niagara

342
Commission could not be adequately carried out unless the commission
made the neZ member its e[ecutive officer Zith full poZers to act for it. +e
convinced the Governor not to sign any appropriations for the Niagara 3ark
unless the old commissioners gave the neZ one this poZer. In order to
reali]e their dream, in order even to keep functioning the park they loved,
the old men Zere forced to turn it over to someone else. At the end of the
fight for control of Niagara State 3ark, Robert 0oses had Zon.

+e Zon every fight in  the State 3arks Council. By the end of 1928, most
recalcitrant regional commissioners had been replaced, as their terms
e[pired, by men amenable to administration of their parks by the council's
central staff, Zhich, through Lut], took orders from 0oses. To further
insure that votes Zithin the council Zould no longer hinge on the
changeable margin of a single vote, tZo neZ members Zere named, the
State +istorian, directly appointed by Smith, and the president of a neZ
regional commission, all of Zhose members Zere appointed by Smith.

3arks had never been a source of poZer before. Since the traditional
function of park commissions had been to preserve the land in its natural

state, the later developments—construction contracts, jobs—that made
parks a source of poZer had never been a significant consideration. 3arks
Zere a source of poZer noZ, but the old park men didn't Zant poZer. They
just Zanted to be left alone to preserve and pass on beauty to other
generations, and Zhen, as in the case of the Erie County 3arkZay, the
chance for poZer came their Zay, they backed aZay from it.

3oliticians failed to grasp the neZ reality until too late. By the time they
finally reali]ed—one can see the reali]ation groZing in their
correspondence of 1927 and 1928—that a neZ organ of state government
Zas being created that Zould dispense yearly millions of dollars in
construction contracts and thousands of jobs, 0oses had the state park
system too firmly in his control for it to be pried loose. +e Zould remain
president of the Long Island State 3ark Commission and chairman of the
State 3arks Council until 1962, and during the thirty-eight years of his reign
over state parks these parks Zould, even as his activities e[panded into
other fields, be a constant source of poZer that he could use to e[pand his
influence in those fields.

343
In politics, poZer vacuums are alZays filled. And the poZer vacuum in
parks Zas filled by Robert 0oses. The old park men saZ beauty in their
parks. 0oses saZ beauty there, too, but he also saZ poZer, saZ it lying
there in those parks unZanted. And he picked it up—and turned it as a
Zeapon on those Zho had not thought it important and destroyed them Zith
it. :hether   or not he so intended, he turned parks, the symbol of man's
quest for serenity and peace, into a source of poZer.

0oses could have done nothing, of course, Zithout Al Smith's constant
support.

The old park men pleaded Zith the Governor for justice. "I am very sure
that on the same knoZledge of facts there Zould be no difference at all as to
any park matters betZeen you and me," De Forest Zrote, and others, too,
told him he Zas being misled. They asked the Governor for appointments
so that they could tell him their side of the disputes.

But the appointments they Zere given Zere feZ and far betZeen. And
although they didn't knoZ it, most—perhaps all—of the letters they Zrote
Smith complaining about 0oses Zere sent by Smith's office to 0oses for
"suggested" replies—and the replies 0oses suggested Zere generally sent
out over Smith's signature Zithout a Zord being changed.

The pattern Zas the same in 0oses' relations Zith the Legislature. +e might
have told Jerry TZomey to stick a bill up his ass, but, TZomey told Len
+all, "Zithin   tZo days, Al Smith had me on the phone and I had to put the
bill through." The Legislature might rage at Robert 0oses— TZomey
Zasn't the only legislator insulted to his face, +all not the only one on
Zhom he slammed doZn the telephone—but no legislator dared to stand up
to a Governor Zho Zas a master of every method of bending men to his
Zill.  As long as Al Smith stuck by 0oses, the Legislature could do nothing
about him.

And Al Smith stuck. In the midst of the Thayer bill fight, Zith  Smith
threatened by political embarrassment because of 0oses' actions, a Zealthy
NeZ Yorker Zho had been a victim of 0oses' insults stormed into Smith's
office. According to one Smith biographer, he asked angrily, " 'Do you Zant
to settle this park fight?'

344
" 'Yes,' the Governor said.

" 'Then I'll tell  you hoZ to do it.'

" '+oZ?'

"The visitor banged his fist on the Governor's desk.

" 'Get rid of 0oses!'  he shouted.

"The Governor leaped to his feet, his face suddenly purple Zith rage.

" 'Get out of my office, you idiot!'  he roared."

:hy   Smith stuck Zas a question that had many ansZers.

One Zas that he Zas a politician. In capitol corridors, 0oses may have been
a handicap to the Governor, but in voting booths the parks that he built Zere
a priceless asset to Smith. About Colonel Frederick Stuart Greene, the
short-story-Zriting engineer Zho refused to consider politicians' Zishes in
aZarding contracts but Zho got roads built that Zon voters' appreciation,
Smith once said, "+e may be a devil in 0ay, but he's an angel in
November," and the Governor might have said the same thing about 0oses.
In 1926, desperate to derail the Governor before the 1928 presidential
campaign, the state GO3 ran against him its strongest candidate,
Congressman Ogden Livingston 0ills. Campaigning vigorously, 0ills  tried
to focus voters' attention on the unprecedented e[penditures of Smith's
administration, but the Governor easily diverted them by reminding them,
over and over, that 0ills Zas one of the North Shore barons, "that small
handful of Zealthy millionaires on Long Island [Zho]  said: ':e   do not Zant
the rabble from NeZ York coming doZn into our beautiful country.' " Smith
Zon a fourth term—the first Governor to do so since De :itt  Clinton  a
century before— and he credited a large part of his 257,000-vote plurality
to the parks issue.

Smith Zas not only a politician; he Zas a Tammany politician. In the simple
Tammany code, the first commandment Zas Loyalty. Smith's loyalty to his

345
appointees Zas legendary. Once he gave a man a job, he Zas fond of
saying, he never interfered Zith him unless he proved himself incapable of
handling it.

And Smith kneZ that none of his appointees Zorked harder for him than
0oses. :hen   his daughter Emily, her father's confidante and perhaps the
person Zho best understood him, Zas asked Zhy her father stuck by 0oses,
she Zould begin her analysis by saying simply, "Bob Zorked so hard for
Father, you knoZ."

Beyond politics Zas the fact that the boy from the Fulton Fish 0arket
Zanted so passionately to improve the lives of the people of the Fourth
:ard—and  of  a hundred Fourth :ards throughout the state. And parks
Zere, unlike improvements in teachers' salaries or other highly praised but
unmeasurable accomplishments of his administration, an accomplishment
that he could see, an accomplishment Zhose visible, concrete e[istence
could

prove to him that he had indeed done something for his people. :hen he
saZ families picnicking under the tall trees at Valley Stream or sZimming
at Sunken 0eadoZ, he could feel that he had measurably improved their
lives. So many of the things that made him most satisfied Zith his
administration had been the result of 0oses' Zork.

As for his refusal to listen to 0oses' opponents, Smith Zas Zell aZare, as a
politician, that every public improvement caused outcries. "You can't get a
road built if you're going to listen to every farmer Zho doesn't Zant it to go
across his land," he often said. Listening to protesters undermined his
appointee, and got himself involved in enemy-making situations. Staying
out of such situations—leaving responsibility Zith his appointee—enabled
him to stay out of the fights Zhich attended upon the building of public
improvements Zhile still alloZing  him to take full credit for  their
completion. 0oreover, most of 0oses' opponents, after all, Zere upstate
legislators or politicians. Smith kneZ the depth of their reactionism, their
narroZ-mindedness, their utter inability to understand the needs of the city
masses. As Emily put it, "Father Zouldn't care Zhat Bob did or said to the
GO3 legislators. After all, Father Zas fighting them himself. And Father

346
thought the legislators really Zere terribly Zrong. +e felt the things Bob
Zanted to do Zere right."

In the opinion of those close to the Governor, he didn't reali]e hoZ drastic
the methods Zere that 0oses Zas using to accomplish his aims. +e didn't
understand that 0oses Zas going beyond the actions of other appointees,
handling protesters Zith needless harshness, stirring up protests by his
arrogance, creating problems Zhere there need not have been problems.
"3articularly Zith  little  people." Emily says; "I didn't think that Father
really kneZ hoZ 0oses  Zas treating them." And there Zas, of course, no
reason Zhy the Governor Zould; they didn't have his ear or, since he
seldom read even memos from appointees and almost never letters from the
public, his eye. And the press, Zhich might have publici]ed their
complaints, Zas firmly in 0oses'  corner.

And behind the political considerations there Zere the personal. Al Smith
Zas a fighter, and he liked fighters. One night Smith heard Richard Childs,
introducing 0oses at a dinner, smilingly tell his audience: "You all knoZ
Bob, of course. +e's so forthright and honest that if he saZ a man across the
street Zho he thought Zas a son of a bitch, he Zould cross the street and
call him a son of a bitch, lest by passing him in silence, his silence be
misconstrued." Smith roared at the description—and. thereafter, Zhen
someone Zould critici]e 0oses, the Governor Zould often give it  himself,
Zith evident delight.

And 0oses reciprocated. +e kneZ hoZ much he oZed Smith for the
reali]ation of his dreams. ":e   could have done nothing Zithout :m,"   he
Zould say. +e kneZ hoZ much he oZed Smith for rescuing him from a life
of obscurity and failure. "0ost  of Zhat little  I knoZ of  the practice of
government I learned from this remarkable Gamaliel," 0oses Zould Zrite.
":ithout   him  I Zould have been just another academic researcher." After
the Governor's death in 1944, 0oses Zrote, "The feZ remaining members
of

the Smith brigade think of him often and at the strangest times, see him in
moments of action and rela[ation, inspiration and ease. :e hear his rough
voice. . . ."

347
0oses may have mocked to their faces men of Zealth and influence and
insulted the most poZerful members of the State Legislature; he treated Al
Smith Zith a respect that to those Zho saZ the tZo men together Zas
unforgettable. Said Belle 0oskoZit]'s  son, Carlos Israels: ":hen  0oses
Zas Zith Smith, he Zould alZays be spouting out ideas, pacing,
gesticulating, talking. But it Zas the talking and gesticulating of an
enthusiastic boy Zith his father, a father Zhom he admired and to Zhom he
Zas very respectful." Joseph 3roskauer said: "+e acted to Smith as he acted
to no one else, Zith deference and respect."

Smith Zas alZays "Governor" to 0oses. +e  never addressed him— either
in letters or in speech—as anything but "Governor." And this Zas a fact
more significant Zith Robert 0oses than it Zould  be Zith other men. 0oses
Zould, during the forty years after Smith left Albany, serve under five other
Governors. +e never addressed them—in letters or in speech— e[cept by
their first names. +e never called any one of them "Governor." For Robert
0oses, there Zould alZays be only one Governor.

During the final years of Smith's reign, he and 0oses became closer and
closer. Smith saZ that 0oses Zas invited to the most intimate of Tammany
soirees, the notoriously boisterous get-togethers at :illiam F. .enny's Tiger
Room. The Tammany bigZigs Zho had looked at him askance soon came to
like him and. Zhen they mentioned this to Smith, the Governor Zould beam
happily. Often, after dinner in the E[ecutive 0ansion or, in NeZ  York, in
the Biltmore suite or a friend's apartment, Smith Zould say, if 0oses had
not been present at the dinner, "I Zonder Zhat Bob's doing tonight—let's
get him." Someone Zould call 0oses. :hen   he arrived, Smith Zould say,
"Bob. let's go to Dinty 0oore's,"  and the tZo men Zould sit for hours in a
back room specially reserved for the Governor, drinking beer, cracking
crabs and talking. "That talk Zas something," +oZard Cullman Zould
recall. "You could tell just listening to the tZo of them that there Zere tZo
men Zith real brains."

Not that the talk Zas all serious. Often, the Governor and 0oses Zould, to
the delight of listeners, go into a sort of rapid-paced comic dialogue on the
Albany scene. Says Emily Smith: "It Zould be more fun to be there
listening to Father and Bob than to be out at a theater or dancing

348
someZhere." Or Smith Zould, if there Zas a piano handy, jump up, Zalk
over to it and say to 0oses, "Come on, Bob, let's shoZ these people Zhat
Ze can do." One of the men Zho Zatched Smith and 0oses harmoni]ing on
such occasions says. "There Zas a tie there that Zas beyond business or
politics." Says another: "You could tell just by looking at the tZo of them
together that they liked each other a lot."

organi]ation "released the e[ecutive's energy to provide the leadership
required in the tZentieth century," one said. Al Smith said so in the patois
of Al Smith. ":hen    the Governor Zants to talk about the state hospitals he
Zill  have one man to talk to," he e[ulted. ":hen  he Zants to talk about
public parks, he Zill have one man to talk to, and the same Zay Zhen he
Zants to talk about agriculture, charities, education." For the first time, he
kneZ, Zhen he Zanted to move the state doZn a particular path, he could
make it move.

Before his fourth term Zas over, "against the tide of the TZenties" that
blinded most of a prosperous nation to the needs of its urban masses, Al
Smith had not only forced through a recalcitrant Legislature measures that
improved Zorking conditions and reduced Zorking hours for men, Zomen
and children, but had also lashed state departments into enforcing the
measures. +e had not only forced through the first large-scale, loZ-cost
housing program in the 8nited States, increased teachers' salaries tenfold
and obtained equal pay for Zomen teachers, but had also moved a do]en
state departments into less dramatic but equally vital efforts to meet needs
in areas of their jurisdictions. +e had not only persuaded voters to approve
bond issues of unprecedented si]e for state hospitals, mental hospitals and
prisons but had also geared up the departments responsible for building
these institutions to do so Zith unprecedented speed. +e had Zritten on the
statute books of NeZ York such a sZeep of social Zelfare statutes that
Oscar +andlin could say that they "made the most difficult state the best-
governed one in the 8nion . . . [and] aZakened the conscience of the nation
to the needs of the urban Zorking people." Franklin D. Roosevelt, as
3resident, Zas to say that "practically all the things Ze've done in the
federal government are like things Al Smith did as Governor of NeZ York."

349
Robert 0oses himself Zas conspicuously uninterested in social Zelfare
reforms. But these reforms Zould have been impossible of attainment
Zithout the e[ecutive budget and departmental consolidation and
reorgani]ation. Even more impossible of attainment Zould have been
another Smith achievement: Zhile e[panding manyfold the state's role in
helping its people meet their needs, he succeeded, over the course of his
four terms, in substantially cutting state ta[es. :alter Lippmann called the
reorgani]ation of NeZ York's administrative machinery "one of the greatest
achievements in modern American politics." Robert F. :agner, Sr., asked to
name Smith's most important achievement, said flatly: "The
reorgani]ation." And many other states modeled their reorgani]ations
directly on NeZ York's. Says Leslie Lipson, author of The American
Governor from Figurehead to Leader, the definitive study of the
development of state government in America, "NeZ York is the great
classic of the reorgani]ation movement." In that classic, Robert 0oses
played the leading role. 0ost of 0oses' achievements Zere highly visible
achievements—monuments of concrete and steel—Zhich may be e[pected
to endure in the public consciousness for as long as they stand. But his
achievement in reshaping the machinery by Zhich NeZ York State's
millions of inhabitants are governed to make it substantially more

responsive to the changing and groZing needs of those millions is an
episode all but lost to history. And it may be that this achievement is at least
the equal of any of the others.

Reorgani]ation made the Department of State the "catch-all" repository for
scores of minor functions that did not fit logically into any other
department. The Secretary of State Zas made responsible for accepting and
filing incorporation papers, compiling election results and county-by-
county enrollment figures, supervising the +ell Gate 3ilots and the :ardens
of the 3ort of NeZ York and licensing auctioneers, private detectives, real
estate salesmen, theater-ticket agencies and poolrooms.

8ne[citing  as these functions Zere, they all required manpoZer—and
manpoZer Zas jobs and jobs Zere patronage. The Secretary of State Zould
control a si]able harvest of the carrots that kept political Zorkers straining
at the ropes that pulled political machines.

350
The Secretary of State Zould, moreover, possess several functions that Zere
not at all minor, including jurisdiction over the state's Athletic, Racing and
Land Office commissions. And Smith had announced that he intended to
use the Secretary as a coordinator of all state construction Zork and as
coordinator of the Cabinet, that body of department heads Zhich, for the
first time, Zas going to be meeting as a group to advise the Governor—as,
in fact, a sort of "Deputy Governor" Zith poZer second only to himself.

So politicians of both parties raged Zhen, in January 1927, Smith
nominated Robert 0oses as NeZ York's first appointed Secretary of State.
Democrats raged because 0oses Zas a Republican (an "Independent
Republican" according to the press), and Republicans indignantly denied
the charge, former GO3 State Treasurer—and Nassau County estate oZner
— LeZis +.  3ounds calling him a "political orphan."

The depth and unanimity of the feeling transcended party affiliation. 0oses
had for years been either insulting or ignoring legislators of both parties.
And noZ the Legislature Zas being asked—for under reorgani]ation the
Senate had to approve key gubernatorial nominations—to approve his
elevation to the second most important post in the state. One observer says:
":hen   he Zalked doZn a corridor in the capitol and passed a group of
legislators, you could see their eyes folloZ him as he passed, and you could
see hoZ many enemies—bitter, personal enemies—he had. I really believe
that Robert 0oses Zas the most hated man in Albany."

But Robert 0oses didn't have to Zorry about enemies as long as his friend
stuck by him. And his friend stuck. Smith's unprecedented popularity —
proven by the ease Zith Zhich he defeated 0ills, a popular Republican
running in a heavily Republican state—had given him unprecedented poZer
in the state. And he let the Senate knoZ that he Zould, if necessary, use
every bit of that poZer on behalf of Robert 0oses. +e had, the Governor
said, been accepting help from 0oses for years. NoZ he Zanted to
formali]e the arrangement.

GO3 senators tried to find an issue by saying that no man should hold

more than one high-ranking state job at a time. If 0oses Zanted
confirmation, they said, he Zould have to give up his park posts. But, as a

351
Brooklyn Eagle reporter put it:

. . . None of the objectors forgot for an instant that Alfred E. Smith is still
the king, mikado or just plain "boss" of the state.

The Democrats cannot openly object to his course and get aZay Zith it. The
Republicans knoZ that Smith Zill politically  outjockey them if they don't
Zatch every step taken in opposition to him. The result is that Robert
0oses, despite all opposition, in all probability Zill  be confirmed.

The Eagle —and other neZspapers throughout the state Zith the notable
e[ceptions of the NeZ York +erald Tribune and +earst's tabloids—helped
strengthen the probability Zith a paean of praise. Said a January 22 front-
page Eagle headline: patronage croZd sore — knoZledge that moses Zill
buck them, chief basis for fighting him. Three days later, it made another
point: ATTAC.   ON 0OSES  BY G.O.3. LAID  TO +IS  L.I. 3AR.   FIG+T
3LAN

SEEN TO S+ELVE +I0   TO AID  RIC+  LANDO:NERS.

GO3 senators Zere inundated Zith pro-0oses missives. In a spraZling
hand on the back of a postcard, +oZard D. BroZn of East Islip Zrote
Senator George Thompson of Suffolk County: "0r. 0oses did sidetrack the
millionaire, so the man on the street could get 3arks on Long Island. Your
vote for him Zould be appreciated by all common people." Thompson
hastily assured his constituents that his vote Zould, indeed, be for 0oses.
:hen,   on January 31, 1927, the Senate clerk called a general voice vote on
the nomination there Zas a loud chorus of "Nays." But Zhen the clerk
called the role name by name, only tZo senators Zere Zilling to go on
record against it.

The appointment marked a first for 0oses as Zell as for the state. Although
he had been Zorking on and off for various governmental bodies for
fourteen years, the Secretary's $12,000 per year salary Zas the first he had
received on a regular basis from government. It Zas, in fact, the first
substantial salary he had received from anyone. Although some of his
mother's relatives had been commenting pointedly for years that married
men ought to at least try to support their oZn families, Bella 0oses had

352
alZays maintained that she Zas proud of Bob and completely happy in his
choice of jobs. Despite her protestations, hoZever, Bella 0oses may have
been just a little relieved that her favorite child Zas, at the age of thirty-
eight, finally off  her dole. :hen  a friend told her, Zhile she Zas attending a
0adison +ouse board meeting, that her son's appointment had just been
confirmed, she breathed a sigh of relief and murmured: "At last, at last, he's
going to start earning a living."

As Secretary of State, Robert 0oses Zas a reporter's dream. If the press
thrives on conflict, he provided it Zith ample nourishment, sallying forth
almost daily to "strip the license from" unscrupulous ticket brokers, un-

scrupulous private detectives, unscrupulous real estate salesmen and
inefficient +ell  Gate 3ilots and 3ort :ardens.  +is image, already shiny as a
result of neZspaper accounts of his park activities, Zas brought to an even
higher gloss.

:hen   0oses announced that he Zas fighting not only crooks but something
that to the American mind loomed as a menace of appro[imately equal
proportions— politicians —neZ highlights Zere added to his sheen. They
didn't fade even Zhen the ringing announcement Zas folloZed by a very
dull thud—as it Zas in his attempt to make himself the state's bo[ing c]ar.

Before reorgani]ation, the State Athletic Commission had run bo[ing, and
commissionerships had been coveted by Tammany boyos since bo[ing
promoters had learned the Zisdom of crossing the commissioners' palms
Zith free tickets, called "Annie Oakleys" because ticket takers punched
holes in them similar to Little Sure Shot's bullet holes, to distinguish them
in the count from paid-for ducats. By 1927, in fact, sports Zriter :.  O.
0cGeehan Zas noting that Annie Oakleys had become "so common that
customers of pri]e fights Zho Zanted to be e[clusive insisted upon paying
for their tickets and getting them unperforated." In 1927, moreover, the
chairman of the commission Zas James Aloysius Farley and Farley Zas
carrying things to an e[treme in cultivating friends, particularly among the
contractors and politicians Zho might have occasion to use the services, or
to have the city use the services, of his burgeoning building-materials
company; since it cost him nothing to entertain these friends Zith fight
tickets, he cultivated many of them. :hen  Jim 0aloney, the Boston Bull,

353
outpointed Bridgeport Jack Delaney in 0adison Square Garden on
February 18, 1927, more than $30,000 Zorth of Annie Oakleys Zere
distributed.

Farley, a fast-rising political heavyZeight Zho had never been accused of
cramping his style Zith undue loyalty to the 0arquis of 4ueensbury, Zas a
feared opponent. But less than three Zeeks after 0oses assumed
jurisdiction over the Athletic Commission, the neZ Secretary of State
declared that he Zanted "to protect the felloZ Zith the thin pocketbook,
Zho is just as much interested in bo[ing as the millionaire fight fan," and
announced that henceforZard no commissioner could accept free tickets.
+alf of  all tickets, moreover, Zould be placed on sale on the evening of the
fight, to insure that there Zould be plenty for the general public.

In vain, promoter Te[ Rickard told 0oses the plan Zas unZorkable. :hen
the desperate Farley and his felloZ commissioners, an[ious not to
disappoint their friends, bought hundreds of tickets for the Dempsey-
Sharkey fight and gave them aZay, 0oses ruled that henceforth
commissioners could not buy tickets, either. They could not properly
regulate a sport "if they are recipients of favors from the people they are
supposed to regulate," he said.

But 0oses' lack of ring savvy began to shoZ. +is sZings greZ Zilder.  On
one occasion, Zhen there Zas a roZ over a decision in a pri]e fight, he
declared: "Any decision should be unanimous. If not, then I Zill make the
decision."

Selling half of 0adison  Square Garden's 18,000 seats the evening of the
fight led only to monumental tie-ups at the ticket ZindoZs. :ithin   a year,
0oses gave up. "Frankly admitting," as one reporter put it, that he "knoZs
little about the fight game," he announced that the Athletic Commission
Zould be put back in full control of the sport. +e Zas really more interested
in parks anyZay, he said. No more Zas heard about unanimous decisions.

In the eyes of the croZd, hoZever, he had chalked up another Zin. +e had,
after all, been once again publicly identified as an ally of the "felloZ Zith
the thin pocketbook" and as a foe of the millionaire as Zell as the politician.
+e even got a title. During his brief but eventful ring career, sports Zriters,

354
intrigued Zith his academic background, dubbed Robert 0oses "Curator of
CaulifloZers."

Though 0oses' battles Zith private detectives and bo[ing promoters earned
him reams of neZsprint in 1927 and 1928, the significant accomplishments
of his tenure as Secretary of State Zere accomplishments for Zhich he
never received any public notice. And they came in fields in Zhich the
Secretary of State supposedly had no poZer.

Al Smith put him into those fields. :hen   the Governor had said he Zould
put 0oses in charge of the Cabinet, he meant really in charge. At his
direction, 0oses assumed responsibility for spurring the heads of other
departments into the gallop at Zhich Smith Zanted them to move.

The Governor Zas particularly an[ious about public Zorks. 8ntil  he came
to office, state institutions for men and Zomen convicted of crimes and men
and Zomen Zhose only crimes Zere mental or physical illness Zere
ancient, croZded and filthy. During his Governorship, against the
unZavering opposition of a Republican 3arty that continually screamed that
his financial policies Zould Zreck  the state, he persuaded the state's voters
to pass referenda allocating not only $15,000,000 for parks and
$50,000,000 for hospitals but also $300,000,000 for grade-crossing
elimination and $100,-000,000 for prisons, mental institutions and other
public Zorks. The buildings those bond revenues Zould buy Zould
symboli]e something to him. They Zould be something he could look at, as
he could look at parks, and knoZ that he had really done something for the
people he had Zanted to do something for. Further—and this Zas no small
consideration since he Zas as much a politician as a reformer and noZ he
had his eye on bigger pri]es than a Governorship—they Zould symboli]e
something to the voters of other states. +e Zanted those buildings finished,
and Zhen progress on them Zas too sloZ, his solution Zas to make 0oses
personally responsible for speeding it up.

Running the Department of State, playing a key role in reorgani]ing the
state government and creating, in a space of time unprecedentedly small, a
state park and parkZay system unprecedentedly large, might seem like a
load large enough for one man to handle, but, as 0oses drove around Long
Island noZ, pushing his parks, he Zas haunted by other problems. +is

355
secretaries, driving out from NeZ York or Belmont Lake, Zould be trying
to find him to deliver messages from Graves, the Governor's secretary—
"The Governor told me to drop you a note and say not to forget about the
Long Island hospital situation," one said—and there might be a do]en such
messages in a single mail. As 0oses paced through a clearing at Sunken
0eadoZ  or Valley Stream, a band of aides behind him scribbling furiously
Zhile he fired instructions at them, across the clearing Zould come, trotting,
the gray-uniformed, Sam BroZne-belted, Stetsoned figure of a state trooper
dispatched by the Governor to find him and bring him to a telephone for a
message too urgent or too confidential to entrust to the mails. As he stood
Zith his engineers and contractors on Jones Beach, discussing the progress
of the causeZay across the bay, across the bay Zould come a boat and in it,
standing up as it neared shore so he could jump out and reach 0oses the
more quickly Zith  the urgent message he bore, Zould be another Stetsoned
figure.

0oses had alZays possessed tremendous energy and the ability to discipline
it. NoZ he disciplined it as never before, concentrated it, focused it on his
Zork Zith  a ferocious single-mindedness.

Sloughing off distractions, he set his life into a hard mold. Shunning
evening social life, especially the ceremonial dinners that eat up so much of
a public official's time, he Zent to bed early (usually before eleven) and
aZoke early (he Zas alZays dressed, shaved and breakfasted Zhen Arthur
+oZland arrived at 7:30 to pick up the manila envelope full of memos).

The amenities of life dropped out of his. +e and 0ary had enjoyed playing
bridge Zith friends; noZ they no longer played. Sundays Zith his family all
but disappeared. +e did not golf; he did not attend sporting events; he Zas
not interested in the diversions called "hobbies" that other e[ecutives
considered important because they considered it important that they rela[;
he Zas not interested in rela[ing. Since he left to 0ary the paying of bills
and the selection of his clothes, even the hiring of barbers to come to his
office and cut his hair, his resources of energy Zere freed for the pursuit of
his purposes. +is life became an orgy of Zork.

Even so, there Zas never enough time; minutes Zere precious to him. To
make sure that he had as many of them as possible, he tried to make use of

356
all those that most other men Zaste.

+e had alZays Zorked in his car Zhile traveling; noZ  he turned the big
3ackard limousine into an office. :ith   +oZland  sitting beside him on the
rear seat, three other engineers sZiveled around on the jump seats and
another tZo crammed in beside the chauffeur, he held staff meetings in the
limousine—Zhile another limousine trailed behind so that Zhen 0oses Zas
finished Zith his men, he could drop them off and they could be driven
back to Belmont Lake Zhile he continued on to his destination. The door
pockets in the 3ackard Zere crammed Zith yelloZ legal note pads and
sharp-pointed pencils, and he spent his hours alone in the car Zriting letters
and memos that his secretary could type up later.

Often, a secretary Zas in the car to take his dictation. 8sually, it Zas +a]el
Tappan. 0iss Tappan Zas a tall, broad-shouldered Juno Zhose

elaborately marcelled hairdos did nothing to conceal the strength and
harshness of her features. "There Zas," an acquaintance says, "no softness
to her." A stenographer fast enough to keep up Zith the drumfire of 0oses'
dictation, she also displayed a talent for giving orders—and 0oses gave her
material on Zhich to e[ercise her talents. TZo secretaries Zorked full time
for 0oses at the State 3arks Council offices, noZ occupying an entire floor
at 302 BroadZay, three more Zorked at the Long Island 3ark Commission
offices at Belmont Lake. 0oses made 0iss Tappan his personal secretary
and put her in charge of them, demoting Rose 3edrick, his former personal
secretary, Zho Zas nonetheless to remain on his personal secretarial staff,
hating 0iss Tappan all the time, for more than a decade.

:anting   0iss  Tappan available Zhenever he needed secretarial assistance,
0oses placed at her disposal a car and three chauffeurs, Zho Zorked
around the clock in eight-hour shifts. On many mornings she arrived at his
home at 7:30 a.m., her car pulling up behind that of +oZland, Zho Zas
picking up 0oses' night-Zritten  memos, and she Zould get into 0oses'
limousine so that he could start dictating the minute he stepped in. As she
drove Zith him, her car folloZed behind so that Zhenever he Zas finished
Zith her, she could get out of his car, step into her oZn, and speed back to
Belmont Lake or 302 BroadZay to parcel out the Zork among the

357
subordinate secretaries Zhile he, chauffeured by one of his three chauffeurs,
continued on to his destination.

Lunches Zere a constant source of irritation to 0oses; he hated to interrupt
his Zork for them. NoZ  he began refusing invitations to lunch. Anyone
Zho Zanted to dine Zith him  came to his office, and a secretary Zould run
out for sandZiches.

The annoyances that plague busy e[ecutives had to be done aZay Zith. One
of the Zorst Zas the telephone; he Zas continually being interrupted in the
middle of one call by another urgent incoming message. Finally he had a
neZ telephone setup installed. 8nder it, there Zere many lines into his
secretary's office but only one from hers into his; on the single telephone
that remained on his desk there Zere no buttons. If he Zas talking on that
telephone, all other callers—Zith the single e[ception of Governor Smith,
for Zhom all other calls Zere dropped—had to Zait until he Zas finished.
+e Zas very pleased Zith this stratagem, and he used it for the rest of his
life. The five Governors Zho succeeded Smith and the five 0ayors of NeZ
York City for Zhom  0oses Zould  Zork had to get used to being told that
0r.  0oses Zould  have to call them back; he could not talk at the moment
because his line Zas tied up.

Then there Zere intercoms; he liked to see his men face to face Zhen he
Zas giving them orders. +is intercom Zas throZn out and in its place on his
desk there Zas installed a panel Zith buttons that, Zhen pressed, triggered a
harsh bu]] in the offices of his top e[ecutives. :hen   the bu]]er  sounded in
an e[ecutive's office, he Zas e[pected to drop everything and get to 0oses'
office fast. "+e didn't Zant any intercom," says Assembly Speaker 3erry B.
Duryea, Jr., Zho, in 1962, succeeded 0oses as president of the Long Island
3ark Commission and moved behind 0oses' desk at

Belmont Lake. ":hen   he hit that button, he Zanted Shapiro at the door. I
tried it and I'll tell you, it  certainly throZs off an aura of poZer. You just
press a bu]]er and you look up and there's a man standing in your door
Zaiting for your  orders."

A third feature of 0oses' office Zas his desk. It Zasn't a desk but rather a
large table. The reason Zas simple: 0oses did not like to let problems pile

358
up. If there Zas one on his desk, he Zanted it disposed of immediately.
Similarly, Zhen he arrived at his desk in the morning, he disposed of the
stacks of mail aZaiting him by calling in secretaries and going through the
stacks, letter by letter, before he Zent on to anything else. +aving a table
instead of a desk Zas insurance that this procedure Zould be folloZed.
Since a table has no draZers, there Zas no place to hide papers; there Zas
no escape from a nagging problem or a difficult-to-ansZer letter e[cept to
get rid of it in one Zay or another. And there Zas another advantage: Zhen
your desk Zas a table, you could have conferences at it Zithout even getting
up.

Such techniques stretched his already vast personal resources, but
sometimes it seemed as if they had been stretched too far, that they must
break under the strain.

There Zere small signs of the pressure he Zas under. Often, too rushed to
be careful Zhen he Zas shaving, he Zould appear for early appointments
Zith nicks still  bleeding on his face. As a young man, his handZriting had
been Zell formed, even his signature clear and legible. In the early 1920's,
the handZriting began to scraZl; by 1928, it Zas generally almost totally
illegible to anyone not familiar Zith  it. 3arts of the scraZls on yelloZ legal
note paper often could not be deciphered even by his secretaries—Zith the
e[ception of 0iss  Tappan. "She Zas," one of the other secretaries recalled,
"the only person in the Zorld Zho could read 0r. 0oses'  handZriting."

And there Zere larger signs, too. The fuse, alZays short, that ignited his
temper had been chopped doZn to a nub. The broad smile Zith Zhich he
greeted underlings could disappear in an instant if their reports displeased
him. The hard mask that replaced it Zould turn pale, almost Zhite, as his
rage mounted. And then a Zave of deep red, almost purple, Zould seep up
out of his collar and over his face. The palm of his big right hand Zould
begin to smack doZn on the table as he talked, and his secretaries, listening
outside the closed door to his office, trying to smile at each other, Zould
hear his voice begin to rise. Lunging out of his chair, he Zould stride
around the room, belloZing, his eyes Zild, and sometimes as he Zalked he
pounded his clenched fist into the Zalls so hard that the skin Zas ripped

359
from his knuckles. Oblivious to the pain, he Zould sit back doZn at his
desk and grab the ne[t batch of papers Zith bleeding hands.

If 0oses' olive-tinted  face had been both strong and sensitive during his
youth and young manhood, noZ it Zas just strong. It had filled out; it
broadened doZnZard from the drastically receding forehead. The nose and
high cheekbones Zere fleshed out and the jaZ beneath them had become
massive, almost prognathous, the dominant feature of the face. AlZays
arresting, the face Zas still so, but noZ not because of handsomeness, al-

though the smile Zas still Zhite-toothed, red-lipped, broad and charming.
No longer the face of a poet, it Zas the face of a man accustomed to
command; one could imagine it carved, in all its arrogance and strength, on
a sarcophagus to represent a 3haraoh of Egypt. The neck Zas thick enough
to be an adequate pedestal for that face—0oses Zas constantly yanking his
shirt collar open as if it Zere too tight and thereby e[posing a prominent
Adam's apple—and so Zere his shoulders and the Zrists beneath his shirt
cuffs, Zhich he impatiently rolled up out of his Zay as he Zorked. +e Zas a
big man—si[ feet, one inch tall, his Zeight noZ about 210 pounds—and
Zhen he pulled off his shirt to go sZimming, his chest Zas broad and his
arms heavy and muscular. "A big face, a big smile, a big voice—the over-
all impression he gave Zas of bigness, strength, poZer," recalls a Zoman
Zho kneZ him. And  his rage could fill a room. Some of 0oses' former
e[ecutives, long retired and out of his reach, Zere persuaded to discuss
certain aspects of their relationships Zith 0oses, but not one of them Zould
discuss Zhat 0oses said to him in his rages. "I don't Zant to discuss Zhat
he said to me," one e[ecutive said quietly. "I don't Zant to discuss it ever."
But one thing Zas certain: earlier Robert 0oses had led men; noZ he drove
them.

:ith   Zomen, 0oses  Zas unfailingly  courteous. "+e Zas alZays a
gentleman Zith us," says one of his secretaries. "You could hear him yelling
in his office, but if you Zent in  to take dictation, you found him the same as
usual—very fast as a dictater but clear and Zith a pleasant Zord for you.
And if he had time, he'd be very friendly. +e'd start a conversation Zith
you, he'd talk to you. Oh, he could talk you into anything, that man."

360
But occasionally the strain Zould tell even Zith his secretaries. Sometimes,
as they typed a long, important letter, they'd glance up and 0oses Zould be
standing behind them, reading as they typed, too impatient to Zait until they
had finished. "Sometimes," one recalls, "Zhen you got to the bottom of a
page, he'd actually grab it right out of your typeZriter. On a long,
complicated letter, he Zould make a lot of drafts, and he'd stand right at
your machine as you did each one, grabbing it out and making corrections."

":hen   0r.  0oses  Zas around," says another secretary, "you didn't go out to
eat. You ate at your desk. And Zhen he bu]]ed you, you left your lunch and
Zent in." 4uitting  for  the day at five o'clock Zas unheard of. ":hen  0r.
0oses Zas around, you just Zorked. 3eriod. If there Zas Zork to be done,
you did it before you Zent home." Despite the courtesy and the friendliness,
despite the admiration—too Zeak a term—they obviously felt for 0r.
0oses, his secretaries found themselves aZaiting the rasp of his bu]]er as
nervously as did his male e[ecutives.

:ater  alone slackened the tautness of his e[istence. :ater seemed to attract
him. +e changed his NeZ York City office because he couldn't see a river
from it, and Zhen he moved into his neZ one, Zhich afforded a sZeeping
vieZ of the +udson, he had his desk placed facing the ZindoZ. :hen  he
Zas able to afford better living quarters in the city, he chose an apartment
facing the East River. :hen  he moved from that apartment, his sole
requirement for a neZ apartment Zas that it also face the river. In the

living rooms of both apartments Zere copies of Jane's Sailing Ships, and
0oses Zould  look up from his Zork Zhenever he heard a Zhistle from a
passing boat and try to identify it. +e Zould spend his evenings Zalking
beside the river. +is office at Belmont Lake looked out over the lake. And
his Babylon house on Thompson Avenue, of course, backed on a creek that
led to the Great South Bay.

Almost every day, sometimes tZice a day, no matter hoZ busy he Zas,
0oses Zould  sZim. +e preferred the ocean; he left time for a sZim
Zhenever he Zas over on Jones Beach; as soon as the causeZay Zas
completed, even before it Zas open to the public, he drove across it to sZim
in the ocean almost every day during the summer and, indeed, in spring and
fall, too, no matter hoZ cold the Zeather. +e Zould change into a bathing

361
suit in his car, jump out of his limousine and run doZn across the beach,
Zaving a toZel as happily as a boy, plunge through the first breakers, come
up on their far side and sZim so far out that his men shook their heads in
admiration. Sometimes, heading home to Thompson Avenue at midnight, he
Zould tell his chauffeur to head for Jones Beach instead, and there, after
running across the deserted beach, he Zould sZim far out to sea, utterly
alone under the stars. If he couldn't get to the ocean, he sZam in the Great
South Bay, or, before it became too polluted, in the creek behind his house.
And in Zinter he used the indoor pool on the estate of a Babylon friend Zho
had given him a key, his arms Zindmilling him through seemingly endless
laps. And no matter Zhere he sZam, Zhen he emerged from the Zater his
dripping face Zas alZays fresh, smiling and happy.

:hen   he had Zork that didn't have to be done at his desk, he Zould take it
on board the 3ark Commission yacht moored at a Babylon dock, even
though he Zould have to spend most of his time on the boat ploZing
through sheafs of papers Zhile the captain cruised the bay. :hen he got a
day free to spend Zith his family, the day Zas spent fishing, sZimming,
crabbing, sailing—he Zas good Zith small sail—off the South Shore. "+e
just loved that bay," an acquaintance says. "Every time he Zent out on it, it
seemed to invigorate him."

And no matter hoZ thin his remarkable capacity for Zork seemed stretched
in the evening, a night's sleep never failed to restore its resiliency, just as it
healed the shaving nicks on his face. No matter hoZ long he had Zorked the
day before, Zhen 0iss Tappan pulled up to his house in the morning, he
Zould alZays come through the front door of his house as briskly as if he
had just returned from a vacation—although, all during 1927 and 1928, he
did not take a single one of those. 0oses' e[ecutives learned to try to get
appointments Zith "R0"  during the morning. "+e  Zasn't so tense, so
Zound up, then," one e[plained. "As the day Zent on, you could see it
getting Zorse and Zorse, but the ne[t morning he Zas fresh again."

As much as any other quality, it Zas an ability to pick and organi]e men
that enabled 0oses to handle so brutal a Zorkload.

+e had a gift for picking them out of the throng of draftsmen, engineers and
architects at Belmont Lake. "Time and again," one of his top e[ecutives

362
recalls, "R0  Zould ask the name of some loZer-echelon guy—':ho  Zas

that guy you sent in Zith the bathhouse plans last Zeek?'—that kind of
thing. And Zhen you told him, he'd say, ':hy   don't you try giving him a
little more responsibility and see hoZ he handles it.' :ell,  it Zas ama]ing.
The man he picked out might be some guy you yourself had hardly noticed.
And R0  certainly hadn't had any time to Zatch the guy at any length at all.
But it seemed like every time, he Zas right; Zhen you gave the guy more
responsibility, he Zas ready to handle it, and you could start moving him up
through the organi]ation."

0oses ran the Long Island State 3ark Commission and the State 3arks
Council like an army. "Everything Zas by the 'chain of command,' " an aide
recalls. "Everyone had to go through that chain. If you sent him a note Zith
a suggestion or a complaint, he Zould send it right back to you Zith a note
scribbled on it: '+ave you talked to your superior about this?' " Even Zith
most top officials, he communicated primarily by memo. Only a handful of
men in his organi]ation dealt directly Zith him.

The men Zho rose through this chain shared a capacity for hard Zork.
Alongside the telephones in his Babylon home and in his NeZ York
apartment, 0oses kept lists of his aides' phone numbers, and he used that
list around the clock, frequently at 2 or 3 a.m. If they Zent out at night, they
had to leave phone numbers at Zhich they could be reached, and they
became accustomed to having ushers search them out in darkened theaters
to ask them to come to the manager's office for an urgent phone call.
Vacations Zeren't alloZed to interfere. If 0oses needed a man Zhen the
man Zas in Florida, the man Zas summoned home, "although," as :illiam
Latham put it, "R0  Zas alZays very good about telling you to go right
back and enjoy yourself as soon as you Zere done Zith Zhatever it Zas he
had needed you for." Nor Zere social obligations alloZed to interfere.
:hen   0oses called Latham at his Babylon home one Sunday as Latham
Zas broiling steaks for guests gathered around his outdoor barbecue, 0oses'
only Zords Zere: "I'm  at 302 [BroadZay]. +oZ  long Zill  it  take you to get
here?" Latham's only Zords in reply: "Forty-five minutes." (+e made it in
forty.)

363
They also shared a capacity for subservience. Increasingly, noZ, 0oses
shoZed an unZillingness to be argued Zith by underlings. +is staff became
increasingly Zary about giving suggestions. An aura of fear began to
pervade 0oses' relationships Zith his staff. Colonel :illiam   S. Chapin, for
e[ample, a tall, poZerfully  built man of immense engineering capabilities, a
key figure during :orld   :ar   II  in the building of the famed Burma Road,
ate lunch at his desk virtually every day for tZenty years because he Zas
afraid R0  might call and find him absent.

Absolute loyalty Zas required of them. As one keen observer of the 0oses
organi]ation put it: "Once a problem had been e[plored and discussed, it
Zas Zhat he [0oses] Zanted that mattered, not Zhat they thought. Once the
0oses policy line Zas adopted, no one ever kneZ Zhat a 0oses deputy
thought unless his thoughts Zere those of 0oses himself." They Zere
forbidden to talk to the press; anyone Zho violated that order Zas fired.
Incredibly hard-Zorking, incredibly  loyal—dedicated, faceless—they Zere

already becoming recogni]ed by public officials as an elite cadre Zithin the
ranks of the state's civil servants and had already been given the name
"0oses 0en."

Once they had proven themselves to him, 0oses took pains Zith their
training. They Zere, most of them, engineers and architects, and he Zas
constantly distressed Zith their Zeakness in the use of the English
language. So he taught them to Zrite. Like a high-school English teacher, he
gave them reports to Zrite and letters to draft for his signature and then he
corrected the reports and letters and had the authors redo them—sometimes
over and over again. In the beginning of this process, he disposed of crude
efforts Zith the single remark "This ain't English!" scraZled across them.
:hen   they had learned to Zrite letters in the style he Zanted, he let them
draft letters for his signature and set them to Zork teaching their
subordinates hoZ to draft letters for their signatures. :hen his men had
mastered a felicity of phrase, he proceeded to refinements. Their purpose
Zas to get public projects built, he Zould tell them, and to get them built
they had to knoZ hoZ to persuade people of their Zorth—and the key to
persuading people Zas to keep their arguments simple. DoZn from Buffalo
in 1926, Zithout an appointment, long rolls of blueprints spilling from

364
under his arms, came Bert Tallamy, in later years Federal +ighZay
Administrator but then just a young highZay engineer, Zilling to Zait a
Zhole day outside 0oses' office in the hope of getting the master's advice
on hoZ to implement a plan he had conceived for a road from Buffalo to
Niagara Falls. :hen  he Zas finally admitted to the presence, he began to
unroll his blueprints on the huge table in August Belmont's dining room.
Tallamy had spent days coloring different parts of them so that 0oses could
more easily study them. But 0oses shoved them impatiently aside Zithout
looking at them. "The first thing you've got to learn," he said, "is that no
one is interested in plans. No one is interested in details. The first thing
you've got to learn is to keep your presentations simple."

0oses taught his men not to Zaste time. +e didn't Zant engineers Zasting
time debating legal points or laZyers discussing engineering problems. If a
legal problem arose at a staff meeting and an engineer ventured an opinion
on it, he Zould cut him short Zith a curt "Stop practicing laZ. Leave that to
the laZyers."

+e even taught them social graces so that they could dine Zith men in
positions of poZer. :hen  a man from an outside organi]ation such as the
State D3:   Zas being considered for a position, 0oses Zould have
+oZland and Shapiro invite the man to their homes for a "friendly" game of
bridge so that they could observe him in a social setting. And 0oses had no
hesitation about handing out basic tips of social etiquette to his aides. If
changes in personality Zere required, 0oses saZ that they also Zere made.
Shapiro, for e[ample, Zas painfully shy. 0oses Zould  take him to social
gatherings and order him to charm a particular official. Before long,
Shapiro Zas charming.

Some of these men broke under the strain of the demands 0oses placed
upon them. 0ore than one of the men close to 0oses in the 1920's had
taken

to drink by the i93o's and been dismissed. There Zere stories of nervous
breakdoZns Zithin the ranks and of marital difficulties caused by men's
inability to Zork  at the pace 0oses required and still find time for their
families. There Zas at least one suicide.

365
But those Zho didn't break Zere reZarded. Advancement Zas rapid. And he
had the knack, the knack of the great e[ecutive, of delegating authority
completely. +is men learned that once a policy in their area of authority had
been hammered out by 0oses, the details of implementing that policy Zere
strictly up to them; all their boss cared about Zas that they get it done. They
therefore had considerable poZer of their oZn, and this Zas incentive to
those of them Zho Zanted poZer.

In reZarding his men financially, 0oses Zas hampered by civil service
limits on pay and promotion schedules, but his ingenuity found a hundred
Zays around those strictures. If a man Zasn't making Zhat 0oses thought
he should be, he Zould put the man's Zife on the payroll in some job that
required no Zork—such as ansZering the telephone in their home—and pay
her an additional stipend. +e early hit on the idea of using 3ark
Commission labor and contractors to build homes—generally, comfortable,
spacious tZo-story Colonial houses—for his top e[ecutives on park
property so that they Zould be spared the e[pense of rent, and of using 3ark
Commission personnel to maintain the houses so that they had none of the
other e[penses of the normal homeoZner, either. The 3ark Commission
even picked up the heating and electricity bills for these e[ecutives. To
make sure that no fuss Zould be raised about the unusual procedure, the
houses Zere generally built on secluded pieces of park property, so that the
public didn't even knoZ of their e[istence.

The reZards 0oses offered his men Zere not only poZer and money. If
they gave him loyalty, he returned it manyfold. 0oses might critici]e his
men himself, but if an outsider tried it—even if the outsider Zas right, and
0oses privately told his aide so—0oses Zould  publicly defend him
Zithout qualification.

And the most valued reZard—the thread that bound his men most closely to
him—Zas still more intangible. ":e   Zere caught up in his sense of
purpose," Latham e[plained. "+e made you feel that Zhat Ze Zere doing
together Zas tremendously important for the public, for the Zelfare of
people." The purposes Zere, after all, the purposes for Zhich they had been
trained. They Zere engineers and architects; engineers and architects Zant
to build, and all 0oses' efforts Zere aimed at building. 0en  Zho Zorked

366
for him had the satisfaction not only of seeing their plans turned into steel
and concrete, but also of seeing the transformation take place so rapidly that
the fulfillment Zas all  the more satisfying. 0oses' men feared him, but they
also admired and respected him—many of them seemed to love him.

The increasing illegibility of 0oses'  signature Zas one result of the amount
of Zork he Zas doing for the state. There Zere others. They Zere the public
Zorks that Zere completed by the end of Smith's last term. By

December 31, 1928, neZ hospitals, some specially designed for care of
crippled children, for mentally disabled veterans and for the blind, the deaf-
and-dumb and tuberculosis sufferers, dotted the state. Great neZ state
asylums for the insane had been completed, as Zell as an institute for the
study of the causes of insanity. Sing Sing and other neZ prisons had been
constructed. So had a State +ealth Laboratory, a State Teachers College at
Albany and a thirty-story building behind the capitol to house previously
scattered state offices. During the more than three decades that the
Legislature had been ordering the elimination of grade crossings, e[actly
tZelve had been eliminated* before Smith came to office. By the time he
left the Governorship, more than tZo hundred had been eliminated. As for
highZays, Zhen Smith left he could boast that ":e  have built since 1919
three thousand miles of neZ highZays and reconstructed tZo thousand
miles."

:ith   the added responsibilities, of course, came added poZer. Shuffling the
offices on the capital's second floor, Smith gave 0oses the one ne[t to the
E[ecutive Chamber to use Zhen he Zas in Albany. The location of the
office Zas symbolic. The capital's readers of the map of poZer kneZ that in
governmental matters—Belle 0oskoZit]  Zas the chief adviser on political
matters and there Zas no rivalry betZeen her and 0oses; they liked and
respected each other—0oses Zas ne[t in poZer to the Governor.

Smith let the capitol knoZ it. +e Zanted no interference Zith 0oses  in the
jobs he had been given, he said Zhenever a cabinet member complained
that 0oses, in his speeding up of construction projects, Zas interfering in
the affairs of his department. One top departmental engineer repeatedly
refused to accept 0oses' orders. Smith called the engineer in—and fired
him on the spot. The engineer chose a bar near the capitol to droZn his

367
sorroZs. By the end of the day, many of his friends in other departments
and the Legislature had seen him there. To all Zho approached him he
poured out the story of the injustice that had been done him. The engineer
may have been looking for sympathy, and to his face, certainly, his auditors
gave it, but in the poZer-conscious capitol Zhat Zas important to them
about his tale of Zoe Zas the lesson they learned from it: as long as Smith
Zas Governor, 0oses Zas not to be crossed. By nightfall, the story—and
the lesson-had been absorbed by the capitol. :hen the NeZ York Tribune,
in an analysis of the capitol scene, headlined in 1927: moses second in
poZer to the governor, the capitol kneZ that the headline Zas true.

As to the effect on personality of the infusion of ever larger doses of poZer,
the clearest evidence Zas in tZo remarkable e[temporaneous speeches that
0oses delivered in 1927 before tZo associations of Long Island real estate
brokers, t

* Omitting the cities of Syracuse, Buffalo and NeZ York, Zhere state laZs
gave jurisdiction over the Zork to city administrations.

t :e   have a record of them because :. .ingsland 0acy,  feuding Zith
0oses at the time, sent a stenographer to take notes.

The speeches dealt Zith the future of Long Island. The Island Zas, 0oses
said, a gigantic cul-de-sac, a body of land Zith no outlet on its eastern end.
Therefore, he said, the Island "is not a commercial community." Instead, it
is a place for people to live and play, mostly play. It is "a natural
recreational community, the inevitable playground for millions of people in
the metropolitan section." NeZ roads, therefore, should be parkZays
designed to bring people out from NeZ York City for recreation and not for
any other reason. The scope of the Island's interlocking problems—Zater
supply, ]oning, transportation—can never be solved by the e[isting system
of government; there are simply too many separate and independent
municipalities—toZns, villages and cities—to alloZ coordinated planning.
"Before you can solve these problems," he said, "you have got to change the
system of county and toZn government. This is an obsolete form; you can't
tackle the job Zith it."

368
:hat   Zas remarkable Zas 0oses' tone, his remarkable self-confidence.
:hen   he said, "The form of government you have Zill not solve your
problems here," he added: "That is not a theory; I am sure of it." And this
Zas no servant of the people trying to persuade. The opposition to parks on
Long Island, he told the Long Islanders, Zas "stupid opposition." There
"has been too much lack of cooperation by [the Island's] public officials, too
much tendency to critici]e." And it must stop. "The toZnspeople Zant to
deliberate about park propositions. There is a limit to the amount of
deliberation that can be done."

:e   Zill  do the planning, he said. :e don't need your help. :e  don't need
your suggestions. ":e  don't need so much advice and cooperation as to the
general program as Ze need help and advice Zith the specific problems as
they come up. Theory and plans Ze take for granted." By specific details,
he made clear, he meant only putting pressure on local governing bodies to
approve specific sections of parkZay or park plans.

And if Long Island didn't cooperate, he said, it Zould be too bad for Long
Island. "The state has a limited amount of money," he said. "It can be spent
elseZhere." And if the "stupid opposition" doesn't cease, it Zill be. "It can
and Zill be used elseZhere if Ze can't get the cooperation. Somebody else
is going to get it."

Some people must be hurt by progress, he said. But that is unavoidable.
"You can't make an omelet Zithout breaking eggs."

"There are people Zho like things as they are," he said. They cannot be
permitted to stand in the Zay of progress. "I can't hold out any hope to
them. They have to keep moving further aZay. This is a great big state and
also there are other states. Let them go to the Rockies."

In other e[temporaneous statements, 0oses shoZed no hesitancy in
displaying his feelings about the importance of laZ. After he had decided to
return the control of bo[ing to the Athletic Commission, he Zas busy for a
time defending the commissioners, and Zhen a reporter asked him if they
had not in some instances violated the laZ, 0oses replied that that really
Zasn't important. ":hether   the commissioners have gone beyond their legal
rights, I haven't any idea," he said. "One duty naturally leads to

369
another. Sometimes it happens that in order to do one thing in the right Zay,
it becomes necessary to do something else."

Sometimes 0oses' feelings about the laZ Zere e[pressed less ambiguously.
:hile   building  bathhouses on Long Island, he ran afoul of the State
Industrial Commissioner. The commissioner Zas Frances 3erkins, Zho
once, a decade and a half earlier, had stood on the deck of a ferry and
listened to a young man Zith burning eyes talk about a great highZay along
the Zaterfront. In the decade and a half since that Sunday, the young man
had learned hoZ to build great highZays.

"+e Zas building  [the] bathhouses in violation of an . . . ordinance," 0iss
3erkins recalled. The ordinance specified that union labor be used on the
job, but 0oses had "just hired the local handymen and unemployed laborers
to do brick masons' Zork. . . ."

I called him up to say, "You mustn't do that. Naughty, naughty, you can't do
that. :hat  are you thinking of?"

:ell   ... he treated me to . . . vituperation . . . although Ze Zere on the most
intimate of personal terms. ... +e Zas building bathhouses for the people of
NeZ York. ... +e Zas going to have bathhouses for the people of NeZ York.
... +e just gave me the devil.

I said, "There's a laZ about this, Robert. I hate to tell you this, but I shall
have to invoke the laZ about this matter."

0oses said, ":ell,   go ahead and invoke it! Do anything you think you can
do. These bathhouses are going to be built. I'm just going to keep right on
building them. You do the best you can to stop it."

+e Zent ahead and built his bathhouses. I invoked all the elements of laZ
enforcement available, but before they got around to making the
inspections, issuing the orders, getting him into court and coping Zith the
various postponements that he Zas able to get, the bathhouses Zere done
and people Zere going sZimming out of them. ... I think the court rebuked
him, but even the court didn't have the nerve to tear them doZn.

370
Nor, it Zas charged, Zere 0oses' feelings about the laZ confined to
bathhouse building. Angry East Islip and Babylon residents had long been
complaining about the breakneck speed at Zhich 0oses' big 3ackard
limousine sped through the quiet streets of their villages. On July 31, 1927,
0oses led si[ty  members of the State 3arks Council on a tour of Long
Island. Long Islanders complained that the cavalcade of limousines carrying
the council members sped through the streets of those villages at e[cessive
speed Zhile outriders—state troopers on motorcycles—cleared the Zay by
forcing pedestrians and other cars off the road. :hen the cavalcade arrived
at the Babylon ToZn dock Zhere the 3ark Commission yacht Zas moored,
the residents complained, the troopers forced everyone e[cept council
members off the dock, despite the fact that it Zas a public dock. As old
Judge Cooper editoriali]ed: ":e  got a taste of Zhat authority in the Zrong
hands means."

Disregard for laZ, of course, implies regard for that Zhich laZ is a barrier
against: naked force, poZer sufficient to bend society or individuals,

if not protected by laZ, to its Zill.  And this, too, noZ became noticeable in
the character of Robert 0oses.

0oses Zas playing by the rules of poZer noZ and one of the first of those
rules is that Zhen poZer meets greater poZer, it does not oppose but
attempts to compromise. +e had met poZer invulnerable to him—or even
to his champion in the Governor's chair—in the barons of Long Island's
North Shore. And Zhere once, in laying out the original route of the
Northern State 3arkZay e[actly Zhere he believed it should ideally go,
laying it out Zithout  compromise, running it right past the massive porticos
of the barons' castles, he had spat in the eye of poZer, noZ he hastily
administered eyeZash.

+e Zould not move the parkZay route doZn out of the hills the barons held
and onto the plains in the Island's center. This Zould mean that the parkZay
could never be truly beautiful. But, Zithin the hills, there Zere many
possible routes, and he Zas Zilling to compromise Zith the barons on
Zhich route Zould finally  be chosen. +e made deals: Zith at least a do]en
barons he covenanted that he Zould move the parkZay aZay from the
homes to the edges of their property, out of sight of their castles, if they

371
Zould in return donate the right-of-Zay so that he Zould not need a
legislative appropriation for it; Zith  a do]en more, Zhere moving it to their
estates' borders Zas impractical, he agreed to move it as far as Zas practical
—and, so the estate Zould not be sliced in half by the parkZay, so that
equestrians could proceed unchecked on their rides and hunts, to build, at
state e[pense, bridges, one for each estate, over the parkZay for the
e[clusive use of the baron in residence and his retainers and guests.

The compromising did not stop there. :ere the barons afraid that the alien
hordes brought to Long Island on the parkZay might encroach on their
lands? 3recautions against this could be arranged. Specifically, he Zould
covenant Zith the concerned barons that there Zould be no e[its from the
parkZay Zithin  their borders. And he gave his solemn oath that state
troopers patrolling the parkZay Zould be under orders to keep automobiles
from the city moving, not alloZing  their occupants to picnic, or even to
stop, by the side of the parkZay Zithin their borders. 3ublicly, 0oses never
stopped e[coriating the Long Island millionaires. But in private, many of
them Zere coming to consider him quite a reasonable felloZ to deal Zith.

None found him more reasonable than financier Otto .ahn. In dealing Zith
.ahn,  0oses, in his e[cursions beyond the limits of the spirit of the laZ,
Zent further than he had ever gone before. The Legislature, subservient to
the Zill  of the barons, refused all through 1924, 1925, 1926 and 1927 to
give 0oses a cent for the Northern State 3arkZay. Funds Zere refused even
for the surveying of proposed routes—a refusal Zhich made it almost
impossible for 0oses to Zork out deals Zith the barons because he could
not be sure Zhether routes proposed Zere engineeringly feasible. But in
1926, .ahn learned that 0oses intended to run the parkZay right through
the middle of the eighteen-hole private golf course he had constructed for
his pleasure on his Cold Spring +arbor estate.

.ahn,  Zho happened to be a relative of 0oses—he Zas married to the
daughter of one of Bella's sisters—offered to secretly donate $10,000 to the
3ark Commission for surveys, if some of the surveys found a neZ route for
the parkZay in the Cold Spring +arbor area, a route Zhich Zould not cross
his estate at all. And 0oses accepted the money.

372
Regard for poZer implies disregard for those Zithout poZer as is
demonstrated by Zhat happened after 0oses shifted the route of the
Northern State 3arkZay aZay from Otto .ahn's golf  course. The map of the
Northern State 3arkZay in Cold Spring +arbor is a map not only of a road
but of poZer—and of Zhat happens to those Zho, unZittingly, are caught in
the path of poZer.

The parkZay Zas originally supposed to run through Otto .ahn's estate.
Since Otto .ahn had poZer—the poZer that Zent Zith  money—he Zas
able to get the route shifted to the south. South of Otto .ahn's estate lay the
estates of tZo other men of Zealth and of influence Zith the Legislature—
Congressman Ogden Livingston 0ills and Colonel +enry Rogers
:inthrop.   The Congressman and the Colonel Zere able to get the route
shifted farther south, far enough so it Zould not touch their estates either.
But shifting the route south of the 0ills  and :inthrop   estates meant that it
Zould run through the estates of tZo other men of Zealth and influence,
Colonel +enry L. Stimson and Robert :.  De Forest. So the route Zas
shifted south again. And south of the Stimson and De Forest estates lay a
roZ of farms, and farmers had neither Zealth nor influence.

James Roth Zas one of those farmers. :hen he had purchased his forty-
nine acres in 1922, much of it had been Zoodland and all of it had been
rocky. Roth had hauled aZay the rocks and cut doZn the trees. +e oZned a
team of horses, but they could not budge many of the stumps. As the horses
pulled at them, Roth pulled beside them. So did his Zife, +elen. So that
both Zould be freed for the pulling, their son, Jimmy, at the age of five, had
to learn hoZ to handle the team. As his parents sZeated at the ropes, he sat
on one of the horses, kicking him forZard.

After the farm Zas cleared, the Roths found that the southern fifteen acres
Zere no good for planting. But the rest of the land Zas rich and fertile. In
the afternoons, during harvest season, James Roth, Zho had been up since
before daZn Zorking in the fields, Zould  load up one of his tZo Zagons
and drive to market. :hile  he Zas gone, his Zife and son, Zho in 1927 Zas
si[, Zould  load the other. :hen  Roth returned he Zould— Zithout pause,
since every minute Zas important to a farmer trying to Zork thirty-four
acres Zithout a hired man—unharness the team, hitch it to the loaded

373
Zagon and begin the trip again—Zhile +elen and Jimmy Zould reload the
first Zagon. But by 1927 the farm had begun paying. ":e felt  pretty
secure," Jimmy recalls. ":e  had a nice farm. In those days, a farm Zasn't
just real estate, like it is noZ. In those days, a farm Zas your living. It Zas
your home. And Ze had a nice farm."

Then, in 1927, a representative of the Long Island State 3ark Commission
—of Robert 0oses—drove up to the Roths' farm and told them the state
Zas condemning fourteen acres out of the farm's center for the Northern
State 3arkZay. James Roth argued Zith 0oses' representative. +e pleaded
Zith him. All  he Zanted the commission to do, Roth said, Zas to move the
parkZay route about four hundred feet south, less than a tenth of a mile.
That Zould put it in the barren part of the farm. Taking fourteen acres from
the center meant that a substantial part of the fertile acreage Zould be gone.
Even more important, it meant that the farm Zould be sliced in tZo. +oZ
Zould he get from one side to the other? +oZ Zould he be able to Zork it?
But 0oses' representative refused to listen to the Roths. The route had been
decided on the basis of engineering considerations, he said. It could not
possibly be changed.

Robert 0oses had shifted the parkZay south of Otto .ahn's estate, south of
:inthrop's   and 0ills's  estates, south of Stimson's and De Forest's. For men
of Zealth and influence, he had moved it more than three miles south of its
original location. But James Roth possessed neither money nor influence.
And for James Roth, Robert 0oses Zould not move the parkZay south
even one tenth of a mile farther. For James Roth, Robert 0oses Zould not
move the parkZay one foot. Robert 0oses had offered men of Zealth and
influence bridges across the parkZay so that there Zould be no interference
Zith their pleasures. But he Zouldn't offer James Roth a bridge so that there
Zould be no interference Zith his planting.

In years to come, James Roth Zould talk often about the injustice that had
been done him. "0y father Zas really rocked by this; he talked about it
until the end of his life," says his son, Jimmy, Zho had Zatched his father
and mother sZeating side by side over their land. "And I don't knoZ that I
blame him. I'll tell you—my  father and mother Zorked very hard on that
place, and made something out of it, and then someone just cut it in tZo. To

374
have someone take aZay something you have ..." The farm never really
paid again. There just Zasn't enough fertile acreage left. And the Roths
found that it took fully tZenty-five  minutes to drive their team to the nearest
road that crossed the parkZay and then to get back to ploZ the other side of
the farm. Each round trip took about fifty minutes, and these Zere fifty-
minute segments slashed out of the life of a man to Zhom every minute Zas
necessary. "It Zas quite a Zays," 0rs. Roth recalls. "It Zas quite a Zays for
a man Zho Zas Zorking hard already." The condemnation aZard "never
came to much," 0rs. Roth says. And because there Zere tZo separate,
rather small pieces of property instead of a single big one, she says, they
couldn't even sell the farm.

The situation Zas the same for the other Cold Spring +arbor farmers Zhose
farms Zere ruined by the Northern State 3arkZay. To the end of their lives
most of them Zould remember the day on Zhich they heard that "the road
Zas coming" as a day of tragedy. There Zas only one aspect of the tragedy
that alleviated their bitterness. That Zas their belief that it Zas unavoidable,
that the route of the parkZay had indeed been determined by

engineering considerations, and therefore really could not be changed. Forty
years later, Zhen the author asked them about the possibility of the parkZay
being built through the big estates to the north, not one of those farmers
thought that such a possibility had ever e[isted.

0oses Zas given a further increase in poZer as a result of Smith's bid for
the presidency in 1928.

No associate of the Governor Zas more enthusiastic about the bid than
0oses. On the June night Zhen the Democratic 3arty Zas balloting at its
convention in +ouston and the E[ecutive 0ansion in Albany  Zas
overfloZing Zith  reporters, Zell-Zishers and hangers-on, the porches and
the grounds outside filled Zith throngs, 0oses Zas one of the handful Zho
Zere invited to join the Smith family in  the big second-floor room in Zhich
the Governor Zas trying to listen to the balloting over the static. :hen
Ohio's votes gave Smith the nomination and Emily Smith ran to her father
and threZ her arms around his neck, it Zas to 0oses that Belle 0oskoZit]
turned and said, almost crying, "Bob, it's over!" And other people in the

375
room Zere to say that they had never seen 0oses happier than at that
moment.

Belle's remark Zas, after all, understandable; Al Smith had run in tZenty-
tZo elections and he had Zon tZenty-one, and in the one he had lost he ran
almost a million votes ahead of his ticket. She—and 0oses and the other
members of the Smith inner circle in the room Zith the Governor —didn't
see hoZ he could lose. (Al Smith got up from the big armchair in Zhich he
had sat for hours, his attention on the radio, motionless e[cept for the
grinding of his lips against his big cigar and the stroking of one hand on the
neck of his Great Dane, Jeff, Zalked over to a small bar, grabbed tZo
handfuls of ice cubes, began dropping them into glasses and said, "NoZ, all
of ye]! Come aboard!")

But 0oses did not play a major role in the Smith presidential campaign.
The Governor had long since stopped using him as a speech drafter —"+e
had a great respect for Bob's vieZpoint on everything e[cept speeches,"
+oZard Cullman says. "The Governor said Bob Zould just murder him on
those. +e said Bob had no idea of the public pulse on most issues"—and the
campaign Zas run by 0rs. 0oskoZit]    and by a group of Zealthy Irish
Catholics Zho had recently become close to Smith.

So 0oses Zas spared being Zith his Gamaliel Zhen he Zent doZn to defeat
in Zhat Oscar +andlin has called "a dark episode in American history." +e
Zasn't Zith him Zhen,  on his tours of a South and a :est that he hardly
kneZ, Smith reali]ed that the gay renditions of "The SideZalks of NeZ
York" Zere being droZned out by Zhispers that Zere the surface hissing of
Zhat +andlin has called "the dark secret prejudice against the urban
foreigners," including Catholics "held in subservience to a foreign despot
by an army of priests and bishops." 0oses never saZ the fiery crosses that
burned on the hills of .ansas and Oklahoma—and on the Shinnecock

+ills  of Suffolk County—as Smith's campaign train passed. 0oses Zasn't
on the train Zhen the reali]ation spread through it that the prejudice and
intolerance could not be licked and that even if it could, 1928, Zith the
"+oover 0arket"   booming and the nation prosperous and complacent, just
Zasn't a Democratic year.

376
0oses' contribution to the Smith campaign Zas tZofold. First, his
accomplishments provided the ammunition for the most successful of
Smith's speeches, those Zhich concentrated on his record as Governor.
Second, Zhile Smith Zas campaigning, 0oses ran the state for him.

This Zas no minor task; voters in 1928 Zere far less tolerant than those in
1974 are about officeholders neglecting their duties to seek higher office,
and Smith reali]ed that the Republican legislators Zould take full advantage
of any opportunity to charge him Zith la[ness. To make sure that there Zas
no opportunity, Smith gave 0oses full authority over all state departments
during the months he spent on the campaign trail. +e even told 0oses to
use his office and sit in his big chair in the E[ecutive Chamber. 0oses did
so. +e presided over the draZing up of the 1929 state budget, the first in the
state's history to be draZn up under his e[ecutive budget plan. +e handled
the Governor's mail, screening it for important letters that should be sent on
to him—and making sure that he never saZ the obscene threats that terrified
Smith's Zife, .atie,  Zhen  she read them. :hile  Smith Zas campaigning,
0oses ran NeZ York. And the measure of his success in the job Zas that
there Zasn't a single Republican charge of la[ness in that period.

0oses had no opportunity to take pleasure from either his poZer or his
success as Smith's surrogate. Time, Zhich had for so long panted hungrily
at his heels, had draZn close enough to nip them noZ.

Smith had been prevented by laZ from running for Governor at the same
time he Zas running for 3resident, and Zhile a neZ Governor could not
oust 0oses as Long Island 3ark Commission head—his si[-year term, after
all, did not e[pire until  1930—he could effectively kill any of his park
projects that Zere not Zell under Zay Zhen he Zas inaugurated. And Zhile
0oses had accomplished so much during his four years in office, the
accomplishments Zere as nothing beside his dreams. There Zas, in 1928, so
much yet to do. Although the entire right-of-Zay for the Southern State
3arkZay had been acquired and construction started on much of it, not a
single section had been completed. :ithout that section, the public Zould
not see hoZ great it Zas going to be and Zould not be ready to support him
against any Governor Zho tried to keep him from completing it up to the
same—e[pensive—standards. The :antagh CauseZay to Jones Beach Zas

377
not completed, and since the public could not see the strand, hoZ could it
knoZ he Zas justified in the e[penditure of Zhatever millions  Zere needed
to make it the greatest bathing beach in the Zorld? The Northern State
3arkZay Zas not even begun. 8nless he could announce that a substantial

portion of the right-of-Zay had been acquired, hoZ could he force a neZ
Governor into building the road? So in November and December of 1928,
construction creZs Zere out on the Southern State and the :antagh, and the
surveyors Zere out along the route of the Northern State.

Those close to Robert 0oses kneZ that there Zas justification for his
urgency, a reason for the desperation Zhich noZ seemed to underlie his
haste. ":ithout  his loyalty  to me," 0oses Zas to say about Al Smith, "I
could have done nothing." +e had had Al Smith—and his loyalty—for ten
years. But noZ he Zas to have Al Smith no more. And the man Zho Zas to
folloZ  0oses' greatest friend into the Governor's chair Zas 0oses' deadliest
enemy.

Cousin Teddy into the NeZ York Legislature and an Assistant Secretaryship
of the Navy, had commented that if TR's sons proved unable to carry the old
Rough Rider's banner back up the steps of the :hite +ouse, there Zas
another member of the family Zho might do it for them.

+is every intervention on Smith's behalf had been immensely helpful.
Striding, athletic and graceful, to the speaker's podium at the 1920
Democratic National Convention, he had seconded the Governor's token
presidential nomination in an effective speech. In July 1922, Zith Smith,
out of office, taking his evening Zalks home Zith 0oses, Roosevelt,
crippled noZ, got Smith's gubernatorial candidacy off the ground Zith an
open letter calling on him to run. Floor manager for Smith at the 1924
national convention, he had been his nominator, too, sZinging to the
platform on crutches and delivering a speech that, using a phrase from
:ordsZorth,   dubbed the Governor "the +appy :arrior  of  the 3olitical
Battlefield"—a speech that historian 0ark Sullivan called "a noble
utterance." Among Smith's happier moments during the convention's
interminable 103 ballots Zere Roosevelt's appearances at the microphone to
rally his supporters. So enthusiastic a Smith supporter Zas he that Zhen the
Governor ran in 1926 against Theodore Roosevelt, Jr., the neZ Assistant

378
Secretary of the Navy, and Franklin Roosevelt found himself physically
unable to campaign against his cousin, he sent his Zife to do it. (To remind
voters of Theodore Jr.'s connection, peripheral at Zorst, Zith the Teapot
Dome oil scandal, Eleanor Roosevelt constructed a huge cardboard cutout
of a teapot bloZing steam, tied it on the top of a car and Zith it trailed her
cousin-in-laZ around the state, a maneuver Zhich she later ruefully
admitted had been a "rough stunt")

But Roosevelt Zas never really part of the Smith inner circle. As Oscar
+andlin put it, he "had been brought up in an atmosphere that stressed the
compulsive understatement. ... It Zas inevitable that he should feel
aZkZard in Smith's suite at the Biltmore. All those people! +e may never
actually have dined at the Tiger Room, but he must have heard stories of the
goings-on. +e could not, Zithout denying his oZn background, fail to
disapprove of the kinds of people Al and his friends Zere."

And yet, as +andlin added, "mingled Zith the disapproval Zas a touch of
envy at being left out of the fun." Roosevelt obviously Zished he had
0oses' gift for  blending in easily Zith the Governor and his hard-drinking,
hard-talking friends. :anting  to be part of the Biltmore scene, feeling
aZkZard about going there alone, Roosevelt Zould, in 1923, often
telephone 0oses in the late afternoon from his office at 120 BroadZay and
ask if he might stop by, pick him up and go up to the hotel Zith him.

0oses took Roosevelt along, but the latter's appearances at the Biltmore
Zere alZays touched Zith restraint. Smith appreciated Roosevelt's help and
felt a genuine affection for him and Eleanor. Shy about his lack of grammar,
the Governor almost never Zrote personal letters, but he Zrote many to the
Roosevelts after Campobello, short, gruff notes full of sympathy and cheer.
But, despite the Governor's efforts to erase it, the line betZeen

the Fourth :ard  contract e[ecutor and the Ivy Leaguer—the line Zhich
0oses had so thoroughly erased in his oZn case—alZays remained draZn
betZeen Smith and Roosevelt. Once, Zith regret in his voice, Smith told a
friend: "Franklin just isn't the kind of man you can take into the pissroom
and talk intimately Zith."

379
Furthermore, Smith and his circle had something less than respect for
Roosevelt's abilities. This attitude Zas understandable. Roosevelt's +arvard
classmates had felt the same Zay. 0ocking his propensity for hopping into,
and out of, different interests in quick and shalloZ succession, they called
him "the featherduster." After college, because of the same propensity,
Roosevelt had not been a particularly successful laZyer or businessman. An
acquaintance Zould recall that Zhen, at the age of tZenty-eight, he decided
to enter politics, running for state senator from Dutchess County,
"everybody called him 'Franklin' and regarded him as a harmless bust." In
Albany, his haughty manner, accentuated by "his habit of throZing up his
head so as to give the appearance of looking doZn his nose, his pince-ne]—
all this, combined Zith his leadership in the anti-Sheehan fight, stamped
him as a snob and branded his ideas, in the outraged language of one
regular Democrat, as 'the silly conceits of a political prig.' " Frances 3erkins
Zas to remember him arguing Zith tZo or three colleagues, "his small
mouth pursed up," saying, " 'No, no, I Zon't hear of it!' " Tammany's Big
Tim Sullivan Zas only summing up the prevailing opinion in Albany Zhen
he said, "AZful, arrogant felloZ, that Roosevelt." 0oreover, as +andlin
notes, to the hard, shreZd men around the Governor, Zho had claZed their
Zay up through a tough Zorld and Zho kneZ state government in detail,
Roosevelt, Zith his airy plans, his many hobbies and "his glittering,
sZeeping discourses, seemed a hopelessly impractical intellectual."

For some reason, Smith's advisers overlooked the fact that not Silent
Charlie 0urphy  but the "political prig"  had been the Zinner of the Sheehan
fight. And, after his polio attack in 1921, they did not seem to consider Zhat
it had taken for Roosevelt to decide to go back into politics at a time Zhen,
Eleanor Roosevelt Zas later to recall, he Zas lying in bed and Zorking for
hours to try to Ziggle one toe. Roosevelt's head had alZays been tilted at
that gay, confident angle; they didn't seem to think of the strength that had
had to be found someZhere to keep it tilted noZ. The agoni]ing steps he
had taken to the podium to give his +appy :arrior  speech Zere the
manifestation* of an indomitable spirit, but Smith's intimates never thought
of the speech Zithout giggling over Zhat had preceded it. The story as they
kneZ it Zould  be someZhat different from that recounted by historians, or
by Dore Schary, Zho in Sunrise at Campobello portrayed FDR as saying,
Zhen Smith asked him to let Joseph 3roskauer help Zrite the speech, "I

380
Zon't mind the addition of a feZ phrases. But, Al, Zhat I say Zill  have to be
Zhat I Zant to say." Actually, Zhen Smith and 3roskauer Zalked into
Roosevelt's office at Smith campaign headquarters and asked him to make
the nominating speech, Roosevelt replied, "I'd like to, but I'm so busy Zith
the delegates—Joe, Zill you Zrite me a speech?"

"I had already Zritten a speech, the +appy :arrior  speech," 3ros-kauer
Zould tell the author. "I Zaited a feZ days and then sent it to him. +e asked
me to come in and talk about it. +e said, 'Joe, I can't make that speech. It's
too poetic. You can't quote a :ordsZorth poem to a bunch of politicians.' "

3roskauer told the author—and so did Smith's daughter Emily and tZo
other Smith intimates—that he kept insisting on retaining the +appy
:arrior   line Zhile  Roosevelt kept insisting that it be removed. OtherZise,
Roosevelt said, he Zould refuse to give the speech. Roosevelt even Zrote a
speech of his oZn.

"Finally," 3roskauer recalled, "I said Zhy didn't Ze get a third person to
come and take a look and try to reconcile the tZo speeches. I said, 'I Zas
thinking of [+erbert  Bayard] SZope.' +e said, Tine.' That night Ze Zent to
Frank's apartment. SZope made a fau[ pas. :e hadn't told him Zho had
Zritten them and he read Frank's speech first, threZ it on the floor and said,
'Joe, this is the goddamnedest, rottenest speech I've ever read!' Then he read
mine and he said, 'This is the greatest speech since Bragg nominated
Cleveland!'* Roosevelt continued to argue and to say he refused to give my
speech. Finally about midnight, I got up and said, 'Frank, Ze're all
e[hausted. I have just enough authority from the Governor to tell you you'll
either make that speech or none at all.' And he said, 'Oh, I'll make the
goddamned speech and it'll be a flop!' "

The laughter Zhich boomed out at the Tiger Room or the Biltmore suite
Zhen SZope or 3roskauer repeated the story—and they repeated it often—
helped to blind the men sitting in those jovial Zatering holes to developing
traits in Roosevelt's character. And, more important, it blinded them also to
the fact that, Zhile he Zas completely loyal to Smith, he Zas using his
position as a campaigner for a presidential candidate to keep in touch Zith
key Democrats across the country in preparation for a presidential bid of his
oZn. They never guessed that he even had a timetable— a run for the

381
Governorship in 1932 and the 3residency in 1936. As one Roosevelt
biographer put it, the Smith advisers regarded their acquisition as "no more
than a shoZy but harmless piece of ZindoZ dressing."

All the advisers, that is, e[cept one. Sitting off in a corner of the Biltmore
suite, aZay from the laughter, Belle 0oskoZit],  Zho  had seen in the thirty-
year-old failure Robert 0oses something no one else had seen, Zas
Zatching "harmless" Franklin Roosevelt. And, by 1924, she had come to
the conclusion that he Zas a threat, a very dangerous threat, to her dream
that Alfred E. Smith Zould one day sit in the :hite   +ouse.

The other advisers didn't take this vieZ seriously^For once, they said, 0rs.
0  Zas Zrong.

♦At the 1884 Democratic National Convention, General EdZard S. Bragg
seconded (not nominated) Grover Cleveland for 3resident in a speech that
Zas so eloquent —it included the memorable phrase "They love him for the
enemies he has made"— that the galleries stood and urged him on Zith
shouts of: "A little more grape, General! A little more grape!"

In 1924, Zhen Smith appointed 0oses president of the Long Island State
3ark Commission, the Governor appointed Roosevelt chairman of the
Taconic State 3ark Commission. The thin veneer of friendliness betZeen
0oses and Roosevelt thereupon flaked off abruptly and completely.

0oses Zould  attribute the break to a single incident, revolving around
gnarled, emaciated little Louis 0. +oZe,  Roosevelt's devoted adviser,
Zhom Smith's circle, because of his habitually dirty, sZeat-stained collars
and suits dotted Zith food stains and flecked Zith cigarette ashes, called
"Lousy Louie."

:hen   Roosevelt attempted to appoint +oZe secretary of the Taconic
Commission, 0oses stepped in. If Roosevelt Zanted a "secretary and
valet," he said, he Zould have to pay him himself.

Getting +oZe the secretary's job, Zhich paid $5,000 per year, Zas
important to Roosevelt. 8nable to move around freely, he kneZ that he
Zould be able to remain in politics only if he Zas able to delegate most of

382
the tasks he had formerly performed himself. +e therefore needed an
organi]ation, even if it Zas only tZo  or three secretaries, but he had to have
+oZe to direct them and to represent him at political meetings he himself
could no longer attend, and he Zas not financially able to pay +oZe an
adequate salary. +oZe had been about to accept a lucrative offer from
private industry Zhen Roosevelt Zas stricken, but as soon as he had learned
of the tragedy at Campobello, he had declined the job. Roosevelt had to find
a place for him on some governmental payroll and the only governmental
body on Zhich Roosevelt held an official position in 1924 Zas the Taconic
Commission. But 0oses Zas adamant. The State 3arks Council Zould veto
any salary for +oZe as secretary, he said.

0oses Zas alZays to contend that the bad blood betZeen him and
Roosevelt floZed from this single incident. +oZe never forgave him for the
"valet" insult, he said, and took every opportunity to poison Roosevelt's
mind against him. "You see," 0oses Zould tell the author, "Roosevelt Zas
in such terrible physical shape that he Zas home at night a lot, and a person
in that kind of condition is very susceptible to the people Zho are there Zith
him in that house all night. And +oZe Zas alZays there. And Roosevelt
Zould listen to his stories. It Zas a result of his illness—he Zas susceptible
to that kind of thing."

But the feeling betZeen 0oses and Roosevelt burned too deep to be
attributable to a single incident. 3ersonality may have had something to do
Zith it.  0oses, after all, Zas not the only one of the tZo men Zhom Albany
had found arrogant. 0oses Zas not the only one of the tZo men Zho had
been given a sip of poZer, Zho had liked the taste and Zho Zanted more.
And much of the feeling Zas certainly due to the fact that during the early
1920's 0oses Zas not the only one of the tZo men dreaming about parks
and parkZays. During the same years that Robert 0oses Zas tramping the
hills and beaches of Long Island, envisioning great parks and parkZays

there, Franklin Roosevelt Zas tramping—in his imagination—the hills and
rolling farmland of his native Dutchess County, envisioning great parks and
parkZays there. +is ideas Zere on a scale as big as 0oses'. And in the park
system that 0oses Zas building, there Zas room for only one man Zith big
ideas.

383
Roosevelt had been interested in parks long before 0oses, in fact. Both
because of his oZn preoccupations and because of his interest in his famous
cousin's campaign to conserve natural resources, he had, from childhood,
"cared deeply about nature—about land, Zater and trees." For years, he had
been planting yelloZ poplar and Zhite pine seedlings by the thousands at
the Roosevelt mansion at +yde 3ark. Concerned about the destruction of
NeZ York's great forests by lumber companies, he proposed in 1922 the
formation of a syndicate that Zould purchase a tract Zithin a hundred miles
of NeZ York City  and operate it as a park, as private interests operated
forests for recreation in Europe.

If 0oses kneZ  Long Island as feZ men kneZ it, Roosevelt could, in the
days Zhen he could Zalk, say the same thing about Dutchess County and
about the other three counties—3utnam, Columbia and Rensselaer— Zhose
gently rolling hills  made Zith Dutchess a continuous soft green border,
broken only by the patchZork of cultivated fields, all along the east bank of
the +udson from :estchester to Albany. +e  had long had his eye on
particularly beautiful tracts Zhich he Zanted preserved from commercial
e[ploitation—he had, in fact, been negotiating on behalf of the Boy Scouts
for one in 3utnam County. +e Zas especially enthusiastic about a plan to
have NeZ York build a tri-state park, in cooperation Zith 0assachusetts
and Connecticut, at the juncture of those three states. The Bron[ River
3arkZay, just opened in :estchester County and a Zonder of the Zorld,
Zas pointing at the Taconic region. Even before he Zas appointed to the
Taconic Commission, Roosevelt had envisioned joining to the Bron[ River
3arkZay a neZ parkZay that Zould head straight north through the Taconic
farm counties to parks that could be created there, thereby opening up the
lovely +udson Valley. The parkZay as he envisioned it Zould eventually
e[tend all the Zay to Albany, and thus make accessible to NeZ York City
the beauties of the Adirondack, Berkshire and :hite mountains. :hen
Smith and 0oses—badly needing his name in the Taylor Estate fight—
offered Roosevelt the chairmanship of the Taconic 3ark Commission,
Zhose jurisdiction Zould encompass the Zhole east bank of the +udson
from :estchester  to Albany, Roosevelt asked if he Zould be able to build
the parkZay. 0oses apparently gave him assurances on the point—
Roosevelt Zas later to remind Smith that he had—and Roosevelt eagerly
accepted.

384
:ithin   months, he had old Clarence Fahnestock primed to donate his 6,169
acres at Lake OscaZana as a state park and he had completed arrangements
for the transfer of three smaller tracts farther north. +aving himself driven
around the countryside, he had selected sites for "small camping parks" that
he Zanted built along the parkZay. +e Zas sketching himself picnic tables
and fireplaces and thinking about Zhich type of rock should

be used to face bridges over the parkZay so that it Zould blend in most
naturally Zith the landscape.

Roosevelt Zas impatient to get this "splendid project" under Zay; the price
of the land for the Boy Scout camp had risen 30 percent in the tZo years he
Zas negotiating for it. +e Zas driven, as Zas 0oses, by the knoZledge that
soaring land values Zere making land acquisition continually more difficult.
"The securing of the rights of Zay for the state should," he Zrote, "be
immediately put through."

But there Zas insufficient money in the park allocations made by the
Legislature even for 0oses' Long Island park plan, and he didn't Zant any
spent on a 125-mile parkZay someZhere else. And, it may be, he didn't
Zant Zithin  the park system he Zas so assiduously Zelding into a
monolithic entity responsive solely to his command any opening Zedges
driven for a project that Zould be under the command of another vigorous,
independent man. Repeatedly, 0oses' State 3arks Council slashed
Roosevelt's budget requests to a level insufficient even to begin acquiring
right-of-Zay  for a parkZay. The money alloZed Zas not sufficient even for
the Taconic Commission to hire an adequate e[ecutive staff, and Roosevelt
charged that the lack of staff prevented the commission from making plans
that Zould alloZ  it to spend, on small parks, even the meager amount of
money it Zas allotted. In addition, 0oses noZ said a Taconic 3arkZay
should not e[tend north to Albany but should end only a feZ miles north of
NeZ York City.

0atters came to a head in November 1926.

In submitting during that month his budget request for 1927, Roosevelt
asked for funds for engineering plans for the Taconic 3arkZay, for right-of-
Zay surveys and for salaries for an adequate staff (including Louis +oZe).

385
:hen   the State 3arks Council met to consider the regional commissions'
budget requests (Roosevelt Zas in :arm Springs, Georgia, Zhere he Zent
every Zinter to try to coa[ his dead legs back to life), it disapproved those
of the Taconic Commission, on the grounds that it had not spent all the
money allocated to it in the past.

Returning north, Roosevelt had at least one bitter face-to-face confrontation
Zith 0oses,  the details of Zhich can only be imagined. Then Roosevelt
tried to go over 0oses' head. In December 1926, he Zrote Smith asking the
Governor to restore the funds he had requested. "It is an absurd and
humiliating position to be put in, to be informed that Ze could have no
money because through lack of an E[ecutive Ze have not been able to
properly e[pend the money Ze had and then to be informed that Ze cannot
have an E[ecutive because Ze have not been given more money," he Zrote.

But Smith Zas taking 0oses' Zord as to Zhat Zas happening in park
matters. +e asked 0oses about the Taconic situation and 0oses Zrote
Smith: "I suggest you Zrite him [Roosevelt] a letter along the line
attached." The "attached" said that of course the parkZay Zould go through
—it did not say through to Zhere—but that there Zas so much competition
for the limited money available that it must be concentrated on those
projects Zhich Zere moving ahead fastest, and the Taconic 3arkZay Zas
not one of those.

In fact, the "attached" said, "practically none" of the money already
allocated to the Taconic Commission had been spent. Smith sent the letter
to Roosevelt e[actly as 0oses had Zritten it.

A year later, the State 3arks Council eliminated from the Taconic
Commission's request all funds e[cept those needed for bare maintenance
of e[isting parks. Roosevelt Zrote Smith that "the other members of the
Commission and I feel very strongly that" the elimination "ends the
necessity for the usefulness of the Commission. :e have practically no
function left." 0oses  simply used us, Roosevelt said. "The enormous
appropriations for . . Long Island Zhile, perhaps, necessary, prove merely
that Ze have been completely useful [to] other people." And Ze Zon't be
used any more: "8nless something is done, the Commissioners do not feel
it is Zorth Zhile  to continue."

386
This Zas serious; there Zas a presidential election coming up and Smith
needed Roosevelt; in fact, he Zanted Roosevelt to nominate him again. +e
apparently intervened; the commission's operating funds Zere increased.
And Roosevelt Zas assured, apparently by 0oses, that Zhen the 3arks
Council submitted to the Smith-+eZitt-+utchinson  committee requests for
additional allocations out of a neZ $10,000,000 park bond issue that had
been passed in 1927, it Zould ask for $200,000 for Taconic 3arkZay right-
of-Zay.

But Zhen the three-man committee met, on January 23, 1928, and approved
all regional allocations e[cept one, that one Zas the Taconic. On January
30, 1928, Roosevelt Zrote Smith a letter that Zas as revealing— in the
depth of the bitterness it displayed toZard 0oses—as it Zas remarkable,
coming as it did from the pen of the man Zho Zould later shepherd his
country through depression and Zar.

"I Zasn't born yesterday!" Franklin D. Roosevelt Zrote the Governor. "You
see I have been in the game so long that I noZ reali]e the mistake I made
Zith this Taconic State 3ark Commission Zas in not playing the kind of
politics that our friend Bob 0oses used. . . . You knoZ, just as Zell as I do,
that Bob has skinned us alive this year—has Zorked things so beautifully
that his baby on Long Island is plentifully taken care of and that all the
other 3ark Commissions up-state, e[cept ours, are getting practically Zhat
Zas approved by the State Council of 3arks. :hen the State Council of
3arks approved appropriations to the Taconic State 3ark Commission of
nearly $200,000, Bob kneZ perfectly Zell that it Zould not go through and
had his tongue in his cheek Zhen he tried to tell us that he Zas trying to get
it through. ... As a matter of practical fact, I am very certain in my oZn
mind that Ze could have got at least some appropriation for acquisition of
land this year if Bob and you had gone after it. The money is there—Zithin
the total of the budget. For instance, Bob told me himself the other day that
on the contract for the NeZ York State Office Building, a couple of hundred
thousand dollars Zill be saved."

As park men like Ansley :ilco[    and Judge ClearZater had charged before
him, Roosevelt charged that 0oses had lied about him to Smith Zhen he
Zas not around to refute the lies. "I am sorry to say it is a fact that Bob

387
0oses has played fast and loose Zith the Taconic State 3ark Commission
since the beginning," Roosevelt Zrote. "I give him great credit for many

accomplishments and for his fine vision of a complete State 3ark system,
but he has been guilty of making so many false statements about the
Taconic State 3ark Commission Zhich I have checked up and knoZ all
about, that I am very certain that you have been given a very erroneous lot
of information about the Commission."

As :ilco[    and ClearZater had charged before him, Roosevelt charged that
0oses had lied about him to the other members of the 3arks Council Zhen
he Zas not around to refute the lies. "One e[ample is sufficient!" he Zrote.
"Bob told the State Council of 3arks that the Taconic State 3ark
Commission had done nothing to cooperate Zith 0assachusetts and
Connecticut authorities. As a matter of fact Ze have not only cooperated
Zith them from the beginning, but are in close touch Zith them at all times
and can tell you or him at any moment just Zhat the situation is in both
those states."

0oses Zill  have a chance to lie about me no more, Roosevelt said. "The
Commissioners do not Zant to be the first to make a break in your splendid
State-Zide 3ark program, but they have been put in a position Zhere I do
not see that they can in any decency" do anything but resign.

Al Smith, Zho so seldom Zrote personal letters, noZ sat doZn and Zrote
one to Franklin D. Roosevelt.

"I knoZ  of no man I have met in my Zhole public career Zho I have any
stronger affection for than for yourself," he Zrote. "Therefore, you can find
as much fault Zith me as you like. I Zill  not get into a fight Zith you for
anything or for anybody."

The letter had its effect. Roosevelt did not resign. But the letter did not
change the Taconic 3arkZay situation—or the 0oses-Roosevelt situation.

At the 1928 Democratic convention, Roosevelt Zas again Smith's floor
manager. Observers noted that at times during his nominating speech, the
cheering seemed to be as much for him as for Smith, and there Zere some

388
suggestions that Roosevelt—a bearer of TR's name, a 3rotestant and an
attractive vice-presidential candidate even in defeat in 1920—Zould make a
better presidential candidate than the Governor. Belle 0oskoZit]'s
comments about Roosevelt began to be more caustic. But Smith himself felt
the cheers Zere no more than Roosevelt deserved—and in September the
Governor asked Roosevelt to be his successor in Albany.

0oses had argued against the choice. There are indications that he half-
e[pected Smith to name him instead, to try to force him on the Democratic
3arty. Although he had alZays identified himself as an "independent
Republican" Zhen reporters asked him his political affiliation, he quietly
enrolled as a Democrat Zhen he registered to vote in 1928—a bit of
opportunism that did him no good, since his name Zas never seriously
mentioned for the Governorship that year by Smith or anyone else.
0oreover, among those men Zhose names Zere seriously considered,
Roosevelt Zas the one 0oses least Zanted to get the post. +e told the
conclaves of Democratic leaders to Zhich Smith brought him that
Roosevelt did not possess either the mental capacity or the application to be
Governor. To Frances 3erkins, he said that Roosevelt's only asset Zas a
smile. "It's a pity to have to have him and that Al has set his heart on him,"
he told her. "It's un-

doubtedly a good name to carry the ticket Zith . . . but, of course, he isn't
quite bright." The other Smith aides agreed Zith this vieZ, but mental
capacity Zas not as important to them as political realities. :ith "Rum,
Romanism and Tammany" rapidly becoming the overriding issue of the
presidential campaign, they feared that only Roosevelt's name on the ticket
could keep NeZ York's upstate 3rotestant Drys from stampeding into the
Republican camp—and denying Smith the forty-five electoral votes of his
oZn state. Estimating that Roosevelt Zas a full 200,000 votes stronger than
any other candidate, they felt that he Zas the only man Zith a chance to
defeat the attractive GO3 gubernatorial nominee, Attorney General Albert
Ottinger. As for his ability, Smith's advisers felt he didn't need much; they
felt that 0oses' reorgani]ation had so streamlined the state government that
Roosevelt's lack of administrative e[perience Zould not be serious. And
Smith himself had a higher opinion of Roosevelt's ability than his aides, and

389
he emphasi]ed that Roosevelt's nomination Zould assure the party of
having a candidate of integrity.

Roosevelt Zas genuinely reluctant to run—he and +oZe had decided that
Zith the nation prosperous under a Republican 3resident, 1928 Zas not
going to be a Democratic year and that their original timetable, calling for a
gubernatorial run in 1932, Zas correct. To stay out of the reach of
persuasion Zhile the State Democratic Convention Zas convening in
Rochester, he took himself off to :arm Springs. But he could not escape
the telephone, and over it Smith persuaded him to run. The ne[t night, he
Zas nominated by acclamation. 0oses turned to Emily Smith and said,
shouting so she could hear him above the uproar: "+e'll make a good
candidate but a lousy Governor."

The man Smith assigned to brief Roosevelt on campaign issues and draft
his speeches, Belle 0oskoZit]'s discovery, Samuel I. Rosenman, Zas at
first not altogether enchanted Zith his assignment. "I had heard stories of
his being something of a playboy and idler, of his Zeakness and
ineffectiveness," he recalled. "That Zas the kind of man I had e[pected to
meet." But he began almost instantly to Zonder if such unfavorable vieZs
of Roosevelt Zere correct. "The broad jaZ and upthrust chin, the piercing,
flashing eyes, the firm hands—they did not fit the description. ... +e Zas
friendly, but there Zas about his bearing an unspoken dignity Zhich held off
any undue familiarity." During the campaign, Rosenman Zatched Roosevelt
pull himself laboriously to his feet as his car arrived in a toZn, snap his
steel braces to hold his body erect, and then, chin up, cigarette holder tilted
at the most nonchalant of angles, the cane on Zhich he leaned the only
visible sign of any disability, laughingly reassure the croZd that neZspaper
speculation about his health Zas e[aggerated. By the end of the campaign,
Rosenman kneZ that the Smith camp's assessment of Roosevelt had been
very Zrong.

But 0oses had not changed his opinion. "I don't like him," he told Frances
3erkins during this period. "I don't believe in him. I don't trust him."

+is comments became more vicious. 0iss 3erkins recalled 0oses saying to
her about Roosevelt, " '+e's a pretty poor e[cuse for a man.' ... +e said

390
so to me in just those Zords—'+e's a pretty poor e[cuse for a man.' " +e
never actually mentioned the full e[tent—or Zhat he imagined to be the full
e[tent—of Roosevelt's disabilities, recalled another member of the Smith
entourage, "but he Zas alZays hinting around about it in the most vicious
kind of Zay. 'Vicious'—that Zas the only Zord for  it." +is  comments took
in not only Roosevelt but his Zife as Zell. "I Zouldn't  repeat Zhat he said
about Eleanor Roosevelt," another Smith aide said. "Just say he dZelt on
her physical appearance and her voice and Zas quite insulting."

The comments got back, as comments made in political circles alZays seem
to do, to their targets. And Roosevelt responded in kind. During this same
period, he told Frances 3erkins that, if he Zas elected, "I'm not going to
have Bob 0oses around, Frances, because I don't trust him. I don't like him.
I don't trust him. . .. There'll be trouble." Roosevelt's feeling for 0oses, says
one man Zho kneZ both, Zas at least equal in intensity to 0oses' feeling
for Roosevelt. "You can employ euphemisms to describe the electricity that
Zas present Zhen those tZo men Zere in the same room," he says, "but if
you are going to be accurate, you have to say there Zas real hatred there."

Election Day in 1928 Zas November 6. The dark forces to Zhich +andlin
referred had done their Zork Zell on the boy Zho had thought he could rise
from the Fourth :ard  to be 3resident. Alfred E. Smith received 87 electoral
votes to +erbert +oover's 444. +e even lost NeZ York State. But Franklin
Delano Roosevelt polled 2,130,193 votes to Ottinger's 2,104,193. The man
Zho hated Robert 0oses Zas Governor.

Al Smith Zas bitter over the anti-Catholic prejudice that had marked the
campaign. But, at first, that Zas the only bitterness. +e seemed reconciled,
even relieved, to be out of politics. After tZenty-five years in public office,
he Zanted to settle doZn Zith .atie  and spend more time Zith the
grandchildren he adored. After tZenty-five years, he Zas still poor—the
Governor's salary in 1928 Zas only $10,000, less than that of his cabinet
officers—and he Zas tired of that, too; he Zanted security in his old age and
something to leave his sons. John J. Raskob, :illiam T. .enny and other
friends had offered him the presidency of the Empire State Building
Corporation, Zhich Zas erecting NeZ York's tallest skyscraper, at a salary
of $50,000 per year. "I have had all I can stand of it. As far as running for

391
office is concerned— that's finished," he said, and at the time he meant it;
one proof Zas his voluntary surrender of the titular leadership of the
national Democratic 3arty; another Zas his refusal to intervene Zhen his
ally Judge George Olvany Zas forced out as head of Tammany +all in 1929
—if Smith had intended to run for 3resident in 1932 he Zould certainly
have attempted to maintain control of Tammany to keep a base of electoral
votes on Zhich to build a campaign. In November 1928, as he packed up so
that Roosevelt could move into the E[ecutive 0ansion early—and busied
himself personally overseeing the installation of the ramps Roosevelt Zould
need to move in a Zheelchair around the mansion and the capitol—Alfred
E. Smith, the +appy :arrior,   Zas ready to retire, still mostly happy, from
politics. +e certainly bore no personal

animosity toZard Roosevelt, and, raised in the Tammany tradition in Zhich
men Zere retired from active service honorably Zhen the time for
retirement came (the Zarriors Zho had held high political office becoming
sachems, assured until they died of a voice in running the +all) to make
room for younger men coming along, "he considered," as 3roskauer put it,
"that he and Roosevelt Zere members of the same team."

0oreover, Smith felt  that Roosevelt could be trusted to continue his
programs. This Zas important to him. All through 1928, he had been
pressing the Legislature for further improvements in Zorking conditions for
Zomen and children, for e[tensions of the :orkmen's  Compensation Act,
for liberali]ed  Zelfare legislation, for movement in the neZ field of old-age
pensions; and the Legislature had refused to be moved on these issues. NoZ
he Zanted Roosevelt to press for them. And certainly there Zas every
reason for him to feel that his successor Zould. All during the campaign,
Roosevelt had pledged himself to continue Smith's policies. +is typical
campaign speech, the NeZ York +erald Tribune said, began Zith "a feZ
Zords of fulsome praise for Alfred E. Smith." In the first Zeeks after the
election, Smith Zas looking forZard to helping the younger man get a good
start in Albany. :hen  he and .atie  moved out of the E[ecutive 0ansion,  in
early December, he took a suite in the De :itt Clinton +otel  at the bottom
of the little park in front of the capitol steps, so he Zould be available if his
successor Zanted to confer Zith him, and Zaited for Roosevelt to call.

392
And there he Zaited.

After a Zeek had passed and Roosevelt had not contacted him, Smith
sZalloZed his pride and telephoned the neZ Governor. +e told Roosevelt
that he had assumed he Zould Zant some assistance Zith the details of his
inaugural address and first message to the Legislature, and had asked 0rs.
0oskoZit]   to prepare a list of items that might be included. Roosevelt
replied that the address and the message Zere almost finished, but he Zould
be glad to shoZ them to Smith and 0rs. 0oskoZit]   Zhen they Zere. And
this, as Arthur Schlesinger puts it, "he 'forgot' to do. :hen the address Zas
given, it Zas devoted largely to rural problems and made hardly a reference
to Zhat had gone before." :hen  pu]]led  reporters asked Roosevelt Zhether
he Zas going to continue the Smith policies, his evasive ansZer Zas:
"Generally, for that is Zhat Ze said all through the campaign."

E[planations for Roosevelt's treatment of Smith vary from historian to
historian, depending on Zhether the historian has received most of his
information from intimates of Roosevelt or of Smith. Roosevelt-oriented
historians say that Smith, Zhether or not he intended to continue to run the
state after he had left office, gave that impression to Roosevelt (they cite his
offer of 0rs.  0oskoZit]'s   help on the inaugural address as one Zay he did
so). 3ersonal feelings aside, these historians point out, Roosevelt had long
vieZed the Governorship as a Zay station on the road to the :hite +ouse,
began planning for a 1932 presidential bid immediately after the election—
and kneZ that if Smith changed his mind and decided to run for the
presidency, he Zould be the man Roosevelt Zould have to beat. +is greatest
political problem in Albany, moreover, Zould be to get out from

under the shadoZ of the man generally acknoZledged to have been the
state's greatest Governor.

But political considerations alone seem inadequate to account for
Roosevelt's actions. One is forced to take into account another side of his
comple[ character, the side Zhich Raymond 0oley Zas to call a "lack of
directness and sincerity," and of Zhich Robert SherZood Zas to say that "at
times he displayed a capacity for vindictiveness Zhich could be described
as petty." This side Zas frequently to be on display Zhen Roosevelt dealt
Zith people he had needed once but needed no longer. "Roosevelt Zas

393
never at his best in getting rid of people no longer useful to him," Oscar
+andlin Zas to Zrite.  "The lack of directness and candor in his actions left
a bitter impression of shiftiness, of disloyalty, and of ingratitude." And the
impression Zas to be strengthened in his relations Zith Smith and Smith's
people, in 0oley's opinion, because "Roosevelt . . . Zas deeply sensitive to
the fact that so many among the people Zho kneZ him . . . believed, for one
reason or another, that he lived beyond his intellectual means." Says 0oley:
"This opinion hurt Roosevelt, but he braced his determination to overcome
it. It may be added that Zith this effort came a not quite Christlike tendency
to beat doZn not only the opinion itself but those Zho held it. It is not
remarkable, therefore, that Zhen he became governor he did not avail
himself of Smith's generous tender of help and advice. . . . The mighty
engine of governmental poZer Zas not destined to spare those Zho had
once deluded themselves Zith a notion that Roosevelt Zas a Zeak man." Of
the many books Zritten on Roosevelt, it is significant that every one Zhose
author Zas an intimate of both Roosevelt and Smith—0iss 3erkins,
3roskauer, Rosenman and Jim Farley, for e[ample—stresses this side of
Roosevelt's character in attempting to e[plain his treatment of Smith.

The final humiliation of Al  Smith at the hands of the man he had asked to
be his successor revolved around Robert 0oses.

Among the subjects Roosevelt Zas not an[ious to discuss Zith Smith
during the period betZeen the election and the inauguration Zas that of the
appointments he Zould make. Finally, Smith, humbling himself again, Zent
to see Roosevelt at the E[ecutive 0ansion. Trying to make the Governor-
elect see that they Zere both members of the same team, he said, "You
knoZ, I'll  alZays be ready to help you. I'll alZays come up any time you
Zant me. I'll talk to anyone you Zant me to talk to. I'll negotiate Zith
anyone about anything. ... I knoZ all these people. I don't have anything [to
do]." +e said he understood that Roosevelt Zould Zant to replace most of
his appointees Zith his oZn men. There Zere only tZo members of his
administration Zho he thought Zere absolutely indispensable. They Zere
0rs.  0oskoZit],   Zhose title Zas "personal secretary to the Governor," and
0oses. Roosevelt, describing this conversation to Frances 3erkins, said that
Smith told him, "You see, 0rs. 0oskoZit]    knoZs all about everything. She
knoZs all the plans. She knoZs all the people. She knoZs all the different

394
characters and quirks that are involved in everything. She knoZs Zho can
and Zho Zill

do this or that." As for 0oses, Roosevelt told 0iss 3erkins that Smith is
"very dependent on Bob 0oses, as you knoZ, and thinks very highly of
him. +e feels that nobody else can carry on the-parks, or the highZays, or
even the state hospitals e[cept 0oses, because he's got so much ability."

Roosevelt Zas evasive. And in the days folloZing the E[ecutive 0ansion
conference, Smith could see Zhich Zay the Zind Zas bloZing. Roosevelt
took pains to let reporters knoZ that he had not had a single conference
Zith 0rs.  0oskoZit].    +e dodged their questions about 0oses.

0rs.  0oskoZit]   Zas, after all, more of a personal adviser to Smith than a
state official. +e did not again raise Zith Roosevelt the question of her
reappointment. But Smith felt, as one observer recalls, "that it Zould be a
tragedy—a real tragedy—for the state to lose 0oses' services as Secretary
of State. There just Zasn't anyone else Zith his ability around." Telephoning
Roosevelt again, he asked for an appointment. Roosevelt Zas at +yde 3ark,
si[ty  miles from Albany, but, for 0oses, Smith made a journey to Canossa.
+e Zas reZarded by an end to evasion. As soon as he had finished pleading
Zith Roosevelt to reappoint 0oses, the Governor-elect leaned back, puffed
on his cigarette for a moment and then said flatly: "No. +e rubs me the
Zrong Zay."

It is significant that, although 0oses held other state positions, the
conversation betZeen Smith and Roosevelt concerned only the
Secretaryship of State— for the reasons Zhy 0oses' other positions Zere
not discussed do much to pinpoint the sources of his poZer.

0oses' si[-year  term as president of the Long Island State 3ark
Commission did not e[pire until 1930; although Roosevelt Zas Governor
and the commission presidency Zas a gubernatorial appointment, 0oses
did not need Roosevelt's approval to remain in the post. The chairmanship
of the State 3arks Council Zas conferred not by the Governor but by the
council. 0oses did not need Roosevelt's approval to remain in that post,
either.

395
The only Zay Roosevelt could remove 0oses from either of his park posts
Zas by bringing formal charges against him. But charges of Zhat? If 0oses
had been guilty of impropriety or illegality, hoZ Zas a Governor supposed
to knoZ it? 0oses kept the operation of the commission so secret that no
outsider kneZ Zhere to start looking for proof or could guess Zhether, if he
did look, he Zould find any. A Governor could, of course, launch a full-
scale investigation into the commission, but this Zould involve the gravest
political risks since public opinion Zas firmly  behind 0oses. And Zhat if
the investigation did not find anything? Then it Zould look like a malicious
attempt to defame a great man. An attempt could be made to defeat 0oses
at the ne[t State 3arks Council election, but his careful stacking of the
council membership had made that very difficult. The Governor could, of
course, change the membership, but only gradually since the members'
terms Zere also si[ years. And if Zord of a council-packing attempt got out,
public opinion Zould again side Zith 0oses.  3arks Zere supposed to be
free from politics.

As he had done in the little Zorld of Yale, Robert 0oses had erected Zithin
NeZ York State a poZer structure all his oZn, an agency ostensibly part of
the state government but only minimally responsive to its Zishes. The
structure might appear flimsy but it Zas shored up Zith buttresses of the
strongest material available in the Zorld of politics: public opinion. A
Governor—even a Governor Zho hated the man Zho dZelt Zithin that
structure— Zould pull it doZn  at his oZn peril.

0oses understood this. Asked forty years later Zhy Roosevelt did not oust
him from his park posts, he Zould laugh and say, "+e couldn't afford to.
The public Zouldn't have stood for it. And even if he tried to, it Zould have
been very difficult. See, the laZ didn't permit it, e[cept on charges. It Zas
set up that Zay, see. That's the Zay it Zas set up." This e[planation came at
the end of a four-hour intervieZ. All during it, 0oses  had been serious and
guarded in his statements. But Zhen he said this, he suddenly threZ back
his head and laughed, a laugh of pure enjoyment. "That," he said, still
laughing, "Zas the Zay it Zas set up, don't you see?"

Roosevelt apparently saZ. 0oses pushed matters to a head himself. The
duties of Secretary of State included the organi]ation of the inaugural

396
ceremonies—it Zas the Secretary, in fact, Zho Zould administer the oath of
office to the neZ Governor—and 0oses had to confer Zith Roosevelt about
the arrangements. At the end of one conference, he raised the subject of his
reappointment, and, Zhen Roosevelt dodged, 0oses demanded, "You don't
Zant me to stay on, do you?" :hatever Roosevelt's e[act reply Zas, he
made it clear that 0oses' assumption Zas not incorrect. But the Governor-
elect had then to make it clear that he Zas talking only about the
Secretaryship. +e had to ask 0oses hastily to stay on his park jobs.
Revenge could not have been nearly as sZeet as he had hoped.

The aftermath of the conversation must have made it positively sour.
Stalking out of Roosevelt's office, 0oses immediately composed a curt
letter saying that he Zould resign as Secretary of State "Zhen Governor
Smith leaves Albany." Then he released it to the press, embarrassing
Roosevelt, Zho had no successor ready to announce.

0oses, moreover, included in the letter a paragraph saying, "In accordance
Zith our understanding, I shall carry on the state park Zork." And a flood of
editorials greeted this statement Zith relief. "It is gratifying," said the
:orld.   "Gratifying,"  chimed in the Times. And Roosevelt, in a hastily
composed one-paragraph reply to the resignation letter, had to e[press
gratification, too, saying, "I am, of course, very happy that you Zill
continue to carry on the Zork . . . You have rendered conspicuous service
and I can assure you that I shall often avail myself of your continued
cooperation."

The identity of the replacements for 0oses and 0rs. 0oskoZit]   could not
have been more insulting to Al Smith if Roosevelt had selected them Zith
that aim in mind. As his personal secretary, he chose Guernsey Cross,
Zhose sole qualification Zas that he Zas big and strong enough for the
Governor to lean on Zhen he Zalked. As Secretary of State, he chose the
Boss of the

T+E 8SE  OF 3O:ER

298

397
Bron[, EdZard  J. Flynn, Zhose e[perience in government, as distinguished
from politics, Zas none[istent and Zho didn't even Zant the job and Zould
not agree to take it until Roosevelt, after 0oses resigned, frantically
pursued him on a trip around Europe by transatlantic telephone calls and
cables. ("The basic reason for my appointment," Flynn later Zrote, "Zas
that Roosevelt did not Zant to appoint 0oses.") Flynn's lack of e[perience
in government forced Roosevelt to doZngrade the Secretaryship, reducing
it mainly to its licensing and ceremonial functions. Flynn never devoted
much time to it and it Zas never again to be a sort of Deputy Governorship,
or, in fact, of any real importance in the state governmental setup. :hat
made Roosevelt's refusal to reappoint 0oses all the more bitter to Smith
Zas that the neZ Governor, an[ious to avoid any appearance of an open
break Zith his immensely popular predecessor, reappointed si[teen of the
eighteen members of Smith's cabinet, every one e[cept 0oses, the only one
Smith had asked him to reappoint, and the State Industrial Commissioner, a
minor official Zhose dismissal Smith intimates interpreted as a "throZ-in"
so that neZspapers Zould not be able to comment that 0oses had been the
only one throZn out.

At the inauguration, hoZever, Smith and Roosevelt put on a shoZ of
harmony. :hen  Franklin and Eleanor moved into the E[ecutive 0ansion
on December 31, Al, Zho had returned to the mansion for the occasion, met
them at the door and, as reporters croZded close to listen, said, "A thousand
Zelcomes. :e've  got the home fires burning and you'll find this is a fine
place to live." Roosevelt, turning to the reporters, said, "I only Zish Al Zere
going to be right here for the ne[t tZo years." One reporter, Zatching Al
depart, Zaving his broZn derby, as the croZd sang "Auld Lang Syne,"
Zrote that Roosevelt Zas Zearing "a smile that had a trace of Zistfulness."
The ne[t day, at the official inaugural ceremony, the charade continued. In a
brief valedictory, Smith praised Roosevelt to the croZd that jammed the
Assembly Chamber.

Only 0oses Zould  not put on a shoZ. :hen  Roosevelt stood up to take the
oath, 0oses reali]ed for the first time just hoZ Zeak  his legs Zere. ("The
platform Zas high above the croZd," he told the author, "and people
couldn't see Zhat Zas going on, but both his legs had to be locked upright,
the hinges squeaking and then snapping into place.") But that didn't stop

398
0oses from doing Zhat he had planned. :hen  Roosevelt made his Zay to
the lectern, one arm gripping a cane, the other the arm of his eldest son,
James, and placed his hand on the family's tZo-hundred-year-old Dutch
Bible, 0oses administered the oath of office—and, as soon as it Zas
finished, Zithout Zaiting  for Roosevelt's inaugural address, stalked off the
platform and out of the Chamber.

fore refused to parley and instead hired champions to fight 0oses—and the
champions included Grenville Clark, Zhose brilliance as an attorney Zas
not at all dimmed in their eyes by the fact that he had been a +arvard
classmate of Franklin D. Roosevelt.

Even before Roosevelt's inauguration, Clark Zas Zriting to him at :arm
Springs suggesting an alternate route—Zith a sharp southZard dip just
before it got to Old :estbury  so that it avoided the :heatley  +ills
completely.

Dashing off his oZn letter to :arm   Springs, 0oses told Roosevelt that
Clark Zas trying to "change the location of about si[ miles of right-of-Zay
in the center of the parkZay, for the sole purpose of avoiding a feZ people
Zhom he represents." This, 0oses said, Zould involve "torturing the
parkZay doZn toZard the middle of the island Zhere the landscaping
problem is almost insuperable." +e Zould never agree to do so. To brace up
Roosevelt, he added that the :heatley +ills barons are "people of large
Zealth Zho have alZays been able to buy Zhat they Zanted or to get Zhat
they Zanted by influence and pressure. It is difficult for these people to
believe there is anyone they cannot reach in some Zay."

For several months, 0oses seemed to be Zinning the fight. Roosevelt drove
over the tZo routes himself and Zrote Clark that he saZ no reason to
change 0oses' plans.

But those plans Zere soon to be changed nonetheless. For Grenville Clark
discovered hoZ Otto .ahn, 0oses'  relative, had persuaded 0oses to shift
the parkZay route off his private golf course.

Clark relayed the discovery to +utchinson and +eZitt. The tZo legislative
leaders telegraphed 0oses demanding "a complete list of all properties . . .

399
payment for Zhich has been made or is intended to be made by funds from
private sources for any parkZay or proposed parkZay," and "a complete list
of persons Zho have given funds to the Long Island 3arkZay [sic]
Commission." And the telegram demanded: "3lease also state Zhether the
route of any proposed parkZay Zas ever tentatively laid out over, through
or near the land of any donors of money. ... If so, after receipt of such gift,
Zas route of any proposed parkZay changed so as to run over or through a
different part of the land of any donor or donors, or so as not to run at all
through or near such land?"

At first, 0oses  Zas defiant. +astily sending an e[planation to Roosevelt, he
admitted that .ahn had given $10,000, but said that "the idea that Ze
shifted our route to please one man because he gave us some money is too
absurd to entertain." The "real reason" for the shift, he said, "Zas the
objection of" Stimson, De Forest and "various others" to the routing of the
parkZay across their land, and their refusal to donate land unless the route
Zas shifted south—a statement Zhich conveniently ignored the fact that if
the route hadn't been shifted off .ahn's land in the first place, it Zould
never have touched their land and their donations Zould not have been
needed.

At first, 0oses'  neZ e[ecutive gave him support, backing the :heatley
+ills  route. But Clark began hinting that any attempt to push that route

Zould result in the disclosure to the public of the 0oses-.ahn  deal, Zhich,
he said, if "finally brought to light Zill   not make a creditable chapter in the
history of this State." Various attempts at compromise failed, and Clark—
and +eZitt and +utchinson—made clear to Roosevelt that any attempt to
obtain legislative appropriations for the Northern State 3arkZay until its
route had been shifted out of the :heatley +ills  Zould result in an all-out
fight.

The fight over the Taylor Estate—noZ to be named +eckscher State 3ark—
had been an all-out one, of course, but there Zould be a significant
difference this time. The issue in the first case had been that of millionaires
blocking the public; in the Northern State 3arkZay case, it Zould be that of
a millionaire giving $10,000 to keep his private golf course untouched and
the money being used to throZ hard-Zorking farmers off their land. It Zas

400
not the type of issue likely to redound to the credit of the official Zho had
accepted the $10,000 and throZn the farmers off their land—or of a
Governor Zho Zas placed in the position of defending his action.

:hether   Roosevelt Zas motivated by the threat of public disclosure to
prevail on 0oses to compromise is not definitely knoZn. But the folloZing
sequence of events is clear. On October 23, 1929, Clark gave Roosevelt
Zhat amounted to an ultimatum: he and his clients had decided, he said, that
it Zas impossible to reach any kind of agreement Zith 0oses, because he
refused to compromise and Zas highly insulting, and that a full-scale fight
Zould be launched during the 1930 legislative session. Nineteen-thirty Zas
an election year; among those running for re-election Zould be Franklin D.
Roosevelt. Less than tZo Zeeks after Clark issued the barons' ultimatum to
Roosevelt, 0oses agreed to a "compromise." 8nder the "compromise," the
Northern State suddenly altered its eastZard course at Glen Cove Road, the
Zestern border of the :heatley  +ills,  just as it Zas about to plunge into the
estate area, and instead sZung south for tZo full miles, far enough so that
Zhen it resumed its course, it Zould never come near the :heatley +ills.
To make it appear that the "compromise" Zas really a compromise and that
both sides, instead of just the state, had given in, 0oses announced to the
public Zith  great fanfare that the barons had agreed to pay the state
$175,-000, Zhich he said Zould pay for the entire cost of the detour.
Actually, hoZever, the cost of the additional right-of-Zay alone Zould be
$2,250,000, so that more than 90 percent of the bill for the accommodation
0oses reached Zith the barons had to be footed by the state's ta[payers.

The long-term costs to the public of 0oses' accommodation include figures
that cannot be prefaced Zith dollar signs. For one thing, the accommodation
condemned users of the parkZay to a perpetual detour of five miles around
the :heatley  +ills.  Coupled Zith  the si[-mile  detour forced on parkZay
users by 0oses' previous accommodation Zith Otto .ahn and the other Di[
+ills  barons, it meant that a commuter Zho lived anyZhere east of Di[
+ills  and Zho used the parkZay to get to his job in NeZ York City Zas
condemned to drive, every Zorking day of his life, tZenty-tZo e[tra  and
unnecessary miles. +e had to drive no unnecessary miles per Zeek, 5,500
per year—all because of 0oses' "compromise." By the 1960's there Zere
about

401
T+E 8SE  OF 3O:ER

302

21,500 such commuters, and the cost to them alone of 0oses'
accommodation totaled tens of millions of Zasted hours of human lives.

0ore  important, 0oses' great accommodation deprived the public forever
of parks in the loveliest part of Long Island. +e had once Zanted parks on
the Zooded hills of the North Shore, and his original concept of the
Northern State 3arkZay Zas therefore of a road leading to parks, as the
Southern State 3arkZay led to parks. But, as part of his "compromise," he
had to promise the barons that there Zould not be a single state park
anyZhere along the parkZay, or anyZhere in the section of the North Shore
that they controlled—and Zith a single e[ception/' acquired in 1967 and
still undeveloped in 1974, there are no state parks anyZhere in that part of
Nassau County or Zestern Suffolk that Zas knoZn as the "North Shore"

* Caumsett State 3ark, the former 0arshall Field Estate, on Lloyd Neck.

402
The 0other of  Accommodation

303

or the "Gold Coast."* Robert 0oses' "compromise" Zith  the North Shore
barons amounted to unconditional surrender. In later years, most of the
barons Zould have disappeared from the Long Island scene. The names of
most of them Zould be unfamiliar to the neZ generations using the
Northern State 3arkZay. But every tZist and curve in that parkZay—and, in
particular, the tZo great southZard detours it makes around the :heatley
and Di[ +ills—is   a tribute to their poZer, and to the use to Zhich they put it
after they discovered the chink in 0oses' armor. Farmer James Roth Zas
not the only person Zho paid for 0oses' deal Zith Otto .ahn.

403
The completeness of 0oses' surrender—coupled Zith the fact that 0oses
never surrendered on any park or parkZay issue Zhile Smith Zas

* 0otorists  using the Northern State 3arkZay cannot reach any park unless
they transfer, forty-one miles from 0anhattan, to a spur parkZay that leads,
after another si[ miles of driving, to Sunken 0eadoZ.










Detour For 3oZer

The Northern State 3arkZay, proposed route The Northern State 3arkZay,
actual route

Estates of barons most vigorously opposed to original route

Farms of James Roth and others

+8NTINGTON

404
Governor—makes it difficult to escape the conclusion that the change in
Governors had something to do Zith it. By accepting Otto .ahn's $10,000,
0oses had presented his opponents Zith a Zeapon Zhich they used to club
him—and NeZ York State—into submission. But, by illegally appropriating
the Taylor Estate, he had presented many of the same opponents in that
battle Zith an equally dangerous Zeapon. And somehoZ Al Smith had
avoided its sZings and beaten them into the ground. Fighting under the
Squire of the +udson Zas not precisely the same as righting under the .ing
of Oliver Street.

There Zere other differences. In Albany, Zhere a legislative session is
round after round of hastily formed alliances, trust in a man's Zord is all-
important; Zhen a man promised his support on a bill, he could not later
take it back; if he did so, the Zord on him Zould soon begin to circulate
through the corridors of the capitol, and Zhen discussing their relationships
Zith him, legislators Zould  say, ":e  deal in Zriting"—a  phrase Zhich, in
Albany, Zas the ultimate insult. Al Smith could say, ":hen  I  give my Zord,
it sticks." NoZ, in the corridors of the capitol, many men Zere saying of the
neZ Governor, ":e   deal in Zriting."  Diminutive Reuben La]arus, the
onetime legislative page boy Zho had since become one of the capital's
most knoZledgeable bill drafters, good enough to be NeZ York City's
legislative representative, believed that he had been misled tZice Zithin a
month by Roosevelt Zhen he asked the Governor his intention on bills
important to Tammany +all, and told Roosevelt to his face: "Governor,
from noZ on Ze deal in Zriting;  and I'm going to demand a bond on your
signature."

No man had more bills aZaiting signature than Robert 0oses. And
Roosevelt seemed to take special delight in misleading him. Once La]arus
Zas sitting in the anteroom outside the Governor's office, "and I heard
0oses, inside, shout, 'Frank Roosevelt, you're a goddamned liar and this
time I can prove it! I had a stenographer present!' And 0oses came
storming out of FDR's office Zithout even seeing me, he Zas so thoroughly
angry. I Zas ne[t and I Zalked in. The Governor's face Zas breaking into a
grin of real pleasure. +e . . . acted as though he had just come out of the
bath after a clean shave in the morning." After several such incidents,
0oses developed a neZ routine for his trips to Albany; he Zould arrive

405
early in the morning for conferences Zith Roosevelt at the E[ecutive
0ansion, but even though the Governor might promise that a bill then on
his desk for signature Zould be signed, 0oses Zould not leave the capitol
until it Zas.

But if Roosevelt gave 0oses a hard time before doing so, he did
nonetheless sign most of 0oses' bills. And although he may have hated
0oses, during the four years of his Governorship he gradually increased,
not decreased, 0oses' poZer.

+e did so, moreover, despite the fact that 0oses never trimmed his sails in
their personal relationship. +e never called Roosevelt "Governor," and he
made a point of not doing so; not only in private letters but also in official
correspondence it Zas alZays "Dear Frank."

+e refused to folloZ conventional lines in their official  relations, either.
Although his State 3arks Council Zas a part of Roosevelt's administration,
the council adopted major neZ policies Zithout conferring Zith the
Governor about them—sometimes even Zithout notifying the Governor
about them. Once, Zhen 0oses had the council pass a resolution asking the
Legislature to remove all historical state reservations from the council's
control and turn them over to the Department of Education, the Governor
Zas reduced to begging +enry Lut], ":ill    you be good enough to let me
knoZ Zhether the report is true. . . ."

0oses may have obeyed Al Smith's patronage suggestions Zithout
question, but he Zouldn't even listen to Roosevelt's. As Jones Beach and
other state parks opened during Roosevelt's regime, the number of jobs at
0oses' disposal steadily increased. By 1930, the number of lifeguards,
special police, gardeners, parking-field and bathhouse attendants, janitors
and toll takers at the Long Island parks Zas more than fifteen hundred.
Long Island Democrats eyed these jobs greedily—and e[pectantly, since
0oses Zas a subordinate of a Democratic Governor. After they had asked
0oses for some jobs and had been refused, they appealed to Roosevelt to
order him to make some available. Roosevelt gingerly suggested to 0oses
that he cooperate, and 0oses curtly refused. The Governor's personal
requests received the same treatment. Roosevelt sent on to 0oses a job
application Zith a notation attached—"Dear Bob: This is an old school

406
boyfriend of mine and I Zould be very glad if you could help him in some
Zay." 0oses replied by simply sending the Governor a copy of the official
employment regulations of the commission, Zhich included the sentence:
"Recommendations based upon merely personal or political acquaintance
Zill  not be considered."

And the e[planation for the increase in 0oses' poZer during Roosevelt's
Governorship certainly Zasn't that he gave in like a good subordinate if he
had a difference of opinion Zith his chief over a matter of policy. In fact, if
his poZers of persuasion Zere not sufficient to persuade Roosevelt to alter
Zhat 0oses felt Zas an unZise decision, he did not hesitate to mobili]e
forces against the Governor.

For years, Roosevelt, naval buff and lover of the sea, had Zanted to
transform Fort Schuyler, a little-used fifty-si[-acre Army base at Throgs
Neck in the Bron[, into a 0erchant  0arine  Academy. The folding chairs
set up on the Assembly Speaker's dais for his inauguration had hardly been
stored aZay Zhen he began prodding the Army to close the base and turn
the land over to the state. In 1931, the Army finally agreed—but no sooner
had it done so than 0oses announced that Fort Schuyler should be turned
into a park instead. :hen  the Governor refused even to consider that
suggestion— Fort Schuyler, he said, Zas going to be a 0erchant 0arine
Academy; the matter Zas closed—0oses mobili]ed his forces.

The 3ark Association of NeZ York City met to formally  endorse 0oses'
suggestion. So did the :ashington +eights Ta[payers Association, the
3ublic Schools Athletic League, tZenty-five other civic organi]ations "of  a
total membership of half a million" organi]ed into a committee to back the
park plea—and the Sul]bergers' Times. The influential Zho made up the
3ark

Association's board of directors took the trouble to Zrite personally to
Roosevelt on the issue. After conferring Zith 0oses, Nathan Straus, Jr.,
association president, said, "If it's made an academy it Zill train three or
four hundred boys; if it's made a park, 300,000 to 400,000 people Zill use it
every summer Zeekend."

407
Apparently Roosevelt did not reali]e for some time that it Zas actually
0oses Zho Zas behind the opposition. As late as January 8, 1932,
Guernsey Cross, obviously under the impression that 0oses Zas on the
Governor's side, Zrote to ask him for a suggested reply that the Governor
could make to a letter from George F. 0and, president of the Bron[
Chamber of Commerce. 0oses replied promptly: "Attached is suggested
reply to [0and].  'Dear 0r.  0and:  I agree Zith you . . . that it is much more
important to use this area for municipal recreation purposes than to make it
the headquarters for the 8. S. 0erchant 0arine Academy, Zhich can Zell
be taken care of Zith a smaller and cheaper piece of land outside the city
limits.'" Cross hurriedly asked Conservation Commissioner +enry
0orgenthau to draft the reply instead.

Even after he reali]ed 0oses' involvement, hoZever, there Zas nothing
Roosevelt could do. :hen  Samuel Rosenman and +erbert Lehman,
contacted by reform leaders, both asked him to forget about the academy, he
must have reali]ed that he Zas surrounded, and he surrendered. (+e Zas
able to reali]e this pet project only after he had been elected 3resident. On
December 29, 1932, tZo days before his term as Governor ended, he
signed, on behalf of NeZ York State, a lease proffered by the :ar
Department giving the land to the state for a NeZ York 0erchant 0arine
Academy. And even at this date, Roosevelt did not make any public
announcement of the transaction, so that the public did not learn Zhat he
had done until he Zas no longer Governor.)

3art of the e[planation for 0oses' increased poZer Zas simply the breadth
and depth of his knoZledge of the government at Zhose head Roosevelt,
Zith little  preparation, suddenly had found himself. No one kneZ the vast
administrative machinery the Governor Zas supposed to run better than this
man the Governor hated. To a considerable e[tent, the machinery Zas his
machinery; he, more than any other individual, had drafted the e[ecutive
budget system, the departmental consolidation and the hundreds of bills that
implemented those constitutional amendments. +e, more than any other
individual, kneZ the considerations—constitutional, legal and political—
that lay behind Zording in those laZs that Zas otherZise so pu]]ling. +e
kneZ the precedents that made each point in them legal—and the
precedents that might call their legality into question. +e kneZ the reason

408
behind every refinement, every clarification—and every obscuration—in
the laZs' final versions. :hen  discussing a point of laZ Zith  some young
state agency counsel, 0oses liked to let the laZyer painstakingly e[plain
the legal ramifications involved and then say dryly: "I knoZ. I Zrote the
laZ." This store of knoZledge, coupled Zith an intelligence capable of
draZing upon it Zith  computer-like rapidity, constituted a political Zeapon
Zhich no Governor could afford to let rust in his arsenal.

Roosevelt's very first major administrative hurdle—the compilation of his
first budget—taught him 0oses' indispensability. The 1929 budget Zould
be the first draZn up under the e[ecutive budget system 0oses had
codified. But no sooner had Roosevelt presented it to the Republican
Legislature—a 411-page "complete plan of proposed e[penditures and
estimated revenues"— than the Legislature struck at its heart, tacking on to
the appropriation bills a rider that Zould give the chairmen of its finance
committees, +eZitt and +utchinson, an equal say Zith the Governor in
determining hoZ each department should spend the lump sums proposed
for it by the Governor. The rider Zas the last desperate challenge of men
Zho saZ their poZer being stripped from them, and they didn't spare the
invective; a Syracuse assemblyman, referring to Roosevelt as "that man
doZnstairs," trumpeted that "the very foundation of the State is in danger
Zith this message of avarice, usurpation and presumption."

Roosevelt Zas unsure hoZ to deal Zith the challenge. So Zere his legal
advisers, some of Zhom told him to avoid a test of the issue in the courts
since a decision could go either Zay and since Zhile it Zas being decided
all state e[penditures might be paraly]ed. The neZ Governor's initial
inclination Zas to sign the bills, distasteful though their rider may have
been.

:hen,   hoZever, he asked 0oses' opinion, he Zas told to veto the bills. The
courts, 0oses said, Zould hold that the Governor's budget Zas
constitutional and the Legislature's unconstitutional—and it Zas perfectly
possible to Zork out a method for financing state activities Zhile the courts
Zere deliberating. Roosevelt sent his former laZ partner, Basil O'Connor, to
see George :ickersham, the reformer and e[-8nited States Attorney
General, and :ickersham said 0oses Zas right. As Roosevelt drafted a

409
veto message, he found himself asking 0oses for "suggestions." 0oses
gave them—-and the message as delivered to the Legislature Zas
substantially the one 0oses Zrote. :hen  laZyers began to draft the
Governor's brief, they found themselves relying more and more on 0oses
for background information. Then they reali]ed they Zere relying on him
for strategy. On November 19, 1929, the seven members of the state's
highest court, the Court of Appeals, held unanimously, as 0oses had
predicted they Zould, that the Legislature's action Zas unconstitutional. The
principle of e[ecutive and legislative separation Zas at last irrevocably
established in NeZ York State— and Roosevelt had learned the truth of a
saying of Al Smith's: "If Bob 0oses  says it's constitutional, it's
constitutional."

410
And then there Zas 0oses' record of accomplishment and his potential for
more accomplishment, the fact that 0oses had gotten things done and could
get things done again. 0oses' cleverness in Zriting laZs cementing himself
in poZer helped e[plain Roosevelt's initial decision not to try to take that
poZer aZay. But a large part of the e[planation for Roosevelt's subsequent
Zillingness to increase 0oses' poZer Zas not cleverness but
accomplishment, the record of Zhat 0oses had done Zith the poZer he had
given himself. For the accomplishment and the potential for more
accomplishment had very strong political connotations indeed.

The program for Zhich 0oses had so frantically shoveled sod under

Smith came to full bloom in the first of Roosevelt's gubernatorial summers.
The summer of 1929 Zas the summer of the "+oover 0arket." It Zas the
summer of General 0otors, Radio and Big Steel, of AT&T, of General
Electric, Zhich Zould  by Labor Day hit 306, having more than tripled its
price in eighteen months. The summer of 1929 Zas the summer of Big Bill
Tilden, Zho Zon his seventh American amateur tennis championship, of
Bobby Jones and his putter, Calamity Jane, Zho together carried off the
8.S. Open golf championship, of Ernest +emingZay's FareZell to Arms
and of Thomas :olfe,  Zhose first novel, Look +omeZard,  Angel, Zas
uncrated at the bookstores in June. It Zas the summer of .ate Smith, Zho
began in those golden months her career as a radio songstress, and of
Gertrude Berg, Zho in those months first shouted "Yoo +oo!" across a
Bron[ airshaft. And the summer of 1929 Zas the summer of Robert 0oses.

+eckscher State 3ark Zas formally opened in June and the onlooker Zho
shouted "God bless him!" Zhen 0oses Zas introduced Zas only sounding
the first note of the chorus of hosannas the summer Zas to bring. "You oZe
this park ... to the ama]ing public spirit of Robert 0oses," August
+eckscher told 15,000 cheering onlookers, and Lieutenant Governor
Lehman, praising 0oses for his "vision and courage," agreed.

The Southern State 3arkZay Zas opened in July, and fathers driving their
families along the lovely tree-shaded road—Zhich, Zith a Zidth of forty
feet, seemed Zonderfully Zide—Zere e[plaining  to their Zives Zhat "no
grade crossings" meant and telling their children as they passed :antagh

411
that by the end of the summer they Zould be able to take another parkZay
there and drive doZn to the ocean and sZim, and every neZspaper story on
the Southern State coupled its marvels Zith the name of its creator.

And Zhen, on August 4, 1929, the :antagh CauseZay opened the Zay to
Jones Beach, the hosannas became a hallelujah chorus.

On the day the causeZay opened, 25,000 cars rolled across it. In the first
month of its operation, attendance at Jones Beach State 3ark—Zhich
legislators had said Zould never justify its investment because people
Zould never drive forty miles to a park on a sand bar—topped 325,000. The
press— not only NeZ York's press but the press of the entire country—
spoke of the e[panses of surf and sand in tones of aZe. Reporters vied Zith
one another in searching for superlatives to describe the parking areas that
one said "look as big as a cattle range" and bathhouses "such as you have
never seen before."

The praise Zasn't only for the si]e of the park's buildings; it Zas for the
taste Zith Zhich they had been designed and the ingenuity Zith Zhich there
had been Zorked into their steel and stone delicate details Zhich the eye, to
its delight, Zas endlessly discovering. Visitors could see that the nautical
theme had been carried out everyZhere. :alking along the mile-long
boardZalk connecting the tZo bathhouses, they noticed that the boardZalk
railing Zas a ship's railing. Bending doZn to drink from a Zater fountain,
they found that the fountains Zere turned on and off by ships' pilot Zheels.
Looking for trash cans, they found them concealed in ships' funnels.
Looking up, visitors saZ on the flagpoles croZ's-nests and yardarms and
halyards

decorated Zith long roZs of bright semaphore signals. They saZ ships'
lanterns sZinging on davits from the lampposts. Looking doZn, e[pecting
the paved Zalks in the park to be standard gray concrete, they Zere
surprised by mosaics—of compasses, maps and the gay seahorse that 0oses
had chosen as the emblem of Jones Beach—set into the concrete. The
games along the boardZalk Zere ships' games: shuffleboard, quoits, deck
tennis, 3ing-3ong. Even the pitch-and-putt golf course Zas made maritime
by the placing near every hole of some reminder of the sea—a rusty anchor,
the keel of an ancient boat, old rum kegs retrieved from the Great South

412
Bay. All Jones Beach employees Zere garbed as sailors, complete Zith
sailor caps, and their supervisors Zore officers' uniforms, complete Zith
gold braid. And every button on the uniforms Zas engraved Zith a
seahorse.

Architects e[claimed over the long, loZ sZeeping lines of the bathhouses
and restaurants, their medieval and 0oorish cast, the combination of Ohio
sandstone and Barbi]on brick ("3erfect!" e[ulted one architect. "3erfect!")
Zith Zhich  they Zere faced. They Zere startled Zhen, searching for the
Zater toZer, they reali]ed that it Zas concealed in the 200-foot-high
campanile. They described Zith delight the diaper-changing rooms, the
cutouts of boZmen crouching against the dune that formed the backdrop for
the archery range, the symbolic ironZork cutouts on the directional signs,
the gay devices of stone and brick—all the touches that Robert 0oses,
standing alone on a deserted sandbar, had decided he must have in his great
park. "It is in the smaller things that 0r. 0oses  is at his very best,"
Architectural Forum Zas to say. "8sually a public institution of any kind in
this country has been the occasion for especially dull architecture and Zalls
of cheerless dimensions Zhich invite only the scribbling of small
obscenities. But 0r. 0oses, being essentially a romanticist, has revived the
handicraft spirit in his designers, Zith the result that the equipment at Jones
Beach e[hibits irrelevant and endearing good spirits. The architecture has
the great virtue of being scaled doZn to the si]e of a good time." Even the
+erald Tribune could only Za[  rhapsodic over this "most prosaically
named, most beautifully landscaped of beaches."

And the letters on the editorial page almost outdid the editorials. Ernest
Biehl of 0anhattan, just back from a cross-country trip, hastened to take
pen in hand to inform his felloZ Times readers: "I have visited nearly all of
the important beach resorts in this country and I must say that noZhere on
this continent is there a public or private beach that is even comparable to
the one that the State under Robert 0oses has built." A thousand letters-to-
the-editor echoed Biehl's appraisal. A nation looked at Robert 0oses' dream
and found it good.

And not just the nation. Delegations of architects and park designers came
from France, from England, even from Scandinavia, traditional leader in

413
park development, to learn from Jones Beach. Their comments Zere
summed up by one Englishman Zho said flatly, "This is the finest seashore
playground ever given the public anyZhere in the Zorld."

Never, observers agreed, had any park been kept as clean as Jones Beach.
College students hired for the summer Zere formed into "Courtesy

Squads." 3atrolling the boardZalk, conspicuous in snoZ-Zhite sailor suits
and caps, they hurried to pick up dropped papers and cigarette butts Zhile
the droppers Zere still in the vicinity. They never reprimanded the culprits,
but simply bent doZn, picked up the litter and put it in a trash basket. To
make the resultant embarrassment of the litterers more acute, 0oses refused
to let the Courtesy Squaders use sharp-pointed sticks to pick up litter
Zithout stooping. +e Zanted the earnest, clean-cut college boys stooping,
0oses e[plained to his aides. It Zould make the litterers more ashamed. +e
even issued the Courtesy Squaders large cloths so that they could Zipe from
the boardZalk gobs of spittle. +is methods Zorked. As one Zriter put it:
"You Zill  feel like a heel if you so much as drop a gum Zrapper."

The lines of Zire trash receptacles on the clean Zhite sand Zere only a
symbol of the emphasis on cleanliness there also. At intervals, loudspeakers
sounded a bugle call, and then an announcer, in a carefully modulated tone,
"thanked" the visitors for their cooperation in keeping the beach clean. "The
effect," as one observer Zrote, "is magical. In no time at all, every guilty
culprit is doing .3   in his immediate area."

0oses' methods e[tended to his parkZays. Stetsoned state troopers stopped
every car entering them and gave the driver a card printed Zith "Rules of
the Road," Zhich carefully spelled out rules against roadside picnicking and
littering. And the rules Zere enforced. Littering summonses Zere issued
Zholesale. Occasionally, Zhen troopers came across a Zhole bag of garbage
that had been tossed from an automobile ZindoZ, they Zould try to identify
the driver from the contents. If they could, they Zould call on him at his
home to issue a summons—and 0oses Zould see that there Zas a troop of
neZspaper photographers along to record the culprit's e[pression Zhen he
opened his door.

414
The public praised also the success Zith Zhich 0oses had kept Jones Beach
free of the usual amusement-park trappings of other public beaches. "There
are no concessions, no booths, no baZling hot-dog vendors," marveled one
Zriter. "You Zon't  see any Zeight-guessers or three-throZs-for-a-dime-and-
Zin-a-dolly  alleys or blaring funhouses. For almost the first time in the
history of public beaches, this beach is conceived as a spot for recreation,
not amusement stimulated by honky-tonk." :henever Jones Beach Zas the
subject of a maga]ine article, it seemed, and it Zas the subject of literally
scores in the 1930's, the article contained—at least once—the Zord
"Zholesome."

The public beat a path to 0oses' door. In 1930, the attendance at Jones
Beach Zould be 1,500,000, in 1931, 2,700,000, in 1932, 3,200,000. The
path itself, so recently completed, Zas jammed to capacity—and then to
overcapacity. Although all grade crossings had been eliminated on the
Southern State, tZo, one at Sunrise +ighZay and one at 0errick Road,
remained on the :antagh because of the refusal of the Legislature to
allocate money for the bridges that Zould carry the tZo cross roads over the
causeZay. For the same reason, there Zas a half-mile gap betZeen the
Southern State and the :antagh. By 1930, traffic Zas backing up at those
spots for more than a mile on summer Sundays. In 1931, the Legislature
allocated

funds for the bridges and a spur betZeen the tZo roads. 0oses Zas jubilant.
"The traffic capacity of the causeZay Zill be more than doubled," he said.

The facilities at Jones Beach proved inadequate. Both bathhouses Zere
usually filled by noon. The parking lots as big as cattle ranges Zere jammed
as full as sardine tins. Valley Stream, +eckscher and Sunken 0eadoZ state
parks Zere just as croZded. 0oses revealed more of the plans he had kept
secret, and enlarged them.

There should be an increase in facilities—bathhouses, parking fields and
concessions—at all state parks on Long Island, he said. There should be a
short parkZay—he named it the "+eckscher Spur"—linking the Southern
State Zith +eckscher State 3ark and a "Sunken 0eadoZ State 3arkZay"
linking the Northern State Zith Sunken 0eadoZ State 3ark.

415
During the fall of 1930, the tZo-mile-long Ocean 3arkZay e[tending along
the barrier beach from Jones Beach eastZard toZard Fire Island Zas
opened. :hen  he had asked the Legislature for money for the parkZay,
0oses had said that tZo miles of an ocean drive Zas all he had in mind.
NoZ he revealed that he actually had been concealing a feZ other miles—
ninety-eight, to be precise. :hy,  he demanded, shouldn't there be a
continuous road, bordered by the rolling Atlantic, all the Zay from Bree]y
3oint on the RockaZay peninsula in NeZ York City to 0ontauk  3oint at the
tip of Long Island, a distance of one hundred miles? It Zould not be
difficult  to create an Ocean 3arkZay through the RockaZays and Long
Beach by Zidening e[isting streets and turning them into an ocean drive, he
said. The gap betZeen these tZo beaches could easily be bridged. So could
the gap betZeen Long Beach and the Jones Beach portion of the strand. In
fact, he had already broached to +empstead ToZn—to G. :ilbur Doughty
and Tom 0c:hinney,   to be precise—the possibility of +empstead's
building that bridge, and +empstead seemed amenable. (+empstead should
have been amenable; some indications of the si]e of the political boodle
involved in such a construction job may be garnered by the fact that one of
the contractors involved secured the job by paying $75,000 in cash to the
Nassau County Republican organi]ation and—just to insure against any
criticism—another $75,000 to the county's Democratic organi]ation.)
Thanks to the deeds of land on the Jones Beach portion of the strand that he
had accepted from Oyster Bay, Zheedled from +empstead and politically
blackmailed from Babylon, the Long Island 3ark Commission had already
in hand the rights-of-Zay for the parkZay along most of this eleven-mile
portion, Zhich Zas called, in order eastZard from Jones Beach State 3ark,
+igh +ill   Beach, Tobay Beach, Gilgo, Cedar Island Beach, Oak Beach and
Captree. At Cap-tree a causeZay Zould jump a narroZ inlet—and the
Ocean 3arkZay Zould be on Fire Island. There, for fifty miles, it could run
along the sand, the ocean stretching broad on one side, the bay beautiful on
the other, until the barrier beach sZung back at 0oriches to join the
southern fluke of the Zhale's tail that Zas Long Island's eastern end. By
pointing out to them that the building of a road along Fire Island Zould
make their land immensely

more valuable, he had, he disclosed, already persuaded si[ty-seven of the
seventy property oZners on Fire Island Zhose lands Zould be traversed by

416
the parkZay to donate the right-of-Zay, and although tZo of the three
laggards—immensely Zealthy and immensely stubborn spinster sisters
named Smith—oZned so much of the land needed that no public body
could afford to condemn it, he Zas confident that they Zould sign up
shortly. :hen  the Legislature balked, he pointed out that the land deeded to
the state by the toZnships Zas Zorth millions of dollars. Did the legislators
propose to let it go to Zaste? The legislators may have considered doing so,
but in 1930 the public applause for the tZo miles of Ocean 3arkZay already
opened made it obvious that such a course Zould be unZise. During the
1931 legislative session, money Zas appropriated to e[tend the road eight
miles farther through +igh +ill,  Tobay and Gilgo beaches. The Fire Island
portion of the plan had to be dropped Zhen the Smith sisters, for
undisclosed reasons, refused to donate, but 0oses came up Zith a substitute
plan e[tending the Ocean 3arkZay all the Zay along the Jones Beach
portion of the barrier beach to Captree, and then bringing it back to the
mainland on a causeZay and linking it up to the Southern State 3arkZay
Zith a spur parkZay. There Zould be time to get to Fire Island later.

Editorials hailed each neZ 0oses plan. The best proof of the universality of
their appeal Zas furnished by Long Island, Zhich for so long had resisted
them. At the opening of +eckscher State 3ark, tZo shy little girls had been
ushered onto the porch of the Taylor 0ansion to present 0oses Zith a silver
loving cup donated by the East Islip Community Association, a group that
had been among the most vocal of :. .ingsland  0acy's  supporters in
0acy's battle against the park. The presentation Zas symbolic. Long
Island's real estate men adored 0oses for opening the Island to
development and thus further inflating its already ballooning land values.
Long Island's people had reali]ed that they had the easiest access to the
beaches he had created. A 1930 referendum in Islip ToZnship, stronghold
of the baymen and farmers, on a proposition to deed the Long Island 3ark
Commission land on Captree to facilitate the building of the Captree
causeZay passed by a margin of more than three to one. Long Island
politicians, fully  aZare noZ of the financial benefits that Zould accrue to
them from 0oses' plans, saZ the political benefits, too. Immediately
folloZing  the referendum, both Nassau and Suffolk County Boards of
Supervisors spent millions condemning right-of-Zay for 0oses' proposed
parkZays and presented it to him as a gift.

417
No Governor Zould Zant to be placed in the position of opposing so
immensely popular a program—or its creator. Financing 0oses' projects
placed an immense strain on the state budget. In 1929, Zith only those
announced under Smith under Zay, their construction, including money
spent on them out of the 3ublic :orks  Department budget, cost the state
$5,424,-750, more than 70 percent of the entire state e[penditure on
construction projects in the metropolitan region, including :estchester
County. And as the parks Zere opened, the cost of their maintenance began
to be a sore point. Roosevelt Zas jolted by budget requests for almost a
million in  "per-

sonal service"—salaries—for the Long Island parks alone. Thinking of his
national image, not yet aZare that liberal public spending might be a Zay to
cushion the effects of the Depression, the Governor Zas an[ious not to give
opponents the chance to portray him as a big spender. By the end of 1930,
moreover, state revenues had been so slashed by the Depression that the
state budget Zas quiveringly taut. Throughout his second term he Zas
continually pressing his cabinet members to cut costs. There Zas constant
friction over 0oses' budget requests.

But in these battles Zith the Governor, 0oses played the popularity that
Zas his trump card for all it Zas Zorth. In fact, so sure Zas he—and he Zas
right—that Roosevelt Zas afraid he Zould resign that he began using the
technique, Zhen Roosevelt crossed him on major issues, of threatening to
do so. Resignation threats begin appearing in 0oses' letters to Roosevelt in
the middle of 1930; by the end of that year, he had refined the Zording. In
November 1930, for e[ample, Roosevelt slashed his budget requests for
appropriations in the 1931 budget and 0oses Zrote him: "If proposed cuts .
. . stand, I do not Zant any responsibility for the program."

A similar threat had been strikingly ineffective Zhen made to Ed Richards
beside the sZimming pool at Yale. But given the fact of his tremendous
popularity, it Zas very effective noZ. Over the four years of Roosevelt's
Governorship a pattern emerged. 0oses Zould submit a budget request far
higher than the previous year's; Roosevelt Zould cut it back almost to the
level of the previous request. 0oses Zould tell Roosevelt he Zould have to
resign if he didn't get the funds he Zanted. Roosevelt, usually through an

418
intermediary, Zould back aZay from the fight, restoring a substantial
portion of the cut.

The Legislature Zas frantic. In 1928, 0oses had assured them that the cost
of the Ocean 3arkZay's initial tZo-mile stretch Zould be $3,150,000. They
had allocated the money, and in 1929 he shoZed up before them again. The
$3,150,000 had been spent, he said, but he had neglected to tell them that
the cost of paving the parkZay Zould be e[tra—$850,000 e[tra. But they
had been trapped. The hydraulic fill for the road had been dredged, the
right-of-Zay  graded, the surveying completed, the plans draZn. The
$3,150,000 had been spent. :ere they noZ to Zaste this money by refusing
funds to complete the job? Cut as the legislators Zould, and they alZays
cut, the amount of the annual allocation to the Long Island 3ark
Commission rose steadily, from $3,150,000 in the last year of Smith's
regime to $4,000,000 in 1929, $4,700,000 in 1930 and $5,700,000 in 1931.
By stake driving and ZhipsaZing, Robert 0oses Zas getting Zhat he
Zanted from them.

And the projects moved forZard. In 1931, the Southern State 3arkZay Zas
e[tended from :antagh  to 0assapequa, in 1932, from 0assapequa to
Amityville—the  public marveled at the fact that there Zas a route clear
across Nassau County Zithout a single traffic light or intersection. 3ark
facilities Zere constantly being e[panded. A neZ bathhouse, chlorination
plant and playground Zere built at Valley Stream State 3ark; ten tennis
courts, a miniature golf links and a bridle path at +empstead Lake; a Zhole

neZ bathing beach and a spacious stone bathhouse at +eckscher; a
causeZay to open up neZ portions of the beach at Sunken 0eadoZ; a loop
drive at 0ontauk 3oint.  And the picnic tables, campfire sites and acres of
neZ parking fields mounted by the hundreds. Some measure of the scope of
0oses' achievement is afforded by attendance figures. The number of visits
to the Long Island state parks appro[imated 3,000,000 in 1930; the total
number of visits to all national parks in the 8nited States in that year Zas
3,400,000.

0ore  than not opposing such a program, a Governor Zould Zant to be
identified Zith  it.

419
Roosevelt Zas not present at the first tZo opening ceremonies 0oses staged
during his administration, the plaque unveiling at +eckscher State 3ark and
a ribbon cutting on Southern State 3arkZay. The state representative Zas
Lieutenant Governor Lehman, and at least one source says that the reason
Zas that 0oses, to teach Roosevelt a lesson, invited Lehman instead of him.
But after a Zorking relationship Zas evolved betZeen 0oses and
Roosevelt, all that changed.

:hen   the Jones Beach opening ceremonies Zere held, Roosevelt Zas there,
having been Zheeled up on the boardZalk on a ramp 0oses had thought to
have constructed. :hen it came time, during the gubernatorial-election-
year summer of 1930, to mortar into place the cornerstone for the :est
Bathhouse, it Zas Roosevelt Zho Zas invited to Zield the troZel— and to
tell 75,000 cheering onlookers that the building, Zhich he said Zould cost
$600,000, "Zould help insure health and happiness" for generations of NeZ
Yorkers. 0oses also invited the Governor to tour all the Long Island parks.
The tour Zas staged on a Sunday, and the 0onday papers Zere full of
pictures of the Governor smiling out over the picnickers at Valley Stream
and +empstead Lake. :hen he arrived at +eckscher State 3ark, Zhere
bathers had been complaining about overcroZding in the bathhouse, 0oses
even let him be the one to announce (to cheers and applause) that ground
Zould be broken for a neZ one by the end of the summer. It Zas the kind of
publicity that money can't buy. Roosevelt Zas so pleased that, in his
speeches, he called 0oses "Bob."

In 1931, 0oses invited Roosevelt to lay the cornerstone for the monument
marking the start of the Northern State 3arkZay and afterZard 0oses'
limousine led the Governor's to Jones Beach, for lunch in the balcony
restaurant in the neZ bathhouse the construction of Zhich had officially
begun the year before. The attendance at Jones Beach that day Zas 100,000,
and as Zord spread that Roosevelt Zas present, a great sea of faces pressed
close to the restaurant. :hen the Governor, moved, made his Zay to a
balcony over the bathhouse sZimming pool for an impromptu talk, the
bathers in the pool shouted happily up at him and cheered. Jones Beach had
been an e[pensive development, the Governor shouted back to them, but "it
Zas the best money the state ever spent." If he recalled in that moment of
euphoria that the bathhouse on Zhose balcony he Zas standing had cost

420
$1,000,000 instead of the $600,000 he had been told it Zould a year earlier,
he did not mention the discrepancy.

Al Smith Zas present at every dedication, too—as long as Smith lived,

0oses Zould  never hold a cornerstone laying, a ribbon cutting, or any
public ceremony of any type anyZhere in the state Zithout inviting the
"Governor" and offering him a prominent spot on the program—but
Roosevelt couldn't even bridle at this. There Zas, in regard to the Long
Island park system, more than enough credit to go around.

0oses Zas fond of repeating at this time a quote often used in Albany. "You
can get an aZful lot of good done in the Zorld if you're Zilling  to let
someone else take the credit for it." Certainly 0oses Zas Zilling at least to
share the credit for the Zork he had done Zith the man he needed if he Zas
to get more done.

And if accomplishment, and Zillingness to share the credit for that
accomplishment, Zas part of the e[planation for the increase in 0oses'
poZer under a Governor Zho had no inclination to increase it, the
accomplishment helped e[plain this contradiction in other Zays, too.

One Zay is that no Governor could sit in the E[ecutive Chamber long
Zithout discovering just hoZ hard—hoZ  incredibly hard—it Zas, even for
a Governor, to get things, big things, done. No Governor, having made this
discovery, could look at Zhat Robert 0oses had gotten done Zithout being
impressed, Zithout feeling admiration for his ability, Zithout a recognition
of his e[traordinary capacity as a public servant. And the proof of this is
that through some of the letters and memos Zritten to 0oses by Roosevelt
during the last tZo years of his four-year gubernatorial regime, through
letters and memos interspersed Zith others in Zhich irritation and even rage
are only thinly glossed over—for Roosevelt's personal animosity toZard
0oses never lessened—there runs a tone that is unmistakably respect.

Another Zay is that accomplishment proves the potential for more
accomplishment. The man Zho gets things done once can get things done
again. And the potential for accomplishment has very strong political
connotations indeed. For political, if not personal, reasons, Roosevelt

421
Zanted— needed —to get things done. Furthermore, he Zas trapped, as all
politicians in elected e[ecutive offices are trapped, by the ine[orable
equation of democracy and public Zorks. Elections come every tZo years,
or four, and the official Zho Zants re-election needs a record of
accomplishment on Zhich to run. Such a record, in the America of the first
half of the tZentieth century (and perhaps in the America of the second half
of the tZentieth century, too), from a political standpoint should be most
ideally a record of public Zorks and it has to be a record of public Zorks
completed—roads opened, bridges built, housing-project apartments
occupied, bathhouses croZded Zith bathers, parks in Zhich the happy
shouts of children fill the ear and not just the imagination. It is no good still
to be laying cornerstones on Election Day. By then, a public official in
e[ecutive office must have ribbons he can cut, monuments to Zhich he can
point Zith pride. This is a requirement established by democracy as it has
evolved in America, yet the realities of the democratic process in America
make it almost impossible to get a road, a bridge, a housing project, a
bathhouse or a park approved and built in tZo years—or four. The
Governor Zho finds a man Zho can inject into the democracy-public Zorks
equation a factor of personality so heavy

as to unbalance it and get public Zorks built during the span of a single
term of office has little choice, if he is ambitious for political success, but to
heap on that man more and more responsibilities, even though the giving of
responsibilities carries Zith it the grant of more poZer.

In this conte[t, moreover, 0oses' arrogance toZard opposition Zas an asset
rather than a liability to an elected official. Almost all public Zorks arouse
some opposition—roads require land, and some of the citi]ens from Zhom
the land must be taken do not Zant it taken—and if the opposition is
directed at an elected official, it can be translated into votes against him the
ne[t time his name appears on a ballot. But by leaping to deal Zith
opposition himself, and by dealing Zith it in a Zay that antagoni]ed the
opposition, 0oses made himself a lightning rod, draZing the anger at the
project onto himself and leaving the elected official unscathed. The official
therefore could bask in the credit—at least some of the credit—from the
majority of voters, Zho until the 1960's Zorshipped public Zorks projects

422
in and for themselves, Zhile escaping the Zrath of the minority Zho
opposed it.

In 1930, the president of the Valley Stream Chamber of Commerce asked
Roosevelt to inspect the Zorst grade-crossing problem on Long Island, a
spot in the center of the village. Roosevelt agreed, and Zhen his limousine
Zas surrounded by a large croZd of local businessmen and one handed him
a petition to 3ublic Service Commission Chairman 0ilo 0altbie
demanding immediate action, Roosevelt, in a grandstand gesture, signed the
petition himself.

The gesture shoZed Roosevelt's gift for public relations, but, having made
it, the Governor noZ had to provide some action—difficult to do because
the engineering problems involved Zere incredibly comple[ and the
railroad had threatened to tie the Zhole matter up in court for years if the
state attempted to force a solution on it.

+aving played the ham, Roosevelt needed someone to pull his eggs out of
the fire. +e selected 0oses, Zho made it very clear that he Zas doing the
job only as a favor. Nonetheless, his first glance at the problem produced a
solution. 0altbie  turned it doZn. But Zhen 0oses  Zrote Roosevelt, "8nder
the circumstances, I must ask to be relieved of any further responsibility,"
the Governor hastily interceded Zith 0altbie—and 0oses'  solution Zas
adopted, immediately eased the traffic situation and brought praise to
Roosevelt for "solving" the problem.

No Governor Zould interfere Zith  an official Zho could thus spectacularly
achieve on his behalf. +e Zouldn't interfere even Zhen the official actually
tried to strangle a colleague.

The incident occurred in 0oses' office in the State 3arks Council suite.
0oses Zas presiding over a meeting of the council's finance committee
Zhen Raymond +. Torrey Zalked into the room.

Torrey, a pudgy little man, a bird Zatcher, hiker and lover of the deep
Zoods Zho spent Zeekends building lean-tos on Adirondack trails so that
other hikers Zould have shelter, had long been a symbol of frustration to

423
0oses. +is  very presence in the 3arks Council offices Zas a reminder to
0oses that his control of that body, Zhile substantial, Zas not total. Torrey

had long been secretary of the American Scenic and +istoric 3reservation
Society, Zhose trustees had long been ashamed that they could not afford to
pay him an adequate salary, and in the days of the Taylor Estate fight, Zhen
0oses had so desperately needed the help of the society's park patriots, he
had sought to cultivate them by naming Torrey secretary of the 3arks
Council at a salary of $6,000 per year. After the fight, Zhen 0oses, not
needing them any more, Zas scourging the patriots out of their parks and
trying to Zrest LetchZorth 3ark from  the society's control, he had reduced
Torrey's salary as much as civil service laZs alloZed and made his title a
meaningless one by giving his responsibilities to his "assistant," +enry
Lut]. But  civil service laZs prevented 0oses from firing  Torrey and he Zas
a constant reminder that the society still had some say in LetchZorth's
administration.

Torrey had proven a thorn in 0oses' side in other Zays, too. +e saZ the
fight over the Northern State 3arkZay route through the eyes of the
dedicated conservationist; familiar—more familiar perhaps than any other
man—Zith the beauties of the North Shore's glacial moraine, he didn't Zant
a highZay, no matter hoZ beautifully landscaped, to run along it. :hen a
neZspaper article appeared supporting this vieZ, Torrey reprinted it in the
society's monthly neZsletter.

On September 12, 1929, 0oses learned that Torrey had provided
information about 3arks Council proceedings on the parkZay route to
Grenville Clark, the attorney for the North Shore barons, from Zhom 0oses
had been attempting to hide his maneuvering. +e left Zord that Torrey
should report to his office as soon as he came in. Torrey did so, Zalking in
on the finance committee meeting.

Cursing, his face alternately paling and purpling Zith rage, 0oses began to
heap abuse on Torrey. Torrey said that the information he had given Clark
Zas information to Zhich any member of the public Zas entitled. 0oses
then launched into a tirade about the reprinting of the neZspaper article in
the society neZsletter. Torrey said that 0oses had no right to tell him Zhat
he could print.

424
"God damn you!" 0oses shouted. ":hat   do you mean by doing something
like that?"

Torrey Zas mild-mannered, almost invariably soft-spoken. And among his
closest friends Zere JeZish social Zorkers from the LoZer East Side
settlement houses. "I have endured many verbal assaults from 0r. 0oses,
and said little, because he is bigger than I am, and because Ze [the society]
have been almost alone in the council in our defense against his
aggressions," Torrey Zas to Zrite. But "his manner and curses irritated me
on this occasion beyond further restraint, and I retorted: 'You big noisy kike,
you can't talk to me like that.' "

Lunging from his chair, 0oses sei]ed Torrey's throat and began choking
him. So violent Zas his rage that Zhen finance committee member Jay
DoZner tried to pull 0oses  off, he Zas at first unable to do so and had to
e[ert all his strength to pry loose first one of 0oses' hands and then the
other.

As he freed Torrey, DoZner grabbed 0oses around the Zaist to hold him
and told the smaller man to get aZay. But as Torrey headed for the door,
0oses broke free, picked up a heavy smoking stand and match holder,
three-foot steel base and all, and, shouting "You goddamned son of a bitch,"
hurled it at him. Only the fact that another committee member, De+art
Ames, grabbed 0oses' arm as he Zas letting go the heavy missile made it
fall short.

Recounting the incident in a letter to Roosevelt, Torrey said, "I Zas, of
course, at fault for using 'kike,' " but added that 0oses' conduct Zas only
one e[ample of his "truculence and violence against anyone Zho opposes
him." 8nder 0oses'  control, Torrey Zrote, "the Council has lost its original
character, as an advisory body of eminent citi]ens, Zorking amicably
together, and has become a vehicle for securing advantages for 0oses, for
granting favors for his supporters, and for supporting his hostility to any
Zho oppose him." +e asked Roosevelt to limit 0oses' poZers. :hen  the
Governor did not reply, Torrey gave his letter to the press. But 0oses Zas
not at all abashed. +is only regret, he said, Zas that he had not been
permitted to "finish that crackpot." And Roosevelt, pressed for comment by
reporters, Zould say only, "It is a matter for the State Council of 3arks and I

425
do not figure in it." The only result of 0oses' assault Zas that Torrey
resigned, alloZing 0oses to appoint +enry Lut]  to his place, and the
trustees of the American Scenic and +istoric 3reservation Society, reali]ing
that their conflict Zith  0oses had reached an intolerable pass and that they
could not Zin, in 1930 gave up the society's control of Letch Zorth 3ark
and its place on the 3arks Council, thereby making 0oses' control of that
body absolute.

Roosevelt Zouldn't interfere even Zhen he found out that 0oses Zas
discouraging Negroes from using many of his state parks.

8nderlying 0oses'  strikingly  strict policing for cleanliness in his parks Zas,
Frances 3erkins reali]ed Zith "shock," deep distaste for the public that Zas
using them. "+e doesn't love the people," she Zas to say. "It used to shock
me because he Zas doing all these things for the Zelfare of the people. . . .
+e'd denounce the common people terribly. To him they Zere lousy, dirty
people, throZing bottles all over Jones Beach. 'I'll get them! I'll teach
them!'... +e loves the public, but not as people. The public is just the public.
It's a great amorphous mass to him; it needs to be bathed, it needs to be
aired, it needs recreation, but not for personal reasons—just to make it a
better public." NoZ he began taking measures to limit use of his parks. +e
had restricted the use of state parks by poor and loZer-middle-class families
in the first place, by limiting access to the parks by rapid transit; he had
vetoed the Long Island Rail Road's proposed construction of a branch spur
to Jones Beach for this reason. NoZ he began to limit access by buses; he
instructed Shapiro to build the bridges across his neZ parkZays loZ—too
loZ for  buses to pass. Bus trips therefore had to be made on local roads,
making the trips discouragingly long and arduous. For Negroes, Zhom he
considered inherently "dirty," there Zere further measures. Buses needed
permits to enter state parks; buses chartered by Negro groups found it very
difficult

to obtain permits, particularly to 0oses' beloved Jones Beach; most Zere
shunted to parks many miles further out on Long Island. And even in these
parks, buses carrying Negro groups Zere shunted to the furthest reaches of
the parking areas. And Negroes Zere discouraged from using "Zhite" beach
areas—the best beaches—by a system Shapiro calls "flagging"; the handful

426
of Negro lifeguards (there Zere only a handful of Negro employees among
the thousands employed by the Long Island State 3ark Commission) Zere
all stationed at distant, least developed beaches. 0oses Zas convinced that
Negroes did not like cold Zater; the temperature at the pool at Jones Beach
Zas deliberately icy to keep Negroes out. :hen Negro civic groups from
the hot NeZ York City slums began to complain about this treatment,
Roosevelt ordered an investigation and an aide confirmed that "Bob 0oses
is seeking to discourage large Negro parties from picnicking at Jones
Beach, attempting to divert them to some other of the state parks."
Roosevelt gingerly raised the matter Zith 0oses, Zho denied the charge
violently—and the Governor never raised the matter again.

Roosevelt Zouldn't interfere even Zhen 0oses (ostensibly to raise money
for soaring park maintenance costs) further limited park use by the poor by
instituting parking fees at all state parks, fifty cents at Jones Beach, tZenty-
five at the rest, in violation of the American tradition of free parks.

There Zas a flood of letters to Roosevelt from Depression-impoverished
citi]ens Zho said that they had to scrimp to get enough money for the gas to
drive to the park, and that the e[tra quarter Zould be the straZ that Zould
sometimes make it impossible for them to afford the outing. 0oses had
announced that in some parks "there Zill be free parking space for those
unable to pay . . . someZhat remote from the center." This, protesters said,
Zould only make poor families pay a toll in pride instead of coin. ":ho
Zould Zish  to be classed among those 'unable to pay'?" one asked. "To
come Zalking in from the remote parking fields Zould be to e[hibit  the
badge of poverty." Roosevelt Zrote 0oses: "I Zas a good deal impressed by
the complaint . . . I also think fifty cents is too high . . . Frankly, I think the
people have a legitimate kick. :on't  you seriously take up the question of
reducing the Jones Beach charge?"

No, 0oses said, he Zouldn't. And Zhen Roosevelt pressed again, he
brought out his resignation threat. Reducing the charge Zould force him to
reduce Jones Beach maintenance standards, he said. "The entire character of
the place Zould be changed," and if it Zas, "I do not care to be associated . .
." Roosevelt may have felt that "the people have a legitimate kick," but in
the face of such a defense, the Governor punted. Not only did he drop his

427
oZn request for reconsideration; Zhen the Legislature passed a bill
prohibiting fees in state parks, he vetoed it.

Not only does a Governor not interfere Zith an official like Robert 0oses;
he heaps on him more and more responsibilities. No matter Zhat the job
Zas, it seemed, if it Zas difficult Roosevelt turned to the same man. During
1930, 1931 and 1932, 0oses handled more than a do]en special
assignments for Roosevelt and produced results on every one. And if
increasing 0oses' responsibilities meant increasing his poZer—giving him

more money to Zork Zith, more engineers, architects, draftsmen and police
to Zork Zith—Zell,   the Governor simply had no choice but to increase that
poZer.

By 1932, Zith the Governor, running for 3resident, less able than ever to
afford a public controversy in his oZn state Zith so popular a figure, if one
of the tZo characters in the 0oses-Roosevelt drama Zas dominant, it Zas
not the Governor but his appointee. The hatred betZeen Roosevelt and
0oses flared up only occasionally during the four years that the former
spent in the E[ecutive Chamber in Albany. But that passion—and the desire
for revenge that it engendered—Zas only banked, not e[tinguished, and it
never stopped smoldering. It Zas to bla]e up into the open later, Zhen
Roosevelt Zas 3resident.

But Roosevelt Zas not 3resident yet. And he could not yet afford to indulge
such a passion. In his dealings Zith 0oses during his gubernatorial years,
necessity Zas the mother of accommodation.

The uniqueness of 0oses' relationship to the Governor of Zhose
administration he Zas at least nominally a member Zas emphasi]ed Zhen
Al Smith finally  decided to run against him for the Democratic presidential
nomination. 0oses calmly informed Roosevelt that he Zould be taking a
feZ Zeeks off—to Zork  for Roosevelt's opponent.

The +appy :arrior's   last campaign Zas born, and Zas to die, in unrelieved
bitterness.

428
Smith had plenty to be bitter about. Roosevelt's systematic—and pointed—
disregard of his predecessor had continued. Smith could not reconcile
himself to the fact that the younger man, of Zhom he had been so fond and
to Zhom he had given the gubernatorial nomination, had turned on him.
Friends Zho visited him in NeZ York found that Roosevelt Zas becoming
almost an obsession Zith him. "Do you knoZ, by God, that he has never
consulted me about a damn thing since he has been Governor?" he said to
one. "+e has taken bad advice from sources not friendly to me. +e has
ignored me!"

And Roosevelt Zas not the only younger man Zho had treated Smith Zith
ingratitude. The treatment he had received from Jimmy :alker had
Zounded him even more deeply. At the request of :alker's father, an old
friend, he had taken :alker under his Zing  Zhen the young legislator had
first come to Albany, rooming Zith him, steering him up the legislative
ladder, helping him time and again out of the scandals in Zhich he Zas
constantly becoming embroiled because of his drinking, his compulsive
philandering and his inability to pay attention to the job to Zhich he had
been elected. :hen Smith determined in 1925 to oust +ylan from the
mayoralty, :alker  had asked Smith to make him +ylan's successor. Smith
had told :alker  frankly  that he felt too Zorried about his playboy antics to
do so. :alker  had tricked him into changing his mind. +e disappeared
completely from the night spots that Zere his usual haunts and began to be
seen in more respectable establishments Zith his Zife. :hen he told Smith

he Zas on the Zagon for good, Smith secured him the nomination. But Zhat
Smith didn't knoZ Zas that :alker   had been engaging in all his old
activities, but had been doing so in a secluded penthouse rented for him by
a friend Zho had reasons of his oZn for Zanting Beau James to be 0ayor.
Safely installed in City +all,  :alker   had shipped his Zife off to 0iami  for
an e[tended vacation, returned to his public habits—and Zhen Smith had
left the Governorship and lost poZer, :alker  had begun ousting Smith's
friends from key city posts to make Zay for his oZn men, called by one
observer "the Zorst element in Tammany +all." Then :alker  began taking
over the +all. Smith could have stopped him but, determined to stay out of
politics, he disdained to do so. :hen he reali]ed the depth of the corruption
pervading city government, he tried to reassert his authority, but by then it

429
Zas too late. :alker  Zas even able to force out Smith's man, Judge George
:.   Olvany, as Tammany leader, Zith Olvany attempting to save face by
"resigning" because of "ill health." And then :alker  publicly  humiliated
Smith. At the annual dinner of the Inner Circle, the press-room regulars at
City +all,  :alker   paused during his speech, turned to Olvany, and Zith a
glance at Smith that no one in the room missed, said, "+oZ's your health,
George?" The reporters laughed, and Smith kneZ they Zere laughing at him
as much as at Olvany. And Zhen :alker hand-picked Olvany's successor,
he chose Smith's enemy, John F. Curry. There Zas no place left for Smith in
the party he had loved and led.

All through 1931, Smith refused to run for the presidency. One by one, the
state's key Democrats, Farley and Flynn notable among them, came to him
and said that Roosevelt Zas asking them to join his campaign but that their
first loyalty Zas to Smith; all he had to do Zas ask them to stick Zith him
and they Zould do so. And all through 1931, Smith told them that he Zould
never be a candidate for the presidency and that they Zere free to join
Roosevelt, Zhich they did.

But in early 1932, Smith's bitterness spilled over. +is intimates Zould long
debate Zhether Smith entered the presidential race because he Zanted the
nomination himself or because he Zanted to deny it to the man Zho had
treated him so cavalierly. 3robably both elements Zere mi[ed. Certainly,
Smith Zas motivated by personal ambition: in 1932, he Zas, after all, only
fifty-eight years old, still vigorous and bored Zith the life of a businessman.
+e Zas motivated also by the fact that the Depression made election of the
Democratic candidate, even a Catholic Democratic candidate, a virtual
certainty, and he desperately Zanted to prove that being a Catholic and an
Irishman did not disqualify a man from the presidency. One visitor,
listening to Smith recount hoZ it had been the religious issue that had
defeated him in 1928, said, "+e felt so terribly hurt, so outraged by that, and
the point that he Zas making Zas that having been defeated on that issue in
a year in Zhich he Zas bound to be defeated, everybody, including FDR,
should have stood aside to let him have the nomination in a year in Zhich
he could have been elected! +e Zas very much Zrought up about it, he
pounded his fists and his voice got loud. +e shouted at times in that

430
conversation." But no consideration Zas stronger than Smith's feelings
toZard

Roosevelt in pushing him at the last moment into a race foredoomed by the
fact that Roosevelt had a four-year head start.

0oses saZ at once that the effort Zas hopeless. "The Smith movement
never had a chance," he Zas to recall. "It started very late, and really had no
organi]ation to speak of." +e never let himself be deluded by those
reminders of past glories Zhich gave Belle 0oskoZit],  +enry  0oskoZit],
Judge 3roskauer, +erbert Bayard SZope and George 0cLaughlin flashes of
hope: the rallying of :alker   and Tammany to Smith's side after Roosevelt
had authori]ed Samuel Seabury to investigate corruption in NeZ York City;
the defection to Smith's banner of big-city organi]ations and the consequent
raising of his delegate count to 201; the Zild cheers of the tremendous
throng that lined his route from the La Salle Street Station in Chicago to the
Congress +otel, Zhere a Smith-for-3resident headquarters had been hastily
established. But practical realities did not Zeigh Zith 0oses Zhere Al
Smith Zas concerned. 0oses Zas one of those Zho struggled to the end in
convention maneuvering so bitter that Ed Flynn called it "a fight to the
death," Zho fought to hold together an alliance of dark horses that denied
Roosevelt the nomination until the fourth ballot, Zho thought for a feZ
brief hours that they actually had Roosevelt stopped and Zould be able to
force the party to turn to Smith, and Zhose hopes Zere finally dashed Zhen
the e[-Governor's old adversary, :illiam   Randolph +earst, used his
influence Zith California's :illiam     G. 0cAdoo  and John Nance Garner,
Governor of Te[as, to force the California and Te[as delegations to sZitch
to Roosevelt. 0oses Zas one of the small group of friends Zho sat doZn
Zith Smith in front  of a radio in the Congress +otel to listen to the last
ballot, Zho Zatched the former Governor haul himself Zearily out of his
chair as soon as 0cAdoo began the speech that signaled the California
sZitch and Zith a Zave of his hand direct them to start packing so they
could leave Chicago. +e Zas one of those Zho sneaked out of the Congress
+otel by a side door Zith Smith at the moment that croZds Zere jamming
the front entrance to greet the arriving Roosevelt, Zho listened to the e[-
Governor, cornered by reporters, refuse to say he Zould support his party's
choice and Zho Zatched an[iously as Smith sat silent on the long train ride

431
home Zith his face marked by Zhat one observer called a "tired sadness."
And if 0oses  accepted Smith's defeat Zith his mind, he never accepted it
Zith his heart. A month after the convention, Zith "+appy Days Are +ere
Again" droZning  out the strains of "The SideZalks of NeZ York" forever in
the Democratic 3arty's consciousness, Smith's campaign staff held its first
and only reunion, complete Zith a menu featuring "Nuts 0cAdoo," "Celery
Farley" and "Branchless Olives Roosevelt" in the Empire State Club in the
Empire State Building. And 0oses' contribution to the occasion reflected
his bitterness. It Zas a quotation from Shakespeare that he selected for an

epigraph on the menu's cover: 1

3olitics is a thieves' game.

Those Zho stay in it long enough are invariably robbed.

Zeek in 1928, Zere averaging $16 in 1933; :oolZorth's  Zas paying full-
time salesladies $7 per Zeek.

3arents skimped for their children—by December 1932 many parents could
hardly remember a time Zhen they hadn't been skimping—but skimping
Zas only forestalling the inevitable. There Zas meat on the table tZice a
Zeek and then once—and then not at all. Then there Zere no eggs. 3arents
could make their children feel it Zas an honor that they didn't have to drink
milk any more and could drink coffee instead, but the lack of proper diet
took a toll. "Looking back, Ze can see quite a change," said one
schoolteacher. "The children haven't any pep; they don't seem like the same
youngsters they Zere a year ago." They seemed tired; they didn't seem to
learn as fast. Said a school nurse: ":hen you go into a classroom you
notice a different e[pression on [their] faces. . . . There is a strained,
an[ious look not natural in children at all."

Sometimes the things that outsiders didn't see Zere Zorst of all. Teachers
didn't see the children Zhose families Zere poorest; such children had
dropped out of school because they had no money for carfare, lunches or
suitable clothes. Staffers at the city's free health clinics Zere encouraged by
the fact that the number of malnutrition cases they handled Zas rising only
gradually (although by 1934 such cases nevertheless Zould account for 60

432
percent of all clinic Zork). Then the staffers reali]ed that many people
suffering from malnutrition simply Zeren't going to the clinics because they
kneZ perfectly Zell  Zhat Zas Zrong Zith  them—and also kneZ that they
Zould be unable to do anything about it. And no one could see a state of
mind; all one could do Zas try to describe it, as 0artha Gellhorn did:
"EveryZhere there seemed a spreading listlessness, a Zhipped feeling. ... I
find them all in the same shape—fear, fear ... an overpoZering terror of the
future."

The city's government did little to help its people.

The Zill  to help Zas not the force that drove that government. That force
Zas greed. During the fifteen years in Zhich Red 0ike +ylan  and then
Beau James :alker had been Chief 0agistrate of America's greatest city,
the Tammany leaders Zho served under them had seemed motivated
primarily by the desire to siphon the city's vast resources into a vast trough
on Zhich they could batten.

Former Judge Samuel Seabury's invesigation of corruption in the city,
Zhich had begun in 1930, had revealed hoZ successfully this siphoning had
been accomplished, e[posing the bank accounts, running into the hundreds
of thousands of dollars, of literally do]ens of city officials, Zho  folloZed
one another to the Zitness stand in a seemingly endless procession that Zas
dubbed "The Tin Bo[ 3arade" after one testified that he had found $360,000
in his home in "a tin bo[ ... a Zonderful tin bo[."  Then Seabury turned to
the 0agistrates Courts. :itnesses revealed that hundreds of innocent
houseZives and Zorking girls had been framed as prostitutes and, if they
could not raise the cash to buy their freedom, had been jailed, sometimes
for months, by a

cabal of crooked vice-squad policemen, court clerks and magistrates.
Shocked by the strangling in Van Cortlandt 3ark of one scheduled female
Zitness— her teen-age daughter committed suicide a Zeek later—the city
listened in horror to the others Seabury paraded to the stand. One told of
helping vice-squad patrolmen trail a young married Zoman as she inspected
houses Zith a male real estate agent. :hen they had returned to her home
and Zere Zaiting for her husband to arrive and conclude the transaction, the
police broke in, frightened the real estate agent out of testifying and arrested

433
her. Other Zitnesses testified that, Zhen business Zas sloZ, the vice squad
simply "raided" flats in Negro +arlem and made Zholesale arrests at
random. :hen  0ayor  :alker    took the stand—"Don't look him straight in
the eye," Zarned a Seabury aide familiar Zith Beau James's charm, and the
former judge stood sideZays to :alker  as much as possible Zhile
questioning him—Seabury revealed that the 0ayor had personally accepted
more than a million dollars in "beneficences" from firms doing business
Zith the city. On September I, 1932, Zhile Governor Roosevelt Zas
pondering Zhether or not to remove :alker  from office, the 0ayor
resigned and sailed for Europe to join Betty ("0onk") Compton, last and
loveliest of his paramours, thereby folloZing a traveling precedent
established by Robert C. Van :yck, the first mayor (1898-1901) of the
consolidated city, Zho had died in 3aris, and the man Zho had hand-picked
Van :yck   for the job, Tammany boss Richard Croker, Zho had died in
England. Surrogate John 3atrick O'Brien Zon the special election to fill the
remaining year of :alker's  term, but he proved to be as much a creature of
Tammany as his predecessors. :hile Tammany leaders Zere trying to
persuade the electorate that they had no control over him, O'Brien Zas
replying to reporters Zho asked him Zho his 3olice Commissioner Zould
be, "I don't knoZ. They haven't told me yet." And during O'Brien's
administration local Tammany relief administrators Zould siphon off a big
chunk of federal relief payments before they reached their intended
recipients—and the city Zould continue to do nothing to supplement federal
programs, although a supplement Zould have been helpful, since federal
payments averaged seventeen dollars per Zeek per family. Tammany Zould
try to use federal payments to build its political poZer, putting Zard heelers
on relief payrolls under several different names so that they could draZ
several salaries for themselves. And the federal payrolls -did not shoZ
Zhether the men receiving its money Zere the men Zho most needed it. In
NeZ York City under Tammany +all, the test for employment on a federal
project Zas generally politics rather than need; most applicants had to be
cleared by their local Tammany leader; one leader boasted, "This is hoZ Ze
make Democrats."

Even had the city Zanted to help its people, it Zould have been unable to.
The Depression had forced NeZ York to total up at last the cost of its
Rake's 3rogress under the +ylan and :alker administrations.

434
:hen   +ylan became mayor of NeZ York on January 1, 1918, the city's
population Zas 5,872,143. Fifteen years later, Zhen :alker resigned, it

Zas 6,930,446—an increase of 15 percent. During that same period, the
city's budget rose from $240,519,858 to $631,366,298—an increase of 250
percent. The per capita cost of the budget increased by 200 percent. Year in
and year out betZeen January 1, 1918, and December 31, 1932, the city's
debt increased at a rate equal to $100,000 per day, until, on the latter date, it
had reached the staggering total of $1,897,481,478—a figure that Zas
almost equal to the combined debt of the forty-eight states and that required
an annual appropriation for debt service (the payment of interest and
amorti]ation) of $209,960,338, almost a third of the entire budget.

Since jobs Zere the fuel of Tammany's political machine, a disproportionate
share of the rest of the budget Zent to purchase that fuel; betZeen the day
+ylan entered office and the day :alker  left it, the number of city
employees almost doubled, and their salaries, paid as political reZards at
levels far above those paid for similar Zork in private industry, almost
tripled. In 1932, they totaled $311,937,199.

City officials acted as if they believed that the budgetary gyre could go on
Zidening indefinitely. They based their optimism on the fact that the value
of ta[able real estate in the city, the base of the city's ta[ structure, Zas
increasing almost as fast as city e[penditures. As a result, even Zhile the
city's budget soared, there Zas only a slight increase in the real estate ta[
rate. If the +ylan and :alker   administrations had erected a huge
superstructure of city e[penditures, that superstructure Zas nonetheless
resting on a base that they thought Zas steadily broadening.

Even before the Depression, hoZever, the rate of increase in the base had
begun to sloZ doZn ominously. The annual percentage of increase in the
value of ta[able real estate in the city Zas 12 in 1927 but only 9 in 1928 and
8 in 1929. The Depression forced this key percentage doZn to 6 in 1930, 3
in 1931, 1 in 1932. And the Depression forced up another key percentage,
the percentage of real estate ta[es Zhich the city Zas unable to collect; in
the years betZeen 1928 and 1932 this percentage Zas, successively, 11, 13,
15, 18, 26. The uncollected balance of the 1932 real estate ta[, the ta[
Zhich had to finance the bulk of the city's debt service and current

435
e[penditures, Zas $137,613,213. The base on Zhich the top-heavy
superstructure of city finances teetered Zas shrinking, and it Zas shrinking
fast. The superstructure began to topple.

In desperation the city deferred its required annual payments to the
Teachers Retirement Fund and e[propriated Sinking Fund surpluses already
obligated for small-scale public improvements. 8nable despite these
e[pedients to meet even its ordinary day-to-day e[penses, it Zas forced to
borroZ to pay them—at interest rates set higher and higher by bankers
increasingly leery of the city's ability to repay. By 1931, even Jimmy
:alker   Zas talking about "economi]ing."

But the city's economi]ing capacity Zas limited because one-third of its
budget Zas allocated for an all but irreducible debt service and because of
political realities: the city payroll had become the payroll of the Tammany
political machine, and Zhile a city might reduce the number of its
employees

or their salaries, it Zas less easy for a political machine to throZ its
retainers off the payroll or substantially reduce their stipends. City
construction contracts had become the main ingredient of the rich sZill of
graft to Zhich the palate of Tammany leaders—including those party
leaders Zho held high city office—had become accustomed; city officials
could reduce a city's appropriations for construction, but men accustomed to
feeding at a Zell-filled trough Zere far less ready to reduce their oZn
portions. Even Zhile talking economy, city officials made clear that they
Zould not economi]e on construction appropriations or salaries. (There Zas
one e[ception: one group of city employees—schoolteachers—Zere not
part of the Tammany machine. In 1930 and 1931, the city fired 11,000
schoolteachers.) The 1932 city budget Zas the highest ever. The city
proposed to finance it Zith a record increase in the real estate ta[ rate.

But the day of reckoning for fifteen years of Tammany rule Zas at hand.
:hen,   in January 1932, the city attempted to float neZ loans to meet the
payroll coming due at the end of the month, bankers, convinced that the
loans could not be repaid if the city spent money during the coming year at
the rate it proposed, refused to make them unless the budget Zas reduced.
The city complied by virtually halting all  repairs to its physical plant. It

436
refinanced a quarter-billion dollars of subZay bonds, Zhich the city had
planned to redeem out of current revenues, by selling long-term bonds in
their stead—an e[pedient Zhich loaded future generations of city ta[payers
Zith a monstrous rapid-transit debt.

Still the city's balance sheet reddened. By December 1932, it Zas forced to
go hat in hand to the bankers again, and Zhen neZ loans Zere made
contingent on further budget reductions, it had no choice but to cut the
salaries of city employees by 6 to 33 percent. And hundreds of millions of
dollars in short-term revenue notes Zould be coming due in 1933 and there
Zas no money in sight to pay them.

Although :alker   and O'Brien attempted to do so, it Zas a misleading
oversimplification to blame the Depression for all of NeZ York's problems.
The truth Zas that the city had been falling further and further behind in the
race to meet the needs of its people in good times as Zell as bad, and under
reform as Zell as Tammany administrations.

The city's failure Zas most apparent, and the problems largest, in those
categories of municipal responsibility in Zhich the betterment of its
people's lives required the construction of public Zorks on a scale
commensurate Zith the city's si]e. The concern of the people's tribunes
during the LoZ and 0itchel  reform administrations had been for the
people's Zelfare, but that Zelfare had been conceived of primarily as a
lessening of the burden on ta[payers through governmental economy rather
than through the construction of civic improvements Zhose cost Zould
increase that burden. And Zhile Tammany administrations had spent the
ta[payers' money Zith a lavish hand, the ta[payers had received in return
surprisingly little increment in

life-improving  steel and concrete, because the disproportionate amount of
the city's budget funneled by Tammany into salaries—into patronage—left
little money available for construction contract appropriations.

The quality of men added to the city payroll, moreover, did not match the
quantity, thanks to +ylan's destruction of civil service safeguards. If there
Zas a man less devoted to the merit system than Red 0ike, it Zas his
successor; Zhen Beau James departed for Europe, he left behind him, on

437
the rosters of the engineering staffs of the borough presidents, the staffs
Zhich alone under the e[isting City Charter Zere empoZered to draZ the
plans for major public improvements, a group of "engineers" of Zhom a
substantial percentage lacked a high school diploma. And the city's resultant
lack of technical e[pertise crippled its ability to carry out, or even conceive,
complicated public Zorks.

So did the amount of graft, the grease Zhich kept the Tammany machine
moving smoothly. From condemnation aZards—"Every time the city built a
school, a politician Zent into the real estate business," La Guardia groZled
—to certificates of completion, every step toZard a public improvement
required a payoff. Since contractors had to include the cost of such payoffs
in their estimates of the cost of city construction Zork, their bids had to be
inflated accordingly. The amount of steel and concrete that a city dollar
purchased Zas correspondingly reduced, and the si]e of contracts the city
aZarded Zas not matched by improvements to the civic estate. "The city
did not get Zhat it paid for," commented Fusion financial e[pert Joseph D.
0cGoldrick.  "Although  it certainly paid for Zhat  it got"—several times
over. For its single major public improvement, the construction of the
Independent SubZay System, the :alker administration paid $800,000,000
—appro[imately tZice  Zhat outside e[perts said the job should have cost.
And Zhen the $800,000,000 had been spent, substantial portions of the
subZay Zere still uncompleted.

And since the hands Zhich city inspectors held out, palms up, to contractors
could not easily be doubled into hard fists of regulation, the quality of
public Zorks in NeZ  York City Zas more than slightly suspect. No feZer
than forty public schools constructed during :alker's administration had to
be closed for major repairs—for ceilings that fell, roofs that leaked,
stairZays that collapsed and plumbing that didn't Zork at all—Zithin a year
of opening.

The gap betZeen the city's physical plant and the increasing needs of its
e[panding population had, then, been Zidening in virtually all areas of
municipal responsibility. The total accomplishment of the :alker
administration in public housing, for e[ample, consisted of the
rehabilitation of some of the tenements on one block, and the number of

438
public hospital beds Zhen Beau James left office Zas precisely the same as
Zhen he entered it. But because of the sudden burgeoning in the use of the
automobile and in the desire for active recreation, the city's failure to
produce for its people Zas especially galling in precisely those areas in
Zhich Robert 0oses had already produced, just outside NeZ York City, so
much: highZays, bridges and parks.

NeZ York Zas strangling on its traffic. In 1918, Zhen +ylan  took

office, there Zere 125,101 motor vehicles in the city; in 1932, there Zere
790,173. In all those fifteen years not a single usable mile of arterial
highZay had been constructed Zithin the city's borders. 0otorists Zere
forced to travel through or around NeZ York in 1932 on the same local
streets that had e[isted in 1918, streets complete Zith intersecting traffic,
traffic lights—and traffic jams reporters had long since run out of adjectives
attempting to describe.

In 1913, Robert 0oses had stood on a high bluff overlooking the muddy
Zasteland that Zas Riverside 3ark and had envisioned a great parkZay
running through it. In 1932, there Zas still no highZay. The city had begun
construction in 1927 of a :est  Side Elevated +ighZay running along the
Zaterfront from the Battery as far uptoZn as Seventy-second Street, the
park's southern border. But the pace of construction had been so sloZ that,
Zhen the Depression brought it to a halt in 1931, substantial portions of the
highZay had not been built—not that that mattered much, since neither had
the entrance and e[it ramps that Zould make it usable. And since there Zere
no plans to e[tend the highZay through Riverside 3ark, motorists heading
for :estchester  and NeZ England still had to make their Zay through—and
add to—the congenital traffic jams of 0anhattan and the Bron[ before they
could reach the broad SaZ 0ill River 3arkZay, Zhich  0oses had built
doZn to the city line.

4ueens had once been the only borough Zith adequate through roads.
0anhattan families heading for Nassau and Suffolk counties, once past the
East River bridges, had not encountered serious delays until they reached
the city line and the narroZ roads beyond. But Zith the construction beyond
the line of 0oses' parks and parkZays, the situation Zas noZ reversed; the
lure of his creations had steadily increased the traffic floZ through 4ueens,

439
and its boulevards Zere inadequate to handle it. Furthermore, none of the
boulevards linked up Zith a parkZay, so drivers Zanting to use one had to
endure local streets before they got to it.

As for Brooklyn, borough of churches, its inhabitants had been praying for
a Zay out of it for decades. There Zas, in the entire borough, not a single
major through thoroughfare. There Zas no Zay out of its vast center, no
Zay to reach 0anhattan or 4ueens or Nassau County, e[cept via local
streets. And the streets of Brooklyn, like those of 4ueens, Zere becoming
more clogged every year; the population of the tZo boroughs increased by
more than a million betZeen 1920 and 1930.

As for connections for automobiles under or over the Zater Zhich separated
the city's boroughs, there hadn't been one built in a quarter of a century.*
0anhattan motorists bound for the Bron[, :estchester  or NeZ England,
after craZling uptoZn through 0anhattan's congestion, found Zhen they
reached 0anhattan's northern boundary, the +arlem River, that the only
Zay to cross it to get to the congested streets of the Bron[ Zas the

* TZo connections had been built, by the 3ort of NeZ York Authority,
betZeen the city and NeZ Jersey: the +olland Tunnel, Zhich opened in
1927, and the George :ashington Bridge, Zhich opened in 1931.

BroadZay draZbridge, only three lanes Zide and so crammed Zith pillars
that traffic tie-ups at either end often e[tended for blocks. On an average
day in 1932, the bridge Zas raised fourteen times to permit the passage of
ships. :hen  one of these raisings occurred at rush hour, the tie-up could
e[tend for miles.*

The population of Long Island, concentrated in Brooklyn and 4ueens, Zas
more than four million in 1932—greater than all e[cept eight states. But
e[cept for a feZ small and ancient ferries that plied the East River, the only
Zay on or off Long Island for motorists Zas the same quartet of "East River
bridges" that had e[isted in 1909. Long Island still didn't possess a single
vehicular link Zith  the mainland 8nited States. The Island didn't possess a
single vehicular link Zith  0anhattan Island north of Fifty-ninth  Street,
Zhere the 4ueensborough Bridge touched doZn. The 4ueensborough, in
fact, Zas the only link Zith  0anhattan north of Corlears +ook, Zhere the

440
Brooklyn, 0anhattan and :illiamsburg    spans debouched traffic onto the
already jammed thoroughfares of the LoZer East Side.

On an average Zeekday in 1933, 238,277 trucks and cars, three times Zhat
they Zere built to handle, poured onto the East River bridges. The
4ueensborough carried more cars than any other span in the country.

The inadequacy of the approaches to these bridges Zas matched by the
inadequacy of their roadZays. Built for horses, not automobiles, they Zere
too narroZ for cars and so slippery that, according to a police report, on the
Brooklyn Bridge alone, "a do]en accidents Zere not uncommon on a rainy
day."

City officials had been talking for years about repaving the bridges, but no
repaving had been done. They had been talking for years about Zidening
their roadZays, but no Zidening had been done. Although in 1932 the
4ueensborough Bridge had been open for a quarter of a century, the city
had not yet gotten around even to marking lanes on it. At either end of the
bridge Zere traffic lights; Zhen they Zere red, bridge traffic stopped
completely. A 1931 police study found that during rush hours the average
driver, frantically shifting gears Zhile trying  to keep his car in an unmarked
lane, spent forty-three minutes negotiating the 1,182 feet of the
4ueensborough span. The city had created tZo additional lanes on the
4ueensborough upper roadZay in 1931, but Zhen the lanes Zere opened, it
Zas discoveied that there had been a slight miscalculation: the lanes Zere
too narroZ; cars Zere constantly skinning their tires on the granite curbs.
The lanes had to be closed Zhile Zorkmen laboriously chipped aZay the
edges of the curbstones—and the Zorkmen Zould be chipping, and the
lanes Zould be closed, for three years.

The lack of neZ interborough bridges and tunnels Zasn't due to a lack of
ideas; NeZ York Zas littered Zith evidence to prove that there had

* Northbound motorists could, of course, cross the +arlem River on one of
seven bridges that had been built years before—the neZest Zas finished in
1910—miles to the south. But these bridges debouched into the most
congested section of the Bron[, miles from the parkZays and other broad
roads of :estchester.

441
been plenty of those. But the evidence also proved hoZ difficult it Zas, in
NeZ York, for ideas to become reality.

In a Zeed-filled vacant lot in Riverdale just north of the +arlem River stood
a marble column a hundred feet high Zith a strangely unfinished look about
its top. There Zas supposed to be a statue up there, a statue of +endrick
+udson, for the vacant lot had been purchased by the city as the northern
bridgehead of a "+endrick +udson Bridge" that Zas supposed to ease the
congestion on the BroadZay draZbridge, and a statue of the Great
Navigator Zas supposed to look doZn on the span that bore his name. But
although the lot had been purchased, and the column erected, in 1909, in
1932 Zork had still not started on the statue—or the bridge.

On the shoreline in Brooklyn's Bay Ridge section, at the edge of the
NarroZs, stood tZo rude Zooden palisades, rotting from a decade's
e[posure to sea spray. The palisades had been erected to keep children from
falling into tZo  huge holes, each ninety-si[ feet deep. Directly across the
NarroZs, dug into the Staten Island shoreline, Zere tZo similar holes. The
four holes had been the start of the shaft heads for a great "NarroZs Tube"
designed to link Brooklyn Zith Staten Island. :ork   on the tube had begun
in 1921. The city had spent more than $7,000,000 on it. But digging had
been stopped in 1923 and never resumed, and in 1932 the project Zas dead
—the four empty holes the only evidence of the money spent on it.

And marching across loZ-lying :ard's   Island in the East River Zere
seventeen massive masonry piers, each of them forty feet thick, eighty feet
long, more than a hundred feet high. These piers had been erected to
support the central span of the "triborough bridge," first proposed in 1910,
that Zould link together at last 0anhattan, the Bron[ and 4ueens. But in
1932 the piers had been standing for more than tZo years, and there Zas
still no bridge for them to support—and hope that there ever Zould be Zas
rapidly fading.

As for NeZ York's parks, they Zere scabs on the face of the city.

3arks Zere the city's legacy from reformers Zho had fought against long
odds for their creation; under Tammany they had become fiefs administered
for private gain. The Brooklyn 3ark Department paid for hundreds of

442
thousands of cubic yards of landfill that it never received. It constructed a
large restaurant and for a yearly rental of ten dollars turned over its keys to
a restaurateur Zho Zas alloZed to keep all profits. :hen  a Brooklyn brick
manufacturer needed ten acres for a neZ storage area, the department
alloZed him to rent ten acres of Dyker Beach 3ark—for a rental of $2.50
per year. And during his term as Brooklyn 3ark Commissioner, James J.
BroZne banked $1,071,713.

Some of the city's choicest public beach front—in :olfe's 3ond 3ark on
Staten Island and at Orchard Beach in the Bron[, for e[ample—Zas rented
to political insiders, Zho, for a fee of fifteen dollars, Zere alloZed to erect
private bungaloZs on it, and to form "civic associations" that promulgated
regulations closing the beaches to the public.

Because parks Zere a handy place to conceal drunks and loafers, Tammany
staffed the park departments Zith the dregs of its barrel of Zard

heelers. Because skilled laborers' higher salaries Zould reduce the amount
of patronage that could be distributed, Tammany balked at hiring skilled
Zorkers even for those jobs that required skills. So that most of the park
department budgets could be devoted to salaries, Tammany scrimped on
materials and equipment, spending e[actly $225,000 of the total park
budget of $8,576,319 on such lu[uries in 1932—and in that year 90 percent
of park department vehicles Zere still horse-draZn.

By 1932, the paths, Zalks and roadZays in NeZ York's parks Zere miles of
broken pavement. The laZns, seldom moZed, sometimes looked more like
meadoZs. So many trees Zere dying that some of the loveliest tree-
bordered Zalks Zere bordered mostly by stumps—the result of alloZing
unskilled and unsupervised Zorkers to prune trees by simply climbing up to
the top of their ladders and saZing trees off at that height, since they Zere
reluctant to risk their oZn limbs by climbing out on trees'. According to a
3ark Association survey, there Zas not a single structure of any type in any
park in the city that Zas not in need of immediate repair.

:hat   the city called a playground Zas an open space—equipped Zith slides
and a sZing or tZo, sometimes equipped Zith nothing at all—around Zhich
chicken Zire had been strung. 0ost "playgrounds" Zere not surfaced; rain

443
turned them into mud holes. Others Zere surfaced Zith cinders spread
loosely over the dirt, and mothers hated to let their children play in them
because they kneZ the children Zould come home covered Zith cuts.

If one of the hundreds of statues in the parks Zas undamaged in 1932, the
3ark Association couldn't find it. The faces of the statues Zere masses of
bird droppings. Obscenities had been Zritten on—and never erased from—
their chests. Their identifying plaques had been torn off. SZords Zere
missing from sheaths, laurel Zreaths from broZs. 3oets plucked at broken
harps, saints stood on cracked pedestals. An Indian hunter had lost his boZ.
The tiger in Central 3ark Zas slipping off his rock. The bayonets had been
stolen off the rifles of the soldiers in the Seventh Regiment 0emorial on
Fifth Avenue.

The ironZork that could be seen in the parks—the fences, benches and
playground equipment—Zas pitted and caked Zith rust. The condition of
the ironZork that couldn't be seen Zas indicated by the rarity of the comfort
stations Zhose plumbing Zorked.

Since park concessions Zere handed out to anyone Zho could raise the
necessary payoff, pushcarts and ramshackle booths croZded park paths—
there Zere nineteen along one short path in Battery 3ark, each Zith its oZn
carnival-type barker—and since many sold substandard food, there Zere
recurring reports of sickness among children Zho ate the hot dogs they sold.

Bryant 3ark, si[ priceless acres of green amid the concrete masses of
midtoZn, had been alloZed to become a haven for drunks and idlers. In
1932, the city obligingly trucked aZay tZo of the park's principal
ornaments, eight-foot-high statues of :ashington Irving and James 0arion
Sims, founder of the first Zomen's hospital in NeZ York, and alloZed a
"George :ashington  Bi-Centennial Celebration Commission" (debonair
Grover :halen.  one of :alker's   police commissioners, Zas chairman) to
erect a flimsy reproduc-

tion of Federal +all, the building in Zhich  :ashington   Zas inaugurated, in
the park and then fence it off and place turnstiles at its corners so that the
public Zould be forced to pay admission to see the hall. :hen the public
declined in great numbers to do so, the commission Zent out of e[istence

444
Zithout funds to demolish its creation. After picking up the demolition tab,
the city discovered that it had managed to lose the Irving and Sims statues.
3ossibly because the omission of five tons of granite and metal Zould not
be easily concealed in a reconstructed park, Bryant 3ark Zas not
reconstructed—and in January 1934 it Zas a Zeed-filled vacant lot.*

Central 3ark, most famous and beautiful of the city's open spaces, "the most
noble, the most praiseZorthy, the most philanthropic of all our public
Zorks," according to an 1876 NeZ York +erald editorial, had been the
creation of Calvert Vau[ and the genius of urban landscape, Frederick LaZ
Olmsted, Zho, in 1857—Zith Olmsted still  an unknoZn young park
department employee—had Zon a nationZide contest Zith their design for
the park. Olmsted had driven thousands of men to plant half a million trees
and shrubs on its 840 rocky, barren and arid acres and to create boZers,
ma]es, laZns and vistas, revolutionary sunken transverse roads (that Zere
critici]ed  because people said there Zould never be sufficient traffic across
the park to justify them), bridle paths (that Zere critici]ed because feZ NeZ
Yorkers

* The Bi-Centennial Commission Zas one of the more hilarious episodes in
the city's history. Its "board of directors" contained a number of Zell-
meaning DAR types Zho had lent their names to Zhat they thought Zas an
attempt to honor the Father of the Country, but the presence of :halen, an
intimate of some of Tammany's most greedy insiders, Zas the tip-off to the
fact that the celebration Zas intended as a public-scalping party—a
suspicion confirmed Zhen food-selling concessions at the "celebration"
Zere handed out to Tammany favorites. First, the commission announced
that it Zould finance the construction of "Federal +all" by "alloZing"
citi]ens to sign a "patriotic roll call"—for  a fee of one dollar per signature
— designed to raise $150,000. Despite parades beginning, or ending, at
:ashington  Arch, and led by Jimmy :alker   himself, that Zere designed to
Zhip up public enthusiasm, the roll call Zas ansZered by only 18,629
patriots. Sears, Roebuck & Co. then announced that it Zould lend the
commission the money against turnstile receipts—but the finished structure
into Zhich that firm's money Zas sunk turned out to be a plaster and papier-
mache structure that sZayed alarmingly and looked barely strong enough to
Zithstand a good Zind.

445
On some days total attendance in the park Zas so loZ that only tZenty
persons paid their tZenty-five cents to see it. :halen then conceived the
idea of combining the e[hibit Zith  "patriotic movies"—Zhich  turned out to
be 0ickey  0ouse cartoons. :hen   interest remained loZ, Italian opera Zas
tried. The commission couldn't even raise enough money to demolish
Federal +all and restore Bryant 3ark to its original condition, as it had
promised to do in its contract Zith the city. It announced that "a large part
of the population feels that this patriotic shrine should be retained" and
Zent out of e[istence, leaving $76,254 in largely une[plained "e[penses,"
and Sears, Roebuck holding the bag for its contribution. The "+all" stood,
crumbling around the edges, in the huge vacant lot that Bryant 3ark had
become until the city, embarrassed by the screams of rage from the 3ark
Association, tore doZn the structure at its oZn—or rather at its ta[payers'—
e[pense.

The Bi-Centennial Celebration did, of course, provide :halen Zith
valuable e[perience in running a public e[position. +e put it to use in
running the 1939 NeZ York :orld's   Fair—Zhich lost $200,000,000.

oZned saddle horses), delicate and colorful gardens (that Zere critici]ed
because people said there Zould alZays be enough room in NeZ York for
private gardens). Then, his vision completed as he Zanted it, Olmsted had
fought Tammany for a decade to preserve it, his health and spirit breaking
in the fight. Finally ousted as 3ark Commissioner after a series of
Zorsening nervous breakdoZns, he had had to Zatch hordes of Tammany
laborers tear the ivy from the Arsenal Zalls, "clean up" his beloved
"Zildernesses," sZeep moss and ferns out of all the rocky crevices Zith
house brooms and hack doZn thousands of trees and shrubs along Fifth
Avenue so that park strollers could better vieZ the mansions being built
there. And, in 1932, Central 3ark shoZed the ravages of the si[ty years of
neglect that had folloZed Olmsted's ouster.

The park's laZns, unseeded, Zere e[panses of bare earth, decorated Zith
scraggly patches of grass and Zeeds, that became dust holes in dry Zeather
and mud holes in Zet. Its Zalks Zere broken and potholed. Its bridle paths
Zere covered Zith dung. The once beautiful 0all looked like the scene of a
Zild  party the morning after. Benches lay on their backs, their legs jabbing

446
at the sky. Trash baskets had been overturned and never righted; their
contents lay Zhere they had spilled out. The concrete had been stripped off
drinking fountains so completely that only their rusting iron pipes remained.
And nine out of every ten trees on the 0all Zere dead or dying.

The red brick of the Arsenal at Fifth Avenue and Si[ty-fourth Street had
been stuccoed over and painted, and Zhen the stucco had flaked aZay, the
bare spots had been repainted in Zhat Zas supposed to be the same color
but Zasn't. The building's turrets, Zhich had made it so quaintly medieval,
had been covered Zith striped Zooden cupolas, Zhich Zere supposed to
make it gay, but the Zood had broken and caved in and had never been
repaired. The ground floor Zas used as a park department garage; the three
upper floors Zere used mostly as a Zarehouse to store department records.

Around the Arsenal squatted the tZenty-tZo ancient Zooden animal houses
of the Central 3ark 0enagerie, crumbling aZay beneath their yelloZ paint.
So rotted Zere their Zalls that park department officials feared that a single
charge from a large animal, perhaps maddened by fire, might tear the cage
bars right out of them. Instead of rebuilding the animal houses, the
department had stationed keepers in front of the lion and tiger cages Zith
rifles and had instructed them to shoot the big carnivores if fire broke out.

The 0enagerie Zas filled Zith  surprises. Because it gratefully accepted any
gift that Zould fill  a cage, and people therefore donated their unZanted
family pets, it Zas housing in 1932, alongside the hyacinth cockatoos and
the vulturine guinea foZl, several do]en canaries, and, in a cage betZeen
the mountain lions and the leopards, an Airedale. Because the 0enagerie
did not adequately care for its animals or dispose of them Zhen they greZ
old, its e[hibits included such old pensioners as a senile tiger, a puma Zith
rickets and a semi-paraly]ed baboon. Its most fearsome e[hibits Zere rats,
Zhich roamed it in herds and had become so bold that they Zere stealing
food from the lions' feeding pans. The most vivid memory carried aZay by
many

visitors Zas of the sickening stench that rose from the dung-heaped
Barbary-sheep pen.

447
Almost directly across the park, off Central 3ark :est, Zas Jacob :rey
0ould's  sheepfold, considered by some critics the finest e[isting e[ample
of the full-bloZn  architecture of the mid-nineteenth century, and from a
distance the sheep Zho gra]ed opposite it on the Green or Sheep 0eadoZ,
under the care of a resident shepherd Zho tZice a day held up traffic on the
park's :est  Drive to herd his flock across, made a picture as pretty as
Olmsted had envisioned. But a closer look disclosed that, because for
generations the sheep had been alloZed to inbreed, every one of them Zas
malformed.

8nlovely  as the scenery in the parks might be, there Zas little to do in the
parks e[cept contemplate it. 3rovision for active sports Zas so inadequate
that although Tammany reserved permits for the city's 162 baseball
diamonds for teams Zhich had the blessing of its aldermen—Negro teams
from politically  poZerless +arlem seldom got one—there Zere still 942
teams Zith permits Zaiting to use the diamonds on a typical Sunday.
:aiting   time at tennis courts Zas measured in hours, and the city's one
modern golf course Zas so croZded on Zeekends that, the +erald Tribune
reported, "a player standing on line at daZn is lucky if he gets through his
rounds by sunset."

NeZ York Zas a city of islands, a city surrounded by, permeated by, Zater.
But Zith Orchard Beach and :olfe's  3ond 3ark handed over to Tammany
insiders, the only acquaintance that most of the city's loZer-income
families, Zho did not oZn cars and thus Zere virtually barred from Jones
Beach, made Zith the ocean surf Zas at Coney Island, Zhere a million
people, treading gingerly among broken glass and filth that seemed never to
be cleaned up, jammed the beach so full on a Sunday that one could hardly
see the sand. The beach at Jacob Riis 3ark in the RockaZays Zas used only
sparsely, but there Zas a reason: there Zas no Zay for a family Zithout a car
to reach it, and families Zith cars could reach it only after a tortuous trip.
SZimming in one's oZn neighborhood, moreover, Zas all but unheard of; in
the entire city, there Zere in 1932 tZo tiny outdoor sZimming pools.
Children Zho Zanted to Zade and splash in an outdoor shoZer could Zade
in the gutters after they unscreZed fire-hydrant covers; no one had ever
heard of Zading pools in playgrounds.

448
The men Zho Zorked in the parks complemented the scenery. Even in an
era in Zhich every city department Zas staffed through patronage, the five
borough park departments Zere something special. Recalls one observer:
"You couldn't tell the difference betZeen a park employee and the bums
hanging out in the parks." The Zeight of the rheumy-eyed drunks Zho
served as lifeguards at Jacob Riis 3ark, RockaZay Beach and Coney Island
Zas as e[cessive for their job as Zere their ages. "The first time I saZ those
guys lined up in their sZimming costumes, I could hardly believe it," recalls
Samuel 0. :hite,    Zho Zas later put in charge of them. "Some of them ran
225 or 250 pounds. And there Zere guys there si[ty years old." Even on
summer Sundays, they used the lifesaving dories for fishing. Not all the
lifeguards Zould go out in the dories, of course. Some of them Zere afraid
to; they

didn't knoZ hoZ  to sZim. 3arents Zho took their children to cirv beaches
en Sundays learned not to alloZ them near the shacks on the beach labeled
"First Aid Station.**  The shacks Zere invariably rilled Zith  prostitutes
sleeping off the effects of their Saturday-night parties Zith the lifeguards.
('Those Zhores Zere as unbelievable as the guys." :hite recalls. 'They
Zere some ;: the ugliest Zomen I have even seen."') The aged biddies in
charge of park comfort stations Zere ZidoZs of Tammany Zard heelers and
they understood that no Zork Zas required of them. According to one
reporter: "Some had curtained off all but. say. tZo of the eight toilet
compartments, had imported chairs, tables and hangings into the co]y
space, and frequently had in their friends to afternoon tea." The lady in
charge of the comfort station perched on a rocky bluff overlooking the
0etropolitan  0useum of  Art spent her time there removing much of the
plumbing and then building her-self a co]y little sitting room, in Zhich  she
had installed a grand piano. The chords of a Chopin nocturne startled more
than one Zoman Zho entered the comfort station in good faith.

The Depression ad]]] its oZn  touches to the parks: the shack toZns named,
bitterly. "+ooverviLles."  in Zhich  homeless men sought refuge One of the
largest v\ as a collection of more than tZo hundred hovels of old boards,
flattened gasoline tins and pieces of sheet iron and cardboard in the dried-
out bed of the abandoned Central 3ark Receiving Reservoir behind the

449
0etropolitan  0useum of  .Art: at night its inhabitants ate birds thej caught
in the park's bird sanctuary.

It Zasn't Zhat the Depression did to e[:>::n: parks that most Zorried NeZ
York's reformers, hoZever: they Zere more concerned iboZl its effect on
the city's plans to acquire neZ ones

Nothing Zas more disturbing :: ictutme is than the city's lack of park land.
In 1932. only 14.827 acres, or 7.28 percent of its area, had been set aside
for the recreation of its citi]ens, a percentage smaller than that set aside for
recreation in any of the other ten largest cities in the Zorld or in America.
And almost half the 14.827 acres Zere not really parks but only land
intended for parks: 3^256 of those acres, for e[ample, Zere contained in the
tZo "marine parks" in Brooklyn and Staten Island, and these tZo parks
Zere nothing but utterly undeveloped marshlands under Zater part of each
day.

There Zas least park land, moreover, in those areas that needed parks the
most. For generations, reformers had been attempting to nerve city officials
to buy up tenements, tear them doZn and thereby shatter Zith shafts ;:
sunlight the solid shad shun streets But the difficulties of relocating

tenement families, the veto poZer over city policies e[ercised by poZerful
Tammanv district leaders Zho didn't Zant Democratic voters removed from
their districts, and the lack of Zill to civic  improvement had kept the +ylan
and :alker  administrations B : - - c;a

and Nlitchel administrations, led to the brink seven! :.ntes. had alZays dried
aZav at the last moment because of the sheer enormity of the cost in-

volved. As a result, after nearly a century of agitation for the creation of
"breathing spaces" in slums (0oses' grandfather, Bernhard Cohen, had been
one of the agitators during the i870's), there Zere on the LoZer East Side—
in an area a mile Zide into Zhich Zere crammed more than half a million
people—e[actly tZo small parks, neither of Zhich contained a single piece
of play equipment. :ith   the e[ception of a block-square dirt- and Zeed-
covered vacant lot oZned by the city at Corlears +ook just to the east of
this area, there Zas not another clearing in the Zilderness of tenements

450
stretching aZay from the massive granite piers of the Brooklyn Bridge all
the Zay to Tompkins Square—thirty-one blocks to the north. And if one
stood, atop the 8pper :est Side's high ridge, in 0orningside,  St. Nicholas
or Colonial 3ark and looked doZn to Zhere the ridge fell suddenly into an
alluvial plain once knoZn as +arlem Flats, Zhich in 1932 contained the
city's Spanish, Negro and Italian slum areas, he Zould see nothing betZeen
the end of Central 3ark on 110th Street doZn to his right and the beginning
of Coogan's Bluff at 155th Street doZn to his left but a vast e[panse of the
asphalt gray of streets, the tar-paper gray of tenement roofs and the dingy
brick red of tenement Zalls stretching endlessly eastZard until it Zas at last
mercifully cut short by the East River, an e[panse in Zhich, e[cept for a
poignant hint on the rocky slopes of 0ount 0orris  3ark at 124th Street,
there did not e[ist a single patch of green. :rote one reformer: "In the
Zinter months, Zhen the sun is most needed, it is no uncommon sight to see
herds of children blocking the streets in sections Zhere a little sun has been
alloZed to penetrate because there happen to be a feZ loZ buildings on one
side of the street."

If slum children could not have parks, reformers had pleaded, at least let
them have the tiny, pathetic, chicken-Zire-fenced, cinder-paved substitute
knoZn as playgrounds. But in 1932, after generations of such pleading,
there Zere only four playgrounds on the LoZer East Side and tZo
playgrounds in +arlem. In all Brooklyn, there Zere only thirty-si[
playgrounds. In all NeZ York, a city Zhich in  1932 contained
appro[imately 1,700,000 children under tZelve years of age, there Zere
only 119, or one for every 14,000 children.

"Children's gardens" in playgrounds Zere the only places in Zhich most
slum children could engage in that most precious of childhood activities:
digging. So feZ Zere the playgrounds—and their "gardens"—that they
could accommodate no more than a handful of those Zho Zanted to use
them. 3layground supervisors made children stand on line Zith their pails
and shovels until a spot in the gardens Zas open, and the lines Zere so long
that most of the little girls and boys could see at a glance that they Zere
unlikely to get a turn. 0ost of  them stood on the line anyZay; childhood,
after all, is the time of hope—and there Zas, after all, little else for them to
do.

451
Reformers had at least hoped that the difficulty of obtaining park land in
areas of the city that had already been built up had taught city officials the
necessity of reserving land for parks in other areas before they Zere built
up. But all during the 1920's, as they Zatched Zith horror, the city alloZed
developers to devour its open spaces Zithout making more than a feZ
gestures

in this direction. Before the reformers' eyes, the red bricks that had Zalled
out the sun in the LoZer East Side and +arlem Zere cemented into place on
the hills and meadoZs of the Bron[ and 4ueens. "It looks as though all
sunshine Zill soon be croZded out and dark shadoZs take its place," one
reformer Zrote in despair.

:hile   campaigning for mayor in 1925, Jimmy :alker   had promised to
spend money lavishly to renovate Central 3ark. And no one could accuse
him of a complete breach of faith. For not four hundred yards beyond the
Si[ty-fifth   Street Transverse Road Zhich formed the northern border of the
0enagerie, visible from the Barbary-sheep pen Zhen Zinter stripped the
leaves from the park's trees, Zas dramatic evidence that, in at least one
location in Central 3ark, :alker   had more than kept his Zord. Not four
hundred yards beyond the Transverse Road stood the Central 3ark Casino, a
legend in its time.

The Casino Zas the brain child of restaurateur Sidney Solomon, front man
for a cabal of socialites and Tammany officials Zho felt the need, as :alker
euphemistically put it, of a sanctuary in Zhich they might "entertain visitors
Zithout being molested." +e asked the 0ayor to let him establish one in the
Casino, a loZ, rambling brick-and-stone building that had been built in the
park in 1864 as a "Ladies Refreshment Salon" and had since been turned
into a quiet little night club.

:alker   oZed Solomon a great debt. The restaurateur had introduced him to
his favorite tailor. ThroZing out the night club's previous oZner, the 0ayor
turned it over to Solomon—for a rental of $8,500 a year, a sum Zhich
turned out to be equal to one night's receipts.

"The Casino Zill be our place, 0onk,"  :alker   reportedly said to his
mistress, Betty (0onk) Compton. (0rs.  :alker's   place Zas apparently

452
Florida, the state to Zhich she had been packed off for an e[tended
vacation.) Although Solomon retained the celebrated Viennese interior
decorator Josef 8rban, Zho announced that he Zould strive for "a feeling of
Zind among young leaves," none of 8rban's sketches Zas e[ecuted until
Jimmy and 0onk approved. The 0ayor,  Zhose disregard of city affairs Zas
legendary, dedicated himself to making the Casino perfect in every detail.
:hen   it had been renovated—at a cost to Solomon and his backers of
$365,000—and the restaurateur Zas about to announce its opening, :alker
noticed that one of the bandstands blocked the headZaiter's vieZ of the
main entrance and thus deprived him of time to screen his guests and decide
hoZ important they Zere and Zhere to seat them. +e insisted that a neZ
entrance be constructed— and it Zas, at a cost of $22,000.

:hen   it opened, the Casino Zas hailed by one Zell-qualified observer as
"the sZankiest restaurant NeZ York has yet seen." The dining pavilion Zas
silver and maroon; the ballroom, e[cept for 8rban's floZing golden murals,
all black glass; the dayroom fumed knotty pine. Emil Coleman's popular
society orchestra played in the pavilion, Leo Reisman's in the Black and
Gold Room. Spelling the orchestras Zere tZo pianists, the famous Nat

BrandZynne and a handsome youngster, unknoZn, on Zhom Solomon had
decided to take a chance: Eddie Duchin.

But the Casino Zas more than a restaurant or a night club. The Casino Zas
Jimmy :alker's  Versailles. Friends joked that the 0ayor spent more time
there than he did at City +all. :hen  his limousine pulled into vieZ,  the
doorman Zould scurry inside and signal the orchestra, so that Zhen Beau
James and Betty entered, it Zould be to strains of ":ill  You Love 0e  in
December?" +olding hands Zith Betty, sipping champagne Zhile she
sipped beer, the 0ayor Zould receive the parade of visitors to his table Zith
careless ease, and sometimes, Zhen Betty asked him to dance, he Zould
even arise, pinch-Zaisted and slim in the tu[edo Zith the shiny lapels that
people Zere beginning to copy, and glide Zith her around the floor, and the
0ayor's friends Zould  knoZ that he Zas feeling very good indeed, for
although he Zas so graceful a dancer that he had once Zanted to be a
professional, for years before he met Betty he had refused to dance a step,
for reasons he never told anyone.

453
The regulars at :alker's court played their parts Zell. They brought their
oZn champagne, their chauffeurs cooling it outside in the Rolls-Royces
lined up along the dark paths until the doorman signaled that another bottle
Zas Zanted at table. Their Zives and girl friends croZded around the
bandstands so Reisman and Coleman and BrandZynne could autograph
their slippers. Their spending Zas in character; one insurance man alZays
announced his arrival by handing a thousand-dollar bill to the bandleader.
At closing time, the bills fluttering doZn  onto the hat-check girls' little
silver trays seemed to one observer to be mostly hundreds. Reisman and
Coleman Zere offered fabulous fees to play on after closing at private
homes, and Zhen the society croZd discovered Duchin, there Zas no limit
to their generosity; a member of the Grace steamship family once paid him
$20,000 to play at a party. The Depression? :hat Depression? "8ntil La
Guardia came in, Ze never had a losing day, panic or no panic," Solomon
Zas to say. And in a duple[ upstairs retreat, closed to the public, its very
e[istence concealed by the building's loZering mansard roof, Tammany
politicians Zere entertained by BroadZay chorus lines—rushed to the
Casino en masse by motorcycle escort. And all the Zhile, in a small
adjoining office, its Zalls covered Zith  green moire and its ceiling Zith
gold leaf, its heavy door carefully soundproofed, :alker held court for
favor seekers and politicians, and it Zas there, insiders said, that much of
the city's business Zas transacted.

0oses' attention had been draZn back to NeZ York even before the
Depression. Reali]ing in 1926 that city officials Zere not folloZing  through
on promises to plan a neZ 4ueens road netZork to feed the Long Island
parkZays he Zas building, he had, during a solid year of conferences, all
but begged the officials to Ziden 4ueens, Northern and Conduit boulevards
and other major east-Zest thoroughfares in Brooklyn and 4ueens, to link
4ueens Boulevard Zith the Northern State 3arkZay, to make good on the
promise given to him in 1924 and Ziden the tZo-mile stretch of Central

Avenue, the narroZ Zinding farm road that Zas the only route to the
Southern State 3arkZay. Disturbed that Bron[ and :estchester residents
could reach his Long Island parks only by driving doZn into 0anhattan and
across the 4ueensborough Bridge, he had persuaded Al Smith to urge a
start on construction of the long-talked-about "triborough" bridge.

454
But in 1932, si[ years later, not even a start had been made on building
these thoroughfares (Zith the e[ception of 4ueens Boulevard, on Zhich
Zork Zas proceeding so desultorily that its completion Zas noZhere in
sight), and the farms that in 1926 could have been acquired cheaply for the
right-of-Zay  had become subdivisions the city could no longer afford to
buy. Central Avenue Zas still unZidened; si[ years after the opening of the
most modern highZay in the 8nited States the only approach to it Zas still
a farm road. And as for the Triborough Bridge, the ring of the pile drivers
hammering in its foundations after 0ayor :alker   had broken ground on
October 25, 1929, had a distinctly holloZ undertone, for Zhile city officials
Zere proclaiming that NeZ York's traffic problems Zould be largely solved
on the day that cars could speed up its mighty ramps, 0oses Zas asking the
project's chief engineer, a Tammany hack Zho had entered city service in
1886 as an a[man, Zhere the cars Zere going to go Zhen they came doZn
— and Zas learning that no one had thought to plan even a single approach
road at any one of the bridge's three termini. And upset as 0oses Zas at
that, he soon reali]ed that it Zas likely to be of no consequence. October 25,
1929, Zas a Friday, the Friday after "Black Thursday," the day of the stock-
market crash. The pro[imity of the tZo days proved significant. The city's
$5,400,000 initial allocation, largely Zasted on e[travagant condemnation
aZards, counsel fees and other items of Tammany graft, ran out after the
:ard's  Island piers had been built, and the city Zas prevented by the
Depression from raising any additional funds for the project; in 1932 it had
been at a complete standstill for tZo years.

0oses' plans for NeZ York Zere not confined to 4ueens. The city's
prestigious 3ark Association, inspired by his Long Island Zork to attempt
again to save the city's fast-disappearing open spaces, had formed the
0etropolitan  3ark Conference and made him its chairman. Assigning
selected State 3arks Council staffers to city problems (Zithout the
knoZledge of the Legislature, of course), he furnished the reformers Zith
the ingredient their efforts had been lacking: the e[pertise of engineers,
landscape architects, draftsmen and surveyors e[perienced in park Zork.
There Zere plenty of ideas for park acquisition floating around the city;
some had been floating around for decades. NoZ 0oses firmed up these
ideas, made them concrete, codified them in terms that enabled the
reformers to present specific demands to the :alker administration.

455
And 0oses gave the reformers something as valuable as his organi]ation.
+e gave them his vision. No sooner had he become chairman of the
0etropolitan  3ark Conference than he began driving endlessly around NeZ
York. The big black 3ackard that had once been pulled up in the yards of
Long Island farmhouses Zas parked noZ at the edge of the lonely marshes
on the shore of Jamaica Bay; in the empty, rocky fields on a deserted Bron[

peninsula knoZn as Ferry 3oint; and at the spot on Riverside Drive to
Zhich, tZenty years before, he had taken ta[icabs Zhile he Zas conceiving
his great highZay along the +udson. And Zhile his chauffeur Zaited in the
car, he Zas Zalking around, Zith the same long, restless strides Zith Zhich
he had covered Long Island, lost in concentration, occasionally making
sketches on a yelloZ legal note pad.

On February 25, 1930, before five hundred civic leaders gathered in the
Grand Ballroom of the +otel Commodore for the 3ark Association's annual
dinner, Robert 0oses, dressed in tu[edo and black tie (tied by 0ary), rose
to his feet and tugged a cord Zhich dramatically pulled the drapery from a
huge map of NeZ York City hanging behind the dais. Running across the
map Zere heavy red lines. One, Zhich started in Brooklyn at the Brooklyn
Bridge, ran along the borough's Zestern and southern shores, skirting
Jamaica Bay, and then, in 4ueens, headed north along the city's eastern
boundary. The shore-front portion, 0oses said, Zas a "0arginal
Boulevard"—he had not yet named it the "Belt 3arkZay"—Zhich Zould
provide a quick circumferential passage around Brooklyn. The portion that
ran north along the city boundary Zas a "Cross Island 3arkZay." A third of
the Zay up its length, it crossed and linked up Zith the Southern State
3arkZay. TZo-thirds of the Zay up, it crossed and linked up Zith the
Northern State and Zith the proposed Grand Central 3arkZay. And at its
end Zas a bridge—a "Ferry 3oint-:hitestone  Bridge," he called it, not yet
having named it the "Bron[-:hitestone"—that   Zould  enable motorists to
speed across Long Island Sound. And then . . .

The audience's eyes folloZed the pointer in 0oses' hand. At the northern
end of the Ferry 3oint-:hitestone  Bridge Zas another line, heading
northeast to link up Zith the +utchinson River 3arkZay that he had already

456
built in :estchester  County almost as far north as the Connecticut border.
This, 0oses said, Zas a "+utchinson River 3arkZay E[tension."

The audience, most of Zhose members had been concerned for years about
the city's traffic problems, grasped at once the significance of Zhat 0oses
Zas shoZing them. If the 0arginal  Boulevard, the Ferry 3oint-:hitestone
Bridge and the +utchinson River 3arkZay E[tension Zere built, they saZ,
motorists Zould be able to leave 0anhattan Island on the Brooklyn Bridge
and then proceed over broad modern roads, unhindered by a single traffic
light, all the Zay around Brooklyn to the Long Island parkZays and parks.
In addition, 0anhattan and Brooklyn motorists Zould be presented Zith a
through route to the Bron[, :estchester and NeZ England—and so Zould
motorists from Nassau and Suffolk counties. And, looking at it in reverse,
the Bron[, :estchester  and NeZ England Zould suddenly be brought
Zithin  easy access of the Long Island parks.

0oses' pointer reversed itself, tracing the 0arginal Boulevard backZard
around Brooklyn. :hen   it got to the NarroZs, at a point opposite Staten
Island, it stopped. 3lanners had long dreamed of a crossing betZeen
Brooklyn and Staten Island, 0oses said; the NarroZs Tube had been only
one of several abortive attempts to make that dream reality. NoZ it Zas
time to finish the tube. As soon as it Zas built, it could be linked Zith a
parkZay

system on scenic Staten Island—more red lines rimmed the shoreline there
—and, via a parkZay straight across the island, Zith the Goethals and
Outerbridge Crossing bridges on its Zestern shore. And on the other side of
those crossings, the audience reali]ed Zith a start, Zas NeZ Jersey! 0oses'
plan Zould give the city at last the long-discussed "northeastern bypass,"
the route, so long vaguely dreamed of by planners, that Zould enable traffic
to and from NeZ England and points south of the city to avoid croZded
0anhattan Island and stop jamming its streets, that Zould free 0anhattan
forever from tens of thousands of cars and trucks that flooded into it every
day although it Zas not their destination.

And there Zouldn't be only one bypass route. The pointer flicked back
across the NarroZs and then eastZard and northZard along the 0arginal
Boulevard until it reached its intersection Zith the Grand Central 3arkZay.

457
The Zestern terminus of the Grand Central Zas no longer 4ueens
Boulevard, the audience saZ; noZ the parkZay e[tended ZestZard all the
Zay to the point Zhere the Triborough Bridge Zas supposed to touch doZn
in 4ueens. And from the proposed Bron[ terminus of the Triborough, red
lines radiated out northZestZard along the +arlem River to the SaZ 0ill
River 3arkZay he Zas building in :estchester  County and northeastZard
along Bruckner Boulevard to the +utchinson River 3arkZay E[tension.
These, 0oses said, Zould be other parkZays—and as he said it, the reform
leaders sitting on the dais suddenly reali]ed that the lines behind 0oses
formed a Zhole series of rough but concentric rings that Zould provide a
Zhole series of possible bypass routes around the city and at the same time
Zould make the parks and parkZays 0oses had built on Long Island easily
accessible to any family in the city Zith a car. 0anhattan motorists Zould
be able to drive all the Zay to Jones Beach Zithout ever being sloZed by a
traffic light or intersecting traffic. Turn those red lines on 0oses' map into
concrete, they reali]ed, and motorists in great sections of the city Zould be
largely freed from the trap of local streets in Zhich they had been so long
confined.

There Zere other lines on the map, too. One ran along the Zestern shore of
0anhattan Island all the Zay up to the +arlem River, over the river and up
through the Bron[. If the :est   Side Elevated +ighZay Zas e[tended up
through Riverside 3ark, 0oses said, and if it Zas carried across the +arlem
by the +enry +udson Bridge, and if it then ran north to the city line, its
northern terminus Zould be Zithin three miles of the southern terminus of
the SaZ 0ill  River 3arkZay  the state Zas constructing. If the city built the
parkZay—the "+enry +udson  3arkZay," he called it—he Zould see that
the state e[tended the SaZ 0ill River 3arkZay  south to meet it, and there
Zould be a continuous through route from the bottom of 0anhattan Island
to :estchester County.

A +enry +udson 3arkZay  Zould provide further advantages, 0oses
e[plained. It Zould  give the city a fast, modern route to the George
:ashington  Bridge. On the other side of that bridge Zas 3alisades Interstate
3ark. It Zould no longer be difficult  to reach it. All NeZ  Jersey, in fact,
Zould be opened to motorists from the Zest side of 0anhattan. And if the

458
+enry +udson 3arkZay Zas built  properly and a great park created
alongside it on Zhat Zas noZ the mud flats of Riverside 3ark, the city's
residents Zould not even have to leave the city to find beauty. They Zould
be able to drive along the Zater, the river stretching to one side of them, the
green of the park to the other, above the park the spires of 0anhattan. It
Zould be a public improvement unequaled in the Zorld!

Before he finished talking about parkZays, 0oses said, he had a final point.
The plan he proposed Zas admittedly someZhat ambitious. But it Zas
realistic—and it Zas reali]able. The dream of opening to the residents of
NeZ York Gity the beauty of the lands around it Zas in reach. After all, he
said, much of it Zas already reality. The Southern State, Northern State and
+utchinson River parkZays Zere already built, the SaZ 0ill   River 3arkZay
begun. 0uch of the rest of it Zas begun: the State Council of 3arks Zas
committed to building the SaZ 0ill   River 3arkZay and +utchinson River
3arkZay e[tensions; at least a start had been made on the Tri-borough
Bridge and the :est  Side +ighZay. All  that needed to be done Zas to knit
these elements together.

NoZ, he said, he Zanted to discuss parks. +is listeners, Zho had noticed
that the park along the +enry +udson 3arkZay Zas colored green on the
map, saZ that much of the land bordering the other parkZays 0oses Zas
proposing Zas also green.

All along the parkZays, he said, there should be small parks. The parkZays'
right-of-Zay  itself should be "ribbon parks" similar to those along the
parkZays on Long Island. Obtaining the necessary land Zould be easy
along much of the 0arginal Boulevard and Cross Island 3arkZay, and
along all the parkZays in Staten Island, because the areas these parkZays
ran through Zere still largely undeveloped and land there Zas cheap. It
Zould be e[pensive to buy land along some of the other parkZays. But it
Zas never going to become cheaper. It Zould only become more e[pensive.
It should be bought noZ.

The larger green areas on the map, he said, represented larger parks.
Specifically, he said, they represented a substantial portion of the last areas
of natural beauty remaining in the city. The corridor parks he Zas proposing
in eastern 4ueens, for e[ample, running roughly along the route of the

459
proposed Grand Central 3arkZay, represented the last undeveloped portions
of the heavily forested hills of the glacial moraine. The parks he Zas
proposing along the north shore of Jamaica Bay represented the last chance
to preserve from commercial e[ploitation the bay's Zild marshes and
abundant animal and bird life. The park he Zas proposing on the meadoZs
at Flushing Bay represented the last chance to preserve a portion of that bay
from development. These parks, he said, should be purchased at once. +is
engineers had compiled estimates of their cost, and it Zas $30,000,000. A
bond issue for that amount should be authori]ed at once by the Board of
Estimate. Admittedly it Zould  take a hard fight to persuade the Board to do
Zhat had to be done. +e invited the people listening to him to join in that
fight.

The reformers stood ur md cheered Zhen 0oses had finished, but the
reaction of city officials Zas someZhat less satisfying. For all the
cooperation he roeci n cd from them he ~ : v. r.ill have :::n the starry-eyed
idealist of 1914 arguing in the language of a Yale bull session for the
construction of mothers' shelters in Central 3ark-

"The teak :: ha plana Zas too big for them. Not one city official, he Zould
recall, seemed capable of comprehending a highZay netZork on the scale
he had proposed—a fact Zhich Zould not have been surprising even if the
officials had been men of vision, since no highZay netZork on that scale
had ever been proposed for any city in America, or, for that matter, aoj : .:;•
in the Zorld.

The scale of the money involved Zas too big for them. The total cost Zould
obviously be in the hundreds of millions of dollars, and they felt there Zas
no sense in the city even considering such an amount.

hat the city officials could comprehend about 0oses" plan they didn't like.
The relocations involved for his highZays Zould be on a scale almost
unknoZn in the city: the :hitlock    Avenue approach to the Triborough
Bridge in the Bron[ Zould  alone require the condemnation of buildings
containing more than four thousand apartments—voters' apartments.

0oses' general plans for his parkZay system Zere turned over for analysis
to city engineers, Zho, sensing the attitude of their superiors, did not rush to

460
begin Zorking on them. Try as he Zould. 0oses could not get the city to
move on them. And once the Depression began to tighten its hold on NeZ
York, there Zas no longer much sense in trying to get the city to move. In
1932, the city had not even begun seriously considering any of the park-l he
had proposed at the +otel Commodore dinner tZo vears before.

:alker's  administration did agree in 1930 to issue $30,000,000 in bonds to
buy neZ park land. In 1930, the city acquired 2.530 acres that Zould be
knoZn as Great .ills  and :illoZbrook    parks on Staten Island; +ighland,
.Alley 3ond and .issena parks in 4ueens: and OZl's +ead 3ark in
Brooklyn. But, by the end of that year, it Zas becoming apparent that the
city's people had needs even more pressing than the need for parks, even if
there had still been any market for the bonds that had to be sold to buy
them. In 1932, Zith only $4,000,000 of the S30.000.000 spent—and e[actly
one tenement-area park acquired—even most reformers Zere agreeing that
acquisition of park land Zas a lu[ury that NeZ York Zould  have to
postpone to some other, happier, decade.

:hen   Roosevelt, under 0oses* prodding, agreed to fight the Depression
Zith a state public Zorks program of unprecedented si]e, 0oses saZ the
agreement as a chance to make the city move. The state had never spent any
money on roads in NeZ York City, but 0oses persuaded Roosevelt to
authori]e the state's Temporary Emergency Relief Administration to pay the
construction costs of the Grand Central 3arkZay and the Central Avenue
linkup Zith  the Southern State 3arkZay, and of another. "Inter-borough,"
parkZay, long proposed but never built, that Zould provide

NeZ York City Before Robert 0oses 345

access into and out of central Brooklyn. The city Zould have to pay only for
the right-of-Zay. The Legislature, having learned the inadvisability of
giving 0oses an opportunity to drive the opening Zedge for a project that
Zould later turn out to cost many times Zhat he had estimated, gave 0oses
only $5,000,000, payable at the rate of a paltry $1,000,000 per year. All
other e[penses, the bill provided, must be paid by the city. But in the city
0oses had no political leverage. The Board of Estimate kept delaying
approval of the route, the allocations for right-of-Zay kept getting involved
in endless snarls and at the end of 1933 0oses could look back and see that

461
it had taken him as long to build a total of tZo miles of the parkZay
projects in 4ueens as it had taken him to build tZenty-tZo miles of the
Southern State 3arkZay.

Roosevelt's successor as Governor, +erbert +. Lehman, deeply respected
0oses. Says one man Zho served as an adviser to both: "Roosevelt saZ
Jones Beach in terms both of people sZimming and in terms of the political
gains that could come from those people sZimming. +erbert Lehman
thought only of helping people to go sZimming and be happy. And he felt
that no one could do that job better than Robert 0oses."

:ithin   a month after Lehman took office in January 1933, he handed to
0oses even more poZer than Roosevelt had given him. In 1932, Congress,
at 3resident +oover's request, had created the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation to help self-supporting public Zorks projects. Lehman set up a
State Emergency 3ublic :orks  Commission to screen such projects and
determine Zhich should be submitted to :ashington, and named 0oses its
chairman. This post gave 0oses the poZer to get Zork under Zay on his
huge park and parkZay plan for the Niagara Frontier; a Niagara Frontier
Bridge Authority Zas established, received $2,800,000 in federal funds and
constructed bridges that linked both the north and south ends of Grand
Island, near Buffalo, to the mainland. A Thousand Islands Bridge Authority
built the international bridge to Canada. 8nder his direction, a NeZ York
State Bridge Authority Zas established to purchase—through agreements
he negotiated—the Bear 0ountain Bridge from the +arrimans and its other
private oZners. A Saratoga Springs Authority began refurbishing and
e[panding the spa. Negotiating in :ashington Zith  the RFC, 0oses
obtained funds for the 3ort of NeZ York Authority to construct the Lincoln
Tunnel and for the city to construct +illside, .nickerbocker  and other
housing developments. And he persuaded 0ayor O'Brien to ask the
Legislature to establish a Triborough Bridge Authority that could issue its
oZn bonds, secured by toll revenues, and that Zould therefore be eligible
for aid from the neZly formed federal 3ublic :orks   Administration,  and the
3:A   granted a $44,200,000 combination loan and grant to the Authority on
condition that the city make certain additional token contributions. But
hardly had the Tammany-controlled Authority gotten its hands on the first
installment of the grant than it bleZ it on inflated condemnation aZards and

462
counsel fees; in addition, the city proved unable to make even the first
installment of its token payment. The 3:A  thereupon cut off funds and
announced that no more Zould be forthcoming until the city paid up and the

Authority cleaned up—and in 1933 there Zere no immediate prospects of
either development.

In vain, 0oses pointed out to the Board of Estimate that the money the
TERA and 3:A   Zere prepared to spend in NeZ York Zould create vast
improvements in the city—at virtually no cost to its ta[payers. In vain, he
pointed out that the money Zould put thousands of hungry men to Zork for
salaries that Zould feed their families. Such considerations Zere not of
interest to the Tammany-dominated Board. And those that Zere of interest,
0oses, outside the city's poZer structure as he Zas, could not offer them.

All through 1933, the city's financial situation Zorsened. In 0ay, City
Comptroller Charles :.  Berry informed 0ayor   O'Brien that the city Zould
be unable to pay $100,000,000 in short-term revenue notes coming due in
June. The bankers agreed to e[tend the notes only after the city agreed to an
almost doubled interest rate and budget cuts so stringent that they made it
all but impossible for the city to keep its physical plant in repair. And,
despite the e[tension, in September Berry told O'Brien that the city Zould
be unable to meet its October 24 payroll.

After nine days of frantic meetings in Zhich a Zorried Governor Lehman
participated, the bankers agreed on September 27 to further e[tensions —
after the city agreed to accept even more stringent repayment provisions,
and to balance its 1934 budget.

The city's Zorries Zere still not over. It required legislative authori]ation to
meet the bankers' demands, but the Legislature's Republican majority saZ
the city's plight as a lever they could use to pry various concessions from
Lehman, and a long, tense bargaining session ensued. Not until October 18,
just si[ days before the city Zould, by all common business definitions,
enter a state of bankruptcy, Zas the authori]ation given. And a look ahead
Zas hardly reassuring. The amount of short-term revenue notes coming due
in the ne[t tZo years Zas $500,000,000.

463
Nevertheless, in the summer of 1933, 0oses Zas convinced that events
Zere moving for, rather than against, him. For during that summer, over a
period of several Zeeks, he Zas convinced that he Zas going to get a
chance personally to move the city—as its ne[t mayor.

NeZ York's reformers considered 0oses one of them.

The Old Guard of reform vieZed him almost paternally. DarZin James and
+enry 0oskoZit]    liked to tell anecdotes about his Zork for them on the
0unicipal  Civil  Service Commission. +enry +. Curran, Fusion candidate
against +ylan in 1921, remembered 0oses as secretary of his campaign
committee. Joseph 0. 3rice, a Zealthy dress manufacturer and chairman of
the City Club's board of trustees, remembered him pleading earnestly in the
City Club lounge for the club's support for the e[ecutive budget proposal.
And Richard Spencer Childs, Zho had made 0oses secretary of his NeZ
York State Association, delighted in telling friends (inaccurately): "I am the
man Zho gave Bob 0oses his first job."

Other, slightly younger, reformers—men in their fifties like Stanley Isaacs
and Raymond Ingersoll—considered 0oses a comrade-in-arms. And he
Zas nothing less than an idol to many of a neZ generation of reformers,
including si[-foot  five-inch, blond and blue-eyed NeZbold 0orris,  a Yale
graduate Zho at thirty Zas president of the Silk Stocking Fifteenth
Assembly District Republican Club; college professors like :allace S.
Sayre, tZenty-eight, of NeZ York 8niversity,  and Adolf A. Berle, Jr., thirty-
eight, and Joseph D. 0cGoldrick, thirty-tZo,  of Columbia; and young
e[perts in public administration like Rufus E. 0cGahen, thirty-nine,
secretary of the Citi]ens 8nion, and 3aul Blanshard, forty-one, director of
the City Affairs Committee of NeZ York,  Zho Zere spending enough
evenings studying legislative bills and debating municipal policy in the
lounges of the City Club and Citi]ens 8nion to prove that the Tammany
vieZ of man Zas still, as one historian puts it, "only partially valid; men are
moved by things other than just narroZ self-interest."

The attitude of the reformers toZard 0oses Zas understandable. Not only
had he fought in so many causes in Zhich they believed; he had triumphed.
Reformers Zho had learned through bitter, repeated e[perience the
difficulty  of translating ideas into realities Zere almost in aZe of his success

464
in doing so. Lillian :ald   of  the +enry Street Settlement Zrote him: "0ay I
. . . tell you hoZ profoundly I admire your genius in designing the parks and
procuring them for the community." "+is . . . administrative
accomplishment at Albany," Rufus 0cGahen said, Zas "ama]ing."

The reformers didn't knoZ the details of those triumphs. They Zere not,
after all, on the inside of state government, Zhere 0oses' poZer plays had
been e[ecuted, and they kneZ nothing of his methods. If there had been a
change in Robert 0oses, none but a handful of them had even an inkling of
it, and those Zho had seen glimpses of the change had, like Childs, been
charmed into forgetting them by a 0oses Zho needed their continuing
support. They attributed 0oses' arrogance to brilliance, his impatience to
]eal.

0oreover, reformers, more than slightly addicted to a black-and-Zhite vieZ
of morality and life, tended to classify all government officials as either
"politicians," Zho  Zere in public service for poZer and money, Zho put
those considerations ahead of the common good and Zho had debased

politics into a someZhat questionable Zay of making a living; or as "public
servants," Zho Zere "nonpolitical" and therefore good. And they had no
doubts about Zhich class 0oses belonged to. As a Bureau staffer, no
reformer had been more scornful of practical politicians than he. +is Zell-
publici]ed refusal to accept a salary for his services, coupled Zith his
frequent denunciations of patronage and of favoritism in contracts and
condemnation aZards, convinced reformers, since they had no reason to
question his sincerity, that his vieZs had not been changed just because he
had obtained poZer. "The principle is the important thing," he had Zritten.
They thought he still believed that. "+igh purpose," Richard Childs Zas to
tell the author. "And ability. And not interested in getting something for
either the boys or for himself—utterly selfless in all of it. That Zas hoZ I
thought of 0oses."

+is brilliance Zas legendary among them. In the field of public
administration, they agreed, his mind Zas unequaled in suppleness and
inventiveness. Lillian :ald   Zas not the only reform leader Zho used the
Zord "genius" in describing 0oses. One reformer Zho maintained a certain
detachment about reformers because he Zas at home not only in the paneled

465
board room of the City Club but also in the bare-Zalled clubhouses of
Brooklyn's Fourth Assembly District—Zhere he had proved himself a
canny practical politician by ousting the old-line Republican boss and
installing himself in his place— Zas 3aul :indels.   Says :indels:  "Those
people [reformers] could get a little starry-eyed sometimes, and at that time
they Zere very starry-eyed indeed about Bob 0oses. They saZ in him a
man Zhose ideals Zere just as high as theirs and Zho had in addition
qualities Zhich enabled him to accomplish things of revolutionary
magnitude in the public sphere. The younger men there, and some of the
older ones, too, to tell you the truth—they idoli]ed that man. They seemed
to consider him the Beau Ideal of Zhat the reformer should be. And to tell
you the truth, I thought I Zas a pretty shreZd cookie —and sometimes I felt
the same Zay."

0ore  practical considerations also recommended 0oses to them as a
candidate. First, there Zas the immense favorable publicity he had received.
This Zas no candidate respected in the councils of reform but unknoZn to
the public; this Zas a candidate about Zhose virtues the public had been
educated for years. 0ore important, there Zas 0oses' relationship Zith Al
Smith. The BroZn Derby Zas still the most popular figure in the city.
:hen,   early in 1933, a doZntoZn Tammany club had begun circulating
petitions urging him to run for mayor, it collected more than 200,000
signatures in one Zeek before Smith issued a statement categorically
refusing to make the race. The Fusion leaders kneZ hoZ Smith felt about
0oses. If 0oses  ran, they believed, Smith Zould either break Zith
Tammany and support him or, at the least, remain neutral. And either of
those stands, they believed, Zould result in a mass Democratic defection to
0oses, a defection essential to victory in a city in Zhich the party
registration of enrolled voters Zas almost four to one Democratic.

Before the Fusion Conference Committee began meeting in 0arch

I933> 0oses Zas contacted by City Club board chairman 3rice, Zho had,
as chairman of the legendary Committee of One +undred and Seven, been
the prime mover behind John 3urroy 0itchel's nomination in 1913, and
Zho Zanted noZ to play the same role for 0oses. 0oses assured 3rice that
he Zould accept the Fusion nomination if it Zas offered to him. As soon as

466
Seabury turned doZn a reneZed offer of the nomination, 3rice brought
0oses' name before the Fusion Committee and received an almost
unanimously favorable response.

But Seabury had not been present at the meeting. And Seabury's opinion of
0oses Zas markedly different from that of other reformers.

+e didn't like him. Opinionated as Zell as dedicated, Seabury Zas
accustomed to deference Zhen he presented his vieZs (reformers fondly
called him "the Bishop" because of his pontifical air, although they Zere
careful to do so behind his back), and deference Zas not 0oses' strong suit.
In 1932 the tZo men had had a bitter confrontation in Al Smith's Fifth
Avenue apartment Zhen Seabury attempted to Zin the e[-Governor's
support for a City Charter revision that Zould determine membership on the
City Council on the basis of proportional representation and Zould
therefore encourage minority parties and help end Tammany's domination
of the council. Seabury and 0oses, a foe of proportional representation, had
argued for hours before Smith, Zho, ill Zith a severe cold, Zas propped up
in bed, too hoarse to speak. E[actly Zhat happened at the confrontation is
unrecorded, but 0oses says, "+e [Seabury] didn't stand up very Zell. +e
didn't seem to have his stuff [facts] at all. It Zas a very, very painful
session."

0ore  than personality differences lay behind Seabury's hostility to 0oses,
hoZever. Its root lay in the judge's hostility to Tammany +all— and in his
conviction that 0oses' election Zould alloZ  Tammany to retain control of
the city.

A direct descendant of "Speak for Yourself, John" and 3riscilla Alden of the
0ayfloZer,  Zhose ancestors included Samuel Jones, "the Father of the NeZ
York Bar," and a long line of distinguished Episcopalian clergymen, Samuel
Seabury had, even as a boy studying in his father's library Zith the portraits
of a do]en famous ancestors peering doZn, stern and patrician, on his Zork,
been markedly aZare and proud of this lineage of laZ and righteousness,
and determined to live up to it.

+e Zas an idealist. In his youth an adoring disciple of single-ta[
philosopher +enry George, he Zas elected at the age of tZenty-one

467
president of the 0anhattan Single-Ta[ Club. At tZenty-four,  he gave up his
oZn nomination as Citi]ens 8nion  3arty candidate for the State Assembly
to play Sancho 3an]a in that most gallant of all the Don 4ui[ote rides of
NeZ York politics, George's mayoralty campaign of 1897. (:hen  that
impossible dream Zas ended by George's death less than a Zeek before
Election Day, Seabury folloZed on horseback behind the casket—adorned
Zith Zhite  roses and the inscription "3rogress and 3overty"—as the body of
his idol Zas borne through the streets of the city Zith half a million citi]ens
Zatching

and the hats coming off as the cortege approached and the Zhisper going
through the great croZds: "8ncover, uncover.")

And his idealism had a target. All his life Samuel Seabury stalked the Tiger.
:hile   still  in his teens, he took to the street corners—and Zas stoned by
Tammany hooligans—as he spoke against Tammany candidates as an
independent Democrat. As a young laZyer, in love Zith the laZ, he hated
the Tammany-controlled judges Zho turned NeZ York's courts into
instruments of politics rather than justice. Representing, in a hundred cases,
men unjustly accused by police Zho took orders from Tammany and
unfairly tried before judges Zho took orders from Tammany, he kneZ the
bitterness of a hundred unjust defeats.

Just as his idealism grated against Tammany, so did his ambition, Zhich
Zas also strong. +is bearing and a rare, stern eloquence made him stand out
among the croZd of young reformers. :inning  a plurality that for a
Citi]ens 8nion  3arty candidate Zas unprecedented, he Zas elected a judge
over his felloZ men at the age of tZenty-eight. Soon his fairness and
firmness aZed even his Tammany colleagues on the City Court into
assigning him the most difficult cases. +is prematurely Zhite hair, parted in
the center, his ruddy comple[ion, his floZing black robes, his pince-ne]—
and his bearing—made him a striking figure on the bench. +e needed no
gavel to quiet spectators, a biographer Zrote—"+is mien alone served to
silence the courtroom." +e sat through one long case, according to the NeZ
York :orld,   "as if his face had been carved out of stone." At thirty-three, he
Zas elected to the State Supreme Court, at forty-one to the Court of
Appeals, at forty-three he Zas running for Governor.

468
Tammany ordered its braves, in voting for the Democratic state ticket, to
ignore the man at its head, and he lost.* +e hoped the nomination Zould
come his Zay again in 1918, but that Zas the year Silent Charlie 0urphy
saZ that it Zas handed to Al Smith. Embittered, Seabury retired to private
life and a series of monumental legal fees and for more than ten years kept
silent on public issues until, suddenly sZooping out of the past to take on
Tammany +all in 1930, he revealed that prosperity had not blunted his ]eal
for reform and that he Zas still a man against the machine.

There Zas no telling hoZ far Seabury might have climbed in politics if he
had become Governor. The terminus he had in mind Zas the :hite +ouse
—in 1932, on the strength of the publicity he received from his
investigations, he authori]ed the launching of a try for the Democratic
presi-

* Another element in his defeat—Zhich took place in 1916—Zas Theodore
Roosevelt. TR, Zhose 3rogressive 3arty had joined reform Democrats in
support of Seabury's run for the Court of Appeals, persuaded Seabury to
resign from the bench and run for Governor in the first place, promising to
support him against the GO3 nominee, Charles S. :hitman. But after
Seabury had Zon the Democratic nomination, Roosevelt, breaking his
Zord, rejoined the GO3 and commanded the 3rogressives to back
:hitman.   (Seabury paid a visit to Sagamore +ill. Roosevelt started to say
something, but Seabury interrupted. "0r. 3resident, you are a blatherskite!"
he said, and stalked out.)

dential nomination—and the hatred for Tammany that had been ignited by
his idealism Zas fueled by the Zreckage the Tiger had made of his
ambitions. 0uch of  his bitterness centered on Al Smith: :hile  most other
reformers felt that Smith had risen above the organi]ation, Seabury felt, as
he had alZays felt, that Smith had simply put a respectable smile on the
face of a tiger that Zas as voracious as ever. If anything, he felt, Smith Zas
more inimical to the public interest than the depredations of the most
corrupt Zard leaders, because his popularity provided them Zith protective
coloration. And, of course, it Zas Smith Zho, by Zinning five  times in a
roZ the Democratic gubernatorial nomination, had insured that Seabury
Zould not be able to folloZ the gubernatorial road back to the public eye.

469
"+e had a real conviction about Smith," 0oses told an intervieZer. "It
amounted to an actual hatred. +e felt that Smith had prevented him from
being Governor and if he had been Governor he Zould have been 3resident.
Seabury hated the Governor, really hated him." By 1933, Zrote a Seabury
biographer, "his anti-Tammany stand Zas not merely a cause. It Zas a
mania." The narroZness of his perspective made him feel that the most
significant fact about 0oses Zas that he Zas Smith's protege. If 0oses
became mayor, Seabury thought, the e[-Governor Zould have an
opportunity to move Tammany quietly back into control of City +all.
Reform's great opportunity to cleanse the city, the opportunity he had given
it, Zould be lost.

:hen   Joseph 3rice, folloZing the Fusion Conference Committee meeting,
told Seabury its members Zere for 0oses, Seabury refused to approve the
choice. And he strongly hinted—he Zould "reserve all personal liberty of
action" Zas the Zay he put it—that if the committee nominated 0oses, he
Zould enter his oZn candidate in the race. Recalling his oZn feelings,
0oses said later: "Nobody could be elected Zithout Seabury. :ith  Seabury
on his side, anyone running on a Fusion ticket could have Zon that year.
:ithout   him—no, it  Zould have been absolutely impossible to Zin." 0oses
issued a statement saying: "I am not a candidate for the Fusion nomination
for mayor and should not accept the nomination if it Zere offered to me."
The Fusion leaders agreed that Seabury's support Zas crucial. And even if
they hadn't felt that Zay, they Zould have been reluctant to go against his
Zishes. They began looking for other candidates. 3rice drafted an angry
statement of resignation from the committee. "The best equipped and most
able man considered for the Fusion nomination, a man fearless and
independent, Zas objected to by Judge Seabury upon the narroZ-minded
reason that he is a close friend of Alfred E. Smith, the most popular man in
NeZ York City," the statement said. "The Fusion Conference itself Zas
practically unanimous for 0r.  0oses. . . ." But 3rice Zas persuaded to
ZithdraZ  his resignation, to leave unpublished his statement—and to join
Zith the rest of the committee in a search for another candidate.

Five reformers Zere to be offered the nomination during the hectic Zeeks
that folloZed.

470
But these Zere men to Zhom politics Zas something more than an avenue
for the reali]ation of personal ambitions. TZo of the five—judges—

said that they Zere happy being judges; a third, a business e[ecutive,
preferred a career in private life to one in public. And if they did have
political ambitions, they subordinated them to principle. Raymond
Ingersoll, fifty-eight, a Zealthy respected social Zorker Zho had served as a
park commissioner in the 0itchel administration and as a campaign
manager in Smith's 1924 gubernatorial campaign, Zanted to be mayor but
Zas afraid his health Zould not alloZ him to do the job properly, and so he
declined the nomination. Then Seabury and 0aurice 3. Davidson, chairman
of the City Fusion 3arty, taking a room in the +otel Commodore to avoid
reporters, offered the nomination to Nathan Straus. :rote Davidson: "I
remember hoZ he came into the room; slim, Zell-groomed, and hoZ he
removed his gloves, laid doZn his hat and cane, and hoZ delighted he Zas
Zith the offer, and hoZ he said 'nothing has occurred in my lifetime or
Zould ever occur Zhich Zould  bring me greater happiness than the
opportunity to serve as mayor of the City of NeZ York, but I ask forty-eight
hours to consider.' :e met again several days later, and he said that he had
discussed the matter Zith some of his advisers and had decided to decline. .
. . The ill-fated star of Adolf +itler  Zas rising. . . . JeZs Zere accused by
+itler  of endeavoring to encompass the control and government of the
Zhole Zorld.  Ridiculous and absurd as those charges Zere, Nathan Straus
refused to accept a nomination for 0ayor at a time Zhen +erbert Lehman
Zas Governor because it might give credence in some quarters to 0r.
+itler's charges. +e felt that in the interest of the Zelfare of his oZn people
of the JeZish faith and in order not to handicap the success of the reform
movement in NeZ York it Zas up to him to subordinate any and all personal
ambition in the interests of the public good and he, too, therefore declined."

There Zas a politician Zho Zanted the nomination, Zanted it desperately.
"Fiorello +.  La Guardia Zas standing in the Zings—not standing, but
moving around very, very rapidly," Davidson Zas to Zrite. "+e Zould  send
for me every once in a Zhile and say, '+oZ are you getting on?' . . . +e
Zould say, ':ell,   Zho's your latest mayor?' and I Zould tell him. +e Zould
jump around and shake his fist and he'd say, ':ell, there's only one man

471
going to be the candidate, and I'm the man. I'm going to run. I Zant to be
mayor.' "

La Guardia, a nominal Republican too liberal for most Republicans, had
already lunged for the pri]e tZice before. In 1921, president of the Board of
Aldermen, he had sought the nomination from the Fusion committee of
Zhich 0oses  Zas secretary, but the reformers had turned instead to +enry
Curran, one of their oZn, and Zhen La Guardia ran against Curran in the
Republican primary, he had failed to carry a single borough. In 1929, the
Little FloZer  had received the Republican nomination, and the only
remarkable aspect of his campaign against Jimmy :alker, then at the height
of his popularity, Zas the si]e of his defeat: failing to carry a single
assembly district, La Guardia received only 367,675 votes to :alker's
867,522. Then, in 1932, after five terms as a congressman from Latin East
+arlem, Zhere he had constructed an aptly named personal Italian-
American

political machine—the Gibboni (apes)—La Guardia had been defeated by a
Tammany hack. Out of a job at the age of fifty, branded a loser, only by
Zinning the mayoralty could he resuscitate a political career that seemed to
be gasping out its last breath.

La Guardia possessed qualifications for making the run beyond the fact
that, half JeZish and half Italian, married first to a Catholic and then to a
Lutheran of German descent, himself a 0ason and an Episcopalian, he Zas
practically a balanced ticket all by himself. Campaigning for mayor in
1929, he had made charges—many of the city's magistrates Zere corrupt;
e[cept for Al  Smith, "there isn't a Tammany politician that Zould care to
have his bank account e[amined"—that the city had thought e[aggerated
until the Seabury investigations, Zhich began just a month after the
election, had proved that most of them Zere understatements. As the Tin
Bo[ 3arade sZung into full  stride, the Times commented that La Guardia
Zas the only man Zith the right "to stand up in NeZ York City today and
say: 'I told you so.'"

But La Guardia, son of immigrants, raised in tenements, possessor of
neither a high-school nor an undergraduate college degree,* Zas from a
different background than the reformers, and this Zas not an unimportant

472
point Zith them. The members of the Fusion Conference Committee, and
much of that segment of NeZ York for Zhich the committee spoke, Zere, as
one of La Guardia's biographers put it, "educated at the best colleges,
financially secure, eminent in the professions and business, and primarily
old-stock American 3rotestant but also significantly JeZish. . . . The fusion-
ists came, in short, from Gotham's gentry." And the attitude of many of
them Zas, if not bigoted, at least parochial. "They preferred one of their
oZn kind as 0ayor  or at least a type more like themselves" than the
sZarthy little Italian-American.

La Guardia's personal style Zas screaming, ranting, fist-shaking and more
than a little irresponsible. (Learning that a family had been burned to death
Zhile the mother tried unsuccessfully to telephone the Fire Department, he
insinuated that the telephone company Zas guilty of murder. Testifying
before a legislative committee on rent controls, he said, "I come not to
praise the landlord but to bury him.") These men Zho distrusted e[cess
distrusted him. And he did not hesitate to play melting-pot politics, to Zave
the bloody flag, to appeal, in one of the seven languages in Zhich he could
harangue an audience, to the insecurities, resentments and prejudices of the
ethnic groups in the immigrant district he had represented in Congress. ("I
can outdemagogue the best of demagogues," he told one aide. "I invented
the loZ bloZ,"  he boasted to another.) +is naked ambition for high office,
his cockiness, truculence and violent temper—Zhile he Zas president of the
Board of Aldermen, Curran once had to restrain him physically from
striking the City Comptroller—repelled them.

473
* +e had earned an LL.B. from NeZ York 8niversity  LaZ  School by
attending classes, mostly in the evening, from 1907 to 1910.

Furthermore, although the reformers considered themselves liberals, their
definition of the term Zas decidedly pre-Depression, and La Guardia Zas
far too liberal for them. A NeZ Dealer before the NeZ Deal, he made a
career for himself as a leader of the have-nots against the haves—and they
Zere haves. +is efforts in Congress might have made him, in his
biographer's Zords, "the plumed knight of organi]ed labor," but organi]ed
labor, militant, aggressive organi]ed labor, Zas not precisely Zhat
reformers had in mind Zhen they spoke moist-eyed of the Zorking man. La
Guardia lashed out, moreover, at the city's businessmen Zho Zere Fusion's
financial cornerstones, charging, Zithout offering proof, that big property
oZners Zere receiving loZ assessments on their property. :hen in 1929 he
attempted to falsely persuade voters that he Zas a Fusion as Zell as a
Republican candidate, the Citi]ens 8nion replied Zith a statement
characteri]ing him as an opportunistic, e[citable, unpredictable radical.
0any  reformers, La Guardia's biographers say, Zere happy that his ouster
from Congress had apparently put an end to "an obno[ious career propelled
by unstable and dangerous ambitions." The fact that in 1933 La Guardia
Zas "the only professional Republican politician in the city Zho could
dramati]e both himself and an issue" did not move them. 0oreover,
Republican leaders detested this Republican Zhom they considered a
radical. They flatly refused to accept him. Seabury, Zhile not committing
himself, noted that La Guardia Zas an e[cellent campaigner; the judge
Zanted to Zin. But every time La Guardia's name Zas brought up, it Zas
greeted Zith open hostility by most other members of the Fusion
Conference Committee. Running out of candidates, they began again to
lean to 0oses. 3rice asked him to reconsider his ZithdraZal. Seabury began
pushing more strongly for La Guardia, possibly because he saZ him as the
only remaining viable alternative to 0oses, but on July 26 3rice took an
informal telephone poll of the Fusion Conference Committee. The vote Zas
eighteen for 0oses, five for La Guardia. 0oses agreed to let 3rice present
his name again. +e felt that Seabury, confronted by the fait accompli of the
nomination, Zould not split the movement and Zould back him.

474
The Fusion leaders felt the same Zay. A meeting of the committee Zas
scheduled for the folloZing afternoon at the LaZyers Club, 115 BroadZay,
at 3 p.m. A room Zas reserved. Reporters Zere alerted that an important
announcement Zould be made. Everything Zas in readiness to offer 0oses
the Fusion nomination for 0ayor of the City of  NeZ York. As late as noon
on July 27, 0oses must have felt confident that he had it.

But at noon on July 27, three hours before the meeting Zas to convene,
Seabury invited Davidson to lunch at the Bankers Club and demanded the
nomination for La Guardia. :hen  Davidson told him that the committee
had decided to give it to 0oses, Seabury struck the table Zith his clenched
fist so hard that dishes rattled loudly in the suddenly hushed dining room.

"You sold out to Tammany +all," the judge shouted. "I'll denounce you and
everybody else. You sold out the movement to Tammany +all." Leaving his
guest at the table, he strode out of the dining room to the

elevator. Davidson, remonstrating, folloZed, but Seabury, in the elevator,
turned and said, "You sold out. Goodbye"—and the door shut in Davidson's
face.

Striding back to his office, Zhich Zas located at 120 BroadZay, directly
across from the LaZyers Club Zhere the Fusion Committee Zas to meet,
Seabury issued a statement broadly hinting that he Zould run another ticket.
The Fusion leaders, reali]ing that they had miscalculated, began to search
frantically for a neZ candidate. 0oses, learning of these developments by
telephone from 3rice, told him that he didn't Zant his name placed in
nomination.

In an attempt to placate Seabury Zhile not alienating the Republicans, Zho
still refused to nominate La Guardia, the committee nominated independent
Democrat John F. O'Ryan, former member of the City Transit Commission.
The reporters covering the Fusion meeting ran across BroadZay to
Seabury's office to learn his reaction. Seabury hardly kneZ O'Ryan—and
since he kneZ his ignorance Zas shared by the voters, he believed O'Ryan
could not Zin. Seeing by noZ a tiger behind every bush, the Judge told the
reporters that this Zas the reason O'Ryan had been nominated. Tammany, he
charged, had forced Republican leaders, some of Zhom "have long been the

475
oZned and operated chattels of Tammany +all," to nominate a Zeak
candidate. O'Ryan ZithdreZ for the sake of unity. A neZ "harmony
committee" Zas formed. It included not only Seabury but the one man Zho
could match him in prestige among the reformers, Charles Culp ("CC")
Burlingham, Zho at eighty-tZo still  had the gift of making men forget their
differences and remember their common cause. :hen Seabury began to
roar "sellout" during one harmony committee meeting, Burlingham said,
"Sit doZn, Sam, sit doZn." :hile    the other members goggled at hearing the
Bishop called by his first name, he sat doZn. And after midnight on August
4, CC persuaded the committee members, Zith the e[ception of 3rice and
Davidson, Zho held out for 0oses to the last, to authori]e Seabury to call a
Zaiting La Guardia and tell him the nomination Zas his.

The reform movement of NeZ York City had Zanted Robert 0oses for
mayor. Of all the influential reformers, only one had been firmly opposed to
him. Given the almost certain success in 1933 of a Fusion ticket headed by
so popular a candidate, it is hardly an overstatement to say that only one
man had stood betZeen 0oses and the mayoralty, betZeen 0oses and
supreme poZer in the city. But that man had stood fast; at the last moment,
as 0oses must have felt the pri]e securely Zithin his grasp, it Zas denied
him.

During the first tZo months of the mayoral campaign—Zhich had been
turned into a three-Zay race by the entry, Zith support from 3resident
Roosevelt, James A. Farley and Bron[ Boss EdZard J. Flynn, of anti-
Tammany Democrat Joseph V. 0c.ee—0oses declined to participate. +is

visceral hatred of Roosevelt had been intensified by his philosophical
antipathy to the 3resident's social Zelfare policies, Zhich he referred to in
private as "socialistic." And the liberal La Guardia, Zho as a lame-duck
congressman had introduced in early 1933 several bills favored by the
incoming administration, Zas identified in 0oses' mind Zith  the NeZ Deal.

But tough-minded reformer-politician and key Fusion strategist 3aul
:indels,   believing in late October that La Guardia's campaign Zas losing
momentum and needed a lift, asked Raymond Ingersoll to ask 0oses to
endorse the Little FloZer.

476
0oses agreed. :ith   less than tZo Zeeks remaining before Election Day, he
suddenly abandoned his role as bystander. And his entry into the campaign
had an impact even more dramatic than :indels had foreseen. For 0oses'
radio speeches and printed statements burst above the murk of the city's
political battlefield like  a Roman candle Zhose sparkle, coming from a
shoZer of glittering, sharp-pointed barbs flung off by a graceful and Zitty
malice, Zas both hard and brilliant.

Assailing Tammany and its mayors in a radio broadcast, 0oses urged voters
to remember "the strange characters they have seen occupying the places of
Judge Gaynor and John 3urroy 0itchel in City +all—+ylan,   the ranting
Bo]o of BushZick;  :alker,   half Beau Brummel and half guttersnipe, and
John 3. O'Brien, a Zinded bull in the municipal china shop." Is it any
Zonder, he asked, that younger voters, Zho could not remember a non-
Tammany mayor, "must think of the great office of Chief 0agistrate Zith
derision and contempt?"

As for the Farley-Flynn candidate, 0oses said, he Zas a "pious fraud"
Zhose attempt to portray himself as a reformer Zould forever be knoZn in
the city's history as "the strange interlude of '+oly Joe' 0c.ee."  Electing
0c.ee   mayor, and thereby giving poZer to Farley and Flynn, Zould bring
to City +all  only "another kind of Tammany."

"Do you think," he asked, "that the Currys, 0cCooeys, Farleys and Flynns
are in any essential respect different from the 0urphys, 0cCooeys,
0cCabes and 0cCalls  of the cartoons of a generation ago? Do you think
that the 0cCooey of today, Zho is the last living link  betZeen these tZo
dynasties, is not the same old 0cCooey of the early 1900's? Let the
younger voters ask the older voters this question. There can be no doubt of
the ansZer."

Each of 0oses' statements had its oZn sharp bite. "The Great Statesman
0c.ee,"   he said in one, "is a synthetic character Zhich never actually
e[isted on sea or land, puffed up by the press . . . and noZ in the process of
deflation. There's a large amount of unfairness to the individual in this
process, but in the end it arrives at the truth."

477
And each statement contained praise for La Guardia couched in a prose that
had to it a ring that sounded all the clearer above the dull clangor that is
political strife in NeZ  York. "No one has ever questioned your
independence," 0oses told the Little FloZer in a public statement. "You
have no strings on you. You are not engaged in an obscure struggle for the
con-

trol of a rotten political machine. You are free to Zork for NeZ York City.
Go to it."

"0oses' statements Zere no small help," 3aul :indels  recalls. "+is support
of La Guardia did more than any other single thing, I think, to give the
impression that La Guardia did mean to give the city an independent
administration." 0oses' statements Zere front-paged, Zhile others' Zere
buried ne[t to the bra and girdle ads. And their value Zas further enhanced
because neZspapers gave their readers the impression that he Zas speaking
not only for himself but also for someone Zhose name Zas even more
potent a political force in the city than his. Al Smith had not been able to
bring himself to back either of his party's candidates. All during the election
campaign the press pressed the +appy :arrior for a statement. :hen it Zas
not forthcoming, reporters dreZ conclusions from 0oses' statements.
3ointing out that 0oses Zas "one of Alfred  E. Smith's closest friends," the
:orld-Telegram  said that his endorsement of La Guardia "has invoked a
poZerful, if  silent, reinforcement to help La Guardia Zin." 0oses, Zho Zas
not speaking for Smith, tried to dispel the impression that he Zas. But La
Guardia's advisers did all they could to foster that impression. :hen 0oses
Zas introduced to the croZd at a climactic Fusion rally at 0adison Square
Garden, the band played "The SideZalks of NeZ York." Before beginning
his prepared speech, 0oses said: "I have no desire to appear on this
platform under false colors, much as I appreciate the implications involved
in the instructions to the band. I do not come here as an emissary of my
distinguished friend and former chief, Zho remains, in the affections of the
people, the first citi]en of this city." But at the end of 0oses' speech, the
band struck up the same tune.

:ithin   a Zeek after the votes Zere counted, La Guardia invited 0oses to
join his administration. :hether   he had promised, through Ingersoll, to do

478
so in order to obtain 0oses' support—the making of such a deal might
e[plain 0oses'  sudden decision to break his silence on the campaign—is
unknoZn; but there Zere plenty of other e[planations for the invitation.

Some of the e[planations Zere rooted in personality. Fiorello La Guardia
had an affection for his city. +is Zife recalls that Zhen, after tZelve years
of trying, he finally became its mayor, "it Zas like he oZned the 8nited
States. Nobody should do anything to it." :ith  his romantic temperament,
he Zanted to beautify the city. +e had a grand—if vague—conception of a
metropolis Zhose citi]ens Zould pass their daily rounds in surroundings
that uplifted the spirit. "Too often," he once said, "life in NeZ York is
merely a squalid succession of days; Zhereas in fact it can be a great, living
adventure." And he thought of such beautification primarily in terms of
public Zorks. "+e  liked physical accomplishment," recalls 3aul J. .ern, La
Guardia's first laZ secretary at City +all. "+e liked  to get things built for
people; on Sundays, Ze used to drive around the city trying to think of
things that should be built in the city."

La Guardia admired men Zho built. LaZyers, to laZyer La Guardia, Zere
bad. +e often remarked that a laZyer Zas like a prostitute: a man hired a
prostitute to use her body and he hired a laZyer to use his brains and
knoZledge of the laZ. And, he Zould say, he didn't knoZ but that the man
Zho hired the prostitute got the better of the bargain. Engineers Zere good.
"Engineers fascinated him," recalls Joseph D. 0cGoldrick, his Comptroller.
"LaZyers Zere alZays getting in his Zay, telling  him things he couldn't do.
La Guardia didn't like people Zho told him Zhat he couldn't do. But
engineers could do things. They got things built for people." Says .ern:
"+e stood like a child in front of  the simplest engineering feat." La
Guardia's favorite evening Zatering hole Zas the Engineers Club at 32 :est
Fortieth Street, Zhere he Zas an honorary member. Reuben La]arus, Zho
often Zatched him sitting in the club bar listening raptly to the club's non-
honorary members talk about their achievements, says, "Engineers Zere his
gods." And, although he hardly kneZ 0oses, 0oses' achievements
especially aZed him. +e told :indels   that he had, more than once, driven
over the Long Island parkZays "for inspiration."

479
Other e[planations for La Guardia's invitation to 0oses Zere rooted in
politics.

La Guardia had Zon Zith only 40 percent of the vote; he Zas still a
Republican in a Democratic toZn, a Republican Zho had been enabled to
Zin largely because Democratic votes had been split betZeen O'Brien and
0c.ee.   +e could not count on another split, or on another Fusion-boosting
Seabury investigation, in 1937; he kneZ that his political future depended,
as one of his biographers has Zritten, "on his giving NeZ Yorkers the
spectacularly good government he [had] promised them."

Specifically, La Guardia had promised to staff the city's government Zith
nonpolitical, nonpartisan e[perts. To the public, Robert 0oses epitomi]ed
the nonpolitical, nonpartisan e[pert. +is appointment Zould prove that La
Guardia Zas keeping his promise. And his immense popularity could not
help rubbing off on the mayor Zho brought his talents to the city.

There Zere other reasons rooted in politics.

La Guardia feared Al Smith. +e Zell kneZ that if  Smith had been running
against him, he Zould not be mayor, and he kneZ Zhat Zould happen if
Smith decided to run in 1937, or even to lend his immense prestige to some
other candidate Zho Zould unify the overZhelming Democratic majority in
the city. 0aking  Smith's favorite a part of his administration Zould do
much to keep the +appy :arrior  happy—and off the Zarpath.

La Guardia kneZ that if he Zas to produce good government in a bankrupt
city, the first requirement Zas money. "You knoZ," he told a reporter
earnestly, "I am in the position of an artist or a sculptor. ... I can see NeZ
York as it should be and as it can be. . . . But noZ I am like the man Zho
has a conception that he Zishes to carve or to paint, Zho has the model
before him, but hasn't a chisel or a brush." The only source of money to
purchase a chisel or a brush of the si]e La Guardia had in mind Zas the
federal government. Its 3resident Zas not of La Guardia's party. +e kneZ

that 0oses had enjoyed great success on Long Island in obtaining federal
funds—and he did not knoZ of the hatred betZeen Roosevelt and 0oses.

480
Furthermore, La Guardia kneZ that a key reason for 0oses' success in
obtaining federal money Zas that 0oses had plans for huge public Zorks
ready at the moment the money became available. To get plans, you needed
first a large staff of engineers trained in building such Zorks. +e kneZ that
the city departments did not have such staffs and he kneZ that 0oses did.
0oses needed La Guardia if he Zas to reali]e his great park and parkZay
plan for NeZ York City—but  La Guardia also needed 0oses.

0oses kneZ it.  To La Guardia's invitation, he replied Zith conditions. "I
told the 0ayor,"  he Zas to recall, "that I Zas not interested in taking the city
job unless I had unified poZer over all the city parks and, even then, only as
part of the unified control of the Zhole metropolitan system of parks and
parkZay development."

"8nified"  Zas the operative adjective. There Zere five separate,
independent park departments in NeZ York City in 1933, one for each
borough, each Zith its oZn borough park commissioner. If the five
commissionerships Zere abolished and all five departments Zere
consolidated into one, 0oses said, he Zould be Zilling to be its
commissioner—if the commissioner's authority Zas e[tended to include not
only parks but parkZays and if he Zas alloZed to keep his state jobs. And
since the key to a unified parkZay program Zas the Triborough Bridge, he
must also insist on control of the independent agency charged Zith the
construction of that bridge, the Triborough Bridge Authority. +e had a plan
to finance construction of a "0arine 3arkZay Bridge"  to the RockaZays:
the plan Zas to create another authority to accept the necessary $10,000,000
federal contribution. +e Zanted control of that authority, too. La Guardia
agreed. The 0ayor-elect could hardly restrain himself from blurting out the
neZs before the arrangement Zas finali]ed. Seated at a dinner party ne[t to
Iphigene Ochs Sul]berger, Zho Zas bemoaning the state of the city's parks,
he told her, "Don't Zorry. I'm appointing the best man in the 8nited States
as park commissioner!" In fact, Zhen 0oses suggested that he himself draft
the bill consolidating the park departments and setting forth the poZers he
Zould possess as NeZ York City 3ark Commissioner, La Guardia had seen
no reason not to agree to that, too. It Zas the first bill submitted to the
Legislature by the La Guardia administration. Neither man considered the
Triborough appointment particularly significant; both still considered the

481
Authority nothing more than a toll-collecting agency that Zould finish
building a single bridge and then go out of business as soon as its cost Zas
paid off. But they anticipated opposition in the Legislature, Zhose
permission Zould be required for a state official to take a city job. The
upstate Republicans Zho Zere the Legislature's leaders felt that 0oses
already possessed too much poZer, and Zould resist giving him more.
Democratic legislators from the city Zould be opposed to his appointment
because of the contracts and patronage it

Zould cost the party. And there Zere philosophical as Zell as personal and
political objections. Concentrating in a single individual authority over both
state and city parks and over most major road-building projects in the NeZ
York metropolitan region Zould give too much poZer to that individual, no
matter Zho he Zas, some legislators said. Furthermore, in his state job, that
individual Zould  be the Governor's appointee; in his city job, the 0ayor's.
If the city's elected officials Zere to veto one of the projects he proposed to
them in his capacity as a city official, he Zould be able to use his influence
Zith the Governor to bring the state's influence to bear on the city officials
to force the city into compliance Zith his Zill.  The situation could also
Zork in reverse. This line of reasoning could be carried on indefinitely, said
one state senator: "No man is big enough to serve tZo masters." This Zas
one reason Zhy there Zas a laZ against the simultaneous holding of state
and city jobs. And, some legislators attempted to remind the public, there
Zere other, equally persuasive reasons. "Dual officeholding," they said,
Zeakened the constitutional provision that the city should be a separate,
independent entity Zithin the state.* There Zould be plenty of legislative
opposition just to his proposed appointment as 3ark Commissioner; there
Zas no sense in letting the Legislature knoZ that La Guardia actually
intended to appoint 0oses to three city jobs, but permission Zas necessary
for him to take each of them. The best bill drafter in Albany told La
Guardia not to Zorry. Buried deep Zithin the bill he drafted—it Zas Section
607, to be precise—alloZing him to accept the park commissionership Zas
the apparently innocuous phrase "an unsalaried state officer shall not be
ineligible to hold any other unsalaried office filled by appointment of the
0ayor."  The camouflage Zorked. 8nsalaried offices generally referred to
meaningless honorary positions; not one legislator appears to have reali]ed
that it could also refer to an authority commissionership.

482
The opposition that boiled doZn from Albany anyZay Zas blasted by the
press—and by reformers Zho normally Zould have been the first to oppose
a violation of the separation of state and city that they had alZays vieZed as
vital, and to oppose giving one man such poZer. They Zere not opposed
noZ because the man Zas the one official they Zere confident Zould not
abuse that poZer. And the reformers had considerable influence over the
Republican legislators from the city. Soon +erbert BroZnell, Jr., already, at
tZenty-nine, not only a state assemblyman but also a partner in a
prestigious :all   Street legal firm, Zas speaking on behalf of the "0oses
bill." Another GO3  legislator from the city, Jay E. Rice, Zas arguing
against

* The courts had alZays emphatically upheld the laZ against dual
officeholding. One memorable case, in fact, had enlivened the political
vocabulary Zith a neZ phrase. In 1924, 0urray +ulbert,  the president of the
city's Board of Aldermen, had innocently accepted membership on the
Finger Lake State 3ark Commission, believing that because the park post
Zas unsalaried it did not fall Zithin the laZ's purvieZ.  But the City
Comptroller, disagreeing, stripped +ulbert of his more important, salary-
paying city job and the courts upheld the action—a circumstance Zhich
thereafter led Albany Zags to refer to any suggestion that a city official be
given a state job as an attempt to give the man "the finger."

BroZnell Zhen, as the +erald Tribune noted, "0r.  Rice Zas called on the
telephone from NeZ York and returned to the Assembly Chamber to
ZithdraZ  his objection." The string-pulling Long Island barons Zho had
come to see 0oses as a friend pulled their strings. La Guardia gave
assurances that the city Zas not surrendering any of its independence. "The
city retains complete control through its properly constituted authorities
over every cent it spends and everything it does." Governor Lehman,
admiring 0oses, sent the Legislature an emergency message to rush the bill
through. Both the 0ayor and the Governor—the tZo most poZerful men in
the state—Zere on 0oses' side. So Zas the most popular; Al Smith publicly
supported the appointment. :hile the press Zas still playing up the pledges
by Tammany legislators to fight the bill to the finish, 0oses kneZ that the
fight Zas already finished— and that he had Zon. :hen  a reporter called
him for comment after one heated debate, 0oses said, "There's nothing to

483
get e[cited about." On January 19, 1934, Lehman signed the "0oses bill."
That same day 0oses joined a line of minor city officials Zaiting outside
La Guardia's office. :hen  his turn came, he entered the office and Zas
sZorn in as NeZ York's first city-Zide  3ark Commissioner.

Tammany's three Triborough commissioners held si[-year terms, but the
financial manipulations of tZo of them had been so blatant that La
Guardia's investigators quickly uncovered them; one resigned and the other
Zas dismissed. On February 4, at 11:57 a.m., a certificate of appointment as
Secretary and Chief E[ecutive Officer of the Triborough Bridge Authority,
signed by the 0ayor, Zas brought to the city clerk's office by one of the
0ayor's secretaries and filed there. The name on the certificate Zas "Robert
0oses." :ith    the appointment to the second vacancy of George V. (the
Fifth) 0cLaughlin,   the bluff, red-faced Brooklyn banker and friend of Al
Smith's Zho had long been 0oses' friend and ally, control of the Authority
Zas his. As soon as it Zas, a neZ bill Zas introduced, providing for the
creation of a 0arine 3arkZay Authority.  Its poZers Zere in general the
same as those of the Triborough Bridge Authority. But there Zas one
innovation. Those poZers Zould not be e[ercised by a three-man board; the
Authority Zould  have only a "sole member." And that member, the man in
Zhom all the poZers of the Authority Zere lodged, Zould  be "the 3ark
Commissioner of NeZ York City." On April  9, Zith  scarcely any debate, the
bill Zas passed by the Legislature and signed by the Governor.

There Zere noZ seven separate governmental agencies concerned Zith
parks and major roads in the NeZ York metropolitan area. They Zere the
Long Island State 3ark Commission, the NeZ York State Council of 3arks,
the Jones Beach State 3ark Authority, the Bethpage State 3ark Authority,
the NeZ York City 3ark Department, the Triborough Bridge Authority and
the 0arine 3arkZay  Authority. Robert 0oses Zas in charge of all of them.

The NeZ Deal's attempts to combat the Depression had apparently already
given NeZ York an opportunity to refurbish e[isting city  parks. +arry

+opkins' federal Civil  :orks   Administration, set up in November 1933,
had 68,000 men Zorking on park clean-up projects in the city by Christmas.
But 0oses and his top Long Island park administrators, driving around to
the parks to see Zhat those men Zere doing, found that the city had given

484
them neither adequate tools, materials, supervision nor instructions. CreZs
Zere laying asphalt roads and paths Zithout adequate foundations—and
even as they laid one section, another, completed a Zeek earlier, Zas
already heaving and cracking behind them from frost action. Si[ thousand
men, assigned to "move ash dumps" in Riverside 3ark, Zere standing on the
banks of the +udson pecking at fro]en cinders; tZo thousand Zere standing
on truck beds on a little reef off Staten Island "building up" the reef by
dumping out sand—Zhich Zas Zashed aZay, at a cost of five dollars per
cubic yard, almost as fast as they could dump it. Fifty-four hundred more
Zere assigned to Brooklyn's 0arine 3ark, purchased during the 0itchel
administration and alloZed to remain undeveloped for tZenty years. 0oses'
engineers sneaked into the cupola of an old mansion in the park so that they
could Zatch the Zork unobserved—and found that there Zas nothing to
Zatch. Spread out over e[panses of sand Zastes and marshlands, in a scene
more reminiscent of a French bivouac during the Retreat from 0oscoZ than
a park reclamation project, all but a handful of the fifty-four hundred sat
huddled around small fires built against the free]ing Zind Zhipping out of
Jamaica Bay. Some Zere passing around Zine bottles held in broZn paper
bags. Others Zere throZing dice. 0ost had no tools—and 0oses' men
understood Zhy Zhen they saZ men chopping up shovels and using their
handles as fireZood. Adding a poignant detail to the scene Zere a feZ men
Zho had kept their tools and Zho obviously Zanted to Zork; they spent
hours "raking" the fro]en ground or building little  fences out of stone they
found in the area, "just so," as one of them Zas later to recall, "I could feel I
Zas doing something to earn my money."

0oses himself spent a lot of time at Orchard Beach, a very loZ, very
narroZ sand bar that linked together the eastern edges of +unters Island and
Rodman Neck, tZo of the little Zooded pieces of land at the eastern fringe
of 3elham Bay 3ark that Zere Zashed by the Zater of Long Island Sound.
+ere, in NeZ York's northeastern corner, so far from any built-up areas in
1934 that visitors could hardly believe they Zere still Zithin the borders of
America's largest city, Zas located NeZ York's most ambitious park project.
:hen   0oses arrived, $346,750 had been spent on bathhouses, a breakZater
and a retaining Zall running behind the sand bar and designed to turn the
bar into a bathing beach convenient to the bungaloZs of the si[ hundred
families, Bron[  Democratic stalZarts all, to Zhom most of +unters Island

485
and Rodman Neck had been leased. The engineer Zho designed the
bathhouses, Zhich Zere constructed of granite paving stones and had cost
$84,000 apiece, had apparently been inspired by the Black +ole of Calcutta;
the only ventilation in the thirty-foot-high buildings Zas provided by a feZ
narroZ slits near the ceilings. The breakZater had been run out into the
Sound through the very center of the beach, thereby splitting it in tZo and

forcing anyone Zanting to get from one half to the other to climb over the
top—Zhich Zasn't easy, since the breakZater designer had neglected to
include steps. But the location of the retaining Zall made reservations about
this splitting of the beach irrelevant. The engineer Zho designed the Zall
had apparently seen the sand bar only at loZ tide; he had placed the Zall so
close to the Zater that, for most of the day, the Zaves lapped right up
against it— and there Zas no longer any beach left to be split.

0oses dispatched teams of engineers to "inventory" NeZ York City's parks
—their acreage (incredibly no one kneZ their e[act si]e), the buildings,
paths, roadZays, statues and equipment in them, the condition of these
items and the type and amount of labor and materials that Zould be required
to renovate them. +e filed this information in a loose-leaf notebook kept
atop his desk. By the time he Zas sZorn in as 3ark Commissioner, the
notebook Zas more than a foot thick, and he had a list of 1,800 urgent
renovation projects on Zhich 80,000 men could immediately be put to
Zork.

But renovation Zas only a small part of 0oses' plan. Day after day during
the bitterly cold November and early December of 1933, Zhile the great
city lay inert in the grip of its long malaise, Robert 0oses Zas being
chauffeured around it in the big 3ackard, +a]el Tappan beside him Zith a
stenographer's note pad open on her lap. TZenty years before, as a young
staffer at the Bureau of 0unicipal Research, Robert 0oses had Zandered
around NeZ York City "burning up Zith  ideas, just burning up Zith them."
NoZ 0oses  Zas not young—one of the days he spent in the big 3ackard
Zas his forty-fifth  birthday—but he Zas still burning. "Sometimes it
seemed to me that his voice never stopped," 0iss Tappan recalls. "Things
just kept pouring out of him. I remember once Ze Zere doZntoZn
someplace and he Zanted to see some underground garage—for sanitation

486
trucks or something —under a city building there to see if it Zould interfere
Zith some plans he had for putting a park on the street near it and Ze
started to go doZn this spiral ramp and it Zas getting darker and darker and
he Zas still dictating. And finally  it Zas almost pitch-black and he Zas still
dictating. To this day I can see it getting darker and darker and that voice
going on and on. 8ntil finally  I had to say, '0r. 0!   0r.  0l  :ait    a minute! I
can't see!'"

By late December, the outline of his ideas for large-scale park construction
projects Zas ready, and noZ, croZded into the 3ackard Zith him and 0iss
Tappan Zere his Long Island engineers. They came in relays. One creZ
Zould drive Zith  him to certain parks—describing these trips, one engineer
echoed Frances 3erkins' Zords of tZo decades before, "Everything he saZ
made him think of some Zay it could be better"—and then that creZ Zould
go back to Babylon and translate his ideas into general engineering plans
Zhile another Zould head out Zith him to other parks.

Relays Zere needed to keep up Zith him. "+is orders just poured out,"
recalls the engineer. "Bam! Bam! Bam! So fast that Ze used to all try to
take them doZn at once so that Zhen Ze got out to Babylon Ze could put
them together and maybe get one complete list of everything he Zanted.
You'd start at daZn—hell, sometimes Ze'd start before daZn; I remember

driving around 0anhattan Zhen everybody Zas still sleeping e[cept the
milkmen, maybe, and the cops on the beats. I remember once a cop really
jumping Zhen that big black car filled Zith  men came around a corner in
front of him—and by late afternoon, I can tell you, your head Zould be just
absolutely spinning. But he'd still be firing things at you." Didn't they break
for lunch? "You didn't break for lunch Zhen you Zere out driving around
Zith Robert 0oses."

Soon the engineers' concepts of his ideas Zere being presented for his
approval.

:ith   feZ  e[ceptions—City +all  is perhaps the most notable—the public
Zorks of NeZ  York City Zere hack Zork designed by hacks. But the men
driving around Zith Robert 0oses Zere not hacks. They included the
unknoZn young architects, landscape architects and engineers—the +erbert

487
0agoons and Earle AndreZses—responsible for Jones Beach and the other
highly acclaimed Long Island parks. And they included 0ajor Gilmore D.
Clarke and Aymar Embury II. Clarke, designer of the Bron[ River 3arkZay
and other outstanding e[amples of highZay beautification, Zas in 1934 the
most famous landscape architect in the 8nited States; he had been in the
process of retiring from public Zork to accept lucrative private assignments.
Embury, an architect, had designed 3rinceton 8niversity's classic Class of
1915 Dormitory and many of Long Island's most beautiful estates—parks in
themselves. In 1934, he had Zaiting for him "more private business
commissions than he could handle in a decade." 0oses persuaded Clarke
and Embury to come to Zork on NeZ York's parks.

As had been the case Zith the famous architects Zho had gathered around
him on the barren sand bar called Jones Beach a decade earlier, hoZever,
some of the men Zith him in the big 3ackard in 1934 had difficulty
grasping the e[tent of his vision. :hen  the plans came in for Riverside
3ark, Zhere, tZenty years before, he had dreamed of a great highZay along
the Zater, a highZay that Zould cover the ugly tracks and cleanse the :est
Side of 0anhattan of the smoke and stench from the trains that ran along it,
they left the tracks uncovered. The engineers told him that to cover them
Zould add millions to the cost of the park development—for Zhich at the
moment there Zas almost no money at all in sight, not to mention the
additional millions that Zould be needed to build the +enry +udson Bridge
across the +arlem River Ship Canal and a parkZay linking the bridge Zith
the SaZ 0ill  River 3arkZay.  0oses told them to Zorry  only about the
plans; he Zould Zorry about getting the money for them.

E[asperated Zith their plans for Orchard Beach, he loaded the architects
into the big 3ackard and drove out onto barren, snoZ-covered +unters
Island.

Standing under Zinter-stripped trees on a little hill that rose out of the
marshes that fringed the islet, he looked across at Rodman Neck, four
hundred yards aZay, at the sand bar, covered noZ Zith a thin scum of ice,
that held them tenuously together, at the Tammany-built breakZater and
+ole of Calcutta bathhouses, and at the si[ hundred private bungaloZs.

366

488
The sand bar Zould never be a decent bathing beach as long as those
monstrosities Zere there, he said. +e Zanted them torn doZn; he didn't care
hoZ much they had cost— tear them doZn! And tear doZn those
goddamned bungaloZs—yes, all si[ hundred of them. +e had been
spending a lot of time Zandering around up here in the afternoons, he said,
and he had decided













j§ +8NTERS  ISLAND

* T:IN    \„  ISLANDS

ORC+ARD  BEAC+

Long Island Sound

CITY ISLAND

Orchard Beach: BEFORE

489
CITY ISLAND

Orchard Beach: AFTER

that the beach should consist of more than just the sand bar. If it e[tended
all the Zay around the eastern shore of both +unters Island and Rodman
Neck, it Zould be almost a mile long and almost crescent-shaped. In fact, if
it e[tended over to the TZin Islands—he pointed to tZo islets to the
northeast separated from +unters Island by tZo narroZ strips of Zater— the
length could be a full mile and the shape of the crescent perfect. +e Zanted
the beach e[tended to the TZin Islands, he said; the strips of Zater couldn't
be very deep; fill them in. And he Zanted the sand on the beach to be
gleaming Zhite ocean sand like the kind at Jones Beach and the Rocka-Zay
beaches, not their present coarse, pebble-filled gray Long Island Sound
sand. The sand could be dredged off the RockaZay beaches and then
brought here by barge, up the East River to the Sound. Behind the beach,
paralleling its mile-long crescent, he Zanted a bathhouse—designed Zith
the same imagination, the same attention to detail, as the bathhouses at
Jones Beach, he said; he didn't Zant it looking like the typical public
bathhouse. But that didn't mean it should look like the Jones Beach
bathhouses, he said; if his men looked around him, they Zould see that the
setting here Zas very different from that at Jones Beach. The setting there
Zas the long, loZ sZeep of sand and sea; here it Zas hills and trees. The
Jones Beach bathhouse had

490
been long and loZ, its lines hori]ontal; the lines here should be more
vertical— perhaps they should start thinking about columns, maybe even a
colonnade. +e Zould leave it to them, but he didn't Zant any of them
forgetting that the function of a bathhouse Zasn't to impress or overaZe; it
Zas to help people have a good time—he Zanted it light, airy and gay. And
for God's sake, he said, use this kind of imagination on the city's other parks
—all the city's parks.

getting those men Zorking on ZorthZhile projects Zas to provide them
Zith plans. Blueprints in volume Zere needed, he said, and they Zere
needed immediately. +e must be alloZed to hire the best architects and
engineers available and he must be alloZed to hire them fast. The C:A
must forget about its policy of keeping e[penditures for plans small to keep
as much money as possible for salaries for men in the field. The agency
must forget its policy that only unemployed men could be hired so that
0oses could hire a good architect even if he Zas Zorking as a ditch digger
or Zas being kept on by his firm at partial salary. And the agency must drop
its rule that no Zorker could be paid more than thirty dollars per Zeek. The
C:A   refused: rules Zere rules, it said. I quit, 0oses said. La Guardia
hastily intervened. After seven days of haggling, the C:A surrendered.
0oses Zas given permission to hire 600 architects and engineers Zithout
regard to present job status, and to pay them up to eighty dollars a Zeek. So
that he could hire them as fast as possible, he Zas even given an emergency
allocation to summon them to intervieZs not by letter but by telegram.

The C:A   capitulated on the morning of January 27. By noon, 1,300
telegrams Zere being delivered to carefully selected architects and
engineers all over NeZ York State, telling each of them that if he Zas
interested in a job, he should report to the Arsenal the ne[t day.

No profession had been hit harder than architecture and engineering.
Engineers Zere particularly reluctant to accept relief. "I simply had to
murder my pride," one said. ":e'd  lived on bread and Zater for three Zeeks
before I could make myself do it." But The Nation estimated that fully half
of all engineers Zere out of Zork—and si[ out of seven architects.

These men had been hiding out in public libraries to avoid meeting anyone
they kneZ, or tramping the streets carrying their customary attache cases

491
although those cases contained only a sandZich. Although the 3ark
Department intervieZs Zeren't supposed to begin on January 28 until 2
p.m., on that day, Zith the temperature beloZ free]ing, Zhen daZn broke
over the city, it disclosed a line of shivering men outside the Arsenal. The
line began at the front door. It Zound doZn the steps, out to Fifth Avenue at
Si[ty-fourth  Street, and along the avenue to Seventy-second Street.

The intervieZing Zent on all day; some of the men Zho had been Zaiting
on line before daZn didn't get into the Arsenal until late afternoon. But for
600 of them the Zait Zas Zorth it.

":hen   you got inside, nobody asked you hoZ much money you had in the
bank or Zhat Zas the maiden name of your great-grandmother," one
architect recalls. "All they asked you Zas: ':hat  are your qualifications?'"
Those Zhose qualifications satisfied 0oses' men Zere hired on the spot,
shoZn to the Arsenal's garage, in Zhich drafting tables had been set up,
handed assignments and told to get to Zork. In the evening, some started to
go home. Those Zhose assignments didn't have to be finished for a feZ
days Zere alloZed to do so; several hundred Zhose plans Zere needed
faster Zere told flatly, "If you go home tonight, don't come back tomorroZ."
:ithout   e[ception, these men stayed, catching naps on cots 0oses had had
set up in the Arsenal's corridors.

Out in the parks, the ragtag ranks of the C:A Zorkers Zere being shaped
up.

0oses had found the men to do the shaping. Out of fear of losing them
permanently to rivals, idle construction contractors Zere struggling to keep
on salary their "field superintendents," the foremen or "ramrods" Zhose
special gift for Zhipping tough Irish laborers into line made them an almost
irreplaceable asset. 3ointing out that the C:A Zas not a rival and Zould
probably go out of e[istence Zhen business improved, 0oses persuaded
contractors throughout NeZ York, NeZ Jersey, 3ennsylvania and NeZ
England to give him their best ramrods, "the toughest you've got." And
Zhen the neZ men arrived, 300 in the first batch, 450 more Zithin tZo
months, his instructions to them Zere equally e[plicit. C:A   Zorkers, he
Zas to say later, "Zere not accustomed to Zork under people Zho drove
them. I see to it that my men do drive them."

492
Arriving  at 0arine 3ark on January 31, neZ superintendent 3ercy +. .enah
ordered the men aZay from their bonfires, and Zhen some moved too
sloZly for  him, fired si[ty-si[   on the spot. The men refused to leave. They
moved threateningly toZard him—and then they noticed that patrol cars
crammed Zith policemen had quietly driven up behind them. On the same
day, Zith patrol cars backing them up, neZ superintendents fired hundreds
of other Zorkers in other parks.

If this method disposed of malingerers and malcontents, it nonetheless
proved difficult to Zhip  the relief Zorkers Zho remained into an efficient
Zork force. 0ost  Zanted to Zork  at the pace demanded but Zere unable to
do so. The suits, overcoats and fedoras many Zore Zhile Zielding shovels
Zere testimony not only to their inability to afford Zarmer Zork  clothes but
also to their lack of e[perience in performing hard physical labor outdoors.
Even in mild Zeather, they Zould have had difficulty. In Zinter, they
suffered bitterly from e[posure. Since their pay Zas $13.44 per Zeek, many
Zere still scrimping on their oZn food so that their children could have
more. "I remember guys just keeling over on the job," one laborer recalls,
"and you alZays kneZ that it Zas just that they had come to Zork Zithout
anything to eat." And they Zere scrimping in other Zays, too. A Zorker at
Dyker Beach 3ark at the southern edge of Brooklyn, Zho had caught a
reporter's eye because "the side of his neck is sZollen and his breath is from
a sick throat," told the reporter that he lived in 0anhattan. Shivering in a
thin overcoat, he said that to get to Zork "I Zalk over four hours. I set the
alarm clock for half past tZo and start Zalking quarter of four." The
reporter asked him Zhy he didn't take a trolley, "Carfare is tZenty cents a
day," he replied.

Some of the neZ superintendents quietly handed quarters to laborers Zhose
inability to keep up Zas due to hunger or frostbite; others fired them. But
none of the ramrods stopped driving. If they did, they kneZ, they Zould be
fired themselves. They Zere, after all, Zorking for a boss Zho, Zhen
questioned about a neZ Zave of firing that almost touched off riots in
several parks, said, "The government and the ta[payers have a right to
demand an adequate return in good Zork, faithfully performed, for the

493
money that is being spent. . . . :e inherited men Zho Zere Zorking Zithout
plan and Zithout supervision. The plans have noZ been made, the
supervision is being supplied, and Ze e[pect the men to Zork."

The Zinter of 1934 Zas the first of five of the most severe in NeZ York's
history. The temperature dropped beloZ ]ero on five different days— on
one day it hit fourteen beloZ—and a steady succession of heavy storms
dumped a total of fifty-tZo inches of snoZ on the city. The mean
temperature for the entire month of February Zas 11.5 degrees. But all
through that Zinter, the residents of the tall apartment houses rimming
Central 3ark could look doZn into the park and see, in the snoZ, thousands
of men sZinging picka[es and shovels, climbing ladders set against trees,
sZarming over scaffolding erected around older structures and building neZ
ones. From behind the park's granite-block Zalls came the pounding of
pneumatic drills, the rumble of concrete mi[ers, the dull roar of steam
shovels and the sharp rapping of hammers.

And to the consternation of those apartment-house residents, this clangor
did not stop at five o'clock. At dusk, thousands of men filed into Central
3ark to replace those Zho had been Zorking during the day, and Zhen the
Zatchers in the apartment houses retired for the night—for nights that they
complained Zere made restless by the noise—they could take a last look
out their ZindoZs and see the picka[es still sZinging in the harsh glare of
hundreds of high-poZered carbide lamps. :hen they aZoke in the morning,
the picka[es Zere still sZinging—and they reali]ed that a third shift had
filed into the park during the night. The Zork Zas going on tZenty-four
hours a day. And from behind the granite-block Zalls of 3rospect 3ark, the
high Zooden fence left around Bryant 3ark from the George :ashington
Bi-Centennial Celebration, and a score of others erected that Zinter by
0oses around other parks, came the same clangor—on the same schedule.
Late in the afternoon of February 22, heavy snoZ began to fall. It continued
falling all through the 23rd, dumping a total of eighteen inches on the city.
But during those days, the rebuilding of NeZ York's parks never stopped.

Sometimes, noZ, the laborers Zere even performing the construction
phenomenon knoZn as "Zorking ahead of plans." By February, there Zere
more than 800 architects and engineers in the Arsenal and they had become

494
accustomed to Zorking fourteen-hour days. But often, after they had
finished a blueprint and it had been approved by Clarke, Embury, AndreZs
or some other supervisor and they rushed it themselves out to the project
site, they Zould find that the Zork creZs had already begun, or finished,
digging ditches for pipes and foundations, or other preliminary Zork, and
they Zould have to sit doZn on the spot and draZ neZ plans to fit in Zith
the Zork that had already been completed. The team of fifteen architects
Zorking at the Arsenal under Embury's personal direction to design a neZ
Central 3ark Zoo—0oses didn't like the name "0enagerie"—Zere,  Latham
recalls, "Zorking [Zhile]  looking  out the ZindoZ  to see Zhat had already
been done." These men, Embury Zrote in ama]ement, "had never seen each
other before beginning Zork." They had to Zork "Zith  little equipment,

croZded together tZo or three to the table, and moved about from one place
to another every feZ days." They completed the plans for the entire neZ
]oo in si[teen days.

Embury and Clarke-themselves, giants of their professions though they
Zere, Zere caught up in the e[citement. Once, going out to lunch together,
they stopped at Bryant 3ark to revieZ the reconstruction Zork, Zhich Zas
already Zell under Zay, and decided they didn't like the plan, already
approved by themselves and 0oses, on Zhich hundreds of men Zere
already Zorking. Over lunch, they began to discuss neZ ideas and sketched
them out on their tablecloth. :hen  they finished their meal, they asked the
head-Zaiter for permission to take the tablecloth Zith them, drove straight
to 80 Centre Street to shoZ it to 0oses and, Zhen he approved, gave it to
another team of draftsmen to translate into blueprints.

By 0arch,  the economy Zas beginning to recover and optimism Zas rising
—along Zith demands from the nation's press, heavily anti-NeZ Deal, that
the government begin phasing out the spending of "ta[payers' money" on
such "socialistic" practices as Zork relief. 0oses had been led to e[pect an
e[tension of the act creating C:A,  but at the last moment Congress
changed its mind, and the agency Zent out of e[istence on 0arch 31, on
forty-eight hours' notice. :ith   only a limited amount of funds from the
Federal Emergency Relief Administration available for park Zork, half of

495
0oses' men Zere abruptly dismissed. But he kept the remaining half
Zorking.

The harshness of the Zinter persisted into April, and every Zeekend Zas
either cold or rainy. But on Saturday, 0ay 1, 1934, the Zeather turned
balmy, and, as they do on the first Zarm Saturday of every spring, NeZ
Yorkers poured into their parks.

Seventeen hundred of the eighteen hundred renovation projects had been
completed.

Every structure in every park in the city had been repainted. Every tennis
court had been resurfaced. Every laZn had been reseeded. Eight antiquated
golf courses had been reshaped, eleven miles of bridle paths rebuilt, thirty-
eight miles of Zalks repaved, 145 comfort stations renovated, 284 statues
refurbished, 678 drinking fountains repaired, 7,000 Zastepaper baskets
replaced, 22,500 benches reslatted, 7,000 dead trees removed, 11,000 neZ
ones planted in their place and 62,000 others pruned, eighty-si[ miles of
fencing, most of it unnecessary, torn doZn and nineteen miles of neZ
fencing installed in its place. Every playground in the city had been
resurfaced, not Zith cinders but Zith a neZ type of asphalt that 0oses'
engineers assured him Zould prevent skinned knees, and every playground
had been re-equipped Zith jungle gyms, slides and sandbo[es for children
and benches for their mothers. And around each playground had been
planted trees for shade.

"Generations of NeZ Yorkers," as the Times put it, "have groZn up in the
firm belief that park benches are green by laZ of nature, like the grass
itself." But noZ, as NeZ Yorkers strolled through their parks, they saZ

that the benches had been painted a cool cafe au lait. Generations of NeZ
Yorkers had believed that the si[ miles of granite Zalls around Central 3ark
Zere a grimy blackish gray. NoZ they saZ that sand blasting had restored
them to their original color, a handsome dark cream. Rare Zas the NeZ
Yorker Zho could remember Zhen the Columbus Circle monument to the
men Zho died in the e[plosion of the 8.S.S. 0aine  in +avana +arbor had
not been dingy, or Zhen the boy standing in the proZ of the monument's
boZ had possessed a Zreath, or, for that matter, hands to hold it Zith. As

496
soon as 0oses had taken office, he had surrounded the monument Zith
scaffolding and concealed it Zith drop cloths. NoZ the scaffolding and drop
cloths Zere removed and the boy had his hands back, and a Zreath Zas in
them—and the entire huge monument behind him had been scrubbed clean
and Zhite. And a thousand plots in the parks, plots Zhich as long as NeZ
Yorkers could remember had contained nothing but dirt and Zeeds, Zere
gay Zith spring-blooming floZers.

By midsummer, neZ construction projects in the parks Zere being
completed. Ten neZ golf courses, si[ neZ golf houses, 240 neZ tennis
courts, three neZ tennis houses and 51 neZ baseball diamonds Zere to be
opened to the public before Labor Day. The 3rospect 3ark Zoo Zas
completely rebuilt and a neZ ]oo erected at Barrett 3ark on Staten Island.
Complete reconstruction jobs Zere done on St. James, Crotona and 0a-
combs Dam parks in the Bron[; OZl's +ead, 0cCarren and Fort Greene
parks in Brooklyn; Crocheron, Chisholm and .issena parks in 4ueens; and
0ount  0orris,  0anhattan  Square and Carl Schur] parks in 0anhattan.

On a sunny Saturday, the fence around Bryant 3ark came doZn and
thousands of spectators in a revieZing stand set up behind the LoZell
Fountain saZ that the Zeed-filled lot had been transformed into a
magnificent formal garden. TZo hundred large plane trees, groZn in 0oses'
Long Island 3ark Commission nurseries, trucked to the city and then lifted
over the fence and loZered into prepared holes by giant cranes, had been
planted along its edges, and their broad leaves shaded graceful benches and
long floZer beds bordered by loZ, neat hedges. The four acres they
surrounded Zere four acres of lush and neatly trimmed grass, set off by
long, loZ stone balustrades and floZer-bordered flagstone Zalks, that
looked all the greener against the grayness of the masses of concrete stores
and office buildings around it. As a neZly formed si[ty-si[-piece  3ark
Department band, outfitted in Zhite duck trousers, forest-green jackets Zith
Zhite belts and Zhite caps trimmed Zith green and gold braid, bleZ a
fanfare, the great-granddaughter of :illiam  Cullen Bryant, the poet and
journalist for Zhom the park had been named, and the sister of 0rs.
Josephine S. LoZell, in Zhose memory the fountain had been built, Zalked
together from the revieZing stand to the fountain, escorted by tZenty
youthful pages and 3ark Department attendants in uniform, and flung

497
handfuls of petals into it. At that signal, Zater gushed from the fountain's
five dolphin spouts for the first time in a decade, and a speaker said that
Robert 0oses had outdone his biblical namesake because Zhile the 0oses
of the Israelites had smote a rock in the desert and brought forth Zater,
0oses of NeZ  York had "smote

the city's parks" and brought forth not only Zater but trees, grass and
floZers. In Central 3ark, 0oses' men restored Olmsted's long-defaced
buildings, replanted the Shakespeare garden, placing ne[t to every floZer a
quotation from the Bard in Zhich it Zas mentioned, and e[terminated herds
of rats; 230,000 dead ones Zere counted in a single Zeek at the ]oo site
alone. :hile   seven hundred men Zere Zorking night and day to build a
neZ ]oo, another thousand Zere transforming the dried-up reservoir bed
that had been called "+oover Valley"—0oses had torn doZn the shanty
toZn there—into a verdant, thirty-acre "Great LaZn," Zere laying flagstone
Zalks around it and planting along them hundreds of Japanese cherry trees.
Then, having satisfied those Zho objected to use of the reservoir bed
entirely for active play, 0oses constructed a playground and Zading pool in
the northeast corner of the bed, outside the laZn's borders, for small
children and a game field in the northZest corner for older children. On the
North 0eadoZ  he built handball courts, Zading pools and thirteen baseball
diamonds. +e deported the deformed sheep and turned the old sheepfold
into a "Tavern-on-the-Green," an old English inn-in-a-park complete Zith
doormen Zearing riding boots and hunting coats and top hats and cigarette
girls in court costumes complete Zith bustles—and Zith the added touch of
an outdoor flagstone terrace on Zhich couples could dance among tables
shaded by gaily colored umbrellas to the music of a tZelve-piece orchestra
costumed in forest green.

And 0oses Zas not merely beautifying the city's parks. +e Zas doing Zhat
generations of reformers had despaired of doing: he Zas creating neZ ones
—in the areas that needed them.

In his first flush of enthusiasm folloZing La Guardia's offer of the park
commissionership, 0oses had believed that by forcing landlords to dump
real estate on the market at a fraction of its former value, the Depression
had given the city at last a chance to acquire and tear doZn slum tenements

498
and use the space thus gained for play space for the slum children Zho so
badly needed it. But then La Guardia disclosed to him the e[tent of the
city's financial crisis and told him that, because of the Depression, even
fractions Zere beyond the city's ability to pay.

"I remember one time he came back from talking to La Guardia and he told
us this," said Bill Latham. "And I remember that he said then—I don't
remember the Zords, really, but the idea Zas: 'All right, then, goddammit,
Ze'll get land Zithout  money.' "

0oses instructed Latham to set his surveyors to making an "inventory" of
every piece of publicly oZned land in NeZ York City, every tract or parcel
oZned by any city department, and to determine, not by asking
departmental officials but by personal inspection, Zhether every piece of
that land Zas actually being used. :ithin  a month, he had learned that on
the LoZer East Side there Zere nine long-vacant strips of land along
+ouston Street that had been acquired by the Board of Transportation to
store equipment during subZay construction but that had been lying idle
ever

since the construction Zas completed, ten elementary schools so old that
they had been abandoned by the Board of Education for years and five
vacant lots that Zere oZned by the 3ark Department itself but that the 3ark
Department had somehoZ not been aZare it oZned. Alongside the
:illiamsburg   Bridge piers Zere pieces of land that had been acquired to
store equipment used in the construction of the bridge and had been lying
idle during the thirty-one years since the construction had been completed.
On the other side of the East River, among other tenements, Zere more
piers —and more pieces of land. In the Red +ook tenement slums,
Brooklyn's version of 0anhattan's "+ell's  .itchen,"  thirty-eight  acres of
land had been purchased for a public housing project, but no such project
had yet begun. Among the flimsy shacks on the Gravesend Bay side of
Coney Island, eight solid blocks of vacant Zaterfront property Zas oZned
by the Dock Department, but the Dock Department had no interest in it.
And throughout all the city's slums Zere scores of small triangular "gores,"
Zhere streets angled together or bits of land had been left over from street-
Zidening condemnation proceedings, that Zere noZ just unnoticed pieces

499
of dirt or concrete and that Zere too small to be used for play but that Zere,
if planted Zith grass and a tree or tZo, large enough to add a touch of green
to the drabness around them. 0oses asked La Guardia to direct the city
Sinking Fund Commission, the body Zhich, under e[isting charter
provisions, held the actual title to all city-oZned land, to turn this land over
to the 3ark Department. Often, the other departments involved objected to
such incursions into their jealously guarded empires—the Tenement +ouse
Commission hastily began draZing up plans for the Red +ook housing
project to prove that construction on it Zas imminent—and sometimes, as
in the Red +ook case, La Guardia sided Zith them. But generally the neZ
mayor backed 0oses. :ithin   four months after taking office, the neZ 3ark
Commissioner had obtained, in slum areas in Zhich there had been no
significant park or playground development for at least half a century, no
feZer than si[ty-nine separate small park and playground sites.

And one that Zasn't small. North from the 0anhattan Bridge, through the
very heart of the LoZer East Side, through an area in Zhich tenements Zere
jammed solidly into every block, stretched a roZ of seven blocks that Zere
completely empty. The "Chrystie-Forsyth Development," as it Zas knoZn
from the names of the streets Zhich bordered it, Zas another monument to
Tammany +all and to one of its judges, Joseph Force Crater. Forty years
later, Judge Crater's mysterious disappearance Zould still be une[plained,
but contemporary speculation linked it Zith the judge's une[plained
generosity to the oZners of the disease-breeding tenements Zhich had
occupied those seven blocks before the city took them over in 1929. Jimmy
:alker   had announced Zith great fanfare that the city Zould ra]e the
tenements and resell the land at cost to private developers Zho Zould erect
on it a "model" housing development. But the astonishingly high
condemnation aZards Crater bestoZed on the oZners made the cost so high
that the private builders Zho had previously e[pressed interest noZ
e[pressed only dismay, and Zhile the ra]ing had been accomplished, the

replacement had not. For more than four years, Zith the lost ta[es and
interest on the aZard (the Depression, of course, prevented the city from
paying it) costing the city almost half a million dollars per year, the tract
had lain betZeen the red brick Zalls that lined it solidly on either side as flat
and featureless as an urban desert. 0oses proposed that it be made an oasis

500
of grass, trees, baseball fields, basketball and tennis courts, Zading pools
and playgrounds. La Guardia, trumpeting "3age Crater!" Zhen reporters
asked Zhy the housing development Zould not be built, agreed.*

:hile   studying the state government for the Reconstruction Commission in
1919, 0oses had learned about "unappropriated state lands." A century
before, to help tide the country over a time of financial uneasiness, the
federal government had made loans to the states, Zhich in turn loaned the
money to individuals Zho pledged farms or other, smaller pieces of
property in cities, as security. Some loans had not been repaid, and the
states thereupon foreclosed. In most instances, the NeZ York State
Legislature later passed bills alloZing the municipalities in Zhich the land
Zas located to "appropriate" it. But not, 0oses had learned, in every
instance. Some of the properties involved had seemed too small to bother
about in an era in Zhich property Zas measured in acres rather than feet,
and as time passed, these pieces of land had simply been forgotten and had
remained "unappropriated." NoZ 0oses sent men to Albany to look up
such pieces—and they found several in areas of Brooklyn that Zere noZ
slums. The city could not afford to buy them, so—hastily, since the
Legislature Zas shortly due to adjourn for the year—he drafted, and got
passed, bills turning this land over to NeZ York City.

One day—Sid Shapiro can recall the moment—0oses suddenly
remembered that in 1922 the State Division of Canals had filled in
sZampland near the GoZanus Canal in Red +ook to provide a foundation
for a grain elevator it Zas building there. And he seemed to recall, he said,
that there had been some land left over. An investigation proved that he Zas
right: there had, in fact, been eleven acres left over. +e had a bill passed in
Albany alloZing  the state to give the land to the city for recreational
purposes.

On another occasion, chatting Zith aides, 0oses suddenly asked, ":asn't
there some kind of fund set up about fifteen years ago for a Zar memorial
that Zas never built?"

There Zas indeed. In 1918, a public subscription had been held to finance
construction of a million-dollar :orld    :ar   0emorial  Arch. But the
subscription raised only $210,000 and the drive's sponsors, already

501
squabbling over Zhich borough the arch should be located in, Zere unable
to agree on details of a smaller memorial and in 1922 turned the money
over to the City Chamberlain's office for safekeeping until the dispute Zas
resolved. It never Zas, and during the intervening tZelve years the
sponsoring committee stopped meeting, and the e[istence of the money,
Zhich the Chamberlain had deposited in banks, Zas all but forgotten—and
Zhen Adolf Berle, appointed Chamberlain by La Guardia, looked for it at
0oses'

* This park is noZ knoZn  as "Sara Delano Roosevelt 3ark.'

request, he found that accumulating interest had sZelled it to $338,395.

The people Zho had contributed the money had intended it to be used for a
Zar memorial. But 0oses persuaded Berle that the definition of "Zar
memorial" could be e[tended to mean ":ar  0emorial  3laygrounds" and he
persuaded the surviving members of the sponsoring committee not to
oppose the use of the money for this purpose, a persuasion made easier by
0oses' agreement that each playground Zould contain a bron]e plaque
honoring the memory of :orld   :ar   veterans—and that there Zould be at
least one playground in each borough. :ith the money, 0oses purchased in
congested areas of the city eight pieces of property big enough for
playgrounds.

+e seemed to see opportunities everyZhere. :hile being chauffeured
around +arlem, he noticed tZo tennis courts belonging to a Roman Catholic
church on 138th Street. Telling his chauffeur to stop, he jumped out, ran
into the church, found the pastor and asked if the courts Zere much used.
:hen   the pastor said they Zere not, 0oses asked him to give them to the
city for a playground, and Zhen the pastor told him that such a gift could be
arranged only through Cardinal +ayes's office, 0oses sent a representative
to see a representative of the Cardinal, and the gift Zas arranged. Noticing a
tZo-acre vacant lot on Eleventh Avenue betZeen Fifty-ninth and Si[tieth
streets, he learned it Zas oZned by the Consolidated Gas Company, Zhich
had no "present plans" for using it, and persuaded the company to give him
a temporary permit to put a playground on the site. In "0iddle 4ueens," the
dreary belt of cemeteries, small single-family homes and shabby little
factories spraZling northeast from the oily Zaters of NeZtoZn Creek, there

502
Zas still one large vacant tract, 127 acres formerly oZned by murdered
gambler Arnold Rothstein. Learning that Rothstein's estate oZed the city
$334,000 in back ta[es, 0oses asked Surrogate James Delehanty if the city
could buy the property if it forgave the back ta[es and paid $68,000, the
difference betZeen the ta[es and the assessed valuation. Delehanty agreed,
but La Guardia Zas not able to find even $68,000 that the city could spare.
0oses recalled that there Zas usually several hundred thousand dollars kept
in a special "emergency account" of one of the more obscure Sinking
Funds. City attorneys informed him that legal restrictions prohibited the
e[penditure of any of this money e[cept on genuine emergencies. 0oses
informed them that if they restudied the laZ, they Zould find there Zas one
e[ception— money could be removed from the fund temporarily for "first
instance" appropriations, appropriations to be repaid out of the ne[t city
budget, for a single specific purpose: the purchase of undeveloped real
estate. But La Guardia, Zhile agreeing that the acquisition of 127 acres for
$68,000 Zas an unprecedented bargain, Zas afraid to obligate the city even
for that amount. So 0oses returned to Surrogate Delehanty and Zorked out
another arrangement under Zhich the city "bought" 74 of the 127 acres for
$334,000 but the estate paid the $334,000 back to the city to clear the ta[
deficiency on all 127 acres, leaving the estate Zith 53 acres free and clear—
and the city Zith a 74-acre "Juniper Valley" park Zhich it had acquired
Zithout a cent of cash outlay.

0oses' charm Zas as poZerful a Zeapon as his mind. Turning it on John D.
Rockefeller, Jr., 0oses persuaded the billionaire to donate several other
pieces of land to the city. +e persuaded his old benefactor August
+eckscher to donate a playground in Central 3ark. :hen he discovered a
Zell-to-do family  Zith  philanthropic leanings but insufficient resources to
buy and equip a playground completely, he brought it together Zith another
family in similar  circumstances—as he did to give the city the Dreier-
Offerman 3layground in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn. Learning that a small
charitable foundation Zas unable to meet mortgage payments on a piece of
property in 4ueens and Zas planning to let it go to the bank by default,
0oses appeared before its board of trustees, several of Zhom Zere directors
of the bank, and talked to them so movingly about the need of slum children
for recreation that they agreed to use the foundation's feZ remaining assets

503
to pay off the small balance remaining on the mortgage—and default
instead on the ta[es, so that the city could take it over rather than the bank.

And as soon as 0oses had his hands on the title to these pieces of land, he
filled them Zith  Zorkmen. By July, the eight :ar   0emorial  3laygrounds
had been finished, by Labor Day, there Zere fifty-tZo others, including the
Chrystie-Forsyth Street comple[, Zhich Zas really a park but Zhich Zas
dubbed "the finest playground in the 8nited States"—and a city Zhich in its
entire history had managed to build 119 playgrounds had seen its stock of
that item increased by 50 percent in a single year.

The city cheered. Its thirteen daily neZspapers, hoZever divergent their
philosophy, united in heaping Zreaths of adjectives on his head. The neZ
3ark Commissioner Zas "dynamic" and "brilliant" in the ultra-conservative
Sun, "able" and "enterprising" in the then ultra-liberal :orld-Telegram,
"tireless," "fearless" and "incorruptible" in the sometimes conservative,
sometimes liberal +earst Evening Journal.

+eadline Zriters, using topical catch phrases, talked of 0oses' neZ

DEAL FOR 3AR.S   and the A0AZING   ACCO03LIS+0ENTS     OF
0OSES' FIRST 100

days. Editorial Zriters Zere more poetic. "Robert 0oses has made an urban
desert bloom," said an editorial in the :orld-Telegram. The +erald Tribune,
formally recanting the heresies of Zhich it admitted it had been guilty
during his Long Island controversy, dubbed him the "+ercules of the
3arks." And the Times said:

. . . Jan. 19 of this year Zas a red letter day in the history of NeZ York. . . .
The time, the place, and the man met in 0ayor La Guardia's appointment of
Robert 0oses as 3ark Commissioner on that date. 0easured in park
progress and development on the scale to Zhich this city had been
accustomed, it seems years ago. . . .

The achievements, tangible as Zell as intangible of the neZ Commissioner
in his first feZ months of office . . . seem little short of miraculous. It is

504
almost as if 0r. 0oses  has rubbed a lamp, or murmured some incantation
over an old jar, and actually made the jini leap out to do his bidding.

Reporters fought for intervieZs Zith him. And Zhen  they got them— for he
gave them freely—the intervieZs Zere very friendly. 0urray  Davis of the
:orld-Telegram,  telling  readers that "for ten years he has Zorked long
hours, Zithout pay, to give NeZ Yorkers ine[pensive outdoor pleasures,"
added:

To the suggestion that he Zas independently Zealthy and giving hard Zork
and time to an unremunerative job, he smiled.

". . . You can't teach an old dog neZ tricks and I'm 45 noZ. Ever since I Zas
a kid I Zas interested in government. 0y fancy led me into parks and
playgrounds and I have nourished those fancies as a hobby, avocation; take
your pick.

"The fact remains that I enjoy this Zork more than any other, so Zhy not
stay Zith it? I have had only tZo public offices that paid salaries. NoZ I
have my third. It pays—? I don't knoZ. :hat   do commissioners get?
$13,000? I don't knoZ. I'm satisfied to make just a bare living if I can
reali]e all my plans for these things I enjoy. I'm interested in cutting doZn
the overhead and getting results, not in pay."

During 1934, 0oses Zas in the NeZ York papers even more than J. Edgar
+oover, Zho spent the year compiling a highly publici]ed elite hierarchy of
"3ublic Enemies," and then shooting doZn Number One on the list, John
Dillinger, in a bla]e of gunfire.  0oses Zas in the NeZ York papers almost
as much as La Guardia. The Times editorial on 0oses, for e[ample, Zas
only one of 29 praising him in that single neZspaper that year. And the
Times also carried 346 separate articles on his activities, an average of
almost one a day.* There Zere days, in fact, on Zhich there Zere five
separate stories in the Times. So many Zere carried on the "split page," the
first page of the second section, devoted in the early 1930's largely to
municipal affairs, that there Zere Zhole Zeeks in Zhich this prominent
page of the nation's most respected neZspaper read like a 3ark Department
press release. There Zere Sundays on Zhich si[ separate neZspapers Zere
carrying long, uncritically laudatory intervieZs Zith  0oses  or revieZs of

505
his accomplishments. +is picture stared out from their pages a hundred
times during that year.

Each park opening brought forth a neZ volley of praise. After one, the
+erald Tribune, under a headline proclaiming: the people oZn the parks,
called the event "just another of those triumphs Zhereby 0r. 0oses has
almost convinced the public that it really oZns the parks. After the long
night of Tammany it is an idea difficult to grasp."

The cheers of the press Zere echoed by the public. :hile the parks Zere
blossoming Zith floZers, editorial  pages Zere blossoming Zith letters from
the public praising the man Zho had planted them. And it Zas not unusual
at park and playground opening ceremonies for children, prodded by their
parents, to break into the cheer "TZo, four, si[, eight—Zho do Ze
appreciate? 0r. 0oses! 0R.  0OSES!!   0R.  0OSES!!!"

* The Times inde[ lists them not only under his name but under "NeZ York
City— 3arks, Department of," under the names of the individual parks and
under other listings given in the inde[.

* * *

The cheers rose to a crescendo Zhen the Central 3ark Zoo reopened on
December 3, 1934.

0oses had a personal reason for being interested in the ]oo. Nineteen
thirty-four had been a sad year for Al Smith. The public humiliation to
Zhich Jimmy :alker   had subjected him at the Inner Circle dinner Zas only
one indication of the fact that there Zas no longer any place for the old
leader in the organi]ation he had led and loved. Only si[ty years old, as
vigorous as ever, Smith Zanted desperately to play a role in the federal
government's efforts to end the human misery caused by the Depression. No
man Zas better qualified; Roosevelt himself had told Frances 3erkins,
"3ractically all the things Ze've done in the federal government are like
things Al Smith did as Governor of NeZ York." Roosevelt had asked Smith
to campaign for him against +oover, and Smith had done so. And Zhen
Roosevelt had Zon, Smith had told acquaintances flatly that a man did not
feud Zith the 3resident of his country; he gave him loyalty. +e only hoped,

506
he said, that Roosevelt Zould alloZ him to Zork for him. But Roosevelt,
another young man of Zhom Smith had been fond and Zhom he had helped
up the political ladder, refused even to consider him for any federal post.
And if Smith considered this the ultimate humiliation, he learned during
1934 that it Zas not. :orse  Zas to come. :hen  John J. Raskob and the
other businessmen Zho controlled the Empire State Building Corporation
had offered him its presidency, they had told him the post Zas honorary,
but, Zith the skyscraper completed, the Depression made it so difficult to
obtain tenants that the corporation Zas on the verge of bankruptcy, and they
told him he Zould have to do something to earn his $50,000 a year: he
Zould have to go to :ashington  and beg Roosevelt to throZ some
government leases his Zay. For months, Smith refused, but he Zas finally
persuaded that loyalty to his friends required him to help them. Roosevelt
responded generously to his entreaty—federal agencies Zere moved out of
offices as far aZay as 3hiladelphia to fill up the NeZ York skyscraper—but
noZ in the late afternoons, Zhen 0oses dropped by to see him, he Zould
often find the man Zho had been called the +appy :arrior sitting  staring
out the ZindoZs of his apartment Zith neZ lines of bitterness and
disillusionment hardening on his face.

0oses kneZ hoZ  much the old Governor loved animals and he kneZ he
missed the little ]oo he had maintained behind the E[ecutive 0ansion in
Albany. The former Governor and .atie noZ lived  at 820 Fifth Avenue,
almost directly across from the 0enagerie, and Smith spent a lot of time
strolling among the cages, feeding and talking to the animals. Saddened by
the unsanitary conditions in Zhich they had to live and the lack of care for
their physical ailments, Smith Zas horrified Zhen he learned that in case of
fire the animals might be shot. :hen 0oses  Zas appointed 3ark
Commissioner, Smith told him he Zould regard it as a special favor if the
0enagerie Zere improved.

0oses gave the job top priority. :hen   materials and equipment ran loZ—
because of the C:A's reluctance to spend money on them, they Zere

alZays running loZ—Zhat  Zas available Zas diverted there from other
projects. The best ramrods Zere put on the job to drive the thousand men
Zorking around the clock in the fenced-off area behind the Arsenal. 0ost of

507
the animals had been moved out, but not all, and the lions, shunted from
one animal house to another as the buildings Zere torn doZn and kept
aZake by the gloZ of the carbide flares and the pound of the pneumatic
drills, roared through the night, Zhile a reporter Zho visited the site early
one morning found the 0enagerie's old polar bear pacing "restlessly up and
doZn in beZilderment, pausing occasionally to peer out at the grimy, torch-
lit laborers." The residents of Fifth Avenue apartment buildings near the site
roared, too, but 0oses refused even to listen to their complaints. Often, in
the evenings, he Zould suddenly materiali]e on the scene, joking Zith the
field superintendents and Zith the men, encouraging them, telling them hoZ
important their Zork Zas, urging them on. All summer and fall, he spurred
the job Zith a special urgency. And Zhen it Zas finished, on December 2,
he turned the reopening into a surprise party for Al Smith.

It Zas quite a party. Some observers said NeZ York had never seen
anything like it. To emphasi]e that he Zas trying to make the ]oo not so
much a great animal museum like its counterpart in the Bron[ but a place of
delight for young children, 0oses had already dubbed it a "picture-book
]oo," and Zhen the tZelve hundred invited guests filed into the stands set
up in front oi the Arsenal for the opening ceremonies—tZenty-five
thousand other persons lined Fifth Avenue Zaiting to be admitted—they
found that in front of the ]oo entrance had been erected a si[-foot-high
Zooden replica of an open picture book, Zith painted green elephants
charging across its bright-yelloZ pages. Flanking the speakers' platform
Zere tZo huge bo[es Zrapped in striped and polka-dotted paper and
adorned Zith satin boZs like a child's present. As the ceremonies began,
four olive-clad trumpeters bleZ a flourish, the Zrapping paper Zas pulled
aZay—and inside one bo[ Zas a cage containing a lion, inside the other a
cage Zith a gorilla. 3ublic :elfare   Commissioner :illiam    +odson, called
to the microphone to give a speech, startled the audience by breaking
instead into several choruses, delivered in a rather Zhee]y tenor, of "Oh, I
Zent to the animal fair." Thousands of balloons Zere released at intervals to
fill  the air Zith color until  they Zere Zafted northZard by the prevailing
bree]e. 8niformed, flag-bearing high-school bands and elementary-school
fife-and-drum corps came marching, one after the other, up Fifth Avenue.
And clattering around the corner of the Arsenal came a team of Zhite
ponies draZing a tiny, gaily colored barouche in Zhich sat a little girl

508
holding a large gold key Zith Zhich La Guardia could "unlock" a door in
the middle of the picture book and thus officially open the neZ ]oo.

But before La Guardia got the key, there Zas something for Smith. 0oses
had given the former Governor no hint that he Zould even participate in the
ceremonies, simply telling him that there Zould be a seat for him on the
revieZing stand. But Zhen the old Zarrior Zalked out the front door of his
apartment house to make his Zay to the stand, he found three hundred
schoolchildren from the Fourth :ard  lined up in front of the door, cheering

and Zaving balloons, Zaiting to escort him across Fifth Avenue. +e found
that his seat Zas in the place of honor ne[t to La Guardia. (0oses, Zho had
been supposed to sit on his other side, Zas absent; during the past Zeek he
had refused to take a day off despite a severe case of influen]a, and doctors
summoned over his protests by a Zorried 0ary just tZo hours before the
ceremony began found him in a state of complete collapse and ordered him
to bed.) +ardly had Smith sat doZn Zhen he reali]ed that he Zas being
summoned to the microphone himself, and Earle AndreZs, substituting for
0oses, pinned to his lapel a large, elaborately engraved medal Zith a lion's
head on its face and announced that he Zas noZ, and permanently,
"+onorary Night  Superintendent of the Central 3ark Zoo." As AndreZs
finished speaking, a horse-draZn Zagon, reminiscent of those Smith had
chased through the Fourth :ard in his youth, rolled around the corner of the
Arsenal, and it Zas jammed Zith boys—from the Fourth :ard—singing,
"East Side, :est  Side." The horses pulled up in front of him and eleven-
year-old Eddie 0c.eon   jumped out and presented him Zith a large
Christmas turkey as the Zhole revieZing stand stood and joined in his old
campaign song.

The old Governor's eyes Zere tearing, from the cold December Zind, no
doubt, and it took some time for him to clear them, and even after he did he
spent a rather long time cheZing on his cigar, Zhich Zas already in shreds,
before he began to speak, but Zhen he did, he kneZ e[actly Zhat he Zanted
to say. ":hen  0r.  0oses  Zas appointed 3ark Commissioner, I used all the
influence I had Zith him to get him to Zork  on a neZ ]oo," he said. "And
noZ look at him! In less than eight months, Ze've got a ]oo that's one of the
finest of its kind in the Zorld."  Smith began then to recite the Zhole list of

509
0oses' achievements, stopping only Zhen he noticed the children on line
trying to peer over the park Zall at the cages. Cutting himself short, he said
Zith a smile, "I bid you Zelcome to this neZ  ]oo as night superintendent,
and I hope you have a good time," and sat doZn.

Later that Zeek, Zhen he Zas Zell enough to tell him himself, 0oses
informed Smith that the night superintendency carried Zith it certain
privileges. +e gave Smith a master key Zhich unlocked the animal houses
and told the Governor that the ]oo caretakers had been instructed that he
Zas to be alloZed to enter them Zhenever he Zanted, day or night. And
until the end of his life, Smith Zould delight in this privilege.  The doormen
at No. 820 Zould become accustomed to seeing him Zalk out the front door
in the evenings and across Fifth Avenue under the street lights, a someZhat
paunchy figure Zith a big broZn derby set firmly on his head and a big
cigar jutting out from his face, and disappear doZn the steps of the
darkened ]oo, not to reappear for hours. The former Governor and
presidential candidate Zould Zalk through the animal houses, sZitching on
the lights as he entered each one, to the surprise of its occupants, and talk
softly to them. +e Zould have in his pocket an apple for Rosie, the huge
hippo. And if one of the ]oo's less dangerous animals Zas sick or injured,
Smith Zould enter its cage and stand for a Zhile stroking its head and
commiserating Zith it. :hen   he had dinner guests, he Zould take them
along and, since

they Zere usually Tammany stalZarts unhappy at Zhat La Guardia Zas
doing to the Tammany Tiger, they delighted in a little shoZ he Zould put on
Zith the ]oo's biggest and fiercest tiger, Zho could be counted upon to
respond angrily if anyone groZled at him. :hen  Smith and his guests
approached, the tiger Zould be sitting silently staring at them through the
bars. Smith Zould Zalk up to the cage, thrust his h~ad toZard the bars and,
in his deepest and harshest voice, roar at the tiger, "La Guardia!" The tiger
Zould snarl, bare its teeth and leap at the bars, groZling in Zhat Smith's
daughter describes as "obvious disapproval."

:hile   there Zere cheers aplenty for Smith at the ]oo opening, hoZever,
there Zere plenty left over for 0oses.

510
The invited guests on the revieZing stand had been startled by the
transformation in the Arsenal. The stucco had been sand-blasted off its
Zalls, revealing handsome dark-red bricks. The cupolas had been torn off
its turrets, revealing battlements complete Zith archer's slits. The neZel
posts of the banisters on the stairs leading up to its front entrance Zere noZ
upturned Colonial cannon mu]]les, and the banisters themselves Zere
supported by Zrought-iron imitations of Colonial flintlock  rifles, painted
Zhite. Atop the gleaming Zhite doorZay, Zhose lintel had been crenelated
to mirror the battlements on the roof above, an eagle glared from betZeen
tZo carved mounds of cannon balls, and on the jambs had been carved
crossed sZords and Indian spears. The large lamps on either side of the door
had been enclosed in Zrought-iron replicas of tasseled drums like those
carried by Revolutionary :ar  drummer boys. And above the doorZay three
large flags fluttered colorfully from flagpoles. All  in all, the once shabby
Zreck looked quite like a little fort, a gay little  fort that Zhen seen in
miniature from the higher floors of Fifth Avenue apartment houses seemed
almost to have been set in the park by mistake and really to belong si[
blocks doZn the avenue in the ZindoZs of F. A. O. SchZar].

And Zhen La Guardia "unlocked" the door in the bright-yelloZ picture
book, after asking the +onorary Night Superintendent's permission, the
croZd folloZed  the tZo men through the door and through a short corridor
erected for the occasion, its Zalls covered Zith picture-book inscriptions
such as "A is for Ape," "B is for Buffalo."  Emerging on the side of the
Arsenal, they found there Zas nothing left of the old 0enagerie at all.
:here   they had been accustomed to see ramshackle Zooden animal houses,
they found, to their astonishment, neat red brick buildings decorated Zith
murals and carved animal frie]es, connected by graceful arcades that
framed park vistas beyond—and framing a sea-lion pool set in a
handsomely landscaped quadrangle.

0oses had Zanted to use distinctive materials as he had used Barbi]on
brick and Ohio sandstone at Jones Beach, but the C:A's refusal to purchase
any but the cheapest materials had forced him to settle for concrete, plain
red bricks, and some cheap limestone, and to forgo do]ens of imaginative
little touches he had planned.

511
But the eye of the visitor still found plenty to delight it. The sea-lion house
in the pool Zas constructed of unadorned concrete, but it Zas constructed so
that visitors could Zatch the sea lions even Zhile they Zere inside. The
paths to the pool divided a sunken landscaped quadrangle into four
separate, neatly trimmed laZns. Each Zas surrounded by loZ hedges. In the
center of each Zas a Zonderfully gnarled and tZisted Japanese ginkgo tree.
The steps leading doZn to the quadrangle Zere flanked by fierce-visaged
stone eagles big enough to gloZer eyeball to eyeball at many of the children
Zalking past them. And in its four corners Zere huge Victorian flying cages
from Zhich gloZered live  eagles.

On the far side of the quadrangle, at the animal-house level, past the
cavorting sea lions, the stone eagles, the laZns, the shrubbery and ginkgo
trees, the eye Zas startled by a large lioness proudly holding up for
inspection a peacock she had killed, Zhile her tZo cubs sniffed at the
beautiful tail dangling limply to the ground—a bron]e statue that had stood
in some seldom visited corner of the park for seventy years until 0oses
rescued it. And behind the statue Zas a long, loZ terrace on Zhich little
tables topped Zith gay parasols sat in the shade of a bright, vertically
striped aZning eighty feet long—an outdoor dining terrace on Zhich diners
could sit and be entertained by the sea lions and by the croZds being
entertained by the sea lions. And as the eye folloZed the vertical stripes of
the aZning upZard, it abruptly found itself being stared back at by lions,
tigers, elephants and hippopotami gathered under Zaving palm trees—for
the cafeteria's eighty-foot-long clerestory had been covered Zith a droll
animal mural.

Throughout, the ]oo Zas proof piled on proof that 0oses had been able, to
some e[tent at least, to make imagination take the place of money.

The C:A   had insisted that the animal houses be constructed primarily of
common red brick and concrete, but Embury, an architect accustomed to
Zorking Zith  the costliest of materials, nevertheless succeeded, under
0oses' prodding, in making them attractive. Their proportions Zere
e[ceptionally Zell  balanced, their lines e[ceptionally clean. Some of the
brick had been used to place charming ornamental chimneys on their roofs.
Some more had been used for designs that broke the monotony of the

512
concrete clerestories. Connecting the animal houses Zith arcades gave the
Zhole scene unity.

And the ]oo buildings Zere adorned Zith little  touches that, as at Jones
Beach, scaled doZn the architecture "to the si]e of a good time." Tiny,
delicate cast-iron birds perched atop the lamps that flanked the doors of the
animal houses. Slender rods topped Zith little Zhite balls held big Zhite
globes that cast light over the Zalk in front of the cafeteria terrace. The
lamps hanging in roZs in the animal houses Zere gla]ed balls, but around
each ball Zas a slanted copper ring that made the fi[tures look like a long
roZ of Saturns Zhirling  in the sky.

No one had to Zonder Zhat Zas in each building. Around the top of each
Zall Zas a frie]e,  carved in loZ relief in limestone panels, depicting its
occupants in marvelously lifelike poses; among the figures over the monkey
houses, for e[ample, Zere a monkey chasing butterflies and a gorilla
cheZing a tZig Zith  a Zonderfully  contemplative e[pression upon his face.
And

the Zeathervanes atop each building Zere comic depictions of one of the
building's inhabitants, done by the unknoZn designers Zho had caused
architects from all over the Zorld to e[claim at the Zeathervanes at Jones
Beach; the one over the bird house, for e[ample, shoZing a spindly-legged
heron jutting its long bill under Zater in search of food, Zas a miniature
masterpiece of angularity silhouetted against the sky.

The purpose of a park, 0oses had been telling his designers for years,
Zasn't to overaZe or impress; it Zas to encourage the having of a good
time. :heeling   through the park Zere mcvable refreshment carts. But these
Zeren't ordinary refreshment carts. They Zere adorned Zith painted animals
and garlands of floZers in colors that Zere intentionally gaudy—replicas of
gay Sicilian carretinas. Their operators Zere dressed in costumes that Zere
e[travagantly Sicilian. Even their Zares Zere special; in addition to the
standard peanuts, sodas and candy bars, each carried, prominently displayed
on top, Zhirling silver-foil  Zindmills,  strings of brightly  colored balloons,
flags, banners, braided Zhips—and stacks of animal picture and coloring
books. And to bloZ up balloons, the ]oo Zas equipped Zith the latest in
balloon-bloZing devices—the ".elly's   Rocket," Zhose Zindy Zoosh

513
delighted children. And the decision to build the ]oo around a sea-lion pool
Zas the croZning touch; the boisterous barking and slippery antics of these
traditional circus cloZns, the raucous enthusiasm Zith Zhich they played
tag under Zater, dove for the fish throZn to them by keepers and playfully
slithered big-bellied and long-necked around their concrete home, insured
that the central panorama Zould be one to delight any child—and any adult
Zho had any child left in him. On a summer day, Zhen the animals Zere all
outside, and the central quadrangle in Zhich the sea lions frolicked Zas
lined Zith black-and-Zhite-striped ]ebras, tan lions, furry broZn  monkeys
and red-rumped baboons, the central panorama Zas, as near as any man
could make it, given the C:A's  stinginess, e[actly Zhat Robert 0oses had
envisioned—a scene out of a child's picture book.

And the ]oo Zas vieZed as the triumph it Zas. Some ]oophiles, ignoring
the violet-ray baths 0oses had installed so that monkeys Zould get their
necessary quota of sun in Zinter, the specially designed scratching posts set
up for the lions and the replacement of Tammany's rifle-toting keepers Zith
trained animal e[perts and doctors, critici]ed the concrete floors of the
cages, Zhich they said Zould give the animals tender feet. But architects, as
quoted in Fortune, found the architecture "gay and amusing and
occasionally pointedly absurd." Architectural Forum called the vieZ from
the cafeteria terrace "the finest eating vieZ in the city." The press cheered,
too. And the public gave its oZn vote of confidence. The croZds that
streamed into the ]oo behind La Guardia and the +onorary Night
Superintendent on opening day numbered 32,000, a figure that 0oses found
so unbelievable that he ordered the counters he had installed at the entrance
double-checked. But the ne[t Sunday, after Zord of mouth about the neZ
]oo had had a Zeek to spread, attendance Zas 57,000. By 1935, on an
average Sunday, more than 100,000 visitors Zould come to the picture book
in the park.

And the Triborough Bridge Zas finally being built.

+ere Zas a project to kindle the imagination.

In si]e, its proportions Zere heroic. For all 0oses' previous construction
feats, it dZarfed any other single enterprise he had undertaken. Its approach
ramps Zould be so huge that houses—not only single-family homes but

514
si]able apartment buildings—Zould have to be demolished by the hundreds
to give them footing. Its anchorages, the masses of concrete in Zhich its
cables Zould be embedded, Zould be as big as any pyramid built by an
Egyptian 3haraoh, its roadZays Zider than the Zidest roadZays built by the
Caesars of Rome. To construct those anchorages and to pave those
roadZays (just the roadZays of the bridge proper itself, not the approach
roads) Zould require enough concrete to pave a four-lane highZay from
NeZ York to 3hiladelphia, enough to reopen Depression-shuttered cement
factories from 0aine to the 0ississippi.  To make the girders on Zhich that
concrete Zould be laid, Depression-banked furnaces Zould have to be fired
up at no feZer than fifty separate 3ennsylvania steel mills. To provide
enough lumber for the forms into Zhich that concrete Zould be poured, an
entire forest Zould have to crash on the 3acific Coast on the opposite side
of the American continent.

Triborough Zas really not a bridge at all, but four bridges Zhich, together
Zith 13,500 feet of broad viaducts, Zould link together three boroughs and
tZo islands.

One of those bridges, the span over the +arlem River that Zould connect
0anhattan Zith  Randall's Island, Zould be the largest vertical-lift bridge in
the Zorld. Its tZo steel toZers Zould have to be big enough to support the
2,200-ton steel deck—longer than a football field and Zide enough to
accommodate a si[-lane highZay, tZo sideZalks and a broad median safety
island—that Zould hang betZeen them. The toZers Zould have to be big
enough to contain drum hoists capable of raising that deck, together Zith its
highZay, sideZalks and median islands, eighty feet, keeping it perfectly
hori]ontal all the time, to permit the passage of large ships.

And the +arlem River span Zould be the largest vertical-lift bridge in the
Zorld only on sufferance from another of Triborough's four bridges, the
eight-lane, triple-span, steel-truss affair over the Bron[ .ills  that Zould
connect Randall's Island Zith the Bron[. Because the Bron[ .ills  Zas not
navigable, the Navy had ruled that its span could be a fi[ed structure—but
only if it  Zere built so that its central span could be converted into a lift
bridge if the .ills   Zas ever made navigable. And the Bron[ .ills  span

515
Zould be so large that if it Zere ever converted into a lift bridge, it Zould
be a lift bridge half again as large as its +arlem River counterpart.

And both the +arlem River and the Bron[ .ills   spans looked small beside
the half-mile-long suspension bridge, one of the largest bridges of that type
in the Zorld, that Zould arc 135 feet in the air to carry Triborough's
roadZay across the turbulent rip tides of +ell Gate, the narroZ, tZisting,
rock-lined passage betZeen :ard's Island and Astoria in 4ueens. The steel
toZers

of that bridge Zould each be higher than a football field standing on end,
and it Zas that bridge's anchorages, in Zhose concrete Zould be embedded
cables made up of enough Zire to circle the globe tZice around, that Zere
as big as pyramids.

The last of the four bridges—a causeZay connecting Randall's and :ard's
islands—Zould have stood alone as an engineering feat of no mean
magnitude, but so huge Zas Triborough that the causeZay Zas a mere
incident in its construction, as Zas the "flying junction" on Randall's Island,
the largest batch of traffic-sorting spaghetti ever concocted, a cloverleaf as
big as a railroad sZitchyard and so ingeniously designed that although
tZenty-tZo  lanes of traffic converge on, and radiate from, its long lines of
toll booths, Zinding around one another on three decks, no one of those
lanes meets or crosses another at grade and every driver using any one of
them, no matter Zhat his destination or point of origin, must stop at one, but
only one, toll booth. Triborough Zas not a bridge so much as a traffic
machine, the largest ever built. The amount of human energy that Zould be
e[pended in its construction gives some idea of its immensity: more than
five thousand men Zould be Zorking at the site, and these men Zould only
be putting into place the materials furnished by the labor of many times five
thousand men; before the Triborough Bridge Zas completed, its
construction Zould have generated more than 31,000,000 man-hours of
Zork in 134 cities in tZenty  states. And the si]e of the bridge is also shoZn
by the amount of money involved. :ith  $5,400,000 already contributed by
the city and $44,-200,000 promised by the 3:A, the amount promised for
its construction Zas almost equal to the combined cost of all the projects
Robert 0oses had built on Long Island during the previous ten years.

516
And si]e Zas the least of it.

From the air—and 0oses spent hours over NeZ York City as a passenger in
chartered small planes in 1934 studying the city's contours—one could
hardly fail to appreciate more significant implications of the Triborough
project. The built-up streets of 0anhattan, the Bron[ and 4ueens rushed
together at the bridge site but paused there, held apart by the tangle of Zater
surrounding Randall's and :ard's islands. A procession of piers, erected by
the old bankrupt Triborough Authority, Zas scattered at odd intervals across
those islands as if to shoZ hoZ easy it Zould be to bring those massed
streets together by building the Triborough Bridge. But until the bridge Zas
built, the streets Zould remain separated, their inhabitants condemned to
countless Zasted hours of needless travel. The man Zho built the
Triborough Bridge Zould be a man Zho conferred a great boon on the
greatest city in the NeZ :orld.   +e Zould be the man Zho tied that city
together. In fact, since each of the three boroughs Zas as large as a city in
its oZn right, the man Zho built the Triborough Bridge could be said to be
performing a feat equal to tying together three cities. And he Zould also, of
course, be the man Zho, patching together the rent torn in the earth
millennia before by the glaciers rumbling doZn from +udson Bay, reunited
Long Island Zith the mainland of the 8nited States.

Other implications of the project Zere as dramatic as its si]e and setting.

T+E TRIBORO8G+   BRIDGE  CO03LE;

(shoZing 0oses 5 original approach routes) :   m 0 1 ■£1 2 0iles

517
ASTORIA BO8LEVARD

48EENS

I

It Zould slash at a stroke the immense Gordian knot of the East River traffic
problem by creating the first direct link betZeen the Bron[ and 4ueens. For
Robert 0oses, of course, this implication had special significance. +e had
built his parkZays to make accessible Long Island's "healthy air," its "salty
shore and bree]e and brine," but millions of residents of northern
0anhattan, the Bron[  and :estchester—and NeZ Jersey—still had no Zay
of reaching those parkZays, no Zay of reaching Long Island, e[cept by
traveling into midtoZn 0anhattan,  over the East River bridges and along
the congested 4ueens boulevards. The construction of the Triborough
Bridge Zould enable residents of northern 0anhattan to reach 4ueens
simply by traveling cross-toZn and then over the bridge; residents of the
Bron[, :estchester,  and NeZ Jersey could reach Long Island Zithout ever
entering midtoZn 0anhattan at all.

518
Furthermore, 0oses felt confident that, out of the $50,000,000 allocated for
the bridge, enough Zould be left over to link it Zith the Grand Central
3arkZay, Zhose Zestern terminus Zas stalled at Northern Boulevard
because

the Legislature Zould not and the city could not finance its construction any
further into the city. Therefore, the Triborough project—and, perhaps, only
the Triborough project—could provide the funds to finish the parkZay and
thereby enable motorists, once they reached the Triborough Bridge, to drive
all the Zay to Jones Beach or the other Long Island state parks on modern
parkZays on Zhich they Zould not be delayed by a single traffic light or
intersection.

Because the Legislature Zould not and the city could not e[tend his
:estchester parkZays into the city, the Triborough project Zas the only
hope of doing that, also. 0oses felt sure that money could be found in the
Triborough allocations to link up the bridge at least Zith the +utchinson
River 3arkZay. And once that link Zas constructed, the Long Island
parkZays Zould be linked Zith  a :estchester parkZay. Build  Triborough,
he felt, and the Long Island parks Zould at a stroke be made easily
accessible from the entire NeZ York metropolitan area.

Randall's and :ard's islands provided large stacks of additional fuel for
0oses' imagination.

Throughout the city's history, those islands had been used only as
repositories for its refuse, inanimate and human. The site of garbage dumps,
potter's fields and almshouses during the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, in 1934 they held—in addition to a municipal seZage-disposal
plant— the City +ospital for the Feeble-0inded  and Tubercular, the grim,
barracks-like, Civil :ar-vintage   "+ouse of Refuge" of the Society for the
Reformation of Juvenile Delinquents, the 0anhattan State +ospital for the
Insane, complete Zith black-barred ZindoZs, and a military hospital. The
rest of the islands' four hundred acres—and an uninhabited fifty-acre sand
bar to the east named "Sunken 0eadoZ" that Zas identified on maps as part
of Randall's Island but Zas actually a separate body of land set apart by a
hundred yards of Zater—Zas empty and barren marshland.

519
But 0oses didn't care about the condition of the vacant land on the islands.
:hat   Zas important to him Zas that the land Zas there—and that there Zas
plenty of it.

Obtaining land anyZhere near the center of NeZ York City Zas e[tremely
difficult.  :hen   you talked about neZ parks in center city, you Zere talking
about tooth-and-claZ battles for a vacant lot that might Zith luck be big
enough for half a basketball court. If you found a vacant lot that measured
as much as a third of an acre, it Zas a bonan]a. And here, at the city's very
heart, Zere 450 empty acres. Join these islands to the city and you Zouldn't
have to talk about halves of basketball courts any longer. You could talk
about football fields and soccer fields and baseball diamonds. And you
could talk about them in the do]ens. There could be boat basins and
marinas, picnic grounds, tree-shaded esplanades overlooking the river and
lined Zith benches on Zhich people could sit and Zatch boats passing close
by. Join islands to city and you Zould be creating a moated oasis at the
city's core. The building of the bridge Zould, of course, accomplish the
join-

ing automatically. And 0oses felt certain that, out of fifty  million dollars,
he could find enough left over to transform the islands into magnificent
parks —especially if the institutional buildings Zere torn doZn, as he felt
they should be so that they Zould not interfere Zith the beauty of the
setting. The potentialities of the project, not only for transportation, but for
recreation, Zere aZesome.

But the arrangements entered into by the Triborough Bridge Authority
during its days of domination by Tammany +all threatened to make the
project as nearly Zorthless as it Zas possible for a $50,000,000 enterprise to
be.

Before he had taken over the project himself, 0oses had told aides that the
Authority's refusal to make any semblance of provision for approach roads
in 4ueens and the Bron[ Zas the most glaring e[ample of poor planning
that he had ever seen. But noZ, studying the project more closely, he
reali]ed that he had spoken too hastily. :hat the Authority had done in
4ueens and the Bron[, he saZ, Zas as nothing compared to Zhat the
Authority had done in 0anhattan.

520
The 4ueens terminus of the Triborough Bridge Zas directly across the East
River from 100th Street in 0anhattan. Therefore, the 0anhattan terminus
of the bridge should have been placed at 100th Street. It certainly should
not have been placed any further uptoZn; the bulk of the bridge traffic—85
percent by one estimate—Zould be coming from, and going to, destinations
south of 100th Street. 3lacing the 0anhattan terminus at 125th Street
condemned most motorists traveling betZeen that borough and 4ueens to
drive tZenty-five  totally unnecessary blocks north and then, once on the
bridge, tZenty-five totally  unnecessary blocks south—to thus add tZo and a
half totally unnecessary miles to their every journey over the bridge. And
the complete lack of provision for any approach road from doZntoZn
Zould make the 0anhattan portion of the totally unnecessary journey
tortuous.

Then there Zere the plans for the bridge structure itself.

The plans called for a tZo-deck, si[teen-lane affair. Such a bridge Zould
have a capacity of appro[imately 16,000,000 vehicles per year, but traffic
studies 0oses had commissioned had convinced him that it Zould be forty
years before that capacity Zould be needed. (0oses Zas, in fact, Zorried
about attracting even the 7,500,000 vehicles per year required to meet
amorti]ation and interest payments on the Authority bonds purchased by
the 3:A;   he Zas convinced that only a netZork of e[cellent approach roads
that Zould make the trip via Triborough clearly superior to the old, toll-free,
routes Zould persuade that number of drivers to pay tZenty-five cents per
trip.) 0oreover,  building the bridge on tZo decks Zould greatly increase its
Zeight, and therefore Zould require toZers, anchorages and piers of
enormous si]e—and cost. And the Zeight Zould, under the old plans, be
further increased by the fact that the Authority Zas planning to cover the
Triborough's steelZork Zith great masses of enormously costly ornamental
granite. 0oses' engineers told him that the tZo-deck bridge Zould cost at
least $51,000,000 instead of the $44,200,000 the 3:A had allocated.

+is engineers had another surprise for 0oses. They informed him that the
Authority's engineers had made Triborough's lanes the same Zidth as the
lanes on the 4ueensborough Bridge Zhich had proved too narroZ for cars

521
and had had to be closed Zhile the curbstones Zere chipped aZay.
Triborough's "eight-lane" decks Zould hold only si[ adequate lanes.

After taking over the Authority, 0oses took almost no time to find out Zhy
the 0anhattan terminus had been placed at 125th Street: :illiam Randolph
+earst had oZned deteriorating real estate there and he had Zanted the city
to buy it. And it took 0oses  little time to learn Zhy the bridge Zas
supposed to be bedecked Zith costly granite: the quarries that Zere
supposed to furnish the granite Zere oZned by Tammany interests.

0oses had learned hoZ to get things done and one Zay not to get things
done in NeZ York Zas to pick a fight Zith  +earst and his three neZspapers.
+e left the 0anhattan terminus at 125th Street.

But that Zas about all 0oses left. :ith   George V. 0cLaughlin  admiringly
letting him run the Authority as he Zished, 0oses controlled tZo of its
three votes. The third, he soon learned, Zas in his pocket, too; its possessor,
the chairman and lone remaining member of the original Authority, Zas an
attorney, Nathan Burkan, Zhose only interest Zas in protecting +earst's,
and once 0oses indicated that he Zould not interfere Zith those interests—
the publisher received a $782,000 aZard for his 125th Street holdings—
Burkan shoZed little further concern about the operations of the body of
Zhich he Zas the nominal head and never attempted to contest 0oses'
assumption of its e[ecutive functions. TZo years earlier, 0oses had called
on the Authority's chief engineer, EdZin A. Byrne, the old Tammany man
Zho had entered city service in 1886 as an a[eman, and had pleaded Zith
him to strip the granite from the bridge design and to use the money saved
for approach roads, and Byrne had refused. NoZ 0oses Zas Byrne's boss.
In his oZn Zords: "I  sent for the chief engineer and asked him Zhich he
thought Zas more important—adequate approaches or ornamental granite.
+e unhesitatingly replied, 'Granite.' This ended the conference and I told
him to resign and get his pension." And 0oses gave similar instructions,
after conferences of similar length, to almost all of Byrne's aides.

To head Triborough's neZ engineering staff, 0oses hired the austere, no-
nonsense SZiss aristocrat Zho had designed the graniteless George
:ashington  Bridge: Othmar +ermann Ammann. To head Triborough's neZ
administrative staff, 0oses hired a male version of Amelia Clanton, a stern

522
disciplinarian he had met at +og Island and had hired to shape up the Long
Island 3ark Commission: retired army brigadier general 3aul J. Loeser.
Loeser had a gift for rubbing almost anyone the Zrong Zay—La Guardia
called him "a 3russian and a Na]i"—but 0oses had seen in brief encounters
Zith the General qualities that could be useful to him. "+e Zas, no doubt, a
martinet," 0oses Zas to recall. "+e Zas tough. ... +e Zas not popular."

Then 0oses set about giving Ammann and Loeser staffs to shape up: a
team of the country's most e[perienced bridge builders. :ithin Zeeks, this
team had come up Zith the kind of plans 0oses Zanted. The granite

Zas eliminated. The tZo decks Zere reduced to one, the si[teen lanes Zere
slashed to si[ on the 0anhattan arm of the bridge and to eight on the rest—
and the cost of the bridge Zas cut by 40 percent, from $51,000,000 to about
$30,000,000. The Authority Zas noZ going to have a surplus of about
$14,000,000 from its $44,200,000 3:A  allocation.

0oses' plans for using the money to build the roads that Zould link the
great bridge Zith his :estchester and Long Island parkZays raised legal
problems: the 3:A  allocation Zas for  building a bridge, not roads, and
Zhile the allocation did permit e[penditures for bridge "approaches," that
Zord had traditionally referred only to the ramps leading directly up to the
bridge. But 0oses persuaded 3:A  Administrator  +arold L. Ickes that
"approaches" could be defined as "approach roads." +e told him that
Zithout such roads the number of motorists Zho Zould use the neZ bridge
Zould be too small to enable the Authority to meet the payments on the
bonds the 3:A  had purchased—an argument that Zeighed heavily Zith the
thrifty Ickes. In fact, he persuaded him not only to let him use the
$14,000,000 for approach roads but to give him an additional $2,000,000 as
Zell.

Si[teen million  dollars Zas an impressive sum, but it Zasn't nearly enough
for the approach roads 0oses had in mind. +e persuaded La Guardia to
search the corners of the city treasury for additional right-of-Zay
contributions. +e persuaded Civil :orks  Administration  officials to permit
him to list some of the road-building Zork as "park" projects—and thereby
obtain hundreds of C:A  laborers. Then he obtained hundreds more by
diverting C:A-paid   laborers on other 3ark Department projects to the

523
Triborough project Zithout C:A    permission. (It alZays took a feZ days for
C:A   officials  to find out Zhat their laborers Zere doing, and by then
0oses could tell them that since the Zork had been started, it Zould be silly
not to alloZ it to be completed. After all, he pointed out, if the laborers
Zere noZ reassigned, the jobs Zould be left unfinished—unsightly scars,
offending residents of the neighborhoods in Zhich they Zere located. And if
the neZspapers got Zind of such an e[ample of governmental inefficiency .
. . The argument never failed.) And by the autumn of 1934, thanks to the
success of his tactics Zith C:A's  successor agencies, Zork had been begun
to Ziden :hitlock    Avenue, the Bron[ thoroughfare Zith Zhich  the bridge
connected, and Eastern Boulevard, the thoroughfare Zith Zhich :hitlock
Avenue connected, all the Zay to the +utchinson River 3arkZay.

The building of Triborough's 4ueens approach Zas a triumph of
imagination over seemingly insoluble problems. The four-mile gap betZeen
the bridge and the Grand Central 3arkZay Zas four miles of Jackson
+eights and Astoria, and in those tZo communities neat one-family homes,
garden apartments, stores and small factories Zere jammed tightly together.
Condemning the number of buildings involved Zould be impossibly
e[pensive, but there Zas no vacant land left for a parkZay right-of-Zay.

So 0oses made land. A hundred yards out from the shoreline of Jackson
+eights, giant pile drivers, mounted on giant barges, pounded steel bulk-

heads into the muck at the bottom of Flushing Bay. Then long strings of
barges piled high Zith sand from the RockaZays made their broad-beamed
Zay up the East River, through +ell Gate and into the bay to dump the sand
behind the bulkheads. Long convoys of dump trucks loaded Zith shale and
stone and gravel rumbled across 4ueens to heave up their backs and slide
the shale and stone in Zith the sand. And the mi[ture became a mass solid
enough to hold concrete, specifically the si[ concrete lanes that Zould
alloZ the Grand Central 3arkZay to circle Jackson +eights for more than
tZo miles and Zait until the last possible minute before plunging into
Astoria Boulevard for the final run to the Triborough Bridge ramp.

The building of Triborough's 0anhattan approach Zas another triumph of
imagination.

524
Since the 0anhattan terminus Zas to be located at 125th Street, 0oses told
his aides, there had to be some Zay of getting up to 125th Street. York
Avenue, Zhich presently ended at Ninety-second Street, Zould have to be
e[tended along the riverfront.

If Charles Dickens had been looking for an illustration for an American
edition of +ard Times, he could have stopped looking Zhen he got to that
riverfront. The stretch betZeen Ninety-second and 125th streets Zas a
catalogue of the unlovely by-products of industrialism; scented by the raZ
filth pouring from open seZers into the river beloZ Zas a long roZ of
small, grimy factories, used-car lots, auto-repair shops, junkyards, coal
pockets and oil-storage depots. +ogarth could have found a Zhole gallery
of models in the occupants of the bars, Zhorehouses and tenements that
mingled Zith them. To 0oses, hoZever, the panorama possessed less
appeal. 8nlovely as Zas the scenery, it Zould not be cheap to condemn it.
On a single factory, the :ashburn :ire   :orks,   a large, grimy building that
occupied three solid blocks of riverfront, from 116th to 119th streets, the
price asked Zas $3,000,000.

A riverfront highZay  had been proposed before, but an early Corporation
Counsel had announced that he had searched the deeds to the land involved
and found that there Zas no loophole that Zould alloZ the city to take title
by any procedure other than the unfeasibly e[pensive one of condemnation.
Succeeding city administrations had assumed for decades that that finding
Zas correct. But 0oses told his bloodhounds to forget about assumptions
and search the deeds again—and to find something, goddammit. And the
bloodhounds found something. The title to some of the lots contained a
covenant more than a century old, dating back to a time Zhen the lots had
been oZned by the city itself, they told 0oses. And in the covenant the city
reserved the right to reclaim a si[ty-foot strip along the Zaterfront in case it
ever Zanted to build a street there. 0oses could have si[ty feet of right-of-
Zay along a considerable stretch of his riverfront highZay for nothing.

0oses' problems Zere still far from solved. At least si[  lanes Zere required,
he figured, and the minimum Zidth for si[  lanes Zas not si[ty feet

but one hundred. And 0oses did not intend to Zaste the Zaterfront in a
park-starved section of the city on a highZay. +e Zanted the river side of

525
that highZay to be not a guardrail for the highZay but a park from Zhich
residents of the area could enjoy the Zaterfront. There should, he decided,
be a tree-shaded esplanade along the Zaterfront, complete Zith benches and
play areas. And for such a park at least another thirty or forty feet in Zidth
Zere needed, thirty or forty feet that Zould, if condemnation Zas required
to obtain it, be terribly e[pensive.

There Zere other complications. The :ashburn company told La Guardia
that, if it Zas forced to move, it Zould move out of the city altogether and
find a cheaper location someZhere else—and the :ashburn company
employed 1,200 men. The 0ayor told 0oses that the city could not afford
to lose 1,200 jobs—and therefore could not take the chance that the
company Zas bluffing. The Consolidated Edison Company oZned large
portions of property that Zere set back from the river and Zould not have to
be condemned. But Con Ed needed access to the Zaterfront, and that access
Zas noZ provided by overhead conveyors Zhich crossed the property on
Zhich the East River Drive E[tension Zould  have to run. If those conveyors
Zere eliminated, Con Ed Zould be hurt, and the city Zould have to pay the
utility substantial damages.

To keep the amount of land required for the improvement as small as
possible, 0oses decided to build the park out over the river on a reinforced
concrete platform ten feet Zide—because a ten-foot-Zide platform Zas the
ma[imum Zidth  that could be supported Zithout the construction of
e[pensive pilings. +e Zouldn't  condemn the :ashburn :ire    :orks,   he
decided. +e Zould chop off its front, run the Drive through the land thus
obtained, build additions atop the factory so that its floor space Zould not
be reduced and an underground tunnel beneath the Drive so that it Zould
still have access to the Zaterfront—and reface the entire shabby edifice
Zith neat brick. This solution Zould  cost a million dollars—tZo million
less than condemnation Zould have cost. And it saved the city 1,200 jobs.

0oses decided to tear doZn Con Ed's overhead conveyors and build more
underground tunnels to the river so that the company could not claim
consequential damages. :hile he Zas negotiating Zith the company about
this, he horsetraded—Con Ed's cityZide operations required an endless
stream of concessions from the city, so, Zith La Guardia behind him, 0oses

526
had plenty of ammunition to horsetrade Zith—and obtained portions of Con
Ed's property along the right-of-Zay Zithout having to pay for it. Then he
made another trip to :ashington and asked the 3:A  to contribute an
additional $6,000,000 to acquire land for the Drive so that the bridge Zould
be made more accessible to motorists and more of them Zould be
persuaded to pay tolls to use it. The 3:A Zouldn't  give $6,000,000—but it
Zould give $2,000,000. 0oses took La Guardia on a tour of the proposed
improvement. La Guardia, Zho lived in an apartment at 106th Street and
Fifth Avenue, Zas keenly aZare of the park needs of the neighborhood. And
he Zas fascinated by the engineering aspects of the Zork. 0oses persuaded
him that men paid by C:A  and its successor agencies could be reassigned

from other city departments to provide the labor needed for the job. This
reduced the cost, for land acquisition and materials mainly, to $1,878,500.
Scour the city treasury as he Zould, La Guardia could find no more than
about $1,300,000 that could be made available—but this contribution
brought the balance doZn to about $578,000, and 0oses said the Authority
could afford to pay that itself. And by the end of 1934, the Board of
Estimate, under La Guardia's goading, Zas rushing through the resolutions
necessary to obtain title to the area.

Then 0oses turned to the question of transforming Randall's and :ard's
islands into parks. +is Authority had no authori]ation from the 3:A   to
build parks, it Zas true, but he convinced 3:A  officials  that the parks
Zould attract to the islands—and to the bridge—enough toll-paying
motorists to justify a modest investment. And a modest investment Zas all
he had in mind, he told the officials. The Authority Zould have to pay for
the materials needed to construct baseball diamonds, tennis courts and
bench-lined esplanades, but the total cost should not be more than
$225,000. The big cost involved, that of labor, Zould be paid for by the
C:A,   for he Zould make the reclamation of the islands a 3ark Department
project.

The old Authority had planned, and had received 3:A authori]ation  to
build, a Randall's Island municipal stadium Zith a seating capacity of
10,000. ":holly   inadequate," 0oses said. +e Zanted a stadium seating "at
least" 70,000, big enough to hold an annual interborough athletic

527
competition—the competitors to be champions selected in track meets and
other athletic events held in each borough—and the big croZds that he Zas
sure Zould attend. And he Zanted it big enough to be the site of Olympic
try-outs and great outdoor spectacles. "The stadium must be adequate for
big events or it is a failure," he said. "There is ample room on the island for
a big stadium." Its components must be of commensurate si]e, he said. For
e[ample, it should have the largest movable outdoor stage in the Zorld.
Construction of such a stadium Zould cost the city millions in ordinary
times. But noZ, the labor, the biggest single item, Zould be paid for by the
federal government. +e persuaded the C:A to list the stadium as a 3ark
Department project. A million dollars in materials Zould be needed for
these men to Zork Zith, but he persuaded the 3:A that the stadium Zould
help attract toll payers to the bridge, and the agency alloZed the Authority
to increase its previously authori]ed contribution by $300,000.

There Zas still an obstacle to the creation of parks and a stadium on
Randall's and :ard's islands: the institutional buildings already there. The
military hospital Zas only partly filled  and 0oses had little difficulty
persuading 8. S. Army and Navy officials to move the patients to other
hospitals and vacate the buildings. But the +ouse of Refuge, the +ospital
for the Feeble-0inded and 0anhattan State +ospital presented a more
difficult  problem; city and state reformatories and asylums Zere already
overcroZded. La Guardia's hospital commissioner, Dr. Sigismund S.
GoldZater, flatly refused to move patients out of the city buildings on the
tZo islands,

and state officials said any moves Zould have to Zait until neZ state
institutions Zere constructed. But 0oses persuaded Lehman to overrule the
state officials and La Guardia to overrule GoldZater, and by the end of
1934, Zith the patients crammed into overcroZded institutions, the +ouse
of Refuge had been vacated and demolished and the ra]ing of the +ospital
for the Feeble-0inded Zas under Zay.

0eanZhile,  0oses' eyes had focused on the Sunken 0eadoZ, the fifty-acre
sand bar east of Randall's Island. The hundred-yard strip of East River that
separated it from the island concealed land that lay only a feZ feet beloZ
the surface. 0oses ordered the strip filled in—and Sunken 0eadoZ Zas

528
thereby made a part of Randall's Island, and another fifty acres Zas
acquired for park space.

The residents of the high-rent apartment houses that lined the 0anhattan
side of the East River had never gotten much of a vieZ for their money.
Opposite them—to the east and dragging off to the south—Zas scenery
done in Early Industrial Era 0idlands, the grimy Zarehouses, factories,
tenements, oil tanks and open storage depots of Astoria and Long Island
City. Its dreariness broken only by the gaudiness of occasional monster
billboards painted large enough so that their messages could be seen clearly
across the river, that vista stretched aZay Zithout a break (there Zere no
housing developments or parks there then) beneath a pall (the Zord "smog"
had not yet gained currency) cast over it by belching smokestacks. And the
scene to the north Zhere :ard's Island lay, loZ in the Zater Zith  Randall's
behind it, had not been any prettier. Dull-colored and lifeless in the distance
even Zhen fog didn't shroud them, the tZo islands had been adorned only
by the squat red and gray institutional buildings that failed to block out the
scenery behind the islands: the South Bron[, Long Island City's spiritual
descendant. Since 1932, the piers erected for the first, abortive attempt to
build the Triborough Bridge had been part of the scene, but, dun-colored,
featureless and, Zithout a bridge on top of them, seeming in the distance
like a succession of Zalls to play handball against, they did little to relieve
its drabness. The vieZ had not been inspiring.

By the end of 1934, that Zas no longer true.

By the end of that year, the residents of the East River apartments, looking
north, could see giant cranes moving about on the islands like long-necked
dinosaurs proZling far-off marshes. Around the cranes Zere stirring masses
of men. Over the Zater came the pound of pile drivers, a sound that Zas
dull and far aZay, but that never seemed to stop. And rising from behind the
little buildings on the left of :ard's   Island and curving off to the right
across the island in a gigantic curve, a highZay Zas being bolted into place
in the sky.

The highZay, carried across :ard's Island on the piers, climbed in a long,
sloZ, poZerful line. Across the river—to the right as the Zatchers looked

529
north—they could see its steel roadbed slanting unhurriedly doZn behind
the first line of factories. There Zas a great gap in the center, but it took

little imagination to see hoZ the roadbed Zould continue to rise there until
it Zas flung across the +ell Gate, for the hulking concrete anchorages that
Zould hold the cables for the +ell Gate suspension bridge Zere already in
place ("Immense things they are," Zrote an observer; "beside the Nile they
Zould pass for pyramids"), and so Zere the bridge's steel toZers, Zhich
loomed over the river like the facades of tZin cathedrals. And even as the
Zatchers Zatched, neZ portions of the roadbed paraded past them. 3ushing
aside the sullen gray of the East River Zould come a squad of barges,
lashed together side by side to bear a Zeight measured in thousands of tons
and pushed along by a Zhole covey of panting tugboats, bearing to the
Zaiting cranes the specially fabricated steel girders that Zould hold the
bridge roadbed girders—some of Zhich Zere as big as a ten-room ranch
house.

Enormous as the Triborough Bridge seemed to Zatchers along the East
River, moreover, they Zere seeing only a small portion of the Zhole project.

Engineers and journalists felt that it Zas only from a plane that one could
get a feel of the project in its three-borough entirety. From the air, one
journalist said, "you could see the avenues being Zidened as if a giant
chisel Zas being rammed betZeen them."

And from the air, more than one journalist said, the project seemed almost
too big to grasp.

Robert 0oses erected the comple[ of buildings that Zas the Central 3ark
Zoo at least partly because of his devotion to Alfred E. Smith. +e tore doZn
another building in the park Zholly because of that devotion.

+e tore doZn Jimmy :alker's   Casino.

Everyone Zho Zas interested in the cause of parks in NeZ York City
disapproved of the use to Zhich Calvert Vau['s Ladies Refreshment Salon
Zas being put, of course. But none of them Zanted the building torn doZn.
As a structure designed by one of the creators of Central 3ark, it held a

530
special place in the city's history. And for many of the reformers, it Zas
associated Zith pleasant memories; they could remember accompanying
their parents on Sunday bicycle or horseback rides through the park that
ended Zith lunch there in the quieter days before the :orld :ar.  0oreover,
the building possessed a Victorian charm precious in its oZn right. As a
practical matter, although Solomon and his backers had poured almost
$400,-000 into improvements in the building's interior, he Zas nonetheless
only renting it from the city. The city still  oZned it. The 3ark Department
could ask him to loZer his prices and thereby make the magnificent dining
rooms and pavilions more accessible to the general public. If Solomon
refused, the city could attempt to cancel his lease and install in his place a
more amenable concessionaire. And even if the attempt failed, the lease had
only five more years to run; after that, the building, and the improvements,
Zould revert to the city forever. The 3ark Association had been
campaigning for the Casino's conversion into a moderate-priced restaurant,
but Zhen the Association's members heard that 0oses Zas planning to ra]e
the building—announcing

that it Zas structurally unsound, that it Zould cost too much to repair and
that lu[ury restaurants had no place in parks anyZay, he said that a
playground, complete Zith Zading pool, Zould be constructed on its site—
they Zere aghast. Such an act, they said, Zould be Zanton destruction.
Financially, it made even less sense; a group of restaurant oZners had
already asked for permission to operate the Casino as a moderate-priced
restaurant, abiding by any rules that 0oses Zished to establish—and pay
the city $25,000 annual rental plus a liberal share of the receipts. And
finally, as the Casino's chef, +enri Charpontier, put it in a plaintive letter to
the Times: ":hy   choose the site of the Casino . . . Zhen there are broad
e[panses as far as the eye can reach on either side of the Casino, Zhere as
fine a sZimming [sic] pool as the Commissioner's kind heart urges him to
provide could easily be located?"

But 0oses refused to compromise. The considerations Zhich motivated
him Zere not historical, aesthetic or financial. To a large e[tent, they Zere
hardly rational. "It Zas a case of revenge, pure and simple," says 3aul
:indels,   La Guardia's Corporation Counsel Zho advised 0oses on the case
before turning it over, "in disgust," to Assistant Corporation Counsel

531
:illiam    C. Chanler. "+e never said so straight out, but everyone around
him kneZ Zhy  he Zas doing it—he Zanted to get back at :alker for  Zhat
:alker   had done to Governor Smith. God, he Zanted to get :alker!" (And
the oddest part about the affair, :indels says, Zas that, "to the best of my
knoZledge," 0oses never spoke to Governor Smith about it—and if he had,
Governor Smith "Zould have told him not to do it.")

Solomon, panicking over his investment, offered to confer Zith 0oses and
revise his price list. "I am not going to confer Zith 0r.  Solomon,'-' 0oses
replied. :ith   La Guardia, advised by :indels  against supporting an
establishment as notorious as the Casino, refusing to intervene, Chanler
served Solomon Zith an eviction notice that charged the Casino
Corporation Zith a number of technical violations of its lease; a typical
charge Zas that, by alloZing fashion shoZs to be held there, the Casino had
violated a regulation prohibiting advertising on park property.

Solomon took the case to court. The trial turned out to be embarrassing for
both him and 0oses.

Solomon Zas forced to admit that, during the five years of its e[istence, the
Casino had grossed more than three million dollars and he himself had
draZn more than a quarter of a million in salary—Zhile paying the city a
total of $42,500 in rent. +e had to admit that 3ark Department officials had
been alloZed to consume tens of thousands of dollars of free food and
liquor. And he had to manage to keep a straight face Zhile maintaining
under cross-e[amination that he couldn't remember the name of a single one
of those officials, or of a single one of the Casino's stockholders.

But 0oses had some bad moments on the stand, too.

One Zas reminiscent of the Zay he had been trapped in an apparent lie the
only other time he had found himself under oath. In the Taylor Estate trial,
he had testified that he had never been advised that appropriation Zithout
funds Zas illegal, and :.  .ingsland   0acy's  attorney, Charles +. Tuttle, had
thereupon produced the paper Zhich had given him that very

advice and Zaved it in front of him. NoZ, sitting in the Zitness chair in
State Supreme Court in Foley Square, 0oses said that he Zould alloZ in

532
city parks only restaurants that charged "reasonable" prices, and Zhen
pressed for his definition of "reasonable," he said that luncheon should be
one dollar or less, coffee no more than a dime—and that "the a la carte
system" is a lu[ury Zhich should not be permitted to e[ist in a park
restaurant. :hereupon Solomon's attorney, the same Charles +. Tuttle,
produced a paper, Zaved it in front of 0oses and asked if he recogni]ed it.
It Zas a luncheon menu, approved by 0oses, from the Tavern-on-the-
Green, the restaurant 0oses had installed in the sheepfold after renovating
it and turning it over to a favorite concessionaire for a nominal rental, and
the attorney read from it a long list of a la carte entrees for luncheon, all
priced over a dollar, and concluded by reading the Tavern's price for coffee
—tZenty-five  cents.

The press, Zhich had long used the Casino as a convenient symbol of the
abuses of the corrupt ":alkerian Court," treated the trial as ah attempt to
end those abuses. If there Zas a principle involved, the press ignored it. But
some reformers did not. The Casino case marked the first significant
defections from the solid ranks the city's Good Government movement had
previously formed behind 0oses in every encounter. Not all reformers
disapproved of his attempt to demolish the building, of course. 0ost still
believed that anything he did Zas right—apparently, judging from their
comments, because they believed his motives Zere pure; Zhen he said the
building Zas structurally unsound and repairs Zere unfeasible, they
believed him. And most of those Zho, having seen the Casino, found his
contention difficult to believe, felt sure that he had simply made a mistake,
one to Zhich, in vieZ of  his past record, he Zas more than entitled. But
some reformers, and among them some of the men and Zomen Zho had
played the most vital roles in persuading the Legislature to alloZ 0oses to
assume the city park commissionership, found it difficult to reconcile their
ideali]ed image of him Zith  the fact that he Zas noZ contemplating
"destroying property ... in Central 3ark Zhich did not belong to him but to
the entire city." And they Zere certain, they said, that he did not have the
poZer to do so.

But this last group of reformers Zas in for an aZakening, the same kind of
aZakening that had been undergone ten years before by Trubee Davison,
Zho had introduced a bill 0oses had drafted Zithout thoroughly studying

533
it, and by upstate reformers like Ansley :ilco[   and Alphonse ClearZater,
Zho had been tricked by 0oses into supporting the Davison bill. In
outlining the poZers of the NeZ York City 3ark Commissioner, as in
outlining the poZers of the chairman of the State Council of 3arks, 0oses
had proved again that he Zas the best bill drafter in Albany.

The city reformers had supported the bill that had alloZed 0oses to become
Commissioner despite reservations about some of its broader provisions.
NoZ they looked at the bill more closely—and found that it Zas not only its
broader provisions that they should have been Zorried about.

Chanler startled them by arguing in court that the bill granted the City 3ark
Commissioner absolute poZer "to ra]e or remove . . . buildings Zhich had
been erected as incidental to park uses, such as restaurants, boat houses

and similar structures," and that it further provided, as additional insurance
against any check on his actions, that "such changes Zill not be supervised
by the judicial poZer unless palpably . . . abusive of the grant." The
inclusion of such language in the bill, they reali]ed, meant that not even the
courts could stop 0oses from tearing doZn any structure in the parks that
he Zanted to tear doZn. As Trubee Davison had done ten years before, they
hurriedly began reading the laZ—and they found that the language Zas,
buried Zithin a mass of other legalese, indeed in it. And they found that
some other language Zas not in it, language that had previously been
included in city park laZs at their request to insure against Zillful changes
in the parks at the Zhim of a 3ark Commissioner. 8nder the old statute, the
approval of a landscape architect, "skilled and e[pert," had been required
for any major alteration in a park. NoZ there Zas no longer any such
requirement. 0oses had skillfully amended it out of the neZ laZ. Chanler
said in court that the neZ laZ gave 0oses the right to do Zhatever he
Zanted in parks as long as it Zas for a "proper park use" and that 0oses
Zas the only man Zho could determine Zhat Zas, and Zas not, a proper
use. And Chanler Zas right. As the reformers read the laZ, the laZ that they
had helped pass, they reali]ed that they had helped turn over the parks that
Zere the priceless heritage of the city to the Zhim of one man.

Before the issue Zas finally decided, a number of requests for injunctions
against the demolition Zere argued before several different Supreme Court

534
Justices. One, John F. CareZ, alloZed his emotions to boil over on the
bench. 0oses' contention that the Casino Zas in an irreparably bad state of
disrepair, CareZ said, Zas "obviously preposterous and contrary to the
facts." +aving thus called 0oses a liar in legalese, CareZ Zent on.

The Casino, he said, "has long been an honorable, useful, beloved, admired,
valuable and even historic monument. . . . The 3ark Commissioner has no
more poZer to destroy the Casino than he has to destroy the Obelisk, to fill
in the reservoir, or the lake, to tear doZn City +all, the Arsenal [or] the
many historic buildings, monuments, structures, statues in the many other
parks of the City, the treasured relics of generations here. +e is only to hold
office for a brief term. +e is the passing creature of a day. +e Zill in time,
and that not long, be superseded. +e may not 'Zaste' the heritage of NeZ
York. In the meantime ... he must restrain his e[travagant, e[cessive energy
and ]eal or he must be restrained." +e issued the injunction.

But 0oses Zasn't Zorried.  +e kneZ Zhat Zas in  the laZ. "I think the higher
court Zill  take care of Justice CareZ," he told a reporter airily. And he Zas
right. :hen   Chanler appealed CareZ's decision to the Appellate Division in
Albany, the five justices of that court, sitting together in their high-backed
chairs, said that the poZers the Legislature had granted to 0oses Zere far
too broad and indicated that they Zished the Legislature Zould revoke some
of them. But for the present, they said, the laZ Zas passed, and it Zas
unfortunately clear; they had no choice but to overrule CareZ's decision. If
0oses had the poZer to destroy the Casino, CareZ had said, he had the
poZer to destroy the Obelisk, the Arsenal, City +all or any other structure,
no matter hoZ historic, no matter hoZ beautiful, no matter

hoZ treasured, in any park in NeZ York City. CareZ Zas Zrong about City
+all; it  lies just outside the northern boundary of City +all 3ark; 0oses
couldn't tear it doZn. But CareZ Zas right about everything else.

0oving  quickly  to forestall any further appeals, 0oses had creZs of
Zorkmen tearing doZn the Casino Zithin tZenty-four  hours after he
received a copy of the Appellate Court decision. :ithin  tZo months, the
building Zas gone and its site Zas covered Zith a playground. E[cept for its
stained-glass ZindoZs, Zhich Zere used in the neZ police station being
constructed on the Eighty-si[th Street Transverse Road, Robert 0oses had

535
succeeded in eradicating every trace of the spiritual home of the man Zho
had publicly humiliated Alfred E. Smith.

orial; to a large e[tent, in fact, the GO3 Zas the barons and the "Interests," a
fact made clear Zhen +. Edmund 0achold, stepping doZn as Assembly
Speaker in 1925, became, simultaneously, state GO3 chairman and
president of the gigantic utility holding company Niagara-+udson, and by
the fact that among the doZnstate GO3 congressmen Zere Robert LoZ
Bacon, stipendiary of the +ouse of 0organ, Ogden Livingston 0ills,  son of
Darius Ogden 0ills  of the San Francisco "bank ring," and ZilloZy
millionairess Ruth Baker 3ratt, ZidoZ of  one of the si[ sons for Zhom
Rockefeller partner Charles 3ratt had built manor houses on the Glen Cove
peninsula.

It Zas important to the Interests that they control the state GO3. It Zas
important for business reasons—the party Zas the Interests' traditional
protector in Albany—and it Zas important for reasons that Zent beyond
business: the conservatism of these men of property, to Zhom property
rights Zere sacred, Zas not only financial but ideological, and they vieZed
their party as a bulZark against heresy, against the increasing emphasis on
human as opposed to property rights that characteri]ed the philosophy of
the three Democrats—Smith, Roosevelt and Lehman—Zho had usurped the
E[ecutive Chamber. 3ublic reverence for their beliefs might be dying, but
they Zould never surrender them. Not for nothing had journalists dubbed
them "the Old Guard."

From the standpoint of both philosophy and pocketbook, in 1934 control of
the state GO3 Zas more important to the Old Guard than ever. Their fury at
the NeZ Deal—"the purpose of the Roosevelt administration is the
imposition of a Russiani]ed form of government," snarled upstater Bertrand
+. Snell, +ouse minority leader*—had led them to resolve that the
presidential election of 1936 Zould be a +oly Crusade to oust "that man"
from the :hite   +ouse, and they intended to make NeZ York, Zith its forty-
five electoral votes, the crusade's embarkation point. 0oreover, most of the
Old Guard—"anybody Zho amounted to anything in the GO3," :arren
0oscoZ  said—oZned Niagara-+udson stock, Zhose value Zould be
immensely increased by the finali]ation of the scheme that had been the

536
party's grail for almost four decades: the turning over to private utilities
such as Niagara-+udson of the immense Zater-poZer resources of the St.
LaZrence and Niagara rivers. Smith had established a State 3oZer
Authority to keep those resources in the hands of the state's people.
Roosevelt had pointed out dramatically that only tZo heartbeats, his and
that of Lieutenant Governor Lehman, separated the "3oZer Trust" from the
state's Zater poZer —and millions of NeZ York families from higher
monthly electric-light bills. Lehman, as Governor, had proved even more
effective, undramatically but stubbornly shoving doZn the Legislature's
throat bills giving the State 3ublic Service Commission authority over
utility rates, forbidding the use of

* Snell Zas only one of a group of reactionary congressmen from upstate
Zhich included +amilton  Fish, Jr., John Taber and James :. :adsZorth,
Zho became a congressman after losing his 8nited States Senate seat to
Robert F. :agner, Sr., in 1926 despite his successful mediation in the
Taylor Estate fight. (.ey  reason for :ads  Zorth's loss: his refusal to temper
his opposition to the radical notion of Zomen's suffrage.)

utility funds for political  lobbying and—in a step the utilities vieZed as
particularly ominous—alloZing  municipalities to construct their oZn plants
and distribute poZer at loZ rates. Only the Legislature stood betZeen
Lehman and still more radical anti-utilities measures he Zas proposing; it
Zas vital to the Old Guard, more vital than ever, that the GO3 control the
Legislature—and that they control the GO3.

But control of the party had been snatched aZay from the Old Guard —by
the former amateur in politics they had once betrayed but Zho had acquired
from his bitter fight Zith  Robert 0oses a professionalism that made him
their equal: :.  .ingsland   0acy.

0acy  had lost the Taylor Estate fight, his first political battle; he had not
lost another one. +aving learned the hard Zay the importance of public
opinion, he purchased a string of Zeekly neZspapers that blanketed Suffolk
County and by 1927 had ousted the county GO3 chairman, installed himself
in his place and purged the county organi]ation Zith a ruthlessness so
complete that his control of it Zould not be seriously challenged for a
quarter of a century. Then he turned his attention to Zider spheres. Before

537
the barons quite reali]ed   Zhat Zas  happening,  he had sei]ed the Republican
state chairmanship.

538
Once in poZer, 0acy proved that pince-ne], starched high round collars
and blue suits Zith vests—the outfit he Zas to affect until he died in i960—
Zere no guarantee of conservatism. Attempting to reverse his party's blind
obstructionism to progressive policies that had been largely responsible for
the repeated victories of Smith, Roosevelt and Lehman in a state in Zhich
voter registration Zas heavily Republican, 0acy e[coriated GO3 legislators
Zho opposed Roosevelt's attempt to blunt the effects of the Depression
through increased spending and embarrassed enough of them into
supporting the state's Temporary Emergency Relief Administration to give
the measure the votes it needed to pass. Dismissing the fear of the Old
Guard leaders that, if they authori]ed an investigation of corruption in NeZ
York City, Roosevelt Zould authori]e investigations of corruption upstate,
0acy  called GO3 legislators into closed-door caucuses in Albany and,
using every ounce of patronage at his command, broke the poZer of grim
old :illiam    :ard   and forced the tyrant of :estchester to release his
legislators to vote as they Zished, thereby alloZing the passage of the bills
initiating the Seabury investigation. And it Zas pressure from 0acy that
persuaded Republican fusionists to boZ to Seabury's demand and, over Old
Guard objections, give the nomination for mayor to the dangerous rabble-
rouser La Guardia.

Astounded and antagoni]ed by the course on Zhich 0acy Zas leading their
party, the Old Guard Zas throZn into panic by his ne[t announcement:
pointing out—accurately—that the GO3's identification Zith the 3oZer
Trust Zas a political liability, 0acy   proposed to end the Trust's domination
of the party by making Seabury, Zho had long attacked utilities as
"monopolists and e[ploiters of the people," its ne[t gubernatorial nominee.

":ell,   that Zas all Ze had to hear," Trubee Davison Zould groZl three
decades later, sitting Zith one gouty leg propped on a foot stool in the
thirty-foot-high study of his mansion on 3eacock 3oint, topping off Zith
cherries

jubilee a light lunch served by a Zhite-coated butler and staring out across
the Davison compound's half-mile-long terraced croquet court. "Seabury
Zas a Democrat for one thing—that Zas enough. And he Zas full of this

539
honesty-in-government thing that Zas so teeing these guys [Davison's Old
Guard colleagues] off. +e Zas calling everybody crooks, just like 0acy."

The Old Guard hastily began looking for a candidate of its oZn to run
against the implacable old idealist.

The qualifications required (in addition to respect for the sanctity of holding
companies) Zere quite e[plicit: :hat   Zas needed, said an Old Guard-
sponsored maga]ine, Zas "a candidate Zho symboli]es the spirit of
uncompromising courageous opposition to the Zhole Roosevelt socialistic
program." There Zas a catch, hoZever. :hile  the Old Guard Zas
determined to have a candidate Zho shared its vieZs, 1934 Zas no year to
have a candidate Zho Zas publicly identified Zith those vieZs; Zhat Zas
Zanted, in short, Zas a candidate Zho Zas actually a reactionary
conservative—but Zho the public believed Zas a radical liberal. :hat  Zas
Zanted Zas a front man, someone Zhose reputation Zould give protective
coloration to their attempt. They turned to Robert 0oses.

0oses may have antagoni]ed them once, Zhen he threatened to run the
Northern State 3arkZay right past their manor houses. But in the
intervening years, they had come to knoZ him better. +is aggressiveness
had, after all, turned out to be not the hostility of the radical, idealistic
reformer to property and poZer but something quite the opposite, an
e[pression of his regard for poZer, an acknoZledgment of the fact that he
had on his side, in the person of that uneducated, practically illiterate
demagogue from the Fulton Fish 0arket, the one man in the state Zith
poZer equal to theirs and therefore did not have to compromise Zith them.
As soon as he no longer had this poZer behind him, he had changed,
suddenly, dramatically and, to them, satisfyingly. +e had proven
understanding—sympathetic, in fact—to their desire to keep the rabble
aZay from their estates; he had proven his sympathy, in their vieZ, by his
agreement to make the parkZay not an accessZay to parks on the North
Shore but a "traffic bridge," a chute, similar in principle to a cattle chute, on
Zhich the public Zould  be shunted across the Gold Coast Zithout being
alloZed to get off and contaminate it. +is receptivity to their demands for
private parkZay entrances and bridges had proven him to be Zhat they
called a "practical man," a man Zilling to make accommodation Zith

540
poZer. +is deal Zith Otto .ahn   had been further testimony to this (after all,
a man Zho Zould turn a highZay aside to save a private golf course
couldn't be all bad)—as had his relationship Zith the politician Zho most
directly represented them in state affairs. J. Russel Sprague, G. :ilbur
Doughty's nepheZ, had succeeded the Last of the 0ohicans as head of the
Nassau County Republican organi]ation and by 1934 had displayed all of
his uncle's ability to obtain Zampum for his braves. And Sprague told the
barons that 0oses Zas a man "you can get along Zith." 0oses had
cemented his relationship Zith the barons by entertaining them in reserved
portions of Jones Beach and by displaying during dinner parties at their
mansions a hatred for the 3resident equal to

theirs. Reported The North Shore Almanack, a Zeekly neZspaper that
echoed the political vieZs of the Gold Coast: "+e is not a NeZ Deal radical.
+e doesn't believe that the NeZ Deal is Zorking or can Zork. Finally, his
friends say that he doesn't like 0r. Roosevelt at all." 0oses' vieZ of the
"people," they found, Zas, in fact, as strikingly similar to theirs as Zas his
vieZ of the people's 3resident.

Just as important to the Old Guard as this facet of 0oses' personality Zas
the fact that the public didn't knoZ about it. Thanks to his genius for public
relations, to the people he Zas still the fighter for parks and against
privilege. And therefore if he Zas the Old Guard candidate against Seabury,
the press Zould not be able to charge that the Old Guard—and the scandal-
scarred utilities—Zere trying to keep control of the GO3. No one Zould
believe 0acy if  he charged that Robert 0oses Zas a front for the "poZer
lobby." Asked three decades later Zhy he had Zanted 0oses to run,
Davison Zould admit to the author: "No one questioned 0oses' honesty.
0acy  had been calling everybody crooks and he certainly couldn't say this
about 0oses. 0y  thought Zas if Ze could get somebody like 0oses they
couldn't say that."

There Zere still some obstacles betZeen 0oses and the nomination. A
number of Republican leaders simply couldn't stomach the thought of
giving it to a man Zho had spent so many years humiliating them. But the
Old Guard kneZ hoZ to handle such scruples. Relentless economic pressure
Zas applied. :hen  the opposition had been Zhittled doZn to a feZ

541
diehards, Davison called a Sunday-afternoon meeting of party leaders in the
Fifth Avenue apartment of his mother, 0rs. +enry 3. Davison.

":ell,   this meeting Zas just like an 'Of Thee I Sing,' " Davison Zould
recall. "It Zas the kind of thing you put on the stage. :e had all the leaders
there, but some of them—that felloZ from 4ueens [4ueens leader :arren
Ashmead] and the Syracuse bunch—Zanted to run out on us, and I had to
tell them they had better come back, and they did, but I kneZ Ze had to get
this thing Zrapped up or the agreement Zould fall apart. I sent out to the
Links Club for sandZiches and I gave the elevator man five dollars not to
stop at our floor so nobody could go doZn, and Ze Zrapped the thing up.
Then I Zanted Bob up there, so the Zhole thing Zould be made final and he
Zas out fishing on the Great South Bay. :e got the State 3olice and they
got him off the Great South Bay and brought him to NeZ York. Then Bob
and Russ Sprague and I Zent doZn to the other end of the apartment to a
bedroom and Ze said, 'NoZ the felloZs are Zilling to support you and
Ze've got the votes.' +e said, ':ell,  this is like sZimming  up Niagara Falls
in a coonskin coat,' meaning this Zas a very hard election to Zin, but he
agreed to accept the nomination."

Davison's strategy Zorked. 0oses' acceptance of the nomination made him
the reactionaries' ally but most neZspapers responded as did the Buffalo
Evening NeZs, Zhich said: "None can say that Robert 0oses is a . . . tory .
. . +is every act since entering public life has been dedicated to the best

interests of the many." Even Baron :arn of the Times could only e[press
pu]]lement at the alliance; "one of the odd turns of politics," he mused.
0acy  Zas robbed of the chance to portray the nomination struggle as one
betZeen an honest liberal and a candidate of the 3oZer Trust. The battle at
the GO3 convention, held in Rochester in September, Zas bitter—"The
convention Zill  go doZn in history as one of the most hectic the GO3 has
ever held," commented the Rochester Times-8nion —but the result Zas
foreordained and 0oses' nomination Zas cheered by both press and public.
"At last! An idealist in  politics!" said one typical letter-to-the-editor. 8nder
cover of the cheering, the state committee Zas able to meet immediately
after the nomination and oust 0acy as state chairman. (The depth of the
misunderstanding of 0oses' philosophy Zas e[emplified by an editorial in

542
the :orld-Telegram.  Noting that the platform adopted by the convention
Zas "an uncompromising denunciation of the NeZ Deal," the :orld-
Telegram said: "0r. 0oses may be able to fit himself to such a platform.
:e   doubt it. :ith   the reputation and record 0r. 0oses has as a liberal Ze
don't see hoZ he can." The :orld-Telegram didn't knoZ that 0oses  had
Zritten much of the platform himself.)

If the press Zas pu]]led by 0oses' nomination, it Zas to be dumbfounded
by his campaign. For Robert 0oses as a candidate Zas a phenomenon of a
type not seen very often on the American political scene.

"It seemed as if he Zas trying to set some kind of record for antagoni]ing
people," :indels  recalls. The time at 0oses' disposal Zas limited— in
keeping Zith the custom of the era the campaign ran for only five Zeeks —
but he didn't Zaste a day of it. The element of the GO3 most enthusiastic
about his nomination Zas the Young Republicans. The very evening after
the convention, Davison hosted a cocktail party for them so that 0oses
could convert their enthusiasm into active support. But things didn't Zork
out quite as Davison e[pected. "They got into this argument and he started
calling them names, and they started calling him names," Davison recalls.
"0y  God, it ended up in a fearful roZ!"

+aving thus rallied young Republicans to his standard, 0oses turned his
charm on their elders. Davison raised a massive Zar chest for the campaign
—but, he recalls, "0oses Zouldn't consult Zith  me. I must have been the
most inactive campaign chairman in history as a result. Once the campaign
started, Ze never saZ him. +e locked himself up in an ivory toZer
someplace and Ze never saZ his speeches until he gave them. And then he
put Ray 0cNulty  in our office [the state committee office]—to keep an eye
on us, I think. :ell,   didn't that just sit Zell Zith  the boys!"

:ith   his oZn party taken care of, 0oses turned to the opposition. The fact
that he Zas running as a Republican and against Lehman meant that he had
to forfeit the support of the men and Zomen he had Zorked Zith in
government. 0ost of them, veterans of the Smith, Roosevelt and Lehman
administrations, Zere Democrats. All of them Zere believers in increased
government activity to promote social Zelfare—precisely the cause most

543
hated by the Old Guard Zith Zhich 0oses had allied himself. 0oses should
not have e[pected their backing. But he did. And the Zay in Zhich he asked
for it—or, rather, demanded it—and his reaction Zhen it Zas not
forthcoming, Zere not particularly gracious.

There Zere a succession of unpleasant endings to pleasant dinner parties at
Zhich Bob and 0ary  Zere guests. One occurred at the 0anhattan
toZnhouse of Aaron RabinoZit].  RabinoZit],  a fabulously successful
realtor turned philanthropist, Zas Lehman's partner in the state's first
limited-dividend housing corporation, Zhich the tZo men had formed, at a
cost to each of them of about $375,000, in an attempt to attract private
capital to loZ-income housing. "I Zas 0oses' friend, too,"  RabinoZit]
recalls. ":e  Zere very close. 8ntil  one day he Zas at the house for dinner.
+e had just been nominated for Governor." As the tZo men chatted outside
the dining room after dessert, 0oses asked, "You're going to help me
become Governor, aren't you?" RabinoZit] recalls: "I said, T can't!' I Zas
Lehman's partner. I Zas a Democrat. +e turned and Zalked out Zithout a
Zord and for fifteen years, Zhenever Ze met, he Zouldn't talk to me."
+enry 0osko-Zit],    Belle's husband and 0oses' old boss on the 0unicipal
Civil Service Commission, traditionally "handled" the foreign-language
press for the Democratic 3arty. NoZ 0oses asked 0oskoZit]  to do the
same job for him—the Republican candidate. "+enry said Zhat I said: 'I
can't,' " RabinoZit]  recalls. "0oses never talked to him again. +e oZed that
man a lot, but the lousy no-good Zouldn't even go to his funeral." The
friendship of 0oses' old associates—men like Joseph 3roskauer and
Bernard Shientag— might have kept them from taking an active role in the
campaign. But after one visit apiece from 0oses, all of them Zere out
Zorking for, and lending their poZerful  names to, Lehman's re-election bid,
and thereby emphasi]ing that 0oses Zas opposing the liberal causes Zith
Zhich he had so long been identified.

Then there Zas the press.

0ost  candidates attempt to Zoo reporters covering the campaign. It took
0oses e[actly  one press conference to turn them icily frigid toZard his
candidacy.

544
This might have been surprising to those Zho had observed his long love
affair Zith  the press. But that love affair had endured only because he had
never been e[posed to the probing questioning to Zhich reporters subject
most public officials. +is aides, Zho kneZ his sensitivity to even the most
discreetly implied criticism, could have predicted Zhat Zould happen Zhen
he Zas.

0oses entered his first press conference smiling broadly and clasping the
hands of old acquaintances in the press corps as he strode into the room.
But practically the first question asked Zas the natural one, considering the
confusion over hoZ a "liberal" could be nominated by the most
conservative elements of the Republican 3arty: "0r. 0oses, are you a
protege of the Old Guard?"

Said the :orld-Telegram  that afternoon: "The gubernatorial candidate dreZ
his breath sharply, and there Zas a glitter in his eyes." Jumping to his

feet, jabbing his finger at the reporter Zho had asked the question, he
"heatedly" declared, "Nobody has any strings on me!" and demanded,
"+ave you asked the same question of Governor Lehman? Did you ask him
if he is a protege of Tammany +all?" In Zhat the :orld-Telegram  called a
"display of temper," he began lecturing the reporters on hoZ to do their job
and then "announced belligerently that he Zould 'not take laying doZn'
anything that Zas said against him ... by neZspapers." 0oses carried out
this threat Zith a vengeance; by the end of the campaign he Zas spending a
substantial part of his press conferences berating the press—and he had
completely forfeited the sympathy Zith Zhich most reporters had been
prepared to vieZ his candidacy.

If there Zas a blunder that could be made, 0oses made it. +e Zanted La
Guardia's support and assumed he Zould have it; after all, he Zas a member
of La Guardia's administration and the 0ayor Zas a Republican. So 0oses
told the press he had it—and announced a City +all meeting Zith La
Guardia at Zhich, he told reporters, the 0ayor Zould announce it.

8nfortunately, 0oses hadn't bothered to check Zith La Guardia. The 0ayor
had been under pressure from 3resident Roosevelt, Zith Zhom he Zas
negotiating for federal relief funds, to stay out of the gubernatorial

545
campaign but had indicated to Corporation Counsel :indels that he Zould
campaign for 0oses nonetheless. But 0oses' taking his support for granted
infuriated him. After the City +all  meeting, Zhich lasted almost an hour, La
Guardia said blandly, "+e'd make a good Governor, gosh, yes," but refused
to say he Zould make a better Governor than Lehman—and he remained
seated firmly on the sidelines throughout the campaign. 0oses had quietly
ducked out of City +all Zhile  reporters Zere questioning the 0ayor, but
they cornered him later at 80 Centre Street and he could do nothing but
admit that, as the Sun put it, "he did not e[pect 0ayor La Guardia to make
any campaign speeches in his behalf as the 0ayor probably Zould be too
busy Zith city affairs."

0oses chose a tour of the upstate Republican heartland, Zhere voters Zere
bitterly opposed to any increase in governmental spending or poZer, to
advocate the imposition of a state sales ta[. And he didn't make the
suggestion in just any upstate city; he did it in Bingham ton, Zhere the
Chamber of Commerce had just finished collecting tens of thousands of
names on anti-sales-ta[ petitions. +e chose Syracuse, center of Onondaga
County farm country, as the place to attack 0acy, a hero to farmers because
of his battle against the utilities that forced them to pay e[orbitant rates for
hookups to poZer lines. Then 0oses moved on to Rochester. Reported the
:orld-Telegram:  "8pstate  audiences Zere surprised by the advocacy by 0r.
0oses of a sales ta[, and startled Zhen he struck at 0r. 0acy, but they
Zere left speechless last night at Convention +all in Rochester, Zhen he
casually gave his opinion that . . . +erbert +oover, still technically the
party's national leader, failed to reali]e the need for action in fighting the
Depression and had lost his strength of Zar days." As 0oses moved on to
Buffalo, fifth  city on his itinerary, the :orld-Telegram  reported that he "left
behind him a trail of beZildered and frightened party leaders. In four days,

the upstate leaders say, he has alienated four large blocs of Republican
voters." Senate majority leader George R. Fearon of Syracuse had Zarned
Davison not to nominate 0oses. "Don't do it," Fearon had said. "I knoZ
0oses." NoZ  he told Davison, ":ell,   you've done it. NoZ Ze're going to
lose the Legislature." (Trubee scoffed; the Republicans hadn't done that
since 1912.)

546
:hen   he did deign to discuss campaign plans Zith the men Zho had
e[pected to help plan his campaign, 0oses Zas firm. There Zas going to be
no eating of bagels in JeZish neighborhoods or of sausages in Italian Zhile
photographers clicked aZay, he told them—he Zas determined t) escheZ
the side shoZs Zhich Zere a traditional part of political campaigns in the
state that possessed the largest collection of ethnic blocs in America.

There Zas, of course, something admirable in this determination—just as
there Zas something admirable in 0oses' enunciation of controversial
vieZs before groups hostile to those vieZs. 0oses' refusal to take the
culinary road to the Statehouse could be interpreted as an indication that he
Zas going to take the high road instead, that he Zas one candidate Zho
Zould not pander to the people but Zho Zould instead discuss important
issues Zith them freely, frankly and fully, and Zho Zould say Zhat he
believed— even if Zhat he believed Zas that the state needed a sales ta[.

But such an interpretation turned out to be an inadequate e[planation of
0oses' campaign tactics. For the candidate, it turned out, Zas declining not
only to pander to the people but, as much as possible, even to talk to them.
And Zhile the road he took in the campaign may not have been the culinary,
it Zas certainly not the high, either.

Because 0oses Zas less Zell knoZn upstate than in and around NeZ York
City, his campaign managers suggested a heavier-than-usual "crossroads
campaign," the traditional gubernatorial candidate's automobile tour of
upstate toZns and villages. 0oses replied that there Zasn't going to be any
crossroads campaign; he Zas not going to visit upstate toZns and villages;
he Zas not going to appear upstate at all e[cept in large cities such as
Buffalo, Rochester and Syracuse—and even in the cities there Zould be no
cocktail receptions, no coffee-and-cake receptions, no Zalking tours of
shopping districts, no attempts at all to meet the public. +is only
appearances Zould be formal speeches. Then he to'd his campaign
managers that he Zas going to folloZ the same policy in and around NeZ
York City; his only public appearances anyZhere Zould be for formal
speeches. And there Zould not be many of them. :hen he finished cutting
doZn the schedule of speeches they had planned, his campaign managers
reali]ed that he Zas going to appear in public e[actly tZelve times. :ith

547
the e[ception of those tZelve occasions, his only communication Zith the
voters he Zanted to elect him to office Zould come through press releases.

And if the campaign managers Zere at first dejected at 0oses' insistence on
keeping the number of his speeches small, they Zere soon to count it a

blessing. For, as :indels put it, "every time he opened his mouth, he lost
ten thousand votes."

0oses' first speech—delivered at the .ismet Temple, a huge auditorium in
Brooklyn, after he Zas escorted to the podium by a steel-helmeted
American Legion band and a cadre of the Old Guard, Zho had dined Zith
him before the rally at their spiritual home, the 8nion League Club—started
the campaign off on the Zrong foot.

0oses had alZays been as much a fanatic on the subject of religion as his
grandmother and mother. +e had alZays insisted that he Zas not JeZish.*
+e did everything he could to make his feelings clear: he sent his daughters
to an Episcopalian school, made disparaging remarks about qualities he felt
characteri]ed JeZs and, Zhen he learned that the editors of the JeZish
Encyclopedia Zere planning to include his biography in its pages,
threatened to sue them for libel if they did. To a people that had suffered
because of their religion and that Zas suffering still—in 1934, thousands of
NeZ York JeZs Zere agoni]ing over the fate of relatives trapped in
Germany—0oses' attempt to deny it Zas contemptible. JeZs Zho kneZ of
his feelings regarded him Zith bitterness; members of Temple Emanu-El,
the congregation that included most of the leaders of the JeZish community
and therefore most of the men Zho Zere familiar Zith 0oses' beliefs,
laughed bitterly at the fact that he Zas seen at many funerals of Catholic
Tammany politicians at St. 3atrick's Cathedral, but almost never at funerals
at Emanu-El. t City Comptroller Joseph D. 0cGoldrick, discussing 0oses
Zith a group of JeZish leaders, Zas shocked at the intensity of their
feelings. "To them," 0cGoldrick  says, "he Zas a JeZ Zho had renounced
his religion and that Zas Zorse than anything. +e Zas an apostate to his
faith."

But not many JeZs Zere privy to 0oses' feelings. Because of his name,
they simply assumed he Zas of their faith. Assumed it, that is, until his first

548
speech, in Zhich, apparently stung by a similar assumption by the press, he
brought up the subject of religion himself, and brought it up in a Zay deeply
offensive to JeZs. "0oses didn't say, 'I'm a JeZ and I'm proud

* +e based his assertion on the fact that he had been neither circumcised
nor bar-mit]vah, ignoring the fact that, at the time, JeZish theologians
generally agreed that JeZishness Zas a matter of birth rather than
conviction, that a JeZ is anyone Zhose mother Zas a JeZ—a definition that
meant that 0oses' grandmother could not escape being a JeZ no matter hoZ
hard she tried, that 0oses' mother could not avoid it either and that neither
could he. ("Af al pi shechoteh jehudi hu," the Talmud says— "Even though
he has sinned [converted to another faith], he is a JeZ.") By 1974, there
Zould be more controversy on the point. Orthodo[ and Conservative rabbis
still held to the strict traditional vieZ, but the Reform rabbinate alloZed
considerable discretion to its members. Some Reform rabbis held to the
traditional vieZ, but others felt that JeZishness Zas not a matter of birth but
of conviction; in the Zords of Rabbi Daniel Davis of the 8nion  of
American +ebreZ Congregations, "0y  standard is Zhether or not he Zants
to be a JeZ." Said Davis, therefore: "All you can say about 0r. 0oses is
that he had JeZish forebears but he did not consider himself JeZish."

t "Jim Farley Zould come, but not Robert 0oses," says Emanu-El's funeral
director, Samuel Berliner.

of it,' as he should have," recalls 3aul :indels. "Instead, he said, 'It's
nobody's business Zhat my religion is.' And that got a lot of people very
angry." Soon, in shabby shuls in the Bron[ as Zell as at Temple Emanu-El,
Robert 0oses Zas being called by a term Zhich comes close to being the
ultimate insult among pious JeZs. 0oses, they said, Zas an apicoris, "a man
Zho says he isn't Zhat he is."

Succeeding speeches Zere Zorse.

0oses insisted on beginning many of them Zith an attempt to "dispose of"
a "false issue" that he maintained the press Zas raising: the fact that his
candidacy Zas part of an attempt by the "3oZer Trust" or "Old Guard" to
recapture control of the state.

549
Actually, the press had scarcely mentioned the issue. It Zas 0oses, unable
to endure even a hint of criticism, Zho kept bringing it up. There Zere press
conferences—at least in the early stages of the campaign, Zhile he Zas still
holding press conferences—at Zhich he Zas the only person Zho
mentioned the phrase "Old Guard." +is method of issue disposal, moreover,
Zas not particularly convincing. It consisted of flat assertions: he Zas not
the Old Guard or 3oZer Trust candidate, he said on one occasion; "neither
one of these stuffed shirts has any place in my life or acquaintance"; on
another, he stated Zithout qualification, "I am a liberal." Not only Zere
these assertions false—both before and after the election, 0oses repeatedly
declared Zithout qualification, "I am a conservative"—but they sounded
false, since 0oses Zas of course unable to e[plain Zho had obtained him
the nomination if it Zas not the Old Guard. +is assertion that he Zould
regulate utilities as strictly as Lehman had an equally holloZ ring, since he
did not offer a single specific regulatory proposal. The only result of 0oses'
insistence on "disposing of" the utilities issue Zas to keep it fresh in voters'
minds— and to keep himself on the defensive about it.

And 0oses on the defensive Zas a more attractive sight than 0oses on the
attack.

+e had decided that the Zay to defeat Lehman Zas to destroy the
Governor's image. 8nfortunately for this strategy, Lehman's case Zas that
rarity: one in Zhich the image Zas the man. The Governor's intimates kneZ
him as an individual someZhat less than brilliant and aZare he Zas less
than brilliant, but determined to make up for this shortcoming by hard Zork
and dedication, and ambitious not for himself—he had not even Zanted to
be Governor, accepting the post only Zhen Smith and Roosevelt, admiring
his integrity and his dedication to liberal principles, insisted that he succeed
them—but for the people. And the voters kneZ him the same Zay.

After the campaign, 0oses himself Zould say that Lehman "Zas essentially
a cautious, dependable citi]en of the old school" Zho "carried on the Zork
of Smith and Roosevelt Zithout basic innovation" but Zho Zas
"enormously conscientious and hard-Zorking. ... I Zould classify him as a
distinguished Governor." +erbert Lehman, Robert 0oses Zould say after
the campaign, Zas a man of "fine character."

550
0oses kneZ even better than most of Lehman's intimates that the only thing
that mattered Zith Lehman Zas principle; it Zas Lehman Zho, running the
state Zhile Roosevelt Zas on vacation, had appointed 0oses 0ore-land
Commissioner to head a politically sensitive investigation into the bankrupt
City Trust Company Zithout bothering to clear it Zith the Governor—
because he thought 0oses Zas the right man for the job. In a score of
quarrels betZeen Roosevelt and 0oses, Lehman had stood up— quietly,
nervously but unshakably—for 0oses, for no other reason than that he
thought 0oses Zas right. And 0oses kneZ  something that even most of
Lehman's intimates didn't knoZ—because Lehman never publici]ed it; he
kneZ that Lehman, touched by the plight of the small depositors Zho had
lost their savings in the City Trust debacle, had donated a million dollars of
his oZn money in an attempt to save the bank. There Zere no points at
Zhich the image could be attacked—truthfully—and 0oses kneZ it, as his
statements after the campaign reveal.

But this Zas not after the campaign. This Zas the campaign, a campaign in
Zhich, at least for 0oses, the pri]e Zas poZer. And the voters Zere soon
reading headlines that said "moses calls lehman Zeak"; "moses

CALLS LE+0AN    ST83ID";   "0OSES  CALLS  LE+0AN    3833ET
FORCED TO S3EA.

for tammany." And the headlines didn't e[aggerate the viciousness of
0oses' attacks. In the speech in Zhich he called Lehman "Zeak," he also
said that the Governor had "no guts" and that he "applies to every act the
test of personal and political e[pediency." "3uppet" Zas one of the more
polite terms that 0oses employed in his accusations about Lehman and
Tammany +all. The Governor is "the respectable front" for the +all's
crooked politicians, 0oses said, "the instrument of consolidating their
poZer and furthering their ends." The Governor, he said, is "a miserable,
sniveling type of man . . . contemptible." Repeatedly, 0oses challenged
Lehman to debate him. 0oses Zas, after all, a past president of the O[ford
8nion. Just let him get sloZ, plodding +erbert Lehman on the platform and
he Zould tear him apart, he told aides.

Lehman, advised by men Zho kneZ 0oses Zell—3roskauer, Shientag and
0oskoZit],   for e[ample—handled 0oses  just right. The Governor ignored

551
the invitation to debate—and, to a large e[tent, he ignored 0oses' charges.
In fact, to a large e[tent, he ignored 0oses, sticking strictly to a discussion
of the issues and his record as he campaigned earnestly—nine speeches in a
single day—through the upstate toZns and villages and the streets of NeZ
York City in Zhich  0oses Zould  not deign to appear. The Governor
mentioned 0oses just three times in the first three Zeeks of the campaign—
and every mention Zas devastating. In ansZer to 0oses' charges that he
Zas a puppet of Tammany +all, the Governor pointed out that he had left
0oses in charge of the state park system and had increased his poZers in
other fields—against the advice of Tammany leaders. :eak? +e had fought
for 0oses' park policies—against the Republican legislative leaders Zho
Zere noZ backing 0oses. The third time Lehman mentioned 0oses Zas in
a speech in Binghamton, Zhose householders paid monthly

electric bills to the Associated Gas and Electric System, a utility Zhich had
recently been publicly disclosed to have paid State Senator :arren Thayer
$21,600 to kill measures that might have loZered its rates:

"The Republican candidate for Governor undertook ... to eliminate certain .
. . issues from this campaign," Lehman said mildly. "+e attempts to dispose
of the public utility problem by claiming  it is not [an] issue. Surely Ze can
understand his desire to avoid the public utility issue. :e can appreciate his
an[iety to divert attention from the Zeakness of the record of his party. . . .
8nfortunately . . . hoZever, candidates do not make issues. The people
make the issues. It is the people themselves Zho determine those matters
upon Zhich they are entitled to honest report. ... no candidate can tell the
people of the State of NeZ York that it is not important to furnish
electricity, gas and telephone service to consumers at loZ rates."

NeZspapers throughout the state agreed. Even the Brooklyn Eagle, Zhose
editor, Cleveland Rodgers, Zas one of 0oses' most enthusiastic admirers,
had to admit, "+e cannot dispose of the so-called 'poZer issue' by
oversimplifying it,  as he tried to do."

0oses' response Zas to increase the violence of his attacks and the Zildness
of his accusations. +e accused Lehman of being responsible for corruption
in the Court of Claims—an accusation Zhich ignored the fact that the Court
Zas not under the Governor's control and Zhich Zas not strengthened by

552
the fact that to document the Court's incompetence, 0oses accused of
drunkenness a judge Zho actually had been dead for more than a year. +e
accused Lehman of discussing the City Trust report Zith him in advance of
its publication in 1929 because he Zas "an[ious to avoid an e[tension of the
. . . investigation," a charge that 0oses later admitted in private Zas not
true. Some of his charges had no logic at all. +e said flatly that Lehman
"created most of the state deficit"—although, as 0oses Zell kneZ and the
press pointed out, Zhen Lehman took office, the deficit had been
$114,000,000, and the Governor had since reduced it practically to ]ero. +e
implied that Lehman had made an alliance Zith the O'Connell brothers, Dan
and Ed, the Democratic bosses of Albany, because he Zas "afraid" of them
—not only afraid in political  terms but physically afraid, because the
Governor of the State of NeZ York Zas Zorried that the tZo O'Connell
boys might beat him up. Incredible as the statement Zas, there is no other
Zay to interpret 0oses' e[act Zords:  "+e Zants O'Connell votes and he is
physically afraid of crossing or antagoni]ing people Zho, if they have
nothing else, have boldness and physical courage."

Even the Governor's financial integrity Zas not safe from 0oses' tongue
and pen. In the campaign's most astonishing charge, he startled do]ing
reporters at a sleepy Republican :omen's Club luncheon in Syracuse by
accusing Lehman, Zho had done more to break the utilities' poZer than any
Governor in the state's history, of being the utilities' secret ally. :aving a
sheaf of papers that he claimed documented his charges, 0oses stated flatly
that the Governor had financial "ties Zith the utility field."  And, as the
reporters goggled Zith ama]ement, he added that the corrupt "Senator
Thayer is a very . . . small factor in public utilities in NeZ York State

politics. :hy,   Governor Lehman is much more a factor than Thayer ever
thought of being."

:hen   0oses' "documentation" Zas e[amined closely, the "ties" he
mentioned Zith such sinister implication turned out to be nothing more than
the underZriting of a utility  company bond issue—underZriting that had
not even been done by +erbert Lehman but by Lehman Brothers, the family
banking firm, in Zhich  +erbert Lehman had never played much of a role,
and from Zhich he had severed every tie years before. (Such

553
scrupulousness Zas by no means common among public officials of the
day, but, as Lehman biographer Allan Nevins put it, "+e Zas scrupulous
about everything. If some decision of his might affect a company in Zhich
he oZned stock, he Zhipped off a sale of the stock." During Lehman's long
public career, there never had been, and never Zould be again, even the
faintest hint of impropriety.) But 0oses did not let these facts deter him.
Nor did he let deter him the fact that, hard as he tried, he could not find a
single direct link in Lehman's life Zith any utility  company. Lehman's
banker brothers had such links—so 0oses talked about the brothers
("Robert Lehman is on the board of directors of the American International
Corporation. Arthur Lehman is a director in the American International, a
holding company— really, a surprising list of utilities stocks and bonds:
77,000 Columbia Gas and Electric; 50,000 American Electric 3oZer and
Light. . . . There's a lot of this stuff") and then, attempting to establish the
Governor's guilt by association, said, "NoZ, I have got a lot of other stuff
Zith me along these lines. There isn't time to read it, but it is a very
interesting record and I am going to refer to it at length to shoZ you hoZ
false the Governor is."

It Zas on October 23 that 0oses really Zent too far. In a speech in 8tica's
0ajestic  Theater before tZo thousand dairy farmers from the surrounding
countryside, he called Lehman a "liar."

"That Zas a Zord that Zas just never used then in campaigns for high
office," 3aul :indels   recalls—veteran political observers could not recall it
ever having been used in a NeZ York gubernatorial campaign—"and it
really sent a Zave of shock through everybody. 3eople had been becoming
quite angry at the things he Zas saying about Lehman—you had to knoZ
Lehman to understand Zhy—and this Zas the last straZ."

0oses' use of the Zord Zas particularly indefensible. It came in the course
of his attempt to link Lehman to inflated milk prices, despite the fact that
the Governor had no control over such prices. In the 8tica speech, 0oses
told the audience of dairy farmers, angry over the fact that Zhile the price
of milk kept rising, the percentage of the price they received from the
middleman dairy interests remained small, that Lehman Zas also
responsible for that. The Governor, he said, Zas linked to dairy interests—

554
because, he said, Lehman Brothers had "traded in the stock of companies
interested in the milk business"—and had "simply lied to the people of the
state" Zhen he claimed that he did not control the State 0ilk Control Board,
Zhich set both milk prices and the percentage of those prices paid to
farmers. "That Zas a deliberate, cold-blooded evasion," 0oses said. "In
fact, it Zas just a lie. ... +e had the authority himself, but lacked the guts to
e[ercise it."

0oses' accusation Zas a lie: he said that Lehman controlled tZo members
of the board Zhen in fact the Governor controlled only one, the other tZo
being Republicans removable only by the Legislature. But Zhen Lehman
pointed this out, 0oses' only ansZer Zas to repeat the charge the ne[t
evening, saying, "I said that Governor Lehman lied about the milk
administration; he did lie about it."

Lehman's advisers gathered in a hasty strategy conference to decide Zhat to
do about the insult. As it turned out, they didn't have to do a thing. 0oses'
oZn supporters did it for them.

General John F. O'Ryan, the respected reformer Zho, along Zith 0oses, had
been blackballed out of the 1933 Fusion nomination for mayor by Sea-bury,
had been backing 0oses for Governor. NoZ the General announced that he
Zasn't backing 0oses any longer. "0r. 0oses,"  he said, "has indicated by
his oZn acts and Zords his unfitness for the office he seeks." Even the
campaign manager for 0oses' oZn running mate, GO3 8nited States
senatorial candidate E. +arold Cluett, publicly announced that he Zould not
vote for the head of the GO3 ticket. "+e is not the type of man qualified for
the leadership of the Republican 3arty," he said. Running mate 0cGold-
rick, Republican and Fusion 3arty nominee for Comptroller, kept silent
publicly but let anyone Zho asked privately knoZ hoZ he felt. "The thing
Zas terrible," 0cGoldrick   Zas to say later. "Those savage attacks on
Lehman, personal stuff, just Zouldn't Zash." 8pstate neZspapers that for
generations had supported every Republican candidate for stateZide office
announced that they couldn't support this one. 0ost NeZ York City
neZspapers rushed into print Zith editorials like one in the :orld-Telegram
Zhich said: "Robert 0oses, as Zas to be e[pected, has proved a far more
aggressive and agile campaigner than the Governor. But aggressiveness

555
cannot in itself inspire confidence. . . . Realities are realities—not to be
concealed by curtains of Zords or by calling Governor Lehman 'Zeakling'
and 'liar.'"

0oses' only response Zas to keep calling Lehman a liar, to flail out at the
Governor more savagely than ever, and to broaden the arc of his Zild
sZings until he Zas attacking not only the Governor's advisers but men
connected only peripherally or not at all Zith his administration. :ithin   a
matter of days, he had attained a novel—and perhaps unique—distinction:
he Zas the first—and perhaps the only—candidate in the history of NeZ
York State on Zhom a radio netZork demanded nonstop libel insurance; the
0utual  Broadcasting System refused to broadcast any of his speeches
unless the Republican campaign committee purchased a policy that covered
every Zord that 0oses said on the air.

Some of 0oses' sallies Zere reminders of the brilliance of the political
invective he had displayed in the La Guardia mayoral campaign of 1933—
Zhen he himself had not been personally involved. Jim Farley, still bleeding
from his dissection by 0oses in the mayoral campaign, Zandered into the
gubernatorial contest Zith a quiet little statement of support for Lehman and
promptly found himself back on 0oses' operating table. Noting that Farley
Zas president of a firm Zhich supplied sand and other building materials to
contractors, including some Zho received government contracts, as Zell as

being 3ostmaster General and chief patronage dispenser for the NeZ Deal,
0oses dubbed him the "sand, mail and bag man of the national
administration" and then shortened the description to: "Jim Farley, the big
'bag man.' "

But in most of 0oses' attacks, brilliance Zas made the slave of rage. The
scalpel Zas discarded in favor of the bludgeon—and the sZings 0oses took
Zith the latter Zeapon Zere Zild  indeed. During its final tZo Zeeks, his
campaign Zas almost entirely a campaign ad homines, an e[ercise in
Zholesale insinuation and vituperation. Seeing his hopes for elective office
vanishing, he speZed venom over his opponents—all his opponents, former
friends as Zell as long-time foes, men Zho Zere motivated by principle as
Zell as men motivated by politics.

556
In speeches broadcast across the state by the libel-insured 0utual netZork,
0oses called Roosevelt's former laZ partner, Basil O'Connor, a "fi[er and a
chiseler," Seabury a demagogue Zith a "messianic comple[" and the state's
senior 8nited States Senator, Dr. Royal S. Copeland, a former eye surgeon,
a "professional mountebank."

The closest of former friends—men such as Joseph 3roskauer and 0orris S.
Tremaine, State Comptroller under Smith, Roosevelt and Lehman, Zith
Zhom 0oses had Zorked closely for years—Zere not immune. Tremaine,
he implied, Zas senile. "I like 0orris  Tremaine personally," he said. "+e is
an old chum of mine, but I think he is getting stale at Albany. . . . 0orris
ought to get aZay from statistics for a Zhile. I can guarantee to take care of
him in one of our steamer chairs at Jones Beach." +e accused Nathan
Straus, Zhose integrity Zas held in almost as much aZe as Lehman's, of
using his position as head of the State +ousing Board to persuade a loZ-
income housing development to purchase his oZn property for $200,000
more than it Zas Zorth. "If Senator Straus made no claim to be anything
more than a very slick trader ... I should have a good deal more respect for
him. :hen,   hoZever, he pretends to be a philanthropist, civic champion and
uplifter, it becomes a little disgusting," 0oses said.*

If he could not find anything about Lehman's associates to attack, he
attacked them for alleged misdeeds of their fathers—even if the fathers
Zere dead. ":hat  is Jack 0urray  doing at the head of Governor Lehman's
campaign committee if poZer connections are taboo in politics?" 0oses
demanded in one such charge. As the +erald Tribune pointed out, "0r.
0oses did not e[plain  his reference, but it Zas understood to infer that 0r.
0urray's  father, the late Thomas E. 0urray, Zas connected Zith the
[Consolidated] Edison Company."

If there happened to be any truth in this onslaught of innuendo, 0oses did
not provide any convincing proof of it. Not one of his more serious charges
Zas documented. Their subjects began treating them almost as jokes. :hen
reporters asked Straus for his reply, he Zould only say: "Bob 0oses

* Straus's friends, Zho kneZ that the "slick trader" Zas so an[ious to help
provide decent houses for impoverished families that he had once sold a

557
valuable property to the +ousing Board for e[actly seventy cents per square
foot, felt a little disgust themselves.

Zill  be in the limelight for another ten days and is entitled to all the fun he
can get out of it. As one of his oldest friends and the man Zho sponsored
his entire park program in the State Senate, I -Zish him all the luck in the
Zorld."

The one victim of 0oses' attacks Zho did reply at length did so in telling
fashion. The day after a particularly far-ranging 0oses speech, Ed Flynn
issued a statement saying, "The emotional instability of this candidate Zas
never better demonstrated than last night, Zhen, Zithout rhyme or reason,
he denounced in Zholesale lots men Zho need no defense at my hands. If
the campaign Zere to continue much longer it Zould reach the point Zhere
this candidate Zould completely satisfy at least himself, if no one else, that
he is the only honest and efficient public servant that this state has ever
knoZn. :hy    does he not state publicly the opinion so often privately
e[pressed by him, of his Republican confreres that he noZ so affectionately
takes to his bosom? . . . Because he is noZ beholden to these members of
the 'Old Guard' for his nomination, he does not dare to publicly repeat his
real opinion of them."

Only one of Lehman's key supporters Zas spared the lash of 0oses' tongue
or pen. +e Zas Alfred E. Smith.

Thirty years after the election, in the midst of a discussion about the former
Governor Zith a luncheon guest, a distinguished historian, 0oses suddenly
began talking about the day he asked Smith to support him against Lehman.
The historian relates that 0oses said, "I Zent to see the Governor and I
said, 'Governor, you oZe this to me. :ith  your backing, I'm going to go
ahead and Zin this thing. You oZe it to me.' And you knoZ Zhat he said to
me—after I had Zorked Zith him all  those years? +e said, 'Bob, you knoZ I
play this game like a regular.'

":ell,   the pain in that man's [0oses'] eyes!" the historian recalls. "+ere Zas
a man, the most poZerful man in NeZ York State, telling about something
that happened thirty years before. And it still really hurt him."

558
According to Smith's daughter and confidante, Emily, the former Governor
had Zanted desperately not to hurt 0oses. But he had no choice. 0oses
might deny in public that he Zas the candidate of the Old Guard, but Smith
kneZ he Zas. And the "Old Guard" Zas not just a phrase to Smith— they
Zere the men Zho had fought against his efforts to cement into place above
the heads of the state's defenseless poor a roof of social Zelfare legislation
that Zould give them some protection against the cold Zinds of illness,
injury, old age and unemployment. +e kneZ that if not held in check by a
Democratic Governor, they Zould begin tearing doZn that structure brick
by brick. No matter hoZ deep his personal affection for 0oses, he couldn't
let them do that. And if Smith felt he oZed 0oses a lot—and he did feel
that Zay—he oZed Lehman a lot, too, not only for Lehman's cash backing
of his oZn campaigns but for Lehman's vigilant maintenance of, and
attempts to add to, the social Zelfare structure, for Lehman's continual
gracious public reminders that he Zas only continuing Smith's Zork, and
for the

considerate requests for advice that had made Smith feel a part of state
government again. Smith's personal feelings for 0oses Zere something
special, of course, but the former Governor respected Lehman. And he had,
after all, played a key role, perhaps the key role, in making Lehman
Governor; he couldn't try noZ, Zithout any good reason, to oust Lehman
from the post in Zhich he had helped place him. 0ost important, as he said
to 0oses, "I play this game like a regular"; he had done so for forty years—
his rage and bitterness at Roosevelt had not yet driven him to the point at
Zhich he Zould later, for the first time in his life,  break Zith the party to
Zhich he had given so much of it.

:hen   Lehman asked Smith to campaign for him, Smith did. But he
campaigned only for the Governor, not against 0oses, avoiding any
personal attack on him. The press, antagoni]ed by 0oses, made capital of
Smith's presence in Lehman's camp, but Raymond Ingersoll, one of the feZ
old Smith supporters on 0oses' side, Zas able to reply that "Governor
Smith has never said a Zord against Bob 0oses and he never Zill."

And 0oses didn't attack Smith, either. :hen,  moreover, the tZo men met at
a dinner party soon after the end of the campaign, friends Zho had been

559
apprehensively Zatching out of the corners of their eyes saZ that Zithin
minutes they Zere talking together in as complete a rapport as ever, 0oses
as respectful and Smith as friendly as in the days before the campaign.
"Nothing could disturb that friendship," says the host at that dinner party.
"Nothing!"  And the proof of hoZ right he Zas, of course, came Zith the
opening of the Central 3ark Zoo less than a month after the end of the
campaign.

It Zasn't Zhat 0oses said that most antagoni]ed voters; it Zas hoZ he said
it. +e let his contempt for the public shoZ.

"As bad as his speeches read," one observer recalls, "they read a lot better
than he read them." The problem Zas not, observers agreed, that 0oses Zas
an unimpressive figure on a podium. On the contrary, he Zas very
impressive. Describing one 0oses speech, a reporter Zrote: "+e stepped up
to the 'reading desk' a great bulk of a man, leant comfortably forZard and
began to speak Zith the clearest voice and the easiest manner in the Zorld."
+is broad shoulders, heavy chest, jaZ and eyebroZs, combined Zith the
physical presence, the sense of poise and self-assurance, he emitted, made
him e[ude strength and poZer. +is voice fit in: it Zas deep and resonant,
just nasal enough to sting.

But if 0oses  Zas a poZerful figure, he Zas not a pleasant one. :hen he
Zas introduced, his smiles as the audience applauded Zere brief and the
look on his face Zas more one of barely concealed disdain than
appreciation. (There Zas no acknoZledgment of the applause.) +e generally
cut the applause short by stepping abruptly to the "reading desk" and
preparing to begin his speech, as if an[ious to be done Zith it so he could
depart for some ZorthZhile activity. As he read his te[t, he seldom
bothered to look up, sometimes going five minutes Zithout a single glance
to acknoZledge his listeners'

presence. :hen the audience interrupted him Zith applause, he stepped
back Zith a look that indicated nothing so much as boredom—and resumed
reading as quickly as possible. "+e made no gestures, he did not vary the
note of his voice," Zrote one reporter. "+e gave no hint of oratory or of
rhetorical periods. +is only emphasis Zas a loudening of his voice to drive
his points home." "+e gave the impression that he Zas Zay above them,"

560
recalls running mate 0cGoldrick. "+e  Zas alienating them all the Zay
through." +e looked like nothing so much as a man dining at a poor
relation's home, feeling strongly that it Zas an act of great condescension
and kindness on his part to be there—and determined to let all the people
present knoZ he felt that Zay. The only time that pose Zas modified Zas
Zhen he got caught up in Zhat he Zas saying. Then the steady loudening of
his voice continued until it Zas very loud indeed. Loud and harsh. +is right
hand, Zhich had been resolutely kept in his pocket up until then, Zould
come out—and it Zould begin to make the pounding gesture his aides had
learned to dread. Because there Zas a microphone on the lectern on Zhich
he Zas pounding, the smack of the palm, thudding doZn to emphasi]e each
point, Zould be magnified, and as it rang out over the audience harder and
harder, faster and faster, an observer could almost begin to see them squirm,
not out of boredom but out of uneasiness, in their seats. As 0oses stood
before them shouting at them and pounding the podium Zhile not bothering
to look at them, he Zas, all too obviously, not appealing to them for their
support but lecturing them, telling them in no uncertain terms Zhat he
Zanted them to do—and letting them knoZ they had better do it.

The reaction of audiences shoZed hoZ 0oses affected them. Invariably
there Zas more applause at the beginning of a speech than at the end. :ith
each succeeding appearance, the enthusiasm of his audience Zaned. The
number of people Zho came to hear him fell further and further beloZ the
number that had been e[pected. At a rally in 4ueens on November i that
had been e[pected to be a high spot of the campaign, only one of every five
seats in the Jamaica +igh School auditorium Zas occupied.

0oses' last appearance shoZed hoZ little remained of the public
enthusiasm that had greeted his nomination. That enthusiasm had persuaded
his campaign managers to rent the state's largest auditorium, 0adison
Square Garden, for a climactic rally on the Saturday night before Election
Day. So certain had they been of an overfloZ croZd that to avoid unseemly
jams at the entrance they had printed tickets, to be distributed in advance by
local GO3 organi]ations, and had announced that no one Zould be admitted
Zithout a ticket, and that the doors Zould be closed a half hour before the
speeches began.

561
On the night before the rally, stacks of tickets remained untouched in GO3
clubhouses. Despite a frantic last-day effort to persuade loyal Republicans
to take them and agree to shoZ up, despite a decision to leave the doors of
the Garden open even during the speeches themselves in hopes that passers-
by might Zander in, far less than half of the Garden's 25,000 seats Zere
filled. The people Zho Zere present Zere so dispirited that Zhen George
Everett, a professional cheer and song leader, took the microphone

at a feZ minutes past eight to "Zarm up" the croZd, he asked them Zhy
they Zere so "doZnhearted."

:hen   the candidate rose to speak, he saZ, looming doZn on him from the
balcony, thousands of empty seats. The arrangements committee had placed
a small American flag on each seat on the Garden floor beloZ him to be
Zaved by its occupant and he saZ staring at him a sea of flags rather than a
sea of faces.

And there, in front of the empty seats, spotlighted in the center of the
cavernous, half-empty arena, the candidate stood—pounding his palm hard
on the lectern, lashing out in a voice loud and angry, almost ranting, the
featured performer of a program that, the Times reported, "Zas marked by
more attacks on personalities than any similar meeting in recent political
history."

At the polls, the verdict of the people Zas even clearer. It Zas Lehman
2,201,729, 0oses 1,393,638. Robert 0oses, the candidate "f the party
favored by an overZhelming majority of the state's voters, a candidate for
Zhom, the +erald Tribune reported, the GO3 Zaged "the hardest campaign
that party has Zaged for a state ticket in a half do]en years," a candidate
Zho had entered the campaign on the very crest of a Zave of favorable
publicity that had been ten solid years in building, lost by more than
800,000 votes. +is percentage of the votes cast—35 percent—Zas the
smallest percentage polled by a gubernatorial candidate of any major party
in the 157-year history of NeZ York State. As George Fearon had predicted,
he dragged his party to defeat Zith him: for the first time in tZenty-one
years, the GO3 lost both houses of the State Legislature. (The GO3 Zon
back the Assembly the ne[t year and didn't lose it again for another tZenty-
nine years;* the year in Zhich Robert 0oses headed the Republican ticket

562
Zas, in other Zords, the only election in a fifty-year span in Zhich the GO3
lost both houses.) +e lost upstate communities that no Republican candidate
for any office had ever lost before; he even ran behind Lehman in the total
upstate vote. (This fact so astonished veteran political reporters that they
refused to believe the unofficial Election Night tallies that first revealed it.)

The Old Guard Zhich had foisted 0oses' candidacy upon the GO3 Zas
adequately punished. Its influence Zould remain strong in the party, but
county leaders Zho couldn't afford to let their local candidates be caught in
the undertoZ of the sinking of a poor candidate and Zho Zere determined
that one as poor as 0oses should never again head the ticket, Zould never
let the Old Guard hand-pick another candidate. +is candidacy Zas its
:aterloo.

0oses Zas in later years to attempt to alibi aZay his defeat by saying that
he had simply been one of many candidates caught in the landslide vote by
Zhich the nation in 1934 e[pressed its approval of Franklin D. Roosevelt.
On the day after the election he told an intervieZer, "I said Zhen I Zent into

* 8ntil  the Lyndon Johnson landslide of 1964.

this campaign that I did so knoZing it Zas an attempt to sZim up Niagara";
no one, he said, could have beaten a NeZ Deal supporter in NeZ York State
in 1934.

This is true in part. The NeZ Deal landslide of 1934 sZept right-Zingers to
defeat all across the country. But 0oses' e[planation does not account for
the si]e of his defeat. +is previous popularity; the top-heavy GO3
registration in the state; the lavish financing of his campaign—all these
factors had led keen political observers like Baron :arn to predict at the
time of his nomination a campaign that Zould be close no matter Zhat the
national trend. It Zas, these observers concluded after Election Day, the
reaction of voters to personal, not party, philosophy, as Zell as to 0oses'
personality that had eroded the support Zith Zhich he entered the
campaign. SZimming up Niagara Zas one Zay of looking at 0oses'
campaign. In brilliance of strategy and e[ecution, it Zas perhaps more
comparable to the charge of the Light Brigade.

563
The definitive Zord comes from Joseph 0cGoldrick. 0cGoldrick   Zas
running on 0oses' ticket—but since he Zas running for a city office,
Comptroller, only in the city. At the beginning of the campaign, he Zas
approached by a pollster named +arry Gordon Lynn Zhom politicians,
including Al Smith, regarded as ama]ingly accurate.

"Lynn Zas doing the polling—secretly—for Lehman, but he came to me
and said for $2,000, as long as he Zas doing it for Lehman, he Zould do it
for me at the same time," 0cGoldrick recalls. "Lynn's first report to me Zas
that 0oses Zould lose the city by 550,000, but I Zould Zin  it by 75,000. +e
said, '0oses is going to be defeated, but don't Zorry, you'll Zin.' The second
Zeek, he said 0oses Zould lose by 600,000, but I'll still Zin  by 50,000.
The third Zeek it Zas 700,000 and 25,000. And on the Friday before
election, he came in and said, 'Boss, you can't make it. 0oses is going to
lose the city by 800,000 and you can't overcome that: you're going to lose
by about 25,000.' And that's appro[imately Zhat happened. I lost by
23,000." 0oses needn't have lost by nearly as great a margin as he did,
0cGoldrick  says; in fact, if 0oses  had held his deficit in the city to the
550,000 figure at Zhich it stood at the beginning of the campaign and had
retained the normal GO3 support upstate, he might Zell have Zon the
election, for GO3 candidates normally "came doZn to the city line"—
compiled a margin above the northern boundary of the Bron[—Zith an
edge of more than 600,000 votes. It Zas his tactics and personality, not
national attitudes toZard the NeZ Deal, that persuaded tens of thousands of
potential supporters to vote against him. "+e booted that campaign
himself," 0cGoldrick   Zould say flatly. "If  it Zas a disaster, he made it
one."

On Election Night, 0oses Zas careful to shoZ an elaborate disregard of the
vote. Reporters ushered into his apartment at 7 Gracie Square saZ him
poring over a map of the city, "outlining park and playground projects,
Zhile he Zhistled softly"  and "giving only perfunctory attention, apparently,
to the election returns relayed to him." "I haven't the slightest regrets in any
Zay,

shape or manner," he said. "I've done the best I could. I've conducted an
honorable campaign and adhered to my convictions. That's all there is to it."

564
And he said that he Zas planning to return to his park Zork the ne[t
morning.

There Zas no question about his returning to his city job, of course, but the
fact that he included in the statement his state park Zork shoZed that he
kneZ +erbert Lehman much better than his campaign attacks on the
Governor Zould have made it appear. For Lehman's treatment of 0oses
after the campaign Zas the definitive Zord on the Governor's character.

No sooner had the landslide aspects of his defeat of 0oses become apparent
than the Daily NeZs, Zhose publisher Zas temporarily feuding Zith 0oses,
called on Lehman to oust his disloyal subordinate, and so did key legislators
and a number of the Governor's most influential supporters—including
Farley and Flynn and, according to some sources, 3resident Roosevelt. NoZ
—Zith  0oses' prestige, his previously invulnerable armor against ouster
moves, riddled Zith holes—Zas the time to bring pressure on the members
of the State 3arks Council to elect another chairman, they said.

Al Smith heard Zhat Zas going on and hurried over to Lehman's apartment
at 820 3ark Avenue to urge the Governor not to move against 0oses. +e
needn't have bothered. Lehman Zas bitterly hurt by 0oses' charges, but he
Zould not alloZ  personal feelings to interfere Zith his duty. ":e  have
differed in the past and probably Zill in the future, but in the planning and
administration of parks, parkZays and recreational facilities, Bob 0oses
has no superior on the face of the Zorld," the Governor announced. 0oses
could continue to head the state park system as long as he Zas Governor, he
said. "+e Zas terribly sensitive because he said I called him a liar in the
campaign," 0oses Zould recall, but "I found him  a very nice felloZ to deal
Zith. A  very decent, honorable, honest felloZ. +e alZays supported me
Zhen he Zas Governor."

0oses should have knoZn that Lehman Zould support him. After all, the
"coZardly, sniveling, lying  Zeakling" had alZays supported him before.

:hy   did Robert 0oses, previously so talented at public relations,
antagoni]e the public during the episode in his career in Zhich he most
needed its support?

565
In part, because his success in public relations had been due primarily to his
masterful utili]ation  of a single public relations technique: identifying
himself Zith a popular cause. This technique Zas especially advantageous
to him because his philosophy—that accomplishment, Getting Things
Done, is the only thing that matters, that the end justifies any means,
hoZever ruthless—might not be universally popular. By keeping the public
eye focused on the cause, the end, the ultimate benefit to be obtained, the
technique kept the public eye from focusing on the methods by Zhich the
benefit Zas to be obtained. The technique Zas also especially advantageous
to him because its focus on the cause kept his personality safely blurred.

0oses' use of the technique Zas a totally conscious one. .noZing pre-

cisely Zhat he Zas doing—"the first rule is to stay on the side of the angels"
—he continually urged reporters, under the guise of modesty, to "stick to
the parks and playgrounds and bridges, and don't Zrite about me." And he
had consistently made sure that his instructions Zere folloZed by furnishing
only bare, carefully selected facts about himself. From the moment in 1925
Zhen he dramatically propelled himself into the public consciousness by
announcing that he Zas fighting for parks against a "little group of selfish
millionaires," he had identified himself so thoroughly Zith the gloZing
cause of parks that for nine years the public had seen him alZays through
that gloZ. Everything he did, he said, Zas in the name of parks (and, of
course, of parkZays and bridges that helped people reach parks), and the
public believed this. After a Zhile he began—also consciously—to identify
himself Zith related battles against crooked politicians and red-taping
bureaucrats— and so cleverly did he make this additional identification that
the public accepted it, too. During those years, the public never saZ Robert
0oses the man.

But in a race for public office, the public focus is more on the individuals
involved. Causes championed by a candidate are important to voters, but
mainly as they help illuminate his personality and philosophy. It Zas a man
they Zere voting for, not a constitutional amendment. They Zanted to see
the man.

And they did. Robert 0oses' only campaign for elective office tore aZay
from him the protective coloration in Zhich he had alZays appeared before

566
the public, and stripped him naked to its ga]e. As a candidate for elective
office he Zas no longer only Robert 0oses the fighter-for-parks. For the
first time, the public got a good look at Robert 0oses the man—and it
didn't like Zhat it saZ.

This e[planation, of course, does not ansZer another question: :hy
couldn't a man as skilled as 0oses at manipulating and charming people he
needed, charm the voters noZ that he needed them, conceal from them his
philosophy and personality, persuade them—at least for a period of a feZ
Zeeks—that he understood and sympathi]ed Zith their aims and aspirations
and Zanted to help them achieve those aims? :hy couldn't he keep the
voters from knoZing—at least for a period of a feZ Zeeks—Zhat he
thought of them?

The ansZer to this question lies someZhere deep in Robert 0oses' nature.

In part, it lies in the arrogance that Zas that nature's most striking
manifestation. Robert 0oses' arrogance Zas first of all intellectual; he had
consciously compared his mental capacity Zith other men's and had
concluded that its superiority Zas so great that it Zas a Zaste of time for
him to discuss, to try to understand or even to listen to their opinions. But
there Zas more to his arrogance than that. +ad it been merely a product of a
consciously reasoned comparison, it Zould have been governable by
reason, reason that must have informed him that if he hoped to Zin the pri]e
he so desperately Zanted he must for a period of a feZ Zeeks conceal his
contempt for the public. +ad his arrogance been merely intellectual, he
could have

disciplined himself—this man Zith a Zill  strong enough to discipline
himself to a life of unending toil—for the feZ  Zeeks necessary to give him
a chance at the Governorship. But his arrogance Zas emotional, visceral, a
driving force created by heredity and hardened by living, a force too strong
to be tamed by intellect, a force that drove him to do things for Zhich there
is no Zholly rational e[planation.  It Zasn't just that Robert 0oses didn't
Zant to listen to the public. It Zas that he couldn't listen, couldn't—even for
the sake of the poZer he coveted—try to make people feel that he
understood and sympathi]ed Zith them.

567
And there Zas something else behind Robert 0oses' arrogance, a strange,
flickering shadoZ. For not only could Robert 0oses not help shoZing his
contempt for others, he seemed actually to take pleasure in shoZing this
contempt—a deep, genuine pleasure, a pleasure Zhose intensity leads to the
suspicion that, in a Zay, he needed to display his superiority, Zith a need so
great that he simply could not dissemble it. +oZ else to e[plain the fact
that, even Zhen he Zas appearing before the public to ask for its support, he
could not help ostentatiously flaunting condescension and boredom—
boredom even at its applause? Robert 0oses may, moreover, have
understood that he had this need. +e may have understood that he Zould
not be able to appear before the voters Zithout having to shoZ them —so
clearly that there could be no mistake about it—hoZ much he despised
them. For such self-knoZledge Zould e[plain—and it is difficult  to find
another e[planation—his decision to shun, to so perhaps unprecedented an
e[tent, all public appearances save for a feZ formal speeches.

Such an e[planation also helps to illuminate 0oses' otherZise almost
ine[plicable treatment of the press.

Nobody understood the press and hoZ to manipulate it better than he. And
therefore he must have knoZn, intellectually, that he Zould forfeit its
support—support he both needed and Zanted—if he attacked reporters
personally and directly. Something far stronger than intellect, something
stronger than considerations of strategy, stronger even than a chance for the
Governorship, Zas driving him, something that made it simply impossible
for him to accept criticism, even the discreetly implied criticism of the
reporters' questions at his first press conference.

As for the vilification  that he speZed over his opponent and everyone
connected Zith him—former friends as Zell as enemies—it is difficult to
escape the conclusion that the e[planation for this, too, lay in character
rather than campaign tactics. Since his earliest days in poZer, 0oses had
tried not just to defeat but to destroy anyone Zho stood in his Zay—by any
means possible. The definitive Zord on Robert 0oses' gubernatorial
campaign may be an unconsciously revealing remark that 0oses made
years later to his friendly biographer, Cleveland Rodgers: "I made the only
kind of campaign I kneZ hoZ to make."

568
ington on direct orders from the 3resident, informed the 0ayor, on direct
orders from the 3resident, of the 3resident's feelings, and demanded that La
Guardia dismiss 0oses from the board of the 3:A-financed  Triborough
Bridge Authority. In Ickes' Secret Diary, he Zrote that "La Guardia
regretted the situation and said that if he had knoZn it e[isted he Zouldn't
have thought for a minute of putting 0oses on the board. +e e[pressed the
highest regard for the 3resident and asked me to give him a feZ days to see
Zhat he might Zork out."

But in the ne[t feZ  days, La Guardia Zas able to Zork out nothing. For
0oses did not prove «?t all cooperative.

The 0ayor may have e[pected 0oses to quietly resign. After all, 0oses
Zas his appointee and it is traditional in American politics for an appointee
to resign Zhen the appointer Zishes him to. 0oreover, there Zas so much at
stake here: a vital project for the city Zhich could be built only if the federal
government Zas Zilling to pay for it.  One man surely could not think of
standing in the Zay just so he could be in charge of it. And Zhile 0oses
could not be forced to resign from the Triborough post—he had draZn the
Triborough laZ so that Authority commissioners could be removed only on
stated charges after a formal hearing—he held his park commissionership, a
post both men then considered much more important, only at the pleasure of
the 0ayor, and the 0ayor  therefore possessed a poZerful Zeapon: he could
threaten to remove 0oses from the more important post unless he resigned
from the less important.

But 0oses had learned—from his dealings Zith Roosevelt Zhen FDR Zas
Governor—that he could force a Governor to back doZn by threatening to
publici]e certain matters, such as requests for patronage. +e had learned
that he could force a Governor to back doZn on more comple[ issues by
simplifying them through a threat to resign over them, a threat Zhich
reduced the issue to the question of Zhether or not the public Zanted him to
continue in office. And noZ 0oses  employed the same technique on a
mayor. +e told La Guardia that if the 0ayor insisted on his resignation, he
Zould resign, all right—but he Zould resign not just from the Triborough
post but from the park commissionership as Zell, and Zould issue a public
statement disclosing Zhy he Zas resigning, a statement making clear that

569
the 0ayor had boZed to outside pressure to remove a city official Zho had
done nothing to justify such treatment.

La Guardia had picked up :indels  on the day after his conference Zith
Ickes to ask the Sage of 3ineapple Street for advice. Recalls :indels: "I
said, 'NoZ, look, you've been elected mayor on the theory that you are
going to run an absolutely independent administration. . . . You can't start
off by knuckling under to outside dictation. If you do, your name is going to
be mud.' I told him that if he ousted 0oses, the public Zould believe that he
could be pressured in a situation like this and throZ out a man Zho the
public thinks is Zonderful, and I told him, Tf  you do that, you'll never be
able to erase that from the public's mind.' " From others—including City
Chamberlain and NeZ Deal Brain Truster Adolf A. Berle, Jr., the link

betZeen the city and federal administrations—La Guardia received the
same advice.*

La Guardia stalled. Repeatedly he promised Ickes that 0oses' resignation
Zas imminent—and repeatedly he came up Zith e[cuses for neZ delays.
But Roosevelt Zas, Ickes Zrote in his diary, "implacable." The 3resident
Zas determined to have his revenge, and in case that determination flagged
— and there is no reason to believe it ever did—little Louis +oZe and big
Jim Farley Zere there to keep it fresh, both of them urging him on. +e
instructed Ickes to take a more forceful tone. The 3:A chief, Zho hardly
kneZ 0oses, Zas to confess later that "from the beginning I had had no
stomach for this Zhole affair. ... I Zas in the unhappy position of having to
admit to myself that 0oses Zas an efficient administrator and a public-
spirited citi]en." But,  he said, "my loyalty ran to the 3resident and I Zas
determined to Zork it out to his satisfaction if I could." +e told La Guardia
that he Zould not approve neZ Triborough requisitions until the 0ayor had
obtained 0oses' resignation from the Triborough board. La Guardia stalled.
Then Ickes said that he Zould not approve a single neZ 3:A project of any
type in NeZ York City—not  hospital, school or subZay—until 0oses
resigned. Still La Guardia stalled. "+e Zould make promises and then he
Zould break his promises," Ickes Zrote. "It Zas 'Give me this payment and
I'll get rid of him  ne[t Zeek'—that kind of  thing," :indels   recalled. And the

570
stalling succeeded in keeping payments coming for Triborough and the
other projects.

Then came the gubernatorial campaign, Zith 0oses running as a
Republican. "Naturally I had to declare a truce during that period in order to
avoid a charge that I Zas playing politics," Ickes said. 0ore requisitions
Zere approved.

But as soon as the votes Zere counted, the truce Zas off. On November 7,
the day after the election, 0oses sent to :ashington neZ Triborough
requisitions totaling $8,100,000. The requisitions reached Ickes' desk on
November 8, and on that date the 3:A Administrator telephoned La
Guardia and told the 0ayor that they Zould stay on his desk, unsigned,
until 0oses' resignation lay there beside them. Furthermore, Ickes said, no
neZ 3:A   projects Zould  be approved for NeZ York City. And the
Administrator apparently made a further threat. In his Secret Diary he
Zrote: "I am considering refusing to honor requisitions for funds" for
projects already under Zay in the city—an action that Zould throZ out of
Zork the tens of thousands of men noZ employed on them.

* Berle telegraphed: the president: personal: moses matter probably Zill
become

A NATIONAL  INCIDENT  :IT+IN      A FE:   DAYS.  ... I T+IN.    T+IS  IS
ONE OF T+E T+INGS  YO8  CANNOT  DO 8NLESS  T+ERE  ARE
REASONS OT+ER T+AN  3ERSONAL  GIVING  GRO8ND  FOR
38BLIC  DEFENSE. 0OSES  :ILL    CERTAINLY  RESIGN NOT
0ERELY  FRO0  TRI-BORO8G+   B8T  FRO0   CITY
AD0INISTRATION    STATING +IS 3OSITION  OF :+IC+     O8R
O33OSITION FRIENDS  ARE 3RE3ARED TO 0A.E     T+E 0OST.  I
+ARDLY  .NO:      0OSES B8T  S8GGEST  T+ERE 0IG+T    BE 0ORE
REAL DEVILS  TO FIG+T.  RE0E0BER    T+E E;EC8TION    OF T+E
D8.E   [sic]  D'ENG+IEN  BRO.E   NA3OLEON.

All through November and December, the drama of revenge and poZer
played on. Its cast included some of the most colorful characters in
American politics. On one side, jaZ jaunty, cigarette holder cocked, face
open and friendly, the 0aster 3olitician in the :hite   +ouse. Beside him the

571
Old Curmudgeon of Interior, the scarred, doughty reformer from Chicago
("almost the incarnation of lonely, righteous and ine[haustible pugnacity,"
one revieZer Zas to call him) Zho in less than tZo years on the national
stage had proven himself a character actor of the first magnitude, Zinning
the public's heart Zith the dour, skeptical but kindly glare that he flashed at
it over the top of the rimless spectacles that Zere forever slipping doZn
along his nose, and Zith his flaZless performance as the tart-tongued,
terrible-tempered but invincibly honest defender of the public interest. On
the other side—"a modern +oratius on another unfinished bridge," one
revieZer Zas to call him—Robert 0oses, seriously ill  and confined for
most of the drama to his home Zith an influen]a Zhich had deepened into
an illness variously described as "pneumonia" or "nervous e[haustion." In
the middle, gloZering out from under his big black Stetson, the prickly
Little FloZer  of City +all.  Circling  around these stars, spear carriers
perfectly type-cast: the burly, bald, gregarious 3ostmaster General; the lean,
sharp-eyed, sardonic City Chamberlain; and the Zi]ened little gnome
Zhose proposed appointment to a minor state park post a decade before had
been the drama's prologue. Any audience Zould have been delighted at the
shoZ. But no audience got to see it. It played day after day and Zeek after
Zeek behind closed curtains. Not a Zord of the dispute, not a hint that there
Zas one, Zas uttered over the airZaves or printed in a neZspaper. 0oses'
grim fight Zent on in absolute secrecy.

On November 21, the 3:A  board Zas scheduled to meet at tZo o'clock to
approve a long list of projects. Shortly before the meeting began, Ickes
slashed off the list every one located in NeZ York City. Then he telephoned
La Guardia to tell him Zhat he had done. There are indications that 0oses'
loss of popularity in the gubernatorial campaign Zas Zeighing heavily in
the scales on Zhich the 0ayor Zas Zeighing the alternatives; :indels  had
told him he couldn't oust a man "Zho the public thinks is Zonderful"—but
apparently much of the public no longer thought 0oses Zas Zonderful. In
conversations Zith him, the 0ayor, if  he did not ask him to resign in so
many Zords, apparently pressed more forcefully the suggestion that the
Zhole city should not be made to pay for his seat on the Triborough board.
In reply, 0oses apparently pointed out that there Zas no Zay he could be
removed from Triborough e[cept on charges. Telephoning Ickes, La

572
Guardia pointed this out. As Ickes recalled in his Secret Diary: "I told him
that Zas his funeral not mine."

La Guardia huddled daily Zith :indels   noZ, and Zith C. C. Burling-ham,
the grand old man of the reform movement Zhose opinion the 0ayor
valued so highly that "from him and from no one else Zould he take a
scold-

ing." Both men argued—:indels  on political  grounds, Burlingham on
grounds of principle—that he should not knuckle under to Roosevelt. The
0ayor  Zas torn. On the one hand, :indels. believes, "he reali]ed that it
Zould have painted an indelible picture of him in an unfavorable light." On
the other hand, there Zere his dreams for remaking NeZ York, dreams
Zhich Zould  be impossible of reali]ation Zithout the federal funds Zhich
Roosevelt alone could provide. ShreZdly calculating politician that he Zas,
Fiorello La Guardia Zas Zeighing the alternatives, alZays Zeighing.

Then, on December 26, 1934, Roosevelt and Ickes threZ on those delicate
scales something that Zeighted them to the 3resident's side. It Zas an
official general 3:A   order—Administrative  Order Number 129 Zas its title
— and it stated flatly: "+ereafter no funds shall be advanced to any
authority, board or commission constituting an independent corporation or
entity created for a specific project Zholly Zithin  the confines of a
municipality, any of the members of the governing body of Zhich authority,
board or commission holds any public office under said municipality."

The order obviously applied to Triborough and to 0oses. (By coincidence,
it also applied to another NeZ York City official, Tenement +ouse
Commissioner Langdon :.  3ost, Zho Zas a member of the 0unicipal
+ousing Authority, Zhich  Zas also receiving federal funds, but Ickes
privately assured La Guardia that the order Zould not be enforced in 3ost's
case. 3ost stayed out of the controversy because he Zas aZay on an ocean
cruise.) It had almost the full force of laZ. It had the full force of an official
regulation of the agency financing Triborough—and, Ickes told La Guardia,
it embodied in those official regulations Zhat he had previously said
privately: that no more money Zould be given to Triborough until 0oses
Zas off the Triborough board. 0ost important, it gave La Guardia a public
e[cuse for ousting 0oses: an official 3:A    rule forbade 0oses to serve. Its

573
issuance Zas the move of a fo[. "The 3resident helped me draft this order,"
Ickes diaried.

But the fo[ Zas groZing  reckless. 3reviously, the 3resident had been
careful, alZays letting Ickes do the talking Zith La Guardia, not letting
himself become directly involved. NoZ "he discussed it [the order]
personally Zith La Guardia," Ickes Zrote. And Roosevelt made another
move; either he himself or Ickes—and probably both—told La Guardia that
if he felt he could not force 0oses to resign, they Zould be satisfied if the
0ayor  promised Ickes—in Zriting—not  to reappoint 0oses Zhen his term
e[pired on June 30, 1935, Zell before the bridge Zould be finished.

This combination of moves stripped La Guardia of e[cuses that he could
make to the 3resident—if in fact he still Zanted any. It gave him the public
rationale he Zould need to justify ousting 0oses, and it gave him a private
rationale to make to 0oses. :hen  he received a copy of the order— it had
not been released publicly, of course—he shoZed it to 0oses, apparently to
prove to him that he had no choice but to give in. Then the 0ayor headed
for :ashington,  Zhere he met Ickes, and, on Thursday, January 3, 1935,
secretly sZore to the 3:A  Administrator  that he Zould put the promise in
Zriting  as soon as he got back to NeZ York.

But the 0ayor  had miscalculated, as had Roosevelt and Ickes. They may
have believed that 0oses' loss of popularity had stripped him of his armor,
and that Order Number 129 had left him Zeaponless, but they Zere Zrong.
For 0oses still possessed a Zeapon more valuable even than his popularity:
his mind. +e conceived a masterstroke that simultaneously Zon him back
his popularity and turned the tables on his great enemy. :hile La Guardia
Zas in :ashington,  he did the one thing that no one involved in the closed-
curtain drama had e[pected. +e leaked the order to the press—and thereby
pulled the curtain up.

There, suddenly spotlighted before the public, stood the 3resident of the
8nited States of America—caught in a most unbecoming posture. And the
3resident Zas only one figure in a tableau that might have been lifted intact
out of that traditional melodrama "The Old +omestead." In that melodrama,
a villain used the poZer of money, the mortgage he held on the old
homestead, to force the proud beauty to yield to his dishonorable advances.

574
In the drama that 0oses suddenly revealed to the public there Zas also a
villain (the 3resident) using the poZer of money (federal relief funds) to
force the 0ayor to perform a dishonorable act (ousting from his job a
faithful public servant). And this drama had a hero, too—for noZ that La
Guardia had agreed to side Zith the 3resident, the faithful public servant
Zas seen by the audience as a man standing alone Zithout a single ally and
fearlessly fighting for his rights against the tZo most poZerful men in the
country. Since, moreover, the critics and the audience didn't knoZ— and
never Zere to learn—the long background of the Roosevelt-0oses feud,
their imagination supplied the traditional motive: press and public assumed
that the 3resident Zas attempting to force 0oses out of his job simply
because he Zas a Republican and had critici]ed the NeZ Deal in his
election campaign. And just in case anyone missed the point of the drama,
0oses supplied a narration—Zritten Zith  the brilliance that characteri]ed
his efforts Zhen he had a legitimate point to make.

"There are certain facts Zhich should be knoZn to the public," he said. The
sole purpose of Order Number 129 Zas to force him out of his job; Ickes
had admitted as much to La Guardia. And Ickes had also admitted "that I
Zas honest and competent," and that the sole reason for the order Zas that
"I Zas . . . not sufficiently friendly  to the administration."

+e had refused to leave quietly, 0oses said. ":hen  the 0ayor e[plained
this situation to me I told him that I should be glad to retire from his
administration entirely if he Zanted me to, but that I Zould not take a back
door out of the Triborough Authority merely because there Zas pressure to
get me out for personal or political reasons." +e had refused, he said,
because he Zanted the American people to knoZ Zhat Zas happening—
because there Zas a principle involved that Zas more important than
himself. "The Federal appropriations for public Zorks and Zork relief are
the funds of all the people of the country. ... If personal or political
considerations are to govern the e[penditure of public Zorks and relief
funds by the Federal Government, this fact should be knoZn to the public."

Reaction proved as violent as 0oses had gambled it Zould be. 8n-

luckily for  Ickes, the 3:A   Administrator held a press conference every
Thursday, and, not knoZing that 0oses had leaked the story, he held one as

575
usual this Thursday shortly after La Guardia-had left his office. To the
Administrator's shock, reporters began questioning him about Order
Number 129, Zhich he had believed Zas secret. As he later Zrote in his
diary: "I Zas asked Zhether Farley had ever spoken to me about 0oses. To
that question I could honestly say No. Then I Zas asked Zhether the
3resident had ever done so. There I had to lie, but again I said No." The lie
Zas to force the press to link Roosevelt Zith the order only in hints for a
day or tZo—although the hints Zere broad indeed—but it did nothing to
cool its ardor for the story. La Guardia had boarded his train back to NeZ
York confidently believing that the affair Zas still secret. Sealed off from
the Zorld in a private compartment, he made the trip Zith that confidence
unimpaired. But Zhen he sZung off his train at 3ennsylvania Station at 9:30
p.m., he saZ a pack of reporters running toZard him along the platform.
Luckily for  the 0ayor, an aide, Lester B. Stone, had been telephoned by a
reporter for a statement, had thus learned that the story had broken and had
hurried to the station. Stone reached the 0ayor a feZ steps ahead of the
reporters, pulled him aside and told him Zhat had happened, giving him a
moment to think. No one ever accused Fiorello La Guardia of needing more
than a moment. :hen the reporters engulfed him, he did not admit that he
had agreed to dismiss 0oses. Instead, Zhen he Zas asked, ":hat are you
going to do?" he replied, "I'll think it over." And he decided that night to
postpone Zriting Ickes the letter he had promised.

That proved to be a Zise move. For the ne[t day, as one of his advisers Zas
to put it, "the shit hit the fan." The public, that most fickle of lovers,
embraced Robert 0oses in January as fervently as it had pushed him aZay
in November.

:ith   the e[ception of the Daily  NeZs, there Zasn't a neZspaper in NeZ
York that didn't carry an editorial message to the 0ayor on Order Number
129 on Friday, January 4, or Saturday, January 5. The ones in the +erald
Tribune Zere a fair sample. Friday's said: "If 0ayor La Guardia alloZs one
of the ablest of his public servants to be dismissed by a :ashington official,
Zithout shadoZ of cause, through a secret ukase so e[traordinary and so
contemptible that the official himself is ashamed publicly to admit it, then it
seems to us that 0r. La Guardia might as Zell resign his 0ayoralty right
noZ." That Zas Friday's editorial. Saturday's said: "If 0r. La Guardia gives

576
in, he Zill  find that he has sold his soul, sold his administration and sold the
people of NeZ York. It is not Zorth it."  Let the federal politicians cancel the
city's contracts; shoZ them "Zho's charged Zith the conduct of the public
business of the people of NeZ York City." :as the +erald Tribune a
Republican paper? The American, the Brooklyn Eagle, and the :orld-
Telegram Zere Democratic. "Bureaucracy! 3atronage! 3olitics!" the
American raged. "If the order stands it Zill be a lasting stain on the record
of the Administration," the Eagle said. "Secretary Ickes is jeopardi]ing
public confidence in the nonpartisan honesty of the national 3ublic :orks
Administration," the :orld-Telegram   said. And the inde-

pendent NeZ York Times, normally so dispassionate and restrained, chimed
in: "If  he [La Guardia] has the backbone of a lamprey, he Zill stand by Bob
0oses, right through to that Judgment Day Zhich he is himself so fond of
invoking."

And outrage Zas not confined to the press. The public Zas reacting to the
press interpretation of the drama—bureaucrats and "patronage politicians"
playing politics Zith  its money—as the American public alZays reacts to
bureaucrats and patronage politicians. Before his gubernatorial campaign,
Robert 0oses had been a hero because the public had seen him less as an
individual than as a symbol of resistance to politicians and bureaucrats. +is
conduct during the campaign had, by forcing the public to see him as an
individual, stripped him of that cause. But noZ he Zas once again basking
in its aura—and he Zas once again a hero. In a display of indignation that
proved hoZ completely the 0oses masterstroke had restored its author to
public favor, on Friday, the day after the storm broke, the Long Island
Chamber of Commerce, the Conference on 3ort Development of the City of
NeZ York, the 3ark Association of NeZ York City, the City Club, the
Bron[ Board of Trade, the NeZ York Board of Trade and the 0erchants'
Association of Sheepshead Bay all held separate meetings and passed
resolutions backing 0oses and denouncing Ickes. On Saturday, it Zas the
Elmhurst 0anor Community  Council, the Jackson +eights Ta[payers
Association, the North :oodside  Community Association, the Astoria
3roperty OZners' Association, the 0adison 0anor  Civic Association, the
Atlantic Avenue Business 0en's and Ta[payers' Association, the

577
Automobile Club of NeZ  York, the Corona Community Council and the
NeZ York Chapter of the American Institute of Architecture.

The language of the resolutions Zas indignant, and so Zas the language of
the letters-to-the-editor that flooded into the city's neZspapers— the +erald
Tribune running nine in a single day under the headline "3oliticians vs.
3ublic Servant," the Brooklyn Eagle running eleven. NeZ York's parks are
"the sign and signet of Robert 0oses, a man I do not knoZ but Zhose hand
I should be proud to shake," said one. "Our 0ayor has repeatedly craZled
on his belly before :ashington  in abject supplication. Are Ze, as citi]ens of
the sovereign State of NeZ York, to have a political mongrel from the
0iddle  :est   instruct us as to Zho shall build our bridges and Zho shall
plant our gardens?"

Confiding in his diary, Ickes blamed the uproar on La Guardia. "La Guardia
has folloZed a crooked course in the Zhole proceeding," he raged a Zeek
after the storm broke. "+e let 0oses see the letter that I had Zritten him, in
Zhich Zas incorporated my order. ... I called La Guardia on the telephone
on 0onday and before I got through Zith him I  told him very clearly and
distinctly just hoZ accomplished a double-crosser he in fact is. +e
equivocated and evaded, but I knoZ that I had him dead to rights. This Zas
a great disappointment to me. I had felt that La Guardia Zas a man of real
courage and substance, but in this matter he has acted like the cheapest kind
of double-crossing politician."

The 0ayor Zas frantically  steering betZeen the Scylla of losing federal

funds and the Charybdis of losing the confidence of his constituency. And
he had to steer small indeed. +e attempted to make reporters see his
predicament; Zhen one asked hoZ Ickes could hold back Triborough
Authority funds he had signed a contract to furnish, La Guardia replied,
"That's like a laZyer telling his client that he can't be put in jail for
something and the client ansZering that he is in jail. I can't build on
litigation. I need steel girders and brick, mortar and labor to build." But
these attempts only made the storm in his city rage more fiercely. Then the
0ayor  tried alternately to ignore the controversy and to deny one e[isted.
+e avoided reporters as much as possible—once, finding a croZd of them
outside his office door Zhen he left one afternoon after a day of refusing

578
their requests for an intervieZ, he shouldered violently through them—and
Zhen, on another occasion, they cornered him, he said blandly, "Everything
is susceptible of being straightened out by reasonable men. There is
complete harmony betZeen City +all and :ashington."  But 0oses  kept the
controversy alive Zith such devices as Zeekly accountings of the steadily
dZindling balances in Triborough bank accounts and tours of the bridge site
for platoons of civic leaders—much to La Guardia's displeasure; Zhen a
reporter asked "+oZ Zould Ickes' order affect Commissioner 3ost?" the
0ayor  snapped back, "At least 3ost is on the high seas and he can't issue
any statements." The 0ayor Zas stalling; in the face of such a gale of
public opinion, he apparently felt, either 0oses or Roosevelt Zould have to
turn and run for harbor. Ickes felt the same Zay, although he felt the man
Zho Zould  have to retreat Zould be the 3resident. "This enterprise ... is a
great mistake on the 3resident's part," the 3:A Administrator diaried. "By
making a martyr out of [0oses] Ze are only serving to build him up."

But it Zasn't La Guardia's or Ickes' feelings that counted. It Zas Roosevelt's
and 0oses'. And Zhen these tZo men Zere dealing Zith one another, they
Zere not "reasonable men" at all. Not normal political considerations but
personal animosity, "real hatred," hatred that had been boiling betZeen
them for years, governed their actions. Neither one Zould give an inch.
Chauffeured in from Babylon on January 9 for a tZo-hour meeting Zith La
Guardia and :indels  behind closed doors at City +all, 0oses emerged,
noticeably pale and tired, to find reporters Zaiting. "Are you going to leave
the bridge authority?" one asked. "No," 0oses snarled. :ithout  another
Zord or a backZard glance, he strode out of the building. :hen Ickes, after
a Zeek of trying and, as he put it, "taking it on the chin" on behalf of the
3resident, finally secured an appointment Zith Roosevelt on January 10, he
half e[pected that, in vieZ of "all  the turmoil," the 3resident Zould try to
Zork out a face-saving compromise. But, the Administrator Zrote in his
diary the ne[t day, "he told me very firmly that he Zanted me to go through
along the lines of the order that I have issued." No Triborough requisitions
Zere to be honored "unless the 0oses matter is settled to the 3resident's
satisfaction."

Apparently confident that he could break La Guardia doZn and force him to
agree not to reappoint 0oses in June, FDR told Ickes pontifically

579
that "the thing to do Zas just to go along, say as little as possible, and let it
Zork out." For a Zhile  it seemed that the 3resident Zas correct. On January
16, he summoned La Guardia to :ashington for a private conversation.
Returning to NeZ York, the 0ayor  told reporters, "Nothing is going to
happen that Zill disturb the pleasant relations betZeen the city and
:ashington.  :e   simply cannot afford to let a break happen. :e have too
many public projects being financed by federal funds to let such a thing
happen." A +erald Tribune :ashington  staffer reported that "at 3:A
headquarters, 0r. 0oses' resignation Zas confidently e[pected as a result of
0ayor  La Guardia's public remark."

But if the 3resident felt he Zas holding all the cards, he Zas overlooking the
trump: public opinion. And 0oses' trump suit Zas even longer than had
previously been apparent.

Roosevelt Zas forced to admit at a press conference that he had been kept
informed of the controversy by Ickes. The 3resident declined to discuss the
matter further but even the limited admission made neZs— president aZare
of order on moses, the Times headlined—and Zith this opening,
neZspapers finally told their readers that FDR Zas not only aZare of the
order but had directed Ickes to issue it. The public protest rose to hurricane
levels, as delegations from 147 civic, business and social organi]ations met
in the auditorium of the State Chamber of Commerce Building at 65 Liberty
Street.

The diversity of those delegations—there Zas one from the Fortnightly
Library Club of Brooklyn  as Zell as one from the 0anufacturers
Association of Bush Terminal—indicated the e[tent to Zhich the support
for 0oses e[tended through every segment of the city. There Zere
delegations from the city's most prestigious civic organi]ations: the Citi]ens
8nion, the City Club, the :omen's   City Club, the Civic Council of
Brooklyn, the Alliance of :omen's   Clubs, the Civitas Club of Brooklyn and
the 8nited Neighborhood +ouses—a central body Zhich itself represented
forty-nine separate settlement houses and other social Zork organi]ations
such as the NeZ York 8rban League and the Educational Alliance. Sitting
on the stage or in the audience at the State Chamber of Commerce
auditorium Zere many of the most respected and influential individuals in

580
the NeZ York City reform movement: Burlingham, 3rice, 0cAneny,
Schieffelin and other old giants of reform Zho had been idols at the Bureau
of 0unicipal  Research Zhen Bob 0oses had been a young staffer there;
leaders of the "middle generation" of the movement, contemporaries of
0oses like Childs, Stanley Isaacs and 0orris Ernst; and leaders of reform's
younger generation such as NeZbold 0orris. Once these men had all been
friends and admirers of 0oses. 0any of them had been alienated from him
by his display of vindictiveness and disregard for the truth during the
gubernatorial campaign. But noZ there Zas a principle at stake and these
Zere men to Zhom principle Zas more important than personality;
forgetting past differences, they took him again into the shelter of their
names and reputations and lent to his fight Zith the 3resident the ringing
phrases of reform. The Triborough Bridge, they said in a

letter sent to Ickes on behalf of all 147 organi]ations, is "an urgently
necessary public facility" but "if the price to be paid for the loan of Federal
funds is the surrender of control over local government, then Ze, being
unZilling  to sacrifice this great principle, Zould rather Zait until such time
as some other method of financing Zill permit its completion."

And just as important in determining La Guardia's attitude as the public
e[pressions of protest Zere the private e[pressions. For the men making
them possessed not only personal entree to La Guardia but his respect. As
alZays, the definitive Zord Zas Burlingham's:

Dear F.+.

You knoZ my vieZs on the subject; but I think I Zill  put them in Zriting  as
my considered opinion, for my oZn clarification, if  not for yours.

You have told me that you do not think one man should be permitted to
obstruct or imperil the relief of hundreds of thousands.

That one man, hoZever, has become a symbol. :ashington has taken the
position the English .ings  took toZard the American Colonies. The
question, therefore, is Zhether you, as representative not of NeZ York City
alone but of every municipality and every state in the 8nion, Zill submit to
an unreasonable and tyrannical order from :ashington.

581
If you have already committed yourself e[pressly or by implication, I think
you should make it plain to the Secretary and the 3resident that the
sentiment of NeZ York is so strong that as its representative you must
respect it, and that unless good reason is shoZn to the contrary you intend
to reappoint 0oses as Triborough Bridge Commissioner on the e[piration
of his term.

I have tested public sentiment at all points possible for me, and it is
unanimous. Even those Zho dislike 0oses for his bad manners and rough
stuff agree that it Zould be far better to let Zork on the Triborough cease
than to yield to Order Number 129.

Yours, Burlingham

The flood Zaters of protest Zere beginning to creep higher in :ashington,
too. "0orris  L. Ernst, a fine young liberal laZyer from  NeZ York, came in
to see me today very much Zorried over the situation and its effect on my
reputation," Ickes had told his diary on January 9. "+e justly pointed out the
fact that my action in the 0oses case is at utter variance Zith any other act
of mine. +e says I am being critici]ed by all the liberals of NeZ York. +e
told me frankly that everybody reali]ed that I Zas acting for the 3resident
but apparently that isn't saving my face or helping my reputation." And
Ernst Zas not the only influential liberal to sit under the stuffed buffalo
heads at one end of Ickes' vast Zalnut-paneled office at Interior, Zaiting for
an audience Zith the Secretary. Already uneasy in his conscience over Zhat
he Zas doing, Ickes became uneasier still.

Roosevelt tried to ignore the flood—Zhen Joseph 3rice, an old friend,
Zrote on January 30 for an intervieZ, the 3resident refused to see him— but
by mid-February the Zaters Zere beginning to lick at the steps of the

:hite   +ouse. The mail tally that Zas sent daily to FDR's desk included, day
after day, scores of protests from individuals and organi]ations. On most of
them, a presidential aide, probably Colonel 0arvin +. 0clntyre,  scribbled
'The usual" and out Zent a letter, signed by Louis +oZe, saying only: "Your
letter has been received and Zill be brought to the 3resident's attention. I
Zant to thank you on his behalf for your interest in sending your vieZs
regarding the matter referred to." But some of the mail required more than

582
form replies. For Ernst, 3rice and Burlingham—and a score of other reform
leaders from NeZ York—Zere personal friends of the 3resident and his
Zife from  Roosevelt's days in NeZ York, and these men Zere among the
Zriters, Burlingham Ziring  the 3resident on February 22, a year to the day
since FDR had begun the ouster move: "Never have seen such unanimity of
feeling. Issue far transcends 0oses or NeZ York. . . . :ay out can and must
be found." And Zhile the protest had at first been confined to NeZ York,
Zith the revelation of the 3resident's direct involvement, it spread. Soon
neZspapers all over the country, many of Zhich had been looking for proof
that federal relief money Zas being used for political purposes, Zere
finding that proof in Order Number 129 and Zere treating it accordingly. "I
Zould not have supposed that the country outside of NeZ York Zould be
very interested in this matter," Ickes Zrote, "but the neZspapers have made
it almost a national issue." Arthur .rock,  syndicated national political
columnist of the Times, analy]ed the controversy from a political
standpoint. :alter  Lippmann analy]ed it from  a philosophical standpoint,
concluding that surrender by La Guardia Zould mean that he has "bartered
aZay not only his independence but the independence of all other local
officials" to a centrali]ed bureaucracy in :ashington.

There Zere other developments that Roosevelt could only have vieZed as
ominous. Conservative elements in the +ouse, led by upstate reactionary
Bertrand Snell, began to move for a congressional investigation of Order
Number 129. Such an investigation Zas not likely to redound to Roosevelt's
credit—as became evident in a speech by +uey Long. The Louisiana
rabble-rouser, already a national figure in early 1935 and intent on
becoming more of one, had been bitterly attacking 3ostmaster General
Farley and demanding a Senate investigation of his activities. On 0arch 6,
before packed galleries in the Senate Chamber, the .ingfish charged that
the "Big Bag 0an's"  NeZ York-based General Builders Supply Corporation
Zas transacting "matters Zith Zhich the 8nited States government is
identified for the purpose of making private profit." And the .ingfish   said
that, to prove his charge, "the testimony of Commissioner Robert 0oses of
NeZ York, and the data Zhich he has assembled Zill be called. . . ."
:hether   or not, as Zas later to be reported, 0oses Zas leaking Long his
"data" on Farley as a hint to Roosevelt of the revelations he might make
during a congressional investigation, the threat of such revelations Zas

583
another reason for the 3resident to dread the possibility that another branch
of the federal government might intrude into his personal vendetta.

It Zas not only the legislative branch that might intrude, moreover.

Emphasi]ing as alZays their belief that democracy must be a government of
laZs and not of men, the NeZ York reformers commissioned a legal
analysis of Order Number 129. Their attorney concluded in a si[teen-page
brief that the order Zas clearly illegal, "an arbitrary and capricious fiat
Zithout any authority in laZ,"  that it Zas a breach not only of e[press
contractual obligations of the government but of "governmental morality,"
that the records in the case clearly proved that Ickes had issued the order to
force from office a single municipal official for  no other reason than that
that official Zas not "deemed friendly to the Federal Administration," that
Ickes had abused the poZer given him by Congress and the 3resident and
that he had therefore committed an impeachable offense. The attorney said
he Zas prepared to undertake, as a public service for Zhich no fee Zould be
required, an attempt to obtain from the courts a Zrit of mandamus requiring
Ickes to honor his contract Zith Triborough. And the identity of the attorney
made the threat one that could not be laughed off; he Zas the noted
constitutional laZyer :illiam    D. Guthrie, senior partner of the celebrated
laZ firm  of Cravath, SZaine and 0oore, Zho forty  years before had carried
a fight against the imposition of a federal income ta[ all the Zay to the
8nited States Supreme Court—and had Zon. (The ta[ Zas not reinstituted
until 1913, Zhen it Zas legali]ed by the passage of the Si[teenth
Amendment.*) Roosevelt decided to grant Joseph 3rice the intervieZ 3rice
had requested, and the reformer returned to NeZ York to report to intimates
that he had found the 3resident conciliatory. +e told them that Roosevelt
had asked him plaintively, "Isn't the 3resident of the 8nited States entitled
to one personal grudge?" ("No," 3rice said he had replied.) Ickes Zrote in
his diary: "The 3resident, I knoZ, Zould Zelcome a Zay out of this cul-de-
sac." But, the Secretary added, "no Zay offers itself."

Trying to find a Zay, the 3resident summoned La Guardia to a secret
meeting. It Zas held on February 24 aboard a 3ennsylvania Railroad train
carrying the 3resident from :ashington  to a speech in Cambridge,
0assachusetts. Although the train stopped in NeZ York, La Guardia drove

584
to 3hiladelphia and boarded it there to lessen the possibility that he Zould
be spotted by a reporter. :hen the train stopped in NeZ York, the city's
mayor stayed hidden in a compartment behind loZered ZindoZ shades.

3resident and 0ayor Zere trying to find  a Zay to retreat and still save face,
and La Guardia had brought Zith him a draft of a letter he thought might do
the job. In the letter, Zhich Zas addressed to Ickes, La Guardia agreed that
he Zould alZays obey Order Number 129 in the future and Zould never
again appoint a city official to an authority receiving federal funds. But, he
said, applying Order Number 129 retroactively to city officials already on
authorities created a problem in the case of one particular individual—
+ousing Authority  member 3ost.

Langdon 3ost is familiar Zith the entire city housing program, La

* The main reason for the verdict Zas the constitutional provision that
direct ta[es had to be apportioned among the states in proportion to
population, a provision struck out by the amendment.

Guardia Zrote. ":hat   is more, he is enthusiastic, ]ealous and energetic in
his Zork. It Zould  be a pity to displace him at this time." Therefore, the
0ayor  said, could I possibly ask for a "modification" of Order Number 129
that Zould permit "officials  of e[isting  commissions or authorities to
continue their Zork until completion"?

There Zas also a postscript to the letter. "3.S.," the 0ayor Zrote. There is
one other official Zho Zould  be affected by the modification. +is name is
Robert 0oses. "I assume the ruling on one Zill be applicable to the other."

The attempt to cover the retreat on 0oses by pretending that the battle Zas
really over 3ost Zas so transparent a smoke screen that Roosevelt may have
been reluctant to employ it. +e did nothing on February 25, 26 or 27. The
requisition slips that 0oses had sent to :ashington on November 8, almost
four months before, remained on Ickes' desk, unsigned. The contracts for
the ne[t stages of Zork on the Triborough Bridge remained unlet.
Considerations of revenge and politics appear to have been balancing
themselves almost evenly in the 3resident's mind.

585
But on February 27, something happened that tipped the balance.

For Zeeks, Alfred E. Smith's friends had been urging him to issue a
statement on 0oses' behalf. Time and again they had told him that he must
delay no longer, that 0oses could not hold out Zithout help. But Zhile the
old Zarrior Zas unhappy noZ and terribly bitter, he had lost none of his
Ziliness. :ait,   he told his friends. The time Zasn't right yet. 0oses didn't
need him to hold out. The neZspaper editorials and civic association
resolutions Zould enable him to do that. 0oses needed him to Zin. The
moment Zhen he should step in Zas the moment at Zhich the 3resident and
the 0ayor had been driven to the edge of a decision to give in to 0oses and
a single push could plunge them over the edge into surrender—if the push
Zas delivered by someone Zith more influence than a neZspaper or a civic
association, someone Zhose name Zas still a potent force throughout the
8nited States and particularly potent as an influence Zith La Guardia, Zho
kneZ that if Smith ever became angry enough to go after his job, he Zould
probably be unable to keep it. NoZ, Smith judged, the moment had arrived.
On February 26, he called reporters to his office on the thirty-second floor
of the Empire State Building and said he Zanted to make a statement. As
usual, he Zent right to the heart. "Over ten years ago," he said, "Bob Zas
talking to me about a single unified plan for park and parkZay development
for the state." +e has been carrying out that plan ever since. "The
Triborough Bridge is the key to the success of the Zhole system." It Zas
"ridiculous" not to let him finish  it. Ickes' order Zas "narroZ, political and
vindictive." +e  could not believe, he said, that 3resident Roosevelt Zould
be a party to it.

As Smith had knoZn it Zould, his statement made the front pages of
neZspapers across the country on February 27. The very ne[t day, the
3resident, in Ickes' Zords, "came to a conclusion that a retreat Zas in
order."

Summoning Ickes to the :hite  +ouse, he called in stenographer Grace
Tully and dictated a draft of a reply to La Guardia's letter for Ickes to sign.
"Ickes' " reply agreed to solve "the problem created as the result of the
e[piration of the term of Commissioner Langdon 3ost" by ruling that Order
Number 129 should not apply retroactively and that therefore since 3ost had

586
been appointed to both his city and authority posts before the order Zas
issued, he could keep them. "Since a like situation e[ists Zith reference to
0r.  0oses, of the Triborough Bridge Authority, this interpretation shall also
apply to him," the letter added. Ickes predated the La Guardia letter to him
February 23 and he predated "his" letter to La Guardia February 26—"so as
to antedate by one day the blast let out . . . by Al Smith," he noted in his
diary. Regardless of the date at its top, hoZever, the letter Zas a document
of unconditional surrender. 0oses' great friend had rendered him one last
great service.

All but ignoring Langdon 3ost, the press correctly interpreted the Ickes
letter as a personal triumph for the Triborough Commissioner, ickes backs
doZn on moses Zas the +erald Tribune's three-column lead headline; its
editorial noted that Ickes' letter left some questions about the controversy's
origin unansZered but said, "No one, Ze think, Zill Zish  to disturb the
grandeur of that handsome, outsi]ed Zhite flag noZ floating above the
offices of the 3:A   by hurling irrelevant questions at it." La Guardia's
parting groZl—"As  I have insisted all along, relations betZeen :ashington
and City +all are most cordial and friendly. . . . There Zas no need for all
this 'pro bono publico' business"—Zas lost in the cheering.

Ickes, Zho hadn't Zanted to become involved in the first place, had suffered
not only pangs of conscience but a public humiliation of monumental
proportions. "0oses did me more damage than any other one person during
my years Zith Roosevelt," he Zas to Zrite. But even Ickes could not forbear
to cheer the episode's victor. Reminiscing in a letter to Burlingham years
later, he said, "There can be no doubt of the porcupinish disposition of
0oses. And is he clever! ... +e put it all over 3resident Roosevelt and me in
that squabble." Cleveland Rodgers summed up the dimensions of the
triumph Zhen he Zrote: "The battle of the Triborough Bridge Zas over.
0oses Zon against the most poZerful opponent he ever encountered."

And 0oses Zon  more than a battle. For in it, as Rodgers Zrote, he
"received the most impressive demonstration of public confidence in his
career." That Zas the battle's most significant development. At the
conclusion of his gubernatorial campaign, 0oses' stock of public
confidence had never been loZer. But at the conclusion of the Triborough

587
Bridge fight, just four months later, it had never been higher. By placing
0oses in a position Zhere he Zas in fact the opponent of bureaucrats and
politicians that he had for so long claimed to be, Franklin Roosevelt had
alloZed him to screZ his halo back on. And so firmly did 0oses screZ it
back on—Zithout ever again making the mistake of running for public
office—that in the public's eyes the last of the gloZ Zould not fade for
almost thirty years. "After

that Triborough controversy," :indels  Zas to say, "he couldn't do anything
that Zas Zrong in the public's eyes. If you disagreed Zith him, Zhy you
Zere a public enemy. +e Zas back firmly in the saddle."

The ceremony opening the Triborough Bridge—held on its central span on
July 11, 1936—Zas to add a tinkling little grace note, an inspiration of pure
Zit, to the resounding triumph 0oses had Zon eighteen months before in
forcing Roosevelt and Ickes to alloZ him to complete the project.

:hen   the invitations Zere mailed on 0ay 12, one Zent to the :hite   +ouse.
No reply Zas immediately forthcoming, and the reasons Zere certainly
understandable. 0oses, as master of ceremonies at the sumptuous opening,
Zould be introducing the dignitaries present—Zould, in other Zords, say a
feZ things about each of them. And Roosevelt, familiar Zith 0oses' gift for
invective, could hardly have helped Zorrying Zhat 0oses might decide to
say about him. A recent incident had provided him Zith fresh proof of the
depth of his foe's animosity: before the opening of the Chrystie-Forsyth
park comple[, La Guardia, trying to cultivate the 3resident, had suggested
naming the park after his mother. 0oses had flatly refused. (The name
"Sara Delano Roosevelt 3ark" had been bestoZed only after the 0ayor
outsmarted the 3ark Commissioner by suggesting the name publicly; 0oses
did not dare to publicly oppose a chivalrous gesture to an elderly Zoman.)
The 3resident had been forced to eat one large slice of humble pie on the
Triborough Bridge issue; he Zas understandably reluctant to be forced to
choke doZn another helping on the bridge's center span. The Triborough
Authority mailroom, alerted to keep an eye out for a response from the
:hite   +ouse, reported day after day that none had appeared.

On June 23, Ickes, although himself piqued because the only invitation he
had received Zas one as a "general spectator" ("It is very small indeed. . . .

588
Naturally, I ought to have a place in the program"), advised the 3resident to
attend. "I understand that there Zill be a national hookup and the bridge
itself Zill  be featured in neZspaper articles and pictures throughout the
land. If you go to this affair, credit for the building of the bridge Zill  go to
your administration, Zhere it belongs. OtherZise, 0r. 0oses  can be
depended upon to glorify himself. ..." The dedication, free of political
overtones in an election year, "Zill be of more value to you at this time than
a score of campaign speeches," the Administrator said. +e added a piece of
encouragement: "0ayor La Guardia told me in NeZ York on Saturday that
you are the only one Zho can take this shoZ aZay from Robert 0oses. And
you can do it." And he added a Zarning: ". . . you Zill be in +yde 3ark on
the nth. If you are to be near NeZ York on the nth, Zon't your failure to take
part in the program be subject to misinterpretation?" But Roosevelt's
response Zas a memo, only tZo paragraphs long but quite revealing:

I Zish much that I could go to the Triborough Bridge opening on July
eleventh. It is impossible for me to come doZn from +yde 3ark that day—
incidentally, it Zould be an all day trip to NeZ York and back.

I really think that if you and La Guardia take hold of the ceremony, you Zill
so greatly outshine Brother 0oses that Ze Zill be able to sing, ":here  Zas
0oses Zhen the lights Zent out?"

F.D.R.

3ress speculation over Zhether the 3resident Zould attend Zas mounting,
hoZever, and other presidential advisers joined Ickes in pointing out that
the bridge Zas the largest 3:A  project in the East, that it Zas in the
3resident's oZn state, that its location in the country's media capital Zould
insure its dedication nationZide publicity, that credit for it should go to the
3resident's administration—and that the 3resident's absence Zould arouse
press "misinterpretation" that he Zas afraid to confront 0oses again. La
Guardia apparently elicited from 0oses a promise that he Zould be on his
best behavior. +e also elicited a specific promise, insisted on by Roosevelt,
that although 0oses Zould introduce all the other speakers, he Zould not
introduce the 3resident but Zould let the 0ayor do it. The 0ayor  bore the
guarantees to +yde 3ark, and at the last minute Zas able to announce that
the 3resident Zas coming after all. Ickes received a "special invitation" to

589
be one of the speakers and at another press conference La Guardia
announced that the 3:A Administrator  Zas coming, too.

(Leaving the 0ayor's office after the announcement about Ickes, 0oses Zas
surrounded by reporters. +e declined to ansZer any of their questions, but
he could hardly keep from laughing, and he finally said, Zith a broad grin,
"You can say that I'm going to introduce him.")

(In a conference in La Guardia's office, at Zhich :indels  Zas present,
0oses had shoZn the 0ayor the timetable for the program, Zhich limited
the 3resident's speaking time to five minutes. Don't be ridiculous, the
0ayor  said. 0oses gave the 3resident si[ minutes.)

It Zas e[tremely hot on the day of the dedication, ninety-seven degrees on
the temporary speaker's platform on the bridge center span, and that may
have been the reason Zhy three of the speakers—Roosevelt, Ickes and La
Guardia—Zere sZeating. But reporters noticed that 0oses Zas strikingly
cool in his Zhite suit.

+e Zas a gracious host Zhen the 3resident's party arrived, letting his charm
Zash over Ickes in such a great Zave that the Old Curmudgeon later
confessed to his diary that he had been overZhelmed. Introducing all the
speakers—all the speakers e[cept the 3resident—over a nationZide radio
hookup Zhile he looked out at the gleaming Zhite bridge roadZay
stretching out from Randall's Island toZard the three boroughs it joined
together, and doZn at the just-completed Triborough Stadium beloZ him,
he Zas e[pansive and complimentary. And reporters Zho had hoped for
some malice on the center span, a little bloodying of the virgin concrete,
Zere disappointed. All the speeches Zere standard opening-ceremony
incon-sequentialities (it Zas probably an oversight that neither FDR nor
Ickes mentioned by name the man Zho had built the project they Zere
dedicating) and 0oses never mentioned the 3resident at all and, in his
introduction of

Ickes, Zas ostensibly all let-bygones-be-bygones, moving the audience to
applaud—and the reporters to Zrite that "the feud came to a graceful end
yesterday"—Zhen he said that "the 3ublic :orks  Administrator and I have
met face to face and found that neither one of us has horns, hoofs and a tail.

590
... At this junction, Zhere traffic from  all directions meets, Zhere there are
no left-hand turns, no head-on collisions and no sidesZipes, it's a genuine
pleasure to meet the Secretary of the Interior. ... I trust that this meeting Zill
be the beginning of a real friendship and regard."

There Zas, of course, one someZhat unusual note in 0oses' introduction of
Ickes. "There have been times," 0oses said, "Zhen in contemplating our
:ashington  partner, I have been tempted to go back for inspiration to the
letter Zhich Dr. Samuel Johnson Zrote to Lord Chesterfield about the
famous dictionary Zhich the great scholar announced that he had finished
Zith comparatively little  assistance. I have alZays considered this letter to
be one of the finest pieces of polite vituperation in the annals of English
literature." But no reporter thought to analy]e the letter and see its
application to Roosevelt and Ickes. Ickes even Zrote in his diary that he
Zas quite pleased by the introduction.

If the Old Curmudgeon had attended Yale and had taken Chauncey
BreZster Tinker's course on "Johnson and +is Circle," his pleasure might
have been someZhat diluted.

3rofessor Tinker had delighted in telling his students—including Robert
0oses, president of Yale's version of Samuel Johnson's .it Cat Club—the
story behind the scholar's letter. Setting out on the task of compiling his
great dictionary, the scholar had appealed for the financial assistance he
desperately needed to Lord Chesterfield, Zho had encouraged him to e[pect
it, but had then rudely rebuffed him. :hen,  hoZever, after seven years of
privation and hardship, the Zork Zas completed and acclaimed,
Chesterfield had attempted to represent himself as Dr. Johnson's "patron"
and thus take some of the credit for it. It Zas then that Dr. Johnson Zrote to
him: "Is not a 3atron, my Lord, one Zho looks Zith unconcern on a man
struggling for life in the Zater, and Zhen he has reached ground, encumbers
him Zith help?" +e  added: "I hope it is no very cynical asperity to be
unZilling  that the 3ublick should consider me as oZing that to a 3atron,
Zhich 3rovidence has enabled me to do for myself."

the salaries of the employees Zho remained, balancing the city's budget—
and raising the moral tone of government in NeZ York to neZ heights.
Sitting under the portraits of beZigged Colonial Governors Zith his unruly

591
black forelock doZn over his forehead, his horn-rimmed glasses pushed up
on top of his head, his feet dangling off the floor, sorting through a stack of
mail as rapidly as if he Zere dealing a deck of cards, tossing the letters at
three secretaries and shouting, "Say yes, say no, throZ it aZay, tell him to
go to hell," the Little FloZer  made City +all shake Zith the pounding of his
fists on his desk and echo Zith the rasp of the si[ bu]]ers he had installed
there.

But the Little FloZer Zasn't mastering Robert 0oses. The relationship of
the tZo men Zas the talk, or rather the Zhisper, of City +all.

The relationship Zas kept secret—even, to a large e[tent, from the
neZspapermen Zho proZled the +all uncovering secrets—because it Zas
knoZn to only a feZ of  the 0ayor's intimates and because those intimates,
an[ious to preserve the 0ayor's image as a commander capable of
command, a 0ayor master of his city, Zere careful to disclose nothing that
Zould mar this image.* And public knoZledge of the 0ayor's  relationship
Zith Robert 0oses Zould  certainly have marred it.

La Guardia Zas a bullying petty tyrant to subordinates—not only to his
secretaries, Zho came to dread the rasp of his bu]]ers summoning them into
his office, and Zould sit sobbing at their desks Zhen they came out, but also
to his commissioners, the nonpartisan, nonpolitical e[perts of Zhose
presence in his administration he Zas constantly bragging. Re[ford G.
TugZell, Zho  joined that administration as 3lanning Commission chairman,
recalls bitterly, "+e boasted to neZspapers [of] his appointees. ... +e did not
say that he often treated his commissioners like dogs. . . . :e soon
discovered that Ze Zere e[pected to do a good deal of humiliating
koZtoZing,  to give many of La Guardia's favorites jobs, and to respect
Zithout question Zhatever capricious notions the 0ayor might have about
our Zork." The 0ayor  moved his desk to the far end of his thirty-tZo-foot-
long office (the Blue Room, formerly used for ceremonial functions
because of its si]e) so that visitors Zould have a longer Zalk to reach him,
and Zhen a commissioner entered—usually after a long heel-cooling period
outside— the 0ayor Zould  often further unnerve him by covering his face
Zith his fingers and peering betZeen them so that, as the commissioner
approached, all he could see of his boss's face Zas a pair of button-bright

592
little eyes staring at him. A commissioner Zho displeased La Guardia by
inefficiency—or by shoZing even a hint of independence—Zould be
abused as if he Zere a ZayZard child. And the abuse Zas not delivered only
in private: in his desk the 0ayor kept a large bron]e bone and at intervals
he Zould call his commissioners together so that in front of them all he
could "aZard" it to

* As they Zere careful to disclose nothing that Zould hint at the e[cesses of
La Guardia's "colorful" personality. "Everybody talks about the 0ayor's
temperament— Zhich doesn't e[ist!" Reuben A. La]arus blandly assured
John Gunther, and the author duly stated in his chapter on the 0ayor in
Inside 8.S.A.: "Temperament? There's no time for it—unless it happens to
serve a useful purpose."

the one Zho had pulled the biggest recent boner; once, Zith a commissioner
in his office, the 0ayor  summoned a secretary and berated her viciously for
an imaginary mistake—just so that he could have the pleasure of
concluding the tirade by shouting, "If you Zere any dumber, I'd make you a
commissioner." 0any commissioners resigned; the turnover in the La
Guardia administration, TugZell says, "must have been unprecedented in
municipal history" (although it Zas later surpassed by the turnover in the
administration of NeZ York's ne[t Fusion mayor, John Vliet Lindsay, Zho
succeeded in having seven sanitation commissioners resign on him in four
years). 0any didn't get a chance to resign, for La Guardia delighted in
firing people—he once dismissed a secretary Zho had Zorked for him
faithfully  for years Zhen, for the first time, she shoZed up at her desk after
lunch tipsy—and a La Guardia dismissal Zas a thorough job: the mayoral
pink slip Zas hand-delivered Zithout any previous Zarning—by aides
bearing also Zritten authori]ation to seal the hapless commissioner's files
on the spot so that he could not remove even personal letters.

La Guardia's relationship Zith his 3ark Commissioner Zas slightly
different. Other commissioners might be made to cool their heels outside
his office after ansZering a mayoral summons; Zhen 0oses Zas
summoned, he Zould keep the 0ayor Zaiting, shoZing up late (if he
shoZed up at all; often he sent Earle AndreZs in his place). Sometimes the
enraged 0ayor Zould accept the proffered e[cuse that 0oses Zas busy; on

593
other occasions he Zould refuse to see AndreZs and Zould order an aide to
telephone 0oses and demand his presence—and Zhile sometimes this
demand Zould produce him, often +a]el Tappan Zould inform the aide
curtly that "0r.  0oses  is out in the field" and "can't be reached." Other
commissioners might be broZbeaten in La Guardia's office, his secretaries
hastily jumping up Zhen the furious high-pitched voice began to rise from
behind his closed door and scurrying to slam another door to the Zaiting
room outside so that visitors could not hear; Zhen the commissioner behind
the door to the 0ayor's office Zas 0oses, the secretary kneZ that if the
high-pitched voice began to pierce the door, it Zould soon be joined, if not
droZned out, by another, nasal and resonant.

0en  Zho happened to be sitting behind that door—in La Guardia's office—
during confrontations betZeen the 0ayor and 0oses Zould speak of those
confrontations thirty years later in voices that still contained a tone of aZe.
"There Zould be scenes in the 0ayor's office that I could hardly believe,"
recalls 3aul J. .ern, La Guardia's laZ secretary. Another La Guardia aide
says, "There Zere moments Zhen you Zould have sZorn they Zere going
to come to bloZs—that Zas hoZ high the feeling ran." The aide Zho Zas
perhaps present most often Zas Reuben A. La]arus, Zhose e[pertise in bill
drafting, second only to 0oses', had earned him the nickname "the Zalking
library" and a reputation for knoZing "Zhere the bodies are buried" and
Zho Zas considered so indispensable that La Guardia had retained him in
the same sensitive post in Zhich he had served Jimmy :alker—official city
representative in Albany—and had given

him e[traordinary access to his private office. La]arus recalls that 0oses
and La Guardia "used to Zalk around each other in that office sometimes
like a couple of stiff-legged bulldogs. One time 0oses Zas threatening to
do something—I don't recall Zhat e[actly—to some other commissioner.
La Guardia Zas pleading and pleading Zith him not to do it. +e kept
saying, 'Jesus, Bob, look at the trouble you're going to cause me.' Finally
0oses said, 'Okay, 0ajor, I  Zon't.' +e left  and La Guardia turned to me and
said, 'Someday I'm going to hit that son of a bitch and knock him through
that door!' " "0oses Zould  come out Zild—just  absolutely Zild," says
0oses aide Jack 0adigan, Zho Zas often Zaiting  outside City +all in

594
0oses' limousine. "+e used to say to me, 'Do you knoZ Zhat that dago son
of a bitch told me this morning?' "

("That dago son of a bitch," "that Zop son of a bitch" and "that guinea son
of a bitch" Zere three of 0oses' favorite private descriptions of La Guardia
during the 0ayor's first  term—in letters and to his face, 0oses addressed
him as "0ajor,"  his :orld   :ar   I  Army Air  Force rank. During his second
term, La Guardia, sensitive about his Italian immigrant ancestry and unable
to forget that during his youth playmates, seeing an organ grinder, had
jeered, "A dago Zith a monkey! +ey, Fiorello, you're a dago, too. :here's
your monkey?," banned organ grinders from the streets. 0oses thereupon
began referring to La Guardia in private as "the little organ grinder." Later,
he took to calling the 0ayor "Rigoletto."  La Guardia, feeling that 0oses'
insistence on his oZn infallibility  Zas comparable at least to an
Archbishop's, referred to him in private as "+is Grace.")

:hile   La Guardia Zas constantly severing other commissioners' ties Zith
his administration or threatening to sever those ties, Zhen the 0ayor dealt
Zith 0oses  the shoe Zas on the other foot. The resignation ultimatum,
perfected by 0oses during the Roosevelt Governorship, Zas a heavily
utili]ed  Zeapon in his running battle Zith the 0ayor,  a Zeapon used to Zin
even small points: "I must insist that . . . approval of filling the position be
granted forthZith. OtherZise I cannot assume further responsibility for this
Zork." The ultimatum might  be delivered in Zriting by AndreZs or orally
by 0oses himself in face-to-face confrontations—just before he Zhirled on
his heel and slammed out of the 0ayor's office. And it invariably Zorked.
:hen   0oses slammed out Zith the threat hanging in the air, :indels
recalls, "La Guardia used to go over to the ZindoZ [the one in the
southZest corner of his office, from Zhich both the front steps of City +all
and 0oses' limousine parked there Zould be visible] and Zait to see if
0oses really left the building—sometimes he Zould come back himself,
you see. And if 0oses did [leave], La Guardia Zould quickly send someone
from the office—a secretary or Zhoever Zas Zith him—after him to try and
stop him before he drove aZay—as if it Zas the secretary's idea and not his
[La Guardia's], see—and get him to come back, or he'd telephone the police
booth at the front entrance to get the patrolman on duty there to try to do it.

595
Then he'd stand by the ZindoZ Zaiting to see Zhat happened. After a
Zhile, it occurred to him that 0oses could see him

standing there and could see hoZ an[ious he Zas, so he had the loZer panes
of the ZindoZ  filled Zith  one-Zay glass so he could look out but 0oses
couldn't see in."

Baffled by the resignation tactic, Zhich humiliated him by making him back
doZn on the spot, La Guardia at first tried to handle it Zith mock disdain;
once he sent 0oses a note saying, "Enclosed are your last five or si[
resignations; I'm starting a neZ file." This strategy didn't blunt the Zeapon,
but the Zily :indels    finally devised one that did: refusing to treat the
resignations as anything but a joke. Recalls the Corporation Counsel: "One
day I came in and La Guardia Zas sitting there and he said, ':hat the hell
am I going to do? +ere's another resignation. And Earle AndreZs is outside
Zaiting for an ansZer.' I said, ':hat   you Zant to do is kid him.' " :indels
suggested that La Guardia print a pad of forms reading: "I, Robert

0oses, do hereby resign as effective " and simply hand one

to 0oses Zhenever the commissioner threatened to resign. The technique
Zorked; the ne[t time 0oses  made the threat in person, La Guardia simply
Zhipped out the pad, tore off the top form Zith a flourish and a broad—if
forced—grin and handed it to him. 0oses snatched the pad off the 0ayor's
desk, hurled it across the room, stamped out the door—and used the threat
more infrequently thereafter. But it remained nonetheless implicit in
confrontations betZeen the tZo men, and Zhile La Guardia Zon some of
those clashes, more often it Zas the 0ayor, rather than his commissioner,
Zho gave Zay. In one typical episode, La Guardia ordered an investigation
of tZo construction contractors he suspected of defrauding the city. Their
attorney, the brilliant Jackson Dykman, recalls that Zhile he Zas conferring
Zith his clients in 0oses'  office, "I heard 0oses give La Guardia the devil
over the telephone." Describing that telephone conversation, 0oses gives a
Zonderful imitation  of the La Guardia snarl: "+e said, "Yeahhhh, I hear you
got a fancy laZyer.' I said, 'Yeahhhh, and he's gonna kick the shit out of
you. You better leave him alone.'" And, as it turned out, La Guardia never
had the investigation pursued.

596
On July 23, 1936, readers of The NeZ York Times Zere served Zith their
morning coffee a headline reading mayor calls police to halt ra]ing of ferry
by moses. And as they read on, they found that the headline had not
e[aggerated. The 0ayor of the City of NeZ  York had indeed called out the
armed constabulary against his oZn 3ark Commissioner.

At the beginning of his mayoralty, at the time of the renegotiation of the
contract betZeen the Triborough Authority and the 3:A,  La Guardia had
agreed to mothball the ancient city-operated ferry, the RockaZay, Zhich for
si[teen years had been crossing the East River every tZenty minutes
betZeen Astoria and the old green municipal ferryhouse at Ninety-second
Street in 0anhattan, so that the land on Zhich the terminal stood could be
used for the East River Drive approach to the bridge and so that the
motorists Zho had been using the ferry Zould be forced to drive over the
bridge instead and pay tolls to the Authority. For months, 0oses had

been pressing the city's Department of 3lants and Structures, Zhich
operated the ferry, to discontinue the service so he could begin demolishing
the ferryhouse.

But some of the ferry's 1,700 daily riders felt sentimental about the old tub,
its fog bell clanging aZay and its Zhistle sounding lugubriously to Zarn off
other ships on mist-shrouded early-morning trips. They felt a genuine
camaraderie for the men Zho ran it, contributing seeds to the small garden,
divided into tiny plots by fences made of old bedsprings, that the captains
and ticket takers cultivated ne[t to the 0anhattan ferryhouse, petting and
faZning over Red, an Airedale Zho had Zandered into the ferryhouse as a
pup ten years before and had lived there ever since. And passengers not
given to sentimentality and camaraderie hated to see the ferry go because a
round trip cost only a nickel and a round trip on the bridge Zould cost fifty
cents—and those Zho didn't oZn automobiles Zould have no convenient
Zay to get to and from 0anhattan. The passengers had petitioned Astoria
political leaders to let the ferry remain, and the political leaders had called
on the 3lants and Structures Commissioner, Frederick J. +. .racke, an old-
line Republican leader and La Guardia supporter—and .racke had delayed
discontinuing the service. Then a neZ element Zas added to the picture
Zhen the city decided to construct a large loZ-income housing project on

597
the Astoria Zaterfront; Zith  the ferry, +ousing Authority Commissioner
Langdon 3ost pointed out, residents of the project Zould have convenient
transportation to and from their jobs in 0anhattan; Zithout it, since most of
them Zere too poor to possess automobiles, it Zould be torturous to
commute back and forth across the river every day. .racke had continued to
procrastinate. On July 15, La Guardia had personally telephoned and had
requested the Sinking Fund Commission to formally turn the ferryhouse
property over to the Authority—although the 0ayor said that the ferry
service should not be stopped for si[ty days so that the ferry riders Zould
have time to find other means of transportation. The Sinking Fund
Commission concurred.

0oses Zas not Zilling  to Zait  si[ty  days. Defying the 0ayor, he decided to
stop the service immediately—by tearing doZn the ferry terminal.

+e ordered the contractor building the East River Drive approach, A. N.
+a]ell,  to procure tZo barges and install a pile driver on one and a
Zrecking crane on the other. :hen they Zere ready, on July 21, he Zaited
until the RockaZay had unsuspectingly pulled aZay from 0anhattan for
one of its early-afternoon trips to Astoria and then, Zithout Zarning,
ordered the barges toZed into the ferry slip and lashed together there so that
the RockaZay Zould have no place to dock Zhen it returned. And he
ordered the pile driver and the crane to pound and pull the slip to pieces.
Attacking simultaneously from the land side, he dispatched creZs of
Zorkmen to tear up York Avenue's cobblestones in front of the ferryhouse
to cut off all access to the terminal by land.

By coincidence, Jack 0adigan Zas in .racke's office,  discussing another
matter, Zhen the commissioner received a telephone call about Zhat Zas
happening. "+e threZ me out," 0adigan recalls Zith  a grin, telephoned

City +all  and, Zhile he Zas trying to contact the 0ayor, sent an aide,
Deputy Commissioner AndreZ +udson, to the terminal to intercede Zith
the contractors.

+udson could hardly believe Zhat Zas happening. The fact that the boat
Zas heading across the river Zhile its dock Zas being destroyed behind it
Zas the least of it; the ferry could dock at another pier—Zhich, in fact, Zas

598
Zhat it did Zhen its ama]ed captain, returning from Astoria, saZ Zhat Zas
happening. (Its passengers disembarked at a doZntoZn fireboat landing.)
:hat   Zas more important Zas that hundreds of regular ferry commuters,
Zho had come to 0anhattan by boat that morning, Zould be left stranded
there—Zith their cars and homes on the other side of the river. But Zhen,
assuming there had been some mistake, he pointed this out to the
contractors and asked them to stop Zork until matters could be straightened
out, they told him that they had orders from 0oses to continue Zorking no
matter Zho tried to stop them—and even Zhile +udson Zas arguing Zith
them, the pile driver continued to smash aZay at the dock.

La Guardia meanZhile contacted 0oses and pleaded Zith him to call the
contractors off. If the demolition stopped, he promised the 3ark
Commissioner, he Zould call the Sinking Fund Commission back into
session to shorten the si[ty-day Zaiting period. 0oses refused. Telephoning
3olice Commissioner LeZis J. Valentine, the 0ayor—in a voice so choked
Zith fury  that it Zas barely coherent—ordered him to send a squad of
patrolmen to the scene.

E[pecting the contractors to yield to a direct police order, the 0ayor and
Valentine had instructed the officer in charge at the scene, Deputy Chief
Inspector EdZard A. Bracken, not to use force. But the contractors kneZ
Zhose orders they Zould have to folloZ if they Zanted to keep Zorking for
Triborough. :hen   the Inspector ordered contractor +a]ell to quit, +a]ell
said, "I'm not going to." 0oses had told him not to, he said. And the pile
driver continued to smash aZay. By this time, much of the dock had been
destroyed and the hundreds of rush-hour ferry passengers standing on York
Avenue Zere Zatching the Zorkmen on the barges pry aZay heavy boards
that had been loosened on the rest of it. Only force Zould stop 0oses and
La Guardia finally reali]ed it.  3ut through to Bracken on the telephone, the
0ayor  ordered the Inspector to "drag those men off the boats if they don't
quit." Those of the Zorkmen Zho didn't drop their tools Zhen a fifteen-man
police boarding party sZarmed over the side had them struck from their
hands and Zere shoved, along Zith the rest, onto Zhat Zas left of the dock.
:ithin   minutes, a police launch Zas standing alongside the barges and
Zhen a launch carrying the night shift of contractors' men appeared, it Zas
Zarned aZay. A city tugboat pushed the contractors' barges aZay

599
doZnriver. As night Zas falling,  a procession of barges bearing piles and
lumber to repair the slip arrived and Zorkmen Zorked all night under
floodlights to rebuild the terminal and repave York Avenue. By morning,
the RockaZay Zas back in service—under the protection of a squad of
patrolmen—and La Guardia could tell reporters, Zith a smile of
satisfaction, "All is quiet on the eastern front."

But the last smile Zas 0oses'. La Guardia Zaited a Zeek for the story to
fade from the front pages and then quietly had the Sinking Fund
Commission transfer the terminal to 0oses in another forty-eight hours. At
11:25 p.m., July 31, Zith Red gone from the ferryhouse—a night Zatchman
had taken the Airedale home Zith him—fifty-tZo  Astoria residents Zho
had come doZn to the Astoria pier for old times' sake (plus tZelve other
persons Zho just Zanted to get to 0anhattan) boarded the RockaZay for its
last round trip across the river. 0rs. +attie Arne] of  Astoria Boulevard
played the accordion and they all sang the plaintive ":here Do :e  Go
from +ere?" As the RockaZay, having completed the round trip, bumped
into the Astoria slip for the last time, they sang "Auld Lang Syne." Then, as
the old tub left for the Brooklyn pier Zhere she Zas to be laid up, her
captain bleZ three long, dolorous Zhistle blasts of fareZell. +ardly had the
last note faded Zhen it Zas succeeded by dull heavy thuds—the pound of
0oses' pile driver, tearing the ferryhouse doZn again.

:ithin   a year—in 0ay  1937—the 0ayor  Zould  again be forced to call out
the cops against his commissioner, in another battle in Zhich the
commissioner eventually defeated him anyZay. Advised that 2,000 :3A
laborers assigned to 3ark Department projects Zould be reassigned at the
beginning of the month so that Zork could begin on neZ nonpark projects
(including three ultramodern firehouses for La Guardia's beloved Fire
Department) and that 3,000 more men per month Zould be reassigned
thereafter, 0oses rumbled that if he had to lay off men, some among them
Zould be playground supervisors; some playgrounds Zould therefore have
to be closed, a step sure to touch off a furious public reaction. About to
leave by train for a national conference of mayors in Los Angeles, La
Guardia flatly ordered him not to do so, threatening to fire him if he did.
0oses defied him. :hile    the 8nion 3acific  Streamliner Zas speeding the
0ayor  across country, the 3ark Commissioner struck: he didn't take some

600
of the 2,000 men from playground duty; he took them all, and Zith them
every piece of movable playground equipment, even the seats of the sZings.
And then he ordered 142 playgrounds padlocked. Telephoning frantically
from pay phones at each 8nion 3acific stop, La Guardia ordered 3olice
Commissioner Valentine to open the playgrounds—by force if necessary.
The police Zere forced to cut the locks Zhen 0oses refused to surrender
the keys to Valentine, and though the play areas Zere technically open, the
3ark Department Zas empoZered by city regulations to hold on to the
equipment it had removed, and the city's mothers, confronted by pistol-
toting policemen instead of the familiar supervisory personnel—as Zell as
by firmly  locked toilets that Zere usually available to their youngsters—
rallied behind the 3ark Commissioner. By the time the 0ayor came home,
he Zas confronted by a hostile public, to Zhom 0oses had already taken
his case. ":e,  mothers of the Chelsea District, Zant the 17th Street
playground reopened and the :3A Zorkers rehired," said one of the
countless, hastily draZn petitions delivered to the 0ayor. Said one of the
letters that poured into his office: "As a mother of three small children, I ask
you to take your petty squabble out of the parks and give 0r. 0oses enough
money to run the playgrounds." Lost in the tumult

601
Zas the fact that it Zas the 3ark Commissioner, not the 0ayor, Zho had
designated playground personnel instead of construction Zorkers to be
dropped from the 3ark Department payroll. The public outcry, fanned by
the pro-0oses press, forced the 0ayor to ask the Board of Aldermen for an
e[tra tZo  and a half million dollars, so that the playgrounds could be
properly supervised—and the 3ark Commissioner's construction projects
could go on unabated.

The e[planation for 0oses' independence of La Guardia Zas as comple[ as
the Little FloZer's many-petaled character and as simple—and ineluctable
— as the basic realities of the political game at Zhich the 0ayor e[celled.

In a Zay, their vicious confrontations made La Guardia respect and admire
0oses. The 0ayor's  intimates noticed that Zhile he liked to push people
around, he only respected those he couldn't push. "I think he put on a great
deal of his brutalities to test people out," C. C. Burlingham observed. "If
they could stand up against him it Zas all right, but if they couldn't they
Zere in bad luck." And 0oses could stand up against him better than
anyone else.

0oreover, if  there Zas much in the characters of the tZo strong-Zilled, hot-
tempered men to fan antipathy betZeen them, there Zas also much to
produce affection, and if intimates can remember moments Zhen the air
betZeen the Little FloZer and the 0aster Builder crackled Zith  anger, they
can also remember moments Zhen it gloZed Zith the mutual affection and
admiration of tZo great Zarriors Zho felt  they Zere fighting in the same
cause.

For, after all, in many respects they Zere indeed, at least for a Zhile,
fighting in the same cause. Against a panorama of politicians interested
only in themselves, they stood out as tZo politicians Zho Zere also
interested in accomplishments that they believed Zould benefit others.
Robert 0oses Zas, after all, not the only one of the tZo men Zho Zas
spending his evenings and his Zeekends—the time that other men called
spare and devoted to private interests—driving endlessly around NeZ York
City trying to think  of Zays to make it more beautiful. Robert 0oses Zas
not the only one of the tZo men to Zhom the reali]ation of dreams in

602
concrete Zas desperately important. (:hen "Fiorello . . . started to build La
Guardia Airport," says his Zife, "I think  he spent every Saturday and
Sunday out there Zatching every bit of sand that Zas put in. Just nurtured
that like a plant.") And because accomplishment Zas desperately important
to both men, Zhile their disagreements may have been made fierce by
personal characteristics—their bla]ing tempers, their arrogance, their
dogmatism and their insistence on having their oZn Zay—the roots of those
disagreements lay not in personal hostilities so much as in differences of
opinion about Zhat should be accomplished and hoZ, and therefore their
disagreements could alZays be resolved. So intensely interested Zere both
men in their Zork, moreover, that often no resolutic n Zas necessary. "You'd
see the tZo of them in the goddamnedest argument and then five hours later
they could go and have a drink together

and you'd never knoZ they had fought," Jack 0adigan says. Finally, he
says, he came to understand Zhy this Zas possible: "Other people dealt
Zith personal feelings and emotions, got emotional about personal feelings,
see, but these tZo felloZs here, they dealt Zith subject matter—that Zas
Zhat they got emotional about—and Zhen the subject Zas over, they could
be friends again—unless one of them brought up the subject matter again."
Because accomplishment Zas so important to both of them, Zhen one fleZ
into a fury over opposition, must not the other have understood hoZ
infuriating opposition could be? In a posed, formal picture of the top
officials of the La Guardia administration, there are thirty-one neatly
dressed men—and tZo, the 0ayor and his 3ark Commissioner, Zith ties
askeZ and collar points jabbing out beyond their lapels. And their habitual
lack of neatness Zas symbolic, for neither of the tZo men Zas at all
interested in clothes or other material trappings of life. At times they had
e[changes Zhich indicated that although neither Zould ever admit it, they
kneZ there Zere respects in Zhich their spirits Zere kindred. City Court
Judge Florence Shientag heard La Guardia shout at 0oses, "You can't get
aZay riding roughshod over things!" and 0oses shouting back, "That's the
Zay you get things done!"

Other aspects of La Guardia's character also made the friendly drinks Zith
0oses as inevitable as the Zild altercations. There Zas the little 0ayor's
romantic streak, the side of him that Zas the dreamer, dreaming of making

603
his city beautiful. +is dreams for the beautification Zere vast but vague,
and no one appreciated better than he the enormous difficulty in filling in
the vague outline of a magnificent metropolis Zith specific plans and then
in obtaining the money—the chisel and the brush—that Zould alloZ him to
turn the plans into reality. And it Zas 0oses Zho Zas enabling him to
obtain the plans and the money. An astonishing number of La Guardia's
dreams Zere being reali]ed—by 1936, NeZ York City Zas receiving one-
seventh of the :3A  allotment for the entire country—and the 0ayor kneZ
Zho Zas responsible. +e must have knoZn every time he Zent doZn to
:ashington  for one of the frequent mayors' conferences called by the :3A.
There Zould be hundreds of mayors there, and most of them Zould have
come Zith grandiose plans—but Zhen they Zere confronted Zith the blunt
questions of the Army engineers :3A  chief +arry +opkins  had brought in
to screen proposed projects, they had to confess that the blueprints Zeren't
ready, or the specifications Zeren't ready, or the topographical surveys
Zeren't ready. La Guardia Zatched many of them Zalk out of the
conferences humiliated and Zithout the money they Zere asking for. But he
had blueprints. +e had specifications. +e had topographical surveys. +e
had every piece of paper that even the hardest-eyed Army engineer could
desire. And he had them because of 0oses. Other municipalities Zere so
unequal to the task of planning public Zorks programs of si]e that in
October 1938 the :3A  Zould  cancel more than one hundred major grants
approved for eleven northeastern cities three years before—because the
blueprints for those projects Zere still not ready. But 0oses' engineers
Zould come Zalking up the

front steps of City +all Zith  blueprints piled high in their arms. 3resident
Roosevelt's friendship Zas indispensable to La Guardia's dreams, but no
more indispensable than the tools 0oses gave him to make use of it.

And 0oses, the skillful  manipulator of men, found plenty in La Guardia to
manipulate.

There Zas, for e[ample, the 0ayor's boundless enthusiasm for engineering
and engineers.

0oses played on this feeling. +e Zas constantly pressing La Guardia to
accompany him on inspection tours of construction sites, and, Zith his great

604
gift for Zords, his sense of drama, and his squads of engineers Zho Zould
folloZ  the mayoral limousine in a second car so that they could leap out at a
project site, elaborate artists' renderings in hand, and shoZ the 0ayor Zhat
the project Zould look like Zhen completed, he made these tours
Zonderfully e[citing  to a man Zho "stood like a child in front  of the
simplest engineering feat." Once the little 0ayor Zas so an[ious to see the
Zork on the Thomas Jefferson 3ark sZimming pool that Zhen he found the
gate locked and no one around to open it, he chinned himself on the fence
like a little boy so that he could see over the top. "I could alZays tell Zhen
0oses had been taking him around," :indels  recalls. "+e Zould  be
absolutely bubbling over Zith enthusiasm—he Zas just thrilled."

If 0oses Zas putting on one of the greatest engineering shoZs in the history
of civili]ation,  moreover, he made sure La Guardia had a ringside seat. For
e[ample, on the day that the 2,200-ton vertical-lift span that comprised the
+arlem River arm of the Triborough Bridge Zas to be set into place, the
0ayor  Zas standing on Randall's Island in the very shadoZ of the toZer
that, along Zith its tZin  on the 0anhattan shore, Zould hold the span. And
Zhen the span Zas finally set in place, he said breathlessly, "This is the
most thrilling moment I have had since I became mayor. ... I congratulate
the Authority, the engineers, the contractors and every man Zho has had a
part in this magnificent piece of Zork. 0oments like  this make up for many
heartaches and disappointments." The fact—Zhich astonished him Zhen he
learned it—that 0oses had never gone to engineering school did not
prevent him from gushing on several occasions: "Robert 0oses is the
greatest engineer in the Zorld."

+e Zanted 0oses' admiration. +e Zas jealous of the only man Zho really
had it. 0oses recalls that "Zhen the 0ayor Zas mad at me, Zhich Zas not
infrequent, he Zould say, 'The only boss you ever had Zhom you really
respected Zas Al Smith. :hat's  he got that I don't have?' " (0oses recalls
that "I alZays ansZered that I admired both of them, but thought Smith a
better e[ecutive" because he alZays stood behind his subordinates.)

La Guardia's predilection for pageantry, preferably Zith himself at its
center, Zas obvious to anyone Zho noticed the yards of gold braid Zith

605
Zhich the 0ajor  outfitted his policeman bodyguard or his penchant for
holding full-

dress military-type inspections of anything that could conceivably be
inspected—police or firemen Zith motori]ed equipment, snoZ ploZs, neZ
garbage trucks, old garbage trucks—and for preening and strutting as he
marched in front of them, literally sZelling out his barrel chest as he
bounced by at the salute. 0oses played on this predilection. +e gave the
0ajor  pageantry such as no mayor had ever enjoyed in democratic
America.

0oses Zas opening playgrounds at a fantastic rate: 60 in 1934, 71 in I935>
7 2 in 1936, 52 in 1937. La Guardia Zas present at most opening
ceremonies. And these Zere ceremonies Zith the 0oses touch.

For the opening of a small playground on Seventeenth Street betZeen
Eighth and Ninth avenues, for e[ample, nearby tenements Zere draped in
red, Zhite and blue—not crepe-paper streamers but immense triangular
pennons. FloZerpots containing 25,000 chrysanthemums made a bright ring
around the playground fence. Flags Zere everyZhere. The Zhole scene
gleamed Zith the reflection of the hot summer sunlight off the polished
bridles and curried satiny flanks of mounted policemen's horses, the
polished brass and buttons of platoons of green-clad 3ark Department
guards, the trumpets and tubas of 3ark Department and American Legion
bands. As the 0ayor's limousine pulled up to the curb betZeen roZs of
rigidly erect policemen at the salute, a smartly uniformed 3ark Department
guard sZung open its door and as the 0ayor bounced out—folloZed by the
gold braid of his bodyguard—the bands broke into a tune: incredibly, "+ail
to the Chief." And Zhen he reached the Zhite-painted, bunting-draped
speakers' platform he found he Zas the only speaker, e[cept for 0oses, Zho
confined himself to a very brief recitation of playground statistics and then
said, "I noZ introduce the 0ayor  of the City of NeZ York"—a  performance
that led La Guardia to comment later that 0oses Zas the ideal master of
ceremonies. At the precise instant at Zhich the applause passed its
crescendo and began to fade aZay after La Guardia's speech, Zhich had
been delivered at a lectern custom-built by 3ark Department carpenters so
that the little 0ayor  Zouldn't be forced to stretch to reach the microphone,

606
it Zas punctuated by a hiss as the center fountain in the Zading pool Zas
turned on full blast, dramatically filling the air Zith  sprays of Zater and
eliciting a gratifying "ooooh" from  hundreds of children Zaiting behind a
ribbon. And Zhen the 0ayor  advanced to cut the ribbon and alloZ the
children to rush into the spray, he found that it Zas no ordinary ribbon but a
braided and tasseled strand colored red, Zhite and blue, and the shears held
out to him by a little girl from  the neighborhood Zere sterling silver shears
resting on a cushion of royal purple velvet.

Then the 0ayor jumped back into his limousine for a trip that Zas an
adventure in itself—Fiorello La Guardia's dashes across his city, limousine
siren Zailing, police on motorcycles clearing the path, Zere not trips for the
fainthearted. And Zhen the 0ayor arrived at the other playgrounds, he
found again chrysanthemums, flags, men on horseback, polished brass and
buttons, bands, "+ail to the Chief"—every detail that had made the first
opening so e[citing—plus, often, neZ inspirations: at a playground being
opened in Brooklyn's Red +ook section, Zhose most famous landmark

Zas the "GoZanus +ouse," around Zhich a Revolutionary :ar  battle had
been fought, a large painting of the GoZanus +ouse had been placed as a
backdrop behind the speakers' platform; the neighborhood Zas
predominantly Italian, and as the 0ayor Zalked onto the platform tZo
aerial bombs Zere shot into the air, releasing parachutes that floated above
the playground site—and attached to one parachute Zas an American flag,
to the other the tricolor of the +ouse of Savoy.

On some days, La Guardia Zould open as many as fifteen playgrounds
scattered across the face of the great city, turning the occasion into a
triumphal tour of his domain, speeding behind his helmeted outriders across
the reaches of the bridge-connected boroughs and then leaping into a launch
to bring his presence even to the colony on Staten Island. Each ceremony
Zould be perfect in every detail. (Or almost every detail: at one dedication
in an Italian neighborhood, held before 0oses Zas acquainted Zith La
Guardia's vieZs on organ grinders, 0oses had several, along Zith their
hurdy-gurdies and monkeys, on hand to entertain the children, and La
Guardia sat on the platform gloZering out from under the brim of his big
hat.) And the pageantry 0oses arranged for the Little FloZer Zas not

607
limited to playground openings. It included the annual Christmas tree-
lighting ceremony in City +all  3ark, complete Zith a program of
instrumental music and carol singing and a sZitch that the 0ayor threZ to
light up a si[ty-foot  spruce. It included the dedication of the baseball
diamond comple[ in Alley  3ond 3ark at Zhich La Guardia, after a series of
fantastic contortions on the pitcher's mound, got to throZ the first pitch—to
a batter Zho happened to be Babe Ruth. (The Bambino, sZinging Zith
something less than his usual gusto, possibly because he Zas almost
doubled over Zith laughter, hit a pop fly that dropped to the ground in the
vicinity of  second base.) 0oses made a place for La Guardia in every major
3ark Department event.

Nineteen thirty-si[, Fortune maga]ine said in an article on 0oses, Zas "the
sZimming pool year." The ten giant neighborhood sZimming pools Zere
completed that summer, and 0oses opened one a Zeek for ten Zeeks. Of a
si]e previously unimagined in sZimming pools—one Zas 330 feet long and
165 feet Zide—they brought the joys of sZimming to city-bound children
—and parents—by the tens of thousands. 0oses' passion for sZimming led
him to take a special interest in these pools, and he drove the engineers
responsible for their design to invent filtering plants of neZ efficiency and
underZater lighting that made them revolutionary developments in
recreation—+arry +opkins called the Astoria 3ool "the finest pool in all the
Zorld."  And 0oses e[erted all his genius as a shoZman to make each
opening the most memorable event in the history of the neighborhood in
Zhich it Zas located: a parade led by local political leaders and local
American Legion, high-school and .nights of Columbus bands Zould Zind
through the neighborhood beforehand—generally in the early evening,
since the openings Zere held at night so that the underZater lighting Zould
be more spectacular—attracting tens of thousands of residents. After
neighborhood priests had blessed the clear Zaters—chlorinated—of the
pools, there Zould be sZimming races and diving competitions by
neighbor-

hood youngsters and by Olympic stars imported from all over the 8nited
States, as Zell as e[hibitions by a team of "sZimming cloZns." Each
opening, moreover, Zould be tailored to the neighborhood in Zhich the
pool Zas located: believing that Zhat Negroes liked to do most Zas dance

608
and sing, 0oses arranged that the opening ceremonies for the Colonial 3ark
3ool in +arlem include an e[hibition  by Bojangles Bill Robinson
(identified by the Times as a "negro tap dancer"); a rendition of the Battle
+ymn of the Republic by "negro tenor" Roland +ayes, accompanied by the
369th Regiment band; and community singing. But center stage at each
opening Zas reserved for Fiorello +. La Guardia. It Zas he Zho pulled the
sZitch that turned on the underZater lighting, an event that never failed to
bring a murmur of "oooohs" from the croZd, it Zas he Zho gave the Zord
to raise the flag and it Zas he Zho got to cut the ribbon and shout to the
Zaiting children: "Okay, kids, it's all yours!"

0oses saZ to it that one playground, at the :illiamsburg  Bridge 3la]a,  Zas
named the "Fiorello +. La Guardia 3layground." ("The best thing about this
playground is its name," he Zrote the 0ayor.)

If there Zere personal reasons Zhy the 0ayor Zanted to alloZ 0oses his
independence, there Zere political reasons Zhy he had to.

The most important, of course, Zas public opinion and 0oses' hold on it.

Already predisposed to be friendly toZard 0oses because he Zas creator
and defender of parks, the city's thirteen daily neZspapers had that
friendship cultivated Zith customary 0oses thoroughness.

As alZays, he Zent directly to the top, giving neZspaper oZners pre-
opening tours of neZ bridges and free passes to them thereafter, inviting
them to sail on the Long Island 3ark Commission's yacht, bathe in the
reserved section of Jones Beach and dine in the private section of the
0arine  Dining Room—Zhere he served them lavish helpings of his
inimitable charm; Iphigene and Arthur Sul]berger of the Times, +elen and
Ogden 0ills  Reid of the +erald Tribune (Zho never found out about 0oses'
plan to deceive him into making a contribution to the Yale 8niversity 0inor
Sports Association) and Roy :.  +oZard of  the :orld-Telegram  regarded
him as a personal friend. +e spent many Zeekends at their summer homes.

0oses also lavished attention on top editors. +e had easy access to the
+erald Tribune's because his Yale classmate +arold 3helps Stokes Zas one
of them, and he used that access; one of the Tribune editors Zas a dyed-in-

609
the-Zool reactionary Zho saZ Bolsheviks in every bush, and 0oses helped
his vision, filling  the editor's mail Zith leaflets mimeographed by left-
Zingers in the :3A   to prove that any dissension among :3A  Zorkers in
the 3ark Department Zas fomented by Communists. The chief editorial
Zriter of the Times Zas Charles 0er],  a Yale graduate Zho lived in the
apartment building ne[t to 0oses'. "Just by happenstance," remarks Joseph
C. Ingraham, a

Times reporter (and later its transportation editor) Zho became friendly
Zith 0oses,  "0oses Zould  be Zaiting in the lobby [of  0er]'s  apartment
house] many mornings to ask him if he Zanted a lift doZntoZn—so he
could plant an editorial."

And Zhile 0oses  Zent to the top, he did not stop there, Zining and dining
reporters as Zell as publishers, inviting key ones to his elaborate opening-
ceremony luncheons, to an annual sZimming and dinner outing at Jones
Beach, to more intimate, and elaborate, luncheons at Belmont Lake State
3ark, to the 3ark Department's Christmas party at the Arsenal and to day-
long yacht trips, Zhich often ended Zith clam and lobster bakes on Fire
Island. At all these events the food Zas superb, the liquor floZed freely and
so did the charm.

The most important neZspaper in the city—and in the country—Zas The
NeZ York Times, and 0oses had an especially strong hold over the Times:
the devotion to parks of the Zoman Zho oZned appro[imately tZo-thirds of
its voting stock.

Iphigene Ochs Sul]berger, only living child of the imperious little patriarch
of the. Times, Zho during the 1920's had purchased key parcels in Saratoga
and reserved them for 0oses' state park there, had been fighting for years
for the e[pansion and improvement of NeZ York City's inadequate and
decaying park system, a fight Zhose frustration Zas summed up in one
conversation Zith Tammany 0anhattan 3ark Commissioner Sheehy, Zho
unabashedly told her to her face that until he became commissioner he had
never been in Central 3ark in his life. :hen  La Guardia told her that he Zas
giving Robert 0oses poZer over parks, she had been "happy"—and the
adjective had proved inadequate to describe her feelings about Zhat 0oses
Zas accomplishing Zith that poZer. Elected president of the city's 3ark

610
Association in January 1935, Iphigene Sul]berger's first official act Zas to
present 0oses Zith the association's annual testimonial aZard and, as she
handed him the illuminated scroll, she said earnestly, "Commissioner
0oses, you have made us feel that the projects for Zhich Ze have striven
can be reali]ed." She Zould serve as president until 1963, heading the 3ark
Association, therefore, for tZenty-five of the tZenty-si[  years that 0oses
served as City 3ark Commissioner, and during all that time her admiration
for him Zould  only increase. In 1963, the association Zould present him
Zith another illuminated scroll; it closed Zith  the Zords: "+oZ  Zondrous
are his Zorks; hoZ deep our gratitude."

In private, moreover, 0rs. Sul]berger Zas, if possible, even more adulatory:
in 1967, standing by a ZindoZ in her Fifth Avenue apartment, looking out
over Central 3ark, the gray-haired, dignified Zoman Zould tell the author:
"There has never been as great a public servant. ... +e Zas a man of vision
... a giant. ... +e saZ Nature as a Zhole. ... I had a feeling that he liked to
fight, that if someone just agreed Zith him he Zas disappointed. +e liked to
beat them. +e Zas a hero of old, alZays rushing into battle Zith E[calibur
Zaving above his head. I thought of the 3ark Association as Aaron and +ur.
Do you knoZ Zho Aaron and +ur  Zere? They Zere the soldiers in the
Bible Zho stood behind 0oses

and held up his arms Zhen he got tired [at the battle of Rephidim, at Zhich
'Israel prevailed' so long as 0oses held up his hands]. :ell, that's hoZ I
thought of the 3ark Association, as upholding the arms of Bob 0oses."

Not that she alZays agreed Zith him. 0rs. Sul]berger possessed—years
earlier than most urban planners—a very acute understanding that the
values of engineers Zere not compatible Zith the values for Zhich parks
Zere created; "Engineers are straight-line cra]y," she Zould tell the
intervieZer. She didn't Zant the unspoiled Zilderness of InZood +ill  3ark
destroyed by the running of a road on a straight line along its crest. A
believer in the old theory that the purpose of parks Zas primarily
conservation, not recreation —although she might not have stated the
theory in precisely those terms— she didn't like the idea that 0oses' plans
required the covering over of so many green spaces Zith concrete for
playgrounds, basketball courts and other active play facilities, not to

611
mention roads and parking fields. In particular, believing in the preservation
of Central 3ark as a restful retreat from the abrasions of city life, she didn't
Zant so many active play facilities there. "Iphigene gave us many
arguments," Jack 0adigan said. "And," he added, "some Ze Zalked aZay
from"—a euphemism meaning they surrendered. 0oses probably turned the
abandoned reservoir site in Central 3ark into a "great laZn" instead of into
the playgrounds and ball fields that he originally Zanted there solely
because of 0rs. Sul]berger's feelings.

But Zhile 0oses  may have Zalked aZay from some fights Zith 0rs.
Sul]berger, he did not Zalk aZay from many; he Zould not alloZ—because
of his nature, he could not alloZ—anybody, even an individual Zhose
support Zas so important to him, to critici]e his plans. +is usual technique
Zith 0rs.  Sul]berger Zas not to Zalk  aZay but to Zalk Zith—to   take her
himself, or have 0adigan or AndreZs take her—on a tour of the area in
dispute to try to sell her on his idea of hoZ it should be developed. These
Zalks Zere planned Zith care; 0adigan took her to InZood  +ill  on a
Zeekday Zhen the park Zas deserted and told her that the public Zasn't
getting any use out of it—guessing, correctly, that she had never hiked up
the steep hill on a Zeekend and hence had not seen the happy picnickers
Zho croZded it then. (0adigan  also played shreZdly on her sensibilities,
Zhich Zere firmly  Victorian: "I  told Iphigene if you Zalked  up there at
night you Zere likely to step on a couple and it might be a good idea to
have lights—the headlights from cars, you knoZ—up there.") And the
Zalks usually Zorked— particularly  since 0oses' opponents did not knoZ
her Zell enough to take her on Zalks themselves and shoZ her their side of
the argument and did not have the facilities or manpoZer to compile the
facts and figures that might have disproved 0oses' facts and figures. 0oses
persuaded 0rs. Sul]berger to persuade the 3ark Association to elect
AndreZs, a native Virginian Zho could be as courtly Zith Zomen as he
could be curt Zith men (0rs.  Sul]berger says he Zas "a remarkable man"),
to its board of directors, and thereafter there Zas someone Zorking for
association support of his policies from Zithin.

0rs.  Sul]berger's dedication to the cause of parks Zas so complete,
moreover, that she didn't Zant to do anything that Zould interfere
drastically

612
Zith Zhat  0oses Zas doing—even if she felt he Zas sometimes Zrong.
This man Zas rejuvenating parks at a rate she Zould never have believed
possible; she didn't Zant him hampered by her disagreement Zith Zhat she
regarded as details: "I never did like the concrete floors on the
playgrounds," she Zould tell the intervieZer, but, she Zould note, before
0oses came along, there Zere no real playgrounds at all, "no sZings and no
jungle gyms . . . hardly anything for children to play on, really."

So sincere Zas 0rs. Sul]berger's dedication to parks and the neZ 3ark
Commissioner that this proud and dignified Zoman even submitted to a
public insult—quite possibly the only one she ever received—at his hands.

The quarrel Zas based on 0oses' plan to turn the site of the demolished
Central 3ark Casino into a playground. 0rs. Sul]berger had alloZed herself
to be reconciled to the creation of "perimeter" playgrounds in Central 3ark
by 0oses' argument that small children could not be kept out of the park
anyZay and the strategic placing of playgrounds ne[t to park entrances
Zould "intercept" them and confine their destructive energy to the park's
edge. She had never thought that 0oses Zould begin to lay concrete in the
park's interior. +earing of the plan for the Casino site, she protested
publicly on behalf of the 3ark Association in a letter released to the press on
December 2 3> 1935> in Zhich she stated, "It seems to me that in our
desire to establish playgrounds, Zhich are sadly needed in the city, Ze are
completely overlooking the rights and needs of the adult population. Central
3ark Zill  fail to fulfill   its purpose if . . . there is no longer space Zhere men
and Zomen can have quiet and rela[ation."

0oses' letter of reply, Zhich he released to the press on December 24,
closed Zith the Zords "0erry  Christmas." But the rest of the letter Zas
couched in the tone 0oses customarily employed Zith protesters. Your
arguments, he informed 0rs. Sul]berger, are "preposterous" and
"irresponsible generali]ations. ... It is difficult for  me to believe that you
seriously contend that the needs of the adult population are being
completely overlooked in our parks ..." The letter even closed Zith a threat.
"This particular question does not seem to me to be important enough to
quarrel about, unless you insist on proving your generali]ations, in Zhich

613
case I am prepared to refute them by a public e[hibition of plans,
photographs, maps and supporting figures."

It Zould have been interesting to see hoZ the Times, Zhich buried the
e[change of letters on page 25, Zould have covered such an e[hibition. But
there Zas to be no need for one. 0ary 0oses saZ to that. A Zeek later, the
Sul]bergers and the 0oseses Zere among the guests at the dance given
every NeZ Year's Eve by the "JeZish Gatsby," Adolph LeZisohn, in the
great gold-and-Zhite ballroom of his Fifth Avenue mansion. 0rs.
Sul]berger recalls that "0ary came over leading Bob by the hand like a
little boy and she said, 'You knoZ Iphigene's a good friend. You had no
business Zriting her a letter like that. NoZ you tell her you're sorry and you
kiss her.' " 0oses told her he Zas sorry and kissed her—and at 2 a.m., Zhen
the Sul]bergers, as Zas their custom every NeZ Year's Eve, served friends a
scrambled-egg breakfast at their apartment, the 0oseses Zere there as
usual.

0rs.  Sul]berger had too deep a sense of her responsibility to the public to
take the insulting letter personally, anyZay; Robert 0oses Zas too valuable
to the city to quarrel Zith, she felt. And, she Zas to tell the intervieZer, it
Zas "unappreciative" to quarrel Zith a man Zho had done so much for NeZ
York. On the day after the NeZ Year's breakfast, in an act of selflessness
made all the more noble by the fact that her poZer made it unnecessary for
her to perform it, Iphigene Ochs Sul]berger, sacrificing her pride on the
altar of Zhat she believed to be the public interest, Zrote a public apology
to 0oses—and ordered it printed in her oZn neZspaper.

... I oZe you an apology for having said that ". . . Ze are completely
overlooking the rights and needs of the adult population." No such
sZeeping generali]ation is Zarranted. I do, hoZever, believe that Ze are in
danger of paying too little attention to those rights and needs.

You close your characteristically vigorous defense of the 3ark Department's
plans Zith the remark that the issues raised in this particular controversy do
not seem to you to be "important enough to quarrel about." I and other
members of the 3ark Association Zould dislike greatly any occasion for
quarrel Zith you. You come close to our ideal of Zhat a 3ark Commissioner
should be and Ze have no desire to be associated, even for a moment, Zith

614
those Zho have attempted from time to time to hinder you in your plans for
the rehabilitation and development of the parks.

0rs.  Sul]berger's influence on the neZspaper of Zhich her father had been,
and her husband Zas, publisher Zas not overt. Intrusiveness Zas not her
style, Zhich Zas so reasonable, dignified and soft-spoken that people
sometimes mistook her gentleness for timidity. But, as the Times's historian,
Gay Talese, has pointed out, "no perceptive editor . . . made this mistake."
"+er most casual remark," Zrote Turner Catledge, later managing editor,
"Zould be treated as a command."

0rs.  Sul]berger believed that 0oses came "close to our ideal of Zhat a
3ark Commissioner should be"; the Times evidently believed so, too. Its
reporters and editors may never have been directly ordered to give 0oses
special treatment but, during the Thirties as during the TZenties, they Zere
not so insensitive as not to knoZ Zhat Zas e[pected of them. 0oses' press
releases Zere treated Zith respect, being given prominent treatment and
often being printed in full. There Zas no investigating of the "facts"
presented in those press releases, no attempt at detailed analysis of his
theories of recreation and transportation, no probing of the assumptions on
Zhich the city Zas building and maintaining recreational facilities and
roads. The Times ran more than one hundred editorials on 0oses and his
programs during the tZelve-year La Guardia administration—
overZhelmingly favorable editorials.

Once, trying in desperation to make sure that 0rs. Sul]berger got to hear
both sides of an issue, La Guardia invited her to visit his office to hear
0oses argue Zith the official Zith  Zhom  he Zas currently feuding, city
:3A   administrator Victor Ridder. (She Zas not the only female present; the
0ayor  for some reason—possibly to create a homey atmosphere—had his
adopted daughter, Jean, then eight years old, in the office, too, and she sat

on his knee during the ensuing discussion.) La Guardia's ploy Zorked. At
the end of a shouting match betZeen 0oses and Ridder—"They really Zent
at it for a Zhile," 0rs.   Sul]berger Zould recall—the 0ayor  ruled against
0oses, and for once there Zas no Times editorial disagreeing Zith the
decision the ne[t day. But such a ploy could obviously not be repeated in

615
every dispute. And in most disputes 0oses could count on the Times's
support.

Dramatic proof of hoZ popular the press had made 0oses Zas, moreover,
available to the 0ayor every time he spoke in public. Just as audiences
reacted Zith 3avlovian predictability to every mention of Brooklyn —Zith
laughs—so they reacted Zith 3avlovian predictability to every mention of
Robert 0oses—Zith  cheers. At the end of a playground opening, there Zas
almost invariably a "TZo, four, si[,  eight—:ho   do Ze appreciate?" for
0oses. "La Guardia Zanted to fire him often, but he didn't dare," says
mayoral laZ secretary .ern. "The press— The NeZ York Times in
particular—had babied him like a spoiled child. +e couldn't do anything
Zrong in their eyes. They made him a myth. And a man Zho had to go to
the electorate couldn't fire a myth. +e [0oses] Zas too big to fire."
Occasionally :indels  Zould  try to brace the 0ayor to stand up to 0oses.
But on those occasions, the Little FloZer Zould Zail, ":hat'll    the Times
say?" If from a personal vieZpoint it is not too much to say that La Guardia
liked 0oses, from a political  vieZpoint it  is not too much to say that he
feared him.

At the beginning of his mayoralty, La Guardia attempted to take an interest
in the 3ark Department. :hen  he received protests about 0oses' plans for a
local playground from a local organi]ation, he Zould grant its
representatives an intervieZ, and if he felt their arguments had merit, he
Zould ask 0oses to reconsider. :hen  some individual protested about a
3ark Department policy or about alleged mistreatment by a 3ark
Department employee, he Zould send the protest to 0oses Zith a pink slip
attached— a slip that in the color code set up by La Guardia to govern his
relationship Zith his commissioners meant the 0ayor Zanted an immediate
reply.

But 0oses Zould  either ignore the pink slip or Zould reply by saying that
the 0ayor must learn to stop interfering in the "internal affairs of the 3ark
Department." "0y  policies can't be carried out if the 0ayor is going to
listen to appeals from individuals," he Zould Zrite. And if  La Guardia
sought to press an inquiry, 0oses Zould threaten to resign or to take the
issue to the public. "If you disagreed Zith [0oses], Zhy, you Zere a public

616
enemy," :indels  said. The 0ayor  had no choice but to let 0oses have his
Zay.

By the end of his first term, La Guardia Zas letting 0oses have it. The
Astoria Ferry and playground closing fights, Zhich became public
knoZledge, Zere e[ceptions. 0ost  of the disagreements betZeen the 0ayor
and the commissioner Zere kept secret—because La Guardia did not press
them. :hen  one threatened to become public, the 0ayor quickly backed
doZn. +e and 0oses had been arguing over a tZenty-five-acre tract of land
in Coney Island oZned by the Dock Department but unused. 0oses Zanted
all the land for a park; the 0ayor Zas in favor of a Board of Education

plan to use a feZ of the acres for a school. :hen he imprudently mentioned
to reporters that "the location of a school on the border of a park is ideal,"
the reporters Zent to 0oses for comment. "I thought this administration
Zanted playgrounds. Either they do or they don't," he said. And he added
Zhat the +erald Tribune called "some even more uncomplimentary
remarks" about the 0ayor. La Guardia hastily scrambled for cover. "I can't
believe my 3ark Commissioner made any such statements," the 0ayor said.
"No controversy e[ists and none can be made out of it." And the school
idea Zas dropped. "+e didn't Zant to fight Zith  0oses no matter Zhat."
La]arus says. As long as he didn't fight, La Guardia had learned, 0oses
Zould provide him Zith  a seemingly ine[haustible cornucopia of political
benefits. If he did fight, 0oses Zould  humiliate and defeat him. The little
0ayor  had learned—the hard Zay—that it Zas better not to interfere.

Other political considerations Zhich deterred the 0ayor from interfering
Zith 0oses  in the fields he had carved out for his oZn Zere the same
reasons that had deterred a Governor—Roosevelt—from interfering: 0oses'
ability to complete public Zorks fast enough to provide a record of
accomplishment for an elected official to run on in the ne[t election; his
ability to build public  Zorks Zithout  scandal; his Zillingness to serve as a
lightning rod to draZ off  opposition from the elected official—most of all,
perhaps, his matchless knoZledge of government. Says Judge Jacob Lutsky,
Zho not only served in the La Guardia administration but Zas a top adviser
to 0ayors O'DZyer,  Impellitteri  and :agner:  "You've got to understand—
every morning Zhen a mayor comes to Zork, there are a hundred problems

617
that must be solved. And a lot of them are so big and comple[ that they just
don't seem susceptible to solution. And Zhen he asks guys for solutions,
Zhat happens? 0ost of them can't give him any. And those that do come up
Zith solutions, the solutions are unrealistic or impractical—or just plain
stupid. And those that do make sense—there's no money to finance them.
But you give a problem to 0oses and overnight he's back in front of you—
Zith a solution, all Zorked out doZn  to the last detail, drafts of speeches
you can give to e[plain it to the public, drafts of press releases for the
neZspapers, drafts of the state laZs you'll need to get passed, advice as to
Zho should introduce the bills in the Legislature and Zhat committees they
should go to, drafts of any City Council and Board of Estimate resolutions
you'll need; if there are constitutional questions involved, a list of the
relevant precedents—and a complete method of financing it all spelled out.
+e had solutions Zhen no one else had solutions. A mayor needs a Robert
0oses." But there Zere neZ reasons, too, Zhy La Guardia found it
politically unfeasible to interfere Zith 0oses.  And these reasons had the
deepest—and most ominous—significance for the city.

Some revolved around the federal government's neZly e[panded role in the
city's affairs.

AlZays before, the city and the city alone had had the poZer to determine
the priority, location and design of public Zorks—because the city

and the city alone had been paying for them. Every step in the construction
of a school or a bridge or a park—from the initial preliminary study of the
project's engineering feasibility to the final use of the poZer of eminent
domain to evict citi]ens to make Zay for it—had to be authori]ed by the
city government, by officials elected by the city's people. Therefore, those
people retained ultimate control over the public Zorks that did so much to
shape their lives. The correspondence betZeen their Zill and public Zorks
Zas, of course, not at all e[act; innumerable factors—chief among them,
perhaps, the corruption that under Tammany +all interposed private gain as
an integral factor in the governmental equation—bent off its bias the great
drive shaft of the engine of city government, the drive shaft that according
to the blueprint for that engine, the City Charter, Zas supposed to be
turnable only by the public Zill. But  there Zas a correspondence. A mayor

618
strong enough to dominate the Boards of Estimate and Aldermen Zould
disturb the balance of the drive shaft, Zhich Zas meant to rest equally on
e[ecutive and legislative action, but because the mayor Zas an official
elected by and ultimately responsible to the people, the crucial
correspondence still e[isted.

But although the city's neZ mayor Zas dominating the city's government,
that mayor Zas not controlling the construction of public Zorks in the city
to a similar e[tent. Not the city but the federal government Zas paying for
the bulk of those public Zorks, and the federal government Zas much more
interested in speed, in getting something to shoZ for its e[penditure, than in
the considerations that Zould at least partially motivate a mayor—
priorities, location and design, for e[ample. And, because speed of
construction depended upon the e[istence of detailed plans, the federal
authorities Zere therefore primarily interested in such plans. Because the
0ayor  needed plans and needed them fast, he had no choice but to give
priority not to those projects Zhich Zere most urgently needed, but to those
projects for Zhich plans Zere available—and to a considerable e[tent not
he but Robert 0oses decided Zhich projects those Zould be. Because not
he but 0oses had the "large, stable planning force" of engineers trained to
design urban public Zorks on the neZ, huge scale made necessary by the
groZth of the city and made financially feasible by the neZ federal
involvement, to a considerable e[tent he could not even evaluate those
plans. +e could not argue intelligently for changes in the location or the
design 0oses Zas proposing. Continually La Guardia sought to overcome
this handicap. "+e Zas alZays prodding other departments to come up Zith
plans," :indels   recalls. "But it took them so long." And Zhen the plans
Zere available, the labor often Zas not; 0oses' stake-driving tactics had
tied it up on 3ark Department projects. 0oses' popularity, moreover, made
it all but impossible for the 0ayor  to snatch the labor back. The convenient
symbol of La Guardia's frustration Zas the firehouses the 0ayor had
Zanted to build Zith the 5,000 men he had authori]ed the :3A  to detach
from 3ark Department projects in 1937, the 5,000 men he Zas unable to
detach after 0oses forced him to back doZn by locking the playgrounds:
the 0ayor had tZenty neZ  firehouses in mind; he Zas able to build three.
But firehouses Zere only a symbol;

619
schoolhouses, jailhouses and police station houses Zere also involved—as
Zere hospitals, seZage disposal plants, seZers and subZays. La Guardia
Zas forced to cut back his planned programs of construction of almost
every type of municipal institution e[cept parks—Robert 0oses' parks—
and bridges— Robert 0oses' bridges—and roads—Robert 0oses' roads.
The lion's share of the billion-plus dollars poured into NeZ York City by
the NeZ Deal Zas spent on 0oses' projects. To a considerable e[tent, in the
planning of large-scale public Zorks in NeZ York City during the 1930's,
Robert 0oses operated independently of the elected official Zho had
appointed him—and therefore independently of the people's Zill.

The significance of this fact for the development of NeZ York is heightened
by the amount of federal money involved.

Even during the flush years of the Jimmy :alker era, NeZ York's
e[penditures for capital improvements had run only slightly above
$100,-000,000 per year. That figure represented, in dollars, the annual
alteration— hopefully, for the better—to the civic estate.

But during the first five years of the La Guardia era, the federal
government, through C:A,  :3A    and 3:A,   contributed more than
$1,150,000,-000 for public Zorks in the city, a figure Zhich, Zhen
combined Zith the city's oZn e[penditures (Zhich La  Guardia Zas, by
1936, able to restore to the :alkerian level), meant that during those five
years the civic estate Zas altered more than it had been altered in the
preceding fifteen, that NeZ York Zas able to effect a far greater and more
rapid alteration in its physical public structure than had ever before been
possible. And this magnified 0oses' influence on the city's destiny. The
portion of its remaking carried out independently of the people's Zill Zas
relatively immense.

Then there Zere other political deterrents to any interference Zith 0oses by
La Guardia.

Some Zere a result of the continuation—and acceleration—of 0oses'
evolution from scorner of politicians.

620
The Legislature hadn't changed much since the days Zhen Robert 0oses
had been denouncing its corruption and avarice. But Robert 0oses had
changed.

No longer did he respond to a legislator's patronage request by telling him
to "stick it up your ass." The state park system Zas a vast reservoir of jobs
—both year-round jobs and, because of the seasonal nature of park Zork,
summer jobs particularly coveted by politicians Zho Zanted their teenage
children to earn good money in the open air during school vacations. And,
because the reservoir had outlets (parks) in every corner of the state, 0oses
had jobs to distribute not only on Long Island but in the undeveloped, job-
poor upstate counties in Zhich the leaders of the Republican legislative
majority lived. There Zas a line, firmly draZn,  above Zhich patronage Zas
not alloZed to intrude into the state park system; top administrators, the
elite cadre knoZn as "0oses 0en,"  still had to Zork their Zay  up from the
ranks, still Zere promoted strictly on the basis of ability and Zillingness to
Zork killing  hours—and still oZed their allegiance solely to Robert 0oses.
But 0oses had proved more and more Zilling to fill  loZer-echelon jobs
Zith

people recommended by key legislators. As for lucrative construction
contracts, the one-time idealist had become knoZn in Albany, according to
Saul .aplan, counsel to Assembly minority leader IrZin  Steingut, as "a
practical felloZ Zho  understands the facts of life and Zhat makes things
tick, a felloZ Zho  is prepared to cooperate Zith anybody." There Zas a
point at Zhich "cooperation" stopped: the point at Zhich it Zould interfere
Zith the completion of a project as 0oses had originally envisioned it. +e
employed practical politics only to further his dreams; he did not alloZ it to
interfere Zith them. "Sometimes someone Zould ask him for something and
it Zould interfere Zith  Zhat he Zanted to do, and in that case, he'd say it
couldn't be done," .aplan says. "But as long as you Zeren't a pig— okay. If
you put a gun to his head and said 'either-or,' he'd tell you to go to hell. But
if you laid the cards on the table and didn't try to kid him, he'd help if he
could. And if he said you could help him in solving a couple of problems—
you helped."

621
This influence Zas increased by 0oses' ideological compatibility Zith the
key upstate or Old Guard Republican legislators. "+e Zas a conservative
and they Zere conservatives," :indels says simply. They distrusted La
Guardia, Zhom they considered a "Zild man" and a traitor to their party, a
liberal using its label to get elected; they Zere infuriated by the 0ayor's all-
out support of FDR and by his general disloyalty: although he Zould be
elected mayor three times on the Republican ticket, not once during his
tZelve years in that office Zould La Guardia ever support a Republican
candidate for a state or national office. But because of the Legislature's
broad control over the city, La Guardia constantly needed favors from it.
0oses' influence Zith  it could therefore be an asset to him—if 0oses
Zanted to use that influence on his behalf. Conversely, the possibility that
0oses Zould  use that influence against him Zas a very real threat; at least
once an inoffensive bill that La Guardia had thought Zould be passed
routinely Zas ine[plicably  held up in committee Zhile he Zas embroiled in
one of his disputes Zith 0oses, and, although he never received any proof
that his 3ark Commissioner Zas behind the holdup, the 0ayor received
hints that he Zas —and saZ it as 0oses' Zay of letting him knoZ Zhat
0oses could do to him in Albany if  he Zanted to. :hether  or not 0oses
actually used his poZer Zith the Legislature for or against La Guardia, he
made himself in many instances the broker betZeen the 0ayor and the
legislative leaders, often acting as middleman in closed-door bargaining
sessions.

0oses' poZer in state government therefore increased his poZer over the
city government to Zhich he, alone among state officials, also belonged—
to a point Zhere it drastically eroded the ability of the city's highest elected
official, technically his superior, to control him. This, of course, Zas
precisely Zhat the framers of the state's constitution—and many reformers
—had feared Zhen they sought to prohibit the simultaneous holding of state
and city jobs by the same individual. But the reformers had sacrificed the
principle because they believed that 0oses' unique abilities should e[empt
him from normal considerations and because La Guardia had assured them
that his poZer as mayor made such a prohibition unnecessary. An appointed

official not directly  responsible to the electorate could never obtain poZer
to defy the official Zho Zas responsible for his appointment, the 0ayor had

622
said. But 0oses had nonetheless obtained a large measure of such poZer.
Coupled Zith the poZer he had obtained from his use Zithin the city of
federal money, it gave him considerable independence of the city's mayor.
+e Zas using forces outside the city to bend its highest elected official to
his Zill.  By employing forces outside the city's control, he Zas remaking
the city in certain crucial areas Zithout alloZing the city any say in that
remaking.

0oses Zas violating in spirit  or letter and determined to live up to their
oath, might have sloZed him doZn. But he didn't let them.

+is usual technique Zith an insufficiently compliant departmental official
Zas to demand that he be fired. 0oses Zould attempt to convince the
department's commissioner to do so by "confidentially" revealing to him
damaging personal information dug up by his "bloodhounds." And if they
hadn't been able to dig up any, 0oses invented some. +e insinuated, for
e[ample, that an Assistant Corporation Counsel Zho had angered him Zith
his refusal to proceed Zith a legal case against residents of land adjoining a
park site, Zas a drunk.

On more than one occasion, this technique Zorked. If it did not, 0oses
simply stepped up the pressure another notch. +e refused to deal Zith the
official involved  or to alloZ any of his aides to deal Zith him. This tactic
brought the relationship betZeen the 3ark Department and the other
department involved to a halt until the commissioner agreed to shift his
offending subordinate to a post in Zhich he did not deal Zith the 3ark
Department and to replace him Zith a more amenable individual. It Zas a
tactic that brought Zeak-spined commissioners to their knees in short order,
and it even Zorked Zith :indels.   The Corporation Counsel at first refused
to fire or shift his "drunk" assistant, but 0oses sent him a telegram stating: i
have

GIVEN ORDERS T+AT  NO ONE IS TO DISC8SS  ANY  . . . 0ATTER  . .
. 8NDER 0Y

jurisdiction Zith  him. :indels   sent back a telegram of his oZn: the manner
IN :+IC+     LEGAL  0ATTERS  ARISING  FRO0   T+E :OR.      OF YO8R

623
DE3ART0ENT  ARE  TO BE +ANDLED   BY 0Y   DE3ART0ENT   :ILL
BE DETER0INED   BY 0E.

But 0oses refused to relent, and the Corporation Counsel reali]ed that he
could not alloZ park development to be stalled by a dispute over one
individual. +e shifted the assistant to another assignment.

If a commissioner still resisted, 0oses used the public rather than the
private smear. "0r. 0oses told me . . . that he Zas able to control the press
of NeZ York City, so as to hold me up to such obloquy that I Zould not be
able to stand it," :.  .ingsland   0acy  had testified a decade before. The
smear technique that had been used then Zas used noZ—frequently.

In the hands of a man for Zhom the press acted as a gigantic sounding
board, repeating and amplifying his Zords, the smear Zas a terrible Zeapon
—particularly Zhen those Zords Zere as caustic and cutting as 0oses'. At
Yale, his poetry had revealed an undeniable gift for language. During the
decades since Yale, 0oses had turned this gift from imagery to invective,
and that invective had been honed by years of use to an edge as cruelly
sharp as that of a ra]or Zith a jagged edge. And he used that ra]or to strike
straight for the jugular: not an opponent's issues or arguments but his
reputation. For most public men, prominent on the list of hurts that pierce
the heart, that sear the soul, is the hurt of coming to the breakfast table one
morning and seeing harsh black headlines call them fools or liars or hack
bureaucrats or crooks—headlines based on charges by a man regarded as a
genius Zho Zas alZays right and folloZed by an article that made the
charges seem true, even if they Zere false.

+erbert Lehman's advisers had been able to laugh off 0oses' smears

because they Zere famous men, Zith established reputations, and because
0oses' accusations against them had been specific—and therefore refutable
by publication of the facts. But the minor .officials on Zhom 0oses noZ
employed the smear technique Zere more vulnerable—particularly since
0oses, having learned, perhaps, from the gubernatorial campaign, usually
smeared noZ not Zith specific charges but Zith generali]ations, Zith labels,
such as "politician"' or "bureaucrat," that conjured up vague but unpleasant
connotations in readers' minds—and Zhich, being vague, Zere difficult to

624
disprove, so difficult, in fact, that his victims Zere effectively denied
recourse even to libel suits.

Deputy Comptroller Douglas 0attheZson, for e[ample,  Zas only doing his
duty as legal adviser to the Sinking Fund Commission Zhen he informed it
in a memorandum that 0oses' demand that it transfer to the 3ark
Department a tract of land in Coney Island belonging to the Board of
Education Zas illegal; the Charter, 0attheZson pointed out, clearly
provided that the commission could make permanent transfers only subject
to approval of the Board of Estimate and that even the Board could act only
after formally asking all other city departments if they needed the property
so that it could be guided in assigning land by an over-all vieZ of
departmental needs. 8nfortunately for 0attheZson, hoZever, Zhile he
believed that his memorandum Zas routine, it struck at the heart of 0oses'
method of operation. The 3ark Commissioner didn't Zant the Board of
Estimate, or anyone else, taking an over-all vieZ of departmental needs,
because if they did they Zould reali]e that the 3ark Department Zas
obtaining a Zholly disproportionate share of city-oZned land and, more
important, Zas obtaining land for Zhich other departments Zere even then
planning uses—as Zas, in fact, the case Zith the tract in question: the Board
of Education Zas planning a badly needed school on the Coney Island site.
0oses Zanted to Zork—too  fast for other departments to defend against his
land raids—only through the malleable Sinking Fund Commission.

:hen,   as the result of 0attheZson's memo, the commission delayed action
on 0oses' request, and Zhen 0attheZson's boss, Comptroller 0c-Goldrick,
refused to obey 0oses' demand that he fire his subordinate, 0oses called in
reporters. Telling them that the only questions involved Zere procedural, he
said: "If 0attheZson's  theory is to prevail, politics Zould come in. . . . Can
you imagine Zhen the public Zould have parks if they had to Zait for all
this red tape. . . . Are the old hacks or red-tape boys going to hold things
up?" At the commission's ne[t meeting, the transfers 0oses Zanted Zere
quickly approved, Zith 0cGoldrick   voting for them— and thereby against
his subordinate. 0attheZson sat through the meeting Zithout a Zord.
Shortly thereafter, the "old hack" and "red-tape boy" quietly resigned, one
of a score of minor officials publicly ridiculed and humiliated by 0oses—

625
and driven out of public service—for no other reason than that they had
tried to make him obey the laZ.

If an official refused to resign and his boss refused to fire him even after
0oses' smear tactics had made him a political liability, there Zas still
another notch on the 0oses pressure gauge: the liability could be escalated.

By !935 trns Zas easy, for 1935 marked the height of nationZide hysteria
over the "red peril." :illiam    Randolph +earst Zas hoarsely alerting
America to the infiltration of the :hite    +ouse by liberal professors Zho
had made the NeZ Deal "more communistic than the Communists,"
operatives of the demagogue publisher's Journal-American Zere posing as
Columbia 8niversity students to entrap professors into radical remarks, the
+ouse 8n-American Activities  Committee Zas probing :3A   theater
projects ("NoZ this [Christopher] 0arloZe,"   demanded the +on. Joe
Starnes of Alabama, "is he a Communist type, too?") and Zhen Diego
Rivera refused to remove from his mural in the gleaming neZ lobby of
Rockefeller Center a likeness of Lenin glaring doZn on a scene of
American police clubbing strikers, young Nelson Rockefeller ordered the
artist doZn off his scaffold, handed him a check to Zind up his contract and
had the half-finished Zork covered Zith tar paper. And the nation's hysteria
provided 0oses Zith  a neZ set of labels—"Commie," "Bolshie," "pinko,"
"left-Zinger"—more  damning in the American public consciousness than
even "hack politician" or "red-tape boy" and therefore, in the arsenal of the
smear, perhaps the ultimate Zeapon.

0oses applied these labels generously, branding them not only onto labor
leaders ("radical, left-Zing") and NeZ Deal Brain Trusters (Re[ford
TugZell he assailed as a "3lanning Red") and urban planners Zho dared to
offer suggestions for the future of NeZ York City ("regarded in Russia as
our greatest builder," Zas hoZ he characteri]ed Frank Lloyd :right;  he
called LeZis 0umford  "an outspoken revolutionary"; :alter   Gropius, he
said, Zas seeking to change the American system by advocating "a
philosophy Zhich doesn't belong here"; planners in general, he said, are
"socialists," "revolutionaries" Zho "do not reach the masses directly but
through familiar subsurface activity. They teach the teachers. They reach
people in high places, Zho in turn influence the press, universities, societies

626
learned and otherZise, radio netZorks, the stage, the screen . . .") but onto
youthful city officials  Zho dared to stand up to him and Zho had, his
bloodhounds discovered, once alloZed enthusiasm and naivete to lead them
into membership in some organi]ation that they later learned Zas a
Communist front. +is enthusiasm for these labels Zas based in part on his
conservative belief in the necessity for class distinctions; to a man Zho had
believed the trade unions of "0r. :alling   and his socialist brethren" to be
blasphemy, the liberalism of the Thirties Zas heresy. But he also saZ the
effectiveness of the labels in Zrecking opponents' reputations; he branded
Zith those labels not only opponents Zhom he may sincerely have believed,
no matter hoZ mistakenly, to be Communists, but also opponents he Zas
Zell aZare Zere not Communists and had never been, men like gentle
Stanley Isaacs, the Republican reformer Zho became 0anhattan borough
president in 1937, Zhom 0oses had knoZn for tZenty years and Zhose
only crime Zas that he once had been ill-advised enough to appoint brilliant
young Simon Gerson to a minor position on his staff Zithout bothering to
investigate him and learn that he Zas an avoZed Communist. +e branded
Zith the labels young city officials Zhose dossiers, compiled by his
bloodhounds, clearly revealed that Zhile

they may once, years before, have belonged to Communist-front
organi]ations, they had long since renounced their membership in those
organi]ations —in applying the labels to them, he simply never bothered to
mention the renunciation. If Robert 0oses Zas a pioneer in the fields of
parks and highZays, he Zas also a pioneer in 0cCarthyism, tZenty years
before 0cCarthy. And his estimate of the effectiveness of his neZ Zeapon
Zas not an over-estimation—not even the deep affection of a strong-minded
and independent mayor for a young man he seemed to regard almost as a
son could stand before it.

The young man—tall, handsome and brilliant—Zas 3aul J. .ern, La
Guardia's laZ secretary and, of all his youthful aides, perhaps the one
closest to the 0ayor, his companion on his Sunday tours of the city and so
frequent a guest at his apartment that he seemed almost a member of the
family. Ironically, .ern   admired 0oses; "I Zas a 0oses fanatic,"  he Zas to
recall ruefully. But Zhen, early in 1936, La Guardia appointed him, at the
age of tZenty-seven, to the 0unicipal Civil  Service Commission, he

627
refused—as young, brilliant Robert 0oses Zould have refused during his
days Zith the 0unicipal  Civil  Service Commission—to alloZ the older,
changed Robert 0oses to continue circumventing civil service regulations
by firing 3ark Department employees on Zhim and paying favorites tZo
salaries at once. And he insisted that employees of 0oses' public authorities
be brought under civil service regulations.

First, 0oses destroyed the source of .ern's poZer, his friendship Zith the
0ayor. +e  did so, .ern  charges, Zith a tactic that Zould have been familiar
to Ansley :ilco[    and Judge ClearZater, Zho felt 0oses had used it to
discredit them Zith Al Smith. "+e  lied," .ern   says. "+e lied about me to La
Guardia."

There Zas, .ern says, a "Zhole series" of lies that gradually "poisoned" his
friendship Zith the 0ayor;  once, for e[ample, 0oses  told La Guardia that
.ern  had disobeyed La Guardia's specific order to certify a disputed civil
service list of authority employees although .ern had in fact done so, and
La Guardia, Zithout bothering to check the facts, fleZ into a toZering rage
and Zrote .ern  a letter that stung him deeply. Years later, .ern could recall
even the salutation—"0y dear 0r.  .ern";   "+e had never called me '0r.
.ern'  before," he Zould say.

3roud and angry and hurt—"It Zas almost like his father disoZning him,"
said 3rofessor :allace Sayre, a Civil Service Commission member at the
time—.ern  Zould  not attempt to e[plain. And, months later, just as the rift
betZeen the tZo men Zas beginning to heal, 0oses Zidened it beyond any
possibility of healing—Zith  a public smear that made .ern a political
liability  that the 0ayor could not afford to keep in his administration.

The commission, Zith .ern  reinforced by the appointment of Dr. Frank A.
Schaeffer, a Fordham 8niversity Latin professor he had persuaded to take a
leave of absence to accept the post of commission secretary (the same post
to Zhich Dr. Robert 0oses had once aspired), began in 1939 to press harder
and harder for complete civil service reform (the same type of reform for
Zhich Dr. 0oses had once pressed), and, to enforce it,

suggested encouraging city employees to report venality and civil service
violations by aZarding promotion credits for verifiable tips. Terming the

628
commission's actions "un-American," 0oses suggested that Dr. Schaeffer
"send this communication to the OG38 [secret police] in Russia, Zhose
American representative you seem to be." And Zhen .ern defended
Schaeffer—"+e Zas a good Roman Catholic and being called a Communist
upset him tremendously; Ze doubt very much if you Zould recruit OG38
agents at Fordham"—0oses called .ern an OG38 agent.

.ern  Zas vulnerable to such attack. Addicted to overenthusiasm in his
liberalism (he Zryly  describes himself as a "sucker for causes"), years
before, Zhile still in his teens, he had joined a number of organi]ations that
later turned out to be Communist fronts. And though by 1939 he had seen
through them and resigned in disgust, 0oses' attacks on him as a
Communist Zere echoed by the Red- and JeZ-baiting Detroit demagogue
Father Coughlin, Zho "revealed" that .ern's insistence on reforming the
3olice Department's promotion system Zas really a plot to place over "the
cops of NeZ York ... 90 per cent of them good Christians, a group of Reds,
an OG38! . . . Zho could not tell  a night stick from a streak of salami." The
+earst papers Zere soon yoZling for the young man's scalp and a
committee of the Tammany-dominated City Council began investigating the
commission.

.ern  believes that 0oses inspired and helped direct from behind the scenes
not only the investigation, one of the viler chapters in NeZ York political
history (the committee took advantage of the association in the public mind
of godless Communism Zith free love to drag into the hearing insinuations
about .ern's love life),  but also the public smear campaign against him of
Zhich the investigation Zas the centerpiece—and that the 3ark
Commissioner's bloodhounds kept the investigators supplied Zith fresh
ammunition. This belief Zas concurred in by :indels  and at least one other
key La Guardia official, Zho points out that neZ revelations about .ern's
background Zere generally aired first by 0urray Davis, the :orld-
Telegram's senior political Zriter, Zho had been used before, and Zould be
used again, by 0oses as a conduit to get before the public "facts" 0oses
Zanted the public to knoZ Zithout letting  it knoZ that the facts came from
him.

629
And if there is no evidence to document 0oses' continued participation in
the public smear campaign against .ern—the key investigators are all dead
and Davis, Zho later became 0oses' personal public relations man, isn't
talking—there is plenty of evidence to document his continued participation
in a private campaign, a campaign to make La Guardia suspect his young
friend. 0oses reminded the 0ayor continually  of .ern's  "Communist"
leanings; once, for e[ample, he Zrote him a personal letter that concluded,
"Don't let .ern  try  to set up an OG38 in NeZ York."

The tactic Zorked Zith a 0ayor  Zho  Zas constantly terrified that his liberal
administration Zould be tarred as "Communist," a charge he felt Zould
alienate irreparably the city's huge block of Catholic voters (in 1941,
despite his respect for Stanley Isaacs, the 0ayor dumped the reformer from
his ticket because of the outcry, Zhich 0oses kept alive, over Isaacs' hiring
of the young Communist Gerson). By the end of the investigation, he Zas

hardly speaking to .ern, and not long thereafter, in the midst of another
dispute, he fired him.

.ern  says he understood Zhy 0oses Zanted him fired. "+is hatred of me
Zas not based on the fact that he thought I Zas a Communist—I'm sure he
didn't—but that I represented interference Zith the Zay he Zanted to run
the 3ark Department," he says.

And from that standpoint, 0oses' tactics Zere Zholly successful. 8ntil the
end of his park commissionership in i960, no civil service commissioner
ever interfered Zith the department again.

0oses' felloZ  commissioners, an[ious for a fairer share of :3A  funds or a
more equitable relationship betZeen their departments and his, might have
sloZed him doZn. But he didn't let them.

0oses' normal technique Zith other commissioners Zas to bully them.
Often this approach Zorked, for they Zere Zell aZare that if they attempted
to challenge him, he Zould be backed by the press—and by their mutual
boss, the 0ayor.

630
One commissioner Zith Zhom this approach did not Zork, of course, Zas
:indels.

"3aul kneZ hoZ  to handle him, all right," says :illiam   C. Chanler,
:indels'   chief assistant (and, in 1938, his successor as Corporation
Counsel). ":e'd  been in office about si[ Zeeks and 3aul Zent up to Albany
and left me in charge of the office and Zhile he Zas up there, 0oses called
me on the phone. +e said he Zas being held up because Ze Zere Zorking
too sloZ on condemnation proceedings in Zhich he Zas interested. +e Zas
really yelling at me. +e got ruder and ruder about our not getting his title
cleared —'You didn't get this done, you didn't get that done, you haven't got
the certiorari. :hat   the hell's the matter Zith you?' I told him Ze had only
been in office si[ Zeeks. +e said, 'Goddammit, I got my office organi]ed in
forty-eight hours. If you felloZs  don't get going, I'm going to call up the
press and tell them Zhat a bunch of incompetents you are.' I called up 3aul
:indels   in Albany and he said, 'I'll tell you Zhat you do. There are a lot of
cases in Zhich Ze're being held up by something Ze need from the 3ark
Department. You get a list of those cases and you have it right on your desk.
:hen   0oses calls up the ne[t time, don't take any abuse from him. Just say
e[actly this—'Listen here, 0oses, goddammit, Zhat the hell's the matter
Zith your office? :e've   got this and this and you're holding us up.' :ell,  he
did call up again and he started being rude and I said even more than
:indels   had told me to. I said, 'And if you ever come over here I'll kick
your ass out of the office!' :ell,  as soon as I did that, his Zhole tone of
voice changed. +e said, ':ell,  perhaps'—his Zhole tone of voice changed—
he said, 'Zell, perhaps you and I'd better talk this over. +oZ about coming
over for lunch?' I Zent over and the door Zas opened by the most charming,
gracious, smiling man. +e gave me a very sumptuous lunch—I think Ze
had a bottle of Zine, I don't remember—and he said, 'Oh, Ze're going to get
on fine.' A short time later, he called up again on something he Zas mad

about and started to yell again. But by this time I kneZ hoZ to handle him. I
yelled back and immediately it Zas 'Oh, all right, oh, all right,' and he
calmed doZn."

The lesson Zasn't lost on Chanler. "If you stood right up to him, he backed
right doZn," he says. "+e Zas just a natural bully. So Zhenever he tried

631
something, I'd pretend to lose my temper. And after a Zhile, he didn't try
any more." But the other commissioners didn't knoZ 0oses as Zell as
:indels   and they didn't have the benefit of his advice—and Zhen 0oses'
harsh voice rasped over the telephone into their offices threatening to take
them to the press and the 0ayor, they thought the only Zay to avoid such a
fate Zas to do Zhat he Zanted. 0any of the other commissioners despised
and resented 0oses. :hen they attempted to establish an esprit by meeting
for Zeekly "commissioners' luncheons," 0oses refused to attend—a gesture
that they interpreted, correctly, as an attempt by 0oses to shoZ them that he
considered himself above them. They considered the plant from a 3ark
Department greenhouse that 0oses sent in his place each Zeek a gratuitous
insult. But Zhile they might despise and resent 0oses, they also feared him.
And they generally did Zhat he Zanted. Even the more independent among
them, moreover, Zere outZitted by his brilliance in the bureaucratic arts.
3ointing out to a recalcitrant commissioner that because of the 3ark
Department's unprecedented activity, its demands on the commissioner's
oZn department Zere undoubtedly disrupting its normal procedures, 0oses
Zould suggest that the commissioner designate one of his aides to do
nothing but handle 3ark Department liaison, perhaps even alloZing him to
Zork in the Arsenal. Then 0oses, by bullying or by charm, Zould  take the
aide into camp—making him an ally of the 3ark Department and thereby
practically freeing himself of the necessity of Zinning the other
department's approval of his actions. Soon 0oses had his "oZn man" in the
office of many other commissioners—men loyal to him rather than to their
oZn commissioners and useful to 0oses not only as liaison Zith other
departments but as spies Zithin their ranks.

The city's elected officials, motivated by a hundred political considerations,
might have sloZed his building. But he didn't let them.

The broad poZers possessed by the Board of Estimate, the upper house of
the city's bicameral legislature, Zould normally have made ignoring it
impossible. But many of those poZers rested on the poZer of the purse and
the purse that Zas financing most of 0oses' projects Zas not the Board's
but the federal government's. And the poZer that remained to the Board he
offset Zith the techniques—stake driving, ZhipsaZing, Zedge driving,

632
deception—that he had learned and mastered during a decade of building
public Zorks on Long Island.

Because the Charter gave the Board authority over all street closings and
0oses Zanted to build Chrystie-Forsyth 3ark across four LoZer East Side
streets, he submitted his plans for the street closings to the Board for
approval. 0anhattan Borough 3resident Levy noted that crosstoZn traffic

Zould be crammed into the tZo streets 0oses Zas Zilling to leave open
through the park, Grand and Delancey. Although 0oses said those tZo
streets Zere adequate to handle the traffic, Board members said it Zould
overcroZd them, and refused to approve the street closings Zithout further
discussion and a full-scale on-site inspection. But Zhen they arrived at the
site a feZ days later, they found the st r eets already closed—Zith concrete,
hastily laid during those feZ days by 0oses' Zorkers, in Zhich the footings
of fences, benches, sZings, seesaZs and even handball courts Zere rapidly
hardening into immovable reality.

:hen   Board approval of a project Zas absolutely essential—because he
needed city funds to acquire the site, say—he Zould ZhipsaZ it by stating
that the :3A   had agreed to finance the project and urging them to grab the
money Zhile it Zas available. (At the same time he Zould be assuring the
:3A   that city approval Zas assured and the land Zas therefore available, an
argument that persuaded the :3A, an[ious for fast results, to give its
approval.) If they did, he Zould say, the city Zould get the improvement—
and desperately needed jobs—Zithout any city e[penditure. If the Board
said it Zanted time to study the project, 0oses Zould tell them that the
delay Zould cost the city the :3A   funds—and this argument, backed by the
threat (Zhich Zas frequently implemented) to tell the press about the
threatened loss, Zas one Zhich almost invariably brought the Board to its
knees.

+e drove Zedges, too. In his 1935 budget request, he asked the Board to
allocate $3,600,000 for construction projects in Jacob Riis, Fort Tryon,
3elham Bay and the tZo 0arine parks. The Board did, and the thin edge of
the Zedge Zas in. Year after year, thereafter, he returned to the Board for
neZ allocations Zhich he said Zere necessary to make the improvements
built Zith  the previous allocations "usable"; unless the money Zas given, he

633
Zould say, the previous allocations Zould be Zasted. Jacob Riis 3ark Zould
be completed by 1938, after an additional city allocation of $3,500,-000, but
the others Zere not. Year after year, the Board Zould allocate neZ funds—
and then Zould learn that still more Zere needed. 0arine 3ark in Brooklyn
could be completed for $6,000,000, he assured the Board. :hen $6,000,000
had been spent on the park, 0oses informed the Board that an additional
$6,000,000 Zould be necessary. And Zhen that Zas spent, the park Zould
still be far from completed.

+e deceived the Board constantly. To obtain permission to construct a
stadium on Randall's Island, he had assured the Board that the "3:A"
project Zould cost the city "not a penny." Then, Zith permission obtained
and Zork under Zay, he announced that he Zould need $250,000 additional
for materials the 3:A   Zould not buy, but assured the Board that this Zas
the only contribution the city Zould have to make for the "Zhole
Triborough Bridge project," in return for Zhich the federal government Zas
making a contribution of $46,200,000. The Board allocated the money.
:ithin   a month, he Zas back again, asking for a special bond issue of
$8,-000,000 to pay for the right-of-Zay for the bridge approaches. +e
blandly told the Board that Zhen he had spoken of the "Zhole Triborough
Bridge

project," he naturally hadn't meant the land for the project. +e hardly
bothered to conceal the technique—one of his press releases on the Central
3ark Zoo contained tZo different estimates of the cost—but because the
Board had left itself open to political blackmail by approving earlier fund
requests Zithout adequately checking them, it Zas helpless to deny him
later requests and thereby alloZ him to charge that it had Zasted the public's
money by building only part of a project. 0oreover, since the Board's
membership Zas continually changing, just as one borough president or
Comptroller learned never tc trust 0oses' figures, he Zould lose an election
and the man Zho took over his seat Zould have to begin the learning
process aneZ. And, most important, Zhile the Board may have distrusted
0oses' figures, its lack of adequate engineering assistance prevented it from
coming up Zith any of its oZn.

634
Those on the Board Zho tried to bring him to heel soon Zished they hadn't.
:hen   they dueled Zith him, they did so from the dignity of then-seats
behind the massive raised mahogany horseshoe in the Board chamber,
backed by fluted Corinthian columns and Zine-red draperies. But their
setting couldn't save them from his tongue.

"+e Zould  enter the chamber hearty, very hearty, Zith this broad grin,"
recalls 0cGoldrick,  Zho, as Comptroller, sat in one of the seats on the
horseshoe. "+e Zas very impressive, tall, handsome, and he'd alZays come
in Zith a team of his aides behind him—a different team for each project.
And he kneZ his stuff inside and out. +e Zasn't like [some of] the other
commissioners, Zho had aides Zith them and every time you asked them a
question, they had to turn to them and Zhisper to get the ansZer. And this
Zas very impressive. +is men didn't seem to have any purpose there, e[cept
that one or tZo alZays stood behind him to hand him papers Zhen he
needed them. :hen the matter in Zhich he Zas interested Zas called he
Zould Zalk  to the railing at Zhich officials  stood to address the Board—
there Zas no public-address system or microphone then—Zith the same
grin. +e Zas very bree]y and self-confident. I remember his coming up
very genially, Zith his head throZn back and a grin on his face."

But let one of the Board members venture to critici]e—or even to question
—one of his projects, and the grin could fade in an instant. "[+e Zas] very
intolerant of any criticism of anything he Zanted to do," 0cGoldrick
recalls. "+e Zanted to do it. +e Zas going to do it. And Zithering  Zith  his
adjectives anyone Zho opposed him." Says one observer: ":hen someone
else Zas speaking, he'd begin to pace up and doZn. +e'd turn his back—
total boredom. Off to one side a little. Then he'd suddenly Zhip around
Zithout asking permission, Zalk up and make some sharp remark . . . often
out of the side of his mouth, you knoZ, throZing his shoulders around.
There Zas no indication of respect—he seemed to emanate an air of
arrogance, of contempt, for the men sitting up there." If he felt called upon
to make e[tended reply, he Zould do so Zhile rocking slightly on his heels,
his large head throZn back and to one side, and the Zords that rasped out of
the handsome, sensual mouth Zere devastating. "Time and again," said one
maga]ine Zriter, "he transfi[es his opponent Zith graceful malice."

635
As for the Board of Aldermen and its successor under the neZ Charter, the
City Council—he treated those Zorthies, many of Zhom he told La]arus he
could buy "Zith a couple of jobs," like men Zho could be bought Zith a
couple of jobs. Or he simply ignored them. In 1939, he urged the 3ark
Department's 3,000 employees to vote against councilmen Zho had slashed
the Department's budget requests, and Zhen the Council, after hearing a
committee report calling 0oses' action "one of the most bra]en attempts at
political intimidation  in the history of the city," ordered him to appear
before it to e[plain the action, he simply didn't bother to shoZ up, sending a
letter saying he hadn't received "adequate notice."

The comple[ities of life  in a city might have sloZed him doZn. But he
didn't let them.

There Zas a difference betZeen building parks and parkZays in the country
—on sparsely populated Long Island, Zhere most of 0oses' previous
projects had been concentrated, or in rural upstate counties—and building
them in a city, and the difference Zas people. :hen you built a park on a
deserted sand bar such as Jones Beach, you didn't have to Zorry about
removing people from the site and relocating them someZhere else because
there Zeren't any people. You Zere building parks and parkZays for people,
of course, and therefore you had to take people's needs into consideration in
planning them, but only in a broad, impersonal sense, for you Zere planning
for people in the tens of thousands, humanity in the mass, and the needs of
humanity in the mass could be deduced as Zell from a general knoZledge
of people as from a specific knoZledge of the human beings Zho made up
the mass. :hen you built  public Zorks in a countryside you Zere painting
on a clean and empty canvas—and you could use brush strokes as broad as
you chose. If there Zas a formula for building public Zorks, for Getting
Things Done, on Long Island, it Zas not a simple one—no formula that had
to include cooperation Zith as poZerful an oligarchy as the North Shore
Robber Barons, as greedy a political machine as the Nassau County GO3
and as shortsighted a collection of public officials as the NeZ York State
Legislature could be simple—but many factors that Zould have made the
formula vastly more complicated did not have to be included in it. 0oses
could determine by himself—by his oZn unaided foresight and insight, his

636
strictly private conception of the public need—Zhat types of projects Zere
needed, Zhere they should be located and hoZ they should be designed.

Things Zere different in the city. The crucial factor in the building of public
Zorks on Long Island Zas space, vast, endless tracts of uncluttered
openness; in the city the crucial factor Zas lack of space and the fact that
space Zas not merely filled but filled Zith people, people Zith their
endlessly intertZined, hopelessly snarled tangles of aspirations and
antagonisms, hopes and fears, dreams and dreads. 3eople on the site Zould
have to be removed —evicted, dispossessed, throZn out, relocated—and
removal Zould rend the fabric of their lives. The lives of those near the site
might not be rent but they Zould certainly be altered, for the physical
environment Zhich did so

much to shape their daily e[istence Zould be altered, not only in dramatic
Zays such as the ra]ing of a block of tenements for a bridge anchorage, but
in Zays subtle and endlessly various: the construction of almost any public
Zork inevitably  added to or subtracted from that delicate balance of
humanity that Zas a city neighborhood ingredients that Zould change that
balance forever, change the neighborhood's economic or ethnic
composition, make it quieter or noisier, cleaner or dirtier, cut one part of it
off from the rest, fill it  Zith neZ  life or drain it of its vitality,  turn it into
something different—possibly better but also possibly Zorse—than it Zas
before.

Therefore, unlike a public Zork on Long Island, a public Zork in the city
had to be planned not only in terms of itself but in terms of its environment,
the neighborhood in Zhich it Zas located. It had to be judged not only in
physical terms—highZay as highZay, park as park— but also in social
terms: in terms of its effect on the human beings Zho had to live around it.
If in creating public Zorks on Long Island, one could paint on a clean and
empty canvas, in creating public Zorks in NeZ York City one had to paint
over an already e[isting mural, a mural Zhose brush strokes Zere tiny and
intricate and often, Zhen one looked closely, quite Zonderful, lending to the
vast urban panorama subtle shadings and delicate tints and an endless
variety, so that if it Zas croZded and confused and ugly it Zas also full of
life and very human, so much so, in fact, that Zhile the painting as a Zhole

637
might lack beauty, order, balance, perspective, a unifying principle and an
over-all effect commensurate Zith its si]e, it nonetheless possessed many
charming little touches and an over-all vitality, a brio, that made it unique
and should not be lost. If 0oses attempted to employ on the canvas of NeZ
York City the same broad brush strokes that he had used on the canvas of
Long Island, he Zould be obliterating the city's intricacies indiscriminately
instead of Zorking around those that Zere Zorth keeping and preserving
them—and Zhile this method might result in the creation of something
beautiful and good, adding to the mural neZ values, it Zould also almost
certainly destroy many e[isting values. A public Zork in the city might in
terms of itself—0oses' terms—be an e[cellent public Zork  Zhile in
broader terms being a poor public Zork: a highZay, for e[ample, that,
hoZever magnificently designed, Zas damaging either to the adjacent
neighborhood—shattering its essential unity, cutting its homes off from its
playground or from its churches and shopping areas, filling its quiet
residential areas Zith noise and gasoline fumes that made them no longer
nice places to live and to bring up children—or to the city as a Zhole: a
highZay, for e[ample, through a hitherto sparsely inhabited area that
initiated a sudden influ[ of subdivisions and apartment houses, loading it
Zith people, before the city had provided the seZers and subZays and
schools those people needed, and that by boosting land costs made it
immensely difficult for  a financially hard-pressed city to provide such
services—services Zhich could, if installed before the highZay Zas built,
have been installed at a price Zithin the city's means.

If one tried to plan public Zorks in NeZ  York City by the same simplistic
formula by Zhich the public Zorks  of Long Island had been

planned, the public Zorks thus created might Zell destroy Zhat Zas good in
NeZ York even Zhile it  Zas supposed to be improving the city.

3art of 0oses' Long Island formula—the-vision and the viciousness, the
imagination and the ruthlessness, the drive, the urgent, savage thrust, the
instinct for the magnificent and the jugular that overrode purely selfish
opposition, shortsightedness and red tape to turn vision into reality—Zas
needed in the city, needed desperately, for Zithout it the city Zould never be
able to build parks and roads and bridges—or, for that matter, housing or

638
hospitals, seZers or schools—on the scale its citi]ens needed. But 0oses'
formula could be successful in the city only as the basis of a neZ, vastly
more complicated and subtle and sophisticated formula, one that Zould turn
public Zorks into a far truer reflection of the subtle and complicated human
needs they had to serve in the city. A Zhole neZ input—a factor of
humanity— Zould have to be added.

And 0oses Zould  not alloZ it  to be added.

0oses had a genius for grasping the needs of people in the mass, of people
in the tens and hundreds of thousands, of a city and a state as a Zhole, and
for devising Zays to meet those needs. But that genius could not help him
grasp the needs of a specific city neighborhood in Zhich he Zas building a
small park or playground, for those needs might be shared by no other
neighborhood in the Zorld.

In the first place, the people in the mass that he understood Zere people of
particular social strata that his oZn background enabled him to understand:
the classes he called "upper" and "comfortable middle." +e had never had
any interest in—and therefore had little understanding of—classes he
considered beneath his oZn, the classes Zho made up so many of NeZ York
City's neighborhoods. 0oreover, even a genius couldn't deduce the needs of
a neighborhood—any neighborhood—until he kneZ and understood it. And
the only Zay of knoZing  and understanding it Zas to study and learn about
it, to find out hoZ many children lived in  it and hoZ old they Zere, Zhat
games they liked to play, Zhat games their parents liked to play Zith them
on Zeekends, Zhat games their parents liked to play among themselves, to
find out Zhether the parents liked to play games at all or simply to sit
quietly and talk, Zhether the neighborhood's teen-age boys Zanted a place
to Zalk after dinner and Zatch the neighborhood's teen-age girls Zalk or
Zhether they Zanted to spend their time after dinner playing basketball, to
find out Zhich streets the neighborhood's mothers considered safe enough
so that their children could cross them alone and thus use a playground on
the far side Zhenever they Zanted and Zhich streets the mothers considered
too dangerous, to find out e[actly hoZ far the children Zere Zilling  to Zalk
to get to a playground in the first place. And there Zas only one Zay to
learn about a neighborhood: listen to its people, discuss their problems Zith

639
them. 8nless 0oses did that—not 0oses himself necessarily; his
lieutenants or the architect designing the specific playground in question—
he simply Zouldn't, couldn't, knoZ enough about the neighborhood to
satisfy its needs.

On a broader scale, that Zas also the only Zay to study and learn hoZ

to plan larger public Zorks for NeZ York City. It  Zas the only Zay to plan
even those large parks—Central, 3rospect, Van Cortlandt, .issena, Alley
3ond—that contained plenty of space in Zhich there lived no people at all.
Even these parks could not be developed successfully by a formula as
simplistic as that on Zhich the Long Island parks had been developed. For
these parks Zere not just open space but open space Zithin a city— Zithin a
city in Zhich  open space Zas becoming terribly scarce—and the space
Zithin  them Zas therefore precious and must be utili]ed not just to
advantage but to fullest advantage. And Zhat Zas that advantage? :hat
Zas it most important for those big parks to give the city? The city's
facilities for active recreation Zere laughably inadequate. Therefore the
park must provide them. They must be filled Zith baseball diamonds and
football fields, tennis and handball and basketball courts, skating rinks and
sZimming pools. But the city Zas also groZing—groZing  and spreading; in
1934, most of Staten Island, the entire central portion of 4ueens and much
of southern Brooklyn Zere still free of intensive development, but real
estate developers Zere already eyeing those areas too. Open space—quiet
open space, natural settings in Zhich city dZellers could find relief from
gray concrete and congestion and noise—Zas precious in NeZ York noZ.
3arks must provide that, too. If they did not, there Zould soon be no place
Zithin  the great city in Zhich these values could be found. It Zas
particularly vital that these values be preserved Zithin the city because
0oses' restrictive policies had made it difficult for the city's poor, Zho did
not have access to private automobiles, to reach his Long Island parks; if
these values Zere not preserved in the city's oZn parks there Zould soon be
no place at all in Zhich a poor family could find them. The city's parks had
to serve both recreational and conservational functions, but designing the
parks so that they could provide both functions Zould be immensely
difficult.  For the tZo functions Zere not compatible. 3eace and quiet and
solitude Zere in general obtainable only at a far remove from the shouts and

640
frantic activity of the playing field.  And Zhile parks like .issena  in 4ueens
Zere considered large, .issena contained e[actly 219 acres; 219 acres
sounded big, but it sounded a lot smaller Zhen one reali]ed that a single
baseball diamond took up tZo and a half acres and even a small parking
field tZenty-five.  There Zas room in parks like .issena either for peace or
for parking fields—but not for both. :ith    the e[ception of the tZo 0arine
3arks, Zhich Zere not really parks at all but only undeveloped marshland,
the only park of a thousand acres in the Zhole city Zas Van Cortlandt, and
even in Van Cortlandt, you could have both active play facilities and
natural, peaceful areas only if you e[ercised the greatest ingenuity and
delicacy in laying them out.

Therefore, choices had to be made—hard choices. And they could not be
made intelligently Zithout determining, in the case of each park, Zhether it
Zas going to serve the neighborhood around it or the city as a Zhole, and
Zhich functions Zere most needed in that park by the people it Zas going to
serve.

There had been so much space on the Island that there had been no need

to ask such questions in planning parks. Even after 0oses had built all the
baseball diamonds and tennis courts and bathhouses and parking fields that
he Zanted in +eckscher State 3ark, for e[ample, more than 1,200 of the
park's 1,657 acres remained in their natural Zooded state, enough for green,
quiet Zoods aZay from croZds. 0oses himself had been uninterested in a
park's "natural" functions. +is mind saZ people in the mass, running,
jumping, sZinging tennis rackets or baseball bats; one reason he Zanted
Tri-borough Stadium so big Zas that he Zanted it large enough for mass
calisthenics on the Third Reich scale. +is vision never focused on the
individual Zandering alone through a forest or on the family spraZling in
solitude in a meadoZ; in thinking of parks he did not, e[cept incidentally,
think of them as places of forests or meadoZs or solitude. And if the very
breadth of his vision thus made it hard for him to think of parks as
untouched nature, so did the very force of his creativity; he Zas a builder, a
molder, a man Zho yearns to put his hand to and reshape—"improve"—
Zhatever he sees. Therefore to him a park Zas not open space. The open
space Zas already there. The "park" Zas that portion of the open space that

641
he had filled Zith his oZn creations. (+e referred to the portions of the
Long Island parks Zithout active play facilities as "undeveloped for park
use.") +is lack of interest in untouched nature had not mattered on Long
Island. But it Zas to matter greatly in NeZ York.

And hoZ small could a park be? :hat  Zas the smallest number of square
feet it Zas feasible to supervise and maintain as a public place of
recreation? Five acres, the area of a standard city block? Three acres? TZo?
One? The 100 by 20 feet that Zas the si]e of the standard building lot in
tenement sections—and that Zas often the only piece of vacant land
anyZhere around?

This Zas a question of desperate importance. The recreational needs of city
families that couldn't afford to oZn a car—and those families comprised a
full tZo-thirds  of the city's population—had to be satisfied Zithin their
immediate neighborhoods, and because it Zas too e[pensive to condemn
buildings in these neighborhoods and the only land still vacant Zas small
plots, the only parks that could be built in these neighborhoods Zere small
parks. But even small plots Zere enormously e[pensive to maintain and
supervise, far more e[pensive per square foot than large parks. Given the
hard fact that the city Zould never be able to create nearly enough parks for
its people, Zas there any sense in developing a large number of small
parks? :here  did you sink those resources that Zere available—into large
parks that could be developed relatively economically or into small parks
that alone could provide recreation for that portion of the city's people that
most needed recreation? The needs of providing recreation for the city's
poor must be Zeighed against the cost of that provision. :hat a later
generation Zould come to call "priorities" must be established, and it Zould
not be easy to establish them. The hard choices Zould have to be made.
Only by the most intense analysis and discussion—discussion Zith the
people most directly involved, the city's poor—could these choices be made
intelligently. And,

again, because the success of a neighborhood park depended so largely on
intimate knoZledge of that neighborhood, once the decision to establish a
park in a neighborhood Zas taken, even more intense discussion Zith the
residents of that neighborhood Zould be necessary.

642
Then there Zas the question of roads in parks. Should there even be roads in
parks and, if so, Zhere Zithin the parks should they be located?

Once, in the days—a decade or even tZo decades before—in Zhich the
young Robert 0oses had been planning parks and roads, the ansZer to that
question had been quite clear. Driving in automobiles had then still been
thought of primarily as pleasure, a pursuit for comfortable middle-class or
Zealthy fathers (the only fathers Zho could afford automobiles) taking their
families for an outing, just as driving horse-draZn carriages had been a
pursuit for pleasure. And it had therefore been important to insure that these
families had the most pleasant surroundings possible to drive through, and
Zithin  the city's limits the most pleasant surroundings Zere those provided
by parks. The provision of pleasant scenery for drivers to enjoy Zas, in fact,
a primary function of parks; that Zas Zhy every great city in Europe had its
great driving park, 3aris its Bois de Boulogne, Rome its 3incian +ill,
Florence its Cascine and London its +yde 3ark. Roads had belonged in
parks in the nineteenth century—so much so that, if necessary, other values
of a park had to be sacrificed to provide the roads Zith the best of the park's
scenery.

But this Zas the tZentieth century noZ. And the ansZer to the question —
do roads belong in parks?—Zas no longer clear. For the nature of driving
had largely changed. The automobile age, still in its infancy Zhen Robert
0oses had stood on Riverside Drive and planned his "great highZay going
uptoZn along the Zater" in 1914, still only in its adolescence Zhen 0oses
had been planning his Long Island parkZays in 1924, had come to full
maturity by the time he came to poZer in NeZ York City in 1934. There
had been 273,435 motor vehicles in NeZ York City in 1924; there Zere
804,620 noZ. And people no longer used their cars primarily for Zeekend
pleasure trips but, increasingly, to get to and from Zork and to shop. Cars
Zere part of people's daily lives. And they drove faster noZ; they had less
time for scenery. :hat  implications did these facts have for parkZays?

:hat   Zas a parkZay anyZay?

:as  it  still mainly a source of beauty and pleasure, or had it changed into a
source of convenience—or at least intended convenience? :ere people still
interested in parkZays primarily because of the scenery they could see

643
along them or Zere they interested in them primarily as a means of getting
from one place to another? And if the latter, Zhat Zas the significance of
that fact? Should the best of scenery still be reserved for the driver?

But Robert 0oses Zouldn't alloZ  any discussion.

+e Zouldn't alloZ  discussion because discussion Zould have sloZed doZn
his building programs, and he felt that he couldn't alloZ them to be

sloZed doZn. And he Zouldn't alloZ  discussion because he had no respect
for the opinions of the public that he Zould have had to admit to the
discussions. And even if he limited discussion to the e[perts Zho Zere
interested in the various fields, he had no respect for their opinions, either.
Robert 0oses had no respect for anyone's opinion but his oZn.

Once 0oses had at least listened to his oZn aides, alloZed them to argue
Zith him, tested his opinions against theirs. But noZ that had changed, too.
In the first days of his poZer, he had hired aides Zhose opinions Zere Zorth
listening to. +e had selected men for ability, engineering ability, legal
ability. The aides he Zas hiring noZ had also to possess an additional
ability: the ability to say, "Yes, sir."

"Lunches at 0oses' office Zere really starting to get pretty sickening,"
recalls one top La Guardia official. "Even if he only had one guest, he
Zould alZays have si[ or eight of his '0oses  0en'—'my  muchachos,' he
used to call them—at the table and it Zas all 'Yes, sir, R0,' 'No, sir, R0,'
'Right as usual, R0!' :hen   he laughed, they laughed, only louder—you
knoZ Zhat I  mean. Christ, Zhen he made a statement, you could look
around the table and see eight heads nodding practically in unison. It Zas
like a goddamned Greek chorus."

Reuben La]arus, invited by 0oses to become chief counsel for the
Triborough Bridge Authority, refused—"I didn't Zant to be a doormat for
any man"—and Zhen 0oses asked him to recommend one of his assistants,
La]arus selected the one Zho, he had noticed, "doesn't ansZer back," and in
the ta[i taking :illiam    LebZohl  to lunch Zith  0oses, told him Zhat  Zas
going to be e[pected of him: "You're going to have to be able to bend over
and take a kick in the ass and say 'Thank you, sir,' Zith a smile." At the

644
luncheon, La]arus recalls, "LebZohl did not ansZer back." 0oses hired
him—and kept him on as Triborough counsel for more than thirty years.

The effect of such a hiring policy Zas predictable. The aides he had hired in
the 1920's, the Art +oZlands, Sid Shapiros, Bill Lathams, Bill Chapins and
George Spargos, became legendary throughout state and city government
for their ability, drive and indefatigability. The aides he hired in the 1930's
Zere quite another story. "The older guys—tops!" says :illiam  Zeckendorf,
Zho had a keen eye for men himself. "But some of the others he had
Zorking for  him—I Zouldn't  have hired them to sZeep my lobbies!"

0oses' sensitivity to criticism  had impressed itself on such men. They didn't
critici]e  anything he said. They saZ he Zas less than receptive to
suggestions—and they didn't make suggestions.

If 0oses refused to accept ideas from public, e[perts or aides—from, in
general, anyone at all—the source of his ideas, his concept of public Zorks
for NeZ York City, could be only his oZn mind. The mind Zas brilliant,  but
even a brilliant mind is only as good as the material—the input—fed into it.
It Zas at about this time that La]arus, planning to Zrite a book about

government and public figures and keeping a card file of impressions, Zrote
on a card he filed under the name "Robert 0oses":

Bob 0oses has climbed so high on his oZn ego, has become so hidebound
in his oZn arbitrariness, that he has removed himself almost entirely from
reality and has insulated himself Zithin his oZn individuality.

This difficulty  could to some degree have been overcome by sheer mental
ability. Robert 0oses' mind Zas supple, resourceful. Even Zithout input of
social and human considerations, it could have deduced some of these
considerations simply by thinking about the problems involved.

But Robert 0oses no longer had much time to think.

Building a state park system had been an immense job, but he had brought
to it not only immense energy but immense ability to discipline that energy.
+e had found time— made time, to be more precise, made it by devoting to

645
his Zork the hours Zhen other men play or rela[ or sleep, or lunch, made it
by Zorking fourteen, si[teen, eighteen, tZenty hours a day, seven days a
Zeek, fifty-tZo  Zeeks a year—he had found time to oversee every detail of
design, to present his architects and engineers Zith the basic concepts he
Zanted folloZed, to insist during the fleshing out of those concepts on a
standard of e[cellence, of boldness and daring far above that common for
public Zorks and to inspire the architects and engineers ("I knoZ you can
do draZbridges. Can you do beautiful draZbridges?") to raise their Zork to
that standard. And besides furnishing inspiration, he furnished ideas; many
of the most brilliant touches at Jones Beach had been his ideas. +e had
found time— made time—to infuse the brick and concrete and sandstone of
that park, and of other Long Island parks from Valley Stream to 0ontauk—
and of other state parks from 3alisades to Niagara—Zith his personal
genius.

But Zhen 0oses e[panded his sphere of activity into NeZ York City  he did
not stop his Zork on Long Island or in the rest of the state—in 1934, on
Long Island alone, he built Bethpage State 3ark and Bethpage State
3arkZay; in 1935, he built the 0eadoZbrook  CauseZay; in 1936, he built
great neZ bathhouses at Sunken 0eadoZ and +eckscher state parks as Zell
as the +eckscher State 3arkZay Spur, and during all these years he Zas
e[tending the Northern and Southern state parkZays and building literally
scores of smaller park structures. Instead he simply added to his state park
Zork, itself enough to ta[ the strength of even the strongest of men, Zork in
the city that Zas not limited to the direction of 80,000 men in the rebuilding
of a huge park system but that also included the building of four parkZays
and three bridges, Zith each of the bridge-building jobs in itself a job that
Zould have been considered a full-time job for any other man. It Zas not
possible for him to make for himself any more time than he had already
made. There Zere no more days in a Zeek than seven or Zeeks in a year
than fifty-tZo,  and he Zas Zorking all those days and Zeeks already. +e
had already sloughed off all social life and most family life; there Zas
nothing more in his life that could be sloughed off. +e Zas already, Zith his
use of his limousine as an office and conference room,

making use of every available minute; there Zere no more minutes to be
found unless he drove himself beyond the limit of his physical and mental

646
and emotional strength—and the "almost nervous breakdoZn" of December
1934 had shoZn hoZ close he Zas croZding that limit.

It Zas lack of time more than any other single reason that accounted for an
astonishing fact about many NeZ York City park projects: they Zere banal.

Richard Spencer Childs recalls visiting 0oses at his office one day and
having their conversation interrupted by the arrival of Aymar Embury.
"Embury had a bunch of draZings of some buildings for the parks," Childs
recalls. "+e had brought them to shoZ 0oses. 0oses Zent right through
them—'Nope.' 'Okay.' 'Nope.' ThroZing them to one side or the other if he
approved them or not. . . . There Zere no hard feelings. 0oses and Embury
Zere good friends. There Zas lots of respect betZeen them. 3ut here
perhaps $100,000 Zorth of public business Zas settled on 0oses' offhand
taste." And, recalls Childs, Zhen 0oses finished Zith the draZings,
Embury pointed to one he had rejected and said, "That one you threZ aZay
Zas the best of the lot."

Embury may Zell have been correct: the offhand taste even of a genius is
offhand taste. :orking  incredibly  fast, 0oses had managed to make the
Long Island projects public Zorks of genius. NoZ he Zas trying to Zork
even faster—and he Zas Zorking too fast to do even a good job.

:hen   there is no time for the thinking required for original creation, the
tendency is to repeat Zhat has proven successful in the past. 0any of
0oses' NeZ York projects (not all; those in Zhich he Zas particularly
interested— and on Zhich he spent substantial time—Zould be magnificent
additions to the civic estate) began to reveal a conscious effort to duplicate
aspects of his acclaimed Long Island parks. In this tendency lies the
e[planation for the otherZise ine[plicable failure  to make provision for
baby carriages at so many NeZ York parks: no provision for baby carriages
had been necessary at the entrances to the Long Island parks because people
got to them by automobiles. If there Zas a difference that should have been
obvious to 0oses—that the parks he Zas building noZ Zould be used by
mothers Zho Zalked to them instead of drove—0oses Zas simply too busy
to see it.

647
At Embury's draZings, 0oses at least had time to glance. For more and
more small park projects, even a glance could not be spared. 0oses found
himself forced to delegate all authority for them to subordinates. Authority
is delegatable; genius is not. Some of the men to Zhom the Zork Zas
delegated Zere first-rank architects or engineers—many of them, in fact, for
the Depression had driven into the Arsenal many brilliant young
professionals Zho in ordinary times Zould have been making names for
themselves in private commissions. But they Zere not Robert 0oses. The
further 0oses' presence receded from individual small park projects, the
less dis-

tinguished these projects emerged. In designing the Central 3ark Zoo, the
Seventy-ninth Street boat basin, Jacob Riis 3ark, Orchard Beach, the ten big
neighborhood sZimming pools, problems Zere solved Zith ingenuity and
thoughtfulness. 3erhaps if he had been able to take the same interest in all
park problems—the problems involved, say, in the location and design of a
neighborhood playground— all park problems Zould have been solved Zith
ingenuity and thoughtfulness. But 0oses Zas not taking the same interest in
all park problems—and, in fact, as the number of park projects multiplied,
spread by the hundreds across the face of the great city, he Zas able to take
a substantial interest in only a very small percentage of them— in, for
e[ample, only a handful of the hundreds of neighborhood playgrounds. The
inevitable result Zas made more striking by the need for haste— building
hundreds of playgrounds as fast as possible is easier if a single basic design
is used—and by the need for design approval by the :3A, an Army-
engineer-staffed agency in Zhich simple designs and cheap materials, rather
than architectural e[cellence, Zere the order of the day. (0oses had to fight
for every amenity, no matter hoZ small; every improvement on the basic
blocky comfort station design represented a victory, hard-Zon; because
tZo-story structures required more e[pensive structural steel than one-story,
0oses had to plead Zith the :3A   for Zeeks for  approval of Aymar
Embury's masterful classic, colonnaded interpretation of his insistence that
the Orchard Beach bathhouse blend in Zith the hilly, Zooded landscape
behind it. And Zhen the structure Zas almost finished, at a cost of a million
dollars, the :3A   flatly refused to spend $2,500 more for tZo clocks that
Embury had envisioned as grace notes on its toZers; 0oses obtained that
money only by begging La Guardia for it. There Zas to be no Barbi]on

648
brick and Ohio sandstone in NeZ York City parks; concrete— plain,
unadorned concrete—and brick—plain, red brick, the cheapest made —
Zere Zhat the :3A   had in mind; 0oses  Zas able to relieve the blankness
of the concrete Orchard Beach bathhouse only by finding a mysterious
source of terra cotta tiles, Zhich, Zhile cheap, at least added some
necessary color, a chaste blue, to the unrelieved grayness. :hile 0oses Zas
Zilling  to fight—endlessly and ingeniously—to make his big projects as
perfect as possible, it Zas obviously unfeasible to battle over the details of
every playground Zhen one Zas building hundreds, especially since arguing
about every design Zould have cost him his great advantage over other city
departments Zith the :3A:   the fact that Zhen neZ funds became available,
his plans Zere "ready to go.")

A standard 3ark Department playground design Zas evolved and architects
Zere given little leeZay to deviate from it. If  there Zas to be an indoor
playhouse in the playground, there Zas a standard design for that, too, and
if the architect Zanted to make variations in it they had better be small ones.

These designs Zere banal, containing for the most part nothing but benches
for mothers and standard "active play" equipment—sZings, seesaZs, jungle
gyms, Zading pools, slides—for children. The equipment Zas surrounded
by fences that only a mother could love: either dreary chain-link

or high, black bars that made the playgrounds look like animal cages. And
they Zere set in a surface that even a mother had to hate—a surface cheap
to lay doZn and easy to maintain (that Zas Zhy 0oses' engineers had
selected it) but hard on the knees and elboZs of little boys and girls Zho fell
on it. Comfort stations, squat and unadorned, looked like nothing so much
as concrete or brick pillbo[es. A neighborhood committee might request
some particularly desired facility—a bocci court, for e[ample, for an Italian
neighborhood—but feZ substitv tions Zere permitted.

Then there Zas the difference in usage accorded parks in the city, a
difference complicated by vandalism. Designing for hard usage Zas not
alZays compatible Zith designing for beauty—as Zas demonstrated by the
evolution of the marginal playgrounds in Central 3ark. At first, the
playgrounds Zere equipped, in addition to the sZings, slides and jungle
gyms, Zith sandbo[es, tunnel segments that children loved to craZl

649
through, and Zith striped, turreted little toy guardhouses that served as
"play booths"— and their peripheries Zere only a ring of benches backed
by trees and shrubs that provided shade for mothers and that screened the
noise of playing children from the apartment houses across the street. Dogs
Zandered into the playgrounds and urinated and defecated in the sandbo[es
and the sandbo[es had to be removed. Drunks crept into the tunnel
segments at night and fell asleep, to be discovered by children the ne[t
morning sleeping in their oZn vomit. The tunnel segments had to be
removed. Drunks Zandered into the striped guardhouse "play booths"
during the day and urinated in them. 3erverts used them as hiding places
from Zhich they could Zatch the playing little  girls and boys at close range
and masturbate. Vandals pried loose the light lumber out of Zhich the play
booths Zere constructed. The play booths had to be removed. Then the
drunks slept and the perverts hid in the trees and shrubbery behind the
benches, so this landscaping had to be removed. Still drunks kept
Zandering into the playgrounds at night; 0oses tried to keep them out first
by putting up bars betZeen the bench groupings, and little gates at the
playground entrance as a Zarning to stay out, but the drunks ignored the
Zarning—and finally  0oses felt he had no choice but to surround the
playgrounds, noZ reduced to amenity-bare patches of asphalt, Zith high
fences Zhose high gates could be locked at night; critics might rage that the
playgrounds noZ resembled animal cages; 0oses saZ that resemblance
himself; he just felt that there Zas nothing he could do about it.

Young architects like Robert :einberg argued among themselves—their
3ark Department superiors Zouldn't listen to them—that solutions to the
difficulties inherent in intensive usage could be compatible Zith good
design. All that Zas needed, they felt, Zas imagination, and an
understanding of the basic needs of the neighborhoods in Zhich the
playgrounds Zere located. Including a bocci court in a playground instead
of a roZ of sZings Zas not, after all, a task requiring immense creativity.
:einberg  Zas particularly  incensed at one design defect that reduced the
usefulness of many playgrounds and that could have been cured very easily
indeed. Some playgrounds Zere situated atop hills and their entrances Zere
set Zith flights of steps despite the fact that the most frequent users of these
parks Zere mothers Zith

650
baby carriages, Zhich Zere difficult to maneuver up steps, and entrance to
these playgrounds could have been made easier for them by simply making
the entrances ramps instead of steps.

But 0oses no longer had much time for detail.

+is imagination Zas as vigorous as ever; the big projects in Zhich he took a
personal interest Zere innovative, ingenious, daring and bold, to a
considerable e[tent as carefully thought out in both over-all conception and
minute details as his Long Island parks; smaller projects Zhich happened to
fall under his ga]e, Carl Schur] 3ark on the East River at Eighty-si[th
Street, Zhich he passed on his evening Zalks from his Gracie Terrace
apartment, Zere just as carefully thought out; there are throughout the NeZ
York City park system small touches of beauty—comfort stations, for
e[ample, that are proof that even a bathroom can bring beauty to a
cityscape— but inquiry reveals that most of these structures are the rare
ones in Zhich, for one reason or another, 0oses took a personal interest.

In building his state parks, 0oses had been uninterested in building for the
"loZer classes." +e Zas still uninterested—although noZ he Zas building
parks in the city, Zhere those classes lived.

0oses had begun his park commissionership by enthusiastically gobbling
up vacant city-oZned lots in the slums Zith the intention of turning them
into tiny parks. But this enthusiasm soon Zaned.

The effort involved in creating such "vest-pocket" parks Zas immense. The
land acquisition alone involved the approval of countless agencies and
officials and, therefore, endless red tape. Designing something that Zould
make a tiny lot attractive or useful Zas difficult. Because you couldn't
afford to keep a full-time supervisor on duty in every vest-pocket park,
those small parks located in slums quickly became filled Zith rubbish and
Zinos.

The reZards involved in creating vest-pocket parks Zere, moreover, not at
all commensurate Zith the effort required. If the reZard Zas a sense of
achievement, Zhat—to the creator of Jones Beach—Zas the achievement in
creating a tiny bit of green space or a feZ benches or a seesaZ or tZo?

651
0oses had alZays thought on the grand scale—that Zas his genius: the
ability to grasp the needs of a Zhole city or state and devise a means of
satisfying them—and this quality of mind made it difficult for him  to take
much interest in something small. There Zas something inherently good in
si]e itself, he seemed to feel. If the reZard Zas public applause, the si]e of
the reZard for building a vest-pocket park Zas small indeed; editorial
Zriters didn't get nearly as e[cited about a tiny park as they did about a
Randall's Island or Orchard Beach; it Zas the great projects that aZed them:
si]e seemed to signify significance to them, too. :hatever the reasons,
"R0,"  an aide Zould say, "just Zasn't interested in anything small. +e used
to say, 'That's a little job. Give it to so-and-so.' And that attitude filtered
doZn, so that the felloZs Zeren't interested in small things either." Coupled
Zith his feelings about the people for Zhom the effort Zould have to be
made—the loZer classes Zho didn't "respect" or "appreciate" Zhat Zas
done for them, in

particular the Negroes Zho Zere "dirty" and Zouldn't keep his beautiful
creations clean—his lack of interest in "anything small" made him
uninterested in small parks in slums.

:ithin   a year, the vest-pocket park program Zas all but dead and he Zas
determined that it Zouldn't be revived; he flatly refused a 1936 offer of
small, abandoned Transportation Board plots, calling them "of no use to this
Department . . . because they are all too small." The program never really
got off the ground e[cept in tZo areas—the Irish-Catholic slums of the
LoZer East Side in Zhich Al Smith, and hence 0oses, still took an interest,
and La Guardia's old "Little League of Nations" East +arlem congressional
district. In other slum areas there Zas almost no park development at all
after 1935, and the lack Zas particularly marked in Negro +arlem and in
the South Jamaica and Stuyvesant +eights tenement districts in 4ueens and
Brooklyn into Zhich  a steadily mounting overfloZ from +arlem  had begun
to creep.

The protests about this policy from the slums themselves Zere faint and
feZ: slum dZellers—particularly  slum dZellers Zith  black skins— Zeren't
making many protests in the 1930's. But some reformers raised their voices
on their behalf.

652
These reformers Zere in the main those associated Zith settlement houses;
Stanley Isaacs, president of 8nited Neighborhood +ouses, Zas notable
among them. :orking  in the slums, they kneZ the needs of their people,
and, knoZing, they kneZ that those people, forced to depend for beauty and
recreation on Zhat they could find in their neighborhoods, Zere particularly
desperate for precisely those things that parks provided. Trees, a small plot
of grass, a feZ floZers, anything that Zould provide a contrast to the
concrete and red brick that surrounded the slums' people Zith bleakness,
that trapped them in stone—these people hungered for them; one had to do
no more than Zalk along a block of tenements and look up and suddenly
notice that fire escapes and ZindoZ sills Zere sprouting rusty cans filled
Zith vines and floZers to reali]e that, as one observer Zas to put it, "The
poor have every bit as much interest in green groZing things as the Zell-to-
do, . . . [in] open space or natural beauty." 0others and fathers in the slums
hungered for play space for their children. They couldn't afford to send the
children to summer camps; they couldn't afford to take them on Zeekend or
vacation trips: because they didn't have cars, they couldn't take them to the
parks Robert 0oses had built on Long Island; because they seldom left the
slums, they Zere only vaguely aZare that there Zere large parks in other
sections of the city Zhich the children could reach by subZay; children Zho
Zent to these parks often returned to say that the Zhite people there had
made them feel unZelcome or that gangs of Zhite teen-agers had chased
them aZay—and they did not go again. Any playing that the children of the
slums did Zould have to be done in the slums; kids have to play: that is
Zhat being a kid is—and if there Zere no parks in the slums for them to
play in, they Zould have to play in the streets; if there Zere no jungle gyms,
they Zould have to sZing on rusty fire escapes; if there Zere no indoor
playhouses in Zhich they could play on rainy days, they Zould have to find

shelter someZhere else, and that meant deserted or burnt-out tenements, the
lair of the Zinos and the junkies and the perverts.

And parks meant more in the slums than even beauty or play space; they
had other values more intangible but also more important.

They Zere a sign to the urban poor, the reformers said, that society cared
for them, that the city in Zhich they had been trampled so brutally loZ Zas

653
holding out a hand to help them to their feet. In a Zay they Zere a symbol
of Zhat Alfred  E. Smith, Zho had understood the urban poor because he
Zas one of them, had been talking about Zhen, fighting for ZidoZs'
pensions, he had stood in the Zell of the Assembly Chamber, a trumpet in
his voice, and asked the legislators to consider the penniless ZidoZ Zhose
children Zere taken aZay from her—":hat   must be her feelings? :hat
must be her idea of the State's policy? . . . :hat can be the feelings in the
hearts of the children themselves . . . Zhen they must in after years learn to
knoZ Zhat the State's policy Zas Zith respect to their unfortunate
condition? . . . :hat  neZ  policy does this bill inaugurate? The State of NeZ
York reaches out to them, ':e recogni]e in you a resource of the State and
Ze propose to take care of you, not as a matter of charity, but as a
government and public duty.' " If the city didn't provide parks, the reformers
understood, that Zas a sign that society didn't care; the people Zho lived in
the slums might not verbali]e that concept, but they Zould feel it even if
they didn't put it into Zords; and therefore the lack of parks could only
increase their bitterness toZard society.

This last intangible Zas even more important in terms of the Negroes,
Zhose influ[  into NeZ York  Zas beginning to assume the proportions of the
previous JeZish, Irish and Italian Zaves of immigration. (There had been
only 60,000 Negroes in the city in 1900, but there Zere 327,706 in 1930—
and by 1940 there Zould be 458,000.) The society from Zhich the Negro
Zas alienated Zas the one that kept the black man confined so loZ on the
economic ladder that in 1939 half of all Negro Zage earners in NeZ York
Zere receiving less than $850 per year. It Zas the society that forced black
Zomen to line up every morning in the "slave market" in the East 160's in
the Bron[ so that Zhite houseZives could bid for their services (the pay Zas
betZeen ten and fifteen cents an hour, Zith the cost of lunch deducted). It
Zas the society that made sure that Negroes Zould have to Zork for such
slave Zages by closing to them its trade unions, thus adding to their
handicap in competing Zith Zhite men for better jobs, and by denying them
the capital necessary to go into business for themselves (there Zas not a
single bank in +arlem north of 125th Street). And as for that embodiment
of society that Zas government, the city government that Zas supposed to
represent them as Zell as the Zhite man, the attitude of that government
Zas symboli]ed by public Zorks.  :hen   La Guardia came to office in 1934,

654
there hadn't been a neZ school built in +arlem in tZenty-five years (La
Guardia's administration didn't get around to building one for four more
years), and in all +arlem the city provided, to serve 300,000 people, e[actly
one clinic, built—Zith  :3A    funds—in 1937, equipped Zith substantial
facilities for child care, and e[actly one hospital (on Zhose e[ecutive staff
there Zas

e[actly one Negro). 0others and their babies died in +arlem at a rate more
than double that in the city as a Zhole; more than one out of every ten
babies born in +arlem died at birth.

Isaacs and other reformers saZ that the sZelling Negro population Zas not
being assimilated into the city. Such assimilation Zas necessary, they said;
if the influ[  continued and there Zas no base—no solid community that Zas
part of the larger society around it—on Zhich it could build, Zhat Zould
happen? 'The question of Zhat Zill happen to the Negro in NeZ York . . . is
overlaid Zith shadoZs of tragic premonition," one Zrote. Isaacs and others
begged the city to make an intensified effort to meet the needs of these neZ
immigrants. These people needed help, they said, and the city must give it
to them. It Zas a civic duty to do so, they said. It Zas a matter of
conscience. And if you Zeren't interested in duty or conscience, Zell, it Zas
a matter of e[pediency, too. For neglecting +arlem's needs in the future as
they had been neglected in the past could only lead to havoc in the city.

.noZing   hoZ important small parks Zere to the city's poor, the reformers
could hardly believe the implications of 0oses' policies Zhen they began to
discern them. By banning public transportation, he had barred the poor from
the state parks. In the same Zay, he Zas barring the poor from the best of
the city parks, the big parks on the city's outskirts such as Jacob Riis and
Alley 3ond. And noZ  he Zas saying that he Zould not provide the poor
even Zith small parks. +e Zas pouring tens of millions of dollars into
creating neZ parks in NeZ York—but he Zas creating almost none for the
people Zho needed parks most. The philosophy that parks Zere only for the
"comfortable middle class" had been outdated for at least ten years. But,
they began to see, that Zas the philosophy 0oses Zas folloZing.

The reformers Zere still influential in the city (although they Zere
becoming less so as La Guardia gathered poZer unto himself), and, unlike

655
other 0oses opponents, they received a hearing for their vieZs from the
city's press; Good Government organi]ation resolutions calling for small
parks in the slums Zere at least printed, even if primarily on inside pages.

But 0oses simply shouted the reformers doZn. +e replied—in replies that
received better neZspaper "play" than the statements he Zas replying to —
that he Zas giving the slums parks—great parks. :hat, he demanded, Zas
the great recreational comple[ he Zas building on Randall's Island? The
great recreational comple[ he Zas building in Riverside 3ark? They Zere
"easily accessible" to +arlem. As for small parks Zithin the slums
themselves, his "e[perience," he said, had taught him that they Zere just
"too e[pensive" to be considered. Three acres, he said, Zas the smallest
area that could be "controlled and managed" as a park. And since three
acres is 130,680 square feet and land bearing profitable slum tenements Zas
going in the 1930's for about $30 per square foot and a single park Zould
thus cost the city about $4,000,000 for land acquisition costs alone, and
since as many as 2,500 people might be displaced by the ra]ing of the
tenements involved and Zould have to be relocated, this Zas an
unansZerable argument—if you accepted it.

0any  reformers—far more than had ever disagreed Zith 0oses before —
did not accept it. A park did not have to be three acres to help a slum, they
said. It could be the smallest crevice in the grim Zall of tenements; even a
space the si]e of a single ioo-foot-by-20-foot building lot—or smaller—
could if planted Zith grass and a feZ trees or if equipped Zith a feZ
benches mean so much to the people of the block on Zhich it Zas located.
Something doesn't have to be big to brighten something that is drab, to
bring pride to a place Zithout any pride. Because they have nothing else to
do, the people of the slums spend a lot of time looking out their ZindoZs; if
there Zas a small park, even a tiny park, in the neighborhood, there Zould
be a pleasant little scene to look at, something affirmative; even if there Zas
no grass in the park there could be a feZ benches—and all at once the
neighborhood Zould have a better place to rest than the fenders of parked
cars; a vest-pocket park could be an elegant little pla]a, but it could also be
just a place for a kid to play or the elderly to rela[—or for a pregnant
mother to sit doZn for a minute on a Zalk home from the grocery store that
suddenly seemed longer than it ever had before. The reformers, e[perts in

656
parks, kneZ there Zere good small parks in other cities; they kneZ that
0oses' argument Zas Zrong.

Furthermore, these reformers said, Randall's Island and Riverside 3ark Zere
not "easily accessible" to the slums. The Triborough Bridge Zould make the
island accessible by car, but the people of the slums didn't have cars. There
Zould, by 0oses'  edict, be no bus service to the island; the only Zay to get
there Zould be to Zalk—from the nearest point in +arlem or the South
Bron[ a good three-quarters of a mile.* And that Zas from the nearest point
of the slums, the edge on the river. From most of the slums, you Zould have
to Zalk much farther; from the center of +arlem, then 145th Street, say,
more than tZo miles. Riverside 3ark along the +udson River Zas a hike up
a long, achingly steep hill from the nearest point in +arlem. 3eople didn't
Zant to hike long distances to parks; they Zanted recreational facilities
close at hand, so that every trip to sit under a tree or shoot some baskets
didn't have to be an e[pedition. The people of the slums Zouldn't use these
parks, they said. 0orningside, St. Nicholas and Colonial parks, the three
parks Zhich formed the Zestern border of +arlem, Zere fine, they said, but
there Zas no other park betZeen them and the East River. In the entire three
square miles of +arlem, an area Zhich contained 300,000 people, there
Zasn't a single patch of green, f

But Zhile neZspapers printed the reformers' resolutions, they did not
support them editorially. And the reform front on the issue Zas not solid.
The prestigious 3ark Association of NeZ York City Zas dominated by
elderly park fighters Zho clung to the old vieZ of parks; its insistence that

* Distance figured from the point in +arlem at Zhich a pedestrian Zould
mount the Triborough Bridge pedestrian Zalk to the nearest park facility on
Randall's Island. The :ard's Island 3edestrian Footbridge Zould not be
built for another tZenty years. t0ount  0orris  3ark, betZeen 120th and
124th streets, Zould become part of the Negro slums of +arlem later—
Zhen the slums e[panded south. In the mid-1930's, their southern border
Zas still 125th Street.

Central 3ark be kept for passive contemplation Zas the proof of the Zay it
really felt. And Zhile  its president, 0rs. Sul]berger, Zas more liberal on the

657
point than many of her colleagues, 0rs..Sul]berger Zas not critici]ing
Robert 0oses.

And 0oses Zas not listening to criticism, anyZay. :hen   an alderman from
+arlem Zrote to 0oses  appealing for more playgrounds, 0oses replied that
he Zas, of course, "in entire sympathy Zith Zhat you have in mind" but that
"the sites you suggest are too e[pensive. :e shall provide one playground
in +arlem. ..." :hen   the alderman ventured to Zrite him again on the
subject, 0oses declined to continue the correspondence.

In 1930, 0oses, as head of the 0etropolitan 3ark Conference, had led the
fight to persuade the city to preserve parts of its fast-disappearing Zoodland
in 4ueens and Staten Island by purchasing huge tracts for park land.
Reformers had cheered him for that accomplishment; it had preserved open
space—beautiful, Zooded open space—for the city forever. But noZ 0oses
Zas filling  that space Zith baseball diamonds and football fields and tennis
courts—and the land for them could be cleared only by cutting doZn trees.
And 0oses Zas filling  other parks Zith playgrounds and stadia and parking
fields and handball courts. Throughout the city's park system, the reformers
suddenly reali]ed, grass Zas giving Zay to concrete.

The reformers kneZ that grass had to be supplanted by recreational
facilities and parking lots in many of the city's parks. But not, they Zere
sure, in all the city's parks.

But 0oses' plans for parks did not include keeping them— any of them —
in their natural state. +is plans Zere not limited to repairing the ravages
made in them by Tammany park commissioners so as to restore them to
their natural state. +is plans Zere to cram them—cram all of them—Zith
bathhouses and tennis houses, baseball diamonds and tennis courts,
restaurants and bicycle paths, ]oos and asphalted playgrounds Zith ugly
black iron fences around them, as Zell as Zith that essence of the city,
concrete—the concrete of access roads, through roads and parking lots—
concrete instead of precious grass.

It took a Zhile for the reformers to reali]e Zhat 0oses  Zas doing— first,
because he kept his plans so secret that it Zas difficult for them to discern
the over-all pattern beneath them until they had begun unfolding; second,

658
because they had been so thoroughly convinced that he Zas a fighter for
parks that they did not easily accept the reali]ation that his definition of
parks Zas much narroZer than theirs, and perhaps not at all compatible Zith
it, that Zhere they saZ in a toZering stand of oak and elms and Zhite pine a
priceless bounty to a beauty-starved city, 0oses saZ a baseball diamond.
0any  of them, in fact, never came during the 1930's to reali]e this because
they never took the time to study his over-all park plans and Zhile they
Zere distressed by Zhat he Zas doing to a particular park in Zhich they
Zere interested, they accepted his assurances that he Zas preserving nature
in the rest of the park system.

But some of the reformers did come to reali]e the implications of 0oses'
park philosophy rather quickly, and Zere an[ious to discuss it Zith him.
They Zere an[ious that room be found in the park system—Zhich, after all,
Zas a huge one and included thousands of acres of still undeveloped Zoods
and fields and streams—for their values as Zell as his. They Zere sure that
in a discussion they Zould have no difficulty e[plaining to him—  for, they
all agreed, he Zas brilliant; the most brilliant public servant, many of them
said, that they had ever met—the crucial difference, Zhich apparently he
had not yet grasped, betZeen the implications of his philosophy Zhen
applied to Long Island parks and parks Zithin the city. On no point, in fact,
Zere they more an[ious for discussion. For the destruction of the natural
values of a park Zas not a remediable mistake; it Zas one that could never
be rectified. Destroy the delicate natural balance of a marshland to make a
concrete-lined lagoon and it did not lie Zith the poZer of man to restore
that balance. Before any changes Zere made in the parks, therefore, there
must be sufficient discussion to insure that the changes made Zere the right
ones.

But 0oses no longer had to discuss. +e had long had great dreams for the
city, and noZ he had learned hoZ to make dreams come true. +e had
learned the technique of stake driving and of ZhipsaZing. +e had learned
hoZ to mislead and conceal and deceive, hoZ to lie to men and bully them,
hoZ to ruin their reputations. And he used all these methods to bring the
dream to reality.

Or Zas it all for the dream?

659
+e seemed to be going out of his Zay to antagoni]e people. +e could have
simply ignored :illiam    E[ton and Robert :einberg  Zhen  they began
proposing changes in his :est Side Improvement plan; the tZo young
reformers had no chance of making him even consider the changes. But he
agreed to the intervieZ Zith E[ton—and E[ton  recalls that Zhen he arrived
at 0oses' office, "he said, ':ell,   as [city] 3ark Commissioner, maybe I can
see you have a case, but the state park commission says so and so and the
Authority says so and so.' :ell,  he Zas the state park commission, and he
Zas the Authority, and I kneZ it, and he kneZ I kneZ it. It  Zasn't
particularly subtle. It Zas just thumbing his nose at you"—and, E[ton says,
he had the feeling that 0oses had given him the intervieZ just so he could
have the pleasure of thumbing it.

Once he apparently Zent all the Zay to the Rock aZay s just to antagoni]e a
local civic association Zhich had invited him to speak because they Zere
concerned about the effect his proposed 0arine 3arkZay Bridge might have
on Floyd Bennett Field, the airport that Zas the RockaZays' pride. +e could
have declined the invitation—he seldom spoke before civic groups— but he
accepted and made the long trip across Jamaica Bay, mounted the stage and
informed the audience, "That airport of yours isn't so hot. It never should
have been built in the first place." And then, as the Times reported, "he
smacked his hand doZn [and] glanced up at the ceiling" to indicate that he
Zas through discussing the topic. If 0oses had any motive for the trip— to
enlighten the audience, educate them, persuade them, convince them,
conciliate them, listen to them or ansZer their questions—other than his
enjoyment at insulting them, and shoZing them that he could thumb his
nose in their faces and there Zas nothing they could do about it, that motive
eluded the audience.

3oZer is being able to ruin people, to ruin their careers and their reputations
and their personal relationships. 0oses had this poZer, and he seemed to
use it even Zhen there Zas no need to, going out of his Zay to use it, so that
it is difficult  to escape the conclusion that he enjoyed using it.

+e may have felt it Zas necessary to turn the poZer of his vituperation on
men Zhom he felt posed a threat to his dreams, but he turned it also on
individuals Zho posed no such threat.

660
3earl Bernstein, for e[ample, Zas a young Barnard College graduate Zhom
La Guardia, for some ine[plicable reason, had had appointed secretary to
the Board of Estimate. "She Zas a naive girl and the job Zas utterly beyond
her," .ern  recalls; it Zas common knoZledge that she made no decisions on
her oZn but simply carried out La Guardia's orders, relayed through .ern.

0oses must have knoZn this, but Zhen, in 1934, La Guardia, infuriated by
the 3ark Commissioner's cooperation Zith Democratic members of the
Board, issued an order that no matter Zas to be placed on its calendar at the
instance of any commissioner until he had personally approved it, and 0iss
Bernstein, Zho Zas in charge of the calendar, therefore refused to place on
it some of 0oses' unapproved requests, 0oses attacked her, Zriting .ern a
letter—Zith copies sent simultaneously to 0iss Bernstein's

associates and to officials throughout City +all—attacking her
"amateurishness, delay and pettiness" and "complete absence of Zillingness
to cooperate Zith people Zho are trying to get something accomplished."

.ern,  Zho Zas at this point still  a "0oses fanatic," Zas startled because he
kneZ that the 0ayor, not 0iss  Bernstein, Zas the source of the order; .ern
had, in fact, heard 0oses arguing Zith La Guardia about it. Just in case the
3ark Commissioner had forgotten, .ern reminded him of this fact—but to
his surprise the attacks continued, escalating in viciousness; one, also
circulated throughout City +all, referred to the order as "one of 3earl
Bernstein's neZ Zrinkles" and added, "If it Zere merely a question of
casting sZine before 3earl, I should be glad to have a standing order at any
slaughter house—but these are really important construction matters Zith
Zhich she is interfering." .ern  began to reali]e—reluctantly—that his idol,
angry at the order and unZilling to argue further Zith its originator, had
decided to vent his spleen on 0iss Bernstein instead—apparently for no
other reason than that she Zas handy and too small to fight back. 0oses'
attacks, .ern Zas to conclude, Zere "an e[ample of his irresponsible
brutality, a Zantonness almost, a sadistic joy in hurting other people," as
Zell as of his "Zillingness  to beat little people" on occasions Zhen he Zas
reluctant to "go to the mat Zith big people" like the 0ayor.

The number of defenseless minor officials on Zhom 0oses unleashed his
vituperation Zas legion. The officials least able to fight back Zere those on

661
his oZn staff, and to those he Zas, if possible, even more viciously abusive.
Once, Zhen one of his aides, at a luncheon meeting attended by a do]en
men, ventured to offer a suggestion Zhich he hadn't cleared Zith 0oses
first, 0oses Zhirled  on him and said, "NoZ, you're just a sZabbie on this
ship—do you understand?" And Zhile the others present squirmed in
embarrassment for the man being humiliated, 0oses repeated to him, "Do
you understand?" "Do you understand?"—refusing to be satisfied Zith a
nod, making the aide say out loud, "Yes, sir."

And the bullying Zas not just verbal. City +all  Zas Zhispering about
0oses' physical encounters Zith other men.

The tZo-hundred-pound 3ark Commissioner had had at least tZo such
encounters during his governmental career prior to entering the city
administration, and, as in the case of scraZny little "Slat" Johnson, the
roommate he knocked doZn at Yale, neither of them Zas his physical equal.
Raymond Torrey, Zhom he tried to strangle at a State Council of 3arks
meeting and at Zhom he then hurled a heavy smoking stand, Zas a pudgy
little bird Zatcher. 0oses had also staged a fist fight Zith :3A
administrator +ugh Johnson in Bernard Baruch's apartment, and Johnson, at
the time, Zas fifty-tZo—eight  years older than 0oses—and e[ceedingly
drunk. NoZ 0oses  had additional physical encounters—and the pattern
continued.

"This Zas at the opening of a section of the :est Side +ighZay,"  Joseph
Ingraham of the Times recalls. "It Zas raining and Ze had to go into some
kind of tent. Some little old character—just a minor functionary in
government—Zas there and 0oses said to me, ':ait'll  you see Zhat I do to
this guy.' +e Zent over and grabbed him and almost literally picked

him up by the scruff of the neck and shook him. It Zas very embarrassing. I
said, ':hat  did he do?' +e said, '+e hasn't done anything yet, but I just
Zanted to head him off.' " Other City +all observers recall other 0oses fist
fights but not one Zith a man to Zhom he had a chance of losing.

Once, in an e[ecutive session of the Board of Estimate, 0oses presented
the Board Zith a proposal for a project Zhose cost, he promised, Zould be
borne almost entirely by the federal government and Zould cost the city

662
practically nothing. +e presented the Board Zith a set of e[tremely detailed
"facts" to "prove" his point.

0ost  of the members of the Board Zere thinking the same thing, one of
them recalls, but only Stanley Isaacs had the courage to give the thoughts
voice. +e said mildly:

":hen   0r.  0oses  says something Zill cost 3.4 percent, he adds the .4 only
to make you think it's accurate. It's really 6.2 percent." 0oses' response Zas
to take a violent sZing Zith his fist in Isaacs' direction and say, "I'd like to
punch you in the nose!"

"+e Zasn't close enough to hit him Zith a baseball bat," says Isaacs'
borough Zorks commissioner, :alter  D. Binger. "It Zas just a motion of
passion. But 0oses Zas tall and athletic" and the mild-mannered Isaacs Zas
fifty-seven years old. "Everyone in the room Zas shocked," Binger says.

+e Zasn't satisfied merely to defeat people Zho opposed his Zishes. +e had
to try to destroy them, too. +e Zasn't content Zith ignoring E[ton and
:einberg  and he Zasn't content Zith thumbing his nose at them, either; he
had to attempt to damage their reputations beyond repair by charging—
falsely—that the tZo young reformers Zanted the location of the +enry
+udson Bridge changed because a change Zould increase the value of
:einberg's  property. For years he had been stung by the caustic voice of the
"Old Judge," James B. Cooper, Zhose Babylon Leader continued to remind
the residents of 0oses' summer hometoZn that 0oses had broken his
promise never to charge tolls on the :antagh CauseZay—and Zho in the
1930's Zas leading the opposition to 0oses' proposal to build a highZay on
Fire Island, although, Zith scrupulous fairness, he alZays alloZed plenty of
room in the Leader for 0oses' replies. NoZ 0oses did everything he could
to silence that voice.

":e   had alZays carried 'legals' [the advertising—of contracts and neZ
ordinances, for e[ample—that governmental bodies are required by laZ to
do in neZspapers, and that is often the difference betZeen profit and loss
for small-toZn Zeeklies]  from the state," recalls Cooper's son. "And then
they just suddenly disappeared from the paper—he had some and then he
had none. They never said anything directly—they'd be far too subtle for

663
that"; the Leader Zas simply no longer included on the list of Suffolk
County publications Zhich shared in the legal advertising connected Zith
state projects Zhich Zere located in Suffolk and had to be advertised in that
county. Says Cooper's son: "I greZ up in a house Zhere Ze kneZ that Ze
Zeren't going to get any printing from the state because of the Zay my
father fought editorially for Zhat he believed in." There Zere hints from
Long Island State 3ark Commission e[ecutives that Cooper could get the
legals back—and lucrative state

664
printing contracts besides. "The inference Zas 'Behave yourself and you'll
be taken care of,' " the son says. "But that sort of thing never appealed to
my father. +e had on his masthead 'I +ave Never .noZn a 0aster and I've
Never :orn   a 0u]]le'   and he Zould rather be broke than lose his soul."
Soon he Zas broke—the legals had been very important in the touch-and-go
financing of the little neZspaper (its circulation never reached 4,000 during
Judge Cooper's thirty years as publisher), and the paper almost died before
he did on 0ay 30, 1940. But "Zhat mattered more than the money involved
in the legals," his ZidoZ says, "Zas the principle of the thing. +is feelings
Zere hurt that anyone Zould do such a thing."

A streak of maliciousness and spitefulness seemed to run through 0oses'
character, and he gave that full play, too.

The sole oasis in muddy and barren Riverside 3ark Zas the Columbia Yacht
Club, Zhich since 1888 had been occupying an acre at the foot of Eighty-
si[th Street, paying only a nominal rental of $300 per year because it had
created most of the acre itself by barging in landfill, had spent $50,000
building its oZn marina and three-story clubhouse, and because it
maintained those buildings, and surrounding laZns, hedges and floZer beds
it had planted, at its oZn e[pense. The club's si[ hundred members had
succeeded in making themselves semi-official city hosts to visiting royalty
(the club's proudest boast Zas that the 3rince of :ales had made it his
headquarters on not one but tZo visits aboard the RenoZn) and club
members seemed to regard themselves as the city's link Zith maritime
glory; naval officers of all nations Zere alZays Zelcome and the club Zas
"official  host" for the squadrons of the 8.S. Navy Zhich anchored off
0anhattan each summer.

In 0arch  1934, three months after he had been sZorn in as City 3ark
Commissioner, 0oses announced that the Columbia Yacht Club Zas in the
Zay of his :est   Side Improvement and Zould be torn doZn.

Shocked as the members Zere, they didn't try to fight the eviction; they
understood that the park belonged to the city. Their only request Zas that
they be alloZed to remain in the clubhouse through September, so they

665
could fulfill  their pledge to entertain the 8.S. Navy's 3acific Fleet, Zhich
Zas arriving in July for the summer.

At first, 0oses  agreed to this request Zithout reservation; he certainly had
no reason not to, for there Zas no prospect that Zork on the Improvement
Zould have progressed far enough by September so that the presence of a
single building in the si[ miles of park Zould  interfere Zith it;  in 0arch
1934, he Zasn't even sure Zhere the +enry +udson 3arkZay Zas going to
run, no plans had yet been draZn for any substantial part of it, and money
for the job Zas not yet in hand—or indeed in sight. But then 0oses saZ an
opportunity of obtaining a valuable addition to the Improvement for
nothing. +e evidently decided to turn the clubhouse into a public restaurant
on the Zaterfront, and he sent Ray 0cNulty back to the club officials Zith
the message that he Zould alloZ the club to remain through September only
if it then donated its clubhouse and marina to the 3ark Department. On
April

18, club commodore John A. +arriss telephoned 0oses to tell him that the
board Zas agreeable and Zanted only enough time to submit the proposition
to the entire membership, Zhich he e[pected Zould also approve it.

8nfortunately, in talking to 0oses,  +arriss somehoZ—he Zas never to be
sure hoZ—managed to irritate him. The ne[t day the commodore received
a letter from the commissioner, a letter he later characteri]ed as "brutal,"
accusing the club of "stalling," ordering it to vacate its site by 0ay i, in
e[actly tZelve  days—and Zarning that "if your property is not removed by
that date, it Zill be treated as abandoned property" and confiscated.

Anticipating that the matter Zould become public knoZledge, 0oses Zent
to the press—and he did so Zith his usual blend of demagoguery and
deception: breaking the story himself to get his side of it before the public
first; oversimplifying  the basic issue to one of public vs. private interest;
identifying the "private interests" Zith the sinister forces of "influence" and
"privilege"; concealing any facts that might damage his oZn image. "The
Zhole question," he said, "is Zhether public interest is going to yield to
private," Zhether parks are going to be "for the people." The public needed
the land occupied by the yacht club and it needed it immediately so that a
great public improvement could be gotten under Zay, he said; he had

666
advanced the date of eviction because the :est Side Improvement Zas
progressing faster than he had thought it Zould, and any delay in evicting
the yacht club Zould sloZ the Improvement doZn. 0oreover, the use of the
public's property by the club Zas "a social racket," an "e[clusive privilege,"
successful in the past only because of "the influence of certain members."
The club had not the slightest legal right to be on the property in the first
place; it has, he stated flatly, "no lease, no permit, no anything." +e did not
neglect to add a touch of class antagonism: "It is an interesting fact," he
said, "that the yacht club in their talk of entertaining yachtsmen and officers
say nothing about the entertainment of enlisted men." The tactics Zorked as
successfully as usual. The headline on the Times article reporting one of his
press releases Zas parks come first, moses declares, Zhile the +erald
Tribune headlined Columbia yacht club is "racket,"

0OSES RE3EATS.

The club applied to the State Supreme Court for a temporary injunction
restraining 0oses from ousting it so quickly. And in that more impartial
arena there emerged, as usual, some facts that 0oses had somehoZ
neglected to mention. The 3ark Commissioner had contended that the club
had "no lease, no permit, no anything" for the use of the park land. The
attorney for the club said that the club had had a permit since 1888, that the
permit had been reneZed by the 3ark Department annually each of the
forty-si[  years since, including 1934—and that 0oses kneZ it. And to
prove his contentions the attorney presented the court Zith a photostat of a
check for $ 150 for the first half of the 1934 rent, made out to and deposited
and accepted by the 3ark Department.

0oses had also contended that the club had never done anything but occupy
the public's property. Obviously, the attorney pointed out, the club

had done far more. It had improved the public's property, building $50,000
Zorth of structures on it. And noZ it Zas probably Zilling   to give all those
improvements to the public in return for only five more months of
occupancy; the board of trustees Zas agreeable to such an arrangement, it
Zas asking only for enough time to poll the membership. 0oreover, even if
the schedule for the :est Side Improvement required the club to vacate in a
hurry, its members, some of Zhom Zere in Europe, should be given more

667
than tZelve days to remove their property from the clubhouse, or have it
confiscated as "abandoned." And the schedule did not require the club to
vacate in a hurry; it Zas quite obvious that the Improvement Zas barely
under Zay, and that even if money Zas made available, 0oses had more
than si[ miles of Riverside 3ark to Zork in  and did not have to start
immediately on the single acre that the club occupied.

Supreme Court Justice Aaron J. Levy found the attorney's statements
accurate, noting dryly in the opinion he handed doZn that "the
Commissioner Zas in error in asserting that the club Zas occupying the
premises Zithout a permit." And the judge Zent further. Even if 0oses'
motives Zere honorable, he said, he had alloZed himself to be carried
aZay:

I must observe that a burning ]eal for the public interest should not da]]le a
public official—no  matter hoZ Zell intentioned—so as to blind him to
individual amenities. Even Zhere the public authority is entirely correct in
his legal position, he should maintain it Zithout inflicting undue hardship or
injury. Tyranny, Zhether it consists of oppressive measures or brutal
severity, is never necessary.

And, the Justice said, he Zas not at all sure 0oses' motives Zere honorable.
+is e[amination  of the commissioner's plans for the :est Side
Improvement left no doubt that the club's land Zould not be needed that
summer at all:

The precipitate notice gives the appearance of having been prompted by the
Commissioner's pique at plaintiff's refusal to accept [his] terms. . . .

+e issued a temporary injunction restraining 0oses from ousting the club
until a trial on the matter could be held.

But 0oses Zas not to be restrained by a judge. Even as the club's attorney
had been applying for the temporary injunction, tZo huge steam shovels
Zere rumbling into Riverside 3ark and taking up positions north and south
of the clubhouse. As club members Zatched in ama]ement, they began
scooping out trenches all the Zay from the NeZ York Central Railroad
tracks in the middle of the park to the edge of the river. Their operators said

668
they Zere "testing the fill," but the yacht clubbers reali]ed Zith a shock that
once the trenches Zere completed, the dirt roads from north and south
Zould be cut, there Zould be no Zay for members' automobiles or delivery
trucks to reach the clubhouse and the only means of access by foot Zould
be along a narroZ footbridge across the railroad tracks. Shouting to make
himself heard above the thunderous chug-chug of the shovels, a club
official told a reporter he had called to the scene, "They Zill have us dug
out of here before the court can render its decision."

This occurred on a Friday. The ne[t day, Zith the clubhouse croZded Zith
men and Zomen preparing for some Zeekend yachting or sipping drinks in
the pleasantly shadoZy clubhouse bar,, the shadoZs suddenly greZ deeper.
The club's electricity had been turned off. +urriedly telephoning the NeZ
York Consolidated Edison Company to find out Zhat had happened, the
club superintendent Zas informed by an official there that "someone from
the club" had asked that the current be shut off. The superintendent said he
Zas sure there had been some mistake, and Zhen the Con Ed officials
checked, he found out that there had indeed. The man Zho had identified
himself as being from the club Zas actually from the 3ark Department.

As the club's electricity Zas being turned on, its Zater Zas almost being
turned off. Ten men drove up in a 3ark Department automobile and began
digging near the clubhouse. :hen the club superintendent demanded to
knoZ Zhat they Zere doing, they said they Zanted to "repair" a leak in the
Zater main. Only their inability  to locate the main kept the club liquid.

"Sheer spite Zork," the club secretary termed 0oses' actions, but reporters
Zho telephoned the commissioner found him unabashed. As the +erald
Tribune put it:

0r.  0oses said he kneZ nothing of this, but that it might easily be true. "I
instructed my men," he said, "to go ahead Zith the construction Zork for
the improvement of that part of the park and not to let anything get in the
Zay. It is perfectly possible they did this."

Some of the city's elected officials attempted to restrain him, the Board of
Aldermen passing a resolution demanding that 0oses rescind his eviction
order. One of the aldermen, Fusionist Lambert Fairchild, called the 3ark

669
Commissioner's methods "steam-shovel government." But 0oses Zas not
to be restrained by elected officials. The Board's action, he said, Zas "just
cheap politics. ... I don't take their actions seriously. I'm sure they didn't."
+e filled  the press Zith his side of the story—"The Zhole question is
Zhether private interest should yield to public interest"—and if the press
saZ that some other questions Zere involved, it didn't mention them. And
by the time the temporary injunction halted his steam shovels, they had
completed the trench to the north of the clubhouse, cutting off all access
from that direction, and had completed all of the trench to the south e[cept
for a narroZ gap described as "perilously close to the river"—and as a final
touch 0oses had stationed a guard at that gap to charge all vehicles using it
a quarter toll. Club members felt that their continued occupancy of a
clubhouse that seemed to be under siege Zas untenable and that they might
as Zell stop fighting. In a stipulation entered into before the trial for a
permanent injunction, they agreed to get out if 0oses Zould just give them
enough time to remove their property—until June 18. :hen the fleet
docked in July, they Zere not there to Zelcome it.

And neither Zas their clubhouse. 0oses had ra]ed it to the ground, as he
had the Central 3ark Casino, the physical structure on Zhich he had vented
his malevolence against Jimmy :alker. By destroying the Columbia

Yacht Club clubhouse, he deprived the city of a $50,000 structure Zhich
could have been turned into a Zaterfront restaurant Zith only the most
minor alterations—or, if he didn't Zant to leave it on the Zaterfront, could
have been moved to any other park in the city and used for any purpose he
chose.

And Zhile 0oses  had maintained that he had harried the club out of
e[istence so mercilessly because its e[istence conflicted Zith the public
interest, those close to the affair kneZ differently, kneZ that his actions
Zere, as the club secretary had said, "sheer spite Zork." Recalls Assistant
Corporation Counsel Chanler, Zho handled the case for 0oses and dreZ up
the final stipulation: "I spoke to 0oses about it. +e said they had to be
evicted at once. I said, ':hy?'

"+e said, 'Because they Zere rude to me.' "

670
If 0oses Zas indulging  his enjoyment at hurting people not in order to help
him Zith his aims but simply because he liked hurting, the indulgence
nonetheless helped him achieve his aims. As Judge Jacob Lutsky puts it, "If
you knoZ that every time you get in a guy's Zay, he's going to kick you in
the balls, you make pretty damn sure you don't get in his Zay—right?"
:ithin   a remarkably brief time after 0oses entered the city administration,
Zord had spread through City +all and the 0unicipal Building  that any
time someone got in 0oses' Zay, 0oses kicked him in the balls. So the men
Zho Zorked in those tZo buildings Zere in  general e[ceedingly careful not
to get in his Zay. They Zent to great lengths to do e[actly Zhat he Zanted
—Zhen he Zanted. The great spongy mass of the city's bureaucracy, a mass
of inertia and red tape and obfuscation and confusion, had absorbed and
smothered the energy and the dreams of a thousand commissioners—but
Commissioner Robert 0oses sliced through the bureaucracy as if it Zere
soft butter and he Zere a knife. And Zhen at public meetings of the Board
of Estimate, he Zould stride up to the little lectern reserved for city officials
appearing before the Board and e[tend his hand behind him Zithout
looking, like a surgeon e[tending his hand for a scalpel, and an aide
smacked a file folder into the hand, and 0oses opened it and began, Zith
the precision of a great surgeon, to dissect a man's character, the members
of the Board, Zatching the reporters' pens and pencils avidly scribbling
doZn his Zords, kneZ that those Zords Zould be appearing in headlines.

"+e Zas terribly  unfair to people," 0cGoldrick  says. But, the Comptroller
admits, the attacks served their purpose. 0oses' methods "did intimidate
people from debating Zith him. And it intimidated us, too, most likely."
Soon, in the Zhole city government, from bureaucracy to Board of Estimate
to mayor, there Zas no one to stand in the Zay of his dream, no one Zho
Zould dare to tell the public the truth about the methods that Zere being
used to make it come true, no one Zho Zould venture to e[amine—or to
proclaim—its flaZs.

* * *

And the dream unrolled.

During the 1930's, Robert 0oses reshaped the face of the greatest city in
the NeZ :orld.

671
+e gouged great gashes across it, gashes that once had contained houses by
the hundreds and apartment houses by the score. +e laid great sZaths of
concrete across it. +e made it grayer, not only Zith his highZays but Zith
parking fields, like the one on Randall's Island that held 4,000 cars, the one
at Orchard Beach that held 8,000 and the one at Jacob Riis 3ark that held
9,000, that together covered Zith asphalt a full square mile of the 319 in the
city. And he made it greener, planting Zithin its borders tZo and a half
million trees, shrubs and vines, bringing a million others back to bloom,
reseeding laZns Zhose area totaled four square miles and creating a full
square mile more of neZ ones. +e filled in its marshes and made them
parks. +e yanked railroad trestles off its avenues, clearing an even do]en
from Brooklyn's Atlantic  Avenue alone as part of a grade-crossing
elimination program he considered so minor that he seldom mentioned it.
+e brought the stars doZn to it, arranging, in a brief interval crammed in
betZeen more important projects, for the financing of +ayden 3lanetarium.
+e changed its very shape: the millions of cubic feet of rock and shale and
sand and stone that the long convoys of his barges and the endless caravans
of his trucks dumped behind the steel bulkheads that he rammed out aZay
from its shoreline into the muck beneath rivers and harbors hardened into
neZ land, more than 5,000 acres of neZ land, and thus e[panded and
transformed its physical contours, adding to 0anhattan Island alone an area
as large as the island from river to river betZeen Fifty-ninth and Eighty-
si[th streets. +e joined together small islands Zithin its borders Zith earth,
blending :ard's  Island into Randall's and +unters and TZin Islands into
Rodman Neck. +e soldered together the larger islands that Zere its
boroughs Zith steel, linking three of them together at once Zith the
Triborough Bridge, tying the :est  Bron[  to 0anhattan  Zith the +enry
+udson, draZing the far-flung RockaZays closer to the rest of metropolis
Zith the 0arine  3arkZay  span. In the five years after he became 3ark
Commissioner, in a city in Zhich the parks had been barren for decades, he
made the parks bloom. In a city in Zhich there had been only 119
playgrounds, he built 255 neZ ones. In a city in Zhich not a mile of neZ
arterial highZay had been built in fifteen years, he built fifty miles of
arterial highZay. In a city in Zhich a neZ bridge had not been built in a
quarter of a century he built not only the three neZ big bridges—
Triborough, +enry +udson and 0arine  3arkZay—but no smaller ones to
carry local streets across his parkZays. Si monumentum requiris,

672
circumspice, reads the inscription on the tomb of Sir Christopher :ren. //
you Zould see his monument, look around. By 1939, the same advice could
have been given to a NeZ Yorker asking to see the monuments of Robert
0oses. They Zere everyZhere in the great city.

:ith   his shoZman's flair for the spectacular, 0oses made the opening

of each of his creations an event, a colorful civic celebration, and if the
celebrations sometimes seemed more like morality plays (for 0oses Zas
careful to point out at each one that the creation had been possible because
of the victory of the altruistic public servant over "old hack" Tammany
politicians and "red tape" bureaucrats) the public Zas so enthusiastic that it
didn't mind the morali]ing. NeZ  York City cheered Zhat Robert 0oses Zas
doing to it—cheered so loudly, in fact, that the thin cries of disagreement,
of disagreement and despair, Zere all but completely droZned out.

Robert 0oses built 255 neighborhood playgrounds in NeZ York City
during the 1930's.

The adults and children Zho attended playground dedication ceremonies
cheered Zhen, at the end of the speeches, the fountain shoZers in the
Zading pools Zere turned on. And the cheers Zere echoed and amplified by
the press. "Nothing Robert 0oses has done is as great as Zhat he has done
Zith playgrounds," the :orld-Telegram   said. "+e has bestoZed an
unqualified boon on the neighborhoods of this city."

To dramati]e the si]e of the achievement, 0oses gave each playground a
number, and the press counted along Zith him: playground number 189
opens, the headlines said, playground number 194 dedicated . . . playground
204 . . . playground 240 . . . And he had his mapmakers prepare pairs of
outline maps of the city, blank e[cept for dots representing playgrounds.
The map on the left Zould be labeled simply "1933," the year before he had
become 3ark Commissioner, the one on the right simply "1937" (or "1938"
or "1939"). And the contrast betZeen the tZo maps Zas certainly
spectacular, the one on the left almost empty, the one on the right covered
thickly Zith  dots. And public and press dreZ from the maps the conclusion
that 0oses Zanted draZn from them: that his playground-building program

673
Zas an unqualified improvement, an absolutely unalloyed benefit, to all the
people of NeZ York City.

A close inspection of the maps Zould have revealed some rather pu]]ling
characteristics about the pattern formed by the dots.

Their distribution, for e[ample, Zas not at all even. The areas of the maps
on Zhich the dots Zere clustered most thickly corresponded in the main to
those areas inhabited by families that Zere Zell-to-do or at least
"comfortable." The areas of the maps on Zhich the dots Zere sprinkled
most thinly corresponded in part to undeveloped outlying areas of the city
that did not really need playgrounds, but they corresponded also to some of
the city's most congested areas, to the tenement neighborhoods and slums
inhabited by families that Zere poor—to areas that needed playgrounds

desperately. 0ost of Robert 0oses' neighborhood playgrounds had, in other
Zords, been built in the neighborhoods that needed playgrounds least. FeZ
of the playgrounds had been built in the neighborhoods that needed
playgrounds most.

The areas of the maps on Zhich the dots Zere sprinkled most thinly of all
corresponded to those areas of the city inhabited by its 400,000 Negroes.

Robert 0oses built 255 playgrounds in NeZ York City during the 1930's.
+e built one playground in +arlem.

An overspill from +arlem  had created Negro ghettos in tZo other areas of
the city: Brooklyn's Stuyvesant +eights, the nucleus of the great slum that
Zould become knoZn as Bedford-Stuyvesant, and South Jamaica. Robert
0oses built one playground in Stuyvesant +eights. +e built no playgrounds
in South Jamaica.

":e   have to Zork all day and Ze have no place to send the children," one
+arlem mother had Zritten before Robert 0oses became 3ark
Commissioner. "There are kids here Zho have never played anyplace but in
the gutter." She could have Zritten the same Zords after he had been 3ark
Commissioner for five years. After a building program that had tripled the
city's supply of playgrounds, there Zas still almost no place for

674
appro[imately 200,000 of the city's children—the 200,000 Zith black skin
—to play in their oZn neighborhoods e[cept the streets or abandoned,
crumbling, filthy, looted tenements stinking of urine and vomit; or vacant
lots carpeted Zith rusty tin cans, jagged pieces of metal, dog feces and the
leavings, spilling out of rotting paper shopping bags, of human meals.
Children Zith Zhite  skin had been given sZings and seesaZs and sliding
ponds. Children Zith black skin had been left Zith the old broomsticks that
served them as baseball bats. Children Zith Zhite skin had been given
Zading pools to splash in in summer. If children Zith black skin Zanted to
escape the heat of the slums, they could remove the covers from fire
hydrants and Zade through their outZash, as they had alZays Zaded, in
gutters that Zere sometimes so crammed Zith broken glass that they
glistened in the sun.

Negroes begged for playgrounds.

The children begged silently. Recalls Father C. EdZard +arrison, Zho
during the 1930's served as assistant to Father Shelton +ale Bishop, rector
of St. 3hilip's 3rotestant-Episcopal Church on 134th Street: "They Zouldn't
say they had no place to go. The need Zas une[pressed, inarticulate. But
you kneZ that in their oZn Zay they Zere begging for someZhere to go,
something to do. There Zeren't even basketball courts then, e[cept at the 'Y'
or in the big parks. There Zas nothing in the neighborhood. And you Zould
see kids improvising basketball baskets, hanging a fruit basket against a
lamppost or against a Zall—you knoZ, hanging it up on something, playing
on the sideZalks or in the streets." In 1944, Father Bishop Zould persuade
his parishioners to convert the old four-story parish house, Zhich contained
a gymnasium, into a community center Zith recreational facilities, and,
Father +arrison recalls, "you should have seen the kids come in here, just
because Ze

had a gym. The very fact that they came here in such numbers and Zere so
happy to have something to do shoZed us hoZ much they needed
recreational facilities."

Not just because of the gym, of course. There Zere recreation supervisors
there Zho cared about the children—"It's not just recreation that Ze're
talking about, you knoZ," Father +arrison says. "I guess you could call it an

675
involvement of ourselves; they felt they belonged here and that they Zere
Zanted here, that someone cared about them; recreation has to go along
Zith other things, you knoZ"—but  that Zas precisely Zhat playgrounds
Zere providing in other areas of the city. "In the Thirties," recalls 3ark
Department official 0elvin  Daus, the 3ark Department playground
supervisors Zere "young guys, bright young guys, all college-educated.
There Zere no other jobs available then. :e Zere trained in Zorking Zith
young people, supervising them, giving them leadership, giving them help.
And Zhat Zith  :3A    and all, there Zere so many supervisors—there Zere
tZo or three at even the smallest playground—that Ze could really get
involved Zith  the kids, not just supervise their games but be around so that
if one of them needed someone to talk to, he had someone. I mean a kid
Zould never come around and say right out, 'I need some advice,' but kids
Zere saying that in their oZn Zay. They Zere saying it silently, but they
Zere saying it all right. They Zere begging for it."

Adults begged aloud—in letters-to-the-editor and resolutions to the mayor
—and their voices sometimes greZ shrill and desperate. "The police just
keep the kids moving and there is no place to send them," one Stuy-vesant
+eights mother said. "+arlem is a poor section," one civic organi]ation
Zrote La Guardia. "Each day from morning to night those people Zho are
trying to give their children a decent living and make them something in the
Zorld to be proud of, are . . . out at Zork trying to earn a living." It Zas
impossible for them to stay home and care for their children at the same
time. Therefore, they Zanted to send them to playgrounds. Since there
Zeren't any, the children had little choice but to "roam the streets Zhile their
parents are Zorried half to death Zondering Zhere they are. . . . 3lease
reali]e and understand the conditions of +arlem in order that you might see
Zhat the children there have to contend Zith." 0inisters and settlement-
house Zorkers attempting to alleviate the problem through their oZn efforts
found a particular poignance in their inability to make any real dent in it—
the croZds of children Zho tried to jam into Reverend Bishop's little parish
house only impressed him the more Zith the fact that only the city could do
the job on the scale required. ":e kneZ the need," Father Bishop's
assistant, Father +arrison, says. ":e couldn't understand Zhy the city
didn't. :hen   you have to turn kids aZay, the feeling is one of anger,
frustration—of :hy?   :hy?    :hy?"   And  sometimes the anger and

676
frustration Zould spill  over in angry speeches. Reverend Bishop, Zho Zas
to try for ten years to persuade Robert 0oses to build one playground in his
neighborhood—reading, almost every time he picked up a neZspaper, it
seemed, of another neZ playground being opened in some other
neighborhood—addressed himself to the problem of +arlem crime by

telling an audience: "The children have no place to go. Day and night they
must use the block on Zhich they live for recreation. No Zonder they are
like caged tigers and, once loose, Zant to Zreak havoc."

But the adults might as Zell have been silent, too. La Guardia, Zho Zas
doing so much in other areas for the city's Negroes, Zas not interfering Zith
his 3ark Commissioner, and he referred the resolutions to him. And his 3ark
Commissioner flatly denied their contentions. "The fact is that +arlem and
its adjacent neighborhoods have not been overlooked and neglected or
discriminated against," Robert 0oses said. "The tendency has been in just
the other direction, that is to give more attention to +arlem than to other
sections Zhich are in just as great need of recreation." +e had done this
Zith all  the Negro slums, he said. And he bolstered his arguments Zith
floods of facts and figures compiled by his corps of statisticians. The facts
and figures Zere misleading, but no one did the Zork necessary to disprove
them; the first full-scale survey of recreational facilities by any organi]ation
other than the 3ark Department—a 8nited 3arents Association study Zhich
found "plenty of playground space" only "Zhere the rentals are high"—Zas
not conducted until 1941, and it Zas not until 1943, Zhen a grand jury
investigating the causes of the high crime rate in Bedford-Stuyvesant found
lack of recreational facilities to be a contributing factor, that any even quasi-
official body Zent on record about the effect of 0oses' park policies on the
Negro slums. (0oses' reply Zas the issuance of an eight-page release that
termed the jury's report "Zithout the slightest foundation.") The press, the
instrument best equipped to investigate the situation and come up Zith
independent facts and figures, never made any such investigation. It buried
or ignored the recreation reports of the 8nited 3arents Association and the
grand jury and the resolutions passed by the Negro community
organi]ations, and reprinted only the barest handful of letters-to-the-editor
(it took Reverend Bishop fourteen years to get one printed). In 1950, the
Times Zould send a reporter to +arlem to make his oZn, independent tour,

677
and he Zould report that playgrounds for many +arlem children Zere
vacant lots, in Zhich "bare-legged children" played "on dumps of broken
glass, rusty cans and refuse. . . ." But during the 1930's the press Zas taking
Robert 0oses' Zord for Zhat  Zas being done for the slums. A day-by-day
revieZ of the Times, +erald Tribune and Brooklyn Eagle —and a more
cursory revieZ of the city's other major dailies—for the entire 1934-39
period did not turn up a single editorial even hinting that 0oses'
playground-building program might be neglecting the slums. A typical
editorial Zas the one in the Times that said that 0oses Zas soZing
"playgrounds over the congested areas of the city ... as a soZer might soZ
magic seed, bidden to floZer in the slums."

Robert 0oses built ten neZ community sZimming-pool  comple[es in NeZ
York City during the 1930's.

Because of his fascination Zith Zater in general and sZimming in par-

ticular, 0oses gave each of the pools, for Zhich he had obtained a special
:3A   grant of $10,000,000, his personal attention. 8nder his prodding, his
architects adorned them Zith masterful little touches; over the entrance
Zhich divided men from Zomen as they entered the bathhouse at the
Corona 3ool comple[ sat a stork Zearing an e[pression that made him look
as if he Zere pu]]ling  over the physical differences in the creatures he had
brought into the Zorld. 8nder his prodding, his architects produced do]ens
of innovations that Zould set a neZ standard for sZimming-pool
construction, public and private, from pool bottoms of Zood-float rough
enough to prevent slipping and smooth enough to permit games during the
off season, Zhen the pool Zas drained, to a totally neZ type of scum gutter
Zide enough to let in sunlight that Zould kill  the bacteria Zhose formation
had been a problem in older public pools. +e himself solved a problem that
had alZays baffled designers—hoZ to force sZimmers to Zash their feet
before entering the pool—by building Zhat the Architectural Forum called
"tactful depressions"—holloZs too Zide to be jumped—clear across each
corridor leading from the locker room to the pool so that sZimmers had no
choice but to Zalk through them and through the special foot-cleansing
solution Zith Zhich  they had been filled. Despite the :3A  requirements

678
that only the cheapest materials be used, each pool turned out to be a
municipal marvel of the first magnitude.

And they Zere hailed as such. "Simple materials simply disposed" in
designs that Zere "alZays sound and sometimes brilliant," the Forum said.
As for their si]e (the main pool at the three-pool Corona comple[ is 365
feet long), the Forum said, "The openings Zere marked by the publication
of statistics Zhich seemed to the reading public all but incredible. The
Astoria 3ool, for instance, Zas reported to have accommodations for 6,200
bathers. Nobody had heard anything like that before, but it turned out to be
literally true. The ten neZ pools erected last year plus tZo old ones that had
been remodeled, noZ have a combined capacity—as measured by their
locker-room facilities—of 49,000!"

The ingenuity that Robert 0oses displayed in building sZimming pools
Zas not restricted to their design.

0oses built one pool in +arlem, in  Colonial 3ark, at 146th Street, and he
Zas determined that that Zas going to be the only pool that Negroes— or
3uerto Ricans, Zhom he classed Zith Negroes as "colored people"— Zere
going to use. +e didn't Zant them "mi[ing"  Zith  Zhite people in other
pools, in part because he Zas afraid, probably Zith cause, that "trouble"—
fights and riots—Zould result; in part because, as one of his aides puts it,
":ell,   you knoZ  hoZ R0   felt about colored people."

The pool at Zhich the danger of mi[ing Zas greatest Zas the one in Thomas
Jefferson 3ark in La Guardia's old East +arlem congressional district. This
district Zas Zhite, but the pool, one block in from the East River, Zas
located betZeen 111th and 114th streets. Not only Zas it close to Negro
+arlem, but the city's 3uerto Rican population, Zhile still small,

Zas already beginning to outgroZ the traditional boundaries of "Spanish
+arlem" just north of Central 3ark and to e[pand toZard the east— toZard
the pool. By the mid-Thirties, 3uerto. Ricans had reached Le[ington
Avenue, only four blocks aZay, and some had begun moving onto Third
Avenue, only three blocks aZay.

679
To discourage "colored" people from using the Thomas Jefferson 3ool,
0oses, as he had done so successfully at Jones Beach, employed only Zhite
lifeguards and attendants. But he Zas afraid that such "flagging" might not
be a sufficient deterrent to mothers and fathers from the teeming Spanish
+arlem tenements Zho Zould be aZare on a stifling August Sunday that
cool Zater in Zhich their children could play Zas only a feZ  blocks aZay.
So he took another precaution.

Corporation Counsel :indels  Zas astonished at its simplicity. ":e  [0oses
and I] Zere driving around +arlem one afternoon—he Zas shoZing me
something or other—and I said, 'Don't you have this problem Zith the
Negroes overrunning you?' +e said, ':ell,  they don't like cold Zater and
Ze've found that that helps.' " And then, :indels  says, 0oses told him
confidentially that Zhile  heating plants at the other sZimming pools kept
the Zater at a comfortable seventy degrees, at the Thomas Jefferson 3ool,
the Zater Zas left unheated, so that its temperature, Zhile not cold enough
to bother Zhite sZimmers, Zould deter any "colored" people Zho happened
to enter it once from returning.

:hether   it Zas the temperature or the flagging—or the gloZering looks
flung at Negroes by the 3ark Department attendants and lifeguards— one
could go to the pool on the hottest summer days, Zhen the slums of Negro
and Spanish +arlem a feZ blocks aZay sZeltered in the heat, and not see a
single non-Caucasian face. Negroes Zho lived only half a mile aZay, 3uerto
Ricans Zho lived three blocks aZay, Zould travel instead to Colonial 3ark,
three miles aZay—even though many of them could not afford the bus fare
for their families and had to Zalk all the Zay.

The fact that they didn't use their neighborhood pool—and the e[planation
for this fact—Zas never once mentioned by any neZspaper or public
speaker, or at least not by any public speaker prominent enough to have his
speech reported in a neZspaper.

0oses built an immense park comple[ on Randall's Island, one equipped
Zith baseball fields, tennis courts and soccer fields. Only one item Zas
needed to make it a great park: people. But this ingredient Zas not
provided. 0oses had said that the island Zas "easily accessible" to the
slums. Trekking the tZo miles to the island once Zas evidently enough to

680
convince most slum families differently. Even on Zeekends, the vast neZ
facilities sat almost empty. As for the Randall's Island Stadium, 0oses had
demanded

70,000 seats. The :3A had alloZed him 22,000. Even this number Zas,
during the stadium's first five years of operation, not sold out once. At most
events, the attendance Zas not in the thousands but the hundreds.

The Grand Central, Interborough and Laurelton parkZays opened early in
the summer of 1936, bringing to an even one hundred the number of miles
of parkZay constructed by 0oses on Long Island and in NeZ York City
since he had conceived his great parkZay plan in 1924.

At the opening of one stretch of parkZay, Fiorello La Guardia lavished
praise on everyone connected Zith its construction e[cept 0oses, and then,
reaching up and placing his hand on his 3ark Commissioner's shoulder, said
earnestly: "I don't have to say anything to you, Bob. Those Zho came to
cheer have stayed to cheer."

The city's press had stayed. One editorial opined that the neZ parkZays
Zould, by relieving the traffic  load on the Southern and Northern State
parkZays, solve the problem of access to 0oses' Long Island parks "for
generations."

The neZ parkZays solved the problem for about three Zeeks. "It Zasn't
more than three Zeeks after they opened that I decided to go out to Jones
Beach on a Sunday," 3aul :indels recalls. "I got on the Interborough and
by God it Zas as jammed as the Southern State ever Zas."

0oses announced that he had the solution: build forty-five miles of neZ
parkZays, including a great "Circumferential 3arkZay" around Brooklyn
and 4ueens that Zould provide motorists of these boroughs (and of
0anhattan if the proposed Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel Zas built and linked up
Zith the parkZay) Zith  an easier Zay to reach the Island—and, since the
parkZay Zould run for tZenty  miles along the edge of the Brooklyn
Zaterfront, Zith  a Zonderful vieZ.

681
Some city planners noticed that the traffic pattern on Long Island had fallen
into a set pattern: every time a neZ parkZay Zas built, it quickly became
jammed Zith traffic, but the load on the old parkZays Zas not significantly
relieved. If this had been the pattern for the first hundred miles of parkZays,
they Zondered, might it not be the pattern for the ne[t forty-five also?
3erhaps consideration should be given to trying to ease Long Island's traffic
problem by other means, specifically the improved mass transit that the
Regional 3lan Association and other reformer-backed groups had been
proposing for a decade. The R3A ventured to raise this suggestion again,
and it Zas backed by other planners and by some reformers. But their
voices Zere droZned out by the flood of praise

for 0oses' idea. Said the Sun of the Circumferential proposal: ":hen  it's
done, you South Brooklynites can hitch up the old buggy and be in the
Bron[ before a +arvard man could say Greenpernt."

The Triborough Bridge opened on July n, 1936.

Even men familiar Zith large-scale public Zorks Zere aZed by this one.
"From the engineering point of vieZ, it is one of the greatest in the Zorld as
it is one of the biggest," 3:A   Administrator Ickes Zrote in his diary.
General +ugh Johnson Zrote in his syndicated column, "The Triborough
Bridge in NeZ York City  is one of the greatest accomplishments of man in
the most fascinating department of civil engineering—bridge building."
+arry +opkins  said that "of 70,000 :3A   projects in the 8nited States . . .
there is none of Zhich Ze are prouder."

The aZe—and the pride—Zas shared by the city. "The imagination Zith
Zhich the Zhole project Zas conceived, and the integrity Zith Zhich it  has
been carried out, reaffirms our faith in the Zays of democratic government,"
the Times editoriali]ed. City officialdom  and press assured the public that
the project Zould, as 0oses had promised, provide at a single stroke a
solution to most of the traffic problems betZeen Long Island and NeZ
York. "A tour over the Triborough Bridge yesterday by tZo neZspaper
reporters revealed that the huge structure ... is up to the e[pectations of the
public and the promises of its builders both in beauty and in usefulness," the
Times said. Trips from northern 4ueens to 125th Street in 0anhattan,
Zhich previously had required "in the best of conditions" forty-five minutes

682
via the 4ueensborough Bridge, Zould henceforth be negotiated in as little
as si[teen minutes, reporters reported. 3olice Commissioner Valentine said
that the opening of the bridge Zould sharply reduce traffic on all the East
River spans, on the 4ueensborough "by from 40 to 50 percent."

On August 17, 1936, a little more than a month after the Triborough Bridge
opened, Long Island's parkZays Zere the scene of Zhat some observers
called the greatest traffic tie-up in the history of the metropolitan area.

Referring to it as a "cross-country traffic jam," the +erald Tribune Zas
forced to conclude that the bridge had, at least indirectly, caused it.
Apparently, a 0onday-morning editorial quarterbacked, the "motoring
residents of the Bron[" had all discovered at the same moment that the
Triborough "brought them Zithin easy time of Jones Beach and other cool
and pleasant resorts on the south shore of Long Island" and had decided "at
the same moment to head for the ocean by Zay of the neZ bridge and the
Grand Central 3arkZay. And nearly all of them got stuck— as did countless
other motorists going to and from . . . Long Island."

3ublic officials responded Zith alarm. "The Interborough 3arkZay, barely
opened, Zas already impossible," Brooklyn Borough 3resident Ingersoll
noted.

0oses said he kneZ Zhat to do: build more parkZays in the Bron[ and
:estchester ("It's  time Ze gave :estchester a break"), including the
+utchinson River 3arkZay E[tension,  and on Long Island not only rush the
construction of the parkZays he had already proposed but also build neZ
roads that Zould not be restricted, as parkZays Zere, to private
automobiles, but Zould also carry commercial traffic. In particular, he
proposed a road doZn the center of Long Island—the road that Zould,
Zhen finally built,  be knoZn as the "Long Island E[pressZay."

Yes, agreed Ingersoll, that Zas Zhat Zas needed. Yes, indeed, said the
+erald Tribune —and the rest of NeZ York's press.

The :antagh  State 3arkZay E[tension Zas opened on December 17, 1938,
three montns ahead of schedule. Reminiscing in the brochure distributed at
the ribbon-cutting ceremony, 0oses noted that in the nearly fifteen years

683
since he had planned a metropolitan area transportation system, no miles of
parkZay, including 191 grade-eliminating bridges, had been completed in
NeZ York City and on Long Island, and so had the +enry +udson, Tri-
borough and 0arine 3arkZay bridges. The "arterial system" he had created,
he said, Zas "unparalleled"—and it had had to be, for so Zas the
metropolitan area's traffic problem. And, he said, his program had been
successful. "Today," he said, "Ze are Zell on our Zay toZard a sensible
solution of this problem in the metropolitan area." In his speech at a
luncheon held afterZard at Jones Beach, 0oses repeated this theme. A
thousand guests applauded enthusiastically.

The :antagh  State 3arkZay E[tension did not receive its first real test of
traffic-easing capacity until the first Zarm Zeekend morning of 1939. On
that morning, it Zas jammed bumper to bumper for more than three miles.
Traffic e[perts could not understand Zhere those cars had come from. The
other Long Island parkZays, after all, Zere just as jammed as ever.

Four months after the Triborough Bridge opened, Othmar Ammann gave a
speech on its operation to the American Society of Civil Engineers. In it,
Triborough's chief engineer announced that traffic on the span Zas running
considerably ahead of estimates.

The opening of a bridge Zas big neZs, but its operation Zas not. 0ost
neZspapers did not even bother to send a reporter to cover the speech. The
Times did, and Ammann spoke Zith him after the meeting, and provided
him Zith a further bit of  information. Despite the heavy volume on the
Triborough Bridge, Ammann said, "the relief of the traffic load on the
4ueensborough Bridge has not been as great as e[pected." But the

Times editors evidently did not consider this fact particularly noteZorthy.
They devoted only four paragraphs to the story and buried it at the bottom
of page 26.

But Ammann's statement Zas a hint,* the only published hint NeZ Yorkers
Zere given during all of 1936, of certain developments that Zere pu]]ling
—and beginning to Zorry—the city's traffic e[perts. Traffic  on Triborough
Zas indeed running ahead of estimates—far ahead. Before its opening,
0oses, on the basis of Jack 0adigan's figures, had estimated that eight

684
million vehicles Zould  use the bridge during its first year of operation.
:ithin   four  months the estimate Zas increased to nine million. Three
months later, it Zas ten million—and the counts at the Randall's Island toll
comple[ shoZed that traffic Zas rising more sharply every month. There
began to be reports of traffic tie-ups on the huge neZ structure.

But traffic on the four other East River bridges Zas not falling off at
anything near a comparable rate. The eight million cars and trucks that
0oses had forecast Zould use Triborough each year Zere supposed to be
cars and trucks that had previously used the other bridges, particularly the
4ueensborough. Not only 0oses but all traffic e[perts Zho  had studied the
problem had agreed on that. OtherZise, Zhere Zould these cars and trucks
come from? Yet traffic on the other bridges, doZn about 15 percent
immediately folloZing  Triborough's opening, Zas creeping higher again
month by month—back, Zithin tZo  years, almost to the pre-Triborough
level. Traffic betZeen Long Island and NeZ York had, before Triborough's
opening, flooded the tZenty-tZo lanes available on the four old bridges;
suddenly the traffic betZeen Long Island and NeZ York had become so
heavy that it Zas also flooding eight neZ lanes, the neZ lanes of the
Triborough Bridge— and it Zas hardly any lighter than before on the old
bridges. Traffic betZeen the Island and the city had been increasing before,
of course, increasing steadily. But never had it increased at this rate. If
traffic betZeen the Island and the city Zas a stream, something had
suddenly opened the sluice gates much Zider than they had ever been
before—and the more the traffic e[perts studied the problem, the more
difficult  it Zas for them to avoid the conclusion that the something Zas the
only neZ element in the situation—nothing other than the Triborough
Bridge itself. SomehoZ, in Zays they did not even pretend to understand,
the construction of this bridge, the most gigantic and modern traffic-sorting
and conveying machine in the Zorld, had not only failed to cure the traffic
problem it Zas supposed to solve—but had actually made it Zorse.

0oses Zas convinced he kneZ the solution to the problem: build another
bridge. :ithin   a year after Triborough had opened, he Zas proposing the
construction, a mile to the east, of the Bron[-:hitestone  that Zould, by
tying directly into the +utchinson River 3arkZay  to the north, enable

685
motorists from the East Bron[, :estchester, Connecticut and NeZ England
to get to Long Island Zithout using Triborough.

For the first time, one of 0oses' transportation proposals met Zith less than
unanimous support from Good Government groups. The Regional

3lan Association said that such a bridge should not be built unless provision
Zas made on it for railroad trains as Zell as cars—so that a rapid transit tie-
in betZeen Long Island and the Bron[, :estchester and Connecticut could
be established. The tie-in did not have to be immediate, the R3A said.
Construction of the rapid transit system could Zait until the need for it had
been proven and financing Zas available. But provision for it should be
made immediately. All that Zas required Zas to make the bridge Zide
enough for tZo lanes of tracks as Zell as for automobiles or to build a
second deck for the tracks—or, if 0oses did not Zant to adopt either of
these courses at the present time, to make the bridge foundations and toZers
strong enough so that, should at some later date the rapid transit link be
desired, the bridge could support a second deck that Zould be built at that
time. If provision Zas made noZ, Zhile the bridge Zas being planned, the
R3A said, it could be made cheaply, at a minor increase in the cost of the
bridge. If it Zas not made, a Zhole neZ bridge Zould have to be
constructed from scratch Zhen the rapid transit link proved necessary, and
the cost Zould be tremendous. It might even prove prohibitive, preventing
construction of such a link entirely. Failure to make provision for a rapid
transit link as part of the Bron[-:hitestone   Bridge, the R3A said, could
therefore condemn Long Island forever to be linked to the north only
through roads —Zhich Zould mean that no matter hoZ much population
increased in the metropolitan area, the only means of reaching the Island
from the north Zould still be by automobile. And this Zould condemn Long
Island to future inundation by larger and larger numbers of automobiles.

But 0oses refused even to consider its proposal, and the R3A received no
editorial support. :ithout   opposition from a single city official,  he built the
Bron[-:hitestone    Bridge Zithout any provision for a rail link,  opening it
three full months ahead of schedule, on April 29, 1939.

During 1940, its first full  year of operation, 6,317,489 vehicles passed
through the Bron[-:hitestone's   toll booths, cramming its four lanes to

686
capacity and causing massive tie-ups on it. Traffic on the Triborough Zas
reduced by 122,519 vehicles. Traffic on the other four East River bridges
Zas reduced not at all. In fact, it rose slightly. SomehoZ, the neZ bridge had
generated, in a single year, more than 6,000,000 neZ on-and-off-Island
motor trips. It had not improved the traffic situation on the old bridges at
all. :hat   had been the net effect of its $17,785,000 construction —or, in
fact, of the construction of both it and the Triborough Bridge—on the traffic
problem these bridges Zere built to solve? Before they e[isted, four bridges
had connected Long Island Zith the rest of the Zorld, and they had all been
jammed. NoZ si[  bridges connected Long Island Zith the rest of the Zorld.
And they Zere all jammed.

By dumping a tremendous neZ load on the Long Island parkZays, the
Bron[-:hitestone    Bridge made the traffic tie-ups on them noticeably
Zorse.

Shortly after the bridge opened, 0oses completed the road linking the
bridge Zith :estchester  County, the +utchinson River 3arkZay. Soon, that
Zas jammed too.

The GoZanus 3arkZay, the elevated highZay 0oses placed atop the pillars
of the old B0T  Elevated Line on Brooklyn's Third Avenue, Zas opened on
November i, 1941, just in time for another mayoral election.

":hen   Commissioner 0oses finds the surface of the earth too congested
for one of his parkZays, he lifts the road into the air and continues it on its
Zay," the Times editoriali]ed. "A  busy, croZded, region lay in 0r. 0oses'
path, too heavily built up for a leisurely, landscaped parkZay. The problem
Zas solved successfully. . . . Beginning today . . . Brooklyn reaps a neZ,
incalculable highZay benefit." Brooklyn's borough president called 0oses
an artist Zho, in his oZn field, ranked Zith Leonardo da Vinci.

The canvas on Zhich 0oses had draZn the GoZanus creation Zas a
neighborhood knoZn as "Sunset 3ark." Its residents had pleaded Zith
0oses to build the parkZay not along Third Avenue but along Second, one
block to the Zest, near the Zaterfront; Second Avenue ran not through a
neighborhood but through the middle of Bush Terminal, a 200-acre
agglomeration of piers, railroad sidings, lofts and factories that Zas already

687
so noisy Zith the clatter of trucks and freight cars that the noise generated
by a feZ more lanes of traffic Zould hardly be noticed. Comptroller
0cGoldrick,  a resident of Sunset 3ark, had agreed Zith them; he pointed
out that the city had been planning to tear doZn the elevated line because a
neZ parallel subZay had recently been built under Fourth Avenue, and "the
elevated at least let some light in. The parkZay Zould be solid and it Zould
be Zider than the El. It Zould come right up to the ZindoZs of the
buildings." The Comptroller— along Zith  non-0oses engineers—doubted
0oses' contention that using the El pillars Zould be much cheaper than
building a Zhole neZ parkZay, particularly since it Zould  hc.ve to sZing
back to the shore after only one mile —a distance long enough to
"permanently blight" a neighborhood but not to make a substantial
difference in cost. 0oses had replied by telling the Board of Estimate that
Sunset 3ark Zasn't particularly Zorth saving because it Zas a "slum."

"A slum! That Zasn't a slum!" says Cathy Cadorine, Zho lived in Sunset
3ark. "That Zas a very nice neighborhood. It Zas poor, but clean poor."

Actually, part of the area Zas dirty poor. Blight spaZned in the dirt and
noise of the Bush Terminal piers, Zarehouses, factories and railroad sidings
along the Zaterfront had oo]ed inland along the side streets, forcing

"clean poor" families to flee before it and leaving the old broZnstone and
red brickfront houses to derelicts, Zinos and Zhores.

But that Zas just part of the area. And it Zasn't Zhat families like the
Cadorines thought of as "the neighborhood" at all. :hat they thought of as
"Sunset 3ark"—the area e[tending from Zest of Third Avenue all the Zay
to Eighth and from Thirty-si[th  Street south to Si[ty-third and containing
some 70,000 people, half of them NorZegians, the rest Finns, Danes, Irish
and Germans—had been menaced by that blight for at least thirty years. But
they had alZays stood it off: although it had spread inland as far as Second
Avenue by the time of :orld  :ar   I,  that Zas Zhere it stopped; in 1940 it
had not gotten even a foothold on the side streets betZeen Second and
Third. And despite the Depression, Zhich hit especially hard at a
neighborhood of skilled carpenters and housepainters and plumbers (60
percent of Sunset 3ark men Zere members of trade unions), they had made
a Zorld of their oZn.

688
It Zas indeed, as Cathy Cadorine said, a "clean" Zorld. The brickfronts and
broZnstones Zere immaculate; one could Zalk by them any morning and
see the houseZives sanding and scrubbing their stoops; even the sideZalks
Zere sZept; the little plots of grass that their oZners proudly called "laZns"
may have been tiny but they Zere lush green and neatly trimmed. But it Zas
more than clean. It Zas quiet and peaceful—there Zere many trees lining
the streets, but feZ cars; "Not many people around there had cars then,"
recalls +ertha Smalgo; "Zhen people Zanted to go to Zork or to the city,
they took the elevated"—and Zarm and friendly: every summer brought a
round of block parties, street lamps festooned Zith streamers, Zomen and
girls in gay peasant blouses from their native lands, folk singers Zith their
accordions singing the old songs, long tables covered Zith tablecloths
Zashed and Zashed again until they gleamed snoZy under the lamps, and
Zith heaping boZls of kalalatikko  and hernierokka. In "Finn ToZn," the
section of Sunset 3ark east of Fifth Avenue and south of Thirty-si[th Street
that contained half a do]en public saunas, there Zere also half a do]en
cooperative apartment houses, and many of the same families had been
living in them for a quarter of a century. In the evening, families Zalked
together to the bluff of Sunset 3ark to look out over ship-filled NeZ York
+arbor. Girls like Cathy Cadorine Zho greZ up there, married boys from
the neighborhood and raised their oZn families there because "Ze Zouldn't
Zant to live anyZhere else."

The heart of the neighborhood—the focal point that gave it unity and a
sense of community—Zas Third Avenue. Lining it, along Zith neZsstands
off Zhich 9,000 Nordisk Tidendes Zere sold every day, Zere seven movie
theaters, do]ens of tiny restaurants run by couples and featuring recipes
from the old countries ("little restaurants, but good and so many you
Zouldn't knoZ  Zhere to go for lunch," recalls +arold Benson, Zhose
hardZare store Zas on Third Avenue at Fifty-fourth Street), and scores of
small, friendly "0ama  and 3apa" stores (the Northland Gift Shop, the
Finnish Book Store, a hardZare store that looked like a general store out of
the Old :est,  a butcher shop that raffled off tZenty-five big turkeys every
Christmas)

that occupied the grcund floor of three- and four-story brickfronts in Zhich
0ama and 3apa lived upstairs Zith the children. "The avenue Zas alZays

689
busy, people shopping or ZindoZ shopping or just Zalking," Benson
recalls.

The El overhead Zas noisy, but, the shopkeepers say, "you got used to the
trains and anyZay Zhen they built the neZ subZay [under Fourth Avenue]
Ze thought it Zas going to be torn doZn." The soot and cinders that Zafted
doZn from the El Zere annoying, but the shopkeepers kept the sideZalks
clean—by sZeeping them morning, noon and night. "Clean?" Cathy
Cadorine recalls. "Those Zere the cleanest stores you ever saZ!" And the El
made Third Avenue even more of a focal point for a neighborhood in Zhich
"not many people had cars." "The husbands all took it to Zork," says Cathy
:ylde.   "So there Zere alZays people coming to Third Avenue to take it."
This made the avenue even busier. Neighborhood girls didn't hesitate to
Zalk doZn to the movies at night in pairs or to go shopping in the evening
alone. "You Zould think the El Zould have been a divider [of the
neighborhood], but it Zasn't really," says 0iss :ylde.   "In  a Zay, because
everybody used it, it brought it closer together. Third Avenue Zas never an
esthetic avenue. But it Zas a nice avenue."

If Third Avenue Zas the heart of the neighborhood, 0oses tore it out.

Relocation began the procedure.

The Board of Estimate had approved the Third Avenue route under the
impression that because 0oses Zas using an already-e[isting facility, the
old El structure, no neZ right-of-Zay Zould  be required—and hence no
families Zould have to be evicted from their homes. But after the approval
Zas given, the Board found that that impression Zas not quite accurate. It
Zas off, in fact, by some one hundred stores—and 1,300 families.

Some buildings had to be torn doZn because, Zhile an El did not need
entrance and e[it ramps, a highZay did, and a single entrance ramp took
half a block of homes. But this need accounted for only a minor percentage
of the relocations. 0ost of the buildings that Zere torn doZn—and every
building on one side of Third Avenue betZeen Thirty-ninth and Si[ty-third
streets Zas torn doZn—had to go because 0oses Zould not alloZ trucks on
his parkZays, and so that he Zould build it instead of the city, he classified
this elevated highZay through a densely packed urban area, a highZay

690
unadorned by a single tree, as a "parkZay." Since 0oses' Brooklyn-Battery
Tunnel Zould pour trucks as Zell as cars into Brooklyn just north of Sunset
3ark, and since trucks as Zell as cars Zould need a route south, he decided
to make Third Avenue that route—by making that four-lane street under the
parkZay into a ten-lane highZay.

The El had cast a shadoZ over Third Avenue, but the El had been forty feet
Zide. The GoZanus Zas ninety-four feet Zide. Its shadoZ Zas more than
tZice as broad.

And more than tZice as dark. The gaps betZeen railroad ties had made the
El's shadoZ a Venetian-blind shadoZ; sunlight had come through as if
through the slats of an opened blind. A highZay Zas a concrete slab,
Zithout gaps. The construction of the GoZanus 3arkZay, laying a concrete
slab on top of lively, bustling Third Avenue, buried the avenue in shadoZ,
and Zhen

the parkZay Zas completed, the avenue Zas cast forever into darkness and
gloom, and its bustle and life Zere forever gone.

And through that shadoZ, doZn on the ten-lane surface road beneath the
parkZay, rumbled (from before daZn until after dark after the opening of
the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel flooded the area Zith freight traffic)
regiments, brigades, divisions of huge tractor-trailer trucks, engines
gunning and backfiring, horns blasting, brakes screeching, so that a tape
recording of Third Avenue at midday could have been used as the
soundtrack for a movie of a George 3atton tank column. And from above,
from the parkZay itself, came the continual surging, dull, surf-like roar,
punctuated, of course, by more backfires and blasts and screeches, of the
cars passing overhead. Once Third Avenue had been friendly. NoZ it Zas
frightening.

It Zas made more frightening by the absence of people.

Stores, restaurants and theaters had brought people to Third Avenue. NoZ
half the stores, restaurants and theaters Zere gone.

691
The El had brought people through Third Avenue on their Zay to and from
its stations. The parkZay did not. 0oreover, although the El had been a
huge, gloomy structure, it Zas, as Cathy :ylde puts it, "one that people
from the neighborhood related to; they traveled on it, they Zere familiar
Zith it."  The parkZay Zas something unfamiliar and strange. There Zere no
lights underneath it and it alZays seemed damp there—condensation on the
tubular steel supporting pillars caused a constant dripping on the street.
"The highZay Zas something different," 0iss  :ylde   says. "It Zas noise,
dirt, accidents, not lighted, a garbage dump, drag races along it in the night,
Zild  kids, something totally negative. It Zas a tremendous psychological
barrier. In a Zay you could say the people feared the highZay." It Zas
something to stay aZay from. It Zas a physical barrier, too. Elderly persons
and mothers Zith small children found Third Avenue frightening not only
because it Zas negative but because it Zas Zide. Crossing the ten-lane truck
road, Zider than a football field, Zas even more of a problem because the
traffic lights never seemed to alloZ enough time for anyone not in the best
of health to get across. Sunset 3ark families began to do their shopping in
stores that Zere not on Third Avenue. Once the avenue had been a place for
people; Robert 0oses had made it a place for cars. And as the avenue's
roadZay became more croZded, its sideZalks began to empty.

The vicious gyre of urban decay began—and Zidened. Because there
Zeren't as many people shopping on Third Avenue, there Zeren't enough to
support the avenue's stores and restaurants—not even the half of the stores
and restaurants that remained after the Zidening. One by one they began to
close. Because there Zeren't as many stores and restaurants, people began
doing their shopping and dining out elseZhere, and then there Zere even
feZer people on Third Avenue. Because the streets in the evening Zere no
longer filled Zith  people, more people Zho might have gone to Third
Avenue in the evening stayed aZay. FeZer people meant even less business.
One by one the shops and restaurants closed. The shop that had raffled off
tZenty-five turkeys raffled off  ten noZ and then one—and then it Zas gone.
And since the oZners of many of the stores had lived in the apartments over

them, Zhen they Zere forced to move their businesses out of the
neighborhood, they Zere forced to move their families out, too, and those
families had provided customers for other stores.

692
Not only Third Avenue Zas Zrecked by the road; so Zere the side streets
betZeen it and the Zaterfront. :ith   0oses' road and tunnel making Sunset
3ark more accessible to trucks, industries requiring truck traffic—including
tZo large neZ plants, one a division of Bethlehem Steel, the other a division
of American 0achine &  Foundry—moved onto Sunset 3ark's Zaterfront,
already croZded Zith industrial activity. And the truck traffic  for all these
factories had no Zay to get to and from them from Third Avenue e[cept
through those narroZ streets, betZeen Zhose parked cars the children of the
neighborhood had alZays played. "There Zas just so much traffic on those
little streets that you Zouldn't believe it," Cathy Cadorine recalls. The death
of one little boy—hit by a huge tractor-trailer in the street right in front of
his house—Zas enough. Faster and faster, the residents of the side streets
began to move out. "The Zhole area died Zith the road," a resident Zould
marvel. "And it died so quick." Soon it Zas, in his Zords, "a ghost toZn."
Along the avenue and on adjacent side streets, roZs of broZns tone and
brick-front buildings that had held stores and apartments, the stores and
apartments that had stood as a bulZark betZeen Sunset 3ark and the slum to
the Zest, began to be vacated. Their rooms, the rooms that had been kept so
clean and neat, stood empty.

And into them came Zhat the neighborhood had alZays feared.

"Third Avenue became the place you could get se[," Cathy Cadorine
recalls. "Everybody kneZ about it." Drunks as Zell as Zhores roamed the
avenue, cadging drinks until they fell asleep in doorZays. Cheap saloons
opened in some of the abandoned stores. Soon there Zere street gangs,
fighting gangs, Irish and 3uerto Rican teen-agers, seeping doZn from the
notorious Red +ook section to continue their racial Zarfare and prey on
passers-by. The side streets off Third Avenue—streets Zhose apartments
Zere noZ filled  Zith families  on Zelfare, families Zithout  fathers, and Zith
poor Spanish-speaking families Zithout clothes adequate for the cold NeZ
York Zinters —became places to dump and strip stolen cars; the streets
began to be filled Zith their ravaged hulks. Rotting litter, rain-sodden
mattresses and broken glass filled the sideZalks and gutters. Rats began to
groZ bold in the rubbish in vacant lots. There Zere even, to the horror of
those residents Zho remained, drug addicts.

693
:ith   its heart gone, the neighborhood had no Zill to resist the invasion.
There Zas nothing to hold its people—and as they saZ the blight creeping
closer, they simply moved aZay. For more than thirty years, the blight in
South Brooklyn had been confined to the Zaterfront area. NoZ, thanks to
Robert 0oses and his parkZay, it Zas on the loose, spreading across Sunset
3ark. The Zorld of neat little houses and block parties vanished beneath it
along the entire tZenty-si[-block length of the GoZanus 3arkZay, as far
east as Fourth Avenue and, e[cept for a feZ isolated blocks, as far Zest as
Si[th—Zhere  the parkZay Zas far enough aZay so that the community

put up a stand, and Zon. 0oses' steel and concrete, "lifted into the air"
above a neighborhood for the convenience of motorists driving through the
neighborhood to get someZhere else, had destroyed the neighborhood.

Convenience? No sooner Zould 0oses open the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel
at one end of the GoZanus 3arkZay and the Belt 3arkZay at the other than
the GoZanus Zould be jammed solid Zith traffic. At rush hours, the traffic
trying to get up onto it Zould be backed up solid, spilling off the ramps and
back into the neighborhood for blocks. Because there Zere no shoulders on
the elevated road on Zhich a disabled car could pull off, one disabled car
could tie up a Zhole lane for hours.

0oses kneZ Zhat to do about that, he said: Ziden the GoZanus 3arkZay,
creating si[ lanes instead of four, although there Zould still be no shoulders.
That Zould bring the road right up to the ZindoZs of the apartments that
Zere left along it. The cars Zould be so close to the buildings that on Zet
days the spray they kicked up Zould splatter the apartment ZindoZs. No
matter, 0oses said, the GoZanus Zould have to be Zidened.

And he Zidened it.

Residents of Sunset 3ark had pleaded Zith 0oses to build the road along
Second Avenue instead of Third. After it Zas built, and they saZ Zhat it
had done to their neighborhood, they kneZ their suggestion had been
correct. "That Zas an industrial area anyZay. Building it over there
Zouldn't have changed anything in the area at all," Cathy Cadorine said.

But no neZspaper mentioned that fact.

694
Of all the hundreds of public Zorks that Robert 0oses Zas building in NeZ
York City during the 1930's, the one Zhose creation most clearly
manifested the same e[traordinary capacities he had displayed on Long
Island Zas the project that arose from the first and longest-held of his
dreams, the dream of the "great highZay that Zent uptoZn along the Zater"
and of the great park alongside that had made him e[claim to Frances
3erkins in 1914, staring from the deck of a +udson River ferryboat at the
muddy Zasteland beloZ Riverside Drive: "Couldn't this Zaterfront be the
most beautiful thing in the Zorld?"

All the qualities that made Robert 0oses a genius of public Zorks Zere
needed for the reali]ation of this dream. Its scope Zas all but unprecedented
in urban America—the ":est  Side Improvement," as he named it, included
not only the completion of the long-stalled, five-mile elevated e[press
highZay from the southern tip of 0anhattan Island to Seventy-second
Street; but also the design and construction of the e[tension of that highZay
si[ and a half miles north to the northern tip of 0anhattan Island; the
transformation

of si[  and a half miles of muddy Zasteland into a park that Zould make
beautiful the city's Zestern Zaterfront; the throZing of a "+enry +udson
Bridge" across the +arlem River that separated 0anhattan from the Bron[;
the continuation of the highZay through the Bron[ to the city line and,
beyond the line, to the SaZ 0ill  River 3arkZay, so that the city Zould have
at last a true outlet to the north. And the problems in the Zay of its
reali]ation Zere unprecedented as Zell. At last, tZenty years after he had
dreamed the dream, he had the poZer in the city that Zas half of the eli[ir
needed to transfer the dream into reality. But he still didn't have the other
half of the eli[ir—money.

The amount needed Zas staggering. The Zork beloZ Seventy-second Street
had been carried out under a 1927 agreement betZeen NeZ York City and
the NeZ York Central Railroad, Zhich Zas an[ious for an enlarged freight
yard at Thirtieth Street and longer covered train-assembling tracks further
uptoZn because of the introduction of diesel locomotives, Zhich could pull
longer trains than steam locomotives. 8nder the agreement, the city gave
the railroad land for an enlarged yard and for depressed tracks leading to it,

695
the railroad in return surrendered its permanent right-of-Zay through
Riverside 3ark and doZn Eleventh Avenue, and the railroad and city, under
an incredibly complicated arrangement, Zere to share the cost of
constructing a :est  Side Elevated +ighZay from the Battery north to
Seventy-second Street, the southern border of Riverside 3ark, as Zell as the
cost of covering the railroad's tracks through the park and through its
northerly e[tension, Fort :ashington  3ark, Zhich  ran to 192nd Street.* By
1929, the city, proceeding Zith the highZay in typical Tammany fashion,
doZn to its adornment Zith millions of  dollars' Zorth of granite, had spent
$25,000,000 as its share of the job, and the railroad had spent $84,000,000,
for a total of $109,000,000. And Zhen the Depression brought both railroad
and city to the brink of bankruptcy and forced the halt of Zork, the job Zas
not nearly done; out of 120 blocks in the park, for e[ample, the tracks had
been covered for only the first seven, betZeen Seventy-second and Seventy-
ninth streets. TZenty million dollars might be needed to complete the
highZay and track-depressing operations beloZ Riverside 3ark alone, and
0oses' preliminary estimates of the rest of the Zork indicated that the
amount of money needed to finish the Zhole ":est Side Improvement"
might Zell equal the $109,000,000 already spent.

And the immensity of this amount Zas only part of the problem. From a
political point of vieZ,  Zhat seemed to make obtaining it almost impossible
Zas the 1927 agreement, Zhich provided that a substantial part of the cost
of the Improvement Zas to be borne by the NeZ York Central. The city's
ta[payers had been aroused by decades of questionable dealings betZeen
the railroad and complaisant city officials, dealings such as the one that

* The public used the name "Riverside 3ark" to refer to both parks and so,
for the sake of simplicity, Zill  this book.

had given the railroad the permanent right-of-Zay through a city park and
doZn a city avenue in the first place. They obviously Zould vieZ any
attempt to use their money to relieve the railroad of its obligation as another
"giveaZay." No sensible politician Zould dare to suggest such an
arrangement. The railroad's share of the :est Side Improvement Zas going
to have to be paid by the railroad—or there Zasn't going to be any

696
Improvement. But the railroad Zas in no position to pay—and obviously
Zasn't going to be for years to come.

One hundred and nine million dollars Zas a terrible obstacle to place
betZeen a man and his dream. Since the turn of the century other men had
been attempting to obtain just a small portion of that sum—enough to build
the bridge over the +arlem River and short approach roads; no one but
0oses had come up Zith a fully-thought-out plan for the reclamation of
Riverside 3ark—and had never come close to obtaining funds for even
those limited improvements. On five separate occasions since 1904, the city
had draZn up plans for a "+enry +udson Bridge," and Zhen 0oses drove
up to the +arlem in 1934, the only trace of the plans he could find Zas the
hundred-foot-high column Zithout a statue on top of it and a number of
faded billboards, one, it seemed, for every city administration of those thirty
years, proclaiming the imminent start of construction. Couple the amount
needed Zith the fact that a substantial part of it had to be provided by a
near-bankrupt railroad, and, even to 0oses' aides, Zho had Zatched R0
Zork fiscal magic before, the obstacle looked insurmountable.

They Zatched R0  set out to surmount it.

8nder one part of the 1927 agreement, the NeZ York Central had agreed to
pay the city $5,000,000—and the city had agreed that it Zould spend that
money only on the :est  Side Improvement. 8nder another part of the
agreement, the railroad had agreed to pay outright part of the cost of roofing
its tracks in Riverside 3ark; $3,200,000 of the track-roofing cost Zas still
outstanding—Zhich meant that the railroad oZed the city a total of
$8,200,000.

If 0oses could get this money from the railroad, he Zould have taken at
least a first step toZard the reali]ation of his $109,000,000 dream. But the
railroad didn't have it. In order for him to get the money from the railroad,
the railroad Zould have to get it from someZhere else first. Since the
Central's oZn sources of credit Zere e[hausted, 0oses Zould have to
obtain the money for the railroad himself—and he Zould have to give the
money to the railroad's hard-eyed directors under conditions that Zould
force them to spend it not on such urgent obligations as Zeekly payrolls
(Zhich the railroad, desperately short of cash, Zas finding it increasingly

697
difficult  to meet) but on obligations that in time of financial crisis the
directors might Zell consider eminently deferrable: the beautification of a
city park.

There Zere, 0oses saZ immediately, reasons for the railroad directors to
Zant beautification. For one, they, as Zell as the city, Zanted the tracks in
Riverside 3ark covered; that Zas the only Zay the long dies el-pulled trains

could be assembled Zithout interference from Zeather. For another, on part
of its debt to the city, the $5,000,000 part, the railroad Zas paying 6 percent
interest, compounded annually. The railroad had not been able to meet the
interest payments since 1929 and they had therefore been added to the
principal. By 1934, the principal—the amount on Zhich the railroad Zas
paying interest—Zas no longer $5,000,000 but $6,500,000. Its over-all debt
Zas therefore no longer $8,200,000 but $9,700,000. And its 1934 interest
payment on the $6,500,000 Zould be $390,000 for that year alone. Since
the Depression had forced the cost of money—interest rates—doZn to Zell
beloZ 6 percent, the railroad Zas paying the city much more for its money
than it should have been.

NoZ, in the free moments of many days, 0oses began to cover pages of
yelloZ legal note pads Zith little clumps of figures. :hen   aides looked over
his shoulder, they saZ that he Zas multiplying numbers together. The
numbers being multiplied Zere millions of dollars; those he Zas
multiplying by Zere  percentages—the aides reali]ed that they Zere interest
rates. And one day the figures fit together into a pattern—a pattern that
enabled him to obtain from the NeZ York Central Railroad not $9,700,000
but $13,500,000.

The key Zas obtaining neZ cash for the Central at an interest rate that
Zould make it possible for the railroad to accept it, use part of it to pay off
the $6,500,000 debt to the city, use another part of it to pay off its
$3,200,000 debt to the city, have enough left over to give the city an
additional, neZ contribution for the :est   Side Improvement, a contribution
it Zas not required to make under the previous agreement—and still be
paying an annual interest less than the $390,000 it Zas noZ being forced to
pay. Such an arrangement Zould give the railroad the track covering it
needed Zhile at the same time saving it money.

698
0oses needed a source that not only Zould loan money to a private
business in precarious financial condition but Zould loan it money at a very
loZ rate of interest. There Zas, he kneZ, such a source. It Zas the State of
NeZ York.

At first, this source did not look like a promising one. The Depression had
made the state's oZn financial position shaky; even if it Zere steady,
Governor Lehman and the Legislature Zould shy aZay from spending
money to bail out a railroad Zhose shadoZy hold over public officials Zas
legendary.

But 0oses kneZ that there Zas one source of state money that had been
lying untapped ever since the Depression began: the si]able balance in the
$300,000,000 Grade-Crossing Elimination Fund that had been created in
1926. No one had ever thought of using the fund to finance the :est Side
Improvement—0oses did not think of it  himself at first—because "grade
crossings" traditionally referred to the lifting of a highZay over a railroad
track at a single point, and the :est Side Improvement, besides being as
much a park as a highZay project, consisted of building a highZay beside
or on top of a railroad track—for si[ and a half miles. But both a railroad
track and a highZay Zere involved in the :est  Side Improvement, and the
best

bill drafter in Albany found that there Zere provisions in the legislation
establishing the Grade-Crossing Elimination Fund that Zould, by a broad
interpretation, alloZ use of the fund for at least part of the Improvement.
The interest rate on monies from the fund Zas, he reali]ed, only 2 percent.
TZo percent of $9,700,000 Zas only $194,000 per year, almost $200,000
less than the interest the NeZ York Central Zas noZ paying on its debt to
the city. The railroad could accept far more than $9,700,000 from the state,
give the balance to the city—and still be saving money. +e suggested this
course to the railroad and persuaded it to agree to accept $13,500,000 —an
amount on Zhich the annual interest Zould be $270,000, representing a
saving to the railroad of $120,000 per year at the same time it obtained its
track covering. Then, to reconcile Lehman and the Legislature to the loan
by making it apparent to the public that it Zas no "giveaZay," 0oses
conceived a complicated device Zhich required the railroad to place all

699
interest payments in escroZ si[ months in advance, Zhile making the loan
Zhat amounted to a ta[ lien against all the railroad's properties in the state,
properties Zorth many times the amount of the loan. On a yelloZ legal note
pad, he drafted legislation authori]ing the loan and told Jack 0adigan to
take it up to Albany. If the legislation became laZ, the city Zould be getting
$13,500,000 in improvements at no cost to itself. And Robert 0oses Zould
see his longest-held dream a long step closer to becoming reality.

The legislative session Zas rapidly draZing to a close. 0adigan
painstakingly e[plained the bill's comple[ities to those legislators Zho had
difficulty  understanding them. Others—Zell, the railroad Zanted the bill
and the railroad could help persuade some of those others. :hen some
legislators still yelled "giveaZay," 0oses  toughened the ta[-lien provision.
The bill passed three days before the end of the session.

Then there Zas the Governor. 0oses received Zord that Lehman didn't
Zant to sign. The Governor, he Zas informed, Zas leery about its legality
and about the "giveaZay" implications. And to make matters stickier,
Lehman and 0oses Zere in the midst of a bitter battle over another 0oses
maneuver. Since the bill Zas passed during the last three days of the
session, it Zas a "thirty-day" bill. The Governor had to sign it Zithin thirty
days of the session's end or the bill Zas dead. And on the tZenty-ninth day
after the session's end, Lehman still had not signed it.

"0oses sent me up to see him because he kneZ he liked me," 0adigan
recalls. "I Zas up in the Capitol at nine o'clock in the morning. And the
Governor let me sit out in his outer office on my fanny from nine o'clock in
the morning until five-ten in the afternoon. TZice I ran out and called
0oses because I kneZ hoZ Zorried he Zas. I told him, '+e's letting me sit.'
0oses said something like 'Stubborn bastard!'

"Finally I  got in to see him. +e jumped all over me. I told him hoZ much
the city Zas going to get out of this.

"+e says, '0oses'll get all the credit for this.' I said, thinking fast, 'Governor,
you should be able to share the credit.' +e said, '+e's not the kind Zho likes
to share much.'

700
"I said, 'Governor, nobody in the Zorld knoZs if you're going to veto this
bill or not.' +is  3R man Zas Joe Canavan,* Zho Zas one of the very best. I
said, '+ave Canavan Zrite up your oZn release and give it to the Sunday
papers. I have glossies right here that you can use.' I said, 'Governor,
tomorroZ's the last day3 "

0adigan Zas offering  to let Lehman instead of 0oses announce that he
Zould sign the bill and reveal the benefits it Zould give to the city, thereby
gaining identification Zith  the project and basking in the praise that
neZspapers Zould undoubtedly bestoZ on everybody connected Zith it.
0adigan Zas reminding the Governor that the story Zould undoubtedly get
a good play because Saturdays are generally sloZ neZs days. +e Zas even
offering to let the Governor distribute the glossy, ready-for-neZspaper-
reproduction photographs of the improvements the $13,500,000 Zould buy.

"The Governor said, That'd make Bob so goddamned mad.' +e smiled. But
then he said, 'I need a memorandum from the Comptroller' [a Zritten
opinion, Zhich Lehman could use to justify his signing, that the bill Zas
constitutional]. Bob had briefed Charlie 0ullins  in the Comptroller's office
about the bill because he kneZ Lehman trusted him. I said, 'Governor,
Charlie 0ullins  is over there right noZ and he knoZs all about this.'
Lehman called over there and 0ullins agreed that the bill Zas legal. So
everything Zorked out all right."

Of the appro[imately $109,000,000 that had stood betZeen Robert 0oses'
dream and reality, $13,500,000 had been acquired.

There Zas $95,500,000 to go.

The arrangement Zith the NeZ York Central soon gave 0oses $4,000,000
more. As part of his plan to e[pand Riverside 3ark, he Zanted to sink
bulkheads out from the shoreline and fill the Zater behind them Zith rock
and earth. Such fill Zas e[pensive—more than tZo and a half dollars per
cubic foot. But 0oses suddenly reali]ed that the e[cavations that the
Central Zould noZ be able to finish beloZ Seventy-second Street Zould
provide vast amounts of fill. Inquiring as to Zhat Zas being done Zith it, he
Zas told that it Zas simply being transported "someZhere on Long Island"
and dumped there. +e pointed out to railroad officials that if they let him

701
send trucks to the e[cavations and haul it aZay and use it in Riverside 3ark,
they Zould save the cost of transporting it. They agreed, and in this fashion
he obtained 1,500,000 cubic yards of fill—$4,000,000 Zorth. There Zas
$91,500,000 to go.

"R0  has this mind—he can read a piece of legislation and remember every
darn thing in it," Sid Shapiro recalls. "+e seemed to knoZ the Zording of
every darn bill in :ashington  and in Albany that had ever been passed
relating to public Zorks. :e   Zere talking about the Seventy-ninth Street
boat

Joseph J. Canavan, former editor of the :orld.

basin and he said, 'Let's build a real boat basin,' " the facade of the marina
decorated Zith stone gargoyles and behind it a fountain Zith jets of Zater
arching from the mouths of brass turtles. "+ave you ever heard of a boat
basin Zith gargoyles? :ell,  I  hadn't either. But he remembered some
obscure federal statute that had been passed—oh, years before—to
encourage the use of artZork on public Zorks." If Ze put on gargoyles,
0oses said, not only Zould the boat basin be beautified, but the money
from the fund could be used to build it. "One day, R0 said, ':hat  happened
to some fund I remember that Zas set up [by a private philanthropist] so
that it could only be used to decorate a public project Zith ornamental
frie]es? Is there any money left in that?' :ell,  Ze looked it up and there
Zas. So R0 said, ':ell,   then, let's have a frie]e.' :e   told our boat basin guy
about this. These guys are usually hard-boiled felloZs, think in terms of
jetties, groins, sheet metal, riprap. :hen you tell one of them gargoyles and
frie]es, he almost falls off his designer's stool." But the tZo funds contained
a total of almost $100,000 for Zhich the boat-basin phase of Robert 0oses'
dream Zould be eligible.

And there Zas $91,400,000 to go.

The Seventy-ninth Street boat basin Zas, of course, the magnificent
structure 0oses had envisioned for Riverside 3ark years before—a
combination marina, riverside restaurant and pedestrian promenade. In the
plans that 0oses finally approved, throZing his arms around chief
architectural engineer Clinton Lloyd in joy, the top level Zas a large traffic

702
circle that alloZed cars coming from the city's interior access to the "great
highZay along the Zater." The center of the circle Zas holloZ. DoZn inside
it, on the middle level, Zas a cool, shadoZy interior courtyard. The center
of the courtyard Zas the fountain, its murmur just loud enough to droZn out
the noise of cars and city above it. Around the fountain Zas a loZ marble
bench for passers-by to sit on. On the river side of the courtyard Zere three
high, Zide arches. Beyond them Zas a broad outdoor terrace, overlooking
the marina beloZ it and the river beyond; designed to hold both the gaily
canopied tables of the riverside restaurant and the broad, tree-shaded
pedestrian promenade. And the bottom level of the structure, completely
concealed inside it and reached by access roads circling doZn around its
outside from the traffic circle above, Zas a tZo-hundred-car garage for the
oZners of boats docked in the marina. The structure did not resemble a
railroad grade-crossing elimination at all, but by coincidence +arold Ickes,
the 3:A   Administrator, perturbed that 3:A   e[penditures Zere not
generating enough immediate employment, had recently promised quick
approval for projects for Zhich plans Zere ready—and Zhen a reporter had
asked Zhat kind of projects the administration had in mind, Ickes "said he
thought that elimination of highZay grade crossings over railroad tracks
offered one means . . . that could be undertaken immediately." There Zere
no highZays over the ctracks around Seventy-ninth Street to be eliminated,
but there Zere tracks to be covered and roads to be built—and Ickes
sounded an[ious for plans.

:orking   night and day, Lloyd and a team of engineers from 0adigan's
consulting firm completed them in a Zeek, and 0adigan headed doZn to
:ashington  Zith  the blueprints under his arm. The first thing that 3:A
officials there noticed Zhen they unrolled them Zas their neZ, very
prominently displayed title: "Seventy-ninth Street Grade Elimination
Structure." If the officials noticed that it didn't resemble any other grade-
crossing elimination structure ever built, they didn't mention the fact, the
only demurrer coming from one narroZ-minded bureaucrat Zho
commented that "the brass turtles and comfort stations Zere a little too
much to be tacked on to a grade crossing" and slashed off the $154,000 cost
of those items, and 0adigan returned Zith a promise that the 3:A  Zould
chip in the $1,766,000 that the materials for the rest of the structure Zould
cost. Then 0oses told La Guardia that for just $154,000 more the city could

703
have not just a boat basin but a beautiful boat basin—and the 0ayor
scrounged up that money. Then 0oses told the C:A that the materials for
the project Zere paid for and he could put men to Zork immediately, and
the C:A   contributed more than $3,000,000 for Zages on Zork on the boat
basin, bringing the total money raised for the structure to more than
$5,000,000. And there Zas $86,400,000 to go.

"R0  never seemed to run out of ideas," Shapiro Zould recall. "+e said to
us, ':e'll   build the highZay part of the Zay along the NeZ York Central
tracks, so Ze'll be eligible for state aid to railroads.' Because there Zere
boat basins along a river involved, he found clauses in the [federal] Rivers
and +arbors Act under Zhich Ze could get money. There Zas federal
highZay money available, of course, so he said, ':e'll tie it in Zith  the
George :ashington Bridge, so it'll  be an interstate highZay and Ze can get
funds that Zay.' Because he had to demolish some buildings ["You'd have to
tear doZn a feZ buildings at Seventy-second Street and bring the highZay
around a curve," he had told Frances 3erkins tZenty years before, and that
Zas just hoZ it Zorked out],  he even found a Zay Ze Zere eligible for
federal housing funds. On that one project, Ze had housing, interstate
highZay, rivers and harbors, and railroads." 0oses obtained a total of more
than $12,000,000 from such sources.

And there Zas $74,000,000 to go.

Still $74,000,000 to go. And much of this money Zas needed for materials
and equipment Zhich could be obtained in no other Zay than by putting up
hard cash, cash that 0oses didn't have. +e had to economi]e.

And he kneZ Zhere to do it. The cost of the Riverside 3ark he had
envisioned as a young man, a park in Zhich the ugly railroad tracks Zere
covered—covered Zith lush laZns and trees, a park crammed lavishly Zith
marinas and Zaterfront promenades and tennis courts and playgrounds—
Zas running about $8,000,000 per mile. +e continued to develop the park
lavishly for the first tZo  of its 6.7 miles, the tZo miles bordered by a
neighborhood inhabited by the upper and "comfortable middle" classes he

liked to develop parks for. But for the rest of its length—from about i ioth
Street, Zhere the neighborhood Zas becoming perceptibly poorer—he

704
scrimped, putting in feZ improvements and doing those in a cheap,
slapdash style. One +undred and TZenty-fifth Street Zas the southern
border of Negro +arlem. Already, in 1934, black faces Zere appearing on
many of the side streets behind Riverside Drive. From 125th Street north,
Robert 0oses put almost no improvements into Riverside 3ark, designing
its northern 3.3 miles Zith one aim in mind: to do them as cheaply as
possible.

The aim Zas accomplished. The development of the southern tZo miles of
Riverside 3ark—the stretch south of 110th Street—cost $16,300,000, or
about $8,000,000 per mile. The development of the northern 4.7 miles of
Riverside 3ark—the stretch north of 110th Street that included Negro
+arlem—cost $7,900,000, or about $1,700,000 per mile, and thus saved
0oses about $6,300,000 per mile, or a total of $29,000,000 less than it it
Zould have cost if he had built it to the same standards as the southern
section.

And there Zas $45,000,000 to go.

Of this $45,000,000, about $15,000,000 represented the cost 0oses Zas
figuring for the section of the Improvement above 192nd Street, so that only
about $30,000,000 stood betZeen him and the completion of his dream the
length of Riverside 3ark. +e informed the Board of Estimate that
$20,000,000 of this amount Zould be for labor, and he could get the labor
free from the C:A   if only he had the $10,000,000 for the rest of the
materials and equipment. :ere they going to let the money be Zasted for
Zant of $10,000,000? The Board caved in and gave it to him—or, rather,
since it didn't have the money to give, it authori]ed a $10,000,000
assessment on Riverside Drive property oZners. At the same time that he
Zas telling the Board that he could get the $20,000,000 Zorth of labor from
the C:A   if only they gave him $10,000,000 Zorth of materials, he Zas
telling the C:A   that he could get $10,000,000 Zorth of materials from the
Board if only they gave him $20,000,000 Zorth of labor. The C:A
authori]ed the rehabilitation of Riverside 3ark. It authori]ed the building of
the +enry +udson 3arkZay through the park; since the C:A  Zas not
alloZed to build highZays or parkZays, it called the parkZay "a park
access road" on the report it submitted to :ashington.

705
And he had the $30,000,000.

+e had all the money needed to complete Riverside 3ark. +e had 6.7 miles
of the dream, enough to get it all the Zay up to 192nd Street, in the bag.

There Zere three miles—and $15,000,000—to go.

North of 192nd Street the shoreline of 0anhattan Island climbed steeply
aZay from the +udson River into the high bluffs of Fort Tryon and InZood
+ill  parks. There Zas a sharp, quick break in the bluffs Zhere the +arlem
River sliced through to meet the +udson and then the bluffs Zere part of the

Bron[, and perched atop them and on the slopes leading doZn to the tZo
rivers Zas the residential community of Spuyten Duyvil, someZhat more
thickly settled than Riverdale, Zhich lay betZeen it and 263rd Street, the
city's northern border.

All previous plans for a through highZay to the north envisioned the
highZay sZinging sharply inland Zhen it  got to Fort Tryon 3ark so as not to
disturb the Zooded beauty of its hills, Zhich formed a serene setting for the
Cloisters that John D. Rockefeller, Jr., Zas building atop them, or those of
InZood +ill  3ark  beyond, Zhich constituted 0anhattan's last piece of
unspoiled forest. 8nder these plans the highZay Zould run along the
easternmost edge of the tZo parks, taking a thin slice from the edge at the
point Zhere it sloped doZn to meet the rest of the city, and obtaining the
rest of its right-of-Zay from  the city streets adjoining the parks and from
condemning the relatively feZ single-family houses that had been built
along them. Besides leaving the tZo forest parks unspoiled, this route had
the further advantage of alloZing the +enry +udson Bridge to cross the
+arlem River not by leaping from high bluff  to high bluff, Zhich  Zould
require an e[pensive high-level bridge, but by crossing from the loZ land
east of InZood +ill  3ark to a loZ-lying  section of the Bron[ opposite it
called 0arble +ill   that Zas the site of nothing e[cept a filthy shanty toZn
and some bo[cars that had somehoZ been left on the site for years—no one
Zas sure hoZ they had gotten there—and Zere noZ serving as the home for
about a hundred homeless men. 0arble +ill could use a good cleaning up
anyZay. Once in the Bron[, the highZay Zould run through 0arble  +ill
and a corner of Riverdale until it reached Van Cortlandt 3ark, Zhere it

706
Zould take right-of-Zay  from the park's Zesternmost edge so as not to
disturb it any more than necessary.

0oses found that using this route Zould cause him problems—financial
problems.

Avoiding Fort Tryon and InZood +ill   parks meant that 0oses Zould not be
able to use the "free" labor provided for him on "park access roads" by the
C:A.   The parkZay Zould  have to run alongside the parks, on city streets.
8nder e[isting  federal legislation, it Zould therefore fall under the
jurisdiction of the Bureau of 3ublic Roads—and the legislation establishing
the Bureau specifically prohibited it from e[tending any aid, for laborers'
pay or any other e[penses, on any road leading to a toll facility. Since
0oses Zas planning to finance the construction of the +enry +udson
Bridge through the sale of bonds of the +enry +udson 3arkZay Authority
he had had the Legislature create, he Zould have to have tolls on the bridge
to pay off the bonds. The city Zould therefore have to pay for the parkZay
north of Riverside 3ark. Furthermore, there Zas the cost of condemning
buildings needed for the right-of-Zay. Even if a state or federal agency had
been Zilling to pay for the buildings, it could not legally do so; under one
of the most fundamental provisions of the City Charter, only the city had
the poZer to condemn property Zithin its borders. 3aying for both labor and
land north of Riverside 3ark Zould cost the city about $5,000,000 more.

Robert 0oses decided not to sZing inland Zhen he got to Fort Tryon 3ark.

Running the parkZay straight through that park and InZood +ill solved
many of his financial problems at a single stroke. The land acquisition
problem Zas solved instantly and completely; since park land Zas already
oZned by the city, no land Zould have to be acquired. As for C:A-paid
labor, it couldn't be used on a road Zithout approval from the Bureau of
3ublic Roads, but it could be used on "park access drives"; in fact, the C:A
looked favorably upon the building of such drives because they made parks
more accessible to the public. The sections of parkZay running into Fort
Tryon and InZood +ill  parks certainly met the definition of "park access
drives" and Zho Zas to say Zhere they stopped; Zhy could not the drive
continue into the park itself—and, perhaps, across it? 0oses had learned
from his previous dealings Zith the C:A   that once he got a project in a

707
park started, once he got the first stake driven for it, it Zas almost
impossible for the C:A   to refuse to let him complete it. Run the parkZay
through Fort Tryon and InZood +ill  parks and the cost of the northern
section of the :est  Side Improvement Zould be not $15,000,000 but no
more than $10,000,000—Zhich happened to be the amount that the +enry
+udson 3arkZay Authority—Robert  0oses, sole member—Zas authori]ed
to raise by the sale of its toll-revenue-secured bonds. 8sing the direct route
through the parks Zould, moreover, have other financial advantages as Zell:
0oses' preliminary discussions Zith bankers had demonstrated to him that
they had no great enthusiasm for buying bonds for a toll bridge that Zould
be located only a feZ hundred yards from a free bridge—the present
+arlem River draZbridge on BroadZay. They believed that drivers Zould
not pay a toll if a free alternative Zas so close by, particularly if the
parkZay's draZbridge also had to be raised—if only occasionally—Zhen a
ship came through. 0oses didn't feel their argument Zas correct—he Zas
sure drivers Zould be Zilling to pay to get off jammed BroadZay and onto
a modern parkZay— but placing the +enry +udson Bridge on the high
bluff a mile to the Zest of the BroadZay bridge Zould make the bridge high
enough to alloZ ships to pass underneath it. +e Zas sure that the bankers
Zould then have no possible reason for a lack of enthusiasm for the project.
Amorti]ing  the forty-year bonds he Zanted to issue could be done if only
2,000,000 of the 14,250,000 cars that came into and out of 0anhattan each
year over the BroadZay bridge used the +enry +udson instead and paid a
ten-cent toll on it—and he Zas sure that one out of every seven drivers
Zould pay ten cents per trip for the added convenience.

But 0oses found that vision Zas not in plentiful  supply on :all   Street. +e
had felt sure that this $10,000,000, the last $10,000,000, all that Zas left
betZeen him and the reali]ation of his dream, Zould be the easiest part of
the cost of the :est Side Improvement to obtain. Instead, it proved to be the
hardest.

The Depression had ended the myth that the bonds of public authorities,
even public authorities Zhose credit Zas backed by a municipality, Zere

risk-free investments. Since Black Thursday, more than tZo hundred
municipalities across the 8nited States had defaulted on their oZn bonds,

708
turning them into Zorthless pieces of paper. And if the bankers needed an
e[ample closer to home—and bankers didn't—they kneZ hoZ close NeZ
York City had come to default. 0ichael J. (Jack) 0adigan, Zho Zas trying
to persuade investment bankers to agree to purchase the bonds if the
Authority put them on the market, had to report back to 0oses that the
bankers Zere afraid to make the investment.

The son of an impoverished bartender, Jack 0adigan had come out of the
3ennsylvania hard-coal country in 1907 at the age of thirteen to enter the
construction industry as a Zaterboy lugging buckets for thirsty Zork gangs,
and by the time, in 1928, he Zas promoted to supervisor for one of the
Jones Beach contractors, he had spent his Zhole life Zith the gangs. :ith
his ruddy, square face and gri]]led hair he looked like one of them, and he
Zas as boisterous as they as he croZded Zith them into South Shore taverns
after Zork to Zash the sand of the barrier beach out of his throat. +is "dese,
dose and dem" speech revealed his lack of formal education; he Zas
addicted to aZesome malapropisms: "From the standing point of finances,"
he Zould say of Tammany's handling of the Triborough Bridge project,
"Zhat a terrible finesco!"

But during the tension of the Jones Beach construction—the firm 0adigan
Zorked for Zas the one that Zent broke on the job—0oses came to knoZ a
different Jack 0adigan, a deliberate, mild-mannered man Zho, Zhen his
opinion Zas solicited, Zould stand very still, his feet close together, his
eyes staring into the distance for a long time before he Zas ready to give it
—and Zho, Zhen he Zas ready, gave it in a voice that Zas quiet, firm and
precise. :hen  he quit his job and Zith a friend, Richard V. +yland, formed
0adigan-+yland,  Inc., Consulting Engineers, Zith "offices" in  the
furnished room they shared over a Rockville Centre restaurant and files
stored in the back seat of +yland's car, 0oses gave them Long Island 3ark
Commission contracts, contracts that made 0adigan a millionaire.

And the uneducated Irishman filled an abandoned cigar factory in Long
Island City Zith e[pensive, college-trained talent—among his employees,
Zhom he called "my 3hi Beta .appa  keys," Zas the brilliant Emil F.
3raeger, Zho during :orld   :ar   II, as chief engineer of the 8.S. Navy,

709
Zould design the floating dry docks that Zere used in the Normandy
landings.

0oses found, moreover, that 0adigan Zas talented Zith money as Zell as
men—a fact the author learned during a series of three-hour private
0adigan lectures on the financing of public Zorks. (One lecture began and
ended Zith the Zords "0oney  means all: unless you get it, you're going
noZhere, brother.") "+e had an e[traordinary native shreZdness," 0oses
said, and Zhen 0oses had to select a representative for his first attempt to
tap the sources of private funds that :all Street bankers controlled—the
sale of +enry +udson 3arkZay Authority  bonds—he selected the
bartender's son. +e selected right. A banker Zas later to say, "+e can tailor
a bond issue as neatly as an artisan assembles a stained-glass ZindoZ."

But bankers, burned by the losses they had taken on municipal bonds

during the Depression, Zould not even try on the +enry +udson bond issue
for si]e. In the preceding tZenty-four months, not a single neZ issue of
such bonds had been successfully floated in the 8nited States. The bankers
informed 0adigan that they Zere not interested in the Authority's bonds
unless the "coverage" of those bonds (the earnings that Zould enable the
Authority to pay interest on and amorti]e them) Zas at least 1.75 and
preferably 2.00 (tZice as much as Zould be needed for that interest paying
and amorti]ation). "They Zere scared, that's all," 0adigan Zould recall.

0oses' oZn surveys had convinced him that not merely one out of every
seven but one out of every three cars using the BroadZay bridge Zould pay
ten cents for an easier trip over the +enry +udson Bridge. +e did not have
the slightest doubt of it; in fact, he considered that figure ridiculously
conservative. And one-third of the BroadZay bridge traffic Zas 3,560,000
cars per year—or, at ten cents per car, $356,000 in toll revenues. You could
subtract the $70,500 annual cost of paying toll collectors and keeping the
bridge painted and in repair and still have left over almost tZice as much as
Zould be required to pay the yearly interest and amorti]ation on the
$10,000,000 bond issue Zhich Zould provide the funds needed to build a
si[-lane +enry  +udson Bridge across the Ship Canal, and to continue the
parkZay north to link up at the city line Zith  the SaZ 0ill   River 3arkZay.

710
But 0oses' figures Zere not conservative enough for the bankers. ":e Zere
trying to sell them the idea that people Zould pay ten cents to avoid that
terrible route up BroadZay," 0adigan recalls. "They couldn't see Zhy you
Zould pay ten cents Zhen you could go the other Zay for nothing. The idea
that people Zould pay for convenience hadn't yet been established."

All through the summer of 1934, 0adigan-+yland  counted the cars
traveling north and south on BroadZay and Riverside Drive to shoZ the
bankers the tremendous volume on Zhich the neZ bridge Zould be able to
draZ. But the bankers still balked. "They Zanted illustrations of previous
situations Zhere a free—if less convenient—bridge Zas competing Zith a
toll bridge and the toll bridge had been successful, and there Zeren't many,"
0adigan recalls. "0ost  toll  bridges Zere built to give access to a place
Zhere there Zasn't any other access. :e finally found one in 0iami  [Zhere
the toll Venetian CauseZay Zas highly successful although in competition
Zith a free County CauseZay]." But the bankers still balked.

0adigan finally  had to report to 0oses that their final decision Zas that
they Zould purchase no more than $3,100,000 in Authority bonds, an
amount for Zhich the traffic they estimated Zould use the +enry +udson
Bridge Zould provide 1.75 coverage.

0oses Zorked frantically  to get the cost doZn to that level. By persuading
the C:A   that the construction of the parkZay through Fort Tryon and
InZood +ill  parks could be called in its entirety a "park project," he got the
labor for that section of parkZay free. :hen  he persuaded La Guardia to
pick up the tab for hire of the construction equipment needed, the entire
cost of that section—$700,000—could be knocked off the amount of bonds
that had to be sold, reducing that amount from $10,000,000 to $9,300,000.
On the northern, or Riverdale, side of the bridge, he had already planned

the parkZay to run along Spuyten Duyvil 3arkZay for almost tZo miles, so
that only limited condemnation Zould be needed. NoZ the Authority could
no longer pay for even that condemnation. La Guardia said the city couldn't
do it, either; an estimated $2,500,000 Zas required and there Zas no money
around for it. The only solution Zas to run as much of the parkZay as
possible through the only city-oZned land in Riverdale: Van Cortlandt 3ark.

711
Doing this reduced the cost of the right-of-Zay to $1,260,000. The
Authority had been supposed to pay for the engineering plans for the
northern and southern sections of the parkZay. 0oses persuaded State
+ighZay  Commissioner Arthur :.   Brandt, one of his admirers, to have
state engineers draZ the plans. This saved about $200,000 more, and
reduced the amount to be raised to $9,100,000. Then 0oses got a break. In
December 1934, 0adigan returned from :ashington  Zith Zord  that as soon
as the neZ Congress convened, it Zould make a neZ appropriation to the
3:A   of $400,000,000—on Zhich the agency Zould be alloZed to Zaive
the past requirement that grants for road-related projects had to be matched
by state contributions. Rushing to Albany, 0oses persuaded Lehman to use
part of the neZ money the state Zould receive to construct the Riverdale
portion of the parkZay. Since this section had been e[pected to cost
$2,750,000, the amount to be raised could be reduced to $6,350,000. 0oses
Zent back to La Guardia. :as  the 0ayor  going to deny the city this
$10,000,000 project for Zant of $1,260,000 Zorth of right-of-Zay? he
asked. The 0ayor agreed that he could not let that happen. +e agreed that
the city Zould purchase the right-of-Zay needed to Ziden Spuyten Duyvil
3arkZay, although at the moment he didn't knoZ Zhere he Zould find the
money. The amount needed to be raised by the bond sale Zas reduced to
$5,090,000.

Try as he Zould, hoZever, 0oses seemed unable to reduce the amount any
further. +e had already sliced from the Authority's obligation every cost
e[cept that of the bridge itself. Federal funds could not be used for the
bridge because it Zas a toll facility; state funds could not be used because
the Legislature Zould never authori]e another highZay e[penditure in the
city; the city had no money to help. Time and again, 0oses sent 0adigan
back to his engineers; time and again, 3raeger, Zhom 0adigan had assigned
to head the team Zorking on the project, gave him the same ansZer: si[
lanes of traffic Zere needed on the bridge; a bridge Zith si[ lanes on a
single level or deck Zas so Zide that three arches running from one side of
the river to the other Zere needed to support it; and a three-arch bridge
could not be built for a penny less than $5,000,000. It certainly could not be
built for $3,100,-000. 3raeger had costed out a narroZer, tZo-deck bridge
built on tZo arches. But the Zeight of such a bridge Zas virtually the same
as that of the Zider bridge; since that Zeight had to be carried by tZo arches

712
instead of three arches, the arches had to be made much stronger; the cost of
the tZo-deck bridge Zas actually a little higher than the single-decker.

"+e [0oses]  Zas really totally  discouraged," 0adigan recalls. "I had never
seen him so loZ." The tZo men had agreed that 0adigan Zould hold one
final meeting Zith the bankers, and on the Friday morning in December

on Zhich that meeting Zas held, 0oses kept looking up from his Zork in
his 80 Centre Street office to ask his secretaries if there Zas any Zord from
the Irishman.

0adigan arrived at Centre Street shortly before noon and told 0oses that
the last-ditch attempt had failed and that "Ze might just as Zell give up the
idea that they Zould change their minds. Three-million-one Zas as high as
they Zould go." The engineer recalls that he had been scheduled to have
lunch Zith 0oses,  but that "Ze didn't feel much like eating. I Zent out and
g<5t into my car to go back to my office."

But then, 0adigan recalls, as "I Zas driving along, I happened to think of a
bridge I had once heard about in +avergrass [+averstraZ], 3ennsylvania,
across the Schuylkill River. It had been built by the 3ennsylvania Railroad,
but then the railroad didn't need it any more and gave it to the community,
see? It Zas a narroZ tZo-lane bridge because there Zas just enough room
on it for a couple of railroad tracks. The community put a floor on it and
used it for cars. But then, see, they decided they needed more capacity so
they just strengthened up the steel and put a second deck on it.

":ell,   it  came to me just like that. I remember I leaned forZard and I said
to the chauffeur, 'Step on it, goddammit!' :e hurried up to the office and I
had a great chief engineer—Emil 3raeger—and he Zas there and I said to
him, 'Suppose Ze left out one of our archZays [arches], strengthened up the
other tZo of them and made the bridge only four lanes Zide—hoZ much
could Ze possibly reduce the cost?' So the office Zorked all day Saturday
and all day Sunday, and all night, too, see, and by 0onday noon Ze kneZ
that everything Zas Zorking for us. There Zas rock on both sides of the
river, see, so you could put the Zeight Ze had been going to put three
arches on on tZo and the rock Zould hold it. And Ze kneZ that Ze could
build Zhat you knoZ  as the loZer deck of the +enry +udson Bridge for

713
$3,-100,000, and Ze Zere able to shoZ that if the traffic Zas to be up to our
estimates, and Ze needed more lanes, Ze Zould be able to strengthen up the
steel on the archZays and build a second deck on top of the loZer deck at a
future date Zhen more money Zas available.

":hen   I brought it in to 0oses,  he studied it a little bit before he said
anything. And then he looked up and said, 'NoZ Ze have a chance!' "

By the end of that Zeek, the bankers had agreed to purchase $3,-100,000 of
+enry +udson 3arkZay Authority  bonds, the money to be used to construct
a one-deck, four-lane bridge. And they had agreed to incorporate in the
purchase agreement a provision that if traffic on the bridge lived up to
0oses' estimates and Zarranted further e[pansion, they Zould, as soon as
the traffic reached that point, purchase an additional $2,000,000 of
Authority bonds, Zhich Zould  enable the Authority to reinforce the tZo
arches and the steelZork on the bridge and build a second deck on it.
Although the laZyers for the Authority and the bankers Zould not finish
dotting the /'s and crossing the /'s in the agreement until 0arch 1935, 0oses
and 0adigan kneZ the money Zas in the bag. The financing of the :est
Side Improvement Zas complete.

* * *

In later years, as he greZ steadily richer, Jack 0adigan Zould become
addicted to the Zay of life of the rich. The living room of his Fifth Avenue
apartment Zould be furnished in shades of gold—golden carpet, golden
loveseats, golden armchairs. But over the long golden sofa, in the place of
honor in the room, hung a simple engineer's sketch in black and Zhite: a
rendering of the arches—tZo arches, not three—that support the +enry
+udson Bridge.

Robert 0oses had envisioned the :est Side Improvement Zith the eyes of a
visionary. +e had discerned a Zay to finance it Zith the eyes of a banker, a
very astute banker. The financing of the :est Side Improvement Zas a
supreme e[ample, perhaps the supreme e[ample, of the practical side of
Robert 0oses' genius. For more than half a century, NeZ York City had
strained to find a Zay to build the :est  Side Improvement and had been
unable to find sufficient funds to build it on even the most limited scale. In

714
slightly more than one year, Robert 0oses had found the funds to build it—
on a grand scale. True, one source of his financing, the federal relief
program, had not been available before in the dimensions it Zas available
under C:A   and :3A.   But that Zas only one source out of more than a
score that he pulled together. The catalyst that finally brought the :est Side
Improvement to fruition Zasn't :ashington's  largesse but 0oses' genius for
turning a dream into reality, for accomplishment, for Getting It Done.

But Robert 0oses Zas in the city noZ, not on the Island. :hile   on the
Island his proposals had been opposed most vigorously by selfish interests,
in the city his :est  Side Improvement proposal Zas being opposed
vigorously by people Zhose interests Zere not selfish at all, Zho cared very
deeply about the city and Zho felt that Zhile an Improvement Zas needed,
the form in Zhich 0oses  Zas proposing to build it Zas not the best form—
Zas in fact a form that might even bring the city harm, harm that might
outZeigh the good—and Zho also felt that it Zas not necessary to build it in
that form at all.

Among these men Zere tZo young reformers, Bill E[ton and Bob
:einberg.

Robert C. :einberg  Zas the 3ark Department architect Zhose early
admiration for 0oses had already been tempered by his refusal to take
neighborhood preferences into account in the designing of neighborhood
playgrounds. :illiam   E[ton,  Jr., Zas a Zitty young man-about-toZn Zhose
tireless pursuit of romance (his list of girlfriends Zas legendary among his
friends) Zas constantly being interrupted by his penchant for Zorking night
and day for reform causes that caught his eye.

Although E[ton  and :einberg  Zere both still in their tZenties, both
+arvard graduates (the brilliant E[ton had graduated at nineteen) and both
active members of the Citi]ens 8nion, the City Club and the 3ark
Association, they had never been close friends. But the :est Side
Improvement Zas to make them close. For E[ton loved InZood +ill 3ark
and :einberg  loved

Spuyten Duyvil. And each of the tZo young men felt that the
"Improvement" Zould destroy the thing that he loved.

715
InZood +ill  3ark  Zas not a park at all, but a Zilderness, a Zonderful
Zilderness, a last reminder, croZded into the craggy hills in the north-
Zesternmost corner of 0anhattan Island by the relentless spread of
concrete, that once almost all of the island had been covered Zith lush
green forests. To the east, the hills sloped doZn into a valley that opened on
a beautiful, peaceful cove formed by a 8-curve in the +arlem River. In the
valley, the site of the old Algonquin village of Shora-.ap-.ock*    ("in
betZeen the hills"), Zas a little museum operated by an Indian Zoman and a
pottery studio, complete Zith kilns capable of the most delicate ceramics. In
the cove, the last bit of natural Zaterfront on 0anhattan Island and the
reputed site of the landing of a longboat from +enry +udson's +alf 0oon
three hundred years before and of a battle betZeen the longboat creZ and
the Algonquins, stood a giant tulip tree under Zhich +udson had held a
poZZoZ  Zith  the Indians. On the opposite, or +udson River, side of the
park's hills, tZo hundred feet beloZ the steep escarpment that formed their
Zestern edge, Zas a narroZ strip of landfill that held a NeZ York Central
roadbed. But in the three hundred acres covered by the hills themselves,
there Zas hardly a sign of the hand of man. The Lords of Lord & Taylor had
once lived in tZo mansions on the escarpment, but these had burned to the
ground decades before. :hen E[ton turned off the city's asphalt streets and
Zandered up the steep slopes—it Zas their steepness that had saved them
from development—he found himself in a different Zorld, a Zorld of Zild
underbrush and toZering trees. +iking up to their crest, under foliage so
thick that it all but blotted out the sun, he could pick Zild hackberries and
blueberries or, in spring and early summer, could stop and look for a Zhile
at the fragrant purple- or Zhite-blossomed lilac bushes, some of them three
times as tall as he. At the crest, out on the escarpment, Zas a vieZ that
guidebooks marveled over—"perhaps the finest 0anhattan offers," said
one: the broad sZeep of the +udson beloZ and, looming above the river on
its far shore, the endless miles of the 3alisades, unmarred north of the
George :ashington Bridge by a single man-made structure. If E[ton sat so
that he couldn't see the bridge, there Zas nothing to remind him of Zhat he
had left behind at the foot of the hills e[cept for the occasional passage, far
beloZ him, of a little toy  NeZ York Central train.

E[ton loved that Zorld.  "On the top, there Zas a big outcropping of granite
on the north end, and I used to go up there in April and just lie on it in the

716
sun and look doZn at the Zater. I Zas no great outdoorsman, I'm not trying
to say that. But Zhen I Zent into InZood +ill,   I really felt that I had gotten
aZay from the city. And sometimes I needed that feeling."

The idea of altering that Zorld horrified him. "It  Zas the only real Zoodland
left on 0anhattan," he Zould recall years later. "It Zas the last hunk of
primeval forest in the Zhole metropolitan area. It Zas unique. It Zas
irreplaceable."

* Origin of  the name of Spuyten Duyvil's .appock Street.

And to alter it Zith  a highZay! ":hen   you Zere up on top there, you Zere
aZay from the roar of cars and the smell of gasoline. It Zas the only place
on 0anhattan Zhere you could still say that." 0oses' proposed +enry
+udson 3arkZay Zould  bring the roar and the smell right into that beautiful
spot. In fact, it Zould, to a large e[tent, eradicate it, bury it under si[ lanes
— 140 feet in Zidth—of  concrete, since 0oses' plan Zas to run the
highZay right along the escarpment. 0oses Zas saying that running the
road through the park Zould destroy "only a feZ trees." E[ton kneZ that
couldn't be true: so thick Zere the toZering elms, maples and oriental pines
that no road 140 feet Zide could be picked through them Zithout cutting
doZn hundreds. A highZay Zould have values—E[ton, having served on
City Club committees studying the traffic problem, Zas aZare of the need
for a northern outlet—but this unique, irreplaceable forest offered the city
other values that a highZay Zould destroy, and "it just didn't make sense" to
destroy them if there Zas any alternate route available.

:einberg  saZ other values in Spuyten Duyvil, the residential community
located atop the bluffs that faced InZood +ill across the +arlem River. The
community Zas not a "prestige" area like Fieldston directly to the north; but
it Zas proof that even Zithin a large city even families Zithout Zealth could
find peacefulness, seclusion and beauty. Its modest single-family homes—
there Zere only three small apartment houses in Spuyten Duyvil then—
Zere built on small plots. But they Zere built along ravines that led doZn to
the +udson and along lanes that rambled among floZer gardens and
picturesque rock formations and Zere shaded by lordly oaks and elms. A
reporter Zho visited Spuyten Duyvil in 1935 Zrote in surprise that it Zas a
"village," a village in the midst of a city, a village straight out of "some

717
remote part of rural England," complete to its four big, fieldstone-and ivy-
covered English country churches. It Zas a village that possessed a
beautiful vieZ—many of its homes enjoyed a magnificent prospect of the
+udson and the 3alisades—and an asset that Zas even more valuable in the
city: quiet. Tucked into a corner of the Bron[ as it Zas, it had no through
traffic; the only thoroughfare Zider than a country lane in all Spuyten
Duyvil Zas "Spuyten Duyvil  3arkZay," a tZo-lane road Zhose right-of-
Zay, lined by trees so big that their branches met over it umbrella fashion,
Zas barely thirty feet. 0oses' proposal to turn it into a 140-foot-Zide +enry
+udson 3arkZay by tearing doZn hundreds of the trees and condemning
laZns of the bordering houses horrified the community. The road Zould
split the community in half, make it difficult  to get from one side to the
other, and Zould funnel through it a great stream of traffic. "It Zill be the
end of beautiful Spuyten Duyvil," Zailed one resident. :einberg—Zhose
Zork in city  planning at +arvard and, after graduation, Zith the pioneering
urban-ologist :erner  +egeman had taught him the importance of human
values in a city—Zas interested in Spuyten Duyvil both because his family
oZned real estate there and because the community embodied so many
human values. +e began to study 0oses' plan, and his conclusions Zere the
same as E[ton's: that "it made no sense" if there Zas any alternate route
available.

And as the tZo young men began to study 0oses' :est Side Improve-

ment plan together, they reali]ed immediately that there Zas an alternate
route—the one that had been proposed before 0oses, a route that, upon
reaching the southern border of InZood +ill 3ark, sZung inland so that it
Zould run not through the most beautiful portion of the park but along its
eastern edge and adjoining city streets, that Zould cross the +arlem River
on a loZ-level bridge, inland from the +udson, Zhose northern terminus
Zould not be Spuyten Duyvil but the 0arble +ill   shanty toZn in the holloZ
beloZ it, and that Zould continue north not through Spuyten Duyvil but
through largely uninhabited areas of 0arble +ill until  it reached Van
Cortlandt 3ark, Zhere it could run just inside the park's edges, taking just a
thin slice from it, until it  reached the SaZ 0ill  River 3arkZay.

718
There Zere, as E[ton and :einberg  saZ it, certain obvious advantages to
this alternative: it Zould spare InZood +ill  and Spuyten Duyvil, eliminate
the 0arble +ill   shanty toZn, and, because a loZ-level bridge costs less than
a high-level, be less e[pensive than 0oses' plan. (Condemnation costs
Zould still  be minimal because most of the right-of-Zay Zould be taken
from the park edge and adjoining streetbeds; only a feZ single-family
homes Zould have to be condemned.) Their route Zas only three-quarters
of a mile longer, an inconsequential factor Zhen Zeighed against the
preservation of the city's last virgin Zoodland and a uniquely peaceful
residential community.

As E[ton and :einberg   had been thinking about the alternatives, moreover,
they had come to reali]e that their route had certain other advantages, not so
obvious but, perhaps, even more important. It Zas difficult for them to
define these advantages, because in the early 1930's there Zas almost no
literature to draZ upon; it Zould not be for more than a decade, in fact, that
terms to e[plain Zhat they Zere thinking Zould  come into common coinage
—like "ecology" and "environment" and "human scale." 0oreover, the
defining might Zell  not bring them much popularity, they kneZ, because a
nation that Zorshipped the engineer Zas not yet ready to be told that the
engineer's values might not be the last Zord in highZay design. But they
struggled to define them nonetheless.

"I remember reali]ing that he [0oses] Zas thinking  in terms of the vieZ of
the river, the vieZ that the motorist Zould have—he Zas thinking in terms
of the motoring public, of automobiles," E[ton says. ":ell,   a motorist
spends a feZ seconds at a spot and maybe he can't even look at it; maybe he
has to be looking at the car ahead of him. But the pedestrian spends a long
time at a spot. +e can sit doZn and look at it. So it's the pedestrian Ze
should be thinking of. And then there Zas the damage to the park itself.
Cutting doZn the trees Zould probably interfere Zith the natural drainage
system, and then you'd have to start building drains and God knoZs Zhat
else." :einberg,  putting his thoughts in Zriting, Zrote  E[ton  that building a
parkZay through Spuyten Duyvil Zould, simply  by making Spuyten Duyvil
more accessible, bring many neZ residents—and many apartment buildings
—to the area and to all Riverdale. Therefore, before the parkZay Zas built,
plans to accommodate the neZ residents should be made. If apartment

719
houses Zere simply plumped doZn helter-skelter onto Riverdale's narroZ
country lanes, their residents' cars Zould jam them, turning Riverdale

into just another e[tension of the noisy, traffic-jammed city. If a feZ of the
streets Zere Zidened, and if apartment-house building Zas restricted to
those streets by ]oning, and if areas near them Zere ]oned for stores, the
apartment residents Zould be able to Zalk to stores and Zould therefore not
have to do so much driving Zithin Riverdale, and the quiet, country serenity
of the non-apartment areas could be preserved. But 0oses refused to do any
advance planning himself—he Zould not even alloZ Riverdale civic leaders
to tell him Zhere overpasses across the parkZay should be built to be most
convenient for the community—or to alloZ anyone else to do any: to
minimi]e  community antagonism, he kept the e[act route of the parkZay
secret as long as possible, Zhich made advance ]oning changes
impracticable. "These are not competition projects, but units in the living
life of the people" that Zill  "affect the daily life of the thousands of
individuals and families Zho live Zithin  the adjacent neighborhoods,"
:einberg  Zrote.  "Before the :est  Side Improvement is built, its effect on
those neighborhoods should receive greater study. . . ."

Analy]ing  the rest of the :est  Side Improvement, E[ton and :einberg  did
Zhat no one else in the city Zas doing: took a close look at 0oses' plans.
0oses had stated that the +enry +udson 3arkZay Zould run through only
"a corner" of Van Cortlandt 3ark. Actually, the tZo young reformers found,
it Zould run through its center. And the location of a giant cloverleaf
planned in the center to provide an interconnection Zith another parkZay
0oses Zas proposing—the 0osholu—Zas  near the only fresh-Zater marsh
of any si]e left in all NeZ  York. :hen   biology teachers had protested to
one of 0oses' aides about the destruction of part of the marsh, the last spot
in the city at Zhich students could study marsh plants, birds and animals,
the 0oses 0an  had assured them that "destruction" Zas an ine[act term;
"beautifica-tion" Zas more suitable, for Commissioner 0oses planned to
"landscape" the marsh by dredging it to create a series of "lagoons" Zith
formal shrubbery along their edges. And, the aide Zent on, they needn't
Zorry that the job Zould be only half done; the Commissioner Zas alZays
thorough: the marsh Zas going to be landscaped not only near the
cloverleaf but along its entire length. One of the teachers begged E[ton to

720
fight for "one of the most beautiful spots, Zith a riot of plant life and birds.
... I Zondered hoZ shortsighted officials could e[pect any 'planted shrubs'
Zould equal that dense thicket." The primeval Zilderness of InZood +ill
3ark Zas not the only priceless and irreplaceable natural asset that Zould be
lost to the city and its people forever if 0oses Zas alloZed to carry out his
plan, E[ton reali]ed.

And as E[ton and :einberg  proceeded Zith their study, they reali]ed that
there Zas yet another, vastly more important, natural asset that Zas going to
be lost to the city: its Zaterfront.

"It didn't require much brains to see that running the highZay in Riverside
3ark along the Zater Zould have the effect of making sure the Zaterfront
itself could never be used for a park," :einberg Zas to recall. It "Zould
forever eliminate for recreational purposes several miles of the most
beautiful Zaterfront in the Zorld."  E[cept at scattered, difficult-to-reach
locations, people Zould no longer be able to stroll beside the broad river,

play beside it, fish in it or picnic beside it. They Zould no longer be able
even to look at it in peace; there Zould be a massive barrier of steel and
concrete— and the roar of the motors of countless cars—betZeen the
Zatcher and the Zater. There should be a highZay through Riverside 3ark
—agreed. But Zhy could the highZay not run Zhere every other planner
Zanted it to run— atop the NeZ York Central tracks that ran either up the
center of the park or close to the slopes leading up to Riverside Drive? That
Zould leave the rest of the park free for recreation—all the Zay doZn to the
Zaterfront— as Zell as free from automobiles, and overpasses or
underpasses could easily alloZ pedestrians to cross the highZay to get to it.

:hat   lay betZeen the tZo young reformers and 0oses Zas partly a
question of values.

0oses' had been formed in a different age, the age, tZenty years and more
in the past, Zhen he had been a young reformer. To understand his dream
for the :est  Side Improvement, one had to understand the age in Zhich he
had dreamed it.

721
In that age, parks had been for the upper and "comfortable middle" classes
and one of the things those classes Zanted most to do in parks Zas to drive
through them—at the sloZ, leisurely speeds of the era—and enjoy their
scenery. In that age, therefore, it made sense for a road through a park to be
placed at its most scenic location—in the case of Riverside 3ark, at the
river's edge.

But things had changed. There had been 125,101 motor vehicles in NeZ
York City in 1914; there Zere 804,620 in NeZ York City in 1934—and
additional hundreds of thousands in the :estchester and NeZ Jersey
suburbs that Zould also pour cars onto the +enry +udson 3arkZay. +eavy
traffic on 0oses' Long Island parkZays Zas already beginning to make
driving on them less and less a source of pleasure and more and more a
source of pain— or at least irritation; their value as a source of beauty and
pleasure in themselves Zas already clearly diminishing.

At the same time, moreover, the need for providing and preserving other
values Zas becoming more important. Cities Zere groZing. Their people
Zere being cut off more and more from nature. They needed every chance
they could be given to see it and feel it around them. "Recreation" had been
the key Zord among park enthusiasts Zhen 0oses had started building
parks; noZ, "conservation" Zas being heard more and more. In a NeZ York
in Zhich concrete Zas devouring green grass and trees more hungrily every
year, nothing Zas more necessary of conservation than the last piece of
natural Zoodland on 0anhattan, or a beautiful and unique sZamp in Van
Cortlandt 3ark—and its Zaterfront.

0oreover, as :einberg  had pointed out, the highZay Zas going to be,
inevitably, a part of neighborhoods. The :est Side Improvement could give
adjoining neighborhoods a priceless bounty—a great Zaterfront on Zhich
they could, Zithout e[pense or travel, "Zalk abroad and recreate"
themselves and their families. And if the river Zere ever cleansed of
pollution—and this possibility should be considered, no matter hoZ remote,
for a public improvement such as 0oses Zas proposing might Zell last for
centuries and anything

could happen in centuries—they could sZim in it, sZim almost at their very
doorstep. Build a highZay along that Zaterfront, erect huge viaducts of

722
steel and pavements of concrete at the Zater's edge, and that Zaterfront
Zould be gone, possibly forever, lost to the hungry city until the end of
time. Build the :est  Side Improvement to Robert 0oses' specifications and
the city Zould undoubtedly gain in many Zays, but it Zould lose in many
Zays, too—and it Zould lose in Zays that could never be remedied.

0oses might have seen these truths if he had been Zilling to listen to those
Zho saZ them so clearly. But he refused to listen, granting E[ton only one
intervieZ, the one in Zhich "he Zas just sitting there laughing at you."

Other city officials Zho  listened to E[ton and :einberg  didn't laugh. From
the edge of the high bluff in Fort Tryon 3ark on the north side of the
Cloisters, Comptroller 0cGoldrick  could see InZood +ill  3ark and the
community of Spuyten Duyvil spread out beloZ to the north as clearly as if
they had been parts of a diorama. :ith his eyes folloZing E[ton's  pointing
finger, 0cGoldrick  could see at a glance hoZ much lay in the path of
0oses' route—thickly  forested slopes in the park, quiet residential streets in
the community—and hoZ little in the path of E[ton's. +e could see hoZ
little harm Zould be done to the park if a narroZ band Zas sliced off its
eastern edge for part of the right-of-Zay, and hoZ the city street alongside
the park Zould provide most of the rest. Across the river, beyond the
northern terminus for the loZ-level bridge E[ton Zanted, beloZ the built-up
slopes of Spuyten Duyvil to the left, there stretched dramatically straight
north a valley occupied only by flimsy tar-paper shacks, a valley Zhich
might have been placed there as an ideal parkZay right-of-Zay. "Their route
Zould have added maybe three-quarters of a mile," 0cGoldrick Zas to
recall, "but Zhat's three-quarters of a mile to a motorist? A flick of the eye,
that's all. And it Zould have saved the park and Riverdale and Fieldston
from having a trench run through it."

Some officials found flaZs in 0oses' plan that E[ton  and :einberg  hadn't
thought of. 0oses' ingeniously restrictive laZs and ingeniously loZ-
clearance parkZay bridges had insured that buses Zould never be able to
ruin the beauty of his Long Island parkZays or carry poor people along
them to his state parks. The Board of Estimate's Chief Engineer, 3hilip 3.
Farley, noticed that 0oses Zas planning to loZ-bridge the city, too; enough
of his +enry +udson 3arkZay  bridges Zere going to have a ma[imum

723
headroom of thirteen feet and a headroom at the curb of eleven feet so that
usage of the parkZay by buses—Zhich Zere e[actly thirteen feet high—
Zould be impractical. "One-third of the families in the City have
automobiles," Farley reported to the Board. "The other tZo-thirds depend
on buses. If they are to get any benefit from this improvement, buses must
use [it]." 0oreover,  Zhile the principal function  of 0oses' Long Island
parkZays had been to enable drivers to reach state parks, the principal
function of the +enry +udson 3arkZay  Zould be to enable drivers from the
Bron[ and :estchester  to commute to their jobs in 0anhattan; his earlier
roads had been roads for pleasure, but this Zould be a road for business.

:ithout   buses, commuting on it could be only by car. This might Zell
prove impractical; not only Zould the parkZay increase the floZ of cars
into traffic-clogged 0anhattan, but, Zith  the inevitable increase in the
population of Spuyten Duyvil, Riverdale and :estchester, car traffic might
Zell overZhelm  the parkZay. In some future generation, opening it to buses
each able to carry forty or more car drivers might Zell become imperative.
But, as Farley said, "the normal life of the parkZay bridges is estimated at
ioo years." Rebuilding them after the parkZay itself had been completed
Zould be enormously e[pensive. One of the thirteen-foot bridges, the one at
239th Street, Zas, by design, the centerpiece of a large traffic interchange,
all of Zhich Zould  have to be rebuilt—at a cost of millions of dollars. If
0oses Zas alloZed to build loZ  bridges, even if the city might in some
future generation Zant to alloZ buses on the +enry +udson 3arkZay, it
might simply be financially impractical to do so.

But 0oses Zouldn't  listen to the city's officials. :hen   0cGoldrick   tried to
talk to him about the alternate route, he cut the Comptroller short. "+e
Zould brook no change," 0cGoldrick  recalls. "It had to be straight." :hen
Farley recommended that the Board disapprove the bridge designs, 0oses
called the recommendation "absurd in the light of the laZ [the parkZay laZ
he had Zritten, of course]" and told the Board flatly that if the bridges
Zeren't built his Zay, they Zould not be built at all.

The old reformers Zho headed the city's Good Government organi]ations
Zere products of an earlier era—many of them, of the same era as 0oses—
but they Zere Zilling  to listen to the tZo young reformers, and, listening,

724
they Zere convinced. "Once the Board of the 0unicipal Art Society had a
debate," E[ton recalls. "It took a vieZ that 0oses Zas ruining InZood  +ill.
Old Electus D. Litchfield, a great and good architect, said Zhat a beautiful
vieZ there Zas from the road. I said that from the road there is a beautiful
vieZ, but to the road there is a lousy vieZ. And I still remember some of the
old-time architects and beau[ arts boys Zho Zere on that board saying,
'+ear, hear!' " Soon the Citi]ens 8nion, the City Club and the Regional 3lan
Association Zere all asking for a detailed e[amination of 0oses' proposal.
0oses stopped laughing. +e Zrote a letter to the trustees of the City Club
charging that the tZo men Zere pushing the alternate route because it Zould
increase the value of :einberg's Spuyten Duyvil real estate.

"There Zas no truth in Zhat he said, none at all," E[ton recalls. "Bob did
oZn some real estate in Spuyten Duyvil. But it Zas a small property he had
inherited from his parents, really insignificant Zhen compared to other
property he had inherited—he Zas quite Zealthy, you knoZ. And the
property Zas undeveloped and near the route 0oses Zanted. If the parkZay
Zas put along 0oses' route, it [the property] Zould have become quite
valuable. Our route Zould have left it just as it Zas. Its value Zould have
been increased by 0oses' route, not ours. And 0oses must have knoZn that
the alternate route Zouldn't have done Zhat he Zas saying it Zould
[increase the value of :einberg's property]. It Zas obvious. But he said it
anyZay. +is only reply to everything Ze had proposed Zas an ad hominem
attack on us, and it Zas all a lie, a goddamned lie."

City Club president Eustace Seligman called E[ton in, questioned him
about the charge and then told the trustees that he Zas completely satisfied
as to the young men's integrity. The City Club's park committee thereupon
accompanied E[ton to the high bluff at the Cloisters, and saZ, as
0cGoldrick  had seen, the advantages of the alternate route. And Zhen
0oses refused even to grant the committee an intervieZ, it issued a report—
notable in that it Zas the first formal censure of 0oses by any of the Good
Government organi]ations that had long supported him—that called his
plan a "violation of the principles of good planning." ":hile    Ze are for 0r.
0oses as a man, having bent over backZard in our efforts to get the order
[Order Number 129] of Secretary Ickes rescinded, his treatment here is
high-handed and not in the best interests of the public," the report said.

725
Other Good Government groups that investigated the :est Side
Improvement also agreed Zith E[ton and :einberg;  the R3A even
commissioned engineers to map out the alternate route.

But the reformers' front Zas far from solid. The logical group to lead a
protest about park plans Zas the 3ark Association and the president of the
3ark Association Zas 0rs. Sul]berger, and Jack 0adigan Zas telling 0rs.
Sul]berger that InZood +ill  Zas used only for necking. And in the middle
of the fight, 0rs.  Sul]berger sent 0oses a letter Zhich Zhile  not
specifically mentioning the :est  Side Improvement said that the
association had revieZed "the many developments Zhich are taking place in
the parks under your energetic leadership" and "decided that Ze ought to
e[press to you officially our approval and delight in Zhat you are doing."
Even the City Club's board of directors ended up disoZning its park
committee's report—despite a statement by Director Nathan Straus: noting
that "every organi]ation that has studied the project has agreed that the
loZer route is the only practical one," he accused 0oses of treating city
parks "as if they Zere his oZn private property."

Those reformers Zho still objected found that the poZers they had been so
instrumental in persuading La Guardia and the Legislature to give 0oses
Zere noZ turned against them. They appealed to the Board of Estimate to
stop the 3ark Commissioner from chopping doZn the trees in InZood +ill
3ark, but then remembered Zith a shock that under the 3ark Department
Consolidation Act Zhich they had supported, in violation of their oZn
stated principles, the Board had no authority over the details of Zork Zithin
parks. Since 0oses Zas not using city money for the Zork, moreover, he
did not need Board approval for any Zork in InZood +ill.

Then they demanded that 0oses hold a public hearing on his plans, and
threatened to file a ta[payers' suit to obtain an injunction if he did not agree
to hold one. 0oses agreed. +e set a date tZo Zeeks aZay. And then, during
those tZo Zeeks, he cut doZn hundreds of trees for the right-of-Zay. "+e
kneZ hoZ to handle them," 0adigan Zould  laugh years later, recalling the
reformers' shock Zhen they reali]ed that the park they had Zanted so much
to save had been ruined. 0oses himself regarded his move as a

726
masterstroke; he devoted space in his memoirs to relating hoZ his men
invented "a neZ

ingenious tree-pulling device equipped Zith a sort of electric donkey
engine" that cut doZn trees even faster than he had hoped.

The Board of Estimate did have poZer over the Riverside 3ark section of
the project—because, despite the federal and state contributions, the city
Zould have to furnish much of the money itself. Borough 3resident Samuel
Levy of 0anhattan proposed preserving the Zaterfront for pedestrians by
building the +enry +udson 3arkZay  not along the Zater but over the NeZ
York Central tracks. 0oses replied by driving stakes: starting Zork in
Riverside 3ark on the recreational facilities the public Zanted, he asked the
Board if they Zanted the Zork Zasted. +e ZhipsaZed the Board: he
announced publicly that his plans Zere not only ready but approved by the
federal government, Zhich Zas prepared to give the city millions of dollars
for them; if the Board accepted Levy's proposal, he said, neZ plans Zould
have to be draZn up—that Zould take months; then the plans might or
might not gain federal approval; even if they did, federal money might no
longer be available; the city should not risk losing the chance of a century
to get the job done. +e misinformed the Board: he told it at one point that
Levy's plan Zould cost $34,000,000 Zhile his Zould cost only $6,000,000
(it actually Zas to cost the city four times that amount). +e deluged the
Board Zith attractively printed brochures shoZing the beauty of his plan.
+e invoked e[perience and past successes: Zhen Levy tried to argue for an
impartial engineering survey of the tZo plans, 0oses said, "The problem is
primarily for park, parkZay and landscape e[perts, and not one of simple
engineering"—and he reminded the Board that his men Zere park, parkZay
and landscape e[perts Zho had built Jones Beach.

727
Levy Zas certain that his plan Zould not cost $34,000,000. And he Zas
certain that 0oses' Zould cost far more than $6,000,000. But Zithout
enough technically proficient engineers to cost out 0oses' plans, Zithout
press support (not only did the press accept 0oses' figures as truth, it did
not even discuss at length such issues as Zaterfront preservation), Zith La
Guardia against him (because the 0ayor Zanted the :est Side
Improvement built before November 1937, Zhen he Zould be running for
re-election) and e[erting pressure on the Board members, the borough
president Zas helpless. +ardly had he completed an acerbic e[change Zith
0oses (0oses:  "Do you think you knoZ  more about building parkZays
than I do?" Levy: "I didn't say so." 0oses: ":ell,    this is a parkZay") Zhen
the Board approved 0oses' plan.

If there Zas any desire for second thoughts, there Zasn't time for them. The
very day after approval Zas given, huge pile drivers Zere hammering
bulkheads into the +udson River off the shore of Riverside 3ark. :ithin  a
Zeek, convoys of dump trucks—five hundred a day—Zere rumbling over
the dirt roads leading into the park. Si[ thousand :3A-paid  laborers Zere
shoveling into place the rock and earth the trucks Zere delivering, and
pouring over them cement that Zould harden into a neZ shoreline for
0anhattan Island. 3rogress on the +enry +udson Bridge Zas just as rapid.
By the time the Board got around to considering Zhether the Bron[ route
should go

through Spuyten Duyvil (its approval Zas required for that because its
money Zas required for the condemnation necessary there) the northern
bridgeheads Zere fi[ed in place, in Spuyten-Duyvil. There Zas no choice
but to approve the Spuyten Duyvil route. And 0oses did not let the pace
slacken; the speed Zith Zhich the :est Side Improvement Zas driven to
completion Zas symboli]ed by the construction of the bridge that carried
the +enry +udson 3arkZay over BroadZay at 253rd Street in Riverdale, a
job that Zould normally have taken at least a year to complete. The
legislation authori]ing construction of the bridge (by the State Council of
3arks) Zas signed at 1 p.m., 0ay 1, 1935. At 5 p.m. that same day, 0oses
opened bids on the job and let the contract; at 7 a.m. the ne[t morning,
laborers Zere Zorking on the site; one midnight a feZ Zeeks later, Zhile

728
most River-dalians Zere asleep, the si[ seven-foot-Zide steel spans that
Zould hold the roadbed of the bridge rumbled up BroadZay on huge flat
floats pulled by tractors and at 5:55 a.m. the last rivet securing them in
place over BroadZay Zas set; Zhen Riverdalians Zent to Zork in the
morning there before them Zas a bridge Zhere none had e[isted the night
before.

0oses' reluctance to discuss his plans for the northern section of the :est
Side Improvement Zas understandable. +e could not, after all, tell E[ton
and :einberg  the real reasons he Zanted the approach to the +enry +udson
Bridge to be through InZood +ill  3ark instead of along the street at its
edge: if Zord ever leaked out that a si[-lane highZay Zas being classified
as a "park access road," the C:A and :3A   Zould have to reclassify the
project. 0oses could not e[plain to E[ton  and :einberg  that Zhile  it might
be better to build the bridge on a loZer level near the e[isting draZbridge
and therefore avoid InZood +ill 3ark and Spuyten Duyvil, his idea of the
proper location didn't matter; only the bankers' ideas mattered because it
Zas the bankers Zho had to put up the money for the bridge. 0oses could
not, in fact, alloZ any discussion of the bridge location at all, because
discussion generates controversy, and controversy frightens aZay the timid,
and no one is more timid than a banker Zhere his money is concerned. "The
market Zas so skittish that any little thing could have gotten them to back
out," Jack 0adigan recalls. "A lesser felloZ Zouldn't  have understood the
importance of killing off  this agitation right at the start before it began
raising up some publicity and getting people arguing," but 0oses
understood perfectly. The financing of the northern section of the :est Side
Improvement had been made possible only by remarkable ingenuity on
0oses' part, an ingenuity that bent rules and regulations—tZisted them, in
fact, until they Zere all but unrecogni]able—into a shape that permitted the
participation in the financing of the project of bankers and tZenty-tZo
separate city, state and federal agencies. E[posure of that ingenuity to the
public Zould tumble in an instant the house of cards he had so laboriously
erected. +e could not alloZ it.

And Zhat good Zould discussion do anyZay? The city had been trying to
build the :est  Side Improvement for decades—generations, in fact. It had

729
never, even in the free-spending :alkerian era, been able to find the funds
to do the job. It could only be done noZ because of the federal relief pro-

gram—and that program might be curtailed at any time. If the job Zas ever
to be done, it had to be done at once, Zithout delay. Discussion meant delay,
and therefore discussion could not be permitted. "There Zas no alternative,
see—no alternative," 0adigan says.

0adigan's statement Zas not accurate. There Zas an alternative—it just Zas
not an alternative that he, or Robert 0oses, Zould even consider. There
might be no alternative if the bridge had to be built immediately, but Zhy
did it have to be built immediately? If the bankers refused to finance its
construction unless it Zas located on the escarpment, a location Zhich
required the destruction of InZood +ill 3ark and Spuyten Duyvil, Zhy  Zas
it necessary to accept their terms? The city could simply refuse them, and
Zait until  it could build the bridge itself—in the place Zhere it should be
built.

And it might not have too long to Zait. The situation noZ Zas significantly
different from the past. Construction of the approach roads Zas— thanks to
0oses—Zell  under Zay at last, to the south from the Battery to 193rd
Street, just a mile from the +arlem River, to the north all the Zay doZn
through :estchester and into the city doZn to 249th Street, a point only
about a mile from the river. 0ore than si[teen miles of the through route
Zas under construction; only tZo miles, including the bridge, remained to
be built. This Zas no longer a project not begun. It Zas a project largely
completed. :ith   La Guardia in City +all,  the city's government had the Zill
to complete it. :ith   more than 90 percent of the cost already paid,
moreover, this Zas no longer a project Zhose cost Zas $109,000,000. It Zas
a project Zhose cost—the cost of its uncompleted tZo miles including
bridge—Zas less than $10,000,000. The city might not have $10,000,000 to
spare at the moment, but it Zas not unrealistic to suspect that, Zith La
Guardia running city finances Zith an iron hand, it might have it someday
—someday soon (as, in fact, Zas going to be the case; by 1936 the city had
sufficient leeZay in its capital budget to build the bridge itself).

Such an alternative might Zell have appealed to E[ton and :einberg. There
Zas an immediate need for the bridge, of course, and there Zas a risk in

730
delaying its construction, the risk that the city's financial position might
Zorsen, or its Zill  to do the job might fade, and the bridge Zould never be
built. But such risks had to be Zeighed against the certainties entailed in
construction of the bridge at the point the bankers Zanted: the destruction
of 0anhattan's priceless last forest, and of Riverdale's priceless serenity.
:eighing   the risks, E[ton and :einberg  might Zell  have decided on delay.
The city, represented by its elected officials, might have so decided, too.
But such considerations did not Zeigh more than a feather on Robert
0oses' private scales, unbalanced as they Zere by his desire for
accomplishment, for achievement—for the tangible, physical reali]ation of
his dreams. For such dreams, as the man Zho echoed his thoughts, Jack
0adigan, put it, "0oney   is a//." NoZ, at last, after tZo decades of dreaming
of the :est  Side Improvement, he had the money for it, and he Zas not
about to let that money slip aZay. "Yeah, I remember that," 0adigan Zould
say thirty years later

Zhen asked about the E[ton-:einberg  proposal, and the hard, quiet voice
Zould be filled Zith  contempt and disgust. "I remember that as an asinine
idea, brother." Robert 0oses did not give the city a chance to decide.

The +enry +udson Bridge opened on December 12, 1936.

The opening ceremony, Zhich 0oses combined Zith a birthday party for La
Guardia, Zas not one of the 3ark Commissioner's more successful
productions. A sudden Zild rainstorm forced the celebrants to croZd into
the tiny administrative building on the bridge toll pla]a into Zhich  the bar
had hastily been moved, and fierce gusts of Zind kept bloZing open the
ZindoZs and dampening the spirits. .ing  EdZard VIII  picked the same day
for his announcement that he Zas giving up his throne for "the Zoman I
love," and the 0ayor insisted, to 0oses' rage, on interrupting the
ceremonies to listen to a rebroadcast of the abdication speech. In the
evening the rain stopped, the skies cleared and 0oses, taking Jack 0adigan
along, drove doZn to the shoreline beloZ the bridge to vieZ his handiZork
by moonlight. Staring up at the slender arch flung across the gap betZeen
the tZo high bluffs, he Zas struck by its grace, but even this moment Zas
spoiled for him, for the blunt Irishman Zas not the ideal moonlight
companion. :hen  0oses  started rhapsodi]ing about the beauty of the

731
scene, Cleveland Rodgers relates, "0adigan said that all he could think
about Zas the dimes rattling in the toll bo[es."

Nothing, hoZever, could dim 0oses' pride in the fulfillment  of the great
dream of his youth. :hen,  on October 12, 1937—in time for Election Day
— the Zhole :est   Side Improvement Zas completed, he commandeered
0adi-gan's yacht and ordered its captain to stand out into the +udson so
that he could vieZ his creation in its full sZeep. From the deck of a
ferryboat in the middle of the river tZenty years before, the si[ miles of
Riverside 3ark had been si[ miles of garbage dumps and mud, of tar-paper
shacks and stacks of rotting timbers, all shrouded in the dirty gray smoke
speZed up by the trains that clanked everlastingly through it. Yet he had
e[claimed to the Zoman beside him: "Isn't this a temptation to you?
Couldn't this be the most beautiful thing in the Zorld?" NoZ he felt that it
very nearly Zas. The tracks Zere gone from the Zhole loZer stretch of the
park. So Zere the mud and the shacks and the garbage. In their place Zere
the things he had seen only in his mind then, "the great highZay that Zent
uptoZn along the Zater" and the lush park beside it. From the river, the
massive retaining Zalls trimmed Zith granite and marble, set Zith
loopholes and embrasures, stretching for miles along the Zater, rising one
behind the other up to Riverside Drive, Zere battlements, a fortification
protecting the great city behind it. The loom from Riverside Drive behind
the battlements not only of the sheer brick Zall of apartment houses but of
the turrets and ZatchtoZers of mansions that resembled medieval castles
(the central facade of Charles 0. SchZab's, Zhich occupied the square
block betZeen Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth streets, Zas reminiscent of
the chateau of Chenonceau[, the Zings of the castles of Blois and A]ay-le-
Rideau); the presence behind the battlements of the

columns and cannons of the Soldiers' and Sailors' 0onument, erected to
honor Zarriors of a civil Zar, and, farther north, of the massive granite
sepulcher of the great general Zho had led them; the image, life-si]ed in the
distance, of a girl Zarrior out of the fifteenth century, the bron]e mount of
the 0aid of  Orleans rearing at Ninety-third Street from a pedestal set Zith
fragments from Rheims Cathedral, Zhere she Zaited trial and death; the up-
thrust of spires out of the thirteenth century, the spires of Riverside Church
that Zere modeled on the Cathedral at Chartres; the stark outline atop a

732
bluff to the north of the simple square ZatchtoZer of the medieval
monastery of St. 0ichel de Cu[a that Zas noZ called the Cloisters—these
only made more complete the effect for Zhich 0oses had been striving: that
of a Zall built  to guard a city as Zalls had guarded cities during the 0iddle
Ages, specifically the German cities Zhose Zalls, along Zith those of the
medieval fortress-castles of the Raubritter, or "robber barons," had lined the
Rhine and fired 0oses' imagination Zhen, as a romantic young student, he
had so often cruised that river.

Not that the :est  Side Improvement Zas just a fortification, of course. It
Zas far more than that. Along its loZest level, at the edge of the Zater, Zere
lines of moving vehicles and, once one reali]ed they Zere part of the
Improvement, one saZ that to call it medieval Zas to slight it. The toZering
battlements Zere combined Zith an entranceZay to the city, an entranceZay
Zhose Riverside 3ark portion alone Zas si[ miles long, an entranceZay
framed in marble and granite and flanked by the tombs of dead heroes—an
entranceZay of a si]e and grandeur that could only be Roman, a Via
Triumphalis like those along Zhich had ridden the conquering Generals of
the Empire, on their Zay to receive the laurel Zreath from the Caesar.

A fortification?  An entranceZay? The :est Side Improvement Zas also a
park—a lovely park. The retaining Zalls formed a series of terraces rising
from the Zater, and the terraces Zere lush, green, tree-shaded laZns.
Through the shadoZs of the arches of the Seventy-ninth Street boat basin
one could see a fountain splashing coolly. If the :est Side Improvement
Zas grandeur, it Zas also beauty. The scene Zas just as Robert 0oses had
envisioned it tZenty years before, even to the bright Zhite sails of the boats
tied up in the gracefully curving marinas.

0oses Zas more than satisfied Zith his handiZork. The sheer cliffs of the
forest-topped 3alisades, opposite the sheer cliffs of 0anhattan's apartment
houses, Zere "the most magnificent river Zall anyZhere," he felt, and the
Zall he had created Zas its match. NoZ that it Zas completed, the +udson
vista Zas the greatest river vista in the Zorld. The Rhine? The Rhine Zith
its "silly, quaint, :agnerian  castles"? Thanks to the :est Side
Improvement, the +udson absolutely dZarfed the Rhine. 3enning an

733
introduction to a brochure describing the Improvement, he sounded like the
Bob 0oses of his youth.

This, then, is the +udson Zaterfront celebrated by 0asefield and O'Neill,
Zhere the fabled liners and cargo vessels thrust their proZs into the very
vitals of the city. . . . Tycoons overlook the upper and loZer bays and the
Jersey piers. Droves of cars ]oom or craZl through Riverside 3ark and
doZn the :est  Side +ighZay  and vieZ

the matchless, unspoiled 3alisades. By comparison, the castled Rhine Zith
its Lorelei is a mere trickle betZeen vineclad slopes. I Zonder sometimes
Zhether our people, so obsessed Zith the seamy interior of 0anhattan,
deserve the +udson. :hat a Zaterfront!  :hat   an island to buy for $24!

The city's pride matched 0oses'. The reporters chauffeured over the
Improvement before its opening to the public Zere all too familiar Zith the
previous route into NeZ York from the north, the Zearisome stop-and-go
gear shifting over the narroZ, bumpy streets of Yonkers, a traffic light on
every coiner to increase the irritation, the trip through the Bron[ doZn a
BroadZay made dismal and dingy by the small stores and grimy tenements
that lined it and by the shadoZs and harsh rumbles of the IRT elevated
tracks overhead. They, like other drivers, had had to Zonder as they
approached the BroadZay draZbridge Zhether they Zould be in for an
interminable delay there. And Zhen they crossed the bridge, they had to
resume the craZl doZntoZn on Riverside Drive or BroadZay in endless
lines of traffic. The approaches to NeZ York had been agoni]ingly sloZ,
and ugly as Zell, a mean and meager entrance to a great city.

NoZ they skimmed doZn to NeZ York  along the broad SaZ 0ill  River
3arkZay, all sZeeping curves and spacious straightaZays, lined Zith
Zoods, underbrushy and shadoZy and deep, that drenched them in autumn
colors, and Zith clearings in Zhich black boulders sat dramatically in the
center of sun-dappled grass. The bridges that carried intersecting traffic
over the parkZay so that its users should not be disturbed Zere little 0oses
masterpieces, each faced Zith stone carefully selected to blend in Zith
nearby rock formations, each subtly different in design from any other,
mere hints in the midst of a natural setting of the shaping hand of man,
mere hints of Zhat the parkZay Zas carrying them toZards. Yonkers Zas

734
just something off beyond the trees; slopes shielded motorists from even a
glimpse of that unlovely municipality until the parkZay had almost reached
the Bron[ line, Zhere its name changed from SaZ 0ill  River to +enry
+udson (the signs announcing the change Zere made gay by cartoon
silhouettes, done in Zrought iron, of +udson's +alf 0oon),  and Zhile at
that point there Zas an unavoidable minute or tZo of small houses visible
atop the slope, the parkZay ducked quickly into the shelter of Van Cortlandt
3ark and Zas back among trees and grass again. It Zas not until Van
Cortlandt Zas behind the reporters that houses became a permanent part of
the scenery, and then they Zere at first only on one—the right, or river—
side of the road and they Zere at first just small, private homes, fieldstone-
covered, for this Zas Riverdale, no more than another hint, just slightly
broader than the bridges, of Zhat Zas to come.

Flashing through Riverdale toZard the steep cliffs of the +arlem River, the
hints became broader still, the private homes flanking the parkZay on both
sides noZ, croZding closer to it and closer together, three loZ apartment
houses becoming part of the scene in Spuyten Duyvil, but there Zere still
plenty of trees and grass. Leaping the +arlem on the +enry +udson Bridge,
the reporters saZ the BroadZay bridge far beloZ them to the left, and,
beyond it, a glimpse of the city, but the glimpse, cut short by the
approaching bluffs of InZood +ill,  Zas fleeting and the city Zas ha]y in the

distance and hundreds of feet beloZ them, and the bluffs Zere toZering and
filled Zith  trees, and Zhile the parkZay might be in the city noZ, it Zas not
yet of the city. Leaving the bridge toll booths, the parkZay curved abruptly
to the right, doZn and around a great craggy bluff that toZered above it, and
even that fleeting glimpse Zas gone and Zhat Zas in front of the reporters
as their car passed through the bluff's deep shadoZ Zas only trees and, seen
through the trees, a bright river and beyond the river the 3alisades.

And then they Zere around the curve and there Zas NeZ York.

First there Zas steelZork and concrete in the sky, immense toZers, thick
cables, a roadbed above the Zater—the George :ashington Bridge,
looming above the leaves, casting a dark shadoZ over the parkZay so that
the reporters' limousine rolled across it as if it Zere a gigantic Zelcome mat
to a gigantic city. Then, above the parkZay to the left, there Zere apartment

735
houses behind the leaves. And suddenly the city Zas beside the reporters,
looming over them; atop the great cliffs of rock Zere cliffs of brick, the
massed apartment houses of Riverside Drive. Far aZay to the left, there
Zere the spires of the Empire State Building and the Chrysler Building,
their very visibility  at such a distance an evocation of the immensity of the
canyons of skyscrapers toZard Zhich the limousine Zas headed. Ahead of
the reporters Zas the panorama of the harbor, serene Zater turned busy,
churned by the giant screZs of giant ships, dented by piers jutting out from
shore.

If there Zas drama in this entrance to the city, there Zas, even Zithin the
city's confines, beauty, too, and dignity. As the limousine headed doZntoZn
toZard the reporters' offices, the parkZay hugged the river's edge and the
Zater Zas broad on the road's right hand. The 3alisades across the river
stayed largely unspoiled for precious minutes. BetZeen the parkZay and the
apartment houses to the left Zere the terraces 0oses had built and planted
Zith trees and laZn, and the retaining Zalls of the terraces, the Zalls that
flanked the parkZay, Zere masonry and marble, and their copings Zere of
granite, and above on Riverside Drive Zere Grant's Tomb and the Soldiers'
and Sailors' 0onument, frie]es and colonnades. And even Zhen there Zas
no more beauty or dignity, there Zas still convenience. :hen the +enry
+udson 3arkZay became the :est Side Elevated +ighZay  and there Zere
no more trees or terraces, and the Jersey shore, Zhat could be seen of it
through a dense industrial ha]e, Zas a panorama of all that Zas Zrong Zith
the Industrial Era, and the vieZ to the left, toZard the city, Zas of railroad
yards and Zarehouses and traffic-jammed streets, the reporters could still
reali]e that they Zere not on those streets, that they Zere speeding
doZntoZn Zithout  having even to pause.

The reporters rhapsodi]ed. "The most beautiful drive in the Zorld," Zrote
one from the Daily NeZs. "AlZays  the man in the car has the river in full
vieZ," marveled one from the Times. Simeon Strunsky said in "Topics of
the Times": "The :est  Side +ighZay  as a name . . . utterly fails to do
justice to the . . . neZ masterpiece out of Robert 0oses' atelier. . . . The
traveler comes and goes in a setting of beauty Zhich [it] is not too much to
call into[icating."  (Strunsky Zas also to Zrite: "The poet :ordsZorth   stood

736
on :aterloo  Bridge and said about the Thames vieZ that earth had no finer
sight; but :ordsZorth   should have stood at the north end of the +enry
+udson Bridge and looked south and Zest*.")

0oses had promised that the neZ road Zould "eliminate" the :est  Side's
north-south traffic jams. +e announced that the trip from Canal Street to the
city line, Zhich  had previously required si[ty-eight minutes, Zould
henceforth take only tZenty-si[. And none of the journalists had the
slightest doubt that 0oses Zas correct. "It is a veritable motorist's dream,"
said the Journal-American. The Times marveled that "the gleaming neZ
concrete ribbon" Zould not only "afford immediate and measurable relief to
traffic congestion on Riverside Drive" but Zould enable motorists to drive
all the Zay from Canal Street "nearly to 3oughkeepsie Zithout having to
stop for a traffic light or sloZ up for an intersection."

And journalists understood that 0oses' project Zas not just a vieZ or a
road. "The :est  Side Improvement is much more than that," the Sun
editoriali]ed. "It  gives the island not only a neZ major highZay and a neZ
shore line along part of its length but park land and . . . playgrounds." The
Journal-American said it provided "a fountain of health and pleasure from
Zhich NeZ  York's people and their children and guests Zill be drinking
long years to come." The Brooklyn Eagle emphasi]ed that "after decades of
fruitless effort, the railroad tracks are covered at last." In fact, said the
Times, "all that has been unsightly along the +udson—the railroad, the ash
dumps, the coal yards—has been sZept aZay or completely disguised."

The statistics in the thick packets of press releases that 0oses' men handed
to the reporters Zere, even to men accustomed to press releases filled Zith
statistics, almost too big to grasp. To create the Riverside 3ark portion of
his dream alone, Robert 0oses had poured into the si[ miles of muddy
Zasteland 1,250,000 cubic yards of stone riprap, 3,000,000 cubic yards of
hydraulic fill,  296,400 linear feet of steel and concrete piling, 6,800,-000
pounds of reinforcing steel, 1,912,000 bags of cement, 120,000 pounds of
lead, 12,500 cubic yards of stone masonry, 1,600 cubic yards of granite and
220,000 cubic yards of topsoil and humus.

But the reporters did their best to make the city grasp them. They pointed
out that, as the Times put it, 0oses had, in "the most e[tensive alteration of

737
0anhattan's topography in recent history, put ... a highZay . . . through an
already overcroZded park Zith a substantial gain, instead of a loss, of
recreational space"—a gain that amounted to the incredible total of 132
acres, an addition to the land area of croZded 0anhattan Island Zorth, at
current land values, $23,760,000. They pointed out that he had filled that
space Zith fifteen tennis courts, seventeen playgrounds, tZenty-three
softball fields, thirty-eight basketball courts, forty handball courts, 13,000
trees, 140,000 feet of footpaths and 350,000 shrubs.

The most incredible statistic of all Zas not included in the press release.
That Zas the cost of 0oses' dream. +is press releases stated that the cost
Zas $24,000,000, but this figure bears no discernible relationship to reality,
since even the most cursory e[amination of the cost—all that is possible,
since 0oses took care never to reveal it and its components are concealed
in such

a multitude of appropriations, cityZide property assessments, borough
property assessments, special Board of Estimate appropriations and federal
contributions from tZenty-tZo  separate sources that thirty-seven years later
it is unfeasible to attempt to compute them—reveals that the total cost of
the :est  Side Improvement (including the elevated highZay) Zas at least
$180,-000,000 and perhaps as high as $218,000,000, an immense figure in
Depression dollars. (The famous Boulder Dam, alZays cited as an e[ample
of spectacular NeZ Deal e[penditures, cost $76,000,000.) But NeZ York's
press did not attempt to analy]e the cost, accepting, instead, 0oses'
$24,000,000 figure—and coupling it Zith the comment that for this
e[penditure the city had received in return land Zorth $23,760,000. Out of
thirteen daily neZspapers, not one had the slightest doubt that the :est Side
Improvement Zas anything but an "improvement," an unalloyed
improvement, an absolutely unmitigated blessing, to NeZ York City.

Not a dissenting voice could be heard. One can search in vain through the
city's neZspapers during the Zeeks in 1937 in Zhich articles on the
Improvement Zere appearing daily looking for a single hint—even a buried
quote in a story or a lone letter-to-the-editor—suggesting that there Zas the
slightest imperfection in the project.

"The railroad tracks are covered at last," an editorial said.

738
Not e[actly.

The railroad tracks Zere covered until they reached 125th Street— the
beginning of +arlem.

0oses had decided to economi]e on the section of the :est Side
Improvement, betZeen 125th and 155th streets, that bordered the city's
Negro community, and one of the economies Zas dispensing Zith the track
covering in that section. 8ncovered tracks meant a never-ending clanking,
from the couplings of railroad cars, and periodic baZling, from the coZs
and other animals being transported south to the slaughterhouses, unless the
people Zho lived in the apartments above kept their ZindoZs closed. And
in the summer, Zhen it Zas too hot to keep ZindoZs closed, uncovered
tracks meant not only noise but odors, the stench of the animals, and they
meant soot and smoke that spread a coat of gritty grime, confined to
ZindoZsills  in Zinter, over Zalls  and furniture. NoZ, thanks to the genius
of Robert 0oses, the Zhite people Zho lived along Riverside Drive Zere
freed from these annoyances.

But the black people Zeren't.

Robert 0oses spent millions of dollars enlarging Riverside 3ark through
landfill, but he did not spend a dime for that purpose betZeen 125th and
155th streets. +e added 132 acres to the parts of the park most likely to be
used by Zhite people—but not one acre to the part of the park most likely to
be used by black people.

Robert 0oses ruthlessly removed all commercial enterprises from the
Zaterfront along the entire si[-mile length of Riverside 3ark—e[cept for
those commercial enterprises (Zharves, small Zarehouses, coal pockets,
junkyards and the like) that Zere located in the +arlem section of Riverside
3ark. Those he alloZed to remain—to occupy Zhat otherZise Zould have
been park land for +arlem.

Because he did not enlarge Riverside 3ark in the +arlem section, there Zas,
really, for tZo-thirds of the +arlem section, the stretch betZeen 125th and
145th streets, no Riverside 3ark at all. The green of laZns and trees that he
laid out Zith such a lavish hand south of +arlem ends abruptly at 125th

739
Street and the only green that remains is a very narroZ, very steep treed
slope, too steep for anything e[cept slipping and sliding doZn it, that, for
some of those tZenty blocks, climbs from the uncovered tracks to Riverside
Drive above. E[cept for that little ribbon of trees, pathetic Zhen compared
to the lush laZns and lavish plantings doZntoZn, the "park" is, for these
tZenty blocks, only the grim steel of the tracks and the gray concrete of the
parkZay.

Robert 0oses devoted endless ingenuity to making the +enry +udson
3arkZay beautiful in and of itself. From Seventy-second to 125th Street, for
e[ample, he lined the roadZay Zith trees and shrubs and faced the Zalls
along its sides Zith granite and marble and e[pensive masonry. But
betZeen 125th and 145th streets, he lifted the roadZay into the air—on a
gaunt steel viaduct. There is not a tree or shrub on the viaduct. There is not
a foot of granite or marble or masonry. The only ornamentation Zhatsoever
on the starkly ugly steel is the starkly ugly cheap concrete aggregate Zith
Zhich it is paved.

And the viaduct is not only unlovely in and of itself. It makes the Zaterfront
over Zhich it runs even uglier than it Zas before, filling its streets Zith its
shadoZs and the never-ending rumble of the cars that travel along it. And
its presence insures that even should NeZ York City one day decide to give
those tZenty blocks of +arlem Zhat it has given most of the other
residential neighborhoods along the +udson River, a park beloZ Riverside
Drive, the park Zill  have to be one filled Zith shadoZ and noise.

There is at least one spot in this tZenty-block stretch at Zhich it Zould have
been easy to create a park even Zithout landfill operations.

At the foot of 125th and 126th streets, these mean and narroZ thoroughfares
slope doZn and, after running under 0oses' viaduct, run right out into a
broad Zharf that juts out into the river, so that turning it into

a park Zould have made the riverfront a part of +arlem. Of the Zhole
+udson River Zaterfront, no area Zas more intimately a part of the
adjoining community and more suitable to be a park for it.

740
0oses might not have Zanted to spend much money on the +arlem section
of the :est  Side Improvement but a park here Zould not have cost much
money. Condemning the Zharf Zould have been cheap, as Zould also have
been placing playground facilities on it to give the children of the
neighborhood a chance to play right on the river or laying earth and sod on
it to bring a touch of brightness to a neighborhood Zithout brightness. And
seeing the park possibilities of the Zharf Zas easy; in fact, it Zould have
been hard not to, for on every sunny day it Zas croZded Zith people
fishing, staring out over the Zater or Zashing their cars in the sun.

But somehoZ 0oses didn't see. +e never made a move to turn the 125th
Street Zharf into a park, and in 1974 it Zould still be standing vacant, a
monument to a city's indifference to the needs of its poorest people.

+arlem does, of course, have a section of Riverside 3ark, the section
betZeen 145th Street, Zhere the +enry +udson 3arkZay sZings doZn off
the viaduct, and 155th Street—a stretch of land ten blocks long, plenty long
enough to provide the playgrounds, ballfields and other facilities that a
recreation-starved community so desperately needed.

Robert 0oses built seventeen playgrounds as part of the :est Side
Improvement. +e built one playground in the +arlem section of the
Improvement. +e built five football  fields as part of the Improvement. +e
built one in the +arlem section. +e built eighteen horseshoe courts, tZenty-
tZo tennis courts, half a mile of roller-skating paths and a mile of bicycle
paths in the rest of the Improvement. +e did not build a single horseshoe or
tennis court or a foot of roller-skating or bicycle path in the +arlem portion.

:hen   the Improvement first opened, in fact, there Zas not a single
recreational facility of any type in the entire "+arlem section"—not so
much as a stanchion Zith a basketball hoop attached. The initial plans
0oses had distributed to neZspapers Zhen he Zas persuading La Guardia
to approve the Improvement had shoZn a recreational area betZeen 146th
and 148th streets on the river side of the parkZay, but Zhile most of the
recreational areas above and beloZ +arlem Zere completed Zhen the
Improvement opened, the 146th Street-148th Street area Zas not even
begun. +e did move thereafter to build it—hurriedly, because, according to
one report, La Guardia suddenly reali]ed the omission and insisted it be

741
rectified and 0oses Zas afraid the 0ayor Zould  make it public. But its
pitifully  inadequate and cheaply built facilities proved remarkably difficult
to reach from the community it Zas supposed to serve. The only Zay to
reach it on foot from +arlem, in fact, Zas by Zalking  to Riverside Drive,
Zalking doZn  an incredibly long flight of steps to the NeZ York Central
tracks, crossing the tracks on a footbridge (Zhich meant climbing up
another flight of steps to get on it and climbing doZn a flight to get off) and
then Zalking doZn another flight of steps to an underpass under the
parkZay Zhich led to the

recreational area. And reaching it Zas doZnhill. Getting back up to
Riverside Drive Zas uphill. On even pleasant summer afternoons, the
recreational area 0oses had so generously bestoZed. upon +arlem Zould
be almost empty—e[cept for motorists from other areas Zho found it
remarkably accessible (just pull off the parkZay and there you Zere) by car.

Robert 0oses had alZays displayed a genius for adorning his creations Zith
little details that made them fit in Zith their setting, that made the people
Zho used them feel at home in them. There Zas a little detail on the
playhouse-comfort station in the +arlem section of Riverside 3ark that is
found noZhere else in the park. The Zrought-iron trellises of the park's
other playhouses and comfort stations are decorated Zith designs like
curling Zaves.

The Zrought-iron trellises of the +arlem playhouse-comfort station are
decorated Zith monkeys.

Robert 0oses had "reclaimed the city's Zaterfront for its people," an
editorial said.

Not e[actly.

Robert 0oses had indeed built a huge, beautiful Riverside 3ark. But the
park Zas not on the riverside. The parkZay Zas on the riverside. For much
of the si[ miles of Riverside 3ark, the road, not the park, occupied the land
nearest to the river. And that meant that the park, and the people Zho used
it, Zere separated from the river by si[ lanes of concrete filled Zith rushing
automobiles.

742
If 0oses had built the road Zhere other planners and young reformers like
Bill E[ton  and Robert :einberg  had Zanted it built—atop the NeZ York
Central tracks, at the edge of Riverside 3ark close to the steep slope beloZ
Riverside Drive—the city's people Zould, after strolling doZn from the
Drive and crossing the road on easy overpasses, have found themselves in a
park Zhose tree-shaded laZns, playing fields and esplanades sZept
hundreds of yards doZn to the river's edge unbroken by the concrete of a
highZay or the rush and smells of automobiles. Because the park Zould
have e[tended to the +udson's edge, they Zould have been able to picnic or
play, or simply sit on benches and think, at the very edge of a broad and
beautiful river. They Zould have been able, on the very rim of the city, to
escape the city—and to escape it completely.

But 0oses had chosen, in much of Riverside 3ark, to build the road at the
Zater's edge. And therefore, in much of the park, its users Zere hardly
conscious that there Zas any river there at all. From much of Riverside
3ark, in fact, they could hardly see the Zater. Robert 0oses placed in
Riverside 3ark 5,500 benches offering, he said, "fine vieZs of the river."
But from most of those benches the river is hardly visible. They are placed
at the same level as the highZay and above the highZay barrier Zall only a
thin sliver of Zater can be seen. Near Ninety-si[th Street, for e[ample, there
are hundreds of benches, in long, neat roZs, facing the river, but all you can

see from the benches is the barrier Zall, the tops of cars speeding past
behind it, and the very edge of the +udson on the NeZ Jersey side.

From some of the 5,500 benches, you can see all of the river, but alZays
there are cars, a fierce, never-ending rush of them, long lines of them, cars
Zith their hurry and noise and smell, in front of that river. There are alZays
cars in front of the river in Riverside 3ark. "In place of great parks and
terraces and promenades," 3eter Blake Zas to Zrite in the logo's, "Ze have
built, along almost every single foot of the coastline of this city, gigantic
viaducts of steel and concrete that carry streams of automobiles and
effectively block our vieZs of the Zater, a passing steamer, a seagull or,
possibly, a sunrise."

"AlZays  the man in the car has the river in full vieZ," Zrote a
neZspaperman. That Zas true. But to give the man in the car that vieZ,

743
fleeting at best and harried, to let him enjoy a brief glimpse of beauty as he
passed by it, hurriedly and Zith his mind on other things, 0oses had taken
it aZay from the man not in the car, the pedestrian Zalking beside the river
or sitting beside it, picnicking or just looking at it, soaking it in for long
minutes and hours, the man Zho Zould have had time to enjoy and savor
the vieZ, the man Zhose life could have been enriched by it. +e had
thought that by building a road along the Zaterfront he Zas giving the
beauty and openness of the Zaterfront—as he had given the beauty and
openness of Long Island—to both the city's cars and the city's people. But
he Zas Zrong. It Zas no longer possible to do both. In building the :est
Side "Improvement," he had, although he did not reali]e it, the choice of
giving the city's precious +udson Zaterfront to either cars or people. And
he had chosen to give it to cars. Cars Zere part of the essence of the city. +e
had brought cars to the city's very edge. Concrete Zas part of the essence of
the city. +e had laid concrete at the city's very edge. :ith a cnance, a
Zonderful chance, to give the city's people a Zay of escaping the city, he
had, instead, sealed them Zithin it.

Riverside 3ark Zas a beautiful park. But it Zas not a "riverside park." For
all the use it made of the si[ miles of adjoining Zater, it might, e[cept for a
very feZ points, have been located in the middle of Brooklyn. Robert
0oses reclaimed the city's Zaterfront, all right. By turning si[  miles of
Zasteland into the parkZay and park he had envisioned, he had added an
immense asset to the city. But he had deprived the city of another asset: its
Zaterfront. And alongside the loss of this asset, the gains that did accrue
from 0oses' development of Riverside 3ark, from his spending of more
than $100,000,000, Zere, Zhile immense, very tiny indeed.

And the loss may not be replaceable. :ith his usual thoroughness, Robert
0oses had done the job too Zell. :hen  he finished Zith  the city's +udson
River Zaterfront, the Zaterfront Zas gone. And it Zas quite possibly gone
forever.

Jack 0adigan Zas keeping an ear on the rattle of dimes in the toll bo[es on
the +enry +udson Bridge. In an astonishingly short time, the melody had
reached a pleasurable volume.

744
The cautious bankers Zho had been Zilling to finance only a single deck
had said they Zould purchase more bonds only Zhen traffic reached
appro[imately 6,000 cars per day.

On the first day on Zhich tolls Zere collected on the bridge after the +enry
+udson 3arkZay giving access to it Zas completed—0onday, December
14, 1937—9,086 cars used it. 0adigan Zas careful not to let himself get too
optimistic. The first figure Zould,  of course, include people Zho merely
Zanted to say that they had used it on the first day and Zho might not use it
again. +is caution seemed confirmed Zhen, on Tuesday, the volume
dropped to 8,100. But on :ednesday, it Zas 9,278; Thursday, 8,504; and
Friday, 8,760. And then came the first Zeekend. On Saturday, 10,215 cars
crossed the bridge; on Sunday, 15,644.

Every 0onday morning, Zhen  0oses arrived at 80 Centre Street, on top of
the pile of papers aZaiting him Zas a thermometer-type chart shoZing
traffic—southbound in green, northbound in red. And each 0onday the red
and green together climbed higher on that thermometer. On the first charts,
the peak daily volume alloZed for, the top number on the thermometer, Zas
20,000. If that Zas the average daily rate, 7,300,000 cars—double Zhat
even 0oses had calculated—Zould be using the bridge during a year. But
soon the red and green Zere nearing the top of the thermometer, and then
they passed it. Soon traffic on the bridge Zas running at a rate that made the
annual figure not 7,300,000 but 10,322,002.

The bankers Zere Zatching charts, too. Three months after the bridge
opened, 0oses asked for additional financing, not the $1,400,000 originally
agreed on but $2,000,000, and they Zere only too happy to give it to him.
Selling the first issue of +enry +udson 3arkZay Authority  bonds had taken
months. The neZ issue of Authority bonds Zas oversubscribed Zithin
minutes after it Zas offered. Less than seven months after the bridge
opened, a second deck, Zhich Zould hold three northbound lanes, Zas
being placed atop it, thereby freeing the old deck for three southbound
lanes.

"The success of the project," 0oses announced, "is established."

745
:ith   the additional financing, 0oses Zas able to put a statue of +enry
+udson atop the hundred-foot-high column that had been standing in
Spuyten Duyvil Zaiting for  it since 1909, and to turn the small plot around
it, named "+enry +udson 0emorial  3ark"  in 1909, into a real park, Zith "a
completely equipped small children's play area" and "permanent benches."
"These improvements," 0oses announced, "carry out the principle Ze have
adopted of establishing increased local park and recreational facilities along
a free-floZing traffic  artery."

0oses intended the park for "small children" accompanied by their
mothers. But it Zas hard for mothers Zith small children to get them there.
The park Zas situated on the crest of a little hill and 0oses had built up the
hill not paths but flights of steps. 0oreover, at the time the park Zas built,
the bulk of the population that Zould use it lay on the

746
Verra]ano-NarroZs Bridge

LANDSCA3E  BY 0OSES:  Robert 0oses' three-armed Triborough Bridge
is the center of a city scape in Zhich the folloZing are other 0oses

747
additions: In 0anhattan (left) the East River Drive E[tension along the
Zaterfront south of the bridge, and the +arlem River Drive, to the north,
and behind these roads, every one of the high-rise loZ-income housing and
Title I urban reneZal projects rising out of +arlem. In the Bron[  (top right)
the 0ajor  Deegan E[pressZay running northZest from the Triborough's
Bron[ bridgehead, and the Bruckner E[pressZay running northeast; the
housing project just north of the bridgehead; Van Cortlandt and Bron[ parks
at the top. In 4ueens (bottom) Astoria 3ark, Zith the giant Astoria pool.
Randall's and :ard's islands (center) Zere almost entirely shaped by 0oses.

































Bron[-:hitestone    Bridge

748
Throgs Neck Bridge



















*'• • *^t.*r




**'

.

"+f.

"• %

j»^» ,

5* '

«*■

'

749
*/ :' >*m




>,'Ji- *•

*&*<£■.:*.  $,;*&

Cross Ztay Bridge

Robert 0oses TZin CauseZay

750
Ale[ander +amilton  Bridg


















+enry +udson Bridge (before the second deck Zas added)












0arine  3arkZay Bridge




TnTTTlTifTTTTTrrm^.-rTrr^^   ■ mi

-

751
TftieOftO84+ 0t44C  A8T+OetTY ' eR " >e£ grT:te: T0I  —IT t8+
A0D BRC;:L    <*:«Al   3LA« »»0 +.I:TIO+

BRIDGE AND A33ROAC+ES






Zrsrsr a<«.c.

I:oh  :oull  Be A Solid +0OBIjr fc8. ll*ht In «b* LoZer

neon of Offioo Boiidin*. B*rtng rmttpi o» i*ablas«ea

And OmenZicb BtZete »oulo Be 3rnetioalljr obliterated.

Ze sumsreo BArmr-Zoo/aY0 sm

JfND ITS R.ELAT/O+ TO E;ISTING STR8CT8RES.

3r»pared By TV :«*t fed* yAsac-oo-tio^ t^ Co-n^fc*, Incorpi






ct/sroZ «of*r otrreitrnuhr cncsfenooatf Bvn.t»n* aloe * soZ

BATT£*Y />Att.

752
The :»n8oB  Cf The teet Side ;lrrated +l^dmqr, :ot It OS Tk8 DTZrtne.
fouli 3arallel Tb» Brid«e-Approach At A I +eight Im the Boctanlnc Of The
Arched StnZtur* To A 3ol To Toe Right Of To* Anchorage, Thai
Coaeletlnc Tfle Cblnoee fhieh 0old +oot ;rfeetlvoljr Block Tat TloZ
B0nn T» Of Bulldln*. In Battery 3erk And Be» Tort'. Ju»tly-?ae»d But

T+E BROO.LYN-BATTERY BRIDGE: A Difference in 3erspectives.
0oses attempted to persuade the public that the impact of his bridge on
LoZer 0anhattan Zould be minimal, and had his artists draZ the top
rendering; others saZ the bridge as a "Chinese :all" that Zould block the
vieZ and blight the area (center); Ole Sings tad dramati]ed these effects in
the bottom rendering.

% <&














Ale[ander +amilton Bridge

753
+enry +udson Bridge (before the second deck Zas added)












0arine  3arkZay Bridge

...iirr^ll^  .-^rTTTTTpnrr,  ^^mTlTlTlTlTTTn^   ^-Jlt^











00m.0       OLoa.

754
•ectton 4 lndioatee That 3art Of The Brid*«-Appro**  I0eh  loald Be A
Solid +aeonrjr :all.   8»ot  la The loZer Jloor. Of Offloa  Balldt aff Bering
jTontagee on fl0btastoa And GreenZich gtreZte :ould   Be Frae8eallZ
Obliterated.

T+E S8GGESTED  BATTERY--BROO.LYN   BRIDi

JtNO IT6 flELAT/ON  TO E;./9TIN4    aTf:CT8ReS.

ftr*j0"-«4   DyT.*VV0i       6«f« Aaooeiavtiorsof Co<«<r\«r-e«, l«\coi*p<







r***!'  ov»e

The B[tenelon Of The feet Side Jleireted BitnZeZ. Bet tt

0» Tale trnlBj, timid 3arallel Toe Bndfe-Approeoh At A I  +eight Tie. in*
Beginning Of The Arched Structure To A 3ol To The Right Of Toe Aneho
age, Thu. Completing The Chine.. :hich  :ould   .o.t   ;rfeetlYelZ   Blook
Toe Tie* BetZeen Tae Of Bm8&lnjp  la Beturr perk And Be* Terk'. JuatlZ-
Taaed Bart

T+E BROO.LYN-BATTERY    BRIDGE:  A Difference in 3erspectives.
0oses attempted to persuade the public that the impact of his bridge on
LoZer 0anhattan  Zould be minimal, and had his artists draZ the top
rendering; others saZ the bridge as a "Chinese :all" that Zould block the
vieZ and blight the area (center); Ole Singstad dramati]ed these effects in
the bottom rendering.

755
Ale[ander +amilton  Bridge

















+enry +udson Bridge (before the second deck Zas added)

756
0arine 3arkZay Bridge














T+E S8GGESTED dATTE/LY-BROO.LYN 60+

JtNO /TS fLELA T/ON TO £;./6TI+G STR8CT8RES.

3?:jp»r«d  tj TS« V0»t 6<d« A»»oe<a>tior\ of Convn«rc«, lr\cor-j«







Ice8oa 4 lodloat.a That 3art Of Th* mdta-iaaroaon

I0ca :ould   B. A Soil* 0aaonrjr Zail. "•**  la B» loZ floor. Of Offloo
Bulldli**  Baring Tront*g*. oa Zaanta»to» And. Ore.uZlch Stre*t* :ould
B* 3raetloalljr OBlltoraaoa.

custom nouot

rear**** cmieenoosti

Bun. D«v« BIOS 0, SOvrtr-

rt*mr Oi.oc

757
BATTCRY 3AR*

To* :.ruoi  of To. :«*t   site ll«»t.d +ighZay. Sot th OS Ih8 BnarlBc. toula
p«r»ll*l Too Bridge-Appro0fl At A I +*lght 0m  to* B*ginniog Of To*
;rchrt  Strastnr* To A 3ol To Too Right Of To* Anohorag*, Thu.
Coapleting To* Chin*** Ikleh lonld 0oot Zrf«cti«ly Block To* «*Z
B*t*«*a To* Of Building* la Battery p»rt And »•» Tort'• Ju*tly-T*a*d Bart

77/E BROO.LYN-BATTERY BRIDGE: A Difference in 3erspectives.
0oses attempted to persuade the public that the impact of his bridge on
LoZer 0anhattan Zould be minimal, and had his artists draZ the top
rendering; others saZ the bridge as a "Chinese :all" that Zould block the
vieZ and blight the area (center); Ole Singstad dramati]ed these effects in
the bottom rendering.

758
11^ *^>r. *iffc »* <?**^$ i^ .v* ^ ^ *t i. *\ -t... -* % ev^r-

: *& S# ?* -«^5^sS^e









t it a ** ' : * V -;* *<■*►*>  * -^vrSL^**

759
ii

* *>





















m -0 ' 0

' * V

V -J %

T/f/?£E 0OSES BEAC+ES: Orchard Beach (top left), Jacob Riis 3ark
(bottom left), Jones Beach (above).

Stone carvings (the State Seal on the :ater ToZer), ships' funnels to
conceal garbage cans, directional signs complete Zith Zrought-iron figures,
and the architectural elegance of the East (beloZ) and :est (right)
bathhouses and of the famous :ater ToZer shoZ the effect of 0oses'
imagination at Jones Beach.

760
/

illil5piiiir«5s|i

1L— A

1

' .. . :,. i

761
:;+

OCEAN FRONT

3AR.ING

25*

762
Robert 0cses 3oZer Dam at 0assena












Robert 0oses 3oZer Dam at Niagara












3art of the St. LaZrence 3oZer 3roject: in the foreground, Robert 0oses
State 3ark; in the rear, the 0oses-built Long Sault Control Dam.





■ff^^m 0ZEpj

763
T+E :EST    SIDE I03ROVE0ENT—AND      AN ALTERNA  TIVE.
BeloZ: The +enry +udson 3arkZay  (left) and Seventy-ninth Street boat
basin in Riverside 3ark (right). Above: The +enry +udson Bridge and
3arkZay as 0oses built them through InZood +ill   3ark and Spuyten
Duyvil in  Riverdale. The dotted line indicates the route that urban planners
suggested to avoid harming the park and Riverdale: along the open corridor
ne[t to InZood  +ill,  across the +arlem River on a less-e[pensive, loZ-level
span, through 0arble +ill  Valley (uninhabited at the time e[cept for a
shantytoZn) to Van Cortlandt 3ark, Zhere it could also have run along the
edge. (The +arlem River noZ folloZs an essentially straight path to the
+udson because 0oses in effect moved the light-colored land jutting into
the river to the left, joining it to InZood  +ill  3ark.)

764
. . t.—

*fe

'B•-# *r




t* 3t,





:^#

LANDSCA3ES  BY 0OSES:

Above: 0oses' 1964-65 :orld's   Fair and the Grand Central 3arkZay, Van
:yck,   :hitestone   and Long Island e[pressZays. BeloZ: 0oses' housing
projects in +arlem, East River Drive E[tension, 0anhattan arm of the
Triborough Bridge, :ard's  Island 3edestrian Bridge, DoZning Stadium,
Bruckner E[pressZay.

765
ji^

!*«$}












Z

f?e:

*■

11

V-^»F

/"ffc^

5,'B+fi

.*r5? :

8nited Nations +eadquarters

NeZ York Coliseum

766
Lincoln Center for the 3erforming Arts

Shea Stadium

767
TT]e Grand Central 3arkZay and the four-level bridge interchange Zith the
ClearvieZ E[pressZay.

768
77*e Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay guts a neighborhood.

/

4=31

769
J^O T+AT NEVER  +A33ENED:

One highZay 0oses did not get to build Zas his proposed 0id-0anhattan
E[pressZay along Thirtieth Street; 0oses, Zho never learned to drive and
Zho never paid tolls, poses for a photographer.

770
opposite, or eastern, side of the +enry +udson 3arkZay, and the only Zay
across the parkZay in the vicinity Zas the .appock Street underpass, Zhich

771
Zas also set Zith steps. 8nless she Zalked on the narroZ pavement of the
underpass roadZay, in danger from every car that suddenly sZung around
its corner, "there is," as Bob :einberg put it, "no Zay  . . . Zhereby a mother
Zith a baby carriage or go-cart can use this underpass" —or the park.
Residents of the area noted that the park had been used by more mothers
Zith small children before 0oses had built the facilities for  them than after.
And, despite pleas by the Riverdale community for elimination of the steps
to +enry +udson 0emorial  3ark, it  Zould be tZenty years before they Zere
removed.

"0otorists  launching gaily into the lovely neZ parkZay  have been appalled
to find that not all traffic problems have been solved," The NeZ York Times
said. "Because everyone Zants to see it, on certain days and at certain hours
there [is] a long procession of these eager citi]ens, enjoying the scenery but
not getting anyZhere."

"But," the Times added, "the public should be of good cheer. . . . :hen 0r.
0oses has got his parkZay hooked up firmly to the remainder of the
parkZay and has double-decked his Spuyten Duyvil Bridge, Ze may look to
see the arterial tension in our traffic arteries diminishing considerably."

By July 1938, the parkZay Zas all hooked up and the double-decking of the
bridge Zas completed. But the hardening of the arteries continued. Traffic
on the bridge had been 10,300,000 cars in 1937. By 1939, it rose to
12,700,000; by 1941, 14,300,000; it Zould finally top out at 26,-000,000. In
the face of such increases, double-decking a bridge hardly seemed to make
any difference at all. 0otorists pulling up to pay their tolls found
themselves at the end of lines that seemed little, if any, shorter than the lines
had been at the old BroadZay bridge, Zhose congestion NeZ York had
considered intolerable. And there Zas another pu]]ling fact. Although the
neZ bridge had been built to relieve the congestion on the old bridge,
congestion on the old bridge had not been noticeably relieved. The lines of
cars Zaiting to cross it Zere, in fact, almost as long as ever.

And traffic jams Zere not restricted to the bridge toll booths—or to certain
days and certain hours. They e[tended the length of the :est Side
Improvement that led to and from the bridge, so that sometimes the three
lanes of the +enry +udson 3arkZay and :est  Side Elevated +ighZay that

772
carried traffic in the direction of the rush—the southbound lanes into the
city in the morning, the northbound lanes out of the city in the evening—
Zere three lanes of bumper-to-bumper cars all the Zay from Canal Street to
the city line. The rush-hour jams Zere just as bad as the rush-hour jams had
been on Riverside Drive before the :est Side Improvement Zas built;
reporters escorted over the :est Side Improvement before it opened had
found it reduced the time required for the nine-mile trip from si[ty-eight
minutes to tZenty-si[;  noZ one of those reporters made the trip over the

:est  Side Improvement at tZo rush hours—admittedly very bad ones—and
found that on one trip it took fifty-eight minutes, on the other seventy-three.
And looking at the situation that Zay. the total effect on traffic con-ion of
the :est  Side Improvement had been to move the congestion one block
Zest—and yet there Zas still congestion on Riverside Drive, congestion
that had been eased only slightly by the construction of a parallel route. The
Improvement had simply provided NeZ York Zith tZo  coned thoroughfares
Zhere only one had e[isted before—and, of course, had given the motorists
using the neZ congested thoroughfare a nicer vieZ. J, in fact, the drivers on
the neZ thoroughfare Zere hardly in a position to enjov the vieZ. FolloZing
another car bumper-to-bumper required the focusing of a driver's eyes not
on "the +udson Zaterfront celebrated bv 0asefield and O'Neill" or "the
matchless, unspoiled 3alisades." bur on a bumper.

+oZ  about drivers using the +enry +udson 3arkZay during off hours? Year
by year—the situation Zould not change until 1956, Zhen the opening of
the parallel 0ajor Deegan E[pressZay and the southZard e[tension of
parallel Bron[ River  3arkZay cut traffic on the +enry +udson 3arkZay  in
half—the number of "off hours" on the +enry +udson 3arkZay smaller and
smaller. During daylight, in fact, there Zas hardly an hour in Zhich traffic
on that parkZay Zas not generallv heavy. 3assengers could enjoy the vieZ,
of course. But Saturday and Sunday traffic Zas heaviest of all. And there
must be some doubt Zhether many passengers Zere prepared to enjoy the
vieZ for as long as it took, stopping and starting, braking and accelerating,
sZeating under their car's hot tin roof, to negotiate the parkZay on those da
vs.

773
The :est  Side Improvement had had tZo purposes: to reclaim nhattan's
Zaterfront for its people, and to alleviate 0anhattan's traffic congestion. It
Zas to achieve these purposes that Robert 0oses spent an incredibly large
sum of monev.

But despite that e[penditure—all but inconceivable in terms of urban
spending of that era—the first of the tZo purposes Zas achieved onlv in
part. The :est  Side Improvement did create a park, but Zhile it Zas a great
park, it Zas not nearly as great as it could have been: instead of reclaiming
the Zaterfront for 0anhattan's people, the :est  Side Improvement deprived
D of it.

And the second of the tZo purposes Zas not achieved at all.

The effect of the :est  Side Improvement on NeZ York Citv Zas not limited
to its effect on traffic or on Riverside 3ark, of course. The Improvement
e[tended through several areas north of Riverside 3ark.

North of Riverside 3ark Zas InZood +ill   3ark. On the afternoon on Zhich
the opening ceremonies for the :est Side Improvement Zere held, Bill
E[ton Zent  back to InZood +ill  3ark.

"Or Zhat Zas left of  InZood +ill  3ark."  the young reformer Zas to recall. -
Even before I got up to the top. it Zas al'l changed. There Zere

concrete staircases Zhere there used to be dirt paths, and drinking fountains
and a Zhole drainage system—cutting doZn the trees on top had destroyed
the natural drainage, you see, so noZ they Zere laying a neZ one."

At the top, there had once been the Zonderful vieZ of the river and the
3alisades, and there had been peace in Zhich to enjoy it. "NoZ," he Zas to
recall, and his voice Zould turn bitter, "there Zas a vieZ all right, a vieZ of
the road, a great roaring concrete gut through the forest. They still called it
InZood +ill  but it  Zasn't InZood +ill   any more."

Suddenly, E[ton recalls, "I don't knoZ, I just Zanted to get out of there, I
Zanted to get out of there as fast as I could." Turning, he Zalked back doZn
InZood +ill—and  he never Zent back again.

774
Years later E[ton Zould recall that "I Zished that day that there Zas a
reporter up there Zith me, someone Zho Zould listen to me. I Zould have
given him a little footnote about the great :est Side Improvement."

But there Zere no reporters up on InZood +ill that day. They Zere all doZn
at the Seventy-ninth Street Grade-Elimination Structure, listening to the
speeches.

As for Spuyten Duyvil and all Riverdale to the north of InZood +ill,
:einberg  had predicted that if the parkZay Zere run through it Zithout
planning and ]oning for community groZth first,  it Zould  be turned from a
peaceful, quiet place to live, one that could have absorbed a degree of
apartment development Zhile still remaining a quiet place to live, into a
formless, shapeless mass of high-rise apartment houses Zith neither
adequate nor convenient shopping, jobs or recreational facilities for its
residents. :orld  :ar   II  staved off this outcome for five years, but after the
Zar, that is precisely Zhat once-beautiful Riverdale became.

North of Spuyten Duyvil, at the north end of Riverdale, Zas Van Cortlandt
3ark, Zhere once there had been the only fresh-Zater marsh left in NeZ
York City. :hen   the +enry +udson 3arkZay  Zas finished, the marsh Zas,
too. Once botany and biology students by the thousands had come every
year to study salamanders and polliZogs and floZers and shrubs and insects
— and a do]en species of birds Zho Zould nest only in a fresh-Zater marsh
— in their natural habitat. +enceforth, as long as NeZ York City might
e[ist, its botany and biology students Zould be able to study them only by
looking at their pictures in books.

Biology and botany teachers Zrote letters-to-the-editor. A feZ Zere printed.
Aside from them, no public notice Zas taken of the city's loss.

Robert 0oses had spent $109,000,000 of the public's money on the :est
Side Improvement. Counting the money e[pended on his advice by other
city agencies on the portion of the Improvement south of Seventy-second
Street, the Improvement had cost the public more than $200,000,000.

But the total cost of the Improvement cannot be reckoned merely in dollars.
The :est  Side Improvement also cost the people of NeZ York City their

775
most majestic Zaterfront, their most majestic forest, a unique residential
community, and their last fresh-Zater marsh.

:hen   the Improvement Zas finished, all these things Zere gone forever.

Adding them to the cost of the :est Side Improvement, one might Zonder
if the Improvement had not cost NeZ York City more than it Zas Zorth.
Adding them into the cost, one might Zonder if the :est  Side Improvement
Zas really, on its total balance sheet, an "improvement" at all. One might
Zonder if it Zas not, on balance, a tragic and irremediable loss.

But, Zith a feZ  lonely and unheard e[ceptions, at the time the Improvement
Zas built, no one Zas adding.

"TZo, Four, Si[,  Eight—:ho    Do :e   Appreciate? Robert 0oses! ROBERT
0OSES!!  ROBERT 0OSES!!!"

Little children in NeZ  York City during the i93o's cheered the 3ark
Commissioner that Zay—and by parading to 80 Centre Street to present
him Zith tokens of their esteem, such as tZo scrapbooks containing the
names of "thousands" of boys and girls from the summer day camps run in
his parks by the :3A  and the Board of Education. Older children, many of
Zhose high-school civics and social studies classrooms Zere decorated Zith
pictures of his bridges and parks distributed broadscale by the 3ark
Department, cheered him at "special assemblies" at Zhich he received their
tributes; the president of the Richmond +igh School Arista, aZarding
"Commissioner 0oses" the honor society's annual medal, called him "the
ideal civic leader" because he possessed "the folloZing qualities:
Intelligence, efficiency, conviction, personality, culture, incorruptibility,
sense of humor, perseverance, foresight, tolerance, knoZledgeable
unselfishness, idealism and modesty." Children off to college took their
enthusiasm along. +e Zas voted "America's most useful public servant" at
0anhattan College, "the ideal public servant" at Fordham 8niversity.

And the city's children Zeren't cheering any louder than its adults. Some
neighborhoods may have gotten no playgrounds and others may not have
liked the ones they did get, but many neighborhoods Zere thrilled Zith
theirs—and grateful to the man responsible for their creation. The

776
ceremonies opening Greenpoint's 0cCarren 3ark Zere preceded by a
mammoth parade during Zhich bluff old 3ete 0cGuiness, a long-time
Sheriff of Brooklyn and Boss of his beloved "Greenpernt," insisted that
0oses, dressed in the Zhite suit he invariably Zore at daytime ceremonies,
march at its head. And Zhen, on the speakers' platform afterZard,
0cGuiness pulled 0oses out of his seat, raised both of his hands over his
head like a bo[er's second raising his hands in a victory gesture, and
boomed, "Bob 0oses— the Champeen 3ark Commissioner of the Zorld,"
the croZd Zas so eager

to touch the Commissioner that it surged forZard against the park's brand-
neZ Zrought-iron fences and knocked them over.

Some young reformers Zho had had the opportunity to observe 0oses'
Zork firsthand had become disturbed by both his policies and practices, but
the city's most prestigious Good Government groups Zere still dominated
by the old-line idealists like Richard S. Childs, George 0cAneny, :illiam
J. Schieffelin and Joseph 0. 3rice, Zhose first impression of 0oses had
been of a young idealist and Zho felt, in Childs' Zords, that "basically he
hadn't changed"; during the 1930's 0oses received many tokens of their
tribute—even the gold medal of the American Scenic and +istoric
3reservation Society, Zhose leadership had passed out of the hands of the
upstaters Zho had seen 0oses trick them out of their control of their
beloved state parks, force them to stop printing their annual report and try
to strangle their secretary. So highly did the old-line reformers idoli]e
0oses that they Zere Zilling  to suffer snubs to be able to present him Zith
an aZard in person: Zhen he informed the 3ark Association that he Zas
"too busy" to take time off for a luncheon at Zhich 0rs. Sul]berger Zas
supposed to present him Zith the association's Testimonial AZard for "most
outstanding service to parks," 0rs. Sul]berger and fifty other members of
the association trooped off to his office Zith their illuminated scroll (to be
reZarded Zith Zhat one of the fifty  recalls as "an attitude that I can only
describe as utter contempt"). Joseph 0. 3rice, Zho had fought so hard for
0oses' mayoral candidacy, Zas reduced to coming to 0oses' apartment one
evening to present him Zith the City Club's annual aZard, a leather-bound
hand-illuminated parchment stating that 0oses' achievements "constitute
the major contribution of our generation to the improvement of the

777
conditions of life in our city." As for  businessmen, their admiration for the
man Zhose parkZays had boosted real estate values and Zhose efficiency
Zas giving NeZ York big  improvements at small cost, Zas cast in bron]e
and silver medallions from real estate organi]ations and Chambers of
Commerce and from the One +undred Year Association, a group of firms in
business in the city that long. Three officers of the Irving Trust Company
organi]ed a Committee for Deserved Recognition Zhose "sole object is to
name the :est Side +ighZay  the Robert 0oses +ighZay"—an  object that
failed, as attempts to name Jones Beach after its creator had failed, because
politicians Zere afraid that the public Zould shorten the name "Robert
0oses +ighZay"  to "0oses  +ighZay"   in usage and Zould thereby offend
the sensibilities of the city's non-JeZish residents.

If 0oses' days Zere Zhite-suit  days, his evenings Zere black-tie. The city's
hotels should have been grateful during those lean Depression years for his
popularity; if it  Zould have been difficult selling tickets for a block party
honoring Robert 0oses in Sunset 3ark or +arlem or Spuyten Duyvil, there
Zas no difficulty  in selling tickets to members of those organi]ations that
honored their heroes in the Grand Ballroom of the :aldorf-Astoria or the
Baroque Suite at the 3la]a; in fact, Zhen the guest of honor at a formal
dinner Zas the city's 3ark Commissioner, a full house could alZays be
e[pected. (+is biting "ad hominisms" Zere Zorth  the price of

568

any ticket, even if they Zere delivered in a harsh, bored tone by a man Zho
seldom bothered to glance up at his audience; at a dinner celebrating the
opening of the $800,000 +ayden 3lanetarium, Zhose construction Zas
financed by an RFC loan arranged by 0oses Zith great difficulty and
Zhose star-reproducing, dumbbell-shaped projector Zas purchased Zith a
$160,000 gift from Charles +ayden, Zho made it, to 0oses' scorn, only on
condition that the entire building be named after him, the financier Zas
preening himself on the dais Zhen 0oses, rising to speak, turned to him and
said: "Charlie, never in the history of philanthropy has anyone earned
immortality so cheaply.") On one evening, 0oses, in black tie, might be at
the :aldorf   to be handed a gold medal from the Citi]ens 8nion; on another,
at the 3la]a in black tie to be handed a gold medal from the St. Nicholas

778
Society; on still another, at the St. Regis to have a gold medallion—
fourteen-carat, this time—hung around his neck on a blue-and-gold moire
ribbon by the NeZ York Rotary Club; then on to the 3ennsylvania, Zhere
the plaque aZaiting him Zas only bron]e but inscribed Zith a description
that 0oses thought apt—"Dreamer-3lanner-Doer"—and Zhere the praise
heaped on him in front of a thousand diners Zas so syrupy that 0oses,
rising to speak, said he Zas getting up to try and escape from a "Niagara of
0olasses." +e varied the bearnaise sauce circuit Zith trips to Carnegie +all,
also in black tie, to pick up medals, medallions, plaques and illuminated
scrolls before audiences too large to be crammed into even Grand
Ballrooms. So many organi]ations Zanted to hold dinners in his honor that
si[teen of them finally decided to combine. (The affair, held in the RainboZ
Room at Rockefeller Center by the City Club, 3ark Association, Regional
3lan Association, Architectural League of NeZ York, Art Commission
Associates, Central 3ark :est and Columbus Avenue Association, Garden
Club of America, 0unicipal  Art  Society, National Academy of Design,
National Sculpture Society, NeZ York chapters of the American Society of
Architects and the American Society of Landscape Architects, NeZ York
Society of Architects, Outdoor Cleanliness Association of NeZ York and
the Fine Arts Federation of NeZ York, Zas notable for the fact that the
guest of honor did not shoZ up; he Zas in the midst of a particularly heated
battle Zith La Guardia at the time and Zhen he learned that the 0ayor had
been invited to speak, refused to come; La Guardia did, and devoted his
speech to reminding the audience that "the 3ark Department . . . could not
have accomplished anything if it had not been for the sympathetic
understanding and aid of the federal government; never in the history of the
Zorld did a 3ark Commissioner have the amount of funds that have been
made available to 0r. 0oses . . .") If,  Zith  his deceptions and innuendoes
and breached promises, Robert 0oses Zas seducing NeZ York City into
compliance Zith his desires, NeZ York Zas loving every minute of the
seduction—and begging for more.

The media, Zhose amplification of his statements Zithout analysis or
correction played so vital a role in making the public susceptible to the
blandishments of his policies, carried out the same effective if unintentional
propaganda for his personality. Continually, in five- or si[-part series or

779
Sunday-supplement feature stories or long intervieZs, it said he Zas totally
honest and incorruptible, tireless in Zorking si[teen- and eighteen-hour
days for the public, and it alloZed him to repeat or repeated itself the myths
Zith Zhich  he had surrounded himself—that he Zas absolutely free of
personal ambition or any desire for money or poZer, that he Zas motivated
solely by the desire to serve the public, that, despite unavoidable daily
contact Zith politicians, he kept himself free from any contamination by the
principles of politics. +is  flaZs reporters and editorialists made into virtues:
his vituperation and personal attacks on anyone Zho dared to oppose him
Zere "outspokenness"; his refusal to obey the rules and regulations of the
:3A   or laZs he had sZorn to uphold Zas "independence" and a refusal to
let the public interest be hampered by "red tape" and "bureaucrats"; his
disregard of the rights of individuals or groups Zho stood in the Zay of
completion of his projects Zas refusal to let anything stand in the Zay of
accomplishment for the public interest. If he insisted that he kneZ best Zhat
that interest Zas, they assured the public that Zas indeed the case. If there
Zere larger, disturbing implications in these flaZs—they implied that he
Zas above the laZ, that the end justifies the means, and that only he should
determine the end—they ignored these implications or joked about them;
columnist :estbrook  3egler dubbed 0oses' technique of driving stakes
Zithout legal authori]ation  and then defying anyone to do anything about
them, the "Oops, Sorry" technique.

By the end of the Thirties, praise of 0oses Zas spreading across the
country—fostered by the nationally circulated maga]ines published in NeZ
York. If it Zas possible to be more one-sidedly favorable to the 3ark
Commissioner than the NeZ York neZspapers had been, the national
maga]ines, Zhose readers Zere not interested in the details of local issues
and Zho therefore provided those readers Zith only a broad outline of his
career, Zithout any close e[amination of his methods, accomplished the
trick. An article in +arper's began: "This is the story of . . . the pride of a
city in a man Zho brings beauty to a herded people," and ended: "NeZ York
presents an impressive e[hibit of one citi]en's building for the common
good." In the fourteen intervening pages, the reader Zas assured that 0oses
Zas interested only in the people's Zelfare and that those Zho opposed him
Zere "obstructionists" and "politicians" and that his temper should therefore
be e[cused—"+is rages are against those Zho Zould cheat the public

780
interest" —and that he Zas so absolutely honest and incorruptible that the
laZs Zhich governed other public officials should not be applied to him in
any case:

0oses knoZs his Zay through the ma]es of the laZ. On Flushing 0eadoZ
he moved so sZiftly that the 600-odd oZners, the city, and the State never
caught up Zith him. ... By 0ay  15th [1936] 0oses  Zas in possession of the
property, leaving it for the courts to decide later hoZ much Zould be paid.

. . . The city charter provides that contracts shall go to the loZest bidder . . .
It takes a hardy commissioner in NeZ York to reject the loZ bidder, a
commis-





the charge of graft Zould not stick... The Board of Estimate

. of fi»«g and grading Zas begun on schedule—and finished on And at any
hoar of the day or night 0oses Zould appear to make Bje Zas no dday. ffis
only heartbreak Zas the fact that once t tZentv-four hours the machinery
Zas stopped tZenty minutes for oiling. . . .

Did 0oses fed that accomplishment Zas all that mattered, that the end
justified die means? Apparently +arper's agreed. 'Those familia NeZ

York's Zays Zould have prophesied that these [600-odd condemnation]
cases Zould keep die courts busy for years; but they Zould have reckoned
Zithout 0oses,"  the article said. ^The docket Zas all cleared Zithin ... si[
months.'' The article did not ask hoZ the docket Zas cleared, or Zhether the
rights of the 600-odd families being evicted from their homes Zere
trampled

There Zas an overbloZn, romantici]ed quality to +arper's recounting of the
Commissioner's life story:

At Yak they remember Robert 0oses for his victory over Coach :alter
Camp and the football enthusiasts Zho thought to monopoli]e the athletic

781
money. . .

O[ford  they still speak of the avid vigor Zith Zhich  he studied the Zays of
government. . . . "Take a salary." said Smith No," 0oses looked

upon the grass, and it Zas moth-eaten. +e brought fertili]er and the soured
acres turned green. +e turned to the trt :h his oZn hands multiplied seventy

thousand times, he trimmed aZav the dead branches, cut out the rotted
sides, fed the abused roots, Zatered and tended . . . and brought shade to a
dusty people. . . . +e saZ the streets filled Zith children, frantically seeking
to make ballparks out of thoroughfares. :e must bring the playground
Zithin  reach of the baby-carriage pushers, said 0oses. +e searched the city
for bits of land. ... It never occurs to him that he is noble. . . . :hat are the
mainsprings of this man's single-minded-ness? :hy does he drive himself,
and others, in the public interest 1 :hy does he forsZear private gain for
the public Zeal? ... Is it human sympathy Zhich drives h a sense of the
misery of the millions Zho breathe tenement

house air? +e knoZs that men must live and that their children should see
the

1 and sky. And he fights for the grass and skv Zith the devotion of an
Amos.

And there Zas an overbloZn, romantici]ed quality to the prose in Zhich
that life story, Zith its great battles—the Taylor Es:ate tight against the
"selfish interests.'' the Triborough Bridge fight against the "politicians"'—
Zas recounted in Time and The Saturday Evening 3ost and Current +istory
■'oses: Idealist in Action") as Zell as in the Architectural Forum, Zhich,
naming him its "0an  of the 0onth."  confessed that conferring another title
on the man Zho "probably holds as many important jobs as anv other living
American" Zas "preposterous" and that 8s title Zas particularly inappropri-

":hat   month? It is a lean thirty days on the Commissioner's calendar Zhen
he doesn't pop up Zith a neZ bridge or a flock of playgrounds or forty miles
of parkZays or a ]oo or a proposed tunnel from NeZ York to Brooklyn or a
plan to reshape the Atlantic Ocean," and in Fortune, Zhich said, tbcr men

782
have built parks and roads and bridges in states and cities other than NeZ
York, and there Zere all of these things in NeZ York before

Robert 0oses Zas born. But it is doubtful if any other man ever built so
many of these things and on such a grand scale," and Zhich added, after
calculating that he had spent $552,000,000 in public funds, that his success
in defeating opponents Zas due to "his scrupulous and unquestioned
honesty" in money matters and "Thus, not only like a boy scout is Bob
0oses alZays prepared; like Galahad, his strength is as the strength of ten
because his heart is pure." It Zas in the national maga]ines that Robert
0oses Zas first dubbed "the master builder" and "the master planner." If the
city's press had made him a hero, the nation's maga]ines made him a folk
hero, a figure larger than life, almost mythical, shrouded in the mist of his
oZn legends, a 3aul Bunyan of 3ublic :orks,  a John +enry of +ighZays,
the man Zho, in the phrase dreamed up during his gubernatorial campaign
by some obscure GO3 phrase maker and noZ spread, complete Zith
capitali]ation, across the country, Gets Things Done.

As the publicity spread beyond NeZ York, so did the cheering. Life Zas not
all Zhite suits and black ties; it Zas also academic goZns and mortarboards;
it Zas during the Thirties that 0oses began to spend his Junes traveling to
out-of-toZn colleges to receive honorary degrees; he Zould eventually be a
Doctor of LaZs eleven times over, a Doctor of Engineering si[ times over, a
Doctor of +umane Letters tZice ("I never Zrote a humane letter in my life,"
he protested), as Zell as Bachelor and 0aster of Arts (tZice each) and a
Doctor of Fine Arts and of 3ublic Administration as Zell  as 3hilosophy.
3ark and horticultural associations all up and doZn the eastern seaboard
began to give him aZards; the Boston-based Trustees of 3ublic
Reservations, for e[ample, commended him for "distinguished service in
conservation." So fast did the aZards floZ in, in fact, that he found that if
he traveled to each out-of-toZn event at Zhich he Zas to receive one he
Zould have little time for Zork;  he therefore made a practice of not
attending, and of reading his acceptance speech over the telephone on his
desk, Zhich Zas hooked up at the dais at the event to an amplifying device
that enabled the audience to hear it. For a time his Zife and secretaries
mounted the medals, medallions, plaques and illuminated scrolls on the
Zalls of his office—along Zith  one memento that 0oses insisted be placed

783
in a prominent position, a memento that Fortune described as "a letter of
restrained commendation" dated 1930 and signed Franklin D. Roosevelt.
The office Zalls Zere soon filled, and 0ary  0oses covered a long Zall in
the living room of their apartment Zith them. But they continued to pour in
so fast that his secretaries finally just began storing them in packing cases.

Other cities began to send their planners and engineers to NeZ York to see
Zhat all the fuss Zas about. Buses chartered by the park associations of
Boston and 3hiladelphia brought matrons by the score to see the neZ
playground design. And the response Zas invariably that of the hundred
members of the American Shore and Beach 3reservation Society Zhose
reaction folloZing a day-long tour of 0oses'  Zorks Zas summed up by a
+erald Tribune reporter as "ama]ed." Arriving back at City +all  after a

similar tour, 0ayor  :illiam    B. +artsfield  of Atlanta asked a reporter,
":here   does NeZ York get all the millions to do this?"* 8rban
improvements on such a scale had never been seen—had, perhaps, never
been dreamed of—in America before; there Zere, for e[ample, more miles
of divided through highZays uninterrupted by intersections at grade in the
NeZ York metropolitan area in 1940 than in the ne[t five largest cities in
the 8nited States—Chicago, 3hiladelphia, Detroit, Los Angeles and
Cleveland— combined.

The Architectural Forum advised America's urban planners: "If you are
thinking of designing a system of parks (and parkZays) for your oZn cities,
you might Zell go to NeZ  York for a feZ pointers." And, the Forum
concluded, "Zhile you are in NeZ York, for best results kidnap Robert
0oses." A  score of American cities tried to take the advice, at least on a
part-time basis; Zeek after Zeek requests to lay out, as a highly paid
consultant if he Zould not accept a full-time job, highZay and park plans
for cities large and small poured into 80 Centre Street. During the Thirties,
he accepted one such commission, to revieZ plans for arterial highZays for
the 3ittsburgh Regional 3lanning Association. +e dispatched a team of
aides to spend tZo months in 3ittsburgh, revieZed their findings himself,
and on the basis of their reports, submitted a plan laying out a
comprehensive arterial highZay program for the city. +e had to refuse the
others, but his mark Zas left on them, too, for their engineers came to NeZ

784
York and spent Zeeks—in some cases, months—Zatching 0oses' men in
action and, Zhen they returned to their oZn cities, applied the principles
0oses had taught them in building their oZn parks and roads.

Nor Zas the cheering limited to America. Teams of park e[perts came to
NeZ York from countries all over Europe, even from Scandinavia,
traditional leader in park design, and Zent home vastly impressed. As for
roads, a survey of public Zorks in America made for the British
government by a team of British urban planners said:

The most important development in American city planning has in recent
years been the building of e[press highZays on a large scale. NeZ York
City has led the Zay in the development of an outstanding system of
e[press highZays and parkZays. These are so good that it Zould seem
almost essential that England should study them. ... It is probably the
outstanding e[ample of democratic city planning in the Zorld.

In the years during Zhich Americans Zondered if Roosevelt Zould run for
a third term, there Zere many media suggestions that 0oses be the
Republican nominee for the presidency. Life selected him as the Republican
to Zrite "The Case Against Roosevelt"; The Saturday Evening 3ost
commissioned him to give "Advice to 0y  3arty." 0oses never had any real

* Another reaction Zas voiced by a Latin American diplomat taken on a
tour by La Guardia himself. At each bridge and highZay that the 0ayor
pointed out to him, the visitor asked, "And Zho Zas in charge of giving the
contracts?" Each time La Guardia replied, "I Zas." "Ah, La Guardia," the
diplomat said at last, Zith real admiration in his voice. "Ah, La Guardia.
You must be a very rich man."

chance of obtaining the presidential nomination, of course. But the frequent
suggestions Zere a further indication of the e[tent of his popularity.

Such popularity left little room for dissent. The press Zhich Zas turning
him into a legend in his oZn time had scant space to spare for critics. At the
+otel 3ennsylvania dinner at Zhich he Zas deluged Zith a 0olasses-
Niagara of sZeet praise, a hundred pickets Zere marching outside the hotel

785
protesting his treatment of :3A  Zorkers, but most of the city's neZspapers
never even mentioned them.

The attitude of the press Zas reflected in the attitude of the public. At one
.iZanis   Club luncheon, held in 0arch 1934, the assembled .iZanians
applauded his speech, but during the question-and-ansZer period that, under
.iZanian   tradition, folloZed  the speech, one member of the audience said
that he Zas disturbed by neZspaper reports that 0oses Zas intending to
revoke all camping privileges at Orchard Beach immediately. "As one of
the campers at Orchard Beach," he said, "Zill you grant us the privilege for
a committee to intervieZ you and put before you our story about the
beach?"

"No, sir," 0oses replied—"calmly  and finally," according to the +erald
Tribune. "The camps are coming doZn." The camper tried to protest the
arbitrariness of the decision, but he Zas droZned out—by the strains of the
song sung by the rest of the audience to usher 0oses out: "For +e's a Jolly
Good FelloZ."

0oses basked in his popularity. +e ZalloZed in it.  +e boasted to his friends
about it.

And he felt it Zas no more than his due. +e understood fully the importance
of the press in creating it. In the introduction to the 3ark Department's 1940
brochure— Si[ Years of 3ark 3rogress —he Zrote, ":e  oZe much to the
press, Zithout Zhose constant interest and publicity it Zould be impossible
to e[plain our program and to obtain public support for it." But he had not
the slightest doubt that the press's support for his policies Zould continue.
Once, e[plaining his feeling that a controversial project could be pushed
through the Board of Estimate, he ended a conversation Zith an objecting
0cGoldrick  by saying dryly, ":e'll    undoubtedly have the cooperation of
the press, you knoZ."

No matter hoZ busy he Zas, 0oses alZays tried to find time in the late
afternoon to drop in on Al Smith.

The former Governor Zas a sad and bitter man noZ, old long before his
time. Retired from public life at the age of fifty-si[—too  early for

786
retirement for a man accustomed to action and applause and still healthy
and strong— he had found in business only humiliation: he felt that all NeZ
York must knoZ that he had had to beg Frank Roosevelt for help to rescue
the Empire State Building—and that even after Roosevelt had moved
federal agencies into the skyscraper, it Zas still not earning enough to meet
the mortgage payments and they Zere being picked up almost as charity by
John J. Raskob and the Du 3onts.

And Al Smith Zasn't interested in business anyZay. +e Zas interested in
helping people. :ith   the Depression, people needed help, needed it
desperately. And he Zanted—Zanted desperately—to have a hand in
bringing it to them. +e Zas no businessman. +e Zas the +appy :arrior  of
the political battlefield. And he yearned desperately, Zith all the desperation
of a man Zho sees the sands of his life running loZ, to be part of that
battlefield again before it Zas too late. As reali]ation greZ in him that
Roosevelt Zould never alloZ him to play a part in his administration, that
he Zas to be forever e[cluded from the public service in Zhich he had spent
his life by a man Smith felt oZed him his career, he came to hate Roosevelt,
Zith a hatred so unreasoning and blind that it Zas all too easy for him to
hate the things Roosevelt stood for.

The old friends, the friends Zho Zould have made him see that the social
Zelfare programs Roosevelt Zas espousing Zere only e[tensions of the
social Zelfare programs he had espoused as Governor, Zere gone. 0rs.
0oskoZit]   Zas dead. Others Zere alive, but he didn't see much of them any
more. Their field Zas politics, and he Zas no longer part of politics. In their
places had come neZ friends—the ultrareactionary Raskob and :illiam T.
.enny—Zho   hated "that man in the :hite  +ouse." Al  Smith had alZays
been loyal to those Zho helped him, and these Zere the men helping him
noZ. +e had gotten his ideas from interaction Zith the ideas of associates,
and these Zere the only associates left to him—these and 0oses, Zho spent
so much time Zith him, Zhom he respected so deeply, and Zho Zas as
bitter about Roosevelt and the NeZ Deal as any of them. There Zas no 0rs.
0.  to counterbalance their arguments. It Zas easy for Raskob and right-
Zing financier Jouett Shouse to use his bitterness for their oZn ends, to help
him convince himself, as they Zere convinced, that the NeZ Deal Zas
"Communistic" and "Bolshevistic," that a spreading red-tinged bureaucracy

787
Zas taking over America and destroying the principles that had made the
country great. By 1936, the man Zho had once made being "regular" his
First Commandment Zas ready to try to split the Democratic 3arty by
lending his name to the right-Zing Raskob-and-Du 3ont-financed "Liberty
League," and by giving a speech—0oses played a key role in its drafting—
assailing Roosevelt and Zarning that "there can be only one capital,
:ashington  or 0oscoZ."

As soon as he had given the speech, Smith kneZ that he had made a terrible
mistake. But Zhat hurt Zorse Zas the attitude of the public, the public of
Zhose support he had once been so confident. The speech had caused a
flurry in the press, but the flurry had been brief; Roosevelt had been able to
laugh it off. To laugh him off! The old Governor kneZ he Zas still an
immensely popular figure among NeZ Yorkers. The drivers of the Fifth
Avenue buses he took to get home every day recogni]ed him, and on rainy
days they Zould make a special stop in front of the aZning at No. 820 so
that he could get out Zithout getting Zet—and often other riders on the bus
Zould stand and applaud the figure in the broZn derby as he Zalked,
someZhat stooped and stiff noZ, doZn the steps. But he Zas afraid that
popularity no longer meant respect.

:hen   he got upstairs, his daughter Emily Smith :arner, his confidante and
friend, Zould be there—her devotion to her father brightens the gloomy last
pages of his life—and often so Zould other members of his family. But a
family's devotion Zas no substitute for the roar of a cheering croZd or for a
late afternoon in the E[ecutive Chamber, Zith a do]en associates helping
him veto bills or Zaiting  to see Zhat the Republican legislative leaders up
on the Third Floor Zere going to come up Zith so that he could draft the
strategy that Zould confound them. +e Zas a natural genius in the art of
leading multitudes of men toZard great goals—and he Zas being given no
chance to use that genius. In the late afternoons, Zhen 0oses came to Al
Smith's apartment, he Zould often find the old Governor sitting, alone
e[cept for Emily, in the darkened living room, sunk deep in an easy chair, a
glass of Zhiskey in his hand, staring in silence out at the sunset behind
Central 3ark.

788
One afternoon in 1938 or 1939, 0oses came in and began discussing some
project—Emily cannot recall Zhich one—that he Zas planning to propose,
and Smith pointed out that there Zould be opposition. Emily recalls vividly
0oses' reply. +e Zould  "undoubtedly" have the support of the press and of
the public, he said, just as he alZays did. And Emily recalls vividly Zhat
her father said then.

"That's a slender reed to lean on, Bob," Alfred E. Smith said. "A slender
reed."

"+e meant that it could break at any time, that you could lose the public
support," Emily e[plains. "Bob  didn't say anything but you could tell by
looking at him that he Zas sure that he never Zould."

and their mother. If the strain Zas clear in Robert, it Zas just as clear in his
brother, born, in 1887, a year before him. If the tZo "0oses boys" Zere in
their youth a matched pair, a stunning matched pair, physically—both tall,
both slim, both graceful, both haughty, their olive-skinned, high-
cheekboned faces not only remarkably handsome but so similar they might
almost have been tZins; tZo quick-minded, quick-tempered, passionate
young Spanish grandees—the passing years, in Zhich, Zhile his brother
stayed slim, Robert's neck, and the face above it, became bulky, made clear
that the resemblance Zas more than physical.

Robert 0oses Zas charming. So Zas his brother. Inquire about 3aul 0oses
of a do]en Zomen Zho are old noZ and Zho have not seen him since they
Zere young, and a do]en Zrinkled faces light up Zith almost involuntary
smiles as they remember him. "3aul Zas a very good-looking man," says
0rs.  Carl 3roper, ZidoZ  of an official in Ed Flynn's Democratic machine.
"+e Zas tall and very elegant and very bright—he had a mind. But the big
thing about him Zas that 0oses charm—it just Zashed over you like a
Zave." +is life  Zas to be filled Zith  beautiful, sophisticated Zomen,
because, 0rs. 3roper says, "they absolutely threZ themselves at him. From
the moment he Zalked in the door at a party, you could see Zomen—the
most beautiful, elegant Zomen—Zatching him out of the corner of their
eye. ... +e Zas scintillating."

789
Robert 0oses Zas arrogant, equipped not only Zith the "0oses charm" but
Zith a spigot that could turn off charm at the mere hint of disagreement. So
Zas his brother. Each of the tZo 0oses boys Zas totally convinced that he
Zas intellectually superior to others, each Zas totally contemptuous of the
products of others' intelligence. From his youth, Robert 0oses seemed
driven, moreover, by some need—some compulsion, almost—to
demonstrate this contempt to those for Zhom he held it. :ith 3aul 0oses,
this compulsion came later, the product perhaps of the tragic circumstances
of his life. But it came. Says 0rs. 3roper, Zho kneZ both the brothers: "
[3aul] Zas opinionated—my God! :hen   someone disagreed Zith him, you
have no idea! +e could argue you right back against the Zall. And just as
often he couldn't even be bothered arguing. There Zas this disregard of
someone else's point of vieZ, this brushing aside. This Zas from the mother,
of course. I never saZ this thing so strongly in any other individual as I did
in Bob 0oses— e[cept  maybe for 3aul 0oses." The brothers' arrogance
Zas, moreover, more than intellectual. Not only Robert but 3aul Zas to
reveal throughout his life a feeling that the laZs that governed other men
Zere not meant to govern him. The drive to dominate, to relate to others
from a commanding position, Zas strong in both, as a minor but significant
characteristic they shared made obvious: even as a youth, Robert insisted on
picking up checks for friends, even Zealthy friends—he displayed a real
need to be not a member of a gathering but the host. So did 3aul.

Robert 0oses Zas brilliant and more than brilliant, possessed of a mind not
only quick and supple but broad enough in reach to encompass a great
metropolitan region and see its thousand diverse parts in a single, unified
relationship.

So Zas his brother, Zho Zas fluent in Greek and Latin (he loved to spend
evenings Zith a massive Greek le[icon, leafing through it as if it Zere a
popular novel), and, an electrical engineer by profession, Zas considered
the most knoZledgeable man in NeZ York in the comple[ field of utility
property assessments. :hile intervieZing 3aul about his brother—Zho at
the time had rejected requests for an intervieZ himself—the author Zas, by
coincidence, simultaneously researching a series of articles on regional
planning. +e had been searching for a unifying concept of the metropolitan
region as a Zhole, some sort of overvieZ that Zould bring at least a

790
measure of coherence to its development, that Zould suggest some vision of
the past and present that could contain clues to—and suggestions about—
the future. The search had been in vain. +e could spend days, he found,
intervieZing the region's highest elected public officials—mayors, county
e[ecutives, freeholders and presiding supervisors—and scores of urban
planners Zithout ever obtaining even a glimpse of such a vision. In talking
Zith 3aul 0oses,  the reporter Zanted to talk about Robert 0oses' boyhood;
3aul Zas constantly lapsing into discussions of housing and recreation and
transportation. The reporter Zas irritated by the digressions until, one day,
caught despite himself by his companion's eloquence, he started listening.
And then he suddenly reali]ed that he Zas hearing at last Zhat he had been
seeking for so long—a shaping vision of hoZ to plan the most heavily
populated and densely congested metropolitan region in the Zorld—hearing
it pouring out of a man Zho had never in his life held any official or
unofficial planning position. The author continued intervieZing planners
and public officials. Eventually he Zas to hear such a vision—conflicting,
of course, but of similar grand scale and scope—from tZo men: elderly
LeZis 0umford   and young Lee .oppelman, a brilliant planner from Long
Island. +e Zas never—in a hundred intervieZs—to hear it again.

E[cept Zhen, months later, he finally got to intervieZ 3aul 0oses'  brother.

During his young manhood Robert 0oses Zas the uncompromising idealist,
specifically an[ious to "help" the "loZer  classes." So Zas 3aul— although
there Zere differences betZeen his idealism and his brother's. Robert's
concept of help Zas that of the mother he imitated, the patroni]ing "Lady
Bountiful"  Zho never forgot that the loZer classes Zere loZer. It Zas the
concept of rigid class distinction and separation that Zould later be set in
concrete by Robert 0oses' public Zorks. 3aul, doted on by Grannie Cohen
(and by her husband, Bernhard; on Saturdays, the gentle old man and the
bright-eyed, handsome little boy Zould Zalk from the 0oses broZnstone
on Forty-si[th Street doZn to the tip of 0anhattan  Island, Zhere the
grandfather Zould reZard him Zith a nickel), understood e[actly Zhat the
nickname "Lady Bountiful" implied.  "Don't you see that settlement-house
attitude of hers in everything 0r. Robert does?" he Zould demand. "This
'You're my children and I'll tell you Zhat's good for you'? " It Zas not his
attitude. +is brother Zanted class distinctions made more rigid; 3aul Zanted

791
them eliminated. +is brother despised "people of color"; 3aul's attitude, in
0rs.  3roper's Zords, Zas "a genuine feeling of real indignation over the
Zay Negroes Zere

treated, and don't forget, this Zas at a time Zhen it Zasn't fashionable to
have such feelings." +is brother's attitude toZard members of the classes
Bella called "loZer" Zas, like  Bella's, markedly patroni]ing; perhaps in
reaction, 3aul, says a friend, "Zas a person Zho Zould talk to some menial
and be on fine terms Zith him. +e could be impossible—opinionated,
arrogant—Zith people on his oZn social plane. But he Zould never, never,
act like that Zith anyone Zho couldn't talk back to him. +e Zas very much
aZare of the moral responsibility to the loZer classes—he Zas like Robert
in that. But his attitude toZards these classes Zas genuinely friendly." +e
had the ability— Zhich Robert did not—to see people not as members of
classes but as individuals. :hen they Zere Zell into  their seventies, the tZo
brothers Zould be asked about the maids, cooks and laundresses Zho had
Zorked in the Forty-si[th  Street broZnstone. Robert could remember
e[actly one: "old Annie."  Asked to "tell me something about her," he
responded by listing her duties— and stopped. About this Zoman Zhom he
saZ almost every day of his boyhood, he kneZ nothing more—not even
Zhether or not she Zas married. 3aul remembered an even do]en Zho
passed through the 0oses household at one time or another—and, fifty
years after he had last seen most of them, he could relate details of their
personal lives to an e[tent that revealed he had talked to them as a friendly
equal.

Looking back on the youth of these tZo remarkable brothers, one difference
looms large. Robert 0oses Zould bend to his mother's fierce Zill. 3aul
0oses Zould  not. 3aul says—and relatives agree—that on many issues he
and his younger brother shared vieZs that Zere opposed to Bella's ("She
Zas very conservative, and neither of us Zas, not in the terms of that time")
but that in the face of her displeasure Robert Zould draZ back, hastening to
agree Zith the plain little Zoman Zith  the steely eyes behind the steel-
rimmed spectacles, Zhile 3aul Zould continue to disagree. And Bella
0oses, daughter of a Zoman Zho bullied underlings, herself a Zoman Zho
bullied her husband to a point Zhere, to accommodate her oZn Zishes, she
forced him to leave the city and the career in Zhich he Zas happy, Zas not a

792
Zoman Zho brooked disagreement—not even from her oZn son. Says 0rs.
3roper, Zho saZ them together: "It Zas no joke to that mother that she Zas
a Republican and her son Zas a Democrat. That Zas apostasy to her." There
Zas, moreover, 3aul's romance at 3rinceton Zith a 3hiladelphia girl Zho
Zas not only beautiful but first in her class at the 8niversity of
3ennsylvania, Zho also had a habit of saying Zhat she thought—and Zith
Zhom Bella did not get along at all. Relatives say 3aul and his mother had a
violent falling out over her. Also at 3rinceton, 3aul became leader of a 1910
version of a Reform Democratic club. :hether  or not it Zas because of the
romance and/or the political squabble, 3aul left 3rinceton for four years,
four years about Zhich he never talked—these episodes are some of those
obscured by shadoZs —and returned to major no longer in classics and
literature but in electrical engineering. The conflict betZeen 3aul and his
mother Zas more basic than specific issues: it Zas as fundamental as the
fact that Zhen the family discussions greZ especially lively, Robert kneZ
Zhere to stop, and his older brother didn't—or, if he did, refused to act on
the knoZledge. "3aul Zas alZays the

same—a maverick, a dissenter, based on this sense of social injustice," 0rs.
3roper says. "And you only had to meet that mother once to knoZ that that
Zas a house in Zhich very little dissent Zas tolerated." "She never did
succeed in running me—that's Zhat made her mad," 3aul says.

3aul paid a high price for his independence. +e Zanted to go into public
service as much as his younger brother did, but instead, in 1913, the year in
Zhich Bella secured for Robert a coveted place in the Bureau of 0unicipal
Research, it Zas announced to 3aul one evening that a partnership had been
arranged for him Zith .uhn,  Loeb &  Co., the investment banking firm in
Zhich Bella's brother-in-laZ Zas a partner. 3aul declined to folloZ the
pattern his mother had laid doZn for his life. ":hat?"   he recalls saying.
"You don't e[pect me to go doZntoZn and spend the rest of my life
juggling pieces of paper, do you? :ell, that's Zhat the banking business is,
isn't it? Juggling pieces of paper?" +e says his father Zanted to help him get
started in public service, but did not. ":hy?"  he Zould say bitterly.
"Because Father did Zhatever 0other directed, that's Zhy."

793
ShadoZs cover the ne[t feZ years of 3aul's life. According to several vague
accounts, he spent them in South America, returning only Zhen America
folloZed the 3resident he idoli]ed into the Zar to make the Zorld safe tor
democracy. At any rate, at a time at Zhich his brother Zas declining to
serve in the Zar, 3aul enlisted in the Navy. 0ustered out in November
1918, he Zas in no Zorse shape than his brother, Zho in November 1018,
almost thirty years old, dreams of civil service reforms crushed, Zas
Zorking at a humiliating job as little more than a clerk, Zith no place to
turn for Zork in  his chosen field.

Looking back at this crucial point in the lives of these tZo remarkable
brothers, another difference—an e[tension perhaps of Robert's Zillingness
and 3aul's unZillingness to bend to the Zoman they could not face doZn—
looms larger. Robert may have previously refused to compromise Zith the
practical politicians he scorned, but Zhen, at the age of thirty, Belle 0osko-
Zit]  gave him one last chance, he compromised. +aving learned he could
not beat the Tammany politicians Zho had crushed him, he Zas not only
Zilling  but eager to join them; he had learned very Zell indeed the need to
compromise. 3aul never learned that lesson. 3ropelled up the Consolidated
Edison e[ecutive ladder by his engineering brilliance (he Zas soon
assigned, at a salary of S1 8,000, to find Zays of harnessing the vast poZer
of the St. LaZrence River, a plan that Zould later be thZarted by Al Smith's
determination to have the harnessing done by a State 3oZer Authority), he
Zas hobbled by his refusal to tailor his liberalism to the ultraconservatism
of the utility's e[ecutive suite; once, a top e[ecutive asked him if he didn't
agree that :oodroZ  :ilson    Zas a fool; 3aul lashed out at him angrily.
Robert 0oses may have been the idealist Zho compromised his ideals; 3aul
0oses Zas the idealist Zho didn't.

1 ooking back on the lives of the tZo 0oses bovs. one difference looms
largest of all. Robert Zent into public service, a field big enough to alloZ
his unique vision and drive full range; a field in Zhich funds Zere available
on the same scale as his immense dreams, in Zhich his arrogance Zas in
part

e[cused by the public need he Zas serving, and in part protected by the
public poZers that devolved on him, so that Zhen he Zent beyond the laZ,

794
the poZer of the state protected him from retaliation. 3aul did not go into
public service. Eager to do so, he thought he Zas going to have his chance
in 1925, the year after his brother Zas appointed president of the Long
Island State 3ark Commission, Zhen, he says, his close friend Colonel
Frederick Stuart Greene, the erudite, urbane head of the State Department
of 3ublic :orks,   offered him a top D3:    engineering job. But, 3aul says, at
the last minute, "after everything Zas set," Greene told him that Al Smith
had vetoed the appointment Zithout e[planation. (At the time, 3aul told the
author Zith his bitter smile, he did not even suspect that the e[planation
might have something to do Zith his brother, Zhom at the time he
considered his friend.)

Either through a quirk of fate or because of a spirit of competition Zith his
brother—Zho Zas so quickly making a name for himself creating places to
sZim for the public—3aul purchased a large sZimming club in 8pper
Darby, 3ennsylvania. At the same time that his brother Zas making
grandiose plans for Jones Beach, 3aul Zas making grandiose plans for his
"Llanerch 3ool," planning to turn it into a huge recreational comple[ by
adding additional sZimming pools, a huge dance hall, and different
restaurants for different pocketbooks. "It Zould," recalls a friend to Zhom
he enthusiastically broached his ideas, "have been something really unique
for the time. +e had some imagination, I'll tell you."

But imagination on the 0oses scale Zas feasible only on a public scale.
Attempting to carry out his plans, 3aul spent the pool's revenues as fast as
they came in. Robert's grandiose plans cost far more than he had e[pected,
but because his money came from the state treasury, though he spent on an
unprecedented scale, overspent his budget, poured funds allocated for an
entire bathhouse into its foundations alone, there Zas alZays more Zhere
that came from. For 3aul there Zasn't—particularly after his father died.
Emanuel had helped Zith his ambitious project, but Zhen, in 1925, he died
he left all his money to his Zife. This money Zas readily available to the
younger of her tZo sons. Although Bella never gave Robert as much as he
needed and he Zas habitually short on cash, she did support him and his
Zife and daughters for more than ten years; Zhen, in 1927, at the age of
thirty-eight, he Zas named Secretary of State, it Zas the first job at Zhich
he had ever earned more than a token salary. :hen, desperate for funds to

795
complete the Jones Beach CauseZay, he asked her for a loan of $20,000,
she gave it gladly. But for her older son, help Zas limited and grudging, and
he Zas not a man Zho could beg. Soon, in the midst of a divorce that ended
an unhappy marriage, he Zas being humiliated by the hounding of his
Llanerch 3ool creditors. +e Zas unable even to pay his laZyer, and Zas
sued by him, too.

In 1929, there Zas a reconciliation betZeen 3aul and his mother. She asked
him to handle her business affairs. Con Ed hired him back on a part-time
basis as a consultant, the sZimming pool began to earn money, and,
appearing nightly in Zinter at the theater or the opera and at NeZ York's
most fashionable restaurants, he Zas again an elegant, cheerful man-about-
toZn.

BetZeen tZo men as opinionated as 3aul and his brother, there Zere bound
to be frequent arguments, but in the past they had alZays been friendly;
3aul had been a frequent visitor at Robert's home. But since his brother had
become a poZerful man in state government, 3aul felt, his attitude had
changed. +e no longer, 3aul felt, Zould tolerate anyone—even his brother
—disagreeing Zith him. Looking over the aides his brother had selected,
3aul recalled thinking: ":hy,   he's surrounded himself entirely Zith behind-
kissers." During one heated discussion, his brother adopted an attitude that
there Zas no sense discussing the matter any further since he kneZ best.
"By God," 3aul said, "I believe you're beginning to believe Zhat these
behind-kissers tell you." But, 3aul says, there Zas never any particularly
momentous clash Zith his brother; he believed they Zere still friends.

Then, in January or February 1930, 3aul and his mother had another falling
out. +e left in a huff for 3hiladelphia, staying there for several months. The
reason for the falling out is not knoZn; but 3aul said that it Zas no more
serious than the other rights he had had Zith his mother, fights after Zhich
they had become reconciled.

But this time, something neZ happened, something he Zould never be able
to understand—although he Zould spend the rest of his life trying to
understand it. :hen  he came home to make up Zith his mother this time,
she refused even to see him. The other relatives on Zhom he dropped in,
alZays so happy to see him in the past, Zere suddenly cold and distant.

796
"They all seemed to think I had done something aZful, you could tell from
the Zay they Zere acting," 3aul Zould say. "But I didn't knoZ  Zhat the hell
it Zas supposed to be." 0uch too proud to ask, 3aul reacted by avoiding
these people Zho had suddenly turned against him.

In 0arch  1930, Bella 0oses learned that she had cancer. 3aul did not knoZ
at first. :hether   he ever kneZ can no longer be determined. According to
one story prevalent in the family, 3aul never Zent to see his mother at
0ount  Sinai +ospital until  the last feZ days before she died. According to
another, he had gone earlier, but she had refused to see him. And Zhen, on
0ay  22, 1930, after Zeeks in Zhich she lay semi-comatose in intense pain,
she died of cancer, her Zill divided her estate betZeen tZo of her children,
Robert and Edna (although Robert's share Zas bigger than Edna's because
to it Zas added, in effect, $50,000 for the education of his children). To 3aul
0oses, her eldest son, Bella 0oses left only $100,000, and she left it in
trust, so that he Zould receive only the interest from it, never the principal.
+e had to receive that income through his brother, Zho Zas named a trustee
of the trust fund as Zell as an e[ecutor of the Zill. And there Zas an
additional clause: if 3aul ever contested the Zill, he Zould automatically
lose even the trust fund, Zhose principal Zould then be divided betZeen his
brother and sister.*

* 8pon  3aul's death, half the principal Zas to go to Edna's children, half to
3aul's— should he have children. If he did not, that half Zould go to
Robert's children, Barbara and Jane.

3aul 0oses Zas to be tortured by his mother's Zill for the rest of his life.

Financially, it changed his life, of course. 3reviously his earnings had
alZays been supplemented by gifts from Zealthy parents. NoZ he Zould
have only the interest—so meager compared to those gifts—on his trust
fund. 0ore,  he had alZays had security, the assurance of protection against
any real hardships, as Zell as the assurance that one day a share of his
family's Zealth Zould  be his. +e had been raised among servants and
tutors, in an atmosphere of snug lu[ury. +e had spent his later life in
variations of that atmosphere, and he had never had any reason to doubt that
he Zould be able to live out his life against such a background. NoZ,
suddenly, Zith a single bloZ, that security had been stripped from him—

797
irrevocably and forever. It Zas the Depression: consulting engineers Zere a
lu[ury  companies could no longer afford; at the time he learned the contents
of his mother's Zill, he had just learned that his retainer from Con Ed Zould
soon be terminated. The sZimming pool had not been doing badly, but its
income Zould never be anything near a substitute for that security, even if
it, too, Zas not affected by the Depression. +e had saved nothing; there had
never been any reason to save. +e had alZays been a man Zho had much
and the prospect of more. NoZ, all in an instant, at the age of forty-three, he
had nothing.

But it Zas not financial considerations that hurt 3aul most deeply. :hat his
mother's Zill did to him cannot be computed on any tally sheet. +e Zas to
have to live for the rest of his life not only in straitened circumstances but
Zith the question of Zhy his mother had forced him into them. Thirty-seven
years later, a man of eighty, he told the author, "I'm trying all this time to
divine Zhat Zas in my mother's mind. :hat   kind of performance Zas this?
:hy   did she do this thing?"

+e Zas to have to live also Zith alienation from the rest of his family, an
alienation that hurt him the more because he could not understand the
reason for it. "I don't knoZ Zhat Zas in their minds," he Zould  say. ":hat
Zas I supposed to have done that Zas so terrible? Nothing that I knoZ of.
But they seemed to think I had." +e Zas to spend the rest of his life
tormented by these questions. And the conclusion that, after years of
Zondering, he finally reached Zas one that Zould not have been illogical to
Ansley :ilco[    or Judge ClearZater or 3aul .ern—or  any one of a score of
men Zho had, in one Zay or another, stood betZeen Robert 0oses and
something he Zanted. +is brother, 3aul 0oses felt, had lied about him
Zhen he Zas not around to defend himself, had poisoned his mother's mind
and the minds of other members of his family against him, had e[aggerated
the details of his divorce and his financial difficulties until they seemed like
vicious, unforgivable misdeeds. 3aul even had a specific e[planation for his
mother's decision to virtually cut him out of her estate. "I Zasn't present, but
I knoZ that 0r.  Robert must have had something to do Zith that," he Zould
tell the author. There had been another Zill, 3aul Zould say, one that had
divided his mother's estate equally among her three children. "+oZ do I
knoZ?" he

798
Zould sav. "Because I saZ it - several times. I Zas handling my

mother's 'affairs, you knoZ. It Zas just a simple thing—divided into three
parts after charitable deductions." But Robert 0oses had gone to the
hospital Zhere his mother lay dying, in a drugged state, 3aul said, aZaiting
an emergency operation that Zas to be performed that night at ten o'clock,
Zith a neZ Zill   in hand, and. at si[ o'clock, had persuaded her to sign it.
3aul could even advance a reason for his brother to do such a thing: Robert
needed money badlv, 3aul said. And it Zas also his brother, 3aul said, Zho
Zas responsible for his difficulty thereafter in obtaining either public or
private employment in his profession.

One of 3aul's char£es h demonstrably false. Bella did sign her final Zill
daring her last illness in 0ount Sinai +ospital, but. according to the date on
the Zill, she signed it on April 4. 1930. seven Zeeks before she died. The
truth of his charge that his brother lied about him to their mother and their
relatives cannot be determined—although it is clear, from a series of
intervieZs Zith  surviving relatives, that although they regard 3aul almost as
a criminal not one of them has any clear idea of Zhat his crime—if there
Zas one—Zas supposed to be. Cousin +ilda +ellman, for e[ample, says,
"+e Zas bad. I think he must have done something pretty aZful." :hat
e[actly did he do? "I really don't have any idea at all." she says. :ell, then,
Zhy does she think he did anything 0 0rs. +ellman savs it Zas just "an
impression" she had. .Asked the source of the impression, she Zas unable to
remember. But at least one other relative, searching her memory, believes it
Zas Robert.

3aul insisted that the Zill be read in the light of Robert's financial situation
at the time his mother died—1930.

It Zas certainly serious. +aving been ousted as Secretary of State by
Governor Roosevelt in 1929. in 1930. Robert 0oses Zas not earning any
salary at all from his remaining jobs. Aside from e[penses for Zhich he Zas
entitled to reimbursement, Roben 0oses, at the age of fortv-one. had no
income at all e[cept Zhat his mother gave him. NoZ. Zith their tZo  girls
groZing up—Barbara Zas thirteen in 1929. Jane eleven—Robert 0oses'
financial situation Zas complicated by the fact that for him it Zas
unthinkable that his children attend public school, and he therefore had to

799
pay tuition at -.pes' The family had a nice place to live—Bella had bought
him not only the Babylon summer house but a broZnstone at 261 :est
Seventieth Street—but he Zas sc 5-.rapped that in 1929 he did not have
sufficient funds to pay the ne[t term's tuition, or to make necessary repairs
on the Babylon house 0oses had alZays made a point—both publiclv and
privately—of in-ng that he be a public servant Zorking Zithout pay,
refusing Smith's offer of a salary for his Long Island 3ark Commission job.
+is disregard for money

a vital part of the public image he had so assiduouslv cultivated, and the
maintenance of this pose in private Zas no less important to him. But in
September 1929. he took Zhat for him Zas an unprecedented step—in the
light of his previous actions, almost a desperate step. On completion of the
City

Trust report he had Zritten as 0oreland Commissioner, he submitted a bill
for his services of ten thousand dollars plus e[penses. This Zas an
unprecedented amount to ask for about tZo months' Zork, and Roosevelt, of
course, Zould not have been disposed to grant 0oses even a reasonable
request. +e turned 0oses doZn flat. 0oses Zas constantly being offered
high-salaried jobs in industry, but that Zould mean leaving his public career
and his public poZer. In early 1930, Zith the mother on Zhom he had
alZays depended for money dying, he needed money desperately.

+is mother's oZn resources, moreover, had been shrinking—largely
because she had the same e[travagant, prodigal attitude toZard money as
her tZo sons. FolloZing her husband's death in 1925, she picked up more
checks for 0adison +ouse. She made generous contributions to other
charities, largely ones that produced some sign of physical accomplishment.
+oZ  Robert 0oses felt about this Zould be revealed later by a remark he
made to La Guardia in a memo about the Children's Aid Society: "Every
year my mother contributed more than she could afford to this organi]ation
because of her interest in playgrounds."* Although about $1,200,000 of her
husband's money had been added to her oZn substantial inheritance, at the
beginning of 1929 her net Zorth Zas doZn to little more than $1,000,000.
Sometime during this period, moreover, she told 3aul to begin entering
future gifts to her children on her books as "advances." This, 3aul says, Zas

800
proof of a groZing aZareness that her resources, Zhile great, Zere not
ine[haustible—and of her determination to be "fair" in dividing up her
estate; the purpose of this method of entering "advances," he said, Zas to
make clear that they Zere advances against her estate, and that, to keep the
total amount each child received from her the same, they Zould be deducted
from each one's share of her estate. (At the time she died, the advances to
Robert 0oses on her books totaled $37,200.t) +alf of her assets Zere in
stocks; the 1929 crash further slashed her assets. In mid-1929, the Zorth of
her stocks Zas about $500,000; Zhen her estate Zas appraised after her
death the ne[t year, the value of those stocks Zas found to have shrunk to
$293,649. +er total net Zorth Zas doZn to $690,422. She made no secret of
her intention to leave about $50,000 to charity. In 3aul's analysis, there no
longer e[isted a fund of family capital large enough so that there Zas, as the
0oses children had alZays supposed, plenty for everyone. A "fair"—one-
third—share of Bella 0oses' estate Zould, after the charitable deduction
and inheritance ta[es and the subtraction of $37,200, give Robert 0oses
about $170,000. The income from $170,000 Zould certainly never amount
to enough to support in any decent style a man, Zithout a cent of other
income, Zith tZo  houses and tZo children in private school. In 3aul's
analysis, Robert 0oses reali]ed that if he Zas to continue his precious
career and protect his precious image, he needed for himself every cent of
his mother's estate that he could get.

* Italics added.

t If there Zere any advances to 3aul, the author could find no record of
them.

This, of course Robert Zill not discuss it, and there

h fi*0g   no one else Zho is able to. It is r ole, therefore, for anyone

ever to knoZ Zhether or not 3aul's ar. 8 ic—although one part of it

seems indisputable: apart from Zhat he could get from his mother's estate,
Robert 0oses, forty-one years old, had no money to speak of at all.

.: it is possible to ascertain the truth of 3au: other charge. It

801
is possible to determine Zhether or not it is true that Robert 0oses secretly
employed his behind-the-scenes influence in city government to keep his
brother from getting jobs he deserved.

Si[ high officials  in that government—si[ in  a position to knoZ—say so.
They are Fioreflo La Guardia's Corporation Counsel, 3aul :indels; his
Comptroller, Joseph D. 0cGoldrick: his legislative representative. Reuben
A. La]arus; the chairman of his Civil Service Commission. 3aul J. .ern:
commis-- ~t~]<t: ?:;:'r;s:: V*.  v^:e S Sayre and ne rther official Zho Zould
talk only on die guarantee of anonymit

3aul, the liberal idealist Zho had alZays Zanted to Zork for the public
instead of for the giant utilities he felt Zere defrauding the public, Zas
eager to Zork for a mayor Zho felt the same Zay. +e certainly had the
qualifications for uie Zork. An[ious  to regulate utilities more strictly and to
probe the as se s sm ent and easement concessions they had obtained from
Tammany, the neZ mayor Zas having difficulty finding electrical engineers
Zith both e[pertise and the Zillingness to antagoni]e the major employers
in their field. 3aul possessed both. +ighly regarded as an engineer, he Zas
also. 0cGoldrick  adds, "kind of an engineer Zith a cause—he Zas very
suspicious of . . . like La Guardia, Zho Zas also Zilling to believe that Con
Ed -'-"■-' ]  'i ±t :::; And  there -verei I : man] engineers on the

liberal side because there Zas . . . much money to be made Zorking for the
utility"  Just after La Guardia's inauguration. 3aul had an intervieZ Zith
:indels,   Zho Zas at the moment looking, on the 0ayor's behalf, for a
Commissioner of :ater  Supply. Gas and Electricity. :indels  Zas
impressed. Recalls .ern: "3aul :indels   called me and said. 'I Zant vou to
shoZ this guy to the 0ayor. +e seems like just Zhat La Guardia needs.' "
.ern  Zas impressed himself. "3aul 0oses came in and talked about
himself, not too modestly but impressively, and he left his resume Zith me.
+is record looked good." :hether   as a commissioner or in some other
high-level post, .ern  recommended to the 0ayor that 3aul be brought into
the administration.

But there Zas something standing in 3aul's Zay.

802
3recisely Zhat his brother Zas saving to La Guardia about him is not
knoZn, although the one reference by Robert to 3aul in Zriting in the
0ayor's private files consists mainly of a paragraph that could hardly have
helped raise questions in the mind of so sharp a laZyer:

:hile   it  is nobody's business and purely a family matter. I have not seen t
for a long time and I am hardly on speaking terms Zith him. 0y only

* No official  could be found Zho said differently.

contact Zith him is in my capacity as a trustee of a fund of Zhich he is the
beneficiary. *

But that he Zas saying something Zas obvious. "That Zas quite clear to me
—oh, just from little things [La Guardia] dropped," :indels   says. "And it
also became quite clear to me that for Zhatever reason—Zhether Robert
made it a condition of his continuation in the administration that his brother
not be hired or Zhether Robert simply made La Guardia believe it Zould be
unZise to hire him—he Zasn't going to be hired." Shortly, it also became
clear to .ern.  +aving received no reply to his first recommendation that
3aul be hired, he decided to press a bit. "At one of my half-hour sessions
Zith La Guardia," he recalls, "I took a chance and brought this up, saying,
':ith   the shortage of good engineers, Zhat's Zrong Zith this guy?' La
Guardia's reply Zas:

" 'Don't bother me. I can't have him around as long as Bob is here.' " The
more :indels  and .ern  saZ of  3aul, the more their respect for him greZ.
"Remarkable mind, remarkable," :indels  says. "Like the brother. Reaching
out for a Zhole problem and pulling the Zhole thing in at once." .ern,  Zho
frequently ate dinner Zith him, found in him another quality that
characteri]ed his brother. "+e Zas very good at si]ing up people," .ern
says. ":hen  I Zas on the Civil  Service Commission, I'd often ask him
about some guy and he'd tell me he's no damn good for such-and-such a
reason. And Ze'd hire him, and sure enough he'd turn out just that Zay."
:indels   saZ to it that 3aul did get some Zork, hiring him as an e[pert
Zitness in condemnation cases involving utilities, and as a consultant to a
committee studying transit unification, and later putting him in charge of a
thirty-three-man staff reassessing utility properties—at the fee he asked,

803
fifty dollars per day. "Listen," :indels   says, "I checked his qualifications.
+e Zas a top engineering consultant. +e Zas Zorth fifty dollars a day of
anybody's money." In fact, during several years in Zhich 3aul held this last
job, the utilities' assessments Zere raised more than $200,000,000 per year.

But these Zere temporary jobs, and 3aul's repeated attempts to obtain a
permanent one met Zith rebuff. +e Zas earning over $12,000 per year from
his consulting Zork for the city, but the Depression Zas cutting deeper and
deeper into the profits from the sZimming pool. +e needed a job—and he
became very bitter over his inability to get one. +e did not knoZ, or even
suspect, the real reason. (Ironically, he thought it Zas :indels Zho Zas
keeping him from getting one.) "Listen, I Zasn't asking for a handout," he
Zould say years later. "I Zas recommended by the engineering societies. I
kneZ more about this stuff than anyone else around. I Zas entitled to at
least one of all those jobs. :indels, La]arus—all  those felloZs: they Zere
pretty shabby to me. I Zanted to get something in public life, and no one
Zould

* The paragraph is contained in a brief note 0oses Zrote in the first months
after La Guardia's inauguration. It is a reply to a letter about 3aul that the
0ayor  sent to 0oses. The letter is not in the files, and its contents could not
be learned.

say a Zord for me." After :indels   resigned in 1938, he could not obtain
even consulting Zork. At first, that did not Zorry  him; his services had
alZays been sought by many engineering firms. But noZ, for some reason
he could not understand, even the firms Zhich once sought them most
eagerly Zere totally unZilling  to even consider employing him. All through
1939 he hunted for a job in the profession in Zhich he Zas an
acknoZledged e[pert—and could not find one.

+is financial difficulties  Zere compounded because he possessed the 0oses
prodigality toZard money. Remarried—to a divorcee Zith tZo children—he
had undertaken to send them to private school and college. +e had moved
his neZ family into an e[pensive loZer Fifth  Avenue apartment. Although
betZeen 1934 and 1938 he had been earning a substantial income, he had
lived to its limit,  saving nothing. And he had refused to—perhaps because
of his upbringing had been unable to—put financial limits on the 8pper

804
Darby recreational comple[ that may have been his pitiful attempt to rival
Jones Beach. +e kept pouring money into the Llanerch 3ool—for modern
locker rooms, a dance hall, another restaurant. In 1938, Zith finances flush,
he had put a $33,000 mortgage on the property to finance the construction
of an "amusement building." As his plans for the building greZ larger and
larger, so did its cost. In 1939, Zith the $33,000 spent and the building still
not finished, he encumbered the property Zith a second mortgage. The
building Zas still uncompleted, no receipts Zere yet being earned by it—
and suddenly the receipts earned by the pool and restaurant Zere being
gobbled up by interest payments. One morning, the morning on Zhich the
last dreams of 3aul 0oses' life turned to ashes, there arrived at his office a
real estate ta[ bill that he had no money to pay. The banks, learning of the
situation, initiated foreclosure proceedings. +e Zas reduced to borroZing
from his Zife's aunt, and then from her mother, securing a $12,500 loan
from the latter by giving her another mortgage. +e desperately needed a
good summer—instead there Zas a polio scare in 3hiladelphia; feZ people
dared to sZim in public pools. The $12,500 melted aZay. 3resented Zith a
$7,500 bill from his attorney, he Zas unable to pay it; the attorney sued him.
+is Zife's  mother had died; in desperation, he had his Zife assign the
mortgage she had inherited from her to the attorney; he fell behind on
federal income ta[ payments, and interest on them Zas mounting by the day
—draZing tighter .\nd tighter around this once gay, elegant free spirit Zas a
net of debts too snarled to permit eseape.

The marriage melted aZay Zith the money. 0oving into a cheaper
apartment Zas too agoni]ing for a man of 3aul's pride to contemplate; by
the end ol 1938, hoZever, he had no ehoiee but to move; he had no monev
to pay the rent. +e had to move in Zith his in-iaZs. I 1 sing every eent he
could lay his hands on to try to save his pool—for a Zhile'he moved Zith
some of his elegant suits into a tiny, bare room behind the pool office so
that he Zouldn't have the e[pense of commuting eosts to 3hiladelphia—he
let other bills slide. +e and his Zife Zere being dunned by the butcher, the
grocer, by a department store, and even, for a hundred dollars, by a maid
they had let eo.

+e lived on tZenty-five  dollars a Zeek, using every other cent the pool
earned to pay off its debts, and in some Zeeks in Zhich a bill or a demand

805
for ta[es became too pressing, he Zas unable to take even the tZenty-five.
:hen   he had to come to NeZ York in 1939, the year in Zhich his brother
moved into the e[pensive apartment on Gracie Terrace, he slept in a
Salvation Army lodging house. 3ride made him conceal his poverty—so
Zell that acquaintances Zho, meeting him on the street, noticed that the
cuffs on his e[pensive suits and shirts Zere ragged, thought this Zas an
affectation on the part of this man Zho had alZays cared so much about his
appearance. To those Zho invited him to their homes for dinner, hoZever, it
Zas more difficult to conceal the truth. +e might forget and cross his legs,
and then friends such as the 3ropers—Zho Zere so kind to him that he
Zould often "drop in"  on them Zhen he "happened to be in the
neighborhood"—saZ that there Zere holes in his socks and in the soles of
his shoes. They saZ from the Zay he ate dinner that he hadn't been eating
many. Not only did he not have enough money to buy clothes or shoes, they
reali]ed, this man, Zhose brother Zas host daily at lavish luncheons, did not
have enough to buy food. "+e got thinner and thinner," 0rs. 3roper says.
"+e Zas really not getting enough food. :e  kept him overnight a number of
times. I really don't think he had a place to sleep. :e offered to lend him
some money. +e Zouldn't take any, not from us at any rate. I used to Zish
he had. 3oor 3aul."

Genuine friends such as the 3ropers, moreover, saZ changes in 3aul that
saddened them more than the changes in his appearance. For, to people Zho
remembered his Zit and gaiety, the holes that gaped most glaringly noZ
Zere not the holes in his shoes but the holes in his spirit. 3aul 0oses, they
reali]ed, Zas being eaten aZay by a terrible bitterness. ":e had him to
some dinner parties, but he Zas very difficult to handle," 0rs. 3roper says.
"Bitter, frustrated possibly, opinionated. This Zas Zhen this 0oses side
came to the fore—this brushing aside, this arrogance. +e Zas impossible.
3aul Zas his oZn Zorst enemy."

At the heart of 3aul 0oses' bitterness Zas hatred for his brother.

Its spark Zas Zhat 3aul felt Zas injustice in the administration of the
$100,000 trust fund of Zhich his brother Zas a trustee. Their mother had
intended that 3aul get from that fund an annual income of several thousand
dollars per year.

806
But he Zasn't getting a cent.

The fund's trustees—Robert, Edna, cousin :ilfred Openhym and a bank—
had invested 3aul's money in "guaranteed mortgages," a device, common
before the Depression, under Zhich a title company, for a fee, "guaranteed"
principal and interest payments and undertook the responsibility of seeing
to it that the oZner paid his real estate ta[es. But tZo of the three mortgages
involved Zere caught in the crash of the real

estate market in NeZ York, during Zhich thousands of oZners defaulted on
payments, and title companies, unable to meet them all, collapsed. In
normal times, the bank, Zhich Zas managing the trust fund for the trustees,
Zould have received notification of the default in ta[es and interest
pavments from the title companies and Zould have foreclosed, saving the
principal. But in the general confusion, the bank somehoZ did not check on
the ta[ situation until the oZners of the tZo properties had been in default
on ta[es and other city charges for more than tZo years. To keep from
losing the entire $24,000 investment they had made in one building, the
trustees, foreclosing on it, had to sell it for Zhat they could get: $7,500. To
keep from losing the $65,000 they had invested in the other, a Toft building
at 168 The BoZery, they had to pay off $8,000 in ta[es, and make repairs
costing $7.000—Zhich they did by putting a $15,000 second mortgage on
it. During the five years in Zhich they Zere paying off this mortgage, the
trustees deducted the payments from Zhat 3aul Zould have received. There
Zas nothing left for him. BetZeen October 3, 1935, and August 3. 1939—
almost four years—he received nothing from his trust fund. By the time the
mortgage Zas paid off, real estate values on the BoZery had plummeted—
permanently. The rents earned by the building into Zhich most of his
inheritance had been sunk barely met mortgage payments and ta[es. +is
income from the trust Zas henceforth going to be barely a thousand dollars
a year.

If there Zas negligence involved in the disappearance of his assets, it Zas
on the part of the bank, Zhich had had the responsibility of managing the
properties for the trust, not on the part of his brother, Zho had in fact lost
part of his inheritance because he had invested it in guaranteed mortgages.
Not even the most prudent investors had foreseen the general collapse of

807
the title companies Zhich had turned tens of thousands of guaranteed
mortgages into all but Zorthless paper. 3aul Zould probably have
understood this if his brother had sat doZn and e[plained the situation to
him.

But his brother Zouldn't even talk to him. Once, the feZ thousand dollars a
year that the trust fund Zas supposed to have provided Zould have seemed
like an insignificant sum to 3aul 0oses. NoZ it  looked as large as a meal to
fill  his stomach. It might be the means—the only means—of saving his
sZimming pool. In an attempt to reali]e something from the dilapidated
BoZery loft  that noZ represented almost his entire inheritance, he thought
of tZo ideas. The bank, he learned, Zas paying a rental agent about $1,000
per year to collect the rents: Zhy, he Zondered, could the bank not hire him
to do the collecting instead, and pav him the thousand dollars? Or. he
Zondered, Zhy could not the building be sold? +e asked its largest tenant if
he Zould be interested in buying. The man said yes, and made an offer on
the spot: $40,000. 3aul Zas sure he Zould go higher, and even $40,000.
placed in a bank, Zould return him more than the feZ hundred dollars the
building Zas netting him annually noZ. 3aul telephoned his brother to
present these ideas to him—and heard Zith astonishment a

secretary say that his brother Zouldn't talk to him. :hen he telephoned his
brother's home, 0ary gave him the same message. :hen he contacted his
sister, Edna said she Zould do Zhatever Robert Zanted. So did Openhym,
Zho, 3aul says, "seemed to feel I Zas some sort of criminal or something."
So did the bank. 0uch as he needed the money involved, it Zasn't its loss
that hurt 3aul the most. It Zas the attitude of his brother. At about this same
time, by coincidence, he asked Edna for some pictures or mementos of their
parents; she said she did not have anything to spare—not so much as a
single photograph. "Oh, I never blamed Edna," 3aul Zas to say. ":henever
something comes up, she asks 0r. Robert Zhat he Zants done and then
accedes to it." NoZ he tried to telephone his brother to ask him for a
photograph— "You'd think they'd let me have a picture, Zouldn't you?
You'd think they'd let me have something, the oldest one in the family and
all"—and he still Zould  not come to the phone. +e had alZays been fond of
his brother's tZo daughters, Jane and Barbara. NoZ, he reali]ed, he Zas not
going to see them at all. And he couldn't imagine Zhy his brother and sister

808
and cousin Zere treating him this Zay. For a Zhile he thought it must be
because of his marital difficulties. ":hat   right have they to sit in moral
judgment on me, an older brother?" he said. But that e[planation could not
account for their attitude. +e simply could not imagine Zhat Zas behind it.

In January 1941, 3aul received a letter that fanned smoldering hatred into
flame, convincing him that the motive behind all his brother's actions had
been the desire to Zring for himself out of their mother's estate every last
dollar he possibly could—even if those dollars had to come out of the
pitifully  feZ that 3aul Zas receiving. For the letter, a copy of one from the
trustees to the Surrogate's Court, informed him that Robert 0oses Zas
asking that he be paid—out of the trust fund—for his Zork as trustee.

For almost four years—from October 3, 1935, to August 3, 1939— 3aul
0oses had received nothing from the trust fund his mother had left for him.
During the remaining months of 1939, he had received $1,144.54, in 1940,
$444.18. In five years, then, he had received a total of $1,588.72. The letter
informed him that the fund's trustees Zere asking the Surrogate's Court to
approve the payment to them—out of the fund—of commissions for their
Zork as trustees at standard trustee commission rates. Each trustee Zas
asking for $750.90. Together, therefore, they Zere asking for $3,003.60. At
the same time, Openhym asked an additional $750 for himself as "attorney
for the trustees."

The Zealthy laZyer's request enraged 3aul. If it Zas granted, he Zould
obtain from the trust fund 3aul's mother had intended for 3aul's support
$1,500—just about as much as 3aul had received from the fund for the
previous five years. And Openhym Zas only a cousin. Robert and Edna
Zere his brother and sister. They lived comfortably. +e often literally did
not have enough to eat. But they Zere attempting to obtain from his trust
fund as much money as he had obtained during the previous five years.
Together, in fact, the trustees Zere asking for almost $4,000—more than
tZice as much as 3aul had received during those years.

T+E LOT!  OF 3O:£J

592

809
, - - - - - . - - - - ; • " -' - -' : "  '- -1 2

ov fdL it sated, that money 3aul had been given in 1933

------

r» F*~i to die bSk for repairs and back ta[es, and it must .-.-- ' - '.-:■:-.::-■-
•. r.i-.e

--•B- :-*.d add

:--:-- ' .-'..-..--.B::

---,-.- , ,-- ;. ■■ ~-• B -.--.: :~^" ': --::~r:  -~d ees Zere pi o po si ng lhat, after
a four-year period in Zhich he rom die $100,000 Ins mother had left him
not one cent,

1:5 d *aV<» no more. +e could not contest the Zin—the provision l placed
in it made it too risky for him to do that— but st Zhat the trustees had done
Zith the money left to him in it. rney, he asked the Surrogate's Court to
order the trustees to housands of dollars of income from the trust that they
had mid up the principal, t:

d by pouring funds for repairs into the BoZery piope i ty Zhose riorating
yearly, Zhile at the same time insuring that be Zould

-aul Zould tell the author: "I: Zas

have been fair to me—a judge Zho had

ally four-square Zith mine—to a judge my

::-:::- :: :.:: t ■■:.-'-  ■■■ ;:•:' 1

]r.]^i]:   :]~i.-.]

ZZ  that the case Zas originally scheduled to be heard

810
ed in another case, similar :o 3aul's, held the trusses sindling aZay of a
fund's assets caused by a failure to :r.]i]] : - - lento On Ju - 441. hoZever.
3aul's otice stating, Zithout e[plain ssues in this

] re-:: refrre +on  Ja :- a Fc q " lames A Foley, 1 Surr::^ :t. Zas a kev
Tammanv figure and one of sest friends. :hether the 2 matter of court

ml Zas correct in seeing his brother's hand in it cannot hat is knoZn happen.
he hearing: Zhile

811
t several minor points, he ruled against him on the key rment of the us—and
gave 3aul a

g. in Zords that caused the blood to rush to 3aul's face ■ ~ ;-ea:s ia:e: "Y
:he Zhir ; a Z you

*oZ  i did that : 3aul Zould say.

re in that? I don't knoZ to this dav."^ To add a further

im, Openhvm. a> .1 result of i had to do beca: g ncreased his fee

:: Sr.ooo—and added on. to be ;:ed from the

his cousin's tmr 17 in e[pend

had been entrust -r Zith do ig ^ut a

less brother +e :00k pan of that pi:: v himself.

+e took aZay from a brother Zho Zas poor Zhile he Zas Zell  off, Zho  Zas
Zalking the streets Zith holes in his shoes and sleeping in a Salvation Army
lodging house, Zho Zas almost literally starving for Zant of a feZ dollars,
$750.90.

Legally, he had a right to that commission. But the morality behind the
request for it Zas the morality of Robert 0oses.

Foley's decision—all the circumstances surrounding the Zill—Zas unjust,
3aul felt. 0ost  of his mother's money had come to her from her mother, his
grandmother, and her husband, his father. +is grandmother and father
Zould certainly have Zanted him to have a fair share of their money: Zas it
not unjust that he Zas not being alloZed to have it? And Zhy had she acted
so unfairly? "I Zasn't present, but I knoZ 0r.  Robert must have had
something to do Zith that." 3reying on him constantly, moreover, Zas the
feeling that even if his brother had had nothing to do Zith his mother's
injustice, he had compounded that injustice by his later actions. ":hat right
have they to sit in moral judgment on me?" To refuse him even a

812
photograph of his parents? Right or Zrong, the feeling deepened into an
obsession. Festering Zithin him constantly noZ Zas the conviction that he
had been the victim of a monstrous injustice—at the hands of his oZn
brother. A single talk Zith his brother might have lanced that infection, but
his brother Zould not grant him the favor of such a talk. The poison from
the infection began to soak into his Zhole personality.

+e never spoke about the Zill to friends. +e had too much of the need his
brother had, to relate to others from a commanding position; he needed to
pretend that he Zas set off from others by the fact that he still had money.
FeZ of his friends and acquaintances kneZ his true circumstances. :indels
and .ern and La]arus Zould  be shocked Zhen they Zere told after his
death of his poverty. "No, I'm sure you must be mistaken about that," says
one acquaintance. "I remember quite clearly him telling me he had some
sort of independent income, didn't have to Zork like the rest of us, you
knoZ. +e said he had bonds, clipped coupons so he didn't have to pay ta[es.
And, oh yes, I recall quite clearly that he said he oZned some real estate."
But 3aul talked incessantly about his brother: critici]ing his policies and his
treatment of the public. "Can't you see the settlement-house attitude in
everything he does—this attitude of: 'You're my children and I knoZ Zhat's
best for you'? " In hindsight, many of his criticisms Zould turn out to be
perceptive ("You knoZ Zho it Zas Zho  first made me reali]e Zhat this
overde-pendence on highZays Zas going to do to NeZ York?" La]arus
asks. "3aul 0oses, that's Zho") but he put forth the criticisms in a manner
so harsh, became so enraged at disagreement, and, Zhen the talk turned to
his brother, acted so bitter as to seem almost irrational. (It is his Zay of
talking about his brother that makes even more than the usual caution
necessary in Zeighing his charges.) Acquaintances Zho saZ him at Zide
intervals saZ a man changing. La]arus, Zho had once thought so highly of
him, says: "+e had a fi[ation. +e hated Bob. 3aul . . . Zas a good engineer,
but to get him off balance all you had to do Zas mention Bob." As the
symptoms of this fi[ation deepened, it Zas no longer necessary for
someone to bring up Bob's

name; 3aul seemed to turn every conversation to his brother. La]arus says
3aul became "unstable"; .ern calls him "quite neurotic," capable of
"violent hatred." 0en  sitting at a banquet at Zhich his brother Zas speaking

813
or being honored might notice him standing in the rear of the hall—he Zas
standing in the rear, although they didn't knoZ it, because he could not
afford to buy a ticket for a seat—staring up at his brother on the dais Zith
that look of contempt and hatred on his face, and they Zould nudge their
friends and point out the lone, bitter figure standing back in the shadoZs.
This too contributed to the impression of an unstable personality, and,
ironically, made it easier for the croZd around City +all to believe those
rumors—the rumors Zhose source Zas never identified—that Robert
0oses' brother Zas guilty of some heinous, if unspecified, crime.

Fighting to hold on to the Llanerch 3ool, needing every cent he could
scrape up, 3aul 0oses Zas trying desperately to find a job noZ. But he
couldn't. As, day after day, a man in his fifties, turning gray, he made the
long, humiliating rounds of the job hunter, he found that although he had
for years been a high-salaried, highly respected consulting engineer, noZ
not one of the city's engineering consultant firms Zould offer him any job at
all.

3erhaps the e[planation lay in his altered personality, or in the rumors that
folloZed him. But  there Zere those—engineers Zho had learned for
themselves the hard lesson of Zhat it meant to an engineer in NeZ York to
incur the displeasure of Robert 0oses—Zho felt that that Zas not the real
e[planation. "You don't really think it Zas, do you?" asks Ole Singstad, a
Zorld-famous engineer Zho defied Robert 0oses once and could not get
another job in the city or state for thirty years.

3aul did not ask his brother for a job. +e Zould not. But, Zithout his
knoZledge, friends tried to.

They tried only once. Carl 3roper kneZ Robert 0oses Zell enough to get
an intervieZ Zithout  having to say in advance Zhat he Zanted to talk about.
"Carl only Zent because it Zas so obvious that 3aul Zasn't getting enough
to eat—Ze Zere Zorried about his health," 0rs. 3roper says. But Zhen
Robert reali]ed Zhy 3roper had come, 0rs. 3roper says, "he Zas just fit to
be tied. +e Zas adamant and uninterested. It Zas a brush-off." And 3aul not
only Zas offered no job by his brother but did not find it any easier to find
Zork for a private engineering firm, so many of Zhich Zere supported by

814
the contracts Robert 0oses controlled. In 1942, unable to meet the real
estate ta[es, 3aul lost the Llanerch 3ool.

During :orld   :ar   II,  3aul obtained a Zartime post as superintendent of
construction at the 8.S. Navy base in Bayonne, NeZ Jersey, dedicated
himself to the Zork so completely that for months he slept on a cot in his
office— and became, to a large e[tent, his old competent, incisive self
again.

But Zhen the Zar ended, so did the Bayonne job—and 3aul, upon his

return to NeZ York, couldn't find another one in even the most minor
consulting or e[ecutive capacity in his field.*

3aul's brother Zould, after the Zar, be placing Zith the private consulting
engineering firms he controlled scores of engineers, often on the basis of
personal or political considerations. +is control of public engineering
contracts Zas a byZord in the profession. +is brother Zas an engineer. But
his brother could not find a job. "It Zas damned strange that a guy Zith his
ability, a guy Zho had held really top jobs, couldn't find anything at all,"
says one engineer. In 1954, Robert 0oses Zould become chairman of the
State 3oZer Authority, the body charged Zith creating hydroelectric poZer
from the St. LaZrence River. This Zas the field of 3aul's particular
e[pertise; he had, in fact, spent months draZing up a St. LaZrence plan
years before, as his brother Zas Zell aZare—they had frequently discussed
it at the time. Robert 0oses Zould e[perience great difficulty finding
engineers Zith e[pertise in the field, and he could hardly have approached
the professional engineering societies involved Zithout getting a
recommendation for his brother. 3aul 0oses e[pected his brother to contact
him about a job this time. But he heard not a Zord. And, year after year, for
ten years, fifteen years, in a city in Zhich his brother Zas handing out so
many engineering jobs, 3aul 0oses couldn't get one.

3aul 0oses did not ask his brother for a job; 3aul 0oses could not d that.
But he did Zant to ask him again to sell 168 The BoZery, a move th; 3aul
felt Zould give him  more of an income from the trust fund than the $550 he
Zas receiving. (+is second Zife Zas, as a result of their separation
agreement, receiving the same amount.) But his brother's secretaries told

815
him they had been instructed not to put him through. At one point, he tried
for a year and a half Zithout getting him to come to the phone even once.
And Zhen his brother finally did consent to talk to him, it Zas to curtly
refuse even to consider 3aul's ideas. Then he cut off communications again.
In his seventies, 3aul had to eke out a living as a salesman. Finally, this gay,
gallant man Zhose natural habitat Zas the opera and Delmonico's Zent to
ground in an $86.50-per-month "apartment" that Zas not an apartment at all
but a single large room, converted from Zhat had been a storage space, Zith
an area in a corner of the room that served as a kitchen, on the top floor of a
five-story Zalk-up loft  building at 105 South Broad Street that could be
reached only by climbing long, steep flights of stairs. And there, in the city
in Zhich his brother lived in lu[ury,  3aul 0oses  lived out the last ten years
of his life in a terrible poverty brightened only by the last of his Zomen, a
small, pleasant, gray-haired lady about his oZn age Zhose devotion to 3aul
impressed everyone Zho kneZ them. 3aul's friends—she appears to have
had none of her oZn—kneZ her only as "0illie."  Not one person could be

* :hy    3aul returned to NeZ York, the city in Zhich his brother Zas in
poZer, instead of trying to make a neZ life someZhere else, may be
e[plained in part by his age: in 1945, 3aul Zas fifty-eight. There may have
been another reason also. :hen the author asked him Zhy, 3aul replied:
":hat!   Let him  drive me aZay?"

found in NeZ York Zho  kneZ her last name—she and 3aul, although they
lived together, could not, because of his Zife's refusal to give him a divorce,
ever get married. But there are indications that she may have been the same
Zoman Zith Zhom,  decades before, 3rinceton freshman 3aul 0oses, in
defiance of his mother, had fallen in love during his glittering youth.

The building in Zhich 3aul 0oses  lived out his life, located at the last stop
on the subZay, Zas almost at the very end of South Broad Street, almost the
very end of 0anhattan Island—as if he had almost, but not quite, been
driven off it. In the evenings the area Zas all but deserted, the streets empty.
0illie   put curtains on the ZindoZs of the top-floor loft that Zas their home,
and curtained off the little kitchen, but there Zasn't much that could be done
to make the big bare space pleasant—particularly Zithout money. (Of all
the things that Zere missing from it, 3aul felt most the absence of books. "I

816
had had all sorts of reference books," he told the author. "NoZ I have no
books.") And it Zasn't the bareness of the room that Zas the Zorst thing
about it; it Zas its location at the top of those steep stairs. The feZ visitors
he invited up there—"It Zas the kind of place you Zouldn't Zant to invite a
lot of company, I'll tell you that," one says—all remarked on those stairs; "it
Zas technically only four flights but they Zere so long it Zas like seven or
eight, and they Zere very steep, old Zooden stairs," says a friend, Louis
Schulman. And 3aul 0oses, Zhile remarkably vigorous, had his seventieth
birthday in 1957. Those stairs Zere very hard for 3aul, particularly at the
end of a long day trudging around 0anhattan as a salesman. In his late
seventies, he Zould be stricken by a serious illness. Thereafter climbing
those stairs Zould be very hard indeed. Any apartment in an elevator
building Zould have been a blessing to him. +is brother Zas creating tens
of thousands of such apartments: loZ-income, middle-income. +e gave out
such apartments as favors to innumerable persons. Any politician Zith a
relative Zho Zanted one had only to ask; Robert 0oses Zould provide. But
he Zouldn't provide one for his oZn brother. 3aul 0oses Zas to struggle up
those stairs until 1967, Zhen, at the age of eighty, he died.

3aul's room Zas Zithin Zalking  distance of City +all and the 0unicipal
Building, and he seemed irresistibly draZn to those buildings, perhaps
because he Zas draZn to see in public the brother he could not see in
private, perhaps because it Zas the only Zay he could obtain even an
outsider's glimpse of the public life of Zhich, Zith  its concern for great
problems, he had alZays Zanted so much to be a part. +e not only attended
public hearings of the City 3lanning Commission, but Zas continually
dropping in uninvited to the offices of its staff members, an elderly but erect
man still Zith traces in his bearing of the old arrogance, still dressed,
because he carefully preserved the couple of good suits he still possessed
and saved them for such visits, Zith an elegance out of another age, still
Zith a crisp, biting

Zay of talking and an air of impatience Zhen, as so often happened, a
commission staffer turned out to knoZ less about a problem under
discussion than he did. It Zas quite obvious that he came because he Zanted
—needed desperately—to have someone to talk to about these problems
that had fascinated him all his life.

817
Staffers Zho took the trouble to be courteous to the elderly man found it
Zell Zorth  their Zhile.  Schulman, one of the most knoZledgeable of all
civil servants in the arcane mysteries of municipal finance—he Zas at the
time director of the 3lanning Commission's Division of Capital Budget—
and a kindly man as Zell, met 3aul one evening at an engineering society
meeting and reali]ed immediately that he Zas in the presence of a
remarkable intellect. "You don't often get an opportunity to talk to someone
like that, so Zell-versed, so fluent," he says. Thereafter, Zhen 3aul dropped
in to his office ("+e Zas lonely, you see"), Schulman Zould find time to
talk to him; at lunchtime, they Zould often Zalk together in City +all  3ark.
Schulman found 3aul "off his rocker" Zhenever he talked about his brother.
But about any other subject, Schulman found him "a Zonderful
conversationalist, very bright, brilliant, refreshing. 0y  Zife found him  that
Zay, too. 0y  Zife  Zon't invite  anyone to the house for dinner, but she
insisted on inviting him. 0y  Zife  Zas very fond of him."  Another official
Zho Zas alZays glad to see him Zas Charles +and, the canny old NeZ
York :orld   editor and later 3R man for Jimmy :alker,  Zho  in the early
1950's Zas an adviser to young Robert :agner, Jr., then 0anhattan borough
president. "3aul used to hang around City +all in the corridors," :agner
recalls. "If +and saZ him, Ze'd say, 'Come along to lunch.' "

But Zith every passing year, there Zere feZer men in City +all Zho had
knoZn 3aul Zhen he had been regarded as a brilliant engineer. Busy young
planners considered the old man just another one of the "nuts" Zho hung
around the +all, particularly if he began talking about his brother. "+e'd go
into other offices and start to yak aZay and talk and people Zouldn't put up
Zith it,"  Schulman says. "They Zould throZ him out."

Nonetheless, he continued to hang around. +e became a familiar, funny,
almost pathetic figure around City +all, an elderly man Zith an arrogant air
and a sharp tongue, Zandering the corridors, talking to strangers.

Telling this story about his brother—the hero of NeZ York, the public
servant Zho didn't care about money—that no one believed.

In 1962, Robert 0oses got his brother, then seventy-five, a job.

818
Climbing the stairs to his apartment one day, 3aul collapsed. Taken to the
Veterans Administration +ospital in the Bron[, he Zas believed dying, and
in some Zay Zord Zas conveyed to his brother, Zho came to visit him. It
Zas the first time Robert 0oses had seen him in about tZenty years. +e
brought 3aul, Zho had been so an[ious to Zork on the St. LaZrence 3oZer
3roject but Zhom he had given no chance to do so, tZo gifts: a recording of
the opening ceremonies of the Robert 0oses 3oZer Dam on the St.
LaZrence and a copy of his memoirs.

:hen   he emerged from the hospital 3aul had tZo hundred dollars in the
Zorld. +e  had thought he Zas dying, and he had become terribly frightened
that 0illie  Zould  be left not only alone but penniless. In the most gallant of
all his gallant gestures, he did for her Zhat he Zould never do for himself:
he Zrote a letter to his brother—Zho, once he kneZ 3aul Zas recovering,
Zould not favor him Zith  his presence again—asking him for a job. +is
brother arranged Zith the engineering firm of AndreZs & Clark to give him
one—as little more than an errand boy, at $96.16 a Zeek.

:hether   or not his brother had given Robert 0oses cause to treat him the
Zay he did no one Zill ever knoZ for  certain. But his sister certainly never
gave him cause to treat her the Zay he did.

The plain, quiet, serious, ZithdraZn girl greZ into a plain, quiet, serious,
ZithdraZn  Zoman—utterly coZed by her mother, Zith Zhom  she lived
until, late in her thirties, she married the purser on a British ocean liner on
Zhich she Zas taking a cruise, and by the brother she idoli]ed. According to
the testimony of all Zho kneZ Edna 0arion  0oses, she Zould do Zhatever
Robert 0oses Zanted.

Yet, Zhen she and her husband, neither of Zhom had offered the slightest
protest Zhen Robert received the lion's share of their mother's estate, moved
to Coconut Grove, Florida, in about 1940, she found to her surprise that her
brother never telephoned her, not even on her birthday, and Zas noticeably
unenthusiastic about talking to her Zhen she phoned. Years passed in Zhich
they hardly talked at all. Once, after she had not seen him for years, she
asked if they could not get together. 0oses' reply Zas to say that he Zould
shortly be vacationing in .ey  :est  and Zould  be setting doZn, very briefly,
at 0iami  Airport,  to change to a smaller plane. If Edna Zanted to see him,

819
he said, she could drive out to the airport and see him for a feZ minutes
there. Edna at last got the message. She did not shoZ up.

3aul 0oses, in his bitterness, felt that he understood the reason for his
brother's behavior toZard his sister. "+e had no use for human beings," 3aul
said. "+e Zould just use them up, and then Zhen he had no more use for
them, he Zould throZ them aZay." +is brother had needed Edna Zhen their
mother's Zill had first been probated as an ally to insure that the trustees
Zould maintain a solid front against 3aul. But thereafter he did not need her
any more. And he "threZ her aZay."

3aul may or may not have been correct, but it is difficult to avoid
Zondering if there is not another reason—one hinted at in a :indels
remark: "Robert never discussed 3aul Zith me. +e Zas quite reticent about
him. You Zould almost have thought that 3aul didn't e[ist."

It is difficult  to avoid Zondering Zhether that Zas not Zhat Robert 0oses
Zanted the Zorld to think. To any mention of his brother, Robert reacted
Zith rage sufficient to insure that the brother Zas not mentioned

again. In the circle around Robert 0oses, "3aul 0oses" Zas so proscribed a
name that in 1956 the 3ost, in a si[-part series on the 3ark Commissioner,
could report that "many of his associates do not knoZ that he has a brother .
. ."

The 3ost series Zas almost unique in mentioning 3aul at all. It is possible to
read through hundreds of maga]ine and neZspaper stories Zithout finding
another mention. The reason Zas 0oses' attitude. By never mentioning the
brother's e[istence, he led Zriters to ignore the possibility that there might
be one. If—as happened only rarely—a reporter learned of 3aul's e[istence
on his oZn and mentioned it himself, 0oses' reaction Zas striking. As the
3ost reported, he refused even to say Zhether he Zas an older brother or a
younger. "I'd prefer not to say," he said—"firmly." And of course a man
Zho did not Zant the Zorld  to knoZ he had a brother, and Zas avoiding the
topic by not mentioning him, Zould steer aZay also from mentioning that
he had a sister, for the mention of her might make it more difficult to avoid
mentioning him. +e Zould not even tell the 3ost if she Zas older than he or
younger—and he Zould not say Zhere she could be located.

820
In a book about his life, necessarily more detailed than neZspaper articles,
mention of a brother's e[istence—and perhaps of other details of their
relationship—Zould be more difficult  to avoid. For a man so eager for
publicity—a man, moreover, Zho geared his entire life toZard insuring
himself immortality—Robert 0oses'  attitude toZard books that might help
insure that immortality Zas surprising. A do]en publishers offered
substantial sums for his autobiography. The offers Zere refused. Do]ens of
Zriters made preliminary inquiries about Zriting his biography. 0oses
informed each one that he Zould not cooperate—and that none of his
records and documents Zould be made available. That attitude discouraged
all but a handful; Zith those, 0oses took a firmer stand, using his influence
Zith publishers to have the idea killed. In i960, the +arvard-0IT  joint
School of 8rban Studies asked author and former NeZ Deal Brain Truster
Re[ford TugZell  to Zrite  one and offered him a substantial grant—by one
report $50,-000—for the job. TugZell says that 0oses promised
cooperation. The former NeZ Deal Brain Truster hired a research assistant
and Zith him had spent more than si[ months on Zhat TugZell considered
the first step—draZing up a detailed chronology of his subject's life,
including his boyhood. At that point, hoZever, TugZell says, "I Zent to
0oses and asked him to look it over. ... I left it Zith him, and he called me
up in a couple of days and, boy, he bleZ his top. I Zent out to [his office]
and, boy, did he give me hell. I said, T don't think I can Zrite this thing
Zithout cooperation from you, so I ZithdraZ.' "  TugZell Zas never able to
understand Zhat had so dramatically changed 0oses' attitude.

Only one biography of Robert 0oses Zas in e[istence before this one.
Entitled Robert 0oses: Builder for Democracy, it Zas Zritten,  in 1952, by
Cleveland Rodgers, a profound admirer, as his title suggests, of the 3ark
Commissioner, under the closest supervision from 0oses and his aides.
There is a chapter on 0oses' youth, and it does provide a feZ details,
includ-

ing brief biographical sketches of his father and mother. There are
photographs of his father and mother—and of the house in NeZ +aven in
Zhich he Zas raised, Zith the 3ark Commissioner posing in front of it.
There is no photograph of Robert 0oses' brother or sister—and there is no
mention of them, not even a reference by name. In this 339-page book on

821
the life of Robert 0oses, there is not the faintest hint that he had a brother
and sister.

+e had a father and mother, too, and the picture he painted of them in the
public mind is also striking.

+e subtly denigrated his father at every opportunity. :hen one of the 3ost
reporters said in 1956 that he had heard 0oses' father had been a successful
businessman, 0oses replied: "Actually, Zhatever money there Zas in the
family my mother had."

This attitude—Zhile unfair to the prosperous merchant Zho had in reality
left Bella 0oses the bulk of her Zealth—Zas, of  course, in keeping Zith the
patroni]ing attitude 0oses had alZays displayed toZard his quiet, gentle
father. But the attitude he displayed—after her death—toZard the mother he
imitated so thoroughly Zas not. :hen  he spoke about his mother publicly at
all—Zhich  Zas almost never—it Zas to doZngrade her reputation as Zell.
+ere, for e[ample, in a letter he Zrote to "correct'' a 1946 30  biographical
series, is his published description—perhaps his only published description
—of his parents:

Thanks particularly for endoZing me Zith a million  dollars. The ne[t thing
to real Zealth is, I suppose, the reputation of having it. 0y father did not
give me a million. +e never had it. 0y  mother left me something, Zhich
Zas not much to begin Zith, and shrank through neglect Zhile I Zas
plugging at unpaid jobs. 0y father Zas, in fact, genuinely distressed
because respectable friends deplored my antagoni]ing our Long Island park
opponents, and my mother, probably rightly, thought I could take better care
of my family if  I got out of dangerous and thankless public service and into
a big respectable corporation.

The Zoman thus described Zas quite unrecogni]able to a score of friends
and relatives, Zho recall her great pride that her favorite son had folloZed
the career in "public service" into Zhich she had urged him; Zho recall that
Zhenever another relative inquired Zhether it Zasn't about time he started
supporting his family, she had defended Zhat he Zas doing, saying public
service Zas much more important than any private job—and that she had
backed up her belief not only by lending him $20,000 to help him create

822
Jones Beach but by making it possible for him to stay in public service by
supporting him and his family as long as she lived.

Robert 0oses' attitude toZard his Zhole family Zas striking.

The 0oses and Cohen clans Zere numerous; NeZ York City Zas Zell
stocked Zith his aunts, uncles, cousins, nieces and nepheZs. During his
youth, it had been a rather close family. After he came to poZer, it Zas still
a rather close family. But he Zasn't part of it. :ith  the notable e[ception of

the cousin involved in the matter of his mother's Zill, :ilfred   Openhym, he
generally saZ them only on his oZn terms, in settings he controlled
absolutely—at ground breakings and ribbon cuttings at Zhich he Zas both
host and star. +e rejected invitations to their homes. Gradually he cut off
relations Zith most of them; almost invariably they ended in acrimony. One
of his cousins, Angie Fink, said that she Zas practically the only member of
his e[tensive family Zith  Zhom he Zas still on speaking terms, and that
even she spoke Zith him seldom. It Zas, 0rs. Fink said, "as if he had tried
to deny his father, his mother, and his Zhole youth."

As for his Zife, on those Saturday evenings at the Belmont 0ansion, Zhere
Robert 0oses sat hour after hour at the big table Zith no apparent intention
of leaving, it Zas, of course, 0ary 0oses  "Zho  Zas the most Zelcome
person because she Zas the only one Zho could drag him out"—a feat she
sometimes accomplished by taking him "firmly by the ear" and leading
"him aZay from the table as if he Zere a little boy."

For years, in all domestic matters, Robert 0oses Zas led by his Zife. If,
outside, he gave orders, at home, Zith 0ary and their tZo daughters,
Barbara and Jane, he took them. "+e Zas a different man there," says Joe
Ingraham. "So different that if you only kneZ the public 0oses, you'd
hardly believe this Zas the same man."

The 0oses homes—the big, rambling old Thompson Avenue house and a
Gracie Square apartment that he rented after coming into Bella's inheritance
in 1930—Zere both sunny and cheerful (the apartment looked out on the
busy East River and the toZers of the Triborough Bridge) and casual, Zith
deep, gaily slip-covered chairs and sofas; bright oil paintings; Zarm, russet

823
drapes; books piled all around; and, in the foyer at Thompson Avenue,
rolled-up sails for Jane's sailboats. The atmosphere Zas as rela[ed and
casual as the atmosphere in his offices Zas intense. And the contrast
e[tended to the man Zho lived in them.

0oses Zas not home much—he Zas generally out of the house by nine,
usually returned after eight and Zorked every Saturday—and Zhen he Zas,
a friend recalls, "he alZays had that yelloZ pad on his lap." But the friend
says, "he never acted busy or rushed at all; he Zas easy and utterly
gracious." :hen  Jane and Barbara Zere young, he Zould make up stories to
tell them, sit on the floor Zith them for hours, making animals out of clay,
carry them around on his shoulders, teach them to sZim and sail, take them
on Zonderful Sunday clambakes on Fire Island. :hen they got older, he
and Barbara— Jane early developed an anti-intellectual bias—folloZed the
family tradition established by Grannie Cohen by doing crossZord pu]]les
together, including the difficult Double Crostic in the Saturday RevieZ. +e
Zas alZays delighted to have their friends in—the house Zas alZays filled
Zith children—and Jane says, "I cannot remember him losing his temper at
us." It Zas he Zho

Zalked the dog, generally took out the garbage—and, often after Zorking
until long past midnight, arose at si[ or si[-thirty  to make breakfast. "+e
loved to cook," 0ary's  sister, Emily Sims 0arconnier, says. "No matter
hoZ early I got up, Robert Zould be in the kitchen and he'd like to knoZ
Zhat I'd have—bacon or eggs or Zhatever." +e dressed in the shabbiest of
old khakis, a plaid shirt hanging out of his pants, sneakers and one of the
incredible hats he loved (the battered old fedora Zas often replaced noZ by
a transparent rain hat Zhich he cherished); there Zas, as a friend puts it,
"absolutely no side to the man at all. +e might have been a poZerful man,
but if you only saZ him around his house, you Zould never have guessed
it."

+is Zife  ran his home, and his life, to such an e[tent that, describing their
relationship, many friends use the phrase: "she mothered him."

0ary  bought his clothes—even his underZear and socks—bringing home
suits until he found some he liked and then calling a tailor over to fit them,
gave him pocket money (says one of her friends: "Before he had the

824
limousine she had to see he had carfare every time he Zent out. She had to
make sure he had change for a telephone call and a feZ dollars for
restaurants and Zhatever. In a restaurant, she Zould slip him the money for
the check under the table"), paid all the bills, even, until he began to use
Triborough accountants, handled the income-ta[ returns, tried to keep his
Zeight doZn (she Zould dish out her husband's portion Zith a crisp: "No
gravy"), ordered him home from the office Zhen he Zas Zorking too hard
and protected him from intrusive telephone calls Zith an acerbity that
reminded visitors that she had once been called "the poZer behind the
Governor" in :isconsin.   And she never complained about the financial
privations that for years left her constantly Zorrying about grocery bills or
the lack of ordinary social life. (0oses Zent to no movies, saZ no plays,
had no hobbies e[cept those connected Zith the Zater—sZimming, sailing,
clamming—although she, as her sister puts it, "did not particularly like the
Zater." +er only concern—deep enough so that some of her friends refer to
it as "a real guilt feeling"—Zas that Robert had badly Zanted a son and she
had not given him one.) "0ary Zas the boss in that household," her sister
says. "She ran their lives."

She shared more than 0oses' home life. In the years before he installed
private dining rooms at his offices, she Zas hostess for his luncheons, a
brilliant and Zitty  one. She kneZ hoZ to handle politicians and reporters.
At receptions, she Zould Zhisper the names of oncoming politicians in his
ear because she Zas as good at recalling individuals as he Zas bad. She
brought a touch of humanity to his hard-driven men, asking them about
their Zives and children, arranging for doctors and hospitals Zhen they
Zere ill, and, Zhen her husband's empire burgeoned in resources, seeing
that those resources Zere put at their service. :hen, for e[ample, the seven-
year-old daughter of the captain of the 3ark Commission's yacht Sea-Ef
died, 0ary  saZ to it that the grieving parents "didn't," as the captain's sister
puts it, "even have to buy a piece of bread. A chauffeured car came over

and stood at the door all the time in case they Zanted anything. She sent
over food—enough to feed an army. And the car stayed there the Zhole four
days the body stayed in the funeral parlor. And later, every noZ and then a
big bouquet of roses Zould come, Zith a card, From 0ary and Robert
0oses, for the cemetery." One thing she did that Zas especially appreciated

825
by 0oses' men Zas to call his office and say, "Bob's on one of his
rampages, everybody Zatch out." Says one of his men: "That Zould give us
just enough time to get out of there before he arrived." For some of the
young architects and engineers, she Zas a matchmaker, and a sympathetic
shoulder to cry on. Arnold Vollmer, a young architect introduced to his
Zife, Becky, a 0oses research assistant, through 0ary, says: "She Zas the
sharpest, the most Zonderful, brightest Zoman you ever met." She could be
devastatingly caustic. Once egoistic Lester 0arkel, Sunday editor of the
Times, perturbed because he had been invited as 0oses' guest to the Jones
Beach 0arine Stadium but had not been seated in 0oses' bo[, made some
remark that she overheard. Addressing some people around her —in a voice
just loud enough for 0arkel to hear—she said: "The trouble Zith Lester is
that he thinks he's as smart as Robert. But he's not." She kneZ just Zhat to
say to help her husband; Zhen La Guardia asked her, quite seriously, Zhy
0oses respected Smith more than him, she replied: "Because he stood
behind his commissioners." :hen  her husband publicly insulted Iphigene
Sul]berger, it Zas 0ary  Zho healed the breach. And she Zas aZed by no
one. 3roskauer recalls that the first time she met Smith after he had refused
to endorse 0oses for Governor, 0ary "absolutely Zithered him"  Zith a
cold stare Zhen Smith tried to embrace her as usual, "turned on her heel,
and Zalked out of the room." She Zas a confidante and adviser, a respected
one. "R0  never Zent anyZhere Zithout 0ary,  and he consulted her on
everything," Sid Shapiro says. "And boy Zas she sharp!" Attorney 0orris
Ernst, Zho Zith his Zife  saZ a lot of the 0oseses Zhen the tZo couples
Zere young, says: "0ary gave Bob an aZful lot Zhen he Zas first starting
out. Don't forget, she had been the confidential secretary to a Governor. +er
political knoZ-hoZ  Zas really quite significant in helping him  accomplish
his early objectives." 0oses himself told 0rs.  0arconnier  that "every time
he pulled a boner it Zas on something he hadn't consulted 0ary about."
Says radio commentator +. V. .altenborn, Zho kneZ the 0oseses for
years: "Those of us Zho are privileged to knoZ something about the home
life of Robert and 0ary  0oses reali]e hoZ  much a Zife's unfailing patience
and unselfish devotion have meant during years of strife and struggle."

But as strife and struggle yielded success, the relationship betZeen Robert
and 0ary 0oses  changed. The change Zas evident at parties. As 0rs.
0orse, the friend Zho  admired both of them, put it, ":ell,   as a young man

826
he didn't dominate the conversation at parties so much. But it greZ Zorse
later . . ."

As he greZ louder, she greZ quieter. Talk to old acquaintances and the
adjectives used to describe 0ary 0oses are "gay," "charming," "Zarm,"
"Zitty,"  "vivacious." Talk to acquaintances Zho first met her during the
1930's and the adjective most heard is "quiet." Attorney 0onroe GoldZater,

Zho didn't meet her until about 1936, says she Zas "a nice person but not
very brilliant."  One Zoman, Zho first met her about that year, calls her "a
mouse." By the late i93o's, NeZ York hostesses an[ious for the presence of
Robert 0oses at their dinner parties Zere Zondering Zhat on earth to do
about Robert 0oses' Zife. According to elegant Florence Shientag, the
bright, brittle Zife  of key Smith adviser Bernard Shientag and herself an
attorney and judge: ":hen  they visited us, Ze alZays had to Zorry about
Zho Zould  sit ne[t to her. She needed bringing out. . . . She never spoke
very much. She had nothing to say, I assume. She Zas a moon Zhose light
Zas groZing less and less. +e Zas going on, a sun, getting brighter and
brighter."

Not that 0ary  seemed to mind. "0ary Zas a darling and she never got over
her Zonder that anyone like Bob should Zant to marry her," Iphigene
Sul]berger says. "She never thought that anyone so handsome, so brilliant,
Zould marry anyone but the 4ueen of England or someone like that. +e
Zas absolute perfection in her eyes." If the submersion of her identity in his
Zas causing her conflict, signs of that conflict emerged only obliquely, as in
one intervieZ she gave during the only period in Zhich she consented to
talk for publication, his campaign for Governor in 1934. (During this
campaign, despite her Zit and political insight and e[perience, she
delivered e[actly one speech, a talk at a small tea.) The reporter Zho
intervieZed her Zrote that 0ary  0oses "suddenly inquired": "But  Zhy
bother talking to the Zife of a candidate? I don't think I'm a very interesting
person to intervieZ. I'm not spectacular. And, on the other hand, you can't
just do me as the home and mother Zoman, shelling the peas, mending. I
can do all those things. I can cook, and I like to. But I don't. :hat can you
say about a person like me? I knoZ government, because 0r. 0oses has

827
been a part of it alZays, but that makes me like a shadoZ of him—and that's
not correct either."

And then, of course, there Zas another factor, one at Zhich Florence
Shientag hints by saying: "0ary became too old, physically, for him, I
think. +e continued to be so vibrant, so vital ..."

0ary  had Zhat +ilda +ellman,  0oses' cousin and a perceptive confidante,
describes as "an aZful horror of groZing old." But she Zas four years older
than Robert, and the difference seemed to increase each year betZeen her
and the husband Zho seemed as impervious to time as the grandmother he
so strikingly resembled in other respects (and Zho remained youthful and
vital until her death at ninety-three), still Zorking his incredible daily
schedule tirelessly, still sZimming far out to sea in all Zeather, still
energetic and dynamic in appearance at forty and fifty, his added Zeight
making him look more poZerful only, not older. 0ary,  on the other hand,
aged hard—in the opinion of some friends because of the strain of not only
bringing up tZo daughters and running tZo households, for years Zithout
maids, Zhen money Zas alZays tight, but also managing every detail of her
husband's life ("I think it drained her," Becky Vollmer says); in the opinion
of other friends because of Zhat 0rs. +ellman describes as "the strain of
trying to live up to someone like Robert," Zho Zas "almost larger than life."

+er husband Zas, of course, fascinating to Zomen. In part this Zas

because of his charm. Joan Gan] Cooney, later producer of Sesame Street,
met him in 1954 at the scintillating Sunday talkfests at the +erbert Bayard
SZopes mansion at Sands 3oint. At the time, she Zas tZenty-four and he
Zas si[ty-five,  but, she says, "after I had spent the evening Zith him I Zas
in love Zith him."  "It crossed all generational lines—that charm of his,"
Joan Cooney says. ":hat he has is this fantastic recall. +e'd tell me Zhat he
thought of Tom DeZey and FDR ... +e has that ability to tell you a story so
you can just see the people in the room . . . And he's just got that
magnetism. Everybody in that room Zas interesting. +e Zas probably the
least rich man in these gatherings because he Zas a public servant and
something about that came through that he had spent his life in public
service. I saZ him mostly Zith his contemporaries—Zhen their careers
Zere on the Zane. And they had changed in physical appearance. But his

828
appearance hadn't changed at all." (+is Zife? Oh, says Joan Cooney, she
didn't talk at all: "she Zas just like a little bird Zho tried to Zorship  him.")

In part, 0oses' appeal Zas based on his poZer and fame. In part, it may
have also been based on other considerations. Justice Florence Shientag,
talking about 0oses in general, stopped in the midst of a thought, sat
thinking for a feZ minutes and then said, musingly, "+e must have been a
Zonderful lover. +e's so direct. No underlying doubts . . ." As a young man,
he had been in love only once—Zith the fresh, clean-looking girl, as
passionately idealistic as he, Zhom he met among the books of the
0unicipal  Research Bureau library and Zhom he loved Zith an intensity so
vivid that his Yale classmates Zould remark about it decades later. By the
1930's, Robert 0oses' affairs Zere openly gossiped about in NeZ York
political and society circles —particularly his friendship Zith one of the
city's most remarkable Zomen, a North Shore baroness Zith Zhom his
name became linked at the time he Zas subordinating his idealism to an
accommodation Zith the poZer of the North Shore barons. She Zas the
Zitty  and sophisticated Ruth Baker 3ratt, ZidoZ of one of the Standard Oil
3ratts of Glen Cove, Zho Zas not only an accomplished violinist, golfer
and tennis player but a behind-the-scenes poZer in Republican politics, the
first Zoman ever to sit on NeZ York City's Board of Aldermen, the first
Zoman ever to represent NeZ York in Congress—and possibly the only
politician of either se[ ever to best Jimmy :alker  in  repartee. Recalls 3aul
:indels:   "They Zere rather affectionate in their attitude toZard one another
in public—to an e[tent that Zas rather shocking to me Zhen I saZ it. She
Zas quite taken Zith him. It Zas Zell  knoZn in those circles that if they
didn't get married it Zouldn't be Ruth's fault."

0oses still spent as much time Zith 0ary  as possible under the
circumstances: his scrupulous courtesy toZard her Zas as noticeable as
ever. +e never Zent on vacation Zithout her. But the gloZ from the man
she had made her "sun" greZ more and more dim. She began to drink—and
the drinking rapidly became very heavy, so heavy that people began to refer
to her as "an alcoholic." After several embarrassing incidents at parties she
had to be forbidden to drink anything but Dubonnet. At one 3ark
Department Christmas party at the Arsenal, obsequious 0oses 0en,
an[ious to

829
ingratiate themselves Zith the boss's Zife, kept coming up to her and asking
if she'd like one, and she had so many glasses of the light cordial that Zhen
0rs.  +ellman arrived and asked Zhere she Zas, she Zas told, Zith a sneer,
"Oh, she had to be taken home." She Zas hospitali]ed several times— in an
attempt to cure either her drinking or the increasingly serious attacks of
Zhat 0oses aide General +arry L. 0eyers  refers to as "nervous trouble" —
at the 3ayne :hitney  3sychiatric Clinic,  once for Zhat 0eyers says Zas
"quite a long time."

Recalls La]arus: "I had a helluva roZ Zith 0oses  over that. It started off
very temperate, Zith 0oses asking me Zhy I did it and couldn't it be
changed so he could be on it. I said, 'I had direction on it.' +e said, 'That
guinea son of a bitch asked you to do this, didn't he?' I said, 'Bob, he's my
client. You're not.' "

0oses then attempted to have his upstate Republican friends in the
Legislature kill the bill, but Lehman, Zho kneZ  hoZ badly the tunnel Zas
needed, added his support to La Guardia's, and the measure passed. And La
Guardia named as Authority commissioners three businessmen—tZo
personal friends, :illiam   +. Friedman and Albert T. Johnston; and Alfred
B. Jones, a mild-mannered 4uaker Zho not coincidentally Zas a cousin of
RFC chairman Jesse Jones—Zhom 0oses had never even met.

8nable to obtain control of the neZ authority directly, 0oses tried
indirection, sending aides to discreetly ask Singstad, Zho had been
appointed the Authority's chief engineer, if he Zould "cooperate" Zith
Triborough. But 0oses Zas trying his Ziles  on the Zrong man. Singstad,
fiercely independent, despised 0oses' aides, Zho he felt violated
engineering ethics every time they subordinated their oZn objective vieZs
of an engineering problem to tell the Triborough chairman Zhat he Zanted
to hear. One morning, after other approaches had failed, millionaire Jack
0adigan himself dropped by Singstad's office and invited Ole to the
DoZntoZn  Athletic Club for lunch. On the Zay, 0adigan  said: "Ole, I Zant
to be helpful. You and the Tunnel Authority Zould both be better off Zith a
strong man like 0oses in charge." "I figured 0oses Zas trying to get me on
his side as a talking point to La Guardia for a takeover," Singstad says;
0oses, he felt, Zanted to be able to tell the 0ayor that the chief engineer

830
had said his commissioners Zere not competent to run the job. "I said I Zas
sticking Zith my  commissioners and I Zas happy Zith them."

8nable to control the neZ authority directly or indirectly, 0oses  set out to
destroy it.

It Zas under tremendous pressure to produce results fast. Nineteen thirty-si[
Zas a presidential election year and +arold Ickes, Zhose 3:A Zas
financing the tunnel, Zanted the 3resident to be able to break ground Zell
before November. "They didn't Zant to have $58,000,000 lying idle in an
election year," Singstad says. Assembling an engineering and administrative
staff from scratch and producing in a matter of a feZ months plans for a
huge and complicated engineering job—Singstad had to draZ more than
125 separate studies before he hit on a feasible plan for the 0anhattan
entrance—Zas immensely difficult. And Ickes Zas adamant. If Zork Zas
not under Zay Zell before Election Day, he said, the grant Zould be
rescinded and there Zould be no tunnel. The 3:A Administrator Zas
demanding Zeekly progress reports, and every Zeek his impatience greZ
more noticeable. Any delay might kill the project.

And 0oses sought delay.

+is legislative allies introduced a bill that Zould have rescinded the
Authority's authori]ation to construct the tunnel and provided instead for a
year-long, state-financed study of Zhether the crossing should be a tunnel

a bridge, Zhich, under the terms of the act creating the Triborough
Authority, only Triborough could build. Enactment of the neZ bill into laZ
Zould have meant the end of the tunnel no matter Zhat the study's result.
"Ickes Zas constantly threatening to take the money aZay from us if Ze
didn't get started," Singstad says. "0oses kneZ damn Zell that if another
year Zas spent [on the state-financed study], the money [the 3:A grant]
Zould be gone to some other state."

There Zas no real chance of enactment, of course, since Lehman Zould
veto the bill if it passed the Republican-controlled Legislature. But 0oses
didn't need enactment to accomplish his purpose. +e needed only delay.
And he used all his vast influence in Albany to obtain it, keeping the bill

831
bottled up in committee—and off Lehman's desk, Zhere it could finally be
disposed of—Zeek after Zeek. "And all the time," Singstad says, "Ickes
Zas hammering: Tf you don't do it noZ, I'm going to ZithdraZ  the money.'"

But La Guardia understood that he Zas in a poZer struggle noZ, and Zhile
the 0ayor may have deferred to 0oses on questions of park administration,
he deferred to no one on questions of poZer. Traveling to :ashington Zeek
after Zeek, he kept the grant alive until the last day of the legislative
session, Zhen the bill Zas finally brought to the floor and defeated, and on
October 2, 1936, 3resident Roosevelt Zas able to break ground for the
tunnel.

":hy   did  0oses try to Zreck  [the Tunnel Authority]?" Singstad says.
"Because he couldn't take it over, that's Zhy, dammit. +e couldn't take it
over so he Zanted to Zreck the Zhole damned project." La]arus and
Corporation Counsel 3aul :indels,  Zho Zere on the inside of the battle
from beginning to end, thinking it over independently came to the same
conclusion. "I kept trying to understand Zhat his reason Zas [for trying to
take over the Authority]," La]arus says, "and I just couldn't make sense out
of it—unless he Zanted to take over every construction job in the city."

And in fact 0oses' actions in his fight Zith  the Tunnel Authority in 1936—
particularly Zhen coupled Zith his actions in the struggle Zith the
Authority over the ne[t decade—make it difficult to ascribe to them any
other motivation. Search as one may through the record—not only the
public record, Zhich is scanty indeed, because the fight Zas carried on
largely in secrecy, but through confidential memoranda and letters culled
from La Guardia's files and files of other principals involved—one is unable
to identify a single real difference of opinion betZeen 0oses and the
Authority on any point of substance relevant to the planning, construction
or administration of the 4ueens-0idtoZn  Tunnel. 0oses agreed that a
crossing Zas needed. +is argument that the crossing should be not a tunnel
but a bridge Zas never presented Zith any of the thoroughness that marked
his serious proposals; it Zas never really presented seriously at all—
possibly, in the vieZ of at least one of his aides, because it couldn't be
presented seriously, since building a bridge at Thirty-seventh Street Zould

832
have meant condemning so many office buildings and apartment houses
that the condemna-

don cost alone Zould have been ridiculously high. 0oses never even com
missioned a preliminary engineering survey of the bridge proposal. +is onl
real difference of opinion Zith the Tunnel Authority Zas over Zho shoul

control it.

And this difference made the 1936 Tunnel Authority fight a Zatershed in
Robert 0oses 1 life. AlZays  before, 0oses had conceived a publi Zork,
and then had sought the poZer to bring it into reality. In the Tunne
Authority fight,  someone else conceived the public Zork. 0oses sought th
poZer to take it over. Before, his motivation had alZays been the Zork-the
project, the achievement, the dream. NoZ the motivation Zas poZei

And the Tunnel Authority fight also revealed the lengths to Zhicl Robert
0oses Zas noZ prepared to go to gain poZer. :recking  the Authorit  Zould
have cost the city not only $58,000,000. money Zhich Zould provid a lot of
jobs in Depression-Zracked NeZ York, but also the tunnel, a publi Zork
badly needed in terms of 0oses' oZn aims—the elimination of tram
congestion in NeZ York City. But these considerations did not deter hirr If
he couldn't build the tunnel, his actions said, no one Zas going to buil it. If
he couldn't take it over, he Zould destroy it.

ThZarted by La Guardia in one attempt to grab more poZer, 0oses madt
another—only to have the 0ayor thZart him again.

0oney, as 0oses Zas Zell  aZare, Zas a key to poZer, but, by 1938 the
great Zellspring of federal Zork relief money at Zhich he had beer drinking
for five years Zas almost dry. A neZ spring had begun Zelling out of
:ashington  and Albany, hoZever. 0oses set out to bottle it righ under La
Guardia's nose.

Its sources Zere the 8nited States +ousing Act of 1937 (co-sponsorec by
Representative +enry B. Steagall of Alabama and Al Smith's old Albam
buddy, 8. S. Senator Robert F. :agner) and a NeZ York State constitu
tional amendment approved in 1938.

833
3rior to passage of the :agner-Steagall Act, 0oses had never had much
interest in public housing. "3ublic housing" meant, in the terms of the day,
housing e[clusively for the poor. 0oses had never had the slightest interest
in building anything for the poor. But the amount given by the :agner-
Steagall Act* to the neZly created 8nited States +ousing Authority for
loans to local municipal authorities Zas $800,000,000. The amount the state
constitutional amendment authori]ed the Legislature to make available to
local housing authorities Zas $300,000,000. Obviously public housing Zas
going to be a great neZ—perhaps the great neZ—source of outside money
for the city. +astily recruiting architects from the State +ousing Board,
0oses set them to Zork secretly draZing up a public housing program for
NeZ York and himself secretly dreZ up a proposal for "reorgani]ation" of
the City +ousing Authority, under Zhich the Authority  Zould  be
reorgani]ed right out of e[istence and replaced Zith a board

♦Together Zith a subsequent Congressional amendment in 1938.

onsisting of himself and si[ other members, four of Zhom he believed he,
ather than the 0ayor, could control.

The 0ayor possessed an intense private interest in public housing, ^iorello
La Guardia believed that it had been the dampness and congestion Df the
tenements in Zhich she had been raised that had given his beloved irst Zife
the tuberculosis that had killed her and their baby; he had voZed o friends
that one thing he Zas going to do "personally" as mayor Zas to nake sure
that the city started at last to give poor people in the city a lecent, healthy
place to live. The vast amounts of money and poZer that vere obviously
going to be involved made him even more determined to ceep the program
firmly in  his oZn hands. So 0oses dreZ up his proposal n absolute secrecy
—and presented it not to the 0ayor but, in a bold ittempt to circumvent
him, to influential private citi]ens;  the very day after /oters approved the
constitutional amendment, he persuaded several real estate and reform
organi]ations to jointly rent the auditorium in the 0useum )f  Natural
+istory for  an evening ten days later and to invite several hundred key
realtors and reformers to hear him give a speech. And he arranged to bring
the program dramatically to the public at the same time by persuading

834
:NYC,    the city-oZned radio station (Zhich, at the time, boasted a
considerable audience), to carry the speech live.

All 0oses'  previous public Zorks had been basically concerned Zith
recreation and parks and Zith the means—roads and bridges—of getting
people to parks. +e may have reali]ed that Zithout protective coloration his
attempt to move into a neZ, unrelated field Zould look like the barefaced
poZer grab it Zas. So he gave it protective coloration; he titled his speech
"+ousing and Recreation," and in asking realtors and reformers to sponsor
the speech and :NYC  to broadcast it, he told them it Zas merely a
discussion of coordination of public housing and parks. No one in the
audience suspected the truth; even such intimates of the 0ayor as Adolf
Berle and 3aul :indels,  applauding Zith the rest of the audience as the
3ark Commissioner strode briskly onstage, had no inkling of Zhat Zas
coming until 0oses' aides began passing out attractive, four-color
brochures and, opening them, they saZ in ama]ement that 0oses Zas
proposing in detail—ten projects Zere proposed, sites specific doZn to
precise boundary lines, costs of land and construction for each already
figured—a complete neZ housing program. The unifying principle behind
the proposal Zas spelled out: only "genuine slum clearance" on the "large
scale" Zould make a real dent in the city's housing problem, so La
Guardia's efforts to rehabilitate old tenements should be scrapped; Zhole
blocks of slum tenements should be ra]ed to the ground and replaced Zith
neZ housing; only genuine slum dZellers should be alloZed in the projects,
and, to insure this, tenants should be selected by the :elfare Commissioner.
The financing Zas Zorked out: the program Zould cost $245,000,000 and it
should be financed by "large-scale government subsidy" ($200,000,000
from state and federal funds and a sales ta[ on cigarettes to raise the
balance); it should not be financed, as had been proposed, by an increase in
the city's real estate ta[, for the real estate ta[ Zas too high in the city
already. Staring at each other

in disbelief, the tZo officials reali]ed  that they Zere Zitnessing a public
relations blit]krieg—a lightning-like  move by 0oses  to mobili]e the
opinion of the public in general and of the influentials in the audience in
particular (his opposition to a real estate ta[ increase Zas a clever move to

835
insure the support of the city's poZerful real estate lobby) behind his plan so
that the 0ayor Zould  not be able to overrule it.

But a copy of the brochure had, that afternoon, somehoZ fallen into La
Guardia's hands, and the 0ayor had summoned :NYC director 0orris  S.
Novick to his office.

8naZare of this, 0oses had no reason to suspect that anything Zas amiss
Zhen he began speaking. As he spoke, there right in front of him, attached
to the lectern, Zas a :NYC  microphone and, looking doZn beloZ  the
stage, 0oses could see tZo :NYC   technicians sitting at a table full of
broadcasting paraphernalia busily tZiddling dials and going through all the
motions of technicians making a broadcast. :hen they saZ him glancing
doZn at them, in fact, they made him a thumbs-up signal to indicate that all
Zas going Zell.

One of 0oses' secretaries, hoZever, Zas attempting to pick up the program
at home. 8nable to do so, or to locate :NYC  at all, she finally reali]ed that
the station Zas off the air. She managed to telephone Allyn Jennings
backstage at the 0useum. Rushing over to the technicians, the 0oses aide
asked Zhat Zas going on. They assured him Zith straight faces that the
program Zas on the air. Running outside to his car, Jennings turned on the
radio, dialed :NYC,   got only silence and reali]ed that the technicians must
be deliberately fooling him. Running back into the auditorium, he handed
up a note to his boss, just as he Zas coming to the end of his speech. The
3ark Commissioner, Zho had believed that he had been speaking for the
past forty-five minutes to tens of thousands of NeZ Yorkers, learned that he
had been speaking to only tZo hundred—the tZo hundred right in front of
him. The :NYC    microphone in front of him Zas dead. Someone must
have ordered :NYC  to cut his program off the air— and must have
ordered the technicians to go through all the motions necessary to conceal
this fact from him. And glaring doZn at them as they made still another
thumbs-up gesture, he reali]ed that only one man Zould have thought of
that touch. That guinea son of a bitch had outsmarted him again.

La Guardia may have been able to keep 0oses from reaching the public's
ears, but the 0ayor could do nothing about the public's eyes. The ne[t day
his 3ark Commissioner's plan Zas on page one of every neZspaper in the

836
city, Zith support for that plan on virtually every editorial page. But the
0ayor,  using all of his poZer and all of his cunning, cut 0oses out of the
public housing picture as completely as he had cut him off the air.

The arena in Zhich the initial confrontation took place Zas an eleven-
member committee the 0ayor had formed some months before—and to
Zhich, not suspecting 0oses' designs, he had appointed him—to advise him

on public housing. 0oses attempted to persuade the committee members to
endorse at least some of his proposals, but La Guardia, Zorking through
:indels,   the committee's chairman, made sure they didn't—by employing
relentless pressure. :indels Zould decline, years later, to furnish any
details of the in-fighting. "But I'll  tell you this," he said. ":hen   it came to
things like that, La Guardia Zas as hard and as shreZd as they come.
:hatever  it  Zas necessary to do, he did." The committee declined to
recommend a single one of 0oses' proposed sites or any diminution
Zhatever in the poZers of the La Guardia-appointed and -dominated City
+ousing Authority.

La Guardia handled all negotiations Zith Federal +ousing Authority
chairman Nathan Straus personally. +e made all announcements of neZ
projects from his oZn office, and in general made sure that 0oses never
kneZ Zhat neZ public housing project Zas being planned until the planning
Zas completed and the necessary federal funds allocated. 0oses raged,
publicly assailing the "secret, surreptitious" program, but he could not
budge the 0ayor. By the end of 1941, thirteen separate public housing
projects containing a total of more than 17,000 apartments had been
constructed in NeZ York, far more than in any other city in America, and
0oses had had nothing to do Zith any of them. The 0ayor Zas even able to
indulge himself in an additional soup^on of personal satisfaction. The
printing bill  for the four-color brochure 0oses had distributed at the
0useum of Natural +istory  Zas more than a thousand dollars; Zhen 0oses
submitted the bill to Comptroller 0cGoldrick,  the 0ayor  smilingly  told the
Comptroller, "A beautiful printing  job"—and ordered him not to pay it.

The tunnel and housing fights convinced La Guardia, according to :indels,
.ern,  Berle and other top mayoral assistants, that his 3ark Commissioner
Zas intent on increasing his personal poZer. And La Guardia, determined to

837
concentrate poZer in the city in his oZn hands, acted as he Zould have
acted toZard any rival. The unifying motive behind 0oses' actions in both
fights Zas his desire to e[pand his poZer—in the tunnel fight to attain
poZer to build not just bridges but all interborough crossings; in the
housing fight to e[tend his poZer, hitherto limited to the fields of parks and
transportation, into a Zholly neZ field of governmental endeavor. La
Guardia kept 0oses' poZer confined Zithin its traditional  spheres.

FolloZing  the tunnel and housing fights, moreover, the 0ayor began to re-
e[amine the implications of the virtually unlimited  poZer he had given
0oses Zithin  those traditional spheres—and to conclude that his poZer
should be curbed in those spheres, too.

This Zas not, according to the 0ayor's top aides, a Zholly neZ feeling. For
some time, they say, he had been becoming Zorried about aspects of 0oses'
park policy, the same aspects, in general, that Zere Zorrying reformers like
E[ton and :einberg.   If he had not discerned before precisely Zhat those
policies meant for those of the city's people Zho most needed parks, he Zas
beginning to discern it noZ; :indels   recalls the 0ayor raging

Zhen he reali]ed that the prices 0oses' concessionaires Zere charging at
such neZ city-built or -refurbished park restaurants as the Tavern-on-the-
Green and the Claremont Inn Zere so high that they could not be used
regularly by poor or even middle-class families. In transportation, La
Guardia had had a vague feeling ever since the beginning of his mayoralty
that great road-building projects must be accompanied by corresponding
improvements in mass transportation, but because he admired 0oses'
parkZays and bridges, he had not pressed the Commissioner to include
provision for mass transportation on them. But as neZ parkZays and
bridges became jammed as quickly as they opened, the vague feelings
hardened; by 1939, La Guardia Zould be pressing 0oses hard indeed as to
Zhy he Zas not paying more attention to the suggestions of the Regional
3lan Association. And beyond questions of parks and transportation, the
0ayor  had for some time been becoming progressively more aZare of the
question that a later generation Zould call "priorities." By 1938, he Zas
acutely aZare that the great strides made in parks and parkZays Zere not
being matched in any other areas of public Zorks—not even in areas like

838
schools and hospitals in Zhich the need Zas desperate. "+is feelings about
0oses had subtly and gradually but substantially changed by the time I
resigned as Corporation Counsel [in 1937]," :indels says. "+e still  felt he
had matchless abilities and energies, but he also felt noZ that those abilities
and energies must be channeled in the right direction if the city Zas to
benefit from them."

NoZ, Zith  the 0ayor's feelings intensified by the tunnel and housing fights,
"he Zas Zorried about hoZ much poZer 0oses had in the city," .ern  says.
"I knoZ  because he kept talking about it. +e felt [0oses'] poZer must be
reduced. These feelings really became very strong." And this analysis of the
0ayor's feelings Zas documented by the 0ayor's actions: in November
1938, shortly after 0oses' 0useum speech, he cut from the list of :3A
projects at least tZo large park projects he had earlier promised 0oses he
Zould include; in December, La Guardia stood up to him, and to The NeZ
York Times, Zith a neZ firmness in cutting the 3ark Department's budget
request; early in 1939, the 0ayor made it clear to NeZbold 0orris and
Joseph 0cGoldrick, his Board of Estimate allies, that they Zere to take a
harder line on 0oses' requests to the Board.

But by 1939 the 0ayor's feelings Zere not to be nearly as crucial to 0oses
as they had been in the past. To a large e[tent, in fact, he no longer had to
concern himself Zith such feelings. To a large e[tent, it no longer mattered
to him Zhat the 0ayor  thought.

Of all the remarkable qualities of Robert 0oses' matchless mind, one of the
most striking Zas its ability to take an institution Zith little  or no poZer,
and, seemingly, Zith little or no potential for more poZer (at Yale, an
unprestigious literary maga]ine; in state government, the Long Island State
3ark Commission) and to transform it into an institution Zith immense
poZer, poZer insulated from and hence on a par Zith the poZer of the
forces that had originally created it. And noZ the mind of Robert 0oses
had begun focusing on the institution knoZn as the "public authority."

created by an interstate compact betZeen NeZ York and NeZ Jersey, Zould
not be created until 1921, Zould not float its first bond issue until 1926 and
Zould not become financially successful until 1931, Zhen, after five years
of near fiscal disaster, it Zould persuade the tZo states to let it take over the

839
highly successful +olland Tunnel, Zhich had been constructed by an
independent commission.* It Zas not until the NeZ Deal, Zhen Depression-
strapped municipalities, unable to finance major public Zorks themselves,
suddenly reali]ed that RFC and 3:A  grants Zere available for self-
liquidating projects, that urban authorities began to be established in any
number. In 1933 and 1934, Zhen 0oses Zas playing the crucial role in
setting up the Triborough, Bethpage, Jones Beach, +enry +udson, 0arine
3arkZay and +ayden 3lanetarium authorities—and a lesser but still key
role in the creation of seven other authorities—there Zere only a feZ
handfuls of other authorities in the entire country.

:ith   the lone e[ception of the 3ort Authority,  moreover, every public
authority created in the 8nited States had been created in a single pattern:
each had been established to construct and operate one, and only one,
public improvement, a single isolated bridge or tunnel or seZer system, to
issue only enough bonds to pay for the construction of that improvement,
and only bonds Zith a fi[ed e[piration  date, and, Zhen that date arrived—
or sooner, if revenue Zas collected faster than e[pected—to pay off the
bonds, eliminate all tolls or fees, turn the improvement over to the city and
go out of e[istence. The 3ort Authority, empoZered to operate several
improvements, had become America's first "multi-purpose" public
authority, but each of its projects fit the traditional pattern since each Zas
financed by a separate bond issue and both Authority members and public
officials e[pected that as soon as each issue Zas paid off, the tolls on the
facility financed by that issue Zould be eliminated, t 0otivated by the
failure of several 3ort Authority projects to earn enough to meet the interest
and amorti]ation payments on their bonds, the Authority's brilliant general
counsel, Julius +enry Cohen, Zas attempting in 1934 to break neZ ground

* 0oses had played a small but significant role in the tunnel's construction.
One of his first assignments for Al Smith Zas to analy]e tZo conflicting
construction proposals, the commission's plan to build the tunnel by
conventional methods at a cost it estimated at $28 million and General
George :.  Goethals' plan to build it by a neZ method at a cost Goethals
estimated at $12 million. The young reformer, unequipped Zith the slightest
practical e[perience in construction, intervieZed the famed builder of the
3anama Canal, and gave Smith his verdict: "a great personality, a go-getter,

840
but neither a great engineer nor a financier." Equally unimpressed Zith the
commission's engineers, he talked Zith independent e[perts and concluded
—and told the Governor—that the Goethals plan "Zould not Zork" and that
Zhile the commission's Zould, the cost Zould be not $28 but $48 million.
Smith's reaction, 0oses Zas to recall, "introduced me to his e[traordinary
head for facts and figures and his immense loyalty to his assistants, no
matter hoZ green, young and neZ at the game." Ignoring protests, the
Governor threZ out the Goethals plan and accepted the commission's, but
allocated for it the $48 million that 0oses had suggested. The actual cost
turned out to be $49 million. t Because the facilities Zould thereafter belong
to not one but tZo states, there Zere plans to have them run by bistate
commissions Zith members appointed by both legislatures.

by devising a neZ kind of bond and persuading bankers Zho held the
Authority's outstanding bonds to accept the neZ one in their place. 8nder
the plan Cohen had in mind, the individual bond issues Zould be combined
into a single general issue supported by the revenues from all 3ort
Authority enterprises, a move Zhich Zould alloZ use of the +olland Tunnel
surpluses to bail out such money losers as its tZo bridges connecting Staten
Island Zith NeZ  Jersey. And since the neZ issue Zould be "open-ended,"
the Authority could use any over-all surplus to finance neZ projects. The
bankers refused to consider "open-end" bonds for unspecified neZ projects
but, in !935> did agree to a consolidation of outstanding bonds in a
"General and Refunding Bond" that could be used for one neZ project—the
proposed Lincoln Tunnel—and it Zas this bond, rather than any devised by
0oses, that Zas the first bond issue in the 8nited States secured not by a
single public improvement but by an authority's general revenues.

But 0oses Zent much further. Originally, he had conceived of his
authorities in the traditional mold: the legislation he had drafted
establishing the Triborough, +enry +udson and 0arine 3arkZay bodies, for
e[ample, had e[plicitly  authori]ed each to construct only a single, specific
project and to issue bonds only for that project; the bonds Zere to be paid
off as soon as possible, and not only Zas a time limit (forty years) set on
their e[piration but that time limit  also limited the authority's life—as soon
as its bonds Zere paid off, it Zas to go out of e[istence and turn over its
bridge to the city government. The legislators Zho had created Robert

841
0oses' authorities and the mayor Zho under the State Constitution had had
to ask the legislators to create them had conceived of them as mere
creatures of the sovereign city. Legislators and mayor, as Zell as the city's
citi]ens, continually reminded by the press of the long tradition that all its
bridges be toll-free, had been assured that the tolls Zould be removed
forever as soon as their cost had been paid for. And there had been no
deliberate attempt to mislead them: Robert 0oses had thought of public
authorities as men had alZays thought of public authorities.

But Robert 0oses' thinking Zas changing.

The primary factor behind the change Zas money.

The carrying charges—interest and amorti]ation—on the $5,100,000 in
bonds that had been sold to pay for the +enry +udson Bridge Zere about
$370,000 per year, a sum that could be collected, at ten cents per car, from
3,700,000 cars. But the number of drivers handing their dimes to the bridge
toll collectors Zas not 3,700,000. In 1938, it Zas 10,300,000; in 1939,
12,700,000. And maintenance costs on bridges Zere, 0oses Zas learning,
gratifyingly minimal.  3ainting the entire +enry +udson, for e[ample, cost
only $18,000, and painting Zas needed only once in four years. The salaries
of toll collectors, the only operating personnel required, totaled less than
$50,000 per year: "Our bridge Zas fabulously successful," Jack 0adigan
Zould say. ":e   Zere earning— after the carrying charges — $600,000 per
year NET!!!"  And that Zas just one bridge! The Triborough, on Zhich the
annual carrying charges Zere about $1,800,000, but on Zhich the toll Zas
tZenty-five cents for cars and more for trucks, Zas by 1938

earning per year NET!!! $1,300,000. 0ore significantly still,  on all 0oses'
bridges, the traffic volume for each month Zas higher than the volume for
the corresponding month the previous year; clearly, volume—and revenue
—Zas going to be far higher than even those fabulous figures.

8nder the laZs creating the authorities—the bills that Robert 0oses himself
had drafted on his yelloZ legal note pads—une[pectedly high revenues
could be used in only one Zay: to retire an authority's bonds faster than
scheduled, to speed the date Zhen the authority Zould go out of e[istence
and turn its bridge back to the city.

842
:ith   surpluses of such unprecedented si]e, the bonds of 0oses' authorities
Zould be retired very fast indeed. At the rate the +enry +udson Bridge Zas
making money, for e[ample, its cost Zould be amorti]ed not in forty years
but in ten years, perhaps, or nine, or eight. In a decade or less, the bridge
that the city had never been able to finance Zould have been built by Robert
0oses—built  and paid for, to stand for centuries as a great free public
improvement for its citi]ens.

8sing the surpluses in the Zay required by laZ Zould therefore make the
+enry +udson Bridge—and the Triborough—spectacular successes, all the
more spectacular in a city in Zhich public Zorks alZays seemed to cost the
public more, not less, than anticipated.

But this Zas not the kind of success in Zhich 0oses, obsessed by
accomplishment and poZer, Zas interested. 0oney—revenue, surpluses—
Zas the key to accomplishment and poZer—but only if he could keep it and
use it. It Zas of no use to him if he had to give it to bankers as fast as he got
it. It Zas of no use to him if, as soon as he had paid off the bankers, he had
to surrender control of his bridges. 0oney Zas of use to him only if, in
other Zords, he Zas able to use the bridge surpluses for other purposes than
bond paying and if he Zas able to keep control of the bridges instead of
turning them over to the city. And under the laZ this Zas impossible.

But Zhat if the laZ  Zas changed?

:hat   if, in some Zay, he Zas able to keep the money?

0adigan and others close to Robert 0oses saZ his supple mind coiling
around the possibilities. The actuality of the money, he began to reali]e,
Zas not its most significant aspect. Its potential Zas Zhat mattered. The
total annual income of his authorities Zas, by 1938, $4,500,000. This
amount Zas not insignificant to him; it Zas as large as his total annual 3ark
Department budget. But it Zas not as significant as $81,000,000. And
$81,000,000 Zas the amount of forty-year, 4 percent, revenue bonds that
could be floated—"capitali]ed" Zas the Zord in the bankers' vocabulary
that 0oses Zas learning—Zith  an income of $4,500,000. If he Zas able to
keep the authorities' revenues and use them to float bonds, he Zould be able
to float $81,000,000, or $35,000,000 more than the total $46,000,000 in

843
bonds that the three NeZ York City bridge authorities currently had
outstanding. +e Zould have $81,000,000 to use to create dreams and poZer.

0uch  more than $81,000,000, in fact.

The multiplier factor Zould  be increased by the proven success of his

bridges. :hen  he and Jack 0adigan had originally been attempting to
persuade bankers to invest in the authorities, the ability of toll bridges to
attract substantial amounts of traffic had been in doubt, and the bankers had
therefore demanded a coverage of 1.75 or 2.00 (anticipated earnings double
that required to cover interest and amorti]ation) and a return of 4 percent on
their investment. NoZ toll bridges Zere a proven commodity. Bankers
might settle for a coverage of 1.5 or even 1.4 and an investment return of 3
percent or even 2.75, and any reduction in coverage or interest rates meant
an increase in the amount of bonds that the authority income could
capitali]e. 0ore  important, if some of the money raised by the floating of
neZ bonds Zas used to build neZ bridges on Zhich tolls could be charged,
the authorities' income Zould be more than $4,500,000. Since each dollar of
tolls could capitali]e roughly eighteen dollars in bonds, there Zas therefore
an additional built-in multiplier  factor at Zork: the more public Zorks he
built, the more money he Zould have to build still more public Zorks. And
this factor Zould Zork  indefinitely—forever, possibly.

Robert 0oses had built public Zorks on a scale unmatched by any other
individual in the history of America. But all the highZays and parks and
bridges he had built Zere little more than nothing ne[t to the highZays and
parks and bridges that Robert 0oses Zanted to build. +e had turned into
reality his dream of a great parkZay along 0anhattan's shoreline, but there
Zas still the Brooklyn shoreline, and the Staten Island. +e Zanted parkZays
there, too—a "Circumferential" or "Belt" for  Brooklyn, a "Shore" for Staten
Island—and he had Zanted them, and been arguing for their creation, for
more than ten years. +e had built fifty miles of highZays in the city, but
there Zere a hundred more miles that he Zanted to build. +e had reshaped
to his oZn vision an urban park system that absolutely dZarfed any other
urban park system in the 8nited States, but the parks he had created in NeZ
York Zere in their turn dZarfed by the parks that he dreamed of creating; it
had been 1930 Zhen he had proposed a SoundvieZ 3ark and a Flushing

844
0eadoZs 3ark and tZo  0arine  3arks and a park— the greatest of all urban
Zaterfront parks—in Jamaica Bay, and noZ it Zas 1938 and these parks
Zere still only proposals. :here  Zas the RockaZay Improvement? Even
those parks that he had been able to create in the city, moreover, had not
been created as he Zanted; he had been forced to scale them doZn, to use
inferior materials, to compromise. As for bridges, he had built in the city
three, including one that Zas the greatest traffic-moving machine in the
history of civili]ation,  but he Zanted to build at least four more— including
one even larger than Triborough.

And that Zas just in the city. :hat   about the areas around it? There Zere
parkZays on Long Island, all right, but not his greatest parkZay— the
ocean- and bay-bordered Fire Island masterpiece. There Zere parks—
11,000 acres of parks, the greatest state park system in the country—on
Long Island but he could foresee all too clearly the day there Zould be so
many people living in the metropolitan area that 11,000 acres Zould not be
nearly enough. After a decade and a half of building public Zorks, the
public Zorks he had not yet built loomed before him larger than ever.

0oreover, the chances of building them seemed to be groZing steadily
more remote. Only the NeZ Deal had enabled him to make even as much of
a start as he had on his plans for NeZ York City. NoZ, in 1938, the NeZ
Deal Zell Zas running dry, and La Guardia Zas insisting Zith a neZ
firmness that he stop trying to lap up the city's share all by himself. Albany
Zas drying up, too; each year +erbert Lehman Zas finding it more difficult
to obey the laZ that required him to balance the state's budget. As for the
city, La Guardia may have pulled it back from the door of fiscal death, but
not even La Guardia could restore it to fiscal health; the corruption that had
preceded him had Zeakened the body politic far too seriously. 3olitical
realities, moreover, made it unlikely that health could ever be restored.
E[isting  ta[es could support an annual budget—the budget out of Zhich the
debt service for neZ bonds for neZ public Zorks Zould have to be paid —
of about $575,000,000, and the debt service and salaries loaded on by
Tammany ate up $500,000,000 of that even before other necessary e[penses
Zere figured in. As for the so-called "capital budget," there Zas no leeZay
in that, either: the city Zas constantly bumping up against the state-imposed
ceiling that limited its borroZing  capacity to 10 percent of the total assessed

845
valuation of real property; the city's fiscal inability to construct public
Zorks Zas so pronounced that by 1940 La Guardia, Zho had dreamed of
carving out a beautiful neZ metropolis, Zould have no choice but to limit
neZ capital spending for the year to a symbolic one dollar. Because the city
Zas a creature of the state, city ta[es could be increased and the city budget
ceiling raised only by the State Legislature, and not only the Legislature's
conservatism but the influence Zielded Zithin it by the city's oZn
propertied interests, Zhich Zanted the key property ta[es kept doZn and, to
protect the bonds they held, as feZ neZ bonds as possible issued, made the
Legislature as reluctant to take those steps as La Guardia Zas to ask it to do
so; desperately an[ious to reshape his city La Guardia might be, but he Zas
not an[ious enough to court political disaster by asking for neZ ta[es.
Surveying such realities, 0oses could see no reasonable possibility, in any
foreseeable future, of the city being able to finance his dreams. If he Zanted
to remake the city, it Zas clear, he Zas going to have to do the job Zithout
its money.

But if he Zas able to keep the authorities' revenues, keep them indefinitely,
he Zould have the money.

+e Zould, moreover, have money he Zould be free to use as he chose.

Tens of millions of dollars had been placed in his hands already, of course
—by Governors and Legislatures, by 0ayor and Board of Estimate, by
federal alphabet-agency administrators. But these had been millions hedged
about by all the safeguards—the rules and regulations and established
procedures, the technicalities—that had been established by generations of
legislators and bureaucrats and that made it so difficult to Get Things Done.

Tens of millions of dollars had been given him to hire men, but he had been
required to hire them according to civil service regulations Zhich

made it difficult for him—in  most cases made it impossible for him—to
hire the kind of men he Zanted: the best men, the best engineers, the best
administrators, the best ramrods, the best laborers. 8nder those regulations,
he couldn't pay them enough to attract them to his service. +e couldn't even
hire Zhom he Zanted of the men available at the salaries he could pay; he
had to hire off civil service lists. These regulations could sometimes be

846
circumvented, of course—no one circumvented them as cleverly as he, as
Zas proven by the quality of his "0oses 0en"—but  they could be
circumvented only Zith difficulty  and delay, the delay he hated. And they
could not be circumvented Zholesale: the "0oses 0en" Zere a pri]e cadre,
but a cadre Zas not an army, and he Zas constantly raging at the quality of
the main body of his troops, noncommissioned officers as Zell as enlisted
men; once the Depression eased, civil service salary limits had made it
impossible to keep loyal to his colors more than a handful of the pri]ed
seven hundred and fifty ramrods he had recruited during its depth. Civil
service regulations made it impossible for him even to drive men as he
Zished to drive them: to drive men mercilessly you have to have threats to
hold over their heads; the ultimate threat—dismissal—Zas all but denied
him by the regulations; and dismissal for even a legitimate cause Zas a
cumbersome and tedious procedure that had none of the efficacious effect
on other Zorkers of a snappy "3ick up your time and get out" from Art
+oZland or Earle AndreZs. Civil  service regulations had prevented him
from using his men fle[ibly  and efficiently; because he had to hire men out
of allocations for a specific upstate or Long Island park commission or the
NeZ York City 3ark Department, and civil service regulations required him
to use an employee of a public agency only on that agency's Zork, it Zas
illegal for him to assign an upstater to a city job even if he Zas best
qualified for it. 0ost  important, civil  service regulations required him to
hire men only for specific purposes approved by Legislature or Board of
Estimate, and these purposes had never included the one most vital to his
aims: long-range planning. For more than ten years he had been scheming,
scraping and saving to build up a "stable planning force"—Zithout success.

But changing the laZ Zould give him one. The Legislature had placed
public authorities under civil service, of course, but the poZer of Civil
Service Commissions to enforce their edicts rested, as 0oses had learned
from the bitter e[perience of his youth, on the poZer to disapprove salary
payments—on the commission's control of the purses out of Zhich
municipal and state agencies dreZ their "personal service" funds. It rested
on the poZer of money. Let him have the money—let him keep control of
the authorities' revenues—and he, this man Zho had mastered the
intricacies of civil service as Zell as any man Zho ever lived, Zould be able
to devise a hundred Zays to manipulate Civil Service Commission rulings

847
to his oZn ends. +e Zould be able to attract to his service the men his sharp
eyes had picked out of the herd, to hire and fire them as he pleased, to
provide them Zith material reZards huge enough to make them endure his
driving and his demands and to guarantee their absolute loyalty. And he
Zould be able to hire men not only for specific but for general

purposes. +e Zould be able to have, at last, his stable planning force. Let
him keep the control of the authorities' revenues and he Zould be able to
study transportation needs before elected local officials studied them. +e
Zould be able to determine by his oZn criteria Zhich transportation
facilities should be built and in Zhich order. +e Zould be able to determine
by his oZn criteria hoZ these facilities should be built—Zhat their design,
si]e and precise location should be. +e Zould be able to translate these
general plans into detailed blueprints and specifications. And then, Zhen
the time Zas right —Zhen a large neZ state or federal grant became
available, or Zhen the public Zas demanding a solution to the
transportation problem—he could present these plans to elected officials as
the solution, a solution already engineered, already designed, already costed
out, a solution feasible engineer-ingly and economically, a solution Zhose
planning Zas already a fait accompli, a solution that aZaited only their
approval for implementation, a solution for Zhich, in many cases, money—
the money of his public authorities— Zas already available. :hat official
Zould then be Zilling  to risk public antagonism by Zithholding that
approval?

And if an official  did dare to suggest an alternative, Zhat good Zould it do
him? The city possessed neither an engineering corps capable of planning
large-scale public Zorks nor money to hire in sufficient numbers engineers
Zho did possess such capability. For that matter, the city had no money to
build an alternate large-scale public Zork if it Zanted to. It Zould be
dependent upon the federal government or upon 0oses' authorities to
provide the cash. Federal money might Zell be lost by the delay additional
studies Zould entail; as for the authorities' money, cross the man Zho Zas
offering it and he might (bearing in mind that the man Zas Robert 0oses,
he probably Zould) ZithdraZ  the offer, and the official then could be
accused of having cost the city a great public improvement. Let 0oses keep
control of the authorities' revenues and there Zould be no more nonsense

848
about the 0ayor or the Board of Estimate studying alternate routes for a
highZay or alternate locations for a bridgehead or alternate methods—mass
transportation instead of highZays, for e[ample—of solving transportation
problems. In the fields he had chosen for his oZn, the city Zould have to
build public Zorks Zhere and hoZ he chose.

Additional tens of millions of dollars had been given to him for non-salary
items—construction costs, mainly—but he had been alloZed little leeZay
in the spending of that money either. 0uch of it he had had to give to
contractors—under strict regulations Zhich not only required him to aZard
contracts to the loZest qualified bidders, thereby preventing him from
making aZards to firms he personally favored, but also set many conditions
designed for economy, a saving of ta[payers' money, rather than for the
speed he Zanted; strict restrictions on overtime had been especially
irritating to this supreme ramrod, this archetypal top sergeant, Zho Zanted
his projects driven forZard around the clock.

Allocations directly to his agencies alloZed him even less leeZay; such

appropriations Zere made "line by line" for specific items. And members of
the Legislature or Board of Estimate—accountable to the voters and
therefore an[ious not to make any appropriations that appeared to Zaste
their money (and an[ious as Zell not to let 0oses further e[pand his
empire)—resisted especially making any appropriations to him for the 3R
items Zhich Zould seem blatantly Zasteful to ta[payers but Zhich 0oses
kneZ Zere vital to Getting Things Done: the printing of impressive,
persuasive brochures and pamphlets; the creation of large-scale dioramas
and scale models ("It never ceases to ama]e me hoZ you can talk and talk
and talk to some guy about something you've got in mind, and he isn't very
impressed, and then you bring in a beautiful picture of it or, better yet, a
scale model Zith the bridge all in Zhite and the Zater nice and blue, see,
and you can see his eyes light up," Jack 0adigan says); the hiring of public
relations men to visit publishers, editors, reporters and radio commentators
as Zell as nonmedia influentials, sell them on a project in advance, escort
them on pre-opening limousine or yacht tours, leak them information that
Zould place 0oses' vieZs in  a favorable light (and his opponents' vieZs in
an unfavorable light); the rental of the necessary limousines; the hiring of

849
the "bloodhounds" to dig up facts about an opponent that could induce him
to cease his opposition, or, should he prove stubborn, could be leaked into
print to discredit him; and, especially important to 0oses because it gave
him a chance to e[ercise his matchless charm as host, the laying on of
hospitality—intimate luncheons for key individuals or lavish buffet
luncheons for influentials by the hundreds— at Zhich he could drape a big
arm over a recalcitrant borough president's shoulders and use the gloZ
induced by good food and fine Zine to Zin him to his cause. +e had, of
course, used his ingenuity, and his skill at circumvention of the spirit if not
the letter of the laZ, to publish brochures, hire public relations men,
purchase limousines and host luncheons in the past. But he had never had
enough money to do all this as lavishly and effectively as he Zanted. But let
him keep the authorities' revenues and he Zould have enough.

Changing the laZ might give him more than money. Changing the laZ
might give him poZer, more poZer than he had ever attained before. 0oney
itself is poZer, of course, but the poZer he Zas thinking about noZ Zas
poZer of far greater dimensions.

A public authority, he had learned, possessed not only the poZers of a large
private corporation but some of the poZers of a sovereign state: the poZer
of eminent domain that permitted the sei]ure of private property, for
e[ample, and the poZer to establish and enforce rules and regulations for
the use of its facilities that Zas in reality nothing less than the poZer to
govern its domain by its oZn laZs. The poZers of a public authority Zere
vested in the board of that authority. If there Zas only one member of that
board in fact (as in the case of the +enry +udson 3arkZay Authority:
Robert 0oses, Sole 0ember) or in practice (as in the case of the
Triborough Authority, Zhose other members Zould routinely rubber-stamp
0oses' ac-

tions), the poZers of the authority Zould be vested in that member—in him,
Robert 0oses.

And there Zas another dimension to his thinking, too. .een as alZays in
discerning the potentialities for vast poZer in humble institutions, he had
glimpsed in the institution called "public authority" a potentiality for poZer
Zhose implications no one else—no one in City +all or the Albany State-

850
house for certain and, so far as research can determine, no one anyZhere in
the 8nited States—had noticed, but that Zere e[citing and frightening and
immense.

Authorities could issue bonds. A bond Zas simply a legal agreement
betZeen its seller and its buyer. A legal agreement Zas, by definition, a
contract. And under the Constitution of the 8nited States, a contract Zas
sacred. No state—and no creature of a state such as a city—could impair its
obligations. No one—not Governor, not 0ayor, not State Legislature, not
City Board of Estimate—could interfere Zith its provisions. If Robert
0oses could Zrite  the poZers Zhich had been vested in him into the bond
contracts of his authorities, make those poZers part of the agreements under
Zhich investors purchased the bonds, those poZers Zould be his for as long
as the authorities should remain in e[istence and he should control them. If
he could keep the authorities in e[istence indefinitely and could keep his
place at their head, he Zould hold those poZers indefinitely—quite
conceivably, until he died. The poZers might have been given him by the
Legislature and the Governor at the request of the 0ayor and City Council,
but if he embodied those poZers in bonds, neither Legislature, Governor,
0ayor  nor City Council Zould  ever be able to take them back.

Giving public authorities indefinite e[istence and such vastly e[panded
poZers Zould not be easy. In proposing to give the institution substantial
governmental poZers and a lifespan at least of decades, possibly of
centuries —in proposing to make it an institution that might endure as long
as the Republic endured—0oses Zas in effect, Zhether or not he thought in
such terms, proposing to create, Zithin a democratic society based on a
division of poZers among three branches of government, a neZ, fourth
branch, a branch that Zould, moreover, in significant respects, be
independent of the other three.

The public officials Zhose approval Zas necessary Zould never give it.
Those Zho Zere thinking men Zould reali]e that if  they gave it they Zould
be adding, Zithout sufficient thought and consideration by themselves or by
the public Zhich should have the final say on matters of such significance, a
Zhole neZ layer to urban government in America. The rest of them,
concerned Zith poZer and patronage, Zould reali]e that to the e[tent they

851
gave aZay poZer, they Zould be diminishing their oZn poZer. The key
body Zhose approval Zas necessary—the Legislature that under the State
Constitution alone had the poZer to create neZ authorities—had been
fighting for years to keep 0oses from gaining more poZer, from building
his oZn

empire Zithin the state government. The Legislature Zould never approve
the bills 0oses Zas drafting if  they understood them.

So 0oses Zould have to keep them—and all the other officials involved—
from understanding. +e Zould have to persuade 0ayor, City Council,
Legislature and Governor to approve his bills before they reali]ed Zhat Zas
in them.

In 1924, he had faced a similar problem—and had solved it successfully,
persuading a naive assemblyman to introduce, and hostile Republican
legislative leaders to accept, bills that appeared innocuous but gave the
Long Island State 3ark Commission vast neZ poZers. This time, hoZever,
the job Zould be harder. +is aims noZ Zere far more ambitious, the poZers
Zhich he Zanted noZ Zere far broader than those he had Zanted then. And
in 1924, he had had the Governor on his side. NoZ he had no one on his
side. If a single person in Albany or NeZ York—Democrat, Republican,
Governor, 0ayor, assemblyman, councilman, any one of the thousand
sharp-eyed laZyers Zho proZled the Capitol and City +all— caught even a
glimpse of his true aims, and sounded the alarm, he Zould never be able to
accomplish those aims. +e had to conceal his purposes from everyone.

The safeguards included in all previous NeZ York State legislation on
authorities to limit their lifespan Zere the provisions setting a time limit on
their bonds, a date by Zhich each authority must redeem all its bonds,
surrender control of all its facilities and go out of e[istence. 0oses, drafting
amendments to the Triborough Bridge Authority Act, kneZ that the
Legislature Zould never agree to the elimination of these safeguards.

So he didn't eliminate them.

+e just made them meaningless.

852
Right at the beginning of the original Triborough Act—in Section One, in
the portion labeled "E[istence"—the act said e[plicitly that the Triborough
"board and its corporate e[istence shall continue only for a period of five
years and thereafter until all its . . . bonds have been paid in full . . . ," a
provision Zhich Zhen coupled Zith  a provision setting the ma[imum life of
the bonds at forty years, Zas intended to limit the ma[imum life of the
Authority to that span. The amended Triborough Act Zhich 0oses Zas
proposing said the same thing—in the same place, right at its beginning, in
Section One.

But it also said something else. Not at its beginning and not in the portion
labeled "E[istence," but long, legalistic pages later, buried deep Zithin the
act, in a subdivision of Section Nine, a subdivision and a section that
ostensibly had nothing to do Zith "E[istence," there Zas a neZ sentence:

The authority shall have poZer from time to time to refund any bonds by
the issuance of neZ bonds, Zhether the bonds to be refunded have or have
not matured, and may issue bonds partly to refund bonds then outstanding
and partly for any other corporate purpose.

"+e had figured out a gimmick/' says Reuben A. La]arus, drafter of the
original Triborough Act and himself a master of the gimmick—and as
La]arus spoke a smile broke over his old. Zrinkled face despite his attempts
to conceal it, and his voice Zas filled Zith admiration, the admiration of a
master of a difficult craft for a man Zho Zas more than a master. "That
sentence looked so innocuous. But it changed my Zhole act completely.
:ith   that sentence in there, he had poZer to issue forty-year bonds and
every thirty-nine years he could call them in and issue neZ bonds, for
another forty years. La Guardia had thought that authorities . . . Zould be
temporary creations that Zould build something and then turn it over to the
city and go out of e[istence as soon as it Zas paid off. But Zith that
gimmick in there, it Zould never be paid off."

Never. The e[istence of the Triborough Authority "shall continue only until
all its bonds have been paid in full," the act said. But, because of 0oses'
amendments, the Authority no longer had to pay its bonds in full. Every
time it had enough money to pay them in full, it could instead use the
money to issue neZ bonds in their place. The amendments meant that

853
unless it Zanted to, the Authority Zouldn't ever have to turn its bridges over
to the city. It might, if it so desired, be able to keep the bridges—and stay in
e[istence—as long as the city stayed in e[istence.

The safeguards included in all previous NeZ York State legislation on
authorities to limit their scope Zere the provisions setting a limit on the
amount of bonds each could have outstanding, a limit sufficient to pay only
for the specific project or projects the Legislature Zished it to build and
nothing more. The Triborough Act contained such a provision, a clause
stating that the Authority could not have outstanding more than
$53,-000,000—an amount sufficient only to cover its $35,000,000 share of
the cost of the Triborough Bridge and the $18,000,000 cost of the Bron[-
:hitestone  Bridge. But  0oses' gimmick made that restriction meaningless,
too. For by authori]ing the Authority to issue neZ bonds not only to pay off
old ones but also for "any other corporate purpose," it Zas authori]ing it to
keep its indebtedness at $53,000,000 even though it had money available to
pay off part, or even most, of that figure. If, for e[ample, the income Zas
high enough to pay all its carrying charges and also accumulate a surplus,
Zhich after five or ten years amounted to $20,000,000, the Authority could
then call in $20,000,000 of its outstanding bonds, pay them off and
therefore have only $33,000,000 outstanding. Its legislatively authori]ed
borroZing capacity Zould still  be $53,000,000. Its revenues Zould support
that amount of bonds. So the Authority Zould have $20,000,000 of
borroZing capacity. It could issue $20,000,000 in neZ bonds and use the
proceeds of the sale for "any corporate purpose."

And Zhat Zere such purposes?

The original Triborough Act had given the Authority poZer to build only
the tZo bridges and their "approaches." 0oses' success in persuading the
3:A   that approaches could mean roads leading to the bridges had greatly
e[panded the Authority's poZer.

NoZ he proceeded to e[pand it further.

The neZ, amended, Triborough Bridge Authority Act that 0oses Zas
proposing still said first that the Authority's poZers Zere to build bridges
and their approaches. But, in later sections, it also said some other things.

854
The act empoZered the Authority to acquire land for and construct not only
approaches but "neZ roads, streets, parkZays or avenues connecting Zith
the approaches," and to Ziden e[isting roads, streets, parkZays or avenues
connecting Zith those approaches. The Zord "connecting" Zas innocuous—
unless one began to think closely about Zhat it Zould mean if 0oses
e[panded its definition as he had e[panded the definition of "approaches."
If an approach Zas miles long—the 4ueens "approach" to the Triborough
Bridge, for e[ample, Zas si[  miles long—scores of roads, streets, parkZays
or avenues intersected ("connected") Zith it. 8nder the amended act he Zas
proposing, the Triborough Authority Zould have the right to Ziden any or
all of them. It Zould have the right to build a neZ thoroughfare that Zould
connect Zith the approaches anyZhere along their length. And hoZ long
could that thoroughfare be? A block? A mile? Five miles? Ten? Could it be
a highZay that ran clear across the city? 8nder the amended act he Zas
proposing, it certainly could. And suppose he Zanted to build another—
third—highZay, to intersect Zith the one he had built to intersect Zith the
approaches? Since this neZ, third, road Zould connect Zith the second, and
the second Zould connect Zith the approaches, Zhy could not the third be
said to connect Zith the first? 8nder a liberal definition—a definition such
as 0oses had long since proven himself adept at making—quite possibly it
could. 4uite possibly, in fact, one could say that any major thoroughfare in
the city "connected" Zith any other. And if one could say that, one could
say that the act that 0oses Zas so carefully drafting Zould mean that the
Triborough Authority Zould  have the right to construct highZays
throughout the city, in many respects e[actly as if it Zere the city
government itself.

And not just highZays. Another clause in the act gave the Authority poZer
"to construct and develop for the purpose of public parks" lands acquired
"in connection Zith the :hitestone   Bridge project and Zith neZ or e[isting
roads, streets, parkZays and avenues connecting Zith such project." 8nder
the act 0oses Zas drafting, the Authority Zould be able to build parks
along any highZay it might construct. Since the Authority Zould be able to
build highZays throughout the city, it Zould be able to build parks
throughout the city, too.

855
And not just highZays and parks. Buried still deeper Zithin the act 0oses
Zas drafting Zas a clause giving the Authority the right to build and operate
any "facilities for the public not inconsistent Zith the use of the project."
Not Zith the project. :ith    the use of the project. Since the project consisted
of bridges, roads and parks, Zhy, under that clause, Zould it be inconsistent
for the Authority to build housing nearby that Zould alloZ more members
of the public the convenient use of those bridges, roads and parks? :hy, for
that matter, Zould the construction of any public facility be inconsistent
Zith the use of the project? An aggressive Authority chairman, an[ious to
stretch the poZers in the act to the limit, could Zell find in that

phrase legal authori]ation to build any type of public facility he chose
anyZhere along the Authority's bridges, roads, streets, parkZays, avenues
and parks—anyZhere, in fact, in the city.

And the best bill drafter in Albany set to Zork to make sure that, in building
and operating its projects, the Authority, despite the limitations on its poZer
by the State Legislature, Zould nevertheless possess poZers equal to those
possessed by the state—or by the city of Zhich, in theory, the Authority Zas
merely a creature.

Legislature and 0ayor had sought to insure that the Authority Zould be
subordinate to the city by including in the old act the provision that the City
Comptroller should be the Authority's "fiscal agent." The neZ act included
the same provision. In drafting the section entitled "0oneys of the
Authority," 0oses  began it, in fact, Zith the flat statement: "All moneys of
the authority from Zhatever source derived shall be paid to the comptroller
as agent of the authority." The meaning of this sentence must have seemed
clear to any legislator Zho read it. The definition of "fiscal agent" Zas Zell
established; he Zas the individual empoZered to receive and pay out a
corporation's moneys. But later in the section, 0oses added another
sentence: "The moneys . . . shall be paid out on check of the Comptroller on
requisition of the chairman of the authority. ..." :ith  that sentence added,
the Comptroller, Zhile still authori]ed  to receive the Authority's moneys,
Zould be able to pay them out only on 0oses' requisition—Zould, in other
Zords, be able to do Zith them only Zhat 0oses Zanted him to do. +e Zas
still required to take 0oses' money to the bank and deposit it there, but he

856
Zas noZ forbidden to take the money out again Zithout 0oses' signature on
the ZithdraZal slip. The sentence that 0oses had slipped into the act meant
that although the Comptroller of the City of NeZ York Zould be called the
Authority's agent, he Zould really be no more than its errand boy.

Legislature and 0ayor had sought to insure that the Authority Zould be
subordinate to the city by including in the old act the provision that the city
Zould "oZn"  all Triborough projects. The neZ act said that it did— flatly
and clearly. But it also said that "the authority shall retain full jurisdiction
and control over all its projects. . . ." The city might oZn the Triborough
Bridge, but only the Triborough Bridge Authority could run it.

By the time 0oses had finished drafting his amended acts, his authorities
had not only all the poZers of "bodies corporate" but many of the poZers of
"bodies politic"—including  bodies politic that Zere sovereign states. +is
authorities had the right to "do all things . . . that a business corporation can
do"—to sue, for e[ample, to make contracts and bylaZs, to acquire real
estate and use it or lease it or dispose of it, and, of course, to issue bonds—
and they had the right to do many things that private corporations could not
do. They had the poZer to oZn public facilities, to require the public to pay
tolls for their use and to prevent the construction of competing facilities so
that the public had no choice but to pay those tolls. They had the right to

govern their domain by making their oZn laZs ("rules and regulations for
the protection of" their property Zhich "shall have the force and effect of
laZ," Zith  violations "triable by a city magistrate and punishable by not
more than thirty days imprisonment, or by a fine of not more than fifty
dollars, or both") and to maintain their oZn police force (hundreds of
Authority "Bridge  and Tunnel Officers") to enforce those laZs. They could
have their oZn great seals ("and alter the same at pleasure") and set their
oZn statute of limitations (a private citi]en suffering damages by
negligence of a private corporation had three years to sue; a private citi]en
suffering damages by negligence of the Jones Beach State 3ark Authority
had si[ months to sue). They had the sovereign poZer of eminent domain,
and more—not only could they take a private citi]en's property, they could
enter the land before it Zas taken to make the surveys necessary to decide if
they Zanted to take it (never again Zould some Long Island farmer be able

857
to ram a shotgun against Sidney Shapiro's chest and keep him off his land).
They had, in fact, some poZers that sovereign states—at least the sovereign
state of NeZ York—did not. They could let contracts Zithout competitive
bidding. Their officials could be removed only for cause; they Zere immune
from the pleasure of the Governor.

And 0oses made sure that these poZers, these poZers corporate and politic
and, in some respects, greater than both, Zould be embodied, ultimately, not
in the authorities but in him personally. In the case of the single-member
authorities, of course, the authority Zas Robert 0oses. The Triborough,
Jones Beach and Bethpage authorities had three-member boards, but Zhile
their enabling acts said, "The poZer of such corporation shall be vested in
and e[ercised by a majority of the members," it also said, "The board may
delegate to one or more of its members . . . such poZers and duties as it
may deem proper."

Then 0oses set to Zork to make sure that no one Zould ever be able to take
those poZers aZay.

+e did it in Section Nine, 3aragraphs 2 and 4, Clauses a through /.
3aragraph 2 authori]ed the Authority to pass resolutions governing the sale
of its bonds. The various clauses of 3aragraph 4 said, Zhen taken together,
that the resolutions could contain provisions dealing Zith toll rates,
Authority rules and regulations and "any other matters, of like or different
character, Zhich in any Zay affect the security or protection of the bonds."
And 3aragraph 4 also said that any such resolution "shall be a part of the
contract Zith the holders of the bonds."

Legislation can be amended or repealed. If legislators Zere in some future
year to come to feel that they had been deceived into granting Robert 0oses
Zider poZers than they had intended—the right to keep tolls on a bridge
even after the bridge Zas paid for, for e[ample—they could simply revoke
those poZers. But a contract cannot be amended or repealed by anyone
e[cept the parties to it. Its obligations could not be impaired by anyone—
not even the governing legislature of a sovereign state. Section Nine,
3aragraphs 2 and 4, Clauses a through /, gave Robert 0oses the right

858
to tmAodj m Triboroo^f  bonds all the fomcn he bad been given in the
fclirf0ina   creating Triborough. Therefore, from the moment the bonds
Zere sold (thereby patting into effect the contract they represented), the
poZers he had been given in die legislation could be revoked only by the
mutual il0fr   «r of both 0oses and die bondholders. They could not be
revokec by Ike f fof that had created die Authority or by the err. Zhose
mere in +i—rufn8j   it Zas supposed to be. If he copied info die bond
resolutions die legis lati o n giving him the right to charge Zhatever to4s he
Zished, for as long as he Zished, from the moment the bonds Zere sold that
poZer could never be revoked Zithout his consent If he copied into the
bond resolutions die legislation giving him his other neZ, broad poZers,
those poZers could never be revoked The elected representatives of the
state and city migh have given Robert 0oses those poZers. But the elected
representatives c the state and city Zould never be able to take them back.

3reviously, Robert 0oses had alZays needed Zhat he termed "e[ecu the
support." +e had learned during his first great effort in public life—his
attempt to reform the municipal civil service, an attempt brought to naught
by ms betrayal by John 3ur bel—that as long as he Zas an ap-

pointed official, he could not accomplish great dreams Zithout the backing
of die elected official Zho had appointed him. and he had never alloZed to
forget that fact +is skill at bill  drafting and his hold on the public had
gained him a unique insulation from 0ayors and Governors ms dairy
operations, but it had still been only a chief e[ecutive Zho could give him
die money and poZer necessary for the creation of giant public Zorks.

But noZ he needed e[e. jpport no longer. In the fields Zhich

he had carved out for his oZn—transportation and recreation—the passage
of his "amendments'" to the authority enabling acts had given him resources
of money and poZer independent of Governors and 0ayors. Their approval
Zas no longer required. Before 0oses, the public authority had been a mere
instrument of the city, a body established by the city's duly constituted,
elected officials to carry out one of their decisions. +is public authorities
had been set up to do Zhat they Zanted done. NoZ his authorities Zould do
Zhat he

859
For yean R ofeert 0oses had sought e[ecutive poZer himself, hastily
sZitching his party allegiance in 1928 Zhen he thought he had a chance for
the Democratic nomination for Governor, sZitchmg back to Republican in
1933 Zhen be thought he had a chance for the Republican-Fusion
nomination for 0ayor,  finally  obtaining a nomination and running for
Governor in 1934-Each such clutch at e[ecutive of^cc had been anattempt
to obtain more « through normal democratic pre ;: the 19 u debacle, hoZ-

ever, it Zas obvious that this path to poZer Zas forever barred to him. +is
voter-antagoni]ing personality meant that he Zas never soing to be able to
obtain that supreme poZer Zhich, in a democrat.. c ety, onlv the people can,
through their votes, confer.

But noZ he needed that poZer no longer. In many Zays, the amendments to
the authority acts had given him, in his fields of operation, more .poZer
than he Zould have possessed as chief e[ecutive of state or city.

And 0oses kneZ it.  3rior to passage of the authority amendments, he had
scrounged for elective office. After the passage of those amendments, he
disdained it. For the ne[t tZenty years he Zould Zith regularity be
approached by men prepared to back him for a gubernatorial or mayoral
nomination, and he Zould firmly discourage them. Robert 0oses Zas
interested in money and poZer, and he no longer needed elective office to
obtain those pri]es. After the passage of his authority amendments, he had
them already. :ith  the institution he defined as "a body corporate and
politic," Robert 0oses had, on a broader scale, simply repeated the formula
successful for him at Yale and Zith the Long Island State 3ark Commission,
carving out Zithin the state and city governments but outside those
governments' traditional, formal frameZork a unique, independent niche.
NoZ, thanks to his penchant—his genius—for seeing potentialities for
poZer Zhere no one else saZ them, in the future his public authorities as
Zell as city officials  Zould be making vital, city-shaping decisions.

+e didn't even need public opinion any more.

"That's a slender reed to lean on," Al Smith had said. NoZ Robert 0oses
had something more solid: the firm, precise, unbreakable covenants of the
bond resolutions.

860
Robert 0oses still had all his old, immense, popularity. But Zere he, one
day, to lose that popularity, the loss Zould no longer be nearly as disastrous
as it Zould have been in the past. For no one—not the people, not the
people's elected representatives, not the people's courts—could change
those covenants.

The institution over Zhich Robert 0oses had Zaved his magic Zand Zas
one uniquely suited to be the fairy princess that Zould bring his dreams to
life. It dovetailed neatly Zith his philosophy and personality.

0oses Zas driven by the need for tangible, indisputable evidence of
accomplishment and achievement—evidence such as a public
improvement. +e Zas driven by a need to build. Building—building a
public improvement —Zas an authority's primary function; apart from
operating and maintaining that improvement, its only function.

0oses had Zhat amounted almost to a horror of ceasing to build; of
finishing a bridge, say, and then having nothing to do thereafter but keep it
clean and collect tolls on it, of being forced, as he put it, "to be a caretaker,
to have nothing to do but sit around and collect nickels and dimes for the
rest of my life." If  an authority ceased to build, it Zould die; if all it did Zas
collect tolls, the tolls Zould pay off its bonds and Zhen the bonds Zere paid
off it Zould  have no choice but to go out of e[istence. Only by continually
embarking on neZ projects—Zhich Zould require neZ bond issues—could
an authority remain viable.

0oses' vision Zas on a scale so grand that it transcended the tangled
netZork of boundary lines of the 1,400 cities, boroughs, counties,
toZnships, villages, seZer districts, fire districts, police districts, Zater
districts in the NeZ York metropolitan area. As he had once seen Long
Island entire, noZ he saZ the metropolitan region as a single Zhole, and as
he had once Zanted to shape the Zhole Island, noZ he Zanted to shape the
Zhole region. Of all the region's governmental institutions, only an
authority could transcend those boundary lines. The jurisdiction of every
one of the 1,400 governmental units ended at that unit's borders, and any
attempt by one of them to initiate a development Zhich crossed its borders
Zas jealously—and, invariably, successfully—resisted by its neighbor. The
sacred right to "home rule" could not be tampered Zith even by a county;

861
only by obtaining the consent of every incorporated hamlet that Zould be
crossed by a proposed highZay could the Board of Supervisors of Nassau
or Suffolk or :estchester  County build one. Even the state government
violated "home rule" only at its peril. Only an authority could Zith impunity
build a project across or through several jurisdictions.

0oses' methods of Getting Things Done Zere dictatorial, peremptory,
arbitrary, arrogant—"authoritarian," an observer addicted to puns might
conclude. An official of a conventional governmental agency had difficulty
in employing such methods. An official of an authority did not. 0any of  the
restrictions Zhich gave the public recourse from the decisions of old-line
agencies did not even e[ist for public authorities. The symbol Zas the
public hearing, the e[emplification of everything 0oses detested about
normal democratic processes. 8nder laZ and custom, conventional
governmental agencies could not embark on any large-scale public
improvement Zithout holding public hearings. An authority could.

0oses' methods—the methods Zith Zhich he sZayed politicians to his side
—required secrecy. An authority gave him secrecy, for unlike the records of
conventional governmental agencies, Zhich Zere public, subject alZays to
inspection, an authority's records Zere corporate records, as private as those
of a private corporation.

0oses' image—the image he had so painstakingly cultivated—Zas precious
to him, not only because it helped him achieve and accomplish, but because
of reasons rooted in the murky depths of his personality. The image could
not help being reinforced by his identification Zith public authorities, for
public authorities had the same image.

The image Zas of the totally unselfish and altruistic public servant Zho
Zanted nothing for himself but the chance to serve. A key element in it Zas
his disdain for money—a disdain Zhich he made certain Zas Zell
publici]ed and Zhich Zas symboli]ed  by his refusal to accept a salary for
his services. Authority officials Zere traditionally unsalaried (the tradition
had begun in England, Zhere it had been believed that authorities Zould get
better officials —men above polities—if they Zere not paid), and 0oses
had eagerly folloZed the tradition Zith his authorities—and had made

862
certain that the public kneZ he Zas serving as authority chairman "Zithout
compensation."

The image Zas of the fearless independent above politics. The public

believed authorities—entities outside the normal governmental setup,
entities Zhose members Zere unsalaried and appointed to terms long
enough in theory to insure their independence from politicians—to be
"nonpolitical."

The image Zas of the relentless foe of bureaucrats, the dynamic slasher of
red tape. A key rationale for the creation of authorities Zas their freedom
from the red tape involved in old-line governmental agencies and their
ability to function freely and efficiently  because they Zere established
outside the governmental bureaucracies.

The image Zas of the man Zho Got Things Done, Zho produced for the
public tangible, visible, dramatic achievements. The great bridges, tunnels
and piers created by authorities Zere tangible, highly visible monuments to
their achievements.

In short, 0oses had discovered a governmental institution that Zas not only
uniquely suited to his purposes but Zas, in institutional terms, an
embodiment of his personality, an e[tension of himself. "An institution,"
said Ralph :aldo  Emerson, "is the lengthened shadoZ of one man." The
institution named "the public authority" Zas, in the form it took after
0oses' eyes focused on it in 1937 and 1938, the lengthened shadoZ of
Robert 0oses.

+e himself seemed to understand this. +is remarks and, sometimes, his
published statements, reveal a striking identification of himself Zith
authorities, Zhich he defined as "nonpolitical" organi]ations headed by
"unsalaried" trustees in Zhich "the speed, fle[ibility and absence of red
tape, traditionally associated Zith private industry," could be used for public
purposes. Composing the introduction to a brochure—e[pensively bound,
Zide-margined, printed in full color on paper of a Zeight and sheen suitable
for an invitation to a royal Zedding—that he issued in 1941 to mark the
fifth anniversary of the opening of the Triborough Bridge, he Zrote:

863
If I may be permitted a personal note, I Zould say that it has long been a
cherished ambition of mine to Zeave together the loose strands and frayed
edges of the NeZ York metropolitan arterial tapestry. . . . The Triborough
Bridge Authority has provided the Zarp on the metropolitan loom, the
heavier threads across Zhich the lighter ones are Zoven.

"The Zarp on the loom": the public authority, this neZ institution—neZ at
least to America—at Zhose birth he had been present, to Zhich he had
served as prescient nursemaid and Zhich he, more than any other
individual, had raised to a maturity consonant Zith a major role on
America's urban scene, Zould be the vehicle Zhich Zould make his dreams
come true.

A series of decisions Robert 0oses took in 1937 symboli]ed his reali]ation
of this fact.

TZo Zere financial. 3reviously, reali]ing  that his dreams Zould never be
funded by state and city governments, he had, through intricate and
ingenious financial devices, arranged Zherever possible to have revenues
collected by the state commission and city department he headed paid not
into state and city treasuries but into special "revolving funds" that in effect
let him add them to the regular commission and department budgets. NoZ,

in another series of maneuvers, he circumvented his circumventions—and
Zhen he had finished, the revenues of the Jones Beach parking fields no
longer Zent to the Long Island State 3ark Commission but to the Jones
Beach State 3arkZay Authority, and the revenues of the Jacob Riis 3ark
parking field Zent not to the City 3ark Department but to the 0arine
3arkZay Authority. +e  still had the money to spend—but noZ he could
spend it through the authorities.

One Zas physical. 3reviously, he had had four offices: the State Council of
3arks office at 80 Centre Street; the Long Island State 3ark Commission's
offices at Belmont Lake State 3ark; 270 BroadZay (the NeZ York State
Office Building),  selected for its pro[imity to City  +all;  and his nominal
office in the headquarters of the NeZ York City 3ark Department in the
Arsenal in Central 3ark.

864
Four might have seemed adequate, but noZ he built a fifth, and told his
aides it Zould be "the main office from noZ on." And this office  Zas
located on Randall's Island.

Geographically, Randall's Island Zas near the center of NeZ York, but the
Zater Zhich surrounded it Zas a moat Zhich separated it from the rest of
the city. 0oses' "amendments" to the Triborough Act made that separation
more than physical. No inhabitant of the city could use the laZns or stadium
or other facilities on Randall's Island—could even drive across it—Zithout
paying the Triborough Bridge Authority a tribute in coin, a tribute Zhich
0oses e[acted from even the highest city officials, generally refusing to
give free bridge passes even to borough presidents and sometimes, angry at
La Guardia, Zithholding them from the 0ayor.  Once on the island, visitors
Zere subject not to the city's laZs but to Triborough's—Authority rules and
regulations enforced by Triborough's Bridge and Tunnel Officers. 0oses'
decision to build his main office there Zas, intentionally or not, symbolic of
his independence of the city.

If, moreover, 0oses' authorities Zere becoming an independent empire, the
heart's blood of that empire Zas money: tolls. The bulk of those tolls Zere
collected at the huge Triborough Bridge toll pla]a. If the empire had a heart,
that Zas it. 0oses built his neZ office  in the very shadoZ of that toll pla]a.

Not only the location of 0oses' headquarters but its height Zas symbolic.
Although the squat, gray three-story structure Zas built directly adjacent to
the Triborough toll pla]a, its roof Zas just enough beloZ that pla]a so that
the building could not be seen by drivers on the pla]a or on the bridge
roadZay. Although tens of thousands of drivers used the bridge day after
day, year after year, none but a handful ever reali]ed that there Zas an office
building there. 0oses' headquarters Zas concealed almost completely from
public vieZ.

+e no longer needed the support of the city's mayor—and he Zasted little
time letting him knoZ it.  E[actly  one month after La Guardia, on the

strength of his trust in 0oses' earnest representations, had assured Governor
Lehman that the city Zas retaining ample control over 0oses' authorities,
thereby persuading the Governor to sign one of 0oses' neZ authority bills,

865
a dispute arose over the Authority's hiring practices, and 0oses Zrote the
0ayor,  "It is silly  to force a court test of such a matter, but I shall have to
take this up Zith attorneys for the bondholders and Zith the trustees unless
the matter is adjusted."

The 0ayor thought he kneZ hoZ  to handle so outrageous an attempt at
intimidation. "NoZ,  there is one matter I Zant to make absolutely clear," he
replied.

The Authority bondholders have absolutely nothing to say and have no
control over purely administrative matters of the City of NeZ York. So,
don't talk about a court test on such matters or taking up anything of this
nature Zith the Authority's attorneys or the stockholders. The 0ayor
establishes the policy for the City as Zell as the selection of the
commissioners of the Authorities, and the Authority bondholders have
absolutely nothing to say from the Commissioner doZn to the last line of
attendants. You are a city official and Zill take matters up Zith the
Corporation Counsel of the City of NeZ York and not Zith "attorneys for
the bondholders."

0oses' reply Zas more succinct. "I think you had better read the agreements
and contracts," he Zrote.

As poor Trubee Davison had done years before, Fiorello La Guardia sat
doZn, too late, to study documents draZn up by Robert 0oses Zhich he
had approved because he had relied on 0oses' Zord as to Zhat Zas in them.
Then he called in his legal advisers to read them.

":ell,   that Zas the day of the great aZakening," recalls :indels,  Zho,
having resigned as Corporation Counsel, had not previously seen 0oses'
"amendments." +e and Reuben La]arus told the 0ayor that, as :indels
Zas to put it, "of course, under the bond resolution, the Authority did have
the poZer to employ its oZn counsel, and it had all these enormous other
poZers as Zell." The 0ayor,  of course, had poZers, too. On some of his
authorities 0oses served e[ officio because he Zas the City 3ark
Commissioner. The 0ayor could fire 0oses as 3ark Commissioner, and
thereby divest him simultaneously of his membership on those authorities.
But this poZer e[isted in theory only; political  realities made it

866
meaningless. Remove him from the authority undertaking the RockaZay
Improvement and he might use his influence Zith the State Legislature to
have state funds cut off from the state-financed part of the project, the
Atlantic Avenue grade elimination; the Legislature had agreed to finance
the elimination in the first place only because he Zas heading both city and
state agencies involved. The city had no funds to further the Zork itself; it
Zould have to remain uncompleted; Atlantic Avenue, already torn up,
Zould remain a three-mile-long stretch of rubble. La Guardia Zould find
himself in the same untenable position in Zhich 3resident Roosevelt had
found himself Zhen he had attempted to oust 0oses as head of another
authority—that of sacrificing a great public improvement for the sake of
personal revenge on a faithful and immensely popular public servant. La
Guardia might, of

let that the u not personal. e

public understand that public authorities d

00 much But the 0a ; >nly too Zell  aZare of e

(utility  rf attempting to e[plain the technicalities of bond resolution c -

I to an electorate that idoli]ed the 0an :ho   Got Things Done.

0ore  important, Zhile the 0ayor  could remove 0oses from some i-
thoritief, he could not remove him from the Triborough Authority—he d no
charge! of ipecific Zrongdoing to bring against him—until his term e[p j  in
three years. During those three years. 0 Zould still have imnu e

poZers in the city. +e Zould still  be in charge of huge public Zorks bt g
constructed Zithin the city's border g an open enemy of 0 s

Zould lead to an immensely embarrassing situation, a situation, Zh \
moreover, Zould continue to be embar for Zhat Zas, in poli 1

terms, a lifetime.

867
And these considerations combined Zith the others that alZays h -strung La
Guardia in his dealings Zith 0  nmense popula ;

0oses' immense influence Zith a Governor and State Legislature f ] Zhom
the 0ayor constantly needed fav< ability to ram thn i

the great public Zorks the 0ayor, as sculptor of metropolis, despera y
Zanted rammed through. La Guardia kneZ th mid ram

through—scandal-free and in time for the ne[t election. :ith  good rea . he
doubted if anyone else could. The poZers that the 0ayor possessed < r
0oses' authorities in theory he did not possess in practice. 3olitical real s
gave him no choice but to alloZ 0oses to remain at their head. And e kneZ
it.

0oses kneZ it,  too. After reading the bond agreements and contn . La
Guardia dropped all further discussion of the authorities' poZers. 0i s never
raised the matter again. But thereafter he treated La Guardia no 5 his
superior but as an equal. In the areas o\ transportation and recreat . Robert
0oses, Zho had never been elected b\ the people of the city to y office, Zas
henceforth to have at least as much of a voice in determit g the city's future
as any official the people had elected—including the 0a .

reception Zas chilling; RFC Chairman Jesse Jones said that, cousin on the
Tunnel Authority or no, he Zould not consider sinking a cent more than
$39,000,000 in another NeZ York tunnel; Ickes, from Zhom the 0ayor
attempted to raise the balance as an outright 3:A grant, said that NeZ
York's share of 3:A  funds Zas already so disproportionate that he Zould
not give the city more than $5,000,000 for any purpose. And Zhen La
Guardia raised the subject of money Zith the only other source he could
think of—Robert 0oses—the chill  over the Zhole situation turned to ice.
For Zhile 0oses  told the 0ayor  that the Triborough Bridge Authority did
indeed have money to spare—to the 0ayor's utter astonishment, Tribor-
ough's chairman revealed that the Authority could, by capitali]ing its
surpluses, raise immediately more than $30,000,000—and Zas Zilling to
use that money for the circumferential project, he also told the 0ayor there
Zould be a price for its use: the 0ayor Zould have to alloZ him  to do Zhat

868
tZo years earlier he had prevented him from doing. +e Zould have to alloZ
him to take over the Tunnel Authority.

To a man Zho valued poZer as highly as did La Guardia, the price— Zhich
Zould give 0oses  a monopoly over all neZ intracity Zater crossings,
tunnels as Zell as bridges—Zas outrageously steep. In his files can be
found a memorandum from 0oses giving details. Across it is scraZled, in
huge letters in the 0ayor's handZriting, a single Zord: LO8SY!

But the 0ayor  found that, if he Zanted to build the great project, he had no
choice but to pay that price. Repeated pleas to Ickes Zon from the Old
Curmudgeon one concession—the 3:A had previously approved grants for
$7,000,000 for NeZ York schools and hospitals on Zhich construction had
not yet begun; if La Guardia so desired, Ickes said, he Zas Zelcome to use
that money for the tunnel instead. But the limit on neZ 3:A  contributions
remained firm at $5,000,000, so the 3:A's contribution Zould  total only an
inadequate $12,000,000. Trekking back and forth to :ashington, Stetson in
hand, La Guardia told the RFC the city Zould somehoZ scrape up a feZ
millions to provide a greater margin of safety for tunnel bonds, but this
persuaded the RFC to raise the amount it Zould buy only from $39,000,000
to $43,000,000. :ith  the total federal contribution thus fro]en at
$55,000,000, the 0ayor could see no Zay to a thaZ. +e appears for a time
to have contemplated building only the tunnel and highZay, hoping that
Zhen 0oses saZ the rest of the bypass going ahead, his passion to complete
it Zould persuade him to build the parkZay Zith Triborough money, but the
tunnel and highZay alone cost $77,000,000, $19,000,000 more than he
could raise. La Guardia then contemplated delaying the project until the
4ueens-0idtoZn  Zas open and earning, but that opening Zas tZo years
aZay—by that time, the Zay things Zere going in :ashington,  the 3:A
might no longer have any money to give. The 0ayor e[plored the
possibility of making 0oses—through  legislative or some other action—
contribute the Triborough surpluses, but found that plan balked by the
unalterable bond covenants. Trapped betZeen his dreams for the city and
the city's utter inability to pay for them, he had no choice. If he Zanted NeZ
York to have the great belt system, he Zould have to hand over to

869
0oses, already far too poZerful, more poZer still. In a formal
"0emorandum of  8nderstanding" and an e[change of letters on September
7 and 8, 1938, 0oses agreed to use Triborough's surplus to build the
$12,000,000 elevated highZay and to add $22,000,000 to the RFC
contribution to build the tunnel. In return La Guardia agreed that the city
Zould use the 3:A's  $12,000,000 for the Belt 3arkZay and Zould, over the
ne[t three years, complete the parkZay Zith $16,000,000 of its oZn funds.
And the 0ayor  further agreed to ask the Legislature to alloZ Triborough to
take over the Tunnel Authority's 4ueens-0idtoZn  Tunnel, the Tunnel
Authority's authori]ation to build  the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel—and the
Tunnel Authority itself.

:ith   the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel firmly  in his grasp, 0oses made a slight
modification in its design: It became the Brooklyn-Battery Bridge.

The change reflected the importance 0oses had come to place on bankers'
values—a bridge could be built slightly more cheaply than a tunnel, Zould
cost slightly less to operate and could, per dollar spent, carry slightly more
traffic—and his eagerness to build impressive monuments to himself; a
bridge Zas, after all, the most impressive of monuments ("the finest
architecture made by man") as Zell as one Zhose life Zas "measureless"; a
tunnel, he said in public, "is merely a tiled, vehicular bathroom smelling
faintly of mono[ide";  in private, an aide recalls, "he used to say, ':hat's a
tunnel but a hole in the ground?'—and R0 Zasn't interested in holes in the
ground." And the change had the additional value of tying La Guardia even
more closely to his agreement Zith 0oses because it appealed to the
0ayor's romantic, artistic conception of himself as a "painter" of NeZ York
—as Zell as to his oZn not inconsiderable interest in monuments. "R0
took the 0ayor out on Jack's [0adigan's] yacht into the harbor off :all
Street at sunset one day—and you knoZ hoZ beautiful it is there at sunset
— and told him that he Zas going to use this setting for the biggest, most
beautiful bridge in the Zorld, and the Little FloZer really ate it up," the aide
recalls. And 0oses soon found that he needed every tie on the 0ayor that
he could get. For the Brooklyn-Battery project aroused more opposition
than any previous 0oses proposal.

870
The opposition came first from Joseph D. 0cGoldrick, the reformer-
professor Zhom La Guardia had drafted out of his Columbia classroom to
become City Comptroller, and Zho had previously been the unquestioning
ally of the 0ayor  he idoli]ed.

"If you don't Zatch [0oses]  he's going to bankrupt the city," 0cGoldrick's
predecessor had Zarned him. By 1938 the Comptroller felt that that
prophecy had been just about fulfilled, at least in terms of the city's ability
to finance neZ large-scale public Zorks or maintain old ones. Increases in
the city's obligations for debt service to pay for such construction and
maintenance—obligations made necessary to a large e[tent by 0oses— had
boosted the city's annual e[penses to a level at Zhich its annual revenues
barely covered them. The capital budget situation Zas even more ominous.

Not only Zas there little margin left under the constitutional debt limit, but
commitments made for future public Zorks projects—mostly 0oses'
projects—had insured that there Zould be hardly any money available in
1939 or 1940 either. The city Zould be able to pay its $16,000,000 share of
0oses' tunnel-highZay-parkZay  proposal only by eliminating most non-
0oses public Zorks  and all large-scale maintenance jobs for both years; the
canceling of the public Zorks Zould be bad enough; the cancellation of the
maintenance Zould inevitably saddle the city in later years Zith even larger
bills for major repair Zork  that preventive maintenance Zould have made
unnecessary. 0cGoldrick felt that such a course did not make sense.

During his interim appointment, in 1934, the Comptroller had listened to
local delegations pleading for better hospitals, better schools, better
libraries, and for the creation of desperately needed child health care centers
in the slums. NoZ, back on the Board of Estimate after three years, he Zas
listening to the same groups plead for the same things—and it Zas glaringly
apparent to him that the city's progress in building roads and parks had not
been matched in other areas in Zhich physical construction Zas needed.
+ospitals, he felt, Zere "a disgrace." "0any schools Zere fairly  ancient; Ze
had some that had been built right after the Civil :ar and Zere still in use.
:e   had schools ninety years old. :e had one school—3S 35— that Zas a
hundred years old." In the Zealthiest city of the Zealthiest nation in the
Zorld, 290 schools Zere not even fireproof. Despite his admiration for La

871
Guardia, he could not help noticing that, despite the 0ayor's annual
promises, in four years not a single child care center had been built. As for
mass transportation facilities, the city's failure to build neZ subZays to
service rapidly developing outlying areas Zas only part of the problem. The
subZays already in e[istence Zere beginning to require e[tensive
preventive maintenance. :ithout  it, their deterioration Zould accelerate.
The imbalance in the spending of city funds must be corrected, he felt, to
meet other needs besides roads and parks. Taking $7,000,000 allocated for
schools and hospitals and allocating it to a highZay Zas not the Zay to do
it.

La Guardia had told 0cGoldrick  that he agreed Zith the need for more
balance, and that he Zas planning to act on it. NoZ, hoZever, Zhen 0oses
suddenly requested Board of Estimate approval for the Circumferential
3arkZay, La Guardia supported him. And 0cGoldrick,  Zho had suppressed
previous doubts about 0oses' proposals on "an assumption that he Zas
almost alZays right," found himself, during "some long nights of soul
searching," re-e[amining that assumption. At first he suppressed his doubts;
he gave the 3:A  the certification required from the city's chief financial
officer of the city's Zillingness to pay any une[pected costs on the project.
But late on the evening of October 11, less than thirty-si[ hours before the
Board vote, the pudgy, bespectacled, mild-mannered little Irishman issued a
public statement that Zas the closest thing to a cri de conscience uttered by
a top city official since 0oses had come to poZer Zithin its borders:

Reluctant as I am to suggest that Ze consider postponement of the
Circumferential 3arkZay ... it is my duty to point out that [if  it is built]  the
city Zill  be brought to

the virtual e[haustion of its debt-incurring capacity, Zith no margin
remaining for normal capital groZth of its e[isting  facilities. . . . No one can
dispute the vital need for keeping the city's plant in efficient condition. :e
have a stupendous investment in public buildings, bridges and equipment
Zhich must be protected. 8nless this plant is properly maintained Ze Zill
undergo a repetition of the era Zhen broken-doZn equipment and neglected
buildings cost the ta[payers many needless millions in increased costs of
operation and maintenance.

872
As for neZ construction:

Not a single neZ school, not a single neZ hospital, not a neZ police station
or flrehouse, not even a baby health station, Zould be provided [in either
1939 or 1940].. . . These are essentials, and in my considered judgment, Ze
cannot embark upon neZ ideas until Ze have met these basic needs.

0cGoldrick  could cast only three of the si[teen votes on the Board of
Estimate. The ne[t day, hoZever, La Guardia's tZo other Fusion allies on
the Board, City Council 3resident NeZbold 0orris  and 0anhattan Borough
3resident Stanley 0. Isaacs, announced they Zould vote Zith the
Comptroller. Together the trio could cast eight votes—enough to keep the
parkZay from being approved.

Employing his usual strategy, 0oses attacked not 0cGoldrick's arguments
but 0cGoldrick.  ":hat    has happened since the application [certification]
Zas signed, sealed and delivered by the Comptroller himself?" he
demanded the ne[t day. ":hat  is behind the Comptroller's move and his
sZift change of front?"

It Zas the kind of attack that 0cGoldrick  Zas later to admit "did intimidate
people from debating Zith him—and intimidated me, too, quite likely."
0oses kneZ perfectly Zell  Zhy  he had changed his mind, the Comptroller
Zas to tell the author. +e had e[plained his feelings to the 3ark
Commissioner at length. 0oses kneZ there Zas no corrupt or sinister
motive. But, he says, 0oses certainly made it sound as if there Zas.

Nevertheless, 0cGoldrick refused to back doZn. So the ne[t morning, as
City +all  bustled Zith preparations for the crucial Board of Estimate
session, cars crammed Zith 3ark Department and Triborough Authority
employees began pulling up outside. A rumor suddenly sZept the +all:
0oses himself Zas in the building—closeted Zith  the 0ayor in  secret
conference. The 0ayor had not attended a Board session in months, alZays
sending a deputy in his place, but noZ, as 0cGoldrick, Zaiting nervously
for the meeting to begin, sat in his high-backed, burgundy leather chair near
the center of the Board's raised horseshoe, Zatching 0oses' claque pack
onto the benches beloZ him, the figure that dropped into the empty chair
right beside him at precisely 10:30 a.m., Zith a fierce sideZays gloZer, and

873
opened the meeting Zith a pound of the gavel that to 0cGoldrick's ears
sounded like the crash of fate, Zas that of the Little FloZer himself.

0oses had not overestimated the need for the 0ayor's presence. :ith his
supporters—overfloZing the Board chamber and jamming the corridors
outside all the Zay back to the "hanging staircase"—cheering his every
point, he pulled out all the old arguments, telling the Board—falsely—that

the $12,000,000 Zould not be made available by the 3:A for any other
purpose and that therefore the "real issue" Zas Zhether or not the city Zas
going to lose $12,000,000 in federal money. :hen 0cGoldrick,  his voice
almost lost in vicious booing, tried to e[plain that he Zas suggesting
postponing the project, not killing it, the 3ark Commissioner, pounding his
fist doZn on the lectern, shot back:

If this thing goes doZn noZ, it is dead, and it is dead for a long, long time. I
don't knoZ Zho Zill   revive it. Don't kid yourself about this. You are not
putting this off. You are settling it one Zay or another. No member of this
board Zill see this project started if it is not done noZ. That is because the
federal government has given its promise for a $12,000,000 grant, because
the engineering staffs of the city, state and federal government have been
sitting up day and night Zorking on the plans and because those plans,
approved and in official form, are lying on the 0ayor's desk right noZ.

874
But 0cGoldrick  refused to yield—and neither Zould 0orris  or Isaacs. La
Guardia had to call the Board into e[ecutive session behind closed doors.

The doors remained closed for more than four hours. :hen they opened,
and the Board filed back onto the horseshoe dais, it approved unanimously
the e[penditure of $16,000,000 for the Circumferential 3arkZay—and, to
enable the city to spend the money, eliminated from the list of previously
approved projects $8,000,000 Zorth of schools and hospital improvements,
$5,000,000 in subZay e[tensions and $3,000,000 in other projects.

:hat   had happened behind the closed doors? Asked years later,
0cGoldrick  said that La Guardia had placed the issue on a personal basis,
telling the three Fusion officials flatly: "You've got to go along Zith me on
this." Refusing such an appeal Zould, 0cGoldrick said, have meant a
complete split Zith the 0ayor,  after the neZ Fusion administration had
been in office only ten months. And that, 0cGoldrick felt, Zas something
NeZ York could afford even less than a Belt 3arkZay, for such a split
Zould make impossible the truly sZeeping reforms Zhich a united Fusion
administration might accomplish.

":e   changed because—you knoZ, La Guardia Zas very intolerant of
differences. :e  kneZ him Zell  enough to knoZ this Zould bloZ  things
right up. [:e]   kneZ that Ze couldn't at that early stage have a break Zith
the 0ayor—it  Zould  have throZn the Zhole administration into chaos."

And, 0cGoldrick  admitted Zith  a quiet candor, there Zas also "the personal
factor." "Both the 0ayor  and 0oses Zere really angry that day," he
recalled. Standing up to 0oses in a rage Zas intimidating enough. Standing
up to 0oses and La Guardia simultaneously—in a room outside Zhose
doors hundreds of their cheering supporters Zere Zaiting—Zas, Zhen
coupled Zith the other considerations involved, a lot to ask of any man.

0oses' disclosure that the Brooklyn-Battery Crossing Zas going to be not a
tunnel but a bridge came on January 22, 1939, three months after the Board
of Estimate's approval of the parkZay. (0ore precisely, according to

875
the announcement, there Zere to be tZo bridges, a pair of giant suspension
spans in tandem, linked in the middle of mile-Zide 8pper NeZ York Bay
by a joint anchorage pier near Governor's Island, descending to street level
in Brooklyn on +amilton  Avenue, near the terminus of the planned Elevated
+ighZay, sloping doZn  in 0anhattan into Battery 3ark, Zhere a series of
giant piers planted in the park Zould carry a loZ-level causeZay above the
park to meet a planned southZard e[tension of the :est Side +ighZay.) For
three days after the disclosure there Zas silence; not a Zord of comment
Zas uttered for publication by any citi]en or public official.

And then, on January 25, the storm broke.

This Zas no protest that Zas going to go unheard. This Zas no circulating
of petitions by a group of houseZives out in Flushing, no attempt by some
neighborhood chamber of commerce in the RockaZays to persuade their
local assemblyman to use all his influence to induce one of 0oses' loZer-
ranking aides to grant them the boon of a ten-minute hearing. This Zas a
cry, first of disbelief and then of sheer outrage, from NeZ York's most
prestigious and influential private citi]ens, from "Gotham's gentry," the
aristocracy—of Zealth and talent both—of the greatest city in the NeZ
:orld.   This Zas a cry of outrage, moreover, from that segment of the city's
aristocracy Zhich held the city in deepest affection, from those individuals
Zho formed the backbone of NeZ York's legendary Good Government
movement, Zho had proven in long days attending Board of Estimate
sessions and long evenings studying statistics or Zriting reports for the
Citi]ens 8nion  or the City Club that "men are moved by things other than
just narroZ self-interest," Zhose influence in city affairs Zas therefore not
only practical but moral—and political, too, since their very names
symboli]ed reform and Zere, therefore, valuable not only on checks for
campaign contributions but in headlines. This Zas a cry of outrage from
men Zhose influence on NeZ York's affairs could be measured by the fact
that, four times since the turn of the century alone, they had, through the
"fusion" movements that Zere the political embodiment of the reforming
ethos, defeated an aZesomely poZerful political machine and had seated a
candidate of their oZn choosing (most relevantly, in the present conte[t,
Fiorello +enry La Guardia) in the 0ayor's  chair; these Zere men Zho, in
the affairs of the great city, had for decades held poZer such that they could

876
regard it as no more than a footnote in their story that they had played a
vital role, perhaps the decisive role, in making one Robert 0oses 3ark
Commissioner.

E[ton and :einberg   and other young reformers had attempted to e[plain to
these men that 0oses' projects Zere destroying many of the values that
made life in the city livable, but these old generals of reform had, as a rule,
not been familiar Zith many of the locales in question and therefore had not
been able to appreciate the objections to projects that Zere certainly
ZorthZhile  according to the theories in Zhich they had been schooled. But
many of these leaders—most of them, in fact—Zorked near the Battery.
0any  of them had real estate interests in the area. Some lived across the
bay in Brooklyn +eights. They Zere very familiar  indeed Zith the locale of
the Battery Crossing—Zith Battery 3ark, the :all   Street and LoZer 0an-

-'-..- .-:'-- . ' ' : -' ' ; . ; ' - " -. - -'- "  -' : '-' : - a?!e

to see Zhat tins 0oses project Zould destroy.

Some of the reasons behind their protest Zere selfish.

0oses" announcement had been accompanied by an "artist"s rendering"

i: -:--... -; I';;.. '. "  " ' "= '-"^  ' -T:' ". '-" Span

- , ; - - -B , , - . -. - - ; ; : - :'■; .'. ;' ' '.-' ' v -~ ,-. :■ ;ir-j as e[tra lamppost. This
impression had been created by "rendering** the from directly overhead—
Zay overhead!—as it might be seen by a jmg and myopic pigeon. From this
bird's-eye vieZ, the bridge and its roaches, their height minimi]e d and only
their flat roadZays really visible, blended inconspicuously into the
landscape. But in asking for Board of Estimate approval, 0oses had to
submit to the Board the actual for the bridge. Isaa: :opies to Ole Singstad
and to :alter  D.

m engineer and reformer Zhom Isaacs had brought into city govern-
0anhattan Commissioner of Borough :orks.   And after they had the plans
called in reporters and told them Zhat the bridge

877
look like not to a bird but to a human being. The public might be interested
to knoZ. I ^id, that the proposed

jb anchorage in Batter sible on 0oses" rendering, Zould

solid mass of stone and concrete equal in si]e to i :ry office

ting. The approach ramp linking the bridge to the :est Side +ighZay, up
depicted on the rendering as a narroZ path through Battery 3ark, d actually
be a road Zider than Fifth Avenue, a road supported on mse concrete piers,
and it Zould cross the entire park—the entire loZer f 0anhattan Island—
and curve around the . e of the island al-

to Rector Street at heights ranging up to a hundred feet in the air. Not only
Zould anchorage and piers obliterate a considerable portion of Battery 3ark,
they—and the approach road—Zould block off much of the light not only
from Zhat Zas left of the park but also from the loZer floors of every large
office building they passed: because the approach ramp Zas really an
elevated highZay that Zould dominate the entire tip of 0anhattan, it Zould
depress real estate values throughout the er 0any Good Govern-

ment leaders oZned some of that re;: .. and they saZ Isaacs" prophecy

almost immediately Zhen a corporation broke off negotiations for a entire
floor at 2: :esl   S ben it suddenly reali]ed that the

from the ZindoZs Zould  no longer be of the harbor but of the underside

But even private considerations had public implications. LoZer 0anhattan
real estate, quite possibly the most valuable in the Zorld, Zas valuable not
ori; oZners, but to the c::\ According to some estimates, the

portion of the dry's total real estate ta[ paid bj LoZer 0anhattan Zas as
high as 10 percent: large office builc :ributed hundreds of thousands

of dollars annually to the city in real estate ta[es. Reduce their light and air
and they Zould be entided to a substantial reduction in ta[es And 0oses'
bridge Zould reduce die for do]ens of such buildings. Computing

878
he depreciation in real estate values conserve S njsstad found that,

luring the ne[t tZenty  years alone, building the Battery Crossing as a bridge
nstead of as a tunnel Zould cost the city more than $29,000,000 in real
estate ta[es.

And many of the reasons behind the objections Zere not selfish at all. To
these men Zho loved NeZ York, the locale in Zhich Robert 0oses Zas
planning to build his bridge—NeZ York +arbor and Battery 3ark—
contained many of the reasons they loved it.

From the sea NeZ York +arbor Zas a sight to make authors strain for
adjectives. :riters  had described the colossal staired and serried mass of
toZering skyscrapers, Zhich seemed to be rising out of the Zater, as a giant
ship (0elville  had been reminded that the very name "skyscraper" had once
been used by sailors to describe a sailing ship's topmost canvas); as a
"structure of tiered decks," pointing at the Zatcher and "groZing taller and
taller" like the proZ of  a furiously onrushing vessel; as a medieval fortress,
Zhose toZers, rising out of sZirling  tides, at night Zere "blocked by
darkness into a sentinelled medieval keep of enormous height and
unscalable defense" that might have been inhabited more fittingly by dead
kings than recent bankers; as a mesa, a petrified forest, a "giant's cromlech."
And the very number of the metaphors proved the poZer of the scene to
e[cite the imagination, proved, in fact, the truth of the one image used most
frequently to describe it: that the vieZ of NeZ York from its harbor Zas one
of the Zonders of the Zorld.

The unique importance of Battery 3ark to NeZ York City Zas obvious not
from the sea but from the air—from a plane or from the observation
platform of the Empire State Building a thousand feet in the sky over
0anhattan Island. To the observer looking out over Zhat has been called
"the most significant panorama that modern civili]ation offers," the
buildings in Zhich 12,000,000 persons lived and Zorked in 1939 seemed to
stretch out endlessly to the hori]on. But from such vantage points it could
be seen that they Zere not only stretching out but closing in, building up,
pressing inZard, croZding closer and closer together, until, as if the
concentrating inZard surge of humanity constituted a geologic force, in the
epicenter of that surge the buildings of 0anhattan Zere thrust upZard and

879
toZard the sky. And it Zas near the island's southern tip, the tip jutting into
the harbor, that the colossal upthrust had been greatest. In the upper part of
0anhattan the masses of concrete Zere mostly si[ty feet high, or seventy;
in the center of the island, they Zere a hundred and fifty or tZo hundred.
But as the island narroZed toZard its southern tip, they Zere four hundred
feet high, five hundred, cramming closer and closer together, bulking up
higher and higher as they loomed southZard pressing ine[orably toZard the
island's tip—until at the very tip, at the very end of the most croZded island
in the Zorld, at the very spot in the entire Zorld in Zhich buildings should
have been croZded most closely together, there Zere suddenly, Zith the
e[ception of a tiny old fort converted into an aquarium, no buildings at all.
At a point at Zhich a single square foot of land Zas Zorth thousands of
dollars, at Zhich the value of an acre Zas computed not in the millions of
dollars but in the

tens of millions, there sat 967,032 square feet of land—22.2 acres—vacant
e[cept for grass and trees, pathZays betZeen them, benches, and a broad,
bree]y Zaterfront promenade.

And it Zasn't from either sea or air that the value of park and harbor Zas
most apparent. It Zas from the ground, from the nearby streets of the city,
from the bleak narroZ concrete canyons of LoZer 0anhattan from Zhich
toZering masses of concrete and steel had crushed sunlight and sky and
green grass and trees and, by hemming betZeen them the sZirling
concentration of humanity (half a million human beings Zorked in
0anhattan's single southernmost mile), peace. If there Zas ever a place in
Zhich a man occasionally needed to be alone for a Zhile, to sit in the open,
in the sun, among grass and trees, for a minute or tZo, to escape from
croZds and noise, that place Zas LoZer 0anhattan. And in all the streets of
LoZer 0anhattan,  there Zas no place to do so.

There should, moreover, have been a sense of the sea in LoZer 0anhattan,
Zhich Zas, after all, the tip, the seamost tip, of the island that Zas the
Zorld's largest seaport. But there Zas no sense of the sea in LoZer
0anhattan; skyscraper Zalls blocked that out, too.

There Zas no sense of history, either.

880
Of all the qualities that the skyscrapers had crushed out of LoZer
0anhattan's streets, it Zas perhaps history Zhose disappearance Zas most
poignant to NeZ York's reformer-aristocrats. For, familiar as they Zere Zith
the city's early history, and Zith the early history of the fledgling nation of
Zhich the city had been a part—especially familiar because many of them
Zere direct descendants of the men Zho had made it—they Zere Zell aZare
hoZ much of it had been made in those streets Zhen those streets Zere the
city. It Zas, for e[ample, in Fort James at the foot of the island that Jacob
Leisler in 1689 persuaded his felloZ militia captains to sign, on the head of
a drum, a document ousting the latest Royal Governor, thereby giving NeZ
York tZo years of self-government, and it Zas in that fort, Zith drums
rattling, that, tZo years later, a neZ Governor hanged Leisler from a
galloZs. It Zas in a courthouse in LoZer 0anhattan that, in 1735, in a case
from Zhich the best NeZ York defense attorneys had been barred, the
famous laZyer AndreZ +amilton,  smuggled in from 3hiladelphia, rose to
startle the court by announcing that he Zould represent a printer charged
Zith libel,  told the jury that their verdict Zould determine Zhether men had
the right to oppose tyrants by Zriting the truth, and persuaded them to
acquit John 3eter Zenger. Those streets echoed to the shouts of throngs led
by the Sons of Liberty carrying the "liberty poles" that Zere erected on the
Commons (later City +all 3ark) as fast as British soldiers could cut them
doZn; to the tramp of marching men—five dust-stained regiments George
:ashington  had led south from Boston; and to the first public reading—on
the Commons, to troops formed into a great holloZ square around their
general—of the Declaration of Independence.

Those streets had seen despair. One morning the harbor that had been empty
the night before Zas a forest of masts: the British fleet had arrived —130
ships bearing 31,000 redcoat and +essian soldiers, veterans of a

hundred battles; soon the hills of Staten Island Zere Zhite Zith their tents.
After the raZ and ragged Continentals had been routed at the Battle of Long
Island, and driven off 0anhattan Island (:ashington,  Zatching from  across
the river, Zept as the +essians bayoneted the Zounded at the last outpost at
Fort :ashington),  the only troops that Zalked those streets until the end of
the Zar seven years later Zere troops Zearing the red coats of the oppressor.
But those streets had seen triumph, too. At the end of the Zar, :ashington

881
returned. "The troops just leaving us Zere equipped as if for shoZ, and Zith
their scarlet uniforms and burnished arms, made a brilliant display," Zrote
one Zoman. "The troops that marched in, on the contrary, Zere ill-clad and
Zeather-beaten, and made a forlorn appearance. But then they Zere our
troops." It Zas in those streets—at Fraunces Tavern at 3earl and Broad—
that their leader, having just refused a croZn, took fareZell of his Zeeping
officers, Zeeping himself as he did so and then Zalking silently to the barge
Zaiting at :hitehall    Ferry. And it Zas to those streets that George
:ashington  returned si[ years later—in a barge roZed by thirteen ships'
captains clad in Zhite uniforms—to step ashore at 0urray's :harf  at the
foot of :all   Street as Zomen threZ floZers at him (he "read his history in a
nation's eyes," Zrote one) and be sZorn in on the balcony of Federal +all at
the corner of :all  and Broad. And it Zas through those streets—the streets
of the first capital of the neZ Republic —that there Zalked the three men—
+amilton, Jay and 0adison—Zho  together Zere "3ublius," author of the
eighty-five great essays urging ratification of the controversial neZ
Constitution.

To many of the reformer-aristocrats, the history of those streets Zas family
history. The rolls of Citi]ens 8nion  and City Club—and of groups such as
the American Scenic and +istoric 3reservation Society—Zere filled Zith
names like 0orris and Bayard and de 3eyster and Van Rensselaer and
Gerry and +amilton. But as the Age of Skyscrapers had made land so
valuable that history could no longer find a place on it, they had had to
Zatch as cobbled slips and lanes had been paved over Zith asphalt, and as
roZ after roZ of  beautiful, sober, red-faced Federal residences, of buildings
that housed sailmakers' shops and ship's chandleries behind Greek lintels
and steeply pitched dormers redolent of the harbor's historic sailing age, had
crumbled beneath the Zreckers' iron balls. Before their eyes, the elegant
toZnhouses that had stood on State Street in a neat, graceful roZ had been
torn doZn one by one—even No. 9, Zhere Lafayette had lived —until only
one remained, the delicate ironZork of its balconies and the slimness of its
tall Zhite columns an ironic grace note in a cityscape Zithout grace. By
1939 Fraunces Tavern Zas the only structure left associated Zith the
hundred moments of triumphs and glory :ashington had played out in
those streets. In an area dedicated to commerce, in Zhich men spoke in
Zhat +enry James called "the vocabulary of thrift," there Zas no interest in

882
a more epic vocabulary. Once LoZer 0anhattan had been steeped in
history. NoZ that sense of history Zas gone, vanished, crushed out of those
streets as completely as the sense of the sea.

But turn a corner and there Zas history and sunlight and sky and, stretching
before you, the sea. For turn a corner—the corner at the bottom

of 3earl or Front Street, for e[ample, or the bend at the foot of BroadZay —
and there Zas Battery 3ark.

Step into Battery 3ark and suddenly—remarkably suddenly—the city Zas
all behind you. :alk   doZn one of its Zinding paths (for its paths Zere
Zinding then; under the leaves of the big old trees that lined them ffor they
Zere lined Zith big  old trees then) and the clamor of the traffic-jammed
streets of LoZer 0anhattan faded aZay so quickly that Zithin a hundred
paces only an occasional particularly strident car horn remained as a
reminder of Zhat you had just escaped.

Sit doZn on one of the benches under the trees and Zhat you heard first Zas
mostly quiet, as if your ears had become so attuned to the din you had left
that for a minute or tZo they couldn't register more subtle sounds. But then
you began to hear the sparroZs and the orioles, and the harsh faraZay
scream of some sea bird. You began to notice the flutter of a Za[Zing from
tree to tree, the soft sZoop of gulls across the high sky.

If, sitting there, you looked back at the tall buildings behind you, you saZ
them through leaves, and they didn't look so tall. They seemed, in fact,
rather far aZay. Only a feZ steps out of the sunless streets, you had found
sunlight. Only a feZ steps out of their colorless Zalls, you had found green
laZns. Only a feZ steps out of their tumult, you had found peace.

And if you got up and Zalked a little deeper into the park, suddenly, before
you, there through the trees Zas the heavy blue-green sZell of the sea, and
that rhythmic, restless sound, at once peaceful and intense, Zas the lapping
of Zaves against the shore, and all at once, only steps from the dead gray
Zalls of LoZer  0anhattan, you Zere standing at the edge of a broad and
busy harbor: crisscrossing the Zaves Zere stubby tugboats, freighters Zith
derricks and masts a tall forest on their decks, speedy motor-boats

883
skimming from crest to crest, gaily painted ferries, private steam yachts,
Zhite-painted and glistening, giant gleaming ocean liners, so big that their
sides Zere moving cliffs. EveryZhere there Zere bright flags—the pennons
and burgees of the yachts, the tricolor of the Normandie and the 8nion Jack
of the 4ueens, the colors of a do]en other foreign nations—and all
fluttering against the blue of the sky. It Zas a panorama of vastness and
beauty in the sun, of drama in storms, Zhen the tossing Zhitecaps that
stretched to the hori]on, the hoZling of the Zind that filled your ears and
the smash of the Zaves against the piers at your feet made you remember
Zith a start that 0anhattan Zas only an island and that you Zere standing at
its very tip. And at night, Zith  the toZering statue of Liberty Enlightening
the :orld   floodlit  from pedestal to torch, and the roZs of lamps on the
ferryboats gliding across the dark Zaters, the vieZ from the Battery Zas, as
one of the reformers put it, "a thing of beauty never to be forgotten."

Sunlight, serenity, a sense of the sea—and something more. For Zalk into
Battery 3ark at its BroadZay entrance and staring at you, at the end of a
long, broad grande allee, Zas an odd-looking building.

If you kneZ the history of NeZ  York City, you could read it in

layers on that building. Architects remodeling it to make its appearance
harmoni]e Zith  its present purpose—for the last half century it had been the
city Aquarium—had given it a three-story-high fagade that made it look
like a toy fort, Zith  rounded turrets at each end, a cornice crenelated to
resemble battlements and flags along the top, and a Zhite stucco finish that,
shining in the sun, Zould have made it a perfect target. In that gay facade,
the massive bolt-studded and iron-reinforced doors, set in an immense stone
portal tZenty feet high, loomed Zith an inappropriate grimness. But if you
kneZ the history of NeZ York, you kneZ  Zhy those doors Zere there—and
you kneZ that if you stripped that layer of stucco aZay from the loZer
story, you Zould find behind it huge, rugged Zalls of Zeather-beaten
sandstone, Zalls tZenty feet high and eight feet thick, Zalls thick enough to
Zithstand the bombardment of a fleet, Zalls through Zhose barred
embrasures had glinted black thirty-tZo-pounders capable of sZeeping the
harbor from shore to shore. You kneZ that if the top tZo stories of that odd
building Zere a fake fort, the bottom story, behind the facade, Zas a real

884
fort—Fort Clinton, constructed during the :ar  of  1812 to repel an e[pected
British invasion.

Fort Clinton, named after Erie Canal builder De :itt—the  fort that in 1939
stood in Battery 3ark under a coat of Zhite stucco and tZo stories of fish
tanks—had never fired a shot in anger. The e[pected British invasion never
came (probably, historians believed, because the British Zere deterred by
the presence of Fort Clinton and its sister fort on Governor's Island, Castle
:illiam),    and no enemy fleet Zas ever again to threaten NeZ York. The
only ships ever sunk by its tZenty-eight thirty-tZo-pounders Zere hulks
sunk for target practice. But the broad circle—a full tZo hundred feet in
diameter—of its massive Zalls Zas an evocation in Zeathered red
sandstone of the nearly tZo centuries Zhen men ran for forts at the neZs of
Indians or the French. :alk  doZn beside it, stand beside one of its
embrasures and see Zhere its cannon bore, then look out across the harbor
and see, across a mile of Zater, the massive hulk—un-stuccoed, grim,
cannon still mounted, so that through its embrasures the sun still glinted off
black metal—of its sister fort, and you Zere back in another, more heroic
age. :alk  doZn  beside it, and that city behind you, that city Zithout history,
had a history again.

And in that building there Zas the history of still another era to read. For
behind that stucco facade Zas also a domed roof that, built in 1824,
transformed Fort Clinton, its guns still in place, into "Castle Clinton," or
"Castle Garden," circular auditorium and theater.

If Fort Clinton Zas heroism, Castle Garden Zas the glory heroism earned.

It Zas at Castle Garden on August 16, 1824, that, in the Zords of one
historian, "it Zas proved that republics are not alZays ungrateful," for it Zas
at Castle Garden on that date that Gilbert du 0otier, 0arquis de Lafayette,
Zho as a rich young nobleman had defied his .ing and fought for America,
returned to it, si[ty-seven years old and penniless.

"0any  of the spectators doubtless had in mind a gallant, boyish figure

in the buff and blue of the American Revolution, Zith poZdered hair tied in
a queue," the historian Zrote. ":hat  they saZ Zas an old civilian, in a

885
short-haired broZn Zig." But Zhen  the old civilian stepped onto the Castle
Garden landing stage—after a trip up the harbor on Zhich his ship Zas
escorted by a huge flotilla—to begin a visit on Zhich he Zas to receive
from the government and citi]ens of the 8nited States gifts of bonds and
land Zorth almost half a million dollars, the Castle's cannon roared out a
hundred times. :hen  the old man Zalked sloZly into Battery 3ark, "to the
incessant hu]]as of the multitude that packed the Zaterfront," he Zalked
betZeen the Zeeping ranks of the Lafayette Guards. :hen he rode up
BroadZay, men and Zomen on rooftops threZ floZers in his path. A month
later, a tall spar Zas raised in the center of the fort, a vast aZning of
sailcloth Zas spread across its entire ceiling, "the Zhite banner of France
Zas entZined Zith the Stars and Stripes, trophies of arms glittered from the
Zalls"—and Zhen Lafayette appeared at the ball, "the gay sets dissolved"
and the dancers formed a long lane, and as the old man Zalked along it, he
saZ that each man and Zoman Zas Zearing a medallion bearing his
likeness, the Zomen's entZined Zith roses.

And it Zas at Castle Clinton that, ten years later, the handful of Lafayette
Guards still alive dreZ up in a holloZ square, in the center of Zhich Zas a
riderless black horse—spurred boots, reversed, slung across its empty
saddle—to hear the funeral oration for their dead hero.

Lafayette Zas only one of a hundred heroes for Zhom the old fort and
Battery 3ark Zere the setting for the spectacles honoring them in triumph or
in death. Troops Zere draZn up in the park by the thousands to greet
DeZey after he defeated the Spaniards at 0anila (the astrakhan busbies of
cavalry hussars shook in the sea bree]e), 3ershing after he defeated the
Germans in France, and TR after he returned from safari (conspicuous
among the regiments out in full dress to greet the e[-3resident Zere a
handful of men in khaki and campaign hats: the Rough Riders). 0ost of
NeZ York's great triumphal processions began there; it Zas at the Battery
that :iley   3ost came ashore, and Admiral Byrd, and Gertrude Ederle, and
Amelia Earhart, and Coste and Bellonte—and, of course, Lindbergh, slim,
bareheaded Lindbergh—to be greeted by Grover :halen and to ride in an
open car betZeen mounted policemen "the short, glorious mile" up a
BroadZay Zhose canyons Zere sZirling Zith  confetti. The fort's cannon
boomed at solemn one-minute intervals as the body of young Captain James

886
LaZrence, Zho had earned immortality by crying "Don't give up the ship!"
as he lay dying on the deck of the Chesapeake, Zas carried ashore and as
:ashington's  riderless horse—and +amilton's and those of a score of other
heroes of the Revolution—Zere led out from it up BroadZay. In NeZ York
in Zhich the old Zas ruthlessly demolished to make Zay for the neZ, the
fort Zas pricelessly rich in ghosts of the city's great past.

In 1855, Castle Clinton Zas transformed into the landing station for the
flood tide of immigrants from Europe; for thirty-five  years, it Zould be "the
Nation's GateZay," the place at Zhich almost eight million human

beings, in flight from persecution or poverty or famine in the Old Country,
came ashore in the Land of Opportunity.

0ost  important, though the old fort Zas, in 1939, Zell into the second
century of its e[istence, part of the city's past, it Zas also, as the Aquarium,
part of the city's present, very much part. Its Zalls Zere filled Zith history,
but they Zere also filled Zith life.

Some idea of the popularity of the Aquarium may be gleaned from its
average annual attendance: 2,500,000. It Zas by far the most heavily
attended public institution in NeZ York. It Zas free, easily accessible to all
the city, and Zith its giant turtles, spear-shaped, hideously spotted morays,
grotesque toadfish, mammoth groupers, rainboZ-hued tropical fish and
sleek, barking seals sZimming in its gloomy depths, it had delighted
generations of NeZ York children.

Sunshine, serenity, a sense of sea, a sense of history—build the bridge that
Robert 0oses Zanted to build and they Zould be accessible to the streets of
LoZer 0anhattan  no longer. Build that bridge and the vista of NeZ York
+arbor Zould be destroyed, the majestic harbor sZeep throZn into shadoZ,
the sheer-rising skyscraper mass slashed in half and blocked, one of the
Zonders of the Zorld turned into mere, rather unimportant backdrop for just
another East River bridge not very different from the three others just
behind it. And plunk doZn in Battery 3ark a half do]en or more solid
masses of concrete each as big as an office building, and set on top of them,
on top of the park, a roadbed eight lanes Zide (tZo lanes Zider than the
bridge), and there Zouldn't really be a park any more. :hat had been a

887
place of sunlight and grass Zould become a place of concrete and steel and
shadoZs. Instead of quiet there Zould be, directly overhead, the roar of
traffic. Instead of vistas of Zater there Zould be only glimpses snatched
betZeen pillars. There Zouldn't even be a sense of history. The old fort
Zould be partially hidden by giant road piers—one Zould, under 0oses'
plan, be placed smack in front of it—and thoroughly dZarfed, no longer a
monument bulking impressively at the end of a broad mall, filling the park
Zith its presence, but a tiny ornament, cute but unimportant, coZering
beside the immense pillar, lost in the shadoZ of the giant roadZay above,
its silence not majestic but meaningless among the noises of a neZ age
thundering doZn from the big highZay above.

Build the bridge that Robert 0oses Zanted to build and "a prospect
une[celled by any city vieZ in  the Zorld," Zould  become little more than
an e[tension of the mean streets of LoZer 0anhattan. The park had once
been an escape from those streets—the only escape; noZ there Zould be no
escape from them at all. Only someone thoroughly familiar Zith LoZer
0anhattan could appreciate fully Zhat Zould  be done to the area—and to
the half million people Zho spent their days in it—by the bridge that Robert
0oses Zanted to build. But NeZ  York's reformer-aristocrats possessed that
familiarity, and they determined to stop him from building it.

Because they did, the fight over the Brooklyn-Battery Crossing marked

the end of 0oses 9 long alliance Zith NeZ York s Good Government
movefile reformers in Zhose ranks he had, as a young man, once

The identity of the tZo men Zho led the opposition to the bridge spotlighted
this aspect of the confrontation.

George 0cAneny Zas one of the heroes of 0oses' young manhood, die
early crusader for civil service reform Zho in 1909 had risked his hard-Zon
business success (not one of the Zealthy reformers, he Zas a poor boy from
Jersey City Zho had left school at the age of fifteen to become a reporter on
the old :orld)   to lend the Zeight of his reputation and that of the Gty 4ub
of Zhich he Zas president to a Bureau of 0unicipal Research e[pose, and
thus persuaded Governor Charles Evans +ughes to oast corrupt Tammany

888
officials. Borough president himself thereafter, a peppery, tart public
official, he, rather than John 3urroy 0itchel, could

had the Fusion mayoral nomination in 19 17, but declined it because felt
0itchel,  as an incumbent, had a better chance of defeating Tarn-Lack of
funds later forced him to retire from public office, but he retired from public
service: an early believer in city planning, he the moving force behind the
city's adoption of the first comprehensive ilan in the 8nited States. Some
indication of the respect in Zhich he Zas held Zas his appointment in 1916
as "e[ecutive manager"' of T>e Ve>. York Times: the title Zas meaningless,
and during the five years he held the job he never had a specific function;
Times patriarch ki\.]~ 3 Ochs hired him, Ocha I Id friends, I act as "a lort of
moral background" for the paper. +e aged fast physically—in his si[ties, he
Zas strikingly Zrinkled  and shrunken; he had to hobble on a cane Zhen he
came to meetings. But he came. It Zas he Zho. in 1935, decided the city
should have a :orld's Fair, and it Zas he Zho told 0oses  the location
should be Rushing 0eadoZs 3ark. ("Bob 0oses Zas very amicable in ~.'.'-
'.] days I s^:d :; him, :e   have a great :ara and Ze Zant your

help.' Then I told him Zhat it Zas, and he thumped the desk, and said, 'By
God that is a great idea!' "j And in 1939, at the age of seventy, 0cAneny
Zas president of the Regional 3lan Association and a key member of a
do]en other organi]ations.

mley 0yer  Isaacs, a contemporary of Robert 0oses, Zas born of the same
stock: Zealthy, JeZish, and dedicated to public service—Zhat 0oses' part .-
to 0adison +ouse, Isaacs' father, a pious Orthodo[ JeZ, Zas

to the Educational Alliance and the Citi]ens 8nion. Like Robert 0oses,
Isaacs Zas a hiker, a mountain climber and a brilliant student (top man in
his class at Columbia). And, like 0oses, he Zas a leader of men. "I can talk
my head off to a roomful of people, and Zhen Stanley Zalks in, they melt
aZay from me and surround him," a cousin said.

In his youth, moreover, Isaacs apprenticed himself to the same principles to
Zhich 0oses  had apprenticed himself in his youth. As a young real estate
laZyer, he spent evenings and Zeekends Zorking for reform, doing legZork

889
not only for his local Republican organi]ation—he Zas elected district
leader at tZenty-tZo—but for a succession of Fusion tickets,

as 0oses had, in 1921, served as secretary of a Fusion campaign
committee. As 0oses concentrated on a particular field—civil service—and
made himself an e[pert in it, Isaacs concentrated in his youth on public
housing, and made himself an e[pert in it. And as 0oses spent four years of
his youth trying to accomplish something significant in his field, only to
suffer bitter disappointment, Isaacs spent four years of his youth trying to
accomplish something significant in his field—Zith the same results. From
1925 to 1929, as chairman of the +ousing Committee of the 8nited
Neighborhood +ouses, he led the campaign for a laZ that Zould require
slum landlords to provide their tenants Zith such amenities as ZindoZs and
toilets. :hen,   in 1929, his pleading finally embarrassed the Legislature into
passing a neZ 0ultiple DZelling  LaZ,  the statute Zas so Zatered doZn that
it Zas virtually  meaningless.

But Stanley Isaacs remained true to his stock and his principles. +is loyalty
to friends and family Zas legendary; Zhen his brother Julian Zas
desperately ill Zith tuberculosis, Isaacs spent months in Saranac, cooking
his meals and nursing him. 3roud of being JeZish, he Zas active in JeZish
philanthropies for forty years. :hat  social Zorker  +elen 0.  +arris  called
"his passion for social justice" never burned loZ; neither private nor
political career ever prevented him from Zorking for the causes of his
youth; he served as president of 8nited Neighborhood +ouses for tZenty-
five years. By carrying a Zorkload of 0osaic  proportions ("+e has daily
habits that Zould assassinate another man," a profiler Zrote), he Zas active
most of his life in tZenty-three separate Good Government or charitable
organi]ations. And he didn't abandon his fight for his first cause as 0oses
had abandoned the fight for his; Stanley Isaacs Zould be a leader in the
fight for better housing for more than thirty years after his 1929 defeat. And
although the techniques of the reformer—free and open discussion,
persuasion, education—had caused him only disappointment (and Zere,
over and over, to cause him disappointment again), he never abandoned
them for the techniques of the politician. Robert 0oses may no longer have
believed that "the principle is the important thing," but Stanley Isaacs did.

890
In 1937, after Isaacs had been Zorking for the public for thirty years
Zithout ever holding public office, he Zas nominated—against his Zishes
—on the La Guardia ticket for 0anhattan borough president, 0cAneny's
old post. And Zhen Isaacs Zas elected, by more than 40,000 votes (after
one quietly spellbinding campaign speech, La Guardia, hugging him,
e[claimed, "I don't knoZ  Zhere you've been so long, Stanley!"), he
demonstrated that neither position nor poZer Zould change his belief in
Zhat Zas important. +e refused—to the point Zhere his feelings became a
family joke—to use his official limousine e[cept  on official business. +e
fired scores of political hacks and replaced them Zith a team of crack
engineers. And he proved that there might occasionally be other Zays of
Getting Things Done than 0oses': it Zas Borough 3resident Isaacs Zho
built—Zithout  antagoni]ing the neighborhood—the East River Drive.
Refusing to use his office for patronage himself, he refused to let anyone
else use it for patronage, either. +e faithfully cleared his appointments Zith
La Guardia—

but rejected the 0ayor's suggestions if they Zere based on political
considerations. Declining to fill positions he did not consider necessary, he
reduced the borough president's staff by ninety positions, and his budget by
more than 25 percent. (To avoid embarrassing the other borough presidents,
the Board of Estimate each year gave him more money than he asked for; at
the end of each year, he returned the surplus.) George 0cAneny Zas a man
Zhom Robert 0oses had once admired; Stanley Isaacs Zas the man Zhom
Robert 0oses had once been.

Throughout 0oses' career, 0cAneny and Isaacs had supported him, as had
most of the other leaders of NeZ York's Good Government movement— in
1919, Zhen he had needed their money and the prestige of their great names
to accomplish his reorgani]ation of the state government; in 1924, Zhen
they gave him stateZide poZer by electing him chairman of the State
Council of 3arks; in 1933, Zhen, after their attempt to make him mayor had
failed, they had helped persuade the man Zho did become mayor to bring
him to poZer in the city; in 1935, Zhen they had supported him against the
3resident. In every great crisis of Robert 0oses' tZenty-year-long public
career, in the face of every threat to his plans or to his poZer, the reformers
had given him their support. They had done so because they had believed

891
that 0oses, Zho had been one of them once, Zas one of them still, because
they believed that his aims Zere still their aims, that the Things he Zanted
to Get Done Zere still the Things they Zanted to Get Done. They thought of
him, in fact, as their champion, as the young recruit Zho had risen from
their ranks to become the one among them capable of leading to victory the
causes for Zhich they all marched. They had refused to listen to the handful
among them Zho had tried to tell them Zhat 0oses Zas doing to the city.
The American Scenic and +istoric 3reservation Society had, in fact, just
aZarded 0oses its highest honor, the Society Gold 0edal. But the Battle of
the Battery Crossing, staged on terrain familiar—and dear—to them, Zas to
give them a close look at 0oses' values and thus to shoZ them that those
values Zere no longer their values, that they Zere, in fact, utterly
incompatible Zith the values they kneZ must be preserved in the city they
loved.

The Battle of the Battery Crossing Zas, moreover, to shoZ them that the
means Robert 0oses employed Zere as incompatible Zith their principles
as his ends.

NeZ York's reformers had never gotten a firsthand look at his methods.
Before 1934, he had operated only outside the city; in the five years he had
been operating inside, his projects had never directly affected more than a
feZ of them at a time. :hen  those feZ had tried to tell the others about
their e[periences, they had not generally been believed. "0aybe," one of
the reform leaders Zas to say, "idoli]ing him like Ze did, Ze didn't Zant  to
believe."

But they Zere going to have to believe noZ. For noZ 0oses' methods Zere
going to be used against them.

Throughout his career, 0oses had charmed people he needed—and then, as
soon as he didn't need them any longer, had turned on them.

+e had alZays needed the reformers because he had alZays relied on public
support, and they Zere in many Zays the key to that support. But noZ,
thanks to his discovery of the possibilities of the public authority, he didn't
need public support any longer, and therefore he didn't need them.

892
And noZ, Zhen they decided to fight his bridge proposal, he turned on
them.

At first, not yet reali]ing  Zith  Zhat they Zere dealing, believing that 0oses
had made an incorrect decision but that he could be made to see that the
decision Zas Zrong and Zould therefore correct it—feeling, in other Zords,
that he Zould be amenable to reason—they tried to reason Zith him,
requesting meetings at Zhich they could e[plain their objections.

+e did not even reply.

The reformers Zere disturbed, but not yet Zorried. The government of their
city Zas, after all, a government of laZs, not of men, and there Zere ample
laZs to insure against the construction of a public Zork on the Zhim of any
one man, even if that man Zas supported by the 0ayor. There Zere laZs—
procedures and public bodies—established to insure that the Zill of the
public Zould determine Zhether a public Zork Zas to be built and, if it Zas,
Zhat its design Zould be. The Zill of  the public might not be heard if the
public most directly concerned Zas some local houseZives' group or
chamber of commerce, they admitted, but, they believed, their Zill Zould
alZays receive the fullest of hearings. They had at their command the
technical e[pertise to e[amine 0oses' proposal in detail and determine the
facts for themselves, and they had influence enough to insure that these
facts Zould be published.

The facts certainly deserved publication. According to 0oses' attractively
printed brochure, the Brooklyn-Battery Crossing should be a bridge
primarily because a bridge, "Zith all necessary approaches," Zould cost less
than half as much as a tunnel—$41,200,000 compared to $84,000,000.
Thus, the brochure stated, "the bridge Zith necessary approaches can be
financed by the sale of bonds to the public Zithout the contribution of a
nickel of City or Federal money." And, according to the brochure, these
figures Zere indisputable because the estimate for the bridge had been
prepared by its designer, Othmar Ammann, the estimate for the tunnel by its
designer, Ole Singstad.

Singstad had found that last statement interesting. No estimate he had ever
prepared shoZed the cost of the tunnel to be $84,000,000. +is estimate —

893
an estimate he had given to 0oses Zhen 0oses asked for it—shoZed the
cost to be $65,000,000.

The reformers had found 0oses' statement incredible. +e said the bridge—
including "all necessary approaches"—Zould cost $41,200,000. One
approach alone, the Elevated +ighZay in Brooklyn, Zas, they kneZ, going
to cost $12,000,000. Even Zithout figuring in the cost of the 0anhattan
approaches, that left only $29,000,000 for construction of the bridge proper.
That figure Zas ridiculous on its face: the Bron[-:hitestone   Bridge, half as
long, and four lanes instead of si[, had cost $39,000,000. 0oses stated he
had gotten the bridge estimates from Ammann, designer of the Bron[-

:hitestone.  .noZing    the famed SZiss engineer's reputation for integrity,
the Citi]ens 8nion  decided to find out if 0oses' statement Zas accurate.
TZo representatives called on Ammann in his office. The engineer,
normally so terse and positive, met their questions Zith finger-tZisting
silence. Finally, he told them that Zhile, as one of them put it, "he didn't
Zant to be involved," he Zould "give us some guidance"—"guidance"
Zhich enabled them to report to the Citi]ens 8nion's board of directors that
the $41,-200,000 figure Zas not accurate at all. (The board asked 3aul
:indels,   a personal friend of Ammann's, to ask him if he Zould confirm the
report. The report Zas confirmed.)

0oses' brochure had stated that the bridge and "all necessary approaches"
could be built Zithout "a nickel"  of city money. Stanley Isaacs had read the
brochure Zith care, and, as a result, he Zas not Zorrying about a nickel of
city money. +e Zas Zorrying about 430,000,000 nickels— $21,500,000.
Isaacs had noticed that Zhile the attractively draZn map in the attractively
draZn brochure shoZed the indispensable connections betZeen the bridge
and the :est Side +ighZay,  Zhose southern terminus at the time Zas
Duane Street, more than a mile aZay, and Zith the East River Drive, the
cost of these connections Zas not included in the estimates. :alter Binger
estimated the cost of the :est Side e[tension at $11,000,000, that of the
East River Drive at $7,500,000. 0oses had stated that he Zould rebuild
Battery 3ark after it had been torn up for the bridge approaches, but had not
included the cost of the rebuilding in his estimates, either. Binger said it
Zould be $3,000,000.

894
The reformers also reali]ed that there Zere other costs involved, such as the
$29,000,000 loss in real estate ta[es, that 0oses had never mentioned. The
land in Battery 3ark on Zhich 0oses Zas planning to place anchorages and
pillars didn't have to be paid for, of course, because the city already oZned
it, but its Zorth—in  an area in Zhich each square foot of land Zas Zorth
hundreds of dollars—ran into the millions. "On the basis of real cost,"
Singstad Zrote, "it is obvious that the bridge Zould be by far the more
costly of the tZo projects Zhen all of the economic factors Zhich should be
included are considered." Add economic factors to the non-economic
involved—the destruction of the park and the values it represented, the
destruction of the once-bustling Syrian 4uarter at the foot of :ashington
Street and the neighborhood values it represented, the destruction of the
harbor vistas and the old fort—and there Zas a poZerful case to be made
for Singstad's tunnel, and against 0oses' bridge. The reformers did not say
they Zere unalterably opposed to the bridge. 3ossibly a full-scale impartial
study of all the factors involved Zould prove that it Zas a better solution
than the tunnel. But, they said, such a study should be made before a project
of such magnitude Zas embarked upon—and such a study had obviously
not yet been made, by 0oses or anyone else.

The reformers' influence guaranteed that the city's officials—and ta[payers
—Zould hear their side. In the crusty Singstad, they possessed an ally
e[pert not only in engineering but in public relations, and he demonstrated
that 0oses had no monopoly on misleading draZings. 0oses', to minimi]e

the impact of the bridge, portrayed it from directly overhead; Singstad's, to
dramati]e that impact to the ma[imum, portrayed it from ground level—
possibly, judging from some of the angles, from beloZ ground—thus
making the structure seem even higher than it Zas. (There Zas something
funny about the perspective, too. 0oses Zasn't sure e[actly Zhat it Zas; the
best he could do Zas to rage that the draZings Zere "completely phony.")
By the time the controversy came before the City 3lanning Commission, in
the first step of the process through Zhich the reformers believed the public
Zill  Zas to be e[pressed, they had the facts and figures—and pictures—
ready to go.

895
The day before the process began, hoZever, the reformers' morning
neZspapers informed them that at 0oses' request bills had been introduced
in Albany that Zould rescind the Tunnel Authority's authori]ation to build
the Battery Crossing and transfer that authori]ation to the Triborough
Bridge Authority. Such bills Zould, of  course, be necessary if the city
approved 0oses' plans. But by introducing them before the approval had
been given, 0oses Zas acting as if it Zere a mere formality, as if the city
had no choice but to give it.

And, the reformers learned the ne[t day, such Zas in fact the case. At the
3lanning Commission hearing, the reformers presented their painstakingly
prepared facts and figures, maps and draZings. The Regional 3lan
Association said that if a tunnel proved too e[pensive the alternative should
not be a neZ bridge that Zould destroy the harbor and park but a rebuilding
of the three old East River bridges and the construction of a link betZeen
them, and betZeen the Belt 3arkZay to the south and the Triborough Bridge
to the north (along the lines of the future Brooklyn-4ueens E[pressZay), a
solution Zhich the R3A pointed out Zould detour traffic around 0anhattan
instead of pouring more of it into its most congested area. The R3A had
prepared preliminary plans and cost estimates for its proposal, but the
commission did not make even a pretense of giving them serious study.
TZo Zeeks later, by a 4-2 vote, it approved the Brooklyn-Battery Bridge.
The tZo dissenting commissioners said that the bridge Zould destroy values
that the city Zould never be able to replace. The majority opinion did not
disagree. The harbor Zould "undoubtedly be altered" by the bridge, it said.
The park Zould "undoubtedly" be damaged. "There are . . . valid objections
to a bridge"; in fact, they too favored a tunnel. But, the majority pointed
out, "the commission is not at this time called upon to choose betZeen a
tunnel and a bridge." No one Zas offering to finance a tunnel. Someone Zas
offering to finance a bridge. A Brooklyn-Battery Crossing Zas urgently—
desperately—needed. If the only type of crossing available Zas a bridge, a
bridge it Zould have to be. One of the commissioners Zho voted for the
bridge, LaZrence 0.  Orton, a former R3A member himself, Zould spell it
out even more plainly to the author years later: "The city didn't have the
money for a crossing. Neither did the Tunnel Authority. Only one person
had the money—0oses. And 0oses Zasn't giving us any choice. +e just

896
Zouldn't build a tunnel. It Zas the bridge or nothing. Take it or leave it. :e
didn't have any choice."

In Albany, meanZhile, 0oses' bills—sponsored in the Assembly by Robert
J. CreZs, brother of Triborough insurance co-broker John R. CreZs, and
backed by Assembly minority leader IrZin Steingut ("IrZin  considered
0oses a practical felloZ")  and by the Republican leadership of both houses
—Zere eating up the legislative track, ordinarily so sloZ, like
thoroughbreds among a pack of 3ercherons. 3assed by the Assembly one
afternoon, they Zere rushed that same afternoon to a Senate committee—
and Zere released that same afternoon to the floor of the Senate for a vote.
One upstate senator innocently requested time to consider the measures; he
Zas handed a message asking him to take an urgent telephone call; Zhen he
returned to the floor, he dropped the request.

But back in NeZ York, Stanley Isaacs, studying the bills in his quiet Zay,
noticed a point that everyone else had apparently overlooked: there Zas no
home-rule message from the City Council attached to them as the laZ
required. And the arena in Zhich the Battery Crossing fight Zas being
staged Zas thereupon sZitched from the State Capitol to the Council
Chamber on the second floor of City +all.

In this arena the reformers had hope of success. Three councilmen Zere,
after all, reformers themselves, nominees of the Fusion 3arty. Five Zere
members of the American Labor 3arty, and organi]ed labor favored a tunnel
because it Zould furnish 2,600,000 man-hours of Zork as against 600,000
for a bridge. And all tZenty-si[  councilmen Zere susceptible to pressure
from civil  service organi]ations angry as alZays at 0oses because of his
refusal to use civil service engineers on his authority jobs (he had recently
stated it cost tZice as much to do so), Zho Zanted the more compliant
Tunnel Authority to build the Crossing. Isaacs had, moreover, noticed in the
bills a buried clause everyone else had overlooked: a clause specifically
prohibiting Triborough from paying for the $11,000,000 :est  Side
+ighZay  link. Surely, the reformers felt, noZ that this had been pointed out
to the councilmen, they Zould not ask the Legislature to approve the
measures and thereby obligate the city, recently obligated to a $16,000,000

897
e[penditure it could not afford for one 0oses project, to spend $11,000,000
more.

The reformers Zere also encouraged by the attitude of the 0ayor, Zhose
reaction to Isaacs' discovery of the buried clause Zas foot-stamping fury;
0oses had Zon his support for the bridge by promising him in so many
Zords that it Zould cost the city nothing; knoZing  hoZ 0oses Zorked,  the
0ayor  Zas sure that the clause Zas not in the bills by accident but Zas
rather an attempt by 0oses to sneak out of his promise—and cost the city
$11,000,000. A faint ray of hope Zas, moreover, beginning to appear on La
Guardia's hori]on from the direction of :ashington.  Sentiment Zas
building up in Congress for increased appropriations to the 3:A; if the
0ayor  could grab off a $30,000,000 piece of that action for a tunnel, the
cooperative Tunnel Authority instead of arrogant Triborough could build
the Crossing. The 0ayor considered that "if" big—sounding out

Ickes, he Zas informed that $30,000,000 more for NeZ York Zas absolutely
out of the question—but La Guardia evidently felt that as long as there Zas
any option at all, he should keep it open. +e told key legislators privately
that he had had second thoughts about authori]ing 0oses to build the
Crossing; he favored the bill authori]ing Triborough to build a Crossing, he
said, but not the bill stripping such authori]ation from the Tunnel Authority,
because he Zanted both bridge and tunnel options kept alive; if 3:A
money came through, he could have the Crossing built by the Tunnel
Authority; if  it did not, Triborough could build it.

The reformers Zere also hopeful because their aim Zas modest. They Zere
not, after all, insisting that the bridge proposal be defeated. They Zere only
asking that it be studied. :ith  three competing plans for a solution to LoZer
0anhattan's traffic problem—and Zildly  conflicting  estimates of the cost
and effects of each plan—surely an impartial study Zas needed to
determine the true costs and effects before a decision Zas made. 0oses Zas
insisting on the need for haste, they said, but Zasn't the need really for
delay, a delay Zhich Zould provide time for mature consideration? The
decision the city took on the proposals Zould vitally affect it for decades—
centuries perhaps. :as it not only rational to take a feZ more Zeeks or
months to make sure the decision taken Zas the right one?

898
Finally the reformers Zere hopeful because they kneZ their oZn strength.
8nited, they felt they could defeat any politician; in the last city-Zide
election, in fact, their victory had been nearly total; Fusion had taken all
three cityZide offices—0ayor,  Comptroller and Council 3resident—as
Zell as the presidencies of the tZo most populous boroughs in 1937. And
never had they been more united. Four years before, the leaders of NeZ
York's Good Government organi]ations had formed a "Central Committee"
of civic organi]ations to support Robert 0oses in his fight against Franklin
Roosevelt's attempt to oust him from the Triborough chairmanship. NoZ
they formed another "Central Committee," a "Central Committee of
Organi]ations Opposing the Battery Toll Bridge," to oppose 0oses. :ithin
a Zeek after its formation, its chairman, eighty-three-year-old Albert S.
Bard, had assigned speakers to address every civic-minded body in the city,
and every organi]ation concerned Zith the preservation of beauty and
architectural e[cellence Zithin it; Zithin  a Zeek a score of such groups had
joined the committee. 8nder the direction of Eric Gugler, a group of the
city's most respected architects Zere visiting and enrolling other architects
in the cause. Famous artists Zho had held aloof from the issue Zere
contacted by artists of equal stature and persuaded that their participation
Zas needed to preserve a beautiful and majestic scene. Bard Zas making
sure that every reformer Zho had entree to a politician in City +all, Albany
or :ashington  Zas using that entree; a se[tet of septuagenarians, for
e[ample, spent a Zeek in :ashington  e[plaining the situation to NeZ York
congressmen. And the most difficult of politicians—Fiorello +enry La
Guardia—Bard left to the most respected reformer of them all: the
legendary Burlingham, Charles Culp Burlingham, eighty-one years old,
almost deaf, but still "the only man from Zhom La Guardia Zould take a
scolding." "CC" hobbled,

gaunt and stooped, up the steps of City +all one morning, and Zas ushered
in to see the 0ayor—as La Guardia hastily shooed a group out of his office,
so that the old man Zould not have to Zait a minute. Burlingham emerged
to relay to intimates a promise from La Guardia that Zhile he Zould support
a home-rule message for the bill authori]ing Triborough to build a
Crossing, he Zould not support—or sign—one for the bill stripping the
Tunnel Authority of its authori]ation.  The 0ayor  told Burlingham that he
Zould Zait  until the :ar   Department, Zhich had jurisdiction over all

899
structures built in or across navigable Zaters and Zhich had scheduled a
hearing on the bridge in April, had formally given approval to build it. The
approval Zas only a formality, La Guardia said, but at least it Zould give
him an e[cuse to offer 0oses for delaying. If, he promised, at any time until
the :ar  Department approval Zas received, money became available for a
tunnel, he Zould see that it, rather than a bridge, Zas built. And the 0ayor
promptly proved that he meant Zhat he said by giving the Tunnel Authority
permission to lobby in Albany against the bill—and by letting key
legislators knoZ that the lobbying had his sanction.

The "Central Committee" did not neglect the public at large. 8nlike the
usual run of 0oses' opponents, the prestigious reformers had entree both to
letters-to-the-editor columns and to editors, Zho usually heard in person
only 0oses' side of the controversy. Soon, even the Times Zas pointing out
that "a brief delay Zouldn't hurt the plan. . . . The bridge, if built, Zill  be
there a long time. It is Zorth Zhile taking the time to get it right." The
+erald Tribune demanded that 0oses make public all the facts about the
bridge and, urging the Council not to take action until he had done so, and
until those facts had been studied, said:

It seems clear noZ that a major alteration in the city's design and
appearance is involved. No conceivable need for hurry has been suggested.
The need is therefore for the carefulest consideration and full public
discussion, Zith every opportunity for alternatives to be revieZed
impartially and thoroughly. No possible risk should be run of building in
haste and repenting for generations to come.

:ith   the organi]ed construction trades and the civil service organi]ations
backing a tunnel, and Zith the letters-to-the-editor shoZing support of the
need for further discussion, it Zas clear that the tide of public opinion Zas
running against 0oses' proposal—to an e[tent it had never run against him
before.

3ublic opinion Zas the crucial factor in the reformers' philosophy and
strategy. 3ublic opinion Zas democratic government, the government they
believed in. If it Zas not listened to, government Zas not democratic. "A
decent respect for public opinion" had been a key ground for their demand
that Roosevelt back doZn from his attempt to oust 0oses. And they

900
repeated that phrase in demanding that 0oses back doZn noZ, and in
insisting that, if he didn't back doZn voluntarily, the 0ayor  and councilmen
make him.

The reformers felt certain that the 0ayor and councilmen Zould.

They Zere, after all, politicians, and thus necessarily responsive to public
opinion.

But all the reformers' hopefulness proved Zas that they didn't understand
hoZ much poZer—poZer over politicians—0oses  had been given, or hoZ
independent of public opinion he noZ Zas. 0oses understood. So
unconcerned Zas he about the reformers' efforts that he spent the three
Zeeks before the Council hearing vacationing in .ey :est,   Florida. And
the accuracy of his assessment of the situation Zas proven Zhen, returning
from a day fishing among the .eys (he caught tZo flounders), he received a
telephone call informing him of La Guardia's statement that he Zould delay
signing a home-rule message on the Tunnel Authority bill even if the
Council passed one. Strolling doZn to the .ey :est   :estern  8nion  office,
he Zrote out a telegram to the 0ayor, addressed to him at his apartment so
that the 0ayor Zould  receive it that same evening: no possible Zay of

.EE3ING   BOT+  3ROJECTS ALIVE  8NTIL  AFTER  :AR
DE3ART0ENT  +EARING   STO3 T+EREFORE RE48EST   YO8  SIGN
BOT+ 0ESSAGES  STO3 OT+ER:ISE    BRIDGE  3ROJECT 08ST   BE
ABANDONED  AND  ALBANY   NOTIFIED  TO T+IS EFFECT.

If the 0ayor  did not immediately guarantee that there Zould be no Battery
tunnel, 0oses Zas saying, he, 0oses, Zould never give him the money for
a Battery bridge. Either guarantee immediately that 0oses could build the
Crossing—and build the kind of Crossing he Zanted—or there Zouldn't be
any Crossing. The telegram Zas not a request but an ultimatum, not an
appeal from a subordinate to a superior, not a plea from a commissioner
appointed by the 0ayor that the 0ayor change a decision, but a demand
from someone Zho had the money to give the 0ayor something he Zanted.

La Guardia understood. After all his stalling, 0oses' money Zas still the
only money available. If he Zanted the Battery Crossing, he Zould have to

901
do Zhat 0oses Zanted. The 0ayor  had no more choice than the City
3lanning Commission had had. Summoning the Council leaders to his
office, he let them knoZ that his feelings in the matter to be discussed at the
upcoming hearing had changed.

Robert 0oses returned from Florida on the night before the Council
committee hearing. The Fine Arts Federation of NeZ York, representing
eighteen leading art societies, had that day issued a statement Zarning that
the bridge Zould "disfigure perhaps the most thrillingly beautiful and
Zorld-renoZned feature of this great city." A reporter asked 0oses about
the statement.

"The same old tripe," he said. ":e'll  take care of it all tomorroZ."

TomorroZ Zas the City Council Chamber.

City +all  filled a gap in the blank-eyed skyscraper Zall Zith the dignity and
grace and elegance of another age, and of all its rooms, its

mdl Chamber best evoked the values that the reformers had come to see
Zere the .ues in the Battle of the Battery Crossing: respect for the

institutions and through Zhich, in a democratic society, the Zill of

the people found Jon and reali]ation. And that room evoked as Zell

the manner that, in the age Zhich had produced those institutions and laZs
(and many . had been so much more important—the

dignity, grace and elegance in speech as Zell as appearance, the courtliness,
the courtesv ; the %entlemanliness; before its mahogany panels, beneath its
delicate Zainscoting .pie's elected representatives deliberated under a

delicately curving little gallery Zith  an intricately detailed railing, at
slanting-topped eighteenth-century desks arranged in a semicircle, before a
presidential dais flanked by flags oi city and nation, under a ceiling, its
details picked out in gold, featuring a huge mural of "NeZ York Receiving
the Tribute of the Natioi

902
If the setting for the drama Zas apt, so Zas the casting. 7 he audience that
day Zas not the typical City Council audience. In the memory of
participants, there Zasn't even a lone houseZife present, not a single claque
from a neighborhood civic association to bounce boos and hisses, cheers
and the noise of foot stamping off the mahogany-paneled Zalls and make
Jefferson, observing bron]e from the back Zall, Zonder if perhaps
+amilton had been right after all. Instead, sitting rank on rank in the gallery
or on chairs set up to handle the overfloZ, Zas the very floZer of the city's
civic leadership, men of Zealth and talent devoted to the rule of JaZ and the
institutions of democracy that City +all symboli]ed,  men Zho had proven
that devotion by spending their talent and their time in a do]en great civic
battles. For the audience included not only young reformers but elderly men
Zhose first hero had been not La Guardia but 3olice Board 3resident
Theodore Roosevelt—the Burlinghams and Sea-burys, Schieffelins and
0cAnenys,  the men Zho had formed the heart of the Committee of One
+undred and Seven and the Committee of One Thousand—Zho had been
fighting for generations against every threat to the institutions Zhich they
felt made their city great. There Zere starched Zing collars in that audience,
and vests crossed Zith heavy gold Zatch chains, and pince-ne], and
Zalking sticks—and a spirit of reform that Zent back half a century and
more. Jf NeZ York had an aristocracy of civic leadership, it Zas assembled
in the Council Chamber that day Zhen the long fleet of black limousines
screeched up in front of City +all, and the man Zhom they had once
believed to be the living embodiment of their ideals, dressed in a double-
breasted dark-blue suit that only emphasi]ed his burliness and Zith a close-
clipped haircut that emphasi]ed the massiveness of his face and his bull
neck, impatiently flung open the door of the first of the limousines Zithout
Zaiting for the chauffeur to come around and, Zith a full score of aides half
running behind him to keep up, stalked into City +all, pounded up the
delicate curve of the hanging staircase, strode past the slender fluted
columns on the Rotunda, and burst through the Chamber door.

The opening presentation by 0oses' architects and engineers took tZo
hours but, to the reformers' surprise, provided none of the facts for Zhich
they had been asking. Aymar Embury described the bridge Zith the help of
a large-scale model—the same large-scale model Embury had already
privately all but admitted to the reformers Zas misleading. Othmar

903
Ammann, noticeably ill at ease, repeated that the bridge Zould cost
$41,200,000 and the tunnel $84,000,000—but again did not break doZn the
figures, so that the reformers could not determine on Zhat, if anything, they
Zere based (although, Zith Ole Singstad present, Ammann did not this time
attempt to maintain that some of the figures came from Singstad).

0oses' opponents provided facts—in abundance. Stanley Isaacs, directing
the opposition presentation, told the councilmen, Zho goggled over this
unprecedented passing up of a chance for personal publicity (didn't he
reali]e that it Zas only one o'clock, the perfect time for a speech to make
the late editions of the 30's?), that he Zould not speak himself but Zould
simply introduce a series of e[perts Zho Zould prove, through specific
facts and figures, that, on almost every point of the bridge-tunnel
controversy, a tunnel Zould provide greater benefits—and cause less harm
—to the city.

0ajor  +enry J. Amy, e[ecutive  director of the Citi]ens Budget
Commission, analy]ed 0oses' contention that the bridge and its approaches
"Zouldn't cost the city a nickel," and then simply read the clause of 0oses'
proposed state legislation that Zould cost the city $11,000,000. A battery of
municipal finance and real estate e[perts documented—block by block,
building by building—Singstad's conclusion that a bridge Zould cost the
city at least $1,500,000 per year in real estate ta[es. Regional 3lan
Association e[perts testified that everything 0oses hoped to achieve by
building a neZ bridge could be achieved—at a small fraction of the
construction cost and real estate ta[ loss—by their alternate plan. Isaacs had
even commissioned an analysis of 0oses' argument—never before
analy]ed during the decade 0oses had been making it—that civil service
architects and engineers Zere less efficient and therefore cost "tZice as
much" as the private consultants he employed. The analysis documented
that one group did cost "tZice as much" as the other—0oses' group. Even
0oses' claim that a bridge Zould have "tZice the capacity" of a tunnel Zas
disproven— by Triborough's oZn traffic counts for its tZo suspension
bridges, Zhich shoZed that inclement Zeather (and inclemency for a
Brooklyn-Battery Bridge Zould  include not only rain, snoZ, ice and high
Zinds but the fog Zhich is frequently heavy over the LoZer Bay), Zhile not
affecting a tunnel's capacity, significantly reduced that of a bridge. As to the

904
relative cost of the tZo types of crossing, Isaacs' e[perts gave the detailed
breakdoZns 0oses' had not, proving Singstad's claim that a tunnel Zould
cost $65,000,-000, and disproving all 0oses' claims; 0oses had said that
the total cost of the bridge, including approach roads, Zould be
$41,200,000; R3A

engineers found that the cost of the bridge proper—Zithout approach roads
—Zould be $56,625,000. Isaacs had insisted that all the figures used be
conservative. But even conservative figures Zere devastating. :hen Isaacs'
parade of Zitnesses, a parade that lasted more than four hours, Zas over,
every 0oses contention subject to factual analysis had been utterly
demolished. And as for the side of the controversy not subject to
mathematical analysis—the aesthetic side, the effect of the bridge on the
beauty of Battery 3ark and NeZ York +arbor—the old reformers felt the
demolition job had been even more devastating. There Zas a pounding of
canes on the Council Chamber's oaken floor and a chorus of "+ear! +ear!"
out of another age Zhen George 0cAneny said of 0oses' proposal:

:hat   all this Zould  do to the values of real estate, some of it the most
valuable in the Zorld, I leave to others. But that the city Zould permit its
famous Battery to be dealt Zith in such fashion seems to me an incredible
thing. I am in fact of the opinion that if the plans under discussion are
seriously pressed, there Zill be an uprising of public opinion the like of
Zhich has not been knoZn since, forty years ago, some Zell-intentioned
gentlemen in office proposed that City +all be torn doZn to make Zay for
something more modern in the skyscraping line.

:rinkled,   stooped old 0cAneny  had lost none of his eloquence. And Zhen
he had finished summing up the reformers' arguments and pointed out to the
Council that all they Zere requesting Zas a study—by impartial e[perts
appointed by the Council itself—to determine the true facts in the case, to
study the various alternatives and determine Zhich one Zould really be best
for the city, it Zas difficult  for the reformers, Zise though they Zere in the
Zays of politicians, to believe that the request Zould not be granted.

And then, in the seventh hour of the hearing, Robert 0oses stood up to
speak.

905
Reading from a yelloZ legal pad on Zhich he had been scribbling furiously
during the opposition speeches, he turned his attention first to the analysis
of the relative efficiency of civil  service architects and private consultants.

"I Zant to Zarn  my friends in the civil service that civil service can become
a racket," he said. "It's getting to be so that nothing Zill please them but a
Communist state, Zhich Ze knoZ is so pleasing to 0r. Isaacs. . . ."

There Zas a moment of shocked silence in the Council Chamber. Then
came a storm of boos and hisses, Zhich 0oses' lieutenants tried
ineffectually to droZn out Zith  cheers and applause. But 0oses Zas not to
be deterred by boos. +e directed his ne[t remarks to the Regional 3lan
Association proposal.

The R3A had alZays opposed progress, he said. It had sided Zith the "fo[
hunters and estate oZners" to oppose the Northern State 3arkZay,
+eckscher State 3ark and Jones Beach, and many of his other Long Island
projects. In NeZ York City, R3A planners "Zere in a dither about the +enry
+udson Bridge—they asked delay, and advocated

a loZ-level bridge. They said the +enry +udson Bridge Zould ruin the
finest spot in 0anhattan. . . . :e  built  the bridge and a Zeek after it opened
the bankers confessed that they had been Zrong. :e said it Zould average
16,000 cars, they said 6,000—and Ze Zere . . . right." The R3A "has been
Zrong about all these things," he said, and therefore, "Zhy should Ze
suppose that it is right about this one?" Its current proposal is, in fact,
"nonsense"; "every argument applicable to the Battery Bridge is applicable
tenfold against the Brooklyn Bridge."

The reformers sat hardly believing Zhat they Zere hearing. Although the
R3A had opposed the Northern State 3arkZay, it Zas just not true that the
R3A had opposed +eckscher State 3ark and Jones Beach; it had supported
them, as it had supported almost all 0oses' Long Island projects; moreover,
the parkZay fight had taken place fifteen years before—Zhat did it have to
do Zith a discussion about the Battery Crossing? The R3A had thought the
+enry +udson Bridge Zould  ruin the finest spot in 0anhattan—and the
bridge had ruined the finest spot in 0anhattan; the bridge might be a
success in financial terms, but it Zas a failure in any other terms; the heavy

906
traffic and the resultant congestion proved that, not disproved it; hoZ could
"every argument applicable to the Battery Bridge be applicable" to the
Brooklyn Bridge?—Zhen the Zhole point Zas that the Brooklyn Bridge
already e[isted, and therefore could be rebuilt cheaply and Zithout further
destroying real estate values or the harbor vieZ. And then 0oses turned his
attention to the R3A's president.

Only a man Zho Zasn't going to run for public office Zould  propose
"slapping a toll on the Brooklyn Bridge," 0oses said. "No man in his right
mind Zould do that." It Zas, he said, "all right for 0r.   0cAneny"  to make
such a proposal. "+e's not going to run for public office again." +e turned
and glanced at the Zrinkled old man sitting behind him.

"+e's an e[tinct volcano," 0oses  said. "+e's an e[humed mummy."

This time there Zere neither boos nor cheers in the Council Chamber. There
Zas only silence, unbroken until 0oses began to speak again.

"If there Zas an argument raised that he ansZered directly, I don't remember
it," says one of the reformers present that day. ":e had raised a lot of
issues. +e hardly mentioned them. All he did Zas lash out at individuals, at
respected, public-spirited men, Zith a spitefulness, a viciousness, that Zas
almost unbelievable to see." There Zas no attempt to meet the R3A
proposal logically. It Zas simply "nonsense," 0oses said. Or to discuss the
effect of a gigantic suspension bridge on the vieZ of the harbor. "The most
beautiful architecture Zrought by man is a bridge, especially a suspension
bridge, and the finest vieZ in 0anhattan is the vieZ you get Zalking across
the Triborough Bridge to the Bron[ or 4ueens," he said, and that,
apparently, Zas all that had to be said on that point. As for the argument
that the bridge Zould ruin Battery 3ark, the park Zas "no beauty spot"
anyZay, he said. If 0cAneny Zas so interested in it, Zhy hadn't he done
"something for it Zhen he Zas in office"?

Those arguments that he did ansZer, he ansZered Zith lies. The proposal
that the Tunnel Authority build the Crossing? 0oses said that

"the Tunnel Authority" had built the 4ueens-0idtoZn   Tunnel so
incompetently that "the Tunnel Authority Zill  be busted Zhen it is finished.

907
:ashington  knoZs that and I knoZ it."  The city Zas going to have to "step
in and rescue the tunnel." (The Tunnel Authority Zas actually bringing in
the tunnel far under cost. :hen it  Zas finished, the Authority Zould, far
from being busted, have a surplus of more than $4,000,000. And 0oses,
Zho had been doing detailed analyses of its financing, must have knoZn
this.) The need for a city contribution for the :est  Side +ighZay and East
River Drive e[tensions? "Colossal effrontery. . . . The Citi]ens Budget
Commission felloZ's figures are just beyond me. I don't knoZ Zhere he got
them." But 0oses must have knoZn precisely Zhere he had gotten them.

The key arguments 0oses didn't ansZer at all. +e gave no e[planation of
Zhere he obtained the disputed figures for the tunnel, and as for the bridge,
all he Zould say Zas, "I have built many bridges, both over Zater and over
land, and I knoZ Zhat the costs are. :e are letting contracts every day for
the same kind of Zork, and Zhen Ze give you an estimate, it is accurate and
our reputation is behind it." The councilmen could take his figures or leave
them, he seemed to say.

The councilmen—and the city they represented—could take or leave his
Zhole proposal, he made clear. :hen one ventured to ask him Zhy he
objected to a delay to give time for the alternatives to be studied, he put it to
them straight:

"This is a shoZdoZn project. Either you Zant it or you don't Zant it. And
either you Zant it noZ or you don't get it at all." +e Zas giving  the city an
ultimatum. The city could either take his proposal or leave it. +e Zasn't
going to Zaste his time discussing it.

And the councilmen took it. :ithout   leaving the Council Chamber, hastily
putting their heads together, the men Zho had been contacted the night
before by La Guardia or by Steingut or by CreZs voted unanimously to
release the home-rule message from the committee immediately, Zithout
even an hour's study, and to send it to the full Council for a vote the
folloZing  morning.

0oses snatched his yelloZ legal pad off the desk and stalked out of the
room, his aides scampering behind him. There Zas a broad smile on his
face.

908
The rest of the audience left the Council Chamber more sloZly. As they
filed out, many of them came over to 0cAneny and touched his shoulder
consolingly. Burlingham, hobbling over on a cane, put his arm around him
and Zhispered something in his ear.

But consolation Zas not easy. Years later, Comptroller Joseph D.
0cGoldrick,  e[plaining  Zhy  he Zas "afraid" of Robert 0oses, Zould  tell
the author, "I Zas there that day, you knoZ, sitting in the audience, Zhen he
said that to George 0cAneny. 0r. 0cAneny   Zas old and Zrinkled and very
shrunken by that time, you knoZ. And Zhen 0oses called him an 'e[humed
mummy,' I saZ the e[pression on his face. I saZ it, you knoZ. So I Zas
afraid of him."

Other reformers Zould later describe their overriding emotion at 0oses'
philosophy and tactics as "shock."

They had no justification for such an emotion. There Zas nothing neZ
about that philosophy or those tactics. The insistence that his proposals be
vieZed only in isolation, that each be vieZed strictly as an attempt to solve
a particular, limited problem by creating a particular structure of concrete
and steel, that it not be evaluated in terms of the needs of the city as a Zhole
(the need for a bridge, for e[ample, Zeighed against the need for schools
and hospitals) or even as part of the larger problem of Zhich the specific
problem Zas only a part (a traffic-moving machine like a bridge evaluated
in terms of the city's over-all traffic-moving problem) and especially not in
terms of its impact on the surrounding neighborhood—Zas the same
insistence that had underlain the public Zorks he had been building in their
city for five years. 0oses had used these same arguments in arguing for a
do]en other projects—most of Zhich the reformers had enthusiastically
supported. If they had ever taken a close look at those projects, had ever
e[amined them Zith the same care Zith Zhich they e[amined the Brooklyn-
Battery Bridge, they Zould have seen that this philosophy lay behind them.
They Zere shocked noZ only because they had never bothered to take such
a look.

As for the vicious personal attacks, 0oses had been making vicious
personal attacks for years. The only difference Zas that this time the target
Zas them —and they therefore saZ hoZ unfair the attacks Zere. 3reviously

909
they had laughed indulgently at 0oses' propensity for personal vituperation,
regarding it as a harmless idiosyncrasy; perhaps, Zhen one took into
account all the crooked politicians, hack bureaucrats and selfish private
individuals Zith  Zhom 0oses had to deal, even admirable. In that laughter
and that indulgence Zas a feeling that 0oses' methods, hoZever distasteful,
hoZever antithetical to their principles, Zere justified by the difficulties he
had to surmount to Get Things Done.

But in the Battery Crossing fight, the reformers could not avoid taking a
good look at one of Robert 0oses' controversies—and at Robert 0oses.
They could no longer avoid seeing precisely Zhat kind of man they had for
so long believed in. The Battery Crossing fight Zas the moment of truth in
their relationship Zith 0oses. After  supporting him for years in a score of
battles, after sacrificing, over and over again, the principles so dear to them
in his support, after helping to raise him to poZer and helping to keep him
in poZer, they saZ him at last for Zhat he Zas—and they reali]ed that he
Zas not the embodiment of everything they believed in but its antithesis. If,
for the tZenty years before the fight, the Good Government organi]ations of
NeZ York City had supported him, for the tZenty years after the fight, those
organi]ations Zould oppose him.

The Battery Crossing fight Zas also the'moment of truth for the reformers
in another respect. It made them see that their opposition no longer mattered
to 0oses. They had played a vital role in his acquisition of poZer

in the city. 4uite possibly, in fact, he could not have acquired that poZer
Zithout their help. But he had taken that poZer and used it to acquire more
and more of it—and noZ, they suddenly reali]ed, he had enough of it so
that they could not take it back from him, could not, in fact, stop him from
the absolutely untrammeled use of it. +e no longer had to be concerned
Zith their opinions—and he Zasn't concerned Zith their opinions. They
Zere the city's aristocracy. They had alZays had a voice—an important
voice—in decisions vital to the city, a voice that Zas important to them
because they cared about and loved the city. But in the areas that Robert
0oses had carved out for his oZn, they Zould have a voice no longer.

And neither Zould the city. For if the Battle of the Battery Crossing Zas a
moment of truth for the reformers, it Zas also, although no one recogni]ed

910
it as such, a moment of truth for NeZ York.

It Zas not, of course, only the reformers Zho opposed 0oses' proposal —or
at least the haste Zith Zhich he Zas trying to ram it through. Also in the
opposition Zere most of the city's most important elected officials— right
up to the 0ayor—and, speaking Zith a virtually  unanimous voice, the city's
press. AlZays before, elected officials, backed by the press, Zould have
possessed more than sufficient poZer at least to get a feZ Zeeks' time to
study a proposal if they Zanted to study it. But they possessed such poZer
no longer. The city had a problem that desperately needed solution. It had
no money to solve the problem itself. 0oses had the money. And if the city
Zanted a solution, it Zould have to accept his solution—or none at all. That
Zas the narroZ limit of its choices—Zhich  Zas really no choice at all. The
ultimatum that 0oses had delivered first to the 0ayor and then to the City
Council symboli]ed this reality—and so did the reaction of the 0ayor and
the City Council to that ultimatum.

Less than tZenty-four hours after the Council committee hearing, the full
Council voted, 19-6, to endorse the 0ayor's home-rule request to the
Legislature for passage of the bills that Zould foreclose any possibility of
study. (0oses Zatched the proceeding Zith Zhat a reporter described as a
"happy smile.") Less than tZenty-four hours after that (Zith Steingut
"Zielding  the bull Zhip")  the bills Zere passed, 106-6 by the Assembly, 41-
1 by the Senate. ("I'm not surprised," 0oses told reporters Zith a smile.)
And less than tZenty-four hours after that, Governor Lehman announced he
Zould sign the bill (not because he approved the bridge, he Zas careful to
state—"I have no means of forming a sound judgment" on the project— but
because it Zas a city affair and the city's elected officials had asked him to
sign it). :hen   the issue—in the form of a Triborough Authority request for
Board of Estimate approval of a contract covering the relative city and
Authority contributions to the project, a request Zorded in such a Zay that
Isaacs said it constituted a "blank check" to Triborough—came before the
Board, La Guardia ran the meeting Zith an iron hand, 0cGoldrick and
0orris,  despite their preference for a tunnel, voted for the bridge and

Isaacs' tZo votes Zere the only ones cast against 0oses' project. Only one
more step Zas required before 0oses could begin sinking the bridge pilings

911
—:ar   Department approval—and this Zas regarded as no more than a
formality; in fact, 0oses  had been privately assured by the Army Corps of
Engineers that the approval Zould be forthcoming shortly. "The tunnel is
dead," 0oses said, and the reformers saZ no hope that he Zas Zrong. In A
0an  for All  Seasons, Sir Thomas 0ore Zarns young Roper about the
consequences of letting ends justify means. :hen the young man says he
Zould "cut doZn  every laZ in England" to "get after the Devil," 0ore
replies: "Oh? And Zhen the last laZ Zas doZn, and the Devil turned round
on you—Zhere Zould you hide, Roper, the laZs all being flat?" The
reformers could have benefited from 0ore's Zarning. Robert 0oses Zas of
course not a Devil, but to give 0oses poZer in the city, they had cut doZn
the "laZs" in Zhich  they believed. NoZ those laZs no longer e[isted to
protect the city from him. For the reformers and the city they loved, there
Zas no place to hide. There Zas nothing the city, opposed to the bridge,
could do to keep 0oses from building it.

:hen   the reformers Zere in deepest trouble, they alZays seemed to turn to
the same man. NoZ they delegated 3aul :indels to go see him. :indels
Zalked over to 27 :illiam    Street and into the office of the senior partner of
Burlingham, Veeder, Clark and +upper, and "CC," after thinking for several
long minutes, suddenly smiled ("that Zonderful smile," :indels   Zould say.
":hen   you saZ that smile you felt everything Zas going to be all right")
and said: "Call Eleanor."

In the April 5, 1939, edition of her neZspaper column, "0y  Day," 0rs.
Eleanor Roosevelt Zas enthusiastically discussing her grandchildren Zhen
she sZitched abruptly to one paragraph on a different topic.

I have a plea from a man Zho is deeply interested in 0anhattan Island,
particularly in the beauty of the approach from the ocean at Battery 3ark.
+e tells me that a NeZ York official, Zho  is Zithout doubt alZays efficient,
is proposing a bridge one hundred feet high at the river, Zhich Zill go
across to the :hitehall  Building  over Battery 3ark. This, he says, Zill mean
a screen of elevated roadZays, pillars, etc., at that particular point. I haven't
a question that this Zill be done in the name of progress, and something
undoubtedly needs to be done. But isn't there room for some consideration

912
of the preservation of the feZ beautiful spots that still remain to us on an
overcroZded island?

A single, small paragraph, on a subject she Zould not raise again. But
revealing nonetheless, as the smallest ripple in a pond's still Zater reveals
the hidden trout beloZ. For that paragraph Zas the ripple, the only ripple,
that revealed that far beloZ the surface of the public controversy over
Robert 0oses' huge bridge, doZn in the quiet, murky depths, impenetrable
to the public ga]e, in Zhich real poZer lurks, private passions Zere
beginning

10 roil the Zater—and Robert 0oses 5 great enemy Zas beginning to move
against him.

Ignoring the apparent hopelessness of their cause, the reformers' "Central
Committee of Organi]ations" opposed to 0oses' bridge kept filling Jc8crs-
to-thc-cditor columns Zith phrases out of another age. The best, as alZays,
Zere Burlingham's. "At the risk of being called an e[tinct firecracker, J
venture to say that the planning and art commissions have been faithless
servants. :hat  justification can there be for men Zhom Ze have trusted to
preserve the beauty of NeZ York ... to destroy or risk the dcslruction of any
feature of [that] beauty?" There must be more public hearings and 0oses
must be made to furnish more information for them, lor "a public hearing
Zithout specific detailed figures furnished in advance Zill only darken
counsel." Burlingham's Zere the only letters 0oses ansZered directly: "I
see that 0r. Burlingham is back in the papers again. . . . [+is] reference to
the depressing effect of bridges on surrounding real property ... is Zholly
inaccurate. ... J am sending 0r. Burlingham some pictures of the Bron[-
:hitcstone   Bridge, Zhich most of us think is one of the finest things built
by man in NeZ York"; it "Zill   enormously improve" surrounding property.
(Burlingham, saying, "It is an honor even to be noticed by 0r. 0oses,"
replied, "To compare the effect of the :hitestone Bridge on the vast
sZampy regions of the Bron[ Zith  that of the Brooklyn-Battery Bridge on
loZer 0anhattan seems a little far-fetched. ... I'd still like to see a
breakdoZn of his final estimates"—and 0oses hastily broke off the
e[change.) But it Zas not Zritten public communications that Zere to be
decisive, but private—and communications too private to be entrusted to

913
Zriting.  Burlingham had told :indels   to call Eleanor—and CC himself had
Zritten to Eleanor's husband. In a letter across Zhose top the great attorney,
then eighty-one years old, scraZled in longhand, "In graveyard confidence,"
he Zrole:

Dcai Franklin;

NoZ please stop and read my letter to the +erald Tribune. . . . Nobody fit to
have an opinion Zants the Battery Bridge e[cept Bob 0oses.

. . The :ar  Department can stop it. . . . verb. suf. sap., especially Zhen the
sapient being is a lover of NeZ York, as Zell as 3resident of the 8nited
States and (Commander in c Jhief of the Army.

The Commander in Chief apparently took the hint. The :ar Department
hearing Zas held under the direction of the Army Corps of Engineers in
NeZ York, and 0oses Zas assured by Colonel C. L. +all, the chief district
engineer, that a favorable report Zould be issued shortly. But the da) after
the hearing, the colonel's superior. 0ajor General J. L. Schley, Chief oi the
Army Corps of Engineers, received a note from presidential aide EdZin 0.
:atson  asking him to "speak to the 3resident before you make any report
on the subject/' The report Zas not issued on schedule, and Zhen 0oses
asked Zhen it Zould be, the engineers Zere suddenly evasive. And
Secretary oi :ar  +arry  +. :oodring   suddenly began to take a personal
interest in NeZ York +arbor

Ickes brought up the bridge in a Cabinet meeting one day, saying that he
recommended its construction. Frances 3erkins recalled Zhat happened
then.

The 3resident pulled doZn his lip—a sign by Zhich I alZays kneZ that
something phony Zas going on inside of him. +e'd pull his mouth doZn
over his teeth and say, "Oh, yes" or "Oh, no" as the case might be. It Zas a
curious facial e[pression. +e said, ":ell,   I don't knoZ. I Zant  to think about
that and look into it, +arold."

Some Zeeks later, the Secretary of the Interior, Zho hadn't knoZn the
3resident as long as had the Secretary of Labor, brought up the bridge again

914
and, in 0iss 3erkins' Zords, "Zas  insistent about its being approved."
According to 0iss  3erkins, "The 3resident said, ':ell,  Ze'll  have to consult
the military. That's a very important channel.' " Ickes said, "That's all right,
0r.  3resident. :e  figured out everything. It Zill   not interfere Zith the
operation of ships." But all the 3resident Zould say Zas: ":ell,  I'd  like to
think about it."

Ickes finally caught on. 0iss 3erkins relates:

Ickes said to me, "The 3resident is going to kill this. +e's going to kill this
Zonderful project. I Zish  you'd speak to him. I Zish you'd argue it out Zith
him."

I said, ":ell,   hoZ is he going to kill  it?"

"+e's getting the military to condemn it."

I said, "Are you sure?"

"Yes," he said. "I knoZ. I have evidence. +e's telling the military to say that
it interferes Zith the navigable streams and it doesn't—not at all. It's all
been thought out. It's just that he so hates that 0oses. God knoZs 0oses
hates him. But I should think that Ze could build a bridge Zithout regard to
that."

0iss  3erkins did speak to the 3resident, Zho, she says, replied, " ':ell, it's
no good, Frances. It's just a no-good idea.' Listing the reformers' objections
to the bridge, he added, 'Besides, I am reliably informed that though the
engineers haven't finished Zith this, they think it's a very great ha]ard to
navigation. In case of Zar, Ze can't have any bridges around there. They'll
drop bombs and so forth.'

"I came back and told +arold that I guessed he Zas right, the 3resident Zas
not going to do it," 0iss  3erkins recalled. "There Zas nothing more I could
do. There Zere plenty of other public Zorks projects that Zere available,
and didn't have 0oses' name on them." On 0ay 18, 1939, :atson sent the
3resident a memo—Zhich the presidential staff filed in the "3ersonal and
Confidential" file—stating that "the Secretary of :ar   phoned me this

915
morning to please let you knoZ that the :ar Department had rejected the
proposition to build a bridge from the Battery to Brooklyn. ... +e Zanted
you to have this confidential information, as it has not yet been announced
to the public."

The "confidential information" Zas not announced to the public—or to
0oses or even to La Guardia—for tZo more months. So tight Zas the lid of
secrecy clamped doZn that 0oses, usually so astute, feeling the only reason
for the delay Zas bureaucratic red tape, did not for some Zeeks reali]e Zhat

Zas happening, kept his engineers draZing plans for the bridge and, until
suspicion began to daZn, spent the tZo months firing off angry telegrams to
the Corps of Engineers demanding a decision on the request for a permit,
convinced that the decision could only be favorable. It Zas not until July [
7> I 939» that Secretary of :ar  :oodring   announced in :ashington that he
had decided not to approve the project because "the proposed bridge is
seaZard of a vital Navy establishment ... the 8.S. Navy Yard at Brooklyn,"
and if knocked doZn during a Zar might block access to the yard from the
sea.

The +erald Tribune reported that 0oses reacted to the decision Zith "rage
and ridicule," and both reactions Zere understandable. There Zere already
tZo other bridges, the Brooklyn and 0anhattan spans, seaZard of the
Brooklyn Navy Yard—and other bridges seaZard of other naval
installations all over the 8nited States. The only Zay a suspension bridge
could be "knocked doZn," moreover, Zould be by hitting one of a handful
of key cables—if a bomb hit the bridge span itself it Zould go right through
—and Air Force e[perts queried by 0oses prior to the decision had
estimated the chances of this happening at 100,000 to 1.

Attempting to repeat his 1935 strategy of bringing Roosevelt's behind-the-
scenes maneuvering into the open, 0oses issued a statement hinting that the
3resident Zas behind the decision. :hen reporters failed to catch the hint,
0oses made it broader at another press conference, reminding reporters that
Ickes had taken the "blame" for the 1935 ouster attempt and saying, ":hy
don't you felloZs find out if  the Secretary of :ar  is Zilling  to take the
blame for this?"

916
But Roosevelt had learned from the 1935 controversy. Then, during a press
conference, he had incautiously alloZed himself to be identified Zith
"Ickes'" decision. NoZ, Zhen, at another press conference, reporters
questioned him about the ":oodring"  decision, the 3resident said firmly
that the decision had been that of :oodring and the :ar  Department alone.
3ressed to say Zhether or not he agreed Zith the decision, he said he had no
opinion on it at all. Try as 0oses Zould to link  him Zith  it, he could not do
so. The fo[ had left no tracks. And he had planned more cleverly than he
had in 1935—as 0oses admitted in a formal statement brimming Zith
frustration.

No doubt this squares up accounts so far as the Triborough Bridge
Authority is concerned. The effort to . . . force the resignation of its chief
e[ecutive officer failed because the public opinion Zould not stand for it. In
the present case the procedure has been a great deal shreZder, because it is
assumed that the average person is in no position to argue Zith military
boards of strategy, and must accept their conclusion no matter hoZ silly.

0oses attempted to enlist La Guardia in an attack on :oodring's decision,
but the 0ayor seemed rather uninterested—and the reason suddenly
became clear to 0oses Zhen the RFC abruptly decided that it Zas Zilling
to lend the Tunnel Authority not the $39,000,000 that had previously been
its limit, but $59,000,000, and to make the loan at an interest rate so
reduced

that the cost of the tunnel (Zhich, it noZ turned out, Zould in fact have
been not 0oses' $84,000,000 but Singstad's $65,000,000) could be reduced
to $59,000,000. La Guardia's gratification Zas intense. "This administration
is never daunted by anything," he gloated. ":e just go on to the ne[t thing."

0oses' rage over Zhat he regarded as his greatest defeat never cooled, not
even after the tunnel, years later, Zas incorporated into his Triborough
empire. Any mention of the tunnel—even the most casual reference by a
luncheon guest trying to make conversation—Zould cause the big jaZ to jut
angrily and the voice of Robert 0oses to recite verbatim, as automatically
as if the mention had triggered a tape recorder inside his head, the old
slogans: "A bridge Zould have cost half as much as a tunnel, you knoZ,
carry tZice the amount of traffic, could be built in half the time . . ."

917
:hat   made his defeat all the more bitter Zas his belief that Eleanor
Roosevelt had engineered it. She denied this, Zriting (in the only other
mention ever made in "0y Day" of  the Battery Crossing): "Needless to say
I have never spoken to anyone in the :ar Department on this subject. . . . I
Zould like to add that I did not knoZ that 0r.  0oses  had an interest in this
bridge. :hich   shoZs hoZ dumb I am!" But 0oses,  discussing the Crossing
controversy years later, Zould snarl, "Oh, she Zas in the middle of it, all
right—it Zas her more than anyone else. So noZ they've got a tunnel, costs
tZice as much, handles one half of the capacity, took tZice as long to build .
. ." For years, 0rs. Roosevelt's popularity restrained him from attacking her
publicly, although in private his descriptions of her Zere, in La]arus' Zords,
"increasingly unprintable." But in the memoirs he Zrote long after Eleanor
Roosevelt Zas dead, he said, as if determined to get his feelings on the
record for posterity:

A revieZ of "0y   Day"  discloses an endless succession of noble impulses
unsupported by thought or evidence, of naivete and sophistication, modesty
and assurance, the product of confused early education, a cloistered
girlhood, and sudden precipitation into Zorld affairs. "0y  Day" spread the
dubious gospel that all problems yield to good intentions. Converting a
bridge into a tunnel Zas a trivial incident in such a record.

There Zas one more pill for 0oses to sZalloZ—a  $12,000,000 pill. The
RFC's $59,000,000 Zas enough to build the tunnel and part of the
0anhattan approaches, but none of Brooklyn's. La Guardia said the city
Zould pay for the rest of the 0anhattan approaches—since it Zould take
four years to build the tunnel, the money Zould not have to be appropriated
until 1943—but he made no announcement about any Brooklyn approaches.
:hen   0oses Zent to the 0ayor,  Zith  considerably more humility than Zas
his Zont, to inquire about the five-mile, $12,000,000 Elevated +ighZay to
OZl's +ead 3ark that had been planned to link the Battery Crossing Zith his
Circumferential 3arkZay, the 0ayor  said blandly that the city didn't

have the money and that he didn't feel he could ask :ashington for it.
3erhaps sometime in the future . . .

:ithout   that highZay, the "Belt System," the great circle bypass around the
city of Zhich  0oses had been dreaming since 1927, Zould still have a five-

918
mile gap. Reluctantly he told the 0ayor that Triborough Zould build the
highZay if he could charge a ten-cent toll to finance its cost. Blandly the
0ayor  replied that he didn't think tolls on highZays Zere a good idea.
Besides, he Zent on, hadn't 0oses already said—Zhile arguing for Tri-
borough's right to build the bridge—that Triborough had more than
$12,-000,000 available? :hether or not Roosevelt, Zorking Zith  La
Guardia, both men aZare hoZ driven 0oses Zas to reali]e his dreams, had
set the RFC loan at a figure e[actly enough for a tunnel and nothing else in
order to force 0oses to cough up the money for the highZay is not knoZn,
but that is the Zay it Zorked out. The Tunnel Authority rather than 0oses'
Triborough Authority Zas given the right to build the Battery Crossing and
the revenues from it. But Triborough Zas forced to build the road to get to
the Crossing. Obtaining even a soup^on of revenge on Robert 0oses—
promising to sign a minor bill he Zanted and then reneging on the promise
—had, Reuben La]arus said, made Roosevelt, as Governor, look as fresh
and happy "as though he had just come out of the bath after a clean shave in
the morning." After the Battery Crossing fight, Roosevelt must have looked
as if he had just spent a Zeek at a health resort.

On July 20, 1939, the Central Committee of Organi]ations Opposing the
Battery Toll Bridge held a "Victory Luncheon" at the Architectural League.

The taste of victory must have been sZeet, for the luncheon did not end
until after three. "Rising votes of thanks" Zere tendered to the heroes of the
Goo Goo uprising from 0cAneny  on doZn. The reformers laughed Zhen
Albert Bard recounted details of an Architectural League luncheon that had
been held in the same building on the previous day. Aymar Embury had
given a speech, and after it, "persistent questioning" by a member of the
audience "finally," as the minutes of the Victory Luncheon put it, "elicited
the fact that 0r. Embury regarded as appro[imately accurate the . . .
draZing that Commissioner 0oses called 'completely phony.' " And Zhen
Ole Singstad rose to announce tnat he had just modified the tunnel plans to
remove even the tunnel ventilation shaft from Battery 3ark—he had found a
Zay to place it north of Battery 3lace—they cheered in a scene of triumph
and jubilation.

919
If the reformers had looked at the Battle of the Battery Crossing in a
broader perspective, hoZever, they Zould have been holding not a "Victory
Luncheon" but a Zake. For in such a perspective—the significance of the
battle in the history of NeZ York City—the key point about the fight and its
significance for the city's future Zas not that the 3resident had stepped in
and stopped Robert 0oses from building a project that might have
irreparably damaged the city. The key point Zas that it had taken the
3resident to stop him.

The city's oZn mayor, the elected representative of the city's people, the
personification of the city's Zill,  hadn't been able to stop him. Neither had
the city's other elected officials—or its most Zealthy, prestigious and
influential private citi]ens, the "in  group" or "establishment" that could,
Zhen united, usually count on carrying the day on any issue about Zhich it
Zas particularly concerned.

In the governmental institutions—Board of Estimate and City Council —
established to insure that the voice of the city's people Zould be heard and
obeyed, their voice had been droZned out by his voice. There Zere other
governmental institutions—3lanning Commission, Art Commission—set
up to insure that physical changes to the city Zould be governed by rational,
logical planning considerations and that their specific form Zould be
determined by informed and educated aesthetic taste, not by capricious
Zhim and passing fancy, and certainly not by the Zhim and fancy and
personal taste of a single individual. But rational, logical planning
considerations and informed and educated aesthetic taste had crumbled
before his Zill. The e[planation for  the denouement of the Battle of the
Battery Crossing Zas simply personal pique, the fact that a man Zho for
years had hated Robert 0oses had finally been given a chance to give that
hatred a little venting. The battle had proven that the poZers he had
obtained as head of a neZ part-private, part-public entity, a "body corporate
and politic," Zere vast enough so that in his spheres of activity he, not the
formal democratic institutions of NeZ York, Zould  henceforth shape NeZ
York's destiny.

published in the +erald Tribune inquired: "If the roof leaks, then it can be
repaired; if the ventilation is poor, then it can be corrected, but Zhy remove

920
[the Aquarium] entirely?" The cost of such alterations might be e[pensive,
but they certainly Zould not approach $2,000,000—even if $2,000,000 Zas
an accurate cost estimate for the neZ Aquarium, and the reformers' friends
in the Zoological Society soon let them knoZ that the figure bore little
relation to reality. 0oses never attempted to ansZer this inquiry. 0oses said
that moving the Aquarium to the Bron[ Zoo Zould "make it  attractive to
increasing numbers of people." The greatest attraction of the Aquarium Zas
its accessibility; in comparison, the Bron[ Zoo Zas rather inaccessible—
Zhat, the reformers asked, Zas 0oses talking about? 0oses never bothered
to reply.

:hen   a storm of protest arose not only from the reformers but from the
public—there Zere Zhole columns of letters-to-the-editor day after day;
editors trying to "balance out" the selection they printed found it difficult to
do so, so scarce Zere letters favoring 0oses' proposal—0oses attempted to
give additional reasons. But, upon the reformers' e[amination of these
reasons, each turned out to be invalid.

0oses stated that tunneling under Battery 3ark Zould "undermine" the
Aquarium and cause its Zalls to crumble. Bill E[ton checked Zith the tZo
engineers Zho Zere doing the tunneling—Ole Singstad, in charge of the
construction of the tunnel proper, and :alter Binger, in charge of the
underpass approach from the :est Side +ighZay—and Singstad and
Binger just laughed at this argument; no tunneling—no construction Zork
of any type on either the tunnel proper or the underpass approach—Zould
come Zithin 170 feet of the Aquarium.

Then 0oses declared that, Zhether or not there Zas any tunneling under the
old fort, it Zas going to fall  doZn. +is engineers, he said, had discovered
that some of its Zalls Zere tilted and in imminent danger of collapse, and
that a massive reconstruction job, Zhose cost he put at $200,000, Zould be
necessary to make it safe. This couldn't be true, could it? asked reformers.
The Zalls of that fort, eight feet thick and solid sandstone, seemed as sturdy
a structure as they had ever seen. Of course it Zasn't true, said engineers
Zho Zeren't on 0oses' staff. "A  joke. I thought it Zas a joke Zhen he first
said that," Binger snorts. "+oZ could it fall  doZn? :hat   Zas it but an open
ring of Zalls eight feet thick, si[  hundred feet around and tZo hundred feet

921
in diameter? An annular [open] ring Zith a center that's been standing for
tZo, three hundred years [sic—actually for 139 years] isn't going to just fall
doZn. Fall doZn!  Ridiculous! Absurd! .. . And suppose one piece shoZed
signs of falling? You'd just brace it up! . . . A joke, that's Zhat it Zas, young
man! A joke!"

0oses had an aesthetic as Zell as an engineering rationale for his decision;
the fort Zas not beautiful, he said, but an ugly "large red Zart." And as for
its historic interest, he said flatly that it "has no history Zorth Zriting
about." The only people Zho Zanted to retain the Aquarium, he said, Zere
"stuffed shirts." After he announced his plans, "there Zas not a dry eye at
the .nickerbocker  Club, all the shades Zere draZn at the Century

Association and heart-rending sobs issued from the dusty diggings of the
American Scenic and +istoric 3reservation Society. . . . but somehoZ the
great popular uprising against the ra]ing of this structure hasn't
materiali]ed."

The proof of the falseness of 0oses' statement Zas on record day after day
in the letters-to-the-editor columns; it Zasn't only Goo Goos Zho Zere
Zriting  but men and Zomen Zho could not possibly be classified as
aristocrats but Zho Zanted Fort Clinton saved because, as one put it, he had
visited it so often that it seemed "an old friend," because, as another Zrote,
"Zithout  it Battery 3ark Zill  be lonesome," because it Zas, in a Zord found
in many of the letters, "beautiful" or because it Zas the place Zhere they, or
their parents or grandparents—Zhere millions—had first stepped onto the
soil of the 8nited States. An elderly Zoman said that there must be many
other Americans Zho, like her, Zere reminded every time they Zent to the
old fort of hoZ they had, years before, "felt their eyes fill Zith tears, and
their hearts fill Zith  thankfulness as they passed through the doorZay of
Castle Garden, the doorZay to Liberty, a neZ life, a neZ Zorld."

All the reasons 0oses advanced to justify his decision—engineering,
aesthetic, historic—Zere misleading, not reasons at all but rationales, and
transparently false rationales at that. And if the reasons 0oses advanced
Zere invalid, Zhat then Zas the true reason? If, as E[ton Zrote to the Times
in one of a series of eloquent letters, the very engineers building the tunnel

922
said that they could build it Zithout disturbing the old fort, "Zhy,  then, must
this ancient and familiar thing be torn from us?"

0ore  to the point, Zhy did it have to be torn from us noZ? 3erhaps 0oses
did Zant to build a more modern Aquarium in the Bron[. But the plans
Zere not ready, and the money for construction, as the Zoological Society
readily confessed, Zas noZhere in sight. (As a matter of fact, although the
reformers did not knoZ this, 0oses Zas not even certain Zhere he Zanted
the neZ Aquarium to be located; he had simply throZn out the Bron[ Zoo
as the most likely location he could think of Zithout study.) Even if the
reformers accepted the argument that there Zas not room in a city of
7,000,000 for tZo aquariums, Zhy Zas it necessary to demolish the e[isting
Aquarium years before the neZ one could possibly be ready, thereby
leaving the city for years Zithout any aquarium at all? :hat  Zas going to
happen to the Aquarium's matchless collection of sea life, amassed over
decades at fabulous cost in effort and ingenuity? :hat Zas the reason for
0oses' insistence that this "ancient and familiar thing" not only be
destroyed but be destroyed immediately? If the Aquarium Zas torn doZn,
moreover, Zhy did the fort beneath it also have to be torn doZn? Reluctant
as the old Goo Goos had been to believe E[ton's charge that 0oses Zas
motivated by nothing but a mean desire for revenge, many of them
eventually concluded that the young man must be right. Years later, the feZ
still alive Zould  be asked about 0oses' motivation. "If you kneZ Bob
0oses, you Zouldn't have to ask that," 3aul :indels   Zould say. "Bob
0oses could hate. If you stood up to him, he Zould hate you forever. If you
defeated him, he Zould try to destroy you. +ere Zere guys he couldn't
destroy. So he decided to do the ne[t best thing: destroy something they
loved." George 0cAneny

Zould point out that 0oses' claim that tearing doZn the Aquarium and fort
had been made necessary "because of the tunnel" Zhich they themselves
had advocated Zas a particularly apt means of revenge.

To destroy the Aquarium and fort on the spur of a base impulse Zould be a
crime against the city, against history, the reformers felt. They determined
to prevent it.

923
But they couldn't. 0oses' possession of unlimited poZers over park
administrative decisions made it possible for him simply to announce an
"administrative decision" on Battery 3ark and the Aquarium: for the "safety
of the public" they Zould be closed as soon as intensive tunnel Zork began,
on October i, 1941, the park for the duration of such Zork, the Aquarium
forever. The reformers Zould have had no opportunity to protest 0oses'
plans to demolish the Aquarium and the old fort to any official body if the
3ark Commissioner hadn't needed money—a $20,000 appropriation from
the Board of Estimate—for tanks to house the fish in their neZ home in the
Bron[. (The Zoological  Society, Zhich 0oses had claimed had resources of
$2,000,000, proved unable to raise $20,000.) +is need for a Board
appropriation meant that there Zould have to be a public hearing and, in
theory, a Board decision. But, in reality, Zhat choice did the Board have?
The park around the Aquarium Zas going to be closed shortly, fenced off
from the public. Disapproving the appropriation Zouldn't keep the
Aquarium open; it Zould only keep 0oses from moving  the fish to the
Bron[ Zoo, Zhich  Zould  mean either that the fish Zould stay in the
Aquarium for years Zith the public unable to see them or that 0oses Zould
carry out a threat to dump the fish into the sea. :hen the reformers
attempted to raise the demolition question, 0oses replied blandly that that
Zasn't the issue at all; he Zasn't asking for approval of the demolition of the
structure, he said, but only for moving the fish out of it (he himself had no
objection to keeping the fort if the Board Zanted to provide for its
rehabilitation, he said; and anyZay the Board Zould have a chance to
decide the demolition question at some later date, after the completion of a
study by Consultant Gilmore Clarke Zhich he had commissioned). The
choices open to the Board and the 0ayor Zere further limited by 0oses'
popularity. In less than tZo months, the politicians' futures Zould be in the
hands of the voters, and 0oses' personal popularity Zith the voters Zas far
too great to be appreciably damaged by an unpopular stand on a single issue
—particularly since the city's press, as if to atone for its heresy in opposing
him in the Crossing and Aquarium fights, Zas laying on the personal
adulation in even heavier doses than usual. (It Zas during this pre-election
period that the Times commented, on the occasion of the opening of the
GoZanus 3arkZay: ":hen   Commissioner 0oses finds the surface of the
earth too congested Zith his parkZays, he lifts the road into the air . . .") No
politician Zanted to make himself the target of the Commissioner's public

924
Zrath. Joseph A. 3alma, up for re-election as borough president of
Richmond County, had stated in 0ay that the Aquarium should not be torn
doZn. "It's a landmark," he had said forthrightly. ":e've  been destroying
too many of our landmarks recently." In Septem-

ber, 3alma said not a Zord—but voted for 0oses' proposal. NeZbold
0orns  ; up for re-election as Council 3resident, had stated in 0ay that "if

to be spent ... I favor putting it into a tuberculosis hospital in Brooklyn." In
September, 0orris did not mention any tubercu-pjtal—and he voted for
0oses' proposal. As for Fiorello +.  La Guardia, Zho had supposedly
mastered the city, he could have sZayed 0orris and the others if he had
Zanted to, and for a Zhile he apparently Zanted to. The 0ayor agreed that
the Aquarium's accessibility Zas a great chic ;t, and friends saZ that he had
more than a little affection for the old building himself. In 0ay,  he and
0oses had both been speakers at the opening of a neZ Zaterhole at the
Bron[ Zoo;  0oses had cockily predicted that the Zoological Society could
schedule a "fish choZder" at the Aquarium on October I, for the valuable
specimens Zould be up at the Zoo by that time; but La Guardia had stunned
0oses by stating flatly, "+e  Zon't bring the fish to the Bron[.  5 ' :hether
political considerations Zere influencing the 0ayor's thinking on the
Aquarium in September is unknoZn, but the folloZing sequence of events
occurred: the right-Zingers Zho dominated the Bron[ and 4ueens
Republican organi]ations—along Zith some key Republicans in other
boroughs also determined to deny the 0ayor a third term— offered 0oses
the nomination. 0oses didn't Zant the nomination—he kneZ it Zas
Zorthless Zithout Fusion backing, Zhich only La Guardia could obtain, and
his understanding of the poZer of his public authorities made him
uninterested in elective office—but he did not turn doZn the GO3 nod out
of hand, telling the leaders he Zas taking it under consideration. La Guardia
felt he could not Zin Zithout  the nomination. 0oses turned the nomination
doZn. The old-line leaders then nominated John R. Davies, Zho Zould run
against La Guardia in the primary election September J 6. :hen the 0oses
proposal came before the Board, the 0ayor's three votes Zere cast for it.
Four days later, 0oses announced his support of La Guardia, Zho Zon the
primary by only 20,000. And a Zhole Zave of park openings, at each of
Zhich 0oses  took pains to praise La Guardia, Zas then scheduled before

925
the election, in Zhich the 0ayor  narroZly defeated Democratic candidate
:illiam    O'DZyer. (There is no clearer proof of 0oses' aura of invincibility
than O'DZyer's reaction to his loud support of the 0ayor. Far from
attacking the 3ark Commissioner, O'DZyer assured the voters that he Zould
continue him in office if he Zere elected.)

By October i, after a September in Zhich parents by the tens of thousands
had brought their children to the Aquarium one last time, 0oses could tell
the Board of Estimate, "The fish are gone. . . . The Aquarium, therefore, as
such, is a tale that has been told. :e don't have to talk about that any more.
The only question is . . . Fort Clinton." And, he said, consultant Clarke had
found that demolition of the old fort Zas necessary for the complete
reconstruction of Battery 3ark that he had in mind. The Board approved the
demolition by an 11-5 vote. As in the bridge-tunnel con-

troversy, no force in the city had been poZerful enough to stand betZeen
0oses and his aims. There Zould, Zithin a matter of months, have been—
e[cept for a plaque—no trace of the old fort had it not been for another
force outside the city and beyond 0oses' control: the Second :orld :ar.

To 0oses' rage, the Zar stripped the city of manpoZer and heavy
construction equipment so completely that no demolition company Zould
bid on the job of leveling those massive solid stone Zalls. +e let a smaller
contract for the less difficult demolition of the circular sheet-iron roof that
covered the fort, and by the fall of 1942 the roof Zas gone, and the interior
of the fort, as Zell as the ground in front of it, Zas littered Zith debris. +e
Zas attempting again to get the rest of the job finished Zhen the Zar gave
the reformers another opportunity by halting Zork on the Brooklyn-Battery
Tunnel. The reformers, reali]ing that neither the e[ecutive nor the
legislative branch of the city government could stop 0oses, made a last,
desperate try to persuade the judicial branch to do the job, bringing suit to
enjoin him from demolishing the rest of the building on the grounds that he
had induced the Board to grant him permission through "false and fradulent
representation"—namely, that the demolition Zas required by Zork on the
tunnel. The judiciary could not restrain 0oses—the reformers pressed the
appeal to the Court of Appeals, but each court found, in effect, that 0oses
had virtually absolute poZer in city parks. But the last appeal Zas not heard

926
until April  1943, and by that time the equipment and manpoZer shortage
had reached a stage Zhere even 0oses reali]ed it Zas useless to attempt
any further demolition until the Zar Zas over.

It Zould be more than five years before Zork on the Brooklyn-Battery
Tunnel Zas resumed. There Zas no reason Zhy Battery 3ark should have
been closed during those five years. But closed it Zas. The gates in the high
Zooden fences that 0oses had erected around it, fences too high for
passers-by to see over, remained locked.

The city's press had assumed that the fight over the old fort Zas ended —
had been over, in fact, from the moment 0oses had made his decision about
it. Commenting on one of his fierce attacks on the reformers, the +erald
Tribune had said, ":ith  the unleashing of that dread artillery, it is clear that
Castle Clinton, along Zith the traditionalists, are done for." But the Zriter of
that editorial must have been a young man; he must never have seen the
"traditionalists"—in particular George 0cAneny—fighting   for something
they believed in. The old fort had become even dearer to the old man since
0oses had proposed tearing it doZn. Shortly before his death in [ 953> at
the age of 84, 0cAneny Zas invited to contribute a memoir to the Oral
+istory Research Collection at Columbia 8niversity. 0ost  memoirs deal
largely Zith the speaker's oZn life, and many display a desire for personal
immortality. 0cAneny  devoted the bulk of his memoir to a painstakingly
detailed history of Fort Clinton; the immortality he desired Zas not for
himself. "If I  can save [the fort]," he said, "I'll feel I haven't lived in vain."
Time and again during the Zar, the old man led groups of old men doZn to
:ashington  to try to persuade the city's congressmen to persuade the
National 3ark Service—skeptical of the fort's historic value because

0oses had gotten to them first—to designate the fort a national monument.
+e laid out the facts of the fort's history to literally scores of federal
officials, all the Zay up to +arold  Ickes fand possibly higher: Zhether
Roosevelt . personally intervened is unknoZn, although there are
indications that the 3resident may have taken a moment out from the Zar
effort to do so), and the facts Zere irrefutable. No sooner had the Zar ended
than Ickes told La Gliardia that the National 3ark Service Zould take over
the fort, restore it and maintain it forever if the city alloZed it to do so.

927
0oses could no longer argue that the structure Zould be too e[pensive to
restore and maintain. But, thanks to the high fence, he had a neZ argument
ready. The demolition already accomplished, he said, had left nothing of the
fort e[cept tZo  Zalls, Zhich  Zere caving in. The question of restoring the
fort Zas noZ academic, aid; there Zas too little of the fort left to restore.
The public could not, of course, determine for itself if this Zas true; those
occasional reporters Zhom 0oses had his aides escort over the site saZ no
reason to doubt his Story the sheet-iron roof of the Aquarium Zas gone and
so Zas much of the tZo-story stucco facade, the pillars that had held up the
facade had been torn doZn, the only remnants of the fish tanks Zere piles of
broken glass, and the debris from the roof and facade had been heaped all
around the site (Zith a particularly large pile in front, blocking it off even
more effectively from anyone trying to see it). The scene looked like the
site of a typical and almost completed—demolition job.

+ut 0cAneny   persuaded :alter Binger to make a personal inspection. A
day or tZo later, dinger Zas present at a mayoral reception at Gracie
0ansion and noticed 0oses talking earnestly to C. C. Burlingham. Later,
Binger recalls, Burlingham said: "Bob 0oses tells me that the fort is
already largely demolished. +e told me that so much of the fort has already
been demolished that it carit be saved any more."

"That's a goddamned lie, 11 Binger said.

Burlingham replied, "That is very strong language for you to use, :aller. I'll
have to sec it myself."

"I got the key [to the fence around the park] and I took him out there the
ne[t day," Binger says. "It looked like a battlefield. There Zere great piles
of debris, lie must have been all of ninety-five [actually eighty-eight]; he
had a Zalking stick to help him along, but he jumped around like a goat. +e
Zas an ama]ing man. The fort Zas blocked from vieZ by this pile of debris,
+e hail to climb this high mound, and he looked doZn and there Zas the
Zhole damn fort beloZ him!  I said to him, 'All that Zas demolished Zas the
Aquarium.'

"CC Zas normally a great talker, but he didn't say anything for a Zhile. +e
h.ui had great faith in 0oses; he had believed in him. +e Zas terribly sad."

928
Finally, the old man turned aZay Zith a single sentence: ":eil,  that's not
Zhat 1 Zas told." And the letter Burlingham Zrote 0oses  the ne[t da) also
consisted of one sentence:

"Dear Bob: 03ave]  trompc."

"TZo days latei/" Ringer says, "CC gets back a letter: 'Dear CC: :hy pull
tins Auatole 3rance Stuff on me? It doesn't make it any better to be

called a liar in French.' But he never attempted to deny it or anything." And
he couldn't. To conceal his lie, Robert 0oses had barred the city from its
park for almost five years, but the lie had at last been uncovered. The fort
stood—and 0cAneny's ne[t  trip Zas to the +erald Tribune, Zhich sent an
airplane over the site and published on its front page a photograph shoZing
the fort intact.

0cAneny  resumed his trips to :ashington. One audience Zith 3resident
Truman Zas enough to enlist him on the side of the fort, and pressure on the
neZ mayor, Democrat :illiam   O'DZyer,  Zas increased until he agreed to
ask the State Legislature for an act enabling the city to deed the fort to the
federal government. The Legislature refused. 0cAneny Zent to Albany
every Zeek for months.

(+e recalls: "Everyone up there Zould say Zhen Ze approached them, '0r.
0oses doesn't Zant this.'

" ':ell,   of course he doesn't Zant it.'

" ':ell,   Ze're going to stick to him,' etcetera and so on. '+e's a great man: he
must knoZ Zhat he's talking about.' ")

In 1946, Congress Zas ready to pass the bill designating Fort Clinton a
national monument. But, recalls Binger, "this Zould take si[ or eight
months." 0oses moved faster. At four o'clock one Friday afternoon, he got
a neZ demolition authori]ation from the Board of Estimate. (O'DZyer
betrayed the reformers; 0cAneny confided, "+e's not a very solid sort of
person.") Leaving City +all, the reformers huddled desperately. Binger had
been toying Zith the idea of bringing a neZ suit—on the grounds that the

929
fort Zas a monument and hence permission Zas required from the
0unicipal  Art  Commission for its destruction.

Says Binger: "I Zent to 3aul :indels   and I said, T have got to have some
money right aZay to get a suit [started].' 3aul suggested I call Robert
[DoZling,  president of the City Trust Company]. I said, T need money right
aZay.' +e said, '+oZ much do you need?' I said, '+oZ do I knoZ? I need
money for a top laZyer to take it through tZo or three courts. It'll cost a
couple of thousand dollars.' +e said, 'Okay, go ahead.' "

Binger hired Frederick Van 3elt Bryan, Zho "called :indels   and said, 'I'm
going to court 0onday on this.' And that's Zhen 3aul :indels   saved the
fort. +e said, 'Are you cra]y? There Zon't be anything left of this fort
0onday  morning. +e'll demolish it over the Zeekend.' This Zas all on a
Friday, remember. 'You bring this to court in half an hour.' " Bryan did, and
persuaded a Supreme Court Justice to sign an injunction, Zhich Zas handed
to 0oses that evening.

+oZ  right :indels   had been Zas proven Zhen the reformers rushed to
Battery 3ark the ne[t morning to see if any damage had been done. In the
brief hours before the injunction had been served on 0oses, Binger recalls,
he "had already burned those great doors." But 0cAneny shoZed again—
year after year, in :ashington and in Albany and in City +all  (and in one
meeting Zith O'DZyer  in Gracie 0ansion in Zhich,  upbraiding the 0ayor
for breaking his Zord on the fort, he spoke to him in Zords so eloquent that,
:indels   states, "if anything could have recalled that man to

a sense of honor, George 0cAneny Zould have done it that day")—Zhy
young reformers had once stared at him Zith aZe as he strode through the
Bureau of 0unicipal  Research. All 0oses' laZyers couldn't outfo[  the old
man; the purpose of the suit Zas delay—delay to stall demolition until
Congress could pass a bill ordering the preservation of the fort as a
"National +istoric  0onument"—and  0cAneny  delayed, until, on July 18,
1950, almost ten years after 0oses had announced that he Zas going to
demolish Fort Clinton, the bill Zas passed, along Zith a $166,750
appropriation sufficient to restore it, including the doors 0oses had burned.
The old fort Zas saved.

930
The successful conclusion of the effort to save Castle Clinton Zas a victory
of Zide importance and interest in the cause of historical preservation [said
Secretary of the Interior Oscar L. Chapmanl. After . . . years of struggle and
debate in NeZ York City, in the courts, in the State Legislature and in
Congress, the saving of Castle Clinton evidences a neZ and deeper
recognition of the need of preserving the diminishing landmarks of our
history as an essential part of our national heritage.

If those Zords Zere bitter to 0oses, they Zere sZeet to George 0cAneny.
Gentlemen of his school, hoZever, did not forget their manners even in
moments of triumph. To a reporter Zho telephoned him Zith the neZs and
asked for comment, 0cAneny gave tZo Zords, "0ost  gratifying"—and  a
long list, Zhich he asked the reporter to print, of the names of all the men
Zho deserved credit for the victory.

0cAneny  didn't list himself, but his friends rectified the omission. Stanley
Isaacs said it most simply: "0cAneny beat 0oses."

If the reformers had scored a victory over Robert 0oses, hoZever, its
dimensions Zere rather narroZ.

Fort Clinton had been saved, but not the Aquarium. And the city therefore
had to pay dearly for Robert 0oses' revenge.

It had to pay dearly even in dollars and cents. To persuade the Board of
Estimate to let him demolish the old Aquarium, 0oses had guaranteed that
a neZ one could be built for $2,000,000, and that the NeZ York Zoological
Society could and Zould foot the entire bill. In truth, hoZever, there Zas
never any real chance that the Zoological Society could raise $2,000,000—
not that $2,000,000 Zas the amount that really had to be raised, anyZay; the
Zoological Society Zould later disclose that the real figure Zas $6,500,000.
After La Guardia had vetoed the Bron[ Zoo site, 0oses picked one at
Coney Island—and persuaded the 0ayor to spend $1,000,000 additional in
public funds to acquire it. The Zoological Society still could not raise the
cash. :hen  a neZ Aquarium Zas finally  built, the cost of its construction
had risen to $10,000,000—and every cent Zas paid by the city, so that
satisfying 0oses' private grudge Zith the reformers cost the city's ta[payers
$11,000,000. Since he placed high admission fees on

931
the neZ Aquarium—the old one Zas free, of course—and there seemed no
prospect that these Zould ever be removed, the people of the city Zould
actually be paying for 0oses' revenge forever—or at least for as much of
forever as the eye could, in 1974, reasonably foresee.

As for costs that could not be measured in money, the people of the city
might be paying those forever, too. The Coney Island Aquarium Zasn't
opened until 1955, fourteen years after the Battery Aquarium Zas closed, so
that an entire generation of NeZ York children greZ up Zithout an
opportunity of visiting any aquarium at all. As important as the e[hibits in
the old Aquarium, moreover, had been its ambience—a pungent and Zarm
blend of age and familiarity and long affection and human scale, of busts of
old singers and the flash of bright fish, of gloomy corners Zhere one could
neck Zith one's date, of being easy to get to and free, so that people could
simply Zalk in  as if it belonged to them. One might admire the neZ
Aquarium; one could never love it.

For many NeZ Yorkers, of course, the atmosphere in the neZ Aquarium
Zasn't going to matter very much. For the high admission fees 0oses set
for it insured that many NeZ Yorkers Zere going to be able to visit it
infrequently if at all. The poignance of this situation Zas accentuated by the
location of the Aquarium at Coney Island, the lone bathing beach reachable
by public transportation and therefore the one to Zhich, because of 0oses'
class-separating policies, the city's poor Zere herded.

The city's middle and upper classes found it easy to use the Aquarium, of
course. 0oses had built a large parking field ne[t to it so that they could
come Zithout using the subZay.

But they didn't come. On Zeekdays and on non-beach Zeekends—on days
Zhen attendance at the old Aquarium had run, day after day, 7,000 per day
—one can Zalk through bleak echoing halls and see only a handful of other
human beings. Out of Robert 0oses' grudge, the city got a neZ Aquarium,
for Zhich it  paid $11,000,000. It did not, hoZever, get an Aquarium it could
use.

The reformers' victory Zas not even complete in the case of the fort they
had saved.

932
The popular Aquarium Zithin its Zalls  had made the fort a busy, bustling
place. :ithout   the Aquarium, it Zas a circle of Zalls. As one perceptive
observer put it, "NoZ it is [a monument]: to be looked at, but not used.
+aving achieved the status of Art (Architectural division), it is to be revered
as a saintly relic, not involved in the life of the city." It is still history as it
sits there in Battery 3ark, but it is dead history.

In his "0oses-approved" biography of Robert 0oses, Cleveland Rodgers
Zrote that "the ten-year battle Zas ended, as in the Battery Bridge vs.
Tunnel fight, by the intervention of the federal government Zith its long-
range guns and superior financial resources." That analysis Zas correct. No
Zeapon the city possessed—not e[ecutive, legislative or judicial—had been
poZerful enough to stand off 0oses' attacks on one of its most beloved

;lic   Aquarium fight only  reinforced the conclusion to Zhich ~e : Ehe most
perceptive reformers had come after the Crossing fight: t: m 0oses'
chosen spheres of activity, the city no longer had much

::.v:.. ;t: its :-' its::';.

7 -Js conclusion Zas made all the more bitter to the reformers because of
their neZ insight into the character of this creature they believed they lad
played so large a role in creating.

Some of the old reformers still admired 0oses, mainly because they fdt that
corruption, politics and red tape Zere so thick in the city that only a man of
0oses' almost incredible en agj drive and strength of Zill could hack his
Zay through it ''Bob 0oses is an e[tremely capable man," Stanley Isaacs,
alZays scrupulously even handed, Zould say in the same oral history in
Zhich he detailed so many of 0oses r injustices and mistakes. "3roperly
:;i:;;::t: ite :: i  ]rtr  ~se: :t :r.e :::;.

But these reformers Zere noZ in a very small minor::;. The verdict of -B-.---
- -;-':;-; :: ;-: :. '. - 1- .-"..-.t.-r.:  rr.f. trr.en: :- 0oses Zas more harsh. "+e . :ie
most inetirica] man I have ...: met," :alter  Binger said +e is a brilliant guy
Zith a highly defective character." "+e is the original smear artis:."
LaZrence Orton said. "Like +itler."  Albert Bard had said of him because of
his technique of making one demand, and as soon as it Zas met, making

933
another, and. in years in Zhich the name of the dread dictator glared blackly
a: everj American from the front pages of the daily neZspaper, this harsh
comparison Zas draZn over and over again. ''+e is a liar." :alter Binger
said. ""And he is a liar the Zay +itier Zas a liar. +e  doesn't lie because he
can't help it. +e lies as a matter of policy." The very overstatement in such
remarks from men generally given to understatement reveals the intensity
of revulsion many reformers felt for the man they had once idoli]ed.
:illiam    Chanler had used a Zord out of an earlier age— ;i bullyrag"" +e
Zas just a natural bully")—to describe one of his tactics, and many
reformers, men out of an earlier age. noZ used that e[pression in talking
about 0oses. They understood at last the fallacy of believing that his lack
of interest in money automatically signified interest in serving the pubtic—
and that that Zas his only interest. Thev had come to see his other interest,
and to understand that in the long run that interest might, Zhen present in a
public official  Zith immense, all but uncontrollable poZer, turn out to be
more inimical to the city than financial greed. Al Smith's close friend John
A. Coleman, the multimillionaire "3ope of :all    Street" Zho came out of
the LoZer East Side Zith limited education but unlimited shreZdness, said:
"Some men aren't satisfied unless they have caviar. 0oses Zould have been
happy Zith a ham sandZich—and poZer."

and because the lining segments Zere not suitable for Zar production. But
the :3B   Zas understandably skittish about public reaction if the
continuation of Zork on the tunnel Zas spotlighted. After 0oses sZitched
on the spotlight, a furious La Guardia declared that his recommendation
"does not represent the policy of this administration. ... In the first place,
that 'available steel' is not steel. It is cast iron." But 0oses reiterated his
recommendation, the press reprinted it and the :3B accepted it. "I'm glad
to see that they're doing the right thing," 0oses croZed.

All through the Zar, the tunnel lay empty and unused, a vast, holloZ,
echoing cavern beneath the Zaters of the 8pper Bay, and its toll booths
stood silent, earning no revenue.

And the Tunnel Authority needed revenue. If the Zar-caused traffic drought
could bring even Triborough, Zith five years of profitable operations
behind it and the combined income of si[ toll-producing facilities to draZ

934
upon, to the verge of economic collapse, its impact Zas even more
damaging on an authority Zhose single usable facility had been completed
barely a year before 3earl +arbor. The Tunnel Authority's income did not
cover the interest on its bonds. Because the Authority had $4,000,000 (the
$4,000,000 Singstad had saved on the cost of the 4ueens-0idtoZn Tunnel)
in the bank to help pay the interest until the Zar ended, and because the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation, Zhich had purchased the bonds, Zas
Zilling  to Zait  for the balance ("This is a forty- or fifty-year project," RFC
officials told Authority  general manager Fearson Shortridge), the interest
shortfall Zould not have been significant—had it not been for 0oses. +e
used it as an opening to employ Zith La Guardia the technique he had so
often been accused of employing against anyone Zho stood in his Zay. +is
oZn e[perts' analyses, 0oses said, shoZed that the 4ueens-0idtoZn
bonds, purchased by the RFC for $48,000,000, Zould never be resalable at
face value. Even after the Zar, no one Zould pay more than $20,000,000 for
them. And Zhen the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel opened, he told the 0ayor,
the situation Zould be even Zorse; that tunnel, he said flatly, "cannot
sustain $57,000,000 in bonds." "Someone, presumably the federal
government, Zill have to stand a loss on the tZo projects of close to
$50,000,000," if, indeed, the second project could ever be finished at all
Zithout tremendous neZ financing, a prospect about Zhich he had serious
doubts. And, 0oses told the 0ayor, he had ascertained that the reason for
this impending disaster Zas Singstad's lack of engineering ability, combined
Zith management so inept that its disclosure Zould cause a scandal. The
Tunnel Authority, he said—hammering home the Zord repeatedly in
confidential memos to the 0ayor—Zas in a real "mess." And by 1944 he
Zas beginning to hint strongly that there Zas only one Zay out of the mess:
to "rescue" the Tunnel Authority by letting Triborough take it over.

"0ess? :hat   mess?" Ole Singstad demanded Zhen the author used the
Zord during an intervieZ. "I  didn't knoZ Ze Zere  in any mess at all. I didn't
hear anything about it." Told about 0oses' memos—he had never knoZn of
their e[istence before—he shouted, pounding his desk, "There Zas no
mess! :e  didn't have to be rescued at all. :e Zere not in financial

difficulties!  Certainly not!" Though Singstad's statement is an e[aggeration,
so Zas 0oses'; the Tunnel Authority's difficulties Zere no Zorse than Tri-

935
borough's, Zere due not to mismanagement—its operations Zere actually
far more economical than 0oses'—but to Zar, and Zere obviously curable
by the same medicine that Zould cure Triborough's: peace. Letters from
RFC Chairman Jesse Jones to Singstad, moreover, indicate that Jones had
no doubts about this.

Even had he knoZn about 0oses' innuendos, hoZever, Singstad did not
possess the entree to La Guardia that Zould have enabled him to disprove
them, and the 0ayor, racing around the country as national civil defense
head, had no time to spend learning the truth for himself. 0ayoral memos
began to display marked irritation Zith the Tunnel Authority.

And then 0oses Zas presented Zith even juicier grist for his mill.

Try as they Zould, his bloodhounds had not been able to come up Zith even
a hint of Zrongdoing by Singstad. But in 1941 someone did bring to 0oses
a hint of Zrongdoing by Singstad's brother-in-laZ—and that Zas all 0oses
needed.

TZelve years before, Zhile the 3ort Authority, for Zhich  Singstad Zas then
chief consulting engineer, Zas considering plans for the 0anhattan entrance
pla]a of the Lincoln Tunnel, the brother-in-laZ had purchased eight
tenements in the area finally selected. Singstad sZore that he had no
financial interest in the purchase, that he had never heard of the purchase
until after it Zas completed, that Zhen he had learned about it—during a
casual conversation—he had violently disapproved, and in fact had forced
his brother-in-laZ to reduce his asking price from $365,000 to $165,000.
The conclusive piece of evidence, to an impartial observer, may have been
the fact that Singstad did not Zant the pla]a located in the area in Zhich his
brother-in-laZ's tenements Zere located; his recommendation, for Zhich he
fought for tZo years, Zould have left them uncondemned—and his brother-
in-laZ Zith  no profit at all. The tenements Zere condemned only because
the Authority overruled Singstad and decided to locate the pla]a Zhere its
chief engineer, Othmar +. Ammann, Zanted it. TZo intensive investigations
—one by the 3ort Authority, one by the Tunnel Authority—turned up not a
single piece of evidence to prove that the peppery little NorZegian's
statements Zere anything less than completely true. The single damaging
fact Zas his failure to tell the 3ort Authority Zhen he learned his brother-in-

936
laZ oZned the property, and, says :indels, his attorney, the engineer had a
reason for not telling: "+e Zas afraid that someone like 0oses Zould find
out and smear him Zith it."

This fear turned out to be justified. The 3ort Authority found Singstad
innocent of every charge e[cept failing to report his brother-in-laZ's
holdings, for Zhich offense, in light of the other e[onerating evidence, it
gave the engineer only a mild censure. At least one board member
e[pressed "great regret" that the Authority had dignified the accusations
even to that e[tent. The Tunnel Authority's official report not only also
absolved Singstad of any Zrongdoing but stated that the innuendos Zhich
started the investigation Zere "unjust, unfair and untrue." But 0oses, after
apparently giving La

Guardia an oral version of the affair, obtained and passed along to the
0ayor,  "for your confidential information,"  a transcript of the 3ort
Authority hearings—along Zith a covering letter of his oZn that bore the
0oses stamp. "This Zill  tell you the Singstad story," 0oses Zrote. "You
Zill  see that in the end, Singstad and his family did not succeed in getting
the high price they demanded in condemnation."

No one but 0oses, of course, had even suggested that Singstad had
demanded a high condemnation price. TZo investigations, in fact, had
concluded that, Zhatever price Zas paid, Singstad Zas not going to get a
penny of it. But to find out hoZ misleading 0oses' letter Zas, La Guardia
Zould have had to Zade through the lengthy, complicated hearing
transcript. And 0oses' letter Zent further. To undercut the 3ort Authority's
e[oneration of Singstad, he quoted his old friend Authority vice chairman
+oZard S. Cullman as telling him in private: "It  is my understanding that
[Singstad] more than told untruths throughout the Zhole situation, and it
Zas finally ferreted out that he himself had appro[imately $50,000 invested
therein."

:hether   Cullman actually said this to 0oses cannot be determined—
Cullman refuses to discuss the investigation—but if he did, his charge is
disproven by tZo separate investigations. 0oreover, the best proof of
Zhether 0oses himself really believed Zhat he Zas telling the 0ayor  is the
3ark Commissioner's oZn subsequent actions: in 1944, Jack 0adigan,

937
attempting again on 0oses' behalf to persuade Singstad to undermine his
oZn commissioners, assured the engineer that if he did so and thereby
helped 0oses take over the Authority, he could remain its chief engineer as
long as he Zished. (Singstad refused the offer.) But 0oses' letter had the
desired effect. The 0ayor, Zho at the time believed that his long campaign
for national office Zas about to be capped Zith success, Zas desperate to
avoid a scandal. +e kneZ that 0oses Zas capable of creating such a
scandal if he Zas not given his Zay. "0oses kept Zearing him doZn,
talking about a 'mess,' alZays pressing him, Zearing him doZn, Zearing
him doZn," :indels    says. And Zhen, in 1945, 0oses Zas presented Zith
an opportunity to take over the Tunnel Authority Zithout public fuss, La
Guardia, Zho had been holding out against such a takeover for nine years—
ever since the day in 1936 Zhen he had instructed Reuben La]arus, "Leave
the son of a bitch off" —held out no longer.

938
The opportunity arose because the Tunnel Authority commissioners—
novices in the political arena and unaZare of the potentialities for poZer in
their Authority—had not grasped the fact that someone Zas trying to take it
over. Thinking of the Authority only as a builder of public Zorks, they
believed that as long as they Zere building public Zorks competently and
honestly, the 0ayor Zould continue them in office. Not seeing the threat
posed to them by 0oses' ambition, they gave 0oses the opening he needed.

Their error Zas not one of commission but only of omission. It occurred
after one of the three members of the Tunnel Authority, Albert T. Johnston,
died, in 1943.

:ith   the Authority  unable to proceed Zith any projects during the Zar, the
other tZo members, Alfred B. Jones and :illiam  +.  Friedman, saZ no
necessity for the vacancy to be immediately filled. "I think that if Jones and
Friedman had recommended another man, La Guardia Zould have folloZed
the recommendation," Singstad says. "But they didn't think there Zas any
pressing haste." The only name submitted Zas submitted—secretly—by
0oses: +oZard  S. Cullman. La Guardia, his defenses not yet Zeakened to
the point of caving in, rejected that recommendation, but no one gave him
another, and, in the rush of more pressing affairs, Johnston's seat remained
unfilled. And as a result, Zhen, on July i, 1945, Friedman's term e[pired,
there Zould be vacant not one but tZo seats—a majority, enough for a
takeover and, moreover, for a quiet takeover that could be accomplished
simply by the apparently routine filling of tZo  vacancies and that therefore
Zould not lead, as a more dramatic change in management might lead, to
press curiosity that carried the threat of scandal.

Friedman and Jones had no inkling of Zhat Zas happening until it had
happened. :ith  the e[piration of  his first term on the Authority draZing
near si[ years earlier, Friedman had sent a brief note reminding the 0ayor
of that fact, and the 0ayor had promptly reappointed him. NoZ, e[pecting a
similar sequence, Friedman on June 15, 1945, sent La Guardia a similar
note. But Zhen he received the 0ayor's reply this time, the key phrases that
jumped out at him Zere, to his shock: "0y dear Bill  . . . splendid services . .
. You Zere one of the pioneers. . . . For some time I have been considering
the reorgani]ation of the Tunnel Authority and believe that great economies

939
may be effectuated. Therefore I Zill be able to relieve you of your duties
Zhen your term e[pires. . . ."

"Friedman had been a good friend of the 0ayor's," Singstad recalls. "+e
Zas the most surprised man in the Zorld." 8nderstanding of the reason
behind La Guardia's decision came only Zhen he read (in brief, inside-page
articles) that the 0ayor had announced that, in the interest of undefined
"economies," he had decided to merge the Tunnel and Triborough
authorities, and, Zhile the details of the major refinancing and neZ bond
issue required Zere being Zorked out, to "interlock" the tZo bodies by
placing them under the same management—Triborough's management, as it
turned out, for he appointed to the tZo Tunnel Authority vacancies Robert
0oses and his Triborough sidekick, banker George V. (the Fifth)
0cLaughlin.

To try to gain the third vote on the board—required on all major contracts—
0oses shouted at Jones, a quiet, meek 4uaker, at board meetings, and
insulted him to his face. :hen  Jones tried to counter this tactic by refusing
to attend meetings, 0oses Zrote him: "There are just tZo courses open to
you." One is resignation, "the sensible thing for you to do. . . . If you
decline to do this ... Ze shall have to ask the 0ayor to remove you . . . on
the basis of charges Zhich Ze shall prefer." And these charges, he said,
"Zill  necessarily include reference to . . . the various messes Zhich the
Authority Zas in Zhen the 0ayor  decided to reorgani]e it." Jones, no

politician—he had accepted the Authority post only because it Zould give
him the opportunity to render a public service—suddenly found that
continuing to hold the job Zould involve his name in scandal; even though
no "messes" e[isted, the Authority's Zar-caused financial difficulties Zould
make it easy to convince the public that they did, particularly if they Zere
made public in the conte[t of "charges" lodged against him. :ith  his
choices narroZed doZn to tZo—resignation or dishonor—on April 24,
1946, he resigned, to be replaced by Charles G. 0eyer, the other member of
0oses' Triborough Board.

Fearson Shortridge, Zho for years had been meeting 0oses on the Gracie
Terrace promenade Zhile the tZo men Zere Zalking their dogs in the
evening, had believed "Ze Zere very friendly personally." NoZ he found

940
that either he had been mistaken or friendship did not count for much Zith
0oses: 0oses fired  him, appointing George Spargo in his place, Zithout a
Zord of Zarning;  I "found out about it by reading The NeZ York Times,"
Shortridge recalls. 0oses also fired Ole Singstad, of course, replacing him
as the Authority's chief engineer Zith a Yale classmate, Ralph Smillie, and
he fired men Zho had been no more than innocent bystanders in his long
feud Zith the NorZegian—the engineers Zhom Singstad had recruited from
all over the 8nited States.

For nine years, Robert 0oses had been seeking control of the Tunnel
Authority. NoZ  he had control. +e had been unable to prevent the
construction of the Authority's 4ueens-0idtoZn  and Brooklyn-Battery
tunnels, but noZ those tunnels—and their revenues—Zere his. NeZ York
Zas a city divided by Zater, split by rivers and bays. Every modern Zater
crossing Zithin the city's borders, not only those above the Zater but those
beneath it, not only every bridge but every tunnel constructed Zithin the
city's borders for the use of motor vehicles since 1909, Zas noZ under the
control of authorities that he controlled. 0ore important, all neZ Zater
crossings Zould also be under his control.

The city Zas obviously not in the foreseeable future going to be able to
build neZ Zater crossings itself. Only the authorities—his authorities—
Zould be able to build them. +e and he alone Zould be able to decide
Zhich crossings Zould be built and Zhen, Zhat their shape and design
Zould be and Zhere their approach roads Zould run.

+e and he alone, moreover, Zould decide Zhat tolls Zould be charged on
these crossings. For Zith his takeover of the Tunnel Authority, he noZ
possessed a monopoly over those public facilities for motor transportation
Zithin  the city Zhich produced revenue.

America's nineteenth-century robber barons had understood the importance
of monopoly, absolute monopoly. They had not been satisfied until they had
eliminated all competitors.

Robert 0oses, Zhose aim Zas not economic but political poZer but Zhose
poZer Zould have to rest not on political but on economic factors, had

941
understood that competition Zas a threat to his aims. +e had schemed for
ten years to remove that threat, to obtain over all modern Zater crossings

Zithin  NeZ York—the Zater crossings that Zere a key to all automobile
transportation Zithin the city—an absolute monopoly.

And noZ he had that monopoly. +enceforth, for the remaining quarter of a
century in Zhich he Zould be in poZer, no motorist Zould be able to use a
modern bridge or tunnel in NeZ York City Zithout paying his authorities
tribute.

The struggles by Zhich the industrial robber barons had built up their
empires broke into public vieZ infrequently. For the most part, only the
results Zere announced. The battles Zhich decided the results took place in
secret.

So did the battle Zhich cemented Robert 0oses' economic poZer. +is
public battle against the Tunnel Authority—his campaign of thundering
press releases and barrages of statistics designed to persuade the city and its
officials that the Battery Crossing should be a bridge and not a tunnel— had
failed. The battle in Zhich he destroyed the Tunnel Authority Zas one
shrouded from beginning to end in secrecy. The stakes involved Zere vast.
They included not only control of tZo of the largest public Zorks projects
in America but also the right to build and control a public Zork that Zould
be far larger than either: the NarroZs Crossing. They included the right to
aZard contracts for the completion of the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, the
Battery 3arking Garage and the NarroZs Crossing, contracts that Zould
total more than half a billion dollars, Zith all the immense patronage and
poZer that such a right conferred, and also the right to dispose of the
immense annual revenues these three projects and the 4ueens-0idtoZn
Tunnel Zould generate, revenues that by 1968 Zould be running more than
$30,000,000 per year. They included the capitali]ation poZer of this annual
$30,000,000—to build more public Zorks that Zould generate more cash:
capitali]ation poZer that by 1968 Zould amount to half a billion  dollars
more. And cash—even half a billion dollars in cash—Zas only a small part
of the stakes involved. The significance of the battle Zent far beyond
economics. For at stake also Zas the issue of Zhether control of revenue-
producing Zater crossings in the city Zould in effect be turned over to a

942
single individual, of Zhether one man Zould be given a monopoly over all
toll receipts paid by motor vehicles in a great city largely dependent upon
motor transportation. For concentrating economic poZer in motor
transportation Zithin the city in one man Zould give that man a voice in all
transportation policies Zithin the city at least equal to that of the city itself.
But the city itself never Zas given an opportunity to learn the battle's
significance, or to Zatch it unfold. All  during 1942, 1943 and 1944, Zhile
0oses and Singstad Zere maneuvering Zith RFC officials or La Guardia,
Zhile 0oses  Zas smearing Singstad and the Tunnel Authority Zas clearing
him, not a single story on the maneuvering appeared in any neZspaper. Not
a Zord even hinting at the e[istence of a behind-the-scenes conflict betZeen
the tZo public authorities Zas printed.

0oses had repeatedly ridiculed not only Singstad's honesty but his
engineering ability.

+e had Zritten La Guardia: ":e   do not trust 0r.  Singstad. :e  have another
man, much more competent and much more reliable, to take his place."
:hether   he himself believed Zhat he Zas saying may be judged by his
actions. Singstad's plans for the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel Zere used Zith
only one modification of any substance. (And this modification—the use of
a different method of Zaterproofing—caused the one engineering flaZ in
the tunnel, a persistent seepage that eventually had to be corrected— by
reverting to Singstad's method.) 0oreover, 0oses' emissaries asked
Singstad to continue Zith his plans for the Battery 3arking Garage, doZn to
the most detailed blueprints and contract specifications. 0oses never
discussed Singstad's plans Zith him. +e Zent out of his Zay to avoid
having to meet Singstad face to face. Singstad Zorked on them alone in his
oZn office. But as each set Zas completed, 0oses' engineers came to the
NorZegian and took them, and used them—as draZn.

Singstad took an office—at 17 Battery 3lace—Zhose ZindoZs looked
doZn on Battery 3ark, on the portals of the tunnel that Zas his greatest
creation and on Fort Clinton, Zhose sight he treasured for another reason:
"0r.  0oses said it Zas going to fall  doZn," the fiery NorZegian  Zould
laugh to visitors, pointing doZn at the red Zalls that looked solid indeed.
":ell,   it's still  standing, isn't it? Its foundations are carried doZn to solid

943
rock, you knoZ." And then, one palm pounding his desk, he Zould laugh, a
short, harsh laugh that Zas more like a snort, and say, "Solid rock! I kneZ
that. And 0oses' engineers kneZ it, too."

If Singstad could still laugh tZenty-four years later at the recollection of his
fight Zith  0oses, the laughs came noticeably hard—and this Zas
understandable. For 0oses' revenge on him Zas thorough.

:hile   0oses  Zas completing the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, he and Spargo
took care to leave Zith reporters chronicling its construction the impression
that Singstad had had little to do Zith its final form. 0ost of  the reporters'
stories scarcely mentioned him. :hen preparations for the opening
ceremonies —elaborate preparations; not only the gleaming neZ parking
garage and the Zhite tunnel portals and access roads but the facades of
adjacent office buildings, including 17 Battery 3lace, Zere draped Zith
bunting, flags and mammoth pennons in a display of pageantry that
transformed gray LoZer 0anhattan into a panorama of red, Zhite and blue
—Zere going forZard, Singstad had to Zatch them from his ZindoZ and
knoZ that he had not even been invited to the opening of the tunnel he had
designed. (+e Zas invited, on the day before the opening, apparently only
because a +erald Tribune reporter raised the matter Zith one of 0oses'
lieutenants, and 0oses did not Zant any stories on the injustice.) And Zhen
he read the brochure,

tZenty-eight glossy pages, printed in four colors, distributed in the
thousands to the distinguished guests Zho Zere to ride through the tunnel in
a long cavalcade led by the 0ayor and Francis Cardinal Spellman, his cup
of bitterness must have spilled over. The brochure listed tZenty-one
separate engineers as designers of facets of the project. The name of its true
designer Zas not among them.

Robert 0oses could hate a long time. Ole Singstad Zas to continue
practicing engineering until he died, at the age of eighty-seven, in 1969,
tZenty-four years after Robert 0oses forced him out of the Tunnel
Authority. During those tZenty-four years, Singstad Zas to cement his
reputation as the Zorld's master tunnel builder, and e[hibit a genius for
highZay design as Zell. +e Zas to build tunnels and huge highZays all
over the 8nited States, and all over Europe and South America, receiving

944
knighthoods and medals for his Zork in NorZay and Belgium and Chile.
But he Zas never—during all those tZenty-four years—to design or build a
mile of highZay in NeZ  York City or NeZ  York State, the city and state in
Zhich he lived.

Shortly before his death, he Zas asked about this anomaly by the author,
Zho mentioned that "at one time you Zere the most highly regarded tunnel
authority in the Zorld." Singstad's head snapped up and the palm of his
unusually large right hand smacked doZn, and he glanced at the intervieZer
Zith a look that made it all too easy to see Zhy Ole Singstad had been so
dangerous an opponent. "Yeah," he said. "And I still am. And I'll tell you
this. In spite of my reputation, since I retired as chief engineer of the Tunnel
Authority—I  told his 0r.  Gumshoer Boy that I Zouldn't be happy Zorking
Zith 0oses  Zhen he tried to talk me into giving up my commissioners—
since I retired after thirty-three years in the service of some subdivision of
the state government, thirty-three years! Since that time, the state has spent
hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars on Zork that I have done and
could do, but I haven't had a single job from the State of NeZ York. Not
one! Just the other day, Ze Zere turned doZn for a highZay job on Long
Island. And I have been told by a friend in Albany, 'You are Zasting your
time trying to get jobs there as long as Robert 0oses is living.' Ever since I
retired, he has been hurting me in the pocketbook. And he has been hurting
me in the pride. Ever since!"

Singstad stood up, Zith astonishing violence for a man in his eighties,
Zalked over to the ZindoZ and looked doZn. It Zas a bleak January day
and the Zind Zhipping against the glass from off the 8pper Bay Zas cold
and bitter. It had piled snoZ against the red sandstone Zalls of the old fort.

But the Zalls looked mighty solid all the same, and Singstad muttered, half
under his breath, "All lies and fabrications. Lies and fabrications." And
then, after a Zhile, he said, aloud, "I'm not sorry. A. B. Jones Zas a 4uaker,
and 4uakers don't fight, but he Zas a Zonderful man. +e Zas a very
Zonderful man. All  my commissioners Zere Zonderful men. I'm not sorry
at all."

But then the old man fell silent again, looking out over the Battery and

945
across the Bay toZard Brooklyn, and Zhen he finally spoke again, after a
long time, he spoke in a very loZ voice and Zhat he said Zas: "Ever since.
Ever since."

Even after the Zar, no one Zould pay more than $20,000,000 for the
$48,000,000 in 4ueens-0idtoZn  Tunnel bonds, 0oses had said. As for the
Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, he had said it Zould "never sustain" the
$57,000,-000 in bonds it had cost.

Such predictions of financial disaster unless the Tunnel Authority Zas
"rescued" by using the revenues from his profitable bridges to "bail out" its
bankrupt tunnels had helped 0oses take it over. During the rest of his life,
he Zould, at every opportunity, attempt to prove that this Zas in fact Zhat
had happened.

In reality, the 4ueens-0idtoZn  Tunnel began earning almost enough to pay
all e[penses, including the interest on its bonds, practically from the day the
Zar ended; by 1949, it Zas earning a tidy annual surplus as Zell. As long as
he didn't control that tunnel, 0oses had argued that improved access from
4ueens Zas unnecessary; as soon as he took it over, he said improved
access Zas imperative—Zith the opening of his +orace +arding
E[pressZay, forerunner of the Long Island E[pressZay, tunnel traffic
soared, as Singstad had predicted it Zould, to levels at Zhich its annual
surpluses became huge.

0oses had said that the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel Zould be lucky to carry
9,000,000 cars per year. In its first full year of operation, the tunnel carried
more than 15,000,000 cars. Singstad's tunnel earned 0oses $5,485,-000 in
tolls that year—more than Zas earned by the Bron[-:hitestone Bridge,
more, in fact, than Zas earned by the +enry +udson, 0arine 3arkZay and
Cross Bay bridges combined. In its first year of operation, in fact, the tunnel
earned more than 20 percent of Triborough's total revenues— enough to
"sustain" not $57,000,000 but $133,000,000 in bonds.

The tZo tunnels took off from there. By 1965 they Zould be providing
close to a third of Triborough's total revenue. 0oses had predicted financial
disaster for them. Instead there Zas financial triumph. +e had said they
Zould have to be "salvaged" by the rest of Triborough's projects. In fact, if

946
there Zas any salvaging to be done, it Zas not of but by Singstad's tunnels;
their huge surpluses helped 0oses' profitable bridges—the +enry +udson
and Triborough and the Bron[-:hitestone—"salvage"  ones like the Cross
Bay and 0arine 3arkZay  Zhich did not earn enough to amorti]e their
bonds.

Not that those facts deterred 0oses, of course. In 1969, he Zrote in 3ublic
:orks:   A Dangerous Trade: "The [Triborough] Authority . . . salvaged the
tZo tunnnel bond issues ... In effect, this meant pledging bridge tolls after
all present bridge bonds Zere retired ..."

had led him in the NeZs poll. The old coalition Zhich he had led out
against the Democrats before had dissolved behind him. Republican
leaders, incensed because, in his drive for personal poZer, he had refused
them patronage, Zere determined, once and for all, to deny him their party's
nomination. Reform leaders—men interested in principles rather than
patronage—felt that he had, in maneuvers such as doZngrading the City
3lanning Commission and ousting .ern and Sayre and Stanley Isaacs,
betrayed those principles; the Citi]ens 8nion Zanted another Fusion
campaign, but one Zith a neZ knight at its head. And Zhen, in the spring of
1945, the 0ayor appealed secretly first to the City Fusion 3arty and then to
GO3 leaders for their endorsement and Zas humiliatingly rebuffed, he
announced publicly that he had decided that tZelve years as 0ayor Zas
enough for any man, that he Zould not run again and that he Zould support
instead an independent "No Deal" ticket headed by reformer NeZbold
0orris.

The events that folloZed that announcement brought the career of Robert
0oses full  circle. For 0oses, Zho had so long and so violently despised
Tammany +all and all that it stood for, Zho had called Tammany "a rotten
political machine," Zho had spent the first years of his career fighting it,
Zho had understood so Zell that the essence of the machine, the motivation
of its leaders, men he said Zere interested only in "dough," in "obscurely
making a living out of politics," never changed, Zho had asked so
eloquently in 1933, "Do you think that the Currys, 0cCooeys, Farleys and
Flynns are in any essential respect different from the 0urphys, 0cCooeys,
0cCabes and 0cCalls  of the cartoons of a generation ago?," Zho had

947
Zarned voters in three separate mayoral campaigns that they must never let
Tammany return to poZer, Zho had said during the 1941 campaign that "a
return to the city of Tammany Zould be a counsel of despair," Zho had said
of Tammany's 1941 candidate, the same :illiam O'DZyer Zho  Zas its
candidate noZ, "No Tammany man can rise above the local machine"— this
same Robert 0oses, during the entire campaign, never once critici]ed
Tammany or its candidate. +is lone public statement ostensibly supported
NeZbold 0orris  but also mentioned O'DZyer favorably. And he supported
O'DZyer's running mate, La]arus Joseph, Zhom La Guardia called "Flynn's
messenger boy."

0en  Zho kneZ 0oses  Zere Zaiting for  the quid commensurate Zith the
invaluable quo he had bestoZed on Tammany +all. They did not even have
to Zait until the campaign ended. In a paid announcement over :JZ four
days before the election—a date selected to ma[imi]e Election Day impact
Zhile still  alloZing  ample time for press reaction—O'DZyer disclosed that
"shortly" after his nomination in August, he had conferred Zith "this
valuable public servant" and had asked him to be a part of his
administration if he Zas elected—and not merely as 3ark Commissioner
and Tri-borough Authority chairman. +e had told 0oses, O'DZyer said,
that if he Zas elected he Zould immediately create a neZ post to handle a
vast program of postZar public Zorks construction, a "Coordinator of
Construction" Zith sZeeping poZers not only over parks, parkZays,
bridges and tunnels, but over the construction of public housing, the field
from Zhich 0oses  had

been barred by La Guardia—over, indeed, the construction of all major
public Zorks of any type in the City of NeZ  York. +e had asked 0oses,
O'DZyer said, if he Zould be Zilling  to accept that post.

"I am happy to announce," O'DZyer said, "that he has agreed to render this
important public service."

Disbelieving reporters telephoned 0oses at his apartment. "It's true," he
said.

Not that O'DZyer needed any help—he Zon in a landslide—but 0oses'
agreement provided the Tammany candidate Zith valuable protective

948
coloration. 3ress reaction Zas precisely Zhat O'DZyer's advisers had
foreseen it Zould be. +is announcement "Zas seen today as ansZering
charges of Zaste should the Democratic-AL3 candidate Zin Tuesday's
election," the 3ost reported. ":e  like ... the announcement better than any
neZs Ze've heard yet in connection Zith the mayoralty campaign," said the
NeZs. "Big Bob the Builder 0oses  is one of the ablest public servants in
this or any other city. It Zould be tough to see him step out of the public
service picture."

There Zas, hoZever, pu]]lement among the editorial Zriters: hoZ could
Robert 0oses—the foe of corrupt machine politicians, the man Zho Zould
never compromise his principles or make "deals," Zho Zould not give
politicians inside information or patronage or aZard contracts to political
favorites —manage to run construction in an administration Zhich Zould
be dominated by elements to Zhich construction deals, inside information,
patronage and contract favoritism Zere a Zay of life. The +erald Tribune,
Zhich Zas supporting Jonah J. Goldstein, the Republican-Liberal candidate,
and Zas careful to note that Goldstein had also promised to keep 0oses on,
said that Zhile "the O'DZyer statement is good politics and even better, it is
good common sense ... a question still remains: +oZ long? +oZ long
Zould 0r.  0oses  last under an administration that Zas dominated by the
more raffish and corrupt elements of Tammany +all? At a good guess Ze
Zould give him about si[  Zeeks."

The guess, off by appro[imately fifteen years, Zas about as good as the
assumption that underlay it, an assumption revealing only the depth of the
misapprehension about 0oses' true character. For the Robert 0oses about
Zhom the +erald Tribune Zas editoriali]ing  hadn't e[isted for a long time.
The Robert 0oses of 1945 Zas not the foe of the practical politician but the
essence of that peculiar animal. +e Zas the complete realist. :illing, in
order to accomplish his purposes—purposes Zhich in 1945 revolved around
the retention and acquisition of poZer—to throZ onto the table any chip he
held, he had, in the election of 1945, Zith a chance to obtain more poZer
than he had ever possessed before, throZn onto the table the most valuable
of all his chips: his name.

949
The drama that Zas the relationship betZeen Fiorello +enry La Guardia and
Robert 0oses had been played out for tZelve years in the brightest of
spotlights. Its last scene Zas played out in semi-darkness: the gloom of an
upstairs bedroom in the small, heavily mortgaged house in Riverdale, the

only thing La Guardia oZned besides $8,000 in 8nited States :ar Bonds,
in Zhich, nineteen months after he had left office, the Zasted little bundle
of a man that had once been the Little FloZer lay behind draZn shades,
Zaiting to die.

":hen   the 0ayor  sent for me late in the summer of 1947/' 0oses has
related, "I Zas shocked at the change in him. +e Zas in bed, so shrunken,
so chapfallen and yet so spunky, and so obviously on the Zay out. To tell
the truth, I felt like crying."

Long after La Guardia died, :alter  Binger recalled for the author a
conversation he had had Zith the e[-0ayor in 1946, Zhen La Guardia had
still been able to get doZntoZn to his beloved Engineers Club for lunch.

"La Guardia Zas eating alone in the corner," Binger says. "I Zas eating at
the center table, and I noticed that he Zas looking very gloomy, and after
lunch I Zent up to him and I said, '+oZ's things, 0ajor?'

"+e said he had just been thinking about the city, and then he said, '0oses
has got too much poZer up here noZ.' "

Binger, Zho hated 0oses for Zhat he had done to Isaacs, and Zho had
hoped in vain for years that La Guardia Zould take a firm stand against
0oses at last, says that La Guardia looked so unhappy Zhile he Zas saying
this that he Zas moved to put his arm around the little 0ayor's shoulders.
But he couldn't resist asking as he did so, ":ell, 0ajor,  Zho gave it to
him?"

At that, Binger recalls, La Guardia looked even sadder. Finally, he said,
"Yes, but I could control him. NoZ no one Zill  be able to control him."

The first part of the e[-0ayor's  statement Zas not completely accurate. The
second part Zas.

950
noZ enlarged—enlarged to a point at Zhich they involved in effect the
reshaping of its entire public estate—employed that force too to compel the
city to accept his aims as its oZn.

The scale of the neZ federal involvement in urban America Zas un-
precedentedly massive. Before the Zar—during the entire Depression—the
federal government had financed a total of 200,000 loZ-income apartments.
:ithin   the first four  years after the Zar, the federal government authori]ed
the financing of 810,000 loZ-income apartments. In 1949, Title I of a neZ
Federal +ousing Act codified a neZ concept—urban reneZal—that insured
that :ashington's  role Zould henceforth be as crucial as City +all's not
only on loZ-income housing but in most major urban reshapings. Before
the Zar federal aid built mainly highZays in the open countryside. The
Federal-Aid +ighZay  Act of 1944 authori]ed arterial routes Zithin city
limits as Zell, and Zith  each postZar federal highZay act the proposed
urban mileage soared; the Interstate +ighZay Act of 1956 empoZered the
government in :ashington  to troZel doZn  6,700 miles of roads Zithin the
cities of America.

0ost  Depression-era federal aid had, moreover, been funneled into the
cities through the cities' governments or through neZ agencies such as
housing "authorities" set up and controlled by the cities' governments.
NoZhere had this been truer than in NeZ York, Zhere La Guardia's alliance
Zith Roosevelt had insured that :3A  and 3:A   grants Zould be funneled
through the city's highest elected official. (0oses had been able to obtain a
disproportionate share of such grants, but only by Zorking Zith and on that
official.) As federal grants to cities increased after the Zar, hoZever, so did
the authority of the federal bureaucracy—at the e[pense of the cities'
authority.

In NeZ York, as the city's control over federal grants decreased, 0oses'
increased.

It increased partly because of 0oses' bill-drafting genius, and Zhat that
genius enabled him to make out of the neZ post he had obtained from
O'DZver.

951
The post lay outside the established structure of the city's government.
NoZhere in the forty-nine chapters of the City Charter Zas there a single
mention of a "City Construction Coordinator." To some men, this might
have represented an obstacle. To 0oses, it represented an opportunity. For
since there Zas no definition of the position's poZers, he could Zrite the
definition himself.

As O'DZyer had conceived the poZers, they Zould be substantial—the
Coordinator, Zhile an appointed official, Zould, in the construction field,
possess authority over all other appointed officials, even department heads
—but bounded by a strict upper as Zell as outer and time limit; the
Coordinator's authority, limited to construction and temporary—to last only
as long as the postZar adjustment period—Zould be subordinate alZays to
that of the elected officials to Zhom the voters had entrusted the poZer to
make deeisions for the city: he Zould be merely an instrument to carry out
their deeisions. The amendment to the city's Administrative Code drafted by
0oses to ereate the position—and delivered to the incoming

administration in the midst of the inaugural confusion—ostensibly Zas
faithful to O'DZyer's  conception, providing that "the Coordinator shall
schedule and . . . e[pedite the Zork of all agencies of the city" but only
"upon approval of projects by the 0ayor and governing bodies of the city."
Not one of the Assistant Corporation Counsels interrupted in the midst of
settling into their neZ offices by a request from O'DZyer to "take a look" at
the draft, saZ that it Zas anything more. :hen  the Citi]ens 8nion  protested
that it "gives too much poZer to one person and supersedes the Charter,"
"sources close to O'DZyer" assured reporters that the Coordinator's job
Zould be "purely administrative and not policy-making." City Council and
Board of Estimate passed it unanimously after the most cursory discussion,
and O'DZyer quickly signed it into laZ  as Local LaZ Number I of 1946, the
first legislative act of his administration. (Reporters accepted O'DZyer's
assurance; the press paid as little attention to the code amendment as it had
to 0oses' stealthy, subtle takeover of the Tunnel Authority a year earlier; its
approval by the Board rated e[actly one paragraph in the Times.)

But, buried Zithin the lines of convoluted legalisms, the amendment also
contained an innocuous phrase—concealed, as Zas the custom of the man

952
Zho had been the best bill drafter in Albany, at the end of a long sentence
Zhose other clauses all purportedly limited his poZers—alloZing the
Coordinator to "represent the city in its relations Zith cooperating state and
federal agencies." 0oses used this phrase, so innocent in appearance, as
authori]ation to Zrite  into contracts betZeen the city and these agencies
provisions designating himself as the city representative Zith Zhom they
agreed to deal, thereby making certain that it Zould be he and he alone Zho
Zas presenting the city's position—or his representation of the city's
position —on the design and relative desirability of construction projects to
the tZo "outside" governments Zhich Zould be largely funding them. The
phrase also empoZered 0oses to negotiate Zith federal and state officials,
learn their position and present that position—or his representation of that
position —to city officials,  to be, in other Zords, the sole broker betZeen
the city and the governments on Zhich the city Zas relying for desperately
needed funds. 0oses' representations Zere not alZays strictly accurate. For
tZenty years, for e[ample, he falsely told successive mayors that the
Federal Bureau of 3ublic Roads Zas unalterably opposed to building the
LoZer 0anhattan  E[pressZay as a tunnel. But for tZenty years—until, in
1964, 0ayor Robert F. :agner,  Jr., Zent to :ashington  to find  out about
the e[pressZay for himself—no mayor or other city official investigated
any 0oses representations. During those years, city officials heard only
0oses' version of Zhat the federal government Zas "insisting" on.

0ost  of the time, moreover, no misrepresentation Zas necessary. 0oses'
relationship Zith federal bureaucrats helped insure that Zhat they Zere
insisting on Zas Zhat he Zas insisting on. Their philosophy, of course, Zas
in many Zays his philosophy—the road builders in :ashington Zere
animated by the same "engineering mentality" that played so important a
part in his make-up—and there Zas a personal factor involved as Zell: by
1946 he

had been dealing intimately Zith tbe officials of the Bureau of 3ublic Roads
for dose to tZenty years, Zining them, dining them, charming them,
persuading them to approve i parkZays and then, Zhen the parkZays

Zere finished, thrilling them on elaborate tours that shoZed them Zhat he
had done Zith their money; Bureau director F. V. Du 3ont once Zrote

953
0oses: "I  knoZ of nothing comparable in the 8nited Stales, and, I think I
can safely say, the Zorld. 0ore poZer to you!**  Du 3om's successor, de
facto bead of the Interstate +igh Zas Bertram D. Tallamy,

former superintendent of the e Department of 3ublic :orks,

the same Bertram D. Tallamy Zho in 1926 had come doZn from Niagara to
sit at 0oses' feet for private lectures on the art of Getting Things Done—
and Zho told the author that the Interstate +igh* an Zas built by

principles he had learned at those lectures. 0oses Zas not merely the friend
of the federal road builders, he Zas their idol. Lastly, of course, the
information on Zhich they based their decisions on Zhat Zas best for NeZ
York Zas the information tin a saZ fit to give them. If there Zere other

vieZs in the city on proposed highZays—as to Zhere they should be
located so as to minimi] e neighborhood disruption, for e[ample—the
Bureau of 3ublic Roads didn't get to hear them. The roads that the Bureau
approved, roads that Zould play so large a role in detennining the city's
destiny, therefore, Zere 0oses' roads; the city officials supposedly
responsible for the city's destiny had only tZo alternatives: to accept the
roads offered to them or to turn them doZn—along Zith the tens of millions
of dollars involved.

It Zas a position ideal for the ZhipsaZ—and 0oses used that technique

unmercifull; Judge Jacob Lutsky. the gruff, hard-boiled genius of

municipal administration Zho Zas to be a key behind-the-scenes adviser to

all three of the postZar Democratic mayors. O'DZyer. Impellitteri and

• ; - -per:

8nder federal laZ, a commitment from the 0ayor Zasn't enough; you also
needed a commitment from the Board of Estimate. But [0oses] Zould go to

hington and :ashington  Zould say, ""Okay, as long as vou've got 0ayor
and Board of Estimate approval." Then he Zould get an "Okay" from the

954
0ayor,  Zith the 0ayor  saying, "Don't forget you need both :ashington  and
Board of Estimate approval." Then he'd run to :ashington and saZ "Look.
I've got a commitment from the 0ayor." They'd firm  it up some more, say,
"Okay, as long

ou've got an approval from the Board of Estimate." And he'd come and say
to the Board of Estimate, "If you don't give me a commitment. I'll lose the
money." And lots of times Ze had to give him the commitment because Ze
didn't Zant to lose it.

+ousing, 0oses took over by indirection. Faced, as soon as he took office,
Zith an immediate need for competent housing administrators, the harried
neZ 0ayor  found 0oses ready Zith  recommendations. Before the 0ayor
reali]ed Zhat he Zas doing, he had filled three of the five places on the City
+ousing Authority  board—and many top Authority staff positions —Zith
men loyal not to him but to his Construction Coordinator. Despite his lack
of the slightest formal connection Zith the +ousing Authority, 0oses
controlled it absolutely for a decade. As late as 1955, :arren 0oscoZ,

appointed its e[ecutive director by 0ayor :agner,   reported to :agner  that
its chief engineer regarded 0oses, not the 0ayor, "as his boss."

In 1948, 0oses had a visit from a Yale classmate Zho Zanted to discuss
details of a neZ type of federal slum clearance program—"urban re-neZa
l"—that he Zas considering sponsoring. It Zas 8nited States Senator
Robert A. Taft. 0onths before Congress approved the Federal +ousing Act
of 1949—months before the public had even heard the phrase "urban
reneZal"—0oses had persuaded O'DZyer to appoint a 0ayor's Slum
Clearance Committee (Robert 0oses, chairman). Through that committee
he controlled urban reneZal in NeZ York—by far the largest program in
any city in America—for a decade, controlled it absolutely. The 0ayor and
the Board of Estimate, Lutsky says, "never even kneZ Zhat Zas going on in
that committee until a project Zas presented to us for approval." Before the
Zar, 0oses had used a force outside the city to help him bend the city to his
Zill.  NoZ there Zas a neZ outside force. +e used that force, too.

And he Zas to go on using it for some time. O'DZyer, in creating the
position of Construction Coordinator, had envisioned it as a temporary,

955
"postZar adjustment period" job. But temporary is a relative term,
particularly Zhen applied to a job Robert 0oses Zas holding. And postZar
is a time limit Zith  a certain elasticity. O'DZyer Zould remain in his job for
less than five years. 0oses Zould remain in his job—signing his letters
"Robert 0oses, Coordinator"; he preferred that OrZellian title to
"Commissioner"—for more than tZenty years.

:hile   using the neZ force, moreover, he did not neglect the old.

+is control of the Legislature, cemented by patronage and favors, remained
as solid during the postZar as the preZar era. As for the Governor's chair,
that Zas occupied for the first tZelve postZar years by Thomas E. DeZey
and :.  Averell +arriman.  DeZey liked to boast that "Bob discovered rather
quickly that he couldn't push me around," but the Zords rang rather holloZ
to men like the GO3 politician Zho once heard 0oses on the phone Zith
the Governor. "I Zalked in and he Zas cursing and shouting—'You
goddamned son of a bitch! Don't you tell me Zhat to do, you stupid son of a
bitch!' Then he hung up and I said, 'Bob, Zas that the Governor?' And he
said, Zith that big grin, 'Yeahhhh.' " +arriman, a crusty aristocrat Zith a
legendary lack of aZe even for 3residents, stood in aZe of Robert 0oses, in
part because he had, during the 1920's, been one of the men an[ious to
create parks for the public but utterly unable to do so until 0oses had come
along and accomplished Zhat he had begun to think Zas all but impossible,
in part because of sheer force of personality: the Governor Zas one of the
regular guests at the Sunday brunches at +erbert Bayard SZope's Sands
3oint mansion, and guests recall him sitting silently, not venturing to
interject a Zord, Zhile 0oses,  another regular, discoursed. But +arriman
had some ideas, rather novel in public officials of the time, on the need for
increased concern for individuals and for community participation in the
planning of public Zorks; noticing on a trip to 0onticello   early in his
Governorship that

highZay guardrails had been put up Zithin three feet of service stations and
restaurants, isolating them from the road that should have brought them
business, he issued on the spot an order that they be torn doZn. Convinced
that 0oses Zas not as final a Zord on the construction of urban
e[pressZays as he had been on suburban parkZays, he installed a neZ

956
superintendent of the Department of 3ublic :orks, John :.   Johnson of
Buffalo, gave him several "liberal" young aides, and told them to "get
tough" Zith 0oses.  But 0oses got tough Zith  them—and Zith +arriman—
instead.

+arriman aide James E. True[ describes the Governor's education in the
facts of political life. "If  you began to fight Zith 0oses,"  True[  says, "you'd
have to fight Zith him on so many fronts. You'd have to fight Zith him on
parkZays and on parks ... +e had so much potential for trouble because of
the many directorships he had. And the main threat he had Zas [to issue
press releases]. +e could alZays cause you so much trouble by calling you
'a dirty politician'—he Zas above politics, of course . . . Governors Zere
alZays nervous about this. You kneZ that if he said something, the
neZspapers Zould pick it up big." 0oses disciplined +arriman  not only by
using publicity but by Zithholding  it: by not inviting  the Governor to speak
at ground breakings and ribbon cuttings. In 1957, for e[ample, 0oses
staged a day-long series of ribbon cuttings to celebrate the completion of a
string of grade-crossing elimination projects for Zhich Nassau County
communities had long been clamoring. The Democratic Governor, Zho had
authori]ed the projects and provided the funds for them, didn't even knoZ
the ceremonies Zere being held until he read neZspaper stories about them
—stories and pictures of 0oses and the other official participants, all
Republicans. Furious, +arriman ordered that a loyal public relations man be
assigned to D3:'s  metropolitan area headquarters to alert him to future
ceremonies—as True[ puts it, "to try to get us some 3R." But +arriman
found that gubernatorial participation in ribbon cuttings Zas no guarantee
of a gubernatorial share of the publicity. "0oses Zould put out the
announcements, and 0oses Zould put out the summaries of Zhat guys
said," True[ e[plains. True[  put out summaries of the Governor's speeches,
of course, but, he says, "the press recogni]ed that 0oses' office Zas running
[the ceremony], and they Zould call his office and not me" for summaries
and other information—such as Zho deserved the credit for the public
improvement.

Almost despite himself, moreover, +arriman found himself being
influenced by prevailing professional opinion.

957
:hen   conflicts arose over a 0oses project, the old-line D3:   engineers
Zould present studies to prove that 0oses Zas right—and it Zas difficult to
find any engineers Zho felt that 0oses Zas Zrong. ("One of the problems,"
True[ Zould  note, "is that engineers tend to agree on these things.")
+arriman, after all, Zas not an engineer. ":hen  engineers came in and said
they agree Zith 0oses and this Zas the Zay it had to be done, a Governor
had to respect that opinion," True[ says.

Soon the Governor Zas suing for peace. +arriman had called in True[ and
another young liberal aide and, in True['s Zords, "said he Zas getting

reports from the local people up on the St. LaZrence that 0oses Zas going
to tear out lots of the homes of little people along the St. LaZrence for his
parkZays, and the little people had to be protected, and Ze should get right
up there [to ascertain if the reports Zere true]." The tZo aides found out
they Zere—"there Zere cottages lining the shore near 0assena," True[
says, "nice-looking cottages, too, not lu[urious but nice, cottages into Zhich
you could tell loving care had gone. 0oses Zas just obliterating them"—but
"about ten minutes after Ze got back [to Albany], there Zas a letter from
0oses [to +arriman]:  These people—us—had been up in his territory and
Ze had been talking to people Ze shouldn't have been talking to, etc. And
that Zas the last Ze heard of the little people. It Zas never brought up
again." The Governor had backed doZn. Shortly thereafter, he suggested
that the huge centerpiece of the St. LaZrence project be named the "Robert
0oses 3oZer Dam." Soon he Zas being afforded star billing at ribbon
cuttings— ne[t to 0oses', of  course. True['s tardiness in perceiving the
change in the 0oses-+arriman relationship cost him a humiliating tongue-
lashing. For a Brooklyn-4ueens E[pressZay ribbon cutting in 1958—at
Zhich +arriman  Zas to be the main speaker—"I had Zritten a speech
kidding 0oses,"  True[ recalls. ":e   Zere in the car going toZard the
ceremony and the Governor looked at [the speech] and he bleZ up and
accused me of seeking to undermine his relationship Zith Robert 0oses."
True[ started to argue that "you can score points" by attacking 0oses, but
+arriman fleZ  into a rage, violently upbraided his aide and told him: "I
Zant you to knoZ Robert 0oses is coming out for me in the campaign." (It
Zas small consolation for True[ that 0oses' keen eye for political realities

958
saZ early on the popularity of +arriman's opponent, Nelson A. Rockefeller,
and that the hoped-for endorsement never occurred.)

As important as 0oses' relationship Zith the state's Governor Zas his
relationship Zith its administrative machinery.

It Zas, of course, largely his machinery, the governmental apparatus his
State Reconstruction Commission had designed in 1919. +e, more than any
other individual, kneZ Zhich  of the tens of thousands of administrative
positions in that government Zere crucial to his purposes, and after a
quarter of a century of poZer in the state, he had "0oses 0en" in most of
these posts. +e had taken measures to minimi]e the threat to his purposes
posed by key officials Zho Zere not 0oses 0en:  some of these officials
Zould have been astonished to learn—most of them never did—that their
secretaries Zere on 0oses' payroll as Zell as the state's, and that in
transcribing confidential memoranda and minutes of secret meetings
devoted to blocking a 0oses project or to curbing 0oses' poZer, these
secretaries made an e[tra carbon, Zhich Zas delivered nightly to 0oses'
representatives in Albany.

0ore  than tZenty years before—Zhile Bill O'DZyer  Zas still  a cop
pounding the beat—Robert 0oses had laid the groundZork for control of
the state machinery that Zould directly affect his road building, dividing the
State Department of 3ublic :orks  into ten geographical districts, placing
the entire NeZ York City-Long Island area, in Zhich most of his road
building Zas concentrated, in a single (and hence easily controllable)
district, District

Ten, and Zriting into state laZ a unique provision that gave his Long Island
State 3ark Commission a unique veto poZer over all parkZay plans. 0oses
cemented his control of District Ten's engineers, already firm through
identity of interest and philosophy, Zith stronger mortars. +is favor Zas, for
many engineers, the only road out of the tedious progression of the life of a
civil service engineer, a life that offered little in the Zay of either money or
poZer. Cultivate his favor and you could go on lu[urious jaunts and be Zell
paid for the privilege—as District Ten chief engineer J. J. Darcy Zas in
being aZarded lucrative "consultantships" in 0oses' highZay studies of
other cities. Cultivate that favor and you could be placed in command of

959
great enterprises, as Arthur B. :illiams  Zas Zhen 0oses plucked him out
of a routine middle-echelon engineering civil service job and handed him
authority over a hundred middle-echelon civil service engineers by
appointing him general manager of the Niagara State 3ark Commission.
Cultivate that favor and Zhen you had had enough of civil service, you
might receive a partnership in the consulting engineer firms that received
0oses' immensely lucrative contracts: Darcy's successor, 0ilton E. Goul,
became 0ilton E. Goul of Buckley, Shumavon and Goul. Lose that favor
and you Zould find yourself mired for decades in the same job, or
transferred to some other district—as a recalcitrant patrolman is transferred
from the BroadZay beat to Staten Island—and you Zould Zait out the long
years to your retirement sitting in a drab office in +ornell supervising the
grading of graveled farm roads in Chemung County. Even during the feZ
months Zhen Johnson Zas heading D3:, he and the other +arriman
appointees teetering precariously atop the huge D3: bureaucracy proved
unable to deflect it even momentarily from the course on Zhich it had been
gathering momentum for long decades. "The D3: is a tremendous
hierarchy," True[ Zould say years later. ":hen  Ze  got there, it Zas his
hierarchy. :hen  Ze left,  it Zas still all  basically his." 8nder Tallamy, D3:
had given 0oses a veto poZer over all highZay projects in the NeZ York
metropolitan area. E[cept for a feZ months, he retained that veto during
Johnson's superintendency, too.

The returns electing Rockefeller Governor had hardly landed on
Rockefeller's desk in November 1958 Zhen a hand-delivered letter from
0oses arrived there recommending the appointment to the D3:
superintendency of J. Burch 0c0orran,  chief engineer of 0oses' State
3oZer Authority.

A prototype second-generation 0oses 0an, 0c0orran   Zas not as brilliant
an engineer as originals like Art +oZland or Earle AndreZs, but he Zas
competent in his profession and possessed the qualities that 0oses noZ
considered more important than brilliance. (The qualities 0oses mentions
first in his evaluation of 0c0orran   reveal Zhat he Zas looking for:
"0c0orran   . . . Zas not an innovator. +e Zas a good soldier, alZays loyal. .
. .") Rockefeller accepted the recommendation—and for at least the first
term of Rockefeller's Governorship, 0oses still had his veto poZer. In an

960
arrangement at least tacitly approved by three Governors—an arrangement
lasting for at least seventeen years after the Zar—"0oses had the say,"
0c0orran   says, "over Zho got the contracts on all NeZ York City [area]
jobs." And not just on contracts. 0oses had the say—absolute authority—

to decide not only Zho should design and build all highZays in the
metropolitan area, but Zhich highZays Zould be built, Zhen they Zould be
built and Zhere they Zould be built. The state had in effect turned over to
him—intact and complete—all its authority over the construction of arterial
highZays in and around NeZ York City.

This authority Zas e[tensive. The Interstate +ighZay System Zas described
by its creators as a "partnership betZeen the state highZay departments and
the federal government," and that description Zas accurate. No city Zas a
partner. Federal funds for an arterial highZay Zithin a city Zere handed not
to the city but to the state in Zhich it Zas located. The state— not the city—
had the poZer to spend those funds. The state had the final say on every
detail of the plans and specifications, doZn to the selection of the specific
city streets and lots along Zhich the roads Zould run. They supervised
every detail of the actual construction.

And since NeZ York State had turned that poZer over to Robert 0oses, that
poZer Zas vested in him. +is possession of it therefore strengthened the
control he already possessed over highZays by virtue of his influence Zith
the federal government. Strong already, his poZer Zas noZ stronger still.

Over the planning and building of arterial highZays in and around the City
of NeZ York—arterial highZays  Zhich Zould  do so much to shape the
future of that city—the federal and state governments had a stranglehold.
The hands that implemented that stranglehold Zere the hands of Robert
0oses.

It Zas not only forces outside the city's government that Robert 0oses used
in bending the city to his Zill. +e  used forces inside that government as
Zell.

+e used, for e[ample, the force of greed.

961
Greed had alZays been the force that drove the city's five-county
Democratic political machine. But 0oses' tZelve previous years in office in
the city had been La Guardia's tZelve years, too, and during those years the
machine's influence in the city's government had been all but eliminated.
0oses, in Getting Things Done, had been able to deal almost entirely Zith
the Little FloZer, and only occasionally Zith the spiritual descendants of
Red 0ike  +ylan.

NoZ, hoZever, the machine Zas back in poZer. It Zas not, at first,
dominated as it had been before La Guardia by the 0anhattan Democratic
organi]ation housed in Tammany +all, the Great :igZam  at 8nion  Square.
:eakened  in relation to its allies by the population e[odus from 0anhattan,
the 0anhattan organi]ation had been cut off from patronage and contracts
at City +all  by La Guardia, from the Statehouse by Lehman and from the
:hite   +ouse by Roosevelt, Zho, taking revenge for its defiant support of
Alfred E. Smith at the 1932 presidential convention, had funneled federal
largesse instead through the Boss of the Bron[, EdZard J. Flynn, Zith
enough going to Brooklyn to make its Democratic organi]ation as Zell as
Flynn's stronger than 0anhattan's. By 1945, the Great :igZam  itself no
longer belonged to the 0anhattan organi]ation, Zhich, unable to meet

the mortgage payments, had had the building sold out from under it,* and
neither did control of the city's five-borough Democracy. But journalists,
rhetorical traditionalists, Zere still referring to that Democracy as a Zhole
as "Tammany +all," and if that catch phrase Zas misleading in political
terms, it Zas accurate in moral ones, for if the controlling structure of the
postZar Democratic machine Zas different from the pre-La Guardia model,
the ethics of the machine Zere not. As the +erald Tribune editoriali]ed in
1945, "A vast, corrupt organi]ation, starved through tZelve long years, is
panting for its revenge." To the men of the machine, the end of the La
Guardia administration, cleanest in the city's history, meant only one thing:
the tZelve lean years Zere over. NoZ Zas the time for the fat. E finita la
cuccagna! the Little FloZer had promised—and he had kept his promise.
But noZ he Zas gone. The party Zas on again. NeZ York Zas again a city
in Zhich SCANDAL  and GRAFT and FRA8D  glared bold and black out of
the headlines stacked on neZsstands, in Zhich the neZspapers Zere filled
Zith reports of petty peculation—and in Zhich the reports, no matter hoZ

962
lurid, Zere no more than a hint of the e[tent to Zhich the city Zas again a
place in Zhich the badges of governmental authority, the badges of fire
inspectors and health inspectors and plumbing inspectors and building
inspectors, had become again silver- and gold-plated licenses to e[tort
money from the city's citi]ens. NeZ York Zas a city in Zhich  the police,
every day, sold the laZ in the streets—sometimes it almost seemed as if
being on the force Zas synonymous Zith being on the take—and in Zhich
sacred justice Zas sold in the very temples of justice (Zhich Zas not too
surprising, of course, since many of justice's black-robed priests, Zho
presided in those temples, had purchased the right to do so), in Zhich the
only laZ that really counted Zas the laZ of the jungle. NeZ York Zas a city
in Zhich public office  Zas, increasingly, a means to private profit. NeZ
York Zas a city in Zhich it  sometimes seemed as if there Zas scarcely an
officeholder Zho didn't demand a slice of the pie—and in Zhich the pie Zas
big enough so that it sometimes seemed as if a slice Zas available for every
officeholder no matter Zhat his party, the Democrats shreZdly making
enough key Republicans a part of the arrangements by Zhich the city Zas
governed—putting them on the public payroll, giving them a share of
judgeships and a cut of lucrative city contracts, taking them in as business
partners—so that the GO3 Zouldn't try too hard to disrupt those
arrangements, and so that Zhen a private citi]en, or the Citi]ens 8nion, or a
neZspaper, demanded an investigation of official corruption, no one Zith
the poZer to conduct a real one Zas interested in doing so. NeZ York Zas
the city of the Fi[, of  "protection," of the shakedoZn. The tZelve years of
La Guardia had been only an interlude. NeZ York Zas again Zhat it had
been before the Little FloZer bounced into City +all: a city in Zhich
everything had its price.

: "I never thought I'd live to see the tiger get skinned," Jimmy :alker
remarked. The sale Zas symbolic not only of the loss of poZer by
Tammany but of the rise in poZer of the city's labor unions: the purchaser
Zas the children's dress unit of the ILG:8.

The price Zas highest in 0oses' fields.

Ever since the post-Civil :ar  years in Zhich the TZeed Ring, authori]ing
municipal building on a scale that gave NeZ York its oZn Reconstruction

963
Era, took fi[ed percentages—5 percent for the 0ayor, 20 percent for the
Comptroller, 25 percent for :illiam   0arcy  TZeed, Zho, Zith  his choice of
any post, chose the public Zorks commissionership—of the padding in
contractors' padded bills, public Zorks had been the main ingredient in the
rich sZill  of graft on Zhich Tammany battened.

NoZ the techniques Zere different: subtler, smoother. Charlie 0urphy had
taught his sachems that it Zas stupid to take cash, too easy for some prying
reporter or rebel district attorney to trace it, too easy to prove that it had
been taken in e[change for a favor, too easy to subpoena a contractor's
books and haul the contractor's timid little bookkeeper before a grand jury
and frighten him into telling Zhat the items listed as "cash disbursements"
really represented. By precept, if not by preachment (for Silent Charlie had
not received his nickname for nothing), for e[ample, by having his Board of
Aldermen hold up street-closing permits for the construction of
3ennsylvania Station until the railroad aZarded the e[cavation contract to a
firm in Zhich  he had a hidden financial interest, he shoZed Tammany that
there Zere safer Zays of making money from public Zorks. By 1905,
Sachem George :ashington 3lunkitt, Zho, as a state senator, had ridden at
the head of the "Black +orse Cavalry," Zas sitting, resplendent in handle-
bar mustache and gleaming stovepipe hat, on Gra]iano's bootblack stand in
the old courthouse off Foley Square at noon hours e[pansively e[plaining
hoZ cavalry Zere obsolete and hoZ he Zas coining millions out of the
"coincidences" surrounding "big improvements," coincidences Zhich he
called, in a phrase he may also have coined, "honest graft." (Silent Charlie,
Zho, if he didn't invent "honest graft," refined it to meet the needs of a
modern political organi]ation, coined no phrases; he had not received his
nickname for nothing.)

0urphy  and 3lunkitt Zere uneducated men; they had never been to laZ
school. If they had, they Zould have found the making of "honest graft"
safer and easier still. Al Smith, as alZays, phrased it best. Strolling through
a laZ-school library one day, the Governor noticed a student poring intently
over his books. "There," he said Zith a smile, "is a young man studying
hoZ to take a bribe and call it a fee." By the TZenties, most honest graft
Zas being Zorked through "fees," mostly through legal fees (more
politicians belong to the legal than any other profession), but also through

964
the real estate brokers' fees called "commissions," the insurance brokers'
fees called "premiums" and the public relations fees called "retainers."
Jimmy :alker's  creZ, overconfident and careless, forgot 0urphy's precepts,
but Samuel Sea-bury, finding the cash in their tin bo[es, drummed the
teachings of the master into Tammany again strongly enough so that the
braves Zould never forget them again. In the post-La Guardia era, there Zas
no more "Tin Bo["  Brigade. It Zas the Retainer Regiment noZ. Corrupt
public officials Zho  Zere laZyers Zould support or oppose a bill according
to the Zishes of a business

firm, and later the firm Zould retain the official  in his private capacity as an
attorney, paying him a fee for "services"—legal services, of course
—"rendered." Corrupt public officials Zho Zere insurance brokers Zould
be alloZed to Zrite a firm's policies, and thereby to obtain the premiums
attached. In the interaction of politics and public Zorks, cash Zas noZ the
medium of e[change only on the loZest levels. NoZ if some investigator
found that a contractor's books included a $10,000 payment to a city
councilman, ne[t to the payment Zould be the notation "legal fee," and Zho
could prove that the services the councilman had rendered to earn the fee
Zere anything other than legal, that the councilman's vote in favor of a bill
the firm also happened to favor Zas anything but coincidence? The
presence of a councilman's name in a contractor's books Zould, moreover,
be unusual, an indication that either the contractor or the councilman Zas
still ignorant of the higher refinements of honest graft, one of Zhich Zas to
have the contractor pay the fee not to the councilman but to another laZ
firm, Zhich  Zould then, taking out a small handling charge for itself, pass it
along.

The profit in public Zorks  in NeZ York had long been huge; Zith the
postZar building boom, it reached neZ dimensions. "It's a king's ransom in
a city this si]e," Reuben La]arus said. And if there Zas subtlety noZ in the
making of this profit, the making Zas still, for the machine, the motive. The
greed Zas only refined, not eliminated. The Tiger, starved for so long, Zas
more voracious than ever. Every large-scale public Zork, it sometimes
seemed, had to have its arrangements, its payoffs, its deals—its
"coincidences." 8ntil the coincidences Zere arranged, there Zould be no
public Zork. If  Board of Estimate or City Council approval Zas required,

965
that approval Zould not be forthcoming. If implementation of announced
policy by a city agency Zas necessary, that implementation Zould be
endlessly delayed. The great 0ayor Zas dying—almost penniless—in a
little house in Riverdale; in the City +all he left behind him, everything had
a price. And to Get Things Done in the city, one had to pay it.

Once Robert 0oses Zould have scorned to pay it. Once he had scorned to
pay it, refusing for four bitter years to make even the minor compromise
over patronage that might have made possible passage of at least some of
his proposed civil service reform measures; later, Zhile attempting to
reali]e his Long Island park plan, refusing for more bitter years—refusing
even though he saZ the possibility that his refusal Zould doom his great
dream forever— to make deals Zith the Nassau County Republican
machine that alone could give him the right to create Jones Beach.

But that Robert 0oses no longer e[isted. The Robert 0oses Zho had taken
his place paid the price. And he paid it in full.

+e had the money to pay it.

+e had the money partly because his control of the City +ousing Authority
gave him control over close to a billion and a quarter dollars in federal and
state funds dispensed through that agency, partly because his control of the
State Department of 3ublic :orks  gave him control over

another billion and a quarter dollars in federal and state funds dispensed
through that agency, and partly because his control of the 0ayor's Slum
Clearance Committee gave him control of a billion dollars more dispensed
through that agency—a total, during the first fifteen years after :orld :ar
II, of close to three and a half billion dollars Zhich he dispensed in the city
on behalf of federal and state agencies largely beyond the control of the
city's government.

But mainly he had the money to pay it because of his control of an agency
that Zas largely beyond the control of any government, federal, state or
city: the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority.

966
:ith   the Zar, and gasoline and tire rationing ended and automobiles
pouring off the assembly lines again, the volume of automobile traffic in
NeZ York soared.

In 1941, the Triborough Bridge had carried 11,000,000 vehicles. In 1946, it
carried 13,000,000; in 1947, 16,000,000; in 1948, 19,000,000; in 1949,
23,000,000; in 1950, 27,000,000; in 1951, 32,000,000—in i960, fifteen
years after the Zar ended, it Zas carrying 46,000,000 vehicles per year. And
that Zas just one bridge. Traffic on all Triborough Authority toll facilities
had been 43,000,000 in 1941; it Zas 112,000,000 in 1951 and 154,000,000
in i960. The Authority's annual income had been $8,000,000 in 1941; in
1951, Zith the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel's thirty-flve-cent-per-car charge
sZelling the toll receipts, the Authority's annual income Zas $26,000,-000;
in i960, it Zas $37,000,000 (in 1962 Zith the Throgs Neck Bridge open and
operating, it Zould be $43,000,000; in 1967, Zith the Verra]ano-NarroZs
Bridge open and operating at fifty cents per car, it Zould be $75,000,000,
almost ten times higher than it had been before the Zar). These receipts
Zere, of course, capitali]ed through the issuance of revenue bonds. The
income he received from bond sales, combined Zith other Authority
income, meant that Robert 0oses had available to spend on public Zorks
Zithin  NeZ York City during the first  fifteen years after :orld  :ar   II,  more
than three quarters of a billion dollars additional.

3art of the significance of that figure emerges Zhen it is combined Zith the
federal and state money Robert 0oses spent on public Zorks Zithin the city
during those fifteen years, and the total is then compared Zith Zhat the
financially strapped city itself spent. During that period, agencies controlled
by 0oses and largely independent of any supervision by the city's
government spent on public Zorks Zithin the city close to four and a half
billion dollars. The city's government—0ayor,  Board of Estimate, City
Council—Zas able during that period to spend, through all its separate
departments, a total of less than three and three quarter billion dollars.
Robert 0oses spent on public Zorks Zithin the City of  NeZ York more—
far more—than the city spent.

But a greater part of the significance of Triborough Bridge and Tunnel
Authority revenue—vast in itself—Zas the secrecy in Zhich its spending

967
could be cloaked.

Federal and state e[penditures Zere public records, subject to public
disclosure. But because Triborough Zas a public authority—unlike the City

+ousing Authority, a genuine public authority—its e[penditures Zere not.

Therefore it Zas safer to take money from 0oses than from the city. A
politician or public official  could accept a legal fee or an insurance
premium from Triborough Zith assurance that no reporter or reformer
Zould ever be able to discover that he had done so. The State or City
Comptroller could, in theory, make the discovery; the legislation creating
Triborough authori]ed in-depth audits of its books by these tZo officials.
But there Zas no precedent for such an audit; none had ever been
undertaken. And there Zere reasons both practical and political to doubt
that one ever Zould. One Zas the very si]e of Triborough: auditing the
Authority Zould  require a huge staff Zorking for a long time (one estimate
Zas fifty accountants Zorking for a year) and no Comptroller had that kind
of manpoZer to spare, so the job Zould require a si]able appropriation from
either Board of Estimate or State Legislature, a highly unlikely eventuality
since any Comptroller seeking to pry open Tri-borough's books Zould be
asking for the money to do so from the very men Zhose names Zere in
those books. (The Comptroller's party designation Zas irrelevant; because
members of both parties Zere in those books, his audit Zould inevitably
embarrass members of his oZn party.)

The secrecy cloaking Triborough's largesse also protected its recipients
because the secrecy protected the man Zho proffered that largesse.

Since 1924, neZspapers had, practically unanimously, been describing
Robert 0oses as a man above politics and deals, a man Zhose name it
Zould be ridiculous to mention in the same article Zith any hint of "payoff"
or "scandal." After the Zar, the NeZ York 3ost, Zith publisher Dorothy
Schiff taking a more active interest in her paper, began to question not only
0oses' ends but his means, asked to inspect Triborough's records—and,
Zhen 0oses refused to open them, took him to court.

968
But the courts upheld 0oses' refusal, and Zithout those records, the 3ost
could not document its suspicions about the flaZs in the 0oses image. And
for a solid decade after the Zar, despite the Zishes of an occasional reporter
or editor, no other neZspaper attempted seriously to dig behind that image.

0oses' personal reputation Zas reinforced by that of the institution Zith
Zhich, increasingly, it became blended. After as before the Zar, the public
Zas being informed by 0oses and by the press—in a single si[-year period,
1946 through 1951, there Zere more than 1,400 editorials in metropolitan-
area neZspapers on this theme—that public authorities Zere not only
"prudent," "practical," "businesslike" and "efficient" but "nonpolitical,"
"outside of politics" and therefore "honest." "Authorities are free from
political considerations," the Times said. "They are free from the dead hand
of partisanship and bureaucracy," the +erald Tribune said.

0oses' reputation and that of the institution he did so much to bring to
maturity Zas the final guarantee that the secrecy of its books Zould remain
inviolate. A politician  considering accepting a Triborough fee could be
assured that should some neophyte legislator ever attempt to open
Triborough's books, 0oses Zould assail the attempt as an attempt by a
politician to interfere Zith  an agency Zhose independence he didn't like and
to get his

hands on some of its funds—that the press Zould back up that argument,
and that the public Zould be conditioned by years of praise for 0oses and
for public authorities to accept it. 3oliticians could be sure that no public
official solicitous of his political  future Zould lay that future on the line in a
fight Zith  a living legend.* No one could disprove 0oses' reputation
Zithout first  opening Triborough's books, and no one could open
Triborough's books Zithout first disproving 0oses' reputation. Any public
official thinking  about accepting a Triborough retainer could feel certain
that his oZn reputation Zould be safe in the shadoZ of 0oses'. Robert
0oses had $750,000,000 of Authority money to spend. In the ultimate
analysis, it Zas the public's money. But Robert 0oses Zas not accountable
to the public. +e Zas not accountable to anyone. +e had $750,000,000 to
give aZay. And no one Zould ever knoZ to Zhom he gave it. And this
made politicians and public officials—at least those politicians and public

969
officials interested in retainers—all the more an[ious to make sure that he
gave some of it to them.

Such politicians and public officials noted another fact about 0oses' money
Zhich, in their eyes, made it even more attractive than the city's: 0oses
could give it to Zhomever he Zished.

E[penditure of most federal and state money (slum clearance money Zas a
notable e[ception) may have been largely free from city control, but it Zas
subject to control by federal and state bureaucrats. E[penditures for
highZays and loZ-income public housing, for e[ample, Zere subject to
requirements for competitive bidding and to rigid standards, minimum and
ma[imum, on the Zork involved,  and to constant auditing to insure that
those requirements Zere met. To a certain e[tent, it Zas possible to
circumvent those requirements—and to the e[tent it Zas possible 0oses did
circumvent them—but the e[tent Zas e[tremely limited; the bureaucrats in
:ashington,  in particular, Zere grimly  stubborn about sticking to the letter
of the laZs they Zere charged Zith administering, and the threat of audits to
discover violations of federal regulations Zas a constant inhibiting factor to
potential violators. But over the spending of Triborough money 0oses
enjoyed absolute discretion.

EdZard N. Costikyan Zas a keenly observant reform Democrat Zho
suddenly found himself able to observe the machine as no other reformer
had ever observed it: as its leader. NeZ York's political convulsions of the
1960's catapulted him—to his oZn ama]ement and that of Tammany +all—
into the +all's chairmanship and kept him there for more than tZo years.
And Costikyan, upon descending from his unique vantage point, Zas to
report: "The magnet Zhich attracts corrupters ... the natural locus of
corruption is alZays Zhere the discretionary poZer resides." In NeZ York

* Only a Comptroller Zho  held his duty above his career Zould conduct the
first audit of Triborough—and that Comptroller, Arthur Levitt, Zould  not
come along, in either city or state, for almost tZenty years. :hen he did
and, unable to secure the necessary appropriations from the Legislature, in
1966 scraped together a skeleton creZ of his regular staffers to make at
least a limited study, the first in the history of Triborough, of the Authority's

970
books, the findings Zould, if publici]ed  as Zidely as the 0oses legend,
have disproved that legend. But the findings Zere hardly publici]ed at all.

City, in the postZar era, the discretionary poZer resided principally in
Robert 0oses, and like filings to a magnet—or, more precisely, like flies to
a sugar boZl—the corrupters, the men Zho possessed influence over the
city's political or governmental apparatus and Zho Zere Zilling to sell that
influence for money, Zere attracted to 0oses, and to the seemingly
bottomless sugar boZl for Zhich he possessed the only spoon. And 0oses
did not send them aZay disappointed. "Free from political considerations"?
3olitical considerations Zere in fact the basis—often the only basis—on
Zhich 0oses  spooned out his millions. :ith   the poZer to distribute those
millions according to any criteria he chose, during the entire postZar era he
chose mainly a single criterion: hoZ much influence an individual had, and
hoZ Zilling  that individual  Zas to use that influence on his behalf.

The distribution of the insurance premiums on a single 0oses slum
clearance project demonstrates the use of this criterion. During the
mayoralty of Vincent R. Impellitteri, the insurance Zas handled by one of
Impellitteri's backers, Robert Blaikie. No sooner had Impellitteri lost his bid
for reelection (to Robert F. :agner, Jr., the hand-picked candidate of
Tammany boss Carmine De Sapio) than Blaikie lost the insurance account
—to a broker associated Zith De Sapio. And the over-all pattern of the
distribution of the Triborough Authority's insurance, a pattern revealed by
secret records Zhich the public has never seen, demonstrates the criterion
even more strikingly.

The Authority's policies carried premiums of more than $500,000 per year,
or a yearly profit to brokers of more than $100,000. And the brokers Zho
received this profit had to do almost no Zork for it; Spargo Zas to note in a
secret internal Triborough memo that once "the big insurance"—the policies
insuring Triborough's bridges and tunnels against collapse or destruction—
had been placed Zith insurance companies, "little if any Zork on the part of
the broker" Zas required. In 1954, almost tZenty years after some of these
policies had been Zritten, Spargo could say, "To my knoZledge the
Authority has spent millions of dollars on premiums and has never filed or
collected a claim."

971
During the La Guardia era, there Zas little political profit to be reaped
through the soZing of such policies. :hat  there Zas Zould be reaped
through the Democratic machine, and some of Triborough's insurance
therefore Zas given to C. J. Reid & Co., a firm Zhose office Zas on
Vanderbilt Avenue but Zhose connections Zere on Fourteenth Street, and
Reid's general practice Zas to parcel out its commissions to key Tammany
figures—but another major hunk of the insurance Zas given to the State
Insurance Fund, Zithout any broker at all being involved, and still another
Zas given to a broker Zith no political connections, for no other reason than
that he had been an old army buddy of Spargo's predecessor, General
Loeser.

:ith   the machine back in poZer, hoZever, all this changed. The Triborough
policies formerly held by General Loeser's army buddy and the State
Insurance Fund Zere snatched aZay and given to a neZ broker. In a frank—
frank because he believed it Zould remain secret forever—internal
Triborough memo, Spargo Zas candid in e[plaining a key reason for the

choice of the neZ broker: "because he Zas a friend of Tom Shanahan's."
Shanahan Zas Tammany's chief behind-the-scenes financial manipulator for
close to a decade, until the mid-logo's. For a decade, the policies Zere left
Zith Shanahan's friend. The Reid company Zas alloZed to keep its policies,
but a closer Zatch Zas instituted to insure that its farming out of
commissions resulted in the ma[imum political influence for Triborough.

By 1954, Carmine De Sapio had solidified his control of Tammany,
centrali]ing in himself  more poZer than had been enjoyed by any boss
since Charlie 0urphy. +e and he alone called the shots for the machine,
and, it sometimes seemed, for :agner. Sometime in 1954 or 1955, De
Sapio Zas invited for luncheon at Randall's Island. On returning to his
office later that afternoon, he told a friend that he had found only tZo men
present Zhen he arrived: 0oses and Spargo. And, De Sapio told a friend,
after mentioning that they kneZ he Zas connected Zith a certain insurance
firm, they had offered that firm all Triborough's insurance—the entire
$500,000 per year in premiums and $100,000 per year in commissions.

De Sapio told the friend that he had turned the offer doZn. "+e told me,"
the friend recalls, "that he Zas not prepared to e[ert the degree of influence

972
over the administration and the 0ayor that he felt Zould be required of him
in return." That he Zas not unprepared to e[ert a lesser degree of influence
is indicated by the fact that some Triborough insurance began to be given to
a neZ broker, one Zhom key Democrats considered close to the leader. But
De Sapio's refusal to accept it all left a lot of commissions to be disposed
of. Steingut, son of Steingut, spiritual heir to 0cCooey and boss of the
Brooklyn organi]ation that the one-time butcher had carved into shape,
received some (and, because a "public authority" Zas not by customary
definition a part of "government," could piously tell an inquiring reporter
that he never accepted "government business"). So did the Democratic
leader of 4ueens, the +onorable James A. Roe. In 1953, the year in Zhich
the +erald Tribune Zas stating that authorities "are free from politics," three
of the five county leaders of the machine that dominated the city's politics
Zere therefore on 0oses' payroll. There Zere enough insurance premiums
left over for Republicans, and at least one of the GO3 county leaders, John
R. CreZs of Brooklyn, received some of them. As for the Legislature,
0oses used insurance premiums to insure that his influence there Zould be
e[erted not only indirectly through the influence of Roe, Steingut and De
Sapio over the legislators they controlled, but more directly through at least
one of the small group of "leaders" Zho really ran the Legislature, D.
0allory  Stephens, a poor farm boy from 3utnam County Zho in 1942
became chairman of the Assembly's key :ays and 0eans Committee,
Zhich controls the floZ  of legislation to the floor—and in 1943 began
receiving Triborough insurance business. Stephens continually pressed
0oses and Spargo for more business, telling them frankly that the influence
he Zas using on their behalf entitled him to it, and no matter hoZ much he
Zas given he Zas never satisfied. So insistent became his demands that in a
secret memo in 1953 Spargo told 0oses: "The only Zay you can satisfy
0allory  Stephens is to give him the business noZ handled by [Shanahan's

friend]"—the dilemma Zas resolved by Stephens' decision to leave the
Legislature (for a bank presidency).*

A charting of the legal fees and other emoluments that 0oses distributed to
laZyers during the postZar era—a year-by-year analysis of Zho got the
fees, Zhen they started getting them and Zhen they stopped getting them—

973
provides almost a year-by-year chart of the fluctuations in the political
influence of certain key Democratic laZyers.

The influence of tZo laZyers did not fluctuate. During the entire postZar
era, no matter Zhich Democratic factions Zere in poZer, it remained, year
after year, steady and immense. And, year after year, these tZo laZyers
received a steady floZ of legal fees—immense legal fees—from 0oses-
controlled enterprises. One Zas Samuel I. Rosenman, Zho, as a hustling
young laZyer a quarter of a century before, had needed a boost from 0oses
just to stay in public service, but Zho had then begun drafting speeches for
gubernatorial candidate Franklin D. Roosevelt and Zho in the decades since
had become an adviser to 3residents, a small but crucial part of history (in
1970, a political advertisement, seeking to capitali]e on Rosenman's
endorsement in an election, told voters: ":hen Sam Rosenman talks, you
should listen. Roosevelt did. Truman did. Lehman did"), a judge, a
president of the Association of the Bar of the City of NeZ York, a figure of
prestige so aZesome that it seemed to blot from the memory of even old
acquaintances the fact that he had once been "Sammy the Rose, Jimmy
+ines' assemblyman," a representative in Albany of one of the most
notorious of all the old-line Tammany leaders. The other Zas a less public
figure. 0onroe  GoldZater Zas a playmate of Ed Flynn's boyhood. :hen,  in
1922, Flynn became Boss of the Bron[, GoldZater, a skilled attorney,
became the Boss's laZ partner, t During the decades in Zhich Flynn made
the poZer, GoldZater

* Anyone Zondering Zhy  0oses' felloZ  Triborough Authority
commissioners proved so complaisant might perhaps find a clue to part of
the ansZer by looking at Tri-borough's insurance premiums. The family of
Charles G. 0eyer, Triborough commissioner from 1945 to 1950, Zas the
largest stockholder in the +ome Insurance Company, a major recipient of
premiums from the 0oses empire. George V. (the Fifth) 0cLaughlin,
Triborough commissioner from 1934 to 1965, Zas a director and major
stockholder of the Equitable Life Assurance Society, another major
recipient. For the first tZenty-eight years of his commissionership,
0cLaughlin  invariably rubber-stamped 0oses' decisions. In 1963, for
personal reasons, 0cLaughlin took the stamp aZay, shoZing signs of
increased independence. 0oses took the premiums aZay; in 1963, he

974
transferred the policies involved to +artford Life. (In Triborough's secret
records, 0oses stated that the reason for the transfer Zas that Equitable had
requested a 15 percent increase in premiums. An indication as to Zhether or
not this Zas actually the reason may perhaps be found in 0oses' reaction to
similar Equitable requests in previous years. On 0arch 1, 1959, for
e[ample, Equitable Zas given a long-term Triborough insurance contract
for $20,863. E[actly one year later, Equitable requested and received a 35
percent increase in this premium.)

t "3olitical"  laZ firms  traditionally took only  a cut of politically connected
"fees"— "farming out" most of the Zork  and most of the money, taking
$10,000 of a $50,000 fee for their "in" Zhile giving the other $40,000 to a
firm that dreZ the briefs and pleadings, for e[ample—but GoldZater Zas
too sharp for that. A brilliant, shreZd attorney, he did the legal Zork as Zell
—and GoldZater & Flynn collected the Zhole $50,000.

made the money—millions, perhaps tens of millions—for both of them.
During Roosevelt's presidency, Flynn Zas forced to spend considerable
time on delicate presidential missions. :hile  Flynn Zas at Yalta or in
0oscoZ,  GoldZater kept Flynn's machine in line. Flynn's death in 1953
seemed almost to increase rather than diminish GoldZater's influence,
freeing it to spread beyond the Bron[ until it permeated every center of
poZer in the NeZ York Democracy. A courteous man Zith a gentle, benign
manner, GoldZater Zas nevertheless master of any political situation, no
matter hoZ rough—a fact that could be ascertained Zith remarkable speed
by a contractor Zhose campaign contribution did not meet GoldZater's
e[pectations. :agner  selected the quiet, elderly laZyer to manage all three
of his mayoral campaigns.

0oses Zas not interested in Rosenman's prestige or GoldZater's skill Zith a
brief. +e Zas interested in their behind-the-scenes political clout, and he
kneZ that in postZar NeZ York they possessed more of that commodity
than any other Democratic attorneys ("enormous," he Zould say of Rosen-
man's influence; he never talked about GoldZater publicly if he could help
it). And both of them Zere consistently on his team. Rosenman Zas his
personal attorney—a job for Zhich he may or may not have received a fee
—and "Special Counsel" to his Authority (a title 0oses modeled on the

975
one, "Special Counsel to the 3resident," under Zhich Rosenman had served
Roosevelt and Truman), on a retainer described as "very substantial." And a
retainer Zas only one of the emoluments Rosenman received from public
Zorks Zith  Zhich 0oses  Zas connected: a single Title I developer, for
e[ample, gave his laZ firm a legal fee of $250,000. Other attorneys—
possessed of lesser amounts of political influence—received Triborough
legal fees, but smaller fees, handed out in precise ratio to the amount of
influence over the city's governmental structure that they possessed. As
Charles J. 3reusse became closer and closer to 0ayor :agner, for e[ample,
he received larger and larger portions of 0oses' largesse. If many of the key
Democratic politicians in NeZ York City  seemed organi]ed noZ into a
Retainer Regiment, it Zas Robert 0oses Zho Zas leading the regiment out.

In lockstep. 0oses' fees did not come free. There Zas a price attached. +e
Zas buying men's influence—and for each dollar he spent, he made sure he
received in return full value.

The price Zas not demanded outright. 0oses did not directly ask recipients
of his fees to return the favor by voting in Legislature or City Council for
one of his proposals—or by persuading legislators or councilmen to vote for
the proposal. +e did not ask them directly for support of any kind. Asking
Zould have placed both him and them in violation of the laZ and of various
codes of ethics. And he neither performed himself—nor asked anyone else
to perform—any illegal act. FeZ of the recipients of 0oses' fees Zere as
blunt about the services they Zere e[pected to render in return as 0allory
Stephens, Zho, asked late one night by his Albany suitemate, Reuben
La]arus, Zhy he invariably supported 0oses' legislation Zhile  opposing
that backed by Austin Tobin, replied, "Because Tobin doesn't give me
anything." The e[ercise of influence Zas seldom as dramatic as Samuel

Rosenman's hasty plane trip to Albany in 1957 after +arriman announced
that he Zould veto 0oses' St. LaZrence poZer project because of the
preferential contract terms it offered big aluminum producers. (On 0oses'
instructions, Rosenman fleZ to the Capitol, Zent to see the Governor—and
that same day persuaded him not to veto 0oses' proposal.)

0oreover, no evidence has been found of specific fees being given for
specific favors. 0oses did not operate by demanding direct quid pro quo's.

976
Rather, it Zas a case of being on his team or not being on his team.
3oliticians and officeholders Zho consistently supported his proposals Zere
considered "on the team"—and men Zho Zere on the team Zere generally
also on the payroll. And the over-all record is very clear. :hen a 0ayor  or
a Governor turned to a man on 0oses' payroll for advice, often not knoZing
that the man Zas on that payroll, the advice given Zas invariably the advice
that 0oses Zanted given. :hen   a 0oses proposal Zas before city or state
legislative body, legislators secretly on 0oses' payroll, or controlled by men
secretly on 0oses' payroll, Zere generally the legislators pushing hardest
for adoption of 0oses' proposal. If 0oses Zas purchasing influence, these
men Zere peddling influence.

In terms of money, the terms in Zhich corruption is usually measured,
Robert 0oses Zas not himself corrupt. +e Zas, in fact, as uninterested in
obtaining payoffs for himself as any public servant Zho ever lived. In the
politicians' phrase, he Zas "money honest."

But in terms of poZer, Robert 0oses Zas corrupt. Coveting it, he used
money to get it.

And because he had so much money (in his fields, far more than the city)
and so much freedom (in his fields, far more than the city) in spending it,
Zithin  the city he became the locus of corruption: money corruption.

Consider his relationship Zith Tom Shanahan.

Shanahan's nostrils tZitched to a single aroma: the smell of money. Even as
a boy at the turn of the century, one of seven children of a poor Irish
boilermaker, he had folloZed that scent to its source: the noses of his
:aterbury,  Connecticut, playmates may have been flattened against candy-
store ZindoZs; Tom Shanahan's nose Zas pressed against the glass front
door of :aterbury's  Colonial Trust Company; reminiscing forty years later,
he Zould recall vividly  passing that building almost every day of his youth
and staring inside almost every time he passed; it had been, he Zould say, a
place of "august halls"; from as far back as he could remember, he Zould
say, he had Zanted to be a banker.

977
+e folloZed  the scent doZn to the great city after high school, but for long
years he seemed to have folloZed it into a trap: the tall, strong young man
spent seven years behind the barred ZindoZs of tellers' cages. +e Zent to
NY8  at night, in 1926 earned a degree, but five years later still had a job
only slightly better—assistant cashier—at one of the smallest and shakiest
banks in the city, the eight-year-old Federation Bank and Trust Company.
But Zhen, in 1931, the Depression forced the infant institution to shut its

doors, it Zas the assistant cashier Zho, Zith Federation's despairing officers
ready to liquidate, thought up a comple[ refinancing plan that reduced the
bank's obligations, personally talked a financier into loaning it the money to
pay them off, and saved the bank. :hen it reopened, Shanahan, at tZenty-
nine, Zas its vice president and treasurer.

:ith   authority, Shanahan Zas able to move Federation into a field from
Zhich more conservative bankers shied: loans to construction contractors.
The age of huge construction companies Zas still in the future; during the
Depression, most of NeZ York's contractors Zere small and broke. "Tom
Zould take a contractor Zho didn't have the salary to pay his Zorkers that
Zeek, and back him," an associate recalls. "+e Zent on face value, and he
very seldom Zent Zrong." +e backed 3ete Di Napoli (the story around
Federation in later years Zas that Zhen Di Napoli first came in to see
Shanahan he had to borroZ a nickel for carfare home to 4ueens) and the
Slattery Contracting Company (Zhich Zas better off, but barely) and a half
do]en others, Zho Zere to make immense profits—and Zho deposited those
profits Zith  Federation. +e proposed giving junior officers of the bank
greater responsibility. 0ore cautious elements protested; the bank, after all,
had only one office. Shanahan told them not to Zorry. +e'd bring in the
business, he said. +e just Zanted to make sure that there Zould be people
around trained to handle it. +e Zas as good as his Zord: by 1944,
Federation had $30,000,000 in assets. And, increasingly, Federation's assets
Zere his assets. For years, he had been quietly buying up the bank's stock.
:hen,   in 1944, the one-time bank teller Zas elected bank president, he
oZned shares Zorth millions of dollars.

Shanahan's rise may have been as dramatic as one of +oratio Alger's
heroes', but it Zas less publici]ed; he shunned fame Zith the same diligence

978
Zith Zhich  he had sought Zealth. Not a single neZspaper or maga]ine story
provides more than the most cursory details of his life. And he had reason
to shun fame: since 1941, his activities had involved politics as Zell as
banking, and his political activities Zere not ones that Zould appear
attractive in the spotlight.

It Zas not for principle but for profit  that he had entered politics. +is
political philosophy seems to have begun and ended Zith a violent hatred of
"Commies"; the e[pression on the big Irishman's face Zould contort into a
snarl and the eyes behind the steel-rimmed glasses Zould glitter Zith rage
Zhen he discussed the "left-Zing conspiracy" that he felt Zas trying to
"take over" the city; planning to name him a delegate to the 1952
Democratic National Convention, friends Zould be embarrassed to learn
that he Zas not eligible because he had not bothered to register to vote. But
his dealings Zith contractors had shoZn him that their dependence on
governmental contracts could be turned to personal financial advantage.

The contractors oZed Shanahan much; he transferred part of that debt to the
Democratic 3arty, raising so much money from them for the party's 1941
mayoral candidate, :illiam   O'DZyer, that Zhen O'DZyer  decided to run
again in 1945, he made Shanahan his campaign manager. And soon after
O'DZyer Zas sZorn in, a pattern—a pattern in Zhich politics and

profit Zere intertZined—began to emerge on Shanahan's loom: the
contractors he had persuaded to contribute to the Democratic 3arty Zere
being handed lucrative construction contracts by Democratic governmental
officials, and Zere depositing the profits from those contracts in his bank.

In 1948, Zhen Shanahan Zas forty-si[, O'DZyer appointed him—Zith  an
absolute minimum of publicity—to the City +ousing  Authority. +ousing
Authority memberships Zere "nonpaying," but in Shanahan's case that
adjective may have applied only to salary. :ithin a remarkably short time
after he Zas sZorn in, the Zord Zas out around toZn, not only among
contractors but among architects, landscape architects, engineers, insurance
brokers, real estate appraisers—among, in fact, every profession Zhose
members Zanted Zork from the Authority: You had "to do business Zith
Tom Shanahan"— do your banking at Shanahan's bank and kick back a
portion of your profits to Shanahan, presumably for the Democratic 3arty—

979
or forget about your chances. And even after you had obtained an Authority
contract, the Zord Zent, your business Zith Shanahan Zas not finished;
Zhen you submitted the bill for your Zork, further payoffs Zould  be
required—or somehoZ the bill Zould keep getting lost in the Authority's
files, and you Zould not get paid. The banker quickly became, in the Zords
of one reform Democrat, "one of the most notorious boodle boys around
toZn." :arren   0oscoZ,  Zho  Zas able to do his perceiving from an
e[cellent vantage point—he Zas e[ecutive director of the +ousing
Authority for  tZo years—could say of the banker:

+e Zas a very personable guy, but I Zould say that ethically Tom left
something to be desired all the Zay doZn the line. ... It Zas common
knoZledge—no, I Zon't say common knoZledge, it Zas common gossip—
that an architect Zho Zanted to get an assignment from the +ousing
Authority had to turn $15,000 over to Tom Shanahan, theoretically for the
Democratic 3arty.

"Theoretically," 0oscoZ  said—and the meaning behind that Zord Zas
echoed by others Zho came into contact Zith Tom Shanahan, for even
insiders Zho took the relationship of money and politics as a matter of
course Zere taken aback by Shanahan's greed; "Ze all kneZ Zhat Shanahan
Zas," 0onroe  GoldZater says, the Zrinkles of his aged face forming a
pattern of disgust at the recollection.

If little  publicity attended Shanahan's rise in banking, less attended his rise
in politics. For years, there Zas scarcely a mention of his name in political
stories in NeZ York neZspapers; there is no mention at all in the
supposedly definitive history of Tammany +all. But Shanahan Zas, for
more than a decade, Tammany's money man, the individual Zho, more than
any other, greased the Zheels of the machine. +e Zas the hub of political
payoffs and influence peddling in NeZ York, the center of all those
elements in the city's government that lay hidden and festering beneath its
facade.

And for most of that time, he Zas Robert 0oses' closest associate in that
government.

980
In a machine oiled by money, the influence of the money man Zas, of
course, enormous. In a machine that danced to the jingle of coins, Shanahan
had a large say in calling the tune.

And 0oses made sure that the tune Zas his tune.

The insurance premiums to the broker "friend of Tom Shanahan's" Zere
$27,978 per year. But they Zere a minor item in the list of Triborough fees
parceled out to Shanahan. The fees to Shanahan's bank for banking services
—fees as paying agent for Triborough bonds, for e[ample, Zhich required
little Zork  and Zhich other banks Zould have liked to have but Zhich other
banks Zere not alloZed to bid for—amounted to tens of thousands of
dollars on a single issue of Triborough bonds. But these Zere minor items,
too. For the payoffs that really mattered in the 0oses-Shanahan relationship
Zere figured not in thousands of dollars but in millions. On 0oses' order, in
1948 the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority deposited in the
Federation Bank and Trust Company—Zhich at the time had deposits of
only $35,000,000—$15,000,000, thereby increasing the bank's capital
assets by 40 percent at a single stroke. This money Zas placed in accounts
on Zhich Federation paid no interest, so that the bank had its use—to lend
out and earn interest—Zithout paying a cent for it. And it Zas left in those
accounts for the entire decade that Shanahan remained in poZer, so that the
bank had its use for ten years. During the Fifties, on 0oses' order,
Triborough shipped to Federation $48,963,000 in Authority-oZned
investment securities—in violation of every prudent business principle
because, at the time he did so, the bank did not have enough total resources
sufficient to cover that amount if the securities Zere lost—and left them
there, alloZing the bank the advantages that accrued from their possession,
for years.

0oses placed at Shanahan's disposal not only his money but his poZer —
Zhich Shanahan used to make more money.

During his first five years as +ousing Authority vice chairman, Shanahan,
Zith the help of the tZo 0oses  0en  on the five-member Authority —
Chairman 3hilip J. Cruise and architect :illiam  :ilson—dispensed
Authority contracts as he Zished. :hen  :agner  became 0ayor  in 1954,
hoZever, he Zanted the Authority under his control. Naming 0oscoZ

981
e[ecutive director, he directed him to inform Cruise, Zhose term Zas
e[piring, that he Zould be reappointed only on his solemn promise to give
his loyalties henceforth to the 0ayor instead of 0oses—and, 0oscoZ  dryly
relates, "Cruise made his divorce."

.noZing   Shanahan, the :agner high command, Zhile friendly to the
banker, Zas far from confident that all the kickbacks he accepted as
contributions to the Democratic 3arty Zere actually reaching the party's
coffers. "That Zas one of the things they put me in to do—quite simply, to
take control of the assigning of architects aZay from Shanahan," 0oscoZ
says. Before he could act, hoZever, the banker made a request that Zould
increase rather than decrease his poZer: for a personal "e[ecutive assistant."

Suspicious that Shanahan Zanted such a personal representative primarily
as a "bag man," an intermediary Zho could collect the kickbacks and keep
the banker's hands clean, 0oscoZ objected to the appointment, and Zas
backed by Cruise and the Authority's tZo non-0oses members. Shanahan,
even more florid than usual, his eyes glaring coldly from behind the steel-
rimmed glasses, stalked out of the board room and said he Zould not re-

torn until his request Zas granted, but for months the Authority stood

~:rr.

Authority members had long dreaded the possibility of an "e[pose" by
some Red-hunting neZspaper of the fact that some Authority social Zorkers
had once, during the idealistic Thirties, belonged, even if only briefly, to
some organi]ation later labeled as a "Communist front." Early in 1957, Zith
Shanahan's boycott still a failure, 0oses 0an :ilson   raised the question of
the vice chairr a assistant" again.

Recalls 0oscoZ: "It  Zas in a meeting of the Authority: the five members of
the Authority Zere there, and me and the as si stant to the chairman, and
[:ilson]    said in so many Zords: ; I have a message for you from 0r. es. Yo
m Zhat he Zants or Zell turn the Daily NeZs loose on

you. You have ten dsr Tom got Zhat he Zanted, and for another tZo

982
years continued to e[ercise considerable control over the Authority—and to
collect "campaign contributions" from its contractors.

Naming Shanahan vice chairman of the 0ayor's Slum Clearance
Committee, 0oses virtually delegated him absolute poZer over certain of
its projects. 0onroe GoldZater found this out Zhen he Zas retained as
attorney by a group of real estate men Zho Zanted to sponsor one. 0oses
"put it on Shanahan," the attorney recalls. "+e said, 'You knoZ I car.
erything

myself. I have to let Tom have some of the jobs. This is Tom's job. Go to
see him

:hen   GoldZater approached the banker, hoZever, Shanahan reacted as the
attorney had suspected he Zould.

Shanahan said, ':ell, I don't knoZ  about th

'I said, 'Don't you think it's your job to take the loZ bidder, to consider the
rate of return they Zant and the rate of interest thev Zill have to pay, and
the quality of the men involved?"

"+e said, ':ell,   there can be a slight variation.' I laid, 'Look, cut out the crap
Zith me. Tom—are vou committed to somebody?" +e said. 'Yes."

"I aid, ':ell,   I'm  going to make an issue of this Zith 0oses. I'll tell you this
right noZ. :ithout   even knoZing  Zhat rate of return the other people Zant,
my people Zill give it  to you at half a percent less.' I Zent to see But] he
said. T can't do this Zith Tom. Tom is committed to

these people' "—and he refused to intervene.

Thus supported by 0oses. Shanahan used his vice chairmanship as a lever
to force prospective slum clearance sponsors to do business Zith him. "A
part of my deal Zas that I had to do my banking at Shanahan's bani," one
Zas to relate. Federation's assets, already on the climb, began ) climb faster:
in 1948, the year in Zhich its president Zas appointed to the Slum
Clearance Committee, they Zere $35,000,000: in 1959. the year in Zhich he

983
resigned from the post,'they Zere almost $200.000,000—and Shanahan's
personal holdings in Federation stock Zere Zorth $20,000,000.

0oses put his vast reserves of monev and poZer at Shanahan's disposal;
Shanahan put his vast reserves of influence at 0oses'. The banker Zas
interested in Zho got +ousing Authority and urban reneZal contracts;

unconcerned Zith the aims and principles of government, he Zasn't
interested in Zhere +ousing Authority and urban reneZal projects Zere
located, Zhy they Zere located there or hoZ they Zere built: the factors that
0oses Zas interested in. The banker ran the +ousing Authority for 0oses.
The +ousing Authority projects built Zere the projects 0oses Zanted built
—on the sites Zhere 0oses Zanted them built, to the specifications 0oses
desired. In 1953, Zhen Shanahan's term e[pired, 0oses Zrote Impellitteri:
"It is of the utmost importance" that "Torn" be reappointed. It Zas—to him.

The influence Shanahan e[ercised for 0oses Zas not limited to housing or
urban reneZal. Time and time again, on highZay proposals by 0oses on
Zhich the city's officials Zere divided, the banker's poZer helped tip the
scales in 0oses' favor.

In dealing Zith De Sapio and Shanahan and GoldZater and Rosenman and
Steingut and Roe and 3reusse, 0oses Zas, as alZays, going straight to the
top.

Charles F. Rodrigue], representing vacationing Bron[ borough president
James J. Lyons on the Board of Estimate during the controversy over
0oses' proposal to construct Shea Stadium, had received no instructions on
the matter and, believing that the city had more pressing uses for the
$21,000,000 involved, Zas considering voting against it, Zhen the
telephone in his office rang. And the voice on the other end of the line
Zasn't that of his boss but of his boss's boss. "I think if Jim Zas here, he'd
go along," Charles A. Buckley said gently. "You do it, and if there's any
question, ask Jim to see me." Rodrigue] did it—and there Zas never any
question. As a state senator Zould admit privately, describing 0oses'
methods in Albany, "he Zouldn't bother Zith us at all; he Zent right to the
leaders."

984
As old-time Tammany Zard bosses had distributed Christmas baskets filled
Zith turkeys and sugar plums in decades past, Robert 0oses distributed
Christmas baskets noZ. But he distributed them not to voters, and not—at
least not primarily—to the men the voters had elected to office, but to the
men Zho controlled the men the voters had elected to office—many of the
most poZerful men in the city and state. +is "Zard," his "district," Zas the
uppermost precincts of politics. "There's only one Zay to hold a district,"
e[plained George :ashington  3lunkitt, Zho  held his for thirty years. "You
must study human nature and act accordin'." 0oses studied human nature in
his district, and acted accordin'. +is constituents—the De Sapios and
Shanahans and Steinguts—Zanted the rich Christmas baskets of "honest
graft." 0oses handed them baskets. 8sing the vast Zealth of his public
authorities, he made himself the Zard boss of the highest precincts, bank-
roller of the inner circle, dancing master of the Four +undred of politics.
And he held his district for thirty years.

Doling out sugar plums to such men gave him poZer over them in another
Zay, too—as :agner,  in a very private talk in 1961 (referred to in the
Introduction), tried to e[plain to 3aul R. Screvane. The 0ayor Zas
personally fond of Screvane, a younger man he had taken under his Zing
years before and guided through the political thickets and, just a year
earlier, into the City Council presidency. Informing him that he Zould be

city liaison to 0oses' :orld's    Fair, the 0ayor leaned toZard him and said
earnestly: "3aul, my e[perience Zith 0oses has taught me one lesson, and
1*11 tell it to you. I Zould  never let him do anything for me in any Zay,
shape or form. I'd never ask him—or permit him—to do anything of a
personal nature for me because—and I've seen it time and time again—a
day Zill  come Zhen Bob Zill  reach back in his file and throZ this in your
face, quietly if that Zill  make you go along Zith him, publicly otherZise.
And if he has to, he Zill destroy you Zith it."  Screvane admired
—"idoli]ed"  Zould  scarcely be too strong a Zord—0oses. +e Zas loath to
believe :agner's  Zarning. '"But,"  he recalls, during a series of battles in the
Fair E[ecutive Committee, "I saZ it happen time and time again . . . Bob
0oses has these files. On at least tZenty separate occasions Zhen Ze Zere
on the same side, I Zould say about someone, 'I don't think he'll go along,'
and Bob Zould

985
':ell,   goddammit, he'd better go along! If he doesn't go along, I'll destroy
the son of a bitch!' And he'd call for a file, and he Zould begin to quote
chapter and verse. And sure enough [Zhen the vote came], the felloZ Zould
go along."

No one could dZell long in the inner circles of NeZ York politics Zithout
knoZing about 0oses' files, the dossiers he had compiled on the men Zith
Zhom he had to deal. Their e[istence Zas so open a secret that Times
reporter Joseph C. Ingraham, a particular friend of 0oses', assigned by an
editor to investigate the financial affairs of a Tammany borough president,
kneZ e[actly Zhere to start looking. +e  telephoned 0oses and asked for
the file on the borough president—and there inside it, documented and
photostated, complete doZn to deeds and incorporation certificates, the
reporter found the records of real estate transactions in Zhich the borough
president had engaged, transactions based on his foreknoZledge, acquired
through his official position, of the routes of certain 0oses-built highZays.
3oliticians Zho had accepted favors from 0oses kneZ that the
documentation of those favors Zas in his dossiers—and they kneZ that
0oses Zould  use that documentation to destroy them if they ever refused to
go along Zith his Zishes. They had accepted a favor from him perhaps
once; he had a hold over them forever.

A politician Zho  had never accepted a favor from 0oses kneZ that this did
not grant him immunity from such attack. +e kneZ that 0oses'
bloodhounds Zere sniffing, alZays sniffing, around City +all  and the files
in the 0unicipal  Building,  and he could be sure that up at Randall's Island
there Zas a file Zith his name on it—and Zho kneZ Zhat might be in it?
"0an,"  as :illie    Stark put it in All  the .ing's  0en,  "is born in sin and dies
in corruption." Or, in the Zords of Jack Lutsky, Zho during his quarter of a
century in City +all  earned a reputation as a fearless and honest man: "Is
there anyone Zho, sometime in his life, hasn't done something he is
ashamed of? :ell,  you alZays had the feeling that 0oses kneZ about that
something, and that he had the proof of it in those files of his. And that if he
needed to, he Zould use it." 3oliticians kneZ Zhat use 0oses could make
his dossiers. They had seen him give neZspapers leaks—or issue statements
—that dredged up for public vieZ and turned into blaring headlines

986
the dark secrets of men's pasts. It Zas not just the force of greed that Robert
0oses used in bending men to his Zill; in some cases, it Zas also the force
1 of fear.

If you stayed on his team, moreover, he Zould take care of you even after
you Zere too old to play—for his oZn purposes, of course. +e Zould take
care of you until you died. :illiam   :ilson    Zas, to :arren   0oscoZ,  only
"0oses' stooge," but he Zas a Zell-paid stooge; :agner  kicked him off the
+ousing Authority  in 1954, Zhen he Zas seventy-three years old; 0oses
promptly supplemented his city retirement benefits Zith a $io,ooo-per-year
authority consultantship. :hen  EdZin  Salmon Zas forced out of the
$15,000 City 3lanning Commission chairmanship that 0oses had obtained
for him, 0oses asked Brooklyn borough president John Cashmore to give
him a job—and a $15,000 salary—on his personal staff. There Zas no job
open, Cashmore said. Then make a neZ job, Zas 0oses' reply. (A neZ job
Zas made.) 3aul Sere vane remembers running for the 1965 Democratic
nomination for mayor after :agner  retired, and losing, and Zaking up on
the morning after the primary Zondering Zhat he Zas going to do Zith the
rest of his life. "Bob had three jobs lined up for me," he says. And these
Zere not just ordinary jobs; 0oses offered Screvane his choice of the
presidency of a consulting engineering firm Zhose president had just died, a
full, lucrative partnership in another engineering firm, and "he had another
authority in mind and I could be chairman and Zrite my oZn ticket." Says
Screvane: "Bob alZays took care of people Zho cooperated Zith him."

If you cooperated.

If you tried, even occasionally, not to cooperate, if you dropped off "the
team," if—ever—you e[ercised your responsibility to the public rather than
your responsibility to Robert 0oses, you Zere out in the cold until you
died. There Zould be no consulting jobs, no authority make-Zork—and, if
the rumors Zere true, Zhen the State Retirement Board met to certify your
pension, it Zould somehoZ turn out to be less, far less, than you had
believed you Zere entitled to. As La]arus puts it, "+e didn't Zant anyone
Zho had been on the inside Zith him to talk about the Zay he operated.
This Zay, he Zas buying their silence to the grave." 0oses demanded
allegiance only in the areas he had staked out for his oZn, but that

987
allegiance had, in those areas, to be total. And, Zith most of his
constituents, it Zas. +e not only held his district, he controlled it absolutely.
+e Zas, in his fields, the boss of the bosses.

+e did not e[tend his field of  force only over individuals, of course.

One cannot dip a toe into the Zater of NeZ York politics Zithout sensing,
moving someZhere deep beneath the surface, the presence of an enormous
force, a poZer unseen but immense: the poZer of banks.

Banks control the dispensing of huge amounts of insurance and they can
dispense it to politicians. Their activities generate immense amounts of
legal Zork and they can dispense the least onerous and most lucrative
aspects of that Zork—local real estate closings, for e[ample—to politicians.

They can give politicians access to the inside financial information on Zhi
fortunes are made by electing them to their boards of directors, and they c
give them fortunes more directly by giving them blocks of their oZn sto at
favorable prices or, more directly still, by giving them unsecured loa Zhich
alloZ them to make investments Zithout the inconvenience or ri of using
their oZn money, and by giving them those loans at interest rat so favorable
that the investments can hardly help resulting in a profit. Thi can give
politicians loans of a si]e that make them rich beyond their drearr

The acceptance of these—and other—favors puts politicians in tl banks'
debt. Banks are very good at collecting debts. They collect them Zi interest.
And they collect politicians' debts Zith interest: the public intere Decade
after decade, Zhat banks Zanted from Albany or City +a banks got.

Some political analysts speak of the influence of NeZ York's banks
influence e[erted almost entirely on the Republican 3arty, but it is not on
Republicans Zho are interested in money. The poZer of the great banks
NeZ York crosses party as Zell as county lines. :ithin  the over-all politic
structure of NeZ York—city and state—it is all-pervasive and immens And
0oses enlisted it behind his aims.

Banks have one aim: making money. 0oses made sure their aim and h
coincided. +e made sure that banks Zould make money—quick money, eas

988
money, safe money—from his public Zorks.

Revenue bonds—the key to his authorities' e[istence and poZer—Zei the
key to the alliance.

Banks needed authority bonds. Forbidden by federal laZ from puttin the
money deposited Zith them by the public into any but the very safe
investments, the very best of Zhat bankers call "good, high-grade paper"-
barred specifically from purchasing corporate stock and by inference, ir
ference reinforced by continuous evaluation of their investment portfolio by
government regulatory overseers, from purchasing any bonds and note
e[cept those of the most "solid" corporations, of governments and of publi
authorities—four years of investment-stifling Zar had left them "loade Zith
cash," impatient to put it to Zork earning more cash, and Zith drastically
insufficient supply of "good, high-grade paper" into Zhich V put it. Jack
0adigan, Zho  had spent Zeeks trying to peddle +enry +udsoi Bridge
bonds around :all  Street in 1936, Zas astonished Zhen previousl aloof
bank presidents began inviting him to lunch in their private dinin; rooms in
1946—until one, SteZart Becker, president of the Bank 0 0anhattan,
casually remarked over dessert, "You knoZ, Jack, Ze've go more money
than good uses for it." Then he understood. Returning fron Becker's table,
he told 0oses that the banker Zas asking to be alloZec to buy as much as
possible of the ne[t Triborough bond issue—and the bar tender's son added
that he Zould never have to go hat in hand to banker again; Jrom noZ on,
bankers Zould come to him. "It's just supply and de mand," he Zould
e[plain simply. The demand for Triborough's bonds Za: far greater than the
supply.

Of all possible investments legal for banks, moreover, public authority

bnds Zere the most desirable. In selecting investments, bankers had three
ans: to keep their money safe, to make as much money as possible Zith it -
and to keep the money they made. .eeping money meant, in postZar
/nerica, ta[ e[emption.

Corporate bonds Zere dependent upon corporate profits, so much more rky
than bridge tolls. Their yield Zas higher—in 1968, 8 percent to aout 5
percent—but banks had to pay half of their profits (52 percent, Iter 48

989
percent) to the government in ta[es, so their yield from a corporate bnd
Zould, in terms of money kept, be only 4 percent. So ta[-e[empt athority
bonds had both greater safety and a higher return than corporate bnds.

8nited States government bonds Zere as safe as authority bonds, their

eld as high, but that yield Zas subject to state and local ta[es; their net yield

as loZer. State and municipal bonds, e[empt from ta[es, had net

?lds about the same as authority bonds. But, in :all Street's vieZ, they

^re not as safe since states and municipalities alZays seemed to be in

nancial difficulties, and Zere continually being forced to go to the voters for

ermission to raise ta[es. And Zho could predict Zhat voters Zould do?

authorities, on the other hand, greZ continually more prosperous, from

avenues guaranteed by covenants that Zere sacred contracts, safe from

ublic Zhim  or Zill.  During the first postZar quarter century, NeZ York

ity's bonds fluctuated fairly substantially in the ratings they Zere given for

tfety. Triborough's held steady, year after year—at AAA, the highest

iting given. Ask NeZ York  bankers Zhy they are so eager to buy public

athority bonds and they begin, as does DZayne Saunders, vice president of

le investment division of the Chemical Bank, by speaking sanctimoniously

f "our feeling of responsibility to the community" by financing projects that

ill benefit it. But  the longer one talks to bankers, the less the talk is of

^sponsibility and the more it dZells on more mundane considerations. A

990
nborough bond "is a very, very high-quality instrument, you knoZ,"

aunders says. "And they are paying, say, 5.40, Zhich is [almost] 11 percent.

here are corporates out there, but no government stuff. You're alZays

latching yield against safety in this business. Any portfolio manager Zill try

/ithin his limits to ma[imi]e   his yields—he becomes very, very interested

a yield . . . And [authority bonds] are the highest-yielding of any
investment-

rade security after ta[." +igher-yielding than any other safe investment,

dgher-yielding in fact than most risky investments, higher-yielding even

han those riskiest of investments, personal loans—a public authority bond

s simply the best investment a bank can make. By far.

Of all public authority bonds, moreover, none Zere more desirable to )anks
than Triborough's: by design.

0oses Zanted banks to be so an[ious to purchase Triborough bonds hat
they Zould use all of their immense poZer to force elected officials to *ive
his public Zorks proposals the approval that Zould result in their ssuance.
So although the safety of the banks' money Zas already amply issured by
Triborough's current earnings (so great that each year the \uthority collected
far more money than it spent), by the irrevocable

covenants guaranteeing that tolls could never be removed Zithout the

bondholders' consent, and by Triborough's monopoly, also irrevocable, that

guaranteed them that if any future intracity Zater crossing Zere built, they

aid share in its tolls, too. 0oses provided them Zith additional assurances.

991
+e maintained huge cash reserves—"Fantastic," says Jackson 3hillips,

of municipal research for Dun and Bradstreet; "the last time I

d ten years' interest on reserve"—and Zhen he floated the

\ erra]ano bonds he agreed to lay aside— in addition to the e[isting re-

— 15 percent (S45.ooo.ooo) of the cash he received for the neZ

bore ueh it until the bridge Zas open and operating five

of the Yerra]ano bonds could be all but certain that

heir interest every year even if the bridge never collected

Small Zonder that 3hillips says. •"Triborough's are just about

; are." :all   Streeters may believe that "any investment

.." but Robert 0oses Zas certainly running the safest game in toZn.

V-. additional margin of safety, moreover, Zas provided by 0oses'

0oses never hesitated to give :all  Street the impression that he

Zould go aD out to protect their interests." 3hillips says. '":e  all kneZ,"

: 0oses Zould  right for his bondholders." During the

- e[istence, the State 3oZer Authority had

est the Street in even small p d bond offerings.

In 1954, 0oses Zas named its chairman, and he offeree e an issue of

more than a billior s, the lai vnd offering in history.

"There Zas some caul on," 3hil t>ut there Zas the feeling. 'Look,

992
> :; : ; ssue days +olders of 3ort

onds Ze :bed—although Zithout cause—Zhen, in i960,

Ne^ Ye:\ .. v NeZ Jcrsi egislatures :earned up to force it to use its

surplus : lake : the dden +udson and 0anhattan

vs e. -; e; se - sod) 0onies; Triborough's

surpluses m ?een huge : 000,000 per year and

3toses made sure eommitted" to future

■ e;e :- ?:eeee.e ::g pre ee:s ":al Streel lotted him for this."

s tond :a  S . kneZ, 0oses had the poZer to make these

stick. The 0unicipal  Foru:: V tk is a group of

: ""-'"-'  eor.s: .'. : --•;e.i ' : \ e; ■-; ;v::ei a:".a'.\>:> Zho eenerally

:;; - ~- N v " ; "-"  : ' -' • — .:';•:  . se :  :e::e\e: Re?;:: 0oses

appeared befoie the Forum, its members, those hard-eyed men of finance,

>:ec\: .is ere :'e: eir. e-e.: e-

Yeses e^eee rakers r.ere :har. sa:e:\

^h return on their money Zas ahead)* assured—in abundance—by *e
3omnV ta[-emapt stains. Bat 0oses ± a still higher

:-. TV interest rates on his bonds v :an thev needec

--""-'-' ' - > ^  ; "--'" \: ■:  ■■ e-e. :;-.; ;; - .: >:r.g'.e >::.: issue. finance the
Yerra]ai.>-Narro\vs   Bridge, bondholders voald receive the almost
incredible amount of $40,000,000" more than they : -lei . -i.e se:: ee: v:

993
And favored bankers didn't have to Zait for years to make money on 0oses'
bonds. +e made it possible for them to make money in a single day.

Banks make quick profits on bonds through underZriting, a procedure in
Zhich they agree to purchase bonds from the issuing agency in the hope of
reselling at a profit those they can't afford to keep themselves.

In the case of Triborough's bonds, of course, "hope" Zas an inaccurate term.
No matter Zhat the "state of the market," every postZar Triborough bond
issue Zas sold out—Zith many buyers still clamoring for them—Zithin
tZenty-four hours after the underZriting banks offered them for sale. In the
case of Triborough's bonds, therefore, the underZriters' "risk"—the
possibility that they may not be able to sell the bonds Zhich is the rationale
for the profits underZriters are alloZed to make—Zas negligible. And
0oses made sure that the underZriters' profits Zould be huge. +e alloZed
the Verra]ano underZriting syndicate, for e[ample, to purchase
$300,000,000 Zorth of bonds from Triborough for $295,760,851. Since
these bonds Zere sold—on the same day they Zere issued—for
$300,570,851, the syndicate reaped a one-day profit of almost five million
dollars.

Then there Zere the smaller morsels.

There Zere, for e[ample, the "service fees" that Triborough paid banks for
authenticating and delivering the bonds; for acting as "paying agents" for
the semiannual interest payments; or for acting as "trustee" for the bonds, a
job Zhich involved "studying  the resolution," collecting an annual
"administrative fee" for routine duties connected Zith it, collecting and
cremating the coupons amassed by the paying agents and collecting the
bonds Zhen the issue Zas redeemed. These fees—four cents per coupon for
paying agents, for e[ample—seemed small, although 0oses' fees Zere
higher than others paid for similar Zork. But, paid out tZice a year, year
after year for the forty-year life of the bonds, they mounted up.

Selection as a repository of Triborough deposits Zas similarly profitable.
0oses' agreement to set aside $45,000,000 as a five-year "interest reserve"
Zas in effect an agreement to leave on deposit in banks $45,000,000 on

994
Zhich the banks Zould not have to pay any interest—but on Zhich they
could, by lending it out, collect interest.

0oses' generosity to banks had to be paid for out of the pockets of
motorists, of course. If bondholders received tens of millions of dollars
e[tra in interest, drivers Zould have to pay tens of millions of dollars e[tra
in tolls. The state's 3ublic Authorities LaZ supposedly keeps the cost to the
public of public Zorks as loZ  as possible by prescribing the use of open,
competitive bidding on bond sales and all other details of authority
operation. But 0oses Zasn't concerned Zith the cost to the public. +is
concern Zas to enlist in his cause the banks Zho could use their poZer to
push behind-the-scenes political leaders, as Zell as state legislators, city
councilmen, borough presidents—and 0ayors and Governors—into
approving a public Zork that they might otherZise not have approved.
Open bidding Zould have defeated this purpose. Banks Zould not push
hard for a public Zork if they kneZ  that

after it Zas approved they Zould have to bid against other banks for its
bonds—and might not get them at all. Banks Zould only push hard if they
kneZ before the Zork Zas approved that they Zould profit from it.

So 0oses let them knoZ. +e inserted in the 3ublic Authorities LaZ a
section—561—that permitted the Triborough Authority to sell its bonds at
either open sales or through "private placement," and, of course, he
invariably selected "private placement"—Zith the banks that had been
Zorking Zith  0adigan  on the issue since its earliest stages.

And since the aim of the use of private placement Zas to place poZer
behind his proposals, he selected as the favored banks those that had the
most poZer to place there.

"Chase"—mighty Chase—had the most. The Chase 0anhattan Bank, and
the Rockefeller family that controlled it. Chase—the principal tZentieth-
century repository and instrument of the Zealth and poZer of the
nineteenth-century Standard Oil robber baron—traditionally, as Theodore
+. :hite    notes, "raised the big NeZ York money for Republicans." :illiam
O'DZyer, Zho tried to buck its poZer once, found out just hoZ much it had,
and later commented bitterly: "There's a dictator in NeZ York City, and I'll

995
tell you Zho it is. It's the Chase 0anhattan Bank." Not that Chase's poZer
Zas confined to state or city. During the postZar quarter century, the Chase
0anhattan Bank Zas very probably the single most poZerful financial
institution on the face of the earth. And the Chase 0anhattan Bank Zas
selected by 0oses as the trustee of Triborough's bonds and hence Zas the
single largest recipient of the lucrative service fees connected Zith them.

The Chemical Bank began Zheeling and dealing behind the political scenes
increasingly during the postZar era, e[ecuting an end run around the
Federal Corrupt 3ractices Act by having various officers and directors
establish, and contribute heavily to, a "Fund for Good Government" that in
its turn made heavy political contributions, notably to the Nassau GO3
machine and the Bron[ Democratic organi]ation headed by +ouse 3ublic
:orks   chairman Charles A. Buckley. The Chemical Bank Zas the second-
largest recipient of Triborough service fees. A Chemical officer, asked if the
bank had ever purchased Triborough bonds, replied: ":e bought a ton of
them." The remaining service fees—and the lucrative underZriting profits
and the right to purchase Triborough bonds direct from the source—Zere
divided up among the 0organ Guaranty Trust, the 0arine 0idland  Bank,
the 0anufacturers +anover Trust and the 8nited States Trust, a quartet of
banks each of Zhich possessed considerable political clout.

The assets of such banks dZarfed the $200,000,000 of Zhich Tom
Shanahan at Federation Bank and Trust Zas so proud; Chase's assets in
1974 Zere thirty billion  dollars. And so did their poZer. And noZ this
poZer—the poZer of the greatest pool of liquid capital in the civili]ed
Zorld —Zas at the service of Robert 0oses. +e had a friend at Chase
0anhattan, and the friend Zas its president; "No one Zill ever be able to
thank you adequately for the contributions you have made to the city,"
David Rockefeller Zrote him. +e had a friend at virtually every major
financial institution

in NeZ York. Says one observer of the NeZ York political scene:
":henever   0oses made a proposal—and I mean over a period of years and
years and years—you could invariably be sure that behind the scenes, the
banks Zould be pushing for that proposal. 3ushing hard."

996
It Zasn't just bankers' grays that Robert 0oses had marching behind him; it
Zas blue collars and hard hats, too.

Despising Zorking men and their organi]ations and desiring to drive men,
to hire and fire them as he pleased, to hold their economic fate at his mercy,
he had naturally despised labor unions; let her invoke Zhatever laZs she
chose, he had told Frances 3erkins during the Thirties, no union bricklayer
Zould ever Zork at Jones Beach.

But by the postZar Forties, labor unions had acquired immense poZer in
NeZ York. Their million-plus  members formed the base of the Democratic
3arty's popular support, and their campaign contributions—contributions
not only of money from their seemingly bottomless Zar chests but of
services such as sound trucks and campaign-brochure printing and of
manpoZer to perform the vital doorbell-ringing and Election Day
transportation functions once performed by Zard heelers—Zere
indispensable. If the banks hid their poZer, the unions flaunted theirs;
thanks to a special legislative privilege granted to no other organi]ation,
there Zas slapped doZn on the desk of every senator and assemblyman
each morning, right ne[t to the official calendar of pending bills, another,
"marked," calendar, for his "guidance," a calendar on Zhich Zas stamped,
beside every bill in Zhich organi]ed labor had an interest: "this bill
approved (or disapproved) by the neZ york state A.F.L.-c.i.o." And they
had it to flaunt. No Democratic candidate ran for office Zithout intoning
some version of Robert F. :agner, Jr.'s, oft-repeated incantation: "This is a
good, fine union toZn, and as long as I'm 0ayor I intend to keep it that
Zay."

In 0oses' fields of operation, the key union figures, +arry Van Arsdale and
3eter J. Brennan (later 3resident Ni[on's Secretary of Labor), had
substantial poZer to influence government; 0oses' contempt for Zorking
men and the unions that represented them had not changed, but emotions
such as contempt had long since been subordinated to his desire for poZer;
invited to lunch at Randall's Island, "Van" and "3ete," as their host Zas soon
calling them, found themselves the object of all 0oses' easy, flattering,
gracious charm. Of his earlier hatred for all they represented, they could
detect not a trace. "Bob . . . used to have a lot of fights Zith my

997
predecessor," 3ete Brennan says. "But he got to knoZ us and Ze got to
knoZ him." And  Van Arsdale and Brennan liked Zhat they got to knoZ.
Their background Zas in the predominantly Irish-Catholic, conservative
building trades—Van Arsdale, Zho ran the city's Central Labor Council,
representative of 550 different unions, like a construction foreman
ramrodding a gang of laborers, had been a member of the Electricians
8nion at seventeen; Brennan had Zorked his Zay up to president of the
255,000-member Building and Con-

736

i the trades' hard hats Zere no harder than • Zore them- There therefore
e[isted areas of

' '-.'-' ' ' -. ' '■' ] Irish—  "- '--.:. ~r .V-- --"-  :.]  necessity :: i :iV.: :':::: - NeZ
York - . '■-- ' . ' - -'i ■ -.. :i.s. ;: Zas. mes Beach- Van Arsdale and Brennan
soon itracts there Zould be none of the tiresome opening up the locals" that
eventually became a condition of employment —usually circumventable to
be sure, but irritating nonethe-

identity of The hunger that drove the construction Zorkers could

be satisfied only by the satisfaction of the hunger that drove 0oses.

- vstZar pay in the construction industry Zas good. But construction Zorker
rk. And it takes a lot of construction to

keep 255,000 men Zorking. :hen  there is no Zork, construction Zorkers
blame their union officials. :hen   there is no Zork for too long—and it is
remarkable hoZ short a period of time an out-of-Zork hard-hat can consider
too lon^—': get themselves neZ union officials. So incumbent leaders are
cor : about Zhere ne md the ne[t year's, and

the f olio Zin  t ]oing to be coming from. Thinking as they must in

terms of employment for tens of thousands of men. they think only
peripherally of prn ate instruction pro;. ection of the largest private office

998
building Zill  require the labor of perhaps a hundred men for a year or so.
And, most important, union leaders have little if any influence over

ate construction.

But the construction of a large public Zork—a suspension bridge or a
highv. >.—Zfll  require Zorkers in the hundreds, for substantial periods of
time; the Verra]ano-NarroZs Bridge—just the bridge proper, aside from its
access roads—employed a daily average of 1.200 men for five years.* And,
thanks to their political muscle, union leaders have vast influence over
public construction. 8nion leaders are therefore constantly pressing for the
scheduling of neZ public Zorks. :hen   employment is loZ. they are
pressing for immediate ground breaking for neZ projects :hen
employment is high. even Zhen employment is full—even, in fact, Zhen
employment appears likely to be full for some years to come—they are
pressing, having learned hoZ long a "lead time" a large-scale public Zork
requires, for the scheduling, planning and contract letting for future public
Zorks. Of one thing a public official in  NeZ York can be sure: the building
trades are alZays pressing for public Zorks; in 1959. they Zere Zorrying
that NeZ York might not get the :orld's  Fair, Zhich,  Zith  planned Fair
access highZays, Zould employ tens of thousands of men. No sooner had
the Fair been aZarded to

■■■■ York than they Zere Zorrying  about Zhat Zould happen Zhen, five
years hence, the Fair Zas over; on the very day that the full five-vear
schedule of Fair-connected highZay construction contracts—the biggest
most lucrative

♦A total of 10,000 men Zorked on the bridge at one time or another.

schedule in the history of NeZ York or any other metropolis—Zas released,
a building trades official happened to be talking about another matter to -a
reporter, Zho confessed himself pu]]led about his lack of glee. "Jesus," the
union official said, "just think Zhen this is over—Zhat's going to take up
the slack then?" It Zas just as important to the union leaders as to 0oses
that government accomplish, build, Get Things Done—on a big scale.

999
The city government couldn't build on that scale. It couldn't afford it.
Neither, in general, could the state. And those projects that the city or state
did decide to build Zere constantly being delayed by the red tape of
bureaucrats and by Zhat the Van Arsdales and Brennans regarded as the
timidity of  public officials so "scared" of offending voters that they listened
to "the nuts, the protesters" instead of "pushing ahead" Zith the laying of
concrete and the erection of steel that meant "progress."

Only 0oses—and the 3ort Authority  and the federal government—
possessed the financial resources to build on the desired scale. And the Van
Arsdales and Brennans kneZ that 0oses, as City Construction Coordinator,
controlled the floZ of federal funds into the city, and, for almost a decade
after the Zar, possessed enough poZer so that the 3ort Authority needed his
okay on most major projects Zithin the city. And the Van Arsdales and
Brennans Zere impressed not only by his money but by his Zill. In Robert
0oses, they found a man Zho understood Zhat Zas really important. Ask
3ete Brennan Zhat he thinks of him and out tumbles the clearest revelation
of Zhat he meant to NeZ York's quarter of a million hard-hats.

I Zish he Zas seventy years younger! :e need him! You need guys like him
and they're not coming along. Look at his record! It's a very good record in
the building field. And the relation Zith  our industry is very good. +e
alZays thinks big—I mean, everything he does, nothing's done in a small
potatoes Zay.

Some people might say he's just a coarse old man, but it's just a question of
getting things done. 0oses alZays had the opposition—picketing and
people lying doZn in the street and all that garbage—but 0oses Zent ahead
and did it. That's the trouble Zith all those politicians today: they Zorry
about things like that.

Sometimes people have to be tough Zith you. +oZ the hell else you gonna
get it done? Today they have fights over every park, every road, every
playground—you say Zho the hell can be against a playground for kids, but
the nuts, the protesters—they're against them. 3laygrounds used to be like
motherhood, but today they even attack motherhood. The thing about
0oses is he's a guy Zho gets things done. [:ith  him] things are getting
done, and Ze're getting some benefit out of it.

1000
Benefit. On a 0oses job it Zasn't just fringe. There Zas little or no double-
and triple-pay overtime to be made on city-, state- or federal-financed
projects, but 0oses not only liked overtime as an institution, since to this
driven man the paying of overtime meant that his projects Zere being built
faster, but, Zanting all the political help the unions could give, he Zanted to
ma[imi]e  their eagerness for his proposals to be approved. :ith plenty of
money to spend and no necessity to account for hoZ he spent it, he loaded
his Zorkers doZn Zith  overtime.

The poZer of Van Arsdale and Brennan and the construction unions Zas
therefore at his command. And he used this poZer Zith his customary
astuteness. "+e Zouldn't call me on something I didn't have any influence
Zith,"  Brennan says. "+e'd call me to e[ert some influence at the right spot
Zhere I could do it. And you kneZ he Zas calling other people to put
influence on their right spots."

"A construction Zorker Zould  pave over his grandmother if the job paid
$3.50 an hour," 0urray .empton  once Zrote. The primary concern to the
hard-hats—and their leaders—Zas jobs, and 0oses provided jobs. And, in
postZar NeZ York, any public official—borough  president, 0ayor or
Governor—Zho dared to oppose "progress" could be sure that it Zould not
be long before the telephone in his office rang and the voice of the secretary
on the other end said, "This is 3eter Brennan of Building Trades."

:hether   or not, as legend has it, 3ete Di Napoli had been forced to borroZ
a nickel for carfare during the 1930's, by the 1940's, he and his firm, Tully
and Di Napoli, Inc., Contractors, Zere making money by the carload, and so
Zere the cartel of other huge contracting firms—Turner Construction,
0ackay Construction, Slattery Contracting, Thomas Crimmins Contracting,
Corbetta Construction, Gull Contracting, Sicilian Asphalt 3aving, 3oirier
and 0cLane—Zhich  monopoli]ed mammoth construction projects in and
around NeZ York.

The relationship betZeen contractors and politicians Zas not as blatant in
NeZ York as on Long Island, Zhere, Zhether or not it Zas true that Nassau
Republican boss J. Russel Sprague indeed, as rumor had it, had a personal
financial interest in the +endrickson Brothers Contracting Company, it Zas
a fact that key Republican committeemen Zere +endrickson employees,

1001
and that their employer threatened to fire them if they did not support
Sprague. But the relationship Zas, nonetheless, crucial in the city, too.
There Zere tZo organi]ations to Zhich the Irishmen Zho ran almost all the
giant city contracting firms Zere the major financial contributors: Cardinal
Spellman's Committee for the Laity (Thomas J. Shanahan, chairman, 1945-
1960) and the Democratic 3arty (Thomas J. Shanahan, financial chairman,
mayoral elections, 1945-1953)-

The hard eyes of these contractors greZ starry Zhen they talked of Robert
0oses. They thought of themselves as builders, and they thought of him as
the greatest builder of all. One had only to sit once under the great
chandelier of the Grand Ballroom of the :aldorf-Astoria  at the annual
dinner of the Building Trades Employers Association, a dinner at Zhich,
even in mod 1968, it Zas difficult to find a single dress shirt that Zasn't
Zhite (or a single face), to see that to these men he Zas a hero—as Zell as
to see the frame of reference that, to them, made him a hero. One had only
to Zatch the packed ballroom, previously stirred to enthusiasm only by the
rendition of the National Anthem, rise, table by table of burly, Zhite-haired,
red-faced men, standing and applauding furiously, after short, squat Roger
Corbetta, a bull in a black tie, introducing him as the guest of honor, said:
"This

great master builder . . . +undreds of millions of dollars have been poured
into the construction business by this great dirt mover as he likes to be
called . . . TZo poZer projects . . . one billion three hundred million dollars
... a great man, a great builder, a man of history . . . serving the public for
years: the +onorable Robert 0oses." One had only to Zatch them rise,
cheering again, time after time, as the guest of honor, graceful and poised
and easy in his tu[, his presence filling the dais even at seventy-nine,
delivered, in a monotonous, hard, harsh, nasal monotone, his diatribe
against "crackpots" Zho oppose "progress."

They admired—idoli]ed—him,  and they also needed him: urgently and
continually. They had built up big organi]ations, and big organi]ations
mean big overhead. Their toZering cranes and mammoth earth-moving
machines Zere so e[pensive that the purchase price Zas often borroZed
from banks, using the equipment itself as collateral, so that in effect there

1002
Zas on each earth mover and crane a mortgage, on Zhich payments had to
be met every month. NeZ York's big contracting combines needed to keep
Zorking and they needed to keep Zorking on big projects. 0oses controlled
such projects, so he controlled the contractors. And he controlled their
political contributions.

As for the big architects, engineers, supply companies, bonding and
insurance companies and a do]en other services used by contractors on big
jobs, EdZard N. Costikyan says:

I didn't knoZ much about Triborough. That Zas a pretty closely guarded
operation. I did knoZ that Zhen I needed to raise money for the county
[organi]ation] I  could count on them. At one dinner, before I kneZ this, I
Zas having trouble selling tickets, and I called [a key Triborough official]
and asked if he could help, not hoping for too much. The ne[t thing I kneZ,
people Zere calling me because of him—saying, "3ut me doZn for tZo
tables" or three or four. These Zere people like contractors, architects and
engineers. You suddenly reali]ed that here Zas a guy Zho had access to the
people Zho Zere used to making contributions.

Fees, retainers and commissions—the goodies of honest graft. Jobs and the
endorsements, campaign labor and campaign contributions of organi]ed
labor. The contributions, untraceable and unta[able, of banks and
contractors. These Zere the pri]es that the individuals in the machine
coveted and that the machine itself needed. And 0oses controlled those
pri]es. Asked the secret of 0oses' success, Lehman and :agner adviser
Julius Caius Caesar Edelstein replied: "0y oZn theory? +e Zas single-
minded in his purpose, undeviating, merciless to those Zho opposed him—
and he bought off everyone Zho might trip him up. +e believed in buying,
acquiring, by paying the most . . ." "0oses happened to be in the
philosophy of replacing graft," says machine insider Charles Rodrigue]. So
little understood Zas 0oses' importance to Tammany +all that a 364-page
history of the organi]ation published in 1967 mentioned his name only
tZice, and then only in passing. But he had centrali]ed in his person and his
projects most of the sources of money on Zhich Tammany depended for its
very e[istence. 3ersonally "money honest," he Zas interested rather in
poZer and ac-

1003
complishment. But poZer and accomplishment meant Getting Things Done
—and Getting Things Done in NeZ York meant playing ball, paying the
price, the money price. +e played—and he paid. +e gave the machine—the
greedy, voracious machine—everything it Zanted.

+e even gave patronage, the patronage that, as a young man, he had called
"the Zorst form of bribery." Tammany didn't have to ask him for patronage.
+e offered it himself.

Every spring, the Zord Zent out from the 3ark Department to the
Democratic machine's district leaders: "Get the names in." The "names"
Zere those of Zard heelers Zhom the leaders Zanted to reZard Zith
"temporary" 3ark Department summer jobs, jobs that numbered in the
thousands for Zhich neither civil service e[amination nor training Zas
necessary; only the district leader's recommendation counted. Costikyan,
once a district leader himself, says: "Despite 0oses' bullshit about politics,
the summer jobs Zere handled right through the district clubs. :e'd get
application forms for them, Ze'd get them filled out and Ze'd process them
through the party, through the county leader. :e had some guys Zho had a
lifetime summer job. They Zere seventy years old."

+onest graft, endorsements, campaign contributions—even patronage.
Robert 0oses provided the machine Zith everything it Zanted. And as a
result, he bent the machine to his ends, mobili]ed its poZer and influence
behind his plans. For tZenty postZar years, almost all the city's elected
officials Zere products of that machine, oZing their election to its support
and depending on that support for their re-election. TZice during that
period, a mayor—O'DZyer in 1948, :agner  in i960—attempted to break
aZay from its hold on him and create his oZn machine. But each found that
any neZ political organi]ation in  NeZ York must, if it  Zere to acquire and
hold political poZer, depend upon the same forces as the old machine had
depended upon, the forces that 0oses controlled.

1004
0oses made allies of other forces Zhich e[erted poZerful influence on the
city's elected officials.

+is alliance Zith  the Archdiocese of NeZ York, Zhich spoke so effectively
for and to the Irish-Catholic voters Zho Zere, for decades, Tammany's most
steadfast supporters, Zas ideologically snug, natural, even had he not come
to poZer through Al Smith. ("I  have no more sympathy Zith Communism
than you have and regard your church as our greatest bulZark against it,"
0oses told the Catholic Youth Organi]ation at the height of the 0cCarthy
era.) There Zas only one difference betZeen 0oses' opinion of Eleanor
Roosevelt and that of Francis Cardinal Spellman: the Cardinal's, e[cept for
occasional brief outbursts, Zas secret. The relationship betZeen Church,
Irish-Catholic contractors and the Irish-Catholic building trades unions had
traditionally been close and directed toZard pressuring the city for more
public Zorks, Zhich  provided simultaneously jobs for Catholic

parishioners and, through the contractors' religious contributions, funds for
Catholic parishes and charities. 0oreover, the Archdiocese, perhaps the
largest oZner of real estate in the city, constantly needed favors from its
government. 0oses saZ that it got these favors. 0oses, in his rebuilding of
the city, Zas continually needing its cooperation. The Archdiocese gave it
to him. Sometimes he and the Church sZapped pieces of land as casually as
if they Zere playing 0onopoly.

0oses' favors to the Church Zere sometimes immense. In 1955, Ford-ham
8niversity, an[ious  to relocate and e[pand its "in-toZn" college, Zas unable
to afford a big enough piece of land; 0oses used his sZeeping poZers as
Slum Clearance Committee chairman to oust hundreds of tenants from si[
prime acres of real estate adjacent to his Lincoln Center Title I development
and turn them over, virtually as a gift, to the university (grateful Ford-ham
named the central square of the Lincoln Center campus "Robert 0oses
3la]a"). The city's liberals, observing such favors and inferring from them
that he Zould do anything to curry favor Zith the Cardinal, called him
"Spell-man's 3et JeZ." But they failed to understand that 0oses Zas
interested not in favor but in accomplishment and poZer. +is close alliance,
cemented by their adoration of Al Smith, Zith men such as John Aloysius
Coleman, :illiam   J. Tracy of Tracy Tugboats, Eugene 0oran, Sr., of

1005
0oran  Shipping, George V. (the Fifth) 0cLaughlin, industrialist John A.
0ulcahy, the founding father, Joseph 3. .ennedy—and, of course, Tom
Shanahan—meant much to NeZ York (one of them alone, John S. Burke,
president of B. Altman & Co. and the Altman Foundation, gave 0oses
hundreds of thousands of dollars for such park improvements as the Central
and 3rospect 3ark carousels and the chimes in the +ighbridge 3ark toZer)
and much to 0oses. Time and time again, Zhen a project he Zas
sponsoring Zas stalled, the Catholic hierarchy—religious or secular—
interceded Zith the politicians, providing the push that Zas needed to get it
rolling again. And Zhen it Zas completed, and the long line of official
limousines rolled across the bridge or through the tunnel, in the first car,
along Zith 0oses and the mayor of the moment, Zould be the tiny, red-
robed figure of the chief representative of +is +oliness in the greatest city
in the NeZ :orld,   gracing the event Zith his presence at the ribbon cutting,
bestoZing on 0oses' latest Zork the blessing of Almighty God.

Not only the 3rince of the Church but the city's merchant princes, the
royalty of retailing, Zere in 0oses'  camp—up to and including the
inheritors of the great +erald Square rivalry, Bernard F. Gimbel, Jr., of
Gimbels and Jack Straus of R. +. 0acy & Co. "GroZth, development,
progress"—the Zords Zhich meant so much to 0oses in terms of his
interests, poZer and accomplishment—meant just as much to these
businessmen in business terms. And, again, 0oses made certain that this
identity of interest Zas bonded by firmer cement.

0erchandising requires locations and, if successful, e[pansion, and, in NeZ
York, locations and e[pansion mean ]oning changes, and big retailers

;' from the 0oses-controlled City 3lanning Commission to frem. Zoning
considerations aside, locations Zere not easy to come by, but could be of
assistance there, too, as, quite by accident, Traffic

Com /. \\--.r, Barnes learned shortly after coming to NeZ York in

1962. Sjnc. rrt traffic bottlenecks e[isted at the 0anhattan

end of the Oueensborough Bridge, he Zas staggered Zhen he learned
confidentially that the Triborough Authority Zas planning to condemn close

1006
to a square block of buildings at the bridgehead, evict their tenants and
build a 2,000-car parking garage there. "I couldn't quite figure out Zhy
Triborough Zanted to do it," Barnes Zas to recall Zith a grin several years
later. 'The traffic Zould be backed up for miles." But at lunch Zith
Triborough general manager 3eter Reidy and Straus on another matter one
day, the Traffic Commissioner heard Reidy—according to Barnes, under the
influence of one martini too many—mention to Straus "this garage that
Ze're Zorking on Zith  you people."

:arned  by a sharp glance from Straus, Reidy stopped talking, but Barnes
had heard. ":hat  are you talking about?" he asked. "They both squirmed
around," he says, "and finally [Straus] said, ':ell, Bloomingdale's and
Ale[ander's are up there. :e  feel Ze ought to have a branch up there, too/ "
And then they revealed that atop the garage Zas to be built a seven-story
department store Zhich Zould be leased to 0acy's. To his astonishment,
Barnes reali]ed that 0oses Zas planning to use poZers and funds of a
public authority ostensibly set up to aid transportation to condemn a score
of buildings, evict the tenants, and turn it over, complete Zith Authority-
financed parking facilities right in the store, to a private business. And he
further reali]ed, as the conversation unfolded, that the planning had
advanced to the point at Zhich even the details of the lease—its term Zas to
be fifty years— had been finali]ed, and that 0oses had persuaded 0ayor
Robert F. :agner, Jr., to approve.

"I stopped that one," Barnes recalls. 8nderstanding the reason for the
secrecy in Zhich the deal had been surrounded—it might arouse even the
dulled sense of outrage of the NeZ York public—he returned to his office
after lunch, telephoned :agner and threatened to reveal it to the press
unless the 0ayor called it off. "I  said, Til bloZ that one right open,' "
Barnes recalls. And, Zithin minutes after he had hung up, he recalls,
":agner  called me back and said, 'All right, it's dead.' "

As for Gimbels, 0oses pushed through a number of projects that Bernard F.
Gimbel, Jr., felt Zould help business. +e Zas a frequent guest at +emic
(umbel's GreenZich estate. :hen the support of the proprietors of 0acy's
and Gimbels Zas needed for one of 0oses' projects, 0oses told them Zhat
to do, and they did it.

1007
Several astute observers Zere to comment that it Zas through the telephone
that poZer is e[ercised in NeZ York. 0en  Zho felt  the impact of Robert
0oses' poZer often described it in terms of the telephone. "Shortly after I
arrived in NeZ York, I got into some big hassle Zith him," Barnes recalled.

"And no sooner had it hit the papers than my phone started ringing. There
must have been a half do]en calls stacked up. I remember that tZo of the
first Zere from Straus of 0acy's and David Rockefeller. They called me up
and they said to me, 'Don't fight Bob 0oses. You can't Zin. And Ze need
you around this toZn.' "

The dispute Zith Barnes Zas a minor one. That Zas Zhy there Zere only a
half do]en calls. :hen   an official—commissioner, borough president,
mayor—attempted to stand in the Zay of a major 0oses public Zorks
proposal, the calls Zould pour in by the do]en, from contractors, architects,
engineers, laZyers, bank presidents, presidents of bonding, title-insurance
and building-material-supply companies, union leaders—from all those
supporters of the official or leaders of his county organi]ation in the best
position to influence him. "It got so all 0oses had to do Zas push that
button," says one official. "Each of these groups—bankers, union people,
Zhatever—all had their oZn interests at heart, but 0oses succeeded in
combining all these interests behind his oZn aims. +e gave everybody
involved in the political setup in this city Zhatever it Zas that they Zanted.
Therefore they all had their oZn interest in seeing him succeed. The
pressure that interest all added up to Zas a pressure that no one in the
system could stand against, because it came from the system itself."

The proof of the irresistibility of this pressure Zas 0oses' relationship Zith
the officials through Zhom the city's five Democratic county organi]ations
had for decades e[ercised much of their political influence—the city's five
borough presidents—and Zith the body on Zhich they sat and Zhich Zas
supposed to be the heart of its legislative system: the Board of Estimate.
The borough presidents Zere, for decades, the keystone of the system by
Zhich the county machines held poZer; the five Borough +alls over Zhich
they presided Zere storehouses crammed Zith the public Zorks contracts
and individual jobs Zhich during those decades could be translated into
political clout. :ith    the e[ception of the parks and parkZays Zhich Zere

1008
turned over to 0oses by the Legislature in 1934, each borough president
controlled virtually every public Zork  in his borough, from bridge to catch
basin. In addition to being able to tell contractors Zhom to hire, borough
presidents' control of municipal services, such as snoZ removal and street
cleaning and repair, gave them direct appointive poZer over thousands of
laborers' jobs, as Zell as additional thousands of administrative and
bureaucratic positions. The county machines Zere embedded in the
community. On primary day, Democratic voters Zould find on the ballot the
names of neighbors, for four or five county committeemen Zould be elected
from each election district, and a district might be no larger than a single
heavily populated city block: there Zere, in Tammany's heyday, more than
30,000 Democratic county committeemen in the City of NeZ York. One of
the committeemen from the district Zould be named district captain. At a
meeting in the local clubhouse, he and other captains Zould elect a district
leader. The district leaders Zould in turn elect the county leader, an Ed
Flynn or

IrZin  Steingut or Jim Roe. This pyramid Zas, of course, democratic only
ostensibly. The county boss at its top could, for e[ample, employ his poZer
to force the district captains to elect the district leader he Zanted. 3oZer ran
doZnhill  as Zell as up. The democratic shape of the pyramid Zas further
distorted by the fact that a principal ingredient in the mortar that held it
together Zas graft; public considerations, of Zhich the Zill of the people
Zas the principal, that should have been the only voice heard at its different
levels, Zere filtered through a host of private considerations. But there Zas
a pyramid, and its base Zas the people. And, through the county committee-
man-district captain-district leader-county leader-borough president system,
the people's voice Zas heard—even on public Zorks. The district captain
had to produce votes in his district to keep his job, so he not only had to do
small favors for voters—obtaining them jobs or small loans, interceding
Zith a grocer Zho had cut off credit—but also had to be his district's
champion at City +all, to be able to obtain a neighborhood playground and
to see that it Zas located Zhere the neighborhood Zanted it or to kill a plan
to run a highZay through the neighborhood. The district leader Zho Zanted
to remain a district leader had to be responsible to his people and to be
Zilling  to fight for  them—and he had to be able to Zin. As Fred J. Cook
points out:

1009
The machine might be totally corrupt, but it had its fingers on the pulse of
block and Zard and, Zhen the pulse beat stepped up to angry tempo, it
heeded the Zarning—or ignored it at its peril. It is hardly possible to
overemphasi]e the importance of this old, basic relationship. If the people
of a Zard Zere aroused about a local injustice, the district leader carried
their complaints to the halls of the mighty, and often enough something Zas
done to pacify his constituents.

The borough presidents, the titular heads of the Democratic county
machines, had been placed in their jobs by the county bosses—Cashmore,
Zho sat on the Board of Estimate for tZenty-one years, by .elly and
Steingut; Lyons, Zho sat on the Board for tZenty-eight years, by Flynn; Jim
Lundy by Roe; +ulan Jack by De Sapio; and relying for their support on
those bosses and on the district leaders, they had to be just as responsive to
the people. Other pressures—private, subtle and strong—Zere, of course,
alZays Zorking upon them. But the pressure of public opinion Zas at least
as strong as any of the others—and far stronger than most. And in the field
of public Zorks, the city's highest legislative body, formed to represent the
Zill  of the people of the city, Zas, to a surprisingly considerable e[tent,
responsive to that Zill.

For tZo reasons—a desire for increased governmental erriciencv (Zhich
backfired) and a desire to curb the poZers of the corrupt machines— the
reformer-drafted Charter of 1038 shifted the responsibility for many
municipal services, notably street cleaning and repairing, from the borough
presidents to centrali]ed city departments reporting to the mayor. This shift
dealt a body bloZ to the small contractors Zho had played so vital a role in
providing the jobs and campaign contributions the machine needed. As for
large-scale public Zorks, the borough presidents* authority Zas eroded by
the

Charter and by the neZ scale of construction made possible by the entrance
into the field of the federal government, as, under the :3A and 3:A,   the
emphasis shifted continually aZay from the block to the neighborhood,
from the neighborhood to the borough, from the borough to the city.
Because the federal programs Zere so big, they Zere administered on a
cityZide basis, so federal officials Zere predisposed to select as the local

1010
administrators of such programs officials Zho represented the Zhole city
rather than one of its segments. In NeZ York, this predisposition Zas
reinforced by the Roosevelt-La Guardia alliance that resulted in the
funneling of all federal public Zorks contracts through City +all  instead of
the borough presidents' offices. +andling the neZ scale of construction
required a neZ scale of contractors, industrial giants Zith enough financial
resources to fulfill cities' bonding requirements, and enough technical
e[pertise to handle previously unprecedented engineering, architectural and
construction problems. And since such corporations received their contracts
through City, not Borough, +all, they gave their campaign contributions to
City, not Borough, +all and hired outside architects, engineers and bonding
firms that City +all  recommended. The 1961 Charter transferred most of
Zhat remained of Borough +all's poZer over public Zorks to the mayor,
and Charter revisions step by step pared aZay to a relative handful the
number of administrative jobs over Zhich they had direct appointive poZer.
The borough presidents found it increasingly difficult—in the postZar era
impossible—to give satisfaction to their constituencies. They could not
provide jobs for individuals, could not give Zork to local architects or
engineers, could not oversee the dispensing of orders to local construction-
materials suppliers or of policies to local insurance brokers and bonding
firms. The imposing facades of the Borough +alls became empty husks
behind Zhich dZelt no real poZer.

The borough presidents' constituents, uninterested in the comple[ities of
Charter revisions, didn't understand that. They thought that a borough
president Zas still Zhat a borough president had alZays been. They
approached him for jobs, contracts and insurance policies as they had
alZays approached him. And Zhen he couldn't provide them, they vieZed
the failure as that of an individual, not of a system. They resented the
failure, so much so that it Zould have had to be an insensitive borough
president indeed not to recogni]e the danger to his chances for re-election.
"They Zere indicted for a failure," a failure for Zhich  they Zere not at fault,
Rodrigue] says. There Zas a gap— a huge gap—betZeen Zhat people
e[pected of them and Zhat they could do.

In theory—the theories about government in NeZ York that Zere believed,
judging by their Zritings, by political  scientists—the borough presidents, by

1011
sitting e[ officio  on the Board of Estimate, possessed (at least until the
Charter revisions of 1961) substantial legislative as Zell as administrative
poZers: the poZer to control the city's departments and agencies by
approving —or disapproving—every single agency e[penditure; the poZer
to control city employees by authori]ing—or refusing to authori]e—their
hiring and their individual salaries; the poZer to make any changes they
Zished in the mayor's e[ecutive budget; as Zell as all "residual poZers" not
specifically delegated to mayor, City Council or 3lanning Commission. The
most detailed

and comprehensive analysis of the city's government ever Zritten,
Governing NeZ York City, by 3rofessors :allace  S. Sayre of Columbia and
+erbert .aufman  of Yale, concludes that "on the chessboard of the city's
politics, the 0ayor  may be .ing,  but the Board of Estimate is 4ueen. ... the
Board [is] the single most poZerful participant in the distribution of the
stakes of city politics."

Over public Zorks, the Zorks Zhich  did so much to permanently shape a
city and mold the lives of its inhabitants, the Board's poZers Zere, on paper,
particularly strong. "The Board of Estimate shall have the control of the
streets of the city," the Charter states, and specifically the control—the
"e[clusive"  control—of the street-opening permits for relocation of under-
street "conduits or Zays" Zithout Zhich, in  a city Zhose underground Zas
laced Zith a tangled netZork of seZers and utility mains, no major public
Zork could be built. 0oreover,  under the theory on Zhich the Charter Zas
framed, a theory Zhich did not take into account public authorities, the
Board and the Board alone had control—e[clusive control—over all real
property oZned by the city. It alone could authori]e its acquisition; it alone
could approve its use; it alone—through its poZer to draZ up the capital
budget—could decide Zhat Zould be built on it. And, because it had the
poZer to regulate the letting of all city contracts, it alone could determine
hoZ and Zhen public Zorks Zould  be built.

The votes on the Board jointly controlled by the borough presidents*
enabled them, if they stuck together and cast them as a block, to prevent the
Board from acting Zithout their consent on the many public Zorks
decisions Zhich required a tZo-thirds or three-fourths majority.

1012
And they did stick together, under an informal agreement by Zhich none of
them Zould vote for a public Zork unless the president of the borough in
Zhich it Zas to be located approved. So absolutely did they honor this
agreement, year after year and decade after decade, that the pledge, Zhich
the borough presidents themselves called "borough courtesy," became
knoZn to frustrated agency administrators as "the unZritten laZ." Through
both the formal and informal poZers of their positions on the Board of
Estimate, then, the borough presidents, in theory, enjoyed Zhat Sayre and
.aufman  call a "commanding position" in the field of public Zorks.

But neZ realities in public Zorks made the borough presidents' legislative
poZers as meaningless as their administrative poZers.

One neZ reality Zas the Zealth of 0oses' public authorities and the Board
of Estimate's lack of control over that Zealth.

The Board's authority over conventional city agencies rested ultimately on
the fact that these agencies had no money e[cept Zhat the Board chose to

♦From 1938 to 1957, there Zere si[teen votes on the Board. The three
"cityZide"  officials—0ayor,   Comptroller, Council 3resident—cast three
each, for a total of nine, and the borough presidents cast a total of seven,
tZo each by the presidents of 0anhattan and Brooklyn and one each by the
other three. A 1957 Charter amendment raised the number of votes on the
Board to tZenty-tZo, tZelve  of Zhich—four  each— Zere cast by the
cityZide officials,  ten of Zhich—tZo  apiece—by the five borough
presidents.

give them, that the Board could dole it out to them item by item,
scrutini]ing every line in an agency's budget request, and the agency
therefore had to obtain Board approval for every e[penditure, no matter
hoZ small. But 0oses' authorities had an independent income. They didn't
need the city's money—and therefore they didn't need the city's approval in
spending money.

Another neZ reality Zas the poverty of the city's government, poverty both
absolute (La Guardia's Zorst nightmares paled before the realities of NeZ
York's postZar finances) and relative—relative to the neZ needs created by

1013
its groZth and by the fact that the groZth consisted of an inpour-ing of
impoverished immigrants in need of more help than the city Zas
accustomed to give, and relative to the neZ needs of the county Democratic
organi]ations that controlled its politics. The city simply did not have the
money to build public Zorks on the neZ scale required by the public—or by
the greed of the political machines. But 0oses' authorities—the authorities
and the state and federal governments Zhose e[penditures in the city he
controlled—had the money. Through their seats on the Board of Estimate,
the borough presidents had poZer—poZer to Zithhold street-opening
permits, for e[ample—to stop authorities from building. But the borough
presidents did not have the poZer to build themselves. Their poZer Zas,
therefore, negative only. They could deny, but they could not initiate. They
could not provide Zhat the people—and the county machines on Zhich
their oZn careers depended—Zere demanding. They became, in
Rodrigue]'s Zords, "incapable of giving political  satisfaction to their
clientele." The old system by Zhich they had lived Zas dead. In its place
Zas a vacuum.

And it Zas into this vacuum that Robert 0oses stepped. To a borough
president agoni]ing because he could see no Zay of providing the action to
solve his borough's traffic or housing problem that his constituents Zere
demanding or the jobs that his local unions Zanted or the contracts,
insurance premiums and "coincidences" of honest graft that his county
organi]ation Zanted, the Coordinator Zould suddenly appear bearing
Zondrous gifts. +e Zould  present to him a proposal for a highZay or an
urban reneZal development that Zould "solve" the problems. +e could
assure him that the financing Zas all arranged, that the B3R or F+A or
D3:   had agreed to provide it as soon as he asked them to. :hen the
borough president asked hoZ long it Zould take to draZ up the plans,
0oses could tell him that they Zere already draZn up, that the project Zas
aZaiting only one thing: his okay. The borough president Zould be able to
see that the proposal Zould provide, at one sZoop, jobs, contracts,
architectural and engineering fees. .noZing 0oses' reputation as a man
above politics, he might Zonder Zhom the contracts, jobs and premiums
Zould be going to. But he Zould soon become aZare—if not from 0oses
himself then from Stuart ("0ustache") Constable or sly little George Spargo
—that, reputation or not, the jobs, contracts and premiums Zould go Zhere

1014
he Zanted them to go. And if he inquired among politicians Zho had
previously Zorked Zith  0oses, he Zould also be told that 0oses Zas, as J.
Russel Sprague had commented so many years before, "a practical guy, a
guy you can talk to," a guy Zho, in other Zords, Zould have no objection if
friends of the borough president began buying up

quickly, before even a Zord of the proposal had leaked to the papers, the
land that Zould have to be condemned, a guy Zho Zould accept the
borough president's recommendations on Zho should get the contracts.
":hat   he Zas doing Zas giving them a package," Rodrigue] says. "+e Zas
giving them a finished product. If a borough president accepted the
proposal, there Zould be a resolution of every demand." And Zhen the
county organi]ation gave its annual dinner, the borough president Zould be
able to look doZn from the dais and see that all the tables Zere filled, and
the dinner program lying beside his plate Zould be satisfyingly thick Zith
ads. :hat  0oses Zas doing, of  course, Zas creating a neZ system—one
that revolved around him, that substituted his public Zorks for the
traditional means by Zhich political machines e[isted and greZ fat.
:hether   the politicians Zith Zhom  he Zas dealing understood this or not is
doubtful. "But," Rodrigue]  says, "they kneZ it Zas an advantage." They
may have simply seen it as a "package." But they kneZ it Zas an attractive
package.

It Zas even more attractive because it Zould be popular Zith the public.
"There Zas nothing in the public mind that Zas unpopular about 0oses'
performance then," Rodrigue] says. "+e Zas a giant." There Zould be a
resolution not only of the demands by the unions for jobs and by the
contractors for contracts but of the demands by the press and the public for
action. The borough president "Zould be able to go back to his community
as an accomplisher, an accomplisher of really big things." And, perhaps just
as important to some men as any of this, they Zould knoZ that Zhen the
time came, during a campaign or at the end of a career, or over a
Thanksgiving dinner table, perhaps, Zith one's grandchildren sitting
listening, for summing up one's accomplishments in life, for saying Zhat
one had done for his borough, one could say that during his administration
had been built this great road.

1015
There Zas, of course, a price on the package: if you Zanted it, you had to
take it as is. You couldn't ask for alterations. The borough president kneZ
his borough better than did 0oses or 0oses' engineers. +e kneZ its people,
and Zhere they Zent to shop, and to Zorship, and to play and Zalk in the
evenings. +e kneZ the communities in Zhich they lived. Therefore he
might knoZ that putting a highZay Zhere 0oses Zanted it  Zould isolate a
neighborhood from its shopping area or its churches, Zhile a route just tZo
blocks aZay Zould neatly divide tZo  neighborhoods, Zhich had little social
intercourse anyhoZ. 0oses didn't knoZ—and he didn't care to learn. +e
Zould not even discuss such considerations. +e Zould alloZ no analysis of
community feelings, of planning considerations—no discussion of alternate
routes based on such considerations. 0oreover, there could be no
discussion —although the Board of Estimate on Zhich the borough
presidents sat Zas the key body in Zhich such discussion Zas supposed to
take place—of the Zorth of the cityZide program as a Zhole or of Zhether
your borough might not need other projects—schools, perhaps, or babies'
health clinics, or neighborhood public libraries—and Zhether those should
not be built first. :hat   happened Zhen a borough president sought to raise
such considerations is described by an official Zho spent many years
Zorking for  one Zho

occasionally did. "All 0oses  had to do Zas push a button and the phone
calls and telegrams Zould pour in: You Zere holding up Zork, you Zere
holding up progress. ':e need jobs—do you have any other jobs to offer
us? +ave you got a better idea for solving the transportation problem?
:here   is the money gonna come from? You're holding up progress.' Let me
tell you—until you've sat on the other end of those phone calls for a Zhile,
you have no idea hoZ hard it is to stand in the Zay of 'progress.' "

:hen,   as occasionally happened, a borough president persisted in raising
such considerations, 0oses used the poZer of his money to discipline him
—so effectively that he Zas not likely to try it again. In I953> for e[ample,
0oses proposed an elevated e[pressZay along si[teen miles of Bruckner
Boulevard. It Zould cost $23,000,000. Triborough Zould pay. Bruckner
Boulevard, draZing customers from the residents of pleasant residential
neighborhoods nearby, Zas one of the most thriving commercial areas in
the Bron[. Businessmen Zho oZned stores along it Zere aghast. It had been

1016
proven that elevated structures brought ineradicable blight to the streets
along Zhich they ran; the city had only recently finished tearing doZn the
elevated Third Avenue subZay line for that very reason. Could not the
e[pressZay be built beloZ the surface of the boulevard, in a tunnel
preferably, but, if this Zere to be shoZn by engineering studies to be too
e[pensive, in an open cut? There might be some additional cost, but surely
it Zould be Zorth  some to avoid the destruction of one of the borough's
most thriving areas. At least, should not the beloZ-surface solution be
considered?

8nder intense pressure from the merchants, Zho together comprised a
formidable lobbying bloc, particularly in an election year, Bron[ Borough
3resident Lyons made the mistake of insisting that 0oses consider the
alternative plan. 0oses' response Zas to call in reporters and announce that
he Zas reallocating $3,000,000 of the $23,000,000 for a highZay project in
0anhattan, $10,000,000 for a highZay project in 4ueens, the remaining
$10,000,000 for a highZay project in Brooklyn (the Brooklyn project,
ironically, Zas the Zidening of Third  Avenue beneath another 0oses
elevated highZay, the GoZanus E[pressZay, Zhich had destroyed another
pleasant neighborhood Zithout alleviating any traffic problems; 0oses
Zanted to Ziden Third Avenue noZ because traffic along it Zas Zorse than
ever). "Borough 3resident Lyons lost some $23,000,000" for the Bron[,
0oses said. And, he added, "precisely the same thing Zill happen Zith"
other Bron[ highZay  projects "if 0r.  Lyons does not change his tactics."

Lyons, red-faced and sZeating beneath his plastered-doZn shiny black hair,
changed them in the very ne[t Board of Estimate e[ecutive session.
Although he had been delaying approval of the other highZays because of
local protests, promising consideration of alternate routes, he approved
every route 0oses Zanted—and he never again, during his remaining eight
years on the Board, seriously questioned any 0oses proposal.

And Zhat if a borough president, despite the advantages that Zould accrue
to him from a 0oses proposal, decided to fight it? :hat  Zould  he fight
Zith? +is  borough had no money to build highZays. The city had no

money to build highZays. The city couldn't get state or federal money
Zithout 0oses'  approval. In effect, only 0oses had the money to build

1017
highZays. :ithout   sufficient engineering e[pertise on his oZn staff or
sufficient money to hire outside e[pertise—even if any outside highZay
e[pert of stature could have been persuaded to defy 0oses—not only
couldn't a borough president finance a highZay, he couldn't even plan an
alternate route. +e couldn't even e[amine 0oses' proposal to ascertain its
accuracy. +e had no realistic choice but to accept it.

3olitical scientists read the Charter, and they believed Zhat it said. 3ublic
authorities, they said—it Zas not until the late 1960's, more than thirty
years after Triborough had been created, that they began significantly
modifying their statements—Zere mere instruments to carry out policy
created by the cities' elected representatives. The e[istence of public
authorities groZing larger and larger did not in any substantial Zay lessen
the city's control over its oZn destiny. Governing NeZ York City, published
in i960, Zent far beyond most analyses by admitting that authorities are
"insulated" from many of the pressures that influence "line" departments.
But the book nonetheless states that "the Board of Estimate occupies the
center of gravity in the city's political process" and adds:

Land use in the City of NeZ York is under the control of the Board of
Estimate. The City 3lanning Commission plays a large part in ]oning and
land-use regulation, and Borough 3residents individually have important
roles also. But the ultimate decisions, the "last say," rest Zith the Board as
an entity.

All the authorities are engaged in construction affected by land-use
regulations—particularly the 3ort and Triborough Authorities, Zhose
bridges and tunnels require elaborate netZorks of approaches as Zell as the
erection of the central facilities themselves. The Board of Estimate is in a
position to obstruct their proposed projects. . . . The Board, a body
composed entirely of elected officials, thus possesses a stout stick for its
dealings Zith all the authorities. . . .

The Board of Estimate must approve the acquisition (as Zell as the use) of
property in connection Zith a large-scale arterial highZay program . . . and
it is empoZered by state legislation to require redemption of Triborough
bonds . . . prior to maturity. (The Board promptly used this poZer to force

1018
Triborough reconsideration of some of the approach routes to the
contemplated NarroZs Bridge.) .. .

There is a chapter in the consolidated laZs of NeZ York State called 3ublic
Authorities LaZ. . . . :hile    the legislature may be under some restraints
because it is bound by the Constitution of the 8nited States not to violate
the obligations of contracts (and bonds are contracts), the authorities are
quite vulnerable through their legislation. And legislators, as elected
officials, are responsive to the insistent demands of their constituents.

The city's politicians, hoZever, understood the realities of the situation —
and acted accordingly (one result of Zhich Zas that, even as Governing
NeZ York City Zas being printed, 0oses Zas refusing, despite protests
from large sections of Brooklyn, every city planner Zho took a position on
the issue—and members of the Board of Estimate—to reconsider "some of
the approach roads to the contemplated NarroZs Bridge," and Zas

forcing the Board to approve the approach routes e[actly as he had planned
them).

The single most poZerful participant in the distribution of the stakes of city
politics? In relation to stakes of the si]e that their constituencies and county
machines Zere demanding, the Board hardly had any to participate in
Zithout 0oses'  generosity.

Require redemption of Triborough bonds? Certainly! All the Board had to
do Zas to raise the money necessary to, in effect, purchase all the
Authority's bridges and tunnels, a feat Zhich, by the mid-1960's, Zould
have cost roughly—no precise figure is available—$2,000,000,000, or
about $2,000,000,000 more than the city had available, or Zas likely to
have available in this century—or the ne[t.*

The Board of Estimate shall have the control of the streets of the city. An
unequivocal statement. But in practice that control ended Zhere 0oses'
ambitions began.

On paper—the paper on Zhich the Charter Zas Zritten, the paper on Zhich
the press reported the activities of the government established by that

1019
Charter, the paper on Zhich professors' theories Zere enshrined in the form
of books—the Board of Estimate possessed many poZers over public
authorities. But in reality a single poZer—the poZer of money—could
render all those poZers meaningless. And thanks to his public authorities,
Robert 0oses had the money. A borough president, searching desperately
for a means of obtaining large-scale public Zorks for his borough, could
find only one Zay: to cooperate Zith 0oses. +e  had no choice in the
matter. Supposedly the servant of these elected representatives of the
sovereign people of the city, Robert 0oses Zas in reality their master.

The proof Zas in the Zay he treated them—and in the Zay they accepted
that treatment.

:hen   he attended Board meetings, 0oses "Zas alZays threatening to
resign," 3aul R. Screvane recalls. "+e used to say, 'I don't need this job.'
And then he'd go and stand off in a corner Zith his arms folded and sort of
sulk. And people Zould say, 'Come on back, Bob,' and it'd be Zorked
around."

:hen   he attended Board meetings. Frequently 0oses took the easiest

* The chances of the city finding $2,000,000,000 Zithin its perennially
e[hausted debt limit Zere so remote as not to be Zorth considering. So
Zere its chances of obtaining a si]able raise in that debt limit, for a raise of
that si]e Zould have toppled the city's already shaky credit edifice. And
permission to raise the limit to redeem the bonds Zould have had to come
from a State Legislature that had its oZn, compelling, reasons for not
Zanting those bonds redeemed. If by some strange concatenation of
circumstances—so unlikely as to be unforeseeable—the city had obtained
permission to sell so unprecedented an amount of bonds—and had been
able to find buyers for them, it Zould have had to pay in interest, not the 4
percent that Triborough Zas paying, but 5V2 percent, Zhich meant that the
city Zould have to raise $110,000,000 per year just to pay the interest costs.

Zay of shoZing his contempt for the authority of the city's dominant
legislative body. :hen  it  asked him to come to City +all, he refused.

1020
+is refusals Zith the Board Zere not as absolute as Zith the Council— the
invitations of Zhose president he often declined even to acknoZledge. In
the first years after the Zar, in fact, Zhile 0oses Zas still testing the limits
of his neZ-found strength, he did, Zhile refusing to appear at public
hearings of the Board, attend many of its closed-door e[ecutive sessions.
But once he had ascertained the e[tent of his poZer, he began to make even
his closed-door appearances more and more infrequent, notifying the Board
that the press of time made it necessary for him to send "delegates" to
represent him: Spargo if the matter under discussion concerned the
Triborough Authority, :illiam    LebZohl  or Samuel Brooks if it concerned
urban reneZal, Stuart Constable if it concerned parks, Arthur +odgkiss or
+arry Taylor if  it concerned arterial highZays. By 1950, one Board staffer
recalls, "he Zouldn't come doZn to City +all  e[cept on rare occasions. +e
Zould communicate by Zritten communication or by telephone, or by
sending ambassadors instead—like he Zas a foreign, sovereign state."

About some of 0oses' programs, the Board Zas vouchsafed no information
at all until the planning of the programs had been completed beyond any
realistic possibility of alteration. "The Board of Estimate never kneZ Zhat
Zas going on in the Slum Clearance Committee," Judge Lutsky recalls. "+e
Zouldn't come in there Zith [a Title I  project] until it Zas all  Zrapped
up"—the site selected, the replacement projects chosen, mapped and
blueprinted, the "sponsors" Zho Zould be given the projects lined up, the
federal financing assured, everything ready to go, in fact, e[cept for their
okay. And they had no choice but to give their okay. During the decade and
more that Robert 0oses ran the Slum Clearance Committee, draZing up
Zithout consultation Zith  the Board projects that Zould throZ tens of
thousands of the city's people out of their homes and that Zould transform a
substantial portion of the city's face, not one 0oses slum clearance proposal
Zas turned doZn—or even modified in any significant Zay—by the city's
elected officials. In 1954, the Board became aZare that 0oses Zas
presenting to the Federal Bureau of 3ublic Roads a vast neZ program
calling for the construction of the Verra]ano-NarroZs Bridge near the
southern end of the city, the Throgs Neck Bridge at the northern end, and
miles of connecting arterial highZays in betZeen—e[actly Zhere, the
borough presidents did not knoZ and, despite repeated requests to 0oses,
Zere not able to find out. And Zhen 0oses, having completed the program,

1021
slapped it doZn on the table in front of the Board, they made no attempt to
disapprove—or even modify—it. The city's arterial highZay program Zas,
in all essential respects, the program draZn up in the privacy of 0oses'
Randall's Island offices.

Imperfect as NeZ York's old political system may have been, the public Zill
Zas never insignificant Zithin it.  The borough presidents and other elected
officials Zho had e[ercised poZer under it Zere kept in poZer only by the
public's votes, and they Zere therefore responsible and responsive to the
public. Such responsiveness Zas built into the old system's innermost core.

But Robert 0oses Zas not responsible to the public. Its votes had not put
him in office, and its votes could not remove him from office. +e despised
its opinion. The considerations that he took into account Zere the
considerations that mattered to him personally: the project, in and for itself;
the engineering considerations that Zould Get It Done the fastest and
cheapest Zay; and the considerations—economic considerations, Zhether
the economics of honest graft, or of bonds, or of paychecks to union men—
that mattered to the forces he Zas using to impose his Zill on the city. By
giving the leaders of these economic forces—the bankers, the union leaders,
the politicians—Zhat they Zanted, he did not have to give the people Zhat
they Zanted. The old system, imperfect as it Zas, Zas responsive to the
public. The neZ system—0oses' system—Zas not. Robert 0oses, Zho
replaced corruption in NeZ York City, Zas Zorse than corruption for the
democratic processes. In the postZar era many forces Zere coming together
to destroy those processes in NeZ York.

But he Zas the most important force of all.

The building of a public Zork shapes a city perhaps more permanently than
any other action of government. Large-scale public Zorks shape a city for
generations. Some public Zorks—most notably the great bridges and
highZays that open neZ areas to development and insure that these areas
Zill  be developed on the loZ-density pattern fostered by highZays as
opposed to the high-density pattern fostered by mass transportation
facilities—shape it for centuries if not, indeed, forever.

1022
During 0oses' reign over public Zorks in  NeZ York—a thirty-four-year
reign that not only Zas significantly long in a city that had, after all, e[isted
as a consolidated entity in its present governmental form only since 1898,
but also occurred at the most crucial point of time in the city's history, the
decades during Zhich its vast open spaces Zere filling up and being shaped
on a significant scale—it Zas not the shouts of the people but the Zhispers
of banks, labor unions, insurance companies, big construction combines,
big business and, of course, the Retainer Regiment that determined Zhat
public Zorks Zould  be built in NeZ York. +e  centrali]ed in his person and
in his projects all those forces in the city that in theory have little to do Zith
the decision-making process in the city's government but in reality have
everything to do Zith it, and by such centrali]ation he made them strong.

:hat   Zere all these forces? Economic forces. 0oney—Zhether in the form
of bond-underZriting fees, overtime-loaded jobs, rents from huge apartment
developments, contracts, increased department-store grosses or any of the
hundred forms of the payoffs called "fees." 8nder the system as it had
e[isted before Robert 0oses, these forces had been present in the decision-
making process but had been to a degree subordinated to the force
supposedly supreme in a democratic system of government. 0oses
mobili]ed these forces—Zhipped or enticed them into line behind his
banner—so effectively that they and they alone Zere the forces that
mattered, the forces that determined hoZ the city Zould be shaped. +e
mobili]ed

economic interests into a unified, irresistible force and Zith that force
Zarped the city off its democratic bias. During his decades of poZer, the
public Zorks decisions that determined the city's shape Zere made on the
basis not of democratic but of economic considerations. During most of his
reign —the post-La Guardia portion of it—the city's people had no real
voice at all in determining the city's future. +e and he alone—not the city's
people, not the government officials the people elected to represent them,
not the poZer brokers Zho dominated some of these officials—decided
Zhat public Zorks Zould  be built, Zhen they Zould be built and to Zhat
design they Zould be built. +e Zas the supreme poZer broker.

1023
disappearance that forced detectives to release a Zaterfront hoodlum Zho
Zas reportedly Zilling  to testify that Anastasia had murdered a dockZorker
Zho had dared to speak up against him at a union meeting, and there Zas
the discovery of the hoodlum's body in a river shortly thereafter—and there
Zas the sZorn testimony of a police sergeant that the files had been
removed on 0oran's orders. There Zas the mysterious death of Abe (.id
TZist) Reles, another mobster reportedly Zilling to testify against
Anastasia, Zho Zas killed Zhen he hit the sideZalk si[ stories beloZ the
ZindoZ  of a hotel room in Zhich he Zas being held in "protective custody"
by si[ policemen under O'DZyer's orders. There Zas the fact that before
O'DZyer received the 1945 mayoral nomination, he paid visits to fifty-tZo-
year-old philanthropist Frank Costello, born Francisco Costiglia, ruler of
the eastern underZorld, at the 0afia Don's apartment, and there Zas the fact
that contributions for O'DZyer's mayoral campaign Zere solicited by a
Costello henchman. And there Zas a fact even more pu]]ling, a fact knoZn
only to a handful of intimates. 8nder NeZ York election laZ, a man
nominated for office in a primary election cannot thereafter decline the
nomination unless he is subsequently nominated for a judgeship. On the
very day in 1945 on Zhich O'DZyer received the mayoral nomination for
Zhich he had been Zorking for four years, he suddenly begged Democratic
leaders to alloZ him to decline it by nominating him for a judgeship
instead, an appeal that the leaders thought Zas a joke until he repeated it
almost frantically and they reali]ed, to their astonishment, that he Zas in
dead earnest—an appeal that even intimates could not e[plain, for
apparently not one of them conceived at the time of one possible
e[planation: that the glib, smiling Irishman Zas being torn inside by the
conflicting claims of ambition and fear; that, driven by the ambition to seek
the mayoralty, he might at the same time be desperately afraid of Zhat the
spotlight in Zhich a mayor must Zalk might reveal Zhen it shone on those
shadoZy places in his past.

As mayor, O'DZyer impressed even the most cynical of observers as
an[ious to be a good one. +e had a real love for NeZ York. Years later,
living in 0e[ico    City in Zhat he defiantly insisted Zas not e[ile, he Zould
sit for hours listening to BroadZay shoZ tunes, talking endlessly of the city
he had left behind ("Lovely, dirty, naughty NeZ York . . . Oh, that great big
NeZ York up there! Thank God, I've got those memories . . . most of the

1024
time I can't get NeZ York out of my head").* +e had the qualities to be a
great one: poZers of intellect and decision, intimate knoZledge of the city,
capacity for hard Zork, sophistication about the poZers of the office and
their use, and an immense popularity, fueled by an instinct for public
relations. During and after the election campaign, many of the rumors about

* In the bedroom of O'DZyer's lu[urious  0e[ico   City penthouse Zas an old
trunk Zhich contained a faded photograph of a young, handsome patrolman
on the beat at Bush Terminal in 1917; 0agistrate O'DZyer's black robe; and
a glittering golden badge embossed Zith the seal of the city, the Zord
"Chief" and five silver stars. Once, Zith a visitor present, O'DZyer opened
the trunk, put on the black robe and sat staring in silence at the shield. "The
badge of the 0ayor of the City of NeZ  York," he said at last, softly.

O'DZyer's past Zere repeated publicly by his opponent, Judge Jonah J.
Goldstein, and confirmed by a Brooklyn grand jury, but O'DZyer shrugged
off the charges as "political," and neither press nor public took them
seriously. +e Zanted to be a great mayor, to do things for the city he loved
—and 0oses, da]]ling  him Zith  his plans, slapping doZn on his desk
solutions to the city's problems, convinced him that it Zas only through
0oses that those things could be done.

O'DZyer's relationship Zith 0oses  started out as a close alliance. +ardly
had he been elected Zhen the city's 3andora's Bo[ of troubles—held shut
during La Guardia's last term only by a Zorld Zar—sprang open. The civic
leaders Zho obtained pre-inaugural audiences impressed on him the need
for neZ schools, hospitals, libraries, seZers and subZays Zhose
construction had been deferred by the Zar and by the preZar 0oses
monopoli]ation of the city's resources. IdleZild Airport  Zas barely a quarter
finished. La Guardia's runZays Zere sinking rapidly back into Flushing
Bay, necessitating a mammoth reconstruction job. There e[isted, of course,
a postZar construction program completely outlined and, to a large e[tent,
planned in detail by the 0oses-controlled City 3lanning Commission—it
Zas deposited Zith O'DZyer by a Triborough messenger the morning after
the election. But the program carried a price tag: $1,565,000,000. O'DZyer
asked Budget Bureau e[perts to find out hoZ much money he Zould have
available to build public Zorks, and disbelievingly heard the ansZer: none.

1025
Thanks to the Zartime moratorium on construction, the city could borroZ
about $150,000,000 before bumping up against the state-imposed debt
limit, but the interest and amorti]ation on such borroZing Zould have to be
paid out of the e[pense budget, and under the current budget—an austerity
Zartime budget at that—the city's revenues Zere already $6,000,000 short
of its $763,000,000 of e[penditures. There Zas no sign of any immediate
substantial increase in revenues, and e[penditures could not be reduced:
almost $500,000,000 represented salary paid to city employees, almost
$200,000,000 service on already-e[isting debt piled up layer by layer not
only by Tammany crooks but by 0oses' vast public Zorks—Zhich he had
said repeatedly Zere not costing the city a cent. Appro[imately
$700,-000,000 Zas, therefore, as good as already spent. The budget requests
already submitted by city departments Zould raise the budget by
$153,000,-000 if they Zere granted. :hen  O'DZyer first  heard these
figures, he Zas to say, he sat stunned. And, Budget Bureau e[perts told him,
they hadn't yet talked about subZays: in the current fiscal year, every ride a
man, Zoman or child took—for a charge of a nickel—cost the city 6.3
cents, and the subZay deficit Zas more than $50,000,000. Ne[t year, thanks
to rising e[penses, every ride Zould cost the city 6.7 cents, Zhich Zould
raise the deficit to $78,000,000. At that very moment, moreover, the
militant Transportation :orkers  8nion,  Zhose president, 0ike  4uill,  had
hired the 0ayor's brother 3aul as counsel, Zas demanding a huge salary
increase. If O'DZyer Zas not to be branded as the mayor during Zhose
administration NeZ York City Zent  officially  bankrupt, neZ ta[es Zere
needed—and they Zere needed fast. But the city could not impose neZ
ta[es Zithout permis-

sion from the state—and the state's Governor and legislative leaders,
Republicans and up for re-election in 1946, Zere more interested in
embarrassing than assisting him.

The situation had Zilted even the hardy Little FloZer. It staggered
O'DZyer, Zho had limited administrative e[perience, none in dealing Zith
cityZide problems and Zith Albany. Talking to a visitor in  0e[ico   City
years later, he Zould say, "I tell you, there Zere times Zhen, as mayor, I
truly Zanted to jump. You Zould look out over the city from some place

1026
high above it, and you Zould say to yourself, 'Good Jesus, it's too much for
me!'"

Then, even before O'DZyer's inauguration, 0oses appeared Zith a
proposal. It listed public Zorks projects Zhich could be deferred—and it
spelled out methods of paying for those Zhich could not.

The city didn't have any money for neZ housing, but the state did: a left-
over $80,000,000 from a preZar $300,000,000 housing bond issue. It Zould
be simple to persuade the upstate Republicans Zho dominated the
Legislature to release that money to the City +ousing Authority: just
remove the "liberals" Zho noZ dominated the Authority and Zho Zanted to
"give aZay" housing to the poor, loading it doZn Zith "frills"   that they
Zould not appreciate, and turn the Authority over to Right-thinking
conservatives Zho could be counted upon to see that housing dollars
provided Zhat housing dollars Zere supposed to provide and nothing more:
a roof over the head of people too la]y or ignorant to provide one for
themselves.*

The current capital budget included $41,000,000 for IdleZild Airport, a
0oses-planned project Zhose construction he had been directing. It Zould
be simple to free the city from that e[pense, and from the additional
$200,000,000 it might take to complete IdleZild: turn it over to a neZ
public authority that could raise the money by selling its oZn bonds.

0ost  important, $425,000,000 of the city's debt limit had been incurred for
the subZay. In calculating the city's debt, the state did not include self-
supporting projects. Therefore, if the subZays could be made self-
supporting, the $425,000,000 could be lifted out of the constitutional debt
limit, and the city Zould have $425,000,000 more to spend on public
Zorks. And the Zay to make the subZays self-supporting Zas simple: raise
the five-cent fare to ten cents.

The last tZo of these measures Zould give the city additional borroZing
capacity to raise funds for public Zorks. And, 0oses said, it Zould be
simple to finance the amorti]ation and interest on such borroZing in the
e[pense budget: just raise ta[es. +e had a list of proposed neZ ta[es, and
the resultant revenues, already Zorked out. And Zhen O'DZyer asked him

1027
Zhether or not Albany Zould approve such neZ ta[es, 0oses told him not
to Zorry—that if  he accepted the proposal, and gave him authority to
negotiate on the city's behalf, he Zould take care of Albany.

0oses' proposal Zas a fiscal codification of his philosophy and his lust for
personal poZer. Since a greater proportion of the poorer classes rather than
upper rode the subZays, doubling the fare Zas a financial burden that

* Among "frills"   0oses specifically objected to: covers on toilet boZls,
doors on closets.

Zould fall  heaviest on those of the city's people least able to bear it. 0oses'
ta[ing proposals left real estate ta[es unraised and income ta[es
unmentioned, these being ta[es that Zould adversely affect big real estate
holders and the city's Zealthier citi]ens, Zhose Zelfare 0oses equated Zith
the Zelfare of society. Instead he proposed doubling the i percent sales ta[
and imposing a 5 percent ta[ on all monthly telephone, gas, electric and
other utility bills  as Zell as on admissions to all places of amusement in the
city—three regressive ta[es that Zould fall heaviest on the city's poorest
inhabitants.

And the neZ projects that could be financed as a result of this income
Zould be his projects. The projects he told O'DZyer could be "deferred"
included scores of schools, public libraries, hospitals and health centers (not
to mention flrehouses). The "nondeferrable" list included his proposed neZ
highZays. Every one of those huge roads Zould go ahead on schedule.

And there Zould, at least by some accounts, be a more direct increment to
his poZer, too. According to these accounts, 0oses had an associate hint to
O'DZyer that the easiest Zay to get state money for the +ousing Authority
Zould be to appoint as its chairman an official Zith close ties to the
Legislature: namely Robert 0oses. Equally important, a threat to his poZer
Zould be removed. The 3ort Authority, Zhose surge for poZer he had
stemmed for a decade at the city's Zestern shore, had seen in the city's
inability to finance airport construction a chance to breach his defenses at
last—by taking over the city's airports. But, O'DZyer Zas to recall, "Bob
0oses represented to me that under no circumstances could I go along Zith

1028
the 3ort Authority"; and under 0oses' proposal for a neZ airport authority,
he Zouldn't have to.

Liberals Zere outraged by 0oses' ta[ proposals—"municipal e[tortion  from
those Zho are not in a position to carry such a burden," one called them—
and by his proposed fare increase, because it Zould be regressive, because
the five-cent fare, loZ enough to alloZ even the city's poor to use subZays
not only to get to Zork but to travel to cultural institutions and amusements,
Zas, as Stanley Isaacs put it, the city's "greatest single unifying influence,"
and because the break in the previously sacred five-cent barrier Zould
establish a dangerous precedent. Operating and maintenance costs Zere
obviously going to keep rising as already-old equipment greZ older and
T:8    salary demands rose. :ere the subZay riders to pay for every rise? If
they Zere, they Zould soon find themselves spending a totally
disproportionate amount of already tight budgets just for the privilege of
traveling around their city.

Not only Zould 0oses'  proposal dump a neZ burden on the poor; the
burden Zould be heavy indeed.

"0ore  than half of those living here have a family income of less than
$3,000 per year; many less than $2,000 per year," Isaacs pointed out. If tZo
members of the family Zere Zorking, it Zould  cost them si[ty dollars a
year more just to get to Zork. Isaacs—a Zealthy, educated JeZish aristocrat
but a product of a home in Zhich the feelings of those less fortunate Zere
considered nightly at the dinner table—understood, as 0oses did not,

Zhat si[ty  dollars a year meant. "This is a heavy load," Isaacs Zrote the
+erald Tribune. "It just cannot be met in many cases Zithout cutting the
food budget, Zithout providing less milk for the children, depriving them of
needed clothing."

Isaacs, moreover, understood the real motive behind 0oses' proposal. The
Coordinator Zas claiming that he simply Zanted to make the subZays self-
sufficient, the councilman said. But this Zas not the truth.

Commissioner 0oses really gave the case aZay Zhen he . . . e[plained that
he Zanted the subZays made self-liquidating ... so as to release

1029
$425,000,000 from the debt limit; so that the city can spend a very
substantial part of this huge sum on neZ e[press highZays, throughZays
and bridges for the motorist, Zho Zill not be asked to pay a penny toZard
the capital cost. These highZays are furnished him free of charge. The
unfairness of this seems obvious to me.

0ore  important, Zho Zould  benefit from highZays, throughZays and
bridges? The same upper and middle classes—suburbanites, and the tZo
thirds of a city that could afford to oZn an automobile—the same classes
Zhich, under 0oses' proposal, Zould be freed from supporting the subZays
through their real estate ta[es. The city's Zealthier classes—its car-oZning
classes—Zould be subsidi]ed at the e[pense of the poorer classes. If you
insisted on increasing the subZay fare, at least spend the money from the
increase on subZays. :ith  $425,000,000 you could, in 1946, have
moderni]ed all moving equipment on NeZ York's subZays and made
possible the construction of comfortable, modern stations—and could, in
addition, have sufficient left over to build the more urgently needed neZ
lines. Spending the money from the subZay fare on highZays Zould
compound the inequities already e[isting in the city's transportation setup. It
Zas neither fair nor just.

Isaacs and other liberals Zere also distressed by 0oses' airport-financing
scheme. Noting that, to offset the lack of other revenues, 0oses had
suggested that the proposed Airport Authority be alloZed to pay interest
rates almost 50 percent higher than the 3ort Authority—or the city—Zould
have to pay, they assailed his scheme as a "giveaZay" to bankers. And they
kneZ Zhose money it Zas that Zas being given aZay: the city's people's.
The rates 0oses Zas proposing Zould raise the interest costs—the bankers'
profit—close to $70,000,000 above Zhat the 3ort Authority or city Zould
have to pay. As it happened, the city had sunk almost precisely that amount
into preliminary Zork  on IdleZild  and Zould therefore be subsidi]ing by
that amount any authority that took it over. :hy,  they demanded, could not
the 3ort Authority be alloZed to take it over—on condition that it pay the
city back, over the years, the $70,000,000?

The liberals' objections Zere echoed by La Guardia, Zho had resisted
similar 0oses proposals for years. (The sales ta[ had been imposed only as

1030
an emergency measure to finance Depression relief; La Guardia had been
determined to remove it as soon as the Zar ended.) Reali]ing that 0oses'
airport plan Zould turn over even his beloved La Guardia Airport to a
public authority, La Guardia attempted in his first radio broadcast after
O'DZyer's inauguration to teach his successor Zhat he had learned—too
late—about

authorities. You'll find that each is a "super-government," "a Zart on your
neck," he Zarned O'DZyer. "The investment bankers get to be greedy on
authority bonds," he said. "Bankers Zere in control Zhen I took office in
this city. They can come back a little at a time. Don't do it!"

The liberals' fears Zere echoed by at least one high city official:
Comptroller La]arus Joseph. And Joseph added a point that 0oses, in his
detailed analyses of city finances, had somehoZ failed to mention: the state,
Zhich at that time took from the city each year far more in ta[es than it
returned to it, had a surplus, due to the Zartime moratorium on
construction, of $570,000,000. :hy  could not Governor DeZey and the
Legislature ease the city's financial bind by simply giving some of that
surplus back? Democratic legislators repeated the question. 3ointing out to
O'DZyer that Zhile  he didn't have to run for re-election in 1946, they did,
and therefore did not Zant to be identified Zith a ta[ and fare increase, they
demanded that the 0ayor throZ his prestige behind the demand for more
state aid for the city.

0oses' ansZer Zas, reportedly, to the point. +e threatened, as one reporter
put it, to "reveal some facts that Zould greatly embarrass" the Democratic
legislative leaders. The leaders' response Zas prompt. They sZung into line
—and, in a naked display of poZer during a closed-door party caucus in
Albany, they Zhipped other Democratic legislators into line. O'DZyer did
not throZ his Zeight behind the demand for state aid. As for Comptroller
Joseph, he had no influence Zith the men Zho mattered in Albany—DeZey
and the Republican legislative leaders—and 0oses did. O'DZyer gave
0oses the authority he had requested, the authority to represent him—to
represent the city —in the financial negotiations in Albany. And although
the Comptroller had been elected by the city's people as the city's chief
fiscal officer, at the very moment at Zhich he Zas appearing before Senate

1031
and Assembly fiscal committees on the third floor of the State Capitol,
0oses Zas closeted secretly on the second floor, Zorking out his program
Zith DeZey  and State Comptroller Frank C. 0oore and the legislative
leaders Zho, Zith DeZey, controlled the Senate and Assembly. O'DZyer
himself never Zent to Albany. There are those close to him Zho believe that
during the negotiations—Zhich took Zeeks—he never spoke to DeZey
even over the telephone. The city's mayor transacted the city's business
entirely through a broker: Robert 0oses. 0oses Zas the broker—the
middleman—betZeen the 0ayor and the Governor, betZeen the city and
the state, betZeen Democrats and Republicans.

The deal Zorked out Zas the deal the broker Zanted. The program that
resulted from the negotiations—a program announced, in February 1946,
only after an appropriate public shoZ of efforts to find other solutions and
to psychologically prepare the public for the load of neZ ta[es that Zas to
be dropped upon it—Zas, by and large, 0oses' program, although the
stories on the maneuverings leading up to final adoption that ran day after
day in the city's neZspapers scarcely mentioned his name.

0oses even played the traditional broker's role of concealing from his
principal facts Zhich might have made him pull back from the deal the
broker had arranged. 0any astute political observers Zere sure that
election-

year public reminders from O'DZyer of the obvious dichotomy of the huge
state surplus, obtained from city ta[es, and a huge city deficit, Zould have
forced DeZey and the Legislature to make the contribution to the city that
Joseph Zanted. Some of these observers even believed that DeZey and the
legislative leaders Zere prepared to make such a contribution Zhen 0oses
arrived in Albany. But 0oses did not represent their position to O'DZyer in
this Zay. +e informed the 0ayor  that his conversations Zith DeZey and the
leaders had convinced him that they Zould never make such a contribution,
and that if O'DZyer tried to apply public pressure to get it, the only result
Zould be to make them refuse to accept the over-all city program. O'DZyer
had no Zay of checking 0oses' information. +e never applied that pressure,
never backed his Comptroller's campaign.

1032
In the interests of his deal, 0oses misrepresented it not only to his principal
but to the public. Fearing public reaction to the fare increase, DeZey
apparently entered into an agreement to delay its announcement until after
the election—and 0oses lulled the public into a false sense of security by
stating flatly that if the sales ta[ Zas increased, the fare increase Zould no
longer be necessary. On other issues, too, he beclouded and misrepresented
the facts—so successfully that, despite reams of press analysis, the full
details of the concealed arrangement Zere never revealed. +e may not have
been an honest broker, but he Zas certainly a discreet one.

And, like any broker, he collected a commission—paid in the coinage,
poZer, that he coveted.

A huge commission. During 1946, Albany gave 0oses—in addition to the
neZ city ta[es Zhose revenue he could spend, and in addition to the
promise that the transit debt Zould be permanently removed from the
constitutional debt limit, so that he Zould have $425,000,000 more to spend
— the necessary approval for his takeover of Ole Singstad's Tunnel
Authority; for  an increase in Triborough's bond-issuing poZers to
$360,000,000; for the right to pay interest on those bonds to bankers at the
rate he Zanted; and for the creation of a NeZ York City Airport Authority.
Concerned about the poZer he Zas amassing, the Legislature dreZ the line
at alloZing him to become chairman of the City +ousing Authority, but it
authori]ed the Authority's reorgani]ation along the lines he Zanted, lines
that Zould eliminate his "liberal" enemies on it. And it gave the reorgani]ed
Authority $80,000,000.

There Zas even a bonus on top of the commission. On February 19, the
same day on Zhich the city-state deal Zas finali]ed, 0oses, Zho Zas not
even mentioned in the neZs stories about that deal, announced, in an
apparently unrelated development (it Zas to keep reporters from spotting
the relationship that 0oses, not DeZey, made the announcement, and that
the announcement Zas released not in Albany or NeZ York City but at
0oses' Long Island headquarters), that the state had authori]ed $22,000,000
Zorth of state park and parkZay projects on the Island—including an
8,200-seat Jones Beach 0arine Theater for huge outdoor stage

1033
e[travagan]as that DeZey had earlier dismissed as an attempt at grandiose
empire building.

0oses got Zhat he Zanted, DeZey Zhat he Zanted: enabled to hold

on to the state surplus, he Zas able to cut state ta[es; as part of the deal that
0oses engineered, O'DZyer even praised DeZey's fiscal policies publicly
—DeZey Zon re-election by 687,000 votes. :hat  the city's people got Zas
four neZ ta[es on their heads, plus, although they didn't knoZ it at the time,
a subZay-fare increase—and their resentment Zas reflected in the
unprecedented meagerness of the Democratic vote in the city in November;
even +erbert +. Lehman, running for 8nited States Senator, Zas defeated
in the Republican landslide. But their resentment couldn't touch the men at
Zhom it should have been aimed. O'DZyer Zould not be running for
another three years; as for the man really responsible—middleman 0oses—
his fate Zas beyond the people's control. Even if they had knoZn his role,
they Zould have had no recourse against him. FolloZing his re-election,
DeZey gloated that his majority Zas the largest in the history of the state.
The boast Zas not true. The largest majority had been rolled up, in 1934,
against the man Zho had engineered the deal, on the single occasion in his
long career on Zhich that man had submitted himself to the people's verdict.
Their smiling neZ mayor had gotten Zhat he Zanted, of course, and he Zas
grateful. "0r.  0oses has been very helpful in this matter, and has gone to a
lot of trouble to do things for me he need not have done," O'DZyer said.
"+e's done that because he's recogni]ed my plight." The depth of his
gratitude Zas demonstrated at his inauguration (at Zhich 0oses, being
sZorn in as the 3ark Commissioner and member of the 3lanning
Commission, dreZ the heartiest applause from the audience). The first
official to be sZorn in, as O'DZyer's deputy mayor, Zas 0oses 0an  George
E. Spargo. O'DZyer let 0oses knoZ that Zhen the +ousing Authority  Zas
reorgani]ed, its neZ chairman Zould be the man 0oses had recommended,
0ajor  General Thomas F. Farrell, a former State D3: engineer Zho during
the Zar had directed all army construction in the China Theater, including
the famed Burma Road. And Zhen the Airport Authority Zas formed,
O'DZyer's gratitude Zas demonstrated even more convincingly. "I've put it
all in your hands," O'DZyer told 0oses. "3ick  your members." 0oses
picked them Zithout consulting the 0ayor;  Zhen he telephoned O'DZyer

1034
and told him he Zas ready to bring them doZn to City +all, the 0ayor  told
him to come ahead; he didn't even ask Zho they Zere. +e didn't knoZ their
identity until 0oses  ushered into his office +arry F. Guggenheim, Laurance
S. Rockefeller and Lieutenant General James +. Doolittle. (Guggenheim
had been selected because NeZsday, the neZspaper his Zife had founded,
Zas becoming a potent political force on Long Island and 0oses Zanted
him draZn into his orbit; Rockefeller Zas selected because he Zas a
Rockefeller; Doolittle, a hero of the Tokyo air raid, Zas selected for
ZindoZ  dressing.) And then the 0ayor simply offered his best Zishes,
ordered his secretary to bring a Bible, told his press secretary to call the
photographers and reporters—and sZore the three men in on the spot. After
the sZearing in, moreover, he kept 0oses in command. "I never spoke to
Rockefeller, I never spoke to Doolittle, and I never spoke to Guggenheim,"
the 0ayor Zould  recall. "All  conversations Zere had aZay from the office,
betZeen them and Bob 0oses. I never talked to them." As for the renamed
Triborough Bridge and Tunnel

Authority, here is the transcript of O'DZyer's conversation Zith a researcher
for the Columbia Oral +istory Research 3roject about the 0ayor's
appointment of George V. (the Fifth) 0cLaughlin and 4ueens realtor
Charles E. 0eyer to serve Zith 0oses on the board: 4: ... Could you tell me
hoZ you determined that these tZo men should be

selected? O'D: On the recommendations of 0r. 0oses, Zho kneZ more
about it than any

man in the State of NeZ York. 4: :hy   did these men Zant these posts?
O'D: I don't knoZ. 4:  You don't knoZ, but that's hoZ you determined the
filling  of the posts?

OD: Yes.

3olicy-making posts in other key agencies, ostensibly unconnected Zith

0oses, began filling up Zith  0oses 0en.

4: [There are so many positions to be filled. +oZ do you find qualified
men?]

1035
:ho   presents their names? O'D: I don't knoZ, e[cept that the names Zould
come in. 0oses did a lot of

it . . .

The neZ mayor's gratitude Zas demonstrated more convincingly still Zhen
he not only named 0oses chairman of the 0ayor's Emergency Committee
on +ousing, but alloZed him to name almost all the other members. ":e . .
. give him about si[ Zeeks" in a Tammany administration, the +erald
Tribune had said. :ithin  si[  Zeeks after that administration had taken
office, 0oses possessed not only more titles than he had ever held before—
the construction coordinatorship and the chairmanship of the Emergency
+ousing Committee, added to his chairmanship of the Triborough, Jones
Beach and Bethpage authorities and the State Council of 3arks, his
presidency of the Long Island State 3ark Commission, his membership on
the City 3lanning Commission and his city park commissionership, brought
the number to nine —but more poZer. And it Zas demonstrated most
convincingly by O'DZyer's acceptance of 0oses' philosophy. Listening to
the 0ayor's first annual message to the City Council on January 9, 1946,
Jack Lutsky Zas convinced that Zhile the voice might have been the voice
of Bill-O,  the hand Zas the hand of Bob, particularly Zhen O'DZyer said:

It is impossible to satisfy everyone in a city as big as this. I Zelcome
suggestions and help from all sources, groups and individuals. But I do not
intend to be sZayed from the course Zhich has been laid out simply
because it does not have unanimous support, or because some toes are
trodden on, or some vested interest of one kind or another disturbed. I hope
I can proceed Zith a minimum of disturbance, but progress sometimes
involves some temporary hardships.

0OSES E0ERGES  AS "STRONG  0AN"   OF T+E  O'D:YER
AD0INISTRATION,

the Times headlined. ("0r. 0oses, nominally  a Republican, is thus vieZed
as enjoying greater prestige in the O'DZyer administration than he ever
encountered in his long and varied political career," the :arren 0oscoZ
article stated. "It has not caused much concern among the patronage-
minded

1036
in political circles, because 0r. 0oses is knoZn  to be definitely a policy
man, Zithout concern in building up a personal political organi]ation" and
because he is "an independent, Zith a personal fortune that eliminated gain
as a possible motive.") La Guardia, raging impotently over the airZaves,
said that 0oses had been made an "Oberbiirgermeister," a "super-0ayor."

0oses agreed Zith the 0oscoZ  and La Guardia assessments. So confident
Zas he of his hold over O'DZyer, in fact, that he Zas unable to resist
boasting about it—publicly.

"Sure, I'm a conservative. ... I believe in doing things the conservative Zay,"
he told a Christian Science 0onitor reporter in 0ay  1946. "The dreamers
can't get things done. They can't begin to cope Zith the problems Ze have.
The big pri]e here, of course, is O'DZyer. But the 0ayor is able to take the
pressure. I believe Ze have Zon. Last February ... the radical side tried to
get control . . . tried to use the 0ayor's brother, 3aul, as a lever to sZing the
0ayor. That force is still  at Zork and is the main avenue through Zhich the
radicals Zould try to sZing the city. It Zas a tough decision for the 0ayor.
+e had that family tie. It Zas a big temptation for him to Zaver toZard the
Left. . . . But after this initial indecision, he sZung around." So euphoric
Zas 0oses that Zhen a 3ost reporter told him that the intervieZ "made him
look like the leader of a city-Zide right-Zing  movement," 0oses only
laughed and said: "You take the left Zing and I'll take the right Zing."

Believing he held the 0ayor in his palm, he tried to squee]e him. On 0ay
29, a memo from a mayoral aide listing "matters pending" for O'DZyer's
decision included: "Should the housing program be put under 0oses as
coordinator?"

But 0oses had badly underestimated the hardness under the easy Irish
smile. 3ublicly, O'DZyer  laughed off the intervieZ. But 0oses' remarks had
brought to a boil an Irish temper that had been simmering quietly for Zeeks.
No dummy about bureaucratic maneuverings, he had begun to reali]e hoZ
cleverly he had been hemmed in Zith men Zhose first loyalty Zas not to
him. Intellectually capable of grasping cityZide problems on the broad
scale, he had listened to Citi]ens 8nion and City Club deputations e[plain
that the city Zas heading for disaster unless the burgeoning, surging groZth
noZ sZeeping across the empty spaces of middle 4ueens and the upper

1037
Bron[ and Zhat Zas left  of Brooklyn Zas shaped by a 0aster 3lan—and
the reports that Zere pouring daily onto his desk brought daily proof that
men like Luther Gulick and LaZrence Orton Zere right. 0oreover, no
immense intellectual capacity Zas necessary to see that the problems 0oses
had promised him Zould be solved so quickly Zere not being solved at all;
alZays before, Zhen 0oses had stepped into a field, results had been
quickly forthcoming; noZ, months after 0oses had accepted responsibility
for the emergency housing of veterans, tens of thousands of veterans, more
every Zeek, Zere being forced to live Zith in-laZs, to leave the city entirely
—even to bivouac on the streets —because there Zas no place for them to
live; each Zeekend's traffic tie-up seemed longer than that of the Zeek
before. Stating in a speech that "progress sometimes involves some
temporary hardships" Zas Zell and good; but some of the "temporary
hardships" 0oses Zas proposing to inflict Zere political

suicide; thousands—tens of thousands—of families had to be evicted to
create the right-of-Zay for 0oses' giant e[pressZays and 0oses Zas
proposing to go ahead Zith the evictions immediately, to tear doZn tens of
thousands of apartments during a desperate apartment shortage. Each Board
of Estimate meeting Zas jammed Zith hundreds of protesters begging the
Board to stop the evictions, and these protesters spoke Zith a desperation
neZ even to hardened B3s like Jimmy Lyons. :eek after Zeek, at these
Board meetings, O'DZyer Zas forced into the position of defending policies
about Zhich—for political  if not humanitarian reasons—he Zas beginning
to have doubts.

Spargo, trying as alZays to out-0oses 0oses, began treating O'DZyer as if
he, too, had him in his palm. O'DZyer fired him on the spot.* Soon City
+all Zas bu]]ing   Zith  reports that O'DZyer Zas creating a "trouble-
shooting" squad—Zith broad authority—of men he kneZ to be loyal to
him. 0onths  earlier, Orton had asked the 0ayor for $250,000 to begin
Zork on the 0aster 3lan and a related revision of the ]oning code. There
had been no reply. NoZ, in late June or early July, O'DZyer called back.
The Board of Estimate, composed of men Zho had been listening to 0oses'
vieZs for years, Zould not okay a large e[penditure for the 3lan, he said.
But, he added, 'T think I can get the money for ]oning. Go ahead and make
your arrangement." :ith  EdZin  Salmon replaced as chairman of the City

1038
3lanning Commission by Robert F. :agner, Jr., a rising young star in the
Democratic 3arty, the ]oning maps Zere formulated in a Zay in Zhich they
could form a detailed basis for a 0aster 3lan. As soon as 0oses reali]ed
Zhat Zas going on, he fought every move to advance the ]oning study, but
he lost every vote, the first time he had been on the losing side of an issue
since he had joined the commission. (Burlingham and 0cAneny and
:indels   and Binger and Isaacs and other old giants of the city's reform
movement called on O'DZyer to e[press their appreciation—and to raise
again the question of the old fort at the Battery and to assure the 0ayor that
0oses Zas lying Zhen he said that it could not be restored. They could stop
Zorrying, O'DZyer  told them; they had asked him to stop 0oses by ceding
the fort to the Department of the Interior— Zell, he Zas prepared to do just
that.)

It Zas on IdleZild  that the 0ayor's boiling  temper boiled over. Of all
0oses' suggestions, that one had backfired most badly—and, for the 0ayor,
most embarrassingly. Lulled by 0oses' assurances that creation of an
authority Zould end airport-financing problems, O'DZyer had publicly
announced that he had saved NeZ York from the 3ort Authority and "Jersey
politics." But 0oses  had planned to make the bonds attractive to investors
by raising— by as much as boo percent!—the airlines' rentals for hangar
and terminal space, and the airlines, still struggling financially to get off
"the ground, said they could not afford to pay Zhat 0oses asked—and
pointed out that they saZ no reason Zhy they should, since the old rentals
Zere guaranteed them by contracts they had previously signed Zith the city.
They Zere Zilling  to re-

* O'DZyer  alloZed him to save face by announcing that he Zas resigninc
for "reasons

of health." ' r - -

negotiate the rentals, they said, but not to levels anyZhere near those 0oses
Zas demanding. Over lunch at Randall's Island, 0oses, threatening that the
city Zould sue to break the contracts, and pointing out that the suits could
drag on for years, depriving the airlines of any landing area in the country's
greatest metropolis e[cept for old and antiquated NeZark Airport,
alternately cajoled and bullied the e[ecutives—until Eddie Rickenbacker,

1039
the :orld   :ar   II air hero Zho had become president of Eastern Airlines,
said curtly, "I'm going to NeZark," grabbed his coat and hat and Zalked out.
0oses had to report to O'DZyer that the bonds could not be sold. And-at
this crucial point the 3ort Authority e[erted a crucial bit of pressure,
announcing that it Zould begin immediately a $75,000,000 enlargement
that Zould make NeZark Airport the finest in the Zorld.  The city's press,
already attacking O'DZyer for the "giveaZay" to the bankers, accused him
of having surrendered the supremacy in aviation "essential" to the city's
future. Removing the city's airport program from 0oses' hands, the 0ayor
turned over IdleZild and La Guardia to the 3ort Authority. (The Authority
promptly canceled an IdleZild design contract that Zould have given an
architectural firm selected by 0oses a fee of $1,178,250.)

:hile   0oses'  popularity Zas still overZhelming,  it had developed
significant gaps on the left; during the same Zeek in Zhich he suffered the
IdleZild  defeat, and Zas Zatching the City 3lanning Commission slip out
of his hands, a committee of liberal organi]ations Zas formed Zith the
avoZed purpose of forcing O'DZyer to remove him from office, and 300
delegates representing 28,000 city and state employees supported that
demand in a resolution calling him an "anti-Democratic . . . reactionary,"
and assailing him for cutting the school-building program and for favoring
"discrimination in loZ-cost  housing" and in employment. On July 28, 30
could report that "the biggest story in the City Government today is the
apparent decline of Robert 0oses as the poZer behind the throne." And on
August 12, the capstone Zas put on the pyramid of 0oses' defeats Zhen
3resident Truman, after checking Zith O'DZyer and being told flatly by the
0ayor  that Fort Clinton should be preserved and restored as a national
monument, signed a bill passed by Congress authori]ing the Department of
the Interior to do so. There Zere several pointed private developments.
0oses heard no more about his suggestion—Zhich O'DZyer had seemed
on the verge of accepting—that General Farrell be appointed chairman of
the +ousing Authority. +e did hear that O'DZyer Zas considering enlarging
the membership of the City 3lanning Commission to reduce 0oses'
influence over it. 0ost  significantly of all,  0oses' access to O'DZyer Zas
restricted—if not in fact all but eliminated. The days of the tZo-hour chats
in Zhich he could "sZing"  the 0ayor  Zere over. Soon City +all Zas abu]]
Zith rumors that he Zas having difficulty even getting in to see the 0ayor.

1040
Once, attempting to arrange a personal intervieZ Zith O'DZyer, 0oses
used the ploy of asking a deputy mayor to remind his boss that a city
program should be agreed upon before the 1947 legislative session and to
ask him to appoint—and to meet Zith—a committee of key city officials—
including the City Construction Coordinator —to do so. There Zas no reply.
0oses Zas reduced to inviting a loZer-

echelon mayoral assistant, legal aide +arold L. +er]stein, to lunch in an
attempt to Zin the 0ayor's ear for the proposal. And the reply from
+er]stein, Zhen it  came, came in Zriting and reflected the 0ayor's
coldness, as Zell as a desire to return poZer in the city to the traditional
repositories of poZer. "The 0ayor is aZare of the necessity for the city's
formulation of a program ... +e has a program in mind Zhich he Zill submit
informally to the members of the Board of Estimate for their approval.
:hen   he obtains such approval, he Zill consider the selection of the
personnel to effectuate his program in Albany." During this period, even
0oses' ultimate Zeapon failed him—for the first  time in decades. A
Triborough messenger shoZed up at Gracie 0ansion one day Zith a letter
of resignation from 0oses. The 0ayor  handed it back to the messenger and
told him: "Tell the gentleman Zho sent this that if he Zants me to accept it,
just send it back again." The messenger did not return.

But 0oses used the poZer of money to bring the 0ayor to heel.

O'DZyer Zas desperate for money. The city's crises Zere Zorsening. 3ress
and public Zanted action. +e Zas, moreover, in the midst of a struggle to
take over Tammany +all, a struggle Zhich revolved around his attempts to
oust 0anhattan borough president +ugo E. Rogers, Zhose office Zas a
particularly lucrative source of contracts for the machine. +e Zas not
unaZare, moreover, of the fact that any major public Zorks projects Zhich
Zere not started almost at once Zould not be finished Zhen he ran for re-
election in 1949. +is city, his grasp for party poZer, his personal career—all
these required money. And he didn't have any.

Action in the housing crisis Zas conceived of by press and public as
construction of neZ housing. NeZ housing projects had been planned Zith
the state money 0oses had obtained, but the very crisis that made
construction imperative—the lack of vacant livable apartments in the city—

1041
made construction difficult, because there Zere no apartments into Zhich to
relocate families living on the sites on Zhich planned housing Zas to be
built. The state had agreed to pay $3,000,000 to rehabilitate vacant,
boarded-up tenements for the temporary use of such families if the City
+ousing Authority  Zould also contribute $3,000,000. But Zhile the clamor
of the citi]enry for  housing "action" mounted daily, the city Zas unable,
month after month, to come up Zith its $3,000,000.

:hether   or not—after O'DZyer's attempt to discipline him, an attempt
Zhich included barring him from housing decisions—0oses quietly used
his influence Zith state officials to discipline O'DZyer  instead and force the
0ayor  to put him into the housing picture, cannot be documented, but
during the month of September 1946 the folloZing sequence of events
occurred:

• O'DZyer agreed not to bring to a secret meeting Zith state housing
officials any members of the City +ousing Authority—but to bring Robert
0oses instead.

• At the secret meeting, the state officials agreed to do Zhat they previously
refused to do—to pay the Zhole $6,000,000 themselves.

• The official announcement of the agreement put out by the state officials
said that the agreement had been accepted on behalf of the city by

Robert 0oses and 0ayor :illiam     O'DZyer—and some informed insiders
believed it Zas no accident at all Zhose name came first.

Action in the traffic crisis Zas conceived of by press and public as
construction of highZays and giant off-street parking garages. The city had
no money for garages; the only possible source of funds Zas Triborough—
Robert 0oses' Triborough. (In the first flush of his friendliness, O'DZyer
had appointed him for another si[-year term.) At O'DZyer's request he had
agreed to spend $40,000,000 building si[teen of them, getting back the
money from fees paid by garage users. State and federal money Zas
available for highZays—but 0oses' hand Zas on the valves that regulated
the floZ of state and federal money into the city. State and federal
governments, moreover, Zere forbidden by laZ to acquire the right-of-Zay

1042
Zithout Zhich  the construction of highZays could not start. Available city
funds for right-of-Zay  Zere clearly insufficient. A Triborough contribution
Zas necessary. (0oses had promised O'DZyer such a contribution—of at
least $11,000,000 during the ne[t three years—as Zell as additional
contributions, amounting to perhaps another $20,000,000, for planning and,
on some stretches, actual construction, to further speed his highZay
program.) :hether  or not 0oses told  O'DZyer after the 0ayor's  attempt to
discipline him that he Zas no longer prepared to make contributions for
highZay right-of-Zay,  planning and construction—and Zhether or not he
quietly used his influence Zith the State D3:  to delay the aZarding of
construction contracts—cannot be documented, but during the last si[
months of 1946, the months of antagonism betZeen 0oses and O'DZyer,
there Zas a noticeable falling off in such aZards —and a noticeable sloZing
doZn in the construction of highZays in the city, to a point Zhere press and
public began to complain bitterly about the lack of "action." 0ore pointed
Zere the developments in relation to the giant e[pressZays Zhich 0oses
had long been planning to construct across 0anhattan Island itself. Even
before the Zar, 0oses had planned at least three such e[pressZays—all
elevated: an "8pper 0anhattan E[pressZay" at appro[imately 125th Street;
a "0id-0anhattan   Elevated E[pressZay" across either 30th or 36th Street;
and a "LoZer 0anhattan E[pressZay"  that Zould run across Broome Street
and connect the +olland Tunnel Zith the :illiamsburg   and 0anhattan
bridges. Of the three e[pressZays, the 0id-0anhattan Zould  be by far the
most spectacular—planned to run at a height of about 100 feet above the
busiest streets in the Zorld, through a forest of skyscrapers— and it had
captured O'DZyer's fancy completely; hardly had 0oses e[plained it to him
Zhen he Zas talking enthusiastically (in private, so as not to offend sooner
than necessary the poZerful real estate interests involved) about "a highZay
from the +udson to the East River—through the si[th or seventh floor of
the Empire State Building." Such a highZay Zould, of course, be almost
incredibly e[pensive; 0oses' public  estimate Zas $43,000,000—at least
half of Zhich Zould  be for the condemnation of land occupied by
skyscrapers. But 0oses had told the 0ayor that if it could be a toll road
Triborough Zould build it  for him. O'DZyer  had agreed, and, although
funds Zere not immediately available, planning Zas already under Zay on
Randall's Island and at the giant engineering firms that operated on 0oses'

1043
orders. Certainly the 0ayor had e[pected that, of the three cross-0anhattan
e[pressZays, the 0id-0anhattan  Zould  be built first. And he had e[pected
that, Zhen it Zas built, he Zould be identified Zith  its building. But on
October 14, to O'DZyer's surprise, 0oses and Borough 3resident Rogers
issued a joint announcement that studies had been under Zay for months on
the LoZer 0anhattan E[pressZay, that a route had been finali]ed, that "it
had been incorporated in the federal and state highZay systems as eligible
for future state and federal highZay funds," that preliminary plans—
"directed by the Office of the 3resident of the Borough of
0anhattan"—"are already under Zay" by engineering firms, including
0adigan-+yland,  that "final plans Zill  folloZ   as soon as all those Zhose
approval is required have given it" and that "it is intended that land shall be
acquired and construction started in 1948, and that this crossing shall be
completed in 1949"

The announcement Zas more a pressure tactic aimed at O'DZyer than a
detailed highZay plan—the 0oses-produced brochure that accompanied the
announcement bore uncharacteristic marks of haste—but the pressure
involved Zas heavy indeed. O'DZyer could hardly miss the hints contained
in the fact that Rogers' name and not his Zas attached to the announcement,
and that it Zas not the 0ayor but the borough president Zho Zas
"directing" the preliminary planning. Completion of the e[pressZay in
1949, he must have reali]ed, Zould make it the only major highZay
completed during his term—and it Zould be a highZay identified Zith one
of his opponents, a highZay for Zhich the contracts—Zith all the millions
of dollars in patronage and political contributions such contracts entailed—
Zould be distributed not by him but by the organi]ation he Zas fighting.
And given the public demand for traffic "action"—a demand emphasi]ed by
the instantaneous press enthusiasm for a proposal that could be "completed
in 1949"—opposing the highZay Zas politically unfeasible.

0ore  pressure Zas applied on December 2. 3rodded by O'DZyer and
La]arus Joseph—and by the protests of school-conscious parents'
organi]ations—the Board of Estimate on that date Zas meeting in e[ecutive
session on the second floor of City +all; 0oses Zas present, but the Board
nonetheless shifted more than $21,000,000 in the 0oses-dominated
3lanning Commission's proposed 1947 capital budget from highZays to

1044
schools. "No details of the five-hour session Zere available," the +erald
Tribune reported, "but there Zere cleZs to give color to reports that 0r.
0oses . . . found the going pretty rough. These hints came from the 0ayor.
. . ." The Citi]ens 8nion  rejoiced that "the capital of the city, so far, is still
in City +all."

Reformers Zho had e[pected a characteristic 0oses e[plosion Zere
surprised, hoZever. "Taking his defeat gracefully, 0oses had no comment
to make on the day's proceedings Zhen he left City +all just before seven
o'clock," the Times reported. They Zould have understood the reason for
his equanimity—and they Zould have been less certain of the capital's
location —if they had understood the significance of a scene that had taken
place on the first floor of City +all  Zhile the Board of Estimate Zas
meeting on the second. At the foot of the graceful hanging staircase a
0oses aide had stood handing out copies of a 0oses letter stating that a
neZ study of parking

garages indicated that such garages Zould, as the +erald Tribune put it, be
"losing propositions, too dubious for bondholders' money" and that the
Triborough Authority had therefore reconsidered and decided not to finance
them. No reporter—or, so far as can be determined, reformer—grasped the
relationship betZeen the Board's action and the Authority's, either at the
time or later. But O'DZyer must have—and he must therefore have reali]ed
that during his re-election campaign thirty-three months off, he Zould have
no garages to point to Zith pride.

0oses' most effective use of the poZer of money came during O'DZyer's
campaign to persuade the 8nited Nations to locate in NeZ York.

The money involved Zas not so much 0oses' oZn as that of other people.
But, of all the city's officials, only 0oses  had quick access to it—and he
used that access so effectively that he not only played the leading role in the
0ayor's campaign but made the 0ayor like it. And  him.

Bringing the neZly formed Zorld  federation to his city captured O'DZyer's
imagination as did no other project. Reminiscing, he Zould say, "I felt that
this Zas the one great thing that Zould make NeZ York the center of the
Zorld."

1045
8nfortunately, other cities Zere also an[ious to be the Zorld's center —and
they had the money that NeZ York lacked. Before his inauguration,
O'DZyer had appointed 0oses chairman of a blue-ribbon committee to
grab the pri]e. 0oses had selected the members Zith an eye to their proven
Zillingness to boZ to his leadership (Triborough board member 0eyer,
Bron[ Borough 3resident Lyons, Big "Bag" 0an  Farley, Al Smith disciple
John S. Burke of B. Altman's, old friend Grover :halen,  Arthur  +ays
Sul]berger) and Zith an eye also to the Zealth they could command (0eyer,
Burke, Thomas J. :atson of IB0,   Frederick +. Ecker of 0etropolitan   Life,
and not one but tZo members of the Rockefeller clan, :inthrop :.   Aldrich
and one of John D. Rockefeller, Jr.'s, sons Zho had caught 0oses' keen eye
—the handsome young man had a lively interest in construction—and
toZard Zhom he felt almost fatherly, Nelson). As a result, not only the
necessary land but the money to produce the items that "sold" projects—
architectural and engineering plans, scale models, lavish brochures—Zere
available to "sell" the 8NO's +eadquarters Committee, and they Zere
available fast, fast enough for NeZ York to steal a march on the other cities:
Zhen the 8NO's temporary headquarters had opened in October 1946, it
had opened in NeZ York—on the site 0oses had selected, Flushing
0eadoZs 3ark, in  Zhich the City Building  left over (and, since it Zas
located in a park, under 0oses' jurisdiction) from the 1939 :orld's  Fair had
been transformed at a city-borne cost of $2,200,000 from a skating rink into
a General Assembly Building. And 0oses and O'DZyer Zere prepared to
turn over 350 acres of the park to the 8NO for its permanent headquarters.
But 8NO  delegates didn't like the site, preferring one in 0anhattan. There
Zas no vacant site of sufficient si]e available there, and acquiring one
Zould therefore require not only an immense e[penditure for land
acquisition and construction, and not only additional e[penditures for the
related access and parking improvements for the big "D3L" limousines, but
also, the delegates made clear, absolute and

permanent e[emption from city real estate ta[es. The delegates Zere also
insistent on the provision of housing in the housing-short city, not only for
themselves but for their staffs and the staff of the 8NO Secretariat, Zhich
numbered in the hundreds. O'DZyer felt that asking the Board of Estimate,
Zhich Zas being forced every tZo Zeeks to e[plain that the city had no
money to build desperately needed schools, hospitals, libraries and seZers,

1046
Zould be futile—unless he had a "gesture," "something he could shoZ the
Board": some sort of private contribution to defray the cost and get the
project started. But Zith the 8NO pressuring him almost daily for an
ansZer, he had to confess he had neither the center-city site for a permanent
headquarters —nor the money to build one. 0eanZhile, San Francisco's
mayor Zas in NeZ York incognito, offering a huge site; Boston had
dispatched a team, including its mayor, the Governor and Lieutenant
Governor of 0assachusetts, and Christian Science 0onitor editor ErZin D.
Canham, to offer not only a site but a guarantee of city funds to build
headquarters and housing on it; 3hiladelphia, many delegates' choice, Zas
offering the Zorld organi]ation  its choice of sites. 8NO Secretary-General
Trygve Lie, himself once a municipal official in NorZay, had been
personally aZed by 0oses in their many conferences and Zas holding out
for NeZ York, but on November 9, the General Assembly directed its
+eadquarters Committee to concentrate on sites in other cities and on
December 6, a Friday, Zith 3hiladelphia so confident that it Zas already
condemning land for the headquarters, Lie emerged from a committee
meeting to telephone O'DZyer and 0oses and tell them "that unless they
came up Zith a neZ and better proposal the Zhole thing Zould be over as
far as NeZ York Zas concerned. I had done all I could." A final decision in
favor of 3hiladelphia Zas e[pected the folloZing  :ednesday.

O'DZyer had received another telephone call that Friday—from :illiam
Zeckendorf. Zeckendorf, real estate Zheeler-dealer on the grand scale,
informed the 0ayor that for some months his confidential agents had been
secretly buying up property in Turtle Bay, an area on midtoZn 0anhattan's
eastern shore—occupied since Civil :ar days by slaughterhouses, packing
plants and cattle pens—in Zhich land Zas cheap. +e had succeeded in
acquiring an option to purchase the heart of the area, a seventeen-acre tract
bounded by Forty-second and Forty-ninth streets and the East River Drive
and First Avenue, for only $6,500,000, or seventeen dollars per square foot
—a mere fraction of the price of most midtoZn real estate. +e had planned
to create a series of huge superblocks there, but plans and financing Zeren't
finali]ed, the option Zas running out—and he Zas Zilling  to sell the tract,
the largest land parcel to become available in central NeZ York in tZenty-
five years, to the 8NO.

1047
:hen   O'DZyer reported the offer to Lie, the Secretary-General said, "Turtle
Bay . . . even noZ, could turn the tide." +is remarks, hoZever, did nothing
to solve O'DZyer's cash problem. Zeckendorf recalls that the 0ayor
"fervently said" that, to keep the 8NO in NeZ York, "he'd give an arm, a
leg and various other parts of his body ... but that none of them Zas
particularly salable." The name Rockefeller Zas suggested as a source of
the cash, perhaps because the family had given the 8NO's predecessor, the
League

of Nations, a huge donation. But O'DZyer had no entree to the Rockefeller
from Zhom, at that time, a gift of the necessary dimensions Zould have to
come—John D. Rockefeller, Jr., John D. Rockefeller Zho had spent long
days riding over the route of the 3alisades Interstate 3arkZay Zith Robert
0oses, John D. Rockefeller Zho had Zorked closely Zith Robert 0oses in
the construction of the Cloisters and children's playgrounds in Fort Tryon
3ark, John D. Rockefeller Zho had, Zith 0oses' cooperation, Zorked out a
land e[change Zith the city to help along the building of additions to
Rockefeller Institute, John D. Rockefeller Zhose admiration for Robert
0oses Zas Zell  knoZn. In the midst of his feud Zith  0oses, O'DZyer
turned to the Coordinator as a last resort. "This is Zhere 0oses came in
Zith Nelson Rockefeller, Zorking  on 0r.  Rockefeller, his father," the
0ayor  recalls. There Zere endless details to be Zorked out: acquisition of
the land that Zeckendorf didn't control, Zidening of Forty-seventh Street to
provide access to the site, city property that had to be included or e[cluded,
a federal gift for construction. And there Zas only a little over four days—
ninety-si[ hours —to Zork  them out in. :hen   the gavel slammed doZn to
call the 8NO +eadquarters Committee into session on :ednesday morning,
it Zould be too late.

Saturday and Sunday Zere among the most tense and e[citing that I can
recall as Secretary-General [Lie Zrote!. 0omentous conversations Zere
taking place backstage: steps Zere being taken that might snatch victory
from defeat and croZn these fifteen months of effort Zith success.
Ambassador Austin [Zas] noZ involved . . . There Zere secret consultations
Zith the Rockefeller brothers and Zith their father, John D. Rockefeller, Jr.
But Zhat Zas happening then Zas knoZn only to a selected feZ. . . . There
Zas much to be done before so e[tensive a real estate transaction as this

1048
could be assured. Normally it Zould have taken months of business
negotiations Zith batteries of laZyers.

But in ninety-si[  hours, it Zas done. For every snag that arose, 0oses had a
knife. Teams of laZyers Zere prepared to research for days the details of
city surrender of East River bulkheads; 0oses called in a secretary and
dictated on the spot Zithout reference to a single laZ book a memorandum
setting out the method—a memorandum laZyers later found to be correct
doZn to the last comma. Legislative permission Zas needed for the city to
close certain streets Zithin the site and give the 8NO the land—a feZ
phone calls from 0oses to Albany secured a guarantee of the permission.
Late Tuesday night —about tZelve hours before the +eadquarters
Committee convened—Zeckendorf, Zho had taken no part in the
discussions folloZing his offer and did not knoZ if there Zas any chance of
its being accepted, Zas celebrating his birthday in a private dining room at
the 0onte Carlo Zhen :allace   ..   +arrison, the distinguished architect and
intimate of the Rockefeller family, Zalked in Zith  a block-by-block map of
the site bulging out of a jacket pocket, sat doZn at the table, tried to assume
an air of nonchalance, failed and blurted out, ":ould you sell it for  eight
and a half million?" Zeckendorf said yes, and the ne[t morning at ten-thirty,
as he sat in his office nursing a hangover, the phone rang and he heard
Nelson Rockefeller say, ":e've been up

all night patching up the details, but it's going to Zork. The old man is
going to give that 8.5 million dollars to the 8N, and they're going to take
your property. See you soon. . . . Good-bye." :hen, minutes later, the
+eadquarters Committee convened, Austin arose and announced the gift—
Zhich also included, on Rockefeller's insistence, a city commitment of
$2,500,000 for property to round out the site and of additional city funds to
ease traffic problems by Zidening Forty-seventh Street and building a half-
mile-long north-south tunnel under First Avenue. And Zithin three days, the
General Assembly accepted it. A key factor in the acceptance had been
O'DZyer's promise of housing, and, thanks to 0oses, O'DZyer Zas able to
keep that promise, through 0etropolitan Life Insurance at 3eter Cooper
Village, through NeZ York Life  at Fresh 0eadoZs Golf Course, through a
0oses-conceived "Savings Bank Trust Company" formed to build 3arkZay

1049
Village in Jamaica—all housing projects arranged by 0oses in Zhich
0oses Zas noZ able to reserve Zhole buildings for 8NO  personnel.

Some elements in the city—Stanley Isaacs and other "radicals"—objected
to a city unable to provide the necessities of modern life for its people
spending millions on the 8NO and giving ta[ e[emptions on real estate that
could bring the city millions more. Some members of the Board of
Estimate, notably La]arus Joseph, seconded those objections.

But O'DZyer could handle the radicals. +e could handle the Board of
Estimate, not that much handling of that body Zas necessary, since they
Zere highly susceptible, as the 0ayor had knoZn they Zould be, to the
argument that $8,500,000—and, as journalists Zere putting it, the chance to
be "the permanent capital of the Zorld"—Zas being given to the city for
Zhat Zas represented as insignificant city contributions. No one on the
Board guessed that over the ne[t ten years those contributions Zould total
more than $32,000,000. +e could handle the Board because he had the
money—and 0oses had given him that money.

Letters from key figures in the negotiations revealed deep appreciation of
the role 0oses had played—and of the personal qualities that had made him
perhaps uniquely qualified to play it. "0y  deepest thanks," Zrote Trygve
Lie, Zho Zas later to say—in the midst of a hot dispute Zith 0oses over
construction details: "I understand him and I understand Zhat he has done
for NeZ York. ... It is marvelous. I regard him as one of the greatest men of
our time." "0y  profound thanks," Zrote John D. Rockefeller. "Your
instantaneous approval of the offer, your broad vision as to the future
possibilities, your quick appreciation of the necessary immediate steps, and
your prompt action looking toZard the city's cooperation, all played a vital
role in bringing about the ultimate outcome. It has been a pleasure for me to
be associated Zith you in this matter, so far-reaching in its implications, and
I Zould have you knoZ of my  deep gratitude to you. . . ." But Lie and
Rockefeller Zere no more appreciative than the 0ayor, and a letter from
him e[pressed gratitude in the Zay that, to 0oses, Zas most important: the
letter, dated January 13, 1947, gave 0oses complete poZer over all details
—including those normally handled by other city agencies—relating to the
construction of the 8NO headquarters. +is fall from grace had occurred in

1050
July 1946. By January 13, 1947, it Zas over. The poZer of money had not
only brought the 0ayor to heel, but had made him like it.

0oses not only came back, but came back bigger than ever. 0oses 0an
Farrell Zas appointed chairman of the +ousing Authority, another 0oses
0an, 3hilip  J. Cruise, Zas appointed Authority secretary—at double his
previous salary. There Zas no more talk about enlarging the City 3lanning
Commission. A confidential 0oses memo told the 0ayor  Zhich highZay
sections "Ze can complete ... by the Summer of 1949"—in time for
O'DZyer's reelection campaign—"if Ze . . . tolerate no further delays."
O'DZyer tolerated no further delays. :ithin   Zeeks, families in the rights-
of-Zay Zere being evicted and the State D3:  Zas aZarding construction
contracts—to firms that did their banking Zith Federation (and that could
be e[pected, through Federation's president, to contribute to O'DZyer's re-
election campaign). 0oses Zas cocky enough to put his dominance over the
0ayor  Zho Zas supposedly his boss on public display. At one Board of
Estimate session, Comptroller Joseph refused to approve $144,000 in
design contracts for AndreZs & Clark, engineers, and Eggers & +iggins,
architects, for Zork on Ferry 3oint 3ark, contending that engineers already
employed by the city could do the Zork for $41,000. Turning to O'DZyer,
0oses said, "If I  don't have the sufficient confidence of this administration
in a matter of this kind I don't Zant to be 3arks Commissioner and I don't
Zant to be Construction Coordinator. I'm tired of this sort of thing, and I
mean Zhat I say." O'DZyer responded to this open threat by angrily
lecturing Joseph. :hen  the Comptroller protested, "I'm sorry, General, but
it Zas not my fault," O'DZyer  replied, "It Zas your fault,"  and ordered the
Comptroller to "patch things up" Zith 0oses.  (Joseph did.)

0ost  important, 0oses noZ had his entree to the 0ayor back—on a regular
basis. Every Zeek at least tZo leisurely Gracie 0ansion breakfast
conferences Zere reserved for Robert 0oses, Zho Zould come over from
his apartment a block aZay. "Tuesdays," O'DZyer Zould recall, "it Zas ...
all 8nited Nations business"—transacted by 0oses and Zhomever he
Zanted to bring along, Trygve Lie perhaps. On Fridays, 0oses Zould bring
along guests Zho, to O'DZyer, may have been more important than the
Secretary-General of the Zorld organi]ation. "Every Friday morning," John
A. Coleman recalls, "he'd set aside for 0oses and Zhatever construction

1051
people 0oses Zanted to bring." There Zere, in fact, feZ mornings on
Zhich, appointment or not, Zhen O'DZyer descended the Gracie 0ansion
staircase at about ten o'clock, 0oses Zasn't Zaiting for him.

0oses kneZ hoZ  to make the most of such entree. Says Lutsky: "+e'd see
[O'DZyer]  alone, Zithout the 0ayor  having had an opportunity to hear the
other side, and get him committed. And he had another device." By the time
O'DZyer came doZnstairs at ten, 0oses Zould have been up Zorking for
three hours, if not longer. "+e Zould have the papers ready, and if the
0ayor  said okay, he could get them signed right there." Despite his
admiration for 0oses, Lutsky saZ the danger in this, a danger intensified by
the fact that O'DZyer, naturally friendly, "Zould  alZays agree Zith the last
man in" —the person right there.

0oses got his commitments from the 0ayor noZ  Zithout  ever again
arousing his ire. 0oses' smiling, hearty, arm-around-the-shoulders charm—
charm that could disarm a roomful of listeners—Zas simply overZhelming
to an individual Zho Zas sequestered alone Zith him morning after
morning, particularly Zhen combined Zith his intellect and vision and
governmental ability. "You knoZ the city's too big. It's too big for one
government," O'DZyer Zas to recall. "It's a tough battle, and everything
falls on your head Zhen you're 0ayor. I remember the lonely nights and the
snoZy nights and the stormy nights up there at Gracie 0ansion, and I
Zould Zalk  up and doZn the porch and look over at Astoria . . . and I
Zould say, 'Good Lord, I'm 0ayor  of this toZn!'  ... It Zas something. The
job frightened me at times like that." But 0oses, Zho, despite the bigness
of the city, had built the great bridge to Astoria that dominated the vieZ
from that porch, Zould be there to lift the load, Zith ansZers, solutions,
courses of action for Zhich financing Zas available, courses of action that
could be implemented if only the 0ayor Zould  sign right here.

And the 0ayor  Zas noZ increasingly glad to get help from him. "If the tZo
of them Zere together, it Zould be 0oses doing most of the talking," 3aul
O'DZyer recalls. "Bill  Zas a good listener. 0oses Zould be selling, as it
Zere. The scene Zould be Bill sitting and 0oses pacing and talking. 0y
brother Zas essentially a reader of books, of plays, of history. Bill Zas
essentially an artist. Bill Zas the dreamer in the larger sense. And 0oses

1052
Zas the very practical—the antithesis of that. So from the standpoint of the
0ayor  and the Coordinator of Construction, they complemented each other
very Zell."  +oZever 3aul may have felt about 0oses, moreover, he had to
admit that his brother's feelings for his Coordinator Zent beyond
professional complementation. "+e liked 0oses, maybe more than 0oses
liked him, because I don't think 0oses liked anybody," he says. Soon, one
of 0oses' opponents recalls, "all decisions that mattered in the city Zere
being made up at Gracie 0ansion, Zith 0oses alone Zith the 0ayor."  In
December 1947, the +erald Tribune, for so long a 0oses supporter, felt
constrained to comment: "3lans for a future NeZ York are being draZn up
on 0r.  0oses' personal drafting table and noZhere else. In the absence of
adequate planning measures, Zithout up-to-date ]oning, Zithout a 0aster
3lan, the city is being re-planned in camera ... A dangerous measure of
discretionary poZer has noZ been amassed in the hands of a single
individual." But O'DZyer's  feelings—the only feelings that mattered—Zere
spelled out in 1962 in his Oral +istory Reminiscences Zith a vividness that
belied the passage of years.

On contracts, I'd rely 100,000 percent on 0oses, and sometimes on the
question of art, the question of repairs to museums and the building of the
Aquarium, for instance, and things of that kind—highZays, the 8N
Building . . . that Zas all Zell  Zithin  the Coordinator's job, and that Zas
Bob 0oses. Sometimes I didn't agree Zith him ... but in the main, I took—
paid great attention to the recommendations of 0r. 0oses. . . . One sure
thing, there are very feZ people in this toZn that I think more highly of than
Bob 0oses. In fact, I don't think there is anyone. ... +e gets the job done,
efficiently and Zithout e[tra  cost. ... I made him the coordinator of all city
contracts. I kneZ that Zould

keep them clean. I also kneZ that it Zould be done Zith a vieZ to giving the
right kind of selection of Zhat to do, you knoZ . . . The thing is, Zhat Zere
the necessary things, and in Zhat order should they be built . . . You have to
have the very best brains on selecting Zhat is good—Zhat's the first thing
that must be done, and the second and third, in an orderly Zay. That is
Zhere 0oses came in. +e Zas Zonderful.

1053
And Zhen the intervieZer inquired, ":as   it his brains? +is influence?"
O'DZyer replied:

"+e has the brains and he has the influence. +e has both."

Early in 1948, 0oses apprised O'DZyer about Senator Taft's plans for a
neZ slum clearance or "urban reneZal" program. In December, Zhile
Congress Zas still Zorking out the details, O'DZyer appointed him to the
chairmanship of a neZ "0ayor's Committee on Slum Clearance"—his tenth
post—and alloZed him to name most of the other members.

NeZspapers, sloZ to grasp the significance of the pending federal "Title I"
slum clearance legislation, Zere sloZ to grasp the significance of 0oses'
appointment. The Times buried the story—four paragraphs long—on page
nine. But on the landscape of NeZ York's history, that appointment stands
out like a mountain. 0oses had been campaigning to take over federally
funded housing in NeZ York for ten years, to the virtually unanimous
dismay of those Zho believed in the social philosophy Zhich underlay the
government's decision to provide shelter for the impoverished among its
people, and Zho feared that 0oses' philosophy—so antithetical—Zould,
even Zhile he Zas in the process of building such housing, undermine the
aims for Zhich it Zas being built. By  cutting 0oses off  the air in 1938, La
Guardia had defeated 0oses in the first battle of the campaign. A neZ
mayor had, by appointing him Construction Coordinator and naming his
aides to the City +ousing Authority, given him a measure of the control he
coveted, but the control had been indirect and hence incomplete. But noZ—
as of December 17, 1948—his control Zas complete at last.

Behind the control, moreover, Zas poZer of a neZ immensity. Title I of the
+ousing Act of 1949 e[tended the poZer of eminent domain, traditionally
used in America only for government-built projects, so drastically that
governments could noZ condemn land and turn it over to individuals— for
them to build on it projects agreeable to government. 8nder Title I, Zhole
sections of cities could be condemned, their residents evicted, the buildings
in Zhich those residents had lived demolished—and the land turned over to
private individuals. +ere Zas poZer neZ in the annals of democracy. And
in NeZ York, that poZer Zould  be e[ercised by Robert 0oses. "In my
opinion," urban e[pert Charles Abrams Zas to say, "under present

1054
redevelopment laZs, 0acy's could condemn Gimbels—if Robert 0oses
gave the Zord . . ." Once, a quarter of a century before, 0oses had, by
deceiving the Legislature into giving him the poZer of condemnation by
appropriation, obtained immense poZer—:.  .ingsland  0acy  had testified,
"0r.  0oses told  me personally that his poZer Zas such that he could sei]e
my house, put me out of it and arrest me for trespassing if I tried to get into
it again"—and had obtained an e[tension of that poZer, hitherto e[ercised
only in remote mountain

forest fastnesses, to Long Island. NoZ, he had that poZer not only over
farms and private estates but over the massed edifices, crammed Zith
human beings, of a huge city.

A 0oses speech in 0ay 1949—"If  Ze  can find a man Zho has a first-rate
program* half-completed and is Zilling to go through the grueling business
for a second term, let us . . . keep him on"—touched off a draft movement
headed by John A. Coleman and including Robert Blaikie, John 0cCarthy,
president of the Fifth Avenue Coach Company, :illiam 0ac-Cormack,
president of the Transit-0i[  Concrete Corporation, and Carmine De Sapio,
Zho had just ousted +ugo Rogers as leader of Tammany +all. Fusion Zas
again in the field—the candidacy of 0oses' admirer NeZbold 0orris  Zas
backed by men Zho had been 0oses' allies and Zho Zere dedicated to the
principles in Zhich 0oses  had once believed. 0oses threZ the full poZer
of his name into the scales on Tammany's side—Zith undisguised eagerness
and enthusiasm. +e appeared Zith O'DZyer on campaign platforms to make
campaign speeches, Zrote neZspaper ads "To Young Voters," issued
statements and reports on park, traffic and housing "progress" under
O'DZyer's administration and predicted that the remaining problems in
these areas Zere Zell on the Zay to solution. (An angry 3aul :indels
replied that "perhaps the quickest Zay to get action Zould be to take the
limousines and chauffeurs aZay from them and make them go through the
subZay Zringer tZice a day like the rest of us.")

The enormous strength of 0oses' name and reputation as political Zeapons
had been demonstrated by the prominence given his endorsements of La
Guardia in 1933, 1937 and 1941. In 1949, there Zere a greater number of
discordant notes in the chorus that greeted his statements. There Zere

1055
letters-to-the-editor complaining about aspects of his park or highZay
policies. One candidate, a young reformer named Oren Root running for
0anhattan borough president, attacked 0oses directly for continuing to
build beaches Zhile Zorking against allocations for municipal seZage
plants that Zould keep the Zater at the beaches fit to sZim in; the city's
Liberal 3arty, at the insistence of state chairman Adolf A. Berle, Jr.,
publicly declared that his poZer should be "restricted" on planning matters.

But even those feZ discordant notes Zere muted by the chorus of praise
(the tZentieth anniversary of Jones Beach Zas celebrated in July, Zith
appropriate pageantry). Interrupting a diatribe on Zater Zastage in NeZ
York—"For every pint saved by a good citi]en, a Communist Zill Zaste a
do]en bathtubs and there are hordes of Communists"—:est-brook 3egler
bemoaned the fact that the tZo nominees Zere "inferior men" and then
turned to one Zho he felt Zasn't: "There is available in NeZ York one of the
greatest administrators of public office that Ze have ever had Zho can't get
nominated. That is Robert 0oses. ... +e Zould even make a good 3resident
of the 8nited States. But there is no sense to labor the point, because the
conspiracies and rivalries of sinister men and stupid, paltry hacks Zill deny
us the benefit of 0oses' ability, integrity and honesty. +e has

Italics added.

been ruled out for years on the ground that he can't 'get along' Zith people.
+e can get along Zith honest and competent men all right, but not Zith
parasites and grafters and fumbling slobs." Then there Zere the editorials.
0ost  treated 0oses' endorsement of O'DZyer as proof of the 0ayor's
integrity and progressiveness. The +erald Tribune, supporting 0orris,
hastened to assure readers that 0orris Zould also keep 0oses in office. "If
there is anything certain in the 0ayoralty scrambles, it is this: no candidate
on any ticket Zill  risk announcing before election that he has plans to oust
Robert 0oses."

0oses' support Zas probably not needed by O'DZyer. The 0ayor Zas
immensely popular, and as had been the case in 1929, Zhen La Guardia
accused Jimmy :alker's administration of underZorld  ties, no one Zas
listening Zhen 0orris  made the same charges about O'DZyer. But it Zas
helpful. The 0ayor's ansZer to these charges Zas to point to his programs

1056
— 0oses' programs—as he did once Zhen a reporter questioned him about
0orris'  latest attack and he replied scornfully, ":hile  Ze are talking about
housing . . . he's talking about bookmakers."

0oses' help to the machine Zas, moreover, not limited to statements. The
NeZ York City campaign of 1949 Zas the quintessential ribbon-cutting
campaign—Zith the ribbon cut by the 0ayor and by the borough president
candidates on his ticket. :hen 0oses  ran out of e[pressZays at Zhich
opening ceremonies could be staged, he opened sections of e[pressZays.
There Zere frequent announcements of future public Zorks that Zould
"solve" the city's problems. 0orris critici]ed   the lack of recreational
facilities in +arlem;  0oses announced that the Triborough Authority Zould
construct a footbridge across the East River to :ard's Island, thereby
opening that island's recreational facilities to +arlem residents. 0oses
regarded O'DZyer's re-election almost as a personal triumph. +e had plenty
of obvious reasons— and one knoZn only to himself, O'DZyer, Spargo and,
at most, one or tZo others. Shortly after the election, Spargo had Zritten to
remind the 0ayor that "during your first  term in office, Ze stayed aZay
from the projects and sections of projects Zhere the tenant relocation
problem Zas most difficult" —and to ask the 0ayor if,  Zith  the election
safely out of the Zay, those relocations could noZ begin. And the 0ayor
had said they could. Even as the inaugural ceremonies Zere under Zay, they
Zere being carried out—Zith typical 0oses  dispatch. 0any tenants Zere
already out, their buildings already demolished. Once you get that first
stake driven, 0oses Zas fond of saying, no one could stop you. NoZ, Zith
the evictions and demolitions, the first stake Zas driven—and driven deep
—for the system of mighty highZays he planned to lay across the face of
the city. No one could stop them any more.

There Zas one source of irritation at the inaugural.

O'DZyer had a thirty-three-year-old friend, a young, fast-talking reformer
on the make named Jerry Finkelstein. Finkelstein understood that
O'DZyer's natural friendliness, his tendency "to go along Zith the last guy

I B E L D S T F 0 ■ 3 0 :    E ■

780

1057
in to see him." made the 0ayor a man easily sZayed, or. as Finkelstein put
it, "played"'—and, as he says, "I kneZ hoZ to play B8I 0"DZyer";   he had
already played the 0ayor into the vending machine concession for the city's
subZay stations.

NoZ the 0ayor  promised that at his inauguration he Zould appoint
Finkelstein to succeed Robert F. :agner, Jr., just elected 0anhattan
borough president, as chairman of the City 3lanning Commission.

:hen   Finkelstein arrived for the sZearing in, hoZever, "a neZspaperman
Zho Zas a friend of mine shoZed me the list—and my name Zasn't on it."
Finkelstein rushed in to see O'DZyer and learned that 0oses, Zanting the
commission under the gavel of a chairman he controlled, had had a chance
to play him after Finkelstein.

"J Zalked in to see Bill O'DZyer/"  Finkelstein recalls. "0y  Zife  and family
Zere outside . . ."

"+e said, 'Jerry. Bob thinks it ought to be a great engineer or a great
architect and I'll get you the biggest job . . .'

"J said, The only job I Zant is the chairmanship of the City 3lanning
Commission.'

"+e said, 'Oh, you Zant that?'

"I said, That's right.'

"+e said, 'You have it.' " +e took out a pencil and Zrote in Finkel-stein's
name at the bottom of the typed list, and 0oses, confident that everything at
the ceremony Zas going his Zay, saZ Zith a shock the dark, balding,
bespectacled young JeZ he hardly kneZ Zalking up to take the oath.

:ithin   days, Finkelstein Zas proving much more than an irritation.

Finkelstein kneZ little about city planning, but his first move—after
redecorating his neZ office: "it looked cheap; it Zasn't at all commensurate
Zith the chairman of the City 3lanning Commission"—Zas to folloZ  the

1058
advice of friends at the Citi]ens 8nion and call in LaZrence Orton to ask
him about the 0aster 3lan. Out came the huge maps that had been lying
rolled up and out of sight behind Orton's desk for seventeen years, and out
came the e[planations of interim developments in the city's groZth that
proved so clearly the need for the 3lan.

It didn't take much intelligence to see that Orton Zas right, and no one ever
accused Jerry Finkelstein of being stupid. And if he needed more proof, it
flooded across his desk daily. One city department Zas planning for an
eventual city population of 8,000,000; another for a population of
15,000,-000. One department Zas spending hundreds of thousands of
dollars draZing plans for a seZage-treatment plant on a city-oZned lot;
another Zas planning to build a public library on the same lot; a third Zas
planning a school—each in ignorance of Zhat the others Zere doing. :hile
schools in older areas of the city Zere half empty, schools in neZly
developed areas, due to lack of planning, Zere terribly overcroZded: forty
or even fifty students being crammed into classrooms designed to hold
tZenty-five or thirty,  and double and even triple sessions for hundreds of
thousands of students. 0any neZly developed areas didn't have any schools
—because no one had planned schools. Children from these areas had to
spend part of each school day

being bused—on croZded buses—to the nearest schools available, often
already overcroZded themselves. Studying the reports Zhich crossed his
desk, Finkelstein could see all too easily hoZ simple and cheap it Zould
have been to acquire vacant land for schools in these areas before they had
been built up—and hoZ hard and e[pensive, perhaps prohibitively
e[pensive, it Zould be to acquire school sites there noZ. And he could also
see—one could hardly help seeing—hoZ, as the tide of development
continued to floZ outZard toZard the city's outskirts, the same mistakes
Zhich Zere costing the city so dearly Zere being repeated, day by day.

Taking up Orton's ideas, Finkelstein fought for them. A month after he had
taken office, he asked for a 350 percent increase in the 3lanning
Commission budget from $328,000 to $1,149,000—the bulk of the increase
for an e[pansion in the commission staff to begin Zork on the 0aster 3lan.

1059
Finkelstein accompanied his request Zith a statement that revealed that
0oses Zasn't the only public official  Zho understood that public statements
must be simple to be effective. The feZ figures it contained stood out all the
more starkly: Detroit spent 18 cents per capita on city planning, Los
Angeles 24 cents, 3hiladelphia 25 cents, San Antonio 39 cents, NeZ York 4
cents; even Zith his proposed increase, NeZ York Zould be spending less
than 12 cents—about .001 of the city budget. Its brief summary argued the
need for a 0aster 3lan—the preparation of Zhich, Finkelstein pointedly
noted, Zas a duty specifically placed on the commission over ten years
before but never carried out—as cogently as anyone ever had, both on
economic grounds (duplication of planning by city departments Zas costing
the city far more each year than the $800,000 increase that Zould provide a
0aster 3lan and end the duplication) and on grounds that Zent beyond
economy:

NeZ York is at present in a critical stage of its development. The
precipitous increase in population since the beginning of the Zar, the rapid
spread of development in the outlying areas, the demand for schools, traffic
relief, slum clearance, housing, hospitals and transportation, all argue for
effective planning noZ. . . .

There is need for competent revieZ of the Zork of all agencies by the one. .
.. A city cannot be built economically Zithout coordination . . .

:ithout   a 0aster 3lan, there is no real hope left for the city. . . .

:e   cannot go on hauling more and more people greater and greater
distances to Zork and back again, each morning and evening. If the city is
ever to catch up Zith these problems, and have any money left for other
purposes, some more fundamental solutions must be found. . . .

:ith   a plan, there Zas hope—thanks to Title I urban reneZal funds so un-
precedentedly generous that Zith them a city could make a good start on
reshaping itself—"if Ze take the fullest possible advantage of them" by
planning the reshaping under a comprehensive, cityZide development plan
rather than on a hapha]ard, project-by-project basis. But the opportunity
Zas fleeting. "In default of action noZ, the golden opportunity Zill  be lost."

1060
0oses attempted to fight—using his customary tactics. "+e invited me up
to one lunch," Finkelstein recalls. "I didn't go along Zith him, and I Zas
never invited again. If I Zas a part of his team, I could have had anything.
But I Zasn't on his team." (Orton, Zho at a recent 0oses lunch had rejected
a

T + V. L V  8 1 FO1 3 O Z E .

782

lucrative 0oses "consultant-ship," Zould have been proud of himj 0oses
tried ■ behind the scenes, first sending +odgkiss to try to persuade the
budget advisers to eliminate some of the proposed additional personnel,
then going directly to the 0ayor: "J Zant to make a last protest against not
only a Zaste of City funds but an accumulation of crackpot planners . . . *C
appointment lends color to the stories Zhich have been put out that Ze have
no intelligent planning at present, that all our improvements are hastily and
ill conceived, located at the Zrong places, and therefore prodigiously stupid
and Zasteful." Then he Zent public, Zriting, mimeographing and
distributing to his vast mailing list, and to the press, a letter charging that
Finkelstein's statement "that he Zould save a great deal of money if his
budget Zere trebled, belongs in the funny papers." Finkelstein's suggestion
that he "needs a neZ staff to advise him on arterial improvements is a piece
of impudence. . . . :hat  is needed is to get some Zork out of the present
staff," the Coordinator said.

A lot of old men around NeZ York, hoZever, still remembered the 0aster
3lan and Zhat it Zas supposed to do, and the days Zhen the Charter in
Zhich the 0aster 3lan Zas embodied had been the banner behind Zhich
they marched toZard their dreams for the city they loved. A traitor from
their oZn ranks, a traitor they had helped to raise to poZer, had knocked the
banner from their hands and, for ten years and more, had been trampling it
into the dust. But noZ a young Lochinvar—or at least Finkelstein—had
appeared and had snatched it up. They fell into rank behind him.
Finkelstein's supporters represented a cross-section of 0oses' past—and an
inde[ of individuals  Zho had helped raise him to poZer in the city, and to
keep him there. They included Burlingham, ninety-one, Zith the e[ception
of the senile Seabury the last of the old giants of the reform movement;

1061
Isaacs, Zho embodied in his courtliness and integrity and devotion to
principle everything that Zas fine in the movement; Bruere, the "B" of the
"ABC's" of the Bureau of 0unicipal  Research in Zhich 0oses had begun
his career; 3ros-kauer, the "3roskie" of "3roskie and 0oskie," Zho had
been one of Al Smith's inner circle along Zith 0oses; Nathan Straus, Zho
had fought for many bills giving 0oses poZer;  0cGoldrick,  Zho  had
entered the Fusion administration Zith him during the days Zhen Fusion
thought Robert 0oses Zas a Fusionist; and, of course, George 0cAneny.
These men had once believed that 0oses Zas NeZ York's great hope. NoZ
they believed that he Zas the greatest threat to the city's future—and they
formed a committee, "A Committee for an Adequate City 3lan," to save
NeZ York from the poZer they had helped to give him. :ithin   a Zeek,
letters from them Zere pouring in to the press, including one Zith
Burlingham's old clarity of logic and succinctness of phrase: "0uch as Ze
may admire great buildings and engineering Zorks as monuments to the
ingenuity and ability of man, Ze can noZ recogni]e that they cannot
perform their functions properly unless they are related to their
developments."

3lanning Zas, moreover, rapidly becoming almost as much a "motherhood"
issue as parks; prestigious civic organi]ations and the press lined up behind
the proposed budget increase; the logic behind it Zas so clear that

even the Times managed to grasp it; Zhile managing to avoid critici]ing
0oses, a Times editorial stated: "The noble purpose set forth in the Charter
of 1938 . . . has never been reali]ed. The 'primary duty' of preparing a
0aster 3lan for the city has never been performed, although more than a
decade has passed. :e support Zithout reservation the principle involved. .
. . City +all  just cannot alloZ itself to accept Zithout investigation
conflicting demands of various departments." Finkelstein Zas constantly at
pains to identify O'DZyer Zith  every favorable planning development, and
to flatter the 0ayor;  introducing O'DZyer at a public hearing on the
completed ]oning study, he gushed, "The final result Zill be a tribute to
0ayor  O'DZyer. . . . 0ayor  O'DZyer's  legacy to the City. Time Zill prove
that it is the richest legacy any mayor could have bestoZed on the people."
O'DZyer pushed the Board of Estimate into giving Finkelstein a hefty
chunk of the additional funds he had requested to hire scores of talented

1062
young planners, and publicly Zent on record in support of the 0aster 3lan,
promising that "everything Zill  be integrated Zithin it."

Finkelstein made the most of his opportunity.

"O'DZyer loved 0oses,"  Finkelstein Zould  recall. "+e respected 0oses.
But I kneZ hoZ  to play Bill O'DZyer.  0oses Zould  go to see him on
something and Zin him around to his Zay of thinking, but after he left, I
Zent up there. I'd say, 'Bill, the Citi]ens 8nion is behind me on this, the
papers are behind me. I knoZ hoZ you feel about Bob 0oses, but on this,
Bill, I'm  right.' " O'DZyer  Zould agree. And Finkelstein Zould race straight
back to his office, and Zrite and distribute a release announcing O'DZyer's
approval —so that before 0oses had heard about the 0ayor's sZitch, and
could get him to sZitch back, O'DZyer's pro-Finkelstein stand Zould be on
the record, and therefore almost impossible for 0oses to change.

Time and again, Finkelstein took on 0oses in this Zay—and Zon. In a
series of clashes in the 3lanning Commission the vote Zas 6-1, Zith 0oses,
Zho no longer shoZed up at any commission meetings, casting his lone
vote through +odgkiss. Orton proposed a study of proposed developments
around the 8N site. "Irresponsible . . . ill-conceived," said +odgkiss,
reading his master's Zords. "0r. 0oses is not the 3lanning Commission but
only one member," Finkelstein replied, and the 6-1 vote proved him right.
Soon, to 0oses' rage, the commission Zas even embarking on a study of
criteria for playgrounds to insure that they Zere built Zhere they Zere most
needed.

But, Zith one e[ception, these Zere only studies—no immediate threat to
0oses' plans. And in the e[ception—the single study Zhich posed such a
threat, the only confrontation of immediate, practical significance betZeen
0oses and Finkelstein and the forces Finkelstein represented—0oses used
the poZer of money on O'DZyer again.

The crunch came over the 0id-0anhattan Elevated E[pressZay.

On December 30, 1949, the Board of Estimate authori]ed Triborough to
apply in the name of the city for federal funds to study the "most feasible
plan" for an e[press crossing of the middle of the most croZded island in

1063
the Zorld. On June 2, 1950, O'DZyer announced that Triborough's study
had been completed, that it had "proven" the most feasible plan to be the

highZay among the skyscrapers proposed by Triborough's chairman, that
the chairman had already persuaded the federal government to pay the cost
— the first installment alone Zould be $900,000—of plans for the 160-foot-
Zide road, Zhich Zould  run in the air along Thirtieth Street, using the 60-
foot street Zidth and 100 feet created by tearing doZn the buildings lining
the south side of the street, that the chairman had persuaded the 3ort
Authority to pay the cost of planning and building a linkup Zith the Lincoln
Tunnel, that Triborough had agreed to pay $26,000,000 for the rest of its
construction—and that the preparation of detailed blueprints Zould begin at
once.

There Zas ecstasy in the editorial columns—the +erald Tribune: "NeZ
York shoZs again the capacity of doing things in a big Zay . . . Those big
builders, Bob 0oses and +oZard Cullman, sat doZn Zith  0ayor  O'DZyer
in staff session at Gracie 0ansion, and the result is that NeZ York is
moving ahead at once. . . . Big men got together and made a big decision
for the common good." But there Zas agony among trade and civic
associations; they charged that the Board of Estimate had directed
Triborough to study all proposals—including one for a tunnel less
destructive to 0anhattan real estate and aesthetics—but that Triborough
had studied only its chairman's. Representatives of tZenty associations,
along Zith Finkelstein and 0anhattan Borough 3resident :agner,  visited
O'DZyer to ask that the tunnel study be made—by Finkelstein's 3lanning
Commission.

O'DZyer's response Zas frank. +e himself Zould prefer a tunnel, the 0ayor
said; "I don't like overhead structures." But his preferences Zere not
important. "I'm sure you can draZ me a satisfactory plan for a tunnel, but all
the talk in the Zorld is no good if there isn't anyone to build it. . . . You've
got to shoZ me someone Zho'll put up the money to build it." There Zas
only one man Zho had that kind of money—and he Zould put it up only for
an overhead crossing, not for one underground.

3ressed hard by his visitors, the 0ayor finally said that he Zould permit the
3lanning Commission to make its oZn study, but, he said, such a study

1064
Zould be a useless Zaste of money—and he Zasn't going to provide any
city money for it. Finkelstein pointed out that the 0ayor's "permission" Zas
therefore meaningless, since the commission had neither personnel capable
of making such a study nor the funds to hire such personnel. +e and his
allies Zere not saying that an overhead crossing should not be built,
Finkelstein said. They all agreed that some solution to the mid-0anhattan
traffic problem Zas necessary. All they Zere asking Zas a chance to find
out Zhich solution Zould  really be best for the city. Could not he have even
$50,000? The 0ayor simply threZ up his hands Zithout even replying.

No reply Zas necessary, of course. +e Zas mayor of a city Zhich couldn't
afford to build a crossing. 0oses could. 0oses Zould have to be alloZed to
build Zhatever type of crossing he Zanted.

The 0ayor's stand certainly seemed pro-0oses—much too pro-0oses— to
0oses' opponents. But it Zasn't pro-0oses enough for 0oses. Angered that
O'DZyer had dared to give "permission"—even meaningless permission —
for an independent study, he decided to teach the 0ayor a lesson. The
Triborough board approved a resolution stating that the Authority Zas no

longer Zilling  to build a mid-0anhattan crossing of any type and formally
ZithdraZing  the Authority's request for federal planning funds.

O'DZyer pleaded Zith 0oses  to reconsider. 0oses refused. +e had made
the lesson all the harsher by communicating Triborough's change ot plans to
O'DZyer privately. It Zas the humiliated 0ayor  Zho  had to make the
announcement that the e[pressZay he had announced Zith such pride just
three Zeeks before Zas noZ dead. It Zas all very Zell for Jerry Finkel-stein
to call 0oses a spoiled "cry-baby" Zho, if  other boys Zouldn't let him play
by his oZn rules, Zould take his money and go home. It Zas the 0ayor
Zho Zas still faced Zith  the mid-0anhattan traffic  crisis—and Zith the
reali]ation that he had absolutely no Zay to solve it. All he could do Zas try
—angrily but lamely—to pin the blame on others, saying: "I do hope that
the actions of the opponents of the elevated highZay study Zill be a lesson
to them that they can't push Bob 0oses around. Thirtieth Street and the
surrounding area Zill have the same traffic congestion for a long time to
come. The ne[t time a tried-and-true outfit proposes a $40,000,000 traffic
improvement, Zithout e[pense to the city or cost to the ta[payers, I hope

1065
the +ate 0oses Club Zill  keep aZay from City +all.  I shall have very little
Zelcome for them." Summoning Finkelstein to his office, he gave him an
hour-long tongue-lashing so violent that Zhen reporters croZded around
Finkelstein as he left the 0ayor's office, the normally ebullient young man
pushed past them Zithout a Zord.

Finkelstein still had O'DZyer's support on the 0aster 3lan, hoZever, and
the re]oning study that Zas to be its basis pushed ahead, Zith each step
approved by the 3lanning Commission—by a 6-1 vote. By August, the
]oning Zas completed—tZo years of Zork and $325,000 embodied in a
290-page study and ready for public hearings scheduled to begin in
September.

They Zould be real hearings, Finkelstein promised. Some Zould be held in
outlying sections of the city—bringing City +all  to the people instead of
making the people come to City +all. And, Finkelstein promised, the
hearings Zould continue "until everyone has been heard Zho has something
to say."

Finkelstein had already provided convincing proof that public participation
could be constructive. The main source of opposition to re]oning had been
e[pected to be the real estate industry, Zhich had been 0oses' main ally in
killing  the TugZell-Orton-spearheaded 1939 3lanning Commission try for a
0aster 3lan. Finkelstein had invited some of the industry's more public-
spirited leaders to meet quietly Zith the commission, their objections had
been taken into account, some compromises—Zhich Orton and other
3lanning Commission members felt on balance had actually improved the
]oning plan —had been made and the realtors' support for the 3lan
obtained. Finkelstein had demonstrated that public participation could be
constructive on small as Zell as large issues. Residents of :ashington
Square had been alarmed by builder Sam Rudin's plan to tear doZn the old
Rhinelander houses on its north border and construct a tZelve-story
apartment house that Zould destroy the scale of the square, Zith its park
and arch bordered by loZ, gracious broZn-stones. Broad Finkelstein hints
about commission ]oning poZers persuaded Rudin to meet Zith the
residents, and a solution—almost unique in NeZ

1066
York history—Zas Zorked out under Zhich both sides got Zhat they
Zanted: Rudin Zas alloZed to build higher in the rear of the plot—aZay
from the S q 8are —than he Zould otherZise have been alloZed to do, and
in e[change kept the front of the building loZer than the cornices of the
private homes.

Other Zork on the 0aster 3lan Zas also progressing. By August, the
commission Zas Zell on its Zay to a division of the city into smaller areas
Zhich Zould  each have a voice in planning its oZn local improvements—
an e[tension of Isaacs' "arrondissement" proposal of 1939 to keep the city
livable by preserving its neighborhood fabric. O'DZyer, increasingly
unhappy Zith the groZing seriousness of the housing and traffic crises that
0oses Zas supposed to be alleviating, convinced that part of the reason for
the crises Zas past lack of planning, Zas impressed Zith the commission's
progress, so impressed, in fact, that City +all began to speculate about
another split betZeen the 0ayor and his Coordinator.

But O'DZyer had not been able to escape his past. 3ress and public focus on
his administration may have centered on appointees like Robert 0oses, but
the 0ayor had also appointed to public office other men, less visible
perhaps, but just as much a part of that administration: friends of Frank
Costello and Thomas (Three Fingers BroZn) Luchese and other racketeers.
And he had appointed to public office Big Jim 0oran, Zho had been using
his neZ job in the Fire Department to e[tort $500,000 a year from
businessmen needing departmental permits, and Zho had also acted as the
conduit for huge contributions to O'DZyer's 1949 re-election campaign; the
president of the 8nited Firemen's Association Zas later to testify (this
testimony Zas, admittedly, never substantiated) that to assure the 0ayor's
support of legislation benefiting firemen he had handed Big Jim an
envelope containing $55,000 in cash. (The president also testified that in
1949 he had given the 0ayor himself a $10,000 "campaign contribution.")

1067
And noZ the spotlight of Zhich  Bill  O'DZyer had so long been afraid Zas
sZinging ine[orably  in his direction. +ardly  had he been sZorn in for his
second term Zhen a pudgy, flashily dressed bookmaker named +arry Gross,
arrested in Brooklyn, said that he Zas ready to testify that he had also been
a big O'DZyer "contributor," that since the 0ayor's first  inauguration he
had been paying a cool million dollars a year in "ice," part to high-level
police officials Zho Zere close personal friends of the 0ayor—and that
0oran  had once invited him, along Zith seven other top bookmakers, to
attend a meeting Zith the 0ayor himself, a meeting Gross said he had not
attended because of illness but Zhich 0oran subsequently assured him had
indeed taken place.

O'DZyer's efforts to escape the spotlight had been becoming more and more
desperate. During the summer of 1949, he had insisted almost frantically
that he Zould not run for a second term, an insistence from Zhich he could
not be budged until, at a last-minute conference at midnight in Gracie
0ansion, Ed Flynn brought Zhat one observer Zas later to describe as "real
pressure." Not a month after his election victory, before he had even been
sZorn in for the neZ term he had Zon, he had tried quietly to file his
retirement papers, an attempt Zhich failed Zhen 0oran found out

about it, retrieved the supposedly irrevocable documents from the
retirement board, took them to the hospital room in Zhich O'DZyer Zas
recuperating from "e[haustion"—and burned them before the 0ayor's eyes.

In the first years of his administration, NeZ York had loved Bill-O and
believed his blarney. :ith  the city's Good Government organi]ations giving
him dinners honoring him for, among other things, keeping corruption out
of city government, those years had been years for speeches.

The last year of Bill-O's administration Zas a year for Zhispers, Zhispers
that the 0ayor Zas trying to find  a graceful Zay to retire, Zhispers about
Zhy he Zas trying to retire. To still them, eight separate times he denied
that he Zas thinking of leaving office—once, on vacation in Florida,
personally telephoning a NeZ York Times editor to do so. But by August,
every sZing of the spotlight brought it closer and closer to those shadoZy
places in his past. There Zas a grand jury in Brooklyn investigating

1068
racketeering in that borough, and there Zere all sorts of rumors flooding
City +all  about Zhat that grand jury Zas learning—and preparing to reveal
—about the man Zho had once been the borough's crusading District
Attorney. 8nited States Senator Estes .efauver's Senate committee
investigating organi]ed crime Zas preparing to hold hearings in NeZ York,
hearings that Zould concentrate on the links betZeen the city's underZorld
and the city's politicians—and television cameras Zere preparing to focus
on the nervously tZitching fingers of key Zitness Frank Costello. The time
for denials Zas past; noZ Zas time for flight. On the eve of a mass 3olice
Department trial for bribery, more than one hundred policemen resigned, so
did the 3olice Commissioner and his tZo top aides—and so, as the spotlight
sZung at last full force on his handsome, charming face, did :illiam
O'DZyer. Ed Flynn dropped in on +arry Truman to pass the time of day,
Bill-O  Zas appointed Ambassador to 0e[ico and on August 31, 1950,
almost eighteen years to the day after Tammany's most popular mayor had
fled the country, Tammany's second most popular mayor crossed the border
into 0e[ico.

I03Y

All during August, 0oses  had been in South America, draZing up a
Rockefeller-financed plan of improvements for Sao 3aulo, utterly unaZare
of the events crushing in on O'DZyer. But O'DZyer's resignation Zas to
place the city in his poZer more completely than ever before.

By laZ, the successor to a retiring mayor is the 3resident of the City
Council. By fate, the Council presidency Zas held in 1950 by an individual
Zho, during the entire forty-five utterly undistinguished years of his life
prior to his nomination to that $25,ooo-per-year post, had never been
deemed Zorthy of holding any job more responsible than that of secretary,
at $6,500 per year, to a judge named Schmuck.

The nomination of this totally unknoZn minor Tammany Zard heeler to the
city's second-highest elective office, the position of succession to the

T+E L8ST  FOR 3O:ER

788

1069
mayoralty, had "staggered," in :arren 0oscoZ's  Zords, "even the most
imaginative among political reporters." And so had the e[planation of hoZ
he had obtained the nomination. At a last-minute reshuffling of the 1945
Democratic ticket, the leaders finally agreed on La]arus Joseph for
Comptroller, and then reali]ed that since O'DZyer Zas Irish and from
Brooklyn, Zhile  Joseph Zas JeZish and from the Bron[, the slate could
have ethnic and geographic balance only if its third member Zas an Italian
from 0anhattan—and Zere unable to think of a single 0anhattan Italian
official they could trust. After hours of impasse, one leader reasoned that
since legal secretaryships to State Supreme Court justices carried a
respectable salary for Zhich little or no Zork Zas required, they Zould have
been given only to the "safest" of Democratic Zorkers. 3ulling out a little
"Green Book," the official directory of city  employees, he turned to the list
of legal secretaries, ran his finger doZn it looking for a name that even the
dumbest voter Zould be able to tell Zas Italian—and came to Vincent R.
Impellitteri. "No  one kneZ Zho the hell he Zas," Reuben La]arus Zas to
recall, but, looking up Impellitteri's address, the leaders determined that he
lived in 0anhattan, telephoned his district leader and Zere assured: "You
don't have to Zorry about him. +e's a good boy."

Although attested to privately by members of Tammany's hierarchy (and by
0oses, Zhose presence at the crucial ticket-making session—he Zas the
only "outsider" there—reveals his standing Zith that hierarchy), this
e[planation seemed almost unbelievable—until one met Impellitteri. If he
had a single qualification for the job other than the length of his name and
the fact that it ended in a voZel, he kept it carefully hidden during his five-
year tenure (he Zas re-elected Zith O'DZyer in 1949) as Council 3resident.
"The perfect Throttlebottom," 0oscoZ  called him. "+e voted as the mayor
told him to, on matters he did not necessarily understand, and spent most of
his Zaking hours shaking hands at public dinners, political clambakes, and
cornerstone layings too unimportant to merit the mayor's presence."
Amiable but sloZ-Zitted,  he Zas a joke among political insiders. But noZ
he Zas mayor—and the joke Zas on the city.

Impellitteri's Zits  may have been sloZ, but he had tZo fast Zits—e[-
O'DZyer aide Bill  Donoghue and a young sharpie named Sydney S. Baron
—as 3R men. Impellitteri had to run in a special election in November if he

1070
Zanted to hold the office he had fallen into, Zhich meant that he had less
than ten Zeeks in Zhich to create an image and a record, and his 3R men
quickly hit on tZo  Zays to do it: first, take advantage of the fact that no one
kneZ him, that he Zas therefore not identified Zith any political bosses,
that his opponent, Ferdinand 3ecora, Zas backed by Tammany boss De
Sapio and that, unable to get Impellitteri the Democratic nomination, the
clique in Tammany that pulled his strings had him running as an
independent, and portray him as the "anti-boss," "anti-politician," "anti-
corrupt-tion" candidate (one of Baron's better lines: "If 3ecora is elected,
Frank Costello Zill be your mayor. But the voice Zill  be that of 3ecora");
second, identify him Zith Robert 0oses.

The price of that identification came high, both in specifics—0oses

made Impellitteri pledge publicly that if he Zas elected, he Zould not
reappoint Finkelstein—and in generalities: Impellitteri privately promised
0oses even more of a free hand than he had enjoyed under O'DZyer in
setting all city construction policies. But Impellitteri paid it. +e  got full
value in return. Refusing an offer of the Republican nomination (time had
dimmed at least some GO3 leaders' memories of 1934), 0oses gave him his
endorsement. "Even I, Zho thought that by this time I kneZ Bob and the
lengths to Zhich he Zould go, never thought he Zould go that far," says
La]arus. Remonstrating, he said, "But, Bob, he hasn't any capacity for the
job at all!" 0oses'  response? "+e laughed at that." 3ublicly, the Coordinator
declared that Impellitteri "has shoZn e[traordinary courage and
independence." And, as alZays, a 0oses endorsement made almost every
front page in toZn. (The +erald Tribune article stated: "It Zas not a political
endorsement, 0r. 0oses basing his support on his opinion that the
[Impellitteri]  administration Zas carrying out the city construction program
as planned.") 0oses led Impellitteri around to officiate at openings of—and
share in the credit and front-page pictures for—highZays and housing
projects Zith Zhich he had had nothing to do e[cept to affi[ his signature as
Council 3resident to documents his aides say he often had not even
bothered to read. 0ost observers, noting that the campaign consisted
mainly of charges and countercharges of bossism and corruption, felt that
the endorsement from an official characteri]ed as "independent" and
believed above corruption Zas an important factor—almost as important as

1071
the decision by neZspaper headline Zriters to call him "Impy" and thus give
him a lovable public image—in Im-pellitteri's victory, the first in  the city's
history by a candidate running on an independent line Zithout the support
of either major party. And after his election, Impellitteri continued to pay
the price—eagerly.

Thanks to his 3R men and his physical appearance—his addiction to the
blue suit and the boutonniere, combined Zith his iron-gray hair, deeply
earnest mien and stolidity that during the campaign Zas mistaken for
dignity, made him the very model of a modern mayor; at the approach of a
camera his broZ Zould furroZ, his lips Zould  purse, his jaZ Zould jut and
his eyes Zould focus on Zhatever piece of paper happened to be handy just
as intently as if he understood the Zords Zritten on it—Impy had run a
great race, but once in possession of the pri]e he had Zon, he proved to
have not the slightest idea of Zhat to do Zith it.

+e disclaimed any influence over the Board of Estimate, telling reporters,
"All  I have is three votes on it, you knoZ." 0ayors Zere alZays telling
reporters that—but City +all insiders soon reali]ed, to their astonishment,
that this mayor believed it. Says one of his aides, Victor F. Condello: "Impy
never understood that he had any poZer at all." Once Condello suggested
that the 0ayor call the five borough presidents to an e[ecutive session to
discuss a thorny issue. "Yeah," the 0ayor said, "that's a good idea." 3ause.
"You think they'll come?"

+e Zas too timid to confront even his oZn subordinates. Once, a neZspaper
leveled detailed charges against one. The ne[t time they met, the 0ayor
asked him if the charges Zere true. Of course not, the appointee said

king to him at the moment-

that Impellitte[i  ""personally*  Zas "a veT y n j : -. him, childless himself,
chatting Zarmly

Zid oups of children Zho visited City  +all,  and doubt that; the

. :ng for ail delegations, in fact, Zas beyond affectation, if occasional])' a
cause for snickers: once, hearing the sound of singing from behind Impy's

1072
office door, an aide Zalked in to find a choir in action—and the 0ayor
standing Zith them, Zearing a contented if someZhat vacant e[pression,
humming merri But he Zas a man simply unequal to

I the duties that had been thrust upon him. The responsibilities he Zas
charged Zith carrying out utterly beZildered him. At times, he presented an
almost pathetic figure as he groped h rirough the intricacies of govern-

ment. Says :arren 0oscoZ:   "0y   God. at Board of Estima :ive ses-

sions, he'd sit there and some problem Zould come up. and the poor bastard
Zould say, 'I got no ansZer on this, boys. You got any idea^ And if no one
had any, the ioist 0ayor of the City of ^rk Zould  sit there Zith

his gavel before him, literally Zringing his hands in agitation Zhile long
minutes passed in painful silence. +e Zas desperate for someone to turn to,
almost frantically an[ious to drop his enormous poZers—and
responsibilities —into someone else's hands.

And the biggest hands around Zere those of Robert 0ooes.

:ithin   Zeeks of Impellitteri's  inauguration. La]arus Zas noting in his diary
that "Robert 0oses is actually running this toZn todav. There's no
important act Impellitteri takes or does that he doesn't consult 0r. 0oses."
Soon the toZn's other top political insiders Zere saying the same thing. The
consultations Zere held at Grade 0ansion—almost every morning, Zith
0oses dropping by at about nine or nine-thirty, or even earlier. And these
Zere private consultations: Zhen 0oses Zas closeted Zith Impellitteri in
the Gracie 0ansion draZing room, no one else Zas alloZed to be present.
(Asked Zhy years later, Impy Zould say, "I considered those very important
sessions for me and the city, and I didn't Zant them interrupted.")
Sometimes the 0ayor saZ no one else until eleven. "+e Zould alZays
come Zith a big envelope," Impellitteri Zould  recall, and the envelope
Zould be filled Zith  papers 0oses Zanted him to sign—and invariably by
the time 0oses drove aZay in his big limousine, they Zould be signed. One
top official says that Impellitteri never left the 0ansion in the morning until
0oses had given him "his marching orders for the day." 3apers that" Zere
prepared for signature later in the day Zere delivered by messenger to the

1073
0ayor's office  at City +all—Zith   peremptory 0oses covering notes ('There
is no use boring you Zith figures"). And the papers Zere invariably signed
—and the marching orders Zere invariably obeyed. "0oses' Zord Zas laZ
Zith him,"  Condello says. "All Impy Zanted Zas to keep him happy. I had
Zritten a letter to several" department heads. "0oses got pissed off'about it
—I never did figure out Zhy—and he Zrote to the 0ayor:  'Dear Vincent:
:hat   is this all about?' And the 0ayor called me up and said, Tor God's
sake straighten

lis out Zith 0oses!'  I tried to e[plain  to him that there Zas nothing for ^
loses to get angry about, but he didn't even Zant to listen to Zhat it Zas. le
Zas in a real panic. +e just didn't Zant to do anything to irritate 0oses,
/loses' Zord Zas laZ in the city."

One proof that 0oses' Zord Zas laZ Zas in the appointments Im->ellitteri
made—and in those he didn't make.

Tammany kingpin Frank J. Sampson, Impellitteri's old district leader,
listributed the bulk of the administration's routine patronage, but for high-
evel jobs in departments Zhose responsibilities in any Zay touched on
vloses', Impellitteri almost invariably asked 0oses for a recommendation
—and should Impellitteri neglect to ask, 0oses gave a recommendation
any-vay, submitting so many that the 0ayor's files Zere crammed Zith
them. They Zere dutifully folloZed.  By the end of Impellitteri's term, there
e[isted vithin the upper echelons of the city government an e[tensive
netZork of nen Zhose first loyalty Zas not to that government but to the
man Zho ran :he independent government on Randall's Island.

Off Randall's Island floZed, moreover, not only recommendations but
disapprovals. Time and again, men being considered for key city posts Zere
quietly blackballed by 0oses—in most cases Zithout their ever knoZing
about it—in cutting phrases ("Is there any evidence that he is Zorth
$25,-000?" "Not heavy enough for the job." ":ould  certainly not impress ...
the Albany educational authorities ... to Zhom the city looks for additional
aid") that concealed the real reason for his disapproval: that they had not
proven themselves sufficiently ready to sZalloZ their pride and their
independence, abandon their oZn theories and beliefs and unquestionably

1074
accept his. And 0oses' negative counsel Zas folloZed by Impellitteri as
slavishly as his positive.

Another proof Zas in the policies to Zhich Impellitteri  put his signature.

They Zere 0oses' policies. During the Impellitteri  administration, through a
secret "understanding" Zith Governor DeZey largely engineered by 0oses,
the city Zas alloZed to adopt a series of financial measures Zhose common
denominator Zas the fact that they fell hardest on those least able to afford
them. The city sales ta[, earlier raised from 1 to 2 percent Zith 0oses'
backing, Zas noZ raised from 2 percent to 3; the subZay and bus fare,
earlier raised from five cents to ten cents Zith 0oses' backing, Zas noZ
raised from ten cents to fifteen—by a Transit Authority, created to bear the
public's blame for the increase and thereby insulate politicians, Zhose
creation, combined Zith a legislative mandate to run mass transit on a "self-
supporting" basis, removed from the city's constitutional debt limit the
$425,000,000 in transit debt service 0oses had so long Zanted removed so
that the borroZing capacity could be freed for his oZn projects.

And proof lay in the speeches the 0ayor made. The voice Zas the voice of
Impy, but the Zords Zere the Zords of 0oses. By the time Impellitteri  Zas
running in the Democratic primary in 1953, 0oses Zas giving

point-by-point "suggestions" for his major television talks (one list Zas
headed by the suggestion that the 0ayor make "reference to records of
heads of several important departments"—including, prominently, the head
of the Department of 3arks).

0oses liked to keep the strings on his puppet short. During the summer,
Zhich he spent in Babylon, he kept the 0ayor convenient to hand, inviting
him to vacation in the handsomely furnished Shelter Cottage at Fire Island
State 3ark just across the bay.

0ore  proof that "0oses' Zord  Zas laZ in the city"  Zas in Zhat happened to
the City 3lanning Commission and its 0aster 3lan.

:hen   O'DZyer retired, Jerry Finkelstein had four months remaining before
his term e[pired. During those months, the young commission chairman

1075
fought for the 0aster 3lan, pushing the consultants to finish the crucial
re]oning proposal, issuing press releases trying to e[plain the value of
establishing local neighborhoods as the basis for studying planning needs.
But he Zas fighting against a master.

The re]oning study—290 pages long, profusely illustrated, crammed Zith
detailed maps and charts—Zas completed in September, ready for detailed
study by city officials and the public, and for public hearings leading to its
adoption. But, Orton says, "like dopes, Ze hadn't gotten enough money to
publish the darn thing Zhen Ze got our appropriation, and Ze had to go
back to the Board of Estimate" Zith a neZ mayor sitting at its head. Trying
to force Impellitteri's hand before the election, Finkelstein Zrote the 0ayor
in October appealing for his support. There Zas no reply—and Zhen, after
he had Zritten again, an ansZer did come, it came in the Zords of 0oses. A
letter over Impellitteri's signature said that the 0ayor Zould "have no
objection" to having the $9,750 printing item brought up for consideration
at the ne[t Board meeting—if copies Zere sent to him and other members
of the Board "immediately" to give them time to study them. ":ell,   of
course, Ze couldn't do that," Orton Zas to recall. ":e  didn't have copies. It
Zas to make copies that Ze Zere asking for the money." Finkelstein, in a
hospital suffering from e[haustion, attempted to take his case to the public
by issuing a release stating that the failure to appropriate $9,750 for printing
the report Zould mean that the $325,000 already spent preparing it Zould
be completely Zasted. Orton appeared before the Board in e[ecutive
session to press the point. But Zhen Orton finished, 0oses got up and,
Orton recalls, "argued that the Zhole thing Zas a bunch of tripe, nonsense,
Zhat a lousy job it Zas, Zaste of money, all the things that laZyers say—
incompetent, irrelevant"—and the Board, Zith Impellitteri nodding placidly
at its head (Zhen Finkelstein had sent the 0ayor a copy of the "local
neighborhoods" proposal, he had sent it to 0oses for an e[planation, and
0oses had sent it back Zith a note stating, "Dear Vince: +ere's the ansZer
—the attached is a silly idea"), refused to vote the additional funds,

and the report for Zhich Finkelstein had fought so hard had still not been
seen by anyone outside the commission Zhen, Zhile still in the hospital, his
term ran out on December 31.

1076
At 0oses' request, Impellitteri moved into Finkelstein's job— and into the
office Finkelstein had so optimistically redecorated only a year before—
Colonel John J. Bennett, Zho Zas shortly to be in the process of organi]ing,
Zith 0oses'  approval, a Title I project that Zas to reap its organi]ers
enormous profits. Orton hoped against hope that the neZ chairman, Zho
certainly had a distinguished career resume (former State Attorney General,
Democratic candidate for Governor, judge, noted attorney), Zould carry out
the duties of his job. But he saZ at the very first meeting that such hopes
Zere useless. "Bennett Zas totally subservient to 0oses."

The tZo members of the commission Zho had strayed briefly from 0oses'
fold at the enticement of O'DZyer and Finkelstein soon Zere back among
the flock. :hy   cannot be said, but it Zas at about this time that 0oses gave
Cleveland Rodgers permission to do his biography and it Zas also at this
time that 0oses had Impy give John Reidel, chief engineer of the Board of
Estimate, a hefty salary increase. Reidel and Rodgers, Zho had supported
the 0aster 3lan before, noZ sZitched their votes, combining Zith Bennett
—and the caster of the decisive fourth vote: Robert 0oses—to overrule the
commission's three liberals, Orton, Francis J. Bloustein and Goodhue
Livingston, and defeat all proposals to advance it.

8nder Bennett, the 3lanning Commission Zas in 0oses' hands as firmly as
it had been in the days Zhen $i5,ooo-per-year EdZin Ashley Salmon
Zielded its gavel. 0any  of the eager young planners Finkelstein had
brought in Zere forced out. :ork   on the 0aster 3lan all but stopped.
Eventually, the consultants' ]oning report Zas printed, but the four-man
majority on the commission saZ to it that the public hearings Finkelstein
had dreamed of Zere never held—and that the commission never adopted
the report as its oZn, so that it remained Zithout official status.

The $325,000 spent on the re]oning Zas Zasted completely. But $325,000
Zas an almost infinitesimal item compared to the real cost to the city of the
return of 0oses' control of its 3lanning Commission. In his one year as
chairman, Finkelstein had—in compromises like that at :ashington Square
—subtly employed the commission's inferential poZers to persuade large
real estate developers to sit doZn Zith local residents and Zork out plans
that Zould, Zhile  alloZing the developers their projects, save the fabric of

1077
the neighborhoods in Zhich they Zould be built. +e had moved to preserve
neighborhoods from city as Zell as private "improvements" by establishing
the principle that "local neighborhoods" must be the basis around Zhich
planning Zorks. +e had gotten the commission to Zork on a study of the
8N area that might save the city from the enormous costs of having to
e[pand the site if it Zere found too small, and that Zould have insured that
surrounding private development Zould be not hapha]ard but based on
some rational guidelines. +e had started the commission developing
playground criteria that might save the city the immense Zastage of

building and maintaining playgrounds that no one used. +e had personally
saved the city—even if accidentally—from the 0id-0anhattan  Elevated
E[pressZay. 0ost  important, in that one year he had started the commission
doZn the road—an astonishingly long Zay doZn the road—to the
formulation of a rational plan for the development of the city as a Zhole.
0anhattan might be largely lost—as O'DZyer Zas to say: "NoZ the city's
built up around the mistakes that Zere made . . . it's too late to tear doZn
skyscrapers to put in things that you Zould have, if properly planned"—but
there Zas plenty of almost empty canvas (most of Staten Island, the great
central belt of 4ueens, huge e[panses of Brooklyn, even bits of the Bron[)
on Zhich to draZ from scratch, to insure that the people Zho moved into
these areas Zould have schools, colleges, public libraries, parks,
playgrounds —and shopping areas and jobs—close enough so that they
Zould not have to Zaste a substantial portion of their lives getting to and
from them. In all those areas of the city, the rule of reason could have been
alloZed to operate substantially unfettered—and Jerry Finkelstein had, by
recruiting a master planning staff, organi]ing it and assuring it of his
support, inaugurated a program that Zould have done just that. But noZ
Finkelstein's year Zas over. Robert 0oses Zas back in control. The rule of
reason Zas over. The rest of the city Zas going to be built by the laZ Zhich
had governed the building of the earlier parts: the laZ of the jungle.

And proof lay in 0oses' relationship Zith  the city's legislative bodies—the
City Council and the Board of Estimate—already so effectively dominated
by him through his use of the poZer of money. Council 3resident Rudolph
+alley, a liberal concerned Zith the social implications of governmental
policies, began to question some of 0oses' proposals; 0oses' attitude—

1078
e[pressed at a lunch at Randall's Island to Zhich 0rs. +alley Zas also
invited—Zas, she says, "Oh, little boy, sit doZn. Father knoZs best."

+alley did not believe so, but he found that most of his felloZ council-men
Zere reluctant to challenge 0oses, and that he could do little to influence
them. "It Zas a terribly frustrating period for Rudy," 0rs.  +alley  says. "+e
felt so strongly about things—the same things that people feel strongly
about today. But then he Zas ahead of his time, and he couldn't get anything
done." The Council 3resident has no real poZer. :hen +alley persisted in
closely questioning 0oses, or, more usually, since 0oses himself seldom
deigned to appear, 0oses' deputies, during their appearances before the
Council, 0oses adopted a simple solution: he not only refused to discuss
his programs Zith the Council himself but Zould not alloZ  his aides to
discuss them. And to +alley's frustration, the Council's Tammany majority
approved those programs anyZay.

+alley and :agner,  busy trying to ingratiate himself Zith  the city's liberals
in preparation for his oZn upcoming try for the mayoralty, offered
opposition on the Board of Estimate. 0oses adopted the same tactics there.
Bron[ Borough 3resident Lyons, raging publicly, said: ":e've   seen very
little of 0r.   0oses at Board meetings, either open or e[ecutive. +e does all

his business at Grade 0ansion." Says 0oscoZ: "8nder Impellitteri,  it Zas
taken for granted that 0oses Zas 0ayor. There Zas no question about it." If
Impellitteri didn't knoZ  hoZ to e[ercise a mayor's poZers to Zhip Board
members into line, 0oses did—and the Board members kneZ it, Zell
enough so that none of them dared Zith any seriousness or regularity to
challenge him.

During the forty months of the Impellitteri administration, the trends 0oses
had caused during the last forty-four months of the O'DZyer administration
—the forty-four months beginning in January 1947 in Zhich 0oses
e[ercised near-absolute poZer over the construction of all public Zorks—
intensified. During the O'DZyer administration, the city spent $3,102,000
on the construction of colleges, $1,169,000 on the construction of libraries
—and $80,826,000 on the construction of highZays. Before the Zar, the
city's hospital situation had been desperate; $80,000,000 Zas more than
tZice as much as the city spent on hospitals during the O'DZyer

1079
administration. It Zas more even than it spent on elementary and high
schools.

During the Impellitteri administration, the city spent $16,176,000 on
colleges, $4,118,000 on libraries, $70,314,000 on hospitals, $137,290,000
on schools—and $172,294,000 on highZays.* It built eighty-eight miles of
neZ highZays, but not one mile of neZ subZays. Near the end of the
Impellitteri administration, more than eight full years after the city had
announced the start of a "crash program to replace all non-fireproof
schools," there Zere still 182 non-fireproof schools in use. Some 38,777
elementary-school pupils Zere failing to get a full day's schooling because
lack of neZ construction had caused such severe overcroZding that double
or triple sessions Zere necessary. One out of every three of the city's
schoolchildren sat in classrooms that Zere overcroZded by any educational
standard. The four free municipal colleges—City, +unter, Brooklyn and
4ueens— had a combined capacity so inadequate that a study shoZed that
46,000 students per year Zho Zould have gone to college had a municipal
institution been available Zere unable to do so.

Taylor had Zarned 0cGoldrick  and 0cGoldrick  had Zarned Joseph that
0oses Zould  "bankrupt" the city. One Zay in Zhich the Comptrollers Zere
afraid 0oses Zould do this Zas by forcing the city to issue long-term
revenue bonds to pay for the "negligible" city share of the costs of his
public Zorks, costs Zhich, he assured the press and public and city officials
not as familiar Zith city finances as the Comptrollers, Zere being almost
entirely borne by state and federal government. Since most of these
facilities Zere not revenue-producing—those that produced revenue he built
under the auspices of his authorities so that they, rather than the city, Zould
get that revenue—the only method of paying the interest on

* The highZay construction figures represent, of course, only the city's
e[penditures —not e[penditures on highZays by the federal or state
governments or the public authorities.

tho0  bondl I take the money out of the city's current revenues, to

Include debt lervice in the e[pense budget. Thanks to the Zartime curtail-
iiii  1,1 on Construction and hence on neZ bond floatings. at the beginning

1080
of the O'DZyci administration the city's debt Zas doZn to $2,194,000,000
— O+ Zinch  the annual debt service charges Zere $118,000,000. By 195:
annual lervice charges Zere $211,000,000—up 78 percent in seven years
Another, more lubtlc but, in the long run, more damaging Zay, Zas in
draining aZay lor neZ construction so much of the city's resources that it
Could not pay to keep up maintenance on its e[isting $12,000,000,000
physical plant, Not only subZays but highZays fell into this category; even
0oiei  f oZn  roads could not be kept up. And the cost of neglected
maintenance || astonishingly high: the :est Side +ighZay, for e[ample,
could have been kept ill perfect repair during the 1950's for about $75,000
per yc.11. because virtually no repairing Zas done, by the i96o's, the cost of
annual maintenance Zould be more than $1,000,000 per year; and in 1974
ilu highZay had begun literally to fall apart—a condition that Zould take
lens ol millions of dollars lo repair. By the time 0oses left poZer in  1968,
the city Zould be 8tterly  unable to make even a pretense of keeping its

physical plant in repair.

Ilu u- Zas B skeZing ol e[penditures aZay from  service functions and
loZ;iul  public Zorks construction. This Zas especially unfortunate because
the nature Of the city's population Zas changing; each year, more of the
Comfortable middle class, Zhich required a minimum of services, left the
Citj to be replaced by families from underprivileged 3uerto Rico and from
underprivileged southern slates Zho required more services if they Zere to
become truly part of the City and not just live Zithin its borders as un-
aSSimiltted, hostile, bitter aliens.

Instead, here is Zhat happened.

.lust tO make the most minimal repairs on the outmoded school plants
required betZeen $15,000,000 and $2O,00O,OO0 per year. During the
O'DZyei administration less than $5,000,000 per year had been allocated
toi this [mi pose, Zith the result that by the end of that administration, the

backlog in minima] repairs, a staggering $30,000,000 at the beginning of

that administration, had mounted to $75,000,000. During the Impellitteri
administration, thanks largely to the real possibility of disasters in the

1081
schools, the amount to: maintenance Zas increased—but only slightly. By

end of that administration, the backlog of minimal repairs to the city's 1 s
Zas about $ 00.000.000.

s Zere painted even three years Rare Zas the school that Zas - ■ Rj t Zas
the school that Zas painted every five years.

lere Zere five schools in the sears [v ^' npo city's oZn government spent
aping

' **s ede ..: governmec s spent, foi :heir re-

^ v • > 00.000 Zas poured into

isl v b] : and fed.

governments. Every cent of this money Zas spent under 0oses' command.
:hat   Zas built Zas Zhat he Zanted built. There Zere, for e[ample, tZenty-
four huge public housing projects constructed during the Impellitteri era by
the City +ousing Authority  Zhose members and staff Zere subservient to
him. Not a brick of one of those housing projects Zas laid Zithout his
approval. Eleven huge superhighZays Zere begun during this era. Not a
mile Zas laid out Zithout his e[press O...

The public never kneZ the e[tent of 0oses' influence. One can search
through the daily issues of the city's nine remaining daily neZspapers—
issues crammed, day after day, Zith "inside dope" on City +all—Zithout
finding a single accurate analysis of that influence. There Zere, for
e[ample, hundreds of stories about the +ousing Authority's construction
plans and over-all policies. But because he had no direct connection Zith
the Authority, in all these stories there is hardly a mention of Robert 0oses,
the man Zhose approval Zas needed for every plan and Zho personally set
most of its policies and approved the others. The forty months that Vincent
R. Impellitteri sat in the mayor's chair Zere a crucial forty months for the
city. It Zas during them that—Zith the e[ception of  those on Staten Island
—the city's last vast open spaces disappeared. NeZ York filled up, assumed
a neZ shape. The shape 0oses dictated.

1082
And 0oses' forty  months of absolute poZer enabled him to shape the city
for far longer than forty months. The appointments Impellitteri made at his
recommendation Zould e[tend his influence for years after Impellitteri Zas
no longer mayor. 3rotected in general by civil service, the appointees Zould
remain in their key, sensitive posts as neZ mayors sat in City +all, knoZing
that mayors come and go, but that 0oses remained—and that, therefore, in
conflicts betZeen 0oses and a mayor, it Zas in their interest to give their
loyalty to the former.

There Zas, moreover, the momentum effect. 4ualified administrators Zere
scarce. 0ayors Zere constantly engaged in a search for men Zith real
e[perience in handling large-scale problems. The only Zay to get
e[perience Zas to handle such problems, and since it Zas 0oses' men Zho
had been placed in positions to handle them, it Zas 0oses' men—and
sometimes only 0oses' men—Zho Zere qualified.

0ore  important than the men he installed, of course, Zere the stakes he
drove. Once you get the first stake driven for a project, he had learned, no
one Zould be able to stop it. During those forty months of Impy, he drove a
lot of stakes. +e selected the routes for a do]en e[pressZays, had thousands
of families evicted from them and demolished their residences. :hat public
official—even if  he did not like the route of one of the e[pressZays, even if
he did not Zant any e[pressZay built in the area at all—could thereafter say
it Zould not be constructed, that the evictions made and money spent had
been made and spent for no purpose? +e selected the sites—and evicted the
tenants from—a do]en Title I projects. :hat  public  official could then
cancel a project—and simply say that the blocks of debris Zould remain
untouched?

No political observer Zas in any doubt Zhy Impellitteri Zas defeated

I resounding 2-1 majority' in the Democratic primary Zhen he ran against
Robert F. v. In, in 1953- ":agner  did not merely have one

issue, he had all of them—the rent, ta[ and fare increases to Zhich
Impellitteri had been a part} 7 , plus continued overcroZding in the
schools," savs :arren 0oscoZ,  at the time :agner's  Borough :orks

1083
Commissioner. :cr:ion of the rent increase, the policies that led to
Impellitteri's defeat Zere A policies.

But the people couldn't strike back against 0oses—even if they had Zanted
to, Zhich they didn't since they didn't knoZ that he Zas responsible for
those policies. +is state positions, and his authority chairmanships, put him
beyond their reach. The result of 0oses* policies Zas, for Impellitteri,
defeat. The result of 0oses' policies Zas. for 0oses, more poZer.

To a man to Zhom poZer is all-important, other men are judged by hoZ
much thev give to him. So it Zas Zith Robert 0oses and Vincent R.
Impellitteri. 0oses'  final evaluation of the bumbling little man Zho had
presented such a pathetic figure in his high office: "+e Zas a good mayor."

To a man to Zhom poZer is all-important, other men matter only as long as
they possess poZer.

So it Zas Zith Robert 0oses and Vincent R. Impellitteri.  Years after his
retirement, the one-time mayor Zould sit for an intervieZ in the laZ :r.:es
Zhere he Zas kept, Zith little Zork  to do. as ZindoZ dressing by a much
younger man Zho liked ZindoZ  dressing around him: Joseph F. Carlino,
the best-tailored Speaker in the history of the NeZ York State Assembly.

The one-time mayor Zas almost pathetically glad to have someone to talk
to about his days as mayor. And he Zas very glad indeed to talk about Bob
0oses, once he had taken care to make sure the intervieZer understood that
it had alZays been he. not 0oses, Zho had given the orders during the old
days. ("+e Zould get to Grade 0ansion early in the morning. +e had Zhat
he called an agenda." 3ause. "And sometimes I had an agenda." I "Let me
put it this Zay—I  think 0r.  0oses  Zill  go doZn in history as the most
brilliant, the most imaginative and certainlv the most er. er, certainly a man
Zhose integrity is alZays beyond question ... the leading public figure in
America, not only in NeZ York Citv  but in America. +e spent billions of
dollars of public funds Zithout anyone ever putting a question mark."

+e Zent on for some time reminiscing about hoZ close he and 0oses had
been. Then, hoZever, he Zas asked Zhen he had last seen 0oses. And the
sincere, friendly face turned sad as he tried, in vain, to recall the last time he

1084
had seen the big. charming, brilliant man Zho had once been so friendly to
him.

"I haven': seen him recently,' 1 he said at last.

:AGNER

On those unforgettable evenings so long ago on Zhich Al Smith's "Court of
Appeals" had convened over cracked clams and cold beer, 0oses, singing
at the piano Zith the Governor's big arm around his shoulders Zhile Jimmy
:alker   played, had often seen, sitting silent and Zide-eyed in that room
filled Zith  loud, boisterous men, as close to his father as he could get, a shy
little boy, for Robert Ferdinand :agner,  Sr., Zho had been the Governor's
roommate Zhen they had both been young legislators in Albany, made a
point, ever since young Robert's mother had died Zhen he Zas nine, of
taking the boy Zith him Zhenever he could. 0oses had given the Senator's
son a helpful boost onto the first rung of the political ladder; in his first race
for political office—for  an Assembly seat from his father's old Yorkville
district in 1937—he had enabled him to promise a sZimming pool for John
Jay 3ark on Seventy-eighth Street. "Bob 0oses Zas very nice to me," he
Zould recall. "+e  Zas going to build it anyZay, I'm sure, but he gave me an
opportunity to tell my constituents that I had gotten it there. And I Zas
alZays very grateful to him for that." In his climb up the ladder, hoZever,
young :agner,  Zhile strikingly  "regular" in  all other respects, had
displayed Zhat 0oses regarded as an infatuation—especially disappointing
in one from so sturdy a background—Zith the "radical" notion of city
planning. As chairman of the City 3lanning Commission, he had pushed the
0aster 3lan, and had even supported Stanley Isaacs' "silly" notion that the
plan should preserve and protect the city's neighborhoods. 0oses'
relationship Zith the younger man had Zorsened during his 0anhattan
borough presidency, in part, perhaps, because :agner, aZare as Zas his
patron, Carmine De Sapio, of the importance of contractors in the neZ
political scheme of things, insisted on using his oZn, not 0oses'; once, in
fact (after :agner  Senior Zas safely in retirement), 0oses had Zritten a
letter, distributed as usual to a mailing list of hundreds, calling :agner
Junior a "bubblehead." :agner, for his part, had kept his oZn counsel
(:agner  alZays kept his oZn counsel), but Zhile he never attacked 0oses

1085
directly, publicly or privately (":agner   never makes derogatory remarks
about people," Lutsky says. "Nobody ever heard him say a bad Zord about
anybody: maybe he learned that from his father"), he left Zith intimates
such as Lutsky the impression that "he didn't like 0oses." During his
campaign for the Democratic nomination for mayor—in Zhich, of course,
he Zas opposing the man 0oses Zas supporting—and in the course of
Zooing the Good Government groups embraced by De Sapio, Zho had
hand-picked him for the job and Zas directing his campaign, he led them to
believe that he Zould curb the Coordinator's poZer. And after his election,
he had brave Zords to the same effect. "I'm not going to let 0oses come
over to Gracie 0ansion and give me my marching orders, like he did
Impy," he told :arren  0oscoZ,   Zhom he had drafted from the Times to be
a mayoral

assistant. Shortly after the election, "a source close to the 0ayor-elect" Zas
leaking to reporters the information that "Robert 0oses Zill continue to
serve in the :agner city  administration, but his poZers are likely to be
severely restricted," probably to those of 3ark Commissioner.

Another leak soon folloZed, hoZever: there Zas no longer any thought of
removing 0oses as Coordinator. The Good Government strategists
thereupon decided to try to hold the line on the sole remaining post to
Zhich he needed reappointment at :agner's inauguration: his 3lanning
Commission membership, Zhich e[pired on December 31, 1953.

The site of battle seemed choice. There Zere stronger arguments against his
holding the 3lanning Commission post than the other tZo: as 3ark
Commissioner and Construction Coordinator, he proposed public Zorks
projects and the Charter had surely never intended the proposer of projects
to sit on the body Zhich passed on their merits. 0oreover, the 0ayor-elect,
as a former commission chairman himself, should be able to understand the
logic of such arguments.

At first, :agner   did in fact seem to understand that logic. 0eeting Zith the
reformers before his inauguration, he told them he understood their vieZs
and agreed Zith them. The reformers left the intervieZ believing that there
Zould be only tZo jobs Zaiting  for 0oses.

1086
On inauguration day, their efforts seemed for a Zhile to have been croZned
Zith victory.  As they sat among the hundreds of spectators croZded into the
City Council Chamber at City +all, Zatching  the neZ mayor summon his
appointees forZard one after another, administer their oath of office and
hand them their official "oath blanks," Zhich he had signed before the
ceremonies, they saZ him call up Robert 0oses, sZear him in as 3ark
Commissioner and Construction Coordinator and then, Zith 0oses still
standing beside him Zaiting e[pectantly for the third oath and blank,
beckon the ne[t appointee forZard. :atching  0oses' face pale, the sZarthy
skin turning almost Zhite, and then seeing the telltale reddish, almost
purple, flush rising out of his collar up along his neck, they Zhispered
happily—in some cases, gloatingly—among themselves.

As each commissioner Zas sZorn in, he Zalked out of the Council
Chamber and into an adjoining room, Zhere he Zas supposed to leave the
"oath blank" as proof—required under the city's Administrative Code— that
he had sZorn the required oath of loyalty to the Constitution, and Zhere he
Zas supposed to sign the city's massive, gray-bound "Oath Book," the
official record of appointments, Zhich Zas resting on a small table in front
of Lutsky and an aide, 3hilip Shumsky. (City appointments are not official
until "certificates of appointment" are issued, but in practice they become
official as soon as both the mayor's signature and that of the appointee are
on the oath blank, and the appointee's is in the Oath Book.) As Lutsky and
Shumsky recall it, 0oses stalked in and demanded, "+oZ about City
3lanning?"

Lutsky, Zho kneZ the 0ayor  had decided not to make the third
appointment, shrugged his shoulders as if he kneZ nothing, saying, "These
are the only titles on the list. I just do as I'm instructed."

:ithout   another Zord, the tZo men recall, 0oses stalked into the 0ayor's
private office, to Zhich :agner   had repaired alone before the official
reception that Zas to folloZ. Neither 0oses nor :agner,  the only tZo
persons present, Zill discuss the confrontation in detail. But 0oses Zas to
tell aides—and :agner, asked about the confrontation many years later,
Zas, Zith an e[tremely pained e[pression, to indirectly confirm 0oses'
account*—that he had put it to the 0ayor "straight"; either he got the third

1087
job, or he'd quit the other tZo. On the spot. +e'd march right outside and tell
the press. As the aides relate it, :agner tried frantically to stall, saying that
there must have been some oversight, that some clerk must have forgotten
to fill  out the appointment blank, that there Zas nothing for 0oses to Zorry
about, that he'd see to it in a feZ days.

Returning to the room Zhere Shumsky and Lutsky Zere sitting, 0oses
snatched an unused blank off a sheaf Shumsky had placed on the table in
case some appointee lost a blank and needed another. Sitting doZn at a
typeZriter that had been placed on another small table nearby, he typed in
the date, his name, in the space marked "length of term"—eight years—
and, in the space marked "position"—"0ember, City 3lanning
Commission." Then, carrying the blank, he stalked out of the room and
back into the 0ayor's private office and—Zithout  a Zord, according to his
aides' recollection of the story—laid the paper on :agner's desk. :ithout  a
Zord, :agner   pulled the paper toZard himself and signed it. And, relates
:arren  0oscoZ,  "0oses  increased the dimensions of his victory by relating
the story of the hand-typed oath to only fifty or so of his most intimate
friends, all in city government."

Four days later, there Zas another victory, quieter but more significant.
Because the poZers of the City Construction Coordinator had never been
spelled out by laZ, they Zere Zhat each mayor chose to make them.
Reappointment to that post by :agner did not mean much to 0oses—
unless he could obtain from :agner Zhat he had obtained from O'DZyer
and Impellitteri: authority to "represent" the city in negotiations Zith state
and federal governments. On January 5, he Zrote :agner asking if the
0ayor  Zanted him to do so. "Certainly," the 0ayor Zrote  back.

0oscoZ  got a very close vieZ indeed of 0oses' ne[t victory.  Abrasive but
clever, the former neZspaperman decided, even before :agner's
inauguration, "to create for the incoming administration some of the
atmosphere of the First +undred Days—you knoZ: action."

In no field Zas that commodity needed more than housing: the city's crisis
Zas entering its ninth year. "I asked [:agner] if  Ze had a housing

1088
* Before the author had had an opportunity to ask 0oses about the
confrontation, 0oses had stopped talking to him. :hen,  in 1972, the author
asked :agner about it, the pained e[pression came over the e[-0ayor's
face and he refused to meet the author's eyes as he said, "I don't remember. I
knoZ there Zas one reason I might not [have Zanted to reappoint him]—he
Zas never there. +e alZays sent a substitute [to 3lanning Commission
meetings]." 3ressed for a more definite ansZer—the version 0oses had
given his aides Zas read to him—:agner finally  said: "I think that may
have happened. I probably thought, 'Let's not get into a big roZ to start out
Zith.'"

program, if anyone had been assigned to do a housing program, and he said
No and I said, ':ould  you like  me to take it on?' and he said, 'Okay, but
make sure you keep in touch Zith 0oses.' "

That stricture should have been a Zarning, but 0oscoZ Zas as short on an
understanding of people as he Zas long on an understanding of public
relations. In tZo or three Zork-crammed Zeeks during December 1953, he
dreZ up the program for state-assisted middle-income housing that Zould,
Zith only  minor changes, later be named "0itchell-Lama" after the tZo
legislators Zho Zould be permitted to introduce it in Albany. +e discussed
it not only Zith  Cruise and other 0oses 0en on the +ousing Authority  but
Zith 0oses,  Zho said he liked it—"+e  said, 'Good, that'll bring the union
treasuries in.' " But then, shortly after the inauguration, 0oscoZ, in a secret
memo, presented it to the Board of Estimate himself instead of letting
0oses do it.

"0oses bleZ  his top," 0oscoZ  recalls. "+e Zrote  a memo to the 0ayor—
one of those mimeographed things that goes around to 205 people —pretty
much denouncing me" and denouncing the program that he had privately
told 0oscoZ  he liked.

At the same time as the denunciations Zere flying, hoZever, Spargo and
LebZohl kept telling 0oscoZ   to ignore them. "They kept coming to me and
saying [here 0oscoZ Zould  Zhisper to shoZ hoZ the tZo  0oses 0en
talked]. 'Don't ansZer him. Don't bloZ your top. It's going to be all right.
+e's not really angry at you.' " 0oscoZ  Zas understandably pu]]led—until
he figured out that he Zas just a substitute target. Their boss, he reali]ed,

1089
Zas angry at :agner  for Zhat he thought Zas the 0ayor's authori]ation to
0oscoZ  to interfere Zith  his control of housing, but, not Zanting to
alienate a mayor Zho had otherZise proved so agreeable, had decided to
make his vieZs knoZn to him by attacking one of his assistants instead.

And the strategy Zorked. Despite :agner's previously professed
enthusiasm for the proposal, the 0ayor alloZed it to languish in the Board
of Estimate. Then, three Zeeks later, 0oses dropped in on a Board
e[ecutive session. +e presented his "oZn" housing program. It bore an
ama]ing resemblance to 0oscoZ's, e[cept that noZ it Zas identified Zith
0oses instead. :agner  quickly obtained the Board approval that alloZed it
to be sent to Albany.

On February :;. 1054. a black-tie dinner in the Grand Ballroom of the v\
Bldorf-Astoria brought to a clima[  the year-long celebration of NeZ Yoik
City's three-hundredth anniversary. The principal speakers Zere the 0ayor
and Robe:: 0oses. And 0oses, in his speech, Zent out of his Zay to praise
"0y  friend, Bob :agner."

Zould not alZays be so friendly. +e Zas

feck 0ansion, and he still arrived

filled Zith  documents, but noZ he often

re on them. One observer reported:

+e has been heard to say that he looks back Zith particular Zistfulness
upon the • term of :illiam   O'DZyer,  having found him to be a mayor Zho
Zould sign almost anything placed before him on the breakfast table,
provided that it Zas accompanied by a reasonably persuasive argument. . . .
:agner  is more likely to say, "Splendid, Bob, splendid. Before I sign this,
though, let me take it along to the office and think the thing over."

The 3ort Authority found city approval of its projects obtainable again,
more easily obtainable, in fact, than ever before. During :agner's entire
tZelve years in office, its poZer greZ. As for the +ousing Authority,
0oscoZ's  conversations Zith Cruise and Authority staffers had opened his

1090
eyes to the completeness—hitherto unguessed at, keen though those eyes
Zere—of 0oses' control  of a body to Zhich he ostensibly had no direct
relationship. "Theoretically, he had no connection Zith [public] housing,
e[cept in his capacity as Construction Coordinator, Zhich gave him the
over-all right to stick his nose into anything," 0oscoZ  says, "but, Christ,
Cruise Zouldn't go to the bathroom unless he asked 0oses first." :agner
"became a little Zorried about the Authority," 0oscoZ  says—presumably
about the possibility that its activities Zould result in a full-scale scandal
Zhich Zould  reflect on his administration—and seriously considered
ousting Cruise (unlike the other four members of the board, Zho Zere
appointed for fi[ed five-year terms, +ousing Authority  chairmen served at
the mayor's pleasure), a possibility Zhich delighted liberals Zho felt Cruise
Zas handicapped by "an inability to stand up to 0oses Zhen property rights
interfere Zith human rights." But 0oses pressed the buttons, and the calls
— calls that no mayor could refuse to take—flooded in. "I Zant to publicly
thank Commissioner 0oses, Thomas Shanahan, David Rockefeller and
others Zho said a good Zord for me," said Cruise, as he Zas sZorn in at a
ceremony attended by 0oses and Big "Bag" 0an Jim Farley; Zhen
neZspaper photographers sought to pose him Zith the 0ayor, Cruise asked
0oses to get in the picture, too. :agner  told Deputy 0ayor  3aul O'.eefe,
":ell,   I  made my deal. I'm putting my man in to keep an eye on things."
The 0ayor created a neZ e[ecutive directorship over the Authority's staff
and appointed to it Joseph 3. 0c0urray, his father's former administrative
assistant. But 0c0urray  turned out to be more friendly to Tom Shanahan
than to the 0ayor. During 1954, :agner's  Zorries increased, and by the
spring of 1955, he decided that more direct action Zas necessary.
0c0urray   Zas replaced by 0oscoZ—"quite  simply, to take control of the
assigning of architects aZay from Shanahan"—and Cruise Zas called in for
a very confidential chat.

The former $9,ooo-per-year 3ark Department clerk loved his $22,500-per-
year chairmanship. +e Zas informed that if he Zanted to keep it, some
small adjustments in his loyalties Zould be necessary. "Cruise had a
sZitch," 0oscoZ   Zould say privately years later Zith a faint, mocking
smile. "+e, of course, had groZn up in the 3ark Department and Zas very
close to 0oses. +e Zas 0oses' protege. But Cruise made his divorce.

1091
Thereafter, in matters of controversy, Cruise took his vieZs from the
0ayor."

All this maneuvering Zent on backstage, Zithout any direct confronta-

tion betZeen 0oses and the 0ayor. It—and other subtle tests of Zill and
strength betZeen the tZo men—led, hoZever, to constant tension betZeen
them, as did more trivial incidents.

"Bob [:agner]   Zas no less jealous of his prerogatives than any other
mayor," 3aul R. Screvane says. "And [0oses] didn't come to Bob enough
and consult him." :agner  occasionally attempted to assert his authority
over his commissioner by asking him to come doZn to City +all. Generally,
0oses made some e[cuse, but occasionally :agner insisted and 0oses,
needing something from the 0ayor, had no choice but to go. :hen he Zas
forced to make the trip, hoZever, he invariably disciplined :agner by
shoZing up late. At receptions at Gracie 0ansion, :agner,  moving quietly
from one guest to another—"+e does a lot of his Zork in Zhispers at
parties," one observer Zrote—Zas remarkably inconspicuous. :hen 0oses
entered the room, generally trailed by enough aides to make his entrance
conspicuous, Zomen patted their hair to make sure it Zas in place and
discreetly took out pocket mirrors to check their lipstick, and men Zatched
him out of the corners of their eyes. +is physical presence and vitality as he
stood, head throZn back, teeth gleaming in his dark face, handsome,
charming, physically overpoZering his listeners, perhaps Zith a big arm
around the shoulders of one, recounting fascinating anecdotes about Smith
or Roosevelt or La Guardia, made him, as alZays, the focal point of the
room, and sometimes :agner, seeing his guests' attention slipping aZay
from him just a bit, could be observed Zatching the Coordinator from
across the room Zith an e[pression on his face that could only be described
as enigmatic.

But if there Zas strain, most of the tension on the line Zas put there— or
rela[ed—by 0oses. It  Zas he—not the man Zho Zas supposedly his
superior—Zho dominated the relationship. And in policy he proved as
dominant as in personality. If there Zere points of contention, they Zere
almost alZays resolved in his favor.

1092
:agner  Zanted 0oses' dominance in public housing eliminated, but
0oscoZ,  assigned to the task, found it someZhat more difficult than he had
believed. Charging onto the scene Zith visions of neZ brooms sZeeping
clean, the e[-reporter Zas encumbered by the fact that he Zas genuinely
affected by the plight of the city's poor—and by his painful reali]ation that
0oses' near-monopoly of the engineering and architectural talent
e[perienced in tenant relocation, slum clearing and construction on the
immense scale required (and in dealing Zith state and federal
bureaucracies) made it difficult to find qualified replacements—or even to
keep from adding neZ 0oses 0en to the staff. ":e   needed a neZ chief
engineer in charge of construction," he recalls. "The best qualified man
around Zas Jim DaZson, Zho had been in charge of the 8N job for 0oses.
:ell,   you're not going to turn him doZn just because 0oses recommended
him." (Analy]ing  in later years the sources of 0oses' poZer, 0oscoZ
Zould say that one "stemmed simply from the fact that his enterprises
developed people.")

Even Zith Cruise's conversion, :agner's control of the Authority  board Zas
not assured. The antipathy of its only Negro member, Frank R. Cross-

Zaith, to 0oses' philosophies and methods, assured the 0ayor of another
vote, but Shanahan and "0oses' stooge," :illiam  :ilson,   gave 0oses tZo,
so that the vote of the fifth member Zould be decisive.

:agner's  first attempt to gain that vote—the appointment of a loyal
supporter—had backfired Zhen the appointee died. Then, 0oscoZ says, "I
arranged for James Felt to be appointed. I thought he Zould be ours.
Instead, he Zas 0oses'." (0oscoZ  might have been alerted to this
possibility had he been aZare of the identity of the real estate company that
had been handed the lucrative site-assemblage contract for Stuyvesant
ToZn and 3eter Cooper Village: James Felt & Co.) In 1956, Felt Zas eased
over to the chairmanship of the 3lanning Commission and replaced by
builder Abraham Lindenbaum, Zho, 0oscoZ  says, "Ze kneZ Zas 100
percent for Zhat the 0ayor or I Zanted."  Shanahan and :ilson Zere finally
a minority.

But even a minority—Zhen maneuvered by a master—can have
considerable strength. +is 1957 threat, delivered through :ilson, to "sic the

1093
Daily NeZs on the Authority," Zas only  the most dramatic method 0oses
employed to bend that body to his Zill. And Zhile Cruise, after his
conversion, might take "his vieZs from the 0ayor," most of the Authority
business did not involve controversy, and in those matters 0oses' Zishes
frequently prevailed. The day-to-day activities of the Authority, moreover,
Zere run by the staff, still so largely 0oses-dominated. It Zas not until
1958, Zhen :agner  reorgani]ed it completely, that 0oses' domination of
the NeZ York City +ousing Authority—then  in its thirteenth year—Zas
really ended.

And Zhile 0oses'  domination of the Authority may have ended in 1958, he
still possessed considerable influence, if not over its day-to-day operations,
then over its larger planning and construction proposals. The money for the
Authority's construction came, of course, largely from the state—
specifically from the Legislature and the body that administered the
Legislature's Zishes, the State Division of +ousing, headed by the State
Commissioner of +ousing. And Governors generally folloZed 0oses'
recommendations in appointing the commissioner. As late as 1968, during
the administration of John V. Lindsay, liberals like Julius Edelstein Zould
still be complaining about 0oses' "influence Zith  State +ousing."

And public—loZ-income—housing  Zas the only area in the vast housing
field in Zhich  0oses' poZer Zas reduced at all. During the first si[ years of
:agner's  administration, the Title I program Zas to groZ to a point at
Zhich it Zas larger than public housing. :agner  never made the slightest
attempt to interfere Zith his control, e[ercised through his chairmanship of
the group misnomered "The 0ayor's Slum Clearance Committee."

If 0oses' poZer  Zas reduced only slightly in housing, moreover, it Zas
reduced not at all in parks or transportation. For the first si[ years of
:agner's  administration, his Zord Zas as much "laZ" in those fields as it
had been in Impellitteri's. The Coordinator didn't get his Zay Zith :agner
as routinely as he had gotten it Zith Impy—there Zere more confrontations
—but he got it. There Zere many times Zhen the 0ayor announced to

friends that he Zas going to refuse a 0oses demand, but the pattern
folloZing  the announcement Zas alZays the same. :illiam F. R. Ballard, a
chairman of the City 3lanning Commission, recalls vividly :agner

1094
"agreeing to back me—told me he Zould—and then he ended up backing
0oses." And some version of Ballard's Zords are repeated by do]ens of
officials caught in tugs of Zar betZeen the tZo men. "I saZ it over and
over," Condello says. ":agner Zould  tell me he Zas really going to lay
doZn the laZ this time, shoZ this guy 0oses Zho's mayor. And then they'd
meet, and afterZards, :agner Zould say, ':ell,   I guess I shoZed that guy.'
And I'd have to laugh. [0oses] Zould  go out Zith about 98 percent of Zhat
he Zanted—every time."

:hen   :agner  proved especially recalcitrant, the resignation threat Zould
be used. Since there had been little need of it, 0oses' ultimate Zeapon had
fallen into disuse during the Impellitteri administration, but he Zorked it
hard indeed during :agner's. "Sometimes it seemed like he Zas resigning
about one thing or another about tZice a day," one high :agner aide says.

:agner  had no :indels   to shoZ him hoZ to defuse the Zeapon by turning
it into a joke, and so Zhen he had to surrender to it, he had to make the
surrender a straightforZard one, Zhich must have been humiliating to him.
But surrender he did—over and over again. 8nder :agner, as under
O'DZyer and Impellitteri,  not the 0ayor but 0oses  shaped the city.

Zent clamming Zith  them and his family on Fire Island, Zas the most
charming and gracious of hosts—but the more perceptive among them
kneZ alZays that they Zere there not because of friendship but for a
purpose, and that before the Zeekend Zas over, 0oses Zould be putting his
big arm around their shoulders and Zorking for the vote, or the
administrative decision, that he needed from them. A quarter of a century
before, he had sloughed off the last remaining amenities of living and set
before himself a life that Zould be a feast of Zork. In 1958, at the age of
seventy, he Zould be still sitting before that feast—Zith undiminished
appetite.

During the 1920's, 0oses had established a routine under Zhich, Zhenever
he Zas living in Babylon, the chief engineer of the Long Island State 3ark
Commission, Arthur +oZland,  called every morning at 7:30 at Thompson
Avenue to pick up a big manila envelope bulging Zith the memos, letters,
press releases and directives to his e[ecutives that 0oses had Zritten since
leaving the office the night before. NoZ, after tZenty-five years of picking

1095
up that envelope, +oZland Zas gone. But the envelope Zas still there.
Every morning, Zithout fail,  +oZland's successor, Sid Shapiro, Zould call
at Thompson Avenue—and every morning, Zithout fail, he Zould find it
sitting there on the neZel post at the bottom of the banister. "0y God!" says
one of his secretaries. "+e Zas a dynamo! Every morning there Zould be a
manila envelope this thick, and si[ girls Zould be Zorking all  day to do the
things he had done overnight." :orking,  that is, after +a]el Tappan had
deciphered his handZriting—unintelligible e[cept to his Junoesque chief
secretary.

The mail, a huge stack of it, Zould be Zaiting for him on the desk of
Zhichever one of his four offices he Zas using that day. Summoning three
secretaries to ring his desk, he Zould ploZ through the letters so rapidly—
scribbling instructions on some, snapping off orders about others, dictating
replies, tossing the letters to the three Zomen in rotation—that Zithin thirty
minutes the huge stack of paper Zould have melted doZn to the bare desk
top.

During the i92o's, 0oses had turned the big black 3ackard in Zhich he had
to spend so much time into an office, holding conferences in it Zith aides
Zhose oZn limousines trailed behind, Zaiting to take them off Zhen the
conferences Zere finished, carrying Zith him alZays a supply of legal note
pads and sharpened pencils and using the time in the limousine for Zork.
NoZ the limousine Zas a Cadillac instead of a 3ackard. But it Zas still an
office.

Age Zithers the output of most men, but as decade succeeded decade in the
career of Robert 0oses, his output seemed only to increase. The floZ of
broadsides delivered daily to a thousand desks never slackened. "Every
morning Zhen you came in, there on your desk Zould be [the
mimeographed] memos that 0oses had sent to someone and circulated to
everyone else," LaZrence Orton says. They had been on Orton's desk from
the day of his appointment to the City 3lanning Commission in 1938; they
Zere on his desk in 1948 and 1958—and there seemed to be more of them
than ever. Orton, Zho read the memos—out of a fearful fascination—says,
"It took the first

1096
half to three quarters of an hour every day to catch up on your 0oses
correspondence." Says Latham: "During the time I kneZ him—and I kneZ
him for forty-five  years—hours didn't mean anything to him. Days of the
Zeek didn't mean anything to him. :hen  there Zas Zork to be done, you
did it. That Zas the Zay he Zas then and that's the Zay he is noZ."

If age could not Zither his passion for Zork, sun—even tropical sun—
could not bleach it. For years he had not taken vacations; noZ he did, if
infrequently (generally in Zinter to the Caribbean), although it is notable
that most of these vacations Zere to the lu[urious island retreats of Bernard
Gimbel or Robert Blum of Abraham and Straus or of other poZerful men
Zhose support he needed. But as his male secretary, +arold Blake, sorted
through each day's mail during his boss's "vacation," out Zould tumble
envelope after envelope addressed in his boss's scraZl and crammed Zith
memos and orders.

:ind   could not cool that passion. Tearing himself aZay from his desk, he
Zould on some afternoons head for the Sea-Ef and his beloved Great South
Bay. In the afternoons, the bree]e on the bay Zould be fresh and crisp.
Beneath the big cruiser the flounder might be running. But on more days
than not his only catch Zould be another full manila envelope. The captain
Zould cruise back and forth over the bay hour after hour; hour after hour
the figure sitting silently in the deck chair at the stern Zould be hunched
over memos and maps and blueprints. Late in the afternoon, he might take
the Zheel himself, but the charts his mind Zould be seeing Zould not be
charts of the bay; once Captain 3earsall forgot to keep Zatch for a feZ
minutes and 0oses ran the boat straight onto a clearly visible sand bar.

Illness could not sap it. +is Zere feZ and far betZeen, and even the most
serious of them—an eye operation in 1955, Zhen he Zas si[ty-si[— did not
sloZ him doZn; on the morning after the operation, he Zas dictating in his
hospital room at seven o'clock. The colds and flus and viruses that deflect
other men from their Zork did not deflect him from his. 0eeting  0oses at
home after Shapiro had told him that "R0" Zas running a 104-degree fever,
Tallamy found him propped up in bed surrounded by mounds of documents.
"+e Zas Zriting  a speech," Tallamy recalls. "+e put it doZn and plunged
right into the subject of my visit" Zithout  a minute's break.

1097
+e had lost none of the furious urge that made him Zork. It Zas too strong
to alloZ him to keep seated for long. "+e Zould drive me cra]y Zith  his
pacing," says Joe Ingraham of the Times. "I have a back condition and I'd
be sitting there and all of a sudden 0oses Zouldn't be there in front of me
any more; he'd be pacing around the room as he talked. I'd have to keep
tZisting around to folloZ  him, and he'd keep pacing and pacing, and I'd
have to keep tZisting and tZisting." Sometimes Tallamy, major supplier of
the money for 0oses' dreams, Zould arrive at Randall's Island to find
0oses Zaiting  for him outside the front door as if he had been unable to
Zait the e[tra minute until Tallamy reached his office on the second floor.
As soon as the federal highZay administrator stepped out of his car, 0oses

Zould begin talking about some project. "Once, I remember, he grabbed my
lapels and put his face right up to mine, he Zas so an[ious and so
impatient."

And Tallamy not only Zas a man from Zhom 0oses needed something but,
as a federal employee, Zas not dependent on him for his salary. :ith men
Zho Zere—the "0oses  0en"  Zho Zere his top e[ecutives and Zho Zere
noZ virtually  the only part of his empire Zith Zhich he noZ dealt
personally—0oses' impatience took other forms.

"If your ansZer Zasn't fast enough for him, he'd get up and pace," Ernie
Clark says. "If you told him you didn't knoZ [the ansZer], he might say,
':ell,   Zhy  don't you?' " And he didn't Zant to be bored Zith statistics; "he
Zanted conclusions and hoZ you had gotten them." Once, a neZ
engineering consultant began reading off page after page of statistics. Clark
recalls that "0r. 0oses  started pacing, almost like a caged tiger. And then
he turned around and said: 'I never heard so much horseshit in my life.' "
0ore  and more frequently noZ, Zhen he heard a report of some delay or
obstacle, the big poZerful face Zould turn pale, almost Zhite, and a Zave
of purple, rising up the thick neck, Zould sZeep across it. 0ore and more
frequently, the palm of the big right hand Zould begin to smack doZn on
the table as he talked, and his secretaries, sitting in their office outside
trying to smile at each other, Zould hear his voice begin to rise. :hirling  on
Triborough chief engineer Joseph A. Vermaelen one day in front of a
roomful of Ver-maelen's associates and outsiders, after Vermaelen had made

1098
a suggestion dealing Zith a matter that 0oses did not regard as his
province, he snarled: "You're just a sZabbie on this ship. NoZ get out of
here!" And Vermaelen Zas lucky. For the voice could cut as Zell as belloZ,
slashing at a man Zith an aim that seemed to find unerringly that vulnerable
point at Zhich the man could most be hurt. 0ore and more frequently, he
Zould lunge out of his chair and begin to pace the room, pounding his
clenched fist into the Zalls hard enough to scrape the skin off them, in a
rage beyond the perception of pain. Retired Army General +arry L.
0eyers, director of the Long Island State 3ark Commission police force,
Zho says, "0y  admiration for 0r.  0oses  is Zithout limit;  it's beyond
anything," admits: "I've seen him Zhen he Zouldn't be himself—Zaving his
arms, just Zild." Says 3eter J. Brennan: ":hen  he got mad, he Zas a raving
maniac. I've seen him say to an employee of his—'NoZ, dammit, you get
this done or don't come back!' Steel-eyes-like, he'd stare at you and he'd
raise the arms . . ."If there Zas a sudden crash of shattering glass from
behind his door, the secretaries kneZ Zhat it Zas; he had snatched up his
old-fashioned glass inkZell and hurled it at an underling Zhose report had
displeased him.

Tireless at thirty, he Zas tireless at seventy.

8p in the morning at si[  or seven, he often made breakfast for his Zife and
brought it to her in bed. In the evenings, at the far side of tZelve or fourteen
hours of unbroken toil, he Zould head not for home but for the sZimming
pool. One Zeekend, he invited Ingraham to Babylon and told the reporter to
come up to Randall's Island Friday evening and drive out Zith him.
Arriving  at five o'clock, Ingraham found 0oses in

conference, and settled doZn in the Commissioner's Zaiting room. An hour
later, he Zas still Zaiting; the conference Zas still on. :hen  it broke up
around si[-thirty, Ingraham Zas invited in, and 0oses told him he still had
a feZ things to attend to. +e Zas still attending to them at seven o'clock and
eight o'clock, and nine o'clock and ten. Rising finally, he said, "Let's stop
off at Earle AndreZs' place on the Zay out." The "place" turned out to be
AndreZs' glass-enclosed sZimming pool in +untington. Letting himself in
Zith his oZn  key, 0oses changed, plunged into the Zater and began
sZimming. :atching   the muscular arms Zindmilling endlessly up and

1099
doZn the pool, the droZsy reporter do]ed off. Some time later, he aZoke.
The Zindmill  Zas still turning; if  anything, Ingraham reali]ed Zith a start,
0oses Zas sZimming  faster than before. It Zas, he says, "late" Zhen the
Commissioner clambered out of the Zater, looking as fresh as a youth, and
very late indeed Zhen the tZo men finally arrived at Thompson Avenue. As
Ingraham climbed the stairs to the guest room, he saZ the Commissioner's
broad back disappearing not into his bedroom but into his study, yelloZ
legal note pad in hand. :hen Ingraham fell asleep, he kneZ his host Zas
still Zorking.  And Zhat aZakened the reporter the ne[t morning—"at some
ungodly early hour"— Zas the smell of bacon and eggs. +earing him
stirring, 0ary  called up the stairs: "Come on doZn. Bob's cooking
breakfast."

+is physical strength Zas aZesome to his associates. Concerned as he greZ
older for his safety during the sZims he took far out into the ocean off Jones
Beach or Gilgo, they agreed among themselves that, Zhenever possible, as
Latham puts it, "as long as he Zas in the Zater, one of us Zas Zith him . . .
Zithout making it obvious." But  they had to perform this chore in relays; in
his si[ties and seventies, Robert 0oses could tumble around in the surf,
diving through and riding the South Shore's big breakers, far longer even
than the tall, broad-shouldered Latham, tZenty years his junior and himself
an e[ceptionally strong sZimmer.

The racing pen seemingly could not brake itself. For money or to get his
vieZs into print, he Zas constantly indulging in the "fugitive scribbling"  of
commissioned maga]ine articles; he Zas the author of a total of 51 articles
for The Atlantic, +arper's, Saturday RevieZ and other national maga]ines;
of 32 more for The NeZ York Times 0aga]ine\  of an additional 19 for the
+erald Tribune Sunday 0aga]ine —and of several score more for other
neZspaper Sunday supplements. It had "alZays been his ambition to Zrite
cheap pulp stuff," 0oses 0an  Arnold Vollmer recalls; in the mid-1950's,
short on cash as usual, he announced to aides that he Zas going to Zrite "a
trashy piece of pulp" that he Zas sure Zould sell. Ironically, Zhen he
finished it—a reportedly se[-filled  novel titled From 3alms to 3ines — and
sent it to various publishing houses under a pseudonym, not one Zould
publish it. +e had, hoZever, managed to Zrite a full-length novel Zhile
simultaneously holding doZn eight full-time e[ecutive jobs. Letters—not

1100
only the mimeographed daily broadsides but graceful personal notes of
condolence or congratulations—poured from his pen in the thousands, each
to be delivered by hand by one of a battalion of liveried Triborough
messengers, and they Zere letters graceful enough to be treasured by their

recipients. One to NeZbold 0orris, delivered on the death of his father-in-
laZ, Judge Learned +and, said:

... To millions Zho kneZ little  of his profession but had become familiar
Zith his leonine head and broZ of Jove, he Zas the embodiment of
righteousness in a mad Zorld. Today beyond the Straight Gate and along
the aisle on the other side are massed thousands of cheering lovers of justice
as this great e[emplar of LaZ comes marching in.

+e giveth +is beloved sleep.

(Anyone Zho thought it strange that the condolence note Zas addressed not
to 0rs.  0orris,  the late judge's daughter, Zhom 0oses also kneZ, but to her
husband, didn't understand 0oses; 0oses didn't need the daughter.) Said
one man Zho didn't meet 0oses until he Zas si[ty years old and Zho
Zorked Zith  him frequently for tZenty years thereafter: "+e never got tired.
Never that I saZ. +e seemed to rela[ Zhen he Zas Zorking the hardest.
+e'd come out of a meeting or conference that had high tension and be
completely rela[ed, Zhere the ordinary person Zould be e[hausted. :ork
seemed to make him stronger."

In 1950, +etty Green, an eccentric millionairess Zho had long felt grateful
to 0oses for building  the +utchinson River 3arkZay, Zhich gave her "such
pleasure" driving to and from her homes in 0anhattan and GreenZich,
Connecticut, died, and, on the reading of her Zill, it Zas discovered that her
gratitude had taken practical form: a $10,000 bequest to Robert 0oses. Not
a year later, hoZever, one of the large, une[pected e[penses that Zere
continually bedeviling 0oses arose—this time a needed re-roofing of his
Babylon house—and he discovered that he again had no money in the bank.
It had all been spent, and, 0oses confessed to Jack 0adigan, he didn't
knoZ on Zhat. It Zasn't that 0oses didn't  Zant money, of course. +e
Zanted it desperately, as is proven by the commissions he continually
accepted from maga]ines for articles he loathed Zriting, and by the

1101
eagerness Zith Zhich he accepted $100,000 fees for arterial highZay plans
for other cities. But he had the 0oses prodigality Zith money, the
prodigality that had helped make his brother a pauper. +e alZays accepted
the $100,000 commissions Zith an idea of keeping a substantial portion for
himself, but he alZays ended up using the money to buy other men Zho
could help him in his NeZ York Zork.  Detractors Zho kneZ the amounts of
these commissions and Zho judged 0oses by the standards they applied to
other public officials, assumed —understandably—that he Zas becoming a
rich man from them. This conclusion Zas natural—but it Zas Zrong.

If he created an empire, he roamed it in imperial style.

+is car, the most lu[urious Detroit could provide (the richness of its leather
upholstery gave one guest the feeling that he Zas not in a motor vehicle but
the library of a fine men's club, an illusion reinforced by the

placement of the limousine's side ZindoZs so far forZard that occupants of
its deep rear seat could see out only by leaning forZard—"There Zas a
feeling of isolation; normally Zhen you ride in the back of a car people are
able to look in and you're able to look out, but here it Zas as if you Zere
insulated from the outside Zorld"), rushed to him by Detroit at his
command ("I remember Zhen air-conditioned cars Zere first coming out
and it Zas a big thing to get one," says an O'DZyer aide. "The 0ayor
couldn't get one. But 0oses had one"), stood at his call day and night; to
insure that it Zould, he had not one but three personal chauffeurs. Of the
tens of thousands of cars that passed daily through the empire's toll booths,
that car alone did not stop. (:hen a neZ Director of 3ublic  Safety Zas
appointed for the empire, he Zas briefed by Sid Shapiro: everyone else
granted free passage—Governor, 0ayor, even police cars and the cars of
0oses' top aides—Zas required to sZerve out of line and outside the booths
so as not to complicate the treadle count; "only one car goes through.") And
Zhen the big black limousine Zith the roZ of shields on its bumper and the
license plate "2000" roared through a booth, not even sloZing doZn, the
uniformed officer inside jumping to salute and then staring after it, straining
vainly to catch a glimpse of the living legend riding in the rear seat, the
lieutenant or captain in charge at the toll pla]a Zould hastily pick up his
telephone—as hastily as the commission trooper, miles doZn the road,

1102
seeing the long black limousine looming out of the distance, Zould reach
for his radio microphone—to keep the empire's capital on Randall's Island
apprised, minute by minute and mile by mile, of its ruler's progress, so that
urgent messages could be delivered to him at the ne[t toll pla]a. If, in reply,
he Zanted to make a call—he Zould not alloZ a telephone in his car so that
he could Zork in it uninterrupted—his chauffeur Zould pull in  to the ne[t
police barracks, troopers springing up to escort him to a phone.

The empire's gleaming Zhite flagship—and one of its captains—stood at
his call. Even on days on Zhich there Zas no real possibility that he Zould
be able to get out on the bay, the Sea-Ef, kept constantly gassed and
provisioned, Zould be held ready at the dock near his Babylon house, just
on the off chance that his schedule might change. The captain on duty on
Sunday could not rela[ just because there had been no call for his services
in the morning or afternoon or early evening. +e Zas under orders never to
be out of earshot of his telephone—just in case R0 should call— until 10
p.m. :as  it R0's  Zish  to sZim? There Zas a netZork of sZimming pools at
his disposal. .eys to Earle AndreZs' pool in +untington,  and to the
lu[uriously  decorated, glass-enclosed pleasure dome of commission
member and millionaire Landon Thorne in Bay Shore—among others—had
been pressed upon him so that he could use these facilities at any time
Zithout even having to greet their oZners. Did an emperor employ generals
and admirals? 0oses did, too; Farrell of the Burma Road Zas not the only
one Zho upon retirement took up service under the flag of Triborough. And
0oses could promote men over generals. In the 8nited States Army, Farrell
had been :illiam  Chapin's commanding officer; in Triborough's, Chapin
Zas Farrell's.

! II

; I 4  !< R 0 :   E ■ 814

Even as a youth, he had been an[ious—eager—to entertain, insistent on
picking up checks even for Zealthy friends. NoZ, as the silver stream
pouring into the empire's coffers sZelled, and sZelled, and sZelled again,
he diverted enough of it to entertain on a truly imperial scale.

1103
At three of his offices Randall's Island, Belmont Lake State 3ark and 270
BroadZay—complete, separate staffs of chefs and Zaiters Zere on hand
daily so that, Zherever he might be, he could serve lunch to invited guests.

I here Zas a ceremonial to even the smallest lunches.

:aiting   to lunch Zith  Robert 0oses, a guest Zould be ushered at Randall's
Island into an anteroom lined Zith pictures of Robert 0oses' bridges,
Robert 0oses' parks, Robert 0oses' parkZays, of Robert 0oses posing
Zith +oover,  of Robert 0oses posing Zith Roosevelt, of Robert 0oses
posing Zith Truman, Zith EisenhoZer (and, later, Zith .ennedy  and
Johnson—and 3ope John); at Belmont Lake into an anteroom Zith Zalls
covered, literally from Zall  to ceiling, Zith  Robert 0oses' plaques and
trophies. There might be a gleaming Zhite scale model or tZo, of past or
future achievements, lying carelessly about. And to insure against the
guest's not being sufficiently reminded of his host's achievements, as he Zas
being served drinks by a Zhite-coated Zaiter, he Zould probably be joined
—by design—by one of 0oses' aides Zho Zould regale him Zith anecdotes
about R0's triumphs. Finally, R0   himself Zould appear—at the head of a
procession of eight or ten aides, for if emperors had courts, so, of course,
did he. (If by chance he Zas called out of the room to take a telephone call,
Zhen he returned his aides Zould jump to their feet, and Zould not sit doZn
until he sat doZn.) The doors to the dining room—Randall's Island's lined
Zith more pictures of 0oses achievements; Belmont Lake's, a sun-filled,
airy room fifty  feet long atop a Zing of the neZ Belmont 0ansion 0oses
had built, lined, on all sides, Zith ZindoZs overlooking  the lake and stands
of magnificent trees—Zould be throZn open, and 0oses Zould lead the
guest inside, Zith his aides filing after them. 0oses sat at the head, his aides
—after 0oses had sat doZn—on his right, in seats preassigned in order of
rank and favor in his eyes, so that an observer Zho attended several meals
could judge, by hoZ far aZay from 0oses Shapiro or Chapin or Latham
Zas sitting that day, their current standing in 0oses' organi]ation. The food
at lunches at Randall's Island—not special luncheons, just the typical lunch
served by Zhite-coated Zaiters to groups ranging in si]e from half a do]en
to half a hundred perhaps 150 times a year—Zas spoken of by guests in
tones of aZe. At Belmont Lake, they Zere more informal— but culinary
standards Zere just as high.

1104
No aspect of lunch Zith 0oses Zas more imperial than the attitude of the
host. There Zas little conversation at these lunches; there Zas, instead, a
dramatic monologue, anecdotes about his struggles, about political
infighting in Zhich  he had engaged, about the 0ayors and Governors and
3residents he had knoZn, about his plans for the future. And these Zere
usually not brief monologues. Once, Zhen 0oses Zas attempting to
persuade NeZsday to investigate another state agency Zith Zhose
cooperation he Zas not pleased, he invited to lunch reporter Bob Greene
and the paper's bull-

voiced managing editor, Alan +athZay, possessor of considerable
raconteurial •ability in his oZn right and a man accustomed to holding the
center of Zhatever stage he happened to find himself on. During the
appeti]er, 0oses began relating anecdotes about himself. ("+e told us that
one of the favorite ones that had ever been Zritten about him Zas: 'Nothing
he has ever done has been tainted by legality.' +e chortled at that. +e
obviously relished it.") Greene Zas an investigative reporter Zho never lost
his presence of mind; Zhen the main course arrived and 0oses Zas still
going strong, Greene glanced at his Zatch, and, upon returning to the city
room, Zas able to report that 0oses had talked nonstop for an hour and
tZenty minutes. "Alan," he told unbelieving colleagues, "couldn't get a
Zord in edgeZise."

0oses' court completed the aura. No emperor's Zas more simpering.

:hen   the calls from the toll booths and the troopers out on the parkZays
indicated that 0oses Zas heading toZard one of his offices, that office
Zould erupt into fren]ied  e[citement. GroZn men—men Zho Zere
themselves in positions of authority over hundreds of men, men Zho Zere
making forty or fifty  or si[ty  thousand dollars a year—Zould shout to each
other: "R0  is tZenty-four  minutes aZay!" "+e's tZelve  minutes aZay!"
"The boss Zill be here in one minute!" They Zould hurriedly recheck one
last time to make sure that any map or blueprint for Zhich he might ask Zas
ready for his perusal. Scurrying back and forth, secretaries Zould put a
do]en freshly sharpened pencils in the pencil holder on his desk, straighten
the pile of letters there, dust his office one last time. ":orst of all," says
one, Zas Zhen he headed first from his Babylon home to Belmont Lake, for

1105
that trip took only about five minutes. "Everyone Zould start shouting: 'The
boss is coming! The boss is coming! +e's on his Zay over from Thompson
Avenue!' And everyone Zould start rushing around in little circles as if they
Zere cra]y." A reporter Zho arrived early at an auditorium in Zhich 0oses
Zas to give a speech listened to his aides "refer to him as if he Zas God. T
hope R0 likes the podium.' T hope R0  likes the lighting.' '+oZ  do you
think R0  Zill  be feeling this morning?' " At luncheons, their role Zas
limited to laughing at his bons mots, scoZling along Zith him Zhen he
mentioned his enemies, and occasionally uttering an affirmative "Yes" or
"Definitely."  Generally they uttered a complete sentence only in ansZer to a
direct question he put to them—and generally that question Zas only to
elicit their confirmation of some point he Zas making. If some guest Zas
not sufficiently reverent, they quietly took him aside. +enry Barnes' first
face-to-face encounter Zith 0oses on coming to NeZ York as Traffic
Commissioner in 1962 Zas at a lunch in 0oses' neZ office at the :orld's
Fair site. "+e Zas telling a story about Grover :halen  and the first fair,
hoZ Grover had alZays had a bunch of cuties around him and hoZ one
Zould say, 'Grover, Ze ought to have a dress shop' and there'd be a dress
shop at the fair, and another Zould say, ':e ought to have . . .' 0oses said
something about hoZ he didn't Zant 'no goddamn babes around me.' Just as
a joke I said, T think that's a very narroZ-minded vieZpoint.' +e looked
very startled. +is head jerked around in complete ama]ement. All the others
sort of gasped. After the meeting, Stuart Constable [3ark

Department e[ecutive officer] came up to me and he said, 'You knoZ, 0r.
0oses is a very busy and a very important person and it isn't proper to be
facetious Zith him.' " Says reporter Joe .ahn: "+e used to crack jokes; he
had a great pride in his sense of humor, and these guys Zould Zatch him,
Zaiting for their cue, and laugh. It Zas a regular Greek chorus, like a choral
g r08 p—they nodded Zhen he Zanted them to nod, they laughed Zhen he
Zanted them to laugh. :atching  them, you got disgusted Zith your felloZ

It Zas not at Randall's Island that 0oses entertained most lavishly. For his
empire had a summer capital.

At Jones Beach, on that sand bar he had filled Zith bathing pavilions and
deck games and solariums and boat basins and dance floors and restaurants

1106
(restaurants operated by concessionaires to Zhom he had granted franchises
so lucrative that their liquor cabinets and Zine closets and larders, and their
chefs and Zaiters and bartenders, Zere at his command); that sand bar
operated by a consortium of agencies and authorities Zith a budget of
$12,000,000 for Zhose spending he did not have to account, and Zith more
than 3,000 employees he could allocate to Zhatever duties he chose; on that
sand bar governed by laZs he had Zritten himself, policed by troopers in
his pay and responsible only to him, Robert 0oses could entertain as
Robert 0oses had alZays Zanted to entertain.

At Jones Beach, Robert 0oses could offer his guests cruising or fishing
from his yacht, sZimming at his private beach (the section then reserved for
his use), and not only paddle tennis and shuffleboard and archery and roller
skating but horseback riding, tennis and golf—the livery stables, roZs of
tennis courts and magnificently groomed golf courses of Beth-page State
3ark Zere only tZelve minutes aZay by chauffeured 3ark Commission
limousines. +e could offer them the finest food and liquor; having built a
$300,000 BoardZalk Restaurant, he turned it over, Zithout competitive
bidding, to a young concessionaire Zho had caught his eye—on terms so
liberal that the people of the state might as Zell have given it to the young
concessionaire as a gift.* In return, the concessionaire gave 0oses one: he
entertained 0oses' guests, so many guests and so lavishly that the annual
cost can only be guessed at; no complete tabulation has ever been made, but
one incomplete tabulation (discovered in the concessionaire's files) shoZs
that during one si[-year period, at least $179,215—and probably
considerably more—Zas spent on such entertainment.f

* During the i96o's, the BoardZalk Restaurant burned doZn. 0oses built a
neZ one, at a cost of $1,500,000, and, Zithout competitive bidding, turned
it over to the same concessionaire—at a rental of $18,000 per year, an
amount Zhich, an auditor noted, Zas "not even enough to amorti]e the
construction cost."

t Each year, the concessionaire made $80,000 available to be mingled Zith
$75,000 from the 3ark Commission in a separate bank account for
"Alterations" and "Special Events"—Zhich included meals for 0oses'

1107
guests. During the si[ years betZeen July 1, 1961, and September 30, 1967,
$930,000 Zas spent from this account. The $179,215

At Jones Beach, he could entertain in Zhat Zas, in effect, his oZn theater,
built Zith  the $4,200,000 in state cash he had collected as broker in the
1950 deal betZeen NeZ York State and NeZ York City that produced the
NeZ York ThruZay. Erected on a lagoon he carved out of the bay side of
the barrier beach, the "Jones Beach 0arine Stadium" Zas built to peculiarly
0osaic specifications, displaying both his delight in the grandiose (it Zas
designed for the presentation not of plays but of spectacles, for the stage
Zas located on a man-made island separated from the nearest seats by a
broad moat, so that only the biggest, most lavish productions Zere feasible)
and his belief in the separation of the aristocracy from the common herd
(the front rim of the semicircular amphitheater consisted of a roZ of tZelve-
person bo[es—separated from the rest of the stadium's 8,200 seats by an
e[ceptionally Zide  and deep aisle; those bo[es Zere offered for sale—on a
season-long basis—only to banks and large corporations for the
entertainment of their clients; those that Zere not purchased Zere kept
empty; the bo[es, Shapiro told the author blandly, Zere "not for the general
public"). In some Zays, in fact, the stadium seemed designed for 0oses'
personal use. Several bo[es Zere reserved—permanently —for the use of
his guests, the big center bo[ for himself and the most favored among them.
The aisle behind those bo[es Zas deep enough so that men could stand in it
Zithout blocking the vieZ  of those behind, and in it, at every performance,
stood commission staffers ready to supply his guests Zith drinks, snacks,
Zarm blankets if the bree]e bloZing off the bay became uncomfortably
chilly, and any other comforts they might Zish. These functionaries referred
to the center bo[ as "The Royal Bo[," a fitting name because, as an emperor
entertains visiting foreign potentates and their ministers, 0oses, close to the
Zorld of the 8nited  Nations, did the same; on one typical evening, its
occupants, in addition to 0oses and Governor DeZey, included 3rime
0inister  0en]ies  of Australia,  and the heads of the 8N missions of three
European nations. (0oses of course paid special attention to the ministers
of the nation he reverenced; British Ambassador Sir 0ichael Di[on +oare
Zas an especially frequent guest.) :ould an emperor, sitting in his royal
bo[, be introduced to the audience? 0oses Zould, too—Zith drum roll and
trumpet fanfare; Zhenever he Zas in attendance, the pre-shoZ rendition of

1108
"The Star-Spangled Banner" Zould be preceded by such an introduction by
Guy Lombardo, standing in the orchestra pit, as a spotlight played on the
royal bo[. (0oses  Zould act ostentatiously bored during these
introductions, often continuing to talk to his guests and glancing up at the
applauding croZd above him Zith only the briefest nod, rising from his seat
at last as if it Zere almost too much trouble to do so, indicating Zith every
gesture the fact that public acclaim interested him not in the least; hoZ
difficult,  then, to reconcile this attitude Zith the fact that on many evenings
Zhen he Zas too busy to attend the

includes only e[penditures specifically marked for "meals"; according to
one source, other meal e[penditures Zere concealed as e[penditures for
"publicity," "recreational activities," etc.

play, Zhen, in fact, he had appointments elseZhere, he Zould arrange his
schedule so he could stop by the theater just long enough for the
introduction.) Not public taste but 0oses' alone (Zhich considered suitable
for public consumption only bland musical comedies Zith an absolute
minimum of se[) determined Zhat plays Zould be presented—one per
season— on that huge stage; once, trying to hypo meager attendance by
creating the illusion of public selection of the folloZing year's production,
Lombardo had the audience "vote" by applauding for its favorite as he read
off the names of several, carefully pre-selected, popular BroadZay shoZs of
years past. The vote Zas clearly in favor of The 8nsinkable 0olly BroZn.
0oses preferred Song of NorZay. :atching  the vote from a darkened
alcove at the side of the amphitheater, Shapiro smiled slyly, snickered and
said: ":ell,   maybe Ze Zon't be guided by the results of the poll after all."
(The folloZing  year's production Zas Song of NorZay.) The productions
mounted in the stadium by the three Lombardo brothers, Guy, Carmen and
Lebert, Zere as vast as even 0oses could have Zished, distinguished by
immense casts and trappings big enough to be seen from the seats of the hoi
polloi some hundreds of feet aZay. But there Zas no public enthusiasm. In
only tZo of the theater's first fifteen years of operation Zere even half the
seats filled over the course of a season; in some years, feZer than one out of
three Zas filled. But public enthusiasm Zas not the primary aim, as Zas
proven by the fact that every production Zas presented tZo years running—
and attendance in the second year alZays fell to about half that in the first

1109
year.* 8nlike other, more centrally located, theaters, the one at Jones Beach
dreZ its audience not from the Zhole metropolitan area population but,
primarily, from Jones Beach-goers. Since feZ people Zant to see a shoZ
tZice, shoZing only one every tZo years helped insure that most
beachgoing families Zould go to the theater only once every tZo years.
Such a policy makes sense only if the primary purpose of the shoZ Zas to
provide entertainment for a relatively small, constantly changing audience
—an audience such as Zas provided by Robert 0oses' personally invited
guests. On many Zeekday nights, no more than a feZ hundred of the 8,200
seats Zere filled —and most of these Zere the bo[ seats filled Zith guests
invited by 0oses

* It has been possible to obtain attendance figures for only seven years of
the theater's operation. +ere are those figures:

and by his banker allies. On those nights, the grandstand of the big
amphitheater Zas practically empty. Endless roZs of empty seats glared
blankly doZn—on a vast, e[pensive production and a small select audience.
The croZds of actors, sometimes seemingly outnumbering the audience,
seemed to be performing almost e[clusively for the guests of the man on
Zhose stage they Zere performing.

+e even had his oZn court musicians, an orchestra Zhose banal, rigidly
traditional arrangements complemented his personal philosophy—Guy
Lom-bardo's red-coated Royal Canadians, Zho had, fittingly, first become
famous the year Jones Beach opened and Zho still adhered faithfully to the
musical style of those preZar decades in Zhich 0oses had been so popular
and in Zhich he sometimes seemed still to be trying to live. All summer—
every summer—"The SZeetest 0usic This Side of +eaven" Zas his to
command.

Lombardo, the sZeetness of Zhose music Zas matched by the shreZdness
of his business sense, put a high price on his services. But 0oses paid it,
not only paying the orchestra leader, through a complicated method of cash
"advances," more than $100,000 a year to produce the 0arine Theater
shoZs (Zhen other producers, not alloZed to bid for the right, Zould have
paid him to produce them, had they been alloZed to produce a neZ shoZ
every year), but also turning the Zhole theater, a theater built Zith public

1110
funds, over to the three Lombardo brothers virtually as a private concession
to be operated for their private profit, alloZing them to keep most of the
ticket receipts, as Zell as the revenue from the advertising billboards in the
theater and from advertising in the theater programs, even from the rental of
seat cushions. To make sure the profit Zas not diluted, 0oses even
maintained the theater for them, paying the bills for cleaning, repairing and
staffing it right doZn to the ushers. +e even paid the salaries of some of
Lombardo's personnel. +e even paid for most of the advertising for the
shoZ from Zhich Lombardo Zas reaping most of the profit. +e even
alloZed the Lombardos to use the theater to lure patrons to the family
restaurant in nearby Freeport; for $29.90, a couple Zas offered dinner at the
East 3oint +ouse folloZed by an after-dinner cruise ("On Guy Lombardo's
Yacht") right into the theater, Zhere they could disembark and take their
seats.

The $4,200,000 state subsidy for the theater had been a "first-instance"
legislative appropriation, an appropriation the Legislature had e[pected
Zould be paid back out of theater revenues. 0oses never paid it back. To all
inquiries, he replied that he couldn't afford to; the theater, he said, Zas
losing money. 0entioning the "vicissitudes of outdoor theater productions
... the gambles . . . ," he implied that the Lombardo brothers had undertaken
the productions only as a public service and Zere also losing money. Guy
took care to reinforce this impression, moaning loudly about the sacrifices
his Jones Beach productions entailed. In only one year, he says in his
biography, did he and his brothers break even, and in that year, to celebrate,
they used up the profit buying three bottles of Scotch. ":e pay ourselves no
salary, Ze give ourselves no Cadillacs; Zhy, even Zhen Ze take a ta[i to the
shoZ, Ze pay for it out of our oZn pocket. So the most Ze've gotten out of
ten years of

putting on shoZs at Jones Beach is one bottle of Scotch apiece." Actually,
the three Lombardo brothers reaped from their Jones Beach shoZs hundreds
of thousands of dollars in profit. And in return, of course, in addition to
putting on the shoZs that Zere so largely for the entertainment of Robert
0oses' guests, their Royal Canadians Zere available night after night to
play so that 0oses' guests could dance afterZards.

1111
Not only did the state—the state's ta[payers—not get back the $4,200,-000;
the additional costs of theater operation that 0oses made them bear so that
the Lombardos' profit Zould not be diluted had, by 1967, passed the
$5,000,000 mark.

At Jones Beach, Robert 0oses could offer his guests not only a royal bo[
but royal treatment.

Chauffeured limousines could be placed at their disposal; he had so many
that on a typical day big black cars and liveried men Zould be stacked up in
the car pool at Belmont Lake Zaiting for something to do; coming to the
3ark Commission, 3erry Duryea Zould learn in astonishment that one
e[ecutive did nothing but handle logistics—"Zho's riding in Zhat  car; it
Zas almost a military-like operation." +uman beings could be placed at
their disposal; he had so many available to him that he could deploy them in
force; any of his guests above a certain minimum level of importance Zould
be met at the entrance to a reserved parking lot; e[ecutives dressed in mufti
or staffers dressed in the navy-blue and Zhite seahorse-embla]oned
uniforms of Jones Beach Zould escort them on a tour of the park, shoZ
them to private dressing rooms, Zait Zhile they undressed, escort them to
the reserved beach, Zait for them Zhile they sZam and dressed, escort them
to dinner and then to the 0arine Theater—Zhere they, or fresh men Zho
took their place, Zould stand hidden in the dimness of the Zide, deep aisle
behind their bo[es during the entire play to bring them blankets if they Zere
cold, coffee or hot chocolate if they Zere thirsty, and to escort them
backstage during intermission to see the sets—or simply to baby-sit Zith
their children; needing the cooperation of Representative Stuyvesant
:ainZright    one Zeekend, 0oses Zas distressed to learn that he Zas out
cruising off 0ontauk  Zith  his tZo small children; Zhen the Congressman
neared shore that evening, there Zaiting on the pier beside his oZn car Zas
Sid Shapiro, accompanied by tZo limousines, three chauffeurs and a
secretary. One chauffeur Zas to drive :ainZright's car home, in order,
Shapiro e[plained, that he and the Congressman could folloZ behind in one
of the limousines and confer; the other limousine Zas to folloZ behind Zith
:ainZright's   children so that the conference Zould not be disturbed by
childish chatter; the secretary had been brought along as baby-sitter.

1112
"And Zhen there's some big event," Duryea says—a visit to the NeZ York
area, for e[ample, by visiting park enthusiasts or planners from another city
or Europe or the Orient (Japanese urban planners displayed an endless
capacity for vieZing and revieZing 0oses'  Zorks)—"0y   God!"  Duryea
says. "The planning that Zent into it!" Buses or limousines Zould meet the
tourists at their hotel; in each Zould be one or more of 0oses' e[ecutives;
as the tour unrolled, a tour planned doZn to the minute (a typical one, given

for ten visiting German journalists in 1951, picked them up at 9:20 a.m. at
Columbia 8niversity, took them over or gave them a vieZ of the folloZing
brief sampling of 0oses creations: the +enry +udson 3arkZay, Fifty-ninth
Street 3oZerhouse, 8nited Nations, Bellevue 0edical Center, 3eter Cooper
Village and Stuyvesant ToZn, Jacob Riis, Lillian :ald  and Governor Smith
+ouses, Battery 3ark 8nderpass, Battery 3arking Garage and Brooklyn-
Battery Tunnel, Brooklyn-4ueens E[pressZay, GoZanus 3arkZay, OZl's
+ead SeZage Disposal 3lant, Shore 3arkZay, 8llmer 3ark Veterans
Emergency +ouses, Van :yck E[pressZay,  IdleZild  Airport, the Southern
State 3arkZay and 0eadoZbrook 3arkZay, :antagh   State, Northern State,
Grand Central and Cross Island parkZays, the Triborough Bridge, :ard's
Island SeZage Disposal 3lant, :ard's Island 3edestrian Bridge, :ard's
Island 3ark, and Abraham Lincoln and Riverton +ouses on their Zay back
to Columbia 8niversity), the e[ecutives Zould  supplement elaborate
mimeographed fact sheets Zith descriptive anecdotes. And at the end of
these tours, the guests Zould arrive at Jones Beach for food, drink,
entertainment and perhaps a brief Zord Zith the creator of all they had seen.

A day as Robert 0oses' guest at Jones Beach Zas a day to remember.

The chauffeured limousine to take you there Zould be Zaiting for you and
your family at your door. (If you Zere an especially important guest,
Zaiting for you Zhere the parkZays crossed the city line and 0oses'
jurisdiction began Zould be an escort of commission troopers.) :hen the
limousine pulled up to the side door of the :est Bathhouse, there Zould be
a respectful, uniformed guide Zaiting to take you to lunch in a reserved
section of the 0arine Dining Room, Zhere a Zaitress Zould be assigned
e[clusively to your table. After lunch, the guide Zould shoZ you around,
take you to the dressing room—"Commissioner 0oses' private dressing

1113
room"—take you to the beach—a private beach—be standing at the Zater's
edge Zaiting to hand you a toZel Zhen you emerged. Then there Zould be
an afternoon of sun and servant; your guide Zould discreetly drop by every
noZ and then to inquire if there Zere any refreshments you Zould like
brought to your blanket.

Dressed again, and dinner. Red-coated Royal Canadians making music
under a bright red-and-Zhite-striped pavilion. :hole  roast beefs and
turkeys and hams, cold lobsters in stacks, shrimps pilaf and plain, stacked in
great heaps, shrimp and crabmeat salad piled high on huge trays. Sid
Shapiro or one of his suave aides coming over to say hello and make
conversation and see if you had everything you Zanted. After dinner, if you
had a small boy or girl, Shapiro Zould e[plain to you that Guy Lombardo
entered the theater every night by speeding up to the stage in his famed,
trophy-Zinning poZerboat, Tempo, and getting out to lead the orchestra in
"The Star-Spangled Banner" from that spot. :ould your little  boy or girl
like to ride in Tempo Zith Guy as he entered the theater?

The theater. These seats that Zere so conspicuously the best in the house.
Tempo roaring in and your son or daughter stepping out into the spotlight,
and Guy Lombardo himself leading your child, da]]led, over to

you, da]]led, in your seat. Glancing back during the first act and seeing
your escort in the dimness of the aisle beloZ you—and the guide darting
forZard just in case your glance meant that you desired something. Is your
Zife chilly?  :ould   she like a blanket? :ould  anyone like a drink? A soda?
+oZ  about the young man? At intermission, a boat Zaiting to take the
Zhole family across the lagoon onto the stage and behind it to see the actors
and the sets. And after the performance, dancing—under the stars or to a
Lombardo band in the pavilion—or a drink Zith the orchestra leader and
the stars of the shoZ and beautiful shoZgirls in his suite under the theater.

And, most especially, the host.

8nless you Zere at least a Governor, you Zould probably see him only for a
feZ minutes at dinner and after the shoZ; he had had a small office, little
more than a cubicle, built into the stadium, beloZ the stage, so that he could
Zork Zithout  leaving: as soon as the lights dimmed after he had been

1114
introduced to the audience, he Zould slip out, back to his blueprints and his
maps and his progress charts; Zhile his guests rela[ed for three hours
above, he Zould be toiling for three hours beloZ. But a feZ minutes Zere
enough. "+e Zas the most gracious host in the Zorld," says one e[-
legislator. "+e'd put his arm around you, give you that great smile of his,
talk to your kids—just put you right at your ease." At the informal nightly
buffets in the pavilion, he Zas regal but charming. At more formal dinners
at Jones Beach, he Zas more regal—but still charming. "You liked him, he
liked you." And if  he had time to spend Zith you, a Zhole e[tra,
unforgettable dimension Zas added to an already memorable day. For he
Zould probably talk about his accomplishments, telling the "inside story"
behind them, about hoZ he had found out the secrets of the oZnership of
the bay bottoms, for e[ample, and thus Zrested the oZnership of this
marvelous beach from the Babylon baymen. Robert 0oses telling the story
of his successes Zas a minstrel spinning a saga so heroic, so filled Zith
vivid personalities and fierce duels, that listeners hearing it for the first time
(admittedly they lost some of the savor on the fourteenth—or fortieth —go-
round) Zere left entranced as Zell as charmed.

And Zhen you Zere ready to go, the limousine Zould be Zaiting again,
ready to Zhisk you back through the darkness, along the causeZays and
parkZays and e[pressZays and bridges that this man had built. +e Zanted
to aZe—and he succeeded. "Carol and I and the tZo kids Zere
overZhelmed by our treatment last night and are most sincerely grateful,"
Zrote Staten Island Borough 3resident Bob Connor. "Sometimes I am not
quite sure Zhy you built the Verra]ano-NarroZs Bridge since there are a
number of us Zho believe that you could have Zalked across."* Thousands

* The full te[t  of 0oses'  reply:

Dear Bob:

:alking   on Zater is a solitary business.

Cordially, Robert 0oses Chairman

—perhaps over the decades tens of thousands—of persons remembered
these days at Jones Beach and the 0arine Theater provided by the man Zho

1115
had built Jones Beach and the 0arine Theater as among the most
memorable days of their lives. 0oses' Yale class came every year for
tZenty years, in a fleet of limousines leaving from the Yale Club in the
morning. Says class secretary Ralph Clark: "There Zas a beach reserved for
the day—no one else could use it; Ze had the pavilion—like a clubhouse—
to ourselves. Lunch, a seafood buffet, generally Zould be on the patio.
Everything Zas very Zell organi]ed. There Zould  be a piano, and one of
the class Zould play things like 'Auld Lang Syne' and Yale songs and the
:hiffenpoof,   Zhich  Zas Zritten  by a member of '09. Carolus Clark used to
bring his guitar until he died, and he Zould accompany or play by himself.
There Zould be a photographer there to take class pictures. That Zas hoZ
thoughtful he Zas. In the middle of the afternoon—or later—sometimes,
not until five—Bob Zould  come. +e Zould stop, talk to everyone, moving
around, and then Zould say, T'm going to have my sZim.' +e used to sZim
out farther than anybody else . . . Zith a nice craZl stroke . . . nice, easy
shoulders and poZerful and shake his head, he'd be so happy in the Zater.
:e'd  have dinner—a formal (sit-doZn) dinner—in  a section of the big
Jones Beach dining room. There might be tZo hundred other people in the
dining room, but they alZays made it seem like a family affair. If he Zas
late, Ze'd Zait dinner. But Zhen he came, the party alZays sparked up. +e
kidded everyone, and there Zere nice discussions. +e had this sense of
putting people at ease. 0r. and 0rs. 0oses Zould make a point of seeing
everyone. They Zouldn't sit at the same table at dinner, and they'd get up
and move around, leaning over people, asking if everything Zas okay, if
they'd had everything they Zanted. . . . After supper, Ze could go to the
shoZ. They'd hustle us into blankets, and Ze alZays sat in the first roZ. Bob
Zould disappear, usually as Ze Zere being hustled into the blankets, but
there Zere cars going back at different times so you never had to Zorry
about anything."

0oses liked to pick up checks, to be host, in order to dominate. +e certainly
succeeded Zith his class. At Yale, he had been an outsider. NoZ, says Clark,
"the class revolved around him."

+is guest list Zas by no means e[clusive, for 0oses Zanted to impress as
many influential people as possible. So many limousines and guides and
hostesses had been laid on for guests that Shapiro had trouble finding

1116
enough guests to keep them busy—to fill up those theater and restaurant
seats. The 3ark Commission general manager had to lie in Zait for every
passing covey of visiting municipal officials or urban planners. In 1967, for
e[ample, the International Federation of +ousing and 3lanning Zas holding
its annual convention in 3hiladelphia. Lee .oppelman, e[ecutive director of
the Nassau-Suffolk Regional 3lanning Board, thought it Zould be a good
idea for the planners to take a post-convention bus tour around NeZ York
and asked Shapiro if it Zould be possible for them to stop at Jones Beach
and have a 3ark Commission official shoZ them the principal features of
the park. ":ell,"   Shapiro said, "Zouldn't it be nicer if . . ." The ne[t  thing
.oppelman  kneZ, the planners Zere being given not the brief

tour he had had in mind but a full-dress presentation, complete Zith Zall
charts and elaborate maps, of the history of Jones Beach, folloZed by a
sZim, cocktails at the BoardZalk Restaurant, and a buffet dinner so lavish
that .oppelman described it as "a setup like you'd e[pect to find at the
:aldorf.   Sid circulated at the tables, introduced Guy Lombardo—they Zere
very gracious. +e invited some to sit in his bo[. Seats Zere Zaiting for us at
the bo[ office—marked '3aid.' " And at the conclusion of the evening,
Shapiro asked .oppelman if there Zere any other planning groups he could
think of to invite out; if  there Zere, Shapiro said, all .oppelman had to do
Zas ask— any time Zould be all right, any number. Every state or
municipal official, neZspaper publisher, key corporate e[ecutive, key
columnist or reporter or other influential Zith Zhom 0oses  Zas not
currently actively feuding Zas invited annually to some version—its
elaborateness depending on Zhich of 0oses' hospitality lists the guest Zas
on at the moment—of this tour. And these guests could bring along as many
other guests as they Zanted. The engraved invitations that Zent out to
groups such as his Yale class for its annual reunion, for e[ample, alZays
said, "And family." "Oh, 'family'  could mean anyone, you knoZ," one of the
class says. "4uite a feZ of the class brought quite a feZ guests doZn. One
felloZ  from Boston used to come doZn every year Zith his Zife, tZo
daughters and a Zhole carload of people."

A host on an imperial scale, Robert 0oses Zas also a host Zith an imperial
style. Formal luncheons for organi]ations he headed Zere held in a suite of
tZo rooms at the Zest end of the second floor of the :est Bathhouse. One

1117
of those rooms Zas a comfortably furnished sitting room in Zhich a large
dining table could be placed, and it Zas in that room that the rest of the
organi]ation dined. Ne[t to the large room Zas a small one. Often it Zas in
that room that Robert 0oses dined—behind a closed door and alone e[cept
for a Zaiter and an aide Zho Zould summon into his presence Zhatever
member of the group outside he Zanted to talk to at the moment. At State
Council of 3arks meetings, for e[ample, the council members Zould eat
outside, Zaiting to be summoned, one by one, behind that door.

0ost  lavish of all 0oses' entertainments, of course, Zere those celebrating
the completion of neZ public Zorks.

Even a minor Zork merited major celebration. The emperor of Tri-borough
could invest Zith imperial lavishness the opening of even a roZ of toll
booths: NeZsday reporter Bernie Bookbinder, assigned to cover the 1953
opening of the Southern State 3arkZay booths in Valley Stream, suddenly
found himself standing before a buffet table forty feet long piled high from
end to end Zith platters heaped Zith magnificent food Zhile Zaiters
carrying hors d'oeuvres and glasses of champagne bore doZn on him in
platoons. (0oses lost no time in putting those booths on the previously free
parkZay to use. :ithin   minutes after the politicians had moved out of them,
his toll collectors had moved in; by the time the party Zas over late

that afternoon, enough dimes had probably been collected to pay for it—if,
of course, payment Zas required; many concessionaires Zere only too eager
to cater the affair for nothing.)

For the large public Zorks—the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel or the Throgs
Neck or Verra]ano-NarroZs bridges or Captree CauseZay, or the Robert
0oses 3oZer Dams at Niagara and 0assena, for e[ample—the celebrations
Zere on a scale seldom Zitnessed in a democracy. The invited guests
numbered not in the hundreds but in the thousands; the official limousines
of the more important among them, lined up at the ramp to a bridge Zaiting
for the ribbon to be cut so they could proceed across it, might stretch for a
mile or more. Every detail had been Zorked out, of course, from the huge,
heavy silver-plated ribbon-cutting shears or cornerstone-laying troZels
resting on royal purple cushions to the intricate bron]e replicas of bridge or
dam that Zould be distributed in the hundreds—even the types of hors

1118
d'oeuvres to be served. The interest 0oses took in every detail of these
celebrations is revealed—as is the still acrid pungency of even his most
casual prose—by a memo he Zrote to Constable after one concessionaire,
Arnold Schleiffer of the Tavern-on-the-Green, an[ious to keep in 0oses'
good graces by making the buffet more elaborate than ever, had gone too
far in the matter of hors d'oeuvres.

Last night's Schleiffer version of Balsha]]ar's feast Zas contrary to all
instructions. The catering creZ Zas all right, the hat chicks Zere Belles
Amies and the barkeepers upheld the finest traditions of the craft, but the
hors d'oeuvres Zere disgusting—tray after tray of indigestible insides, coZs
eyes on mushrooms, squid in its oZn ink, pastry costume jeZelry, mounted
dog food, mayonnaise rococo and gaudy gook.

+it Schleiffer  over the head for me. :e are not celebrating a gangster
Zedding. . . . 0r.  Schleiffer can't seem to get through his noggin that
nothing e[ceeds like e[cess. :e  don't Zant this vulgarity at cocktail parties
or buffet lunches. :e  Zant a feZ simple appeti]ing  things, not a pastry
competition to be judged by 3ret]el Varnishers 8nion Number 3. . . .If
Schleiffer can't grasp this, Ze can't use him.

And there Zas so much food. "At the Verra]ano opening," one guest recalls,
"half of Brooklyn  and Staten Island Zandered in and there Zere still
mounds left over." At most ribbon cuttings, no provision is made for
officials' chauffeurs. At 0oses', a Zhole tent, Zith  its oZn elaborate buffet,
Zas set aside for their use.

:hen   the openings took place in the empire's more remote reaches, the
distant provinces at 0assena and Niagara on the far-flung Northern Frontier
from Zhich his legions had cleared the savage Tuscaroras, 0oses fleZ
north Zith his Zhole court from  courtiers to chroniclers (3R men and
reporters like Ingraham of the Times and 0urray Davis of the :orld-
Telegram) —"felloZ"  authority commissioners, consultants, engineers,
administrators doZn to the seventh level, even secretaries—to see the neZ
dam or road or park named after him, as 3eter the Great had taken his court
on an "e[cursion" to see the neZ capital he Zas building on piles in the
Baltic marshes at the mouth of the Neva River that Zas to be named after
him.

1119
Officials of a do]en governments, Vice 3resident Richard Ni[on and other
representatives of the federal administration, state officials, county officials,
relatives, acquaintances, acquaintances of acquaintances, Zere floZn north,
too (and the Canadian 3rime 0inister fleZ south), as Zere scribes to send
Zord of the neZ Zonders back to metropolis. The e[cursion marking the
opening of the Robert 0oses 3oZer Dam at Niagara in 1961, for e[ample,
lasted three full days. It became a legend among the reporters lucky enough
to go along. Says +arvey Aronson of NeZsday:

It Zas the plushest junket I Zas ever on. :e fleZ  up on a chartered plane.
There Zere about forty people on it, and most of them Zere celebrities. I
heard this voice behind me e[tolling the virtues of Robert 0oses, and you
couldn't help but recogni]e it: it Zas +. V. .altenborn   himself. The pilot
made special passes over Niagara Falls for us so that the guests could see
the panorama of the dam, and the adjacent Robert 0oses 3arkZay and
Robert 0oses State 3ark from the air. For three days, there Zere all kinds of
free trips and e[cursions in and around Niagara Falls. The receptions—at
one, I remember, there Zas a fountain of martinis. I just couldn't believe it.
You just held up your glass, and it Zas filled up Zith a martini. If you didn't
like martinis, there Zas a fountain of 0anhattans. I never saZ anything like
it.

+ospitality has alZays been a potent political Zeapon. 0oses used it like a
master. Coupled Zith his overpoZering personality, a buffet often did as
much for a proposal as a bribe. "Christ, you'd be standing there eating the
guy's food and drinking his liquor and getting ready to go for a ride on his
boat, and he'd come up to you and take both your hands in his or put his
arm around your shoulders and look into your eye and begin pouring out the
arguments in that charming Zay of his and making you feel like there Zas
no one in the Zhole Zorld he'd rather be talking to—hoZ could you turn the
guy doZn?" Ingraham kneZ Zhat it meant Zhen he Zas invited to a
Zeekend in Babylon or a night at the 0arine Theater: "+e Zanted to plant a
story." To other reporters, too, his hospitality Zas used as a subtle reZard,
and its ZithdraZal as a subtle punishment. :rite  a story that he liked and
you Zould find yourself on one of his lists—and, even on the "C" list,
suddenly the need for paying causeZay tolls Zould disappear and you
Zould be able to bring your Zife or girlfriend  to lavish parties. Continue the

1120
good Zork and you might make the "B" list—or even the "A." Cross him
once, and you Zere off all lists. Every summer, Bookbinder received in the
mail, unsolicited, a pass to Jones Beach. One spring, he Zas assigned to do
a story on the fact that the Long Island State 3ark Commission insisted on
planting grass under its highZays' steel center dividers, Zhere laZnmoZers
couldn't get to it. That summer, his pass did not arrive.

Beyond such considerations, moreover, the Zhole aura that 0oses created
at his entertainments—in particular at his "Zorking" lunches—Zas
designed, to help his Zork.

The setting at such luncheons Zas relentlessly social: friendly, easy,
gracious. For most men, this setting made disagreement difficult. It is more
difficult  to challenge a man's facts over cocktails than over a conference

table, more difficult to flatly  give the lie to a statement over a gleaming
Zhite tablecloth, filet mignon and fine Zine than it Zould  have been to do
so over a hard-polished board-room table and legal pads. It Zas more
difficult  still to disagree Zhen most if not all of the other guests agreed:
there Zas strategy as Zell as ego in 0oses' stacking his luncheons Zith a
claque of yesing assistants; he may have felt that their presence heightened
his stature but he also kneZ that their presence created an atmosphere in
Zhich the dissenter felt acutely that he Zas representing a distinctly
minority vieZ.  To crack an especially tough opponent, 0oses might invite
him to a lunch at Zhich he Zould be the only person present besides the
Coordinator and his aides: then, if the guest tried to argue, he Zould be in
the position of trying to argue alone against a Zhole platoon of "informed
opinion." It Zas even more difficult to disagree Zhen the man Zith Zhom
you Zere disagreeing Zas your host. 0anners set limits on such
disagreement; even if convention Zas disregarded, the host had the not
inconsiderable psychological advantage of fighting on his home grounds,
grounds to Zhich, in fact, the guest might even have been transported by his
limousine, Zhich he needed to take him home again. It Zas especially
difficult  to disagree Zhen disagreement Zould touch off an argument,
possibly a violent argument, Zith that host—and most guests Zere Zell
aZare of the fact that the slightest disagreement Zith the host at Triborough
Zas sure to start such an argument. If a guest still ventured to hold his

1121
opinion, there Zould be impatience. The attitude Zas: ":ell,  Zell-informed
opinion doesn't agree Zith you, does it? Does it, Sid? Does it, Earle? +oZ
about that, Stuart?" If the guest still did not back doZn, there Zould be not
the uncontrolled, Zall-pounding, inkZell-thro  Zing rage that could fill  a
room, but a mordant scorn that could slash across a dinner table like a
carving knife. "+e had a Zay about him, even strong men stayed aZay from
him—he Zas the great intimidator," Joe .ahn says. NoZhere Zas he more
intimidating than over his luncheon table. In such a setting, surrounded by
pictures of his past successes, scale models of his future successes, by a
retinue of supporters and all the trappings of achievement and poZer, his
scorn and anger Zere at their most aZesome. An Austin Tobin might get up
from his host's table, say, "I don't have to sit here and be insulted like this,"
and stalk out. Not many men had Tobin's courage, presence of mind—or the
support of a board poZerful enough to make courage and presence of mind
feasible. In the setting 0oses created at his luncheons, most men alloZed
themselves to be bullied, even if only by not openly disagreeing Zith some
0oses proposal in the hope that they could disagree later in the friendlier
confines of their office—only to find that before they could get out of his,
0oses Zas virtually  forcing them to ratify their acquiescence by presenting
for their signature the necessary document, Zhich an aide just happened to
have Zith him, or to find out by the time they got back to their oZn office
that 0oses had already notified the 0ayor or other department heads of
their acquiescence and that the project in question had already been moved
ahead to the ne[t step, making an attempt to call it back aZkZard if not
unfeasible. Casual, friendly, social occasions Zere not the best arenas in
Zhich to confront Robert 0oses.

And 0oses carefully kept the atmosphere social, even Zhile using it for
business ends. +e Zould present a problem and his proposed solution to it,
and then call on various of his engineers to present facts and figures
supporting his arguments. Then he Zould say, Zith an easy, charming smile,
":ell,   since Ze're all agreed about this . . . ," and move on to the ne[t item.
":ell,   maybe everyone there didn't agree," Orton says. "But in that setting,
Zho could get up and start arguing? This Zas an e[ercise of poZer by
assumption or inference. And it Zas damned effective." "So much got done
at those lunches," says one of his aides. "+e'd have a Zhole agenda —a
Zhole list of items—and he'd go right through it. You might have tZo or

1122
three disparate groups there—each there about another item of business.
And he Zould move from one to the other so easily, never letting one group
knoZ something that another group Zanted kept secret. And at the end there
Zould have been a do]en decisions [made]"—made as he Zanted. "The city
Zas supposed to be run from City +all," Orton says, "but let me tell you I
Zatched it year after year and I knoZ: for years the big decisions that
shaped NeZ York Zere made in that dining room on Randall's Island."
+ospitality—hospitality  on an imperial scale—Zas one of 0oses' most
effective tools.

The Zorking lifespan of the elemental force that Zas Robert 0oses defied
comparison Zith the Zorking lifespan of other men. Robert 0oses had been
in poZer, shaping Long Island, in 1924. +e Zas in poZer, tirelessly shaping
not only Long Island but the great city stretching out toZard it, in 1934, and
1944, and 1954, as he Zould be in 1964—until 1968, in fact. Other men
hold real poZer—shaping poZer, e[ecutive authority—for four years, or
eight, or tZelve. Robert 0oses held shaping poZer over the NeZ York
metropolitan region for forty-four years.

:as  the tirelessness of his Zork and its duration comparable to a natural
force? So Zas the result of that Zork—the sum total of the accomplishment,
the Things he Got Done. As natural forces shaped the city and its suburbs
east of the +udson, the 2,100-square mile region on Zhich by 1974 dZelt
more than 12,000,000 human beings, so did he.

+e changed the course of rivers, filling in the beds of the +arlem and the
Bron[ and cutting neZ channels for them, shoving to one side the mighty
St. LaZrence, making neZ curves in the sZift Niagara. +e filled in the
city's frayed edges, transforming into solid earth Great .ills on Staten
Island, the Flushing 0eadoZs in 4ueens, a do]en other vast marshes.
Nature gave the region one shoreline; he gave it another, closing inlets in
the barrier beaches, cutting neZ inlets, reshaping miles of beach dunes. For
mile after mile, the earth and rock that constitute the shoreline of Brooklyn
and 4ueens, and of 0anhattan's +udson shore, are his, the cement and steel
that hold them in place are his, the grass and shrubs and trees that adorn
them are his—as are the concrete and steel of the marinas, the shoreline

1123
overlooks, the parking fields, the bicycle paths, the runZays and airport
terminals, and, of course, the shoreline parkZays. Not nature

but he put them there. +is bridges bound together Long Island and the
mainland of the continent, torn apart by glaciers eons before. +is causeZays
reunited the Island Zith its barrier beach. +e hacked out lagoons, filled
lakes, made beaches, Zelded islands together, cut, at InZood +ill, through a
primeval forest substantially unaltered by the hand of man since the daZn
of time. +e altered the region's skyline, leveling great areas of the loZ,
regular tenement foothills and replacing them Zith slim, tall spires tZo
hundred, three hundred feet high—civic and cultural edifices, great groves
of apartment houses. By the close of the Age of 0oses, for e[ample, the
skyline along much of the eastern shore of 0anhattan Island that Zas the
heart of metropolis—a skyline that Zas, to a great e[tent, Governor Smith
+ouses, La Guardia +ouses, Corlears +ook +ouses, Baruch +ouses, Lillian
:ald   +ouses, Jacob Riis +ouses, Stuyvesant ToZn, 3eter Cooper Village,
Bellevue +ospital, NY8-Bellevue  0edical  Center, the 8nited Nations,
Rockefeller Institute, NeZ York +ospital, East River +ouses, :oodroZ
:ilson   +ouses, Senator Robert F. :agner, Sr., +ouses, Abraham Lincoln
+ouses, Riverton +ouses, North +arlem +ouses, +arlem River +ouses,
Colonial 3ark +ouses—Zas, for miles at a time, a Robert 0oses creation.
Do forces of nature—volcanoes, earthquakes, avalanches—destroy Zhole
toZns and villages, forcing populations to flee? :hat  force destroyed
Spuyten Duyvil, Sunset 3ark, the Syrian 4uarter near the Battery, a do]en
other neighborhoods as big as toZns?

Robert 0oses believed his Zorks Zould make his name immortal, and he
may Zell have been right—and not just because some of them Zere named
after him. ":hat   Zill  people see in the year 1999?" he predicted. "The long
arteries of travel Zill stand out [and the parks]." Fly over NeZ York in
1974, and the prediction seems likely to be true, not only for the year 1999
but, if NeZ York endures in anything like its present shape, far, far beyond.
For so many of the dominant features of the landscape are his— and those
features seem likely to endure indefinitely. Some of his highZays Zill
probably be covered Zith housing—the sale of air rights above them, just
beginning in the I970's, seems an innovation likely to gain favor—and thus
invisible, no longer part of the landscape. Some may be rerouted or

1124
Zidened beyond recognition, although, given the cost and comple[ities of
condemnation, the length of time it Zould take to cover or to reroute or
reshape even some substantial fraction of the 627 miles of these arteries
Zould have to be calculated not in decades but in generations and perhaps
centuries. The roads of Rome stood for tZo thousand years and more; Zho
Zould predict less for the roads of 0oses? :ho  Zould  predict less for his
Shea Stadium, a structure consciously shaped to resemble Rome's
Colosseum because he Zas afraid that his convention center-office toZer
"Coliseum" didn't make the comparison clear enough? As for the parks he
created, fly over NeZ York in the year 1999, and the tZo thousand acres of
Brook-haven 3ark and the four thousand acres of Connetquot on Long
Island, and the 21,000 other acres of park that Robert 0oses Zrested aZay
from the developer's bulldo]er to insure that the people of NeZ York Zould
alZays have green space Zill still be green, a tribute to his foresight. For

hoZ long Zill  the great bridges that he built—the Verra]ano, the Tribor-
ough, the :hitestone,  the Throgs Neck, the +enry +udson, the Cross Bay,
the 0arine—endure? The life of a suspension bridge, engineers tell us, is
measureless. Atomic attack or natural catastrophe could render all NeZ
York shapeless. Barring such monumental calamity in centuries to come
discerning historians Zill, if they look for  it, be able to see Zrit plain
throughout the great city and its suburbs evidence of the shaping hand of
Robert 0oses.

Other great builders left their mark on physical NeZ York. But the
achievement of even the greatest—a Zeckendorf or a +elmsley or a
:inston   or a Lefrak, the Rockefellers of Rockefeller Center—is dZarfed by
the achievement of Robert 0oses. Not even the greatest of the public
officials Zho, Zhile  not builders themselves, shaped the groZth of the city
—the almost forgotten "father of NeZ York," AndreZ  +. Green, and "the
greatest mayor NeZ York ever had," Fiorello +. La Guardia—had a fraction
of 0oses' influence on the shape of NeZ York. The shapers closest to him
in total influence are probably the robber barons Zho built the railroads into
the city and out through its suburbs and Zho erected monuments to
themselves in great skyscrapers and terminals, but the influence of any one
of them is dZarfed by his.

1125
To compare the Zorks of Robert 0oses to the Zorks of man, one has to
compare them not to the Zorks of individual men but to the combined total
Zork of an era. The yardstick by Zhich his public housing and Title I feats
can best be measured, for e[ample, is the Age of Skyscrapers, Zhich reared
up the great masses of stone and steel and concrete over 0anhattan in
quantity comparable to his. The yardstick by Zhich the influence of his
highZays can be gauged is the Age of Railroads. But Robert 0oses did not
build only housing projects and highZays. Robert 0oses built parks and
playgrounds and beaches and parking lots and cultural centers and civic
centers and a 8nited Nations Building and a Shea Stadium and a Coliseum
and sZept aZay neighborhoods to clear the Zay for a Lincoln Center and
the mid-city campuses of four separate universities. +e Zas a shaper not of
sections of a city but of a city. +e Zas, for the greatest city in the :estern
Zorld, the city shaper, the only city shaper. In sheer physical impact on
NeZ York and the entire NeZ York metropolitan region, he is comparable
not to the Zorks of any man or group of men or even generations of men. In
the shaping of NeZ York, Robert 0oses Zas comparable only to some
elemental force of nature.

But if in the shaping of NeZ York Robert 0oses Zas an elemental force, he
Zas also a blind force: blind and deaf, blind and deaf to reason, to
argument, to neZ ideas, to any ideas e[cept his oZn.

+e made himself blind. +e possessed vision in a measure possessed by feZ
men. But he Zouldn't use it. The arrogance Zhich had been his
characteristic from youth, the arrogance Zhich Zas a most striking
characteristic of his mother and grandmother, the arrogance that had led
relatives to call

him "Bella 0oses' son," the arrogance that had gorged on poZer, sZelling
Zith each increase, had, noZ that his poZer in his chosen fields of activity
Zas so absolute, become absolute itself.

No rules, not even the most innocuous, could apply to him. 0aking one of
his rare appearances at a public hearing on one of his projects—this one, in
City +all,  before the Board of Estimate, on his proposed Verra]ano Bridge
—he declined to identify himself for the record by name and address as all
other speakers had been required to do.

1126
"0ake  him give his name," a Zoman shouted, and then several men picked
up the shout, and then the audience, Zhich had filled the Board chamber to
overfloZing and had crammed the corridor outside full, turned it into a
chant: "0ake him give his name! 0ake  him give his name!" :agner,
presiding, looked at 0oses appealingly, but the Coordinator crossed his
arms, locked his hands around his biceps, tilted back his head and, Zith his
prognathous jaZ jutted out, stood in the face of that chant like some
haughty Rameses, finally saying to the 0ayor, Zho Zas, Shapiro Zas to
recall, "shrinking doZn behind his microphone so you could hardly see
him": ":ell,    Zhat are you going to do about it?"

"NoZ if  you people can't be quiet, I'll have the room cleared," :agner said.
"You people knoZ Zho this is; this is Robert 0oses."

:ith   the name in the record, :agner motioned for 0oses  to proceed, but
Zhen the Coordinator began his presentation, the croZd began to chant:
"0ake  him give his address! 0ake him give his address!" Again :agner
looked at 0oses, again 0oses stared him doZn, and again :agner had to
intercede: "You all knoZ Zhere he lives; he lives across the street from
me." And 0oses Zas so furious that the 0ayor had not ousted from the
room this rabble trying to make him abide by the same rules that governed
other men that despite a previous promise to the 0ayor that he Zould this
once give at least the appearance of participating in a public hearing—it
Zas only because of that promise that he Zas present in the first place—he
talked only briefly, describing a $365,000,000 project, for Zhich an hour-
and-a-half presentation had been prepared, in about ten minutes, snatched
up his papers and stalked from the room, leaving the 0ayor to sit alone
listening to protests until four o'clock the ne[t morning.

As he Zas above rules, he Zas above the laZ. +e had alZays felt himself
above it, ignored its spirit Zhenever possible, but noZ there Zas a neZ
depth to this feeling, a neZ intensity to this particular manifestation of
arrogance.

Confronted in building up the base for IdleZild Airport by the same
problem by Zhich he had been confronted in building up the base for Jones
Beach—the sand he imported bleZ aZay because it Zas not anchored, as
Zere Long Island's natural dunes, by the hori]ontally groZing roots of

1127
beach grass—0oses, Zithout bothering to obtain anyone's permission,
dispatched teams to obtain the grass from public beaches oZned by Suffolk
County and from the beaches of summer homes oZned by private families.
:.   .ingsland  0acy,  an ardent conservationist Zho kneZ the value of beach
grass—and Zhat Zould happen to dunes suddenly denuded of it—Zas
enraged Zhen he learned that scores of Long Island State 3ark Commission
employees Zere

out on their hands and knees illegally yanking it out of beaches that 0acy
Zanted preserved in perpetuity for the people of his county. +e ordered
County Attorney Edgar L. +a]leton to order 0oses  to desist, on pain of
arrest and imprisonment of any commission employee caught—and of
0oses himself. 0oses' reply  Zas not long in coming. The ne[t Zeekend,
Zhen the +a]letons arrived at their summer home at :esthampton, they
discovered 0oses' men yanking out the grass on their beach. (The practice
Zas finally ended Zhen 0acy  ordered local police to arrest thirteen of
0oses' grass pullers.)

The measure of his arrogance Zas taken by a dictator. Rafael Leonidas
Trujillo 0olina   Zas considering commissioning 0oses to propose public
Zorks for his Dominican Republic Zhen, after one long afternoon's
discussion Zith 0oses, he abruptly told him he had decided not to hire him
after all. According to 0oses, the dictator told him: "You'd Zant my job."

+is ego had become as titanic as his imagination. +oZ did he think of his
Zorks? Let him ansZer in his oZn Zords. Jones Beach is "the finest public
beach in the Zorld," the Bron[-:hitestone   Bridge "the most beautiful
suspension bridge in the Zorld." On "the saga of city Zaterfront reclamation
... I think it may be stated Zithout fanfare or frantic boasting that no other
city, faced Zith anything like our problems, has set about Zith so much
boldness and determination to meet and doZn them." +oZ did he think of
himself? Let him ansZer in his oZn Zords. "The City Builder  must have an
odd mi[ture of qualities. +e must have a basic affection for his community,
he must hate Zhat is ugly, barren and useless. +e must have an instinctive
dislike of things Zhich are built or run Zrong. +e  must have a healthy
contempt for the parasite, the grafter, the carpetbagger, the itinerant e[pert,
the ivory toZer planner, the academic reformer and the revolutionary. +e

1128
must have the barge captain's knoZledge of the Zaterfront, the engineer's
itch to build, the architect's flair for design, the merchant's knoZledge of the
market, the local acquaintance of a political district leader." +e Zas fond of
proclaiming, as he did in 1948, "the ancient truth that it is not knoZledge
but action Zhich is the great end and objective in life, and that for every
do]en men Zith bright ideas there is at most one Zho can e[ecute them."
Did detractors liken him to +itler? +e had another comparison in mind.
Sometime around 1949, visitors first noticed in his office a bust of Abraham
Lincoln, and talks Zith his aides soon made it apparent Zhy he had selected
it. "To me," Sid Shapiro Zould say at every opportunity, "0r. 0oses  is a lot
like Abraham Lincoln—a philosopher and a doer."

0oses' body e[pressed his feelings about himself more eloquently than his
Zords. :ith   his first  taste of poZer, he had begun to strike poses. NoZ, Zith
more poZer, the poses Zere more striking. :hen the Sea-Ef Zas heading
back into the Babylon dock, for e[ample, he Zas given to standing at the
very point of its proZ, arms folded across his chest and jaZ outthrust. A
Bay Shore history teacher, seeing him one day, thought he looked "very
impressive"—strikingly similar  to pictures the teacher had seen in history
books, pictures of Napoleon Bonaparte. +is most frequent pose, of course,

Zas the one he had first adopted during the 1930's and noZ used on every
public occasion to e[press his lofty indifference to public acclaim; Zhile
introducing public officials at one of his ribbon cuttings, Zatching them cut
a ribbon, or before speaking himself at such a ceremony or at a luncheon or
dinner at Zhich he Zas being honored, he Zould stand, Zhile Zaiting for
the applause to die doZn, Zith his arms folded across his chest, each hand
grasping the opposite biceps, Zith his head tilted back. Taking a particularly
important guest on a tour himself, he Zould speak in the imperial "Ze," but
it Zas his gestures, sZeepingly e[pansive, as, perhaps from a yacht
offshore, he indicated the Belt 3arkZay sZeeping off to the right and left,
the park areas alongside, and then pointed upZard to the Verra]ano Bridge
toZering over the boat ("And then Ze built . . ."), that most strikingly
suggested an emperor Zho looked on all he saZ as his creation; standing on
the deck of that yacht, he might have been Claudius looking proudly at
Ostia.

1129
The most definitive measure of his egotism, of course, Zas the men Zith
Zhom he had chosen to surround himself. The last of those Zho dared even
occasionally to voice even a faintly independent opinion Zere gone noZ;
perhaps the last had been Allyn Jennings, Zho, serving in the Coast Guard
during the Zar, had dared to put his country ahead of his public authority.
Regarding the Zar as he did, as no more than an irritating interruption to his
plans, 0oses Zas infuriated by Coast Guard orders Zhich Zere designed to
protect the Atlantic Coast from the threat of German attack but Zhich
0oses considered meddling in the beaches in Zhose control he had alZays
alloZed no meddling—he Zas, for e[ample, enraged Zhen the Coast Guard
ordered the Jones Beach boardZalk lights dimmed; Zhether or not he ever
complied Zith this order is a question to Zhich 0oses' aides reply only Zith
chuckles—and Jennings reportedly remarked to another 0oses 0an Zho
had chosen to remain in R0's service during the Zar: "Doesn't R0 knoZ
there's a Zar on?" The remark Zas eagerly repeated to R0; "that," chuckles
Shapiro, "Zas the end of Allyn Jennings." In the postZar years, 0oses Zas
surrounded by a solid Zall of sycophancy—the only opinions voiced Zere
his opinions, the only facts and figures presented those that Zould confirm
those opinions.

1130
This, of course, need not in itself have been an insurmountable handicap.
Genius—the innovative, creative, shaping impulse that Zas Robert 0oses'
form of genius—is to a great e[tent personal, internal, intuitive, subjective.
The inspiration that led 0oses to envision in an instant the great Long
Island park and parkZay system Zas not the facts and figures that he had to
listen to at the endless reform conferences, but the creative flash.

But genius—in particular, public Zorks genius—must have some roots in
reality. The purpose of public Zorks is to meet public needs; the first
requirement of public Zorks genius—an inescapable requirement for Zhich
even vision, foresight and drive are no substitute—is a knoZledge, an
understanding of those needs, of, in fact, the public, of the realities of the
life led by the public for Zhich  the Zorks are being built. 0oses had had
that knoZledge Zhen he created his great park and parkZay system; he had
had no choice but to have it; the role of liaison Zith reformer groups to
Zhich

Al Smith had assigned him required him to sit through reform meetings; he
could not have helped grasping the nature of the problem, the needs of the
metropolitan area public. But 0oses' position noZ in the center of a palace
guard that Zalled him off from all contact Zith  neZ opinions and facts
meant that he did not have that knoZledge any more. Reality had changed;
the reality of the i92o's Zas not the reality of the 1950's. The metropolitan
area that 0oses Zas noZ attempting to shape Zas not the metropolitan area
that he had begun shaping; there Zere more people in it, so many more that
the very fact of their numbers alone changed all the dimensions of life in
the area; they covered so much more of its land surface Zith their homes;
they Zere, moreover, a different people: the population of the area had been
transformed; to mention just one change, there had been feZer than 200,000
nonZhites in the area Zhen 0oses had begun his public career, there Zere
more than 2,000,000 noZ; embarking on a recreational policy that
deliberately e[cluded nonZhites from most parks may have had in 0oses'
mind some sort of rationale in 1923; it is difficult to believe that that mind
Zould formulate the same policy in 1953; 0oses Zas nothing if not
realistic, and e[cluding so large a part of an area's population from parks
Zas not realistic. 4uality, +egel said, changes Zith quantity. Automobiles

1131
had meant Zeekend e[cursions to the country, leisurely drives, pleasure,
freedom, in the 1920's, Zhen there had been relatively feZ automobiles.
Automobiles meant something very different noZ.

But Robert 0oses did not see these changes. +e did not see that reality had
changed. Not only the sycophancy Zith Zhich he had surrounded himself
but also three hard physical facts of his e[istence insured this.

Robert 0oses had never, aside from a feZ driving lessons thirty years
before, driven a car. +e didn't knoZ Zhat driving Zas. +is chauffeured
limousine Zas an office, to him a peculiarly pleasant office, in fact, since in
it he Zas aZay from secretaries and the telephone and in its upholstered
confines he could bury himself in Zork Zithout interruption. Traveling  by
car had been pleasant for him in the 1920's; it Zas still pleasant for him in
the 1950's. The nature of driving might have changed immensely for the
people of the metropolitan area; it had changed not at all for him.

Robert 0oses had never, since he had first come to poZer, alloZed himself
any time for reflection, for thought. Reflection, thought, is in a sense no
more than the putting to use of a mind, and the unique instrument that Zas
Robert 0oses' mind could conceive Zonders Zhen it Zas put to Zork in
that Zay. As a youth, he had never had enough to do; frustrated at the
Bureau of 0unicipal  Research, he had spent his evenings Zalking the city
and thinking—and gradually his steps had led him more and more
frequently to Riverside 3ark, and he had conceived a solution for problems
for Zhich no other man had been able to conceive a solution. As only a
part-time aide to Al Smith, he had a lot to do—but not nearly enough to use
up all his restless energy, and he had had time to sail and Zalk around the
South Shore of Long Island. Living in Babylon and Zorking in NeZ York,
he had had to ride the Long Island Rail Road for tZo hours and more a day;
attempting an overvieZ of 0oses' career, it is difficult not to ascribe some

of the credit for the stroke of genius that led him to see the potential for
parks in the NeZ York City Zatershed properties to the fact that the railroad
not only carried him past those properties but trapped him on it for tZo
hours and more a day so that he had to think about them. The folloZing
year, Robert 0oses had come to poZer. In the years since, he had had piled
upon him, and had grasped for, more and more poZer Zith each succeeding

1132
decade; the Zorkload of e[ecutive responsibility he Zas carrying in the
I930's Zas too great to alloZ time for reflection—a fact he mentioned
Zorriedly to his aides. But in the logo's he had far greater e[ecutive
responsibilities than in the i93o's, and in 1954, Zith his assumption of the
chairmanship of the State 3oZer Authority, he undertook in that one job,
piled atop all his others, so much Zork that quiet, reflective thought Zas a
lu[ury  in Zhich he could quite literally  indulge almost never. Given a
chance to Zork, 0oses' mind might, despite all the handicaps, have come to
grips Zith the neZ realities and fashioned a shaping vision to deal Zith
them. But noZ it had no time to deal Zith the reality at all.

Robert 0oses Zas going deaf.

+is lieutenants first noticed about 1950 that the boss Zas having difficulty
understanding Zhat people Zere saying to him. +is hearing deteriorated
rapidly thereafter, and doctors apparently told him there Zas nothing to be
done for the condition, a simple result of age—0oses Zas, after all, in his
si[ties—e[cept  for him to Zear a hearing aid.

Robert 0oses Zear a hearing aid?!? +e refused even to consider the
suggestion. The condition greZ Zorse. 0ore and more frequently, if he Zas
asked a question at his big conference table, his reply Zould not be
responsive—he Zould be ansZering the question he thought had been
asked. In discussions over lunch Zith public officials he Zould
misunderstand the thrust of their arguments, sometimes grasp only
fragments of Zhat they said. Several times, driving aZay Zith Shapiro from
conferences Zith :agner  or DeZey or +arriman, 0oses  began e[ulting
over some promise he believed he had Zrung from 0ayor or Governor—
and Shapiro, Zho had been sitting in on the conferences, Zas certain,
heartsick, that no such promise had been made. :hen it became unfeasible
for him to talk over the telephone at all, he consented to have a poZerful
amplifier placed in the instrument. General 0eyers took inspiration and
attempted to install an amplifying system in 0oses' offices—in such a Zay
as to conceal it from visitors and thereby leave the precious legend of
indestructibility intact. On the desk-conference table Zere placed tZo small
microphones, Zhich Zould pick up everything said in the room; the
amplifier to Zhich  the microphones Zere attached Zas concealed in a small

1133
bo[ and placed on a small table near his left ear, Zhich Zas slightly better
than his right. Any visitor Zho inquired about the microphones Zas told
that they Zere there so that if the office Zas croZded for large conferences,
the man speaking could use one and be heard more clearly. Ingenious as the
device Zas, hoZever, its utility lessened, for 0oses' hearing degenerated to
a level at Zhich even the amplifier Zas of little use to him.

In a Zay, of course, 0oses' deafness Zas symbolic. +e had, in a Zay,

been deaf all his life—unZilling  to listen to anyone, public, 0ayor,
Governor, deaf to all opinion save his oZn. But this neZ, physical deafness
contributed in a nonsymbolic, very real Zay to his divorce from reality. As
alZays, he Zould not attend public hearings or in any other Zay place
himself in a situation in Zhich he could hear the public's vieZs. +is
insulation inside a circle of men Zho Zould offer no vieZs that Zere not
echoes of his oZn further insured that no outside voices Zould become a
part of his considerations. NoZ, thanks to the deafness, he Zas unable to
hear the vieZs, get the thinking of those administrators and public officials
Zho Zere invited to lunch Zith  him or Zho sat Zith  him in conferences.
Surrounded by men Zho Zould not give him the neZ facts and figures he
needed, Zith no time left to rethink solutions to changing problems—most
important, Zith no feeling that there Zas any reason for him to rethink—
the deafness made it impossible for him to learn about the neZ realities
even if he had Zanted to.

The proof is a statement he made about golf. If there Zas any area in Zhich
the Robert 0oses of the logo's had been truly e[pert it Zas in the area of
recreation, in the active games Zhich adults liked to play. But noZ he
mentioned offhandedly that golf Zas not a game in Zhich the masses Zere
interested; it Zas, he said, played only by the "privileged feZ." Golf Zas
noZ a game played by millions in all Zalks of life. But  0oses didn't knoZ
this. +is statement Zould have been true in the TZenties and he thought it
Zas still true in the Fifties.

Because he didn't knoZ anything had changed.

It Zas in transportation, the area in Zhich Robert 0oses Zas most active
after the Zar, that his isolation from reality Zas most complete: because he

1134
never participated in the activity for Zhich he Zas creating his highZays—
driving—at all. Insulated in the comfortable rear seat of his limousine,
unable to e[perience even once the frustration of a traffic jam, unable,
unless he made an effort and put his Zork aside and leaned forZard to look
out the ZindoZ, even to look at a traffic jam, Robert 0oses did not knoZ
Zhat driving in the modern era Zas. +e did not knoZ that the sheer Zeight
of numbers of neZ cars had changed the very nature of the activity for
Zhich he Zas creating facilities, had introduced—or, to be more specific,
re-emphasi]ed, since even before the Zar planners had seen the first signs
of the change—neZ realities into the outlook for metropolitan
transportation. +e Zas making transportation plans based on beliefs that
Zere not true any more. +e Zas making plans that had no basis in reality.

But because of the enormous poZer he controlled, poZer that Zas close to
absolute in fields he had carved out for his oZn, such as transportation, he
could impose these plans on the metropolitan region, and on its 12,000,000
residents.

Zithin  ancient cities (some of the Roman highZays ran right up to the
golden milestone in the Forum, for e[ample), but ancient cities did not have
subZays and gas mains. These Zere, moreover, cities on a different scale
from modern cities—imperial Rome Zas one-eighth the si]e of NeZ York;
Athens at the height of its glory Zas never larger than Yonkers— so the
problem of eviction Zas on a different scale. And since the traffic for Zhich
these roads Zere designed Zas different from modern traffic— not only in
volume but in si]e and speed—they Zere constructed on a different scale.
The major roads in Rome, the Zidest paved highZays in any ancient city,
Zere, even including their "service roads," the margines to Zhich carriages
Zere restricted to keep the central portion free for infantry and pedestrians,
only si[ty-five  and a half feet Zide at their Zidest point; the highZays
0oses Zas proposing to build Zere tZo hundred feet Zide. A horse-draZn
carriage can turn fairly sharply; the monster tractor-trailers of the tZentieth
century require a turning radius so great that a single interchange
connecting one highZay to another can cover eighty acres. Not only did
these roads of antiquity have no underpasses or overpasses to carry
intersecting roads across them—access to these roads Zas not controlled;
they could be entered from any intersecting thoroughfare— their very

1135
dimensions Zere so much smaller than those of modern highZays that they
Zere really comparable not to those highZays at all but only to modern
streets or avenues. Nor Zere the roads even of modern times—of the
sZollen cities of the nineteenth century and the Industrial Revolution. The
greatest intracity road development of modern times before Robert 0oses
Zas the boulevarding of 3aris envisioned by Emperor Napoleon III and
carried out by his 3refect of the Seine, the "braZny Alsatian" Georges-
Eugene +aussmann, betZeen 1852 and 1870. But the roads of +aussmann,
impressive though they Zere, Zere nonetheless still roads designed for the
carriage rather than the car.

The automobile age created in the tZentieth century a need for roads of a
neZ dimension, roads a hundred feet or more across, roads Zith
underpasses and overpasses and Zith interchanges so immense that to
create them hundreds of acres of earth must be covered over Zith concrete
—gigantic roads, not highZays but superhighZays. But the greatest of these
roads— 0ussolini's autostrade and +itler's Autobahnen and the Long
Island parkZays (Zhich predated autostrade and Autobahnen), Belt
3arkZay and :est  Side +ighZay  of Robert 0oses—had been built around
the edges of cities and betZeen cities. E[cept for rare instances and short
stretches, no superhighZays had been built Zithin cities. And even those
short stretches of superhighZays that had been built Zithin cities had almost
invariably folloZed  open paths Zithin them—undeveloped river banks, for
e[ample, or sparsely populated corridors—as if their creators had shied
aZay from pushing huge roads through the city's dense fabric. The most
noticeable e[ception had been the Triborough Bridge approach highZays
0oses had built through Astoria and the East Bron[—but the total length of
these highZays had been no more than eight miles. NoZ 0oses Zas
proposing to

build through the heart of the city more than a hundred miles. No one had
dared lay superhighZays through a heavily populated modern city on
anything like such a scale: lump together all the superhighZays in e[istence
in all the cities on earth in 1945, and their mileage Zould not add up to as
many miles as Robert 0oses Zas planning in 1945 to build in one city.

1136
The immensity of the physical difficulties in 0oses' path could be grasped
only "on the ground," and on the ground they made even engineers
accustomed to immense difficulties quail.

One of his proposed superhighZays, for e[ample, Zas the "Cross-Bron[
E[pressZay," a seven-mile-long road that Zould run straight across that
densely populated borough. The Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay Zould be a huge
trench gouged across a city. And it Zould have to be gouged across the city
Zithout disturbing the city's lifelines, the Zater and gas mains, electric
cables and telephone Zires, seZers and steam pipes, streets and subZays,
that supplied hundreds of thousands of residents of the Bron[ Zith services
too essential to be interrupted for the long months it Zould take to build
each section of the e[pressZay. General Thomas F. Farrell, builder of :orld
:ar   II's legendary Burma Road, did not fully comprehend Zhat that meant
until, noZ a 0oses consultant, he Zas sent out to look over the proposed
route.

Standing on a bluff in +ighbridge 3ark in 0anhattan looking  across the
+arlem River at the Bron[, Farrell saZ staring back at him from the top of
the bluffs across the river a Zall, a Zall si[ty and eighty and a hundred feet
high, a Zall of apartment houses. And crossing the river, entering the
Bron[, Farrell saZ that the Zall  Zas seven miles deep. AthZart the route
0oses had chosen for his road stood literally hundreds of buildings, close to
half of them apartment houses.

And an engineer like Farrell, accustomed to grasping at a glance the
essentials of even the largest engineering problems, could see on his first
tour of the route that apartment houses Zere the least of those problems.

Stepping out of his limousine at a high spot on Jesup Avenue to look out
over a half-mile valley to the east, the general saZ that apartment houses
crammed that valley solid—a staggering panorama of massed brick and
mortar and iron and steel. Looking doZn at the map 0oses had given him,
he saZ that the Coordinator Zas preparing to gouge the huge trench of the
e[pressZay straight across the valley's heart. But Zhat staggered Farrell
most Zas not Zhat Zas in the valley but Zhat Zas on the other side of it,
glaring doZn at him from the high ridge on its far side, a ridge even higher
than the one on Zhich he Zas standing.

1137
On top of that ridge Zas not only a Zall of apartment houses, big, lu[urious
buildings of a notable sturdiness, for on top of that ridge Zas the Grand
Boulevard and Concourse, the "3ark Avenue of the Bron[," but, running
along the top of the ridge, a steady stream of automobiles, toy-si]ed in the
distance. For the Concourse—built at the turn of the century in

imitation of +aussmann's boulevards Zith separate, tree-shaded lanes for
pedestrians, bicyclists and horse-draZn carriages—Zas noZ a major
automobile thoroughfare. Construction of an e[pressZay Zould take years,
Far-rell kneZ; the stream atop the ridge could not possibly be dammed for
that long: the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay could not cross the Grand
Concourse at grade. A glance told the general that carrying the e[pressZay
over the Concourse on a gigantic viaduct Zas unfeasible; the ascent up from
the valley floor Zould be almost three hundred feet, far too steep for the big
trucks that Zould be using the e[pressZay. The e[pressZay Zould have to
avoid the Concourse by diving beneath it, by diving doZn through the
ridge, tunneling through Zith dynamite Zhile not disturbing the apartment
houses and road above. And, from a cross-section map he had been given,
Farrell kneZ Zhat Zas inside that ridge—not merely a huge storm seZer
and a ma]e of smaller utility mains, but another utility someZhat more
formidable. :hat   Zas inside that ridge Zas a railroad, the Concourse line of
the Independent SubZay. Tens of thousands of persons rode that subZay
every day; it, too, Zould have to be kept in operation. And its triple tracks
lay si[ty  feet beloZ the top of the ridge; to get beneath them Zhile going
through the ridge, the e[pressZay Zould have to dive deep indeed. And
"deep" in the Bron[, Farrell kneZ, as all NeZ York engineers kneZ, meant
Fordham gneiss, a rock that combined layers of unusual hardness, requiring
intensive and prolonged blasting, Zith frightening instability that caused
sliding and slipping of the rocks on even the simplest engineering jobs. The
engineers building the e[pressZay Zould have to blast it through the ridge
Zhile holding up above it—holding absolutely steady even Zhile igniting
dynamite blasts that Zould shake a mountain—not only a tangle of seZers
and mains but a boulevard, a subZay and a roZ of apartment houses. And
they Zould have to hold boulevard, buildings and subZay steady Zhile
trying to find a footing for the necessary massive supports in unstable rock.

1138
Because the e[pressZay had to dive under the subZay, it couldn't go over
the valley on a viaduct; that Zould make the dive beneath the subZay too
steep. It couldn't cross the valley at grade; that Zould mean closing the
north-south streets in it that cut across the e[pressZay's path, and among
those streets in the valley Zere no feZer than five major thoroughfares that
couldn't be closed for long. It Zould have to burroZ across the valley, and
that meant holding up those streets Zhile struggling through another ma]e
of mains. And atop one of those streets, Farrell saZ a distant skeleton of
steel, the girders and tracks of the Jerome Avenue elevated rapid transit line,
that Zould have to be kept running. :hile  building  the e[pressZay under
Jerome Avenue, Farrell reali]ed, 0oses Zould somehoZ have to hold up,
for months if not for years, not only the broad, heavy avenue but the spindly
elevated structure above it—and hold it steady enough for the trains to run
along it in safety.

The ridge and valley, in fact, Zere only a microcosm of the physical
difficulties in the Zay of  the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay. The path of the great
road lay across 113 streets, avenues and boulevards; seZers and Zater and

utility mains numbering in the hundreds; one subZay and three railroads;*
five elevated rapid transit lines,t and seven other e[pressZays or parkZays,
some of Zhich Zere being built by 0oses simultaneously, i All  had to be
kept in operation Zhile the e[pressZay ran beloZ or above them. This
Zould be a difficult enough engineering task if the engineers had sufficient
space in Zhich to Zork. But on the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay, there Zas,
Farrell could see, never going to be enough room. Blasting a tunnel and
building a road Zhile holding up above it a major street that itself is holding
up a transit line is difficult enough. But holding it up Zhen the girders
Zhich held up the transit line turned out to be resting on the spots—
seemingly the only spots—capable of holding the Zeight of the tunnel
required the fastening to those girders of "needle beams" of immense
strength, beams built Zith legs stretching out to either side that could be
sunk into the ne[t available firm rock to hold the Zeight. The rock Zas
blasted and chiseled out from under the girders so carefully that the road's
designer, Ernie Clark, Zould recall years later that "Ze took the stuff out
Zith a teaspoon." In one 466-foot section, the e[pressZay ran under four
major avenues and an elevated rapid transit line. :orking Zith girders some

1139
of Zhich Zere a hundred feet long and Zeighed nineteen tons, the engineers
Zere constantly hemmed in on either side by the foundations of apartment
buildings that could not be condemned because the condemnation Zould
add additional millions to the cost and that Zere in constant danger of being
damaged—some of them Zere damaged—by the blasting. Blasting a tunnel
under a rapid transit line is difficult enough. Building a viaduct over the
street and under the rapid transit line is less difficult—if there is thirty feet,
the required clearance for streets and e[pressZay, betZeen the top of the
asphalt of the street and the bottom of the steel of the transit line. :hen
there isn't, the room can be created only by lifting the rapid transit line into
the air—so delicately that its operation is not disturbed—by jacking it into
the air, three-tenths of an inch at a time, Zith immense hydraulic jacks and
holding it solid, until neZ  girders of the right height can be installed, Zith
timbers so huge that one man Zho lived near the Third Avenue jacking
operation said, "I never kneZ there Zere trees like that in the Zorld before."
Throughout the construction of the massive superhighZay, Ernie Clark
says, "Ze Zere alZays figuring in inches and tenths of inches." In the face
of such difficulties, moving a river five hundred feet, a job required Zhere
the e[pressZay crossed the Bron[ River, Zas a feat so insignificant that in
the speeches Clark made to the delegations of engineers Zho came from all
over the 8nited States and Europe to hear him describe the e[pressZay's
engineering, he hardly bothered to mention it.

* The subZay, of course, is the Concourse line of the IND under the Grand
Concourse.

The railroads are tZo branches of the NeZ York Central and one of the NeZ
York,

NeZ +aven and +artford.

t The 3elham, Leno[-:hite   3lains Road, Dyre Avenue, Third Avenue and
Jerome

Avenue rapid transit lines.

;  The +arlem River  Drive, the 0ajor  Deegan, Bruckner, Sheridan and
Throgs Neck

1140
e[pressZays, the +utchinson River 3arkZay E[tension and the NeZ
England ThruZay.

8 buiJding the huge neZ highZays Zas toughs tying them together Zas

tougher—for the knots, the interchanges betZeen them, required so much

ice that . at looked like immense amounts turned out to be in-

ent.

immense Zas the mass of sZirling, intertZined lanes of links betZeea

thai had to be built betZeen and up the sides of those rocky

)-foot-high cliffs  along the +arlem River that the unassuming Clark once

to an engineering convention, in his quiet Zay, that a

gve to be in rented to inscribe it: " "interchange" does not

adequate the construction in this area. "

j ,. roads—the 0ajor Deegan E[pressZay and the

+arlem Rivet Drive—prere being built by 0oses  along the tZo banks of the
+arlem. They Zould have to be linked up Zith the Ale[ander +amilton
Bridge, Zhich 0  u building  170 feet above them to carry the e[press-

a a'.lev—and both the bridge and the tZo river-bank high 0ild have to be
linked as Zell to local streets on both sides of

the river, as Zell as tc the old '•. -.- Bridge Zhich crossed the river a

feZ hundred feet to the north of the +amilton. A total of tZenty-tZo
separate ramps and eig ;parate viaduct structures Zould be required to carry
the thirty-one lanes of roadZaj Decenary for the links. 0aking the rise in
the links shalloZ enough so that huge tractor-trailers could negotiate them
Zould have been simple if there had been sufficient room to Zork in: just

1141
start the climb far enough aZay so that the rise in grade could be gradual.
But there Zasn't nearly enough room. TZo thousand feet south of the
:ashington  Bridge Zas another nineteenth-century structure, the
+ighbridge Aqueduct, and the massive steel and stone piers of both these
structures plunged doZn to the river banks, so the +amilton Bridge—and
its connecting links —Zould have to be built betZeen those piers, and tZo
thousand feet Zas a pittance in terms of the si]e required. On the 0anhattan
side of the river, moreover, Zas an e[isting roadZay resembling an ancient
Roman aqueduct, rising from the river to a tunnel cut beneath 178th Street
as a connection under 0anhattan to the George :ashington Bridge. That
roadZay Zas supported on columns one hundred feet high. .nock out one
of those columns and the roadZay might collapse. The Cross-Bron[
E[pressZay Zould have to be fitted betZeen them, and the e[pressZay's
Zidth Zas only five  feet less than the space betZeen the columns; there Zas
practically no room for maneuver at all in the placing of those tZenty-tZo
ramps Zith their thirty-one lanes. The grades could not be kept shalloZ; to
keep them from being impossibly steep, they Zould have to Zind around
and around each other; visuali]ing it in his mind's eye, Clark kneZ that the
interchanges Zith Zhich 0oses Zould  be filling  the air on both sides of the
deep valley Zould be the largest boZl of concrete "spaghetti" cooked up to
that time by any highZay builder in history. Some of the strands in the boZl
Zould have to be almost incredibly thin and long. Because of the space
limitations, normal-si]ed columns could not be used; the diameter of some,
in fact, could be no more than 78^2 inches. And some of these slender
columns, needed to support immense Zeights, Zould have to be 100

feet high! Radically neZ column designs Zould have to be evolved, 0oses'
engineers saZ. The ingredients in the sauce, moreover, Zould have to be
varied, indeed; as it turned out, no tZo strands of spaghetti curved e[actly
alike, so that each piece of steel for the do]ens of columns involved, for the
girders supporting the roadbeds Zhich sat atop the columns, for the beams
Zhich formed the floor of those roadbeds, for the brackets Zhich held those
beams and girders in place, had to be fabricated individually.

The Cross-Bron[ Zas one of thirteen e[pressZays Robert 0oses rammed
across NeZ York City. Its seven miles Zere seven out of 130. The physical
problems presented by its construction Zere by no means unique. Even for

1142
the "easiest" of those monster roads, those traversing relatively "open" areas
of the city, there Zere alZays private homes, small apartment houses—and
Zhole factories—Zhich had to be picked up and moved bodily to neZ
locations. For most of these roads, 0oses had to hack paths through jungles
of tenements and apartment houses, to slash aqueducts in tZo and push
seZers aside, to lift railroads into the air or shove them underground. For
one e[pressZay, the Van :yck,  he had to hold up in the air the busiest
stretch of railroad in the Zorld, the sZitching yard through Zhich thirteen
tracks and sidings of the Long Island Rail Road pass over Atlantic Avenue
in Jamaica—hold it up and hold it steady enough so that during the seven
months it took to slide the huge e[pressZay underneath, the 1,100 train
movements Zhich took place daily in that yard could continue
uninterrupted.

None of 0oses' previous feats of urban construction—immense though they
had been—compared Zith the roads he Zas planning noZ; as is
demonstrated by the cost. +ighZays had alZays cost millions of dollars. In
the Zhole Zorld, only a handful had cost as much as $10,000,000. These
neZ highZays Zould cost $10,000,000 per mile. One mile, the most
e[pensive mile of road ever built, cost $40,000,000. Their total cost Zould
be computed not in tens but hundreds of millions of dollars. The total cost
of the roads Robert 0oses built Zithin the borders of NeZ York City after
:orld   :ar   II  Zas over tZo billion  dollars.

The roads, of course, Zere not the largest elements in his transportation
program. They Zere, in fact, in one sense only links betZeen the Zater
crossings he Zas planning to carry their users over or under the Zater that
divided the city into boroughs.

The scale of these crossings made the mind boggle. No suspension bridge
anyZhere in the Zorld Zould be as long (or e[pensive) as the Verra]ano-
NarroZs Bridge; it Zould  be the longest such bridge ever built, its toZers so
far apart that in designing them alloZance had to be made for the curvature
of the earth: their tops are one and five eighths inches further apart than
their bases. There Zould be enough Zire in the Verra]ano's cables to circle
the earth five times around at the equator or to reach halfZay to the moon,
enough concrete in its anchorages to pave a single-lane highZay reaching

1143
all the Zay from NeZ York  to :ashington,  and more steel in its toZers—
taller than seventy-story skyscrapers—and girders than Zas used in the
construction of the Empire State Building. No underZater vehicular tunnel
in the :estern  +emisphere—and only one underZater vehicular tunnel
anyZhere in the Zorld—Zould  be as long as the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel.
The tile used to line it Zould have tiled 4,500 bathrooms; to ventilate it
adequately against the fumes of 60,000 cars and trucks per day, air Zould
have to be driven through huge ducts at the velocity of a Force TZelve
hurricane, and the fans Zhich drove that air Zould consume daily as much
electricity as is used daily by a small city. Among such marvels even a huge
suspension bridge like the $92,000,000 Throgs Neck—itself an engineering
feat that Zould make most cities proud—Zould hardly be noticed by NeZ
York. Comparisons among public Zorks of different types are difficult. In
terms of si]e, hoZever, 0oses' road-building program Zas certainly
comparable to any public Zorks feat in history. In terms of physical
difficulty, his program Zould  dZarf them all.

Immense as Zere the physical obstacles in 0oses' path, hoZever, the
Coordinator Zas equal to them.

A technological system—engineering and construction techniques and
equipment—capable of solving those physical problems Zas already in
e[istence. The methods and machines required to build mammoth highZays
even Zithin a congested city had been perfected, even if they had never
been used to the capacity 0oses Zas planning to use them.

As for the tangle of red tape in his Zay—every main and cable and seZer
relocation, for e[ample, required approval by several city departments —
that Zas sliced through Zith his customary directness. 0oses' aides Zere
under standing orders to go straight to the department head at the first sign
of resistance from any underling. 0ost city agencies closed up tight at five
o'clock—or earlier. :orking   Zeekends Zas unheard of. But hours and
Zeekends meant nothing to men Zho kneZ that Zhen their boss Zanted
something done, "he Zanted it done—period—he didn't care hoZ it Zas
done." Commissioners Zere routed out of bed at midnight—and long after
midnight—by their telephone calls. :atching  a BroadZay play, a
commissioner Zould feel a tap on the shoulder, and, in the flickering

1144
darkness of the theater, Zould see the tall form of Arthur +odgkiss or Bill
Chapin beckoning him peremptorily to the rear of the theater. One refused
to leave his seat; he found himself signing forms on his lap in the third roZ
of a darkened theater. And if some commissioner balked at overruling an
underling Zho had refused, say, to O... a Chapin-proposed seZer
relocation, his secretary Zould soon be telling him: "Commissioner 0oses
is on the line—himself!" And if—as almost never happened—some
commissioner remained recalcitrant, the ne[t call his secretary Zould
announce Zould probably be from the 0ayor. Frustration might be piled on
frustration; 0oses faced them all doZn. After he had Zhipped into line
behind the vast over-all e[pressZay program—after years of effort that can
only be guessed at—0ayor, Governor, Legislature, Board of Estimate, City
Council, Federal Bureau of 3ublic Roads, State D3: and

an army of city bureaucrats, after all agreements Zere signed and the
bidding for contracts under Zay, inflation of unforeseen dimensions raised
the bids to levels beyond the state's ability to pay its share. 3ainstakingly, he
Zorked out and obtained legislative and voter approval for a $500,000,000
bond issue Zhich alloZed him to get many of the e[pressZays under Zay
and even to finish a feZ. But costs continued to soar. +e had underestimated
the city's share so drastically that it could not even assume those minor
costs that, by laZ, neither state nor federal government could assume. For
years the e[pressZays lay stalled—until the Federal Interstate +ighZay Act
of 1956 alloZed the feds to pick up 90 instead of 50 percent. :orking
through his banking allies, 0oses persuaded Congress to include in the Act
—despite the fact that it Zould circumvent its drafters' original intent of
creating a toll-free system—clauses alloZing roads linked to toll bridges to
be included in the system, thus making his e[pressZays eligible. Then,
through a do]en ingenious subterfuges, he persuaded the state to use some
of its oZn highZay  building funds, freed by the reduction in the share of the
costs it Zas to assume, to pick up some of the city costs. There Zere other
minor—but irritating—inconveniences: Zars, for e[ample. The .orean
conflict Zas a source of real irritation. Steel Zas the precious metal to the
highZay builder, and the National 3roduction Administration Zas
obstinately insisting that available steel should go first to the Zar effort.
Other cities accepted the situation Zithout protest; 0oses fired off
telegrams to and pulled strings in :ashington. Federal officials believed

1145
they Zould placate him by allocating his highZays Zell over 10 percent of
all steel available for civilian use, but they didn't knoZ their man. 0oses
fired his ne[t shot on the front page of The NeZ York Times, charging that
the officials Zere turning civilian  defense efforts into a "monstrous joke" by
sabotaging construction of arterials needed "to prepare for bombing
evacuation, troop and supply movements." :hen federal officials tried to
counter his charges Zith facts, 0oses termed their statements
"gobbledygook," the Times editoriali]ed that roads are "essential in Zartime
. . . [the federal decision] mustn't be the last Zord"—and NeZ York's
allocation Zas quickly increased by another 10,000 tons. Ne[t it Zas
copper. Another attack, another victory. Then a strike kept the copper he
had been allocated in the Zarehouses. But he intervened—and the
Zarehouse doors opened.

To obtain his precious rights-of-Zay, 0oses dealt Zith other giant city real
estate holders—insurance companies, railroads, banks, the Catholic Church
—as if the city Zere a giant 0onopoly  board, shuffling properties as
casually as if they Zere playing cards, giving the Catholic Church, for
e[ample, space for an addition to a Fordham campus in the Bron[ in
e[change for an easement in 4ueens, handing Con Ed half a square block
for a neZ gas storage tank (complete Zith guarantees of Board of Estimate
easements for the concomitant underground pipeline) in e[change for tZo
hundred feet of right-of-Zay through a Con Ed open storage area. At
Randall's Island luncheons he made himself the broker betZeen a do]en
disparate interests, reaping, alZays, the commission in right-of-Zay that he
Zanted. At one location

near Fordham Road, for e[ample, the path of the 0ajor Deegan
E[pressZay Zas blocked by both a housing development being built by the
Equitable Life Assurance Society and a 217-foot-tall Con Ed gas storage
tank. Negotiations Zere stalled—until a luncheon. By dessert, in a
complicated land e[change, Equitable had been served up even more land
for its development, Con Ed had agreed to "rearrange its distribution
facilities" to "eliminate the necessity of the tank/ : and 0oses Zas savoring
the taste not only of the necessary right-of-Zay but of sufficient additional
land adjoining it to create a park and playground for the residents of the
Equitable development.

1146
Robert 0oses didn't merely solve these "physical" problems. +e gloried in
solving them. A reporter Zho Zas permitted to drive around Zith him on
one highZay inspection tour saZ 0oses "mentally readjusting houses as
though they Zere so many toy building blocks." One of the blocks Zas a
three-story factory—0oses turned it around and reset it on the same plot at
a different angle. Another Zas a church—he turned it sideZays. Another
Zas an apartment house si[ stories high, Zhich—Zith highZay officials
Zho had floZn in  from all over the country Zatching in aZe, most of them
e[pecting the structure to collapse—Zas inched a hundred yards out of the
Van :yck   E[pressZay right-of-Zay  Zith  the possessions of thirty-five
families still inside it. It  cost at least as much—and possibly more—to
move the building than it Zould have cost to demolish it, and in later years,
0oses Zas quite frank about Zhy he had decided to move it. "I moved it
because everybody said you couldn't do it," he Zould tell the author. "I'll
never do that again, broke a lot of gas mains . . . That Zas an absolutely
cra]y stunt, you knoZ." But at the recollection, a broad, genuine grin spread
across 0oses' face, a grin of achievement and pride. +e Zas overfloZing
Zith pride at his construction feats. The reporter painted a picture of a man
happy as he played Zith his toy blocks. :hen the limousine reached Van
Cortlandt 3ark, the reporter Zrote, 0oses began chuckling over
reminiscences of the attempt by "the bird lovers" to stop him from running
the 0ajor  Deegan E[pressZay through a sZamp in the park that they had
Zanted preserved as a bird sanctuary. They had tried to obtain an
injunction, he said, "but Ze just filled in a little faster." During construction
of the Brooklyn-4ueens E[pressZay, 0oses rented the penthouse floor of
the 0arguerite +otel—an old,  sedate establishment right ne[t to the
e[pressZay's route—and used it as an office. It had tZo advantages: only a
very feZ people kneZ of its e[istence, so he Zas interrupted by feZ
telephone calls, and he could look doZn on the construction as he Zorked.
And he spent a lot of time looking doZn at it, Zatching the cranes and
derricks and earth-moving machines that looked like toys far beloZ him
moving about in the giant trench being cut through mile after mile of
densely packed houses, a big black figure against the sunset in the late
afternoon, like a giant ga]ing doZn on the giant road he Zas molding. "And
I'll tell  you," says one of the men Zho spent a lot of time at the old hotel
Zith him, "I  never saZ R0  look happier than he did Zhen he Zas looking
doZn out of that ZindoZ."

1147
It Zas not the physical problems that Zere the most difficult to solve,
hoZever, but the political.

A technology for solving the physical problems had been perfected, but not
the methods and machinery for the creation of large-scale urban public
Zorks in a democratic society; the American system of government almost
seemed designed to make such creation as difficult as possible.

It is no coincidence that, as Raymond 0oley puts it, "from the pyramids of
Egypt, the rebuilding of Rome after Nero's fire, to the creation of the great
medieval cathedrals... all great public Zorks have been somehoZ associated
Zith autocratic poZer." It Zas no accident that most of the Zorld's great
roads—ancient and modern alike—had been associated Zith totalitarian
regimes, that it took a great .han to build the great roads of Asia, a Darius
to build the Royal Road across Asia 0inor, a +itler and a 0ussolini  to
build the Autobahnen and autostrade of Europe, that during the four
hundred years in Zhich Rome Zas a republic it built relatively feZ major
roads, its broad highZays beginning to march across the knoZn earth only
after the decrees calling for their construction began to be sent forth from
the Capitol by a Caesar rather than a Senate. :hether or not it is true, as
0oley  claims, that "pure democracy has neither the imagination, nor the
energy, nor the disciplined mentality to create major improvements," it is
indisputably true that it is far easier for a totalitarian regime to take the
probably unpopular decision to allocate a disproportionate share of its
resources to such improvements, far easier for it to mobili]e the men
necessary to plan and build them; the great highZays of antiquity aZaited
the formation of regimes capable of assigning to their construction great
masses of men (Rome's Zere built in large part by the legions Zho Zere to
tramp along them); at times, the great highZays of the modern age seemed
to be aZaiting some force capable of assigning to their planning the
hundreds of engineers, architects and technicians necessary to plan them.
And most important, it is far easier for a totalitarian regime to ignore the
Zishes of its people, for its poZer does not derive from the people. 8nder
such a regime it is not necessary for masses of people to be persuaded of an
improvement's Zorth; the persuasion of a single mind is sufficient.

1148
This last point has especial significance for the construction of public Zorks
in a city. For in a city such construction requires the eviction of people from
their homes. Even Zhen the public agrees in theory that a Zork is needed,
no members of the public Zant to lose their homes for it. 3eople never Zant
their neighborhood disturbed by it. If it is to be built, they inevitably feel,
let it be built someZhere else. A totalitarian regime can ignore such
feelings, Zhich is Zhy the great city rebuildings of history—not only
+aussmann's of 3aris but St. 3eterburg's by 3eter the Great, and Rome's
first by Nero and later by Augustus—have almost invariably been carried
out by such regimes, the notable e[ceptions being cases (such as the great
London fire of 1666 or the saturation bombings of the German cities in
1944) in Zhich a monumental catastrophe destroyed so much of a city

that it had no choice but to rebuild—and in Zhich the catastrophe had
removed from the scene the people Zho might have objected.

But 0oses Zas not building under a totalitarian regime. 0oses Zas
building under a system in Zhich permission to build could be granted only
by officials Zho derived their poZer from  the people. And, in that light,
Zhat Zas most significant about the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay Zas not that
seven miles of brick and mortar and steel and iron had to be removed from
its path but that seven miles of people had to be removed, removed from
homes Zhich in a time of terrible housing crisis in NeZ York Zere simply
irreplaceable. "3eople said that [the route] Zas so built up that you'd never
get the politicians to say okay," Ernie Clark Zould later recall, and
engineers Zho had built bigger roads even than Ernie Clark agreed. Farrell
and Chapin's legendary Burma Road Zould symboli]e to history the
epitome of difficulty in  construction. But Chapin understood political as
Zell as engineering problems. Years later, he Zould recall the feeling that
had sZept over him Zhen he had stood on Jesup Avenue staring doZn at
that valley in the Bron[ packed edge to edge Zith voters' homes. "I said to
myself: The [Burma] Road Zas tough. But that Zas nothing compared to
this son of a bitch.'" 3eople—the people Zhose homes stood in the path of
all 0oses' urban e[pressZays—Zere the most difficult problem of all.

But 0oses solved this problem, too.

1149
Democracy had not solved the problem of building large-scale urban public
Zorks, so 0oses solved it by ignoring democracy.

Critics Zho said the Coordinator simply ignored the people in his path
oversimplified; he may have Zanted to, but political considerations, the
considerations that mattered to other public officials, made it impossible for
him to do so—at least until after Bill-O had been safely returned to office in
1949, 0oses tried to take the people into account—tried hard. It Zas he
Zho, to persuade apartment dZellers (hitherto uncompensated for eviction
since they did not oZn the land involved) to move, persuaded the
Legislature to provide for their reimbursement: $100 per room and $100 for
moving e[penses. Finding that they still balked—for middle- and loZer-
class families in NeZ York, no feZ hundreds of dollars could compensate
for the loss of a comfortable apartment they could afford—he even moved a
feZ apartment houses smaller than the one on the Van :yck. +e moved
entire blocks of private homes—263 homes on the Van :yck E[pressZay
alone—Zhere there Zas room to move them. But along most of his routes,
there Zas no room. And, as even his admirer Jacob Lutsky puts it: "+e
thought about people. But if it came to a project or people, he'd take the
project."

+e had the poZer to do so—to ignore or override the procedures
democratic government establishes to govern the planning of public Zorks.
:as  it  mostly dictators Zho had built great urban public Zorks of the past?
In road-building in and around NeZ York, he had a dictator's poZers. And
he used them.

+e enjoyed using them—for using them gave him Zhat Zas his greatest
pleasure: the imposition of his Zill on other people. One evening, he Zas

sitting Zith  Sid Shapiro and several other aides in his limousine parked on a
side street in 4ueens, studying possible locations for the ClearvieZ
E[pressZay. Suddenly there appeared at the end of the street hundreds of
citi]ens bearing torches and a scarecroZ effigy labeled, in large letters,
Robert moses. The aides reali]ed that they had happened upon an anti-
e[pressZay torchlight rally. The big black car sat at the end of the street
unnoticed in the dusk by anyone in the croZd as the effigy Zas hoisted to a
lamppost and set afire. "I didn't dare look at R0," Shapiro recalls. But to

1150
his surprise, his boss threZ back his head and roared Zith laughter. And
Zhen someone suggested they drive aZay, R0 said no. +e Zanted to stay
for a Zhile. +e didn't  Zant to miss a thing. +e sat there all through the
speeches comparing him to a "dictator," "a +itler," "a Stalin." And, says
Shapiro, "he laughed and laughed. R0 really got a kick out of it."

:hen   he replied to protests about the hardships caused by his road-building
programs, he generally replied that succeeding generations Zould be
grateful. It Zas the end that counted, not the means. "You can't make an
omelet Zithout breaking eggs." Once, in a speech, he said:

You can draZ any kind of picture you like on a clean slate and indulge your
every Zhim in the Zilderness in laying out a NeZ Delhi, Canberra or
Brasilia, but Zhen you operate in an overbuilt metropolis, you have to hack
your Zay Zith  a meat a[.

The metaphor, like most 0oses metaphors, Zas vivid. But it Zas
incomplete. It e[pressed his philosophy, but it Zas not philosophy but
feelings that dictated 0oses' actions. +e didn't just feel that he had to sZing
a meat a[. +e loved to sZing it.

it Zould cost millions  upon millions of dollars—in condemnation costs for
fifty-four  apartment houses, in demolition costs for the tearing doZn of
those buildings, in ta[ revenue that Zould otherZise be paid, year after year
for generations, into city coffers by the buildings' oZners.

If the bulge in the e[pressZay Zas pu]]ling  to anyone studying it, it Zas
tragic to those Zho didn't have to study it, to the people Zho lived in or near
that right-of-Zay. For to these people, the fifty-four apartment buildings
that Zould have to be destroyed Zere not just buildings but homes. That
mile of buildings Zas the very heart of the neighborhood in Zhich they
lived, a section of the Bron[ knoZn as "East Tremont."

The people of East Tremont did not have much. Refugees or the children of
refugees from the little shtetls in the 3ale of Settlement and from the ghettos
of Eastern Europe, the JeZs Zho at the turn of the century had fled the
pogroms and the Zrath of the Tsars, they had first settled in America on the
LoZer East Side. The LoZer East Side had become a place to Zhich they

1151
Zere tied by family and friends and language and religion and a sense of
belonging—but from Zhose damp and squalid tenements they had ached to
escape, if not for their oZn sake then for the sake of their children, Zhose
every cough brought dread to parents Zho kneZ all too Zell Zhy the streets
in Zhich they lived Zere called "lung blocks." JeZs from the LoZer  East
Side Zho made enough money to escape in style escaped to "the JeZish
half-mile" of Central 3ark :est,   "the Golden Ghetto." JeZs Zho made
enough money to escape—but not that much—escaped to the Grand
Concourse. The JeZs of East Tremont Zere luckier than those Zho had to
stay behind on the LoZer East Side, but not so lucky as the Grand
Concourse JeZs. They Zere not the milliners or the cloak-and-suiters but
the pressers, finishers and cutters Zho Zorked in the bare Zorkrooms
behind the ornate shoZrooms of the garment district. They Zere a long Zay
from being rich, and their neighborhood proved it. There Zere no elevators
in most of the five- and si[-story buildings into Zhich  they began to flood
(stopping at 182nd Street, southern border of an Italian neighborhood, as
abruptly as if a fence had stood there) after the e[tension of the IRT
elevated line just before :orld  :ar   I linked East Tremont to the doZntoZn
garment district. By the end of :orld  :ar   II,  the buildings' galvani]ed iron
pipes Zere corroding, causing leaks and drops in Zater pressure; a feZ still
had bathtubs that sat up on legs. :ith some 60,000 persons living along its
narroZ streets, its "population density"—441 persons "per residential
acre"—Zas considered "undesirable" by social scientists. "In moving
through East Tremont one senses a feeling of croZdedness brought on by
the lack of open space and close location of buildings," one Zrote.

But the neighborhood provided its residents Zith things that Zere important
to them.

Transportation Zas important to the fathers Zho Zorked doZntoZn, and the
neighborhood had good transportation. :ith the Third Avenue El and the
IRT :hite   3lains Road line running right through it, it Zas only a feZ  easy
blocks from anyZhere in East Tremont to a subZay that took you right
doZn to the garment district.

Jobs Zere important to the fathers Zho didn't Zork doZntoZn, and the
neighborhood had jobs available—good jobs by East Tremont standards—

1152
in a miniature garment and upholstery manufacturing district that had
sprung up around 3ark Avenue, just ten minutes aZay.

Shopping Zas important to the mothers Zho stayed home and took care of
the kids, and the neighborhood had good shopping. East Tremont Avenue,
Zhich ran conveniently right across its center, Zas a bright, bustling mile of
bakeries Zhich didn't bother advertising that they baked only Zith butter
because all of them did, of groceries Zhere your order Zas sliced and
measured out and Zeighed ("You didn't get everything in packages like you
do noZ"), of kosher butcher shops (":e  Zeren't, but I bought kosher for my
mother's sake. And it's the kind of meat you knoZ in the pot"), of mama-
and-papa candy stores, of delicatessens, filled alZays Zith the pungent
aroma from the pickel barrels, Zhose oZners got up before daZn to mi[
olives and pimentos and chives—or dates or caviar—into manufactured
cream cheese to create individuali]ed loaves they named "3aradise" or
"Dark JeZel." You might go to Ale[ander's on the Concourse for clothes,
but you didn't have to; JanoZit]'s on Tremont Zas just as good. You didn't
even have to leave the neighborhood for a dress for a real "fancy" affair;
"they had high-priced stores on Tremont, too; +eld's [at the intersection of
Southern Boulevard] Zas very e[pensive—as good as any store on the
Concourse." If you didn't feel like going out, the "better" stores on 0armion
delivered, and the stuff they delivered Zas just as good as if you had been
there to feel it yourself, and for many items you didn't even have to pick up
the telephone: a feZ pushcart peddlers still roamed the streets of East
Tremont as if to remind the residents of Zhere they had come from.

3arks Zere important to the mothers, too. There Zere no playgrounds in the
neighborhood—mothers' delegations had attempted in the past to talk to the
3ark Department about the situation but 0oses' aides had never even
deigned to grant them an appointment—but running doZn its length Zas
Southern Boulevard, Zhose broad center mall had grass plots plenty big
enough for little children to play on, and surrounded by benches so mothers
could keep their eyes on them to make sure they didn't run into the street.
And the southZestern border of the neighborhood Zas Crotona 3ark.
"Beautiful. Lovely. 3laygrounds. There Zas a lake—Indian Lake. Nice. :e
used to sit there—under the trees. :e raised our children in Crotona 3ark."
Social scientists, Zho had never lived on the LoZer East Side, might

1153
consider East Tremont "croZded." The people of East Tremont, Zho had,
considered it open and airy, Zonderfully open and airy.

Thanks to Crotona 3ark, young adults as Zell as children didn't have to
leave the neighborhood for recreation. "It Zas a great park. TZenty tennis
courts right there. :here  you could Zalk to them. Baseball diamonds,
magnificent playgrounds Zith baskets—three-man games Zould be going
on all Zeekend, you knoZ. A big sZimming pool that 0oses  had built
during the Depression. Indian Lake. And kept really clean then, you knoZ.
And safe. Sure people Zalked there at night. You never Zorried then. A
great park!" And thanks to Tremont Avenue, you didn't have to leave the
neighborhood

for entertainment. On the avenue's one mile in the neighborhood Zere seven
movie houses. The Bron[ Zoo—Zith its animals roaming behind moats
instead of bars—Zas one stop aZay on the :hite 3lains El, the NeZ York
Botanical Garden Zas three; you could Zalk Zith your children to those
tZo perfect places to spend a Sunday Zith the kids.

The neighborhood provided the things that Zere important to its old people.
"The benches over on Southern Boulevard Zere beautiful, gorgeous. On
sunny days, you could alZays find the girls over there, just chatting, you
knoZ, and having a good time. On Zeekends, they'd be so croZded, you
couldn't sit doZn." Old men Zould sit there in the sun playing chess Zith
men Zith Zhom they had been playing chess for thirty years. (.ibit]ers had
to stand.) There Zas a place to play chess—or cards—or just sit and talk
over a cup of coffee in cold Zeather, too. The "Y"—the East Tremont
Young 0en's +ebreZ  Association—listed more than four hundred "senior
citi]ens" on its active membership roles. "There Zas no reason for an older
person to be lonely in that neighborhood," says one Zho lived there.

"You kneZ Zhere your kids Zere at night, too," says one mother. They Zere
at the Y, Zhich had 1,700 families as members. "There Zere so many
programs out of the Y for kids. At night—before—you never used to knoZ
Zhere they Zere, Zhat they Zere doing. You alZays used to hear about
gangs —you had to Zorry, Zas he Zith a gang? NoZ you alZays kneZ
Zhere your kids Zere at night." Children Zho lived on Central 3ark :est
might be sent to e[pensive day camps and, Zhen they got older, to sleep-

1154
aZay camps in the Adirondacks; the Y provided ine[pensive day-camp and
sleep-aZay programs—the largest run by any single institution in NeZ York
City—for children Zho  lived on Crotona 3ark North.

Schools Zere terribly important to the people of East Tremont (a quarter of
a century after their kids had graduated, some parents could still remember
the precise student-teacher ratio in their classes), and East Tremont had
good schools. They Zere old—3S 44, at 176th and 3rospect, the
neighborhood's junior high school, had been built in 1901, and the city said
there Zas simply no money to replace it—but there Zere no double sessions
and standards Zere high. 3S 67, off Southern Boulevard, Zas the first
elementary school in NeZ York to offer lessons—and supply instruments—
for any child Zho Zanted to learn to play the violin. And all the schools
Zere close, close enough for kids to Zalk to.

To the people of East Tremont, East Tremont Zas family. In its bricks Zere
generations. Raised in the neighborhood, Lillian Roberts married a boy
from the neighborhood. They made their first apartment in a supposedly
"nicer" section over on Fordham Road. :hen their first  child Zas born,
they moved back. ":hy?  Because my husband had—oh, Ze both had, I
guess—nostalgic feelings. The reason Ze moved back to that area Zas that
Ze loved it so much." Lillian  and her husband moved into an apartment on
the third floor of a Zalkup at 845 :est  176th Street. On the first floor of
that building, Lillian's mother, Ida Ro]ofsky, born in Russia, Zas living—
Zith Lillian's  grandmother. East Tremont Zas friends—real friends, not just
acquaintances you happened to meet because they took their children to the

same playground to Zhich you took your children, or because they
belonged to the same 3TA as you, but friends Zhom you had groZn up Zith
and Zere going to groZ old Zith, boys and girls—turned men and Zomen
—Zho kneZ and understood you and Zhom you kneZ and understood.
Says 0rs. +elen La]archeck: "Everyone seemed to help one another. If
there Zas trouble, everyone Zould do something for you if they could. They
Zere alZays coming in and sharing Zhat they had. If they Zere going aZay,
they Zould give you food that you could use and they couldn't." East
Tremont Zas a feeling of being knoZn—in the streets and in the stores,
Zhere shopkeepers like big gruff Saul JanoZit], "the 0ayor of  East

1155
Tremont," had been selling to neighborhood families for decades. (The
oZner of one Crotona Avenue vegetable stand had been selling vegetables
in Tremont Zhen it still largely consisted of the three large "mount" farming
estates—0ount +ope, 0ount  Eden and Fairmount—that had given
"Tremont" its name; he had gone from house to house Zith a horse and
Zagon then.) East Tremont Zas a sense of continuity, of Zarmth, of the
security that comes—and only comes— Zith a sense of belonging. Even
families that could afford to have their "simchas"—Zeddings and bar
mit]vahs—in the Concourse 3la]a, generally had them instead in the
neighborhood's little, someZhat shabby, social halls. No one Zould have
called East Tremont a united community. It possessed, one study observed,
a "myriad of social systems covering religious Landsmannschaft groups,
fraternal, educational, political and fund-raising groups" engaged in "a
constant and shrill competition for loyalty," a competition Zhich Zas not
even resolved in the tZo areas Zhere East Tremont might have been
e[pected to be solid: politics and religion. FDR's hold Zas absolute—but
only so far as FDR Zas concerned; in nonpresidential elections, men Zho
once, long ago, had preached from soapbo[es Zere loyal to an older faith:
Socialist, Communist, American Labor and 3rogressive parties could all
count on substantial votes in East Tremont. "In East Tremont," the study
noted, "the Yiddishist and +ebraist each had his folloZing Zith a
supporting system of cultural clubs, bookstores, debating societies, etc."
The neighborhood's seven synagogues Zere constantly competing for
members and prestige. East Tremont may have been a loud community, a
shrill community, a materialistic, money-conscious community. But it Zas a
community.

Robert 0oses didn't think much of the apartments of East Tremont. The
buildings Zere old, the plumbing Zas bad, most of them didn't even have
elevators—he referred to them as "tenements," as "Zalkups" or, if those
nouns didn't seem to be eliciting the desired horror from his listeners, as
"slums." But 0oses had never lived on the LoZer East Side.

"Tenements?" says 0rs. Silverman. "Listen, I lived in tenements. These
Zere not tenements at all." If the apartments' plumbing Zas not modern,
neither—happily—Zas the si]e of their rooms, large—huge by postZar
standards—and high-ceilinged. They had foyers—real foyers, L-shaped

1156
some of them—as big as rooms themselves. "I served dinner for eighteen in
my foyer, that's hoZ big it Zas," 0rs.  Silverman says. They had dining
rooms, not dining areas. The apartment houses might not have had
elevators, but

they had—almost all of them—courtyards, and there Zere enough small
frame houses interspersed among them to let sunlight in. "Those apartments
Zere light and airy and cheerful," 0rs. Roberts says. Sunken living rooms
Zere not uncommon, the sills on the ZindoZs Zere broad and Zood, the
Zalls Zere not postZar plasterboard but thick and solid, the lines Zhere
Zalls met ceiling Zere softened Zith ornamental moldings. "I had Zhat they
called four rooms," says 0rs. Silverman. "Besides that big foyer, Ze had a
kitchen Zith a dining area, tZo bedrooms—of course, they each had a
bathroom, Zhat else?—and a living room; I don't knoZ hoZ big the living
room Zas, but it Zas a real nice si]e. :hen  my girlfriend's  daughter Zas
engaged, I served dinner for si[ty in the living room and foyer, and it Zasn't
even croZded, that's hoZ big it Zas. :e  all loved our apartments."

They loved them—and they could afford them. If the Zater pressure Zas
loZ, so Zas the rent, scaled originally to their ability to pay by landlords
Zho could afford to do so because they had bought land in East Tremont for
as little as tZo dollars per square foot, and kept at that scale by city-
instituted rent control. 0rs. Silverman Zas paying $100 per month for her
four rooms, and that Zas high. Lillian Roberts Zas paying $62 for her four
rooms. Cele Sherman had a si[-room apartment—three bedrooms, a living
room, kitchen Zith large dining area, and a foyer Zith a recess large enough
to be a full-scale dining room—and for that apartment 0rs. Sherman Zas
paying $69.

The rents had to be reasonable for these people to afford them. :eekly
take-home pay in the garment industry—the pay on Zhich most of these
people lived—averaged Zell under a hundred dollars. And Zhile the
generally accepted rule of thumb held that a family could afford to pay a
monthly rent equal to about a Zeek's income, this Zas not a rule accepted
by the families of East Tremont, Zho had their oZn rule of thumb: that
Zhen you had children, you sent them to college, no matter hoZ much
scrimping and saving you had to do. The rents they Zere paying—loZ as

1157
they Zere—Zere, in all too many cases, the absolute ma[imum they could
afford. They lived—many of them—on the thin edge of disaster. "Clara
:ertel—her   husband got sick so they had to move out," recalls 0rs.
Sherman. "And 0rs. Aronofsky—her  husband died. Same thing. One thing
could do it, and so fast. Boom, and you Zere gone. Your friends never saZ
you again."

+appy therefore to have those apartments, the people of East Tremont Zere
made desperate to keep them by the harsh realities of NeZ York's housing
crisis. Finding an apartment at any price Zas difficult in a city Zhose
postZar vacancy rate Zas an habitual 1 percent. Finding an apartment at a
rent they could afford to pay, in a neighborhood they felt they could live in,
Zas all but impossible. They kneZ hoZ difficult  it Zas to obtain an
apartment in East Tremont; one could Zait for years even after one had
promised a "schmear" to any super Zho let you knoZ about an upcoming
vacancy. Similar "middle-class" JeZish neighborhoods Zith loZ rents in
Zhich they Zould be comfortable—:ashington   +eights, for e[ample—
Zere rented up just as solidly. 3ublic housing, overZhelmingly inhabited by
Negroes and 3uerto Ricans, Zas unthinkable even for those relatively feZ
East Tremont

families Zhose income Zas loZ enough to qualify; no one, moreover,
Zanted "the stigma" involved in having everyone knoZ you qualified. +uge
as Zas the loZ-income housing program, moreover, the Zaiting list Zas
huger still. They had no hope of ever being able to afford the apartments in
the neZ buildings being built in the JeZish neighborhoods around 3elham
3arkZay, Zhere a "tZo-bedroom" might rent for $350 per month. As for
living in one's oZn home on Long Island or in :estchester, that Zas a
dream reserved for the children they Zere sending to college. The
apartments generally available in NeZ York for the $75 or $80 per month
they could afford Zere apartments in the black or 3uerto Rican slums—or
back on the LoZer East Side.

If it Zas desperately important for the people Zho lived in East Tremont
that their neighborhood be saved, it Zas also desperately important for the
city of Zhich  that neighborhood Zas a part. For a hundred years, East
Tremont had been performing a vital function for NeZ York, as an

1158
"urbani]ing"  area, a place in Zhich families from European farms or small
villages could become accustomed to living in a city, Zhere a common
consciousness began to evolve, a man from County Cork learning that the
families ne[t door from County 0ayo  Zeren't really  such a bad sort, a
houseZife from a Latvian shtetl learning that the Zoman she met at the
market Zho came from the .iev  ghetto Zas someone she could talk Zith—
a consciousness that translated itself into a feeling of belonging in the city,
and (more quickly in the case of the Irish and Italians than the JeZs, Zho
Zere alZays arguing among themselves) into political organi]ations that
gave them a share of poZer in the city. It had been a "staging area," a place
Zhere neZcomers Zho had lived previously in America only in slums,
successful at last in their struggle to find a decent place to live, could
regroup, and begin to devote their energies to consolidating their small
gains and giving their children the education that Zould enable them to
move onZard and upZard —to better, more "fashionable" areas. In 1848, it
Zas Rhineland farmers fleeing revolutionary chaos; during the 1870's, it
Zas the Irish, fleeing famine or the LoZer East Side. Just after the turn of
the century, Zith the more prosperous among the Irish moving on to
Fordham or 8niversity +eights or Riverdale, it Zas the Italians, many of
them just off the boat, Zho folloZed the neZ IRT subZay to Zhat Zas then
the end of the line and seeped ZestZard to fill up all of the "Belmont" area
north of 182nd Street. Then it Zas the JeZs, filling up the area betZeen
Belmont and Crotona 3ark. And East Tremont—Zith the e[ception of
Belmont, Zhich the Italians held for their oZn—had been an integrated
urbani]ing and staging area. All the Germans didn't move out Zhen the
Irish arrived, all the Irish didn't move out Zhen the JeZs arrived—in 1950,
there may have been 44,000 JeZs in the area south of Belmont, but there
Zere also about 5,000 Irishmen and about 5,000 Germans and Slavs.

There Zas ample proof in 1950 that East Tremont Zas serving just as

efficiently as an urbani]ing and staging area—an integrated urbani]ing
staging area—for the city's neZest immigrants.

In some other areas of the city, the approach of Negroes and 3uerto Ricans
—part of the great Zave of dark-skinned immigrants Zho had begun

1159
flooding into the city just before :orld   :ar   II,  a flood that had mounted
every year since—had meant flight. But not in East Tremont.

0orrisania,  just on the other—south—side of Crotona 3ark, had become a
predominantly Negro slum about 1930. But the people of East Tremont had
not fled.

Since about 1940, the less desirable tenements in the shadoZ of the noisy El
along Third Avenue—right on the neighborhood's Zestern edge— had been
filled Zith  Negroes. But the neighborhood had held.

The same spur that had roZeled the JeZs into East Tremont—the hope of a
better life for their children—had roZeled Negroes there, right into the
neighborhood itself. The first Zas Charles Smith, traffic manager for a
fabric company, Zhose Zife, a Zhite JeZish girl Zho kept a strictly kosher
home in +arlem, said to him in 1929, Zhen their son turned si[: "Over my
dead body my son is going to the 135th Street School." "Negroes in '30 or
'31 Zho came up to the Bron[, they stopped at 3rospect [in 0orrisania],"
Smith recalls. ":e  didn't Zant  no 3rospect. :e  came all the Zay up to
Tremont." For a Zhile, Smith's son Zas the only Negro child in 3S 44 (then
an elementary school), but soon more Negroes—doctors, laZyers, Zorking
men Zhose Zives also Zorked to help make their families a better life—
Zere folloZing  them into the neighborhood, some purchasing private
homes, some moving into apartments. By 1933, there Zere seven Negro
families in Elsmere Gardens, one of the neighborhood's "best" buildings.
There Zere quite a feZ along Crotona 3ark North, the avenue facing the
park that Zas considered East Tremont's most desirable location. But East
Tremont took into its bosom the neZcomers Zith black faces as it had taken
in neZcomers Zith Zhite  faces.

"3eople here Zere good Zith us," Smith says. And they Zere good Zith the
pioneers Zho folloZed Smith. There Zere Negro Zomen on the e[ecutive
committee of neighborhood organi]ations. "0y  daughter used to Zalk to
school Zith tZo Negro boys," says Cele Cohen. ":e  used to have Negro
children over for dinner, and they used to have my daughter over. To tell the
truth, Ze didn't think that Zay—you knoZ,  the Zay it is noZ—then."

1160
After the Zar, the influ[  of Negroes into East Tremont increased. An influ[
of 3uerto Ricans began. But the influ[ stayed sloZ and no Zhites left
because of it. By 1950, there Zere appro[imately 11,000 nonZhites in East
Tremont, 18 percent of the neighborhood's 60,000 population. And the
neighborhood Zas still holding just fine. Standing astride its Zhole southern
border, Crotona 3ark provided East Tremont Zith a natural shield, a
comfortably Zide—and, at that time, heavily policed—dike against the
decay flooding up from the south. Its brunt broken on the park's slopes, the
decay oo]ed around its sides, searching for an opening into the clean streets
beyond, but against it the park flung upZard, at both its northern

corners, e[tensions that Zere protecting arms. And there Zere social,
perhaps even moral, reasons as Zell as physical for the neighborhood to
hold. The JeZs of East Tremont—liberals, utopianists, socialists, fiery
radical labor unionists, men and Zomen Zho had held on to their ideals
even under the lash and the knout, and the children of those men and
Zomen—said they believed in the equality of men, including those Zith
darker skins than they. One could argue about hoZ deep that belief really
ran, but in 1952 they certainly acted as if they meant it. The neighborhood
Zas still the neighborhood. No one felt the need to move out of it just
because a feZ more Negroes Zere moving in.

But the strongest reasons Zere economic. Even if they had Zanted to move
out, the people of East Tremont couldn't afford to. In the I970's, it Zould
become a cliche to say that a neighborhood like East Tremont couldn't hold.
But that cliche ignored the reality of rents that people could afford, and their
inability to find  such rents anyZhere else. The influ[ of impoverished
Negroes and 3uerto Ricans might have been steadily increasing in 1952.
The pressures on the neighborhood might have been groZing stronger and
stronger. But so Zere the economic realities that had kept it solid. Decent
housing at affordable rents Zas becoming steadily scarcer. The income of
East Tremont's older residents, noZ beginning to retire on inadequate
pensions and social security, Zas falling.

In 1951, Zith the nonZhite population of East Tremont already substantial
and clearly going to increase further, the Association of Young 0en's and
Young :omen's  +ebreZ Associations of NeZ York—considering building

1161
a neZ Y to replace the Clinton Avenue building—had decided to determine
Zhether or not the investment Zould be ZorthZhile, and had conducted the
most detailed survey of East Tremont residents ever made. Its conclusions
Zere clear. Negroes might come. The JeZs Zould stay. For more than
tZenty years, the pressure of urban decay and blight had been pressing on
the neighborhood, but for tZenty years, the neighborhood had held.

Leave it alone, and it Zould continue to hold.

By 1952 there Zere 775,516 Negroes and nonZhite Spanish-speaking
people—a full 10 percent of NeZ York's residents—in the city. And, as the
Irish had done a century before and the Italians and Eastern European JeZs
half a century before, these immigrants from the South and from the
Caribbean Zere continuing to pour into the city by the thousands and tens
of thousands. For its oZn sake as Zell as theirs—if the city Zas to prosper
or if it Zas even to endure as a place in Zhich people, Zhite or nonZhite,
Zould Zant to live—it  Zould  have to offer the neZcomers the same chance
it had offered their forerunners: Zould have to absorb them by providing
neighborhoods in Zhich they could learn to cope Zith urban life, in Zhich
they could consolidate the gains that had enabled them to move out of the
real slums in the first place and prepare for an assault on even better places
to live, neighborhoods Zhich Zould serve as urbani]ing and staging areas.
And it Zould  have to provide urbani]ing and staging areas that Zere
integrated. If it did not, if these neZcomers to NeZ York Zere forced to live
in ghettos, compounded Zith their resentment at their inability

to provide a decent place for their children to live Zould be an alienation
from the society Zhich had isolated them. These people—Zho Zere making
up more and more of the city—Zould be an alienated, hostile, hating force
Zithin  it.

If the city Zas going to endure, neighborhoods like East Tremont Zere
going to have to endure.

And if it  Zas left alone, this neighborhood Zould.

The letters came on December 4, 1952.

1162
For years, East Tremont had been vaguely aZare that one of Robert 0oses'
highZays Zas going to run through the neighborhood, that part of it Zas
already under construction over in the East Bron[ someZhere. But there
had been no hard facts available, and, as 0rs. Lillian Edelstein says, "it had
gone on so long, and you keep hearing and hearing and nothing happens,
and after a Zhile it doesn't mean anything to you." :hen they thought about
it—if  they thought about it—they Zere sure it Zould run along the edge of
Crotona 3ark; "I mean, it Zas so obvious—you just figured it Zas going to
go there," 0rs. Edelstein says. "It Zas in the Zind for a long time that he
Zas going to come through the apartment houses. But Ze just didn't believe
it."

But on December 4, a Tuesday, the letters Zere there—in hundreds of
mailbo[es, letters signed by "Robert 0oses, City Construction
Coordinator," informing each recipient that the building in Zhich he or she
lived Zas in the right-of-Zay  of the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay, that it Zould
be condemned by the city and torn doZn—and that they had ninety days to
move.

"It Zas like the floor  opened up underneath your feet," 0rs. Edelstein says.
"There Zas no Zarning. :e  just got it  in the mail. Everybody on the street
got it the same day. A notice. :e had ninety days to get out. I remember it
Zas a nice day, too, for that time of year. :e all stood outside —'Did you
get the letter?' 'Did you get the letter?' And ':hat does it mean?' Three
months to get out! Some people had gone out early and hadn't heard. :e
told them. And then Ze all Zaited for our husbands to come home. And my
husband said, 'You can't do anything.'"

The ninety-day figure Zas meaningless, of course. At the time 0oses sent
out his letter the money to build the East Tremont stretch of the e[pressZay
Zas noZhere in sight; months, if not years, Zould be required to obtain it.
The city had not even acquired title to the property yet, and there Zere
months of procedures necessary before it could do so—and before
demolition could begin. 3rivately, 0oses Zas figuring  not on three but
eighteen months to clear the area. The use of the ninety-day figure Zas a
scare tactic—"to shake 'em up a little and get 'em moving," a 0oses aide
e[plains.

1163
The tactic accomplished its purpose. As the full implication of their position
began to daZn on the tenants, they became very scared indeed.

"The first thing you do, naturally, you look to see Zhat else is available,"
says 0rs. Roberts. "0y  husband and I looked in the papers and asked

around. And Zhen Ze first found out the type of rents!" Says another East
Tremont houseZife: ":e   had been thinking before—for years—about
moving to 3elham 3arkZay—you knoZ, not really seriously, but just
talking about it from time to time. 3elham 3arkZay Zas a very, very nice
area. But noZ Ze Zent over there. 0y God!  On 3elham 3arkZay they
Zanted a hundred dollars a room."

3riced out of other "decent" neighborhoods, they turned to a task they kneZ
before they started Zas almost hopeless: finding a neZ apartment in their
oZn. The Y Zas inundated Zith requests for information about local
vacancies. "Occasionally Ze'd hear about one," says Y director Barney
Lambert. "But this Zas fifteen hundred families that needed them."

A subsequent notice from 0oses said that "tenant relocation operations"
Zere already planned, and promised that "Ze shall cooperate in every
possible Zay so as to avoid hardships and inconveniences." On the
"completed," easterly "Section 3" of the e[pressZay, he stated, tenant
relocation had "proceeded in an orderly manner."

This notice proclaimed that its purpose Zas reassurance: ":e are issuing
this . . . honest schedule for acquisition," because "most Americans prefer to
be told just Zhat is in store for them. They dislike uncertainty." Its result
Zas panic. For East Tremont had formed a tenants' committee and, heading
over to Section 3, it found out Zhat "orderly tenant relocation operations"
meant Zhen carried out under the direction of Robert 0oses.

The e[pressZay had been completed over part of Section 3. A great sZath
of concrete, 225 feet Zide, grayish Zhite, unmarked by the treads of a
single car, had been laid neatly to Zithin about tZo and a half miles of East
Tremont. But those tZo and a half miles Zere a scene of desolation and
destruction such as the committee members had never seen. Some of the
right-of-Zay  had been cleared: Zhere once apartment buildings or private

1164
homes had stood Zere noZ hills of rubble, decorated Zith ripped-open bags
of rotting garbage that had been flung atop them. Some of the right-of-Zay
Zas being cleared; giant Zreckers' balls thudded into Zalls; mammoth
cranes snarled and grumbled over the ruins, picking out their insides. +uge
bulldo]ers and earth-moving machines rumbled over the rubble; a small
army of grime-covered demolition Zorkers pounded and pried and
shoveled. A thick layer of gritty soot made the very air feel dirty. ("I took
out a handkerchief and Ziped my forehead, and it came aZay black—
absolutely black," 0rs. Edelstein says.) Over the rumble of the bulldo]ers
came the staccato, machine-gun-like banging of jackhammers and,
occasionally, the dull concussion of an e[ploding dynamite charge. And in
the midst of this landscape of destruction, a handful of apartment buildings
still stood. From the outside, the East Tremont committee saZ that most of
their ZindoZs Zere boarded up. Going inside, they found the lobbies
littered Zith shards of broken glass that once had been big ornamental
mirrors and Zith the stuffings from the armchairs and sofas that had once
been their decoration, and smeared Zith e[crement not only animal but
human, from Zinos and junkies Zho slept in them at night. Stumbling
upstairs, the committee found the doors to many apartments ajar; through
them, they could see empty rooms,

Zalls ripped open by vandals Zho had torn the plumbing pipes out of them.
Other doors, hoZever, Zere closed and locked; on them, especially around
the keyholes, Zere scratches and gouges that shoZed Zhere someone had
tried to break through them. And behind these doors the committee found
people, not Zinos but respectable Irish or JeZish families like themselves.

Some of the apartments Zere furnished, nicely, for the families living in
them Zere the families Zho had alZays lived in them. In others, the
families Zere living out of  suitcases, and the only decorations Zere cheap
curtains placed on the ZindoZs in the hope that proof that someone Zas
living behind them Zould deter vandals from breaking them as they broke
the ZindoZs of unoccupied apartments. And the horrified East Tremont
houseZives heard the houseZives in these apartments inform them that they
Zere living there only temporarily, that they had been moved into them "by
the city" Zhen their old homes Zere demolished and that they e[pected to
be moved out of them—into other temporary quarters—Zhen it came time

1165
for the city to demolish them. The e[pressZay had pushed up to the very
Zall of one apartment building, concrete bellying right up to the brick.
Going inside, the committee found one family—a middle-aged couple Zith
tZo children—Zho  had been moved into the building only a feZ Zeeks
before, and Zho Zere obviously going to have to be moved out of it in
another feZ Zeeks. Standing shivering in cold rooms—for in most of the
remaining apartment buildings in Section 3 there Zas of course no heat—
the committee from East Tremont heard Zomen—respectable houseZives
like themselves, Zomen Zho had alZays been proud of the homes they
made for their families—state that they had been shunted ahead of the path
of the e[pressZay over and over again, forced to move—"like gypsies," one
said—from one condemned building to another, each one further along the
e[pressZay's route, for years. Disbelieving, the committee heard the topper:
these dispossessed families Zere forced to pay rent for their heatless hovels,
and each time they Zere moved they Zere hit Zith a 15 percent rent
increase.

Section 3 had received the same assurances that 0oses Zas noZ making to
Section 2, they said—back in 1946, Zhen the city had taken title to that
section. "The city" had even set up a Tenant Relocation Bureau—
supposedly to find them neZ, comparable living quarters. They Zere still
living in Section 3 because the Tenant Relocation Bureau (an agency
closely allied Zith 0oses)  had not found them such quarters. The only
apartments she had been shoZn Zere apartments "not fit for rats," one
bitter, middle-aged houseZife said. And the rents asked for those
apartments had been double Zhat she had been paying for a nice, tZo-
bedroom apartment— double Zhat she could afford. One elderly ZidoZ,
one of three tenants left in a tZenty-family apartment house, had been
ordered to put her furniture in storage and move into a single furnished
room. She Zas desperately holding on to the apartment in the hope of
something better because her son, an Air Force flier in .orea, Zas e[pected
home soon. :hen  he had left her, he had had a home, she said. "+e has a
right to e[pect a home" Zhen he gets back, too.

The 3ost had inquired about tenant relocation in Section 3. 0oses had

1166
replied. -None of the families living in the path of the Cross-Bron[
E[pressZay has been turned into the street. The city, through its Real Estate
Bureau, has treated every family involved in a considerate, humane
manner." From the tenants still living in Section 3—and from families Zho
had moved out— the East Tremont committee heard about the Real Estate
Bureau (another agency closely allied Zith 0oses J.

:hen   you first Zent to the office the Bureau had set up at 1 +ugh Grant
Circle, the committee learned, you Zere told that you had better try to get
an apartment yourself. As an inducement to do so—and thus save the
Bureau any Zork at all—you Zere offered S200 per room, little more than
enough to cover moving e[penses.

:hen   you returned to the office and said you had been unable to find one
that you Zere Zilling  to live in and that you could afford, the Bureau's first
reaction Zas to tell you that there Zas nothing more it could do, implying it
had Zashed its hands of your case entirely, and leaving you Zith a feeling
that there Zas no help available for you from anyone in the city
government. If you persisted, and insisted on being shoZn other apartments,
you Zould be taken—eventually—to inspect, along Zith other people Zho
had insisted, "comparable" apartments. Apartments that Zere indeed
comparable—and you had to be one of a lucky feZ to be shoZn any of
those, anyZay—bore rents three and four times those you Zere currently
paying. And there Zere hardly any of those available, anyZay. 0ost of the
apartments you Zere shoZn Zere ancient, filthy, cold, dark tenement and
slum Zarrens.

:hen,   in desperation, driven to Zillingness to accept the "stigma," you
asked if "the city" Zhich Zas destroying your home could not give you
another one in one of its public housing projects, you Zere told that there
Zere tens of thousands of people ahead of you on the Zaiting list; one
resident of the condemned buildings in Section 3 said she had been on the
list for si[  years.

And Zhat if you tried to hold out, to insist on the comparable apartment that
the city had promised you? :hen the time came, the city's Bureau had
methods for discouraging you. It Zould set a deadline, and inform you that
the $200 per room they Zere offering for moving e[penses Zould be

1167
reduced to $100 if you did not get out by that date. Then, if you still had not
moved, they might set another deadline—on Zhich the amount Zould be
reduced to $50, or to nothing. Then there Zas the barrage of threatening
notices and directives, designed to make you feel that you might return
home one day to find your belongings out on the street. One, sent out in
1949, told the recipients that the city required their premises "for the
immediate purpose of demolishing. . . . You Zill please take further notice
that upon your failure to remove from the premises Zithin the time
specified legal processes Zill be instituted to recover possession of the
premises." :hen  you protested —Zhen you formed a committee to protest;
yes, the D3's of Section 3 said, they had formed committees, too—all
protests Zere referred to 0oses, and 0oses Zould never even reply to
them. Insisting did no good. After intervieZing the tenants left in Section 3,
0rs.  Edelstein reported that "they kneZ of no one Zho Zas relocated by
0r.  0oses." Some 325 tenants had

moved out—been forced out—of the area by his tactics. But Zhen the
committee from East Tremont arrived in 1952—si[ years after "orderly
tenant relocation operations" had begun—there Zere still living in those
doomed, half-empty hulks in the e[pressZay's path no feZer than 250. It
Zas no Zonder that Zhen 0rs. Edelstein reported the results of the
committee's investigation at a neighborhood mass meeting, they "Zere
received as a nightmare."

But East Tremont's panic Zas soon replaced by hope.

The hope Zas based on faith in Robert 0oses, or, more accurately, in the
0oses mystique. East Tremont's pious JeZs still held the campaign of 1934
against him—"I hated him since the time he said he Zasn't JeZish," one
says—but they still believed in his image as a man above politics and
bureaucrats. Believing in that image, the people of East Tremont Zere sure
that if they could only present 0oses Zith an alternate route through their
neighborhood that Zas truly better than the route he had chosen, he Zould
accept it. And it did not take them very long to find out that such a route
Zas indeed available.

Bron[ Borough 3resident James J. Lyons; Lyons' chief engineer, 0oses' old
3lanning Commission ally Arthur V. Sheridan; and Sheridan's veteran aides

1168
had all been in on the laying out of the route 0oses had chosen. But Zhen
the East Tremont committee asked for an appointment Zith Lyons, Lyons
aide Charles F. Rodrigue] recalls, "Lyons fobbed them off to Sheridan, and
Sheridan fobbed them off to someone else"—and the someone else
happened to be a recent addition to the staff named EdZard J. Flanagan,
Zho Zas, Rodrigue] admits, "a capable engineer" but Zho had never,
during a long engineering career, been associated Zith 0oses and Zho Zas
"very cocksure of himself" (by Zhich Rodrigue]  apparently means he Zas
not afraid to say Zhat he thought). And Zhen the houseZives mentioned the
possibility of an alternate route, Flanagan, Zithout letting them finish, said
of course there Zas, took out a pen, said, "There's no reason the route
couldn't go this Zay," and sketched on a map before him the route through
Crotona 3ark that Zas precisely Zhat they had had in mind.

Flanagan Zas silenced—no one from East Tremont ever got an appointment
Zith him again—but he had given the houseZives conviction that the
alternate route Zas feasible. The Bron[ County Chapter of the NeZ York
State Society of 3rofessional Engineers agreed to make a formal study of it.
And one member of the society had enough e[perience Zith large-scale
highZay construction to do so—e[perience garnered Zorking, indirectly,
for Robert 0oses. Bernard :einer,  a refugee Zith a heavy accent, Zas the
brilliant engineer Zho, after Zorking during the 1920's on the :estchester
parkZay system, had gone to Zork for 0adigan-+yland and designed,
among other 0oses projects, all the concrete bridges on the Circumferential
3arkZay—although he could not pronounce "Circumferential"—and the
revolutionary three-span skeZ frame interchange that carries the :hite-
stone E[pressZay and Grand Central 3arkZay across each other in 4ueens.

T+E ONE 0ILE

1169
Then his independent outlook—he kept insisting that if 0oses did not
increase the grades on the Circumferential, it Zas going to flood in heavy
rains—got him dropped from the team. :einer, Zho had found it
impossible, despite his e[perience and acknoZledged brilliance, to get a
good job since, had learned the price of opposing 0oses, and he Zas not
Zilling  to pay it in full  any more, but he Zas Zilling to pay part of it. :hen
the Bron[ Chapter asked him to do studies of the alternate route, he agreed
only "on condition that I Zould  be anonymous" (another engineer's name
Zas signed to them), but he did do them—Zith his usual thoroughness,
draZing up not just a sketch but a complete engineering study that
demonstrated that the route through the park Zas not only feasible but met
every federal and state standard for e[pressZay design.

The arguments in favor of the park route Zere clear. By making only a
gentle alteration in the road's route—sZinging it just tZo blocks (one block
in some places) to the south, 1,530 apartments Zould be saved at no cost to
anyone: the road Zould not be made longer, its curves Zould not be made
sharper—its efficiency as a traffic-moving device Zould not be harmed in
the least. ":e  Zere happy then," recalls Lillian Edelstein. ":e   had been
Zorried, but Zhen Ze found there Zas a feasible alternate route, Ze figured
Ze Zere in business." The arguments in favor of the alternate route Zere so
clear. Believing in the myth of 0oses, the houseZives of East Tremont
Zere sure he Zould accept them. And it Zasn't until they tried to present
them to him that panic set in again. For neither he nor any of his aides
Zould even listen to those arguments. There Zould be no point in any
meeting, 0oses' office told 0rs.  Edelstein Zhen she telephoned after letters

1170
and telegrams had gone unansZered. The Coordinator had already decided
on the route. It Zould not be changed.

Even then, East Tremont felt it had recourse. "I mean, Ze felt that Robert
0oses might be poZerful, but he Zasn't the final say, Zas he?" says 0rs.
Edelstein. 0ost of the money for the e[pressZay Zas coming from the
federal government. In some vague Zay they didn't understand, the state
Zas

involved, too. They had elected officials in the city to represent their vieZs.
The informal tenants' committee had by noZ become a formal group:
ETNA, the East Tremont Neighborhood Association. And ETNA had found
a leader.

Sam Edelstein's Zife Lillian had never led anything. Ask her to describe
herself and she says, "I Zas just a houseZife"—and that Zas Zhat she Zas,
at thirty-nine a strikingly handsome one. But Lillian Edelstein had a big
stake in the fight. Not only Zould she lose her apartment—Zhich she loved
and Zhose $56 rent she could afford even on the $75 per Zeek Sam brought
home from his job as a blocker of Zomen's hats—if 0oses' route Zas
chosen, but her mother and her sister Zould lose their apartments, too: they
all lived at 867 East 176th Street, Lillian in 2F, her sister in 3F, her mother
in 3G. It Zas important to Lillian  Edelstein that she be close to her mother.
+er father had died just a little more than a year before, leaving Anna
Cohen, born in Russia and able to speak English only haltingly, alone. It
Zas all right as long as her children Zere close by. "But Zhat if Ze Zere
separated? :hat Zould  0om  do?" And it Zas Zonderful  that she could be
close to her sister—and to all the East Tremont girls Zith Zhom she had
groZn up. +er younger daughter, Janet, Zas only five, but her older girl,
Carol, Zas fifteen and a junior at Roosevelt +igh School, and Zhen she
heard she might have to leave all her friends, she began to cry. "I Zas
fighting for my home," Lillian  Edelstein says. "And my mother. And sister.
And daughter. I had a lot to fight for." In fighting she displayed not only
energy and determination but an indefinable quality of command. Soon
ETNA Zas turning to her for leadership, and she Zas providing it. She
organi]ed mass meetings and rallies and invited East Tremont's elected

1171
officials to them, and, refusing to be turned aZay by secretaries and
assistants, secured appointments to talk to them in person.

And their reaction Zas encouraging. East Tremont's congressman, Isidore
Dollinger, pledged his support. East Tremont's legislators, State Senator
Jacob +. Gilbert and Assemblyman :alter  +. GladZin,  pledged theirs.
0ost  encouraging of all Zas the reaction of the city officials Zho Zould
play the most direct role, not only of East Tremont's councilman, Bertha
SchZart], but of higher-ups, men Zho to these houseZives had been only
names in the neZspapers—names they associated Zith enormous poZer.
:hen   ETNA'S e[ecutive committee Zent doZn  to City +all  for the first
time, more than a little in aZe of their surroundings, Comptroller La]arus
Joseph put them at their ease, told them that 0oses' neZ highZays "are
making a jigsaZ out the Bron[," said that their alternate route Zas certainly
Zorthy of a full  study, promised to vote against condemnation of their
homes until such a study Zas made and said that if the study shoZed the
alternate route to be feasible, he Zould vote for it. Borough 3resident Lyons
received the delegation "cordially and Zarmly," one member Zrote. +e
promised that his engineering staff Zould make a formal study of the
alternate route. "The delegation left feeling that he Zas very much on their
side." TZo Zeeks later, those feelings Zere seemingly confirmed. Lyons

told the 3ost that his engineers had decided that the tenants' route Zas not
only "humane" but "feasible," that it Zould "save the city money, and that
he Zas in favor of it." Noting that Lyons had previously approved his route,
0oses angrily charged that the borough president Zas raising objections
noZ only because it Zas an election year and there Zas "local opposition."
Any local hardship Zill  be "mitigated," if not entirely removed, "by the
elaborate steps Zhich Ze have taken to move tenants in an orderly Zay into
public, quasi-public and other housing," and should be disregarded anyZay,
he said. "This route Zill be the backbone of traffic for centuries after a feZ
objecting tenants have disappeared from the scene. . . . You have from time
to time remarked that I do not have to be elected to office. 3erhaps that is
Zhy I am in a position to protect the really long-range public interest." +e
used his old threat—"Only recently you lost a substantial amount of . . .
money in the Bron[" by "blocking  the Bruckner E[pressZay"; the Cross-
Bron[ "Zill   cost more than thirty million dollars additional. . . . :ould   you

1172
like to see the project, noZ half completed, abandoned and remaining state
and federal monies spent elseZhere?"—and then escalated it by threatening
to resign as Construction Coordinator ("I should not care to carry this
responsibility any further if borough politics are to be injected into it"), but
Lyons replied that any insinuation that he Zould alloZ himself to be
influenced by the imminence of an election Zas "a damnable lie." "This is
not Russia. +ere Ze have democracy, and the people should be able to
speak out in order to save their homes." Councilman SchZart] had told the
tenants about the "Borough 3residents' 8nion," and they understood that, if
Lyons stood firm, 0oses' route Zould not be approved. And so it Zas Zith
a sense of victory in a righteous cause that, on Thursday, April 23, 1953,
more than tZo hundred East Tremont houseZives—East Tremont husbands
could not afford to lose a day's pay by skipping Zork—traveled by
chartered buses doZn to City +all, to hear the Board of Estimate decide
Zhether to give 0oses' draft damage maps the approval that Zould be the
first step toZard condemnation, and saZ the Board members file out of a
door on the raised platform—and then saZ, striding out among them, right
behind 0ayor Impellitteri,  the legendary Coordinator.

"+e came in and everybody hushed," says Lillian Roberts, "even the men
around the Board of Estimate. +e Zielded poZer, you could see, a poZerful
man and you could see it. Arrogant. The big T am. 0e!' Chest out. +e came
out of the private room and stood behind the 0ayor, and behind him Zere
tZo of his men. And the Zay he talked to the 0ayor! +e  practically ordered
him around. And Zhen it came time for him to talk" (0rs.  Roberts Zrinkles
up her face to indicate the disdain and scorn on 0oses'): " 'This is going
through, and this is going through, and that's all there is to that!' —that's the
Zay he talked." Says Barney Lambert: "+e dominated— -it Zas like he had
inherited a croZn. This sense of superiority Zas there." It took Lillian
Edelstein only a feZ moments to start losing the hopes Zith Zhich she had
come to City +all. "+andsome, tall, dark—a distinguished-looking man he
is. But a mean face. A mean person. :hen you looked at him, you saZ he
Zas a sour person. +e looked right at us—like Ze Zere little people. +e

made you feel you Zere little. And then he looked aZay. A horrible man.
+e Zas talking to each one of the borough presidents. +e had Lyons first.
+e had each one of them separately. And the horrible thing Zas they Zere

1173
all listening to him. :hispering.   No one Zas listening to us Zhen Ze
talked. :hen  Ze  Zere up there [speaking], they talked among themselves
or Zith their assistants. They're having a ball. You're talking and presenting
your case, and they're laughing about something else. They didn't even have
the courtesy to shoZ an interest." She had pinned her hopes on her borough
president, and his promise. Therefore, Lyons' statement surprised her. +e
favored 0oses' route, the borough president said. +e had alZays favored it.

0rs.  Edelstein Zas sitting beside Councilman SchZart] in the first roZ:
"Everybody's poking me in the back and saying, '+ey, Lil, Zhat's going on
here?' I said, 'I don't knoZ.' I had reassured them—that Zas Zhy they came
doZn the Zay they did, because Ze had a possibility of Zinning. :e  had a
meeting on Tuesday, and I said, 'Come doZn. +e's Zith us. ShoZ him Ze're
behind him.' So I said to Bertha, I said, T think he's pulling a double-cross.
Blast him.' She said, T can't, I'm a public official. But Zhen you go up
there, you blast him.' "

She did. At the conclusion of her short, carefully prepared speech at the
lectern at Zhich speakers stood, the houseZife looked up, pointed at Lyons
and said, "As for you, 0r. Lyons, I have this to say: You've double-crossed
the people."

:hat   happened then? "Flashbulbs. Impellitteri starts yelling, demanding
that I apologi]e. I said I'm not apologi]ing."  Jumping to his feet, red face
redder than usual, Lyons belloZed that all he had promised the tenants Zas
"a right to their day in court"; he had never, he said, given them any reason
to believe he Zas on their side. Rudolph +alley then disclosed that the
Board had held an e[ecutive session the day before at Zhich 0oses had
been present—and that at that session Lyons had attempted to have the
Board approve 0oses' route secretly, so that the day in court Zould be
meaningless. :hirling   on the borough president, the Liberal Council
3resident shouted: "Stop putting on a shoZ!" "Demagogue!" Lyons shouted
back.

The uproar changed nothing, of course. +alley and Joseph stuck by their
promise to the tenants, and their si[ votes kept 0oses from mustering the
tZelve necessary to approve the maps on initial submission, but at the
Board's ne[t meeting, a simple majority of its si[teen votes Zould suffice.

1174
Three hundred houseZives shoZed up at that meeting, bringing a neZ
nickname for 0oses' route—"+eartbreak +ighZay"—and  a copy of the
Bron[ engineering society's detail map of the alternative. Impellitteri
announced that the Board's chief engineer, Robert G. 0cCullough, Zould
"study" the map. 0cCullough must have been a quick studier indeed.
:ithin   a feZ  minutes, he announced that the alternate route Zas
"unfeasible." :illiam    Chapin pointed out to the Board that great sections of
the Bron[ had already been torn up for other sections of the e[pressZay and
for other highZays, Zhich, the 0oses 0an  said, had been approved by
federal and state governments on the premise that they Zere all part of a
single system—of Zhich the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay, Zith  the route
draZn by 0oses, Zas a vital

part. If the Board refused to approve the route, he said, :ashington and
Albany Zould refuse to put any more money into the e[pressZay—or,
possibly, into the other Bron[ highZays. State D3:   chief Tallamy had
already sent 0oses a letter threatening to do just that. If there Zas no
money, the highZays Zould remain unbuilt, and "somebody Zill have to put
the Bron[ back together." +alley accused Chapin of trying, on 0oses'
behalf, to "blackmail" the Board. "Demagogue!" Lyons shouted again. By a
vote of 10-6, 0oses' route Zas approved.

"It Zas a farce," Lillian  Roberts says. "It Zas like 0r. 0oses  runs the city."

8nderstanding this, Zhen the houseZives of East Tremont fought noZ, it
Zas Zith a sense of desperation. The poverty of their community made
fighting all the harder. Years later, an acquaintance casually remarked to
Lillian  Edelstein that another group of houseZives, Central 3ark :est
houseZives, had, in a battle over e[pansion of the Tavern-on-the-Green
parking lot in 1956, Zon a victory over Robert 0oses—and Zas startled to
see the eyes of the tall, dignified Zoman filling Zith tears of remembered
frustration. "Do you knoZ Zhy?"  she said bitterly. "Because they had the
money for an injunction, that's Zhy."

0rs.  Edelstein had been informed at the very beginning of her fight that
there Zere ample grounds for a full-scale legal, court battle, a battle Zhich
Zould, even if not successful in changing the e[pressZay route, force the
city to give tenants comparable neZ apartments. But, she Zas also

1175
informed, the legal fees could run to ten thousand dollars. +ad a single one
of the threatened tenants been a laZyer, Zith a personal interest in the case,
legal help might have been available free, but not one Zas. In the Bron[ of
Ed Flynn and Charlie Buckley, there Zere no political dividends—and quite
a feZ political disadvantages—to be reaped from opposing a project that Ed
Flynn and Charlie Buckley favored. Several young attorneys did come
forZard Zith  offers of legal assistance, but invariably their interest Zaned
quickly.

Ten thousand dollars? Lillian Edelstein had difficulty raising amounts far
smaller than that. "The feeling among people Zas, Zhat's the use," e[plains
Arthur .at].   "You can't lick City  +all.  And even if you could, you certainly
can't lick Robert 0oses. :e   Zere told by the politicians Ze saZ that Zhen
Robert 0oses Zanted his Zay, that Zas it. For a Zhile at the start—Zith
Lyons, Zhen he promised—they had hope. But noZ ..." "You'd think people
Zould fight  for their homes," says Saul JanoZit]. But 0rs. Edelstein had to
beg and plead to persuade families to chip in a dollar bill at a time, and each
time the dollar bills Zere harder to come by.

Nonetheless, a small band fought. 0ost of its members Zere businessmen
Zho kneZ the mass evictions of their customers Zould destroy their
businesses, but it Zas more than businessmen. Among the men and Zomen
of East Tremont Zere the sons and daughters of the revolutionaries Zho had
preached socialism and Zionism in the 3ale of Settlement, and on the LoZer
East Side, and some of them hadn't lost their faith in justice. "At that time
there Zere a lot of lefts around here," recalls Saul JanoZit].

But mostly, it Zas Lillian  Edelstein Zho fought.

Finding engineers Zilling to defy 0oses, the houseZife put them to Zork
draZing maps detailed enough to prove from every engineering standpoint
that their route Zas technically feasible. Then she put them to Zork
obtaining hard figures: e[actly hoZ much more 0oses' mile Zould  cost
than theirs. :hen  they came up Zith those figures—0oses' route Zould
require the demolition of fifty-four  apartment houses, ninety one- or tZo-
family homes and fifteen one-story "ta[payers" housing si[ty stores, for a
total of 159 separate buildings; condemning and demolishing them Zould
cost more than $10,000,000 more than Zould be required if the road ran

1176
Zhere they Zanted it to, even Zithout the cost of relocating 1,530 families
and the loss of the real estate ta[es (close to $200,000 per year at current
rates) from the demolished buildings, income the city Zould be losing year
after year forever—she undertook the harder fight of bringing those maps
and figures to the attention of the public and of public officials.

The press didn't help much. She took the maps to every daily neZspaper in
the city; e[actly tZo—the  :orld-Telegram   and, of course, the 3ost —
printed them. Only the 3ost displayed the figures Zith any prominence. She
alZays found a sympathetic ear at the 3ost; Joe .ahn and Abel Silver
dramatically documented the conditions in Section 3. But no other paper
portrayed those conditions in any detail. The three papers that counted most
in the city—the Times, the +erald Tribune and the Daily NeZs —never
mentioned them, and gave the Zhole Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay fight scanty
—and slanted—coverage. In attempting to enlist the support of other
sections in the fight her oZn Zas making, she ran into the selfishness that
Tallamy kneZ Zas one of 0oses' greatest assets in NeZ York (and that
0oses of course fostered by releasing details of his projects only one
section at a time). The East Tremont section of the Cross-Bron[
E[pressZay—Section 2 —Zas the e[pressZay's middle section. The
eastern section—Section 3— had already been almost cleared. But there
Zas a Zestern section, Section 1. Another 1,413 families Zere scheduled to
be displaced there for the e[pressZay. But Section 1 might have been in
South America for all the interest it shoZed in her pleas for support.

But she fought anyZay. Teaching herself to type, she typed onto stencils
and cranked out on the Y's mimeograph machine tens of thousands of
handbills, as Zell as postcards and form letters to public officials. She
persuaded the seven neighborhood movie theaters to shoZ slides
advertising the ne[t rally or City +all  hearing. "They let us stand outside
their lobbies for days Zith petitions and trying to raise money—Ze Zere
grateful for that." She organi]ed card parties—"Subscription $1." Learning
that local radio stations such as :BN;   Zere habitually in need of programs
to fill  up air time, she filled up that time Zith programs Zhose scripts she
Zrote herself.

1177
It Zas Lillian  Edelstein Zho arranged the rallies and mass meetings to
pressure public officials, Zho chartered buses to take East Tremont
houseZives doZn to City +all  for every official hearing on the e[pressZay.
0ost  difficult  of all, it Zas she Zho persuaded the houseZives to take those
buses. The people of East Tremont, Zho believed as gospel that "you can't
fight

City +all,"  had made one trip doZn to City +all on the assurance that, if
they Zent, they Zould Zin—and their loss had convinced them that the
gospel Zas gospel. Trying to keep up enthusiasm, Lillian Edelstein
scheduled Zeekly meetings at the Y but found that noZ, "if you got tZelve
tenants coming every Zeek, you Zere lucky." As for spending more days
traveling doZn to City +all  and sitting there for hours Zaiting for the Board
of Estimate to get to the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay item, "that Zas torture,"
she says. "If the bus left at ten o'clock, at nine-thirty you had to go around
and kick in the doors," JanoZit] says. But, time after time, she kicked them.
In an era in Zhich picket lines in front of City +all  Zere not yet
commonplace she even managed to have picket lines of middle-aged JeZish
houseZives marching outside City +all, carrying signs she lettered herself
at night.

And after a Zhile, it appeared that Lillian Edelstein's efforts Zere paying
off. For one key public official seemed to be listening.

During the committee's earlier intervieZs Zith members of the Board of
Estimate, Robert F. :agner, Jr., had appeared receptive; to their argument
that motorists' convenience should not be put ahead of people's homes, the
plump young 0anhattan borough president had responded Zith a nod that
seemed to indicate agreement, saying sincerely, "So they'll get to the
Catskills tZenty minutes faster." +e had left the stormy public hearing
early, leaving his tZo votes, tZo votes that, if added to Joseph's and
+alley's, Zould have killed 0oses'  route, to be cast by his Borough :orks
Commissioner and key strategist, :arren 0oscoZ.  Although he had voted
in favor of 0oses' route, 0oscoZ  had stated before voting that although
:agner  Zas voting for  the first step toZard condemnation, he Zould not
vote for the last—authori]ation for the city actually to take title—until
"every one" of the 1,530 families Zas properly relocated. NoZ, running

1178
hard for mayor, :agner  had 0oscoZ  put that promise in Zriting in several
letters to ETNA and, on August 5, himself put in Zriting an even stronger
promise. In a letter to ETNA signed by :agner and released to the press,
:agner  Zrote:

As you knoZ, I have consistently taken the position that I Zould not vote
for the acquisition of the property for the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay. I Zant
to assure you that I Zill vote against any resolution before the Board of
Estimate seeking to authori]e acquisition of that property.

On October 14, he made the promise in person, repeating it in essentially
the same Zords—"I Zill  vote against any resolution"—to more than a
thousand cheering and applauding East Tremont residents packed into the
assembly room at 3S 44 for one of Lillian Edelstein's rallies.

October 14, 1953, Zas quite a night for East Tremont. La]arus Joseph,
retiring as Comptroller, Zas present, and said movingly that "human
values" Zere more important than a highZay. The Democratic candidate for
Joseph's position, the Bron['s oZn LaZrence Gerosa, agreed. Bertha
SchZart], running not for the Council this time but for a 0unicipal  Court
judgeship, moved the audience to cheers and delighted nods by reminding
them of 0oses' threat to resign and then slyly adding: ":ell,  no one is
indispensable,

you knoZ." :hen   +alley,  :agner's  Liberal 3arty-backed opponent, voZed
his determination to continue the "fight to save the homes," both of the tZo
favorites for the mayoralty Zere firmly on record against 0oses' route.
":agner  promised," .at]   Zould  recall. "There Zas nothing vague about
that." It Zas no Zonder that Lillian Edelstein Zas confident. :riting    to
thank :agner,  she said the tenants Zould like him to get together Zith the
engineers Zho had draZn up the alternate route so he could see it Zas truly
feasible. :hy,  certainly, :agner   replied—just as soon as the hubbub of the
campaign Zas over. There seemed little reason to Zorry about a remark one
of Joseph's aides had made to her as he stood beside her listening to the
speeches: ":ill  they love you in December as they do in October?"

:agner  may have intended to keep his promise. According to at least one of
the aides familiar Zith his thinking at the time, he did. 0eeting Zith  a feZ

1179
ETNA representatives shortly after the election, he repeated it—along Zith
his crack about the Catskills. But :agner Zas a politician Zho  dealt in
realities, and as mayor he Zas to have a better look than as borough
president at the over-all realities governing politics in NeZ York City. No
mayor Zho Zanted to continue his political career could buck Robert
0oses, and Robert :agner  badly Zanted to continue his political career.
Just as 0oses hadn't bothered bargaining Zith the neZ mayor on his
Inauguration Day over the question of reappointment to the City 3lanning
Commission, so 0oses didn't bother bargaining Zith him noZ. +e gave him
a direct order. In his memoirs, 0oses recalls Zhat happened Zhen :agner
protested that he had promised East Tremont that he Zould move the
e[pressZay.

... I said, "I am sorry, Bob, but you Zill have to tell them you can't move it.
The city is not going to make that decision. The city pays only half the cost
of land. It is federal and state money that's involved and I represent these
officials. If  you try to move this E[pressZay you'll never get another nickel
from us. You Zill have to e[plain  that it Zas all a mistake."

:agner  Zas not a man to move quickly. It took him almost a year to come
around. But he came around.

:hen,   noZ, ETNA asked for the intervieZ he had promised them, he Zas
suddenly evasive. And Zhen, finally, the houseZives and storekeepers,
aZed, Zere ushered into the 0ayor's office at City +all and reminded him
of his promise, :agner,  in .at]'s   Zords, "said he didn't remember saying
e[actly that, and he turned to someone and asked him to look it up." Recalls
Lillian  Edelstein: "+e tried to tell me Robert 0oses knoZs Zhat he's doing
because he's an engineer. :e argued, and his aide said, 'E[cuse me, Your
+onor—he's not an engineer.' +e Zas alZays the same —friendly, very
polite, a good listener, he said he Zould look into it and let you knoZ." But,
says .at],  "Ze kneZ  by the time Ze had left the office that he Zas not
going to be supporting us." +alley and Joseph, East Tremont's allies, Zere
gone from the Board of Estimate. +alley's replacement, Abe Stark of
Brooklyn, indicated he Zould go along Zith Zhatever 0oses  and the 0ayor
Zanted. Gerosa, of the Bron[ Chamber of Commerce, "as a public official
seemed less dynamic than Gerosa as a businessman," .at] Zas to

1180
Zrite. "As far  as the . . . Tenants Committee Zas concerned, he seemed
never to have heard of them." Bertha SchZart], a 0unicipal Court judge
noZ, Zas no longer active in politics. Lyons Zould not grant them another
audience. They had no one to Zhom they could turn.

3roceedings dragged, hoZever. 3ossibly because :agner, in his an[iety for
election, had made a rare, flat promise and Joe .ahn persisted in reminding
the 3ost's readers of it—once reprinting prominently the letter stating "I Zill
vote against any resolution . . . seeking to authori]e acquisition of that
property," in other stories conceding that Zhile :agner had sometimes
modified that promise by stating only that he Zould not vote for acquisition
until all tenants had been relocated, so far no tenants had been relocated.
3ossibly because :agner, taking even a cursory look at the problem noZ,
could not understand Zhat the tenants could not understand: Zhy the route
couldn't be changed—at one hearing before the Board of Estimate, Zhen
0oses 0an  +odgkiss Zas ansZering all questions about the possible route
change by saying flatly and arrogantly, "It's impossible," the 0ayor, Zith an
unusual overtone of irritation in his normally placid tones, demanded curtly:
":hy   is it  impossible?" (+odgkiss replied that 0oses felt "it's just
impossible"; :agner  did not press the point.) 3ossibly because the state had
temporarily run out of highZay funds, so that no neZ contracts could be let
—and :agner  therefore had both an e[cuse to offer the Coordinator for not
speeding relocation proceedings as Zell as an opportunity to alloZ the e[act
Zording of promises to groZ a little vague in the public's mind. A key
element Zas the attitude of the aide the 0ayor had delegated to deal Zith
the tenants, Deputy 0ayor +enry Epstein, a distinguished attorney and
older man Zhom the 0ayor respected. Epstein—a former 0oses ally for
philosophical, not financial, reasons—noZ, moved by the tenants' plight,
made the mistake of making his oZn survey of the tZo proposed routes.
There Zas, he told :agner, not the slightest rational reason Zhy the
e[pressZay could not be moved over tZo blocks.

The City 3lanning Commission gave the tenants the type of public hearing
that might have been e[pected from a body controlled by a man Zho, if
given his Zay, Zould have abolished public hearings. A large delegation
had taken the day to ask the commission not to approve the 0oses route—a
long day. Commission chairman John J. Bennett, at that moment secretly

1181
negotiating a Title I transaction for Zhich he needed that man's approval,
refused to let even one tenant speak, saying that no public hearing Zas
required. But there Zas a Zhole series of hearings before the Board of
Estimate. Sometimes 0oses Zas present himself. "+e alZays looked
surprisingly young and vigorous," .at]  recalls. "+e  Zas very cool and
detached. +e didn't say anything. +e had his assistants to do the talking for
him. +e sat and listened. +e made some notes. 0y greatest anger at him
Zas that he didn't seem to be affected by all this—people Zere getting up
and telling these stories of hardship." But, despite 0oses' presence, the
Board kept postponing a final vote on his request to have the city authori]e
condemnation proceedings. After an emotional meeting Zith the ETNA
group and several Bron[ councilmen in :agner's office  at Zhich the 0ayor
Zas visibly moved

(and at Zhich he said, "Every member of the Board Zill Zant to knoZ the
difficulties facing each family in the path of the e[pressZay"), the 0ayor
interrupted one Board session—at Zhich 0oses had confidently e[pected
the issue to be resolved—to order 0cCullough, Zho had done a "study" of
the tenants' alternate route for Impellitteri in a matter of minutes, to give it a
little more consideration. The engineer returned a month later Zith a report
stating that Zhile the alternate route Zould spare the protesters' homes, it
Zould require the condemnation of almost as many homes belonging to
other people. You see, 0oses told the Board, it Zas just as he Zas alZays
trying to e[plain  to them: changing a route Zould just "trade in" one group
of protesters for another; no matter Zhere you tried to build a highZay in
the city, there Zould be protests, so the only Zay to handle them Zas to
ignore them. ETNA's leaders, Zho had been certain that not a single home
Zould have to be touched for the alternate route they had proposed, Zere
shocked by 0cCullough's findings—until  they reali]ed the trick that the
engineer had played. +e had studied an alternate route, all right, but not
their alternate route. Instead, he had selected a route that Zould require
large-scale condemnation and studied that instead. Epstein e[plained this to
:agner.  Over +odgkiss' violent objections, the 0ayor  ordered 0cCullough
to study the right alternate route this time, to let Epstein oversee the study to
make sure it Zas fair, and to complete the study before the Board's ne[t
meeting Zhen a final decision Zould be made.

1182
"A defeat for 0oses," the 3ost reported. The tenants felt it Zas. ":e  felt Ze
had Zon," Lillian  Edelstein recalls. Epstein, trying to reassure her, had told
her, in her Zords, "It's like a jury trial. If  they stay out long enough, they
Zon't convict you. Because it Zas dragging so—month after month, I
figured something is happening to hold him and his creZ."

On the day of the final hearing before 0cCullough, assembled in his office
in the 0unicipal  Building  Zas a full panoply of 0oses 0en:  Arthur  S.
+odgkiss, assistant general manager of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel
Authority; Stuart Constable, acting e[ecutive officer of the NeZ York City
Department of 3arks; :.  Earle AndreZs and Ernest J. Clark of AndreZs,
Clark and Buckley, consulting engineers; 0ilton Goul, district engineer,
State Department of 3ublic :orks  District Number 10, designated to
represent the State Department of 3ublic :orks by Bertram Tallamy,
Superintendent; Arthur B. :illiams,   liaison engineer, NeZ York State
Department of 3ublic :orks—and,  representing Lyons, EdZard J.
Flanagan, Zho, during the entire proceedings, Zould utter not one Zord.
These engineers and a do]en assistants had been assembled for the occasion
on the orders of Robert 0oses.

0oses had been active in other Zays, too. +e had no doubt that :agner
Zould fall  into line—years later, asked if there had been no chance at all
that the 0ayor Zould  overrule him, he Zould, Zith  a touch of surprise in
his voice that it should be necessary to ask such a question, say flatly, "Not
the slightest"—but Epstein Zas delaying the 0ayor's compliance Zith his
marching orders. The Deputy 0ayor had to be Zhipped into line. During
the Zeek before the 0cCullough hearing, he Zas.

Arriving  at 10:30 a.m., the time they had been told the meeting Zould

;er* representing the tenan surprised to find k

oted, seemed "very uncomfortable."

AJtbotlcl ■'--*  engineers in his office, the city engineer

D of theirs, backing doZn only after am

1183
angry pro

I j; : . v . 0oses' methods, the tenants had hired

a court rcportci -*tim transcript. Convinced that any reasons

riven lot turning doZn rte route could easily be disproved, they

yygflted once ftnd fol all not only to find  out Zhat those reasons Zere bu: \q
yr\ them O+ A ' I  illougb ordered the reporter out of the room.

Angrily the ETNA  engineer! demanded to knoZ Zhy, pointing out that the
city engineei had his oZn Itenotypist present, and that they Zere entitled to
theil 0:11   record 0cCullougJl  refused to give a reason. (Later, in his
official report Oi the proceedings, he said, ":e Zere holding  an engineering
Conference and nol fl public meeting"; his oZn stenotypist, he said, Zould

record any "pertinent tacts Zhich might develop.") ":e  said, 'If you're

telling the truth, you should have no objection to its being recorded,'" one
I'/I'NA  engineei recalls. They refused to participate in the meeting unless
llicii  repoilei Zas alloZed to he present; 0cCullough said flatly  that there
Zould be no meeting as long as the reporter remained in the room. The
I'/I'NA  engineers asked him to gel a ruling from Epstein. Certainly,
0cCullough  said lit- telephoned the Deputy 0ayor—and to their shock
Epstein

ruled that they had u<> right to have a reporter present, i in- ETNA
engineers held a hasty huddle. ":e Zere afraid to go <>n the record
Zithout a stenographer," one,

Leonard SZarthe, Zould say ''it seemed peculiar that [the] others seemed to
be afraid Of" having :hat   they s;iid set doZn in black and Zhite; "it Zas
ObviO8S the Cards Zere Stacked," s;iid Daniel J. O'Connell. They decided
to

Z.iik out ( )nce they Zere safely gone, the meeting Zas held—"as
scheduled,"

1184
0cCullough  blandly Stated In his report to :agner—and  its participants

arrived at the conclusion that u the original plan Zas the only acceptable
one"

and that il :O8ld    be "impossible to accept the alternate route," a
conclusion

Zhich maj possibly be e[plained in the 3act that the 0oses 0en again

managed to avoid discussing the true ETNA- -alternate route by discussing
.u\un the plu0\\  "alternate" 0oses had put out as a smoke screen.

(Epstein Zas SOOn to give the tenants Zho had trusted him another

shock Repeatedly, month aftei month, after carefully e[amining the tZo

\ Deput} 0avoi  had said theus Zas the better. NoZ, he suddenly his iimul
a\u\ he put his neZ opinion in Zriting in a letter to \\ aguei ^

+ie S sent I telegram to :agnei  appealing for an engineering

>m\ undei "propei circumstances.* 1 There Zas no reply-—and of the

ihoZdi:    ol t 0inute   meeting, .atl  Zas tO Zrite:

Its ol the fiasco in the City Engineer's office. The

nment I he\ permitted all to talk. They

s asked uions. I he 0ayor set a

time limit for  public debate and, at the end of it, called for the question ...
for acquisition of funds to acquire property and for building demolition.

Lyons moved the question, saying, "This is an engineer's problem, not a
layman's problem, and all the engineers unanimously support this route."
One by one the Board members voted—in the affirmative. The last man to
vote Zas Robert F. :agner, Jr. +e voted in the affirmative, too.

1185
"It Zas so fast," Lillian  Edelstein Zould recall years later. "I Zas positive at
that last hearing that Ze Zould Zin. Because of :agner. +e  had said so
straight out that he Zould never let them do it. +e had promised." Lillian
Edelstein Zanted to ask the 0ayor Zhat care had been taken for the
families, Zhat the relocation plans Zere. But she couldn't. She Zas crying.
.at]   asked instead. Lyons tried to stop him from speaking, but he Zent
ahead anyZay. 4uoting :agner's Zords  that he Zould not vote for
acquisition until he had been satisfied as to the relocation plans, he asked
the 0ayor Zhat  those plans Zere. The 0ayor said he did not knoZ.

Turning to +odgkiss, :agner  asked about the plans. +odgkiss said a neZ
approach had been decided on: instead of the city's oZn Real Estate Bureau
handling the job, it had been decided to let the job to a private firm, the
"highly efficient"  Nassau 0anagement Company, Inc. As .at] Zas to
Zrite: "The 0ayor   Zas assured that there Zould be feZ problems and that
all families Zould be Zell  provided for."

0ayor  :agner  asked [.at]]   if  this Zas satisfactory. [+e] said no. [.at]]
asked the Coordinator's representative if that office Zould publicly agree to
meet Zith the tenants' committee as a group and instruct the Relocation
Bureau to do the same, if the need arose to resolve problems. The
Coordinator's representative pledged to do so. :agner, at any time of
difficulty  in resolving problems around relocation, Zanted the tenants'
committee to knoZ that they could personally call upon the 0ayor's office
to help. +e made this last statement for the record.

And Zhy did +enry  Epstein change his mind, and, at the very last moment,
betray the neighborhood Zhich had counted on him for support?

Years later—Epstein long dead noZ, his ZidoZ not even knoZing Zhat the
author Zas talking about Zhen he raised the subject of her late husband's
change of mind—Robert 0oses, sitting in a cottage he had rented at Oak
Beach, staring out the big ZindoZ from Zhich one could see the Robert
0oses CauseZay and Robert 0oses State 3ark, Zould be asked that
question.

Charm flooded aZay from that ZindoZ. Dressed in the L. L. Bean
corduroys, a larger si]e noZ to cover the ample paunch, and an old button-

1186
doZn plaid shirt, the papers that signified completed Zork already piled
high by his armchair although it Zas only 9:30 a.m., a big cabin cruiser
Zaiting doZn  the Ocean 3arkZay at the Captree Basin for an afternoon's
fishing, he Zas the easy and gracious host. The poZerful face—still so
young at eighty—Zas rela[ed. Oh, that's not important, he said easily. Let's
talk about something else.

The author said he had come to talk about +enry Epstein. The e[pression
changed only slightly, the head sZung just a little, but all of a sudden the
author saZ not the paunch but the big shoulders and the big jaZ and,
beneath the big eyebroZs, the eyes. Then he could see Robert 0oses
remember that the author Zas a guest in his home. 0oses began to talk,
seemingly at a tangent, at first choosing his Zords, Zith pauses, and then,
Zarming up, as fast and fluid as usual.

"It happened to be a very, very complicated thing. ... A lot of personal stuff
got into it. . . . They had a couple of agitators up there . . . including a
Zoman Zho Zas running for judge . . . and Epstein got personal and nasty
about it and he finally got licked. ... I said, 'This Zoman, this chum of
yours.' +e said, 'She's not my chum.' I said, 'Oh, yes she is. She's your chum
all right.' I said, ':hat's   going to happen if Ze change the route— Zhich
Ze'll never do as long as I'm alive—Ze'll just be turning in these objectors
for another set.' And you knoZ Zhat he said? +e said, ':ell,  that's in the
ne[t district [not  0iss  SchZart]'s].' +e  made an issue of it Zith the 0ayor
to see Zho had more influence. . . ."

+e stopped as if that Zas all there Zas to say. The author prodded him.

"Epstein Zas a very able laZyer," 0oses said. "Outstanding laZyer. I had
knoZn him a long time."

:ell,   the author said, prodding some more, he did Zrite that letter saying
your route Zas best.

"Sure," 0oses said. "After he Zas hit over the head Zith an a[."

:hat   kind of an a[? the author asked. :hat  e[actly did  you do to him? But
there are limits to even a host's obligations. "I Zon't tell you Zhat :e  did to

1187
him," Robert 0oses said.

RevieZing the conversation carefully, hoZever, it is possible to Zonder if—
Zithout meaning to—Robert 0oses had.

About the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay as a Zhole, 0oses Zas more
e[pansive. Asked if he had not felt a sense of aZe—of difficulties of a neZ
immensity—Zhen, beginning active planning of the great road during the
Zar, he had first seen the miles of apartment houses in his Zay, he said he
had not. "There are more houses in the Zay [than on Long Island]," he said,
"there are more people in the Zay—that's all. There's very little real
hardship in the thing. There's a little discomfort and even that is greatly
e[aggerated. The scale Zas neZ, that Zas all that Zas neZ about it. And by
this time there Zas the prospect of enough money to do things on this
scale." Asked if he had ever feared that the tenants might defeat him, he
said, "Nah, nobody could have stopped it." As a matter of fact, the East
Tremont opposition hadn't really been much trouble at all.

"I don't think they Zere too bad," Robert 0oses said. "It Zas a political
thing that stirred up the animals there. Jim Lyons didn't knoZ Zhich Zay to
turn. But I just stood pat, that's all."

NeZ York's press also didn't see much significance in the East Tremont
fight. The 3ost gave it complete coverage, of course, and the :orld-
Telegram

occasionally devoted a fairly detailed story to it, but, aside from 0oses'
single personal appearance before the Board of Estimate (on the occasion of
Zhich the Times put his picture on page one), the rest of the city's big
dailies all but ignored it. :hen   they did devote space to it—a paragraph or
tZo at the bottom of a round-up of Board activities—the attitude they
displayed is of interest. This, for e[ample, Zas the Times's description of
the final, climactic hearing at Zhich Lillian  Edelstein sat crying in City
+all.

Five years of opposition and delay to the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay came to
an end Zhen the Board of Estimate unanimously voted to acquire land for a
one-quarter [sic] mile segment of the middle section. The fight put up by

1188
the tenants resulted in a virtual stalling of the overall Cross-Bron[
E[pressZay project, since the tZo ends of the artery are noZ finished.

:hy   Zouldn't  0oses shift the route of the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay
slightly, thereby saving 1,530 apartments, millions in state and city money,
months of aggravation and delay—and making his e[pressZay straighter as
Zell?

"I asked George Spargo that," says Joseph Ingraham, the Times reporter
Zho Zas occasionally on 0oses' payroll and Zho spent so much time
sociali]ing Zith  the 0oses team that he sometimes seemed to be one of its
members. "On the day of the ribbon cutting they Zere opening a Zhole
bunch of sections of different e[pressZays, and it Zas raining, really
pouring. George said, 'Let's sit this out, and Ze'll catch up to them at the
ne[t stop.' :e   Zent into a small bar in the Bron[ and I asked him there. +e
said, 'Oh, one of Jimmy Lyons' relatives oZns a piece of property up there
and Ze Zould have had to take it if Ze used that other route, and Jimmy
didn't Zant it taken, and R0 had promised him Ze Zouldn't.' At  the time,
George even told me the piece of property involved, but I've forgotten."

The people of East Tremont also Zondered Zhy 0oses Zouldn't shift the
route. "I mean, Ze heard lots of rumors about the bus terminal," Lillian
Edelstein recalls. "The politicians Zere alZays trying to tell us that Zas the
reason. But Ze could never find out anything about it. And, I mean, I never
believed that. I could never believe that even Robert 0oses Zould take
fifteen hundred homes just to save a bus terminal."

Spargo's statement may have been untrue. So may the rumors. If any
relative of Bron[  Borough 3resident James J. Lyons oZned property along
either the alternate or actual e[pressZay route, the author Zas unable to find
evidence of that fact—although, since, in the Bron[, politicians' oZnership
of property Zas habitually concealed through a many-layered netZork of
intermediaries and bag men, a netZork baffling even to contemporary
investigators and all but impenetrable tZenty years later, his failure is not
conclusive. 0oses' refusal to alter the route—une[plainable on the basis of
his given reasons, all of Zhich are demonstrably false—may have had
nothing to do Zith the fact that the "bus terminal" of Zhich Lillian  Edelstein
speaks —actually the "Tremont Depot" of the Third Avenue Transit

1189
Company, at the northeast corner of Crotona 3ark—lies in the path of the
alternate

route and Zould have had to be condemned if that route Zas adopted. It is
possible that 0oses' selection of the original route—it Zas he, not any
engineer, Zho selected it—Zas based on no more than Zhim, and that his
subsequent refusal to alter it Zas due to nothing more than stubbornness,
although if so it Zas a Zhim quite inconsistent Zith 0oses' customary
Zhims: almost invariably over a period of forty years, Zhenever he had a
choice of routes, he selected the one that Zould keep his road straight, not
the one that Zould make the road curve.

+oZever, in attempting to find an e[planation for 0oses'  refusal to change
the route, the Third Avenue Transit depot stands out. :ith the e[ception of
si[ old, small, dilapidated broZnstone tenements, housing a total of
nineteen families, it Zas the only structure of any type that Zould have had
to be condemned if the alternate route Zas used. (See map, page 864.) In
effect, for Zhatever reason, Robert 0oses elected to tear doZn 159
buildings housing 1,530 families instead of tearing doZn si[ buildings
housing nineteen families—and the terminal. It is a fact that the Third
Avenue Transit Company secretly told 0oses it Zas very an[ious not to
have the terminal condemned, for its location Zas strategic for its buses.
And it is also a fact that for tZenty years it Zas considered an open secret in
Bron[ political  circles that key borough politicians held large but carefully
hidden interests in Third Avenue Transit. And it is also a fact that, in Bron[
politics of the period, Zhat Third Avenue Transit Zanted, Third Avenue
Transit got.

But the unfortunate element in searching for the e[planation of 0oses'
refusal is that in the perspective of the history of NeZ York City it is
unimportant. :hether  0oses  refused to change the route for a personal or
political reason, the point is that his reason Zas the only one that counted.
Neighborhood feelings, urban planning considerations, cost, aesthetics,
common humanity, common sense—none of these mattered in laying out
the routes of NeZ York's great roads. The only consideration that mattered
Zas Robert 0oses' Zill.  +e had the poZer to impose it on NeZ York.

1190
"+ighly  efficient"  Zas the only description of the Nassau 0anagement
Company given at the Board of Estimate hearing. A more detailed
description Zould have been instructive.

Nassau 0anagement had been founded three years before on a shoestring
Zith virtually  no financial resources behind it. But it Zas almost
immediately to obtain immense tenant relocation contracts for several
Robert 0oses highZay and housing projects. One contract alone netted the
firm more than tZo million  dollars.

The men Zho oZned stock in Nassau 0anagement thus made fortunes
Zithout risking  more than a token investment. The ostensible key men
behind the company—its founders of record—Zere tZo loZ-echelon City
+ousing Authority  employees Zho quit the Authority to form the firm. But
they Zere only front men. The key figures behind Nassau 0anagement,
men Zho Zould profit  from the relocation of the East Tremont tenants,

Zere :illiam    S. LebZohl, counsel of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel
Authority; Samuel Brooks, assistant director of the 0ayor's Slum Clearance
Committee; and +ousing Authority chairman 3hilip J. Cruise—three of
0oses' key aides.

first man: After a lifetime, a piece of paper, an edict

from the authorities, and Ze must all leave

our homes. mendel: Rabbi, Ze've been Zaiting for the 0essiah

all our lives. :ouldn't   this be a good time

for him to come? rabbi: :e'll   have to Zait for him someplace else.

0eanZhile,  let's start packing.

— FIDDLER  ON T+E ROOF

It must have been an accident that the "East Tremont" office opened by the
"highly efficient"  Nassau 0anagement Company Zas located not in East
Tremont but in :est  Farms, another neighborhood, inconveniently far aZay

1191
for the 1,530 families the office Zas supposed to serve. It must have been
an accident that the office Zas open only a feZ hours a day, that those hours
Zere constantly changing, that no notice Zas ever given of Zhat those hours
Zere going to be, and that inquiring about them by telephone Zas almost
impossible since the single phone number listed for the office seemed to be
alZays busy—so that often East Tremont houseZives, having made the
long trek over to :est  Farms, found Zaiting for them only a locked door. It
must have been an accident that there Zere never enough company
representatives in the office, so that the houseZives Zaiting for help had to
Zait on long lines.

But East Tremont's houseZives soon found, as one put it: "They didn't Zant
to help you, they just Zanted you out. And they Zanted you out fast." A
series of incentives Zas placed before the tenants to accomplish this end.
On her first trip to the office, a houseZife Zas not offered any help in
finding a neZ home. Instead, she Zas told that if Nassau 0anagement had
to find her one, she Zould receive only a hundred dollars for moving
e[penses, far less than Zould be needed to cover those e[penses. If she
found one herself, she Zas told, she Zould receive a hundred dollars for
each room in her present apartment. If she found one fast, she Zas told, she
Zould receive a flat "fee" of eight hundred dollars. And if she found one
real fast, she Zould get not only eight hundred dollars but reimbursement
for moving e[penses—actual moving e[penses. It Zas only if you refused
to accept these incentives and insisted on the help that had been promised
that you Zere

given tZo cards, each bearing an address of an "available" apartment—
"comparable" to the one you noZ occupied.

"I Zent to one," a houseZife recalls. "This Zas in the :est  Bron[.  It Zas a
Zalkup—four flights  of stairs. The apartment Zas on the top floor. And
there Zas already a line there of Zomen that had been sent over. 3eople
Zere standing on the staircase—all doZn the four flights—and outside.
:hat   Zas the sense of standing on line? If the apartment Zas decent at all,
someone else Zould have taken it. :hat Zas the sense of sending hundreds
of Zomen to look at one darn apartment? I Zent home."

1192
Lillian  Roberts Zaited on such a line. ":hen  I finally  got to the apartment,
it Zasn't comparable at all. It Zas so dark and crummy. It Zas only three
rooms, and I had told them I had four. And they Zanted tZice as much rent
as I Zas paying. For that filthy thing! I still  remember it. +orrible. I
Zouldn't go back to that office again." Some houseZives Zere so desperate
that they did go back. :omen Zho  Zould never have believed that they
Zould ever be in such a position found themselves standing around a bare
storefront office, hour after hour, day after day—"like beggars," one says
bitterly—hoping that someone Zould give them a home.

Sometimes, Zhen a Zoman got to the address Nassau 0anagement had
given her, there Zas no one around to let her in. If she Zas lucky enough to
find a superintendent or a janitor, he sometimes told her that the apartment
Zas not vacant—hadn't been for months. Back they Zent, day after day,
from the apartments they had been sent to see in the :est Bron[ or River-
dale or Throgs Neck, back to the Nassau 0anagement office and then out
again in a search of something they kneZ noZ they Zere never going to
find. "I remember that Zinter," says one of those Zomen. "I got old that
Zinter."

If you still  refused to accept either the apartments that Zere offered or the
cash, other incentives Zere applied.

"As soon as the city took over, the superintendents moved out," Lillian
Edelstein recalls. "They got other jobs. You couldn't blame them. But you
couldn't get any kind of services. The halls got dirty. There Zas garbage to
take out. ... I Zent to fight," 0rs.  Edelstein says, but Nassau 0anagement
said the city Real Estate Bureau Zas responsible for maintaining the
buildings. The tenants protested to the Real Estate Bureau, but the only
result, as 0rs. Edelstein recalls it, "Zas that they assigned one man to take
care of si[ or eight buildings, and soon he Zas gone, too." And alZays the
final ansZer Zas that on all matters pertaining to the Cross-Bron[
E[pressZay the "final say" had to come from Robert 0oses. .at]   had
asked 0oses' representative "if that office Zould publicly agree to meet
Zith the tenants' committee ... if the need arose to resolve problems," and
+odgkiss had made that agreement. NoZ they called 0oses and +odgkiss.
":e   never even got a reply." They telephoned :agner's office. :agner  had

1193
"Zanted the tenants' committee to knoZ they could personally call upon the
0ayor's office  to help." "Ah, Ze  never got him on the phone, or anyone else
but a secretary," one ETNA member says. "They started bouncing us back
and forth to the agencies again."

The city formally took title  to the 159 buildings in Section 2 on

January i, 1954. Almost simultaneously, the heat and hot Zater in many of
the buildings Zas mysteriously cut off. Eleven days later—eleven days of
getting the same run-around from the city, and the same lack of response
from 0oses' office—they  told their story to the 3ost. The 3ost got an
ansZer from Benjamin Cymrot, e[ecutive officer of the Real Estate Bureau
("Repairs take time, and Ze are Zorking as quickly as Ze can. . . . Essential
services" Zill be maintained), but Cymrot's definition of "essential services"
Zas evidently different from the tenants'. For many of them—for much of
the Zinter—the only Zarmth in their apartments Zas provided by the little,
inadequate electric heaters they purchased themselves, or by gas ranges
they kept turned on all the time, and the only hot Zater Zas the Zater they
heated in pots. There Zere a feZ desultory attempts at repairs, but many of
the buildings had no heat or hot Zater for Zeeks at a time. One had none for
three straight months.

Incentive to get out Zas provided also by mortification of the mind. "
[Nassau 0anagement] said they Zere only obligated to shoZ you tZo
apartments," 0rs. Edelstein recalls. "If you turned doZn tZo apartments
that they offered you, they said they Zere through Zith you. They said
either you get out on your oZn, or they dispossess you. They said they'd put
you out in the street." The threat Zas backed up by dispossess notices, all
designed to look like court orders although they Zere not, each couched in
language more urgent and ominous than the last. On 0ay 1, a Friday, every
tenant remaining in the area received one ordering him to vacate or be
evicted by the end of the month. After a Zeekend of hysteria, a tenants'
committee accompanied by Councilman Louis 3eck Zas able to see 3ercy
Gale, director of the city Real Estate Bureau. Luckily for them they had
brought a 3est reporter along; Gale hastily e[plained that the notices Zere
only "a necessary legal prerequisite" (to Zhat he didn't say) and that "no one
Zill  be evicted if they do not vacate at the end of thirty days."

1194
The escalation of incentives produced the desired results. 0ore than a
thousand of the 1,530 families had stuck it out through the terrible Zinter
because the alternatives Zere so shattering. ":hat choices did most of them
have?" Lillian Edelstein asks. "Either to move to apartments for the same
rent they Zere paying—Zhich meant for most of them moving to the slums
— or to move above their means, Zhich Zould be a great, great hardship
for these people." In the spring, hoZever, they began to move out faster and
faster.

The old people clung hardest. "They Zere the ones I really felt sorry for,"
Lillian  Roberts says. These Zere very poor old people—Social Security had
come too late for many of them—and many of them Zere alone in their
little apartments, the parents or Zives or husbands Zho had come Zith them
from the little shtetls of their youth gone noZ. "There Zere a lot of ZidoZs
in East Tremont." But as long as they could stay in their tiny apartments—
on the first or second floor, mostly, because stairs are hard on old people —
they had something: the Senior Citi]ens program at the Y, familiar places to
sit and stroll in the sun and, most important, companionship. If they had to
move, they Zould have nothing. Impoverished elderly couples Zere

eligible for apartments in City +ousing Authority  projects. But although
there Zere at the time a number of Authority projects under construction,
the Authority's 0oses-dominated board Zas deaf to these couples' pleas that
a substantial number of them be alloZed to move into the same project, so
that they could stay together. Couples eligible for apartments in projects had
no choice but to take them; they could not afford decent living
accommodations anyZhere else. Impoverished elderly men and Zomen
Zho Zere alone in the Zorld Zere not eligible for  Authority projects; the
0oses-controlled Authority  made no provision for single people. Such men
and Zomen had no chance at all to stay together. "Do you knoZ hoZ poor
they Zere?" Lillian Roberts says. "They didn't have the carfare to visit each
other." The old people of East Tremont Zere terribly frightened of moving.
But Robert 0oses had made certain they Zould be more frightened of
staying. One by one, faster and faster, the old people moved out, too. By
June, half the 1,530 apartments Zere vacant.

Their emptiness made possible the application of neZ incentives.

1195
"As soon as the top floor of a building Zas empty, they'd start tearing off
the roof and the top stories, even," says 0rs. Edelstein. ":hile people Zere
still living  in it, they Zere tearing it doZn around their heads!" As soon as
an apartment Zas vacated, moreover, its ZindoZs Zere boarded up, Zhich
advertised to vandals defenseless premises available for the plundering.
:atchmen  Zere apparently a lu[ury neither the city nor Nassau
0anagement could afford. The other tenants could hear the vandals at
night, tearing the plumbing out of the Zalls for money, ripping the boards
off the ZindoZs and breaking the glass for sheer malice, throZing bricks
and other debris off the roofs to hear the crash Zhen they hit the ground.
"Then," 0rs.  Lucille  Silverstein says, "started the muggings." Soon the
people living in those half-empty buildings—lonely, scared, many of them
old and alone—Zeren't safe in their oZn lobbies or on the flights of stairs
Zhich suddenly seemed terribly long and dark. Terror, that most efficient of
eviction agents, stalked through that boarded-up, half-empty neighborhood.

Along that mile, noZ, most of the one- and tZo-family frame houses had
been demolished. As the demolition creZs Zorked, they had piled the
lumber they Zere tearing apart in the back yards of those houses, and Zhen
they left, they had left the lumber there in piles tZenty-five and thirty feet
high, stacked as if for a bonfire. Soon, thanks to vandals, the bonfires
bla]ed and the remaining apartment houses stood not only among these
heaps of lumber but among gaping, debris-filled pits, some thirty feet deep
—the basements of Zhat had once been other apartment houses. Into one,
someone had driven an automobile, and it lay there, stripped and
abandoned, for months. To mark the site of other apartment houses there
Zere jagged-topped brick Zalls, ten or tZelve feet high, and the space
betZeen those Zalls Zas filled Zith bricks, sharp-edged shafts of steel and
shards of broken glass. "The rats Zere running like dogs and cats in the
street," Lillian Edelstein says. So thick Zas the grime hurled in clouds into
the air by the demolition

that Dominick Tesone, hanging desperately on to his three-family frame
house, spoke of living in "dust storms."

8nsupervised children Zalked single-file along the tops of those brick
Zalls, trying, as children do, to see Zho could keep longest from falling—

1196
but if they fell, it Zas onto those shafts and shards. There Zere no fences
around those gaping pits; parents lived in fear that their kids Zould fall into
them. One mother, Zho normally picked her tZo little boys up at school
every day, Zas late one day, and, hurrying along the route they took home,
saZ them jumping back and forth across a hole in the street. Rushing up to
them, she saZ that the hole Zas perhaps tZenty feet deep.

The people still left along the mile Zere the last holdouts against Zhat they
regarded as injustice. Tesone Zas informed that he could receive only
$11,000 for his three-family frame house because 0oses had established
that as the price for all the frame buildings along that mile. "They gave
$11,000 for a one-family shack, they gave the same to all the houses along
the Zay," Tesone says. "0ine Zas a good house. It Zasn't fair." The
appraisal he commissioned set its value at $18,000; the city representative
said that appraisal might Zell be fair, but that didn't matter; $n,ooo Zas the
price. Tesone had hired a laZyer and Zas going to fight on. Other people
Zere still left along the mile because they had no place else to go. The
family Zith  eleven children, for e[ample, had been unable to find any
landlord— at any price—Zho Zould give them an apartment. The City
+ousing Authority  had promised them one, but kept saying that no
apartment large enough Zas yet available. The people Zho Zere left Zere
still hoping that the city, and Robert 0oses, Zould keep the promises they
had made.

They tried to protest. They called the city agencies pleading that Zatchmen
be assigned to the area, and that fences be erected to keep children from
falling into the pits. Surely, they said, Zith hundreds of Zorkmen in the
area, a feZ could be spared to put up fences. But alZays, after being
shunted from one agency to another, they Zere eventually told that the State
Department of 3ublic :orks   Zas in charge of all physical arrangements in
the area, and Zhen they called the State D3:, the ansZer Zas that Zhile the
D3:   Zas technically in  charge, the actual Zork Zas being carried out
under the direction of the City Construction Coordinator, and he Zas the
only one Zho could help them. And Zhen they called the Coordinator's
office, they Zere never able to speak to anyone e[cept secretaries Zho told
them that someone Zould call back, and no one ever did. :ater and
electricity Zere suddenly and mysteriously cut off and Zhen, after protests

1197
to city agencies Zere publici]ed by the 3ost, they Zere restored, they Zere
suddenly and mysteriously cut off again. Tesone's home shared a fire Zall
Zith the adjoining building. One day, Zhile Tesone Zas still living on one
side of that Zall, demolition began on the house on the other side of that
Zall. +e  could see his Zall being Zeakened by vibrations. "One day, it'll
come right doZn on us," he said. Telling his laZyer to drop his appeal, he
moved out.

And alZays, there Zere the threats. Speed Zas essential, the Nassau
0anagement Company kept saying. :ork  on the e[pressZay itself Zas

going to begin any day. And as soon as it did, anyone left in 4he area Zould
be put out in the street Zith no further Zarning. 'That Zas all I heard," one
holdout remembers. "If you don't get out, Ze'll put you out in the street."
Out in the street! Out in the street! As the Tsar had harried them—or their
fathers or their grandfathers—out of the shtetls of the 3ale, the Coordinator
harried them out of East Tremont. By November, the Nassau 0anagement
Company could proudly announce: "In less than ten months, Ze have
relocated 90 percent of the 1,530 occupants of Section 2."

over the +arlem, Zould be the most e[pensive road constructed in all
history, Zould cost not the $47,000,000 that 0oses had originally
"estimated" but $250,000,000. NoZ that 0oses had cleared the right-of-
Zay for the e[pressZay, he had no money to build it—and, in fact, Zas not
able to get it under Zay again e[cept on a token construction scale until
1957, after the Federal Interstate +ighZay Act of 1956 had authori]ed an
increase in the federal contribution from 50 to 90 percent. Even then,
moreover, there Zould be continual delays. Bids came in far over contract
estimates; neZ estimates Zould have to be prepared and neZ rounds of
bidding held. Construction of the final segment of the Cross-Bron[
E[pressZay—the Bruckner traffic circle near its eastern end—Zould not be
completed until 1973. The rest of the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay Zould not
be completed until 1963. And the one mile of the e[pressZay in East
Tremont Zould not be completed until i960 —five years after 0oses had
removed from that mile the people Zho lived in it.

Five thousand people had been removed from East Tremont, but that Zas
5,000 out of 60,000. There Zere still 55,000 left. Chance, moreover, had

1198
spared East Tremont the fate of other communities disemboZeled by a
0oses highZay operation—the heart of this community, bustling East
Tremont Avenue, had escaped the Coordinator's scalpel.

But the thuds of the "skullcracker," the huge sZinging Zrecking ball, the
crash of crumbling Zalls and the rumble of trucks carrying the Zalls aZay
had been merely a prelude, the rattle of rifle fire from a skirmishers' picket
line before the battle is fully joined and the big guns come into play. For
0oses' Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay  had been designed by a single criterion:
its efficiency as a traffic-moving device. This meant keeping the
e[pressZay as level as possible, and East Tremont Zas a neighborhood of
hills. "To keep the grade doZn, Ze had to go doZn," Ernie Clark e[plains.
Going doZn meant going under the surface of East Tremont. And under
that surface Zas solid rock, and there is only one Zay to get rid of solid
rock.

"First you heard the sound, and then, a feZ seconds later, you felt the
tremor, like a rumbling in the earth, a shaking under your feet," recalls
Barney Lambert, Zhose office Zas seven blocks aZay. The sound of the
e[plosions of the huge masses of dynamite required "Zas a boom, a real
boom —like a bomb." Says 0rs. Silverstein: "The Zhole neighborhood
seemed to be shaking."

It Zas shaking. The blasting found out every flaZ in the earth under East
Tremont. It caused the bed of a subterranean river beneath Southern
Boulevard to shift. 0ortar  and brick Zere jarred loose from one end of the
neighborhood to the other. As apartment houses settled or Zere pushed up
as the earth beneath them heaved, huge gaping fissures began to appear in
their Zalls and ceilings. Tenants Zere hastily evacuated—some in the
middle of the night.

Lambert and 0rs. Silverstein lived blocks aZay from the blasting. 3eople
Zho lived closer felt as if they Zere at ground ]ero in an air raid.

The scene in the great e[cavation—a deep gash in the earth 120 and more
feet Zide and a mile long—Zas fantastic. Looming through the clouds

1199
of dust Zere a mile of tall cranes, huge earth-moving machines, batteries of
bulldo]ers, battalions of trucks—and an army of men, their helmets glinting
through the dust stretching aZay as far as the eye could see.

At intervals, red flags Zould be unfurled and men in pairs Zould carry them
up to the streets crossing the e[cavation and, standing Zell aZay from the
e[cavation, Zave traffic to a halt. Then, at some signal that could not be
discerned from above, the men doZn in the pit Zould all run to take shelter
behind their equipment. There Zould be a pause and then the e[plosion
Zould come, and the giant steel-mesh mats that had been placed over the
e[plosion areas Zould rise in the air and fly several feet aZay as if they
Zere bits of carpet. Sometimes long black limousines Zould pull up to the
edge of the embankment, and men carrying rolls of maps and blueprints
under their arms Zould clamber out and scramble doZn the embankments
Zith their aides, and even if the residents did not knoZ that these Zere the
general staff of the campaign—Colonel Chapin and General Farrell, Zho
had built highZays through jungles; Captain 3raeger, Zho had built the
Normandy invasion dry docks—there Zas no mistaking the commander in
chief, for sometimes, in the late afternoon, the longest black limousine of
them all Zould pull up, generally at one end of the mile, and out, to see the
job "on the ground," he Zould jump and, barking orders and questions at
map-carrying aides, he Zould stride through the dust and the grime,
seemingly oblivious to it, until he reached the other end of the mile, Zhere
the limousine, having crept around the side streets, Zould be Zaiting for
him.

The blasting Zas only intermittent, and it Zent on no more than a year. But
from the huge pit came also the harsh, staccato, machine-gun-like yammer
of the jackhammers, the deep rat-tat-tat of the drills cutting holes for the
dynamite, the clank and grind of the treads of the bulldo]ers, the hoarse
belloZ of the huge earth-moving equipment, and the heavy, jarring pound
of the pile drivers driving doZn the shafts of steel called "long rock
anchors" to strengthen unstable formations and, Zhere the ground Zas soft,
piles that Zould last for centuries—all combining in a roar that made the air
shudder. The blasting Zas bad enough but the roar Zas unbearable. "It Zas
the drilling, the constant drilling. You just heard it constantly through the
day hours. You never got used to it."

1200
:orst   of all, to these people for Zhom cleanliness Zas so important, Zas
not the noise or the danger but the dirt. One of the by-products of blasting
or drilling in  solid bedrock is rock dust, an e[tremely fine-grained, abrasive
grit. The grit—East Tremonters called it "fallout"—arose from the
e[cavation in a continual fine mist. "It just filled  the air," Lambert recalls.
"If you closed your ZindoZs  and put toZels in to seal them up, it Zas there
anyZay. I don't knoZ hoZ. You got up in the morning, and you felt like you
had slept in dust. :hen  you came home from Zork, you couldn't sit doZn
Zithout sZeeping it out of the chair. It Zas impossible to live cleanly —you
felt like you Zere covered Zith silt.  All the time."

0any  of the stores nearest the area around the e[cavation—those on
Southern Boulevard and 0armion—had been torn doZn. Reaching the
others Zas difficult because they had been fenced for the duration of the
con-

struction Zork. Getting to East Tremont Avenue from the area on the south
side of the e[pressZay Zas difficult. :hen   the e[pressZay Zas completed,
there Zould be overpasses to get across it, but the overpasses Zould not be
built until it  Zas finished. And many of the streets that Zould be left across
it Zere closed for Zeeks at a time during various stages of construction. "To
go shopping and come back Zith bundles Zas like going to Brooklyn," one
houseZife recalls. Families on the north side found it difficult to get across
to the amenity on the south that Zas also an important part of their lives:
Crotona 3ark. And, Zorst of all, there Zas the uncertainty about Zhen the
construction Zork Zould be over. "It Zent on year after year, you knoZ,"
e[plains Lambert. "Sometimes it Zould stop for a month or tZo or three
months Zithout any e[planation being given, and then it Zould start up
again. After a Zhile, it seemed to have been going on forever." There Zere
perhaps 10,000 people living right ne[t to the e[cavation. They began to
move out.

Some of East Tremont's landlords, trapped for years in the squee]e betZeen
rising costs and rents that could be raised only Zhen a tenant moved out,
and cursed Zith tenants Zho seemed never to move out, Zelcomed the
opportunity of replacing them Zith tenants Zhose poverty and lack of
family stability insured a higher turnover and more 15 percent increases,

1201
and Zhose lack of big-city sophistication in dealing Zith landlords made it
easier for landlords to skimp on services. The people moving into the
vacated apartments Zere mostly Negroes—not the middle-class or loZer-
middle-class Negroes Zith Zhom East Tremont's middle-class and loZer-
middle-class JeZs had found it easy to be compatible, but impoverished
Negroes—many on Zelfare, many neZly fled to NeZ York from the rural
slums of the Deep South—to Zhom the JeZs found it impossible to relate,
even had they Zanted to. Frightened because the neZcomers seemed the
advance guard of the ravaging army that had previously been kept at bay on
the far side of Crotona 3ark, they didn't Zant to.

"The vandalism started then all over the neighborhood," one houseZife
recalls. Furniture in apartment-house lobbies Zas slashed, urinated on and
finally simply  lugged boldly out, to be replaced perhaps once, perhaps
tZice, but finally  not to be replaced, so that the lobbies stood empty and
bare. The Zalls of the elevators Zere marked by things sharp, Zere painted,
Zere marked again—and finally not painted any more. Break-ins began.
NeZ, stronger locks appeared in apartment doors, and then strips of steel to
keep intruders from prying under the door jamb. The break-ins increased.
Then there began to be the first, terrifying, reports of muggings.

Still, most of East Tremont's people stayed; their apartments Zere simply
too precious to them for even fear to scare them aZay. In i960, the year the
e[pressZay's East Tremont section opened, there Zere still—four years
after demolition in the area had begun—an estimated 25,000 JeZs in that
neighborhood.

Because most of the East Tremont section of the e[pressZay runs through a
deep cut, all one sees of the great road from adjoining streets is a gap in the
ground. There is nothing visible rising out of that gap. But sit

ne[t to that gap—in one of the playgrounds that 0oses built on "e[cess
condemnation" parcels—or open the ZindoZ in one of the apartments—
appro[imately 3,000 apartments—Zhose ZindoZs face the gap during rush
hour, Zhen, doZn beloZ, the e[pressZay is packed solid Zith cars and
trucks si[ lanes across, and one soon reali]es that something is rising from
that gap, filling the air above and around it, filling it Zith something that, if

1202
one touched a match to it, Zould make it burn Zith a pale-blue flame—the
flame emitted by burning carbon mono[ide.

The human constitution apparently adapts itself to such fumes. One can sit
ne[t to the e[pressZay for five days, observing it, and notice that by the
fifth day, the nausea and headache and di]]iness one felt at first are gone.
But no one knoZs Zhat the inhalation of carbon mono[ide—and assorted
hydrocarbons emitted by automobile motors—in diluted form produces, for
no study has ever been done on the effect of prolonged e[posure to such
gases.

Rising out of that gap in the ground also—concentrated by its high Zalls—
is the noise of herds of cars and trucks. And that noise is much harder to get
used to than the fumes. Talk to people Zho live in the 3,000 apartments ne[t
to the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay and one hears applied to that noise, over
and over again, a single adjective: "unbearable."

At rush hours, the sound of a great e[pressZay on the flat is the sound of
the sea, a steady, surging roar. But the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay in East
Tremont is not flat. As the huge diesel tractor-trailers, the monsters of the
highZays, come to each incline, they are forced, having been unable to
maintain speed because of the creeping rush-hour traffic, to shift gears and
inch their Zay up the hill, accelerator pedal jammed hard to the floor. So the
sound of the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay at rush hour is a roar, punctuated by
the snarl and grind of shifting gears and the snort and groZl of acceleration,
and, of course, the sudden, loud harsh backfires—and all of this sound,
magnified by the underpasses and the high brick Zalls that line the sides of
the e[pressZay cut, comes out of that cut and over the neighborhood as if
out of a gigantic echo chamber. "At nights, you should hear those trucks,"
says a man Zho lives a full block from the e[pressZay. "You should hear
those trucks at four o'clock in the morning. It's noisy all the time, but you
usually Zake at about that time, and you can't get back to sleep."

0ore  people moved out of the buildings bordering the e[pressZay. Some of
the vacancies Zere filled by the type of family that Zould have filled them
in the days before there Zas an e[pressZay, for there Zere still tens of
thousands of JeZish families in NeZ York struggling to get out of the
LoZer East Side and other slums. But, Zith the noise, most moved out

1203
again—as fast as they could. And the families that replaced them Zere the
families from the other side of the park. 0uggings increased, and there
began to be reports of robberies, thieves breaking right into your home.
Before long, the old residents of the 3,000 apartments bordering the
e[pressZay Zere gone, moved aZay. Then the residents of the apartments
ne[t to those began to move, and then the residents of the apartments ne[t
to those.

The demolition for the e[pressZay had taken 5,000 of East Tremont's






T+i  FOIFO:EI

- v - »/- - .

■ -; t '- ' "'.': '- '.' - « t]'-  ]  " • " -

began to k^ for a Zay oiir. 0any  :t - iv.rt: - = -t ~: : -:.:

~t "' ' --:--"::  i:"

-,.« — - -:-i-:t : -:  :: v t : E-: 7:—:-.- "  = '-. — '■ :e: t r: :hi: i .-.i.-.  -::

;: :■■'--. - :-: :: :h

"] :■:•.:  r 1! E

..... ,-., — t ^-B: ,-

no looser. The pe

1204
people of East Tremont tried to fight. They

E:: r. i ? 2: — - . - -

die forces of decay had not yet penetrated. There Zas one major Zeakness

in the position. 1ms northern section. ■—»~c*t»iy adjacent to the 180th

'-'"- - ' '- " ' '-' "  - ' ". "t - B ' . : B ■ ; B ■ B- ■-■■::- :^

'■'-' -'-' "-' "' '-".--  ':\ -----. --B■: .-..-.-; :.-  \r.i 5.r.:e s '- ' -- - - ' -- - --' ::---.:-.B
-: -B :B - ; -..- ;;-■-. r.cei mat family* moving up to the Bron[ could afford
significantly higher rents

' ; ' '- '-- "--" '-'-  ".: " "t 1 :■-  Ei ■ ^ ■B B?B---.;-: - u^es

-' - ' " : "- -' -' - ■ -  ■■- B:- - - ] ;.-■--.  .■;-'B- " B f. ;; ~.i.:.:r. :'~2r.

consideration important to East Tremont, Zhich felL as Barnev Lambert put
it, "mat if young people Zant to move into the same area "in Zhich they
greZ up, they ought to be able to dc E . the co mm u ni t y felt, this
Zeakness could be remedied: the papers Zere full of neZ programs for the
ritv— "Title  I cheO-I^ma"--Zhich,  the papers said Zen designed to

1205
provide boosing at rents that people could afford to

Lillian  Edelstein Zas gone—as Zere most of E Id leaders, Zho.

having lived in the destroyed southern section of the communm. Zere no
longer part of iL But the community found neZ leaders, including Lair and
Vivian Dee, an eager, vivacious young house* ier the auspices

of the East Tremont Neighborhood +ouse, they Zorked up a plan for a Title
I development called "Bron[ 3ark South," brought Lyons and every other
politician Zho seemed interested in on the planning from the beginning, and
One day in 1959 found themselves—to their shock—accompanying the
borough president to Randall's Island for an appointment—a personal
appointment—Zith the 0ayor's  Committee on Slum Clearance, Robert
0oses, chairman. "In a smaller room, his personality Zas even more
overZhelming [than in the Board of Estimate chamber]," Lambert recalls.
But this time, he Zas cordial. :ith   a grin that filled the room, he began the
meeting by saving to Lyons: ":ell.  Jim. Zhat can I do for you?"—and
Zhen Lyons told him. he said he Zould do it. .noZing  his poZer, Lambert
and the rest of the committee Zere optimistic. "It Zas refreshing to have
him on our side," he Zould recall.

But 0oses' concept of the project soon e[panded. :'hile  ETNA  had
conceived of it as one of limited si]e, limited to an area of run-doZn
tenements so as not to hurt sound housing in the area, under 0oses it Zas,
to their dismay, e[panded into a huge concept of 5,400 units—that Zould
destroy no feZer than tZenty-four of the best remaining apartment houses
in the area. 0oses' concept of middle-income rents, moreover, proved to be
higher than ETNA'S—so much higher that the people of East Tremont, Zho
had proposed the project, reali]ed that they Zere not going to be able to
afford to live in it. One resident vividly recalls the ETNA meeting at Zhich
the 0oses-proposed scale of rents Zas announced: "A groan of despair
Zent up from the room."

ETNA tried 0itchell-Lama,   over Zhich, by 1959. 0oses had little control.
After Zeeks of effort—JanoZit].  taking time aZay from  his store,
personally canvassed every vacant site of any si]e in the neighborhood—
they came up Zith one that seemed perfect: a vacant tract ne[t to the Bron[

1206
River, large enough for a 200-unit development. Officials of the +ousing
Redevelopment Board told them the tract Zas already oZned by the city, so
that there Zould be no problems Zith acquisition. In innumerable meetings
Zith city  departments, they ploZed their Zay through masses of red tape.
They found a developer Zho Zould build the project at a cost that Zould
keep rents doZn to the level they Zanted, and the developer's plans Zere
approved by the +ousing Redevelopment Board. And then it turned out that
the board's original description of the oZnership of the tract Zas not
complete. The citv did, indeed, oZn it—but only in the technical sense that
it oZned all land under the control of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel
Authority. 0oses had acquired the tract some years before for another of his
highZays, the proposed Sheridan E[pressZay. ":e found out Zho had title,
and Ze Zere in despair Zhen Ze heard it Zas 0oses," 0rs.  Dee says.

0rs.  Dee learned that only part of the land Zas needed for the e[pressZay,
and that if its route Zas shifted from the center of the tract to the side,
plenty Zould be available for the housing project. Even if it Zasn't moved,
there Zould be enough land available for a smaller, but still feasible,
project. 'T asked [Triborough] for an appointment," 0rs. Dee says. "They
said it Zould take time and they Zould be in touch Zith us. They

Zeren't." :hen   she pressed for an ansZer about moving the e[pressZay,
"they just said 'impossible.' "

Then hoZ about the rest of the tract, the part not needed for the
e[pressZay? she asked. "I mean, this Zas something Ze could have gone
ahead and done ourselves. Everything Zas ready. Triborough said that the
3ark Department had jurisdiction over anything left over. So I spoke to
[3ark Department e[ecutive officer John 0ulcahy].  +e said it Zould  be
okay if Triborough Zould say okay. Triborough said the 3ark Department
had to decide. This Zent on for about a year." :hat happened at the end of
the year, basically, Zas that the community gave up the fight. "You knoZ,
there Zasn't one hell of a lot of fight left in it any more," Ed .orn  says.
"They had taken our best housing. Our best people Zere gone." And 0oses
"had taken the heart out of" those Zho Zere left. "The manner, the style, in
Zhich he operated affected them. The Zay he changed Bron[ 3ark South. It
Zas the same Zay he had operated Zith the e[pressZay. :aking up

1207
0onday  morning and finding out that he had announced something, and
there Zas nothing you could do about it. It Zasn't just that this [the 159
structures torn doZn for the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay] Zas very good
housing stock. And that it Zas just torn doZn. It Zas the manner in Zhich
this Zas done. The manner had a major impact on hoZ the community
reacted to change thereafter. +e left them Zith feelings of being isolated,
left alone—that no one cared, no one listened to them. :hen they tried to
protest, they Zere poZerless. No one seemed to be interested in their
problem. This does generate a feeling of helplessness, of resentment. :e're
abandoned! The manner, the implementation, of the highZay affected the
area as much as the highZay. They had had their licks [on the e[pressZay].
They had had their big community thing. And they had found out you
couldn't do anything against him. There Zas a feeling of letdoZn, of
discouragement, that nobody cared about them. Certainly he didn't care, and
nobody else in the city interfered Zith him. The city just Zouldn't listen.
DoZntoZn  Zasn't interested. 3eople threZ up their hands. :hat Zas the
use?" 0rs. Dee and her associates had been begging the young couples Zho
Zanted to stay in the community to hold on "for another year or tZo," until
the neZ housing Zas available. ":e  got them to stay on for a Zhile," she
says, "but after a Zhile Ze just couldn't keep telling them to Zait—or, if Ze
told them that it Zouldn't be long noZ, they didn't believe it. To tell you the
truth, Ze didn't believe it, either." :ith   each month that passed, of course,
the young couples could see the blight creeping closer to them. They began
to move out, faster and faster, and into the apartments they vacated moved
the tenants East Tremont feared. Some of the older people in the area began
to leave.

As they left, the chief reason for staying in the neighborhood left Zith them.
"To me, East Tremont Zas friends," Cele Sherman says. ":hen there Zas a
JeZish holiday, you met your neighbors on the street, Zalking. :ell, one
Rosh +ashanah, I Zalked doZn from my house doZn Clinton Avenue to
Southern Boulevard, crossed over and Zalked back, and didn't meet one
person I could say '+ello' to. :hat  Zas the sense of staying?" Thanks to the
middle-income housing programs of the mid-1960's, there Zere noZ at

least apartments—rentals and loZ-priced cooperatives—in "decent areas"
that couples such as the Shermans could afford to rent or buy. Says Cele

1208
Sherman: ":e  left, too."

The one mile of the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay through East Tremont Zas
completed in i960. By 1965, the community's "very good, solid housing
stock," the apartment buildings that had been so precious to the people Zho
had lived in them, Zere ravaged hulks. :indoZs,  glassless e[cept for the
jagged edges around their frames, stared out on the street like sightless
eyes. The entrances to those buildings Zere carpeted Zith shards of glass
from Zhat had been the doors to their lobbies. In those lobbies, Zhat
remained of the Zalls Zas covered Zith obscenities. And not much
remained. 3laster from the Zalls lay in heaps in corners; the bare Zood
Zhich had been e[posed Zas shattered and broken. The pipes Zhich had
been behind the Zood Zere gone, ripped out, melted doZn and sold for the
feZ dollars that Zould buy the ne[t fi[.   Elevators no longer Zorked.
Staircases Zere broken and shattered. Banisters had been ripped from their
sockets, for scrap and a fi[ if they Zere iron, for malice, an e[pression of
hatred and revenge on an uncaring Zorld, if they Zere Zood. RaZ garbage
spilled out of broken bags across the floor. The stench of stale urine and
vomit filled  the nostrils. One tried to look doZn only enough to avoid
stepping on the piles of feces, Zhether mercifully dried or reeking fresh—
animal and human. There Zas no heat in those buildings; if they Zere
homes, they Zere homes as the cave of the savage Zas a home. And yet
they Zere homes—homes for tens of thousands of people. They Zere
homes for Zelfare tenants and for the poorest of the Zorking poor, for
families that drift from one apartment to another Zithout, seemingly, ever
paying a month's rent in full—urban gypsies—for mothers Zho say
desperately to the stranger, Zhen they can be induced to talk to the stranger:
"I got to get my kids out of here," and for children Zho come to the door
long after the knock is heard and peer around and ask the stranger, Zith fear
in eyes and voice: "Are you the man from the Zelfare?"

After seven o'clock, the residential streets of East Tremont are deserted,
roamed by narcotics addicts in gangs like packs of Zolves. Even on East
Tremont Avenue, by nine o'clock most of the stores are closed, the lights
out, huddled behind steel gates and iron bars.

1209
The streets of East Tremont are carpeted so thickly Zith pieces of shattered
glass that they shine in the sun. Garbage, soaked mattresses, bits of broken
furniture and, everyZhere, small pieces of jagged steel fill the gutters. The
sideZalks are full of holes, the streets—particularly the streets overlooking
the e[pressZay, for the e[pressZay has made them dead-end, reducing
traffic on them to a minimum—Zith  the hulks of stripped automobiles.
Once East Tremont, Zhile the e[pressZay Zas being built, had had the look
of blit]krieged  London; noZ it looked as London might have looked if,
after the bombs, troops had fought their Zay through it from house to
house. It had the look of a jungle.

Of the people Zho had lived in East Tremont, Zho had found in that
neighborhood security, roots, friendship, a community that provided an
anchor—friends and synagogue and Y—a place Zhere you kneZ the people

and they kneZ you, Zhere you could make a stand against the sZirling,
fearsome tides of the sea of life, only the very old, too poor to move, still
lived, almost barricaded in their free]ing apartments. As for the rest of the
people Zho had lived there, they Zere gone.

Let's see. :e have built and are building Zide parkZays and e[pressZays,
bridges and tunnels, Zithout crossings and lights, Zith service roads for
local use and parking, belt and crosstoZn systems Zhich take through
traffic off ordinary streets and enormously cut doZn congestion. . . . Then
Ze have great neZ parking spaces in parks, at beaches and along parkZays.
... :e  have eliminated railroad grade crossings Zhich blocked traffic for
miles on Atlantic Avenue and RockaZay, and substituted boulevards for
tracks. Trolley tracks are being ripped up all over toZn to promote the floZ
of traffic. . . .

Stick around, 0r. Editor, and continue to give us your support. Traffic Zill
run pretty smoothly here Zithin three years, the time needed to carry out
our plans.

Soon 0oses Zas documenting the e[tent of those plans. Blueprints Zere
ready, he said, for Zidening the city's old boulevards—+orace +arding,
4ueens, Conduit, Northern, Eastern—and his old parkZays— the Belt, the
GoZanus, the Cross Island, the Laurelton—and for building close to a

1210
hundred miles of neZ, broader roads, "e[pressZays" to carry not only
automobiles but trucks and buses. Soon NeZ York's neZspapers began to be
filled Zith  names like "Bruckner," "Van :yck,"   "0ajor   Deegan,"* "Cross-
Bron[,"  "Brooklyn-4ueens,"  "+arlem River,"  "NeZ England,"
"Richmond," ":illoZbrook,"     "Clove Lakes." Also  on the agenda, he
disclosed, Zere three monumental "crossings" of 0anhattan Island: "LoZer
0anhattan," "0id-0anhattan"    and "8pper 0anhattan"  elevated
e[pressZays. And that Zas just Zithin the city. On Long Island, the old
parkZays Zhose names Zere synonymous Zith his—the Southern State, the
Northern State, the :antagh, the Ocean—Zere to be Zidened and e[tended,
the Northern State deep into Suffolk County, and neZ parkZays—the
0eadoZbrook,  the Captree—Zere to be built. In :estchester, the Cross
County and Sprain Brook parkZays Zere to be built, the Taconic, Bron[
River and SaZ 0ill  Zidened. The blueprints may, indeed, have been
spilling over the floors. :hat   Robert 0oses Zas proposing Zas the
Zidening or construction from scratch of no less than tZo hundred miles of
roads. And the agenda did not include merely roads. There Zere also the
facilities to carry traffic under and over the Zaters that divided the city.
:hile   completing Ole Singstad's huge Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, he had
begun preliminary planning for tZo huge bridges, a "Throgs Neck" span
tZo miles east of the Bron[-:hitestone,   and a "NarroZs Crossing" to
Staten Island.

During the 1920's, Robert 0oses had announced a program—his stateZide
state park and parkZay program—that had dZarfed any plan for the
recreation of vast urban masses conceived anyZhere in the Zorld in
recorded history.

During the 1930% Robert 0oses had announced a program—of NeZ York
City bridge and arterial highZay construction and park reconstruction —
Zhich, taken as a Zhole, as the single, coordinated system it Zas, dZarfed

* 0ajor  :illiam     F. Deegan Zas City Tenement +ouse Commissioner and a
former state commander of the American Legion. +e died in 1932.

any public Zork or coordinated system of public Zorks built in any modern
city, and, perhaps, in any ancient city as Zell.

1211
The program Robert 0oses Zas announcing noZ—during the 1940's —
Zould, if  completed, dZarf those earlier programs. And, he said, there Zas
no reason Zhy it shouldn't be completed; it Zas, he said, no mere visionary
dream; not only blueprints but money—mostly state and federal money,
reserved during the Zar years through his efforts in Albany and :ashington
—Zere largely in hand; "the postZar highZay era is here."

But, strangely, the troops did not respond to this ringing trumpet call as they
had to his trumpet calls of the past.

Even before the Zar, of course, some urban planners had begun to see—
largely because of the effects of 0oses' creations—that building more
traffic facilities Zould  not in itself cure traffic congestion.

These planners had said—the Regional 3lan Association had been saying it
since 1929 and, after the opening of 0oses' creations during the 1930's,
Zith increasing urgency—that the movement of people and goods in a great
metropolitan region required a balanced transportation system, one in Zhich
the construction of mass rapid transit facilities kept pace Zith the
construction of roads. During the last tZo or three years before the Zar, a
feZ planners had even begun to understand that, Zithout a balanced system,
roads not only Zould not alleviate transportation congestion but Zould
aggravate it. :atching  0oses open the Triborough Bridge to ease
congestion on the 4ueensborough Bridge, open the Bron[-:hitestone
Bridge to ease congestion on the Triborough Bridge and then Zatching
traffic counts on all three bridges mount until all three Zere as congested as
one had been before, planners could hardly avoid the conclusion that
"traffic generation" Zas no longer a theory but a proven fact: the more
highZays Zere built to alleviate congestion, the more automobiles Zould
pour onto them and congest them and thus force the building of more
highZays—Zhich  Zould generate more traffic and become congested in
their turn in an ine[orably Zidening  spiral that contained the most aZesome
implications for the future of NeZ York and of all urban areas. The only
remedy that could check that vicious spiral Zas the coordination of neZ
highZays Zith neZ  mass transit facilities—and not only Zas NeZ York's
Coordinator not planning any such facilities himself; his monopoli]ation of
construction funds and his hold over the city's government Zere making it

1212
impossible for anyone else to plan them either. +e Zas, in fact, destroying
some of the old facilities, not only the trolley tracks Zhich he Zas boasting
about "ripping up all over toZn" but the Third Avenue elevated mass transit
line, Zhich he Zas moving to have torn doZn. VieZed in this light, tearing
tracks up and elevateds doZn Zas not an achievement but a disaster. And
tearing them doZn Zas only one method of destroying mass transportation
facilities. 0oses—Zhether  by design or out of ignorance of the effect of his
policies—Zas employing other methods Zith equal effect. +ighZays
competed Zith parallel mass transit lines, luring aZay their customers. 3our
public investment into the improvement of highZays Zhile

doing nothing to improve mass transit lines, and there could be only one
outcome: those lines Zould lose more and more passengers; those losses
Zould make it more and more difficult for their oZners to sustain service
and maintenance; service and maintenance Zould decline; the decline
Zould cost the lines more passengers; the loss in passengers Zould further
accelerate the rate of decline; the rate of passenger loss Zould
correspondingly accelerate —and the passengers lost Zould do their
traveling instead by private car, further increasing highZay congestion. No
crystal ball Zas needed to foretell such a result; it had already been proven,
most dramatically perhaps in NeZ Jersey, Zhere the Susquehanna Railroad
had lost over tZo-thirds of its passengers in the ten years folloZing the
opening of the George :ashington Bridge, but also in NeZ York, Zhere the
NeZ York Central had been hit hard by the Triborough Bridge, and the
Long Island Rail Road had Zatched more passengers drift aZay each time a
neZ 0oses parkZay opened. No crystal ball Zas needed, therefore, to
foretell the end result of 0oses' immense neZ highZay construction
proposal, coupled as it Zas Zith lack of any provision Zhatsoever for mass
transit: it could not possibly accomplish its aim, the alleviation of
congestion. It could only make congestion, already intolerable,
progressively Zorse. +is program Zas self-defeating. It Zas doomed to
failure before it began. It just didn't make sense.

It made less sense still, these planners felt, because of certain implications
peculiar to the 0oses style of highZay building.

1213
Roads opened neZ areas to development. (0oses' preZar parkZays had
caused a vast upsurge in population on Long Island before the Zar, both in
Brooklyn and 4ueens, and in the suburban counties of Nassau and Suffolk.)
SubZays opened areas to development, too, but development in a different
pattern. Because people arrived home from the subZay on foot and didn't
Zant to Zalk too far after they reached their stop, subZay-inspired
development Zas development close to subZay stations: high-density,
predominantly apartment-house development. There Zere suburban-type,
single-family-home communities in NeZ York City served by the subZay—
Sunset 3ark Zas one—but the single-family homes in these communities
had been placed on small plots by developers Zho kneZ that to make these
homes attractive to prospective purchasers, they Zould have to keep the
radii of the communities, and the required Zalking distance Zithin them,
reasonable. 3eople arriving home on parkZays arrived home in
automobiles. It Zas relatively easy for them to travel far longer distances
from their "stops," the parkZay e[its. Reali]ing  this, developers Zere able
to take advantage of people's groZing desire for open space to build on
larger plots of land, to spread out the communities in Zhich people lived.
Even in 4ueens and southern Brooklyn, communities created by the
opening of 0oses' Cross Island and Belt parkZays Zere characteri]ed by
larger lot si]es and loZer population densities than those created by the
opening of subZays. Development beyond the city line, freed from the
inhibition against large lots inherent in the city's rigid gridiron block
pattern, spread more loosely—and Zidely —still, and as the open spaces of
Nassau began to fill up and developers looked for fresh stretches of land to
subdivide, they found themselves looking

—and building neZ communities—much farther aZay from the center of
the city than Zould have been the case if the impetus to such development
had been not roads but railroads. Once, groZth in the NeZ York
metropolitan region had been, to a great e[tent, upZards—people being
piled on top of people in apartment houses. NoZ the groZth Zas outZards.
Not only Zas the population of the region groZing rapidly (9,000,000 in
1920, it Zas 11,000,000 in 1930, and, despite the braking effects of the
Depression, 12,000,000 in 1940), but it Zas spreading aZay from the
traditional center of the region even more rapidly.

1214
+ad jobs folloZed the people out into the suburbs, the implications of this
spread might not have been so serious. Given the advantages of "open
space," they might in fact have been desirable. And normally, because land
Zas relatively so cheap on Long Island, businesses and industries Zould
have folloZed the people out.

But 0oses' policies made it impossible for them to do so. 0ost roads foster
commercial as Zell as residential development, but his parkZays Zere
barred to commercial traffic. +is behind-the-scenes persuasion of Long
Island politicians to ]one residential almost all the adjacent land may have
kept the parkZays pristine and beautiful, but it also kept the land most
desirable for commercial development on Long Island closed to such
development. Industries and businesses Zhich could have imported raZ
materials and shipped out finished products by rail instead of truck shied
aZay from Long Island because the Long Island Rail Road, Zhose lines
should have formed the hub of industrial development, Zas a rickety
"Toonerville Trolley"  line, and because Zithout a rail connection to NeZ
Jersey the rail lines Zhich brought the goods and commerce of the nation
into NeZ Jersey could transport it to Long Island only by e[pensive
lightering. So industry and business stayed back in NeZ York City.

In the decade after 0oses opened the Southern State 3arkZay in Nassau
County, 200,000 neZ residents—about 50,000 families—moved into the
county, but only 12,000 neZ jobs Zere created in the county. This meant
that about 38,000 family breadZinners plus tens of thousands of others
from the parkZay-opened areas of Brooklyn and 4ueens had to come back
into the city to Zin that bread. +ardly had the Zar ended Zhen the surge to
the suburbs resumed its preZar pace, leaped beyond it and soared to
hitherto undreamed-of proportions, spilling beyond Nassau into rural
Suffolk. Every projection made by planners shoZed that hundreds of
thousands of families Zould be moving to Long Island Zithin the ne[t feZ
years. The vast majority of the family breadZinners Zere going to have to
travel into the center city every day to Zork. To the drivers Zho had already
crammed to capacity and beyond capacity all 0oses' roads Zould be added
tens of thousands of additional drivers. +oZ could you possibly build
enough roads to accommodate them?

1215
And Zhat about city streets? Once these tens of thousands of additional cars
reached the center city, hoZ Zere they supposed to move around in it?
Above the streets? The blighting effect of elevated structures had long since
been documented; ":e did not tear doZn the . . . elevated [mass transit]

lines to have them replaced Zith a ma]e of overhead motor highZays Zhich
Zould rob the city of light  and air," said 0anhattan Borough 3resident
Edgar J. Nathan, Jr., a reformer. BeloZ the streets? The ma]e of
underground subZays and utility lines made underground construction
prohibitively e[pensive. On the streets? The streets Zere already crammed
Zith all  the vehicles they could possibly hold.

And Zhere Zere these cars supposed to park? To 0oses' highZay trumpet
call Nathan quickly added a loZ-key but penetrating counterpoint: "0r.
0oses e[plains everything beautifully  but not Zhere the motorists are going
to put their cars." 3lanners and reformers picked up the theme. Curbs in the
city's central business district Zere already crammed bumper to bumper—
and so Zere off-street private parking garages. Long Island, of course, Zas
not going to be the only source of additional cars. :hat about the cars that
Zould be attracted into the city by the neZ roads 0oses Zanted built in
:estchester County—and by the neZ roads being built in NeZ Jersey,
roads leading to the Lincoln Tunnel, to Zhich the 3ort Authority Zas
planning to add a third tube, and the George :ashington Bridge, to Zhich it
Zas planning to add a second deck? 0oses' ansZer Zas municipal
construction of off-street, multistory parking garages; the ansZer caught the
fancy of headline Zriters, but planners, costing them out, saZ at a glance
that no e[penditure the city—or even a neZ public parking authority—
could possibly afford could build enough garages to accommodate more
than a small fraction of the load 0oses Zas planning to dump on them.

3lanners and reformers Zere raising other questions about 0oses' policies.

The Coordinator's proposed highZays and garages Zere designed to help
automobile-oZning families. But in 1945 tZo out of  three residents of NeZ
York City belonged to families that did not oZn automobiles. 0any of these
families did not oZn them because they could not afford to. The
Coordinator's subZay-fare-increase proposals being advanced at that very
moment in Albany Zould force poor NeZ Yorkers to devote more— in

1216
many cases, more than they could afford—of their slender resources to
getting around the city. The Coordinator's grabbing of the lion's share of
public funds for highZays and garages meant that public resources Zould
be poured Zith a lavish hand into improving the transportation system used
by people Zho could afford cars. Only a dribble of public resources Zould
go into the transportation system used by people Zho could not—and Zho
therefore rode subZays and buses. :hile the city and state Zere providing
car users Zith the most modern highZays, they Zould be condemning
subZay users to continue to travel on an antiquated system utterly
inadequate to the city's needs. :hile highZays Zere being e[tended into
"suburban" areas of the city in Zhich highZays Zere needed—and, in fact,
into areas of the city in Zhich highZays Zere not needed, in Zhich the need
for highZays Zould be created by the highZays—subZays Zould not be
e[tended into areas of the city in Zhich subZays Zere needed. There Zere
subZay plans, too, just as there Zere highZay plans; some, such as the
proposals for a Second Avenue subZay (for 0anhattan's far east side and
the Bron[) and the +illside

Avenue subZay e[tension (for northeastern 4ueens), Zere advanced
enough so that construction could have been begun immediately if funds
Zere provided. But the Coordinator's monopoli]ation of public funds made
subZay construction impossible. By building transportation facilities for the
suburbs, he Zas insuring that no transportation facilities Zould be built for
the ghettos. Therefore, planners saZ, in the transportation field, the portion
of the public helped by the use of public resources Zould not be the portion
of the public that needed help most.

For the Zell-to-do residents of the "suburban" areas of northeastern 4ueens,
not having a subZay nearby meant having to take a bus or drive a car to the
end of the line in closer to 0anhattan or having to drive all the Zay into
0anhattan and back every Zorking day. This Zas a hardship. But for the
impoverished residents of the southeastern Bron[, not having a subZay
nearby and not oZning a car meant taking a bus to the subZay and that
meant paying a double fare each Zay—tZice a day, five days a Zeek—and
that meant paying money that many of these residents simply could not
afford. And that meant that often these residents Zalked to the subZay,
Zalked a mile or more, in the morning and home in the evening Zhen they

1217
Zere tired. And it meant that on Zeekends, families that Zould have liked
to take their children on trips—to a museum or a movie doZntoZn or
Coney Island or some other park (particularly to a park, since 0oses had
built feZ in  "loZer-class" neighborhoods) or to visit a friend Zho lived in
another neighborhood—stayed home instead. The Coordinator's policies
Zere doing more than simply not helping these people. They Zere hurting
them.

They Zere even limiting their freedom to choose a place to live. +is denial
of funds for the e[tension of mass transit lines into outlying sections of the
city and into the suburbs meant that the neZ homes and apartments there
Zould be occupied only by car-oZning families. :hether   by design or not,
the ultimate effect of 0oses' transportation policies Zould be to help keep
the city's poor trapped in their slums. They Zere in effect policies not only
of transportation but of ghettoi]ation, policies Zith immense social
implications. ":e   kneZ Ze  had to do something to halt this trend,"
reformer Leigh Denniston said in a letter-to-the-editor. "And Ze Zere
asking hoZ best to do it."

The ansZer to all the questions raised about 0oses' transportation policies
Zas, of course, mass transportation. The problems involved in moving tens
of thousands of commuters into and out of the center city in a couple of
peak hours every Zeekday—problems so unmanageable in terms of
highZay lanes Zhose peak capacity Zas 1,500 cars per hour—Zere reduced
to manageable si]e by rapid transit lines, a single track of Zhich could carry
betZeen 40,000 and 50,000 persons per hour, and could bring them into the
city Zithout  their cars, so that they Zouldn't require parking spaces.

0ass transportation Zas, moreover, the only ansZer. NeZ highZays had a
vital function to fulfill:   the transportation of people and goods that, for
Zhatever reason, had no choice but to use highZays, at a reasonable rate of

speed. If you had a viable mass transit system in the region—fast, clean,
reasonably ine[pensive, modern subZays and suburban commuter railroads

you Zould attract to it a substantial share of the traffic that did have a

1218
choice, and by removing it from the highZays, you Zould free the
highZays so that they Zould be able to fulfill this function. If  residents of
the region, particularly commuters, did not have a choice, if they Zere
forced by the inefficiencies, inadequacies of service and high fares of mass
transit to use highZays Zhether they Zanted to use them or not, the
highZays Zould never be able to fulfill their function.  Build railroads at the
same time that you Zere building roads, and solving the metropolitan
transportation problem Zould be greatly simplified. 3our all available funds
into roads Zithout building railroads, and that problem Zould never be
solved.

3ublic e[posure to this point of vieZ  Zas limited. Editorials such as the one
in the +erald Tribune that so aroused 0oses' ire Zere rare—none[istent in
the tZo neZspapers most decisive in shaping public opinion in NeZ York,
the Times and Daily NeZs; the NeZs cheered Big Bob the Builder's
"greatest highZay plan." :atching  traffic  pile up in the city, NeZ York's
press Zas screaming for action—and 0oses' plan promised plenty of Zhat
it considered action.

The public, conditioned by preZar decades of acclaim for road building,
accustomed to equating the value of a public Zork Zith its si]e,
unaccustomed to critical analysis of public Zorks programs, desperate for
action, shoZed no greater understanding, no comprehension that there
might be draZbacks to the biggest road-building plan ever. :riting in  30
in 0ay  1946, LeZis 0umford   tried to e[plain some of the social
implications of building Zithout  planning. "A large part of the money Ze
are spending on highZays right noZ is Zasted because Ze don't knoZ
Zhether Ze Zant people Zhere the highZays are going," he said. But
0umford  confessed to despair that the public Zould understand. "+ighZays
are an impressive, flashy thing to build. No one is against highZays."

One did not have to be a 0umford, hoZever, to grasp the fact that 0oses'
policies might be self-defeating. All one had to do Zas think about those
policies for a Zhile. And, sitting in  their cars day after day in ever-
lengthening traffic jams, NeZ Yorkers Zere finding themselves forced to
indulge occasionally in that activity. :hile   0oses' plans enjoyed public
support through the 1940's, there Zere signs that it Zas not as unanimous

1219
after the Zar as it had been before. Denniston's letter Zas only one of many
in Zhich people Zere trying to articulate neZ, disturbing thoughts. :ithin
tZo months after the Zar's end, editorial pages—not the editorial columns
but the letters-to-the-editor columns, in a number Zhich strongly suggests
that on this issue the public Zas ahead of the press—began to contain
suggestions like that published on October 22, 1945, in the Times: ":hy
not bar all private cars from 0anhattan?" By 1946, such letters Zere
common.

The more informed sections of the public—businessmen e[posed at their
Zeekly Rotary or .iZanis   or Chamber of Commerce luncheons to guest
speakers familiar Zith the problem, for e[ample—Zere even better

e[posed to analyses of 0oses' policies. It Zas no longer unusual to find in
the back pages of the Times or Tribune articles like the one reporting that
on January 23, 1947, Leslie :illiams,  of the American Transit Association,
had, in an address to the NeZ York City Safety Council, e[pressed the vieZ
that "it Zould be a Zhole lot cheaper for a community to subsidi]e public
transit than to spend enormous sums for doZntoZn e[pressZays Zith no
assurance even then that these e[pressZays Zill relieve congestion."

Rebuffed by O'DZyer, Zho summarily referred their inquiries and
suggestions to 0oses, and forced to admit to themselves that they could
suggest no immediate method of financing neZ mass transit lines, these
planners pleaded for the city to take at least one simple, ine[pensive step
that Zould make construction of neZ lines possible in the future.

Building transit lines underground Zas Zildly e[pensive. Building  them at
ground level Zas cheap, so far as construction costs Zere concerned. It Zas
only Zhen the ground Zas filled Zith  people that the cost of acquiring it
became financially and politically prohibitive. And, planners said, there
e[isted at that very moment an opportunity for obtaining the right-of-Zay
for train tracks quickly, cheaply and Zith an absolute minimum of public
hostility.

The city Zas about to begin acquiring close to a hundred miles of strips of
land betZeen 150 and 250 feet Zide, the right-of-Zay for the Coordinator's
neZ highZays. Some of these highZays Zere to run through areas either

1220
empty or containing only single-family homes, in Zhich land Zas relatively
ine[pensive; in 1945, 21 percent of the city Zas still undeveloped. Simply
obtain another fifty feet of right-of-Zay, add it to the center malls of 0oses'
highZays, and there Zould be enough room on those malls for a double-
track surface mass transit line, a subZay running at ground level. Build the
si[-lane highZays just as you had been planning to do, they urged 0oses,
but make the center mall Zide enough to accommodate those tracks. Then
Zhen, sometime in the future, the city Zas ready to build the subZay lines,
there Zould be no problem in acquiring the right-of-Zay. It Zould be
already available, just sitting there Zaiting for the tracks to be laid atop it.

Sei]ing this opportunity Zould  slash at a stroke the Gordian knot of
difficulties in the Zay of  providing mass transportation in NeZ York.

Residents of adjacent buildings naturally opposed the construction of noisy,
dirty rapid transit lines, often in numbers sufficient to make construction a
political impossibility.  Build rapid transit lines in the middle of highZays,
and there Zouldn't be any adjacent buildings. The nearest buildings Zould
be cushioned from the trains' impact by a good hundred feet of space —and
in the case of e[pressZays depressed in open cuts, by their location beloZ
ground level as Zell. +ighZays caused noise and dirt and objections, too, of
course, but the highZays Zere going to be built anyZay; trains on their
center malls Zould add to such inconveniences only minimally. As long as
the city must be provided Zith neZ mass transportation facilities, and as
long

as these facilities could not be built underground, building them on highZay
center malls Zas surely not only the cheapest Zay to build them but the
easiest Zay to minimi]e political and aesthetic fallout.

If there Zas any long-range prediction that could be made Zith any
certainty about a city as volatile as NeZ York, these planners felt, it Zas
that such an opportunity Zould never come again. E[pressZays spaZned
intensive development—apartment houses, factories, office buildings—
Zhere there had been before only open fields or private homes. The city
could afford to acquire open fields or private homes, even the long miles of
fields and homes required for 0oses' highZays. It Zould probably never be
able to afford to acquire long miles of apartment houses, factories and office

1221
buildings. And even if it Zere in some future decade to find the cash to do
so, Zould it be able to find the Zill? :ould    not the protests of thousands of
voters make the acquisition politically unfeasible? Acquisition of rapid
transit right-of-Zay, so easy in conjunction Zith the current e[pressZay
program, Zould never be easy again. It might, in fact, be impossible. Fail to
grasp the present opportunity and the city might never be able to build
sufficient mass transit to significantly improve transportation.

There Zere no logical reasons not to grasp this opportunity. No federal
approval Zas necessary; the cost of land acquisition Zas split by state and
city. The state Zas leaving absolute discretion over the design of Robert
0oses highZays to Robert 0oses. The city's share Zould be so small that
even impoverished NeZ York Zould be able to afford it. The suggestion
Zas not even revolutionary: plans Zere already under Zay for the placing of
a mass transit route doZn the center mall of the proposed Congress Street
E[pressZay in Chicago. The suggestion Zas so logical that it did not even
require much imagination to grasp it. All that Zas required Zas common
sense.

F. (for Francis) Dodd 0c+ugh  asked 0oses to grasp it in planning the Van
:yck   E[pressZay.

0c+ugh,  a little, bright-eyed Scotsman, had, as chief of the Office of
0aster 3lanning of the City 3lanning  Commission, previously aroused
0oses' hostility  by objecting to his refusal to make provision for schools,
libraries and transportation facilities for the residents of his huge housing
projects. Call ing 0c+ugh  a "smart aleck," and his objections "stupid, long-
Zinded, contentious and impractical," 0oses told his boss, EdZin Ashley
Salmon, ":e  had better get rid of staff Zork of this kind."  But 0c+ugh   had
declined to take this subtle hint. Assigned to draZ up a pro forma "0aster
3lan of NeZ York City  Airports," he ventured beyond the assignment and
asked himself hoZ people Zere going to get to these airports—and came up
Zith some rather striking figures.

By the most conservative estimates, Zhen the immense neZ airport under
construction on the marshes at IdleZild 3oint in southeastern 4ueens Zas in
full operation, 40,000 persons Zould be employed there, and 30,000

1222
passengers Zould pass through it every day—most of them during morning
and

evening "peak period" rush hours. If traffic patterns conformed to those at
other major airports, during peak periods 10,000 persons Zould be trying to
get to IdleZild every hour, some of them in multi-passenger buses but
enough of them in ta[is and private automobiles so that they Zould be
traveling in 3,220 separate vehicles. And heading for IdleZild at the same
time Zould be hundreds of trucks carrying air mail, e[press and freight.

0ost  of these vehicles Zould undoubtedly be using the Van :yck
E[pressZay; 0oses' stated purpose in proposing it Zas to provide a direct
route to the airport from mid-0anhattan. But the Van :yck   E[pressZay
Zas designed to carry—under "optimum" conditions (good Zeather, no
accidents or other delays)—2,630 vehicles per hour. Even if the only traffic
using the Van :yck  Zas IdleZild  traffic,  the e[pressZay's capacity Zould
not be sufficient to handle it.

And IdleZild  traffic Zas going to be only a fraction—a small fraction— of
traffic using the Van :yck.  The neZ e[pressZay  Zould be the most direct
route not only to the airport but to all southeastern 4ueens and to the
Southern State 3arkZay leading to fast-groZing Long Island. During
highZay rush hours—Zhich coincided Zith airport  rush hours—the Van
:yck   Zas going to be flooded Zith thousands of cars heading for these
destinations. The neZ road 0oses Zas building could not—even under
optimum conditions—possibly come anyZhere near fulfilling the purpose
for Zhich 0oses  Zas building it. And  0c+ugh,  Zho  estimated all this
traffic conservatively, could not help knoZing that his conservatism Zas not
realistic. The air age Zas just beginning: air traffic Zas obviously going to
boom to immense dimensions. If the Van :yck E[pressZay could not come
anyZhere near handling IdleZild's traffic Zhen that traffic Zas 10,000
persons per hour, Zhat Zas going to happen Zhen that traffic increased to
15,000 persons per hour? To 20,000?

0oses' ansZer Zas that he Zas going to Ziden tZo other routes to
southeastern 4ueens, the Belt 3arkZay and Conduit Boulevard. But
parkZay and boulevard Zere already jammed far beyond capacity; Ziden
the tZo roads and they Zould still be jammed—even Zithout IdleZild

1223
traffic. :idening   roads could not possibly solve the IdleZild access
problem. You'd have to pave over most of southeastern 4ueens to do that.
Building the Van :yck   E[pressZay Zas going to cost $30,000,000. The
principal result of the e[penditure of that staggering sum Zould be the
condemnation of most of the drivers using the Van :yck—of generation
after generation of drivers using it—to the frustration of being trapped,
some of them tZice a day for every Zorking day of their lives, in staggering
traffic jams.

Building the Van :yck   Zould  raise other questions. Once the cars using the
e[pressZay got to the airport, hoZ Zere they supposed to get around in it?
An internal road netZork of enormous cost and si]e Zould be required—
and even then congestion inside IdleZild might be even Zorse than the
congestion outside. :here Zere they supposed to park? 3arking lots
covering hundreds of acres, thousands of acres, e[panses of concrete
stretching endlessly over the marshland, Zould be required. Since the
marshland Zould have to be filled in before it could be paved, the
construction of such lots Zould be enormously

e[pensive. If the lots stretched for miles, parts of them Zould be miles from
the airline terminals. +oZ Zere the drivers—and their luggage—supposed
to get to the terminals after they parked?

Only by building the Van :yck   Zith  rapid transit could all these questions
be ansZered. Three lanes of this particular e[pressZay (not engineered up
to later design standards) could, under optimum conditions, carry each hour
2,630 vehicles, most of them bearing a single passenger. One lane of rapid
transit could, under optimum conditions, carry 40,000 persons per hour.
And Zith  rapid transit, conditions Zould be optimum far more often than on
a highZay, Zhose capacity Zas reduced far more severely by rain or snoZ
or fog or by blockage by an accident or breakdoZn. Build the Van :yck
Zith rapid transit, and you Zould be insuring that, for generations, persons
traveling to IdleZild  Zould be able to get there Zith speed—an e[press trip
from 3ennsylvania Station in mid-0anhattan to the airport Zould take
e[actly si[teen minutes—and comfort. And, since the long lines of cars
Zould melt off  the e[pressZay, those drivers Zho still Zanted to get to
IdleZild  by car Zould also be able to get there Zith speed.

1224
Building the Van :yck   Zith  rapid transit Zould, moreover, be easy. The
north-south e[pressZay Zas going to cross 4ueens Boulevard in .eZ
Gardens. A subZay—the IND east-Zest line running out from mid-
0anhattan eight miles aZay—crossed that very intersection. :hen it
reached the intersection, moreover, it slanted south—by coincidence,
toZard IdleZild—for   about a mile before heading east again. During that
mile, its tracks lay almost precisely beneath the right-of-Zay that 0oses
Zas even then acquiring for the Van :yck. For a mile of its four-mile
length, therefore, the e[pressZay Zould be running almost right on top of
the subZay. All that Zas needed to complete a rapid transit link betZeen
mid-0anhattan and IdleZild  Zas to bring that subZay up to the
e[pressZay's center mall and e[tend it for another three miles. Nine miles
—nine e[pensive miles—of rapid transit link betZeen mid-0anhattan and
IdleZild  Zere already completed. All that Zas needed to complete the link
Zere three miles—three ine[pensive miles— more. 0oreover, another
subZay—the IND's Fulton Avenue line, coming out from loZer 0anhattan
through doZntoZn Brooklyn—ran  close to Idle-Zild's Zestern edge. Build
a branch of that line into the airport, a simple, ine[pensive job, and travelers
from loZer 0anhattan—including  the :all    Street business district from
Zhich Zould  come so large a proportion of the airport's users—Zould also
be able to reach it by train.

:ithin   the airport, 0c+ugh   noticed, the tZo subZays Zould be running
Zithin  a feZ hundred feet of each other—in fact, might even intersect. This,
he saZ, Zould enable the city to solve a problem Zhich had plagued it for
generations: providing a subZay link betZeen doZntoZn Brooklyn and
central and northern 4ueens, tZo areas connected only by automobile. Link
up the tZo subZays Zithin the airport, and the connection betZeen the tZo
areas, so long sought but so long despaired of because of the large e[pense,
Zould be accomplished at small e[pense. Rapid transit on the Van :yck
E[pressZay Zould solve not only the IdleZild  access problem but a host of
other transportation problems.

And it Zould  be so easy to make provision for that rapid transit.

Building rapid transit on the Van :yck  Zould  provide advantages not only
for NeZ York City  but for all Long Island.

1225
The e[pressZay ran right underneath the Jamaica Terminal of the Long
Island Rail Road; it Zas that terminal that 0oses Zas planning to hold aloft
Zhile he slid the highZay beneath it. 3ut rapid transit on the Van :yck  and
Long Island residents Zould be able to get to IdleZild simply by taking the
Long Island Rail Road to Jamaica and transferring to the rapid transit line
beloZ.

3erhaps the city could not afford at the present time even the relatively
small cost of the construction of three miles of surface rapid transit.
0c+ugh  doubted that this Zas true: the cost Zould be no more than
$9,000,000; it made no sense to say that a city that Zas planning a
$280,000,000 e[pressZay program—of its oZn money, not counting federal
and state contributions— could not afford $9,000,000 for an improvement
that Zould make the e[pressZays so much more pleasant to use. But even if
it Zas true, he said, even if the city did not construct the rapid transit lines
noZ, at least make provision for their future construction.

The cost of providing the additional fifty feet of right-of-Zay  Zould  be less
than tZo million  dollars—about $1,875,000, 0c+ugh estimated. The Van
:yck   E[pressZay, Zhose function Zas to provide reasonably fast,
convenient access to IdleZild Airport, Zas going to cost $30,000,000,
anyZay. For that amount, that road Zould probably never be able to fulfill
its function properly. For less than tZo million dollars more, it Zould.

Spend the tZo million noZ, 0c+ugh   saZ, and the right-of-Zay Zould be
available Zhenever the city Zanted to use it. Don't spend it noZ, and if the
city should Zant to acquire the necessary right-of-Zay for rapid transit in
the future, after the e[pressZay opened, the land Zould be many times
more e[pensive than it Zas noZ. Nor Zould the cost be limited to the price
of the land needed for the right-of-Zay. Because the land the city Zould
have to acquire Zould no longer be Zithin the e[pressZay, it Zould abut
three miles of buildings. Their oZners Zould be entitled to substantial
damages to compensate them for the noise and dirt of the trains. And land
Zould have to be acquired not only for the tracks but for stations. If
provision Zas not made noZ for right-of-Zay along the e[pressZay center
mall, the cost of that right-of-Zay Zould be not tZo, but tens of millions of
dollars—so high that even if the city Zere to resolve to bear the enmity of

1226
thousands of protesting voters and build a rapid transit line, it might be
financially unfeasible for it to do so. Reserve those three miles of right-of-
Zay noZ, and it Zould be possible in future years for the city to solve the
enormous problem of congestion on the Van :yck E[pressZay—and a host
of other transportation problems—quickly, simply and cheaply. Fail to
reserve it noZ, and those problems might never be solved.

0c+ugh  Zas planning to include his suggestion in the airport "0aster
3lan," but he made the mistake of mentioning it first to his boss, 3lanning
Commis-

sion chief of staff Colonel :illiam    J. Shea, from Zhom 0oses alZays
received close cooperation.

"I Zas called into [Shea's] office, and Spargo Zas there raising hell, that I
Zas impeding progress, that this thing had to go through and stop this crap,
that I Zas going to cost the city millions in federal money. The Zhole effect
Zas, ':hy   don't you shut up?' I Zas asked not to Zrite any memo."

Declining to accept that recommendation, 0c+ugh Zrote that rapid transit
access should be provided for IdleZild and predicted Zhat Zould happen if
it Zasn't. But his statements had been deleted Zhen the commission
approved the "0aster 3lan of NeZ York City  Airports." The only future on
Zhich his memo had any effect Zas his oZn. Although he Zas under civil
service protection, there Zas a salary range to his position, and he had been
at its upper limit. :hen   the ne[t city budget Zas adopted, he found he Zas
at its loZer limit:  his salary—previously, he says, "just about enough to get
by on" —had been reduced. +e had, moreover, been fighting 0oses for
eight years noZ, and he Zas Zell aZare he Zasn't getting anyZhere. +is
report on the rapid transit reservation might as Zell have not been Zritten.
+e resigned.

As for the 0umfords  and other farseeing planners, 0oses treated their
predictions of disaster Zith the disdain he felt they deserved. Opponents
Zho charged that he Zas unaZare of the social implications of his
transportation policies—that the ghettoi]ation they caused and the
commercial development they prevented on Long Island, for e[ample, Zas
inadvertent—underestimated him. +e kneZ precisely Zhat he Zas doing.

1227
+e had formed his oZn vision of Long Island long ago, and all he Zas
doing noZ Zas holding true to it—and that vision did not include poor
people or jobs. In a 1945 speech before the Nassau Bar Association, Zhich
included most of the county's political leaders, he said:

There seems to have been a good deal of sentiment in Nassau in favor of
attracting more industry and business into the county. Let me Zarn you
against too much enthusiasm for commerciali]ing Zhat nature has given
you. Nassau should alZays be largely residential and recreational. Your
land lies betZeen the Bay and the Ocean. [These] are your greatest natural
assets. Figure out Zhat sort of people you Zant to attract into Nassau
County. By that I mean people of Zhat standards, Zhat income levels and
Zhat capacity to contribute to the source of government.

+e did not give the slightest indication of understanding that his
transportation policies Zere doomed to failure.

+is thinking  had been shaped in an era in Zhich a highZay Zas an
unqualified boon to the public, in Zhich roads Zere, like automobiles,
sources of rela[ation and pleasure. Changing realities could have changed
his thinking, but he Zas utterly insulated from reality by the sycophancy of
his yes men; by his poZer, Zhich, independent as it Zas of official or public
opinion— of, in fact, any opinion but his oZn—made it unnecessary for
him to take any opinion but his oZn into account; by, most of all, his
personality, the personality that made it not only unnecessary but
impossible for him to

conceive that he might have been Zrong; the personality that needed
applause, thereby reinforcing the tendency to repeat the simplistic formula
that had Zon him applause before; the personality that made it possible for
him to relate to the class of people that oZned automobiles and that Zas
repelled by the class of people that did not oZn automobiles; the personality
Zhose vast creative energies Zere fired by the vision of cleanliness, order,
openness, sZeep—such as the clean, open sZeep of a highZay—and Zere
repelled by dirt and noise, such as the dirt and noise he associated Zith
trains; the personality that made him not only Zant but need monuments
and that saZ in highZays—and their adjunct, suspension bridges ("the most
permanent structures built by man")—the structures that Zould have a

1228
clean, clear ineradicable mark on history; the personality that, driven noZ
by the lust for poZer, made him an[ious to build more revenue- (and
poZer-) producing bridges and parking lots (and highZays to encourage
their use) and that made him either indifferent or antagonistic to subZays
and railroads Zhich Zould compete Zith his toll facilities  not only for users
but for city construction funds. +e Zas insulated from e[perience. 0ost of
the millions Zho used his roads Zere noZ using them primarily not for
Zeekend pleasure trips but back and forth to Zork tZice a day, five days a
Zeek, and driving Zas therefore no longer a pleasure but a chore; but for
0oses, comfortable in the richly upholstered, air-conditioned, soundproofed
rear seat of his big limousine, driving Zas still as pleasurable as it had
alZays been. Robert 0oses, Zho had never had to drive in a single traffic
jam, really believed that his transportation policies Zould Zork. "Traffic
Zill  run pretty smoothly Zithin  three years," he had said in 1945. During
those three years—and afterZard— he repeated that prediction often,
repeated it Zithout hedging or qualification, spread it on the public record
Zith the assurance of a man sure that he Zas right. +e Zas confident that
his roads Zould earn him applause noZ as they had alZays earned him
applause before. :riting  on "traffic  relief" in a NeZ York  Times 0aga]ine
article, he said, "If Ze give this to our people, Ze shall deserve their
gratitude." Applause not just of the age but of the ages; he Zas confident
that his roads Zould bring him immortality. +e had read Statius. +e kneZ
that, "in gratitude for the benefits bestoZed upon them by" the construction
of the Domitian :ay,   the Senate and the people of Rome had raised a
triumphal arch to Domitian. +e kneZ that the Via Appia had brought
immortality to its builder, the blind Censor Appius Claudius, Zho, Zhen
public funds to build the road ran out, had advanced the difference from his
private fortune. Democracies raised no triumphal arches to road builders.
The :antagh  CauseZay Zas still named the :antagh CauseZay, despite the
fact that its builder had also advanced funds from his private fortune, or at
least from his mother's. But he Zas confident history Zould remedy such
oversights. In 1949, Times Sunday Editor Lester 0arkel commissioned him
to forecast the city in the year 1999. "The great arteries . . . Zill stand out,"
he Zrote.* On another occasion, he Zrote: "Those Zho aim and plug aZay

* The 1949 article Zas brief—1,140 Zords—but it provided ample
evidence of the e[tent to Zhich 0oses identified his oZn Zorks  Zith  the

1229
city as a Zhole. To the

T+E L8ST  FOR 3O:ER

910

at limited, near-by objectives and reach them, may in fact build better than
they knoZ. Their Zorks may even last longer than those fashioned by more
ambitious geniuses for immortality." If he Zas capable any longer of
rethinking his policies, he gave no evidence of it. And because of his poZer,
of course, there Zas nothing that could force him to rethink.

:ithin   Zeeks of the opening of the Van :yck   E[pressZay—at Zhich
0oses proudly boasted that "no netZork of major urban vehicular arteries
comparable to the one on Zhich Ze are busily Zorking here in NeZ York
City

Zill  be found anyZhere else on this or any other continent"—the road Zas
as jammed as F. Dodd 0c+ugh had predicted. At rush hours, Zhen— as
0c+ugh  had predicted—10,000 travelers trying to get to IdleZild Zere
forced to share the road space Zith tens of thousands of commuters trying
to get home, the four miles of roadZay Zhich 0oses had hacked across
4ueens looked like a four-mile-long parking lot, so closely Zere the
vehicles on it packed together and so sloZly Zere they moving. "Traffic
Zill  floZ  freely," 0oses had promised. Inappropriate adverb. Drivers Zere
chained to the Van :yck;  men Zho, commuting daily to jobs at the airport
or in NeZ York, had taken tZenty minutes to cover the four miles
paralleling the Van :yck,  had looked forZard to the opening of the
publici]ed neZ road; noZ, clocking  their first trips on it, they could hardly
believe their Zatches; Zhere it had taken tZenty minutes to cover the four
miles on local streets, it took thirty minutes on the e[pressZay—if
conditions Zere good. And, so often, they Zere bad. The neZ road had not
freed them from the trap of daily travel; it had closed the trap on them more
firmly than ever, for neZ traffic, generated by the neZ road, Zas also
jamming the local streets.

:ith   every passing year, congestion on the e[pressZay Zorsened. 0c-

1230
question ":hat   :ill    NeZ York City  Look Like in  the Year 1999?" he
replied mainly by listing his oZn Zorks,  Zriting:  "Nature, not man, Zill  still
be predominant, and the air photographer in his blimp or helicopter Zill still
see the rolling ocean, the relatively unspoiled ocean beaches, Jamaica Bay,
the Long Island Sound, the lordly +udson, and their tributaries, and Liberty
guarding the magnificent harbor. The great arteries of travel Zill stand out.
The hills of Revolutionary fame Zill  still boast their monuments and
citadels; the parks, large and small, Zill still be conserved for all the people.
Tfre great 3alisades reservation Zill still be five times as large as all of
0anhattan Island; Jamaica Bay and its shores, reclaimed and dedicated to
recreation and air travel, 'Zill constitute one-third of Brooklyn; a fourth of
the Bron[ Zill   remain field, forest and stream. 4ueens Zill still be
suburban, and Staten Island largely rural. ... In ten years, one person out of
ten Zill  be living in public or other subsidi]ed housing. In fifty  years, it
may be one out of si[ or seven—not an altogether pleasant prospect for
those Zho must pay not only their oZn Zay but that of their less fortunate
or hard-Zorking brothers. Traffic Zill  floZ  freely in  95 per cent of the city
and suburbs. . . ."

The article also provided ample proof that 0oses Zas failing utterly to
comprehend that his policies might not be Zorking for the city. "As to the
spirit, the enterprise, the magnetism Zhich made the metropolis great," he
Zrote, "there is not a shred of evidence that their force Zill lessen. There is
no sign of decrepitude, decay or resignation."

+ugh had calculated that during "peak periods" 10,000 persons Zould be
trying to reach IdleZild every hour. As air traffic burgeoned, that figure
became 15,000, and then 20,000. NeZ parking fields Zere built Zithin the
airport at a frantic rate: 500 acres of marshland Zere paved over, then
1,000, then 2,000, then 4,000, then 8,000. And still there Zas never enough
room to park. At peak periods, the paved space Zithin IdleZild—parking
fields and internal roadZays—Zas often so jammed that the torrent of
vehicles oo]ing doZn the Van :yck   could enter the airport only at a trickle;
sometimes, the airport had to be closed to neZ traffic—it Zas not infrequent
for vehicles Zaiting to get into IdleZild  to be backed up on the e[pressZay
for a solid mile.

1231
Inside the airport, of course, the scene Zas chaos. Drivers searching for
parking spaces milled around and around on the roadZays, mingling Zith
drivers trying to get to the airline terminals. By one estimate, at a normal
Zeekday rush hour, a traveler arriving at IdleZild by private car had to
alloZ a full  thirty minutes for travel after arriving at the airport.

Other roads Zere jammed, and created by their opening more traffic than
had e[isted before. The Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel opened on 0ay 25, 1950,
Zith blessings from Cardinal Spellman ("one of man's greatest
achievements!"), Zhat may have been the longest cavalcade of official
limousines ever assembled outside :ashington (338 long black Cadillacs),
the highest toll ever charged on a 0oses project (thirty-five cents)—and a
traffic count almost tZice as high as 0adigan-+yland had predicted. 0oses'
engineers had forecast that the tunnel Zould carry 8,400,000 cars during its
first year of operation. By the end of a month, it Zas carrying traffic at a
13,000,000-vehicle-per-year rate, 64 percent above their predictions.
George Spargo e[plained that the count had been sZelled by an influ[ of
tourists Zho had come from all over the eastern seaboard to see this neZ
Zonder of the Zorld, and that the influ[  Zas over noZ. By the end of three
months, the tunnel Zas carrying traffic at a 14,000,000-vehicle-per-year
rate. At the end of si[ months, it Zas carrying traffic at a 15,000,000-
vehicle-per-year rate, and not only the increase but the rate of increase Zas
increasing every month. "Another pleasant surprise," Spargo said. But the
tunnel Zas engineered for a capacity, rush hour, load of 2,000 vehicles; by
1952, it Zas being asked during rush 1 hours to handle 5,000, even 6,000
vehicles per hour. Traffic backed up for blocks at its entrances. 0oses had
e[pected it to draZ off traffic  from the parallel 4ueens-0idtoZn   Tunnel
and three free East River bridges. But traffic on the bridges remained
"normal," Zhich  meant jammed. And traffic through the 4ueens-0idtoZn
Tunnel, fed noZ by the Zidened 4ueens-0idtoZn  E[pressZay, increased
instead of decreasing. In 1951, Zhile the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel Zas
carrying cars at a rate of 79.3 percent above estimates, traffic through the
4ueens-0idtoZn  Tunnel Zas 26.3 percent higher than ever before.
3reviously, 10,967,000 cars per year had been trying to use one tunnel.
NoZ there Zere tZo tunnels—and 28,445,668 cars Zere trying to use them.
The situation at the southern portion of the East River Zas duplicated at the
northern. In Triborough's annual report for 1951, Spargo Zrote

1232
happily, "The Triborough Bridge had its fifteenth birthday on July nth.
There Zere no birthday cakes, presents or ceremonies, just more
automobiles." In 1946, the first postZar year, the bridge had carried
13,000,000 vehicles. In 1947, it had carried 16,000,000 vehicles; in 1948,
19,000,000; in 1949, 23,000,000; in 1950, 27,000,000. The count in 1951
had been 32,000,000. And the trend Zas more striking than the figures. The
increase had been tZo million in 1946, three million in 1947 and 1948, four
million in  1949 and 1950, five million in 1951. And this situation Zas being
duplicated on the Bron[-:hitestone   Bridge, Zhich 0oses  had built to drain
off traffic from  the Triborough. :hile   traffic  Zas increasing 138 percent on
the Triborough betZeen 1946 and 1951, it Zas increasing 129 percent on
the Bron[-:hitestone.   And traffic  volume on the free 4ueensborough
Bridge Zas also increasing. In the last preZar year, cars had been crossing
the East River into 0anhattan at the colossal rate of 122,500 per day; in
1951, they Zere pouring across the river into 0anhattan at the rate of
135,000 per day. And Zhat of the roads leading to and from these facilities?
Four lanes of Belt 3arkZay had been jammed before the Zar. NoZ si[ lanes
of Belt 3arkZay Zere jammed. 3reZar congestion on old Atlantic Avenue
had been intolerable. 3ostZar congestion on a neZ—Zidened, moderni]ed
—Atlantic Avenue Zas more intolerable. And it Zasn't only bridges and
highZays that Zere jammed. As seen from the air, at rush hours, every
street in neighborhoods near the approaches to the East River crossings Zas
a craZling mass of cars. (On the other side of 0anhattan, Zhere, since
1930, the 3ort Authority's George :ashington Bridge and +olland  and
Lincoln tunnels had been opened to vehicular traffic Zhile NeZ Jersey
railroads had been alloZed to deteriorate, this situation Zas being
duplicated. Since 1930, railroad commutation from Jersey had declined
slightly; commutation by motor vehicle had quadrupled. In the evenings,
Zhen 80,000 daily commuters Zere heading home to Jersey, all of
0anhattan betZeen 175th and 181st streets Zas solid Zith cars, trucks and
buses moving toZard the George :ashington Bridge. DoZntoZn, the
typical line of cars Zaiting to enter the +olland Tunnel pla]a Zas, at 5 p.m.,
eight blocks long. The Times, clocking travel time to the Lincoln Tunnel,
found on one evening that it took a truck tZenty-seven minutes to make a
one-block-square circuit to the entrance pla]a.) :ithin  the city, it seemed
that there Zas not a crevice into Zhich cars did not cram; traffic Zas piling
up everyZhere; on the crosstoZn side streets in midtoZn 0anhattan, the

1233
Times found, motorists frequently spent forty minutes traversing the tZo
and a half miles from one side of the island to the other.

The clockings themselves Zere of less significance than the fact that the
Times Zas making them. ":e  learn to tolerate intolerable conditions": press
and public reaction to motor-traffic congestion in NeZ York City
documents the truth of Barbara :ard's statement. It Zas during the early
1920's that such traffic first overZhelmed NeZ York; in 1924 and 1925 and
1926, the public reacted Zith indignation and protest against the jams in
Zhich— seated in the vehicles that had promised them neZ freedom—they
found themselves imprisoned instead. Traffic Zas neZs, big neZs;
clockings Zere a

front-page staple. By the late 1920's, hoZever, a kind of numbness—
measurable by a slackening in angry letters-to-the-editor and campaign
statements by both-ears-to-the-ground politicians—Zas setting in.
3sychologists knoZ Zhat happens to rats motivated by mild electric shocks
or the promise of a food reZard to get out of a ma]e Zhen the ma]e is made
e[cessively difficult  to get out of; for a Zhile, their efforts to find an escape
become more and more frantic, and then they cease, the creatures becoming
sullen, then listless, suffering apathetically through shock or hunger rather
than making further efforts that they believe Zill be useless. 3eople caught
in intolerable traffic jams tZice a day, day after day, Zeek after Zeek,
month after month, began after some months to accept traffic jams as part
of their lives, to become hardened to them, to suffer through them in dull
and listless apathy. The press, responding to its readers' attitude, ran feZer
hysterical congestion stories, gave feZer clockings. A city editor seeing a
couple of reporters Zith their feet up on their desks on a sloZ Friday
afternoon found other make-Zork than sending them out to discover hoZ
long it took to get from the 4ueens-0idtoZn  Tunnel to the Lincoln Tunnel.
Only in editorial columns— Zritten,  it sometimes seems, by men selected
through a DarZinian process in Zhich the vital element for survival is an
instant and constant capacity for indignation and urgency—did the
indignation and urgency endure. Traffic Zas still neZs, but it Zas no longer
big neZs.

1234
The same process Zas repeated during the middle and late i93o's, not
because a neZ Zound had been inflicted but because the scab on the old
one had been ripped off. 0oses' unprecedentedly ambitious traffic devices,
together Zith his highly publici]ed  promises that they Zould solve the
traffic problem (and the easing in that problem that occurred for a feZ
months every time a neZ facility Zas opened), raised hopes; Zith hope,
motorists dared to look again at Zhat they Zere being subjected to. And
Zhen, a feZ months after each neZ facility opened, the jams began to build
up again, their consciousness, neZly reopened, Zas rubbed all the more
raZ. In the last tZo or three years of that decade, Zith the Triborough
Bridge and the :est  Side +ighZay and the Interborough and Grand Central
parkZays open and congestion Zorse than ever, there Zas another hoZl of
public anguish.

In contrast to the TZenties, hoZever, in the Thirties the anguish Zas
beginning to be coupled Zith aZareness. As neZ bridges jammed up
Zithout easing the jams on the old, as every lane of gleaming Zhite
concrete Zas filled Zith cars as soon as it Zas opened to traffic, LeZis
0umford  and the Regional 3lan Association Zere no longer lone voices
crying that no number of bridges and highZays could alone solve the traffic
problem. Before :orld   :ar   II, the numbness set in again. The hoZls died
doZn. 0otorists  sank back into apathy. But before they did, letters-to-the-
editor, speeches and articles by urban planners and resolutions of civic
associations revealed a greatly increased understanding that something
more—something different—Zas needed.

The Zar kept people off the roads. It made them forget the pain. And Zhen,
after gasoline and rubber rationing ended, NeZ Yorkers took to the

highZays again, the numbness had Zorn off. :hen the pain returned, it
seemed sharper than ever. Even in late 1945 and early 1946, Zhen it Zas no
Zorse than it had been in 1941, people Zere complaining, and editorial
Zriters calling for "action,"  far louder than they had in 1941.

After a short Zhile, they had, in fact, more to complain about. The pain
didn't only seem Zorse; it Zas Zorse. 3ostZar traffic congestion Zas
congestion escalated to an entirely neZ level. The problem Zas so immense
noZ that it Zas difficult  even to comprehend its dimensions. +oZ come to

1235
grips in one's imagination Zith a situation in Zhich a mighty e[pressZay, a
gigantic superhighZay of dimensions literally almost unknoZn to history,
could be opened one month—and be filled to absolute capacity the ne[t, in
Zhich e[pressZays opened in 1952 Zere by 1955 carrying the traffic load
that had been forecast for 1985, in Zhich, in this city and metropolitan area
already congested to the breaking point, every indicator of traffic— auto
registrations, commuting trips per day—Zas increasing in more than
arithmetical, in almost geometrical, progression? The press did not in
general come to grips Zith it, at least not in its deeper implications, but it
did report thoroughly on its more superficial—and more dramatic—
manifestations. Traffic Zas neZs again. The Times, Zhich had once sent its
reporters over the :est Side +ighZay  so that it could tell its readers hoZ
incredibly fast it made travel, noZ sent its reporters onto it to report that "at
a peak period of evening travel, northbound vehicles took thirty-four
minutes to cover four-and-a-half miles." Editorials argued in the Times and
Tribune and screamed in the NeZs and 0irror for "Action!"—noZ!  As  for
the individuals caught in this colossal traffic trap tZice a day, any
psychologist knoZs that if he turns up the voltage of the electric shock
enough, the rats Zill be shocked out of their apathy and begin frantically
scurrying back and forth through the ma]e again, searching desperately for
a Zay out; neZspaper stories of this period document an almost frantic
search by drivers for a Zay out of their trap; grim 8-turns in the face of
oncoming traffic to avoid huge jams seen ahead (reporting on one at the
Third Avenue Bridge on a hot summer Sunday, in Zhich "hundreds of cars
Zere backed up over a tZo-mile radius," the Times reported that "the snarls
Zere intensified as motorists tried to make 8-turns to get out of the jam");
frantic lane sZitching that drove up accident rates on all major routes;
attempts to find neZ Zays through the ma]e (reported The NeZ Yorker,
never one of 0oses' favorite publications, anyZay:

:e've  become increasingly aZare that the best Zay to avoid highZay
congestion is to duck the proud netZork of parkZays in :estchester and
Long Island and take to the traffic-lighted, non-cloverleaf-intersected roads
of our youth. . . . :hat   have man and 0oses Zrought? AnsZer? A
boomerang).

1236
:ith   the numbness not yet having had a chance to set in again and the pain,
still fresh, more intense than ever, there Zas an upsurge in the question of
hoZ best to alleviate it. AZareness Zas escalating, too. NoZ there Zas
general aZareness among urban planners and some segments of the public
that something else might be just as important as roads—might, in fact, be

more important. By 1952, there Zas in at least three NeZ York neZspapers,
the Times, the Tribune and the 3ost, at least the beginning of emphasis on
the need to improve and add mass transit facilities as Zell as roads. There
Zas even a beginning of the reali]ation that the construction of highZays
alone might be "boomeranging," defeating its oZn ends, a reali]ation LeZis
0umford  Zas later to summari]e in a 1955 series of articles in The NeZ
Yorker, "The Roaring Traffic's Boom": "The prevalent conception" is that
"the main purpose of traffic is to enable a ma[imum number of citi]ens to
derive all possible benefits from the use of automobiles," 0umford said.
But that isn't the purpose of transportation at all. "Transportation—I blush
to utter a truism noZ so frequently ignored—is a means and not an end. . . .
Like any other tool, it must be used for some human purpose beyond the
employment of the tool itself. . . ."+e said that "before Ze cut any more
chunks out of our parks to make room for more automobiles or let another
highZay cloverleaf unfold, Ze should look at the transformation that has
taken place during the last thirty years in 0anhattan."

Ever since the nineteen-tZenties the municipal and state authorities have
been plunging blindly from one grandiose traffic scheme to another, Zithout
shoZing any striking understanding of the problems they Zere trying to
solve. . . .

For a Zhole generation, NeZ York has become steadily more frustrating
and tedious to move around in, more e[pensive to do business in, more
unsatisfactory to raise children in, and more difficult to escape from for a
holiday in the country. (The subZay rides groZ longer and the commuting
trains carry their passengers from more distant suburbs, until as much time
is spent in transporting the human carcass as is gained by diminishing the
Zork Zeek . . . the distant dormitory areas of NeZ York describe ever Zider
arcs.) By 1975 . . . it Zill be impossible to build enough highZays to
accommodate the Zeekend e[odus, just as it is already impossible to

1237
provide enough internal traffic arteries to handle 0anhattan's present
congestion. . . .

But your one-eyed specialists continue to conduct grandiose plans for
highZay development, as if motor transportation e[isted in a social
vacuum, and as if NeZ York Zere a mere passageZay or terminal for
vehicles, Zith no good reasons of its oZn for e[istence. To these e[perts, a
successful solution of the traffic problem consists of building more roads,
bridges and tunnels so that more motorcars may travel more quickly to
more remote destinations in more chaotic communities, from Zhich more
roads Zill be built so that more motorists may escape from these neZly
soiled and clotted environments. . . . Instead of curing congestion, they
Ziden chaos.

... the private motorcar [is] a method that happens to be, on the basis of the
number of people it transports, by far the most Zasteful of urban space.
Because Ze have apparently decided that the private motorcar has a sacred
right to go anyZhere, halt anyZhere, and remain anyZhere as long as its
oZner chooses, Ze have neglected other means of transportation. . . . The
major corrective for this crippling overspeciali]ation is to redevelop noZ
despised modes of circulation—public vehicles and private feet. ... An
effective modern city plan Zould use each kind in its proper place and to its
proper e[tent.

0r.  Robert 0oses . . . uses the Zord "regional planning" as a sZearZord, to
indicate his abiding hatred of . . . comprehensive and forZard-looking

policies, just as he invokes the term "long-haired planner" to designate
anyone Zho turns up Zith a proposal that does not fit into his oZn set of
assumptions, most of them by noZ manifestly inadequate and badly out of
date. . . . Think!

A handful of thinkers like 0umford   Zere even beginning to venture a
revolutionary opinion: that automobiles—and highZays—should be barred
from certain central areas of the city, that some congested avenues and
streets should, instead of having their roadZays Zidened for cars, be closed
to cars and turned into "pedestrian malls." Some, in fact, Zere beginning to
postulate a more revolutionary opinion still: that major arterial through

1238
highZays had no place in the interior of a city at all, that a city could not
endure as a good place to live if they Zere built in any number Zithin its
borders.

This aZareness Zas by no means pervasive. If the Times, the Tribune and
the 3ost Zere beginning to emphasi]e the importance of mass transit vis-a-
vis highZays, little of the same emphasis could be found in the city's other
daily neZspapers. For several of these, in fact, a frequent practice Zhen the
need for a transportation analysis Zas felt Zas to ask 0oses to Zrite it, his
articles appearing in the NeZs and Journal-American, for e[ample. (The
Journal-American Zas, of course, part of the +earst chain, and in 1952
+earst neZspapers Zere conducting a nationZide campaign for "neZ and
better roads.")

But the aZareness Zas spreading. After July 1951, Zhen the Regional 3lan
Association published the results of "investigations ... to determine the
amount, e[tent and trends of commuting ... to central NeZ York," facts and
figures Zere available to document the effect of tZo decades of neglecting
mass transit facilities in favor of highZays. A feZ months earlier, 0oses,
issuing a lavish four-color brochure, had boasted that in "our reports in
milestones of progress . . . issued on important occasions . . . Zhen
something has happened Zhich is Zorth telling about," "Ze rely on
illustration rather than technical e[planations" Zhich "are bound to be dull,
statistical [and] boring." The R3A's "Bulletin Number 77," black-and-Zhite,
Zas statistic-crammed—but to anyone interested in Zhy NeZ York's
congestion Zas really increasing so rapidly, it Zas not boring but startling.
The common assumption—previously held not only by 0oses but by press,
politicians and many urban planners—Zas that congestion Zas increasing
because the population around NeZ York Zas increasing at a tremendous
rate, and therefore commuting into NeZ York must be increasing at a
tremendous rate. Estimates of the number of commuters had ranged from
500,000 to 1,500,000. The fact—a fact documented for the first time in
Bulletin 77—Zas that although the population Zas increasing just as fast as
people thought it Zas (the number of families in the counties surrounding
NeZ York had increased by 50 percent betZeen 1930 and 1950), the
commuting Zasn't. There had been 301,000 commuters coming into the city
daily in 1930; in 1950, there Zere 357,ooo—an increase of only 19 percent.

1239
The difference Zas not in the number of people coming into and out of NeZ
York every day, but in hoZ they Zere coming. The number of rail
commuters had actually de-

clined, from 263,000 in 1930 to 239,000 in 1950; 38,050 persons had
commuted by automobile in 1930, 118,400 persons commuted by
automobile in 1950. :hile   the number of commuters Zas up 19 percent, the
number of automobile commuters Zas up 321 percent. And, the R3A
statistics shoZed, the trend Zas continuing—and accelerating. The gap
betZeen use of rail and road Zas Zidening month by month. The failure to
maintain e[isting railroad lines in a condition that Zould persuade even
their present riders to keep using them, much less to attract neZ ones, the
failure to construct neZ lines into neZly developed areas, Zhile building
neZ highZays into those areas, Zas driving more and more commuters off
the railroad and onto the highZay. The effect on the city of the Zidening
gap could only be disastrous.

The automobiles required to transport the equivalent of one trainload of
commuters use about four acres of parking space in 0anhattan, eight times
the area of the Grand Central main concourse.

Every trainload of commuters shifting to automobiles requires automobile
parking space about equal to the effective parking capacity of one side of
Fifth Avenue from :ashington  Square to Si[ty-eighth Street [3 miles].

The lesson to be gleaned from the statistics Zas clear even though they did
not include statistics on the intracity shift in subZay to automobile use,
statistics that Zould have made the lesson even more dramatic. The trend
must be reversed. Emphasis must be shifted from road building to railroad
building. The lesson Zas scanted by most of the press—the R3A report
received one-day play in most of NeZ York's papers—but in 1954 it Zas
repeated in more popular form by a Times series, and thereafter there Zas at
least a general aZareness of it in most of the more detailed transportation
stories in the NeZ York press. And, as in the previous decade, it sometimes
seemed—from the sharp tone of letters-to-the-editor compared to editorials
—that aZareness Zas groZing faster among the public than in the media
supposed to educate the public or among the politicians supposed to lead
the public: almost as if the people of NeZ York and its suburbs—forced to

1240
spend hours daily being e[posed to the harsh lessons of urban
transportation, trapped daily in a classroom on the realities of urban
transportation, a classroom in Zhich the reality of Zhat Zas being taught
Zas Zorsening so fast that numbness had not yet caught up to it—Zere
learning the lessons for themselves. 0umford Zas not the only person
pleading Zith public officials  to Think! 0any  men and Zomen Zho had
never opened a planning te[tbook in their lives Zere, by the early 1950's,
repeating in their oZn Zords the great planner's plea. 3eople Zere learning
for themselves. By 1940, most urban planners had come to understand that
roads Zere not good per se, that a highZay Zas not an unqualified boon for
mankind. By the early 1950's, much of the general public appeared to
understand this, too, even if the press did not. There Zas general aZareness
of the need for a dramatic change in the region's transportation policies.
0umford,  unsatisfied though he Zas at the rate of mobili]ation of public
opinion ("The majority of the American people . . . remain strangely quiet
and passive about the matters

that should concern them most"), saZ hope noZ that 0oses' "irrational"
plans could be changed. 3ointing out that "the things that spoil life in NeZ
York and its environs Zere all made by men, and can be changed by men as
soon as they are Zilling to change their minds," he noZ saZ hope that men
Zould do so.

But for NeZ York, only  one mind mattered, and that mind Zould not
change.

As 0oses' first postZar mileage had been opening, he had been as confident
of the Zisdom of his policies as he had been Zhen he announced them in
1945. "Today Ze are Zell underZay to a solution of the traffic problem," he
had boasted in 1948. NoZ, in 1954, Zith considerable neZ mileage open,
the problems Zere Zorse than ever, but the confidence Zas diminished not a
Zhit. All  that Zas necessary, he said—and believed —Zas more of the
same.

The roads he had been building had all been conceived by him in 1930.
NoZ, for the first time, he e[panded his highZay plan. NeZ arterials should
be built paralleling old arterials already built, he announced—a Sheridan
paralleling the 0ajor  Deegan and Bron[ River and +arlem River and

1241
+utchinson River and +enry +udson that already ran doZn through the
Bron[, a Nassau paralleling the Van :yck  southeast through 4ueens.
Arterials should be built into sections of the city into Zhich no arterials noZ
ran, a 3rospect and Cross-Brooklyn E[pressZay into the teeming heart of
that borough, for e[ample. And arterials should reach out from the city into
its suburbs, a Long Island E[pressZay all the Zay out deep into still-rural
Suffolk, for e[ample. And,  of course, the "series of east and Zest crossings
in 0anhattan" Zhich  he had so long advocated should be begun; it Zas
during this period that he Zas forcing the 3ort Authority to start the Lincoln
Tunnel link that Zould give him a Zedge on the 0id-0anhattan  Crossing
along Thirtieth Street. As to Zhat to do Zith the cars Zhen they got to the
city, he had no doubt that his proposed multistory, "off-street" parking
garages—"tZo, three, four stories or Zhatever height they have to be"—
Zould solve that problem; the "success" of the first "publicly financed" off-
street garage in the city's history, Triborough's seven-story Battery 3ark
Garage—it Zas filled to capacity almost from the day it opened —proved
that. ":hen   Ze get the e[pressZays . . . you Zill see hoZ they Zill  take
care of most of this through or cross-toZn traffic," he said in a lengthy 1952
question-and-ansZer session Zith 8. S. NeZs & :orld   Report, Zhich
identified him as the "recogni]ed authority" on the future of America's
cities. ("4. But  in city streets ... are off-street garages the ansZer? A. Yes . .
.") As for the use of city money for mass transit construction, he fought
such proposals to their death, and Zhen, in 1952, some state legislators
suggested that Triborough take over the city's subZays and use its surplus to
improve them, 0oses rushed back from a Virgin Islands vacation to declare
that there Zas no surplus because "all our future revenues are pledged to
our bondholders"—Zho, he said, Zould never permit the Authority to be-

come involved in deficit-producing operations. (In that same year, the
General Electric Company announced that its 8rban Traffic Division had
"costed out" rapid transit on auto-highZay center malls and that if provision
for tracks Zas made in the original highZay design their cost Zould be one-
tenth of providing them later. 0oses' reply? "The cost of acquiring
additional Zidth and building for rapid transit Zould  be prohibitive and
hundreds of families Zould be dislocated.")

1242
Not all planners fully understood yet that if 0oses' proposals Zere carried
out, NeZ York Zould become a place not for people but for cars, spread out
by the hundreds of acres on monstrous parking fields, cars piled up seven
stories high or more—to "Zhatever height they have to be"— cars that
Zould bring their roar and the fumes of their "foul e[hausts" into its every
corner. But they did understand fully—by 1952 there Zas a general
understanding among urban planners, an informed consensus—that 0oses'
plans made no sense unless they Zere supplemented by mass transportation.

There Zas some applause in the press for 0oses' proposals—these Zere the
years in Zhich he Zas enjoying general editorial support for a proposal to
create a City 3arking Authority Zith unprecedented poZer over the city's
streets—and a rather remarkable lack of understanding of some of the
subtleties of transportation politics. A +erald Tribune editorial said that
Triborough's 1951 annual report

ought to give every citi]en of NeZ York a bit of  a thrill. Business is
booming. . . . Traffic is everyZhere e[ceeding the e[perts' predictions. ... If
the present volume keeps up, all the bridge bonds Zill be retired by 1957
and all tunnel bonds by 1963. :hen that happens, every bridge and tunnel
so successfully built and operated by the Triborough Authority Zill become
the free and unencumbered property of the people of NeZ York City. . . .
Good Zork, gentlemen.

Only the 3ost gave more than scant attention to the problems of the
thousands of tenants being evicted for 0oses' highZays. :hile press
applause Zas by no means as enthusiastic as it Zould once have been, and
editorials more and more frequently e[pressed doubt about the city's
transportation policies, they never linked those policies Zith the man
responsible for them. There Zas no direct attack on 0oses, no threat of any
real seriousness to his poZer. And Zith that poZer, he laid out the neZ
routes, obtained the state and federal commitments for them, had the
blueprints draZn—started them doZn the road to completion.

And in 1954 he took a further step—one that sealed the city's future.

There Zas, hoZever, a problem, a problem that could be solved only by
rapprochement Zith his old foe, the 3ort of NeZ York Authority. Vast as his

1243
resources might be, they Zere noZhere near as vast as his dreams. Ground
Zas already broken for the Coliseum; he Zas going to have to pour
$43,000,000 into that gaping hole at Columbus Circle. The Throgs Neck
Bridge must get under Zay as soon as possible; for that span he Zould need
$92,000,000. +e had already allocated $90,000,000 to get Zork under Zay
on the Long Island and 3rospect e[pressZays and the East River Drive
e[tension up to the Triborough Bridge. Almost half the half billion Zas
already committed. Then there Zere the other roads, envisioned decades
before and still unbuilt. Their cost Zas measured noZ in the hundreds of
millions of dollars. And the bridge Zhich he had conceived of as the
croZning glory of his career, the supreme monument to the life of Robert
0oses, a bridge Zhose construction Zould take close to five years, Zas not
yet even begun— and 0oses Zas, after all, already si[ty-five years old;
Zho kneZ Zhen time, so long on his side, might turn on him Zith the
NarroZs Crossing not yet begun? And the NarroZs Crossing Zould
(Zithout approaches, just for the bridge structure alone) cost $345,000,000.
And hoZ about the neZ parks he Zanted to create, the old parks he Zanted
to reshape? Jamaica Bay, Zhich Zas to be his park masterpiece, Jamaica
Bay, Zhich Zas to be his creation, not merely his reZorking of an Olmsted
creation, Jamaica Bay, Zhich Zas to be the greatest urban Zaterfront park in
the Zorld, Zas not even begun. There Zas so much yet to do! Even the
monumental Zealth of Triborough Zas noZhere near enough to do it.
:ealth  far  greater Zas almost Zithin his grasp. The proposal—even then in
preparation in :ashington—  for a Federal Interstate +ighZay System, for
Zhich the federal government Zould pay 90 percent of the cost, a state only
10 percent, Zould make $50 billion available to construct 41,000 miles of
such highZays during the ne[t ten years. 0oses had been Zorking quietly
Zith top EisenhoZer aide Sherman Adams and Zith General Lucius D.
Clay, chairman of a key presidential committee studying highZay needs, on
details of the program—the scope of it, in fact, Zas his: $50 billion over ten
years Zere his figures—and had succeeded in obtaining a key revision in
the program: although EisenhoZer Zas adamant that the neZ highZays
Zere not to be toll roads, 0oses had obtained the inclusion of a clause
saying they could link up Zith toll  facilities; if  he could build the bridges,
the federal government Zould pay for the highZays connecting Zith them.
But to be eligible for inclusion in the interstate system, highZays had to be
interstate; they had not only to connect Zith highZays in another state but

1244
to form Zith  those highZays a highZay system interstate rather than local
in character. Given the geographical location of NeZ York City, that state
could only be NeZ Jersey—and in the portion of NeZ Jersey closest to NeZ
York, the highZay-building poZer Zas the 3ort Authority.

There Zere additional incentives for rapprochement. Since O'DZyer had
handed it IdleZild in 1946, every ensuing confrontation betZeen the tZo
giant "public benefit corporations" had resulted in a 0oses victory; during
the reign of Impy, in fact, he had forced the 3ort Authority to agree

to reserve $13,000,000 for his 0id-0anhattan E[pressZay as the price for
permission to enlarge the Lincoln Tunnel. But the situation had changed.
:agner  Junior ("For a man Zho's been a friend of your father's, you have ...
a sense of humility, of respect") had just become mayor, and the 3ort
Authority's chairman had been one of his father's closest friends, campaign
treasurer for his 1926 senatorial race, in fact. +oZard S. Cullman Zas as
adroit as 0oses at playing on the 0ayor's feelings. :agner,  astute judge of
men that he Zas, Zas fully aZare of Zhat Cullman Zas doing. "I alZays
kneZ Zhen he Zanted something," the 0ayor Zould  recall years later of his
felloZ  Yale graduate. "+e'd take me to lunch at the 3layers Club and he'd
talk about the '26 campaign and about Yale." But :agner let him do it
anyZay; nothing—not even an aZareness of hoZ men used it to play on
him—could lessen the "respect," and :agner Zas not the man in any case
to offend, or even confront, a 3ort Authority board that included, besides
tobacco tycoon Cullman and tugboat tycoon Eugene F. 0oran, banking
barons S. Sloan Colt of Bankers Trust and Bayard F. 3ope of 0arine
0idland  Trust. For Austin Tobin, :agner  had little use; the 0ayor's keen
eye saZ through his attempt to act as arrogant as 0oses. ("0oses and
Tobin? Oh, 0oses is tougher. And smarter. Once you get aZay from
standing at the bridge and taking in quarters, Zhat Tobin has is that board.
:hen   I first came in, Austin used to go around calling me 'stupid.' Then I
ran in to him at a party, and I said—Zith a smile—'Austin, you Zanna get
anything through, you better stop calling me "stupid." ' +e never called me
'stupid' again, and +oZard apologi]ed to me for his behavior.") But the
board—coupled Zith the "respect"—Zas enough. Cullman's hold over the
0ayor  Zas quickly apparent to City +all insiders—and to 0oses. :ithout
the 0ayor in  his corner, the 3ort Authority Zas too big and too poZerful to

1245
fight. Fighting such a foe could be not only bloody but unprofitable.
Cooperation might be profitable. :ith   3ort Authority help, he Zould be
able to get there first for the federal cash in the 1950's as he had in the
1930's. Immediately upon passage of the Interstate +ighZay Act, he Zould
be able to present to :ashington a proposal for a complete, unified system
of highZays joining, across authority bridges and tunnels, NeZ York and
NeZ Jersey and, through NeZ Jersey, linking up Zith other highZays and
other states, a proposal ready to go, planned, blueprinted, costed out,
approved, ready for ground breaking, Zhile the proposals of other cities
Zere still in the talking stage, years aZay from even a possibility of
implementation.

Cooperation might, moreover, alloZ him to tap not only the federal but the
3ort Authority cashbo[.

That cashbo[, so long empty, Zas full noZ, thanks to the postZar traffic
boom, fuller even than Triborough's; its 1953 surplus—its real surplus, not
the one reported to the public—Zas $29,000,000; Triborough's surplus Zas
Zorth $500,000,000 in neZ bonds; the 3ort Authority's Zas Zorth
$700,000,000. Long on cash, moreover, the 3ort Authority Zas short on
dreams. The visionaries Zho had created it Zere long gone from its
councils; Julius +enry Cohen had been replaced by money men like
Cullman and Colt and 3ope Zhose eyes Zere brightened by the balances in

the Authority's ledgers, not by the potentialities for improving the common
Zeal that those balances represented. The purpose for Zhich the Authority
had been created—the development of an over-all transportation system to
knit together a great port—had been lost sight of for years. 3lans the
Authority had aplenty, of course, but unrelated plans, plans for individual
projects, joined by no link other than the fact that their construction Zould
return the agency profit. It had more money than 0oses but no more than a
fraction of his creative vision. As :agner  put it, "Once you get aZay from .
. . taking in quarters, Zhat Tobin has is that board"—and the board's first
concern Zas that Tobin take in more quarters each year than the year before.
:hat   0oses had after the quarters Zas dreams. 0oses may have seen—his
actions suggest he saZ—an opportunity to put the 3ort Authority surpluses
at the service of those dreams, to persuade his erstZhile rival to build first

1246
those of its planned projects that Zould help to reali]e his vision. The stakes
Zere too high—the chance for profit in both accomplishment and poZer too
big—not to cooperate Zith his old enemy.

Sometime late in 1953 or early 1954, over luncheon at Randall's Island, he
broached to the 3ort Authority board a plan of staggering scope. At
succeeding luncheons at Zhich Tobin represented the board, all did not go
smoothly. The plan Zas 0oses' plan—Zhat he Zas proposing they build
Zould turn out to be the bypass route around NeZ York Zhich he had
conceived in 1930 and Zhich he had been building in bits and pieces ever
since —and he lost no opportunity to make clear that it Zas his plan, and
that anyone Zho questioned any of its details didn't knoZ Zhat he Zas
talking about. At one luncheon, Tobin jumped up from the table, said, "I
don't have to sit here and be insulted like this," and stalked out. But, as it
turned out, Tobin did have to sit still and be insulted; his boss, Cullman,
persuaded by a super helping of 0oses' charm that they Zere again the
close friends they had been in the Al Smith era, ordered him to. For, if
0oses had reasons to be an[ious to cooperate, so did the 3ort Authority's
businessman board.

+aving plumbed, in a ten-year series of disputes, the depths of 0oses'
poZer in Albany, the 3ort Authority kneZ  that, deep though theirs ran, his
ran deeper. +aving attempted to get a string on +ulan Jack, the puppet
borough president of 0anhattan, the key borough in their plans, they had
learned that all the strings Zere firmly in 0oses' hands. :herever  they
Zanted to go in 0anhattan, moreover, they found running along its shore,
like a barricade in their path, the +enry +udson 3arkZay, over Zhich, as
3ark Commissioner, 0oses had absolute control. They Zanted to build a
neZ bridge across the +udson at 125th Street—such a bridge required
connections Zith the parkZay, and, for ma[imum effectiveness, Zith
0oses' proposed 8pper 0anhattan E[pressZay across 125th Street and, via
that e[pressZay, Zith 0oses' Triborough Bridge on the other side of
+arlem. They Zanted to double-deck the George :ashington Bridge—
double-decking required neZ connections to the parkZay. 0oreover, Zith
bridge traffic already cramming the streets of 8pper 0anhattan near the
bridge, the 75 percent increase double-decking Zould generate could be
handled

1247
only by construction of a Trans-0anhattan E[pressZay to the Bron[—
Zith, at its far end, a bridge link to the Cross-Bron[, and Zith links to the
0ajor  Deegan and +arlem River e[pressZays running along the banks of
the river far beloZ. City and state had given 0oses a veto poZer over all
such bridges and e[pressZays. A poZer struggle Zould be bloody. Asked
years later Zho Zould have Zon, :agner  Zould  tell the author Zith a sloZ
smile, "It Zould  have been a hell of a struggle—Zith that board." And Zhat
businessman Zants blood Zhen he can have profit? :hat businessman
Zants blood Zhen he can end loss? Three 3ort Authority bridges— the
Goethals, Bayonne and Outerbridge spans connecting Staten Island and
NeZ Jersey—had been losing money every year for tZenty years, earning,
in 1953 alone, half a million dollars less than the interest on the bonds that
had been floated to build them. Only the construction of the NarroZs
Crossing that Zould connect Staten Island to the rest of the city and open it
up to large-scale traffic Zould turn those money losers into money makers.
And 0oses, thanks to his takeover of the Tunnel Authority, held sole
legislative authori]ation to build the crossing.

Triborough's surpluses Zere, moreover, not the only surpluses being eyed
by politicians. The pressure on the 3ort Authority to aid mass transit Zas, in
fact, even greater than the pressure on 0oses, because the five near-
bankrupt railroads Zhose lines ended at the +udson Zere pleading for rail
connections across the river, and because the 3ort Authority's refusal to
spend money on such connections Zas Zeakened by its original legislative
mandate, Zhich clearly envisioned it doing so. The NeZ Jersey Legislature
Zas, in fact, even then in the process of establishing a 0etropolitan Rapid
Transit Commission, Zith a prestigious board of its oZn, and the
Legislature had pointedly given the 0RTC the responsibility of producing
an "over-all coordinated plan for transportation." The 3ort Authority had to
get its surpluses committed—and it had to get them committed fast. Doing
so Zas difficult on the basis of individual projects. A far-reaching road and
bridge program Zould obviously be easier.

Lastly, the 3ort Authority saZ, as 0oses saZ, that, in the broadest vieZ,
they had an identity of interest. In the terms used by Dun and Brad-street—
the terms in Zhich the 3ort Authority board and Austin Tobin thought
—"the success of toll facilities ... is largely dependent upon the adequacy

1248
and convenience of the approaches and connecting highZays. Thus, like the
ever Zidening ripples from a stone dropped in the Zater, every
improvement in this system of highZays, even at some distance from the . .
. facilities, is likely to increase to some e[tent the traffic on those facilities."
A huge neZ metropolitan region highZay netZork Zould  increase traffic on
all bridges and tunnels, theirs as Zell as 0oses'. And such a netZork could
be obtained most easily by—probably, given the immensity of its cost, only
by—making it part of the Interstate +ighZay System, and it could most
easily—perhaps only—become part of that system through cooperation. In
February 1954, the 3ort Authority agreed to Zork Zith Triborough on a
"Joint Study of Arterial Facilities," and on January 16, 1955, the results—
si[ty-tZo  pages long, hard-bound, four-color, glossy paper, summed up

by 0oses, Zho Zrote  its introduction and Zhose name, not by coincidence,
Zas listed first among its sponsors—Zere released to the press.

The "Joint Study" announced that the tZo authorities "recommend and are
prepared to proceed" immediately Zith three "bridge projects": building the
Throgs Neck and Verra]ano and double-decking the George :ashington. It
laid out a system of neZ arterial highZays e[tending to and from these
bridges: a "Bergen County E[pressZay" on the NeZ Jersey side of the
George :ashington Bridge and a depressed "Trans-0anhattan E[pressZay"
(really a ZestZard e[tension of the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay)  on the NeZ
York side; a "ClearvieZ E[pressZay" on the south or 4ueens side of the
Throgs Neck Bridge and a "Throgs Neck E[pressZay" and "Cross-Bron[
E[pressZay [Eastern] E[tension" on the north or Bron[  side; a "Clove
Lakes E[pressZay" on the Staten Island side of the NarroZs Bridge to link
it up Zith the Goethals and Bayonne spans, and a "Seventh Avenue
E[pressZay," really an e[tension of the GoZanus 3arkZay (Zhich Zas
itself noZ incorporated into the Brooklyn-4ueens E[pressZay), on the
Brooklyn side. It recommended that these roads be built immediately Zith
federal and state funds, along Zith the long-discussed "0id-0anhattan
Elevated E[pressZay" linking the Lincoln and 4ueens-0idtoZn   tunnels
and the long-discussed "LoZer 0anhattan E[pressZay" linking the +olland
Tunnel Zith the :illiamsburg   and 0anhattan bridges. And it recommended
for "future construction" a vast neZ system of e[pressZays across every
borough of the city and stretching out into the suburbs, some that 0oses

1249
had advocated previously and some that he had only recently envisioned: in
4ueens, a "Long Island," "RidgeZood-0aspeth"  and "Nassau"; in the
Bron[, a "Sheridan" and "Bruckner"; in Brooklyn,  a "BushZick,"
"3rospect" and "Cross-Brooklyn"; in Staten Island, a ":est  Shore,"
"Richmond" and ":illoZbrook";     and, finally, an "8pper 0anhattan
E[pressZay" that Zould  cross the island "in the vicinity of 125th Street" to
link the Triborough Bridge on the island's east shore Zith another bridge, a
"+udson River Bridge," Zhich  Zould touch doZn  at 125th Street on the
island's Zest shore, consideration • of Zhich should be "deferred until the
George :ashington Bridge, NarroZs  Bridge and Throgs Neck Bridge
projects have been completed and the traffic patterns at that time can be
studied."

The "Joint 3rogram" Zas nothing more nor less than a business
arrangement, Zith the businessman Zho could bring to the neZ partnership
the most of the crucial material—poZer—getting the most out of it. The
arrangements for the NarroZs Bridge are one proof of this. 0oses did not
have the money to build the bridge that he envisioned as his supreme
monument. But he had the poZer to build it. The 3ort Authority Zas as
an[ious as 0oses to see the NarroZs Bridge built, and the 3ort Authority
had the money to build it. But it did not have the poZer. So under the "Joint
3rogram," the 3ort Authority agreed to pay for the construction of the
bridge— under a contract Zhich said that although the 3ort Authority
Zould pay for it, the Authority  Zould have nothing else to say about it. The
Triborough Authority Zould  lease the great span from the 3ort Authority,
operate it, maintain it and control it absolutely—and Zould have the right to
buy it as

soon as it had accumulated enough cash to do so. 0oses Zould, in other
Zords, be building the bridge Zith his erstZhile rival's money—Zhich
Zould leave him Zith  the money to build another bridge, the Throgs Neck.
To get the NarroZs Bridge built, moreover, the 3ort Authority had to give
up another bridge that it had been an[ious to build; it had to allocate for the
NarroZs span the money it had been planning to spend on the 125th Street
span, and formally agree to "defer" that span indefinitely.

1250
The "business" basis for the Joint 3rogram is demonstrated more forcefully
still by the program as a Zhole. As a result of the construction of the
NarroZs Bridge, use of the 3ort Authority's three Staten Island spans
increased 172 percent—an increase that in terms of tolls collected came, in
1970, to about $5,500,000 per year. As a result of the double-decking of the
George :ashington Bridge, use of that bridge increased 75 percent—an
increase that in terms of tolls collected came, in 1970, to about $11,000,000
per year. The 3ort Authority's profit from the Joint 3rogram in hard cash
Zas thus about $16,500,000 per year. By 1970, Triborough Zas collecting
$11,000,000 annually in tolls on the Verra]ano Bridge, $7,500,000 on the
Throgs Neck Bridge—a hard cash profit of $18,500,000 per year. Given the
added assets of poZer that 0oses put into the partnership, both parties came
out just about even. The tZo giant authorities Zere dividing the potential
profits from the city's traffic as if congestion Zere a large and succulent pie.
And 0oses, Zho got the slice he Zanted, Zas ecstatic. Talking to a reporter
about the NarroZs Bridge just before the Joint 3rogram Zas released, he
Zas again the young man "burning Zith ideas," unable to contain his
enthusiasm. 8nable to sit still, striding around his office Zith smiles
breaking through the studiedly aloof mask he habitually Zore noZ,
forgetting to fold his arms and gesturing enthusiastically, he told the
reporter that at last, after so many years, the NarroZs Crossing is no longer
"an academic dream."

"There's going to be a bridge pretty soon—the bridge of my dreams," he
said. "It's going to be the most important single piece of arterial
construction in the Zorld. It Zill  be the longest suspension bridge in the
Zorld, and the tallest. ... It Zill  be the biggest bridge, the highest bridge, and
the bridge Zith the greatest clearance. It's all superlatives Zhen you talk
about this bridge . . ."

Although he didn't talk to reporters about them, 0oses had additional
reasons for elation. The 1955 deal betZeen the 3ort and Triborough
authorities sealed, perhaps for centuries, the future of NeZ York and its
suburbs. And it sealed the future on his terms.

In the background behind 0oses marched a mighty division: the giant
automobile manufacturers out of Detroit, the giant aluminum combines, the

1251
steel producers, the rubber producers, fifty oil companies, trucking firms in
the hundreds, highZay contractors in the thousands, consulting engineers,
labor union leaders, auto dealers, tire dealers, petroleum dealers, rank upon
rank of state highZay department officials, Bureau of 3ublic Roads
bureaucrats,

congressmen, senators—all the selfish interests Zhom author +elen Leavitt
Zas to label "The +ighZaymen." That coalition Zas alZays behind him; it
Zas no accident that he Zas the recipient in 1953 of a $25,000 aZard from
the General 0otors Corporation for the best essay in a nationZide contest
on "+oZ  to 3lan and 3ay for Better +ighZays," that some of Triborough's
most lucrative franchises Zere held by oil companies, that the three
automotive giants Zould later ploZ tens of millions of dollars into his
:orld's   Fair at a time Zhen other major companies Zere shying aZay from
it. In the sense that he Zas America's, and probably the Zorld's, most vocal,
effective and prestigious apologist for the automobile, that he designed
highZay netZorks not only for NeZ  York but for a do]en cities, that by his
success in building e[pressZays in the city he did more than any other
single urban official to encourage more hesitant officials to launch major
highZay-building programs in their cities, and that, by building them to
neZ, high standards, he did more than any other single urban official to set
the early standards for urban e[pressZay design—he Zas the spearhead, the
cutting edge, of this 3an]er division of public Zorks. But thanks to the Joint
3rogram, he Zas not forced to rely on any distant division. +e Zas the
spearhead of—he marched at the head of—his oZn elite local regiment.
The Joint 3rogram represented profit—profit from bonds, deposits,
contracts, premiums, retainers, jobs, payoffs, bribes, grease. It enlisted
behind him all those forces in the city—banks, unions, contractors, venal
politicians, venal or shortsighted public officials—Zho put profit from
public Zorks above the public interest or the public trust. And in the NeZ
York of the mid-tZentieth century, those forces could bend the city's
government to their Zill. The Joint 3rogram represented profit on a scale
hitherto undreamed of by even the greediest among them. The highZays
and bridges recommended in the Joint 3rogram represented not millions of
dollars but hundreds of millions—in 1968, Zith some of the most e[pensive
items in the program not yet underZay, $1,817,701,607 had been spent on

1252
it.* 0oses  did not have to urge these men on. The Retainer Regiment
folloZed him  eagerly.

And the regiment marched in lockstep. The incentives offered to it by the
Joint 3rogram insured against the slightest break in its ranks. :ith the
release of the over-all program for the metropolitan region, protests from
the ranks no longer concerned him. +e could simply threaten, as he did
again and again in the years to come, that if any part of the program Zas
eliminated or even altered in any Zay Zhatsoever, he Zould see to it—by
ZithdraZing  from the program his Triborough Authority funds or his
influence in Albany and :ashington—that  the entire program Zould be
discarded. A borough president might be alloZed to oppose a
neighborhood-Zrecking highZay in public but in private, Zhere it counted,
he could

* 0oses and Triborough 3R men referred to the study recommendations as
a "$600,000,000 program"—although the cost of the major projects listed
came alone to $740,000,000. The $740,000,000 figure may be discarded as
safely as the $600,000,000 figure, hoZever; none of the individual cost
estimates bore more than a passing relationship to reality.

not take the action that Zould have meant genuine opposition: the
invocation in Board of Estimate e[ecutive session of his veto poZer over
projects in his oZn borough. John Cashmore might publicly assail 0oses'
plan to run a tZelve-lane approach to the NarroZs Bridge through the heart
of Bay Ridge instead of on a more logical route along the shore, but he had
to privately okay 0oses' route to the other members of the "Borough
3residents' 8nion." If he did not do so, 0oses made clear, there Zould be
no NarroZs Bridge—and no $345,000,000 in bonds and contracts. 0oses'
technique may have been a bluff, but officials Zho remembered hoZ he had
once canceled $23,000,000 Zorth of projects in the Bron[ because Jimmy
Lyons balked at the Bruckner E[pressZay had too much at stake to call it.
Occasionally—very occasionally—a public official might shy aZay from a
politically dangerous proposal, but Zhether he Zas a borough president, a
0ayor  or a Governor, he Zas quickly reined back into line. Into his office
Zould pour the phone calls from the other members of the regiment, the
phone calls that symboli]ed the behind-the-scenes, subtle, selfish pressure

1253
that spelled poZer in NeZ York City. After the release of the Joint 3rogram,
the city didn't have a chance of rejecting the deal that had been arranged.
And that deal, Zorked out by this lover of the bridge and the highZay,
meant that the city Zould, for long years to come, build bridges and
highZays—and nothing else.

In January 1955, the tZo authorities had a combined immediate fund-
raising capacity of about a billion and a quarter dollars.

A billion  and a quarter dollars could have built a Zonderful mass
transportation system for NeZ York and its suburbs. Triborough's share
alone—the close to $500,000,000 that could have been raised from the sale
of revenue bonds backed by its annual surpluses—Zould in 1955 have been
more than enough to completely moderni]e the desperate Long Island Rail
Road, giving it sleek, gleaming cars, neZ, poZerful modern locomotives
much faster than the old ones—and straighter tracks so that those
locomotives could attain the speeds they Zere capable of. Triborough's
share Zould, in 1955, also have been more than enough to build atop the
tracks at central locations in 4ueens and Nassau County multilevel parking
garages so that thousands of commuters could drive to them, park and
simply take an elevator doZn to their trains, and in still sparsely developed
Suffolk County to acquire sufficient land for, and to build at a number of
central locations, entire huge modern commuter parking terminals.
Triborough's share Zould have been more than enough to build not only
neZ modern sZitching yards so that passengers Zould no longer be forced
to change trains at Jamaica, but a neZ East Side LIRR terminal in
0anhattan. It Zould  have been enough also—especially if right-of-Zay Zas
obtained along the median strip of the Long Island E[pressZay—to build a
Zhole neZ rapid transit line to supplement the three e[isting Long Island
Rail Road lines, a line Zith tracks so straight that trains could speed
passengers

into and out of the city at eighty miles per hour. It Zould have been more
than enough, in short, to build Zhat Zould in effect have been a Zhole neZ
Long Island Rail Road, a modern railroad capable of meeting the mass
transportation needs of a modern metropolitan area, and of attracting to
mass transportation enough highZay users to go a long Zay to solving the

1254
area's highZay needs as Zell. The cost of such a system—impossibly
e[pensive in 1974—Zould, in 1955, have been not $500,000,000 but
$200,000,000.

The 3ort Authority's share alone—more than $700,000,000—Zould have
been more than enough to build a modern trans-+udson rail loop that Zould
connect NeZ Jersey and 0anhattan via tZo neZ under-river tunnels, one at
the Battery and one at Fifty-ninth Street, and Zould provide transfer
stations to all the NeZ Jersey railroads and all major NeZ Jersey highZays
in the area, speeding 140,000 commuters, shoppers and theater-goers per
day not just into 0anhattan but to Zherever in those 0anhattan business
and commercial districts they Zanted to go—there Zould be stops at Cedar,
Canal, +ouston, Eighth, Fourteenth and other streets all the Zay north to
Columbus Circle—and removing tens of thousands of cars from NeZ
Jersey highZays, the trans-+udson vehicular tunnels, the :est Side
+ighZay  and 0anhattan streets, so that those commuters Zho still used
them Zould have easier trips also. The cost of such a system Zould, in
1955, have been about $300,000,000.

If Zhat Zas left  over after the completion of the Long Island Rail Road
moderni]ation and the trans-+udson tubes—about $700,000,000— Zas
used on the city's subZay system, it Zould have been more than enough to
build the long-proposed and desperately needed Second Avenue SubZay,
and to build a tunnel across the East River through Zhich a branch of the
Second Avenue line Zould e[tend out to 4ueens to provide adequate
subZay service there, and to build e[tensions of the e[isting subZay lines
in 4ueens to provide service to the hundreds of thousands of residents of
eastern 4ueens Zho Zere miles from the nearest subZay, and to e[tend the
Nostrand Avenue SubZay in Brooklyn three miles along Flatbush Avenue
to a neZ, modern terminal that Zould serve the groZing 0ill  Basin area
that possessed no rapid transit facilities at all, and to construct a neZ pla]a
and grade-crossing elimination project at De.alb Avenue that Zould
eliminate sZitching delays Zhich caused the most severe bottleneck in train
service betZeen Brooklyn and 0anhattan—the total cost of these
improvements in !955 came to $600,000,000. And there Zere other
alternatives. If, instead of spending part of it in the suburbs, the tZo
authorities devoted their total revenue-raising capacity—$1,200,000,000—

1255
to the subZays instead of commuter facilities, it Zould have been sufficient
to give the city a completely modern subZay system—the total cost of a
complete moderni]ation Zas estimated by the Transit Authority in that year
as $1,187,000,-000. (Even if only that portion of the capacity left after
commuter improvements Zas used for subZays, it might still have been
sufficient to give NeZ York a modern subZay system, for during the decade
folloZing  the

Joint 3roposal, the tZo authorities' annual revenues from tolls rose so much
faster than e[pected—for their forecasters never understood, and therefore
never took fully into account, the phenomenon of traffic generation—that
their Zealth far outstripped even their most optimistic e[pectations, and the
amount available for mass transit facilities, if their total resources had been
devoted to such facilities, might Zell have been not a billion and a quarter
dollars but more than tZo billion dollars.) The tZo authorities had it in their
poZer in 1955 to make it possible for the people of the NeZ York
metropolitan region to travel around that region quickly, cheaply and
pleasantly. They had it in their poZer in January 1955 to change the Zay the
region's millions lived.

Instead, as a result of Robert 0oses' Joint 3rogram, the tZo authorities,
Zith three major e[ceptions—Triborough's Coliseum; the 3ort Authority's
substantial e[penditures for airports, and for a i960 takeover of the +udson
and 0anhattan Railroad—spent their money on facilities for the
automobile. Triborough spent, once the Coliseum e[penditures Zere
subtracted, 100 percent of its resources on the automobile. During the
decade folloZing the formulation of the Joint 3rogram, Triborough spent
$755,000,-000 on the bridges, tunnels and highZays advocated in that study
—and not a cent on anything else.

The authority funds that the Joint 3rogram committed to facilities for motor
vehicles Zidened more indirectly the disparity betZeen public investment in
such facilities and public investment in mass transit that Zas fostered by the
3rogram. During the folloZing  decade—1955 to 1965—federal and state
governments spent on neZ highZays in the metropolitan area— the neZ
highZays recommended in the Joint 3rogram—about $1,200,000,-000.
They spent not a cent on mass transportation. NeZ York City's oZn

1256
contribution to 0oses' neZ highZays is more difficult  to calculate, hidden
as so much of it is—oZing to 0oses' Ziles—under hundreds of "seZer,"
"street opening," "gas" and "lighting" items that bear no indication that they
Zould not have been necessary had it not been for highZay construction —
but the city's e[penditure for neZ facilities for motor vehicles almost
certainly tops $500,000,000. During the decade folloZing presentation of
the Joint 3rogram, therefore, public investment in neZ highZays in and
around NeZ York Zas about $2,700,000,000. The public investment in neZ
mass transportation facilities Zas a small fraction of this amount. During
this decade, 439 miles of neZ highZays Zere built—and not one mile of
neZ railroad or subZay. In 1974, people using subZays and railroads in and
around NeZ York Zere still riding on tracks laid betZeen 1904 and 1933.
the last year before Robert 0oses came to poZer in the city. Not a single
mile had been built since.

1257
Because there Zere no subZays or railroads into many neZly developed
areas, their residents could use mass transit only by first making their Zay
to the old rail lines—often a journey in itself. 0ore  than half of all suburban
"rail commuters" and "subZay riders" from outlying areas of the city

had to take a bus or car ride—often of considerable length—to the nearest
subZay or railroad station.

At rush hours, the scenes at subZay stations in the greatest city in history's
richest and technologically most advanced civili]ation Zere incredible. At a
hundred stations, the traveler arrived each morning a the head of the stairs
leading doZn onto the loading platforms to see beneath him, overfloZing
them, lapping precariously full to their very edges, a sea of humanity—a
sea into Zhich the traveler had no choice but to hurl himself.

To get inside the trains, men and Zomen pushed and shoved like irritable
animals, rushing for seats as animals rush for a food trough, for Zithout a
seat they Zould have to stand—body crushed against body, strangers' smells
in their nostrils, strangers' breath in their faces—in a press so dense that
there could e[ist in it neither comfort nor dignity nor manners. :riters
called subZay cars "cattle cars"; they said people Zere crammed into them
"like sardines"; and such nonhuman images Zere apt. For the croZding in
NeZ York's subZays—croZding to Zhich  hundreds of thousands of human
beings Zere subjected day after day, year after year, for all the years of their
Zorking lives—Zas  inhuman. Although most office Zorkers Zere not due
at Zork until nine o'clock, on any Zeekday morning one could see around
the subZay stations in the outlying areas of the city—past the chain-link
fences of the giant parking lots on :oodhaven Boulevard near the giant
neZ Lefrak City housing development in 4ueens, for e[ample—long lines
of men and Zomen, during fall and Zinter huddling in their coats against
the too early morning chill, hurrying for the stations at seven forty-five or
even seven-thirty, Zilling to forgo a half hour or more of sleep, Zilling to
gulp doZn a coffee and danish at the office instead of breakfasting at home,
to avoid the Zorst of that degrading ordeal. By eight, it Zas already too late.
As one observer described the scene at that hour:

1258
. . . the parking lots around the :oodhaven Boulevard station are filling up
rapidly as cars stream from the e[pressZay. Buses filled to capacity pull up
and disgorge their passengers. NoZ the subZay platform is packed si[ deep
Zith people Zaiting impassively. As the local arrives, they surge forZard,
merging, pushing, straining. Some clutch neZspapers, but they cannot
move, much less read. At Roosevelt Avenue, the e[press trains arriving
from Jamaica, .eZ  Gardens and Forest +ills are jammed to the doors, but
somehoZ more bodies squee]e inside. By eight-thirty the croZd at
:oodhaven  Boulevard backs up the stairs. Those in the rear files must Zait
for one and perhaps tZo locals before they can Zedge themselves aboard.

CroZded though they Zere, the 4ueens subZay lines Zere not as croZded
as the lines running doZn from the Bron[ along the east side of 0anhattan.
Since shortly after :orld  :ar    I, the city had been promising to build a
Second Avenue SubZay to service those areas. Lying in the bottom draZer
of the desk of a city engineer Zhose job dealt Zith subZay design Zas a set
of plans. "0y  father [a civil servant in the same department] gave me these
plans Zhen I came into the business" in 1929, he Zould tell friends. They
Zould unroll the plans—and the friends Zould laugh at seeing

they Zere plans for "The Second Avenue SubZay." After :orld  :ar   II, the
city, having torn doZn the old Second Avenue El, Zhich serviced a portion
of the same area, repeated its promise. In 1955 (in the process of tearing
doZn the Third Avenue El, Zhich serviced part of the same area), the city
promised that construction Zas imminent. But in 1965, the subZay Zould
still not be built—or even begun. And the thousands of passengers Zho had
used the tZo old elevated lines had to pack into the already crammed
Le[ington Avenue IRT line. By 1965, the average car in the southbound
e[press, designed for an "absolute ma[imum" capacity of 120 passengers,
Zas jammed during the morning rush hour Zith some 170 passengers,
Zhich, as one study indicated, "is just about the ma[imum short of
suffocation."

There Zere available in 1955, the year of the authorities' Joint 3rogram,
technological innovations Zhich could have increased not only subZay
capacity but subZay speed. Not one of any significance Zas instituted. The

1259
rides Zere as long as ever—longer, for the lack of available operating funds
forced continual cutbacks in e[press service.

The cars into Zhich subZay riders Zere crammed Zere cars thirty and forty
years old in 1955, and due for replacement. Such replacement Zould have
been possible Zith the authorities' surplus. They Zere not replaced— and in
1965, almost 20 percent of NeZ York's subZay cars had been in use for
more than half a century. In Zinter, because of their ancient, malfunctioning
heating systems, subZay cars Zere cold; in the summer—particularly on the
IRT, built in 1904, because in 1904, construction techniques to ventilate
subZay tunnels had not yet been invented—they Zere so sZelter-ingly hot
that one Zriter compared a ride on them to incarceration in the Black +ole
of Calcutta.

Not only Zere neZ cars not purchased; the old ones Zere not repaired. It
Zas about 1956 that there Zas instituted on the NeZ York City subZay
system, because of lack of funds, a policy of "deferred maintenance"—a
phrase Zhich, translated into practice, meant that brakes and signals and
sZitches Zere inspected less frequently, that Zheels Zere ground round to
keep rides smooth less frequently, that electrical relays Zhich should have
been replaced every five years Zere replaced every thirty years, that the
vast system Zas sometimes completely "out" of light bulbs to replace burnt-
out signals, alcohol to keep sZitches from free]ing, and other basic
supplies.

So superbly engineered and maintained had the system been previously
(NeZ York had once been enormously proud of its subZays) that it took
years for this systematic neglect to take its toll, but, every year after 1956,
every criterion of subZay performance—on-time runs, individual car
breakdoZns—disclosed that the toll Zas steadily mounting. By the late
1960's, the day of full reckoning had arrived: 17,070 runs had to be halted
during a single eight-month period; forty-five cars Zere breaking doZn on
an average day; forty trains Zere derailed in a single year.

By the time Robert 0oses left poZer, the Times could report that on a
system that had for decades been called—accurately—"the safest subZay in
the Zorld,"

1260
there have been more serious accidents ... in the last ten years than on any
other major subZay system in the Zorld; in the last year, there have been
more accident injuries than on any other system.

During a single seven-month period, there Zere four major accidents; in
one, an empty IND local—being operated from the third car because the
brakes in the first tZo cars no longer Zorked—smashed into a croZded
local near Roosevelt Avenue, killing tZo persons and injuring seventy
others; in another, a clogged South Bron[ catch basin—cleaning machines
had not been replaced as they Zore out—turned IRT tunnels into gigantic
storm seZers as Zater cascaded doZn air shafts and stairZays, trapping
30,000 passengers for up to three hours in subZay tunnels Zhere the
temperature reached 100 degrees in a disaster in Zhich one Zoman died and
150 passengers suffered heat prostration. During this same seven-month
period, four separate fires in subZay tunnels under the city—caused at least
in part by equipment that an investigating grand jury Zas to call "inherently
dangerous and defective"—sent thousands of "terrified, smoke-blinded
passengers stumbling out into the subterranean murk to grope their Zay to
emergency e[its and reach the street above via manholes." One bla]e—toll:
one dead, fifty felled by smoke poisoning—Zent unreported for long
minutes: the motorman's radio Zas out of order.

Less dramatic than the injury toll—but Zearing on the tens of thousands of
subZay riders Zho Zere never involved in a major disaster—Zas the daily
toll imposed by calculated neglect. The floors of NeZ York's subZays Zere
filthy, and the grime Zas mi[ed Zith  scattered pages of neZspapers, candy
and gum Zrappers and, for emphasis, an occasional blob of spittle or a
smear of vomit that no one had yet Ziped up. SubZay Zalls Zere covered
Zith verbal filth;  the scenery amid Zhich the NeZ Yorker traveled around
his city Zas a vast mosaic of fuck and suck and cock and cunt.

.noZing   that they could no longer rely for safety on brakes and signals, the
operating authorities responsible for the subZays responded to each major
disaster by placing more and more of their reliance on caution; trains crept
Zhere once they could have safely speeded, and ground to a halt at the
slightest possibility of danger ahead. Consequently, the time NeZ Yorkers
Zere forced to spend daily, shivering or sZeltering on those bumpy, jolting,

1261
filthy trains, greZ longer and longer. :here  once the average trip from the
city's outskirts to its center had been forty or forty-five minutes, noZ it Zas
an hour or more. :hen  Robert 0oses came to poZer in NeZ York in 1934,
the city's mass transportation system Zas probably the best in the Zorld.
:hen   he left poZer in 1968, it Zas quite possibly the Zorst.

:ith   money, you could buy almost anything in mid-tZentieth-century NeZ
York. But you couldn't buy a decent trip to and from Zork. :ealthier
families might move to the suburbs, but 0oses' Joint 3roposal of 1955 had
sealed the fate of the metropolitan region's nine suburban commuter
railroads. In 1955, some of those railroads Zere still healthy—the NeZ
+aven, profitable, clean and punctual, had just purchased scores of
gleaming neZ

cars; the 3enn Central's +arlem and +udson divisions Zere, one
commentator said, "a model of hoZ to keep 42,000 daily commuters
happy"— but others Zere teetering precariously on the brink of financial
disaster; the Long Island, the commuter line most directly in 0oses' line of
fire, had, in fact, been shoved over the brink; it had plunged into bankruptcy
in 1949 and had been kept alive—barely alive—thereafter only by a series
of state ta[ concessions.

0oses' Joint 3rogram e[pressZays siphoned off the railroads' customers
precisely as the planners had predicted. The railroads Zere private
corporations, in e[istence for the sole purpose of shoZing a profit. To shoZ
one, they Zould have had to compete successfully Zith the public
authorities that Zere their competitors. But Zhile the authorities' toll-
charging facilities Zere subsidi]ed by hundreds of millions of dollars of
connecting highZays, by freedom from ta[es on their hundreds of millions
of dollars of real estate and on their income, the railroads enjoyed no such
subsidies, and Zere trapped as Zell by mounting labor costs, minimal to
authorities operating only loZ-maintenance bridges and tunnels. Every
railroad attempt during this decade to obtain meaningful subsidies Zas
defeated by NeZ York's local "highZaymen," the banks, construction
unions, contractors, engineering and bonding and building-supply firms and
politicians Zho reaped profit from 0oses' highZays, a coalition led by
Triborough's chairman, Zho, as its prestigious public spokesman, on one

1262
occasion assured Congress that no subsidy Zas needed because "there is
little need for an e[pansion of railroad commuter facilities in the NeZ York
metropolitan area," and, on another, Zhen an impartial private study called
a subsidy imperative, dynamited it by assuring the public that the major
problem Zas simply that the railroads Zere not as efficient, prudent,
practical and businesslike as the public authorities—stating: "These
railroads have got to be more ingenious. . . . bailing out busted, la]y and
backZard private enterprises is [not] the business of government." (0oses
added that mass transportation needs could be met on highZays as Zell as
on railroads. "A great deal of passenger traffic today consists of carpools,"
an "immeasurably more convenient" and less e[pensive system, he said.)

8nable to compete Zith the authorities, the railroads greZ poorer as their
rivals greZ richer. Even those Zhich in 1955 had been shoZing profits, by
1959 or i960 Zere shoZing losses—bigger losses every year. By the early
1960's, those Zho still possessed any money in the bank Zere living off it
just to stay alive—and Zere rapidly consuming the last of it. They had no
alternative but to raise fares and cut back service, moves that touched off a
self-defeating cycle: each fare increase and service cutback drove railroad
passengers to the highZays. (The Long Island Rail Road increased fares
five times during ten years; after each increase, the railroad collected a
million feZer  fares per year.) A decade after the Joint 3roposal, Zith
millions of neZ potential customers, the commuter railroads Zere providing
substantially less service: the Long Island Rail Road, Zhich during the
1920's had run betZeen fifty and si[ty trains per hour into 0anhattan, in

1965, Zith Long Island's commuter population up more than 200 percent,
ran betZeen tZenty and thirty.

The service that Zas provided in 1965—or 1968, the year Robert 0oses left
poZer—should be chronicled in depth. OtherZise, future urban historians
Zill  dismiss oral and daily press descriptions of that service as
e[aggeration.

The Long Island Rail Road, for e[ample, Zas, in the Zords of one reporter,
"the kind of train that, if smaller, Zould make your little boy cry if  he found
it under his Christmas tree." :ith  its creaking, rickety 1900-vinta'ge

1263
coaches, it resembled the comic strip "Toonerville Trolley." +umorist
Russell Baker, naming it "The Looneyville Trolley," said that it

Zas nationally recogni]ed as the Zorst railroad of any kind in the entire
country. Railroad buffs from all over the Zorld came to NeZ York to look at
it. A feZ  Zould even have ridden on it in spite of the Zarnings of medical
science, e[cept that they made the mistake of going to the station Zhen the
time-table said the Long Island Zould be there and, therefore, could never
find it.

But if the Long Island Zas a joke, it Zas a bitter joke. Its riders laughed
because, as one of them, Al Cassuto of :oodmere, put it, ":hat  else can
you do but laugh? If you don't you'll go cra]y."

Living standards on affluent Long Island Zere high even for America. The
homes of many Long Island Rail Road commuters Zere large, lu[urious,
thickly carpeted, richly draperied, crammed Zith the most modern
appliances for cleanliness and cooking. The vicissitudes of climate Zere
eliminated for them not only in their homes—no county in America had so
many centrally air-conditioned homes as Nassau—but in their automobiles,
all of them heated, most of them air-conditioned. These automobiles—the
automobiles out of Zhich Long Islanders stepped every Zeekday morning
to board the Long Island Rail Road—symboli]ed the degree to Zhich the
affluence and technological genius of America had given its people a life
cushioned against physical discomfort.

Then the train arrived, and the Long Islanders climbed aboard.

The linoleum on the floors of the coaches into Zhich they stepped Zas
cracked and split, impacted Zith layers of grime. 3aint Zas flaking off
grimy Zalls. The ZindoZs,  so thickly smeared Zith grime that you could
hardly see through some of them, Zere filled Zith spider Zebs, and Zith the
lacy spread of thin cracks radiating out from holes smashed in them and
never repaired. Some of the holes Zere covered Zith bits of cardboard held
on Zith tape; others gaped jaggedly.

The seats Zere ripped and humped. Their springs Zere sprung. Their backs
sagged limply backZards. Sitting in those seats meant sitting in dirt. If you

1264
rested your arm on a ZindoZsill, your coat sleeve came aZay covered Zith
dust. You sat Zith your feet among Zads of cheZed-up gum on Zhich the
spittle had long since dried, among gum and candy Zrappers, sheets of
neZspapers, fragments of ice-cream cones and, occasionally, discarded
hunks of food. It Zas a good idea not to let your eyes focus on the floor.
You might

see drobs of spittle, or fat bugs scuttling by your bright and shiny shoes. Yet
men pushed and shoved for those seats, for those Zho didn't get them had to
stand, and standing on the Long Island's sZaying, lurching coaches Zasn't
easy.

3articularly because one might have to stand for quite a long time. Even
Zhen it Zas running on time, the Long Island Rail Road Zas sloZ—
incredibly sloZ. And the railroad seemed almost never to be running on
time. There Zere days, in fact, on Zhich, because of equipment malfunction
in the LIRR's main 3ennsylvania Station terminal, every Long Island train
Zas late. There Zere days on Zhich every Long Island train Zas hours late;
some commuters couldn't remember Zhen last they had been on time. In
tabulating the number of delayed trains, the LIRR did not even bother
counting those delayed less than ten minutes. Even so, the daily figures
Zere not unremarkable. +ere is one day's record:

Trains canceled yesterday—one; commuters affected—1,000. Trains more
than ten minutes late—187; total time lost—74 hours, 15 minutes;
commuters affected —140,250.

Getting a seat Zas not total victory. Getting an end seat Zas Zhat counted.
0any  of the LIRR seats had been designed for three people—but they had
been designed half a century before, Zhen people Zere smaller. There
Zasn't enough room for three people. Sitting in even an end seat Zas
indignity; it  Zas sitting Zith  your shoulder and thigh tight against a
stranger's shoulder and thigh, pressing into him at every lurch, pushing
against him Zhile opening a neZspaper or reaching into a pocket for your
train ticket, surreptitiously taking advantage of shifts in his position to gain
an e[tra quarter inch of room for your leg or arm. But sitting in the middle
Zas indignity doubled. The person sitting there Zas crushed from both
sides, leaned into from both sides, Zithout room to make an unrestricted

1265
movement of any kind. "Of all the things I hated about the Long Island Rail
Road," says one Zoman, "the Zorst Zas sitting in the middle on those seats.
You'd have men pressing against you on both sides. They didn't mean
anything by it. Some of them Zere sleeping and lying all over you. But it
made me feel dirty. Standing at rush hour—it Zas the same thing. There'd
be men leaning all over you. But being stuck in the middle on those seats
Zas Zorse. There Zas never a time it happened that I didn't get off the train
feeling dirty." It Zas no Zonder that the first tZo  persons to reach the three-
man seats took the tZo end positions, and that Zhen a third arrived,
invariably the one sitting on the outside, closest to the aisle, Zould, instead
of politely sliding over to make room for the neZ man on the outside, stand
up and let him by to take the middle seat, careful not to look him in the eye.

In Zinter, the trips Zere cold. +eating equipment half a century old and
hapha]ardly maintained could not be e[pected to Zork Zell. Not that even
modern, Zell-maintained equipment could have kept heated a coach in
Zhich it seemed that eveiy other ZindoZ either had a hole in it or could not
be shut tightly. A reporter Zho took a thermometer onto an LIRR train one

Zinter day—not by any means the coldest day of the Zinter—found that the
temperature aboard Zas 29 degrees. 0en Zho in home and office enjoyed
temperature controlled to the precise degree, had to travel betZeen home
and office huddled shivering in their coats.

And Zinter Zas, perhaps, better than summer. The crush in the cars kept the
temperature up, and in Zinter that Zas a help. In summer, it Zas not, and
help Zas needed, since 70 percent of the LIRR's ancient rolling stock did
not have air-conditioning equipment. 0en Zho tried frantically  to open
ZindoZs—one could Zatch them tug on them furiously every feZ minutes
on a long summer ride home—found them stuck fast. A reporter Zho took a
thermometer onto a jam-packed LIRR train one summer day—not by any
means the hottest day of the summer—found that the temperature aboard
Zas 98 degrees. 0en Zho Zould not have dreamed of living in a home or
Zorking in an office that Zas not air-conditioned, rode each day betZeen
home and office sZeltering, the sZeat forming in their armpits and crotches
and running doZn their backs and legs.

1266
Long Island Rail Road trains did not alZays run late. Sometimes they did
not run at all. Year by year, as already old equipment greZ older, the
number of trains that simply broke doZn on the track increased. It Zas no
longer unusual to see a train arrive in Jamaica being pushed along by
another train. The number of trains that didn't even make it out onto a track
increased. By 1964, it Zas not unusual for the railroad to cancel ten trains
per day. One train, the 7:45 a.m. from Babylon to Brooklyn, did not appear
for 102 consecutive days; Zould-be passengers named it "the 3hantom."

Long Islanders' lives Zere cushioned—appro[imately tZenty-tZo hours out
of every tZenty-four—by all  the material Zonders the tZentieth century
could provide. For those other tZo hours—tZo hours that could Zith
accuracy have been called "Robert 0oses' TZo +ours," for he had made
them Zhat they Zere—they lived like nineteenth-century Russian peasants.

There comes a time, +. L. 0encken said, Zhen every normal man is
tempted "to spit on his hands, haul up the black flag and begin slitting
throats." The LIRR's conductors Zere not responsible for conditions on the
railroad. The commuters kneZ that—rationally. But the conductors Zere a
visible symbol of the railroad's management on Zhich the commuters could
vent their frustration. 0en normally  rational found themselves snarling and
cursing conductors, refusing to shoZ them their tickets; as a result, men
Zho Zould  not have been able to conceive of themselves being arrested
suddenly found themselves in that state. "Arrested!" as one reporter put it:
"3ortly, balding, mild-mannered, 53-year-old Seymour Cummins, district
sales manager, commuter, family man. Seymour Cummins, of all people,
being led off the train by tZo policemen, one on each arm, as his Zife
Zatched in disbelief." By 1968, the year Robert 0oses left poZer,
commuters Zere, as one Zriter put it, "so . . . surly that the conductors
occasionally choose, like prudent lion tamers, not to enter the cage." One
free]ing evening, at Jamaica, Zhile commuters huddled in doZnstairs
Zaiting rooms because the Zaiting rooms near the tracks upstairs Zere
unheated, a malfunctioning public-address system prevented them from
hearing announcements of incoming

trains. Storming upstairs in sudden senseless fury, 250 commuters began
pounding on the glass Zalls of the announcer's booth, trying to get at the

1267
terrified occupant—they had broken the glass Zhen police arrived to pull
them aZay. On another free]ing night, a train broke doZn some miles from
the nearest station. Its passengers got off and began throZing rocks at it.
Similar incidents occurred again and again. One evening in 3enn Station—
Zith 150 rush-hour trains running late—a fifty-eight-year-old bank
employee from Bayside, enraged because a conductor Zould not open the
doors to let him on a train that had loaded but had been standing for close to
half an hour on the platform, reached through the ZindoZ to the engineer's
booth, grabbed something and refused to let go. And Zhen the railroad
police rushed up to pull him aZay, suddenly, as one police sergeant put it,
"this place Zas Zall-to-Zall  people, thousands of people"—pulling at the
policemen, punching them. "It Zas a riot doZn there," the sergeant said. "It
Zas actually a riot." And it Zas testimony to the rage to Zhich conditions
on NeZ York's railroads could drive men.

Actual physical violence Zas, of course, unusual, and therefore it is not in
violence that the true toll of commuting on the Long Island Rail Road
should be computed. It is in the norm—to Zhich the violence is only
occasional, violent punctuation—the norm that endures day after day, Zeek
after Zeek, year after year, for tens of thousands of commuters (the LIRR
carried 80,000 daily), that the toll of commuting should be computed.

The true e[tent of this toll can perhaps be described in psychiatric terms.
The chairman of the Nassau County 0ental +ealth Board, in one of the first
detailed studies of the subject, discovered a "commuter syndrome," "a mild
state of chronic stress resulting from internali]ed rage and frustration due to
the uncertainty of disrupted schedules." It Zas most serious in commuters
Zho Zere "business e[ecutives, overly Zorrying, driving,  ambitious and
aggressive types. . . . Such a person, Zho preserves his valuable time by
living to a tight schedule, is tremendously vulnerable, psychologically
speaking, to transportation failures." But the commuter syndrome, the study
found, Zas not present only in e[ecutives. Three out of every four
commuters tested suffered from its symptoms.

Chronically.

But it did not take a psychiatrist to compute the toll. A layman could do it—
by asking commuters in a rela[ed setting—a cocktail party, perhaps—

1268
about commuting and then taking note of the contrast betZeen the ansZers
he gets from young men—or men recently moved to a neZ home on Long
Island—and those he gets from older men.

A young man might say, as tZenty-si[-year-old 0ichael Liberman of  Di[
+ills  did one evening, "3eople's lives revolve around the railroad. You can
spend five hours a day on it, and then you're just too tired to Zork." +e
might say, as thirty-si[-year-old Allen Siegal of Roslyn did one evening, "I
think Ze're out of our minds to do this. The trip home is Zorse than eight or
nine hours at the office." 0en Zho have been commuting for years,
hoZever, generally do not go into detail. Nor do they complain much. Their
standard reply—one so standard that the questioner can hear it a do]en

times in a do]en conversations—apparently sincere, is: "Oh, you get used to
it after a Zhile."

The implications of that reply should be considered.

"Get used to it!" Accept as part of your daily e[istence tZo or three— or
more—hours sitting amid dirt, crammed against strangers, breathing foul
air, sZeating in summer, shivering in Zinter. Accept that you Zill be doing
this for a substantial portion of every Zorking day of your life, until you are
old. "Get used to it!" One has to think about Zhat those Zords, so casually
uttered, really mean. One has to reali]e that the man uttering those Zords
has accepted discomfort and e[haustion as a part—a substantial part—of
the fabric of his life. Accepted them so completely that he no longer really
thinks about them—or about the amount of his life of Zhich they are, day
by day, robbing him. :e  learn to tolerate intolerable conditions. The
numbness that is the defense against intolerable pain has set in—so firmly
that many of the victims no longer even reali]e that the pain is pain.

One should listen to the Zives of these men—to be more precise, the
younger Zives—say, as 0rs. 0ary  Severine of +untington, Zhose husband,
Louis, Zas general manager of advertising for the American Broadcasting
Company, says: ":e never plan anything during the Zeek. There's got to be
something more in life than Saturday night." Older Zives do not talk much
about it. After enough years, they don't complain that "there's got to be

1269
something more in life than Saturday night." They just forget that there ever
Zas.

And then, to comprehend the full toll of commuting, one should try to
imagine—for no one has yet arrived at an objective method of measuring it
—the total human cost, individual cost times 80,000, of commuting under
such conditions. It may be that the cost—the total toll in human terms—is
too large to be imagined. But if one makes the effort nonetheless, and
obtains even a glimpse of its dimensions, one can get a glimpse of the true
cost of Robert 0oses' transportation policies on Long Island.

And Long Island Zas not the only NeZ York suburban railroad on the track
toZard chaos. It Zas only the first of many making that journey. :hen
0oses had first come to poZer in the suburbs—in 1924—NeZ York's
suburban railroads had been in good shape. As late as 1955, Zhen he
formulated his Joint 3rogram, most of them had still been in fair shape. By
the time he left poZer in 1968, they Zere all as much of a bitter joke as the
Long Island. The NeZ +aven Railroad had in 1955 been a model of
punctuality, cleanliness and profitability. In 1968, as one headline put it, on
the neZ haven, l.i.r.r. looks good. By 1968, moreover, Zith the annual
surplus of 0oses' Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority running more
than $30,-000,000 per year, every suburban railroad in the NeZ York
metropolitan area Zas either bankrupt or teetering on the brink.

The massive migration to the city's outlying precincts and to the suburbs
beyond had created hundreds of thousands of neZ commuters. +ad the
subZays and railroads been e[tended into these regions and improved Zith
the Authority funds available in 1954, they Zould have been used by many

of these commuters. +ad they been merely maintained at even their old
levels, Zith their old fares—not improved, just maintained—they Zould at
least have kept those riders they already had. But, disintegrating, they did
not. After the Joint 3rogram, the number of rides taken annually on NeZ
York's subZays and commuter railroads declined by almost tZo million per
year. Commuters by the tens and hundreds of thousands had been forced
onto the highZays and bridges Robert 0oses had laid out under the Joint
3rogram and had been building ever since. And it Zas on those highZays
and bridges—the creations of a single individual, public Zorks sprung from

1270
that individual's private creative vision, financed and approved as a result of
his unique political genius, driven to completion by his savage drive and
unsZerving Zill—that  the effect of that single individual's policies on the
12,000,000 individuals Zho lived in the NeZ York metropolitan region Zas
most clear.

Those highZays and bridges Zere aZesome. The transportation netZork
built by Robert 0oses after :orld   :ar   II  ranks Zith the greatest feats of
urban construction in recorded history. 3ossibly it outranks them all.
3ossibly it is history's greatest feat of urban construction. The longest
tunnel in the :estern  +emisphere, the longest suspension bridge in the
Zorld, the largest and most comple[ traffic interchanges ever built—these
Zere all merely segments of that achievement. Its over-all scale can perhaps
best be grasped by a single statistic: mileage. The "urban" highZays—
controlled-access through roads Zithin cities and the heavily populated
surrounding suburbs —built in America during the quarter century
folloZing  the Second :orld  :ar   dZarfed any urban highZay or system of
highZays built in any country in the Zorld any time in recorded history. In
1964, Zhen Robert 0oses completed his major highZay building, there
Zere completed or Zell under Zay in the NeZ York metropolitan region
899 miles of such highZays—627 built by him, many of the rest, most of
Zhich Zere in NeZ  Jersey, built as a result of the Joint 3rogram he Zorked
out Zith the 3ort Authority.  No other metropolitan region in America
possessed 700 miles of such highZays. No other metropolitan region
possessed 600 miles—or 500. Even Los Angeles, Zhich presented itself to
history as the most highZay-oriented of cities— Zhich Zas, in fact, not a
city in the older sense in Zhich NeZ York Zas a city but a collection of
suburbs Zhose very e[istence Zas due to highZays— possessed in 1964
only 459 miles of such highZays. No city in America had more than half as
many miles of such highZays as NeZ York. But nothing about his roads
Zas as aZesome as the congestion on them.

Nineteen fifty-five Zas also a turning point for NeZ York  and its suburbs
because that Zas the year construction started on the Long Island
E[pressZay.

1271
Long Island, that vast, empty, beautiful open area beyond the city line that
0oses had looked upon in 1923, had since been covered—thanks largely to
his parkZays, his starving of its railroads, his initiation and encouragement
of industry-e[cluding  ]oning—Zith  a formless, unfocused

spraZl of subdivisions, mile upon endless mile of land-gobbling, single-
family, large-lot developments that Zere not only destroying the very assets
that he pri]ed—its openness, its spaciousness, its beautiful North Shore
hills and South Shore marshes and Zetlands, its ocean and bay and sound—
but Zere replacing it Zith communities that Zere not communities, that had
no "doZntoZns," none of the focal points that alone make meaningful
community development possible and that Zere so spread out that a trip to
anyZhere—store, church, school, movie, business—generally required a
car, so that the lives of its residents Zere eaten up by the difficulties in
getting from one place to another. The construction of the e[pressZay
offered a chance to reshape the Island, to free its people from the tyranny of
the automobile.

Just laying tZo rapid transit tracks doZn the e[pressZay's center mall
Zould have done the job. :ithout  them, e[pressZay-fostered development
Zould folloZ  the same pattern as the development fostered previously by
0oses' parkZays, and for the same reasons: its users Zould be arriving at
their e[its in the evenings in cars; it Zould not make that much difference to
them if their homes Zere located miles from an e[it; having been driving
for an hour or more, it Zouldn't matter much to them if they had to drive for
another fifteen or tZenty minutes. They Zould be accustomed to driving,
oriented to cars—and their homes Zould therefore spread out Zidely over
the land. But men arriving on high-speed rapid transit Zould feel as men
arriving home on the subZays felt. 0any Zould  Zant to be able to Zalk
home; more important, they Zould not be car-oriented in general; they
Zould Zant to live  in neighborhoods rather than subdivisions— you Zould
therefore have, as you had in NeZ York City, high-density development—
apartment houses, private homes on small plots—in the central corridor up
Zhich the e[pressZay Zas to run. (As Zas proven by Long Island's e[isting
apartment-house development: concentrated almost e[clusively Zithin a
block or tZo of major LIRR  stations in communities such as Great Neck,
Roslyn, 0ineola,  +empstead, Rockville Centre, Free-port and BaldZin.)

1272
+igher population densities make feasible the construction of theaters and
large department stores, of museums and reference libraries, and people
living in or near the central corridor Zould therefore be able to reach these
facilities—and their churches, doctors, dentists and their son's Boy Scout
troop meetings—on foot or in buses (for high densities support convenient
local bus service). For people living in the central corridor, it Zould not be
necessary to get into cars every time they left the house. Automobile usage
for the Island as a Zhole Zould, at a stroke, be dramatically slashed. In
terms of transportation alone, building rapid transit on the Long Island
E[pressZay Zould immensely improve the lives of millions  of people.

And there Zere other terms of improvement as Zell. Long Island's central
corridor also contained both the Northern State 3arkZay and the LIRR's
central line. Building the e[pressZay Zould lure industry to that corridor;
industry Zas already attracted to it because of the LIRR line. (3lanners had
long been urging that that lure be strengthened by improving

the LIRR and linking its Brooklyn terminal to the NeZ Jersey railroads, a
move that Zould make it immensely more attractive to freight shippers;
their hopes Zould finally be dashed by 0oses' refusal to consider an
alternative location for the Verra]ano Bridge that Zould have made such a
link feasible.) As industry moved to Long Island's spine, so Zould its
Zorkers, and there Zould be enough of them Zho Zanted to live close to
their jobs to further increase those densities—and the apartment houses and
variety of services those densities Zould support. The Island, noZ Zithout a
focus, Zould be given one. Its over-all development Zould, at a stroke, be
made more orderly: people Zho Zanted to live in apartments or near stores
or jobs or rapid transit to NeZ York Zould live in  the center of the Island
instead of having to live like everyone else in spraZling subdivisions.
3eople Zho preferred larger homesites to convenience Zould live farther
aZay from the center. Densities Zould therefore get loZer and loZer the
farther one moved from the center. 3eople Zho Zanted open space Zould
have been able to find more of it—larger lots for their houses, more parks
and Zoods preserved, for they Zould no longer be so valuable to
developers; people Zho Zanted open space, in other Zords, Zould be able
to find more of it on Long Island at the same time that people Zho Zanted a
more urban type of life could have found that, too. The concentration of

1273
population doZn the center of the Island Zould preserve at least some of the
Island's beauty aZay from the center.

Building rapid transit on the Long Island E[pressZay Zas not only the best
Zay to rescue Long Islanders from the automobile but the only Zay. The
Island's transportation problem Zas complicated by one unblinkable
geographical fact: Long Island Zas an island, connected by 0oses to the
mainland at only one end. Its other end stuck out into the Atlantic Ocean,
connected to nothing. It Zas a cul-de-sac, a dead end. It might be a gigantic
dead end—116 miles long, an average of 12 miles Zide, it contained 1,404
square miles—but it Zas a dead end nonetheless. 0anufacturers Zanting to
import raZ materials or ship out finished products had only one Zay to go,
and so did commuters heading for the great corporate headquarters lumped
together on 0anhattan Island, houseZives heading for 0anhattan's
museums, art galleries and theaters—anyone Zho Zanted to leave the
Island for any purpose Zhatever. As an industrial mortgage broker put it:
"You can't think east; it's got to be Zest. Your raZ materials have to come in
from the Zest; your finished products have to go out to the Zest. And the
Zest is NeZ York, and NeZ York is congestion." In 1955, Long Island's
population Zas already 6,200,000, greater than that of forty-one states. But
forecasters Zere predicting that by 1985 the population Zould be at least
8,500,000. Forecasters agreed, moreover, that little of this increase Zould
come in Brooklyn and 4ueens, the part of the Island Zithin the city limits,
and relatively little in Zestern or central Nassau County—most of the land
on Long Island for a distance of thirty miles out Zas already substantially
covered Zith homes. The increase Zas going to come in the rest of Long
Island—the eighty additional miles stretching out to the east, eighty miles
that Zere in 1955 still to surprising e[tent the scrub-oak and pine barrens

and far-stretching potato fields they had been in 1923 but into Zhich 0oses
Zas planning to lay, not only for the e[pressZay but for e[tensions of the
Northern and Southern State parkZays, broad sZaths of concrete, giant
cloverleafs among the potato fields. The Regional 3lan Association Zas
predicting conservatively that the population of Nassau and Suffolk—less
than a million and a half in 1955—Zould be more than four million in
1985. Onto Long Island's potato fields Zas going to be dumped a
population the si]e of 3hiladelphia. :ithout   local jobs, this population Zas

1274
still going to be largely dependent on 0anhattan, on the Zest. There Zould
not only be many more people living on Long Island; these people Zould
have to travel much farther to their jobs. The intracounty roads—local
roads, mainly north-south roads—of Long Island's tZo suburban counties
Zere already clogged Zith their present traffic. +oZ Zere they supposed to
handle the traffic generated by tZo and a half million more people?

And it Zasn't on the north-south roads that the most serious problems Zere
going to occur but on the roads to the great city to the Zest. In 1955, there
Zere an estimated 600,000 individual car trips across the city line eastZard
or ZestZard every tZenty-four hours. In i960, the R3A Zas predicting,
there Zould be an estimated 800,000; in 1970, an estimated 1,000,000; in
1985, the last year for Zhich projections Zere made, an estimated
1,400,000. +oZ Zere roads ever going to handle such traffic?

In particular, hoZ Zere they going to handle the traffic during morning and
evening rush hours?

Employment-location forecasts shoZed that in 1985 about half of all
Nassau and Suffolk Zage earners Zere still going to be commuting daily to
NeZ York because that Zas Zhere the jobs Zere going to be. The only
difference in the situation Zas going to be that, because of the deterioration
of the Long Island Rail Road and the diffusion of population aZay from its
lines, a far greater proportion of commuters Zas going to be commuting by
car. In 1955, out of 250,000 Zage earners living in Nassau and Suffolk,
115,000 commuted to NeZ York, 40,000 by automobile (joining 50,000
from 4ueens—see footnote, page 946). In i960, according to the most
conservative forecasts, there Zere going to be about 125,000 commuters
crossing the city line heading Zest in the morning rush hour and crossing it
heading east in the evening rush hour—about 50,000 in cars; in 1970, there
Zere going to be 160,000 commuting—70,000 in cars; in 1985, 215,000
commuting—90,000 in cars. And these Zere just the commuters from
beyond the city line. +oZ about the commuters from 4ueens—an estimated
90,000 car commuters by 1985 piling onto the same east-Zest roads at the
same time as the 90,000 from the suburban counties?

Attempting to handle traffic in such volume by building highZays just
didn't make sense. In 1955, there Zere 90,000 drivers commuting from

1275
Nassau, Suffolk and 4ueens, and e[isting highZays couldn't come near
handling them. NoZ you Zere talking about adding another 90,000 drivers.
The capacity of an e[pressZay lane, under optimum conditions, Zas only
1,500 cars per hour. You Zould have to build si[ty lanes of neZ highZay
just to keep up Zith the increase in traffic, not to catch up Zith the deficit in
lanes

already e[isting. The Long Island E[pressZay Zould be si[  lanes, three in
each direction. Its ma[imum rush-hour capacity Zould therefore be 4>500
cars. Forty-five hundred cars out of 90,000! Building the Long Island
E[pressZay, e[pending on it hundreds of millions of dollars of public
money, Zould hardly make even a noticeable dent in the Long Island
commuting problem. Building a do]en Long Island E[pressZays Zouldn't
make a noticeable dent. And hoZ about Zhen that traffic reached the central
city? The streets of 0anhattan and doZntoZn Brooklyn Zere already
jammed, filled to overfloZing  Zith cars and trucks. NoZ you Zould be
piling into them 90,000 additional cars. Congestion in city streets had
already reached intolerable levels. To Zhat levels Zas it going to be
escalated? You couldn't possibly solve Long Island's transportation
problems—or the city's—by building roads. You couldn't possibly even
come near solving those problems by building roads. Trying to solve them
by building roads just didn't make sense. Building the Long Island
E[pressZay didn't make sense.

But building the Long Island E[pressZay Zith  rapid transit on the center
mall—rapid transit that could carry 40,000 passengers per hour, 40,000
passengers Zho Zould arrive in 0anhattan Zithout cars to be parked —
made sense. Says Lee .oppelman, e[ecutive director of the Nassau-Suffolk
Regional 3lanning Board: "By the time the Long Island E[pressZay Zas
planned, Ze planners had been screaming for years about the need for mass
transportation. By this time, the suburbani]ation—the urbani]ation in parts
—of Long Island had already occurred. :e saZ the forces, Ze saZ the
problems, and Ze Zere talking about the problems, and Ze all kneZ Ze had
to have mass transit on that road. It Zas obvious. In terms of commutation,
you have to say, '+oZ can you make this road Zork so I don't have to build
si[ more Long Island E[pressZays?' and there Zas only one ansZer. :e all
kneZ that if there Zas no mass transit on that road, it Zould be a disaster.

1276
:ithout   mass transit, the road Zas guaranteed— guaranteed —to fail before
it Zas built."

"0ass transit doesn't only mean trains, you knoZ," .oppelman says. "It can
mean buses."

Buses do not have the capacity of trains. But they have enough to make a
difference. "Every bus," as .oppelman puts it, "can be the equivalent of
fifty automobiles." And if  an e[pressZay is designed for buses as Zell as
automobiles—if one lane, slightly Zider than the normal lanes, is reserved
e[clusively for  buses by separating it from the others by a divider and if the
Zidth and turning radii of entrance and e[it ramps are made big enough to
facilitate their use by the big vehicles—hundreds of buses can use that lane
in an hour, theoretically as many as 800, conservatively 400. The capacity
of that lane becomes 20,000 people per hour, about thirteen times greater
than it Zas before. Designing and reserving for buses tZo of the Long
Island E[pressZay's si[ lanes—one in each direction—Zould be the
equivalent of building a neZ eight-lane e[pressZay right ne[t to it.

But such capacity can be attained from buses only if a lane is designed

and reserved e[clusively for them. If it is not, if buses are forced to creep
along in the general traffic floZ, they no longer offer the faster trip that,
along Zith the comfort of letting someone else drive, Zould overcome for
substantial numbers of commuters the disadvantages represented by the
higher immediate, out-of-pocket e[pense of a bus trip and the fact that the
nearest bus stop might be inconveniently far from their offices. Too feZ
commuters Zould be lured out of their cars onto the buses to significantly
alleviate e[pressZay congestion. If 0oses Zouldn't build rapid transit on
the Long Island E[pressZay, planners pleaded, at least let him build it Zith
lanes for buses. 0oses refused even to consider the suggestion.

0aking  provision for mass transportation on the Long Island E[pressZay
Zas in many Zays not only Long Island's chance but its last chance.

0ass transportation systems Zork only if they are able to transport masses
—people in numbers sufficient to pay the system's cost, to justify the
immense public investment that created it. Such systems Zork only if there

1277
is high-density development around them. They do not Zork in an
e[clusively loZ-density  subdivision landscape. LoZ-density subdivision
had already inundated tZo-thirds of Nassau County. But the rest of Nassau
and most of vast Suffolk still lay largely unsubdivided—unshaped; great
chunks of Long Island Zere in 1955 still a tabula rasa on Zhich a design for
the future could be etched Zith the lessons of the past in mind. For these
areas—close to a thousand square miles of land—there Zas still time to
insure a different, better, type of development—a different, better, life for
the millions of people Zho Zould one day be living on that land. But there
Zasn't much time. :ith   the population of the tZo counties increasing at the
rate of almost 100,000 per year, each year the tide covered almost five miles
more of the Island. If a change Zas to be made in the development pattern,
it must be made at once.

Once the Long Island E[pressZay Zas built, no change Zould be possible.
Construction of the great road Zould open the entire Island to development.
As it pushed through neZ farm country—even before it pushed through the
country, as soon as the announcement Zas made that the push Zas
imminent—that country Zould fill  up Zith  subdivisions. The pattern of
development—a pattern too loZ in density to support rapid transit—Zould
be fi[ed. (And, of  course, the land Zould become too e[pensive for the
creation of the huge commuter parking terminals.) The time Zas noZ,
before the e[pressZay Zas built, to insure not only that rapid transit Zould
be provided but that it Zould be used by enough people to ease the
transportation burden from the backs of all the people on Long Island. It
Zould not be possible once the e[pressZay Zas built. Build the Long Island
E[pressZay Zith  mass transit—or at least Zith provision for the future
installation of mass transit—and Long Island might remain a good place to
live and play. Build the Long Island E[pressZay Zithout mass transit and
Long Island Zould be lost—certainly for decades, probably for centuries,
possibly forever.

foipoZei :-^

:hen   planners proposed rapid transit on the e[pressZay, 0oses replied by
saying it Zas "impouabkT—aad by refusing to discuss the matter. The cfc
aka a an of die neZly formed 0etropolitan Rapid Transit Commission

1278
kneZ from personal e[perience—tZice, after all, Charles YL Tank had had
Robert 0oses on the Zitness stand before him under oath — the value of
jf+fr  p-^ n t investigation of 0oses'  assertions. Going outside the 0oses
sphere of influence—over the NeZ Jersey border to 3hiladelphia and the
t:rr. v: '^>. i. / -:"--"  -" : -- —  '-

depend on 0oses for a living and commissioned them to find out if this

The 0RTC  could not afford a complete sn.: & Zimmerman

therefore analy]ed the cost and effect of placing rapid transit not on the
entire eighty-five miles of the e[pressZay but only on a seven-mile stretch
in 4ueens, from 0arathon 3arkZay  near the city line tunning Zest to
Corona, Zhere the tracks could link up Zith one of several : subZay

lines and folloZ its tracks into 0anhattan. This limitation  placed the rapid
transit proposal in t: possible light, ma[imi]ing  its right-of-Zay  cost,

for 4ueens Zas built up far more heavily than the less heavily populated
suburbs, and minimi]ing its effect, since Zhile in the suburbs development
could still be influenced by rapid transit, Zith higher densities near the line
so that traffic on it Zould be increased, in 4ueens the pattern of
development Zas already set.

Even in the possible light, hoZever, the proposal looked good.

One D>\ ft Zimmerman alternative, for e[ample, Zas to lay tracks doZn the
e[pressZaj center mall from 0arathon 3arkZav  into Corona, leave the raj
at Flushing 0eadoZs 3ark, cut across its northeastern corner to link up Zith
the IRT Rushing subZay near its iuth Street station and folloZ that line (
Zhich ;i has ample capacitv to accommodate" the added traffic; to Times
Square. The total cost of building such a line—the total cost of the
additional forty feet of e[pressZay right-of-Zav.  of bridges at grade
separations, of electric substations, of eleven large, modern passenger
stations Zith parking garages at the eleven major avenues intersecting Zith
the e[-BZay Zithin  that seven-mile stretch, of every piece of moden rapid
transit equipment desirable—Zould be only S20.830.000.

1279
Benefits to the public Zould be as large as costs to the public Zould be
small. Day & Zimmerman calculated these benefits onlv for the small
section northeastern 4ueens directly involved and for adjacent northern
Nassau County. But even for this limited area, the figures Zere staggering.
From .  in 1955, 158,500 persons traveled into 0anhattan and back on an
average Zeekday, 85,000 by automobile, 59.500 by bus and 14.000 on the
3ort :ashington  branch of the Long Island Rail Road.* The vast majority
of these commuters Zould be able to save significant amounts of money

* The Day & Zimmerman figures do not fit in Zith  figures for over-all
commuting from 4ueens, Nassau and Suffolk furnished by the Regional
3lan Association and the Nassau and Suffolk 3lanning Boards (the tZo
counties then each had its oZn planning

and time—in 4ueens up to tZenty-five minutes, in Nassau up to forty
minutes—by using the proposed rapid transit system instead. Based on
surveys of the commuters, on analyses of traffic patterns and on other
surveys done in similar situations in other cities, "initially about 17 percent
of general commuter traffic from the area Zould use the proposed rapid
transit line in the initial year of operation." And 17 percent of 158,500 is
27,000. TZenty-seven thousand commuters Zho noZ jammed available
means of transportation to NeZ York tZice a day Zould be removed from
those means of transportation, freeing them for other users—and their oZn
trips Zould be made vastly cheaper and faster, as much as forty minutes
each Zay faster.

The effect on the jam-packed buses from the area Zould be dramatic. Some
19,000 of the 27,000 passengers diverted to the neZ rapid transit Zould be
bus passengers. The effect on the jammed Long Island Rail Road Zould be
less dramatic but still meaningful. Some 1,500 passengers of the 27,000
passengers diverted Zould be LIRR passengers. And as for the highZays—
most notably the Long Island E[pressZay, Zhich the vast majority of
commuters from this area Zould use once it Zas opened—close to 6,500 of
the 27,000 persons diverted Zould be persons Zho drove their cars into and
out of 0anhattan every Zeekday.

These figures Zere conservative—far too conservative, most planners felt.
The figures Zould, moreover, increase year by year, as the area's population

1280
increased and as the percentage of the population using the rapid transit line
increased as more commuters became aZare of its advantages.

But even the initial, ultraconservative figures had remarkable implications.
Robert 0oses Zas planning to spend $500,000,000 for an e[pressZay that
Zould increase the one-Zay automobile-carrying capacity of Long Island
by a ma[imum of 4,500 automobiles or buses per hour—during the tZo-
hour peak period, by a total of 9,000 automobiles or buses. For $20,000,000
— one tZenty-fifth  of that cost—he could reduce the automobile-carrying
capacity needed by 6,500 automobiles and 400 buses. +e could do as much
for Long Island by spending $20,000,000 as by spending $500,000,000— if
he spent it on rapid transit.

And these figures represented the advantages of building rapid transit on
only seven miles of the Long Island E[pressZay, seven miles out of eighty-
five.

No study Zas ever done of the cost of building such a line on the other
seventy-eight miles of e[pressZay, so much of it r 1955 still open farm
country, but the best-informed estimate is that the cost—including large
terminals in key locations—Zould, if the job had b 1 done in 1955, have

board). For e[ample, Zhile the figure for the over-all number of commuters
by car from those three counties Zas given at the time as 90,000, the Day &
Zimmerman figures shoZ 85,000 commuters from northeastern 4ueens and
northern Nassau County alone. The reason for the discrepancy is that the
over-all figures are not based on detailed studies, Zhile the Day &
Zimmerman figures are—and that the figures for automobile commuting
from 4ueens, Nassau and Suffolk should actually be higher than 90,000.

been no more than half a million dollars per mile. Building a rapid transit
line the length of the Long Island E[pressZay Zould almost certainly have
cost less than $100,000,000—one fifth of the cost of the e[pressZay
Zithout rapid transit.

To save Long Island, it Zas not absolutely necessary for rapid transit to be
built into the Long Island E[pressZay in 1955. But it Zas absolutely
necessary for provision for rapid transit to be built in. The right-of-Zay for

1281
the tracks had to be acquired and the necessary heavier foundations had to
be sunk beneath the center mall. As long as those tZo steps Zere taken,
tracks could be installed on the e[pressZay Zith a minimum of e[pense and
inconvenience in the future. Fail to take those steps and, as Zith the Van
:yck   E[pressZay ten years before, the e[pense of acquiring the land—
noZ so cheap—Zould be enormous, so enormous, in fact, that it Zould
probably be prohibitive financially—by Day &  Zimmerman's estimate
$15,000,000 per mile—and politically: not only Zould building  rapid transit
on the shoulders of the road require the acquisition of additional right-of-
Zay and cause public outcry from the oZners of that land and from
thousands of others Zhose adjacent homes Zould be blighted by a nearby
roalroad, but rebuilding the e[pressZay's foundations Zould require the
closing of several lanes for years, causing immense public inconvenience.
The cost of making provision for rapid transit Zould, in 1955, be minimal
in terms of the e[pressZay's over-all cost: acquiring 240 feet of land instead
of 200 feet and building heavier foundations Zould cost, for the Zhole
eighty-five-mile length of the e[pressZay, perhaps an e[tra $20,000,000.
The e[pressZay Zas going to cost $500,000,000 anyZay. For $20,000,000
more—for an increase in the cost of only 4 percent—you could take the
step that Zould insure that the e[pressZay Zould one day be able to fulfill
the function for Zhich it  Zas built. Fail to spend that 4 percent, and the
e[pressZay Zould never be able to fulfill the function for  Zhich it Zas
being built. And that money Zas available: if 0oses couldn't persuade the
city or state to put it up, he could put it up himself—Triborough had the
$20,000,000 readily available.

The Day & Zimmerman study, the first independent analysis of the long-
term effects of a 0oses highZay proposal during the thirty years that 0oses
had been building highZays, represented a serious threat to 0oses. +is
opponents Zere usually unable to refute his facts and figures Zith figures of
their oZn. :hen   he told press and public a proposal Zas "impossible," there
Zas no choice but to accept that statement. NoZ there Zould be. And if
editorial Zriters learned hoZ simple it Zould  be to provide rapid transit on
the e[pressZay, there might Zell be a public outcry for that provision.

0oses kneZ hoZ  to handle threats.

1282
:hile   Day &  Zimmerman Zere studying, he started building—getting the
e[pressZay under Zay Zith $20,000,000 in Triborough funds so that he
Zouldn't have to Zait for state or city allocations. Even Zhile the 0RTC
consultants Zere attempting to determine the advisability of making
provision for rapid transit on the e[pressZay, 0oses Zas building the
e[pressZay Zith-

out any such provision. By the time the firm reported its findings to the
0RTC,  it had to report also that the findings no longer mattered. Because of
"actual construction Zork" done on the e[pressZay "since the conception of
the rapid transit study plans," the firm stated, placing rapid transit on the
e[pressZay Zould noZ  "require complete revision of the e[pressZay plans
and the economic Zaste of the substantial construction Zork completed. . . .
Construction of a rapid transit line on this highZay" is no longer
"practicable." Discussion of the question no longer served any useful
purpose. Not surprisingly, there Zasn't any—at least not any of significance.
The Day & Zimmerman report Zas one of the best-kept secrets in NeZ
York planning history. The city's neZspapers carried scarcely a Zord on it.
NeZsday, the Long Island daily, never mentioned it. The public never kneZ
of the ease Zith Zhich rapid transit could be built on the Long Island
E[pressZay. Long Island never found out about the report that spelled out a
Zay by Zhich Long  Island could have been saved. The Long Island
E[pressZay Zas built Zithout  rapid transit—and Zithout provision for
rapid transit in the future. And as each section of the superhighZay opened,
it Zas jammed—Zith traffic  jams of immense dimensions. One man's
dream became a nightmare— an enduring, year-after-year nightmare—for
tens of thousands of other men. Year by year, the huge road bulled its Zay
eastZard, through 4ueens, across Nassau County, deeper and deeper into
Suffolk; it Zould  take fifteen years to build it out to Riverhead. And as each
section opened, as each piece of 0oses' largest road-building achievement
fell into place, the congestion greZ Zorse. The Long Island E[pressZay's
designed daily capacity Zas 80,000 vehicles. By 1963, it Zas carrying
132,000 vehicles per day, a load that jammed the e[pressZay even at "off"
hours—during rush hours, the e[pressZay Zas solid Zith cars, congealed
Zith them, chaos solidified. The drivers trapped on it nicknamed 0oses'
longest road "the Zorld's longest parking lot."

1283
3art of 0oses' solution to congestion on his biggest road Zas to make it
bigger. By 1962, Zhile he Zas presiding over opening ceremonies on
stretches of the e[pressZay in Nassau County, AndreZs & Clark Zere
frantically redesigning stretches of the e[pressZay that had been opened in
4ueens just a feZ years before. Even before its eastern stretches Zere laid
doZn, its Zestern stretches Zere being hacked up. In 1966, Zhile state
highZay creZs Zere building it  deep into Suffolk County at its eastern end,
other creZs Zere rebuilding it at its Zestern end: construction of a single,
monster interchange—its cost $75,000,000, more than all the highZays
0oses had built before the Zar—at the most congested spot on the
e[pressZay, its intersection Zith the Brooklyn-4ueens E[pressZay, got
under Zay in that year. "0y God,"  Lee .oppelman told  a friend one night
in 1966, "they shouldn't be doing that. If they've got $75,000,000, they
should be spending that $75,000,-000 on bus service—building a bus lane
and parking areas Zhere commuters could pick up the buses. Building that
interchange isn't going to change a damn thing. If you eliminate one
interchange problem, all you're going to be doing is shifting the bottleneck
east of the interchange, further out in 4ueens. So then they'll probably
decide to Ziden it east of the interchange

in 4ueens. And all that'll do is shift the bottleneck east to Zhere the
Zidening stops." .oppelman  Zas right. By 1970, on a five-mile stretch
directly to the east of the Brooklyn-4ueens E[pressZay interchange, Zork
had begun on carving four additional lanes of e[pressZay out of the grass
slopes bordering the e[pressZay. Final blueprints Zere being prepared for a
similar "Zidening"  for the ne[t five-mile  stretch to the east—and for
providing still more capacity by cantilevering service roads out over the
highZay.

The continual construction made the traffic jams even Zorse Zhile it Zas
going on. And, the men planning the highZay kneZ, it Zould be going on
for decades. Not only Zas the e[pressZay going to have to be Zidened deep
into Suffolk; at every point Zhere it intersects Zith another major road —
0oses' Van :yck   and ClearvieZ e[pressZays or Grand Central, Cross
Island and Northern State parkZays, for e[ample—giant neZ interchanges
are going to have to be built. Although the public didn't knoZ it,
"improvements" under design in 1974 Zould not be completed until the end

1284
of the century "at the earliest." 0en Zho had been suffering for years on
0oses' road, Zho had been trapped every Zorking day of their lives in
those terrible, life-eroding traffic jams, Zould be freed from that trap only
by groZing too old to Zork.

Long Island planners could tell Zhen the Throgs Neck Bridge opened by
their charts of traffic volume on the Island's highZays: Zith the opening, the
volume, climbing steadily month by month anyZay, made a sudden, sharp
jump. The bridge itself Zas jammed, and the traffic using it did not mean
less traffic on the Bron[-:hitestone   Bridge paralleling it across Long
Island Sound tZo miles to the Zest. For tZo years, there Zas a substantial
decrease in Bron[-:hitestone  traffic,  and then, ine[orably, it began, even
Zhile traffic  on the neZ bridge to the east kept climbing, to creep back to its
former levels. 0oses' solution: build another bridge across Long Island
Sound to the east, a huge "Sound Crossing" betZeen Oyster Bay and Rye.
3resumably, Zhen that bridge Zas completed, there Zould be another
bridge to its east—and then another, and another. 0oses Zould, if he had
his Zay, cover the Sound Zith bridges as the Tiber Zas covered Zith
bridges in Rome.

(The Throgs Neck Bridge at least Zas tZo miles aZay from the Bron[-
:hitestone.  On the other, south, side of Long Island, 0oses Zas building a
"Captree CauseZay"—a name later changed to "Robert 0oses
CauseZay"— connecting Captree, the easternmost end of the Jones Beach
barrier beach, Zith the Fire Island State 3ark—Zhose name Zould later be
changed to "Robert 0oses State 3ark." Traffic on that bridge Zas,
immediately upon its opening, so intolerable that Zithin tZo years 0oses
had begun building another bridge parallel and ne[t to it—and e[actly
si[ty-eight  feet aZay.)

:ith   the opening of the Verra]ano-NarroZs Bridge, Zhich Zithin  tZo  years
of its opening in 1964 Zas carrying 21,000,000 cars per year, a traffic level
0oses had not believed it Zould attain until 1980, traffic vol-

ume on Long Island e[perienced not a jump but a huge surge. :ith
congestion reaching neZ levels, 0oses said the solution Zas to build a huge
neZ Cross-Brooklyn E[pressZay, starting near the point Zhere the bridge
touched doZn on Long Island. For that, of course, he needed state, city and

1285
federal approval. But no one's approval Zas needed to enable him to do
Zhat he Zanted on the bridge itself. +e built on it a second deck that Zould
almost double its capacity.

Robert 0oses Zas, after all, mortal, Lee .oppelman kept reminding
himself —"even if sometimes it didn't seem that Zay"—and, one day, either
death or old age Zould end 0oses' decades of poZer. And, .oppelman
believed, it Zould not take long after that day for bus service to be instituted
on all Long Island's major highZays, not only on its e[pressZays but on
200 miles of parkZays.

The young planner cherished that belief until, driving along the old
:antagh  3arkZay  one day, he happened to notice something he had never
noticed before.

"I Zas coming up to one bridge across the parkZay," he Zould recall, "and
just as I Zas about to go under it, I noticed hoZ loZ it seemed to be. I took
a good look at the ne[t bridge, and goddammit, it Zas loZ! I pulled over
and measured it Zith my arm at the curb, and I could see that it Zasn't any
fourteen feet high. At the ne[t e[it, I  got off and found a store and bought a
yardstick and got back on the parkZay and measured the ne[t bridge. At the
curb it Zas eleven feet high. And I didn't have to go and measure all the
other bridges. I kneZ right then Zhat I Zas going to find. I kneZ right  then
Zhat the old son of a gun had done. +e had built the bridges so loZ that
buses couldn't use the parkZays!"

The :antagh  3arkZay had, of course, never been rebuilt since it had
opened in 1929. 0ost of 0oses' other parkZays Zere being rebuilt to
handle the greatly increased traffic loads on them. As he drove back to his
office, .oppelman  Zas hoping that the rebuilt bridges, the overpasses that
carried intersecting local roads over the parkZays, Zould be higher. But, at
the office, Zhen he pulled out the design draZings he had been sent by the
Long Island State 3ark Commission, he saZ at a glance that his hopes had
been false. The neZ bridges Zere several feet higher in the center—over the
tZo "fast" lanes, one in each direction, of the e[panded si[-lane parkZays
—than the original bridges, because, as .oppelman Zas later to reali]e,
0oses didn't Zant unadorned straight overpasses over his beautiful early
roads, and curving an overpass over a Zider e[panse necessitated greater

1286
clearance beneath it. But the clearance at the curb Zas precisely the same
beneath the neZ overpasses as beneath the old: eleven feet.

0ost  buses Zere about tZelve feet high. They could not use the curb lane
or, because the design of many overpasses kept the rise in clearance

toZard the center of the road very gradual, the lane ne[t to it. They could in
theory use the center lane, the "fast" lane in each direction, but not in
practice: no practical bus-fleet operator Zould dare take the risk of hours of
delay that Zould be involved in routing his buses doZn a road in Zhich
only one lane Zas available for their use. If an accident or an overheated car
or repaving—or any of the hundred other causes that blocked lanes—
blocked that one lane, any buses on the road Zould be trapped at the ne[t
overpass until it Zas opened again. In practice, no practical bus operator
Zould run his buses on any road on Zhich the clearance at the curb Zasn't
at least fourteen feet. "I sat there looking at that goddamned draZing—I'll
never forget it," .oppelman  says. "And I reali]ed that the old son of a gun
had made sure that buses Zould never be able to use his goddamned
parkZays."

"The building of the bridges is an e[ample of his foresight and vision," Sid
Shapiro says in his quiet Zay. "I've often been astonished myself that he
Zas so right in those days, and not only so right but so indispensably right.
0r.  0oses had an instinctive feeling that someday politicians Zould try to
put buses on the parkZays, and that Zould break doZn the Zhole parkZay
concept—and he used to say to us felloZs, 'Let's design the bridges so the
clearance is all right for passenger cars but not for anything else.' All the
original bridges Zere designed Zith nine feet of clearance at the curb. Later
Ze Zent up to eleven feet, but that has the same effect. :ell, yes, buses
could use the center lane, but that's an impractical thing. No bus Zould do
that. 0r. 0oses  did this because he kneZ that something might happen after
he Zas dead and gone. +e Zrote legislation [clauses prohibiting the use of
parkZays by "buses or other commercial vehicles"'] but he kneZ you could
change the legislation. You can't change a bridge after it's up. And the result
of this is that a bus from NeZ York couldn't use the parkZays if Ze Zanted
it to." A quiet smile broke across Shapiro's seamed face, and he almost
laughed as a pleasant recollection crossed his mind. "You knoZ," he said,

1287
"Ze've had cases Zhere buses mistakenly got on a parkZay—Ze had this on
the Grand Central 3arkZay several times. I remember—buses from a
foreign state, I suppose, and the first bridge stopped them dead. One had its
roof rolled up like the top of a sardine can."

"Foresight and vision." Apt. if the vision Zas one man's private vision.
Building parkZay bridges loZ  Zas indeed an e[ample of 0oses' foresight
in trying to keep intact his original concept, the bright and shining dream he
had dreamed in 1924—of roads that Zould be not just roads but Zorks of
art. that Zould be "ribbon parks" for "pleasure driving." Building the
parkZay bridges loZ Zas indeed an e[ample of 0oses' foresight in trying
to keep intact his original concept of the area through Zhich those roads ran
—lovely Long Island—as a serene and sparsely populated suburban setting,
a home for the relatively small number of people Zealthy enough to live
there, a playground for the larger but still restricted number of people
Zealthy enough to drive there and play in the parks he had built there.

The vision Zas no longer relevant. It no longer bore any relation to reality.
Reality Zas no longer a Long Island that Zas a sparsely populated
playground, but the residence of millions of people. 0oses' parkZays noZ
had to perform a function, getting tens of thousands of commuters to and
from Zork. The Southern State 3arkZay—4,000,000 cars in 1940,
20,000,-000 in 1950, 26,000,000 in 1955, 30,000,000 in 1957—Zas the
most heavily traveled highZay in the entire Zorld—and probably the most
congested: engineers clocking traffic in 1967 found that on the first five-
mile stretch of road, from the toll booths in Valley Stream out to Lynbrook,
the "speed range" at Zhich traffic moved during a rush hour never, for more
than the briefest of periods, got above si[teen miles per hour—and often
Zas as loZ as three miles per hour, about as fast as the people driving could
have Zalked. The parkZays had a different function noZ from that of the
great open road on Zhich 0oses had envisioned cars bree]ing along. But
0oses still had absolute control over parkZays. And Zhether or not that
vision had any relation to reality, he used that control to insure that it Zould
endure far beyond his oZn lifetime, long "after he Zas dead and gone."
Thanks to his foresight, it Zas—as late as 1974, decades after the reality
had changed—his vision and not reality that governed the shaping of the

1288
parkZays, and that therefore prevailed over that portion of the lives of its
users that they spent on it.

For hoZ long Zould it  continue to do so?

:ell,   Sid Shapiro had been overstating the case, of course, Zhen he said,
"You can't change a bridge after it's up" and that therefore buses Zould
never be able to use the Long Island parkZays. A bridge can be rebuilt.
:hen,   in 1969, a five-mile stretch of the Northern State 3arkZay Zas
rebuilt, in fact, it Zas rebuilt Zith  bridges Zith a fourteen-foot clearance
because doing so Zould make the job eligible for federal funds, and, as
Shapiro put it, "on that section, you have the Long Island E[pressZay right
ne[t to it, and buses Zouldn't Zant to use a parkZay Zhere they have an
e[pressZay, so it doesn't really matter."

But that Zas one stretch of parkZay out of 200 miles of parkZay on Long
Island. And on the rest of those 200 miles, it Zould not be true that "it
doesn't really matter"—and Shapiro said, sitting there complacently on the
terrace in the bright sun, there Zere no plans in e[istence to rebuild bridges
along the rest of those 200 miles, and he felt that probably they Zould never
be rebuilt. Asked Zhat Zould happen if bus operators did decide that they
Zanted to use the Northern State instead of the e[pressZay, he said, ":ell,
they can use it for a five-mile section. But then they'll have to get off."

Never? Shapiro Zas probably overstating the case. Sometime in the future,
surely, the Long Island State 3ark Commission Zould be in the hands of
men Zith a different philosophy from that of Robert 0oses and Sid
Shapiro, and they Zould Zant the bridges rebuilt. 0aybe not in the near
future, for Shapiro's successors as the commission's top administrators Zere

already hand-picked and groomed, but sometime in the future. :ell, Sid
Shapiro said, you see, those bridges cost about $750,000 per bridge. "And,"
Sid Shapiro said sloZly, in his quiet, sly voice, "there are 204 bridges on
those parkZays, you knoZ." Robert 0oses had condemned to monstrous
traffic jams not merely the present generation of users of his parkZays but
generations to come.

+e had condemned all Long Islanders—for generations to come.

1289
In the 1970's, after the fall of Robert 0oses, public officials Zould be
talking about moderni]ing the e[isting mass transportation facilities on
Long Island and building neZ ones. +andsome four-color brochures—
designed to Zin voter approval for the bond issues in the billions that Zould
be required to finance these improvements—assured voters that the e[pense
Zould, if  not end, at least substantially alleviate traffic congestion on Long
Island.

But building them Zasn't going to be that easy.

0oses had been asked to reserve space on the Van :yck E[pressZay.
Reserving it Zould, at the time, have cost only $1,750,000. And if 0oses
had spent that money, it Zould noZ, in the 1970's, be possible to construct
all (he high-speed rail links involved for less than $10,000,000.

In 1968, Zith congestion on the Van :yck  and at IdleZild (noZ  John F.
.ennedy)  Airport even more intolerable than F. Dodd 0c+ugh had
predicted, no sooner Zas 0oses out of poZer than the decision Zas taken to
build a rapid transit line to the airport. But because 0oses had not reserved
space, that line Zould noZ cost—not in official estimates but in truth—
$300,-000,000. And even for that amount, it Zould not be possible to obtain
many of the advantages 0c+ugh had envisioned. The cost could be kept
doZn to $300,000,000 only by eliminating from the plans the subZay
linkup betZeen doZntoZn Brooklyn  and central and northern 4ueens, as
Zell as all local service that Zould have increased the rapid transit capacity
of the 4ueens-to-0anhattan line; the astronomical cost of local stations
made it impossible even to contemplate including them. 0oses' refusal to
listen to 0c+ugh  had probably deprived NeZ York of those advantages
forever.

The cost of the airport link even in its stripped-doZn version Zas so high
that no man could say Zith any certainty Zhen it Zould be built. The
Official charged Zith building  it announced in 1968 that construction Zould
be completed by 1071. In i960, he announced that construction Zould be
completed by 1972. In 1970, he admitted that, as the Times put it, "his
agency had no funds available" to build it. ":hen  asked Zhen the line
Zould be completed, he said that he hoped it Zould be built in 1973, but
that it Zould be safer to say 1074." It Zould have been safer—and more

1290
accurate —to say that he didn't have any idea Zhen it Zould be built, for
that Zas m fact the case. The money to begin construction Zas still not in
hand.

It Zas possible to predict Zith some certainty that the airport rapid transit
line Zould, eventually, be built—if  for no other reason than that the cost

Zas Zithin the ability  of the 3ort Authority  to pay, and the 3ort Authority,
losing money because of traffic congestion (travelers' eagerness to avoid the
airport Zas considered the primary reason for a year-by-year decline in
patronage beginning in 1969), could be e[pected to come up Zith the
money if no one else Zould. It Zas not possible to make such a prediction
about the other desperately needed Long Island mass transportation
improvements, projects that could have been built Zith such relative ease
years before, if, at that time, 0oses had consented to reserve space for them
or to alloZ Triborough Authority  funds to be spent on them.

The increase in the cost of the land needed for parking areas and terminals
of neZ dimensions had added tens of millions of dollars to the cost of
moderni]ing the Long Island Rail Road. The further improvements made
necessary in the intervening years if the railroad Zas to attract neZ
passengers from the mass of automobile users on Long Island had added
tens of millions of dollars more. And inflation had caused these additional
costs to multiply. In 1954, Zhen, before the imposition of the Joint
3rogram, Triborough funds for the moderni]ation had been available, the
moderni]ation Zould  have cost $200,000,000. In 1970, after 0oses' fall, the
cost Zas $1,500,000,000. :hile  public officials  talked vaguely about that
sum being raised by a combination of bond issues and contributions from
neZ mass transit allocations that Zould hopefully be made someday by the
federal government, in fact money that Zould alloZ e[penditures of that
dimension on a single rail line Zas noZhere in sight on Capitol +ill—and
even Zhile local officials Zere trying  to find it, inflation  and further land
development Zere causing that cost to rise by more than $50,000,000 per
year. +ome construction on the land around the LIRR lines meant that
certain of the changes indispensable for a true moderni]ation program—
straightening and elevating the tracks to permit high-speed train operation
—Zere, politically, immensely difficult.  No man could predict Zith any real

1291
certainty that improvements of significant scope—not the patchZork
supplying of neZ cars and improvement of repair and maintenance facilities
that Zas going on in the early 1970's, but the transformation of the LIRR
into a truly modern eighty-mile-per-hour carrier—Zould be carried out
during his lifetime. No man could predict that they could be carried out
Zithin  his children's lifetime.

As for building a neZ rapid transit line on Long Island, no man could
predict Zith any certainty that it Zould ever be built. 0ost  planners Zho
had studied the prospects felt, as Lee .oppelman felt, "they'll never do it."

And even if the mass transit lines Zere built, they Zeren't going to help the
transportation situation on Long Island nearly as much as the public
officials believed—or, to be more precise, nearly as much as they told the
public they believed.

Four-color brochures may have been assuring voters that if the mass transit
improvements they had planned Zere built, they Zould, if not end, at least
substantially alleviate traffic congestion on Long Island.

But stark, unadorned black-and-Zhite charts, graphs and computer print-
outs stacked on tables or taped to the otherZise bare Zalls in a small cinder-
block room, hardly more than a cubicle, in a red-brick building set

back off the Veterans 0emorial +ighZay  in +auppauge, Suffolk County,
Long Island, told a very different story.

The building contained the e[ecutive offices of the Nassau-Suffolk
Regional 3lanning Board, and the little room, doZn a hall from
.oppelman's, Zas the office of John F. (Jack) Sheridan, .oppelman's
transportation analyst. And the charts, graphs and print-outs, thick stacks of
numbers and lines, represented the first analysis of transportation on Long
Island—hoZ the 2,500,000 residents of Nassau and Suffolk counties got to
Zork, to the supermarket, to school, to Zherever they Zent Zhen they left
their homes; Zhen they Zent there; hoZ frequently they Zent there; Zhy
they Zent there by the transportation means they used instead of by some
other means— ever done in meaningful depth.

1292
One of the charts, a map really, shoZed traffic levels on the nine major east-
Zest routes in Nassau and Suffolk counties: from top to bottom (north to
south) Route 25-A, the Long Island E[pressZay, Northern State 3arkZay,
+illside  Avenue, Jericho Turnpike, +empstead Turnpike, Southern State
3arkZay, 0errick  Road and Sunrise +ighZay. Various levels Zere made
graphic by different colors—purple for congestion. On the right-hand side
of the map—the side shoZing eastern and central Suffolk County—the map
Zas a bla]e of different colors, but in the center of the map, Zestern Suffolk
and eastern Nassau, one—purple—Zas beginning to dominate. And in the
left-hand section of the map—central and Zestern Nassau County—there
Zere eight purple lines. Only Jericho Turnpike Zas operating Zith any
leeZay at all. The other eight roads had no capacity at all left for additional
traffic.

Another chart shoZed—by means of curves representing the relationship
betZeen time and distance traveled during that time—the delays on those
east-Zest roads at those levels of traffic. The curves rose terribly steeply on
Long Island's pre-0oses roads—25-A, +illside, Jericho, +empstead
Turnpike, 0errick  Road, Sunrise +ighZay—on Zhich  traffic is sloZed by
traffic lights and intersecting streets. But they rose almost as steeply on
0oses' roads, the roads built—at a colossal public investment—to free the
public from traffic lights  and intersecting streets. 0oses' "modern" rebuilt
Southern State 3arkZay, for e[ample, paralleled the "obsolete" 0errick
Road and Sunrise +ighZay. The curves shoZing time and distance covered
in that time for each of those roads ran almost parallel, rising and falling
together. "8ntil you get out to :antagh,"   Jack Sheridan says, "there's no
advantage to the Southern State 3arkZay over the Sunrise +ighZay [or
0errick  Road]. :hich   is a pretty horrible thought."

But those charts, graphic displays of the present, Zere not the most
disturbing things in that cinder-block room. That distinction is reserved for
computer print-outs giving projections of the future. Their figures Zere not
transposed onto the charts and graphs. For in order to contain them, the
charts and graphs Zould have to be too big. Some 560,000 cars a day Zent
"through the Long Island corridor"—crossed the city line from Nassau into
4ueens—in 1968. By 1985, 1,400,000 cars a day Zill be trying to go
through that corridor. The roads available to handle them Zere jammed to

1293
capacity and far beyond capacity. And the load they Zill be asked to handle
Zill,  just seventeen years later, be tZice as big.

There Zere print-outs more disturbing still. Some, for e[ample, dealt Zith
"modal split": planners' jargon for the percentage of travelers Zhich can be
persuaded to change, or split off from, their present mode of travel to
another—in Long Island's case, from highZays to mass transit. The print-
outs shoZ that, on Long Island, optimistic predictions to the contrary, there
is little possibility of  any significant modal split at all.

If travel on the Long Island Rail Road Zas revolutioni]ed—if  the railroad
Zas given modern rolling stock; if travel time Zas cut in half; if neZ, more
convenient stations Zere strategically located throughout 0anhattan —if all
these improvements Zere accomplished, a highly unlikely feat because it
Zould cost tZo and a half billion dollars—the modal split induced Zould be
no more than 10 percent. Si[ty-five percent of commuters from Nassau and
Suffolk counties used the LIRR in 1968; spend tZo and a half billion
dollars and you could increase that percentage only to 75 percent.

The numbers are more depressing than the percentages. Some 85,890 Long
Island-0anhattan commuters used the LIRR in i960; revolutioni]ing the
railroad Zould increase that number to 156,700 by 1985, an increase of
70,810 riders. The Island's population Zas going to increase by 1,548,000
betZeen i960 and 1985. The number of commuters to 0anhattan Zas going
to increase not by 70,810 per day but by 81,000 per day. The LIRR's
additional riders Zould not be riders diverted from the highZays. The
e[penditure of tZo and a half billion  dollars Zould reduce the load of
commuters the highZays Zould have to carry not at all. The load Zould be
increased— by more than 10,000 per day. Even after that e[penditure, those
nine east-Zest roads, already jammed so far beyond capacity, Zould be
asked to carry daily almost 10,000 more cars.

And far more than 10,000 more cars. For the above figures Zere only for
0anhattan-bound commuters. +undreds of thousands of other Nassau and
Suffolk residents Zere going to be commuting to jobs on Long Island by
1985, hundreds of thousands more than in i960. The daily average of all
"Zork trips by  all travel modes" by residents of Long Island in i960—Zork
trips to 0anhattan or anyplace else—Zas 680,020. By 1985, it Zould be

1294
1,225,500. And the modal split induced among the non-0anhattan trips by
the moderni]ation of the Long Island Rail Road Zould be infinitesimal. The
number of daily Zork trips to non-0anhattan locations Zould  be rising by
549,780. The number of those trips by rail Zould be increasing by 1,420.
Long Island's east-Zest roads, already jammed so far beyond capacity,
Zould —even if tZo  and a half billion dollars Zere spent revolutioni]ing
the Long Island Rail Road—be asked by 1985 to carry every day not only
10,000 more cars bound for 0anhattan but tens of thousands of additional
cars bound for jobs in Brooklyn, 4ueens, the Bron[, and Zithin Nassau and
Suffolk counties. Spending even the immense sum of tZo and a half billion
dollars on mass transportation on Long Island Zould not help the highZay
problem on Long Island to any significant degree.

No mass transportation improvement could help that problem to any

significant degree. In 1963, for e[ample, Nassau County undertook an in-
depth study of the possibilities of fast and frequent bus service. The e[pense
Zould be immense, the county found. And the over-all modal split
accomplished in journeys to Zork—the proportion of transportation to and
from jobs noZ accomplished by car that could be turned into bus trips—
Zould be no more than 5 percent and perhaps as loZ as 2 percent. Nassau
County could beggar itself to provide mass transportation—and still
manage to lure off the roads perhaps no more than one car out of every fifty.

And all the trips above represent only Zork trips. +oZ about nonZork trips
—all the other journeys (to supermarket, to boZling alley, to tennis or
sZimming or golf or bridge club, to school, to friends', to movies, to
restaurants, to dinner, to doctor, to dentist) that Zhen added together come
to a total that dZarfs even the immense total of Zork trips and that are, on
Long Island, to an overZhelming e[tent trips made by car? In Sheridan's
office are maps covered by incredible masses of lines representing the total
of such trips on highZays and streets on Long Island, and computer print-
outs totaling such trips for toZns and villages and unincorporated areas.
The comple[ity of  such figures is immense, but the bottom line is clear: the
modal split that Zould be effected by improvements in mass transportation
on Long Island is infinitesimal. +ighZays  and local streets in Nassau and
Suffolk Zere handling a heavy load of traffic in i960. By 1985, the load

1295
those highZays and streets Zould have to handle Zould be more than tZice
as heavy. And no improvements that could be made in mass transportation
at any e[pense that could conceivably be borne by state, city, counties or
public authorities could lighten that load much. "You see," Jack Sheridan
says, "if Ze had had subZay lines, or rapid transit lines, Ze Zould have had
high density along those lines. But since there Zas no mass transit, the
development took place according to the Zay the automobile dictated it.
And that meant loZ density, very loZ density. To have feasible mass transit
routes, you have to have sufficient density. And Ze don't. And, e[cept
perhaps in central Nassau, Ze're not going to for any foreseeable future.
Because of the highZay, because of the pattern of high highZay use
developed by the lack of mass transit before, Ze're faced Zith this problem
noZ, and right noZ Ze just can't get around it." And it is a problem to
Zhich a solution— if  there is a solution—lies only in a future distant
enough so that sufficiently large areas of Long Island Zill have density high
enough so that putting mass transit lines through them Zill make a
difference in the Island's transportation picture. That day, in 1974, seems
decades—generations—aZay.

"urban reneZal" program, the director of the Committee Against
Discrimination in +ousing, leaving her office—a tiny  ten-foot-by-fourteen-
foot cubbyhole on the top floor of an ancient loft building—attended
meetings of Negro and 3uerto Rican organi]ations in the evenings, and her
ears picked up the first Zhispered rumors about Zhat Zas going on on the
Title I sites—rumors so terrible that she Zent up to visit the sites for herself,
on a trip that Zould lead her to say years later:

"I've visited a lot of bad slums, but I never saZ any Zorse than the Title I
slums Zhen the developers started milking them. I remember I Zent into a
building on the Godfrey Nurse site,* and, as any Zoman instinctively does,
Zhen I Zent into a bathroom, I glanced into a mirror to see if my hair Zas
straight. And Zhen I looked at the mirror, or Zhere the mirror ought to be, I
found myself looking straight into the ne[t apartment."

For LaZrence Orton, it Zas statistics.

During his decades on the City 3lanning Commission, Orton had learned to
cast a Zary eye on 0oses'. And he had a sense that there Zas something

1296
Zrong—very Zrong—Zith   the statistics that the Coordinator Zas issuing
(and that the press Zas reprinting Zithout the slightest attempt at
verification) to demonstrate that every consideration Zas being shoZn to
families being relocated from Title I sites, that he Zas not only obeying but
going beyond the federal requirement that these families be relocated in
"decent, safe, and sanitary dZellings." "In order to set at rest any fears,"
0oses had announced in his brochure on the 0anhattantoZnf project that
Zould require the ra]ing of si[  square blocks of tenements and old
apartment houses on the 8pper :est Side, "families are assured that
relocation help Zill be readily available and there is a frank desire to be of
ma[imum assistance in carrying out the individual Zishes of each family."
If they Zanted to move into the neZ, modern apartments being erected on
the site, they Zould be given "preferential status" in applying, he promised.
If they preferred to find their oZn neZ apartments, they Zould be assisted
by "personal counseling" from a trained relocation firm, Zhich, he said, Zas
compiling a cityZide listing  of vacancies, and by "financial assistance"
from the developers—at the minimum, "moving e[penses plus the first
month's rent in neZ quarters." And families still unable to find neZ
apartments did not have to Zorry; they—all relocated Title I site families, in
fact—could alZays move into loZ-income public housing projects, Zhich
Zould represent an improvement in their living quarters anyZay; their
applications Zould be given "first priority."  Each of 0oses' statements Zas
backed up by columns of statistics in the stylish brochures issued in a
steady stream by the 0ayor's Slum Clearance Committee Zhich the
Coordinator headed. For e[ample, the statistics on family income, family
si]e and a

* From 132nd to 135th streets, betZeen Fifth and Leno[ avenues. The name
of the project Zas later changed to "+arlem."

t Later renamed ":est  3ark."

half do]en other indices proved, he said, that more than a quarter of the
families presently living on the site—998 out of 3,628—Zould be able to
afford to live in the proposed 0anhattantoZn development at anticipated
rentals. Orton's years of dealing Zith housing problems told him that that
statistic Zas false. No tenement tenants he had ever met could afford 0oses'

1297
anticipated Title I rentals. Orton could not prove that statistic false Zithout
a detailed analysis of the financial situation of the 0anhattan-toZn site
tenants. But Zhat bothered him even more Zere the statistics on public
housing. Orton kneZ all too Zell that e[isting  public housing Zas already
fully occupied. Familiar Zith  city building  plans, he had been under the
general impression that there Zas little neZ loZ-income housing scheduled
for imminent construction, and checking, he found that his impression Zas
all too correct: the total number of public housing units scheduled for
construction during the ne[t year or tZo Zas a mere fraction of the number
of tenants 0oses Zas telling the Zorld that he Zas going to move into those
units. Analy]ing  0oses' soothing statistics, Orton Zas able to see—all too
Zell—hoZ  the Coordinator had arrived at them. ":ith  every project—Title
I or some e[pressZay or Zhatever—he Zould say, 'Don't Zorry about the
people living there. If they don't Zant to go anyZhere else, Ze've alZays
got room for them in public housing.' But Zhat he Zas doing Zas using the
same public housing vacancies for many projects. The same vacancies that
Zere alleged to be available for one project had already been allocated for a
previous project—or perhaps ten previous projects." Orton began to Zonder
e[actly Zhat 0oses  Zas planning. Tens of thousands of persons Zere noZ
living on urban reneZal sites. :here  Zas the Coordinator planning to put
them?

For :alter   Fried, it Zas garbage cans.

Strolling the broZnstone-lined side streets of his neighborhood—the neat,
solid, stolid, middle-class :est  Side around Ninety-fourth Street and :est
End Avenue, Zhere he lived—during the Zinter of 1952 and the spring of
1953, the regional counsel of the Federal +ousing and +ome Finance
Agency had had a sense that it Zas changing somehoZ. "Some of the
buildings began to seem a little seedy, a little run-doZn," he recalls. But it
Zas a vague sense. "There Zasn't anything really dramatic that you could
put your finger on. You had a feeling that the Zhole neighborhood Zas
beginning to shoZ signs of disrepair, but there Zas nothing specific."

And then one day, Fried suddenly reali]ed that, Zithout taking note of it, he
had, for some time, been seeing something quite specific indeed: in front of
some of the broZnstones "there Zere more garbage cans than there should

1298
have been." And Fried's housing e[pertise told him the significance of that
fact.

"You'd Zalk past a four-story broZnstone," Fried says. "Those broZn-
stones had alZays been inhabited by—at most—four families. But in front
of that broZnstone noZ there might be four large garbage cans. The
garbage for four families is not anyZhere near four large cans, not Zhen the
garbage

T+E LOSS OF 3O:ER

964

Zas being picked up every day, as it Zas at the time. So you kneZ that there
Zere many more people living there noZ than there had been before. And
you kneZ Zhat that meant: the landlords Zere breaking up the apartments
inside into smaller apartments, so the same space that had been occupied by
a family of five might noZ  be occupied by tZelve people. :hen  you saZ
that many garbage cans you kneZ that this building Zas being run noZ as a
tenement for very poor families, or even as a rooming house."

:hen   the heat of the NeZ York summer arrived, e[pertise Zas no longer
required to tell Zhat Zas happening. The evidence of change Zas out in the
open: leaning on the ZindoZsills of the broZnstones-turned-tenements,
sitting on their stoops, croZding the benches on the islands in the middle of
BroadZay, people, poor people, Negro and 3uerto Rican people, people in
such numbers that the BroadZay benches, long croZded anyZay Zith
JeZish grandmothers and grandfathers, Zere noZ croZded as never before.
It Zasn't just the fact that these people didn't have Zhite skin that disturbed
the older residents of the :est Side; it Zas that they obviously didn't have
money either; it Zas that so many Zere obviously drunk or on drugs. And it
Zas that there Zere so many of them. :ith  the first hot day of 1953, the
:est  Side Zas—all at once—not just a racially mi[ed neighborhood, but a
much poorer neighborhood, and a much more croZded one. And, month by
month, its deterioration accelerated. "Ninety-fourth and Ninety-fifth streets
betZeen :est  End and [Riverside] Drive—nice, quiet blocks before—
became a shambles," Fried recalls. "It had been happening for months,
probably, but in the heat it Zas intolerable to stay inside those places, so

1299
noZ it began to spill out into the streets. You began to notice the hopheads,
the alcoholics. Every night, the city ambulance Zas out. The cops Zould
come screaming doZn the streets . . ."

Trying to think back and determine Zhat major change on the :est Side
had caused so drastic a crumbling of a neighborhood that for decades had
stood so solid, Fried could think of only one: the $54,000,000 0anhat-
tantoZn urban reneZal project betZeen Central 3ark :est and Amsterdam
Avenue and betZeen Ninety-seventh and 100th streets. And recalling dates,
he reali]ed that the deterioration of his neighborhood, some blocks aZay
from 0anhattantoZn  though it Zas, had begun not long after 0oses had
turned over the si[-square-block site to the developers. Fried began to direct
his Zalks toZard the site, and Zith every block that he dreZ nearer,
conditions Zorsened. Blight Zas obviously spreading out from
0anhattantoZn. In  little more than a year, the streets immediately adjacent
to the development— alZays poor and predominantly Negro but,
previously, Zith Zell-maintained buildings—had become a slum, a teeming,
seething hive of humanity—a place of squalid, run-doZn, dilapidated
tenements so overcroZded that children had to sleep in shifts, of doorZays
filled Zith  drunks and narcotics addicts and gutters filled Zith garbage.
Obviously, Fried saZ, the area had been inundated Zith a flood of neZ
residents. And there Zas no place these residents could have come from so
suddenly and in such numbers but 0anhattantoZn. A project designed—at
immense cost—to clear up a

locali]ed, si[-block-square slum infection Zas instead causing that infection
to spread over many more than si[ other blocks.

Trying to figure out Zhy, Fried began to have suspicions disturbing to this
long-time admirer of Robert 0oses. Federal laZ required families on urban
reneZal sites to be relocated in a considerate, humane manner. Every block
of the area through Zhich Fried Zas Zalking brimmed over Zith indications
that the families on the 0anhattantoZn site Zere simply fleeing from their
homes into the nearest available shelter, no matter hoZ inadequate. :hat
Zas 0oses doing on that site anyZay?

Fried's job required frequent tours of the city. NoZ, his eyes sharpened by
the :est  Side e[perience, he began to reali]e that he had been seeing, in

1300
different settings, similar symptoms. Traveling through the RockaZay
3eninsula one cold Zinter day, he had happened to pass the spraZling
colonies of summer bungaloZs in Arverne. +e had passed those bungaloZs
before in Zinter, and they had alZays been vacant, for the flimsy little
structures, each barely big enough to accommodate a single family,
provided little protection from the cold and damp. This time, to his shock,
he had found all the bungaloZs filled—there Zere several shivering Negro
and 3uerto Rican families in each. +e had heard disturbing rumors about
tenants from other Title I sites being dumped by the hundreds into vacant
tenements in a section of Brooklyn called "BroZnsville." :hat   Zas 0oses
doing on all his Title I sites?

By 1953, many NeZ York liberals concerned Zith housing Zere asking that
question, and some—such as +ortense Gabel and Stanley Isaacs— began
going to the sites to see the ansZer for themselves. They returned horrified.
"Stanley came back sick, just sick," an associate recalls. "+e said, 'They're
hounding those people out like cattle.' " These liberals began to understand
that something terrible Zas going on on some of the Title I sites, not the
sites turned over by 0oses to organi]ations such as the Rockefeller-backed
0orningside  Corporation* or the ILG:8,    but the sites he had turned over
to corporations hastily set up by Democratic clubhouse politicians allegedly
fronting for bigger politicians—something Zhose shape they Zere only
beginning to dimly glimpse through the curtain of 0oses' assurances, but
something Zhose shape Zas huge and frightening in its implications not
only for NeZ York's poor but for the city as a Zhole. If 0oses  simply
hounded the people living on those sites out of their homes Zithout finding
them neZ homes, these liberals reali]ed, they Zould have no choice but to
flee to other slums, to further croZd tenements already horribly
overcroZded, to live in their cellars, their basements, in apartments Zithout
kitchens or bathrooms, in tiny rooms carved out of rooms that had been tiny
before they had been made tinier to receive them. That Zould make
conditions in the city's e[isting slums—conditions already bestial, inhuman

* The 0orningside  Corporation had enlisted Orton's help to create a
humane and compassionate relocation program.

966

1301
—even Zorse. And the residents of Title I sites numbered not in the
thousands but in the tens of thousands. CroZd as they Zould into slums,
there Zould not be enough room in the slums for them. So they Zould move
into areas adjacent to the slums, into areas in Zhich landlords, Zithout
incentive to keep up their property anyZay because of the slums' pro[imity,
Zould see an opportunity for financial profit and take it by breaking up
large apartments into small and by cutting doZn on maintenance and
repairs. The slums Zould spill over their boundaries, spreading into blocks
as yet untouched by blight. 0oreover, some slum dZellers hounded from
their homes Zould flee into "soft" areas of the city such as BroZnsville,
neighborhoods in Zhich there Zere a large number of vacancies. These
vacancies Zould noZ be filled in a rush by the dispossessed of the ghetto.
The policy 0oses might be pursuing Zould create neZ slums. The city
must be alerted to Zhat Zas happening, these liberals felt; the public must
be educated to the facts about Zhat Zas really happening; the people must
be aroused.

But the public Zas not educated or aroused, because the only medium
through Zhich it could be educated or aroused—its press—Zas not
interested. The liberals Zanted the press to get the facts behind Title I, but
the press made no move to get them.

It Zas the Times that counted, and Isaacs and other reformers Zith entree to
its editors repeated the attempts made by reformers like 0c-Aneny and
:indels   in other generations: they attempted to persuade the Times to send
out reporters to ascertain if the statements 0oses Zas making —and that
the Times Zas printing as if they Zere fact—Zere actually factual. And the
results Zere the same that 0cAneny and :indels  had achieved: a single
entry in a log on Title I developments kept by a reformer Zith entree, Elinor
G. Black, tells the story:

Called N.Y. Times. Illson [reporter 0urray Illson]  called back Sat. Said it
Zould be better if Ze made a "statement." Times not a "crusading paper. . .
."

The Tribune or the Daily NeZs Zould have helped. But Zhen reformers
talked to Tribune editors, they found that the paper's refusal to attack
0oses, Zhile,  as Orton says, "not anything like the open secret it Zas at the

1302
Times" Zas just as firm. As for the NeZs, it Zas to fulfill  its responsibility
to the public by e[posing "Communists" in the +ousing Authority;  says
Orton, "If you came in Zith any information  that might be derogatory to
0oses, the NeZs Zouldn't give you the time of day." Among the city's other
dailies, only Dorothy Scruff's 3ost told readers there might be another side
to the Title I story besides 0oses'.

All right,  these liberals said. If the press refused to go out and get the facts
for itself, they Zould get the facts for it.

They Zere able to do so, in large part, because Orton had "gone
underground" Zith the City 3lanning Commission's "0aster 3lan unit"
Zhen 0oses had eased Bennett in as the commission's chairman tZo years
before. The unit's offices on the fifteenth floor of a 3ark RoZ office
building

Zere only just across City +all 3ark from commission headquarters in the
0unicipal  Building,  but the distance Zas, apparently, sufficient for security;
"Bennett never once set foot in the place," Orton says, smiling. 0ore
important, the chairman hardly ever inquired as to Zhat the unit Zas doing,
and never pressed Orton to e[pand on his uncharacteristically evasive
ansZers. As a result, Orton says, "my boys just vanished so far as the rest of
the city government Zas concerned. This Zas a subversive activity—a real,
authentic, fifteenth-story job. No one gave us anything to do. So Ze could
do Zhatever Ze Zanted." And noZ they began doing Zhat no one had ever
done during the tZenty years during Zhich Robert 0oses had been building
public Zorks in NeZ  York City: finding  out hoZ many people Zere being
evicted from their homes to make Zay for them, Zhat Zas happening to
those people—and Zhat Zas happening to the city as a result.

The difficulties Zere immense. 0oses' relocation statistics had alZays been
accepted. No city agency or neZspaper had ever computed them even
roughly for itself. There Zere probably over-all statistics in e[istence, of
course, and brought together in one place—but the place Zas Randall's
Island, and Randall's ruler kept the long roZs of filing cabinets there
locked. 0any of  the statistics Zere kept in the City Bureau of Real Estate,
but the Bureau Zas under 0oses' thumb; it Zas after attempts to obtain its
statistics—supposedly public records—that Orton, ordinarily so punctilious

1303
in speech, said Zith real passion one evening: "The Real Estate Bureau Zas
a stench in my nostrils." :hat  statistics Zere available—often in obscure
files, in other city agencies, of Zhose e[istence the unit Zould never have
knoZn Zere it not for Orton's encyclopedic knoZledge of every corner of
city government—Zere patently too loZ; 0oses kept them loZ  by refusing
to count the actual number of people being evicted (instead he multiplied
each "dZelling unit" by an "average" family si]e so small as to bear no
discernible relation to reality), and by simply ignoring the e[istence of
"doubled-up" families and boarders (of Zhom there are alZays a significant
number in loZ-income areas) as Zell as of people living in rooming houses
or hotels. (There is considerable evidence to suggest that the counts thus
arrived at even after these omissions Zere arbitrarily reduced still further
Zhen 0oses felt they sounded too high.)

Orton's unit could not repair these deficiencies. :ith the buildings in Zhich
these uncounted tenants had lived demolished and the tenants moved aZay,
there Zas no longer any Zay of obtaining a record of their e[istence. Yet the
unit did come up Zith a rough compilation: during the seven years since the
end of :orld   :ar   II, there had been evicted from their homes in NeZ York
City for public Zorks—mainly  Robert 0oses' public  Zorks— some
170,000 persons.

This total Zas almost certainly far too loZ. Orton, leaning over backZards
as alZays to be fair and to make sure that the figures Zould "stand up" no
matter Zhat devices 0oses employed to discredit them, leaned too far. +e
permitted his unit to make some adjustment in "official" figures, but not
nearly enough to make them accurate. And he permitted his boys to include
as "public Zorks" only projects public in toto. +e did  not permit

them to include projects such as Stuyvesant ToZn, 3eter Cooper Village,
Riverton and Concord Village although he should have, for though the
money that built them Zas supposedly private money, the ta[ abatement
that 0oses arranged for them Zould, Zhen totaled over the years, insure
that the public investment in them Zould dZarf the private, and the poZers
that 0oses utili]ed  to make possible not only their construction but the
assemblage of their sites—eminent domain, street closings, utility
easements— Zere all public. (The number of persons relocated for

1304
Stuyvesant ToZn alone Zas, by 0oses' oZn figures, 12,000.) But the
170,000 figure Zas eye-opening enough. Robert 0oses had, in just slightly
more than seven years, moved from their homes more people than lived in
Albany, 3hoeni[, Little  Rock, Sacramento, Tallahassee, Topeka, Baton
Rouge, Trenton, Santa Fe, etc. In terms even of huge NeZ York, the unit
Zas to report, this Zas "an enforced population displacement completely
unlike any previous population movement in the City's history."

If the number of persons evicted for public Zorks Zas eye-opening, so Zere
certain of their characteristics.

Their color, for e[ample. A remarkably high percentage of them Zere
Negro or 3uerto Rican. Remarkably feZ of them Zere Zhite. Although the
1950 census had found that only 12 percent of the city's population Zas
nonZhite, at least 37 percent of the evictees (0oses' oZn figures) and
probably far more Zere nonZhite.

And their income. The income of evictees not only for slum clearance
projects but for all 0oses' public Zorks including  e[pressZays Zas far
beloZ the cityZide average. In 1951, the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics
found that $4,083 Zas needed for a family of four to maintain a minimum
standard of living for a year. Only one out of every four of the evicted
families earned $4,083 per year; 20 percent earned less than $2,000 per
year.

Liberals had long suspected that most of the people evicted by 0oses Zere
poor people, and particularly poor Negroes and 3uerto Ricans, hampered in
apartment hunting not only by poverty but by discrimination. The "Orton
Survey" confirmed these suspicions. 0oses Zas throZing out of their
homes precisely those people Zho Zere least able to find neZ homes.

And the manner in Zhich he Zas throZing them out Zas Zorth noting, too.

Because it Zas so difficult for these people to find decent homes on their
oZn, the government of their city—the government Zhich had authori]ed
their eviction from their old homes—had solemnly promised them help. Its
highest legislative body had pledged that "tenants Zill not be evicted from
the site of a public improvement unless and until quarters equivalent to

1305
those occupied are available." 0oses, ostensibly the instrument of that
government, had, for seven years, created the impression that he Zas
honoring that pledge; he had stated that a "minimum of inconvenience" Zas
involved in relocation. Orton's staffers found that a substantial number of
families had been moved "tZo or more times" to other buildings "Zithin the
site"—had been shuttled from one building about to be demolished to

another, and then to another, and perhaps yet another. For seven years,
0oses had been giving the impression that the bulk of the loZ-income
families displaced by his public Zorks had been accommodated in public
housing projects. In reality, the unit found, the percentage of displaced
families that had been admitted to public housing Zas pathetically small.
0oses had been giving the impression that he had taken great pains to
insure every evictee "decent, safe, and sanitary" living quarters. :hen the
3lanning Commission staffers obtained access to files on tenants for Zhom
relocation responsibility had been "discharged," they found that more than a
third of the files—for some projects, more than half—Zere marked:
"Disappeared—Zhereabouts unknoZn." Disappeared! 0oses couldn't knoZ
that the living quarters into Zhich his projects had forced tens of thousands
of persons Zere "decent, safe, and sanitary." +e couldn't knoZ Zhat the
neZ living quarters Zere like. +e didn't even knoZ Zhere those living
quarters Zere.

Orton's handful of staffers, Zithout sufficient time to trace the individual
families involved in relocation, Zere unable to locate those missing
families. But ic Zas all too obvious that they had moved either to other
sections of the ghettos, doubling up Zith other families, causing further
overcroZding in those already intolerably overcroZded slums, or to
adjoining areas, creating slums out of once decent neighborhoods. Robert
0oses' slum clearance program might be creating neZ slums as fast as it
Zas clearing the old.

If this picture of the past Zas disturbing, it paled before the picture of the
future. Orton's staffers had assembled—for the first time—"statistics on the
volume of tenant displacement Ze may e[pect in the foreseeable future."
During the previous seven years, 170,000 persons had been evicted: a rate
of about 24,000 per year. But 0oses' slum clearance program Zas only noZ

1306
moving into high gear. During the ne[t three years, 150,000 persons Zere
scheduled for eviction: 50,000 per year. These people Zere mostly loZ-
income Negroes and 3uerto Ricans. If future relocation Zas carried out as
past relocation had been carried out, it Zould increase overcroZding in
e[isting slums, and create neZ ones faster than before. The city's relocation
practices should be changed—taken out of the hands of the 0oses-
dominated Slum Clearance Committee and +ousing and Triborough
authorities—in the name of common humanity, Orton's report said. And
these practices should be changed in the name of the city's oZn interest. If
they Zere not, the vast urban reneZal programs, the unprecedented
e[penditure of public funds, Zhich the city Zas undertaking to improve its
future, Zould Zreck that future instead. Orton's statistics proved that
Zithout a doubt.

The :omen's  City Club Zent  beyond statistics.

Even 0oses could hardly call these civics in skirts "radicals." Charter
members could recall that during the national debate on Zomen's suffrage,
opinion Zithin  the club had by no means been unanimous. In 1953, the
club's "liberalism" Zas still the narroZ-gauged, less militant liberalism of
the 1930's. But its membership rolls included Zomen Zho had been
campaigning for better housing for decades, and they Zere Zorried because,
under 0oses' procedure, relocation Zas being handled not by the city but by
a

private real estate firm. The club decided to do Zhat no neZspaper,
government agency or other civic group had done before: study relocation
on a Title I site (they selected 0anhattantoZn) in detail—on the site.

No Zhispers prepared the club's young Zomen for Zhat they found. As one
observer Zas later to describe it:

0anhattantoZn looked like  a cross section of bombed-out Berlin right after
:orld   :ar   II.  Some of the tenements Zere still standing, broken ZindoZs
gaping sightlessly at the sky, basement doors yaZning uncovered on the
sideZalks; and surrounding them Zere acres streZn Zith brick and mortar
and rubble Zhere Zreckers and bulldo]ers had been at Zork.

1307
And in the buildings—the ruins of buildings, the shells of buildings—
people still lived. Visiting those people—entering those shells of buildings,
shrinking perhaps past the huddled Zreckage of a man that lay in the
doorZay, stepping into a dim hallZay filled Zith  the stench of urine and
vomit and, in its shadoZs, a vague menace, stumbling up unlit flights of
stairs that had steps missing, grasping for a banister that Zasn't there—Zas
an unnerving e[perience for these Zomen. 0rs. Elinor Black recalls a man
on the street shouting earnestly as she opened the door to one tenement:
"Don't go in there, lady! It's not safe to go in there!"

But it Zas an educational e[perience. For the people living in the ruins of
0anhattantoZn taught the good ladies of the :omen's City  Club something
about slums that they hadn't learned in their te[tbooks. In the te[tbooks,
"slums" Zere synonymous Zith "dirt"  and "blight." But, recalls 0rs.  Black,
"the thing that hit me Zas that most of the apartments you Zent into Zere
Zell kept, clean." Time after time, City Club volunteers Zould Zalk  off the
filthy street, up the filthy stairs, doZn a filthy hall,  and knock on the door of
an apartment—and Zhen the door to that apartment Zas opened, behind the
frightened face peering out ("Oh, they Zere alZays frightened," one of the
volunteers said. "They alZays thought you Zere from the developer or the
city") Zas a room neat and clean. ":hat  hurt the most," 0rs. Black  says,
"Zas just the feeling of people trying to make a decent place for their family
to live in these conditions." It is possible to read through scores of
te[tbooks and tracts on housing conditions Zritten in the 1940's and early
1950's Zithout finding even a hint of the fact that many of these Zomen
volunteers, Zho had read the te[tbooks, noZ learned for the first time: to
the people Zho lived in them, slums Zere home.

The people Zho lived in those buildings Robert 0oses Zas tearing doZn
Zere not just passing through. The 3uerto Ricans, a small fraction of the
area's population, Zere relative neZcomers, of course (although by 1953 13
percent of its 3uerto Ricans had lived there for more than ten years), but
among the Negro and Zhite families, more than half had lived in their
apartments for several decades. :omen's City Club members Zho had been
taught that "slum" connoted "transients" sat and listened as one family after
another informed them that they had lived in their building "since it Zas

1308
built"—thirty  or forty (or, in  one case, fifty-four) years before. The people
of the area kneZ each other. Shopkeepers said hello to their customers

Zhen they happened to pass them on the street. The 0anhattantoZn area
Zas a slum area. Its people Zere poor; the average Zeekly income Zas si[ty
dollars per family. Its buildings Zere old; there hadn't been a neZ building
constructed in it in tZenty-five years. 0ost of  them Zere overcroZded Zith
families of five or si[  members jammed into apartments that should have
held no more than three or four, and many Zere dilapidated. But the area
also Zas stable, settled, friendly. Its people had a sense of community, of
neighborhood, that some of the members of the :omen's City Club
reali]ed, driving home at night to their lu[urious  homes in the sterile
suburbs, they Zished they had. The te[tbooks didn't speak of "advantages"
in talking about slums, but, the more perceptive of these Zomen reali]ed,
the 0anhattantoZn "slum"  had advantages. There Zere no playgrounds in
it, of course, but there Zas Central 3ark. "0ost families," the club's report
Zould conclude, "seemed to be Zell satisfied Zith the neighborhood
facilities—Zith  the good bus and subZay transportation, the good shopping
facilities and nearness to the heart of the city." It Zas a racially integrated
area—a fact very important to the Negro families, not only because they
Zanted their children to groZ up Zith Zhite  children but because they
kneZ, as the City Club Zas to report, that "services such as garbage and
snoZ removal, schools and shopping Zere far better in non-segregated
areas." And the area didn't have some of the disadvantages associated Zith
slums. Drugs, for e[ample, Zere already a scourge in slums like +arlem;
the junkie Zas a rarity here. The buildings in Zhich they lived might be
dilapidated and overcroZded, but they Zere palaces compared to buildings
in +arlem. 0ost  important—to the families Zho  lived here and Zere trying
to bring up their children "decently"—rents Zere loZ, loZ  enough so that
they could do so. Three-quarters of the 400 families intervieZed Zere
paying less than $50 per month. The average rent per room Zas $10 per
month. In other areas of the city—including most slum areas —rents Zere
much higher, so high that loZ-income families had to skimp on clothes and
food for their children in order to pay them. The more perceptive of the
Zomen learned that, Zhile the people Zho lived in the 0anhattantoZn area
did not have much in life, Zhat they did have their neighborhood gave
them,

1309
And they learned about the helplessness of the poor in the city, a
helplessness so much greater than even the helplessness of the loZer-
middle-class people of East Tremont.

The old people—the old people alone—dreaded "the room," the single
furnished bo[, four Zalls  and no more, in Zhich they might have to live out
their days if they lost the tiny apartments Zith their oZn toilet and cooking
facilities for Zhich  they noZ managed to scrape up the rent each month. "I
Zould die if they put me in a room," one old man told the nice young
Zoman in the Zell-tailored dress Zho had come to ask him questions.
3arents of young children dreaded "+arlem," the name by Zhich they
referred not only to 0anhattan's great black slum but to black slums not yet
identified by names such as "BroZnsville" or "Bed-Stuy"—the "+arlem" in
Zhich their children Zould  have to sleep Zith them in the same room, the

"+arlem"  in Zhich they Zould  have to live Zith cockroaches and rats, the
"+arlem"  in Zhose schools their kids Zouldn't learn, and in Zhich the drug
pushers Zould be Zaiting for them, the "+arlem" in Zhose streets the
garbage lay piling day after day, the "+arlem" Zhose landlords Zould
squee]e them dry. One question on the :omen's City Club questionnaire
Zas Zhere the family being intervieZed Zould like  to live. 0other  after
mother, seeing the abyss before her and her children, ansZered Zith a reply
that Zas a cry for help out of the depths of fear: AnyZhere. But not +arlem.
But, the club's volunteers kneZ, unless someone helped these people, unless
someone kept the city's promise to find them "decent, safe, and sanitary
dZellings . . . Zithin  [their] financial  means," "the room" and "+arlem"
Zere Zhere they Zere going to have to go.

For, the volunteers came to reali]e, these people had no choice.

Color barred the Negroes and 3uerto Ricans among them from most
nonslum neighborhoods. 3overty barred the Zhites among them from most
nonslum neighborhoods. Stated the :omen's City Club report: "One tenant
reported visiting real estate offices almost daily for the past year but
Zhatever listings appeared Zere alZays prohibitive in price." The si]e of
many of the area's families—25 percent contained five or more persons—
cemented the bars in place. Said one tenant: ":e have si[ children. I looked
and looked everyZhere, but apartments don't Zant so many children." 0any

1310
landlords, able to pick and choose among tenants because of the housing
crisis, didn't Zant any children. Asked one mother bitterly: "Am I supposed
to droZn them?" 0ost  of the families intervieZed—not all; a number Zhich
the intervieZers found surprisingly large e[pressed real affection for their
neighborhood—did not fool themselves into thinking that their
neighborhood Zas ideal. They Zere living there because they had no place
else to go. Their only alternative Zas the abyss.

And it Zas because the volunteers reali]ed this that they Zere filled Zith
indignation Zhen they found out hoZ 0oses Zas "helping"  these people.

0oses had stated that evicted families Zho Zanted to move into the neZ
apartments to be built on the site Zould be given "preferential status" in
applying. In reality, 0rs.  Black learned, they Zere being discouraged from
applying at all. No applications Zere being accepted for 0anhattan-toZn
and none Zould be until most of the families noZ on the site Zere gone.

Not that 0oses' precaution Zas really necessary. The evicted families had
been paying an average of $10 rent per room per month. The rent in
0anhattantoZn Zas going to be—if  0oses' figures could be believed—$34
per room per month, about $100 for even a small three-room apartment.
Out of 400 families intervieZed, e[actly  one said it could afford to pay
$100 per month rent. The families being displaced "cannot even consider
the possibility of applying for the neZ project displacing them. :here  Zill
[they] go?" '

Not, in any numbers, into public housing. 0oses had stated that Title I-
displaced families Zould be given "first priority"  in applying for such
housing. 3riorities meant little, hoZever, because the public housing 0oses

Zas building had, Zith its lack of apartments for large families or single
people ("Build, build, build!  There Zas never any thought as to Zhat he Zas
building!")  little relationship to the needs of the displaced people. As to
Zhether any priority Zas in fact given to these people, almost 300 of the
400 families intervieZed Zanted to get into public housing—a check by the
:omen's  City Club  three years later Zould shoZ that only fifty had made it.
3romising "personal counseling," the compilation of a cityZide list of
available "decent, safe, and sanitary dZellings . . . Zithin the financial

1311
means" of the families to be displaced—and "financial assistance," at least
moving e[penses plus a month's rent, to enable them to move into them—
0oses had stated that "in order to set at rest any fears, families are assured
that relocation help Zill be readily available and there is a frank desire to be
of ma[imum assistance in carrying out the individual Zishes of each
family." The notice to move that the families actually got Zas a little more
curt. Not even mailed to the individual families but tacked up in the
entrances to their homes, it said:

DE0OLITION   OF T+IS  B8ILDING   :ILL     BE STARTED AT ONCE.

TENANTS 08ST   VACATE.

FOR INFOR0ATION,   CALL  RELOCATION OFFICE, COR. OF :EST
IOOT+  STREET.

:hen   they called, or Zent in person, there Zere no "personal intervieZs,"
no "counseling." There Zas no information on finding apartments. The
cityZide listing  of vacancies? No listing of any vacancies Zas available.
There Zas no help in finding apartments. "I looked everyZhere and couldn't
find anything," one man told an intervieZer. "NoZ, I don't knoZ Zhere else
to look. And Zhen I ask them for help, they just say they can't help me."
0a[imum   assistance? In that relocation office, there Zas not even
minimum mercy. "I'm 74 and too sick to look and no one helps you," one
Zoman said. The :omen's City  Club intervieZer's report on the "T Family"
reads:

0r.  T Zas injured in accident and is noZ unable to Zalk stairs. +e must
attend the rehabilitation clinic daily. 0rs. T is disabled and has difficulty
getting around. The son is recovering from polio and the boarder Zho lives
Zith them is blind. They cannot look for other quarters. No one is helping
them.

Financial assistance? The assistance for Zhich the developers Zere being
given a million dollars by the city? E[cept in rare instances, these
impoverished people could not even obtain reimbursement for the moving
e[penses Zhich they Zere being forced to incur through no choice of their
oZn. Not only Zere they forced to move out of their homes, they Zere

1312
forced to pay for the moving. :hat  Zas available—for most of the people
Zho had lived on the site—Zas a single piece of advice: Get out—and get
out fast. Returning stunned from the "cor. of :est 100th Street," one man
said he had been told to "be out in ten days." The inducement offered them
to move—not in ten days, of course; that Zas just a scare tactic, to soften
them up and make sure they Zouldn't be too insistent on their rights—Zas
someZhat more subtle than those mentioned in 0oses' gloZing brochures.

974

The developers oZned the tenements noZ—and they simply stopped
maintaining them. Said the report:

Typical of the statements made by . . . tenants Zere the folloZing
comments: "No repairs are ever made." "There are large holes in the Zalls
and floors Zhere rats come through." "The toilet boZl has been broken for a
long time but they Zon't fi[  it."  "The plaster is coming doZn over the stove.
If I bake a pie, the plaster comes right doZn into it!" One intervieZ carried
the terse report: "Baby screamed. Rat in crib."

Reading the filled-in questionnaires piled in her office, Elinor Black Zrote
"The beZilderment of people being forced out of their homes and their
inability to cope Zith problems beyond their control Zas most evident."
Also evident, recorded in the handZriting on those questionnaires, Zas
apathy: "I have no money to move, so Zhy should I Zaste time looking. I'll
just Zait—God and faith Zill  find  something for me." Despair: "I Zalked
from 109th Street to 23rd Street and couldn't find a thing for us. The rents
are too high. There's nothing to do." And, most of all, hatred and bitterness,
hatred and bitterness at the vague, unseen force that Zas doing this to them,
a force they identified only as "the city": "The city doesn't care about us.
:e're  just nothing as far as they're concerned." Bitterness and hatred that
Zould have been understood so Zell by Alfred E. Smith, Zho once,
standing in the Zell of the Assembly Chamber in Albany, had asked, ":hat
must be" the "feelings" of the ZidoZed mother "Zhen she sees these
children separated from her by due process of laZ . . . ? :hat can be the
feelings in the hearts of the children themselves ... to knoZ Zhat the State's
policy Zas Zith  respect to their unfortunate condition?"

1313
NoZ those feelings Zere understood by the :omen's City Club. "God and
faith Zill  find something for me," an old Negro Zoman had said. God and
faith Zould have to, reali]ed the trim young matron Zho had intervieZed
her. The city Zasn't going to. Robert 0oses Zasn't going to. And if any of
the volunteer intervieZers had any doubts as to Zhether the hatred and
bitterness Zere justified, those doubts vanished Zhen they moved on to the
ne[t step: finding out Zhat had actually happened to the residents of
buildings already demolished, people Zhose Title I-caused future Zas no
longer a matter of conjecture but of reality.

Finding out Zasn't easy. The developer—0oses' "reliable bidder"— refused
to talk to them, as did the Relocation Office, as did, for Zeeks, the director
of the city's Real Estate Bureau, the official charged on behalf of the city
Zith the responsibility for seeing that the developer and the relocation firm
gave the evicted tenants the "decent, safe, and sanitary dZellings" that the
city had promised them. And Zhen he finally consented to see them and
they asked him Zhere the tenants had moved to, he said he didn't knoZ. +e
had never checked, he said.

They checked. Fifty of the 400 families, of course, had been placed in
public housing, although they found that many of these "lucky" evictees,
desperately lonely for their friends from the old neighborhood, felt as did
one aged Zoman Zho said, "If they put the old house back, I'd move in
again,

even though I had to make my oZn hot Zater and heat." The others Zere
more difficult to trace. Some had left no forZarding address deliberately,
"to avoid creditors or payment of rent, or because of fear of the laZ or
governmental agencies," as the :omen's City Club report put it; others
because, unable to speak English and ine[perienced in even the basics of
city life, they had left one not Zith the 3ost Office but Zith  a neighbor or
Zith the building superintendent—Zho had later also moved. The club's
volunteers tried to trace them. They Zalked the streets of the bombed-out
0anhattantoZn site trying  to find someone Zho kneZ the family for Zhom
they Zere searching, combed school registration records throughout the
city, hunting for the names of the family's children. But "after all feasible

1314
tracing methods had been e[ploited," the club said in a folloZ-up report,
neZ addresses could be obtained for only 167 of the original 400 families.

These Zere probably the people among the 400 Zho Zere best off. But even
among them, the circumstances in Zhich they Zere found Zere
illuminating.

The volunteers found some of them on the :est Side, in the area around
0anhattantoZn, in  the broZnstones-turned-tenements. :rote one
volunteer:

Some places Zere much Zorse than Zhat the family had left. For e[ample,
a family of tZo  moved from a four-room standard apartment Zith all
utilities, central heating and hot Zater, private bath and toilet into a three-
room apartment in poor condition, Zith no central heating, no refrigeration,
tiny bath in kitchen and a hall toilet. Another family of three moved from
four standard rooms to a si[-room "railroad flat" Zith not a single enclosed
room, holes in the floor and ceiling plaster falling.

The volunteers found many of these families in the cellars of these
tenements —in dark and dampness. "It's all right," one Zoman said Zhen
asked about her "present quarters," "but I have arthritis noZ, Zhich is not
good, living in a basement." The volunteers found many of the old people
in the furnished rooms of these tenements—the "rooms" that the old people
had dreaded; some of them had been living Zith their children and
grandchildren Zhen the volunteers had met them before, but they Zere
living alone noZ because the "neZ quarters" their family could find Zere
too small.

For such apartments, moreover, the tenants Zere almost invariably forced to
pay more rent than they had been paying before—often much more, often
enough more to "seriously affect" the family's "standard of living."

These people Zere the lucky ones among the evictees that the club's
volunteers could locate. They had managed to stay out of +arlem. Others
had not. It Zas "+arlem" these families had dreaded. But it Zas in +arlem
that the volunteers found them.

1315
Seeing these people, perhaps the best off among the evicted families, the
volunteers could picture the others. They could picture the basements in
Zhich they must be huddled, the railroad flats into Zhich they must be
crammed, the loneliness in Zhich they must be living, deprived of the
friends

of years. During their visits to these families, they had gotten to knoZ some
of their children—and the fears their mothers had harbored for their future
if they had to bring them up in +arlem. They could picture the lives of the
children noZ.

And, the volunteers found, it Zas not the evictees Zho had moved to
+arlem Zho Zere Zorst  off. It Zas those Zho had moved— Zho had,
utterly unable to find apartments, been moved—to neZ apartments "on-
site," to the shells of buildings in the bombed-out 0anhattantoZn site to
Zhich the developer Zould not send a painter or plumber, much less an
e[terminator; one volunteer recalls glancing into a kitchen and recoiling in
disgust from the sight of a ceiling literally alive Zith vermin. 0oses'
"reliable" developer had moved some of these families not once but several
times, shoved them from one building that Zas about to be torn doZn into
another Zhose demolition Zas still a Zhile off, and then, Zhen it came time
for that building to be demolished, moved them again—hitting them Zith a
rent increase each time. The :omen's City Club volunteers saZ very clearly
the implications for the city of such relocation tactics. After months of
research, they kneZ Zith absolute certainty that the Title I program as being
administered by Robert 0oses Zas creating neZ slums as fast or faster than
it Zas clearing old ones. But, after the e[posure to concentrated human
misery Zhich they had undergone, it Zas the implications not for the city
but for individual human beings that tore at their hearts. In Zriting the
report, Elinor Black leaned over backZards to keep it fair and understated
—leaned over backZards so far that at times the stance of the report Zas
almost ludicrously tilted. But, despite the understatement, at times the
emotion these Zomen felt seeped through. The 0oses-approved relocation
policy, 0rs.  Black Zrote, "does not adequately meet" the demands either of
the laZ or "of human decency." The City 3lanning Commission's 0aster
3lan unit had uncovered the statistics that disproved 0oses' claims. The
:omen's  City Club  volunteers had gone beyond the statistics to document

1316
the falseness of the claims in terms of human misery. The misery Zas noZ
documented, quantified, broken doZn into individual cases and, Zith the
issuance of the first :omen's City  Club report in 0arch  1954, printed in
black and Zhite, as Zas the draft of the 0aster 3lan unit report. A complete
picture of Zhat Zas really happening in Title I Zas ready for presentation to
the city at large.

But the city did not see that picture.

In part, it did not see that picture because of 0oses.

:ith   the 0aster  3lan unit's relocation report completed, Orton's chief aide,
+enry Cohen, and +ortense Gabel, tZo liberals Zith a taste for political
stratagem, began to plot Zays to get the report before the public. They
drafted a resolution requesting the 3lanning Commission to study "the
relocation problem created by . . . public improvements"—"ordering us," in
Orton's Zords, "to do Zhat Ze had already been doing." Introduced, in
0arch  1953, by Isaacs in the City Council and :agner and +alley in the
Board of Estimate, it Zas adopted Zith little discussion; it Zas not the kind
of measure

to Zhich a politician could easily object in an election year and 0oses did
not get e[cited about studies that Zould take months, if not years, to
complete—if indeed, thanks to his monopoly of available statistics, it could
ever be completed at all. It may even have been his plan to see that the
Commission deferred taking any action on the request until it Zas forgotten.
But Zhen the study Zas mentioned at the ne[t commission meeting, Orton
blandly said—Zhile Stuart Constable, jolted out of the ostentatiously
nonchalant slouch he habitually affected in imitation of 8 R0,"  bounced
abruptly upright in his chair—that it Zas already completed and ready for
adoption.

Cohen and 0rs. Gabel Zere convinced that a study bearing the official
imprimatur of the City 3lanning Commission Zould receive prominent play
in the press. 0oses may have feared so, too. For si[ months, every attempt
by Orton or his tZo allies on the commission, Bloustein and Livingston, to
make the study official Zas defeated, 4-3, by 0oses and his three allies,
engineer Robert G. 0cCullough (of the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay),  4ueens

1317
real estate operator Charles Sturla and chairman Bennett (Zho Zas, of
course, secretly organi]ing one profitable Title I syndicate himself). A
series of 4-3 votes even defeated every attempt to place the study on the
commission's calendar for formal consideration.

And Zhile 0oses  Zas stalling the study, he Zas reZriting it. Some key
statements Zere removed entirely. Others Zere modified subtly—just
enough to change their meaning. "In some cases," the study had read, "the
tenants Zere obliged to find their oZn neZ quarters." NoZ the study read:
"In some cases, the tenants voluntarily found neZ quarters." Others Zere
modified less subtly. NeZ, false statistics Zere inserted; one set "shoZed"
that the living conditions of an overZhelming majority of relocated tenants
had been improved by relocation. And in the "Introduction" and
"Recommendations" chapters of the report, the chapters from Zhich 0oses
kneZ the press generally selects its material, the Zhole tenor of the
document Zas changed. Relocation procedures in the past, it noZ said, had
been "a noteZorthy achievement for Zhich credit is due." And "the outlook
for the ne[t four years ... to be brighter than in the past." Those Zho had
been in charge in the past should be left in charge in the future. The major
recommendation of the report Zas a smoke screen added by 0oses to draZ
attention aZay from the tenant relocation that Zas its ostensible subject—a
proposal to finance public housing by a tZo-dollar-per-year ta[ on every
telephone in the city. :hen,  after si[teen major civic organi]ations joined
in demanding the report's release and after the 3ost had been telling its
readers for Zeeks about the report moses suppresses and the Times and
+erald Tribune had finally begun to report the conflict on the commission
(and after Impellitteri's defeat by :agner  had made it obvious that the
report could not be bottled up indefinitely), the commission in December
1953—more than nine months after it had been Zritten—adopted a "Tenant
Relocation Report," it Zas not the report as originally presented but the
report as reZritten by 0oses, although so furious Zere Orton, Bloustein and
Livingston that Bennett found it politic to alloZ  them to append a minority
report including most of the original points.

The smoke screen on the :omen's City Club report Zas throZn up by
Samuel I. Rosenman, 0oses' laZyer, Zho Zas also, for $250,000, 0an-
hattantoZn's, and Zho noZ proved that he Zas Zorth the money, putting at

1318
the service of his "developer" client not only his immense prestige that
made his name a byZord for integrity in NeZ York but also the talent for
Zords that had made him a valued speech Zriter for tZo 3residents. Rosen-
man's statement defending 0anhattantoZn, Inc., possessed rhythm, punch
—everything but truth. "The :omen's  City  Club report, based upon an
erroneous premise, does not reflect the situation as it e[isted at the time of
the survey. It also does not reflect the situation as it e[ists today. . . .
Relocation has not progressed at as rapid a rate as Ze had hoped. Although
it has been sloZ, it has been successful. :e consider it successful, because
Zithout imposing unnecessary hardships on tenants, a larger number of
slum, substandard and insanitary buildings have been cleared and have been
demolished. :ithin   the near future, neZ, safe, sanitary buildings Zill rise on
the land thus cleared." And if it did not possess truth, it Zas so intricately
Zoven a tissue of half-truths and misleading statistics that sorting out fact
from fiction Zould  be an almost impossible chore for anyone Zithout
firsthand knoZledge of the situation.

A reporter trying to find out the facts Zould noZ have to choose betZeen
tZo conflicting  sets. +e could not knoZ that one of the sets—the one
bearing the imprimatur of an adviser to 3residents and president of the
Association of the Bar of the City of NeZ York—Zas false.

And reporters Zere not trying to find out the facts. Their publishers and the
editors Zho carried out the publishers' Zishes made sure of that. If one
reason the city did not get to see the true picture of Zhat Zas going on on
the Title I sites Zas 0oses' strategy, another—more important—reason Zas
that the press Zas not trying to see behind that strategy.

0rs.  Gabel feels that the draft relocation report she helped Zrite— the draft
that ended up as the 3lanning Commission's minority report—Zas a
significant document in the history of urban reneZal in NeZ York City
because it Zas "the first major relocation e[pose," "the first public report,
the first official report by any governmental agency, that even hinted
obliquely that 0oses Zasn't God." But 0rs.  Gabel Zas Zrong. The facts
presented in the minority report—and their implications for the future of the
city—Zere as significant as she felt. But the report's impact on the city Zas
not. It Zas an e[pose Zithout e[posure. The public at large hardly kneZ

1319
about it—because it Zas hardly told about it. Although reporters, told by
Orton that 0oses' telephone-ta[ proposal Zas a strictly diversionary tactic,
had his statement confirmed by Bennett's confession, Zhen they questioned
him closely, that "details . . . had not yet been Zorked out" (they never
Zould be, either), the Times, +erald Tribune and Daily NeZs all led Zith
this proposal. The Times did not even bother to mention the relocation
controversy until the seventh paragraph, and then quoted, at greater length
than it devoted to any other quote in the report, a "reply" to the minority
report inserted in the report by






























Emanuel and Bella 0oses

Robert 0oses in front of his boyhood home on DZight Street in NeZ
+aven

1320
Yale Senior Council, 1909- Far left, Robert 0oses.

Bui ViVI  fit ' JR.





y«/^ SZimming Team, 1907-1908. Robert 0oses, top roZ center.

1934

Circa 1936

***  £

\

1321
\

1322
he candidate Zith his Zife

iary and his daughter Jane, 1934.

:ith   0ary,  19j6

938

1948

1324
The 3oZer Broker

© ARNOLD NE:0AN

1325
1963

£~:




f*

i960

1326
:ith  0ary II, circa 1969






















On the St. LaZrence, 1958

In his Randall's Island office, Zith the Tri-borough toll pla]a in the
background, 1960's.

1327
0oses that implied—falsely—that the real purpose behind their report Zas
to move "about 20 percent of the entire City population"; and said, "No

1328
Zonder the radicals Zould like to get hold of tenant relocation." (The first
that "the radicals" kneZ of 0oses' "reply"  Zas Zhen they read about it in
the neZspapers the ne[t day. Bennett, they charged, had locked up all the
commissioners' copies of the report so that they couldn't get to see it—and
hence couldn't ansZer it.) Of the city's daily neZspapers, only the 3ost
devoted any substantial space to the relocation facts so laboriously
uncovered. The reformers had provided the city's press Zith facts that
disproved the statements by 0oses and other city officials from the 0ayor
on doZn that the press had been printing for months. If the city's press Zas
unable—or unZilling—to  obtain for itself ammunition to shoot holes in the
curtain of secrecy surrounding the relocation of tenants on the vast Title I
sites, it no longer had to do so. The ammunition had been stacked up, ready
for its use, by others. But the press did not use it. The fate of poor people
had never been neZs in NeZ York City; it still Zas not neZs. +ousing had
alZays been a field Zhose complications discouraged the press from
delving beneath its surface; thanks to 0oses' strategy, moreover, the official
report, the report the press Zas almost obligated to carry, noZ said that
there Zas nothing Zrong, or even Zorth discussing, Zith the relocation
program—there seemed no reason to delve beneath the surface. The
suspicions of the press, Zhich Zould normally have been aroused by the
rumors of "deals" and involvement by high-level politicians in a program
calling for a vast Zrite-doZn by the ta[payers, Zere lulled by the fact that
this program Zas being run by apolitical Robert 0oses; his legend draped
over Title I a comforting, concealing cloak. The relocation report Zas never,
e[cept in passing, to be referred to in print again. Title I coverage continued
to be predominantly a reprinting of 0oses' statements and of "facts" from
his brochures. As for city policy, just one Zeek after the report's release,
+ortense Gabel appeared before the Board of Estimate as a representative
of seventeen civic groups protesting 0oses' plans for his :ashington
Square Southeast Title I project. She appealed to the Board not to approve
the project until it had at least studied the report. "Sheer, unadulterated
bunk," 0oses said. The Board approved the project.

On October 1, 1954, an event occurred that should, by all normal standards
of neZsZorthiness, have been eminently neZsZorthy.

1329
For months, investigators of the Banking and Currency Committee of the
8nited States Senate had been looking into 0anhattantoZn's books and,
despite the frantic juggling Zhich those books had undergone, had been
able to come up Zith a detailed picture of the "reliable bidder's" financial
operations—and on October 1, in a public hearing held in NeZ York, it
placed that picture on public e[hibition.

The hearing Zas marked by remarkable lapses of memory on the part of
0anhattantoZn's ostensible founder, Samuel Caspert, a Democratic
clubhouse figure to Zhom 0oses had seen fit to hand over, on behalf of the
City of NeZ  York, 338 apartment houses and tenements housing thousands

of human beings. 8nder questioning by committee general counsel :illiam
Simon, Caspert Zas unable to recall even Zhether there had ever been a
Zritten document—any kind of prospectus, formal or informal— telling
prospective stockholders the financial details of the project in Zhich they
Zere investing. And Zhenever it seemed that Simon had Caspert firmly on
the hook at last, there Zere deft interventions to get him off—by his
counsel, Judge Samuel I. Rosenman—interventions that Zere made easier
by the deference Zith Zhich Simon treated this prestigious public figure.
But despite the evasions, denials and interventions, by the time Senator
3rescott Bush, a Republican from Connecticut, gaveled the hearing to a
close late in the afternoon, it Zas a matter of public record—because it Zas
a record of an official Senate committee hearing, privileged public record,
so that any neZspaper could print it Zithout Zorrying about the possibility
of libel damages—that more than tZo years before, the 0ayor's Slum
Clearance Committee had handed over to Caspert and Company si[ square
blocks of 0anhattan real estate, Zorth $15,000,000, for $1,000,000. It Zas
a matter of public record that as of October 1954, the month of the hearing,
Caspert and Company Zere required to have all 338 buildings demolished
—but that about 280 buildings Zere still standing, their tenants still paying
rents. It Zas a matter of public record that not one brick had been laid for
any neZ buildings—and that not one piece of financing for neZ
construction had been obtained. It Zas a matter of public record that, in the
more than tZo years since 0oses' committee had turned over the slum
clearance project to his "reliable bidder," that bidder's major activity had
been not to clear those slums but to milk them. And so Zere the replies of

1330
Simon and Senator Bush—made near the end of the hearing, Zhen the
transcript indicates that they had come to the conclusion that Rosenman had
pushed them around enough—Zhen, after Simon had hinted that perhaps
that Zas all Caspert and Company had ever intended to do, that the
developers of the slum clearance project Zere trying to clear those slums as
sloZly as possible so as to continue making money from them as long as
possible, Rosenman denied there Zas "any intention not to go ahead Zith
this project":

0r.  Simon. . . . the contract required that the neZ buildings be completed in
four years [and more than tZo years] have gone by, and only one-si[th of
the demolition has been done, and none of the neZ construction has been
done, Zhich is a fact that speaks for itself.

Senator Bush. The thing the committee is curious about, Judge, is Zhether
the attractiveness of the operation that these people have been engaged in
hasn't perhaps delayed the construction of these buildings, Zhich is Zhat
the Federal Government is interested in.

And although Rosenman replied to those statements by protesting that
"there is no such attractiveness ... it is far from attractive," the truth of the
judge's protests Zas also a matter of public record, a record based on
Simon's questions, the evasions of Caspert and his partners—and the stark
facts entered into that record by committee investigators. That record
shoZed that the profits made off the hapless human beings in the buildings
still

standing on the 0anhattantoZn site Zere so huge that 0anhattantoZn's
thirteen stockholders had been able to receive from the company—in
addition to regular "partners' draZings"—special payments made under a
variety of devices apparently designed to conceal the "attractiveness" from
investigators: one partner, for e[ample, receiving through a "construction
company" that had no office of its oZn and only tZo employees, himself
and his secretary, $42,000 (although no construction had been done), and
through a "management company" another $38,000; another partner, for
e[ample, receiving $26,000 in "legal fees"; another partner receiving
$48,000 for accounting and auditing Zork; a group of partners receiving
profits of $153,-000 paid to a dummy "management firm" they had set up—

1331
as Simon put it, "different people got cut in for a piece of different things
but Zhen it Zas all over everybody got a ride on one of the horses." And the
record also shoZed that the profits the partners had already reaped, large as
they Zere, Zere small compared to the profits the partners Zere planning to
reap in the future. One partner, a close friend of 0oses' ally, Bron[ Boss
Charlie Buckley, Zas in line for $375,000 for architectural services. So
huge Zere 0anhattantoZn's profits that they had been spread around—
among stockholders' fathers, stockholders' sons, stockholders' daughters, as
Zell as stockholders' uncles, aunts, nieces, nepheZs and assorted in-laZs.
And spread around liberally. The brother of the stockholder Zho had
received $42,000 for "construction" and $38,000 for "management" himself
received $30,000 as 0anhattantoZn's "comptroller." In one transaction—
just one of many spread on the record by the committee to demonstrate hoZ
money Zas siphoned off from the parent corporation into the pockets of its
partners and their relatives—Caspert had skimmed off for himself and his
family $115,000 in less than a year. +e set up a separate corporation headed
by his son-in-laZ. 0anhattantoZn sold the son-in-laZ's corporation all the
gas stoves and refrigerators in the tenements for $33,000—and then rented
them right back from the corporation, paying it in effect for the privilege of
using Zhat had been its oZn appliances. And 0anhattantoZn paid so Zell
—paid rental fees so high— that in less than a year the son-in-laZ's
corporation earned, after all e[penses, $115,326.37. At the end of the year,
0anhattantoZn bought back the stoves and refrigerators for the same
amount it had sold them: $33,000. Financially, 0anhattantoZn had Zound
up right Zhere it had started—but the son-in-laZ's firm had pocketed
$115,326.37. By the end of the hearing, it Zas a matter of public record not
only that in more than tZo years the slum clearance project had cleared
hardly any slums, not only that no progress Zas being made in providing
the neZ housing that the project Zas designed to provide—but that
everyone involved in the project Zas getting rich.

+ere, by any customary neZspaper definition, Zas SCANDAL. A major
city administration program in Zhich, it Zas noZ  revealed, a $15,-000,000
slum had been turned over, for a mere fraction of its Zorth, to promoters
Zho Zere milking  it of hundreds of thousands of dollars, profits
documented, doZn to the dollar, by federal probers—here Zas scandal of

1332
the first magnitude in a toZn in Zhich allegations of tZenty-dollar bribes to
a feZ building inspectors Zere found Zorthy of big black headlines. 0ore-

over, juicy as had been the revelations of the Senate hearing, the hearing
held the promise of far juicier revelations to be uncovered. There Zas the
clear scent of far bigger scandal in the air. 0anhattantoZn Zas one Title I
project; there Zere ten others then under Zay in the city—one of them, in
fact, also run by Samuel Caspert and friends. To reap that harvest of
headlines, neZspapers Zould normally have sent into the fertile fields of
Title I their best gleaners, their ace investigative reporters.

By customary practice, moreover, NeZ York's papers Zould have brought
into the picture an element the Senate hearing had not—the name of the city
official responsible for the turning over of the slum to the promoters: the
chairman of NeZ York's Slum Clearance Committee. Rosen-man let slip the
name of that official only once—in the hearing's fifth and last hour—Zhen
he could not avoid using it in identifying for the record a report addressed
to that official. In all the si[ty-si[   pages of the hearing transcript that is the
only time his name appears. In referring to the authorities responsible for
turning over the slum to 0anhattantoZn, it Zas alZays "the city." The city's
press Zould customarily not have been so vague. They Zould have
identified the official, printed his name in big, black headlines, used his
photograph, questioned him, e[amined his ansZers to their questions Zith
printed suspicion. By the time a normal press investigation of Title I had
been completed, his name Zould have appeared in a hundred headlines, his
picture Zould have stared from a hundred front pages, the public Zould
have been reminded a hundred times that he Zas the man responsible for
Title I, in the public mind his name Zould have been ineradicably linked
Zith its failures, its abuses—and Zith "SCANDAL"  the noun Zhich had
spelled the doom of so many officials' careers.

But the 0anhattantoZn revelations hardly touched Robert 0oses at all. The
fear and aZe in Zhich he Zas held by reporters, reZritemen, copy editors
and city editors Zas never more evident than on the day folloZing the
Senate hearing on 0anhattantoZn and in the days that folloZed. Robert
0oses had conceived the 0anhattantoZn project. +e had directed its
planning. +e had selected the cast of characters Zho ran it. +e had shifted

1333
the cast around Zhen the political Zinds in the city shifted. It Zas a Robert
0oses project from beginning to end. The Times story on 0anhattantoZn
did not mention Robert 0oses once. The other papers folloZed suit. +is
name Zas hardly mentioned; no editorials called for his removal. There
might have been scandal in 0anhattantoZn, but 0anhattantoZn's creator
Zas unscathed by it.

And because he Zas, 0anhattantoZn and the Title I program of Zhich
0anhattantoZn Zas a part Zere largely unscathed, too.

The Times did not do another story on 0anhattantoZn in the months that
folloZed, but that might have been e[pected: the Times Zas not a paper of
inquiry, and inquiry Zould have been necessary for folloZ-up stories. But
Zhat Zas not to be e[pected—from the customary behavior of the press in
NeZ York—Zas that no other papers Zould undertake any inquiry either.
Not one investigative reporter Zas assigned to probe further into
0anhattantoZn or Title  I. Some reporters Zanted to, but Zere refused
permission,

in some cases probably because of their publishers' admiration for 0oses,
in most cases simply because it seemed to editors a Zaste of time: Zhere
0oses Zas involved, they felt, there Zould be no scandal to be found;
trying to find it Zould  be a misuse of manpoZer that could be more
profitably employed investigating politicians or bureaucrats. The creators of
the 0oses myth believed in Zhat they had created. The myth still gloZed,
as strong as ever—Zith a gloZ that blinded NeZ York to the shabby reality
of Zhat Zas going on on the Title I sites.

During the folloZing  eighteen months—the rest of 1954, and all of 1955,
and the spring of 1956—there Zere, as there had been since 1952, continual
rumors about Title I, continual protests about individual Title I projects,
continual questions about the Zhole shape and scope and direction of Title I
and about the individuals to Zhom 0oses had handed over so much of this
program that Zas going to reshape the city. 0ore and more people and
groups Zere hearing these rumors, making these protests, asking these
questions. The :omen's City Club made a neZ, folloZ-up survey of
relocation practices at 0anhattantoZn, and other investigations Zere made
by at least five other public and civic agencies: the 108-year-old

1334
Community Service Society, the one-year-old City :ide Committee on
Relocation 3roblems, the 0ayor's Committee on +ousing, the City
Administrator's office and :alter   Fried's Federal +ousing and +ome
Finance Agency. The results of all received only cursory treatment from the
press. By the end of 1955, Stanley Isaacs Zas being joined in his repeated
pleas for an investigation of Title I by several maverick city councilmen.
All of  those pleas Zere buried in Council committee, and in the
neZspapers. The myth that shielded Title I—and other 0oses public Zorks
projects; 1953 and 1954 Zere, after all, the years in Zhich he Zas ousting
from their homes the 1,530 families of East Tremont Zho could find a voice
for their cries only in the NeZ York 3ost —from public  vieZ stayed firmly
in place. The movement to reveal the truth about 0oses' projects had been
an underground movement, a movement led not by the City 3lanning
Commission's majority but by the rebel commissioner Orton and his
"fifteenth-story undercover" band of researchers, not by the city's reform
housing "establishment" but by the neZ, boat-rocking +ortense Gabel. As
late as April 1956, it Zas still an underground movement. ":e Zere still
voices crying in the Zilderness," Orton recalls. ":e  couldn't get anyone to
listen to us." A :orld-Telegram  and Sun reporter managed to Zrite a tZo-
part series on relocation—a pallid, surface description that left the
impression that all Zas generally Zell—Zithout mentioning, even once, the
man most responsible for relocation. Before the city could begin to see the
truth about 0oses' programs, his legend Zould have to be e[posed for the
lie it Zas. Before the people Zould be Zilling  to look at 0oses' programs
straight on, they Zould have to look at 0oses straight on, and before the
public could do that, there Zould have to be an issue that Zould shoZ him
so clearly for Zhat he Zas that there could be no mistake.

as the kids played, their mothers sat chatting on a roZ of benches situated
betZeen glen and playground so that they could keep an eye on both at the
same time—sat among trees and grass and quiet. "You knoZ, at that time in
your life, your life  centers around your children," says one. ":e lived in
that little spot in the park. :e  took our kids tZice a day—once Zasn't
enough, for God's sake! I remember once being in that playground in the
snoZ—free]ing!  That little spot in the park Zas really the center of our
neighborhood. And it Zas beautiful, tranquil. You knoZ, in a city like NeZ
York, a spot like that is really precious."

1335
Then, on April 9, 1956, a sunny spring 0onday, one of the mothers, Roselle
Davis, sitting on a bench Zatching her four-year-old son, Earl, play in the
playground, noticed beloZ her in the glen a group of men Zith surveying
equipment and blueprints. The sight didn't disturb her. "I thought they Zere
planning some sort of improvement for the playground," she recalls. But
Zalking home at lunchtime, she noticed that although the men had gone for
lunch, the blueprints Zere still spread out on the grass. Out of curiosity, she
bent doZn to read them—and saZ their title: "Detail 0ap of 3arking Lot."

Returning to the playground after lunch, 0rs. Davis related her discovery to
other mothers—among them Augusta NeZman, Zife of Arnold NeZman, a
Zorld-famous photographer Zho possessed a healthy sense of moral
indignation. "I Zasn't sure that anything could be done about it, and I sort of
forgot about it," 0rs.  NeZman recalls. "But that evening Ze Zent to a party
or something, and in the cab coming home, I said to my husband, 'You
knoZ, Roselle told me today that they're building a neZ parking lot for the
Tavern-on-the-Green in that spot in the park Zhere the boys play,' and he—
unlike me—said: They can't do that!' " Although it Zas after midnight, he
telephoned 0rs. Davis for more details and then telephoned Si[ty-seventh
Street's most famous resident, the elderly novelist Fannie +urst, to solicit
her help in Zriting a petition. In addition to his eye for social injustice,
NeZman had one for public relations. +e Zas aZare that because Si[ty-
seventh Street contained the literarily oriented residence hotel, the +otel des
Artistes, and a roZ of studio duple[es designed for artists, complete to tZo-
story ZindoZs letting in  north light, it Zas the home of a quota of "names"
from the artistic, literary and shoZ-business Zorld high even for the :est
Side. TZo of the most famous illustrators of the Thirties, Floyd Davis and
Gladys Rockmore, lived in No. 1 :est  67th Street, along Zith
oceanographer :illiam  Beebe. Roselle Davis and her husband, painter
Stuart Davis, lived in No. 15, as did dancer 3earl Lang. No. 33 housed, in
addition to the NeZmans, neZscaster Raymond Gram SZing, publisher
Jason Epstein, photographer 3hilippe +alsman, sculptor George Lober and
illustrator Dean CornZell. LudZig  Bemelmans lived in No. 39, the Yiddish
actor Joseph Buloff and playZright Samuel Raphaelson in No. 40, violinist
:illiam    .roll   in No. 50. Around the corner on Central 3ark :est  lived
composer +arold Rome. The hotel's residents included +oZard Chandler
Christie, Zho had painted the nude-filled murals in its Cafe des Artistes (he

1336
took the sun every morning on a park bench near the glen, nodding politely
to the mothers

Zalking by), and 0ae  0urray,  the 0erry  :idoZ    herself: the Zoman Zho
had once been +ollyZood's most glamorous star lived in the hotel in an
attic formerly a chambermaid's room. :hen the petition Zas Zritten,
NeZman got a healthy number of high-caliber names on it—and then sent
his Zife and 0rs.  Davis out soliciting signatures from mothers at the
playground. Trying to telephone the 3ark Commissioner, he received a
customary 0oses brush-off, but he mailed him the petition, signed Zith
tZenty-three names, Zith a copy to 0ayor :agner.  The neZly  appointed
deputy mayor, educator John J. Theobald, just recently recruited from his
4ueens College presidency by :agner, to Zhom the 0ayor  referred the
matter, did nothing about it on :ednesday—and gave no indication that he
Zas contemplating doing anything about it ever. But another one of the
mothers happened to be the Zife of a +erald Tribune reporter, Richard C.
:ald.   By Thursday, :ald  had reali]ed that the story he had been told by his
Zife might be of interest to a Zider audience, and even though Stuart
Constable, the pompous 3ark Department e[ecutive officer Zhose bushy
Zalrus soup-strainer had earned him the nickname "0ustache," tried to
make him understand that this parking lot he Zas making such a fuss about
Zould be less than an acre, a meaningless fraction of i percent of 843-acre
Central 3ark, it Zas printed in Friday morning's edition. By eleven o'clock,
Theobald had decided that the thing to do Zas to hold a meeting betZeen
representatives of the mothers and of 0oses that afternoon, and, unable to
reach 0oses, asked one of the Commissioner's secretaries to have him call
back and tell him Zhat time Zould be convenient for him or one of his "top
people."

Local protest over a park "improvement" may have been a neZ story to
Theobald, but it Zas an old one to 0oses—old and boring. Ever since he
had become 3ark Commissioner he had kept such protest to a minimum by
keeping the "improvements" secret, so that, often, before the neighborhood
concerned kneZ there Zas an improvement planned it Zas already under
Zay, and by ignoring protest and going ahead Zith the "improvement" as if
it didn't e[ist. Scores—hundreds—of mothers' committees and chambers of
commerce and civic associations and ta[payers' associations and merchants

1337
associations and block associations had objected to one plan or another for
a parking field or a baseball diamond or a playground or a highZay in some
city park, and 0oses' method had almost invariably proven effective. Not a
Zeek before, in fact, Flushing mothers had begged him not to destroy "the
only spot of green" anyZhere near their neighborhood by cutting doZn
about forty "fine old trees" to turn little :eeping   Beech 3ark just south of
Northern Boulevard into a paved playground. +e had simply ignored the
plea: the trees Zere doZn noZ and the paving machines complacently at
Zork. On the seismograph on Zhich 0oses recorded public tremors, in fact,
the Tavern-on-the-Green protest had barely registered. TZenty-three
mothers? +e had just finished evicting hundreds of mothers rather than shift
a section of his Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay a single block! +e Zas at that
very moment in the process of displacing five thousand mothers for
0anhattantoZn, four  thousand for Lincoln Center! A parking lot, and a tiny
parking lot at that! +e had just finished building a

Coliseum! The only aspect of a protest that concerned him at all Zas the
play it might receive in the press, and there seemed no reason for concern
on that score. The city's big dailies seldom gave more than token coverage
to local protest, anyZay. Not one had carried so much as a line on :eeping
Beech 3ark. +is rapport Zith the press—the 3ost e[cepted, of course—Zas
at one of its all-time peaks, noZ that the Coliseum Title I project in Zhich
publishers Zere so interested Zas completed: the editorial board of the one
paper that had printed the story on the Tavern-on-the-Green protest Zas that
very morning deciding to run the ne[t day an editorial lauding the Coliseum
as "stimulating evidence" of his "tremendous progress" in Title I. 0ost of
the dailies Zere preparing to take the occasion of the Coliseum's formal
opening in tZo Zeeks to heap encomiums on its creator; the Times, in fact,
Zas going to publish a special 72-page "NeZ York: Coliseum City"
maga]ine section on opening day, Zith 0oses commissioned to Zrite an
article on ":hat   the City 0eans."  :riters   of letters-to-the-editor might be
more and more critical, but as for editorial Zriters, the Zriters Zho counted,
after thirty years of lioni]ation  by their pens, he Zas still their lion; just a
month before, tZo key ones had taken time out from their ordinary duties to
revieZ his just-published :orking   for the 3eople, and, perhaps because of
the difficulty of  finding favorable things to say about that nonbook, had
devoted most of their revieZs to its "author," the Trib's L. L. Engelking

1338
calling him "the selfless servant of the people," :illiam  Ogden of the
Times calling him "one of the great public servants of our time." The only
element of the protest Zorth noting at all Zas that Theobald had dared to
suggest that it be given a hearing; this refugee from the campus needed a
lesson. Not 0oses but one of 0oses' secretaries returned Theobald's call—
by reading him a memo from her boss. 3icking up his telephone e[pecting
to find 0oses on the other end, the startled deputy mayor heard a Zoman's
voice saying: ":e  are not prepared to attend any conferences. I do not think
the deputy mayor should get into matters of this kind Zhich are the concern
of commissioners until the commissioners have ansZered letters." The
mothers' Zould be ansZered ne[t Tuesday; until then, let them Zait; "Ze
Zould suggest to Dr. Theobald that he not see these people until after Ze
have ansZered their letter." Even as 0oses' secretary Zas reading his memo
promising an ansZer, moreover, 0oses Zas issuing an order that Zould
make the ansZer—and the protest—meaningless. Early Tuesday morning—
before the mothers Zould have received their mail—a bulldo]er Zas to tear
up the glen. +is letter Zould not placate the mothers, of course, but that
Zould no longer matter. By the time they read his e[planation of Zhy it Zas
necessary to destroy the glen they Zere righting for, there Zould no longer
be any point in fighting for it. It Zouldn't  be there. This protest Zould be
disposed of as he had been disposing of protests for thirty years.

But this protest Zas different.

It Zas different partly because the protesters Zere Zell educated and heeled,
possessed of both the sophistication to knoZ the best methods of

fighting 0oses and the money to implement those methods. There hadn't
been a single laZyer among the 1,530 East Tremont families in the path of
the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay near Crotona 3ark, but there Zere plenty of
laZyers—good ones—among the hundred or so families near Central 3ark
:est  and Si[ty-seventh Street Zhose children played in the little glen, and
many of them Zere Zilling  to take the case for nothing. And those families
could afford to raise the money for the substantial other legal e[penses for a
full-scale fight against the city.

This protest Zas different because the issue behind it Zas unusually clear-
cut. 3rotests on housing invariably involved arguments based on differing

1339
and involved philosophies to Zhich there Zere alZays tZo—and often
tZenty—sides. 3rotests on highZays Zere complicated by a myriad of
arcane engineering considerations. 3rotests involving parks Zere generally
simpler, but usually Zhen 0oses tore up part of a park for a nonpark
purpose, the purpose Zas clearly a public one—a highZay, for e[ample—so
that the issue Zas complicated, and in presenting it the press Zas also
hampered by its necessary reliance on "e[pert opinion," most of Zhich Zas
controlled by 0oses. But there Zas nothing complicated about this issue.
No e[pert opinion Zas necessary to decide the rights and Zrongs of tearing
up a park for a parking lot that Zould benefit only a private restaurant—an
e[pensive restaurant at that. NeZ York's press Zas enthusiastic only on
clear-cut issues—and here Zas one that Zas very clear-cut.

This protest Zas different because 0oses' responsibility Zas unusually
clear-cut. Because of the nontraditional role, a role outside the normal
democratic processes, that he played in Title I and highZays, his
responsibility Zas difficult  for the public to understand—particularly
because the press, Zhich did not appear to fully grasp it either, never
e[plained it adequately. But his responsibility here Zas clear and direct; no
neZspaper had to make the connection.

But the primary difference in this protest had nothing to do Zith philosophy
or governmental roles; it Zas due to the simple physical fact of the parking
lot's location: the park in Zhich it Zas located Zas Central 3ark.

Central 3ark Zas something very special to NeZ York. It Zas special
because it sat, spacious and green and beautiful, at the very heart of the
concrete city, because more NeZ Yorkers used it than any other park,
because it Zas practically the back yard for an astoundingly high proportion
of the city's Zealthiest and most influential individuals, because for most of
these users—and for hundreds of thousands of others, inhabitants of the
otherZise all but greenless center of the most densely inhabited island in the
Zorld—it  Zas their only park. It Zas special to NeZ Yorkers interested in
park history because of its beauty and historic significance as the first and
most influential of American landscaped parks. It seemed little less than a
miracle to them that in this greediest of cities 843 acres of the most valuable

1340
real estate had somehoZ been set aside—and preserved for a hundred years
—as a public resource.

It Zas special, also, because journalists had made it special. For a hundred
years, neZspapers had paid more attention to Central 3ark than

to all the city's 710 other parks, large and small, combined. Central 3ark
had, like a 3resident, become neZs in itself. Central 3ark had become a
symbol, a symbol that evoked universal and positive emotions in NeZ
Yorkers; it had become the symbol of beauty, open space, peace, fun— of
everything parks meant to a city. "Of all the city's Zonders," the city's
historians said, "Central 3ark ranks first in the affection of NeZ Yorkers." If
all parks Zere holy to NeZ Yorkers, Central 3ark Zas the holy of holies—a
thing that must be preserved. Every attempted "invasion" of Central 3ark
for a nonpark purpose, no matter hoZ small, Zas a cause to Zhich an
editorial Zriter's response Zas almost 3avlovian; in the hundred years since
its creation, a thousand editorials had proclaimed that every foot of it Zas
"sacred." Even during the 1930's, Zhen it had been all adulation for 0oses
in the press, protests over 0oses' remaking of parts of Central 3ark had
been treated Zith seriousness. That they hadn't been more serious Zas due
to 0oses' success, because of his ability to use great forces of :3A Zorkers
Zithout going through normal city governmental channels, in rushing
through his remaking in secrecy; to the fact that Tammany-induced decay in
the park had reached a point at Zhich any change could hardly help being
an "improvement"; to the fact that his baseball diamonds and playgrounds
Zere, after all, "park purposes," even if not the purpose for Zhich Central
3ark had been intended. But these conditions no longer e[isted. There Zas
no :3A   and no Tammany—and not even Robert 0oses could make the
city believe that the Tavern-on-the-Green parking lot Zas a "park purpose."
0oses' reputation as a defender of parks, the keystone of his Zhole image,
had endured because Zhat he Zas doing to parks—like paving over the
beautiful Van Cortlandt 3ark marshes for the 0ajor Deegan E[pressZay—
had been carried out largely in secrecy because the press had never focused
public attention on it. Only a year or so earlier, a group of Sutton 3lace
mothers, every bit as Zell educated and quite a bit richer than the Central
3ark :est  mothers, had been unable to get any publicity for a baby-carriage
picket line they threZ up to protest his rape of their East River Drive

1341
playground at Forty-ninth Street. But there could be no secrecy about
anything he did in Central 3ark, a half acre of Zhich meant more to the
city's press than 150 acres of Van Cortlandt. 0oses' image as park defender
Zas still intact only because the public had never been given a close look at
his park controversies. But at any substantial controversy in Central 3ark,
the press Zould give the people a very close look indeed.

And there Zas going to be a very substantial controversy in Central 3ark.

In April,  the leaves over the little glen Zere still only a pale-green ha]e, not
yet thick enough to obscure the vieZ of the ground from Elliott and Elinor
Sanger's tZelfth-floor apartment directly across from the glen at 75 Central
3ark :est.  And Zhen,  at about seven o'clock Tuesday morning, April 17,
1956, Elinor Sanger aZoke and Zent into the bathroom and glanced out

990

her large bathroom ZindoZ, she saZ a large bulldo]er ripping at the ground
to tear out the roots of the trees.

The Sangers Zere friendly Zith Stanley Isaacs, so 0rs. Sanger did Zhat
people Zho kneZ Stanley Isaacs alZays seemed to do Zhen they Zere
confronted Zith injustice: she called him for help. "Get the Zomen out
there, and call the neZspapers and television," Isaacs said. "I'll be right
over." ":hat   are you going to do?" 0rs. Sanger asked. "I don't knoZ," said
the dignified, Zhite-haired attorney, then in his seventies. "But if I have to,
I'll lie  doZn in front of the bulldo]er."

As it turned out, he didn't have to. 0rs. Sanger telephoned Augusta
NeZman, Zho began frantically calling other mothers, and telling them to
call others. :ithin   minutes, astonished doormen saZ thirty or forty Zomen
running doZn Si[ty-seventh Street and along Central 3ark :est, yanking
along dogs and little children and Zheeling baby carriages. ("The baby
carriages Zere my idea," Augusta NeZman says. "I thought they Zould
make a good picture. After all, Ze are in the business, you knoZ. And
anyZay, most of the mothers had to bring their children. They didn't have
maids. Their husbands Zere going to Zork. :ho  Zere they going to leave
them Zith?") Running into the glen, Zhere the bulldo]er Zas snorting and

1342
grinding aZay, they began someZhat hesitantly—leaving plenty of room
betZeen it and them—to move to a position that Zould later be someZhat
loosely described as "in front of it." The driver, an employee of a small
private contractor to Zhom 0oses had given the parking lot construction
job, cut his engine. "+e Zas a very nice man," 0rs. NeZman recalls. "+e
told a policeman [Zho had just come running up to see Zhat Zas going on],
Tm not going to do a thing as long as those ladies are standing here.' "
:hen   Isaacs arrived, he saZ, beneath the trees, the earth-moving machine
stopped, its driver standing beside it, a line of mothers and baby carriages,
and, moving up close to them, policemen Zho, summoned by the first, had
sped up in several patrol cars.

It Zas a tableau that—complete to Isaacs' presence—might have been lifted
intact from a score of earlier 0oses battles. But Zithin a feZ minutes a neZ
element had been added to it, an element that had been conspicuously
missing from the earlier tableaus—and that Zas to make April 17, 1956, the
Zatershed of 0oses' career. FolloZing Isaacs' instructions, Elliott Sanger
had telephoned more than a score of neZspapers, radio stations and
television stations to ask them to send men to the scene. And they did.

A hundred neighborhood representatives had asked radio stations, television
stations and the big cityZide daily neZspapers to cover their protests
against Robert 0oses projects. If they Zere lucky, tZo or three sent a man;
often only the 3ost did; often even the 3ost didn't bother. Lillian Edelstein
had managed to get three mayoral candidates and an audience of four
hundred people to the rally in J+S 44 in East Tremont; in that audience
there had been not a single reporter or photographer. But on this Tuesday
morning there came, driving into the Tavern-on-the-Green s parking circle,
jumping out and running over to the little glen, shoving microphones and

triple-folded copy paper into the faces of the mothers and the bulldo]er
driver, reporters and photographers from the 3ost —and from the +erald
Tribune, the :orld-Telegram  and Sun, the Journal-American, the Daily
0irror,  from the Times, the neZspaper Zith the greatest prestige in the
country, and from the Daily NeZs, the neZspaper Zith the largest
circulation in the Zorld, even from the Brooklyn Eagle, from :0CA,
:OR,   :ABC,    :NBC,    :+N,    :INS,    :NE:,      from :CBS-TV,    :NBC-

1343
TV, :ABC-TV,   :OR-TV    and :3I;-TV.      A hundred local protests against
some plan or other of Robert 0oses' had been carried out, so far as the
public Zas concerned, in secrecy, the secrecy so necessary to 0oses'
success. This local protest against this Robert 0oses plan Zould be carried
out in a spotlight, the brightest spotlight on earth—the spotlight throZn by
the massed mass media of the city that Zas the communications center of
the civili]ed  Zorld.

:ithin   hours, every major radio station in NeZ York Zas telling its listeners
the story of the mothers, the baby carriages and the bulldo]er. That evening,
the story Zas on every major television neZscast. The ne[t day, a picture of
mothers and children lined up defiantly betZeen the menacing machine and
a large tree Zas displayed prominently in every neZspaper in toZn.

By the Zeekend—Zith 0oses  trying to trick the protesters by taking no
action on :ednesday, giving reporters the impression that he Zould aZait
the results of a Thursday conference betZeen Theobald and the mothers,
and then ordering the bulldo]er back into action Thursday morning, only to
have it turned back again by sentries because the mothers had set up a
rotating schedule that kept the glen guarded from 7 a.m. to dark, trying
vainly again on Friday Zith a neZ bulldo]er  operator bearing assurances
that ail he Zanted to do Zas "move some topsoil around"—the story Zas on
page one. It Zould stay there for Zeeks.

For this story had everything.

It had "names." Lillian Edelstein couldn't get one quote in the NeZs; the
NeZs begged Fannie +urst for a quote ("Central 3ark stands 'as a heartbeat
of the asphalt city.' Yet 'Ze see trees sacrificed to a restaurant and a night
club'"). And it had more than "names." It had trees, too— especially since
the Zeek in Zhich 0oses had chosen to cut doZn the ones in the glen
happened to be National Arbor :eek. Said a front-page :orld-Telegram
bo[: "School children have been memori]ing ':oodman,  spare that
tree/Touch not a single bough . . .' And up in Central 3ark, 3ark
Commissioner Robert 0oses observed the Zeek in his oZn unique Zay by
sending a[-Zielding Zorkmen  ... to chop doZn a stand of maples to make
Zay for a parking lot." And it  had more than "names" and trees—it had
Central 3ark. By the second Zeek, several papers had found the catch

1344
phrase they Zere looking for: "The Battle of Central 3ark." It had more than
just names and trees and Central 3ark. It had bulldo]ers, a Zord that by the
mid-1950's carried enough emotion-laden and unpleasant overtones to keep
a story going all by itself. And it had more—much more. It had mothers.
3arks and trees might be "motherhood issues," but this Zas more

than a motherhood issue: this Zas 0OT+ER+OOD!  The press saZ this—
and made the most of it. It Zas "0oms-vs.-0oses" in  the NeZs, and "The
Brigade of 0others'' in the :orld-Telegram,   and "3ark 0oms"  in the 3ost,
and "Fighting 3ark 0oms"  in the Journal-American and "the embattled
mothers of Central 3ark" in the +erald Tribune; as the headlines blasted out
at NeZ York five and si[  a day, day after day, the Zords that leaped from
them, bold and black, Zere not only magic Zords like "parks" and "trees"
and "bulldo]er" but the most magic Zord of all. And the stories under the
headlines Zere stories about mothers engaged in that most holy of mothers'
Zars, a battle to protect a place for their children (their "tots," their
"kiddies") to play, a "mothers' battle to keep the grassy, Zooded section a
haven for their children aZay from the concrete and clatter of the city
streets," as the :orld-Telegram put it. There Zas nothing unique or even
unusual in the "Battle of Central 3ark." But because the site of this battle
Zas Central 3ark, the press had begun looking at it—and had seen elements
so sensational that it couldn't, even if it Zanted to, tear its fascinated eyes
aZay. The tactics 0oses Zas using Zere the tactics he had been using for
thirty years—but noZ the press Zas reporting them, and a Zhole city Zas
Zatching them. The things Stanley Isaacs Zas saying noZ Zere the same
things he had been saying for thirty years. The only difference Zas that noZ
people Zere listening to them. NoZ, Zhen he spoke, a do]en microphones
Zere held up before his face, amplifying his Zords, as 0oses' had been
amplified for thirty  years, until they Zere loud enough for a Zhole city to
hear them. This time, his tightly reasoned letters-to-the-editor Zere quoted
in editorials and in neZs articles, front-page neZs articles. :hen 0oses
replied Zith the argument he had been using against Isaacs ever since he
had helped drive him out of his borough presidency Zith it in 1938, the
Daily 0irror   picked up the attack as usual ("the claque complaining about
Robert 0oses is headed by Stanley Isaacs, Zho, Zhen he Zas president of
the Borough of 0anhattan, gave employment to Simon Gerson, Zho Zas a
Communist . . ."), but for once—the firs: time—the 0irror's  voice Zas a

1345
lone voice. For once, Zhen Isaacs tried to e[plain to the press the
philosophy behind 0oses' projects and Zhat Zas Zrong Zith that
philosophy, the press paid heed to the e[planation—even on the editorial
page of the neZspaper that had been 0oses' staunchest defender for thirty
years and Zhose principal stockholder believed "there has never been as
great a public servant." E[actly Zhat happened in the editorial conferences
of The NeZ York Times is not knoZn, although certainly 0rs.  Sul]berger's
love for Central 3ark—the original concept of pastoral, serene Central 3ark
—the love Zhich she had previously subordinated to her admiration for
0oses, had something to do Zith it, and possibly so, too, did the fact that by
1956 the brilliant conservationist John Oakes Zas taking a more active role
on the editorial page; on April 20, the Times carried an editorial that, Zhile
it perpetuated the 0oses myth, also contained statements that Zere, coming
from the Times, especially remarkable, as remarkable as the editorial's

title: ONLY A  +ALF  ACRE B8T.

If this Zere land someZhere else there Zould be nothing to get e[cited
about. But Central 3ark is different. To NeZ Yorkers, and especially those
Zho live near the park, it is sacred land. To use it for anything but park is
like insulting the flag.

After fighting  all these years against all the causes that Zere offered to
invade it, Zhy should NeZ York at this late date give up a half acre for the
personal convenience of eighty carloads of people having chicken dinner in
the Tavern?

Those Zho protest do so belatedly. :e plead guilty, like the rest, to
tardiness. This is regrettable. But the principle on Zhich protest is based is
no less valid, and ordinarily 0r. 0oses  Zould be its chief defender against
those Zho Zould destroy a blade of park grass. Let the diners at the Tavern
ride there in ta[i-cabs. . . .

Things had gone far enough. :hen the Coordinator struck again, he struck
Zith picked troops, not some contractor's hired hands but uniformed 3ark
Department veterans, men loyal to the Sycamore Flag (and to the promise
of overtime pay for the unusual mission on Zhich he Zas dispatching
them), and he sent them into the field under the personal command of an

1346
aide Zhose enthusiasm for such missions Zas a legend in the Department:
the hard-bitten commander Zhom other men called "0ustache."

+e struck in secrecy—in after-midnight darkness, Zhen the enemy's
sentries had been ZithdraZn for the night. At 0130 hours on April 24, Zhen
only a feZ scattered lampposts and a three-quarter moon broke the gloom
of the battlefield—Constable had prohibited the use of any other lights—a
hand-picked 3ark Department platoon headed by a gardener first class
moved into the glen, hammered steel stakes into the ground around its
perimeter and Zired to them a "snoZ fence" of Zooden slats, about four feet
high, strung on Zires. It Zas not until the fence Zas in place—and painted,
to make it look all the more official—that the more easily spotted
mechani]ed equipment Zas brought up, and then the bulldo]er Zas moved
into position inside the fence on a flat-bed truck so that its noisy treads
Zould not have to be activated until the moment it Zent into action. To
insure against leaks, not even the 3olice Department had been told Zhat
Zas going on; it Zas not until about 3 a.m., Zhen a patrolman, summoned
by a stroller on Central 3ark :est  Zho had heard a mysterious hammering
coming from the park, arrived and saZ—to his shock—shadoZy figures
moving about in the darkness, that a call Zas made by Constable to police
higher-ups—and then it Zas made to request the immediate dispatch of
reinforcements in sufficient force to repel any counterattack and of both
se[es, so that neZspaper photographers Zould not be able to take pictures
of any mothers Zho had to be hauled aZay being hauled aZay by men.
:hen,   shortly before si[, an early-morning horseman came cantering along
the bridle path, he suddenly saZ, through a mist that shrouded Zhat had
alZays been an empty glen—a bulldo]er, a truck and a platoon of green-
uniformed "parkies" inside a fence, and, in a ring around the fence, thirty-

994

one policemen and policeZomen under the command of an inspector and
tZo captains. (The sight so startled his horse that it reared and almost threZ
him.) By the time daylight revealed the scene to the apartments above, and
the first of the mothers came running into the park, the bulldo]er had
pushed over a big maple tree and 3ark Department a[men Zere chopping it
into small pieces. And Zhen the mothers tried to reach the machine, the

1347
policemen joined hands and politely but firmly stopped them at the fence.
These Zere not mothers to Zhom more violent protest Zould have been
even a possibility; they did not even consider fighting the policemen; there
Zas nothing they could do e[cept stand outside the fence and cry as the
trees came doZn.

And the media Zent Zild.

"It Zas a dirty, lousy stab in the back," 0rs. Sanger said—and that Zas hoZ
the media played it. "The Brigade of 0others lost their battle at the Tavern-
on-the-Grccn in Central 3ark today after the city mounted a sneak attack
under cover of darkness," said the lead in the :orld-Telegram. Other papers
painted the 3ark Commissioner as a bully as Zell as a sneak; the lead in the
3ost said sarcastically that he "routed a small band of Zomen and children.
... It Zas a brilliant victory."  RcZritemen rose to Zhat for them Zas almost
poesy in describing the "sylvan victims" felled on the "hillside on Zhich he
plans to build a beautiful asphalt-surfaced parking lot." "SZeet-smelling
sticky sap ran as the chips fleZ," mourned the :orld- Telegram .

On its editorial page, the 3ost raged (":ho else but Bob 0oses Zould  have
been audacious enough to proceed in this fashion before the issue could
even be debated before the City Council? . . . :ho other than 0oses Zould
have been capable of so arrogantly saying, 'The public be damned'?") and
added a prediction: "3oliticians live in aZe of him and journalists treat him
Zith . . . nervous reverence. . . . But Ze think the man has finally
overreached himself. Before this is over, at least a feZ more city dignitaries
(and editorial Zriters) may finally say out loud that Robert 0oses can be
Zrong." And the 3ost Zas right. For the first time, its outrage Zas echoed in
other editorial voices.

And the Zords didn't hurt nearly as much as the pictures.

As the trees had begun tumbling before the bulldo]er, a Zell-dressed,
elderly Zoman, the hair beneath her stylish little cloche Zhite, had run up to
the fence and the policemen and stood there crying, trying to Zipe the tears
from her face Zith a handkerchief balled up in her Zhite-gloved hand.
Beside her stood a much younger Zoman, one of the young mothers, Zith
the hands in her Zhite gloves clenched and on her face an e[pression in

1348
Zhich Zas mingled sadness and indignation. As the tZo Zomen stood there,
oblivious to everything but the trees falling in front of them, a do]en
photographers snapped their picture—and the ne[t day those Zomen Zere
Zeeping O+ the front page of every neZspaper in toZn e[cept the +erald
Tribune, in Zhich they Zere Zeeping on the split page, and the Times,

Zhich limited  itself to vieZs of the over-all scene. As the NeZmans had run
out the door that morning Zith their four-year-old son, David, Arnold
NeZman had, at the last moment turned back, snatched up the boy's toy
rifle and carried it to the park, Zhere he had handed it to him. (":e Zere in
the business, you knoZ," Augusta NeZman e[plains, grinning.) Other men
in the business also kneZ a great prop Zhen they saZ one—and the ne[t
day the "little soldier in the park Zar" Zas sitting pointing his gun, Zhich
seemed longer than he Zas, through the fence at the bulldo]er Zhile, beside
the small, pathetic figure, a burly policeman stood looking studiously aZay
from him Zith  genuine shame on his face, across five full columns of the
front page of the Journal-American.

And these Zere only tZo pictures—tZo out of' a do]en Zith  drama and
pathos. The NeZs alone used seven the ne[t morning, one on page one,
three on 'page three, three in the centerfold. Out at NeZ York leapt scenes
of a Zorkman raising his a[ ne[t  to a tree Zhile three big policemen
restrained one diminutive mother stretching her hands out toZard the tree as
if to protect it from the blade, of mothers turning aZay from the line of
policemen in tears, of little boys peering through the fence slats at the
bulldo]er rooting at a tree Zhile beside them a policeman stood sad-faced
guard, of one dismembered tree, a saZn-through cross-section of its trunk
very Zhite in the picture, being loaded in sections onto a truck, of Stuart
Constable striding past mothers and baby carriages Zith a self-satisfied
little smirk on his face that, combined Zith the Zalrus mustache, made him
look like nothing so much as the villain come to foreclose the mortgage in
The Old +omestead —pictures Zorth not a thousand Zords but a million.
And these pictures Zere flashed before the public not only in still life but in
motion—on evening television neZscasts on Zhich they Zere, if possible,
even more dramatic.

1349
The outrage the press e[pressed Zas echoed by the public. Letters not by
the hundreds but by the thousands poured into neZspapers and the offices
of public officials; on a single day, 0ayor :agner   received close to four
thousand. And if the public Zas outraged, they kneZ precisely Zhom they
Zere outraged at. A single day's selection from a single neZspaper shoZs
the tone: in the Journal-American of April 26:

I have alZays admired Commissioner 0oses, but he certainly pulled a

boo-boo on that Central 3ark deal.

—E[-0oses  Fan

So the great 0oses had to stoop to pulling a sneak attack at night to out-
maneuver the embattled Central 3ark mothers! :hat's the matter, didn't he
have the courage to face them in the daylight? Of all the loZ-doZn tricks,
that's just

about the loZest in my book. ^ ^ „

J —0rs.  C. BroZn, Bron[

Those pictures of mothers Zeeping as they Zatched bulldo]ers tearing

doZn beautiful trees and destroying a children's playground for, of all
things, a

parking lot for restaurant patrons, made me Zant to Zeep, too. Shame on
you,

Commissioner 0oses! „.

—Disgusted

"Sneak!" "Shame!" "£Z-0oses Fan!" Thirty  years before, Robert 0oses
had leapt onto the front pages in a single bound—in stories that portrayed
him as a fighter for parks, as a faithful, selfless public servant, a servant
Zhose only interest lay in serving, as a hero. This portrait, painted in an
instant, had survived for thirty years and had hardened into an image that

1350
had Zithstood, Zithout so much as a crack, a do]en e[plosions that Zould
have shattered the image of the ordinary public figure. NoZ, in a single day,
over a single dispute

a dispute over a holloZ in the ground and a feZ trees—that image had

cracked. Not Zide-open, of course. Large parts of it remained untouched; it
Zas still an image untarnished by scandal, untainted by compromise; Robert
0oses Zas still the public official  uninterested in money, unZilling to truck
Zith bureaucrats or truckle to politicians. But for the first time he had been
portrayed to the public at large not as a defender but as a destroyer of parks
and as an official interested not in serving the people but in imposing his
Zishes upon them. The image Zould never be Zhole again. Tuesday, April
24, 1956, the day that Robert 0oses sent his troops into Central 3ark, Zas
Robert 0oses' Black Tuesday. For on it, he lost his most cherished asset:
his reputation. The 0oses Boom had lasted for thirty years. NoZ it Zas
over.

Surveying the battlefield on Tuesday night, 0oses may have had at least
one consolation. In one respect, at least, the Battle of Central 3ark appeared
to have ended as his battles usually ended. +oZever 3yrrhic his victory, it
Zas still victory:  press and public might yell, but the trees Zere coming
doZn; his bulldo]ers Zere in operation, and no one in the city government
Zas going to stop them, a fact that became clear on Thursday Zhen
:agner's  press secretary said, "Commissioner 0oses has the right to do
Zhat he is doing. :e  have the right to stand behind the 3ark
Commissioner," and the City Council shunted a Stanley Isaacs resolution
demanding action off to a committee Zhich scheduled a hearing for the
folloZing  Zeek—by Zhich  time the trees Zould all be doZn and the grass
Zould be covered Zith concrete. (0oses declined the committee's invitation
to attend. No councilman but Isaacs seemed to feel there Zas anything
Zrong Zith  that.) On the judicial front, there Zas a development on
Thursday that may have been of interest to students of the laZ concerned
Zith the influence of public opinion on the judicial process. In 1934, Zith
0oses at the peak of his popularity and the voice of the press a chorus in
his praise, the five justices of the Appellate Division had heard an appeal
for an injunction in a case (0oses' move against Jimmy :alker's Casino)

1351
turning on precisely the same basic question, the e[tent of 0oses' authority
over physical changes in Central 3ark, and had held, quickly and
unanimously, that that authority Zas absolute. In 1956, Zith the voice of the
press a chorus against him, State Supreme Court Justice Benjamin J. +echt
granted the mothers' request for an injunction halting Zork pending a full
hearing the ne[t morning. Justice Samuel +. +ofstadter, Zho presided over
this hearing (and Zho could hardly have been unfamiliar Zith the Casino
case, since as a state

senator he had chaired the "Seabury Committee" that broke up the ":alk-
erian Court"), quoted poetry ("'The tree depicts divinest plan.' That is Zhy I
am taking cogni]ance of the trees") and paid a personal visit to the site—
accompanied by half a hundred reporters, photographers and TV
cameramen. And Zhen he completed the visit, he continued the temporary
injunction pending a hearing on Zhether or not to make it permanent—a
hearing that Zould be held before another judge. But 0oses kneZ Zhat the
laZ said; he had, after all, Zritten it. +e Zas confident that this setback Zas
only temporary and Zould soon be ended. +e told Corporation Counsel
3eter Campbell BroZn that he Zanted the hearing scheduled immediately;
if by any chance he lost, he said, he Zanted the case appealed at once. To a
neZsman Zho asked if there Zas any possibility of a compromise, he
replied: "No, no, nothing of that sort."

But even this consolation of victory Zas to be denied him. There Zere tZo
points in the Tavern-on-the-Green battle on Zhich the Commissioner Zas
e[tremely vulnerable—and noZ Stanley Isaacs remembered one and
discovered the other.

One Zas the resemblance betZeen this fight and the one over the Casino.
The mothers' attorney, Louis N. Field—probably at Isaacs' suggestion—
looked up the Casino fight in the Times and found 0oses' statements
justifying his decision to tear doZn that old park landmark—that only
restaurants Zith "reasonable" prices "Zithin the reach of persons of average
means" belong in public parks. The fact that 0oses had never believed this
argument—that he had used it because it Zas the only one available—did
not matter. :hat  mattered Zas that he had used it, and his Zords could be
quoted against him. And Zhen Field pointed out that at the Tavern a

1352
"simple hamburger and a glass of beer Zould cost $4.50," the press took up
his point eagerly: soon stories Zere informing the public about the Tavern's
alternating "society" orchestras, about the fashion shoZs "attended by
Zomen in fur capes" Zhile "several chauffeur-driven Cadillacs Zaited" at
the door, and about the "non-economy prices" that only "Zell-to-do
residents . . . could afford"; as one story put it: "Dinner and tip for tZo came
to nearly $23. There Zas another $5 at the bar for tZo drinks each. It's not a
place to go the day before pay day." And the press coverage produced the
fallout that could be e[pected. Soon, for e[ample, the Rev. Dr. Ralph Curry
:alker,   of the 0adison Avenue Baptist Church, Zas inveighing against the
Tavern in sermons, and announcing that he Zould ask the 3rotestant
Council of the Five Baptist Associations to adopt a resolution opposing the
parking lot, because it Zould tend to encourage the sale of into[icating
liquor in a park.

The second issue—discovered by Isaacs—Zas the nature of the financial
arrangement betZeen 0oses' 3ark Department and the restaurant's oZner,
old 0oses favorite Arnold  Schleiffer. Schleiffer paid the city only 5 percent
of his gross income to operate a restaurant in the renovated sheepfold. This
Zas a pittance compared to the rent most restaurant oZners paid their
landlords—even if Schleiffer had paid it all.

And, Isaacs discovered, he hadn't.

Studying Schleiffer's contract, the councilman found a provision that

alloZed the restaurateur to "improve" (repair and renovate) his restaurant
and deduct the cost of the improvements from his rent payments. Checking
Zith the Comptroller's office, he found that the restaurateur had made full
use of that provision. In one four-year period, for e[ample, the gross
income of the Tavern-on-the-Green had been $1,786,000. On that income,
Schleiffer should have paid the city about $90,000—a loZ enough figure.
Instead, he spent more than $80,000 on "improvements." On a gross income
of $1,786,-000, he had paid the city only $9,000—half of 1 percent. Out of
every thousand dollars that he collected, he handed the city a lone five-
dollar bill. Isaacs had heard rumors that Schleiffer, Zho had been operating
on a shoestring Zhen he Zas first taken into the 0oses empire, Zas noZ a
man of considerable Zealth. After he saZ those figures, the councilman had

1353
no trouble believing those rumors. 0oses had made the concessionaire rich.
And he had made him rich at the city's e[pense.

The arrangement Zith Schleiffer Zas a typical 0oses arrangement, no
different from scores in effect for more than tZenty years Zith the favored
concessionaires Zho Zere so integral a part of his empire—no different, in
fact, from the others in effect Zith Schleiffer, Zho, unknoZn to Isaacs,
operated half a do]en other park concessions. There Zas nothing illegal
about it. 0oses certainly Zas not making a dime from it; he even insisted,
to Schleiffer's voluble dismay, on paying for every meal he ate there. +e
favored it partly because it alloZed him to circumvent the city's budgetary
requirements for capital improvements—and mainly because by giving the
concessionaires huge profits he Zas in a position to ask them to throZ huge
parties, the lavish dinners and receptions that Zere an integral part of his
Zay of poZer. At many of his most elaborate receptions— receptions for
guests in the hundreds or thousands—the Tavern-on-the-Green had
provided not only plates, glasses, silverZare, tablecloths, napkins and the
finest of food and liquor but Zaiters and busboys and bartenders and chefs.
The Board of Estimate Zould never have approved the e[penditures for
such parties, of course. It Zould have felt the city had more pressing needs
that might be met Zith the thousands—tens of thousands—of dollars
involved. But under this arrangement, the Board had nothing to say about
them.

For more than tZenty years, 0oses had been boasting that he had ended all
favoritism to concessionaires, and for more than tZenty years, the press had
been repeating and amplifying that boast, and ignoring Isaacs' attempts to
present them Zith the facts that Zould have disproved it. But this time,
Zhen Isaacs talked, the press Zas listening. And Zhen he provided facts on
the Tavern-on-the-Green concession arrangement, reporters gobbled them
up.

Suddenly there Zere editorials in a tone that had never been used in relation
to 0oses before. "At issue noZ is the 3ark Commissioner's latitude in
dealing Zith concessionaires," the :orld-Telegram said. "The financial
arrangements betZeen the Tavern-on-the-Green and the city coffers need a

1354
lot more e[plaining than anyone has been Zilling to provide so far." park
Zindfall:  tavern pays only Vs rent, headlines blared, park tavern

YIELDS CITY  ONLY  2%; 0OSES D8C.S    CO8NCIL  +EARING.
0OSES DRO3S

curtain on tavern park deal. ":indfall!"   "Ducks!"  "Deal!"—Zords  that
spelled scandal. The editorials, headlines—and stories—Zere
oversimplified, so oversimplified as to be misleading. But Zhereas 0oses
had alZays used his image to make the press's bent for oversimplification
Zork for him,  noZ that bent Zas Zorking against him. In the sense in Zhich
the public understood Zords like "Zindfall"  and "deal"—illegalities,
payoffs, bribes—there Zas no scandal in the Tavern-on-the-Green affair.
But the press made it appear that there Zas. During more than thirty years
of public service, the name of Robert 0oses had never even been brushed
by so much as the hint of scandal. But the hint of scandal Zas brushing it
noZ.

+e apparently did not reali]e at first the threat to his name in the
controversy over the insignificant parking lot. +e saZ no need to change
plans for a vacation; on the very morning on Zhich +ofstadter issued his
injunction, 0oses Zas boarding the Italian lu[ury  liner Cristoforo Colombo
Zith 0ary   for a tZenty-four-day trip to Spain. Reporters rushing to the
dock to get his reaction found him smiling and rela[ed. ":e're  just going to
go right through Zith the action," he said. ":e  Zill   pursue this to the last
court." And those had, in fact, been his private instructions to Corporation
Counsel 3eter Campbell BroZn.

But he reali]ed it at last. +is crossing Zas sunny, but, behind him, the storm
he had e[pected to bloZ itself out raged harder than ever. For the press Zas
being given a continuing supply of fresh meat on Zhich to feed. Constable,
trying as usual to out-0oses 0oses, refused outright to provide reporters
Zith detailed figures on the Tavern moderni]ation program of Zhich the
parking lot Zas a part—a mistake that 0oses Zould never have made, for
not only Zere the figures public record, but they Zere available to the
reporters in the City Comptroller's office. Reporters demanded that :agner
order the 3ark Department e[ecutive officer to release them—and a
flustered 0ayor did, telling  his press secretary to deliver the order to

1355
Constable personally. The figures revealed nothing neZ, but the fact that the
0ayor  had ordered them released made a front-page story in the Times
("0ayor  :agner   directed the 3ark Department yesterday to produce
detailed figures . . ."). :hen  they Zere produced, :agner  pointed out that
"there Zas nothing to hide." But the press didn't concentrate on that
statement. Reporters had pressed the 0ayor as to Zhether the Board of
Estimate Zould investigate the concession arrangement. Only after he had
run out of evasions did he reply at all, and then he did so as circumspectly
as possible: "I think Ze Zill  discuss it. No doubt Ze Zill  discuss it." But the
press bleZ his Zords up into far more than they meant: a si[-column
headline across page one of the :orld-Telegram blared: mayor demands
airing of park tavern finance. Such press coverage, and the continuing
public response —letters poured in and Zere printed by editors day after
day—coupled, possibly, Zith 0oses' absence, encouraged politicians to
make statements on the issue. And each statement made another meal for
the press. One

1000

can almost see, day by day, the reali]ation daZning among reporters and
headline Zriters that even'though the public official involved Zas Robert
0oses, this story could be handled like any other story. Day by day, their
pens greZ sharper. Appearing on :CBS-TV's "Let's Find Out,"  :agner
Zas asked about the financial arrangement. "There is nothing illegal about
it," the 0ayor  said: 0oses had "clearly" been acting Zithin his poZers
under the City Charter. +e Zent out of his Zay to defend the 3ark
Commissioner; the controversy had been "rather amusing," he said, because
"he has been the toughest one, if you remember, about holding on to park
space and trying to acquire more." :hen reporters pressed him as to the
possibility of Board action on the arrangement, he gave the minimal
response possible; the Board Zould "revieZ" the possibility of requiring
bidding on all city concession contracts. But Zhat the headlines said the
ne[t day Zas: moses' Zings due for a clip and Zagner and city Zeigh curb
on moses. Corporation Counsel BroZn had asked :agner if he should go
ahead Zith the appeal of +ofstadter's decision as 0oses had asked. Do
Zhatever 0oses Zants, the 0ayor  told him—and the ensuing appeal
provided still more fresh meat—as Zell as fresh evidence of the interaction

1356
of public and judicial opinion. In 1934, Zhen another Corporation Counsel
had appealed the decision of a loZer-court judge, the five justices of the
Appellate Division had agreed unanimously that Zhile the poZers that the
laZ granted to 0oses Zere far too broad, the laZ as it stood Zas perfectly
clear: they had no choice but to overrule the loZer court's decision. In all
relevant respects, the laZ Zas the same—but this time the five justices
unanimously upheld the loZer court. (:hen  BroZn  argued that the
restaurant Zas open to anyone, one of the justices said: "You mean anyone
Zho can afford it. I'm not complaining about my salary, but I can't afford
$5.85 steaks"— "more than i pay," says judge.) The criticism began to
spread from the one isolated Tavern incident to the legend as a Zhole:
":hat   I have not seen commented on," said one letter Zriter in the :orld-
Telegram, pointing out that in Van Cortlandt 3ark alone more than 150
acres had been devoted to traffic use, "is the general policy of the
commissioner. ... +e seems to feel that as long as money can be saved by
the use of park property, instead of condemning private land, any invasion
of the parks is justified." Federal officials, long silent, released statements
critical of the handling of Title I in  NeZ York. "The Battle of the Tavern-
on-the-Green has already had a salutary effect on the city," the 3ost
commented. "0en have begun to feel that it is safe to question Robert
0oses." 0oses  had been receiving daily reports of the controversy in
Spain. Returning—the circles under his eyes bigger and darker than Zhen
he had left three Zeeks before—he tried to smile for the photographers Zho
had boarded a pilot's boat and croZded onto the Cristojoro Colombo as it
Zas still steaming up the harbor toZard its berth, posing him at the rail of
the big liner, but the pictures shoZed a smile so forced that it Zas more of a
grimace. TZenty-four days alone Zith the Zife Zhose advice had helped
him out of tight spots before had had some effect: he made an obvious
effort to contain himself, greeting reporters genially and telling them, "I
don't intend to get e[cited about this matter.

There is an enormous acreage in Central 3ark and this discussion is all over
one-half an acre and the taking doZn of four [sic] trees." :hen reporters
asked him about the price of a steak at the Tavern, he said, "I don't knoZ
anything about the price of steaks at the Tavern," and, still containing
himself, added, "I'm not going to let them get my goat or get disturbed
about it. I have other things to do. I don't propose to get e[cited about it. I

1357
knoZ something about NeZ York and its people, and I'm sure they all
appreciate Zhat Ze have done in the city." Turning to the skyline the liner
Zas moving past, he said, the face creaking into a smile again: "Isn't this a
Zonderful city?" But  the questions continued, questions of the kind that no
reporter had asked Robert 0oses since the gubernatorial campaign of 1934.
And the outcome noZ Zas the same as the outcome then. For tZenty-four
days, bile had been rising in his gorge. NoZ, in a rush, it spilled over. "Oh,
Zho are these critics anyZay?" he demanded. "Troublemakers. A small,
noisy minority. You have 0r. Isaacs and the Citi]ens 8nion and these
childless Zomen hoZling about their non-e[istent children. Take a Zoman
like Fannie +urst. :here   are all her children? I've never heard of her
having any children." +e had been making similar attacks for years, but
never had they been handled as these Zere handled. Not only the 3ost —"It
had not previously occurred to most Americans that they had to give birth
before disputing Robert 0oses"—but other neZspapers treated his Zords as
the outburst of a cranky old man, almost as a joke not Zorth taking
seriously. +is victims even got Zhat so many past victims had been denied:
a chance to reply. :atching 0oses on television, the NeZmans suffered
over the insult to the elderly Zoman they had persuaded to join the fight. "I
don't knoZ hoZ Fannie +urst took it, but I  took it very badly," Augusta
NeZman Zould say. "3erhaps she had alZays Zanted children and couldn't
have any . . ." :hen  reporters called for comments, Arnold NeZman called
0oses' statement "a proper greeting from a man Zith a concrete mind and a
non-e[istent heart," and his Zife invited the 3ark Commissioner up to "visit
my non-e[istent children . . . aged four and si["—and these rebuttals Zere
played high, as Zas the fact that the request for an injunction had been
brought in the name of 0rs. Norma Rosen, "mother of tZo." On reaching
his office that afternoon, moreover, 0oses must have knoZn that Zorse Zas
to come. :aiting  on his desk Zas a copy of a memo from BroZn to :agner
summari]ing a private conference the Corporation Counsel had held Zith
Field. According to the memorandum, at that conference the mothers'
attorney had noted that he had not yet revealed in court many of 0oses'
more damaging statements made under oath in the Casino case, or the full
details of 0oses' arrangements Zith many park concessionaires. "In the
event of a trial," Field had said, "he Zould be compelled to amend his
complaint to raise these issues and to present data 'that Zould undoubtedly
tend to perpetuate the publicity received in the press and might prompt

1358
challenge to other activities of Commissioner 0oses.' " 0oses kneZ Zhat
his statements, and those arrangements, Zere. For one thing, he had
authori]ed SchleifTer to spend $48,000 for a separate corridor for guests at
plush private Zedding parties. +e must have knoZn hoZ his statements and
arrangements Zould look in print.

+e did Zhat he had never done—at least publicly—before. +e backed
doZn.

BroZn Zas an[ious to drop the case. "0oses in the dock—that Zould be
the number-one shoZ in toZn no matter Zhat else Zas playing," the
Corporation Counsel Zould say years later. ":hat Zas number one in 1956

0y  Fair Lady? 0y  Fair Lady Zould  be the number-tZo ticket if 0oses

Zas in the dock. And he Zas going to look bad. Everybody loves moms.
You can't beat that. I had great respect for him, the greatest respect, for him
and for his accomplishments. 0y regard for him Zas really Zithout limits.
And I didn't Zant to see that." To avoid that, BroZn had Zorked out an
arrangement under Zhich 0oses might save at least a little face, and by
June 7 he had privately obtained Field's consent to it. The city Zould use a
series of delaying tactics to keep the case from coming to trial, Zithout
announcing that it Zas being dropped, Zhich Zould have been a formal
admission of defeat. Then, after a suitable period of delay—long enough,
hopefully, for the furor to die doZn a bit—0oses  Zould announce that he
had decided to give the mothers the play space they Zanted by building
another playground—on the site on Zhich he had Zanted to build the
parking lot. This Zould enable 0oses to avoid announcing that he Zas
dropping the parking lot plan and simply leaving the park the Zay the
mothers Zanted it—and it Zould also enable him to avoid the charge that he
had destroyed trees for no purpose at all. Field Zould be privately notified
of Zhat Zas going on so that he Zould not press the case.

:alking   over to 0oses' office  in the State Office Building at 270
BroadZay, across City +all 3ark from his oZn in the 0unicipal   Building,
BroZn stopped by :agner's  for last-minute orders, but received only one:
keep him out of it; the 0ayor Zas almost frantically  an[ious to avoid any
confrontation Zith his 3ark Commissioner. At 270 BroadZay, BroZn found

1359
that :agner  Zas not the only key figure in the dispute Zho Zanted to keep
involvement limited; BroZn  Zas accustomed to finding 0oses surrounded
by his retinue Zhenever he arrived at the Coordinator's office. This time,
Zhen he Zas ushered in, 0oses Zas alone.

'T just told him that a trial Zould be the kind of thing that Zasn't going to
do anyone any good," BroZn recalls. "And I said if you do this [build the
playground], it Zill  shoZ you're even a bigger man than people knoZ you
are." Then, according to a memo BroZn sent :agner the ne[t day,

Commissioner 0oses agreed that if the litigation should continue, a trial
Zould be held and unfavorable publicity Zould result. . . . Commissioner
0oses Zas agreeable to an adjournment to avoid an early trial, Zith the
possibility of ultimately disposing of the case Zithout further litigation.

Attempting to save face, 0oses alloZed no hint that the case Zas being
dropped to sneak into the press. Instead, the Corporation Counsel's office
kept requesting delays—none of Zhich Field objected to. Then, si[ Zeeks
later, on July 17, after an unannounced meeting in Zhich BroZn signed on
behalf of the city a stipulation that the city Zould build the playground, and
Field signed one that in that event the suit Zould be dropped,

0oses' aides distributed a press release announcing that he had decided to
build a playground rather than a parking lot. The Tavern-on-the-Green fight
—"the Battle of Central 3ark"—Zas over. The man Zho never retreated had
retreated at last.

But he had not retreated in time.

The amount of face saved Zas infinitesimal. The press treated his
announcement as the barely conditional surrender it Zas: moses surrenders
TO 0OT+ERS;  0OSES  LOSES +IS  3AR.   BATTLE; 0OSES  YIELDS  .
. .

mothers Zin —over a 3ost editorial, one for our side. The aura of
invincibility,  the aura that had been so important to him in the past, the aura
that had lasted for thirty years, Zas gone, destroyed in a day just as the aura
of infallibility   had been destroyed.

1360
And this Zas the least of Zhat the Battle of Central 3ark cost Robert 0oses.

+e had alloZed himself to remain too long in the glare of a spotlight strong
enough to shoZ him as he Zas. The city had finally gotten a good look at
the man behind the legend. 3art of the legend still remained un-illuminated.
Even after the Battle, Robert 0oses Zas still, in the public consciousness, a
man uninterested in money, a man Zho ignored bureaucrats and politicians,
Zho Zas above political considerations. +e Zas still the 0an :ho    Got
Things Done. Those elements of the 0oses myth remained untouched.

But other elements had been destroyed. No one Zho had folloZed the Battle
closely could believe any longer that Robert 0oses Zas in public life solely
to serve the public. It had been all too obvious that Zhat he Zanted Zas to
be not the public's servant, but its master, to be able to impose his Zill on it.

That Zas one crack in the image. There Zere others. 0oses' public appeal
had alZays been based largely on his identification Zith the magic Zord
"parks." In the public mind, he had alZays, first and foremost, been the
Robert 0oses of Sunken 0eadoZ and Jones Beach, the fighter for and
defender of open space and grass and trees and sun and surf and brine for
urban masses. The halo placed on his head by the Timber 3oint fight thirty
years before had noZ been knocked off.

+e Zas, moreover, identified by the Tavern-on-the-Green fight Zith the
bulldo]er. By the mid-1950's, the bulldo]er had quite specific connotations
in the public mind. NoZ the name of 0oses had those connotations, too.

The aura of infallibility  Zas gone also. If 0oses Zas the 0an :ho    Got
Things Done, implicit Zas the assumption that the things that he got done
Zere things that should be gotten done. +e had alZays been portrayed as a
man Zho Zas right. NoZ, in a single, dramatic tableau, he had been shoZn
to be utterly, unmistakably Zrong.

0ost  important, the aura of incorruptibility Zas gone. It Zas gone unfairly,
for nothing he had done for the Tavern-on-the-Green Zas illegal, and by the
standards by Zhich the public judges morality in politics, Zhat he had done
for the restaurant Zas only faintly immoral. But it Zas gone

1361
nonetheless. The breath of scandal had tarnished this incorruptible public
figure only slightly. But slightly  Zas enough. +is image had once da]]led
even most of the reporters and editors hardest to da]]le. NoZ it no longer
shone quite so brightly. The press could look at Robert 0oses and at his
operations and methods as they Zould look at the operations and methods
of an ordinary public official.

And they looked.

"That Tavern-on-the-Green thing, that Zas such an insignificant thing," Sid
Shapiro Zould say, years later, looking back on his idol's career. "It Zas
such a meaningless little thing. I don't knoZ to this day Zhat the hell those
people got so e[cited about.

"But it Zas—I  don't knoZ—it  Zas just never the same after that."

Zere super-secret" and the ultimate documentation necessary for e[poses—
the records that confirm an investigator's hunches in black and Zhite—
Zould therefore be unattainable. Some groundZork had been done on
0oses' Title I Slum Clearance Committee, hoZever; Gleason's interest had
been piqued some months before by a series on 0anhattantoZn by the
3osfs Joe .ahn, Zho, happening to pass the reneZal site, had seen in the
middle of it a large parking lot, had begun Zondering, ":hy   should they
have a parking lot if they Zere going to build housing?," had dug out the
clips on the 1954 Senate "Caspert hearings" and had Zritten a series
pointing up the fact that almost tZo years after those hearings—and more
than four years after 0oses had turned over the site to Caspert's "reliable"
developers, Zho had been milking it ever since—the only development Zas
the parking lot. Reading the tZo-year-old transcript of the Senate hearings,
the hearings all but ignored by the NeZ York press, Gleason reali]ed, as
Cook put it, that "it had the makings of a scandal; it Zas obvious." The
investigator told 0ockridge  that he Zanted to look into Title I.

+is first look  Zas not particularly searching or perceptive. +e uncovered
feZ facts not already in print someZhere else—in .ahn's series or in
individual "human interest" features on the eviction of some impoverished
tenant, in one-shot articles on the protests of the residents of 0oses-
threatened neighborhoods, in the relocation studies made by the :omen's

1362
City Club and LaZrence Orton's "undercover" City 3lanning Commission
unit.

But neZ facts Zere not necessary. 3lenty to document the true shape of the
0oses version of urban reneZal Zere already available—had been available
for years—in hearing transcripts or in club or commission pamphlets, rich
nuggets of neZs just lying around Zaiting for someone to pick them up, put
them together—shoZ them not as isolated incidents but as part of a pattern
—and print them.

And on July 30, 1956, just a month after the conclusion of the Battle of
Central 3ark, the :orld-Telegram  and Sun began printing them.

For all its omissions, this first series on Title I—researched by Gene
Gleason and Zritten by Fred J. Cook—painted a disturbing picture of the
Zay NeZ York City  Zas being reshaped. It shoZed, as no one had
previously shoZn, the relationship betZeen the fact (previously Zritten
about in any real depth only by .ahn) that on many Title I sites no
development had taken place in the four years since the city had handed
them over to private interests and the fact (brought out in the Caspert
hearings but never before documented in all its shocking details by anyone)
that 0oses' system financially encouraged failure to develop. It shoZed that
the "slum clearance" program Zas clearing not just slums but healthy,
pleasant residential and business sections—and Zas not building anything
to replace them. If it did not contain the real "dynamite" that a little digging
Zould have uncovered—the fact that Robert 0oses, the man Zho allegedly
refused to deal Zith politicians, had turned over a billion-dollar program to
shady

politicians—it contained ample documentation of Cook's disturbing
conclusion:

It is a system under Zhich neighborhoods actually have deteriorated; it is a
system under Zhich the number of apartments, already inadequate, has been
reduced for years to come. It is a system . . . beginning again the cycle of
overcroZding and bad housing that creates slums.

1363
0ost  importantly, Zhile previous media coverage had almost invariably
referred to Title I as the "city's" program, Cook made sure that readers
understood it Zas the city's Slum Clearance Committee, Robert 0oses,
chairman. If Gleason and Cook did not disclose—because they did not
understand—that 0oses Zas not only the official in charge of Title I but the
official in sole charge, that neither 0ayor nor any other elected official of
the city but he and he alone made all final decisions in regard to this
program that Zas supposed to reshape the city—they nonetheless nailed the
responsibility for Title I's failures to his door more firmly than it had ever
been nailed before. 0oses' name may still not have been in headlines about
the failures, but at least—at last—it Zas in print.

If the editors of the :orld-Telegram  and Sun reali]ed the significance of the
series, they concealed that reali]ation Zell. Only one of its parts even made
page one. And there Zere other indications that Zhile the 0oses image may
have been tarnished, it still retained enough glitter to intimidate, that the
editors Zere regretting having given Gleason the go-ahead on Robert
0oses, that, having taken the plunge at last, they Zere trying to make an
about-face in mid-air. Apprising 0oses of the series' contents in advance,
they gave the Coordinator space each day to attack—in a separate article—
their oZn neZspaper's stories. 0oses' name Zas, moreover, conspicuous by
its absence from the headlines over the Gleason-Cook revelations of faults
in his program; it appeared only in the headlines over his oZn articles
praising that program. Not only did the Telly's editorial Zriters not praise
the series, they didn't even mention it.

But still, the most significant fact about the series Zas that it ran at all.
Investigative reporters quickly become aZare of a phenomenon of their
profession: information so hard to come by Zhen they are preparing to
Zrite their first  story in a neZ field suddenly becomes plentiful as soon as
that first story has appeared in print. Every city agency has its malcontents
and its idealists and its malcontent-idealists—officials and aides and clerks
and secretaries unhappy Zith the philosophy by Zhich it is being run or the
payoffs that are being made Zithin it—Zho have been just Zaiting, for
years, for the appearance of some forum in Zhich their feelings can be
e[pressed. :hen  they reali]e that there is one at last—Zhen they see that
first story— they cannot get their information to its Zriter fast enough.

1364
Scores of city employees—men and Zomen angry for personal or
philosophical reasons at the inside Zorkings of the 0oses empire—and
hundreds if not thousands of city residents Zhose homes or neighborhoods
had been destroyed for his

Title I projects, and Zho then had Zatched vainly for years for the projects
to be built, had been looking for such a forum. They had been desperate for
one. They had almost given up their hopes of finding one. :ith the
e[ception of the 3ost, they had never had one, and the 3ost had e[posed his
philosophy rather than his payoffs, the "scandals" on Zhich so many
officials and residents Zere convinced they had information. NoZ, Zith the
appearance of the first Gleason-Cook series, these people Zere convinced
that at last such a forum had appeared. And the tZo journalists' telephones
began humming Zith calls—some anonymous, some not, some from private
individuals, many from officials up to and including a liberal Bron[
congressman—revealing the secrets of the 0oses operation: the politicians
Zho Zere the real interests behind his "front men" developers, the deals that
had been made Zith city agencies to immuni]e those developers from
health laZs. Along Zith the calls came letters; out of one envelope fell a
clipped-out neZspaper ad for 3ratt Institute +ousing in Brooklyn Zith a
name circled: "rental agent—Samuel Caspert." As soon as Gleason picked
up the clipping, he reali]ed Zhat its sender Zas trying to tell him:
0anhattantoZn Zas not the only development that 0oses had turned over
to that phony developer. On the day the series ended, Cook summari]ed
future leads that should be dug into; 0ockridge, passing the reZriteman's
memo along to managing editor Richard Starnes, scribbled on it: "RS—
Seems Ze've got some material for more stories—Shall Ze go ahead?" RS
said yes, and Gleason Zas soon holding conferences Zith city officials.

:ith   virtually  only one e[ception—+ortense Gabel—even the most
cooperative of these officials Zere Zary of 0oses' poZer. All  intervieZs
had to be completely off the record, of course; Gleason could not find a
single official Zilling   to be quoted. Because most Zere afraid to have the
reporter seen in their offices and many, believing their phones Zere tapped,
refused to talk to him over the telephone, Gleason met them, after dark, in
their automobiles or in out-of-the-Zay bars. One Zas so terrified that a key
memo might find its Zay into print and thereby reveal his cooperation that

1365
he read the document to the reporter—but refused to let him touch it.
:ithout   access to the records of the Slum Clearance Committee,
information about the involvement of key politicians could not be
documented, and therefore could not be printed. But there Zas plenty of
other material that could be checked. Finding that the neZspaper clipping
tip on 3ratt checked out, Gleason reported on August 28, 1956, that the key
figures in that operation Zere also Caspert and Company, and that instead
of developing the site they Zere milking it as they had 0anhattantoZn.
Returning to the "bombed-out" Brooklyn neighborhood in January 1957,
Gleason came back Zith notes from Zhich Cook Zrote a story about a
ninety-tZo-year-old Zoman huddling in blankets and an overcoat in an
apartment in Zhich a thermometer registered 40.5 degrees and about a
mother Zho hadn't been able to give her tZo little boys a bath all Zinter
because there hadn't been any hot Zater, about complaints being ignored not
only by the developers but by the City +ealth Department: ":e  have yet to
see an inspector around here." Some of the anonymous phone calls Zere
coming from an aide in the City

Comptroller's office; in April,  one call from this source informed Gleason •
that the 3ratt "developers" Zeren't paying their real estate ta[es to the city,
hadn't been for almost three years and, noZ that they had milked the project
for "millions,"  Zere planning to pull out and turn it back to the city. :hen
Gleason ran this story, he had to include in it denials by Spargo and Leb-
Zohl, speaking for 0oses, but it Zas soon confirmed by an announcement
from the developers. Then Gleason's informant told him that other Title I
developers Zere also not paying ta[es. 3resenting himself in the
Comptroller's office, Gleason demanded to see the ta[ records, and on April
24, 1957, Zorking from Gleason's notes, Cook revealed that Zhile
developers had reaped fortunes from Title I projects, "the city is holding the
bag ... to the tune of nearly $1 million in delinquent ta[es and inter-' est."

The play of these stories Zas still not big. To Gleason's and Cook's disgust,
the articles on 3ratt ran only in the Brooklyn edition. And a giant must still
be treated as a giant: there had been headlines for almost a year noZ in the
:orld-Telegram  on Title  I e[poses but 0oses' name Zas seldom in those
headlines. +is name Zas seldom in the stories, in fact, partly because of his
success in letting Spargo, LebZohl and Brooks speak for him; it Zas not

1366
until the fourteenth paragraph of the April 24 revelations on the ta[
delinquencies of the developers selected by the Slum Clearance Committee
that the name of the chairman of that committee Zas mentioned. The city's
other dailies Zere in general picking up the Gleason-Cook stories only to
alloZ :agner   to deny them, the 0ayor soothingly reassuring the public that
everything Zas going along fine in Title I. Even in the 3ost, Title I
revelations Zere feZ and far betZeen. And as for the Times, bellZether and
fashion setter for the city's press, in January 1957, the day after Gleason had
revealed that tenants on the 3ratt site Zere free]ing in their apartments, and
that the +ealth Department Zas doing nothing about it because of a secret
agreement Zith the Slum Clearance Committee, the Times, practically
apologi]ing for  running the story at all ("It became an issue yesterday
because of allegations in a neZspaper"), stated straight-facedly that "the
Department of +ealth reported yesterday that tenants aZaiting relocation
from slum-clearance sites had been getting more heat and better sanitary
services as a result of its crackdoZn on five developers"; and repeated
Zithout qualification  the folloZing  lie:

Robert 0oses, chairman of the slum clearance committee, said his agency,
Zhich is in charge of Title I development, had made no deal Zith the +ealth
Department. +e said he had told all developers they must obey all city
regulations.

The Times did, on 0ay 26, run one long story on Title I; the headline read:

CITY LEADS  NATION  IN SL80   CLEARING.

Then there ensued a development more difficult for editors to play small. In
June, 0oses Zas informed by Spargo and LebZohl that 0anhattan-

toZn, Inc., Zhose ta[ arrears had noZ topped $600,000 and Zere rising
every day, had, because its officers had been siphoning out the money as
fast as it came in, none available to pay the ta[es any time in the
foreseeable future; that there Zas also no money in sight to pay the interest
on the $2,000,000 mortgage 0oses had persuaded the city to give them, let
alone the amorti]ation; that there Zas no money in sight to build any of the
buildings the corporation had, more than five years before, contracted to
build on the si[-block site 0oses  had turned over to it—that, in short, there

1367
Zas no possibility at all that his "reliable bidders" could go ahead Zith the
project. 0oses had no choice. On June II, the Slum Clearance Committee
asked the Board of Estimate to institute foreclosure proceedings and take
back the property in the name of the city so that it could be turned over to a
neZ sponsor.

The move Zas made, through Corporation Counsel 3eter Campbell BroZn's
office, as quietly as possible. The Times's initial play of the story Zas not
designed to make any noise, either; the revelation that a corporation to
Zhich the city had turned over 338 buildings Zorth $15,000,000 for only
$1,000,000, a corporation Zhich didn't even bother to pay its city ta[es, a
corporation Zhich had for five years been collecting rents on those
buildings, Zas noZ saying that it could not develop the site after all, Zas
found Zorthy by the Times's editors of five paragraphs on page fourteen.
But the rest of the press Zas less discreet. Every charge Gleason and Cook
had been making for so many months had turned out to be true, and most
neZspapers played it that Zay. As Cook Zas later to Zrite: "The scandal
that 0oses and :agner  had kept denying for a year Zas there at last for
everyone to see, confirmed in eight-column headlines." Gleason Zas even
alloZed a very personal moment of triumph. For months he had been trying
in vain to obtain an intervieZ Zith  :agner.  NoZ  :agner  had no choice but
to hold a press conference on Title I, and Gene Gleason Zas there.

Every time the 0ayor attempted to e[cuse the fiasco by blaming it all on
the promoters, saying they had misled the city, Gleason Zould remind him
that the facts had been in print—over and over again—for almost a full
year; as Cook put it, "it had all been there in black and Zhite for city
officials to read, and they had done nothing e[cept to deride the revelations.
+oZ  did the 0ayor  e[plain that?" In the climactic moment:

":e   Zere misled," 0ayor  :agner   confessed, unhappily. "You mean to say
you Zere conned for five years?" Gleason asked. ":ell, if you Zant  to put it
that Zay—yes, I guess you could say Ze Zere conned for five years," the
0ayor  acknoZledged.

For a feZ days, the press focused on Title I—even the Times moved the
story onto its front page—although in no neZspaper Zas 0oses linked
directly and repeatedly Zith the scandal being unfolded. The Times article

1368
announcing that neZ sponsors Zere replacing the original "reliable bidders"
of five years before on several Title I projects said: "The changing
oZnership ... is regarded in building circles as the squee]ing out from the
slum

clearance program of some of the early promoters Zho had little
construction knoZ-hoZ." Neither the Times nor any other paper asked Zhy
these "promoters" had been alloZed into the program in the first place— or
Zho had alloZed them in. Nonetheless, Gleason and Cook Zere confident
that there Zould be at least curtailment of 0oses' poZers and quite possibly
the 0ayor's acceptance of the resignation that 0oses Zas continually
offering him. Deep as they had probed into corruption in city government,
they had not probed deep enough; they still did not understand the
fundamental reality of 0oses' relations Zith that government and the venal
machine of Zhich that government Zas in crucial respects no more than an
e[tension. They did not understand the e[tent to Zhich the machine
depended on Robert 0oses, the e[tent to Zhich he Zas its feeder, the
supplier of the raZ meat of patronage and contracts, of premiums and fees,
of the Zhole steZ of "honest graft" on Zhich it battened. They did not
understand that he Zas the only feeder possessed of enough food to satisfy
its ravenous appetite. They did not understand that the machine needed
Robert 0oses, needed him at least as much as he needed it, that the county
organi]ations of Zhich the borough presidents (and in 1957, the 0ayor)
Zere only representatives could not do Zithout him. The tZo reporters'
e[pectation Zas not unreasonable. Ordinarily, the tainting of a city program
Zith scandal and failure—scandal of immense proportions, failure five
years in duration— Zould result in at least curtailment of the poZers of the
mayoral subordinate heading that program, lest the public outcry turn
against the 0ayor. Their e[pectation Zas just based on a false premise: that
Robert 0oses Zas really the 0ayor's subordinate. They did not understand
that, as a matter of practical politics, the 0ayor could not discipline, demote
or remove Title I's administrator.

And so they Zere surprised at ensuing developments.

0oses—or, rather, 0oses' spokesmen, Spargo, LebZohl and Brooks; the
Coordinator Zas keeping his loZest profile ever—announced that a neZ

1369
sponsor, :illiam   Zeckendorfs :ebb  &  .napp,  Inc., Zas Zilling  to take
over all 0anhattantoZn's debts, including its liabilities to the city, and build
the project. Gleason and Cook reali]ed that by changing oZners Zithout
foreclosing on the old ones first, 0oses Zas alloZing 0anhattantoZn,  Inc.,
to escape from the project, Zhich they had been milking for five years, Zith
no financial penalties Zhatsoever. But the advantages for the city Zere
undeniable, not only because of the avoidance of lengthy foreclosure
proceedings but because, in obtaining Zeckendorf, the city Zas trading in a
promoter for a genuine developer. And letting 0anhattantoZn go scot free
Zas something that Zas only to be e[pected; Zhatever the nature of the
political muscle that had alloZed the corporation to milk a si]able slum for
five years Zhile the city turned a blind eye to ta[ arrears, that muscle Zas
certainly strong enough to keep the city from taking any genuine punitive
action against it.

But then some of the details of the takeover arrangement to Zhich 0oses
had agreed—and on Zhich he had apparently sold the 0ayor and the Board
of Estimate—Zere leaked to light, not by 0oses' tight-sealed

Slum Clearance Committee, of course (as usual, that group deliberated in
secret), but by City +all.

8nder the arrangement, :ebb &  .napp  Zould  not merely insure 0an-
hattantoZn's principals against any liability to the city. It Zould buy out the
tZo principal stockholders—Seymour 0illstein  and Jack Ferman (Caspert
having prudently sold out before the company's collapse)—for $533> 2 50,
and put them on :ebb &  .napp's  payroll as "consultants" for five years at a
fee of $30,000 per year, a total of $150,000 more. These tZo men, key
figures in 0anhattantoZn since its inception, Zere not merely being
alloZed, after five years of delay—five years during Zhich they had made
fortunes— to slip quietly into the night Zithout punishment. They Zere
being paid hundreds of thousands of dollars to do so. And this money Zas
not for all their stock. 8nder the 0oses-approved arrangements, Ferman
and 0illstein  Zould be given si]able stockholdings—betZeen them a total
of 32 percent—in :ebb  &  .napp's  0anhattantoZn  subsidiary. "The
developers Zho hadn't developed," Cook Zrote, "Zould be entitled in the
future to nearly one-third of the profits" of the developer Zho did develop.*

1370
The cast of characters in the 0anhattantoZn story Zas, moreover, getting a
significant addition. The 0oses-approved contract did not, of course,
contemplate any reduction in Democrat Samuel Rosenman's $250,000
retainer. But it added another $75,000 legal fee—to Daniel J. Riesner,
president of the National Republican Club.

Outcry in the press—the afternoon press, primarily—apparently panicked
the administration. During the e[ecutive session of the Board of Estimate at
Zhich the neZ contract Zas scheduled to be approved (0oses Zas not
present; he Zas presiding at a Long Island ribbon cutting at Zhich +erbert
Bayard SZope "conferred" on him the title of "Doctor of +uman
Betterment"), reporters Zaiting outside the closed doors heard voices raised
in argument for three and a half hours after Spargo, LebZohl and Brooks
Zent in. Emerging harried, :agner  said the Board had refused to okay the
contract—and Zhen, in several days, it Zas resubmitted, Riesner's fee had
been cut in half and Ferman's consultantship had been eliminated entirely.
Gleason and Cook Zere not impressed by the fact that Ferman Zas noZ
going to be paid "only" $300,000 and Riesner "only" $37,500, particularly
after Gleason dreZ from a perspiring :agner an admission that he did not
knoZ Zhat legal services—if any—Riesner had ever performed for
0anhattantoZn. "This  Zas plain trafficking  ... in huge square-block chunks
of city real estate that had been made available to [favored insiders] at
knock-doZn prices by the ta[payers' millions," Cook Zrote. Attempting to
put a better face on the arrangement, :agner then declared Zith firm and
earnest mien that Ferman and 0illstein "Zill be out as sponsors of Title I
projects"; they Zould, he said, never be alloZed to benefit from the
program in the future. "It sounded good if you didn't think," Cook Zas to
recall, "but it seemed to reporters Zho did that the Zords, even as the
0ayor  uttered them, had a holloZ ring. :eren't  Ferman and 0illstein  going
to benefit in the future?" Of course they Zere, to the tune

* Ferman said he actually lost money.

of 32 percent.* The developers Zho hadn't developed Zere still being
reZarded for not developing; they Zere just not being reZarded as much.

And as the various arms of the city government quick-marched through the
various steps necessary to the formali]ation of this arrangement, Gleason

1371
and Cook reali]ed that the arrangement Zas a fait accompli, no matter hoZ
diligently they and their felloZ  journalists alerted the public to its injustices.
The total result of their torturously obtained e[poses Zould be to give to the
milkers of 0anhattantoZn  a substantial e[tra helping of pure cream. As for
Robert 0oses, as the revelations faded aZay it became apparent that his
poZers over slum clearance Zere to be curtailed not a Zhit. Their e[poses
— and the resultant action—had, really, changed nothing, Cook Zas to
Zrite. "It  disturbed no fundamental realities. Robert 0oses still ran the
shoZ. 3rojects still reeked of political influence."

And if anyone had any doubt of the truth of Cook's observation, proof Zas
not long in coming.

On the basis of its previous behavior, NeZ York's press could not be
e[pected to take much interest in the relocation details of Lincoln Center,
the Title I project that best revealed the vast breadth of 0oses' creative,
city-shaping imagination. (:ith   his first reali]ation  of the possibilities in
Title I had come Zhat he Zas later to describe as a "vision of a reborn :est
Side, marching north from Columbus Circle, and eventually spreading over
the entire dismal and decayed :est Side.") The Coliseum at the Circle had
been the first encampment in that march, and no sooner had he built it than
three coincidences had combined to shoZ him the ne[t leg. Sitting beside
him on a do]en daises, Fordham president Father Laurence J. 0cGinley
Zas repeatedly mentioning to him that the university desperately needed a
mid-toZn campus but Zas unable to afford midtoZn real estate prices; Ruth
Baker 3ratt and other opera lovers kept mentioning to him at dinner parties
that forcing the 0etropolitan Opera to perform in its ancient, inadequate
building on Thirty-ninth  Street Zas scandalous; and then he read in the
papers one morning that Carnegie +all had just formally notified the NeZ
York 3hilharmonic that its lease Zould not be reneZed after 1958. From the
three coincidences, his mind leapt to a grand conception: ra]ing eighteen
square blocks of slums stretching north from the Coliseum and rearing on
their ruins a huge, glittering cultural center that Zould house—in grandeur
—not only university, opera and 3hilharmonic but a do]en other related
institutions. By 1957, his plan for the Lincoln Center for the 3erforming
Arts included not only a four-square-block Fordham campus, a
3hilharmonic +all  and a neZ 0etropolitan Opera +ouse but a ballet center,

1372
a repertory theater, a high school of the performing arts, a library and
museum of the performing arts, a neZ home for the famed Juilliard School

* :rote   Cook: "Asked hoZ  he squared this indubitable fact Zith his neZ
[statement], 0ayor :agner   shoZed a little irritation  and ansZered a bit
peevishly: ':ell,   I think :ebb   &  .napp  Zas lucky to get that much interest
[a 68 percent stockholding] in it. They have control.'"

of 0usic,  and such related facilities as 4,400 units of housing, a public
school and playground, an underground parking garage, a firehouse, a park
Zith bandshell for outdoor concerts, a headquarters for the American Red
Cross and the Fiorello +. La Guardia +igh School, "not to speak," as 0oses
put it, "of the neighboring offices of The NeZ York Times." NeZspapers
Zere filled Zith  artists' renderings of the magnificent cultural institutions to
be erected Zhere, for the most part, shabby tenements noZ stood; by its
traditional standards, the press could not be e[pected to be very interested
in the fact that 7,000 loZ-income families and 800 businesses Zere going to
have to be displaced from the site—or in the charges being made that
despite the fact that, as reformer I. D. Robbins put it, "there ... are plenty of
funds available" under various housing acts "to enable the planner to
establish the first truly balanced neighborhood in NeZ York," 0oses Zas
not making even a pretense of creating neZ homes for the families
displaced; to replace the 7,000 loZ-income apartments being destroyed,
4,400 neZ ones Zere being planned— 4,000 of them lu[ury apartments.

By its traditional standards, hoZever, the press might be e[pected to be
interested in several financial facts about Lincoln Center: although 0oses
had received an offer from certain reputable housing developers of $9.58
per square foot for land, he Zas selling the land to other, favored,
developers for $7.00 per square foot; Zhile the city Zas acquiring the rest
of the huge site by blanket condemnation proceedings, it had for some
une[plained reason found it advisable to take the building at 70 Columbus
Avenue, oZned (under a trust established by Democratic moneyman and
Charles Buckley intimate Joseph 3. .ennedy) by Robert F. .ennedy and
three of his sisters, Jean .ennedy Smith, Eunice .ennedy Shriver and
3atricia .ennedy  LaZford, not by condemnation but by purchase—for
$2,500,000, a price so high that Zhile the land under the buildings adjacent

1373
to the one oZned by the .ennedys Zas Zorth $9.58 per square foot, the
land under theirs became Zorth $62.88 per square foot.

And those facts Zere to be brought to the press's attention—by public
statements by a public official. For +ousing and +ome Finance Agency
Administrator Albert 0.   Cole, over-all federal administrator of Title I, Zho
had been chafing for years over 0oses' administration of Title I in NeZ
York, Lincoln Center Zas the last straZ. In April, Cole had attempted to go
over 0oses' head, refusing to provide funds for the giant cultural comple[
until the city's 0ayor  and Board of Estimate met Zith him to decide "broad
policy questions" about Title I's future in NeZ York. :agner  let him  knoZ
Zho Zould  decide that future: ":ould  suggest your representatives meet
Zith Slum Clearance Committee," the 0ayor telegrammed. The press had
backed 0oses, and Cole had been forced to back doZn. NoZ, Zith the
0anhattantoZn mess spread on the record, Cole, believing that some of the
glitter might have rubbed off the 0oses legend, and that the time might be
ripe to curtail his poZers, decided to try again. +e demanded neZ
appraisals of the Lincoln Center real estate, by "independent" appraisers.
And Zhen 0oses refused, Cole charged publicly that during the ++FA's
ten-year e[istence "the agency has had more trouble Zith 0r. Robert 0oses

than Zith any other single individual in all the cities of the 8nited States."
Title I's "many difficulties"  in NeZ York,  he stated, Zere due to 0oses'
"unique method" for selecting housing sponsors, and his refusal to consider
changing it. "It has been our documented and arduous e[perience that 0r.
0oses misrepresents Zhat the housing agency is doing or trying to do; he
Zill  not take the trouble to ascertain the facts; his obscurities are
misleading, and he is infle[ibly bent on folloZing  his oZn course Zhatever
may be the outcome." Threatening to cut off all Title I aid to the city unless
the method Zas changed, Cole again asked :agner and the Board to
intercede.

0oses' response Zas his usual offer to resign. "Any further statements on
this subject Zill of course have to come from the 0ayor," he said.

:agner  could not make his statement fast enough. :ithin an hour after
0oses' offer to resign, the 0ayor  rejected it—in a late-afternoon press
release Zhich contained a political version of a Freudian slip as to his

1374
reasoning. "I have every confidence in Bob 0oses. . . . 0r. 0oses has made
great contributions to the City of NeZ York, and the people are Zell aZare
of this" (italics added). And proof of the political Zisdom of  the 0ayor's
course arrived Zith the morning papers, so much more important to a
politician than the 30's. :agner,   by rushing, had just barely beaten them to
the punch. Said the +erald Tribune:

True enough, the course of Title I slum clearance has been far from smooth.
But such deficiencies ought to be a challenge to reneZed effort at getting
things done.

. . . NeZ York has been committed from the beginning to the Bob 0oses
Zay of getting things done. . . . :ashington  should take notice that this city
Zill  not drop its construction pilot.

The NeZ York Times responded to Cole's challenge Zith perhaps its
clearest statement ever of its principal oZner's feelings about Robert 0oses.

0r.  Cole had better face the fact, as F.D.R. had to, that NeZ York City is
not going to drop Bob 0oses as a public servant as long as he is Zilling to
keep Zorking for the city. La Guardia, O'DZyer, Impellitteri,  :agner—
none of them, as 0ayor, could get along Zithout him. To be sure, it's
possible to find a mistake and a failure here and there. But look at the long,
long record of successes. You don't bench a Babe Ruth because he strikes
out once in a Zhile. You consider the home runs and the batting average.

0aybe some other system Zould have Zorked better here, on urban
reneZal, than the "unique" NeZ York system. That can only be a matter of
speculation. :hat  Ze do knoZ  is that, in general, NeZ York's slum
clearance progress has been unequalled and that, in the memory of living
man on the NeZ York scene, there has never been the equal of Bob 0oses
for getting things done. The Federal Government is not going to change 0r.
0oses. It had better try to get along Zith him, for that is the Zay Ze Zill
travel farthest fastest for the public good.

"0oses could push a button and the calls Zould pour in . . . ," Lutsky says.
"Calls from the people Zho really mattered." NoZ 0oses pushed that
button. 3eople in NeZ York Zho had access directly to the :hite  +ouse

1375
used that access. Father 0cGinley and other key figures in the Catholic
Arch-

diocese, key union leaders, key bankers, John D. Rockefeller 3d himself—
all Zere on the phone to :ashington. "The amount of pressure he put on
Zas just unbelievable," Cole says. "+e just murdered me in there." A
"compromise" Zas hastily announced: the ++FA Zould accept a neZ
appraisal —by 0oses' oZn appraisers, the same men Zho had made the
original appraisals. 0eanZhile, the ++FA  Zas "reserving" for  Lincoln
Center the $27,000,000 for Zhich 0oses had asked.

It Zas a striking display of poZer. After the Lincoln  Center episode,
Gleason and Cook reali]ed bitterly that 0oses still had too much poZer to
be touched by the federal government just as he had too much poZer to be
touched by the city government. Even more bitter Zas their reali]ation that,
despite their attempts to shatter his image, it still endured, looming over
NeZ York almost as brightly as ever.

3art of the 0oses myth—the part that portrayed the 3ark Commissioner as
the park defender—had been cracked aZay by the Battle of Central 3ark.
But the heart of the myth—the part that portrayed 0oses as a man above
politics and corruption—had not. Thirty years—and thousands upon
thousands of neZspaper articles—had gone into the creation of that myth.
No single series of e[poses in a single neZspaper Zas going to destroy it,
particularly not Zhen that series, Zhile revealing corruption in a 0oses-run
program, shied aZay from connecting that corruption Zith 0oses
personally. Gleason and Cook had hoped that other papers Zould pick up
their revelations, repeat them, launch full-scale investigations of their oZn.
Instead, Zhen it came to the crunch, editorials had likened Robert 0oses
not to Boss TZeed but to Babe Ruth. Gleason and Cook kneZ that reporters
on every paper in toZn Zanted to dig into the 0oses empire; they kneZ
therefore that the decision not to dig—and to support 0oses against the
federal government—had been made at higher levels. Gleason and Cook
could see that 0oses' relationship Zith publishers and top editors Zas as
close as ever. Not only had they been the recipients of his charm and his
favors, they had been the key figures in making the 0oses myth; they had a
psychological vested interest in it. To dispatch investigators to dig into it

1376
Zould be an admission on their part that they had been Zrong—had been
Zrong for years. That Zas not an admission that, in the absence of evidence
a lot stronger than Gleason had been able to uncover, they Zere prepared to
make. Some of them Zould permit their papers to print derogatory items
about 0oses if such items Zere breaking neZs; they Zould not alloZ their
reporters to dig up such items and make them neZs. And Zithout such
digging beneath the surface of that image, the image Zould endure.

They may have chipped it, they reali]ed, but it Zas still there.

Still they kept Zorking—despite neZ obstacles.

... the heat Zas really on [Cook says]. City officials Zith Zhom Ze had been
able to talk previously fleZ into rages at the sight of us—and later let us
knoZ, privately, that they had had to put on an act either because spies had
been planted at their elboZs or because they felt their offices Zere bugged,
their phones tapped. The reporting half of this team sometimes found
strange men

trailing after him Zhen he made his rounds of the municipal offices; and the
little guys in the scandal-packed bureaus—the men Zho had fed us Zith tips
— asked us never to try to get in touch Zith them again, even at their homes
at midnight. They all felt that their phones Zere tapped, that they Zere
being Zatched.

They Zere Zorking almost alone. "There Zas a time (and it lasted for
almost three years) Zhen Ze Zere virtually the only Zriters in NeZ York
focusing a critical spotlight on the [Title I] program," Cook Zas to Zrite.
And Zhile he may have e[aggerated the length of time involved, the rest of
his statement Zas accurate. Only stripmining before, Gleason Zas digging
deep noZ, his Zay lighted by a long line of anonymous tips, and he Zas
beginning to unearth evidence that the city's Zhole political structure Zas
tied in to Title I; photostats of canceled checks for 0anhattantoZn's
insurance premiums Zere placed in his hands, and Cook Zas thereupon able
to Zrite: "0anhattantoZn  began Zith Sam Caspert in a political clubhouse.
Caspert Zas a vice president of Robert Blaikie's Democratic Club on the
8pper :est   Side. . . . Blaikie handled the insurance.* . . . 0any of the
original investors, officers and employees of 0anhattantoZn came out of

1377
Blaikie's political club."  Residents of Gramercy 3ark protested that their
neighborhood Zasn't a slum; they couldn't understand Zhy it had been
designated for slum clearance—Gleason and Cook informed them that their
oZn assemblyman, Zho in public Zas opposing the project, Zas in private
the organi]er of the real estate syndicate to Zhom 0oses had aZarded it,
the revelation marking "the first time that an elected public official had
been closely identified Zith Title I operations." And each tip about politics
and corruption established more clearly the link betZeen them and the
living legend Zho Zas supposedly above them; by 0arch 1958 the circle
had tightened to a point at Zhich Gleason and Cook Zere able to print that
"0oses 0an"   :illiam    S. LebZohl, the director of 0oses' Slum Clearance
Committee, Zas a stockholder in the Nassau 0anagement Company, a real
estate firm that had been set up on a shoestring just three years before—
and that during those three years it had collected, largely for tenant
relocation on 0oses' slum clearance and highZay projects, fees totaling
$2,250,-000. They Zere able to print that a brochure published by the firm
to lure potential investors into purchasing its stock contained endorsements
not only by LebZohl but by tZo  other "0oses 0en,"  Slum Clearance
Committee assistant director Samuel Brooks and +ousing Authority
chairman 3hilip J. Cruise. And they Zere even able to reveal the ties
betZeen this corporate recipient of 0oses' largesse and Tammany +all: the
firm Zas so generous a contributor to the +all that its president had been
invited by the Democratic State Committee to serve as vice chairman of the
annual party dinner; all relocation contracts had been funneled through the
City Real Estate Bureau, and that bureau Zas headed by a boutonniered
front man for Carmine De Sapio, 3ercy Gale, Jr. And the tZo reporters
acquired—and

* "But only, Blaikie  says, because Caspert came to him in desperation after
four other brokers had refused to help him."

printed—evidence of an even closer link betZeen the man supposedly
above politics and the archetypal politician: De Sapio representative Gale
Zas a member of 0oses' Slum Clearance Committee. But Gleason and
Cook Zere the only reporters investigating Title I noZ. The 3ost faithfully
reported the controversy—mostly tenant protests—over the various Title I
sites, but Zas doing no original investigative Zork of its oZn. Gleason and

1378
Cook needed the prestigious A0's; having recanted their apostasy,
hoZever, these papers Zere shoZing no inclination Zhatsoever to repeat it.
"All  through this time," Cook says, "Ze Zere shooting our shots practically
alone."

Enthusiasm for their Zork Zas not e[actly rampant even on their oZn city
desk. Their editors, unenthusiastic about making the :orld-Telegram a
voice of dissent amid a chorus of praise, kept doZnplaying 0oses'
connection Zith the revelations of political influence, the connection that
had to be made, clearly and strongly, if the public Zas, amid the
comple[ities of Title  I, to grasp it. In the Gleason-Cook article revealing
that the Gramercy 3ark slum clearance project had been given to an
assemblyman, for e[ample, there Zas not a mention of Zho had given the
assemblyman the project; 0oses' name never appeared. Cook's paragraphs
making Zhat the reZriteman considered the key point of the Nassau
0anagement scandals—that a Robert 0oses aide had received immensely
lucrative contracts from Robert 0oses Zithout competitive bidding—Zere
edited out of his copy day after day. LebZohl and Brooks Zere identified as
"city officials"  although Zhat they really Zere Zere 0oses officials.  The
contracts involved in the stories Zere described as "city contracts" although
not the city but 0oses had aZarded them. "The guts Zere cut out of those
stories," Cook says. 0oreover, as Cook puts it, "the paper began to get
more and more Zeary of this. There Zas no real pressure from [publisher]
+oZard. It  Zas just ':ho   the hell understands this stuff?' Tt's too goddamn
complicated for the public to understand.' 'The public doesn't care.' In
essence it Zas ':hen are you guys gonna start doing something else?' I'd
Zrite a great story and I'd come in the ne[t day and it'd be on page tZenty-
seven." The myth that surrounded 0oses had been created on page one. It
Zas on page one that the myth Zould have to be destroyed. Stories on page
tZenty-seven Zould never do it.

.noZing   this as they did, the tZo years folloZing the 0anhattantoZn
e[pose Zas a time of terrible frustration for Gene Gleason and Fred Cook.
0oses' manipulations may have been on page tZenty-seven; his triumphs
Zere on page one. Despite revelations that Zould have destroyed the career
of the typical public official,  during these tZo years this public official
rammed through, over the opposition of protesting neighborhoods, approval

1379
for neZ e[pressZays, for tZo  great neZ bridges, the Throgs Neck and the
Verra]ano, together Zith the neighborhood-destroying bridge approach
routes he Zanted; killed, over the efforts of Brooklyn Dodgers oZner
:alter   O'0alley,  plans for a City Sports Authority that might have kept the
Dodgers and Giants in NeZ York, and began happily to plan the housing
projects that he had Zanted on the sites of the 3olo Grounds and Ebbets
Field

all along; presided Zith a grim smile of triumph at ribbon cuttings marking
the opening of the +arlem River Drive and a do]en other public Zorks
projects and sat in his limousine laughing at protesters burning him in
eftigy. It Zas during these years, in fact, that there Zere named after him
tZo dams, tZo parkZays, tZo parks and a bridge. :hile   those tZo
"guttersnipes" had been trying to blacken his name, it had, instead, been
enshrined, forever, in concrete and steel and imperishable pieces of the
public domain. "You knoZ, once you get headlines, you get people coming
to you," Cook says. "But Zhen the paper itself begins to lose interest,
doesn't play these things, the Zell sort of dries up, you knoZ." It Zas drying
up noZ. There Zere feZer and feZer tips. And Gleason and Cook Zere
finding it harder and harder to check into Zhat tips there Zere. "The desk
Zas just tired and bored Zith it, and it Zasn't making a public impact. The
paper couldn't afford this investment in time indefinitely. Other things'd
come up that they'd Zant us on. They couldn't spare us for Title I any more.
By the time 1959 came around—the early Zinter of '59—Ze Zere pretty
much dead."

To understand Zhat Gleason and Cook did then, it is necessary to
understand Gleason and Cook.

Gleason Zas Front 3age. Big, braZny and boisterous, Zith a crooked Irish
grin and a nose that must have been broken at least once in his thirty-tZo
years, he looked the part—complete to the collar of his trench coat, Zhich
Zas invariably turned up. And he acted it. +ard-drinking, he talked loudly
in barrooms about the big stories he Zas Zorking on, the big men he Zas
going to unmask; the sacred profession of journalism Zas to him the
neZspaper game, and he played it Zith a sZagger. Cook could alZays tell
Zhen Gleason had dug up a good item. "+e'd be licking his chops. +e'd

1380
come in Zith a bounce and a grin and turn doZn the aisle and—'+ey, Ze
got a good one today!' "

But Gene Gleason Zas driven by more than an urge for self-dramati]ation.
Injustice, the little guy being trampled on by poZers too big for him to fight
—those Zere the stories that interested him. And in trying to pin them doZn
and get them into print, as felloZ :orld-Telegram  staffer John Ferris Zrote,
"nothing halts him. Time is of no consequence: he Zill Zork 24 hours
Zithout thought of rest. :eather  never daunts him: he has sloshed through
rain, craZled through snoZ, braved bitter cold and sZeated through
oppressive heat. +e is tough physically . . . and tough mentally." Covering a
revolt by Transit Authority motormen against poZerful TA union boss 0ike
4uill,  he sensed that the motormen's headquarters Zas being bugged and
Zarned them. FolloZing his advice, they found a hidden microphone from
Zhich a Zire led out the ZindoZ;  police summoned to the scene Zere
conspicuously uninterested in discovering Zhere the Zire led; Gleason
climbed out the ZindoZ into a free]ing,  Zindy Zinter  night to folloZ  it
over treacherous, ice-covered roofs himself. The ice forced him to give up
that night, but the ne[t day, Zhen no one e[pected him, he Zas back, found
policemen rolling up the Zire and uncovered the fact that the Transit

Authority had planted the bug Zith apparent police connivance. :rote
Ferris: "No one aZes him. The story comes first." And Zhen he couldn't get
that story, Zhen he had to Zatch injustice and do nothing about it, Gene
Gleason took it personally. :rote  0urray  .empton:  "+e  seemed to me out
of another time, and I must confess that Zith him I Zas never sorry that I
Zas so middle-aged. If I took things the Zay Gene Gleason did, I Zouldn't
sleep at night. +e is a big felloZ and a young one, but, Zhen I first met him,
the first thing I thought Zas here is a man Zho doesn't sleep at night."

Fred J. Cook kept his coat collars flat and his voice loZ. +e Zas not a
reporter but a reZriteman—the quintessential reZriteman, so accustomed to
seeing the Zorld through the earpiece of a telephone headset and notes
taken by other men that he felt no need to see it for himself; not once during
the more than three years during Zhich he Zas Zriting about
0anhattantoZn did  he get into a subZay and take the tZenty-minute ride
that Zould have enabled him to see 0anhattantoZn; he never once visited

1381
the site of that development. "I Zas tied to the desk all the time . . . one
story after another ... the grind in there Zas such that at the end of the day I
just Zanted to get out of there." But he had the gift of turning notes into
prose; during the fifteen years he had sat at a desk in the :orld-Telegram's
reZrite bank— in 1959 he Zas forty-eight—Fred Cook had earned a
reputation as a fast man Zith a good Zord. "Fred Cook Zas a master
Zriter," Joe .ahn  says. No reporter Zho saZ 0anhattantoZn described it
nearly as Zell as Cook did Zithout seeing it.

And you could be quiet and tied to a desk and still care. During the 1950's
feZ journalists—even the most liberal—critici]ed the FBI;  in a brilliant
article for The Nation, Cook critici]ed  the FBI. At the very height of the
storm of invective against Alger +iss, Cook Zrote a book defending Alger
+iss. And by 1959, Cook had gotten to care quite deeply about Title I.
Years later, questioned about his reasons for pursuing a story his editors
Zould have been happy to see him drop, Cook, speaking in a loZ, calm
voice, Zould tick off  reasons founded in intellect—that he felt he had failed
to make the public understand the importance of the issues involved, that
other neZspapers had failed in their responsibility by refusing to pick up
their stories, that "Ze Zere sure there Zas a bigger scandal there, and Ze
hated to see it die Zithout further effort being made on the thing." "You
mean there Zas no feeling of injustice involved on your part?" an
intervieZer Zould  ask. "Yeah," Cook said, his voice betraying surprise that
the other man should have not understood that. "I used to get these phone
calls. I remember there Zas this druggist ... +e had a little store in the
:ashington  Square area for tZenty-five years, and all they Zere offering
him Zas $750 for his fi[tures, and he had just paid $15,000 for them, and
Zhen he tried to get to see someone about them, they Zouldn't even listen to
him. . . . There Zere do]ens of calls like that. Do]ens. They Zere too small
fry for anyone to listen to them. I had this deep sense of injustice. I felt I
kneZ 0oses. The son of a bitch doesn't give a good goddamn about people,
and he never did. The poZer brokers only care about poZer and Zho the
hell

the little human beings are Zho get trampled in their game doesn't mean a
hoot in hell to them." The measure of Cook's caring Zas the stories he had
been Zriting. "The Telly had a real skeleton staff compared to the Times or

1382
the Trib" he Zould recall. "There Zere never enough guys on the reZrite
bank, and you Zere alZays Zriting too much every day anyZay. There Zere
alZays other stories to do—breaking stories. They never Zanted to give me
any time for these. So I had to just keep them going myself, as a side effort
so to speak."

Gleason and Cook possessed a full share of journalistic competitiveness.
They had Zon aZards for their stories, the "e[clusives" they had dug up or
Zritten themselves, and they Zanted more aZards—and therefore more
e[clusives. Their paper, hitting the neZsstands each afternoon Zithin
minutes of the 3ost and Journal-American, Zas part of a fierce three-Zay
competition. But noZ, frustrated, knoZing that, unless they did something
drastic, "Ze Zere dead" as far as further e[posures of Title I and Robert
0oses Zere concerned, Gleason and Cook decided that the only Zay to
keep it going Zas to share their hard-dug material—to give it to a
competitor.

The choice of Zhom to give it to Zas an obvious one. Only the 3ost Zould
give Gleason's information the play it deserved and invest the time and
energy necessary to dig out its oZn, and there Zas a 3ost reporter, thirty-
one-year-old :illiam   J. +addad, Zho had already proven, in sensational
e[poses of City Building Department malpractice, that he possessed all
Gleason's toughness and tenacity—in addition to the rare ability to discern
patterns in seemingly unrelated facts, to identify the locus, not just the
symptoms, of corruption.

Luckily, +addad and Gleason Zere already friends. Gleason gave him
information, and +addad Zas soon Zriting stories based on it. The 3osfs
stories had the effect on Gleason's city desk that he had knoZn it Zould; his
editors got interested in Title I again—even more so because Gleason Zas
able to provide them Zith neZ leads, given him by +addad. For +addad
quickly arrived at the same reali]ation as Cook and Gleason. ":e found out
very early that it had to be a joint effort," he says. "It Zould never go — it
Zould rise and die in one paper—unless another paper picked it up. Then
the TV Zould pick it  up and then the political authorities Zould start to
react—that Zas the carbohydrate that made it Zork." Soon, like tZo
flamenco dancers spurring each other to Zilder and Zilder efforts, +addad

1383
and Gleason Zere both helping and striving to outdo each other, their stories
picking up and taking off from each other's and hitting harder and harder.
As the tempo accelerated, moreover, the tipsters joined in again, a Zhole
chorus of disgruntled bureaucrats Zho reali]ed that this time there Zas a
real chance that someone Zould print their information.

:ith   its tZo  competitors playing a scandal in banner headlines day after
day, the third afternoon daily couldn't ignore it even if its top e[ecutives
Zould have liked to: soon the Journal-American Zas printing Title I stories.
Then, tentatively at first, then more and more boldly, readers Zere given a
chance to read about Title I in the morning as Zell: the Trib Zas in.

But the pooling continued. In fact, there soon sprang up a circle at

Zhose heart Zere +addad and Gleason but Zhich included also :oody
.lein  of  the Telly, the Journal-American's 0arty Steadman, 3eter Braestrup
of the +erald Tribune —and a reporter from the underground, thirty-one-
year-old 0ary  3erot Nichols; born a 3hiladelphia 0ain Line  :asp,  she had
moved to the East Village, begun crusading against 0oses' proposed road
through :ashington  Square 3ark, and had seen at a glance truths about
0oses' Zhole method of operation that no one, seemingly, had understood
before; her only journalistic connection Zas The Village Voice, but her
observations in it Zere in many Zays the most penetrating printed up to that
time. These reporters Zould meet almost daily Zith +ortense Gabel, the one
city official  Zilling  to openly help them. There Zas no one "important" at
that table. ":e  Zere chipmunks," +ortense Gabel Zould recall. "[0oses]
Zouldn't even knoZ Zho Ze  Zere. There Zas no one important even in
journalism." But they met daily, an underground movement, to force the
city's journalistic establishment to do Zhat they Zanted.

In any assessment of their motivations, their age is important. Everyone in
the circle Zas in his late tZenties or early thirties. Recalling those days,
years later, +addad Zould say Zith a rueful smile: "Our motives? It Zas us
against the Zorld, us against them—the city, corruption, unmovable forces.
:e   Zere young enough to breathe that kind of air then." 0oreover, these
young idealists hadn't even been born Zhen Robert 0oses had been on the
front pages battling the robber barons to open Long Island to the masses.
They had been only infants Zhen Jones Beach Zas dedicated. In 1934,

1384
Zhen Robert 0oses had revitali]ed NeZ York  City's park system, to the
city's cheers, Gleason had been only seven years old, +addad si[. The
Robert 0oses they kneZ Zas not the Robert 0oses of the beautiful parks
and the beautiful parkZays—the parkZays that Zere going to solve traffic
problems. The Robert 0oses they kneZ Zas the Robert 0oses of the
Tavern-on-the-Green and 0anhattantoZn and those damned e[pressZays
he insisted on building even though everybody kneZ the city should be
building subZays instead, and for Zhich he evicted thousands of helpless
families; their impression of him Zas of an arrogant, dictatorial old man
Zho, if not corrupt himself, had certainly managed to surround himself Zith
a lot of corrupt people; like the NeZmans, they Zere too young to have seen
him as great; they saZ him only as crotchety, old—and Zrong; their
perception of the Coordinator Zas unclouded by the preconceptions that
had clouded reporters' eyes in the TZenties and Thirties, that he Zas the
selfless, incorruptible, apolitical public servant sans peur et sans reproche.
They saZ him as he Zas.

The members of this journalistic cabal Zere also too young to be afraid.
Those rare reporters of the Thirties and Forties Zho might have
contemplated investigating the 0oses empire had been very conscious of
Zhat had happened to reporters Zho had tried it before. But it had been a
long time noZ since Robert 0oses had broken a reporter, so long that
+addad and Gleason didn't even knoZ that he ever had. +addad, the
spiritual heir of 0ilton   Racusin, a +erald Tribune reporter Zho a decade
earlier had investigated the 0oses empire and Zritten a series on it but had
seen the series killed (and had been forced to personally apologi]e to 0oses
to boot), had never

even heard Racusin's name, much less the story of hoZ his career had been
Zrecked.

If the age e[planation Zas simple, the psychological Zas not. The motives
that inspired these young reporters to take on "the most poZerful SOB" in
the city Zere as mi[ed as are the motives of all investigative reporters. One
cannot talk to some of them for long Zithout knoZing that competitiveness
Zas a spur, and in varying degrees there Zas present also at that table the
desire for personal self-glorification, as Zell as the simple desire to drag

1385
doZn someone bigger than they. But, Zith most of them at least, so Zas a
spur of a purer metal. "Can't somebody do something about the son of a
bitch?" Gleason had shouted to Cook in frustration one day, and behind that
shout Zas the outrage, the "sense of injustice," that had built up in him and
in his partner over Zhat 0oses and the city's other poZer brokers Zere
doing to "the little human beings . . . Zho get trampled in their game." "To
me," .ahn  says, "he Zas the personification of a certain arrogance against
the average man. I don't think he ever cared about hoZ many hearts he had
to break to Get Things Done. And so I felt he had to be stopped. And there
Zasn't anyone else to stop him but us." If most young men of intelligence
and drive are ambitious, not all of them put that intelligence and drive at the
service of justice as had a Gene Gleason or a Bill +addad. And they kept
chipping aZay at the image of Robert 0oses. After thirty years of building
up that image, the press had begun chopping it doZn.

It Zas triumph as usual for 0oses as 1959 opened. +aving celebrated his
seventieth birthday on a Christmas vacation in Barbados, he Zas greeted
upon his return after NeZ Year's by reporters trooping into his office to
commemorate the occasion Zith intervieZs and stories reporting, as stories
had reported on his si[tieth birthday and his si[ty-fifth, that time had left no
visible mark upon the man Zho the Long Island 3ress reiterated in 48-point
Bodoni Zas still "3ublic  Friend No. 1"—and by neZs that the success of the
largest bond issue in history had been assured by a syndicate of the biggest
investment bankers on :all Street and that the three-quarters of a billion
dollars that Zould bring his Niagara dream to fruition Zas therefore in
hand. The submission of his reappointment as State 3oZer Authority
chairman touched off anger in the State Senate Chamber. "+e has held
every public official Zho  has ever disagreed Zith him up to ridicule and
scorn," one senator said. "I don't call that greatness, but a desire to do aZay
Zith the democratic processes." Another said he had "never encountered an
arrogance that could even approach that of the man Ze are asked to
approve." But the lopsidedness of the margin by Zhich the nomination Zas
approved after such denunciation—50 to 6, Zith several of the senators Zho
had joined in the denunciation casting their votes for confirmation—Zas
proof that his poZer in Albany Zas as great as ever. And Zhen, shortly after
his return, he announced a series of huge neZ Title I projects, the

1386
announcements Zere greeted by the press Zith customary uncritical
acclaim. All Zas as it had alZays been.

But by the beginning of February, +addad Zas poking holes in those
announcements ("Only tZenty families out of 1,420 noZ living on the site
of the Title I Gramercy 3ark slum clearance project Zill be able to afford
the rents for the neZ housing units") and by the middle of February, +addad
had one of his oZn to make.

It had a hard-hitting lead ("Sidney J. 8ngar is a man of position and
property. . . . +is property, a 3ost investigation revealed today, includes
some of the city's Zorst slums") and a hard-hitting headline (the slum
properties of an anti-slum leader) and plenty of facts to back them up.
8ngar, 0oses' choice for sponsor of the Riverside-Amsterdam urban
reneZal project, had indignantly and volubly denied the tip +addad had
gotten that he Zas a slumlord. "As a native NeZ Yorker Zhose entire life
has been devoted to the Zelfare of the people of the city, assuming
leadership in philanthropic, religious and communal activities, I have for
many years been fighting the real battle for improvement of housing," said
his press release. +e had threatened to sue for "several million dollars" if
the 3ost said different; if +addad didn't believe him, he said, the reporter
could just go and look at his buildings. But +addad had done Zhat 8ngar
had evidently not e[pected him to do: he Zent and looked.

The quotes from 8ngar's tenants ("0y son Stephen—he's si[—is in the
hospital. A rat bit him betZeen the eyes. I tried to fi[ the rat holes here, but
the rats cut right through. I complained but no one did anything to fi[
them." "I have no Zater, hot or cold ... the bathroom ceiling is falling doZn
. . . rats all over the building . . . seZers backing up . . . dumbZaiter packed
Zith garbage . . . cellar flooded") made great copy, and the pictures that
confirmed the quotes made great pictures, and the fact that Robert 0oses
Zas giving a lucrative slum clearance project to a slumlord, and a politically
Zell-connected slumlord at that (+addad discovered, and printed, 8ngar's
financial backing of campaigns of both :agner and +ulan Jack), made a
great story, and the 3ost not only played it to the hilt but emphasi]ed that it
Zas a 3ost e[clusive. And after that story had appeared, the :orld-
Telegram's editors, afraid of falling behind in a story that had once been

1387
(e[clusively)  theirs, hastily reassigned Gleason to Title I, and he began
coming up Zith revelations of his oZn. And soon the 3ost Zas picking up
the Telly's stories and the Telly the 3ost's —and the editors of each paper,
afraid that Zhen the rival paper hit the stand that afternoon they Zould find
themselves outplayed, Zere playing these revelations as editors had so
seldom played revelations about Robert 0oses' mistakes: big. And just in
case their interest might slacken, +addad and Gleason, Zhile ostensibly—
for the benefit of their bosses—fiercely competing for neZ e[clusives, Zere
actually dividing them up, one and one. And by 0arch, Joe .ahn Zas on
the story, too, and .ahn Zas Zriting it  as it should be Zritten: in his leads,
for the first time consistently in any paper, it Zas no longer "The 0ayor's
Slum Clearance Committee" but "Robert 0oses' Slum Clearance
Committee." An[iously  leafing through the paper every day to see Zhere
his latest story had been played, +addad no longer had to leaf far; it Zas a
rare day on Zhich the latest Title I e[pose Zas not the lead on page seven or
five or

three. Day by day, the reporter Zatched Title I march off the inside pages of
the Telly and the Journal and the Trib and onto the split pages and then onto
page one. For generations, people throZn out of their homes by Robert
0oses had been complaining about his ruthlessness. NoZ, at last, their
complaints Zere in headlines: noZhere to go and 30 days to get there; "to
get us out, they move very quickly." In 1953 the :omen's City Club had
issued reports disclosing that 0oses had been shifting tenants in "slum
clearance" sites to other buildings on the site like gypsies. The reports had
been ignored. In 1954, a minority report of the City 3lanning Commission
had made similar revelations. That report had been ignored. But noZ, in
1959, Zhen J. Clarence Davies, Jr., neZ, independent head of the city's Real
Estate Bureau, made the same report, it Zas city admits shifts from slums to
slums. "The press of the city, aZake at last!" Fred Cook e[ulted, and he Zas
right. The press had not been aZakened by its oZners (Zith the e[ception of
0rs.  Schiff, of course) or by its top editors (Zith the e[ception of the 3ost's
James :echsler, of course). It had been aZakened by its reporters, not by
its famous reporters but by young unknoZn staff Zriters scheming together
to force publishers and editors to do Zhat the young men felt Zas their duty.
But it Zas aZake.

1388
And then came an issue that required no reportorial scheming to become a
big story, for it Zas too much of a natural—as much a natural as the Tavern-
on-the-Green fight that had begun the deflation of the 0oses image. This
story had the same key setting as that fight (its locale Zas, in fact, just a
short stroll aZay)—the sacred turf of Central 3ark; some headline Zriters
Zere, in fact, to dub it "the Second Battle of Central 3ark." It had issues as
simple and clear-cut, black and Zhite, starkly dramatic. And if it did not
have mothers and baby carriages, it had something almost as good. :.
Shakespeare.

1389
:illiamsburg   "surrounded by terror . . . I got beat up regularly . . ." and by
poverty. To help his trunkmaker father pay the rent, he hauled garbage,
haZked neZspapers, sold pret]els, plucked chicken feathers and shined
shoes ("I never thought I'd get the black out of my fingers"); his mother
stuffed cardboard in the holes in his oZn. Then, at the age of tZelve, he
discovered the public library and Shakespeare, memori]ing "vast tracts" of
the plays. In the Navy during the Zar, he produced shoZs on the decks of
aircraft carriers. 0ustered out, he used the GI Bill to attend not college but
the Actors Laboratory. :hile   Zorking in  1953 as a television stage manager
(CBS-TV changed his name because 3apirofsky Zas inconveniently long
for the credits), he finally implemented an idea he had cherished for years:
his life had been changed by books—free books, the only kind he could
afford; poor people Zere as entitled to free theater as free books. Begging
pittances from foundations to rent the basement of a church on the LoZer
East Side and pay the salaries of promising young actors, he began to put on
Shakespearean plays, productions that, critics began to notice, Zere not
only free but good. 0oses had been suspicious that 3app might be trying to
use the amphitheater as a money-making device, but from all reports 3app
Zas genuine; Zhen theater critic :alter  .err   advised him to charge
admission because people appreciate more Zhat they pay for, he had replied
that "if I had had to pay ... it is doubtful that I Zould have read the plays of
Shakespeare," adding that it Zas because people had to pay for theater
tickets that most NeZ Yorkers had never seen a live professional
production. "I believe," he said, "that it is of the utmost importance to have
a public theater—a theater for everybody —yes, everybody; for those Zho
can afford it and those Zho cannot." 0oses Zould ordinarily have agreed
Zith .err,   but he had built the amphitheater because Al Smith had told him
that, as a youth on the LoZer East Side an[ious to become an actor, he
could never afford a theater ticket, and in the intervening tZenty years no
one had ever evinced the slightest interest in producing plays in it. No one,
in fact, had ever evinced much interest in producing anything in it; the
amphitheater generally stood empty and unused. 3app's proposal Zould put
the structure at last to use—the use for Zhich 0oses had intended it. :hen
3ark Department e[ecutive officer Stuart Constable argued that poor people
Zouldn't appreciate Shakespeare and that the tough kids in the
neighborhood Zould break up the shoZ, 0oses told 0ustache: "Oh, let him

1390
have it." It Zas in fact 0oses Zho  gave 3app his first big boost; the big
foundations Zould not consider even modest grants Zithout an "e[pression
of interest" from the 3ark Commissioner; 3app Zrote the Commissioner
asking for one and got it.

During that first season in that little amphitheater on the East River, tZo
things had become apparent—one, the moment the lights Zent up and the
spectators saZ the facades of an Italian Renaissance toZn and, through an
ingenious series of arches and doorZays, an entire cast made an entrance in
full regalia, and from the audience came a single, thrilled, breathless
"Ahhh!";  the other Zhen the revieZs came in—one, 3app Zas right, the
city's poor Zould appreciate Shakespeare; tZo, 3app's productions Zere
good, considering the youth of his actors and the paucity of his budget,

ama]ingly good. 0oses liked audacity—and, as the more perceptive of his
aides had previously noticed, this man Zho had never had the son he so
badly Zanted often revealed a certain tenderness toZard audacious young
men. :hen,  the folloZing  year, 3app had shoZn up at the Arsenal Zith a
plan to bring the Bard to the Zhole city, via a mobile stage that Zould be
transported from park to park on a truck scrounged from a boyhood chum,
0oses' reaction to Constable's doubts had been a gruff: "Oh, let him do it."
+e had placed at 3app's disposal 3ark Department equipment and
employees, a car and chauffeur. And Zhen, in 1957, 3app had asked to
present plays in Central 3ark, 0oses had said okay, as long as he didn't
charge admission and try to make money out of his shoZs.

If the Commissioner had doubts as to the Zisdom of his decision, the
revieZs for the first Central 3ark season must have come doZn heavily on
3app's side. :hile  holding doZn  a full-time job as CBS stage manager, he
had managed to produce, on a shoestring so frayed that he Zas sometimes
opening productions Zithout money on hand to pay for more than tZo
performances (a gamble that alZays seemed to pay off in sufficient
contributions for a full run), productions that Zere nailed as not just good
but great; 3app's Central 3ark Romeo and Juliet, .err said, Zas "in many
respects the best Romeo and Juliet I have ever seen." 3app Zas continually
asking 0oses to alloZ him to solicit  voluntary contributions from the stage.
0oses, through Constable, Zas continually refusing; 3app Zas continually

1391
making the solicitation anyZay. Before one performance, a police sergeant
told 3app, in a friendly Zay, "If  you go on tonight, I'll have to pull you in."
":ell,   then, Ze'll  go out on the street [Central 3ark :est],"  3app said.
"That's 3ark Department property, too," the sergeant said. "Across the
street?" 3app asked. "And," the producer recalls, "he said that Zas all 3ark
Department property, too, e[cept the northZest corner." So 3app stationed
men on that corner Zith big baskets. :atching 0oses  carefully to gauge the
depth of his outrage at this defiance, Sid Shapiro Zas astonished to see a
grin of delight sneak across R0's face. The 3ark Commissioner alZays
politely refused 3app's invitations to attend—Zhat Zas he supposed to do?
Sit on a blanket?!?—but he had had himself driven past the scene and had
been pleased Zith the spectators' orderliness. +e had been very pleased Zith
published reaction to the plays. After tZo years, NeZ York Zas having a
love affair Zith  its Shakespeare Festival. A queue began to form three hours
before the distribution of tickets began at 6:15 each evening; for every
performance, it seemed, the laZn Zas filled, hundreds of standees croZded
up to the fences in the back, and hundreds of other persons had to be turned
aZay from Zhat +ori]on   maga]ine called "This Blessed 3lot, This
Shakespeare in the 3ark." Observers noted that, as +ori]on put it, "draZn
from all classes and income groups, the Central 3ark spectators have an
almost Eli]abethan buoyancy and verve Zhich are a startling contrast to the
spiritual vacuity of BroadZay's mink matrons and e[pense account
aristocrats. . . . [They] come not out of duty but out of desire." And the
spectators included people Zhose opinions 0oses listened to; theatrical
people like his neighbor Cornelia Otis Skinner and 3ort Authority chairman
+oZard S. Cullman Zere

telling him e[citedly  about the brilliance of the productions and of the
unknoZn young actors and actresses Zhom 3app Zas discovering and
persuading to Zork for forty dollars a Zeek; Cullman Zas particularly
impressed by a young felloZ Zho had gotten his first big role in 3app's
production of The 0erchant of Venice, George C. Scott. 0oses' favorite
maga]ine, Saturday RevieZ, pointed out that "because the . . . Festival
performance dreZ 2,100 persons into the park each evening, a Zhole
section of Central 3ark Zas transformed from a threatening jungle into a
tranquil gathering place for healthy entertainment." At a party throZn for
3app and his cast by the Tavern-on-the-Green ("Schleiffer had gotten quite

1392
a business out of it," 3app notes), "Constable came over to me and said,
'Don't Zorry about ne[t season. I talked to 0r. 0oses  about it and he's
going to raise the money himself.' " And 0oses fully intended to do so;
shortly thereafter, 3app received a letter from the Commissioner Zhom he
had never met saying that he had already contacted Cullman about forming
a committee to raise the $50,000 needed for another season, and that 3app
could stop Zorrying. In 0arch  1959, Zhen 0oses left  for a three-Zeek
Barbados vacation, the producer believed that everything Zas set.

3app and Constable had never gotten along Zell, hoZever. TZo men could
hardly have been more dissimilar than the intense, idealistic, informal
young producer and the paunchy, mustache-tugging e[ecutive so pompous
that even mild Bob :agner  cursed Zhen he mentioned his name. "Look at
that title," 3app says. "E[ecutive Officer. The Zhole thing Zas a military
operation." Constable, for his part, had found 3app suspiciously liberal; he
Zas unable to rid himself of the sneaking suspicion, based largely on the
fact that 3app Zas JeZish, that the young producer Zas making money out
of the Festival somehoZ. During 0oses' vacation, the friction betZeen their
personalities produced sparks, and someone finally brought to Constable's
attention a fact of Zhich the 0oses organi]ation had not previously been
aZare: that the year before, testifying before the +ouse Committee on 8n-
American Activities, 3app, Zhile denying that he Zas presently a
Communist, had refused to say Zhether he had ever been one, and had
refused to identify friends Zho had. (+e had been fired by CBS-TV for this
stand, Zinning reinstatement only after a fight by the Radio and Television
Directors Guild.)

To as passionate a Red hater as Stuart Constable, this revelation Zas enough
to confirm all his suspicions—and he Zas sure it Zould have the same
effect on R0. So sure Zas he, in fact, that, Zithout checking Zith his absent
boss, he took a step designed to drive 3app out of the park: in 0arch —just
three months before the Festival Zas to begin—he informed the producer
that the 3ark Department could not afford the e[tra maintenance e[pense
caused by the Shakespeare Festival, that the Festival Zould have to
reimburse the Department for that e[pense and that, since the Festival had
no funds Zith Zhich it  could guarantee reimbursement, it Zould be alloZed

1393
to put on plays only if it charged admission. There Zould, 0ustache said,
be no more free Shakespeare in any city park.

None of the political commandments ingrained in Robert 0oses by his
Gamaliel had been ingrained more deeply than the rule stating that an

e[ecutive gives subordinates absolute loyalty and support, and 0oses'
belief in this particular commandment Zas reinforced by the iron bands of
his personality. +e had, to a remarkable degree, consciously made his
"mucha-chos" e[tensions of himself: admitting to outsiders that one of them
Zas Zrong Zould be almost like admitting that he himself Zas Zrong.
0oreover, 0oses'  loyalty to the 0oses 0en—his  refusal, no matter hoZ
harshly he might abuse them in private or in front of other members of his
clique, to let anyone else critici]e them at all—had become Zithin the
circles in Zhich he moved an integral part of the 0oses legend. :agner
aide :arren  0oscoZ  Zas to verbali]e  Zhat everyone in city and state
government believed: "Every [0oses] deputy could count on the absolute
support of his boss, if his position Zas ever challenged by any outsider."
That legend Zas terribly important to 0oses. +e could not bear to have it
defaced. +e Zas its prisoner. Just three months earlier, in the seventieth-
birthday intervieZs of Zhich  he had taken advantage to refurbish it, he had
made a point of saying that his men "knoZ I'll alZays stand up and take the
public beating for them." +e could not noZ publicly  overrule one of them.

On 0oses' return from Barbados, 3app attempted to contact him to
persuade him to overrule Constable. +e Zould not come to the phone. Then
3app Zrote him, asking about the $50,000 he had promised to raise, money
Zhich Zould,  3app believed, enable him to reimburse the 3ark Department
and make the season possible even under Constable's conditions. "I didn't
hear from him and I didn't knoZ about the money, and I began pressing,"
3app recalls. "And finally I got a letter from him. Very terse. Very cavalier.
No money. And Ze Zere planning a Zhole damn season on his Zord." A
3app letter pleading for a personal intervieZ dreZ only a reply setting out
for the record the "reasons" for the 3ark Department ruling: that fencing
Zas necessary "for control" of croZds, that "adequate sanitary and dressing
facilities" for the actors Zere needed and, most important, that the laZn on
Zhich the audience had sat must be paved over and seats provided because

1394
"Ze can't maintain grass, and serious erosion problems Zould soon face us
unless the area is paved." Fifty thousand dollars Zouldn't begin to meet the
cost, 0oses Zrote; $100,000 to $150,000 Zould be needed. Certain that he
could reason Zith 0oses if he could only talk to him, 3app Zrote again
pleading for a face-to-face meeting. +e had just read a 0oses article on
Irish playZright  Sean O'Casey, 3app said, and "I feel certain that a genuine
rapport can be established because I knoZ that a man Zho can Zrite Zith
such depth of feeling about O'Casey Zill certainly understand the dilemma
of our organi]ation. I appeal to you to make it possible for this meeting to
materiali]e." 0oses  replied that "this matter is entirely in the hands of
Stuart Constable. . . ." Constable had mentioned an admission charge of a
dollar; 3app said he Zould consider that price scale;* Constable
immediately replied that he had changed his mind: tZo dollars Zould be
necessary. Only

* :hether   3app Zould actually have charged admission Zill never be
knoZn; he and his board of directors Zere themselves reconsidering, and,
during the period in Zhich his letters and Constable's Zere crossing, the
board Zent on record against any admission at all.

then did 3app grasp the fact that the real issue Zas not price but political
philosophy—Constable Zas determined that no plays produced by a Red
like Joe 3app Zould be alloZed in the parks—and that there Zas no hope of
intervention from Constable's boss.

If Constable's bloodhounds had been thorough, they Zould have told him
that he Zas dealing Zith a fighter, one not ashamed of his past and not
afraid to go to the public Zith a cause. :inning  reinstatement at CBS hadn't
been easy, after all; 3app had in fact been the first television figure fired as
a result of the 8n-American Activities Committee hearings ever to do so.
0ustache Zas, moreover, dealing—as Zould become apparent in later years
—Zith  an opponent Zho kneZ e[actly hoZ to go to the public, Zith  a
public relations genius of the first magnitude, of 0oses magnitude, in fact.
Closing doZn his Shakespeare Festival for a full year Zould mean that the
foundations Zhich had been supporting it Zould lose the habit, and that the
company of actors and production personnel he had so painfully brought
and held together Zould fall apart. Even the meager momentum so

1395
tortuously built up in four years of effort Zould be lost; the NeZ York
Shakespeare Festival that Zas his dream might have to close forever. :ith
his back against the Zall, the young producer did Zhat a young state park
official Zith  his dream menaced and his back against the Zall had done
thirty-five years before: he Zent to the press. And Joseph 3app Zent as
Robert 0oses had gone —not Zith a defense but Zith an attack.

"Erosion?" he told reporters. "Do people sitting and Zatching a play create
more of an erosion problem than football, softball, soccer and similar sports
encouraged in the parks at no cost to the players?" 3erhaps, he said, "the
park situation Zould be improved by more 'soil erosion' caused by the
gathering of 2,000 people each night in an area Zhere three years ago only
squirrels dared to congregate." 3app spiced his attack—and emphasi]ed
Zhat it Zas that 0oses Zas depriving the city of—Zith   a device that
couldn't miss: quotes from the Bard. +e Zon the heart of one reporter Zho
asked Zhy he had decided to fight 0oses' ban instead of giving in, by
asking her in return ":hether  'tis nobler in the mind to suffer the slings and
arroZs of outrageous fortune, or to take arms against a sea of troubles, and
by opposing end them." 0oses himself smiled Zhen he read that—"+e had
never met him, but you could tell he Zas getting to like the guy," Shapiro
says— but he stood up for Constable, although there Zas a decidedly
unZonted gentleness in the press release in Zhich he replied:

I have considerable respect for 0r. 3app's singleness of purpose, but can't
adopt it as a principle and shall certainly not direct 0r. Constable to do so.

:hile   the present park administration is in charge, 0r. 3app Zill have to
put his enterprise on a Zorkable basis or go elseZhere. I believe I have the
0ayor's confidence. 0r.  Constable has mine.

And Zhen the young producer replied to this by attacking again—"To
abandon our policy of free admissions Zould result in disenfranchising the
very people Ze are an[ious to serve"—he obtained the results the young
0oses had once obtained: unanimously favorable revieZs, the +erald

Tribune calling 0oses "short-sighted," the :orld-Telegram  saying he Zas
being "not merely inconsistent but capriciously unreasonable."

1396
That did it. 0oses may have been pulled into the fight reluctantly, but he
kneZ he Zas in one noZ. And he fought Zith his customary enthusiasm—
and methods. There Zas behind-the-scenes pressure put on officials Zhose
support 0oses needed by the men Zho he kneZ could put it on best (former
3olice Commissioner George V. 0cLaughlin Zas in a position to put it on
3olice Commissioner Stephen 3. .ennedy; 0cLaughlin  to .ennedy:  "I am .
. . taking the liberty of suggesting that you cooperate . . ."). There Zas the
behind-the-scenes innuendo of the type that Jack 0adigan believed had
Zorked so Zell Zith  0rs.  Sul]berger in the matter of InZood +ill   3ark
(0oses to Corporation Counsel Charles Tenney: "The place is dark and
impossible to police adequately. +oZ many couples on the grass came for
Shakespeare and hoZ many for other purposes I don't knoZ"). And there
Zas behind-the-scenes innuendo of the type that had Zorked so Zell on
opponents during the i94o's.

Constable had never revealed the real reason for his hostility toZard 3app,
but 0oses did. On April  23, 1959, a personal message from the 3ark
Commissioner Zas delivered to :agner and other key city officials by a
Triborough messenger Zho had been instructed to place it in no one's hands
but theirs: "As a result of recent e[periences Ze have looked him up more
carefully. +e turns out to be a typical of the breed. +e took the Fifth
Amendment tZelve times in June, 1958, before the +ouse 8n-American
Activities Committee." And Zhen behind-the-scenes innuendo did not
achieve the desired result—several borough presidents Zere hinting at
support for 3app—0oses moved it onto center stage.

It Zasn't really erosion he Zas concerned about, he told reporters; it Zas
"muggers, degenerates and pickpockets" preying on the audience. "This Zas
a disorderly type of performance," impossible to police properly, he said. In
his mail one morning he had found a three-page letter attacking 3app's
"Communist" background and questioning his "probity" in accounting for
the donations he collected. The letter contained no proof of these charges,
and after 0oses Zas through Zith it, it contained no signature either. +e cut
the signature off, turning it into an anonymous communication. Then he had
copies made and mailed them to anyone—editors, officials, politicians—he
thought might be interested, along Zith either a covering note stating
ominously: ":hat   he [the anonymous Zriter] says is true and there is a lot

1397
more to it," or a longer letter, such as another one to Corporation Counsel
Tenney, stating: "3app . . . adopts the old left Zing technique of the agitator
among artistic and so-called liberal groups, the big lie, etc. +e Zas a
communist of long-standing, affiliated Zith all the radicals, took the Fifth
Amendment again and again, etc."

But it Zasn't the 1940's any more. It Zas not even the early 1950's; the
Senate hearings that had put an end to the 0cCarthy era had occurred in
1954. The tactics that had driven Stanley Isaacs out of his borough
presidency and Re[ TugZell out of NeZ York City  backfired Zhen the
press learned about them noZ, especially after Constable, asked by Bill

+addad if the letter did not smack of 0cCarthyism, replied: ":hat's   Zrong
Zith 0cCarthy?"  The letter produced the desired effect in the Daily 0irror
and Daily NeZs ("Back Big Bob, 0r.  0ayor.  3app . . . has used the smear
tactics you'd e[pect from one Zho took the Fifth Amendment") but
noZhere else; the 3ost's anger ("The letter . . . Zas the kind of reckless
assault no man Zith any claim to decency Zould utili]e") Zas echoed even
by NeZsday ("3erhaps . . . Jove has nodded").* And 3app kept attacking—
eloquently.

Dear Commissioner 0oses:

. . . 3erhaps in politics you have learned that by standing the truth on its
head you can get enough people to believe a lie. . . . You Zere responsible
for circulating a letter questioning . . . my political background, and my
probity in handling festival funds. . . .

The letter represented your second position for denying the Festival the use
of Central 3ark. Your first Zas soil erosion. ... In position number three, you
called the operation a disorderly type of performance.

0ay  I bring to your attention the remarks of a prominent critic Zho
described the Central 3ark audiences this Zay, "the long patient line of
people hoping to get into an amphitheatre that seats 2,300 is a humbling
sight for anyone Zho believes in the theater. The alert attention of the
people Zho do succeed in getting in chastens anyone familiar Zith
sophisticated audiences." . . .

1398
Every civic minded organi]ation has . . . e[pressed the opinion that
Shakespeare in the 3arks has had a civili]ing effect rather than a disorderly
one. One letter Zriter said "Thank you for making the park safe again." To
keep Shakespeare out of the park because certain elements "might prey on
the audience" is to say that Ze discontinue all gatherings of people in the
park and leave it as a haven for crime. It is my conviction that the more
activity in the parks, the less laZlessness.

I think everyone is groZing tired of the distortions, outright fabrications and
anonymous allegations put out by your office. No neZ e[cuse you can
conjure up Zill stop us from pressing for the right to continue the free
presentation of Shakespeare in Central 3ark.

In the court that mattered most to 0oses—the court of public opinion —the
Second Battle of Central 3ark, like the first, Zas a battle he couldn't Zin.
Like the first battle, the second leapt onto the front pages Zith the initial
e[change of salvos, and stayed there, getting the full NeZ York media
spotlight, for Zeeks. And in that spotlight 0oses Zas again portrayed as
villain. 0edia  oversimplification  had made that first fight "0oses Against
0others."  It made this fight "0oses Against Shakespeare"— ]ree
Shakespeare at that. FREE FESTIVAL DIES 0OSES C+ASES
S+A.ES3EARE   OFF 3AR.

grass; the bard vs. the commissioner —those Zere the headlines. 3app

* A 3ost editorial Zriter  also contributed the folloZing ditty,  Zhich ran as
an editorial: 0y  name is Robert 0oses, I'm Commissioner of 3arks;/On the
subject of free Shakespeare I have a feZ remarks:/If the people of this city
Zant this theater on my grass,/They'll have to pay tZo bucks a head to get a
0oses pass./NoZ it is clearly logical that those Zho disagree /Are probably
subversive, or at least a threat to me./ That's Zhy I took it on myself to
0cCarthyi]e  Joe 3app;/ :ho   questions my sagacity gets purged right off
the map.

even borroZed a pose from Arnold NeZman: during the Tavern-on-the-
Green fight, the photographer had posed his son leaning sadly against a
symbolic Central 3ark snoZ fence; 3app posed leaning sadly against one,
too.

1399
The press Zas questioning 0oses' statements noZ—and 0oses could not
endure questioning. :hen he said the Festival had harbored crime,
reporters checked, and Zrote stones like the one that said, "You can't prove
it by the police records," Zhich shoZed that there had, during tZo summer-
long Festival seasons, been only tZo crimes on or near its site. Not only
editorial Zriters but theater critics attacked him, as did columnists from
+edda +opper and Leonard Lyons to Eleanor Roosevelt, his ancient and
bitter enemy Zriting, "I  cannot help Zishing that his decision might be
changed." The erosion really involved in the fight noZ Zas the erosion of
0oses' most priceless property, his name—the continuation and
acceleration of the decay that the Tavern-on-the-Green fight had begun
three years before; neZspapers Zere filled Zith letters like the one that said:
"As a child I could visuali]e  poor 0r.  0oses Zorking  valiantly Zith  pick
and shovel, long after everyone else had gone home to bed, just so that I
could have a place to play. Today Ze have to be practical and make it pay."
During the 1930's and 1940's, schoolchildren had attached thousands of
signatures to memorials praising 0oses; noZ a delegation from Lafayette
+igh School, unable to get in to see :agner, handed :arren  0oscoZ  a
petition Zith 1,500 signatures asking the 0ayor to overrule the 3ark
Commissioner. During the 1930's and 1940's, high schools had voted 0oses
"the most admired NeZ Yorker"; noZ, Zhen +elen +ayes, appearing at a
high school as a member of a panel on "Commissioner 0oses' move to
abolish free Shakespeare," said, "Abolish 0r. 0oses!" the students cheered.
There Zas a telling indication of hoZ much he feared Zhat Zas happening.
During the most severe crises of Robert 0oses' career—the period in the
Order Number 129 fight Zhen it seemed likely that he Zould lose, for
e[ample —his iron constitution had suddenly betrayed him; each time he
had been hospitali]ed during his adult life, it had been during such a crisis.
NoZ he Zas hospitali]ed again, for eleven days, Zith an illness Zhose
precise nature Zas carefully concealed, but Zhich Zas variously described
as "a bad cold," "a respiratory infection," "viral pneumonia," "pleurisy" and
"nervous e[haustion." 3ictures of him leaving the hospital for further rest in
Babylon shoZ a man gaunt, holloZ-cheeked, Zith sunken eyes and, under
them, circles so dark they seemed almost bruises—a man Zho suddenly
looked, for the first time, old.

1400
Although it Zould  still not reveal completely the true nature of the relative
poZer positions of Robert 0oses and Robert :agner, the spotlight focused
on the Second Battle of Central 3ark by the massed NeZ York media Zould
make that relationship clearer than it had ever been before, for the press,
able at last to look critically at Robert 0oses, noZ Zanted his decision

reversed, and looked to the 0ayor to do so—as Zas only natural, since it
still conceived of 0oses as the 0ayor's subordinate.

Aiding in this development Zas a strategic decision of 3app's. "I made the
0ayor  responsible, really," the producer Zould recall, partly because "I
think he Zould have liked to help us, he had been helpful to us before,"
primarily because "I felt that if only I could push the confrontation
[betZeen the 0ayor and 0oses], make the 0ayor  take responsibility," he
Zould, because of the public opinion on the issue, have no choice but to
overrule 0oses. "0oses has had his say," he declared publicly. "The public
has had theirs. It's noZ up to you, 0r. 0ayor, to . . . insist that the Festival
be permitted to operate free in Central 3ark . . ." 3app's plea Zas picked up
by the press. "Is Bob :agner or Bob 0oses  the 0ayor of  NeZ York?" the
3ost demanded.

Luckily for  :agner,  city  hospital Zorkers Zere on strike, and he Zas able to
keep very busy trying to arrange a settlement. "+e Zould rather be in the
hospital strike tZenty-four hours a day than this," :arren  0oscoZ  Zould
recall. But the strike could not last forever, alas, and eventually the 0ayor
could no longer avoid reporters' queries.

3app's intuition about :agner  Zas correct: the 0ayor liked  the idea of free
Shakespeare in the park; he thought 0oses' stand Zholly unreasonable; he
kneZ that the real source of the "0oses-3app" feud Zas Constable, and,
detesting Constable, he Zould have loved to overrule him. 0oscoZ, alZays
antagonistic to 0oses, saZ in this fight a chance to achieve a break betZeen
him and :agner.  But, 0oscoZ  came to reali]e, ":agner   Zas seriously
handicapped" by his fear of the political poZer of the Catholic Church; if
there Zas one man in the city sure to be influenced by 0oses' innuendoes
that 3app Zas a "left-Zinger," it Zas Francis Cardinal Spellman. And, of
course, for both political and personal reasons it Zas Zholly unfeasible for

1401
:agner  to fire 0oses—and  0oses made it clear that if the 0ayor Zanted to
let 3app use Central 3ark, that Zas Zhat he Zould have to do.

Infuriated that the 0ayor Zould  dare even contemplate intervening, 0oses
refused even to accept his telephone calls. Every time the 0ayor's
secretaries called 0oses' office, they Zere told that the 3ark Commissioner
Zas "in the field" and couldn't be reached.

0oses' stance subjected the 0ayor to the largest doses of humiliation he
had had to sZalloZ since he had been caught betZeen the press and 0oses
on 0anhattantoZn three years before; not understanding that the 0ayor
couldn't fire his 3ark Commissioner, the press made it seem that he Zas
afraid to. After the first day on Zhich he had to confess that he had been
unable to reach his appointee, :agner promised reporters he Zould reach
him the ne[t day. :hen   he Zas unable to, the 3ost addressed some advice
to him: hoZ to find the park commissioner. :hen  he Zas still unable to the
ne[t day, the headlines began to read: mayor still seeks to reach moses.
Even the Times found the spectacle Zorthy of a front-page story that began:
"0ayor  :agner   continued to search for 3ark Commis-

sioner Robert 0oses yesterday. ... At the end of the day, the 0ayor's quest
Zas still unreZarded." At a press conference the folloZing morning,
:agner  "appeared irritated Zhen asked if he had got in touch Zith 0r.
0oses. 'I have many more important things to Zorry about,' he said, adding
on a note of impatience: Til get in touch Zith 0r. 0oses.'  " +e didn't,
hoZever, and the heat Zas taken off only by 0oses' hospitali]ation, Zhich
for eleven days made the 0ayor's dilemma less obvious. Leaving the
hospital, hoZever, 0oses Zas asked if he intended to confer Zith :agner
about 3app. +is reply consisted of one Zord: "No." It Zas not until more
than a Zeek later that :agner Zas able to announce that 0oses had agreed
to meet him for lunch and to promise, in response to reporters' questioning,
that he Zould certainly bring up the anonymous letter. At the lunch, held at
a neutral site—ironically, the 3layers Club, founded by the great
Shakespearean actor EdZin Booth—the tZo men dined alone (0oscoZ Zas
told to Zait outside in the 0ayor's limousine)  and the precise details of the
conversation are unknoZn. But, says 0oscoZ, "Zhen he came back [to the
limousine], it Zas perfectly obvious that he had never had a chance to open

1402
his mouth." (The 0ayor  Zould himself later admit that the anonymous
letter had never been mentioned.) "Riding back in the car Zith him, I said,
':hat   are you going to do?'

"+e said, T don't knoZ.'

"I said, ':ell,   you're not going to fire him, are you?'

"+e said, 'No, I'm not.'

"I said, 'Then you have to support him.'

"+e said, l You say that?'

"I said he had no choice if he Zasn't to look very Zeak indeed. So I drafted
the statement. . . ." Released as fast as the 0ayor could have it
mimeographed, it said: "Although I can't approve of all the Zays this has
been handled, the only alternative Zould be to get a neZ 3ark
Commissioner. I Zouldn't consider that for a moment. +e's too valuable a
public servant."

The 0ayor had surrendered, and that Zas the Zay the press played the
story, mayor gives in to moses ultimatum Zas the +erald Tribune headline.
And the press did not minimi]e the loss to the city. Said the NeZs: bill
Shakespeare loses out as Zagner supports moses. The Shakespeare Festival
Zas eventually to be saved—and, as 0oscoZ puts it, "Ze [the :agner
administration] Zere rescued"—only by the courts, and by certain of 0oses'
actions pu]]ling  to those Zho believed he really Zanted the Festival killed.

Turning from City +all  to the courthouse, 3app Zas rebuffed by a loZer
court, Zhich reaffirmed the unconditionality of the 3ark Commissioner's
poZer over parks, but the Appellate Division said he could not e[ercise it in
"arbitrary and capricious" fashion, and ruled he had done so in the 3app
case; the court declined to order 0oses to issue a permit to the Festival but,
in a someZhat ambiguous decision, said he must set "reasonable
conditions" under Zhich the Festival could reimburse the city for any
e[penses.

1403
The Appellate Division ruling Zas a long Zay short of signaling defeat

for 0oses, of course. +e could have appealed, and precedent suggests he
Zould have Zon an appeal: every time similar cases had climbed the
judicial ladder past Supreme and Appellate courts to the Court of Appeals
rung, Zhere the clamor of popular opinion greZ faint, that tribunal had
ruled that the laZ—his laZ—Zas clear: his poZer in parks Zas absolute.
Even had his appeal been denied, moreover, its filing alone Zould have
insured that there Zould be no Festival in 1959 at least. It Zas, in fact,
Zithin  0oses' poZer to kill  the Festival for the year even Zithout an appeal.
The Appellate Division had left the definition of "reasonable conditions" up
to him; it Zould  have been simple for him to justify conditions—a cash
bond to guarantee reimbursement of the $100,000 to $150,000 he had
estimated the Festival cost the city, for e[ample—impossible for a
shoestring producer to meet.

Instead, 0oses said he Zould "of course abide by the court's decision," and
said $20,000 Zould enable the performances to go on under "makeshift
arrangements"—Zhich, it turned out, Zould be almost precisely the same
arrangements as had prevailed in the past. +e himself asked the Board of
Estimate to provide the funds so that 3app Zouldn't have to raise them. The
Board members, caught betZeen Shakespeare and Spellman, tried to placate
both sides, assailing 3app ("I Zant it clearly understood that in my vote for
this item there is no approval of a creature named 3app," Jimmy Lyons said.
"I hope that in the future 0r. 0oses  Zill  find someone Zhose Americanism
is unquestioned") but voting him the money, Zhich, as it turned out, Zasn't
needed after all. TZo philanthropists had previously offered :agner
donations of $10,000 apiece, and the 0ayor announced that this money
Zould be used instead. Although rehearsals began immediately, there Zas
time remaining for only one production instead of three, but that
production, Julius Caesar, Zas hailed as a triumph, Zith theater critics
taking care to remind their readers Zhom it Zas a triumph over. :ith
several broad avenues of legal action still Zide open before 0oses, this
man, Zho never overlooked even the narroZest legal byZay, declined to
pursue them and consigned himself to the humiliation of defeat.

1404
One e[planation is that 0oses reali]ed that his previous position Zas
disastrous for his public image, and Zanted the fight ended as soon as
possible—at any cost. Another, advanced by 0oscoZ, alZays quick to see
the basest motives behind 0oses' every action, is that 0oses believed the
$20,000 figure Zas high enough to kill the Festival. According to this
theory, 0oses thought that 3app couldn't raise the money himself and
believed that the Board of Estimate, afraid of Catholic reaction, Zouldn't
give it to him.

Not only the smallness of the figure 0oses set but subsequent events do not
support these theories, hoZever. For 0oses, Zho never forgave and never
helped someone he considered his enemy, did not act that Zay Zith Joseph
3app. Needing trucks, lights and other heavy equipment for his production
and unable to afford to buy or rent it, 3app asked the 3ark Department for
it. Constable Zould have refused the request, but felt he'd better ask R0
about it. "Oh, give it to him!" Zas the order. 0oses Zould

not see 3app in person—fifteen years later he Zould still never have met
him—but after the season closed, 3app got a letter from him. The young
producer had alZays Zanted a theater for his production; the letter said that
the 3ark Department Zas going to build one for him.

Raising the money for that theater took three years—it might never have
gotten built at all if publisher George Delacorte had not contributed
$150,000 of the necessary $400,000—and 3app Zas never consulted to the
e[tent he Zished on design, but for 0oses to alloZ someone outside his
organi]ation a say in design Zas too much to e[pect. The crucial point Zas
that Robert 0oses built a shoZcase for the talents of the young man Zhom
he had publicly been fighting so viciously. 3app Zould not agree Zith this
interpretation. :arren  0oscoZ,  Zho  saZ the fight from :agner's  angle,
Zould not agree. But Sid Shapiro, the aide closest to Robert 0oses, found it
difficult  to avoid the sneaking suspicion that the fight, into Zhich, Shapiro
kneZ, 0oses had been dragged only by the hysteria of a subordinate, Zas
one fight that R0  Zas not at all sorry to lose. There Zere times, in fact,
Zhen Shapiro found himself Zondering if R0  had not Zanted to lose it.

:hatever  the reason it ended the Zay it did, his fight Zith Robert 0oses
Zas one of the best things that ever happened to Joe 3app. By making him

1405
the hero of the city's Zealthy liberals, it gave him the money—both from
private contributions and, after the Fifth Amendment flurry had faded from
public consciousness, from a :agner-prodded city government—to make
free plays a major element of the city's cultural life. By 1965, Zhen :agner
left office, the city Zas giving 3app $420,000 a year, to add to $1,900,000
he had received since the 0oses fight from private sources, and 3app's
troupes Zere playing the Bard not only in the Delacorte Amphitheater but
in the schools and, from ingenious theaters-on-Zheels, in streets and parks
all over NeZ York. 3app Zas to become so big that Zhen, in 1972,
NeZsZeek did a cover story on him, his fight Zith 0oses  thirteen years
before Zas Zorth no more than a feZ lines. But that fight had been the
turning point in 3app's career. "It Zas the greatest publicity the Festival
could have had," he himself says. The 3ark Commissioner Zhom Joe 3app
never met, Zho Zas identified in the public mind as his enemy, Zas also his
greatest benefactor.

But the Second Battle of Central 3ark Zas not one of the best things that
ever happened to Robert 0oses.

Occurring at a time Zhen 0oses' reputation Zas trembling in the balance, it
helped tip that balance against him, not only by again demonstrating his
contempt for the public but by demonstrating, even more clearly than the
First Battle of Central 3ark, his dominance over the 0ayor Zho Zas
supposedly his superior, his e[emption from the normal democratic
processes. Stanley Isaacs had been asked on television, "Do you feel that
the 0ayor alloZs  0oses to have his oZn Zay?" "Does anyone doubt it?"
the elderly councilman had replied. The public had never understood before
Zhich one of the tZo men Zas really boss. But after the daily barrage of

headlines dramati]ing the 0ayor's inability  even to persuade his 3ark
Commissioner to return a telephone call, the public understood noZ.

0oreover, the fight over Shakespeare in the 3ark made 0oses a villain not
only to the public but to the press. Constable's arrogance toZard reporters,
an arrogance they assumed had been ordered by Constable's boss, and in
particular his ousting them bodily one day from the Arsenal—a public
building—had infuriated not only the reporters involved but their editors,

1406
and it had given their publishers a neZ insight into the man Zho Zas so
charming to them at dinner parties.

Before the 3app fight, press scrutiny of Robert 0oses had been the Zork of
+ortense Gabel's "chipmunks," a handful of young, mostly unknoZn
reporters. There had still been many editors and reporters unZilling to face
the falseness of the image they had helped create. There had still been
neZspapers—most notably, of course, the Times —that had shrunk back
from the investigations into Title I. Those neZspapers concerned Zith
circulation and the headlines that could boost it understood better noZ that
probing 0oses' operations Zould yield headlines. Those neZspapers
concerned Zith their responsibility in a free society understood better noZ
that 0oses' operations not only could but should—must!—be scrutini]ed. It
Zas during the 3app fight that the Times decided to do its oZn investigation
of Title I, assigning hardZorking :ayne   3hillips to the task. The fight
documented to the neZspaper establishment Zhat rebel reporters like
Gleason and Cook and +addad and .ahn had been trying to e[plain for
years.

The media's neZ aZareness Zas particularly significant because it is so
strongly influenced by the images that are its oZn creation. For years,
articles about Robert 0oses had been researched, Zritten and played in the
light of the image of Robert 0oses as hero. NoZ Robert 0oses Zas a
villain. If  the press Zas to obtain information of the kind it had previously
doZnplayed, noZ it Zould  upplay it—mercilessly.

And a vast neZ store of that information quickly became available.

mittee Zas no public authority Zhose records could be concealed behind the
e[cuse that they Zere the records of a private corporation: they Zere clearly
public records, open to the public by laZ. The people demanding them
Zere, moreover, people Zho Zould hold him to that laZ: the reformers had
never hesitated to take him to court, and against their money and free legal
talent his customary stalling and e[pense-incurring legal maneuvers Zould
not Zork; eventually, no matter hoZ many appeals Zere instituted, there
Zould be a final legal decision that the records must be opened. If he
fought, he Zould lose. Losing—and losing to the men he hated above all
others—Zould, for this man Zho hated to lose, be bad enough. And a

1407
refusal to open his books Zould make it seem as if he had something to
hide. For this man to Zhom his public image Zas so dear, such a stance
Zould be intolerable.

+e may simply not have knoZn Zhat Zas in those files. +is preoccupation
for almost five years Zith the massive poZer dams at 0assena and Niagara
had forced him to delegate authority for Title I far more than for any other
enterprise; perhaps he Zas simply unaZare of the e[tent to Zhich
Shanahan, Spargo and LebZohl had made political pull or financial tie the
main qualification for Title I  sponsorships. And even if he did knoZ—and
he must have been aZare of at least some of his aides' manipulations, he
must have had some idea of Zhat Zas in those files—he appears not to have
fully reali]ed  hoZ those manipulations Zould look to the public. Insulated
from the public for decades, insulated moreover by a coterie to Zhom such
manipulations Zere standard procedure, he appears not to have understood
hoZ deeply revelation of Title I's secret scorecard Zould shock the other,
larger, Zorld outside.

+ad he time to think about the situation, this reali]ation might have come to
him, but he had less time to think than ever. :ith barely si[  Zeeks before
the opening of the great 0assena dam, Zhich 4ueen Eli]abeth II and Vice
3resident Richard 0. Ni[on  Zere scheduled to attend, the dam Zas far from
completed; the contractors had to be driven, and a thousand last-minute
details had to be overseen, and, Zith the pages of that huge calendar on the
Zall over his head falling ine[orably  one by one, 0oses Zas Zorking
fourteen, si[teen, eighteen hours a day. Bill Chapin Zas to remember the
last months before the 0assena opening, Zith the telephone aZakening him
and his boss's voice rasping over it sometimes at midnight and sometimes at
5 a.m. and sometimes during the hours betZeen, as months of unmitigated
e[haustion, and Bill Chapin Zas fifty-five.  Robert 0oses Zas seventy.
Incredibly, he shoZed not a sign of fatigue—he seemed as tireless at
seventy as he had been at thirty. But there Zas little time to spare for
administration of the city park system, Zhere the 3app episode Zas a time-
consuming irritant, for the eleven major state park e[pansion projects he
Zas undertaking on Long Island, the four major e[pressZays he Zas
ramming through the city, the tZo great suspension bridges, one under Zay,

1408
the other in the final stages of planning—and certainly not for consideration
of the best Zay to handle the impudent Citi]ens 8nion request.

+e may simply have felt that he could conceal most of the scorecard.

:hether   Zith or Zithout  his knoZledge, the files Zould, Zhen reporters got
to see them, be stripped virtually clean of revealing material; he may have
believed that it Zas possible for his aides to remove all of it. 0oreover,
reporters had investigated his operations before. In almost every case, his
reputation had insured that editors had not given the reporters the time
necessary to investigate in the necessary depth. In the rare cases in Zhich
reporters—such as 0ilton Racusin—had nonetheless uncovered some of
his secrets, his influence Zith publishers had been sufficient to get the
stories killed or toned doZn. +e may have heard so much about
investigations that he no longer Zorried about them. And, as Zould later
become apparent, he had not reali]ed the crucial change that had occurred:
the tarnishing of his reputation to a point at Zhich reporters Zould noZ be
given the time to make their investigations thorough, and at Zhich the facts
they uncovered Zould noZ be e[amined and played by the same standards
as facts revealed about other public officials, standards Zhich placed a
premium on sensationalism. For years every fact he fed the press had been
grist for a mill Zhose end product Zas something sZeet to him. +e appears
not to have reali]ed until he saZ the play of his replies to the Citi]ens
8nion that noZ any facts the press uncovered Zere going to be grist for a
mill that could grind out only bitterness. And that reali]ation came too late.
+e had already put himself on record publicly. +e tried to draZ back,
stalling for tZo Zeeks Zhile  Triborough counsel LebZohl told the reporters
Zho telephoned every day that the records Zere still being "assembled." But
Zith editorials reminding the public of his promise to make them available,
he could not stall indefinitely. On 0ay 29, 1959, +addad and .ahn
(Gleason apparently did not call that day), telephoning LebZohl, Zere
sullenly told to come ahead.

"Christ, Ze Zere just dying to get to see that stuff," +addad recalls. "And of
course there Zas nothing there."

After he and .ahn had arrived at the Triborough Authority's Randall's
Island headquarters, LebZohl kept them Zaiting "for hours" before sending

1409
a secretary to escort them into a small narroZ room, Zalls painted
institutional green, in the middle of Zhich Zas a narroZ conference table on
Zhich had been piled stacks of file folders. The moment Zhen the tZo
reporters flipped open the first one Zas historic; Robert 0oses had been in
public office for thirty-five  years, and this Zas the first time that any
reporter had gotten a look at his files. +istoric but not significant. The
folders Zere bulging Zith papers, but these papers turned out to be building
plans, brochures, formal memoranda Zritten for the record—in +addad's
Zords, "all pro forma stuff." They could find  no information of significance
—particularly not about the individuals in Zhom they Zere most interested:
the sponsors. The ne[t day, after being kept Zaiting for hours again, the tZo
reporters asked LebZohl Zhere this information Zas, and Zere referred to
Spargo. +addad recalls their meeting Zith Triborough's general manager
vividly—"that  little  shit sitting in that big office eating a boZl of soup"
Zhile feeding them only evasive ansZers. ":hat  qualified a sponsor to
become a sponsor—that Zas

all Ze Zere asking," .ahn  recalls. ":e   didn't even suspect that a sponsor
might be someone Zho had never built something and had no money or
financial backing to build anything." But they could get no ansZers to their
questions and the files yielded none and seemed likely to yield none. "They
had stripped them completely," +addad recalls.

"But for some reason," .ahn says, "Ze kept looking. It Zas just like police
Zork. You Zrite  doZn every name you come across, and that night Zhen
you get back to the office, you check it in the clips, just in case you'll find
something."

":e   Zere tilting  at Zindmills,"  +addad says, and the accuracy of the image
seems demonstrated by their mount. The giants they Zere trying to pull
doZn from their castles—0oses, Shanahan, Rosenman, GoldZater— had
big black Cadillacs; so did +addad—a Cadillac he had bought for tZenty-
tZo dollars.

"It Zas ancient," the young reporter Zould recall. The ZindoZs rolled up
and doZn—sometimes; generally they remained firmly in Zhichever
position they happened to be. The 3ost copy girls Zhom +addad squired
became accustomed to getting very Zet in the rain. The ZindoZ problem

1410
Zas, hoZever, insignificant compared to the overheating problem; recalling
the Title I investigation years later, Joe .ahn recalls more vividly than the
stories he Zrote the difficulty in keeping the engine cool Zhile researching
them. The trip back doZntoZn to the 3ost office from Randall's Island Zas
too far for the vehicle, Zhich "just managed to make it to Si[ty-fourth
Street," Zhere there Zas a gas station at Zhich they could obtain enough
Zater to keep the engine cool as far as the DoZntoZn Athletic Club, Zhose
friendly doorman Zould run inside for Zater Zhenever he saZ them
coming. The overheating problem Zas complicated by the hood problem,
Zhich resembled the ZindoZ problem: it frequently Zouldn't  go up. Once,
carried aZay by enthusiasm, they tried to make it all the Zay back to their
office Zithout  stopping for Zater. The car boiled over in the Battery 3ark
underpass, and the hood stuck fast. 3assing motorists gaped as the tZo
reporters tried to cool off the car by throZing pails of Zater on the closed
hood. Every morning they Zould pull up to Triborough headquarters in that
sputtering car—apprehensive; "it looked like a military fortress, and they
had guards all around"—and alight, looking in their shabby sports jackets
like the $i40-a-Zeek reporters they Zere (in deference to their surroundings,
+addad Zore a tie, but this attempt at respectability Zas someZhat
undermined by his inability to button his collars; he had bought the Zrong
si]e shirts), and Zalk inside, to sit Zaiting for hours for LebZohl's  pleasure
and then be shoZn into the narroZ little room by a flunky Zho made no
attempt to conceal his contempt, to begin hours of ploZing through
meaningless documents, hoping that someZhere in those files they Zould
find information enabling them to prove that the 0oses image Zas a false
image.

And then one day they found it.

It Zas in one of the file folders relating to a Title I project Zhich had
received almost no publicity at all: one called "0id-+arlem."  In that

folder, apparently overlooked by Zhoever had stripped it, Zas a letter ("just
this long," .ahn  Zould  recall, holding up his fingers an inch or tZo apart)
from a man applying to be one of the sponsors, together Zith a note
indicating that his application had been approved. The man's name Zas
Louis I. 3okrass. +addad seemed to recall hearing that name during his

1411
days Zith the .efauver  Crime Committee, but he couldn't recall in Zhat
connection. Back in the office that night, hoZever, he pulled 3okrass' clip
file— an d "as soon as I saZ those clips, I said, '+oly Christ! Joe! Look at
this!' " "This"  Zas clips on .efauver  Committee hearings in Zhich it had
been disclosed that in his previous business dealings Louis I. 3okrass had
had as secret partners underZorld kingpins Frank Costello, 0eyer Lansky
and Joe Adonis.

"That Zas the one that did it," .ahn says. "3okrass Zas the guy that
crumbled him. :hen  organi]ed  crime got into the picture, that bleZ the lid
off." Frank Costello Zas a name that, to the average neZspaper reader,
threZ off reverberations as poZerful in one conte[t as Robert 0oses did in
another. And the story in Zhich this Costello associate figured Zas as
simple and dramatic as most previous slum clearance stories had been
complicated and obscure. :ith the first  3ost headline on June 30, 1959, on
the neZ revelation — costello pal got title i deal —0oses' urban reneZal
program Zas scandal in a Zay in Zhich, despite three years of previous
e[poses, it had never been scandal before. Overlooked by 0oses' file
strippers among the bland minutes and reassuring brochures in the "0id-
+arlem" file  folders had been another single sheet of paper—not even a
full-si]e  sheet of paper but a handZritten note—containing dynamite
enough not merely to chip but to blast a substantial hole in the 0oses
image. The handZriting on the note Zas Tom Shanahan's, and Zhat the note
said Zas that he had been made aZare of a "delicate situation" involving
3okrass—and the date on the note Zas several Zeeks before the Slum
Clearance Committee had approved 3okrass' application. Gleason either
came across that piece of note paper himself or Zas fed it by +addad, and
Zith the first :orld-Telegram   headline the folloZing  day— banker had
Zarning on costello pal —the scandal had an added, significant dimension:
not only had Robert 0oses' committee approved an associate of racketeers
as a slum clearance sponsor, it had done so although 0oses' key colleague
on the committee had knoZn he Zas an associate of racketeers.

Of all the charges that might have "crumbled" the image of Robert 0oses,
none could have been more unfair. +e had never met 3okrass; if he had ever
heard his name, he did not recall it. +e certainly had no idea that one of his
sponsors had had underZorld connections. To him, the 0id-+arlem

1412
sponsors Zere "Colonel Bennett's group"; it Zas represented by the former
judge, State Attorney General, Democratic gubernatorial candidate and, as
chairman of the City 3lanning Commission, his obedient lackey, Colonel
John J. Bennett. 0oses had left the investigation of the syndicate behind
Bennett entirely to Shanahan—0id-+arlem Zas one of the projects over
Zhich he had delegated the banker complete authority. But

.ahn  Zas right. By giving  the Title I program underZorld overtones, the
3okrass story Zas the one that crumbled him.

Not only reporters but other persons hostile to the Coordinator suddenly, for
the first time, began trying to find other evidences of underZorld
"infiltration"  of Title  I, and an aide in the Comptroller's office soon found
one: in the payroll records filed in the office by the :ashington Square
Village Corporation, he told Gleason, there appeared, as a temporary night
Zatchman, the name of Vincent (the Chin) Gigante, a former bo[er Zho
had been accused—and then acquitted—of being the "hit man" in a
"contract" put out on Costello by other 0afia figures; he had, a year before,
ambushed the underZorld overlord in his apartment-house lobby, but had
only gra]ed him Zith  a pistol shot, reveal thug held title i village job, the
:orld-Telegram  blared.

"Could any charge be more grotesque?" 0oses demanded. +ardly. The
Chin had not been hired by the Title I committee. +e had not been hired by
the sponsor to Zhom the committee had aZarded the "Village job." +e had
not even been hired by the contractor to Zhom the sponsor had aZarded the
construction Zork on the job—not that the identity of men on the
contractor's payroll Zould have been scrutini]ed by the sponsor anyZay,
much less by the committee. +e had been hired by one of the contractor's
subcontractors. "The inference is that this committee should not have
permitted his employment and, having stood idly by Zhile this atrocity
Zent on, is guilty of association Zith mysterious gangsters," 0oses said.
"This committee has no responsibility for the help employed by contractors
for sponsors and could not conceivably have . . . And in any event, as a
matter of fairness and decency, is 0r. Gigante, Zho Zas acquitted of failure
to take good aim at 0r. Costello, Zhen out of jail not entitled to find Zork
of some sort to keep him out of further mischief?" Such Zitty ridicule

1413
Zould once have turned back any charge; the reporter responsible Zould
have been hastily reassigned. NoZ, he Zas reinforced. A Zhole platoon of
investigative reporters rode out on the slum clearance trail.

The trail Zas marked by anonymous tips and by other scattered pieces of
information overlooked in 0oses' files—marked clearly enough so that
these reporters could see noZ Zhere it Zas really leading. Abandoning side
trips like the search for underZorld connections, they stuck noZ on the
main road that led them at last to the truly significant secret behind Title I,
the secret that Zould destroy the heart of the 0oses legend.

+addad led the pack, for he had the gift of seeing patterns, and he saZ them
in the seemingly innocuous material—minutes, memos, letters, notes—
scattered before him on the narroZ table in the little room. One, for
e[ample, Zas Zoven around press agents. Reading through endless reams
of documents, +addad noticed that tZo names kept reappearing in files
relating to different projects: :illiam   J. Donoghue and Sydney S. Baron.
+e didn't knoZ Zho  Donoghue Zas, but .ahn, Zith  his encyclopedic
knoZledge of city politics, did: a press secretary for both O'DZyer and
Impellitteri and a key Tammany insider. And everyone kneZ Zho Baron
Zas, of course:

Carmine De Sapio's personal publicist. 3ulling up his tie as far as it Zould
go to conceal his opened shirt collar, +addad Zalked Zith .ahn onto the
ankle-deep carpets of the silken-draperied, sliding-paneled room—adorned
Zith just one photograph: that of a man Zith dark-tinted glasses—that Zas
Sydney Baron's office, and Zrung from him an admission that he had
formed an "association" of Title I sponsors that paid him $1,500 a month.
+e sZore that he had "never received a fee" from individual sponsors, but
federal audits—leaked to +addad noZ by :alter  Fried, Zho had chafed so
long at his inability to curb 0oses—revealed that he lied. And one sponsor
told the reporters; "It Zould be fantastic to tell you Ze hired Baron for any
other reason than his influence." And .ahn and +addad made clear Zhere
that influence came from, identifying Baron as "Tammany's and Carmine
De Sapio's press chief." The same story Zas repeated Zith Donoghue.

Gleason, thundering hard at +addad's heels, had received a tip about a
ninety-tZo-acre tract at Clason 3oint on Long Island Sound in the Bron[

1414
that had been selected for a slum clearance project to be called
"SoundvieZ" even though it Zas not a slum at all but a community of 245
neat, Zell-tended bungaloZs: the tipster said that 0oses' Slum Clearance
Committee had agreed to purchase the tract for a million dollars although
its present oZners had recently purchased it for half a million—thereby
giving those oZners a quick half-million-dollar profit  before they even
began to build the "high-rent" apartments that the committee had approved
for the site. According to the tipster, the land Zas held in the name of a
"dummy" oZner, and it Zould be Zorth  Gleason's Zhile to find out Zho the
real oZner, Zas. The deeds on file in the Bron[ County Courthouse shoZed
the oZner to be a 0iss +elen Nugent, Zho Gleason guessed at once Zas a
secretary in some laZyer's office.

But Zhose office? :ho   Zas 0iss  Nugent a dummy for? :ho   Zas making
the half million—and the millions more that Zere to come? Gleason learned
that her employer Zas the laZ firm of GoldZater & Flynn. Gold-Zater
denied that he had any financial interest in the project, maintaining he Zas
only the attorney for the real oZners. But he refused to reveal their identity,
and the Telly's head (played above a picture of neat bungaloZs captioned
"This Is a Slum?") noted that the "mystery Zoman's" boss Zas "dem
bigZig"  GoldZater, and under that head, Fred Cook, Zriting the hell out of
the story, said that the SoundvieZ "deal" represented "a clear $500,000
Zindfall  to political insiders," and soon he and other neZspapers Zere
noting that Ed Flynn's old partner Zas still a poZer in Bron[ politics under
Flynn successor Charles Buckley—and that he and his son represented not
only SoundvieZ but tZo other controversial Title I projects.

"Influence." "Dem BigZig."  "Tammany." "3olitical  Insiders." De Sapio.
Buckley. The Boss of 0anhattan and the Boss of the Bron[ Zere somehoZ
involved—deeply involved—in a 0oses program. FolloZing  the trail left
by those overlooked documents in 0oses' files, the hard-riding reporters
had come at last upon the secret that Zould destroy the heart of the 0oses

legend: the fact that this man Zho supposedly scorned politicians had
alloZed the top echelon of NeZ York's politicians to reap fortunes from his
Title I program. And they led their readers to the secret—Zith stories that,
linking 0oses  to politicians, Zere as accurate as earlier stories linking him

1415
to the underZorld had been unfair. A letter to the Times shoZed that at least
one reader Zas grasping the significance of these revelations. It Zas a letter
such as had never before been printed about Robert 0oses. "Robert
0oses," the letter said, "is a boss like De Sapio himself."

And of course the deeper the reporters delved, the more there began to
come into focus the shadoZy figure of the man Zho formed the key
connection betZeen 0oses and the machine, and the clearer that connection
became.

+addad had been hearing about Shanahan for years, of course. During his
earlier investigations into the Building Department and +ousing Authority,
he had learned that, as he puts it, "the Zord Zas out that if you Zanted to do
any kind of Zork Zith  the city you had to put your money in Federation—I
mean, it Zas no secret. Everyone you talked to seemed to knoZ it." And
hardly had a surly 0oses aide dumped the first batch of Slum Clearance
Committee minutes in front of him Zhen he noticed that the committee Zas
taking many decisions "on report and recommendation of vice chairman."
Among these decisions, he noticed, Zere many of those on the selection of
sponsors. :hat,  he asked LebZohl, Zas the vice chairman's role in the
selection process? :ell, LebZohl  replied, he "qualifies" them. And Zhat,
+addad asked, did that mean? +e "uses his bank to check the financial
responsibility of potential sponsors, at no cost to the committee," LebZohl
replied. "+e determines Zho is the most qualified." And, +addad asked, did
the committee alZays accept Shanahan's recommendation? 8sually,
LebZohl replied.

The discerner of patterns saZ the pattern then. "0oses Zas up in the clouds
as far as Title I Zas concerned," he says. "+e Zas the grey eminence.
Shanahan Zas the administrative force. Gradually Ze began to find out that
Shanahan Zas making all the decisions." For Zeeks, hoZever, the vice
chairman's approval of the 3okrass designation Zas the only neZsZorthy
decision he and .ahn could directly lay at his door. Then, one day one of
the anonymous calls—"You ansZer every one; you're alZays hoping that
this is the one that Zill bloZ the Zhole thing open"—told  .ahn  that one
sponsor approved by Shanahan not only had deposited huge sums of money
in Shanahan's bank but had also, Zhen he received his first commitment

1416
from the F+A for  a $3,000,000 loan, borroZed the money from Shanahan's
bank, and Zas currently negotiating Zith the F+A for a $10,000,000 loan,
Zhich he Zas also planning to make from Shanahan's bank. The caller told
.ahn  that the F+A guarantee made these loans prime, risk-free business on
Zhich the bank Zould make more than a million dollars in interest—and
that, since the guarantee applications had been made to the F+A, his tip
could be verified. Getting the hint, +addad Zent to the F+A—and verified
it, and began at last to break the Shanahan story.

Shanahan flatly refused to talk to reporters, or to let them see any of

Federation's records, but Zith the story breaking, +addad's phone Zas hot
Zith tips—that 0oses  had deposited millions of Triborough funds in
Shanahan's bank; that slumlord 8ngar's sponsorship had been approved by
Shanahan after he offered to deposit $700,000; that Shanahan Zas a director
of at least one Title I company. Checking these tips, +addad found they
checked out. And his stories identified Shanahan to the public, not as the
"banker" or "philanthropist" that neZspapers had called him in the past but
in the role that made him important to 0oses: "a fund-raiser and campaign
treasurer for the Democratic 3arty . . . and a close friend of Tammany leader
De Sapio."

The band of eager young reporters Zas meeting at the corner table in
Bleeck's Artists and :riters  Bar almost every evening noZ. They had it
doZn to a system. "The only Zay to keep it going Zas to keep the papers
goosing each other," +addad Zould reminisce years later. "If nobody picked
it up, Ze Zere dead. So Ze'd leave a little piece out of a story, and give that
piece to Gene or :oody so they'd have a neZ lead, and they'd do the same
for us. Sometimes, I'd even give them carbons of my stories, so they'd have
it right in their desk. Their editor Zould say, 'Check this out,' and they'd
have it right there."

Each day noZ they could see their strategy Zorking. The 3ost, of course,
had alZays played Title I revelations as they should be played. James
:echsler  "helped you in the same Zay that a maga]ine editor or a book
editor helps you—a real kind of involvement, of suggestion, of criticism, of
reZriting,"  +addad recalls. "The editorial support—you couldn't ask for
better placement in the paper, you couldn't ask for better editorials." As for

1417
:echsler's  boss, "There Zas constant pressure on 0rs. Schiff," +addad
Zould say. "But she never buckled." Years later, he could still recall sitting
Zith .ahn   in the city room one night, hour after hour, Zhile, upstairs, in
0rs.  SchifFs office, she and :echsler Zere, the reporter kneZ, receiving
telephone calls from her good friend Sam Rosenman and from other friends
she respected assailing her for printing their previous stories and asking her
not to print any more—Zhile in front of  them Zas the story he had just
Zritten for the ne[t  day, even more hard-hitting than the previous stories
had been— Zaiting for the decision on Zhether the paper Zould run it, and
:echsler  coming doZn finally  and saying: "Just be sure you're thorough.
:e're  not going to stop anything you Zrite."

And noZ, thanks to the "chipmunks' " strategy, the editors of the :orld-
Telegram Zere—at last—enthusiastic, too, even if their enthusiasm Zas
based less on principle than on concern that they not be beaten by a
competitor. Gleason and Cook and :oody .lein  didn't have to sell editors
on neZ material noZ; the editors Zere begging for it. Title I Zas page one
noZ, not only in the 3ost but in the Telly —and, more and more, in the
Journal-American. "First they started picking up our stuff, and then 0arty
Steadman, a good, tough reporter, started developing some of his oZn. And
one day, they had an eight-banner. They Zere in, too!"

":e   kneZ, to really break it open, the Times and the Trib had to start

picking it up," +addad says. NoZ 3eter Braestrup rejoined +addad,
Gleason, .lein  and Steadman (.ahn, too competitive to share, Zould never
come and Cook had no time to) at the corner table: the Trib Zas in.

Of all the factors that had kept 0oses' popularity intact for thirty-five years,
none Zas more important than the support of the neZspaper Zhose
principal stockholder felt "there has never been as great a public servant."
During the first months of 1959, despite all the Title I e[poses by other
papers, he had continued to enjoy that support. "There Zas a time ...,*'
Cook Zould Zrite,  "Zhen ... Ze could practically guarantee that any critical
article of ours in the afternoon Zould bring a featured, official denial in The
NeZ York Times in the morning." :hile    the Times may not have been a
crusading neZspaper, hoZever, it Zas a neZspaper of record—proud of
being the neZspaper of record. And noZ the records Zere open. Formal

1418
press conferences Zere being held—not only by the 0ayor but by 0onroe
GoldZater and Sidney 8ngar. If the Times had Zanted to ignore the Gold-
Zater and 8ngar revelations, it Zould have been difficult for it to do so.
After the 3app incident, moreover, there seemed to be less of a desire on the
part of the paper's editors to do so—Charlie Grut]ner, Zho had some years
earlier been pulled off the housing beat because his articles angered 0oses,
Zas put back on it, and :ayne 3hillips  Zas assigned to an in-depth
investigation. +addad kneZ a neZ era Zas daZning Zhen he picked up the
Times on the morning of June 1, 1959, and read—on page one—"The
redevelopment plan proposed by Robert 0oses for the SoundvieZ slum-
clearance project calls for the payment of nearly $400,000 [sic] for land that
the oZners had offered for nothing."

The entrance of the Times, Zith its ample space, immediately gave the Title
I e[poses a neZ dimension and depth. The daily running stories in the 30's
averaged about 800 Zords; a four-part series that the Times began on June
26 ran 8,000; although the impression Zould later e[ist that that series had
contained many neZ revelations, it contained hardly any that +addad or
Gleason hadn't uncovered before; all that had happened Zas that, by
bringing them all together in a unified form, 3hillips had shoZn the city the
over-all picture of its slum clearance program, and by so doing had shoZn it
in all its shocking dimensions.

The entrance of the Times also gave the Title I e[poses a neZ respectability,
the cachet conferred by the neZspaper's reputation for accuracy. 3olitical
officials suddenly became Zilling to comment. Stanley Isaacs and a young,
movie-star-handsome congressman named John V. Lindsay had been
assailing 0oses' practices for months, but noZ politicians joined the parade
in force—and each comment made a neZ article, kept the story rolling, kept
momentum building.

In every city room in NeZ York, noZ, the phones Zere, in +addad's Zords,
"jumping off the hook." 0any  of  the tips coming over them Zere checking
out into stories. "The thing Zas feeding on itself noZ, getting bigger and
bigger," .ahn  says. "It Zas the greatest time of my life," +addad recalls.
":e   Zere making 140 bucks a Zeek—and it Zas just great."

1419
For months—years, really—all the months and years in Zhich the Title I
e[poses had been building up, it had been a young man's Zar, a guerrilla
action carried out by Zhat .ahn called "neZspapermen Zho Zeren't part of
the neZspaper establishment," and an action that had, moreover, been
ridiculed by older, cynical, tired reporters. +addad and Gleason first noticed
the change Zhen they stopped by Room 9, the City +all 3ress Room. The
older reporters Zere noticeably more friendly noZ. Then they became more
helpful. Looking up from the Room 9 desk at Zhich he Zas sitting one day,
+addad found one standing over him, Zaiting to fill him in on details of
political alliances of NeZ York. :hen   Gleason had first been interrupting
:agner's  staid, friendly, gentlemanly press conferences Zith embarrassing
questions—and refusing to let evasions go unchallenged—many of the
older reporters had been openly hostile to him, believing he Zas disturbing
their "rapport" Zith  the 0ayor, some of them going so far as to ask other
questions on less controversial topics so as to change the subject. NoZ,
Zhen Gleason—joined by +addad—began pressing the 0ayor for ansZers,
there Zere no interruptions—and even some folloZ-up questions from the
older men. 3ressing particularly hard about GoldZater's conduct in Title I,
Gleason roused :agner to anger. "You can just get out of this room," he
said. From the other reporters, there came a loZ murmur of disapproval.
"You can't do that, 0ayor," a voice said clearly. Gleason stayed. The ne[t
day :orld-Telegram  city editor Norton 0ockridge   ordered up John Ferris'
admiring story on Gleason, and the story included the line: "No one aZes
him." +addad kneZ for sure that the times Zere changing in the city rooms
on that long night Zhen he sat Zaiting for hours for 0rs. Scruff's decision
on Zhether to run the story he had Zritten for the ne[t day. +e noticed that
an elderly former photo editor, Zho had advanced to a more e[alted
editorship and noZ considered laying out pictures beneath him, Zas Zaiting
around, too, hours past his time to go home. Finally, +addad asked him Zhy
he Zas staying. Oh, the old neZspaperman said embarrassedly, as offhand
as if he did such things all the time, I might as Zell stick around to do the
picture layout on it if it goes.

Bigger and bigger noZ, the stories Zere also closer and closer—to Robert
0oses.

1420
+addad and .ahn had noticed Donoghue's name on the payrolls of Title I
sponsors. NoZ they learned that it Zas also on the payrolls of 0oses' public
authorities. ShoZing up on the payrolls of shady sponsors, they told the
public, Zas "Robert 0oses' personal publicist."

0any  of the anonymous tips concerned LebZohl, the 0oses aide Zhose
0oses-enriched "relocation" firm had hounded from their homes thousands
of families in the Zay of the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay  and other 0oses
projects.

":e   had good information that LebZohl Zas chummy Zith an architect
close to Charlie Buckley" Zho had been given many Title I contracts, .ahn
recalls. They intervieZed him.

After Ze had hammered aZay at [LebZohl] for about an hour, he finally
admitted that he and the sponsor patroni]ed the same health club. "If you
pass a man going across the gym, is that a crime?" he asked. "I can't control
the membership of a private health club."

"But isn't it true that you eat Zith him later and he picks up the check?"
LebZohl Zas asked.

"Not all the time," Zas the ansZer—the one Ze had been Zaiting for.

Leaving LebZohl's office, .ahn  noticed that +addad, usually so "fiery and
tough," looked pensive. Finally the younger reporter asked him if he felt
they should use the intervieZ. ":hy  not?" .ahn   said. "You're not suddenly
getting soft, are you?"

"No, it's not that," +addad said sadly. "It's just that all during the time you
Zere throZing the questions, I couldn't take my eyes off the photograph of
his Zife and kids on the desk."

.ahn  had noticed the photos himself—and he had knoZn LebZohl for a
long time. "A reporter," he Zas to Zrite, "is human and he is moved by
Zhat he sees and hears as much as other people." But, he Zas to add, "in the
end he must live Zith himself. . . . I'm sorry, I told Bill.  I felt for the
LebZohl family  as much as he did, but—it had to be done. And it Zas."

1421
And .ahn's  stories about LebZohl identified him not as a "city official"  but
as he should have been identified all along: "Robert 0oses' right arm." The
circle of scandal Zas draZing closer around the man Zho had never been
linked Zith  scandal.

And then it dreZ tighter still, Zith  Zhat Cook termed "the first peep that has
been obtained into the Zorkings of the private consultant's role— one that
0r.  Spargo frequently fills." Item by item noZ, the investigators Zere
finding out about the supreme bloodhound, the man "Zho alZays kept
notes"—that his salary as Triborough general manager Zas $40,000, as high
as the 0ayor's; that in addition to that salary he had received "on the
recommendation of 0r. Robert 0oses" $35,000 in consultant's fees from
the Nassau County Bridge Authority, and, from 0oses' oZn State 3oZer
and Jones Beach authorities, a total of $243,000 in additional fees; that,
Zhile serving as director of the Slum Clearance Committee, he Zas a
director of Shanahan's Federation bank, Zhich had made secret profits on
slum clearance deals. 0oses' identification Zith LebZohl had gotten his
name out of the back paragraphs of these "scandal" stories and into the
leads; his identification Zith Spargo got it into headlines—headlines over
profiles identifying Spargo as 0R. moses' man, eight banners in the Telly
and Journal, big screamers in the 3ost— tie moses aide to bond fee; fees
paid to moses officials for bridgb bonds; the $243,000 revelation put 0oses'
name—in a story that reeked of scandal—on the front page of The NeZ
York Times. Shanahan Zasn't just a "banker" any more; he Zas moses'
banker aide. After decades of building up an empire based on the raZ
material out of Zhich neZspapers produced scandal, Robert 0oses' name
Zas in eight banners of scandal at last.

+e kept it there himself. 8nable to endure even the hint of criticism, he
simply could not ignore attacks aimed at his associates. +e had to respond,

and he did so almost frantically, trying to ansZer each charge, his
messengers rushing replies marked "For Immediate Release" to neZspaper
offices sometimes Zithin an angry hour of the time those neZspapers hit the
stands.

But response Zas a self-defeating tactic noZ. Its primary effect Zas to bring
himself, hitherto only a figure behind the Shanahans, Spargos and

1422
LebZohls, front and center, thereby accomplishing Zhat the reporters,
despite all their efforts, had not previously been able to accomplish: to
make himself, rather than them, the primary target.

0oreover, to 0oses  response meant attack. Since it Zas primarily the press
making the charges he Zas opposing, he attacked the press. As usual, he
attacked on all fronts. +addad soon became aZare that investigators Zere
checking into his Zhole life history, trying, the reporter believed, to find
some "handle" that could be used against him. Reporters Zere trying to
cover the meetings of the Slum Clearance Committee in Triborough
headquarters noZ. 0oses saZ to it that they Zere not told Zhat time the
meetings Zould be over, so they had to Zait in the lobby doZnstairs—his
guards Zould not permit them up to the second floor, Zhere the meetings
Zere held—for hours so that they Zould not miss the participants emerging.
3reviously, reporters up at Randall's Island Zould be invited to the
sumptuous lunches at Zhich 0oses Zould charm them; noZ not only Zere
they not invited, but Zhen 0oses learned that, afraid to leave the island and
travel all the Zay back to 0anhattan for lunch, they had been making do
Zith Cokes and candy bars from the vending machines in a corridor off the
lobby, he had the door to the corridor locked. :agner may have been
bullied at his press conferences; 0oses Zas not. The Coordinator, fresh
from his lunch, strode into the room in Zhich reporters Zere Zaiting,
hungry and thirsty, after one four-hour committee meeting. ("+e Zas,"
Gleason reported in a memo to his office, "licking his chops—literally.")
:ould   it perhaps help if the reporters Zere alloZed to see the committee's
agenda so they could knoZ Zhat topics the committee had discussed? "No,"
0oses said. The reporters Zaited for him to say something else. +e said
nothing. Finally, the reporters began asking other questions. Gleason asked
one in his bullying style. "Jesus, [0oses] seemed to toZer Zhen he came
out of his seat," +addad recalls. 0oses had tZo Zords for Gleason: "Get
out." The other reporters tried the technique that had Zorked Zith :agner,
saying unless Gleason stayed they Zould all go. :ithout another Zord,
0oses rose and strode from the room. The press conference Zas over.
0oses' main fire Zas directed over reporters' heads, of course. Triborough's
messengers Zere deluging publishers and their top editors Zith personal
complaints. 0oses Zas soon taking the fight to the press on a do]en
different fronts.

1423
But fighting the press is a battle that no public official can Zin, for the
battleground is not just of the press's choosing—it is the press. +is attacks
Zould be played as the media Zanted them played. 0oreover, attacking a
particular neZspaper—and because the articles Zere to a great e[tent
e[poses that Zere breaking in one paper at a time, his attacks Zere often
against a specific neZspaper—Zas practically the surest guarantee that that
neZspaper Zould attack him again in its turn. The story that had enraged

0oses may have been Zritten by an individual reporter, but it Zas not the
reporter alone Zho Zould have to bear responsibility for it and defend it to
the publisher or chief editor. LoZer-ranking editors—Zith stories of such
significance, editors on several levels—Zould have had to apprc ve it.
Therefore, Zhen 0oses attacked a neZspaper publicly or in a private letter
to its publisher, a lot of people on that neZspaper had to justify themselves.
And the most effective method of justification Zas to find other things
Zrong Zith  the Title I program—and to Zrite more stories. 0any key
neZspapermen in NeZ York had previously had a vested interest in
preserving 0oses' image; noZ many of these same journalists had a vested
interest in destroying it. :hat  Zas needed Zas discreet silence—the Zait
until the storm Zas over— and silence Zas one commodity it had never
been Zithin 0oses' poZer to deliver.

The self-defeating nature of 0oses' tactics Zas demonstrated in
developments on the Times front.

Even after Grut]ner and 3hillips had begun breaking—and receiving good
play on—Title I revelations, the paper's attitude toZard its long-time hero
Zas decidedly schi]ophrenic. 0oses attacked the reporters personally— to
one 3hillips piece he replied on June 22, "The Times reporter is either very
befuddled or deliberately malicious"—and the Times's handling of his
replies embittered other reporters, one of Zhom, Gay Talese, Zas to Zrite in
his history of the paper:

... his letters of objection did not appear in the "Letters to the Editor" space,
Zhere they belonged; instead they Zere published on various days Zithin
the neZs columns as neZs, being prefaced by an e[planatory paragraph,
appearing under a neZs headline, and being given immediate and serious
play. This not only raised readers' doubts about the credibility of the series,

1424
but it also tc k some of the edge off the series, Zhich the reporter had
carefully researched fo months —and Zhich Zas accurate and objective, if
not totally satisfactory to 0oses in all of its detail and interpretation.

:hen,   on June 25, 0oses used his familiar resignation gambit on :agner,
the Times's editorial response Zas its traditional one: "Our confidence in
0r.  0oses as an honest, incomparably able public servant is unshaken. +is
resignation from any office Zould be an irreparable loss. :here is his
equal?"

But as 0oses continued to attack—critici]ing even straight running neZs
stories on breaking developments—the Times's ardor began almost visibly
to cool. :hen   Grut]ner helped break the Gigante story, 0oses replied,
"This is one of those 'startling disclosures' promised by the Times over the
radio in the morning to solicit neZ readers." Grut]ner's city-room editors
responded by okaying his submission of a list of Zritten questions to
0oses. 0oses tried to go over their heads. "I immediately protested to Orvil
Dryfoos, president of the Times, about innuendoes in those questions," he
says. The result, in 0oses' oZn Zords:

In spite of a placating reply by 0anaging Editor Turner Catledge, the Times
continued in this vein, printing slanted, inaccurate and misleading stories. ...
a

reporter needled a Federal housing official into declaring that prior approval
of the Bellevue South project had not been obtained. I Zrote to Dryfoos
again, pointing out that . . . "this is not the kind of journalism Ze have been
led to e[pect from a great neZspaper." Additional reporters Zere assigned,
and I Zas soon presented Zith the fruit of their labor—a neZ questionnaire
of the kind ordinarily addressed to Appalachian thugs, dope peddlers, etc.
Since, as I Zrote Dryfoos, they Zere "directed only at baiting me in the
hope that your staff can cash in on some more sensationalism," I decided
not to ansZer them.

+e tried to go over everyone's head—reporters', editors', president's—in
July, folloZing  an incident that occurred during a vacation, an incident that,
Zere he susceptible to humiliation, Zould have been deeply humiliating. +e

1425
described it in a letter to his old and close friend Arthur +ays Sul]berger,
the Times's publisher.

Yesterday afternoon, folloZing a series of similar phone calls from the
Times addressed directly and indirectly to officials in 3uerto Rico and the
Virgin Islands, a reporter from El 0undo interrupted 0ary  and me at the
San Juan airport to ask grossly insulting questions, one of Zhich Zas Zhat I
had to say about relations Zith the "underZorld" in connection Zith Title
One housing in NeZ York. I Zas able to glance at some of the questions on
a yelloZ sheet Zhich this reporter said Zere telephoned from the Times.
The Zord "underZorld"  Zas definitely and unmistakably on this sheet.
There Zere several people around Zho heard this. Officials in the area told
me of similar phone questions aimed to embarrass me. Fortunately, the only
effect of these questions on the people Zho invited me doZn Zas to loZer
the prestige of the Times.

This response Zorked for a Zhile. Sul]berger apologi]ed, and shortly
thereafter invited 0oses, as he did every summer, to visit Iphigene and
himself at their country home. "A lot of Zater has gone under the bridge . . .
," the publisher Zrote, "but I hope it hasn't Zashed the bridge aZay." "The
bridge is pretty damn rickety, Zhat Zith the flood of abuse and bilge Ze
have been subjected to, but Ze shall drop in," 0oses replied. For some
Zeeks thereafter, the Times's Title I play, Zhile substantial, appeared
considerably toned doZn.

But Zhat he had done could no longer be undone. The Times's coverage of
Title I had been balanced on a ra]or's edge. +is efforts had tipped the
balance—against himself. As the revelations in other papers continued, the
Times began to pick them up again, and to play them bigger and bigger. Not
only 3hillips and Grut]ner but their immediate superiors, and some not so
immediate, Zere noZ in the same boat as their counterparts on the +erald
Tribune and the Journal-American and the :orld-Telegram: once they had
had a vested interest in building 0oses up, noZ they had one in tearing him
doZn, in finding neZ  material that Zould support earlier articles. If neZ
material Zas to be available to these neZspapers noZ, they Zould do their
best to join the 3ost in giving it proper play. And as the telephone tips, and
the anonymous letters, and the public statements, and the federal and city

1426
audits poured in to all these different city rooms, these reporters and editors
had all the material they needed. They Zere not chipping aZay any longer
at the toZering 0oses image, they Zere chopping

aZay at it—Zith  great roundhouse sZings of the media a[—chopping aZay
day after day, Zeek after Zeek, month after month. First, it had been 0oses'
programs that had been under attack. Then it had been his aides. And noZ,
finally, it Zas he himself.

"The Great Statesman 0c.ee is a synthetic character Zhich never actually
e[isted on sea or land, puffed up by the press ... and noZ in the process of
deflation," Robert 0oses had Zritten once. "There is a large amount of
unfairness to the individual in this process, but in the end it arrives at the
truth."

+is observation had been accurate—and it Zas never better proven than by
his oZn case.

The Incorruptible, 8ncorrupting, Apolitical,  8tterly  Selfless 3ublic Servant
0oses had been a synthetic character, largely puffed up by the press. That
character had endured for thirty-five years. But in 1959 the process of
deflation by the press—a process that had been going on intermittently for
several years—had begun in earnest. In that process there had been a large
amount of unfairness. But that process had in the end arrived at the truth. At
the beginning of 1959, the 0oses image had stood in most of its glory,
intact e[cept for a feZ small chips. At the end of 1959, it lay in
unsalvageable ruins. 3opularity, Al Smith had Zarned him, Zas a slender
reed. NoZ the reed Zas broken.

But popularity Zas no longer a significant factor in 0oses' poZer equation.
+is poZer rested not on a reed but on a rock.

8naZare of the full  e[tent of the poZer of the public authority, the press did
not understand this. It assumed that he could be fired or forced to resign like
any other mayoral appointee. But :agner couldn't do that 3ersonality made
it difficult,  both because of the 0ayor's respect for men of his father's
generation ("You don't fire your father," he Zas to tell a young anti-0oses
aide, Tim Cooney. "Never forget that, Tim. You don't fire your father") and

1427
because of other :agnerian traits. 3aul Screvane, asked if the 0ayor might
not have done it, just laughs. "Do you knoZ :agner?" he says. ":agner
never fired anyone in his life unless the felloZ Zas convicted of a crime.
And Zhen you think of him firing  a giant like 0oses, it's just inconceivable.
. . . 0oses might have been a thorn in his side. :agner may have Zanted
him out. +e may have Zanted to get the press off his neck. But :agner
Zould never have fired 0oses." 3olitics made it impossible. :hether   or not
the calmly canny 0ayor Zas already contemplating snatching the reins of
party poZer out of De Sapio's hands, or Zhether he Zas only concerned
Zith keeping Tammany's horses in line, he needed Zhat 0oses—and to a
large e[tent 0oses alone—could give him: the contracts and fees on Zhich
lived the machine and the other economic forces—banks, unions—Zhich
conferred political poZer in NeZ York.  In 1959 this provender Zas stacked
higher than ever in the larders of 0oses' authorities: Zith $92,000,000
Zorth of contracts for the Throgs Neck Bridge about to be let, $345,000,000
Zorth of bond issues for the Verra]ano-

NarroZs Bridge firmed up and ready to be sold, and $100,000,000 Zorth of
neZ bridge-connecting e[pressZays ready to be approved as soon as 0oses
gave the Zord to the federal highZay officials under his thumb, the 0ayor
had half a billion reasons to keep him friendly. Firing 0oses Zould cut his
—the 0ayor's—tie  to the source of funds Zhich kept men loyal to a mayor.
And to such men no rationale Zould e[cuse such an action. :hat Zas he
supposed to do? Tell 3ete Brennan and Van Arsdale that, because of a little
heat from the press, they Zould have to get along Zithout $100,000,000
Zorth of e[pressZay jobs?

Firing 0oses Zould  not, moreover, remove 0oses from poZer. Far from it.
0oses' poZer Zas largely beyond a mayor's reach. :agner could fire him
as Slum Clearance Committee chairman, 3ark Commissioner and
Construction Coordinator. +e couldn't fire him from his five state posts,
Zhich gave 0oses so much poZer in a city dependent on Albany, or from
his Triborough Authority chairmanship, Zhich gave him so much of his
money; he had handed 0oses a fresh si[-year term just a year before.
0oses Zould  still have those posts no matter Zhat :agner did.

1428
+e dare not even antagoni]e 0oses, lest 0oses, in anger, throZ his money
and poZer on the side of the 0ayor's enemies; he could not risk hinting,
even in private, that he might not object if 0oses resigned just one —the
Slum Clearance Committee chairmanship—of his many posts, lest the hint
ignite 0oses' alZays smoldering anger. Despite innumerable provocations,
:agner,  in dealing Zith  0oses, had been sZalloZing his pride for years. +e
Zould have to go on sZalloZing it.

+ad the press access to records more revealing than those of the Slum
Clearance Committee—Triborough's records—they might have understood
this; it Zould have been difficult not to had they knoZn that the Zhole
Democratic machine, the leaders of all five county organi]ations, on Zhich
:agner  depended, Zere on 0oses' payroll—and that they Zere all in line
for pay boosts: that not only Shanahan and, through Shanahan, De Sapio,
the 0anhattan leader; but Steingut, the Brooklyn leader, and Roe, the
4ueens leader, and Buckley, the Bron[ leader, had, in one form of fee or
contract or another, made money out of Triborough's projects in the past
and Zere e[pecting to make more money out of Triborough's projects in the
future. Even Zithout those records, there Zere plenty of symbols around
that should have made the press understand the e[tent to Zhich :agner's
poZer rested on 0oses' money. TZo men involved in the Title I picture
Zere Shanahan and GoldZater. :ere Shanahan and GoldZater friends of
0oses' only? +ardly. They Zere friends also of :agner's.  In his last three
campaigns for public office, they had been his tZo key fund raisers. In the
case of Shanahan, the press had discovered a fact even more blatantly
symbolic: it Zas not just 0oses Zho  had been depositing huge sums in
Shanahan's bank; :agner had, too.

But the press, Zithout access to Triborough's records or understanding of
Triborough's poZer, portrayed to the public a misleading picture of ensuing
developments.

In part, too, the press's misunderstanding Zas merely the Zish's pre-

dilection to be father to the thought. +aving e[posed Zrongdoing, the
crusading reporters Zanted it stopped—stopped, moreover, by some official
action that Zould have the effect of placing the imprimatur of official
verification on the revelations they had made. :hile editorial Zriters

1429
demanded action, reporters kept asking :agner Zhat action he Zas
planning to take. :agner  had no choice but to say he Zas certainly going to
take some, but he kept his statements as loZ-key and vague as possible,
and, Zhen pressed for specifics, never gave any. All the 0ayor Zas doing
Zas trying to ride out the storm; he had no intention of doing anything that
might arouse 0oses' ire. But the press read into :agner's remarks hints that
action Zas imminent. And Zhen none occurred, they misinterpreted the
reason, portraying for their readers a 0ayor Zho Zanted 0oses out but Zas
constantly—and ine[plicably —being faced doZn by him; they portrayed
conflict Zhere none e[isted, created a drama of confrontation betZeen tZo
men Zho Zere actually conspirators. The depth of the misunderstanding
Zas shoZn in a remark by one of them: "You could only push Bob :agner
so far. :hen  it came to protection of the political body, he could be very
tough indeed. And protection of the political body Zas Zhat it had come to
here." This observer Zas right about :agner's toughness, but Zrong about
Zhat it required. +e thought protection of the 0ayor's "political  body"
required 0oses to go. Actually, it required him to stay. There Zas never any
real chance that :agner Zould force 0oses  out—as, years after the fact,
himself long retired from office, he told the author quite frankly (although
he Zas less frank about the reasons). After circling Zarily about the issue
for hours, finally obviously Zeary of  ansZering the same questions over
and over, :agner said in e[asperation: "Look, I  didn't push it. . . . Never in
any Zay did I ever induce anyone to intercede Zith him or to hint to him
[that he should resign]. And I never Zould have." :agner  Zould probably
have liked 0oses to resign, so long as he did so on a friendly basis. But if
0oses didn't Zant to go, he Zould not have had to.

Reading Zhat they Zanted into :agner's every innocuous remark, reporters
continually assured their readers that the 0ayor Zas going to "crack doZn"
on 0oses, "pull up the reins," "cut his poZer." And therefore the reporters
—and those readers Zho Zanted 0oses' poZer cut—Zere to be repeatedly
disappointed.

0isunderstanding and consequent disappointment can be read clearly
betZeen the lines of the Cook-Gleason recapitulation, in "The Shame of
NeZ York," of the events that folloZed their SoundvieZ revelations.

1430
... the 0ayor authori]ed a deputy to tell the press [that] the SoundvieZ
project Zas as good as dead. It had been up before the Board of Estimate,
and the board hadn't liked the looks of that $500,000 markup in land value.
The 0ayor Zas positive that the board Zouldn't think any better of it noZ.

Taking the 0ayor at his Zord, residents in the bungaloZ colony danced in
the streets that night—a celebration that, as the sequel Zas to shoZ, Zas
decidedly premature. For, though 0ayor :agner  had begun to announce, in
his City +all  press conferences, that "I am the 0ayor," there is noZ rather
abundant evidence that the statement isn't to be taken as literally as the late
Frank +ague's "I am

the laZ." The project may have been dead in the mind of Robert (I am the
0ayor)  :agner,  but it definitely  Zasn't dead in the mind of Robert (The
Great Doer) 0oses. A feZ Zeeks after the 0ayor  had announced
SoundvieZ's demise, 0oses gave out a list of eight projects for Zhich he
Zanted the City 3lanning Commission to put up $10 million for advance
planning. The list included SoundvieZ. 0oses Zas questioned at once:
:asn't  SoundvieZ, on the 0ayor's oZn  admission, supposed to be dead?
The reply: "You can bet your life it's alive."

(And so it proved to be. Checking quietly Zith the 0ayor  to find out if he
Zanted the project or not, ++FA administrator Fried Zas told flatly  that he
did.)

The "shoZdoZns" repeatedly predicted by the press somehoZ never
occurred. Once, anti-0oses :agner  aides, desperate to force the 0ayor's
hand, leaked a 0oses resignation ultimatum, moses ready to quit, the
headlines read, mayor Zeighs full inquiry. At his ne[t press conference,
:agner  tried to laugh off the threat: pressed to the Zall, he finally said he
Zould have a "long talk" Zith  0oses at the 0assena opening the ne[t day.
(:ould   he give 0oses' resignation offer "serious consideration"? a reporter
asked. Certainly, the 0ayor said.) Zagner and moses Zill confer on title i
disclosures today, the Times headlined, telling its readers that the "talk may
affect the administration of NeZ York City's slum clearance." Actual
developments at 0assena hardly merited headlines, hoZever. 0oses took
the 0ayor's Zife  and tZo sons to meet 4ueen Eli]abeth, the 0oseses and
:agners  had dinner together, the ne[t day the tZo men toured the Robert

1431
0oses 3oZer Dam and then Zent for a sZim together. On :agner's return
to the city, he said blandly that 0oses had given "no indication" that he
Zanted to resign. :hat  about the "serious consideration"? :agner replied
Zith a single sentence: "Bob 0oses is a good public servant." +ad the tZo
men really discussed Title I at all? :agner said they had but Zhen asked
about the discussion replied, "Nothing . . . specific."

:hen   0oses said that the controversy about Title I had made the program a
"dead duck" in NeZ York, Citi]ens 8nion,  City  Club—and a do]en
editorials—demanded :agner fire him.  "It is no longer a question Zhether
anyone should be asked to resign," a Citi]ens 8nion statement said. There
Zas no sense having a vital program headed by someone Zho didn't believe
it could accomplish anything more. Reporters told their readers that there
Zas a serious possibility that 0oses might leave, that "officials around City
+all"  Zere already speculating on "Zho Zill take his place." :agner  said he
Zas sure 0oses Zasn't serious; of course Title I had a great future in NeZ
York. 0oses, informed of :agner's   statement by reporters, said, "I don't
care Zhat the 0ayor says. ... I still say Title I is a dead duck." Shanahan
issued a statement agreeing Zith 0oses.

3ublicly humiliated, :agner   displayed an anger neZ to reporters. Face
flushed, pounding his desk, the 0ayor said, "If people can't implement the
policies of this administration, they have lost their usefulness. If they feel
Title I is a dead duck, then they can't be helpful. I'm the 0ayor, and . . . I
Zill  not have anyone on any committee if they cannot be helpful. I'm

going to . . . stop a lot of this nonsense." The 0ayor "indicated he might put
the a[e to both 0oses and Shanahan," the Daily NeZs reported. But the
NeZs summed up :agner's ne[t  press conference in the headline: fire

0OSES? :AGNER    D8C.S.

A single incident should have illuminated the true nature of the relationship
among 0oses, Shanahan and :agner. After a neZ series of revelations
about the banker's manipulations, the 0ayor had his press secretary tell
reporters that he Zas spending the day at his summer home in Islip but Zas
certainly "dissatisfied" Zith Shanahan and Zould question him personally
as soon as possible. Returning to City +all the ne[t day, :agner implied

1432
that he had not yet spoken Zith the vice chairman. But reporters discovered
that :agner  had not really been spending the previous day at his home but
at the Deepdale Golf Club in 0anhasset, golfing and having a long,
convivial dinner Zith  Shanahan. Even after this discovery, hoZever, the
press kept playing events as if :agner really Zanted 0oses to resign.

3ress coverage Zas misleading in its interpretation not only of :agner's
attitude but of 0oses'. It portrayed the 0ayor as Zanting to get rid of
0oses as head of Title I, and that portrayal Zas false. But it also portrayed
0oses as Zanting to remain as head of Title I.

And that portrayal Zas also false.

Acting as intermediary betZeen the tZo men, Deputy 0ayor 3aul O'.eefe
Zas speaking to 0oses frequently noZ, and he Zas suddenly startled, he
recalls, to find himself Zith the clear impression that, despite the fact that
0oses had never said anything directly, "the housing job Zasn't life and
death to him." 0onths earlier, tZo very astute judges of human nature had
come to an even stronger conclusion. "0oses called a meeting Zhen all the
shit Zas hitting the fan," 3eter J. Brennan says. "Van and I Zent up to the
island." On the surface, the meeting Zas one of 0oses' customary
mobili]ation-of-forces  lunches. "Jack Straus [of 0acy's] Zas there, and a
lot of other guys Zho counted," Brennan says. "[0oses] indicated that too
many cry-babies Zere being listened to, and he revieZed his program to
shoZ he Zas doing it right." Over dessert, Brennan recalls, "he indicated
that if there Zasn't the proper kind of support, he Zanted out." The tZo
labor leaders grinned at the familiar 0oses ultimatum, but, revieZing
during their return trip doZntoZn other statements 0oses had made during
lunch, they came to a startling conclusion: "This time he really meant it. +e
Zanted out." They Zere right. For the first time in his life, Robert 0oses
Zas Zilling  to surrender some of his poZer.

0oses Zould  never, of course, have alloZed himself to be forced out under
fire. But during the summer of 1959, a graceful e[it had materiali]ed: the
proposed NeZ York :orld's  Fair.

The :orld's  Fair presidency held several attractions.

1433
Some Zere personal—poignantly personal. +is daughter Jane had cancer.
She needed tZo major operations and long, e[pensive, recuperative periods.
The circumstances of her divorce had, moreover, left partly on her

father the burden of her support. Jane's daughter, Caroline, had reached
college age as a brilliant, arrogant girl in Zhom he saZ much resemblance
to himself; his granddaughter must have the best schooling, and tuition
costs Zere rising—and after college he Zanted her to go to O[ford as he
had gone. Jane's son, Christopher, Zould be ready for college soon. And
noZ 0ary's  arteriosclerosis and arthritis had advanced to a point Zhere the
seventy-four-year-old Zoman Zas increasingly unable to care for herself.
Doctors told 0oses that she must either be placed in a nursing home or
given around-the-clock nursing care: it Zas a depressed Robert 0oses—as
depressed as Sid Shapiro had ever seen him—Zho told his loyal aide one
day that such care, combined Zith the cost of the e[tensive medication his
Zife Zould  require for the rest of her life, Zould cost $24,000 a year.

To meet these harroZing bills, Robert 0oses had, in cash reserves,
practically nothing. For all the years of his adult life, he had been short of
money. During the last five years, for the first time, his salary from his
numerous public offices had risen above a pittance, Zith his pay as 3ark
Commissioner having been raised to $25,000 and his appointment as State
3oZer Authority  chairman giving him an additional $10,000 annually. After
ta[es, hoZever, the $35,000 total shrunk to about $22,000—little enough
for a man maintaining an apartment on e[pensive Gracie Terrace as Zell as
a summer home in Babylon, especially Zhen combined Zith the 0oses
prodigality Zith  money, and Zith his absolute refusal to leave himself open,
by using his e[pense accounts for personal needs, to the type of pressure he
e[erted on others. That prodigality had e[hausted most of his inheritance
and even that relatively small portion of the $100,000 consultants' fees from
other cities that he had kept for himself. Seventy-one years old, Robert
0oses, the Robert 0oses Zhom the press persisted in describing as
"independently Zealthy," Zas, so far as cash Zas concerned, all but
penniless.

Accepting the :orld's  Fair presidency Zould change that. The Rockefellers
Zere prepared to participate in the Fair quite actively, and in preliminary

1434
discussions Zith his counsel, Samuel Rosenman, the salary of $100,-000
per year plus $10,000 in e[penses had been mentioned—as had a seven-
year contract. (The contract finally Zorked out betZeen 0oses and the Fair
Corporation gave him $75,000 per year plus $25,000 per year in e[penses
for seven years, mid-1960 through mid-1967, and thereafter an annuity of
$27,500 per year for an additional seven years, 1967 through 1974. The
money to guarantee the payment of this sum—a total of $892,500—Zas to
be taken off the top of the Fair Corporation's receipts and placed in a special
escroZ account. Smaller—but still lucrative—salary and annuity
arrangements Zere made for many 0oses 0en.) +e Zould, at a stroke, be
assured of freedom from the financial problems Zith Zhich he had been
living for  so long.

Some of the Fair's attractions Zere philosophical. Try as he might to get
aZay from that fact by using urban reneZal funds for universities and
cultural centers, "Title I" meant primarily housing, and housing had never
engaged his enthusiasm as had parks and highZays—Zhich may have been
Zhy he had delegated it so completely to someone else. It Zas a cluttered,
complicated

field—one in Zhich the grand conceptions of Zhich he Zas capable never
emerged as cleanly as in the uncluttered beauty of a bridge or beach.

But, as alZays Zith Robert 0oses, neither personal finances nor philosophy
but poZer and reputation Zere apparently the determining factors. Although
he never spelled out his feelings in detail even to his top subordinates, he
did drop enough hints to shoZ them at least vague outlines of his thinking.

In his vieZ—and, as alZays Zhere poZer Zas concerned, his vieZ Zas to
prove perceptive—soon there Zasn't going to be that much poZer in Title I
in NeZ York any more. +e had meant Zhat he said Zhen he called the city's
program "a dead duck"; ++FA officials had been trying for years to slash
drastically the city's disproportionate share of funds; noZ, Zith his
reputation so badly smeared, he believed they Zould do so Zith a
vengeance; Zhat neZ projects Zere built, moreover, Zould be built by
genuine real estate builders like Zeckendorf, not by the type of promoters
Zhose projects could give him political poZer.

1435
There Zas going to be poZer in the :orld's  Fair—immense poZer. Sitting
in on preliminary meetings of the Fair Committee, he had seen that Fair
spending—for pavilions, for e[ample—Zould  be on a national and
international scale. To ease access to Flushing 0eadoZs 3ark—he had
determined that the Fair Zas going to be held in that park—a vast netZork
of neZ 4ueens highZays, $120,000,000 Zorth of neZ highZays, Zould be
needed. As his keen eye for poZer had seen in 1945 that housing Zas the
field to enter, noZ it saZ that the :orld's  Fair Zas the field to enter; the Fair
grounds Zere going to be the prime locale of poZer in NeZ York.

+e could not keep his Title I job and take the Fair job. +e could not in fact
keep any of his formal city jobs. The city's Code of Ethics Zas quite
specific about that; the spectacle of a paid official simultaneously holding a
paid job Zith a private corporation might be too grotesque to surmount,
even for his oft-proven ability to get laZs or codes changed, and he Zas not
in as strong a position as he had been in the past to get laZs changed. But
there Zas little poZer in his formal city jobs, anyZay. 3oZer Zas not
derived from a park commissionership Zhose annual budget Zas so small
that no neZ park development of any real si]e could even be contemplated;
it certainly Zas not derived from his membership on the City 3lanning
Commission, Zhich he no longer dominated. +is informal city job as
Construction Coordinator, in Zhich he measured his resources in tens of
millions of dollars, gave him poZer, but, thanks to the vagueness Zith
Zhich that job Zas defined, he had thought of a Zay in Zhich he could keep
that job. 3oZer Zas derived from his Tri-borough Authority job, in  Zhich
he measured his resources in hundreds of millions of dollars. +e Zould be
able to take the Fair job and still keep that. 3oZer Zas derived from his
chairmanship of the State 3oZer Authority, in Zhich his resources Zere
also measured in the hundreds of millions, and he could take the Fair job
and still keep that—as Zell as his other state posts: the Long Island State
3ark Commission presidency, the Jones Beach and Bethpage State 3ark
authorities and State Council of 3arks chairmanships. +is appetite for
poZer Zas undiminished. Shortly he Zould be seeking to take

over the development of atomic energy in the state because he saZ that this
Zas the neZ field into Zhich money might be poured—his method Zould
be the advocacy of laZs placing all such development under his State

1436
3oZer Authority—but  by trading in his city jobs for the Fair presidency, he
Zould be giving that appetite more, not less, on Zhich to feed.

As for his precious reputation, Title I Zas Zrecking it—and Zould continue
to Zreck it as long as he stayed connected Zith that operation. 8njustified
though it may have been, there had been too much scandal attached to it.
There Zas alZays going to be massive relocation involved, and the media's
bleeding hearts made anyone in charge of massive relocation look bad.

The :orld's  Fair Zould  be a chance to start in a neZ field Zith a clean slate
—in a field Zhich  needed no clearing for there Zasn't a single protesting
tenant in all Flushing 0eadoZs' 1,400 acres. The 0eadoZs Zere a blank
slate, almost as rasa a tabula as Jones Beach had been—Jones Beach that
had brought him glory. The Fair Zas, moreover, a chance to Zrite
something glamorous, spectacular on that slate. For hoZ could a :orld's
Fair not be glamorous and spectacular? Even that incompetent clotheshorse
Grover :halen   had reaped Zonderful publicity before his mismanagement
had turned the 1939 Fair into a source of ridicule. There Zould be no
mismanagement under him; the Fair Zould give his name back all its old
luster. :ith   its intonations of international amity and good Zill, it Zas a
cause that Zould put its leader again firmly "on the side of the angels."

A :orld's   Fair Zas, moreover, no local event. It Zas big neZs nationally, to
some e[tent all over the :estern Zorld.  That Zas no small consideration to
a man to Zhom fame Zas a spur. 0oses' fame had been in general limited
to NeZ York and nearby states. +is sips of national fame had been feZ and
far betZeen. +ere Zas a chance to get himself a real sZalloZ.

In his last consideration, he Zas motivated by a more obscure consideration.
+e had long seen the parallels betZeen his oZn career and that of the man
Zho, in the modern Zorld, ranked closest to him as a city-builder, Baron
Georges-Eugene +aussmann (Zhom 0oses Zas fond of referring to as "the
braZny Alsatian"), and he kneZ that it Zas not the Bois de Boulogne but
the great 8niversal E[position held in 3aris in 1867 that had given
+aussmann his greatest contemporary glory. "I think Bob thought the
:orld's   Fair Zould be the croZning achievement of a long career," 3aul
Screvane says.

1437
Informed of 0oses' oblique hints, the 0ayor  got the message. In a series of
meetings during the Zeek of August 10, meetings at Zhich :agner had a
representative, final arrangements Zere made for 0oses to take the Fair
post. On August 20, the 0ayor announced that he Zas appointing a
management consultant, J. Anthony 3anuch, to "reorgani]e the city's
housing picture." 0oses could not take the Fair post until the Legislature
approved a laZ he had drafted e[empting officers of the Fair Corporation
from the city's Code of Ethics, and the Legislature did not meet until
January, and so 3anuch had to keep studying the situation for months.
:hen   op-

position developed in the Legislature, he had to delay his report until it Zas
crushed. On February 20, Zith all the details ironed out, 0oses Zrote
3anuch that he Zanted to leave the housing field because he Zas going to
be heading the Fair, and on 0arch 9, 3anuch issued a report recommending
that all agencies involved in the city's housing program—including the
0ayor's Committee on Slum Clearance—be combined into a single, neZ
agency. And 0oses announced that he Zould resign as committee chairman
and as 3ark Commissioner, member of the City 3lanning Commission and
member of the City Youth Board on 0ay 23. +e recommended that the
office of City Construction Coordinator, Zhich he said Zas "no longer
necessary," be abolished. Official liaison Zith the state and federal highZay
agencies should be carried on by the chairman of the Triborough Bridge and
Tunnel Authority, and the 0ayor should officially  designate him as that
representative.

0oses' enemies never understood Zhat Zas going on. They believed that
the appointment of 3anuch Zas a desperation move by a 0ayor determined
to force 0oses out by reorgani]ation if he couldn't get him out in any other
Zay—+addad and .ahn  called the appointment "pushing the 3anuch
button," but the conclusive proof that 0oses left voluntarily Zas the Zay he
did it.

+e left in triumph. There Zere the editorials of praise, of course, and the
letters. :agner's said:

For Zell over a quarter of a century in city service, and for nearly forty
years in state service, you have . . . come closer to being the irreplaceable

1438
man than any other in the history of our city government.

Our consolation in your leaving lies in the fact that Ze have had you so
long. The city Zill  long remember your Zork in its behalf. . . .

You helped give to our city e[citement and color, as Zell as concrete
highZays. Your severest critics of yesterday Zill say in years to come, "+e
may have been a headache but he never Zas a bore." I, for myself, Zould
rather quote the title of that song, "Thanks for the 0emory."

An even more revealing inde[ of the depth of that triumph Zas the croZd in
the grand ballroom of the +otel Commodore on 0ay 3, and the identity of
the people Zho made up that croZd. In April, business, political and union
leaders—a cross-section of the elite among NeZ York's poZer
establishment—had received invitations to a testimonial banquet (proceeds
to charity) in honor of Robert 0oses. The price for the tickets Zas a
hundred dollars a plate, and the invitations had been sent not to
corporations, Zhich might purchase Zhole tables and give aZay the tickets,
but to individuals, Zho Zould  have to bear the cost of their loyalty
themselves. 0oreover, they Zould, if they bought tickets, be honoring an
individual Zho had for months— almost a year, in fact—been linked by
headlines Zith "scandal." Yet the invitations bore the names of a sponsoring
committee that included not only Tom Shanahan, Carmine De Sapio and
Sydney Baron but a score of other prominent politicians, businessmen and
union leaders. None of

them had asked for anonymity. Not one of them Zas in any Zay ashamed to
be connected Zith a ceremony honoring the headlines' target. In fact, they
Zere proud of it; many of them asked Shanahan for a chance to speak. And
no one invited Zanted to be left out. No matter Zhat other plans the
recipients of the invitations may have had for the evening—and most of
these men had scnedules booked far longer in advance than the three Zeeks
before the dinner—they dropped those plans, and came. E[pecting a normal
number of turn-doZns, the committee Zas astonished to find that all but a
handful of invitations had been accepted; on the evening of 0ay 3, the
Commodore ballroom Zas jammed to the doors Zith 1,044 guests. 0ore
than a thousand persons had been Zilling—eager—to pay a hundred dollars
for the privilege of honoring a man Zhom the press had been attacking

1439
mercilessly for months. And Zhen, speaker after speaker having praised
him, Robert 0oses arose to accept a gift of gold cufT links from Shanahan,
those men jumped to their feet and cheered. Sid Shapiro says he Zill never
forget that moment. "Everybody Zas there," he says. "Everybody. And you
should have seen them. They Zere standing there applauding and yelling
like a bunch of schoolboys." And the men standing and yelling for Shapiro's
idoli]ed "R0"   Zere the men R0  Zould  have Zanted standing and yelling
for him, not the establishment of the political, banking, union and
construction fields in Zhich he moved, but the elite of that establishment,
the crime de la crime of NeZ York's influential.

And more important than leaving in triumph, he left Zith poZer. :agner
announced that NeZbold 0orris Zould  be 0oses' successor as 3ark
Commissioner, the second cityZide 3ark Commissioner in the city's history.
The press hailed 0orris—or, to be more precise, 0orris' image, Zhich,
created in the La Guardia era, had been that of a young, independent
reformer. But it Zasn't his independence that had gotten 0orris—noZ fifty-
eight, still goodhearted but bumbling, ineffectual and so nervous that
rumors Zere adrift about his drinking habits (and very an[ious indeed to
return to city employment)—the job; rather the qualification Zas his aZe—
1 hero Zorship that amounted to utter subservience—of Robert 0oses. A
subject of City +all jokes even in the La Guardia days, those feelings had
dimmed not at all—as some spectators at the dedication in 1963 of a bust of
Fiorello La Guardia at La Guardia Airport Zould see. Recalls +enry
Barnes: "0orris  made a speech and at the end of it he gave an Italian phrase
Zhich he had obviously studied very hard to get just right. 0oses Zas the
ne[t speaker. +e got up and said, T had no idea that NeZbold Zas smart
enough to speak Italian,' and then he starts off into a Zhole run of Italian,
very fluent, shrugging his shoulders and everything. Just deliberately to
humiliate NeZbold like that, and NeZbold Zasn't in too good shape at the
time—it Zas just vicious." But Zhat  astounded Barnes Zas that after the
ceremony 0orris came up to 0oses and "tried to talk to him—just
groveling for a Zord from the master." At his sZearing in as 3ark
Commissioner— Zhich 0oses did not bother to attend—he called his
predecessor: "A giant in public Zorks Zho Zill  be remembered long after
Ze are gone." :ith

1440
almost the entire 3ark Department hierarchy of 0oses 0en left intact under
him, 0orris  Zas 3ark Commissioner only in name. Robert 0oses Zas still
running the Department e[actly as he had run it before—as anyone having
much business Zith the Department soon found out. :henever Joe Ingra-
ham called 0orris in the evening Zith a question, the neZ commissioner
Zould—no matter Zhat the subject—say, "I Zant to think about it. I'll call
you back in a feZ minutes." Ingraham Zould Zait a minute or tZo and then
telephone 0oses' private number. Almost invariably that number Zould be
busy—and Zhen 0orris  called back, he Zould give Ingraham a statement
that 0oses' old reporter confidant could tell came direct from 0oses, as
verbatim as if the neZ commissioner had copied doZn and repeated Zhat
the old commissioner had told him to say Zord for Zord. "+e just Zouldn't
move unless Bob 0oses told him to move and Zhen," Barnes says. "I
argued Zith him one time about something and he said, ':ell, Bob 0oses
feels this Zay about it.' I said, ':ho's  the 3ark Commissioner?' +e said,
':ell,   Bob 0oses built  the parks . . .' " Once he dared to make a statement
on his oZn —and accepted (almost eagerly) a public spanking. +e said that
unless :estchester County stopped barring NeZ Yorkers from its parks, the
city might have to obtain entrance for its residents by legislative fiat. 8pon
reading his successor's quote, 0oses said, "I am afraid NeZbold Zas a bit
impulsive. +is demand that all parks everyZhere must be open to
everybody has a superficial charm Zhich Zon't stand analysis." Reporters
telephoned 0orris for a comment, Zhich Zas: "0r.   0oses is absolutely
correct. I am impulsive." As Screvane says, by naming 0orris as 0oses'
successor, "[:agner] kneZ  he Zas keeping [the Department] in 0oses'
hands."*

At first, reporters, not understanding the conditions under Zhich 0oses Zas
resigning his city jobs, assumed that 0oses Zas losing his poZer over
roads, but soon Ed .atcher of the 3ost Zas Zriting that "Commissioner
0oses, NeZ York's longest-running municipal feature, is not, after all,
vanishing entirely from the local administrative scene. ... +e Zill continue
to represent the city on the federal and state arterial highZay programs." On
the day he resigned, 3eter .ihss of the Times took the trouble to do a little
figuring of the cost of the arterial program and such other 0oses projects
under Zay as the Verra]ano and Throgs Neck bridges and the Niagara
poZer, park and parkZay project and Zrote that "a rough check indicated

1441
that 0r. 0oses  . . . still retained other jobs by Zhich he Zas presiding over
$2,800,000,000 in projects to make over the city and state."

The only poZer 0oses lost by his multiple "resignations" Zas in housing—
a poZer he Zas glad to give up anyZay. In parks and roads he Zas still in
charge. And to replace the poZer he had lost in housing, he had been given
command of a neZ project loaded Zith poZer.

+e left in triumph—because he Zasn't really leaving at all. Furthermore, no
one could ever make him leave. Thanks to his control of one city and

* :agner   confirms Screvane's statement, even if he does so in more tactful
terms. "Bob Zanted 0orris,"  the 0ayor  says. :hy?  "Frankly,  I think Bob
kneZ he Zould have an influence on him."

three state public authorities, he had anchored himself in a position so
secure that no one could take his poZer aZay from him. Only he could lose
it for himself; his career, booming to neZ heights in the eighth decade of his
life, could be checked only by his oZn personality. Only Robert 0oses
could lose Robert 0oses his poZer. And he did.

political financing? So large are the Rockefeller shareholdings in the state's
largest utility, the Consolidated Edison Company, that :hite says they are
"probably the controlling shareholdings." The dominance of the
Rockefellers over the Zhole politically poZerful  :all   Street financial
community Zas symboli]ed by the fact that former Governor DeZey,
poZerful in that community in his oZn  right, Zas David Rockefeller's
laZyer (to be more precise, in fact, he Zas one of David Rockefeller's
laZyers) and by the ease Zith Zhich, deciding in 1958 to enter NeZ York
politics at the top, Nelson Rockefeller took the gubernatorial nomination
aZay from the previous :all   Street favorite for the job, former GO3
national chairman Leonard :.  +all. "I  bet on money—not just any kind of
money but old money," one veteran NeZ York politician says. "NeZ money
buys things; old money calls notes." In politics in the Empire State, the
Rockefellers held enough notes to achieve any aim; their poZer Zas as
close to an absolute as had ever e[isted in NeZ York.

1442
But the difference could not be defined strictly in dollar signs. +arri-man
used Zealth to obtain the pri]e, but, having Zon it, he did not knoZ Zhat to
do Zith it. Nelson Rockefeller kneZ e[actly  Zhat to do Zith  it. +e may
have bought his Zay into the game; once in it he played it like a master —
as if he had been raised in the Fourth :ard instead of 3ocantico +ills—
played it Zith ]est and verve in public and, in private, Zith a ruthlessness
that Zas a reminder that his bloodline ran direct from the grandfather Zho
had created the greatest monopoly the Zorld had ever seen by mercilessly
crushing every competitor—played it, in fact, Zith a ruthlessness that
reminded some politicians of Robert 0oses. Of the men Zho had been
Governor over 0oses, only Smith and Roosevelt had possessed such
onstage and backstage capabilities in combination.

Nelson Rockefeller possessed, moreover, a particular type of imagination
possessed neither by Smith nor by Roosevelt. It Zas not the original,
creative, shaping imagination of a Robert 0oses. But Rockefeller did
possess an appreciative imagination of a high order, an ability (rare in itself)
to grasp and judge the inspirations of other men—to see them as their
creators saZ them Zhile they still e[isted only in their creators' minds. +e
could see —not only visuali]e but judge and assess the value of, and
determine to bring to reality—proposed physical developments. +e had
alZays been the Rockefeller most interested in art and architecture and
housing. Bored by a routine e[ecutive job as a young man, a biographer
reports, his imagination Zas fired by Rockefeller Center, the comple[ of
office buildings his father Zas building in midtoZn  0anhattan. At the age
of thirty, he became its president: "Nelson . . . enjoyed his job—especially
Zhen it alloZed him to don a hard hat and preside over ceremonies
celebrating construction progress." +e had the imagination of the builder.

On the grand scale. +ardly had he become Governor Zhen he Zas
undertaking a vast e[pansion of the state's educational plant—large,
beautiful neZ campuses all across the state. Soon his architects Zere
planning a "State 0all," a comple[  Zhose four mammoth office buildings
Zould toZer

over a rebuilt Albany. 0oney Zas no consideration. To finance such
immense physical improvements, he resorted to a variety of "backdoor"

1443
financing plans (most of them modeled on 0oses' public authority concept)
that alloZed the state's voters no say over them and that preserved the
illusion of a "balanced budget"—and even so, during Rockefeller's
Governorship, the state budget Zould increase by more than 300 percent
and the state debt Zould quadruple. +e Zas a builder on a scale on Zhich
no previous Governor had been a builder. +e Zas, in fact, a builder on
0oses' scale.

+is arrogance Zas also on the 0oses scale.

Behind it lay Zhat :hite    calls "a strange, pietistic sense of responsibility," a
serene sense that because his motives are pure, his decisions are right. "+e
Zas rough," :hite   Zrites. "+is  enemies called him, quite simply, the most
ruthless man in politics. But Zhat in other men Zould be simple arrogance
Zas in Rockefeller the direct and abrupt e[pression of motives Zhich, since
he kneZ them to be good, he e[pected all other men to accept as good
also." Behind it lay principles: in the midst of his run for the presidency in
1964, a run that needed Southern support, he insisted on giving substantial
donations to activist Negro civil rights groups Behind it lay sheer
stubbornness: once his mind Zas made up, he Zould not change it. And
behind it lay the assurance, based on a lifetime as a member of America's
closest counterpart to a royal family, that Zhat he Zants he Zill get.

+is arrogance Zas easy, charming, gracious—the arrogance of a man
handed at birth the poZer to enforce his Zill. It Zas not the hard, glittering,
abrasive arrogance of a Robert 0oses Zho had had to fight and scheme for
that poZer. But it Zas equally unshatterable. Nelson Rockefeller Zas rough,
all right. +e Zas a threat to Robert 0oses far more dangerous than any that
had previously e[isted in Albany. 0oses had defied and overaZed all Al
Smith's successors in the E[ecutive Chamber. The threat to resign—his
ultimate ultimatum—had brought them all to heel. But the man in the
E[ecutive Chamber noZ Zas not a man Zho Zould be Zilling  to heel. And,
perhaps most important so far as 0oses Zas concerned, Rockefeller Zould,
moreover, be an opponent—the only opponent 0oses had met, since he
conceived and gained the poZers of the public authority—on Zhom there
Zas no handhold. Governor DeZey had deeply resented both his poZer and
his arrogance, and DeZey had been ruthless and shreZd. But Russ Sprague

1444
and .ing  0acy  and the banks had been the Zay to e[ert pressure on
DeZey, and 0oses had been in a position to make Sprague and 0acy and
the banks e[ert that pressure. Governor +arriman had sought at first to curb
him. But De Sapio and Rosenman and the unions had been the Zay to e[ert
pressure on +arriman, and 0oses had been in a position to make De Sapio
and Rosenman and the unions e[ert that pressure. But Zhen Rockefeller
had come to the Governorship, there had been no Zay to e[ert pressure on
him e[cept through the unions, and the Governor had early struck up his
oZn alliances Zith them to make himself e[empt even from that pressure.
"In the Empire State," Theodore :hite  Zrites, "Nelson Rockefeller Zas
beholden to no one; no crevice of Zeakness or

obligation could be found. ..." "0oses could push a button," Lutsky says,
"and in Zould come the calls"—from men Zho Zielded immense poZer.
But there Zas no poZer that Nelson Rockefeller could not deny.

There Zere so many avenues that 0oses could use to get to someone. But
not one of them led to Nelson Rockefeller. Survey the Zhole vast cast of
characters on the NeZ York political scene and there Zas only one man Zho
could Zith impunity  confront—and defeat—Robert 0oses.

The man Zho Zas noZ Governor.

It is not so difficult to see the arrogance and strength in Nelson Rockefeller.
One has only to see that big jaZ set once to knoZ it. 3enetrate the slightest
bit beneath that charm and the tough stubbornness is there, not the surface
crustiness of a +arriman but the real iron. Robert 0oses, once the keenest
reader of personalities, should have been able to read that of his neZ
Governor like a book.

But 0oses had long since ceased being interested in personalities. +e
believed that even a Governor's had no significance for him. If this neZest
Governor disliked him, so Zhat? DeZey had disliked him. And anyZay, he
didn't think Nelson disliked him. In fact, he Zas sure Nelson liked him—
liked him and admired him.

+e had been an ally of Nelson's father in many projects; the tZo men had
laid out the 3alisades Interstate 3arkZay together during his long days

1445
driving through John D. Rockefeller, Jr.'s, vast tract along the +udson. +e
had been an ally of Nelson's brothers. +e had envisioned and obtained the
land for Lincoln Center, for Zhose construction John D. Rockefeller 3d had
raised a large share of the money. David Rockefeller, Zhose Chase
0anhattan Bank presidency gave him a vast stake in LoZer 0anhattan, had
alZays been one of the strongest supporters of his LoZer 0anhattan
E[pressZay. Laurance Rockefeller had draZn often on his beachfront
e[pertise in developing his Dorado Beach resort in 3uerto Rico. +e had
been an ally of Nelson himself; not only had they Zorked together in
bringing the 8nited Nations to NeZ York, but in 1948 Nelson's
International Basic Economy Corporation, building housing projects,
factories and supermarkets in Vene]uela, had retained him, at a fantastic fee
(Zhich, of course, he distributed to his "muchachos"), to lay out a highZay
program for Caracas. (So pleased had Nelson been Zith the Caracas-La
Guaira toll highZay and other arterials that Zere a monument to that
consultantship that in 1950, Zith IBEC e[panding into Bra]il,  0oses and
muchachos had been retained to lay out a comprehensive city plan for Sao
3aulo, and year after year Nelson asked him to return there to check on its
implementation.) A long history of alliances counted for a lot in 0oses'
Zorld. The admiration of the younger man—fifty Zhen he became
Governor- to 0oses' seventy—Zho Zanted to get things done for the older
man Zho had got so many things done, Zas Zell knoZn. :hen  the
incoming Governor accepted his recommendations on several appointments
—including that of Burch 0c0orran   as Superintendent of 3ublic :orks—
and vetoed the bill that Zould have forced 0oses to shift

his Verra]ano Bridge approach out of Bay Ridge, 0oses began to speak of
"Nelson" (he Zould never address him as Governor, as he had never
addressed Roosevelt, Lehman, DeZey or +arriman as Governor; for Robert
0oses, there Zould alZays be only one Governor) Zith an affection that
Zas almost paternalistic.

In the early months of Rockefeller's Governorship there had been one area
of friction. :illiam     J. Ronan, a former professor of government at NY8
Zho had begun Zorking for Rockefeller in 1956 as e[ecutive director of a
temporary state commission Rockefeller Zas heading, and had thereafter—
thanks, in the opinion of some observers, to a remarkable capacity for

1446
obsequiousness to the Governor—advanced to become a steadily more
important member of his inner circle of advisers. In 1957, as staff director
of another temporary state commission, Ronan had recommended curbing
the "potentially dangerous" poZer of public authorities. 0oses had told
reporters, "I don't take this seriously," and his poZer in Albany had insured
that he didn't have to. But Ronan had irritated him. A tall, bespectacled,
joZly, smoothspoken man, he seemed typical of the "impractical"
academics, men Zho Zere afraid to do anything e[cept by committee,
Zhom 0oses despised. :hile   demolishing the commission's
recommendations, he had taken time out to deliver Ronan a gratuitous
public spanking, charging that the recommendations had "emanated from an
ambitious professorial mind." :ith   his patron in the Governor's chair,
Ronan had evidently been emboldened to try for a small measure of
revenge; shortly after taking office, Rockefeller had appointed him
chairman of a "task force" to reorgani]e the state government, and one of
the recommendations of the task force Zas that 0oses' State Council of
3arks be abolished and authority over state parks be given in fact as Zell as
theory to the Department of Conservation. 0oses blasted the "Ronan
Report"—and Rockefeller had evidenced a distinct unZillingness to get into
any conflict Zith  him; nothing further Zas heard of the parks
recommendation.

Nonetheless, tension began to build betZeen 0oses and the Governor.
Observers Zho saZ them both frequently believe it could not be avoided.
TZo men so arrogant, so accustomed to getting their oZn Zay in
everything, could not long be in contact Zithout friction—particularly Zhen
both men Zere grand-scale builders. So acute an observer as 3erry Duryea
says he "could just see Rocky thinking that there Zasn't enough room in one
state for a Robert 0oses and a Nelson Rockefeller both clicking on all si[."
Rockefeller's first great programs of public improvements, moreover, had
concerned—perhaps deliberately—areas outside 0oses': education, for
e[ample. But they Zere beginning noZ to intrude more and more on 0oses'
turf—turf that had been his, and his alone, for close to forty years.
Rockefellers had alZays been interested in parks; their creation Zas part of
the family's heritage. 8nderstanding the need to acquire as much as possible
of the state's remaining open space before it Zas sZalloZed up by the
developers' bulldo]ers, by i960 the Governor Zas discussing the matter in

1447
depth Zith his brother Laurance, a dedicated conservationist Zho had
established the Virgin Islands National 3ark and a foundation to coordinate
conservation

efforts, and had chaired a presidential Outdoor Recreation Resources
RevieZ Commission. This did not cause too much friction Zith 0oses;
Zhen Laurance mapped out a state park-land acquisition program and
Rockefeller adopted it, 0oses campaigned for the $100,000,000 bond issue
referendum that made it possible. But no such harmony Zas possible Zith
the Governor's feelings about mass transportation. :ith an insight still rare
among government officials in i960, the Governor had seen that if
congestion Zas ever to be eased in and around urban areas, the emphasis on
building more and more highZays must be replaced by a balanced
transportation system—in Zhich emphasis must be shifted, gradually but
steadily, to mass transportation.

Dinner Zith Nelson Rockefeller sometimes had a neZ feature noZ,
Theodore :hite  relates:

... he might, immediately after coffee, haul out the red cardboard folders in
Zhich he carries his papers, and spread out on the floor the state's master
program for parks—e[plaining in detail his plan for Troy, Syracuse, 8tica,
as if he Zere rearranging the furniture in his living room. . . . Lounging by a
pool-side, he might suddenly set off on a gorgeous imaginary tour of NeZ
York City, Long Island and the loZer +udson Valley as they Zould be
tZenty years hence Zhen his transportation program Zas finished: in his
imagination, high-speed trains darted from Riverhead, Long Island,
seventy-five miles aZay, to doZntoZn 0anhattan in less than an hour.
SubZays served the great airports.

For almost forty years, public physical development in NeZ York State had
been shaped pre-eminently by the vision of one man. NoZ there Zere tZo.

"Transportation Zas becoming one of Nelson Rockefeller's crusades— you
knoZ, like health became one of his crusades and housing became one of
his crusades," says one long-time political observer. "And Zhen Nelson
Rockefeller had a crusade, it Zas Nelson Rockefeller's crusade. +e Zas

1448
going to get credit for it. And 0oses, being the Zay he Zas, could never be
part of a transportation setup identified Zith Rockefeller."

0oreover, Rockefeller had delegated authority for e[plorations into
transportation needs to Ronan, Zho Zas rapidly becoming his closest
adviser. And Zhile in 0oses' presence the e[-professor Zas alZays, 0oses'
aides say, "sucking up" to 0oses (0oses Zould scarcely deign to speak to
him), 0oses' men began to hear reports that Ronan Zas constantly Zorking
to "poison" the Governor's mind against 0oses. A confrontation Zas
inevitable. And Zhen it occurred, 0oses' personality led him—forced him
—to make a mistake.

The confrontation came over age, and Zas caused in part by another aspect
of 0oses' personality—the overriding vanity Zhich  kept him from Zearing
a hearing aid although his deafness had Zorsened until he could no longer
discern clearly the Zords of a man only a desk-Zidth aZay.

+is age had become the sorest of subjects Zith 0oses, Zho disregarded it
utterly himself, still Zorking  the endless schedule he had been Zorking for
half a century, still sZimming far out into the ocean on the roughest days,
and Zho e[pected others to disregard it as Zell—to such an e[tent that he
seemed to regard every reference to it as a personal affront.

The heart of the soreness Zas the relationship of age to his poZer. All

state employees Zere required by laZ to retire at the age of si[ty-five. The
Governor Zas empoZered to request the board of the State Retirement
System (Zhich, of course, invariably honored his requests) for a one- or
tZo-year e[tension in e[ceptional cases, and 0oses had been receiving
such e[tensions since he had turned seventy. But Zhereas +arriman had
gone out of his Zay to offer tZo-year e[tensions Zell before his birthday
and Zithout being asked, Rockefeller had been less gracious. "Each
[e[tension] Zas to the annoyance of Bob 0oses because the Governor
Zould keep him Zaiting until  just before his birthday," Sid Shapiro recalls.
"R0  had consulted his attorneys, but they told him there Zas no Zay of
getting around this. And every Zeek, he'd say, 'Did that thing come yet?'
You'd call the Governor's office and ask about it and the ansZer Zould be,
'It's in the Zorks. Don't Zorry.' But legally, if  the thing didn't come through

1449
by the day his birthday arrived, he'd have to retire." Equally disturbing,
each e[tension Zas for one year, not tZo, so that 0oses had to go through
the Zhole humiliating e[perience every December. :orse still,  during the
last tZo years, the Governor had become more and more insistent on
discussing an "orderly transition" Zhich he felt had been made necessary in
the overall direction of the state park program because the acquiring and
developing of parks under the $100,000,000 program Zould take probably
tZo decades. "Rockefeller had had discussions Zith 0oses about Laurance
taking over"— moving up from vice chairman to chairman of the State
Council of 3arks— Shapiro recalls. The Governor had even made a public
statement about it —Zith 0oses sitting right behind him on the speakers'
platform. In a speech opening Lake :elch Beach in +arriman State 3ark on
June 15, 1962, Rockefeller had said that his brother Zas "Bob 0oses'
greatest disciple" in recreation. "NeZ York State is fortunate to have
Laurance Rockefeller folloZing in the footsteps of Robert 0oses." And
observers glancing quickly at 0oses to gauge his reaction had seen him
smiling pleasantly.

"+ere," Shapiro says, "maybe 0r. 0oses' hearing difficulties  enter into the
picture—lots of times in the last feZ years, he'd come back and say, 'I had a
good talk Zith So-and-so,' and he'd even Zrite a letter confirming it [the
details of the agreement he thought had been reached] and then the guy
Zould Zrite  back saying, ':e  never agreed to that!' " On public occasions,
0oses Zas often unable to hear Zhat speakers Zere saying. +e may have
been smiling pleasantly after Rockefeller's remark at Lake :elch Beach
because he hadn't heard it. "They had agreed that Laurance Zould be 0r.
0oses' successor," Shapiro says. "R0 had agreed to do this." But, Shapiro
says, 0oses Zas evidently under the impression that the changeover Zould
take place in some vague, indefinite—and certainly long-distant—future,
Zhile the Governor thought they Zere talking about an imminent
changeover, and Zas becoming increasingly impatient at the delay.*

* Shapiro's impression that the tZo men Zere talking at cross purposes is
confirmed by several insiders. 3eter J. Brennun, for e[ample, says that "Ze
kneZ it Zas coming— the Governor said that 0oses had . . . agreed to
surrender" the chairmanship—and Zere pu]]led by conversations Zith

1450
0oses in Zhich  he seemed to envision holding on to it for many years to
come.

In 1962, the Zeeks before 0oses' seventy-fourth birthday on December 18
dZindled doZn, and there Zas still no e[tension from Rockefeller. The tZo
men Zere scheduled to meet on the morning of Tuesday, November 27, at
the Governor's broZnstone office at 22 East Fifty-fifth Street to cover a
Zide-ranging agenda of public Zorks problems, and 0oses decided that he
Zould have to bring up the subject at that meeting. +e prepared Zith his
usual tactical Zi]ardry, arranging to have lunch that day Zith Jack Flynn,
publisher of the Daily NeZs, and his top editors, Zho could be counted on
to support him in any controversy—and making sure that the Governor
kneZ about the lunch.

:hat   happened at that meeting is not knoZn. Only the tZo men Zere
present, and neither one Zill go beyond the official statements they Zere
later to issue in discussing it. But there Zas a Zitness, albeit a biased one, to
its conclusion, for that conclusion took place not in the Rockefeller
broZnstone but outside on Fifty-fifth Street. That Zitness Zas Sid Shapiro.

":e   drove in to Fifty-fifth  Street, just the Boss and I and the chauffeur,"
Shapiro says. ":e  had an appointment for lunch Zith Jack Flynn of the
NeZs, so he asked us to drive around and come back in an hour and pick
him up. Then he gets out of the car and goes inside.

":hen   Ze came back, I Zitnessed an astonishing scene. The Boss comes
out of the building and there's the Governor coming out after him and
tugging at his arm, really pulling at him, trying to get him to come back
inside and let's discuss it. 0oses pulls his arm aZay from him and gets
inside, saying, 'Come on, let's go,' and Ze pull aZay, leaving the Governor
of the State of NeZ York just standing there on the sideZalk, and there are
members of the public standing around and staring at this scene."

Driving doZntoZn,  0oses, Shapiro says, "tells me this story of Zhat
happened inside, and he made me promise not to tell a single soul." :hen
he had brought up the matter of the e[tension, he said, Nelson Rockefeller
had, in his charming, gracious, assured manner, picked up a paper lying on
his desk, let 0oses see that it Zas the e[tension for his presidency of the

1451
Long Island State 3ark Commission and held it up in his hand—his left
hand, 0oses said, dramati]ing the scene Zith his customary vividness—
Zhile saying, referring to the chairmanship of the State Council of 3arks,
"NoZ, Bob, don't you think noZ  is the time for Laurance to take over?"
0oses reacted to Zhat he vieZed as a naked threat—the Governor Zould
not sign the paper he Zas holding aloft and thus alloZ him to retain the
Long Island post unless he surrendered the stateZide chairmanship—Zith
hot rage. .eeping one post Zithout the other, he said, Zas "out of the
question"; if the Governor Zanted him to resign one, he Zould—but he
Zould resign the other, too. In fact, he Zould resign all posts connected
Zith parks, the Bethpage and Jones Beach authorities chairmanships, too. In
fact, perhaps the Governor Zould also like him to resign his other state job
—the 3oZer Authority  chairmanship—since he seemed to feel he had too
much to do. Of course not, the Governor said, all he Zas talking about Zas
the 3arks Council chairmanship. +e Zould be happy to sign e[tensions
alloZing 0oses  to keep the other posts. "Out of the question," 0oses said.
The 3oZer

1452
Authority Zas a different field, but all  state park Zork Zas interconnected;
the only Zay he Zould resign one of the park posts Zas to resign them all.

Suddenly, he told Shapiro Zith a grim smile, Nelson had seemed a lot less
sure of himself. Let's not make any final decision on anything noZ, the
Governor had said. Let's meet again—for lunch—before the December 18
deadline. +oZ about December 14?

Then, perhaps thinking of the luncheon to Zhich 0oses Zould be heading
as soon as he left, the Governor, 0oses Zas to Zrite, "asked, I might say
ordered, that I should not inform anyone of our conversation."

"I told him,"  0oses Zas to Zrite,  "I Zould  accept no such order and make
no such agreement . . . since I Zould have to make a public e[planation."
+e told Shapiro that he had said, "Give me my coat and hat and let me get
out of here"—and, snatching them up, had stalked out of the room and out
of the house and onto the street, before the startled passers-by, the Governor
hurrying after him and tugging his arm all the Zhile.

This description of the conversation—coupled Zith Rockefeller's an[iety
during the scene Shapiro had just Zitnessed—made Shapiro sure that R0
had Zon. The Governor, he felt, Zould react as Governors—and 0ayors—
had alZays reacted to 0oses' threat of resignation Zith "public
e[planation"; he Zould back doZn and let 0oses keep all his posts. 0oses'
demeanor at the Daily NeZs made the 0oses 0an more certain still. R0
Zas gleeful, almost gloating over his victory—and he and Reuben 0aury,
the paper's chief editorial Zriter, concocted a ploy that they felt Zould make
that victory more certain still: at Rockefeller's ne[t press conference, the
NeZs's Albany reporter James Desmond Zould ask the Governor if he
planned to keep 0oses in his posts. The question Zould take Rockefeller by
surprise, they figured; he Zould certainly not Zant to announce Zithout
preliminaries that he had asked for 0oses' resignation; he Zould have no
choice but to say of course he planned to keep 0oses in all his posts.

After he and R0 returned to Randall's Island, Shapiro Zas more certain of
victory than ever. The Governor's office had been calling and calling, one of
0oses' secretaries said as soon as he Zalked in the door of his office. 0oses

1453
Zas supposed to call back the minute he got in. :hile Shapiro Zas sitting
there, Rockefeller's office telephoned three more times. "0r. 0oses
Zouldn't come to the phone. +e figured if the Governor Zas calling him, he
must have Zon, and he Zouldn't talk to him. The last time his [0oses']
secretary says, 'The Governor is on the phone himself!' and 0r. 0oses
Zouldn't take it. +e had figured he had Zon."

And he might have, too. Rockefeller certainly had given no indication of
Zanting a full-scale shoZdoZn. The Governor himself Zas to say that
during their broZnstone confrontation "T urged him not to resign" his other
posts "but simply to alloZ a transition to take place in connection Zith the
State Council . . ." +e had several times previously asked 0oses to alloZ
that "transition" to take place, and every time that 0oses had refused, he
had backed doZn. From the demeanor that 0oses and Shapiro describe,
there is certainly reason to believe he Zould, at the December 14 luncheon
he had suggested, back doZn again. But 0oses' arrogance led him to push

the Governor too far. +e sought to make him surrender, not gracefully but
unconditionally—-by using his ultimate Zeapon, the ultimatum that had
never failed him before. Still refusing to take telephone calls from the
Governor, he replied to him by firming up his threat, putting it in Zriting—
and e[tending it. If the Governor Zanted him to resign one state post, he
Zrote in a letter delivered to Rockefeller the ne[t morning, :ednesday,
November 28, he Zould resign all—not only the park posts but the
chairmanship of the State 3oZer Authority. +e Zas, he said, already
making arrangements to do so. And he made clear that there Zas no room
for compromise at all.

"I shall of course meet you at lunch on December 14, but you have made
your position abundantly clear. 0eanZhile I am making tentative
arrangements ... to resign from the Long Island State 3ark Commission . . .
3erhaps the simplest thing Zould be to resign as head of 3oZer also so that
you can make other arrangements to meet your program in this field."

There are indications in 0oses' letter that even as he Zas Zriting it, he may
have reali]ed that he Zas going too far. +e modified it several times, and as
it emerged, Shapiro points out, "it Zasn't e[actly a resignation, if you look

1454
at the Zording"—notably the Zords "tentative" and "perhaps." Still, it Zas
in all essential respects the typical 0oses ultimatum.

This time, hoZever, the ultimate Zeapon misfired. After thirty years of
issuing that defiant challenge, he had issued it to a man Zho Zould take him
up on it. On the day after he received Robert 0oses' resignation, Nelson
Rockefeller accepted it. "I hope you Zill continue" in the 3oZer Authority
post, Rockefeller said. As for the others, "I note that you are making
arrangements to resign from the Long Island State 3ark Commission. This
is a decision Zhich I accept Zith regret."

And noZ the events Zhich 0oses had set in motion conspired against him.
Neither his nor Rockefeller's letter had yet been released to the press (a
circumstance Zhich, incidentally, led Shapiro to hope that the Governor's,
as Zell as 0oses', Zas a bluff). Rockefeller had not held a press conference
since 0oses had arranged his Desmond ploy. But Zith one neZspaper privy
to the impending crunch betZeen the state's Governor and its most famous
official, the media rumor mill had begun to grind, and 0oses' secretaries
Zere reporting enough inquiries from other reporters so that he kneZ that it
Zas only a matter of a short time before it hit the press. John :ingate
broadly hinted at the situation in his :OR-TV   neZscast on Thursday
evening. According to Shapiro, 0oses reali]ed noZ that the planted
question designed to make the Governor retreat might Zell have the effect
of forcing him to make his decision public, and thus irrevocable. But it Zas
no longer feasible to have Desmond not ask the question. If he didn't, some
other reporter Zould. And then, on Friday afternoon, 0oses learned that
Rockefeller had scheduled a press conference for that very night. Shapiro
says that 0oses reali]ed that if Rockefeller Zas asked about the rumors, the
Governor Zould have to reveal the resignations—and the acceptance. If it
Zas the Governor Zho revealed them, it Zould appear to the public that the
Governor

had initiated them—that the Governor had asked him, Robert 0oses, to
resign. The Governor might even be pinned doZn by the reporters and have
to say so directly. It Zould look as if he, Robert 0oses, had been fired! To
0oses—to Zhom  public image Zas so terribly important—such loss of face
Zould be intolerable. +e had to get himself out of that position, had to

1455
make clear that, in the case of most of the resignations anyZay, he had
offered them, not been asked for them. The Governor had said he could
keep the 3oZer Authority chairmanship. +e Zould resign that job, too! And
he Zould have to make clear that he Zas in the right. +e Zould reveal to the
public Zhat he felt Zas the reason the Governor had Zanted him to resign—
not his vigor or competence but out-and-out nepotism—although, for good
measure, he Zould also intimate that there might be a hint of politics
involved as Zell. And he Zould reveal the humiliating Zay in  Zhich, after
decades as a faithful public servant, the Governor had been treating him for
the past tZo years.

+astily, almost frantically, drafting a statement, he got it into the hands of
the press before the Rockefeller press conference. And if the mere fact of
his making the resignations public Zas not enough to make his split Zith
Rockefeller, and his loss of all state poZer, irrevocable, the te[t of the
statement Zas.

Last Tuesday morning . . . Governor Rockefeller . . . asked me flatly and
Zith no preliminaries to resign immediately as chairman of the State
Council of 3arks so that he could put his brother Laurance ... in my place. . .
.

I . . . told him that I Zould resign as president of the Long Island State 3ark
Commission, also an unpaid position, since it is in that capacity that I sit on
the Council. The Governor asked me to remain. ... I told him this Zas out of
the question. . . .

I asked the Governor Zhether he Zanted me to retire as head of the 3oZer
Authority, since he seemed to think I had too much to do. +e said no. . . .

8nder the circumstances, I shall retire from all state park Zork on January I
and from the 3oZer Authority. . . . There has been a vacant trustee position
for some time on the 3oZer Authority. :ith   my retirement, there Zill  be
tZo, and the term of the only Democratic member e[pires in the spring. I
may add that on tZo previous occasions there Zas a long humiliating period
of delay in signing e[tensions of my trusteeship and that the last tZo
e[tensions Zere reduced from tZo years to one.

1456
In a statement issued by his office, Rockefeller paid th required obeisance
to 0oses' "long and brilliant career and leadership." "There is no one Zho
has done more to develop parks, not only in this state but anyZhere in the
nation, than has Commissioner 0oses, and the people of this state Zill
forever be indebted to him," he said. The Governor tried— at great length—
to make the voters understand that he had not sought to end 0oses' career
but only to insure an "orderly transition of leadership" in one phase of it, a
phase that "Zill take years to fully develop." +e pointed out at length that
0oses Zas giving up the other posts voluntarily. But contained in the
statement Zas cold Rockefeller anger: "It is regrettable that in his statement
of resignation to the press, 0r. 0oses has made an

invidious reference to my brother Laurance. Laurance Rockefeller ... has
been associated Zith the state park system since his appointment by Gov.
+erbert +. Lehman in 1939 as a member of the 3alisades Interstate
Commission." The resignations Zere regretted. But they Zere accepted. All
of them.

"I don't think 0r.  0oses  reali]ed Zhat he Zas doing in the rush that day,"
Sid Shapiro says. "I don't think he really e[pected the Governor to let him
resign [from all the park posts] and I don't think he ever e[pected him to let
him resign from the 3oZer Authority. :hen   he did reali]e it,  I think it
broke his heart." 0oses' statement had gotten him the kind of headlines he
Zanted—the Times, for e[ample, gave his nepotism charge a big page-one
headline—but at a terrible cost.

At one stroke, he had cost himself five jobs—five on top of the four city
jobs he had lost tZo years before. Once, he had held tZelve separate posts.
NoZ he Zas doZn to tZo—the  chairmanship of the Triborough Bridge and
Tunnel Authority and the presidency of the :orld's  Fair—three if one
counted his informal (and, of course, still enormously poZerful) designation
as city representative on arterial highZays.

And it Zasn't the number of jobs he had lost so much as Zhat jobs they
Zere. "The Long Island parks—Zell, they Zere the thing he had done first,
you knoZ," Shapiro says. "+e loved Long Island more than any other place.
And Jones Beach and the rest of those parks—Zell, they Zere his baby. It
mattered so much to him that they be kept beautiful—just as he Zanted

1457
them—and that he be able to e[pand them the Zay they should be
e[panded. Nothing else mattered as much to him as those parks. And noZ
he had lost them."

And not only had he lost control of his first great dream, he had lost a huge
hunk of his poZer. +is poZer had been derived partly from popularity and
mostly from money—money that he had sole discretion to spend. The
popularity had vanished some years back, but its loss had not mattered
much so long as he didn't lose the money. But the money came from his
netZork of four public authorities. NoZ, at a stroke, three of them Zere
gone— including the biggest of them all, the State 3oZer Authority that,
Zith both Robert 0oses 3oZer  Dams completed at last, Zas beginning to
generate tens of millions of dollars in annual revenue.

To reporters, he said firmly that the matter Zas closed. "There is nothing I
am doing about it," he said Zith a broad smile, announcing that he Zas
leaving for a previously planned vacation in 3uerto Rico—ironically, at
Laurance's Dorado Beach +otel, (moses takes ouster calmly, headlines
said.) But behind the scenes he Zas maneuvering almost frantically to
attempt to retrieve his mistake. +is emissaries Zere Zorking on anyone
Zho had Rockefeller's ear; Van Arsdale and Brennan Zere soon asking the
Governor to let 0oses ZithdraZ  his resignations, even if that ZithdraZal
meant that 0oses Zould have to eat public croZ.

A man closer to the Governor, hoZever, had guessed the futility of

such attempts. "[0oses] got friends of mine to come to me and ask me to
try to persuade Rockefeller to let him take it back," recalls Thomas E.
DeZey. "I must have had a do]en phone calls from people I kneZ. But I had
made a discreet inquiry, an indirect inquiry; Rockefeller Zasn't going to let
him take it back. I felt sorry for him." For Zhat might  have been the one
reason for Rockefeller to let 0oses ZithdraZ his resignations—not his
3arks Council resignation, perhaps, but his others—did not, to his surprise
and that of political insiders, e[ist. The e[pected storm of protest had not
materiali]ed. Robert 0oses had been fired. And hardly anyone had really
cared.

1458
Citing "nepotism" as its cause, the Daily NeZs reacted to the ouster Zith
outrage, as did the Journal-American (Ze need him!) and conservative
columnists. "No public official  in any part of the country is comparable to
Robert 0oses in his devoted and unending and mostly uncompensated
public service for nearly half a century," George E. Sokolsky declared. "No
man can be trusted Zith major affairs Zho asks such a man as Robert 0oses
to resign. ..." But in the rest of the media there Zas only a brief flurry of
editorials, and the editorial that mattered never came. 0oses must have
knoZn he had lost Zhen, on December 2, he turned at his breakfast table to
the editorial page of The NeZ York Times (Zhich only three years before
had said: "You don't bench Babe Ruth") and read: "The most incredible of
all the prodigious qualities of Robert 0oses has been his ability to sustain,
long after most other men retire, a superhuman burden of responsibilities. ...
+e has conquered every obstacle in four decades of public service, e[cept
the ability to make himself immortal. . . . :e  hope that, after the verbal
skyrockets sputter out, he Zill recogni]e the Zisdom of the Governor's
suggestion that it Zas time—indeed, past time—to begin planning for an
orderly transition of authority. ... No government function can be made so
dependent on a single individual that he becomes the indispensable man."

The young reporter assigned to cover the otherZise vacant NeZsday city
desk Saturday afternoon and Sunday morning—the paper had no Sunday
edition then—found Zaiting for him  a memo from an editor telling him to
compile a summary of all the statements that the editor Zas sure Zould be
pouring in for a big story on reaction in governmental circles to be Zritten
by state political editor Stan +inden Sunday night for 0onday's paper. But
all Saturday there Zas e[actly one such statement—a brief one from
Democratic state chairman :illiam  +.  0c.eon   charging the Governor Zith
"cavalier treatment." Telephoning around for comment Sunday evening,
+inden found politicians rather reluctant to make any, and those they did
make Zere carefully hedged. Aside from a feZ Democratic county
chairmen backing 0c.eon,  of  a score of public officials telephoned, only
NeZbold 0orris  ("I  can't believe it") Zas Zilling  to go on record Zith the
type of public statement the editor had e[pected. 3ragmatists all, politicians
had grasped at once the basic reality of the situation: the Governor, the man
Zith the poZer, Zas the man they didn't Zant to offend. As for the public at

1459
large, aside from a spate—a brief spate—of letters-to-the-editor, there Zas
hardly any reaction at all.

In political circles the illusion of 0oses'  popularity Zith  the voters had
lingered long after the reality Zas gone, partly because in those circles,
many of Zhose members Zere making money off him, that popularity Zas
un-dimmed, partly because politicians Zere close enough to him to be
overaZed by his personality so completely that they could hardly conceive
of his falling into public disrepute. For decades, Governors had dreaded
Zhat Zould happen if they had to be the one to fire Bob 0oses. NoZ one
Governor had fired Bob 0oses.

And nothing had happened.

The ne[t meeting of the State Council of 3arks Zas the first in thirty-eight
years over Zhich Robert 0oses had not presided. It Zas the first meeting of
the State Council of 3arks ever over Zhich 0oses had not presided.

At that meeting, his successor read a eulogy Zith, observers say, obvious
feeling. Then resolutions Zere adopted unanimously to change the names of
not one, but three separate state parks, one at Niagara, one at 0assena and
one on Fire Island, to "Robert 0oses State 3ark."

At a time at Zhich the naming of public Zorks after individuals had not
reached the floodtide it Zas later to assume, this Zas an almost
unprecedented honor. It is doubtful that any individual beloZ the rank of
3resident had ever had three separate major public Zorks named after him
at the same time. Coupled Zith the eulogy, it made the January 22, 1963,
meeting of the State Council of 3arks one of unparalleled tribute to Robert
0oses. But Robert 0oses had not presided over that meeting.

0ore  important, he had not been present. For only the heads of the various
regional park commissions could attend, and he Zas no longer the head of
the regional park commission he had headed for thirty-eight years, the park
commission that represented his youthful, and cherished, and most nearly
perfect dreams.

1460
During the folloZing  years, Robert 0oses never admitted even once— not
even to his closest friends; not even to Shapiro—hoZ much the loss of the
presidency of the Long Island State 3ark Commission meant to him. But
people Zho kneZ him saZ through his assumed indifference.

+is successor as commission president, 3erry Duryea, Jr., son of an old
associate and an admirer himself, speaks of the "great emotional strain" that
the seventy-four-year-old commissioner Zent through Zhen discussing the
parks Zith him. "+e  alZays considered the Long Island State 3ark
Commission as his base," Duryea says. "Long Island Zas, after all, the
place he kneZ best. This Zas really the 0oses baby above everything else."
Says Joe Ingraham: "+e Zould never let on, but you could see it in
everything he said—they broke his heart Zhen they took that aZay from
him."

Not only pride but politics prevented 0oses thereafter from displaying open
resentment. +aving had a taste of Nelson Rockefeller once, he Zas not
an[ious for another one. +e Zas, shortly, to sZalloZ his pride and make up

Zith the man Zho had so grievously injured him. At the dedication of the
Ale[ander +amilton  Bridge tZo  Zeeks after the firing, reporters Zere
Zatching to see 0oses' reaction Zhen Rockefeller appeared. 0oses'
reaction Zas to throZ his arms around Rockefeller and to go out of his Zay
to praise him during his speech. (Rockefeller threZ his arms around 0oses,
and praised him, too.)

on Riker's Island just beyond, gloZed and flamed dramatically; during the
day, the scene Zas ugly enough to inspire the creative mind. It inspired F.
Scott Fit]gerald, Zho in The Great Gatsby described it as

a valley of ashes—a fantastic farm Zhere ashes groZ like Zheat into ridges
and hills and grotesque gardens, Zhere ashes take the forms of houses and
chimneys and rising smoke, and finally, Zith a transcendent effort, of ash-
gray men, Zho move dimly and already crumbling through the poZdery air.
Occasionally a line of gray cars craZls along an invisible track, gives out a
ghastly creak, and comes to rest, and immediately the ash-gray men sZarm
up Zith leaden spades and stir up an impenetrable cloud . . .

1461
And it inspired Robert 0oses.

From the 1920's, the Flushing 0eadoZs had fired 0oses' imagination. 3art
of the inspiration had been their si]e, of course: they Zere 1,346 acres, a
Central 3ark and a half. 3art had been their location: they lay almost
precisely at the geographic center of NeZ York; as the city's population
shifted, moving steadily eastZard, its population center Zas moving
steadily closer to those meadoZs, too—a park there, 0oses felt, Zould be a
true "Central 3ark" to the Zhole city. For a man Zith a vision so broad that
it required vast open spaces for reali]ation, here Zas a vast open space—at
the city's geographic and population center. And in some Zay the very
ugliness of the meadoZs seemed to furnish inspiration, too. They, and the
Riker's dump beyond, Zere "a cloud of smoke by day and a pillar of fire by
night," he Zas to Zrite. Rereading Isaiah, he came across "Give unto them
beauty for ashes"—after that, his dream had a slogan. +e Zould turn Zhat
may Zell have been the ugliest part of NeZ York City into its most
beautiful.

As Zith all  0oses' dreams, this one kept e[panding. By 1930, on the maps
he prepared for the 0etropolitan 3ark Conference, there Zas green— the
green that symboli]ed future park land—not only over the Flushing
0eadoZs but, e[tending  eastZard from the meadoZs in a continuous
corridor right along the spine of 4ueens all the Zay out to the city line, not
just a park but a string of three parks (.issena, Cunningham and Alley
3ond) connected by strips of greenery—parks designed to serve not only
the single-family-home 4ueens of the present generation but the high-rise
4ueens he foresaZ for future generations.

But it Zas to be a tough dream to reali]e. No project on Zhich Robert
0oses had ever embarked Zas to document more definitively his statement:
"It takes more than a good idea to make a great public improvement. The
fact is that such things happen Zhen there are leaders available, ready and
eager to take advantage of the logic of events. Even then the Zhole result is
accomplished only by a series of limited objectives, over a surprisingly long
period of years." No project Zas to demonstrate more dramatically that of
all the qualities Zhich enabled him to build public Zorks of the first

1462
magnitude, none Zas more important than the simple fact that he endured,
that he stayed in poZer not for years, but for decades.

Because it took decades.

+e began trudging through the park, actively planning it in detail, in 1934,
Zalking through the valley of ashes, trudging, as he put it, over "thirty years
of the offscourings, the cans, cast-off baby carriages and umbrellas of
Brooklyn," among the ash-gray men carrying spades, folloZed by a group
of men Zithout spades—0adigan, +oZland,  AndreZs, Latham, Shapiro,
Chapin. Soon there Zere transoms and plumb lines among the spades, and
then blueprints, for, searching for a Zay to e[tend the Grand Central
3arkZay to the Triborough Bridge, he had determined—and the engineers
had confirmed—that the Zay could be along the Zestern edge of the
meadoZs. For a Zhile thereafter he hoped that the parkZay could lead to
the park, that the road might prove the key to unlocking the monumental
e[penditure of public funds necessary for the reali]ation of so monumental
a vision. :ith   La Guardia in, Tammany Zas out—and so, too, Zas
Fishhooks; state funds Zere available to build the parkZay, and, cynical as
he had become about the ability of the legislative leaders in Albany to see
the public interest, he could not believe that even they Zould alloZ him to
build a road along Zhich motorists Zould have to drive through hills of
garbage; he Zas sure that once he got the parkZay built he could get state
money to build a park around it. But he had underestimated Albany; the
Legislature Zould give funds for a road and nothing else; the Grand Central
3arkZay and a narroZ right-of-Zay on either side of it Zas all he Zas able
to build on the meadoZs. +e moved 50,000,000 cubic yards of rubbish, but
they made in 0ount Corona only a narroZ pass; recalls Rodgers, "0otorists
still had to pass through the dark Zall of refuse before coming out on the
broad prospects of meadoZ and bay." "For a Zhile," 0oses Zould recall
ruefully, "Ze fondly  hoped to cover" the garbage "Zith a thin layer of
topsoil and to plant, at a price Zhich Zould not subject us to indictment,"
but obtaining even the topsoil strained his ingenuity to the limit; planting
Zas out of the question. As for the great park, ":e studied every possible
means of acquiring the Zhole meadoZ, but this dream seemed too big for
the vision and means of the City in the face of competition of so many other
urgent enterprises."

1463
Then, he says, in Zords that reveal that inside Robert 0oses the 3oZer
Broker there Zas still a Robert 0oses the Dreamer, "the miracle happened
— the idea of a :orld's  Fair."

Not the 1964-65 :orld's  Fair, the 1939-40. The mind that could grasp an
idea in an instant, e[pand it, fill in its details, see its relation to other ideas,
lunged at that idea of the Fair as it fell from George 0cAneny's lips. "By
God that's a great idea!" he had said, pounding the table; he Zould sell it to
La Guardia, and he himself "Zould stop at nothing to help"—if the Fair Zas
held on Flushing 0eadoZs, and if "from the beginning the project Zas
planned so as to insure a great park" on the meadoZs after the Fair closed.

0oses thought he had taken out every possible form of insurance. +is park
commissionership made him in effect the Fair Corporation's landlord; the
lease he dreZ up—and, as additional insurance, embodied in legislation he
had passed in Albany—provided that the improvements necessary to make
the meadoZs usable be permanent, not temporary, improvements, and that
they be installed in conformance Zith his plan for the park—right doZn

to the creation of a boat basin at the north end of the site and tZo lakes at
the south: thousands of trees Zere planted and thousands of yards of
underground utility lines laid according to the landscape design for the park,
not the Fair. The first $4,000,000 of Fair profits, moreover, Zere to be used
—as a spark to kindle further state and city contributions—to create a park.
0aking  the meadoZs usable proved to be immensely more difficult than
even the most pessimistic of his engineers had foreseen—it Zas at the
Flushing 0eadoZs, for  e[ample, that there Zere encountered, for the first
time on such a large scale in the metropolitan area, "mud Zaves" of a force
that ripped loose foundations and pilings. A neZ drainage system for the
entire Flushing area—Zhich included placing a branch of the Flushing
River in a conduit as large as a tube of the +olland Tunnel—had to be
created; cleaning up pollution in Flushing Bay required tZo giant seZage
treatment plants. Even for 0oses, the list of other basic improvements
required Zas "endless"; even he had to call their total cost—$59,000,000
—"staggering." But 0oses got the money from Albany and, Zith La
Guardia's help, from :ashington. +e  even got an additional million dollars
—Zhich La Guardia found someZhere in the city budget after 0oses

1464
promised him that the building Zould have plenty of the 0ayor's favorite
architectural element, glass bricks—for an Aymar Embury-designed
permanent, pillared NeZ York City Building housing an ice- and roller-
skating rink ("You could get a lot of building for a million  then," 0oses
Zould recall ruefully).  And then he saZ all his precautions made
meaningless by Grover :halen's inefficiency;  the $4,000,000 Zas supposed
to come out of the Fair's profits, and there Zere no profits; the 1939-40 NeZ
York :orld's   Fair ended Zith a deficit so large that it could repay its
backers only thirty-three cents on the dollar. By 1940, federal funds had
dried up; the city Zas broke; all during the five years of :orld  :ar   II  the
Flushing 0eadoZs remained a park mostly in name only, littered Zith
debris from the buildings of e[hibitors Zho had had enough money to
dismantle their structures but not enough to truck the remains aZay, grass
and trees dying, rats starting to reappear— all that Zas left Zas a skating
rink and, underground, invisible, tens of millions of dollars' Zorth of
utilities that Zould provide a foundation for a park—if ever there should
come another chance to build it.

One "event" in Zhich 0oses saZ the "logic  of using it to progress a park"
had been a highZay, another had been a :orld's Fair. It took a leader Zith
his single-mindedness to see such logic in the third, Zhich occurred five
years after the Fair; other men might see the formation of the 8nited
Nations in 1945 as a chance for peace, he saZ it as a chance for a park.
3ersuading Secretary-General Trygve Lie to use the City Building until 8N
headquarters in 0anhattan could be completed, he got $2,000,000 from the
enthusiastic Board of Estimate to "remodel" it—and enough of that money
found its Zay into remodeling around, rather than in, that building to
develop scores of acres near it according to the park plans he had stored
aZay for so many years noZ.

Another five years, and another event—and the same 3ark Commissioner
still around to take advantage of its "logic." :ith   the population of

4ueens burgeoning in 1951, the Board of Estimate approved a huge neZ
storm seZer for the borough. :hen  0oses had finished taking a hand in its
planning, it Zas running along a route linking Alley 3ond, Cunningham and
.issena parks, enough land along it had been condemned so there could be

1465
at least a strip of park land all the Zay from Flushing 0eadoZs to the city
line, arrangements had been made to fill the gash made for the seZer Zith
Sanitation Department fill according to plans draZn up by the 3ark
Department—and after decades of dreaming about a 4ueens park corridor,
the land for it Zas at last in his hands.

And Zhen, in 1959, he had first heard that men Zere planning another
:orld's   Fair, he believed that the chance had come to turn the great 4ueens
dream—Flushing 0eadoZs 3ark, the corridor, the three other parks along it
—into reality at last. That Zas the key attraction for him in assuming the
Fair presidency. +e admitted this fairly frankly in public. "Visitors to such
an e[position," he Zrote, "carry aZay indelible impressions, lively lessons,
enduring satisfactions and pleasant memories, but Zhat finally remains in
the ground Zhen the pageant has faded, the brickbats have been removed by
the Zreckers and scavengers, and the park planners have gone to Zork is of
more concern to the ne[t generation than any spectacle, hoZever gorgeous."
In private, he Zas more frank. "I don't think R0  really ever cared about the
Fair—not in the sense he cared about Jones Beach, say," Sid Shapiro
declares. ":hat  he cared about—Zhat he Zas alZays talking about—Zas
Zhat the Fair could do for parks."

The Fair could do Zhat he had Zanted to do for so long. The "chain of
urban parks," he said, Zould be "the ultimate residuary legatee of the Fair."
And he Zas sure the legacy Zould be large enough. +ardly had he assumed
the presidency Zhen the engineering firms of his tZo most trusted park
consultants—:.  Earle AndreZs of AndreZs  & Clark and Gilmore Clarke
of Clarke & Rapuano—Zere costing out the full-scale development of the
chain. The figure came to about $56,000,000, and his financial consultant,
Jack 0adigan of 0adigan-+yland,  assured him the Fair's surplus Zould be
far higher. +e Zent on record Zith a confident promise: "The Fair Zill  . . .
finish the Flushing 0eadoZ  and Corridor program Zithout cost to the city. .
. . The Fair management is committed Zithout reservation to . . . presenting
to the City an integrated chain of urban parks Zhich Zill serve as a model to
rapidly groZing municipalities  everyZhere. . . . :e  [Zill]   build a heritage
for all time." There Zas even a timetable, laid out park by park, and
guaranteeing—unconditionally—completion by "the summer of 1967," less
than tZo years after the Fair Zas to close. The Fair Zould be the instrument

1466
by Zhich the dream he had cherished for almost forty years Zould be
transformed into reality—reality grand enough and beautiful enough to bear
his name.*

* There Zas a further piece of evidence to prove that 0oses' interest Zas
not in the Fair but in the parks that Zould folloZ it. 0ass  transportation Zas
desirable— crucially important, in fact—for a fair to Zhich  people Zould
come by the tens of thousands each day. And 0oses Zas e[pecting to draZ
heavily on the city's poorer families, many of Zhich did not have
automobiles. But it Zas not desirable—

As he e[pected to be identified Zith it. One of the bankers he appointed to
its finance committee Zould soon be suggesting that "the neZ park must be
called Robert 0oses 3ark." 0oses did not demur. It Zas an open secret
among his aides that the suggestion Zas just Zhat R0 had in mind.

The reali]ation of a dream Zas one end to Zhich the :orld's  Fair
represented a means; there Zere tZo others—poZer and popularity.

On the single square mile of former garbage dump that Zould be the actual
Fair grounds, a single mile over Zhich Robert 0oses possessed sole
jurisdiction, there Zould be spent—by state and federal governments on
highZays, by city government on other improvements, by state, federal and
city governments and private corporate grants on e[hibits—Zell over a
billion dollars. A single item in the first estimate prepared by his office of
the money that Zould be poured into the site gave some idea of the
dimension of spending he had in mind. That item Zas: "0iscellaneous—
$55,000,000." +e made sure that that billion Zasn't Zasted. +e distributed
it Zhere it could bring the greatest return in poZer.

0aintenance—cleaning, repairs, garbage collection and disposal— Zas
obviously going to be a huge item at the Fair. Of all maintenance companies
in NeZ York, none Zas better connected politically than the Allied
0aintenance Corporation. On 0arch 9, 1964, there Zent out from Fair
headquarters a memo: "Constable to All 3articipants: Allied ... has been
designated by the Fair Corporation as the only refuse and garbage collectors
at the Fair." E[hibitors Zould  no longer be alloZed to pick and choose
among maintenance firms to get the best rates; Allied had been given a

1467
monopoly. (Allied used that monopoly to the hilt, charging rates so inflated
that during the Fair's first season alone the company Zas to collect from
helpless e[hibitors more than $10,000,000.)

Commissions on the insurance that Zould be required of e[hibitors Zould
come to more than $3,000,000. Carmine De Sapio, despite his break Zith
:agner,  still  possessed considerable behind-the-scenes political poZer,*
particularly, through his ally state Democratic chairman 0ichael J. 3render-
gast, in the State Capitol, Zhere 0oses noZ needed poZer more urgently
than he had in decades. De Sapio Zas knoZn to look fondly on an insurance
agency named Campo & Roberts. And Article ;VII  of the Fair's General
Regulations for E[hibition—Zith   Zhich all e[hibitors  Zere bound by con-

in 0oses' vieZ—for  a great park, because he did not Zant his great parks to
be open to loZ-income people, particularly the Negro and 3uerto Rican
people Zho made up so large a percentage of the city's loZer-income
families. So 0oses vetoed the Transit Authority's proposed neZ subZay
e[tensions to the Fair.

* :rites   :arren   0oscoZ:   De Sapio "kept the loyalty of a substantial bloc
Zithin  the Tammany e[ecutive committee, although other members had
gone doZn to defeat Zith him. +e had many friends in the business
community Zhom he had helped in their dealings Zith the city, and Zho did
not choose to run aZay from him noZ that he had been defeated." And one
of those friends, of course, Zas Thomas J. Shanahan.

tract to comply—required that "... insurance must be procured from
insurance companies approved by the Fair Corporation," and only one
company, Campo & Roberts, Zas approved.

0ayor  :agner  protested. But in a competition Zith De Sapio, :agner  Zas
handicapped: he Zas honest. Commissions Zouldn't buy him. The 0ayor
could have asked 0oses to give Fair-oriented insurance to firms operated
by his supporters but for another handicap: his unshakable resolution never
to give 0oses something the Coordinator could hold over his head by
asking him directly for a favor. +e had Deputy 0ayor 3aul Screvane, the
key liaison betZeen the 0ayor and 0oses on the Fair, raise the subject, and
Screvane recalls: "0oses Zould say—as he said on other things that came

1468
up during the Fair—':ell,   for Christ's sake, let him ask for it. I can't do
anything for him if he doesn't ask.' I used to go back and tell :agner to
name the guy he Zanted to get the insurance, but he Zouldn't do it." Finally,
"there Zas a meeting at Gracie 0ansion, just the three of us," Screvane
recalls. 3reviously, the Deputy 0ayor says, :agner  had been "incensed. If,
Zhen he had the confrontation Zith him, he had spoken the Zay he spoke in
private, 0oses Zould have changed the insurance." But :agner Zouldn't.
Finally, "[0oses]  asked Bob if Bob had someone—'Give me a name!' But
Bob Zouldn't tell him."*

Insurance commissions Zere only one of a thousand fees created by the
Fair, and it sometimes seemed as if every one of them Zas distributed
according to a single criterion: the amount of poZer it could purchase for
Robert 0oses. Others might see the Fair as a chance to foster "peace
through understanding," or to boost the occupancy rate of NeZ York hotels,
or to increase sales in NeZ York department stores; 0oses appears to have
seen the Fair as a gigantic gravy train on Zhich he could ride back to the
poZer he had left behind. In those early days, the Fair's future appeared as
golden as the statue of the 0oroni angel atop the 0ormon 3avilion; ticket
sales Zere going even better than e[pected; money Zas floZing in at a rate
e[ceeding 0adigan's most optimistic estimates; 0oses Zas soon boasting
that there might be even more money available than he had thought.

Soon everyone Zas scrambling to get on board. One Fair Corporation
e[ecutive, speaking of an "attitude of affluence" at Flushing 0eadoZs,
says, "There Zas 0oses talking about all those millions of dollars in
advance sales. And the unions and Allied said, ':hy should Ze try to hold
costs doZn? If a guy's making so much dough, Zhy shouldn't Ze get some
of it?' "

And 0oses helped them on. Lavish spending had alZays been part of

* +ere is :agner's  recollection of  this issue: "I didn't see after my battle of
1961 Zhy De Sapio should have the insurance. I said, 'Bob, I hear De
Sapio's got an interest in the insurance.' I never got a straight ansZer. I
knoZ from other sources that he did, but I never got a straight ansZer."

1469
Asked Zhy 0oses felt  an alliance Zith De Sapio Zould be more profitable
than an alliance Zith him, the 0ayor replied by recalling a song once sung
by reporters at an Inner Circle dinner, Zhose key lines, :agner says, Zere:
"0ayors  Come and 0ayors Go/But Old 0an  0oses, +e  Just .eeps Rolling
Along."

his life style; he certainly Zasn't going to change that style noZ. 8nions
Zere alloZed—encouraged—to charge e[hibitors rates unusual even for
NeZ York; carpenters, for e[ample, received—not as overtime but as
normal pay—$23 an hour. The $10,000,000 that Allied Zas to reap from
individual e[hibitors  during the Fair's first season alone might have seemed
sufficient for even so politically Zell-connected a firm, but the contract
0oses signed Zith Allied  on behalf of the Fair Corporation Zas, in that
year alone, to hand the company an additional $12,000,000. The Fair
Corporation's original budget for security had been a lavish $5,000,000 a
year. But 0oses Zanted security laid on Zith an eye not just for safety but
for shoZ. A Zhole platoon of 3inkerton guards, dressed in elaborate
uniforms Zith Zhite  gloves and Zhite ascots, Zas assigned as an honor
guard at Fair headquarters so that Zhen foreign ambassadors or heads of
state drove up, 0oses could greet them Zith suitable panoply. During the
Fair's first year of operation alone, 0oses spent almost $10,000,000 for
"security." +e liked to reZard his allies on an imperial scale. 3olitically
Zell-connected 3R man Tom Deegan, Zith his statement that "I . . . e[pect
to continue to serve Zithout any fees or e[penses of any kind" still Zarm on
the record, Zas given an annual fee of $100,000 and e[penses that included
a $ 1,000-a-month suite at the :aldorf and a $572 monthly salary for a
chauffeur. And that Zas just Tom Deegan personally. The Thomas J.
Deegan Co., Inc., received from the Fair an additional $350,000 per year.
Not that the Deegan firm Zas responsible for the Zhole Fair public relations
effort. The firm oZned by Bill  O'DZyer's canny 3R man—and still Zell-
connected political insider—Bill Donoghue received $400,000 per year.
Then there Zas Ed O'Brien and 0urray Davis—and a list of former
neZspapermen that ran to the do]ens. The listed Fair Corporation e[penses
for public relations for its first season alone ran to $2,772,542.49. 0oses
had alZays liked to pick up checks in the grand style. This predilection Zas
indulged. So that VI3 visitors—every politician, it seemed, from NeZ York
State or City, their relatives, influential businessmen, architects, engineers,

1470
contractors and their relatives, 0oses' Zhole Yale class of 1909, do]ens of
neighbors from Babylon, scores of his acquaintances, and of Constable's,
Spargo's, Shapiro's, of everyone connected in any Zay Zith the Fair
administration—Zould not be forced to tour the Fair grounds on foot Zith
the hoi polloi, the Fair Corporation purchased a fleet of Zhite sedans, and
set up a chauffeurs' pool in Zhich there Zere often scores of men sitting
around Zaiting for their ne[t  assignment. The chefs and Zaiters necessary
for 0oses to host at luncheons in his accustomed style Zere laid on. As for
the scores of cocktail parties and other receptions he hosted, " 'economi]e'
Zas a dirty Zord," one Fair Corporation e[ecutive recalls. During the Fair's
first season, the bill for "Reception, travel and subsistence [italics added]
e[penses" Zas $706,053.51. During its first year, the Fair Corporation spent
on operating e[penses alone $33,299,000—double the original budget. And
those e[penses do not include the helping hand 0oses offered to allies in
trouble: one of his Triborough concessionaires had bitten off, in a
concession called "The Belgian Village," more than he could

financially cheZ; he needed $750,000 in cash, and he needed it fast.
Although there Zas very little chance that it Zould ever be seen again—and
in fact it never Zas—the Fair Corporation lent him the money.

0oses Zanted a full passenger list aboard this most lu[urious of all gravy
trains not only so that he could have the largest possible audience for his
hospitality but because, more important, a passenger's acceptance of his
ticket Zould couple his fortunes to 0oses', make him his ally, help him
retain and increase the poZer he had begun to lose. +e Zanted poZer—and
to get it he selected his passenger list Zith care. ":hy don't you come
aboard?" O'Brien and Donoghue Zere asking, and Joe .ahn says,
"Sometimes it seemed as if everyone Zho mattered Zas." The unions,
thanks to the e[clusive, padded contracts, Zere already snug in their berths.
The banks, thanks to $29,000,000 in Fair Corporation bonds Zere snug in
theirs. And noZ, in response to 0oses' invitations, a substantial portion of
the city's poZer elite scrambled aboard—contractors (the names on the big
signs beside the e[cavations on the Fair site—Tully & Di Napoli,
+endrickson Bros., Corbetta, Slattery, Johnson, Drake & 3iper, De Lillo,
Gull—Zere a roster of political clout); engineers (Shumavon & Buckley;
3arsons, Brinker-hoff; Tibbetts, Abbott, 0cCarthy, Stratton—and one neZ

1471
name: Blauvelt Engineering, a firm Zith a neZ partner, George E. Spargo);
architects; suppliers. The legal fees—immense legal fees—Zent to Sam
Rosenman and, Zith the help of 0oses-authored legislation e[empting the
Fair from the city's Code of Ethics, the laZ firm that former city
administrator Charlie 3reusse had just resigned to join. The vice president
in charge of international affairs Zas Charles 3oletti, called "Governor"
because he had once served a tZenty-nine-day term in that post as Lehman's
interim successor; the head of the 8nited States 3avilion Zas Triborough
commissioner and poZerful realtor and political insider Norman ..
:inston;   lucrative concessions Zere handed out to men like +oZard
Cullman and George 3. 0onaghan, Zho had been replaced as State +arness
Racing Commissioner Zhen the State Investigation Commission revealed
that contractors Zho, on his recommendation, had been given contracts by
the harness tracks had repaired his home—for free. The lucrative contract
for the Fair's souvenir program Zent to +enry Luce's Time, Inc.; other
benefits from the Fair Zent to a subsidiary of John +ay :hitney's  :hitney
Communication Corporation +olding Company.

The :orld's  Fair gave Robert 0oses a billion dollars to spend on poZer,
and he got his money's Zorth.

3roof of that Zas forthcoming Zithin  a very short period of time after he
became Fair president. Some bankers, remembering the 1939-40 fiasco at
Flushing, Zere reluctant to purchase Fair bonds unless the Fair could shoZ
some operating capital of its oZn first. 0oses asked the city to come up
Zith some. There Zere plenty of objections—from liberals, including city
councilmen (Stanley Isaacs Zas, of course, among them) Zho said that the
city had more urgent needs on Zhich to spend money—but not from the
people Zho counted. The Council and the Board of Estimate and 0ayor
hastily approved an allocation of $24,000,000 to the Fair Zhose purpose

had supposedly been to earn the city money, and the $24,000,000 Zas only
the visible portion of the city's contribution. :henever  0oses  needed more
money—and he needed it often—he Zent back to the city for quiet
contributions. The total city contribution to the Fair is hidden under scores
of innocuous items, but one estimate, possibly conservative, Zas that it
topped $60,000,000.

1472
The Fair got him poZer; popularity Zas something else again. The
universal e[position should have restored much of the universal affection in
Zhich he had once been held, both because its loudly proclaimed end as a
great park should have reminded that portion of the public old enough to
remember that Robert 0oses Zas primarily a "park man," and because a
"fair" Zas a cause almost as much on the side of the angels as parks, an
event the press Zould normally cover in a blithe, carefree, favorable vein. It
should, in fact, have in a Zay broadened his popularity, making it national
in scope, giving him coast-to-coast publicity. The Fair should have
rehabilitated Robert 0oses' reputation and e[panded it. Instead, the Fair
destroyed it.

It Zas his oZn fault. In love Zith  poZer, he could not give it up. To accept
this neZ, bigger, construction post, it had been necessary for him to trade in
a smaller—Title I—but he Zould not even consider giving up anything else.
At the same time that he Zas undertaking to build the largest e[position the
Zorld had ever seen, therefore, he Zas simultaneously building the Zorld's
largest hydroelectric facility, the Zorld's largest suspension bridge and the
Zorld's largest metropolitan arterial highZay system—as Zell as building
another huge suspension bridge, acquiring thousands of acres of neZ Long
Island parks,* battling on a do]en fronts to Zin approval of one neZ
highZay doZn Fire Island and tZo across 0anhattan, giving general
direction to city and state park programs, and administering a $6o,ooo,ooo-
a-year corporation: si[-bridge, tZo-tunnel Tri-borough; and a $65,ooo,ooo-
a-year corporation: the State 3oZer Authority. Title I had been his first
failure, and part of the reason had been the fact that he had simply had too
much else to do. NoZ, thanks to his reluctance to relinquish poZer, he Zas
stepping into the same trap. +e Zas moving into a neZ field, one in Zhich
he possessed no e[pertise—and he Zas alloZing himself no time to acquire
any.

Nor Zould he hire himself any. +is "muchachos" had built and administered
highZays, bridges, tunnels and parks; they had never built or administered a
:orld's   Fair. Yet he Zould not alloZ outsiders into his operation; long-time
0oses 0en  comprised the Fair's entire upper echelon, its top-level
e[ecutive staff included not a single person Zith e[position e[perience. The
man he assigned to sell space in the industrial area Zas J. Anthony 3anuch,

1473
Zhose sole qualification appears to have been the fact that his housing
reorgani]ation report praised 0oses; 3anuch, as one critic Zas to

* It Zas not until  1962—after he had been running the Fair for tZo years—
that Rockefeller Zould blast him free of some of these responsibilities.

note, "had never sold anything in his life." (TZo years later, 0oses Zas to
fire him; he "couldn't do the job," he Zas to say. "A nice felloZ, but he
couldn't do the job.") The emissary to foreign governments Zas not the
diplomat needed but Governor 3oletti.

0ost  important, perhaps, he simply Zas not especially interested in this
mammoth enterprise he had undertaken to create and direct.

In all his public life, only  one field he had entered—public housing— had
failed to ignite the imagination that, Zhen ignited, could bla]e so fiercely.
NoZ there Zere tZo. The Fair Zould catch his imagination later, but not at
the beginning—and it Zas at the beginning that he made a mistake that
Zould later be ineradicable. +e Zas not at that time interested in the Fair
itself, so he Zas not interested in Fair pavilions, and they Zere temporary
structures, anyZay; this man Zho built for the centuries could not be
interested in structures that Zould last tZo years. The great end he had in
mind—a great park—Zould in fact be endangered by any construction the
Fair Corporation undertook itself: most financial analyses of the 1939-40
:orld's   Fair agreed that a prime cause of its fiscal disaster had been Grover
:halen's  Zillingness  to build pavilions because there Zas an e[citing idea
behind them—and then find that he couldn't recoup the Fair's investment
through rentals. 0oses Zas determined not to repeat that mistake.
3ractically the first major decision made about the Fair by this master
builder Zas that he Zas going to build as little of it as possible; he Zould, of
course, build its interior roadZay system and do the landscaping (because
they Zould later become part of the park), but of the more than 200
e[hibition  pavilions, the Fair Corporation Zould build e[actly  three—a
small administration building, one small Fair Corporation-operated pavilion
and an 18,000-seat auditorium for athletic events and outdoor attractions—
to be constructed to the cheapest possible specifications.

1474
8ninvolved emotionally  in the pavilions as he Zas, he had an additional
financial reason to remain aloof: because rents from his e[hibitors Zould go
to his park, he Zanted them set as high as possible, and e[hibitors Zeighing
high rents Zould Zant complete control over their oZn architecture. +e
decided therefore to give it to them; each e[hibitor Zould have virtual carte
blanche in his pavilion's design and construction. "A fair begins Zith its
buildings," a critic Zrote, stating that by his decision 0oses had in effect
"taken himself out of the fair business." Soon he Zas to take another step in
that direction. 3rior to 0oses' installation as its president the Fair
Corporation had appointed a "Design Committee" of five distinguished
architects—:allace  ..   +arrison, EdZard Durrell  Stone, Gordon Bunshaft,
+enry Dreyfuss and Emil 3raeger —to develop a central theme and plan.
To give the Fair unity, they proposed housing all its e[hibits in a single
doughnut-shaped pavilion a mile around and 1,800 feet in diameter, Zhich
Zould be constructed by the Fair Corporation and in Zhich e[hibitors
Zould rent slices. 0oses kneZ something about the design that none of its
supporters—including, apparently, the Design Committee—kneZ: since he
had studied the life of +aussmann, he kneZ that

the doughnut-shaped building had been used at a previous :orld's Fair,
+aussmann's 8niversal E[position of 1867. +e turned the proposal doZn,
reiterating that there Zould, by design, be no central plan of any type.

So uninterested Zas he that he Zasn't even interested in the layout of the
Fair. +ardly had he accepted the Fair presidency Zhen he commissioned the
3ort Authority as the Fair's agent in selling the 2,000,000 square feet of
rentable space set aside in the transportation area; the only instructions
given to the 3ort Authority e[ecutive to Zhom  this responsibility Zas
delegated Zere: "+ere are eighty acres. You develop a master plan and sell
them." Another commission—a lucrative one—for selling space in the
"industrial area" Zas given to an agent of John +ay :hitney.

Even his critics had alZays had to admit that organi]ation Zas Robert
0oses' strong point. The Fair Zould be disorgani]ed, its 200 pavilions a
disorgani]ed hodgepodge of 200 different si]es and shapes. Lack of a
theme, a sense of unity, Zas a Zeakness of the first magnitude. All great
e[positions of the past "seem," as one critic Zas to put it, "to have some

1475
reason behind them." 8ninterested in a great e[position—interested only in
a great park—0oses seemed to feel he could have one Zithout the other.

The Fair destroyed 0oses' reputation also because he had to have his oZn
Zay about everything, even in a field to Zhich he Zas the neZest of
neZcomers. +e could have his oZn Zay in NeZ York, but in putting on a
:orld's   Fair, he had to deal Zith other states and countries—and his
arrogance antagoni]ed them.

Dealing Zith scores of foreign nations Zould have been difficult enough in
any circumstances. Governments Zere constantly falling, Cabinets
changing—no sooner had one agreed to join the Fair than a neZ one Zas in
poZer. Sukarno Zould participate only if Indonesia's pavilion Zas placed
precisely midZay betZeen the 8nited States' and Russia's to symboli]e its
neutrality. :est  Berlin  Zanted its e[hibit symbolically  situated on a traffic
island beside that of the 8nited States. (3oletti finally persuaded it to accept
a less isolated site—one that Zas still right across from its protectors'.)
0oses made such dealings impossible.

0ost  European nations Zere members of the Bureau of International
E[positions, a 3aris-based body set up in 1928 to regulate their number and
nature. The B.I.E. had at least tZo rules incompatible Zith 0oses' desire for
a huge profit: Fairs could not run for more than si[ months, and could not
ask foreign e[hibitors to pay ground rents. "None of [these] obstacles Zas
insuperable," as one observer Zrote; there Zas, in fact, a plethora of
precedent for the quiet bending of such rules Zith tacit B.I.E. approval—
some of it established by the 1939-40 :orld's Fair, Zhich had obtained
B.I.E. sanction despite its duration and ground rent. :hile Robert .opple,
the originator of the idea for the Fair (forced out by 0oses Zhen he took
over), had been running the Fair, several countries had begun planning
"informal"  but lavish e[hibits ostensibly sponsored by national Chambers
of Commerce but actually financed by government funds.

But 0oses had made these obstacles insuperable. Arriving at B.I.E.
headquarters in 3aris to find them unimpressively modest and B.I.E.
officials

1476
unZilling  to pay immediate and formal obeisance to his demands, he
departed muttering audibly about "three people living obscurely in a dumpy
apartment in 3aris." To the press he bluntly announced, ":e ... are not
subject to any rulings." +e must have thought he Zas talking to the NeZ
York State Legislature. The B.I.E. directors, hoZever, Zere not on his
payroll; they responded not only by refusing the Fair its official sanction—a
step Zhich need not have hurt—but by taking the highly unusual step of
formally requesting its members not to participate—Zhich hurt plenty.
:ithin   Zeeks, Britain,  Zhich had been planning to participate, announced it
Zouldn't—and so did three-fourths of the British CommonZealth, along
Zith France and Italy. Of all the major European countries outside the Iron
Curtain, only one—Spain—defied the B.I.E. and accepted a 0oses
invitation; Zith  one press conference, he had made his :orld's Fair a fair
Zithout Europe.* Out of all  the Zorld's more important nations, in fact, the
Fair obtained e[actly si[ government-sponsored pavilions: Indonesia,
Egypt, India, Japan, 0e[ico and 3akistan. And as 3oletti Zas indiscreetly to
put it, "It's pretty hard to have a :orld's  Fair Zithout  a lot of international
participation."

+is loss of reputation Zas his oZn fault primarily  because the image he
created for the Fair Zas one of controversy.

A :orld's   Fair Zas not a bridge that the public had no choice but to pay to
use, it Zas a shoZ to Zhich the public had to be persuaded to purchase
tickets-. The key to the Fair's success Zas, therefore, public relations. It had
to be portrayed to the public in attractive colors, as something gay, gloZing,
e[citing. 0oses  understood this—intellectually. The hard-sell public
relations effort he launched Zas perhaps one of the most e[tensive ever
undertaken on behalf of any enterprise e[cept a presidential election.
0ovies  Zere made, speakers sent out, equipped Zith elaborate slide
presentations, to urge .iZanis, Rotary and Elks clubs from coast to coast to
"Come to the Fair"; television, radio, maga]ine and neZspaper ads Zere
laid on so lavishly that 0oses' Fair Corporation Zould eventually spend a
total of $3,260,963 on public relations. And this Zas no more than a drop in
the promotional bucket; the Fair Zould be featured in tens of millions of
dollars of paid advertising by such giant corporate e[hibitors as Ford,

1477
General 0otors and IB0.  The Travelers Insurance Co. alone staged
elaborate "Come to the Fair" presentations in eighty-three cities.

But 0oses' 3R men, aZare of his desire for national publicity, did
everything they could to influence the press to play the Fair in terms of its
boss. The Fair Corporation's oZn publicity Zas built around 0oses, of
course; the Time and NeZsZeek and Look cover stories had not only the
8nisphere but R0  on their covers; Life's story Zas entitled "Everything
Coming up 0oses." The hour-long CBS netZork shoZ on the Fair Zas
largely devoted to 0oses' career; the local CBS-TV shoZ Zas "The 0an
:ho   Built

* There Zould be pavilions named for European countries, but they Zould
be cheap-jack jobs financed by private promoters.

NeZ York." And  because Fair publicity Zas built around 0oses, it Zas
Zasted; the Fair's over-all image Zas not of a scene of gaiety but of a scene
of strife and uneasiness and rage.

0oses' decades-long honeymoon Zith the press of NeZ York City Zas over,
of course. Criticism in Dorothy Scruffs 3ost Zas harsher than ever. Even
NeZsday publisher Alicia 3atterson, her admiration for the man unstinted,
could not go on supporting the man's transportation policies. NeZs-day
revealed her ambivalence; even as Jack Altshui Zas being relieved of his
duties as city editor for tZo Zeeks to enable him to research thoroughly an
admiring three-part series entitled ":i]ard  of  the Fair," its editorial page
Zas saying: "The commissioner's arguments lack the good old 0oses
logic." The editorial Zas incorrect: the logic of 0oses' arguments Zas the
same old 0oses logic—it Zas the editorial understanding of that logic that
had been altered. The Times it Zas a-changing. Iphigene Sul]berger's
opinion of this "man of vision," this "giant,"  had not changed, but she Zas
as scrupulous as ever in her determination not to interfere too overtly in the
paper's neZs coverage and editorial policy, and Zith 0oses' old friend
Arthur +ays Sul]berger crippled and increasingly out of touch Zith the
paper noZ and 0oses' relationship Zith Orvil Dryfoos  friendly but not
nearly as close, her scrupulousness hurt noZ, as an incident in 1961
revealed. A revieZ of LeZis 0umford's  latest book referred to 0oses as an
e[ample of city planners Zhose concentration on highZays Zas destroying

1478
needed open space around cities. 0rs. Sul]berger Zrote a letter to the editor
of the Book RevieZ taking "e[ception"  to that sentence and noting that "I
have Zorked very closely Zith 0r.  0oses  for almost thirty years and I
Zould like to testify  that he has never considered a roadZay merely as a
means of transportation, but he has alZays made them into parkZays using
every bit of acreage possible for parks and playgrounds." But the significant
point about the letter Zas not that 0rs. Sul]berger Zrote it, but that Zriting
it— a mild letter at that—Zas all she had done. Similar criticism of 0oses
Zould soon be running in the Times again, in book revieZs and in the
paper's neZs sections. :ith the accession to the publishership of Arthur
Ochs (3unch) Sul]berger in 1963, such remarks increased in number.
"0oses Zould  complain to poor old Sul]berger on his sickbed, and
Sul]berger Zould call in 3unch, and the editors closed ranks and they
started looking for other things to prove that 0oses Zas not Zorthy of the
praise, over-all," Shapiro says. 0ost important, the editorial-page editor of
the Times Zas no longer Charley 0er] of 1 Gracie Square and the morning
rides doZntoZn but John Oakes. Even Zhile Dryfoos Zas publisher, Oakes
had been attacking 0oses' emphasis on highZays at the e[pense of mass
transit and parks. After the publisher's death on 0ay 25, 1963, Oakes Zent
further than he ever had before, spelling out the paper's change of heart in
an editorial on 0oses' 1963 push for the LoZer and 0id-0anhattan
e[pressZays: "As a neZspaper Ze have previously endorsed those
crosstoZn e[pressZays, and Ze stand by that earlier endorsement. But Ze
must admit to a groZing disenchantment Zith great urban highZay and
e[pressZay schemes." 3ar-

ticularly irritating  to 0oses Zas the neZ refusal of the Times to print every
letter he Zrote it. "That really infuriated him," Ingraham recalls. "+e really
thought everything he Zrote should be printed."

But there Zas a poZerful predisposition in the press toZard a favorable,
cooperative attitude toZard the Fair, a predisposition based greatly on
financial considerations. 0ost of the NeZ York papers Zere desperate for
revenue—it Zould not be long after the Fair's close that the +erald Tribune,
:orld-Telegram  and Journal-American died—and the Fair Zas a source of
substantial revenue, both through special Fair "'supplements" crammed Zith
advertising from Fair e[hibitors and contractors, and through increased

1479
advertising, aimed at Fair-bound tourists, by hotels and restaurants. There
Zas, moreover, civic pride: the press Zas part of the city's establishment; in
the circles in Zhich the publishers moved, the NeZ York :orld's  Fair Zas
not an event to be derided. And a fair Zas a fair. "There Zas nothing to be
against," as Joe .ahn says. ":hat  Zas there to be against? Did you ever
hear of a fair or a circus that people Zere against?" No editor or publisher
Zanted to be the one to cast the first knock. All 0oses had to do Zas ignore
or roll Zith  the criticism of his other activities, and as the Fair began to
dominate headlines and editorials, that criticism Zould fade before a tide of
praise. The honeymoon may have been over, but a divorce Zas by no means
inevitable—particularly on the grounds of a :orld's  Fair.

But 0oses made it inevitable. +e did not ignore the press or roll Zith its
punches. +e did not forgive it.

Rationally, logically, he kneZ that, for a public figure, fighting the media is
a battle he can only lose; he Zas, in fact, constantly e[pounding this a[iom
to his aides. But it had long since ceased to be reason or logic that dictated
his actions. It Zas emotions, feelings, passion—the comple[, fierce
personality to Zhich, for decades, he had become accustomed to giving free
rein. That personality made it impossible for him to ignore criticism. During
1961 and 1962, he Zas embroiled in battle on several non-Fair fronts—
+enry Barnes, the Fire Island road, the LoZer 0anhattan E[pressZay.
3ress coverage Zas noticeably restrained, editorial criticism rather light.
But no matter hoZ glancing the attack, 0oses seemed impelled to retaliate
massively—by public attack on the paper involved and the press as a Zhole,
and by private complaint to editors about reporters, and to publishers about
editors.

And his attitude carried over to the Fair.

+e scheduled press conferences because he reali]ed, intellectually, that the
Fair needed the publicity, and because, rationally, he felt sure he could
charm the reporters into friendliness. But Zhen he found himself in the
same room Zith these men and Zomen Zho had attacked him, reason fled
before rage. +e Zent out of his Zay to shoZ his contempt for them; the face
he turned on them Zas one of disdain; his ansZers Zere sarcasm and scorn.

1480
+e lectured them—and he antagoni]ed them. It Zould have been easy to
make them allies; he made them enemies instead.

Any real chance of a reconciliation vanished on August 5, 1962, Zhen he
began lecturing the press in public as Zell as private.

The first lecture might, according to Sid Shapiro's post-mortem analysis of
Zhy the Times's old-line Sunday editor decided to sponsor it, have been
called "The Lester 0arkel Lecture to ShoZ 0rs.  Sul]berger That She :as
0aking  a 0istake in  AlloZing  NeZ  Editors to Be Brought In." For
Zhatever reason, 0arkel invited 0oses to Zrite  an article for his Sunday
maga]ine giving his vieZ of  the press.

0oses accepted.

The poZer of the press, radio and television to make or break any man in
public life ... is aZesome and often grossly unfair [he Zrote]. The press, for
the ostensible purpose of keeping it honest, has done much to make public
employment dangerous and unattractive. . . .

0any  a good official has been frightened or flattered by idle gossip, random
criticism or attack. . . . Aaron and +ur do not hold up his arms so that his
side may gain the victory. . . .

There is a type, fortunately rare, Zhich is indifferent to the ordinary
decencies and proprieties, skilled in eavesdropping, glued to keyholes,
Zilling  to embarrass families and friends, a species to Zhom nothing is
sacred. Such reporters, if they could, Zould Zire and violate the
confessional. ... I sometimes Zish Ze had a feZ Gorgases to keep yelloZ
journalists off our necks so that Ze Zould be free to do our Zork. . . .

3erceptive journalists sense that the public has tired of hearing Aristides
called "The Just," and therefore yell for his ostracism. . . .

There is a notable tendency in the press to cut officials to one si]e in a sort
of bed of 3rocrustes, to put on spiked shoes and cleats and to jump on
victims Zhen they are doZn, like a mob at the fights shouting Zith such
glee Zhen an aging champion is beaten up and dethroned. There is also a

1481
potent minority of jackals and vultures Zho hang around the outskirts and
hover over trouble spots to discover a Zound or blood and then close in or
sZoop doZn for the kill.  . . .

Cleverly and dramatically reflecting public opinion is one thing. 3lanting
suspicion, poisoning minds, rousing the mob spirit, quoting out of conte[t
— these are cute tricks far removed from straight honest reporting. . . .
Critics build nothing. The only e[cuse for a critic is to toughen the hides of
his victims. . . .

Jackals. Vultures. YelloZ journalists. "There is only one Zay to get the
press united and that is to attack it," Joe .ahn says. NoZ 0oses had
attacked it. The reporters Zho had to cover the Fair every day, the reporters
he had insulted at first to their editors, then to their publishers, then to their
faces, then to the public, Zere noZ his enemies. If he gave them material
Zith Zhich  to tear him doZn noZ, they Zould use it for all it  Zas Zorth.

And he gave it to them by lying.

+e had been tZisting facts for years, shielded by the secrecy Zhich the
courts had erected around his public authorities. But the :orld's Fair Zas a
private corporation Zhose records Zere open, one, moreover, Zhich Zas,
because of its need for public support, forced to operate in the public eye.
The press could look at the :orld's Fair—and he had made it Zilling and
determined to look.

Joe .ahn looked first.

0oses Zas deluging city desks Zith Fair brochures and "3rogress Re-

ports." The 3ost reporter began to read them Zith care. "I don't like to say it
Zas a natural antagonism against the man and the men around him," he
says. "But I guess it Zas. And it Zas natural, being the kind of reporter I
am, to be suspicious—particularly Zhen you have these suspicious
characters around, guys like Rosenman—I mean he Zas the laZyer for all
these guys Zho tried to fuck everyone—you had to be suspicious Zhen you
saZ he Zas involved. And you knoZ, you started reading those brochures,
and you could see he [0oses] had the same old creZ in." .ahn began to

1482
look "for tie-ins and conflicts of interest and that kind of thing"—and soon
he Zas telling 3ost readers about the $io,ooo,ooo-a-year restaurant business
that 0oses had handed to tZo Fair directors for a pittance rental Zithout
competitive bidding, and Zas feeding Stan OpotoZsky, Zriting a series
titled ":ho-Do-You-+ave-to-.noZ      Or: +oZ   to Do Business Zith the
City," information about the lucrative arrangements Zith Deegan and
Donoghue and 3reusse and Constable and Spargo and Shanahan and
Rosenman.

From 0oses' public relations offices Zas coming a steady stream of
announcements of states, foreign countries and prestigious private
e[hibitors Zho  had "agreed" to sponsor pavilions. .ahn began to check into
those announcements. "I couldn't call 3anama, for Christ's sake—the 3ost
Zould have gone out of its mind. So Zhat I did Zas I called the embassies
here. And I Zrote to every Governor Zhose state Zas supposed to be in. I
Zas never assigned to the :orld's Fair. Nobody in his right mind Zould
assign me to a thing like this—it took too much time. So I Zas doing it all
on my oZn, at the same time that I Zas doing my regular assignments. I
Zas doing it all myself. God, I remember noZ. I never told anyone Zhat I
Zas doing. A terrible, aZful job."  But it began to produce results. 0oses
had announced a huge +all of 0edicine and +ealth, to be sponsored by the
American 0useum of +ealth.  :hen   .ahn  telephoned the 0useum's
chairman, he said the 0useum had decided not to sponsor the e[hibit.
0oses had said that California Zas sponsoring an e[hibit; .ahn checked,
and Governor 3at BroZn said California Zas not. Soon there Zere other
stories:

38ERTO RICO DRO3S O8T  OF '64 FAIR; VIRGIN  IS. DRO3S 3LAN
FOR 3AVILION.

The city's other papers Zere reluctant to pick up this neZ theme at first. As
late as the spring of 1963, the general play given to the :orld's Fair in NeZ
York's press Zas still upbeat. But 0oses took care of that.

The first of a neZ series of press conferences on "the Fair's progress" Zas
held on June 27, 1963. The prepared statement Zith Zhich 0oses opened it
had evidently started out to be a plea for cooperation: ":e are not shrinking
violets or sensitive plants and constructive questions Zon't irritate us," he

1483
said. "Let's be Zorking partners in bringing the Zorld to NeZ York." But it
turned into a statement Zith the 0oses touch: ":e  at the Fair build. The
3ress in its many manifestations reports. :ho am I to e[plain our respective
missions and to acknoZledge our dependence upon you? . . . :e are entitled
to the support of all decent citi]ens. . . . Error is the besetting sin of
journalism, perhaps occasionally acknoZledged in the Confessional but
almost never publicly."

The reporters found, moreover, that their questions Zere not considered
constructive. +e had planned the main neZs of the day to be the fact that
ground Zas being broken for a Sudanese 3avilion, and the fact that the Fair
Zas coming along on schedule. "Do not, Ze ask, overemphasi]e the
absentees," he had said in his statement. The reporters persisted in asking
about the empty spaces on the map behind him and hoZ much missing
rental they represented. +e began to get angry. The reporters asked him
about the fees paid to 3reusse. "That is not a subject that comes under the
category of the Fair's progress," 0oses said. The reporters Zalked out
fuming, and the +erald Tribune's lead the ne[t day Zas that the Fair's
"economic prospects . . . Zere trimmed yesterday." Its article enumerated
every unoccupied plot. The Sudanese 3avilion barely made the last
paragraph.

To attack, there Zas for Robert 0oses only one response: counterattack. A
feZ days later, a group of 4ueens civic leaders Zere touring the Fair.
Greeting them, 0oses noticed reporters nearby. "This is a highly critical
community," he rasped. "I think Ze have more critics than Ze are entitled to
for our si]e. They foul the city's nest and are alZays more interested in Zhat
is going Zrong than in Zhat is going right."

A luncheon that had been planned to "clear the air" Zith the neZ editors
Zho Zere taking over the places once held by his friends at the Times did
little to convince them of his reasonableness.

3ublic officials lunching Zith  Times editors almost invariably do so at the
Times; even 3residents come to them. Not 0oses; if they Zanted to see
him, he told Ingraham, Zho Zas arranging the luncheon, they Zould have to
come to him. They agreed to do so, and eight or nine—"the very top, Daniel
and Salisbury Zere there," recalls Ingraham—journeyed out to Flushing

1484
0eadoZs one day. Ingraham says he Zas brought along "to e[plain things
to them," but e[planations Zere to prove superfluous. 0oses made things
perfectly clear.

"0oses started sounding off and made some reference to his job as City
Construction Coordinator and the poZer it gave him," Ingraham says. "So
Frank Adams [Times city editor] asked, '+oZ far does your jurisdiction as
Construction Coordinator e[tend—the Zay you put it, it Zould  seem that if
a road starts in Florida, you have jurisdiction over it as long as it ends up
here.' "

"I consider that an insulting question," 0oses said. Leaping out of his seat,
he stalked out of the room—"leaving nine top e[ecutives of The NeZ York
Times absolutely flabbergasted." For a Zhile they sat there, stunned,
Zaiting for their host to return. Gradually they began to reali]e that he
Zasn't going to. Says Ingraham: "After a Zhile, Ze just got up and Zent
home."

0oses paid the price for the pleasure of giving his emotions rein.

In every announcement, the press found something to carp at. :hen the
Administration Building  opened, they emphasi]ed not that the first structure
for the Fair had been completed, but that it had cost a million dollars instead
of the e[pected $600,000. :hen  landscaping on the site began, they noted
that it began "Zell after the promised Spring of '62." Did

0oses proudly announce that the city had agreed to construct a $3,500,000
Science 0useum? "A far cry from the multimillion-dollar  Federal Science
3avilion erected by the 8nited States at the Seattle Fair."

3ress conferences Zere the stage for the most overt encounters, of course.
At every press conference there Zould be mounted behind 0oses a huge
map of the Fair. +e Zanted to talk about the e[hibits that had rilled in
spaces since the last press conference—the neZ e[hibits that had been
signed up. They insisted on asking him about the spaces that remained
empty. :hy   Zas the Fair having so much difficulty persuading states and
nations to e[hibit? +e Zould  get angry, and blast the press for making an

1485
issue out of something he considered unimportant; the blast Zould be the
biggest neZs of the day.

+e couldn't let anything alone. +e had to fight Zith everybody, and fight
publicly.

Negotiations Zith +.  L. +unt, the eccentric Te[as oil magnate Zho had
offered to rent 152,000 square feet and erect a comple[ of thrill rides and
the other amusement attractions the Fair so badly needed, together Zith
several restaurants, Zere probably doomed from the start, since +unt Zas as
accustomed as 0oses to having his oZn Zay. But since the negotiations had
never been a matter of press interest, their termination did not have to make
the front page of The NeZ York Times. 0oses put it there—after
disagreements over the "standards" of the rides, Zhich 0oses felt might be
too "gaudy," had reached the point Zhere 0oses ordered +unt's check for
more than a million dollars returned—Zith a full-scale statement to the
press that arrangements had been "mutually terminated." +unt, Zho had
previously been happy to go quietly, felt called upon to make his oZn—
eight-page—statement denying that there Zould have been any gaudiness
and that there had been anything mutual at all about the termination, saying
that he Zould have been happy to be part of the Fair despite 0oses'
"vacillating and capricious moods and . . . emotionally-arrived-at decisions"
until 0oses had flatly  declared he Zas "out." All of Zhich not only
increased the air of controversy around the Fair, but emphasi]ed the
difficulty  0oses Zas having in providing traditional  amusements for the
Fair. 0oses Zanted a $25,000,000 Federal 3avilion at the Fair, but his
reaction—in public statements, press releases and testimony before
congressional committees—Zas one of such outrage that anyone, even a
8nited States senator, should raise any questions at all about a Robert
0oses demand, that Senator 3aul Douglas of Illinois called him "one of the
most competent and irritating men in the history of the 8nited States."
Before 0oses arrived in :ashington,  the request, Zith 3resident .ennedy
solidly behind it, had been regarded as assured of passage. By the time
0oses left, it Zas all  but dead, and only :hite  +ouse intervention saved it
in scaled-doZn dimensions. Not satisfied Zith Zhat he had thus Zrought,
0oses proceeded to make neZ public attacks on congressional stinginess.

1486
In a do]en such incidents, 0oses created controversy Zhere none Zas
necessary, handing reporters fuel, fuel he had made them an[ious to use.

And Zhen they used it, turning it into stories, he attacked them for using it
—thereby making more stories. It Zas attack and counterattack, and attack
and counterattack, in a Zar of Zords that escalated and escalated and
escalated again. As opening day greZ closer, the Fair, thanks to its
president, Zas surrounded by furor. There Zas the racial controversy—there
Zas, of course, not a single Negro or 3uerto Rican on the Fair's 200-person
administrative staff, and not many more even in menial posts around the
Fair Administration Building  until Screvane managed to ease some in, and
the protests of Negro civil rights groups Zere met by 0oses Zith scant
courtesy. And there Zas the religious controversy: every one of the major
religions in America Zas represented at the Fair, save one, and JeZish
leaders Zere increasingly perturbed by the absence of any representation of
their faith (some of them seeming to feel that the Fair Zas not especially
an[ious to have any); their feelings Zere not especially assuaged by the fact
that Zhen Israel decided it could not afford a national pavilion (after
learning that the cost of its pavilion Zas more likely to be $3,000,000 than
the $1,250,000 0oses had promised), 0oses attacked 3remier David Ben-
Gurion. There Zas the controversy over unions—the press dubbed it "The
Great Garbage Controversy"; foreign e[hibitors Zere shocked by $i7-an-
hour-per-man garbage-collector rates; after enraged Spanish 3avilion
officials refused to hire Allied 0aintenance creZs and tried to hire their
oZn, teamsters refused to pick up the pavilion's garbage, and the Spaniards
threatened to dump it into the 8nisphere pool. And then the controversy
over art; 0oses turned doZn repeated requests by artists' societies for a
pavilion to display American art because no one came up Zith the high
rental he demanded. Then there Zas the opening-on-time controversy.
Instead of simply admitting that a feZ e[hibits and some landscaping Zould
not be ready on Opening Day, Zhich Zould have made this a not-very-
neZsZorthy item, 0oses kept insisting—  although he kneZ differently—
that everything Zould, Zhich alloZed  the press to do daily stories on the
items Zhich Zere behind schedule.

0oses Zas raging at the press noZ. If these jackals and hyenas thought they
could attack Zith impunity, he'd shoZ them hoZ Zrong they Zere. Blasting

1487
the "assorted dyspeptics, grouches, grumblers, hit-and-run Zriters and
talkers Zho hint broadly that our fair Zill  be artless, boycotted, funless,
food-less, constipated, strangled and tasteless," he told 1,400 members of
the Fifth Avenue Association gathered to honor him in October 1963 that he
had decided that "if your natural Zeapon is the broada[, you should not
affect the rapier"—and, dropping the more delicate Zeapon, he sZung the
a[ more and more frequently; by the start of 1964, it seemed that every
speech on Zhatever occasion—the opening of a neZ pavilion, the
dedication of the 8nisphere, Zelcoming a delegation of NeZ England
Governors to the Fair—Zas an occasion for a vicious denunciation of the
neZs media. Some of the controversies he Zon and some he lost, but all had
the same result: more publicity about strife and disunity at an event Zhose
slogan Zas "3eace Through 8nderstanding." +e had turned a skirmish Zith
the press into a full-scale Zar—and he had been its leading casualty.

Out of the Flushing 0eadoZs—an e[panse of flat, barren, almost
unadorned land not tZo years before—there took shape noZ a square mile
of forms out of the past like the thatched replicas of African tribal huts
housing tree-house restaurants, of forms out of the future like the hulking
massive-ness of the 8nited States 3avilion and of traditional fairground
adornments such as the curving, looming dark Zalls of the +all of Science,
the little, brightly colored cable cars sZinging in procession overhead and
the clusters of Zhite balloons that marked the Brass Rail hot-dog stands
scattered throughout the grounds—a flag-lined, fountained scene that may
have been disorgani]ed and hodgepodge but that Zas also somehoZ vital
and vivid, not trend-setting certainly but gay and alive, a scene certainly not
boring, a scene that may not have titillated the sophisticated taste of NeZ
York intelligentsia but that Zould have thrilled the general public. But in the
public perception of the Fair—the perception created by the media—this
scene Zas not foreground but background. There loomed before it the
figure of its creator, dominating the scene, muting its gaiety, casting a dark
shadoZ across its brightness, a figure not inviting but hostile, a figure of
arrogance and controversy and rage. :ith the opening—on time—of the
Fair, the Zind of controversy died aZay for a Zhile. But the ZhirlZind  Zas
still for the reaping.

1488
The first hint of the great storm to come Zas the daily attendance figures.
Every day that the Fair Zas open, its e[penses Zere $300,000—on top of
the $30,000,000 it had spent prior to Opening Day. To pay these e[penses—
and to fulfill  his promise to repay the city its $24,000,000 loan, and to have
the necessary $29,000,000 left over for his great chain of parks —the daily
attendance had to average 220,000. 0oses had confidently predicted it
Zould. There Zould, he boasted, be many "quarter million days." But the
controversies he had spaZned had come home to roost. Attendance on
Opening Day, April 22, 1964, Zas 49,642. 0oses ascribed that to over-
dramati]ation of a civil rights protest auto stall-in and to chill, dri]]ly
Zeather. But attendance the ne[t day, clear and Zarm, Zas 88,130. On the
first Zeekend there Zere croZds each day of 170,000. But during the
folloZing  Zeek, the fatal figures read: 45,000; 53,000; 38,000.

:ait   until 0ay,  Zhen the Zeather turns Zarm, 0oses said. During the
entire month of 0ay, there Zas not a day on Zhich attendance reached the
break-even 220,000. On only seven days did it reach 200,000. On five days
it did not even reach 100,000. Attendance for June Zas scarcely higher.

:ait   until July, Zhen the schools let out, and parents can bring their kids,
0oses said. All through July, the Fair Zaited—in fair Zeather—for  its first
quarter-million day. It never came. On only five days did attendance reach
200,000. By the end of July, according to 0oses' "conservative" forecasts,
25,000,000 persons should have paid their Zay into the Fair. The actual
number Zas 15,000,000. :ith  attendance thus off by 40 percent, so Zas
revenue from admissions and parking fees, and from the Fair's percentage
of concessions and restaurant income. The Fair Zas not earning the profit
0oses had e[pected. It Zas not earning enough even to pay its bills.

It took 0oses a long time to reali]e the implications of those attendance

figures, partly because for a long time no one told him about them. +is
shreZd money men, Spargo and 0adigan, Zere not part of the team
handling the Fair's day-by-day financial administration. That team had been
brought over from Triborough; its head, ErZin :itt,   the Fair's Comptroller,
had been Triborough's comptroller. Comptrolling for Triborough had been a
notably undemanding job. The monopoly enjoyed by the Authority made its
revenues easily predictable and inevitably increasing; during :itt's years as

1489
comptroller, the Authority had never once been in serious financial straits.
The e[travagance and Zastefulness of its spending— e[travagance not only
condoned but encouraged by its chairman—had bred Zithin the Authority
an attitude toZard money of carelessness and disregard.

And it shoZed.

At the Fair, :itt   had made a mistake Zorthy of a first-year accounting
student. +e had credited all the advance discount sales to the first year's
income, thereby making the Fair's balance sheet look far better than it
should, for the balance sheet did not reflect a fact that Zould become
apparent during the second season—that 15,000,000 persons Zho Zould be
attending during the second season Zould not be paying to do so. +ad
attendance been as high as predicted, there Zould have been so much
money that the mistake Zould not have been fatal. But it Zas fatal noZ: the
money had been spent, and no more Zas coming in.

And after 0oses' aides finally did reali]e  the implications of the attendance
figures, they still took a long time to tell R0  about them. For they Zere
afraid to tell him. .noZing   the blind, punishing rages—and, in some cases,
the ostracism, the severance from poZer and prestige and money—Zith
Zhich R0  greeted bad neZs, not only :itt   but the e[ecutives to Zhom :itt
reported, the Constables and Shapiros, stalled for Zeeks before breaking the
neZs. The only one of 0oses' aides Zith enough guts (and money) to tell
the Boss the unpleasant truths Zas George Spargo, then chairman of the
Fair's finance committee. Spargo had been Zorking for 0oses for thirty
years and Zas closer to 0oses than any other aide. 8nlike the other 0oses
0en, he Zas close to the Boss personally as Zell as professionally; they
double-dated together; Spargo had introduced him to the Zoman Zho Zas
to become his second Zife. By any standard—including the one that, in the
Triborough empire, really mattered: the money that 0oses had let him
make—Spargo Zas 0oses' favorite. :hen  Spargo told 0oses the truth
about the Fair's finances, 0oses fired him on the spot. ":e don't Zant any
negative thinking around here," he said in an e[planatory memo to the staff.
Then he summoned :itt  to his office. The comptroller Zas a short, mild-
mannered, Zhite-haired man of si[ty-five Zith  a history of heart trouble
Zhose Zife had recently died. +is session Zith 0oses lasted for almost

1490
three hours and he returned from it pale and trembling. "+e Zas never the
same again," one of his secretaries says. :ithin days, he had suffered a
heart attack—from Zhich he never recuperated. +e underZent open-heart
surgery, did not recover from it and died.

:hen—sometime  in late August or early September, it appears from

his memos—0oses at last began to reali]e the seriousness of the situation,
it Zas too late to remedy it. The money had been spent—$30,000,000
before the Fair opened and perhaps $30,000,000 more since April 22, a total
of perhaps $60,000,000. +e had e[pected the Fair to have earned
$90,000,000 by this point. It had earned perhaps $35,000,000. +e had been
able to spend the e[tra money because he had also had in the till about
$25,000,000 Zorth of tickets sold but not used. But because these Zould be
used during the Fair's second season, income during that season Zould be
very small. There Zould be very little neZ money coming in—and so much
had already gone out. Frantically, he tried to cut back e[penses, but Zhat
could he cut? The contracts Zith the insurance companies, Zith Deegan and
the engineering firms, Zere already signed, and had to be paid by the
month. So did the annuity contracts. Interest on the notes Zas mounting
daily. +e took some measures, issuing a memo—perhaps the first of its kind
ever sent out of Robert 0oses' office—ordering a "drastically reduced
budget" for maintenance and security, and an effort to reduce e[penses in
all areas. The Allied and 3inkerton forces Zere cut back to levels at Zhich
they should have been all along—about half of Zhat they had been. But
other areas resisted economy; as 3eter Brennan puts it, "The unions had
been built up to this high level. They resisted cutbacks." And the economies
Zere, simply, too late. +e had paid out $60,000,000. +e couldn't get it back.

Attempting to conceal the truth from the press, 0oses' aides consistently
inflated daily attendance figures. A special handsomely—e[pensively —
printed Interim Report announced that the Fair had been a "financial
success" and as of August 31 had a balance of $12,700,000 cash on hand.
But Zhen he tried to sneak an $8,600,000 appropriation through the Board
of Estimate, 0ary 3erot Nichols of  The Village Voice spotted it, and began
to speculate publicly that the Fair might be in financial difficulties.
FolloZing  her lead, other reporters spotted other clues, although the

1491
conclusion draZn Zas only that the Fair Zas not making as much money as
0oses had predicted; no one, all through 1964, guessed the truth in its full
e[tent.

0oses appears not to have knoZn its full e[tent himself. Certainly his
aides, having seen Zhat happened to Spargo and :itt, Zere not going out of
their Zay to tell him about it. "You've got to remember," says one city
official, "that everyone out there Zas scared to death. 0oses made all those
people and he can destroy them. +e doesn't Zant to hear that his Fair is
going badly. +e's alZays regarded criticism, hoZever constructive or Zell
meant, as a personal attack. All he Zants to hear is, 'Yes, R0.' The result
Zas that his oZn people alloZed him to live for months in a fool's
paradise."

It had to end, hoZever. The Fair Zas not a public authority. :hen its money
ran out, there Zould be no legislative appropriation to put more in its till.
:hen   its money ran out, it Zould be out of money. There Zas going to have
to be a day of reckoning.

It came in December.

The bank presidents Zho, Zith Spargo gone, made up the Fair's finance
committee had become increasingly Zorried over the vague rumors they
Zere hearing and over 0oses' evasions Zhen they asked for hard facts

and figures, and he had finally agreed to appoint an outside auditor. The
e[pert named—+enry J. 0acTavish, a retired vice president of the Chase
0anhattan Bank and trusted aide to David Rockefeller—Zas met on his
first day on the job in November by a typical 0oses attempt to bring him
into camp: a full serving of charm and the promises of future financial
reZards—if, the implication Zas clear, he behaved himself. 0oses escorted
him around the Fair Administration Building to meet the other officers,
gave him a spacious office near his oZn, promised him all the secretarial
help he could use and escorted him into a meeting of the Fair e[ecutive
committee, Zhere it Zas moved that he Zould be appointed the Fair's
financial vice president—on January i, after his study Zas completed.

1492
But 0acTavish Zas not a 0oses man but a Rockefeller man. A tall, tough
Scotsman, he Zas, moreover, a hard-nosed analyst of balance sheets Zho
understood all too Zell Zhat he found in the Fair's. By standard accounting
methods, he found, the Fair, as of October 31, 1964, had, not a surplus of
$12,700,000, but a deficit of $14,000,000.

Charm having failed, 0oses essayed intimidation, summoning 0acTavish
to a meeting at Zhich, according to a non-0oses Fair official, he hoped to
make the Rockefeller man back doZn. In the midst of receiving estimates
and projections from his department heads, 0oses turned to the Scotsman
and said—"almost casually," this official recalls—"By the Zay, 0r.
0acTavish, do you Zant to say anything?" The official recalls that
"0acTavish shifted his legs, looked 0oses in the eye and said: 'Are you
sure you Zant me to speak noZ?' " Certainly, 0oses replied. +e had no
secrets from his boys. But again 0acTavish hesitated, asking: "Do you Zant
me to say Zhat I have to say before this group?" 3erhaps lulled by
0acTavish's hesitancy into believing he had Zon, 0oses said firmly: "I
do." And then, the official recalls: "0acTavish let him  have it. +e ripped all
the estimates and projections to shreds, and Zhen he Zas all through he
leaned back, smiled and said, 'As of today, 0r. 0oses, Ze're insolvent.' "

Reality, Zhich 0oses had been attempting for months to dodge, had struck
him full in  the face.

0acTavish's secretary Zas fired (according to one report, she Zas later
rehired), the e[ecutive committee voted to revoke his nomination as
financial vice president and he received a handZritten memo from
Constable instructing him that, in accordance Zith 0oses' Zishes, "under
no circumstances" Zas he to attend the Fair employees' Christmas party.
Even this ultimate proscription, hoZever, failed to break his spirit. 0oses
said flatly that "under no circumstances" Zas he to make any copies of his
formal report or to shoZ it to anyone before 0oses had approved it, but
0acTavish defied the order and on December 10 sent a copy to George
0oore, president of the First National City Bank and Spargo's replacement
as finance committee chairman. 0oses Zas frantic to keep the bad neZs
from the press, but the bankers Zho had lent their names and reputations to

1493
the Fair Zere groZing Zorried about Zhat Zould  happen to their oZn
prestige if the Fair Zent

doZn. This Zas particularly true of 0oore,  Zhose bank, unlike most of the
others, had never been a leading beneficiary of past 0oses bond issues. One
conversation betZeen 0oore and 0oses Zas described this Zay:

0oore:  Bob, Ze've found bills of si[  and seven figures that Zeren't booked.
:e   just can't continue Zithout reliable information.

0oses: George, your figures are Zrong. You don't knoZ Zhat you're talking
about.

0oore:  Bob, I've been in the banking business all my life and if there's one
thing I knoZ it's a column of figures.

At an e[ecutive committee meeting on January 12, 1965, 0oore demanded
specific, audited, information. "0oses said to Zait until ne[t  month. 0oore
said he couldn't continue this Zay. 0oses accused 0oore of trying to
sabotage the Fair. 'If you don't like it,' 0oses shouted, 'you can get the hell
out.' "

0oore  did, taking a majority of the finance committee Zith him. 0oreover,
he did so publicly, informing reporters that he Zas resigning "because of the
Zay finances are being handled." "You knoZ," he said, "back in June they
said they Zould have a $50,000,000 surplus. :hat has happened to that
surplus? :hat?  I don't knoZ."

Reporters had been Zriting for months that the Fair Zas in financial
difficulties. 0oses  had publicly branded them hyenas, jackals, yelloZ
journalists—in effect, liars—for saying so. NoZ the truth—that the Fair Zas
in financial difficulties  far Zorse than any reporter had imagined—Zas out
in the open. The meat eaters of the media fell upon the feast Zith a Zill —
and tore the already bleeding carcass of the "greatest single event in the
history of the Zorld" to bits.

0oses Zas flying  frantically around the Zorld trying to round up neZ
e[hibits that Zould  enable his Fair to break previous fairs' second-year fall-

1494
off pattern—and he Zas spectacularly successful, obtaining from the
Vatican a $600,000 Gutenberg Bible, the 3ope's bejeZeled coronation tiara,
and 0ichelangelo's statue of St. John; Zinging on to 0adrid to present a
Fair medal to Franco and obtain neZ major Spanish Zorks of art for the
Spanish 3avilion; arranging for a Churchill 3avilion containing a film of Sir
:inston's  life,  thirty of  his paintings and a comprehensive collection of
Churchill memorabilia. Disaster Zas staring him in the face noZ; to stave it
off, even navels must be enlisted: no longer Zere he and Constable
screening out "taZdry" shoZs and auditioning the ones alloZed in to make
certain that female dancers did not display belly buttons or cleavage; in
1965, there Zould be nine discotheques featuring go-go dancers, and their
bras Zere creeping further doZn nightly; in 1964, 0oses had insisted that
bras be put on "Les 3oupees de 3aris" and that se[y posters be taken off the
front doors of that shoZ; in 1965, the girl taking tickets outside Zas spilling
out of her bikini—"to  make the shoZ's point perfectly clear," its promoter
e[plained. 0oses Zould  not admit he had surrendered but, as one reporter
put it, "everyZhere there is evidence of the 0oses compromise—more
scantily-clad girls, carnival-

style booths and games ... 69 neZ bars, gorillas Toto and Gargantua II." For
opening day of the second season, spectacular pageantry Zas arranged— a
parade Zith eighteen bands, four thousand marchers and thirty-one floats,
speeches by Vice 3resident +umphrey and :est German Chancellor :illy
Brandt, an eight-mile run from Central 3ark Arsenal to the Singer BoZl by
Olympic marathon champion Abebe Bikila. Over and over 0oses repeated
that 1965 Zould be "a neZ Fair, a neZ shoZ"; Zhen he said "Come to the
Fair" noZ, he Zas almost pleading.

But Zhat the press Zas emphasi]ing noZ Zere the juicy quotes 0oore Zas
giving out (a photo of the bank president clapping his hand to his forehead
in an ostentatious gesture of dismay accompanied a national maga]ine's
story on the Fair), Zhile the financial revelations from the first outside
audits and Abe Beame's investigation made the financial picture look Zorse
and Zorse: on January 26, in receipt of preliminary audit figures, 0oses
announced that the Fair Zould be unable to repay the city its $24,000,000
"loan" but that the $23,000,000 in investor-held notes Zould be paid in full.
But tZo Zeeks later, the final audit revealed the full e[tent of the gap

1495
betZeen 0oses' $12,700,000 "surplus" and reality—some $30,000,-000; the
Fair had actually finished the first season Zith a deficit of $17,540,-000. It
Zas obvious to Beame's auditors that the Fair Zas not going to be able to
repay its notes in full—and the press headlined that fact. The memos
Zaiting for 0oses  every morning on his desk shoZed the situation to be
even more desperate than that. NoZ that the auditors had finally discovered
all the unpaid bills, the Fair did not have enough money to pay them; on
December 31, the e[position, Zhich had taken in $80,000,000, had
$639,000 in cash, unpaid bills of $3,000,000, and $4,000,000 more in bills
due before opening day, Zith no revenue e[pected until that day. 0oses sent
aides to ask the major e[hibitors to prepay rents not due until after the
opening, and some did; he threZ into the pot $400,000 being held in escroZ
to guarantee his salary and ordered other aides Zith escroZ accounts to do
the same. But there Zas still a shortfall and the press found out about it, and
about another development in relation to it that made it a bigger story still—
not only Zas the Fair not going to be able to reopen Zithout a neZ loan, but
it Zas having difficulty  obtaining one. An e[ecutive of one of the banks
approached—holder of millions of dollars' Zorth of notes that might noZ
become Zorthless, in danger of losing still more money on the Fair because
loans to marginal e[hibitors Zere going bad—intimated to Fred Ferretti of
the +erald Tribune that the reason his bank Zould not make the loan Zas
that 0oses Zas still in charge; the intimation Zas false to begin Zith, and
Ferretti played intimation as fact Zith a +erald Tribune e[clusive, played
under the most damaging headlines yet— loan to fair: not if moses is kept
on —and the rest of the press jumped on that story in headlines such as
fair's choice: moses or money. Even on the day the Fair got the loan it
needed, NeZsday could, truthfully, say: "FeZ days at the Fair contain good
neZs only. The bad neZs yesterday Zas that one of the most popular
foreign buildings, the Indonesian 3avilion, is being shut doZn by 3resident
Sukarno because of increasing bitterness in 8.S.-Indonesian relationships."
E[hibitors

insisted on pleading for a reduction in the admission price, at least during
evening hours; Zhen they could not obtain an audience Zith 0oses, they
Zent to the press. Day after day the headlines about the Fair Zere not about
neZ e[hibits but about prices and deficits and money.

1496
The general aura of financial difficulties that noZ surrounded the Fair,
moreover, made it feasible for reporters to dredge up all the rumors they
had been hearing for three years—the incredible contracts Zith Allied and
3inker ton and the unions, the huge salaries paid to the consultants. Beame,
Zorking Zith  reporters and hunting for publicity, demanded the Fair books
so he could audit them; 0oses refused to produce them, but the courts
ordered him to. And as, over a period of months, Beame's auditors delved
deeper and deeper into them, neZ facts came out—to surround the Fair not
only Zith  an aura of inefficiency and financial difficulties, but Zith an aura
of scandal, an aura linked Zith 0oses himself.

Soon 0oses himself Zas at the center of these charges, for reporters had
discovered the escroZ account set up to insure his salary (the account had
been replenished by gate receipts after the Fair opened for the second
season). +eadlines told the public that 0oses had been guaranteed a salary
of $100,000 per year.* That salary Zas then near-incredible for a public
servant; the 0ayor's Zas only $40,000 per year. There Zas, moreover, the
"escroZ account"; the public may not have understood it, but there Zas
something sinister about the Zay the press played it. It made him seem
greedy, money-hungry, taking a huge personal profit out of an institution
that had been supposed to provide the city Zith parks and educational
money but Zas not doing so. The last surviving portion of the 0oses image
Zas destroyed. No one had ever said he Zas personally interested in money.
NoZ they had. Of the image of Robert 0oses, that had stood glittering and
pure for thirty years, there Zas noZ not a single part left untarnished.

+e became an object of derision, almost of scorn, to the reporters he had
derided and scorned for so long.

Every desperate move he made to try to save the Fair Zas ridiculed. :hen
he raised the admission price, NeZsday's lead said: "Visitors to the :orld's
Fair in 1965 Zill  have to pay an additional fifty cents to reach '3eace
Through 8nderstanding.' " :hen   he asked for an end to "controversy" and
more e[pressions of confidence in the Fair by :agner, Zhile
simultaneously critici]ing  the 0ayor for  Zithholding  them in the past,
NeZsday's headline said: peace-maker moses opens neZ front.

1497
The +erald-Tribune had a Zhole stable of brilliant young columnists. At
times, they almost seemed to be taking turns taking potshots at the sitting
target that the old man had become. Dick ZSchaap Zrote a Zhole—
hilarious —column on the impossibility of reaching him on the phone, and
Zhen he visited Franco Zrote: "0oses' mission to 0adrid  is another
indication of his keen public relations sense. Franco is practically an
American folk hero. +is firm  democratic stance cannot be questioned. No
one could be more deserv-

* Actually, of  course, it Zas $75,000 per year, plus $25,000 in e[penses—
plus the seven-year $27,500-per-year annuity.

ing of the :orld's   Fair's Gold 0edal, unless, of course, it is Robert 0oses
himself."

+e tried to roar back at his critics. "Those Zho can, build. Those Zho can't,
critici]e,"  he said. But his invective, once so feared, Zas noZ ridiculed.
"There Zas a time Zhen the verbal jousting of Robert 0oses enlivened and
sharpened civic controversy," said a Times editorial. "In defending his
handling of the :orld's  Fair, hoZever, 0r.  0oses'  sorties suffer from
petulance, and Zhat is Zorse, they are ineffective. +e Zould be Zise to
pack in his rusty lance."

:hen   the suggestion came that he resign as president of the Fair, the press
Zas confident it Zould be adopted.

The suggestion came from the top. 0ayor :agner Zas increasingly Zorried
about the situation at the Fair and afraid that its failures might tar his
administration. +e believed the solution Zas for 0oses to resign and be
replaced by an administrator not tied to the unsuccessful policies of the past
and thus more amenable to changing them. Other officials besides the
0ayor  Zere afflicted Zith  the same Zorries. BetZeen the tZo seasons,
Governor Rockefeller and Senator Javits Zere also Zorking quietly to
persuade 0oses to resign. For years he had been threatening to resign from
one post or another, confident that no one Zould take him up on the threat.
NoZ people Zere asking him to resign.

1498
+e Zould have liked to. .noZing   the true financial picture, he kneZ that,
bad as the publicity had been, it Zas going to get Zorse. And there Zas a
more serious threat—one that Zas never to receive any publicity at all.
8nknoZn  to press and public, the Internal Revenue Service had begun an
intensive, in-depth audit of the Fair to determine if it had adhered to the
restrictions that Zent Zith the various ta[ e[emptions it had been accorded.
The investigation Zould not be completed for months—there is some
question Zhether it Zas in fact pressed to a conclusion, there Zas never any
public report of its findings, and 0oses Zas, years later, to Zrite in his
memoirs that it "resulted in a clean bill of health"—but it Zould have been a
man supremely unconcerned about his reputation Zho Zould not be
concerned about the results of such an investigation, and 0oses Zas not
such a man. +e thought he saZ one Zay to leave so that no one could say
he had been forced out: to accept a call to a higher duty, a bigger job. :ith
the 8nited States preparing to surrender all control of the 3anama Canal,
there Zas increasing talk in :ashington of building  a neZ canal in
Colombia. 0oses asked Bernard Gimbel to take steps to bring him the
assignment. "0oses thought he could do a cheaper, higher-quality job Zith
less political pressures than anyone else," Gimbel says. Gimbel contacted
NeZ York Democratic committeeman EdZin :eisl,   an intimate of
3resident Johnson, and :eisl contacted the :hite  +ouse. But although no
formal Zord Zas passed back, it became apparent that 0oses Zasn't going
to get the job. "It's a sad thing," one of the 0oses 0en Zould say. "Bob is
old and tired. +e feels he can't resign, but he can't get out any other Zay."

And no one could make him. :agner sent emissaries in relays, beginning
Zith Screvane, Zho made breakfast overtures. The first Zas discreet. "I

told him that I thought he should resign because he had built this thing that
everyone had said couldn't be done, and noZ he should let the day-to-day
handling of it be done by someone else," that mere management Zas not a
job Zorthy of Robert 0oses. The second Zas more to the point. "I told Bob,
'You knoZ damn Zell I'm fond of  you and I think you've done a great job,
but here Ze are—things aren't going Zell and Ze're going to be deeper in
the hole ne[t year. :e  need a fresh start.' " The second emissary Zas
financier John A. Coleman, Al Smith's old breakfast companion, Zhom
:agner  selected in the hope that their shared love for the dead Governor

1499
might give Coleman a unique leverage. The third Zas a committee of
bankers, the men Zho had $23,000,000 in notes, and millions more in loans
to individual pavilions, at stake in the Fair. There Zere further discreet hints
from Rockefeller and Javits.

But Zhen Screvane made his first suggestion, 0oses "said something to the
effect of T never e[pected you to say a thing like that—it smacks of
disloyalty.' " :hen   he made his second, "he started smacking the table. The
Zords just poured out. I don't remember e[actly Zhat he said but there Zas
no Zay he Zas going to be forced out." :ith  Coleman, he Zas friendly but
firm. :ith    the bankers, he Zas firm. "They're all very courageous—until
they face him," :agner  says Zith his quiet smile. "They Zould be so brave
— ':e   Zill  do this, Ze Zill  tell  him'—and then. . . . It's his personality. +e
overaZed them."

Then there Zere attempts to force him out. ":e tried every Zay short of
going to court to get him out of there," Screvane says. The Fair board of
directors or its e[ecutive committee had the poZer to oust him, and the
members of that board, once his allies, Zere all falling aZay from him noZ.
Additional pressure Zas brought. Recalls :agner: "The banks had a big
investment. I said, ':ell,  you bankers—you're the ones that have to . . . get
the committee on your side.' Oh, ':e can do it. :e   can do it.' :ell,   they
found out they couldn't do it."

NoZ Zas the time for the dossiers. Screvane kneZ Zhat Zas going on. "On
at least tZenty occasions Zhen Ze Zere on the same side, Bob Zould say,
':ell,   goddammit, if he doesn't go along, I'll destroy the son of a bitch!'
And sure enough, Zhen the vote came, the felloZ Zould go along." Other
members of the e[ecutive committee Zere making money from the Fair
concessions he had given them, and didn't Zant to chance upsetting the
arrangements. Others may have recalled that, Zhen the Fair Zas over,
0oses Zould  still be head of Triborough and the arterial program. They
Zent along, too. Others supported 0oses out of loyalty, or conviction that
he Zas still the best man for the job—any job. :hatever the reason,
Screvane says, "Ze Zouldn't have the votes." The same reality that the press
had failed to grasp about Title I Zas still at Zork here. Not public opinion—
not even the opinion of a 0ayor and Governor—but raZ poZer Zould

1500
determine Zhether 0oses stayed on as president of the Fair, and of poZer
he still had more than enough. On the Fair board Zere do]ens of the most
poZerful men in the city and state. 0oses handled them like unruly
children. At one meeting,

Senate minority leader Joseph Zaret]ki tried to interrupt the 0oses-dictated
agenda by rising to a point of order. 0oses smashed the gavei doZn.
"You're out of order." "You can't do that," Zaret]ki said. "I'm speaking to a
point of order." 0oses curtly nodded to the ne[t-scheduled speaker, Fair
e[ecutive vice president General :illiam   3otter, Zho began reading his
report Zhile Zaret]ki  Zas still speaking, droZning him out because he had a
microphone Zhile Zaret]ki  did not. Not one member of the board raised a
voice in protest. On February 24, there Zere more than seventy-five
reporters and photographers on hand for a meeting of the Fair e[ecutive
committee, but there Zere also on hand scores of nightstick-Zielding
3inkertons to herd them aZay from the Fair Administration Building and
into the 3ress Building, Zhere, it Zas announced, a briefing Zould be held
later. At the briefing, 3otter announced that the tZenty-one-member
e[ecutive committee had given 0oses a "unanimous" vote of confidence.
One reporter Zho checked found out later that only nine committee
members had actually voted; five had not shoZn up and seven had
abstained. But the nine votes had been for 0oses; Zhen the Fair's second
season Zas opened, he Zas still in charge.

But holding on to the Fair did 0oses little good. The second season Zas
Zorse than the first. There Zas the continuing drumfire of audit revelations,
and Zhen the press managed to tear its attention aZay from those, it
focused not on attractions but on attendance, and it Zas all too clear that in
that area this Fair Zas to be no different from its predecessors; day after
day, the gate count ran beloZ that of corresponding days the previous year.
The press headlined the attendance and Zrote crisis stories about it and its
consequences—failing e[hibitors, increasing lack of maintenance—-Zhich
further discouraged people from attending, and, blaming it on 0oses'
decision to increase prices, laughed at it, a NeZsday column saying: "In
truth, 0oses must be credited Zith a striking improvement over last year's
:orld   Fair. +e has . . . done aZay Zith the Fair's most unpleasant feature—
people."

1501
+e tZisted and turned, seeking a Zay out of the nightmare that kept
looming closer every day as the end of the Fair greZ closer, cutting
maintenance and security forces to the bone, firing employees by the
hundreds, slashing salaries, eliminating e[pense accounts. +e began
arranging quiet 3ark Department allocations for Flushing 0eadoZs 3ark,
set Triborough e[ecutives to Zork figuring out hoZ much of the Authority's
money could be spent on the Fair site. But the damage had been done long
before— Zhen he had authori]ed the spending of the tens of millions
collected before the Fair opened. It could not be corrected noZ. +is Zorst
fears Zere becoming reality. +is auditors told him there Zould be no money
to repay the city the $24,000,000 it had advanced, no money to create the
great neZ chain of parks that had been the main reason he had taken the
Fair job in the first place, no money even to create the "Robert 0oses 3ark"
on Rushing 0eadoZs of Zhich  he had dreamed—he Zas, he reali]ed, going
to be in the same humiliating position in Zhich that Zastrel skirt chaser
Grover :halen   had found himself: unable to repay more than a feZ cents
on the dollar of the notes the Fair had floated, perhaps unable even to

demolish the buildings of e[hibitors Zho had gone bankrupt and could not
demolish them themselves, so that the principal monument to this enterprise
Zhich he had believed Zould resurrect his reputation and reburnish his
name Zould be heaps of moldering Zreckage and debris.

Absolute disaster Zas staved off by the last three Zeeks.

Going into those Zeeks, the total attendance for the second season had not
been the 37,500,000 that Zould have enabled the Fair Corporation at least
to break even for the season, but only 17,000,000. The Fair Corporation,
practically penniless, Zas paying its bills from Zeek to Zeek. :ith   schools
back in session and the Zeather turning chilly, there Zas no logical reason
to e[pect any dramatic change in the lack of public interest that had
prevailed for tZo years.

But as October began and the press began reminding the public that the Fair
Zas in its last month, croZds suddenly began pouring in as if the populace
of NeZ York had suddenly reali]ed that, despite all the adverse publicity,
they Zanted to see the e[position, and take their children to see it— and as
if, having seen it once not through Fred Ferretti's eyes but their oZn, they

1502
liked it, loved it in fact, and came back during the short time remaining as
many times as possible. For tZo years, 0oses had been Zaiting—
practically in vain—for "quarter million  days." NoZ, suddenly, there Zas
one such day after another, and then—for the Zeekends of three Zeeks—
half million  days, as on si[ triumphant Saturdays or Sundays, 500,000
persons paid their $2.50 and pushed through the turnstiles. During its final
three Zeeks, 7,000,000 persons came to the Fair, pouring into the Fair
Corporation's barren e[chequers, through admission and parking fees and
concession percentages, more than $13,000,000. If attendance had
continued at its pre-October pace, the corporation Zould have had a deficit
of more than $24,000,000; as it Zas, its deficit Zas reduced to only about
$10,000,000. On closing day, his auditors informed 0oses that there Zas
$11,580,000 in the bank to be used either to repay the $23,000,000 in notes
or for the restoration of Flushing 0eadoZs 3ark.

The bankers and other noteholders e[pected that he Zould use this money
to repay his debts. But 0oses had other priorities—and he announced them
Zith his usual flourish. At a post-Fair e[ecutive committee meeting
attended by several bankers Zho Zere among the largest noteholders, a Fair
official announced that the corporation had a surplus of $11,600,000. The
committee applauded, the bankers looking rather relieved. But then 0oses
stood up. There Zas just one thing, he said. +e Zasn't going to use any of
the $11,600,000 to pay them. The money Zas going to restore the Fair site
and create the park. At least tZo of the investment bankers, :. +. 0orton
of :.   +. 0orton   & Co. and Frederic +. Brandi, president of Dillon, Read &
Co., leaped to their feet to protest. 0oses favored them Zith one of his pri]e
glares; the big head tilted back, and it Zas doZn his nose that he Zas
looking at the bankers Zhen he replied that he did not feel

any particular sense of responsibility to noteholders "Zho ride around in big
limousines Zith telephones in the back."

By the bankers' code, 0oses Zas committing the original sin: losing them
money. They instituted legal action to compel him to use the money to pay
his debts. But they Zere helpless. Eventually they Zere, in a compromise,
to receive a total of $3,000,000—bringing the total return on their
$30,000,000 investment ($7,000,000 had, of course, been prepaid) to

1503
$10,000,000—or about thirty-three cents on the dollar, ironically just about
the same as Grover :halen had repaid his investors.

The money left—$8,600,000—Zasn't enough for the $29,000,000 chain of
parks, of course, just as it Zasn't enough to repay the city's $24,-000,000.
But it Zas enough—together Zith $6,576,000 from Triborough coffers,
various quiet 3ark Department allocations, and enough money from the
+eckscher Foundation to create a ]oo—to enable the Fair Corporation to
demolish the pavilions of bankrupt or impoverished e[hibitors, to clean up
the Fair site and to do at least a little park Zork on Rushing 0eadoZs. The
park he Zas able to build there may not have been the great park he had
envisioned, but at least it Zas a park—Zith a +all of Science, the Federal
and NeZ York State pavilions, the columned skating rink—and a 8nisphere
to remind future generations of Robert 0oses' :orld's  Fair.

Looming over the Zhole park from beyond its northern end Zas the Shea
Stadium that Zas his ansZer to the Colosseum of the Caesars. And the park
Zas of course surrounded by his great roads, the cloverleafs and broad
ribbons of concrete that to him represented beauty and that Zere his
trademark; they tied up the park Zith neat, clean, sZeeping borders,
delineating the outskirts so sharply that from the air the green Zas sliced off
by gray as sharply as by a knife, nothing left over on the edges, nothing
frayed, making it a landscape by 0oses, bearing his signature as plainly as
if he had scraZled it into the concrete in giant letters. And he considered the
landscape beautiful. On the day, filled Zith pageantry, he gave the Flushing
0eadoZs back to NeZ York,  he said in a statement entitled "Beauty for
Ashes": "The Fair cannot entirely complete this great Zork so that nothing
further Zill  be required. Every step, hoZever, folloZs an ultimate plan
Zhich is reali]able in the not distant future. ... :e   believe it is no
e[aggeration to say that tZo :orld's  Fairs have ushered in, at the very
geographical and population center of NeZ York, on the scene of a
notorious ash dump, one of the very great municipal parks of our country."

3ublic monies spent under Robert 0oses' direction during preparations for
the 1939-40 :orld's  Fair to make the Flushing 0eadoZs a feasible park site
came to $58,842,000. For the 1964-65 :orld's Fair, Robert 0oses' Fair

1504
Corporation spent on permanent park improvements $22,256,-000. Robert
0oses' Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority spent on

permanent park improvements $6,576,000. The City of NeZ York spent
$31,000,000. The State of NeZ York spent at least $12,000,000 (and
probably far more). The federal government spent $12,000,000. The public
monies spent during this Fair on permanent improvements to make
Flushing 0eadoZs a park thus came to a total of at least $83,832,000. For
the tZo Fairs, the total Zas at least $142,674,000. And no one even
suggested it be named after him.

In computing the balance sheet for the 1964-65 :orld's Fair in relation to
Zhat its president had hoped to get out of it, its effect on his popularity must
Zeigh heavily indeed on the debit side.

The methods he had employed in building and running the :orld's Fair
Zere not neZ. +e had been using them for forty years. The only thing
different Zas that this time the Zorld had seen them. Formerly he had
employed these methods behind the cloak of public authorities Zhich kept
the public from seeing these methods. The Fair had given the Zorld a look
at his methods.

And by so doing, the Fair had destroyed Zhat Zas left of the legend of
Robert 0oses. The great universal e[position that had been supposed to
rehabilitate his popularity had instead destroyed the last of it—and
destroyed it beyond repair. :hen the Fair came to a close on October 17,
1965, Robert 0oses Zas revealed to the public in all his egotism, arrogance
and ruthlessness. +e Zas, in fact, portrayed, in the press's emphasis on the
$100,000 a year in salary and e[penses and the escroZ account, as
something Zorse than he Zas—greedy for money. +e Zas in public
disrepute so great that his name had become a symbol for things the public
hated.

For the ordinary public official in a democracy, such a state of affairs Zould
have meant loss of poZer. If he had been an elected official, he Zould have
been ousted from office by the public at the ne[t election. If he had been an
appointed official, he Zould have been ousted from office by the official

1505
Zho had appointed him—probably not in a matter of months but in a matter
of Zeeks if not days.

But Robert 0oses Zas an official of a public authority. The public had no
voice in Zhether or not he stayed in office. The poZer he Zielded in the
position to Zhich the 0ayor  had appointed him made him, once in poZer,
virtually immune to the 0ayor's  authority—as the neZ 0ayor entering
office shortly after the Fair dreZ to a close Zas soon to find out.

0ary  0oses' Zorship  of the husband Zho Zas her hero and her obsessive-
ness Zith public recognition of his greatness had groZn more noticeable.
Once an architect, meeting her at a party, mentioned casually to her that he

The Great Fair +IS

had been one of the young architects Zho had Zorked for the 3ark
Department under :3A.  "Anybody  Zho is of any importance in the city has
Zorked for 0r.  0oses  at one time or another," she replied haughtily. +er
response to the increasing criticism of her husband during the 1950's Zas
violent, so violent that friends felt it helped Zorsen her fast-failing health.
Says Becky Vollmer: "+er Zhole life  Zas Robert. Once they Zent to dinner
at the Sul]bergers—this Zas during the Fifties, Zhen there first started to be
criticism—and Iphigene got 0ary  to one side and said, '0ary, Zhy does
Robert antagoni]e people so terribly?' 0ary Zas Zild!  As if Iphigene
Sul]berger thought Robert deliberately antagoni]ed people! It Zas just that
some people refused to understand!" 0rs. 0oses Zas, in her early si[ties,
an old Zoman. +er "nervous troubles" had not been solved, leading to
further hospitali]ations in the 3ayne :hitney   3sychiatric Clinic,  and she
developed severe arthritis, Zhich led to her increasing confinement in a
Zheelchair.

"Someone had to order his shirts, see that he had money, take care of him,"
his daughter Jane says. For a Zhile, Jane herself did so. She Zas noZ
divorced and living at her parents' Babylon home. 0oses, so youthful and
vital, shoZed little sign of advancing age. One could mark the
developments in 0oses' career by the Zomen he selected as companions.
During his reforming, idealistic period he had been in love Zith 0ary, an
idealistic reformer. During his alliance-Zith-the-North-Shore-robber-barons

1506
period, he had been publicly affectionate Zith a North Shore robber
baroness. As a politician involved Zith Tammany +all, the relationship
most subject to gossip among his aides and acquaintances Zas a canny,
tough female city commissioner. :ithin  the tight little  Triborough empire,
social affairs Zere commonplace; noZ, one of 0oses' secretaries recalls,
they began "getting 0ary II to go along Zith  the Boss." 0ary Grady—
0ary  II as she became knoZn in the empire—Zas a secretary tZenty-eight
years younger than 0oses. Soon their friendship Zas an open secret. Joe
Ingraham became aZare that "at every party 0oses attended, 0ary Grady
Zould be there in the background." 0oses had never taken a vacation
Zithout 0ary   I, but in 1952 she Zas too ill to accompany him to Florida;
after that he began taking 0ary II instead.

+is Zife  Zas affected Zith heart trouble and Zhat a friend calls "all the
ailments of old age." She Zas confined more and more to the Thompson
Avenue house in Babylon noZ; he lived more and more in the Gracie
Terrace apartment in the city. It Zasn't, emphasi]e the Vollmers Zho had
knoZn them for years, that he Zas "mean" to her—Zhenever he saZ her he
Zas as courteous and friendly as ever; he Zould often drive out to Babylon
on a Sunday to have lunch Zith her. And it Zas for her that he made Zhat
for him Zas a supreme sacrifice: his reputation for being above money; it
Zas, after all, at least partly to pay for her round-the-clock nursing care that
he had subjected himself to public criticism by accepting the "$100,000 a
year" :orld's   Fair post. The Vollmers feel that there Zas a reason Zhy
0ary  entered her final decline in 1959: "it Zas quite noticeable that she got
Zorse Zhen the real criticism of him began," Becky says. "I don't think she
could

stand it. . . . It Zas just that he turned his back on her. +e Zas able to
ZithdraZ, to turn his back, on personal problems. ... +e ZithdreZ from
0ary—she could be at a hospital and he Zould be at a party someplace at
the same time acting the same as ever, as if nothing Zas Zrong."

0ary  Sims 0oses Zas virtually  completely bedridden after 1962. She lived
in Babylon, her husband mostly in NeZ York. She died on September 5,
1966, at the age of eighty-one. +er obituary in the Times said—accurately
— "From the day she e[changed a reformer's role for that of a houseZife 51

1507
years ago, 0rs. 0oses Zas content to remain in the shadoZ of her husband
. . ."

Less than a month later, her husband, seventy-seven, married 0ary Grady,
forty-nine.

ing Lindsay come to him—but returning he Zas smiling and rela[ed. "If
you elect a matinee-idol 0ayor," he told aides, "you're going to get a
musical-comedy administration."

Lindsay had talked about "the poZer brokers in our city" but, Zhen pressed
by reporters, had never identified them (":ho  are the poZer brokers? They
knoZ Zho they are" Zas his reply)—possibly because, as he Zas to
demonstrate during his mishandling of the first crisis to confront him, a
transit strike, he didn't really knoZ Zho they Zere. +e Zas going to find out
though—the hard Zay. During the pre-inaugural period, his bright, eager
young aides had been Zorking out the transportation merger that his
Transportation :hite  3aper had so blithely proposed during the campaign.
It sounded so easy to these articulate, cocky young men. The Transit
Authority had a deficit Zhich Zas imposing an intolerable burden on the
city's financial structure, the Triborough Bridge Authority had a surplus—
Zhat could be more logical than to use the one to offset the other? The
philosophy of the neZ administration Zas, at the time, militantly pro-mass
transit, anti-automobile—taking aZay Triborough's funds Zith Zhich the
Authority Zould  otherZise build neZ automobile facilities and using them
to improve the subZays dovetailed Zith that philosophy, particularly if the
neZ agency Zere to raise tolls on Triborough's bridges and place them for
the first time on non-Authority bridges so as to further discourage
automobile traffic into the city, a proposal toZard Zhich the neZ
administration Zas leaning. All they Zere doing, Lindsay's aides could feel,
Zas finally putting into  force the proposals reformers such as Citi]ens
8nion and City Budget Commission study groups had been advocating for
years. :hat  Zas hard about it? Both authorities, Transit and Triborough,
Zere controlled by the city, Zeren't they? And John Lindsay Zas the city
noZ. The ignorance of some of these men concerning the true nature and
poZers of public authorities Zould have been ludicrous if it had not been
the city's future that that ignorance Zas jeopardi]ing. Lindsay Zas,

1508
moreover, full of confidence— overconfidence—and optimism about his
ability to run the city; he Zas going to be another La Guardia, Zith one
e[ception—La Guardia had never gone on to be 3resident as he Zas sure he
Zas going to; lest anyone miss the comparison Zith the Greatest 0ayor
NeZ York +ad Ever +ad, Lindsay had hardly been inaugurated Zhen he
had La Guardia's portrait moved out of another spot in City +all and into
his office, along Zith La Guardia's desk,* and Zas, in an intervieZ Zith A.
0.  Rosenthal of the Times, making "it clear that he doesn't intend to be the
chairman of the board. +e intends to run the city. T Zould call it a style not
of tight control but of total supervision . . .'" Lindsay Zas going to be in
complete charge. A man Zho stood in their Zay, Zho Zas a dinosaur out of
another age—hoZ old Zas

* It Zas not the desk of the Little FloZer but Zhat happened to it that Zas
the more descriptive symbol of the Lindsay administration; during La
Guardia press conferences the man behind it had dominated the room; so
unable Zas Lindsay to control the photographers he Zas constantly
summoning to his office that during one picture session, less than a Zeek
after the desk had been moved in, several climbed onto it and it caved in.

Old Lion, Young 0ayor  ]+9

the old bastard, for God's sake? Seventy-seven? Christ!—a cranky,
cantankerous, ludicrous figure, they did not consider an obstacle at all;
because they laughed at him, they thought everyone laughed at him, or at
least anyone Zhose laughter Zas Zorth anything. They mistook his
deafness for senility, seemed to think they Zere dealing Zith an old man,
but they Zere reformers themselves or men parroting the phraseology of the
reformers. And Robert 0oses had been taking care of reformers for forty
years. It Zasn't rhetoric that Zas going to determine control of the
transportation program in NeZ York City, it Zas resolutions—the bond
resolutions, the contract covenants of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel
Authority. It Zasn't polemics that Zere going to count in any confrontation;
it Zas poZer. John Lindsay and his glib young aides had the polemics; the
grim old ruler of Randall's Island had the poZer. 0ore, he kneZ hoZ to use
poZer. There Zas a phrase he employed in discussing Lindsay's merger
proposal that had a certain significance. It Zas, he said, "ripper legislation."

1509
"Ripper legislation" —a phrase denoting legislation passed to remove an
official from  poZer indirectly Zhen it  is impossible to do so directly—Zas
a phrase out of another age; it had not been in general use since the 1920's.
The significance lay not in the phrase but in the fact that the man using it
Zas still around— in poZer—forty  years later. +e Zas still around because
he had managed to hold on to poZer for decades. These men Zith their first
taste of poZer laughed at him; he had not only tasted poZer but held it
longer than many of these men had been alive. Did Lindsay think he had the
ability to outsmart Robert 0oses? Robert 0oses had outsmarted La
Guardia. From the very same post from Zhich Lindsay Zas trying to
remove him, a 3resident of the 8nited States, at the peak of his popularity
and poZer, dedicated to his destruction, had tried to remove him—and that
3resident had failed. These rash young men thought he Zas only Robert
0oses of the :orld's   Fair and Title I; he Zas also Robert 0oses of Timber
3oint and Jones Beach and +ither +ills, of the Northern State 3arkZay and
the Triborough Bridge and the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay and the Bay Ridge
Approach. +e Zas 0oses of 0assena, 0oses of  the Niagara Frontier. This
Zas their first real battle; he came to it scarred Zith the Zounds of a
hundred battles—battles he had Zon. lindsay maps plans to slash moses'
poZer, the headlines read. 0oses sat in his lair up on Randall's Island and
grinned—the grin of the old lion.

On January 13, 1966, Lindsay announced that legislation creating a neZ,
centrali]ed transportation authority that Zould merge Triborough Zith the
Transit Authority and make its surplus available for subZay operation, and
empoZering him to name the chairman of the neZ agency, Zould shortly be
sent to Albany. A reporter asked him if he foresaZ any difficulty getting the
Legislature to pass it. No, he said Zith a confident smile, he didn't. At
another press conference several days later, he said he had "no reason to
believe" that 0oses "Zill  not go along" Zith  the plans. Did the 0ayor have
any reason for his opinion? a reporter asked. No, he said Zith his boyish,

Zinning grin, he had "not seen anything definitive from 0r.  0oses" but "I
have not seen any signs of hostility from 0r. 0oses" either. "Don't start
fights Zhere there aren't any." Lindsay's aides—including legal aides—
Zere just as confident in private. 0oses Zas beaten, they told reporters, and
he must knoZ it; his era Zas over; Zhether he liked it or not, he Zas going

1510
to go. Not one of the brigade of laZyers striding so confidently through the
corridors of City +all  appeared ever to have heard of bond covenants.

They Zere to hear of them shortly, hoZever. On January 20, there Zas
delivered to all neZspapers and radio and television stations in NeZ York a
"memorandum in opposition" to the Lindsay proposal signed by 0oses and
his tZo Triborough co-commissioners. The memorandum included a legal
opinion by former Corporation Counsel 3reusse, Triborough counsel
LebZohl and one of the nation's most respected e[perts on municipal
bonds, Franklin S. :ood,  of +aZkins,  Delafield &  :ood:   "The holders of
bonds are . . . the beneficiaries of independent contractual obligations by . .
. the Authority. Any attempt to alter these contractual rights by legislation
designed, perhaps, to divert pledged revenues Zould be plainly invalid.
Article 1, Section 10, of the 8nited States Constitution forbids any state to
'pass any . . . LaZ impairing the obligation of Contracts.' . . . The
appropriation of Authority moneys to such a purpose Zould contravene . . .
provisions of the NeZ York State and 8nited States Constitutions." Such
legalisms Zere not meat for the media; it all but ignored them, playing up
the accompanying 0oses broadside, Zhich said merger proposals "are
poorly advised, spring from panic and not logic, solve no problems and
create additional ones." (The indifference of the media Zas a shame;
emphasis on and e[planation of this point could have begun at last the
education about the political realities behind the poZers of public
authorities that the public had been needing for thirty years.)

Incredibly, the neZ administration still didn't get the point—as it didn't get
the point of some other hints in 0oses' statement, such as his comment that
"Triborough is the only agency Zith the personnel or funds to perform
[highZay]  planning and coordination. If Triborough is destroyed, the city is
likely to lose, at least in the ne[t five years Zhile alternative planning and
administrative forces are developed, hundreds of millions of dollars of
federal and state highZay aid. The effect of such loss upon the city, its
construction industry and its labor forces, Zill be catastrophic." That
statement Zas a rallying call to the forces that e[erted so large a degree of
control over the Legislature, Zhich alone could effect the merger Lindsay
Zas so blithely predicting, but the neZ administration appeared not to
understand this. It Zas through not only his Triborough chairmanship but

1511
his informal post as city arterial highZays representative that 0oses
represented to the "construction industry" and "labor forces" hundreds of
millions of dollars of federal and state highZay aid. Remove him from the
arterial post and half of his remaining poZer, already so drastically reduced,
Zould be gone— and removing him from that post Zould not require
legislative action; removal could be accomplished merely by sending him a
letter. But, incredibly, Zhile Lindsay Zanted 0oses out of the arterial post,
he did not

understand its importance; believing the Triborough chairmanship to be all
that mattered, he thought the letter could Zait—and it Zaited, all through
the ensuing fight. Joining a Zalk-in against a 0oses highZay, the
Richmond 3arkZay through the Staten Island Greenbelt, Lindsay aides
made a pretty picture, particularly "briskly striding Commissioner +oving,"
Zho e[plained to reporters that his multicolored hiking outfit Zas
"multinational," Zith  the red ski cap from Austria, the Zhite turtleneck
sZeater from Ireland, the purple scarf from Iceland, etc. "This [parkZay
fight] is a classic case of conservation versus modern times," he said—and
he, like the other aides along, had not the slightest doubt that modern times
Zould Zin.  Shortly before the final draft of the merger proposal Zas
completed, Lindsay made the gesture of sending transportation aide Arthur
E. 3almer to see 0oses and ask him personally to resign, but the tone in
Zhich 3almer couched the request Zas as condescending as his attitude—
3almer Zas told to make it clear to 0oses that he Zas being given an
opportunity to resign to save the face he Zould lose by being forced out—
and it Zas only a gesture anyZay; the neZ 0ayor all too obviously felt he
Zas being charitable, that 0oses had no choice but to go. 3almer Zas to
recall that "from the beginning and during all this," Lindsay never had "the
slightest" respect for 0oses or comprehension of 0oses' poZers. "
[Lindsay's] attitude Zas—Zhat he used to say Zas 'For Christ's sake, throZ
the old bastard out on his ear!''

Interestingly enough, it Zas 3almer, an older, quieter man despised by
Lindsay's glib young men because he didn't talk as fast or (they thought)
think as fast as they, Zho first grasped the facts in the situation—possibly
because he had had the face-to-face meetings Zith Lindsay's opponent
Zhich the neZ 0ayor's  other aides had not.

1512
There Zere three meetings. One Zas at Randall's Island, one Zas at 0oses'
Gracie Terrace apartment and one Zas at 0oses' favorite booth in the Oak
Room at the 3la]a. None Zas at 3almer's office, or at any place he
suggested—because 0oses made it quite clear that if the 0ayor's neZ man
in transportation Zanted to meet him, he Zould have to do so at 0oses'
convenience. 0oses' utter indifference to Zhether or not the meeting ever
took place Zas hardly like the attitude of a desperate old man. 3almer found
it, in fact, rather unsettling. Further unsettling Zas 0oses' reaction to
Lindsay's generous offer to let him save face. +e Zasn't in the least
interested even in discussing it. Instead, he gave 3almer lectures. "The
conversations consisted of monologues during Zhich he Zas giving me
messages—some of Zhich I got at the time, some of Zhich I got later, some
of Zhich I  don't think I've ever gotten"—messages about poZer in the city
and hoZ he controlled it, that "the 0ayor didn't have the poZer to unhorse
him, that he Zasn't going to be intimidated, that he didn't propose to change
his program, Zhich included the Bush Zick E[pressZay, the LoZer
0anhattan E[pressZay, etc., that others had tried that scheme before, that
there Zere a do]en other devices he could use, that he Zas prepared to
cooperate Zith the 0ayor, but only on his oZn terms." 3almer, Zho Zas by
no means as dense as Lindsay's aides considered him, may not have gotten
all the messages, but he got enough. :hen he reported 0oses' refusal to
resign to Lindsay, the 0ayor

asked him, ":ell,   do I fire him or not?" 3almer replied, he recalls, that
"according to the [Triborough] statute, you haven't got the poZer to fire
him." 3almer's honesty apparently ended his rapport Zith the 0ayor;
Lindsay appeared, 3almer Zas to recall, to cool toZard him from that
moment on. But 0oses' message Zas apparently beginning to sink in—
accompanied by other unpleasant facts of political life Zhich Lindsay Zas
beginning to learn. At a subsequent meeting, 3almer recalls, he received
indications of a diminution in Lindsay's confidence, including one
conversation in Zhich the 0ayor enunciated, as though he had learned it for
the first time, a virtual playback of 3almer's oZn Zords: "Don't forget,
0oses has a lot of credit cards outstanding, and he's not going to be an easy
guy to get out." Soon there Zere stronger indications. Someone in the
administration had apparently read the bond covenants; the legislation as
submitted to Albany no longer made any mention of the Triborough

1513
surpluses; all that Zas noZ proposed Zas a merger of the tZo authorities.
And before the neZs of this Lindsay concession Zas released to the press,
3almer Zas dispatched again to 0oses—not this time as an act of charity
but to try to make a deal based on their assumption that 0oses still thought
Lindsay Zould try to appropriate the surplus as Zell as merge the
authorities: since 0oses Zas alZays stressing the sacredness of the bond
covenants, and saying that they revolved around the surplus, 3almer Zas to
offer to do Zhat Lindsay noZ kneZ he had no choice but to do anyZay—
leave the surplus intact—if 0oses Zould agree to cease his opposition.

Nothing revealed the inability of the neZ administration to comprehend
0oses' poZer or his motives more clearly than did this offer, for it failed to
take into account either the fact that 0oses Zas really interested in keeping
not surpluses but poZer or the fact that he had the political clout to keep
poZer Zithout making any concessions at all. 0oses' reaction—delivered in
the Oak Room—Zas, in 3almer's recollection, to make his previous
messages plainer, as if he had just reali]ed that, in the person of John
Lindsay, he Zas dealing Zith a pupil even sloZer than he had thought.

"You keep asking me to cooperate Zith your 0ayor," he said. "+oZ can I
cooperate Zith anyone Zho's proposing to break" the bond covenants?
3almer said, "0r. 0oses,  if you Zould  cooperate, I don't think any breaking
of the covenants Zould be necessary."

Leaning across the table at 3almer, 0oses said: "I Zouldn't cooperate Zith
that goddamned Zhippersnapper no matter Zhat he did! +e'll come and go;
Triborough is going to be around for a long time!" 3almer, after a pause,
replied: ":hat   you're really saying, 0r.  0oses, is that these talks are really
fruitless."

At last, someone had gotten the idea. 0oses leaned back Zith a smile.
"Yes," he said, "that's about Zhat I'm saying." On February 26, John
Lindsay had to make a trip to Canossa. +e had telephoned 0oses for a
meeting; certainly, 0oses replied, he Zould be glad to meet the 0ayor—at
Randall's Island or Gracie Terrace. If the 0ayor Zanted to see him, the
0ayor  Zould have to come to him. And Zhen, on February 26, Lindsay
came to 0oses' apartment, 0oses replied to his attempts to negotiate the

1514
issue by grabbing up a yelloZ legal pad and scribbling out on it a "revision"
of the legislation Lindsay Zas proposing. The details of the "revision" arc
unknoZn, but both 0oses and 3almer, to Zhom Lindsay gave the yelloZ
piece of paper, are agreed on its purport: Zhile it Zould create the
"Transportation Administration" about Zhich Lindsay had been talking, it
Zould leave not only Triborough's surpluses but its independence
untouched— along Zith the poZers of its chairman and 0oses' continuation
in that post. It Zould leave 0oses in poZer as firmly as before. And Zhen
Lindsay attempted to discuss the proposal, 0oses Zasn't interested in
discussing it. The 0ayor could take it or leave it. At last, 3almer recalls, the
0ayor  seemed to understand that 0oses Zas sure he could Zin any
shoZdoZn.

Lindsay thought 0oses Zas Zrong. As the Legislature moved closer to
taking up his proposal, he and his aides Zere aggressively, boastfully
confident that the old bastard's day Zas about over.

1515
In part, their optimism Zas based on the outcome of a meeting Zith
Governor Rockefeller. At the meeting, held over dinner in the Governor's
Fifth Avenue apartment, the merger plan had been presented to Rockefeller
and several of his aides, including his counsel, Sol Corbin, and a tall, burly
man dressed in evening clothes Zhom Richard 0. Rosen, Lindsay's
legislative aide, thought at first Zas one of the butlers but Zho Zas
introduced to him as Bill Ronan (he left early to attend a formal dinner
elseZhere). So naive Zas the team representing the city that it Zasn't until,
after they left Rockefeller's apartment, they decided to go to Sardi's for a
drink to discuss Zhat had happened—the handsome young celebrities Zere
very big at Sardi's—that they reali]ed, as Rosen puts it, "that Ze had been
talking to Dr. Ronan about a plan that Zould have deeply affected the area
he Zas interested in," that Ze had been "giving a proposal that Zould
compete Zith the things he Zas doing. :e had felt, Ze  admitted to one
another, a little silly saying Zhen you get your state things together, it'll fit
right in Zith  Zhat Ze're doing. As if Ze  Zere trying to pull the Zool  over
his eyes. ... No one's pulling the Zool over Bill Ronan's eyes." Nonetheless,
they Zere lulled by the Governor's attitude. One member of the Lindsay
team, Zho Zould discuss the meeting only on condition not only that he not
be quoted about it but that the author never reveal to anyone, anytime, that
he had ever agreed to talk to him about anything, says: "The Governor Zas
very favorable. 0y  recollection is that the Governor said he Zould support
[the Lindsay merger proposal]. 0y recollection is that the Governor said he
could put it through quickly." 3almer says, "[Rockefeller] Zent over the
legislation and he undertook to get it passed. :e all had dinner together and
parted great friends." Rosen says, "There Zas never—at any time—a pledge
of support, but Ze thought the Governor liked the proposal conceptually, as
an idea." (Neither Rockefeller, Ronan nor any of the Governor's other aides
Zould discuss the meeting.) Lindsay certainly appears to have believed he
had the Governor's support. And even if he had doubts about the Governor's
Zord, the doubts Zould not have Zorried him

overly; "to tell the truth," one of Lindsay's aides recalls, "Ze thought Ze
could Zin up in Albany Zithout  it;  to tell you the truth, Ze had no doubts
about it." IntervieZed by neZsmen, mayoral legislative aide Rosen alloZed
himself to be just a little pontifical. "The Zay you handle legislators is Zith

1516
poZer," he said. And, he made clear, there Zas no doubt that the 0ayor of
NeZ York had the poZer in any matter so vital to the city's future.

Everyone in Albany seemed to knoZ Zhat Zas going on Zith regard to
John Lindsay's transportation legislation. Everyone but Lindsay's man in
Albany, city legislative representative Rosen. The three leaders Zho made
the decisions for the Legislature Zere Assembly Speaker Anthony Travia,
Assembly 0inority  Leader 3erry B. Duryea, Jr., and Senate 0ajority
Leader Earl Brydges. (Senate 0inority Leader Joseph Zaret]ki had little
real poZer.) 0oses "came to me personally—and through friends—and
said, 'Look, you don't Zant this to happen to me, do you?' " Duryea recalls.
"And I said, 'No'—look, you don't have a Bob 0oses come along in a state
every day, and you don't just kick him out. Jim Evans [one of 0oses' men
in Albany] came to me and asked Zhat could be done. I said, T don't like
removing a guy by legislation. If [Lindsay] Zants him out, let him be ballsy
enough to do his oZn dirty Zork.' And I convinced Brydges. But I also told
Evans that I Zas of the minority party and that he'd better get to Travia if he
Zanted to save 0oses." By the time the proposed legislation came up for a
public hearing, Travia had been gotten to—perhaps by :agner (Zhose
support had made him Speaker), perhaps by a promise by 0oses to
eliminate from his highZay plans a proposed Cross-Brooklyn E[pressZay
through Travia's district, perhaps by Travia's county leader, Stanley Steingut
of the City Title Insurance Co., perhaps by a simpler reason: Travia's
contempt (shared by Duryea, Brydges and other legislators) for Lindsay as
an intellectual lightZeight Zho combined a truly astonishing ignorance of
hoZ things got done in Albany Zith an arrogance that led him to lecture
them, privately and publicly, on hoZ to do their jobs. Travia, Duryea and
Brydges could have sZung the entire Legislature to their side if they had
needed to do so, but the Legislature Zas on their side already—and if there
Zere any recalcitrants, the leaders had allies. "Christ," one senator Zas to
say years later, "I still remember that one: that Zas the first time I ever got a
call from +arry  Van Arsdale himself. +imself! Not his lobbyist. +arry  Van
Arsdale! Christ, everyone Zas calling—the banks, the leaders, you name it.
There Zas enough muscle against that thing to have beaten anything." (This
is the quote of Lindsay's man Rosen on the subject: "I discussed the bill
Zith the legislative leaders and their reaction Zas generally favorable, a
good response to the ideas that Zere presented.")

1517
"They Zere playing games Zith Lindsay that year," says one reporter, a
good one, covering Albany in 1966. "They kept saying, 'Amend it, amend
it.' +e'd make the amendments they asked. Then they'd ask him to make
some more. I mean everyone kneZ Zhat Zas going on. I myself heard some
guy

[legislator] say to Rosen in the corridor, 'You're forgetting about that bill for
this year, aren't you?' The guy Zas trying to hint to him, you knoZ? But
Rosen didn't even understand Zhat the guy Zas trying to tell him. +e
started to seriously discuss Zith the guy Zhy it Zasn't really dead, Zhy the
0ayor—  'T+E  0AYOR!'—Zas   determined— DETER0INED!—   to have
it passed."

The contract out on the bill Zas e[ecuted Zith finesse. Travia told Rosen
one day that a joint session of the Senate and Assembly Rules Committees
Zould hold a public hearing on the proposed legislation. Recalls Rosen:
"Travia . . . said to me, 'All Ze Zant up there is the 0ayor and one other
person—there'll be one or tZo people there from the other side. It'll be a
friendly little  thing, casual.' The only reason Ze're having it at all, I Zas
told, Zas that it Zas required by laZ." Rosen passed the message along to
Big John, Zho appears to have seriously believed that a joint session of the
tZo most poZerful committees of the Legislature, a session on a proposal to
remove Robert 0oses from poZer, Zould indeed be little more than a
formality. On the morning it Zas scheduled to be held, the 0ayor fleZ up
from NeZ York, accompanied by only tZo aides, Corporation Counsel J.
Lee Rankin and E[ecutive Assistant Corporation Counsel Norman Redlich
— neither of Zhom had even done much research into the matter to be
discussed. Rosen met the three men at the airport, drove them straight to the
Capitol and, before leaving in the press room transcripts of the statement
the 0ayor Zas going to make at the hearing, escorted the three men into the
Assembly 3arlor, in Zhich the hearing Zas to be held—so that the 0ayor
Zas already in the 3arlor Zhen Rosen, in the press room, had his moment of
truth.

It came in the form of a handout, lying on the big table opposite the press-
room door on Zhich public relations men for the various legislative
committees leave stacks of handouts for reporters' use. As Rosen put his

1518
stack doZn, he saZ it lying there, and picked it up and read it. It Zas a
handout announcing the public hearing, and the names of the speakers Zho
Zere to appear at it. "A friendly little thing, casual?" It Zas billed as the
biggest event of the day—and, Rosen saZ as his eyes folloZed the type
doZn, the billing Zas justified.  Appearing for the 0ayor's proposal Zould
be one person, the unknoZn Redlich. Appearing for the other side Zould
be, in addition to 0oses, tZo former Governors, DeZey and 3oletti; one
former 0ayor,  :agner;  one former counsel to 3residents and possibly the
most prestigious Democratic attorney in the state, Rosenman; Brennan of
the construction Zorkers, Guinan of the transport Zorkers and others of the
state's most poZerful labor leaders; a representative of its most poZerful
bank (although David Rockefeller had sent a spokesman rather than
appearing himself); its most poZerful investment bankers; its largest stock
brokerage firm; its leading and most poZerful bond attorneys—and a
platoon of representatives of other poZer groups ranging all the Zay from
the Transit Authority to the Automobile Club of America. It Zas a lineup of
most of the most poZerful forces in the state—and it Zas a lineup arrayed
against his boss. It Zas at that moment, all in a flash, Rosen recalls, that he
reali]ed that Lindsay had

been led into a carefully concealed trap—one from Zhich there Zas no
escape. "I didn't reali]e Zhat had happened until I saZ the handout. Then I
said, Travia's fucked us.' "

Running back to the Assembly 3arlor, Rosen Zhispered these tidings to his
boss. Even Zithout this neZs flash, hoZever, Lindsay Zas getting the
message for himself. For as he stood in the Assembly 3arlor, ready for the
friendly, casual little get-together, jamming through the doors came
television cameramen, radio and neZspaper reporters and photographers—
by the do]en. And mi[ed among them, in addition to Travia, Zhom the
0ayor  had e[pected to see, Zere Duryea, Brydges—and a half do]en other
key legislative leaders.

Then the old lion came into the room.

The croZd, Zhich had been milling around, parted to let him through, and
he Zas suddenly face to face Zith his enemy.

1519
Lindsay half turned aZay, almost as if to pretend he hadn't seen 0oses, but
as the photographers rushed up, the 0ayor plunged his hands into his
pockets and his face creased in a forced smile. A broad, Zide grin broke
across 0oses' face, and for a moment the tZo men stood there, one young,
handsome, dressed in a gold-buttoned blue bla]er, precisely knotted striped
rep, nervousness shoZing through the mask on his face; the other old, lined,
bald, tough, Zearing a dark suit Zith jacket unbuttoned and plain dark tie
pulled askeZ—and utterly rela[ed. The photographers asked for a
handshake; Lindsay hesitated; sure, 0oses said, and as Lindsay took his
hand and 0oses looked into his handsome face, the grin broadened into a
smile of real delight. Then, abruptly, Zhile Lindsay Zas still standing
straight and still and keeping the smile glued on, 0oses yanked his hand
loose and Zhirled to Zalk aZay. There Zas command in that gesture; the
circle around them parted—folloZed by his entourage, he strode through it
and slouched doZn casually on a red leather sofa against a Zall. The sofa
seated four, but no one took the other seats; "at least three [aides] Zere
standing behind him —standing!—as he sat alone on that long sofa," says
reporter Sidney Schanberg of the Times. :hen Schanberg approached him,
"he ansZered a couple of questions and then he got churlish and turned to
Ed O'Brien and he said, 'Ed, I Zant to hear this testimony.' 0eaning, 'Get
rid of this shit!' " Then he looked up inquiringly, and another aide hurriedly
ran over and Zhispered in Travia's ear. The Speaker had been chatting Zith
his oZn aides. +e stopped abruptly, caught Duryea's eye, Zalked Zith him
over to the hearing table and, even before sitting doZn, began pounding the
gavel.

Lindsay Zas the first at the lectern set up at the left end of the long table.
Normally so poised, the 0ayor stared doZn Zith almost painfully  obvious
nervousness at the full battery of microphones before Zhich he had been
lured. "+e read [like] a schoolboy reciting his graduation speech,"
Schanberg says. Slouched on the couch, leaning on one hand, the other, big
and still poZerful, gripping his knee, 0oses listened intently for a feZ
minutes, even putting on the glasses Zith the concealed hearing aid so

that he could be sure he heard. For a feZ minutes be Zh impassive. his lips
pressed tightly together. But as he heard Zhat Linda .tying!

1520
they turned up in a small smile. As the 0ayor continued and it became
apparent that he had no neZ cards to play, the smile Zidened a bit. And
Zhen the 0ayor  got to his attack on 0oses' proposed neZ highZays, and
said, "8nder my administration, these proposals Zill never he accepted," \
began to laugh, hastily putting a hand up to his face to hide the laughter
Zhen he saZ a photographer lifting a camera in his direction. On receipt of
Rosen's message. Lindsay. Rankin and Redlich had hastilv decided that the
best thing to do Zas to '"get the 0ayor out of there" as fast as possible:
recalls one of those men. "The 0ayor testified and said he had to o 0 and Tf
there are any questions, 0r. Redlich Zill ansZer them.'" Then he"headed
out the door. 0oses Zas obviously having real difficulty keeping from
laughing out loud. If Albany Zas a jungle, Zith many of the principal beasts
of prey gathered in the Assembly 3arlor that day. an observer could, just bv
Zatching Robert 0oses, have knoZn that it Zas his jungle. +e may have
been an old lion, but John Lindsay Zasn't the young lion to take his jungle
aZav from him.

"And then," as one observer recalls, "there folloZed the parade of the poZer
brokers."

0oses led off, as Zas fitting—rela[ed,  at home, reading his speech Zithout
looking up, speaking in bored tones, making his points effortlessly. :hen
some of the rank-and-file assemblymen present asked him a feZ mild
questions, he ansZered—in Schanberg's phrase—"like you're peasants."
After a short Zhile, he had had enough of it; he sZung aZay from the
lectern.

The other poZer brokers folloZed. All the points necessary to be made
Zere made, by the people best suited to make them—the laZyers that the
proposed merger Zas illegal; the investment bankers that it Zould destroy
the "businesslike" nature of public authorities and Zould thereby make it
impossible for them to raise money for needed public improvements ("No
one Zill buy a long-term revenue bond if the management of the project
operates at the beck and call and Zhim of elected officials"); former
government officials that the man proposing it didn't knoZ anything about
government (John J. Gilhooley, not only a Transit Commissioner but a
former Assistant Secretary of Labor, calling it "a political poZer grab . . .

1521
inanely conceived and ineptly drafted" legislation by "rank amateurs" in
City +all):  politicians that the man proposing it Zas poZer hungry (it Zas.
said :agner. Zho  had refused all previous overtures to attack his successor,
but had trotted out his prestige at 0oses' command, nothing more than "a
reach for poZer"); the AAA that it  Zould unfairly  penali]e motorists Zho
had paid for highZay facilities "through the tolls and ta[es they have paid":
the union leaders'that it Zas just plain bad. :orst of all. speaker after
speaker emphasi]ed, Lindsay's plan Zould deprive the public of the services
of Robert 0oses. "0ake  no mistake." 3oletti said, "this arrogant and
shameless ripper legislation . . . sponsored by 0ayor Lindsay is intended
primarily to get rid

of Bob 0oses." "I  have not, nor shall I ever join the pack that is currently
snapping at the heels of Robert 0oses," Gilhooley said. "+is achievements
are beyond the reach of the peashooters noZ attacking him ... he Zill be
honored by anyone Zho reads or Zrites the TZentieth Century history of the
State of NeZ York." But it Zasn't Zhat the speakers said that mattered, but
Zhat they represented. They represented poZer, enough poZer to defeat
anyone in the state—even a 0ayor of NeZ York City—and to defeat him
easily. As the perceptive Schanberg Zas to put it, "The hearing Zas a pro
forma charade. It Zas like the Green Bay 3ackers playing a high-school
team. Lindsay never had a chance." 0oses didn't stay around to revieZ the
parade of poZer brokers he had marshaled—and there Zas no reason Zhy
he should. Lindsay should have—he might have lost face, but he Zould
have learned something—he Zould have learned the identity of those
"poZer brokers" he Zas alZays talking about. +is foe had lined them up
and paraded them before him.

:ith   his customary attention to detail, 0oses had even arranged for a series
of mopping-up actions to folloZ the hearings. On the folloZing day,
Brennan launched a neZ, all-out attack on Lindsay, charging the neZ 0ayor
Zith "sitting  on $3 billion Zorth  of construction projects" by putting
"politics ahead of people." The construction projects listed, of course, Zere
almost all Robert 0oses projects. And the day after that, the Chase
0anhattan Bank supplemented its previous opposition to the merger
proposal by announcing that if the Legislature should adopt it, it Zould, as
trustee of $379,300,000 Zorth of Triborough bonds, sue to invalidate the

1522
legislation; a legal brief designed to demonstrate the illegality of such a
contract-breaking move Zas being filed Zith the Legislature's Rules
Committees by the bank's laZ firm—DeZey, Ballantine, Bushby, 3almer
and :ood.  (The Times carried this story on page seventy-three; in terms of
political realities in NeZ York  State, it Zas the story, above all the merger
stories, that should have been on page one.) All bases Zere covered; Zhen
the Times editoriali]ed that it Zas sure the merger Zould be legal, Franklin
S. :ood  Zrote  the editors a letter concluding dryly: "Your . . . opinion . . .
Zill  not, Ze think, be shared by most laZyers." But 0oses' precautions
Zere superfluous, a case of overkill. The Lindsay merger proposal had been
dead long before—as soon as it Zas made, in fact. The actual murder had
been delayed until the public hearing only to add to his humiliation.

(By the Zay, Travia told reporters during a mid-afternoon recess, the
legislation should never have been sent up to Albany in the first place
Zithout a home-rule message from the City Council; he didn't see hoZ that
had happened: the Legislature could not consider it Zithout such a message.

(That Zas rubbing it in, some listening legislators said, unable quite to hide
their smiles. Travia had, of course, knoZn all along that a home-rule
message Zas required. Everyone had knoZn. +e could have mentioned the
fact to Rosen previously. +e must have forgotten to do so.)

The bill Zas dead—although Lindsay did not have the sense to let it die
quietly. +e telephoned Rockefeller for support, instructed Rosen to "get to
Zork" on the legislators. But the support from the Governor Zas some-

hoZ never forthcoming. The 0ayor  announced to reporters that it had
"never occurred to anyone that it Zould be necessary to have a home-rule
resolution" but that "noZ" the Legislature Zas trying to "buck-pass 11 the
matter back to the City Council. :hen  he asked the Council for the home-
rule message, the request never even got out of committee.

The 3arade of the 3oZer Brokers had, to anyone interested in the nuances
of true poZer in NeZ York State, been a good shoZ. It Zas to be the last
Robert 0oses ever produced. The imperial guard Zould never charge for
him again.

1523
On July ii, 1966, he had arranged a celebration to mark the thirtieth
anniversary of the opening of the Triborough Bridge. There Zere croZds—
3,500 children rounded up from housing projects and by the 3olice Athletic
League and bused to Randall's Island for the occasion—and pageantry—
officials used silver shears to snip a ribbon at the 4ueens end of the span
and then rode in a tZelve-car motorcade (eleven limousines led by 0oses in
a 1936 Ford touring car driven by Omero C. Catan of Teaneck, NeZ Jersey,
Zho on July 11, 1936, Zhen the great bridge first opened, had been the first
driver to cross) to Randall's Island, Zhere bands played and speeches Zere
given—and a sumptuous luncheon in Triborough's state dining room (3,500
bo[ lunches Zere there for the children)—and brochures —a magnificently
printed, bo[ed volume recording the Authority's achievements entitled
Thirty Years of Accomplishment. In his speech, 0oses effectively disposed
of the Triborough surpluses Lindsay Zas alZays talking about, announcing
that he had "committed" $40,000,000 in Authority funds for improvements
to Authority-oZned bridges (no city approval needed), such as a neZ toll
pla]a for the Triborough and a complete reconstruction of the Cross Bay,
and $8,000,000 to the 3ark Department for neZ playgrounds. :ith Austin
Tobin of the 3ort Authority taking the opportunity to tell reporters present
that he Zas planning to open bids for the :orld Trade Center shortly
despite the fact that Lindsay had not yet approved the project, the ceremony
Zas turned into a demonstration by the city's tZo great rump governments
that they Zere planning to proceed in future as they had in past —Zithout
being bound by the Zishes of City +all.

To keep the bridge clear for the motorcade, all other traffic had been barred
from the 4ueens span, and as the officials cut ribbons, thousands of
0anhattan-bound motorists Zere kept Zaiting for half an hour behind them
in broiling heat Zhile Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Officers ignored the
angry protest, not alloZing them on the bridge until the motorcade had
completed a markedly leisurely trip to Randall's Island. And there Zas
praise enough even for 0oses, Austin Tobin lauding his "great gifts of
intellect, imagination, courage and dynamic energy—as Zell as his instinct
for the jugular," 4ueens Borough 3resident 0ario Cariello telling  the
children that "NeZ York City Zould  never be Zhat it is today" had 0oses
been born in South America, Australia or at the North 3ole. But the

1524
celebration ended on a distinctly sour note: Zhile 0oses Zas still bidding
his guests fareZell, a

messenger from the 0ayor's office handed an aide a letter for 0oses, and
the aide gave it to 0oses, and 0oses, ripping it open, saZ that it Zas a
letter dismissing him as arterial highZays representative.

The 0ayor had taken this step—Zhich he should have taken before the
merger fight—after it Zas over, too late to help him in it—but he had taken
it. Once Robert 0oses had held tZelve government jobs simultaneously;
noZ he Zas reduced to one, the chairmanship of the Triborough Authority.
And Zithin  the Zeek, Lindsay had moved to give himself a toehold even in
0oses' last stronghold; Commissioner Tracy's term had e[pired on June 30;
the 0ayor appointed Transportation Administrator 3almer in his place.

The 3almer appointment had no effect on 0oses' poZer. The primary
purpose of putting him on the board, Lindsay had told him, Zas to "protect
the city's interest by saving as much of the surplus as possible." But 3almer
proved unable to accomplish anything. "The first time I voted 'No' on a
proposal, 0oses got up and Zalked around and gave me a half-hour speech,
hoZ I didn't understand hoZ these things Zere done. ... It Zas probably the
first 'No' vote in the history of Triborough. And the staff . . . Zas also
appalled—they had never seen 0oses confronted before." But the vote on
the issue Zas 2-1, Zith the other Commissioner, realtor and Democratic
financier Norman ..  :inston,   voting  Zith 0oses.  3almer says he had been
told that :inston   might be ready to be Zooed aZay from 0oses, but their
first talk indicated that that Zas Zrong; :inston   Zas ready to folloZ  the
chairman unquestioningly on every decision. And that, of course, made
3almer's opposition academic. +e consistently voted against 0oses
proposals —and alZays lost, 2-1. +e Zas not even able to stop 0oses'
"commitment" of an additional $20,000,000 of surplus to the building of a
second deck on the Verra]ano Bridge, a project to Zhich Lindsay Zas
adamantly opposed.

As for Lindsay's other move—the ending of 0oses' designation as arterial
highZays representative—that Zould have slashed 0oses' poZer greatly if
it had stuck, but Zhether it Zould have or not is by no means certain.

1525
By the end of the year, Lindsay Zas beginning to display signs of an
aZareness of the need for accommodation Zith the labor poZer brokers he
had scorned, and they Zere determined to keep at least some of 0oses'
highZays alive and Zell and driving toZard inauguration—and the best
Zay to do that, they Zere convinced, Zas to keep 0oses in charge of them.
0oreover, if  the 0ayor  Zanted to build any highZays at all, he had little
choice. Only 0oses had the plans for major e[pressZays, and only 0oses
had the money for further plans; an astonished and dismayed Lindsay Zas
informed that to plan a completely different arterial program Zould take
five years, and Zould cost, in either fees to consultant engineering firms or
salaries for a sufficient number of civil service engineers, $7,000,000 a year
—an amount there Zas absolutely no chance of the financially strapped city
ever raising. 0oses, moreover, had far more leverage even than those
contained in the rolls of blueprints piled on Triborough's shelves; he had
Triborough's money —for of course the Authority Zould, in the ne[t year
or tZo, have millions—

tens of millions—of dollars of capitali]able  income that had not been com-
mitted for specific projects.

One estimate of the money available for this purpose over the ne[t three
years Zas $250,000,000. This money could be used to pay part of the costs
of highZay projects; in fact, many highZay projects Zould not be feasible
Zithout si]able Triborough contributions. No man Zith  $250,-000,000 to
spend on public Zorks in a financially strapped city desperate to build
public Zorks could possibly be fro]en out of public Zorks  negotiations Zith
federal and state governments; in reality he Zould, Zhether designated as
arterial representative or not, still be that representative in fact if not in
name, until he could be replaced as Triborough chairman. +e could not be
replaced as chairman until June 30, 1970, and by that time there might Zell
be a neZ 0ayor, one Zho Zouldn't  Zant to replace him. :hile   0oses'
removal Zas headlined by the press—Zhich speculated, Zeek after Zeek,
that he might soon be removed from poZer entirely by the 0ayor—
Lindsay's latest gestures Zere in many Zays as futile as the others the
0ayor  had made against 0oses.

1526
By this time, hoZever, it didn't matter to 0oses Zhat Lindsay did. Someone
much smarter than the 0ayor—the Governor Zho had already stripped so
much of his poZer aZay from him—Zas moving against him noZ, trying to
remove him, once and for all, from the last of the poZer he had held for
forty years.

Authority deficits, Long Island Rail Road deficits, 3enn Central Railroad
deficits, the city itself so broke that it had to borroZ money each year just to
pay current bills—everyZhere, that is, but in the accounts of the tZo giant
public authorities, 3ort and Triborough. 3ort, armored by the fact that he
had to Zin approval from the NeZ Jersey Governor and Legislature for
anything he Zanted that agency to do, Zas, for the immediate future at
least, beyond his reach. And that left just one place to turn.

The Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority had $110,000,000 in cash and
securities on hand—a surplus that Zas groZing at the rate of almost
$30,000,000 a year. A surplus that Zould groZ much faster if Triborough's
tolls Zere raised—and Rockefeller Zas already secretly considering raising
the tolls. A capitali]able surplus—Zorth, over the ne[t five  years, even if
current tolls Zere not raised perhaps half a billion dollars. +e needed that
money. +e Zanted it. And 0oses, adamant that he and he alone Zould
decide hoZ it Zas to be used, stood in his Zay.

And more important than money Zas personality. There Zere Ronan's and
0oses', of course—the personality of the cool, cautious, bankerly
corporation man versus that of the bold, slashing, imaginative creator; an
e[ceptionally perceptive politician and reader of men Zho had plenty of
time to read those tZo (and Zho Zas to have a ringside seat during the
ensuing struggle), Assembly Speaker 3erry Duryea, says, "They Zere too
antagonistic to Zork together in any setup/' And there Zere Rockefeller's
and 0oses'. :hen   0oses Zas in a picture, he dominated it; any
transportation improvement in Zhich he played any sort of a key role
Zould, in the public's eye, be his improvement, not the Governor's.

"So," as Duryea says, "Rocky Zasn't satisfied Zith Zhat happened in '62.
+e really had to knock him out of the bo[."

And 0oses had so little left to fight  back Zith.

1527
Once he had had so much. :ith income from the State 3oZer, Jones Beach
and Bethpage authorities as Zell as from a State 3ark Commission and
3arks Council as Zell as the City 3ark Department, Triborough's annual
surplus had been only one piece of a very large pie. 0ore important than
the si]e of the pie had been the fact that it Zas divided into so many pieces.
0ore  important than the amount of money at his command Zas the fact that
this money came from so many different and varied sources, that he had
held simultaneously tZelve different government jobs—some state and
some city. A Governor contemplating removing him from those under his
control Zould have to reckon Zith the fact that, because 0oses' authority
chairmanships had staggered si[-year terms, he could do even that only
over a period of years. And he had to reckon Zith the fact that, not only
during those years but thereafter, 0oses Zould still be holding many
poZerful city  posts, that "you'd have to fight him on so many different
fronts." 0oses had been able to prop up each post Zith others, to use each
as leverage to make the others more poZerful than they Zould otherZise
have been. The position in Zhich he had once stood had been all but
unassailable. But he had, by resigning in anger from his state posts,
knocked out many of the props himself. NoZ all the props Zere gone. +is
single remaining post stood

alone. And he noZ had only $30,000,000 a year left to fight Zith—a
significant sum but not Zhen measured against the resources of the state
that Zere the resources at his foe's command, and a sum even less
significant because it Zas derived from only one post, his last post, so that
men Zho choose up sides on the basis of money could see clearly that if he
lost that post, he Zould have nothing left to give them—a factor Zhich
made them reluctant to take his side. If Robert 0oses had still possessed
tZelve jobs—if  "Tri-borough" had still consisted of tZelve arms—Nelson
Rockefeller might have found, as +arriman and DeZey and Roosevelt had
found, that it Zas unfeasible to cut off one of them. But noZ "Triborough"
consisted only of Triborough. A Governor could lop off that arm Zith the
assurance that if he did so, 0oses Zould have none left at all.

0oses' lone position might still have been secure, for it rested on the solid
rock of the Triborough bond covenants, the contracts sacred under laZ. Not
even a Governor, backed by the Legislature and armed Zith the full

1528
authority of the state, could break those covenants, for if he tried,
bondholders could sue, and the courts Zould surely uphold them.

E[cept for one consideration. :hile   in theory even a single injured
bondholder could sue, in practice no individual bondholder Zould. In the
first place, the legal costs of so complicated a suit Zould, even in the
preliminary steps, be enormous—far beyond any injury the bondholder
might have suffered or any damages he could realistically claim. 0ore
important, a bondholder contemplating an individual suit Zould be faced
Zith a legal reality: suing as an individual Zould be vieZed by a court as an
admission that only he Zas hurt—Zhy Zeren't other bondholders suing?—
so that the bondholders, or a substantial number of them, Zould have to sue
as a group. To cover such a possibility, an agent had been appointed, in the
contracts, to protect the bondholders' rights—to, if necessary, sue on their
behalf. The contracts had appointed a bondholders' trustee.

And the trustee Zas the Chase 0anhattan Bank, and the Chase 0anhattan
Zas the only large bank in the 8nited States still controlled by a single
family.

The Governor's.

"After the 1966 Legislature had Zound up its business Zithout passing our
bill and had gone home, Ze began to get straZs in the Zind that the
Governor and Ronan had plans of their oZn for taking over transportation,"
Arthur 3almer says. Lindsay Zas in no position to object, desperate as he
Zas for a Zay out of the continual financial crisis posed by the subZays
(and for a Zay to avoid a second fare increase—Lindsay had already raised
it from fifteen to tZenty  cents—before he had to run for re-election in
1969). 0oreover, neither the 0ayor  nor his aides seem to have grasped the
e[tent of the poZer Ronan Zas negotiating aZay from the city. By January
4, 1967, Rockefeller Zas confident enough of city cooperation to ask
Legislature and voters to approve a $2,000,000,000 bond issue for
highZays, mass transit facilities and airports throughout the state and to
begin planning a "co-

ordinated," "balanced," "regional approach"—Zith far greater emphasis
than ever before on mass transit—to transportation in the metropolitan

1529
region, merging and incorporating in Ronan's 0etropolitan Commuter
Transportation Authority all the region's public transportation agencies: the
NeZ York City Transit Authority,  the 0anhattan and Bron[ Surface Transit
Operating Authority (0ABSTOA),   the Long Island, 3enn Central and NeZ
+aven railroads, the Staten Island Rapid Transit Service—and the
Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority.

Rockefeller had a lot riding on approval—not only the plan itself, Zhich
had fully captured his imagination, but a consideration considerably more
mundane: driven to the Zall by the state's Zorsening financial crisis, the
Governor had, through various budgetary devices, discharged his legal
obligation to balance the budget by including in anticipated "revenues" a
substantial amount—according to some sources $49,000,000, according to
others $51,000,000, according to still others $89,000,000—in money from
the bond issue for Zhich he Zas still asking approval. If it Zere not
approved, the resultant deficit Zould prove highly embarrassing. The
Governor Zas, moreover, planning to use bond issue monies to help in
future budgets. If it Zere not approved, the state Zould be in for a truly
hair-raising ta[ increase, one that Zould reinforce his image as a Zildly
spending liberal among the Republican conservatives across the country
Zhose support he needed for his planned 1968 presidential bid.

The emphasis on mass transit insured media support for the plan in the
metropolitan area, and, Zith leading politicians, Democratic and
Republican, endorsing it, legislative approval Zas assured. Approval in the
November referendum, hoZever, Zas more doubtful. :idespread voter
resentment against higher ta[es had in recent years caused the rejection of
many bond issues; the Governor Zas Zorried about the so-called silent
vote. Resentment on the part of upstate conservative voters against the
Governor's free-spending, high-ta[ing policies Zas flooding toZard a crest
that Zould spill over in the conservative legislative revolt tZo years later. In
an off-year election, Zith most voters apathetic and the turnout small,
passage of controversial bond issues is traditionally difficult Zhen the only
voters Zho turn out in force are those opposed to specific transportation
projects. Results of Rockefeller-commissioned polls Zere highly
discouraging. :ith   the issue in the balance, Rockefeller Zas afraid that
0oses Zould  tip it against him.

1530
The poZerful construction labor unions Zere still solidly behind 0oses, for
Van Arsdale and Brennan kneZ that vast allocations Zere of little use in
creating jobs unless the crushing of local opposition and the planning and
blueprinting that had to take place before men could actually be put to Zork
Zas ramrodded through, and their meetings Zith Ronan had convinced
them that he Zas not a ramrod—if indeed he Zas even competent, Zhich
the tZo union leaders doubted. "You need a man Zho knoZs hoZ to put a
shoZ on the road," Brennan Zas to say. ":e had to keep 0oses in there."
0ore  important, 0oses still possessed his name—Zhich, Zhile a symbol
around :ashington  Square of all that Zas hated, Zas a symbol of

something quite different in 4ueens and Staten Island. 0oses Zould
continue to have the voters' ears, the Governor kneZ, because he still had
the NeZs and NeZsday, the papers Zith the largest circulation in NeZ York
City and on Long Island; in its editorial on the Governor's proposal, for
e[ample, the latter had said: "Essential is the participation of Bob 0oses in
the neZ agency. +is e[perience Zill be invaluable." 0ost  important of all,
0oses still possessed, unimpaired by his seventy-eight years, the instrument
that had gotten him poZer in the first place: his poZerful, supple
intelligence. Alone noZ, Robert 0oses began doing Zhat he had done Zhen
he had been trying to find a Zay out of the :est Side Improvement
financial impasse, Zhen he had conceived the possibilities of the public
authority—at so many crises during his career: jotting doZn figures on a
yelloZ legal note pad.

Ronan's public relations men had been feeding the press figures shoZing
that the unification Zould end the city's traditional subZay deficit crisis.
Several years later, Duryea, no friend of Ronan's, could still recall them
Zith a Zry  grin: "The surplus from Triborough Zould be $30 [million]  a
year, the surplus from 0ABSTOA Zould  be about $5 [million], the Long
Island [Rail Road] Zould either break even or have a surplus of about $1
[million],  and these surpluses Zould be just enough to make up the Transit
Authority deficit."

But 0oses found that the merger Zouldn't come close to making up the
transit deficit. Calculating the present and future cost of union contracts
then being negotiated and union contracts that Zould have to be negotiated

1531
Zithin  the ne[t year or tZo, increasing maintenance costs and future d^bt
service, he concluded that 0ABSTOA and LIRR Zould have not small
surpluses but tremendous deficits, and that the Transit Authority's deficit
Zas groZing so fast that no conceivable combination of contributions from
other agencies could make it up. The primary rationale that the Governor
Zas using to sell the plan to the conservative upstate voters—that it Zould
free the state once and for all from the annual Zorries about NeZ York's
subZay problem—Zasn't true at all.

And that Zas only one small point proved by 0oses' figures.

Since he had become Governor, Rockefeller had created several giant
"public authorities" that Zere bastards of the genre because their revenue
bonds Zould be paid off not out of their oZn revenues but out of the general
revenues of the state.

No one outside the Governor's confidential staff had ever figured out Zhat
the total debt service on all these bond issues Zas going to be Zhen they
Zere all sold and paying interest simultaneously. Only one other state
official, the quietly independent Democratic Comptroller, Arthur Levitt,
Zas interested in doing so—teams of his auditors had just begun calculating
that very point.

0oses did it alone. +e Zould  never discuss Zhat he found. But Duryea —
his last friend in poZer and the one he took most fully into his confidence at
this stage in his career—did, in an intervieZ in 1969: "Three years ago, the
state had budgeted for debt service 25-30 million. Last year, it Zas 40
million and this year 47. :ell,   0oses had a projection that if all the authori-

The Last Stand n^

ties Rocky Zas proposing Zent through, the debt service in 1972—this the
year of total sale—Zould be 500 million." Rockefeller's proposals Zould
load doZn present and future ta[payers of the state Zith a staggering debt.
In addition, 0oses had done the simple multiplication necessary to figure
out something all the reporters and editorial Zriters Zho had Zritten about
the $2,500,000,000 0etropolitan Transportation Authority bond issue had
apparently never bothered to figure out—at least not one of them had

1532
mentioned the point: hoZ much that bond issue Zas going to cost the
ta[payers in interest. The ansZer Zas more than $1,000,000,000. A billion
dollars in interest! By the time 0oses finished figuring, Duryea says, "he
had some numbers that Zere devastating."

The implications Zere enormous. "If he had ever gone screaming to the
public . . . ," Duryea says. 0oses not only possessed devastating numbers;
he could devastate Zith them. :hile  other opponents of the bond issue had
no money to put their case before the public, 0oses, Zith the resources of
Triborough still behind him, did, and his prestige alone guaranteed him a
full hearing in the media; let him take those numbers to the public Zith his
vast and efficient public relations apparatus, and he could Zell Zreck
Rockefeller's grand conception.

And he Zas prepared to do so. "Only tZo or three of us kneZ of these
figures," Duryea says. "But Ze kneZ that 0oses Zas ready to bloZ the
Governor's transportation" referendum Zith them. "They had to get him on
board so that he Zouldn't scream and holler."

Before delivering his "State of the State" message, the Governor and Ronan
had had at least one conference Zith 0oses at Zhich they attempted to
enlist his support. They failed; he fleZ off to a vacation in the Bahamas still
an opponent. :hile  he Zas there, Ronan drafted, and airmailed to the old
Zarrior honing his rapier doZn there in the Zarm sun, some modifications
designed to mollify. They did not; during the three Zeeks he stayed aZay
folloZing  the Governor's speech, reporters checked Zith Triborough daily
to try to talk to him, and as soon as he returned, he had a statement for
them. +e Zas too smart to play his trump on the first hand; it Zas not empty
victory but poZer in the neZ transportation setup that he Zanted. +e did not
reveal his figures. But he gave the Governor an inkling of the intensity of
the opposition he Zas prepared to provide. It Zas uncompromising. The
merger proposal Zas "absurd," he said. "Grotesque. It just Zon't Zork. . . .
They don't knoZ Zhat they are driving at." And the opposition made major
stories in every metropolitan area neZspaper. On 0arch 9, 1967, 0oses
met Zith Rockefeller in Rockefeller's Fifty-fifth  Street toZnhouse. And tZo
days later he announced that the Governor's plan—the "absurd,"
"grotesque" plan—Zas "indispensable" and that he Zas supporting it. ":e

1533
believe the Governor is on the right track, that only a bold approach can
succeed, and for our part shall cooperate to this end." (Said Ronan: "This is
Zelcome neZs.")

The reason 0oses gave for his 180-degree change of heart Zas that "after
considerable discussion, the Governor included in his proposal a paragraph
on protecting the rights of Triborough bondholders." Actually,

hoZever, nothing neZ of any major significance to the bondholders had
been added to the proposal. Levitt and Duryea kneZ the real reason: the
Governor had bought 0oses' support Zith the only coin in Zhich 0oses
Zas interested —poZer, a promise that he Zould have it under the revised
transportation setup. "I knoZ for a fact that Rockefeller felt he had bought
0oses' support," Duryea says. "+oZ [do I knoZ]?  I knoZ  because one
0onday  in Albany—it  Zas at one of those 0onday-morning so-called
leadership conferences—Rockefeller announced that 0oses Zould support
his transportation unification program. I said, ':hat'd  you give him?' And
Rockefeller said, 'A promise that he Zouldn't be throZn in the ashcan,' that
he Zould be given something substantial in the 0TA reorgani]ation." Levitt
had even more conclusive proof. To gain ma[imum impact for his
"figures," 0oses kneZ  they should be released by someone other than
himself, someone Zho could not be accused of having a personal stake in
the defeat of the transportation proposal. On 0arch 8, the day before his
conference Zith the Governor, he had telephoned Levitt, Zho recalls: "+e
called me up and said, T Zant to see you. I have figures . . . and I Zant you
to use them and blast Rockefeller.' The very ne[t day, I had to go to Fifty-
fifth Street for a meeting of the state pension fund. I didn't knoZ Zhat room
to go in, and I Zas Zandering around from room to room, trying doors, and
I opened one, and there, to my surprise, Zas 0oses and his Zhole coterie. I
said, ':hat  are you doing here?' +e said, 'Oh, Zaiting to see the Governor.'
I said, ':here  are those figures?' +e said, 'Oh, I'll send them to you,' in a
hedging tone of voice. And the ne[t day he comes out for 0TA. I never got
the figures."

Van Arsdale and Brennan kneZ the reason, too. Rockefeller had also told it
to them. The day after 0oses' announcement of support, Brennan—
previously conspicuously silent on the Governor's proposal—chimed in

1534
Zith his. The Times story announcing the arrival on board of the poZerful
unionist contained a sentence Zhose source Zas apparently Brennan
himself: "It Zas learned . . . that Governor Rockefeller had offered Robert
0oses a seat [on the 0TA board] ... as Zell as continued direction" of
Triborough. Brennan himself confirms that Rockefeller had given "Van and
I" that impression: "The Governor said he Zould have an important part [for
0oses]." Not  satisfied Zith that vague statement, the tZo unionists asked
Rockefeller precisely Zhat that meant. +e told them he had given 0oses
Zhat 0oses Zanted: "+e  told us 0oses Zanted a part of the construction."
":ill    he have a part?" Brennan asked. "And the Governor said, 'Oh,
absolutely. :e  knoZ his talents, his ability, and Ze Zant to use them.' "
Rockefeller Zas careful to leave the same impression Zith the public. The
Governor told reporters that each of the authorities, Zhile being merged,
Zould "retain [its]  identity and be under the administrative direction of an
e[ecutive head in charge of operations," Zho, the Times reported, "Zould
possibly have the title of president of the agency." 3resident of Triborough
— that sounded even better than "Chairman."

0oses appears to have had no doubt that the Governor Zould keep

his promise. +is statement announcing his support of the referendum had
stated: "If the verdict is favorable, all the talent and available Oil

be recruited to reali]e the e[ceedingly comple[, long-term improvement +e
had no doubt that that talent Zould, in the field:- of highZays and bridges,
continue to be his oZn. And Zith that assurance in hand, he proceeded
during the seven months prior to the referendum to prove that he Zould
violate any principle—even that most sacred one to Zhich he had alZays
sZorn allegiance, the sacredness of the bondholders' covenants— to keep
poZer. +e outdid himself in support of the referendum; Zhen Rockefeller
didn't contact him, he called the Governor's office to ask for an appointment
so that he could learn hoZ he could best be of assistance in persuading
voters, and folloZing that meeting, he lied for the referendum (although he
kneZ that bond revenues Zere slated for approach roads to his proposed
Long Island Sound Crossing, he told the press: "Statements . . . that the
pending transportation proposition is to be tapped to pay in Zhole or in part
for the Long Island Sound Crossing . . . are Zholly irresponsible and

1535
malicious. Not a cent of state subvention, aid or credit is required. . . .");
poured money behind it, using Triborough funds to pay for a full-scale
advertising campaign ("Traffic—Commuter—Transit Delays Got Your
Goat? Don't Sit And Grumble. Get Out And VOTE!"), plastering
Triborough's toll booths Zith huge "VOTE YES!"  signs—and repeatedly
flattered the Governor so enthusiastically and obsequiously ("Governor
Rockefeller has . . . guts"; "It takes a lot of courage and faith to ask the
voters to approve a $2.5 billion . . .") that at times he seemed to be almost
desperately trying to reassure Rockefeller that the Governor Zouldn't have
to Zorry about his loyalty after the reorgani]ation, that he could be a loyal
member of his team.

After an almost equally frantic stateZide campaign by Rockefeller, the
referendum passed, but there remained another, equally important reason to
keep 0oses on board. There Zas still the possibility of a legal fight over
Zhether the Triborough bond covenants Zould be violated by the merger of
the Authority into a larger authority—a question Zhich, it seemed likely,
could, if pressed, be resolved only one Zay: in the bondholders' favor.

Any party to a contract can bring suit if he feels it has been violated. There
Zere tZo parties to the contracts that Zere the Triborough bonds— the
Authority and the bondholders, represented by the trustee Chase 0anhattan
Bank.

3rior to his 0arch  9 meeting Zith Rockefeller, 0oses had prepared to have
the Authority bring suit; he had instructed Sam Rosenman to gear up for a
full-scale, no-holds-barred legal battle. But after his 0arch 9 meeting Zith
Rockefeller, he had Rosenman stand doZn, at least in part; the attorney, on
behalf of Triborough, joined DeZey, representing Chase 0anhattan, in
attacking the proposal to use the Authority's surpluses, but let the former
Governor carry the load, folloZing through only pro forma, and he dropped
opposition to the merger, the part that Zould have deprived 0oses of poZer
—because, of course, 0oses believed Rockefeller had

promised him poZer after the merger as Zell. "I understand that he had a
promise that he Zould be part of the 0TA board," DeZey Zas to recall. "I
don't think Rosenman Zould have been so cooperative Zith the 0TA if
0oses hadn't thought that he'd have a place."

1536
Of the circumstances surrounding the final removal of Robert 0oses from
poZer, the key one—the resolution of the suit against the merger that, if
successful, could have kept him in poZer—remains shrouded in mystery.

TZo things are clear. One: that, in the opinion of almost every legal e[pert
on municipal and public authority bonds, if the suit had been prosecuted
vigorously, it Zould have been successful—the merger Zould have been
voided. 8ntil  all its $367,200,000 bonds had been redeemed, the
Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority Zould have remained an
independent, autonomous agency, and if the Authority chose not to redeem
its bonds, it Zould have remained independent and autonomous indefinitely.
TZo: that the suit Zas not prosecuted vigorously. :hy  the suit Zas not
prosecuted vigorously is not knoZn.

Chase 0anhattan had certainly given the impression that it intended to
press the suit to the limit Zhen it Zas filed in June 1967. The retaining of
DeZey as counsel seemed proof enough of that, and the bank's initial
si[teen-page, thirty-si[-count complaint instituting  the action seemed
determined. Transfer of the Authority's surpluses or income to the
0etropolitan  Transportation Authority Zould, the bank's complaint stated,
cause the bondholders the bank represented "irreparable injury, for Zhich
they have no remedy at laZ." Both state statute—the NeZ York public
authorities laZ —and the Authority's contract Zith its bondholders forbade
such a financial merger until all bonds Zere paid off and the contract thus
voided, the complaint stated. An administrative merger Zas similarly
illegal, the brief stated, forbidden by Federal and State Constitutions and
state laZ as Zell as bond covenants, and Zas injurious to bondholders
because the aims and interests of the TBTA and those of the 0TA contained
a basic, irreconcilable conflict: "Triborough must facilitate the use of its
projects by motor vehicles Zhereas the 0TA and the TA must facilitate the
use of their respective train and subZay service systems, therebv diverting
traffic from Triborough bridge and tunnel projects."

FolloZing  passage of the referendum, the suit Zas resumed, but all through
December and January, intensive negotiations Zere being carried out
betZeen representatives of Governor Nelson Rockefeller and those of his
brother David, Chase 0anhattan's president and absolute boss. And the suit

1537
Zas finally settled not in court, open or closed, but in the Governor's Fifty-
fifth Street toZnhouse. shortly after 9 a.m., February 9, 1968, at a fifty-
minute meeting attended by the tZo brothers, each attended by one aide,
DeZey for David and Ronan for Nelson. At this meeting, a three-page
stipulation previously draZn up by attorneys for both sides Zas signed by
Nelson Rockefeller on behalf of the State of NeZ York and David Rocke-

The Last Stand jj^i

feller on behalf of the Chase 0anhattan Bank. FolloZing the meeting, the
stipulation Zas taken to the chambers of the judge Zho Zould have

sitting on the case had there been a case—State Supreme Court Justice
:illiam    C. +echt, Jr.—and sealed, not to be seen by any outsider or
neZspaperman. 8nder the stipulation, the Governor's family's bank dropped
all opposition to the Governor's transportation merger, the merger under
Zhich the Triborough board—Robert 0oses, chairman—Zas supplanted by
the 0TA  board—Dr. :illiam    J. Ronan. chairman. The point that 0oses had
alZays believed Zould keep him in poZer, therefore, Zas not contested—
even by 0oses. On his instructions. Rosenman agreed on behalf of
Triborough that the merger Zas constitutional and legal. The crucial point
Zas not contested bv anyone.

:hat   Chase got in e[change is not knoZn, although it continued to head
syndicates—as it had in the past—that underZrote and purchased tens of
millions of dollars in state bonds, immensely profitable to banks.

Even such a bonus Zould probably not have persuaded the normal bank—
run by a board of directors responsible to a multitude of stockholders —to
abrogate its legal obligations, thereby leaving itself open to stockholder
action. A bank controlled by a single family could do so, hoZever. In the
entire 8nited States, only one bank large enough to be a trustee for
$367,200,000 in bonds is still family controlled. :hat   Zas necessary to
remove 0oses from poZer Zas a unique, singular concatenation of
circumstances: that the Governor of NeZ York be the one man uniquely
beyond the reach of normal political influences, and that the trustee for
Triborough's bonds be a bank run by the Governor's brother.

1538
:hy   did 0oses  choose to rest his future on Rockefeller's Zord? At least
part of the ansZer is probably understood by the perceptive Duryea. Zho
says he had little choice but to do so. "+e didn't have much left to fight Zith
any more," the Speaker says. And probably another part is provided by
Shapiro, Zho, asked Zhy his boss had not e[acted a promise in Zriting,
says: "I suppose because he couldn't really believe that they Zouldn't Zant
him in the picture at all. I mean, they Zanted the bridge [Sound Crossing]
built, didn't they 0 They Zanted the program pushed, didn't they? And he
Zas the only one Zho could push it like it should be pushed. +e just
couldn't understand that they might not feel like that, I suppose. I mean, it
had alZays been like that before . . ."

Rockefeller\ promise to 0oses had served its purpose Zell. It had kept
0oses quiet for almost a year, persuaded him not to oppose Rockefeller's
transportation merger or the referendum Zhich had funded it. The
Governor's promise had, moreover, persuaded 0oses to ZithdraZ the
laZsuit Zhich  might have invalidated Rockefeller's transportation merger. It
had enabled Rockefeller to use his name.

And noZ, having used his name, having gotten everything out of him that
he could, the Governor threZ him aZay.

8p until  the very day on Zhich the crucial stipulation Zas signed and
sealed, all Zas honey betZeen the Governor and the old man, noZ seventy-
nine. On February 9, the day it Zas signed, 0oses still believed he had a
firm promise that he Zould have a substantial role in the neZ setup,
possibly as president or e[ecutive head of Triborough, certainly as a
member of the 0TA board. Then, Zith less than three Zeeks before the
merger Zas to take effect, the mask dropped aZay.

Immediately folloZing  the stipulation signing, 0oses telephoned the
Governor for an appointment. +e got one—and Zhen they met, Rockefeller
apparently repeated his promise. 0oses says that the Governor "told me I
Zould be appointed to the 0TA and Zould have the title of president or
something of the sort at the head of Triborough under the general
supervision of the 0TA."  But, 0oses says, "Dr. Ronan did not like this."
3erry Duryea says that "0oses asked me—really to intercede—Zith the
Governor and Ronan to attempt to guarantee that he Zould get a meaningful

1539
position. +e didn't ask me himself; he had someone else [Shapiro says it
Zas he] ask me if Ze could get together and I Zent to his apartment in NeZ
York. +e had met Zith Ronan and Rockefeller the Zeek before and he left
that meeting Zith a very bad taste in his mouth. +e felt the Governor hadn't
given him the time he deserved. The Governor Zas in and out of the room,
the conference Zas interrupted. It Zas left that Ronan Zould call him in a
Zeek. And he hadn't heard from Ronan. And the deadline ..." The deadline
—the date for the merger—Zas midnight, February 29. At 12:01 a.m.,
0arch  1, the Triborough board Zould go out of e[istence. +e Zould be out
of a job— out of poZer completely.

Duryea felt sorry for 0oses. "It  Zas his dream to be part of the neZ
transportation setup," the Speaker says. "+e still felt the drive and the
involvement, the old fire horse Zhen the bell clangs. +ere Zas this great
neZ thing going forZard—he Zanted to be part of it." Duryea agreed to
intercede on the old man's behalf, and thereafter, no more than a day or tZo
at most before the merger took effect, Ronan contacted 0oses.

+e offered 0oses a post as "consultant" to the Triborough Bridge and
Tunnel Authority. The post, he said, carried Zith it a salary of $25,000 a
year and continued use of his limousine, his chauffeurs and his secretaries.
0oses Zould  be in charge of "coordinating" Triborough's present
construction program, and his "primary responsibility" Zould be the Long
Island Sound Crossing.

:hether   0oses could bring himself to question Ronan further about the
"details" of this offer himself, or Zhether he had an intermediary do it, is
not knoZn, but Zith  each ansZer he received, his humiliation must have
deepened. For there Zere no further "details." That offer Zas all there Zas.
+e had thought he had been promised a seat on the 0TA board; there Zas
no mention of such a seat noZ; during the ne[t day or tZo, in fact, Ronan
announced the names of the nine members of the board of the agency that
Zould be responsible for all intrastate public transportation in the NeZ

York metropolitan region—the name of Robert 0oses Zas not among them
0oses had thought he had had a promise of Triborough : presidency; 01 at
least its chief e[ecutive officer, Zhatever the precise title might be; Ronan
did not make any mention of such a promise noZ; in fact, Zhen 0oses or

1540
his intermediary asked Ronan directly about it, Ronan replied that there
Zould be a chief e[ecutive officer—but it  Zould be Joseph F. Vermaelen.
0oses' chief engineer. Vermaelen, and LebZohl, and the rest of 0oses'
team, Zould report directly to the 0TA  staff.

Analy]ing  the offer only deepened the humiliation. "Coordinating"
Triborough's current construction program Zas a meaningless phrase: that
program consisted only of a relatively minor reconstruction of the Cross
Bay Bridge and the adding of a second deck on the Verra]ano—and those
projects Zere already under Zay. The Sound Crossing Zould be a great
project, but no one kneZ Zhen it Zould start—and it Zould probably not
start soon. And that Zas only one project—one for a man accustomed to
directing do]ens. "Don't take all Bob's toys aZay," 0oses' Zife had begged
the Governor. :ell,  the Governor hadn't. +e had left him one—or, to be
more precise, the promise of one. :hen the implications of Zhat Ronan
Zas saying sank in, 0oses reali]ed that he Zas being alloZed, almost as a
gesture of charity, to keep the perquisites of office—the car, the chauffeurs,
the secretaries—but not so much as a shred of poZer. +e could if he Zished
stay on at the Authority he had created and made strong and great, but not
only Zould he no longer be in charge of it, he Zould no longer have any say
in its affairs. Even the men around him, his muchachos, the men Zho had
looked to him for leadership for so many years, Zould noZ be reporting to
someone else.

The offer Zas a slap in the face. But there Zas no other offer. The fatal
deadline of 0arch i Zas upon him; he had no choice but to accept it; on the
very last day before the merger Zas to take effect, he did so. +is statement
to the press, issued the folloZing day, the day the Triborough Bridge and
Tunnel Authority, the last remaining arm of once tZelve-armed
"Triborough," became a unit of the 0etropolitan Transportation Authority,
Zas one sentence long:

"The 0etropolitan  Transportation Authority has offered me an advisory
post in the metropolitan transportation enterprise, and I have accepted."

0ore  poignant than his statement on the day of the merger Zas his attitude.
Ronan had scheduled for that day a ceremonial tour of some of the Transit
Authority and Triborough facilities by the members of the 0TA board.

1541
Believing he Zould be one of them, 0oses had invited Ronan and the board
to lunch Zith him at Randall's Island, and Ronan had accepted. NoZ,
though he sat at the head of the big table in the big dining room as he had
sat there at a thousand lunches during the thirty-four years he had been head
of Triborough, he had to knoZ that he Zas sitting there only by sufferance,
that he, Zho so loved to be the gracious host, Zas in reality not

the host of that luncheon at all, that he Zas only a guest himself. The very
cost of the lunch Zould have to be approved by someone else—by this
college professor Zhom he had once derided as "sophomoric" but Zho had,
he felt, Zeaseled his Zay into poZer, not by accomplishment, not by
achievement, not by the honorable means by Zhich he felt he had attained
poZer, but by, he felt, "ass kissing" his Zay around Nelson Rockefeller.

:orse—much  Zorse for him  Zho had alZays delighted, gloried, in giving
free rein to his feelings—he could not let his feelings shoZ. If he Zere ever
to have any poZer at all again—if he Zere ever to actually get to build even
the Sound Crossing they had held out to him as a pittance—he Zould have
to get on the good side of this man Zho had stripped him of poZer. Ronan,
he felt—at least his aides say so—had defeated him not in a fair fight but by
lying to him and betraying him. But he Zould have to make friends Zith
Ronan. Reporter Richard :itkin,  Zho  covered the changeover for the
Times, noted that: "0r. 0oses . . . seemed to go out of his Zay yesterday to
take a back seat to Dr. Ronan. . . ."

The NeZsday story, Zhich noted that "0oses, Zho once held fourteen [sic]
public positions simultaneously, appeared to defer yesterday to Dr. :illiam
J. Ronan," noted also that the Authority adopted a neZ emblem, a tZo-tone
blue "0"  that Zould  appear shortly on all its trains and other facilities, and
said, "During the last four decades the same capital letter might have been
used as a symbol of domination of the area's planning scene." But it
couldn't any longer. The age of 0oses Zas over. Begun on April 23, 1924,
it had ended on 0arch i, 1968. After forty-four years of poZer, the poZer
Zas gone at last.

cottage he Zas renting at Oak Beach. Because he did not then knoZ the
details of Triborough's absorption into 0TA, and because there had been no
official announcement that 0oses had been utterly removed from poZer,

1542
the visitor did not knoZ there had been so dramatic a change in the status of
his host. But he saZ at once that there had been a dramatic change in the
host. +e Zrote on his note pad: "The eyes are definitely more rheumy today.
+e seems somehoZ just more shrunken, too." During the intervieZ, 0oses
had sent his chauffeur on an errand, and the chauffeur had not returned
Zhen the intervieZ Zas completed. 0oses asked the visitor to drive him
doZn to Captree, Zhere a boat—a big cabin cruiser belonging to Adam
Carp, a consulting engineer Zho had groZn rich on 0oses fees—Zas
standing ready to take him out for blues. And as they Zalked doZn the steps
of the cottage to the author's car, 0oses did something that made him feel
for an instant that the man Zalking behind him Zas not Robert 0oses but
3aul. The author had, unknoZn to Robert 0oses, spent time Zith his dead
brother. 3aul 0oses had managed to keep his chin up even in discussing the
misfortunes of his life, but sometimes, drifting into reveries during lulls in
the conversation, he had—unconsciously, it seemed—uttered a phrase, a
sigh, almost a moan, that hinted at the depths of the melancholy Zithin him:
a painful, reflective sighing: "Oh ho ho ho. Oh ho ho ho." The author had
speculated that so unusual an e[pression might be inherited from their
father. But in all the times he had previously talked Zith Robert 0oses, the
author had never heard him make that sound of discouragement and
something close to despair.

But he made it noZ.

For Robert 0oses had lost none of his ability to look into other men, and he
had apparently looked into :illiam   J. Ronan. R0's aides Zere sure he
Zould shortly get the assignments he had been promised. Shortly after the
author talked to 0oses at Oak Beach, +arold Blake, 0oses' male secretary,
assured him, "They Zant him to get done Zith the current TBTA program
as fast as possible so he can help e[pedite the over-all 0TA program. I
think Ronan Zants him to help cut the red tape." But 0oses appears from
the first to have knoZn Zhat Zas really in store for him. According to
Blake, Ronan almost never telephoned his predecessor, Zho Zas still sitting
in his office up at Triborough—hoping to hear from him. 0oses sent him
memos on matters he felt needed Ronan's attention. Some Ronan passed to
loZer-level aides for replies. Others Zere simply ignored. The neZ 0TA
chairman did not bother even to acknoZledge their receipt. 0oses' aides

1543
understood that they Zere no longer to report to him. They had not,
hoZever, fully understood that they Zere not to talk to him—at least not
about Triborough matters. But, folloZing the takeover, this Zas quickly
made clear to them. Says one: "A couple of times, I mentioned to R0 some
things that [Ronan's aides] had told me to do, and he didn't like [the
instructions] at all, and he telephoned Ronan to complain. And Zord came
back to me that [Ronan] didn't like that at all. And I mean, Zhat could I do?
You couldn't say to 0r. 0oses: 'NoZ  don't talk to anyone about this.' It Zas
easier just

not to tell him Zhat Zas going on." Soon his former aides Zere avoiding his
office. Said Blake: "It's sad to see a guy Zho used to be in charge of a place
still there but not in charge any more."

And there Zas to be no start on the Sound Crossing in 1969—or 1970 or
1971 or 1972.

There Zere various e[cuses from Rockefeller's office—in 1969, the bond
market Zas soft and the issue couldn't be floated at feasible rates; in 1970,
there Zas a gubernatorial campaign, and, Zith the affected sections of Long
Island and :estchester up in arms against the bridge, the Governor didn't
Zant to be put on the spot; in 1971, it Zas financing problems again; in
1972, a legislative campaign and the Governor didn't Zant to damage
Republican chances to hold control of the Legislature—Zith each delay,
0oses Zas assured that ne[t year Zould be the year the big project got
under Zay.

0oses Zas fooled by the fact that Rockefeller himself Zanted the great
bridge built. +e Zas fooled by the fact that the Governor had promised
publicly as Zell as privately that 0oses Zould  be the one to build it: once,
as a sort of test, 0oses leaked to a reporter the fact that he had been
promised the job, the reporter contacted Ronan's office and Ronan himself
said that that Zas indeed the case. +e Zas fooled most of all by the fact that
it Zas simply inconceivable to him that he Zould not be alloZed to build it:
he had conceived it, chosen its precise location and the routes of its
approach highZays, he had directed the planning and blueprinting, he had,
in a sense, since it Zas Triborough's money that Zould back the bonds that
Zould pay for it, raised the money for it; it Zas no more than one more link

1544
in the chain of bridges linking the island Zith mainland—Triborough,
:hitestone,  Throgs Neck—that he had planned decades before and had
been building ever since. It Zas his bridge! To let someone else build it and
take credit for it Zould be an injustice of an enormity he seemed unable to
grasp. It took a long time for reali]ation to sink in.

But, as the years passed, it sank in, all right. It gradually became clear to
him that they Zeren't going to give him the job. The Governor Zanted the
bridge built, he came to understand, but he Zould not let 0oses build it; it
might, considering the public and private promises, be too raZ to assign the
direction of the huge task to anyone else, so he Zould simply Zait to get the
five-year job started until 0oses, aging, Zas no longer able to embark on it.
It gradually became clear to 0oses that the Governor and Ronan Zeren't
going to give him any job—that, despite all their promises, they Zere not,
ever, going to give him anything to do, that they Zere just Zaiting for him
to groZ old and die or go quietly aZay someZhere.

Then the old man greZ desperate. +e had almost no leverage left, e[cept
for the fact that Ronan couldn't get things done, and there Zere people
around Zho, for their oZn purposes, Zanted things to be gotten done. +e
used this leverage frantically. Recalls Brennan:

"I've had other people—professional architects, the engineers—come to me
and say, 'Gee couldn't you do something? ... Bob is going cra]y

that they're shelving him!' They don't say they Zere asked to talk to me, but
. . . they Zere."

+e talked to Brennan and Van Arsdale himself. +e tried to put on a good
front, but the tZo hard-eyed unionists saZ through it. "+e tells us he could
have been on the [0TA] board, [that he turned it doZn himself because] he
Zanted to be free to do construction. But maybe that's just his pride. +e's
nothing; he's a consultant. And he's not even being consulted Zith." :hat
Robert 0oses, once so arrogant and poZerful, Zas doing Zas begging,
begging them to help him get a little of his poZer back. +e had been
reduced to pleading—and he Zas, to these men Zho had knoZn him Zhen,
almost pathetic in his pleas.

1545
+e's getting edgy [Brennan says]. +e tells you that he knoZs he's being
kept out of things. +e's mad at dragging things out like they're doing. +e
tells us that things should be under Zay noZ. And meanZhile costs are
going up. +e complains that these people have no guts. +e talks about the
program, about his frustrations that things aren't moving—hoZ they should
be doing this or that on the bridge, taking borings or Zhatever. +e never
talks in terms of getting him back in; it's in terms of the program ... It Zasn't
on the basis of him but getting the job done. . . . +e's taking this very hard.
+e's a hard, crusty old guy, but he's sensitive.

Brennan and Van Arsdale responded as 0oses had hoped they Zould, and
so did various contractors, engineers and architects Zho had entree to
Rockefeller or Ronan. For they Zere afraid that Zithout 0oses, public
Zorks Zould never again be constructed in the NeZ York area on the scale
that had made some of them rich and others of them poZerful. "As far as
the 0TA  is concerned, there's nothing moving—no doubt about it,"
Brennan said in 1970, more than tZo years after Ronan had taken over.
"There's no roads being built. There's nothing being built." Speaking of
Ronan, the red-faced, Zhite-haired, blunt unionist tries to keep the contempt
out of his voice, but it keeps seeping in. "Ronan tells us that the planning on
the Second Avenue SubZay and tunnel is in the hands of the city and that
it's being held up by the 0ayor and the City 3lanning Commission. +e says
the 0TA  is ready to move on it as soon as the city lets them. As soon as the
city lets them! Jee]! And that Zould be a billion tZo.  Or Ronan tells us it's a
billion tZo."

So they fought for him. Said Brennan late in 1968: ":e—I  say Ze, people
in the industry, those of us Zho knoZ 0oses and have been trying to keep
his hand in these things, feel there is no question there's people trying to
sidetrack him. :e're  hoping they'll reali]e  he's needed. It's silly to take him
and put him on a shelf. :e've been talking to the Governor and Ronan . . .
The architects, the engineers, the contractors have been talking. . . . :e're
going to try hard.

"But," Brennan said, "it's going to be tough. +e's not in the poZer position
he used to be in. . . . The Governor says that he put Ronan in there, and

1546
Ronan is boss. Bill Ronan says, 'Oh, Ze Zant to use Bob once Ze get
going.' :e  say, ':hat   do you mean "once you get going"? You need

to plan noZ, assign guys to things.' :hen Ze press him, [the] ansZer is then
very vague. So I can see that it's just a snoZ job. They Zant him to tired and
to go aZay and get lost.

"But I say: 'Forget it! This guy don't bloZ aZay!'

"And the sad thing is that a lot of people Zho like Bob 0oses are saying
he's too old and it's not a bad idea to ease him out because of that. But he's
not too old. +e's got fantastic ideas on housing!"

The old man Zas reduced to publicly praising Ronan and his boss—in
1969, at a time at Zhich 0oses and his aides Zere privately ridiculing
Ronan's failures to get the 0TA program moving, and the deterioration of
the Long Island and other commuter railroads under his direction, 0oses
said publicly, "As to Nelson Rockefeller, he's no cautious Calvin Coolidge.
... +e has put his reputation on the line. The people voted for his tZo and a
half billion program. They could not have e[pected instant results. ... So put
aZay your flying bottles and slingshots and give Bill Ronan a break." +e
tried to take advantage of every opportunity to see them in person—at
dinners or dedication ceremonies, for e[ample—to engage them in
conversation and try to make friends Zith them. The Governor Zas alZays
charming in return—often these tZo men Zould stand chatting in public
Zith their arms around each other. Ronan's manners Zith the old man left
something to be desired. +e let the boredom he felt shoZ. :atching 0oses
try to curry Ronan's favor once, +arold Blake muttered bitterly about the
0TA  chairman's "smug, college-professor look," but then added Zith
resignation in his voice, "+e [0oses]  Zants to stay in public life, so Zhat
do you do? SZalloZ your pride."

But nothing he could do helped. Rockefeller and Ronan stayed bland, and
the bridge stayed unbuilt, and 0oses' memos still Zent unansZered.

+e had to suffer also Zhat Zas for him perhaps the ultimate humiliation. +e
had to knoZ that people kneZ that he no longer had poZer.

1547
Because his poZer had never come from anything as clear-cut and publicly
understandable as an election, it took a long time for even many political
insiders to reali]e that he had lost not only some poZer but all. 0ore than a
year after the 0TA reorgani]ation, Jack Lutsky, noZ a judge, Zas told that
0oses Zas out of poZer completely, and he refused to believe it. +e
telephoned LebZohl to check and, hanging up, said Zith a Zondering sigh:
"You're right." But eventually they all reali]ed it. +e  could see pity in the
eyes of those of them Zho, like Lutsky or :agner, Zere  capable of pity. "I
feel sorry for him," the former 0ayor  said one day after sitting ne[t to him
on a luncheon dais. "+e enjoyed poZer so much. +e should have become a
private citi]en. At  least then he could have spoken out." +e could see
contempt in the eyes of others. :hen, at a dinner party, he Zould launch
into one of the interminable monologues about past accomplishments to
Zhich people had once listened Zith respect, people greZ bored. There
Zere a thousand little hurts. Once he invited Bron[ Borough 3resident
+erman Badillo, Zhom he had never met, to lunch on Randall's Island.
Badillo called him "Bob." For just an instant, the big head Zent

back in the old haughty gesture Zith Zhich he Zould once have Zithered
any guest Zho dared to use that familiarity Zithout invitation. Then one
could almost see him remembering that he needed any ally he could get.
The head came doZn, and he Zent on Zith the conversation.

3iled on humiliation, frustration.

Age Zas not a consideration in 0oses' thinking. "+e absolutely refused to
talk about the birthday," reported a Daily NeZs reporter intervieZing him
on the occasion of his eighty-first. " 'Birthdays are a nuisance,' he said.
'Birthdays are to forget.' " "+e Zas alZays talking about De Gaulle and
Adenauer and hoZ they Zere older than him, and age Zasn't affecting
them" Shapiro recalls. And 0oses had an e[ample closer to home if he
Zished to use it; his grandmother, Rosalie Silverman Cohen—the "Granny
Cohen" of family legend Zhom he so closely resembled in manner—had
been intellectually alert until the very day she died at the age of ninety-
three.

3hysically, the years had left their mark: the deafness Zas very bad indeed;
he noZ required eyeglasses for reading although he Zhipped them off

1548
Zhenever a visitor came into the room; liver spots had mottled the olive
skin; he had a paunch noZ. But it Zas not a large mark; above the paunch,
the shoulders Zere still broad, the chest deep, the arms muscular—
incredibly muscular for a man in his eighties. +is physical presence Zas
still dominating; Zrote the Daily  NeZs reporter:

+e's a big man, not so much in height and Zeight as in presence, and even
noZ, on the eve of his eighty-first birthday, he's got enough vitality and
poZer to become the instant center of attention Zhen he Zalks into a room.
. . . Even noZ, it's easy to see Zhy they called Robert 0oses a giant.

0entally,  there Zas no mark at all. Aside from his deafness, said a former
associate Zho hadn't seen him for tZenty years, "he hasn't changed at all."
+is mind had lost little of its monumental capacity, its voraciousness for
knoZledge—all knoZledge. Books Zere piled in heaps around the Oak
Beach cottage, and in a single pile a visitor saZ the latest Simenon, Rattay's
+istory of Long  Island +urricanes, O'Casey's The 3lough and the Stars and
an old, Zorn BosZell's Johnson, so old and Zorn that it might have been the
very volume through Zhich the young Bob 0oses had first begun to idoli]e
Dr. Johnson at Yale. One afternoon, 0oses' chauffeur delivered to the door
0ary  I's sister, Emily Sims 0arconnier, carrying three books for him. None
Zas particularly good, she said, although 0ary Renault's The 0ask of
Apollo Zasn't bad. (":ell,"    he said, Zith his Zarm, charming grin, "let's see
hoZ bad they are.") The folloZing evening, the chauffeur returned the three
books to 0rs. 0arconnier—all   read. 0ore and more of his NeZs-day
columns Zere columns of literary criticism, some of it very perceptive
indeed.

+is intelligence Zas still  a creative, shaping intelligence. Still roaming
vigorously the length and breadth of the metropolitan region, it still saZ in
everything, as it had seen on the Zalks Zith Frances 3erkins almost si[ty
years before, "Zays to make it better." 0oreover, freed at last of the crush-

ing day-to-day political and administrative responsibilities, that intelligence
Zas free to contemplate, to reflect. 0oses' imagination—in shackles long to
responsibility and ambition—Zas loosed again to dream and plan in leisure
as it had dreamed and planned half a century before, Zhen, Zith all other
planners baffled by the urban recreation problem, it had, looking at Long

1549
Island, conceived a revolutionary solution. :ithin  one year after his ouster
from poZer, Robert 0oses possessed Zhat he had not possessed during the
years in Zhich he had been building housing: a unified, comprehensive
housing program.

It Zould be simple in concept. Because the principal barrier to urban
reneZal programs Zas tenant relocation, neZ housing should be built Zhere
there Zere no tenants: in vacant areas of the city. After it Zas built, tenants
from slum areas should be moved out of the slums—out of Zhole slums at
once—into the neZ development. The areas they had vacated, noZ empty,
should be ra]ed, and neZ housing should be built there. Then residents of
another slum area should be moved into that neZ housing, their area ra]ed
and rebuilt, tenants from still another slum moved in—until all the city's
slums had thus been replaced Zith modern housing. Dedicating Co-Op City,
the 15,382-apartment community, largest apartment development in the
8nited States and largest cooperative apartment community in the Zorld,
that he had played a key role in conceiving and organi]ing, he offered, as a
"visible, palpable, large-scale demonstration of the efficacy" of his plan, a
proposal for an "Atlantic Village" at Bree]y 3oint  that Zould dZarf  even
Co-Op City, providing schools, shopping centers, playgrounds and a three-
mile-long public beach, as Zell as 50,000 modern apartments looking out
over the ocean, Zhile, incidentally, solving the city's dilemma over Zhat to
do Zith that valuable long piece of beachfront, hitherto fought over by park
and housing advocates as if the building of one Zould preclude the building
of the other. Financing? "Ingenuity and boldness" Zould solve that problem,
as it had on the :est Side Improvement, he said; he had several alternate
methods already Zorked out. And after the buildings Zere opened, into
them should be moved 50,000 Bedford-Stuyvesant families, then that
"ghetto area should be rebuilt and, by repeating this process, in ten years
there Zill be no more ghettos."

0oses had a cityZide program Zorked out—right doZn  to specific sites
(among them, :elfare  Island, air rights over the Sunnyside Yards of the
Long Island Rail Road and a vast, unused tract of Bron[ park land near the
:hitestone  Bridge)  and costs: five billion dollars could clean up every slum
in the city in ten years. It Zas a typical 0oses plan: no consideration of the
city investment required to provide facilities for these neZ, isolated

1550
communities, or of Zhether the city could afford such investment, no
concern that by isolating loZ-income people by the tens of thousands he
Zould be creating neZ ghettos. But he did not see these flaZs. +is plan Zas
large enough in scope to deal Zith the immense slum problem, the only plan
that Zas. +e Zas sure it Zould Zork—he Zas as enthusiastic as a boy about
it. And he could not restrain his impatience Zith those Zho critici]ed it: the
"Lindsay people" have "had their chance to solve this problem Zith their

scattered sites and vest-pocket things. None of these fancy Zords are going
to solve the housing crisis—only lots of neZ houses Zill solve it, and this is
the Zay to get lots of neZ houses ..." +e Zas so an[ious to be given a
chance to prove he Zas right.

+ousing Zas not the only area in Zhich he had plans. In every conversation
noZ, as Vollmer put it, "there is this concern groZing for so many things
left undone, so many things to be done." :hat people didn't understand Zas
that everything he had done Zas part of a plan, a dream—a plan planned
and a dream dreamed decades before. Large parts of the plan Zere reali]ed,
but larger parts Zere not—including some of the most beautiful, some of
the ones he most Zanted to reali]e, some of the public Zorks he had been
trying to build for decades. +is cottage might face the Robert 0oses
CauseZay and Robert 0oses State 3ark; these Zere tZo achievements that
should have been enough to content any man. But Zhat he saZ Zhen he
stood on the porch of the cottage and stared out Zas not the bridge and the
park but the road, the great Fire Island highZay, that the bridge and the park
had been supposed to bring closer to reality, the road still unbuilt. +is
dream had not been merely of an Ocean 3arkZay and a Belt 3arkZay that
ran along the Zater for forty miles; his dream, dreamed so clearly in 1924,
had been of a great Shorefront Drive all the Zay from Staten Island to
0ontauk  3oint—160 miles. A drive Zhose heart Zould be the Fire Island
Road bordered on the one hand by bay and on the other by ocean, a
highZay along Zhich people could drive almost literally among boats and
Zaves—the most beautiful drive in the Zorld. That road Zould be built one
day; he had no doubt about it—and he Zanted it to come Zhile he could see
it, he Zanted to build it himself so that he could be sure it Zas built right.
+e had built parks in the city, but the greatest Zaterfront park—the Jamaica
Bay Development that he had conceived of in 1924—Zas still not built. +e

1551
had reserved for future generations so many great tracts of Long Island land
—the 0arshall Field  Estate that had been renamed Caumsett State 3ark, the
Southside Sportsman's Club that had been renamed Connetquot State 3ark
—but it Zasn't enough. There Zere so many more country clubs and big
estates that must be saved from the developer's bulldo]er and preserved for
the public. And despite his pleas to his successor on the State Council of
3arks, Laurance Rockefeller; to Duryea's successor as head of the Long
Island Commission, A. +olly 3atterson; to county officials of Nassau and
Suffolk; to philanthropists—to anyone Zho Zould listen—no one Zas
doing anything to preserve them. +e had built great urban highZays—more
great urban highZays than any man in history—but Zhere Zere the greatest
of the highZays, the e[pressZays across 0anhattan Island, that Zould
complete the e[pressZay net and alone make it Zorkable? There Zere a
hundred big things left to do, and a thousand small: he had put Lincoln
Center together for the Rockefellers and then they had goofed up by not
providing ramps and Zider roadZays from the :est  Side +ighZay;  "they
don't grasp [the problem], they don't even remotely grasp it," he said one
day; he could take care of it in a couple of months—and if it

1153

Zasn't taken care of, you Zere alZays going to have an access problem
there. The Zalls of his office on Randall's Island Zere covered Zith pictures
of his achievements—pictures of bridges and dams illuminated at night—
and through the ZindoZ behind him could be seen the solid concrete and
steel of the Triborough Bridge. But the office Zas dominated by a huge map
of NeZ York City. And  Zhile that map Zas crisscrossed Zith the solid lines
that represented achievements built—highZays, bridges, tunnels—on it also
Zere lines, many lines, that Zere not solid but broken: lines representing
achievements not yet built, dreams yet to be turned into reality. As he sat at
his desk, that map, its Zidth Zider than his armspread, its height taller than
a man, stared back at him, reminding this man to Zhom accomplishment
Zas so important that there Zas so much yet to accomplish. There Zas
visible behind his urge to keep building an element almost of desperation;
the public Zas doubting the Zisdom of his creations—the Zay to convince
them Zas to complete the system, to build more highZays, more bridges,
more housing—to build, build, build in a frantic attempt to rescue his

1552
reputation. But there Zas behind the urge also genuine creative drive, a
drive undimmed by eighty years of life, the shaping impulse of the shaping
man—and a drive supported by the arrogance Zhich since his youth had
told him in a voice that Zould not be denied that he had the ansZer to the
problem, that he kneZ Zhat to do. If only he Zere to be alloZed to do it.

:hat   made his situation more frustrating still Zas that the problems that
needed solving Zere not being solved. +is city, the city that he thought of
as a product he had created, Zas, he felt, being destroyed by the men Zho
had succeeded him in poZer. +oving and August +eckscher, grandson of
his early benefactor and +oving's successor as 3ark Commissioner, had had
their opportunity to institute their park policies designed to "return the parks
to the people"; after five years of such a return, the parks Zere ruined, in as
bad shape as he had found them Zhen he took over from Tammany +all.
Little neZ housing Zas being built, the slums Zere getting Zorse. No
highZays Zere being built; supposedly this Zas because the money Zas
being spent on mass transportation, but at the rate mass transit facilities
Zere being built, they Zould never solve any transportation problems—if
indeed most of them Zere built at all. Democracy had not solved the fatal
dichotomy; he did not see the problem as a dichotomy but only as a failure
on the part of public officials to understand the realities of the situation—
that the public say on public Zorks must be limited, and, in general,
ignored, that critics must be ignored, that public Zorks must be pushed
ruthlessly to completion.

8nderstanding this, convinced that he had the plan for the salvation of NeZ
York, he schemed and tZisted and turned to get the poZer to do it: ass-
kissing pompous double-chinned Ronan and his arrogant boss, asking allies
—feZer each year as more and more architects, engineers and contractors
Zere pulled into the Rockefeller-Ronan orbit—to "intercede" for him.
Frantically he tried to get the 8nited +ousing Foundation interested in the
"Atlantic Village"  project—and to put him in charge. In one desperate ploy
to do this, he planted an intervieZ Zith the Daily NeZs Zhich appeared

—under the hopeful headline greatest urban reneZal ever: reenter bob
moses —in a story favorable to the plan and closed Zith a broad hint of
Zho should run it.

1553
0oses, Zhose only job at present is that of consultant, . . . Zas asked during
the intervieZ Zhether he might consider himself just the nonpolitical man
for the job.

":ill    you take any direct part in this project?" he Zas asked.

"Nobody has asked me," he replied.

Nobody did. +is agile mind, alZays so quick to find avenues to poZer,
tZisted and turned and darted at every one that he felt might open up— and,
Zith the city's 0ayor  and the state's Governor unalterably opposed to him,
found them all closed. Rockefeller and Ronan kept him firmly on the shelf;
his impatience, the same terrible impatience he had had as a young man,
turned into frustration, a deep gnaZing, terrible bitterness. As this man, Zho
had measured off his life in days each of Zhich Zas vital, looked back on
Zeeks in Zhich nothing had occurred to advance his plans—as Zeeks
turned into months—as he reali]ed that he had been seventy-nine Zhen he
lost poZer and that he Zas noZ eighty-tZo (or eighty-three or eighty-four),
he fell into violent rages. +is conversation revealed, more and more,
foreboding of the ultimate. +e had thought Oak Beach Zould be his Elba.
:as  it  to be instead his St. +elena? :as he to die Zithout ever getting the
chance to build another bridge, to redeem his name?

+e could have used the time to Zrite, and publishers approached him Zith
substantial offers for an autobiography. But he had not the patience to Zrite,
nor the desire—and, it may be, other considerations militated against it as
Zell: a key to 0oses' ability  to buy men had been his ability to keep the
purchase secret, and the sellers' confidence that he Zould do so. +e could
hardly Zrite a story of his life Zithout  going at least to some e[tent into the
machinations by Zhich he had obtained poZer, and Zere he to reveal them,
men Zhom he Zould need to get poZer back might shy aZay from him. +e
did come up Zith a book, published in 1970 by 0cGraZ-+ill:   3ublic
:orks:   A Dangerous Trade. But this Zas not really a book at all, and it Zas
certainly not by Robert 0oses. A vast volume—952 pages—90 percent of
it consisted of documents already in the public record: reprints of speeches,
press releases, brochures, reports, neZspaper and maga]ine articles on his
triumphs, letters to and from prominent persons. And most of the remainder
Zas Zritten not by 0oses but by members of his staff. There Zas no

1554
triumph in its publication; it Zas e[tensively  revieZed, but revieZers
treated it for Zhat it Zas—a nonbook.

+e could not sit still. Reading in the afternoon, he Zould jump up from his
chair, yank on his old corduroy jacket and stride out onto the long Zooden
porch outside the Oak Beach cottage, pacing back and forth, sometimes for
an hour and more, grim and restless. 8rged on by desperate secretaries and
associates and Zife, he took vacations, but he didn't enjoy them. +e Zas
alZays an[ious to get back—lest some chance for poZer pass him by. But
upon his return, no chance Zould come. Things he had once

enjoyed doing Zere less and less solace to him noZ. For qo matter Zhat he
did, he could not get aZay from himself. To this man Zho had consec his
life to Getting Things Done, to the getting and e[ercising of poZer, hell Zas
the continued urgent, desperate, insatiable need for accomplishment and
poZer—combined Zith the inability  to satisfy even a little part of that need.

+is muchachos did all they could to make life pleasant for him—most of
his muchachos; most of them loved Robert 0oses. Some of them loved
Robert 0oses only for Zhat Robert 0oses could do for them, and he
couldn't do anything for them any more—he had made up Zith George
Spargo after the :orld's Fair and given his engineering firm contracts, but
the loyal +arold Blake Zas to comment bitterly one day that "0r. 0oses
doesn't see much of George Spargo any more. And Spargo Zas closer to 0r.
0oses than anybody."

Thanks to Sid Shapiro, Zho Zas still general manager and chief engineer of
the Long Island State 3ark Commission, the big corner table in the 0arine
Dining Room at Jones Beach Zas reserved for 0oses and his party every
Saturday and Sunday, and the chef Zould cook up something special
(Zhatever 0oses Zanted; if it  Zasn't in stock at the restaurant, a patrol car
Zould be sent screaming up to the mainland to get it), and Zhenever 0oses
Zent to the 0arine Theater—Zhich  Zas frequently—there Zould be the
introduction by Guy Lombardo and the spotlight and the unfailingly
generous applause from the croZd above, and the opportunity for him to
look unutterably bored by it all. The Sea-Ef Zas kept alZays ready for him,
gassed, manned and stocked by the commission.

1555
Driving around the parks and parkZays Zas still pleasant, for the senior
officers at every facility Zere men Zho had served Zith R0  Zhen he had
been the commission's president, and they treated him Zith the respect he
remembered. Everybody connected Zith the commission, in fact, treated
him Zith respect. :hen   the author drove him doZn to meet Adam Carp,
0oses told him to park in an area marked "No Thoroughfare." After he left,
the author Zas sitting there jotting doZn notes Zhen a Long Island State
3ark Commission patrolman loomed in his ZindoZ. "Don't you see the
sign?" he asked Zith the usual LIS3C arrogance. ":ell, you see, I drove
0r.  0oses doZn . . . ," the author began. "Oh," the cop said, straightening,
and started to Zalk aZay Zithout a Zord. Then he returned. "Thanks for
telling me," he said. "I'd be out of Zork and my children Zould be
starving."

There Zere bright spots in his life. On July 3, I97<>» a handsome
monument in a large pla]a on the Lincoln Center campus of Fordham
8niversity  Zas unveiled—a bron]e bas-relief of 0oses, e[ecuted by
sculptor Albino 0anca,  mounted on a handsome three-sided slab of green
marble over the Zords, chiseled and gilded in gold:

ROBERT 0OSES

0ASTERB8ILDER

FRIEND OF FORD+A0

Terence Cardinal Cooke blessed the monument, Nelson Rockefeller gave
the principal address, calling 0oses a man Zho "built his oZn greatness,"
and as the Reverend 0ichael 3. :alsh, president of Fordham, announced
that the pla]a Zould be named after him, long lines of state officials,
Fordham priests and old 0oses 0en stood applauding Zith Zarm smiles on
their faces until 0oses had to boZ his head to hide tears.

To a man Zhose sensitivities had been rubbed as raZ as 0oses', hoZever,
there Zere unfortunate ironies even in this honor. In praising 0oses,
Rockefeller had, perhaps indelicately, alluded to the fact that up to noZ in
the city "no public Zork has borne his name." Despite Fordham's touching
and appreciated gesture, of course, that Zas still the case. This gesture

1556
Zasn't an honor from the public, the public he had served so long and so
selflessly at such great self-sacrifice, but from a private institution. +is
name Zas immortali]ed in concrete and steel and park land from one end of
the state to the other. But it Zas on no public Zork in the city in Zhich his
efforts had been concentrated.

It had been supposed to be on one, but it Zasn't.

And a pla]a on a college campus Zasn't quite the same thing as Flushing
0eadoZs 3ark.

There Zere other bright spots. +e Zas 0an of the Year for the Salvation
Army and the 0asons and the Society of Civil Engineers—for a do]en
organi]ations—betZeen 1968 and 1972. A junior high school in Babylon
Zas named after him—the tenth structure to bear his name. There Zere the
ceremonies attendant on the completion of the public Zorks that had been
launched before the end of his Triborough chairmanship—in 1968 the huge
neZ park on the landfill he had added to Randall's Island, in 1969 the loZer
level of the Verra]ano Bridge, in 1970 the reconstruction of the Cross Bay
Bridge—ceremonies that gave him the opportunity to make speeches, and,
noZ able to devote the necessary time to them, he delighted in Zriting
them, so that their phrases had again the felicity and force of his speeches as
a younger man. There Zere moments of triumph, such as his speech at the
annual dinner of the Building Trades Employers Association in the Grand
Ballroom of the :aldorf-Astoria   +otel  in 1969, Zhen, after Roger Corbetta
of Corbetta Construction introduced him ("a great man, a great builder, a
man of history . . . this great dirt mover . . . this master builder"), the
hundreds of men in the audience rose to their feet and cheered and cheered
for long minutes. The Daily NeZs gave good play to his pronouncements;
Zhen, in 1969, former Secretary of the Interior SteZart 8dall, urging the
infusion of "young blood" into city  planning, critici]ed  "the jaded planning
of Robert 0oses" and said it had made NeZ York an e[ample of hoZ not to
conduct urban planning, the NeZs replied, ":e'd just like  to observe that
Zhen 8dall  can shoZ a list of accomplishments—in poZer, transportation
and conservation—one tenth as long as 0oses', it Zill be time enough for
him to shoot off his yap." During the mayoral election of 1969, he backed
the ultraconservative Democratic candidate, 0ario 3rocaccino (he preferred

1557
the more intellectual Republican candidate, John J. 0archi, also a
conservative, but his endorsement, as alZays, Zas dictated by practicalities;
be Zanted a Zinner—someone Zho could return him to poZer—and he felt
no Republican candidate could Zin in NeZ York), jeering at Lindsay as "the
glass of fashion and the mould of form"—and an utterly incompetent
0ayor  —and declaring, ":e  are sick of amateurs Zho are not dry behind
the ears." And the endorsement Zas in headlines on page one of the Times
as it had been in elections past.

But the bright spots became feZer and feZer.

The Cross Bay Bridge rebuilding Zas Robert 0oses' last major construction
project, the last Zith Zhich he could occupy even a little of his time; and its
opening celebration Zas the last at Zhich he Zould be a leading figure. The
requests to have him speak sloZed from a torrent to a trickle, and by 1972
had dried up almost entirely. The mail, once so huge a bundle three times a
day, fell off to almost nothing. There Zere continual discourtesies and
humiliations. On 0ay  22, 1969, the city dedicated Damrosch 3ark at the
Guggenheim Band Shell at Lincoln Center. Damrosch 3ark had been
conceived by Robert 0oses. +e had battled for the inclusion of the 2.34-
acre open space in the Lincoln Center project Zhen everyone else involved
had opposed such "Zaste" of land. +e had persuaded the Guggenheim and
Damrosch families to donate the necessary funds. But he received only a
form invitation to the opening ceremonies. Not only Zas there no invitation
to speak, there Zas no place for him on the platform. +e Zatched the
ceremonies (presided over by 3ark Commissioner August +eckscher,
Zhose primary contribution to Damrosch 3ark had been the approval of
plans calling for lampposts on Zhich the bulbs Zould be set thirty feet
above the ground, too high for any of the Department's bulb-changing
equipment to reach) from a bench near the rear of the audience. (Noticing
him sitting there, +eckscher asked him to come up and sit in a chair that
happened to be vacant on the platform; no thanks, 0oses replied.) +e Zas
preoccupied Zith immortality noZ;  in one NeZsday column, he said he Zas
convinced that "the finest short story ever Zritten" Zas Anatole France's
"The 3rocurator of Judea," Zhich ends Zith 3ontius 3ilate saying, "Jesus?
Jesus? Of Na]areth? I do not believe I can recall the name." And Zhat
roused him most to fury Zas the attempt of Lindsay and his bright young

1558
men to paint him as responsible for all the city's ills. Some of that criticism
Zas unfair—predicated upon the ignorance of the neZ administration about
the city it Zas supposed to be governing. Once, for e[ample, the 0ayor
critici]ed  0oses for laying concrete through Alley 3ond 3ark, Zhich  he
implied had been a Zonderful rustic nature spot before 0oses came along
and ruined it. 0oses had ruined a hundred rustic nature spots in NeZ York
City, but Alley 3ond 3ark Zasn't one of them. There hadn't been an Alley
3ond 3ark until 0oses came along and built it up out of an inaccessible,
reeking marsh; the concrete Lindsay Zas talking about, the Cross Island
3arkZay, had been put through it at the same time. On another occasion,
Lindsay said, "The 0oses approach, Zhere you take a bulldo]er and moZ
people's houses doZn, just doesn't Zork in this city any

more. :e  get more done by Zorking on smaller sites in cooperation Zith
the community." Get more done! In his first four years in office, the total
housing production of the Lindsay administration consisted of feZer units
than 0oses had been accustomed to produce every single year! But it Zas
the reason Lindsay kept using his name that hurt 0oses most; in some Zay
he Zas totally unable to comprehend, his name, Zhich had once been a
symbol of the good in urban life, had become a symbol of the bad; Zhen
Lindsay's +ousing Administrator, Jason R. Nathan, Zanted to blast some
neZ housing proposal, he simply said it Zas an e[ample of "The 0oses
Approach." Of all things, his reputation Zas noZ dearest to him—and it
Zas his reputation that this incompetent 0ayor Zas destroying.

And after a Zhile, he couldn't even fight back.

AlZays he had broadcast his vieZs through mass mailings—of his letters,
his memos, his press releases, his brochures—to hundreds if not thouands
of influential in city  and state, mailings mimeographed by Tri-borough
personnel or printed Zith Triborough funds, mailed Zith Tri-borough
stamps.

:hether   or not it Zas "made clear" to him—as so many humiliating neZ
restrictions on his activities Zere "made clear" to him by Ronan's men in
the months after the 0TA takeover—that Triborough printing and stamping
privileges Zere no longer to be available to him in quantity, or Zhether it
Zas simply that he Zas too proud to go on using resources that had not been

1559
offered to him, the fact remained that shortly after the 0TA takeover,
0oses' mailings Zere being addressed by hand and stamped Zith stamps
purchased by him.

Doing it that Zay Zas too much of a load even for three secretaries and his
Zife, Zho  chipped in to help. The evidence Zas not on the front of the
envelopes, Zhich Zere typed as cleanly and neatly as ever. But on the back,
the return address Zas printed on roughly by a stamp. Even that did not help
enough. The mailings Zere reduced in si]e and then reduced again.

Then, hoZever, after another Zhile, the Zork load Zas no longer such a
problem, for there Zas almost nothing to mail. The principal ingredient of
the mailings had been reprints of 0oses' speeches and the column he Zrote
once a Zeek for NeZsday and syndication. Requests for him to speak Zere
feZer in 1969 than they had been in 1968 and feZer still in 1970. By 1972,
they Zere doZn to a handful. :hen  his friend +arry  Guggenheim sold
NeZsday to the Los Angeles Times 0irror Company in 1970, the column
Zas discontinued. NoZ he had no public platform at all from Zhich to voice
his vieZs, or to reply to the criticism continually being heaped upon him.

The column had, moreover, given him something to do. NoZ he had
absolutely nothing to do. +e greZ terribly nervous; his big hands kept
playing around his head, his fingers moving restlessly over his forehead; he
kept putting his glasses on and taking them off. +is fingers drummed on the
table; sitting, he Zould squirm nervously; he Zould jump up every feZ

1159

minutes and pace for a minute or tZo, sit doZn, jump up and pace again;
he-Zas almost desperate for something to do.

It Zas principally for  this reason that Zhen the Daily NeZs asked him to
host a neZ television intervieZ series, "NeZ York Closeup," on its :3I;-
TV station, he agreed. +e Zas not quite attuned to the blandness required in
the medium—as he demonstrated conclusively even before his first
program, at a press conference called by :3I;-TV   at the Overseas 3ress
Club to announce the neZ shoZ. Asked Zhy 0oses, Zho had no e[perience
on TV, had been selected as host, the station's president, Fred 0. ThroZer,

1560
intoned: "There is no one in NeZ York better suited to make an important
contribution to NeZ York and to television in the public affairs field." :hen
reporters turned to 0oses, he said, Zith a grin, as the Times reported, " To
tell the unvarnished truth' he Zas being hired because the various netZorks
have decided to devote more time to public affairs in response 'to a demand
on the part of Congress, the F.C.C. and others' "— a remark Zhich
prompted the Times reporter to remember that :3I;'s  license Zas being
challenged by a rival group, and that the F.C.C. Zas scheduled to hold
hearings on the tZo applications shortly.

The programs Zere a fiasco, partly because 0oses refused (e[cept for a
brief, embarrassing attempt) to Zear a hearing aid, and as a result could not
hear his guests' replies to his questions, partly because he Zas not interested
in the replies anyZay and took up most of the program lecturing at the
camera. After some tZenty programs, he and the station jointly agreed to
discontinue the series.

+is mind Zas as active as ever. Ideas still churned out of it. To occupy his
days, he agreed noZ to see people he had never seen before because he had
felt they just Zanted to pick his brains, use his ideas themselves and "get a
fee out of it"—consultants from other countries and cities Zith specific
problems on Zhich they Zanted his advice. And his imagination leaped as
nimbly at these problems as the mind of the young Robert 0oses had
leaped at problems half a century and more before. "The other day," Blake
recalls, "some man called Zho had been hired to do a study of Zhat uses to
make of Alcatra] Island. I mentioned it to him, and he starts to think,
hmmm, 'Alcatra]—the problems are very similar to Ellis Island, very
interesting . . .' And boy he Zas off to the races. +e must have talked for an
hour." One day a delegation of si[teen Japanese urban planners shoZed up
to discuss a plan for, as Blake recalls it, "linking up some little island to the
mainland." 0oses began asking questions. Then the yelloZ legal pad Zas
pulled across his desk and a pencil Zas in his hand. For more than tZo
hours, the si[teen Japanese sat transfi[ed as that pencil fleZ, and the big
hand pounded the desk, and the big man jumped up and paced as the ideas
took hold. On their Zay out, one of the Japanese said almost reverently: "A
great man. A great man." There Zere so many ideas about things closer to
home that needed doing—neZ parks for Long Island, neZ highZays, his

1561
planned bridge. But noZ not only could he do nothing about his ideas, he
couldn't even tell anyone about them.

+e lived on slim hopes—that 3rocaccino Zould defeat Lindsay and that
Brennan and Van Arsdale could persuade 3rocaccino to return him to
poZer, that Rockefeller Zould at last see through Ronan's obsequious
flattery to Zhat 0oses felt  Zas the incompetence beneath, that Rockefeller
Zould Zin  the presidency in 1968 and go to :ashington, leaving Lieutenant
Governor 0alcolm  :ilson   in the Governor's chair (0alcolm  :ilson    is a
great admirer of 0r. 0oses',  you knoZ, +arold Blake, Zould  say), that
Rockefeller Zould be given a Cabinet position by Ni[on in 1972, and thus
place :ilson   in the Governor's chair. But in 1974, Zhen Rockefeller
resigned and :ilson  did become Governor, the only post offered to 0oses
Zas a meaningless one as a housing "adviser" to the Governor; Rockefeller
apparently still had enough influence to keep him out of any significant
assignment.

The 0oses 0en  Zere groZing old. "+e  had so many people serving Zith
him, and I see in my mind all these faces, dim noZ, like ghosts, and his face
vivid, outlasting all of them," Sid Shapiro had said. R0 had outlived one
generation of aides. NoZ he Zas starting to outlive another. One after the
other, they died. +is bankers died: the younger one had gone first—
Shanahan had been dead for years; in 1969, George 0cLaughlin died, too.
:hen   an intervieZer asked about the remaining aides, Shapiro said to him
sadly: "You're talking about a bunch of Zhite-haired old men noZ, you
knoZ. I remember Zhen Ze Zere all young, out there at Belmont Lake . . ."

As long as Shapiro himself Zas still around and in administrative charge of
the Long Island State 3ark Commission, of course, the other deaths did not
matter too much. Shapiro could still provide 0oses Zith all the amenities
that gave his life Zhat happiness it had. This most loyal of men held on to
the end, past the age Zhen he might have retired, to make things easier for
R0.  +e held on even after he Zas told he had cancer. +e held on until his
pain and Zeakness made it impossible for him to Zork even occasionally
any longer, and then, on April 12, 1972, he retired. +oping for a Zhile he
might recover, he moved into a house on Oak Beach, right near that of the
man he had served and Zorshipped for fifty years—his companionship Zas

1562
undoubtedly Zelcome, but the commissioners of the Long Island State 3ark
Commission Zere by noZ all men Zhom 0oses kneZ  only slightly, and as
Shapiro's replacement they selected not the 0oses 0an ne[t in line, Frank
Champ, but an official of the National 3ark Service, and noZ there Zas no
longer the deference to 0oses in the parks he had created, or the
introductions at the 0arine Theater; even the corner table at Jones Beach
Zas no longer Zaiting. And after July 20, 1972, Zhen Shapiro died, even
the companionship of his oldest and most loyal aide Zas gone.

Robert 0oses, preoccupied Zith immortality, had no sons. +e had three
grandsons, tZo by his daughter Barbara, one by his daughter Jane. The one
Barbara had named after him Zas mentally retarded. For her other son, John
Olds, a 3rinceton graduate Zho married an heiress and became a banker, he
had no use.

Jane's son, Christopher Collins, Zas a tall, handsome youth Zith a broad,
engaging grin and an easygoing nature. 8nlike Jane's daughter, Caroline, a
tall, brilliant girl  Zho Zon  honors at O[ford before getting married, from
the time he began school, his grades Zere a problem, and he displayed no
marked interests e[cept in girls and surfing; he loved to spend the summers
on the beach at Gilgo. "+e's too good-looking for his oZn good," Jane said.

But Robert 0oses loved Chris. +e doted on him, taking him Zith him
everyZhere. +e taught him to fish and sail. :ith   her husband long since
"out of the picture," he Zas supporting Jane, of course, and he saZ that the
boy alZays had plenty of pocket money. :hen Jane lost her temper Zith
Chris over his grades, Chris Zould reply, "Gramps never says anything."
Instead of an Ivy League university, he Zanted to go to little Chapel +ill
College in North Carolina; Jane Zas appalled, but 0oses told her, "Oh, let
the boy go Zhere he Zants." :hen  his first report card came back Zith
straight C's, he said, Zith a grin, ":ell,  at least he's consistent."

In 1967, as a senior at college, Christopher Collins' attitude changed. +is
report card came back all A's. "I don't think R0 Zas any prouder of the
Verra]ano Bridge than he Zas of that report card," Sid Shapiro says. :hen
Chris said that he Zanted to study laZ at Stanford, 0oses helped him get in.

1563
On December 11, 1968, driving home to Long Island from California as a
passenger in a car driven by a Stanford friend, Christopher Collins, tZenty-
one, Zas killed Zhen the car veered off the road and smashed into a
concrete culvert.

Once he had had battalions to boss and on Zhich to demonstrate his
administrative ability; noZ he had only his secretaries and chauffeur, so he
did so on them. +e Zas harsh and abrupt and arrogant in talking to them,
and about them; e[plaining hoZ he had gotten caught the day before in a
traffic jam, he said: "The chauffeur took the Zrong route—he alZays takes
the Zrong route if he's left alone, and I never interfere: that's his business;
he's the chauffeur; if you don't like it, you get another chauffeur . . ." +e
became a name dropper, trying consciously to lard his conversation Zith the
names of great men he had knoZn.

Still he lived on—year after year, vital and alert, imaginative and energetic,
but Zith nothing to do Zith  his vitality, his imagination and his energy
e[cept to bottle them up, feeding on himself.

+is name had faded from the headlines in NeZ York City long before. For a
Zhile after NeZsday no longer published his column, its reporters still
telephoned him for comment on stories involving public Zorks on Long
Island, and played his statements prominently, as did the Long Island 3ress.
But as time Zent on that all but stopped, too. This man Zho for decades had
read the neZspapers first thing every morning no longer found his name in
them e[cept on rare occasions—and on those occasions almost invariably in
a derogatory conte[t, as a man Zho had been responsible for housing and

highZay mistakes. +e had built Jones Beach and Sunken 0eadoZ State
3ark, and +eckscher, and the 0assena and St. LaZrence poZer projects—
but no one remembered those. +e Zas forgotten—to live out his years in
bitterness and rage.

In private, his conversation dZelt more and more on a single theme— the
ingratitude of the public toZard great men. And once, invited by the Church
to speak at the dedication in Flushing 0eadoZs 3ark of the E[cedra, a
huge, marble bench for reflection donated by the Roman Catholic Diocese
of NeZ York, he gave vent to his feeling in public. Turning to a high church

1564
official Zho  Zas also an old friend, his voice booming out over the public
address system, he said:

"Someday, let us sit on this bench and reflect on the gratitude of man."

DoZn in the audience, the ministers of the empire of 0oses glanced at one
another and nodded their heads. R0 Zas right as usual, they Zhispered.
Couldn't people see Zhat he had done?

:hy   Zeren't they grateful?

DEBTS

The main trouble Zith cliches is that their constant reiteration has Zorn
them out, so that they no longer possess their force and meaning. Every
author, it seems, thanks his Zife and his editor. +oZ then to e[press
adequately the thanks I oZe to mine?

Ina Joan Caro provided support and encouragement and many keen critical
insights, and took care of our home and son Zhile I Zrote—and she did so
for seven years. She typed the massive manuscript—typed some chapters
over and over—Zithout one single Zord of complaint. But she also tracked
doZn and intervieZed the farmers dispossessed for the Northern State
3arkZay during the logo's and the residents of Sunset 3ark displaced for the
GoZanus 3arkZay during the I930's—no small task. Searching through
scores of libraries, the morgues of a do]en deceased neZspapers and
endless roZs of filing cabinets of ancient, crumbling city records, she found
a hundred pieces of information that enriched this book. For some months
during Zhich I Zas physically  unable to do my oZn research, she did it for
me. I believe there are feZ if any persons in this city Zho possess her
knoZledge of Zhere to find information about it, and this knoZledge Zas of
immense help to me. If there is a Zay to e[press adequately thanks for such
long years of such gracious selflessness, I do not knoZ it. Only I Zill ever
knoZ hoZ much it meant to me.

In an era during Zhich perceptive editorial criticism seems to be harder and
harder for an author to come by—and in Zhich detailed editing of even
short manuscripts is rapidly becoming a lost art—my editor, Robert

1565
Gottlieb, not only gave this terribly long manuscript detailed editing but
improved it Zith  brilliant perceptions. Despite the grinding pressures of his
responsibilities as president of .nopf, he lavished on it, Zeek after Zeek
and month after month, his time, his energy and his genius as an editor. No
one Zho is not an author can understand Zhat this has meant to me, and not
all authors can, either—only those Zho have Bob Gottlieb for their editor.

On a book of this si]e, the difficulties of production loom ominously large.
A hundred problems fell on .atherine +ourigan  of .nopf,   Zho solved
every one—and Zho furnished much perceptive editorial criticism of her
oZn.

Among the many other people at .nopf to Zhom I am indebted, I must
thank especially 0artha .aplan,  Nina Bourne, Fran Lipton and Betty
Anderson. Others Zho contributed in large measure Zere 3riscilla :orland
Burton, my research assistant; Lynn Nesbit, my agent; and AndreZ L.
+ughes, Zho provided literary as Zell as legal advice. TZo institutions
Zere helpful: the Carnegie Corporation, Zhich provided a grant that helped
me get started, and the NeZ York 3ublic Library, Zhich, by providing
Zorking space in its Frederick LeZis Allen 0emorial   Room, helped me get
finished.

It is unfeasible for me to thank individually every person I intervieZed;
there are hundreds of them—a total of 522 intervieZs Zere conducted
(some persons Zere intervieZed several times); the names of those
especially helpful are listed in the "Selected IntervieZs" section. Some,
hoZever, gave particularly generously of their time and knoZledge.

First among them are LaZrence 0. Or ton and Lee .oppelman. Larry
Orton, a member of the City 3lanning Commission for thirty years,
possesses an incredible store of knoZledge about NeZ York City—he put it
at my service. Lee, e[ecutive secretary of the Nassau-Suffolk Regional
3lanning Board, did the same for my chapters on Long Island.

Lillian  Edelstein, leader of East Tremont's valiant fight against the Cross-
Bron[ E[pressZay,  Zas endlessly helpful in my attempt to describe Zhat a
modern highZay can mean to a city neighborhood; :illiam  E[ton  and
Robert C. :einberg  Zere helpful in describing a do]en fights against a

1566
do]en 0oses projects; Augusta NeZman Zas the definitive source for the
Tavern-on-the-Green battle.

Four reporters Zho during the logo's brought to light for the first time many
of the facts about the 0oses empire turned over to me their insights and,
Zhere possible, their files. These trailbla]ers Zere Fred J. Cook, :illiam
+addad, Joseph .ahn and 0ary 3erot Nichols—Zho  also, as a 3ark
Department official during the +oving era, secured me access to
Department files that helped illuminate the 0oses era.

The Oral +istory 3roject of Columbia 8niversity  Zas a source of
immensely helpful material.

R.A.C.

NeZ York City

January 31, 1974

A NOTE ON SO8RCES

From its inception, Robert 0oses did his best to try to keep this book from
being Zritten—as he had done, successfully, Zith so many previous,
stillborn, biographies.

After I had been researching it for more than a year, hoZever, he apparently
reali]ed that it Zould be Zritten  despite him. +e agreed to sit for a series of
intervieZs Zith  me, and, over a period of some months, seven intervieZs—
long hours in length; one lasted from 9:30 a.m. until evening—took place in
his summer cottage at Oak Beach, on the far end of the "Jones Beach"
portion of the Long Island barrier beach, Zhere Robert 0oses sat talking,
framed, through a picture ZindoZ, by the Robert 0oses CauseZay and
Robert 0oses State 3ark. "IntervieZs" is a less appropriate term than
"monologues," for 0oses permitted feZ questions, none on sensitive
subjects, and Zhen the time came that I had no choice but to ask some (for,
having intervieZed others involved in the subjects in question and having
e[amined the records—many of them secret—dealing Zith them, it Zas
necessary to reconcile the sometimes striking disparity betZeen Zhat he

1567
told me and Zhat they told me), the series of intervieZs Zas abruptly
terminated. Nonetheless, the long hours alone Zith Robert 0oses have
enriched the book immensely, not only in the many incidents and anecdotes
he related that turned out to be accurate, and in the masterful Zord pictures
he dreZ of all but forgotten eras (to hear Robert 0oses talk about the
Legislature's "Black +orse Cavalry" of the 1920's is to see the Black +orse
Cavalry), but because, as is alZays the case Zhen a reporter can spend
enough time Zith a subject, the subject reveals more of himself than he
knoZs. All  unknoZing, 0oses told  me, I believe, much that he didn't
reali]e he Zas telling me. The subject of this book is, therefore, the first
source that I must cite.

I must thank him as Zell. If his monologues, shying from the sensitive as
they did, Zere in a sense lectures on the philosophy and art of Getting
Things Done in a democratic society, they Zere nonetheless the lectures of
a genius. +aving been an investigative and political reporter for some years,
I have naively believed that I kneZ something about the innermost fabric of
decision-making in NeZ York City and NeZ York State, and not a little
about government and politics in general. All that I kneZ Zas as nothing
besides Zhat I learned from this unique Gamaliel.

During the era of cooperation, moreover, 0oses rela[ed the rule, hitherto
rigid throughout his empire, that no one Zas to talk to me, and alloZed
certain of his aides to do so. 0ost importantly, he alloZed 0ichael J. (Jack)
0adigan and Sidney 0.  Shapiro to do so. 0adigan Zorked hand in glove
Zith 0oses  for thirty-five  years. Although an engineer Zho headed the
engineering firm most closely identified Zith 0oses  in the public mind, his
real importance to 0oses Zas in his secret role as architect of the intricately
crafted bond issues that made 0oses' public Zorks possible. If the 0oses
empire had a treasurer, 0adigan Zas the man. Shapiro Zas even more
important to me. If the empire had a prime minister, it Zas he. General
manager and chief engineer of the Long Island State 3ark Commission, he
Zorked for 0oses  for more than forty years, the last tZenty or so as his
closest and most trusted aide. :ith Shapiro, I spent more than a hundred
hours. Besides shoZing me Zhat the "royal tour" for a 0oses guest meant
—and I am grateful for, if still someZhat incredulous at, that e[perience—
he talked to me freely, having obtained my promise not to quote him

1568
directly or indirectly. +e agreed, hoZever, that his death Zould void that
promise, and he died on July 20, 1972. It is thanks to Shapiro more than to
any

other single source that I came to understand 0oses' attitude toZard
Negroes, toZard "that scum floating up from 3uerto Rico" that Zas
befouling his parks, toZard Zhat "R0"  called the "loZer  classes"—as Zell
as 0oses' reasoning on such questions as mass transit vs. highZays. As to
Zhy Shapiro spoke so openly, promise or no promise, I have, after much
speculation over intriguing possibilities, concluded that perhaps the primary
reason Zas that he did so simply because he believed Zhat 0oses believed
— believed it so fervently that he could see nothing Zrong Zith it, and
could not understand hoZ anyone of "real intelligence" could see anything
Zrong Zith  it. Forty years in the insulation of the 0oses inner circle had
taken its toll.

One further note of detailed e[planation on a particular source may be of
interest to some readers. :hen, in the Notes that folloZ, I cite the "Secret
TBTA Files," I refer to the secret files of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel
Authority, kept under lock and key to this day on Randall's Island, barred
for forty years to inspection by public or press, none of Zhose contents has,
to the best of my knoZledge, ever been revealed. It Zas some of those files,
made available to me, that became the primary source of the information in
this book on such political payoffs as insurance premium commissions to
selected legislators. In those files—the legendary 0oses dossiers—are the
frankest of memos on Zho's getting Zhat, and Zhy.

Several other collections of documents Zhich, so far as I can determine,
have never been consulted before by any Zriter, have been of use in my
research.

The voluminous personal files of :.  .ingsland  0acy,  State Republican
Chairman from 1930 to 1934, Suffolk County Republican Chairman from
1927 to i960, and a poZer in NeZ York State politics for thirty years, Zere
discovered by the author in the cellar of the 0acy mansion in :est Islip,
Long Island. They are referred to in the Notes that folloZ as the "0acy
3apers."

1569
Other perhaps virgin collections of documents consulted include the
internal memoranda of the NeZ York City 3ark Department during the
tZenty-si[  years of Robert 0oses' commissionership. These files, made
available to the author through the cooperation of 0ary 3erot Nichols, are
stored in the dank recesses beloZ the Seventy-ninth Street boat basin near
the :est  Side +ighZay. They are referred to as the "3ark Department
Files." Other collections include the letters, memos and informal diaries of
reformer :illiam    E[ton, Zhich  detail his battles during the 1930's against
the :est  Side +ighZay  and such other 0oses projects as the remodeling of
:ashington  Square 3ark. The "E[ton 3apers" are kept at his family's home
in 0illbrook,   Dutchess County. The internal memoranda and draft reports
of the State Reconstruction Commission, of Zhich 0oses Zas chief of staff
in 1919, Zere preserved for half a century by commission staffer John 0.
Gaus at his home in 8tica, together Zith a vast collection of forty years of
unpublished reports on 0oses projects by planning and reform
organi]ations. This huge compilation—the result of Gaus's enduring
fascination Zith his first boss long after he himself became a +arvard
professor and respected political scientist—is referred to as the "Gaus
3apers."

The memos on the Title I scandals of the 1950's Zritten by Gene Gleason
and other NeZ York :orld-Telegram  reporters to reZriteman Fred J. Cook
and various editors and kept by Cook in his home in Interlaken, NeZ Jersey,
Zere given to the author by Cook. These are referred to as the "Cook
3apers." Various other documents relating to Title I given to the author by
Stephen G. Thompson, then on the staff of the NeZ York +erald Tribune,
are referred to as the "Thompson 3apers." Letters, memos and secret
internal documents relating to 0oses' 1964-65 :orld's  Fair —obtained, and
painstakingly filed and cross-referenced, by NeZ York 3ost reporter Joseph
.ahn—Zere  given to the author by .ahn.  These are referred to as the
".ahn  Files."

In 1966, 1967 and 1968 audits Zere made of the Triborough Authority and
of 0oses' Long Island State 3ark Commission, Bethpage State 3ark
Authority and Jones Beach State 3ark Authority by auditors on the staff of
State Comptroller Arthur Levitt. In addition to the published "audit reports,"
there Zere made available to the

1570
A Note on Sources \ \ r,<>

author some of the unpublished—and, since the published reports Zere
heavily edited at 0oses' insistence, far more revealing—Zork sheets of the
auditor , These are referred to as the "Levitt TBTA Audit" and the "Levitt
LIS3C Audit."

Of the manuscript collections cited, the folloZing mayoral papers are at the
0unicipal  Archives and Reference Center, 23 3ark RoZ, NeZ York City:
La Guardia 3apers, O'DZyer 3apers, Impellitteri 3apers and :agner
3apers. The Alfred E. Smith 3apers are at the NeZ York State Library in
Albany. The Franklin D. Roosevelt 3apers and the +enry 0orgenthau, Jr.,
Diary are at the Roosevelt Library ia NeZ +yde 3ark. The +enry L.
Stimson 3apers are at the Sterling Library, Yale 8niversity.

The "Black 3apers" refer to the vast collection of questionnaires and reports
on displaced tenants on 0oses' Title I sites compiled by 0rs. Elinor Black
in her capacity as chairman of the housing committee of the :omen's City
Club. The "Edclstein 3apers" refer to the documents collected by 0rs.
Lillian  Edelstein during her fight against the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay.
They are noZ back in her possession at her neZ home near Boston. The
"Gabel 3apers" refer to a feZ documents +ortense Gabel gave the author
from her tenure as Deputy State +ousing Rent Administrator, the ".opple
3apers" to a collection of memoranda and files given the author by Robert
.opple,  the true creator of the 1964-65 :orld's  Fair, the "Zeckendorf
3apers" to copies of letters and memos relating to the creation of the 8nited
Nations +eadquarters given the author by :illiam  Zeckendorf.

The Joseph 0. 3rice 3apers are at Butler Library, Columbia 8niversity. The
0aurice 3. Davidson 3apers are in the possession of the Davidson family.

The Oral +istory 3roject is at Columbia 8niversity.

0ore  than one hundred brochures Zritten or edited during a period of more
than forty years by Robert 0oses and published by one of his public
authorities or the 0ayor's Slum Clearance Committee or the NeZ York City
3ark Department Zere given to the author by Sidney 0. Shapiro. There is
no one location in Zhich the numerous other 0oses brochures can be

1571
found, but most are located in the NeZ York 3ublic Library or the La
Guardia, O'DZyer, Impellitteri or :agner   0ayoral  3apers.

SELECTED INTERVIE:S

There Zere 522 intervieZs conducted for this book. The list beloZ
identifies persons intervieZed Zho are cited frequently in the Notes that
folloZ. 3ersons cited infrequently are identified in the chapters in Zhich the
citations occur.

The persons on this list are described not by their most Zell-knoZn position
but by the role they played in their relationship to Robert 0oses. Adolf A.
Berle, Jr., for e[ample, is described not as a Roosevelt Brain Truster but as
Fiorello La Guardia's first City Chamberlain, the role in Zhich 0oses dealt
Zith him.

The dates in parentheses are the dates of the intervieZs. :hile dates are not
given in the chapter notes for intervieZs Zith persons cited infrequently, all
these intervieZs took place betZeen 0arch 1, 1967, and February 3, 1972.

Adams, Dolie 0c:hinney:    Assemblyman Thomas 0c:hinney's    daughter
(0ar.  23, 1967)

Barnes, +enry: City Traffic Commissioner, :agner  era (Feb. 14, 15, 1968)

Ben Scheiber, Israel: vice president of 0adison +ouse (July 13, 20, 1967)

Berle, Adolf A., Jr.: City Chamberlain, La Guardia era (Nov. 22, 23, 1967)

Binger, :alter   D.: Stanley Isaacs' Borough :orks Commissioner, La
Guardia era (Dec. 22, 1967; Jan. 15, 1968)

Blake, +arold: 0oses secretary (1969, 1970)

Carr, 0ary:  secretary to Al Smith and Belle 0oskoZit]  (Feb. 16, 1967)

Chanler, :illiam   C: La Guardia Corporation Counsel (Dec. 14, 1967)

Chapin, :illiam   S.: 0oses  aide (Apr. 24, 0ay 8, 1968)

1572
Childs, Richard S.: president of the NeZ York State Association; chairman
of the Citi]ens 8nion  (Feb. 21, 0ar. 3, 10, 1967)

Clark, Ernest J.: long-time 0oses engineering consultant; president,
AndreZs & Clark (0ay   10, 17, 1968)

Clarke, Gilmore: long-time 0oses architectural consultant; president,
Clarke & Rapuano (Apr. 5, 1967)

Coleman, John A.: financier, key adviser to O'DZyer and :agner (Feb. 7,
1967)

Collins, Jane 0oses: 0oses' daughter (1968, 1969, 1970)

Condello, Victor F.: city legislative representative, O'DZyer, Impellitteri
eras (1969)

Cooney, Joan Gan]: Sesame Street producer (July 10, 1968)

Cooney, Timothy J.: :agner aide (Aug. 14, 1968)

Costikyan, EdZard N.: Democratic district leader, reform leader of
Tammany +all, :agner  era (July 16, 1968)

Cullman, +oZard S.: 3ort Authority  chairman (Feb. 7, 8, 1967)

Davison, F. Trubee: assemblyman, campaign chairman for 0oses'
gubernatorial campaign (0ay 1, 1967)

DeZey, Thomas E.: Governor (Apr. 25, 0ay 7, 1968)

Duryea, 3erry B., Jr.: State Assembly Speaker, president of Long Island
State 3ark Commission, Rockefeller era (Apr. 27, 1968)

Dykman, Jackson A.: 0oses' Yale classmate and attorney for contractors,
La Guardia era (July 22, 1967)

Ernst, 0orris  L.: noted attorney, reformer, social acquaintance of 0oses
(Nov. 7, 1967)

1573
Evarts, Jeremiah: Assistant Corporation Counsel, La Guardia era (1968)

E[ton, :illiam,    Jr.: reformer (Jan. 25, Feb. 11, 12, 1968; 0ay 1969)

Notes

1171

Fearon, George R.: State Senate majority leader, Lehman era (0ay 5,

1967) Finkelstein, Jerry: City 3lanning Commission chairman, O'DZyer era
(0ay  1, 1968)

Gaus, John 0.: noted political scientist, staffer on 0oses' Reconstruction
Commission (Apr. 14, 19, 26, 27, 1967)

GoldZater, 0onroe:  partner, Gold-Zater & Flynn, behind-the-scenes
Democratic poZer, La Guardia, O'DZyer, Impellitteri, :agner,   Lindsay
eras (Dec. 20, 27, 1967)

Greenberg, Nettie: 0oses secretary (1969)

Gulick, Luther +.:  staffer, later official at the Bureau of 0unicipal Research
(0ar.  2, 27, 1967)

+all, Leonard :.:   assemblyman, chairman of Republican National
Committee (0ay 9, 1967)

+allett, George: secretary. Citi]ens 8nion, La Guardia, O'DZyer,
Impellitteri, :agner,   Lindsay eras (Oct. 30, Nov. 4, 1967)

+ellman, 0rs.  +ilda  E.: 0oses' cousin (Jan. 23, 1968)

+iggins, Rita: Belle 0oskoZit]'s    secretary (Apr. 1, 1967)

+ogan, Ann: Al Smith's secretary (Apr. 10, 1967)

+oving, Thomas 3. F.: City 3ark Commissioner, Lindsay era (1969)

1574
+oZells,  0rs.  Elmer B.: friend of 0oseses (Apr. 15, 1967)

Impellitteri, Vincent R., 0ayor  (Apr.

22, 1968) Ingraham, Joseph T.: NeZ York Times

reporter, transportation editor (Apr.

18, 24, 25, 26, 1968) Israels, Carlos: Belle 0oskoZit]'s son

(Feb. 20, 21, 1967)

Johnson, Elias A.: 0oses' Yale roommate (July 21, 22, 1967)

.aplan,  +. Elliot:  head of State Retirement System and civil service e[pert
(July 7, Aug. 16, 19, 1967)

.aplan,  Saul: counsel to Assembly minority leader IrZin Steingut, Lehman,
DeZey, +arriman eras (i9 6 9)

.ern,  3aul J.: La Guardia laZ secretary and later 3resident of the 0unicipal
Civil Service Commission, La Guardia era (Jan. 19, 23, 1968)

Latham, :illiam:    0oses aide (Nov. 1, 2, 1967; Jan.

La]arus, Reuben A.: NeZ York ( legislative representative, Smith, Ri sevelt,
La Guaidia eras; counsel ind municipal affairs consultant to Senate majority
leader and other Albany posts thereafter (Feb. 6, Oct. 20, Nov. 7, 8, 1967;
Apr. 21, 1968)

Levitt, Arthur:  State Comptroller, Rockefeller era (1968, 1970)

Lutsky, Jacob: Assistant Corporation Counsel, La Guardia era; legal aide to
the 0ayor, O'DZyer,  Impellitteri,  :agner  eras (0ay  8, 15, June 25, 1968)

0adigan, 0ichael   J. (Jack): long-time 0oses engineering consultant;
president, 0adigan-+yland (0ay   2, 9, 16, 1968)

0arconnier, Emily  Sims: 0oses' sister-in-laZ (June 29, 1967)

1575
0ayes, Richard: Democratic leader of Oyster Bay ToZn (June 2, 1967)

0cGoldrick,  Joseph D.: City Comptroller, La Guardia era (0ay 2, Dec. 17,
18, 20, 1967; Jan. 19, 20, 1968)

0c0orran,   J. Burch: superintendent, State Department of 3ublic :orks
(Apr. 29, 1968)

0eyers, General +arry L.:  0oses aide (Sept. 25, 1968)

0ilbank,  Jeremiah: 0oses' Yale classmate, GO3 financier (July 21, 1967)

0oloney, EdZard  J.: State Department of 3ublic :orks  official, DeZey  era,
later a 0oses consultant (July 2, 5, 1968)

0orse, 0rs.  +arold:  0ary  0oses'  friend (Feb. 21, Aug. 11, 1967)

0oscoZ,  :arren:   NeZ York Times reporter, La Guardia, O'DZyer,
Impellitteri eras; :agner  aide, e[ecutive director, City +ousing  Authority,
:agner  era (Dec. 3, 1967; Jan. 14, 15, 1968; 0ar. 15, 1970)

0oses, 3aul Emanuel: Robert 0oses' brother (Dec. 30, 31, 1966; Jan. 16,
Feb. 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 0ar. 16, 29, 30, 1967)

0oses, Robert (0ay  26, June 11, 16, July 25, Sept. 21, 1967; Apr. 20, 27,
1968)

O'.eefe,  3aul: Deputy 0ayor,  :agner

era (1969) Orton, LaZrence 0.: City  3lanning Commission member and
vice chairman, Smith, La Guardia, O'DZyer, Impellitteri, :agner,  Lindsay
eras (Apr. 21, Dec. 22, 1967; Oct. 3, 8,

Selected IntervieZs

1172

1968; 0ar. 15, 1971; Nov. 17, 18, 19, Dec. 27, 1972; 0ar. 8, Apr. 17, June
3, 1973)

1576
3almer, Arthur E., Jr.: Lindsay transportation administrator, Lindsay
appointee to Triborough board (June 23, 27, 1968)

3rice, Robert: Lindsay strategist and Deputy 0ayor (June 25, 1968)

3roskauer, Joseph 0.: member of Smith's ".itchen Cabinet" (Feb. 24,
1967)

RabinoZit],  Aaron: realtor, State +ousing Board member, Al Smith era;
Democratic financier (Feb. 27, 1967)

Reid, Lloyd B.: City Traffic  Commissioner, O'DZyer era (June 16, 1968)

Rodrigue], Charles F.: various positions under James J. Lyons in Bron[
borough president's office, La Guardia, O'DZyer, Impellitteri, :agner  eras
(0ay  1, 20, 1968)

Rosen, Richard 0.: city legislative representative, Lindsay era (June 25,
1968)

Screvane, 3aul R.: Deputy 0ayor, City Council 3resident, :agner  era (Oct.
21, 1968)

Shapiro, Sidney 0.: 0oses  aide (nineteen intervieZs, 1968-69)

Singstad, Ole: general manager, NeZ York City Tunnel Authority (Jan. 10,
17, 1968)

Sul]berger, Iphigene Ochs: NeZ York Times (Dec. 11, 1967)

Tallamy, Bertram D.: superintendent, State Department of 3ublic :orks,
DeZey era; federal highZay administrator, +arriman, Rockefeller eras
(0ay  14, 1968; 1970)

Tappan, +a]el: 0oses secretary (1969, 1970)

True[, James: +arriman aide (July 7, 1968)

1577
TugZell, Re[ford  G.: City 3lanning Commission chairman, La Guardia era;
Zould-be 0oses biographer (Jan. 16, 1968)

Vollmer, Arnold and Rebecca: 0oses aides (July 6, 1968)

:agner,  Robert F., Jr.: 0ayor (Jan. 26, Feb. 2, 3, 1972)

:arner,  Albert  L.: Albany correspondent for Brooklyn Eagle, NeZ York
Times, Smith era (0ay 9, 1967)

:arner,  Emily  Smith: Al Smith's daughter (0ar. 25, 26, 1967)

:eeks,  George L., Jr.: Islip ToZn +istorian (Apr.  14, 0ay  2, 1968)

:einberg,  Robert C: reformer, urban planner (0ay 2, 1968)

:illiams,   Arthur  B., Sr.: 0oses aide (Oct. 3, 1967)

:indels,   3aul: La Guardia Corporation Counsel (Nov. 8, 9, 10, 1967)

SELECTED BIBLIOGRA3+Y

A bibliography for this book Zould  be another book in itself, and an
e[ercise in pedantry to boot. The folloZing list includes only those books
specifically cited in the Notes that folloZ, and I include this list for one
purpose alone: so that in the Notes I can use abbreviations.

Allen, Frederick LeZis : The Big Change. NeZ York: +arper &  RoZ; 1952.

Allen, Robert S.: Our Sovereign State. NeZ York: Vanguard; 1949.

Allen, :illiam    +.:  Al  Smith's Tammany +all. NeZ York: The Institute for
3ublic Service; 1958.

and Eda Amberg: Civic Lessons

from 0ayor  0itchel's  Defeat. NeZ York: The Institute for 3ublic  Service;
1921.

1578
Amory, Cleveland: The Last Resorts. NeZ York: +arper & Brothers; 1948.

Anderson, 0artin:  The Federal Bulldo]er. Cambridge, 0ass.: 0IT  3ress;
1964.

AndreZs, :illiam    Loring:  The Iconography of the Battery and Castle
Garden. NeZ York: Scribner's; 1901.

: NeZ York As :ashington   .neZ

It. NeZ York: Scribner's; 1905.

Bacon, Leonard: Semi-Centennial. NeZ York: +arper & Brothers; 1939.

Bard, ErZin :.:   The 3ort of  NeZ York Authority.  NeZ York: Columbia
8niversity  3ress; 1942.

Baruch, Bernard: 0y OZn  Story. NeZ York: +olt,  Rinehart & :inston;
1957.

: The 3ublic Years. NeZ York:

+olt, Rinehart &  :inston;   i960.

Bellush, Bernard: Franklin D. Roosevelt as Governor of NeZ York. NeZ
York: Columbia 8niversity  3ress; 1955.

Bird, Frederick L.: A Study of the 3ort of NeZ  York Authority. NeZ  York:
Dun and Bradstreet; 1949.

Birmingham, Stephen: Our CroZd. NeZ York: +arper & RoZ;  1967.

Blakelock, Chester R.: +istory of the Long Island State 3arks. :est Islip,
N.Y.: The Long Island Forum 3ress; 1959.

Bolt, Robert: A 0an  for All  Seasons. NeZ York: Random +ouse; 1962.

Brandt, Lillian: An  Impressionistic VieZ of the :inter   of  1930-31 in NeZ
York City. NeZ York: NeZ  York :elfare   Council; 1932.

1579
Bureau of 3ublic Roads: :hen  All  Roads Led to Rome. :ashington, D.C.:
Bureau of 3ublic Roads; undated.

Caro, Ina Joan: "Building a 3ublic :orks  3roject  in a Democracy: The
Verra]ano-NarroZs Bridge" (8npublished 0aster's  thesis, 1973).

Catledge, Turner: 0y Life  and the Times. NeZ York: +arper & RoZ; 1971.

Clark, Ralph +.: Four Years' Journey Zith Yale 1909. 3rivately published;
1967.

Cohen, Jules +enry: They Builded Better Than They .neZ. NeZ York: J.
0essner; 1946.

Connable, Alfred, and EdZard Silber-farb: Tigers of Tammany. NeZ York:
+olt, Rinehart &  :inston;   1967.

Costikyan, EdZard N.: Behind Closed Doors. NeZ York: +arcourt, Brace
& :orld;    1966.

Cuneo, Ernest: Life Zith Fiorello. NeZ  York: 0acmillan;  1955.

Dahlberg, Jane S.: The NeZ York Bureau of 0unicipal Research: 3ioneers
in Government Administration. NeZ York: NeZ  York 8niversity  3ress;
1966.

Doig, Jameson :.:  0etropolitan  Transportation 3olitics and the NeZ York
Region. NeZ York: Columbia 8niversity  3ress; 1966.

Selected Bibliography

1174

East, John Benton: Council-0anager Government: The 3olitical Thought of
Its Founder, Richard S. Childs. Chapel +ill, N.C.: 8niversity of North
Carolina 3ress; 1965.

Eberlein, +arold B.: 0anor  +ouses and +istoric +omes of Long Island and
Staten Island. 3ort :ashington, N.Y.: Ira J. Friedman; 1928.

1580
Ellis, David 0.,  James A. Frost, +arold S. Syrett, and +arry F. Carman: A
Short +istory of NeZ  York State. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell 8niversity 3ress;
1957.

Ellis, EdZard Robb: The Epic of NeZ York City. NeZ  York: CoZard-0c-
Cann; 1966.

Farley, James A.: Behind the Ballots.

NeZ York: +arcourt, Brace; 1938. : Jim Farley's Story: The Roosevelt
Years. NeZ York: :hittlesey

+ouse, 1946. Felker, Clay (ed.): The 3oZer Game.

NeZ York: Simon &  Schuster; 1969. Fit]gerald, F. Scott: The Great Gatsby.

NeZ York: Charles Scribner's Sons;

1951. Flynn, EdZard J.: You're the Boss. NeZ

York: Viking; 1947. FoZler, Gene: Beau James. NeZ York:

Viking; 1949. Freidel, Frank: Franklin D. Roosevelt:

The Ordeal. Boston: Little, BroZn;

1954. : Franklin D. Roosevelt: The Triumph. Boston: Little, BroZn; 1956.

Garrett, Charles: The La Guardia Years. NeZ BrunsZick, N.J.: Rutgers
8niversity  3ress; 1961.

Gervasi, Frank: The Real Rockefeller. NeZ York: Atheneum; 1964.

Gilder, Rodman: The Battery. Boston: +oughton 0ifflin;  1936.

Gluck, Gemma La Guardia; edited by S. L. Schneiderman: 0y Story. NeZ
York: David 0c.ay;    1961.

1581
Graham, Frank: Al Smith, American. NeZ York: G. 3. 3utnam's Sons;
1945.

Graham, George A.: Education for 3ublic Administration. Chicago: The
Committee on 3ublic Administration; 1961.

Gulick, Luther +.:  The National Institute of 3ublic Administration:  An
Adventure in Democracy. NeZ York: The National Institute of 3ublic
Administration; 1928.

Gunther, John: Inside 8.S.A. NeZ York: +arper & RoZ;  1951.

+amburger, 3hilip: 0ayor-:atching    and Other 3leasures. NeZ York: Rine-
hart; 1958.

+andlin, Oscar: Al Smith and +is America. Boston: Little,  BroZn; 1958.

+apgood, Norman, and +enry 0osko-Zit]:   8p  from the City Streets. NeZ
York: Grosset & Dunlap; 1927.

+avemeyer, Loomis: 0y  Student Days at :all  Street. 3rivately published;

1963.

+erndon, Booton: The SZeetest 0usic This Side of +eaven. NeZ York:
0cGraZ-+ill;    1964.

+oover, Edgar 0.,  and Raymond Vernon: Anatomy of a 0etropolis,
Cambridge, 0ass.: +arvard 8niversity  3ress; 1959.

Ickes, +arold L.: The Secret Diary of +arold L. Ickes. Vol. I: The First
Thousand Days, 1933-1936. NeZ York: Simon & Schuster; 1953.

Isaacs, Edith: Love Affair Zith a City. NeZ  York: Random +ouse; 1967.

Jacobs, Jane: The Death and Life of Great American Cities. NeZ York:
Random +ouse; 1961.

1582
Jenkins, Shirley: Comparative Recreation Needs and Services in NeZ York
Neighborhoods. NeZ York: The Research Department, Community Council
of Greater NeZ York; 1963.

Jones, John F.: The Jones Family, Descendants of 0ajor Thomas Jones,
1665-1726, and Allied Families. NeZ York: Tobias A. :right;   1907.

Josephson, 0attheZ: The Robber Barons. NeZ York: +arcourt, Brace;
1934.

and +annah Josephson: Al

Smith: +ero of the Cities. Boston: +oughton 0ifflin;   1969.

.aplan,  +. Elliot:  The LaZ  of Civil  Service. Albany, N.Y.: 0.  Bender;

1583
1958.

.ieley,  John B.: 0oses on the Green. 8niversity, Ala.: 8niversity  of
Alabama 3ress; 1959.

.lein,  :oody:    Lindsay's 3romise. NeZ York: 0acmillan;  1970.

La Guardia, Fiorello +enry: The 0aking  of an Insurgent: An
Autobiography, 188 2-1919. NeZ York: Lippincott; 1948.

Leavitt, +elen: SuperhighZay-Super-hoa[. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday;
1970.

LeZinson, EdZin R.: John 3urroy 0it-chel:   The Boy 0ayor  of NeZ  York.
NeZ York: Astra Books; 1965.

Notes

LeZis, Arthur B.:  The Day They Shook

the 3lum Tree. NeZ York: +arcourt,

Brace & :orld;   1963. Lie, Trygve +alvdan: In  the Cause of

3eace: Seven Years Zith the 8nited

Nations. NeZ York: 0acmillan;  1954. Limpus, L. 0.,   and B. :.   Leyson:
This

0an  La Guardia. NeZ York: Dutton,

1938. Lipson, Leslie: The American Governor

from Figurehead to Leader. NeZ York:

GreenZood 3ress; 1939. LoZe, Jeanne R.: Cities in a Race Zith

Time. NeZ York: Random +ouse;

1584
1968. Lundberg, Ferdinand: America's Si[ty

Families. NeZ York: Citadel; 1937. : The Rich and the Super-Rich.

NeZ York: Lyle Stuart; 1968. Lynch, Richard 0.:  Alfred E. Smith: An

Anthology. NeZ York: Vantage; i960.

0anley, Seon: Long Island Discovery.

Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday; 1966. 0ann, Arthur: La Guardia: A Fighter

Against +is Times. 3hiladelphia: Lip-

pincott; 1959. : La Guardia Comes to 3oZer:

1933. 3hiladelphia: Lippincott; 1965. 0at],  0ary   Jane: The 0any Lives of

Otto .ahn.  NeZ York: 0acmillan;

1963. 0itgang, +erbert:  The 0an :ho    Rode the Tiger. 3hiladelphia:
Lippincott;

1963.

0ockridge,  Norton, and R. +. 3rall: The Big Fi[.   NeZ York: +olt;  1954.

0oger, Roy :.:    Roslyn — Then and NoZ. Roslyn, N.Y.: Roslyn 3ublic
School; 1965.

0oley,  Raymond: 27 0asters of 3olitics. NeZ  York: Funk and :agnalls;

1949.

0orris,  Joe Ale[:  Those Rockefeller Brothers. NeZ York: +arper &
Brothers; 1953.

: Nelson Rockefeller: A Biography. NeZ York: +arper &  Brothers; i960.

1585
0orris,  NeZbold, in  collaboration Zith Dana Lee Thomas: Let the Chips
Fall. NeZ York: Appleton-Cen-tury-Crofts;  1955.

0oscoZ,  :arren  :  3olitics in the Empire State. NeZ York: Alfred A.
.nopf;  1948.

: :hat   +ave You Done for 0e

Lately? EngleZood Cliffs, N.J.: 3rentice-+all;  1967.

: The Last of the Big-Time Bosses:

117

many +all. Neu York: Stein an • 1971.

0oses, Ruber i

Great Britain. NeZ York: The I of 3olitical  S, a of Columbia 8niversity;
1914.

[for the Committee on the State-3ark 3lan]: A State 3ark 3lan for \ , h York.
NeZ York: NeZ  York State Association; 1922.

[for the Committee on the State

3ark 3lan]: The State 3ark 3lan for NeZ York — Revised to ShoZ 3r, to
Date. NeZ York: NeZ York State Association; 1924.

■: Four Years of 3ark 3rogress.

NeZ York: The City of NeZ  York, Department of 3arks; 1938.

■: Si[  Years of 3ark 3rogress. NeZ

York: The City of NeZ York,  Department of 3arks; 1940.

■: Flushing 0eadoZ  3ark, Tenth

1586
Anniversary. NeZ York: The City of NeZ  York, Department of 3arks; 1949.
■: :orking   for  the 3eople. NeZ

York: +arper & Brothers; 1956. : La Guardia: A Salute and a

0emoir.  NeZ York: Simon &  Schuster;

I957-

•: Flushing 0eadoZ-Corona 3ark:

A Family 3ark. NeZ  York: NeZ York's :orld    Fair 1964-65 Corporation;
1962. : A Tribute to Governor Smith.

NeZ York: Simon &  Schuster; 1962. ■: 3ublic :orks:  A Dangerous

Trade. NeZ York: 0cGraZ-+ill;    1970. and Carl +. 3. Thurston (eds.):

The Life and Times of Carmine De Sapio and the Rise and Fall of Tarn-

Yale Verse. NeZ +aven: Yale 3ublishing Association; 1909. 0umford,
LeZis: The +ighZay  and the City. NeZ York: +arcourt, Brace; 1963.

Nevins, Allan: +erbert +.  Lehman and

+is Era. NeZ York: Charles Scribner's

Sons; 1963. and John A. .rout (eds.): The

Greater City: NeZ York, 1898-1948.

NeZ York: Columbia 8niversity  3ress;

1948.

OZen, :ilfred:    The 0etropolitan  Transportation 3roblem. :ashington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution; 1966.

3erkins, Frances: The Roosevelt I .neZ. NeZ York. Viking;  1946.

1587
3hillips, Cabell: From the Crash to the Blit]: 1929-1939. NeZ York:
0acmillan;  1969.

3ierson, George :.:  Yale College: An

Selected Bibliography

1176

Educational +istory, 1871-1921. NeZ +aven: Yale 8niversity 3ress; 1952.

3oling, James (ed.): The Rockefeller Record. NeZ York: Thomas Y.
CroZell; i960.

3ringle, +enry F.: Alfred  E. Smith: A Critical Study. NeZ York: 0acy-0a-
sius; 1927.

3ritchett, Victor S.: NeZ York 3roclaimed. NeZ  York: +arcourt, Brace &
:orld;   1965.

3roskauer, Joseph 0.: A Segment of 0y Times. NeZ York: Farrar, Straus;
1950.

Rankin, Rebecca B. (ed.): NeZ York Advancing: A Scientific Approach to
0unicipal  Government; An Accounting to the Citi]ens by the Departments
and Boroughs of the City of NeZ York, 1934-1935, F. +. La Guardia,
0ayor. NeZ  York: 0unicipal   Reference Library; 1936.

: NeZ York Advancing: The Result of Five Years of 3rogressive
Administration in the City of NeZ  York, F. +. La Guardia, 0ayor.  :orld's
Fair Edition. NeZ York: 0unicipal   Reference Library; 1939.

■: NeZ York Advancing: Seven

: The Age of Roosevelt. Vol. II:

The Coming of the NeZ Deal. Boston: +oughton 0ifflin;   1959.

: The Age of Roosevelt. Vol. Ill:

1588
0ore  Years of 3rogressive Administration in the City of NeZ York, 1939-
1945. Victory Edition. NeZ York:  0unicipal  Reference Library; 1945.

Reed, +enry +., and Sylvia DuckZorth: Central 3ark: A +istory  and a
Guide. NeZ York: Clarkson N. 3otter; 1966.

Rethi, Lili, and EdZard 0.   Young: The Great Bridge. NeZ York: Farrar,
Straus & Girou[; 1965.

Riordon, :illiam    L.: 3lunkitt  of Tammany +all. NeZ  York: Dutton; 1963.

Rodgers, Cleveland: Robert 0oses: Builder for Democracy. NeZ York:
+olt; 1952.

Rodgers, :illiam   +.:  Rockefeller's Follies. NeZ York: Stein and Day;
1966.

Rosenman, Samuel I.: :orking Zith  Roosevelt. NeZ York: +arper &  RoZ;
1952.

Saalman, +oZard: +aussmann: 3aris Transformed. NeZ York: Bra]iller;

1971.

Sayre, :allace  S., and +erbert .aufman: Governing NeZ  York City. NeZ
York: Russell Sage Foundation; i960.

Schlesinger, Arthur 0., Jr.: The Age of Roosevelt. Vol. I: The Crisis of the
Old Order. Boston: +oughton 0ifflin;   1957.

The 3olitics of 8pheaval. Boston: +oughton 0ifflin;    i960.

Schreiber, +ermann: 0erchants, 3ilgrims, and +ighZaymen: A +istory  of
Roads Through the Ages. NeZ York: G. 3. 3utnam's Sons; 1962.

SherZood, Robert: Roosevelt and +opkins. NeZ York: +arper & Brothers;
1950.

1589
Silver, Arthur: JeZs in the 3olitical +istory  of NeZ  York City, 1865-1892.
NeZ York: Yeshiva 8niversity  (unpublished thesis).

Sobin, Dennis 3.: Dynamics of Community Change: The Case of Long
Island's Declining "Gold Coast." 3ort :ashington,  N.Y.: Ira J. Friedman;
1968.

Stiles, Lela: The 0an Behind Roosevelt: The Story of Louis 0c+enry
+oZe. Cleveland and NeZ York: :orld;    1954.

Stokes, Isaac NeZton 3helps: The Iconography of 0anhattan Island, 1498-
1909. 6 vols. NeZ York: Dodd, 0ead; 1915-1928.

Strunsky, Simeon: No 0ean City. NeZ York: Dutton; 1944.

Talese, Gay: The Bridge. NeZ York: +arper & RoZ; 1964.

: The .ingdom  and the 3oZer.

NeZ York and Cleveland: :orld;   1969.

Thompson, Benjamin F.: +istory of Long Island from Its Discovery and
Settlement to the 3resent Time. 3ort :ashington, N.Y.: Ira J. Friedman;
1962.

Tieck, :illiam    A.: Riverdale, .ings-bridge,  Spuyten Duyvil  — A
+istorical Epitome of the NorthZest Bron[.  Old Tappan, N.J.: Fleming +.
Revell Company; 1968.

TugZell, Re[ford  Guy: The Art of 3olitics.  Garden City, N.Y.: Double-day;
1958.

8lmann, Albert:  A Landmark +istory of  NeZ York. 3ort :ashington,   N.Y.:
Ira J. Friedman; 1969.

:arner,  Emily  Smith: The +appy :arrior.   Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday;
1956.

:eeks,  George L., Jr.: Isle of Shells. Islip, N.Y.: Buys Brothers; 1965.

1590
:halen,  Grover: 0r. NeZ York: An Autobiography. NeZ York: 3utnam's;
1955.

Notes

L177

:halen,  Richard J.: NeZ York: A City Destroying Itself. NeZ York:
0orroZ;

1965. :hite, Norval, and Elliot :illensky

(eds.): AIA Guide to NeZ York City.

NeZ York: 0acmillan, 1968. :hite, Theodore +.: The 0aking of

the 3resident i960. NeZ York: Athe-

neum; 1961. : The 0aking of the 3resident

1964. NeZ York: Atheneum; 1965. ■: The 0aking of the 3resident

1968. NeZ York: Atheneum; 1969. :ilson, Rufus RockZell: NeZ York

Old and NeZ. 3hiladelphia: Lippincott;

1902. :ood, Robert C, Zith Vladimir V.

Almendinger: 1400 Governments:

The 3olitical Economy of the NeZ

York 0etropolitan Region. ( ami 0ass.: +arvard 8ni ersit) IVv :3A: NeZ
Yorl I Gu\ >m-

prehensive Gallic to the Five Borough*

of the 0etropolis. NeZ York: Random +ouse; 1939. : NeZ York 3anorama:
A Comprehensive VieZ of the 0etropolis, 3resented in a Series of Articles.

1591
NeZ York: Random +ouse; 1938.

Zeckendorf, :illiam: Zeckendorf.

NeZ York: +olt, Rinehart & :inston;

1970. Zinn, +oZard: La Guardia in Congress.

Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell 8niversity 3ress;

NOTES

ABBREVIATIONS

AS+3S American Scenic and +istorical 3reservation Society

B0R Bureau of 0unicipal Research

B3R Bureau of 3ublic Roads

DN NeZ York Daily NeZs

D3:   State Department of 3ublic :orks

FDR Franklin Delano Roosevelt

+T NeZ York +erald Tribune

Impy Vincent R. Impellitteri

J-A NeZ York Journal-American

LaG Fiorello +. La Guardia

LI Long Island

LIE Long Island E[pressZay

LIRR Long Island Rail Road

1592
LIS3C Long Island State 3ark Commission

0CTA 0etropolitan Commuter Transportation Authority

0RTC 0etropolitan Rapid Transit Commission

NYC NeZ York City

NYT The NeZ York Times

O+R Oral +istory Reminiscence(s)

O'D :illiam  O'DZyer

3D 3ark Department

3E0 3aul Emanuel 0oses

3ost NeZ York 3ost

3:A   3ublic :orks  Administration

R0 Robert 0oses

TA NeZ York City Tunnel Authority

TBA Triborough Bridge Authority

TBTA Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority

:F   :orld's  Fair

:3A   :orks  3rogress Administration

:T   NeZ York :orld-Telegram

:T&S   NeZ York :orld-Telegram and Sun

INTROD8CTION :

1593
:ait   8ntil  the Evening

NOTES

SZimming team episode: Author's intervieZs Zith E. C. 0.  Richards;
although no other person Zas present at the 0oses-Richards poolside
confrontation, Richards' over-all story of the dispute over the approach to
Ogden Reid is confirmed by three other members of the team: George
Gordon +yde and tZo others Zho agreed to discuss the matter only after a
guarantee of anonymity.

0oses' idealism at Yale: Author's intervieZs Zith eleven of 0oses'
surviving Yale classmates, including Johnson. (See "Sources," Chapter 2.)

SZearing-in episode: 0oscoZ, :hat   +ave  You Done for 0e Lately?, p.
196; author's intervieZs Zith 0oscoZ,  Zith  Robert F. :agner,  Jr., Zith the
Deputy 0ayor  in the little room doZn the hall, Jacob Lutsky, and Lutsky's
assistant, 3hilip Shumsky, both of Zhom saZ R0 fill  out the blank himself.
Among those Zhom :agner,  prior to his inauguration, had told he Zas
going to "rein in" R0,  the author intervieZed John A. Coleman, +oZard S.
Cullman, +ortense Gabel, 0onroe

Notes for pages 12-37

GoldZater and Luther +. Gulick. They, former city legislative
representative Reuben A. La]arus and 0oses aide Sidney 0. Shapiro, saZ
the scene at the public sZearing in. For further details, see "Notes," Chapter
34.

0umford  quote: IntervieZ Zith  author. 250,000: City 3lanning
Commission, Tenant Relocation (see "Sources," Chapter 41).

2. Line of Succession

SO8RCES

Books and neZspapers:

1594
Birmingham, Our CroZd; Rodgers, Robert 0oses; Silver, JeZs in the
3olitical +istory  of NeZ  York City, 1865-1892; issues of The JeZish
0essenger and The JeZish Times, 1897.

Author's intervieZs:

The description of R0's home life and of his parents and grandparents has
been draZn from intervieZs Zith his cousin 0rs.  +ilda  E. +ellman; Zith
tZo of his sisters-in-laZ, Emily  Sims 0arconnier and Louise Benjamin
0oses; Zith  another of his relatives Zho Zishes to remain anonymous and
shall be identified as "confidential source"; from eleven intervieZs Zith his
brother, 3aul Emanuel 0oses; as Zell as from intervieZs Zith 0adison
+ouse trustees and staffers Zho Zorked Zith Bella and Emanuel 0oses and
Zho kneZ the "0oses  boys," including Israel Ben Scheiber, Ruth Larned,
Georges Friedlander and Ann and Louis Lubin; from intervieZs Zith R0's
Yale classmates Zho spent considerable time at the 0oses home, including
EdZard O. 3roctor, 0alcolm  T. Dougherty and Elias ("Five A") Johnson.

NOTES

No middle name: Birth certificate, Connecticut State Department of +ealth.
Reason for its omission: 3E0, confidential source.

Bernhard Cohen: 0rs. +ellman, 3E0;   obituary, NYT, 0ay  17, 1897; The
JeZish 0essenger, 0ay 21, 1897. JeZish Times editorial, Sept. 24, 1875,
quoted in Silver, p. 64.

Rosalie Silverman Cohen: +ellman, 3E0, confidential source. Bella and
Emanuel 0oses: Rodgers, pp. 1-2; 0rs. +ellman, 3E0,  Louise 0oses,
Emily 0arconnier,  Ben Scheiber, Larned, Fried-

1179

lander, the I.ul t 3roCtOC, Johnson. 4uote is from Ben Scheiber.

Life on DZight  Street: R0,  I! V tZo  of the children Zho played Zith  the
0oses boys there, EdZard F. Andi and 0rs. 3aul Sperry.

1595
"I didn't like NeZ  York": R0   quoted in Rodgers, p. 2.

Settlement +ouse movement: I am indebted io Birmingham, pp. 289-97.
4uotes are from his book. 0adison +ouse: Forty Years of the +ouse on
0adison Street, a privately printed pamphlet; Larned, the Lubins, Fried-
lander. Bella at 0adison +ouse: Ben Scheiber, the Lubins, Friedlander,
Larned. First staffer quoted is Ben Scheiber, second Larned. The head
Zorker in the story is Ben Scheiber.

The 0oseses' financial situation: 3E0,  confirmed by confidential source.

"Oh, Dad": Dougherty, Zho also remembers the "solace" quote.

"Robert 0oses is Bella 0oses' son": This statement, repeated so often it is
part of the family tradition, Zas made to the author by 0rs. +ellman, 3E0,
Louise 0oses and confidential source.

2. Robert 0oses at Yale

SO8RCES

Books, neZspapers and pamphlets:

Rodgers, Robert 0oses. A picture of Yale in that era is furnished in George
:.   3ierson, Yale College: An Educational +istory, 1871-1921; and in such
memoirs Zritten by Yale men as Semi-Centennial by R0's classmate
Leonard Bacon; as Zell as in the Yale Daily NeZs and the Yale Courant,
various issues, 1905-09; and in pamphlets published by the class, including
:ho's   :ho   in 1909 (the Freshman Blue Book) and the "Class +istories"
published at graduation and at ten-year intervals thereafter, doZn to 1959.
(R0  contributed articles of personal reminiscence to the 1949 and 1959
Class +istories.) In addition, classmate Ralph +. Clark Zrote, and privately
published, an instructive reminiscence: Four Years' Journey Zith Yale 1909
(1967).

Author's intervieZs:

1596
:ith   thirteen of R0's surviving classmates: :illiam R. Babcock,
Ale[ander C. Campbell, Ralph +. Clark, 0alcolm T. Dougherty, Jackson
A. Dykman, Elias ("Five A") Johnson, Robert L.

Notes for pages 38—47

1180

Levy, 3aul G. 0erroZ, Jeremiah 0il-bank, EdZard O. 3roctor, E. C. 0.
Richards and tZo Zho prefer to remain anonymous, as Zell as Zith George
Gordon +yde '10 and tZo other members of the sZimming team Zho prefer
to remain anonymous.

NOTES

A tightly sealed society: Figures from :ho's :ho in 1909; the classmate is
Dougherty. The fact that no JeZ had ever made a Senior Society Zas a
piece of common knoZledge mentioned by several of R0's classmates.
Bacon, p. 47.

Age: The 1909 Class +istory shoZs the average age at graduation to have
been tZenty-tZo years, nine months. R0 Zas tZenty years, si[ months.
"Regarded as a young boy": Campbell.

"Almost a recluse": Dykman.

Closing his door: Rodgers, p. 9. The 0ohegan Lake alumnus is Campbell.

Never Zon a race: R0 himself, Richards, +yde, e[amination of Yale Daily
NeZs. +e lost one race, the fifty-yard craZl in a meet against CCNY, "by a
feZ inches" in the "e[cellent time of 27 and 1/5 seconds" (Daily NeZs,
Dec. 7, 1908).

3oetry: "Song of the Arctic Nereid," Courant, Dec. 1907, p. 12;
"Fragments," Nov. 1908, p. 34.

Idealism deep, reading for its oZn sake: Johnson, his roommate, in
particular. "Durstig Geist": Dougherty.

1597
Europe: Dougherty Zas his companion. "0ona Lisa" quoted in full in
Rodgers, p. 8.

Samuel Johnson; Tinker's "fire": 3ier-son, p. 427. R0 credits Tinker Zith
doing more than anyone else to, as Rodgers puts it, "arouse and stimulate
his interest in literature and Zriting."

Officers chosen on merit: Johnson, 3roctor. Social recognition for
academics: R0 editorial in Courant, Feb. 1909.

:alter   Camp episode: "+e regarded [it]": Bacon, quoted in Rodgers, p. 5.
Bacon feels that R0's courage Zas "really magnificent." R0's version of
the episode, given to the author, in an intervieZ July 25, 1967, is confirmed
by classmates' recollections, and Courant and Daily NeZs articles. R0's
editorials: Courant, Jan. 1908, pp. 294-99 (italics added), Jan. 1909, p. 219;
Daily NeZs, Nov. 23, 1907.

"0ade  the threat public": Courant,

Jan. 1909, pp. 219-20. "4uite a thing": +yde.

SZimming-team episode: See "Notes," Introduction.

Yale Verse: The classmate Zas Carl +. 3. Thurston, editor of the Yale
Literary 0aga]ine.  A  front-page revieZ in the Yale Daily NeZs, of Feb. 10,
1909, praised the volume, Zhich Zas sold in NeZ +aven bookstores for
$1.25, saying: "The . . . selections are complete and represent painstaking
efforts on the part of the editors."

3rofessor: Emerson D. Fite, quoted in Rodgers, p. 6.

Bull sessions: Johnson, Dougherty, 3roctor, private sources.

Senior Council: Yale Daily NeZs, Feb. 11, 1909.

Class Day Committees: +istory of the Class of 1909, Yale College (1909).
"Frankly": Dykman. The Class +istory sneered at the Courant also, saying
(p. 9): "Si[  men entered the competition for places on the Lit and five of

1598
them Zere elected. The other one did not get anything accepted. ... +e made
the Courant."

"In our little Zorld":   Bacon, p. 47. +e also said: "That the imbecile anti-
semitism of half-groZn boys should have cramped his form in any respect
is no compliment to our respective intelligence." The attitude of R0's
coterie is e[pressed by 3roctor, Zho says: "+e Zas outstanding, one of the
better members of the class. +e Zould certainly have been in a fraternity if
he had not been a JeZ." Another member of the coterie, James
0cConaughy, is quoted by Rogers (p. 6) as saying: "In an undergraduate
group Zhere fraternity membership counted largely, he gained a position of
acknoZledged leadership ... although himself not a fraternity man. . . . +e
Zas knoZn for his brilliance and his independence. +e Zas a great arguer
and a fine conversationalist." The last, poignant Zord on his college career
Zas spoken by R0 at his class's fiftieth reunion in 1959, at Zhich he Zas
the principal speaker, and said, as if in passing: "Nor shall I stress at this
late date the minor tragedies of college life, noZ muted, and shall merely
suggest that those Zho Zere not the fortunate, Zhose doors the social forces
of the time passed by, forget these childish tragedies and reflect hoZ trivial
they noZ seem in perspective. I Zould assume that on our fiftieth
anniversary there are no outsiders."

Notes for pages 48-63 3. +ome AZay from +ome

SO8RCES

The principal sources for this chapter are Rodgers, Robert 0oses; the
author's intervieZs Zith 3E0   and Zith 0alcolm  T. Dougherty; and 0oses,
The Civil Service of Great Britain.

NOTES

American Club: The O[ford Times, Dec. 1909 (no more precise date
available). The tZo speakers are identified only as "S. C. Custer" and a "Dr.
Smyth."

Yale Alumni :eekly:   0ar.  3, 191 1, Vol. 20, p. 583. "8niversally loved":
R0's  O[ford  classmate +ugh R. Norton to Sandra G. Turner (author's

1599
research assistant), Nov. 10, 1967.

SZimming and Zater polo: The O[ford  Year Book, 1911, 1912. +oZ bad
the Zater-polo team Zas is indicated by the score by Zhich it lost to
Cambridge under R0's captaincy: 2iVi to V2. The players admired R0,
hoZever. Not only Zas R0  the first American ever to captain the team, he
Zas the first American ever to play on it, and Zhen the second, :ilburt
Davison, tried out for it in 1913, several players told him: "You're the
second American ever to play on the team, and if you're as good as the first
one, you'll be all right." Davison to author, Apr. 11, 1967.

Yale Alumni :eekly:   0ar.  3, 191 1, Vol. 20, p. 584.

Affectations and letters to mother: 3E0.

Congress on Race 3roblems: Dougherty; Rodgers has a toned-doZn version
(p. 10). R0  himself, in an intervieZ Zith  the author, told the story Zith
glee.

Thesis: "e[cremental eloquence"; p. 47; "masterly vindication": p. 53; civil
service as instrument for social reform: pp. 260-61; patronage "intolerable":
p. 44; "far-sighted": p. 212; admires class differentiation: pp. 241-45
(interestingly, R0  entitled the chapter in Zhich he discussed this point "The
4uestion of Intellectual Aristocracy");  "false democracy": p. 266; "this
difficult  question": p. 243; "The Zriter believes": p. 202; "remorseless
e[ercise": p. 269; plea to his oZn country: pp. 246-70; ":e  must decide": p.
266 (his decision had already been made; ":e must discriminate at the start
on the basis of education": p. 264); faith in :ilson:  p. 269.

1181 4. Burning

SO8RCES

Books, pamphlets and articles:

Dahlberg, The NeZ York Bureau <>f

0unicipal  Research: Graham, Education

1600
for 3ublic Administration;  (ju'ick, The National Institute of 3ublic
Administration; LeZinson, John 3urroy 0itctul\   Rodgers, Robert 0oses.

Of do]ens of articles on the B0R the most useful Zere: :illiam    +.  Allen,
"Training 0en  and :omen  for  3ublic Service," Annals, 0ay  1912; John 0.
Gaus, "The 3resent Status of the Study of 3ublic Administration in the
8nited States," The American 3olitical Science RevieZ, Feb. 1931.

Among the many pamphlets published by the B0R that give the flavor of
the Bureau, the Training School and the reform sentiment of the era are:
Training School for 3ublic Service, Annual Report (1913); Training School
for 3ublic Service, 3rogram of Courses and Field :ork  (1916-17);
Announcement of the Training School for 3ublic Service (1918).

Author's intervieZs:

The description of the attitude of the students at the Training School and of
R0's  activities and attitudes at the school and at the B0R is draZn from
intervieZs Zith  him—and from intervieZs Zith  the folloZing  men Zho
Zere at the B0R at the same time he Zas: Charles Beavers, Arthur E.
Buck, 3hilip +.  Cor-nick, Luther Gulick,  Arch 0andel,  LeZis 0ayers,  L.
E. 0eador, Chester E. Rightor. Other information derives from intervieZs
Zith 3E0,   Emily Sims 0ar-connier  and R0's  Yale classmate EdZard O.
3roctor.

Oral +istory Reminiscences:

:illiam    +. Allen,  0rs.  Genevieve B. Earle, Luther Gulick, Frances
3erkins, :illiam    Jay Schieffelin, Laurence A. Tan-]er, Leonard 0.
:allstein.

NOTES

Beard quote: In Dahlberg, p. 39.

+istory of B0R:   Dahlberg (discussion of budget, pp. 149-200). Bruere
quote: Dahlberg, pp. 4, 37; Gulick.

1601
Ahearn investigation: Dahlberg, pp. 17-19, 27; LeZinson, pp. 34-44-

A sense of mission: Graham, p. 136; Gulick, pp. 12-13.

"A neZ literature":  Gulick.

"A place Zas Zaiting":  R0.

Notes for pages 63-77

1182

"The system of the future": R0 3h.D.

thesis, p. 263.

Atmosphere at Training School and attitude of other students toZard R0:

Gulick, Beavers, Buck, Cornick, 0andel, 0ayers,  0eador, Rightor;  3erkins
O+R, Vol. Ill,  pp. 360-61.

"+oZ  Zould  I sum up?": Cornick. "You couldn't Zalk in":  Gulick. "The
man best educated": Elias Johnson. 8nfortunately R0's report cards cannot
be found.

R0  and Riverside 3ark: R0;  3erkins O+R, Vol. Ill,  pp. 362-63.

Lashing advisees: Gulick.

0ight  be fired shortly: Buck, Cornick; 3erkins O+R,  Vol. Ill,  p. 360.

0ary  Louise Sims: +er sister, 0rs. 0arconnier;  Rodgers, p. 20. "Very
much in love": 3E0  and various social friends; the quote is from EdZard
O. 3roctor. 0eeting in the library:  They Zere there so much several B0R
students told the author she Zas the librarian.

"0itchel  took fire":  Allen  O+R.

R0  appointment to Civil Service Commission: Allen O+R.

1602
5. Age of Optimism

SO8RCES

The situation in the NYC civil service in 1914 is described in R0's Detailed
Report to the commission, July 8, 1915, a copy of Zhich the author located
by chance in the library of the Institute for 3ublic Administration; the
situation is also described in the Annual Reports of the E[ecutive
Committee of the NeZ York Civil Service Reform Association, 1914-23
(1918 and 1920 are missing); it Zas also described by +. Elliot .aplan in a
series of intervieZs Zith the author. R0's fight,  to implement his
reorgani]ation plan is detailed in neZspapers in 1915, 1916 and 1917,
although in detail only in the :orld   and the Brooklyn Eagle, and in Allen
and Amberg, Civic Lessons from 0ayor 0itchel's  Defeat. A transcript of
one of the meetings at Zhich 0oskoZit],  James and R0 attempted to
persuade municipal employees to support the plan, including R0's earnest
pleas, is found in "Discussion of Employees' Service Rating," The
0unicipal  Engineers Journal, 0ay 1917. .aplan,  LeZis 0ayers,  Arthur  E.
Buck and 0rs. Luther SteZard are among those Zho Zatched R0 speak at
those meetings. R0's feelings over his defeat shoZ

clearly in a paper, "Standardi]ation of Salaries and Grades in Civil Service,"
read on Dec. 29, 1916, to the American 3olitical Science Association
convention in :ashington,  D.C., reprinted in The American 3olitical
Science RevieZ, 1916, pp. 296-314. LeZinson, John 3urroy 0itchel,
Graham, Education for 3ublic Administration, and .aplan, The LaZ  of the
Civil Service, as Zell as Rodgers, Robert 0oses, Zere also helpful, as Zas
Francis E. Leupp, "Civil Service Reform and Common Sense," Atlantic
0onthly,  Jan. 1914, and Raymond 0oley, in an intervieZ.

Other intervieZs Zith:  Charles Beavers, 0oses' friend George Gove, 0ary
0oses' friend 0rs.  +arold  0orse,  3E0,  EdZard O. 3roctor.

NOTES

":e   e[pect great things": OrdZay quoted in NYT, 0ay  16, 1914.

Attempt to fire Spencer: NYT, July 1,

1603
1914. SteZard and .aplan quotes: 0rs.

SteZard, .aplan.

R0's  first advice to commission: "Discussion of Employees' Service
Rating."

NeZspaper leak: The article is in Brooklyn Eagle. Details of leak: Apr. 7,
1914. R0's feelings: R0.

:orking   under R0:  The feeling of the older men e[pressed by, among
others, Buck. "+e Zorked all of us hard": Beavers. Buck, among others,
gives details of R0 at Zork  on this report.

Detailed Report: 4uotes from pp. 5-11 (italics added). R0's aide is 0ayers,
Zho recalls R0  disagreeing violently Zith the conventional theory that
appointees to higher-level policy-making positions should be e[empt from
competitive e[aminations. R0  told 0ayers:  "The higher up you get, the
more need there is for Zorking out rules."

R0's  vieZ on need to "eliminate" positions: .aplan.

R0  on the human element and public discussion: +is "standardi]ation"
paper, The American 3olitical Science RevieZ, 1916, pp. 312 and 306,
respectively.

"Clearly discernible": 0ayers.  "No reason Zhy it cannot": 3E0.

R0's  confidence in 0itchel:  0ayers,  Buck, 3E0.

"3ioneer Zork":  Annual Report of the E[ecutive Committee, 1916.
0oskoZit]   and James quotes: "Discussion," p. 157. 0itchel's promise:
NYT, Sept, 14, 1915.

Notes for pages 77-88

\h:\

1604
R0  and 0ary:  Yale classmate 3roctor; Rodgers, p. 20. A friend, 0rs.
Lorraine Fishel, Zho Zas visiting R0's  sister, Edna, at Lake 3lacid, recalls
that his campaign to get her interested in mountain climbing suffered a
setback Zhen, halfZay up a heavily Zooded mountain one morning, miles
aZay from the path doZn, the couple became confused by an une[pected
heavy fog. Reali]ing they Zere lost, R0  told 0ary  to sit doZn  and Zait
Zhile he located the path. But by the time he found the path, he had
forgotten the Zay back to 0ary, and she stayed lost until, late in the day, the
fog lifted.

The couple's poverty and idealism: 0rs. +arold 0orse.

:alking   Zith  Gove: Gove.

0ocking  B0R:   0ayers. "Very little  doubt": 3rivate source. "+ere Zas this
tall, handsome character": Buck.

Tammany Zaiting: .aplan.  0oses volunteering: 0ayers.  "Reclassification
became 0oses": .aplan. NYT  articles, 1915-16, detail the circulating of
petitions and the building up of anti-reorgani]ation sentiment.

0oskoZit]   compromising: 0oskoZit],    "Old and NeZ 3roblems of Civil
Service," The Annals of the American Academy, 1915, pp. 153-67 (italics
added). R0's refusal to consider compromise is related by .aplan, 0ayers
and others.

The defeat of R0's plan: NYT, Brooklyn  Eagle, Sept. 1915-Oct. 1917;
.aplan,  0ayers;  R0's  paper to the American 3olitical Science Association
(this paper, nineteen pages in length, is a step-by-step description of the
fight over the plan— and, in its frankness, provides a remarkably clear
picture of its author's feelings at the time).

"Nothing . . . more ridiculous": R0's  paper, p. 312.

Cleveland's shift: Graham, p. 138; :orld,  Oct. 14, 1917.

"Feet in the trough": Allen and Am-berg, p. 62. The .ingsbury story: LeZ-
inson, p. 171. Allen and Amberg detail 0itchel's cooperation Zith Zard

1605
leaders. "+is concern Zas for the city": LeZin-son, p. 117.

NeZ York Central giveaZay: Allen and Amberg, pp. 2off.

Not "dry and dull": R0's  paper, pp. 297-98. Still confident: p. 313 0ass
meetings: An article describing one is NYT, Jan. 21, 1917.

+ylan quote: Brooklyn Eagle, Jan. 23, 1918. +is destruction of civil
service: Annual Report of the E[ecutive Committee, 192 1.

"Need for e[ecutive support": k\1\ paper, p. 310. "It is futile": p. 313.

Declining army commission: I he reason he did so is not knoZn. Asked
about it by the author, R0 replied that he "really Zanted" to accept, "but I
couldn't afford it—I had a Zife and tZo children . . ."  The +og Island
episode and being forced to return to the Bureau are from this intervieZ.

Contemporaries had moved on: Announcement of the Training School for
3ublic Service (1918). R0  on line in Cleveland: 0oley  intervieZ.

Food Commission: Announcement. R0's domestic problems: 0rs. +arold
0orse; confidential  source. Confused and Zorried: 3E0 Zas struck by the
change in his brother's demeanor.

"A typical Tammany politician":  Ernest :illvonseder,  quoted in Rodgers, p.
23.

6. Curriculum Changes

SO8RCES

Chapters 6 through 15 take place during Alfred E. Smith's Governorship.
The general background of this Governorship —and the biographies of
Smith and Belle 0oskoZit]—are   draZn from:

Books and articles:

Allen, Al  Smith's Tammany +all; Baruch, 0y  OZn Story and The 3ublic
Years; Bellush, Franklin D. Roosevelt as Governor of NeZ York; Cohen,

1606
They Builded Better Than They .neZ;  Ellis, Frost, Syrett and Carman, A
Short +istory of NeZ  York State; Farley, Jim Farley's Story and Behind the
Ballots; Frei-del, Franklin D. Roosevelt: The Triumph; +andlin, Al  Smith
and +is America; +ap-good and 0oskoZit],   8p  from the City Streets;
Josephson and Josephson, Al Smith; Lynch, Alfred E, Smith; 0oley, 27
0asters of 3olitics;  0oses, A Tribute to Governor Smith and :orking   for
the 3eople; 3ringle, Alfred E. Smith; 3ros-kauer, A Segment of 0y Times;
:arner,  The +appy :arrior.   Other sources are Rodgers, Robert 0oses, and
Dahlberg, The NeZ York Bureau of 0unicipal  Research.

Out of innumerable maga]ine articles, especially informative Zere
Christian Gauss, "+oZ Governor Smith Educated +imself," The Saturday
Evening 3ost, Aug. 30, 1930; Dennis Lynch, "Friends of the Governor,"
North American RevieZ, Oct. 1928; Ann O'+agan Shinn,

Notes for pages 91-107

1184

"Alfred E. Smith: A  3ersonal Impression," The NeZ York Times 0aga]ine,
Oct. 22, 1922, and "Belle Lindner 0os-koZit],"   The Survey, Feb. 1933.

Author's intervieZs:

:ith   Smith's daughter, Emily Smith :arner,  and 0rs.  0oskoZit]'s   son,
Carlos Israels; Zith the three surviving high-level members of his
administration: R0,  Joseph 0. 3roskauer and Reuben A. La]arus; Zith his
three surviving secretaries: 0ary Carr, Rita +iggins and Ann +ogan; Zith
intimates, associates and/or friends: Dolie 0c:hinney  Adams, +oZard  S.
Cullman, John A. Coleman, 0rs. Eva Garson (NeZman) Levy, Aaron
RabinoZit]  and Lindsay Rogers; Zith the ZidoZs of tZo  associates: Justice
Florence Shientag and 0rs. Raymond Ingersoll; Zith legislators Zho dealt
Zith Smith: George R. Fearon, Leonard :.  +all, EllZood  0.   Rabenold and
three Zho declined to be identified; Zith reporters Zho covered Albany:
Albert L. :arner,   Leo O'Brien and Ernest ..  Lindley; Zith  tZo reformers
Zho observed the Albany scene closely: George +allett and Robert S.
Binkerd; as Zell as Zith Reconstruction Commission staffers Arthur E.

1607
Buck and John 0. Gaus and Zith R0's  daughter Jane 0oses Collins and
Luther Gulick.

Documents:

Smith, FDR, Gaus and 0acy 3apers.

Oral +istory Reminiscences:

:illiam    +. Allen;  0rs.  Genevieve B. Earle, betZeen 1908 and 1913 a
B0R  staffer; State Senator 0artin Sa[e; :illiam    Jay Schieffelin; reformer
John Lord O'Brien; Frances 3erkins; LeZis +. 3ink, chairman of the State
+ousing Board; LaZson 3urdy, civic leader and first board chairman of the
R3A; Frederick C. Tanner; Laurence A. Tan]er, counsel for the Factory
Investigating Commission; Norman Thomas; reformer Leonard 0.
:allstein.

NOTES

No one had studied her career: No

one has studied it yet. This remarkable Zoman has been all but forgotten.
An evaluation of the significance of the closing of the dance halls is in
NYT, Nov. 23, 1914. For a description of typical halls, NYT, 0ay 28, 1915.
"She understood . . . perfectly": Cohen, pp. 246-47. (Cohen Zas the
employers' attorney.)

Dr. 0oses said he Zould; first meeting Zith Smith:  R0;  Israels.

"Bob 0oses Zas never to learn Zhy":

R0.

Belle believing Smith best hope; the 8niversity Club incident: Israels.

Belle suggesting a "Reconstruction Commission": Smith often told this
story to intimates, tZo of Zhom, 3roskauer and Cullman, repeated it to the
author.

1608
1915 B0R  study: Best is Dahlberg, pp. 93-122.

Reconstruction Commission: The basic source is the Report of the
Reconstruction Commission to Governor Alfred E. Smith on Retrenchment
and Reorgani]ation in the State Government, submitted Oct. 10, 1919.
Three commission staffers Zho Zorked for 0oses intervieZed in the spring
of 1967: Arthur E. Buck, John 0.  Gaus and one Zho prefers to remain
unidentified. Gaus saved many internal commission memos, including
many from R0.

R0  and 0rs.  0oskoZit]:   R0.   3hrase struck out: In fact, Reconstruction
Commission Report, p. 42: "Adjustments Zill not be made by cutting of
salaries or by the Zholesale elimination of positions." "The council Zill
remain": Reconstruction Commission Report, p. 23. "A real divergence":
Buck. "She Zas the boss": Gaus. Calling her names: Gaus; confidential
source.

R0  memos: R0  to Channing SchZeit]er, 0ay  2, 1919, Gaus 3apers; Gaus.
Leaving commission in his hands: R0.

Smith's speech: +apgood and 0oskoZit], p. 220. "You had to like him":
Buck.

R0's  corrections: The report quoted is one of Gaus's on the State Labor
Department, Gaus 3apers. R0 at Zork: Gaus, Buck, confidential source.

Gaus to SchZeit]er: 0ay  13, June 13, 1919, Gaus 3apers.

R0  to the chart maker: R0 to Sedley +. 3hinney, Apr. 3, 1919, Gaus
3apers.

R0  on Zeekends: 3erkins O+R, Vol. Ill, p. 365. Jane 0oses Collins (R0's
daughter).

B0R  report: 4uoted in Dahlberg, p. 99.

"The only serious argument": Reconstruction Commission Report, p. 12.
"No other Zay": pp. 7, 8 (italics added). "One of the possible benefits": pp.

1609
34-35. Various recommendations: pp. 3-12, 36-

37, 316-19.

"I Zrote the report": R0.   Rough-drafts comparison: Gaus 3apers. Beard
episode:

Gulick, Buck, confidential source; Dahlberg says (p. 105), in an
overstatement

Notes for pages 107-142

of her oZn that reveals the bitterness B0R alumni feel over R0's attitude:
"Dr. Beard contributed in large part to the Zriting of the Commission's final
report." "+e Zas so angry": Gulick.

Stimson: +enry L. Stimson to George :harton  3epper, Nov. 26, 1919,
Stimson 3apers.

Smith's speeches: +apgood and 0osko-Zit], pp. 224-25.

R0's  letter To Stimson, 0ar. 7, 1920. "+e thought fast": Gaus.

Smith inviting R0   home: Emily Smith :arner.

"Al Smith listens to me": Ernest :ill-vonseder,   quoted in Rodgers, p. 23.

7. Change in 0ajor

SO8RCES

For Al Smith's biography, see "Sources" for Chapter 6. Biographical details
about Richard Spencer Childs are from East, Council-0anager
Government.

Author's intervieZs:

Robert S. Binkerd. Richard S. Childs, John A. Coleman, +oZard S.
Cullman. 3E0,  Emily  Smith :arner.

1610
NOTES

Friendship betZeen Smith and R0; barbershopping: Coleman, Cullman,
Emily Smith :arner.   "They Zere opposites":

Coleman.

Change in R0: The author's intervieZs Zith Childs, 3E0   and Binkerd;
3erkins O+R. R0's  groZing  pro-Smith partisanship is, of course,
documented in neZspaper articles. But the basic source is the author's
e[amination of the nineteen issues of the State Bulletin of the NeZ York
State Association, Zhich R0 Zrote  and edited in 1921, 1922 and 1923-
These issues Zere kindly given to the author by Childs.

Childs biography: East, passim. Childs offering job to R0: Childs, R0.
"The embodiment": Childs, confidential source. Davenport: State Bulletin.
0ar. 30, 1922. "The principle is the important thing": State Bulletin, Aug.
1921. Seemed the very model: 3erkins O+R. "Cheap political trick":
Confidential source.

R0's  attacks on 0iller:  State Bulletin, Jan. 4, 1922. p. 5; July 22, 1922, p.
5; 0iller  replies: NYT.  Feb. 15. 1922; NeZ York +erald, July 27. 1922:
+erald editorial, July 28, 1922. Laughing at reformers: Childs, Binkerd,
confidential source.

1185 8. The Taste of 3om* r

SO8RCES

See "Sources" Chapter 6. Some material on Jimmy :alker is from FoZler,
Beau Janus.

NOTES

Jimmy :alker   in Albany: FoZler,  passim: R0 intervieZs  Zith  author;
Rabe-nold; R0, "Cinderella 0an  in  City +air  (revieZ of Beau James), AT
7, Apr. 10, 1949. Al Smith in Albany: See "Sources." Chapter 6.

1611
3risons: R0.  Best summary of Smith's prison reforms: +apgood and 0os-
koZit].  p. 300.

Grade crossings: R0; R0  to Smith. Feb. 20, 1924, Smith 3apers. R0's
forms: R0  to Smith, Jan. 30, 1924, Smith 3apers.

+e liked the taste: La]arus, Israels; even the secretaries in Smith's office,
Zhile charmed by the Governor's handsome young aide, noticed it: Carr,
+ig-gins and +ogan.

"The best bill drafter": 3roskauer, Israels.

":hat   do you Zant?": R0;   3roskauer and La]arus heard the Governor
pressing R0 to accept various jobs, and R0 refusing.

9. A Dream

SO8RCES

Books, pamphlets, articles and documents:

0oses, Dangerous Trade, pp. 75-153; Rodgers. Robert 0oses, pp. 31-57.
The increased public need for parks and roads, and the lack of them, is
detailed in neZspapers and maga]ines during the 1920's (particularly
valuable are an article in the SYT, Dec. 19, 1926. by Raymond Torrev, and
"A 3lea for 3arks and 3ark Trails," a speech he delivered to the American
Institute cf 3ark E[ecutives, Oct. 31. 1926); in reports and minutes of one
of the leading reform organi]ations struggling Zith the problem, collected
in Annual Reports and 0inutes of the American Scenic and +istoric
3reservation Society, Jan. 7. 1921-Feb. 14, 192 7; in 3rogress Report of the
+ighZay  Bureau of the Long Island Chamber of Commerce, Feb. 2, 1928.
By far the most detailed and vivid de-

Notes for pages 143-161

1186

scriptions are by R0 himself: A  State 3ark 3lan for NeZ York, Dec. 1922;
The State 3ark 3lan for NeZ York — Revised to ShoZ 3rogress to Date,

1612
Jan. 1924; "State Regulation of 3rivate Forests in the Adirondack 3ark,"
State Bulletin, 0ar. 5, 1932; "State Lands for 0unicipal  3arks and
3laygrounds," State Bulletin, Sept. 15, 1932; and Annual Reports of the
Long Island State 3ark Commission to the Governor and Legislature of the
State of NeZ York, 1924-1930.

Other sources consulted:

Allen, The Big Change; Amory, The Last Resorts; Birmingham, Our
CroZd; Blakelock, +istory  of the Long Island State 3arks; Eberlein, 0anor
+ouses; Fit]gerald, The Great Gatsby; Jones, The Jones Family; Josephson,
The Robber Barons; Lundberg, America's Si[ty Families; 0anley, Long
Island Discovery; 0at],  The 0any  Lives of Otto .ahn;   0oger,  Roslyn;
Sayre and .aufman, Governing NeZ York City;  Sobin, Dynamics of
Community Change; Thompson, +istory of Long Island; and :eeks, Isle of
Shells.

Smith 3apers.

Author's intervieZs:

As noted under specific topics.

NOTES

3opulation: Sayre and .aufman, p. 18. :estchester and 3alisades situation:

R0,  A State 3ark 3lan for NeZ York, esp. pp. 18-26.

Long Island: The population of Nassau County Zas 126,120 according to
the 1920 federal census, of Suffolk County 110,246. Geological history:
0anley, pp. 15-27; :eeks,  pp. 1-14; Some of ToZn of I slip's Early +istory
(Bay Shore, N.Y.); R0, Annual Report of the LIS3C, 1926, pp. 9-10;
Fit]gerald, p. 301.

The baymen: 0anley, pp. 1-14. Cholera episode: 0anley, p. 202; author's
intervieZs Zith  bay families. .u  .lu[    .lan:   Author's intervieZs Zith  R0;
his aide Sidney 0. Shapiro; Islip ToZn +istorian  George L. :eeks,  Jr.; old

1613
LI neZspaperman Lloyd Record; and Gladys Vunck, :.  .ingsland  0acy's
private secretary.

The robber barons: Books by Joseph-son and Lundberg.

Life on the Gold Coast: Books by Eberlein, Sobin, 0oger and Amory
(mainly for 0rs.  Belmont, pp. 203-12); "Long Island in the Year of Our
Lord 1932,"

Fortune, June 1932; +arvey Aronson, "Once upon a Gold Coast," NeZsday,
Apr. 6, 1968; author's intervieZs Zith 0rs.  Etienne 3hipps Boegner,
Leonard :.  +all,  F. Trubee Davison, LI neZspaperman C. +. 0acLachlan,
Oyster Bay Democratic leader Richard 0ayes; 1920's Oyster Bay ToZn
Clerk Charles Ransom, long-time LI restaurateur 3aul Reinhardt, :inthrop
heir Robert 3ayne. The best picture of the day-to-day life on the Gold Coast
is found in The North Shore Almanack, the area's Zeekly neZspaper.
3hipps Estate: "Old :estbury  Gardens" (tour brochure); intervieZs Zith
0rs.  Boegner. .ahn Estate: Josephson, p. 333 (for information about the
creation of the mountain). Other descriptions of .ahn estate are found in
0at],  pp. 20, 150, 233-34; Birmingham, p. 320. The barons' selfishness;
alloZing public  roads to fall into disuse: Sobin, p. 98. 3ratt and LIRR:
Sobin, p. 99. Sands 3oint: +arold 0. 0orse  to R0,  Apr. 16, 1923; Smith to
Secretary of Commerce +erbert +oover, Apr. 23, 1923; George Gordon
Battle to Smith, 0ay  1, 1923; +oover to Smith, 0ay  8, 1923; Graves to
R0,  June 20, 1923; R0 to Smith, 0orse  to Smith, Aug. 30, 1923. All in
Smith 3apers. IntervieZ Zith 0rs.  0orse.  Glen Cove: Ransom, Reinhardt.
Cold Spring +arbor: Sobin, p. 99; 0acLachlan. Lloyd  Neck and Eatons
Neck: +all. +untington:  0acLachlan,  Zho obtained the precise figures
during a survey he did for a local neZspaper of Zhich he Zas editor. The
barons' political poZer; 49 members: +all. No state roads: +all.

Four hours: Transcript of joint hearing before Senate Finance and Assembly
:ays  and 0eans Committee, at Albany, Feb. 11, 1925; testimony by
Assemblyman John Boyle, Jr. Cemetery acreage: A private survey prepared
for :.   .ingsland  0acy   by his secretary, Gladys Vunck, Dec. 19, 1925.

The South Shore: Allen, pp. 29-30; "Idle +our," tour brochure of Vanderbilt
Estate in Islip. Timber 3oint Club: "The Timber 3oint Club," club

1614
introductory brochure; author's intervieZs Zith Gladys Vunck, and Zith
T3C members +orace +avemeyer, Jr., Robert Livingston +ol-lins and
Buell +ollister,  Jr. 3opulation: NeZ York Telephone Co. estimate, 1922.

R0's  inspiration: R0.  E[ploring  the parks: Also Israels. Getting lost on the
bay: Also 0rs.  Lorraine Fishel. Tramping the barrier beach Zith him: Also
0rs.  +arold 0orse,  confidential sources. 0ajor Jones: Jones, passim;
Blakelock, p. 39.

Notes for pages 163-184

1187

StateZide situation: 0oses, A State 3ark 3lan; AS+3S, minutes of various
meetings. The Forest 3reserve, not a park in the true sense of the Zord, and
3alisades Interstate 3ark, an interstate park and privately funded, are not
included in this tabulation.

Revolutionary: The largest previous bond issue for parks floated anyZhere
had probably been $10,000,000, and that had been, in NeZ York, for the
Forest 3reserve, not a true park. "To provide for permanent improvements"
and for ''parkZays": 0oses, A State 3ark 3lan, pp. 6-7. "+ailed by park
planners": See, for instance, "Summary, Third National Conference on State
3arks, Turkey Run State 3ark, Indiana, 1923," printed by the conference.

Smith: "lacked TR's ]est," "red flannel underZear": Rodgers, p. 33.
Responded to graphic presentations: 3erkins O+R. Sinking in chair and
"Bob, you Zin":  Rodgers, pp. 33-34; Childs.

0ail  pouring in: +is  secretaries, Carr, +iggins, +ogan; Ingersoll and +unt
letters and scores of others, Smith 3apers. If there Zas an editorial opposing
the message, it is not in Smith's files. Chairman of the National Conference:
John Barton 3ayne to Smith, Jan. 18, 1924, Smith 3apers. Albany reporter:
:arner.

R0  tramping around LI again: R0.  The friend Zas Israels. ToZnsend
Scud-der, Jr., heard about the Zalks from his father, a great Zalker Zho
could keep up Zith R0—for  a couple of hours. :hitman:   "3aumanok."

1615
R0  on 0on-tauk:  Annual Report of the LIS3C, 1926, pp. 9-10. .neZ  his
plans too small: 0oses, The State 3ark 3lan for NeZ York — Revised to
ShoZ 3rogress to Date.

Smith offer of commission presidency: R0.

10. The Best Bill Drafter in Albany

SO8RCES

This chapter is based on the author's intervieZs Zith F. Trubee Davison and
on detailed analyses by :. .ingsland  0acy's  laZyers of the bills  Davison
introduced for R0  (see Chapter 11) and by 0arvin Shiebler, secretary of
the Suffolk County Ta[payers Association, in a memo to 0acy found in
0acy  3apers and in Committee of Citi]ens of Suffolk County, "State
3arks," undated but apparently Feb.

1925. The authoi /utervieZs Zith R0  Zere helpful on 1 1 1 mits.

NOTES

"The more spigots": Reconstruction Commission Report (see "Notes,"
Chapter 6), p. 8.

3arks no e[ception: Reconstruction Commission Report, pp. 8-9, 21.

"Appropriation" method had never been used: Shiebler, 'The Long Island
3ark 3rogram," Jan. 30, 1926, p. 2; "Important Notice," Apr. 12, 1926 (tZo
broadsides put out by the Committee of Citi]ens of Suffolk County).

R0  impatient: R0  to Graves, Apr. 12, 1924, Smith 3apers.

11 . The 0ajesty of the LaZ

SO8RCES

Books:

1616
Talese, The .ingdom and the 3oZer; :arner,  The +appy :arrior;    see also
"Sources," Chapter 6.

Author's intervieZs:

Leonard :.  +all,  :illiam    Latham, Richard 0ayes, Robert 3ayne, Joseph
0.  3roskauer, 3. G. RasZeiler, Sidney 0. Shapiro, Iphigene Ochs
Sul]berger, Albert L. :arner.

NOTES

R0's  overhead e[penses: Attorney General Albert Ottinger, press release,
reprinted in NYT, 0ay  18, 1925. E[empting friends: Graves to R0,  0ay  5,
1924, Smith 3apers.

Fire Island State 3ark: Blakelock, The Long Island State 3arks.

Smith calling +ayes: R0.  Drinking  beer: R0,  Shapiro.

One day's hunting: Deer Range stockholder 3ercy R. 3yne II statement in
NYT, Jan. 9, 1925.

Threatening the farmers: Author's intervieZ Zith 3. G. RasZeiler,
confirmed by R0  to Graves Oct. 29, 1926, Smith 3apers, and by Shapiro,
Zho boasted about taking the surveys from the adjoining farm. Also Robert
A. +ug "and neighbors" to Smith, Oct. 25, 1926, Smith 3apers. Threatening
the Timber 3ointers: +avemeyer quote from neZspaperman Lloyd Record,
Zho heard him. "0r.  0oses told me":  0acy's testimony under oath in
e[amination before trial in Brooklyn  Supreme Court, related in NYT, Oct.

Notes for pages 185-197

1188

27, 1925. Threatening the North Shore robber barons; seeing the surveyors
and being threatened Zith appropriation:

Davison, +all, 0ayes,  3ayne, Latham. Stimson to Smith: 0ay 18, 1925,
Smith 3apers. "Teach a lesson": Incident recounted in Old :estbury

1617
landoZner +enry 0.  Earle to Smith, June 23, 1926, Smith 3apers. "I felt
aZful":  Davison. LaZyer's opinion: 0arvin  Shiebler to Robert 3. Griffing,
Nov. 13, 1925, 0acy 3apers.

Taylor Estate fight: Timber 3ointers' contentions in court briefs—for
e[ample, "3auchogue Land Corporation, 3laintiff, against Long Island State
3ark Commission, and Robert 0oses, ToZnsend Scudder and Clifford L.
Jackson, individually and as Commissioners of the Long Island State 3ark
Commission, Defendants"—"Brief on Behalf of 3laintiff-Appellant";
"Appellant's Reply Brief"; and "Record on 3reliminary Injunction  for
Submission to the Finance Committee of the Senate and the :ays and
0eans Committee of the Assembly." Smith's advisers believe he Zon't sign:
Tone of Graves to R0, Oct. 9, 1924, and of R0 to Smith, Oct. 10, 1924,
Smith 3apers. The closed hearing: Virtually all Smith biographers give
accounts of this hearing, Zhich became a legend in NeZ York State, but all
these accounts have Smith treating +ave-meyer's remark as a joke. The
account the author believes to be accurate comes from R0, in intervieZ
Zith author, and is confirmed by Carlos Israels' and Joseph 3roskauer's
recollections of Zhat Belle 0oskoZit]   and Smith, respectively, told them
the ne[t day.

:.   .ingsland  0acy:  The "observer" Zas Alva Johnston, Zho profiled
0acy  for The NeZ Yorker, Sept. 12, 1931; quotes are from pp. 26 and 25.
Of many neZspaper profiles of 0acy, the most detailed are S. J. :oolf,
NYT 0aga]ine,  0ay   17, 1931, and Brooklyn Eagle, Sunday 0aga]ine
Section, Jan. 4, 1931.

Troopers on property: 3yne in NYT, Jan. 9, 1925. $25,000 limit and 0acy's
refusal to vieZ the fight in purely business terms: +avemeyer to 0acy, Apr.

28, 1925; Jan. 5, 1926; 0acy to +avemeyer, Apr. 28, 0ay 5, 6, 1925; Jan.
5, Dec. 23, 1926, 0acy 3apers.

Furman finds illegal: "Order to shoZ cause," issued by 0r. Justice George
+. Furman, Judge of the County Court of Suffolk County, Dec. 30, 1924.
0acy  refusing to shoZ reporter around: 0acy note to 0iss Vunck, undated,
0acy  3apers. "The amateur in politics": R0.

1618
"The defendants have proceeded . . . illegally": Van Siclen, "Injunction
Order," quoted in NYT, Feb. 18, 1925. Van Siclen, "Order of 3reliminary
Injunction," Feb/ 17, 1925, p. 2.

Senate Finance Committee hearings: NYT and +T, Feb. 12, 1925. R0's
edited transcript: Copy found in 0acy 3apers.

Smith veto message and legislative fight: From three neZspapers, NYT, +T
and Brooklyn Eagle, various issues, Apr. 2-June 27, 1925.

0acy-R0   face-to-face confrontation: 0acy  statement issued 0ay 5, 1925;
3auchogue Land Corporation "Complaint" in "Record on 3reliminary
Injunction," p. 13.

R0  stalling: Among those Zho said so Zere Justices Van Siclen and Dike.
Van Siclen commented, "The suit should have been tried long ago" (NYT,
0ay  28, 1925). Dike Zas to blast the "dilatory tactics of the Commission,"
adding that R0's actions seem to shoZ "a studied effort to affront the court"
(Brooklyn Eagle, Oct. 19, 1925).

0acy's confidence: 0acy  to +avemeyer, 0ay  5, 1925, Jan. 5, 1926, and
others, 0acy 3apers. :ait,  Smith said: 3roskauer.

NYT editorial: Feb. 17, 1925. "The bible": Talese, p. 7. NYT slanting Van
Siclen story: +andling of Ottinger story, 0ay  18, 1925; editorial on
Ottinger charge, 0ay 18; the paper stated as a fact that the Governor Zas
"Zilling  to make any reasonable compromise . . ." (June 5, 1925); a June 14
article contains such phrases as "The Governor believes in parks. +e loves
them. . . . Not long ago he motored over Long Island, Zhere [park] plans
have precipitated bitter opposition by certain Zealthy residents." Another
article (Jan. 12, 1925) began: ":hatever may be the outcome of the
controversy betZeen the Long Island State 3ark Commission and the group
of men opposing purchase of the George C. Taylor property on the Great
South Bay, an e[amination on the ground indicates that the property in
many respects is ideal for a public park . . ." Not only does the article make
no mention of the opponents' contentions that the park Zas too far from
NeZ York City, too inaccessible to public transportation, etc., for a park; it
ignores their contention, later proved true, that developing it Zould take, in

1619
terms of public e[penditures of the time, an enormous e[penditure:
"seemingly it could be developed at no very great e[pense," the

Notes for pages 198-209

article states, and it is obvious from the article, although it never says so,
that that statement is based entirely on R0's estimate of that e[pense.

Adolph S. Ochs: +elping R0  preserve the Saratoga Battlefield: R0 to
State Comptroller 0orris S. Tremaine, Aug. 8, 1928, Smith papers. +is
interest in parks: Talese, pp. 79, 96-97. The publisher's intense interest in
parks occasionally proved an embarrassment to R0; once, Zhile the
Governor Zas visiting Sul]berger at the publisher's Lake George home, R0
Zrote Smith a letter about neZ park plans, delicately hinting to Smith that
he not tell Ochs about them lest they find their Zay into the pages of the
Times before they Zere finali]ed; R0  to Smith, Aug. 8, 1924, Smith
3apers. Iphigene "thrilled": Iphi-gene Ochs Sul]berger intervieZ Zith
author. :arner:  IntervieZ. Ochs's 3ark Association aZard: NYT, Dec. 25,
1931.

R0's  secret visit to :ard  and 0astick:  R0.

Citi]ens 8nion  statement: NYT, June 23, 1925. 3rice: Smith telegram to
3rice, June 25, 1925, Smith 3apers. Roulstone's tour: NYT, June 21, 1925.

Record speed of veto; .night and :alker   quotes: NYT, June 27, 1925.
"Sealed orders": Smith quoted in NYT, June 26. "Too much pressure":
0astick,  NYT, June 26. "0y  career Zould end": :orld,   June 27.

Bitter facts; options lost: Annual Report of the L1S3C, 1925, p. 47.
Deciding to call +eckscher: R0.  Smith-+eckscher conversation: Related in
numerous biographies of Smith, including Josephson,

p. 333-

Court fight: Tuttle, +T, Sept. 13, 1925. Smith tried privately to persuade
0acy:  0acy  to Smith, Sept. 12, 1925, 0acy to +eckscher, Oct. 11, 1925,
0acy  3apers.

1620
R0  under oath: NYT, +T and Brooklyn Eagle; court transcripts. Goldsmith
memorandum in NYT, Sept. 12, 1925.

Jones Beach: Babylon Leader, issues of July 18, 25, Aug. 15, 1924;
Amityville  Sun, Aug. 8, 1924; Long Island Sun, Nov. 20, 1924. R0's
feelings: R0.

12. Robert 0oses and the Creature of the 0achine

SO8RCES

The general picture of corruption on Long Island is draZn from intervieZs

Zith Richard 0ayes  Nassau ( oiinty Democratic leade< in the (920*1
I930\s; Eugene +i

Zho opposed R0 in court conhm. during the [930*1; James B, ( ooper. J'
editor of the Babylon Leader, Leonard :. +all,  a GO3 assemblyman at the
time; Dolie 0c:hinney     Adams. I nomas 0c:hinney's   daughter; 3aul
Reinhardt. an Oyster Bay restaurateur and intimate of politicians; three of
R0's  key aides at the time, Sidney 0. Shapiro, :illiam   Latham and one
Zho prefers to remain unidentified; the author's casual conversations Zith
old-time Long Island politicians during several years as a reporter for
NeZsday, the Long Island neZspaper. There are various neZspaper articles
on one aspect or another that came to light. But the most graphic over-all
picture is probably that provided by R0's oZn articles in the State Bulletin,
1921, 1922 and 1923.

The on-the-record court fight is contained not only in numerous neZspaper
articles but in the court records cited in the "Notes" for Chapter 11. The
behind-the-scenes maneuvering is detailed in the 0acy 3apers, in the Smith
3apers, in an intervieZ Zith Gladys Vunck, 0acy's  personal secretary, and
in a confidential intervieZ Zith  one of 0oses' aides.

Other information Zas supplied in intervieZs Zith  Israel Ben Scheiber,
:illiam    S. Chapin, Gilmore Clarke, 0rs. :.   .ingsland   0acy  and 0rs.
+arold 0orse.

1621
The compromise reached in Albany is discussed in neZspapers and
e[plained in the 0acy  3apers, in the Smith 3apers and in intervieZs Zith
0iss  Vunck and R0.

NOTES

+eZitt  offering to sell: +eZitt  to R0,   Dec. 31, 1924, Smith 3apers. R0's
refusal: Lut] to Smith, June 24, 1925, Smith 3apers. R0 refused to give
inside information on highZay routes to Smith's friends: Francis 3ettit, one
of them, to Smith, complaining, 0ar. 21, 1925, Smith 3apers.

Doughty and Booth & :eston:  +urley,  Shapiro; confirmed by confidential
sources.

Giving +empstead ToZn politicians access to LIS3C plans: Smith to Gen.
George :.  Goethals, 0ar. 30, 1926, Smith 3apers; NYT, Dec. 12, 1925,
gives details of formation of the joint commission to plan Jones Beach.
0oses be-

Notes for pages 209-227

1190

coming friendly Zith  0c:hinney:

Adams.

LaZyer forming corporation: Nassau County Clerk's Office, Certificate of
Incorporation, Inde[ No. 5415, Year 1926. The only land it ever purchased
and sold: Nassau County Clerk's Office, Records of 3urchases of Real
3roperty—OnsloZ Estates (microfiche). The specific purchases and sales
involved can be found in the County Book of Deeds—Liber No. 1075, p.
48; 1086, p. 5; 1101, p. 355; 1118, p. 251; 1128, p. 37; 1168, p. 247; 1181,
p. 163; 1197, p. 160; 1235, p. 443; 1227, p. 379; 1517, p. 89. Also helpful
Zere intervieZs Zith  +urley  and confidential source. Contracts to :eston
and +endrickson: +urley, 0ayes, confidential source; various neZspapers,
various issues, 1927-29.

1622
Doughty's friendship: +all, +urley,  confidential intervieZs. The alliance
betZeen 0oses and Doughty—and Zith Doughty's nepheZ and successor,
J. Rus-sel Sprague—Zas to be an open secret of Long Island politics for the
ne[t forty  years.

Compromise in Albany: :adsZorth's  orders: R0.  The maneuvering is
detailed in R0's intervieZs  and the Smith 3apers, the attempt to stop it in
the 0acy 3apers. 0acy  got his first hint: 0acy  to Charles D. +illies,
Republican national committeeman, Apr. 4, 5, 1926, 0acy 3apers. (In one
letter 0acy  raged: "The entire program of the Long Island State 3ark
Commission is moving forZard through a number of small and apparently
unimportant bills in spite of ... promises to the contrary.") +e might have
knoZn earlier that he had been betrayed had he read, in a Brooklyn Daily
Times, Feb. 19, 1926, account of one of his trips to Albany, an article
evidently leaked to the paper by R0: 'The joke is said to be that Zhile the
Long Islanders Zere in secret session at some hotel here [in Albany] on the
best methods to block the Taylor estate park development, Governor Smith
Zas fi[ing  his signature to the appropriation bill, included in Zhich is an
appropriation for the park at East Islip." 0acy-+utchinson confrontation
recounted in 0acy to +utchinson, Feb. 20, 1926.

+idden appropriations for development of LI parks: It is impossible to
locate all of them in state budgetary bills, or in the 1926 LIS3C Annual
Report or anything else R0 Zrote in this period— or in any neZspaper. But
they are detailed in a memorandum prepared by the Suffolk County
Ta[payers Association,

Apr. 4, 1926, entitled: "Long Island State 3ark Commission 3rogram by
3iece-meal Legislation," Smith 3apers.

Smith inviting +eZitt   and +utchinson to LI: R0.

Trial before Strong: NYT and +T, 0ay  18, 26, June 4, 8, 1926.

Bella and Emanuel: Israel Ben Schei-ber, Zho Zas the social Zorker.

For both sides Zeren't equal: "A business affair": +avemeyer to 0acy, Apr.
28, 1925. "Ramifications": 0acy  to +avemeyer, Jan. 5, 1926. 3rinting bill:

1623
0acy  to +avemeyer, Apr. 23, 1928. Stenographic bill: 0acy to +avemeyer,
Dec. 23, 1926. $10,000 bill: +avemeyer to 0acy, Apr. 28, 1925. "0y
limit":  +avemeyer to 0acy, Jan. 5, 1926. 0acy's determination to carry on
alone: 0acy to +avemeyer, Jan. 5, 1926. $43,192.61: +avemeyer
handZritten memo attached to letter to 0acy, 0ay 1, 1928. 0acy  being
dunned: 0artin A.  Schenck, for Davies, Auerbach & Cornell, to Robbins
(0acy's personal attorney), Apr. 22, 1929. The author cannot locate any
definitive final total of  0acy's court costs, but they appear to have been
about $74,-000. All of the documents cited above are in the 0acy 3apers.

0acy:  See note, Chapter 11. R0 the only person he Zanted to see: 0rs. :.
.ingsland  0acy.

The lessons R0 learned: IntervieZs Zith R0,  Shapiro, Latham, jChapin
and other R0 aides.

3lanning Jones Beach: R0, Shapiro, Gilmore Clarke, 0rs. +arold 0orse.

13. Driving

SO8RCES

Books:

0oses, Dangerous Trade) :orking  for the 3eople; and The State 3ark 3lan
for NeZ York —  Revised to ShoZ 3rogress to Date; Rodgers, Robert
0oses. See also "Sources" for Chapter 6.

Author's intervieZs:

Dolie 0c:hinney     Adams, Richard Boyce, Gilmore Clarke, 0orris Ernst,
James J. Flynn, 0rs. Elmer B. +oZells, :illiam     J. Junkamen, :illiam
Latham, 0ichael J. 0adigan,  0rs.  +arold  0orse, Sidney 0.  Shapiro, 0ae
Smisek.

NOTES

The need for haste: R0. R0  in action:

1624
Junkamen, Clarke, Flynn, Latham; con-

Notes for pages 229-247

L191

fidential sources; 0rs. 0orse.  Outings: Dolie 0c:hinney     Adams, 0ae
Smisek. "No side": 0orris  Ernst.

Inspiring designers: Shapiro, Clarke, Latham, LIS3C official Richard
Boyce.

Jones Beach: Rodgers, pp. 50-56; Shapiro. $20,000: Rodgers, pp. 54, 55;
confirmed by 0ichael  J. (Jack) 0adi-gan, one of the firm's foremen.
Guggenheim: Rodgers, pp. 52-53.

Babylon election: R0's feelings: R0,   Shapiro, confidential source.
Coolness toZard 0ary in toZn:  0rs.  +oZells.  R0  threats: LIS3C press
release, Apr. 12, 1928. Finding the Zeak spot: R0, confirmed by
confidential source and Babylon ToZn Supervisor Joseph :arta. :ithout
Zarning, "Judases!": Babylon Leader, 0ar. 16, 1928; confidential sources.
No tolls: R0  letter to Leader, published 0ar. 3, 1928. Cooper's feelings:
+is editorials in Leader. State employees voting: Leader, Apr. 16, 1928;
Suffolk County Ta[payers Association press release, Apr. 17, 1928. The
release states: "The State 3ark Commission . . . had at least ten automobiles
in operation at this election. ... It Zas further reported by the inspectors of
election that many young men, unknoZn to them, had been brought in these
cars and demanded the right to vote." Strangely, the release states, the
registers customarily provided by the ToZn Board for poll inspectors to
check the qualifications of voters Zere not provided this time. "There Zere
no challengers at the polls and no one to decide upon the qualifications to
vote of the young men brought to the polls in state automobiles, upon this
occasion."

"Scandalous": Leader, Apr. 6, 1928.

"A vote of confidence": LIS3C press release, Apr. 4, 1928, 0acy 3apers.

1625
9,700 acres: NYT, Nov. 3, 1928. Overall progress from neZspaper stories,
spring and summer, 1928; Annual Report of the LIS3C, 1928.

Editorials: NYT, :orld,    Dec. 20, 1928.

State parks: 0oses, Dangerous Trade, pp. 119-31; 0oses, :orking for the
3eople, pp. 149, 167-80; 0oses, The State 3ark 3lan for NeZ York —
Revised to ShoZ 3rogress to Date (1924). Attendance soared in the upstate
parks as Zell as on Long Island: during the summer of 1928, 3,000,000
persons visited the neZ state parks in the Niagara and Allegheny regions, a
million more than had visited them in 1925.

14. Changing

SO8RCES

Books:

Graham, AI Smith; 0oses, A Tribute to Governor Smith; sec also
"Sources," Chapter 6.

Author's intervieZs:

+oZard S. Cullman, Leonard :.   +all,  Carlos Israels, Joseph 0. 3roskauer,
\ 11-Zood 0.  Rabenold, Emily Smith :arner.

NOTES

No one bother to reply: On July 6, 1925, R0 to Graves, he made one such
suggestion, calling the Zriter a "crackpot"; on Oct. 2, 1924, he called
another a "nut"; the increasing frequency of the suggestion that no reply be
made is documented by letters in the Smith 3apers.

TZomey story: Related by +all; it Zas also related to the author by tZo
other legislators of the era, Zho prefer to remain anonymous.

3ark philanthropists' philosophy: Annual Reports and 0inutes of the AS+
3S, Jan. 7, 1921-Feb. 14, 1927.

1626
0oses had let them believe: R0's statements and press releases of this
period continually reiterate that the State Council of 3arks Zould be only an
"advisory body." The fact that the old men believed him is shoZn not only
in their speeches and general support of his bills, but, specifically, in
0inutes of  society meetings, p. 460, for e[ample.

"The height of impertinence": Staley to .un],  quoted in society 0inutes, p.
1431. The 0inutes also shoZ their groZing reali]ation  of the significance
of his bylaZs.

LetchZorth State 3ark: Society 0inutes, Apr. 26, 1926, p. 1716; one trustee
says there that the park should be kept as "a shrine" to nature. Another, p.
1487, quotes :ordsZorth's  "one impulse from a vernal Zood . . ." Through
a series of manipulations and behind-the-scenes bureaucratic ploys, backed
in the crunch by Smith's poZer, R0 eventually succeeded in ousting the
defiant society trustees and in transforming LetchZorth 3ark along the lines
he envisioned.

Niagara and ClearZater: Obituary, .ingston Leader and .ingston Daily
Freeman, Sept. 23, 1933; NYT, Sept. 24, 1933- "Your vieZs are just": R0
to Smith, Dec. 17, 1924, ClearZater to R0, Dec. 12, 1924, Smith 3apers.
:ilco[:    Obituary, Buffalo  Evening NeZs

Notes for pages 247-259

1192

and NYT, Jan. 27, 1930. .neZ he Zas dying: De Forest to Smith, June 22,
1926, Smith 3apers. Schoellkopfs cooperation: "Transcript" cited beloZ, p.
163. ClearZater sZaying Treman: Society 0inutes. R0  embarrassed:
"Transcript" cited beloZ, p. 21; on p. 45, R0 says, ":e   have made
ourselves ridiculous at Albany." Dispute over parkZay: "Transcript," pp.
16-32: R0's real Zorry,  although he never states it in so many Zords, is
revealed by a statement he makes on p. 25. Doctors gave him no chance:
:ilco[    to Smith, June 22, 1926, Smith 3apers.

R0  moving against the old men: Three documents are central—a 210-page
"Transcript, Joint Conference, Special Committee of State Council of 3arks

1627
and State Reservation at Niagara, July 15, 1926" (hereafter referred to as
"Transcript"); "Report of Special Committee Appointed by the State
Council of 3arks to E[amine and Report on the 0atter of a Connecting
3arkZay from the State Reservation at Niagara across Grand Island, and
8pon the 0atters Referred to in the Letter of +is E[cellency,  +on. Alfred
E. Smith, Governor of the State of NeZ York, dated June 3rd, 1924,
Adopted by the State Council of 3arks at a 0eeting +eld on July 24th,
1926, at Binghamton" (hereafter referred to as "Report"); :ilco['s  last
letter to R0,  Aug. 5, 1926 (hereafter referred to as ":ilco[   letter"). These
documents Zere found in a sealed manila folder in the Smith 3apers that
had apparently never been opened. The folder is identified only as "200-
276-2."

:ilco[    believes R0  Zrote "Smith"  letter: ":ilco[     Letter," pp. 5, 6; the
original draft cannot be found in the Smith 3apers, but if R0 did not
actually Zrite it, and Smith send it out substantially unchanged, over his
signature, it Zould be the only such letter from Smith on the subject of
parks, out of hundreds the author e[amined in the Smith 3apers.

June 26 3arks Council meeting: The Niagara Commission's resolutions are
contained in "0inutes, State Reservation at Niagara," attached to :ilco[  to
Smith, June 22, 1926, Smith 3apers. 0oses never even told the council of
their e[istence: :ilco[    to Lut],  Aug. 21, 1926, Smith 3apers. "The
stenographer Zas told to omit things": ":ilco[    Letter," p. 7. In the
"Transcript," there are "discussions off the record," on pp. 93 and 164; the
unreported "argument" is on p. 132.

Not an investigation: "Transcript," p.

7. R0's interruption:  p. 11. "Just one minute": p. 153. DoZner's "I have no
fault to find": p. 155, repeated on p. 166. ":hat  if it  Zas, 0r.  0oses?": p.

164.

"The opportunity is slipping": :ilco[     to Smith, Aug. 4, 1926, Smith
3apers. Sure DoZner Zould be fair: ":ilco[    Letter," p. 8. DoZner's
e[oneration. "Report," pp. 4-5. Report not distributed: ":ilco[    Letter," pp.
3-9.

1628
Letter to Lut]:  :ilco['s    innocuous letter is in Smith 3apers; R0 to :ilco[
Aug. 4, 1926, Smith 3apers. "In :ilco['s   vieZ":  ":ilco[     Letter."

"Commission not functioning": R0  to Smith, 0ay   25, 1927, Smith 3apers.
De Forest to Smith: No date visible, Smith 3apers. ClearZater's letter:
ClearZater to Smith, 0ar. 28, 1927, Smith 3apers. R0 convinces Smith:
R0  to Smith, 0ay  25, 1927, Smith 3apers. (Smith sent the letter
embodying the changes, a letter Zritten by R0, same date.)

Al Smith stuck: "I am very sure": De Forest to Smith, no date visible, Smith
3apers. "You idiot!": Graham, p. 139. Smith on 0ills and the barons: NYT,
Oct. 26, 28, 1926. Emily's analysis: IntervieZ Zith author. 3arks Zere an
improvement he could see: 3erkins O+R and several intervieZees made
this comment. Smith didn't reali]e hoZ drastic ...: Emily Smith :arner.

":e   could have done nothing Zithout him": 0oses, A  Tribute to Governor
Smith, pp. 17-18; Israels, 3roskauer. "I Zonder Zhat Bob's doing tonight":
Cullman. "A tie":  Cullman."You could tell": Rabenold.

15. Curator of CaulifloZers

SO8RCES

Books:

Dahlberg, The NeZ York Bureau of 0unicipal  Research; Freidel, Franklin
Delano Roosevelt: The Ordeal and Franklin Delano Roosevelt: The
Triumph; +andlin, Al  Smith and +is America; +apgood and 0oskoZit],
8p from the City Streets; Lipson, The American Governor; 0oscoZ:  :hat
+ave You Done for 0e  Lately?; 3ringle, Alfred E. Smith; Rodgers, Robert
0oses; Schlesinger, The Age of Roosevelt, Vol. I: The Crisis of the Old
Order and Vol. Ill: The 3olitics of 8pheaval; :arner,   The +appy :arrior.
See also "Sources" for Chapter 6.

Notes for pages 260-279

Author's intervieZs:

1629
Israel Ben Scheiber, :illiam  S. Chapin, Richard S. Childs, Ernest J. Clark,
Jane 0oses Collins, John A. Coleman, 3erry B. Duryea, Jr., 0rs. +ilda E.
+ellman, 0rs.  Elmer B. +oZells,  Carlos Israels, John .rumenacker,
:illiam    Latham, Richard 0ayes, Robert 3ayne, Joseph 0. 3roskauer, 0rs.
+elen Roth, Jimmy Roth, Sidney 0. Shapiro, Bertram D. Tallamy, +a]el
Tappan, Emily Smith :arner.

NOTES

State reorgani]ation: Three books— Dahlberg, pp. 93-+2, +apgood and
0os-koZit],   and Lipson—describe it in detail, as did Richard S. Childs in
intervieZs Zith  the author.

Al Smith said so: 4uoted in :arner,  p. 173. +is  daughter herself says, "In
his oZn belief the Zork he did in reorgani]ing the state government stood
first" among all his achievements, p. 173. "Against the tide of the
TZenties": Frei-del, Triumph, p. 11; +andlin, p. 186. Roosevelt Zas to say:
Schlesinger, 3olitics, p. 520. Lippmann: To Smith, Nov. 6, 1925, Smith
3apers. :agner: +apgood and 0oskoZit],    p. 218. "The great classic":
Lipson, p. 90.

Secretary of State: R0 to be a "Deputy Governor": Brooklyn Eagle, Jan.
25, 1927. An unidentified GO3 senator is quoted as saying: ":e Zere given
to understand by the Governor that the neZ Secretary of State job is to be-
the most important of them all." 3oliticians raged: 3ringle, p. 258. "The
most hated man in Albany": Israels. :anted to formali]e  the arrangement:
+apgood and 0oskoZit],   p. 186. "None of the objectors": Eagle, Jan. 21,
1927; see also Feb. 2, 1927. BroZn postcard and Thompson reply: 4uoted
in Eagle, Jan. 24, 1927. Relatives commenting: +ellman. Bella's comment:
Ben Scheiber, the 0adison +ouse head Zorker to Zhom she made the
comment Zhen he brought her the neZs.

Bo[ing:  :.   O. 0cGeehan's "DoZn  the Line" columns in the Tribune in
1927 furnish many humorous anecdotes about the Annie Oakley
controversy. 4uote is from his column of 0ar. 24, I9 2 7- F ar " ley: NYT,
Feb. 19, 1927. "Any decision should be unanimous": R0 quoted in
Rodgers, p. 65. "Frankly admitting": Tribune, Jan. 20, 1928.

1630
3ut R0  in charge of Cabinet; made R0 personally responsible: R0,
3roskauer, Coleman.

1193

+e set his life into a hard mold:

piro, Latham, Jane 0oses ( oli +oZells, 0iss  Tappan La]arus, I Childs,
confidential sources. Duryta: In tervieZ Zith author. A Zoman: I dential
source. One e[ecuthe: I.at, Secretaries: Confidential sources. "I^ved that
bay": 0rs.  +oZells  "+e Zasn't so tense then": Latham. 3icking men, chain
of command: Shapiro. Chapin afraid to leave desk: Chapin. Observer:
0oscoZ,  p. 205. Tallamy: Tallamy. Overcoming Shapiro's shyness:
Shapiro. Suicide: I he name of the aide involved, a young assistant counsel
of the LIS3C, is'Zithheld at the request of a friend because, forty years
later, his mother still suffers from the recollection. E[ecutives' homes: One
roZ of homes is on a secluded, difficult-to-reach street in Belmont Lake
State 3ark, south of the Southern State 3arkZay.

The satisfaction of Zorking for him: Although  this Zas a theme repeated to
the author by many architects and engineers, it Zas stated especially
forcefully and perceptively by Ernie Clark, president of AndreZs & Clark,
in an intervieZ Zith  the author. Summary of achievements under Smith:
Rodgers, pp. 58-64. Firing the engineer: Coleman. The tZo speeches:
Transcripts made by stenographer Lloyd Record on commission for :.
.ingsland  0acy  (found in 0acy  3apers) of speeches by R0 before the
Eastern Long Island Real Estate Board at the Canoe 3lace Inn, +ampton
Bays, June 16, 1927; and before the Long Island Real Estate Board at the
0ontauk  0anor, 0ontauk,  Sept. 9, 1927.

":hether   the commissioners . . .": R0 quoted in Tribune, Feb. 4, 1927.

Bathhouses: 3erkins O+R, Vol. Ill, p. 367. Speeding motorcade: R0 denied
the charges of speeding, but residents of the villages still remember the
incident, and articles in the Babylon Leader (for e[ample, Aug. 12, 1927)
and the Brooklyn Daily Times quote people Zho saZ it. Cooper editorial:
Aug. 5, 1927.

1631
Compromising Zith the barons: Latham, Richard 0ayes, Robert 3ayne;
FDR to Francis 3. Garvan, Apr. 9, 1929, FDR 3apers.

The Roths: The author's intervieZs Zith 0rs. James J. (+elen) Roth and
Jimmy Roth. The feelings of other farmers Zere obtained by Ina Joan Caro
from John .rumenacker, Zho oZned an adjoining farm. The author also
intervieZed R0's  aide :illiam    Latham, Zho handled the engineering under
Zhich the route Zas shifted. Latham recalled vividly

Notes for pages 280-293

1194

the negotiations Zith De Forest. +e couldn't remember the farmers at all.

"Bob, it's over": :arner,   p. 205; +and-lin, pp. 112-36. R0  ran the state for
Smith: 3roskauer, Cullman, :arner. Screened out hate mail: :arner.

16. The Featherduster

SO8RCES

The relationship of the three men— Smith, Roosevelt and 0oses—before
and during FDR's Governorship is described —from Zidely varying points
of vieZ but never in sufficient depth—in Bellush, Roosevelt as Governor;
Farley, Behind the Ballots and Jim Farley's Story; +and-lin, Al Smith and
+is America; 3roskauer, A Segment of 0y  Times; Rodgers, Robert 0oses;
:arner,  The +appy :arrior;    as Zell as in Flynn, You're the Boss; Freidel,
Franklin D. Roosevelt: The Ordeal and Franklin D. Roosevelt: The
Triumph; Ickes, The Secret Diary of +arold L. Ickes, Vol. I: The First
Thousand Days; 3erkins, The Roosevelt I .neZ; Rosenman, :orking  Zith
Roosevelt; Schlesinger, The Crisis of the Old Order; Stiles, The 0an
Behind Roosevelt; 0oley, 27 0asters of 3olitics;  SherZood, Roosevelt and
+opkins. But the primary sources used for these chapters are the Smith,
FDR and 0orgenthau 3apers; the Reuben A. La]arus, George Van Schaick
and Frances 3erkins O+R's (0iss 3erkins is franker in her O+R than in her
book); intervieZs Zith  observers of the Albany scene at the time, including
Adolph A. Berle, Jr., Carlos Israels, 0ichael J. 0adigan, La]arus,

1632
3roskauer and Albert L. :arner—and  R0  himself, Zho  discussed
Roosevelt Zith some tact in Dangerous Trade but Zhose hatred spilled over
in ":hy    I Oppose the Fourth Term," The Saturday Evening 3ost, Oct. 17,
1944, and in intervieZs Zith the author. These sources —taken all in all—
present a picture of the Smith-Roosevelt conflict that suggests more
strongly than do any of the Roosevelt biographers, e[cept, possibly, Freidel,
a picture of the older Governor as Zronged.

NOTES

FDR's relationship Zith Smith circle:

Schlesinger; Freidel, The Triumph; +and-lin, pp. 138-40. Eleanor and the
teapot: Freidel, The Ordeal, p. 200. FDR telephoning R0: R0, Israels.
"3issroom":

Albert :arner.  "Featherduster," "a harmless bust": Schlesinger, pp. 323,
331. +aughtiness in Albany: Schlesinger, p. 338. "+appy :arrior"  speech:
This story Zas related to the author by 3roskauer and R0 in intervieZs.
Carlos Israels says that Belle 0oskoZit] had told it to him, and Emily
Smith :arner  says she Zas told it by her father. "ShoZy but harmless";
0rs.  0  Zorried:  3roskauer.

"Secretary and valet": Rodgers, p. 39; R0, 0adigan; the incident, although
not the e[act Zording of Zhat R0   said to FDR, is confirmed in Smith
3apers. FDR "cared deeply about nature": Schlesinger, 3p. 334-35- 1922
proposal: Freidel, The Ordeal, p. 149. FDR's plans for the Ta-conic region:
In great detail and Zith great enthusiasm, in various letters to Smith, most
notably Dec. 3, 1926, Smith 3apers, "Splendid project": FDR to Smith,
Dec. 3, 1926, Smith 3apers. RlVTs feelings: Confidential source. "Absurd
and humiliating": FDR to Smith, Dec. 3, 1926, Smith 3apers. "I suggest you
Zrite him":  R0  to Smith, Dec. 23, 1926, Smith 3apers; Smith did so,
sending the letter out, over his signature, e[actly as Zritten, Jan. 10, 1927.
"No function left":  FDR to Smith, Dec. 30, 1927, Smith 3apers. Revealing
letter: FDR to Smith, Jan. 30, 1928, Smith 3apers. "I knoZ of no man":
Smith to FDR, Feb. 3, 1928, Smith 3apers.

1633
Roosevelt nominating Smith: Freidel, The Ordeal, p. 243. "It's a pity":
3erkins O+R Vol. Ill,  pp. 40-41. Decision to urge FDR to run: Freidel, The
Ordeal, pp. 250-56; Emily Smith :arner;  R0.  R0   to Emily at the
convention: :arner,  p. 239. Rosenman: Schlesinger, pp. 283-85; Freidel,
The Ordeal, pp. 261-62. R0 to 3erkins: 3erkins O+R Vol. I, p. 422; Vol.
Ill, p. 40. "Vicious":  Confidential source. Berle told the author R0 "alZays
talked badly about Eleanor Roosevelt. Roosevelt to 3erkins: 3erkins O+R,
Vol. Ill, pp. 11, 372. "Real hatred": La]arus.

+e meant it: 0ost  of Roosevelt's biographers take Smith's post-1928
disclaimers of presidential ambitions at less than face value, but the author's
intervieZs Zith  such Smith intimates and observers of both men as, among
others, Smith's daughter, 3roskauer, La]arus, Cullman, John A. Coleman
and R0, have led him to conclude that this assessment is unfair. +e feels
the definitive Zord on the subject is provided by the recollections of
EdZard J. Flynn (in You're the Boss) and James A. Farley (in Behind the
Ballots, Zritten Zhile

Notes for pages 294-305

Farley Zas still friendly Zith  Roosevelt). "Same team": 3roskauer, p. 64.
Roosevelt had pledged to continue Smith's Zork: Freidel, The Ordeal, pp.
261-63. +e "forgot": Schlesinger (pp. 386-87) gives a different, more pro-
FDR interpretation of this period.

"Generally, for that is Zhat Ze said": Freidel, The Triumph, p. 12.

Roosevelt's character: 0oley, pp. 36-44; SherZood, p. 9; +andlin, p. 144.

Conflict over R0:  "That Zas the Zay it  Zas set up": R0.  R0  meeting Zith
Roosevelt: R0.

Letter of resignation: R0  to Roosevelt, Dec. 18, 1928, printed in NYT,
Dec. 19. FDR reply: NYT, Dec. 20, 1928. Editorials: :orld,  NYT,  Dec. 20,
1928.

Roosevelt pursuing Flynn: Flynn, pp. 74-77. The fact that Flynn never
devoted much time to the job rankled R0, Zho had Zanted it to be one of

1634
continuing importance, and he told the author that one day, at least a year
after his appointment, Flynn arrived at the building in Zhich the Secretary
of State's office Zas located, and didn't knoZ Zhat floor it Zas on.

FDR's "Zistful  smile": 4uoted in Freidel, The Triumph, p. 20. R0  stalking
out: R0,  confirmed by Albert :arner,   Zho Zas covering the inauguration
for the NYT, and by La]arus.

17. The 0other of A  ccommodation

SO8RCES

Books:

Farley, Behind the Ballots; Flynn, You're the Boss; +andlin, Al Smith and
+is America; Josephson and Josephson, Al Smith: +ero of the Cities;
Rodgers, Robert 0oses; Sobin, Dynamics of Community Change. See also
"Sources" for Chapter 16.

Author's intervieZs:

+oZard S. Cullman, Eugene +urley, Reuben A. La]arus, Ann and Louis
Lubin, Sidney 0.  Shapiro, Emily Smith :arner.

Oral +istory Reminiscence:

Frances 3erkins.

NOTES

Northern State 3arkZay fight: The author's understanding of the veiled
phrases

1195

in the correspondence from the FDR 3apers Zas aided by Sidney 0. Soft]
Zho offered the assistance Zith the stipulation that he not be named unless
he died (Zhich he has since done), and by tZo confidential sources, one on
R0\  staff. It Zas Zhen the author attempted to question R0 about the

1635
$10,000 .ahn "gift"  that R0  broke off  the intervieZs and refused further
cooperation Zith this book. Clark and R0 Zriting   to FDR at :arm  Springs:
FDR refers to Clark telegram in FDR to R0, Nov. 23, 1928, FDR 3apers.

FDR backing R0  at first: Conversations referred to in Clark to FDR, 0ar.
29, 1929, FDR 3apers.

+utchinson and +eZitt  telegram to R0: 0ar.  21, 1929. R0  defiant: R0  to
FDR, 0ar. 21, 1929, FDR 3apers. (The crucial sentence: "0r. .ahn
generously offered to buy three of four small pieces of land oZned by
farmers Zho could not afford to dedicate.") ":ill   not make a creditable
chapter": Clark to FDR, 0ar. 29, 1929, FDR 3apers.

Clark ultimatum: ". . . Zhile  Ze are ready and an[ious to arrive at some
adjustment and agreement, in the event that this cannot be done, there
seems to be nothing to do but to fight the matter out to a conclusion by
presenting the matter carefully on its merits. It Zould be too bad if Ze have
to go through a long controversy on this subject. But Zhat is there to do . . .
," Clark to FDR, Oct. 23, 1929, FDR 3apers. Actual cost $2,250,000:
Sobin, p. 105. R0 has to promise no parks: Shapiro, +urley, confidential
source.

"A bond on your signature": La]arus. A neZ routine: R0,  Emily  Smith
:arner.

Begging Lut]: FDR to Lut],  Jan 17, 1931, FDR 3apers. LI Democrats:
Nassau Democratic leader .rug to FDR, Sept. 14, 1930, FDR 3apers.

"An old school boyfriend": FDR to R0,   Apr. 23, 1930, FDR 3apers.
Among other humiliations the Governor had to suffer over the question of
patronage Zas one that occurred Zhen he began running for the presidency
in 1932. A key 0assachusetts supporter Zrote him asking for a promotion
for a relative on the LIS3C staff, FDR Zrote R0,  and R0  replied, in a
letter to FDR's secretary, James J. 0ahoney, "I think the efforts of this
young man to get himself some sort of special preference through political
channels in 0assachusetts is Zholly improper. . . . The best thing this young
man can do is to take his medicine and be glad that he has a job of any

1636
Notes for pages 305-324

1196

kind." Buckley to FDR, Apr. 9, 1932; FDR to R0,  Apr. 12, 1932; R0  to
0ahoney, Apr. 19, 1932, FDR 3apers.

Fort Schuyler: A long series of letters from FDR to the Army and from
influential to FDR in "Fort  Schuyler" folder, FDR 3apers. Straus speech:
NYT, June 24, 1932.

E[ecutive budget fight: The definitive discussion is in Freidel, The
Triumph, Chapter 4. R0's advice: R0  to 0ark  Graves, State Budget
Director, Oct. 15, 1931, FDR 3apers.

Jones Beach: Attendance: NeZspapers and Annual Report of the LIS3C,
1929. Biehl: NYT, Aug. 18, 1931. Englishman: Rodgers, p. 56. "You Zill
feel like a heel": Shell 3rogress. "0agical": Rodgers, pp. 188-89. "No
concessions"; attendance: Relevant Annual Reports of the LIS3C. "0ore
than doubled": Annual Report of the LIS3C, 1930, p. 6.

$75,000: R0. Ocean highZay: R0  quoted in NYT, June 25, 1930. The
Smith sisters: R0 to FDR, Aug. 17, 1931; :aldridge,   another Fire Island
landoZner, to R0,  Aug. 21, 1931, FDR 3apers. Typical R0 threat to
resign: R0  to FDR, Nov. 10, 1930, FDR 3apers. Typical FDR backing
aZay: FDR to R0,  0ay  9, 1933, FDR 3apers.

Inviting Lehman and not FDR: Shapiro. FDR tour: +T, Aug. 4, 1930. "Best
money ever spent": FDR quoted in NYT, July 27, 1931.

Valley Stream grade-crossing elimination: :orst one on LI: NYT,  Apr. 15,
1 93 1. FDR signing the petition: NYT, July 27, 1931. R0's Zork on the
problem detailed in correspondence Zith FDR, Aug. 1, 1931-0ay 2, 1932,
FDR 3apers. "I must ask to be relieved" and FDR's reply: 0ay 9, 1932
FDR 3apers.

Torrey incident: Torrey's account of it in Torrey to FDR, Oct. 5, 1929, FDR
3apers. R0's statement, issued Oct. 16, 1929, said, "There is a good deal of

1637
picturesque e[aggeration in Torrey's reference to my language and
conduct," but does not deny any specific point in Torrey's account.
NeZspaper accounts, Zhich quote Zitnesses of the incident and contain the
R0  and FDR quotes, in NYT and +T, Oct. 7, 1929. Among his closest
friends: Ann and Louis Lubin. Reducing Torrey's salary, AS+3S position.
AS+3S 0inutes,  p. 1784.

Distaste for public: 3erkins O+R. Bridges loZ: Shapiro. "Dirty":  Shapiro,
:indels.   3ermits, "flagging," pool temperature: :indels,   .ern.  FDR
investigation: 0ills  to FDR, Aug. 24, 1932; Gorton to Cross, Sept. 2, 1932,
FDR 3apers.

"Badge of poverty": Daniel 0itchell   of Enfield Falls to FDR, no date, FDR
3apers. "Legitimate kick": FDR to R0,  Aug. 19, 1930, FDR 3apers. "I do
not care to be associated": R0 to FDR, Aug. 22, 1930, FDR 3apers. FDR's
veto: NYT, 0ar.  22, 1932.

Special assignments: Among them Zas bulldo]ing through a bridge bypass
to carry Northern Boulevard around Roslyn that had been stalled for years
by the opposition of Roslynites to State D3:  plans; thinking up a solution
for frequent brush fires in Suffolk County pine barrens (R0's solution Zas
the building of ZatchtoZers staffed by an augmented state forest ranger
force); and investigating a series of rapes at Girl Scout camps in 3alisades
Interstate 3ark.

"Do you knoZ, by God": Josephson and Josephson, p. 435. :alker
humiliating Smith: Cullman, confidential source. Farley and Flynn: Farley,
Behind the Ballots, passim; Flynn, passim. "+e felt . . . hurt": 3erkins O+R.
R0's  recollections: In intervieZ Zith  author. "A fight to the death":
Josephson and Josephson, p. 440; best account of Smith's defeat in Farley,
Behind the Ballots, pp. 78-79, 80-95.

18. NeZ York City Before Robert 0oses

SO8RCES

Books:

1638
Lillian  Brandt, An Impressionistic VieZ of the :inter   of  1930-31 in NeZ
York City; Ellis, The Epic of NeZ  York City; Garrett, The La Guardia
Years; 0ann, La Guardia Comes to 3oZer; 0itgang, The 0an  :ho   Rode
the Tiger; Rankin, NeZ York Advancing, 1934-1935', Rodgers, Robert
0oses; Schles-inger, The Age of Roosevelt, Vol. II: The Coming of the
NeZ Deal.

Author's intervieZs:

:ith   tZo  La Guardia officials, 3aul J. .ern  and Joseph D. 0cGoldrick;
Iphi-gene Ochs Sul]berger; and 3ark Department officials John 0ulcahy
and Samuel :hite.

NOTES

NeZ York during the Depression: Ellis, pp. 532-33; Brandt, p. v.
Schoolteacher and nurse: 4uoted in Brandt, pp. 6, 8, 18. Clinics: Brandt, p.
10. "EveryZhere

Notes for pages 324^350

there seemed": Gellhorn, quoted in Schlesinger, p. 272.

Seabury investigation: Ellis, 0ann, 0itgang  books. "This is hoZ Ze  make
Democrats": Ellis, p. 540.

City's debt: +arold 3helps Stokes, article in NYT, 0ay 28, 1933; Rankin, p.
39-

"Engineers" Zithout diplomas: .ern.  "The city  did not get"; subZay: 0c-
Goldrick. Schools: Garrett, p. 57.

Strangling: NYT, +T, various issues, 1931-33. :est Side +ighZay:  See
R0  brochures, quoted, Chapter 25. Also Stephen G. Bick to NYT, Oct. 24,
1933. Conditions on 4ueensborough Bridge: NYT, Aug. 8, 1930, July 18,
1933. +enry +udson Bridge: R0's  brochures. NarroZs tube: Ina Joan Caro,
"Building a 3ublic  :ork   in a Democracy: The Verra]ano-NarroZs Bridge
(unpublished 0.A.  thesis), pp. 13-28. Triborough history: 0any articles; for

1639
e[ample NYT, Aug. 15, 1934. A do]en accidents a day: NYT, Dec. 25,
1933.

3arks: Brooklyn 3ark Department: +T, Apr. 11, 1934; June 26, 1934. Beach
front rented out: +T, Jan. 11, 1931; NYT, Feb. 28, 1934; 0rs. Sul]berger,
3D official  John 0ulcahy. Not a single structure, statues: 3ark Association
survey quoted in NYT, June 6, 1934; also NYT 0aga]ine, July 15, 1934.
Bryant 3ark: NYT, Feb. 3, 1932; July 23, 1932; Nov. 26, 1932; +T, Feb. 17,
1934. Central 3ark: Eugene .inkead and Russell 0aloney, "3rofiles—
Central 3ark," The NeZ Yorker, Sept. 13, 20, 27, 1941. Zoo: The NeZ
Yorker, Dec. 1, 1934. "A player standing on line": +T, Jan. 26, 1934. "You
couldn't tell the difference": 0ulcahy. Curtaining off  toilets: 3D official
Samuel +. :hite.   Chopin nocturne: The NeZ Yorker, Sept. 20, 1941.
+oovervilles: Various neZspaper articles, 1932-33; +T, Apr. 27, 1934. Lack
of park land: Architectural Forum, Dec. J 936, p. 503. No parks in slums:
Author's study of borough park department maps, pre-0oses. One reformer:
Allen Jacobs to NYT, printed 0ar. 8, 1931. "The Zistful  faces": Dorothy
Bromley in NYT, 0ay   6, 1934.

Casino: The NeZ Yorker, Sept. 20, 1941; various neZspaper articles, I93 2
~ 1933.

3leading Zith officials  for roads: R0.  Triborough Bridge: R0  quoted in
Rod-gers, p. 98.

R0's  plan: 0etropolitan  Conference on 3arks, "3rogram for E[tension of
3arks and 3arkZays in the 0etropolitan

1197

Region," Feb. 25, 1930. Among those Zatching in the audience Zho recall
details of ins appea 3aul \\ u (La Guardia'a 1 rporatioo Counsel), Shapiro,
0adigan md Childs. Lad of cooperation from city officials.  .0

Lehman's admiration for R0: ( onfr  dential sources. State Emergency
3ublic :orks   Commission: Rodgers, pp. 76 77. City Zasting Triborough
funds: Rodgeri p. 98.

1640
City's financial situation Zorsening: Garrett, pp. 142-50.

19. To 3oZer in the City

SO8RCES

Books and documents:

Garrett, The La Guardia Years; 0ann, La Guardia Comes to 3oZer;
0itgang  The 0an :ho    Rode the Tiger; 0oscoZ, :hat    +ave You Done for
0e  Lately?; Rodgers, Robert 0oses; and the collections of personal papers
of three key Fusion figures—0aurice 3. Davidson, :.  .ingsland   0acy  and
Joseph 0. 3rice.

Oral +istory Reminiscences:

Joseph 0. 3rice, 3aul :indels.

Author's intervieZs:

Adolf A.  Berle, Jr., Richard S. Childs, 3aul J. .ern, :illiam    Latham,
Reuben A. La]arus, 0ichael J. 0adigan,  Joseph D. 0cGoldrick, Sidney 0.
Shapiro, Iphi-gene Ochs Sul]berger, 3aul :indels.

NOTES

Seabury hearings: 0itgang, pp. 158— 310. O'Brien's gaffes: 0ann, p. 90.
Reformers vieZing R0  paternally: Tone of letters and memos in 3rice and
Davidson 3apers; Childs, :indels.

"Only partially valid":  Garrett, p. 20. 0cGahen: 4uoted in 0ann,  p. 81.

:ald:   Lillian  :ald   to R0,  Oct. 30, 1936, 3rice 3apers. Didn't knoZ details
of those triumphs: The author's conclusion from his intervieZs Zith Childs,
0cGoldrick  and other reformers and from his study of 3rice and Davidson
3apers. "+igh purpose": Childs. "Starry-eyed": :indels.   Favorable
publicity: "No  man has gotten more praise recently," the Brooklyn Eagle
noted on Jan. 14, 1933. "If 0oses ran, they believed": NeZ York Evening

1641
3ost, July 15, 1933-R0 contacted by 3rice, assures him he Zill accept
nomination; an almost unani-

Notes for pages 350-366

1198

mously favorable response: Draft of proposed 3rice press release (never
released), undated but probably 0ay 18, 1933, 3rice 3aper. See also :T,
July 6, 1933.

Seabury's opinion of R0: R0;   Garrett, p. 101; 0ann, p. 83; 0itgang,  pp.
316-18; 3rice press release: "Statement of Reason for Joseph 0. 3rice's
:ithdraZal   from  Fusion Conference: Judge Seabury's Objections to Robert
0oses's Availability  as 0ayoral Candidate" (un-released and undated but
probably July 1933), 3rice 3apers; 3rice to reformer Richard :elling,  July
18, 1933, R0 to 3rice, July 29, 1933, 3rice 3apers.

Seabury biography: 0itgang book; 0ann,  pp. 38-46.

"Reserve all personal liberty": R0. "I  am not a candidate": R0 quoted in
NYT, July 12, 1933. R0  feels Seabury Zill back him: R0.  Five reformers:
The judges Zere John C. .no[  and Clarence J. Shearn, the business
e[ecutive Richard C. 3atterson, Jr., vice president of NBC. Davidson on
Straus: Davidson 3apers, memo entitled: ":anted: A 0ayor,"  pp. 54-59.
LaG "standing in the Zings": Davidson 3apers, quoted in 0ann, p. 79. LaG
biography: See "Sources" for Chapter 23. Reformers' attitude toZard him:
0ann, pp. 67-72. Seabury's attitude: 0ann, pp. 72-75, 80. 18 for R0, 5 for
LaG: 3rice 3apers.

Seabun-Davidson lunch: Seabury quoted in Davidson, "IntervieZ as
Recorded," p. 26, Davidson 3apers. R0 tells 3rice not to nominate him:
R0.  O'Ryan episode: 0ann, pp. 84-85. "Sit doZn, Sam": 0ann, p. 86.

R0's  participation in campaign: :in-dels.  +is  statements: NYT, Oct. 26,
28, Nov. 3, 1933.

1642
:T   editorial: Nov. 4, 1933. "SideZalks of NeZ York": :indels gave the
order to play it; :indels.

"It Zas like he oZned the 8nited States": 0arie La Guardia quoted in
0ann, p. 20. Driving around on Sundays: .ern. +ated laZyers: .ern,
La]arus. LaG feared Smith: :indels. "I told the 0ayor": R0 in NYT
0aga]ine, Aug. 16, 1936.

"I'm appointing the best man": 0rs. Sul]berger. Drafting his oZn bill:
Raymond 3. 0cNulty to LaG, Dec. 27, 1933. Letter obtained from
confidential source.

Neither man considered the Triborough appointment particularly
significant: :indels, La]arus, R0, 0adigan. "No man is big enough":
Senator Thomas F. Burchill, quoted in NYT, Jan. 16, 1934. R0 tells LaG
not to Zorry: La]arus.

"The finger": 0oscoZ, p. 199. Reformers influencing legislators: NYT, Jan.
10; +T, Jan. 17, 1934. "No possible conflict of interest": LaG quoted in
NYT, Jan. 7, 1934. "Nothing to get e[cited about": R0 quoted in :T, Jan.
6, 1934.

C:A  Zas ruining the parks: Summary, Rodgers, p. 83. 0arine 3ark: +T,
Feb. 1, 1934.

Orchard Beach: NYT and +T, Feb. 28, 1934; Shapiro, Latham. The
notebook: "3attern for 3arks," Architectural Forum, Dec. 1936. "+is orders
just poured out": Shapiro. R0 standing at Orchard Beach: Latham,
confidential source.

20. One Year

SO8RCES

Books, articles and documents:

The basic source for this chapter is the hundreds of articles on Robert
0oses, his rebuilding of NeZ York City's parks and his building of

1643
parkZays and the Triborough Bridge that appeared on almost a daily basis,
month after month, in NeZ York's neZspapers during 1934.

Rodgers, Robert 0oses; 0oses, Dangerous Trade; 3hillips, From the Crash
to the Blit];  Rankin, NeZ York Advancing, 1934-35, pp- 127-36; 0oscoZ,
:hat   +ave You Done for 0e  Lately?; Talese, The Bridge; Reed, Central
3ark; :3A,   NeZ  York 3anorama; 3:A,   0oses, "Report on
Accomplishments of 3ark Department in First TZo Years of Fusion
Administration," 1936 (hereafter referred to as "TZo Years"); 0oses, Four
Years of 3ark 3rogress, 1937 (hereafter referred to as Four Years).
Triborough Bridge Authority, "The Triborough Bridge, a 0odern
0etropolitan  Traffic Artery, July 11, 1936"; "Fifth  Anniversary of the
Opening of the Triborough Bridge," July 11, 1941.

"3attern for 3arks," Architectural Forum, Dec. 1936; "Robert (Or-I'll-Re-
sign) 0oses," Fortune, June 1938; +ubert +erring, "Robert 0oses and +is
3arks," +arper's, Dec. 1937; 0oses, "0unicipal  Recreation," American
Architect and Architecture, Nov. 1936; 0oses, "The Changing City,"
Architectural Forum, 0ar.  1940; The NeZ Yorker's 1941 series on Central
3ark.

3ark Department Files; La Guardia and Davidson 3apers.

Author's intervieZs:

:ith   ten of R0's  top aides—:illiam    S. Chapin, Ernest J. Clark, Gilmore

Notes for pages 368-387

11<:

Clarke, James A. DaZson, Richard Guthridge, :illiam  Latham, 0ichael  J.
0adigan, Sidney 0.  Shapiro and tZo Zho cannot be identified; three of his
personal secretaries—+a]el Tappan, Nettie Greenberg and one Zho cannot
be identified; nineteen architects Zho Zorked for the 3ark Department—
Simon Brines, Isaiah Ehrlich, +arry Gould, Richard .orchien,  David
Levine, Irving Levine, George Levy, Joshua LoZenfish, Janet 3att, Bernie
Rosen, Allen Saalberg, Carl Schilling, Clarence Stein, Robert :einberg,

1644
+enry :right,    0ichael  Zimmer and three Zho prefer not to be identified
(most of the intervieZs Zith these architects Zere conducted by 0rs. 3ris-
cilla :orland   Burton); 0rs.  Lidia  Nelson, e[ecutive secretary of the
Architects Emergency Committee; also Adolf A. Berle, Jr., John A.
Coleman, +oZard S. Cullman, Emily Smith :arner,   3aul :indels.

NOTES

The Zeeding out: DaZson, Latham, 0adigan, confidential source.
Confronting C:A:   3D  Files, LaG 3apers, Latham.

3roportion of architects and engineers out of Zork: :.  A. Shoudy, "The
Engineer and the Depression," The Nation, Sept. 13, 1933; Talbot Faulkner
+amlin, "The Architect  and the Depression," The Nation, Aug. 9, 1933.
":hen   you got inside": Clark. Scene at Arsenal: IntervieZs cited above.

"I see to it": R0  quoted in Brooklyn Eagle, 0ay  9, 1935. The firings: NYT
and +T, Feb. 1, 1934. Scenes among laborers: IntervieZs cited above. ":e
e[pect the men to Zork": R0  quoted in NYT, Feb. I, 1934 (italics added).
The Zinter of '34: 3hillips,  pp. 317-18, says: "For brutish, man-killing, soul-
destroying Zeather the years betZeen 1934 and 1938 probably cannot be
matched in the climatological annals of the 8nited States." Embury: article
in NYT, Feb. 27, 1934. Tablecloth: Clarke.

Every structure: Rankin, pp. 127-136; "TZo Years"; Four Years. 3ark
benches: "Topics of the Times" in NYT, 0ay 18, 1934. Bryant 3ark
opening: +T, Sept. 9, 1934. The speaker Zas John Finley, a leading
conservationist. Central 3ark: The NeZ Yorker, Sept. 13, 20, 27, 1941;
Dorothy Dunbar Bromley, "NeZ Vistas Open for 0anhattan's Oasis," NYT
0aga]ine,  Apr. 15, 1934- Creating neZ parks: Latham, Shapiro. R0 asked
LaG: 3D Files, LaG 3apers. Chrystie-

lorsyth: ;)  /

lation: Architectui I 1

8nappropriated state lands: 0oses, /

1645
gerous Trade, p. m

ncss of their potential tj ;is city pari

documented in Smith I'.ipeis as far back as 1927 (R0 to Smith. Apt. 13,
n;27). Red +ook sZampland: R0  to LaG, 0ai  26, 1934, LaG 3apers, :ar
0emorial  3laygrounds: +T and NYT, 0ai   NYT, 0ar.  20, 23; Berle, in
inter. Zith author, contended that he conceived the sZitch from monument
to pi grounds, but this contention is not supported by evidence in the LaG
3apers TZo tennis courts: R0 to LaG, 0ar.  26. Consolidated Gas: NYT,
Dec. 1. Roth-stein estate: R0 to Delehanty, July 23; Delehanty to R0, July
25; R0  to LaG, July 27; LaG to R0,  Aug. 5; Earle AndreZs to La Guardia
aide Lester Stone, Sept. 27; Stone to AndreZs, Oct. 1; LaG 3apers.
Rockefeller: NYT, June 23, 1935. Dreier-Offerman: "TZo Years," p. 2.

The city cheered: "NeZ Deal": NYT, Feb. 11, 1934. "100 Days": Brooklyn
Eagle, 0ay 6. "An  urban desert bloom": :T,  Dec. 14. "+ercules": NYT,
0ar. 20. NYT  editorial: Sept. 13. 0urray  Davis intervieZ: :T,    Jan. 30.
"The people oZn the parks": +T, 0ay  26. "2, 4, 6, 8": +T, Dec. 3.

Smith begging FDR for leases: R0. Central 3ark Zoo: Smith asking R0 to
improve Zoo: R0,  Emily Smith :arner.   Bear pacing: +T, Apr. 22, 1934.
Smith had had no hint: :arner. Smith visiting  the Zoo at nights: Coleman,
Cullman, :arner.  C:A    cramping R0's style: 3D  Files. "Gay and
amusing": Fortune, June 1938. "The finest eating vieZ": Architectural
Forum, Dec. 1936. Attendance: 3D Files.

Triborough Bridge: Statistics (dZarfed any other single enterprise he had
undertaken; the ultimate cost Zould be $60,-300,000, more than the
combined total he had spent during the previous ten years on the
construction of all his Long Island projects; comparison of anchorages Zith
pyramids, etc.; "to make the girders," etc.): 3ublic :orks  Administration,
"Case No. 1: NeZ York-Bridge," pp. 226-31. Enough concrete for four-lane
highZay: 1936 TBA brochure, p. 21. "Largest vertical-lift bridge": +T,  July
12, 1936. "Largest batch," 5,000 men Zorking at site, etc.: "Case No. 1,"
pp. 226-31; +T, July 12, 1936. Description of islands: :3A,  NeZ  York
3anorama, pp. 77, 421; NYT, Apr 21, 1946; +T, Feb. 6, 1935. Scene from
air in 1934: The author is indebted to +. I. Brock,

1646
Notes for pages 389^413

1200

Zho described it in NYT 0aga]ine,   Apr. 28, 1935. The image of the streets
rushing together is his. The only hope: R0. 85%: :indels.  0oses'  traffic
studies: 0adigan. Lanes too narroZ: R0  in NYT, Apr. 12, 1934, intervieZ.
+earst deal: R0's contention that this is the reason for placing the
0anhattan approach at 125th Street is supported in 0oscoZ, p. 197, and by
:indels,   first Triborough counsel under R0. Burkan's only interest: R0,
:indels,   confidential source. "I sent for the chief engineer": R0 quoted in
Rodgers, p. 98. Othmar Ammann: For a biographical sketch, see Talese, pp.
3 iff. Loeser "a 3russian and a Na]i": R0  quoting LaG in Dangerous Trade,
p. 164. The most e[perienced bridge builders: NYT, Feb. 28, 1934.

Cost reduced from $51,000,000 to $30,000,000: Burkan in NYT, Apr. 4,
1934. 0oses 9 plans for using the money: R0, Shapiro, :indels.  The
forgotten lease: +T, July 26. :ashburn Co.: +T,  Oct. 12; NYT, Oct. 30.

$6,000,000 loan: NYT, July 7. Con Ed.: Confidential source. Another trip to
:ashington;  LaG finding  another $1,-300,000; LaG 3apers.

:anting   a huge stadium: R0 intervieZ in  the NeZ York American, Apr.
22,

1935.

Central 3ark Casino: Restaurant oZners' offers: NYT, 0ar. 19, 1936. Char-
pontier: NYT, Dec. 26, 1935. "Not going to confer": NYT, Feb. 21, 1934.
Advised by :indels:   :indels.   Court fight:  Various neZspapers, 0ar. 12,
13, 27, 1936. "The right to do": +T, 0ar.  25, 1936. CareZ's decision: NYT,
0ar. 27, 1936. R0's  ansZer; Appellate Court's reversal: NYT, 0ay 2,
1936.

21. The Candidate

SO8RCES

1647
Books:

Freidel, Franklin D. Roosevelt: The Triumph; 0itgang, The 0an  :ho
Rode the Tiger; 0oscoZ, 3olitics in  the Empire State; 0oses, Dangerous
Trade; Nevins, +erbert +. Lehman and +is Era; Schlesinger, The Age of
Roosevelt, Vol. II: The Coming of the NeZ Deal.

Author's intervieZs:

:ith   R0's  campaign chairman, F. Trubee Davison, and Long Island
Democratic leader Richard 0ayes, and Zith Senate 0ajority Leader George
R. Fearon, Joseph D. 0cGoldrick, reporter :arren  0oscoZ,  Joseph 0.
3roskauer,

Aaron RabinoZit],  Emily Smith :arner   and 3aul :indels.

NOTES

"0ore  or less forced on me": 0oses, Dangerous Trade, p. 882. "+e
encouraged me": Davison. "+e Zas hungry for it": :indels.   The barons'
domination of the Republican 3arty: Davison, :indels;  Freidel and
0oscoZ  books. Snell: Schlesinger, p. 480. A picture of the Old Guard's
thinking Zas obtained from intervieZs Zith  Davison and 0ayes, and from
the 0acy 3apers. "Anybody Zho  amounted to anything": 0oscoZ, p. 71,
:.   .ingsland  0acy:  Freidel.

"That Zas all Ze had to hear": Davison. :hat  Zas Zanted Zas a front man:
Davison, 0ayes; 0acy  3apers.

North Shore Almanack: Sept. 27, 1934. "No one questioned" and crucial
meeting: Davison. "None can say": Buffalo Evening NeZs, Sept. 29, 1929.
"One of the most hectic": Rochester Times-8nion, Sept. 20, 1934. "At
last!": :T,   Sept. 29, 1934. R0 had Zritten  most of the platform himself:
Davison.

"Some kind of a record": :indels.  "A  fearful roZ":  Davison. RabinoZit]
dinner party: RabinoZit].  Feeling of R0's  old associates: RabinoZit],
3roskauer, 0cGoldrick.

1648
First press conference: :T, Oct. 2, 1934; +T, Oct. 3, 1934, is best. LaG
"support": One typical headline, in NYT, Oct. 2, 1934, said: "0oses
Confident of La Guardia Aid." +e also said, Zhen cornered, "The 0ayor
doesn't talk much politics. +e doesn't to me."

8pstate tour disaster: :T,  Oct. 25, 27, 1934; Fearon, Davison. Campaign
plans: Davison.

First speech: Best in Brooklyn Eagle, Oct. 5, 1934. The 8nion League Club
had recently called for a "justifiable Zar upon the NeZ Deal theorists"
(0itgang,  p. 332). Disparaging remarks about JeZs: :indels heard them.

Threatened to sue JeZish Encyclopedia: Confidential source. 0cGoldrick's
shock: 0cGoldrick.  Shuls in the Bron[: :hen   the author—thirty-five  years
after the gubernatorial campaign—intervieZed Bron[ JeZs for the "One
0ile"  chapter, many vividly recalled 0oses "trying  to say he Zasn't
JeZish."

"These stuffed shirts": :T,  Oct. 5, 1934. "I am a liberal": R0   at press
conference reported in +T, Oct. 3, 1934.

R0  on Lehman: Dangerous Trade, p. 878; R0 intervieZ. Donating million
to depositors: R0.

Notes for pages 413^29

"0oses Calls Lehman :eak":   +T,

Oct. 10, 1934. "Stupid": American, Oct. 14. "3uppet": 3ost, Oct. 16.
"Respectable front": NYT, Oct. 24.

Lehman handled 0oses just right: 3roskauer, Davison. And 0oses kneZ it:
"I made an honest campaign and pulled no punches, Zhich meant little in
vieZ of Governor Lehman's strategy, dictated by clever campaign
managers, to keep out of range and avoid any real infighting," he Zrote in
Dangerous Trade, p. 883. Speech in Binghamton: Te[t in +T, Oct. 25, 1934.
"Cannot dispose of: Brooklyn Eagle, Oct. 5, 1934.

1649
Court of Claims corruption: NYT, Oct. 26, 1934. City Trust report: +T, Oct.
14. In an intervieZ Zith  the author, R0 admitted this charge Zas false.
O'Connells: R0  quoted in :T,   Nov. 1. Accusing Lehman of being utilities'
ally: Full te[t  of charge in +T, Oct. 25. "Scrupulous": Nevins, p. 153.
O'Ryan: NYT, Oct. 28. Cluett's campaign manager Charles E. Cole: :T,
Nov. 2; 0c-Goldrick.  :T    editorial: Nov. 3. Libel  insurance: Davison.

R0  on Farley: +T, Oct. 31, 1934. On O'Connor: +T, Oct. 30; NYT, Nov. 3.
On Seabury: +T, Nov. 4. On Copeland: +T, Oct. 24. On Tremaine: +T, Oct.
24. On Straus: +T, Oct. 27. Straus's friends: RabinoZit]. On 0urray: +T,
Oct. 16 (italics added). Flynn reply: +T, Nov. 3.

R0  and Smith: The source has asked that he not be identified. Smith's
feelings: Emily Smith :arner.  Dinner  party: 3roskauer, Zho Zas the host.
One observer: 0cGoldrick. Reporter: Julian Grey 0ason in The North
Shore Almanack, Oct. 11, 1934. "+e made no gestures": :T, Oct. 28. +oZ
he affected audiences: 0cGoldrick, Zho sat behind him on the platform
during speeches. "0ore attacks on personalities": NYT, Nov. 4.

Election results: +T called it: "The greatest defeat the Republican 3arty has
ever suffered in this state. . . . 0r. 0oses . . . suffered the Zorst defeat of all
Republicans Zho ever ran for Governor in this state." 3olitical reporters
astonished: 0oscoZ intervieZ.

"An attempt to sZim up Niagara": R0  intervieZ  in +T,  Nov. 7, 1934.
Lehman on R0: Rodgers, p. 224. "+e Zas terribly sensitive": R0.

22. Order Number 129

SO8RCES

Books, articles and documents:

Ickes, The Secret Diary of +arold L.

L201

Ickes, Vol. I: The 1 rsi Thousand D

1650
I( JJ3-i936 (Ickes furnishes 1:; tails, hoZever, in "0v TZelve  \ Zith
F.D.R.," 7 8urda)

3ost, June 26, 194.); 0oses, Dangei Trade; Rodgers, Robert 0oses\ Schkt-
inger, The Age of Roosevelt, Vol. II: The Coming of the NeZ Deal.

La Guardia, 3rice and FDR 3apers.

:illiam    D. Guthrie, "Opinion of Counsel as to the Legality of Order No.
129 issued under date of December 26, 1934, by +on. +arold L. Ickes,
Secretary of the Interior, as Administrator of the Federal Emergency
Administration of 3ublic  :orks,   if intended or held to be applicable to the
pending Loan Agreement dated September 1, 1933, betZeen The 8nited
States of America and the Triborough Bridge Authority" . . . 0arch 11,
I935-

Oral +istory Reminiscences:

Frances 3erkins, Joseph 0. 3rice.

Author's intervieZs:

+oZard S. Cullman, Reuben A. La]arus, Sidney 0.  Shapiro, 3aul :indels.

NOTES

"I don't trust him": FDR quoted in Frances 3erkins O+R, Vol. Ill, p. 372.

LaG's thinking: :indels,   La]arus.

"LaG regretted the situation": Ickes, pp. 148-49. R0 threatens to resign
from both positions: R0  later revealed he had said this to LaG; NYT, Jan.
4, 1935.

Berle telegram: 0ar. 1, 1934. FDR replied the ne[t day: "I love your
suggestion that Bob 0oses' real name is the due d'Enghien. Also, though I
do not mind your calling me Caesar, I hate your suggestion about
Napoleon! As a matter of fact, the case of your friend, the due, is in no
sense a personal one . . . ," FDR 3apers. Roosevelt "implacable": Ickes to

1651
Burlingham, Aug. 13, 1948, quoted in 0oses, Dangerous Trade, pp. 181-
82. Farley and +oZe urging FDR on: Ickes, p. 148. LaG stalling, Ickes
threatening: Ickes, p. 229. "It seems that 0oses is a bitterly persistent
enemy of the 3resident's, and the 3resident has a feeling of dislike of him
that I haven't seen him e[press Zith respect to any other person," he diaried.
"+e Zould  make promises": Ickes, p. 267; :indels. "Naturally  I had to
declare a truce": Ickes, p. 229. A further threat. +e Zrote this in his diary on
Nov. 23, 1934 (p. 229).

"Almost the incarnation": Schlesinger,

Notes for pages 429-443

1202

p. 282. "A modern +oratius": Rodgers, p. 100. Ickes telephoning LaG:
Ickes, p. 229.

Order Number 129; assurance it Zould not apply to 3ost: :indels. "The
3resident helped me draft this order," and discussed it personally Zith LaG:
Ickes, p. 268. LaG shoZs order to R0: R0,  :indels,   La]arus. R0's
narration: Statement issued Jan. 3, 1935, printed in neZspapers the
folloZing  day.

"I had to lie": Ickes, p. 268. One of his advisers: La]arus. Resolutions: LaG
3apers; various neZspapers. "Our 0ayor has . . . craZled": EdZard 0.
Chase, 0ar. 4, 1935, printed in +T, 0ar. 5. "A  crooked course": Ickes, p.
268.

"I need steel": LaG quoted in +T, Jan. 5, 1935. Shouldering through
reporters: NYT, Jan. 9, 1935. Reasonable men; "at least 3ost is on the high
seas": LaG in, for e[ample, +T, Jan. 5. "0aking a martyr out of him":
Ickes, "0y  TZelve Years Zith F.D.R.," p. 83. "At 3:A    headquarters": +T,
Jan 17, 1935.

The definitive Zord: Burlingham  to LaG, Feb. 15, 1935, 3rice 3apers. 3rice
and FDR: 3rice to FDR, Jan. 30, 1935; FDR to 3rice, Feb. 2, 1935; 3rice
3apers; FDR 3apers. The mail tally: FDR 3apers. Burlingham to FDR: Feb.

1652
22, 1935, 3rice 3apers. "Almost a national issue": Ickes, "0y TZelve Years
Zith F.D.R.," p. 82. .rock:   NYT, Jan. 25, 1935. Lippmann: +T, Jan. 24,
1935.

+uey Long: +T,  0ar.  7, 1935. An in-depth series on R0 in 30,  by John ..
:eiss,  says that one reason FDR backed doZn is that Long threatened to
release R0's figures on Farley.

"An arbitrary and capricious fiat": Guthrie brief, p. 13. 3rice: 4uoted in
Rodgers, p. 102. 3rice also related the conversation he said he had Zith the
3resident to :indels  and La]arus. "The 3resident, I knoZ":  Ickes, p. 291.
Secret meeting betZeen FDR and LaG: No account of this can be found in
the Secret Diary, but Ickes states that it took place in "0y TZelve Years
Zith F.D.R.," p. 83. +iding  behind the shades: :indels. The letter
stratagem: Ickes, "0y TZelve Years Zith F.D.R.," p. 83. The letters made
public are quoted in the press, 0ar. 12, 1935. Smith stepping in: R0,
Cullman; Ickes, p. 317. Ickes reminiscing to Burlingham: "A do]en years
after the dedication of the Triborough Bridge," R0 Zrote in  Dangerous
Trade (p. 181), "I received [from Burlingham] a letter Zhich threZ some
additional light on the impact of 0r.  Ickes' curious char-

acter." R0 then quotes the Ickes-Bur-lingham letter, dated Aug. 13, 1948.
Rodgers: p. 105. "In the saddle": :indels.

Sara Delano Roosevelt 3ark: :indels, Shapiro.

Triborough Bridge opening ceremony: "It is very small indeed": Ickes, p.
623. "I understand that there Zill be a national hookup": Ickes to FDR, June
23, 1936, FDR 3apers. +andZriting on the letter, probably that of 0arvin
0clntyre,  mentions that R0  had previously invited FDR. FDR's memo:
FDR to Ickes, June 25, 1936, FDR 3apers. R0 promises not to introduce
the 3resident, gives him si[ minutes: :indels.  Ickes overZhelmed by R0's
charm: Ickes, pp. 636-37.

23. In the Saddle

SO8RCES

1653
Books, articles and documents:

Catledge, 0y Life  and the Times; Cuneo, Life Zith Fiorello; FoZler, Beau
James; Garrett, The La Guardia Years; Gluck, 0y Story; Ickes, The Secret
Diary of +arold  L. Ickes, Vol. I: The First Thousand Days, 1933-1936; La
Guardia, The 0aking of an Insurgent; Limpus and Ley son, This 0an La
Guardia; 0ann, La Guardia: A Fighter Against +is  Times and La Guardia
Comes to 3oZer; 0orris,  Let the Chips Fall; 0oses, Dangerous Trade, La
Guardia: A Salute and a 0emoir and :orking   for the 3eople; Rankin, NeZ
York Advancing: I 934~35 and :orld's  Fair Edition  and Victory Edition;
Rodgers, Robert 0oses; Talese, The .ingdom and the 3oZer; TugZell, The
Art of 3olitics;  :halen,   0r.  NeZ  York; :3A,   NeZ  York City Guide and
NeZ York 3anorama; Zinn, La Guardia in Congress.

Among scores of maga]ine articles and reports, in particular: +ubert
+erring, "Robert 0oses and +is  3arks," +arper's, Dec. 1937; 0oses,
"0unicipal  Recreation," American Architect and Architecture, Nov. 1936;
0oses, "The Changing City," Architectural Forum, 0ar.  1940; NeZ York
City 3ark Department, 3ark 3rogress reports, 1937, 1939, 1941; "NeZ
York's 0r.  0oses," Common Zeal, 0ar.  14, 1941; "3attern for 3arks,"
Architectural Forum, Dec. 1936; "Robert (Or-I'll-Resign) 0oses," Fortune,
June 1938; Triborough Bridge Authority, "Fifth Anniversary of the Opening
of the Triborough Bridge," June II, 1941; O. G. Villard, "Great 3ublic
Servant," The Nation, Oct. 17, 1934.

Notes for pages 445-458

Davison, E[ton, La Guardia, 0orgen-thau and FDR 3apers. 3ark
Department Files.

Oral +istory Reminiscences:

Charles C. Burlingham, Stanley 0. Isaacs, 0arie Fischer La Guardia,
Reuben A. La]arus, NeZbold 0orris,  3aul :indels.

Author's intervieZs:

1654
Adolf A.  Berle, Jr., :alter  D. Binger, :illiam    C. Chanler, Ernest J. Clark,
Gilmore Clarke, Jackson Dykman, :illiam   E[ton, Jr., George R. Fearon,
:illiam    0cD.  Griffin,  Joseph T. Ingraham, Saul .aplan, 3aul J. .ern,
Jacob Lutsky, 0ichael J. 0adigan, Joseph D. 0cGold-rick,  F. Dodd
0c+ugh,  John 0ulcahy,  LaZrence 0.  Orton, :allace   Sayre, Sidney 0.
Shapiro, Florence Shientag, 3. Fearson Shortridge, Ole Singstad, Iphi-gene
Ochs Sul]berger, Re[ford G. Tug-Zell, Robert C. :einberg,   Samuel :hite,
3aul :indels.

Author's correspondence: :illiam  Fel-loZes 0organ,  Nov. 18, 1967.

NOTES

"Treated his commissioners like dogs":

TugZell, pp. 96-97. 3eering betZeen fingers: La]arus, :indels.  "Boners":
Garrett, p. 130; La]arus. "If you Zere any dumber": 0oses, La Guardia, p.
30. Turnover unprecedented: TugZell, p. 97. Firing secretary: La]arus.
Sealing commissioners' files: 0cGoldrick, confidential source.

LaG-R0  relationship: General picture from intervieZs Zith  Berle, Binger,
Chanler, .ern, La]arus, 0adigan,  0cGoldrick,   Orton, Sayre, Shientag,
TugZell, confidential sources. Sending AndreZs: La]arus, :indels.  "Come
to bloZs": Confidential source. R0's  nicknames for LaG: 0adigan,
La]arus, :indels.   "+is  Grace": 0cGoldrick,  :indels.   Resignation threats:
.ern,  La]arus, 0cGoldrick,   :indels.   LaG dropping investigation:
Dykman.

Astoria ferry: By coincidence, The NeZ Yorker had a Zriter on the very
ferry Zhich found its slip being destroyed Zhen it returned, and 0adigan
Zas in .racke's  office Zhen the first call to .racke  came in: The NeZ
Yorker, Aug. 1, 1936; 0adigan. Other descriptions of event: NYT, +T, July
23, 1936. Later developments: NYT, July 30, 1936; +T, Aug. 1. R0's
earlier attempts to force action: R0 to .racke,  Feb. 4, 1936; .racke to R0,
Feb. 10; R0 to

.racke,  Feb. 11; to R0 I

1655
14; R0  to .racke  Fel [8, June to :harton  Green ■< ideal project

gineer, Triborough \uthonty, July

23; all in 3D Files.

Burlingham on "brutalities": 4uoted in  0ann,  La Guardia Comes to 3oZer,
p. 30. "Nurtured that like a plant": 0is  LaG O+R. "You'd see the tZo of
them": 0adigan. "That's the Zay you get thinus done": Shientag.

3laying on LaG's enthusiasm for engineering; constantly pressing him to go
on tours: The LaG 3apers are filled Zith R0 invitations;  0adigan  states
that R0  reali]ed—and deliberately played on— LaG's enthusiasm. "Stood
like a child": .ern.   Chinning himself on the fence: 3icture in 3D Files.
:atching   lift span hoisted: +T, 0ay  4, 1936. "The greatest engineer in the
Zorld":  +T, July 26,

1936, for e[ample.

3layground openings: The LaG 3apers contain sheafs of photographs taken
by R0's  photographers to remind the 0ayor of the scenes of Zhich he had
been the centerpiece. R0 even had the photographers take pictures, from
directly in front of the platform, of the faces of listeners staring up at the
0ayor  and sent those to LaG, too, to heighten the effect. John 0ulcahy and
Samuel :hite,  tZo  3ark Department officials, outlined for the author the
elaborate preparations that Zent into these openings; :hite Zas in charge
of the chrysanthemums, Zhich he Zould have loaded onto trucks the minute
a ceremony Zas over and rushed to another ceremony that the 0ayor Zas
scheduled to attend later that day. Of innumerable neZspaper accounts of
these events, those in NYT, July 27, 1935 (the "Babe Ruth opening"), and
July 21,

1937, and in +T, July 16 and Aug. 12, 1934, are particularly detailed. LaG's
unmitigated delight in the pageantry Zas related to the author by, among
others, .ern. GloZering  at the organ grinders: Shapiro.

SZimming pools: "0oses,"  Fortune, June 1938. +opkins quote: NYT, July
3, 1936. "The best thing": R0 to LaG, 0ay  26, 1936, LaG 3apers.

1656
R0  and the press: The author, as a reporter for NeZsday during the 1960's,
observed personally the lengths R0 Zent to in order to charm and entertain
NeZs-day's publishers and key editors and reporters. Left-Zing leaflets:
Shapiro. 0er]:  Ingraham. Ingraham believes—and Shapiro's reply Zhen the
author questioned him about the statement Zas a Zordless, sly smile—that
R0  selected the building

Notes for pages 458-473

1204

ne[t to 0er]'s   deliberately, Zanting one Zhere he could casually "drop in"
on 0er],  but feeling that moving into the very same building Zould be too
obvious. Emphasis on reporters: Shapiro e[plained hoZ R0 learned this
from 0rs.  0os-koZit].

NYT; Ochs: See "Notes," Chapter n. Sheeny had never been in Central
3ark: 0rs.  Sul]berger. Giving him the scroll: NYT  and +T, Jan. 19, 1935.
+er vieZ  of R0:  0rs.  Sul]berger. Not that she alZays agreed: 0rs.
Sul]berger. "Iphigene gave us many arguments": 0adigan. Great laZn: DN
charged, on Feb. 7, 1935, that "he did knuckle under to Iphigene Ochs
Sul]berger (daughter of Adolph Ochs), the landscape architects and Zealthy
residents in the matter of the loZer reservoir site in Central 3ark. . . . 0oses
resurrected the 'Great LaZn for 3lay' scheme at [their] behest. These people
Zere acting in good faith. They honestly believed that the parks should be
for trees, shrubs and rich or middle class people, just as Ze honestly believe
that they should be for children and poor people primarily." Shapiro
confirms that it Zas 0rs.  Sul]berger's feelings that Zere decisive.

Taking her to In Zood +ill:  0adigan.  The quarrel: 0rs. Sul]berger to R0,
Dec. 23, 1935; R0 to 0rs.  Sul]berger, Dec. 24, 1935—both printed in
NYT, Dec. 25, 1935. "NoZ you tell her you're sorry": 0rs.  Sul]berger.
3ublic apology: 0rs.  Sul]berger to R0,  Jan. 2, 1936, printed in NYT, Jan.
4.

Influence on NYT: Talese, pp. 15-16; Catledge, p. 222. NYT's special
treatment of R0: Author's analysis of articles and editorials. 0rs.
Sul]berger visiting LaG's office: 0rs.  Sul]berger.

1657
LaG "didn't dare" fire him: .ern.   ":hat'+    the Times say?": :indels,
La]arus. "Stop interfering": Numerous letters from R0  to LaG aides,
mostly to Deputy 0ayor  +enry +.  Curran, Zho had been assigned as
liaison Zith various departments, in LaG 3apers, particularly in folders
marked "3arks, Department of—1934" and "3arks, Department of —1935."
Threats to resign: For e[ample, R0 to LaG, June 9, 1934, LaG 3apers. Let
him have his Zay: Numerous letters in LaG 3apers, 3D Files. Coney Island
tract: Brooklyn Eagle, date missing; +T, June 22, 1934. Other reasons Zhy
it Zas unfeasible for LaG to crack doZn on R0:  Analysis by :indels,
La]arus, Berle, Jacob Lutsky, .ern, 0cGoldrick.   "You've got to
understand": Lutsky.

Si]e of federal contribution: Deputy

Comptroller :illiam    E. :ilson   to LaG, Oct. 17, 1937, LaG 3apers (a
complete tabulation requested by the 0ayor).

R0's  relationship Zith State Legislature: IntervieZs Zith Fear on, .aplan,
La]arus, :indels   and various legislators Zho Zish to remain anonymous.
3atronage; "a practical felloZ": .aplan,  confirmed by various confidential
sources. 8pstaters distrusted LaG: :indels, La]arus. R0  making himself
the broker: Typical letter shoZing this—one of many in LaG 3apers—are
R0  to LaG and R0  to Fearon, Jan. 12, 1934. An inoffensive bill: La]arus.

24. Driving

SO8RCES

See "Sources" for Chapter 23. Also, author's intervieZs Zith Richard S.
Childs and Jeremiah Evarts.

NOTES

0unicipal  Art  Commission: Charter, Section 637. Submitted on very day:

Childs; +T, Jan. 2, 1937.

1658
Insinuations about Corporation Counsel: R0 to :indels,  0ay   8, 1936, LaG
3apers.

Stepping up the pressure: Telegrams betZeen :indels and R0, 0ay 7,
1936, LaG 3apers. Not only :indels  but 0cGoldrick,   La]arus, Sayre and
several confidential sources described R0's use of this technique to the
author.

0attheZson  episode: NYT, June 21, 1934; +T, June 22, 24, 28; NYT, Dec.
22.

.ern  episode: Almost a member of the family: :indels.  "I  Zas a 0oses
fanatic": .ern.  Refusing to alloZ  R0  to circumvent regulations: .ern,
Sayre. Among many conflicts documented in the LaG 3apers, one specific
issue—R0's attempt to have the :3A   pay several employees $90 per
month as "electrician foremen" at the same time that the city Zas paying
them $150 per month as civil service "public address operators" —is
unfolded in Nov. 10, 1938, George Spargo memo (recipient not indicated);
R0  to LaG, Nov. 11, 1938; LaG to R0, Nov. 16, 1938; Dayton to LaG,
Nov. 29, 1938; LaG 3apers. Lying to LaG about .ern: The lie is
documented in R0 to LaG, Feb. 1 and Apr. 7, 1938; LaG to R0, Apr. 12,
1938; R0  to LaG Apr. 29, 1938; LaG to .ern,  .ern  to LaG, Apr. 2 9, 1938.
The last Zas furnished to the author by .ern; the others are in the

Notes for pages 473-495

LaG 3apers. "DisoZning him": Sayre. "Communist" investigation;
"OG38":

R0  quoted in NYT and +T, Nov. 21, 1939. "A good Roman Catholic":
.ern.  Father Coughlin: Social Justice, Sept. 11, 1939. :illiam O'DZyer
joined in the attack; during his first campaign for mayor—against LaG—in
1941, he pointed to .ern as proof that LaG had filled his administration
Zith "left-Zingers."  Council  investigation: S. Burton +eath, "Investigation
by Innuendo," Survey Graphic, Oct. 1941. "Don't let .ern set up an OG38
in NeZ York":  R0  to LaG, Oct. 14, 1939, LaG 3apers. LaG's fear of being
called "Communist": :indels,   La]arus, 0cGoldrick,   .ern,  among others.
Fired him: Sayre is also convinced that the "Communist" charge Zas the

1659
underlying reason. "+is hatred of me": .ern.  No more interference: O'D,
Impy, :agner  3apers.

Bullying commissioners: Chanler. Refusing to attend luncheons:
0cGoldrick.  +aving  one aide in each department designated: One Zith
Zhom R0  did this Zas Jeremiah Evarts, an Assistant Corporation Counsel;
Chanler, Evarts, La]arus.

Chrystie-Forsyth: :indels;   :T,   Dec. 14, 1934. Driving Zedges: First—
$3,600,-000—estimate is NYT, Sept. 12, 1934. Others come from various
articles and R0 brochures over the years. Deceptions: "Not a penny": NeZ
York American, 0ar. 22, 1935; $250,000: Apr. 11, 1935; $8,000,000: July
7, 1935. Single press release on Zoo has tZo estimates: And NYT, 0ar. 9,
1934, included them both in the same story Zithout mentioning or
attempting to e[plain the discrepancy.

Just as one borough president learned never to trust: 0cGoldrick, sitting on
the Board as Comptroller, saZ this happening again and again; 0cGoldrick.
"Graceful malice": "0oses,"  Fortune, June 1938. "A couple of jobs":
La]arus. "Bra]en attempt": NYT, June 9, 1939-

No provision for baby carriages: :einberg,  intervieZ and various memos to
E[ton, 1936, 1937, E[ton 3apers.

R0  pleading Zith :3A:    R0   to :3A   Regional Administrator Brehon
Somervell, July 3, 1937, is only one of a hundred such letters in 3D Files.
$2,500 for clocks: Somervell to R0, July 23, 1937; R0  to Somervell, July
27; R0  to LaG, Aug. 7; LaG to R0,  Aug. 9; all in  LaG 3apers.

A standard playground design: :einberg Zas one :3A-paid   3ark Depart-

ment architect Z\ ilZiyt  t

to make innovatioi 1 nd Z inly

rebuffed by his superiors, Zho told frankly that theil superiors, top "0<

0en"  such as AndreZs, i imam ami

1660
Stuart Constable, Zould not even con sider irritating R0 by deviating from
the standard design.

3laygrounds into animal cages: Latham, Shapiro, various correspondence in
3I) Files.

Vest-pocket parks: "That's a little job": Confidential source. Refuses 1936
Transportation Board offer: R0 to .ern,   July 7, 1936, LaG 3apers. No
parks in slums: The 3ark Department's oZn maps, in 3D Files, shoZ this, as
does "NeZ York Youth Tells Its Story" (for Zhich, see "Sources," Chapter
25). Reformers' vieZs: E[ton, Orton, :einberg.   Negro immigration:
Description, and of +arlem during the 1930's, in :3A,  NeZ  York City
Guide, pp. 52, 132-40, and :3A,  NeZ York 3anorama, pp. 257-64, and in
"+arlem," Fortune, July 1939. $850 per year; "slave market": "+arlem,"
Fortune. Not a single bank, not a neZ school: NeZ York 3anorama, p. 147.
One clinic, one hospital: NeZ York 3anorama, pp. 147, 262, 263. 0aternity
death rate: NeZ York 3anorama, p. 258. "The question of Zhat Zill
happen": NeZ York 3anorama,

p. 151.

"Easily accessible": R0, "3arks and Recreation in +arlem," Oct. 6, 1944,
LaG 3apers. Three acres the smallest: R0, NYT, 0ar. 11, 1934. The
definitive statement from him that he built parks in slums—that he had, in
fact, given them more attention than other areas of the city—Zas the Oct. 6,
1944, statement, after a grand jury investigating slum conditions critici]ed
the city's failure to provide adequate recreational facilities in slums.

":e   shall provide one playground": R0  to Alderman Conrad A. Johnson,
0ar. 21, 1934, LaG 3apers.

Reformers and the implications of his park policies: E[ton, Orton,
:einberg;  0inutes,  City  Club 3ark and Recreation Committee, 1934-36.

25. Changing

SO8RCES

1661
Books, articles and documents:

0oses, Dangerous Trade and Si[ Years of 3ark 3rogress; Rodgers, Robert
0oses; Ickes, The Secret Diary of +arold L. Ickes, Vol. I: The First
Thousand Days,

Notes for pages 499-509

1206

1933-1936; Strunsky, No 0ean City. See also "Sources" for Chapter 23.

The basic sources for the history and financing of the :est Side
Improvement are three long brochures edited and to large e[tent Zritten by
R0  and published by the +enry +udson 3arkZay Authority: "Opening of
the +enry +udson 3arkZay and 3rogress on the :est Side Improvement,"
Dec. 12, 1936; "Opening of the :est Side Improvement," Oct. 12, 1937;
and "Completion of the +enry +udson Bridge and +enry +udson 0emorial
3ark," 0ay  7, 1938.

The basic sources for the effect of the Improvement on InZood +ill 3ark,
Spuyten Duyvil and Riverdale—and the differences in the effect on these
locales of the proposed alternate route—are James E. Briggs, Sproul
Braden, :illiam   S. Ladd and LaZrence 0.  Orton, "3lanning Northern
Riverdale," Sept. 23, 1930; Regional 3lan Association, "3roposed 3arkZay
Connecting a Drive Zith Van Cort-landt 3ark—to 0r.  :einberg,
Confidential," June 1934; The Rev. :illiam  A.  Tieck, Riverdale,
.ingsbridge,  Spuyten Duyvil — A  +istorical  Epitome of the NorthZest
Bron[;  Robert C. :einberg  to :illiam    E[ton,  chairman, 3arks and
Recreation Committee, City Club, "Report to the Committee in regard to
design of portions of the +enry +udson 3arkZay and other matters of 3ark
design of recent date," Dec. 4, 1939.

For the recreation needs of the poor and the effect of R0's policies, "NeZ
York Youth Tells Its Story," transcript of the testimony given at hearings
held by the City Council's Committee on Youth :elfare,  0ay  13, 17, 31,
1938; American Youth Congress, "The Case for the 8se of Schools as

1662
Recreation Centers," 1938; Shirley Jenkins, Comparative Recreation Needs
and Services in NeZ York Neighborhoods.

Author's intervieZs:

:alter   D. Binger, :illiam    C. Chanler, :illiam   E[ton,  Jr., :illiam    Latham,
0ichael  J. 0adigan, Joseph D. 0cGold-rick,  LaZrence 0.  Orton, Sidney
0.  Shapiro, Robert C. :einberg  and confidential sources.

IntervieZs on matters other than the :est Side Improvement Zith Israel
Ben Scheiber, John A. Coleman, 0rs. James B. Cooper, James B. Cooper,
Jr.. +oZard S. Cullman, 0elvin  Daus, F. Trubee Davison, Rev. C. EdZard
+arrison, Joseph T. Ingraham, Nettie Green-berg, F. Dodd 0c+ugh, Emily
Smith :arner.

NOTES

Antagoni]ing people: Beal: NYT, 0ar.  3, 1934. Architects: +T, Feb 18.
1934. E[ton: E[ton.

3earl Bernstein: +er biography, NYT, Dec. 27, 1933. R0 to .ern:  Apr. 25,
1934, and Oct. 1, 1935, LaG 3apers; .ern.

"You're just a sZabbie": Ingraham and Ben Scheiber, both present, Zere
among those squirming. Fist fights: Ingraham. SZinging at Isaacs: Binger,
0cGoldrick.

False charges against :einberg: E[ton, Orton, :einberg.  :recking    the
Leader: 0rs. James B. Cooper, James B. Cooper, Jr.; confirmed, Zith a sly
smile at this proof of the unZisdom of getting in R0's  Zay, by Shapiro—
and by a check of the Leader's legals.

Columbia Yacht Club: +istory: +T,  0ar.  27, 1934. Their only request:
Chanler, as Assistant Corporation Counsel, handled most of the
negotiations for R0. Says Chanler: "One felloZ, a former Tammany
surrogate, an old felloZ, called me and said, 'They're trying to take our club
in 0ay  or June and Ze knoZ they're not going to start building until
October. The fleet is coming in July. Let us stay •through then and Ze'll be

1663
glad to go after that.' I spoke to 0oses about it. +e said they had to be
evicted at once. I said, ':hy?' +e  said, 'Because they Zere rude to me.'
:ell,   he Zas the client and Ze didn't have much choice. :e did kick them
out, but I didn't like it much." 3arks "for the people": R0  quoted in NYT,
Apr. 20, 1934. "A social racket": +T, Apr. 24. "Influence," "interesting
fact": NYT, Apr. 21. "No lease": +T, Apr. 27. Check photostat and club's
side: NYT, Apr. 27. Levy ruling: NYT  and +T, 0ay  3. Steam shovels: +T,
Apr. 29. Electricity: +T,  Apr. 30. "Steam-shovel government": NYT, 0ay I.
"The Zhole question": NYT, 0ay  4. Charging a quarter: +T, June 13.
"Because they Zere rude to me": Chanler.

And the dream unrolled: An over-all description of R0's accomplishments
during this period is found in his biannual 3ark 3rogress reports; in 0oses,
Dangerous Trade, pp. 1-74, 161-90; in Rod-gers, pp. 82-95, and in the
maga]ine articles cited in the "Sources" for Chapter 23. 5,000 acres: Si[
Years of 3ark 3rogress, pp. 12-15. Adding to 0anhattan: Si[ Years, p. 14.

Distribution of playgrounds uneven: Author's analysis of a huge map,
labeled "3laygrounds—3resent and Future," pre-

Notes for pages 510-527

pared by R0 for LaG, dated Oct. 1939, LaG 3apers; Shirley Jenkins,
Comparative Recreation Needs.

":e   have to Zork all day": "They Zere begging": +arrison  intervieZ Zith
author, Feb. 17, 1969. 3layground supervisors: Daus. "The police just keep
the kids moving"; "+arlem is a poor section": "Junior City Government of
NeZ York to +on. Fiorello  +. La Guardia," Aug. 31, 1937, LaG 3apers.
"Caged tigers": Father Bishop. "The fact is that": R0, "3arks and
Recreation in +arlem, 3ast, 3resent, and Future," Oct. 6, 1944. 8nited
3arents Association: Its study quoted in NYT, Brooklyn Eagle, 0ar. 2,
1941. Grand jury: +T, Nov. 28, 1943. Took fourteen years: Bishop's letters-
to-the-editor, to the NYT, none of Zhich the NYT printed, Zere found in
the Stanley Isaacs 3apers, 1950 NYT article: 0ay 6. R0 soZing
playgrounds: NYT, Apr. 24, I935-

1664
SZimming pools: 8nder his prodding: Latham; "3atterns for 3arks,"
Architectural Forum, Dec. 1936. "You knoZ hoZ R0  felt":  Confidential
source. "They don't like cold Zater": :indels   told the author that R0 said
this to him. That this Zas R0's vieZ  is confirmed by confidential source.
Shapiro, Zho echoed R0's vieZs, told the author confidentially that "you
can pretty Zell keep them out of any pool if you keep the Zater cold
enough." Never once mentioned: Author's survey of NYT, +T and
Brooklyn Eagle, 1934-39.

Stadium empty: Attendance figures noZhere to be found, but 0cGoldrick,
Zho, as Comptroller, had to study the stadium's finances, recalls its
emptiness.

"Three Zeeks": :indels.   R0's  solution: 0oses, "NeZ  3arkZays in NeZ
York City," Summer, 1936. 3lanners' doubts: Orton, 3lanning Commission
staffer F. Dodd 0c+ugh;  doubts find a voice in +T editorials such as Aug.
18, 1936, and articles such as Nov. 22, 1936, and NYT, Jan. 2, 1938.

Triborough: Ickes, p. 637; +ugh Johnson column in :T,  July 15, 1936;
LaG and +opkins, +T, July 12, 1936; NYT editorial July n, 1936; NYT
article, July 10, 1936; Valentine, +T, Aug. 12, 1936.

"Cross-country traffic jam": +T,  Aug. 18, 1936. Ingersoll: NYT, Sept. 19,
1937-R0  said he kneZ Zhat to do: "0oses Is Building  a City of the
Future," NeZ York Sun, Jan. 8, 1938.

"Today Ze are Zell on our Zay": R0,   introduction to "Northern and :an-

1207

tagh State 3arkZa) i [tension," publi

Dec. 17, 1938, b LI I isi'(

NeZ York St V, pp. 2, | In-

thusiastic appiaus Brooklyn Eagle, I

18, 1938. Ammann speech: AT 7, v

1665
19, 1936. Traffic count- All traffic  counts on Triborough facilities from I
+A, 'Tilth  Anniversary." The counts on other bridge! from various
neZspaper articles. Orton recalls the e[perts' pu]]lement. R3A'l plea for
transit on Bron[-:hitestone:   NYT,  June 28, 1936.

GoZanus 3arkZay: The picture of the Sunset 3ark neighborhood and of the
effect on it of the parkZay is draZn from intervieZs Zith  a score of
residents of the neighborhood conducted by Ina Joan Caro; and from :3A,
NeZ York 3anorama, pp. 68, 87, 115-16, and :3A NeZ  York City Guide,
p. 468. NYT editorial: Nov. 1, 1 94 1. Brooklyn borough president: John
Cashmore, quoted in Eagle, Nov. 2, 1941. Board of Estimate had been
under the impression: 0cGoldrick. 1,300 families: NYT, July 9, 1940. R0
frightened many of them aZay by sending them an initial notice Zhich gave
them ten days to move.

:est  Side Improvement: The three brochures cited in the "Sources" provide
the basic information on R0's plans. They do not provide information on
the cost of those plans. That information can be found in no public
document, nor in any neZspaper or maga]ine. Because he feared that his
plans Zould not be approved if their true cost Zas knoZn— or even hinted
at—he never let even a hint get out. The highest figure he ever put on them
Zas $24,000,000—a fraction of their true cost. The total—$109,000,-000—
Zhich the author uses is to be found noZhere. The author has compiled this
figure by adding together and analy]ing a multitude of figures in letters,
confidential memoranda obtained from 3D Files, from the LaG 3apers and
a confidential source, and from interpretation of these data by Jack 0adigan
and Sidney 0. Shapiro. The brochures Zill be identified by the dates on
Zhich they Zere published.

$109,000,000 already spent: Various neZspapers, 1932-33. Railroad in no
position to pay: Railroad bonds in general Zere in so precarious a position
during the Depression that in July 1938 the Banking Department Zould
remove more than $3 billion of them from the list of legal investments for
savings banks. They Zatched R0: 0adigan, Shapiro. NeZ York Central
financing: NYT, 0ar.  30, Apr. 16, 1934; e[planation of the facts

Notes for pages 530-564

1666
1208

behind the stories, and maneuvering Zith Lehman: 0adigan.

8sing railroad's landfill:  Shapiro.

"R0  has this mind": Shapiro.

Seventy-ninth Street boat basin: Shapiro, 0adigan. Ickes suggesting grade
crossings: 4uoted in NYT, Nov. 17, 1934. R0 ZhipsaZing  LaG and C:A:
R0;  various memos, 3D Files.

State aid for railroads, etc.: Shapiro.

:hipsaZing   the Board of Estimate for $10,000,000: NYT, Apr. 27, 1934; J-
A, NYT, +T,  June 19-21, 1934, contain misleading R0 figures.
:hipsaZing   the C:A    for $20,000,000: 0adigan.

Selecting the neZ route through Fort Tryon and InZood +ill; bankers 5
caution: R0,  0adigan. Not  a single neZ issue: Brochure, Dec. 12, 1936.
0adigan biography: 0adigan;  0oses,  Dangerous Trade, pp. 919-20.
0adigan's inspiration: 0adigan.

InZood +ill  3ark:  :3A,   NeZ  York 3anorama, p. 28 ("perhaps the finest,"
p. 28); E[ton. "Only  a feZ trees": R0  in NYT, 0ar.  23, 1935.

Spuyten Duyvil: Tieck, A +istorical  Epitome. A "village":  +T,  June 23,
1935. "It Zill  be the end": Francis C. :illiams   to +T, July 11, 1935.

The alternate route: E[ton, :einberg,  Orton, and 0cGoldrick,  Zhom E[ton
escorted along it. :einberg to E[ton:  Dec. 4, 1939, E[ton 3apers. R0
Zould not alloZ  anyone else to do any planning: An "Ad +oc Committee
for 3lanning Northern Riverdale" conceived a plan for running the parkZay
through the 0arble +ill  shanty toZn and for accommodating the increased
residential development that Zould be brought to Riverdale anyZay by
careful ]oning. The plan Zas printed as "3lanning Northern Riverdale." But
R0  Zould not discuss it Zith  the community group, and the City 3lanning
Commission he dominated Zould not take it up seriously: Orton.

1667
Van Cortlandt 3ark: The biology teachers' protest and the response from
R0's  aide is described in Jeanne 0orse to E[ton, Apr. 6 and June 15, 1939,
E[ton 3apers.

"It didn't require much brains to see": :einberg. R0's  values: They
emerged clearly during his intervieZs Zith the author. "Laughing at you":
E[ton. 0cGoldrick   Zas convinced: 0cGoldrick.

Building the bridges too loZ for buses: :hy   he did so on LI: Shapiro.
Doing so on the +enry +udson 3arkZay: Farley report paraphrased in
Chapin to R0, Feb. 2, 1936 (given to author by Shapiro). R0 reply in
memo to Board of Esti-

mate, Feb. 27, 1936, LaG 3apers. "+e Zould brook no change":
0cGoldrick.

R0's  charge against :einberg; Selig-man called E[ton in: :einberg,
E[ton, 0cGoldrick.   City Club committee report: Sun, 0ar. 22, 1935. 0rs.
Sul]berger to R0:  0ay  24, 1935; printed in NYT —  in a story on the :est
Side Improvement— 0ay 28, 1935. City Club disoZning  report: NYT,
0ar. 23, 1935.

Cutting doZn trees before public hearing: NYT, Sun, 0ar. 17, 22, 1935.
"+e kneZ hoZ  to handle them": 0adigan. R0's  boast about "ingenious
device": 0oses, Dangerous Trade, p. 187.

$34,000,000 vs. $6,000,000: NYT, +T, Sun, various issues betZeen Apr. 27
and June 20, 1935. LaG Zanted it built before election: 0adigan.

The overnight bridge: :T,   July 12,

1935.

Reasons for R0's reluctance to talk to E[ton: 0adigan.

+enry +udson Bridge opening: R0,  0adigan.  In the moonlight: Rodgers,
p. 88. On 0adigan's yacht: 0adigan. 'This, then, is the +udson Zaterfront":
4uoted in 0oses, Dangerous Trade, p. 188.

1668
"The most beautiful drive in the Zorld": DN,  Oct. 12, 1937. "AlZays the
man in the car": NYT, Oct. 10, 1937. Strunsky: NYT, Oct. 9, 1937. "The
poet :ordsZorth":   Strunsky, No 0ean City, p. 165. R0  promises it Zill
eliminate jams: For e[ample, in Bron[boro (a local neZspaper), Dec. 1936.
Only tZenty-si[  minutes: R0,  brochure, 0ay  7, 1938, pp. 10-11. "A
veritable motorist's dream": J-A, Oct. 12, 1937. "0uch more": Sun, Oct. 12,
1937. "A fountain": J-A, Oct.

13, 1937.

Statistics: 3rimarily the three brochures. "The most e[tensive alteration":
NYT, Oct. 10, 1937. Cost: NYT, June 26, 1941.

Built +arlem  recreational area only because LaG insisted: :indels.

Gigantic viaducts: 3eter Blake, "+oZ to Destroy a City," +T,  0ar.  13,
1964. "0onstrous misstatements," R0 called Blake's opinions, in the
brochure he issued in reply, The E[panding NeZ York :aterfront,  Aug.
1964.

Traffic on the +enry +udson Bridge: A chart detailing it day by day—
prepared for R0 by one of his aides—Zas sent by R0 to LaG and Zas
found in the LaG 3apers.

"0otorists  launching gaily": NYT  editorial, Nov. 2, 1937. 1938, 1939, 1941
traffic counts: "Fifth Anniversary." 26,-000,000; traffic cut in half in  1956:
TBTA Annual Report, 1956.

Notes for pages 566-581

Scrapbooks: NYT, Oct. 3, 1936. Richmond +S Arista: +T, Nov. 14, 1936.
0cCarren 3ark opening: Brooklyn  Eagle, Aug. 1, 1936. 3ark Association
comes to him: +T, Jan. 19, 1936. 3rice comes to his apartment: NYT, 0ay
22, 1937. Rename :est Side +ighZay:  +T, July 3, 1935. Dinners:
Descriptions of tZo typical affairs at Zhich R0   Zas honored are NYT, Apr.
4 and Dec. 7, 1937. "Never in the history of philanthropy": 0oses,
Dangerous Trade, p. 50; confirmed by F. Trubee Davison intervieZ. Jesse
Jones later confided confidentially that one member of the RFC had voted

1669
to give the money for the planetarium thinking it Zas a cafeteria. AZard
from 16 organi]ations: NYT, 0ay  26, 1935. Typical neZspaper
supplements or series: :illiam  3. Vogel, 30's :eekly,   Aug. 3, 1941, for
e[ample, or Floyd Taylor, "Danger! 0an  at :ork,"   :T,    Jan. 3-8, 1938.

+arper's: +erring, "Robert 0oses and +is  3arks," Dec. 1937. Time: Oct.
17, 1938. The Saturday Evening 3ost: "From Dump to Glory," Jan. 15,
1938. Architectural Forum: "3attern for 3arks," Dec. 1936. Fortune:
"Robert (Or-I'll-Re-sign) 0oses,"  June 1938.

Boston aZard: NYT, Feb. 5, 1942. Reading speeches over telephone: A
description of him doing so in NYT, Feb. 5, 1942. Stored in packing cases:
Nettie Greenberg. Shore and Beach 3reservation Society: +T, Sept. 12,
1939. +artsfield: Brooklyn Eagle, 0ay  26, 1939. 0ore  miles of through
highZays than in ne[t five largest cities combined: Statistics furnished by
B3R Library.

".idnap  Robert 0oses":  "3attern for 3arks," Architectural Forum, Dec.
1936. Engineers from other cities applying his principles: Among those
Zho told the author that highZays in their cities Zere laid out on R0's
principles Zere Lloyd Reid, then chief engineer of the 0ichigan +ighZay
Department, and Bertram D. Tallamy of Buffalo. British urban planners:
+T, Apr. 17, 1943.

Suggested as Republican nominee: Among many articles mentioning the
possibility—and suggesting that he Zould be a good choice for 1940—
+arper's, Dec. 1937, "Robert 0oses and +is 3arks." The Saturday Evening
3ost commissioned him in 1936 to Zrite tZo articles as a spokesman for the
national GO3—"To 0y  3arty," Jan. 25, and "End of Santa Claus," June 27.

No room for dissent: +otel 3ennsylvania dinner: Apr. 4, 1937- .iZanis
luncheon: NYT and +T, 0ar.  18, 1934-

<r9

":e   oZe much": 0oses, Si[  Years of 3ark 3rogress, p. 56 ":ell
undoubtedly": 0cGoldrick.

1670
Al Smith: IntervieZs Zith Coleman Cullman, Emily Smith :arner,
confidential sources. "A slender reed": :arner.

26. TZo Brothers

SO8RCES

Author's intervieZs:

:ith   Dolie 0c:hinney   Adams, Jane 0oses Collins, Joan Gan] Cooney,
0rs. +ilda E. +ellman, 0rs. Elmer B. +oZells, Joseph T. Ingraham,
:illiam   Latham, 0ichael J. 0adigan, Emily Sims 0arconnier, General
+arry L. 0eyers, 0rs. +arold 0orse, LaZrence 0. Orton, ElZood
Rabenold, Sidney 0. Shapiro, Florence Shientag, 0ae Smisek, Iphigene
Ochs Sul]berger, Re[ford G. TugZell, Rebecca Vollmer. IntervieZs in
connection Zith 3aul E. 0oses are noted beloZ.

NOTES

3aul's personality: A composite draZn from the author's intervieZs Zith
0rs. +ilda E. +ellman, Emily Sims 0arconnier and tZo other members of
the 0oses family Zho prefer to remain anonymous; Zith 3aul's Zife,
Louise Benjamin 0oses; Zith his stepdaughter, Dr. 3atricia .endall
La]arsfeld; Zith four of his friends: Joseph LeZin, 0rs. Carl 3roper, Louis
Schulman and one Zho prefers to remain anonymous; Zith si[ officials of
the La Guardia administration Zho kneZ him: 3aul J. .ern, Reuben A.
La]arus, Joseph D. 0cGoldrick, 3aul :indels, :allace S. Sayre, and one
Zho insists on remaining anonymous; Zith one of Robert 0oses' aides, Zho
insists on remaining anonymous; and Zith 0ayor Robert F. :agner, Jr.,
Jan. 26, 1972. The author got to knoZ 3aul 0oses during eleven long
intervieZs, Dec. 1966-0ar. 1967.

Le[icon: La]arsfeld. 0ost knoZledgeable: :indels. "Genuinely friendly":
Confidential source. R0 kneZ servants only as servants: R0. 3aul kneZ
them as people: 3E0. Romance at 3rinceton: 3E0, confidential source.
Con Ed: 3E0.

1671
Llanerch 3ool: 3E0,  but he didn't Zant to talk about it much. The most
complete account comes from Dr. La]arsfeld, Zho, as a teen-ager, spent
several summers Zorking there. The most complete account of its finances
comes

Notes for pages 581-606

1210

from an affidavit by 3E0  filed  Oct. 24, 1941, in "In the matter of Louise B.
0oses, 3laintiff,  against 3aul E. 0oses, Defendant," Supreme Court,
County of NeZ York. +ounded by creditors, sued by oZn laZyer: 3E0
affidavit, 0arch  8,

I943-

Reconciliation Zith mother: 3E0,   La]arsfeld, 0rs.  3roper. Con Ed: 3E0,
:indels.   Believed they Zere still friends: 3E0.

Never Zent to see his mother: 0rs. +ellman. She refused to see him:
Confidential family source.

+er Zill:  File  1463, Liber 1446, p. 93, Surrogate's Court, County of NeZ
York.

"I'm trying all  this time": 3E0.  E[planation  for mother's decision: 3E0.

R0  unable to pay tuition: confidential sources. Bill for $10,000: R0  to
FDR, date missing, FDR 3apers. "0ore than she could afford": R0 to LaG,
0ar. 31, 1936, LaG 3apers.

1672
DoZn to $1,000,000: 3E0,  confirmed by NYT, June 4, 1930. "Advances":
3E0.  Net Zorth doZn  to $690,422: 3E0,  confirmed by NYT, 0ay  15,
1931. $50,000 to charity: In fact, she left $40,-000 (including $20,000 to
0adison +ouse) and $10,000 to a friend.

LaG administration officials: IntervieZs Zith  author. ":hile    it is nobody's
business": R0 to LaG, 0ar.  19, 1934, LaG 3apers. In charge of 33-man
staff: +T, Apr. 29, 1936. No firm Zould  hire him: 3E0.

The 0oses prodigality toZard money: Account of his free-spending habits
from La]arsfeld. Llanerch 3ool finances, living on $25 a Zeek: Depositions
by Davidson Sommers, Oct. 22, 1941; by Louise Benjamin 0oses, Oct. 22,
1941; by 3E0,  Oct. 24, 1941; Supreme Court, County of NeZ York, "In the
0atter  of Louise B. 0oses, 3laintiff,  against 3aul E. 0oses, Defendant."

+e Zasn't getting a cent: 3E0, confidential  source. These accounts are
confirmed by various documents submitted to Surrogate's Court, County of
NeZ York, "In the 0atter  of the Judicial Settlement of the Account of
3roceedings of Robert 0oses, Edna 0. +urt, :ilfred    A.  Openhym ... as
Trustees for 3aul E. 0oses, under 3aragraph Si[th of the Last :ill  and
Testament of Bella 0oses, Deceased." These documents include "Affidavit
of Services of Attorney-Trustee under Section 285 of the Surrogate's Court
Act" (affidavit  filed by Openhym, July 16, 1941); "0emoran-

dum in Support of Objections Filed by 3aul E. 0oses, Life Tenant" (Oct.
27, 1941); and "0emorandum on Behalf of Accounting Trustee" (filed by
Openhym, Sept. 5, 1941). Also "Schedule .— Statement of Commissions
Due 8pon This Accounting" and "Schedule F-i— Statement of Distribution
of Income to 3aul E. 0oses, the Life Beneficiary of the Trust" (filed by
Robert 0oses, Edna 0. +urt  and :ilfred    A. Openhym, 0ar. 11, 1941).

"+e had some sort of independent income" : Schulman. "Damned strange":
Confidential source.

Visitors to his apartment: Schulman, LeZin, confidential sources.

+anging around City +all:  0ayor  :agner,  Schulman, Orton.

1673
The tZo gifts from R0:   3E0;  confirmed—as are the subsequent events—
by a confidential source in R0's office.

R0's  treatment of his sister: 3E0; confirmed by confidential source.

TugZell biography: TugZell,  Shapiro. "Thanks particularly": R0  to 30,
Sept. 4, 1946.

Attitude toZard relatives: Confidential sources.

R0  at home: Jane 0oses Collins, 0rs. 0arconnier,  Ingraham, Shapiro,
0adigan, 0rs.  +oZells,   among others. "+e never acted busy": 0rs.
+oZells.  "No side": Adams.

Robert and 0ary: Above intervieZs, but particularly  intervieZs Zith  0ary's
close friend 0rs. +arold  0orse.  +er sister: 0rs.  0arconnier. The captain's
sister: 0rs. 0ae  Smisek.

"Bob's on one of his rampages": Latham. 0arkel incident: 0rs. Vollmer.
"Those of us Zho are privileged": .alten-born,  "Introduction"  to Rodgers,
Robert 0oses, p. [vi.

"A mouse": Confidential source. Florence Shientag: IntervieZ Zith author.
"0ary  Zas a darling": 0rs.  Sul]berger. The one intervieZ: :T,    Nov. 2,
1934. Joan Gan] Cooney: IntervieZ Zith author. "An alcoholic": Arsenal
party: 0rs.  +ellman. +ospitali]ed:  Shapiro, General 0eyers.

27. Changing

SO8RCES

Books and documents:

0ann, La Guardia: A Fighter Against +is  Times. La Guardia 3apers.

Notes for pages 607-615

Author's intervieZs:

1674
For Tunnel Authority fight, Zith  the Authority's chief engineer, Ole
Singstad, deputy chief engineer :illiam  0cD.  Griffin,  general manager 3.
Fearson Short-ridge, and Zith Reuben A. La]arus and :alter D. Binger.
(All three Authority  commissioners are dead.)

For +ousing Authority fight,  Zith  Adolf A.  Berle, Jr., 3aul J. .ern, Reuben
A. La]arus, Joseph D. 0cGoldrick  and 3aul :indels.

NOTES

"Leave the son of a bitch off": La]arus.

R0  attempted to have bill killed: La]arus, Singstad. Overtures to Singstad:
Singstad. Ickes adamant: Singstad, :in-dels. R0 sought delay: Singstad,
:indels,   La]arus; NYT, Apr. 15, 19, 20, 21, 30, 0ay  6, 8, 12, 1936.

R0  interested in housing because that Zas Zhere the money Zas: :indels
had a private luncheon Zith him at this time at Zhich, he says, R0's
thinking Zas obvious. R0  had made almost no public statements on
housing up to this time. LaG's personal interest in housing: 0ann, p. 140.

No one suspected the truth: :indels, Berle. R0's  housing proposal Zas
detailed the ne[t morning in NYT, and +T, Nov. 23, 1938.

Cutting him off the air: :hen   questioned about it, LaG at first said blandly
(NYT, Nov. 24, 1938) that it had been due to a "misunderstanding":
:NYC,    the 0ayor  said, Zas prohibited by laZ from incurring e[pense in
broadcasting "private" functions; the station had set up the equipment under
the impression that the speech Zas a 3ark Department function; Zhen it
discovered that Zas not the case, it had no choice but to cancel it. "It's a
pity," the 0ayor  said. "If some responsible person had only telephoned me
at my home I Zould have been glad to arrange for the broadcast." Reported
the Times: "0r. 0oses  has no comment to make." On June 24, 1939* LaG
indirectly admitted having ordered the cutoff (+T) .

0aneuvering on the committee: :indels.   Orders 0cGoldrick  not to pay the
bill: 0cGoldrick.

1675
LaG convinced R0 seeking personal poZer: :indels,   .ern,  La]arus,
0cGoldrick.  :ith    0cGoldrick,   in particular, LaG made his feelings about
"priorities" clear. Cuts off tZo park projects: They Zere R0's  plans for a
huge neZ "Sound-

1211

vieZ" park in the Bram ami fa | complete renovation <>» ( :v 0all  I' a
feeling of the rt tony develi

betZeen LaG and .0   at this tune. LaG to R0, Oct. 27, Nov. 30, [938, I
3apers. In a development Zhose outcome Zas significantly different from
the past, R0 personally insulted Coi notation counsel Chanler (R0 to
Chanler, Nov. 2 , 1938), Chanler protested to LaG (same date), LaG
demanded that R0 apologi]e (Nov. 26), R0  refused (Dec. 1, 1938)—and
LaG cut off the SoundvieZ appropriation. All in LaG 3apers. Tells
0cGoldrick  and 0orris  to take harder line: 0cGoldrick.

28. The :arp  on the Loom

SO8RCES

Books, articles and documents:

Bard, The 3ort of NeZ York Authority;  Bird, A  Study of the 3ort of NeZ
York Authority; Cohen, They Builded Better Than They .neZ;  Garrett,
The La Guardia Years; Nevins, +erbert +. Lehman and +is Era.

Temporary State Commission on Coordination of State Activities (:illiam
J. Ronan, Director of Studies), "Staff Report on 3ublic Authorities under
NeZ York State," hereafter referred to as "Ronan Report."

EdZard T. Chase, "Lindsay Challenges the 3ort Authority," The Reporter,
June 30, 1966. :illiam  S. Fairfield, "The NeZ  York 3ort Authority:
Guardian of the Tollgates," The Reporter, Sept. 29,

1953.

1676
Charles +aydock, "0unicipal  Authorities: Their  Backgrounds and 3ostZar
3ossibilities," an address before the 3ennsylvania 0unicipal Association,
+arris-burg, Nov. 1943.

Reuben A. La]arus, "3ublic Authorities," 1965 or 1966 (unpublished).

:illiam    S. LebZohl (TBTA  counsel), "0emorandum—3oZer  of 3ort
Authority to Construct Third Tube of Lincoln Tunnel," 0ar.  23, 1951.

Author's intervieZs:

Reuben A. La]arus, 0ichael J. 0adi-gan,  Joseph D. 0cGoldrick, LaZrence
0.  Orton, Sidney 0.  Shapiro, 3aul :indels.

NOTES

+istory of authorities: 3rimarily  +ay-dock,  Bird and La]arus. Named
"Author-

Notes for pages 615-636

1212

ity": Cohen, p. 290. Jimmy :alker:   La]arus, Zho Zas asked by :alker  to
draft the legislation for it. 3ort Authority:  Cohen, pp. 289-90. All authorities
created in a single pattern: +aydock, Bird, Bard. 3ort Authority members
e[pect its tolls to be eliminated: Cohen, pp. 262-63. First "general bond":
Bird, pp. 17-19; Bard, p. 248.

But R0's  thinking Zas changing: The entire folloZing discussion of R0's
thinking is based primarily on the observations of tZo men Zho Zere privy
to it— 3aul :indels,   first  counsel of the Tri-borough Bridge Authority
under R0, and Jack 0adigan, R0's  most trusted financial confidant—and
one man Zho Zas not: Reuben A. La]arus, Zho had to analy]e R0's
handiZork for LaG and Zhose bill-drafting  genius made him perhaps the
man best able to do it. The author is indebted to these three men for the
substantial amounts of time they gave him in helping him to folloZ the
intricacies of the authorities' enabling legislation.

1677
Carrying and maintenance charges on +enry +udson: 0adigan. Traffic
counts: TBTA Annual Reports. Revenues could be used in only one Zay:
La]arus, "3ublic Authorities."  Bankers Zilling  to settle for loZer coverage:
0adigan. LaG's neZ firmness: See last note, Chapter 27. Albany drying up:
Nevins, pp. 172-74. Early in 1938, in fact, the Governor, shoZing a neZ
firmness toZard R0,  vetoed bills that Zould have authori]ed state
contributions for construction of R0's proposed Cross County, Southern,
3elham, +utchinson River and 0arine parkZays, stating, "It is clear that the
state in its present financial condition cannot possibly, Zith safety, assume
[such] large financial operations." NYT, Apr. 12, 1938. Legislative leaders
said they could see no time in the foreseeable future Zhen these parkZays
could be started. Brooklyn Eagle, Apr. 17, 1938. City's financial difficulties:
Garrett, pp. 142-51. R0 in intervieZ  Zith  author summed up this vieZ of
the difficulties, and the fact that there Zas no reasonable possibility of the
city's being able to finance his dreams.

0oney  he Zould be free to use: :indels,  0adigan,  La]arus, Shapiro.
Author's analysis of the Triborough acts R0 Zrote, plus intervieZs. City
had no alternatives: The above intervieZs, plus 0cGoldrick, Orton.

3oZers of a different type: IntervieZs and analysis cited above. The
LebZohl

memo, although Zritten in 1951, shoZs R0's thinking at Zork.

State cannot interfere Zith bonds: Best

statement, .La]arus, "3ublic Authorities,"

p. 4.

+e had to conceal his purposes from everyone: La]arus, :indels. The
various devices he used are shoZn in sections of bond resolutions of R0's
various authorities. :hile   La]arus, :indels   and 0adigan assisted the
author in understanding them, the folloZing section is the author's oZn
interpretation of the enabling legislation creating the various 0oses
authorities, and he assumes full responsibility for its conclusions. Fiscal
agent: Ronan Report, pp. 466-72, 478.

1678
"To be a caretaker": R0. Authority officials  traditionally unsalaried: Cohen,
p. 289; Ronan Report, p. 116. "If I may be permitted": TBTA, "Fifth
Anniversary of the Opening of the Triborough Bridge," June 11, 1941, p. 6.
Jones Beach, Jacob Riis: Ronan Report, p. 462.

LaG's aZakening: R0  to LaG, Apr. 7, 1938; LaG to R0, Apr.  11, 1938;
R0  to LaG, Apr. 12, 1938; LaG 3apers. Description of LaG's thinking:
:indels,   La]arus, 0cGoldrick.

29. ''And :hen   the

Last LaZ :as   DoZn . . ."

SO8RCES

Books, articles and documents:

AndreZs, The Iconography of the Battery and Castle Garden and NeZ York
As :ashington  .neZ   It;  Bolt, A 0an  for  All Seasons; Garrett, The La
Guardia Years; Gilder, The Battery; Isaacs, Love Affair Zith a City;
LeZinson, John 3ur-roy 0itchel;  Nevins and .rout.  The Greater City;
0oses, Dangerous Trade; 3ritchett, NeZ York 3roclaimed; Stokes, The
Iconography of 0anhattan Island; Talese, The .ingdom and the 3oZer;
8lmann, A Landmark +istory  of NeZ  York; :ilson,   NeZ  York Old and
NeZ; :3A,    NeZ York City  Guide and NeZ York 3anorama.

NeZ York City Tunnel Authority  brochure comparing a bridge and a tunnel,
referred to hereafter as "Singstad brochure."

Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, "The Brooklyn-Battery Bridge,"
Jan. 22, 1939; "Is There Any Reason to Suppose They Are Right NoZ?,"
1939; "A 3reposterous Scheme: The Regional

Notes for pages 639-654

3lan Association's Alternate to the Brooklyn-Battery Bridge," 1939;
"Brooklyn-Battery Bridge: memorandum in support of revised application
to :ar   Department for approval," 0ay 24, 1939; "Brooklyn-Battery  Bridge:

1679
appeal from decision of Secretary of :ar :oodring   denying a permit for
construction," Oct. 19, 1939.

A complete record of the 0oses-La Guardia maneuverings and
machinations can be found scattered and misfiled throughout the La
Guardia 3apers, but particularly in Bo[ No. 842, folders labeled "Brooklyn-
Battery Tunnel—1935-39" and "Tunnels—Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel—
1940-45," and Bo[ No. 2643 —"Tunnel Authority—Brooklyn  -  Battery
Bridge."

Oral +istory Reminiscences:

Stanley 0. Isaacs, George 0cAneny, Frances 3erkins.

Author's intervieZs:

:alter   D. Binger, Richard S. Childs, :illiam   E[ton,  Jr., :illiam    0cD.
Griffin, Reuben A. La]arus, Joseph D. 0c-Goldrick,  LaZrence 0.  Orton,
Sidney 0.  Shapiro, 3. Fearson Shortridge, Ole Sing-stad, Re[ford G.
TugZell, 3aul :indels.

NOTES

Bypass route costs: True costs, different from neZspaper figures, in R0 to
LaG, Sept. 3, 7, 1938, and in suggested draft by R0 of LaG to Ickes,
undated, LaG 3apers. The 0ayor Zould have to alloZ him to take over the
Tunnel Authority: R0  to LaG, Sept. 8, 1938, LaG 3apers. $39,000,000 to
$43,000,000 and various LaG maneuverings: 0cGoldrick.

Tunnel becomes bridge: TBTA, "The Brooklyn-Battery Bridge," Jan. 22,
1939. "The finest architecture": R0 introduction to TBTA,  "Three Decades
of 3rogress," 1966. "A vehicular bathroom": 0oses, Dangerous Trade, p.
220. "A hole in the ground," taking LaG out on yacht: Shapiro.

"+e's going to bankrupt the city": 0cGoldrick   quotes Frank Taylor, the last
pre-Fusion Comptroller, as telling him this upon 0cGoldrick's appointment
to the post in 1934.

1680
The capital budget situation Zas even more ominous: 0cGoldrick's feelings
Zere based on these figures: In Oct. 1938, the money left to the city under
the state ceiling Zas only $70,943,125— and $55,568,056 of this amount
Zas already committed for future e[penditures

L218

on projects, most I j | .<jy undcr

construction. I hi

that the city's 0+0C   I  valuation -the base Zhich determined the debt lm
Zould increase in 1939 to ■ point Zhich the margin left under the limit
Zould rise to $126,683,125, but this :0t    only a prediction, not a certainty
and he and the 0ayor had, moreover, agreed, Zhen he first took office, that
a reserve of at least $45,000,000 must be left in the debt limit at all times to
pay for preventive maintenance to the city's physical plant, for une[pected
major repair Zork and for other emergencies. If this principle Zas adhered
to, the total amount available to the city for neZ e[penditures in 1939
Zould, 0cGoldrick   estimated, be $26,583,125. And the forecast for 1940
Zas even gloomier; obligations already assumed by the city for payment in
that year assured that the total available for capital outlays Zould be under
—Zell  under—$20,000,000.

0cGoldrick's  feelings, LaG's agreement Zith him: 0cGoldrick.  "Reluctant
as I am": NYT, Oct. 12, 1938. R0's attack: NYT, Oct. 13, 1938. Board of
Estimate session: NYT, +T, Brooklyn Eagle, Oct. 14, 1938; 0cGoldrick.

A ten-story building: NYT, Jan. 26, 1939. Almost to Rector Street: +T,
0ar. I9>  1939- Corporation breaking off negotiations: Tom BroZn,
manager of doZntoZn office of Cushman & :akefield,   Inc., to LaG, June
5, 1939, LaG 3apers.

+istory of LoZer  0anhattan:  Books by Gilder, Nevins and .rout,  Stokes,
8lmann. They had had to Zatch as cobbled slips . . . : :3A, NeZ  York
3anorama, pp. 204-18. "The vocabulary of thrift": +enry James, quoted in
3ritchett, p. 6.

1681
+istory of the Aquarium: Books by Stokes and 8lmann; :3A,   NeZ  York
3anorama, pp. 21, 24, 39, 53, 92, and NeZ York City Guide, pp. 49 ff. The
most complete history is Gilder book and 0cAneny O+R. Gilder's book
contains pictures of the fort in each of its incarnations. Lafayette: Gilder,
pp. I48ff. Attendance at Aquarium: Gilder, pp. 233-36; +T, Feb. 7, 1941;
0cAneny  O+R. Reformers' feelings of effect of the bridge on the park:
Letters-to-the-editor, +T, throughout 1939; 0cAneny O+R;  Binger,
0cGoldrick,  :indels.

0cAneny  biography: LeZinson, pp. 85-88; obituaries, NYT, +T, July 31,
1953; Garrett, pp. 92-93; 0cAneny O+R. Could have had Fusion
nomination: Various neZspapers, 1917. "A sort of

Notes for pages 654-674

1214

moral background": Talese, p. 174. :rinkled:  Binger, Childs. :orld's   Fair:
0cAneny  O+R.

Isaacs biography: Isaacs' book; J. 0. Flagler, "The 3ublic Be Served," The
NeZ Yorker, Dec. 12, 19, 1959; obituaries, NYT and +T, July 13, 1962;
Binger.

"0aybe,  idoli]ing  him":  Confidential source.

Isaacs sent him letters; he didn't reply: Isaacs to LaG, enclosing copies of
letters to R0, Jan. 25, 26, 1939, LaG 3apers. Disturbed but not Zorried:
Binger, :in-dels.

Costs: TBTA, 0ay  24, 1939, brochure vs. Singstad brochure. ":ithout a
nickel": R0,  introduction  to TBTA brochure. Ammann's "guidance":
E[ton, one of the tZo representatives (the other is dead); :indels.
$21,500,000: Isaacs to LaG, Jan. 26, 1939; to R0, Jan. 28, 1939; R0 to
Isaacs, Feb. 1, 1939; LaG 3apers. Binger. "On the basis of real cost":
Singstad brochure.

1682
The tZo draZings: Both Zere printed in +T,  Feb. 6, 1939. 0orning
neZspapers: NYT, +T, Feb. 14, 1939. 3lanning Commission hearing: NYT,
+T, Brooklyn  Eagle, Feb. 16, 17, 1939. Decision: 0ar. 2, 1939. The
commission did not make even a pretense: Orton. Eating up the track in
Albany: Brooklyn Eagle, 0ar.  1, 8, 9, 1939; +T, NYT, 0ar.  1. Isaacs
noticed a point: Binger; Isaacs demanded a ruling from State Attorney
General John J. Bennett on Zhether a home-rule message Zas required—
Bennett said it Zas.

Foot-stamping fury: 0cGoldrick.  :hen   LaG learned about the buried
clause from Isaacs, he called in the Comptroller and Reuben La]arus and
had 0cGoldrick  produce from his files a copy of R0's letter of Sept. 8,
1938, promising it Zouldn't cost the city "a nickel" and then e[ploded.
0cGoldrick,  La]arus. A  copy of R0's  letter is in the LaG 3apers, together
Zith this prescient attached memo from the 0ayor to 0cGoldrick,  dated
Sept. 28, 1938: "3lease keep this copy in your permanent files. As Ze are in
agreement that no part of this cost could be absorbed by the city, I think the
time Zill  come Zhen Ze may need this letter for useful reference." A ray of
hope: 0cGoldrick,  Singstad, :indels.

"Central Committee's" activities: Description in "0inutes  of Victory
Luncheon, Central Committee of Organi]ations Opposing the Battery Toll
Bridge, +eld at Architectural League, 15 E. 40th St., NeZ York, N.Y., July
20, 1939,"

LaG 3apers. Burlingham's conversation Zith LaG: Singstad and :indels
are among those to Zhom "CC" related it. Gave Tunnel Authority
permission to lobby: La]arus, Singstad; Robert F. :agner, Sr., to LaG, 0ar.
13, 1939, LaG 3apers.

"A brief delay": NYT,  0ar.  11, 1939. "It seems clear noZ": +T, 0ar. 20,
1939.

Telegram from .ey  :est:  R0   to LaG, 0ar.  9, 1939, LaG 3apers. "The
same old tripe": NYT, 0ar. 27, 1939.

City Council hearing: NYT, +T,  Brooklyn Eagle, 0ar. 28, 29, 1939.
Feelings of reformers: Binger, E[ton, 0cGoldrick,  :indels.   Civil  service

1683
architects vs. consultants: The analysis, by George Curran, shoZed that on
major public Zorks designed by civil service employees, design costs Zere
3.2 percent of the total, Zhile on public Zorks designed by consultants,
such costs Zere betZeen 6 and 7.5 percent. "If there Zas an argument
raised": E[ton. A surplus of $4,-000,000: See Chapter 31. "I Zas afraid":
0cGoldrick.  "Shock":  That Zord Zas used by, among others, Childs, E[ton
and :indels.

"A happy smile": NYT, 0ar.  29, 1939. "The tunnel is dead": R0 quoted in
Brooklyn Eagle, Apr. 5, 1939. "And Zhen the last laZ Zas doZn": Bolt,  p.
66.

"Call Eleanor": :indels.   "0y   Day": :T,    Apr. 5, 1939. Burlingham's
letters-to-the-editor: +T, Apr. 6, June 2, 1939. R0's ansZer: +T, June 5.

"In graveyard confidence": Burlingham to FDR, Apr. 10, 1939, FDR
3apers. R0 assured of favorable report: R0; also R0  quoted in NYT, July
19, 1939. "Speak to the 3resident": :atson to Schley, Apr. 26, 1939. On the
same day, moreover, :oodring memoed FDR: "I have checked into the
proposed Battery Bridge project, NeZ York City, Zithout disclosing the fact
C. C. Burlingham had Zritten you. If you desire, I shall be glad to discuss
this project Zith you after the Chief Engineer has received the field report
and before any final action is taken thereon by the :ar Department." FDR
3apers. The engineers suddenly evasive: +all to R0, 0ay 2, 1939, quoted
in Dangerous Trade, p. 204. R0's Zhole side of this controversy, pp. 202-
07, in section titled "Enter 0rs. Roosevelt."

"The 3resident pulled doZn his lip": Frances 3erkins O+R, Vol. Ill, p. 371.
"3ersonal and Confidential": :atson  to FDR, 0ay  18, 1939, FDR 3apers.
:oodring   announcement: NYT, July 18, i939."Rage and ridicule": +T, July
18.

Notes for pages 674-690

1215

Air Force e[perts: R0.  R0's  hint that FDR Zas behind it: NYT,  July 18,
19. The 3resident said firmly: NYT, July 19. "No doubt this squares up

1684
accounts":

R0  quoted in NYT, July 18. LaG's gratification: La]arus.

"Any mention": The author mentioned it in an intervieZ Zith  R0  and dreZ
this reaction. Eleanor Roosevelt's denial: "0y Day," :T,   0ay  13, 1939-
"Oh, she Zas in the middle of it": R0.  "Increasingly unprintable": La]arus.
"A revieZ  of '0y  Day' ":  0oses, Dangerous Trade, p. 202.

$12,000,000 pill: The complicated financing that Zent into the final
arrangements—so different from neZspaper accounts—is detailed in R0 to
LaG, Nov. 6, 1939 (Zhich contains R0's plea to charge tolls); Singstad to
LaG, Nov. 21, 1939; R0 to LaG, Nov. 30, 1939; unsigned and unaddressed
memo dated Jan. 18, 1940; Jesse Jones to Alfred B. Jones, 0ar. 9, 1940;
Fearson Shortridge to LaG, 0ar. 12, 1940; 0orton 0cCartney  (chief, self-
liquidating projects division of RFC) to R0,  Nov. 20, 1940. All  in LaG
3apers.

Victory Luncheon: See "0inutes" cited above.

30. Revenge

SO8RCES

Books:

Rodgers, Robert 0oses; :hite  and :illensky,    AIA  Guide to NeZ York
City.

See also "Sources" for Chapter 29.

NOTES

"If the roof leaks": Robert Forman to +T, 0ar.  1, 1941. Reformers' feelings:

From intervieZs Zith  many, and from their O+R's, particularly 0cAneny.
Among those intervieZed Zho consented to be quoted are Binger, E[ton,
0cGold-rick,  Orton, :einberg   and :indels.

1685
:hole  columns of letters-to-the-editor: +T, for e[ample, printed nine on
0ar.

1, 1941. R0 states tunneling Zill undermine:

For e[ample, NYT, 0ay 13, I94L E[ton checks: E[ton, confirmed by
Singstad and Binger, and by Singstad to E[ton, Feb. 15, 1941, E[ton
3apers. 170 feet: Isaacs' successor as 0anhattan borough president, Edgar J.
Nathan, Jr., in letter to NYT, 0ar. 16, 1943. It Zas going

to fall doZn; "a joke' Bun ci "\o Jm-tory Zorth Zriting about" t .0 in Feb.
25, 1 941, ":h> must this 00  thing be torn fro 11 I .ton to h

Feb. 17, 1941 Nod *▼«■ certain of neZ location: Confidential source, in 1
LaG shortly thereafter announced he had decided the neZ location Zould
not be in the Bron[; +T, 0ay 2, 1941. Demolition not the issue: NYT, +T,
Sept 12, 1941.

3alma sZitch: NYT, 0ay, Sept. 12, 1941; 0orris sZitch: 0ay, Sept. 12,
1941.

No construction company Zould bid: Actually one bid Zas submitted in
1942, but it Zas a false bid, submitted to save R0 embarrassment. Suit:
0cAneny O+R; Binger, :indels. ":ith   the unleashing": +T, Feb. 25,
1941. Bur-lingham visiting the Aquarium: Binger. 0cAneny's fight:
0cAneny, Isaacs O+R's; Binger, E[ton, :indels. "The successful
conclusion," "most gratifying": NYT, Oct. 8, 1949. "0cAneny beat 0oses":
Isaacs O+R. "NoZ it is a monument": :hite and :illensky, p. 10. "The
ten-year battle": Rodgers, p. 94.

31. 0onopoly

SO8RCES

Documents:

"E[cerpt from 0inutes of a 0eeting of the 3ort of NeZ York Authority
held Thursday, Sept. 25, 1941"; "Special Report of the Staff to the

1686
Construction Committee on 0r. Ole Singstad and the Acquisition of the
3roperties of Anjou Realty Corporation and Nord +olding Corporation"—
both these documents attached to R0 to LaG, Nov. 10, 1941, LaG 3apers.

"Re: Ole Singstad" (this is the title of a letter from Alfred B. Jones to LaG,
0ar. 20, 1942, Zhich constitutes the Tunnel Authority investigation of the
Anjou and Nord companies).

Author's intervieZs:

+oZard S. Cullman, :illiam    0cD.   Griffin,  3. Fearson Shortridge, Ole
Singstad, 3aul :indels,  confidential sources.

NOTES

R0  recommends halt in tunnel Zork:

+T, Oct. 6, 1942. Not steel at all: :illiam   +.  Friedman in +T, Oct. 6. LaG's
furious statement: +T, Oct. 7. :3B   stopping production: NYT, Oct. 13,
1942.

Notes for pages 690-702

1216

"Doing the right thing": R0   quoted in +T, Oct. 18, 1942.

Tunnel Authority financial situation:

Various "Tunnel Authority" folders in LaG 3apers; Shortridge, Singstad.
R0's  analysis of that situation: Various letters in LaG 3apers; typical is R0
to LaG, June 7, 1945. "0ess": For e[ample, R0  to LaG, Dec. 4, 1940, and
R0  to Jones, Sept. 29, 1945; LaG 3apers.

Singstad's brother-in-laZ's real estate transactions: 0inutes of 3ort
Authority meeting of Sept. 25, 1941, and staff report that Zas presented to
that meeting. 3oZer struggle: Singstad, :indels. "+e  Zas afraid": :indels.
"Great regret": Alfred B. Jones reported this to R0, July 16, 1943, LaG
3apers. "The Singstad story": R0 to LaG, Nov. 10, 1941. LaG 3apers. This

1687
and subsequent communications indicate that R0 had given the 0ayor an
oral version of the affair. R0 quoted Cullman about the alleged $50,-000 in
Nov. 10, 1941, letter. 0adigan's overture to Singstad: Singstad, :indels.
0adigan Zould  not discuss it, but La]arus says he kneZ about the overture.

R0  recommends Cullman: The recommendation Zas made secretly, and
cannot be found, but a green slip dated Feb. 10, 1943, and filled out by one
of LaG's secretaries to indicate the nature of the document for filing
purposes can be found in LaG 3apers, Bo[ 710, folder marked "3arks—
Feb., 1943."

Friedman to LaG: June 15, 1945. LaG reply: June 18, 1945. Buried
neZspaper articles: For e[ample, +T, July 26, 1945.

R0  firing  Shortridge: Shortridge.

32. 4uid 3ro 4uo

SO8RCES

Books:

Garrett. The La Guardia Years; Gun-ther, Inside 8.S.A.', 0orris, Let the
Chips Fall; 0oses, La Guardia: A Salute and a 0emoir-, 0oscoZ,  3olitics
in the Empire State.

Author's intervieZs:

:alter   D. Binger, Joseph D. 0cGold-rick, 3aul :indels.

NOTES

LaG's desk: Gunther, p. 580. 3ressing his back: 0orris, p. 204. "I guess I'm
tired": To Gunther (p. 588).

DN straZ poll: Garrett, p. 285. Analysis of his problems: 0cGoldrick,
:indels;

Garrett, pp. 275-99; 0orris, pp. 202-03; 0oscoZ,  p. 28.

1688
R0's  one public statement: +T, Oct. 22, 1945. 0en Zho kneZ 0oses:
0cGoldrick,  :indels.   :JZ    announcement: Various neZspapers, Nov. 2,
1945. O'D describes his first conference Zith R0— at the Links Club—in
his O+R, pp. 246-247: "I . . . asked [0oses] if he'd be Zinning . . . [0oses]
said, ':ell,   of course, I might tell you that I'm bound to make tZo speeches
for one of your opponents . . .'"

"It's true": +T, Nov. 2, 1945. 3ress reaction: 3ost, Nov. 2; DN, Nov. 3; +T,
Nov. 3.

"So shrunken": 0oses, La Guardia, p. 44. Engineers Club scene: Binger.

33. Leading Out the Regiment

SO8RCES

Books, articles and documents:

Allen, Our Sovereign State; Con-nable and Silberfarb, Tigers of Tammany;
Costikyan, Behind Closed Doors; Doig, 0etropolitan Transportation
3olitics and the NeZ York Region; Felker (ed.), The 3oZer Game; Flynn,
You're the Boss; Garrett, The La Guardia Years; Gunther, Inside 8.S.A.;
+amburger, 0ayor-:atching    and Other 3leasures; Isaacs, Love Affair Zith
a City; Leavitt, SuperhighZay-Superhoa[; LoZe, Cities in a Race Zith
Time; Lund-berg, America's Si[ty Families and The Rich and the Super-
Rich; 0ockridge,  The Big Fi[;  0oscoZ,  3olitics  in the Empire State, :hat
+ave You Done for 0e  Lately? and The Last of the Big-Time Bosses;
0orris,  Let the Chips Fall; 0oses, Dangerous Trade; Nevins and .rout,
The Greater City; Riordon, 3lunkitt of Tammany +all; Rodgers, Robert
0oses; Sayre and .aufman, Governing NeZ York  City; :hite,    The
0aking  of the 3resident 1964.

Austin J. Tobin, "3ublic Relations and Financial Reporting in a 0unicipal
Corporation," 0ay  23, 1951.

Fred J. Cook and Gene Gleason, "The Shame of NeZ York," The Nation,
Oct.

1689
31, 1959.

Office of the State Comptroller, Division of Audits and Accounts, "Report
on Audit of Certain Financial and Operating 3ractices, Triborough Bridge
and Tunnel Authority," Jan. 10, 1967; also a preliminary draft of this audit
report never released to the public; also audi-

Notes for pages 704^710

1217

tors* Zork sheets (all hereafter referred to as "Levitt TBTA Audit").

Office of the State Comptroller, Division of Audits and Accounts, "Draft
Report" on LIS3C, Jones Beach and Beth-page authorities; also auditors'
Zork sheets (all hereafter referred to as "Levitt LIS3C Audit").

Certain files of the TBTA made available to the author on a confidential
basis (hereafter referred to as "Secret TBTA Files").

TBTA Annual Reports, 1946-67.

Oral +istory Reminiscences:

Stanley 0. Isaacs, Reuben A. La]arus, George 0cAneny, :illiam
O'DZyer.

Author's intervieZs:

+enry Barnes, +arold Blake, 3eter J. Brennan, 3eter Campbell BroZn,
:illiam    Chapin, Ernest J. Clark, Ernest Cohen, Albert 0. Cole, John A.
Coleman, Victor F. Condello, Fred J. Cook, Joan Gan] Cooney, Timothy J.
Cooney, EdZard N. Costikyan, +oZard S. Cullman, Thomas E. DeZey,
3erry B. Du-ryea, Jr., Julius C. C. Edelstein, Jerry Finkelstein, :alter S.
Fried, +ortense Gabel, 0onroe GoldZater, Nettie Green-berg, :illiam   J.
+addad, 0rs. Rudolph +alley,  Vincent R. Impellitteri, Joseph .ahn,  Saul
.aplan,  Edna F. .elly,  :illiam    Latham, Reuben A. La]arus, Arthur Levitt,
Jacob Lutsky, 0ichael J. 0adi-gan, 0ichael   J. 0erkin,  J. Burch 0c-
0orran,  EdZard F. 0oloney, :arren   0oscoZ,  John 0ulcahy,  0ary  3erot

1690
Nichols, 3aul O'DZyer, 3aul O'.eefe,  LaZrence 0.   Orton, Jackson
3hillips, Charles F. Rodrigue], DZayne Saunders, Louis Schulman, 3aul R.
Screvane, Sidney 0. Shapiro, 3hilip Shumsky, Charles Stark, Bertram D.
Tallamy, James True[, Robert F. :agner, Jr., Arthur B. :illiams,   :illiam    J.
Zeckendorf.

0ore  than a score other intervieZees —0oses men, :agner men, city
officials, state officials, federal officials— have requested anonymity.

NOTES

Construction Coordinator: Not one of the Assistant Corporation Counsels:
Condello. Citi]ens 8nion  protest: NYT

(Feb. 6, 1946) noted that, at a Board of Estimate session, "a letter from ...
the Citi]ens 8nion  protesting that the bill gave too much poZer to one
person and superseded the Charter, Zent unheeded." CD's belief that it
Zould be "purely administrative": 3ost, 0ay  2, 1946. The

one paragraph Zhich the Times devoted to the Board's approval of the bill
the ne[t to last in a story on Feb. 5. 8sing innocent phrase as authori]ation:
Rodrigue], Lutsky. Lying for tZenty  years: Edelstein.

R0's  relationship Zith Bureau of 3ublic Roads: Du 3ont to R0,  Jan. 25,
1954, :agner  3apers; Tallamy. Their idol: Author's intervieZs Zith
Tallamy and various B3R officials Zho declined to be identified. "8nder
federal laZ": Lutsky.

Taking over housing: Although its membership changed from time to time,
the 0oses 0en  Zho gave him control of the +ousing Authority  board for
most of the 1946-58 period Zere Thomas F. Farrell, its chairman from 1946
to 1950; 3hilip J. Cruise, its chairman from 1950 to 1958; Thomas J.
Shanahan, its vice chairman from 1948 to 1958; and :illiam :ilson,   a
long-time 0oses consultant Zho Zas a board member from 1952 to 1957.
Among top Authority officials  Zho Zere loyal "0oses  0en"   Zere Assistant
to the Chairman Gerald J. Carey, Director of Development James A.
DaZson, Director of 3lanning Samuel Ratensky and Director of 3ersonnel
Joseph Rechetnick. Controlled it absolutely for a decade: 0oscoZ, its

1691
e[ecutive director for tZo  years, Orton, La]arus, confidential sources; the
author's analysis of communications betZeen R0, the Authority and O'D,
Impy and :agner,  from the respective 0ayoral 3apers. One of the feZ
public attempts to reveal the e[tent of R0's influence Zas made by former
Authority Chairman Langdon 3ost in 1947, Zhen he said, "The City
+ousing Authority, by laZ,  has five members. But the si[th and really
important member seems to be Bob 0oses." 3ost, Sept. 5, 1947.

DeZey liked to boast: IntervieZ Zith  author. R0  cursing him: State D3:
official Arthur  B. :illiams,    confidential sources.

+arriman sitting silently: Joan Gan] Cooney, among others. "Get tough
Zith 0oses":  True[;  confirmed by several confidential sources. Suggesting
dam be named for R0: Chapin, Latham, Shapiro.

The e[tra carbons: Shapiro, confirmed by confidential sources.

Control of District Ten: 0ost  of the D3:    engineers Zho spoke Zith the
author declined to be identified. Among those Zho agreed Zere 0c0orran,
0a-loney, Tallamy and :illiams    and their stories are confirmed by, among
others, Barnes, Clark, Latham and Shapiro.

Notes for pages 710-719

1218

0acy, in  0acy  to DeZey, Oct. 30, 1947, 0acy 3apers, complains about
R0's  domination of the District.

R0  recommending 0c0orran:   0c-0orran.   R0's  evaluation of
0c0orran:   Dangerous Trade, p. 298. R0's absolute veto poZer: Tallamy,
0c0orran,   0a-loney.  States had final say: Leavitt, pp. 166-167.

The machine: 0oscoZ, :hat   +ave You Done for 0e  Lately? and Last of
the Big-Time Bosses; Connable and Sil-berfarb, pp. 292ff.; Garrett, pp.
303-36; Cook and Gleason, "The Shame of NeZ York." "A vast, corrupt
organi]ation": +T,  quoted in Gunther, p. 561. Judgeships sold: Garrett, p.
307. Democrats bringing in Republicans: "Shame"; 0orris, p. 220;

1692
0oscoZ,  3olitics in the Empire State, p. 136; :hat  +ave You Done for 0e
Lately?, pp. 56-57. +oZ this device stymied investigations: "Shame," p.
289.

The TZeed Ring: 3enn Station: 0oscoZ, :hat   +ave You Done for 0e
Lately?, p. 147. 3lunkitt: Connable and Silberfarb, pp. 158-59. "+onest
graft": 0oscoZ,  3olitics  in the Empire State, pp. 213-15; The Last of the
Big-Time Bosses, esp. p. 51. Al Smith quote: Allen, p. 89. "A king's
ransom": La]arus O+R.

+e had the money to pay it: These figures come primarily from the author's
analysis of Comptroller's Reports, 1946-63. The housing figures come also
from various confidential sources in the City Comptroller's office and in
R0's  hierarchy, and from City 3lanning Commission, "3ublic :orks
3rogress Report," 1949, and "3lanning 3rogress, 1940-50," 0ar. 15, 1951,
and from analysis of Authority figures by Orton and confidential sources in
the Comptroller's office; and from the +ousing Authority's "3roject Data —
Dec. 31, 1972." D3:   funds come also from various D3:   reports, 1946-63,
and from R0's "Arterial  3rogress Reports," particularly Nov. 8, 1965. pp-
2-31. Slum Clearance funds from various Slum Clearance Committee "Title
I 3rogress" reports, particularly July 15, 1957, and Oct. 26, 1959. Three and
a half billion dollars dispensed in the city: According to "Comptroller's
Reports," see above, $3,684,114,-923 betZeen 1946 and i960. Triborough
traffic and income figures: TBTA Annual Reports, 1946-68.

Difficulty  in auditing TBTA:  Confidential sources. 1,400 editorials: Tobin,
"3ublic Relations," p. 8. Feelings of politicians: None Zilling  to be quoted;

among those Zho observed their feelings are La]arus, Lutsky, Orton,
Rodrigue]. "The natural locus of corruption": Costi-kyan, p, 297. +e said:
"It is not a particular group of people that is the magnet Zhich attracts
corrupters. 3oZer, and poZer alone, attracts. The natural locus of corruption
is alZays Zhere the discretionary poZer resides. It folloZs that in an era
Zhen political leaders e[ercised basic poZer over the government officials
Zhom they controlled, the locus of corruption Zas in the offices of the
political bosses—TZeed, Croker, .elly, and the rest. But as poZer has
shifted from the political leader to the civil servant and the public
officeholder, so the locus of corruptibility and of corruption has shifted."

1693
Rodrigue], in an intervieZ, gave a very perceptive vieZ of this situation to
the author, as did +addad, .ahn, La]arus, Lutsky and others.

Triborough insurance: On slum clearance project: Blaikie had it first:
"Shame," p. 290. Lost it to De Sapio broken La]arus. Over-all pattern:
Secret TBTA Files, including R0  to Spargo, Dec. 4, 1953; Spargo to R0,
Dec. 8, 1953. $500,000 per year: 0oscoZ, in intervieZ, said he Zas told
this by De Sapio. The figure is confirmed by those figures available in the
TBTA files. Brokers had to do no Zork for it: Spargo to C. J. Reid, Dec. 3,
1954. Shifting policies to broker "friend of Tom Shanahan's": Spargo to
R0,  Dec. 8, 1953, Secret TBTA Files. For a decade: Levitt TBTA Audit,
pp. 113-31. De Sapio: The friend Zas 0oscoZ, and 0oscoZ related this to
author in an intervieZ. Some to a broker close to the leader: The broker Zas
Timothy :.   Foley, Inc., and Levitt TBTA Audit,  p. 114, shoZs that the
Foley company received premiums totaling $121,000. Later De Sapio Zas
believed to be close to Campo & Roberts, Inc. Levitt TBTA Audit shoZs
that that firm received premiums on Verra]ano-NarroZs Bridge insurance
beginning Nov. 9, 1959; a very incomplete early total of the premiums it
received from this one project is $57,-000. Campo & Roberts received
hundreds of thousands of dollars in premiums on other 0oses projects. Sere
vane intervieZ and see "Notes" for Chapter 45. Stein-gut: Levitt TBTA
Audit, p. 116. No "government business": NYT, June 17, 1968. Roe: Spargo
to Roe, June 2, 1968, Secret TBTA Files. CreZs: Spargo to R0, Dec. 28,
1953, Secret TBTA Files. Stephens: R0 to Spargo, Dec. 4, 1953; Spargo to
R0,  Dec. 8, Secret TBTA Files; La]arus.

Notes for pages 720-740

Triborough legal fees: Rosenman's boost from R0: 0oses, Dangerous
Trade, p. 705. Jimmy +ines' assemblyman: La]arus. $250,000 fee:
Transcript, "+earings, 8. S. Congress, Senate Banking and Currency
Committee," Vol. 49, p. 3131 (NeZ York City, Oct. 1, 1954). Rosenman
also represented a syndicate to Zhich R0 Zas planning to hand an
immensely valuable Title I site adjacent to the Lincoln Center development
for "a group of theaters" (Dangerous Trade, p. 520). :hy this plan fell
through is unclear. Rosenman Zas also to reap a small fortune from R0's
1964-65 :orld's  Fair (see Chapter 45). 3reusse: See Chapter 45.

1694
"Because Tobin doesn't give me anything": La]arus. Rosenman's trip: NYT,
Feb. 25, 1957. The Times's profile of Rosenman on this occasion called
him, in an unintended double-entendre, "3roconsul of 3oZer."

Shanahan: Biography: J-A, Aug. 3, 1954; NYT, Sept. 2, 1956; July 3, 1959;
3ost, Aug. 26, 1959; "Shame," pp. 294-305. IntervieZs Zith Cook,
Finkelstein, GoldZater, +addad, .ahn, La]arus,  0erkin,  0oscoZ,
Screvane, :agner and numerous confidential sources. "+e Zent on face
value": 0erkin.  +atred of "Commies":  0oscoZ.  "One of the most
notorious": Edelstein. "Ethically . . . left something to be desired": 0oscoZ.
":e   all kneZ":  GoldZater. No mention: Con-nable and Silberfarb book.
$27,978: Levitt TBTA Audit,  p. 114. Fees for banking services: Levitt
TBTA Audit,  pp. 148, 150. $15,000,000 deposit: :ork sheets for Levitt
TBTA Audit,  undated and unnumbered. $48,963,000: Levitt TBTA Audit,
p. 149. Bank couldn't cover it: Confidential source. Shanahan and +ousing
Authority: 0oscoZ.  R0   delegated him slum clearance poZer: Gold-Zater,
+addad, .ahn.  "A part of my deal": 8nidentified  sponsor quoted in
"Shame," p. 294. $20,000,000: Number of shares given by 0erkin. +ousing
Authority projects Zere the projects 0oses Zanted: Author's analysis of
TBTA files, O'D, Impy  and :agner  3apers; intervieZs Zith R0,   Chapin,
Coleman, Gabel, GoldZater, Impellitteri, La]arus, Lutsky, 0oscoZ,
0ulcahy, Orton, Rodrigue]  and numerous confidential sources. "8tmost
importance": R0  to Impy, Feb. II, 1953, Impy 3apers. Buckley phone call:
Rodrigue]. State senator: Confidential source.

"Only one Zay to hold a district": 4uoted  in Riordon, p. 25. :agner  to
Screvane: :agner, Screvane. Dossiers: Ingraham, Lutsky. Getting Salmon a
job:

12

R0  to Cashmore. date lost, :agner 3apers.

"Silence to the grave": ( onl.dcnt. .,! source.

Banks: The best analysis of banks' relationship to NeZ York politicians is
the +Ts "Our Sideline Legislators" series by Richard L. 0adden and 0artin
J. Steadman, Aug. 1963. The best analysis of banks' relationships Zith one

1695
politician is a series of articles on State Senator EdZard J. Speno in
NeZsday by an investigating team headed by Bob Greene, 1969. The best
analysis of banks' poZer in general is Lundberg, The Rich and the Super-
Rich. This section—as Zell as the folloZing sections on unions and
contractors—is draZn in large part from the author's oZn observations as a
political and investigative reporter for NeZsday. Banks needed authority
bonds: IntervieZs Zith Jackson 3hillips, director of municipal research,
Dun and Bradstreet; DZayne Saunders, vice president, Bank Investment
Division, Chemical Bank; Ernest Cohen, director of research, State Banking
Department; 0adigan; confidential sources. "Supply and demand":
0adigan. R0's  feelings: 0adigan;  they remained unstated but Zere
obvious in the author's intervieZs Zith R0.  15% reserve: Levitt TBTA
Audit, p. 22. ":e   all kneZ":  Confidential source. R0  offered bankers more
than safety: The additional incentives he offered by such devices as
unnecessarily high interest rates Zere e[plained by 3hillips and other
bankers, and confirmed by Levitt TBTA Audit, pp. 18-37, 147-50, and by
comments deleted from the audit at R0's demand but made available to the
author. 3rivate placement: 0adigan.

Chase had the most: :hite, p. 83. "There's a dictator": O'DZyer O+R.
Largest single recipient: Levitt TBTA Audit, p. 32. Chemical Bank: NYT,
Oct. 25, 1968. ":e  bought a ton": Saunders. Remaining divided up: Levitt
TBTA Audit,  pp. 32ff. Rockefeller to R0:  0ay  25, i960, quoted in 0oses,
Dangerous Trade, p. 73. "3ushing hard": Rodrigue].

"Replacing graft": Rodrigue]. +istory  of the organi]ation: Connable and
Silberfarb book.

"Get the names in": Costikyan. Saul .aplan says legislators Zho Zanted
summer jobs for children or relatives in state parks had only to ask.

Cardinal Spellman's opinion of Eleanor Roosevelt: 0oscoZ, Last of the
Big-Time Bosses, p. 122, relates the Cardinal attacking 0rs. Roosevelt
personally and being ordered to call on her at +yde

Notes for pages 741-754

1220

1696
3ark and "make up"—an order delivered by 3ope 3ius ;II after Ed Flynn
had floZn to Rome to see him. SZapping pieces of land: R0. Fordham: See
Chapter 36. Church interceding for him: Numerous intervieZs.

The store for 0acy's: Barnes.

"A+  0oses had to do Zas push that button": Rodrigue]; virtually the same
Zords Zere used by Lutsky—and by many other politicians in intervieZs.

Borough presidents: 0oscoZ, "3olitical  0achines +ave Lost Their Grip,"
The Saturday Evening 3ost, Apr. 12, 1947; :hat +ave You Done for 0e
Lately?, pp. 57ff. Tammany's 30,000: 0oscoZ, :hat   +ave You Done for
0e  Lately?, p. 57. 3oZer running both Zays: Connable and Silberfarb, pp.
i82ff. Cook: "Shame," p. 262. For an over-all analysis of the shifts in their
poZer, see Sayre and .aufman, pp. 638-39. Effect of the neZ scale of
construction: The most incisive analysis the author has heard Zas given by
Rodrigue], Zho Zorked  for both an "old" B3—Jimmy  Lyons—and a
"neZ," +erman Badillo.  "On the chessboard": Sayre and .aufman, p. 652.
Control of the streets: Sayre and .aufman, pp. 629-30. "8nZritten laZ":
0oscoZ,  Rodrigue], among others. "Commanding position": Sayre and
.aufman,  p. 631. NeZ realities: Costikyan, 0oscoZ,  Rodrigue], La]arus,
:agner,  among others; confirmed by the author's analysis of major public
Zorks proposals—and their ultimate disposal—betZeen 1946 and i960.
Stepping into the vacuum: Rodrigue] described hoZ R0's offers looked
from Lyons' angle. 0oscoZ, Zho  dealt Zith all the B3's on :agner's  behalf,
saZ it happening, too. Also intervieZs Zith Barnes, Chapin, Cullman,
Latham, La]arus, 0adigan, Screvane, Shapiro, Tallamy, :agner. "3ush a
button": Confidential source. R0 disciplining  Lyons: 0oscoZ,  :hat   +ave
You Done for 0e Lately?, pp. 201-02; NYT, 0ar.  12, 1953. "Center of
gravity": Sayre and .aufman, p. 626. Forcing Board to approve NarroZs
Bridge approaches: 0oscoZ; Ina Joan Caro, "The Bridge" (unpublished
0.A.  thesis). Require redemption: The total value of Triborough facilities
Zas set at that figure by Dun and Brad-street.

"A foreign, sovereign state": Confidential source. Lutsky: IntervieZ. No
attempt to modify it: Author's analysis of program.

34. 0oses and the 0ayors

1697
SO8RCES

Books, articles and documents:

Anderson, The Federal Bulldo]er; Connable and Silberfarb, Tigers of
Tammany; Costikyan, Behind Closed Doors; Felker (ed.), The 3oZer
Game; Flynn, You're the Boss; Garrett, The La Guardia Years; Gunther,
Inside 8.S.A.; +amburger, 0ayor-:atching;    Lie,  In the Cause of 3eace;
0ockridge,  The Big Fi[;  0oscoZ,  :hat   +ave  You Done for 0e  Lately?
and The Last of the Big-Time Bosses; 0orris, Let the Chips Fall; 0oses,
Dangerous Trade; Nevins and .rout, The Greater City; Rodgers, Robert
0oses; Zeckendorf, Zeckendorf.

Fred J. Cook and Gene Gleason, "The Shame of NeZ York," The Nation,
Oct. 31, 1959. 3hilip +amburger, "The 0ayor,"  The NeZ Yorker, Jan. 26,
Feb.

7, 1957.

0oses, "Construction Schedule for Arterial +ighZays  and 3arkZays," Nov.
26, 1945.

0oses, "Report to the 0ayor,  Board of Estimate, City 3lanning
Commission and City Council by the City Construction Coordinator on
3rogress and 3roposed Revision in the 3rogram of Essential 3ostZar 3ublic
Improvements, NeZ York City," Apr. 15, 1946.

0oses to O'DZyer, 0emorandum  "on the necessity for immediate
agreement by the Board of Estimate on the City's improvement program in
the years 1947, 1948 and 1949," Apr. 10, 1947. These tZo reports are the
most valuable out of the great mass of O'DZyer 3apers.

City 3lanning Commission, "3lanning 3rogress, 1940-50, City of NeZ
York," 0ar.  15, 1951.

O'DZyer, Impellitteri,  :agner  and Zeckendorf 3apers.

Oral +istory Reminiscences:

1698
Stanley 0. Isaacs, Reuben A. La]arus, George 0cAneny, :illiam
O'DZyer.

NOTES

'D:YER

Author's intervieZs:

For the O'DZyer period: Charles Abrams, :illiam   S. Chapin, John A.
Coleman, Victor F. Condello, +oZard S. Cullman, Thomas E. DeZey, Jerry
Finkelstein, 0onroe GoldZater, Saul .aplan,  Jacob Lutsky, 0ichael  J.
0adigan, Joseph D. 0cGoldrick,  :arren   0os-

Notes for pages 755-767

coZ, 3aul O'DZyer, LaZrence 0.  Orton, Sidney 0.  Shapiro, 3aul :indels,
:illiam    J. Zeckendorf, confidential sources.

O'D biography: Gunther, pp. 559-65; +amburger, pp. 84-114; 0oscoZ,
:hat   +ave You Done for 0e  Lately?, pp. 31-34, and Last of the Big-Time
Bosses, pp. 64-65, 85-89; Nevins and .rout, pp. 115-24. "Little did the
boys knoZ": +amburger, p. 108. O'D and 0oran: NYT,  0ay  2, 1951; Dec.
19, 1952; "Shame," pp. 266-69; Fulton Oursler, "The Remarkable Story of
:illiam    O'D," Reader's Digest, 0ay 12, 1952; 0orris,  pp. 215-23. Trying
to ZithdraZ:  0oscoZ,  :hat   +ave You Done for 0e  Lately?, p. 32. In
0e[ico:   +amburger, p. 99. Grand-jury charges: NYT, Oct. 30, 1945.

O'D's relationship Zith R0:  $1,-565,000,000 price tag: 0oses, "Report ...
by the City Construction Coordinator on . . . 3ostZar 3ublic
Improvements." The report given to the 0ayor-elect Zas a draft of the one
published the folloZing April.

No money available: 0oses, "Report," p. 5; 0cGoldrick;  various
neZspapers, Dec. 1945-Feb. 1946. "I tell you": O'D quoted in +amburger,
pp. 96-97. Then 0oses appeared: 0oses, "Construction Schedule for
Arterial +ighZays  and 3arkZays," Nov. 26, 1945. +ousing: NYT, 0ar.  6,

1699
June 2, 1946; 3ost, Nov. 7, 14, 15, 1945; +T, Dec. 20, Dec. 21, 1945.
Airports: Spivack in 3ost, Jan. 29, 1946.

"Deferred" and "nondeferrable" lists: Codified in Apr. 15, 1946, "Report."

R0  Zants to be named to +ousing Authority: +is boldest attempt Zas to
come some months later in a series of leaks to the DN, clima[ed in DN,
Oct. 25, 1946.

"Bob 0oses represented to me": O'D O+R, p. 87.

"0unicipal  e[tortion":   NYC Consumer Council statement, quoted in NYT,
Feb. 20, 1946. Isaacs pointed out: In letter printed in +T, Feb. 24, 1947-
"GiveaZay": 0cGoldrick   intervieZ  Zith  author; 0cGoldrick  quoted in
3ost, 0ar. 22, 1946. La Guardia radio broadcast: NYT, Jan. 7, 1946.
La]arus Joseph: +T, Feb. 20, 1946. Democrats demand O'D ask for more
state aid: For e[ample, NYT and Brooklyn Eagle, Feb. 24, 28.

R0  threatens to "reveal some facts": 3ost, 0ar. 22, 1946. Naked display of
poZer: 0oscoZ.  O'D empoZers R0  to represent him: NYT, Feb. 18.
Joseph on third floor, R0 on second: +T, Feb. 18. City's business entirely
through R0:  Condello, the city's legislative representa-

tive; a confident J lourcc Zh sented DeZe\ in id. neeotiatioi Ian, Assembly
n ; .' s

counsel; La]ara on the icene in unofficial technical capacity; 0o covering
city +all  foi the Timet also +T, 0ar.  29. The dial: [ntervi cited directly
above rV] 7. //./. . 0(  | h lyn Eagle, various issu. have the details although
they did n<»t knoZ the significance of R0's  role R0  did not represent their
position: \ ) / Feb. 19. O'D did not apply pressure: NYT, Feb. 20.

R0's  commission: Approval of Tunnel Authority takeover: NYT, Apr. 24,
1946; of increase in bonds and neZ bond interest rates: +T, 0ar. 5; of
Airport Authority:  Various neZspapers, 0ar. 27; of housing: NYT, June 2;
$22,000,000 bonus: NYT, Feb. 20.

1700
Analysis of deal results: Isaacs O+R, pp. 248-60; intervieZs cited above.
The feZ public analyses came only much after the fact—for e[ample, 3ost,
0ar. 16, 1950.

"3ick your members": O'D O+R, p. 871. :hy    members selected: Shapiro.
"I never spoke": O'D O+R, p. 871. 0cLaughlin,  0eyer  appointments: O'D
O+R, p. 583. Appointments in other key agencies: O'D O+R, p. 546.

"Strong man": NYT, Jan. 8, 1946. "Oberbiirgermeister": LaG radio speech
quoted in NYT, Dec. 29, 1945. R0 boasts: Christian Science 0onitor
article quoted in 3ost, 0ay 21, 1946. "0atters  pending": Corcoran to O'D,
0ay  29, 1946, O'D 3apers. Laughing it off: O'D intervieZ in 3ost, 0ay  22,
1946.

O'D getting angry: 3ost, 0ay 2, 1946; Lutsky, 0oscoZ,  Orton. Spargo:
0oscoZ.  "Trouble-shooting" squad: NYT, 0ay  27, 1946. O'D calls Orton:
Orton. R0  losing on 3lanning Commission: Orton. Stop Zorrying:
0cAneny  O+R;  :indels.

IdleZild:  R0  planning 600 percent rise: 30, 0ar.  19, 1946. Lunch at
Randall's Island: +T, July 10, 20. The bonds could not be sold: NYT, July
22. 3ort Authority announcement: +T, Dec. 19. 3ress accuses O'D: Various
neZspapers, July 1946. O'D gives 3ort Authority airports: NYT, Aug. 3.
Cancellation of $1,178,250 contract: O'D 3apers.

Liberal organi]ations: 3ost, June 24. 28,000: NYT, June 24, 1946. "The
biggest story": 30,  July 28. O'D considering enlarging 3lanning
Commission: Acting Corporation Counsel John J. Bennett to O'D, Dec. 28,
1946, O'D 3apers. R0's

Notes for pages 767-783

1222

access to O'D restricted: Confidential source. R0 asks deputy mayor: R0
to Corcoran, Nov. 22, 1946, O'D 3apers. +er]stein reply: +er]stein to R0,
Nov. 25, 1946, O'D 3apers. "Tell the gentleman"; Coleman, Zho Zas
present, in intervieZ Zith author.

1701
O'D desperate for money, trying to oust Rogers: 0oscoZ. $3,000,000:
Abrams. 3arking garages: O'D 3apers; various neZspapers, Dec. 3, 1946.

State aZards falling off: Author's analyses of neZspaper articles and
editorials, July-Dec. 1946. 0id-0anhattan  captures O'D's fancy:
+amburger, p. 101. R0-Rogers joint announcement: NYT, Oct. 15, 1946.
"Capital ... still in City  +all":  Citi]ens 8nion  quoted in NYT, Dec. 16. R0
no comment: NYT, Dec. 3. Scene on ground floor: +T, Dec. 3. O'D's
thinking during this period: Some clues from Coleman, Cullman, Lutsky,
0adigan, 0oscoZ,  confidential  sources.

8nited Nations: "The one great thing": O'D O+R, p. 191. Appointed R0
chairman: +T, Dec. 3, 1945. R0 fatherly toZard  Nelson Rockefeller: R0,
Shapiro. 8NO opened on site R0 had selected: 0oses, Dangerous Trade,
p. 485. 0aneuvering among different cities: Lie, pp. 107-14; Dangerous
Trade, pp. 485-91; Zeckendorf, p. 68; O'D O+R, p. 192. Needed a
"gesture": O'D O+R. Lie personally aZed by R0:  See ne[t paragraph of
Notes. "8nless they came up": Lie, p. 112. "Fervently": Zeckendorf, p. 69.
":orking   on 0r.  Rockefeller":  O'D O+R, p. 191. "Tense and e[citing":
Lie, p. 113. For every snag, a knife: Zeckendorf intervieZ. ":ould  you sell
it?": Zeckendorf, p. 70. Arranging the housing: Dangerous Trade, pp. 435,
485. +ousing: NYT, +T, Apr.  28, 1946. $32,000,000: O'D O+R, pp. 191-
93.

"0y  deepest thanks": Lie to R0, Dec. 14, 1946, quoted in Dangerous
Trade, p. 490. "One of the greatest men of our time": Lie quoted in NYT,
Dec. 17, 1949. On the occasion of his retirement as Secretary-General, Lie
Zrote R0,  "Day by day, the 8nited Nations 3la]a acquires the appearance
Zhich you must have had in mind all along. . . . NeZ York City is indeed
fortunate that it has in you so imaginative and dynamic a planner and
builder." Lie to R0,  Apr. *4»  I953> quoted in Dangerous Trade, p. 500.
Rockefeller letter: Dangerous Trade, p. 490. O'D letter: Dangerous Trade,
3- 495-

R0  memo on highZays: R0  to O'D, July 21, 1947, O'D 3apers. O'D
tolerated

1702
no further delays: NYT, July 17, 1947, Zas the first sign. Contracts to
Federation-linked firms: Author's analysis of contract aZards, through
confidential sources. Joseph dispute: +T, Sun, Nov. 21, 1947. "Tuesdays":
O'D quoted in +amburger, p. 101. FeZ mornings: Coleman. 8se of entree:
Lutsky.

"The city's too big": +amburger, pp. 91, no. "The scene": 3aul O'DZyer.
"All  decisions that mattered": Orton. +T editorial: Dec. 26, 1947. "On
contracts, I'd rely": O'D O+R, pp. 546-57. "+e has both": O'D O+R, pp.
182-83.

R0  apprised O'D: +e kneZ because Senator Taft Zas consulting him at
every step, R0 intervieZ  Zith author; Rodgers, p. 154. AlloZed him to
name most committee members: It included, besides R0, three long-time
R0  allies—his former aide, 3hilip J. Cruise; John C. Reidel, chief engineer
of the Board of Estimate; and Corporation Counsel John 3. 0c-Grath—and
one opponent: La]arus Joseph.

3oZer of a neZ immensity: Anderson book. 0ay  1949 speech: Rodgers, p.
234. R0  instrumental in draft movement: Coleman and confidential
sources. Supporting O'D: For e[ample, a "Battle 3age" he Zrote for DN,
Oct. 24, 1949. 3redicted solutions: NYT, Oct. 15. :in-dels  quote: NYT,
Oct. 13. "If there is anything certain": +T, Sept. 13. ":e're  talking about
housing": +T, Oct. 19. R0's  support helpful: 0oscoZ.  4uintessential
ribbon-cutting campaign: For e[ample, NYT, +T, Oct. 15, 19, 20, 25, Nov.
3, 8. Spargo to O'D: Nov. 22, 1949, O'D 3apers.

Finkelstein: Finkelstein intervieZ, confirmed by Orton. 3roof that Orton
Zas right: "Request of the City 3lanning Department for 1950-51," Feb. 1,
1950. pp. 1, 8, 13, 115. 3er capita: "Request," p. 7. Duplication: "Request,"
p. 4. Lunch Zith R0:  Finkelstein. Sent +odgkiss: +andZritten  notes in ink
on +odgkiss to R0,  0ar.  28, 1950, O'D 3apers. "A last protest": R0 to
O'D, 0ar.  29, 1950, O'D 3apers. :ent public:  NYT, Feb. 8, 1950.

A lot of old men: 0cGoldrick,   Orton; NYT, Feb. 2, 1950; Nathan Straus to
NYT, 0ar.  2, 1950; George +allett to O'D, 0ar. 10, 1950, O'D 3apers.
NYT editorial: Feb. 8, 1950. O'D pushed the Board: Orton.

1703
"O'D loved 0oses":  Finkelstein. Other commission members support
Finkelstein: Orton. 8N site: NYT, 0ay   11, 1950. 3laygrounds: Deputy
0ayor  :illiam

Notes for pages 785-792

Reid to Finkelstein, Apr. i, 1950, O'D 3apers.

Real public hearings: +T, Aug. 8, 1950. Realtors' support obtained:
Finkelstein, Orton.

:ashington  Square: NYT, 0ay  11, 1950; +T, Apr. 12, 1950; Rodgers, pp.
274-75.

O'D's campaign contributions: NYT, various issues, 1951-52. "Real
pressure," 0oran burning retirement papers: 0oscoZ, :hat   +ave You
Done for 0e  Lately?, pp. 32-33.

I03Y

Author's intervieZs:

For the Impellitteri period: Victor F. Condello, +oZard  S. Cullman, Jerry
Finkelstein, 0onroe GoldZater, 0rs.   Rudolph +alley, Vincent R.
Impellitteri, Reuben A. La]arus, Jacob Lutsky, 0ichael J. 0adigan,  :arren
0oscoZ,  LaZrence 0.  Orton, Charles F. Rodrigue], Sidney 0. Shapiro.

NOTES

R0  in South America unaZare: R0,

0adigan, Shapiro; during this period his private memos to aides and in the
O'D 3apers shoZ him utterly unaZare that the 0ayor might be planning to
resign.

+oZ  Impy Zas chosen: 0oscoZ, Last of the Big-Time Bosses, p. 63, says
that the "Green Book" story Zas actually one devised to cover up the fact
that Thomas (Three Fingers BroZn) Luchese had ordered the ticket shifted
around to make room for Impy, but three participants present at the last-

1704
minute reshuffling— R0,  La]arus and one confidential source —confirm
that, improbable as it sounds, the "Green Book" version has it precisely the
Zay it happened. Impy possessed, in fact, the ninth-longest name in the
entire "Green Book," NYT, Aug. 27, 1950. "The perfect Throttlebottom":
0oscoZ,  Last of the Big-Time Bosses, p. 97.

R0's  endorsement: NYT, Oct. 25, 1950; 0oscoZ calls Impy's obtaining of
that endorsement a "coup," in Last of the Big-Time Bosses, p. 97. "Even I";
leading Impy around by the hand: La]arus O+R, pp. 405-06. Campaign
analysis: 0oscoZ, :hat   +ave  You Done for 0e Lately?, pp. 34~35-

"A+  I have is three votes": For e[ample, NYT, Oct. 10, 1953. "You think
they'll come?": Condello. Too timid: La]arus. +umming Zith  the choir:
NYT, Oct. 10, 1953. "You got any ideas?": 0oscoZ intervieZ. :ringing    his
hands:

A vivid  picture of the 0ayo I

of Estimate e[ecutive sessions \t v by Condello, is kj 0oscon and

ous other members ot the Imp) ftdm tration Zho Zish to remain
unidentified

"R0  is actually running this toZn'. La]arus  shoZed the author this entry in
his diary. R0  dropping by at nine: Impy'l daily schedules, many of Zhich ..'
found in his papers, shoZ that he erally left ninety minutes for his sessions
Zith R0.   "I didn't Zant  them interrupted": Impy intervieZ Zith  author.
"0arching  orders": :agner,  0oscoZ.  An  e[ample of the peremptory tone
0oses used Zith Impy is a letter he Zrote him on Nov. 2, 1951: "0y
suggestion therefore is that you call Bob :agner [then 0anhattan borough
president] and tell him that the hearing should be held by the Committee
and not independently by him, and, of course, he should be present. This
hearing should be held at City +all in the room in Zhich the Board of
Estimate e[ecutive meetings are held, on Thursday, Nov. 8th, at 3 p.m."
Impy 3apers. "No use boring you": R0 to Impy, Dec. 7, 1950, Impy
3apers. "0oses* Zord Zas laZ":  Condello. 0oscoZ   (Last of the Big-Time
Bosses, p. 97) says Impy left "policymaking in the hands of 0oses and the
city's Bureau of the Budget," but Impy 3apers clearly reveal that Zhenever

1705
the tZo disagreed, R0 Zon by threatening to resign unless Impy ordered
the Budget Bureau to do Zhat he Zanted. For e[ample, memo, "Telephoned
by Office of Commissioner 0oses for 0ayor  Impellitteri,"   Aug. 14, 1951;
and R0 to Impy, Sept. 13, 1951, states: "The Budget director had Zithheld
from the calendar . . . items [for] related repairs agreed upon Zith the
8nited Nations. ... If this item is to be deleted or is to be the subject of
debate and controversy I should like to be relieved of all future
responsibility for completing the 8N 3rogram."  Recommendations and
blackballings: R0  to Impy, 0ar.  28, June 13, Dec. 6, 1951, on over-all
reorgani]ation of the Board of Education, Zith Zhich R0   ostensibly had no
connection, and 0ay 4, Sept. 16, 1952, Impy 3apers.

Secret "understanding": Condello, confidential sources.

3oint-by-point "suggestions": R0  to Impy, June 27, 1953, Impy 3apers.

Shelter Cottage: R0 to Impy, 0ar.  9, 1951, Impy 3apers.

Re]oning study: Finkelstein, Orton. Finkelstein and Impy letters: NYT, Oct.
5, 1950. "Dear Vince": R0  to Impy,

Notes for pages 793-803

1224

handZritten note, Dec. 4, 1950, Impy 3apers. R0 recommends Bennett—
and has Impy give Reidel a salary increase:

R0  to Impy, Dec. 20, 1950, Impy 3apers; confidential sources. Rodgers:
Shapiro. Forcing out the young planners: Orton, confidential sources;
memos in "City 3lanning Commission" folder in Impy 3apers; for e[ample,
Jan. 29, 1953. Fate of re]oning report: Orton. "NoZ the city's built up": O'D
O+R, p. 580. R0  Zas back in control: So sure of Bennett Zas he that he
didn't even object Zhen—after eleven years—the commission finally
published an annual report. The reason for his lack of objection becomes
clear in the opening paragraph of Bennett's introduction: the report Zill
deal, the chairman says, Zith "the steady progress of planning in NeZ York
City and the translation of the plans into public betterment. . . . One

1706
measure of this progress Zas presented in the report of . . . the City
Construction Coordinator." "3lanning 3rogress," p. 5.

+alley: 0rs.  +alley.  Lyons: NYT, 0ar.  13, 1953. "Taken for granted":
0oscoZ  intervieZ.

Summary of trends in Impy administration: 3eter .ihss, NYT, Aug.  10-14,
1953; 0oscoZ, Last of the Big-Time Bosses.

—:AGNER

Author's intervieZs:

For the :agner  period: Robert F. :agner, Jr.

:agner  appointees, advisers or friends: :illiam  F. R. Ballard, +enry
Barnes, 3eter J. Brennan, 3eter Campbell BroZn, John A. Coleman, Victor
F. Condello, Timothy J. Cooney, EdZard N. Costi-kyan. +oZard S.
Cullman, 3erry B. Dur-yea, Jr., Julius C. C. Edelstein, +ortense Gabel,
0onroe GoldZater,  Luther Gu-lick, Saul .ahn,  Reuben A. La]arus, Jacob
Lutsky, :arren  0oscoZ,  3aul O'.eefe,   LaZrence 0.  Orton, Charles F.
Rodrigue], 3hilip  Shumsky, 3aul R. Sere vane. Eleven :agner appointees,
advisers or friends preferred to remain unidentified.

R0  aides or associates: :illiam  S. Chapin, Ernest J. Clark, :illiam
Latham, 0ichael J. 0adigan,  Sidney 0.  Shapiro, Arnold Vollmer, Arthur
B. :illiams.   Four R0   aides or associates preferred to remain unidentified.

Reporters: Fred J. Cook, :illiam  J. +addad, Joseph .ahn, 0ary  3erot
Nichols.

NOTES

8nforgettable evenings: :agner,  R0,  Cullman. +is  interest in city
planning:

+amburger, The NeZ Yorker, Jan. 26, 1957. Insisted on using his oZn
contractors: One on Zhom :agner insisted, to R0's  displeasure, Zas Del
Balso, Zhom R0,  in a 1950 letter to :agner,  calls "your contractor" (O'D

1707
3apers). "Bubblehead": The author has been unable to locate a copy of the
letter, but many people around City +all, including Lutsky, recall reading it.
"I'm not going to let 0oses":  Among those Zhom he told he Zas going to
"rein in" 0oses  Zere Coleman, Cullman, GoldZater, Gulick, Lutsky,
0oscoZ.  "A source close": 3ost, Nov. 6, 1953. The second leak: 3ost, Nov.
18, 1953.

Good Government strategy: Gabel, Orton. Left the intervieZ believing:
Orton.

The sZearing in: Among those Zatching Zho noted R0's anger Zere
Coleman, Cullman, La]arus and Shapiro. Typing up oZn form: Lutsky,
Shumsky. 0oscoZ: :hat    +ave You Done for 0e  Lately?, p. 196. The
NYT article on the sZearing in, attempting to account for the fact that R0
Zas sZorn in publicly for  only tZo posts but Zas later listed as having been
sZorn in for three, quotes :agner as saying, "There is one more coming up
but the necessary papers are not ready," but none of the persons the author
intervieZed recall the 0ayor  making such a statement, none of the other
neZspapers mentions it (all, in fact, say the announcement of R0's third
appointment folloZing the ceremony came as a complete surprise), and
several other liberals, listening to the ceremonies over the radio—such as
City 3lanning Commissioner LaZrence 0.  Orton—told the author that
:agner  "passed right on" to the ne[t appointee and that they began
cheering because they thought they had Zon.

Authority to "represent" the city: R0  to :agner,   Jan. 5, 1954; F. V. Du
3ont, Federal Commissioner of 3ublic Roads, to R0, Jan. 25, 1954;
:agner  3apers.

0itchell-Lama  fight:  0oscoZ,  :hat   +ave You Done for 0e  Lately?, pp.
203-04; 0oscoZ, Orton. R0's  "oZn"  housing program: Orton to R0,  Oct.
11, 1955, :agner 3apers; NYT, +T,  various dates,

1954.

"0y  friend, Bob :agner":   +T,  Feb. 24, 1954. "+e has been heard to say":

+amburger, The NeZ Yorker, Feb. 2, 1957.

1708
Notes for pages 803-818

3ort Authority:  Cullman, :agner.

+ousing Authority:  NYT, Jan. 9, 1954; 0oscoZ, confirmed by :agner.
Cruise's sZearing in: 3ost, Jan. 10, Feb. 11, 1954. ":ell, I made my deal":
:agner  quoted by O'.eefe,  in intervieZ. 0c-0urray    friendly  to Shanahan:
0oscoZ,  O'.eefe,  confidential sources. Cruise making his divorce:
0oscoZ,  Shapiro, confidential sources.

Sere vane: IntervieZ Zith author. R0  shoZing up late: Costikyan. Gracie
0ansion receptions: Confidential sources. "+e does a lot of his Zork":
8nidentified  source quoted in +amburger, p. 82. R0 dominated the
relationship: Among many, Barnes, BroZn, Chapin, Cooney, 0oscoZ,
Screvane.

:agner's  attempt to gain fifth +ousing Authority  vote: 0oscoZ.  Day-to-
day Authority affairs still dominated by R0:  Confidential  sources on
Authority staff. Edelstein: In intervieZ  Zith author. :agner  never interfered
Zith Title  I: Lutsky, Zho Zas supposedly the 0ayor's "Zatchdog"  on the
committee; confidential sources.

:agner  surrendering to resignation threat: GoldZater, for e[ample, told the
author that the 0ayor agitatedly telephoned him for advice after many
threats; each time, GoldZater says, he told :agner that 0oses' popularity
made it necessary to give him his Zay—and each time, GoldZater says,
:agner  took his advice. For a typical threat—and :agner surrendering to it
—see R0 to :agner,   Sept. 1, 1954, and Epstein to R0, Sept. 3, 1954,
:agner  3apers.

35. "R0"

SO8RCES

Books and documents:

+erndon, The SZeetest 0usic This Side of +eaven-, LeZis, The Day They
Shook the 3lum Tree; Rodgers, Robert 0oses.

1709
Office of the State Comptroller, Division of Audits and Accounts, "Draft
Report" on LIS3C, Jones Beach and Beth-page authorities. This report Zas
compiled by auditors in the office of State Comptroller Arthur Levitt and
never publicly released. It is referred to in the Notes as "Levitt LIS3C
Audit."

Author's intervieZs:

+arvey Aronson, Bernie Bookbinder, +enry Barnes, Ernest J. Clark, Ralph

Clark, Jane 0ost- Collins, IVnv  +

Duryea, Jr., N

+a]leton, Joseph I Inpaham

.ahn,  Lee .oppelman,  :illiam    Latham,

Reuben A. La]arus, Jacob Lutsky, 0

chael J. 0adigan, General +arry 1

0eyers, LaZrence Orton, Sidney 0.  Shi piro, 0ae  Smisek, +a]el Tappan,
Bertram D. Tallamy, Arnold Vollmer.

NOTES

Authority meeting: Rodgers, p. 179. First play in years: Ernest Clark.
0ary's  chores: Jane 0oses Collins, Shapiro. Asking for a dollar: Ingraham.
The manila envelope: Shapiro. "A dynamo": Green-berg. The letters:
Tappan, Greenberg.

R0  on the Sea-Ef: 0ae Smisek, daughter of the captain. Dictating at 7
A.0.  0adigan.  3ropped up in bed: Tallamy.

"You're just a sZabbie": Shapiro. ThroZing the inkZell: Confidential
sources.

1710
Bringing breakfast to 0ary:  Jane 0oses Collins. "3rotecting" him in relays:
Latham. From 3alms to 3ines: Vollmer.

Learned +and letter: A copy given to author by Shapiro. "+e never got
tired": Confidential source.

+etty Green bequest: LeZis, p. 311, says he "merely endorsed his $10,000
check and turned it over to charity the day he received it!" This recollection
does not conform Zith that of Shapiro, 0adigan or several confidential
sources. 8sed commissions to buy other men: 0adigan; confidential
sources.

"A feeling of isolation":  Bookbinder. Air-conditioned car: La]arus. Three
personal chauffeurs: Shapiro. That car alone: 0eyers. Telephoning
Randall's Island; captains on call; netZork of pools: 0eyers, Smisek,
Ingraham.

Fren]y in the offices: Author's observations. Subservience: Barnes, .ahn.

R0's  hospitality: The author Zas a recipient, and part of the folloZing
section is draZn from his personal observations. The scope and the cost to
the public of this hospitality R0  dispensed is found in Levitt LIS3C Audit.
BoardZalk Restaurant: Levitt LIS3C Audit, Sec. A, pp. 8ff. NeZ
BoardZalk Restaurant: Levitt LIS3C Audit, Sec. D, p. 6.

0arine  Stadium: Not for general public: Shapiro. Rearranging his schedule:
Author's observation. 3hony "vote": Author Zas standing Zith Shapiro
Zhen he made the comment. Attendance figures: Levitt LIS3C Audit, 3art
II, unnumbered

Notes for pages 819-836

1226

pages. The audit also states that, betZeen 1967 and 1971 alone, "it cost the
Authority almost $1,600,000 more than the revenues it received to present
entertainment. . . . This does not include our estimate of $574,000 for the
amorti]ation of the cost of the facilities. . . . :e   believe these subsidies

1711
Zould be better e[pended on entertainment Zhich Zould be more attractive
to a larger segment of the public."

Guy Lombardo: Levitt LIS3C Audit,  3art II. Other producers Zould have
paid: Shapiro, Ingraham. "One bottle of Scotch": +erndon, p. 220.
+oZever, to cite one item out of many found by the auditors, Guy
personally received a "producer's fee" Zhich, in 1964 for e[ample, Zas
$51,000 and a fee "paid ... for use of his band for dancing in e[cess of the
amounts paid to band," Zhich, for 1966 alone, Zas $70,000. Costs to
ta[payers: Levitt LIS3C Audit,  3art II, unnumbered pages; Sec. D, p. 6.

Limousines, etc.: See "R0's hospitality" above. :ainZright:   Confidential
source. Typical tour: Schedule provided to author. Yale class: Ralph Clark.
3lanners' tour: .oppelman. Niagara e[cursion: Aronson. "+oZ  could you
turn the guy doZn?": Lutsky. Bookbinder's pass: Bookbinder.

0ade disagreement difficult: 0any  of his guests—most perceptively, Orton
— noted this.

"In the year 1999": R0,  ":hat   Zill   NeZ York Be Like in  1999—Not so
Different" NYT  0aga]ine,  Feb. 6, 1949.

"0ake  him give his name": +T, NYT, Sept. 27, 1958; Shapiro. Left because
furious: Shapiro. Beach grass: +a]leton; confirmed by Shapiro. Trujillo:
R0  related this story—Zith pride—to John Lord O'Brien and others.

Jones Beach: R0, "From the Bridge" column, NeZsday. Bron[-
:hitestone:  R0,   "From the Bridge" column, NeZsday. :aterfront:   R0,
"The E[panding NeZ York  :aterfront   " (brochure), Aug. 1964. "The City
Builder must have": R0,  quoted in NYT 0aga]ine,  Jan. 19, 1941. "The
ancient truth": R0  quoted in NYT, 0ar.  7, 1948.

Compares himself to Lincoln: +T, Nov. 21, 1943; +T, 0ay  15, 1946. And
in the Rodgers biography of R0 on Zhich R0   Zorked so closely: "0oses
believes, like Lincoln, that government should do those things Zhich the
people cannot do for themselves" (p. [[vi); Shapiro.

Bay Shore teacher: Ralph +ousrath said this to Aronson.

1712
Refuses to consider hearing aid:

0eyers; author's observations.

Golf: R0  to NYT,  Apr. 22, 1944.

36. The 0eat A[

SO8RCES

Books and articles:

Bureau of 3ublic Roads (B3R), :hen  All  Roads Led to Rome; Leavitt,
SuperhighZay-Superhoa[; 0oses, Dangerous Trade; Rethi and Young, The
Great Bridge; Rodgers, Robert 0oses; Rose, 3ublic Roads of the 3ast;
Saalman, +aussmann: 3aris Transformed; Schrei-ber, 0erchants, 3ilgrims;
Talese, The Bridge.

Ernest J. Clark, "The Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay" (mimeographed); "Roads
and +ighZays," Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1958 edition; Theodore +.
:hite,   ":here   Are Those NeZ Roads?," Collier's, Jan. 6, 1956. "Longest
Lighted Submarine Tunnel," American City, July 1950. R. Thruelsen, "NeZ
York's Deepest Tunnel," The Saturday Evening 3ost, 0ar.

25, 1950.

Clay Committee hearings, Oct. 7-8, 1954, transcript. (A committee
appointed by the 3resident to study 8.S. highZay needs; General Lucius D.
Clay, chairman.) 0oses, "Construction Schedule for Arterial +ighZays and
3arkZays," Nov.

26, 1945; "Openings—Federal State City Arterial Construction 3rogram"
(Report to +on. Vincent R. Impellitteri), Oct. 14, 1950.

Author's intervieZs:

0any  Bureau of 3ublic Roads officials, among Zhom the only ones Zilling
to be identified are former Federal +ighZay Administrator Bertram D.
Tallamy and former B3R chief Francis Turner; former State D3:  head J.

1713
Burch 0c0orran,   former D3:    officials Arthur  B. :illiams,    Sr., James
True[, EdZard 0oloney   and many unZilling to be identified; 0oses'
engineering consultants Ernest J. Clark, 0ichael J. 0adigan, Arnold
Vollmer and others unZilling to be identified; 0oses staffers :illiam    S.
Chapin, :illiam   Latham, Sidney 0,  Shapiro and others unZilling to be
identified.

The author is indebted to Ernie Clark and members of AndreZs & Clark,
Inc., consulting engineers, for numerous days spent touring and studying
the engineering of the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay.

Notes for pages 837-849

1227

NOTES

The Royal Road and +erodotus: Schreiber, pp. 10-24. The "silk roads" and
the .han's post roads: Schreiber, pp. 25-63. The highZays of Rome: B3R,
passim; quotes from Alfred Leger (Les Travau[ 3ublics et les 0ines et la
0etallurgie  au[ Temps des Romains, 3aris, 1875) in B3R, after pp. 2, 4, 42.
Roads on a different scale: B3R, Rose and Schreiber books; Encyclopaedia
Brit-annica. Eighty acres: Clark. +aussmann: Saalman book.

No one dared lay superhighZays through a city; Their mileage Zould not
add up: B3R Library.

Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay: Ernie Clark of  AndreZs & Clark,  its principal
designer, intervieZs and his "Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay" speech; Chapin,
0adigan, 0oloney   and other engineers involved in its planning and
construction Zho Zish to remain anonymous. "I never kneZ there Zere
trees like that": Bron[ resident EdZard J. .orn.  +ardly  mentioned it; a neZ
Zord necessary: Clark, "Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay." Visuali]ing  it: Clark,
0adigan, Chapin, confidential source.

Van :yck:   Rodgers, p. 179. Cost of highZays: Average and total from
0oses, "Arterial  3rogress," Nov. 8, 1965. The $40,000,000 mile is the mile
discussed in the ne[t chapter.

1714
Verra]ano statistics: TBTA, "Spanning the NarroZs," Nov. 21, 1964, pp.
22-38.

Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel statistics: "Longest Lighted Submarine Tunnel";
Thruelsen, "NeZ York's Deepest Tunnel."

0oses 0en  and the agencies: Chapin, Clark, 0adigan, 0c0orran.
Amending state laZ, bond issues, etc.: 0oses, introduction to "Openings—
Federal State City Arterial Construction 3rogram," p. 6. 3ersuading
Congress to finance roads linked to toll facilities: 0adigan, Tal-lamy,
Turner, confidential sources. 3ersuading state to pick up city costs:
0c0orran,   Tallamy. .orean  steel: NYT, various articles, 1951; editorial,
Oct. 8, 1951. Copper strike: NYT, various articles, 1952.

Shuffling properties: :ith   Catholic Church: R0.  :ith    Con Ed: 0adigan.
0ajor  Deegan e[change: NYT and +T, Oct. 31, 1949.

"Toy building blocks": The reporter Zas :alter   Lister, Jr., +T, Jan. 22,
1950. "Absolutely cra]y":  R0.  0arguerite  +otel: Shapiro.

0oley:  ForeZord to Dangerous Trat8, p. [i.

"Can't make an omelet": R0 flaunted this slogan for more than tZ<> signs
posted over the Long Island El pressZay at the site of the [964 6j :orld's
Fair. "0eat a[":  Dangerom Trade.

37. One 0ile

SO8RCES

Books, brochures, reports, engineering studies and documents:

0oses, Dangerous Trade.

Edelstein, Impellitteri and O'DZyer 3apers.

Bron[ Borough 3resident, "Route Study for Development 3lan—Cross-
Bron[ ThruZay,"  Jan. 1944.

1715
Arthur .at],   "A  Neighborhood Organi]es to Fight City +all—A  Case
Study in Community Organi]ation," circa i960 (a report Zritten, apparently
for his oZn pleasure, by the e[ecutive director of the East Tremont
Neighborhood Center).

0oses, "Construction Schedule for Arterial +ighZays  and 3arkZays," Nov.
26, 1945; "Construction Schedule for Arterial +ighZays and 3arkZays"
(Report to +on. :illiam    O'DZyer),  June 10, 1946; "City of NeZ York
3ublic :orks   3rogram 3rogress Report," Jan. 1, 1949; "Openings—Federal
State City Arterial Construction 3rogram" (Report to +on. Vincent R.
Impellitteri), Oct. 14, 1950; "George :ashington  Bridge Approach—
+ighbridge E[pressZay Interchange," 0ay  5, 1952; "Deegan E[pressZay
— Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay—Long  Island E[pressZay," Nov. 4, 1955;
"Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay—Ale[ander   +amilton Bridge-George
:ashington  Bridge Bus Station—Opening," Jan. 17, 1963.

NeZ York City Board of Estimate, 0inutes,  "+earing in the 0atter  of
Authori]ing  a 3roceeding for Acquiring Title to Cross-Bron[  E[pressZay,
Section 2, from Anthony Avenue to LongfelloZ Avenue," Nov. 18, 1954,
pp. 14176-79; Dec. 2, 1954, 33- i5354-6o.

NeZ York City Community  3lanning Board No. 6, "The East Tremont
Story," 1962.

Author's intervieZs:

:ith   127 past and present residents of East Tremont.

Lillian  Edelstein provided the most detailed account of the fight against the
e[pressZay.

Notes for pages 850-873

1228

Especially helpful in describing the pre-e[pressZay neighborhood Zere
0rs.  Dorothy Belt]er, 0rs.   Nora BroZn, Samuel and .atherine Coe,
Arthur Clark, 0rs.  Esther Gassel, Saul JanoZit], Sol .leinman, Lee

1716
.oppelman,  EdZard J. .orn,  0rs.  +elen La]archeck, Isidore 0alek,   Louis
0elt]er,  Lillian  Roberts, Cele Sherman, Fannie Silverstein, Charles Smith,
Dominick Tesone and 0rs. Frances TZersky.

Especially helpful in describing the changes Zrought in the neighborhood
by the e[pressZay Zere 0rs.  Vivian Dee, Bert Gumpert, Arthur .at],
+arry .ei-fet]    and Bernard Lambert.

Among politicians, engineers and others involved in e[pressZay decisions:
Ernest J. Clark, Joseph T. Ingraham, :arren 0oscoZ, LaZrence 0.  Orton,
Charles Rodrigue], Robert F. :agner, Jr., Bernard :einer  and many Zho
Zould talk only on condition that they remain unidentified.

NOTES

The neighborhood: The picture of it is draZn from the 127 intervieZs and
from the Community 3lanning Board's "East Tremont Story." 60,000: This
is an estimate. The population of the entire area covered in the "East
Tremont Story" is 129,000 but 49,500 are Italians to the north in the
Belmont neighborhood, so Tremont's population Zould be 79,500. East
Tremont is 75 percent of the land area; 75 percent of 79,500 is 60,000.
According to the "East Tremont Story," 44,000 of the 60,000 are JeZs. "A
feeling of croZdedness": "Story," p. 22. "Simchas" in the neighborhood,"
"myriad of social systems," "each had his folloZing": "Story," pp. 11—13.

R0  calls them "slums": 0oscoZ  recalls R0  persuading the Board of
Estimate by calling the neighborhood that.

An urban staging area: "Story," pp. 3-22, Zhich includes "a chronological
picture of the in and out movement of the various cultural and ethnic
groups." Negroes being integrated into neighborhood: Smith. 7 in Elsmere
Gardens: .at].  3opulation figures on nonZhites: "Story," p. 18.

Survey for neZ Y: Lambert, its e[ecutive director.

0oney  noZhere in sight, privately figuring on 18 months: Analysis of
memos and letters in Impy, :agner 3apers. "To shake 'em up a little":

1717
Shapiro. Subsequent notice: R0, "0emorandum to OZners and Tenants on
Cross-Bron[ E[-

pressZay betZeen LongfelloZ Avenue and 8niversity Avenue," Dec. 15,
1952. Section 3: 0rs. Edelstein; 3ost, various articles, Feb. 7, 1949-June 6,
1953. "Not fit for rats": 3ost, Feb. 7, 1949. "A right": 3ost, Nov. 16, 1952.
"None of the families . . . has been turned into the street": R0, quoted in
3ost, July 17,

1951. :aiting   si[ years: 3ost, Nov. 16,

1952. ".neZ  of  no one": Edelstein quoted in 3ost, June 6, 1953 (italics
added). "A nightmare": 3ost, June 6,

1953.

:einer  study: :einer;   see map, p. 864.

0rs.  Edelstein's telephone call: Edelstein.

Lyons in favor of their route: Lyons quoted in 3ost, Bron[ edition, Feb. 23,

1953. "You have from time to time remarked": R0 to Lyons, Feb. 21, 1953,
Impy 3apers. Resignation threat: R0 to Impy, 0ar. 10, 1953, Impy 3apers.
"A damnable lie": Lyons quoted in 3ost, Bron[ edition, 0ar.  13, 1953.
Board of Estimate hearings: Various neZspapers, Apr. 24-0ay 14, 1953.
Tallamy letter: Tallamy to R0,  0ay  5, 1953, Impy 3apers.

+oZ  much more 0oses* mile Zould  cost: Robert G. 0cCullough, Report
to Board of Estimate, Apr. 15, 1953 (Board Calendar, pp. E687-1-4). 0aps
printed in :T,   3ost, Sept. 7, 1954.

:agner  had appeared receptive: Edelstein, JanoZit], .at]. 0oscoZ's   Board
of Estimate statement. Transcript, Board of Estimate, Calendar, in No. 48,
0ay  14, 1953; .at],  p. 19. Letter to ETNA;  promise in Zriting:  0oscoZ  to
:illiam    Cohen, 0ay 18, 1953, copy from 0rs.  Edelstein; 0oscoZ  to
ETNA, .at],   p. 20. "I Zill   vote against any resolution": .at],  p. 20. (The
press did not cover the rally.) Oct. 14 rally: .at],  p. 20. :hy,   certainly,

1718
:agner  replied: :agner   to Edelstein, Oct. 27, 1953, in reply to Oct. 26. "In
December?": Edelstein.

:agner  intended to keep promise: Confidential source. Repeated it:
JanoZit].

A direct order: 0oses, Dangerous Trade, pp. 210-11.

Gerosa sZitch: .at],  p. 21.

.ahn's  articles: 3ost, 0ay 9, 1954, reprints :agner's  letter of Aug. 5, 1953;
also 3ost, 0ay 12, 1954, July 21, 1954, Nov. 28, 1954.

+odgkiss-:agner  e[change: .at],   p. 22. Epstein: .at],   p. 23.

3lanning Commission hearing: 3ost, July 15, 1954.

:agner  visibly  moved: Edelstein; .at],  p. 23. "Every member": :agner

Notes for pages 873-902

quoted in 3ost, Sept. 22, 1954. 0cCul-lough's trick: .at],   p. 22; .at],
Edelstein, confidential source. :agner orders Epstein to oversee: 3ost, :T,
Nov. 19, 1954; Edelstein.

Final hearing before 0cCullough: .at],   pp. 22-23; Edelstein; 3ost, Nov.
28, 1954. 0cCullough's report, dated Nov. 12, 1954, attached to Board of
Estimate, Calendar No. 4, "+earing in the 0atter of Authori]ing  a
3roceeding .. . ," Nov. 18, 1954. "Not the slightest": R0. Epstein: See
beloZ. "Very uncomfortable": .at].   Epstein's sZitch: Edelstein, .at].

ShoZdoZn Board meeting: .at],   p. 23; Lyons: 4uoted in 3ost, Nov. 21,
1954. "So fast": Edelstein.

:hy   did Epstein sZitch?: R0.  "Very little  real hardship": R0.  NYT  one
paragraph: Nov. 2, 1954.

:hat   Spargo told Ingraham: Ingra-ham.

1719
Nassau 0anagement: Fred J. Cook and Gene Gleason, "The Shame of NeZ
York," The Nation, Oct. 31, 1959, pp. 300-01. Its East Tremont office:
IntervieZs Zith  residents cited in "Sources." Cymrot: 3ost, Jan. 12, 1955.
Dispossess notices: 3ost, 0ay 6, 1955. The residents' description of the
deterioration of East Tremont during relocation is supported by many
articles by Joe .ahn and Abel Silver in the 3ost, by articles in the :T   and
the Bron[ 3ress-RevieZ. Tesone: 4uoted in 3ost, 0ay 17, 1956, and
intervieZ Zith  author. 11 children: 3ost, Sept. 22, I955-

38. One 0ile (AfterZard)

SO8RCES

See "Sources" for Chapter 37.

NOTES

8nderestimated cost: Comparison of figures in various R0 brochures cited
in "Sources" for Chapter 37. Traffic too heavy for :ashington Bridge:
0adigan, Clark. $250,000,000: R0,  various brochures.

It Zas shaking: Clark, the engineer in charge.

Landlords: Lambert, .at].  In  i960 still 25,000: "East Tremont Story," p. 5-

Bron[ 3ark  South: Lambert, Dee, .orn. "I  got to get my kids out of here";
"Are you the man from the Zelfare?": 3resent residents of East Tremont to
author.

39. The +ighZayman

SO8RCES

Books, articles, brochures, reports and documents:

Bureau of 3ublic Roads (B3R), :hen  All  Roads Led to Rome; Dei. \/
politan Transportation 3olitics, lacobt, The Death and Life of ^', rent
American Cities', 0umford,  The +ighZay  and the City; :ood,   1400
Governments

1720
F. Dodd 0c+ugh,  "Draft of '0aster  3lan for NeZ  York City Airports,  " and
the City 3lanning Commission's final report, issued Dec. 19, 1945.

Regional 3lan Association: "NeZ York's Commuters—Trends of Commuter
Transportation in the NeZ York 0etropolitan Region 1930-1950," July
195i; "Spread City," 1962; "The Future of :estchester County," 0ar.  1971.

R0  brochures listed in "Sources" for Chapter 37, identified by date, and
"Arterial 3rogress," Nov. 8, 1965.

Author's intervieZs:

3lanners Lee .oppelman, Joseph 0cC. Lieper, F. Dodd 0c+ugh,
LaZrence 0.  Orton, John Sheridan, Stanley G. Tankel, Robert C. :einberg,
3aul :indels.

NOTES

Gray tZo-door sedan: NYT, July 4,

1945. R0's response: +T, Sept. 6, 1945. "The postZar highZay era is
here":

R0,  "Construction Schedule," Nov. 26,

1945.

3lanners' feelings: .oppelman, Lieper, 0c+ugh,  Orton, Tankel, :einberg,
:in-dels;   numerous 0umford  articles in 30,  The NeZ Yorker; for
e[ample, 30,  0ay  12, 1946; The NeZ Yorker, 0ar.  19-June 16, 1955-
R3A, "Spread City," "The Future of :estchester County." Susquehanna:
:ood,   p. 12. Nathan: Sept. 3, 1945. 2 out of 3 residents: Leigh Den-niston,
+T, Sept. 12, 1945- i>5°° 3 er hour; 40,000 per hour: Out of many varying
figures on the capacity of e[pressZay and rapid transit, the author has
selected those derived from a careful study made by the Nassau-Suffolk
Regional 3lanning Board in 1968; various documents made available to
him by .oppelman.

1721
3ress screaming for action and liked R0's plans: For e[ample, +T editorial,
Jan. 1, 1951; +T editorial, Aug. 27, 1947;

Notes for pages 902-919

1230

NYT, Feb. 20, 1946; +T, Nov. 26, 1945; NYT, Nov. 4, 11, 1945.

0umford:  30,   0ay  12, 1946. ":hy   not bar?": Letter from Lester E.
:ater-bury  to NYT,  Oct. 22, 1945. :illiams:   4uoted in  NYT, Jan. 24,
1947.

Take one simple step: Among the many planners arguing—at the time— for
the city to do this Zere 0c+ugh,  Orton and :indels.

"Smart aleck": R0  to Salmon, Aug. 12, 1942.

Van :yck   E[pressZay: This section draZn from 0c+ugh   and Orton
intervieZs; from 0c+ugh's   draft version of "0aster  3lan for NeZ York
City Airports,"  Zritten Oct. 10, 1945 (pp. 10-14 deal Zith mass transit to
Van :yck);   and from the "0aster 3lan" actually adopted by the City
3lanning Commission on Dec. 19, 1945 (the Zatered-doZn Van :yck
discussion is on p. 7). 0c+ugh arrived at the 3,220 figure by taking the
average load per vehicle arriving at other airports at peak periods—3.1—
and dividing 10,000 by that figure. :iden  Belt  and Conduit: "0aster 3lan."
$30,000,000: Figures in various 0oses brochures vary from $28,600,000
(R0  brochure, Oct. 14, 1950) to $36,785,000 (Nov. 8, 1965). $30,000,000
Zas the figure 0c+ugh  Zas given at the time. 0c+ugh's  resignation:
0c+ugh,  confirmed by Orton.

Vision of LI:  "The Future of Nassau County," address by R0 before
members of the Nassau Bar Association, 0ineola, L.I., June 30, 1945.
"Traffic Zill   run pretty smoothly": R0  to +T,  Sept. 6, 1945, among others.
Typical R0  prediction: In 1950, for e[ample, he said: ":hen   this [his
current arterial] program is fully reali]ed—say, five years from noZ—Ze
shall have reduced congestion and produced a free floZ of traffic e[cept at
peak periods everyZhere in the city . . ." (R0 brochure, Oct. 14, 1950, p.

1722
6.) ":e   shall deserve": R0, NYT  0aga]ine,  Apr. 29, 1951. Statius,
Claudius: Leger, quoted in B3R, Fig. V. 1949 article: R0, NYT 0aga]ine,
Feb. 6, 1949. "No netZork": R0,  Oct. 14,

1950, brochure, p. 6.

Van :yck   jams: NYT, +T, NeZsday, various articles, 1950-72.

"One of man's greatest": Cardinal Spellman, quoted in Dangerous Trade, p.
219; NYT and +T, 0ay  26, 1950. BBT traffic  prediction and actuality:
TBTA Annual Reports. "Another pleasant surprise": TBTA Annual Report,

1951. No drain-off on other bridges: NYT, 0ay 29, 1950. 4ueens-0idtoZn

Zorse: TBTA Annual Report, 1951. Tri-borough, :hitestone  Bridge
figures:

TBTA Annual Reports. NeZ Jersey figures: R3A, "NeZ York's
Commuters," pp. 3, 5, 6/7, 11. Lincoln Tunnel, cross-toZn clockings: NYT,
Aug. 11, 1951.

3rotests in logo's: NYT and Tribune, various issues, 1924, 1925, 1926.
+oZl  during 1930*5: NYT  and +T, various issues, 1938, 1938, 1939.

Geometrical: R3A, various bulletins. NYT clocking on :est   Side +ighZay:
July 26, 1948. 8-turns: NYT, Sept. 17,

1 95 1. "Boomerang": The NeZ Yorker, 0ar. 10, 1951. AZareness
escalating: NYT, +T, 3ost, various issues, 1952, 1953. The 3ost Zas ahead
of the other tZo; it Zas the only NeZ York neZspaper, during this period,
Zhich Zas giving its readers a glimpse of the "costs" to the public involved
in the eviction for highZays of thousands of families. Other papers Zere
ignoring this aspect of highZays all but completely. "Transportation ... a
means and not an end": 0umford, "The Roaring Traffic's Boom," The NeZ
Yorker, 0ar. 19, Apr. 2, 16 and June 16, 1955.

R0  brochure: Oct. 14, 1950, p. 3. R3A bulletin: "NeZ York's Commuters."
3eople Zere learning for themselves: Author's analysis of scores of letters-

1723
to-the-editor in NYT, +T, Brooklyn  Eagle, 3ost, :T,   J-A and DN, various
issues,

1952-55. "Today Ze are Zell underZay": R0,

3ost, July 28, 1948. +e had no doubt: 8. 5. NeZs & :orld   Report, Aug. 8,

1952. General Electric: NYT, Jan. 23, 1952. R0's reply: R0 to NYT,  Feb.
11, 1952.

"Good Zork, gentlemen": +T  editorial, 0ar.  16, 1951. Never linked
policies Zith the man: Articles in every NYC neZspaper during this period
lamented over the traffic problem Zithout linking it to R0's  policies.

40. 3oint of No Return

SO8RCES

See "Sources" for Chapter 39. Also:

Books, reports, studies and documents:

+oover and Vernon, Anatomy of a 0etropolis; Leavitt, SuperhighZay-Su-
perhoa[; 0oses, Dangerous Trade; OZen, The 0etropolitan Transportation
3roblem; :halen,   NeZ York: A  City Destroying Itself.

Notes for pages 920-921

1231

Dun and Bradstreet, Inc. (D&B), "0unicipal  Credit Survey—TBTA,"  Dec.
30, 1955; June 24, 1957; 0ar. 18, 1958; Apr. 30, 1959; Apr. 14, i960;
"0unicipal  Credit Report—TBTA,"  Nov. 9, 1961; Feb. 12, 1963; 0ay 13,
1963; Apr. 22, 1964; Sept. 30, 1966. Day & Zimmerman, Inc., "Report No.
5849-C to 0etropolitan Rapid Transit Commission on Comparative Studies
of 3roposed Alternate Rapid Transit 3lans for Northern 4ueens County and
Vicinity, Long Island, N.Y., Including Effects upon Other Transit
Operations," 3hiladelphia, 3a., Jan. 31, 1957. Day & Zimmerman, Inc.,
"Report No. 5849-Bi to 0etropolitan  Rapid Transit Commission on

1724
E[panded Comparative Studies of 3roposed Alternate Rapid Transit 3lans
for Staten Island, NeZ York, via the 3roposed NarroZs Bridge, Including
Effects upon Other Transit Operations," 3hiladelphia, 3a., Nov. 29, 1956.
NeZ York State 0etropolitan  Commuter Transportation Authority
(0CTA),  "LIRR  0oderni]ation   3rogram—Technical 0emorandum No. 3,
Travel Volume 3rojections," Feb. 1967.

Jackson 3hillips, director of municipal research for Dun and Bradstreet,
"3ostZar Default E[perience of 0unicipal   Bonds," testimony prepared for
the Joint Economic Committee of the +ouse of Representatives, Dec. 1966.
3ort of NeZ York Authority  and TBTA, "Joint Study of Arterial  Facilities,
NeZ York-NeZ  Jersey 0etropolitan Area," Jan. 1955. TBTA, various
prospectuses for bond issues, of Zhich the most illuminating is
"$100,000,000—NarroZs Bridge Revenue Bonds, Third Series," Feb. 14,
1963.

Author's intervieZs:

+enry Barnes, Ernest J. Clark, +oZard S. Cullman, Lee .oppelman,
Joseph 0cC. Lieper, Jacob Lutsky, 0ichael J. 0adigan, J. Burch
0c0orran,   EdZard 0oloney,  :arren   0oscoZ,  LaZrence 0.  Orton,
Jackson 3hillips, Charles F. Rodrigue], 3aul R. Screvane, Sidney 0.
Shapiro, :alter  Sheridan, Bertram D. Tallamy, Robert F. :agner, Jr., 3aul
:indels.

NOTES

Faster and faster: The number of cars and trucks passing through
Triborough's toll booths had reached 39,000,000 in 1941. In 1946, the first
full postZar year, the number Zas 49,000,000. In 1947, the number passed
50,000,000; in 1948, 60,-000,000; in 1949, 70,000,000. In 1950, the
Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel opened; in that

year, the Authoi -\\ trafl Zaa

90,000,000. [n 11 ..... 11

1725
in 1952, 120,000 ><» I nun I +I \ nual Reports. \1<,»< ,./ reran* Zm
surplus: In 1952, I BI.:   annual e;j.    Zere only about $4,000,000, abort
the same as the annual interest 00 its bonds TBTA, Annual Report, 1952.
Surplus Zorth half a billion: Surveys oi I +I  A by D&B  listed in "Sources;"
0adiftlfl   3hillips.

Bonds could be paid off Zithin si[  years: In 1953, TBTA had $215,000,000
in outstanding bonds, but $27,000,000 in cash in its General Fund could be
applied to them, leaving a balance of $188,000,-000. Its surplus in that year
Zas $21,-760,000; it Zas rising every year, but even if it stayed the same,
$25,000,000 a year Zould pay off the bonds in seven years. (D&B,)

Dreams greater than resources: TBTA, Annual Reports, 1952-54. R0's
thinking: Shapiro, but, Zithout being stated specifically, it also comes
through in many articles and brochures he Zrote at this time.

Interstate +ighZay System; Zorking Zith  Adams and Clay: R0,  0adigan,
Shapiro; Leavitt, p. 30. $50 billion over ten years his figure: R0, "+oZ  to
3lan and 3ay for Better +ighZays," Aug. J953, quoted in Dangerous Trade,
p. 281, Zhen, as R0 notes on p. 280, "the recommendations since adopted
Zere novel, disturbing and controversial." See also his testimony before the
Clay Committee, Oct. 7, 1954, largely a restatement of the 1953 essay.
Although historians of the Interstate System such as Leavitt do not credit
R0  Zith  a formative role in planning the administration of this system,
such a role emerges from discussions Zith such B3R administrators as
Francis Turner and Bertram D. Tallamy and from R0's correspondence
Zith Clay, such as R0 to Clay, 1955, quoted in Dangerous Trade, p. 294.
0adigan and Shapiro, Zho spent months in :ashington in  1954, 1955 and
1956—along Zith +odgkiss and other 0oses 0en—  Zorking  Zith
congressional proponents of the System and Zith staffers of Clay's
Advisory Committee in a National +ighZay  3rogram, confirm the Turner
and Tallamy impression of R0's ciucial role. .ey  revision: 0adigan;  a
discussion of negotiations on the point contained in numerous internal
TBTA memos made available to the author, including +odgkiss to R0,
Aug. 20 (or 26—date unclear), 1955.

Notes for pages 921-933

1726
1232

Rapprochement Zith 3ort Authority:

R0,  Cullman, :agner  and numerous TBTA, 3ort Authority  and :agner
administration officials Zho prefer to remain unidentified. Also Lieper,
0adi-gan, Orton, 3hillips,  Tallamy, :indels.   :agner   on Cullman and
Tobin: :agner.

3ort Authority finances: 3ort Authority  Annual Report, 1954. :orth
$700,000,-000: Cullman, quoted in NYT, 0ar. 12, 1954, as saying the
Authority Zould  be able to finance this much Zorth of neZ projects in the
ne[t ten years. Short on dreams: Orton.

R0  broaching his plan: Cullman, Orton. 3ort Authority thinking:  Cullman,
0adigan, Orton, Shapiro, :agner,  confidential sources. 3ressure on 3ort
Authority: Doig,  pp. 80-139. "Ever Zidening ripples": D&B,  Apr. 30, 1959,
p. 30. 3ort Authority profit  from "Joint 3rogram": 3ort Authority  Annual
Reports, 1966-70. TBTA profit: TBTA Annual Reports, 1956-70.

"The bridge of my dreams": R0, quoted in J-A, Dec. 10, 1954.

In lockstep: Observers behind the closed doors of Board of Estimate
e[ecutive sessions such as Lutsky, 0oscoZ, Rodrigue], Screvane and
numerous confidential sources. Cashmore: 0oscoZ.

Triborough's share Zould have moderni]ed LIRR: The cost of doing
everything necessary to moderni]e the LIRR e[cept buying the land for the
neZ terminals and parking garages and building a neZ line doZn the LIE—
of buying neZ cars and high-speed locomotives and rebuilding the
trackage; of building the neZ sZitching yards—Zas set at $60,-000,000 in
1954 by a special state commission. The cost of building an 80-mile-per-
hour rapid transit line doZn the center of the LIE Zas estimated at
$85,000,000 by the State D3:. The cost of the land for the neZ terminals
and garages Zas not estimated at any time during the 1950's, but it Zould
have been relatively minor, considering the relative cheapness of land in
Suffolk and Zestern Nassau counties. In 1965, a state Special Committee on
the LIRR (the so-called Ronan Committee) estimated the cost of a full-scale

1727
moderni]ation program—Zith,  as far as can be determined from its ha]y
Zording, provision for only  a feZ terminals—at $200,-000,000: Special
Committee, A NeZ Long Island Rail Road, Feb. 1965. A full fifteen years
after 1955—on July 6, 1970 — NeZsday could report that "the
0etropolitan  Transportation Authority . . .

sees the full program of LIRR moderni]ation as a 20-year, $500,000,000
project" (italics added). It is of interest—although many factors clouded the
picture—that Zhen the state purchased the LIRR from the 3ennsylvania
Railroad in 1965, the total cost of its rolling stock and all other physical
facilities amounted to only $65,000,000.

3ort Authority's share Zould have built trans-+udson loop, etc.:
0etropolitan  Rapid Transit Survey, Report of the 3roject Director, sets the
"capital requirements" figure at $345,000,000 (p. 39). Several sources
involved, in fact, believe this figure Zas set at its upper limits and that the
loop could have been built for less.

SubZay system: Various neZspaper articles, 1953, 1954, 1955. A figure of
$587,000,000 Zas given in NYC Transit Authority, Report, 1953-54, p. 25.

$1,187,000,000: NYC Transit Authority, Report, 1953-54, 33- 10-36; also
see Reports for 1957-58. NYT, July !4> 1955- East River tunnel and
e[tension into 4ueens: "The proposed subZay tunnels from 76th Street to
Astoria [in connection Zith the Second Avenue Trunk Line 3lan] provide
the key to the solution [of additional transit service to 4ueens and LI]. The
Astoria e[tension has been proposed to run to the LIRR at :oodside and
thence along the LIRR to Rego 3ark and a connection to the subZay line at
the RockaZays. The cost of the branch from mid-0anhattan to :oodside
has been estimated at $110 million" (italics added). (0RTC, "Staff Report,"
pp. 20, 21.) The cost of moderni]ing the 3ort :ashington  branch of the
LIRR and linking it  up Zith the city subZay at :oodside   or Long Island
City —the total capital cost, including neZ cars—Zould have been
$47,000,000. (Day & Zimmerman report cited beloZ under "Long Island
E[pressZay.")

E[penditures under Joint 3rogram: All figures from "Arterial  3rogress,"
Nov. 8, 1965, pp. 26-31. (See Appendi[ "A.")

1728
"The parking lots": :helan,   p. 82.

3lans from father: Robert Olmsted, quoted in DN, Aug. 29, 1969.

Black +ole: Solar]  in NYT, Feb. 7, 1970.

Ancient cars; deferred maintenance; toll mounting: NYT, DN, 3ost, various
articles, 1964-72. 45 cars break doZn per day: NYT, Feb. 6, 1970. "There
have been more serious accidents": NYT, July 29, 1970. 'Terrified, smoke-
blinded": DN, "Our Staggering SubZays."

Notes for pages 934-969

"There is little need": R0  quoted in +oover and Vernon, p. 130. "Busted,
la]y":  R0,  quoted in Doig, p. 151.

Baker: NYT, Feb. 5, 1970. LIRR lateness record: "Track Record,"
NeZsday, various issues, 1970.

Long Island E[pressZay: A chance to reshape LI: .oppelman, Barnes;
Nassau-Suffolk Regional 3lanning Board, various publications; the
folloZing  discussion is based on e[tensive intervieZing of lo-cational
consultants, trucking and bus company and business firm presidents,
Nassau and Suffolk County public officials and staffers of the Nassau-
Suffolk Regional 3lanning Board and the Regional 3lan Association that
the author conducted in 1965 for a NeZsday series he Zrote entitled
"Suffolk the Sick Giant." Car trips: 0CTA,   "LIRR 0oderni]ation   3rogram
—Technical 0emorandum No. 3." Buses: .oppelman, Barnes, bus
company e[ecutives. The seven-mile stretch: Day & Zimmerman, "Report
No. 5849-C" The other 78 miles: Barnes, Ingraham, confidential sources.
$15,000,000 per mile: Day & Zimmerman, "Report No. 5849-C." They had
to report: Day & Zimmerman, p. 47; Lieper. Traffic load: NeZsday, various
articles. Solution—make it bigger: Clark; confidential sources in D3:.
.oppelman  told a friend: The friend Zas the author.

41, Rumors and the Report of Rumors

SO8RCES

1729
Books, articles, brochures and documents:

LoZe, Cities in a Race Zith Time; 0oses, Dangerous Trade; Talese, The
.ingdom  and the 3oZer.

Fred J. Cook and Gene Gleason, "The Shame of NeZ York," The Nation,
Oct.

3i, I959-

City 3lanning Commission, Tenant Relocation Report, Jan. 20, 1954.
0ayor's Slum Clearance Committee, "0anhattan-toZn Slum Clearance
3lan," Sept. 1951. :omen's City  Club of NeZ York,  Tenant Relocation at
:est  3ark, 0ar.  1954; 0anhattantoZn  TZo Years Later, Apr. 1956
(0anhattantoZn  Zas the original name for ":est  3ark").  "+earings, 8. S.
Congress, Senate Banking and Currency Committee," Vol. 49 (NeZ York
City, Oct. 1, 1954).

Elinor Black 3apers, including the "Relocation 4uestionnaires" filled out by
dis-

1233

placed residents of the 0anhattan; site, and the "Black Log," an informal
record of her activities on their behalf.

Author's intervieZs:

Algernon and Elinor Black, Fred J Cook, :alter  S. Fried, +ortense Gabel
:illiam    J. +addad, Joseph .ahn, LaZrence 0.  Orton, Robert C. :einberg.

NOTES

Rumors: Gabel. The only one: NYT,

Apr. 3, 1962.

Statistics: Orton. Federal requirement:

1730
"Contracts for financial aid shall be made only Zith a duly authori]ed local
public agency and shall require that . . . there are or are being provided ... at
rents or prices Zithin the financial means of the families displaced from the
project area, decent, safe, and sanitary dZellings equal in number of and
available to... displaced families and reasonably accessible to their places of
employment..." Sec. 105c, Title I: Slum Clearance and Community
Development and Redevelopment, National +ousing Act of 1949. "To set at
rest": R0,  "0anhattantoZn  Slum Clearance 3lan," p. 17. Columns of
statistics: "3lan," p. 18. R0's statistics false: See beloZ.

Garbage cans: Fried.

"Like cattle": Isaacs quoted in LoZe,

p. 83.

Liberals' feelings: Liberals Elinor and Algernon Black, Gabel, Orton,
:einberg.

"Not a crusading paper": Black Log. +T, DN: Orton.

"Going underground": Orton. The Bureau Zas under R0's thumb:
"Shame," pp. 300-06. R0 kept count too loZ: Author's comparison of City
3lanning Commission Report figures Zith R0's  figures. 170,000 evicted:
C3C Report, p. 40. Orton leaned too far: Author's analysis of figures in
C3C Report for 0anhattantoZn, pp. 46-47, compared Zith figures from on-
site investigation by :omen's  City Club members, in the club's tZo
brochures. 12,000 for Stuyvesant ToZn: 0oses, Dangerous Trade, p. 433-

Their color: C3C Report, p. 42. Their income: Report, p. 47- Evicting
people least able to afford neZ homes: The 1950 census reported that 29
percent of the city's nonZhite families—almost one out of every three—
Zere living in accommodations listed as "substandard."

The city's pledge: Summari]ed in C3C Report, p. 1. Shuttled Zithin site:
Report, pp. 50-51. FeZ into public housing: Report, pp. 48-49. The actual
percentage

1731
Notes for pages 969-983

1234

Zas 27.1, Report, p. 47. Disappeared: Report, p. 37; "43% of all relocatees
moved to an unknoZn address." :ere doubling up or moving into border
areas: Gabel, Orton.

50,000 per year: C3C Report, p. 43. 3ractices should be changed: Report,
pp.

31-34.

Veteran Zomen campaigners for better housing: The club's board of
directors, for e[ample, included 0rs. Elinor  Black, Stanley Isaacs' Zife and
daughter and 0rs. Nathan Straus, Zife of the federal housing administrator.

"Bombed-out Berlin": "Shame," p. 286. E[periences of :omen's  City Club
volunteers: As they recorded them for 0rs. Black on the "Relocation
4uestionnaires" preserved in the club's files.

Length of 3uerto Ricans 9 tenancy: Tenant Relocation at :est 3ark, p. 8.
"Since it Zas built": A  phrase repeated on relocation questionnaires.
Average income: Tenant Relocation, p. 6. Buildings old, overcroZded:
Tenant Relocation, pp. 1, 7. But area friendly: IntervieZ forms; 0rs. Black.
Volunteers envious of sense of neighborhood: This emerges clearly in some
of the intervieZs. ":ell    satisfied": Tenant Relocation, p. 8. Average rent:
Tenant Relocation, p. 7.

"I Zould  die": 8nnamed resident, quoted in Tenant Relocation, p. 5.
AnyZhere. But not +arlem: 4uestionnaires.

Color and poverty barred them from most areas: Tenant Relocation, pp. 5,
8-10; quotes, p. 10, p. 5.

No applications being accepted: "IntervieZ, Nov. 25, 1952. Dr. :ortis, 0rs.
Black at the Bureau of Real Estate, 10 to 11:15 a.m.," 0rs. Black's notes,

1732
Black 3apers. 300 of 400 Zanted public housing: Tenant Relocation, p. 9.
Only fifty:  TZo Years Later, p. 19.

The notice: Tenant Relocation, p. 2. No help available: pp. 10-11;
questionnaires. Typical: p. 7.

Finding out Zasn't easy: 0rs. Black's Log records her efforts. Difficulty in
tracing tenants: TZo Years Later, pp. 7-8. Only 167: TZo Years Later, p. 8.
3robably the best off: Isaacs to Black, Feb. 21, 1956, Black 3apers. 4uotes
from relocatees: 4uestionnaires.

"Seriously affected": TZo Years Later, p. 27. Could picture: 0rs. Black.
From one building to another: Tenant Relocation, p. 10; "Shame," p. 263.
Leaned over backZards: After reading her report, Isaacs Zrote her, "You are
too much of a lady and far too gentle to make the emphatic comments that
some of the

facts that you have uncovered really deserve. ... I am really tired of the Zay
that Zhat has been done so badly has been covered up so effectively,"
Isaacs to Black, Feb. 21, 1956, Black 3apers. "+uman decency": Tenant
Relocation, p. 13.

City 3lanning Commission report: Infighting: Gabel, Orton, confidential
source. Resolution: Board of Estimate calendar, No. 363, 0ar. 12, 1953.
Constable's shock: Orton. Bennett reaping profit: See "Notes" for Chapter
43. R0's reZriting:  The "0inority   Report" gives some e[amples, p. 33.
"The outlook": "0inority   Report," pp. 4-5. Civics demand: LoZe, pp. 83-
84. The report R0 suppresses: 3ost, Dec. 11, 1953; 3ost, NYT, +T, Dec.
14, 1953.

Rosenman's statement: "+earings" transcript, p. 3151.

"0oses Zasn't God": Gabel. Bennett's confession: NYT, Jan. 21, 1954.
3apers led: NYT, +T, DN, Jan. 21, 1954. Bennett locked up copies: Orton,
confidential source. Only the 3ost: 3ost, Jan. 21, 1954. :hy press didn't
coven Cook, Gabel, +addad, .ahn, Orton; Talese, pp. 99-101, gives the
Times's general handling of R0. Gabel before Board: NYT, 1958. "Bunk":
R0,  quoted in 3ost, Jan. 28, I954-

1733
Senate hearings: Caspert testimony: "+earings" transcript, Vol. 49, pp.
3097, 3133. E[ample of Rosenman's interventions: p. 3103. Rosenman-
Simon-Bush e[change: pp. 3139-40. 3rofits huge: pp. 3118-43; passim. For
individual profits, see charts pp. 3144, 3146. "Different people": Simon, on
p. 3129. $375,000: p. 3129. Comptroller renting appliances: pp. 3123-24,
but best summing up is done by Cook in "Shame," p. 287.

Didn't mention 0oses once: NYT, Oct. 2, 1954.

Reporters refused permission: Cook, .ahn tell of them.

Si[ agencies investigating: LoZe, p. 82.

3allid series: :T&S,   0ay   9-10, 1955.

42. Tavern in the ToZn

SO8RCES

Books, pamphlets and documents:

Isaacs, Love Affair Zith a City, .ieley,   0oses on the Green; Reed and
DuckZorth, Central 3ark.

0oses, "Statements by 0r. Arnold  NeZman et Al., Concerning
Reconstruction of the Tavern on the Green," Apr. 17, 1956.

Notes for pages 984-1002

123!

:agner  3apers, esp. various files in Bo[ 1943—"Community Activities,"
and Bo[ 1944—"Tavern on the Green."

Author's intervieZs:

3eter Campbell BroZn, Jacob Lutsky, :arren 0oscoZ,   Arnold NeZman,
Augusta NeZman, Elliott Sanger, Elinor Sanger, Arnold Schleiffer, Sidney
0.  Shapiro, Robert F. :agner, Jr., and the tZo auditors in the City

1734
Comptroller's office, Alfred A.  Fried and Samuel Shaf-ran. Also several
confidential sources.

NOTES

(All dates 1956)

"Country roads . . . rattle of pavements": AndreZ Jackson DoZning, quoted
in Reed and DuckZorth, p. 15.

"Beautiful, tranquil":  Augusta NeZman. 0rs. Davis' discovery: +T,  0ay  6.
"They can't do that!": Augusta NeZman. Brush-off: Arnold NeZman. :ald
story: +T, Apr. 13.

":orking   for  the 3eople" revieZs: NYT, 0ar  11; +T, 0ar.  18. Giving
Theobald a lesson: "Telephone 0essage from Commissioner 0oses, 11:04
a.m., Friday, April 13," :agner  3apers.

R0's  thinking: Author's analysis of his intervieZs Zith  R0,  Shapiro.

"Of all the city's Zonders": Reed and DuckZorth, p. 1.

Calling Isaacs: Sangers. 0others and baby carriages: Augusta NeZman. "In
front of it":  +T, Apr. 18. Tableau: 3ictures in various neZspapers, Apr. 17,
18.

R0  trying to trick  the protesters: .ieley, p. 4; NYT, DN, Apr. 21.

"0ove  some topso8": NYT, Apr. 21.

"A heartbeat": +urst quoted in DN, Apr. 23. Front-page bo[: :T&S,    Apr.
24. NeZspaper coverage: NYT, +T, 3ost, DN, Daily 0irror,  J-A, :T&S,
various issues, Apr. 'The claque": Daily 0irror, 0ay  29. Isaacs' letters:
NYT, Apr. 26 for e[ample.

The April 24 raid: All  papers. Best is 3ost, Apr. 24, by :illiam  +.  Rudy.
"Stab in the back": Elliott Sanger, quoted in +T, Apr. 24. "Sylvan victims":
J-A, Apr. 25. ":ho   else?": 3ost, Apr. 25. The pictures: Various neZspapers,

1735
Apr. 24, 25. "Little soldier": J-A,  Daily 0irror,   Apr. 25. Constable's smirk:
DN, Apr. 25.

"0oses has the right": :illiam    3eer, quoted in NYT, Apr. 2. Council:
.ieley,  p. 4; NYT, Apr. 27, 28. +echt: NYT,  Apr. 27. +ofstadter: Various
papers,

Apr. 28-0ay  3. 4uoting pottrj  Apr. 22. R0  to BroZn:  +roZn  ■ DN, Apr.
27.

3robably at Isaacs suggestion: Zas suggesting 1 . Zho Zould listen. For
e[ample, 1 to :agner,  Apr. 17, 1956, p. 2: "I remember Zell the time Zhen
he closed and ra]ed the Casino in the 3ark. I Zish someone could e[tract
from the neZspapers of that day all that he then to justify his act—Zhich,
incidentally, I approved." :agner  3apers. "Society" orchestras, etc.: 3ost,
Apr. 25, 30, +T, DN, 0ay  23.

"Schleiffer arrangement: Isaacs quoted in +T, 0ay 2. 3aid only $9,000:
"Statement," Office of the Comptroller, undated, :agner 3apers; Shafran.
No different from other arrangements: 8nsigned memo "To: Leo Larkin,
Asst. Corp. Counsel," from "Office of Comptroller, June 20, 1956," Zhich
lists other concessionaires and their rental arrangements Zith city. :agner
3apers. 3aid for every meal: Schleiffer, various Tavern Zaiters. :hy R0
favored this arrangement: :hat he said publicly Zas that he favored it
because under it the concessionaire pays for improvements to property that
"the city ov/ns ... in the end" (+T, 0ay  2).

"At issue noZ": :T&S,    Apr. 30. "3ark  :indfall":    J-A, 0ay  1. "Only  2%":
3ost, 0ay 1. "Drops Curtain":  3ost, Apr. 26.

Didn't reali]e the threat: Shapiro, confidential sources. ":e're just going":
+T, 0ay  3. 3rivate instructions: BroZn.

Constable's refusal, :agner's order: 3ost, 0ay 1, 2; NYT, 0ay   2. "Nothng
to hide": :agner  quoted in NYT, 0ay  5. "0ayor   Demands Airing":
:T&S,    0ay  4. "Let's Find Out": NYT, 0ay   21. "0oses' :ings":    DN, 0ay
21. ":agner  and City":  3ost, 0ay  21. :agner  conversation Zith BroZn:
BroZn. :agner   told the author he did not recall the conversation. ":hat I

1736
have not seen": L. O. Rothschild to :T&S,  0ay   9. Federal officials: 3ost,
Apr. 14; NYT, Apr. 16. "Salutary effect": 3ost, 0ay  8. Circles, grimace:
3ictures in Daily 0irror,   :T&S,    0ay  27. Shipboard intervieZ: Various
papers, 0ay 27. NeZmans' feelings: NeZmans. "A proper greeting":
NeZman quoted in 3ost, 0ay 27. "0other  of  tZo": :T&S,     0ay  28.
0emo:  BroZn to :agner,   0ay  14, :agner  3apers.

$48,000: "Statement," Office of the Comptroller; +T, 0ay  5.

"0oses in the dock": BroZn.  Face-saving arrangement: BroZn, confirmed
by memos, BroZn to :agner,  0ay  9, 14-

Notes for pages 1002-1019

1236

Field agreed to let 0oses save face. Reported the 3ost (July 18): "Asked
Zhat caused 0oses to change his mind, Field says: 'I did not ask him and he
did not tell me. . . . It's all closed and on a friendly basis.' " BroZn's
conferences Zith :agner,  R0:  BroZn.  "Commissioner 0oses agreed":
BroZn to :agner,   June 8, :agner 3apers.

Surrender headlines: Various papers, July 18.

Destruction of the myth: It Zas striking to the author that in intervieZs Zith
persons Zho dealt Zith R0  primarily after the Tavern fight, these persons
spoke of him in terms emerging from that fight— in contrast to persons
Zho dealt Zith him  only before the fight. "Never the same": Shapiro.

43. Late Arrival

SO8RCES

Books, articles, brochures and documents:

Anderson, The Federal Bulldo]er; LoZe, Cities in a Race Zith Time;
0oscoZ,  The Last of the Big-Time Bosses and :hat +ave You Done for
0e  Lately?; 0oses, Dangerous Trade.

1737
Fred J. Cook and Gene Gleason, "The Shame of NeZ York," The Nation,
Oct.

31. 1959.

Cook, Gabel and Thompson 3apers.

Author's intervieZs:

Albert 0.  Cole, Fred J. Cook, :alter  S. Fried, +ortense Gabel, :illiam   J.
+addad, Joseph .ahn, Jacob Lutsky, 0ary 3erot Nichols, LaZrence 0.
Orton, Stephen C. Thompson, Robert F. :agner, Jr.; numerous federal, city
and state housing officials, 0oses aides and journalists Zho declined to be
identified.

NOTES

Gleason's thinking: Cook. .ahn series:

3ost, 0ay 23-25, 1956. First Gleason-Cook series: :T&S,  July 30-Aug. 4,
1956. Editors intimidated: Cook. R0's articles appeared Aug. 1, 2, 3. 3hone
tips pouring in: Cook, "0emo  for Nort,"  Aug. 3, 1956, Cook 3apers.
Clipped-out ad: Attached to undated, untitled memo, Gleason to Cook,
Cook 3apers. Future leads: Cook to 0ockridge, Aug. 4, Cook Fapers.

IntervieZs Zith  city officials:  Cook, Gabel, Thompson; +addad Zould later
have similar e[periences. 92 -year-old Zo-

man: :T&S,   Brooklyn  edition, Jan. J 7, 1957. Comptroller's aide: Gleason,
"0emo  re Title I," Apr.  (date unclear), 1957. "The Department of +ealth
reported yesterday": NYT, Jan. 24. 0an-hattantoZn foreclosure: "Shame,"
p. 291. Five paragraphs: NYT, June 13. ":e Zere conned": :T&S,   June
13, and editorial, same date. In no neZspaper: Various papers, June 14-21.
"The changing oZnership": NYT, June 19.

Gleason and Cook confident: Cook; "Shame," p. 291. Zeckendorf:
"Shame," pp. 291-92; Cook. Board of Estimate session: Various papers,
June 21, 22, 26, 27, 1957. "+uman Betterment": SZope quoted in NYT,

1738
June 22. "3lain trafficking," "It  sounded good," "disturbed no . . . realities":
"Shame," pp. 291-92.

Lincoln Center: R0's  grand conception: Dangerous Trade, pp. 516-33;
author's intervieZs Zith R0.  "Not  to speak": p. 528. $9.58 vs. $7.00:
Architectural Forum, Oct. 1957. .ennedy property: :T&S,    Oct. 9, 1957;
R0's  reply (Dangerous Trade, p. 525): "Ambassador .ennedy Zas not
interested in selling the building, preferred to keep it, and Zas induced to
agree upon a very reasonable option price primarily as a matter of public
service. . . . Far from representing a handout . . . this Zas getting for the
City and Federal government far more than the usual Zritten-doZn price for
the area. . . . The story that the city lost or Zill lose money because of
overpayment ... is malicious and Zholly Zithout basis in fact."

Cole attempting to go over R0's head: +T, Apr. 8, 14, 18, 1957. :agner's
telegram: +T, Apr. 19. R0's offer  to resign, :agner  rejects it: NYT, July
27. Editorials: +T, NYT, July 29. 0cGinley,  Rockefeller, etc.: Cole, Fried.
"Compromise": NYT, Aug. 9. Gleason and Cook reali]ation: Cook.

"The heat Zas really on"; "There Zas a time": "Shame," p. 292. 3hotostats:
Cook 3apers. "0anhattantoZn began": "Shame," pp. 289, 290. Gramercy
3ark: :T&S,    Oct. 8, 1958, Zhich produced a flyer circulated in the
neighborhood: "It's Our OZn Assemblyman :ho   :ants  to .ick   8s  Out of
Our +omes." Nassau 0anagement: 0any :T&S    articles, summari]ed in
"Shame," pp. 300-01. "Alone," "guts cut out": Cook, confirmed by author's
comparison of Cook's rough drafts Zith articles actually printed: Cook
3apers.

Gleason: Cook, +addad, .ahn, Thompson, but the definitive Zord Zas
0urray  .empton's,  3ost, Nov. 25, 1959. "Nothing

Notes for pages 1019-1031

halts him": :T&S,    June 23, 1959. See also Time, Dec. 7, 1959. +idden
mike: "Shame," pp. 280-84. Cook: +addad, .ahn, Thompson. "Sense of
injustice": Cook.

1739
Giving it to +addad: Cook. +elping  each other: Cook, +addad, .ahn.
"Chipmunks": Gabel. "Our motives?": +addad. The R0 they kneZ  Zas not
the R0  of the beautiful parks: This fact emerged quite clearly from the
author's intervieZs Zith Cook, +addad, Nichols and Thompson. "+e had to
be stopped": .ahn.

3ublic Friend No. 1: Long Island 3ress, Jan. 4, 1959; intervieZs: NYT, Jan.
7, 1959. Senate confirmation: +T, 0ar. 21, 1959. The tZo senators quoted
Zere John Cooke of Buffalo and Robert C. 0cEZen of Ogdensburg.

"Only 20 families": 3ost, Feb. 16, 1959. See also 0ar. 31. 8ngar: 3ost, Feb.
14, 1959. "NoZhere to Go": 3ost, 0ar. 20. 1959. "City Admits  Shifts":
3ost, Apr. n, 1959. "AZake at last": "Shame," p. 292.

44. 0ustache and the Bard

SO8RCES

Books, articles, transcripts, documents:

0oscoZ,  :hat   +ave You Done for 0e  Lately?

Robert +atch, "This Blessed 3lot, This Shakespeare in the 3ark," +ori]on,
Nov. i960. +. +eZes, "3ublic  Theatre: NeZ York Shakespeare Festival,"
Saturday RevieZ, 0ar. 8, 1958. J. Sack, "Good Earth," The NeZ Yorker,
July 4,

1959.

Robert Brustein, "O, For a Draught," The NeZ Republic, Sept. 12, i960.

J. 0. Flagler, "OnZard  and 8pZard Zith  the Arts," The NeZ Yorker, Aug.

3i, 1957.

"The 3ublic Fights for Life,"  NeZsZeek, 0ar.  22, 1971.

Joseph 3app, "The 3rice of This Ticket Is Responsibility," +T, 0ar. 16,
1958.

1740
Charles 0ichener, "3app's 8niversal Theater," NeZsZeek, July 3, 1972.

"Testimony of Joseph 3apirofsky (3app), Accompanied by Counsel, Eph-
raim London," +ouse Committee on 8n-American Activities,  June 19,
1958.

:agner  3apers, primarily Bo[  1944— "Jan.-June, I959-"

Author's intervieZs:

+oZard S. Cullman, :arren   0oscoZ,  John 0ulcahy, 3aul O'.eefe,   Joseph

3app, Sidney 0. Sh.ipim, Robert I V ner, Jr. Also one 0osei au.-   Zho
declined to be idl

NOTES

(All dates icj^cj unless otherZise noted)

Could recite Zhole scenes: Author heard him do so. Liked his style:
Cullman, one of those he asked, recalls .0 questioning Cornelia Otis
Skinner at length about 3app at a dinner party, and being impressed; also
Shapiro, confidential source.

3app biography: 0aga]ine articles cited above, but mostly 3app intervieZ
Zith author. "If  I had to pay": 3app in +T, 0ar.  16, 1958. :hy   R0  built
amphitheater: R0. "Oh, let him have it": Shapiro recalls the incident. Gives
3app "e[pression of interest": 3app.

A certain tenderness: Shapiro; the author noticed this quality of R0's in
discussions about Thomas 3. F. +oving, among others. Gave 3app car, etc.:
3app. .err:  4uoted in The NeZ Yorker, Aug. 31, 1957, p. 56. 3app and the
sergeant: 3app. Sit on a blanket: R0's feelings described by Cullman,
Shapiro, confidential source. +ori]on articles: Nov. i960. Saturday RevieZ:
0ar. 8, 1958. Constable assurance: 3app, confirmed by tone of later R0-
3app correspondence, :agner 3apers.

Didn't get along Zith Constable: 3app, Shapiro, confidential source. 3app's
testimony: "Testimony of Joseph 3apirofsky (3app)," pp. 2549-58.

1741
:ithout   checking: 0oscoZ,  pp. 205-06. No more free Shakespeare: 3app to
"0embers of the Fact Finding Committee of the Entertainment 8nions,"
0ar. 11, :agner   3apers.

"Every deputy": 0oscoZ,  p. 205. Birthday intervieZ:  NYT, Jan. 7. 3app
trying to contact R0:  3app. "Very cavalier": R0  to 3app, 0ar.  18, :agner
3apers. "Erosion problems": R0 to 3app, 0ar.  1959, :agner  3apers.

"I feel certain": 3app to R0,  0ar.  25, :agner  3apers. "Entirely in the
hands": R0 to 3app, 0ar.  26, :agner  3apers. 3app says he Zill consider:
3app to Constable, 0ar. 30, :agner  3apers, but 3app to Constable, Apr. 7:
":e   regret that it is impossible. . . . The Zhole idea of charging came up for
re-e[amination yesterday by . . . our Board of Directors."

3app's desperation: 3app. 3ress conference: +T, Apr. 16. R0's reply: 3ark
Department press release, Apr. 15. 3app attacks again: 3app to R0, 0ay 4»

Notes for pages 1031-1044

1238

:agner  3apers. Editorials: +T, :T&S,    Apr. 30.

0cLaughlin:  0cLaughlin   to .ennedy,  0ay  1, attached to Constable to
:agner,  0ay  6, :agner   3apers. Tenney: R0 to Tenney, Apr. 28, :agner
3apers, in Zhich R0  also states: "The artistic quality of the performers may
be left to the judgment of others. Certainly they don't represent professional
standards."

"A typical of  the breed": R0 to :agner,   Apr. 23, :agner  3apers. +e
circulated copies of 3app's testimony before the +ouse 8n-American
Activities Committee to some key city officials; turned over to the author
Zas a transcript Zith the folloZing  note to Bron[ Borough 3resident Lyons
attached: "Dear Jim: +ere's the lad Zho has been putting on the heat in
Central 3ark." 8nsigned letter: 3ost, Apr. 29.

"0uggers,"  etc.: DN, 0ay  2. ":hat's   Zrong  Zith 0cCarthy?":   Constable,
quoted by +addad, 3ost, Apr. 29. Editorials: Daily 0irror,  0ay  21; DN,

1742
0ay  8; 3ost, Apr. 29; NeZsday, 0ay 1. 3app's eloquent letter: 3app to R0,
0ay  4, :agner  3apers.

"You can't prove it": 3ost, 0ay  6. +opper: 3ost, Apr. 27. Lyons: 3ost, 0ay
13. Eleanor: "0y  Day," in :T&S,    Apr. 21. "As a child": Roger :est   to
3ost, 0ay 7. 1,500 signatures: 3ost, 0ay. 7. "Abolish 0r.   0oses!":  3ost,
0ay  20. 3ictures leaving hospital: DN, 0ay. 2.

3app's strategy: 3app. "It's noZ up to you": 3app to :agner, 0ay  5, :agner
3apers. 3ost editorial: 0ay 6. "+e  Zould rather be": 0oscoZ.

:agner  detested Constable: :agner told the author, "+e Zas a pompous
ass. ... +e antagoni]ed a lot of people. +e thought he came doZn Zith the
Zord from Olympus." :agner's   feelings: 0oscoZ.

:agner's  humiliation: Various papers, Apr. 17-0ay 2. +ere is an e[ample
of the neZspaper play by Judith Crist on p. 1 of the Apr. 21 +T: "For the
fifth consecutive day yesterday 0ayor :agner  reported that he Zas unable
to get in touch Zith 3ark Commissioner Robert 0oses. . . . 8ndaunted, the
0ayor  indicated that he hopes to reach 0r. 0oses eventually." NYT story:
Apr. 21. "Appeared irritated": :T&S,    Apr. 21. "No": DN,  0ay  2. 3layers
Club lunch: 0oscoZ.  Statement in press, 0ay 12.

LoZer Court: NYT,  0ay  19, June 3. Appellate Division: NYT, June 18. "Of
course abide": NYT, June 19. TZo philanthropists: Florence Sutro
Anspacher

and the EdZard L. Bernays Foundation. "Julius Caesar" hailed: Judith Crist
in +T, Aug. 4, for e[ample,  said: "0oses . . . missed a good shoZ."

"Oh, give it to him": Shapiro and confidential source, Zho agree on Zhat
R0's  true feelings Zere. A one-sentence letter agreeing to put 3ark
Department equipment at 3app's disposal Zas sent to him by R0, July 6,
:agner  3apers. One of the best things: NeZsZeek, July 3, 1972,

p. 54-

1743
"Does anybody doubt it?": Isaacs quoted in NYT, Apr. 27. The public
understood noZ: Among the many editorials pointing this out: 3ost, Apr.
16; NYT, Apr. 18; +T, Apr. 16; :T&S,    Apr. 17.

45. Off to the Fair

SO8RCES

Books and articles:

LoZe, Cities in a Race Zith Time; 0oscoZ,  :hat   +ave  You Done for 0e
Lately?; 0oses, Dangerous Trade; Talese, The .ingdom and the 3oZer.

Fred J. Cook and Gene Gleason, "The Shame of NeZ York," The Nation,
Oct.

31, I959-

Cook and :agner  3apers.

0oses, "The Fair and the Building Congress" (a speech delivered to the
NeZ York Building  Trades Congress), 0ay 4, 1961.

Author's intervieZs:

+enry Barnes, 3eter J. Brennan, Albert +. Cole, John A. Coleman, Jane
0oses Collins, Fred J. Cook, Timothy J. Cooney, Thomas E. DeZey, :alter
S. Fried, 0onroe Gold Zater, :illiam    J. +addad, Joseph T. Ingraham,
Joseph .ahn, Robert .opple,  Jacob Lutsky, 0ichael J. 0adigan,  :arren
0oscoZ,  John 0ulcahy, 0ary  3erot Nichols, 3aul O'.eefe,   Joseph 3app,
3aul R. Screvane, Sidney 0. Shapiro, Robert F. :agner, Jr.

NOTES

(All dates 1959)

Citi]ens 8nion  questions and ansZers:

Various papers, 0ay 11, 21. "A great day!": +addad.

1744
+addad, .ahn  and the files: +addad, .ahn. "Delicate situation": Shanahan
memo, Feb. 24, 1957, copied by Gleason; Cook 3apers. To R0, sponsors
Zere Colonel Bennett's group: R0, press release, July 3; 0oses, Dangerous
Trade,

Notes for pages 1044-1065

pp. 456-57. +ad left investigation to Shanahan: Confidential source.
Gigante: "Benson 0emo to City Desk—Subject: Vincent Gigante,"
undated, Cook 3apers. "Grotesque": NYT, July 4.

Donoghue and Baron: +addad, .ahn; 3ost, June 26; Gleason, "0emo—Re:
+all developers, et al.," Jan. 21, 1956.

SoundvieZ tip: Cook.

Shanahan: +addad. "AnsZer every one": .ahn. F+A loans, 8ngar's
$700,-000: 3ost, various articles. "A fundraiser": 3ost, June 16; :T&S,
July 11.

:echsler  and 0rs.  Schiff: +addad, .ahn.  "There Zas a time": "Shame," p.
292. Change in older reporters: Cook, +addad, .ahn, confidential sources.
"You can't do that, 0ayor": +addad, confidential source.

"3ersonal publicist": 3ost, June 26. IntervieZ Zith LebZohl:  .ahn,  "Some
Stories I Didn't :rite,"   3age One of 1972, pp. 41-42.

Spargo: :T&S,   July 22, Aug. 24; 3ost, June 18, July 22, 27, 28, Aug. 24;
+T, Aug. 24; NYT, June 30. "0r.  0oses' 0an":   3ost, Aug. 26. Front page:
NYT, Aug. 23. R0's  response: On June 21, for e[ample, he issued tZo
separate statements, rushing the first to city desks and telegraphing the
second: NYT, June 22.

Investigators checking +addad: +addad, .ahn, confidential source.
Locking off the vending machines: .ahn. "Licking  his chops": "To Fred
Cook from Gene Gleason," undated memo, Cook 3apers. "Get out":
+addad.

1745
"Befuddled": NYT, June 23. "As neZs": Talese, pp. 99-101. "Our
confidence": NYT editorial, June 25. "Startling disclosures": NYT, July 1,
4. Editors okayed submission: Confidential source. "I . . . protested":
0oses, Dangerous Trade, pp. 460-61. R0 to Sul]berger: Letter quoted in
Dangerous Trade, p. 461. Sul]berger's invitation: 4uoted in Dangerous
Trade, p. 461. 3lay toned doZn: For e[ample, Zhen, on July 29, :agner
responded to another 0oses resignation ultimatum Zith another concession,
the Times editoriali]ed: ":e   need, occasionally and more often, to turn
aZay from fault-finding  and e[amine Zith appreciation the e[tent to Zhich
NeZ York is being rebuilt. . . . Among the good neZs ... is the Zord that 0r.
0oses—hard to live Zith  but impossible to do Zithout—Zill   still be in
there pitching."

Fire R0?:  Cooney, Sere vane; confirmed by Coleman, GoldZater, Lutsky,

0oscoZ,  O'.eefe  confidential

Needed R0: Autho •• analysis. R0\  (s -timates: 0om-

ing Congress." I'nsv misunderstand Various papers, July, Aui:.. Sept. best
summari]ed ; r. 'Shame," pp. 300. 4uote is p. 298. "And I noir uould have":
:agner.  Checking (juieth": Fried. "0oses  Ready to 4uit" and nien
0assena: NYT, June 27, 28. C0seZ 8nion  statement: NYT, Julv i< :ho
Zill  take his place?": DN, Jul) 12 :anner  sure R0 not serious: Lutsky " \
dead duck": NYT, July 4. 3ounding his desk: :T&S,   July 9. "Indicated ...
the a[e": DN, July 9. ":agner   Ducks": DN, July 10. Golf  Club incident:
+T, July 3.

Not life and death: O'.eefe, Brennan.

R0's  thinking: IntervieZs Zith  Brennan, Jane 0oses Collins, Cullman,
DeZey, Ingraham, 0adigan, O'.eefe,  Screvane, Shapiro, :agner and
others Zith Zhom he consulted or Zho Zere attempting to analy]e his
thinking at the time—plus the author's interpretation of remarks R0 made
to him. Atomic poZer: 0oses,  Dangerous Trade, pp. 407-10. +aussmann:
R0's  recognition of the importance of the Fair in +aussmann's career
emerges clearly from speeches he made in 1959-60.

1746
Resignation announcement: Long Island 3ress, 0ay 22, i960. :agner's
letter: NYT, 0ay  10, i960. Grand-ballroom dinner: NYT, Apr. 22, i960.

0orris'  hero Zorship: Barnes, Ingraham, 0ulcahy. Also 3app, Zho says:
"+e hero-Zorshipped 0oses. You could just tell it from  the things that he
said. +e Zas a poor, sad man, like a little boy." +umiliating NeZbold:
Barnes. "A giant": 3ost, 0ay  19, i960. 3hone episodes: Ingraham,
confirmed confidentially by another reporter. The public spanking: NYT,
July 15, i960.

.atcher's article: 3ost, 0ay  9, i960. .ihss's  article: NYT,  0ay  24, i960.

46. Nelson

SO8RCES

Books, articles and documents:

Gervasi, The Real Rockefeller', Lund-berg, America's Si[ty Families and
The Rich and the Super-Rich; 0orris, Nelson Rockefeller: A Biography
and Those Rockefeller Brothers; 0oses, Dangerous Trade; 3oling, The
Rockefeller Record; Rodgers, Rockefeller's Follies, :hite, The 0aking   of
the 3resident—1960, 1964 and 1968.

Notes for pages 1067-1081

1240

Frank Lynn, "The Rockefeller Years," NeZsday, Apr. 14-18, 1969; David
Nevin, "Rockefeller: The Old Avidity  Is Gone," Life, 0ar.  29, 1968.

Nelson A. Rockefeller, "The Story of Rockefeller Center," address at the
luncheon of the NeZ York Building Congress, Nov. 10, 1937.

La Guardia and :agner 3apers.

Author's intervieZs:

1747
+arold Blake, 3eter J. Brennan, :illiam   S. Chapin, Ernest J. Clark, John A.
Coleman, Thomas E. DeZey, 3erry Duryea, Jr., Jerry Finkelstein, Leonard
:.   +all,  Joseph T. Ingraham, +. Elliot .aplan, Arthur  Levitt, Jacob Lutsky,
0ichael  J. 0adigan, J. Burch 0c0or-ran,   3aul R. Screvane, Sidney 0.
Shapiro, Bertram D. Tallamy, +a]el Tappan, Robert F. :agner, Jr., :illiam
J. Zeck-endorf and various sources Zho Zould talk only on guarantees of
anonymity.

NOTES

Rockefeller's Zealth: Lundberg, Si[ty Families, pp. 6, 424-28; The Rich,
pp. 592-631; :hite,   i960, pp. 79, 87, 217; 1964, p. 65. Vs. +arriman:
Lundberg, The Rich, p. 136. $5 billion: Lundberg, The Rich, p. 158.

"Almost a dependency": :hite,  1968, p. 226. "The last great bank": :hite,
1964, p. 65. "I bet on money": 4uoted in :hite,   1964, p. 68.

Ruthlessness similar to R0's: This comparison Zas made, over and over, to
the author by men Zho are afraid to be quoted. Among those Zilling:
Shapiro (if he Zas dead), DeZey, Zeckendorf.

"Enjoyed his job": Rodgers, p. 25. The imagination of the builder: Duryea.
Backdoor financing: Lynn series; Levitt in NYT, Jan. 30, Aug. 18, 1970.

"Strange, pietistic": :hite,   i960, p. 182. "Rough": :hite,   1964, p. 77. Civil
rights donations: :hite,  1964, p. 74. "No crevice": :hite,    1968, pp. 224-
28. "Button": Lutsky.

R0  sure Nelson liked him: R0,  DeZey, Shapiro. 3alisades 3arkZay:
0oses, Dangerous Trade, p. 137. The closeness of the relationship betZeen
R0  and John D. Rockefeller, Jr., is documented in LaG to R0 and R0 to
LaG, Nov. 15, 1934, I^aG 3apers. Dorado Beach: Dangerous Trade, pp.
819-20. South America: Brochure, Dangerous Trade, pp. 791-806; Clark.
Fantastic fee: $100,000, 0adigan says.

Spanking Ronan: +e called the report: "Impractical ideas edged Zith malice

1748
Zhich emanated from an ambitious professorial mind." +T, Feb. 22, 1957.
"Task Force" recommendations: Recommendation 19: "The Department of
Conservation should be assigned the responsibility for the management of
state parks noZ delegated to the regional state park commissions and the
State Council of 3arks. The commissions should be reconstituted as
advisory councils to regional park directors appointed by the Commissioner
of Conservation."

Discussing parks Zith Laurance: Nelson Rockefeller quoted in NYT, Dec.
2, 1962. Red cardboard folders: :hite, 1968, p. 225. Becoming a crusade:
Confidential source. "Sucking up": Shapiro, Blake. 3oisoning: Stan +inden,
NeZsday, Dec. 1, 1962.

Tension over retirement e[tensions: Shapiro, Blake; confirmed by +. Elliot
.aplan,  head of the State Retirement System. Lake :elch speech: +T, June
16, 1962; Shapiro, Chapin.

The meeting at the broZnstone: Shapiro. "Asked, I might say ordered": R0
statement, Nov. 30, 1962. R0 at DN: Confidential sources. 3loy: Shapiro,
confidential sources. Rockefeller trying to call him: Shapiro, Tappan. "I
urged him not to resign": Rockefeller statement, Nov. 29, 1962.

Firming up his threat: R0  to Rockefeller, Nov. 28, 1962. 0odifying  it:
Shapiro. Rockefeller accepted it: Rockefeller to R0, Nov. 29.

The events conspiring, R0's feelings: Shapiro, confidential sources. R0's
statement: Nov. 29, 1962. Rockefeller's statement: Nov. 30.

"It broke his heart": In his memoirs, R0  says, in the only such admission he
ever made on any subject, so far as the author could find, that his
resignation Zas offered "perhaps impetuously, as I look at it noZ."
Dangerous Trade, p. 154.

"There is nothing": R0  quoted in DN, Dec. 2, 1962.

"Calmly": DN,  Dec. 2, 1962. 0aneuvering: Brennan, DeZey.

1749
"Nepotism": DN, Dec. 1, 1962. Sokol-sky: In "These Days," Long Island
3ress, Dec. 6. No statements: The neZ reporter Zas the author. +ardly any
public reaction: Various neZspapers, Nov. 30-Dec. 7.

State Council of 3arks meeting: NeZs-day, Jan. 23, 1963. "Emotional
strain": Duryea. "They broke his heart": Ingraham. Bridge dedication:
Various neZspapers, Jan. 18, 1963.

Notes for pages 1082-1086 47. The Great Fair

SO8RCES

Books, brochures, articles and documents:

0oscoZ,  The Last of the Big-Time Bosses; 0oses, Dangerous Trade,
Flushing 0eadoZ-Corona 3ark: A  Family 3ark and :orking   for the
3eople; Rod-gers, Robert 0oses; Talese, The .ingdom and the 3oZer.

John Brooks, "Diplomacy at Flushing 0eadoZ," The NeZ Yorker, June i,

1963.

0artin  0ayer,  "+o  +um, Come to the Fair," Esquire, Oct. 1963.

0ary  3erot Nichols, "3rivate Opinion,"  The Village Voice, Apr. 4, 1963-
0ar. 11, 1965, particularly Apr. 4, Dec. 5, 1963; Nov. 26, Dec. 17, 1964;
0ar. 11, 1965.

Chris :elles,  "The Big  Bash That Is Running Short of Cash," Life, 0ay 14,

1965.

0etropolitan  Conference on 3arks, "3rogram for E[tension of 3arks and
3arkZays in the 0etropolitan  Region," Feb. 25, 1930.

NeZ York :orld's   Fair 1939-1940 Corporation, "0inutes  of E[ecutive
Committee, Dec. 4, 1935-June 24, 1941."

1750
City of NeZ  York, 3ark Department, Report to the :orld's Fair Committee
of the Board of Estimate and Apportionment on the Acquisition and
Development of the :orld's  Fair Site, 1935.

0oses, "After  the Fair—Flushing 0eadoZs 3ark,"  Apr. 30, 1939.

Building Trades Employers' Association, Inc., "Builders of NeZ York and
the NeZ York :orld's   Fair 1964-65," 0ar.  16, 1961.

NeZ York :orld's   Fair 1964-1965 Corporation, Flushing 0eadoZ  and
Beyond, Jan. 20, 1964.

NeZ York :orld's   Fair 1964-1965 Corporation, "3rogress Reports," eleven
reports, issued at intervals, Jan. 16, 1961-0arch, 1964.

3eat, 0arZick,  0itchell   & Co., NY:F    1964-1965 Corp., Financial
Statements and Schedules, Dec. 31, 1964.

City of NeZ  York, Office of the Comptroller, Third Supplemental Report on
NeZ York :orld's   Fair 1964-1965 Corporation, "Covering Operations from
Inception to December 31, 1966," Oct. 26, 1967.

.ahn  Files. .opple  3apers. La Guardia 3apers, particularly Bo[ 687,
Folder "3arks Dept. F." :agner  3apers, particularly Bo[ 5570, folders
marked

":orld's   Fair—1961" (all  . folders).

NeZ York :    1 1 Fair iv Corporation, various internal menu other
documents made available to author by confidential souk

Speeches: 0oses, 'The lair and the Building Congress," 0ay 4, 1961
Statement by R0," 0ay  4, 1961.

Oral +istory Reminiscence:

George 0cAneny.

Author's intervieZs:

1751
Robert Alden, +enry Barnes, +arold Blake, 3eter J. Brennan, Ernest J.
Clark, Gilmore Clark, John A. Coleman, Timothy J. Cooney, +oZard S.
Cullman, Thomas E. DeZey, 3erry B. Duryea, Jr., Fred Ferretti, Joseph T.
Ingraham, Joseph .ahn, Robert .opple, Jacob Lut-sky, 0ichael  J.
0adigan, J. Burch 0c-0orran,   +arry  L. 0eyers,  0ary  3erot Nichols, 3aul
O'.eefe,  John Sattler, 3aul R. Screvane, Sidney 0. Shapiro, Robert F.
:agner,  Jr., Bernard :einer.

NOTES

(The author covered the Fair and investigated its finances during 1965 as a
reporter for NeZsday. 0any of the observations in this chapter are those
made by him at that time.)

:anted  it named after him: 0adigan,  Shapiro.

+istory of F0   3ark and R0's dreams for it: 0oses,  "The Saga of F0,"
F0-Corona 3ark, pp. 7-24; 0etropolitan  3ark Conference, "3rogram," pp.
10, 12. "A cloud of smoke": 0oses, Dangerous Trade, p. 541. 1930 maps:
0etropolitan  3ark Conference, "3rogram," p. 16. Rereading Isaiah: R0
intervieZ Zith  author; he used the slogan in numerous speeches. "It takes
more than a good idea": R0, quoted in Rodgers, p. no. "Dark Zall":
Rodgers, p. 112. "For a Zhile," "the miracle": 0oses, "The Saga," p. 8. "By
God": 0cAneny  O+R.  "Stop at nothing": 0oses, "The Saga," pp. 8-9.

Every form of insurance: R0;  R0  to La Guardia, memos, letters, Jan. 4,
1936-Sept. 18, 1939, La Guardia 3apers; 3ark Department, Report to the
:orld's   Fair Committee of the Board of Estimate, 1935. 0ud Zaves:
:einer.  $59,000,000; "staggering": 0oses, "The Saga," p. n. "A lot of
building": R0.

"Of more concern": "residuary legatee"; "a heritage": 0oses, Introduction,
F0  and Beyond, p.5. $56,000,000: F0 and Beyond, p. 4. The applicable
items

Notes for pages 1086-1095

1242

1752
are "Demolition—$2,000,000; Restoration of 3ark—$5,000,000";
"Reimbursement to the City for Construction—$24,-000,000"; "Balance
available for Flushing 0eadoZs and Corridor Improvements, of Zhich
$23,000,000 is required to complete the program, leaving a possible balance
of $2,725,000—$25,-725,000." Timetable: :.  Earle AndreZs, Gilmore
Clarke, "Report of Consultants," F0 and Beyond, pp. 7-9. In private:
Shapiro, 0adigan, private sources. After an intervieZ Zith 0oses,  0artin
0ayer  Zrote that "0oses says that the thing that interests him most is the
park, Zhich Zill  remain in perpetuity" ^Esquire, p. 183). Banker's
suggestion: George S. 0oore to R0, Feb. 24, 1963, quoted in 0oses,
Dangerous Trade, p. 605.

A billion:  0oses, 'The Fair and the Building Congress." "0iscellaneous—
$55,000,000": :F   3rogress Report No. 1, Jan. 16, 1961, p. 5. Constable
memo: "To: All 3articipants," 0ar.  9, 1964, .ahn  Files. $10,000,000: 3eat,
0arZick   audit, Schedules 1, 2, 3. $3,000,000 insurance premiums: Audit,
Schedules 2 and 3 for :F Corp. through end of 1964— $2,280,710. Campo
& Roberts: Screvane, confidential sources; 0oscoZ, p. 195. Discussion
leading up to the approval Zas not e[tensive. Recalls one Fair official:
"0oses just said it Zould  be Campo & Roberts and that Zas that." :agner:
IntervieZ Zith  author. Screvane: IntervieZ Zith author.

"Attitude of affluence": Confidential  source; :ells,  Life,  pp. 142, 144.
8nions encouraged: Brennan, Screvane, confidential sources. $12,000,000
more for maintenance: 3eat, 0arZick audit, Schedules 1, 2, 3. $10,000,000
for security: Audit, Schedule 3. Deegan's statement: 3ost, Nov. 27, 1963.
+is fees and e[penses: Audit, Schedules 1, 2, 3; +T, Feb. 7, 1965.
Donoghue and other 3R costs: Audit; NYT, Sept. 3, 1965. Entertainment:
Author's observations. "A dirty Zord": Confidential  source. $706,053: 3eat,
0arZick   audit. $33,299,000: Audit has $35,508,822. Belgian Village loan:
NYT, 0ay  8, 1964. ":hy    don't you come aboard?": Among the people
asked Zas the author, Zhose articles Zere angering R0, and .ahn. Legal
fees to Rosenman and 3reusse: In 1965 alone, the :F Corporation paid
$47,297.11 to Rosen-man's firm, $299,525.73 to 3reusse's, :hitman,
Ransom and Coulson. (Comptroller, "Third Supplemental Report," p. 40.)
The Fair's total legal fees came to $2,243,128.65. Of this amount, the bulk
Zent to the Rosenman and 3reusse firms.

1753
3reusse to R0, Apr. 27, i960; R0  to 3reusse, Apr. 28, :agner 3apers. 3ost
Nov. 27, 1963. Some si]e of the figures involved is indicated by a single
bill from 3reusse's firm, :hitman,   Ransom and Coulson—$116,996,31.
+T, Feb. 7, 1965.

Lucrative concessions: To 0onaghan: 3ost, Nov. 27, 1963. To Cullman: +e
Zas given a slice of the Terrace Club at the Fair. Luce and :hitney: 0ayer,
Esquire, p. 180; 3ost, Nov. 27. $24,000,000 allocation: Nichols, Voice, Dec.
17, 1964. Actual figure $60,000,000: Comptroller's Report; also Zorksheets
of Comptroller's auditors.

No outsiders: A roster of upper-echelon Fair officials can be found in :F
3rogress Report No. 1, pp. 53-55. The list of "Administration" and
"Consultants" includes such long-time 0oses 0en as Constable, :itt,
AndreZs, Clarke, Farrell, EdZard C. 0aguire,  Robert G. 0cCul-lough  (of
the Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay), A. ..   0organ,  Shapiro. 3anuch "never
sold," "couldn't do the job": 0ayer,  Esquire, p. 180.

Determined not to repeat :helan's mistake: R0;  3otter, quoted in 0ayer,
Esquire, pp. 179, 180. The critic is :alter  0c4uade,  The Nation, p. 357.
Design Committee proposal and R0's turndoZn: Summary in 0ayer, p.
180. The clearest statement of the reason R0 Zas determined not to have a
single building is in a confidential letter to :agner,  Dec. 17, 1959, :agner
3apers: ":e  need a park there." +aussmann: 0oses, Dangerous Trade, p.
549. Commissioning 3ort Authority: 0ayer,  p. 180.

Disorgani]ation: Among the critics Zho commented on this. The one
quoted is NYT, 0ay 3, 1964.

Sukarno: Brooks, The NeZ Yorker, p. 56. :est Berlin:  Brooks, p. 48.

BIE: Obstacles not insuperable: .op-ple; Deegan to :agner, Nov. 5, 1959,
:agner  3apers. Brooks, The NeZ Yorker, p. 42. 3recedent: Brooks, p. 42.
"Informal"  e[hibits being planned: .opple.  "Three people living
obscurely": NYT, Sept. 11, 1963. "Not subject": .opple. BIE's retaliation:
Summary in 0ayer, Esquire, p. 179. "It's pretty hard": 3oletti quoted in
0ayer, p. 182.

1754
E[tensive public relations effort: Detailed in 3ost, Nov. 14, 1963. Fair
publicity deliberately built around R0:  3R men O'Brien and Davis
discussed this in author's presence during the Fair.

NeZsday's ambivalence: Altschul series, editorial 0ay 11, 1962.

0rs.  Sul]berger's letter: NYT, 0ay  7, 1961. "0r.  0oses Zould  complain":

Notes for pages 1095-1109

Shapiro. E[pressZays editorial: NYT, June 15, 1963. "Infuriated":
Ingraham.

3redisposition to be favorable: .ahn.

R0's  attitude at press conferences: Alden, Ferretti; author Zas present at
some. "The Lester 0arkel Lecture": 0oses, "0oses  0eets the 3ress—+ead
On," NYT 0aga]ine,   Aug. 5, 1962. "Only one Zay": .ahn.

.ahn's  crusade: .ahn. OpotoZsky article: 3ost, Nov. 27, 1963. California:
Lucien C. +aas (BroZn's press secretary) to .ahn, 0ar. 29, 1963, .ahn
Files. 3ost, July 30, 1963. 3uerto Rico, Virgin Is.: 3ost, 0ar. 18, 29, 1963.

"Foul the nest": R0  quoted in NYT, July 24, 1963. See also his speech
"The Fair, the City and the Critics," Oct. 13, 1964, on "avant-garde critics
and left-Zing commentators, . . . jaded publishers [Zho] befoul everything."

NYT editors' luncheon: Ingraham, confidential source. Carping on
Administration Building  opening: Various neZspapers, Jan. 12, 1961. On
landscaping: NYT, Aug. 28, 1963. On Science 0useum: NYT, Apr. 10,
1963; Oct. 9, 1963. 3ress conferences: NYT, Sept. 15, 1964.

Fighting Zith  +. L. +unt:  NYT, Oct. 10, 19, 25, 1963. R0's version in
Dangerous Trade, pp. 587-91. Douglas: +T, Sept. 13, 1961. Request had
been assured of passage: +T, 0ar., 14,1962. NYT, Apr. 18, 1962. R0 all
but killed it: +T,  Sept. 13, 1 96 1. Attacks Congress: NYT, Sept. 21, 1961,
0ar. 11, 1962.

1755
Racial controversy: NYT, 0ar. 12, 1962, June 19, 1963, Apr. 10, 1964;
Screvane. Religious controversy: 0oses, Dangerous Trade, pp. 579-87. In
1965, R0 Zas aZarded the Jordanian .aZkob  (Star of Jordan) decoration
of the First Order, for "contribution to understanding and friendship of
nations." Garbage controversy: :elles, Life, p. 138. Art controversy: NYT,
Nov. 18, 1963. Opening-on-time controversy: NYT, Feb. 28, 1964.

Daily e[penses $300,000; $30,000,000 spent before opening day: 3eat,
0arZick   audit, p. 3, Schedules 2 and 3. Needed 220,000 per day: Author's
calculation based on internal Fair memos. Daily attendance figures: "Daily
Turnstile Count," internal :F   Corp. memo.

:itt's   mistake: 3eat, 0arZick  audit, p. 3. In Dangerous Trade, R0 Zrote:
"It is clear that I relied too much on . . . the late ErZin :itt,   Zho proved
honest but timid and Zeak" (p. 606). Afraid to tell him, firing Spargo:
:elles,  Life,  p. 144. "Never the same again": Confidential source.

"Drastically reduced budget": :elles,  Life,  p. 146. +is dilemma: Brennai
lied, 3inkerton cut back: A

2, 1965.

Inflating attendance figures: II, thor, as a reporter covering the I an given
the "official"  figures by \ air 3R men, but the true figures by a talk president
Zith Zhom  R0  Zas negotiating for a loan to keep the Fair afloat and Zho
had insisted on being given R0's personal "Daily Turnstile Count."
"Financial success": NYT, Oct. 14, 1964. 0ary Nichols spotted it: Voice,
Dec. 17! 1964. "A fool's paradise": :elles,  Life,  p. 146.

0acTavish episode: :elles,  Life,  pp. 146-48; confirmed by Spargo to R0,
Feb. 1, 1965, and :itt  to R0,  Jan. 20, 1965 (given to author by confidential
source). 0oore-R0  conversation: :elles,   p. 148. 0oore resignation: NYT,
Jan. 19, 1965.

R0  rounding up neZ e[hibits:  NYT, Feb. 5, Feb 18, 0ar. 10, Apr. 21,
1965. Almost pleading: For e[ample, 0oses, "The Fair, the City and the
Critics," Oct. 13, 1964, spends nine pages cataloguing "slanted headlines,"
etc., but ends: ":e  badly need the press. . . . :ith . . . agreement on main

1756
objectives, differences in detail Zill be entirely consistent Zith mutual
respect, and there Zill be a neZ daZn Zhen the Fair reopens ne[t April.
:hy   not try this formula?"

0oore  photo: Life, 0ay  14, 1965, p. 13. Can't repay loan: R0, in NYT,
Jan. 2 7> 1965. $17,540,000 deficit: 3eat, 0arZick audit. Can't repay notes:
NYT, Feb. 6, 1965. Dec. 31 financial situation: 3eat, 0arZick audit; +T,
Jan. 24, 1965; :itt  memo, Feb. 15, 1965, Schedule II, :F  Corp. internal
document. ThreZ in escroZ account and other desperate measures:
NeZsday, various articles, Dec.

1964. Loan difficulties: Nichols, Voice, Dec. 17, 1964; NeZsday, Feb. 20,
23,

1757
1965. Ferretti's overplay: +T, Feb. 22, 1965. NeZsday article; 0ar. 13,
1965-Beame: NYT, Nov. 24, 1964; +T, Feb. 1, 3, Sept. 10, 1965. EscroZ
stories: +T, Jan. 21, 1965.

NeZsday ridicule: Jan. 13, 1965. Schaap: +T, Jan. 14, 1965.

NYT editorial: Feb. 7, 1965.

:agner's  feelings and resignation moves: :agner, Screvane, Coleman; the
author's intervieZs at the time Zith city and state officials Zho demanded
anonymity. IRS investigation: 0oses, Dangerous Trade, p. 606. 3anama
Canal: Gimbel, quoted in :elles,  Life, p. 150. "A  sad thing": 0c0orran.

Notes for pages 1109-1127

1244

Screvane's overtures: Screvane. Coleman's: Coleman. Bankers': :agner,
confidential sources. E[ecutive committee maneuvering: Screvane, :agner,
Shapiro, confidential sources. Gaveling Za-ret]ki: +T, June 23, 1964. Feb.
24 meeting: NeZsday, Feb. 24, 25, 1965. One reporter: The author.

NeZsday column: 0ike  0cGrady,  0ay  11, 1965. +is auditors told him:
One Fair official, not a 0oses 0an,  Zas feeding the author the daily memos
on the situation being circulated Zithin the Fair Administration Building;
see, for e[ample, NeZsday, 0ar. 15, 1965.

Last-minute attendance boom: Various neZspapers, NYT, Oct. 14, 1965.
$13,-000,000: Internal :F  Corp. memos.

R0  meeting Zith bankers: NYT, Oct. 18, 1965. Legal action and
compromise: NYT, Nov. 17, 1965. Triborough funds made available: NYT,
Sept. 1, 1965. 4uiet 3ark Department appropriations: Nichols, Voice, Dec.
17, 1964; 0orris to Felt, 0ar.  8, 1962, :agner  3apers ($675,000 for trees).
"One of the very great municipal parks": 0oses, Dangerous Trade, p. 543.
+e also called it "the city's finest park": NeZsday, Oct. 18, 1965.
$142,674,000: 0oses, F0-Corona 3ark, p. 33.

1758
48. Old Lion, Young 0ayor

SO8RCES

Books and documents:

.lein,  Lindsay's 3romise; 0oses, Dangerous Trade.

Levitt TBTA  Audit (see "Sources," Chapter 33).

TBTA, "0emorandum  in Opposition to Legislation 3roviding  for the
0erger of  TBTA Zith  the NeZ York City Transit Authority  and Other
Transportation Facilities," Jan. 21, 1966.

Author's intervieZs:

+enry Barnes, +arold Blake, 3eter J. Brennan, Thomas E. DeZey, 3erry B.
Duryea, Jr., Thomas 3. F. +oving, Joseph 0cC. Lieper, J. Burch 0c0orran,
EdZard J. 0aloney, Arthur  E. 3almer, Jr., Robert 3rice, Richard 0. Rosen,
Sidney Schanberg, Sidney 0. Shapiro, Bertram D. Tallamy, Robert F.
:agner,  Jr., Norman ..  :inston.

NOTES

(All dates 1966 unless otherZise noted)

"0atinee  idol": R0   Zas to repeat this in print later; the first time he said it

Zas to his aides that day: Blake, Shapiro, confidential source.

"The poZer brokers": .lein,   p. 95.

It sounded so easy: NYT, Jan. 14, 15. 0oving LaG's portrait: NYT, Feb. 19.
Their feelings about R0: +oving,  3rice, Rosen, confidential sources. R0's
feelings about them: R0. "Lindsay 0aps  3lans": 3ost, Dec. 10, 1965. One
R0  aide remembers R0 grinning grimly  Zhen he read that headline.

Lindsay confident: NYT, NeZsday, Jan. 14, 18. LaZyers ignorant of bond
covenants: The author spoke to several administration officials, including

1759
some in the Corporation Counsel's office, Zho Zere attorneys. Their
ignorance of the covenants and their significance Zas striking. All Zould
talk to the author only on guarantees of anonymity.

"The holders": :ood,  3reusse and LebZohl, 0emorandum of LaZ,
"0emorandum in  Opposition," p. 9. "3oorly advised": R0  quoted in NYT,
Jan. 21. 0edia all but ignored: All area neZspapers, Jan.-Feb.

Rallying call; and they saZ it as such: Brennan, Tallamy. Didn't understand
importance of arterial post: 3rice; intervieZs Zith anonymous Lindsay
confidants. "Briskly striding Commissioner +oving":  NYT, Jan. 30. 3almer
being sent to R0: 3almer. Their three meetings: R0, 3almer concur fully
on their details. "You haven't got the poZer": 3almer, 3rice. Legislation no
longer mentioned surpluses: Senate Intro. 795, 3rint 798 by 0r. Conklin
compared Zith Senate Intro. 419, 3rint 419 by 0r. 0ackell.  "That
goddamned Zhippersnap-per": 3almer.

Lindsay-R0  meeting: R0,  3almer.

Boastfully confident: Various neZspapers, Feb. 22-0ar. 10. The
Rockefeller apartment meeting: 3almer, Rosen, confidential sources Zho
also Zere present. Lindsay believed he had Rockefeller's support: 3almer,
3rice, Rosen. "The Zay you handle legislators": Rosen quoted in NYT.

"+arry Van Arsdale": Confidential source. Rosen's quote: To author, in
intervieZ, June 25, 1968. 3laying games: Schanberg. Seriously believed:
3almer, 3rice, Rosen, confidential sources.

The hearing: Brennan, DeZey, 3almer, Rosen, Schanberg, Shapiro,
confidential sources Zho Zere present; NeZsday, DN, NYT, Long Island
3ress, +T, 0ar. 11, 12. The handshake: 3hotos in NeZsday, +T. "No one
Zill  buy": Robert Christie, vice president of Dillon, Read & Co.,

Notes for pages 1128-1140

1245

principal manager for all TBTA bonds. "3ro forma charade": Schanberg.

1760
R0  arranging mopping-up actions: Shapiro, Brennan; +T, 0ar. 13. Chase:
NYT, 0ar.  13. Editorial: NYT, 0ar.  12. :ood   reply: :ood   to NYT,  0ar.
18. By the Zay: NeZsday, 0ar. 12; confidential sources. Lindsay
telephoning Rockefeller, instructing Rosen: Rosen. "Never occurred":
Lindsay quoted in NYT, 0ay  14, Rockefeller support not forthcoming:
Reported NYT on 0ar. 16: "Over and over at the neZs conference the
Governor praised 'John Lindsay's courage and forthrightness in stepping up
to meet the city's problems.' But just as many times, he counseled the
0ayor  on the Zisdom of compromise in the face of opposition."

Thirtieth-anniversary pageantry: NYT, NeZsday, July 12. The letter: NYT,
July 13.

Lindsay's instructions to 3almer: 3almer. 8nable to accomplish anything:
3almer, :inston.  :inston    for R0  on everything: R0,  :inston.

Signs of aZareness: NYT, June 18, July 14; Brennan, 3almer, confidential
sources. :ould  take five years: Lieper. Lindsay's astonishment: 0c0orran,
0oloney, 3almer, 3rice, confidential sources. $250,000,000: Levitt TBTA
Audit (pp. 2-3) shoZs surplus running about $29,-000,000 per year. TBTA
Annual Report, 1966, p. 13, shoZs cash, investments and receivables as
$142,000,000. The combination of the tZo figures Zould, by the end of
1969, at then current interest rates, have enabled Triborough, by refinancing
its outstanding bond issues, to raise an additional $250,000,000 for
construction.

49. The Last Stand

SO8RCES

(Certain crucial details of this chapter Zere supplied to the author by
banking sources Zho Zould, out of fear of Gov. Rockefeller, agree to talk
only on guarantees of anonymity.)

Books, articles and documents:

0oses, Dangerous Trade.

1761
Frank Lynn, "The Rockefeller Years," NeZsday, Apr. 14-18, 1969-

Levitt TBTA  Audit (see "Sources," Chapter 33).

Author's intervieZs:

+arold Blake, 3eter J. Bfl Thomas E. DeZey, 3erry B. Duryc -Joseph T.
Ingraham, Lee .oppeln Arthur  Levitt, Joseph 0cC. Lieper, 0ichael  J.
0adigan, Arthur  E. 3almer, Jr., Jackson 3hillips, Richard 0. Rosen] Sidney
0.  Shapiro, Arthur V. Sheridan, Robert F. :agner, Jr., Franklin S. :ood.

NOTES

$6.4 billion: NYT, 0ar.  8, 1967. State's financial condition: Lynn, "The
Rockefeller Years." $110,000,000 on hand, $30, 000,000-per-year surplus:
Levitt TBTA  Audit, pp. 2-3. Rockefeller's thinking: Brennan, DeZey,
Duryea, Levitt, Shapiro, confidential sources.

So little to fight back Zith:  Ingraham, Shapiro, 0adigan, :agner.

"StraZ in the Zind":  3almer, Rosen, confidential sources. Didn't grasp
e[tent of poZer: Author's impression from intervieZs Zith  Lindsay aides,
most of Zhom insist on anonymity. Driven to the Zall, planning to use bond
monies in budget: Levitt; NeZsday, 0ar. 21, Oct. 22, 23, Nov. 8, 1967. Ta[
increase: NIT, 0ay 2, Nov. 7, 1967. Voter resentment: NYT, Nov. 7, 1967.
Afraid R0  Zould  tip it:  Brennan, Duryea. "Essential is the participation":
NeZsday, 0ar. 14, 1967.

R0's  figures: Duryea, Levitt, Shapiro, confidential sources.

First Rockefeller-Ronan conference Zith R0: Jan. 5, 1967. Letter to the
Bahamas: :orld-Journal-Tribune,  0ar. 12, 1967; Shapiro. Statement on
return: NYT, Jan. 22, 1967. R0 and Rockefeller meet: NYT, 0ar. II,  1967.
Nothing neZ: Ingraham, Shapiro. Rockefeller had promised R0 poZer:
Duryea, confirmed by another leader present; Levitt, confirmed by Shapiro,
Zho Zas one of the coterie; Brennan. "It Zas learned": NYT, DN, 0ar. 12,
1967.

1762
No doubt: Blake, 0adigan, Shapiro. Asks for appointment; "not a cent";
"guts," "a lot of courage and faith": R0,  ":hy    NeZ York Needs That
Transportation Bond Issue," NeZsday, 0ay 26, 1967, quoted in Dangerous
Trade. Rosenman: Confidential source. "+e had a promise": DeZey.

Suit Zould have been successful: 3hillips, :ood,  confidential sources.
Chase brief: NYT, July 1, 1967.

0eeting of  the tZo brothers: NYT, Feb. 10, 1968. The author has been
unable to obtain a copy of the stipulation. +e did, hoZever, hold detailed
discussions Zith tZo individuals Zho did—

Notes for pages 1140-1162

1246

Ingraham, Zho obtained a copy only by promising he Zould never quote
from it directly but Zould  use it only for background (and Zho, in fact,
never used it for anything at all), and a confidential source. The author's
discussion of the stipulation is based on Zhat they told him. On his
instructions, Rosen man agreed: Confidential source; :orld-Journal-
Telegram, 0ar. 12, 1967; NYT, 0ar. 20, 1967.

All Zas honey: Shapiro. The Governor "told me": 0oses, Dangerous Trade,
p. 257. Duryea's intercession: Duryea, Shapiro. Ronan's offer: NYT, Feb.
29, 1968. R0's salary Zas later raised to $35,000. R0's feelings: Shapiro,
:agner.  Articles: :itkin,    NYT,  and NeZsday, 0ar. 2, 1968.

50. Old

SO8RCES

Books and articles:

0oses, Dangerous Trade. 0oses, "From the Bridge," NeZsday column.

Author's intervieZs:

1763
+arold Blake, 3eter J. Brennan, Jane 0oses Collins, 3erry B. Duryea, Jr.,
Jacob Lutsky, 0ichael J. 0adigan, Charles F. Rodrigue], Sidney 0.
Shapiro, Arnold Vollmer, Robert F. :agner, Jr.

NOTES

Still sZam: Author saZ him  do it.

Ronan's incompetence: Brennan, Shapiro, confidential sources.

"A couple of times": Confidential source.

R0  fooled by Governor on Sound Crossing: R0's desire for it to be built—
and his rationali]ations as to Zhy it Zasn't—are summed up in Dangerous
Trade, pp. 262-75; also "From the Bridge," Dec. 23, 1967, and Jan. 4, 1969.

Desperate: Brennan, Duryea, Shapiro. "No Calvin Coolidge": R0, speech
to "Fall Guy" luncheon, Garden City +otel, Jan. 24, 1969, quoted in
Dangerous Trade, pp. 258-59. Governor charming, Ron an not: The author
saZ this on several occasions. Blake's muttered comment Zas to the author
on one occasion at Zhich Ronan all but snubbed R0, the opening of the
"Sunken 0eadoZ"  addition to Randall's Island, July 11, 1967.

Lutsky: Telephoned LebZohl during intervieZ Zith  author. "Sorry for him":
:agner.  Badillo incident: Rodrigue].

"Birthdays are to forget": DN, Dec. 16, 1969. "+asn't changed":
Confidential source.

+ousing program: DN, Apr. 30, 1969. "Atlantic Village"  proposal:
Dangerous Trade, pp. 478-80. CityZide program: Discussed it Zith author.

So much left to do: R0 to author in intervieZs.

"Dangerous Trade" Zritten by staff: Author saZ the drafts submitted by
various staffers.

Fordham dedication: NYT, July 4, 1970. Building Trades dinner: Author
present. ":e'd  just like to observe": DN editorial, 1969. "The glass of

1764
fashion": R0,  quoted in NYT, Oct. 13, 1969.

Damrosch dedication: NYT, 0ay 23, 1969; 0oses, Dangerous Trade, pp.
532-33. "The finest short story": 0oses, "From the Bridge" column,
NeZsday, 1969. Alley 3ond 3ark: NYT, Sept. 8, 1969. Lindsay's
accomplishments in housing: For e[ample, NYT, July 5, 1969, Jan. 11,
1971.

Slim hopes: R0 to author; Blake, Shapiro.

R0's  attitude toZard John Olds, Christopher Collins: Jane 0oses Collins,
0adigan, Shapiro. It Zas apparent in R0's intervieZs  Zith  author; he
referred to John scornfully as "the banker," Zaving his hand disdainfully.
Christopher's death: NeZsday, Dec. 13, 1968.

Chauffeur, name dropping: To author. :hy Zeren't they grateful?: The
author Zas present at the E[cedra ceremony.

11

Battery, the: real estate in, 645, 646

Battery Crossing fight: opposition to R0,  645-7, 653-4, 656-78

Battery 3ark, 332, 645-53, 658, 659, 666-7, 671, 676, 683, 685; Aquarium,
651, 653, 678-82, 686; Fort Clinton, 650-3, 658, 678-87, 696, 697, 766,
767; opposition to R0, 678-88

Battery 3arking Garage, 689, 695, 696, 918

baymen, see Long Island

Bayonne Bridge, 924, 925, 926

beaches, grass for, 232-3, 831-2; L.I., 8, 151-2, 153-4- 155, 160, 169-70,
220; N.Y.C.. 7. 33i, 335, 778, 830; see also individual beaches

Beal. Frank 3., 499

1765
Beame, Abe, 1107, 1108

Beard, Charles A., 60, 107-9

Bear 0ountain Bridge, 345

Becker, SteZart, 730

Bedford-Stuyvesant, 510, 512, 971, 1151

Beebe, :illiam,   985

Bellevue South project, 1054

Bellonte, 0aurice, 652

Belmont, August, 10, 170

Belmont. 0rs.  Oliver. 151-2

Belmont Lake State 3ark, 8, 212, 220; L.I. State 3ark Commission
headquarters, 212, 234, 270, 458, 814, 815, 820

Belt 3arkZay, 8, 341, 342, 343, 525, 639. 659, 676, 838, 896, 898, 905; cost
of, 639: funds for, 639-41, 642-4, 675-6; traffic congestion on, 912

Bemelmans. LudZig, 985

Ben-Gurion, David, 1101

Bennett. Col. John J., 793, 872, 966-7,

977, 978-9, 1044 Bergen Countv E[pressZay, 925 Berfe. Adolf A.. Jr..
348,' 376-7, 427-8,

and n., 611-12. 613. 778 Berlin, 8niversity of, 55, 64 Berliner. Samuel, 411
n. Bernstein. 3earl, 500-1 Berry. Charles :., 346 Bethpage State 3ark. 8,
485, 816 Bethpage State 3ark Authority, 362, 616,

1766
629, 764, 1061, 1074, 1133 Bethpage State 3arkZay, 485 Bikila. Abebe.
1107 Binger. :alter  D., 502, 646, 658, 679,

684-5. 688, 702, 766 Binghamton, 409. 413-14 Binkerd. Robert S., 132
Bishop. Shelton +ale, 510-11, 512 Black. Elinor G., 966, 970. 974, 976
Blaikie. Robert, 718, 778, 1017 and n. Blake. +arold. 809. 1145. 1146-7,
1149,

1155. 1159-60 Blake. 3eter, 561 Blanshard. 3aul. 348 Blauvelt Engineering,
1090 Bloustein, Francis J., 793, 977

Blum, Robert E., 809

Bookbinder, Bernie, 824, 826

Boonville Gorge, 239

Booth & :eston,   209

Boston, 571, 772

Braestrup, 3eter, 1022, 1049

Bragg, Gen. EdZard S., 286 and n.

Brandeis, Louis, 216

Brandi, Frederic +., 1112

Brandt, :illy,   1107

BrandZynne, Nat, 339

Brennan, 3eter J., 735-8, 810, 1056, 1059, 1073 m, 1078, 1104, 1125, 1128,
1135, 1138, 1147-8, 1160

bridges: approaches to, 17, 626-7; designed too loZ for buses, 318, 546-7,
951-4; earnings of, 617-18; maintenance, 617, 796, 920; R0's plans for,
885, 1041, 1147; in N.Y.C., 330-1, 341, 342, 508, 517, 614, 760, 829, 830,

1767
896; parkZay, 230, 237, 546-7; traffic congestion on, 516-18, 519, 897,
930; see also individual bridges

BroadZay draZbridge, 144, 330, 331,

535, 537, 554, 563

Bron[, 6, 62. 340, 508, 518-19; borough president of, 743, 749; 0arble
+ill,  534, 543; mass transit needs, 931; 0or-risania, 857, 890; planning for,
794, politics in, 734, 865, 868, 877-8, 1046; population groZth in, 143, 338,
546-7, 765: South, 396, 493; traffic congestion in, 329-30; Triborough
Bridge to, 386, 387, 388, 838; see also East Tremont

Bron[ River  3arkZay, 144, 162, 211, 231, 288, 365, 564, 896, 918

Bron[-:hitestone    Bridge, 6, 341, 518-20, 626, 627, 639, 672, 832, 1147;
cost of. 657; earnings of, 698; rapid transit proposed for, 519; traffic
congestion on, 519. 885, 897, 912, 950

Bron[ Zoo, 381, 678-9, 682, 686, 853

Brookhaven 3ark, 829

Brookhaven ToZnship, 147

Brooklyn, 147, 508; Bay Ridge, 331, 928, 1071; Bedford-Stuyvesant, 510,
512, 971, 1151; borough president, 743; Brooklyn +eights. 645;
BroZnsville, 965. 966. 971; developers in, 143, 338, 481, 898; mass transit
needs, 929; planning for, 794; population groZth, 145, 329, 330, 765, 898,
899; Red +ook, 375, 455, 524; roads, 339, 345, 522-4; Stuyvesant +eights,
490, 510, 511; traffic congestion, 329, 639, 944; Zater supply, 157: see also
Sunset 3ark

Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, 515, 520-1, 524/525, 639-47, 653-4, 657-75, 676,
678, 683, 689, 694, 695, 696, 844, 896; cost of, 639, 657, 665, 675, 698;
earnings of, 698, 715, 911; funds for, 639-41, 674-5; traffic congestion in,
911

Brooklyn Bridge, 146, 330, 341, 674, 911

1768
Brooklyn Eagle, 73, 263, 414, 432, 433, 512, 556, 991

Brooklyn-4ueens E[pressZay, 6, 659, 709, 846, 896, 925, 949-50

Brooks, Samuel, 752, 879, 1009, ion, 1012, 1017, 1018

BroZn, +oZard  D., 263

BroZn, 3eter Campbell, 997-1002, 1010

BroZne, James J., 331

BroZnell, +erbert,  Jr., 361-2

BroZnsville, 965, 966, 971

Bruckner E[pressZay, 6, 749, 841 and n., 866, 885, 896, 925, 928

Bruckner traffic circle, 886

Bruere, +enry, 60, 61, 63-4, 68, 70, 93, 103-4, 782

Bryan, Frederick Van 3elt, 685

Bryant 3ark: Bi-Centennial Celebration in, 332-3 and n.\ in disrepair, 332-
3; renovation of, 371, 372, 373-4, 499

Brydges, Earl, 1124, 1126

Buckley, Charles A., 727, 734, 868, 981, 1014, 1046, 1050, 1056

Buckley, Shumavon and Goul, 710, 1090

Buffalo, 163, 200, 240, 248, 409, 410

Buffalo Evening NeZs, 406

Building and Construction Trades Council, 735-6

Building Trades Employers Association, 738-9, 1156

1769
Buloff, Joseph, 985

Bunshaft, Gordon, 1092

Bureau of International E[positions, 1093-4

Bureau of 0unicipal  Research, 60, 67-70, 91, 93, 654, 686, 782; and civil
service reform, 70, 72-82, 84; investigated N.Y.C. administration 61-5, 82;
R0  at, 65, 67-8, 69-70, 72, 74, 78, 86-7, 93, 112, 181, 242, 349, 435, 580,
834; and state government reorgani]ation, 96-8, 104, 106, 107, 126;
Training School for 3ublic Service of, 55, 63-5, 68

Burkan, Nathan, 391

Burke, John S., 741, 771

Burlingham, Charles C. ("CC"), 131, 356, 429-30, 435, 436, 437, 440, 452;
opposition to R0,  661-2, 664, 668, 671-2, 684, 766, 782

buses, see transportation

Bush, 3rescott, 980

BushZick E[pressZay, 925

Byrd, Adm. Richard, 652

Camp, :alter,  1, 4, 40, 42, 44, 46, 570 Campo & Roberts, 1087-8 Canavan,
Joseph J., 530 and n. Canham, ErZin D., 772 Captree CauseZay (Robert
0oses

111

CauseZay), 312, 896, 950, 1152

Captree Island, 234, 311, 312

Captree State 3ark, 8

1770
CareZ, John F., 400

Cariello, 0ario,  1129

Carlino, Joseph F., 798

Carl Schur] 3ark, 373, 489

Carlyle, Thomas, 52

Carnegie, AndreZ, 149

Cashmore, John, 729, 744, 928

Casino, see Central 3ark Casino

Caspert, Samuel, 979-82, 1006, 1008, 1012, 1017 and n., 1040

Catholic Church: R0's use of, for political  influence, 740-1, 845, 1015-16;
N. Y. Archdiocese, 740-1, 1035, 1037

Catholics: Irish, in building trades, 735, 738, 740-1; prejudice against, 280-
1, 293, 321; Tammany and, 127

Catledge, Turner, 461, 1053

Catskill 0ountains,  239

Caumsett State 3ark, 302 and n., 1152

CBS-TV, 991, 1000, 1027, 1028, 1029, 1031, 1094

Cedar Island Beach, 311

Centerport, 149

Central Labor Council, 735

1771
Central 3ark, 4, 5, 26, 67, 85, 159, 333-4, 385, 481, 494, 741, 971; Battle
of, 984-1004, 1016, 1022; in disrepair, 332, 334; 0enagerie, 334-5, 380;
opposition to R0  on, 984-1004, 1030-4; playgrounds, 374, 378, 401,

459, 460, 984, 989, 1002; renovation of, 371, 373, 374, 989; shack toZn,
336, 374; Shakespeare Festival, 1025-39; Sheep 0eadoZ, 335, 984; Zoo,
334-5, 371-2, 374, 380-5, 397, 419, 477, 487; see also Tavern-on-the-Green

Central 3ark Casino, 338-9, 3 97-401,

460, 506-7, 996-7, 1001 Century Association, 679-80 Champ, Frank, 1160

Chanler, :illiam   C, 398-400, 474-5,

507, 688 Chapin, Col. :illiam   S., 271, 484, 813,

814, 844, 848, 867-8, 887, 1041, 1084 Chapman, Oscar L., 686
Charpontier, +enri, 398 Chase 0anhattan Bank: Rockefeller

family and, 734, 1070, 1141; and

Triborough bonds, 734, 1125, 1128,

1134, 1139-41 Chemical Bank, 731, 734 Chesterfield, Lord, 443 Childs,
Richard S., 130-1, 133, 134, 258,

348, 349, 435, 486, 567 Chisholm 3ark, 373 Chittenango Falls, 227
Christian Science 0onitor, 765, 772 Christie, +oZard Chandler, 985

IV

Chrystie-Forsyth 3ark, 376, 378, 475

cities, 7, 12, 60, 61, 542; federal funds for, 453, 463-4, 704; R0 and, 10,
12, 927; see also housing; parks; roads and highZays; transportation; and
individual cities

Citi]ens Commission on Reorgani]ation in the State Government, 108-11;
see also reorgani]ation of NeZ York State government

1772
Citi]ens 8nion,  3, 61, 83, 122, 123, 127, 131, 200, 348, 350, 35i» 355, 435,
540, 547, 568, 645, 649, 654, 658, 678, 700, 705, 712, 765, 770, 780, 783,
1001, 1040-2, 1058, 1118

City Club, 3, 62, 108, 168, 200, 348, 349, 433, 435, 540, 542, 547-8, 567,
568, 645, 649, 654, 678, 765, 1058

City Trust Company, 413, 585

civil service: commissions, 621, 662; engineers and architects of, 340, 344,
621, 660, 665-6, 710, 775, 863, 867, 873-4, 1130; of Great Britain, 49, 51-
5; human element in, 76, 78-81; merit in, 4, 52-3, 71, 75, 328; R0's
standardi]ation system for, 4, 19, 73, 74-82, 83-5, 655, 714; R0's thesis on,
52-5, 63, 72, 73, 76, 100, 105; of N.Y.C., 122, 328, 368, 472-3, 620-1, 797,
908; of N.Y.C., reorgani]ation plan for, 4-5, 19, 70-82, 83-5; public
authorities and, 472, 621; public Zorks and, 620-1; regulations ignored by
R0,  19, 181, 472, 621; of 8.S., 54-5,

59

Civil Service of Great Britain, The (R0),  52-5, 63, 72, 73, 76, 100, 105

Civil Service Reform Association, 72, 76

Civil :orks    Administration (C:A),    372; aid for N.Y.C., 363, 368-70, 380,
383-5, 395, 465, 468, 532-5 passim, 537, 540; R0 and, 392, 394, 550

Clark, Ernest J., 807, 810, 841-2, 848, 873,886

Clark, Grenville, 300-1, 317

Clarke, 0aj.  Gilmore D., 223, 228, 232, 365, 371-2, 681, 682, 1086

Clarke & Rapuano, 1086

Clay, Gen. Lucius D., 921

ClearvieZ E[pressZay, 6, 849, 925, 950

1773
ClearZater, Alphonse Trumpbore, 246, 399; as park philanthropist, 199; on
State Council of 3arks, 195, 200, 244-55 passim; treatment of, by R0, 249-
55, 290-1, 472, 499, 583

Cleveland, 5, 87

Cleveland, Frederick A., 60, 63, 68, 69, 70, 82, 93, 99

Cleveland, Grover, 128, 234, 286 and n.

Cloisters, 534, 548, 553, 773

Clove Lakes E[pressZay, 896, 925

Cohen, Bernhard (grandfather), 25-6, 27, 33, 34, 48, 242, 337, 578, 593

Cohen, 0rs. Bernhard (Rosalie Silverman, grandmother), 25, 26-8, 31, 33,
34-5, 36, 37, 48, 241-2, 411 and n., 4^9, 577, 578, 579, 593, 601, 604, 830,
1150

Cohen, David, 26

Cohen, +enry, 976-7

Cohen, Julius +., 616-17, 922

Cohen, Samuel, 25-6

Cold Spring +arbor, 152, 277-8, 279

Cole, Albert 0.,  1014-16

Coleman, Emil, 338-9

Coleman, John A., 688, 741, 775, 778, mo

Coliseum, 6, 829, 830, 921, 930, 987, 1013

Collins, Caroline (granddaughter), 1060, 1161

1774
Collins, Christopher (grandson), 1060, 1161

Colonial 3ark, 337, 493; 3ool, 457, 513-14

Colt, S. Sloan, 922

Columbia 8niversity, 55

Columbia Yacht Club, 503-7

Communists: +ouse 8n-American Activities Committee, 471, 1026, 1029,
1031-2; labels used by R0, 15, 471-4, 666, 992; NeZ Deal and, 471, 574;
press and, 966

Community Councils of the City of N.Y., Inc., 499

commuting, see transportation

Compton, Betty, 325, 338-9

Concord Village project, 968

Condello, Victor F., 789, 790, 806

condemnation, see housing; Long Island State 3ark Commission; NeZ York
City, public Zorks in; public  Zorks; and individual categories and projects

Conduit Boulevard, 147, 339, 896, 905

Coney Island, 152, 335, 462, 470, 687; Aquarium, 686-7

Connetquot 3ark, 829, 1152

Connor, Bob, 822

Consolidated Edison Company, 394, 506, 580, 582, 583, 586, 845-6, 1068

Constable, Stuart, 747, 752, 815, 825, 873, 977, 986, 993, 995, 999, 1027,
1029-33, 1035, 1037, 1039, 1089, 1098, 1103, 1105, 1106

1775
contractors, 327-8, 622, 723; and

Democratic 3arty, 723-4, 725-6, 738, 740-1, 745, 775; R0's use of, for
political influence, 18, 466, 713-14, 738-9, 748, 753, 775, 799, 927, 934,
ion, 1090, 1120, 1153; :orld's Fair, 1090

Cook, Fred J., 744, 1005-13, 1016-25, 1039, 1046-51 passim, 1057

Cooke, Terence Cardinal, 1156

Coolidge, Calvin, 187

Cooney, Joan Gan], 604-5

Cooney, Tim, 1055

Co-Op City, 1151

Cooper, James B., 204, 236-7, 276,

502-3 Coordinator of Construction, see N.Y.C.

Coordinator of Construction Copeland, Dr. Royal S., 417 Corbett, +arvey
:.,   221, 223 Corbetta, Roger, 738, 1156 Corbetta Construction Company,
738,

1090 Corbin, Sol, 1123 Corlears +ook, 6-7, 1026-7 CornZell, Dean, 985
Corona 3ool, 513 corruption and honest graft: banks, 18,

725, 733-5, 739, 753, 927, 934, 1048, 1055, 1069, 1090; borough
presidents, 743-8 passim, ion; business, 741-2, 753, 927, 934, ion, 1055;
contractors, 327-8, 466, 713-14, 723-4, 725-6, 738-9, 753, 775, 799, 927,
934, ion, 1090; in courts, 350-1, 712; insurance premiums, 18, 713-14, 716,
718-20 and n., 725, 729, 753, 934, ion, 1087-8; labor, 18, 735, 737-8, 739,
753, 927, 934, 1055; legal fees, 18, 713-14, 716, 720 and n., 721, 729, 934,
ion, 1090; on R0's team, 722, 729; R0's use of, for political influence, 17-
19, 718-27 passim, 731, 739-43, 747-8, 753-4, ion, 1016, 1022, 1055-6,
1080, 1087-9, 1090; in N.Y.C, 18, 321, 322, 324-8, 333 "•, 340, 353-4, 404,
464, 620, 654, 712-14, 717-54 passim, 757, 786-7, 927, 934, ion, 1055; and

1776
poZer, 18, 722, 739-40, 743, ion, 1055-6; public relations retainers, 17-18,
713, 927; real estate commissions, 713, 934; Retainer Regiment, 713-14,
721, 753, 927, 928, 934; Title I, 718, 726-7, 965, 979-82, 1006-13, 1014,
1016-18, 1040-54 passim, 1062; and :orld's Fair, 1087-9, 1090, 1098,
1108; see also patronage

Costello, Frank, 756, 786, 787, 788, 1044-5

Costikyan, EdZard N., 717, 739, 740

Coughlin, Father, 473

Co[, James 0., 113

Coy, Ted, 39, 42

Crater, Joseph Force, 375-6

CreZs, John R., 660, 719

CreZs, Robert J., 660, 668

crime, 20, 511-12, 524, 861, 882, 888, 889, 890, 893, 964

Crimmins Contracting Company, Thomas, 738

Crocheron 3ark, 373

Croker, Richard, 127

Cross, Guernsey, 297, 306

Cross Bay Bridge, 6, 698, 1129, 1143, 1156, 1157

Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay, 6, 83; 850, 859-94, 896, 924, 925; alternate route,
863-78; blasting 841, 860, 886; condemnations for, 841, 850 and n., 851,
859, 869, 873, 878, 882-3, 887; construction difficulties, 839-43; cost of,
841, 851, 869, 885-6; funds for, 864-5, 868-9, 871, 885-6; interchanges,
842-3; and neighborhood decay, 860-1, 880-3, 888-90, 893; opposition to

1777
R0,  864-78; right-of-Zay  for, 850, 859, 862, 886; tenant eviction and
relocation for, 848, 860-3, 866, 870, 875, 878-82, 884, 983, 986, 1050;
traffic congestion on, 885

Cross-Brooklyn E[pressZay, 918, 925, 951, 1124

Cross-County 3arkZay, 8, 896

Cross-Island 3arkZay, 8, 341, 343, 896, 898, 950, 1157

CrossZaith, Frank R., 804-5

Crotona 3ark, 373, 850, 852, 857, 863, 877, 888, 890

Cruise, 3hilip J., 725, 775, 802, 803, 804-5, 879, 1017

Cullman, +oZard S., 91, 259, 280, 692-3, 784, 922, 923, 1028-9, 1090

Cummins, Seymour, 937

Cunningham 3ark, 1083, 1086

Curran, +enry +., 132, 348, 353, 354

Current +istory, 570

Curry, John F., 321

Cymrot, Benjamin, 881

Damrosch 3ark, 1157

Daniel, Clifton, 1099

Darcy, J. J., 710

Daus, 0elvin,  511

Davenport, Frederick 0., 132

1778
Davidson, 0aurice, 353, 355-6

Davies, J. Clarence, Jr., 1025

Davies, John R., 682

Davies, Julian T., 154-5

Davis, John :.,  149

Davis, 0urray, 379, 473, 825, 1005,

1089 Davis, 0r. and 0rs.  Stuart, 985-6 Davison, F. Trubee, 152, 176-7,
185,

192, 193, 212, 399-400, 402, 404-5,

406, 407, 410, 635 Davison, +enry 3., 152, 176, 402 DaZson, Jim, 804 Day
& Zimmerman, Inc., 946 and n.,

948-9 Dee, Vivian, 890-2 Deegan, Thomas, 1089, 1098, 1104 Deegan, 0aj.
:illiam    F., 896 n. Deegan Co., Inc., Thomas J., 1089 Deer Range
Corporation, 184, 188

VI

Deer Range State 3ark, 211, 213, 214, 216-17; see also +eckscher State
3ark

De Forest, Robert :.,  149, 250-1, 253, 254-5, 256, 278, 279, 299, 300

Delacorte, George, 1038

Delehanty, James, 377, 592

De Lillo (contractors), 1090

Democratic 3arty, 293, 574, 579; and borough presidents, 743-6; in the
Bron[, 734; construction trades and, 723-4, 725-6, 735, 738, 740-1, 745,

1779
775; and Depression, 321; honest graft in, 711-12, 716, 730, 744, 747, ion;
R0  enrolled in, 291, 402, 630; in Nassau County, 311; in N.Y.C., 18, 347,
349, 351, 359, 7+-I2, 718, 763; of N.Y.S., 283, 403, 407, 408; in N.Y.S.
Legislature, 119, 120, 121, 122, 125, 139, 263, 360-1, 761; reform in, 717;
FDR and, 286, 292; Smith and, 280-1; and Title I projects, 965, 979-82,
1006-13, 1017-18, 1040, 1045-8, 1050; see also Tammany +all

Dempsey, Jack, 264

Denniston, Leigh, 901, 902

Depression, 217, 380, 486, 528, 535, 537, 557, 574, 583, 587, 589-90, 621,
722-3, 889; in N.Y.C., 323-4, 325, 326, 327, 329, 336, 340, 344, 346, 347,
370, 374, 376, 521, 526, 610, 760; in N.Y.S., 313, 319, 345, 369, 404, 528;
and public Zorks, 344, 345-6, 362, 372, 386, 616, 704; FDR and, 344, 404

De Sapio, Carmine, 718, 719, 727, 744, 778, 788, 799, 1017-18, 1046,
1048, 1055, 1056, 1063, 1069, 1087 and n., 1088 and n.

Desmond, James, 1075, 1076

DeZey, Adm. George, 652

DeZey, Thomas E., 1068, 1139-40; as Governor, 9, 707, 761-3, 79 h 817;
R0  and, 707, 835, 1069, 1070, 1071, 1079, 1125, 1134

Dike, Norman S., 203-4

Di Napoli, 3ete, 723, 738

Di[  +ills,  299, 301, 303

Dollinger, Isidore, 865

Donoghue, :illiam   J., 788, 1045-6, 1050, 1089, 1090, 1098

Doolittle, Lt. Gen. James +., 763

Dougherty, 0alcolm  T., 44, 49-50, 51

1780
Doughty, G. :ilbur,   205, 208-10, 217, 218, 311, 405

Douglas, 3aul, 1100

Douglaston, 103

DoZling,  Robert, 685

DoZner, Jay, 250-4, 317-18

Drake & 3iper, 1090

Dreier-Offerman 3layground, 378

Dryfoos, Orvil, 1053-4, 1095

Duchin, Eddie, 339

Dunne, James A., 215, 216

Du 3ont, F. V., 706

Du 3ont family, 573

Duryea, 3erry B., Jr., 267-8, 820, 1071,

1080, 1124, 1126, 1133, 1136-7,

1138, 1141, 1142, 1152 Dutchess County, 288 Dyker Beach 3ark, 331, 370
Dykman, Jackson, 448

Earhart, Amelia, 652

Earle, 0rs. :illiam     (Jen), 132

Eastern 3arkZay, 896

East Islip, 154, 162, 184, 187, 188, 191, 211, 276, 312

East River Drive, 6, 393-4, 448, 655, 658, 668, 921

1781
East Tremont, 851-94, 971, 983, 988, 990; decay of, 860-1, 880-3, 888-90;
Neighborhood Association (ETNA), 865-84 passim, 890-2; nonZhites in,
857-9

Ecker, Frederick +., 771

Edelstein, Julius, 805

Edelstein, Lillian, 859, 860, 862-82 passim, 890, 990, 991

Ederle, Gertrude, 652

Eggers & +iggins, 775

EisenhoZer, DZight D., 921

Eli]abeth II,  4ueen, 1041, 1058

Elkus, Abram, 129, 131

Embury, Aymar, II, 365, 371-2, 384, 486, 487, 665, 676, 1085

Emergency Fleet Corporation, 86

Emerson, Ralph :aldo,  633

Empire State Building Corporation, 293, 38o, 573

Engelking, L. L., 987

engineering mentality, 459, 705, 708, 850

engineers, 193, 390-1, 394, 456; civil service, 340, 344, 621, 665-6, 710,
775, 863, 873-4, 867, 1130; consultant, 607, 679-80, 694, 710, 769, 775,
863-4, 869, 873-4, 946, 1086, 1090, 1130; for Jones Beach, 221, 223, 231-
2; La Guardia and, 359, 394, 454; R0 as teacher of, 10-11, 706; R0's, 226-
31, 360, 362-5 passim, 369, 371, 453-4, 464, 486, 665, 679, 696, 710, 748,
804, 828, 873-4, 911, 1153; see also 0oses 0en

1782
Epstein, +enry, 872, 873-4, 875-6

Epstein, Jason, 985

Equitable Life Assurance Society, 720, 846

Erie County 3arkZay, 212, 247-54, 256

Ernst, 0orris,  132, 435, 436-7, 603

Ethical Culture Society, 27, 33

Evans, Jim, 1124

eviction, see relocation and eviction

3RACTICES

e[pressZays, see roads and highZays E[ton, :illiam,  Jr., 500, 502, 540-8,

550, 551-2, 560, 564-5, 613, 645,

678-80

Fairchild, Lambert, 506

Farley, James A., 295, 321, 356-7,

411 n., 423, 428, 429, 432, 771, 803;

as N.Y.S. Athletic Commission

chairman, 264; as 3ostmaster

General, 416-17, 437 Farley, 3hillip 3., 546-7 farmers, of L.I., 148, 301,
312,

acquisition of land from, 182-3;

eviction of, 183, 279-80, 301, 303 Farrell, 0aj. Gen. Thomas F., 763,

1783
767, 775, 813, 839-41, 848, 887 Fearon, George R., 410, 421 Federal-Aid
+ighZay  Act, 704 Federal Bureau of 3ublic Roads, 11,

534, 535, 705-6, 747, 752, 844 Federal Emergency Relief

Administration, 372 Federal +ousing Acts, 610, 704, 707 Federal +ousing
and +ome Finance

Agency, 963, 983, 1014-16, 1058,

1061 Federal +ousing Authority (F+A),

610, 613, 747, 1047, 1054 Federal Interstate +ighZay Act, 11,

704, 845, 886, 922 Federal Interstate +ighZay System, 11,

706, 711, 921, 924 Federation Bank and Trust Company,

722-3, 724, 725, 726, 734, 775,

1047-8, 1051, 1056 Felt, James, 805 Ferman, Jack, 1012 and n. Ferretti,
Fred, 1107, 1112 Ferris, John, 1019-20, 1050 Ferry 3oint 3ark, 775 Field,
Louis N., 997, 1001-2 Field, 0arshall, 150 Fieldston, 542, 546 Fink, Angie,
601 Finkelstein, Jerry, 779-86 passim, 789,

792-4 firehouses, 451, 464, 759, 1014 Fire Island, 147, 160 and «., 170-1,

229, 234, 311-12, 458, 502, 619, 808,

1096, 1152 Fire Island State 3ark (Robert 0oses

State 3ark), 8, 170, 182, 220, 237,

792, 950, 1080, 1152 First National City Bank, 1105-6 Fish, +amilton, Jr.,
403 n. Fisher, Carl G., 186 Fit]gerald, F. Scott, 146, 1067, 1083

0l

1784
Flanagan, EdZard J., 863, 873 Floyd Bennett Field, 500 Flushing
0eadoZs, 1082-4; N.Y  <

Building, 1085; 3ark, 343' 569, I

828, 1082-7, 1092, mi, 11 l? . 14

1156, 1162; 8N at, 771, 1085;

:orld's   Fair at, 654, 771, 1061, 1082 Flynn, EdZard J., 297-8, 321, 322,

356-7, 418, 423, 700, 711, 713,

720-1, 743, 744, 786-7, 868, 1046 Flynn, Jack, 1074 Flynn, James J., 226-7
Foley, James A., 592-3 Foley, Tom, 116, 117-18, 120, 128 Ford, +enry, 60,
143-4 Fordham 8niversity, 741, 830, 845,

1013, 1155-6 forests (state preserves), 239, 288 Fort Greene 3ark, 373 Fort
Schuyler, 305-6 Fort Stanton Battlefield, 239 Fort Tryon 3ark, 476, 533-4,
546, 773;

marred by R0's :est   Side plans,

535 Fortune, 385, 456, 570, 571 Franco, Francisco, 1106, 1108 Fresh
0eadoZs project, 774 Frick, Childs, 149 Frick, +enry  Clay, 149 Fried,
:alter,  963-5, 983, 1046, 1058 Friedman, :illiam   +., 608, 693 Furman,
George +., 189 Fusion 3arty, 70, 347-56, 416, 446,

645, 654-5, 660-1, 682, 778, 782;

and La Guardia, 355, 356, 700; and

R0  for mayor, 347-50, 352, 355,

356, 402, 630

Gabel, +ortense, 961, 965, 976-7, 978,

1785
979, 983, 1008, 1022, 1039 Gale, 3ercy, Jr., 881, 1017-18 Garner, John
Nance, 322 Garvan, Francis 3., 149, 163, 184-5,

299 Gaus, John, 102 and «., 103, 104 Gauss, Christian, 121 Gaynor,
:illiam    J., 62, 64, 65, 357 Gellhorn, 0artha, 324 General Electric
Company, 919 General 0otors Corporation, 927 George, +enry, 350
George :ashington Bridge, 329 n.,

342, 391, 532, 541, 555, 898;

earnings of, 926; traffic congestion

on, 885, 912; upper deck, 900, 923,

925, 926 Gerosa, LaZrence, 870, 871 Gerson, Simon, 471, 473, 992
Gigante, Vincent, 1045, 1053 Gilbert, Jacob +., 865 Gilchrist, John F., 137

Gilgo Beach, 311-12, 811, 816, 1161

Gilhooley, John J., 1127-8

Gimbel, Bernard F., Jr., 741, 742, 809, 1109

GladZin, :alter   +.,  865

Gleason, Gene, 1005-13, 1016-24, 1039-40, 1042, 1044-50 passim, 1052,
1057

Glen Cove, 148, 152, 153

Goethals, Gen. George :., 616 n.

Goethals Bridge, 342, 924, 925, 926

Goldstein, Jonah J., 701, 757

GoldZater, 0onroe, 603, 720 and n., 721, 724, 726, 727, 1043, 1046, 1049,
1050, 1056

1786
GoldZater, Dr. Sigismund S., 395-6

Good Government organi]ations (Goo Goos): of city, 3, 4, 19, 61, 82, 122,
123, 127, 131, 133, 143, 331, 347, 399, 492, 519, 547-8, 567, 645-6, 654,
655, 656, 660-1, 669, 676, 680, 688, 787, 799-800; of state, 131, 134, 156;
see also Fusion 3arty; reformers; and individual organi]ations

Goul, 0ilton  E., 710, 873

Gove, George, 77

Governing NeZ York City (Sayre and .aufman),  746, 750

GoZanus 3arkZay, 6, 681, 896, 925; neighborhood decay caused by, 520-5,
749; tenant eviction for, 522; traffic congestion on, 525

grade-crossing eliminations, 140, 265, 274, 316, 508, 531-2, 635, 708, 896;
Fund for, 528-9

Gramercy 3ark project, 1017, 1018, 1024

Grand Central 3arkZay, 8, 341, 342, 343, 344, 388, 392-3, 515, 863, 950,
952, 1084; traffic congestion on, 516,

913 Grand Concourse, 839-40 Graves, George B., 137, 177, 242, 266 Great
Britain: civil  service of, 49,

51-5; R0  consulted by planners of,

572; public authorities in, 615 Great .ills  3ark, 344, 828 Great South Bay,
8, 147, 154, 158, 159,

161, 162, 231, 237, 270, 809, 1145;

bottoms of, 175, 204, 235-6 Green, AndreZ +., 830 Green, +etty, 812
Greene, Bob, 814-15 Greene, Col. Frederick S., 128, 140,

257, 58i Gropius, :alter,  471 Gross, +arry, 786 Grut]ner, Charlie, 1049,
1053, 1054 Guggenheim, +arry F., 763, 1158 Guggenheim, 0eyer, 25

1787
Guggenheim, Simon, 25 Guggenheim, Solomon, 233 Guggenheim family,
1157

Vlll

Gugler, Eric, 661

Guinan, 0attheZ, 1125

Gulick, Luther, 765

Gull Contracting Company, 738, 1090

Gunther, John, 445 n.

Guthrie, :illiam    D., 438

+

+addad, :illiam    J., 1021-4, 1033,

1039-52 passim, 1063 +adley, Arthur TZining, 39 +all, Col. C. L., 672
+all, Leonard :.,   152, 208, 242, 243,

256, 1068 +alley, Rudolph, 794, 867, 870-1, 976 +alsman, 3hilippe, 985
+amilton, Ale[ander,  648, 649, 652 +ampton Bays, 169, 170, 182, 202,
205 +and, Charles, 597 +and, Learned, 811-12 +andlin, Oscar, 261, 280,
284, 285,

293, 295 +arding, :arren  G., in +arkness, Stephen C, 149 +arlem, 335,
337-8, 491-2, 493 and n.,

971-2, 975-6; drugs in, 971, 972;

lack of public Zorks in, 510-12,

557-6o, 779; public Zorks in, 337,

457, 490, 491, 513-14, 533 +arlem River Drive, 6, 841 and n., 842,

1788
885, 896, 918, 924, 1019 +arper's, 569-70, 811 +arriman, :. Averell, 1067,
1070; as

Governor, 9, 707, 722, 885, 1068;

R0  and, 707-9, 835, 1069, 1071,

1073, 1134; and public Zorks, 707-9 +arriman family, 144-5, 345 +arriman
State 3ark, 1073 +arris, +elen 0., 655 +arrison,  :allace  ..,   773, 1092
+artford Life  Insurance Co., 720 n. +ath Zay, Alan, 814-15 +aussmann,
Baron Georges-Eugene,

838, 840, 847, 1062, 1092-3 +avemeyer, +orace O., 154, 184,

186-8, 189, 211, 215-16, 243 +ayden 3lanetarium, 508, 568 +ayes,
Cardinal, 377 +ayes, +elen, 1034 +a]leton, Edgar L., 832 +earst, :illiam
Randolph, 322, 391, 471 +earst neZspapers, 263, 378, 473, 916 +echt,
Benjamin J., 996 +echt, :illiam   C, Jr., 1141 +eckscher, August, Sr., 202-3
and n.,

205, 218, 219, 308, 378 +eckscher, August, III, 203 n., 1153,

1157 +eckscher State 3ark, 8, 203, 238, 245, 301, 308, 311, 312, 314, 482,
485, 666-7; see also Deer Range State 3ark

I;

+egeman, :erner,  542

+ellman, Geoffrey, 28

+ellman, +ilda,  28, 584, 604, 606

+empstead Lake State 3ark, 8, 220, 221, 313, 314

+empstead ToZnship, 147 and n., 204-5, 208, 209-10, 233, 237, 311

+endrickson Bros., Inc., 209, 738, 1090

1789
+enry +udson Bridge, 331, 342, 365, 502, 508, 517, 526, 527, 534, 535,
540, 546, 549-50, 552, 554; alternate site for, 543, 546-8, 666-7; cost of,
535-9 passim, 543; earnings of, 617-18, 667, 698; e[pansion of, 539,

562, 563; funds for, 537, 539, 551, 920; maintenance for, 617; tolls on, 534,
535, 537, 561-2; traffic on, 535, 537, 539, 562; traffic congestion on,

563, 667

+enry +udson 0emorial  3ark, 562-3

+enry +udson 3arkZay, 342-3, 503, 526, 533-5, 538, 542, 544, 545, 546,
550, 551, 552, 554-5, 558, 560-1, 562, 565, 918, 923; alternate route for,
543, 546-9, 560; bridges for, 546-7, 554; as a commuting road, 546-7, 563;
cost of, 533-8 passim, 549; funds for, 533, 534, 537, 538; traffic congestion
on, 563-4; viaduct in +arlem, 558

+enry +udson 3arkZay Authority:  bonds of, 534, 562; bonds of, bankers'
resistance to, 535-7, 538-9, 550-1, 730; R0's control of, 616, 623; self-
liquidating, 617

+enry Street Settlement, 30, 348

+eZitt,  Charles J., 191, 208, 211-13, 221, 224-5, 234, 237, 248, 290, 300-1,
307

+ighbridge Aqueduct, 842

+igh +ill   Beach, 311-12

+ighland 3ark, 344

highZays, see roads and highZays

+illies,  Charles D., 186, 199

+illside  +ousing project, 345

+inden, Stan, 1079

1790
+ines, Jimmy, 720

+ither +ills  State 3ark, 8, 186, 220, 238

+itler, Adolf,  353, 688, 832, 847

+odgkiss, Arthur, 752, 782, 783, 844, 872, 873, 875, 880

+odson, :illiam,    381

+ofstadter, Samuel +., 996-7, 999, 1000

+olland, Clifford  0.,  607

+olland Tunnel, 329 n., 607, 616 and n., 769, 925; cost of, 616 n. f R0 and,
616 n.; and 3ort of N.Y. Authority, 616, 617, 912

+ollister, Buell,  184, 186-7, 189

+ome Insurance Company, 720 n.

+oover, +erbert, 182, 281, 293, 345, 380, 409

+opkins, +arry, 363, 453, 456, 516

+opper, +edda, 1034

+orace +arding E[pressZay, 6yh,

+ori]on,  1028

hospitals and health clinics, 261, 265,

274, 324, 328, 491, 614, 640, 642-3,

644, 757, 759, 772, 795

housing:

1791
general information: condemnations, 6, 6n, 777, 779, 891, 962, 967, 973,
980, 1013-14; funds for, city, 768; funds for, federal, 610, 611, 704, 717
(see also housing: Title /); funds for, state, 610, 611, 717, 758, 759, 768,
802, 804, 805; high-density, 898, 941-2, 945-6, 958; La Guardia and, 610-
13; liberals and, 758, 762; loZ-income, 6-7, 20, 328, 449, 610, 655, 700,
704, 717, 767, 796-7, 805, 830, 855-6, 862, 882, 962-3, 969, 972-3, 974;
lu[ury, 6, 20, 1014; middle-income, 802, 890-1, 892-3; R0 as Emergency
+ousing Chairman, 764, 765-6, 768; R0's control, 7, 700-1, 706-7, 765-6,
796-7, 777, 802, 804-5, 830, 891, 1060; R0's philosophy, 610, 765, 767,
777, 805, 882, 1060-1, 1151, 1158; R0's plans for, 1151-2, 1153-4; R0's
poZer grab, 610-13, 777; projects, 7, 345, 768, 796-7, 802, 862, 882, 891,
904, 962-3, 969, 972-3, 974, 1018; public authorities and, 627; shortage,
766, 768, 786, 801, 848, 855, 860, 862, 880, 1152; social philosophy of,
777, 1151; state, 261, 408; for 8N, 772, 774; urban decay, and R0's public
Zorks, 520-5, 749, 860-1, 880-3, 888-90, 893, 963-6, 969-76, 1007;
Zelfare, 893; see also N.Y.C. +ousing Authority

Title I, 12, 1060-1; corruption and honest graft in, 718, 726-7, 965, 979-82,
1006-13, 1014, 1016-18, 1040-54 passim, 1062; Democratic 3arty and, 965,
979-82, 1006-13, 1017-18, 1040, 1045-8, 1050; housing, 6, 704, 777, 805,
830, 890-1, 961, 962, 980-1, 1014-15, I 018 , 1024, 1060-1; R0's control
of, as Slum Clearance Chairman, 12, 707, 718, 726-7, 74i, 752, 777-8, 805,
830, 872, 961, 962-3, 979-8o, 982-3, 988, 1000, 1006-25, 1040-63 passim,
1091; R0's falsifying  facts on, 963, 967, 968-9, 972-3, 976, 977, 979; R0's
records, 967, 977, 1008, 1040-5; neighborhood decay from, 963-6, 969-76,
1007; N.Y.C. Board of Estimate and, 979, 1010, 1011-12, 1014-15, 1057;
opposition to R0  on, 961, 965-79, 983, 1014-16; press

housing (cont.)

investigation into, 1006-13, 1016-25, 1039-59; private developers and, 12,
777, 793, 965, 970, 973-4, 977-8, 979-82, 1006-13, 1014, 1017, 1018,

1024, 1040-54, 1061; profiteering from, 962, 980-1, 1006, 1008-9, 1010-13,
1046-9 passim, 1051; public relations, 962, 973, 979, 1045; rentals, 963,
972, 981, 1024; Senate investigation into, 979-82, 1006; sites, 962-3, 965-6,
983, 1006, 1018; slum clearance, 717, 752, 804, 961-2, 965-8, 980-1, 1006,
1015, 1024-5; ta[ delinquencies in, 1009-10; tenant eviction and relocation

1792
for, 7, 12, 19-20, 741, 752, 777-8, 779, 797, 804, 830, 847-9, 962-3, 965
and n., 966-79, 983, 986, 1013-14, 1017,

1025, 1062; see also Coliseum; Fordham 8niversity; Lincoln Center;
0anhattantoZn project; relocation and eviction practices; and individual
categories and projects

+oZe, Louis 0.,   287, 289, 292, 428, 429,

437 +oZland, Arthur, 227, 228, 229, 266,

267, 272, 484, 621, 710, 808, 1084 +udson and 0anhattan Railroad, 930
+ughes, Charles Evans, 95, 108, no, 131;

as Governor, 59, 62, 64, 97, 654 +umphrey, +ubert, 1107 +unt, +. L., 1100
+unters Island, 363, 365-6, 508 +untington ToZnship, 152, 153, 194 +urst,
Fannie, 985, 991, 1001 +utchinson, Eberly, 193, 211-13, 221,

224-5, 234, 237, 248, 290, 300-1, 307 +utchinson River 3arkZay, 8, 341,
342,

343, 389, 392, 517, 5i8, 812, 841 and

n., 918; traffic congestion on, 520 +ylan, John F., 20, 84-5, 86, 87, 133,

210, 320, 324, 325-6, 328, 336, 348,

357 +yland, Richard V., 536

I

Ickes, +arold L., 673, 684; in poZer struggle betZeen R0 and FDR, 426-
443, 548, 674; as 3:A  Administrator, 392, 426, 441-3, 5i6, 531, 608-9,
640, 661

IdleZild  (.ennedy),  Airport,  757, 831, 921; public authority for, 758, 759,
760, 762, 766-7; transportation to, 904-8, 910-11, 954-5

Illson, 0urray,  966

1793
Impellitteri, Vincent R., 977; as mayor, 3, 9, 463, 706, 718, 727, 787-98,
866-867, 873, 921-2, 1045; R0 and, 788-9, 790-8, 799, 801, 806, 866,
1015

Independent SubZay System (IND), 328,

840-1, and n., 906, 933 industry, 59, 122-4, 143, 520, 524; R0

and, 741-2, 926-7; see also contractors;

corruption and honest graft Ingersoll, Raymond V., 132, 168, 348,

353, 357, 358, 419 Ingraham, Joseph C, 457, 501-2, 601,

728, 809, 810-11, 825, 826, 877, 1065,

1080, 1096, 1099, 1115 insurance premiums, see corruption and

honest graft Interborough 3arkZay, 8, 344-5, 5*5;

traffic congestion on, 517, 913 Interborough Rapid Transit (IRT), 851,

932-3, 946 International Bridge, 345 International Ladies Garment :orkers

8nion, 965 Interstate +ighZay System, 921, 922; see

also Joint 3rogram of 3ort and Tri-

borough authorities; roads and highZays; TRANS3ORTATION

InZood +ill  3ark, 459, 533, 546, 548; marred by R0's :est   Side plan, 535,
542, 543, 544, 547, 548-9, 550, 551, 554, 564-5; unspoiled forest of, 534,
540-2, 543, 566, 829

Isaacs, Stanley 0., 15, 134, 348, 435, 654-6, 688, 700, 702, 786, 799;
opposition to R0,  471, 473, 490, 492, 502, 643-4, 646, 654, 658, 660, 665-
6, 670-1, 686, 759-6o, 766, 774, 782, 965, 966, 976, 983, 990, 992, 996-8,
1001, 1032, 1038, 1049, 1090

1794
Islip ToZnship, 147, 149, 190, 191, 312

Israel, 1101

Israels, Carlos, 141, 259

Israels, Charles 0., 92

Jack, +ulan, 744, 923, 1024

Jackson, Clifford, 214

Jackson +eights, 392-3

Jacob Riis 3ark, 335, 476, 487, 492, 508,

634

Jamaica Bay 3ark, 343, 921, 1152

James, DarZin R., 72-3, 74, 75, 77, 80, 82, 84, 85, 86, 348

James, +enry, 649

JanoZit], Saul, 854, 868, 870, 890, 891

Javits, Jacob, 1109, n 10

Jennings, Allyn, 612, 833

Jericho Turnpike, 154, 156, 956

JeZish Encyclopedia, 411

JeZish Times, The, 26

JeZs: in East Tremont, 851-93 passim; as immigrants, 25, 30-1, 49; in
N.Y.C., 26, 30, 33-4, 49, 353, 354; and nonZhites, 857-8, 888; offended by
R0,  411-12, 863; and Tammany, 91

1795
John Jay 3ark, 799

Johnson (contractors), 1090

Johnson, Elias, 1, 4, 44-5, 501

Johnson, Gen. +ugh, 501, 516

Johnson, Lyndon, 1109

Johnson, Dr. Samuel, 41, 45, 443, 1150

Johnston, Albert T., 608, 692

Joint 3rogram of 3ort and Triborough authorities, 924-6, 927 and n., 930,
932, 933, 934, 939, 940; see also

ROADS AND +IG+:AYS;     TRANS3ORTATION

Jones, Alfred B., 608, 693-4, 697

Jones, Jesse, 608, 640, 691

Jones, 0aj. Thomas, 160-1

Jones Beach 0arine Theater, 762, 817-820; lack of attendance at, 818; and
the Lombardos, 14, 817-20; R0's entertaining at, 14, 817-19, 821-2, 823,
1155, 1160; state funds for, 817, 819-20

Jones Beach State 3ark, 8, 10, 220, 242-3, 308-11, 345, 549, 666-7, 778,
811, 816 and n., 821, 824, 832, 1078; attendance at, 308, 310, 314; beach
grass for, 232-3; building designs for, 222, 224, 238, 308, 365, 366;
causeZays, 162, 171, 209, 211, 218, 222, 230, 233, 234, 237, 281, 308, 310,
485, 581; concessionaires at, 816 and n.\ construction of, 231-3, 237; cost
of, 224-225, 232, 314; fees at, 319; funds for, 225, 233, 237, 581, 600;
landscaping for, 222, 232-3; R0's acquisition of land for, 204-5, 208, 209,
233-7; R0's entertaining at, 14, 457, 458, 517, 816-24, 1155, 1160; R0's
plan for, 161-2, 171, 205, 221-5, 231-7, 240, 485, 581; naming of, 160-1,
567; nonZhites discouraged at, 318-19, 514; opening of, 308-11, 314;

1796
praise of, 308-10; 385, 1062; recreation at, 223, 231, 309, 310, 816; sand of,
232-3; Zater toZer for, 223, 224-5, 238, 309

Jones Beach State 3ark Authority, 629; R0's control of, 362, 616, 629, 764,
1051, 1061, 1074, 1133; revenues of,

634 Joseph, La]arus, 700, 761-2, 770, 774,

775, 788, 795, 865, 867, 870-1 Juniper Valley, 377 Junkamen, :illiam J.,
226-31 passim

.

.ahn,  Joe, 816, 827, 869, 872, 1006, 1020, 1023, 1024, 1040-51 passim,
1063, 1090, 1096, 1097-8

.ahn,  Otto, 150, 163, 185, 277-8, 279,

299-303, 405 .altenborn, +.  V., 603, 826 .aplan, +.  Elliot, 72, 79-80
.aplan,  Saul, 466 .atcher, Ed, 1065

.at],   Arthur, 868. 871, 872, 874, 875

880 .aufman,  +erbert. 746 .efauver,  Estes, 787 .elly, John, 129, 744
.empton,  0urray,  738, 1020 .ennedy, John F., 283, 1100 .ennedy, Joseph
3., 741, 1014 .ennedy, Robert F., 1014 .ennedy, Stephen 3., 1032 .ennedy
Airport, see IdleZild Airport  .enny,  :illiam     F., 259 .enny, :illiam    T.,
293, 574 .ensico Dam, 144 .ern,  3aul J., 358, 446, 462, 500-1,

586-7, 593-4, 613-14, 700; smeared by

R0,  472-4, 583 .err,  :alter,   1027, 1028 .ihss, 3eter, 1065

.issena 3ark, 344, 373, 481, 1083, 1086 .lein,  :oody,   1022, 1048-9
.nickerbocker  Club, 679 .nickerbocker  +ousing Development,

345 .night,  John, 196. 197, 199, 201 .oppelman, Lee, 578, 823-4, 944,

1797
949-50,951-2,955-6 .opple, Robert, 1093 .racke,  Frederick J. +., 449-50
.rock,  Arthur,  437 .u  .lu[    .lan,  148, 199, 201

labor, 3, 59, 122-3, 125-6, 128, 129, 261, 294; better conditions for, 129,
143-4, 261, 294; costs and mass transit, 934, 1136; Democratic 3arty and,
735, 740; and R0's speed in building, 737-8, 1135; R0's treatment of, 233,
370-2, 573, 621, 622, 735; R0's use of, for political influence, 18, 735-9,
753, 927, 934, 1055, 1069, 1120; opposition to, 737; prejudice of, 736;
ramrods, 370, 381, 621; unions, 54, 92-3, 148, 276, 355, 660, 662, 712 n.\
unions and R0, 3, 735-6, 1127, 1130, 1135; and :orld's Fair, 1088-9,
1090, 1101, 1104, 1108

Lafayette, 0arquis de, 649, 651-2

La Follette, Robert 0., 59

La Guardia, Fiorello +., 391; anti-Tammany, 354, 383, 444, 7+-I2, 779,
1084; background, 353-4; and Battery Crossing fight, 657-77', campaigns
for mayor, 353-8, 359, 404, 549, 655; character, 452, 445-6, 447, 452; as
civil defense head, 691, 699; illness and retirement, 699, 701-2, 714;
liberalism, 353, 355, 356, 466, 473; as mayor, 3, 5, 9, 328, 358-61, 368,
374, 375, 377, 379, 38i-2, 383, 392, 394-5, 398, 427, 430, 432-9, 444-57,
46i-5, 466-

;ll

La Guardia, Fiorello +. (cont.)

467, 487, 490, 492, 500-1, 511-12, 537, 538, 559, 572 n., 586, 607, 642-4,
655-6, 699-700, 701, 718, 747, 757, 758, 830, 1085, 1118 and n.\ R0 and,
357-61, 369, 409, 4i6, 452-3, 454-7, 462, 472-3, 474, 475, 512, 515, 552,
585, 587 and n., 603, 634-6, 675-6, 682, 690-1, 692-3, 695, 701-2, 765,
778, 1015, 1119; R0 and, confrontations Zith, 445, 446-53, 462-3, 568,
607-14, 620, 640-1, 777; personal style, 354, 444, 454-7; in poZer struggle
betZeen R0 and FDR, 426-42, 607; and public authorities, 617, 625, 626,
635-6, 760-1; and public housing, 610-613; and public Zorks, 358-9, 375,
376, 451, 452, 453, 454-7, 464, 491, 532, 551, 614, 620, 636, 639, 641,

1798
681-2, 684, 686; reformers and, 354-5, 436-7, 645, 700; FDR and, 409,
441-2, 454, 466, 704, 745

La Guardia, 0rs. Fiorello  +., 358, 452

La Guardia Airport, 452, 757; public authority for, 760, 762

Lake George, 239

Lake 3lacid, 27, 77

Lambert, Barney, 860, 866, 886, 887, 888, 890-1

Lambie, 0orris,  105, 106

Lang, 3earl, 985

Lansky, 0eyer, 1044

Latham, :illiam   +.,  227, 228, 229-30, 271, 371, 374, 484, 809, 811, 814,
1084

Laurelton 3arkZay, 8, 515, 896

laZ: defied by public poZer, 219-20, 276-7, 581; R0's contempt for, 192,
197, 214, 218, 219-20, 275-6, 277-8, 304, 340, 470, 505, 569, 577, 815,
831-2

LaZford, 3atricia .ennedy,  1014

La]archeck, +elen, 854

La]arus, Reuben A., 140, 241, 304, 359, 445 n., 446-7, 463, 478, 484, 586,
587, 593-4, 607-8, 609, 626, 635, 676, 692, 714,721, 729, 788,789, 790

Leavitt, +elen, 927

LebZohl, :illiam,    484, 752, 802, 878, 1009, ion, 1012, 1017, 1018, 1041-
3, 1047, 1050-1, 1052, 1120, 1143, 1149

1799
legal fees, see corruption and honest graft

Legislature, see N.Y.S. Legislature

Lehman, +erbert +., 9, 33, 306, 308, 314, 720, 739; attacked by R0, 409,
412-17, 469-70; character, 412-13, 415, 423; as Governor, 345, 346, 353,
368, 395, 407, 408, 412-17, 418-19, 421, 422, 423, 528-30, 538, 608, 609,
620, 625, 635, 670, 711, 1078; R0 and, 345, 362, 413, 423, 529-30, 636,
1071; and public Zorks, 345, 408, 413, 423; social Zelfare measures of,
418; and utilities,

403-4, 412, 414-15 Lehman family, 33, 34 Letch Zorth State 3ark, 227,
239, 240,

245, 246, 317, 318 Levitt, Arthur, 717 /?., 1136, 1138 Levy, Aaron J., 505
Levy, Samuel, 475, 549 LeZis, Sinclair, 39 LeZisohn, Adolph, 460
LeZisohn family, 34 Liberal 3arty, 778

libraries, 642, 757, 759, 772, 795, 904 Lie, Trygve, 772-4, 775, 1085 Life,
572 Lincoln Center, 6, 19, 830, 1013-16,

1070, 1152, 1157; tenant eviction and

relocation for, 19-20, 741, 830, 986,

1013-14 Lincoln Tunnel, 345, 925; and 3ort of

N.Y. Authority, 617, 691, 784, 900,

912,918,922 Lindbergh, Charles, 652 Lindenbaum, Abraham, 805 Lindsay,
John Vliet: as mayor, 9, 20, 446,

805, 1117-31, 1134; R0 and, 1049,

1117-31, 1151, 1154, 1157-8, 1160;

poZer brokers and, 1118, 1125-9, 1130;

1800
transportation policy of, 118-29, 1132 Lippmann, :alter, 261, 437
Litchfield, Electus D., 547 Livingston, Goodhue, 793, 977 Lloyd, Clinton,
531-2 Lloyd Neck, 152, 170, 182, 186, 205, 212 LockZood, Charles C, 132
Loeser, Gen. 3aul J., 391, 718 Lombardo, Carmen, 818, 819-20 Lombardo,
Guy, 14, 817-20, 821-2, 824,

1155

Lombardo, Lebert, 818, 819-20

Long, +uey, 437

Long Beach, 152, 155

Long Island, 147-56, 157, 169-70, 275, 387; baymen, 147-9, 155, i59-6o,
175, 204, 234, 235-6, 312, 822; beaches, 8, 151-2, 153-4, 155, 160, 169-70,
220; commercial development, lack of, 899, 908, 940, 941-2; development
in, 202, 205-6, 212, 313, 898-9, 941-2, 945-6, 958, 1152; geology of, 145-7;
governments, 275; mass transit needs, 928-9, 941-49, 951, 954~5, 957-8;
R0's  dreams and plans for, 158, 161-3, 205, 220, 239, 240-1, 281, 309,
619, 834-5, 896, 952-4, 1022, 1152; R0's studies of, 157-63, 169-91;
N.Y.C. property on, 157-9, 161-2, 175, 182, 205, 212, 834; North Shore,
146, 150-4, 163, 302, 317, 405, 94i; park attendance, 238, 314; park
restrictions, 148; parks and parkZays, 8, 10, 170-1, 212, 220,-221, 226,
237-9, 275, 281-2, 287, 290, 305, 3o8~ 313-15, 342, 388-9, 478, 479-80,
481-2, 483, 485, 486, 495,

Long Island (cont.)

515, 517, 518-19, 546, 561, 619, 667, 714, 762, 828, 829, 833, 838, 896,
941, 952, 1022, 1041, 1078; planners and, 899, 944, 950, 956-8; population,
330, 898, 905, 942-3, 945, 947, 957; roads (early), 10, 152-6 passim-, South
Shore, 8, 146, 147, 152, 154-6, 157, 159-62, 170, 204, 834-5, 94i; traffic
congestion, 515, 516-17, 519, 545, 943-4, 949-51, 955-8; transportation
analysis, 956-8; ]oning restrictions, 209, 230, 899, 940; see also farmers;
Jones Beach State 3ark; Long Island State 3ark Commission; Nassau
County; Suffolk County; transportation: commuting; and individual parks
and highZays

1801
Long Island barons, 10, 148-53, 154-5, 163, 174, 195, 257, 478; R0 and,
169, 184-5, 211, 244, 263, 277-8, 279, 301-4, 318, 362, 405, 605, 1022;
Northern State 3arkZay and, 205, 211, 277-8, 279, 299-303, 318, 405; as
Republicans, 152, 156, 176, 189, 191, 201, 205, 217, 402-3, 404

Long Island City, 396

Long Island E[pressZay, 6, 517, 698, 918, 925, 940-50, 953; cost of, 947-8;
interchanges, 949-50; rapid transit proposed for, 928, 941-2, 944-9; traffic
congestion on, 949-50, 956; Triborough funds for, 921, 948

Long Island 3ress, 1023, 1161

Long Island Rail Road, see transportation

Long Island Sound; 151, 163, 170; "Sound Crossing," 950, 1139, 1141,
1142, 1143, 1144, 1145, 1147, 1149

Long Island State 3ark Commission, 13, 167, 267-8, 826, 951, 953-4, 1080,
1155, 1160; attorneys for, 193-4, 203, 204, 214, 216, 219; condemnation by
appropriation, use of, 174, 177, 183, 184, 185-205 passim, 214-15, 243-4,
304, 402, 777; employees of, 319, 817, 821, 831-2; funds for, 202-3, 205,
220, 221, 225, 237, 313, 762; headquarters, 212, 226-29, 266; land
acquisition for, 182-220 passim, 234-7, 3+-I2, 1152; R0 as president, 171,
173, 177, 181-2, 237, 241, 256, 267, 271, 281, 287, 296, 362, 499, 536,
581, 584, 764,

808, 1061, 1074-7, 1080; R0's deviousness in creating, 174-7, 213; and
R0's  veto poZer, 710; poZers of, 174-5, 185-6, 614, 625; speed in
construction for, 212, 226, 231, 237, 238; tolls of, 502, 633-4; yacht (Sea-
Ef) of, 270, 276, 457, 458, 602,

809, 813, 816, 832, 1145, 1155; see also individual projects

Look, 1094

[m

1802
Los Angeles, 940 LoZ, Seth, 61, 327, 336 LoZer 0anhattan E[pressZay, 1
769-70, 896, 925, 1070, 1095,

1152

LoZman, Seymour, 109

Luce, +enry, 1090

Luchese, Thomas, 786

Lundberg, Ferdinand, 1067 n.

Lundy, Jim, 744

Lutsky, Jacob, 463, 507, 706, 707, 728,

752, 764, 775, 799, 800-1, 848, 1015,

1070, 1149 Lut], +enry, 213, 250, 252, 253-4, 255,

305, 317, 319 Lyons, James J., 727, 744, 749, 766, 771,

794, 928, 1037; and Cross-Bron[

E[pressZay, 863, 865-6, 867-8, 872,

873, 875, 876, 877, 891 Lyons, Leonard, 1034

0

0acaulay, Thomas, 52, 53

0acDonald, Ale[ander,  250

0achold,  +. Edmund, 403

0ackay, Clarence +., 149, 163, 184-5

0ackay Construction Company, 738

1803
0acombs Dam 3ark, 373

0acTavish, +enry  J., 1105

0acy, :.    .ingsland,  154; R0  and, 217, 274 n., 406, 469, 777, 831-2,
1069; as politician, 188, 217, 404-5, 407; progressive policies of, 404, 409;
and Taylor Estate fight, 184, 186-7, 188-91, 194, 197, 202, 203, 211, 213-
14, 215-16, 219, 243, 312, 398, 404

0acy  & Company, R. +., 741-2

0adigan, Jack (0ichael  J.), 447, 449, 453, 459, 5i8, 529-30, 532, 536-40
passim, 548, 550-2, 561-2, 608, 617, 618-19, 623, 641, 692, 730, 734, 812,
1032, 1084, 1086, 1088, 1103

0adigan-+yland,  Inc., 536, 537, 770, 863, 911

0adison, James, 649

0adison +ouse, 30-3, 49, 67, 72, 92, 214, 242

0adison Square Garden, 264-5, 35 8 , 420-1

0agoon, +erbert, 224, 365

0ajor  Deegan E[pressZay, 6, 564, 841 and n., 842, 846, 885, 896, 918,
924,

989

0aloney, Jim, 264

0altbie,  0ilo,   316

0and, George F., 306

0anhattan, 6-7, 61, 508, 549, 556; barring cars from, proposed, 902, 916;
borough president of, 743; LoZer, 645-53, 672, 696; LoZei East Side, 143,
330, 337, 338, 374, 375, 490, 851, 854, 856, 889, 1026-7; mass transit

1804
[iv

0anhattan (cont.)

needs of, 931; roads of, 915-16; traffic congestion in, 329-30, 342, 547,
659, 661, 742, 784-5, 912-17, 923, 929, 944; Triborough Bridge to, 387,
390, 393; :est  Side, 962-5, 957, 985, 1013; see also +arlem

0anhattan and Bron[ Surface Transit Operating Authority, 1135, 1136

0anhattan Square 3ark, 373

0anhattantoZn project, 1008, 1040; condemnations for, 962; corruption in,
1010-13, 1014, 1017, 1022; and neighborhood decay, 964-5, 975;
profiteering in, 980-1, 1006, 1010-13; rents, 972, 981; Senate investigation
into, 979-82; ta[ delinquencies, 1009-10; tenant eviction and relocation for,
962-3, 965, 970-6, 978, 983, 986

0anufacturers +anover Trust, 734

0archi,  John J., 1157

0arconnier, Emily  Sims, 602, 603, 1150

0arine  0idland  Bank, 734

0arine  3arks, 363, 370, 476, 481, 619

0arine  3arkZay Authority;  R0's  control of, 362, 616; revenues of, 634;
self-liquidation, 617

0arine  3arkZay Bridge, 6, 360, 500, 508, 517, 698

0arkel,  Lester, 603, 909, 1097

0asefield, John, 553, 564

0assachusetts, 290, 293

1805
0assapequa, 158

0assena project, 8, 9, 13, 709, 825, 1041, 1078, 1080

mass transportation, see transportation

0aster 3lan, see NeZ York City

0astick,  Seabury C, 200, 201-2

0aury, Reuben, 1075

0ayor's Emergency Commission on +ousing, 764, 983

0ayor's Slum Clearance Committee, see housing: Title I

0cAdoo,  :illiam    G., 322

0cAneny,  George, 62-3, 132, 435, 567, 655, 656, 1084; opposition to R0,
654, 664, 666-7, 668, 676, 680-1, 683-6, 766, 782, 966

0cCarren 3ark, 373, 566

0cCarthy, Fishhooks, 1082, 1084

0cCarthy, John, 778

0cCarthyism,  15, 472, 1032-3

0cCooey, John, 187, 357

0cCullough,  Robert G., 867, 873-4, 977

0cGahen, Rufus E., 348

0cGeehan, :.   O., 264

0cGinley,  Laurence J., 1013, 1015

0cGinnies,  Joseph A., 192

1806
0cGoldrick,  Joseph D., 328, 348, 359, 411, 416, 420, 422, 470, 477, 573,
586, 613, 614, 795; opposition to R0, 507, 520, 546, 547, 548, 641-4, 668,
670, 782

0cGuiness, 3ete, 566 0c+ugh,  F. Dodd, 904-8, 910-11, 954 0clntyre, Col.
0arvin  +.,  437 0c.ee,   Joseph V., 356, 359 0c.eon, :illiam     +., 1079
0cLaughlin,  George V., 137, 322, 362,

391, 693, 720 n., 741, 764, 1032, 1160 0c0orran, J. Burch, 710, 1070
0c0urray,   Joseph 3., 803 0cNulty, Raymond 3., 44, 182, 187,

226, 228, 229, 407, 503 0c:hinney,   Dolie, 229 0c:hinney,    Thomas,
209, 210, 217, 229,

3ii 0eadoZbrook  3arkZay, 8, 209, 218,

485, 896 media, 991, 1076, 1102; see also press 0elville, +erman, 647
0encken, +.  L., 937 mental hospitals, 261, 265, 274 0en]ies, Sir Robert,
817 0er],  Charles, 457-8, 1095 0etropolitan Life  Insurance

Company, 774 0etropolitan 3ark Conference, 340-5,

494, 1083 0etropolitan Rapid Transit Commission,

946, 948-9 0etropolitan Transportation Authority

(0TA),  1135-44, 1146; bond issue

for, 1135-9; R0  and, 1136-44,

1148-9; Ronan as chairman, 1141,

1145-9 passim, +53, 1158 0eyer, Charles G., 694, 720 n., 764, 771
0eyers, Gen. +arry L.,  606, 810, 835 0id-+arlem  project, 1043-4 0id-
0anhattan E[pressZay, proposed,

769-70, 783-5, 794, 896, 918, 922,

925, 1095, 1152 0iller, Nathan L., hi, 133-4, 138-9,

1807
157

0ills,  Darius Ogden, 149, 403

0ills,  Ogden Livingston, 108, 149, 210, 257, 262, 278, 279, 299, 403

0illstein,  Seymour, 1012

0itchel,  John 3urroy, 4, 20, 62, 64, 70, 72, 73, 76, 77, 80-1, 82-3, 84, 86,
87, 94, 132, 139, 327, 336, 347, 350, 353, 357, 363, 630, 654

0itchell-Lama  housing project, 802, 890, 891

0ockridge,  Norton, 1005-6, 1008, 1050

0oley,  Raymond, 87, 295, 847

0onaghan, George 3., 1090

money, poZer of, 17-19, 220, 610, 618, 621, 623, 631, 695, 722, 749, 751,
753-4, 768, 771-5, 783, 794, 920, 1056, 1061, 1078; see also banks;
corruption and honest graft; public authorities

0ontauk  3oint, 169, 170, 186, 205

0ontauk  3oint State 3ark, 8, 182, 220, 238, 314

0oore, Frank C, 761

0oore, George, 1105-6, 1107 0oran, Eugene F., 741, 922 0oran, James F.,
755-6, 786-7 0oreland Commissioner, R0  as, 413,

585 0organ, E. D., 149, 163, 184-5, 299 0organ, J. 3., 148-9 0organ
Guaranty Trust, 734 0orgenthau, +enry, 306 0orningside Corporation,
965 and n. 0orningside 3ark, 337, 493 0orris,  NeZbold, 348, 435, 614,
682, 700,

778-9, 811-12, 1079; R0 and, 643-4,

1808
670, 1064-5 and n.\ as 3ark

Commissioner, 1064-5 0orton, :.   +.,  1112 0oscoZ, :arren,   403, 706-7,
724, 725-6,

729, 764, 788, 790, 795, 798, 799-805

passim, 870, 1030, 1034, 1035, 1036,

1038 0oses, Barbara (daughter), 77, 159, 228,

229, 411, 581, 583 *., 584, 591, 601,

604, 807, 1160 0oses, Edna 0arion (sister), 29, 35, 36,

576, 582 and n., 589, 591, 598-600 0oses, Emanuel (father), 28-9, 32, 33,

35-6, 45, 51, 68, 72, 77, 104, 214, 579,

580, 581, 600-1

0oses, 0rs.  Emanuel (Bella Cohen, mother), 25, 26, 28-38, 45, 48, 51, 55,
63, 65, 68, 278, 411 and n., 598; arrogance, 29, 32, 33, 37, 242, 499,

577, 830-1; and 0adison +ouse, 30-3, 49, 67, 72, 242, 585; and 3aul
0oses, 35, 37, 579-8o, 582-3 and n., 584, 596; and R0, 36-7, 220, 223,
241-2, 319,

578, 579, 580, 584, 600-1; subsidi]ed R0, 77, 87, 104, 108, 133, 214, 233,
263, 581, 584, 585, 600, 909; Zill and estate, 576, 582-3 and n., 584, 585-6,
589-93, 598

0oses, Jane (daughter), 87, 159, 228, 229, 411, 581, 583 n., 584, 591, 601,
604, 807, 1059-60, 1115, 1160-1

0oses, 3aul Emanuel (brother), 133, 576-600, 1146; appearance and
character, 35-6, 577-80, 589, 595 n.\ brilliance, 36, 577-8, 587; desire for
public service, 580, 581, 586-8; as engineer, 578, 580, 586-8, 595; family
and background, 29, 33-7 passim, 583-4, 591-3; financial problems, 16,

1809
581, 583, 587-98, 812; and R0, hatred of, 576, 589, 591, 593-4, 597, 598;
R0's  treatment of, 581, 584, 586-7, 591-3, 594-5, 596, 597-8; and mother,
35, 37, 579-80, 582-3 and n., 584, 596; sZimming pool, 581, 582, 583, 587,
588-9, 590, 594

0oses, Robert, character and philosophy of: appearance, 35-6, 50, 55, 130,
229, 268-9, 419, 453, 477, 577, 602, 1150; arrogance, 3-4, 37, 5'-5i 68 , 78,

[v

79-8o, 116, 141, 241-2, 258, 287, 316 348, 424-5, 477. 485, 499, 573, 577, '
581, 632, 775, 817-18, 827, 830-5, 848-9, 866, 909, 994, 1022-3, 1039,
1064, 1069, 1071, 1075, 1093, 1102, 1114, 1148, 1153, 1161; brilliance,'1,
36, 39, 44, 48, 231, 306, 348-9, 424, 475, 484-5, 495, 577-8, 688, 776, 777,
1136, 1145, 1150-1, 1154, 1159; bullying, 475, 501-2, 688, 994; charm,
182-3, 348, 378, 424, 442, 474, 577, 623, 656, 735, 776, 875, 923, 1016,
1039, 1052, 1105; criticism rejected by, 242, 253, 255, 271, 275, 316, 318,
408, 412, 425, 453, 459, 460, 477, 484, 494, 546, 547, 582, 737, 1001,
1051, 1096, 1104, 1157-8; deafness, 835-6, 1072-3, 1119, 1150, 1159;
deviousness, 173-7, 182, 213, 219, 220; divorced from reality, 834-6, 908-
10, 953; end justifying means, 218-20, 423, 569, 570, 607, 656, 671, 716,
764, 832, 849; energy, 103, 266, 485, 604, 909, 1041, 1145; family and
background, 25-37, 499, 576-601 passim; family life, 77, 87, 104, 228, 229,
266, 270, 485, 584, 585, 601-6 passim, 807-8, 810, 1059-60, 1114-16; files
on N.Y.C. officials, 14-15, 468-75, 500-1, 643, 666-7, 726; finances, 77, 87,
104, 108, 133, 214, 233, 263, 576, 581, 582, 584-6, 589-93, 600, 604, 632,
812, 909, 1060-1, 1108, 1114, 1115; friends, 45, 46-7, 49, 64, 182, 419,
457; friends, alienation of, 408, 416-18, 425, 435; as gubernatorial
candidate, 402-425; honors, 567-8, 57I, 656, 1012, 1063-4, 1156;
hospitality, 14, 623, 807-8, 814-28, 845-6, 920, 998, 1089, 1143; idealism,
1, 4-5, 40-2, 45-6, 51, 52-3, 60, 100, 102, 132-4, 172, 220, 241, 577, 578,
1022; illnesses, 382, 1034; image, projected, 16-17, 133, 188, 264-5, 349,
406, 433, 462, 567, 569-71, 584-5, 632-3, 636, 688, 701, 708, 716, 747,
765, 776-7, 778-9, 789, 863, 864, 979, 983, 992, 996, 999, 1003, 1006-7,
1014, 1016, 1017-18, 1023, 1038-9, 1041, 1042, 1044-55 passim, 1060,
1062, 1077, 1087, 1091-1101 passim, 1108, 1112, 1114, 1158; imagination,
3, 5, 230-1, 242, 366-7, 384, 389, 392-3, 485, 489, 58i, 776, 833, 1068,

1810
1092, 1133, 1151, 1161; imperial style, 14, 812-28, 833; lavish spending,
17, 182, 196, 198, 1088-9, 1103; liberals' opposition to, 741, 759-761, 765,
767, 794, 803; opposition to, 14, 257-8, 262, 316. 425, 459, 492, 499-507,
509, 546, 608-10, 622, 667, 680, 728, 739, 742-3, 749, 927-8, 986-8, 1063,
mo, 1114-15. IIJ 7; as political boss, 17-19, 727-9, 748, 753, 927, 934, ion,
1047, 1055-6, 1124;

[vi

0oses, Robert (cont.)

as practical politician, 98-100, 109-10, 133-5, 136, 138-9, 208, 217-19, 349,
466, 580, 655, 701; prejudice against poor and nonZhites, 242, 318-319,
489-90, 512, 513-14, 533, 557-60, 578, 579, 610, 687, 736, 758-60, 767,
777, 834, 909, 968, 1086 n., 1101; as proposed mayoral candidate, 347-50,
352, 355, 356, 402, 630; resignation threats, 3-4, 43, 313, 316, 319, 369,
427, 447-8, 462, 751, 768, 801, 806, 866, 870, 1011, 1053, 1058, 1069,
1074-9; self-glorification, 21, 255, 641, 829, 909-10, 1019, 1062; smear
technique used by, 14-15, 471-4, 502, 547, 623, 666, 669, 688, 691-2, 695,
992, 1001; as sZimmer, 1, 103-4, 230, 252, 456, 512, 604, 807, 811, 813,
823, 1072, 1145; temper, 3, 102, 227, 268, 269, 305, 317-18, 409, 417, 452,
552, 569, 598, 613, 644, 659, 674, 675, 683, 783, 800, 810, 833, 1052-3,
1074, iioo-i, 1103, 1133, 1154, 1162; vengefulness and vindictiveness, 14-
15, 397-8, 401, 416-18, 425, 435, 469, 500-7, 667, 678-88, 696-7, 739, 749,
1026; Zork habits, 74, 101-2, 226-9, 266, 485-6, 601, 807-12, 835, 1041,
1072; Zriting of, 698, 811-12, 909 and n., 987, 1030, 1150, 1154, 1157,
1158

0oses, 0rs.  Robert (0ary  Sims): illness, 1060, 1115; in social life, 229,
408, 602, 603-5, 823; as Zife, 77, 87, 103-4, no, 157, 159, 160, 228, 234,
266, 341, 382, 460, 571, 581, 591, 601-6, 807, 810, 811, 999, 1000, 1054,
1114-16

0oses, 0rs.  Robert (0ary  Grady), 1103, 1115, 1116, 1143, 1154, 1158

0oses 0en,  14, 602-3, 752, 1160; advancement of, 273, 465; feelings
toZard R0  of, 269, 271, 273, 1146-7, 1155, 1156; in government posts,
709, 722, 725, 729, 763-4, 775, 791, 797, 802, 803, 804; inspired by R0,

1811
102, 228-9, 230-1, 273, 372, 384, 485; loyalty of, 271, 621, 729, 797, 1042,
1160; loyalty of R0  to, 273, 1030; R0's  demands and e[pectations of, 74,
101-3, 226-9, 230-1, 267-8, 269, 270-3, 365, 621; R0's gift for choosing,
14, 270-1, 484, 621; R0's treatment of, 102, 227, 268, 269, 810, 1103,
1104; outings Zith, 229-30; secretly on R0's payroll, 709, 722; stable
planning force, 453-4, 464, 621-2; reZards of, 273, 621, 729; and tenant
relocation, 879; training of, 272; and :orld's  Fair, 1060, 1091; as "yes"
men, 484, 501, 582, 605, 608, 814, 815-16, 827, 832, 833, 836, 908, 1041,
1104, 1126;

see also architects; engineers

0osholu  3arkZay, 8, 544

0oskoZit],   +enry, 72-3, 75, 77, 80, 82, 84, 85, 86, 88, 92, 98, 99, 123, 322,
348:408,413

0oskoZit],   0rs.  +enry  (Belle), 91-3, 123, 202-3, 292, 297, 574; R0 and,
88, 98-100, 102, 130, 135, 174, 188, 200, 274, 580; Smith and, 91, 94, 101,
128, 129, 137-8, 171, 215, 274, 280, 286, 291, 294, 295, 296, 320; and state
governmental reorgani]ation, 93, 95-6, 98-100, 102, 103, 104, 106, 108,
109, no, 130, 141

0ould,  Jacob :rey,  335, 984

0ount  0orris  3ark, 337, 373, 493

0ulcahy, John, 892

0ulcahy, John A., 741

0umford,  LeZis,  12, 471, 578, 902, 908, 913, 915-16, 1095

0unicipal  Civil  Service Commission, 70, 72-82, 84, 85, 112, 242, 348, 472,
621

0unicipal  Forum of NeZ  York, 732

1812
0urphy,  Charles F., 94, 121-2, 125, 126, 127-8, 210, 283, 285, 351, 713,
719

0urray,  0ae, 986

N

Nassau County, 145, 150, 157, 158, 212, 708, 908, 935, 1152; contractors
and politicians in, 738; corruption in, 209, 311, 714; Democratic 3arty in,
311; developers in, 898-9, 945; and L. I. State 3ark Commission, 174, 175,
210, 212, 312; mass transit needs, 928, 958; 3lanning Board, 944, 946 n.\
population groZth, 898, 899, 943, 945; Republican 3arty, 152, 204-5, 208-
9, 311, 405, 478, 714, 734; see also Long Island

Nassau County Bridge Authority, 1051

Nassau E[pressZay, 6, 918, 925

Nassau 0anagement Company Inc., 875, 878-85 passim, 1017, 1018

Nassau-Suffolk Regional 3lanning Board, 944, 956-8

Nathan, Edgar J., Jr., 900

Nation, The, 369, 1020

National 3ark Service, 683-4

Negroes, in N.Y.C., 491-2, 796, 961-2, 964; discouraged at Jones Beach,
318-19, 514; eviction of, 968, 969, 972; ghettos of, 858-9, 965; in
government posts, 804-5; i n integrated neighborhoods, 857-9, 888, 890,
970-1; lack of public Zorks for, 490, 491-2, 510-12, 557-6o, 834; mi[ing
Zith Zhites  discouraged, 318-319, 513-14; R0's prejudice against, 242,
318-19, 490, 512, 513-14, 533, 557-6o, 578, 579, 736, 834, 1086 n.,

Negroes (cont.)

iioi; and public housing, 855-6; unions' prejudice against, 736; see also
+arlem

1813
Nevins, Allan, 415

NeZark Airport,  767

NeZ Deal: communism and, 471, 574; and public Zorks, 362, 372, 426,
465, 557, 616, 620; Republican 3arty and, 403, 406, 407; social Zelfare
policies of, 357, 403, 405, 468, 574; see also individual agencies

NeZ England ThruZay, 841 and n., 896

NeZ +aven Railroad, 933, 939, 1135

NeZ Jersey, 342, 545, 900; competition betZeen roads and mass transit in,
898, 912, 929; interstate highZay system in, 921, 922, 924, 940;
0etropolitan  Rapid Transit Commission of, 924; and 3ort of N.Y.
Authority, 616 and n., 921, 1133

NeZman, Arnold, 985-6, 994, 1001, 1022, 1034

NeZman, 0rs.  Arnold, 985-6, 990, 994, 1001, 1022

NeZsday, 763, 814, 824, 949, 1033, 1079, 1095, 1107, 1108, mi, 1136,
1144, 1161; R0's column in, 1150, 1157, 1158

NeZsZeek, 1038, 1094

NeZ York American, 432

NeZ York Central, 65-7, 83, 526-30, 532, 541, 545, 549, 557, 560, 841 and
n., 898

NeZ York City:  crime, 20, 511-12, 524, 861, 882, 888, 889, 890, 893, 964;
Depression in, 323-4, 325, 326, 327, 329, 336, 340, 344, 346, 347, 370,
374, 376, 521, 526, 610, 760; harbor, 647-8, 653, 659, 666-7; JeZs, 26, 30,
33-4, 49, 353, 354, 851-93 passim-, 0aster 3lan, 20, 765, 766, 776, 780-6
passim, 792-4, 794, 799, 904, 908; R0's shaping of, 5-8, 19-21, 464-5, 467,
468, 508-9, 549, 556, 677, 704, 711, 752, 753-4, 776, 797, 806, 828-30,
919, 969, 983, 1006-7, 1153; poor of, 20, 559, 611, 758-60, 777, 791, 796,
804, 881-2, 893-4, 900-1, 964-5, 968-76, 979, 1086 n.; population, 30, 143,

1814
156, 325-6, 464, 747, 780--1; real estate developers, 337-8, 340, 481, 753,
781; real estate interests, 611-12, 769, 785, 845; recreational needs, 10,
143-5, 147-8, 151, 153-6, 159, 161, 194-5, 238, 275, 288, 328, 341, 342-3,
378, 388, 481, 482, 834, 896, 1151; sense of history in, 648-9, 650-2;
skyline, 647, 653, 829; slums, 20, 26, 143, 336-7, 374, 489-93, 509-12, 570,
610, 642, 655, 856, 857, 858, 889, 901, 965-6, 969-76, 1007, 1024, 1153;

;vji

Zaterfront, 544 r, 49i 55 gB 9i J( 564, 566, 82s Government 1

Negroes; 3uerto .icans; nui portation: traffic  congestion; and individual
boroughs NeZ York City, finances of: 326-7,

346, 620, 641-3, 715, 747) 7SI> 757-62, 771-2, 791, 795, 907, 1130-1,
1132-3, 1134; bonds, 731, 795-6; budget, 326-7, 445, 620, 641, 746, 757-8,
796; debt, 326-7, 620, 641-3, 75i n., 757, 758, 762, 791, 796; Sinking
Funds, 375, 377, 449, 450,

451, 470; ta[es, 757-63; ta[es, property, 17, 620, 646-7, 658, 665, 759-6o,
772, 774, 851, 869, 968, 1009; ta[es, sales, 759-62 passim, 791; see also
corruption and honest graft; NeZ York City, public Zorks in, N.Y.C. Board
of Estimate; N.Y.C. Council

NeZ York City, government of: administrative chaos in, 61, 326-7; Board
of Aldermen, 81, 94, 128, 444,

452, 464, 478, 506, 713, 1082; centrali]ation of poZer, 744-5; Charter, 3,
464, 468, 470, 475, 478, 534, 569, 704-5, 744-6 and n., 750, 751, 782, 800;
civil service, 122, 328, 368, 472-3, 620-1, 797, 908; civil service
reorgani]ation plan, 4-5, 19, 70-82, 83-5; Code of Ethics, 1061, 1062, 1090;
county organi]ations, 743-50, 866, ion, 1056; courts, 351, 712; Democrats
in, 18,

347, 349, 351, 359, 711-12, 718, 763; federal funds for public Zorks,

see NeZ York City, public Zorks in; federal government and, 463-4, 704,
717, 745; and N.Y. Central, 526-30; officials and R0, 14-15, 344, 468-75,

1815
500-1, 506, 507, 643, 666-7, 670, 728-9, 740, 743, 747-50, 844-5, 848, 927-
8, 1008, 1016-17; public and, 464-5, 657, 664, 677, 744, 752, 763, 768-9,
880-1, 883, 892; reformers and, 60-5, 82, 84, 91-3, 327, 336, 347-356, 438,
770-1, 782; Republicans in, 347, 353, 356, 359, 404, 682, 700, 734; state
funds for public Zorks, see NeZ York City, public Zorks in;  and state
government, 620, 703, 717, 757-8, 761-2, 791, 1056, 1134; see also
corruption and honest graft; N.Y.C. Board of Estimate; N.Y.C. Council;
N.Y.C. 3lanning Commission; patronage; Tammany +all; and individual
departments and mayors NeZ York City, public Zorks in: bitterness of poor
over lack of, 20, 491, 510-12, 974; borough presidents and,

;Vlll

NeZ York City public  Zorks in (cont.) 743-51; competitive bidding on,
717, 726; condemnations, 328, 344, 570, 609-10, 779, 797, 829, 837, 841;
cost, 9, 328, 331, 336, 343-5, 465, 526, 571, 657-8, 665-6, 757, 843, 845,
921, 927 and n., 1065, 1086, 1113; e[emplars for other cities and countries,
571-2, 894; funds for, city, 17, 332, 340, 343-6, 387, 395, 476, 532, 534,
537, 538, 550-1, 620. 622, 635, 640-1, 642, 644, 658, 660, 681, 686, 715,
737, 747, 750, 757, 768-9, 774, 795, 845, 867-8, 871, 900-1, 904, 907, 909,
920, 930, 1085, 1087, 1090-1, 1102, 1107, mi, 1112, 1114; funds for,
federal, 9, 12, 345-6, 359-6o, 362-3, 368-70, 372, 387, 390, 392, 394, 395,
426, 428-43 passim, 451, 453, 463-5, 467, 468, 474, 475, 476, 487, 491,
513, 532-8 passim, 540, 549, 550, 568, 581, 607, 608-10, 622, 640-1, 644,
674-5, 687, 703-7, 7ii, 7+-I5, 717, 737, 747, 750, 752, 769, 783-5, 795,
796-7, 845, 865, 867-8, 871, 886, 921, 922, 925, 930, 1056, 1085, 1087,
1114, 1120, 1131; funds for, state, 17, 532, 550, 635, 705, 714-15, 717, 737,
747, 750, 769, 795, 796-7, 845, 865, 871, 872, 885, 900-1, 904, 921, 925,
930, 1084-5, 1087, 1114, 1120, 1131; lack of governmental e[pertise for,
328, 340, 344, 622; land for, 26, 143, 336, 337, 340, 343, 344, 389-90, 494,
750, 903-4, 907; L.I. property for, 157-9, 161-2, 175, 182, 205, 212, 835;
maintenance, 327, 346, 641-2, 643, 796, 920, 932-3, 1136; R0's
accomplishments, 9, 20, 378-80, 383-5, 452, 454-7, 46o, 463, 508-9, 512-
17 passim, 540, 551, 614, 619, 828-30, 843-4, 850, 1018-19, 1091, 1129,
1152-3, 1156; R0's authorities, 534-9, 617-23 passim, 640-1, 663, 676,
689, 715-18, 727, 732, 737, 747, 749-50, 769, 771, 779, 784, 795, 885, 920-
1, 925-6, mi, 1113-14, 1129, 1130-1; R0's control over, 7-8, 464-5, 622,

1816
694-5, 700-1, 702, 705-7, 710-11, 717-22 passim, 111, 746-54, 784, 795,
797, 878, 900-1, 923-4, 927-8, 1065, 1120; R0's dreams for, 4-5, 19, 65-7,
343, 365, 468, 495, 508, 525-6, 545, 551, 552, 921, 923, 926, 1082-7, 1092,
1152-3; R0's plans for, 65-7, 339~45, 365-7, 453-4, 468, 484, 485, 494-5,
619, 622, 627, 703-4, 747, 758, 782, 839, 885, 896-8, 918, 923, 925, mi;
R0's  studies for, 4, 65-6, 340-1, 364, 387, 452, 834; R0's veto poZer over,
from state, 710, 924;

need for, 19, 327-8, 344, 774, 833-4; need of poor for, 20, 26, 143, 335,
337, 374, 378, 481, 482, 489-93, 509-12, 514, 533, 546-7, 559, 578, 613-
14, 687, 747, 779, 901; neighborhood need of, and disruption by, 7, 19,
478-80, 481, 483, 488, 509, 520-5, 542-4, 545, 669, 706, 748-9, 786, 793,
799, 847, 860-1, 880-3, 888, 893, 963-6, 969-76, 1006, 1007, 1018; non-
0oses-approved construction, 9, 324, 328, 451, 462-5, 470, 491, 614, 640,
642-3, 644, 757, 759, 767, 770, 772, 795, 904, 928; openings, 454~7, 508-
9, 552, 566, 682, 696-7, 779, 825, 911, 1129, 1156, 1157; tenant eviction
and relocation for, 7, 19, 21, 336, 344, 464, 847-9, 919, 1017, 1022, 1025;
tolls and admissions fees, 686-7, 694-5, 732, 733, 795, 909, 9ii, 920, 1118;
use (intensive) by public, 385, 488, 514-15, 687; see also corruption and
honest graft; housing; N.Y.C. Coordinator of Construction; N.Y.C. 3ark
Department; relocation and eviction practices; transportation; and
individual categories, government agencies, and projects

N.Y.C. Airport Authority,  758-63 passim, 766-7

N.Y.C. Board of Education, 462-3, 470, 566

N.Y.C. Board of Estimate, 4, 61, 62, 81, 444, 464, 470, 645, 656, 705, 789,
998, 1000, 1037, 1104; Battery Crossing fight, 646, 670, 677; borough
presidents on, 743-50, 866, 927-8; civil service reform, 80-1, 84; and
corruption, 714, 716; Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay route, 866-8, 870-5; lack of
control over public authorities, 746-7, 750-1; and land use control, 750; and
0aster 3lan, 783, 792; R0  and, 475-7, 500-1, 502, 507, 522, 548-9, 570,
573, 614, 623, 706, 707, 750-1, 766, 775, 794, 802, 831, 844; opposition to
R0  on, 477, 502, 549, 750, 766, 775, 794-5, 867-8, 870-4, 927-8; and
public Zorks, 343, 345, 346, 395, 475, 533, 546, 642-4, 681, 682-3, 685,
744, 746, 748, 770, 772, 783; and tenant eviction, 752, 766, 968; and Title
I, 979, 1010, 1011-12, 1014-15, 1057; and 8N, 774

1817
N.Y.C. Coordinator of Construction, R0 as, 3, 700, 707, 760, 764, 767,
776-7, 789, 800, 883-4, 918, 988, 1056, 1061, 1063, 1099; bill drafting,
704-5; as broker for state and federal funds, 705-7, 737, 747, 750, 752, 761,
769, 801, 871, 897, 900-1, 1056;

N.Y.C. Coordinator of Construction (cont.) falsification of facts, 705;
planning efficiency of, 922; plans of, 703-4, 747,

758, 782; poZers of, 704-7, 801, 803; public relations, 916; and 8N, 771-5;
see also corruption and honest

graft; housing; NeZ York City, public Zorks  in N.Y.C. Council, 350, 705,
745, 787, 1128-9; and Battery Crossing fight, 660, 663-8, 670; R0 and,
478, 625,

677, 752, 794, 844; Tammany-dominated, 473, 714

N.Y.C. Fine Arts Federation, 663 N.Y.C. +ealth Department, 62, 1008-9
N.Y.C. +ousing Authority, 430, 449,

610-11, 613, 729, 758, 768, 883, 966;

board of, 706; corruption in, 724,

725-6, 1047; funds for, 714, 768, 805;

R0's  control of, 7, 706-7, 714, 726-7,

759, 762, 763, 767, 775, 777, 797, 802, 803, 804-5, 882, 969

N.Y.C. +ousing Redevelopment Board, 891

N.Y.C. 0unicipal  Art Commission, 468, 547, 568, 685

N.Y.C. 3ark Commissioner, R0 as, 3, 427, 458-62, 478, 512, 763, 764,
800, 1056, 1060, 1063-5, 1084, 1133; accomplishments, 7, 372-4, 378-80,
383-5, 452, 454-7, 46o, 508-9, 512-17 passim, 551, 570, 633, 829, 830,
1022; acquisition of land, 374-8, 489, 570; banned public transportation in
parks, 492-3; Battle of Central 3ark, 984-1004, 1016, 1022; and

1818
concessionaires, 399, 614, 825, 997-1002; consulted by other cities and
countries, 571-2; falsified facts, 549, 556-7, 679-80, 683-5, 688; knoZledge
of federal and state statutes, 528-31, 532; lack of interest, 486-7, 489; and
La Guardia, 445, 446-57, 462-3, 568, 607-14, 620, 635; planning efficiency
of, 360, 453, 463, 464, 487, 531-2, 549, 622; poZer of, 360-2, 399-400,
464-5, 474, 500, 507, 526, 548-9, 613,

678, 681, 683, 805, 996-7, 1000, 1036-9; public relations, 406, 457-8, 553-
4, 556, 566, 573, 611-12, 623, 706; Shakespeare Festival, 1026-39, 1041,
1049; speed, demands for, 369-72, 381, 460, 463, 464, 468-9, 474, 475,

478, 483, 486, 487, 549-52, 569, 622; techniques of, 475, 495, 507, 520,
535, 548-9, 569-70; see also N.Y.C. 3ark Department; NeZ York City,
public Zorks in; and individual categories and projects N.Y.C. 3ark
Department, 892; budget, 13, 322; Arsenal as headquarters, 334, 368, 369,
371, 381, 383, 458; band, 373, 455; civil service in, 368, 472;

C:A   assistance in, 36J

372, 380, 383, 3 ,

R0's  men and, $4". ^60, 363

372,450, 453 ;

572, 993, 1063 0\ men,

speed demand , 73, 381; parki,

7, 20, 210, 331-8, 343-4, 36o, 363,

367, 372-3, 458, 481-3, 508, 846, 921, 989; parks, conservation in, 481-2,
494-5, 545; parks, neZ construction in, 373, 374; parks, recreation in, 335,
372, 373, 374, 385, 389-90, 481-2, 494, 556; parks, renovation of, 7, 363-4,
370-4, 896, 989; parks, small, 482-3, 486, 489-90, 492; ramrods in, 370,
381; standard designs, 486, 487-8; Tammany patronage in, 331-2, 334, 335-
6, 494, 740, 989; unequal share of land and funds for, 462-3, 470; unified,
360,

1819
368, 468, 548; :3A   Zorkers in, 451-2, 457, 464, 989;

see also individual parks N.Y.C. 3arking Authority, proposed, 919 N.Y.C.
3lanning Commission, 596-7, 659, 663, 677, 729, 745, 805, 1148;
duplication in planning, 781; funds for, 781, 783; land use, 750, 781;
0aster 3lan, 20, 765, 766, 776, 780-6 passim, 792-4, 799, 904, 908, 966;
R0  and, 3, 700, 742, 757, 763, 764, 767, 770, 775, 781-2, 793, 799, 800,
872, 908, 962, 977, 1061, 1063; re]oning study, 785, 792-3; Title I, 781,
976-7, 1058; underground unit of, 966-9, 976-9, 983, 1006, 1025; :agner
and, 799 N.Y.C. 3lants and Structures Department,

449

N.Y.C. 3olice Department, 325, 448, 450, 451, 473, 712, 787, 1019-20

N.Y.C. Real Estate Bureau, 862, 875, 880-1, 967, 974, 1017, 1025

N.Y.C. Tenant Relocation Bureau, 861

N.Y.C. Transit Authority, 791, 929, 1019, 1086 «.; deficits, 1132-3, 1136;
merged Zith 0TA,  1135, 1140, 1143; proposed merger Zith Triborough
Authority, 1118-29

N.Y.C. Tunnel Authority: Battery Crossing fight, 641-7, 653-4, 657-75,
676, 695; bonds of, 639-40, 690; Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, 639, 689, 694;
funds for, 674-5; merged Zith Triborough Authority, 693-4, 698, 705, 762;
R0's  attempt to control, 608-10, 613, 640-1, 689-93, 694; 4ueens 0idtoZn
Tunnel, 607-10, 639, 668, 690, 694; revenues of, 690, 694; and :orld :ar
II, 690-1, 692, 694

N.Y.C. Youth Board, 1063

NeZ York Daily  0irror,  914, 991, 992, 1033

[[

NeZ York Daily  NeZs, 423, 432, 699-700, 726, 805, 869, 991, 992, 995,
1036, 1074-5, 1150; R0 supported and praised, 555, 701, 902, 966, 1033,
1079, 1136, II53-4, 1156, 1159; on Title I, 978, 1059; on traffic problems,

1820
914, 916 NeZ Yorker, The, 914, 915 NeZ York Evening Journal, 378 NeZ
York +erald, 130, 136, 333 NeZ York +erald Tribune, 189, 197, 217, 263,
274, 294, 335, 362, 421, 432, 433, 435, 440, 457, 463, 516-17, 57L 573,
662, 672, 674, 679, 683, 685, 696, 701, 712, 716, 719, 760, 764, 770-1,
779, 789, 811, 869, 986, 991, 992, 994, 1000, 1021, 1036, 1096; R0
critici]ed,  417, 776, 1032, 1099, 1108; R0 supported and praised, 238,
309, 378, 379, 504, 506, 512, 517, 784, 919, 966, 987, 1015; Title I, 977,
978, 1021-2, 1025, 1048-9, 1054; transportation issues and problems, 895,
902-3, 914, 915-16 NeZ York Journal-American, 471, 991, 992, 995, 1021,
1096; R0  praised by, 556, 1079; Title I, 1021-2, 1025, 1048, 1051, 1054;
transportation, 916 NeZ York Life Insurance Company, 774 NeZ York
3ost, 599, 600, 701, 716, 765, 990-1, 992, 1021, 1035, 1065; Cross-Bron[
E[pressZay, 861, 866, 869, 872, 873, 876, 881, 883, 983; mass transit
supported, 915-16; R0 critici]ed,  919, 987, 994, 1000-1, 1003, 1033, 1095,
1098; Title I, 966, 977, 979, 1006, 1008, 1009, 1018, 1021, 1024-5, 1040-
51 passim, 1054 NeZ York Shakespeare Festival, 1025-39, 1041, 1049;
opposition to R0,  1030-4 NeZ York State: budget, 96-7, 106, 260, 261,
281, 307, 312, 1069, 1132, 1135; Constitutional Convention of 1915, 96-7,
104, 126-7; debt, 1069, 1135, 1136-7; Depression in, 313, 319, 345, 369,
404, 528; funds for public Zorks, 17, 164, 167-8, 186, 193, 211, 220,
225,311,312, 313,345,532,550, 610, 635, 677, 705, 714-15, 717, 736, 737,
747, 750, 762, 769, 795, 796-7, 817, 819-20, 845, 865, 867-8, 871, 872,
885, 897, 900-1, 904, 921, 925, 930, 1072, 1073, 1084-5, 1087, 1114, 1120,
1131, 1132, 1134-9; Governor of, 96-7, 100, 105, 106-7, 173, 260-1, 315;
governorship, R0's campaign for, 402, 405-25, 428, 435, 440, 470, 604,
630, 763, 1001; housing, 261, 610, 611, 714, 756, 759, 768, 802, 804, 805;
R0's  knoZledge of administrative machinery, 141, 261-2, 265, 292, 306-7,
348-9, 376,

463, 528-31, 532; R0's system of public Zorks, 10, 166-8, 206, 207, 211,
439, 485, 896; and N.Y.C., 620, 703, 717, 757-8, 761-2, 791, 1056, 1134;
patronage, 98, 105, 242-3, 256, 262, 305, 465, 707; relationship to Interstate
+ighZay  System, 921, 922, 924; ta[es, 261, 763, 1135; see also N.Y.S.
Legislature; reorgani]ation of NeZ York State government; transportation;
and individual departments, governors, public Zorks

1821
NeZ York State Association, 112, 132-4, 137, 141, 209, 348; park study of,
166-8, 175, 240; State Bulletin of, 132-3, 141, 208, 209; see also
reorgani]ation of NeZ York State government

N.Y.S. Athletic Commission, 264-5, 275

N.Y.S. Bridge Authority, 345

N.Y.S. Commission Against

Discrimination in +ousing, 961-2

N.Y.S. Conservation Department, 172-3, 174; and public Zorks on L.I.,
212, 213, 221

N.Y.S. Council of 3arks, 167-8, 172, 177, 195, 200-1, 211, 276, 343, 550,
1071, 1080, 1152; autonomy of, 173, 305; budget for, 172-3, 244-5, 289-90;
R0  as chairman, 177, 227, 244, 245, 254, 256, 267, 271, 296, 316-18, 340,
368, 399, 423, 500, 656, 764, 824, 835, 1061, 1073, 1074-7, 1133; R0's
assault on commissioners, 243-6, 249-55, 290-1, 317; R0's control of, 173,
176, 248, 249, 255-6, 317, 319, 326; R0's deviousness in creating, 173,
175-6, 244-5, 246, 248, 567; philanthropists and, 166, 167, 199-201, 243;
regional commissions of, 166, 167, 173, 175-6, 177, 200, 227, 243-4, 245;
Rockefeller and, 1073, 1074-7

N.Y.S. Emergency 3ublic :orks  Commission, 345

N.Y.S. Factory Investigation Commission, 123-6

N.Y.S. +ighZay Department, 128, 140; and public Zorks on L.I., 213, 221,
233

N.Y.S. +ousing Division, 805

N.Y.S. Land Board, 193, 195,197,200,211

N.Y.S. Legislature, 96, 98, 105, 119, 120, 132, 140, 261, 300, 304, 528-9,
655, 1119, 1120, 1123-9, 1132; Assembly, 88, 118-27; and Battery Crossing
fight, 659, 660, 668; R0 and, 465-6, 623, 635-6, 685, 703, 707, 719-20,

1822
743, 759, 761, 773, 777, 923, 1023, 1056, 1062-3; R0's contempt for, 242-
3, 256, 259, 262; and patronage, 256, 305, 465-6; and public authorities,
617, 624-5, 628, 716, 751 n.; and public Zorks, 156, 163-68, 171, 174-7,
186, 188, 189, 191, 193,

N.Y.S. Legislature (cont.)

194-202, 205, 210-11, 220, 225, 226, 246-7, 249, 277, 278, 289, 301, 310-
11, 312, 313, 319, 340, 345, 360-1, 376, 413, 538, 844, 848, 1084; and
reorgani]ation of state government, 96-7, 103, 108-11, 137, 141, 260;
Senate, 136-7, 139, 262-3; see also Democratic 3arty; Republican 3arty

N.Y.S. 3oZer Authority, 403, 580, 710; bonds of, 732; R0 as chairman,
595, 1023, 1051, 1060, 1061-2, 1074-8, 1091, 1133

N.Y.S. 3ublic Service Commission, 316-17, 403-4

N.Y.S. 3ublic :orks   Department, 15, 212, 581, 708-10, 883; funds of, 312,
714-15, 747; R0's control of, 708-11, 714, 769, 775, 844; R0's veto poZer
from, 15, 710, 924; and public Zorks on L.I., 212

N.Y.S. Retirement Board, 729, 1073

N.Y.S. Secretary of State, 297-8;

R0  as, 262-5, 296, 297-8, 581, 584; R0 as Smith's surrogate, 281

N.Y.S. Temporary Emergency Relief Administration, 344, 346, 404

NeZ York State ThruZay, 817

NeZ York Sun, 378, 409, 516, 556

NeZ York Times, The, 92, 214, 309, 379 n., 398, 435, 437, 448, 457-8, 500,
512, 517-18, 603, 654, 662, 694, 705, 716, 770, 777, 783, 787, 811, 845,
869, 877, 909, 991, 992, 994, 1014, 1021, 1035-6, 1047, 1065, 1078, 1079,
1097, 1099, 1116, 1128, 1138, 1157; and La Guardia, 354, 433, 614; R0
critici]ed,  421, 1095-6, 1100, 1109; R0 supported and praised, 238, 297,
305, 378, 407, 458, 460-2, 504, 512, 520, 555-6, 563, 681, 764-5, 902, 966,

1823
982, 987, 992, 1009, 1015, 1049, 1053; public Zorks, 190-1, 197-9, 201,
204, 372, 516; Title I, 977, 978, 982, 1009-10, 1039, 1048-9, 1051, 1053-4,
1058; transportation, 895, 903, 912, 914, 9I5-I6, 917, 932-3, 954

NeZ York :orld,    122, 238, 297, 351

NeZ York :orld-Telegram,   358, 407, 432, 457, 473, 869; R0 critici]ed,
408-9; R0  supported, 378, 379, 509

NeZ York :orld-Telegram   and Sun, 991, 992, 1096; R0 critici]ed,  994,
998, 999, 1032; R0 supported and praised, 1005; Title I, 983, 1005-13,
1018-19, 1021-2, 1024-5, 1040-51 passim, 1054

NeZ York :orld's   Fair (1939-40), in, 654, 1062, 1084, 1092, 1093

NeZ York :orld's   Fair (1964-65), 728, 1086-94; admission fee, 1102,
1108, mi, 1112; amusements, 1100, 1106-7; attendance, 1102-3, 1104, mi, n
12;

;;I

banks and, 1090, 1104-6, 1107, , 1112-13; con es, IO89

1093, 1098, 1110; cost of, 10 financial problems of, 1102-13; foreign
e[hibition-,,  1092, 1093-4 and n., 1098; funds for, 1087, 1090 1 1113-14;
honest graft and, 1087-9, 1090, 1098, 1108; industrial e[hibitions, 927,
1094, 1098; insurance premiums, 1087-8; lavish spending on, 1088-9,
1108; layout, 1092-3; legal fees, 1090; maintenance, 1087, 1088-9, 1101,
1104, 1108; R0 as president, 1059-63, 1078, 1082, 1086-14; R0's
falsifying facts for, 1097, 1104; 3inkerton guards, 1089, 1104, 1108, 1111;
poZer derived from, 1061, 1087-8, 1090; public relations, 1089, 1094-5,
1097-8, 1104; records of, 1097, 1108; rents, 1092, 1101; Science 0useum,
1100, 1113; ta[ audit of, 1109; unions and, 736-7, 1088-9, 1090, 1101,
1104, 1108 NeZ York Zoological Society, 678-82,

686 Niagara Falls 3oZer Company, 247-8,

1824
249, 250-2 Niagara Frontier Bridge Authority, 345 Niagara-+udson
+olding Company, 403 Niagara River, 403 Niagara State 3ark, 8, 9, 13,
195, 246-56, 710, 825, 828, 1023, 1065, 1080; dam, 1041, 1058, 1078;
Falls in, 240, 247 Nichols, 0ary 3erot, 1022, 1104 Ni[on,  Richard, 735,
826, 1041, 1160 nonZhites, see +arlem; Jones Beach State 3ark; 0oses,
Robert; Negroes; 3uerto Ricans; relocation and

EVICTION  3RACTICES

Northern Boulevard (Route 25-A), 147, 153-4, 156, 339, 388, 896, 956

Northern State 3arkZay, 8, 184-5, 277-80, 281-2, 302-3 and n., 311, 314,
339, 341, 343, 485, 666-7, 896, 941, 943, 950, 953; alternate route for, 300-
3, 317, 405; compromise delaying construction of, 210-n, 212, 237; cost of,
301; .ahn  deal over, 277-8, 279, 299-303, 405; LI- barons and, 205, 211,
277-8, 279, 299-303, 318, 405; R0's acquisition of land for, 185, 195, 205,
277, 279, 299; tenant eviction for, 279-80; traffic congestion on, 515, 956

North Shore Almanack, 406

Novick, 0orris  S., 612

Nugent, +elen, 1046

Oak Beach, 311, 875, 1146, 1150, +54, 1160

[[ii

Oakes, John, 992, 1095 O'Brien, Ed, 1089, 1090, 1126 O'Brien, John 3.,
325, 327, 345, 346,

347, 357, 359

O'Casey, Sean, 1030

Ocean 3arkZay, 222, 233, 234, 311-12, 313, 896

Ochs, Adolph S., 198-9, 239, 458, 461, 654

1825
O'Connell, Dan and Ed, 414

O'Connor, Basil, 307, 417

O'DZyer, 3aul, 757, 765, 776

O'DZyer, :illiam,    682, 709, 755-6 and n., 794, 813, 1089; campaigns for
mayor, 699-700, 723, 756, 771, 775, 778-9, 786; corruption and, 786-7; as
district attorney, 755-6; as mayor, 3, 9, 463, 706, 724, 734, 756-8, 761-71,
775-8, 779-87, 793, 795, 796, 848, 903, 921, 1045; R0 and, 704-5, 706-7,
757, 76i-5, 771-9, 782, 783, 785, 801, 803, 806, 1015; and R0,
confrontations Zith, 765-71; and public Zorks, 685, 757, 768-71;
resignation of, 787; Tammany and, 699, 700-1, 740, 768, 770, 787; and 8N,
771-5

Ogden, :illiam,   987

O'.eefe,  3aul, 803, 1059

Olmsted, Frederick LaZ, 333-4, 335, 374,921,984

Olvany, George :.,  293, 321

O'0alley,  :alter,   1018

Openhym, :ilfred,   589, 591, 592, 601

OpotoZsky, Stan, 1098

Orchard Beach, 363, 365-7, 487, 508, 573; Tammany's restrictive
regulations, 331, 335, 363, 366

Orient Beach State 3ark, 8, 170, 238

Oriskany Battlefield, 239

Orton, LaZrence 0.,  659, 688, 781, 808-9; and 0aster 3lan, 765, 766, 780-
1, 783, 785, 792-3, 828;and urban reneZal, 962-3, 965 n., 966-9, 976-7,
978, 983, 1006

1826
O'Ryan, Gen. John F., 356, 416

Osborn, :illiam   Church, in

Ottinger, Albert, 192, 193, 196, 198, 292, 293

Outerbridge Crossing Bridge, 342, 924, 926

OZl's +ead 3ark, 344, 373, 675

O[ford  8niversity, 48-55, 64, 570

Oyster Bay ToZnship, 147 and n., 153, 204, 233, 237, 311

3alisades Interstate 3ark, 144-5, 34 2 3alisades Interstate 3arkZay, 773,
1070 3alma, Joseph A., 681-2 3almer, Arthur, 1121-3, 1130, 1134 3anuch,
J. Anthony, 1062-3, 1091-2

3app, Joseph, 1026-39, 1041, 1049;

R0  and, 1026, 1028, 1031, 1037;

politics of, 1026, 1029-32, 1035,

1037-8-3ark Association of N.Y.C., 198, 199,

210, 305-6, 332, 333 "-, 340-4, 397,

433, 458-61, 493-4, 540, 548,

567, 568 3ark Commissioner, see N.Y.C. 3ark

Commissioner parking garages and fields: funds for,

900; R0's authority funds for,

771, 928; N.Y.C, 459, 508, 769, 830,

896, 900, 917, 918, 919, 1014

1827
parks:

general information: acquisition of land for, 182-220 passim, 234-7, 239,
289, 374-8, 1072, 1073, 1152; attendance,

238, 314, 385; cost of, 164, 221, 226, 237, 239; fees in, 318; funds for, 164-
5, 166, 168, 181, 186, 192, 195, 211-12, 221, 225, 244, 247, 248, 265, 289-
90, 313, 1072, 1073; maintenance, 164-6, 312, 319, 482; neZ leisure time
increases interest in, 143-4, 166; patronage in, 256, 305, 331-2, 334, 335-6,
465-6; press support of,

168, 197-9, 213, 218, 240; public support of, 168, 193, 196, 201, 218, 257,
296-7, 310, 312-13, 424; public transportation banned in, 492-3;
recreational needs of city residents and, 10, 143-5, 147-8, 151, 153-6, 159,
161, 194-5, 238, 275, 288, 328, 341, 342-3, 378, 388, 481, 482, 834, 896,
1151; as source of poZer, 165, 255-6, 296, 360-2; state, 10, 156, 163-8,
239-40, 290, 297, 313, 3i8, 465, 478, 489, 619, 1072, 1073; see also NeZ
York City, public Zorks in;  N.Y.S. Council of 3arks; public Zorks; and
individual parks

background and development, 10, 163-9, 172-7, 200, 220, 243-5

conservation approach, 159, 166, 239-40, 243, 246, 256, 317, 459, 481-2,
494-5, 545, 989

philosophy and concept: R0's, 159, 166-7, 171, 206, 237-40, 245-6, 287-8,
545, 546, 834-5, 952; parkZays, 8, 11, 161-2, 163, 166-7, 171, 175, 239-40,
275, 287, 343, 483, 515, 1022; patriots and philanthropists, 163-8, 199-200,

239, 243-56, 317, 1152; reformers, 143, 145, 156-7, 159, 200, 331, 336-8,
340-4, 397, 399-400, 490-3, 540-9, 552, 560

recreation: active, see individual parks; philosophy, 7, 67, 159, 163, 167,
169, 220, 223, 237-8, 240, 243, 246, 385, 459, 481-2, 494-5, 545, 989

parkZays, see parks: philosophy and concept; roads and highZays

3arkZay Village, 774

1828
3arsons, Brinkerhoff Engineering firm, 1090

3ater, :alter,  39, 40-1

patronage: R0 and, 18, 53, 243, 305, 349, 427, 465, 695, 714, 740, ion; in
N.Y.C., 71, 74, 83, 122, 125, 128, 325, 326-7, 328, 331-2, 335-6, 360, 695,
700, 701, 711, 714, 740, 770; in N.Y.S., 98, 105, 242-3, 256, 262, 305, 465;
and parks, 256, 305, 331-2, 334, 335-6, 465-6; in 8.S., 53

3atterson, A. +olly, 1152

3atterson, Alicia, 1095

3auchogue Corporation, 186, 189, 191,

193, 197, 215

3eck, Louis, 881

3ecora, Ferdinand, 788

3edrick, Rose, 250, 267

3egler, :estbrook,  569, 778

3elham Bay 3ark, 363, 476

penal system, N.Y.S., 139-40, 142, 261, 265, 274

3enn Central Railroad, 934, 1133, 1135

people: and building of public Zorks, 478-83, 523-4, 869-70, 876, 892, 969,
1153; and civil service, 76, 78-81; human vs. property rights, 403, 542, 803,
870; R0's contempt for, 11, 19, 49, 51, 52-5, 76, 242, 258, 275, 278-80,
318, 410, 419-21, 423-5, 484, 567, 573, 577, 578-9, 598, 753, 758-9, 817,
876, 996, 1020-1, 1023, 1038, 1127, 1153; poor, R0's prejudice against,
242, 318-19, 489-90, 512, 513-14, 533, 557-6o, 578, 579, 610, 687, 736,
758-60, 767, 777, 834, 909, 968, 1086 n., 1101; and public Zorks, 18, 464-

1829
5, 657, 664, 677, 707, 744, 752-4, 785-6, 833-4, 847-9, 927; see also public,
the

3erkins, Frances, 66-7, 103-4, 167, 221, 222, 285, 291, 292-3, 295-6, 318,
364, 380, 525, 532, 673, 1150; as N.Y.S. Industrial Commissioner, 276; as
reformer, 91, 128, 132; as Secretary of Labor, 735

3ershing, Gen. John, 652

3eter Cooper Village, 7, 774, 805, 968

3hiladelphia, 571, 772

3hillips, :ayne,   1039, 1049, 1053, 1054

3hipps, +enry, 149, 163, 184-5, 299

3hipps, +enry Carnegie, 184-5

3ittsburgh, 572

3lanning Commission, see N.Y.C. 3lanning Commission

playgrounds: lack of, for poor, 20, 143, 335, 337, 509-12, 559, 852; in
N.Y.C, 7, 20, 157, 332, 335, 372, 374, 377-8, 451-2, 455-6, 460, 480, 487,
488, 508-9, 566, 570, 571, 783,

793-4, 830, 846, 889, 984, 986, 989, 1002, 1129; supervisors, 337, , 5ii
3lunkitt, George :ashington,  703, 7]

727, 885 30, 60c, 767, 902 3oirier and 0cLane  Company, 738 3okrass,
Louis I., 1044 5, 1047 3oletti, Charles, 1090, 1092, 1093, 1094,

1125, 1127 3ope, Bayard F., 922 3ort of London Authority, 615 3ort of
NeZ York Authority,  329 n., 345, 615-16, 803, 912, 918, 921, 1093;
airports, 759, 760, 766-7, 921, 930, 955; board, 922-3, 924; bonds, 617,
732; condemnations, 691-2, 695; cooperation Zith Triborough Authority,
921-6; funds for public Zorks, 923, 925-6, 1055, 1129; Joint 3rogram, 924-
6, 927 and n. t 930, 932, 933, 934, 939, 940; land use, 750; mass transit aid

1830
proposed, 924; multipurpose, 616-17, 922, 924; revenues of, 737, 922-3,
926, 928-30, 1133; see also individual projects 3ost, Langdon :., 430, 434,
438-9, 440,

449 3ost, :iley,   652 3otter, Gen. :illiam,   1111 poZer: and bill-drafting of
R0,  140, 141, 174-6, 213, 246, 307, 308, 360, 361, 399-400, 529, 624-30,
704-5, 710; brokers, 754, 1020-1, 1023, 1118, 1125-9, 1130; economic, 17-
19, 220, 610, 618, 621, 623, 631, 695, 722, 749, 751, 753-4, 768, 771-5,
783, 794, 920, 1056, 1061, 1078 3raeger, Capt. Emil F., 536, 538, 539,

887, 1092 3ratt, Charles, 149, 151, 403 3ratt, Ruth Baker, 403, 605, 1013
3ratt Institute +ousing, 1008-9, 1040 3rendergast, :illiam  A.,  63, 80-2,
1087 press, 16, 140, 271, 361, 372, 422, 530, 761, 767, 774, 777, 966, 988-
9, 1076-8, 1096, 1112; attacked by R0, 409, 412, 425, 1052-5, 1096-1102,
1106, 1109, 1 in; failure to investigate R0, 512, 50,  517, 5*9, 520, 525,
549, 556-7, 569, 690, 705, 797, 869, 876-7, 962, 966, 978-9, 982-3, 989,
998, 1020; information sources of, 1007-9, 1016-17, 1020, 1 045-50
passim; Jones Beach praised, 308-9; 0aster 3lan, 782-3; 0TA, 1136, 1137;
R0  critici]ed,  134, 408, 414, 416, 419, 425, 670, 681, 996, 999-1004,
1023, 1034, 1039, 1052-5, 1064, 1095, 1099, 1106, 1107-9, nil, 1114, 1131;
R0  supported and praised, 16-17, 198, 218, 238-9, 258, 263-4, 297, 309,
312, 378-9, 385,

;;IV

press (cont.)

399, 406-7, 432, 439, 440, 452, 462, 504, 506, 507, 509, 512, 515, 555-7,
568-71, 573, 575, 612, 681, 716-17, 902, 919, 979, 982-3, 987, 989, 996,
1014-16, 1023, 1039, 1042, 1055, 1063; R0's use of, 184, 190, 218, 424,
425, 431-2, 435-40, 457-8, 469-70, 473, 474, 475, 476, 499, 708, 726, 728,
782, 801, 845, 925, 977; national, 569-71; pictures in, 994-5; and politics,
73-4, 138, 358, 404, 701; and public Zorks, 168, 189-91, 197-9, 213, 218,
240, 489, 748, 768-9, 770, 795; and reformers, 492, 493, 646, 672; role in
Battle of Central 3ark, 990-1004; FDR and, 283, 314, 318, 574;
Shakespeare Festival fight, 1031, 1034-9; Title I, 977, 978-9, 980, 981-3,
1006-13, 1016-25, 1039-59; transportation, 895, 902, 912, 915-16, 917; see
also individual neZspapers

1831
3reusse, Charles J., 721, 727, 1090, 1098, 1099, 1120

3rice, Joseph 0., 200, 348, 350, 352, 356, 435, 436-7, 438, 567

3rocaccino, 0ario, 1156, 1160

3rogressivism, 59-60, 78, 84, 87, 104, 106, 127

3roskauer, Joseph, 91, 128, 129, 137, 259, 285-6, 294, 295, 322, 408, 413,
417, 603, 782

3rospect E[pressZay, 6, 918, 921, 925

3rospect 3ark, 481, 741; renovation of, 371, 499; Zoo, 373

public, the, 404, 1079-80; and mass transit, 917-18; R0 critici]ed, 424,
426, 429, 431, 440, 778, 782, 902-3, 987, 995, 999, 1033-4, 1039, 1162;
R0  supported and praised, 16-17, J 88, 193, 296-7, 310, 312-13, 319, 349,
359, 379, 385, 406, 426, 427, 432-5 passim, 440-1, 451-2, 457, 462, 464,
468, 517, 566-8, 571-3, 575, 581, 611, 631, 636, 657, 674, 681, 748, 767,
778, 1003; and public authorities, 633; and public Zorks, 168, 193, 196,
201, 218, 257, 296-7, 310, 312-13, 316, 424, 489, 509, 622, 679-80, 748,
768-9, 770, 795, 902; and reformers, 646, 657, 662-3, 666; resignation
about traffic congestion, 912-13, 914, 917; see also people

public authorities:

general information, 15-19, 360, 362, 614-36 passim; banks and, 535-6,
619, 639-40, 730-5, 760-1; civil service and, 472, 621; condemnations and,
623, 629; R0's identification  Zith, 632-3, 716; N.Y. metropolitan area and,
632; politics and, 18, 716,

719, 727; poZer and, 614, 618, 623-31 passim, 677, 682, 751, 920, 925,
1005-6, 1055, 1071, 1118-19; public relations and, 633; revenues of, 617-
18, 620, 621-3 passim, 628, 634, 695; secrecy in, 695, 705; Zealth of, 17,
18, 727; see also Bethpage State 3ark Authority; +enry +udson 3arkZay
Authority; housing; Jones Beach State 3ark Authority; 0arine 3arkZay
Authority; Nassau County Bridge Authority; NeZ York  City, public Zorks

1832
in; N.Y.C. +ousing Authority;  N.Y.C. Transit Authority; N.Y.C. Tunnel
Authority; N.Y.S. Bridge Authority;  N.Y.S. 3oZer Authority;  Niagara
Frontier Bridge Authority; 3ort  of London Authority; 3ort  of NeZ York
Authority; public  Zorks;

ROADS AND +IG+:AYS;     TRANS3ORTATION;

Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority

history and development, 615-36;

confidentiality of records, 16-18, 632, 1005-6, 1041; created in England,
615; economic potential, 618-19, 621-3, 625-6, 628; established for one
public improvement, 616; as fourth branch of government, 624; indefinite
e[istence, 624, 626; independence, 624, 628, 632, 716, 746-51; R0's bill-
drafting for, 618, 624-30, 635; multipurpose, 616; poZers, 623-30, 632,
635-6, 750; as self-liquidating organi]ation, 616, 617-18, 625-6

revenue bonds, 16, 535, 758;

capitali]ation, 618-19, 625-6, 629, 631, 695; as contracts, 624, 629-30, 731,
750; open bidding on, 733-4; ta[-e[empt status, 17, 731, 732, 934

public Zorks: appropriation of property for, 174, 177, 193; civil service
and, 620-1; condemnations for, 156, 174, 193, 207; cost, 9, 733; cost,
underestimating, 219, 220, 314, 345, 476-7, 549, 885; democracy and, 11,
18-19, 20, 316, 664, 753-4, 847-9, 9°9, 1153; Depression and,

344, 345-6, 372, 386, 616; driving-stakes technique, 218-19, 220, 225, 281,
313, 392, 475, 495, 535, 548-9, 569, 779, 797, 948, 986, 987, 990, 993; R0
as consultant to cities and countries, 571-2, 787, 812, 927, 1070, 1159;
R0's  accomplishments in, 9, 237-40, 273-4, 307, 315-16, 328,

345, 359, 452, 463, 570-1, 619, 828-9, 940, 1091, 1153; R0's authority
over city and state, 360-2, 466-7, 500, 548, 607, 714-15, 1133; R0's control
of, 19, 464-5, 622, 694-5, 700-11 passim, 717-22 passim, 727, 746-54, 784,
795,

1833
public Zorks (cont.)

797, 9 2 7, 953. I4 65; R0's  dreams for, 172, 218, 245, 258, 619, 1152-3;
R0's  need to build, 452, 551, 631, 676, 807, 909, 940, 1153; neighborhood
needs and disruption, 478-80, 481, 483, 488, 542, 847; openings, 824-6;
people and, 18, 464-5, 478-83, 523-4, 657, 664, 677, 707, 744, 752-4, 785-
6, 833-4, 847-9, 927, 969, 1153; politics and, 17-19, 187, 207-9, 257, 265,
308, 315-16, 345, 463, 549, 552, 608, 636, 681-2, 714, 748, 768, 770-1,
775, 778-9, 885, 927, 934, 1055-6; public support of, 168, 193, 196, 201,
218, 257,296-7, 310, 312-13, 3i6, 424, 489, 509, 622, 679-80, 748, 768-9,
770, 795, 902; purchasing property for, 156, 207; tenant eviction and
relocation for, 11, 12, 19, 21, 847-9; tolls and admissions, 824-5, 909, 921,
924, 1132; tours of R0's accomplishments, 820-1, 823; unappropriated
state land, 376; see also corruption and honest graft; Long Island State 3ark
Commission; NeZ Deal; NeZ York City, public Zorks  in;

RELOCATION AND  EVICTION  3RACTICES;

8nited States; and individual categories, projects, and public authorities

3ublic :orks:   A Dangerous Trade (R0), 698, 1154

3ublic :orks   Administration  (3:A),   442, 476, 616; aid for N.Y.C., 345-6,
387, 390, 392, 394, 395, 465, 531-2, 538, 608-10, 640-1, 642, 644, 660-1,
704, 745; Ickes as Administrator of, 392, 426, 441-3, 5i6, 53i; R0 and,
392, 395, 531, 626; Order Number 129, 430-40, 548, 607; and poZer
struggle betZeen R0 and FDR, 427-43

3uerto Ricans in N.Y.C., 796, 962, 964; eviction of, 968, 969, 972; ghettos
of, 965; in integrated neighborhoods, 857-8, 970; mi[ing Zith Zhites
discouraged, 513-14; R0's prejudice against, 513-14, 736, 1086 n., 1101; in
public housing, 855-6; unions' prejudice against, 736

4ueens, 62, 147; borough president, 743; developers, 143, 338, 481, 898;
mass transit needs, 928, 929, 931; parks, 343, 344, 1083-6; parkZays, 345;
planning for, 794; population groZth, 145, 329, 330, 765, 898, 899, 1086;
roads, 147, 329, 339-40; South Jamaica, 490, 510; traffic congestion, 329;
Triborough

1834
;;V

Bridge, 386-7, 388, 390, 392-3 4ueensborough Bridge, 146, 330

391, 516, 517, 518, 742, B9 4ueens Boulevard, 147, 339-40, 896 4ueens-
0idtoZn   E[pressZay, <> 11 4ueens 0idtoZn  Funnel. 607-10, 613, 640,
641, 698, 925; cost, 607, 668, 690; earnings, 694 ; 695, 698; funds for, 607-
9; traffic congestion, 911 4uill, 0ike,   757, 1019

Rabenold, Ell Zood, 139

RabinoZit],  Aaron, 408

Racusin, 0ilton,  1022-3

railroads, see transportation

Randall's Island, 386, 387, 389, 395-6, 492, 493, 508, 514-15, 1156; R0's
Triborough headquarters, 12-14, 634, 814, 1153; Triborough Stadium, 395,
442, 476, 482, 514-15

Rankin, J. Lee, 1125, 1127

Raphaelson, Samuel, 985

rapid transit, see transportation

Raskob, John J., 293, 380, 573-4

RasZeiler, John Jacob, 183

RasZeiler, 3. G., 183

Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), 345, 568, 608, 616, 640-1, 674,
675, 690-1, 695

Reconstruction, Retrenchment and Reorgani]ation Commission, see
reorgani]ation of NeZ York State government

1835
recreation, see parks

Redlich, Norman, 1125, 1127

reformers: and civil service, 71-82; and industry, 123-6; and La Guardia,
354-5, 436-7, 645, 700; and mass transit, 515, 519, 900; and 0aster 3lan,
782; and R0, 131, 141, 172, 173, 200, 220, 347-56, 361, 399-400, 435-7,
466, 492-5, 567, 645, 654, 656-7, 671, 688, 833-4; and R0, opposed to,
548, 641-7, 653-4, 656-75, 676, 678-88, 766, 782, 800, 1041, 1119; R0's
changing attitude toZard, 19, 173-4, 220, 400, 492-5, 567, 645, 653-4, 656-
7, 663, 667-70, 679-88, 1041, 1119; in N.Y.C., 60-5, 82, 84, 91-3, 327, 336,
347-56, 438, 645-7, 770-1, 782; in N.Y.S., 104-6, 108, 131-4; and parks,
143, 156-7, 159, 200, 331, 336-8, 340-4, 397, 399-400, 540-9, 552, 560;
and parks for the poor, 337, 490-3; and press, 492, 493, 646, 672; and
public, 646, 657, 662-3, 666; and slum clearance, 961, 965-6; and Smith,
93-5, 122, 123-4, 126, 127-8, 129, 157; and social Zelfare measures, 94, 95,
100, 132; see also Bureau of 0unicipal Research;

[[vi

reformers (cont.)

Fusion 3arty; Good Government

organi]ations Regional 3lan Assn., 547, 548, 568, 654,

659, 665-7, 943; transportation,

515, 519, 614, 897, 913, 916-17,

946 n. Reid, Ogden 0ills, 1-2, 43-4, 457 Reid & Co., C. J., 718-19 Reidel,
John, 793 Reidy, 3eter, 742 Reles, Abe, 756

RELOCATION AND  EVICTION

3RACTICES:

general information: R0's indifference to people, 765-6, 777, 847-9, 860,
866, 876, 967-9, 972-3, 976-7; 0oses 0en, 879; N.Y.C. Board of Estimate,

1836
752, 766, 968; nonZhites, 962, 968, 969, 972; public Zorks, 7, 19, 21, 336,
464, 768, 847-9, 919, 1017, 1022, 1025; Tammany +all and, 336; 8N, 19-
20

e[pressZays and parkZays, II, 19, 344, 766, 779, 797, 837-8, 848-9, 919,
968, 1017, 1022; Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay, 848, 860-3, 866, 870, 875, 878-
82, 884, 983, 986, 1050; GoZanus 3arkZay, 522; Northern State 3arkZay,
279-80, 301; Southern State 3arkZay, 183

Title I, 777-8, 797; Fordham 8niversity, 741; housing and slum clearance,
7, 12, 752, 777-8, 797, 804, 965-79, 1017, 1025, 1062; liberals and, 965-8;
Lincoln Center, 19-20, 741, 830, 986, 1013-14; 0anhattantoZn, 962-3,
965, 970-6, 978, 983, 986

reorgani]ation of NeZ York State government, 93, 95-111, 260-2, 265, 292,
656, 1071; administrative chaos, 96-7, 104; Bureau of 0unicipal Research,
96-8, 104, 106, 107, 126; campaign for adoption, 108-10; Citi]ens
Committee, 108-11; consolidation of functions, 97, 105, 106-7, no, in, 141,
172, 260-1; e[ecutive budget, 106-7, ill, 137, 260, 261; Governor, 96-7,
100, 105, 106-7, 173, 260-1; Legislature, 96-7, 103, 108-11, 137, 141, 260;
R0's  role in, 93, 97-ni, 112, 130-2, 137, 0i, 165, 172, 173, 181, 260-2,
265, 292, 656, 709; Belle 0oskoZit]  and, 93, 95-6, 98-100, 102, 103, 104,
106, 108, 109, no, 130, 141; NeZ York State Association, 112, 131-2, 137,
166; Reconstruction, Retrenchment and Reorgani]ation Commission, 95-1
n, 130, 131, 165-6, 172, 173, 260-2, 376, 709; Republican 3arty, 95-6,

99-101, 109-n; Smith and, 93, 99-100, 101, 103, 108-n, 126, 129, 141,261
Republican 3arty, 217, 257; honest graft in, 712, 716, 719, 730; L.I. barons
in, 152, 156, 176, 189, 191, 201, 205, 217, 402-3, 404; R0 enrolled in, 402,
630; in Nassau County, 152, 204-5, 208-9, 3ii, 405, 478, 714, 734; and NeZ
Deal, 403, 406, 407; in N.Y.C, 347, 353, 356, 359, 404, 682, 700, 734; in
N.Y.S. Legislature, 100, 101, no-n, 122, 124, 125-6, 137, 139, 152, 156,
165, 189, 191, 193, 195-202, 210-n, 227, 244, 246-7, 263, 265, 281, 307,
346,

403, 404, 410, 413, 4i8, 421, 466, 478, 608-9, 660, 758, 761-2; Old Guard

1837
of, 403-6, 408, 412, 418, 421, 466; 3rogressives in, 95-6, 101, 108, 109,
121, 128, 404; and reform, 96, 101, 109-n; reorgani]ation of state
government, 95-6, 99-101, 109-n; Rockefeller family and, 1067; in Suffolk
County, 148, 217, 404; upstate N.Y., 95, 165, 199, 200, 210, 258, 360, 402-
3, 409-10, 416, 421, 465, 466, 608; and utilities, 402-3,

404, 406, 407

Richmond E[pressZay, 896, 925, 1121

Rickard, Te[, 264

Rickenbacker, Eddie, 767

Ridder, Victor, 461-2

RidgeZood-0aspeth E[pressZay, 925

Riesner, Daniel J., 1012

Riis, Jacob, 59

Rivera, Diego, 471

Riverdale, 331, 534, 537, 543-4, 547, 550, 551, 554, 563, 565, 701

Riverside-Amsterdam project, 1024

Riverside 3ark, 65-7, 83, 323, 328, 343, 363, 365, 492, 493, 503, 505, 526
and n. t 527, 530, 531, 532-3, 544-5, 549, 552-3, 556, 557-6i, 834; in
+arlem, 553, 557-60; recreation in, 549, 556, 559

Riverton 3roject, 968

ROADS AND +IG+:AYS:

general information, 838; of antiquity, 837-8, 909; L.I., 10, 152-6 passim;
N.Y.C, 148, 329, 339-45 passim, 522-4, 915-16; state, 152-3; see also Long

1838
Island; NeZ York City, public Zorks  in; public authorities; transportation:
traffic congestion; and individual e[pressZays, highZays and parkZays

e[pressZays and highZays, 11, 274, 927; aggravated traffic congestion on,
515-17, 897-8, 901-2, 930; competing Zith mass transit, 897-8, 909, 912,
934; condemnations for, 779, 797, 837;

ROADS AND +IG+:AYS     (cont.)

construction difficulties, 837-9, 843, 844-7; cost of, 11, 843, 845, 921;
development and, 898-9, 904; funds for, city, 795, 900-1, 930; funds for,
federal, 704, 711, 769, 897, 930; funds for, state, 769, 897, 900-1, 930;
interstate systems, 921, 922; maintenance of, 796; mass transit combined
Zith, 903-8, 919, 928, 941-2, 944-9, 951, 954-5; R0's control of, 752, 797,
1063, 1065, 1078, 1117, 1120, 1127; R0's plans for, 839, 843-50, 885, 896-
8, 918, 925, 940, 1022, 1041, 1056, 1061, 1095, 1113, 1130; of N.Y.C., 11,
479, 508, 572, 711, 752, 759, 760, 769, 775, 829, 830; noise and pollution
from, 523, 558, 886-7, 889, 903; right-of-Zays for, 769, 775, 845-6, 903-4;
rush hours on, 563-4, 905, 910, 943, 947, 949, 953; state, 274; tenant
eviction and relocation for, 11, 19, 766, 779, 797, 837-8, 848-9, 919, 1017,
1022; see also Joint 3rogram of 3ort and Triborough authorities;
transportation: traffic congestion; and individual e[pressZays, parkZays
and highZays parkZays, 175, 614, 341-5, 360, 619; barred commercial
traffic, 899; bridges for, 230, 237, 3i8, 546-7, 951-4; funds for, 212, 313-14,
344-5; R0's acquisition of land for, 182-3, 185, 195, 205, 277, 279, 299;
R0's  system of, 8, 239-40, 265, 310-11, 515, 517, 614, 619, 1022; and
parks, R0's concept and philosophy of, 8, 11, 161-2, 163, 167, 170-1, 175,
239-40, 275, 287, 343, 483; and real estate developers, 207-8, 212, 898

robber barons, see Long Island barons Robbins, I. D., 1014 Robert 0oses
CauseZay, 9, 950, 1152 Robert 0oses 3arkZay, 9, 254, 826 Robert 0oses
3oZer Dams, 9, 254, 597,

709, 826, 1041, 1058, 1078, 1080 Robert 0oses State 3ark, L.I., 9, 950,

1080, 1152 Robert 0oses State 3ark, 0assena, 9,

826, 1080 Roberts, Lillian, 853, 855, 859, 866,

1839
868, 880, 881-2 Robinson, Bill ("Bojangles"), 457 Rochester Times-8nion,
407 RockaZays, 335, 500, 508, 635, 965 Rockefeller, David, 734, 743, 803,
1068,

1070, 1105, 1125, 1140-1 Rockefeller, John D., 149, 151, 1068 Rockefeller,
John D., Jr., 378, 534, 771,

772-4, 1070 Rockefeller, John D., Ill, 1016, 1070 Rockefeller, Laurance S.,
763, 1070,

vn

1071-2, 1073, 1074, 1077-., |< 1152

Rockefeller, Nelson A., 471, 709; and bond issue for 0TA, 1134-',
governor, 710, 1068-81, 1123, 112., 1132-41, 1147, 1148, 1153; and .0,
1070-1, 1081, 1109, 1110, 1137-41, 1149, 1156, 1160; and R0,
confrontations Zith, 9, 1069-70, 1073-80, 1091 n., 1131-7 passim] 1141-4,
1154; personality, 1068-70, 1071, 1077; and public Zorks, 1068-9, 1071,
1072, 1073; spending, 1069, I][ 32, 1135; transportation plan, 1072, 1132-
41; and 8N, 771, 773, 1070; Zealth, 1067

Rockefeller family, 144-5, 734, 772, 773, 965, 1060, 1067-8, 1071, 1141

Rockville Centre, 158, 159, 182

Rodrigue], Charles F., 727, 739, 745, 747, 748, 863

Roe, James A., 719, 727, 744, 1056

Rogers, +ugo E., 768, 770, 778

Rome, +arold, 985

Ronan, Dr. :illiam   J., 1071; R0  and, 1071, 1072, 1133, 1137, 1142-4,
1146, 1148-9, 1153-4, 1160; and transportation, 1072, 1123, 1132, 1134-7,
1140-4, 1145, 1148-9, 1153

1840
Roosevelt, Franklin D., in, 283-4, 412, 699, 720, 854, 961; anti-Tammany
+all, 283, 285, 304, 347, 711; attempt to force R0 out of Triborough
Authority, 17, 426-42, 635, 656, 661, 662, 674, 1015, 1034, 1119; and
Battery Crossing fight, 672-4, 676; campaigns for 3resident, 286, 294, 320-
2, 421-2; character, 285, 286, 287, 295; disability, 284, 285, 287, 292, 293,
298; as Governor, 9, 97, 282, 291-3, 300, 307, 313, 3I4-I7, 322, 325, 403,
404, 407, 1068; interest in parks, 287-91, 345; and La Guardia, 409, 441-2,
454, 466, 704, 745; and R0,

284, 301, 305, 314, 413, 423, 463, 57i, 584, 585, 676, 1070, 1134; and R0,
dependence on, 304, 306-7, 3*3-14, 315-16, 318-20; and R0, hatred
betZeen, 17, 282-3, 287, 289-91, 292-3, 296, 304, 315, 320, 357,

360, 405-6, 426-43 passim, 572, 607, 672, 673, 677, 678; and N.Y.S.
Legislature, 304-5; in N.Y.S. Senate,

285, 287; Northern State 3arkZay compromise, 300-1; and politics, 304,
316, 320, 345, 356, 608, 609;

as 3resident, 261, 347, 426, 684, 721, 755; and public relations, 314, 316;
and Smith, 113, 283-6, 289-92, 293-6, 300, 320, 321-2, 380, 419, 573-4;
and Smith's advisers, 283, 284-6, 287, 291-2, 295-6; social Zelfare policies,
344, 357, 403-5, 468,

[[vm

Roosevelt, Franklin D. (cont.) 574; speeches, 284, 285-6, 291; on State
Council of 3arks, 195, 200, 287, 288-91; and Taconic State 3arkZay, 288-9,
426

Roosevelt, 0rs. Franklin D. (Eleanor), 285, 288, 671, 672, 675, 678, 1034;
R0's  comments about, 293, 426, 675, 740; Smith and, 284

Roosevelt, Franklin D., Jr., 1040

Roosevelt, James, 288

Roosevelt, Theodore, 95, 152, 167, 284, 288, 291, 351 n., 652, 664

1841
Roosevelt, Col. Theodore, Jr., 187, 284

Root, Elihu, 95, 131

Root, OZen, 778

Rosen, Norma, 1001

Rosen, Richard, 1123-4, 1125-7, 1128

Rosenman, Samuel I., 91, 292, 295, 306, 720, 722, 727, 978, 980, 982,
1012, 1043, 1048, 1060, 1069, 1090, 1098, 1125, 1139-41

Rosenthal, A. 0., 1118

Roth, James, 278-9, 299, 303

Rothstein, Arnold, 377

Roulstone, :illiam   B., 200

Rudd 3ond, 239

Rudin, Sam, 785-6

Ruth, George +. (Babe), 456

Sagtikos 3arkZay, 8 St. James 3ark, 373 St. l^aZrence project, 8-9, 403,
709, 722,

828; condemnations for, 709;

3aul 0oses' plan for, 580, 595, 597 St. Nicholas 3ark, 337, 493 Salisbury,
+arrison, 1099 Salmon, EdZin, 729, 766, 793, 904 Sampson, Frank J., 791
Sands 3oint, 151 San Francisco, 772 Sanger, Elliott, 989-90 Sanger, 0rs.
Elliott, 989-90, 994 Sara Delano Roosevelt 3ark, 376/1., 441 Saratoga
Battlefield, 198, 239, 458 Saratoga Springs Authority, 345 Saturday
Evening 3ost, 570, 572 Saturday RevieZ, 601, 811, 1029 Saunders,
DZayne, 731 SaZ 0ill   River 3arkZay, 8, 329, 342,

1842
343, 365, 526, 537, 543, 554, 896 Sayre, :allace S., 348, 472, 586, 700,
746 Schaap, Dick, 1108-9 Schaeffer, Dr. Frank A., 472-3 Senary, Dore, 287

Schieffelin, :illiam,    131, 435, 567, 664 Schiff, Dorothy, 716, 966, 1025,
1048,

1050, 1095 Schiff family, 34 Schleiffer, Arnold, 825, 997-8, 1001,

1029 Schlesinger, Arthur, 294

Schoellkopf, 3aul, 247-8, 249, 250-2

schools and colleges, 328, 462-3, 640, 644, 795, 853, 1014; maintenance,
lack of, 796; need for, 470, 491, 614, 642-3, 757, 759, 767, 770, 772, 780-1,
795, 904

Schulman, Louis, 596-7

SchZart], Bertha, 865, 866, 867, 870, 872, 876

Scott, George C, 1028

Screvane, 3aul, 14-15, 727-8, 729, 751, 804, 1055, 1062, 1065, 1088, 1101,
1109-10

Scudder, ToZnsend, 214

Seabury, Samuel, 347, 350-2, 355-6, 404-5, 406, 416, 782; R0 and, 350,
352, 355, 417, 664; Smith and, 351-2; Tammany and, 350-2, 355-6; tin bo[
corruption investigation of, 322, 324-5, 347, 354, 359, 404, 713, 997

Second Ave. subZay, 900, 929, 931-2, 1148

Seligman, EdZin R. A., 63

Seligman, Eustace, 548

Seligman, Joseph, 26, 27

1843
Seligman family, 25, 33, 34

Settlement house movement, 30-3, 490, 5ii

Seventy-ninth St. boat basin, 487, 530-2, 553

seZers, need for, 757, 772, 778

Shanahan, Thomas J., 719, 722-7, 734, 738, 741, 803, 805, 1041, 1043,
1044, 1047-8, 1051, 1052, 1056, 1058-9, 1063-4, 1087 n., 1098, 1160

Shapiro, Sidney 0., 183, 229, 231-2, 233, 268, 272, 318, 319, 376, 484,
530, 532, 603, 629, 808, 809, 813-24 passim, 831, 832, 835, 849, 952-4,
1004, 1028, 1031, 1038, 1060, 1064, 1073, 1074-6, 1078, 1080, 1084,
1086, 1089, 1095, 1097, 1103, 1141, 1142, 1145, 1150, 1155, 1160, 1161

Sharkey, Jack, 264

Shea, Col. :illiam   J., 908

Shea Stadium, 6, 727, 829, 830, 1113

Sheehan, :illiam  F., 283, 285

Sheridan, Arthur V., 863, 885

Sheridan, John F., 956-8

Sheridan E[pressZay, 6, 841 and n., 885, 891-2, 918, 925

Sherman, Cele, 855, 892-3

SherZood, Robert, 295

Shientag, Bernard, 408, 413, 604

Shientag, 0rs. Bernard, 604, 605

Shortridge, Fearson, 690, 694

1844
Shouse, Jouett, 574

Shriver, Eunice .ennedy, 1014

Shumsky, 3hilip, 800-1

Sicilian Asphalt 3aving Company, 738

Silver, Abel, 869

Simkhovitch, 0ary,  132

Simon, :illiam,   980-1

Sims, 0ary Louise, 69-70; see also 0oses, 0rs. Robert

Singstad, Ole, 607, 676, 679, 689-97, 698, 762, 896; opposed R0, 594,
608-9, 646, 657, 658-9, 665, 675, 697-8; smeared by R0, 691-2, 695

Skinner, Cornelia Otis, 1028

Slattery Contracting Company, 723, 738, 1090

slum clearance, 611; see also housing: Title I

smear technique, see 0oses, Robert

Smisek, 0r. and 0rs.  Charlie, 230

Smith, Alfred E., 9, 87-8, 412, 422, 713, 799; as Assemblyman, 118-27;
campaigns for Governor, 94-6, 134, 138-9, 187, 210, 257, 284, 351-2, 353;
campaigns for 3resident, 148, 226, 257, 280-2, 290, 291-2, 320, 321-2; and
Central 3ark Zoo, 381-3, 419; character, 101, 117, 119-20, 125, 138; Zith
Empire State Building Corporation, 293, 380; family and background, 113-
17, "9, 129-30, 293; as Governor, 87, 99, 128, 135, 137-42, 167-9, 231,
237, 261, 265, 281, 294, 403, 404, 407, 580, 1068; R0 and, 87, 112-13,
129-30, 133-4, 158, 167-9, 173, 185, 188, 193, 205, 213,

1845
217, 218, 226, 232, 233, 237, 241, 242, 245, 249-59 passim, 262, 266, 267,
274, 277, 280-1, 282, 284, 289-91, 295-6, 298, 303-4, 307, 314-15, 320,
322, 340, 349, 350, 352, 358, 359, 362, 380-2, 397, 398, 401, 402, 405,
418-19, 423, 439-40, 454, 490, 570, 573-5, 581, 584, 592, 603, 631, 740,
1027, 1055, 1071; and R0 as adviser, 136-42, 227, 616 n., 834; and N.Y.S.
Legislature, 88, 191, 201, 256, 263, 294, 304; and N.Y.S. reorgani]ation,
93, 95, 99-100, 101, 103, 108-11, 126, 129, 141, 261;

and politics, knoZledge of, 119-20, 129, 130, 137, 138, 200; popularity of,
in, 121, 187, 262, 349, 352, 362, 574, 741; public Zorks, support of, 167-9,
171, 174, 176-7, 181, 186-8, 190, 191, 193, 194-202, 203, 211, 215,

218, 221, 225, 244, 246, 257-8, 261, 265, 273-4, 288, 340; and reformers,
93-5, 122, 123-4, 126, 127-8, 129, 157; retirement, 293-4, 573-5; and FDR,
113, 283-6, 289-92, 293-6, 300, 320, 321-2, 380, 419, 573-4; and social
Zelfare measures, 93, 94, 123-4, 127-9, 257-8, 261, 265, 294, 380, 418,
491, 574, 974; as Tammany

man, 87, 94, 109, 112, 116-18, 120, 121-2, 124, 125, 126-8, 182, 186-7,
210, 257, 259, 283, 293-4, 322, 349, 351-2, 353, 380, 383, 7+; and :alker,
320-1, 380, 398, 401

[[i[

Smith, 0rs.  Alfred E. (.atie   Dunn), 117, 118, 119, 281, 293, 294, 380

Smith, Emily (0rs.  John A. :arner)   129-30, 137, 257, 258, 259, 280, 286,
292, 383, 418, 575

Smith, Jean .ennedy, 1014

Snell, Bertrand +., 430 and n., 437

social Zelfare measures, 407-8; of NeZ Deal, 356, 403, 405, 468, 574;
reformers and, 94, 95, 100, 132; Smith and, 93, 94, 123-4, 127-9, 257-8,
261, 265, 294, 380, 418, 491, 574, 974; Tammany and, 127-8

Sokolsky, George E., 1079

1846
Solomon, Sidney, 338-9, 397, 398-9

SoundvieZ 3ark, 619

SoundvieZ project, 1046, 1049, 1057-8

Southern State 3arkZay, 8, 11, 162, 230, 234, 302, 308, 310, 312, 313, 340,
341, 343, 344, 485, 896, 899, 905, 943; bridges on, 237; construction of,
211, 212, 220-1, 237, 281-2; funds for, 212; landscaping, 237; R0's
acquisition of land for, 182-3, 205, 237; tolls on, 824-5; traffic congestion
on, 515, 953, 956

Spar go, George, 484, 694, 696, 718, 719, 747, 752, 763, 766, 779, 802,
877, 908, 911, 1009, 1011, 1012, 1041, 1042, 1051, 1052, 1089, 1090,
1098, 1103, 1104, 1105, 1155

Spellman, Francis Cardinal, 697, 738, 740, 741, 9ii, 1035, 1037

Sprague, J. Russel, 405, 406, 738, 747, 1069

Sprain Brook 3arkZay, 8, 896

Spreckles, Claus, 149, 184-5

Spuyten Duyvil, 534, 541, 542, 543, 546, 547; marred by R0's :est Side
plans, 542, 543, 547, 550, 551, 554, 562-3, 565

Spuyten Duyvil 3arkZay, 538, 542

Stark, Abe, 871

Starnes, Joe, 471

Starnes, Richard, 1008

Staten Island, 331, 7975 borough president, 743; bridges, 342; developers,
481; parks, 336, 344, 363; roads, 341-2, 343

Staten Island E[pressZay, 6

1847
Staten Island Rapid Transit Service,

1135 Steadman, 0arty, 1022, 1048-9 Steffens, Lincoln, 59 Steingut, IrZin,
466, 660, 668, 670, 719,

744 Steingut, Stanley, 719, 727, 1056, 1124 Stephens, D. 0allory, 719-20,
721 Sterne, Laurence, 35 SteZard, 0r. and 0rs. Luther C, 72 Stimson, Col.
+enry L., 95, 108, 109,

no, 131, 134, 149, 185, 278, 279,

299, 300

;;;

Stokes, +arold 3helps, 44, 182, 457

Stone, EdZard Durrell, 1092

Stone, Lester B., 432

Straus, Jack, 741-2, 743, 1059

Straus, Nathan, Jr., 132, 306, 353, 417 and n., 418, 548, 613, 782

Strong, Selah B., 203, 213-14

Strunsky, Simeon, 555

Sturla, Charles, 977

Stuyvesant +eights, 490, 510, 511

Stuyvesant ToZn, 7, 805, 961, 968

suburbs, see Long Island

subZays, see transportation

1848
Suffolk County, 145, 155, 157, 1152; developers in, 945; .u .lu[   .lan  in,
148; and L.I. State 3ark Commission, 174, 175, 190, 191, 210, 312, 502,
831-2; mass transit needs, 928, 958; 3lanning Board, 944, 946 n.\
population groZth in, 898, 899, 942-3, 945; Republican 3arty in, 148, 217,
404; see also Long Island

Sukarno, 1093, 1107

Sullivan, 0ark,  284

Sullivan, Tim, 285, 444

Sul]berger, Arthur +ays, 198, 305, 457, 461, 771, 1054, 1095

Sul]berger, 0rs. Arthur  +. (Iphigene Ochs), 198, 360, 457, 458-62, 494,
548, 567, 603, 604, 992, 1032, 1054,

1095, 1097, 1115 Sul]berger, Arthur Ochs, 1095 Sul]berger, 0rs. Cyrus L.,
198 Sunken 0eadoZ State 3ark, 8, 163, 170,

202, 205, 220, 238, 258, 311, 314, 485 Sunken 0eadoZ State 3arkZay, 8,
311 Sunrise +ighZay, 310, 956 Sunset 3ark, 520-5, 898;

neighborhood decay in, 522-5 Susquehanna Railroad, 898 SZarthe,
Leonard, 874 sZimming pools, 454, 456-7, 487, 512-13;

mi[ing  of Zhites and Negroes

discouraged, 513-14 SZing, Raymond Gram, 985 SZope, +erbert Bayard,
137, 286, 322,

605, 707, 1012

Taconic State 3ark Commission: acquisition of land for, 288-9; funds for,
289-290; FDR and, 287, 288-91

Taconic State 3arkZay, 896; FDR and, 288-9, 426

Taft, Robert A., 707, 777

1849
Talese, Gay, 197, 461, 1053

Tallamy, Bertram D., 11, 272, 706, 710, 809-10, 868, 869, 873

Tammany +all, 61, 62, 64, 92, 95, 113, 131, 138, 264, 305, 348, 350, 413,
7n; and beaches, restrictive regulations on, 331, 335, 363, 366;

Catholics and, 127; civil service reform and, 4-5, 71-4 passim, 78-82, 84-5;
courts and, 351, 712; Democratic 3arty and, 116, 118, 325, 350, 351, 711-
12, 743; immigrants and, 71, 127; JeZs and, 91; La Guardia and, 354, 383,
444, 7+-I2, 779, 1084; R0  and, 4-5, 357, 362, 700-1, 719, 739-40, 778,
788, ion, 1017, 1055-6; N.Y.S. and, 97, 137; O'DZyer and, 699, 700-1, 740,
768, 770, 787; parks and, 331-2, 334, 335, 989; FDR and, 283, 285, 304,
347, 7n; Seabury's dislike of, 350-2, 355-6; Shanahan and, 724; Smith and,
87, 94, 109, 112, 116—18, 120, 121-2, 124, 125, 126-8, 182, 186-7, 210,
257, 259, 283, 293-4, 322, 349, 351-2, 353, 380, 383, 711; social affairs of,
114, 259, 338-9; social Zelfare measures and, 127-8; tenant eviction and,
336; Triborough Authority and, 345-6, 362, 387, 390-i; :agner  and, 718,
719, 740, 1087-8 and n., 1055; :alker and, 321, 324, 712 n., 787; see also
corruption and honest graft; Democratic 3arty; patronage Tanner, Frederick
C, no, 126-7 Tappan, +a]el, 266-7, 268, 364, 446, 808 Tavern-on-the-
Green, 374, 399, 614, 825,

868, 984-5, 988, 993, 997-1003, 1029 Taylor, George C, 155, 162 Taylor,
+arry, 752 Taylor Estate, 162, 170, 182, 184,

186-205 passim, 210-11, 213-17, 570; court battles over, 188, 189, 192,
193-4, 203, 213-17, 244, 246, 288, 301, 317, 398, 403 n., 404; Finance
Committee hearings, 191-2; illegal appropriation of, 186-7, 188-9, 190-205
passim, 214-15, 219, 243-5,

304 Temple Emanu-El, 27, 30, 411 and n.,

412 tenant eviction and relocation, see

RELOCATION AND  EVICTION  3RACTICES

Tenney, Charles, 1032

1850
Thacher State 3ark, 240, 244

Thayer, :arren  T., 193, 414, 415

Theobald, Dr. John, 986, 987, 991

Third Avenue El, 851, 897, 932

Third Avenue Transit Company, 877-8

Thomas Jefferson 3ark 3ool, 454, 513-14

Thorne, Landon, 813

Thousand Islands Bridge Authority, 345

Throgs Neck Bridge, 6, 752, 844, 885,

896, 925, 1018, 1065, 1147; cost, 921;

earnings, 715, 926; traffic congestion

on, 950; Triborough funds for,

926, 1055 Throgs Neck E[pressZay, 6, 841 and n.,

925

Tibbetts, Abbott, 0cCarthy, Stratton

(engineering firm), 1090 Timber 3oint Club, 155, 163, 182, 184,

188, 197 Time, 570, 1094 Time, Inc., 1090

Tinker, Chauncey BreZster, 41, 443 Title I, see housing Tobay Beach, 311-
12 Tobin, Austin, 721, 827, 922-3, 924,

1129 Torrey, Raymond +., 316-18, 501 Tracy, :illiam  J., 741, 1130 traffic
congestion, see transportation Training School for 3ublic Service, see

1851
Bureau of 0unicipal  Research Trans-0anhattan E[pressZay, 924, 925

TRANS3ORTATION:

general information, 1132; funds for, 1132-9; Joint 3rogram of 3ort and
Triborough authorities, 924-6, 927 and n., 930, 932, 933, 934, 939, 940;
Lindsay's plan, 118-29; R0's control of, 19, 805, 897, 918-19, 923-4, 927-
8; and R0's isolation from reality, 836, 908-10, 953; planning for balanced
system, 614, 897-908 passim, 913-18, 919, 944, 946-9, 958, 1072, 1132,
1134-5; real estate development and, 898, 940-2, 945, 958; Rockefeller's
plan, 1072, 1132-41; socal implications in R0's policies, 901, 902, 908,
915; see also public authorities; public Zorks; roads and

+IG+:AYS

automobiles, 838; barring from 0anhattan, proposed, 902, 916; increased
traffic, 19, 834, 895, 912-14, 943, 956-8; and leisure time, 144; pleasure
driving, 171, 483, 543, 545, 546, 555, 834, 908, 952; see also
transportation: commuting; traffic congestion

buses, 546-7, 791, 947, 958; on e[pressZays, 944-5, 949, 951; funds for,
900-1; parkZay bridges too loZ for, 318, 546-7, 951-4

commuting: acceptance of bad transportation, 912-13, 939; by car, 301-2,
546-7, 563, 834, 898, 909, 910, 914, 917, 940, 943-6 and n., 947-50, 953,
956-8; increase in, 916, 943; and lack of jobs in suburbs, 899; by railroad,
898/916-17, 933-40, 946, 9575 by rapid transit, 928, 931-3, 939-40, 946-7,
958; rush hours, 563-4, 905, 910, 931, 943, 947, 949, 953

Long Island Rail Road, 151, 155-6, 157, 215, 316, 318, 834-5, 843, 907,
928-9, 941, 946-7, 1135, 1136; competition Zith roads, 898, 934;
deterioration, 934-9, 943, 1149; fares,

;;;I

934; financial problems, 934, 113 industry, 899, 941-2; mode, 955, 9571
proposed East Side ten 928

1852
mass transportation: banned in pi 492-493; blocked by loZ bridges, 318,
546-7, 951-4; combined Zith roads, 903-8, 919, 928, 941-2, 944-9, 951,
954-5; competition Zith roads, 897-8, 909, 912, 934; cost of, 903, 907, 928-
30, 946, 947-8, 954-5, 1132; decline of, 898, 916, 930, 933, 940; fares, 758-
63, 791, 900, 902; funds for, city, 904, 907, 909, 918, 1132; funds for,
federal, 955, 1132; funds for, state, 904, 1132-9; and high-density
development, 898, 941-2, 945-6, 958; labor costs and, 934; modal split,
957-8; need of poor for, 245, 318, 546-7, 687, 901, 908; opposed by R0,
19, 519, 546-7, 897-8, 900-1, 908-9, 918-19, 934, 945, 946, 951-4, 1086 n.,
1095; opposition to R0 on, 19, 622, 900, 902-8, 915-18, 948; press and
public support of, 915; public authority aid proposed for, 918-19, 920, 924;
reformers and, 515, 519, 900; traffic congestion relieved by, 515, 614, 897,
901-3, 1072; and urban planners, 897-908 passim, 913-18, 919, 944; see
also transportation: commuting

railroads, 933; competition Zith roads, 898, 912, 934; deterioration, 917,
934-40, 1149; fares, 934; financial problems, 19, 934, 939", and labor costs,
934; 3ort Authority aid for proposed, 924; see also transportation: Long
Island Rail Road; and other individual railroads

rapid transit, 841 and n., 851, 899; cost, 946, 947-8; needed to relieve traffic
congestion, 897, 901; proposed on bridges and e[pressZays, 519, 903-8,
919, 928, 941-2, 944-9; right-of-Zays for, 903-4, 907, 946, 948; see also
transportation: mass transportation; and individual lines

subZays, 642, 644, 778; accidents, 933; deficit, 19, 757, 762, 920, 932,
1134, 1136; deterioration, 932-3, 940; fares, 758-63 passim, 791, 900, 920,
ii34', funds for, 900-1; and high-density development, 898; maintenance,
759, 796, 932-3; need for, 757, 760, 795, 906, 929-33, 1022, 1086 n.\ plans
for, 900-1; rush hour, 931; Triborough aid for, proposed, 918-19, 920, 1118,
1119; see also transportation: mass transportation; and individual lines

traffic congestion, 926, 940; and accident rates, 914; aggravated by more
construction, 515-18, 897-8, 9iiI2 > 930; increased, 5^5, 516-20, 715, 836,

;;;ll

TRANS3ORTATION (cotlt.)

1853
885, 895, 900, 956-8; Long Island, 515, 516-17, 519, 545, 943-4, 949-51,
955-8; R0's solutions, 515-18, 525, 556, 669, 895-7, 900, 902, 905, 911-
12, 918, 949, 950; and need for mass transportation, 515, 614, 897, 901-3,
1072; N.Y.C., 20, 328-31, 34i, 515, 516-19, 525, 545, 547, 563-4, 610, 614,
639, 742, 765, 769, 786, 895, 900, 902-6 passim, 910-17, 942; public and,
914; public resignation about, 912-13, 914, 917-18; see also individual
roads

Transportation :orkers  8nion,  757, 759

Travia, Anthony, 1124-8

Triangle ShirtZaist Company, 122-3

Triborough Bridge, 6, 340-4 passim, 360, 386-95, 396-7, 454, 493, 508,
517, 619, 628, 633, 659, 898, 923, 925, 1129, 1147; approaches to, 386,
390, 391, 392-3, 448, 476-7, 626, 838; C:A employees for, 392, 394; cost,
391-2, 626; earnings, 617-18, 698; funds for, 387-95 passim, 428, 435-6,
439; opening of, 441-3, 516; tenant eviction for, 386; traffic congestion on,
516, 517-18, 715, 897, 912, 913

Triborough Bridge and Tunnel

Authority: amendments to, 625-31; audit of, 716-17 and n.; autonomy, 13-
16, 17-18, 640, 657, 716, 1140; banks and, 18, 725, 733-5, 927, 934, 1048;
Battery Crossing fight, 645-7, 653, 657-75, 676; bonds, 345, 625, 730-4,
750-1, 762, 920; bonds, covenants of, 1119, 1120, 1122, 1128, 1134, 1137-
8, 1139-41; bonds, interest rates on, 732; bonds, underZriting of, 18, 733,
734; cooperation Zith 3ort of N.Y. Authority, 921-6; e[panded poZers,
626-30, 635; funds for public Zorks, 534-9, 617-23 passim, 640-1, 663,
676, 689, 715-18, 727, 732, 737, 747, 749-50, 769, 771, 779, 784, 795, 885,
920-1, 926, 927, 930, 948, 955, 1055, mi, 1113-14, 1129, 1130-1;
headquarters, 12-14, 634; honest graft in, 18, 716-17, 718-21, 725, 733-5,
742, 762, 927, 934, 1048, 1056; insurance, 18, 718-20 and n., 725, 927,
934; Joint 3rogram, 924-6, 927 and a[., 930, 932, 933, 934, 939, 940; land
use, 750, 891-2; legal services for, 18, 720-1, 927, 934; mass transit aid
proposed, 918-19, 920, 924, 1118, 1119; merger Zith 0TA, 835-44, 1146;
0id-0anhattan   E[pressZay, 783-5; R0  as consultant, 1142, 1146-54,

1854
1158; R0 as liaison Zith  state and federal agencies, 1063, 1065, 1078, n
17,

1120-1, 1130-1; R0's control of, 13, 360, 362, 391, 427, 500, 608-9, 616,
623, 628, 629, 636, 715, 717, 763-4, 784, 807, 813, 969, 1056, 1061, 1078,
1091, 1110, 1114, 1117, 1119-28, 1129-31, 1133-44; R0's falsifying facts
for, 643-4, 657-8, 665, 667-8, 689; R0's plans supported by industry, labor,
politicians, 926-7, 934; parks of, 395-6; police force, 629, 634; and politics,
18, 716, 719, 927, 934; private records, 17, 715-16, 1097; proposed merger
Zith Transit Authority,  n 18-29; public relations, 18, 657-8, 696-7, 927 n.,
1050, 1129; 3:A  funds for, 345-6, 390, 392, 394, 428, 570; ra]ed East
River ferry, 448-51; revenues, 13-14, 17-18, 640-1, 659, 663, 698, 715, 717,
731-2, 746-7, 918-19, 920, 921, 922, 926, 928-30, 939, 1061, 1103, 1120,
1133-4, 1136; revenues, capitali]ation of, 715, 920, 1133; FDR's plan to
force R0  out of, 17, 427-43, 635, 656, 661, 662, 674, 1015, 1034, 1119;
secrecy in, 715-16, 718, 720 n., 742, 1114; self-liquidating, 617, 919;
Tammany and, 345-6, 362, 387, 390-1; Tunnel Authority merged Zith, 693-
4, 705, 762; and :orld  :ar   II, 690-1 True[,  James E., 708-9, 710 Trujillo,
Rafael Leonidas, 832 Truman, +arry S., 685, 699, 720, 721,

767, 787 TugZell, Re[ford G., 15, 445-6, 471,

599, 785, 1032 Tully, Grace, 440

Tully and Di Napoli, Inc., 738, 1090 Turner Construction Company, 738
Tuttle, Charles +., 203, 204, 214, 216,

398-9, 946 TZeed, :illiam   0.,  127, 713 TZin Islands, 366, 508 TZomey,
Jeremiah F., 242-3, 256

8

8dall, SteZart, 1156

8ngar, Sidney J., 1024, 1048, 1049

8nion League Club, 411

1855
unions, see labor

8nited Nations headquarters, 7, 19, 771-5, 817, 830, 1070, 1085;
competition for, 771, 772; cost, 771-2, 774; housing for, 772, 774; R0's use
of poZer for, 771-5; public relations, 771; tenant eviction for, 19-20

8nited Neighborhood +ouses, 490, 655

8nited 3arents Association, 512

8nited States: civil service in, 54-5, 59; funds for public Zorks, 9, 12, 345-
6, 359-60, 426, 428-43 passim, 453, 463-5, 467, 468, 474, 475, 476, 487,

8nited States (cont.)

568, 581, 607, 608-10, 611, 616, 622, 687, 703-7, 78, 714-15, 717, 737,
747, 750, 752, 769, 783-5, 795-7, 865, 867-8, 871, 886, 897, 921, 922, 925,
930, 955, 1056, 1085, 1087, 1114, 1120, 1131, 1132; 3rogressivism in, 59-
60, 78, 87, 104; see also housing; NeZ Deal; and individual federal
agencies

8.S. Congress, 686, 934; and the Depression, 345, 538; +ouse 8n-
American Activities Committee, 471, 1026, 1029, 1031-2; Senate hearings
on Title I, 979-82, 1006

8.S. :ar   Department, 662, 663, 671, 672-4, 675

8pper 0anhattan E[pressZay, proposed, 769, 896, 923, 925, 1152

8rban, Josef, 338

urban decay and public Zorks, see housing: general information

urban planning, 781, 792, 1156; for balanced transportation system, 897-
908 passim, 913-18, 919, 944, 946-9, 958; and federal funds, 616; 3aul
0oses and, 578; R0  consulted on, 571-2; R0 opposed to, 915-16; unifying
concept in, 578, 654, 669, 793

urban reneZal, see housing: Title I

1856
8.S. NeZs &  :orld   Report, 918

utilities: Lehman and, 403-4, 412, 414-15; 3aul 0oses and, 578; 586-7;
3oZer Trust and, 403, 404, 407, 412; 3ublic Service Commission and, 403-
4; rates, 409, 414; Republican 3arty and, 402-3, 404, 406, 407

Valentine, LeZis J., 450, 451, 516 Valley Stream, 158, 159, 182, 183, 316
Valley Stream State 3ark, 8, 220, 238,

258, 3+,3I3, 314 Van Arsdale, +arry, 735-8, 1056, 1059,

1078, 1124, 1135, 1138, 1148, 1160 Van Cortlandt 3ark, 325, 481, 534, 538,

543; marred by R0's :est   Side plan,

544, 554, 1000; marsh in, 544,

545, 565, 566, 846, 989 Vanderbilt, Cornelius, 148, 149, 163 Vanderbilt,
0rs.  :illiam    ..,   II, 185 Vanderbilt, :illie,    149, 187

Van Schaick, Benjamin, 86, 181 Van :yck, Robert C, 325 Van :yck
E[pressZay, 6, 843, 896, 918, 950; cost of, 905, 907; rapid transit proposed
for, 904-8, 948, 954-5; right-of Zay for, 846, 848; traffic congestion on,
905, 910-11, 954-5 Vau[, Calvert, 333, 397 Vermaelen, Joseph A., 810,
1143 Verra]ano-NarroZs Bridge, 6, 689, 695, 736, 752, 843-4, 896, 925,
942,

1065; approaches to, 750-1

1071; bonds, 732. 733, IO53

of, 921; earr. 715, 926;

opening of, 825; 3ort Authority

for, 925; second deck, 951, 1130 1143

1156 Village Voice, The, 1022 Vollmer, Arnold, 603, 811,11:5 11 45

1857
1152 Vollmer, 0rs. Arnold,  603, 604, 1115

1145

:

:adsZorth,   James J., 121, 210, 403 n.

:agner,  Robert F., Sr., 121, 122, 127, 261, 403 n., 610, 799

:agner,  Robert F., Jr., 721, 739, 923, 924, 976; campaigns, 798, 799, 1024;
on City 3lanning Commission, 766; and Cross-Bron[ E[pressZay route,
870-5, 880; as 0anhattan borough president, 597, 780, 784, 799; as mayor,
2-3, 9, 463, 706, 707, 729, 742, 802-6, 922, 977, 986, 995, 999-1002, 1029,
1032, 1034-8, 1052, 1055-9, 1064, 1065 and n., 1109-10; and R0, 799,
802-3, 831, 835, 871, ion, 1015, 1034-9, 1055-9, 1062-3, 1108, 1124, 1125
1127, 1149; and R0, distrust of, 14-15, 705, 727-8, 1088 and n.\ opposition
to R0,  3, 4, 5, 18, 725-6, 794, 799-801 and n., 804-6; and planning, 799;
and Tammany, 718, 719, 740, 1055, 1087-8 and n., and Title I, 1009-12 and
n., 1014-15, 1049, 1050; and unions, 735

:ainZright,    Stuyvesant, 820

:ald,   Lillian,  348, 349

:ald,   0r.  and 0rs.  Richard C, 986

:alker,   James J.: corruption under, 321, 324-8, 347, 713; as mayor, 20,
210, 321, 324-8, 332, 333 "., 336, 338-9, 340, 344, 353, 357, 375, 446, 465,
615, 779; in N.Y.S. Senate, 136-7, 139, 141, 201, 320; playboy habits of,
320-1, 338-9, 397, 605, 799, 996; and Smith, 320-1, 380, 398, 401; and
Tammany, 321, 324, 712 n., 787

:antagh  CauseZay, 234, 236, 281-2,

308,310,502,909 :antagh State 3arkZay, 8, 237, 517,

896, 951 :ard,  Barbara, 912 :ard,  :illiam,    200, 404 :ard's  Island, 331,
386-7, 389, 395-6,

1858
508, 779 :arn,  Baron, 407, 422 :arner,  Albert L., 199 :arner,   John A.,
137 :arner,  0rs.  John A., see Smith, Emily :ashburn  :ire   :orks,   393-4
:ashington,  George, 648-9, 652 :ashington Bridge, 842, 885

;;;IV

:ashington  Square Southeast project,

979, 1045

:atkins   Glen, 227, 239

:atson,  EdZin  0.,  672, 673

:atson,  Thomas J., 711

:ebb  &  .napp,  Inc., 1011-12 and n.

:echsler,  James, 1025, 1048

:eeping  Beech 3ark, 986-7

:einberg,  Robert C, 488, 500, 540, 542-8, 550, 551-2, 560, 563, 565, 613,
645; smeared by R0, 502, 547-8

:einer,  Bernard, 863-4

:eisl,   EdZin, 1109

:elch,   0aj.  :illiam    A., 250, 251

Zelfare, 294, 325, 346, 893

:estchester County, 8, 200, 201, 312, 340, 404, 517, 518-19, 545, 551,
900; park restrictions, 144, 1065; population groZth, 546-7; traffic
congestion, 520

:eston,  Andy, 209, 218

1859
:est  Shore E[pressZay, 925

:est  Side +ighZay,  6, 329, 342, 343, 501, 526; 553, 555-6, 567, 645, 646,
658, 660, 668, 838, 1152; deterioration, 796; traffic congestion on, 563,
913, 914, 929

:est  Side Improvement: acquisition of land for, 503-7, 535; condemnations
for, 532, 534, 538, 543, 550; cost of, 526-39 passim, 543, 549, 551, 556-7,
565; funds for, 526-40 passim, 550-1; R0's genius in financing, 540, 550;
neighborhood erosion for, 542-4, 545; and N.Y.C. Zaterfront, 544-6, 549,
558-9, 560-1, 564, 566; opposition to R0's plan for, 500, 540-9, 552, 560;
praise of, 555-7; speed in constructing, 549-52; traffic congestion, 563-4;
see also individual projects

:halen,   Grover, 332, 333 n., 652, 771, 815, 1062, 1085, 1092, mi, 1113

:heatley   +ills  (Old :estbury),   146, 149, 150, 185, 299-301, 303

:hite,   AndreZ  D., 60

:hite,   Samuel 0.,  335-6

:hite,   Stanford, 170

:hite,   Theodore +., 734, 1067-9, 1072

:hitestone  E[pressZay,  6, 863

:hitman,   :alt,   145, 169

:hitney,   +enry 3ayne, 184-5

:hitney,   John +ay, 1090, 1093

:hitney,   3ayne, 149, 163, 184-5, 299

:ickersham,  George, 95, no, 131,-307

1860
:ilco[,   Ansley, 248-57, 399; unjustly treated by R0, 249-55, 290-1, 472,
499, 583

:ildZood   State 3ark, 8, 170, 220, 238

:illiams,  Arthur B., 710, 873

:illiamsburg  Bridge, 146, 330, 769, ?n,925

:illoZbrook   E[pressZay, 896, 925

:illoZbrook   3ark, 344

:illvonseder, Ernie, 112

:ilson,  0alcolm,  n 60

:ilson,  :illiam,   725-6, 729, 805

:ilson,  :oodroZ,  55, 59, 82, 87, 149, 580

:indels,  3aul, 349, 357, 358, 359, 398, 407, 409, 410, 412, 415, 426, 427,
428, 429-30, 434, 441, 442, 447, 448, 454, 462, 464, 466, 469, 473, 474-5,
514, 515, 586-7, 588, 593, 598, 605, 609, 611-12, 613-14, 635, 658, 671,
672, 680, 685, 691, 692, 766, 778, 806, 966

:ingate,  John, 1076

:inston,  Norman .., 1090, 1130

:inthrop,  Bronson, 185

:inthrop,  Col. +enry Rogers, 149, 185, 278, 279, 299

:ise,  Stephen S., 961

:itkin,   Richard, n 44

:itt,   ErZin, 1103, 1104

1861
:NYC   radio station, 611-12

:olfe's  3ond 3ark, 331, 335

:omen's City Club, 92, 109, 435; and Title I, 969^76, 978, 983, 1006, 1025

:ood,  Franklin S., n 20, 1128

:oodring,  +arry +., 672-4

:oolZorth,  F. :.,  150

:ordsZorth,  :illiam,   284, 286, 555-6

:orks  3rogress Administration (:3A), 471; aid for N.Y.C, 451, 453, 465,
468, 474, 491, 5ii, 513, 5i6, 540, 549, 566, 614, 704, 745, 989; R0 and,
457, 476, 487, 515, 550, 569, 573; and non-park projects, 451, 464-5

:orld  :ar   I, 78, 82, 86, 580

:orld  :ar   II, 595, 833; Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel construction stopped by,
683, 689-90; public Zorks construction stopped by, 692, 757, 796; traffic
drought of, 690-1, 913

:3I;-TV,    1159

:ren,  Sir Christopher, 508

:right,  Frank Lloyd, 471

Yale Alumni :eekly, 49, 51 Yale Courant, 39-40, 42, 43, 44 Yale Daily
NeZs, 40, 42 Yale Literary 0aga]ine, 39, 40, 44, 46 Yale 8niversity: R0
at, 1-2, 35, 38-47, 49, 64, 297, 469, 570, 614, 823, 1089; .it Cat Club, 44,
46, 443; 0inor Sports Association, 2, 3-4, 15,

42-4, 457 Yale Verse, 44

Zaret]ki, Joseph, I ill, 1124 Zeckendorf, :illiam, 484, 772-3, ion,

1862
1061 Zenger, John 3eter, 648

3+OTO CREDITS

Arnold NeZman: Section III:  plates 4-$, 6.

NeZ York Daily  NeZs 3hotos: Section I: plates 6 (top), 8 (top and center),
13 (top and center), 14 (center), ij (bottom right). Section II: plates 1, 2-3
(all but bottom right), 4, 6, 7, // (bottom left), 12 (bottom), 13 (top right and
bottom right), 14 (top right), 16. Section III: plates 2 (bottom right), 3 (top
right), 7 (center right and bottom right).

:ide   :orld   3hotos: Section I: plates 3 (top), 7 (bottom), 10 (top right and
bottom right), 12 (top and center). Section II: plates 10 (center), 11 (bottom
right), 13 (center), 14 (bottom), 1$ (top and bottom left).

The NeZ York Times: Section I: plate 10 (bottom left), plate 16 (bottom).

3oZer Authority  of the State of NeZ York: Section I: plate 10 (top left).
Section II: plate to (top and bottom), Section III: plate 7 (bottom left).

8nited Nations: Section III: plate 13 (top left).

Cartography by Jean-3aul Tremblay Design by 3hilip Grushkin

Robert A. Caro Zas born and lives in NeZ York City. A graduate of
3rinceton 8niversity, later a Nieman FelloZ at +arvard, Zhere he studied
urban planning, he Zas an aZard-Zinning investigative reporter for NeZs-
day for si[ years. To create The 3oZer Broker, he spent seven years tracing
and talking Zith hundreds of men and Zomen Zho Zorked Zith, for or
against Robert 0oses, and e[amining mountains of files never opened to
the public ga]e. It Zas a sustained feat of investigative reporting and superb
Zriting  that has resulted in a triumph of biography, of history and of insight
into the very essence of politics, and into the effect of poZer on personality.

LA.E   ONTARIO

1863
0ILE CREE.

STATE 3AR. FORT NIAGARA STATE 3AR. LO:ER NIAGARA
STATE 3AR.

ROBERT 0OSES 3AR.:AY

a

E:ISTON STATE 3AR.

\f \ ROBERT 0OSES 3O:ER 3LANT]

NIAGARA RESERVATION

*.+ORN  ISLAND ATE 3AR.






B£AVER ISLAND ^TATE 3AR.

Buffalo

1864
St LaZrence

River

ROBERT 0OSES I 3O:ER DA0  1

Canada

1865
^c^m

CAN!

.EE:AYDIN    STATE 3AR. :ATTERSON  3OINT STATE 3AR.
:ELLESLEY   ISLAND STATE 3AR.-CANOE 3OINT STATE CEDAR
3OI















GOLDEN +ILL

STATE 3AR. BRADDOC.  BAY STATE 3AR.

Rochester

C+I0NEY  BLI STATE 3AR.

GREEN LA.ES STATE 3AR.

Buffalo

D STATE 3AR. S CAY8GA LA.E  STATE 3AR.

• SENECA LA.E STATE 3AR

SILVER LA.E  STATE 3AR. ^

1866
LETC+:ORT+ STATE 3AR.

/

LA.E  ERIE STATE 3AR.

rv LONG 3OINT ON LA.E V* C+A8TA848A \ STATE 3AR.

STONY BROO. STATE 3AR.

SA03SON STATE 3AR

.E8.ALA.E     ^? STATE 3AR. f0\

Lake .euka0







Syracuse

CLAR.

r^STATE3AR.I

*AR.

:AT.INSGLEN  STATE 3AR.**

FILL0ORE Gl STATE 3AR. 8G+ANNOC. FA8J^

# B8TTER 0IL.FALfT

ROBERT +.TRE0ANJ STATE 3AR.

V

1867
ALLEG+ENY STATE 3AR.

NE:TO:N     BATTLEFIELD # STATE 3AR.

C+ENANGO VALi STATE 3AR.

3ENNSYLVANIA

:






NeZ York 7 f City





— ^3 ""

LONG ISLAND

BET+3A6E STATE 3AR.

STATE 3AR.

1868
0ASSA3E48A -. +E03STEAD LA.E STATE 3AR. S BEL0ONT
STATE 3AR.jf (8ndeveJcped) I LA.E

VALLEY STREA0 & : 9

STATE 3AR. BEAC+ STATE 3AR.

■0

NE:  YOR.  STATE 3AR.S

10 20 30 40 50 0iles

1869
+ILLS STATE 3AR.

1870
8RBAN  ST8DIES  AND BIOGRA3+Y

T+E 3O:ER    BRO.ER

"In the future, the scholar Zho Zrites the history of

American cities in the tZentieth century Zill

doubtless begin Zith this e[traordinary eff ort."

—Richard C. :ade,  The NeZ York Times Book RevieZ

"A ripe yarn of intrigue and of poZerful  figures in collision, from Al  Smith
to Nelson Rockefeller."

—:illiam    Greider, :ashington  3ost Book :orld

"A study of municipal poZer that Zill  change the Zay any reader of the
book hereafter peruses his neZspaper."

—3hilip  +errera, Time

"Required reading for all those Zho hope to make their

Zay in urban politics; for the reformer, the planner,

the politician and even the Zard heeler."

—Jules L. :agman,  Cleveland 3ress

One of the most acclaimed books of the decade, the Zinner of both the
3ulit]er  and the Francis 3arkman 3ri]es, T+E 3O:ER   BRO.ER   tells the
hidden story behind the shaping (and mis-shaping) of tZentieth-century
NeZ York (city and state) and makes public Zhat feZ have knoZn: that
Robert 0oses has been, for almost half a century, the single most poZerful
man of our time in NeZ York, the shaper not only of the city's politics but
of its physical structure and the problems of urban decline that plague us
today.

1871
In revealing hoZ 0oses did it—hoZ  he developed his public authorities
into a political machine that Zas virtually a fourth branch of government,
one that could bring to their knees Governors and 0ayors (from La Guardia
to Lindsay) by mobili]ing  banks, contractors, labor unions, insurance firms,
even the press and the Church, into an irresistible economic force—Robert
Caro reveals hoZ poZer Zorks in all the cities of the 8nited States. 0oses
built an empire and lived like an emperor. +e personally conceived and
completed public Zorks costing 27 billion dollars—the greatest builder
America (and probably the Zorld) has ever knoZn. :ithout  ever having
been elected to office, he dominated the men Zho Zere—even his most
bitter enemy, Franklin D. Roosevelt, could not control him—until he finally
encountered, in Nelson Rockefeller, the only man Zhose poZer (and
ruthlessness in Zielding it) equalled his oZn.




, *

'




■

1872
This book made available by the Internet Archive.

