1
THE WESTING   GAME
         by Ellen Raskin
                   *
                (1978)

2
1      ♦       Sunset   Towers


The sun sets in the west (just about everyone knows  that), but 
Sunset Towers faced east. Strange!
       Sunset Towers faced east and had no towers. This glittery, 
glassy apartment  house  stood alone  on  the  Lake  Michigan 
shore five stories high. Five empty stories high.
       Then one  day (it   happened to be  the Fourth  of  July),  a 
most  uncommon-looking    delivery   boy   rode   around  town 
slipping  letters  under the  doors  of  the chosen tenants-to-be. 
The letters were signed Barney Northrup.
       The delivery  boy  was sixty-two  years old,  and there was 
no such person as Barney Northrup.



Dear Lucky One:


       Here it  is—the apartment you’ve  always dreamed of,  at a 
rent you can afford,  in the newest, most luxurious  building  on 
Lake Michigan:


       SUNSET TOWERS
       - Picture windows  in every room
       - Uniformed  doorman, maid service
       - Central air conditioning,  hi-speed elevator
       - Exclusive neighborhood,  near excellent schools
       - Etc., etc.

3
       You have  to  see it  to believe  it.  But  these unbelievably 
elegant apartments  will   be shown  by  appointment  only.   So 
hurry, there are only a few left!!!   Call me now  at 276-7474 for 
this once-in-a-lifetime  offer.


Your servant,
Barney Northrup


P. S. I am also renting ideal space for:
       - Doctor’s  office in  lobby
       - Coffee shop with entrance from  parking lot
       - Hi-class restaurant on entire top floor



Six  letters  were  delivered,  just  six.  Six   appointments  were 
made, and  one  by   one,  family   by  family,   talk,   talk,   talk, 
Barney  Northrup   led   the  tours   around  and   about  Sunset 
Towers.
       “Take  a look   at all   that glass.  One-way  glass,”  Barney 
Northrup said. “You  can see out, nobody can see in.”
       Looking  up, the Wexlers (the first appointment of  the day) 
were blinded  by the blast  of morning  sun that  flashed off  the 
face of the building.
       “See those chandeliers? Crystal!”   Barney  Northrup  said, 
slicking   his  black   moustache  and  straightening   his  hand-
painted  tie  in  the  lobby’s   mirrored   wall.   “How   about  this 
carpeting? Three inches thick!”
       “Gorgeous,”  Mrs. Wexler replied,  clutching  her husband’s 
arm as her high heels wobbled in the deep plush pile. She, too, 

4
managed an approving glance in the mirror before  the elevator 
door opened.
       “You’re  really   in  luck,”  Barney  Northrup  said.  “There’s 
only  one apartment left,  but  you’ll   love  it.  It  was meant  for 
you.”   He   flung    open   the   door   to   3D.    “Now,    is   that 
breathtaking, or is that breathtaking?”
       Mrs.  Wexler  gasped; it  was breathtaking,  all  right.   Two 
walls of the living   room were floor-to-ceiling   glass. Following 
Barney  Northrup’s  lead,  she  ooh-ed and  aah-ed her  joyous 
way through the entire apartment.
       Her trailing  husband was less enthusiastic. “What’s this,  a 
bedroom or a closet?” Jake Wexler asked, peering into the last 
room.
       “It’s  a bedroom, of course,” his wife  replied.
       “It  looks like  a closet.”
       “Oh,  Jake, this apartment  is perfect  for  us, just  perfect,” 
Grace Wexler argued in a whining coo. The third bedroom was 
a trifle  small,  but it  would  do just  fine for  Turtle.  “And  think 
what it  means having your  office  in the  lobby, Jake; no  more 
driving   to  and  from   work,   no  more  mowing   the  lawn   or 
shoveling snow.”
       “Let  me  remind  you,”   Barney  Northrup   said, “the   rent 
here is cheaper than what your old house costs in upkeep.”
       How would  he know that, Jake wondered.
       Grace stood before  the front  window   where, beyond  the 
road,   beyond   the   trees,   Lake   Michigan    lay    calm   and 
glistening. A  lake view!  Just wait  until  those so-called friends 
of hers  with  their  classy houses see this place.  The furniture 
would have to be reupholstered; no, she’d buy new furniture—
beige velvet.  And  she’d  have  stationery  made—blue  with  a 

5
deckle  edge, her  name  and  fancy  address in  swirling   type 
across the top:  Grace Windsor  Wexler, Sunset Towers on the 
Lake Shore.


Not  every   tenant-to-be  was   quite   as  overjoyed  as  Grace 
Windsor   Wexler.  Arriving    in    the  late   afternoon,   Sydelle 
Pulaski looked up and saw only  the dim, warped reflections  of 
treetops and drifting clouds in the glass face of Sunset Towers.
       “You’re  really in  luck,”  Barney Northrup said for  the sixth 
and last time. “There’s only  one apartment left, but you’ll   love 
it. It  was  meant for  you.”   He flung   open the door  to  a one-
bedroom apartment in the rear. “Now, is that  breathtaking or is 
that breathtaking?”
       “Not  especially,”   Sydelle Pulaski  replied  as she  blinked 
into the rays of the summer sun setting  behind the parking lot. 
She had waited all these years for a place of her own, and here 
it was, in  an elegant building where  rich people lived.  But she 
wanted a lake view.
       “The  front  apartments are taken,”  Barney Northrup   said. 
“Besides, the rent’s  too steep for  a secretary’s salary. Believe 
me, you get the same luxuries here at a third of the price.”
       At  least  the  view  from   the side  window   was  pleasant. 
“Are you  sure nobody can see in?” Sydelle Pulaski asked.
       “Absolutely,”     Barney    Northrup    said,   following     her 
suspicious stare to the mansion on the north  cliff.  “That’s  just 
the old  Westing  house up  there;  it  hasn’t  been lived   in  for 
fifteen years.”
       “Well,  I’ll  have to think  it over.”

6
      “I   have twenty  people  begging for  this  apartment,” 
Barney Northrup said, lying through his buckteeth. “Take it or 
leave it.”
      “I’ll  take it.”
      Whoever, whatever else he was, Barney Northrup was a 
good salesman. In one day he had rented all of Sunset Towers 
to the  people whose names were already printed on  the 
mailboxes in an alcove off the lobby:


            Office ♦              Dr. Wexler
            Lobby ♦             Theodorakis Coffee Shop
            2C ♦                  F. Baumbach
            2D ♦                  Theodorakis
            3C ♦                  S. Pulaski
            3D ♦                  Wexler
            4C ♦                  Hoo
            4D ♦                  J. J. Ford
            5           ♦           Shin Hoo’s Restaurant


Who were these people, these specially selected tenants? They 
were mothers and fathers and  children. A  dressmaker, a 
secretary, an inventor, a doctor, a judge. And, oh yes, one was 
a bookie, one was a burglar, one was a bomber, and one was a 
mistake. Barney Northrup had rented one of the apartments to 
the wrong person.

7
2      ♦       Ghosts   or  Worse


On September first  the chosen ones (and the mistake)  moved 
in. A  wire fence  had been erected along the north  side of  the 
building;  on it a sign warned:


       NO TRESPASSING—Property   of the Westing estate.


The newly  paved driveway  curved  sharply and doubled  back 
on itself rather than breach the city-county  line. Sunset Towers 
stood at the far edge of town.
       On September second Shin Hoo’s Restaurant, specializing 
in  authentic  Chinese  cuisine,  held  its  grand  opening.  Only 
three people came. It was, indeed, an exclusive neighborhood; 
too exclusive for  Mr. Hoo.  However, the less expensive coffee 
shop that  opened on  the  parking  lot  was  kept busy  serving 
breakfast, lunch,  and dinner  to  tenants “ordering   up”  and to 
workers from nearby Westingtown.
       Sunset Towers was a quiet, well-run building,  and (except 
for the grumbling  Mr. Hoo)  the people who lived there seemed 
content. Neighbor  greeted neighbor  with  “Good  morning”   or 
“Good  evening”  or a friendly   smile, and  grappled with  small 
problems behind closed doors.
       The big problems were yet to come.


Now  it  was the  end of  October.  A  cold,  raw  wind  whipped 
dead leaves about the ankles of the four people grouped in the 
Sunset Towers driveway,  but  not  one of  them  shivered. Not 
yet.

8
       The  stocky,   broad-shouldered   man  in   the   doorman’s 
uniform,  standing with   feet spread, fists  on  hips, was  Sandy 
McSouthers. The two slim,  trim  high-school seniors, shielding 
their eyes  against the  stinging  chill,  were  Theo Theodorakis 
and Doug Hoo. The  small, wiry  man pointing  to  the house on 
the hill was Otis Amber,  the sixty-two-year-old  delivery  boy.
       They faced north,  gaping like  statues cast in  the moment 
of discovery, until  Turtle  Wexler, her kite  tail of  a braid flying 
behind her, raced her bicycle into  the driveway.  “Look!  Look, 
there’s smoke—there’s  smoke  coming  from  the  chimney  of 
the Westing house.”
       The  others had  seen it.   What  did  she  think  they  were 
looking at anyway?
       Turtle   leaned  on   the  handlebars,  panting   for   breath. 
(Sunset  Towers   was   near   excellent   schools,   as   Barney 
Northrup  had  promised, but  the  junior   high  was four   miles 
away.) “Do   you  think—do  you  think   old  man Westing’s  up 
there?”
       “Naw,”   Otis   Amber,   the  old   delivery   boy,   answered. 
“Nobody’s  seen  him  for  years.  Supposed to  be living   on  a 
private island in  the South Seas, he is; but most folks  say he’s 
dead. Long-gone dead. They say his corpse is still   up there in 
that big  old  house. They  say his  body  is  sprawled out  on  a 
fancy  Oriental  rug,  and  his  flesh  is  rotting   off  those  mean 
bones, and   maggots  are  creeping  in   his  eye  sockets  and 
crawling  out his nose holes.”  The delivery  boy  added a high-
pitched he-he-he to the gruesome details.
       Now someone shivered. It was Turtle.
       “Serves him  right,”   Sandy said. At   other times  a cheery 
fellow,  the  doorman often  complained   bitterly  about  having 

9
been fired from  his  job  of twenty  years in  the Westing  paper 
mill.  “But  somebody  must be up  there. Somebody alive,  that 
is.”  He pushed back the gold-braided  cap and  squinted at the 
house through,  his  steel-framed  glasses as  if  expecting   the 
curling  smoke to write  the answer  in the autumn  air. “Maybe 
it’s those kids again. No, it couldn’t  be.”
       “What  kids?” the three kids wanted to know.
       “Why,  those two unfortunate fellas from  Westingtown.”
       “What  unfortunate  fellas?”  The three heads twisted  from 
the doorman  to the  delivery  boy.  Doug Hoo  ducked  Turtle’s 
whizzing  braid. Touch  her precious pigtail,   even by accident, 
and she’ll  kick  you in  the shins, the brat.  He couldn’t  chance 
an injury  to his legs,  not with  the big  meet coming. The track 
star began to jog in place.
       “Horrible,    it   was  horrible,”    Otis   Amber   said  with   a 
shudder that   sent the   loose  straps of   his  leather  aviator’s 
helmet swinging  about his  long, thin  face. “Come  to  think  of 
it, it happened exactly one year ago tonight. On Halloween.”
       “What  happened?” Theo  Theodorakis  asked impatiently. 
He was late for work in  the coffee shop.
       “Tell  them, Otis,” Sandy urged.
       The delivery  boy  stroked the gray  stubble on his  pointed 
chin. “Seems  it  all  started with  a  bet;  somebody bet them  a 
dollar  they couldn’t   stay in  that  spooky  house five  minutes. 
One measly  buck!  The  poor  kids   hardly  got  through  those 
French doors  on  this  side of   the Westing  house  when they 
came tearing   out  like   they  was  being  chased  by  a  ghost. 
Chased by a ghost—or worse.”

10
       Or  worse? Turtle   forgot  her  throbbing  toothache.  Theo 
Theodorakis  and Doug   Hoo,  older  and  more  worldly-wise, 
exchanged winks but stayed to hear the rest of the story.
       “One fella  ran out  crazy-like,  screaming his  head off. He 
never stopped screaming ’til  he hit  the rocks  at the bottom  of 
the cliff.    The  other  fella  hasn’t  said  but   two  words  since. 
Something about purple.”
       Sandy helped him out. “Purple waves.”
       Otis Amber  nodded sadly. “Yep, that poor fella  just sits in 
the state asylum  saying,  ‘Purple   waves, purple  waves’  over 
and over again, and his scared eyes keep staring at his  hands. 
You see, when he came running out of  the Westing house, his 
hands was dripping with warm,  red blood.”
       Now all  three shivered.
       “Poor kid,”  the doorman  said. “All  that pain  and suffering 
for a dollar bet.”
       “Make  it  two dollars  for  each minute I  stay in  there, and 
you’re on,”  Turtle said.


Someone was spying on the group in the driveway.
       From the front  window  of  apartment 2D,  fifteen-year-old 
Chris Theodorakis  watched his  brother  Theo shake hands (it 
must be a bet) with the skinny,  one-pigtailed girl  and rush into 
the lobby.  The  family   coffee  shop would   be busy  now;  his 
brother should  have  been working   the counter  half  an  hour 
ago. Chris  checked  the wall   clock.  Two  more  hours  before 
Theo would bring  up his dinner. Then he would  tell  him about 
the limper.
       Earlier  that afternoon  Chris  had followed   the flight   of  a 
purple  martin  (Progne  subis)  across  the  field   of  brambles, 

11
through the oaks, up to the red maple on the hill. The bird  flew 
off, but something  else caught his eye. Someone (he could not 
tell  if  the  person was  a man  or  a woman)  came  out  of  the 
shadows  on   the   lawn,   unlocked   the   French  doors,   and 
disappeared into  the  Westing  house. Someone with   a  limp. 
Minutes later smoke began to rise from the chimney.
       Once  again Chris   turned  toward  the  side  window   and 
scanned the house on the cliff. The French  doors were closed; 
heavy drapes hung full  against the seventeen windows he had 
counted so many times.
       They  didn’t   need drapes on  the  special  glass windows 
here in Sunset Towers. He could see out, but nobody could see 
in.  Then   why   did   he  sometimes  feel   that   someone  was 
watching him? Who  could be watching him?  God? If God was 
watching, then why was he like  this?
       The binoculars  fell  to the  boy’s lap.  His  head jerked, his 
body coiled, lashed by  violent  spasms. Relax, Theo will  come 
soon. Relax, soon the geese will be flying south in  a V. Canada 
goose (Branta canadensis).  Relax. Relax  and watch the wind 
tangle the smoke and blow it toward Westingtown.





3      ♦      Tenants    In   and   Out


Upstairs in  3D Angela  Wexler stood on  a hassock as still and 
blank-faced pretty  as a  store-window  dummy.  Her  pale blue 
eyes stared unblinkingly at the lake.

12
       “Turn,  dear,” said  Flora Baumbach,  the dressmaker, who 
lived and worked in  a smaller apartment on the second floor.
       Angela pivoted in  a slow quarter turn. “Oh!”
       Startled by the small cry, Flora Baumbach dropped the pin 
from her pudgy  fingers and almost  swallowed the three in  her 
mouth.
       “Please be careful,  Mrs.  Baumbach; my Angela  has very 
delicate  skin.”   Grace Windsor   Wexler  was  supervising   the 
fitting  of  her daughter’s  wedding dress from  the beige  velvet 
couch. Above  her  hung  the two-dozen  framed  flower   prints 
she had selected and arranged  with  the greatest of  taste and 
care. She could  have been an interior  decorator,  a good one, 
too, if it  wasn’t for  the pressing demands of so on and so forth.
       “Mrs.  Baumbach  didn’t   prick  me, mother,”   Angela  said 
evenly. “I   was just  surprised to  see smoke coming  from   the 
Westing house chimney.”
       Crawling  with slow  caution on her hands and knees, Flora 
Baumbach paused in the search for the dropped pin to peer up 
through her straight gray bangs.
       Mrs.  Wexler  set her coffee  cup  on  the driftwood   coffee 
table and craned  her neck  for  a better  view. “We  must  have 
new   neighbors;    I’ll     have   to    drive    up    there   with    a 
housewarming gift; they  may need some decorating advice.”
       “Hey,   look!   There’s  smoke  coming   from   the  Westing 
house!” Again Turtle  was late with the news.
       “Oh,  it’s  you.”  Mrs.  Wexler  always  seemed surprised to 
see her other  daughter, so  unlike  golden-haired,  angel-faced 
Angela.

13
       Flora Baumbach, about to rise with  the found pin,  quickly 
sank down again to protect her sore shin in the shag carpeting. 
She had pulled Turtle’s braid in the lobby  yesterday.
       “Otis  Amber says that old  man Westing’s  stinking  corpse 
is rotting on an Oriental rug.”
       “My,   oh   my,”   Flora   Baumbach  exclaimed,   and  Mrs. 
Wexler clicked her tongue in an irritated  “tsk.”
       Turtle decided not to  go on with  the horror story. Not  that 
her mother cared if she got killed  or ended up a raving lunatic. 
“Mrs.  Baumbach, could you  hem my witch’s  costume? I  need 
it for tonight.”
       Mrs.  Wexler  answered. “Can’t   you  see she’s busy  with 
Angela’s  wedding  dress?  And  why   must  you  wear  a  silly 
costume like that? Really, Turtle,  I  don’t know  why  you insist 
on making yourself ugly.”
       “It’s   no  sillier   than  a  wedding   dress,”  Turtle   snapped 
back. “Besides, nobody  gets married anymore, and if  they do, 
they don’t   wear silly   wedding  dresses.” She  was close  to  a 
tantrum. “Besides,  who  would   want to  marry  that  stuck-up-
know-it-all-marshmallow-face-doctor-denton…?”
       “That’s   enough  of   your   smart   mouth!”    Mrs.   Wexler 
leaped up,  hand  ready  to  strike;  instead  she straightened  a 
framed  flower   print,    patted  her  fashionable   honey-blonde 
hairdo, and sat down  again. She had never hit  Turtle, but  one 
of these days—besides, a stranger was present. “Doctor Deere 
is a brilliant  young man,”  she explained for  Flora Baumbach’s 
ears. The dressmaker  smiled  politely.  “Angela   will   soon  be 
Angela  Deere; isn’t  that  a  precious name?”  The  dressmaker 
nodded. “And  then we’ll  have two  doctors in the family.  Now 
where do you think you’re  going?”

14
       Turtle  was at  the  front  door.  “Downstairs   to  tell  daddy 
about the smoke coming from the Westing house.”
       “Come  back this  instant. You  know  your  father operates 
in the afternoon; why  don’t  you go to  your room  and work on 
stock market reports or whatever you do in there.”
       “Some room, it’s  even too small for a closet.”
       “I’ll   hem your witch’s  costume, Turtle,” Angela  offered.
       Mrs. Wexler  beamed on her perfect child draped in  white. 
“What an angel.”


Crow’s clothes  were black;  her  skin, dead white.  She looked 
severe. Rigid,  in  fact.  Rigid  and  righteously  severe. No  one 
could have  guessed that under that  stern facade her  stomach 
was doing flip-flops  as Doctor Wexler cut out  a corn.
       Staring down  at the  fine  lines of  pink  scalp that  showed 
through the podiatrist’s  thinning   light  brown hair  did  nothing 
to ease her queasiness; so, softly humming a hymn, she settled 
her gaze on the north window. “Smoke!”
       “Watch it!”   Jake Wexler almost cut off  her little  toe along 
with the corn.
       Unaware  of  the  near  amputation,  the  cleaning   woman 
stared at the Westing house.
       “If  you  will  just sit  back,”  Jake began, but his patient did 
not hear him.  She must have been a handsome woman at one 
time, but life  had used her harshly. Her faded hair, knotted in a 
tight bun on the nape of her gaunt neck, glinted gold-red  in the 
light.  Her  profile   was  fine,   marred  only  by  the  jut   of  her 
clenched jaw. Well,  let’s  get  on with  it,  Friday  was  his busy 
day, he had phone calls to make. “Please sit  back, Mrs. Crow. 
I’m almost  finished.”

15
       “What?”
       Jake gently  replaced her  foot  on the  chair’s  pedestal. “I 
see you’ve hurt your shin.”
       “What?”   For an  instant  their eyes  met; then  she looked 
away. A shy creature (or  a guilty  one), Crow  averted her face 
when  she  spoke.  “Your   daughter   Turtle  kicked   me,”   she 
muttered, staring  once  again  at  the  Westing  house. “That’s 
what happens when  there is  no  religion  in  the home.  Sandy 
says Westing’s corpse is up there, rotting  away on an Oriental 
rug, but I don’t  believe it.  If  he’s truly  dead, then he’s roasting 
in hell. We are sinners, all.”


“What  do you  mean his  corpse is rotting  on  an Oriental  rug, 
some kind  of  Persian  rug,  maybe a  Chinese rug.”   Mr.  Hoo 
joined his son at the glass sidewall of the fifth  floor  restaurant. 
“And  why   were  you  wasting  precious  time  listening   to  an 
overaged delivery  boy  with  an  overactive  imagination  when 
you should have been studying.” It  was not a question; Doug’s 
father never asked questions. “Don’t shrug at me, go study.”
       “Sure, dad.”  Doug  jogged off  through the  kitchen; it  was 
no use arguing that  there was no  school tomorrow,  just  track 
practice.  He  jogged  down  the  back  stairs;  no  matter  what 
excuse he gave, “Go study,”  his father  would say, “go  study.” 
He jogged into  the Hoos’  rear apartment, stretched out on  the 
bare floor and repeated “Go study” to twenty  sit-ups.
       Only  two  customers  were expected  for  the  dinner  hour 
(Shin  Hoo’s  Restaurant  could  seat  one hundred).   Mr.  Hoo 
slammed the  reservations book  shut, pressed a  hand against 
the pain in his ample stomach, unwrapped a chocolate bar and 
devoured it   quickly   before acid  etched  another  ulcer.  Back 

16
home again,  is he.  Well,  Westing won’t   get off   so easy this 
time, not on his life.
       A small,  delicate  woman in  a  long white  apron  stood in 
silence  before   the   restaurant’s   east  window.    She  stared 
longingly  into  the boundless gray distance as if far,  far on the 
other side of Lake Michigan  lay China.


Sandy McSouthers  saluted  as  the maroon  Mercedes  swung 
around  the  curved   driveway   and   came  to  a   stop  at  the 
entrance. He opened  the car  door with   a ceremony  reserved 
only  for   Judge J.  J.  Ford.  “Look    up  there,  judge.  There’s 
smoke coming from the Westing house.”
       A  tall  black  woman  in  a tailored  suit,  her  short-clipped 
hair touched  with   gray, slipped  out  from   behind the  wheel, 
handed the car keys  to the  doorman, and cast a  disinterested 
glance at the house on the hill.
       “They  say nobody’s  up there, just  the corpse of  old  man 
Westing rotting  away  on an Oriental  rug,”  Sandy reported  as 
he hoisted a full  briefcase from  the trunk  of  the car. “Do  you 
believe in ghosts, judge?”
       “There is certain to be a more rational explanation.”
       “You’re  right,  of course, judge.”  Sandy opened the heavy 
glass door   and followed    on  the  judge’s  heels  through  the 
lobby. “I  was just repeating what Otis Amber said.”
       “Otis Amber  is a stupid  man, if  not downright  mad.”  J. J. 
Ford hurried  into  the elevator. She should  not have said that, 
not  her, not  the  first   black,  the  first  woman,  to  have  been 
elected to a judgeship in  the state. She was tired after a trying 
day, that was it. Or was it? So Sam Westing has come home at 
last. Well, she could sell the car, take out a bank loan, pay him 

17
back—in  cash.  But  would  he  take  it?  “Please  don’t  repeat 
what I said about Otis Amber, Mr.  McSouthers.”
       “Don’t   worry,  judge.”  The  doorman  escorted her  to  the 
door   of   apartment   4D.   “What    you    tell   me   is   strictly 
confidential.”  And  it  was. J. J. Ford  was the biggest tipper  in 
Sunset Towers.


“I  saw  someb-b-b…”  Chris  Theodorakis  was  too  excited to 
stutter out   the news  to  his  brother.  One  arm  shot  out  and 
twisted up over his head. Dumb arm.
       Theo squatted next  to the  wheelchair. “Listen,  Chris,  I’ll 
tell you  about that  haunted castle on the  hill.”   His voice  was 
soothing  and  hushed  in   mystery.  “Somebody   is  up  there, 
Chris,  but  nobody  is there,  just  rich  Mr.   Westing, and  he’s 
dead. Dead  as a squashed June  bug and  rotting   away on  a 
moth-eaten Oriental rug.”
       Chris relaxed as he always  did when his  brother told  him 
a story. Theo was good at making up stories.
       “And   the  worms  are  crawling   in  and  out  of  the  dead 
man’s skull,  in  and  out  of his  ear  holes, his  nose holes, his 
mouth holes, in and out of all his  holes.”
       Chris  laughed, then  quickly  composed his  face.  He was 
supposed to look scared.
       Theo leaned closer. “And   high above  the putrid  corpse a 
crystal chandelier  is tinkling.   It  tinkles  and twinkles,   but not 
one breath of air stirs in that gloomy  tomb of a room.”
       Gloomy  tomb of  a room—Theo  will   make a good writer 
someday, Chris  thought.  He  wouldn’t   spoil   this  wonderful, 
spooky Halloween  story  by telling   him about  the real person 
up there, the one with the limp.

18
       So Chris  sat  quietly,  his  body  at ease, and heard  about 
ghosts and ghouls and purple waves, and smiled at his brother 
with pure delight.
       “A  smile  that  could  break  your  heart,”  Sydelle  Pulaski, 
the tenant in 3C, always said. But  no one paid any attention to 
Sydelle Pulaski.


Sydelle Pulaski  struggled out  of  the taxi,  large end first.   She 
was  not  a  heavy  woman,  just   wide-hipped   from  years  of 
secretarial sitting.  If  only  there was a ladylike  way  to get  out 
of a  cab. Her  green rhinestone-studded glasses slipped down 
her fleshy nose as she grappled with  a tall  triangular  package 
and a stuffed shopping bag. If only  that lazy driver  would  lend 
her a hand.
       Not for  a nickel tip,  he wouldn’t.  The cabbie slammed the 
back door   and sped  around  the  curved  driveway,  narrowly 
missing the  Mercedes that  Sandy was driving   to the  parking 
lot.
       At least the never-there-when-you-need-him  doorman had 
propped open the  front  door. Not  that he  ever helped her,  or 
noticed her, for that matter.
       No one ever  noticed. Sydelle  Pulaski limped  through  the 
lobby.  She  could  be  carrying   a high-powered   rifle   in  that 
package and no one would   notice. She had moved  to  Sunset 
Towers hoping to meet elegant people, but  no one had invited 
her in for so much as a cup of tea. No one paid any attention to 
her, except that  poor  crippled  boy  whose  smile  could  break 
your heart, and that  bratty kid  with  the braid—she’ll   be sorry 
she kicked her in the shin.

19
       Juggling  her  load,  earrings jingling   and  charm  bracelet 
jangling,   Sydelle   Pulaski   unlocked   the   several   locks   to 
apartment 3C   and bolted   the  door  behind  her.  There’d  be 
fewer burglaries  around  here if   people listened  to  her about 
putting in dead-bolt locks.  But nobody listened. Nobody  cared.
       On  the   plastic-covered   dining   table   she  set   out  the 
contents  of  the   shopping  bag:   six  cans  of   enamel,  paint 
thinner,  and brushes. She  unwrapped  the long   package and 
leaned four  wooden  crutches against  the wall.   The  sun was 
setting over  the parking  lot,  but Sydelle  Pulaski did  not  look 
out her back window.  From  the side window   smoke could be 
seen rising  from  the Westing  house, but  Sydelle Pulaski  did 
not notice.
       “No  one ever notices Sydelle Pulaski,”  she muttered, “but 
now they will.  Now  they will.”





4      ♦      The   Corpse    Found


The Halloween  moon  was full.   Except for  her  receding chin 
Turtle Wexler looked  every inch the witch,  her dark unbraided 
hair streaming wild   in the wind  from  under her  peaked hat, a 
putty wart  pasted on her small beaked nose. If  only she could 
fly   to    the  Westing   house   on   a   broomstick    instead  of 
scrambling over  rocks  on all  fours,  what  with  all  she had to 
carry. Under   the  long  black  cape  the  pockets of   her  jeans 
bulged with necessities for the night’s dangerous vigil.

20
       Doug  Hoo  had already  reached the  top of  the  cliff   and 
taken his station behind the maple on the lawn.  (The track star 
was  chosen  timekeeper  because he   could  run   faster  than 
anyone in the state of  Wisconsin.)  Here she comes, it’s  about 
time. Shivering  knee-deep in damp leaves that couldn’t  do his 
leg muscles much good, he readied his thumb on the button of 
the stopwatch.
       Turtle squinted into  the blackness that lay within  the open 
French doors. Open,  as though  someone or some  Thing was 
expecting her. There’s  no  such thing  as a  ghost; besides, all 
you had to  do  was speak friendly-like   to  them. (Ghosts,  like 
dogs, know  when  a person’s  scared.) Ghosts or  worse,  Otis 
Amber had said. Well,  not even the “worse”   could hurt  Turtle 
Wexler. She was pure of heart and deed; she only kicked shins 
in self-defense, so that couldn’t   count against her. She wasn’t 
scared; she was not scared.
       “Hurry  up!”  That was Doug from  behind the tree.
       At  two  dollars a  minute, twenty-five   minutes  would  pay 
for a  subscription to  The Wall  Street Journal.  She could  stay 
all night.  She was  prepared. Turtle checked  her pockets: two 
sandwiches, Sandy’s flask filled  with  orange pop, a flashlight, 
her mother’s silver  cross to ward off  vampires. The putty  wart 
on her nose (soaked in Angela’s perfume  in the event she was 
locked up with   the stinking  corpse) was clogging  her nostrils 
with sticky  sweetness. Turtle took  a deep breath of chill  night 
air  and flinched   with   pain.  She was  afraid  of  dentists,  not 
ghosts or…don’t   think  about purple  waves,  think  about  two 
dollars a minute.  Now,  one—two—three—three  and a  half—
GO!
       Doug checked his stopwatch. Nine minutes.

21
       Ten minutes.
       Eleven minutes.
       Suddenly  a  terrified   scream—a  young  girl’s   scream—
pierced the night. Should he go in, or was this one of the brat’s 
tricks? Another scream, closer.
       “E-E-E-e-e-e-e-e-e-e!”     Clutching    the    bunched    cape 
around her  waist,   Turtle  came  hurtling   out  of  the  Westing 
house. “E-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-e!”


Turtle had seen the corpse in the Westing house, but it was not 
rotting  and it  was not sprawled  on an Oriental  rug.  The dead 
man was tucked in a four-poster bed.
       A throbbing   whisper, “Pur-ple,  pur-ple”   (or  was it  “Tur-
tle, Tur-tle”—whatever  it  was, it was scary), had beckoned her 
to the master bedroom on the second floor, and…
       Maybe it  was  a dream. No,  it  couldn’t  be;  she ached all 
over from the tumble down  the stairs.
       The moon  was down, the  window  dark. Turtle  lay  in  the 
narrow  bed  in  her  narrow  room,  waiting   (dark,  still   dark), 
waiting. At  last slow  morning  crept up the cliff   and raised the 
Westing house, the house of whispers, the house of death. Two 
dollars times twelve minutes equals twenty-four  dollars.
       Thud! The morning  newspaper was flung against the front 
door. Turtle tiptoed  through the sleeping  apartment to retrieve 
it and climbed back  into bed, the dead man staring at her from 
the front page. The face was younger;  the short beard, darker; 
but it was he, all right.


                       SAM WESTING   FOUND  DEAD

22
Found? No   one  else  knew  about  the  bedded-down  corpse 
except Doug, and he had not believed her. Then who found the 
body? The whisperer?


              Samuel    W.     Westing,     the    mysterious 
              industrialist  who  disappeared thirteen  years 
              ago,  was  found  dead  in   his  Westingtown 
              mansion last  night.  He was sixty-five   years 
              old.
                    The  only   child   of   immigrant   parents, 
              orphaned at the age of twelve, self-educated, 
              hard-working    Samuel  Westing   saved  his 
              laborer’s  wages  and bought  a  small  paper 
              mill.  From these meager beginnings he built 
              the     giant      Westing      Paper     Products 
              Corporation    and    founded    the    city    of 
              Westingtown   to   house   his  thousands   of 
              workers   and  their   families.   His  estate  is 
              estimated  to  be  worth   over   two  hundred 
              million  dollars.


Turtle read that again: two hundred million  dollars. Wow!


                    When asked the secret of his success, the 
              industrialist   always  replied:  “Clean   living, 
              hard  work,  and  fair  play.”  Westing  set  his 
              own  example; he neither  drank nor  smoked 
              and never gambled.  Yet he was a  dedicated 
              gamesman and a master at chess.

23
Turtle had been in the game room. That’s where she picked up 
the billiard  cue she had carried up the stairs as a weapon.


                    A  great   patriot,   Samuel  Westing   was 
              famous  for   his   fun-filled    Fourth   of  July 
              celebrations.   Whether   disguised   as   Ben 
              Franklin  or a lowly  drummer boy, he always 
              acted   a   role   in    the   elaborately   staged 
              pageants  which    he   wrote   and   directed. 
              Perhaps best remembered  was his  surprise 
              portrayal of  Betsy Ross.
                    Games   and     feasting    followed     the 
              pageant, and at  sunset Mr.  Westing  put  on 
              his    Uncle    Sam   costume    and   set   off 
              fireworks     from     his    front     lawn.     The 
              spectacular  pyrotechnic   display   could   be 
              viewed thirty  miles away.


Fireworks!   So   that’s   what   was  in   those   boxes  stamped 
Danger—explosives  stacked in   the ground   floor  storeroom. 
What a “pyrotechnic  display”  that would make if  they all  went 
off at the same time.


                    The paper king’s later years were marred 
              by   tragedy.    His   only    daughter,   Violet, 
              drowned on the eve of her wedding,  and two 
              years later  his  troubled  wife  deserted their 
              home.  Although    Mr.   Westing  obtained   a 
              divorce, he never remarried.

24
     Five   years  later   he  was   sued  by   an 
inventor over  rights  to the disposable  paper 
diaper. On his way to  court Samuel Westing 
and  his   friend,   Dr.    Sidney  Sikes,   were 
involved in  a near-fatal automobile accident. 
Both  men   were  hospitalized   with   severe 
injuries.   Sikes  resumed   his  Westingtown 
medical  practice   and  the  post   of   county 
coroner,   but   Westing    disappeared  from 
sight.
     It   was  rumored,  but   never  confirmed, 
that  he controlled   the  vast  Westing  Paper 
Products Corporation  from  a  private  island 
in  the   South  Seas.  He   is  still    listed   as 
chairman of the board.
     “We  are surprised as you are, and deeply 
saddened,”  a    spokesman  for    Julian    R. 
Eastman,  President  and   Chief   Executive 
Officer   of    the  corporation,    stated  when 
informed  that Westing’s  body was found  in 
his lakeside home. Dr.  Sikes’ response was: 
“A  tragic  end to  a tragic  life.  Sam Westing 
was a truly great and important man.”
     The funeral  will  be private. The executor 
of  the   Westing  estate  said   the  deceased 
requested   that,    in     place    of     flowers, 
donations  be   sent  to   Blind    Bowlers    of 
America.

25
Turtle turned the page of the  newspaper, but that was all. That 
was all?
       There was no mention of how the body was found.
       There was  no  mention  of  the  envelope propped  on  the 
bedside table on  which  a  shaky hand had  scrawled:  If  I  am 
found dead in  bed. She had been edging  her way  against the 
four-poster, reading  the words  in  the  beam of  the flashlight, 
when she felt the hand, the waxy dead hand that lay on the red, 
white,  and blue  quilt.  Through  her  scream she had  seen the 
white-bearded face.  She  remembered running,  tripping   over 
the billiard  cue, falling   down the stairs, denting  Sandy’s flask 
and dropping everything else.
       There was no mention of two  suspicious peanut butter and 
jelly  sandwiches on  the premises, or  a flashlight,   or  a silver 
cross on a chain.
       There was no mention of  prowlers;  no mention of  anyone 
having seen  a witch;   no mention  of  footprints   on the  lawn: 
track shoes and sneakers size six.
       Oh well,   she had nothing   to fear  (other  than losing  her 
mother’s  cross). Old   Mr.  Westing  probably  died  of   a heart 
attack—or  pneumonia—it  was drafty  in  there.  Turtle  hid the 
folded newspaper in  her desk drawer,  counted her black-and-
blue marks (seven), dressed, and set out to find the four people 
who knew she had been in the Westing house last night:  Doug 
Hoo, Theo  Theodorakis, Otis  Amber,  and Sandy. They  owed 
her twenty-four dollars.


At noon the sixty-two-year-old   delivery  boy began his rounds. 
He had sixteen letters to deliver  from  E. J. Plum, Attorney-at-

26
Law. Otis Amber knew what the letters said, because one was 
addressed to him:


                  As  a   named beneficiary      in    the 
            estate    of    Samuel W.  Westing,   your 
            attendance   is   required   in   the  south 
            library         of     the      Westing     house 
            tomorrow  at   4  P.M.  for    the   reading 
            of   the  will.


“Means old man Westing left you some money,” he explained. 
“Just sign this receipt here. What do you mean, what does 
‘position’ mean? It means position, like a job. Most receipts 
have that to make sure the right person gets the right letter.”
      Grace Windsor Wexler wrote housewife, crossed it out, 
wrote decorator, crossed it out, and wrote heiress. Then she 
wanted to know “Who else? How many? How much?”
      “I ain’t allowed to say nothing.”
      The other  heirs were too  stunned by  the unexpected 
legacy to bother him with questions. Madame Hoo marked an 
X  and her husband filled in  her name and position. Theo 
wanted to sign the receipt for his brother, but Chris insisted on 
doing it himself. Slowly, taking great pains, he wrote Christos 
Theodorakis, bird-watcher.
      By  the time the sun had set behind the Sunset Towers 
parking lot, Otis Amber, deliverer, had completed his rounds.

27
5      ♦       Sixteen   Heirs


The marbled   sky  lay  heavy  on  the  gray  Great  Lake  when 
Grace Windsor Wexler parked her car in the Westing driveway 
and strode up the  walk  ahead of  her daughters. Her  husband 
had refused to  come, but  no  matter. Recalling  family   gossip 
about a rich  uncle (maybe  it  was a great-uncle—anyway,  his 
name was Sam) Grace had convinced herself that  she was the 
rightful  heir.  (Jake was  Jewish, so  he could  not  possibly  be 
related to Sam Westing.)
       “I  can’t  imagine   what became  of  my  silver  cross,”  she 
said, fingering  the gold-link   necklace under her mink  stole as 
she paused to appraise the big house. “You know,  Angela, we 
could  have the  wedding  right   here.…Turtle,  where  are you 
wandering off to now?”
       “The  letter  said—  Never  mind.”  Turtle  preferred  not  to 
explain how  she knew  the  library  could  be entered from  the 
French doors on the lawn.
       The front  door was opened by Crow. Although  the Sunset 
Towers cleaning woman  always wore  black, here it  reminded 
Grace Wexler to dab at her eyes with a lace handkerchief. This 
was a house of mourning.
       The silent Crow  helped Angela  with  her coat and nodded 
approval of her blue velvet dress with  white collar and cuffs.
       “I’ll   keep my furs with  me,”  Grace said. She did not want 
to be taken for  one of the  poor relatives. “Seems rather  chilly 
in here.”
       Turtle, too, complained  of the chill,  but her mother tugged 
off her coat to reveal  a fluffy,  ruffly  pink  party dress two sizes 

28
too large  and  four  inches  too  long.  It  was  one of  Angela’s 
hand-me-downs.
       “Please sit  anywhere,”  the lawyer   said without  glancing 
from  the  envelopes he  was sorting  at  the  head of  the  long 
library table.
       Mrs.  Wexler took  the  chair to  his  right  and motioned  to 
her favorite.  Angela sat  down next  to her  mother, removed  a 
trousseau towel from her large tapestry shoulder bag, and took 
up embroidering  the monogram D.  Slumped in the  third chair 
Turtle pretended she had never seen this  paneled library  with 
its bare and dusty shelves. Suddenly she sat up with a start. An 
open coffin  draped  in bunting  rested  on a raised  platform  at 
the far  corner  of  the room;   in  it  lay  the dead  man, looking 
exactly as she had found  him,  except now  he was  dressed in 
the costume of   Uncle  Sam—including  the  tall  hat.  Between 
the waxy   hands,  folded  across his   chest, lay   her  mother’s 
silver cross.
       Grace  Wexler  was  too  busy  greeting   the  next  heir  to 
notice. “Why   Doctor  D., I  had no  idea you’d  be here; but  of 
course, you’ll  soon be a member of the family.  Come, sit  next 
to your bride-to-be; Turtle,  you’ll  have to move down.”
       D. Denton  Deere, always in  a hurry, brushed a quick  kiss 
on Angela’s cheek. He was still wearing his hospital  whites.
       “I   didn’t   know  this   was  a pajama  party,”   Turtle  said, 
relinquishing  her  chair  and  stomping  to  the  far  end  of  the 
table.


The  next  heir,   short  and  round,   entered  timidly,   her   lips 
pressed together in  an  impish  smile  that  curved up  to  what 
must be pointed ears under her straight-cut, steely hair.

29
       “Hello,   Mrs.   Baumbach,”   Angela  said.  “I    don’t  think 
you’ve met my fiancé,  Denton Deere.”
       “You’re  a lucky man, Mr.  Deere.”
       “Doctor   Deere,”  Mrs.  Wexler  corrected  her, puzzled  by 
the dressmaker’s presence.
       “Yes,  of   course, I’m    so  sorry.”  Sensing  that  she  was 
unwelcome at  this end of  the  room, Flora  Baumbach walked 
on. “Hi,  mind  if  I  sit  next to you?  I  promise not to  pull  your 
braid.”
       “That’s  okay.”   Turtle  was  hunched  over  the  table,  her 
small chin  resting between  her crossed arms. From  there she 
could see everything except the coffin.
       Grace Wexler   dismissed the  next  heir   with  an  audible 
tongue click.  That  distasteful  little  man didn’t   even have the 
sense to remove  his  silly  aviator’s  cap.  “Tsk.”  And   what in 
heaven’s name was he doing here?
       The delivery boy  shouted: “Let’s give  a cheer, Otis Amber 
is here!”  Turtle  laughed, Flora  Baumbach tittered,  and Grace 
Wexler again clicked her tongue, “Tsk!”
       Doug Hoo  and his father entered silently,  but Sandy gave 
a hearty  “Hi!”    and a  cheery  wave.  He wore  his  doorman’s 
uniform, but unlike  Otis Amber, carried  his hat in his hand.
       Grace Windsor Wexler was no longer  surprised at the odd 
assortment  of   heirs.   Household   workers,    all,   or   former 
employees, she decided. The  rich  always  reward  servants in 
their wills,   and her Uncle  Sam was  a generous man. “Aren’t 
your parents coming?” she asked the older Theodorakis boy as 
he wheeled his brother into the library.
       “They weren’t  invited,”  Theo replied.
       “Itsss-oo-nn,”  Chris announced.

30
       “What  did he say?”
       “He   said   it’s   snowing,”    Theo   and  Flora    Baumbach 
explained at the same time.
       The heirs  watched helplessly  as the  invalid’s  thin  frame 
was  suddenly  torn   and  twisted   by  convulsions.   Only   the 
dressmaker rushed to his side. “I know, I know,”  she simpered, 
“you were trying  to tell  us about the itsy-bitsy snowflings.”
       Theo moved her  away. “My   brother is  not an infant,  and 
he’s not retarded, so please, no more baby talk.”
       Blinking  away tears, Flora Baumbach returned to her seat, 
the elfin smile still  painted on her pained face.
       Some stared at the afflicted child  with morbid  fascination, 
but most turned away. They didn’t want  to see.
       “Pyramidal  tract involvement,”   Denton  Deere whispered, 
trying to impress Angela with  his diagnosis.
       Angela, her  face a mirror  to  the boy’s  suffering, grabbed 
her tapestry bag and hurried out of the room.


“Why   hello,   Judge Ford.”   Proud  of   her  liberalism,   Grace 
Windsor Wexler  stood and leaned over  the table to  shake the 
black woman’s hand. She must be here in some legal capacity, 
or maybe her mother  was a household maid,  but of  one thing 
Grace was  certain:  J.  J. Ford   could  no  more  be related  to 
Samuel W. Westing than Mr. Hoo.
       “Can’t   we  get started?”  Mr.   Hoo  asked, hoping   to  get 
back in time  to watch the football  game on television.  “I  must 
return to my  restaurant,” he announced loudly. “Sunday  is our 
busy day, but  we are  still  accepting reservations. Shin  Hoo’s 
Restaurant on  the fifth   floor   of  Sunset Towers,  specializing 
in…”

31
       Doug tugged at his  father’s sleeve. “Not  here, dad; not  in 
front of the dead.”
       “What  dead?” Mr.  Hoo  had  not noticed  the open  coffin. 
Now he did. “Ohhh!”
       The  lawyer   explained   that  several   heirs  had  not   yet 
arrived. “My   wife  is  not coming,”   said Mr.  Hoo.  Grace said, 
“Dr. Wexler was called away on an emergency operation.”
       “An   emergency  Packers  game  in   Green  Bay,”   Turtle 
confided to Flora  Baumbach, who scrunched up her  shoulders 
and tittered behind a plump hand.
       “Then  we  are still   waiting  for   one, no,  two  more,”  the 
lawyer said, fumbling  with  his papers, his hands shaking under 
the strict scrutiny of  the judge.
       Judge Ford  had recognized  E.  J. Plum.  Several  months 
ago he had argued before her  court, bumbling  to  the point  of 
incompetence.    Why,     she    wondered,     was    a     young, 
inexperienced  attorney  chosen to   handle  an estate  of  such 
importance? Come  to think   of  it,  what  was she doing  here? 
Curiosity? Perhaps, but what  about the rest of  them, the other 
tenants of Sunset Towers? Don’t  anticipate, Josie-Jo, wait  for 
Sam Westing to make the first move.
       Light  footsteps were heard in the hall. It  was only Angela, 
who blushed and, hugging  her tapestry bag close to  her body, 
returned to her seat.
       The  heirs  waited.  Some  chatted  with   neighbors,  some 
looked up  at the  gilt  ceiling,  some studied  the pattern of  the 
Oriental   rug.   Judge   Ford   stared   at  the   table,   at   Theo 
Theodorakis’ hand. A  calloused hand,  a healed cut, the  shiny 
slash of a burn on the deep bronze skin. She lowered her hands 
to her lap. His Greek skin was darker than her “black”  skin.

32
                                                 *


Thump, thump,  thump.  Someone was coming,  or  were  there 
two of them?
       In  came  Crow.  Eyes lowered,   without  a  word,  she  sat 
down next  to Otis Amber.  A dark  cloud passed from  her face 
as she eased off a tight shoe under the table.
       Thump, thump, thump. The last expected heir arrived.
       “Hello,  everybody. Sorry I’m  late. I  haven’t quite adjusted 
to this”—Sydelle   Pulaski waved  a gaily  painted crutch  in the 
air,   tottered,    and    set   it    down    quickly     with    another 
thump—“this   crutch.  Crutch.   What  a  horrible   word,   but  I 
guess I’ll  have  to  get used to  it.”   She pursed her  bright  red 
mouth, painted to a fullness beyond the narrow line  of her lips, 
trying  to suppress a smile  of  triumph.  Everyone  was staring; 
she knew they would notice.
       “What  happened, Pulaski?”  Otis Amber  asked. “Did   you 
pull Turtle’s  braid again?”
       “More  likely   she visited Wexler  the foot  butcher,” Sandy 
suggested.
       Sydelle was pleased to hear someone come to her defense 
with  a loud  click  of  the  tongue. She had  not even  blinked  a 
false eyelash at  those offensive  remarks (poise,  they  call it). 
“It’s  really  nothing,”  she reported  bravely, “just  some  sort of 
wasting disease. But pity me not, I shall  live out my  remaining 
time enjoying  each precious  day to  the full.”   Thump,  thump, 
thump. The secretary kept to the side of the room, avoiding the 
Oriental  rug  that   might  cushion  the   thump  of  her  purple-
striped crutch, as she made her way to the end of the table. Her 

33
exaggerated hips were  even  more  exaggerated by  the wavy 
stripes of white on her purple dress.
       Purple waves, Turtle thought.
       Denton  Deere almost  fell  off   his chair,  leaning  back  to 
follow  this  most unusual  case. First she  favored her  left  leg, 
then her right leg.
       “What  is it?” whispered Mrs.  Wexler.
       The intern did  not have the least notion, but  he had to say 
something.  “Traveling    sporadic   myositis,”    he  pronounced 
quickly  and  glanced  at  Angela.  Her  eyes  remained  on  her 
embroidery.
       The  lawyer  stood,  documents  in  hand,  and cleared  his 
throat several times. Grace Windsor  Wexler, her  chin tilted  in 
the regal pose of an heiress, gave him her full attention.
       “One minute  please.” Sydelle Pulaski propped her purple-
and-white-striped  crutch   against the  table,  then  removed   a 
shorthand pad and pencil  from  her  handbag. “Thank  you  for 
waiting; you  may begin.”





6      ♦      The   Westing    Will


“My   name,”  the   young  lawyer   began, “is   Edgar  Jennings 
Plum. Although  I  never had the honor  of  meeting Samuel W. 
Westing, for   some reason yet  unexplained,  I  was  appointed 
executor  of   this  will    found   adjacent  to   the  body   of   the 
deceased.

34
       “Let  me assure you that I have examined the documents at 
hand as thoroughly  as possible  in  the short  time  available. I 
have verified the signatures to be those of  Samuel W. Westing 
and his two witnesses: Julian R. Eastman, President and Chief 
Executive Officer  of Westing Paper Products Corporation,  and 
Sidney Sikes, M.D.,  Coroner of Westing County. Although  the 
will  you  are about  to hear  may seem eccentric,  I  pledge my 
good name and reputation on its legality.”
       Breathless  with   suspense, the  heirs  stared  popeyed  at 
Edgar Jennings  Plum,  who  now  coughed  into  his  fist,  now 
cleared his throat, now  rustled papers, and now, at last, began 
to read aloud from the Westing will.


              I,   SAMUEL    W.   WESTING,   resident   of 
              Westing   County    in    the    fair     state   of 
              Wisconsin in  the great  and glorious  United 
              States of America, being  of sound mind and 
              memory, do hereby declare this to be my last 
              will  and testament.


              FIRST    ♦     I  returned   to  live   among  my 
              friends  and  my  enemies. I   came home  to 
              seek my heir, aware that in  doing so I  faced 
              death. And so I did.
                    Today  I    have  gathered   together   my 
              nearest and  dearest, my sixteen nieces  and 
              nephews


“What!”

35
                    (Sit down, Grace Windsor Wexler!)


The  lawyer    stammered  an   apology   to   the   still-standing 
woman. “I  was only  reading; I  mean, those are Mr.  Westing’s 
words.”
       “If   it’s  any  comfort   to  you,  Mrs.  Wexler,”   Judge Ford 
remarked with   biting  dignity,  “I   am  just  as appalled by  our 
purported relationship.”
       “Oh, I  didn’t  mean…”
       “Hey, Angela,”   Turtle called  the length  of  the table. “It’s 
against the law to marry that doctor-to-be. He’s your  cousin.”
       D.  Denton   Deere,  patting   Angela’s   hand  in   his   best 
bedside manner, pricked his finger on her embroidery needle.
       “I   can’t  tell  who   said what   with  this  chatter,”   Sydelle 
Pulaski   complained.   “Would     you   read   that   again,   Mr. 
Lawyer?”


                    Today  I    have  gathered   together   my 
              nearest and  dearest, my sixteen nieces  and 
              nephews (Sit down, Grace Windsor Wexler!) 
              to view  the body of  your Uncle  Sam for the 
              last time.
                    Tomorrow its  ashes will  be  scattered to 
              the four winds.


              SECOND   ♦   I,  Samuel W. Westing, hereby 
              swear that  I  did  not  die of  natural  causes. 
              My life  was taken from me—by one of you!

36
“O-o-o-uggg.”   Chris’s arm  flailed  the air,  his accusing finger 
pointed here, no there; it pointed  everywhere. His exaggerated 
motions acted out  the confusion  shared by  all but  one of  the 
heirs  as they   looked  around  at  the  stunned  faces  of  their 
neighbors to  confirm   what they  heard.  Rereading her  notes, 
Sydelle Pulaski now uttered a small shriek. “Eek!”
       “Murder?  Does that mean Westing was murdered?” Sandy 
asked the heir on his left.
       Crow turned away in  silence.
       “Does that mean murder?” he asked the heir on his right.
       “Murder?  Of  course it  means murder.  Sam Westing was 
murdered,”  Mr.  Hoo  replied. “Either   that  or he  ate once too 
often in that greasy-spoon coffee shop.”
       Theo resented Hoo’s slur  on the  family  business. “It  was 
murder, all right.  And the will   says the murderer is one of us.” 
He glared at the restaurant owner.
       “Have the police  been notified of  the charge?” Judge Ford 
asked the lawyer.
       Plum shrugged. “I presume they will  perform  an autopsy.”
       The judge  shook  her head in  dismay. Autopsy?  Westing 
was already embalmed; tomorrow he would be cremated.


                    The police   are helpless.  The  culprit   is 
              far  too cunning  to  be apprehended for  this 
              dastardly deed.


“Oh  my!”   Flora Baumbach  clapped a  hand to  her mouth  on 
hearing “dastardly.” First  murder, now a swear word.

37
                    I, alone, know  the name. Now it  is up to 
              you. Cast  out  the sinner, let  the  guilty  rise 
              and confess.
       “Amen,”  said Crow.


              THIRD   ♦   Who among you  is worthy  to be 
              the  Westing heir?  Help  me.  My  soul shall 
              roam restlessly until that  one is found.
                    The estate is at the crossroads. The heir 
              who wins  the windfall   will   be the one  who 
              finds the…


“Ashes!”   the doorman  shouted. Some  tittered  to  relieve  the 
unbearable tension, some cast him a reproachful glance, Grace 
Wexler clicked   her tongue,  and Sydelle  Pulaski  shhh-ed. “It 
was just  a  joke,”  Sandy  tried  to  explain.  “You  know,  ashes 
scattered to  the  winds,   so the  one  who   wins  the  windfall 
gets— Oh, never mind.”


              FOURTH      ♦     Hail   to   thee,  O  land   of 
              opportunity!  You have made  me, the son of 
              poor    immigrants,     rich,    powerful,     and 
              respected.
                    So take stock in America,  my heirs,  and 
              sing  in  praise  of  this  generous land.   You, 
              too, may strike  it rich  who dares to play  the 
              Westing game.


       “Game? What game?” Turtle wanted to know.

38
       “No  matter,”   Judge Ford  said,  rising  to  leave.  “This  is 
either a cruel trick or the man was insane.


              FIFTH    ♦   Sit  down, your  honor, and  read 
              the letter  this  brilliant    young attorney  will 
              now hand over to you.


It was  uncanny. Several heads turned towards  the coffin,   but 
Westing’s eyes were shut forever.
       The brilliant   young  attorney fumbled   through a  stack of 
papers, felt  his  pockets,  and  finally   found  the  letter  in   his 
briefcase.
       “Aren’t   you going  to  open it?”  Theo  asked as the judge 
resumed her seat and put the sealed envelope in her purse.
       “No   need. Sam  Westing  could   afford  to   buy  a  dozen 
certificates of sanity.”
       “The poor  are crazy, the rich just eccentric,”  Mr. Hoo  said 
bitterly.
       “Are   you  implying,   sir,  that   the medical   profession  is 
corrupt?” Denton Deere challenged.
       “Shhh!”


              SIXTH   ♦   Before you  proceed to the game 
              room  there   will   be  one  minute   of  silent 
              prayer for  your good old Uncle  Sam.


Flora Baumbach was the  only  heir to  cry. Crow  was the only 
one to pray. By  the time Sydelle  Pulaski could  assume a pose 
of reverence, the minute was up.

39
7      ♦      The   Westing    Game


Eight card  tables, each with  two  chairs, were arranged in  the 
center of  the  game room.  Sports equipment  lined  the  walls. 
Hunting  rifles,  Ping-Pong  paddles, billiard   cues (a  full  rack, 
Turtle  noticed),  bows  and  arrows,  darts, bats,  racquets—all 
looked like  possible  murder weapons to  the jittery  heirs  who 
were waiting to be told  where to sit.
       Theo  wandered  over  to  the  chess  table  to  admire  the 
finely   carved  pieces.  Someone had  moved   a  white  pawn. 
Okay, he’ll   play   along.  Theo  defended the  opening  with   a 
black knight.
       On hearing Plum’s  throat-clearing  signal, Sydelle  Pulaski 
switched the painted crutch  to her left  armpit  and flipped  to a 
fresh page in her notebook. “Shhh!”


              SEVENTH     ♦      And   now,  dear   friends, 
              relatives,  and  enemies,  the  Westing game 
              begins.


              The rules are simple:
                    - Number  of players:  16,  divided into  8 
              pairs.
                    - Each pair will  receive $10,000.
                    - Each pair will  receive one set of clues.
                    - Forfeits:   If  any  player  drops  out, the 
              partner  must leave the game. The pair must 
              return  the  money. Absent  pairs  forfeit   the 

40
              $10,000;  their  clues  will   be held  until  the 
              next session.
                    - Players  will  be given  two days’ notice 
              of the next session. Each pair may then give 
              one answer.
                    - Object of the game: to win.


“Did  you  hear that,  Crow?”  Otis Amber  said  excitedly.  “Ten 
thousand dollars!   Now  aren’t   you  glad  I   made you   come, 
huh?”
       “Shhh!”  That  was Turtle.  The object  of  the game was to 
win, and she wanted to win.


              EIGHTH    ♦   The heirs  will  now be  paired. 
              When called, go  to the assigned table.  Your 
              name and position will  be read as signed on 
              the receipt.
                    It  will    be  up  to  the  other   players  to 
              discover who you really  are.


              1    ♦ MADAME    SUN LIN HOO, cook
                         JAKE WEXLER, standing or sitting 
                               when not lying  down


Grace Wexler  did  not  understand  her  husband’s joke  about 
position. Mr.  Hoo  did, but  he was in no  mood for  humor;  ten 
thousand dollars  was at  stake. Both  pleaded for  their  absent 
spouses—“Emergency  operation,”   “My    wife   doesn’t   even 

41
speak English”—to   no avail.  Table  one remained empty  and 
moneyless.


              2    ♦ TURTLE   WEXLER, witch
                         FLORA BAUMBACH, dressmaker


Sighs of relief greeted the naming of Turtle’s  partner, but Flora 
Baumbach  seemed pleased  to  be   paired  with   the  kicking 
witch. At  least,  her face was  still  puckered in  that  elfin  grin. 
Turtle had hoped for one of  the high-school seniors, especially 
Doug Hoo.


              3    ♦ CHRISTOS  THEODORAKIS, bird-
                               watcher
                         D. DENTON DEERE, intern, St. 
                               Joseph’s Hospital, Department  of 
                               Plastic  Surgery


Theo protested: He and his brother  should be paired together; 
Chris was his responsibility.  Mrs. Wexler  protested: Doctor D. 
should  be  paired   with   his   bride-to-be.   D.   Denton  Deere 
protested, but   silently:   If   this  had  been  arranged  for   free 
medical advice,  they  (whoever  they  are) were  mistaken.  He 
was a busy man. He was a doctor, not a nursemaid.
       But  Chris was  delighted to  be part  of  the outside world. 
He would  tell the intern  about the person who limped  into  the 
Westing  house;  maybe  that  was  the   murderer—unless  his 
partner was the murderer! This was really exciting,  even better 
than television.

42
              4    ♦ ALEXANDER    MCSOUTHERS, 
                               doorman
                         J. J. FORD, judge, Appellate Division 
                               of the State Supreme Court


The heirs watched the jaunty  doorman pull  out a chair  for the 
judge.  It   had  never   occurred  to   them  that  Sandy   was  a 
nickname  for   Alexander,   but  that   couldn’t   be   what  Sam 
Westing meant by It will  be up to the other players  to discover 
who you really are. Or could  it?
       The   judge    did   not    return   the    chip-toothed    smile. 
Doorman, he  calls himself,  and  the others had signed  simple 
things, too:  cook,  dressmaker. The podiatrist  had  even made 
fun  of  his  “position.”    She  must  seem as  pompous  as that 
intern,  putting  on  airs with   that title.   Well,  she had  worked 
hard to get where  she was, why shouldn’t  she be proud  of it? 
She was no token; her  record was faultless.…Watch  it,  Josie-
Jo. Westing’s getting  to you  already and the  game has barely 
begun.


              5    ♦ GRACE   WINDSOR WEXLER, heiress
                         JAMES SHIN HOO, restaurateur


Grace Windsor Wexler ignored the snickers. If  she was not the 
heiress now, she would be soon, what with  her clues, Angela’s 
clues, Turtle’s   clues,  Denton’s  clues,  and  the  clues  of  Mr. 
Hoo’s obedient son. Five  thousand dollars  lost! Oh  well,  who 
needs Jake anyway? She’d win on  her own. “You’ll   be happy 

43
to know   that  Mr.  Westing  was  really  my  Uncle   Sam,”  she 
whispered to her partner.
       So what, thought Mr.  Hoo.  Five thousand dollars lost!  He 
should  have told   his  wife  about  this   meeting,  dragged her 
along.  Sam   Westing,  the   louse,   has  cheated  him   again. 
Whoever killed  him deserves a medal.


              6    ♦ BERTHE   ERICA CROW, Good 
                               Salvation Soup Kitchen
                         OTIS AMBER, deliverer


The delivery  boy danced a merry  jig;  but Crow,  her sore foot 
squeezed back into her tight  shoe, headed for table six  with  a 
grim  face. Why  were they  watching  her? Did  they  think  she 
killed Windy?  Could the guilty  know her guilt?  Repent!
       Crow limps,  Chris Theodorakis noted.


              7    ♦ THEO   THEODORAKIS, brother
                         DOUG HOO, first in all-state  high-
                               school mile run


They slapped  hands, and Doug  jogged  to  table  seven. Theo 
moved more slowly.  Passing the chessboard he saw that white 
had made a second  move. He  countered with  a  black  pawn. 
Maybe he should  not  have written  brother, but  like  it  or  not, 
that was his position  in  life.  Chris was smiling  at him  in  pure 
sweetness, which   made  Theo  feel  even   guiltier   about  his 
resentment.

44
       “I   guess that  makes us  partners,  Ms.  Pulaski,”   Angela 
said.
       “Pardon me, did you say something?”


              8    ♦ SYDELLE   PULASKI,  secretary to the 
                               president
                         ANGELA WEXLER, none


Angela stepped tentatively  behind  the secretary, not knowing 
whether to ignore her disability  or to  take her arm. At least her 
crippled   partner  could   not   be   the  murderer,   but   it   was 
embarrassing being paired with such a…no, she shouldn’t  feel 
that way. It was her  mother who was upset (she could feel  the 
indignant anger without   having to  look  at Grace); her perfect 
daughter was paired with a freak.
       What  good  luck,  the  hobbling  Sydelle  Pulaski  thought. 
Now  she would  really   be noticed  with   such a  pretty  young 
thing for  a partner. They might even invite  her to the wedding. 
She’d paint a crutch white with  little  pink nosegays.
       Denton Deere was troubled. What in the world  did Angela 
mean by “nun”?


Once again Edgar Jennings Plum cleared his throat.
       “Nasal   drip,”   Denton   Deere  whispered,  confiding    the 
latest  diagnosis  to   his  partner.  Chris   giggled.   What’s   the 
crippled kid so happy about, the intern wondered.


              NINTH   ♦   Money! Each  pair in  attendance 
              will   now  receive  a  check  for   the sum  of 

45
              $10,000.   The   check   cannot   be   cashed 
              without   the   signatures  of   both  partners. 
              Spend it  wisely  or  go for  broke.  May  God 
              thy gold refine.


A  piercing  shriek   suddenly  reminded  the  Westing  heirs  of 
murder. While  passing out the checks, the lawyer  had stepped 
on Crow’s sore foot.
       “Is this  legal, judge?” Sandy asked.
       “It   is   not   only   legal,   Mr.   McSouthers,”   Judge  Ford 
replied, signing  her  name to  the check and  handing it  to  the 
doorman, “it   is  a shrewd  way  to keep  everyone playing  the 
game.”


              TENTH    ♦    Each  pair   in  attendance will 
              now receive an envelope containing  a set of 
              clues. No  two  sets of  clues are  alike.  It  is 
              not what  you have, it’s what  you don’t  have 
              that counts.


Placing  the last  of  the  envelopes on  table  eight,  the  young 
lawyer smiled at Angela. Sydelle Pulaski  smiled back.
       “This  makes no  sense,” Denton Deere  complained. Four 
clues typed  on  cut  squares of  Westing  Superstrength  Paper 
Towels lay on the table before him.
       Arms and elbows at odds, with  fingers  fanned, Chris tried 
to rearrange  the words  in  some  grammatical,  if  not  logical, 
order.

46
       “Hey, watch  it!”  the intern  shouted, as one clue wafted to 
the floor.
       Flora Baumbach  leaped from  her chair  at the  next table, 
picked up the square of  paper and set it face  down before the 
trembling youngster. “I  didn’t  see it,” she announced loudly. “I 
really didn’t   see it,”  she repeated under the questioning  gaze 
of her partner, Turtle Wexler, witch.
       The word she had seen was plain.
       The  players  protected  their   clues  more  carefully   now. 
Hunched over  the tables,  they moved  the  paper squares this 
way and that  way, mumbling  and  grumbling.  The murderer’s 
name must be there, somewhere.
       Only  one pair had not  yet seen their clues. At  table  eight 
Sydelle  Pulaski  placed one  hand  on  the  envelope, raised  a 
finger  to her  lips  and tilted  her  head toward  the other  heirs. 
Just watch and listen, she meant.
       She may be  odd, but  she’s smart, Angela  thought.  Since 
each pair had  a different  set of  clues, they  would  watch  and 
listen for clues to their clues.


“He-he-he.”  The delivery  boy slapped his partner on the back. 
“That’s us, old pal:  Queen Crow and King Amber.”
       “What's  this: on  or no?”  Doug  Hoo  turned a clue  upside 
down, then right side up again.
       Theo  jabbed an  elbow  in  his  ribs  and  turned  to  see if 
anyone had heard. Angela lowered her eyes in time.
       J. J. Ford crumpled the clues in  her fist  and rose in anger. 
“I’m   sorry, Mr.   McSouthers. Playing   a pawn  in  this  foolish 
game is  one  thing,   but  to  be  insulted  with   minstrel   show 
dialect…”

47
       “Please, judge, please don’t  quit  on me,”  Sandy pleaded. 
“I’d   have to  give   back  all  that  money;  it  would   break my 
wife’s heart. And my  poor kids.…”
       Judge Ford regarded the desperate doorman without  pity. 
So many had begged before her bench.
       “Please, judge. I lost  my job,  my pension. I  can’t fight  no 
more. Don’t quit  just because of some nonsensical words.”
       Sticks  and stones  can break  my  bones,  but  words  will 
never hurt me, she had chanted as a child. Words did hurt,  but 
she was no longer a child. Nor a hanging judge. And there was 
always the chance…“All  right,  Mr. McSouthers. I’ll   stay.” J. J. 
Ford sat down, her eyes sparking with wickedness. “And  we’ll 
play  the  game just  as  Sam Westing  would   have  played  it. 
Mean!”
       Flora Baumbach squeezed her eyes together and screwed 
up her face. She was concentrating.
       “Haven’t  you memorized them  yet?” Turtle  didn’t like  the 
way Otis Amber’s  scrawny neck was swiveling  high out  of his 
collar. And what was Angela staring at?
       “Yes,  I  think   so,”  the  dressmaker replied,  “but   I  can’t 
make heads or tails of them.”
       “They  make perfect sense to me,” Turtle said. One by one 
she put the clues in her mouth, chewed and swallowed them.


“Jibberish,”  Mr. Hoo muttered.
       Grace Windsor Wexler agreed. “Excuse me, Mr. Plum, but 
what are  these clues clues  to? I   mean, exactly  what  are we 
supposed to find?”
       “Purple waves,”  Sandy joked with a wink  at Turtle.

48
       Mrs. Wexler  uttered a cry of  recognition  and changed the 
order of two of  her clues.
       “It’s  still  jibberish,”  Mr. Hoo complained.
       Other  players pressed the  lawyer  for  more  information. 
Ed Plum only shrugged.
       “Then could  you please give us copies of the will?”
       “A  copy will  be on file…”  Judge Ford began.
       “I’m   afraid  not, your  honor,”  the  lawyer  said. “The  will 
not, I  mean the  will  will   will…”    He paused and tried  again. 
“The  will   will    not  be filed   until   the  first  of   the  year. My 
instructions specifically  state that no heir is allowed  to see any 
of the documents until the game is over.”
       No copy? That’s  not fair.  But  wait, they  did have a  copy. 
A shorthand copy!
       Sydelle Pulaski  had plenty  of  attention  now.  She smiled 
back at  the  friendly   faces, revealing  a  lipstick   stain on  her 
front teeth.
       “Isn’t  there  some sort of  a last  statement?” Sandy asked 
Plum. “I  mean, like the intern says, nothing makes any sense.”


              ELEVENTH    ♦   Senseless, you say? Death 
              is  senseless yet makes way  for   the living. 
              Life,  too, is  senseless unless you know who 
              you are, what  you want, and  which way the 
              wind blows.
                    So on  with   the  game. The  solution   is 
              simple  if  you know  whom  you are  looking 
              for. But heirs, beware! Be aware!

49
                    Some are not who they say they are, and 
              some are not who they seem to be. Whoever 
              you are, it’s time to go home.
                    God bless you all and remember this:
                    Buy Westing Paper Products!





8      ♦      The   Paired    Heirs


During   the  night   Flora   Baumbach’s   itsy-bitsy   snowflings 
raged into  a  blizzard.  The  tenants of  Sunset  Towers awoke 
from  clue-chasing,  blood-dripping   dreams, bound  in  twisted 
sheets and imprisoned by fifteen-foot snowdrifts.
       No telephones. No electricity.
       Snowbound with a murderer!
       The slow procession looked like  some ancient, mysterious 
rite as partner sought out partner on the windowless stairs, and 
silent  pairs  threaded through  the  corridors  in  the  flickering 
light of  crooked, color-striped  candles (the product  of Turtle’s 
stint at summer camp).
       “These    handmade   candles   are   both    practical    and 
romantic,”  she said, peddling  her wares from  apartment  door 
to  apartment   door  to   frightened   tenants  at   seven  in   the 
morning.  (Oh, it’s  only  Turtle.)   “And  the  colored stripes  tell 
time, which  is very handy  if your  electric clock  stopped. Each 
stripe  burns  exactly   one-half   hour,  more   or  less.  Twelve 
stripes, six hours.”
       “How  much?”

50
       “Not  wishing   to take  advantage of  this  emergency, I’ve 
reduced the price to only five dollars  each.”
       Outrageous. Even more  so when  the electricity   came on 
two hours after her last sale. “Sorry, no refunds,” Turtle  said.
       No  matter. What   was five   dollars  to  heirs  of  an estate 
worth two  hundred million?  Clues,  they had to work  on those 
clues.  Behind    closed  doors.   Whisper,   someone   may   be 
listening.
       Not all  the heirs were  huddled in  plotting,  puzzle-solving 
pairs. Jake Wexler had retreated to  his office  after  a long and 
loud argument with  his  wife.  He sure could have used half  of 
that ten thousand dollars, but  he wouldn’t  admit  it, not  to her. 
The forfeited   money upset  her more  than the  murder  of  her 
uncle, if he was her uncle.
       Five   floors    above,   Jake’s  partner   stood   before   the 
restaurant’s front   window  staring  at  the  froth  on  the  angry 
lake, and beyond.  No  one had bothered to  tell  Madame  Hoo 
about the Westing game.
       Other players were  snowbound elsewhere: Denton  Deere 
in  the hospital,   Sandy at  home.  No  one  gave a  thought  to 
where Otis Amber or Crow  might be.
       But   Sydelle  Pulaski   was   there,  thumping   her   crutch 
against the  baseboards as  she limped   through  the  carpeted 
halls  on the  arm  of  her  pretty   partner. Not  one,  but  seven 
tenants had  invited  her  to  morning   coffee  or  afternoon  tea 
(murderer or not, they had to see Pulaski’s copy of that will).
       “Three   lumps,   please. Angela   drinks   it   black.”   Your 
health? “Thank  the lord  I’m  still   able to hobble  about.” Your 
job?  “I   was  private   secretary  to  the   president  of  Schultz 
Sausages. Poor Mr. Schultz,  I  don’t  know  how  he’ll  manage 

51
without   me.”   Your  shorthand  notes?  “Thank    you  for   the 
refreshments. I  must  hurry  back  for  my   medication.  Come, 
Angela.”


One heir had not  invited  them in,  but that didn’t   stop Sydelle 
Pulaski  from   barging  into   apartment  2D.   “Hi,   Chris.   Just 
thought we’d pop in  to see how you’re doing.  Don’t be scared. 
I’m  not the murderer, Angela is not the murderer, and we don’t 
think you are the murderer. Mind  if  I sit  down?” The secretary 
toppled into  a chair  next to the  invalid  before he could  reply. 
“Here,  I  stole  a  macaroon for  you.   It’s  so  sticky  you’ll   be 
tasting it  all day;  I  must have six  strands of coconut  between 
my upper  molars.”  Chris  took  the  cookie.  “Just  look  at that 
smile, it could break your  heart.”
       Angela wished  her partner had not said that; it  seemed so 
insensitive, so crude.  But at least  Sydelle was talking  to  him, 
which was more than she was able to do. Angela, the fortunate 
one, standing like   a dummy.  “Um,   I  know  Denton wants  to 
work on the clues with  you. He’s snowbound, too.”
       “You  ver-r   pred-dy.”  How   did  “pretty”    come  out?  He 
meant  to  say  “nice.”    Chris  bent  his   curly   head  over  the 
geography book in his  lap. She wasn’t laughing  at him. It  was 
all right  to ask her because she was going to marry his partner. 
“Wha ar-r g-gra-annz?”
       Angela did not understand.
       Chris fanned the pages of the book to a picture  of a wheat 
field. “G-gra-annz.”
       “Oh, grains. You  want to know  the names of some grains. 
Let’s see, there’s wheat, rye, corn, barley, oats.”

52
       “O-ohss!”  Angela  thought  the  boy  was going  into  a  fit, 
but he was only repeating her last word: oats.
       Sydelle was puffing   her warm breath  on the window  and 
wiping   a frosted   area clean  with   her  sleeve.  “There,   now 
you’ll  be able to  watch the birds  again. Anything  else we can 
do for you, young man?”
       Chris nodded. “Read m-me short-han n-noos.”
       The pretty lady  and the funny lady  moved quickly  out the 
door. One limped,  but it  was a pretended limp (he  could tell), 
not like the limper  on the Westing house lawn.
       Oats. Chris closed his eyes to picture the clues:


                            FOR     PLAIN     GRAIN     SHED


Grain  = oats = Otis  Amber.  For +  d (from  shed) =  Ford. But 
neither the  delivery   boy  nor  the  judge  limped,  and  he still 
hadn’t figured  out she or  plain. He’d  have to  wait  for Denton 
Deere; Denton Deere was smart; he was a doctor.
       Chris raised  his binoculars  to the  cliff.  Windblown   drifts 
buttressed the house—something moved on the second floor—
a hand holding   back the  edge of  a drape.  Slowly  the  heavy 
drape fell  back  against the window.   The Westing  house was 
snowbound, too, and somebody was snowbound in it.


Only  one of  the  players  thought  the clues  told  how  the ten 
thousand-dollar check was to be spent. Take stock in America, 
the will  said. Go for broke, the will  said.
       “In  the stock  market,”  Turtle  said. “And   whoever makes 
the most  money  wins  it  all,  the whole  two   hundred million 
dollars.” Their  clues:

53
                              SEA     MOUNTAIN     AM     O


stood for   symbols  of  three corporations  listed   on the  stock 
exchange: SEA, MT (the abbreviation  for mountain), AMO.
       “But  am and o are separate clues,” Flora Baumbach said.
       “To confuse us.”
       “But   what   about   the   murderer?  I   thought   we   were 
supposed to find the name of the murderer?”
       “To  put us off  the track.”  If  the  police suspected murder, 
she’d  be  in   jail   by   now.  Her   fingerprints   were   all   over 
everything  in the  Westing house,  including  the corpse.  “You 
don’t   really   think   one  of   us  could   have  killed   a   living, 
breathing   human   being    in    cold   blood,    do   you,    Mrs. 
Baumbach? Do  you?”  Turtle  did,  but  the  dressmaker was a 
cream puff.
       “Don’t  you  look at me like  that, Turtle Wexler!  You know 
very  well   I  could   never  think   such  a  thing.   I  must  have 
misunderstood. Oh my, I just  wish Miss  Pulaski had shown us 
her copy of the will.”
       Turtle  returned to  her  calculations,  multiplying   numbers 
of shares times price, adding a broker’s  commission,  trying to 
total the sums to the ten thousand dollars they had to spend.
       Flora Baumbach may  have been wrong about the murder, 
but she was not convinced  of Turtle’s  plan.  “What  about Buy 
Westing Paper Products? I’m sure that was in the will.”
       “Great!”  Turtle  exclaimed.  “We’ll   do just  that, we’ll   add 
WPP to the list of stocks we’re going  to buy.”
       Flora    Baumbach    had     watched    enough    television 
commercials to know  that Buy Westing Paper  Products meant 
that as  soon as  she could  get  to  market,  she’d  buy  all  the 

54
Westing products on the shelf. Still,  it  felt good having  a child 
around again.  She’d  play  along,  gladly.  “You   know,  Turtle, 
you may be right about putting  our money in the stock market. 
I remember the will   said May  God thy  gold refine.  That must 
be from the Bible.”
       “Shakespeare,” Turtle  replied.  All  quotations  were either 
from the Bible  or Shakespeare.


Mr.  Hoo moved  aside a  full  ashtray  with  a show  of  distaste 
and rearranged the clues. “Purple fruited  makes more sense.”
       Grace Wexler   looked  across the  restaurant  to  the  lone 
figure   at  the   window.   “Are   you   sure  your   wife    doesn’t 
understand English, I mean, after living  here so long?”
       “That’s  my second wife.  She came over from Hong Kong 
two years ago.”
       “She  does look   young,  but  it’s  so  hard  to  tell  ages of 
people of  the Oriental  persuasion,”  Grace said.  Why  was he 
glaring at her  like that? “Your   wife is  quite lovely,  you know, 
so doll-like  and inscrutable.”
       Hoo bit  off half  a chocolate bar. He had enough problems 
with  the empty  restaurant, a lazy  son, and his  nagging ulcer; 
now he has to put up with this bigot.
       Grace lit   another  cigarette  and  rearranged the  clues  to 
read: purple   waves.  “You   heard that   doorman  say  ‘purple 
waves’;  it  must mean  something. And  that  ghastly  secretary 
was wearing   a  dress with   purple  waves  last  night,   not  to 
mention her crutch.”
       “You  should  not  speak unkindly   of  those less  fortunate 
than you,” Hoo said.

55
       “You’re  quite  right,”   Grace  replied. “I   thought  the poor 
thing  handled   her  infirmity    with   great   courage—traveling 
mimosa, my  future son-in-law  says; he’s  a doctor, you  know. 
Anyhow,  Pulaski  couldn’t  possibly  be  the  murderer, not  the 
way she  gimps  around. Besides,  how  could  my  Uncle  Sam 
know she’d wear purple waves to his funeral?”
       Hoo  waved   the  cigarette  smoke   from   his  face.  “The 
murderer  had  to  have  a  motive.  How   about  this:  A  niece 
murders her rich uncle to inherit  his money?”
       Good sport that  she was, Grace tossed back her head and 
uttered an amused “Ha-ha-ha.”
       “Not  that  I  care,”  Hoo  said.  “That  cheating  moneybags 
got what he deserved. What’s the matter?”
       “Look!”   Grace pointed to the clues.


                  FRUITED     PURPLE     WAVES     FOR     SEA


“For  sea! The murderer lives in  apartment 4C!”
       “I  live  in  4C,”   Hoo barked.  “If   Sam Westing  wanted to 
say 4C he would have written  number 4, letter C.  S-e-a means 
sea, like what a turtle swims in.”
       “Come  now, Mr.  Hoo, we  are both being  silly.  Have you 
spoken to your son about his clues?”
       “Some son. If  you can catch him,  you  can ask him.”  Hoo 
stuffed  the rest  of  the  candy bar  in  his  mouth.  “And   some 
business I’ve  got  here. Everybody  orders  up, nobody  orders 
down. That  coffee shop is  sending me to  the poorhouse. And 
your Angela and that  Pulaski woman,  they didn’t  show us the 
will,  they  didn’t  give  us their clues,  they didn’t  pay  for  three 

56
cups of  jasmine tea and  six almond  cookies,  and you smoke 
too much.”
       “And  you  eat too much.”  Grace  threw her  coin purse on 
the table and stormed out  of the  restaurant. Change, that’s all 
he’ll  get from her;  he’d have to beg on  his knees before she’d 
sign Grace Windsor Wexler  on the  ten-thousand-dollar check, 
that madman. Some pair they made: Attila the Hun  and Gracie 
the  useless.  Gracie   Windkloppel    Wexler,    heir   pretender, 
pretentious heir.


First, the  money. They  signed their  names to the  check; half 
would go  into Doug  Hoo’s  savings account; half  would  go to 
Theo’s parents. Next, the clues:


                         HIS     N     ON     TO     THEE     FOR


“Maybe   they’re    numbers:   one,   two,   three,   four,”    Theo 
guessed.
       “I  still  say on is no,”  the bored track star said. He clasped 
his hands  behind  his  head, leaned  back  in  the  coffee  shop 
booth and  stretched his  long  legs under  the opposite  bench. 
“And  no is what we got: no real clues, no leads, no will.”
       After  three cups of coffee, two  pastries and a bowl of rice 
pudding with   cream, Sydelle  Pulaski  had offered  nothing   in 
return.
       Theo refused  to  give  up.  “Are  you  sure  you  didn’t  see 
anything unusual at the Westing house that night?”
       “I  didn’t   kill  Westing,  if  that’s  what  you  mean, and the 
only unusual thing  I saw was Turtle  Wexler. I think  the pest is 
madly in love with  me; how’s  that for luck?”

57
       “Get  serious, Doug.  One  of  the heirs  is a  murderer;  we 
could all get killed.”
       “Just  because  somebody  zapped  the  old   man  doesn’t 
mean he’s going to kill   again. Dad says…”  Doug  paused. His 
father’s  comment  about  awarding  a  medal  to  the murderer 
might be incriminating.
       Theo  tried   another   tack.   “I   was   playing   chess  with 
somebody in the game room last night.”
       “Who?”
       “That’s  what’s  strange; I don’t  know  who.  We’ll  have to 
find out which  one of the heirs plays chess.”
       “Since when is chess-playing evidence for  murder?”
       “Well,   it’s   something  to   go  on,”   Theo  replied.   “And 
another thing:  The  will   said  no two   sets of  clues are  alike. 
Maybe all the clues put together make one message, a message 
that points  to the  murderer. Somehow or  other  we’ll  have  to 
get the heirs to pool the clues.”
       “Oh, sure. The killer  can’t  wait to hand over the clues that 
will  hang him.”  Doug  rose. Snowbound or not, he had to  stay 
in shape for  the track meet. For  the rest of  the day he jogged 
through  the  hallways  and  up  and  down   stairs, scaring   the 
nervous tenants half out of their wits.


Judge J. J. Ford had no doubt that the clues she shared with the 
doorman were meant for  her, but  Sam Westing could  toss off 
sharper results than:


                        SKIES     AM     SHINING     BROTHER

58
His choice  of words  must have  been limited;  therefore, these 
clues were part of  a longer statement. A statement that named 
a name. The name of the murderer.
       No. Westing could not  have been murdered. If his life  had 
been threatened, if   he  had been  in  danger of   any  kind,  he 
would   have  insisted  on   police   protection.  He   owned   the 
police; he  owned the  whole  town.  Sam Westing was  not the 
type to let himself get killed.  Not  unless he was insane.
       The   judge   opened   the   envelope  given    her   by   the 
incompetent  Plum.  A  certificate  of   sanity,  dated last  week: 
“Having   thoroughly   examined…keen  mind   and  memory…
excellent physical condition…(signed)  Sidney Sikes, M.D.”
       Sikes.  That  sounded  familiar.    The  judge   scanned the 
obituary she had cut from Saturday’s newspaper.


              …Samuel   Westing    and   his   friend,    Dr. 
              Sidney Sikes,  were involved  in  a near-fatal 
              automobile    accident.     Both    men    were 
              hospitalized   with     severe  injuries.    Sikes 
              resumed his  Westingtown  medical  practice 
              and the post of  county coroner, but  Westing 
              disappeared from sight.


Sikes was Westing’s friend (and, she remembered, a witness to 
the will),   but he  was also  a physician  in  good standing.  She 
would  accept his  opinion   on  Westing’s  sanity,  for  the  time 
being at least.
       Back to the clues. Look  at her, the big-time  judge, fussing 
over scraps of  Westing  Superstrength Paper Towels.  “Forget 

59
the clues,” she said aloud, rising  from her desk to putter  about 
the room.
       Nibbling  on a macaroon, she stacked the used coffee cups 
on a tray. If only  that Pulaski person had let her study the will. 
That’s  where the  real  clues  were  buried,  among  the  veiled 
threats and pompous promises, the slogans and stillness in that 
hodgepodge of a will.
       In  his  will   Sam  Westing  implied   (he did   not  state, he 
implied)  that (1)  he was murdered,  (2) the  murderer was one 
of the heirs, (3)  he alone knew  the name of the murderer, and 
(4) the name of the murderer was the answer to the game.
       The  game: a  tricky,   divisive  Westing  game.  No  matter 
how much  fear and suspicion  he instilled  in  the players, Sam 
Westing knew that  greed would  keep them playing  the game. 
Until the “murderer”   was captured. And punished.
       Sam Westing was not murdered,  but one of  his heirs was 
guilty—guilty   of  some offense  against a relentless man. And 
that heir  was in  danger. From his  grave Westing  would  stalk 
his enemy, and through his heirs he would wreak his revenge.
       Which   one?  Which   heir  was   the  target  of   Westing’s 
vindictiveness? In  the name of justice  she would  have to find 
Westing’s victim   before  the  others  did.  She would   have  to 
learn everything  she could  about each one of  the heirs.  Who 
are they, and how did their lives touch  Westing’s, these sixteen 
strangers whose only connection with  one another was Sunset 
Towers? Sunset Towers—she’d start from there.
       Good,  the telephones  were working   again.  The number 
she dialed was answered on the  first  ring.  “Hi  there, this  is a 
recording   of   yours  truly,    Barney  Northrup.    I’m    at  your 
service—soon as I get back in  my office,  that  is. Just sing out 

60
your problem  to  old  Barney  here when  you  hear the  beep.” 
Beep.
       J. J. Ford hung up without  singing  out her problem  to old 
Barney. He, too, could be involved in  Westing’s plot.
       The  newspaper,  she  would   try   the  newspaper;  surely 
someone was snowbound there. After eight  rings, a live  voice 
answered. “We usually  don’t  supply  that kind  of  information 
over the phone, but since it’s you,  Judge Ford, I’ll  be happy to 
oblige.  Just spell  out  the  names and I’ll    call  back  if  I  find 
anything.”
       “Thank  you, I’d  appreciate that.” It  was a beginning. Sam 
Westing was dead, but maybe, just once, she could beat him at 
his own game. His last game.


Having   found  what   she  wanted   in  Turtle’s   desk,  Angela 
returned to her  frilly   bedroom where Sydelle  Pulaski, glasses 
low on  her nose, was perched on  a ruffled  stool at  the vanity 
table, smearing blue shadow on her eyelids.
       “First   we   tackle  our   own   clues,”   the  secretary  said, 
frowning  at  the result  in  the threefold  mirror.  Unlucky   from 
the day she was born, she now had a beautiful  and well-loved 
partner. There was always the chance that they alone had been 
given the answer. She unsealed the envelope and held it out to 
Angela. “Take one.”
       Angela removed the first  clue: good.
       Now  it  was  Sydelle’s  turn.  “Glory   be!”   she exclaimed, 
thinking  she had  the name  of  the murderer.  Her thumb  was 
covering the letter d. The word was hood.
       Angela’s turn. The third  clue was from.
       Sydelle’s turn. The fourth  clue was spacious.

61
       The fifth  and last clue  was— Angela uttered  a low moan. 
Her hand  shook as she  passed the paper to  her partner.  The 
fifth  and last clue was grace.
       “Grace, that’s your  mother’s name, isn’t  it?”  Sydelle said. 
“Well,  don’t  worry, that  clue doesn’t mean your  mother is  the 
murderer. The will  says: It is  not what you have, it’s  what you 
don’t have that counts.”  The  secretary had not yet transcribed 
the shorthand, but she had read it through several times before 
hiding  the  notebook  in  a safe  place. “By   the  way,  are you 
really related to Mr. Westing?”
       Angela  shrugged.  Sydelle  assumed  that  meant  no  and 
turned to the clues.


                GOOD     GRACE     FROM     HOOD     SPACIOUS


“The  only   thing   I   can  figure   from   these  clues  is:  Good 
gracious  from  hood   space. As   soon  as the  parking   lot   is 
shoveled out, we’ll  peek under the hoods of all the cars. A map 
or more  clues may  be hidden  there. Maybe  even the  murder 
weapon. Now, let’s hear about the other clues.”
       Angela reported  on the clues  gathered in the  game room 
and during the day’s comings and goings:
       “King,   queen.  Otis Amber   said, ‘King    Otis  and Queen 
Crow.’
       “Purple   waves. Mother  switched two  clues around when 
Sandy mentioned those words.
       “On  (or  no).  Doug  and  Theo could  not  decide  whether 
that clue was right side up or upside down.
       “Grains.  Chris  Theodorakis thinks  that clue refers to Otis 
Amber. You know, grains—oats.

62
       “MT.”   Angela  showed her partner  the crumpled scrap of 
paper she had picked up  along with  Sydelle’s  dropped crutch 
during Flora Baumbach’s tea party.


                         500 shares MT at $6 =         $3000
                         broker’s commission =             +90
                                                                      ---------
                                                                       $3090


“I  checked Turtle’s diary.  She is not following   any stock  with 
a symbol  like  MT, so  it  must be one  of  her clues. MT  could 
stand for either mountain or empty.”
       “Excellent,”   Sydelle  Pulaski  remarked.  Her  partner was 
beautiful, but not dumb. “Read  all the clues together now.”


                GOOD     HOOD     FROM     SPACIOUS     GRACE
                        KING     QUEEN     PURPLE     WAVES
                     ON(NO)     GRAINS     MOUNTAIN(EMPTY)


Sydelle was disappointed.  “It   is not what  you have, it’s  what 
you don’t have that counts. And  what we don’t  have is a verb. 
Nothing makes sense without a verb. What about the judge?”
       “Judge Ford thought her clues were an insult, and she said 
something about playing  a pawn  in Westing’s  game. And she 
had a  clipping  of   the obituary   on her  desk.  This  obituary.” 
Angela  handed  Sydelle  the  newspaper  taken  from  Turtle’s 
drawer.
       “What’s  that?”
       It was a knock on the front  door.
       It was footsteps in the living  room.

63
       It  was Theo.  “Anyone   for  a game  of  chess?” he asked, 
leaning through the bedroom doorway.
       “No,  thank you,” Sydelle  replied, looking  very busy.
       Theo smiled shyly at Angela and left.
       Sydelle  read  the   obituary   in  Turtle’s   newspaper.  The 
words two  hundred  million  dollars   were underlined,  but  she 
found a more  interesting item.  “Sam Westing  was a master at 
chess; no wonder Theo’s so interested. Do you know  anything 
about the game, Angela?”
       “A  little,”   she replied slowly,  putting  the  pieces in order. 
“The  judge says she’s a  pawn and  Otis Amber  says he’s  the 
king,   Crow’s   the  queen—   Oh  well,    it’s   probably   just  a 
coincidence.”
       “We  can’t  leave  any  stone  unturned,”  Sydelle  insisted. 
“As the will  says, Object of the game: to win.”
       “What  did you say?”
       “Object  of the game: to win.”
       “How    about:  object   of   the   game:   twin.   Maybe   the 
murderer is a twin.”
       “Twin!”   Sydelle  liked  that.  The  only  problem  would  be 
getting the murderer to  admit that he (or  she) is a twin.  “Let’s 
get back to my apartment. It’s time I  transcribed those notes.”
       Angela  helped   the  invalid   to   her  feet   and  nervously 
peered in both directions before stepping into the hallway.
       Sydelle chuckled  at  her timidity.   “There’s  nothing  to  be 
scared of, Angela. Westing  was murdered for  his  money, and 
we’re not  rich  yet. We  won’t  be rich  enough to  be murdered 
until  we  find  the  name, and  by the  time  we  get the  money 
from the estate, the murderer will be locked up in  jail.”

64
       In spite of  the impeccable logic, Angela  looked back over 
her shoulder several times on the way to 3C.
       “Strange.” Sydelle  stood before her open apartment door.
       She had slammed it  shut  on leaving,  but  had not  locked 
the dead bolt;   after  all,  not  even a  burglar  could  get into  a 
snowbound building. Unless…
       Angela, too  frightened  to notice  that Sydelle  ran through 
the apartment with  her crutch  in  the air,  found her  partner in 
the  bathroom   frantically    tossing   soiled   towels   from    the 
hamper.
       Sydelle  Pulaski  stared at  the  bare  wicker  bottom,   then 
sank to the rim  of  the bathtub,  shaking her  head in disbelief. 
Someone in Sunset Towers had stolen the shorthand notebook.





9      ♦       Lost  and   Found


Early the  next morning  a typed  index  card was tacked to  the 
elevator’s back wall:


              LOST:  Important      business     papers    of 
              no   value    to    anyone   but    the    owner. 
              Please    return      to    Sydelle      Pulaski, 
              3C.  No  questions     asked.


The shorthand  notebook was  not returned,  but  the idea  of  a 
bulletin  board  was an  instant success. By  late  afternoon  the 
elevator  was  papered  with   notices  and  filled   with   tenants 

65
facing sideways  and backwards, reading  as they rode  up and 
down.


              Lost:  Silver  cross  on  filigree   chain,  topaz 
              pin   and   earrings,   gold-filled     cuff   links. 
              Return   to    Grace   Windsor    Wexler,  3D. 
              REWARD!



                              All players willing to discuss
                                     sharing their clues
                   come to the coffee shop tomorrow 10 A.M.



WHOEVER STOLE MY MICKEY MOUSE CLOCK BETTER GIVE 
IT  BACK.  JUST  LEAVE IT   IN   THE  HALL  IN   FRONT OF 
APARTMENT 3D WHEN NO ONE’S LOOKING.
                                                                        TURTLE WEXLER



                               ORDER DOWN, NOT UP!
     Or  come  on  up  to   the   fifth      floor      and  dine   in
                                       elegance   at
                            SHIN  HOO’S RESTAURANT
       Specializing       in    exquisite      Chinese   cuisine.



LOST:  STRING  OF   PEARLS.  SENTIMENTAL   VALUE.   IF 
FOUND, PLEASE BRING THEM TO APARTMENT 2C. THANK 
YOU,      FLORA     BAUMBACH       (DRESSMAKING     AND 
ALTERATIONS, REASONABLY PRICED)

66
                                  FOUND: SIX CLUES
                The following   clues, printed on squares of
                  Westing Toilet Tissue, were found in the
                                  third  floor  hallway:
             BRAIDED     KICKING     TORTOISE     ’SI     A     BRAT



I   am  having    an   informal      party     this     evening    from 
eight     o’clock       on.    You   are     all     invited.         Please 
come.
                                                   J.    J.   Ford,    apartment    4D



                            Turtle,  wherever you are—
                      Be home at seven-thirty SHARP!!!
                                                                     Your loving  mother


“Mom,  I’m  home.” No one else was.
       On  reading  Mrs.   Wexler’s   note  in  the  elevator,   Flora 
Baumbach  had  insisted,  “You   must  do  what   your   mother 
says.” When  Turtle   replied,  “Like   showing  her  our  clues?” 
Flora Baumbach’s  answer was  “Perhaps so. After   all,  she is 
your mother.”
       Flora  Baumbach was  sappy. Always   smiling  that  dumb 
smile, always so polite to  everybody. And so timid.  When they 
had finally  reached a snowbound broker, Flora Baumbach was 
so nervous she dropped the telephone. Turtle  had to  admit  to 
some nervousness herself, but  it  was the  first  real  order she 
had ever  place.  For  a minute   there, she  thought  she might 
choke on the thumping  heart that  had jumped into  her throat, 

67
but she had pulled  off  the transaction like  a pro.  Now  if only 
the stock market would  go up,  she’d show Mr.  Westing about 
refining   gold.    The   next   part   of    the   will    would    read: 
“Whichsoever   pair   made   the  most   money   with    the  ten 
thousand dollars inherits the whole estate.” She was sure of it.
       “Oh,  there you are.”  Grace Wexler acted as if  Turtle  was 
the tardy one, but she quickly sweetened. “Come, dear, let’s go 
to your room and I’ll  fix  your  hair.”
       Her mother sat behind her  on the edge of the narrow  bed, 
loosed the dark brown  hair and brushed it  to a gloss.  She had 
not done that with such care in a long, long time.
       “Have you eaten?”
       “Mrs.   Baumbach  made   me  a  dinner.”   Turtle   felt   the 
fingers  dividing   the  hair   into  strands.  Her  mother   was  so 
warm, so close.
       “Your  poor father’s  probably  starving;  he’s been so busy 
on the phone, changing appointments and all.”
       “Daddy’s  eating in the coffee  shop; I just  saw him there.” 
Turtle  had dashed in  shouting:  “The   braided tortoise  strikes 
again!” and kicked  a surprised Theo in  the shin. (It  was Doug 
Hoo, not Theo, who had made the sign.)
       Her mother twisted  the three strands into a braid.  “I  think 
you should wear your party dress tonight; you look  so pretty in 
pink.”
       Pretty? She had  never used  that word  before,  not  about 
her. What’s going on?
       “You know,  sweetheart, I’m rather hurt  that you won’t  tell 
your own mother about your clues.”
       So that  was  it.   She should  have  known.  “My    lips  are 
sealed,” Turtle said defiantly.

68
       “Just one eensy-beensy clue?” Grace wheedled, winding a 
rubber band around the end of the braid.
       “N-n-n,”  Turtle  replied through sealed lips.
       Angela  came  into  the  small   room  and  tugged  Turtle’s 
braid (only her sister could get away with  that).
       Beaming  on   her  favorite,   Grace  took   her  hand,  then 
gasped. “Angela, where’s your engagement ring?”
       “I  have a rash on my finger.”
       Thump, thump. Sydelle Pulaski  appeared in the doorway.
       “Hi,  what’s everybody doing  in the closet?”
       “See, I told you  this is a closet,” Turtle said.
       Grace ignored the complaint.  It did  no good being nice  to 
that ungrateful   child,  never  satisfied,  always  whining   about 
something or other. “Oh, hello,  Miss Pulaski.”
       “I’ve   been feeling  a  bit  weakly,  thank you,  but  nothing 
can keep me  from  a  party.”  Sydelle’s  crutch was  painted  in 
black  and   white   squares  to   match  her   black   and  white 
checkered dress. Her large hoop earrings were  also black and 
white: the white  one dangled from  her left  ear, the black from 
her right.
       “The party  is such a lovely idea,”  Grace said, warming up 
to  the   owner  of   the   shorthand  notes.  “When   I   saw   the 
invitation  in  the elevator  I  suggested to Mr.  Hoo  that he call 
the  judge  to   see if   she  needed  hors  d’oeuvres;   and  sure 
enough, he got an order for  six dozen.”  She turned to Angela. 
“Hadn’t  you better  get dressed, dear? It’s getting  late. It’s  too 
bad Doctor D. can’t escort you to the party, but your  father and 
I will  take you.”
       “Angela   and I   are going   together;  we’re  partners,  you 
know.”  Sydelle  had  it  all  planned.  They  were  to  appear in 

69
identical costumes; tonight  was the night  they would  discover 
if one of the heirs was a twin.
       “I’m   going   to  the  party  with   Mrs.  Baumbach,”   Turtle 
remarked. “The sign said everyone’s invited.”
       Again Grace ignored  her. “By  the way, Miss Pulaski,  I do 
hope  you’ve   changed your   mind   about  showing  me   your 
notes.”
       It  was the secretary’s turn  to  seal her lips.  She wouldn’t 
put  it  past  that  uppity   Grace  Windsor  Wexler  to   steal the 
notebook from an unfortunate cripple  and then rub it in.
       Grace tried  again,  her voice  dripping   with  honey.  “You 
know, of  course, that if  I  do win  the inheritance, everything  I 
own goes to Angela.”
       Turtle  bounded up.  “Let  me  out  of  here: a person  can’t 
breathe in this  closet.”  She kicked  the  bed, kicked  the chair, 
kicked the desk, and elbowed past the disapproving secretary.
       “What  in the world  is wrong  with  that child?”  her mother 
said.


Judge Ford was instructing Theo in  the art of bartending when 
the telephone rang. The snowbound newspaperman had found 
several items in the files.
       “First,  the  engagement announcement of  Angela  Wexler 
to  D.  Denton  Deere.  Next,   several  clippings   on  a  lawsuit 
brought against Sam Westing by an inventor named…”
       “Hold  on,  please.” Mr.  Hoo waddled  in  with  a large tray 
of appetizers. The judge pointed  him to the serving  buffet and 
apologized  to  her caller.  “I’m    sorry,  would  you  repeat  that 
name.”

70
       “James Hoo.  He  claimed  Westing  stole  his  idea  of  the 
disposable paper diaper.”
       “One  minute,  please.” The  judge  cupped her  hand over 
the mouthpiece.  “Please don’t  leave,  Mr.  Hoo. I  was  hoping 
you’d  stay for  the party, as a guest, of  course. Your  wife  and 
son, too.”
       Hoo  grunted.  He  hated parties.  He  had seen his  fill   of 
people eating and  drinking  and acting  like  clowns,  jabbering 
like…so  that’s   it:  jabbering,   dropping  clues.  “I’ll     be  right 
back.”
       The  receiver   hissed  with   an  impatient   sigh,  then  the 
researcher went on.  “I’ve   got a  thick  file  of  sports  items on 
another Hoo, a Doug Hoo. Seems he runs a pretty fast mile for 
a high-school  kid.  That’s  all  I  could  find  on  the names  you 
gave me,  but  I  still  have  stacks of  Westing  clippings  to  go 
through.”
       “Thank you  so much.”
       The doorbell rang.
       The party was about to begin.





10      ♦       The   Long   Party


“I  hope we’re  not  too  early.”  Grace Windsor  Wexler  always 
arrived at parties  fashionably  late, but not  tonight.  She didn’t 
want to miss a thing, or a clue, or wait  around in her apartment 
with  a murderer  on the  loose. “I  don’t   think  you’ve  met my 
husband, Doctor Wexler.”

71
       “Call  me Jake.”
       “Hello,  Jake,”  Judge Ford said.  A firm   handshake, laugh 
lines around his  eyes. He needed a  sense of humor with   that 
social-climbing  wife.
       “What   a lovely   living   room,   so practically   furnished,” 
Grace commented. “Our apartments are identical in layout,  but 
mine looks  so different.   You must  come see what  I’ve  done 
with  it. I’m   a decorator, you  know. Three  bedrooms do seem 
rather spacious for a single woman.”
       What  does  she mean,  three  bedrooms? This   is  a one-
bedroom apartment.  “Would  you  care for  an  appetizer, Mrs. 
Wexler? I’m  curious  to  know  exactly how  you  are related to 
the Westing family.”
       The judge had hoped to take the “heiress” by  surprise, but 
Grace gained  time  by   coughing.  “Goodness,  that  ginger  is 
spicy—it’s  the Szechuan cooking  style, you  know. How  am I 
related?  Let  me   see, Uncle   Sam  was   my   father’s  oldest 
brother, or was he the youngest brother of my father’s father?”
       “Excuse me,  I have to  greet my other  guests.” The judge 
left the prattling  pretender. Father’s brother or father’s  father’s 
brother, if the relationship  was on the paternal side her maiden 
name would be Westing.
       The party went  on and on. No one dared be first  to leave. 
(Safety  in  numbers,  especially  with   a  judge  there.)  So the 
guests ate and drank and jabbered; and they watched the other 
guests eat and drink and jabber. No one laughed.
       “I  guess murder isn’t very funny,”  Jake Wexler said.
       “Neither  is money,” Mr.  Hoo replied glumly.
       Deciding  that his  wife  had found  the perfect  partner, the 
podiatrist moved  on to  the two  women  standing in  silence at 

72
the  front   window.   “Cheer   up,  Angie-pie,   you’ll    see your 
Denton  soon   enough.”   His   daughter   twisted   out   of   his 
embrace. “Are you all  right, Angela?”
       “I’m   fine.”   She was  not  fine.  Why   did  they  ask about 
Denton all  the time,  as though she was nobody  without  him? 
Oh, it  wasn’t  just  that. It  wasn’t  even the  humiliation   of her 
mother  chiding  her  about  the  “twin”    costume  (in   front  of 
everybody) and sending her back to  their apartment to change 
clothes. It was more than that, it was everything.
       Jake turned to Madame Hoo. “Hi  there, partner.”
       “She doesn’t speak English, dad,” Angela said flatly.
       “And  she never will, Angela,  if no one talks to her.”
       “Snow,”  said Madame Hoo.
       Jake followed   her  pointing   finger.  “That’s   right,  snow. 
Lots and lots of snow. Snow. Trees. Road. Lake Michigan.”
       “China,”  said Madame Hoo.
       “China? Sure, why not,”  Jake replied. “China.”
       Angela  left  the chatting  couple.  Why  couldn’t   she have 
made some sort of friendly  gesture? Because she might do the 
wrong  thing    and  annoy  her   mother.  Angela-the-obedient-
daughter did only what her mother told  her to do.
       “Hello,  Angela. One of  these tidbits might  cheer you up.” 
Judge Ford held the  tray before  her. “I  hear you’ll   be getting 
married soon.”
       “Some  people  have all  the  luck,”   Sydelle  Pulaski  said, 
appearing from nowhere  to lean over  the tray  to spear a cube 
of  pork.   “Of    course,  not   all   us  women   have  opted   for 
marriage,   right,    Judge   Ford?   Some    of   us    prefer   the 
professional  life,  though   I  must  say, if   a  handsome young 

73
doctor like  Denton Deere proposed to me, I  might just  change 
my mind. Too bad he doesn’t happen to be twins.”
       “Excuse me.” The judge moved  away.
       “I’m  not  having any luck  at all, Angela,”   Sydelle whined. 
“If    only   your   mother   hadn’t   made   you   change  clothes 
someone surely   would   have   mentioned  ‘twin.’    It’s   much 
harder to judge  reactions when I  have to bring  up the  subject 
myself.  You  shouldn’t   let  your  mother   boss you  like   that; 
you’re a grown woman, about to be married.”
       “Excuse me.” Angela  moved away.
       “Yes,  thank  you, I   would  like  a  refill,”   Sydelle  said  to 
nobody  and hobbled   to  the  bar. “Something   non-alcoholic, 
please, doctor’s orders. Make it a double—twins.”
       Twins? What’s  she talking about, Theo  wondered, staring 
at the black  and white  checkered  costume. “Two  ginger  ales 
for the chessboard coming right up.”


Hidden  among her  guests, the judge  studied  the two  people 
standing off in  the corner, the only  pair in  Sunset Towers who 
were not Westing heirs.
       George Theodorakis  placed his  hand on  the  shoulder of 
his  invalid   son. A   large,  bronze,  hard-working   hand.  Like 
Theo’s.  Theo  resembled  him  in   so many   ways:  tall,   wide 
shoulders, slim-waisted, the same thick straight  black hair; but 
age had  chiseled  the  father’s  face  into  sharper  planes. His 
troubled eyes stared across the room at Angela.
       Catherine Theodorakis,  a slight,  careworn woman,  gazed 
down on her younger son with tired,  dark-circled eyes.
       From his  wheelchair  Chris  watched legs.  Other than  the 
funny lady with  the shorthand notes, the only limpers  were his 

74
brother Theo (Turtle  had kicked  him  again) and Mrs.  Wexler, 
who stood on one  leg rubbing  her stockinged foot  against her 
calf. A high-heeled shoe stood alone on the carpet beneath her. 
Judge Ford didn’t limp;  besides, she couldn’t be a murderer, in 
spite of his  clues. Nobody  here looks like  a murderer, they’re 
all nice  people, even  this fat  Chinese man  who  grumbles all 
the time.
       George  Theodorakis    greeted  Mr.    Hoo   with    “How’s 
business?” Hoo spun around and stomped off  from  his fellow 
restaurant owner in a huff of anger.
       James Hoo, inventor, that’s  who the  judge wanted to  talk 
to, but there was a problem  at the bar. A long line  had formed 
and it wasn’t moving.
       “There  are sixteen white  pieces and sixteen  black pieces 
in chess,”  Theo was  explaining  to  Sydelle  Pulaski. “Do   you 
play chess, Judge Ford?”
       “A  bit,  but I  haven’t  played in  years.”  The judge led  the 
secretary away  from  the  crowded  bar. Theo  must  think   the 
Westing game  has something  to  do  with  chess. He  may  be 
right, it certainly  is as complicated as a chess game.
       “But  I did study,”  Doug was arguing.
       The judge  interrupted.  “I  haven’t  had  a chance to  thank 
you for the  delicious food,  Mr. Hoo.  How long  have you been 
in the restaurant business?”
       “Running  up and down stairs is not studying,”  Hoo said.
       Sydelle  Pulaski  butted  in.   “Father  and  son?  You  look 
more like twins.”
       “You’re  equal  partners with   that Theodorakis  kid,”   Hoo 
continued. “Why   didn’t  you  insist  on holding  the meeting  in 
our restaurant instead of that greasy coffee shop?”

75
       “Because   some   people   don’t    like    chow    mein   for 
breakfast,” Sydelle Pulaski replied.
       “There   you  are,  dear.”   Grace  patted  a  stray  wisp   of 
Angela’s hair  into  place. “We  must do  something about  your 
coiffure. I’ll   make an appointment for you  with my  hairdresser 
once the  snow   is  cleared;  long  hair  is   too  youthful   for  a 
woman about to  be married.  I can’t  understand what got  into 
you, Angela,  coming to  this party  in  that old  checkered dress 
and those awful accessories. Just because your partner dresses 
like a freak…”
       “She’s not a freak, mother.”
       “I   was  just   speaking  to   Mr.   Hoo  about   catering  the 
wedding  shower on  Saturday;  I  arranged  for  little   Madame 
Hoo to serve in one of  those slinky Chinese gowns. Where are 
you going? Angela!”
       Angela rushed  into Judge Ford’s  kitchen.  She had to  get 
away, she  had  to  be  alone,  by  herself,  or  she’d   burst  out 
crying.
       She was  not  alone.  Crow   was  there.  The  two  women 
stared at each other in surprise, then turned away.
       Poor baby. Crow  wanted to  reach out to  the pretty  child; 
she wanted to take her in her  arms and say: “Poor, poor  baby, 
go ahead and cry.”   But  she couldn’t.  All   she could  say was 
“Here.”
       Angela took  the dish towel  from the cleaning  woman and 
bunched it against her face to muffle the wrenching sobs.
       The guests jabbering on  and on about  the weather, about 
food,  about  football,   about  chess, about  twins.   Turtle  was 
slumped on  the  couch,  scornful  of  dumb  grown-up   parties. 
You’d  think  one  of  them  would  know   something about  the 

76
stock market.  She missed Sandy. Sandy was  the only  one in 
this dumb building  she could talk to.
       “Remember  that  quotation:  May  God  thy  gold  refine?” 
Flora Baumbach asked. “Let’s take a poll.  I’ll  bet ten cents it’s 
from the Bible.”
       “Shakespeare,” Turtle argued, “and make it ten dollars.”
       “Oh my!  Well, all  right, ten dollars.”
       Together they made the rounds.  Four votes for  the Bible, 
three for  Shakespeare and one abstention (Madame  Hoo  did 
not understand the question).
       Sydelle Pulaski  voted  for  the Bobbsey  twins.  “And  how 
do  you  know   those  words   were  in   the  will?”    she  asked 
suspiciously. Too suspiciously.
       So that’s  what “Lost:   Important  business papers” meant. 
Somebody  stole  the  shorthand  notes.  Turtle  smiled   at  the 
delicious nastiness of it all. “I  remember, that’s all.”
       “If   you  remember  so well,   tell  me  what  comes  before 
that,” Sydelle challenged.
       “I  don’t know, what?”
       The secretary had an audience now. “I  don’t  mind  telling 
you, but not if  you ask like that.”
       Theo said, “Please?” not Turtle.
       Sydelle turned toward  him  with  what should  have been a 
gracious manner, but she grimaced when the top  of the crutch 
poked her in  the chest. “The  exact quotation,”  she announced 
loudly, hoping  she was right, “is  Spend it wisely and may God 
thy gold refine.”
       Right  or  wrong,  her guess was  received  with  groans of 
disappointment. The  heirs had expected more:  a hint,  a clue, 
something. It was time to go home.

77
11      ♦       The  Meeting


A  pale  sun   rose  on  the  third   snowbound   morning.   Lake 
Michigan  lay calm, violet,  now  blue, but the tenants of Sunset 
Towers on  waking  turned  to  a different   view.  Lured  by  the 
Westing house they stood at their side windows scoffing  at the 
danger, daring to  dream. Should they  or shouldn’t  they  share 
their clues? Well,  they’d  go to the  meeting in  the coffee shop 
just to see what the others intended to do.
       Waiting in  her closet of  a room Turtle stared at the white-
weighted branches of the maple on the hill.  A  twig snapped in 
silence, a flurry   speckled the crusted snow.  Sometimes when 
her mother was too busy to do her hair  she sent Angela in, but 
today no one came. They had forgotten about her.
       Brush and  comb  clutched in  her  fists  like  weapons, she 
stormed into apartment 2C. “Do  you know how to  braid hair?”
       Flora  Baumbach’s  pudgy  fingers,   swift   with   a  needle, 
were clumsy  with  a comb,  but after  several tangled  attempts 
she ended up with   three equal strands. “My,   what  thick  hair 
you have. I  tried braiding  my daughter’s  hair once, but  it was 
too fine, soft and wispy  like a baby’s, even in her teens.”
       That was  the last  thing  Turtle  wanted to  hear. “Was  she 
pretty, your daughter?”
       “All   mothers  think  their   children  are  beautiful.  Rosalie 
was an exceptional child,  they said,  but she was the lovingest 
person that ever was.”
       “My  mother doesn’t think  I’m  beautiful.”
       “Of  course she does.”

78
      “My  mother says I looked just like a turtle when I was a 
baby, sticking my head out of the blanket. I still look like a 
turtle, I guess, but I don’t care. Where’s your daughter now?”
      “Gone.” Flora Baumbach cleared the catch in her throat. 
“There, that braid should hold for the rest of the day. By the 
way, you’ve never told me your real name.”
      “Alice,”   Turtle replied, swinging  her head before the 
mirror. Not  one  single hair  escaped its tight  bind.  Mrs. 
Baumbach would make a good braider if  only she’d stop 
yakking about her exceptional child. Rosalie, what a dumb 
name. “You’d better get to the meeting now. Remember, don’t 
say a word to anyone about anything. Just listen.”
      “All  right, Alice. I promise.”


Theo wheeled his brother into the elevator and read the new 
message on the wall:


            $25  REWARD for the return   of  a  gold 
            railroad      watch   inscribed:     To   Ezra 
            Ford     in     appreciation      of     thirty 
            years’      service     to    the    Milwaukee 
            Railroad.
                                 J.   J.  Ford,   apartment  4D


      “Fod-d-d, fo—de,” Chris said.
      “That’s right,  Judge Ford. Must be her father’s watch. 
Probably lost it. I  don’t think it  could have been stolen by 
anyone at the party last night.”
      Chris smiled. His brother had not understood him. Good. 
This might be an important discovery—Judge Ford’s name 
was the same as her apartment number: Ford, 4D.

79
       Theo led  the  waiting  tenants through  the  kitchen  where 
Mr. and Mrs.  Theodorakis  handed out cups of  tea and coffee. 
“Sorry,  we’ve   run   out  of   cream  and  lemons.  Please help 
yourself to some homemade pastries.”
       Walking  into  a  coffee shop  was like   entering a  cave. A 
wall  of snow  pressed against the plate-glass window,  sealing 
the door that once opened to the parking lot.
       “I’ve   got  a  car  buried   out  there,”  Grace  Wexler   said, 
slipping  into  a  booth  opposite  her  partner.  “Hope  I   find  it 
before the snowplows do.”
       “If  they ever get here,”  Mr. Hoo  replied. “Good  thing  this 
meeting wasn’t held in  my restaurant, I’d go broke  passing out 
free  tea, if   you  call   this  tea.”  He  held  up  a  tea  bag  with 
contempt, then groaned on  seeing his sweat-suited son jog  in 
with  a sweet roll  between  his teeth and  vault  over his  hands 
onto a stool. “Where’s your  daughter the turtle?”
       Grace Wexler looked  around. “I  don’t  know, maybe she’s 
helping her father with  his bookkeeping.”
       “Bookkeeping!”   Mr.  Hoo  let out  a whoop.  Grace had no 
idea what was  so funny, but  she joined  him  in loud  laughter. 
Nothing stirred people’s envy  more than a private joke.
       Thinking   she  was   being  laughed   at,  Sydelle   Pulaski 
dropped  her  polka   dot   crutch   and  spilled   her  coffee   on 
Angela’s  tapestry bag before  managing  a solid  perch  on the 
counter stool.
       Clink,   clink.  Theo   tapped a  spoon  against  a  glass for 
attention. “Thank  you  for  coming.  When the  meeting is  over 
you   are  all    welcome   to   stay   for    a   chess  tournament. 
Meanwhile,  I’d  like  to  explain  why my  partner  and me…my 
partner and I…called   this  meeting. I  don’t  know  about  your 

80
clues, but our clues don’t  make any sense.” The heirs stared at 
him  with  blank  faces, no  one nodded,  no one  even blinked. 
“Now  then, if  no two  sets of  clues are alike, as the will   says, 
that could   mean that  each set  of  clues  is  only  part  of  one 
message. The more clues we put together, the better chance we 
have  of  finding    the  murderer  and  winning   the   game.  Of 
course, the inheritance will be divided  into equal shares.”
       Sydelle Pulaski  raised her  hand like  a schoolgirl.   “What 
about the clues that are in the will itself?”
       “Yes,  we’d   appreciate having   a copy   of  the  will,   Ms. 
Pulaski,” Theo replied.
       “Well,  equal shares doesn’t seem quite fair,  since I’m  the 
only one here who  thought of taking  notes.” Sydelle  turned to 
the group,  one  penciled  eyebrow  arched  high  over  her  red 
sequined spectacles.
       Her self-congratulatory   pose was too much  for  Mr.  Hoo. 
Grunting loudly,  he squeezed out of the booth and slapped the 
shorthand pad on the counter.
       “Thief!”    the  secretary shrieked,  nearly  toppling   off  the 
stool as she grabbed her notebook. “Thief!”
       “I   did   not   steal  your   notebook,”   the   indignant   Hoo 
explained. “I  found it  on a table in my restaurant this morning. 
You can believe  me or not,  I  really don’t  care, because those 
notes you so selfishly  dangled under our noses are completely 
worthless.  My  partner  knows   shorthand and  she  says your 
shorthand is nothing but senseless scrawls. Jibberish.”
       “Pure   jibberish,”     Grace   Wexler   added.   “Those    are 
standard shorthand symbols all  right,  but  they don’t  translate 
into words.”

81
       “Thief!”     Sydelle   cried,   now    accusing   Mrs.   Wexler. 
“Thief!  Larcenist!  Felon!”
       “Don’t,  Sydelle,”  Angela said softly,  her eyes set on the D 
she was embroidering.
       “You  wouldn’t  understand, Angela, you  don’t  know what 
it’s like  to be.…”  Her voice broke.  She paused then lashed out 
at her enemies,  all of  them.  “Who   cares a fig  about  Sydelle 
Pulaski? Nobody, that’s who.  I’m  no fool,  you know. I  knew I 
couldn’t  trust  any one  of  you. You  can’t  read my  shorthand 
because I wrote in Polish.”
       Polish?!?!


When  the   meeting   was  again   called   to   order   Mr.   Hoo 
suggested they offer Ms.  Pulaski a slightly  larger  share of the 
inheritance  in   exchange   for   a  transcript   of   the   will—in 
English. “However,  I  repeat, neither my partner nor I  stole the 
notes. And if  anyone here suspects us of murder, forget it,  we 
both have airtight alibis.”
       Doug choked  on his sweet roll.   If  it got  around to  alibis, 
they’d find  out  where he was the  night of  the murder. On  the 
Westing house lawn.
       Mr.  Hoo   went  on.  “And    to  prove  our  innocence,  my 
partner and I agree to share our clues.”
       “One minute,  Mr. Hoo.”  Judge Ford stood. It was time for 
her to speak before  matters got  out of  hand. “Let  me  remind 
you, all  of  you, that  a person is  innocent until   proven guilty. 
We are  free  to   choose whether   or  not  to   share our  clues 
without  any  implication  of  guilt.   I  suggest we postpone  any 
decision until  we  have given  the matter  careful  thought,  and 
until  the time  all  of  the heirs  can attend. However,  since we 

82
are assembled, I have a question to ask of  the group;  perhaps 
others do, too.”
       They all  did.  Wary of  giving  away  game plans, the heirs 
decided the questions would be written out, but no names were 
to be signed.  Doug collected  the scraps of  paper and handed 
them to Theo.
       “Is anyone here a twin?”  he read.
       No one answered.
       “What  is  Turtle’s  real  name?”  Doug  Hoo  was planning 
another nasty sign.
       “Tabitha-Ruth,”   replied  Mrs.  Wexler   with  a  bewildered 
look at Flora Baumbach, who said “Alice.”
       “Well,  which is it?”
       “Tabitha-Ruth Wexler. I  should know, I’m  her mother.”
       Doug changed his mind  about the sign.  He couldn’t  spell 
Tabitha-Ruth.
       Theo unfolded  the next  question. “How   many  here have 
actually met Sam Westing?”
       Grace  Wexler   raised  her   hand,  lowered   it,   raised   it 
halfway, then lowered it  again, torn between her claim  as Sam 
Westing’s relative  and being accused of  murder. Mr.  Hoo (an 
honest man) held up his hand and kept it  up. His was the only 
one. Judge Ford  did not  think  it  necessary to respond  to her 
own question.
       Theo  recognized the  sprawling  handwriting   of  the  next 
question: “Who  got  kicked  last week?”  Chris  did not  receive 
an answer. The meeting was adjourned due to panic.

83
12      ♦       The   First   Bomb


It  was  so  sudden:  the  earsplitting  bangs,  the  screams,  the 
confusion.   Theo   and   Doug   ran   into    the   kitchen;   Mrs. 
Theodorakis  ran  out.   Her   hair,  her  face,   her  apron  were 
splattered with dark dripping  red.
       “Blood,”  Sydelle  Pulaski cried, clutching  her heart.
       “Don’t   just   sit  there,”   Catherine  Theodorakis  shouted, 
“somebody call the fire  department.”
       Angela  hurried  to the  pay  phone on  the wall   and stood 
there trembling, not knowing  whether to call or  not. They were 
snowbound, the fire engines could not reach Sunset Towers.
       Theo leaned through  the kitchen  doorway.  “Everything’s 
okay. There’s no fire.”
       “Chris,   honey,  it’s   all   right,”    Mrs.   Theodorakis  said, 
kneeling before the wheelchair.  “It’s  all  right, Chris,  look!  It’s 
just tomato sauce.”
       Tomato   sauce!  Mrs.    Theodorakis   was   covered  with 
tomato sauce, not blood. The  curious heirs now  piled  into the 
kitchen,  except   for   Sydelle  Pulaski,   who   slumped  to   the 
counter. She  could  have  a  heart  attack  and  no  one  would 
notice.
       Mr. Hoo  surveyed the scene, trying to conceal his delight. 
“What   a  mess,”   he  said.  “That    row   of  cans   must  have 
exploded from  the heat of  the stove.”  The entire  kitchen  was 
splattered with tomato  sauce and soaked in foam from the fire 
extinguishers. “What a mess.”
       George Theodorakis regarded him with  suspicion. “It  was 
a bomb.”

84
       Catherine   Theodorakis   thought   so,   too.   “There   was 
hissing, then bang, bang, sparks flying all over  the kitchen, red 
sparks, purple sparks.”
       “Cans   of   tomato   sauce  exploded,”   Doug   Hoo   said, 
defending his father. The others agreed. Mrs. Theodorakis was 
understandably hysterical. A  bomb? Ridiculous.  Sam Westing 
certainly did not appear to have been killed by a bomb.
       Judge Ford suggested that the accident be reported to  the 
police immediately  in order to collect  on the insurance.
       “You  might  as well  redecorate the entire kitchen,”  Grace 
Wexler,  decorator,  proposed.  “It    should  be  functional    yet 
attractive, with lots  of copper pots hanging from the ceiling.”
       “I    don’t   think    there’s  any   real   damage,”   Catherine 
Theodorakis replied, “but  we’ll  have to close for  a few days to 
clean up.”
       Mr. Hoo smiled. Angela  offered to help.
       “Angela,  dear, you  have  a fitting   this  afternoon,”  Grace 
reminded her, “and  we  have so much  to  do for  the  wedding 
shower on Saturday.”
       In  thumped  Sydelle  Pulaski.  “I’m    fine  now,   just  a bit 
woozy. Goodness, what a nasty turn.”


Having recovered from  the nasty  turn, Sydelle  Pulaski settled 
down to transcribing  her shorthand to Polish, then from  Polish 
to English.  Startled  by  loud  banging on  her  apartment door, 
she struck the wrong typewriter key.
       “Open up!”
       Recognizing  the  voice,  Angela   unbolted  the  door  to  a 
furious Turtle. “All   right, Angela,  where is it?”
       “What?”

85
       “The newspaper you took from  my desk.”
       Angela  carefully   dug  through  the  embroidery,  personal 
items, and other  paraphernalia in  her tapestry bag and  pulled 
out the newspaper folded  to the Westing  obituary. “I’m   sorry, 
Turtle. I would  have asked for it, but you weren’t  around.”
       “You  don’t also  happen to have my Mickey   Mouse clock 
in there,  too, do  you?”  Turtle  softened on seeing  her sister’s 
hurt expression. “I’m   only kidding.  You  left your  engagement 
ring on the sink  again. Better go get it  before somebody steals 
that, too.”
       “Oh,  I   wouldn’t   worry  about  anyone  stealing  Angela’s 
ring,”  Sydelle Pulaski remarked. “No  mother would  stoop that 
low.”
       The thought  of  Grace being the  burglar  was so funny  to 
Turtle,  she  plopped  down  on  the  sofa  and  rolled  about  in 
laughter. It felt  good to laugh; the stock market  had fallen five 
points today.
       “Angela,  please tell  your  sister to get  her dirty  shoes off 
my couch. Tell her to sit up and act like a lady.”
       Turtle   rose  with   a  tongue   click   very   much  like   her 
mother’s, but she was not about to leave without striking  back. 
Arms folded,  she leaned against the wall and let  them have it. 
“Mom   thinks  Angela  was  the  one who  stole  the  shorthand 
notebook.”   That   got  them.   Look   at   those  open   mouths. 
“Because mom asked to see it, and Angela does everything she 
says.”
       “Anyone  could  have stolen my notebook;  I didn’t   double 
lock  my  door  that  day.”   If  Sydelle   couldn’t  trust   her own 
partner, she was alone, all alone.
       “Did  mom really  say that?” Angela asked.

86
       “No,  but I  know  how she thinks, I  know  what everybody 
thinks. Grown-ups are so obvious.”
       “Ridiculous,”   scoffed Sydelle.
       “For  instance, I happen to know  that Angela doesn’t want 
to marry that sappy intern.”
       “Ridiculous.  You’re just  jealous of your sister.”
       “Maybe,”   Turtle  had  to  admit,  “but  I  am  what  I  am.  I 
don’t need a crutch to get attention.”  Oh, oh, she had gone too 
far.
       “Turtle   didn’t   mean it   that  way,  Sydelle,”  Angela  said 
quickly.  “She used the  word  crutch  as a symbol.  She meant, 
you  know,  that  people are  so afraid   of  revealing  their  true 
selves, they have to hide behind some sort of prop.”
       “Oh, really?”  Sydelle  replied. “Then  Turtle’s  crutch is her 
big mouth.”
       No, Angela  thought,  hurrying   her sister  out  of  the door 
and back to their apartment, Turtle’s crutch is her braid.


The newspaperman  called  again to  say  he had  found  some 
photographs taken at  Westingtown  parties  twenty  years ago. 
“One of  those names appears in a caption as Violet  Westing’s 
escort: George Theodorakis.”
       “Go on,”  the judge said.
       “That’s  all.”  He promised  to send her the clippings  in the 
Westing file as soon as he was shoveled out.
       The   judge   now   knew    of   four    heirs   with    Westing 
connections:  James  Hoo,  the   inventor;   Theo’s  father;   her 
partner, Sandy  McSouthers,   who  had  been  fired   from   the 
Westing paper mill;   and  herself. But  she  had to  learn more, 

87
much more about each one of the heirs if  she hoped to protect 
the victim of  Sam Westing’s revenge.
       She  would   have  to   hire   a  detective,   a  very   private 
detective, who had not been associated with her in her practice 
or in the courts. J. J. Ford  flipped  through the yellow  pages to 
Investigators—Private.
       “Good  grief!”  Her  finger  stopped near the top of  the list. 
Was it a coincidence  or dumb luck?  Or was  she playing right 
into  Sam Westing’s  hand? No   choice but  to  chance  it.  The 
judge  dialed  the   number  and  tapped  her  foot   impatiently 
waiting for  an answer.
       “Hello.    If   you’re    looking    for   a   snowbound   private 
investigator, you’ve  got the right number.”
       Yes, she had the right number. It may be a trick, but it was 
no coincidence. The voices were one and the same.





13      ♦       The   Second   Bomb


No one was in the  kitchen of  Shin Hoo’s  Restaurant when the 
bomber set a tall can labeled “Monosodium  glutamate” behind 
similar  cans on a  shelf. The  color-striped  candle would  burn 
down  to  the  fuse at  six-thirty;   whoever   was working   there 
would be at the other end of the room. No one would  be hurt.


          Due to the unfortunate  damage to the coffee shop
                          SHIN  HOO’S RESTAURANT
          is prepared to satisfy all  dinner accommodations.

88
                  Order down, or  ride up to the fifth  floor.
               Treat your taste buds to a scrumptious meal
        while  feasting your eyes on the stunning snowscape
              before it melts away. Reasonable prices, too.


Grace Wexler tacked her sign  to the elevator  wall  as she rode 
up to her new job. She was going to be the seating hostess.
       “Where’s the cook?”  Mr. Hoo  shouted (meaning his wife). 
He found  Madame  Hoo  in  their   rear fourth-floor    apartment 
kneeling before her bamboo  trunk, fingering  mementoes from 
her childhood  in China.  He hurried  her up to  the kitchen,  too 
harried  to   find   the   words  that   would   explain   what   was 
happening. Now where was that lazy son of his?
       Doug jogged  in from  a tiring  workout  on  the stairs. How 
was he  supposed to know   the restaurant  would  open early? 
Nobody bothered telling  him.
       “Some  student  you   are;  anyone  with   the  brain  of   an 
anteater could have figured  that out: people are short  of food, 
the coffee shop  is closed for  repairs.  Stop arguing,  go take a 
shower, and put on your busboy outfit. Get moving!”
       “Don’t   you think  you’re  rather  hard on  the boy?”  Grace 
commented.
       “Somebody’s  got to  give him  a shove. If  he had his  way 
he’d  do   nothing   but  run,”   Hoo   replied   between  bites  of 
chocolate. “You’re  not so easy on Angela, either.”
       “Angela? Angela  was born good, the perfect  child. As  for 
the other one, well…”
       “It’s  not easy being a parent,” Hoo said woefully.

89
       “You  can  say  that  again.”  Grace  held  her  breath.  Her 
husband would have done just that, said  it again, but  Mr. Hoo 
only nodded in shared sympathy. What a gentleman.
       Only  Mr. and Mrs.  Theodorakis ordered  down. The other 
tenants of  Sunset Towers  lined  up  at  the reservations  desk, 
waiting  for Grace Windsor  Wexler to  lead the way. Oversized 
menus clutched in her arms, Grace felt the first  proud stirrings 
of power rush  up from  her pedicured toes to the very  top curl 
on her head. If Uncle Sam could pair off  people, so could she.
       “You  see your brother every day, Chris, how  about eating 
with  someone else for  a change?” She  wheeled the boy  to  a 
window  table  without  waiting   for  an answer.  It  would  have 
been yes.
       The two cripples  together, Sydelle Pulaski  thought. She’d 
show that high  and mighty  hostess, she’d show them  all. She 
and Chris could have private  jokes, too, and everybody  would 
be sorry they weren’t sitting  with them.
       “Whas  moo  g-goo g-gipn?”   Chris  asked, baffled  by  the 
strange words on the menu.
       “I  think  it’s  boiled  grasshopper.” Sydelle screwed up  her 
face and Chris laughed. “Or chocolate-covered moose.”
       “Frenssh-fry   m-mouse,”    Chris   offered.   Now    Sydelle 
laughed. They both laughed heartily, but no one envied them.


“Your brother seems to be enjoying Ms. Pulaski.”
       Theo nodded,  awed by  the beautiful  Angela,  three years 
older  than  he, so  fair-skinned   and  blonde,  so  unattainable. 
Here he was  sitting  at the  very same table  with  her, just  the 
two of them, and he couldn’t  think  of a single thing  to say that 
wasn’t stupid or childish  or childishly  stupid.

90
       Usually   the  quiet   one,  Angela  tried   again.  “Are    you 
planning to go to college next year?”
       Theo nodded, then shook  his head. Say something,  idiot. 
“I  got a scholarship to Madison,  but I’m   not going. I’m   going 
to  work   instead.”  What  big,   worried,   sky-blue  eyes.  “The 
operation for  Chris will   be very  expensive.”  That was worse, 
now she’s feeling  sorry for  him.  “If   Chris had been born  that 
way, maybe  it  wouldn’t    be so  bad,  but  he was  a  perfectly 
normal kid,  a great kid. And  he’s smart, too. About  four  years 
ago he started to get clumsy, just little things at first.”
       “Perhaps my  fiancé  can help.”  Angela   bit  her lip.  Theo 
was not asking for  charity. And fiancé,  what an old-fashioned, 
silly  word.  “I   went  to  college  for  a  year. I  wanted  to  be  a 
doctor, but, well,  we don’t have as much money as my mother 
pretends. Dad  said  he could  manage  if  that’s  what  I  really 
wanted, but my mother said it was too difficult   for  a woman to 
get into medical school.”  Why was she gabbing like this?
       “I  want  to  be a  writer,”  Theo  said.  That really   sounded 
like kid  stuff.  “Would   you go back  to college  if  you won  the 
inheritance?”
       Angela looked  down.  It  was a question she did  not want 
to answer. Or could not answer.


Long before  becoming a  judge, Josie-Jo Ford  had decided to 
stop smiling.  Smiling  without  good reason was demeaning. A 
serious face put the smiler on the defensive,  a rare smile put a 
nervous witness  at ease. She now  bestowed  one of  her  rare 
smiles on the dressmaker. “I’m  so glad we have this chance to 
become acquainted, Mrs.   Baumbach. I   had so  little  time  to 
chat with my guests last night.”

91
       “It  was a wonderful party.”
       Flora Baumbach appeared even smaller and  rounder than 
she was as she sat twisting her napkin with  hands accustomed 
to being busy. Was her face permanently creased from years of 
pleasing customers, or was a tragedy lurking  behind that grin? 
“Have you always specialized in  wedding gowns?”
       “Mr.   Baumbach   and  I   had   a  shop  for   many   years: 
Baumbach’s for  the Bride  and Groom.  Perhaps you’ve  heard 
of it?”
       “I’m   afraid  not.”  The  judge  would  have said  no  in  any 
case to keep her witness talking.
       “Perhaps you’ve   heard of  Flora’s  Bridal  Gowns?  That’s 
what I  called  my  shop  after  my  husband left.  I  don’t  know 
much about grooms’ clothes,  they’re mostly  rentals, anyway.” 
Flora Baumbach lost her timidity;   the judge  let her chat away. 
“I’m  using heirloom  lace on the  bodice of Angela’s  gown; it’s 
been in  my   family   for   three generations.  I   wore  it  at  my 
wedding, and I dreamed that someday I’d have a daughter who 
would wear  it, too,  but Rosalie  didn’t  come along until  I  was 
in  my   forties,   and…”   The   dressmaker  stopped.  Her   lips 
tightened into  an even wider  grin.  “Angela  will   make such  a 
beautiful bride. Funny  how she reminds me of her.”
       “Angela  reminds you of your  daughter?” the judge asked.
       “Oh  my, no.  Angela reminds  me of  another young  girl  I 
made a wedding dress for: Violet Westing.”


The heavy  charms on  Sydelle Pulaski’s  bracelet  clinked  and 
clunked as she raised a full fork and flourished it  in a practiced 
ritual before  aiming  it at  her open mouth.  Chris’s movements 
were even  jerkier.  She’s a good  person, he  thought,  but she 

92
thinks too much  about herself. Maybe  she never had anybody 
to love.
       “Here, let me help you  to some of this delicious sweet and 
sour ostrich.”
       Their  laughter drowned  out the  loud  groan from  another 
table where Turtle  sat alone, a transistor  radio plugged  in her 
ear. The stock market had dropped another twelve points.
       “I’m  starved, let’s sit  down to eat.” Head held  high, Grace 
Wexler led her  husband across the restaurant. “All  I want  is a 
corned beef sandwich, not a guided tour.”
       “Would  you  prefer  to  sit  alone or  with  that  young  lady 
over there?”
       “I  thought I was going to sit  with you.”
       “Please be  seated,” Grace  replied.  “Jimmy,   I  mean Mr. 
Hoo, will  take your order shortly.”
       Jake snatched the menu  from  his  wife  and  watched her 
glide (gracefully,  he had to admit) to the reservations desk and 
whisper in  Hoo’s  ear. (Jimmy,  she calls  him.)  “That’s  a  fine 
kettle  of   fish,”    he  exclaimed,   then   turned  to   his   dinner 
companion.  “Fine   kettle  of   fish.  I’m   so  hungry   even  that 
sounds good, and from the  looks of  this menu that’s  probably 
what I’ll  get.”
       “I’m   okay,”   Turtle  replied,   the final   prices  of   actively 
traded stocks tumbling in her ear.
       Mr. Hoo waddled  over. “I recommend the striped bass.”
       “See, what did I tell  you, a kettle of  fish.”
       Turtle  switched off  the radio.  She had heard enough  bad 
news for one day.

93
       “How   about spareribs done  to  a crisp,”   Hoo  suggested; 
then he  lowered  his voice.  “What’s   the  point  spread on  the 
Packers game?”
       “See me later,” Jake muttered.
       “Go  ahead  and  tell  him,  daddy,”   Turtle  said.  “I   know 
you’re a bookie.”


“Can  you stand  on your  legs?”  Sydelle  Pulaski  asked. “Can 
you walk at all?”
       People never asked Chris those questions; they whispered 
them to his parents behind his back. “N-n-no. Why?”
       “What  better  disguise  for  a  thief  or  a  murderer  than  a 
wheelchair, the perfect alibi.”
       Chris enjoyed being taken for  the criminal type. Now  they 
really were friends. “When  you ree m-m-me nos?”
       “What? Oh, read you my  notes. Soon, very soon.” Sydelle 
daintily  touched  the  corners of   her mouth  with   the  napkin, 
pushed back her chair and grabbed her polka dot crutch. “That 
was a superb meal, I must  give my  compliments to  the chef.” 
She rose, knocking the chair  to the floor,  and clumped toward 
the kitchen door.
       “Where  is  she  going?”  Angela,  starting  up  to  help  her 
partner, was distracted by shouting in the corridor.
       “Hello  in  there, anybody  home?”  Through  the restaurant 
door  came  a   bundled   and  booted  figure.   He   danced  an 
elephantine jig,   stomping  snow  on  the carpet,  flung  a  long 
woolen scarf  from  his neck  and yelled,  “Otis  Amber  is  here, 
the roads are clear!”
       That’s when the bomb went off.

94
“Nobody   move!  Everybody  stay  where  you  are,”   Mr.  Hoo 
shouted as he rushed into the sizzling, crackling kitchen.
       “Just a little  mishap,”  Grace Wexler explained,  taking her 
command post  in  the  middle  of  the  restaurant. “Nothing   to 
worry about. Eat up before your food  gets cold.”
       A  cluster   of   red  sparks  hissed  through   the  swinging 
kitchen  door,  kissed   the  ceiling   and  rained  a  shimmering 
shower down   and around  the  petrified   hostess. Fireflies   of 
color faded  into her  honey-blonde hair  and scattered into  ash 
at her feet. “Nothing  to worry about,”  she repeated hoarsely.
       “Just  celebrating  the  Chinese  New   Year,”  Otis  Amber 
shouted, adding one of his he-he-he cackles.
       Mr.  Hoo  leaned through  the  kitchen  doorway, his  shiny 
straight black hair (even shinier  and straighter) plastered to his 
forehead, water  dribbling  down  his  moon-shaped face. “Call 
an ambulance, there’s been a slight accident.”
       Angela dashed past Mr. Hoo into  the kitchen. Jake Wexler 
made the emergency telephone call and sent Theo to the lobby 
to direct the ambulance attendants.
       “Why  are you  standing there like  a statue,”  Hoo  shouted 
at his son.
       “You told  everybody to stay where they were,”  Doug said.
       “You’re  not everybody!”
       Madame  Hoo    tried   to   make  the   injured   woman   as 
comfortable  as  possible  on  the  debris-strewn  floor.  Angela 
found the  sequined spectacles, wiped  off  the wet,  crystalline 
mess and placed them on her partner’s nose.
       “Don’t   look  so  worried,  Angela.  I’m   all  right.”   Sydelle 
was in pain, but she wanted attention on her own  terms, not as 
a hapless, foolish victim of  fate.

95
       “Looks   like   a  fracture,”   an  ambulance  attendant  said, 
feeling her right ankle.  “Careful how  you lift  her.”
       The secretary suppressed a grunt. It was bad enough being 
drenched by the overhead sprinkler  and  draped with  noodles; 
now they were carrying her right  past them all.
       Grace pulled  Angela  away  from  the stretcher. “You   can 
visit your friend  in a few  days.”
       “Angela,   Angela,”   Sydelle  moaned.  Pride   or  not,   she 
wanted her partner at her side.
       Angela  stood  between  her  determined  mother  and  her 
distraught partner, paralyzed by the burden of choice.
       “Go with  your  friend, Angie-pie,”  Jake Wexler said. Other 
voices chimed in. “Go  with Pulaski.”
       Grace realized she had lost. “Perhaps you should go to the 
hospital, Angela,   it’s  been  so  long  since  you’ve  seen  your 
Doctor   D.”    She   winked   mischievously,    but   only    Flora 
Baumbach smiled back.


The policeman and the fire  inspector visiting  the scene agreed 
that it was nothing  more than a gas explosion. Good  thing the 
sprinkler  system worked  or Mr.  Hoo  might  have had  a good 
fire.
       “What  kind of a fire  is a good fire,”  Hoo wanted to know.
       “And  what about the burglaries?” Grace Wexler asked.
       “I’m   with   the  bomb  squad,”   the  policeman  explained. 
“You’ll  have to call  the robbery detail for that.”
       “And  what about the coffee shop accident?” Theo asked.
       “Also  a gas explosion.”
       Jake  Wexler   asked   about   the   odds   of   having   two 
explosions in two days in the same building.

96
       “Nothing   unusual,”   the  fireman   replied,  “especially   in 
weather like this,  no ventilation,  snow packed over the ducts.” 
He  instructed  the  tenants  to   air  out   their  kitchens   before 
lighting  ovens.
       Mrs. Wexler  turned up the heat in  her apartment and kept 
the windows  open for  the  next three  days. She did  not  want 
anything blowing  up during Angela’s party.
       But the  Wexler apartment was  exactly where  the bomber 
planned to set the next bomb.





14      ♦       Pairs   Repaired


The snowplows  plowed  and  a warm  sun finished  the  job  of 
freeing  the tenants  of  Sunset Towers  (and the  figure  in  the 
Westing house) from their wintry  prisons.
       Angela, disguised in  her mother’s old  beaver coat and hat 
and in  Turtle’s   red boots,  was  the  first  one  out.  Following 
Sydelle’s instructions  she hastily  searched under the  hood of 
every car in  the parking  lot.  Nothing  was there (nothing,  that 
is, that  didn’t   seem to  belong to  an  automobile  engine). So 
much for Good gracious  from hood space.
       Next came Flora  Baumbach. Behind her a bootless Turtle 
tiptoed  through  puddles. Miracle   of  miracles:  the  rusty  and 
battered  Chevy   started,   but   the  dressmaker’s   luck   went 
downhill  from  there. First,  the hood of  her car flew   up in the 
middle   of    traffic.    Then,   after    two   hours    of   watching 
mysterious symbols move across the lighted panel high  on the 

97
wall of  the broker’s office,  her eyes began to cross. After three 
hours the grin  faded  from  her  face. “I’m   getting  dizzy,”  she 
said, shifting  her  position  on the  hard wooden  folding  chair, 
“and worse yet, I think  I’ve  got a splinter in my  fanny.”
       “Look,  there goes one of our stocks,” Turtle replied.
__________________________________________________
SEA         GM        LVI         MGC          T      AMI         I
        5$8½        5000$67       32¼          2$14    1000$65¼       3$19¼     8$22½
__________________________________________________


       Flora Baumbach caught a glimpse of  SEA 5$8½ as it  was 
about to magically   disappear off  the left  edge of  the moving 
screen. “Oh my, I’ve forgotten  what that means.”
       Turtle sighed.  “It  means five  hundred shares of SEA was 
traded at $8.50 a share.”
       “What  did we pay?”
       “Never  mind,  just write  down  the prices of  our stocks as 
they cross the tape like  I’m  doing.  Once school  opens it’s all 
up to you.”  Turtle did  not tell  her partner that they had bought 
two hundred  shares of SEA  at $15.25  a share. On  that stock 
alone they had a loss of  $1,350, not counting  commissions. It 
took nerves of steel to play the stock market.


“The  Mercedes   is  wiped   clean  and  shiny   like   new,”   the 
doorman boasted. His  face  reddened around  old  scars as he 
rejected a folded  five  dollar  bill.  “No   tips, judge,  please, not 
after all   you’ve  done  for  the  wife  and  me.”  The judge  had 
given him the entire ten thousand dollars.
       J. J. Ford  pocketed the bill   and, to make  amends for her 
thoughtless gesture, asked the doorman about his family.

98
       Sandy perched  on  the  edge of   a  straight-backed  chair, 
adjusted his round wire-framed  glasses, repaired at the bridge 
with adhesive tape, across his broken nose, and told  about his 
children. “Two  boys still  in  high school, one daughter married 
and expecting my  third  grandchild  (her  husband just  lost his 
job so they all moved in  with us), another daughter who works 
part-time as a typist  (she plays  the piano real  good), and two 
sons who work in a brewery.”
       “It   must   have  been  difficult    supporting   such  a  large 
family,”  the judge said.
       “Not  so bad.  I picked  up  odd jobs  here and there after  I 
got fired   from  the  Westing  plant  for  trying   to  organize  the 
union,   but   mostly    I   boxed.   I    wasn’t   no   middleweight 
contender, but I wasn’t  bad, either. Got my  face smashed up a 
few   times  too   many,   though;   still   get   some  pretty   bad 
headaches and my brain gets sort of fuzzy.  Some dummy of  a 
partner you got stuck with, huh, judge?”
       “We’ll   do   just  fine,   partner.”  Judge  Ford’s  attempt  at 
familiarity  fell  flat. “I  did  try to phone you, but your  name was 
not listed.”
       “We don’t  have a  phone no more; couldn’t   afford it  with 
the kids making  so many calls. But I  did make some headway 
on our clues. Want  to see?” Sandy removed  a paper from  the 
inside of his cap and placed it  on the desk. Judge Ford noticed 
a flask protruding from  the back pocket of  his uniform,  but his 
breath smelled of peppermint.


              The   clues  as   figured   out   by   Alexander 
              McSouthers:

99
                        SKIES     AM     SHINING     BROTHER


              SKIES—Sikes (Dr.  Sikes witnessed the will)
              AM  BrothER—Amber  (Otis Amber)
              SHINing—Shin  (the middle  name of James 
                    Shin Hoo or what Turtle  kicks)
              BROTHER—Theo  or Chris  Theodorakis


“Remarkable,”   the   judge   commented  to   Sandy’s   delight. 
“However, we are looking  for one name, not six.”
       “Gee, judge, I forgot,”  Sandy said dejectedly.
       Judge Ford  told  him  about  Theo’s  proposal,  but  Sandy 
refused to go along. “It  seems too easy, the clues adding up to 
one message, especially for a  shrewd guy like  Westing.  Let’s 
stick it  out together, just  the two  of us. After  all,  I got  me the 
smartest partner of them all.”
       Shallow  flattery   for   the  big  tipper,   the  judge  thought. 
McSouthers  was  not   a  stupid   man;  if    only   he  was  less 
obsequious—and less of a gossip.
       The doorman scratched his head. “What I can’t  figure out, 
judge, is why I’m  one of the heirs. Unless Sam Westing just up 
and died, and there is no murderer. Unless Sam Westing is out 
to get somebody from his grave.”
       “I   agree with   you  entirely,   Mr.  McSouthers.  What   we 
have to find out  is who these sixteen heirs are, and which one, 
as you say, was Westing ‘out to get.’”
       Sandy beamed. They were going to play it his way.


“What you  need is an advertising campaign.”
       “What  I need is my half of  the ten thousand dollars.”

100
       “Five  thousand dollars is what  I estimate the redecorating 
and the newspaper ads will cost.”
       “Get out of  here, get out!”
       Grace stared at Hoo’s  smooth, broad face, at  the devilish 
tufts of  eyebrow  so high  above those flashing  eyes, then she 
turned her  back  and  walked  out.  Sometimes  she wondered 
about that man—no,  he couldn’t  be the murderer, he couldn’t 
even kill   the waterbug  in  the sink  this  morning.  Grace spun 
around  to  see if   she  was  being  followed   on  the  footstep-
hushing carpet in  the  third  floor  hall.  No  one was there,  but 
she heard voices. They were coming  from  her kitchen.  It was 
nothing, just  Otis  Amber  shouting  at Crow,  something about 
losing their clues.
       “I  remember  them, Otis,”   Crow  replied  in  a  soft  voice. 
She felt  strangely  at  peace. Just this  morning  she  had been 
given  the chance  to  hide her  love  in  Angela’s  bag,  the  big 
tapestry shoulder bag  she carries next  to her  heart. Now  she 
must pray that the boy comes back.
       “I  remember them, too,  that’s not  the point,”  Otis Amber 
argued. “What  if  somebody else finds  them? Crow?  Are  you 
listening to me, Crow?”
       No, but  Grace Wexler was listening.  “Really,  Mr.  Amber, 
can’t you  find   another time  to  discuss your  affairs  with   my 
cleaning woman. And where are you going, Crow?”
       Crow was buttoned  up in a black  moth-eaten winter  coat; 
a black shawl covered her head.
       “It’s   freezing   in  here.”   Otis  Amber   shut  the  window. 
Grace opened  the window.   “The  last  thing  I   need is  a  gas 
explosion,” she said peevishly.

101
       “Boom!”   he replied. The two women  were so startled that 
the delivery boy sneaked up on the unsuspecting for the rest of 
the week, shouting “Boom!”
       Besides   shouting     “Boom!”      Otis    Amber    delivered 
groceries from the shopping center to Sunset Towers, back and 
forth, to and fro.  Not only  did the tenants have to restock their 
bare shelves, they had to  add Westing  Paper Products by the 
gross to  their orders.  “Idiots,   just because the  will   said Buy 
Westing Paper  Products,”   he muttered,  hefting  a  bulky  bag 
from  the compartment  attached to  his bike.  Even  Crow  was 
using  Westing  Disposable  Diapers  to  polish  the  silver   and 
Westing  Paper  Towels  to   scrub  the   floors.   (Is  that   what 
happened to their  clues?) Poor  Crow,  she’s taking  this game 
harder than he had expected. She’s been acting strange again.
       “Boom!”   Otis Amber shouted as the intern hurried by.
       “Idiot,”   muttered Denton Deere.


Denton Deere  paced the  floor.  “Listen,   kid,  I’d  like   to help 
you, but  I’m  only  an intern  specializing  in  plastic  surgery. It 
would be different  if  you wanted a nose job or  a face-lift.”  He 
had meant to be amusing; it sounded cruel.
       Chris had not asked for charity. All  he wanted was to play 
the game with the intern.
       All  the intern wanted was half  of the ten thousand dollars. 
“I  hear  your  brother suggested sharing  clues.  Sounds like  a 
fine   idea.”   No  response.  Maybe   the   kid   thinks   I’m   the 
murderer. The tenants must think so, the way they peered over 
their shoulders; and that  delivery  boy shouting  like that.  Why 
me? I’m  a doctor; I  took an oath  to save lives, not  take them. 
“I’m   a  very   busy  man,  Chris,  I   have  lots  of   sick  people 

102
depending on me.  Oh well.”   Plowing  his  fingers  through his 
stringy  mouse-brown  hair  to  keep it   out  of  his  eyes (when 
would  he find  time  for  a haircut?), he  seated himself next  to 
the wheelchair. “The  clues are in my  locker. What  were they? 
‘The rain in  Spain falls mainly  on the plain’?”
       “F-for   p-plain   g-g-grain  shed.”  Chris  spoke  slowly.  He 
had practiced  his recitation   over and  over, hour  after  lonely 
hour. “G-grain—oats—Otis   Amber.  F-for, shed—she, F-Ford. 
F-Ford lives in f-four  D.”
       “Ford,  apartment  4D,  good thinking,   Chris.”   The intern 
rose. “Is that all?”
       Chris decided not to tell  him about the limper on the lawn, 
not until  the next  time. His  partner would  have to  visit  him a 
next time, and a next time, as long as he didn’t sign the check.
       “Now,  about signing the check,” Denton Deere said.
       Chris shook his head. No.


On a  bench in  the lobby  Angela  embroidered  her trousseau, 
waiting for  Denton. Dad had tried to teach her to drive, but she 
was too  timid;   he,  too  impatient.  Why   bother  with  driving 
lessons, her mother said, anyone as pretty  as you  can always 
find  a  handsome young  man  to  chauffeur  you.  She  should 
have insisted. She should have said no just once to her mother, 
just once. It was too late now.
       Theo  came in  with   an armload  of   books. “Hi,   Angela. 
Hey, I  found  that  quotation, or  rather,  the librarian  found  it. 
You know: May  God thy gold refine.”
       “Really?”   Angela  thought it   unnecessary to remind  him 
that it  was Flora  Baumbach and Turtle  who  had asked about 
the quotation, not she.

103
       What lush lips,  what white teeth, what fine  and shiny hair. 
Theo fumbled  between the pages of a chemistry  book  for the 
index card. On it  was written  the third  verse of  “America,  the 
Beautiful”:


              America! America!
              May God thy gold  refine
              Till  all success be nobleness
              And every gain divine.


Theo had begun reading the refrain  and ended up singing.  He 
shyly  laughed  off  his  foolishness.  “I   guess it   doesn’t  have 
anything  to  do  with   money  or   the will,    just  Uncle   Sam’s 
patriotism popping up again.”
       “Thank  you, Theo.”  Angela stuffed  her embroidery in  the 
tapestry bag on seeing Denton Deere rush off the elevator.
       “Hello,  Doctor Deere, how about a game of chess?”
       “Let’s  go,” the intern said, ignoring  Theo.
       Sandy opened  the  front  door   for  the  couple,  whistling 
“America,  the Beautiful.”   The  doorman was a  good whistler, 
thanks to his chipped front tooth.


“I can’t  drive you home; I’m  on duty  tonight.”
       “I’ll   take a cab.”
       “Why   must  you   go  back  to  the  hospital?  Your   crazy 
partner isn’t dying,  you know.”
       “She’s not crazy.”
       “She  made up  her so-called  wasting  disease, I  call  that 
crazy. Nothing was wrong  with  her legs until  the explosion  in 
the Chinese restaurant.”

104
       “You’re  wrong.”
       “First  you ask me  to look  in  on her, now  you don’t  want 
my  opinion.  Anyhow,  I  called  in  a  psychiatrist.  Maybe  you 
should  talk  to  him,   too.  I’ve   never  seen  you  so  troubled. 
What’s wrong,  the wedding  dress isn’t  ready, the guest list  is 
too long?  You’ll   have  to  cope with   more important   matters 
than that  once we’re  married.  Unless  you  don’t  want  to  get 
married. Is that it?”
       Angela twisted  the engagement ring her mother made her 
wear in spite of  the rash. No, she did  not want to get  married, 
not right away, but  she couldn’t say it,  she couldn’t  tell him—
them, not like  that. Denton would  be so hurt, her mother…the 
engagement was announced  in  the  newspaper, the  wedding 
gown, the  shower…but once  they found  out  she wasn’t their 
perfect Angela…
       How   long   has  she  been  sitting   here  in   the  hospital 
corridor? A man in  a business suit (the psychiatrist?) came out 
of Sydelle’s  room.  “You  must be Angela,”   he said. How  had 
Sydelle described  her—a pretty  young  thing?  “I  hear  you’re 
going  to  marry  one  of  our  interns.”   She was  going  to   get 
married, her one claim to fame.
       “How  is Ms. Pulaski, doctor?”
       “Do  you  mean is  she crazy?  No.  No  more  or less  than 
anybody else in town.”
       “But  the crippling  disease, she made that up?”
       “So  what?  The   woman  was  lonely   and  wanted  some 
attention, so she did  something about it.  And quite  creatively, 
too. Those painted crutches are a touch of genius.”
       “Is  that normal?  I  mean, it’s  not  insane to  shock people 
into noticing  who you are?”

105
       The doctor  patted Angela’s  cheek  as though  she were a 
child. “No  one was hurt by her little  deception. Now, go in  and 
say hello to your friend.”
       “Hello,  Sydelle.”
       Without  makeup, without  jewelry, clothed  only in  a white 
hospital gown,  she looked older, softer.  She looked like  a sad 
and homely human being. You talk to the doctors?”
       “It’s  a simple fracture,” Angela  replied.
       “What  else?” Sydelle turned her face to the wall.
       “The doctor  says your disease is incurable, but  you could 
have a  remission lasting  five   years, even  more,  if  you  take 
good care of yourself and don’t overdo it.”
       “The  doctor  said  that?”  Maybe  a  few  people  could  be 
trusted. “Did  you bring my makeup? I must look  a mess.”
       In the  overstuffed tapestry  bag, under Sydelle’s  cosmetic 
case, Angela found a letter. It  was a strange letter, written in  a 
tense and rigid hand:


              Forgive me, my daughter. God bless you, my 
              child.   Delight  in   your  love  and  the  devil 
              take  doctor  dear.  Hast  thou  found  me,  O 
              mine enemy? The time draws near.


Taped at the bottom were two clues:


                                     THY     BEAUTIFUL

106
15      ♦       Fact   and   Gossip


Friday was back to normal,  if the actions of  suspicious would-
be  heirs  competing  for   a  two-hundred-million-dollar     prize 
could be considered normal.
       At  school, Theo  studied, Doug  Hoo  ran, and  Turtle  was 
twice sent to the principal’s  office for  having been caught with 
a transistor radio plugged in her ear.
       The coffee shop was full of  diners.
       Shin Hoo’s restaurant had reopened, too, but no one came.
       J. J. Ford  presided at  the bench, and  Sandy McSouthers 
presided  at  the   front   door,  whistling,    chatting,   collecting 
tidbits of gossip and adding some of his own.
       Flora  Baumbach,   her  strained   eyes  shielded  by   dark 
glasses, drove Turtle   to  school  on  her  way  to  the  broker’s 
office and  picked her  up in  the late afternoon  with  a sheet of 
prices copied from  the  moving  tape. They had  lost $3,000 in 
five days.
       “Paper   losses,”  Turtle   said.   “Doesn’t    mean  a   thing. 
Besides, I didn’t pick  these stocks. Mr. Westing did.”
       Did  he? The  dressmaker thought  of  the  clue  Chris  had 
dropped; no stock  symbol  had five  letters  or even resembled 
the word plain.  But  Flora  Baumbach played fair  and kept  the 
secret to herself.


Four people stood  in  the driveway’s  melting  snow,  shivering 
as the sun dropped behind Sunset Towers. The fifth  jogged  in 
place. No smoke had risen from  the chimney since that fateful 

107
Halloween;  still  they stared up  at the  Westing house, murder 
on their minds.
       “He  looked  too peaceful  to have been murdered,”  Turtle 
said. She sneezed and Sandy handed her a Westing tissue.
       “How   would   you   know?”   Doug  replied.   “How   many 
people have you seen murdered?”
       “Turtle’s    right,”   her   friend    Sandy  said.   “If    Westing 
expected it,  he’d  have seen it  coming.  His  face  would  have 
looked scared.”
       “Maybe   he  didn’t   see it   coming,”   Theo  argued.  “The 
killer  was very  cunning,  Westing said. I  read a mystery  once 
where the victim   was allergic  to bee stings  and the murderer 
let a bee in through an open window.”
       “The  window  wasn’t open,”  Turtle said,  wiping  her nose. 
“Besides, Westing would  have heard the  buzzing and jumped 
out of bed.”
       Doug  had  an  idea.  “Maybe   the  murderer  injected  bee 
venom in his veins.”
       Otis Amber  flung his  arms in the air.  “Whoever  said Sam 
Westing was allergic to bees?”
       Doug tried  again. “How   about snake venom? Or poison? 
Doctors  know  lots  of   poisons that  make  it   look  like   heart 
attacks.”
       Turtle almost  kicked  Doug, track  meet or not.  Her father 
was a  doctor.  She  would   not  have  minded  if  he  had  said 
“interns.”
       “I  once  heard about a  murderer who  stabbed his  victim 
with  an icicle,”  the doorman  said. “It  melted  leaving no  trace 
of a murder weapon.”
       “That’s a good one,”  Turtle exclaimed appreciatively.

108
       Sandy had more. “Then  there  was a Roman who  choked 
on a single goat  hair someone put in  his milk.  And  there was 
the Greek   poet  who  was  killed   when  an  eagle  dropped  a 
tortoise on his bald head.”
       “Maybe  Westing  was just  sleeping until  Turtle  stumbled 
and fell on his head,” Doug suggested.
       “That’s  not funny,  Doug Hoo.”  How  could  she ever have 
had a crush on that disgusting jerk?
       Doug  would  not  let  up.  “And   who  was that  suspicious 
person in  red boots  I  saw  opening the  hoods of  cars  in  the 
parking lot  the other  morning?”  He  looked at Turtle’s  booted 
feet.
       “The  thief stole  my boots and put  them back again. They 
leak.”
       “A  likely  story, Tabitha-Ruth.”  Doug  pulled her braid  and 
ran into the lobby at full  speed.
       Sandy  placed   a   large   hand  on   Turtle’s   shoulder,   a 
comforting hand, and a restraining one.
       Otis Amber  hopped on his bike. “Can’t  stand around chit-
chatting  about a  murder  that  never happened. Sam  Westing 
was a madman. Insane. Crazy  as a bedbug.”  He pedaled  off, 
shouting back, “We ain’t  murderers, none of us.”
       Theo could not agree. If  there was no murderer, there was 
no answer; and without  an answer, no one could win.  “Sandy, 
did anybody  leave Sunset Towers on Halloween  night, before 
Turtle and Doug?”
       The doorman  scratched his head under  his hat,  thinking. 
“One  day seems like   the  next, people  coming  and  going.  I 
can’t remember.”
       “Try.”

109
       Sandy  scratched  harder.  “Only   ones  I   recall  are  Otis 
Amber and Crow. They left  together about five o’clock.”
       “Thanks.”   Theo  hurried  into   the building   to  check  his 
clues.
       Turtle  had no  reason to suspect Otis  Amber  or  Crow  or 
any of  the  heirs. Money   was the  answer. Her  only  problem 
was that dumb stock  market; it  didn’t  want  to play  the game. 
“Sandy, tell me another story.”
       “Okay,  let’s see. Once, long  ago in  the olden  days, there 
was this soothsayer who  predicted  the day of  his  own death. 
That day  came, and the  soothsayer waited to  die  and waited 
some more, but nothing happened. He was so surprised and so 
happy to  be alive  that he laughed  and laughed. Then,  at one 
minute to midnight,  he suddenly died. He died laughing.”
       “He  died laughing,”  Turtle  repeated thoughtfully.  “That’s 
profound, Sandy. That’s very profound.”


“Where’s  everybody?”   The apartment  was  empty,  as usual. 
Jake Wexler  decided  that  Shin  Hoo’s  was  going  to  have  a 
paying customer.
       “I’d  like  a table, if you’re  not too crowded.”
       “I   think  I  can  squeeze you  in,”   Hoo   said, leading   the 
podiatrist through  the empty restaurant. “You  must have liked 
those spareribs.”
       “Yeah,  sure.”  Jake  watched  his  wife   slowly   stack  her 
papers at the reservations desk. At  last, seeming to  recognize 
him,  she  walked  over.  Jake returned  his   unlit  cigar   to  his 
pocket. (Grace hated the smell.)
       “I’ve  already eaten,” Grace said, sitting down.
       “Hello  to you, too,”  Jake replied.

110
       He probably thinks  that’s funny. Since when do  people go 
around saying hello to their husbands?
       “What’s  new with   you, Grace? Where  are the kids? And 
what are all  those presents doing on the  coffee table? It’s  not 
your birthday  and it’s  not  our anniversary.”  What  was she so 
upset about. “Or is it?”
       “No,   it  isn’t.   Those are  gifts   for  Angela,  the  wedding 
shower is tomorrow.  Don’t   worry,  you’re  not supposed to  be 
there, just  the girls.  The  doorbell  was ringing   all  morning,  I 
couldn’t  leave the  apartment for  an instant;  one at a  time he 
delivered them,  the smirking   fool,  and each time  he shouted 
‘Boom!’”
       She  looked   especially   attractive   today,  Jake  thought. 
Between the ringing doorbell  and the booms, she had managed 
time for the beauty parlor and the sunlamp.
       Mr.   Hoo  set  the   spareribs  on  the   table  and  lowered 
himself to a chair.
       Grace lost  her scowl.  “Since   you’re  here, Jake, I’d   like 
your  opinion    on  the   advertising   campaign  I’m    planning. 
Jimmy and I  are having a slight  disagreement. I  say that Shin 
Hoo’s sounds like  every  other Chinese restaurant to  English-
speaking ears.”
       English-speaking ears? Jake bit his lip in  an effort to  keep 
silent.
       “I  say the restaurant needs a name people  won’t  forget,” 
Grace continued. “A name like  Hoo’s On First.”
       Jake could  not  help   himself.  He  tried  to  cover  a  loud 
guffaw  with  louder coughing.  Hoo  pounded him  on the  back 
and apologized for the ginger.

111
       “You  remember  that  old  baseball  routine,  Jake,”  Grace 
prompted.
       Yes, he  did.   “Who’s   on  first?   No,  What’s  on  second; 
Who’s on first.”
       “It’s   an  idiotic    name,”  Hoo   argued.  “Hoo’s   On   First 
sounds like my  restaurant is  on First  Street, or  worse yet, on 
the  first  floor.   Customers  will    end  up  in  the  coffee   shop 
drinking dishwater  tea.”
       “Not  the way  I’ll  promote  it, they  won’t,”  Grace insisted. 
“Well,  what’s your opinion,  Jake?”
       The podiatrist  put down  the sparerib he was about to bite 
into. “Hoo’s  On First is a dandy name.”
       Before he  could  pick  up the rib  again,  Hoo whisked  the 
plate off the table. “Who  elected you judge, anyhow?”


The judge returned  to Sunset Towers with  clippings  from  the 
newspaper’s files. Faithful  Sandy was waiting.
       Hoping   to   interrogate   both   George  Theodorakis   and 
James Shin Hoo, they alternated their dinner orders. One night 
they would order up, the next night  they would order down.  To 
their   disappointment    Theo   delivered   up.   They    had   no 
questions to ask him, but he had one for the doorman.
       “Chess?”  Sandy  replied.  “Sorry,  don’t   know  the  game. 
I’m a whiz  at hearts, though. ‘Shooter,’ they call me.”
       Theo left them to their  sandwiches and their work.
       The  private   detective   the   judge   had  hired   was   still 
investigating   the  heirs,  so  tonight’s   project   would   be  the 
Westing family.
       Judge Ford opened the thin  folder on  Mrs. Westing.  Mrs. 
Westing—no   first    name,  no   maiden   name.   In   the   few 

112
newspaper photographs in  which   she appeared, always  with 
her  husband, the  captions   read:  Mr.  and  Mrs.   Samuel  W. 
Westing. A shadowy  figure, a shy  woman, she seemed to slip 
behind her husband before the camera clicked, or had her face 
masked by  a floppy  hat  brim.  A  slim  woman  dressed in the 
fashion of  the  time:  long,  loose chemise, narrow  shoes with 
sharply rounded toes and high spiked heels. A nervous woman, 
her hands, especially in the later  pictures, were blurred.  In the 
final photograph  a black veil  covered her face. She seemed to 
lean unsteadily  against  the  stocky  frame  of  her husband  as 
they left the cemetery.
       Sandy reported his findings.  “Jimmy  Hoo  never met Mrs. 
Westing. Neither did Flora  Baumbach. She said Violet’s fiancé 
brought her to the shop for fittings.  She says it’s bad luck for  a 
groom  to  see  the  bride   in  the   wedding  gown   before  the 
wedding;  I   guess she’s  right.   Well,  that’s  it.   Nobody   else 
admits to having known Mrs.  Westing, except me.”
       “You knew  her, Mr. McSouthers?” the judge asked.
       “Well,   not  exactly,  but  I  saw  her  once  or  twice.”   The 
doorman  described  Mrs.  Westing   as  blonde,  full-lipped,    a 
good figure  though on the  skinny side.  “Mostly  I  recall  those 
full  lips because she had a mole right here.” He  pointed to the 
right corner of his mouth.
       Judge Ford  did  not  remember a  mole;  she remembered 
copper-colored hair and thin  lips,  but it  was so long ago, and, 
well—Mrs.  Westing was white. Very white.
       Next,    Westing’s    daughter.   The    judge    studied   the 
photograph under the headline:


             VIOLET   WESTING  TO MARRY  SENATOR

113
The senator turned out to  be a state senator, a hack politician, 
now  serving   a  five-year   jail   term   for   bribery.   But   Flora 
Baumbach was  right  about  the resemblance. Violet   Westing 
did   look    like    Angela    Wexler.    And    that   was    George 
Theodorakis, all   right,  dancing  with  her  in  the society  page 
clippings.
       “What  does it all mean, judge?” Sandy asked, squinting at 
the pictures  through his  smeared glasses. “Angela  looks  like 
Westing’s daughter,  and Theo  looks like   his father,  the  man 
Violet Westing really  wanted to marry.”
       “How  did you know  that?”
       Sandy shrugged. “It  was common gossip  at the time, that 
Westing’s daughter  killed   herself  rather than  have  to  marry 
that crooked politician.…”
       Now  the judge  remembered; her mother  had written   her 
about the  tragedy.  “Tell   me, Mr.   McSouthers,  you  seem to 
know  what’s   going  on  in   this  building:   Is  Angela   Wexler 
involved with  Theo in any way?”
       “Oh  no.”   Sandy  was  certain  of  that.  “Angela   and  her 
intern seem happy enough with each other. At least, I  hope so. 
I mean, if  Sam Westing  wanted to  replay that  terrible  drama, 
Angela Wexler would  have to die.”

114
16      ♦       The   Third    Bomb


“Boom!”
       Grace Wexler  slammed  the  door  on  the  delivery  boy’s 
silly  face and returned to  her party  with  a pink-ribboned  gift. 
The gossiping  guests were sipping  jasmine tea from  Westing 
Paper Party  Cups,  nibbling   on  tidbits   from   Westing  Paper 
Party Plates, and wiping  their  fingers on  Westing Paper Party 
Napkins. Madame  Hoo served in  a tight-fitting   silk  gown  slit 
high up her thigh,  a costume as old-fashioned and impractical 
as bound feet.  Women in  China  wore blouses and  pants and 
jackets. That’s what she would wear when she got home.
       Grace clapped  her hands for  attention.  “Girls,   girls!  It’s 
time for  the bride-to-be  to  open her presents. Angela, you  sit 
here and everybody gather round.”
       Angela  did as her  mother said.  She lowered  herself to  a 
cushion on the  floor,  ringed by  gift  boxes and surrounded by 
vaguely  familiar  faces.  She had  not  invited  her  few  friends 
from  college;  they   were  bent  on  careers, this  wasn’t   their 
thing. These were her mother’s  friends and the newly  married 
daughters  of   her  mother’s   friends—and   Turtle,   who   was 
leaning against the wall,  arms folded,  smirking.  Lucky  Turtle, 
the neglected child.
       “Read it out  loud, dear,” Grace ordered, as Angela opened 
the card tied to the yellow-ribboned  box.


              To the bride-to-be in the kitchen stuck,
              An asparagus cooker and lots of luck.
                                            from Cookie Barfspringer

115
       “Thank  you,”  Angela said, wondering  which  one was the 
Barfspringer.
       The next gift  was an egg poacher.
       The  box  in   pink   ribbons  contained  another  asparagus 
cooker.
       “I   sure  hope Doctor   Deere  likes  asparagus,”  someone 
remarked. The  giver  said  she could  return  it   for  something 
else, although two might  come in  handy. “A  doctor’s wife  has 
so much entertaining to do.”
       Angela glanced at her watch  and reached for the tall,  thin 
carton wrapped in gold foil.
       “Look  how  Angela’s hands are shaking;  she’s as nervous 
as a groom.” Giggles. “Bride-to-be  jitters.”  More  giggles.
       Slowly, Angela  unknotted  the gold  ribbon. Carefully,  she 
unfolded  the  gold  foil.   How  neatly  she did   everything,  the 
perfect  child;   not   like   Turtle,   who  ripped   off   wrappings, 
impatient to see what was inside.
       “Hurry     up,   Angela,    you’re    such    a   poke,”    Turtle 
complained. Suddenly  there she was,  kneeling down  to  peek 
under the lid.
       “Get  away,”  Angela  cried, jerking   the gift   up and  away 
from  her sister  as the lid  blasted  off  with  a  shattering bang. 
Bang! Bang!  A  rapid  rat-a-tat-tat. Rockets  shooting, fireballs 
bursting, comets shrieking, sparks sizzling.  Two dozen framed 
flower prints  falling  off the wall.
       Then it  was  over. Screams hushed to  whimpers  and  the 
trembling guests crawled out from  under tables and peered out 
of closets.

116
       “Is  anyone hurt?”   Grace Wexler  asked nervously.  Other 
than being  scared out of  ten  years of  their  lives,  thank  you, 
they were fine. “Where’s Angela?”
       Angela was still  seated on the cushion in the middle of the 
floor. Fragments of  the scorched box lay  in her burned hands. 
Blood  oozed from  an  angry  gash on  her cheek  and trickled 
down her beautiful face.


Heirs,  beware, Sam Westing  had  warned. They  should  have 
listened. Now it  was too late.
       The  suspicious  heirs  gathered in  the  lobby   around  the 
police  captain called  in  by  Judge Ford.  One  of  them  was a 
murderer, they  thought, and  one of  them was  a bomber, and 
one of them  was a thief.  But  which  was which  and who  was 
who? Or could it be one and the same?
       “Some    game,”   Mr.    Hoo    grumbled,    unwrapping    a 
chocolate bar. One ulcer  wasn’t  enough, Sam Westing had to 
give him three more. “Some game. The last one alive wins.”
       (Now, there’s  a likely  suspect, Otis Amber  thought.  Hoo, 
the inventor; Hoo, the angry man, the madman.)
       “The last  one alive wins,”  Flora  Baumbach repeated. “Oh 
my, what a terrible thing to  say.”
       (Can’t trust  that dressmaker, Mr. Hoo thought. How  come 
she’s grinning at a time like this?)
       The  captain  offered  no  help  at  all.  “Neither   the  bomb 
squad nor the  burglary  detail  has enough evidence  to search 
the apartments,” he explained.
       “You call  that justice?” Sandy asked.
       (Good-natured Sandy  couldn’t  be  the one.  He wasn’t  in 
the building  when  the first  two  bombs went  off,  or when  the 

117
judge’s watch  was stolen, Jake Wexler  thought.  On the  other 
hand, he sure did hate Sam Westing.)
       “Yes, Mr. McSouthers, justice  is exactly what I  call it.”
       (Not   her,  not  the  judge,   in   spite  of   the  clues,  Chris 
thought. Unless she’s one of those Black Panthers in disguise.)
       “Those   weren’t    gas  explosions,    those  were   bombs. 
Right?” Theo pressed the captain.
       (A   nice  kid,   that   Theo.  Doug,   too,  Flora   Baumbach 
thought. But  how  often had she seen television  interviews  of 
next-door  neighbors saying:  Can’t  believe  he  killed   thirteen 
people, he was such a nice  kid. Oh  my, oh  my, what’s gotten 
into me, thinking  such a thing?)
       The  captain  would   not   call  them   bombs.  “More   like 
childish pranks,”  he said.
       (Childish  pranks! That brat’s capable of anything.)
       Turtle stuck her tongue out at the sneering Doug Hoo.
       “Evil   pranks of  the  devil,”   Crow  muttered.  Her  blessed 
Angela was almost killed.
       “Crow  could be the one. Bring hellfire  down  on all of us,” 
Theo whispered to Chris, “but  she wasn’t in the building  when 
the first two bombs went off.”
       “Yes, s-she was.”
       “No,  she wasn’t.”
       The captain  described the  so-called  bombs. “Just  a  few 
fireworks  triggered by a squat striped  candle set in a tall  open 
jar; the  ribbon  probably hid  the  air holes in  the  box. No  one 
would have been hurt  if the  young lady  had not tilted  the box 
toward herself.”
       “A  time bomb,”  Grace Wexler  said, glaring  at the person 
who delivered the gifts.

118
       (An   unhappy  woman,   that  self-appointed   heiress,  the 
judge thought. Unfulfilled,    possibly disturbed.  Capable of  the 
burglaries, perhaps, but not  the bombings. She wouldn’t   have 
hurt her own daughter—at least, not Angela.)
       “Don’t  look  at me like  that,”  Otis Amber  shouted at Mrs. 
Wexler.  “I   don’t  own   no  striped  candles, or   no  fireworks, 
neither.”
       (That  idiot  is  the likeliest   of  all,  Grace thought.  But  he 
wasn’t around when the coffee shop blew up.)
       “O-o-o-ggg  a-a-ahh.”  The  excitement  was too  much  for 
Chris Theodorakis.
       (That  was  one  heir  no  one  suspected. And  Angela,  of 
course, no one could suspect her.)
       Otis Amber  was  not even  sure of  that.  “Still   waters run 
deep,” he said. “He-he-he.”
       Turtle could  not let him  get away with  that, even if  it was 
true.
       “Otis Amber  limps,”  Chris noted the next day.


Her  family   kept  reassuring  her.  “You’re   going  to   be fine, 
Angela, just fine.”
       The loud  snore  that  erupted from  the  next  hospital  bed 
was Sydelle Pulaski pretending to be asleep.
       “I  still  don’t  remember,” Angela mumbled.  Her bandaged 
cheek made speaking difficult.  Her face hurt, her hands hurt—
hurt very much.
       “Traumatic  amnesia,” Jake Wexler said.  “It  happens after 
sudden accidents. Don’t  worry, Angie-pie,  you’re  going  to be 
fine.”

119
       “You’re  going  to  be fine,  Angela,  just  fine,”   Grace said 
despondently. “I’ll  be back tomorrow. Come, Turtle.”
       “In  a  minute.”  Turtle   waited  for  the door  to  close.  She 
touched her sister’s bandaged hand. “Thanks.”
       “For what?”
       Another snore from Sydelle.
       “Just thanks.  The fireworks   would  have  gone off  in  my 
face if you  hadn’t  pulled the box  toward you.  Here, I  brought 
your tapestry bag; I didn’t  look  at your notes or clues, honest.” 
But she had removed the incriminating evidence.
       “Turtle,  tell me the truth. How  bad is it?”
       “The doctor  had to take some glass out of your hands, but 
no stitches. The burns will heal okay.”
       “And  my face?”
       “Some  scarring,   not  bad  really,   Angela.  Besides,  you 
always said being pretty  wasn’t important,  it’s  who you  really 
are that counts.”
       Angela  wondered   about  that.  Maybe   she  was  wrong. 
Maybe pretty  was important.  Maybe  she was crazy, she must 
have been crazy.
       “Don’t   worry,  you’ll    still   be pretty,”   Turtle  said.  “But, 
wow, that sure was a dumb thing to do.”
       Sydelle Pulaski’s  eyes popped  open in  surprise. Quickly 
she squeezed them shut and uttered another loud snore. Well, 
what do you know? Her sweet, saintly partner was the bomber. 
Good for her!

120
17      ♦       Some   Solutions


Monday was  a gray, rainy  day. Depressing. So was  the stock 
market, which fell  another six points. Turtle was jittery.
       All  the  heirs were jittery.  The  bomb squad was  called in 
several times to examine suspicious parcels. One turned out to 
be a sealed vacuum cleaner bag full of  dust that Crow  had set 
behind the  incinerator  door. Another  was  a box  delivered  to 
Mrs.  Wexler.  In  it  were  bonbons (her  favorite)   and  a note: 
Love and kisses, Jake.
       “What  do  you  mean, how  come? Can’t  I  send candy to 
my wife  without  getting  the third  degree? I thought  you were 
looking on the thin  side, okay?”
       Grace made him eat the first piece.
       The next day  Grace received a larger box.  In it  the bomb 
squad found one  dozen long-stemmed  roses and a note:  For 
no reason at all, just love, Jake.
       The bomb  squad was called  again when  Turtle  ran after 
her partner  through  the  lobby  shouting  “Mrs.   BAUM-bach, 
Mrs.   BAUM-bach!”      Someone  thought    she  had   shouted 
“Bomb!  Bomb!”
       A  hollow   wind   wailed   through  damp  Tuesday.  In  the 
morning  the  stock market  rose  three  points.  “Bullish,”    said 
Flora  Baumbach. In   the  afternoon  the market  dropped  five 
points. “Bearish,”   said Flora Baumbach. Those  were the only 
two trading terms she had learned.
       Madame Hoo, a quicker  student than the dressmaker, had 
learned more  words: partner,  money, house, tree,  road, pots, 
pans, okay, football,   good, rain,  spareribs.  Her teacher, Jake 

121
Wexler, visited  her  in  the kitchen  before  he sat  down to  his 
daily  lunch   in  the  Chinese  restaurant. Today  his  wife   and 
Jimmy  Hoo  agreed  to  eat with   their  only   customer on  the 
promise that he would  help them with  their clues and not  take 
a share of the inheritance if they won.
       Grace laid their five  words on the table.
       “These are clues?” Jake looked down on purple  waves for 
fruited sea. He switched two  squares of Westing Superstrength 
Towels. “Purple  fruited  makes more sense. How about grapes 
or plums?”
       Grace was  about  to  insist  on  purple  waves,  but  plums 
reminded her  of  something.  “Plum,”   she said  aloud. “Plum. 
Wasn’t the lawyer’s name Plum?”
       “You’re   right,  Grace,”  Mr.  Hoo   said excitedly.   “You’re 
absolutely right.”  He tore one of the clues in  two: fruit/ed.  “Ed 
Purple-fruit.  Ed Plum!”
       “We got it,  we got it,”   Grace cried, leaping up to embrace 
her partner.
       “I  never did trust lawyers,”  Mr. Hoo shouted gleefully.
       “What  about the other clues: for  sea waves?” Jake asked, 
but the happy,  hugging and  dancing, celebrating  pair  did not 
hear him.
       “Boom!”   said Madame  Hoo, placing  a plate  of  spareribs 
on the table. That word she had learned from Otis Amber.


Sandy was proud  of  the notebook  he bought, with   its glossy 
cover photograph of a bald  eagle in flight  (sort of  appropriate, 
he explained to the judge; fits  in with  Uncle Sam and all  that). 
In  it  he  painstakingly   entered  the  information   culled  from 
reports  the  private   detective  delivered   each day   to  Judge 

122
Ford’s  office:  photostats  of  birth   certificates,  death  notices, 
marriage licenses, drivers’ licenses, vehicular accident reports, 
criminal records, hospital  records, school records. To these the 
doorman added the results of his own snooping.
       “My  investigator  is having a difficult   time getting  into the 
not-so-public records of  Westingtown,”  the judge  said. “We’ll 
have to put the Westings aside and begin with the heirs.”
       “Since  we’re  feasting on  chicken  with  water  chestnuts,” 
Sandy said, “I’ll  start off  with  the Hoos.”  (Doug had delivered 
down.) He read aloud from his entry:


              ♦  HOO


                    JAMES SHIN HOO. Born:  James Hoo in 
              Chicago. Age:  50. Added  Shin  to  his name 
              when  he went  into   the restaurant  business 
              because it sounded more Chinese. First wife 
              died of  cancer five years ago. Married  again 
              last year. Has one son: Douglas.
                    SUN LIN HOO. Age:  28. Born  in  China. 
              Immigrated  from Hong  Kong two years ago. 
              Gossip: James Hoo married her for  her 100-
              year-old sauce.
                    DOUGLAS HOO (called Doug). Age:  18. 
              High-school    track   star.  Is   competing   in 
              Saturday’s track meet against college milers.
                    Westing  connection:    Hoo    sued   Sam 
              Westing over the invention  of the disposable 
              paper  diaper.   Case  never  came  to   court 

123
              (Westing   disappeared).   Settled   with    the 
              company  last  year for   $25,000. Thinks   he 
              was    cheated.    Latest    invention:     paper 
              innersoles.


“I  can  take  some credit  for   those paper  innersoles,”  Sandy 
bragged. “My   feet  were killing   me,  standing  at the  door all 
day, so  I  said  to  Jimmy:  ‘Jimmy,   if  only   somebody would 
invent a good innersole  that didn’t  take up so much room  like 
those foam-rubber things.’ And  sure enough, he did it. They’re 
great, I got a pair in my shoes now, wanna see?”
       “No,  thank you.” The judge was eating.


It was past midnight  when Theo finished  his homework  in the 
dim light  of  the study  lamp. The  wind  was still  howling,  and 
something (a word?  a phrase?) was still  eluding  him.  He had 
been studying solutions  in  chemistry.  Solutions—that  was it! 
The solution is simple, the will  said. He was sure of it.
       By  changing for  and thee to  the numbers four  and three, 
Theo was able to arrange the clues into  a formula (whether  or 
not it  was a chemical solution,  let alone  the Westing solution, 
was another matter).


             N     H(IS)     FOR     NO     THEE     (TO)     =     NH4NO3


But four  clue  letters were left  out:  isto, osit,  itso, otis.  OTIS! 
He had  it:  a formula   for  an explosive,  and  the name  of  the 
murderer! He had to tell Doug.
       “Where g-g-gogin?”

124
       “Shhh!”   Theo   smoothed  the   blanket   over  his   sleepy 
brother  in   the  next   bed,  struggled  into   his   bathrobe  and 
stumbled over the wheelchair as he tiptoed out of the room.
       The  elevator made  too  much  noise,  use the  stairs. The 
cement was cold, he had forgotten his slippers. Two unmarked 
doors, which  one? Tap, tap.  Tap. A  grunting  voice,  dragging 
footsteps. Please, let it be Doug, not Mr. Hoo or Judge Ford.
       It was Crow.  Clutching  a robe about her gaunt frame,  her 
unknotted hair  hanging long  and limp,   she tried to  focus  her 
dulled eyes on  the shocked face  of  her visitor.  “Theo!  Theo! 
The wind, I heard the wind.  I knew you would  come.”
       “Me?”
       Grasping   his   hand  she   pulled   him   into   the   maid’s 
apartment between  4C  and 4D   and shut  the  door. “We   are 
sinners, yet  shall  we be  saved. Let  us  pray  for  deliverance, 
then you must go to your angel, take her away.”
       Theo found himself  kneeling  on the bare floor  next to the 
praying Crow. He must be dreaming.
       “Amen.”





18      ♦       The   Trackers


It   was  Flora   Baumbach   who   braided  Turtle’s    hair  now, 
sometimes in three strands, sometimes four, sometimes twined 
with ribbons, while  Turtle read The Wall Street Journal.
       “Listen  to this:  ‘The newly  elected chairman  of the board 
of  Westing Paper  Products Corporation,   Julian  R.  Eastman, 

125
announced  from    London    where   he   is    conferring    with 
European management  that  earnings  from  all   divisions  are 
expected to double in the next quarter.’”
       “That’s  nice,”  Flora  Baumbach said, not  understanding a 
word of it.
       Turtle  gave the  order  for  the  day. “Listen   carefully.  As 
soon as you get to the broker’s office  I want  you to sell AMO, 
sell SEA, sell MT,  and put all the money into WPP. Okay?”
       Oh my!  That meant selling every stock  mentioned in their 
clues and buying more shares of Westing Paper Products—at a 
loss of some thousands of  dollars.  “Whatever  you say, Alice, 
you’re the smart one.”
       Flora Baumbach’s  hands were gentle,  they never hurried 
or pulled  a  stray hair.  Flora  Baumbach loved  her, she  could 
tell. “I  like  when you  call me Alice,”   Turtle  said, “but  I better 
not call  you  Mrs.  Baumbach  anymore, because of  the bomb 
scare, you know.”   Calling  her  Flora  would  spoil  everything. 
“Maybe I  could call you  Mrs. Baba?”
       “Why  not just Baba?”
       That’s exactly  what  Turtle  (Alice)   wanted to  hear. “Was 
your daughter, Rosalie, very smart, Baba?”
       “My,   no.  You’re  the  smartest  child  I   ever  met,  a  real 
businesswoman.”
       Turtle  glowed   behind  The  Wall  Street  Journal.   “I   bet 
Rosalie baked  bread and patched  quilts  and dumb  stuff  like 
that.”
       The  dressmaker’s  sure   fingers   fumbled   over  the   red 
ribbons  she was  weaving  into  a  four-strand  braid.  “Rosalie 
was an exceptional child. The friendliest,  lovingest…”

126
       Turtle  crumpled  the  newspaper. “Let’s   go.  I’m   late  for 
school and you’ve got that big trade to make.”
       “But  I haven’t finished  tying the ribbons.”
       “Never   mind,   I   like   them   hanging.”   Turtle   felt   like 
kicking somebody, anybody, good and hard.


Sandy was not at the door when they left. He was in apartment 
4D   neatly   writing   in    his  patriotic    notebook   information 
gathered on the next heir.


              ♦  BAUMBACH


                    FLORA   BAUMBACH.    Maiden    name: 
              Flora Miller.  Age:  60. Dressmaker. Husband 
              left  her years ago, sends no money. She had 
              a  retarded daughter,  Rosalie,  a Mongoloid 
              child.    Sold   bridal   shop   last   year   after 
              Rosalie died  of  pneumonia, age 19. Spends 
              most of her time at the stockbrokers.
                    Westing   connection:    Made    wedding 
              gown  for  Violet   Westing, which   she never 
              got to wear.


Sandy turned to a  fresh page, propped his feet  on the judge’s 
desk  and  began to   read  the  data  supplied  by   the  private 
investigator on Otis  Amber. He  laughed so hard he nearly fell 
off the tilting  chair.


                                                 *

127
Haunted by last night’s dream, Theo jogged  behind his partner 
halfway  to   the  high  school  before  he  uttered  a  breathless 
“Stop!”
       Doug Hoo stopped.
       “Who  lives in the apartment next to yours?”
       “Crow. Why?”
       “Nothing.”   How  come  he didn’t  know  that?  Because no 
one ever wonders where  a cleaning  woman lives,  that’s why. 
But  he wasn’t  like   that,  was he? Still,   it  must  have  been a 
dream. In  the  dream, the  nightmare, Crow   had given  him  a 
letter, but the  only thing  he found  in  his bathrobe pocket  this 
morning was a Westing Paper Hankie.  “Hey, wait!”   Doug had 
started off again. “I  figured  out  our clues. Ammonium  nitrate. 
It’s used in fertilizers,  explosives, and rocket propellants.”
       “I   knew  those  clues   were  a  pile   of  fertilizer,”    Doug 
replied,  jogging  easily.  Only  one thing   mattered: Saturday’s 
big track  meet. If  he won or  came in a  fast second he’d have 
his   pick    of   athletic    scholarships.   He    didn’t    need   the 
inheritance.
       “Stand   still   and  listen.”    Theo  grabbed  Doug   by   the 
shoulders and held him  flat-footed   to the  ground. “Like   it  or 
not we’re partners, and you’ve got to do your  share.”
       “Sure,”  Doug  replied.  His  father  was  angry, his  partner 
was angry, and a bomber was blowing up  Sunset Towers floor 
by floor. Some game! “What  do you want me to do?”
       “Follow  Otis Amber.”


Head tilted  back, Flora Baumbach  squirted drops in  her eyes, 
blinked, and stared again at the moving tape.

128
__________________________________________________
HR                  WPP                  BRY      TA              Z                   WPP
      1000$42½         5000$39¼   27       5$17¼    5000$27¼  5000$39½
__________________________________________________


“Oh  my!”   Westing  Paper  Products  had jumped  four   and  a 
quarter, no, four   and a half  points.  Her  eyes must  be blurry 
from  the  medicine.  The  dressmaker sat on  the  edge  of  her 
chair,  biting  her  fingernails,   waiting   for  WPP  to   cross the 
board again. There:  WPP $40. Oh  my,  oh my!  This  morning 
she had paid  thirty-five   dollars  a share. There it  goes  again: 
WPP $40¼. Oh my, oh my, oh my!


After   classes, instead  of  running   around  the  indoor   track, 
Doug Hoo  jogged  out of  the gym  to  the shopping  center six 
blocks away. There  was Otis Amber,  placing  two  cake boxes 
in the compartment of  his bike.  He picked  up a package from 
the butcher shop, and pedaled off, unaware of the sweat-suited 
figure trotting   half a  block behind  him,  and went  into Sunset 
Towers to make his deliveries.
       “Hi,   Doug.  Gonna run  the  mile  under  four  minutes  on 
Saturday?” the doorman asked.
       “Sure hope so. Do  me a favor, Sandy, give a loud  whistle 
when Otis Amber comes out. Okay?”
       Chip-toothed  Sandy  gave such  a loud  whistle   that Otis 
Amber would  have been deafened if  the flaps of  the aviator’s 
helmet had not been snug against his ears.
       Leaving   his   bicycle   in   the  parking   lot,   Otis   Amber 
boarded a bus. Doug ran the five  uphill  miles  to a house with 
the placard: E.  J. Plum, Attorney.  He ran  another three uphill 

129
miles after  the bus  that took  the delivery  boy  to  the hospital 
entrance.
       Doug sank down  in  a waiting-room  chair,  wiped his  face 
on his sweatshirt and picked up a magazine. Fascinated by the 
centerfold picture,  he almost missed Otis  Amber, who  dashed 
out of the hospital as though fleeing for  his life.
       Hiding  behind  parked  cars, Doug  followed   the  delivery 
boy to  another  bus, ran  four  steep  miles  to a  stockbroker’s 
office (how  is  it that  all roads go  uphill?),  from  the broker  to 
the high school,  from  the high school  (downhill,  at  last) back 
to Sunset Towers.
       The exhausted  track  star leaned  against the  side  of  the 
building, thankful  he was not a long-distance runner.
       “I  gotcha!” Otis  Amber poked a skinny  finger into  Doug’s 
ribs.  “He-he-he,”   he cackled,  handing  the  startled  runner  a 
letter. “It’s  from  that lawyer  Plum.  Says all  the heirs gotta be 
at the Westing house this Saturday night. Sign here.”
       With  his last ounce  of energy he  wrote Doug  Hoo,  miler 
on the receipt, then slid down  the wall  to a weary squat. Some 
miler.  His  feet  were  blistered;   his  muscles,  sore; he  could 
barely breathe, he might never run another step in his life.


On receiving  the notice  of the  Westing house meeting, Judge 
Ford canceled her remaining  appointments and hurried  home. 
Time was running out.
       Sandy read to her from his notebook:

130
              ♦  AMBER


                    OTIS JOSEPH AMBER. Age: 62. Delivery 
              boy. Fourth-grade  dropout. IQ:  50.  Lives in 
              the    basement   of    Green’s    Grocery.    A 
              bachelor. No living  relatives.
                    Westing  connection:    Delivered   letters 
              from E. J. Plum, Attorney,  both times.


“I  would’ve  guessed Otis had an IQ of minus ten,”  Sandy said 
with a smile.
       “Go on to the next heir,”  the judge replied.


              ♦  DEERE


                    D.    DENTON       DEERE.      Age:    25. 
              Graduate of UW  Medical  School.  First-year 
              intern, plastic  surgery. Parents live in Racine 
              (not heirs).
                    Westing connection:  Engaged to Angela 
              Wexler  (see Wexlers),  who looks  like   Sam 
              Westing’s  daughter,  Violet,   who  was  also 
              engaged to  be  married,  but  to  a politician 
              not an intern.


“That’s  awful  complicated, I  know,”  the doorman apologized, 
“but it’s  the best I could do.”

131
              ♦  PULASKI


                    SYDELLE PULASKI. Age: 50. Education: 
              high   school,  one   year  secretarial  school. 
              Secretary   to    the    president   of    Schultz 
              Sausages. Is taking  her first  vacation  in  25 
              years  (six  months’   saved-up  time).   Lived 
              with  widowed   mother  and  two  aunts until 
              she moved to Sunset Towers. Walked with  a 
              crutch  even before  she  broke her  ankle  in 
              the   second   bombing.    Now    needs   two 
              crutches (she paints them!).
                    Westing connection: ?


“We don’t  have any medical reports on her muscular ailment,” 
Sandy reported. “The  nurse at Schultz  Sausages said she was 
in perfect health when she left on vacation.”
       “Strange,”  the  judge remarked.  A suspicious  malady, no 
apparent Westing  connection,  somehow  Sydelle  Pulaski  did 
not seem to fit in.


Sydelle  Pulaski  clasped  the translated  notes  to  her  bosom. 
“My  little  secret, mustn’t peek,” she said coyly, but the doctors 
had come to see Angela.
       The plastic  surgeon loosed  the tape from   her cheek and 
peered under the gauze. “One graft  should do it,  but we  can’t 
operate until the tissue heals,” he said to the intern, then spoke 
to the  patient. “Call   my  secretary for  an appointment  in  two 

132
months.” He  strode out of  the room  leaving  Denton Deere  to 
replace the bandage.
       “I  don’t   want plastic  surgery,”  Angela  mumbled.  It  still 
hurt to talk.
       “Nothing  to be frightened  of. He’s the best when it  comes 
to facial repairs, that’s why  I brought him  in.”
       “We’ll  have to postpone the wedding.”
       “We can have a small informal  wedding.”
       “Mother  wouldn’t  like  that.”
       “How  about  you, Angela,  what  do you  want?”  He knew 
her unspoken answer was “I don’t know.”
       The  door  flew  open  and  slammed against  the  adjacent 
wall.  “Where   do  you   think  you’re   going?”   Denton  pulled 
Turtle to a halt  by one of  the streaming ribbons  twisted in  her 
braid. “The sign says No Visitors.”
       “I’m  not  a visitor, I’m   a sister. And get your germy  hands 
off my hair.”
       Denton  Deere hurried  to  seek first   aid  for  his  bleeding 
shin and sent the biggest male  nurse on the floor  to  take care 
of Turtle,  the same male nurse who chased Otis Amber out  of 
the hospital   for   sneaking up   on  a  nurse’s  aide  carrying  a 
specimen tray and shouting, “Boom!”
       Turtle  had time for  one  question. “Angela,  what  did  you 
sign on the receipt this time after ‘position’?”
       “Person.”
       “I  changed mine to victim,”  Sydelle said.
       Turtle  paid   no  attention  to  the  victim.    She was  more 
interested in  the two  men  entering the  room: the  burly  male 
nurse and that creep of a lawyer,  Plum. “I  gotta go.  Don’t  say 
anything to  anybody  about anything, Angela,  no  matter what 

133
happens. Not even to a  lawyer. You know  nothing,  you hear? 
Nothing!”  She skirted Ed Plum,  ducked under the outstretched 
hairy hands of  the male  nurse, slid down  the hall,  scampered 
down the stairs and out of the hospital.
       “Hi,  how  are you?”  Ed  Plum smiled  at Angela,  ignoring 
the patient in  the other  bed. He  didn’t  recognize Ms.  Pulaski 
without  her  painted  crutch.   “I’m   sorry   to  hear  about  your 
accident. Otis Amber told  me about it. Just thought I’d  drop in 
for  a chat.”  The  young  lawyer,  who  had admired  the  pretty 
heiress from the minute he first laid  eyes on her, did not have a 
chance to chat.
       Grace Wexler  entered  the room,  saw  the answer  to  the 
clues:  Ed   Purple-fruit,     the  murderer,   standing   over   her 
daughter, and uttered a blood-curdling shriek.


Three visitors  in  one  day!  The first   was Otis  Amber  with  a 
letter and  another receipt  to sign.  Chris  had pretended to  be 
scared by the “Boom!”   but  he wasn’t  really. He had  twitched 
because he was  excited  about  going   to  the  Westing  house 
again, even if he hadn’t figured out the clues.
       Then  Flora   Baumbach   came  to  see  him.   He   wasn’t 
nervous at all with  that  nice lady. She smiles that funny  smile 
because she’s sad  inside.  She  once had  a  daughter  named 
Rosalie. She told  him how  Rosalie would  sit  in  the shop and 
say hello to the customers, and how she would feel the fabrics. 
Mrs.  Baumbach  made  wedding   dresses, which   are  mostly 
white, so  she bought samples of  materials  with  bright  colors 
and patterns because Rosalie  loved  colors  best. Rosalie  had 
573 different  swatches in her collection  before  she died. Mrs. 

134
Baumbach  said  her  daughter  might  have  been  an  artist  if 
things had turned out differently.
       What   would   I   have   been  if   things   had   turned   out 
differently?
       The  third    visitor   entered.  Limping!    His   partner   was 
limping!  Too much excitement, his stupid body  was jerking all 
over the place.
       Denton Deere  sat down  next to  the wheelchair.  “Take  it 
easy, Chris. Calm  down,  kid,   I’m  not  the  creature from  the 
black lagoon, you know.”
       His   partner,    a   doctor,   watched    horror    movies   on 
television, too. Slowly  arms untangled, legs unsnarled. Slowly 
Chris stuttered  out  his  news: Flora  Baumbach  felt  so  guilty 
about seeing their  dropped clue  that she told  him  one of  her 
clues: mountain. “But  we m-mus-n t-tell  T-Turtle.”
       “Don’t  worry,”  the intern said, displaying  a bruised shin.
       Chris laughed, then stopped. “I s-sorry.”
       “Mountain,    hmmm.”   Denton  Deere  thought   about  the 
new  clue.  “If    a  treasure  is  hidden  in   a  grain   shed  on  a 
mountain plain, I  sure don’t have time to look for  it. Do  you?”
       “N-n-n.”
       “Let’s  forget  the clues, I  have something more  important 
to tell you. Don’t  get excited, okay?”
       Chris nodded. His partner was going to ask for the money.
       Denton   Deere   stood.  “I’ll     get   your    toothbrush   and 
pajamas, then we’ll go to the hospital. Don’t  get excited.”
       Chris  got  excited.  How   could  he explain   that  what  he 
wanted  from    his   partner   was  companionship,    not   more 
probing,  pricking  doctors  with  their  bad news  that made his 
mother cry?

135
       “Listen,  Chris, can you hear me? Just overnight. I  found a 
neurologist,  a  nerve  doctor,   who  works   on  problems   like 
yours.”
       “Op-p-pra-shn?”
       “No  operation.  Did   you  hear me,  Chris?  No  operation. 
The doctor  thinks  a  new  medicine  may  help, but  he  has to 
examine   you,   make   some   tests.   I    have   your   parents’ 
permission, but  no one will   touch  you unless we  talk  it  over 
first, you and me, together. I promise.”
       Chris  grimaced  trying  to  smile.  His  partner  said  talk  it 
over, the two of them, together. They were really  partners now. 
“You c-c-cn have m-money.”
       “What?  Oh,  the  money. Later.  Here,  let  me take  those, 
you  won’t   need them   in  the  hospital.”   Chris  clung   to  his 
binoculars. “Well,  I  guess you do need them. Ready? Here we 
go!”
       All  of a sudden he was leaving  Sunset Towers, pushed by 
his limping  partner. Maybe Doctor  Deere is not who  and what 
he says he is. Maybe he is being kidnapped for ransom. Maybe 
he’s being held hostage. Oh boy, he hasn’t had so much fun in 
years.





19      ♦       Odd   Relatives


Thursday was a sunny day, a glorious day; the autumn air  was 
crisp and clear. None of the heirs noticed.

136
       WPP  crossed  the  tape  at  $44…$44½…$46.    Forty-six 
dollars  a share!  Oh my!   (“Don’t   sell  until   I  give  the word, 
Baba,” Alice-Turtle  had said.) Baba. The dressmaker smiled at 
her new name  and eased back in  the chair,  but not  for  long. 
WPP $48¼. Oh my, oh my! Flora  Baumbach bit her thumbnail 
to the quick. If  only the child  was here.
       The  child   was  being   examined  by   the  school   nurse, 
having  been caught  again  with  a  radio  plugged  in  her  ear. 
Turtle  blamed  her  misbehavior   on  a  toothache. “The   only 
thing that soothes the horrendous pain is listening to music.”
       “You should see a dentist,” the nurse said.
       “I  have an appointment next week,” Turtle  lied. “Can  I go 
home now? The pain is truly unbearable.”
       “No.”  The nurse packed the tooth  with foul-tasting  cotton 
and sent her back to class. So every half hour Turtle had to ask 
permission to  go to the  lavatory  in order  to keep up  with  the 
latest stock market reports. “Bladder infection,”   she explained.


Crow  polished  Mrs.   Wexler’s  silver   teapot with   a  Westing 
Disposable Diaper for  the third  time. Two  more days, the day 
after next.  It  was  too painful,   going  back to  that  house, but 
Otis said she must, to collect her due. It was her penance to go 
back, not her due. Blessed is he who expects nothing.
       “Boom!    Just  a  warning    to  keep   doors   locked,”   the 
delivery   boy   said,   dumping   a   carton   of   Westing   Paper 
Products on  the  kitchen  floor.  “You   know,  Crow  old  pal,  I 
think I figured  out who the bomber is.”
       Crow  stiffened as she stared at her distorted  reflection  in 
the shining silver. “Who?”

137
       “That’s  right,”   Otis  Amber   said. “James  Shin  Hoo.  He 
wanted to put  the coffee shop out  of business, right? Then  he 
had to bomb his own restaurant so nobody would  suspect him, 
right? And  he catered the Wexler party. Nobody  would  notice 
if  the  caterer brought  in  an  extra  box  along  with  the  food, 
right?”
       James Shin Hoo was the bomber. Crow’s hands trembled, 
her face  blotched  with   hate. That  beautiful,   innocent  angel 
reborn; Sandy said her face will be scarred for life.  James Shin 
Hoo, beware! Vengeance shall be mine.


The judge  rearranged her  docket in  order  to  have these last 
days free.  (Leave   it  to  Sam  Westing  to  interfere   with  her 
work.)
       Sandy turned to his next entry. “It’s  an interesting one.”


              ♦  CROW


                    BERTHE ERICA CROW. Age: 57. Mother 
              died    at     childbirth,     raised     by    father 
              (deceased).  Education:    1    year   of    high 
              school.  Married  at  16, divorced  at  40.  Ex-
              husband’s    name:    Windy      Windkloppel. 
              Hospital     records:    problems    related    to 
              chronic  alcoholism.  Police record:  3  arrests 
              for  vagrancy.  Gave  up  drinking   when  she 
              took up  religion.  Started the Good Salvation 
              Soup   Kitchen   on   Skid   Row.   Works    as 

138
              cleaning  woman in  Sunset Towers,  lives  in 
              maid’s apartment on fourth  floor.
                    Westing connection: ?


“Yes, it  is interesting,”  Judge Ford replied,  “but  it hardly  tells 
us what we want to know.”


“You’ve  got a customer.” Jake Wexler pointed a sparerib at the 
black-clad figure standing at the restaurant door.
       “Must  be  a bill   collector,”   Hoo  said, frowning   over  his 
account book.
       Grace looked  up,  saw it  was  only  the  cleaning woman, 
and returned  to  the  sports  photographs  she was  sorting.  A 
dozen or more  superstars would  be framed  and hung on  one 
wall of Hoo’s  On First.
       “Come on over and join  us,” Jake shouted.
       Limping  to their  table, Crow  heard Mrs. Wexler  click  her 
tongue. Sinful woman,  she’ll  go to hell  with  her pride and her 
covetousness, and take that foot-butcher of a husband with her. 
And  that   one,  the   fat  one,   the  glutton,   the   bomber,  the 
mutilator of  innocent children.
       Maybe  she is  a customer, Hoo  thought,  recognizing  the 
face clenched in  righteous anger  as that of  a diner  not being 
served fast enough. He  rose and pulled  out a chair  for  Crow. 
“My  wife  will  be serving a Chinese tea lunch shortly.”
       Madame Hoo  placed a variety of  dumplings  on the table, 
giggled at Jake and ran back to the kitchen.
       That tittering  Madame  Hoo was  a beautiful  woman. And 
quite young.  Grace, casting a suspicious eye  on her husband, 

139
was suddenly seized by a surge of gnawing jealousy (maybe it 
was just the fried dumpling).
       Madame Hoo   returned to  pour  the  tea. Jake  patted her 
hand. Good, Grace noticed, she’s clutching her stomach, about 
time she felt  jealous. The podiatrist  turned his  smile to  Crow. 
“Nothing  wrong with  your appetite, I’m  happy to see.”
       “Nothing  is  wrong with  my  mouth,”  the cleaning  woman 
replied, looking  down at her plate, “it’s   my feet that hurt. That 
corn you  cut out didn’t   heal yet, I  got  a callus on  the sole of 
my left foot,  and my ingrown  toenail is growing  in again.”
       Grace clasped a hand over  her mouth  and ran out  of  the 
restaurant. Mr. Hoo headed for the kitchen.
       “Your  trouble   comes from  years  of  wearing  the  wrong 
kind of shoes,” Jake lectured.
       Crow wasn’t  listening.  James Shin Hoo, the bomber,  was 
coming back. He had something in his hand.
       “Here,  Crow,  try   these. I  invented   them  myself.  Paper 
innersoles. They’ll   make you  feel like  you’re  floating   on air. 
It’s tough standing on your feet all  day. Here, take them.”
       Crow  examined  the  two  pads  of  spongy  folded   paper. 
“How  much?”
       “Nothing,  compliments of  the house.”
       Still   suspicious,  Crow   slipped  the   innersoles  into   her 
shoes and tried  walking.   What  a blessed relief.   Otis Amber 
was wrong. James Shin Hoo was a charitable man, he couldn’t 
be the  bomber.  Crow  floated   out  of  the  restaurant without 
paying for her lunch.


“Oh  no,  not another  victim,”   Sydelle  Pulaski  cried,  stuffing 
her notes under the mattress.

140
       The  nurse   wheeled  Chris   next   to  Angela’s   bed   and 
explained that the boy  was being tested for a new medication. 
“Are  you  all  right?”   she asked, bending  over  the squirming 
patient.
       Chris was trying  to remove a blank,  sealed envelope from 
his  bathrobe pocket.   He  knew  his  brother  had  a  crush  on 
Angela.  He figured  Theo  must  have sneaked upstairs  in  the 
wrong  bathrobe to  slip  this  letter  under Angela’s  door,  then 
remembered she was in the hospital and was too shy to give  it 
to her in person.
       “Look  at that smile,”  Sydelle exclaimed.
       “F-from  Theo,”  he said. Chris hoped to watch Angela read 
the love letter, but the nurse insisted he return to his room.
       “Bye-bye,   good luck,”   Sydelle   called. Angela   waved  a 
bandaged hand.
       “M-moun—t-tain,”       Chris    replied.    “From     T-Turtle.” 
Serves her right for kicking  his partner.
       Mountain,    Angela    thought.   Turtle’s    MT    stood    for 
mountain, not empty. And the letter was not from Theo:


              Your love has 2, here are 2 for you.
              Take her away from this sin and hate
              NOW! Before it  is too late.


Again two clues were taped at the bottom:


                                    WITH     MAJESTIES


“Crow  and Otis  Amber’s  clues  are not king  and  queen,” she 
told Sydelle. “They  are with thy beautiful  majesties.”

141
                                                 *


Sandy and the judge were still at work on the heirs.


              ♦  WEXLER


                            JAKE WEXLER. Age: 45. Podiatrist. 
              Graduated   from    Marquette.   Married    22 
              years, has two daughters (see below).
                            GRACE WINDSOR WEXLER. Born 
              Gracie  Windkloppel.   Age:   42.  Married   to 
              above.  Claims  to  be  an interior   decorator. 
              Spends  most  of  her   time  in   the  Chinese 
              restaurant or the beauty parlor. She and Jake 
              (see above) have two daughters (see below).
                            ANGELA     WEXLER.    Age:     20. 
              Engaged to marry D.  Denton Deere (also an 
              heir). One year college (high  grades). Victim 
              of third  bombing. Embroiders a lot.
                            TURTLE   WEXLER.    Real   name: 
              Tabitha-Ruth  Wexler. Age:  13.  Junior-high-
              school   student.   Plays  the   stock   market. 
              Smart    kid,     but     kicks     people.    Flora 
              Baumbach calls her Alice.
                            Westing connection: Grace Windsor 
              Wexler  claims that  Sam Westing is  her real 
              uncle. Angela  looks  like  Violet  Westing, so 
              does Grace in a way, except she’s older.

142
Sandy fidgeted with his  pen. “There’s something I  didn’t write 
down. Maybe  I shouldn’t  tell  you,  you being  a judge and  all, 
but, well, Jake Wexler…he’s a bookie.”
       No, he  should not  have told  her. “A  small-time  operator, 
I’m  sure, Mr.  McSouthers,”   the judge  replied coldly.   “It  can 
have  no  bearing   on   the  matter   before  us.   Sam  Westing 
manipulated  people, cheated  workers,  bribed  officials,   stole 
ideas, but Sam Westing never smoked or drank or placed a bet. 
Give me a bookie any day over  such a fine, upstanding, clean-
living  man.”
       The doorman’s face reddened. He pulled  the dented flask 
from his hip pocket and downed several swigs.
       She had been too harsh. “Would  you like  me to fix   you a 
drink, Mr.  McSouthers?”
       “No  thanks, judge. I prefer my good old  Scotch.”
       “Windkloppel!”    The judge’s outburst  was so unexpected, 
Sandy had a hard time keeping down the last swig.
       “Grace   Wexler’s   maiden   name   is   not   Windsor,   it’s 
Windkloppel,”  the judge  exclaimed, riffling   through the  pages 
of  Sandy’s  notebook.  “Here  it  is:   ‘Berthe  Erica  Crow.  Ex-
husband’s name: Windy Windkloppel.”
       Sandy   stopped   coughing,    started    laughing.    “Grace 
Windsor Wexler  is related to somebody all  right;  she’s related 
to the cleaning woman. Think she knows, judge?”
       “I    doubt   it.   Besides,   we   cannot  be   certain   of   the 
relationship.  I’d  like   to see the  documents in  Crow’s   folder 
again.”
       “I’m    sure  it’s   Windkloppel,   judge,   I  checked  all   my 
spellings three times over.”

143
      Judge Ford reread the private investigator’s reports. “Mr. 
McSouthers, it is Windkloppel, but look carefully at the name 
of the woman in this interview.”

       Berthe   Erica   Crow? Sure   I   knew her.   She 
       and  her   pa   lived    in   the    upstairs    flat. 
       We   were     best     friends,        almost     like 
       sisters,      but  she  was the   pretty    one with 
       her   beautiful      complexion  and  long   gold-
       red   hair.    She left     school  to   marry  a  guy 
       named Windkloppel.   Haven’t   seen  or  heard 
       from     her     since.      She’s     not     in     any 
       trouble,     is   she?
                          Transcript    of  a  taped  interview
                        with   Sybil   Pulaski,    November 12.


“Pulaski!” the doorman said.
      “Not just Pulaski,” the judge pointed out. “Sybil Pulaski. 
Sam Westing wanted Crow’s childhood friend, Sybil Pulaski, 
to be one of his heirs. He got Sydelle Pulaski instead.”
      “Gee, judge, I never noticed that; boy, am I dumb. But 
what does it mean?”
      “What it  means, Mr. McSouthers, is that Sam Westing 
made his first mistake.”




20     ♦      Confessions


Friday came quickly to the Westing heirs. Too quickly. Time 
was running out.

144
       Turtle skipped school.  She was in trouble enough, but she 
could build  her own  school and hire her own  kind  of teachers 
once she became a millionaire.
       In spite of  having Turtle  at her side, Flora Baumbach still 
stared at the ever-changing, endless tape from the  edge of the 
chair, chewed what remained of her fingernails,  and uttered an 
“Oh  my!”   each time  WPP went  by. At  two  o’clock   Westing 
Paper Products sold  at  fifty-two    dollars  a share,  its  highest 
price in fifteen  years.
       “Now,  Baba. SELL!”


Doug  Hoo  had a  legitimate  excuse  from  classes: tomorrow 
was the big  track meet. He  jogged, he sprinted, he  ran at full 
speed—not on the track,  but on the trail  of  Otis Amber.  Back 
and forth  from  the  shopping  center to  Sunset Towers, again 
and again and again and…hey, this is a new direction.
       Otis Amber parked his  delivery bike  in front  of a rooming 
house and  went  inside.  Doug  waited,  hidden  in  a  doorway 
across the street. And  waited. People  came and went,  but no 
Otis Amber.   Doug  jogged  up  and  down  the  block  for   two 
hours. Still no sign of  Otis Amber.
       Doug was cold and hungry, but at least his feet didn’t  hurt 
anymore. Last  night   when  he asked  Doc  Wexler  about  the 
blisters, the podiatrist told  him  to see his father—his father, of 
all people. But those paper innersoles really worked.
       At  five  o’clock   Otis Amber  skipped  out  of  the rooming 
house, hopped on his  bicycle,  and returned to  Sunset Towers 
empty-handed.  Doug’s   assignment  was  over,  well,   almost 
over. Where was Theo?

145
Theo was  being patched up  in  the hospital  emergency  room 
after  a  slight   miscalculation   in  his   “solution”    experiment. 
Fortunately, no one else was around when the lab blew up.
       “You  like playing  with  explosives,  kid?”  the bomb squad 
detective asked. Accidents in  high-school  chemistry  were not 
unusual, but this student lived in Sunset Towers.
       “I   was   experimenting   on   chemical   fertilizers,”    Theo 
replied, wincing  as the doctor  probed his  shoulder for  a glass 
shard.
       “The first  bomb went off  in your  folks’  coffee shop, right? 
Your mother and father work you  pretty hard, don’t they?”
       “They  work harder than I  do. Why all  the questions? Your 
captain   said   the    Sunset   Towers   explosions    were   just 
fireworks.”
       “Sure they were, but bombers have a funny  habit of going 
in for bigger and bigger bangs. Until  they get caught.”
       Theo  had  an  alibi.   He  was  nowhere  near  the  Wexler 
apartment the  day  the  third   bomb  went  off.   The  detective 
grunted  a warning   about  careless chemistry,  but  Theo   had 
already learned his lesson. “Ouch!”


At last  the coffee  shop owner himself  delivered  the up  order. 
The judge came right  to  the point.  “Mr.  Theodorakis,  tell  me 
about your relationship  with  Violet  Westing.  I have  reason to 
believe a life is in  danger or I would not ask.”
       It   was  a   question  he   had  expected.  “I    grew   up   in 
Westingtown where  my  father was  a factory  foreman.  Violet 
Westing and I were what you’d  call childhood  sweethearts. We 
planned to  get married  someday, when I  could  afford  it,  but 

146
her mother broke us up. She wanted Violet to marry somebody 
important.”
       The judge had to  interrupt.  “Her  mother? Are  you saying 
it  was  Mrs.  Westing  who   arranged the  marriage,   not  Sam 
Westing?”
       George Theodorakis nodded.  “That’s  right.  Sam Westing 
tried to involve  Violet  in  his business. I  guess he hoped she’d 
take over the paper company one day; but she had her heart set 
on being  a  teacher.  Besides, Violet   didn’t   have much  of   a 
business sense. After   that  her  father  never  paid  her  much 
attention.”
       “Go on.”  The judge held the witness in her stare.
       The subject  was becoming  painful,  and Mr.  Theodorakis 
faltered several times in the telling.  “Mrs.  Westing handpicked 
that politician—probably   figured  the guy would  end up in  the 
White House and her daughter would be First Lady.  But Violet 
thought he  was  nothing  but  a cheap political   hack,  a cheap 
crook. Violet  was a gentle person, an only  child.  She couldn’t 
turn against her mother, she couldn’t face marrying that guy.…
I guess she couldn’t find  any way  out, except… Mrs.  Westing 
sort of went off  her rocker after Violet’s  death, and I…  well,  it 
was a long time ago.”
       “Thank  you, Mr. Theodorakis,”  the judge  said, ending the 
interrogation.  The   man  had  a  different   life   now,  different 
loves, different  problems.  “Thank   you, you  have  been a big 
help.”
       Sandy was now able to complete the entry:

147
              ♦  THEODORAKIS


                    THEO THEODORAKIS. Age:   17.  High-
              school senior. Works  in  family  coffee  shop. 
              Wants to  be  a  writer.  Seems lonely;   can’t 
              find  anyone to play chess with.
                    CHRISTOS THEODORAKIS.   Age:   15. 
              Younger   brother   of   above.   Confined   to 
              wheelchair;  disease struck about  four  years 
              ago. Knows a lot about birds.
                    Westing     connection:       Father      was 
              childhood    sweetheart  of    Sam   Westing’s 
              daughter (who  looked  like  Angela  Wexler). 
              Mrs.   Westing   broke   up   the   affair.    She 
              wanted  daughter  to  marry  somebody  else, 
              but Violet   Westing killed  herself  before the 
              wedding. Neither  parents of above are heirs.


“I  hear the new medicine  they’re trying   out on Chris  is doing 
some good,”  Sandy reported.  “But   the poor  kid  needs more 
help than  medicine.  He’s real  smart,  you  know. Chris  could 
have a real future, be a scientist or a professor, even; but it will 
take a pile  of  money, more  money  than his  folks  could  ever 
make, to put him through college with  a handicap like that.”
       “The parents interest me more,”  the judge  said. “Why  are 
they not heirs?”
       Sandy  had  some  thoughts  on  that,   too.  “Maybe   Sam 
Westing didn’t   want  to  embarrass George Theodorakis,  him 
being married and  all. Or  maybe Westing figured  he’d  be too 

148
busy with   his  coffee  shop  to  stay  in  the  game.  Or  maybe 
Westing blamed  him  for  his  daughter’s  death, figuring   they 
should have eloped.”
       “No,  if  Sam Westing blamed  Mr.  Theodorakis, he would 
have made  him  an  heir  in  this  miserable  game,”  the judge 
replied. “There  are too many maybes here, which is what Sam 
Westing planned. We must not allow ourselves to be distracted 
from   the  real   issue:  Which   heir   did   Sam  Westing   want 
punished?”
       “The person who hurt him  most?” Sandy guessed.
       “And  who would  that be?”
       “The person who caused his daughter’s death?”
       “Exactly,  Mr.   McSouthers. Sam  Westing plotted  against 
the person he held  responsible for  his daughter’s  suicide, the 
person  who   forced  Violet    Westing  to   marry   a   man  she 
loathed.”
       “Mrs.   Westing?   But   that’s  not   possible,   judge.   Mrs. 
Westing is not one of the heirs.”
       “I  think  she is, Mr.  McSouthers. The former  wife  of Sam 
Westing must be one of the heirs.  Mrs. Westing is  the answer, 
and whoever she is, she is the one we have to protect.”





21      ♦       The   Fourth    Bomb


The door to apartment 2C opened. Flora  Baumbach screamed, 
and Turtle  flung  herself on  the pile  of  money  they had  been 
counting.

149
       It was Theo,  not the thief.  “Can  I  borrow your  bike  for a 
few hours?  It’s  very  important.”  Theo  was not  a runner  like 
Doug, who was fuming  about his being  so late. He needed the 
bicycle to follow  Otis Amber,  right now.
       Turtle stared at him in stony silence.
       “I   didn’t   make  that  sign  in  the  elevator;   besides, you 
already kicked  me  for  it.  Please, Turtle.”   She still   wouldn’t 
answer, punk kid. “I  had a long  talk with  the police  today, but 
I refused to tell them who the bomber was.”
       “What’s  that supposed to mean?”
       What  does  she think   it   means? It   means that  he  and 
everybody else knows that Turtle  is the bomber. “Never  mind. 
Can I have your bike or not?”
       “Why  do you want it?”
       Theo ground his teeth. Take it  easy; anger won’t help  any 
more than blackmail did.  Try being  a good guy. “I saw Angela 
in the hospital today. She sends her regards.”
       “What’s  that supposed to mean?”
       “You let  me have that bike, Turtle Wexler, or—or  else!”
       Turtle did  not have to ask what  “or  else” meant: police—
bomber—Angela,  but  how  did  Theo  find   out? “Here!”    She 
threw the padlock  key across the room  and waited  for him  to 
rush out before she let go of the money.
       “He’s such a nice boy,” Flora  Baumbach remarked.
       “Sure,” Turtle  replied, dialing  the telephone number of the 
hospital. “Angela  Wexler, room 325.”
       “Room 325 is not  accepting any calls.”
       Turtle  hung  up  the  phone. If   Theo  knew, others  knew. 
Angela had set off  those fireworks  wanting  to get  caught, but 
it was different  now. Now she was confused, now she was just 

150
plain scared. They  could  force  a confession out  of  her in  no 
time, the  guilt   was right  there  staring  out  of  those big  blue 
eyes. Maybe   they’re  questioning   her  now.  “Baba,  I’m   not 
feeling so good; I think  I’ll  go home to bed.”


Weaving  through  rush  hour   traffic   on  Turtle’s   bike,  Theo 
trailed  the   bus  to  a   seamy  downtown   district   across  the 
railroad tracks  where Crow  and  Otis got  off.  Skid  Row.  The 
pair  wandered  through  the  dimly   lit,   littered,   and stinking 
street, bending over  grimy  bums  asleep in doorways,  raising 
them to their  unsteady feet, and leading the  ragtag procession 
into a decaying storefront.  Paint was peeling  off the letters  on 
the window: Good Salvation  Soup Kitchen.
       A drunken  wreck of  a man lurched  into  Theo, who  put a 
quarter into  the  filthy   outstretched  hand, more  out  of  fright 
than charity.
       Snatches of hymn-singing   drifted  toward  him as the  last 
of the stragglers staggered through the door. Theo  crossed the 
narrow street  and pressed his  nose against the  steamy soup-
kitchen  window.   Rows  of   wretched  souls  sat  hunched  on 
wooden benches. Crow  stood  before  them in  her  neat black 
dress, her hands raised toward  the crumbling  ceiling.  Behind 
her Otis Amber stirred a boiling  mess in a big iron pot.
       Theo pedaled  back  to Sunset Towers  at  a furious   pace. 
Whatever brought Crow  and Otis Amber to these lower depths 
was none  of  his  business. He  hated himself  for   spying.  He 
hated Sam Westing and  his dirty   money and  his dirty  game. 
Theo felt as dirty as the derelicts he spied on. Dirtier.


                                                 *

151
The judge thought they had finished with  the heirs.
       “Not  quite,” the doorman said.


              ♦  McSOUTHERS


                    ALEXANDER    McSOUTHERS.    Called 
              Sandy. Age: 65. Born:  Edinburgh,  Scotland. 
              Immigrated  to Wisconsin,  age 3. Education: 
              eighth   grade.   Jobs:   mill    worker,    union 
              organizer,  prizefighter,   doorman.   Married, 
              six children,  two grandchildren.
                    Westing connection:  Worked in  Westing 
              Paper plant 20 years. Fired  by Sam Westing 
              himself  for  trying   to organize  the  workers. 
              No pension.


Sandy turned to a blank page, pushed his taped glasses up the 
broken bridge of his nose and looked at the judge. “Name?”
       It   had  not  seemed  sporting   to  investigate   one’s  own 
partner, but McSouthers  was right,  this  was a Westing  game. 
Of course, she had kept  some facts from  him  about the other 
heirs, but only because she did not trust his blabbering.
       “Josie-Jo Ford, with  a hyphen between Josie and Jo.”
       “Age?”
       “Forty-two.   Education: Columbia;   law degree, Harvard.” 
The judge waited  for  the doorman to  enter the information  in 
his slow, cramped lettering.  He  had to be meticulous  in order 
to prove  he was better than  his eighth-grade education.  It’s  a 
pity he had not gone further, he was quite a clever man.

152
       “Jobs?”
       “Assistant   district   attorney.  Judge:  family    court,   state 
supreme court,  appellate division.  Appellate   has two  Ps and 
two Ls. Never married, no children.”
       “Westing connection?”
       The  judge paused,  then spoke  so rapidly   Sandy  had to 
stop taking  notes. “My   mother  was a servant  in the  Westing 
household, my   father  worked  for   the  railroad  and  was  the 
gardener on his days off.”
       “You mean you lived  in  the Westing house?” Sandy asked 
with obvious surprise. “You  knew the Westings?”
       “I   barely  saw   Mrs.  Westing.  Violet   was   a  few  years 
younger than I,  doll-like  and delicate.  She was not allowed  to 
play with   other children.  Especially   the skinny,  long-legged, 
black daughter of the servants.”
       “Gee, you  must  have been lonely,  judge, having  nobody 
to play with.”
       “I  played with  Sam Westing—chess. Hour after hour I  sat 
staring down  at that  chessboard. He lectured  me, he insulted 
me, and he won every  game.” The  judge thought  of their  last 
game: She had been so excited about taking his queen, only to 
have the master checkmate her in the next move. Sam Westing 
had deliberately sacrificed  his queen and she had fallen for  it. 
“Stupid  child,  you  can’t  have  a brain  in  that  frizzy   head to 
make a move  like  that.”   Those were  the last  words  he ever 
said to her.
       The judge continued: “I  was sent to boarding school when 
I  was  twelve.  My   parents visited   me  at  school  when  they 
could, but I never set foot in  the Westing house again, not until 
two weeks ago.”

153
       “Your  folks  must  have really  worked  hard,”  Sandy said. 
“An  education like that costs a fortune.”
       “Sam Westing  paid for  my  education. He  saw that I  was 
accepted into the best schools, probably  arranged for my  first 
job, perhaps more, I don’t know.”
       “That’s  the  first   decent thing   I’ve   heard about  the  old 
man.”
       “Hardly  decent, Mr. McSouthers.  It was to Sam Westing’s 
advantage to have a judge in his  debt. Needless to say, I have 
excused myself   from   every  case  remotely  connected  with 
Westing affairs.”
       “You’re   awfully   hard  on  yourself,  judge.  And  on  him. 
Maybe Westing paid for your  education ’cause you were smart 
and needy, and you did all the rest by yourself.”
       “This  is getting  us nowhere,  Mr. McSouthers.  Just write: 
Westing  connection:  Education   financed  by   Sam  Westing. 
Debt never repaid.”


Theo, upset over his Skid Row snooping, took out his  anger on 
the UP button,  poking  it,  jabbing  it,  until  the elevator  finally 
made its way down to the lobby. Slowly  the door slid open. He 
stared down  at  the  sparking,  sputtering  arsenal,  yelled  and 
belly-flopped   to  the  carpet  as  rockets  whizzed   out  of  the 
elevator, inches  above  his  head.  Boom!  Boom!   A  blinding 
flash  of  white  fire   streaked through  the  lobby,  through  the 
open entrance door, and burst into  a chrysanthemum  of color 
in the night sky. Then the elevator door closed.
       The  bomber   had  made  one  mistake.   The  last   rocket 
blasted  off  when   the  elevator  returned   to  the  third   floor. 
Boom!

154
       By the time  the bomb squad reached the scene (by way of 
the stairs), the smoke had cleared, but the  young girl  was still 
huddled on the hallway  floor,  tears streaming down her turtle-
like face.
       “For   heaven’s sake,  say  something,”   her  mother  said. 
“Tell me where it  hurts.”
       The pain was  too great to  be put into  words. Five  inches 
of Turtle’s braid were badly  singed.
       Grace Wexler   attacked  the  policeman.  “Nothing    but  a 
childish   prank,  you   said.  Some   childish   prank;   both  my 
children cruelly   injured,  almost killed.   Maybe now  you’ll   do 
something, now that it’s too late.”
       Unshaken by  the mother’s  anger, the  policeman held  up 
the sign that had been taped to the elevator wall:


                     THE BOMBER  STRIKES AGAIN!!!


On the  reverse side was a  handwritten  composition:  “How   I 
Spent My Summer Vacation” by  Turtle Wexler.
       Grace grabbed  the theme  and shook  it  at  her  daughter, 
who was being rocked in  Flora Baumbach’s arms. “Somebody 
stole this  from   you,  didn’t   they, Turtle?  You  couldn’t   have 
done such  an awful   thing,  not  to  Angela,  not  to  your  own 
sister, could you, Turtle? Could you?”
       “I  want to see a lawyer,” Turtle replied.


The bomb  squad, faced  with  six  hours’  overtime  filling    out 
forms  and delivering   the  delinquent  to  a  juvenile  detention 
facility,  decided  it  was  best  for  all  concerned  to  escort the 

155
prisoner to apartment 4D and place her in the custody of Judge 
Ford.
       Judge Ford   put  on  her  black   robe  and  seated herself 
behind the  desk. Before  her  stood a  downcast child  looking 
very sad and  very sorry.  Not  at all  like  the  Turtle  she knew. 
“You surprise me, Turtle Wexler.  I thought you  were too smart 
to commit such a dangerous, destructive, and stupid act.”
       “Yes ma’am.”
       “Why  did you  do it,  Turtle? To hurt someone, to get even 
with someone?”
       “No  ma’am.”
       Of course not. Turtle kicked  shins, she was not the type to 
bottle up her anger. “You do understand that a child  would not 
receive as harsh a penalty as an adult would? That there would 
be no permanent criminal record?”
       “Yes ma’am. I  mean, no ma’am.”
       She  was   protecting    someone.  She   had  set   off    the 
fireworks  in   the  elevator  to  divert   suspicion  from  the  real 
bomber. But who was the real bomber? Nothing to  do but drag 
it out of  her, name by name, starting with the least likely.  “Are 
you protecting Angela?”
       “No!”
       The judge was astounded by the excited response. Angela 
could not be the bomber, not that sweet, pretty thing. Thing? Is 
that how  she  regarded that  young  woman,  as a  thing?  And 
what had  she ever  said to  her  except ‘I   hear you’re  getting 
married,  Angela’   or  ‘How    pretty   you  look,   Angela.’   Had 
anyone asked about her ideas,  her hopes, her plans? If   I had 
been treated like  that I’d   have used dynamite,  not fireworks; 
no, I would  have just walked  out and kept right  on going.  But 

156
Angela  was  different.  “What   a  senseless thing  to  do,”   the 
judge said aloud.
       “Yes ma’am.”  Turtle stared down at the carpet, wondering 
if she had given Angela away.
       Judge Ford rose and placed  an arm around Turtle’s  bony 
shoulders. She had never wished for a sister until this moment. 
“Turtle,  will  you  give  me your word  that  you will   never play 
with fireworks  again?”
       “Yes ma’am.”
       “While  we’re  at it, do you have anything else to confess?”
       “Yes  ma’am.  I  was in  the  Westing  house the night  Mr. 
Westing died.”
       “Good lord,  child, sit  down and tell me.”
       Turtle began with  the  purple-waves story,  went on to  the 
whisperings,  the  bedded-down   corpse, the   dropped  peanut 
butter and jelly  sandwiches and her mother’s cross, and ended 
with the twenty-four  dollars she had won.
       “Did  either you or Doug  Hoo call the police?”
       “No  ma’am,  we  were  too scared,  we just  ran.  Is  that a 
crime?”
       The  judge  said  it  was  a criminal   offense  to  conceal  a 
murder.
       “But  Mr.  Westing  didn’t  look   murdered,”  Turtle  argued. 
“He looked  asleep, like  he did in  the coffin.  He  looked like  a 
wax dummy.”
       “A  wax dummy?”
       Now Turtle  was the one surprised by the excited response. 
The judge thinks  it might  have been a real wax  dummy, not a 
corpse at all. Then what happened to Sam Westing?

157
       The judge regained her composure. “Not  reporting  a dead 
body is  a violation   of  the health  code, but  I wouldn’t   worry 
about it. Is there anything else, Turtle?”
       “Yes ma’am,”  Turtle  replied, glancing  at the portable  bar. 
“Could I  have a little bourbon.”
       “What?”
       “Just a little.  On a piece of cotton  to put in  my cavity. My 
tooth hurts something awful.”
       Relieved at not  having a juvenile  alcoholic  on  her hands, 
Judge Ford prepared the home remedy. “Is  that better? Good. 
You may go home now.”
       Home  meant going  to  Baba.  Baba loved   her no  matter 
what, and Turtle  didn’t  care if  the others thought  she was the 
bomber—except Sandy. He was walking toward her right  now, 
walking    his   bouncy    walk,    but   not   smiling.     Sandy   is 
disappointed  in  her,  he  thinks  she  hurt  her  own  sister,  he 
doesn’t want to be friends anymore.
       “How’s  my girl?”   Sandy said, cupping his hand under her 
chin and lifting  her head. “Whew!  Hitting  the bottle again?”
       “It’s  just bourbon on cotton for  my toothache.”
       “Yeah, I’ve  heard that one before.”
       “Honest Saaan-eee.” Turtle was pointing  inside  her wide-
open mouth.
       The doorman peered in. “Wow, that’s some cavity, it  looks 
like  the Grand  Canyon.  Tomorrow  morning  you’re   going to 
see my dentist—no back talk. He’s  very gentle, you won’t  feel 
a thing. Promise you’ll  go?”
       Turtle nodded.

158
       Sandy smiled.  “Good,  then down  to business. My  wife’s 
having a  birthday  tomorrow.  I  thought one  of your  gorgeous 
striped candles would make a swell present.”
       “There’s  only  one  candle  left,”   Turtle  replied.  “It’s   the 
best of the lot. Six super colors. I  spent a lot of time making  it; 
that’s why I wouldn’t   part with it.  But since it’s  for your wife’s 
birthday, Sandy, I’ll  let you  have it for  only five  dollars. And  I 
won’t charge you sales tax.”


“Try  not to stick  your fanny  out so far,”  Angela  said from her 
chair. Now   that  Sydelle  Pulaski  depended on  crutches,  she 
lurched clumsily, hobbled by  old habits.
       “Just    keep    reading     those    clues.”    The     secretary 
straightened, shoulders back, stomach in, until her next step.
       With their  telephone switched off  and Contagious Disease 
added to the No Visitors sign, the bomb  victims had privacy  at 
last. Sydelle had twice read the entire will  aloud. Now  Angela, 
her hands unbandaged, was reshuffling the collected clues.


              GRAINS     SPACIOUS     GRACE     GOOD     HOOD
      WITH     BEAUTIFUL     MAJESTIES     FROM     THY     PURPLE
                           WAVES     ON(NO)     MOUNTAIN


“Again,”   Sydelle   ordered.  “Change  them  around  and  read 
either  the   word   on   or   the   word   no;   both   together  are 
confusing.”


               GOOD     SPACIOUS     GRAINS     WITH     GRACE
           ON     THY     PURPLE     MOUNTAIN     HOOD     WAVES
                         FROM     MAJESTIES     BEAUTIFUL

159
“Shh!”  Someone was  at the door. Angela  picked  up the  note 
that was slipped underneath.


              My  darling  Angela:  I guess the sign  on the 
              door   means  I   should   stay  away,   too.  I 
              understand.  We  both   need  time  to   think 
              things over. I’ll  wait.  I love you—Denton


“What  does  it  say, what  does it   say?”  Sydelle  pressed, but 
Angela read only the postscript aloud:


              P.S. You have another admirer. Chris  wants 
              to  give  you   and  Ms.  Pulaski   one  of  our 
              clues.  (Flora  Baumbach  has  seen it,  too.) 
              The word is plain.


“Like  an airplane?” Sydelle asked.
       “No,  plain, like  ordinary. Like  the wide open plains.”
       “Plains, grains. Quick,  Angela, read the clues again.”


                 GOOD     HOOD     FROM     SPACIOUS     PLAIN
           GRAINS     ON     WITH     WITH     BEAUTIFUL     WAVES
            GRACE     THY     PURPLE     MOUNTAIN     MAJESTIES


       “That’s  it,  Angela.  We got  it,  we  got  it!”   Sydelle  could 
barely control her excitement. “The  will  said, Sing in  praise of 
this generous land.  The  will   said, May  God  thy  gold  refine. 
America,   Angela,    America!    Purple    mountain    majesties, 
Angela. Whoopee!”

160
       Fortunately Sydelle Pulaski  was close to the bed when she 
threw her crutches in the air.





22      ♦       Losers,    Winners


Saturday morning a new message was posted in the elevator:


              I,    TURTLE     WEXLER,    CONFESS    TO 
              THOSE  FOUR   BOMBS.   I’M   SORRY,  IT 
              WAS  A  DUMB    THING   TO   DO   AND  I 
              WON’T  DO   IT  AGAIN.  BUT!   I  AM  NOT 
              THE      BURGLAR       AND      I       NEVER 
              MURDERED  ANYBODY, EVER.
                                           YOUR FRIEND,  TURTLE


              P.S. TO MAKE  UP  FOR SCARING YOU,  I 
              WILL  TREAT  EVERYBODY HERE  TO  AN 
              EXQUISITE  CHINESE   CUISINE  DINNER 
              WHEN I  WIN THE INHERITANCE.


“Poor Grace,”  Mr. Hoo  said. “One  daughter almost killed,  the 
other one a  bomber. Smart-aleck  kid,  first  she blows  up  my 
kitchen, then she advertises my cuisine. Win  the inheritance—
ha! Maybe I’m  lucky  my son is a dumb jock.”
       “Boom,”   Madame  Hoo   said  happily.  She  knew  where 
they were going.  Always  on the day  when Doug  ate six  eggs 
for breakfast, he ran around and around a big track and people 

161
clapped and gave him  a shiny  medal.  Doug was  so proud  of 
his medals. She would never take them, not even the gold one, 
not even if   it  took  her two  more  years to pay  to  go back  to 
China.  No,  she  would  never  take  Doug’s  medals,  and  she 
would  never sell  that  wonderful   clock  with  the  mouse who 
wears gloves and points to the time.


“You  must be  out of  your  mind,  Jake Wexler.  Go to  a track 
meet with  all those people pointing  at me,  snickering, saying: 
‘Look,  there she is, the mother of Cain and Abel.’ I’m  not even 
sure I have  the nerve to  show  my face  at the  Westing house 
tonight.”
       “Come on, Grace, it’ll   do you good.”  The podiatrist  urged 
his reluctant  wife   down  the  third  floor   hall.  “Stop  thinking 
about yourself for a change, think how  poor Turtle must feel.”
       “Don’t  ever mention that  child to me again, not after  what 
she did to Angela.  I never told  you this,  Jake, but I’ve  always 
had a sinking  sensation that the hospital  mixed  up the babies 
when Turtle was born.”
       “It’s  no wonder she wanted to blow us all up.”
       Grace’s despair  exploded in  anger. “Oh,   I  get it,  you’re 
putting the blame  on me. If  you  had given her  a good talking 
to about  kicking   people  when  I  asked, she  might  not  have 
ended up a common criminal.”
       “Whatever  became of  that  fun-loving  woman  I  married, 
what was her name—Gracie Windkloppel?”
       Grace  quickly    looked   around   to   see  if   anyone  had 
overheard that ugly name, but they were in  the elevator, alone. 
“Oh, I  know  what people  think,”  she complained.  “Poor  Jake 
Wexler, good  guy, everybody’s  friend,  married  to that  uppity 

162
would-be  decorator.  Well,   Angela’s   not  going   to   have  to 
scrimp and  save to make  ends meet; she’s  going  to marry  a 
real doctor. I’ll  see to that.”
       “Sure  you  will,    Grace,  you’ll   see  that Angela   doesn’t 
marry  a  loser  like   her  father.”  A   real  doctor,  she  says. A 
podiatrist is  a “real”   doctor—well,  it  is  these days, but when 
he went to  school it  was different.  He could  have gone back, 
taken more courses, but he was married by then, a father—oh, 
who’s  he kidding,   Gracie’s  right,   he is  a  loser. Next   she’ll 
mention having  to  give up  her family   because she married a 
Jew—no, she never  brings  that up,  Grace with  all  her  faults 
would never do that.
       The elevator  door  opened to  the lobby.  Grace  turned to 
her  silent,  sad-eyed  husband, the   loser.  “Oh,  Jake,  what’s 
happening to  us?  What’s  happening  to  me? Maybe   they’re 
right, maybe I’m  not a nice person.”
       Jake  pressed the   CLOSE  DOOR  button  and   took  his 
sobbing wife  into his  arms. “It’s  all right,  Gracie, we’re  going 
home.”
       The doors opened on the second floor. “Mom!   What’s the 
matter with  her, daddy, she’s crying?  Gee, mom, I’m   sorry, it 
was just a few  fireworks.”   If  her  mother ever found  out  who 
the real bomber was, she’d really go to pieces.
       Turtle  looked even  more like  a turtle  today  with  her sad 
little face peering out  of the kerchief tied  under her small chin. 
“Let go  of the door, Turtle,”  Jake said. “And  have a good time 
at the track meet. You, too, Mrs. Baumbach.”
       Track meet? They weren’t going  to a track meet. And they 
sure were not going to have a good time.

163
       Grace was still  sobbing  on Jake’s shoulder  as he led her 
into their apartment.
       “Mother,  what’s the matter? What’s wrong with  her, dad?”
       “Nothing,  Angela,  your  mother’s  just having  a good cry. 
Why don’t  you and Ms. Pulaski leave us alone for a while.”
       “Come, Angela,”   Sydelle  said, prodding  her with  the  tip 
of one of her mismatched crutches. “We have some painting to 
do.”
       Angela looked  back at the embracing  couple; her father’s 
face was buried  in  her  weeping  mother’s  tousled hair.  They 
had not asked how  she got home  from  the hospital  (by taxi), 
they had not asked if she was still in pain  (not much), they had 
not  even  peeked under   the  bandage to  see  if   a  scar  was 
forming  on  her cheek  (there was).  Angela  was on  her  own. 
Well, that’s  what she wanted,  wasn’t  it? Yes, yes it  was!  She 
uttered a short laugh,  and her hand flew  up to  the pain in  her 
face.
       “Do  I look funny  or something?”
       “No,  I wasn’t  laughing at you,  Sydelle, I’d  never laugh  at 
you. It’s just that suddenly everything  seemed all right.”
       “It’s  all right,  all  right,”  her partner replied,  unlocking the 
four locks  on  her apartment door.  “Tonight’s  the  night we’re 
going to win it  all.”
       Were they?  The will   said  look  for  a  name. They  had a 
song, not a name.
       “‘O  beautiful  for  spacious skies,’”  Sydelle began to  sing, 
“‘For  purple waves of grain.’”
       “Not  purple,”  Angela  corrected  her, “amber.  ‘For  amber 
waves of grain.’”
       Amber!

164
                                                 *


Judge Ford paced the floor. Tonight Sam Westing would wreak 
his revenge unless she could  prevent it.  If   she was right,  the 
person in danger was  the former  Mrs.  Westing. And  if  Turtle 
was right  about the wax  dummy, Sam Westing  himself  might 
be there to watch the fun.
       There was a knock  on her door.  The judge was surprised 
to see Denton  Deere, even more  surprised when  he wheeled 
Chris   Theodorakis    into    her    apartment.    “Hello,     judge. 
Everybody  else in  the building  is  going  to  the track  meet, it 
seems. I   passed Sandy  on  the   way  out   and  he  said  you 
wouldn’t  mind having  Chris for  part of  the afternoon. I’ve  got 
to get back to the hospital.”
       “Hello,   Judge  F-Ford.”   Chris   held  out   a  steady hand 
which the judge shook.
       “You’re  looking  well, Chris.”
       “The m-medicine  helped a lot.”
       “It’s  a big step forward,”  the intern  said. Wrong word,  the 
kid may never  leave that wheelchair. “An  even more  effective 
medication  is  now  in  the developmental  stage.”  That  really 
sounded pompous.  “Well,   so  long,  Chris.  See  you  tonight. 
Thanks, judge.”
       “He knows  lots of b-big  words,” Chris  said.
       “Yes,  he certainly  does,”  Judge Ford  replied.  What  was 
she going to do with  this  boy here? She had so much to think 
about, so much to plan.
       “You c-can work,  I’ll   birdwatch,”  Chris  offered, wheeling 
to the window, his binoculars banging  against his thin chest.

165
       “Good  idea.” The  judge returned to  her desk to study the 
newspaper clippings.  Mrs.  Westing:  a tall,   thin  woman.  She 
may no longer be thin,  but she would  still  be tall. About  sixty 
years old. If  Sam Westing’s former  wife  was one of  the heirs, 
she had to be Crow.
       “Look!”   Chris  shouted, startling  the  judge into  dropping 
her files   to  the  floor.   She  rushed to   his  side,  thinking   he 
needed help. “Look up there, judge. Isn’t  it b-beautiful?”
       High in  the fall  sky a V  of geese was flying  south. Yes, it 
was a beautiful sight. “Those are geese,” the judge explained.
       “C-Canada goose (Branta c-canadensis),”  Chris replied.
       The  judge   was  impressed,  but   she  had  work   to   do. 
Stooping to  gather the dropped clippings,  she was confronted 
by the face  of  Sam Westing. The photograph  had been taken 
fifteen years ago. Those piercing eyes, the Vandyke beard, that 
short beaked  nose (like   a turtle’s).   The  wax  dummy  in  the 
coffin  had been molded in  the former  image  of Sam Westing 
as he had looked fifteen years ago—not as he looked now. She 
searched the   folder.   No   recent   photographs,  no   hospital 
records, no death certificate,  just the  accident report from  the 
state highway police:  Dr.  Sidney Sikes suffered  a crushed leg 
and  Samuel W.   Westing  had  severe  facial  injuries.   Facial 
injuries! It  was the face that had disappeared fifteen years ago, 
not the man. Westing had a different face, a face remodeled by 
plastic surgery. A different face and a different name.
       Now what?  Her gaze rested on her charge at the window. 
Feeling  her eyes,  Chris  turned  around. The  boy  has  a nice 
smile.

166
“I  hope  you  are better  at  filling   cavities   than making  false 
teeth,” Turtle said, gripping  the arms of the dentist’s chair. In  a 
glass cabinet against the wall three rows of dentures grinned at 
her with crooked teeth, overlapping teeth, notched teeth.
       “Those faults  are what makes the dentures look real,”  the 
dentist  explained.  “Nothing   in   nature  is  quite  perfect,  you 
know. Now, open your mouth wide.  Wider.”
       “Ow!”   Turtle screamed before the probe touched tooth.
       “Just relax, young lady, I’ll   tell you when  to say ‘Ow!’”
       Turtle   tried  to   think   about   other  things.   False  teeth, 
buckteeth—that rotten  bucktoothed  Barney Northrup  stopped 
by this morning  to tell  the Wexlers they would  have to pay for 
all  the  damage  done by   the  bombs.  Barney  Northrup   had 
called   her   parents   “irresponsible”     and   had    called   her 
something worse, much  worse. He sure was surprised  by that 
kick; it  was her hardest one ever.
       “Now  you can say ‘Ow!’”   The dentist unclipped the towel 
from her shoulder.
       Turtle  passed her tongue over  the drilled   tooth. She had 
not  felt  a  thing,  but  the  real  pain  was  yet  to  come.  Flora 
Baumbach was  taking  her  to  the  beauty parlor  to  have  her 
singed hair cut off.


College teams  from  five  states competed  in  the  first  indoor 
track meet of  the season, but the big  event, the mile  run, was 
won by a high-school senior.
       “That’s  my  boy, that’s my  Doug,”  Mr.  Hoo  shouted, one 
voice among thousands cheering the  youngster on his  victory 
lap.

167
       Cameras flashed as  Doug posed,  smiling  broadly,  index 
fingers  high  in   the  air.  “I   owe  it  all   to  my  dad,”   he told 
reporters, and  cameras flashed again  as Doug  flung   an arm 
around the proud Mr.  Hoo.  Just wait until  the  next Olympics, 
the inventor   thought.  With   Doug’s  feet  and  my  innersoles, 
he’ll run  them all to the ground.
       Later    that    evening     Madame    Hoo,    chattering     in 
unintelligible  Chinese,  made it  known  that she wanted  Doug 
to wear his prize  to the Westing house. Standing on tiptoe  she 
placed the ribbon over his  bent head and patted the shiny gold 
medal in place on his chest. “Good boy,” she said in English.


A saddened Sandy returned to  apartment 4D. “Hi,   Chris.  Did 
you talk to him,  judge?”
       “Talk to  whom?”
       “Barney  Northrup. He was waiting  at the front  door when 
I got back  from the track  meet, mad as a wet cat. Said he had 
lots of complaints about me—never being  on duty, drinking  on 
the job—lies like  that. He fired  me right on the spot. I told  him 
you wanted to see him, figuring  you might  put in  a good word 
so he’d let me stay on.”
       “No,   Mr.   McSouthers,   I’m   sorry,  but   I   haven’t   seen 
Barney  Northrup    since  I   rented   this   apartment.”   Barney 
Northrup,  was that  Westing’s disguise:  false  buckteeth, slick 
black wig, pasted-on moustache?”
       “Well,  it’s  not the first  time I  got fired  for  no cause.” The 
dejected doorman  blew  his  nose loudly   in  a  Westing  Man-
Sized Hankie. “Hey  Chris, bet you  don’t know  the Latin name 
of the red-headed woodpecker.”

168
       That  was   a  hard  one.  Chris   had  to   say  Melanerpes 
erythrocephalus very slowly.
       “Some smart kid,  hey, judge? Chris,  the judge and I  have 
a little business to discuss. Excuse us for a minute.”
       Judge Ford joined the doorman in  the kitchen. “Our  game 
plan is this, Mr. McSouthers. We give  no answer. No answer at 
all. Our duty is to  protect Westing’s ex-wife.”
       “Crow?”  Sandy guessed.
       “That’s right.”
       “There’s something else that’s been bothering me, judge. I 
know  it   sounds crazy,  but,   well,   I  found   out  Otis  Amber 
doesn’t live in  the grocer’s basement, and he’s not as dumb as 
he pretends. He’s a snoop and a troublemaker and I don’t think 
he is who he says he is?”
       “And  who do you think  Otis Amber is?”  the judge asked.
       “Sam Westing!”
       Judge Ford leaned against the  sink  and pressed her head 
against the cabinet. If Sandy was correct,  she had played right 
into the man’s hands—Sam Westing’s hands.


“C’mon  Crow,  you always  like  to get  there early to  open the 
door for people.”
       Crow had stopped in  the middle of  the steep road to stare 
up  at  the  Westing   house.  “I’ve    got  a  funny   feeling   that 
something evil   is  waiting  for   me  up there,  Otis.  It’s   a bad 
house, full of misery  and sin. He’s still there, you know.”
       “Sam Westing  is dead and buried.  Come  on, if  we  don’t 
go we gotta give  the money  back, and we already  spent it on 
the soup kitchen.”

169
       “I  feel  his  presence, Otis.  He’s  looking  for   a murderer, 
Violet’s murderer.”
       “Stop scaring  yourself with  crazy notions,  you sound like 
you’re on the bottle again.”
       Crow strode ahead.
       “I  didn’t  mean  that, Crow,  honest. Look  up there  at that 
moon. Isn’t it  romantic?”
       “Somebody’s in  real danger, Otis, and I think it’s  me.”





23      ♦       Strange    Answers


Lawyer  Plum   was  there  and  one pair   of  heirs  when   Otis 
Amber  danced into  the  game room.  “He-he-he,   the Turtle’s 
lost its tail, I  see.”
       Turtle slumped low  in  her chair. Flora Baumbach  thought 
the short,  sleek  haircut  was  adorable, especially  the  way  it 
swept forward  over her  little  chin,  but Turtle  did  not want  to 
look adorable. She wanted to look mean.
       The dressmaker  fumbled  past the  wad of  money  in  her 
handbag. “Here, Alice, I  thought you might like  to see this.”
       Turtle  glanced  at the  old  snapshot.  It’s  Baba,  all  right, 
except younger. Same dumb smile. Suddenly she sat upright.
       “That’s   my  daughter,  Rosalie,”   Flora   Baumbach  said. 
“She must have been nine or ten when that picture was taken.”
       Rosalie was squat and square and squinty, her  protruding 
tongue was  too large  for  her  mouth,  her head  lolled  to  one 
side. “I   think   I   would  have  liked   her,  Baba,”  Turtle   said. 

170
“Rosalie  looks  like  she was  a very  happy  person. She must 
have been nice to have around.”
       Thump-thump,  thump-thump.   “Here  come  the victims,” 
Sydelle Pulaski announced.
       Angela  greeted her  sister  with  a  wave  of  her  crimson-
streaked,  healing  hand.   Turtle   had  convinced   her  not   to 
confess: It  would  mean a criminal   record, it  would  kill   their 
mother, and no  one  would  believe  her anyhow.  “I  like   your 
haircut.”
       “Thanks,”   Turtle  replied.  Now   Angela  had  to  love  her 
forever.
       Most of  the  heirs had to  comment on Turtle’s  hair.  “You 
look like  a real  businesswoman,” Sandy said. “Well,   that’s an 
improvement,”  Denton  Deere said.  “You  look  n-nice,”  Chris 
said. Only Theo, bent over the chessboard, said nothing. White 
had moved the king’s bishop  since the last meeting. It  was his 
move.
       At  last  the  stares  turned  from  Turtle’s   hair  to  a  more 
surprising sight.  Judge Ford strode in as regally  as an African 
princess, her  noble head  swathed in  a  turban,  her tall   body 
draped in  yards  of  handprinted cloth.   She slipped  a note  to 
Denton Deere then  sailed to  her place  at table  four.  Goggle-
eyed Otis  Amber  was  speechless; they  all  were,  except for 
Sandy. “Gee, that’s a nifty   outfit,  judge. Is  that what  you call 
ethnic?”
       The judge did not reply.
       Applaud, the local  hero has arrived! Doug raised his arms, 
pointing his index  fingers to the flaking  gilt  ceiling  in the I’m-
number-one  sign,  and   acknowledged  the   clapping  with    a 
victory lap around the room.

171
       “Here come  the Wexlers,”  Mr. Hoo  remarked, seating his 
puzzled wife at table one.
       Turtle exchanged an anxious glance with Angela.  The last 
time they  saw their mother  she was crying  her head off;  now 
the  tears  were  gone   from   her  bleary   eyes,  but  she  was 
staggering, giggling, her hair was a mess.
       “Sorry  we’re   late,”  Jake  apologized.  “We  lost  track   of 
time.” They  had been clinking wineglasses in a small cafe (the 
cafe they  used to  go  to  before they  were  married),  toasting 
good times.  They  had had  many good  times  together, many 
good memories shared, it seems—three big wine bottles full.
       Happy Grace waved at the heirs. She felt so wonderful,  so 
overflowing  with  love for Jake, for everybody.
       “Hi,  mom,”  Turtle called.
       Grace blinked at a young short-haired girl.  “Who’s  that?”
       Jake greeted his  partner  with  a  “How   are you  this  fine 
day?”
       “Doug  win,”  replied Madame Hoo.
       Having  opened the door  to  the last  of  the heirs,  a tense 
and troubled  Crow  took her  seat next to  Otis Amber.  Ghost-
threatened, she waited for the unseen.
       “Hey,  lawyer,  can we open  these?” Otis Amber  shouted, 
waving an envelope. A similar envelope lay  on each table.
       His forehead  creased with uncertainty,  Ed Plum  fumbled 
through his papers. “I guess so” was his opinion.
       Cheers erupted as the heirs withdrew the checks.
       Again  Judge Ford  signed her  name to the  ten-thousand-
dollar check and handed it to the doorman. “Here  you are, Mr. 
McSouthers, this  should tide  you  over until  you  find  another 
job.”

172
       Sandy’s   heartfelt    thanks   were    muffled    by   Sydelle 
Pulaski’s loud “Shhhh!”
       “Shhhhhhhh!”  Grace Wexler  mimicked,  then she dropped 
her head into her  crossed arms on the table and fell   asleep to 
the sound of the lawyer’s throat-clearing  coughs.


              TWELFTH      ♦      Welcome  again    to   the 
              Westing house. By now you have received a 
              second  check   for   ten   thousand   dollars. 
              Before the  day is  done you  may  have won 
              more, much more.
                    Table by table,  each pair  will   be called 
              to  give   one,  and  only   one,  answer.  The 
              lawyer  will  record your  response in case of 
              a dispute.  He does not  know the  answer. It 
              is up to you.


              1    ♦ MADAME    SUN LIN HOO, cook
                         JAKE WEXLER, bookie


Bookie? He  really must  have been distracted when  he signed 
that receipt. Jake studied the five clues on the table:


                      OF     AMERICA     AND     GOD     ABOVE


Even  knowing   his  wife’s   clues  didn’t    help;  he’d   have  to 
gamble on a long shot. “Say something,” he said to his partner.
       “Boom!”   said Madame Hoo.
       Ed Plum wrote Table One: Boom.

173
              2    ♦ FLORA   BAUMBACH, dressmaker
                         TURTLE WEXLER, financier


Turtle read a prepared statement: “In  spite  of the fact  that the 
stock market  dropped thirty  points  since we  received our ten 
thousand dollars, we have increased our capital to $11,587.50, 
an appreciation of twenty-seven  point eight  percent calculated 
on an annual basis.”
       Flora Baumbach  slapped a wad  of bills   on the table  and 
two clinking  quarters. “In  cash,” she said.
       Ed Plum asked them to repeat their answer.
       “Table two’s  answer is $11,587.50.”
       Sandy applauded. Turtle took a bow.


              3    ♦ CHRISTOS  THEODORAKIS,
                               ornithologist
                         DENTON DEERE, intern


Ornithologist? His  brother must have given him that fancy  title 
when he  filled   in  the  receipt.  Maybe  he  would  become  an 
ornithologist  someday.  He  was a  lucky   person, getting  that 
medicine and all. He didn’t  want to  accuse anybody, not Judge 
Ford (apartment  4D),  not Otis  (grain)  Amber,  not the  limper 
(just  about  everybody  limped   at  one time   or  other—today 
Sandy was limping).   “I  think  Mr.  Westing is  a g-good  man,” 
Chris  said  aloud.  “I   think  his  last  wish   was to   do  g-good 
deeds. He g-gave me  a p-partner who  helped me.  He g-gave 
everybody the p-perfect p-partner to m-make friends.”
       “What  is table three’s answer?” the lawyer asked.

174
       Denton Deere replied. “Our  answer is:  Mr. Westing was a 
good man.”


              4    ♦ J.   J. FORD, judge
                         ALEXANDER MCSOUTHERS, fired


“We  don’t  have  an  answer,”  the  ex-doorman  responded  as 
planned.
       The judge looked at table three. Denton Deere, her note in 
his hand, shook his head which meant: No, Otis Amber has not 
had plastic surgery done on his face. The judge turned to  table 
six. Otis  Amber  could not  be Sam Westing  (she was right  to 
have  trusted  him).    But   Crow   is  expecting   something   to 
happen. Crow knows  she is the  answer, she knows she is the 
one.


              5    ♦ GRACIE   WINDKLOPPEL WEXLER, 
                               restaurateur
                         JAMES HOO, inventor


Grace raised her head. “Did someone say Windkloppel?”
       “Never  mind   Windkloppel,   it’s  our  turn,”   Hoo  snarled. 
The lawyer got names and positions all fouled  up, and I’ve got 
a drunk for a partner. He prodded Grace to her feet.
       Faces  were   swirling,    the  floor    was  swaying.    Grace 
grabbed the edge of the floating table and gave her answer in a 
thick,  slurred voice.  “The   newly  decorated restaurant, Hoo’s 
On First,  the eatery of  athletes, will   hold its  grand reopening 

175
on Sunday. Specialty  of   the day:  fruited  sea bass on  purple 
waves.”
       Grace sat  down  where  the chair  wasn’t.   Turtle  gasped, 
Angela looked  away, the heirs tittered as Jake helped his wife 
up from the floor.
       “What  is table five’s answer, please,” the lawyer pressed.
       “Ed Plum,”  said Mr. Hoo.
       “Yes, sir?”
       “That’s our  answer: Ed Plum.”
       “Oh.”


              6    ♦ BERTHE   ERICA CROW, mother
                         OTIS AMBER, deliverer


“Mother? Did  I write  mother?”  Crow  mumbled.
       “Is that your  answer?” Ed Plum asked.
       “I   don’t  know,”   Otis   Amber  replied.   “Is  ‘mother’    our 
answer, Crow?” He could have sworn she had again signed the 
receipt Good Salvation Soup Kitchen.
       Crow  repeated,  “Mother,”    and  that’s  what   the  lawyer 
wrote down.


              7    ♦ DOUGLAS   HOO, champ
                         THEO THEODORAKIS, writer


Their  clues:  a  chemical   formula  for   an  explosive  and  the 
letters o-t-i-s. Doug,  basking in  glory, didn’t  care. Theo stood, 
turned to the man he was about to accuse and saw the scene in 

176
the soup kitchen,  saw Otis Amber  cooking  soup for  the dirty, 
hungry men. “No  answer,” Theo said, sitting down.


              8    ♦ SYDELLE   PULASKI, victim
                         ANGELA WEXLER, person


Sydelle was dressed for the occasion in  red and white  stripes. 
Leaning on  crutches decorated with  white  stars on  a field  of 
blue to match  the cast on her ankle,  she hummed into  a pitch 
pipe and began to sing one note above the pitch she played.


              O beautiful  for spacious skies
              For amber waves of grain
              For purple  mountain majesties
              Above the fruited plain.


What a  spectacle she made,  her wide  rear  end sticking   out, 
singing in  that tuneless, nasal voice. The derisive  smiles soon 
faded as, pair by pair, the heirs heard their code words sung.


              America! America!
              God shed His grace on thee
              And crown thy good with  brotherhood
              From sea to shining sea.


“Such a beautiful  song,”  Grace Wexler slurred,  but the others 
sat in  somber  silence.  Even  Turtle  thought   table eight   had 
won.
       “What  is your answer?” Ed Plum asked.

177
       “Our  answer,”  Sydelle Pulaski  announced with  certainty, 
“is Otis Amber.”
       The heirs  listened to the  lawyer  read the next  document, 
but  their   eyes  stayed fixed   on   table  eight’s   answer:  Otis 
Amber.


              THIRTEENTH   ♦   Okay, folks,  there will  be 
              a  short   break   before  the   big   winner   is 
              announced. Berthe  Erica  Crow, please  rise 
              and go to the kitchen for the refreshments.


Dazed with  fear,  Crow  rose. The thirteenth  section.  Thirteen 
was an unlucky number.
       Judge Ford told Sandy to follow   her. “Hey, Crow,  old pal, 
do me a  favor and  fill  this  for  me,”  he said,  handing her  his 
flask  as they  left   through  the  door.  “I’ll    go  on  the  wagon 
starting tomorrow. Promise.”
       Angela left  the room,  too, concerned over Crow’s  trance-
like state. Turtle  followed  Angela to  make sure she didn’t end 
up in  the fireworks   room  again. The  judge  remained seated, 
watching the remaining  heirs who  were watching Otis  Amber. 
The delivery boy  had had enough of their suspicions; he swept 
a pointed  finger  across their  range, imitating   the sound  of  a 
machine gun: “Rat-a-tat-tat-tat-tat.”
       Crow  and Angela came back with  two  large trays;  Turtle 
returned empty-handed, puzzled but much relieved.
       The judge  joined Denton  Deere and Chris  at  table three, 
bringing  a plate  of  small cakes  with  her. “None  of  the  heirs 

178
have had   plastic  surgery  as  far   as I   can  tell,”   the  intern 
remarked. “But your  partner sure could have used some.”
       The judge  studied Sandy McSouthers’  prizefighter’s  face 
as he leaned against the open doorway. Their eyes met and he 
lifted his flask  in salute. “Anybody  want a drink?”
       “Sure,”  Grace Wexler replied with  a giggle, but  Jake gave 
her a cup of strong black coffee instead.
       “We  must   keep  our  wits   about  us,  Mr.  McSouthers,” 
Judge Ford said, walking   toward him.  “Sam  Westing has not 
made his final move.”
       “Nothing   like  Scotch to  clear  the head,”  he  replied.  He 
took a long  swig,  coughed, wiped his  mouth on  the sleeve of 
his uniform and glared at Crow  with narrowed, watery  eyes.
       Theo grinned  down  at  the chess table.  White  had made 
another move,  a careless  move. He  licked   the cake  crumbs 
from  his  fingers,   wiped  his  hand  on  a  Westing  Paper Tea 
Napkin and took his opponent’s queen from  the board. At least 
he had won the chess game.
       Perched on  the corner  of  table  eight,  the young  lawyer 
tried  to  start  a  conversation  with  Angela,   ignoring  Sydelle 
Pulaski, who  twice asked, “Surely  you  must have the answer, 
Mr. Plum?”  She nudged her partner.
       “Surely  you  must  have  the  answer, Mr.  Plum,”   Angela 
repeated sweetly.
       “Oh,  of course;  at least, I  assume I do,”  he replied.  “My 
instructions  are  to  open  the  documents  one by   one  at  the 
scheduled time.”  He checked his watch.  “Oops!”   He was one 
minute late.

179
       Ed Plum  hurried  to the  billiard  table,  tore open  the next 
envelope and pulled  out  the document,  cutting  his  finger  on 
the paper’s edge.


              FOURTEENTH      ♦      Go  directly    to   the 
              library.  Do not pass Go.



24      ♦       Wrong,    All   Wrong


Grace Wexler clung  unsteadily to Mr.  Hoo’s  arm. “Where  are 
we going?”
       “Who  knows,” Hoo  replied. “We didn’t  even pass Go.”
       Partner sat with partner  at the long library  table, moaning 
with   impatience   as   Ed   Plum   opened   another  envelope, 
removed a tagged key, tried to  unlock the  top right-hand  desk 
drawer, reread the  tag, unlocked  the  upper left-hand  drawer, 
and found the next document:


              FIFTEENTH     ♦    Wrong!  All   answers are 
              wrong!


“What!”  Sydelle Pulaski  cried.


              I  repeat:   Wrong!  All   answers are  wrong! 
              Partnerships  are canceled; you  are on your 
              own. Alone.
                    The lawyer   will   leave and  return   with 
              the  authorities  at  the  appointed  time.  And 

180
              time  is  running  out.  Hurry,   find  the  name 
              before  the   one   who  took   my   life   takes 
              another.
                    Remember: It  is not  what you  have, it’s 
              what you don’t have that counts.


Madame Hoo  knew  from  the shifting  eyes that  a bad person 
was in the room. She was the bad person. They would find  out 
soon. The crutch lady had her writing-book   back, but all those 
pretty things  she was  going  to  sell, they  wanted  them back, 
too. She would be punished. Soon.
       “How  much time do we have?” Turtle  asked.
       Ed Plum  left  the  library  without   answering. And  locked 
the door!
       “Oh  my!”  Flora Baumbach  ran to the French doors. They 
opened.
       Sydelle Pulaski complained  of a chill,  and the dressmaker 
had to shut the doors, but she left them unlatched, just in case.
       Mr.  Hoo  said  the tea  tasted funny,  maybe  they  had  all 
been poisoned. Denton Deere diagnosed paranoia.
       The  doorman,  who  was  pacing  the  room,   replied  that 
anyone  who   was  not   paranoid,  after   being  told   that   the 
murderer would kill   again, was really crazy. He stopped to pat 
Turtle’s slumped  shoulders. “Cheer up, my  friend,  the game’s 
not over yet,” Sandy whispered. “You  can still  win. I  hope you 
do.”
       Otis  Amber  told  everyone  to  sit  where he  could  watch 
them.
       Theo rose. “I   think  it’s  about  time we  played  as a team 
and shared our clues and shared the inheritance.”

181
       With the murderer? Well, all  right. Agreed.
       Sydelle Pulaski still   thought the answer had something to 
do with  “America,  the Beautiful.”   “Does anybody  have a clue 
word that is not in the song?”
       “I’m  not sure,”  Doug said mischievously. “Sing  it again.”
       No one cared for  that  idea. “It   is not  what you  have, it’s 
what you don’t have that counts,”  Jake Wexler reminded them. 
“Maybe some words in the song are missing from  the clues.”
       That makes sense. “Does anyone have the word amber?” 
Mr. Hoo asked.
       “Not  again,”  Otis Amber  groaned. “You  heard the will,  it 
said all  answers were  wrong.  Well,  I  was one  of  the wrong 
answers.”
       “But  Mr. Westing  wrote the will   before the game began,” 
Sydelle  argued.   “Perhaps  he   assumed  we   weren’t   smart 
enough to find you out so soon.”
       Judge Ford did  not interfere  (Otis Amber  could  take care 
of himself).  She had to be prepared to  defend Crow when  the 
time came.
       Crow sat with  her head bowed, waiting.
       No one had the word amber, but two  pairs had am in their 
clues. “Two   ams do  not an  amber  make,”  Sydelle  declared. 
“Two ams stand for America, America.”
       “I’ve    got  America,”    Jake  Wexler   shouted.  “I’ve    got 
America.”
       Ravings of  a  madman, Mr.  Hoo  thought. The  podiatrist, 
could he be the one?
       Jake explained in a calmer voice. “The  two  ams could not 
stand for   America,   America,  because  one  of   my  clues  is 
America.”

182
       Sandy stood,  took  a long  swig  from  his  flask,  coughed, 
then spoke in  a  hoarse voice. “We’re   getting  nowhere. Why 
doesn’t  everybody  hand  in  their   clues  so Ms.   Pulaski  can 
arrange them in order and we can see what’s missing?”
       Her  eyes  narrowed  with   suspicion,  the  judge  watched 
Sandy collect the clues. “Just write  them out again,”  he said to 
Turtle, who  had eaten the originals.  Then he placed the paper 
squares before the secretary and resumed his  seat. What was 
her partner doing? Why  was he playing into  Westing’s hands? 
He  knows  the  answer, he  knows   he’s leading   the heirs   to 
Crow. Again  the  judge  studied  the doorman’s  battered face: 
the scars; the bashed-in nose; the hard, blue  eyes under those 
taped spectacles. The baggy uniform. Everyone  was given the 
perfect partner,  Chris  said. Chris  was  right.  She  was paired 
with the one person who could confound her plans, manipulate 
her  moves,  keep  her   from   the  truth.   Her   partner,  Sandy 
McSouthers, was the  only  heir  she had not investigated.  Her 
partner, Sandy McSouthers, was Sam Westing.


The secretary quickly arranged the clues in order:


              O   BEAUTIFUL   FOR   SPACIOUS   SKIES
              FOR   AM              WAVES   OF   GRAIN
              FOR   PURPLE   MOUNTAIN   MAJESTIES
              ABOVE              FRUITED   PLAIN
              AMERICA   AM
              GOD   SHED   HIS   GRACE   ON   THEE
              AND              N   THY   GOOD   WITH   BROTHERHOOD
              FROM   SEA   TO   SHINING   SEA

183
“The  missing  words,”   Sydelle  Pulaski  announced, “are  ber, 
the, erica, and crow. Berthe Erica Crow!”
       Crow paled.
       Judge Ford   stood.  “May   I   have  everyone’s  attention? 
Thank you. Please listen very carefully  to what I have to say.
       “We found the answer to Sam Westing’s puzzle, now what 
are we going to  do? Remember: We have no  evidence of any 
kind  against  this  unfortunate  woman.   We  don’t  even  have 
proof that Sam Westing was murdered.
       “Can we  accuse an innocent woman of  a murder that has 
never been proved? Crow is our  neighbor and our helper. Can 
we condemn her to a life  imprisonment just  to satisfy our own 
greed? For money promised in an improbable and illegal  will? 
If  so, we  are guilty   of  a far  greater crime  than  the accused. 
Berthe Erica Crow’s  only  crime  is that her  name appears in a 
song. Our crime  would  be selling—yes,  I said  selling, selling 
for profit—the  life  of an innocent, helpless human being.”
       The judge paused to let her words sink  in, then she turned 
to her partner. Her  voice hardened. “As  for  the master of  this 
vicious game…”  She paused. “What’s happening to him?”
       “Uh—uh——UHHH!”      Sandy’s hand  flew  to  his  throat. 
He struggled to his feet, red-faced and gasping, and crashed to 
the floor in eye-bulging  agony.
       Jake Wexler  and Denton  Deere hurried  to  his  aid. Theo 
pounded on the door, shouting for help.  Ed Plum unlocked  the 
door and  two  strange men rushed past  him.  One, carrying  a 
doctor’s bag, quickly  limped  on crooked legs to the side of the 
writhing  doorman. “I’m   Doctor  Sikes. Everyone, please move 
away.”

184
       The  heirs   heard  a  low   groan,   a  rasping   rattle…then 
nothing.
       “Sandy!  Sandy!”   Turtle  screamed,  pushing  through  the 
restraining hands. She looked down  on the doorman sprawled 
at her feet. His face was twisted in rigid  pain;  his mouth gaped 
over the chipped front tooth. The taped glasses had fallen from 
his blue eyes that were  locked in  an unseeing stare. Suddenly 
his body straightened  in one last  violent  twitch.  His right  eye 
closed, then opened again, and Sandy moved no more.
       “He’s dead,”  Doctor Sikes said, gently turning  her away.
       “Dead?”   Judge Ford  repeated  numbly.  How   could  she 
have been so wrong? So very wrong?
       A  sob  tore  through  Turtle’s  soul  as  she  ran to   Baba’s 
comforting arms. “Baba,  Baba, I don’t want  to play anymore.”


The second  stranger, the  sheriff   of  Westing  county,  herded 
them  back  to  the  game  room.  Without   thinking,   the  heirs 
seated themselves at the assigned tables.
       Turtle sat quietly;  it  was Flora  Baumbach’s turn  to weep. 
Crow waited.  Only  the throbbing  veins  in  her tightly-clasped 
hands told of her torment.
       “Excuse me, sir,”  Ed  Plum said. “I   realize this may  seem 
inappropriate,  but according  to  Samuel  W. Westing’s  will,   I 
must read another document on the hour.”
       The sheriff  checked his watch.  What kind  of a  madhouse 
is this? And  there’s something  mighty  fishy  about this  cocky 
kid-lawyer   calling  in   the  middle  of  dinner,   insisting  that  I 
hurry right  over.  That was half  an hour  before anybody  died. 
“Go ahead,” he grumbled.

185
       Plum  cleared  his  throat  three times  under  the  sheriff’s 
suspicious glare.


              SIXTEENTH    ♦    I,  Samuel  W. Westing  of 
              Westingtown,       born       Sam       “Windy” 
              Windkloppel  of Watertown (I  had to  change 
              my  name for  business  purposes. After  all, 
              who     would     buy     a     product      called 
              Windkloppel’s  Toilet  Tissues? Would  you?) 
              do hereby  declare that  if  no  one wins,  this 
              will  is null  and void.
                   So hurry,  hurry,  hurry, step right  up and 
              collect  your prize. The lawyer  will  count  off 
              five minutes. Good luck  and a happy Fourth 
              of July.


“Windkloppel,  did  someone say Windkloppel?”  Grace Wexler 
slurred.
       “I  knew  Westing  wasn’t  an immigrant’s   name,”  Sydelle 
Pulaski said. “I knew  it.”
       “The man was insane,” Denton Deere diagnosed.
       Shhh!   They   were   struggling    with    their   conscience. 
Millions  and millions  of dollars  just for naming her name.
       One minute is up!
       The  heirs  stared at  the  answer:  Berthe  Erica   Crow.  A 
religious fanatic,  maybe even crazy, but a murderer? They had 
no evidence that Westing was murdered, the judge said so.
       Crow  waited.  She had not  suffered enough  for  her sins, 
her penance was yet to begin.

186
       Two minutes are up!
       Two hundred million  dollars,  Turtle thought,  but who gets 
it?  The  last  part  the lawyer   read  wasn’t  very  businesslike. 
Besides, she could  never peach on  anybody, not  even Crow. 
Who  cares about  anything   anyhow—Sandy  is  dead,  Sandy 
was her friend, now she’ll  never see him again—ever.
       Judge Ford  tried  not  to  look  at  the  empty  chair  at  her 
table, McSouthers’  chair.  Her one  concern was  the safety  of 
Crow. The judge watched the heirs and waited. Crow waited.
       Three minutes are up!
       Westing  wasn’t  murdered,  the  judge  said  so,  but  what 
about Sandy? He was drinking  from  the flask Crow  filled  and 
he died choking. Poison?
       Crow  felt the  eyes on her. The hating  eyes. They scoffed 
at her  beliefs,  they joked  about  her  soup kitchen.  Only  two 
people here  mattered  to  her.  She was  so  tired,  so  tired  of 
waiting. Of  waiting.
       Four minutes are up!
       “The answer is Berthe Erica Crow.”
       “No,”  Angela cried. “No,  no!”
       “She’s  crazy,”  Otis  Amber  shouted. “She  doesn’t  know 
what she’s saying.”
       “Yes  I   do,   Otis,”   Crow   said  flatly    and  repeated  her 
statement: “The  answer is Berthe  Erica  Crow.”  She rose and 
turned to the confused lawyer.  “I  am Berthe Erica  Crow. I  am 
the answer and I am the  winner. I  give half  of my  inheritance 
to  Otis  Amber,   to  be  used  for   the  Good   Salvation  Soup 
Kitchen. I give  the rest of the money to Angela.”

187
25      ♦       Westing’s    Wake


Sandy  was  dead.  Crow   had   been  arrested.  The  fourteen 
remaining  heirs  of  Samuel  W. Westing  sat  in  Judge Ford’s 
living  room wondering what  had happened.
       “At   least the  guilt  is  not  on our  hands,”  Mr.  Hoo  said, 
trying  to convince  himself  that a  clear conscience was worth 
two hundred million  dollars.
       “Crow’s  going  to  jail,”  Otis  Amber  wailed,  “and  all  you 
do is pat yourself on the back for not being a stoolie.”
       “Let   me   remind   you   that  Crow    confessed,”  Sydelle 
Pulaski reminded him.
       “Crow   only    confessed  to  being   the   answer,  nothing 
more,” Angela  said, pressing her hand against the tearing pain 
in her cheek.
       “Even  if   Sam Westing  wasn’t  murdered,  like  the  judge 
said,”  Doug   Hoo  argued,  “there   was  nothing   wrong  with 
Sandy until he drank from the flask  Crow filled.”
       “If    Crow   is   innocent,”   Theo   said,   “that   means   the 
murderer is still here in this  room.”
       Flora  Baumbach tightened  her  grip  on  Turtle,  who  was 
nestled in her arms.
       “Poor Crow,”  Otis Amber  muttered, “poor Crow.”
       “Poor  Sandy, you  should say,”  Turtle  responded angrily. 
“Sandy’s the one who’s dead. Sandy was my friend.”
       “You  should  have  remembered  that  before  you  kicked 
him,” Denton  Deere remarked.
       “I  never kicked Sandy, never.”

188
       The intern  turned sideways in  his chair  in  case of attack, 
but  the  kicker  stayed  slumped  in  sadness. “Well,   someone 
kicked  him  today. That  was one  mean bruise  he had  on his 
shin.”
       “That’s  a lie, that’s a disgusting  lie,”  Turtle shouted. “The 
only  person  I   kicked  today   was  Barney  Northrup   and  he 
deserved it.   I   didn’t   even  see  Sandy  until   tonight   at  the 
Westing house. Right, Baba?”
       “That’s  right,”    Flora  Baumbach  said,  handing  Turtle  a 
Westing Facial Tissue.
       But   Turtle   was  not   about   to  cry   again   in   front   of 
everybody,  like   a  baby.  If   only  she  could   forget  how   he 
looked, suffering,  dying:  the  twisted body,  the chipped tooth, 
that horrible  twitch,  that one eye (that was the worst)  that one 
eye blinking.  Sandy used to wink at her  like that when  he was 
alive. When he was alive.  Turtle blew  her nose loudly  to keep 
from sobbing.
       “Sandy  was my  friend,  too,”   Theo said.  “I   was playing 
chess with him in the game room, but he didn’t  know I  knew.”
       “Why   is everybody   lying?”  Turtle   slumped further   into 
Flora  Baumbach’s arms.  Sandy  was her  friend,   not Theo’s. 
And Sandy didn’t  know how to  play chess.
       The judge, too, was surprised. “How   can you be certain it 
was Mr. McSouthers you were playing  with, Theo?”
       “That’s  what  partners  are  for.  Doug  watched  the chess 
table to see who was moving the white pieces,” Theo replied.
       Again  the  track  star  thrust  his  I’m-number-one   fingers 
high in the air.
       Dumb jock,  thought  Mr. Hoo.  Doesn’t he  realize this is  a 
wake? But he is the champ. My son’s the champ.

189
       “Doug  win,”  said Madame Hoo.  They did not  suspect her 
anymore. Good, very  good. But  it  was so sad about  the door 
guard.
       Theo  went  on  in  a  mournful   voice.  “I’m    sort  of  glad 
Sandy didn’t go back to the chessboard after my last move. He 
never knew he lost the game.”
       “Did   you  checkmate him?”  the  judge  asked. Could  she 
have been right  about  McSouthers  after  all?  No. A  disguise 
was one thing, but Sam Westing lose a game of chess? Never.
       “Well,  not  exactly checkmate,”  Theo replied,  “but  Sandy 
would have had to resign. I took his queen.”
       The  queen’s sacrifice!  The  famous  Westing  trap.  Judge 
Ford   was   certain   now,   but   there   were   still    too   many 
unanswered questions. “I’m   afraid greed got  the best of  you, 
Theo. By  taking white’s  queen you were  tricked  into opening 
your defense. I know, I’ve  lost a few games that way myself.”
       Theo recalled the  position of  the chessmen, thankful  that 
his skin was too dark to reveal his blushing.
       Turtle  almost  smiled.   That  Theo  thinks  he’s  so  smart; 
well, Sandy showed him,  Sandy beat him  at chess. But Sandy 
doesn’t play  chess. And  she never  kicked  him  either.  Buck-
toothed Barney Northrup   was the one she kicked,  not  Sandy. 
But Sandy had  the sore shin. Buck-toothed,  chip-toothed,  the 
crooked false  teeth  in  the  dentist’s  office  (Sandy’s  dentist). 
“Cheer up, my friend,  the game’s not over. You can still  win.  I 
hope you do.” Those were the last words Sandy said to her. He 
winked  when  he said  that. Winked!   One eye  winked!  Dead 
Sandy had winked at her! Sandy had winked!
       “Oh  my,”  Flora Baumbach  exclaimed as Turtle  suddenly 
bolted from her arms.

190
      “Angela, could I see your copy of the will?”
      Angela handed it over (she could not refuse her sister 
anything, now).


Turtle leaned against the dark window, poring over Sydelle 
Pulaski’s transcript of the will:


            FIRST.  I   returned    to   live    among my 
            friends    and  my enemies.  I  came home 
            to     seek   my  heir,      aware  that     in 
            doing   so I   faced  death.
                  And so I   did.


“To seek my heir,” Turtle repeated to herself.


                  Today  I   have   gathered   together 
            my  nearest   and dearest,    my  sixteen 
            nieces   and nephews (Sit    down, Grace 
            Windsor   Wexler!)    to   view   the   body 
            of     your   Uncle    Sam for     the    last 
            time.
                  Tomorrow   its       ashes    will       be 
            scattered    to   the  four   winds.


Winds? “Windkloppel,” Turtle said aloud. Her mother had 
been right all along about being related to Sam Westing.
      “Windkloppel,” Grace mumbled. Jake patted her head.
      “Windkloppel,”  the judge repeated. At least she could 
explain that. “Crow married a man named Windkloppel, who 
then changed his name to Westing. Berthe Erica Crow is the 
former wife of  Samuel W. Westing. They had one child, a 
daughter, who drowned the night before her wedding. It was 

191
rumored that she killed herself rather than marry the man her 
mother had chosen for her. If Sam Westing blamed his wife for 
their daughter’s death, then the sole purpose of this game was 
to punish Crow.”
      Crow was Sam Westing’s ex-wife? The heirs found that 
hard to believe. “Then why would Mr.  Westing give her a 
chance to inherit the estate?” Theo asked.
      “M-maybe he  wanted his enemies to for-g-give him,” 
Chris said.
      “Ha!” said Mr. Hoo, one of the enemies.
      Turtle read on:

            SECOND.  I,      Samuel   W.    Westing, 
            hereby   swear that    I   did   not  die   of 
            natural     causes.   My life      was  taken 
            from  me—by one of you!
                  The   police     are    helpless.       The 
            culprit       is   far     too   cunning   to   be 
            apprehended    for       this      dastardly 
            deed.


“What does dastardly mean?”
      “Oh  my!”  Flora Baumbach was relieved to hear Jake 
Wexler define the word as “cowardly.”


                  I,    alone,   know the   name. Now it 
            is    up to   you.   Cast  out   the  sinner, 
            let    the  guilty     rise   and  confess.

            THIRD.  Who among you is    worthy   to 
            be   the   Westing   heir?    Help   me.  My 

192
            soul    shall      roam  restlessly       until 
            that    one is   found.


For the first time since Sandy died, Turtle smiled.
      Judge Ford sat in glassy-eyed thought, elbows propped on 
the desk top, her chin  resting on her  folded hands. Why, 
indeed, was Crow an heir? Sam Westing could have pointed 
his clues  at the  Sunset Towers cleaning woman without 
naming her an heir.
      “Crow’s not going to inherit anything, not if she’s in jail 
for murder,” Otis Amber complained bitterly. “All your talk 
about chess and sacrificing queens. Crow’s the one who’s been 
sacrificed.”
      “What did you say?” the judge asked.
      “I said Crow’s the one who’s been sacrificed.”
      Uttering a low  groan, Judge Ford sank her head in her 
hands. The queen’s sacrifice! She had fallen for  it  again. 
Westing had sacrificed his  queen (Crow),  distracting the 
players from the  real game. Sam Westing was dead, but 
somehow or other he would make his last move. She knew it; 
she felt it deep in her bones. Sam Westing had won the game. 
“Stupid, stupid, stupid!”
      The heirs stared in amazement. First they are told that 
Samuel W. Westing was married to their cleaning woman, now 
a judge is calling herself stupid. It couldn’t be true.
      “Sam Westing wasn’t stupid,” Denton Deere declared. 
“He was insane. The last party of the will was sheer lunacy. 
Happy Fourth of July, it said. This is November.”
      “It’s  November fifteenth,” Otis Amber cried. “It’s  poor 
Crow’s birthday.”

193
       Turtle  looked  up from  the  will.  Crow’s   birthday? Sandy 
had bought  a striped  candle for  his  wife’s  birthday,  a  three-
hour candle. The game is  still  on! Sam Westing came back  to 
seek his  heir.  “You  can  still  win.   I  hope  you  do,”  he  said. 
How? How?  It is  not what  you have, it’s what  you don’t have 
that counts.  Whatever  it  was she didn’t   have, she’d  have to 
find  it  soon. Without   letting  the  others  know  what  she was 
looking for.  “Judge Ford, I’d  like to call  my first  witness.”





26      ♦       Turtle’s    Trial


Hoo was furious.  “Haven’t  we  had enough game-playing,”  he 
complained. “And  led by a confessed bomber, no less.”
       Judge  Ford  rapped  for   silence  with   the  walnut   gavel 
presented to her by associates on her appointment to  a higher 
court. Higher  court?  This  was the  lowest court  she had ever 
presided at:  a thirteen-year-old   lawyer,  a court  stenographer 
who  records in  Polish,   and the  judge  in  African   robes. Oh 
well,  she had  played  Sam Westing’s  game,  now  she would 
play Turtle’s  game. The similarity   was astounding; Turtle  not 
only looked like  her Uncle Sam, she acted like him.
       “Ladies and gentlemen,”  Turtle began, “I stand before this 
court to prove that  Samuel W. Westing is dead and that Sandy 
McSouthers is dead, but Crow didn’t  do it.”
       Pacing the  floor,  hands behind  her back,  she confronted 
each of  the heirs  in  turn  with  a  hard stare. The  heirs  stared 
back, not knowing if  they were the jury  or the accused.

194
       Grace Wexler blinked up at her daughter. “Who’s  that?”
       “The district  attorney,” Jake replied. “Go  back to sleep.”
       Now  frowning,  now  smiling   a secret smile,  Turtle  acted 
the part  of  every brilliant   lawyer  she had  seen on television 
who was about to win an impossible case. The only flaw  in her 
imitation  was an occasional rapid twist of  her head. (She liked 
the grown-up feeling of  shorter hair swishing around her face.)
       “Let    me  begin   at   the   beginning,”    she  began.   “On 
September first  we  moved into  Sunset  Towers. Two  months 
later, on Halloween,  smoke was seen rising from  the chimney 
of the deserted Westing house.” Her first  witness would be the 
person most likely  to have watched the  house that day. “I  call 
Chris Theodorakis to the stand.”
       Chris lay  a calm  hand on the Bible   and swore to tell  the 
truth, the whole truth, and nothing  but the truth. What fun!
       “You are a birdwatcher, Mr.  Theodorakis, are you not?”
       “Yes.”
       “Were you birdwatching  on October thirty-first?”
       “Yes.”
       “Did  you see anyone enter the Westing house?”
       “I  s-saw s-somebody who limped.”
       Good, now  she  was getting  somewhere. “Who   was that 
limping  person?”
       “It  was D-Doctor Sikes.”
       “Thank   you,   you  are   excused.”  Turtle   turned  to   her 
audience. “Doctor  Sikes was Sam Westing’s  friend,  a witness 
to the  will,   and his  accomplice  in  this game.  On the  day in 
question he limped into the Westing house to build a fire  in the 
fireplace. Why?”  Her next witness might  answer that.

195
Judge Ford   instructed  the  witness  to  remove   his  aviator’s 
helmet. His  gray  hair  was tousled  but  barbered. “And   place 
your gun in the custody of the court.”
       “Oh   my!”     Flora   Baumbach   gasped  as   Otis   Amber 
unzipped his plastic jacket, pulled a revolver  from his shoulder 
holster and handed it over to the judge,  who locked the gun  in 
her desk drawer.
       Turtle  was as startled as the other  tenants. “Mr.  Amber,” 
she began bravely, “it seems that we are not all who we say we 
are. In other words, who exactly are you?”
       “I  am a licensed private investigator.”
       “Then why  were you disguised as an idiot delivery  boy?”
       “It  was my disguise.”
       Turtle was dealing  with  a practiced witness.  “Mr.  Amber, 
who employed you?”
       “That’s privileged  information.”
       The judge interceded. “It   would be best to  cooperate, Mr. 
Amber. For Crow’s sake.”
       “I    had   three   clients:    Samuel   W.   Westing,   Barney 
Northrup, and Judge J. J. Ford.”
       Turtle  stumbled over  her next question.  “What  were you 
hired  to  do  and when  and  what  did  you   find  out?  Tell  us 
everything you know.”  It  was unsettling to  see Otis Amber act 
like a normal human being.
       “Twenty  years  ago,  after his  wife   left  him,   Samuel W. 
Westing hired  me to  find  Crow, keep  her out  of trouble,  and 
make sure she never  used the Westing  name. I  assumed this 
disguise for that  purpose. I mailed  in my  reports and received 
a monthly  check from  the Westingtown  bank until   last week, 
when I  was notified  that my  services were  no longer needed. 

196
But Crow  still  needs me, and I’ll  stick by  her, no matter what. 
I’ve  grown  fond  of  the woman;  we’ve  been together  such a 
long time.”
       “How  and why did Barney  Northrup hire you?”
       “Amber   is   second  in   the  phone  book   under  Private 
Investigators;  maybe  Joe Aaron’s  phone  was busy  that  day. 
Anyhow,   Barney   Northrup   wanted   me  to   investigate   six 
people.”
       “What  six?”
       “Judge  J.   J.  Ford,   George  Theodorakis,   James  Hoo, 
Gracie Windkloppel,   Flora   Baumbach, and  Sybil   Pulaski.  I 
made a mistake on the last one;  I wasn’t  aware of  the mix-up 
until  I looked  into  Crow’s  early  life  for  the judge. It  seems I 
confused a Sybil Pulaski with  a Sydelle Pulaski.”
       “Would  you  please  repeat that,”   the court  stenographer 
asked.
       “Sydelle Pulaski,”  Otis Amber  repeated, then turned to the 
judge. “I   couldn’t  tell  you  about Crow’s  relationship  to  Sam 
Westing—conflict  of interest, you understand.
       Judge  Ford   understood  very   well.   Sam  Westing   had 
predicted  every   move  she  would   make.  That’s   why   Otis 
Amber, with  his  privileged  information,  was one of  the heirs; 
that and to convince Crow (the queen) to play the game.
       Turtle  had more questions.  “Are  you  saying that  Barney 
Northrup didn’t   ask you to investigate  Denton Deere or  Crow 
or Sandy?”
       “That’s  right.   Denton Deere  turned  up  in  my  report  on 
Gracie Windkloppel—the   Wexlers.  Barney  Northrup  said  he 
was looking   to  hire  a  cleaning  woman  for   Sunset Towers, 

197
good pay and  a small  apartment, so I  recommended Crow.  I 
don’t know  how Sandy got the doorman’s job.”
       “Mr.  Amber, you were also hired  by Judge Ford, I assume 
to find  out who  everybody really  was. Did  you investigate  all 
sixteen heirs for the judge?”
       “I  didn’t investigate  the judge or her partner.”
       The judge bristled at the reminder of  her stupidity.
       “Therefore,”     Turtle     continued,     “you     have     never 
investigated the man  we knew  as Sandy McSouthers  for  any 
of your clients?”
       “Never.”
       “One more question.”  It was the question she had planned 
to ask before learning that Otis Amber was not who  he seemed 
to  be.   “On   the  afternoon   of   Halloween,   when   we  were 
watching the smoke in  the Westing house chimney, you told  a 
story about a corpse on an Oriental rug.”
       “I  saw it,” Grace Wexler cried,  “I saw him.”
       Turtle  forgot   the rules  of   the court   and hurried   to  her 
mother. “Who did  you see, mom? Who? Who?”
       (Terrified  by the whos, Madame Hoo slipped away.)
       “The  doorman,”  Grace replied,  lifting   her  dazed face  to 
her husband. “He  was dead. On an Oriental  rug,  Jake. It  was 
awful.”
       Jake stroked his wife’s hair. “I  know, Gracie, I  know.”
       Turtle  returned to  her witness.  “Mr.  Amber,  did  you  tell 
that spooky story to  dare one of us to go to the Westing  house 
that night?”
       “Not  really. Sandy told  me the story that morning,  and we 
decided to scare you kids with it, being  Halloween.”

198
       “Thank   you,  Mr.   Amber,  you   may  step  down.”   (Step 
down  was a  term  used  in  court;  the  floor  was  level  here.) 
Turtle turned to her baffled  audience. “A fire  was started in the 
fireplace to call  attention to the deserted house. Then a spooky 
story  was told  to  dare  someone to  go  into  the  house. That 
someone was me. I sneaked in the  house, followed  Dr. Sikes’ 
whispers, and found the corpse of Samuel W. Westing in bed. I 
now call D. Denton  Deere to the stand.”


Turtle  stared at her  most unfavorite  heir.  “Intern   Deere, you 
saw the  body  of  Samuel  W.  Westing  in  the  coffin.  Did   he 
appear to have been poisoned?”
       “I  could not say; he was embalmed.”
       “You  are under oath, Intern Deere. Do  you swear that the 
body of Samuel W. Westing was embalmed?”
       What kind  of a trick question was that? “I  cannot swear to 
it, no. I did  not examine the body in the coffin.”
       “Could  the body in the coffin,  which you  did not examine, 
have been no body  at all?  Could it  have  been a wax dummy 
dressed in the costume of Uncle Sam?”
       “I  am not an expert on wax dummies.”
       “Yes or no?”
       “Yes, it’s  possible, anything  is  possible.” What’s  the brat 
driving at? Or is she just trying  to make a fool of  me?
       “Intern  Deere, you may not be an expert in wax dummies, 
but  you  are  an  expert  in   medical  diagnosis,  and  you   did 
examine the body of Sandy McSouthers. Correct?”
       “Yes  to  the  first  question,  no  to  the  second. I   did  not 
examine Sandy;  I  tried  to  make  him  comfortable  until  help 
arrived. He was still alive  when Doctor Sikes took  over.”

199
       Turtle  turned  quickly  to  conceal  her  smile.  “But  surely 
you  saw  enough  symptoms  to   make  one  of  your   famous 
diagnosises.” She peered at the  judge from  the  corner of  her 
eye. That last word didn’t  sound right.
       “Coronary  thrombosis,”  the  intern  diagnosed, “but  that’s 
just an educated guess. In simple language: heart attack.”
       “Then Sandy could not  have died of an overdose of lemon 
juice, which  is what I saw Crow  put in his flask?”  Turtle  could 
have called on Angela to testify to that, but  she didn’t want her 
screwy sister confessing all over the place.
       “I  never heard of anyone dying  as a result of  lemon juice 
consumption,” the expert replied.
       “One  more  question,  Intern  Deere.  Do  you   swear that 
Sandy had a bruise on his shin resulting from a kick?”
       “Absolutely.  I  should  know, having  been the recipient  of 
such a kick myself.”
       “You may step down.”


“I call  Sydelle Pulaski to the stand. SYDELLE  PULASKI!”
       Overcome with  excitement, the secretary had to be helped 
to her feet for the oath-taking.
       “Ms.   Pulaski,   I  must   compliment   you  on   your   good 
thinking in  taking down the will   in shorthand.”
       “Professional habit.”
       “This  looks professional, all  right. The typing  is perfect—
well,  almost  perfect.  It  seems you  left  out  the  last word   in 
section three:

200
                  The estate   is   at   the  crossroads. 
            The heir    who wins  the  windfall     will 
            be  the  one who finds    the


“Finds the what, Ms. Pulaski? Finds the what?”
      Sydelle squirmed under Turtle’s hard stare. Leave it to the 
brat to discover my one error. “There was so much talking I 
couldn’t hear the last word.”
      “Come now, Ms. Pulaski, you claim to be a professional.”
      Hounding the witness and doing it quite well, Judge Ford 
thought, coming to the  secretary’s defense. “I don’t think 
anyone heard the word, Turtle. Mr. McSouthers made a joke 
about ashes at that point.”
      “You are excused, Ms. Pulaski,” Turtle said offhandedly, 
her eyes on the will. The judge was right. Sandy had joked 
about  ashes  scattered  to   the   winds.   Winds,   Windy 
Windkloppel, no, it still didn’t make sense. It is not what you 
have, it’s what you don’t have that counts—maybe no word 
was ever there. She read on:

            FOURTH. Hail   to    thee,    oh  land   of 
            opportunity!      You have  made me,  the 
            son     of     poor     immigrants,      rich, 
            powerful,    and  respected.
                  So  take    stock     in    America,    my 
            heirs,     and  sing   in    praise   of    this 
            generous  land.   You,  too,   may strike 
            it     rich   who dares   play   the  Westing 
            game.

            FIFTH.   Sit     down,  your    honor,   and 
            read     the     letter       this      brilliant 

201
              young   attorney      will       now  hand   over 
              to   you.


“Judge Ford,  could  you  introduce  as evidence the  letter that 
brilliant  young attorney handed over to you?”
       “It   is  just   the  usual  certification   of   sanity,  signed  by 
Doctor Sikes,”  the judge replied  as she removed the envelope 
from  her  files.  But   the  letter  was  gone; the  envelope  now 
contained a receipt:


              Check received, November 1            $5,000
              Check received, November 15          +5,000
              Total amount paid by Judge Ford    $10,000
              Cost of educating Josie-Jo Ford      -10,000
              Amount owed to Sam Westing                  0


“I’m  afraid  the original  letter  has been replaced by a personal 
message. It has no bearing on this case, and…”
       “Yes, please.” A trembling  Madame  Hoo stood before the 
judge. “For  to  go to  China,”  she said timidly,  setting  a scarf-
tied  bundle  on  the desk.  Weeping  softly,  the  thief   shuffled 
back to her seat.
       The judge  unknotted  the  scarf and  let  the flowered  silk 
float  down  around  the booty:   her father’s  railroad   watch,  a 
pearl necklace,  cuff   links,  a  pin   and earrings  set,  a  clock. 
(Grace Wexler’s silver cross never did turn up.)
       “My   pearls,”   Flora  Baumbach  exclaimed  with   delight. 
“Wherever did  you find them, Madame Hoo? I’m  so grateful.”
       Madame Hoo did not  understand why the round little  lady 
was smiling at  her. Cautiously she peered through her fingers. 

202
Oh! The  other  people did  not  smile.  They  know  she is bad. 
And Mr. Hoo,  his anger is drowned in shame.
       “Perhaps stealing  is   not  considered stealing  in  China,” 
Sydelle Pulaski said in a clumsy gesture of kindness.
       The  judge rapped  her  gavel.  “Let  us  continue  with  the 
case on hand. Are you ready, counselor?”
       “Yes,  your  honor,  in  a  minute.”   Turtle  approached  the 
frightened thief. “Here,  you can keep it.”
       With   shaking   hands  Madame   Hoo   took   the  Mickey 
Mouse clock from  Turtle and clutched the priceless treasure to 
her bosom. “Thank you, good girl,  thank you, thank you.”
       “That’s okay.”
       The  heirs  were anxious  for   the  trial  to  continue.  They 
pitied the poor woman, but the scene was embarrassing.


One half hour to  go. Turtle  was so close to winning  she could 
feel it,   taste it,  but  still  the  answer eluded  her. “Ladies   and 
gentlemen, who was Sam Westing?” she began. “He was poor 
Windy Windkloppel,   the son of immigrants.  He  was rich Sam 
Westing, the head of  a huge paper company. He was  a happy 
man who  played  games. He was  a sad man  whose daughter 
killed  herself. He was  a lonely  man who moved  to a faraway 
island.  He  was  a sick   man  who  returned  home  to  see his 
friends and  relatives before  he died. And  he  did  die, but  not 
when we thought he did. Sam Westing was still  alive when the 
will  was read.”
       The judge rapped for order.
       Turtle continued. “The  obituary, probably  phoned in to the 
newspaper by   Westing  himself,   mentioned  two   interesting 
facts. One: Sam Westing was never seen after his car crashed. 

203
Two: Sam  Westing acted in  Fourth  of  July pageants, fooling 
everybody with   his clever  disguises. Therefore  I  submit  that 
Sam Westing was not only  alive,  Sam Westing was disguised 
as one of his own heirs.
       “No  one would  recognize  him.  With  that face  bashed in 
from  the  car  crash, his   disguise could   be  simple:  a  baggy 
uniform, a chipped front  tooth, broken eyeglasses.”
       Sandy?
       Does she mean Sandy?
       The judge had to pound her gavel several times.
       “Yes,   ladies  and   gentlemen,”   Turtle   went   on,   “Sam 
Westing  was  none  other   than  our  dear  friend   Sandy,  the 
doorman. But Sam Westing did not drink,  you say. Neither did 
Sandy. I used his  flask  on Halloween  and  there was a funny 
aftertaste in my pop, but not  of whiskey;  I know  how whiskey 
tastes, because I use it for toothaches. It was medicine.  Sandy 
was a sick man,  and the flask  was part  of his  disguise, but it 
also contained the medicine that kept him alive.”
       Turtle   surveyed   the   stupefied   audience.  Good,    they 
bought her  little   fib.  “As  I   said earlier,  I  saw Crow   fill   the 
flask  with  lemon  juice  in  the  kitchen,  but  I  saw  something 
even more interesting  on  my  way back  to  the game room:  I 
saw Sandy coming out  of the library.  Sam Westing, as Sandy, 
wrote the  last part  of  the will   after  the  answers were given, 
then locked it in the library  desk with  a duplicate key.
       “But  what  about the murder,  you  ask,” Turtle  said,  even 
though no  one had  asked. “There  was no  murder. The  word 
murder was first mentioned by  Sandy, to put us off the track.  I 
did not die  of natural  causes, the will  says, My life  was taken 
from me—by one of  you!  Sam Westing’s life   was taken from 

204
him  when  he  became Sandy  McSouthers.  And  Sandy  died 
when his  medicine  ran  out.”  Turtle  paused in   a pretense of 
letting the  heirs mull  over her  last words, trying  to  figure  out 
what to do next.
       Why  did   Turtle  leave  out  Barney  Northrup,   the  judge 
wondered.  She knows   Northrup   and  McSouthers  were  the 
same man because of the bruised shin. Either she doesn’t want 
to confound the jury,  or she has no more idea than I have why 
Sam Westing had to play two roles.
       Why  did   Sam Westing   have to   play  two  roles,  Turtle 
wondered. He had a  big enough  part as the doorman  without 
playing  the real-estate man as well.   Why  two roles?  No, not 
two, three. Windy Windkloppel  took  three names; one: Samuel 
W. Westing, two: Barney Northrup,  three: Sandy McSouthers.
       The judge had a question:  “Surely  Mr.  McSouthers could 
have had  his  prescription   refilled,   or  are  you  implying   he 
committed suicide?”
       “Pardon me?” Turtle  was searching the will.


                    The  estate    is    at   the    crossroads. 
              The  heir    who  wins   the   windfall      will 
              be  the   one  who  finds     the

              FOURTH.


That’s it, that  has to be it: The heir  who wins the windfall   will 
be the one who finds the fourth! Windy  Windkloppel  took  four 
names, and she knew who  the  fourth  name was! Keep  calm, 
Turtle Alice   Tabitha-Ruth  Wexler.  Slowly,  very  slowly,   turn 

205
toward the judge, act dumb, and ask her to repeat the question. 
“I’m  sorry, your honor, would  you repeat the question?”
       Turtle   knows   something.    The   Judge  had   seen  that 
expression before.  Sam  Westing used  to  look  like   that  just 
before he won a game. “I  asked if you  consider Sandy’s death 
a suicide.”
       “No,   ma’am,”    Turtle   said  sadly.  Very   sadly.   “Sandy 
McSouthers—Sam  Westing   suffered   terribly   from    a  fatal 
disease. He was a dying  man who  chose his  time to  die. Let 
me read from the will:


              SIXTH.    Before     you   proceed     to     the 
              game room   there    will      be  one   minute 
              of   silent       prayer    for     your   good   old 
              Uncle   Sam.


“Ladies and gentlemen,  heirs (for  we all  inherited something) 
let us bow  our  heads in silent  prayer for  our  benefactor Sam 
Westing, alias Sandy the doorman.”
       “Crow!”   Otis Amber leaped to his  feet as Ed Plum led the 
cleaning woman through the door.





27      ♦       A Happy    Fourth


His aviator’s  helmet again flapping  over  his ears, Otis Amber 
danced up  to   his  soup-kitchen  companion,   flung  his   arms 
around the taut body, and squeezed her tightly. “Hey Crow  old 
pal, old pal, old pal.”

206
       “They   said   I   was   innocent,   Otis.   They   said  I   was 
innocent,” she replied vaguely.
       Angela, too, wanted  to hug her in welcome,  but closeness 
was not possible for  either of  them. Instead, Angela  offered a 
crooked smile.  Crow  nodded  and lowered  her  eyes, only   to 
raise them to Madame Hoo,  clutching  a Mickey  Mouse clock. 
“Things  very  good,”   Madame  Hoo  said, extending  her  free 
hand and shaking Crow’s hand up and down.
       “It  was  all a  regrettable mistake,”  Ed  Plum explained  to 
the judge. “Can you  imagine, that  sheriff wanted to  arrest me, 
not Crow—me,  Edgar Jennings Plum—he wanted to arrest the 
attorney!   Fortunately,    the   coroner    determined   that   Mr. 
McSouthers died of a heart attack as did Samuel W. Westing.”
       “Then  Turtle’s  right,”  Theo  said. “There  was no  murder. 
The coroner was part of the plot.”
       Ed  Plum   had  no  idea  what   Theo  was  talking   about. 
Masking  his ignorance  with  arrogance, he  continued.  “I  had 
my suspicions  about this  entire  affair  from  the  start. I  came 
here for one reason only: to  announce my resignation from  all 
matters regarding the Westing estate, with sincere apologies to 
all concerned.”
       “Wasn’t   there   a  last   document?”   Judge  Ford   asked, 
knowing that Sam Westing had to make his last move.
       “Yes, but as I no longer take a legal interest…”
       “Please turn it over to the court.”
       Baffled  by the  word “court,”   the lawyer  set the envelope 
on the desk and found his way out of Sunset Towers.
       Without once clearing  her throat, Judge Ford proceeded to 
read the final page of the will  of Samuel W. Westing.

207
              SEVENTEENTH    ♦    Good-bye,  my  heirs. 
              Thanks for  the fun and  games. I can rest  in 
              peace knowing   I  was  loved  as  your  jolly 
              doorman.


              EIGHTEENTH     ♦    I,  Samuel  W. Westing, 
              otherwise known  as Sandy McSouthers and 
              others, do hereby  give and bequeath all  the 
              property  and   possessions in  my  name  as 
              follows:
                    To all  of you,  in  equal shares, the  deed 
              to Sunset Towers;
                    And  to  my  former   wife,   Berthe  Erica 
              Crow,     the     ten-thousand-dollar       check 
              forfeited    by   table    one,    and   two    ten-
              thousand-dollar   checks  endorsed  by  J.  J. 
              Ford and Alexander McSouthers.


              NINETEENTH    ♦   The sun has set on your 
              Uncle  Sam. Happy  birthday,  Crow.  And to 
              all of  my heirs, a very happy Fourth of  July.


Judge Ford set the document down. “That’s it.”
       That’s it? What about the two  hundred million  dollars,  the 
heirs wanted to know.
       “We lost the game,”  the judge explained, staring at Turtle, 
her face a mask of sad, childlike innocence as she nestled once 
again in Flora Baumbach’s arms. “I  think.”

208
       Turtle  rose and walked  to  the  side window,  seeking  the 
Westing  house, which   stood  invisible   in  the  moon-clouded 
night.  (Hurry  up,  Uncle  Sam, I  can’t  keep up  this  act much 
longer. The candle must have burned through the last stripe by 
now.)
       Behind  her  the  discontented  heirs  grumbled:  He  made 
fools of us all.  He played us like puppets. He was a g-good m-
man. He was a vengeful man, a hateful man. Windkloppel? He 
tricked us, the cheat. A madman, stark raving mad.
       “Oh  my, oh my, just  listen to you,”  Flora  Baumbach said. 
“You  each have  ten thousand  dollars  more than  you  started 
with  and an apartment building   to boot.  The man is  dead, so 
why not think  the best?”
       BOOM!
       BOOM!
       BOOM!
       “Happy  Fourth of July,”  Turtle shouted as the first rockets 
lit up the Westing house, lit up the sky.
       BOOM-BOOM-BOOM-BOOM.
       BOOM!!!
       The heirs gathered around Turtle at the window.
       BOOM!  Stars of  all  colors  bursting into  the night,  silver 
pinwheels  spinning,   golden  lances  up-up-BOOM!    crimson 
flashes flashing blasting, scarlet showers BOOM!  emerald rain 
BOOM!  BOOM!   orange flames,  red flames leaping  from  the 
windows, sparking the turrets, firing  the trees.…
       “BOOM!”    cried  Madame Hoo,  clapping  her  hands with 
delight.

209
       The great winter  fireworks  extravaganza, as it came to be 
called, lasted  only  fifteen  minutes.  Twenty  minutes later  the 
Westing house had burned to the ground.
       “Happy  birthday,  Crow,”   Otis  Amber  said, reaching  for 
her hand.


The orange glow  of the morning  sun had just  begun its climb 
up the  glass front   of  Sunset Towers  when Turtle   set out  to 
collect   the  prize.   She  pedaled   north   past  the   cliff,    still 
smoldering  with  the  charred  remains of  the  Westing  house. 
Reaching the crossroads she turned into the narrow lane whose 
twisting curves mimicked  the shoreline.
       The heir who  wins the windfall   will  be the one who finds 
the fourth.  It  was  so simple  once  you  knew  what you  were 
looking     for.    Sam    Westing,    Barney    Northrup,     Sandy 
McSouthers (west, north,  south). Now  she was on her way  to 
meet the  fourth   identity  of  Windy   Windkloppel.   She  could 
probably have figured  out the address, too, instead of  looking 
it up  in  the Westingtown  phone  book—there  it  was, number 
four Sunrise Lane.
       A long driveway,  its privacy  guarded by tall  spruce, led to 
the modern  mansion  of   the  newly-elected  chairman  of   the 
board of Westing  Paper Products Corporation.  Turtle climbed 
the stairs, rang the bell and waited. The door opened.
       Turtle  felt  her  first  grip  of   panic as  she confronted  the 
crippled doctor.  Could she have  been wrong? “I’d   like  to see 
Mr.  Eastman, please,”  she  said  nervously.  “Tell  him   Turtle 
Wexler is here.”
       “Mr.  Eastman is  expecting you,”  Doctor  Sikes  said. “Go 
straight down the hall.”

210
       The hall   had an  inlaid  marble  floor   (no  Oriental  rugs). 
Reaching its end she entered a paneled library  (this  one filled 
with books). There he was, sitting at his desk.
       Julian R. Eastman rose. He looked stern. And very proper. 
He wore  a  gray business suit  with   a vest,  a striped  tie.  His 
shoes were shined. He limped as he walked toward her, not the 
crooked limp   of  Doctor   Sikes, just  a  small  limp,   a  painful 
limp.  Again   Turtle   was  gripped   by  panic.  He   seemed so 
different,  so important.   She shouldn’t   have kicked  him   (the 
Barney Northrup him).  He was coming closer. His  watery blue 
eyes stared at her over his rimless half-glasses. Hard eyes. His 
teeth were  white,  not  quite  even (no  one  would  ever  guess 
they were false). He was smiling. He wasn’t  angry with  her, he 
was smiling.
       “Hi,  Sandy,” Turtle said. “I  won!”





28      ♦       And   Then…


Turtle  never  told.   She went   to  the  library   every  Saturday 
afternoon, she explained (which  was partly  true). “Make  your 
move, Turtle, you don’t  want to be late for the wedding.”
       The ceremony  was held  in Shin  Hoo’s  restaurant. Grace 
Wexler,  recovered from   a  world-record  hangover,  draped  a 
white cloth  over the liquor   bottles and set a spray of  roses on 
the bar. No drinks would be served today.
       Radiant in  her wedding gown  of white  heirloom  lace, the 
bride walked  down  the aisle,  past the tables of  well-wishers, 

211
on the  arm of  Jake Wexler.  Mr.  Hoo,  the best  man, beamed 
with  pride  at  her  light  footsteps  as  he supported  the  knee-
knocking, nervous groom.
       A fine  red line  of  a scar marked Angela’s  cheek, but  she 
looked   content   and    lovely    as   ever   in    her   pale   blue 
bridesmaid’s  gown.   The  other   bridesmaid   wore  pink   and 
yellow with  matching crutches.
       The guests cried  during the  wedding  and laughed during 
the reception.  Flora Baumbach  smiled  and cried  at the  same 
time. “You  did  a good job  altering the  wedding dress, Baba,” 
Turtle said, which made the dressmaker cry even harder.
       “A  toast to the bride and groom,”  Jake announced, raising 
his glass of ginger ale. “To Crow  and Otis Amber!”
       The heirs of  Uncle Sam Westing  clinked  glasses with the 
members of the Good Salvation  Soup Kitchen,  sobered up for 
this happy occasion. “To Crow and Otis Amber!”
Apartment 4D  was  bare. For the  last time  Judge Ford  stared 
out the side window  to the cliff  where the Westing house once 
stood. She would  never  solve the Westing  puzzle;  perhaps it 
was just   as well.   Her   debt  would  finally    be  repaid—with 
interest; the money she received from  the sale of  her share of 
Sunset  Towers  would    pay  for    the  education   of   another 
youngster, just as Sam Westing had paid for hers.
       “Hi,  Judge Ford, I c-came to  say g-good-bye,” Chris  said, 
wheeling himself  through the door.
       “Oh,  hello,  Chris,  that  was nice  of  you,  but  why  aren’t 
you   studying?  Where’s   your    tutor?”   She   looked   at   the 
binoculars   hanging   from    his   neck.   “You    haven’t    been 
birdwatching again, have you? There will  be plenty of  time for 
birds later; first  you must catch up on your  studies if you  want 

212
to get into  a good school.”  Good  heavens, she was beginning 
to sound like Mr. Hoo.
       “Will   you  c-come to  see m-me?” Chris  asked. “It  g-gets 
sort of lonely with  Theo away at c-college.”
       The  judge gave  him  one  of  her  rare  smiles. He  was  a 
bright  youngster  (“Real  smart,”   Sandy  had said),  he  had  a 
good future (Sandy had said that, too), he needed her influence 
and the  extra  money,  but  she might   smother  him  with   her 
demands. “I’ll  see you when I can, and I’ll  write  to you, Chris. 
I promise.”


Hoo’s  Little   Foot-Eze  (patent  pending)  was  selling  well   in 
drugstores and shoe repair shops.
       “Once we  capture the Milwaukee   market I’ll   take you  to 
China,” James Hoo promised his business partner.
       “Okay,”  Madame  Hoo replied,  toting  up accounts on  her 
abacus. No  hurry.  She  had many  friends  in   Sunset Towers 
now. And  no more cooking,  no  more tight  dresses slit up her 
thigh.  Her  husband had  bought  her a  nice  pantsuit  to  wear 
when they called on customers, and for her birthday  Doug had 
given her one of his medals to wear around her neck.


The secretary to  the president  of Schultz  Sausages was back 
on the job.  Her ankle  mended, Sydelle  Pulaski had discarded 
her  crutches.  She  had  all   the  attention   she  could   handle 
without  them;  after  all,  she  was an  heiress now.  (It   wasn’t 
polite to  ask how much, but  everyone knew Sam Westing had 
millions.)  Of  course she could  retire to  Florida,  she said, but 
what would  poor  Mr.  Schultz  do without   her? And  then one 
unforgettable Friday Mr.  Schultz, himself, took  her to lunch.

213
Jake Wexler  had given  up  his  private  practice  (both  private 
practices) now  that  he had  been appointed consultant  to  the 
governor’s  inquiry    panel  for   a  state  lottery    (thanks  to   a 
recommendation by Judge Ford). Grace was proud of him, and 
his daughters were doing well. In fact  everything was fine, just 
fine.
       Hoo’s  On  First  was a  great  success. Grace Wexler,  the 
new owner, offered  free meals to the sports figures  who came 
to town,  and  everyone wanted  to  eat where the  athletes ate. 
The  restaurant’s  one   windowless   wall   was   covered  with 
autographed photographs  of   Brewers,  Packers,  and  Bucks. 
Grace straightened the framed picture  of a  smiling  champion, 
signed: To Grace W. Wexler, who serves the number-one food 
in  town—Doug  Hoo.   She certainly   was  a lucky   woman:  a 
respected restaurateur, wife of  a state official,   and mother  of 
the  cleverest  kid  who   ever  lived.   Turtle  was  going   to  be 
somebody someday.
       A  narrow  scar remained,  and would   always  remain,  on 
Angela’s cheek. It  was slightly  raised, and  she had developed 
a habit of  running  her  fingers along  it  as she pored over  her 
books. Enrolled  in  college  again,  she lived  at  home to  save 
money for the years of medical school ahead. She had returned 
the engagement ring  to Denton  Deere; she had  not seen him 
since Crow’s  wedding. Ed  Plum had stopped calling  after  ten 
refusals. Angela had neither the time nor the desire for a social 
life   what   with   studying,   her  weekly   shopping   date  with 
Sydelle, and Sundays spent helping Crow and Otis in  the soup 
kitchen.
       “Study, study, study,” Turtle  said.

214
       Angela saw little  of her sister, who was either at school, in 
Flora  Baumbach’s  apartment, or  at  the  library.   “Hi,   Turtle, 
how come you’re so happy today?”
       “The stock market jumped  twenty-five  points.”


The  newlyweds,   Crow   and  Otis   Amber,   moved   into   the 
apartment  above  the   Good  Salvation   Soup   Kitchen.   The 
storefront mission  had been renovated and expanded with  the 
money from  the inheritance. Grace Wexler had supervised the 
decorations: copper pots hung from the ceiling,  the pews were 
padded with   flowered   cushions  and  fitted   with   hymnbook 
pockets and drop-leaf  trays. There  was meat in  the soup  and 
fresh bread every day.





29      ♦       Five   Years   Pass


The former  delivery  boy danced into  the Hoos’ new  lakefront 
home. “Let’s  give a cheer, the Ambers are here!” Otis  came to 
celebrate Doug’s victory   wearing the  old zippered  jacket and 
aviator’s helmet.  He had even let  a stubble grow  on his  chin. 
The only  thing missing  was his delivery   bike (they  had come 
in   the  soup-kitchen   van).   “Thank    you  for    the  generous 
donation, Mr.  Hoo.  God  bless you,”   Crow  said.  “Otis  and I 
distributed  the innersoles  among  our  people. It  helped  their 
suffering  greatly.”   She  looked  worn,   her  skin   pulled  tight 
against the fragile bones, and she still wore black.

215
       Mr. Hoo,  on the other hand, was stouter and less angry. In 
fact, he was almost happy. Business was booming. Milwaukee 
loved  Hoo’s  Little   Foot-Eze,  and so  did  Chicago  and  New 
York and  Los Angeles,  but he  still  had not  taken his  wife  to 
China.
       Theo  Theodorakis,  graduate  of  journalism   school,  cub 
reporter, held up the newspaper, hot off the press:


                     OLYMPIC   HERO COMES  HOME


Four columns were devoted to  the history  and achievement of 
the gold medal winner  who had set a new record for the 1500-
meter run.  Theo  had  not  actually  written  the  article  on  the 
local hero, but  he had sharpened pencils for  the reporter  who 
did.
       “Take a bow, Doug,”  Mr. Hoo said, beaming.
       Doug leaped on  a table and  thrust his index  fingers  high 
in the  air. “I’m   number  one!”  he shouted. The Olympic   gold 
medal hung from  his neck, confetti  from the  parade dotted his 
hair. The Westing heirs cheered.


“Hello,  Jake, I’m   glad you  could  come,” Sunny  (as Madame 
Hoo was now  called)  said, shaking  the hand of  the chairman 
of the State Gambling Commission.
       “Boom!”   Jake Wexler replied.


“Hello,  Angela.”  Denton Deere had grown  a thick  moustache. 
He was a neurologist. He had never married.
       “Hello,  Denton.”  Angela’s  golden hair  was tied  in a knot 
on  the  nape of   her  neck.  She  wore  no  makeup.  She  was 

216
completing her third  year of  medical school.  “It’s  been a long 
time.”
       “Remember  me?” Sydelle  Pulaski  wore  a red and  white 
polka  dot  dress and  leaned  on  a  red  and  white  polka   dot 
crutch. She had sprained her knee dancing a tango at the office 
party.
       “How  could I ever forget  you, Ms. Pulaski?”  Denton said.
       “I’d    like    you   to   meet  my    fiancé,   Conrad   Schultz, 
president of Schultz Sausages.”
       “How  do you do.”


“Judge Ford, I’d   like  you to  meet my friend,  Shirley  Staver.” 
Chris  Theodorakis   was   in   his  junior    year  at   college.  A 
medication, recently  discovered, kept his limbs  steady and his 
speech well controlled.   He sat in  a wheelchair,  as he  always 
would.
       “Hello,   Shirley,”   the  judge  said.  “Chris  has  written   so 
much about  you.  I’m   sorry  I’m   such a  poor correspondent, 
Chris; I  found  myself  in  a  tangle of  cases this  past month.” 
She was a judge on the United States Circuit Court of Appeals.
       “Chris  and I  were  both  chosen to  go on  a birdwatching 
tour to Central America this  summer,” Shirley said.
       “Yes, I know.”


For old times’  sake Grace Wexler catered the party herself and 
passed among the guests with a tray of appetizers. She owned 
a chain  of  five   restaurants now:  Hoo’s  On  First,  Hoo’s  On 
Second, Hoo’s On Third, Hoo’s On  Fourth, Hoo’s On Fifth.
       “Who’s  that  attractive  young  woman  talking  with   Flora 
Baumbach?” Theo asked.

217
       “Why,  that’s  my daughter  Turtle.  She’s really  grown  up, 
hasn’t she? Second year  of  college  and she’s only   eighteen. 
Calls herself T. R. Wexler now.”
       T. R. Wexler was radiant. Earlier that day she had won her 
first chess game from the master.





30      ♦       The   End?


Turtle  spent the  night  at  the bedside  of  eighty-five-year-old 
Julian  R.  Eastman. T.  R.  Wexler  had  a  master’s  degree in 
business administration, an advanced degree in corporate law, 
and had  served  two  years  as legal  counsel  to  the  Westing 
Paper Products Corporation. She had made one million dollars 
in the stock market, lost it all,  then made five million  more.
       “This  is it, Turtle.”  His voice  was weak.
       “You  can die before my  very eyes, Sandy, and I wouldn’t 
believe it.”
       “Show some respect. I can still change my will.”
       “No,  you can’t. I’m  your lawyer.”
       “That’s   the  thanks  I  get  for   that  expensive  education. 
How’s the judge?”
       “Judge Ford  has just been appointed to  the United  States 
Supreme Court.”
       “What   do  you  know,  honest  Josie-Jo  on  the  Supreme 
Court. She was a smart kid, too, but she never once beat me at 
chess. Tell  me about  the others,  Turtle.  How’s  poor,  saintly 
Crow?”

218
       “Crow   and Otis  are  still  slopping   soup,”  Turtle  fibbed. 
Crow and Otis  Amber had died  two  years ago, within  a week 
of each other.
       “And  that funny  woman with  the painted crutches, what’s 
her name?”
       “Sydelle  Pulaski Schultz.  She and her husband moved to 
Hawaii. Angela keeps in touch.”
       “Angela. And  how is your  pretty sister, the bomber?”
       Turtle  never  knew  he  knew.  “Angela   is  an  orthopedic 
surgeon.” Julian R. Eastman was an old man, but suddenly  his 
mind, too,  was old. For  the first  time  since the Westing game 
he was wearing the dentures with  the chipped  front  tooth. He 
had turned  back to  his happiest  times.  Sandy was dying,  he 
was really   dying.  Turtle   held  back  her  tears.  “Angela   and 
Denton  Deere  are  married.   They  have  a   daughter  named 
Alice.”
       “Alice.  Doesn’t  Flora Baumbach call you Alice?”
       “She used to, she calls me T. R. as everyone does.”
       “How  is  the dressmaker, Turtle? Tell  me about them, tell 
me about all of them.”
       Flora  Baumbach  had  given   up  dressmaking  when  she 
moved in  with   Turtle  years ago.  “Baba  is well,   everyone is 
well.  Mr.   and  Mrs.   Theodorakis  (remember,  they   had  the 
coffee shop in  Sunset Towers),  they retired  to  Florida.  Chris 
and  his  wife    Shirley   teach  ornithology   at   the  university. 
They’re both professors. Chris discovered a new subspecies on 
his  last  trip   to  South  America;   it’s   named  after  him:   the 
something-Christos parrot.”
       “The something-Christos  parrot, I  like  that. And the  track 
star? Has he won any more medals?”

219
       “Two  Olympic  golds in a row. Doug  is a sports announcer 
on television.”
       “And  how  is  Jimmy  Hoo’s  invention  going? I  gave him 
the idea, you know.”
       “It  looks  like   a real  winner,  Sandy.” Mr.   Hoo, too,  was 
dead. Sunny Hoo finally   made her trip  to China,  but returned 
to carry on the business.
       “And  tell  me about my  niece, Gracie  Windkloppel.  Does 
she still think she’s a decorator?”
       “Mom   went into  the  restaurant business, has a  chain of 
ten. Nine are quite successful. I  keep telling  her to give  up on 
Hoo’s On Tenth, to cut her losses, but she’s stubborn as ever. I 
guess she hangs on to  it  because it’s in  Madison,  to  be near 
dad. He’s now the state crime commissioner.”
       “He’s well  qualified  for  the job. And your  husband, how’s 
his writing  coming along?”
       He had remembered. “Theo’s   doing fine.  The  first  novel 
sold about six copies, but  it got  great reviews. He’s just  about 
finished with  his second book.”
       “And  when are you two going to  have children?”
       “Someday.”  Turtle  and Theo had  decided against having 
children   because  of   the   possibility    of   inheriting   Chris’s 
disease.
       “If  it’s a boy we’ll   name him Sandy, and if it’s a girl,  well, 
I guess we can name her Sandy, too.”
       The old  man’s  voice  was barely  audible  now. “Did   you 
say Angela had a little girl?”
       “Yes, Alice,  she’s ten years old.”
       “Is she pretty like  her mother?”
       “I’m  afraid  not, she looks a lot like you and me.”

220
       “Turtle?”
       “Yes, Sandy.”
       “Turtle?”
       “I’m  right  here, Sandy.” She took his hand.
       “Turtle,  tell Crow  to pray for me.”
       His  hand turned  cold,  not  smooth,  not  waxy,  just  very, 
very cold.
       Turtle  turned to  the  window.  The  sun was  rising  out of 
Lake Michigan.  It was tomorrow. It  was the Fourth of July.


Julian  R.   Eastman  was  dead;  and  with   him   died   Windy 
Windkloppel,   Samuel   W.  Westing,   Barney   Northrup,   and 
Sandy McSouthers. And with him  died a little  of Turtle.
       No one, not even Theo, knew her secret. T. R. Wexler was 
understandably sad  over  the  death  of  the  chairman   of  the 
board of   the Westing  Paper  Products Corporation.   She had 
been his legal adviser; she would inherit  his stock and serve as 
a director  of  the  company  until  the  day  she, too,  would  be 
elected chairman of the board.
       Veiled in  black  she hurried  from   the funeral  services. It 
was Saturday and  she had an important  engagement. Angela 
brought   her   daughter,  Alice,    to   the   Wexler-Theodorakis 
mansion to spend Saturday afternoons with her aunt.
       There she was,  waiting  for  her  in  the library.   Baba had 
tied red ribbons in the one long pigtail  down her back.
       “Hi  there, Alice,”  T. R. Wexler said. “Ready  for a game of 
chess?”

