1
      OVER
   3 MILLION
DALE CARNEGIE ^                                ffi
 BOOKS SOLD!                                      "X?N
                                                                $5.99 U.S.
                                                                $7.50 CAN.








  EASYWAYTO
          EFFECTIVE
           SPEAKING
       ^DALE
       CARNEGIE

           Modern techniques for dynamic communication
                  A revision by Dorothy Carnegie of
     PUBLIC SPEAKING AND INFLUENCING MEN IN BUSINESS
                           by Dale Carnegie

2
  U.S. $5.99
 CAN. $7.50





































vO

3
'Effective speaking ...is the

 revealing expression of a
        human personality/'

       "This revision of the textbook that Dale
   Carnegie wrote for his courses has been
   based upon my husband's own notes and
   ideas. The title is one which he himself
   chose.   
       "Business, social, and personal satisfac-

   tions depend heavily upon a person's ability

   to communicate clearly to his fellow men
   what he is, what he desires, and what he be-

   lieves in. And now, as never before, in an
  atmosphere of international tensions, fears,
   and insecurities, we need the channels of
  cbmmunication between peoples kept open.
       "It is my hope that The Quick and Easy
  Way to Effective Speaking will be helpful in

  all these ways, both to those who wish merely
  to function with greater ease and self-con-
  fidence in practical pursuits, and to those
  who wish to express themselves more com-
  pletely as individuals seeking a deeper per-
  sonal fulfillment." —Dorothy Carnegie

4
Books by Dale Carnegie

How to Develop Self-Confidence and Influence People by Public
   Speaking
How to Enjoy Your Life and Your Job (Revised Edition)
How to Stop Worrying and Start Living
How to Win Friends and Influence People (Revised Edition)
The Quick and Easy Way to Effective Speaking


Published by POCKET BOOKS























   Most Pocket Books are available at special quantity discounts for bulk
   purchases for sales promotions, premiums or fund raising. Special
   books or book excerpts can also be created to fit specific needs.

   For details write the office of the Vice President of Special Markets,
   Pocket Books, 1230 Avenue of the Americas. New York, New York
   10020.

5
                      The
             QUICK&
   EASYWAYTO
         EFFECTIVE
          SPEAKING
        -DALE
       Carnegie

               A revision by Dorothy Carnegie of
     PUBLIC SPEAKING AND INFLUENCING MEN IN BUSINESS
                       by Dale Carnegie








                    POCKET BOOKS
New York London Toronto Sydney Tokyo Singapore

6
   The sale of this book without its cover is unauthorized. If you purchased
   this book without a cover, you should be aware that it was reported to
   the publisher as "unsold and destroyed." Neither the author nor the
   publisher has received payment for the sale of this "stripped book."















                        POCKET BOOKS, a division of Simon & Schuster Inc.
                         1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020


Copyright © 1962 by Dorothy Carnegie


Published by arrangement with Association Press


All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce

this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever.
For information address Association Press,
291 Broadway, New York, NY 10007


ISBN: 0-671-72400-2


First Pocket Books printing December 1977


25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17

POCKET and colophon are registered trademarks of
Simon & Schuster Inc.


Printed in the U.S.A.

7
                                                                                      1





                              Contents


Introduction                                                                  ix



Part One / Fundamentals of Effective Speaking


  1. Acquiring the Basic Skills                                      IS

       Take Heart from the Experience of Others          17
       Keep Your Goal Before You                                21
       Predetermine Your Mind to Success                   25
       Seize Every Opportunity to Practice                    28

  2. Developing Confidence                                         30

       Get the Facts About Fear of Speaking in Public 3
       Prepare in the Proper Way                                  34
       Predetermine Your Mind to Success                   39
       Act Confident                                                       41

  3. Speaking Effectively the Quick and Easy Way 45

       Speak About Something You Have Earned the
           Right to Talk About Through Experience
           or Study                                                           46
       Be Sure You Are Excited About Your Subject 52
       Be Eager to Share Your Talk with Your
           Listeners                                                          55



Part Two / Speech, Speaker, and Audience

  4. Earning the Right to Talk                                      61

       Limit Your Subject                                                62
       Develop Reserve Power                                      63
                                                                                      v

8
         Fill Your Talk with Illustrations and Examples 66
         Use Concrete, Familiar Words That Create
             Pictures                                                                72


    5. Vitalizing the Talk                                                     76

         Choose Subjects You Are Earnest About                77
         Relive the Feelings You Have About Your
             Topic                                                                    83
         Act in Earnest                                                          83


    6. Sharing the Talk with the Audience                          85

         Talk in Terms of Your Listeners' Interests               86
         Give Honest, Sincere Appreciation                         89
         Identify Yourself with the Audience                         90
         Make Your Audience a Partner in Your Talk 93
         Play Yourself Down                                                 95




 Part Three / The Purpose of Prepared
                          and Impromptu Talks


   7. Making the Short Talk to Get Action                       101

        Give Your Example, an Incident from Your
            Ufe                                                                      107
        State Your Point, What You Want the
            Audience to Do                                                   113
        Give the Reason or Benefit the Audience May
            Expect                                                                115


  8. Making the Talk to Inform                                        118

       Restrict Your Subject to Fit the Time at Your
            Disposal                                                             120
       Arrange Your Ideas in Sequence                           121
       Enumerate Your Points as You Make Them 122
       Compare the Strange with the Familiar                  123
       Use Visual Aids                                                      130
VI

9
  9. Making the Talk to Convince                              133

       Win Confidence by Deserving It                        135
       Get a Yes-Response                                         135
       Speak with Contagious Enthusiasm                  139
       Show Respect and Affection for Your
           Audience                                                        141
       Begin in a Friendly Way                                     141

10. Making Impromptu Talks                                    146

       Practice Impromptu Speaking                           147
       Be Mentally Ready to Speak Impromptu           150
       Get into an Example Immediately                      151
       Speak with Animation and Force                       151
       Use the Principle of the Here and Now              152
       Don't Talk Impromptu—Give an Impromptu
           Talk                                                                153



Part Four / The Art of Communicating

11. Delivering the Talk                                              159

       Crash Through Your Shell of
           Self-Consciousness                                       160
       Don't Try to Imitate Others—Be Yourself           161
       Converse with Your Audience                            163
       Put Your Heart into Your Speaking                    166
       Practice Making Your Voice Strong and
           Flexible                                                           168



Part Five / The Challenge of Effective Speaking

12. Introducing Speakers, Presenting
           and Accepting Awards                                   173

       Thoroughly Prepare What You Are Going
           to Say                                                             175
       Follow the 7-7-5 Formula                                   178
                                                                                    vn

10
       Be Enthusiastic                                                      182
       Be Warmly Sincere                                                183
       Thoroughly Prepare the Talk of Presentation 183
       Express Your Sincere Feelings in the Talk
           of Acceptance                                                    184

13. Organizing the Longer Talk                                     186

       Get Attention Immediately                                      187
       Avoid Getting Unfavorable Attention                      195
       Support Your Main Ideas                                       197
       Appeal for Action                                                   202

14, Applying What You Have Learned                         207

        Use Specific Detail in Everyday Conversation 209
        Use Effective Speaking Techniques in Your Job 210
       Seek Opportunities to Speak in Public                  211
        You Must Persist                                                   212
       Keep the Certainty of Reward Before You 214

Acknowledgments                                                         221






















vm

11
                       Introduction







                  Dale Carnegie began teaching his first
public speaking course in 1912 for the YMCA at 125th
Street in New York City. In those days, public speaking
was regarded as an art, rather than as a skill, and its
teaching aims were directed toward producing orators
and platform giants of the silver-tongued variety. The
average business or professional man who merely
wanted to express himself with more ease and self-con-
fidence in his own milieu did not wish to spend his time
or money studying mechanics of speech, voice produc-
tion, rules of rhetoric, and formalized gestures. Dale
Carnegie's courses in effective speaking were immedi-
ately successful because they gave these men the results
they wanted. Dale approached public speaking not as a
fine art requiring special talents and aptitude, but as a
skill which any normally intelligent person could ac-
quire and develop at will.

                                          ix

12
 x                                  Introduction

     Today, the Dale Carnegie courses circle the globe
 and the validity of Dale Carnegie's concept is attested
 to by thousands of his students everywhere, men and
 women from every walk of life, who have successfully
 improved their speaking as well as their personal effec-
 tiveness.
     The textbook Dale Carnegie wrote for his courses,
 Public Speaking and Influencing Men in Business, went
 through more than fifty printings, was translated into
 eleven languages, and was revised by Dale Carnegie
 several times to keep pace with his own increased
 knowledge and experience. More people used the book
 each year than the combined enrollments of the largest
 universities.
     The fourth revision of the book has been based upon
 my husband's own notes and ideas. The title is one
 which he himself chose before his work was interrupted
 by death. I have tried to keep in mind his basic philoso-
 phy, that effective speaking is more than "saying a few
 words" to an audience: it is the revealing expression of
a human personality.
     Every activity of our lives is communication of a sort,
but it is through speech that man asserts his distinctive-
ness from other forms of life. He alone, of all animals,
has the gift of verbal communication, and it is through
the quality of his speech that he best expresses his own
individuality, his essence. When he is unable to say
clearly what he means, through either nervousness, tim-
idity, or foggy thought-processes, his personality is
blocked off, dimmed out, and misunderstood.
    Business, social, and personal satisfaction depend
heavily upon a person's ability to communicate clearly
to his fellow men what he is, what he desires, and what
he believes in. And now, as never before, in an atmo-
sphere of international- tensions, fears, and insecurities,
we need the channels of communication between peo-
ples kept open. It is my hope that The Quick and Easy
Way to Effective Speaking will be helpful in all these

13
                                  Introduction                               xi

ways, both to those who wish merely to function with
greater ease and self-confidence in practical pursuits,
and to those who wish to express themselves more com-
pletely as individuals seeking a deeper personal fulfill-
ment

                                                   Dorothy Carnegie

15
                         PART ONE

                                   4  >


       Fundamentals of

   Effective Speaking




In every art there are few principles and many tech-
niques.

In the chapters that make up the first part of this book,
we discuss the basic principles of effective speaking and
the attitudes to make these principles come alive.

As adults, we are interested in a quick and easy way to
speak effectively. The only way we can achieve results
quickly is to have the right attitude about achieving our
goal and a firm foundation of principles to build upon.

17
                  CHAPTER ONE


                 Acquiring the

                  Basic Skills




                   I started teaching classes in public speak-
ing in 1912, the year the Titanic went down in the icy
waters of the North Atlantic. Since then, more than
seven hundred and fifty thousand people have been
graduated from these classes.
    In the demonstration meetings preceding the first
session of the Dale Carnegie Course, people are given
the opportunity of telling why they intend to enroll and
what they hope to gain from this training. Naturally,
the phraseology varies; but the central desire, the basic
want in the vast majority of cases, remains surprisingly
the same: "When I am called upon to stand up and
speak, I become so self-conscious, so frightened, that I
can't think clearly, can't concentrate, can't remember
what I intended to say. I want to gain self-confidence,
poise, and the ability to think on my feet I want to. get
my thoughts together in logical order, and I want to be
able to talk clearly and convincingly before a business
or social group."
   Doesn't this sound familiar? Haven't you experi-
enced these same feelings of inadequacy? Wouldn't you
give a small fortune to have the ability to speak con-
vincingly and persuasively in public? I am sure you
would. The very fact that you have begun reading the
                                          15

18
16            FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

pages of this book is proof of your interest in acquiring
the ability to speak effectively.
    I know what you are going to say, what you would
say if you could talk to me: "But Mr. Carnegie, do you
really think I could develop the confidence to get up
and face a group of people and address them in a co-
herent, fluent manner?"
    I have spent nearly all my life helping people get rid
of their fears and develop courage and confidence. I
could fill many books with the stories of the miracles
that have taken place in my classes. It is not, therefore,
a question of my thinking. I know you can, if you prac-
tice the directions and suggestions that you will find in
this book.
    Is there the faintest shadow of a reason why you
should not be able to think as well in a perpendicular
position before an audience as you can sitting down? Is
there any reason why you should play host to butter-
flies in your stomach and become a victim of the
'"trembles" when you get up to address an audience?
Surely, you realize that this condition can be remedied,
that training and practice will wear away your audi-
ence-fright and give you self-confidence.
    This book will help you to achieve that goal. It is
not an ordinary textbook. It is not filled with rules
concerning the mechanics of speaking. It does not
dwell on the physiological aspects of vocal production
and articulation. It is the distillation of a lifetime spent
in training adults in effective speaking. It starts with
you as you are, and from that premise works naturally
to the conclusion of what you want to be. All you have
to do is co-operate—follow the suggestions in this
book, apply them in every speaking situation, and per-
severe.
    In order to get the most out of this book, and to get
it with rapidity and dispatch, you will find these four
guideposts useful:

19
                        ACQUIRING THE BASIC SKILLS      17

phot/ TAKE HEART FROM THE
                 EXPERIENCE OF OTHERS

    There is no such animal, in or out of captivity, as a
born public speaker. In those periods of history when
public speaking was a refined art that demanded close
attention to the laws of rhetoric and the niceties of de-
livery, it was even more difficult to be born a public
speaker. Now we think of public speaking as a kind of
enlarged conversation. Gone forever is the old grandil-
oquent style and the stentorian voice. What we like to
hear at our dinner meetings, in our church services, on
our TV sets and radios, is straightforward speech,
conceived in common sense and dedicated to the prop-
osition that we like speakers to talk with, and not at,
us.
    Despite what many school texts would lead us to be-
lieve, public speaking is not a closed art, to be mas-
tered only after years of perfecting the voice and
struggling with the mysteries of rhetoric. I have spent
almost all of my teaching career proving to people that
it is easy to speak in public, provided they follow a few
simple, but important, rules. When I started to teach at
the 125th Street YMCA in New York City back in
1912, I didn't know this any more than my first
students knew it I taught those first classes pretty
much the way I had been taught in my college years in
Warrensburg, Missouri But I soon discovered that I
was on the wrong track; I was trying to teach adults in
the business world as though they were college fresh-
men. I saw the futility of using Webster, Burke, Pitt,
and O'Connell as examples to imitate. What the mem-
bers of my classes wanted was enough courage to stand
on their hind legs and make a clear, coherent report at
their next business meeting. It wasn't long before I
threw the textbooks out the window, got right up there
on the podium and, with a few simple ideas, worked
with those fellows until they could give their reports in

20
 18           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

a convincing manner. It worked, because they kept
coming back for more.
    I wish I could give you a chance to browse through
the files of testimonial letters in my home or in the of-
fices of my representatives in various parts of the
world. They come from industrial leaders whose names
are frequently mentioned in the business section of The
New York Times and The Wall Street Journal, from
governors of states and members of parliaments, from
college presidents, and from celebrities in the world of
entertainment There are thousands more from house-
wives, ministers, teachers, young men and women
whose names are not well known yet, even in their own
communities, executives and executive trainees, la-
borers, skilled and unskilled, union men, college
students, and business women. All of these people felt
a need for self-confidence and the ability to express
themselves acceptably in public. They were so grateful
for having achieved both that they took the time to
write me letters of appreciation.
    Of the thousands of people I have taught, one exam-
ple comes to mind as I write because of the dramatic
impact it had on me at the time. Some years ago,
shortly after he joined my course, D. W. Ghent, a suc-
cessful businessman in Philadelphia, invited me to
lunch. He leaned across the table and said: "I have
sidestepped every opportunity to speak to various
gatherings, Mr. Carnegie, and there have been many.
But now I am chairman of a board of college trustees.
I must preside at their meetings. Do you think it will
be possible for me to learn to speak at this late date in
life?"
    I assured him, on the basis of my experience with
men in similar positions who had been members of my
classes, that there was no doubt in my mind that he
would succeed.
    About three years later we lunched together again at
the Manufacturers' Club. We ate in the same dining
room and at the very same table we had occupied at

21
                       ACQUIRING THE BASIC SKILLS       19

our first meeting. Reminding him of our former conver-
sation, I asked him whether my prediction had come
true. He smiled, took a little red-backed notebook out
of his pocket, and showed me a list of speaking en-
gagements for the next several months. *The ability to
make these talks," he confessed, "the pleasure I get in
giving them, the additional service I can render in the
community—these are among the most gratifying
things in my life*"
    But that was not all. With a feeling of justifiable
pride, Mr. Ghent then played his ace card. His church
group had invited the prime minister of England to
address a convocation in Philadelphia. And the
Philadelphian selected to make the introduction of the
distinguished statesman, on one of his rare trips to
America, was none other than Mr. D. W. Ghent
    This was the man who had leaned across that same
table less than three years before and asked me
whether I thought he would ever be able to talk in
public!
    Here is another example. The late David M.
Goodrich, Chairman of the Board of the B. F.
Goodrich Company, came to my office one day. "AH
my life," he began, "I have never been able to make a
talk without being frozen with fear. As Board Chair-
man I have to preside at our meetings. I have known
all the board members intimately for years, and I have
no trouble talking to them when we are sitting around
the table. But the moment I stand up to talk, I am ter-
rified. I can hardly say a word. I have been that way
for years. I don't believe you can do anything for me.
My trouble is too serious. It has existed too long."
    "Well," I said, "if you don't think I can do anything
for you, why did you come to see me?"
    "For one reason only," he replied. "I have an ac-
countant who takes care of my personal accounting
problems. He is a shy chap, and to get into his little of-
fice, he has to walk through my offipe. He has been
sneaking through my office for years, looking at the

22
                                                                                           a

 20           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

floor and hardly ever saying a word. But lately, he has
been transformed. He walks into my office now with
his chin up, a light in his eye; and he says, 'Good
morning, Mr. Goodrich/ with confidence and spirit I
was astonished at the change. So, I said to him: 'Who
has been feeding you meat?* He told me about taking
your course of training; and it is only because of the
transformation that I have witnessed in that frightened
little man that I have come to see you.**
    I told Mr. Goodrich that if he attended the classes
regularly and did what we asked him to do, within a
few weeks he would enjoy speaking before audiences.
    "If you can do that," he replied, "I'll be one of the
happiest men in the country."
    He joined the course, made phenomenal progress,
and three months later, I invited him to attend a meet-
ing of three thousand people in the ballroom of the
Hotel Astor, and talk to them on what he had gotten
out of our training. He was sorry—couldn't come—
previous engagement The next day he phoned me. "I
want to apologize," he said. "I have broken that en-
gagement Til come and speak for you. I owe it to you.
HI tell the audience what this training did for me. I'll
do it with the hope that my story will inspire some of
the listeners to get rid of the fears that are devastating
their lives."
    I asked him to speak for two minutes only. He spoke
to three thousand people for eleven minutes.
    I have seen thousands of similar miracles worked in
my courses. I have seen men and women whose lives
were transformed by this training, many of them re-
ceiving promotions far beyond their dreams or achiev-
ing positions of prominence in their business,
profession, and community. Sometimes this has Been
done by means of a single talk delivered at the right
moment. Let me tell you the story of Mario Lazo.
    Years ago, I received a cable from Cuba that aston-
ished me. It read: "Unless you cable me to the con-
trary, I am coming to New York to take training to

23
                                                                                     1a

                       ACQUIRING THE BASIC SKILLS      2

make a speech." It was signed: "Mario Lazo." Who
was he? I wondered! I had never heard of him before.
    When Mr. Lazo arrived in New York, he said: "The
Havana Country Club is going to celebrate the fiftieth
birthday of the founder of the club; and I have been
invited to present him with a silver cup and to make
the principal talk of the evening. Although I am an at-
torney, I have never made a public talk in my life. I
am terrified at the thought of speaking. If I fail, it will
be deeply embarrassing to my wife and myself socially;
and, in addition, it might lower my prestige with my
clients. That is why I have come all the way from
Cuba for your help. I can stay only three weeks."
    During those three weeks, I had Mario Lazo going
from one class to another speaking three or four times
a night Three weeks later, he addressed the distin-
guished gathering at the Havana Country Club. His
address was so outstanding that Time Magazine report-
ed it under the head of foreign news and described
Mario Lazo as a "silver-tongued orator."
    Sounds like a miracle, doesn't it? It is a miracle-—
twentieth-century miracle of conquering fear.


second/ KEEP YOUR GOAL BEFORE YOU

    When Mr. Ghent spoke of the pleasure his newly ac-
quired skill in public speaking gave him, he touched
upon what I believe (more than any other one factor)
contributed to his success. It's true he followed the
directions and faithfully did the assignments. But Fm
sure he did these things because he wanted to do them,
and he wanted to do them because he saw himself as a
successful speaker. He projected himself into the future
and then worked toward bringing that projection into
reality. That is exactly what you must do.
   Concentrate your attention on what self-confidence
and the ability to talk more effectively will mean to
you. Think of what it may mean to you socially, of the

24
 22           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

friends it will bring, of your increased capacity to be of
service in your civic, social, or church group, of the in-
fluence you will be able to exert in your business. In
short, it will prepare you for leadership.
    In an article entitled "Speech and Leadership in
Business/' S. C. Allyn, Chairman of the Board of the
National Cash Register Company and Chairman of
UNESCO, wrote in the Quarterly Journal of Speech:
"In the history of our business, many a man has drawn
attention to himself by a good job done on the plat-
form. A good many years ago a young man, who was
then in charge of a small branch in Kansas, gave a
rather unusual talk, and is today our vice-president in
charge of sales." I happen to know that this vice-
president is now the president of the National Cash
Register Company.
    There is no predicting how far the ability to speak
on your feet will take you. One of our graduates,
Henry Blackstone, President of the Servo Corporation
of America, says, "The ability to communicate effec-
tively with others and win their co-operation is an asset
we look for in men moving to the top."
    Think of the satisfaction and pleasure that will be
yours when you stand up and confidently share your
thoughts and feelings with your audience. I have trav-
eled around the world several times, but I know of few
things that give greater delight than holding an audi-
ence by the power of the spoken word. You get a sense
of strength, a feeling of power. "Two minutes before I
begin," said one of my graduates, "I would rather be
whipped than start; but two minutes before I finish, I
would rather be shot than stop."
    Begin now to picture yourself before an audience
you might be called upon to address. See yourself step-
ping forward with confidence, listen to the hush fall
upon the room as you begin, feel the attentive absorp-
tion of the audience as you drive home point after
point, feel the warmth of the applause as you leave the
platform, and hear the words of appreciation with

25
                       ACQUIRING THE BASIC SKILLS      23

which individual members of the audience greet you
when the meeting is over. Believe me, there is a magic
in it and a never-to-be-forgotten thrill.
    William James, Harvard's most distinguished profes-
sor of psychology, wrote six sentences that could have
a profound effect on your life, six sentences that are
the open sesame to Ali Baba's treasure cave of cour-
age: "In almost any subject, your passion for the sub-
ject will save you. If you care enough for a result, you
will most certainly attain it. If you wish to be good,
you will be good. If you wish to be rich, you will be
rich. If you wish to be learned, you will be learned.
Only then you must really wish these things and wish
them with exdusiveness and not wish one hundred
other incompatible things just as strongly."
    Learning to speak effectively to groups brings other
benefits than merely the ability to make formal public
speeches. As a matter of fact, if you never give a
formal public speech in your life, the benefits to be
derived from this training are manifold. For one thing,
public speaking training is the royal road to self-confi-
dence. Once you realize that you can stand up and talk
intelligently to a group of people, it is logical to assume
that you can talk to individuals with greater confidence
and assurance. Many men and women have taken my
course in Effective Speaking primarily because they
were shy and self-conscious in social groups. When
they found they were capable of speaking on their feet
to their fellow class members without having the roof
fall in, they became aware of the ridiculousness of
self-consciousness. They began to impress others, their
families, friends, business associates, customers, and
clients, with their newly found poise. Many of our
graduates, like Mr. Goodrich, were impelled to take
the course by the remarkable change in the personali-
ties of those around them.
   This type of training also affects the personality in
ways that are not immediately apparent. Not long ago I
asked Dr. David AHman, the Atlantic City surgeon and

26
 24           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

 former president of the American Medical Association,
what in his opinion were the benefits of public speaking
training in terms of mental and physical health. He
smiled and said he could best answer that question by
writing a prescription that "no drugstore can fill. It
must be filled by the individual; if he thinks he can't,
he is wrong."
    I have the prescription on my desk. Every time I
read it, I am impressed Here it is, just as Dr. Allman
jotted it down:

         Try your best to develop an ability to let others
    look into your head and heart Learn to make
    your thoughts, your ideas, clear to others, individ-
    ually, in groups, in public. You will find, as you
    improve in your effort to do this, that you—your
    real self—are making an impression, an impact,
    on people such as you never made before.
        You can reap a double benefit from this
    prescription. Your self-confidence strengthens as
    you learn to speak to others, and your whole per-
    sonality grows warmer and better. This means
    that you are better off emotionally, and if you are
    better off emotionally, you are better off physi-
    cally. Public speaking in our modern world is for
    everybody, men and women, young and elderly. I
    do not know personally about its advantages to
    one in business or industry. I only hear that they
    are great But I do know its advantages in health.
    Speak when you can, to a few or to many; you
    will do it better and better, as I have found out,
    myself; and you will feel a buoyancy of spirit, a
    sense of being a whole, rounded person, such as
    you never felt before.
        It is a wonderful sense to have, and no pill ever
    made can give it to you.

    The second guidepost, then, is to picture yourself as
successfully doing what now you fear to do, and to

27
                        ACQUIRING THE BASIC SKILLS      25

concentrate on the benefits you will receive through
your ability to talk acceptably before groups. Remem-
ber the words of William James: "If you care enough
for a result, you will most certainly attain it"



third/ PREDETERMINE YOUR MIND
                  TO SUCCESS

    I was asked once, on a radio program, to tell in
three sentences the most important lesson I have ever
learned. This is what I said: 'The biggest lesson I have
ever learned is the stupendous importance of what we
think. If I knew what you think, I would know what
you are, for your thoughts make you what you are. By
changing our thoughts, we can change our lives."
    You have set your sights on the goal of increased
confidence and more effective communication. From
now on, you must think positively, not negatively,
about your chances to succeed in this endeavor. You
must develop a buoyant optimism about the outcome
of your efforts to speak before groups. You must set
the seal of determination upon every word and action
that you devote toward the development of this ability.
    Here is a story that is dramatic proof of the need for
resolute determination on the part of anyone who
wants to meet the challenge of more expressive speak-
ing. The man I am writing about has come up the
management ladder so far that he has become a big-
business legend. But the first time he stood up to speak
in college, words failed him. He couldn't get beyond
the middle of the five-minute talk his teacher had as-
signed. His face went white, and he hurried off the plat-
form in tears.
    The man who had that experience as a young
student didn't let that failure frustrate him. He deter-
mined to become a good speaker and didn't stop in
that determination until he became a world-respected
economic consultant to the government His name is

28
 26          FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECITVB SPEAKING

 Clarence B. Randall In one of his thoughtful books,
 Freedom's Faith, he has this to say about public speak-
 ing: "I have service stripes all the way up one sleeve
 and all the way down the other from appearances be-
 fore luncheons and dinners of manufacturers' associa-
tions, Chambers of Commerce, Rotary Clubs,
fund-raising campaigns, alumni organizations, and all
the rest I talked myself into World War I by a patri-
otic address in Escanaba, Michigan; I have barn-
stormed for charity with Mickey Rooney, and for
 education with President James Bryant Conant of Har-
vard and Chancellor Robert M. Hutchins of the Uni-
versity of Chicago; and I have even made an
after-dinner speech in very bad French.
    "I think I know something about what an audience
will listen to, and how they want it said. And there is
nothing whatever about it that a man worthy to bear
important business responsibility cannot learn if he
will"
    I agree with Mr. Randall The will to succeed must
be a vital part of the process of becoming an effective
speaker. If I could look into your mind and ascertain
the strength of your desire and the light and shadow of
your thought I could foretell, almost with certainty,- the
swiftness of your progress toward your goal of im-
proved communicative skills.
    In one of my classes in the Middle West, a man
stood up the first night and unabashedly said that as a
builder of homes he wouldn't be contort until he be-
came a spokesman for the American Home Builders'
Association. He wanted nothing more than to go up
and down this country and tell everybody he met the
problems and achievements of his industry. Joe Haver*
stick meant what he said. He was the kind of class
member that delights an instructor: he was in dead
earnest He wanted to be able to talk, not on local is-
sues only, but on national ones, and there was no half-
heartedness about his desires. He prepared his talks
thoroughly, practiced them carefully, and never missed

29
                        ACQUIRING THE BASIC SKILLS      27

a single session, though it was the busy season of the
year for men in his business. He did precisely what
such a class member always does—he progressed at a
rate that surprised him. In two months he had become
one of the outstanding members of the class. He was
voted its president
    The instructor handling that class was in Norfolk,
Virginia, about a year later, and this is what he wrote:
"I had forgotten all about Joe Haverstick back in Ohio
when, one morning while I was having breakfast, I
opened the Virginia Pilot. There was a picture of Joe
and a write-up about him. The night before, he had
addressed a large meeting of area builders, and I saw
that Joe was not just a spokesman for the National
Home Builders' Association; he was its president"
    So, to succeed in this work, you need the qualities
that are essential in any worthwhile endeavor: desire
amounting to enthusiasm, persistence to wear away
mountains, and the self-assurance to believe you will
succeed.
    When Julius Ceasar sailed over the channel from
Gaul and landed with his legions in what is now En-
gland, what did he do to insure the success of his
army? A very clever thing: he halted his soldiers on
the chalk cliffs of Dover; and, looking down over the
waves two hundred feet below, they saw red tongues of
fire consume every ship in which they had crossed. In
the enemy's country, with the last link with the Con-
tinent gone, the last means of retreat burned, there was
but one thing left for diem to do: to advance, to con-
quer. That is precisely what they did.
    Such was the spirit of the immortal Ceasar. Why not
make it yours, too, as you set out to conquer your fear
of audiences? Throw every shred of negative thought
into the consuming fires and slam doors of steel upon
every escape into the irresolute past

                                   * * *

30
28           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

fourth/ SEIZE EVERY OPPORTUNITY
                  TO PRACTICE

    The course I gave in the 125th Street YMCA before
World War I has been changed almost beyond recogni-
tion. Every year new ideas have been woven into the
sessions and old ones cast away. But one feature of the
course remains unchanged. Every member of every
class must get up once, and in the majority of cases,
twice, and give a talk before his fellow members. Why?
Because no one can learn to speak in public without
speaking in public any more than a person can learn to
swim without getting in the water. You could read ev-
ery volume ever written about public speaking—in-
cluding this one—and still not be able to speak. This
book is a thorough guide. But you must put its sugges-
tions into practice.
    When George Bernard Shaw was asked how he
learned to speak so compellingly in public, he replied:

**I did it the same way I learned to skate—by doggedly
making a fool of myself until I got used to it" As a
youth, Shaw was one of the most timid persons in Lon-
don. He often walked up and down the Embankment
for twenty minutes or more before venturing to knock
at a door. "Few men," he confessed, "have suffered
more from simple cowardice or have been more horri-
bly ashamed of it"
    Finally, he hit upon the best and quickest and surest
method ever yet devised to conquer timidity, cow-
ardice, and fear. He determined to make his weak
point his strongest asset He joined a debating society.
He attended every meeting in London where there was
to be a public discussion, and he always arose and took
part in the debate. By throwing his heart into the cause
of socialism, and by going out and speaking for that
cause, George Bernard Shaw transformed himself into
one of the most confident and brilliant speakers of the
first half of the twentieth century.
    Opportunities to speak are on all sides. Join organi-

31
                                                                                   —

                       ACQUIRING THE BASIC SKILLS       29

zations and volunteer for offices that will require you to
speak. Stand up and assert yourself at public meetings,
if only to second a motion. Don't take a back seat at
departmental meetings. Speak up! Teach a Sunday
School class. Become a Scout leader. Join any group
where you will have an opportunity to participate ac-
tively in the meetings. You have but to look around
you to see that there is scarcely a single business, com-
munity, political, professional, or even neighborhood
activity that does not challenge you to step forward
and speak up. You will never know what progress you
can make unless you speak, and speak, and speak
again.
    "I know all about that," a young business executive
once said to me, "but I hesitate to face the ordeal of
learning."
    "Ordeal!" I replied. "Put that thought out of your
mind. You've never thought of learning in the right
the conquering—spirit."
    "What spirit is that?" he asked.
    "The spirit of adventure," I told him, and I talked to
him a little about a path to success, through public
speaking, and the warming up, the unfolding, of one's
personality.
    'Til give it a try," he finally said. 'Til head into this
adventure."
   As you read on in this book, and as you put its prin-
ciples into practice, you, too, will be heading into ad-
venture. You will find it is an adventure in which your
power of self-direction and your vision will sustain you.
You will find it is an adventure that can change you,
inside and out

32
                 CHAPTER TWO


                 Developing
                 Confidence



                  "Five years ago, Mr. Carnegie, I came to
the hotel where you were conducting one of your
demonstrations. I walked up to the door of the meeting
room and then stopped. I knew if I entered that room
and joined a class, sooner or later Fd have to make a
speech. My hand froze on the doorknob. I couldn't go
in. I turned my back and walked out of the hotel.
    "E I had only known then how you make it easy to
conquer fear, the paralyzing fear of an audience, I
wouldn't have lost these past five years."
    The man who spoke these revealing words wasn't
talking across a table or a desk. He was directing his
remarks to an audience of some two hundred people. It
was the graduation session of one of my courses in
New York City. As he gave his talk, I was particularly
impressed by his poise and self-assurance. Here was a
man, I thought, whose executive skills will be tremen-
dously increased by his newly acquired expressiveness
and confidence. As his instructor, I was delighted to
see that he had dealt a death blow to fear, and I
couldn't help thinking how much more successful, and
what is more, how much happier this man would have
been if his victory over fear had come five or ten years
before.
   Emerson said, "Fear defeats more people than any
                                        30

33
                          DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE         31

other one thing in the world" Oh, how I have been
made aware of the bitter truth of that statement And
how grateful I am that during my life I have been able
to rescue people from fear. When I started to teach my
course in 1912, little did I realize that this training
would prove to be one of the best methods ever yet
devised to help people eliminate their fears and feelings
of inferiority. I found that learning to speak in public is
nature's own method of overcoming self-consciousness
and building up courage and self-cojifidence. Why? Be-
cause speaking in public makes us come to grips with
our fears.
    In years of training men and women to speak in
public, I have picked up some ideas to help you
quickly overcome stage fright and develop confidence
in a few short weeks of practice.



first/ GET THE FACTS ABOUT
                 FEAR OF SPEAKING IN PUBLIC

    Fact Number One:
    You are not unique in your fear of speaking in pub-
tic. Surveys in colleges indicate that eighty to ninety
per cent of all students enrolled in speech classes suffer
from stage fright at the beginning of the course. I am
inclined to believe that the figure is higher among
adults at the start of my course, almost one hundred
percent


   Fact Number Two:
   A certain amount of stage fright is useful! It is
nature's way of preparing us to meet unusual chal-
lenges in our environment So, when you notice your
pulse beating faster and your respiration speeding up,
  Mi't become alarmed. Your body, ever alert to exter-
      stimuli, is getting ready to go into action. If these

34
 32            FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

 physiological preparations are held within limits, you
 will be capable of thinking faster, talking more fluently,
 and generally speaking with greater intensity than un-
 der normal circumstances.



     Fact Number Three:
     Many professional speakers have assured me that
 they never completely lose all stage fright. It is almost
 always present just before they speak, and it may per-
 sist through the first few sentences of their talk. This is
 the price these men and women pay for being like race
 horses and not like draft horses. Speakers who say they
 are "cool as a cucumber" at all times are usually as
 thick-skinned as a cucumber and about as inspiring as
 a cucumber.



     Fact Number Four:
     The chief cause of your fear of public speaking is
simply that you are unaccustomed to speak in public.
'Tear is misbegotten of ignorance and uncertainty,"
says Professor Robinson in The Mind in the Making.
For most people, public speaking is an unknown quan-
tity, and consequently one fraught with anxiety and
fear factors. For the beginner, it is a complex series of
strange situations, more involved than, say, learning to
play tennis or drive a car. To make this fearful situa-
tion simple and easy: practice, practice, practice. You
will find, as thousands upon thousands have, that pub-
lic speaking can be made a joy instead of an agony
merely by getting a record of successful speaking ex-
periences behind you.

    The story of how Albert Edward Wiggam, the prom-
inent lecturer and popular psychologist, overcame his
fear, has been an inspiration to me ever since I first
read it. He tells how terror-struck he was at the

35
                         DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE         33

thought of standing up in high school and delivering a
five-minute declamation.
    "As the day approached," he writes, "I became posi-
tively ill Whenever the dreadful thought occurred to
me, my whole head would flush with blood and my
cheeks would burn so painfully that I would go out be-
hind the school building and press them against the
cold brick wall to try to reduce their surging blushes. It
was the same way with me in college.
    "On one occasion, I carefully memorized a decla-
mation beginning, 'Adam and Jefferson are no more.9
When I faced the audience, my head was swimming so
I scarcely knew where I was. I managed to gasp out
the opening sentence, stating that 'Adams and Jeffer-
son have passed away.' I couldn't say another word, so
I bowed . . . and walked solemnly back to my seat
amid great applause. The president got up and said,
'Well, Edward, we are shocked to hear the sad news,
but we will do our best to bear up under the circum-
stances.' During the uproarious laughter that followed,
death would surely have been a welcome relief. I was
ill for days afterward.
    "Certainly the last thing on earth I ever expected to
become was a public speaker."
    A year after he left college, Albert Wiggam was in
Denver. The political campaign of 1896 was raging
over the issue of Free Silver. One day he read a pam-
phlet explaining the proposals of the Free Silverites; he
became so incensed over what he considered the errors
and hollow promises of Bryan and his followers, that
he pawned his watch for enough money to get back to
his native Indiana. Once there, he offered his services
to speak on the subject of sound money. Many of his
old school friends were in the audience. "As I began,"
he writes, "the picture of my Adams and Jefferson
speech in college swept over me. I choked and stam-
mered and all seemed to be lost But, as Chauncey De-
pew often said, both the audience and I managed
somehow to live through the introduction; and encour-

36
34           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

aged by even this tiny success, I went on talking for
what I thought was about fifteen minutes. To my
amazement, I discovered I had been talking an hour
and a half!
    "As a result, within the next few years, I was the
most surprised person in the world to find myself mak-
ing my living as a professional public speaker.
    "I knew at first hand what William James meant by
the habit of success."
    Yes, Albert Edward Wiggam learned that one of the
surest ways of overcoming the devastating fear of
speaking before groups is to get a record of successful
experiences behind you.
    You should expect a certain amount of fear as a
natural adjunct of your desire to speak in public, and
you should learn to depend on a limited amount of
stage fright to help make you give a better talk.
    If stage fright gets out of hand and seriously curtails
your effectiveness by causing mental blocks, lack of flu-
ency, uncontrollable tics, and excessive muscular
spasm, you should not despair. These symptoms are
not unusual in beginners. If you make the effort, you
will find the degree of stage fright soon reduced to the
point where it will prove a help and not a hindrance.



second/ PREPARE IN THE PROPER WAY

    The principal speaker at a New York Rotary Club
luncheon several years ago was a prominent govern-
ment official We were looking forward to hearing him
describe the activities of his department
    It was obvious almost at once that he had not
planned his speech. At first he tried to talk impromptu.
Failing in that attempt, he pulled out of his pocket a
sheaf of notes which evidently had no more order than
a flatcar full of scrap iron. He fumbled awhile with
these, all the time becoming more embarrassed and
inept in his delivery. Minute by minute he became

37
                          DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE         35

more helpless, more bewildered But he kept on floun-
dering, apologizing, trying to make some semblance of
sense out of his notes and raising a glass of water with
a trembling hand to his parched lips. He was a sad pic-
ture of a man completely overcome by fright, due to
almost total lack of preparation. He finally sat down,
one of the most humiliated speakers I have ever seen.
He made his talk as Rousseau says a love letter should
be written: he began without knowing what he was go-
ing to say, and finished without knowing what he had
said.
    Since 1912, it has been my professional duty to eval-
uate over five thousand talks a year. From that experi-
ence, one great lesson stands out like Mt Everest,
towering above all the others: only the prepared
speaker deserves to be confident. How can anyone ever
hope to storm the fortress of fear if he goes into battle
with defective weapons, or with no ammunition at all?
"I believe," said Lincoln, "that I shall never be old
enough to speak without embarrassment when I have
nothing to say."
    If you want to develop confidence, why not do the
one thing that will give you security as a speaker?
"Perfect love," wrote the Apostle John, "casteth out
fear." So does perfect preparation. Daniel Webster said
he would as soon think of appearing before an audi-
ence half-clothed as half-prepared


                 NEVER MEMORIZE A TALK
                           WORD FOR WORD

   By "perfect preparation" do I mean that you should
memorize your talk? To this question I give back a
thunderous NO. In their attempts to protect their egos
from the dangers of drawing a mental blank before an
audience, many speakers fall headlong into the trap of
memorization. Once a victim of this type of mental

38
 36           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

 dope addiction, the speaker is hopelessly bound to a
 time-consuming method of preparation that destroys
 effectiveness on the platform.
     When H. V. Kaltenborn, the dean of American news
commeiitators, was a student at Harvard University, he
 took part in a speech contest He selected a short story
entitled "Gentlemen, the King." He memorized it word
for word and rehearsed it hundreds of times. The day
of the contest he announced the title, "Gendemen, the
King." Then his mind went blank. It not only went
blank; it went black. He was terrified. In desperation
he started telling the story in his own words. He was
the most surprised boy in the hall when the judges
gave him first prize. From that day to this, H. V. Kal-
tenborn has never read nor memorized a speech. That
has been the secret of success in his broadcasting
career. He makes a few notes and talks naturally to his
listeners without a script.
    The man who writes out and memorizes his talks is
wasting his time and energy, and courting disaster. All
our lives we have been speaking spontaneously. We
haven't been thinking of words. We have been thinking
of ideas. If our ideas are clear, the words come as
naturally and unconsciously as the air we breathe.
    Even Winston Churchill had to learn that lesson the
hard way. As a young man, Churchill wrote out and
memorized his speeches. Then one day, while deliver-
ing a memorized talk before the British Parliament, he
stopped dead in his mental tracks. His mind went
blank. He was embarrassed, humiliated! He began his
last sentence all over again. Again his mind went blank
and his face scarlet. He sat down. From that day to
this, Winston Churchill has never attempted to deliver
a memorized talk.
    If we memorize our talk word for word, we will
probably forget it when we face our listeners. Even if
we do not forget our memorized talk, we will probably
deliver it in a mechanical way. Why? Because it will
not come from our hearts, but from our memories.

39
                          DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE         37

When talking with people privately, we always think of
something we want to say, and then we go ahead and
say it without thinking of words. We have been doing
that all our lives. Why attempt to change it now? If we
do write oat and memorize our talkj, we may have the
same experience that Vance Bushnell had
    Vance was a graduate of the Beaux Arts School in
Paris, and later became vice-president of one of the
largest insurance companies in the world—the Equi-
table Life Assurance Society. Years ago, he was asked
to address a conference of two thousand Equitable Life
representatives from all over America at a meeting in
White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia. At that time, he
had been in the life insurance business for only two
years, but he had been highly successful, so he was
scheduled to make a twenty-minute talk.
    Vance was delighted to do so. He felt h would give
him prestige. But, unfortunately, he wrote out and
memorized his talk. He rehearsed forty times in front
of a mirror. He had everything down pat: every
phrase, every gesture, every facial expression. It was
flawless, he thought
    However, when he stood up to deliver his address,
he was terrified. He said: "My part in this program
            M
is. . . . His mind went blank. In his confusion, he
took two steps backward and tried to start all over
again. Again, his mind went blank. Again he took two
steps back and tried to start. He repeated this perform-
ance three times. The platform was four feet high;
there was no railing at the back; and there was a space
five feet wide between the back of the platform and the
wall. So, the fourth time he stepped back, he toppled
backwards off the platform and disappeared into space.
The audience howled with laughter. One man fell off
his chair and rolled in the aisle. Never before nor since
in the history of the Equitable life Assurance Society
has anyone ever given such a comic performance. The
astonishing part of the story is that the audience

40
 38           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

thought it was really an act The old-timers of the
Equitable Life are still talking about his performance.
    But what about the speaker, Vance Bushnell? Vance
Bushnell himself told me it was the most embarrassing
occasion of his life. He felt so disgraced that he wrote
out his resignation.
    Vance BushnelTs superiors persuaded him to tear up
his resignation. They restored his self-confidence; and
Vance Bushnell, in later years, became one of the most
effective speakers in his organization. But he never
memorized a talk again. Let us profit by his experi-
ence.
    I have heard countless scores of men and women try
to deliver memorized talks, but I don't remember even
one speaker who wouldn't have been more alive, more
effective, more human, if he had tossed his memorized
talk into the waste basket If he had done that, he
might have forgotten some of his points. He might
have rambled, but at least he would have been human.
    Abe Lincoln once said: "I don't like to hear a cut-
and-dried sermon. When I hear a man preach, I like to
see him act as if he were fighting bees." Lincoln said
he wanted to hear' a speaker cut loose and get excited.
No speaker ever acts as if he were fighting bees when
he is trying to recall memorized words.


           ASSEMBLE AND ARRANGE YOUR
                         IDEAS BEFOREHAND

    What, then, is the proper method of preparing a
talk? Simply this: search your background for signifi-
cant experiences that have taught you something about
life, and assemble your thoughts, your ideas, your con-
victions, that have welled up from these experiences.
True preparation means brooding over your topics. As
Dr. Charles Reynold Brown said some years ago in a
memorable series of lectures at Yale University:
"Brood over your topic until it becomes mellow and

41
                          DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE         39

expansive . . . then put all these ideas down in writing,
just a few words, enough to fix the idea . . . put them
down on scraps of paper—you will find it easier to ar-
range and organize these loose bits when you come to
set your material in order." This doesn't sound like
such a difficult program, does it? It isn't It just re-
quires a little concentration and thinking to a purpose.


REHEARSE YOUR TALK WITH YOUR FRIENDS

    Should you rehearse your talk after you have it in
some kind of order? By all means. Here is a sure-fire
method that is easy and effective. Use the ideas you
have selected for your talk in everyday conversation
with your friends and business associates. Instead of
going over the ball scores, just lean across the luncheon
table and say something like this: "You know, Joe, I
had an unusual experience one day. I'd like to tell you
about it" Joe will probably be happy to listen to your
story. Watch him for his reactions. Listen to his re-
sponse. He may have an interesting idea that may be
valuable. He wont know that you are rehearsing your
talk, and it really doesn't matter. But he probably will
say that he enjoyed the conversation.
   Allan Nevins, the distinguished historian, gives simi-
lar advice to writers: "Catch a friend who is interested
in the subject and talk out what you have learned at
length. In this way you discover facts of interpretation
that you might have missed, points of arguments that
had been unrealized, and the form most suitable for the
story you have to tefl."



third/ PREDETERMINE YOUR MIND
                 TO SUCCESS

    In the first chapter, you remember, this sentence was
        in reference to building the right attitude toward

42
 40           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

public speaking training in general. The same rule ap-
plies to the specific task now facing you, that of mak-
ing each opportunity to speak a successful experience.
There are three ways to accomplish this:


            LOSE YOURSELF IN YOUR SUBJECT

    After you have selected your subject, arranged it ac-
cording to plan, and rehearsed it by "talking it out"
with your friends, your preparation is not ended. You
must sell yourself on the importance of your subject
You must have the attitude that has inspired all the
truly great personages of history—a belief in your
cause. How do you fan the fires of faith in your
message? By exploring all phases of your subject,
grasping its deeper meanings, and asking yourself how
your talk will help the audience to be better people for
having listened to you.


    KEEP YOUR ATTENTION OFF NEGATIVE
            STIMULI THAT MAY UPSET YOU

    For instance, thinking of yourself making errors of
grammar or suddenly coming to an end of your talk
somewhere in the middle of it is certainly a negative
projection that could cancel confidence before you
started. It is especially important to keep your atten-
tion off yourself just before your turn to speak.
Concentrate on what the other speakers are saying,
give them your wholehearted attention and you will not
be able to work up excessive stage fright


                  GIVE YOURSELF A PEP TALK

    Unless he is consumed by some great cause ta which
he has dedicated his life, every speaker will experience

43
                         DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE         41

moments of doubt about his subject matter. He will ask
himself whether the topic is the right one for him,
whether the audience will be interested in it He will be
sorely tempted to change his subject At times like
these, when negativism is most likely to tear down
self-confidence completely, you should give yourself a
pep talk. In clear, straightforward terms tell yourself
that your talk is the right one for you, because it comes
out of your experience, out of your thinking about life.
Say to yourself that you are more qualified than any
member of the audience to give this particular talk and,
by George, you are going to do your best to put it
across. Is this old-fashioned Coue teaching? It may be,
but modern experimental psychologists now agree that
motivation based on autosuggestion is one of the strong-
est incentives to rapid learning, even when simulated.
How much more powerful, then, will be the effect of a
sincere pep talk based on the truth?


fourth/ ACT CONFIDENT

   The most famous psychologist that America has pro-
duced, Professor William James, wrote as follows:
    "Action seems to follow feeling, but really action
and feeling go together; and by regulating the action,
which is under the more direct control of the will, we
can indirectly regulate the feeling, which is not.
   Thus the sovereign voluntary path to cheerfulness,

if our spontaneous cheerfulness be lost, is to sit up
cheerfully and to act and speak as if cheerfulness were
already there. If such conduct does not make you feel
cheerful, nothing else on that occasion can.
    "So, to feel brave, act as if we were brave, use all of
our will to that end, and a courage-fit will very likely
replace the fit of fear."
    Apply Professor James' advice. To develop courage
when you are facing an audience, act as if you already

44
 42           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

had it Of course, unless you are prepared, all the act-
ing in the world will avail but little. But granted that
you know what you are going to talk about, step out
briskly and take a deep breath. In fact, breathe deeply
for thirty seconds before you ever face your audience.
The increased supply of oxygen will buoy you up and
give you courage. The great tenor, Jean de Reszke,
used to say that when you had your breath so you
"could sit on it" nervousness vanished.
    Draw yourself up to your full height and look your
audience straight in the eyes, and begin to talk as con-
fidently as if every one of them owed you money.
Imagine that they do. Imagine that they have assem-
bled there to beg you for an extension of credit The
psychological effect on you will be beneficial.
    If you doubt that this philosophy makes sense, you
would change your mind after a few minutes9 conversa-
tion with almost any of the class members who have
preceded you in following the ideas on which this book
is based. Since you can't talk to them, take the word of
an American who will always be a symbol of courage.
Once he was the most timorous of men; by practicing
self-assurance, he became one of the boldest; he was
the trust-busting, audience-swaying, Big-Stick-wielding
President of the United States, Theodore Roosevelt
    "Having been a rather sickly and awkward boy," he
confesses in his autobiography, "I was, as a young
man, at the first both nervous and distrustful of my
powers. I had to train myself painfully and laboriously
not merely as regards my body but as regards my soul
and spirit"
    Fortunately, he has disclosed how he achieved the
transformation. "When a boy," he wrote, "I read a
passage in one of Marryafs books which always
impressed me. In this passage, the captain of some
small British man-of-war is explaining to the hero how
to acquire the quality of fearlessness. He says that at
the outset almost every man is frightened when he goes

45
                          DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE        43

into action, but that the course to follow is for the man
to keep such a grip on himself that he can act just as if
he were not frightened After this is kept up long
enough, it changes from pretense to reality, and the
man does in very fact become fearless by sheer dint of
practicing fearlessness when he does not feel it
    "This was the theory upon which I went There were
all kinds of things of which I was afraid at first, rang-
ing from grizzly bears to *mean' horses and gun-
fighters; but by acting as if I were not afraid I
gradually ceased to be afraid. Most men can have the
same experience if they choose."
    Overcoming fear of public speaking has a tremen-
dous transfer value to everything that we do. Those
who answer this challenge find that they are better per-
sons because of it. They find that their victory over
fear of talking before groups has taken them out of
themselves into a richer and fuller life.
   A salesman wrote: "After a few times on my feet
before the class, I felt that I could tackle anyone. One
morning I walked up to the door of a particularly
tough purchasing agent, and before he could say 'no,' I
had my samples spread out on his desk, and he gave
me one of the biggest orders I have ever received,"
   A housewife told one of our representatives: "I was
afraid to invite the neighbors in for fear that I wouldn't
be able to keep the conversation going. After taking a
few sessions and getting up on my feet, I took the
plunge and held my first party. It was a great success. I
had no trouble stimulating the group along interesting
lines of talk."
    At a graduating class, a clerk said: "I was afraid of
the customers, I gave them a feeling that I was apolo-
getic. After speaking to the class a few times, I found
that I was speaking up with more assurance and poise,
   began to answer objections with authoritativeness.
My sales went up forty-five per cent the first month af-
ter I started to speak to this class."
    They discovered that it was easy to conquer other

46
44           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

fears and anxieties and to be successful where before
they may have failed. You, too, will find that speaking
in public will enable you to face what each day
presents with a sure touch that confidence brings. You
will be able to meet the problems and conflicts of life
with a new sense of mastery. What has been a series of
insoluble situations can become a bright challenge to
increased pleasure in living.

47
                 CHAPTER THREE


                 Speaking Effectively

                 the Quick and
                  Easy Way




                   I seldom watch television in the day-
time. But a friend recentfy asked me to listen to an
afternoon show that was directed primarily to house-
wives. It enjoyed a very high rating, and my friend
wanted me to listen because he thought the audience
participation part of the show would interest me. It
certainly did. I watched it several times, fascinated by
the way the master of ceremonies succeeded in getting
people in the audience to make talks in a way that
caught and held my attention. These people were obvi-
ously not professional speakers. They had never been
trained in the art of communication. Some of them
used poor grammar and mispronounced words. But all
of them were interesting. When they started to talk
they seemed to lose all fear of being on camera and
they held the attention of the audience.
   Why was this? I know the answer because I have
been employing the techniques used in this program for
many years. These people, plain, ordinary men and
women, were holding the attention of viewers all over
the country; they were talking about themselves, about
their most embarrassing moments, their most pleasant
memory, or how they met their wives or husbands.
They were not thinking of introduction, body, and con-
clusion. They were not concerned with their diction or

48
 46           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

their sentence structure. Yet they were getting the final
seal of approval from the audience—complete atten-
tion in what they had to say. This is dramatic proof of
what to me is the first of three cardinal rules for a
quick and easy way to learn to speak in public:



 hrst/ SPEAK ABOUT SOMETHING YOU
                   HAVE EARNED THE RIGHT TO TALK
                   ABOUT THROUGH EXPERIENCE OR
                   STUDY

    The men and women whose live flesh-and-blood sto-
ries made that television program interesting were talk-
ing from their own personal experience. They were
talking about something they knew. Consider what a
dull program would have resulted if they had been
asked to define communism or to describe the organi-
zational structure of the United Nations. Yet that is
precisely the mistake that countless speakers make at
countless meetings and banquets. They decide they
must talk about subjects of which they have little or no
personal knowledge and to which they have devoted
little or no attention. They pick a subject like Patri-
otism, or Democracy, or Justice, and then, after a few
hours of frantic searching through a book of quotations
or a speaker's handbook for all occasions, they hur-
riedly throw together some generalizations vaguely
remembered from a political science course they once
took in college, and proceed to give a talk distinguished
for nothing other than its length. It never occurs to
these speakers that the audience might be interested in
factual material bringing these high-flown concepts
down to earth.
    At an area meeting of Dale Carnegie instructors in
the Conrad Hilton Hotel in Chicago some years ago, a
student speaker started like this: "Liberty, Equality,
Fraternity. These are the mightiest ideas in the diction-

49
                           SPEAKING EFFECTIVELY            47

ary of mankind. Without liberty, life is not worth liv-
ing. Imagine what existence would be like if your
freedom of action would be restricted on all sides."
    That is as far as he got, because he was wisely
stopped by the instructor, who then asked him why he
believed what he was saying. He was asked whether he
had any proof or personal experience to back up what
he had just told us. Then he gave us an amazing story.
    He had been a French underground fighter. He told
us of the indignities he and his family suffered under
Nazi rule. He described in vivid language how he es-
caped from the secret police and how he finally made
his way to America. He ended by saying: "When I
walked down Michigan Avenue to this hotel today, I
was free to come or go, as I wished. I passed a police-
man and he took no notice of me. I walked into this
hotel without having to present an identification card,
and when this meeting is over I can gp anywhere in
Chicago I choose to go. Believe me, freedom is worth
fighting for." He received a standing ovation from that
audience.


       TELL US WHAT LIFE HAS TA UGHT YOU

    Speakers who talk about what life has taught them
never fail to keep the attention of their listeners. I
know from experience that speakers are not easily per-
suaded to accept this point of view—they avoid using
personal experiences as too trivial and too restrictive.
They would rather soar into the realms of general ideas
and philosophical principles, where unfortunately the
air is too rarefied for ordinary mortals to breathe. They
give us editorials when we are hungry for the news.
None of us is averse to listening to editorials, when
they are given by a man who has earned the right to
editorialize—an editor or publisher of a newspaper.
The point, though, is this: Speak on what life has
taught you and 1 will be your devoted listener.

50
48            FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

    It was said of Emerson that he was always willing to
listen to any man, no matter how humble his station,
because he felt he could learn something from every
man he met I have listened to more adult talks, per-
haps, than any other man west of the Iron Curtain, and
I can truthfully say that I have never heard a boring
talk when the speaker related what life had taught him,
no matter how slight or trivial the lesson may have
been.
    To illustrate: Some years ago, one of our instructors
conducted a course in public speaking for the senior
officers of New York City banks. Naturally, the mem-
bers of such a group, having many demands upon their
time, frequently found it difficult to prepare ade-
quately, or to do what they conceived of as preparing.
All their lives they had been thinking their own indi-
vidual thoughts, nurturing their own personal convic-
tions, seeing things from their own distinctive angles,
living their own original experiences. They had spent
forty years storing up material for talks. But it was
hard for some of them to realize that
    One Friday a certain gendeman connected with an
uptown bank—for our purposes we shall designate him
as Mr. Jackson—found four-thirty had arrived, and
what was he to talk about? He walked out of his office,
bought a copy of Forbes' Magazine at a newsstand, and
in the subway coming down to the Federal Reserve
Bank where the class met, he read an article entitled,
"You Have Only Ten Years to Succeed." He read it,
not because he was interested in the article especially,
but because he had to speak on something to fill his
quota of time.
    An hour later, he stood up and attempted to talk
convincingly and interestingly on the contents of this
article.
    What was the result, the inevitable result?
    He had not digested, had not assimilated what he
was trying to say. "Trying to say"—that expresses it

51
                           SPEAKING EFFECTIVELY            49

precisely. He was trying. There was no real message in
him seeking for an outlet; and his whole manner and
tone revealed it unmistakably. How could he expect
the audience to be any more impressed than he himself
was? He kept referring to the article, saying the author
said so and so. There was a surfeit of Forbef Maga-
zine in it, but regrettably little of Mr. Jackson.
    After he finished his talk, the instructor said, "Mr.
Jackson, we are not interested in this shadowy person-
ality who wrote that article. He is not here. We can't
see him. But we are interested in you and your ideas.
Tell us what you think, personally, not what somebody
else said. Put more of Mr. Jackson in this. Would you
take this same subject next week? Read this article
again, and ask yourself whether you agree with the au-
thor or not. If you do, illustrate the points of agree-
ment with observations from your own experience. If
you don't agree with him, tell us why. Let this article
be the starting point from which to launch your own
talk."
    Mr. Jackson reread the article and concluded that he
did not agree with the author at all. He searched his
memory for examples to prove his points of disagree-
ment. He developed and expanded his ideas with de-
tails from his own experience as a bank executive. He
came back the next week and gave a talk that was full
of his own convictions, based on his own background.
Instead of a warmed-over magazine article, he gave us
ore from his own mine, currency coined in his own
mint. I leave it to you to decide which talk made a
stronger impact on the class.


  LOOK FOR TOPICS IN YOUR BACKGROUND

   Once a group of our instructors were asked to write
on a slip of paper what they considered was the biggest
problem they had with beginning speakers. When the
slips were tallied, it was found that "getting beginners

52
50            FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

to talk on the right topic" was the problem most fre-
quently encountered in early sessions of my course.
    What is the right topic? You can be sure you have
the right topic for you if you have lived with it, made it
your own through experience and reflection. How do
you find topics? By dipping into your memory and
searching your background for those significant aspects
of your life that made a vivid impression on you.
Several years ago, we made a survey of topics that held
the attention of listeners in our classes. We found that
the topics most approved by the audience were con-
cerned with certain fairly defined areas of one's back-
ground:

    Early Years and Upbringing. Topics that deal with
the family, childhood memories, schooldays, invariably
get attention, because most of us are interested in the
way other people met and overcame obstacles in the
environment in which they were reared.
    Whenever possible, work into your talks illustrations
and examples from your early years. The popularity of
plays, movies, and stories that deal with the subject of
meeting the challenges of the world in one's early years
attests to the value of this area for subject matter of

talks. But how can you be sure anyone will be inter-
ested in what happened to you when you were young?
There's one test. If something stands out vividly in
your memory after many years have gone by, that al-
most guarantees that it will be of interest to an audi-
ence.

    Early Struggles to Get Ahead. This is an area rich in
human interest. Here again the attention of a group
can be held by recounting your first attempts to make
your mark on the world. How did you get into a partic-
ular job or profession? What twist of circumstances ac-
counted for your career? Tell us about your setbacks,
your hopes, your triumphs when you were establishing

53
                           SPEAKING EFFECTIVELY            51

yourself in the competitive world. A real-life picture of
almost anyone's life—if told modestly—is almost sure-
fire material.

    Hobbies and Recreation. Topics in this area are
based on personal choice and, as such, are subjects
that command attention. You can't go wrong talking
about something you do out of sheer enjoyment. Your
natural enthusiasm for your particular hobby will help
get this topic across to any audience.

    Special Areas of Knowledge. Many years of working
in the same field have made you an expert in your line
of endeavor. You can be certain of respectful attention
if you discuss aspects of your job or profession based
on years of experience or study.

    Unusual Experiences. Have you ever met a great
man? Were you under fire during the war? Have you
gone through a spiritual crisis in your life? These are
experiences that make the best kind of speech material.

   Beliefs and Convictions. Perhaps you have given a
great deal of time and effort to thinking about your
position on vital subjects confronting the world today.
If you have devoted many hours to the study of issues
of importance, you have earned the right to talk about
them. But when you do, be certain that you give spe-
cific instances for your convictions. Audiences do not
relish a talk filled with generalizations. Please don't
consider the casual reading of a few newspaper articles
sufficient preparation to talk on these topics. If you
  low little more about a subject than the people in
your audience, it is best to avoid it On the other hand,
   you have devoted years of study to some subject, it is
    ioubtedly a topic that is made to order for you. By

   I means, use it

54
 52           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

     As was pointed out in Chapter Two, the preparation
of a talk does not consist merely in getting some
mechanical words down on paper, or in memorizing a
series of phrases. It does not consist in lifting ideas sec-
ondhand from some hastily read book or newspaper ar-
ticle. But it does consist in digging deep into your mind
and heart and bringing forth some of the essential con-
victions that life has stored there. Never doubt that the
material is there. It is! Rich stores of it, waiting for you
to discover it Do not spurn such material as too per-
sonal, too slight for an audience to hear. I have been
highly entertained and deeply moved by such talks,
more entertained and more moved than I have been by
many professional speakers.
    Only by talking about something you have earned
the right to talk about will you be able to fulfill the sec-
ond requirement for learning to speak in public quickly
and easily. Here it is:



second / BE SURE YOU ARE EXCITED ABOUT
                   YOUR SUBJECT

    Not all topics that you and I have earned the right
to talk about make us excited. For instance, as a do-it-
yourself devotee, I certainly am qualified to talk about
washing dishes. But somehow or other I can't get ex-
cited about this topic. As a matter of fact, I would
rather forget about it altogether. Yet I have heard
housewives—household executives, that is—give su-
perb talks about this same subject They have some-
how aroused within themselves such a fury of
indignation about the eternal task of washing dishes, or
they have developed such ingenious methods of getting
around this disagreeable chore, that they have become
really excited about it. As a consequence, they have
been able to talk effectively about this subject of wash-
ing dishes.

55
                           SPEAKING EFFECTIVELY             53

    Here is a question that will help you determine the
suitability of topics you feel qualified to discuss in pub-
lic: if someone stood up and directly opposed your
point of view, would you be impelled to speak with
conviction and earnestness in defense of your position?
If you would, you have the right subject for you.
    Recently, I came across some notes I had written in
1926 after I had visited the Seventh Session of the
League of Nations in Geneva, Switzerland Here is a
paragraph: "After three or four lifeless speakers read
their manuscripts, Sir George Foster of Canada took
the floor. With immense satisfaction I noted that he
had no papers or notes of any kind. He gestured al-
most constantly. His heart was in what he was saying.
He had something he very much wanted to get across.
The fact that he was earnestly trying to convey to the
audience certain convictions that he cherished in his
own heart was as plain as Lake Geneva outside the
windows. Principles I have been advocating in my
teaching were beautifully illustrated in that talk."
   I often recall that speech by Sir George. He was sin-
cere; he was earnest Only by choosing topics which
are felt by the heart as well as thought out by the mind
will this sincerity be made manifest Bishop Fulton J.
Sheen, one of America's most dynamic speakers,
learned this lesson early in life.
    "I was chosen for the debating team in college/' he
wrote in his book, Life Is Worth Living, "and the night
before the Notre Dame debate, our professor of debat-
ing called me to his office and scolded me.
   " 'You are absolutely rotten. We have never had
anybody in the history of this college who was a worse
speaker than yourself.'
    " 'Well,* I said, trying to justify myself, 'if I am so
rotten why did you pick me for the team?'
    " 'Because,' he answered, *you can think; not be-
cause you can talk. Get over in that corner. Take a
paragraph of your speech and go through it' I ire-

56
54            FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

peated a paragraph over and over again for an hour, at
the end of which he said, 'Do you see any mistake in
that?' 'No/ Again an hour and a half, two hours, two
and a half hours, at the end of which I was exhausted.
He said, 4Do you still not see what is wrong?*
    "Being naturally quick, after two hours and a half, I
caught on. I said, *Yes. I am not sincere. I am not my-
self. I do not talk as if I meant it' "

    At this point, Bishop Sheen learned a lesson he al-
ways remembered: he put himself into his talk. He be-
came excited about his subject matter. Only then the
wise professor said, "Now, you are ready to speak!"
    When a member of one of our classes says, "I don't
get excited about anything, I lead a humdrum sort of
life," our instructors are trained to ask him what he
does in his spare time. One goes to the movies, another
bowls, and another cultivates roses. One man told his
instructor that he collected books of matches. As the
instructor continued to question him about this unusual
hobby, he gradually became animated. Soon he was
using gestures as he described the cabinets in which he
stored his collection. He told his instructor that he had
match books from almost every country in the world.
When he became excited about his favorite topic, the
instructor stopped him. "Why don't you tell us about
this subject? It sounds fascinating to me." He said that
he didn't think anyone would be interested! Here was a
man who had spent years in pursuit of a hobby that
was almost a passion with him; yet he was negative
about its value as a topic to speak about This instruc-
tor assured this man that the only way to gauge the in-
terest value of a subject was to ask yourself how
interested you are in it He talked that night with all
the fervor of the true collector, and I heard later that
he gained a certain amount of local recognition by go-
ing to various luncheon clubs and talking about match
book collecting.
    This illustration leads directly to the third guiding

57
                           SPEAKING EFFECTIVELY            55

principle for those who want a quick and easy way to
learn to speak in public.



third/ BE EAGER TO SHARE YOUR TALK
                 WITH YOUR LISTENERS

    There are three factors in every speaking situation:
the speaker, the speech or the message, and the audi-
ence. The first two rules in this chapter dealt with the
interrelationships of the speaker to a speech. Up to this
point time is no speaking situation. Only when the
speaker relates his talk to a living audience will the
speaking situation come to life. The talk may be well
prepared; it may concern a topic which the speaker is
excited about; but for complete success, another factor
must enter into his delivery of die talk. He must make
his listeners feel that what he has to say is important to
them. He must not only be excited about his topic, but
he must be eager to transfer this excitement to his lis-
teners. In every public speaker of note in the history of
eloquence, there has been this unmistakable quality of
salesmanship, evangelism, call it what you wilL The ef-
fective speaker earnestly desires his listeners to feel
what he feels, to agree with his point of view, to do
what he thinks is right for them to do, and to enjoy
and relive his experience with him. He is audience-cen-
tered and not self-centered. He knows that the success
or failure of his talk is not for him to decide—it will be
decided in the minds and hearts of his hearers.
   I trained a number of men in the New York City
Chapter of the American Institute of Banking to speak
during a thrift campaign. One of the men in particular
wasn't getting across to his audience. The first step in
helping that man was to fire up his mind, and heart
with zeal for his subject I told him to go off by himself
and to think over this subject until he became enthusi-
astic about it I asked him to remember that the

58
 56           FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

Probate Court Records in New York show that more
than 85 per cent of the people leave nothing at all at
death; that only 3.3 per cent leave $10,000 or over. He
was to keep constantly in mind that he was not asking
people to do him a favor or something that they could
not afford to do. He was to say to himself: "I am
preparing these people to have meat and bread and
clothes and comfort in their old age, and to leave their
wives and children secure." He had to remember he
was going out to perform a great social service. In
short, he had to be a crusader.
    He thought over these facts. He burned them into
his mind. He aroused his own interest, stirred his own
enthusiasm, and came to feel that he, indeed, had a
mission. Then, when he went out to talk, there was a
ring to his words that carried conviction. He sold his
listeners on the benefits of thrift because he had an ea-
ger desire to help people. He was no longer just a
speaker armed with facts; he was a missionary seeking
converts to a worthwhile cause.
    At one time in my teaching career I relied consider-
ably on the textbook rules of public speaking. In doing
this I was merely reflecting some of the bad habits that
had been instilled into me by teachers who had not
broken away from the stilted mechanics of elocution.
    I shall never forget my first lesson in speaking. I was
taught to let my arm hang loosely at my side, with the
palm turned to the rear, fingers half-closed and thumb
touching my leg. I was drilled to bring the arm up in a
picturesque curve, to give the wrist a classical turn, and
then to unfold the forefinger first, the second finger
next, and the little finger last When the whole aes-
thetic and ornamental movement had been executed,
the arm was to retrace the course of the curve and rest
again by the side of the leg. The whole performance
was wooden and affected. There was nothing sensible
or honest about it
    My instructor made no attempt to get me to put my
own individuality into my speaking; no attempt to have

59
                           SPEAKING EFFECTIVELY             57
me speak like a normal, living human being conversing
in an energetic manner with my audience.
   Contrast this mechanistic approach to speech train-
ing with the three primary rules I have been discussing
in this chapter. They are the basis of my entire ap-
proach to training in effective speaking. You will come
across them again and again in this book. In the next
three chapters each of these rules will be explained in
detail.

60
58             FUNDAMENTALS OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING




    The Fundamentals of Effective Speaking

       CHAPTER L ACQUIRING THE BASIC SKILLS


            1. Take Heart from the Experience of Others
           2. Keep Your Goal Before You
           3. Predetermine Your Mind to Success
           4. Seize Every Opportunity to Practice


       CHAPTER H. DEVELOPING CONFIDENCE


            1. Get the Facts About Fear of Speakingin Public
           2. Prepare in the Proper Way
                Never Memorize a Talk Word for Word
                Assemble and Arrange Your Ideas Beforehand
                Rehearse Your Talk with Your Friends
           3. Predetermine Your Mind to Success
                 Lose Yourself in Your Subject
                Keep Your Attention Off Negative Stimuli
                     That May Upset You
                 Give Yourself a Pep Talk
           4. Act Confident

      CHAPTER in. SPEAKING EFFECTIVELY THE QUICK
                               AND EASY WAY


           1. Speak About Something You Have Earned the
                Right to Talk About Through Experience or
                Study
                Tell Us What Life Has Taught You
                Look forTopics in Your Background
           2. Be Sure You Are Excited About Your Subject
          3. Be Eager to Share Your Talk with Your Lis-
                teners

61
                        PART TWO

                                   <  >


       Speech, Speaker,
            and Audience




In this part we discuss the speech triangle—the three
aspects of every speaking situation*


First, there is the speech itself. We learn about the con-
tent of the talk, how it must be recreated from the warp
and woof of our experience.

Second, there is the speaker. Here we discuss those attrl*
butes of mind, body, and voice that must energize the
delivery of the speech.

Third, there is the audience, the target toward which the
speech is aimed and the final arbiter of the success or
failure of the speaker's message.

63
                  CHAPTER FOUR


                  Earning the

                  Right to Talk



                    Many years ago, a Doctor of Philosophy
and a rough-and-ready fellow who had spent his youth
in the British Navy were enrolled in one of our classes
in New York, The man with the degree was a college
professor; the ex-tar was the proprietor of a small
side-street trucking business. His talks were far better
received by the class than those given by the professor.
Why? The college man used beautiful English. He was
urbane, cultured, refined His talks were always logical
and clear. But they lacked one essential—concreteness.
They were vague and general Not once did he illus-
trate a point with anything approaching a personal ex-
perience. His talks were usually nothing more than a
series of abstract ideas held together by a thin string of
logic
    On the other hand, the trucking firm proprietor's
language was definite, concrete, and picturesque. He
talked in terms of everyday facts. He gave us one point
and then backed it up by telling us what happened to
him in the course of his business. He described the
people he had to deal with and the headaches of keep-
ing up with regulations. The virility and freshness of
his phraseology made his talks highly instructive and
entertaining.
   I cite this instance, not because it is typical of col-
                                          61

64
 62                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

 lege professors or of men in the trucking business, but
 because it illustrates the attention-compelling power of
 rich, colorful details in a talk.
     There are four ways to develop speech material that
guarantees audience attention. If you follow these four
steps in your preparation you will be well on the way
 to commanding the eager attention of your listeners.



 first/ LIMIT YOUR SUBJECT

     Once you have selected your topic, the first step is to
stake out the area you want to cover and stay strictly
within those limits. Don't make the mistake of trying to
cover the open range. One young man attempted to
speak for two minutes on the subject of "Athens from
500 B.C. to the Korean War." How utterly futile! He
barely had gone beyond the founding of the city before
he had to sit down, another victim of the compulsion
to cover too much in one talk. This is an extreme ex-
ample, I know; I have heard thousands of talks, less
encompassing in scope, that failed to hold attention for
the same reason—they covered far too many points.
Why? Because it is impossible for the mind to attend to
a monotonous series of factual points. If your talk
sounds like the World Almanac you will not be able to
hold attention very long. Take a simple subject, like a
trip to Yellowstone Park. In their eagerness to leave
nothing out, most people have something to say about
every scenic view in the Park. The audience is whisked
from one point to another with dizzying speed. At the
end, all that remains in the mind is a blur of waterfalls,
mountains, and geysers. How much more memorable
such a talk would be if the speaker limited himself to
one aspect of the Park, the wildlife or the hot springs,
for example. Then there would be time to develop the
kind of pictorial detail that would make Yellowstone
Park come alive in all its vivid color and variety.
    This is true of any subject, whether it be salesman-

65
                      EARNING THE RIGHT TO TALK        63

ship, baking cakes, tax exemptions, or ballistic missiles.
You must limit and select before you begin, narrow
your subject down to an area that will fit the time at
your disposal
    In a short talk, less than five minutes in duration, all
you can expect is to get one or two main points across.
In a longer talk, up to thirty minutes, few speakers
ever succeed if they try to cover more than four or five
main ideas.



second/ DEVELOP RESERVE POWER

    It is far easier to give a talk that skims over the sur-
face than to dig down for facts. But when you take the
easy way you make little or no impression on the audi-
ence. After you have narrowed your subject, then the
next step is to ask yourself questions that will deepen
your understanding and prepare you to talk with au-
thority on the topic you have chosen: "Why do I be-
lieve this? When did I ever see this point exemplified in
real life? What precisely am I trying to prove? Exacdy
how did it happen?"
    Questions like these call for answers that will give
you reserve power, the power that makes people sit up
and take notice. It was said of Luther Burbank, the
botanical wizard, that he produced a million plant
specimens to find one or two superlative ones. It is the
same with a talk. Assemble a hundred thoughts around
your theme, then discard ninety.
    "I always try to get ten times as much information
as I use, sometimes a hundred times as much," said
John Gunther not long ago. The author of the best-
selling "Inside" books was speaking of the way he
prepared to write a book or give a talk.
    On one occasion in particular, his actions bore out
his words. In 1956, he was working on a series of arti-
cles on mental hospitals. He visited institutions, talked
to supervisors, attendants, and patients. A friend of

66
64                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

mine was with him, giving some small assistance in the
research, and he told me they must have walked count-
less miles up stairs and down, along corridors, building
to building, day after day. Mr. Gunther filled note-
books. Back in his office, he stacked up government
and state reports, private hospital reports, and reams of
committees' statistics.
    "In the end," my friend told me, "he wrote four
short articles, simple enough and anecdotal enough to
make good speeches. The paper on which they were
typed weighed, perhaps, a few ounces. The filled note-
books, and everything else he used as the basis for the
few ounces of product, must have weighed twenty
pounds."
    Mr, Gunther knew that he was working with pay
dirt He knew he couldn't overlook any of it An old
hand at this sort of thing, he put his mind to it, and he
sifted out the gold nuggets.
    A surgeon friend of mine said: "I can teach you in
ten minutes how to take out an appendix. But it will
take me four years to teach you what to do if some-
thing goes wrong." So it is with speaking: Always
prepare so that you are ready for any emergency, such
as a change of emphasis because of a previous
speaker's remarks, or a well-aimed question from the
audience in the discussion period following your talk.
    You, too, can acquire reserve power by selecting
your topic as soon as possible. Don't put it off until a
day or two before you have to speak. If you decide on
the topic early you will have the inestimable advantage
of having your subconscious mind working for you. At
odd moments of the day when you are free from your
work, you can explore your subject, refine the ideas
you want to convey to your audience. Time ordinarily
spent in reverie while you are driving home, waiting for
a bus, or riding the subway, can be devoted to mulling
over the subject matter of your talk. It is during this
incubation period that flashes of insight will come, just

67
r                            EARNING THE RIGHT TO TALK       65

      because you have determined your topic far in advance
      and your mind subconsciously works over it.
          Norman Thomas, a superb speaker who has com-
      manded the respectful attention of audience& quite op-
      posed to his political point of view, said: "If a speech
      is to be of any importance at all, the speaker should
      live with the theme or message, turning it over and
      over in his mind. He will be surprised at how many
      useful illustrations or ways of putting his case will
      come to him as he walks the street, or reads a newspa-
     per, or gets ready for bed, or wakes up in the morning.
     Mediocre speaking very often is merely the inevitable
     and the appiopriate reflection of mediocre thinking,
      and the consequence of imperfect- acquaintance with
     the subject in hand.*'
         While you are involved in this process you will be
     under strong temptation to write your talk out, word
     for word. Try not to do this, for once you have set a
     pattern, you are likely to be satisfied with it, and you
     may cease to give it any more constructive thought. In
     addition, there is the danger of memorizing the script
     Mark Twain had this to say about such memorization:
     "Written things are not for speech; their form is liter-
     ary; they are stiff, inflexible, and will not lend them-
     selves to happy effective delivery with the tongue.
     Where their purpose is merely to entertain, not to in-
     struct, they have to be limbered up, broken up, collo-
     quialized, and turned into the common form of
     unpremeditated talk; otherwise they will bore the
     house—not entertain it."
         Charles F. Kettering, whose inventive genius sparked
     the growth of General Motors, was one of America's
     most renowned and heartwarming speakers. Asked if
     he ever wrote out any part or all of his talks, he re-
     plied: "What I have to say is, I believe, far too impor-
     tant to write down on paper. I prefer to write on my
     audience's mind, on their emotions, with every ounce
     of my being. A piece of paper cannot stand between
     me and those I want to impress."

68
 66                SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

third/ FILL YOUR TALK WITH
                   ILLUSTRATIONS AND EXAMPLES

    In the A rt of Readable Writing, Rudolf Flesch be-
gins one of his chapters with this sentence: "Only sto-
ries are really readable." He then shows how this
principle is used by Time and Reader's Digest. Almost
every article in these top-circulation magazines either is
written as pure narrative or is generously sprinkled
with anecdotes. There is no denying the power of a
story to hold attention in talking before groups as well
as writing for magazines.
    Norman Vincent Peale, whose sermons have been
heard by millions on radio and television, says that his
favorite form of supporting material in a talk is the il-
lustration or example. He once told an interviewer
from the Quarterly Journal of Speech that "the true
example is the finest method I know of to make an
idea clear, interesting, and persuasive. Usually, I use
several examples to support each major point."
    Readers of my books are soon aware of my use of
the anecdote as a means of developing the main points
of my message. The rules from How to Win Friends
and Influence People can be listed on one and a half
pages. The other two hundred and thirty pages of the
book are filled with stories and illustrations to point up
how others have used these rules with wholesome ef-
fect.
    How can we acquire this most important technique
of using illustrative material? There are five ways of
doing this: Humanize, Personalize, Specify, Dramatize,
and Visualize.


                      HUMANIZE YOUR TALK

    I once asked a group of American businessmen in
Paris to talk on "How to Succeed." Most of them
merely listed a lot of abstract qualities and gave

69
                       EARNING THE RIGHT TO TALK       67

preachments on the value of hard work, persistence,
and ambition.
    So I halted this class, and said something like this:
"We don't want to be lectured to. No one enjoys that
Remember, you must be entertaining or we will pay no
attention whatever to what you are saying. Also
remember that one of the most interesting things in the
world is sublimated, glorified gossip. So tell us the sto-
ries of two men you have known. Tell why one
succeeded and why the other failed. We will gladly lis-
ten to that, remember it, and possibly profit by it**
    There was a certain member of that course who in-
variably found it difficult to interest either himself or
his audience. This night, however, he seized the human
interest suggestion and told us of two of his classmates
in college. One of them had been so conservative that
he had bought shirts at the different stores in town, and
made charts showing which ones laundered best, wore
longest, and gave the most service per dollar invested.
His mind was always on pennies; yet, when he was
graduated—it was an engineering college—he had such
a high opinion of his own importance that he was not
willing to begin at the bottom and work his way up, as
the other graduates were doing. Even when the third
annual reunion of the class came, he was still making
laundry charts of his shirts, while waiting for some ex-
traordinarily good thing to come his way. It never
came. A quarter of a century has passed since then,
and this man, dissatisfied and soured on life, still holds
a minor position.
   The speaker then contrasted with this failure the
story of one of his classmates who had surpassed all
expectations. This particular chap was a good mixer.
Everyone liked him. Although he was ambitious to do
big things later, he started as a draftsman. But he was
always on the lookout for opportunity. Plans were then
being made for the New York World's Fair. He knew
engineering talent would be needed there, so he
resigned from his position in Philadelphia and moved

70
 68                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

 to New York. There he formed a partnership and en-
 gaged immediately in the contracting business. They
 did considerable work for the telephone company, and
 this man was finally taken over by that concern at a
large salary.
     I have recorded here only the bare outline of what
the speaker told. He made his talk interesting and illu-
minating with a score of amusing and human interest
details. He talked on and on—this man who could not
ordinarily find material for a three-minute speech—and
he was surprised to learn, when he stopped, that he
had held the floor on this occasion for ten minutes.
The speech had been so interesting that it seemed short
to everyone. It was his first real triumph.
    Almost everyone can profit by this incident The av-
erage speech would be far more appealing if it were
rich with human interest stories. The speaker should
attempt to make only a few points and to illustrate
them with concrete cases. Such a method of speech-
building can hardly fail to get and hold attention.
    Of course, the richest source of such human interest
material is your own background. Don't hesitate to tell
us about your experiences because of some feeling that
you should not talk about yourself. The only time an
audience objects to hearing a person talk about himself
is when he does it in an offensive, egotistical way. Oth-
erwise, audiences are tremendously interested in the
personal stories speakers tell. They are the surest
means of holding attention; don't neglect them.


PERSONALIZE YOUR TALK BY USING NAMES

    By all means, when you tell stories involving others,
use their names, or, if you want to protect their identity,
use fictitious names. Even impersonal names like "Mr.
Smith" or "Joe Brown" are far more descriptive than
"this man" or "a person." The label identifies and indi-
vidualizes. As Rudolf Flesch points out, "Nothing adds

71
                       EARNING THE RIGHT TO TALK       69

more realism to a story than names; nothing is as unre-
alistic as anonymity. Imagine a story whose hero has
no name."
    If your talk is full of names and personal pronouns
you can be sure of high listenability, for you will have
the priceless ingredient of human interest in your
speech.


                              BE SPECIFIC-
             FILL YOUR TALK WITH DETAIL

    You might say at this point, "this is all very fine, but
how can I be sure of getting enough detail into my
talk?" There is one test. Use the 5-W formula every re-
porter follows when he writes a news story: answer the
questions When? Where? Who? What? and Why? If
you follow this formula your examples will have life
and color. Let me illustrate this with an anecdote of
my own, one that was published by the Readefs Di-
gest:
    "After leaving college, I spent two years traveling
through South Dakota as a salesman for Armour and
Company. I covered my territory by riding on freight
trains. One day I had to lay over in Redfield, S. D., for
two hours to get a train going south. Since Redfield
was not in my territory I couldn't use the time for
making sales. Within a year I was going to New York
to study at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts,
so I decided to use this spare time practicing speaking.
I wandered down through the train yards and began
rehearsing a scene for Macbeth. Thrusting out my
arms, I cried dramatically: 'Is this a dagger which I see
before me, the handle toward my hand? Come, let me
clutch thee: I have thee not, and yet I see thee, still/
    "I was still immersed in the scene when four police-
men leaped upon me and asked why I was frightening
women. I couldn't have been more astounded it they
had accused me of robbing a train. They informed me

72
  70                SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

  that a housewife had been. watching me from behind
 her kitchen curtains a hundred yards away. She had
 never seen such goings-on. So she called the police,
 and when they approached they heard me ranting
 about daggers.
      "I told them 1 was 'practicing Shakespeare,' but I
 had to produce my order book for Armour and Com-
 pany before they let me go."
     Notice how this anecdote answers the questions
 posed in the 5-W formula above.
     Of course, too much detail is worse than none. All
 of us have been bored by lengthy recitals of superficial,
 irrelevant details. Notice how in the incident about my
 near-arrest in a South Dakota town there is a brief and
 concise answer to each of the 5-W questions. If you
 clutter your talk with too much detail, your audience
 will blue-pencil your remarks by refusing to give you
 their complete attention. There is no blue pencil more
 severe than inattentiveness.


                      DRAMATIZE YOUR TALK
                          BY USING DIALOGUE

     Suppose you. want to give an illustration of how you
succeeded in calming down an irate customer by using
one of the rules of human relations. You could begin
like this:
    "The other day a man came into my office. He was
pretty mad because the appliance we had sent out to
his house only the week before was not working
properly. I told him that we would do all we could to
remedy the situation. After a while he calmed down
and seemed satisfied that we had every intention to
make things right." This anecdote has one virtue—it is
fairly specific—but it lacks names, specific details, and,
above all, the actual dialogue which would make this
incident come alive. Here it is with these added quali-
ties:

73
                       EARNING THE RIGHT TO TALK       71

   "Last Tuesday, the door of my office slammed and I
looked up to see the angry features of Charles Blexam,
one of my regular customers. I didn't have time to ask
him to take a seat. 'Ed, this is the last straw,' he said,
*you can send a truck right out and cart that wash
machine out of my basement*
    "I asked him what was up. He was too willing to re-
ply.
    " It won't work/ he shouted, 'the clothes get all
tangled, and my wife's sick and tired of it*
    "I asked him to sit down and explain it in more de-
tail.
    " 'I haven't got time to sit down. I'm late for work
and I wish I'd never come in here to buy an appliance
in the first place. Believe me, I'll never do it again.'
Here he hit the desk with his hand and knocked over
my wife's picture.
    " 'Look, Charley,' I said, 'if you will just sit down
and tell me all about it, I promise to do whatever you
want me to do.' With that, he sat down, and we calmly
talked it over."
    It isn't always possible to work dialogue into your
talk, but you can see how the direct quotation of the
conversation in the excerpt above helps to dramatize the
incident for the listener. If the speaker has some imita-
tive skill and can get the original tone of voice into the
words, dialogue can become more effective. Also, dia-
logue gives your speech the authentic ring of everyday
conversation. It makes you sound like a real person
talking across a dinner table, not like a pedant deliver-
ing a paper before a learned society or an orator rant-
ing into a microphone.


             VISUALIZE BY DEMONSTRA TING
             WHAT YOU ARE TALKING ABOUT

    Psychologists tell us that more than eighty-five per
cent of our knowledge comes to us through visual im-

74
72                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

pressions. No doubt this accounts for the enormous ef-
fectiveness of television as an advertising as well as
entertainment medium. Public speaking, too, is a visual
as well as auditory art.
    One of the best ways to enrich a talk with detail is
to incorporate visual demonstration into it. You might
spend hours just telling me how to swing a golf club,
and I might be bored by it. But get up and show me
what you do when you drive a ball down the fairway
and I am all eyes and ears. Likewise, if you describe
the erratic maneuvers of an airplane with your arms
and shoulders, I am more intent on the outcome of
your brush with death.
    I remember a talk given in an industrial class that
was a masterpiece of visual detail. The speaker was
poking good-natured fun at inspectors and efficiency
experts. His mimicry of the gestures and bodily antics
of these gentlemen as they inspected a broken-down
machine was more hilarious than anything I have ever
seen on television. What is more, visual detail made
that talk memorable—I for one shall never forget it,
and I am sure the other members of that class are still
talking about it.
    It is a good idea to ask yourself, "How can I put
some visual detail into my talk?" Then proceed to
demonstrate, for, as the ancient Chinese observed, one
picture is worth ten thousand words.


fourth/ USE CONCRETE, FAMILIAR WORDS
                   THAT CREATE PICTURES

    In the process of getting and holding attention,
which is the first purpose of every speaker, there is one
aid, one technique, that is of the highest importance.
Yet, it is all but ignored. The average speaker does not
seem to be aware of its existence. He has probably
never consciously thought about it at all. I refer to the
process of using words that create pictures. The

75
                      EARNING THE RIGHT TO TALK        73

speaker who is easy to listen to is the one who sets
images floating before your eyes. The one who employs
foggy* commonplace, colorless symbols sets the audi-
ence to nodding.
   Pictures. Pictures. Pictures. They are as free as the
air you breathe. Sprinkle them through your talks, your
conversation, and you will be more entertaining, more
influential.
    Herbert Spencer, in his famous essay on the "Phi-
losophy of Style," pointed out long ago the superiority
of terms that call forth bright pictures:
    "We do not think in generals but in particulars. . . .
We should avoid such a sentence as:
    " 'In proportion as the manners, customs, and
amusements of a nation are cruel and barbarous, the
regulations of their penal code will be severe!'
    "And in place of it, we should write:
    " 'In proportion as men delight in battles, bull fights,
and combats of gladiators, will they punish by hanging,
                                    °
burning, and the rack.'
    Picture-building phrases swarm through the pages of
the Bible and through Shakespeare like bees around a
cider mill. For example, a commonplace writer would
have said that a certain thing would be "superfluous,"
like trying to improve the perfect. How did
Shakespeare express the same thought? With a picture
phrase that is immortal: "To gild refined gold, to paint
the lily, to throw perfume on the violet."
    Did you ever pause to observe that the proverbs that
are passed on from generation to generation are almost
 all visual sayings? "A bird in the hand is worth two in
 the bush." "It never rains but it pours." "You can lead
 a horse to water but you can't make him drink." And
you will find the same picture element in almost all the
 similes that have lived for centuries and grown hoary
 with too much use: "Sly as a fox." "Dead as a door-
 nail." "Flat as a pancake." "Hard as a rock."
     Lincoln continually talked in visual terminology.
 When he became annoyed with the long, complicated,

76
74                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

red-tape reports that came to his desk in the White
House, he objected to them, not with colorless phrase-
ology, but with a picture phrase that it is almost impos-
sible to forget "When I send a man to buy a horse,"
he said, "I don't want to be told how many hairs the
horse has in his tail I wish only to know his points."
    Make your eye appeals definite and specific. Paint
mental pictures that stand out as sharp and clear as a
stag's antlers silhouetted against the setting sun. For
example, the word "dog" calls up a more or less defi-
nite picture of such an animal—perhaps a cocker span-
iel, a Scottish terrier, a St Bernard, or a Pomeranian.
Notice how much more distinct an image springs into
your mind when a speaker says "frtfldog"—the term is
less inclusive. Doesn't "a brindle bulldog" call up a
still mor^ explicit picture? Is it not more vivid to say "a
black Shetland pony" than to talk of "a horse"? Doesn't
"a white bantam rooster with a broken leg" give a
much more definite and sharp picture than merely the
word "fowl"?
    In The Elements of Style, William Strunk, Jr.,
states: "If those who have studied the art of writing
are in accord on any one point, it is on this: the surest
way to arouse and hold the attention of the reader is
by being specific, definite, and concrete. The greatest
writers—Homer, Dante, Shakespeare—are effective
largely because they deal in particulars and report the
details that matter. Their words call up pictures." This
is as true of speaking as of writing.
    I once devoted a session years ago in my course in
Effective Speaking to an experiment in being factual.
We adopted a rule that in every sentence the speaker
must put either a fact or a proper noun, a figure, or a
date. The results were revolutionary. The class mem-
bers made a game of catching one another on generali-
ties; it wasn't long before they were talking, not the
cloudy language that floats over the head of an audi-
ence, but the clear-cut, vigorous language of the man
on the street

77
                          EARNING THE RIGHT TO TALK             75

    "An abstract style," said the French philosopher
Alain, "is always bad. Your sentences should be full of
stones, metals, chairs, tables, animals, men, and
women."
    This is true of everyday conversation as well. In fact,

all that has been said in this chapter about the use of
detail in talks before groups applies to general conver-
sation. It is detail that makes conversation sparkle.
Anyone who is intent upon making himself a more ef-
fective conversationalist may profit by following the ad-
vice contained in this chapter. Salesmen, too, will
discover the magic of detail when applied to their sales
presentations. Those in executive positions, house-
wives, and teachers will find that giving instructions
and dispensing information will be greatly improved by
the use of concrete, factual detail.

78
                 CHAPTER FIVE


                 Vitalizing the Talk



                   Right after the First World War, I was
in London working with Lowell Thomas, who was giv-
ing a series of brilliant lectures on Allenby and
Lawrence of Arabia to packed houses. One Sunday I
wandered into Hyde Park to the spot near Marble
Arch entrance where speakers of every creed, color,
and political and religious persuasion are allowed tQ air
their views without interference from the law. For a
while I listened to a Catholic explaining the doctrine of
the infallibility of the Pope, then I moved to the fringes
of another crowd, intent upon what a Socialist had to
say about Karl Marx. I strolled over to a third speaker,
who was explaining why it was right and proper for a
man to have four wives! Then I moved away and
looked back at the three groups.
   Would you believe it? TTie man who was talking
about polygamy had the fewest number of people lis-
tening to him! There was only a handful. The crowds
around the other two speakers were growing larger by
the minute. I asked myself why? Was it the disparity of
topics? I don't think so. The explanation, I saw as I
watched, was to be found in the speakers themselves.
The fellow who was talking about the advantages of
having four wives didn't seem to be interested in hav-
ing four wives himself. But the other two speakers,
                                        76

79
                             VITALIZING THE TALK                77

talking from almost diametrically opposed points of
view, were wrapped up in their subjects. They talked
with life and spirit Their arms moved in impassioned
gestures. Their voice* rang with conviction. They radi-
ated earnestness and animation.
    Vitality aliveness, enthusiasm—these are the first

qualities I have always considered essential in a
speaker. People cluster around the energetic speaker
like wild turkeys around a field of autumn wheat.
    How do you acquire this vital deliverv that will keep
the attention of your audience? In the course of this
chapter I will give you three sovereign ways to help
you put enthusiasm and excitement into your speaking.



first/ CHOOSE SUBJECTS
               YOU ARE EARNEST ABOUT

    In Chapter Three was stressed the importance of
feeling deeply about your subject. Unless you are emo-
tionally involved in the subject matter you have chosen
to talk about, you cannot expect to make your audi-
ence believe in your message. Obviously, if you select a
topic that is exciting to you because of long experience
with it, such as a hobby or recreational pursuit, or be-
cause of deep reflection or personal concern about it
(as, for instance, the need for better schools in your
community), you will have no difficulty in talking with
excitement. The persuasive power of earnestness was
never more vividly demonstrated to me than in a talk
made before one of my classes in New York City more
than two decades ago. I have heard many persuasive
talks, but this one, which I call the Case of Blue Grass
vs. Hickory Wood Ashes, stands out as a kind of tri-
umph of sincerity over common sense.
   A top-flight salesman of one of the best-known sell-
ing organizations in the city made the preposterous
statement that he had been able to make blue grass
grow without the aid of seeds or roots. He had, ac-

80
78                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

cording to his story, scattered hickory wood ashes over
newly plowed ground. Presto! Blue grass had ap-
peared! He firmly believed that the hickory wood
ashes, and the hickory wood ashes alone, were respon-
sible for the blue grass.
    Commenting on his talk, I gently pointed out to him
that his phenomenal discovery would, if true, make
him a millionaire, for blue grass seed was worth several
dollars a bushel. I also told him that it would make
him the outstanding scientist of all history. I informed
him that no man, living or dead, had ever been able to
perform the miracle he claimed to have performed: no
man had ever been able to produce life from inert mat-
ter.
    I told him that very quietly, for I felt that his mis-
take was so palpable, so absurd, as to require no em-
phasis in the refutation. When I had finished, every
other member of the course saw the folly of his asser-
tion; but he did not see it, not for a second. He was in
earnest about his contention, deadly in earnest. He
leaped to his feet and informed me that he was not
wrong. He had not been relating theory, he protested,
but personal experience. He knew whereof he spoke.
He continued to talk, enlarging on his first remarks,
giving additional information, piling up additional evi-
dence, sincerity and honesty ringing in his voice.
    Again I informed him that there was not the remot-
est hope in the world of his being right or even ap-
proximately right or within a thousand miles of the
truth. In a second he was on his feet once more, offer-
ing to bet me five dollars and to let the U. S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture settle the matter.
    And do you know what happened? Several members
in the class were won over to his side. Many others
were beginning to be doubtful. If I had taken a vote I
am certain that more than half of the businessmen in
that class would not have sided with me. I asked them
what had shaken them from their original position.
One after another said it was the speaker's earnestness,

81
                             VITALIZING THE TALK                 79

his belief, so energetically stated, that made them begin
to doubt the common sense viewpoint
    Well, in the face of that display of credulity I had to
write the Department of Agriculture. I was ashamed, I
told them, to ask such an absurd question. They re-
plied, of course, that it was impossible to get blue grass
or any other living thing from hickory wood ashes, and
they added that they had received another letter from
New York asking the same question. That salesman
was so sure of his position that he sat down and wrote
a letter, too!
    This incident taught me a lesson Fll never forget. //
a speaker believes a thing earnestly enough and says it
earnestly enough, he will get adherents to his cause,
even though he claims he can produce blue grass from
dust and ashes. How much more compelling will our
convictions be if they are arrayed on the side of com-
mon sense and truth!
    Almost all speakers wonder whether the topic they
have chosen will interest the audience. There is only
one way to make sure that they will be interested:
stoke the fires of your enthusiasm for the subject and
you will have no difficulty holding the interest of a
group of people.
   A short time ago, I heard a man in one of our
classes in Baltimore warn his audience that if the
present methods of catching foci fish in Chesapeake
Bay were continued the species would become extinct.
And in a very few years! He felt his subject. It was im-
portant He was in real earnest about it. Everything
about his matter and manner showed that. When he
arose to speak, I did not know that there was such a
creature as a rock fish in Chesapeake Bay. I imagine
that more of the audience shared my lack of knowledge
and lack of interest. But before the speaker finished, all
of us would probably have been willing to sign a peti-
tion to the legislature to protect the rock fish by law.
    Richard Washburn Child, the former American Am-
bassador to Italy, was once asked the secret of his

82
 80                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

 success as an interesting writer. He replied: "I am so
 excited about life that I cannot keep still. I just have to
 tell people about it" One cannot keep from being en-
 thralled with a speaker or writer like that.
     I once went to hear a speaker in London; after he
 was through, one of our party, Mr. E. F. Benson, a
 well-known English novelist, remarked that he enjoyed
 the last part of the talk far more than the first When I
 asked him why, he replied: "The speaker himself
 seemed more interested in the last part, and I always
 rely on the speaker to supply the enthusiasm and inter-
 est"
     Here is another illustration of the importance of
 choosing your topics well.
     A gentleman, whom we shall call Mr. Flynn, was
enrolled in one of our classes in Washington, D. C.
 One evening early in the course, he devoted his talk to
a description of the capital city of the United States.
He had hastily and superficially gleaned his facts from
a booklet issued by a local newspaper. They sounded
like it—dry, disconnected, undigested. Though he had
lived in Washington for many years, he did not present
one personal instance of why he liked the city. He
merely recited a series of dull facts, and his talk was as
distressing for the class to hear as it was agonizing for
him to give.
    A fortnight later, something happened that touched
Mr. Flynn to the core: an unknown driver had
smashed into his new car while it was parked on the
street and had driven away without identifying himself.
It was impossible for Mr. Flynn to collect insurance
and he had to foot the bill himself. Here was some-
thing that came hot out of his experience. His talk
about the city of Washington, which he laboriously
pulled out sentence by sentence, was painful to him
and his audience; but when he spoke about his
smashed-up car, his talk welled up and boiled forth
like Vesuvius in action. The same class that had
squirmed restlessly in their seats two weeks before now

83
                                                                                      1

                             VITALIZING THE TALK                 8

greeted Mr. Flynn with a heartwarming burst of ap-
plause.
    As I have pointed out repeatedly, you cannot help
but succeed if you choose the right topic for you. One
area of topics is sure-fire: talk about your convictions!
Surely you have strong beliefs about some aspect of life
around you. You don't have to search far and wide for
these subjects—they generally he on the surface of
your stream of consciousness, because you often think
about them.
    Not long ago, a legislative hearing on capital punish-
ment was presented on television. Many witnesses were
called to give their viewpoints on both sides of this
controversial subject. One of them was a member of
the police department of the city of Los Angeles, who
had evidently given much thought to this topic. He had
strong convictions based on the fact that eleven of his
fellow police officers had been killed in gun battles with
criminals. He spoke with the deep sincerity of one who
believed to his heart's core in the righteousness, of his
cause. The greatest appeals in the history of eloquence
have all been made out of the depths of someone's
deep convictions and feelings. Sincerity rests upon be-
lief, and belief is as much a matter of the heart and of
warmly feeling what you are saying as it is of the mind
and coldly thinking of what to say. "The heart has rea-
sons that the reason does not know." In many classes I
have had frequent occasions to verify Pascal's
trenchant sentence. I remember a lawyer in Boston
who was blessed with a striking appearance and who
spoke with admirable fluency, but when he finished
speaking people said: "Clever chap." He made a sur-
face impression because there never seemed to be any
feeling behind his. glittering facade of words. In the
same class, there was an insurance salesman, small in
stature, unprepossessing in appearance, a man who
groped for a word now and then, but when he spoke
there was no doubt in any of his listeners' minds that
he felt every word of his talk.

84
  82                SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

     It is almost a hundred years since Abraham Lin-
 coln's assassination in the presidential box of Ford's
 Theatre in Washington, D. C, but the deep sincerity of
 his life and his words still lives with us. As far as
 knowledge of law is concerned, scores of other men of
 his time outstripped him. He lacked grace, smoothness,
 and polish. But the honesty and sincerity of his ut-
 terances at Gettysburg, Cooper Union, and on the
 steps of the Capitol in Washington, have not been sur-
 passed in our history.
     You may say, as one man once did, that you have
 no strong convictions or interests. I am always a little
 surprised at this, but I told this man to get busy and
get interested in something. "What, for instance?" he
asked. In desperation I said, "Pigeons." "Pigeons?" he
 asked in a bewildered tone. "Yes," I told him, "pi-
geons. Go out on the square and look at them, feed
them, go to the library and read about them, then
come back here and talk about them." He did. When
he came back there was no holding him down. He
started to talk about pigeons with all the fervor of a
fancier. When I tried to stop him he was saying some-
thing about forty books on pigeons and he had read
them all. He gave one of the most interesting talks I
have ever heard.
    Here is another suggestion: Learn more and more
about what ypu now consider a pretty good topic. The
more you know about something the more earnest and
excitedly enthusiastic you will become. Percy H. Whit-
ing, the author of the Five Great Rules of Selling, tells
salesmen never to stop learning about the product they
are selling. As Mr. Whiting says, "The more you know
about a good product, the more enthusiastic you be-
come about it." The same thing is true about your top-
ics—the more you know about them, the more earnest
and enthusiastic you will be about them.

85
                             VITALIZING THE TALK                 83

second/ RELIVE THE FEELINGS YOU HAVE
                  ABOUT YOUR TOPIC

    Suppose you are telling your audience about the po-
liceman who stopped you for going one mile over the
speed limit. You can tell us that with all the cool disin-
terestedness of an onlooker, but it happened to you
and you had certain feelings which you expressed in
quite definite language. The third-person approach will
not make much of an impression on your audience.
They want to know exactly how you felt when that po-
liceman wrote out that ticket. So, the more you relive
the scene you are describing, or recreate the emotions
you felt originally, the more vividly you will express
yourself.
    One of the reasons why we go to plays and movies is
that we want to hear and see emotions expressed. We
have become so fearful of giving vent to our feelings in
public that we have to go to a play to satisfy this need
for emotional expression.
    When you speak in public, therefore, you will gener-
ate excitement and interest in your talk in proportion
to the amount of excitement you put into it. Don't
repress your honest feelings; don't put a damper on
your authentic enthusiasms. Show your listeners how
eager you are to talk about your subject, and you will
hold their attention.



third/ ACT IN EARNEST

    When you walk before your audience to speak, do
so with an air of anticipation, not like a man who is as-
cending the gallows. The spring in your walk may be
largely put on, but it will do wonders for you and it
gives the audience the feeling that you have something
you are eager to talk about. Just before you begin, take
a deep breath. Keep away from furniture or from the
speaker's stand. Keep your head high and your chin

86
84                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

up. You are about to tell your listeners something
worthwhile, and every part of you should inform them of
that clearly and unmistakably. You are in command,
and as William James would say, act as if you are. If
you make an effort to send your voice to the back of
the hall, the sound will reassure you. Onoe you begin
making gestures of any kind, they will help to stimulate
you.
    This principle of "warming up our reactivity," as
Donald and Eleanor Laird describe it, can be applied
to all situations that demand mental awareness. In their
book Techniques for Efficient Remembering, the Lairds
point to President Theodore Roosevelt as a man who
"breezed through life with a bounce, vigor, dash, and
enthusiasm which became his trademark. He was ab-
sorbingly interested, or effectively pretended he was, in
everything he tackled." Teddy Roosevelt was a living
exponent of the philosophy of William James: "Act in
earnest and you will become naturally earnest in all
you do."
    Above all, remember this: acting in earnest will
make you feel earnest

87
                  CHAPTER SIX


                  Sharing the Talk

                  with the Audience




                  Russell Conwell's famous lecture,
"Acres of Diamonds," 'was given nearly six thousand
times. You would think that a talk repeated so often
would become set in the speaker's mind, that no word
or intonation would vary in delivery. That was not the
case. Dr. Conwell knew that audiences differ. He
recognized that he had to make each successive audi-
ence feel that his talk was a personal, living thing
created for it, and it alone. How did he succeed in
keeping this interrelationship between speaker, speech,
and audience alive from onfc speaking engagement to
the next? "I visit a town or city," he wrote, "and try to
arrive there early enough to see the postmaster, the
barber, the hotel manager, the principal of the schools,
some of the ministers, and then go into the stores and
talk with people, and see what has been their history
and what opportunities they had. Then I give my lec-
ture and talk to those people about the subjects that
apply to them locally."
   Dr. Conwell was thoroughly aware that successful
communication depends upon how well the speaker
can make his talk a part of the listeners and the listen-
ers a part of the talk. That is why we have no true
copy of "Acres of Diamonds," one of the most popular
talks ever given from a lecture platform. With his
                                          85

88
 86                SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

clever insight into human nature and his painstaking
industry, Dr. Conwell did not give the same lecture
twice, although he addressed almost six thousand dif-
ferent audiences on the same subject You can profit
from his example by making certain that your talks are
always prepared with a specific audience in mind. Here
are some simple rules that will help you to build up a
strong feeling of rapport with your listeners.



first/ TALK IN TERMS OF
                YOUR LISTENERS* INTERESTS

    That is exactly what Dr. Conwell did. He made a
point of working into his lecture plenty of local allu-
sions and examples. His audiences were interested be-
cause his talk concerned them, their interests, their
problems. This linkage with what your hearers are
most interested in, namely, themselves, will insure at-
tention and guarantee that the lines of communication
will remain open. Eric Johnston, former head of the
United States Chamber of Commerce and now
president of the Motion Picture Association, uses this
technique in almost every talk he gives. Note how
resourcefully he employed local interests in a com-
mencement address at the University of Oklahoma:

        You Oklahomans are well acquainted with
    goose-pimple peddlers. You don't have to think
    back too far to remember when they were writing
    Oklahoma off the books as a hopeless risk for-
    ever.
        Why, in the 1930's, all the ravens of despair
   were telling the crows to bypass Oklahoma unless
   they could pack along their own rations.
        They consigned Oklahoma to an everlasting fu-
   ture as part of a new American desert Nothing
   would ever bloom again—they said. But in the
    1940's Oklahoma was a garden spot—and the

89
                SHARING THE TALK WITH THE AUDIENCE 87

    toast of Broadway. For, once again, there was
     "waving wheat that sure smells sweet when the
    wind conies right behind the rain."
        In one short decade, the dustbowl was smoth-
    ered with corn stalks as high as the elephant's eye.
        Here was a pay-off for faith—and calculated
    risk
        But it is always possible to see our own times in
    better perspective against the backdrop of yester-
    day.
        So I looked up the files of the Daily Oklaho-
    man for the spring of 1901 in preparation for my
    visit here. I wanted to sample the flavor of life in
    the territory fifty years ago.
        And what did I discover?
        Why I found the big accent was all on Okla-
    homa's future. The big stress was on hope.

    Here is an excellent example of talking in terms of
audience interest. Eric Johnston used instances of cal-
culated risk right out of his listeners' back yards. He
made them feel that his talk was no mimeographed
copy—it was freshly created for them. No audience
can withhold attention from a speaker who talks in its
interests.
   Ask yourself how knowledge of your subject will
help the members of your audience solve their prob-
lems and achieve their goals. Then proceed to show
 lem that, and you will have their complete attention,
    you are an accountant and you start your talk by
 aying something like this, "I am going to show you
low to save from fifty to a hundred dollars on your tax
 &turn," or you are a lawyer and you tell your listeners
Slow to go about making a will, you will be certain to
lave an interested audience. Surely, there is some topic
    your special fund of knowledge that can be of real
lelp to members of your audience.
   When asked what interests people, Lord Northcliffe,
 le William Randolph Hearst of British journalism, re-

90
 88                SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

 plied, "themselves." He built a newspaper empire on
 that single truth.
     In Mind in the Making, James Harvey Robinson
 describes reverie as "a spontaneous and favorite kind
 of thinking." He goes on to say that, in reverie, we al-
 low our ideas to take their own course, and this course
 is determined by our hopes and fears, our spontaneous
 desires, their fulfillment or frustration; by our likes and
 dislikes, our loves, hates, and resentments. There is
 nothing so interesting to ourselves as ourselves.
     Harold Dwight, of Philadelphia, made an extraordi-
 narily successful talk at a banquet which marked the fi-
 nal session of our course. He talked about each person
 in turn around the entire table, how he had spoken
 when the course started, how he had improved; he re-
 called the talks various members had made, the sub-
jects they had discussed; he mimicked some of them,
 exaggerated their peculiarities, had everyone laughing,
had everyone pleased. With such material, he could not
possibly have failed. It was absolutely ideal. No other
topic under the blue dome of heaven would have so in-
terested that group. Mr. Dwight knew how to handle
human nature.
    Some years ago I wrote a series of articles for the
American Magazine, and I had the opportunity of talk-
ing with John Siddall, who was then in charge of the
Interesting People Department.
    "People are selfish," he said. "They are interested
chiefly in themselves. They are not very much con-
cerned about whether the government should own the
railroads; but they do want to know how to get ahead,
how to draw more salary, how to keep healthy. If I
were editor of this magazine," he went on, "I would
tell them how to take care of their teeth, how to take
baths, how to keep cool in summer, how to get a posi-
tion, how to handle employees, how to buy homes,
how to remember, how to avoid grammatical error,
and so on. People are always interested in human inter-
est stories, so I would have some rich man tell how he

91
               SHARING THE TALK WITH THE AUDIENCE 89

made a million in real estate. I would get prominent
bankers and presidents of various corporations to tell

the stories of how they battled their ways up from the
ranks to power and wealth.*'
    Shortly after that, Siddall was made editor. The
magazine then had a small circulation. Siddall did just
what he said he would do. The response? It was over-
whelming. The circulation figures climbed up to two
hundred thousand, three, four, half a million. Here was
something the public wanted. Soon a million people a
month were buying it, then a million and a half, finally
two million. It did not stop there, but continued to
grow for many years. Siddall appealed to the self-inter-
ests of his readers.
    The next time you face an audience, visualize them
as eager to hear what you have to say—as long as it
applies to them. Speakers who fail to take this essential
egocentricity of their listeners into account are apt to
find themselves facing a restless audience, one squirm-
ing in boredom, glancing at wristwatches, and looking
hopefully toward the exit doors.


second/ GIVE HONEST, SINCERE
                 APPRECIATION

   Audiences are composed of individuals, and they
react like individuals. Openly criticize an audience and
they resent it. Show your appreciation for something
they have done that is worthy of praise, and you win a
passport into their hearts. This often requires some
research on your part. Such fulsome phrases as "this is
the most intelligent audience I have ever addressed,"
are resented as hollow flattery by most audiences.
   In the words of a great speaker, Chauncey M. De-
pew, you have to "tell them something about them-
selves that they didn't think you could possibly know/*
For example, a man who spoke before the Baltimore
Kiwanis Club recently could find nothing unusual

92
90                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

about that club except that it had in its membership a
past international president and an international
trustee. This was no news to the members of the club.
So he tried to give it a new twist. He started his talk
with this sentence: "The Baltimore Kiwanis Club is
one club in 101,898!" The members listened. This
speaker was certainly wrong—because there were only
2,897 Kiwanis Clubs in the world. The speaker then
went on:

        Yes, even if you don't believe it, it is still a fact
    that your club, mathematically at least, is one in
    101,898. Not one club in 100,000 or one in 200,-
    000, but just exactly one in 101,898.
        How do I figure that out? Kiwanis International
    has only 2,897 member clubs. Well, the Baltimore
    club has a past president of Kiwanis International
    and an international trustee. Mathematically, the
    chances that any Kiwanis club will have both a
    past president and an international trustee at the
    same time are one in 101,898—and the reason I
    know ifs right is that I got a Johns Hopkins
    Ph.D. in mathematics to figure it out for me.

    Be exactly one hundred per cent sincere. An insin-
cere statement may occasionally fool an individual, but
it never fools an audience. "This highly intelligent au-
dience. . . ." "This exceptional gathering of the"
beauty and chivalry of HoHokus, New Jersey. . .             ,
4Tm glad to be here because I love each one of you."
No, no, no! If you can't show sincere appreciation,
don't show anyl



third/ IDENTIFY YOURSELF
                WITH THE AUDIENCE

    As soon as possible, preferably in the first words you
utter, indicate some direct relationship with the group

93
               SHARING THE TALK WITH THE AUDIENCB 91

you are addressing. If you are honored by being asked
to speak, say so. When Harold Macmillan spoke to the
graduating class at De Pauw University in Greencastle,
Indiana, he opened up the lines of communication in
his first sentence.
    "I am very grateful for your kind words of wel-
come," he said. "For a Prime Minister of Great Britain
to be invited to your great university is an unusual oc-
casion. But I feel that my present office was not the
only nor, indeed, perhaps the main reason for your in-
vitation."
    Then he mentioned that his mother was an Ameri-
can, born in Indiana, and that her father had been one
of De Pauw's first graduates.
    "I can assure you that I am proud to be associated
with De Pauw University," he said, "and to renew an
old family tradition."
    You may be sure that Macmillan's reference to an
American school and to the American way of life
which his mother and her pioneer father knew made
friends for him at once.
    Another way to open the lines of communication is
to use the names of people in the audience. I once sat
next to the main speaker at a banquet and I was
amazed at his curiosity concerning various people in
the hall. All through the meal he kept asking the mas-
ter of ceremonies who the person in the blue suit at
one table was, or what was the name of the lady in the
flowered hat When he arose to speak, it became evi-
dent at once why he was curious. He very cleverly
wove some of the names he had learned into his talk,
and I could see the evident pleasure on the faces of the
persons whose names were used and I sensed the warm
friendliness of the audience that this simple technique
won for the speaker.
   Notice how Frank Pace, Jr., speaking as the
president of the General Dynamics Corporation,
worked in a few names to advantage. He was speaking

94
92                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

at an annual dinner of Religion in American Life, Inc.,
in New York:
    "This has been a delightful and meaningful evening
for me in many ways," he said. "First, I have my own
minister, the Reverend Robert Appleyard, here in the
audience. By his words, deeds, and leadership he has
been an inspiration to me personally, to my family, and
to our entire congregation. .        .  . Secondly, to sit be-
tween Lewis Strauss and Bob Stevens, men whose in-
terest in religion has been amplified by their interest in
public service . . . is again a source of great personal
pleasure       "

    One word of caution: If you are going to work
strange names into your talk, having learned them
through inquiries made for the occasion, be sure you
have them exactly right; be sure you understand fully
the reason for your use of the names; be sure you men-
tion them only in a favorable way; and use them in
moderation.
    Another method of keeping the audience at peak at-
tentiveness is to use the pronoun "you" rather than the
third-person "they." In this way you keep the audience
in a state of self-awareness, which I have pointed out
earlier cannot be overlooked by the speaker if he is to
hold the interest and attention of his listeners. Here are
some excerpts from a talk on Sulphuric Acid by one of
our students in a New York City class:

        Suphuric acid touches you in your life in a
    score of ways. If it were not for sulphuric acid,
    your car would stop, for it is used extensively in
    the refining of kerosene and gasoline. The electric
   lights that illuminate your office and your home
    would not be possible without it
        When you turn on the water for your bath, you
   use a nickel-plated faucet, which requires sul-
   phuric acid in its manufacture. The soap you use
    has possibly been made from greases or oils that
   have been treated with the acid. The bristles in

95
               SHARING THE TALK WITH THE AUDIENCE 93

    your hairbrush and your celluloid comb could not
    have been produced without it Your razor, no
    doubt, has been pickled in it after annealing.
        You come down to breakfast The cup and sau-
    cer, jf they are other than plain white, could not
    have come into being without it Your spoon,
    knife and fork have seen a bath of sulphuric acid
    if they are silver-plated. And so on through the
    whole day sulphuric acid affects you at every turn.
    Go where you will, you cannot escape its influ-
    ence.

    By skillfully using "you" and inserting his listeners
into the picture, this speaker was able to keep attention
alive and glowing. There are times, however, when the
pronoun "you" is dangerous, when it may establish a
cleavage between speaker and audience rather than a
bridge. This occurs when it might seem as though we
were talking down to our audience or lecturing it Then
it is better to say "we" instead of "you."
    Dr. W. W. Bauer, Director of Health Education of
the American Medical Association, often used this
technique in his radio and television talks. "We all
want to know how to choose a good doctor, don't we?"
he said in one of his talks. "Arid if we are going to get
the best service from our doctor, don't we all want to
know how to be good patients?"


fourth/ MAKE YOUR AUDIENCE A
                 PARTNER IN YOUR TALK

   Did it ever occur to you that you can keep an audi-
ence hanging on every word by using a little showman-
ship? The moment you choose some member of the
audience to help you demonstrate a point or dramatize
an idea, you will be rewarded by a noticeable rise in at-
tention. Being aware of themselves as an audience, the
members of it are keenly conscious of what happens

96
 94                SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

when one of its own is brought into "the act" by the
speaker. If there is a wall between the man on the plat-
form and the people out there, as many speakers say,
the use of audience participation will break that wall
down. I remember a speaker who was explaining the
distance it takes to stop a car after the brakes have
been applied. He asked one of his listeners in the front
row to stand and help demonstrate how this distance
varied with the speed of the car. The man in the audi-
ence took the end of a steel tape measure and carried it
forty-five feet down the aisle, where he stopped on a
signal from the speaker. As I watched this procedure I
couldn't help but notice how the whole audience be-
came engrossed in the talk, I said to myself that the
tape measure, in addition to being a graphic illustration
of the speaker's point, was certainly a line of communi-
cation between that speaker and this audience. Without
that touch of showmanship the audience might still be
concerned with what it was going to have for dinner or
what programs would be on TV that evening.
    One of my favorite methods of getting audience par-
ticipation is simply to ask questions and to get re-
sponses, I like to get the audience on its feet, repeating a
sentence after me, or answering my questions by rais-
ing their hands. Percy H. Whiting, whose book How to
Put Humor in Your Speaking and Writing contains
some valuable advice on the subject of audience partic-
ipation, suggests having your listeners vote on some-
thing, or inviting them to help you solve a problem, j
"Get yourself in the right state of mind," says Mr.
Whiting, "a state of mind that recognizes that a speech
is unlike a recitation—that it is designed to get audi-
ence reaction—to make the audience a partner in the
enterprise." I like that description of the audience as
partner in the enterprise." It is the key to what this
chapter is all about. If you use audience participation
you confer the rights of partnership on your listeners,

97
               SHARING THE TALK WITH THE AUDIENCE 95

 fifth/ PLAY YOURSELF DOWN

    Of course, nothing will take the place of sincerity in
this speaker-audience relationship. Norman Vincent
Peale once gave some very useful advice to a fellow
minister who was having great difficulty keeping the
audience intent upon his sermons. He asked this minis-
ter to question his feelings about the congregation he
addressed each Sunday morning—did he like them, did
he want to help them, did he consider them his intel-
lectual inferiors? Dr. Peale said that he never ascended
the pulpit without feeling a strong sense of affection for
the men and women he was about to face. An audience
is quick in taking the measure of a speaker who as-
sumes that he is superior in mental accomplishment or
in social standing. Indeed, one of the best ways for a
speaker to endear himself to an audience is to play
himself down.
    Edmund S. Muskie, then U. S. Senator from Maine,
demonstrated this when he spoke to the American
Forensic Association in Boston.
    "I approach my assignment this morning with many
doubts," he said. "In the first place, I am conscious of
the professional qualifications of this audience, and
question the wisdom of exposing my poor talents to
your critical view. In the second place, this is a break-
fast meeting—an almost impossible time of day for a
man to be on guard effectively; and failure in this re-
spect can be fatal to a politician. And thirdly, there is
my subject—the influence which debating has had on
my career as a public servant. As long as I am active
politically, there is likely to be a sharp division of opin-
ion among my constituents as to whether that influence
has been good or bad.
   "Facing these doubts, I feel very much like the
mosquito who found himself unexpectedly in a nudist
colony. I don't know where to begin/*
   Senator Muskie went on, from there, to make a fine
address.

98
96                 SPEECH, SPEAKER, AND AUDIENCE

     Adlai E. Stevenson played himself down at the be-
ginning of a commencement exercise address at Michi-
gan State University. He said:
     "My feeling of inadequacy on these occasions brings
to mind Samuel Butler's remark when he was once
asked to talk about how to make the most out of life. I
think his reply was: 1 don't even know how to make
the most out of the next fifteen minutes.* And I feel
that way about the next twenty minutes."
     The surest way to antagonize an audience is to indi-
cate that you consider yourself to be above them.
When you speak, you are in a showcase and every
facet of your personality is on display. The slightest
hint of braggadocio is fatal. On the other hand, mod-
esty inspires confidence and good will. You can be
modest without being apologetic. Your audience will
like and respect you for suggesting your limitations as
long as you show you are determined to do your best.
    The world of American television is a demanding
one, and every season top-rated performers fall under
the withering fire of competition. One of the survivors
who corner bad year after year is Ed Sullivan, who is
not a television professional, but a newspaper man. He
is an amateur in this fiercely competitive field and he
survives because he doesn't presume to be anything but
an amateur. Some of his mannerisms on camera would
have been handicaps for anyone with less natural ap-
peal. He cups his chin in his hand, hunches his shoul-
ders, tugs at his necktie, stumbles over words. But
these failings are not fatai for Ed Sullivan. He doesn't
resent people for criticizing these faults. At least once a
season he hires the services of a talented mimic who
caricaturizes him to perfection, exaggerating all his
faults. Ed Sullivan laughs as unaffectedly as everyone
else when this performer holds the mirror up to nature.
He welcomes criticism, and audiences love him for it
Audiences like humility. They resent the show-off, the
egotist
    Henry and Dana Lee Thomas, in their book Living

99
                SHARING THE TALK WITH THE AUDIENCE    97

Biographies of Religious Leaders, said of Confucius:
"He never tried to dazzle people with his exclusive
knowledge. He merely tried to enlighten them with his
inclusive sympathy." If we have this inclusive sympa-
thy, we have the key that unlocks the door to the audi-
ences' heart

100
98



  Spefech, Speaker, and Audience

    CHAPTER IV. EARNING THE RIGHT TO TALK


         1. Limit Your Subject

         2. Develop Reserve Power
         3. Fill Your Talk with Illustrations and Examples
              Humanize Your Talk
              Personalize Your Talk by Using Names
              Be Specific—Fill Your Talk with Detail
              Dramatize Your Talk by Using Dialogue
              Visualize by Demonstrating
                  What You are Talking About
         4. Use Concrete, Familiar Words That Create
              Pictures


    CHAPTER V. VITALIZING THE TALK


         1. Choose Subjects You Are Earnest About
         2. Relive the Feelings You Have About Your
              Topic
         3. Act in Earnest

    CHAPTER VI. SHARING THE TALK WITH THE AUDIENCE


         1. Talk in Terms of Your Listeners' Interests
         2. Give Honest, Sincere Appreciation
         3. Identify Yourself with the Audience
        4. Make Your Audience a Partner in Your Talk
         5. Play Yourself Down

101
                                         »










                     PART THREE

                                    < »


          The Purpose of
            Prepared and
       Impromptu Talks





Now we develop in detail two acceptable methods of de-
livering a talk, the extemporaneous and the impromptu
method.

Three chapters are devoted to talks to persuade, inform,
and convince as prepared extemporaneously.

One chapter discusses impromptu speaking, which may
be persuasive, informational, or entertaining as the on-
the-spot occasion demands.

Success in the use of either the extemporaneous or the
impromptu method is most assured when the speaker
has clearly formulated in his mind the general purpose
of a talk.

103
                  CHAPTER SEVEN


                  Making the

                  Short Talk

                  to Get Action



                 A famous English bishop, during World
War I, spoke to the troops at Camp Upton. They were
on their way to the trenches; only a very small percent-
age of them had any adequate idea why they were
being sent. I know; I questioned them. Yet the Lord
Bishop talked to these men about "International Am-
ity/' and "Serbia's Right to a Place in the Sun." Why,
half of them did not know whether Serbia was a town
or a disease. He might just as well have delivered a
learned disquisition on the nebular hypothesis. How-
ever, not a single trooper left the hall while he was
speaking; military police were stationed at every exit to
prevent their escape.
   I do not wish to belittle the bishop. He was every
inch a scholar, and before a body of churchmen he
would probably have been powerful; but he failed with
these soldiers, and he failed utterly. Why? He evidently
knew neither the precise purpose of his talk nor how to
accomplish it
   What do we mean by the purpose of a talk? Just
this: every talk, regardless of whether the speaker real-
izes it or not, has one of four major goals. What are
they?

                                   * *

                                         101

104
                                                                                        —
 102              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

     1. To persuade or get action,
    2. To inform.
     3. To impress and convince.
    4. To entertain.

Let us illustrate these by a series of concrete examples
from Abraham Lincoln's speaking career.
    Few people know that Lincoln once invented and
patented a device for lifting stranded boats off sand
bars and other obstructions. He worked in a
mechanic's shop near his law office making a model of
his apparatus. When friends came to his office to view
the model, he took no end of pains to explain it. The
main purpose of those explanations was to inform.
    When he delivered his immortal oration at Gettys-
burg, when he gave his first and second inaugural
addresses, when Henry Clay died and Lincoln de-
livered a eulogy on his life—on all these occasions,
Lincoln's main purpose was to impress and convince.
    In his talks to juries, he tried to win favorable deci-
sions. In his political talks, he tried to win votes. His
purpose, then, was action.
    Two years before he was elected president, Lincoln
prepared a lecture on inventions. His purpose was to
entertain. At least, that should have been his goal; but
he was evidently not very successful in attaining it. His
career as a popular lecturer was, in fact, a distinct dis-
appointment. In one town, not a person came to hear
him.
    But he succeeded notably in his other speeches,
some of which have become classics of human ut-
terance. Why? Largely because in those instances he
knew his goal, and he knew how to achieve it
    Because so many speakers fail to line up their pur-
pose with the purpose of the meeting at which they are
speaking, they often flounder and come to grief.
    For example: A United States congressman was
once hooted and hissed and forced to leave the stage of
the old New York Hippodrome, because he had

105
                                                                                  —
              MAKING THE SHORT TALK TO GET ACTION 103

unconsciously, no doubt, but nevertheless, unwisely
chosen to make an informative talk. The crowd did not
want to be instructed. They wanted to be entertained.
They listened to him patiently, politely, for ten
minutes, a quarter of an hour, hoping the performance
would come to a rapid end. But it didn't. He rambled
on and on; patience snapped; the audience would not
stand for more. Someone began to cheer ironically.
Others took it up. In a moment, a thousand people
were whistling and shouting. The speaker, obtuse and
incapable as he was of sensing the temper of his audi-
ence, had the bad taste to continue. That aroused
them. A battle was on. Their impatience mounted to
ire. They determined to silence him. Louder and louder
grew their storm of protest. Finally, the roar of it, the
anger of it, drowned his words—he could not have
been heard twenty feet away. So he was forced to give
up, acknowledge defeat, and retire in humiliation.
   Profit by his example. Fit the purpose of your talk to
the audience and the occasion. If the congressman had
decided in advance whether his goal of informing the
audience would fit the goal of the audience in coming to
the political rally, he would not have met with disaster.
Choose one of the four purposes only after you have
analyzed the audience and the occasion which brings
them together.
   To give you guidance in the important area of
speech construction, this entire chapter is devoted to
the short talk to get action. The next three chapters
will be devoted to the other major speech purposes: to
inform, to impress and convince, and to entertain.
Each purpose demands a different organizational pat-
tern of treatment, each has its own stumbling blocks
that must be hurdled. First, let's get down to the brass
tacks of organizing our talks to get the audience to act.
   Is there some method of marshaling our material so
that we will have the best chance for successful follow-
through on what we ask the audience to do? Or is it
just a matter of hit-and-miss tactics?

106
                                                                                              ;

 104              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

     I remember discussing this subject with my associ-
 ates back in the thirties when my classes were begin-
 ning to catch on all over the country. Because of the
 size of our groups we were using a two-minute limit on
 the talks given by class members. This limitation did
 not affect the talk when the purpose of the speaker was
 merely to entertain or inform. But when we came to
 the talk to actuate, that was something else. The talk to
 get action just didn't get off the ground when we used
 the old system of introduction, body, and conclu-
 sion—the organizational pattern followed by speakers
 since Aristotle. Something new and different was obvi-
 ously needed to provide us with a sure-fire method of
 obtaining results in a two-minute talk designed to get
 action from the listeners.
     We held meetings in Chicago, Los Angeles, and
New York. We appealed to all our instructors, many of
them on the faculties of speech departments in some of
our most respected universities. Others were men who
held key posts in business administration. Some were
from the rapidly expanding field of advertising and
promotion. From this amalgam of background and
brains, we hoped to get a new approach to speech or-
ganization, one that would be streamlined, and one that
would reflect our age's need for a psychological as well
as a logical method for influencing the listener to act
    We were not disappointed. From those discussions
came the Magic Formula of speech construction. We
began using it in our classes and we have been using it
ever since. What is the Magic Formula? Simply this:
Start your talk by giving us the details of your Exam-
pie, an incident that graphically illustrates the main
idea you wish to get across. Second, in specific clear-
cut terms give your Point, tell exactly what you want
your audience to do; and third, give your Reason, that;

is, highlight the advantage or benefit to be gained by
the listener when he does what you ask him to do.
    This is a formula highly suited to our swift-paced
way of life. Speakers can no longer afford to indulge in

107
               MAKING THE SHORT TALK TO GET ACTION 105

long, leisurely introductions. Audiences are composed
of busy people who want whatever the speaker has to
say in straightforward language. They are accustomed
to the digested, boiled-down type of journalism that
presents the facts straight from the shoulder. They are
exposed to hard-driving Madison Avenue advertising
that shoots the message in forceful, clear terms from
signboard, television screen, magazine, and newspaper.
Every word is measured and nothing is wasted. By
using the Magic Formula you can be certain of gaining
attention and focusing it upon the main point of your
message. It cautions against indulgence in vapid open-
ing remarks, such as: "I didn't have time to prepare
this talk very well," or "When your chairman asked me
to talk on this subject, I wondered why he selected
me." Audiences are not interested in apologies or ex-
cuses, real or simulated. They want action. In the Magic
Formula you give them action from the opening word.
    The formula is ideal for short talks, because it is
based upon a certain amount of suspense. The listener
is caught up in the story you are relating but he is not
aware of what the point of your talk is until near the
end of the two- or three-minute period. In cases where
demands are made upon the audience, this is almost
necessary for success. No speaker who wants his audi-
ence to dig deep in their pocketbooks for a cause, no
matter how worthy, will get very far by starting like
this: "Ladies and gentlemen. I'm here to collect five
dollars from each of you." There would be a scramble
for the exits. But if the speaker describes his visit to
the Children's Hospital, where he saw a particularly
poignant case of need, a little child who lacked finan-
cial help for an operation in a distant hospital, and
then asks for contributions, the chances of getting sup-
port from his audience would be immeasurably en-
hanced. It is the story, the Example, that prepares the
way for the desired action.
   Note how the incident-example is used by Leland

108
 106              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

Stowe to predispose his audience to support the Unit"
 Nations' Appeal for Children:


         I pray that I'll never have to do it again. Can
     there be anything much worse than to put only a
     peanut between a child and death? I hope you'll
     never have to do it, and live with the memory of
     it afterward. If you had heard their voices and
     seen their eyes, on that January day in the bomb-
     scarred workers' district of Athens . .  Yet all I
     had left was a half-pound can of peanuts. As I
     struggled to open it, dozens of ragged kids held
     me in a vise of frantically clawing bodies. Scores
     of mothers, with babes in their arms, pushed and
     fought to get within arm's reach. They held their
     babies out toward me. Tiny hands of skin and
     bone stretched convulsively. I tried to make every
     peanut count
         In their frenzy they nearly swept me off my
     feet. Nothing but hundreds of hands: begging
    hands, clutching hands, despairing hands; all of
     them pitifully little hands. One salted peanut here,
     and one peanut there. Six peanuts knocked from
    my fingers, and a savage scramble of emaciated
    bodies at my feet Another peanut here, and an-
    other peanut there. Hundreds of hands, reaching
    and pleading; hundreds of eyes with the light of
    hope flickering out I stood there helpless, an
    empty blue can in my hand . . . Yes, I hope it
    will never happen to you.

    The Magic Formula can be used also in writing
business letters and giving instructions to fellow em-
ployees and subordinates. Mothers can use it when mo-
tivating their children, and children will find it useful
when appealing to their parents for a favor or privilege.
You will find it a psychological tool that can be used to
get your ideas across to others every day of your life.
    Even in advertising, the Magic Formula is used ev-

109
               MAKING THE SHORT TALK TO GET ACTION 107

cry day. Eveready Batteries recently ran a series of ra-
dio and television commercials built upon this
Formula. In the Example step, the announcer told of
someone's experience of being trapped, for instance, in
an overturned car late at night. After giving the
graphic details of the accident, he then called upon the
victim to finish the story by telling how the beams of
the flashlight, powered by Eveready Batteries, brought
help in time. Then the announcer went on to the Point
and Reason: "Buy Eveready Batteries and you may
survive a similar emergency." These stories were all
true experiences out of the Eveready Battery Com-
pany's files. I don't know how many Eveready Bat-
teries this particular advertising series sold, but I do
know that die Magic Formula is an effective method of
presenting what you want an audience to do, or to
avoid. Let us take up the steps, one at a time.



first/ GIVE YOUR EXAMPLE,
               AN INCIDENT FROM YOUR LIFE

    This is the part of your talk that will take up the
major portion of your time. In it you describe an ex-
perience that taught you a lesson. Psychologists say we
learn in two ways: one, by the Law of Exercise, in
which a series of similar incidents leads to a change of
our behavioral patterns; and two, by the Law of Effect,
in which a single event may be so startling as to cause
a change in our conduct All of us have had this type
of unusual experience. We do not have to search long
for these incidents because they lie close to the surface
of our memories. Our conduct is guided to a large ex-
tent by these experiences. By vividly reconstructing
these incidents we can make them the basis of influenc-
ing the conduct of others. We can do this because
people respond to words in much the same way that
they respond to real happenings. In the Example part
of your talk, then, you must recreate a segment of your

110
 108              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

experience in such a way that it tends to have the same
effect upon your audience as it originally had upon
you. This places upon you the obligation to clarify, in-
tensify, and dramatize your experiences in a way that
will make them interesting and compelling to your lis-
teners. Below are a number of suggestions which will
help to make the Example step of your action talk
clear, intense, and meaningful.


                       BUILD YOUR EXAMPLE
       UPON A SINGLE PERSONAL EXPERIENCE

     The incident type of example is particularly power-
ful when it is based upon a single event that had a
dramatic impact upon your life. It may not have taken
more than a few seconds, but in that short span of time
you learned an unforgettable lesson. Not long ago a
man in one of our classes told of a terrifying experi-
ence when he tried to swim to shore from his over-
turned boat. I am sure that everyone in his audience
made up his mind that, faced with a similar situation,
he would follow this speaker's advice and stay with the
capsized boat until help came. I remember another ex-
ample of a speaker's harrowing experience involving a
child and an overturned power mower. That incident
was so graphically etched in my mind that I will always
be on guard when children are hovering near my power
mower. Many of our instructors have been so
impressed by what they have heard in their classes that
they have acted promptly to prevent similar accidents
around their homes. One keeps a fire extinguisher
handy in his kitchen, for instance, because of a talk he
heard which vividly recreated a tragic fire that started
from a cooking accident Another has labeled all
bottles containing poison, and has seen to it that they
are out of the reach of his children. This action was
prompted by a talk detailing the experience of a dis-
traught parent when she discovered her child uncon-

111
              MAKING THE SHORT TALK TO GET ACTION 109

scious in the bathroom with a bottle of poison clutched
in her hand.
    A single personal experience that taught you a
lesson you will never forget is the first requisite of a
persuasive action talk. With this kind of incident you
can move audiences to act—if it happened to you, your
listeners reason, it can happen to them, and they had
better take your advice by doing what you ask them to
do.


                          START YOUR TALK
          WITH A DETAIL OF YOUR EXAMPLE

    One of the reasons for starting your talk with the
Example step is to catch attention at once. Some
speakers fail to get attention with their opening words
because all too often these words consist only of repeti-
tious remarks, cliches, or fragmentary apologies that
are of no interest to the audience. "Unaccustomed as I
am to public speaking," is particularly offensive, but
many other commonplace methods of beginning a talk
are just as weak in attention-getting value. Going into
the details of how you came to choose the subject, re-
vealing to the audience that you are not too well
prepared (they will discover that fact soon enough), or
announcing the topic or theme of your talk like a
preacher giving the text of the sermon are all methods
to avoid in the short talk to get action.
   Take a tip from top-flight magazine and newspaper
writers: begin right in your example and you will cap-
ture the attention of your audience immediately.
   Here are some opening sentences that drew my at-
tention like a magnet: "In 1942, I found myself on a
cot in a hospital"; "Yesterday at breakfast my wife was
pouring the coffee and . . ."; "Last July I was driving
at a fast clip down Highway 42 . . ."; "The door of
my office opened and Charlie Vann, our foreman, burst

112
 1 10            PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

 in"; "I was fishing in the middle of the lake; I looked
 up and saw a motor boat speeding toward me."
     If you start your talk with phrases that answer one
 of the questions, Who? When? Where? What? How? or
 Why?, you will be using one of the oldest communica-
 tion devices in the world to get attention—the story.
 "Once upon a time" are the magic words that open the
 floodgates of a child's imagination. With this same hu-
 man interest approach you can captivate the minds of
 your listeners with, your first words.


                       FILL YOUR EXAMPLE
                    WITH RELEVANT DETAIL

     Detail, of itself, is not interesting. A room cluttered
 with furniture and bric-a-brac is not attractive. A pic-
 ture filled with too many unrelated details does not
 compel the eyes to linger upon it. In the same way, too
 many details—unimportant details—make conversation
 and public speaking a boring test of endurance. The
 secret is to select only those details that will serve to
 emphasize the point and reason of the talk. If you want
to get across the idea that your listeners should have
their cars checked before going on a long trip, then all
the details of your Example step should be concerned
with what happened to you when you failed to have
your car checked before taking a trip. If you tell about
how you enjoyed the scenery or where you stayed
when you arrived at your destination, you will only
succeed in clouding the point and dissipating attention.
    But relevant detail, couched in concrete, colorful
language, is the best way to recreate the incident as it
happened and to picturize it for the audience. To say
merely that you once had an accident because of negli-
gence is bald, uninteresting, and hardly likely to move
anyone to be more careful behind the wheel of a car.
But to paint a word picture of your frightening experi-
ence, using the full range of multisensory phraseology,

113
               MAKING THE SHORT TALK TO GET ACTION 111

will etch the event upon the consciousness of the listen-
ers. For instance, here is the way one class member de-
veloped an Example step that points up vividly the need
for great caution on wintry roads:

        I was driving north on Highway 41 in Indiana
    one morning just before Christmas, in 1949. In
    the car were my wife and two children. For several
    hours we had been creeping along on a sheet of
    mirror-like ice; the slightest touch on the steering
    wheel sent the rear of my Ford into a sickening
    slide. Few drivers got out of line or attempted to
    pass, and the hours seemed to creep as slowly as
    the cars.
        Then we came to an open stretch where the ice
    was melted by the sun and I stepped on the accel-
    erator to make up for lost time. Other cars did the
    same. Everybody suddenly seemed in a hurry to
    get to Chicago first The children began to sing in
    the back seat as the tension of danger subsided.
        The road suddenly went uphill and into a
    wooded area. As the speeding car reached the top
    I saw, too late, that the northern slope of the hill,
    still untouched by the sun's rays, was like a
    smooth river of ice. I had a fleeting glance of two
   wildly careening cars in front of us and then we
   went into a skid. Over the shoulder we went,
   hopelessly out of control, and landed in a snow-
   bank, still upright; but the car that had been fol-
   lowing us went into a skid, too, and crashed into
   the side of our car, smashing in the doors and
    showering us with glass.

   The abundance of detail in this example made it
easy for the audience to project themselves into the
picture. After all, your purpose is to make your audi-
ence see what you saw, hear what you heard, feel what
you felt. The only way you can possibly achieve this
effect is to use an abundance of concrete details. As

114
 112               PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

 was pointed out in Chapter Four, the task of prepara-
 tion of a talk is a task of reconstructing the answers to
 the questions Who? When? Where? How? and Why?
 You must stimulate the visual imagination of your lis-
 teners by painting word pictures.


               RELIVE YOUR EXPERIENCE AS
                               YOU RELATE IT

     In addition to using picturesque details, the speaker
 should relive the experience he is describing. Here is
 where speaking approaches its sister field of acting. All
 great speakers have a sense of the dramatic, but this is
 not a rare quality, to be found only in the eloquent.
 Most children have a plentiful supply of it Many per-
 sons of our acquaintance are gifted with a sense of tim-
 ing, facial expression, mimicry, or pantomime that is a
 part, at least, of this priceless ability to dramatize.
 Most of us have some skill along these lines, and with
 a little effort and practice we can develop more of it.
     The more action and excitement you can put into
the retelling of your incident, the more it will make an
impression on your listeners. No matter how rich in de-
tail a talk may be, it will lack punch if the speaker
does not give it with all the fervor of re-creation. Are
you describing a fire? Give us the feeling of excitement
that ran through the crowd as the firemen battled the!
blaze. Are you telling us about an argument with your
neighbor? Relive it; dramatize it. Are you relating youij
final struggles in the water as panic swept over you?
Make your audience feel the desperation of those awful
moments in your life. For one of the purposes of the
example is to make your talk memorable. Your listen-
ers will remember your talk and what you want them
to do only if the example sticks in their minds. We re-
call George Washington's honesty because of the
cherry tree incident popularized in the Weem's biogra-
phy. The New Testament is a rich storehouse of princi-

115
               MAKING THE SHORT TALK TO GET ACTION 113

 pies of ethical conduct reinforced by examples full of
 human interest—for instance, the story of the Good
Samaritan.
    In addition to making your talk more easily remem-
bered, the incident-example makes your talk more in-
teresting, more convincing, and easier to understand.
Your experience of what life has taught you is freshly
perceived by the audience: they are. in- a sense, prede-
termined to respond to what you want them to do. This
brings us right to the doorstep of the second phase of
the Magic Formula.


second / STATE YOUR POINT, WHAT
                  YOU WANT THE AUDIENCE TO DO

    The Example step of your talk to get action has con-
sumed more than three-quarters of your time. Assume
you are talking for two minutes. You have about
twenty seconds in which to hammer home the desired
action you wish the audience to take and the benefit
they can expect as a result of doing what you ask. The
need for detail is over. The time for forthright, direct
assertion has come. It is the reverse of the newspaper
technique. Instead of giving the headline first, you give
the news story and then you headline it with your Point
or appeal for action. This step is governed by three
rules:


       MAKE THE POINT BRIEF AND SPECIFIC

   Be precise in telling the audience exactly what you
want them to do. People will do only what they clearly
understand. It is essential to ask yourself just exactly
what it is you want the audience to do now that they
have been disposed to action by your example. It is a
good idea to write the point out as you would a tele-
gram, trying to reduce the number of words and to

116
114               PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

make your language as clear and explicit as possible.
Don't say: "Help the patients in our local orphanage."
That's too general. Say instead: "Sign up tonight to
meet next Sunday to take twenty-five children on a pic-
nic." It is important to ask for an overt action, one that
can be seen, rather than mental actions, which are too
vague. For instance, "Think of your grandparents now
and then," is too general to be acted upon. Say in-
stead: "Make a point of visiting your grandparents this
weekend." A statement such as, "Be patriotic," should
be converted into "Cast your vote next Tuesday."


                      MAKE THE POINT EASY
                        FOR LISTENERS TO DO

    No matter what the issue is, controversial or other-
wise, it is the speaker's responsibility to word his point,
the request for action, in such a way that it will be easy
for his listeners to understand and to do. One of the
best ways to do this is to be specific. If you want your
listeners to improve their ability to remember names,
don't say: "Start now to improve your memory of
names." That is so general it is difficult to do. Say in-
stead: "Repeat the name of the next stranger you meet
five times within five minutes after you meet him."
    Speakers who give detailed action points are more
apt to be successful in motivating their audiences than
those who rest upon generalities. To say: "Sign the get
well card in the back of the room" is far better than to
urge your listeners to send a card or write a letter to a
hospitalized fellow class member.
    The question whether to state the point negatively or
positively should be answered by looking at it from the
listeners' point of view. Not all negatively phrased
points are ineffective. When they epitomize an
avoidance attitude they are probably more convincing
to listeners than a positively stated appeal. Don't be a

117
                MAKING THE SHORT TALK TO GET ACTION 115

 bulb-snatcher was an avoidance phrase employed with
 great effect some years ago in an advertising campaign
 designed to sell electric light bulbs.


                           STATE THE POINT
               WITH FORCE AND CONVICTION

     The Point is the entire theme of your talk. You
 should give it, therefore, with forcefulness and convic-
 tion. As a headline stands out in block letters, your re-
quest for action should be emphasized by vocal
animation and directness. You are about to make your
last impression on the audience. Make it in such a way
that the audience feels the sincerity of your appeal for
action. There should be no uncertainty or diffidence
about the way you ask for the order. This persua-
siveness of manner should carry over to your last
words, in which you give the third step of the Magic
Formula.


third/ GIVE THE REASON OR BENEFIT
               THE AUDIENCE MAY EXPECT

    Here again, brevity and economy are necessary. In
the reason step you hold out the incentive or reward
the listeners may expect if they do what you have
asked in the Point


         BE SURE THE REASON IS RELEVANT
                          TO THE EXAMPLE

   Much has been written about motivation in public
speaking. It is a vast subject and a useful one for any-
one engaged in persuading others to act. In the short
talk to get action, on which we are centering our atten-
tion in this chapter, all you can hope to do is highlight

118
116               PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

the benefit in a sentence or two and then sit down. It is
most important, however, that you focus upon the ben-
efit that was brought out in the Example step. If you
tell of your experience in saving money by buying a
used car, and urge your listeners to buy a secondhand
car, you must emphasize in your reason that they, too,
may enjoy the economical advantages of buying sec-
ondhand. You should not deviate from the example by
giving as your reason the fact that some used cars have
better styling than the latest models.


           BE SURE TO STRESS ONE REASON—
                               AND ONE ONLY

    Most salesmen can give a half-dozen reasons why
you should buy their product, and it is quite possible
that you can give several reasons to back up your Point
and all of them may be relevant to the Example you
used. But again it is best to choose one outstanding
reason or benefit and rest your case on it. Your final                i
words to the audience should be as clear-cut as the
message on an advertisement in a national magazine. If
you study these ads upon which so much talent has
been expended, you will develop skill in handling the
point and reason of your talk. No ad attempts to sell
more than one product or one idea at a time. Very few
ads in the big circulation magazines use more than one
reason why you should buy. The same company may
change its motivational appeal from one medium to an-
other, from television to newspapers, for instance, but
rarely will the same company make different appeals in
one ad, whether vocal or visual.
    If you study the ads you see in magazines and news-
papers and on television and analyze their content you
will be amazed at how often the Magic Formula is used
to persuade people to buy. You will become aware of
the ribbon of relevancy which binds the whole ad or
commercial together into a unified package.


                                                                                                 i

119
                MAKING THE SHORT TALK TO GET ACTION 1 17

    There are other ways of building up an example, for
instance, by using exhibits, giving a demonstration,
quoting authorities, making comparisons, and citing
statistics. These will be explained more at length in
Chapter Thirteen, where the longer talk to persuade
will be discussed. In this chapter, the formula has been
restricted to the personal incident type of example be-
cause, in the short talk to get action, it is by far the
easiest and most interesting, dramatic, and persuasive
method a speaker can use.

120
                   CHAPTER EIGHT


                   Making the

                   Talk to Inform




                     Probably you often have heard speak-
ers like one who once made a United States Senate in-
vestigating committee squirm with annoyance. He was
a high-ranking government official, but he did not
know any better than to talk on and on, vaguely, with-
out ever making his meaning clear. He was pointless
and obscure, and the committee's confusion mounted
by the moment Finally one of its members, Samuel
James Ervin, Jr., speaking as the senior Senator from
North Carolina, got a chance to say a few words—and
they were telling ones.
    He said the official reminded him of a husband he
knew back home. The husband notified his lawyer he
wanted to divorce his wife, although he conceded she
was beautiful, a fine cook, and a model mother.
    "They why do you want to divorce her?" his lawyer
asked.
    "Because she talks all the time," the husband re-
plied.
    "What does she talk about?"
    "That's the trouble," the husband answered, "she
never says!"
    This is the trouble, too, with many speakers, both
women and men. Their hearers don't know what such
                                            118

121
                      MAKING THE TALK TO INFORM      119

speakers are talking about. They never say. They never
make their meaning clear.
    In Chapter Seven, you received a formula for mak-
ing short talks to get action from your listeners. Now, I
am going to give you methods to help make your
meaning clear when you set out to inform, and not mo-
tivate, your listeners.
    We make informative talks many times every day:
giving directions or instructions, making explanations
and reports. Of all the types of talks given every week
to audiences everywhere, the talk to inform is second
only to the talk to persuade or get action. The ability
to speak clearly precedes the ability to move others to
action. Owen D. Young, one of America's top industri-
alists, emphasizes the need for clear expression in to-
day's world:

       As one enlarges his ability to get others to un-
    derstand him, he opens up to that extent his op-
   portunity for usefulness. Certainly in our society,
   where it is necessary for men even in the simplest
   matters to co-operate with each other, it is neces-
   sary for them first of all to understand each other.
   Language is the principal conveyor of understand-
   ing, and so we must learn to use it, not crudely
   but discriminatingly.

   In this chapter are some suggestions to help you see
language so clearly and discriminately that your audi-
ence will have no difficulty understanding you. "Every-
thing that can be thought at all," said Ludwig
Wittgenstein, "can be thought clearly. Everything that
can be said, can be said clearly."

122
1 20              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

first / RESTRICT YOUR SUBJECT TO FIT
                   THE TIME AT YOUR DISPOSAL

    In one of his talks to teachers, Professor William
James pauses to remark that one can make only one
point in a lecture, and the lecture he referred to lasted
an hour. Yet I recently heard a speaker, who was lim-
ited by a stop watch to three minutes, begin by saying
that he wanted to call our attention to eleven points.
Sixteen and a half seconds to each phase of his subject!
Seems incredible, doesn't it, that an intelligent man
should attempt anything so manifestly absurd? True,
this is an extreme case but the tendency to err in that
fashion, if not to that degree, handicaps almost every
novice. He is like a Cook's guide who shows Paris to
the tourist in one day. It can be done, just as one can
walk through the American Museum of Natural His-
tory in thirty minutes. But neither clearness nor enjoy-
ment results. Many a talk fails to be clear because the
speaker seems intent upon establishing a world's record
for ground covered in the allotted time. He leaps from
one point to another with the swiftness and agility of a
mountain goat.

    If, for example, you are to speak on Labor Unions,
do not attempt to tell us in three or six minutes why
they came into existence, the methods they employ, theI     j
good they have accomplished, the evil they haveel
wrought, and how to solve industrial disputes. No, no;

if you strive to do that, no one will have a very clear
conception of what you have said. It will be all con-
fused, a blur, too sketchy, too much of a mere outline.
    Wouldn't it be the part of wisdom to take one phase,
and one phase only, of labor unions, and cover that ad-
equately and illustrate it? It would. That kind of talk
leaves a single impression. It is lucid, easy to listen to,
easy to remember.
    When I went to call one morning on a company
president whom I know, I found a strange name on his;

123
                                "

                       MAKING THE TALK TO INFORM     121

 door. The personnel director, an old friend of mine,
 told me why.
     "His name caught up with him," my friend said.
     "His name?" I repeated. "He was one of the Joneses
 who control the company, wasn't he?"
     "I mean his nickname," my friend said. "It was
 'Where-Is-He-Now?* Everyone called him 'Where-Is-
He-Now' Jones. He didn't last long. The family put a
cousin in his place. He never took the pains to know
what this business is all about. He'd put in a good long
day, all right, but doing what? Popping in here, pop-
ping in there, all over the place, all the time. Just sort
of covering ground. He thought it was more important
for him to see that a shipping clerk turned out an elec-
tric light or that a stenographer picked up a paper clip
than it was for him to study a big sales campaign. He
wasn't in his office much. That's why we called him
4
 Where-Is-He-Now.'
    "Where-Is-He-Now" Jones reminds me of many
speakers who could do much better than they do. They
don't do better because they won't discipline them-
selves. They are the ones who, like Mr. Jones, try to
cover too much ground. Haven't you heard them? And
in the midst of a talk, haven't you wondered, "Where
is he now?"
   Even some experienced speakers are guilty of this
fault. Perhaps the fact that they are capable in many
other ways blinds them to the danger in dispersed ef-
fort. You need not be like them. Hold fast to your
main theme. If you are to make yourself clear, your
hearers must always be able to say, "I understand him.
I know where he is now!"


second/ ARRANGE YOUR IDEAS
                 IN SEQUENCE

   Almost all subjects can be developed by using a logi-
cal sequence based on time, space, or special topics. In

124
1 22             PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

the time sequence, for instance, you might consider
your subject under the. three categories of past, present,
and future, or you might begin at a certain date and
move backward or forward from that date. All process
talks, for example, should begin at the raw-material
stage and move through the various manufacturing
steps that produce the finished product. How much de-
tail you bring in will, of course, be governed by the
time you have.
    In the space sequence, you arrange your ideas ac-
cording to some central point and go outward from
there or you cover the material directionally, north,
south, east, and west If you were to describe the city of
Washington, D. C, you might take your listeners to the
top of the capitol building and indicate the points of in-
terest in each direction. If you are describing a jet en-
gine or an automobile, for example, you might best
discuss it by breaking it down into its component parts.
    Some subjects have a built-in sequence. If you set out
to explain the structure of the United States Govern-
ment, you will do well to follow this inherent organiza-
tional pattern and discuss it according to the legislative,
executive, and judicial branches.



third / ENUMERATE YOUR POINTS
                  AS YOU MAKE THEM

    One of the simplest ways to keep a talk shipshape in
the minds of your listeners is to mention plainly as you
go along that you are taking up first one point and then
another.
    "My first point is this:. . . ." You can be as blunt
as that. When you've discussed the point, you can say
frankly that you are going to the second one. You can
keep on that way to the end.
    Dr. Ralph J. Bunche, when assistant secretary-gen-
eral of the United Nations, began an important talk

125
                      MAKING THE TALK TO INFORM      123

sponsored by the City Club of Rochester, New York,
in this straightforward manner:
    "I have chosen to speak tonight on the topic, 'The
Challenge of Human Relations/ for two reasons," he
said. He went on at once to add, "In the first
place. . . ." He continued soon, "In the second
place. . . ." Throughout the talk, he was careful to
make clear to his audience that he was leading it, point
by point, to his conclusion:
    "We must never lose faith in man's potential power
for good."
    The same method was given an effective twist when
the economist, Paul H. Douglas, spoke to a con-
gressional joint committee struggling with means to
stimulate business when it once was lagging in this
country. He spoke both as a tax expert and as Senator
from Illinois.
    "My theme," he began, "is this: The quickest and
most effective way to act is by means of a tax cut for
lower and middle income groups—that is, those groups
which tend to spend almost all their income."
                            ,"
    "Specifically. . . he went on.
                       ,"
    "Further. . . he continued.
                            ,"
   "In addition. . . he continued.
   "There are three principal reasons:. . . . First. . . .
Second      Third
   "In summation, what we need is an immediate tax
cut for low and middle income groups in order to in-
crease demand and purchasing power."



foukth/ COMPARE THE STRANGE
                 WITH THE FAMILIAR

    Sometimes you will find yourself floundering in a vain
attempt to explain your meaning. It's something quite
clear to you but requiring involved explanation if your
hearers are to be clear about it too. What to do? Com-

126
1 24             PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

pare it with something your hearers do understand; say
one thing is like the other, the strange like the familiar.
    Suppose you are discussing one of chemistry's con-
tributions to industry—a catalyst. It is a substance that
causes changes to occur in other substances without
changing itself. That's fairly simple. But isn't this bet-
ter? It is like a little boy in a schoolyard, tripping,
punching, upsetting, poking all the other children
there, and never being touched by a blow from anyone
else.
    Some missionaries once had to face this problem
of putting strange statements into familiar terms when
they translated the Bible into the dialect of a tribe liv-
ing in equatorial Africa. Should they translate literally?
They realized that if they did, the words at times would
be meaningless to the natives.
    They came, for example, to the lines: "Though your
sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow."
Should they translate this literally? The natives didn't
know snow from jungle moss. But they had often
climbed coconut trees and had shaken down nuts for
lunch. The missionaries likened the unknown to the
known. They changed the lines to read:
    "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white
as the meat of a coconut."
    Under the circumstances, it would be hard to im-
prove on that, wouldn't it?


                TURN A FACT INTO A PICTURE

    How far away is the moon? The sun? The nearest
other star? Scientists are apt to answer space-travel
questions with a lot of mathematics. But science lec-
turers and writers know this is no way to make a fact
clear to an average audience. They turn the figures into
pictures.
    The famous scientist Sir James Jeans was particu-
larly interested in mankind's yearnings to explore the

127
                       MAKING THE TALK TO INFORM      125

 universe. As a scientific expert, he knew the mathe-
 matics involved, and he also knew that he would be
 most effective in writing or speaking if he dropped in a
 figure only here and there.
     Our sun (a star) and the planets around us are so
near that we do not realize how far away other objects
whirling in space are, he pointed out in his book, The
 Universe Around Vs. "Even the nearest star (Proxima
Centauri) is 25,000,000,000.000 miles away," he said.
Then, to make this figure more vivid, he explained that
if one were to take off from the earth at the speed of
light—186,000 miles a second—it would take him four
and a quarter years to reach Proxima Centauri.
    In this way, he made the vast distances in space
seem more real than did another speaker whom I once
heard describe such a simple thing as distances in
Alaska. He said Alaska's area was 590,804 square
miles, and dropped the attempt to show its size right
there.
    Does this give you any kind of picture of the size of
the 49th State? It didn't give me one. To visualize its
bigness, I had to wait until I learned from another
source that its area more than equals the combined ar-
eas of Vermont, New Hampshire, Maine, Massachu-
setts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, West
Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia,
Florida, Tennessee, and Mississippi. Now the 590,804
square miles take on a new meaning, don't they? You
realize that in Alaska there's plenty of room to move
around.
    Some years ago a member of one of our classes
described the fearful toll of fatal accidents on our high-
ways by this appalling picture: "You are driving across
the country from New York to Los Angeles. Instead of
highway markers, imagine coffins standing upright in
the earth, each containing a victim of last year's
slaughter on the roads. As you speed along your car
passes one of these gruesome markers every five

128
                                                                                        —

 126              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

seconds, for they are spaced twelve to a mile from one
end of the country to the other!"
    I never take a ride in a car very far before that pic-
ture comes back to me with startling realism.
    Why is that so? Because ear impressions are hard to
retain. They roll away like sleet striking the smooth
bark of a beech tree. But eye impressions? I saw, a few
years ago, a cannon ball imbedded in an old house
standing on the banks of the Danube—a cannon ball
that Napoleon's artillery had fired at the battle of Ulm.
Visual impressions are like that cannon ball; they come
with a terrific impact. They imbed themselves. They
stick. They tend to drive out all opposing suggestions
as Bonaparte drove away the Austrians.


                    AVOID TECHNICAL TERMS

    If you belong to a profession the work of which is
technical—if you are a lawyer, a physician, an en-
gineer, or are in a highly specialized line of business
be doubly careful, when you talk to outsiders, to
express yourself in plain terms and to give necessary
details.
    Be doubly careful, for, as a part of my professional
duties, I have listened to hundreds of speeches that
failed right at this point, and failed woefully. The
speakers appeared totally unconscious of the general
public's widespread and profound ignorance regarding
their particular specialties. So what happened? They
rambled on and on, uttering thoughts, using phrases
that fitted into their experience and were instantly and
continuously meaningful to them; but to the uniniti-
ated, they were about as clear as the Missouri River af-
ter the June rains have fallen on the newly plowed
cornfields of Iowa and Kansas.
    What should such a speaker do? He ought to read
and heed the following advice from the facile pen of
former Senator Beveridge of Indiana:

129
                       MAKING THE TALK TO INFORM      127

         It is a good practice to pick out the least intelli-
     gent-looking person in the audience and strive to
     make that person interested in your argument
     This can be done only by lucid statements of fact
     and clear reasoning. An even better method is to
    center your talk on some small boy or girl present
    with parents.
        Say to yourself—say out loud to your audience,
    if you like—that you will try to be so plain that
    the child will understand and remember your ex-
    planation of the question discussed, and after the
    meeting be able to tell what you have said

    A physician in one of our classes remarked in a talk
that "diaphragmatic breathing is a distinct aid to the
peristaltic action of the intestines and a boon to
health." He was about to dismiss that phase of his talk
with that one sentence and to rush on to something
else. The instructor stopped him, and asked for a show
of hands of those who had a clear conception of how
diaphragmatic breathing differs from other kinds of
breathing, why it is especially beneficial to physical
well-being, and what peristaltic action is. The result of
the vote surprised the doctors so he went back, ex-
plained, enlarged in this fashion:

       The diaphragm is a thin muscle forming the
   floor of the chest at the base of the lungs and the
   roof of the abdominal cavity. When inactive and
   during chest breathing, it is arched like an inverted
   washbowl.
       In abdominal breathing every breath forces this
   muscular arch down until it becomes nearly flat
   and you can feel your stomach muscles pressing
   against your belt This downward pressure of the
   diaphragm massages and stimulates the organs of
   the upper part of the abdominal cavity—the stom-
   ach, the liver, the pancreas, the spleen, the solar
   plexus.

130
128               PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

         When you breathe out again, your stomach and
    your intestines will be forced up against the dia-
    phragm and will be given another massage. This
    massaging helps the process of elimination.
        A vast amount of ill health originates in the in-
    testines. Most indigestion, constipation, and auto-
    intoxication would disappear if our stomachs and
    intestines were properly exercised through deep
    diaphragmatic breathing.


    It is always best to go from the simple to the com-
plex in giving explanations of any kind. For example,
suppose you were trying to explain to a group of
housewives why refrigerators must be defrosted. This
would be the wrong way to go about it:

        The principle of refrigeration is based on the
    fact that the evaporator pulls heat from the inner
    portion of the refrigerator. As the heat is pulled
    out, the accompanying humidity clings to the
    evaporator, piling up into a thickness which in-
    sulates the evaporator and necessitates more fre-
    quent turning on of the motor to compensate for
    the thickening frost.

    Notice how much easier it is to understand if the
speaker starts with what the housewives are familiar
with:

        You know where you freeze meat in your re-
    frigerator. Well, you know, too, how the frost
    gathers on that freezer. Every day the frost gets
    thicker and thicker until the freezer must be de-
    frosted to keep the refrigerator in good working
    order. You see, frost around the freezer is really
    like a blanket covering you in bed or like rock
    wool between the walls insulating your house.
    Now the thicker the frost gets, the harder it is for
    the freezer to pull the warm air out of the rest of

131
                       MAKING THE TALK TO INFORM      129

     the refrigerator and keep the refrigerator cold.
     The refrigerator motor then must work more of-
     ten and longer to keep the box cold. But with an
     automatic defroster on your refrigerator, the frost
    never gets a chance to build up thickly. Conse-
    quently, the motor works less often and for short-
    er periods.

    Aristotle gave some good advice on the subject:
"Think as wise men do, but speak as the common peo-
ple do." If you must use a technical term, don't use it
until you have explained it so everybody in the audience
knows what it means. This is especially true of your
keystone words, the ones you use over and over.
    I once heard a stock broker speak to a group of
women who wanted to learn fundamentals of banking
and investment. He used simple language and he put
them at ease in a conversational way. He made every-
thing clear except his foundation words, which were
strange to them. He spoke of the "clearing house,"
"puts and calls," "refunding mortgages," and "short
sales and long sales." What could have been a fascinat-
ing discussion became a puzzle because he did not
realize his hearers were unfamiliar with the words that
were part and parcel of his trade.
    There is no reason to avoid a keystone word which
you know will not be understood. Just explain it as
soon as you use it Never fail to do this; the dictionary

is all yours.
   Do you want to say something about singing com-
mercials? Or about impulse buying? About liberal arts
courses, or cost accounting? About government subsi-

dies, or automobiles that pass on the wrong side?
Would you like to advocate a permissive attitude to-
ward children, or the LIFO system of valuing inven-
tories? Merely make sure that your hearers accept your
keystone words in these specialized fields in the same
sense in which you accept them.

132
 130              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

 fjfth/ USE VISUAL AIDS

     The nerves that lead from the eye to the brain are
many times larger than those leading from the ear; and
 science tells us that we give twenty-five times as much
attention to eye suggestions as we do to ear suggestions.
     "One seeing," says an old Japanese proverb, "is bet-
ter than a hundred times telling about."
     So, if you wish to be clear, picture your points,
visualize your ideas. That was the plan of John H.
Patterson, founder of the National Cash Register Com-
pany. He wrote an article for System Magazine, out-
lining the methods he used in speaking to his workmen
and his sales forces:


        I hold that one cannot rely on speech alone to
    make himself understood or to gain and hold at-
    tention. A dramatic supplement is needed. It is
    better to supplement whenever possible with pic-
    tures which show the right and the wrong way: di-
    agrams are more convincing than mere words,
    and pictures are more convincing than diagrams.
    The ideal presentation of a subject is one in which
    every subdivision is pictured and in which the
    words are used only to connect them. I early
    found that in dealing with men, a picture was
    worth more than anything I could say.

    If you use a chart or diagram, be sure it is large
enough to see, and don't overdo a good thing. A long
succession of charts is usually boring. If you make the
diagram as you go along, be careful to sketch roughly
and swiftly on the blackboard or flip chart. Listeners
are not interested in great art work. Use abbreviations;
write largely and legibly; keep talking as you draw or
write; and keep turning back to your audience.
    When you use exhibits, follow these suggestions and
you will be assured of the rapt attention of your audi-
ence.

133
                       MAKING THE TALK TO INFORM      131

     1. Keep the exhibit out of sight until you are ready
          to use it.
     2. Use exhibits large enough to be seen from the
          very last row. Certainly your audience can't learn
          from any exhibit unless they see it.
     3. Never pass an exhibit around among your listen-
          ers while you are speaking. Why invite competi-
         tion?
    4. When you show an exhibit, hold it up where your
         listeners can see it.
    5. Remember, one exhibit that moves is worth ten
         that don't. Demonstrate if practicable.
    6. Don't stare at the exhibit as you talk—you are
         trying to communicate with the audience, not
         with the exhibit.
    7. When you have finished with the exhibit, get it
         out of sight if practicable.
    8. If the exhibit you are going to use lends itself to
         "mystery treatment," have it placed on a table
         which will be at your side as you speak. Have it
         covered. As you talk, make references to it that
        will arouse curiosity—but don't tell what it is.
         Then, when you are ready to unveil it, you have
         aroused curiosity, suspense* and real interest.

   Visual materials are becoming more and more prom-
inent as devices to promote clarity. There is no better
way to insure that your audience will understand what
you have to say than to go before them prepared to
show as well as to tell them what you have in mind.
   Two American presidents, both masters of the spo-
ken word, have indicated that the ability to be clear is
the result of training and discipline. As Lincoln said,
we must have a passion for clarity. He told Dr. Gul-
liver, the President of Knox College, how he developed
this "passion" in early life:

       Among my earliest recollections I remember
   how, when a mere child, I used to get irritated

134
 132              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

    when anybody talked to me in a way I could not
    understand. I don't think I ever got angry at any-
    thing else in my life. But that always disturbed my
    temper, and has ever since. I can remember going
    to my little bedroom, after hearing the neighbors
    talk of an evening with my father, and spending
    no small part of the night walking up and down
    and trying to make out the exact meaning of some
    of their, to me, dark sayings. I could not sleep,
    though I often tried to, when I got on such a hunt
    after an idea, until I had repeated it over and
    over, until I had put it in language plain enough
    as I thought for any boy I knew to comprehend.
    This was a kind of passion with me, and it has
    since stuck by me.

    The other distinguished president, Woodrow Wilson,
wrote some words of advice that strike the right note to
end this chapter on making your meaning clear:

        My father was a man of great intellectual en-
    ergy. My best training came from him. He was in-
    tolerant of vagueness, and from the time I began
    to write until his death in 1903, when he was
    eighty-one years old, I carried everything I wrote
    to him.
        He would make me read it aloud, which was al-
   ways painful to me. Every now and then, he
   would stop me. "What do you mean by that?" I
   would tell him, and, of course, in doing so would
    express myself more simply than I had on paper.
    "Why didn't you say so?" he would go on. "Don't
    shoot at your meaning with birdshot and hit the
   whole countryside; shoot with a rifle at the thing
    you have to say."

135
                  CHAPTER NINE


                  Making the

                  Talk to Convince




                    There was once a small group of men
and women who found themselves in the path of a hur-
ricane. Not a real hurricane, but the next thing to it. In
short, a hurricane of a man named Maurice Goldblatt.
Here is how one of that group described it:

       We were sitting around a luncheon table in
   Chicago. We knew this man was reputed to be a
   powerful speaker. We watched him intently as he
   stood up to speak.
       He began quietly—a spruce, pleasant man of
   middle age—thanking us for inviting him. He
   wanted to talk about something serious, he said,
   and he hoped we would forgive him if he dis-
   turbed us.
       Then, like a whirlwind, he struck. He leaned
   forward and his eyes transfixed us. He didn't raise
   his voice, but it seemed to me that it crashed like
   a gong.
       "Look around you," he said. "Look at one an-
   other. Do you know how many of you sitting now
   in this room are going to die of cancer? One in
   four of all of you who are over forty-five. One in
   four!"
      He paused, and his face lightened. "That's a
                                        133

136
134              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

   plain, harsh fact, but it needn't be for long," he
   said. "Something can be done about it This some-
   thing is progress in the treatment of cancer and in
   the search for its cause."
       He looked at us gravely, his gaze moving
   around the table. "Do you want to help toward
   this progress?" he asked
       Could there have been an answer except
   "Yes!" in the minds of any of us then? "Yes!" I
   thought, and I found later that so did the others.
       In less than a minute, Maurice Goldblatt had
   won us. He had drawn us personally into his sub-
   ject. He had us on his side, in the campaign he
   was waging for a humanitarian cause.
       Getting a favorable reaction is every speaker's
   objective any time, anywhere. As it happened,
   Mr. Goldblatt had a dramatically good reason for
   wanting to get one from us. He and his brother,
   Nathan, starting with little more than nothing, had
   built up a department store chain doing a business
   of more than $100,000,000 a year. Fabulous
   success had come to them after long, hard years,
   and then Nathan, ill only a short time, had died of
  cancer. After that, Maurice Goldblatt saw to it
   that the Goldblatt Foundation gave the first mil-
   lion dollars to the University of Chicago's cancer
   research program, and he gave his own time—re-
   tiring from business—to the work of interesting
   the public in the fight against cancer.
       These facts, together with Maurice Goldblatt's
   personality, won us. Sincerity, earnestness, enthu-
   siasm—a blazing determination to give himself to
   us for a few minutes, just as he was giving himself
   year in and out to a great cause—all of these fac-
   tors swept us up into a feeling of agreement with
   the speaker, a friendliness for him, a willingness
   to be interested and moved.

137
                      MAKING THE TALK TO CONVINCE  1 35

 first/ WIN CONFIDENCE BY DESERVING IT

     Quintilian described the orator as "a good man
 skilled in speaking." He was talking about sincerity and
 character. Nothing said in this book, nor anything
 which will be said, can take the place of this essential
 attribute of speaking effectiveness. Pierpont Morgan
 said that character was the best way to obtain credit; it

 is also the best way to win the confidence of the audi-
 ence.
    "The sincerity with which a man speaks/' said
Alexander Woolcott, "imparts to his voice a color of
truth no perjurer can feign."
    Especially when the purpose of our talk is to con-
vince, it is necessary to set forth our own ideas with
the inner glow that comes from sincere conviction. We
must first be convinced before we attempt to convince
others.



second/ GET A YES-RESPONSE

   Walter Dill Scott, former president of Northwestern
University, said that "every idea, concept, or conclu-
sion which enters the mind is held as true unless hind-
ered by some contradictory idea." That boils down to
keeping the audience yes-minded. My good friend Pro-
fessor Harry Overstreet brilliantly examined the psy-
chological background of this concept in a lecture at
the New School for Social Research in New York City:

       The skillful speaker gets at the outset a number
   of yes-responses. He has thereby set the psycho-
   logical processes of his listeners moving in the af-
   firmative direction. It is like the movement of a
   billiard ball. Propel it in one direction, and it
   takes some force to deflect it, far more force to
   send it back in the opposite direction.
       The psychological patterns here are quite clear.

138
 136               PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

     When a person says "No" and really means it, he
     is doing far more than saying a word of two let-
     ters. His entire organism—glandular, nervous,
     muscular—gathers itself together into a condition
     of rejection. There is, usually in minute but some-
     times in observable degree, a physical withdrawal,
     or readiness for withdrawal. The whole neuro-
     muscular system, in short, sets itself on guard
     against acceptance. Where, on the contrary, a per-
     son says "Yes," none of the withdrawing activities
     takes place. The organism is in a forward-moving,
     accepting, open attitude. Hence the more
     "Yesses" we can, at the very outset, induce, the
    more likely we are to succeed in capturing the at-
    tention for our ultimate proposal.
         It is a very simple technique—this yes-re-
    sponse. And yet how much neglected! It often
    seems as if people get a sense of their own impor-
    tance by antagonizing at the outset The radical
    comes into a conference with his conservative
    brethren; and immediately he must make them
    furious! What, as a matter of fact, is the good of
    it? If he simply does it in order to get some
    pleasure out of it for himself, he may be pardoned.
    But if he expects to achieve something, he is only
    psychologically stupid.
        Get a student to say "No" at the beginning, or
    a customer, child, husband, or wife, and it takes
    the wisdom and patience of angels to transform
    that bristling negative into an affirmative.

    How is one going to get these desirable "yes-respon-
ses" at the very outset? Fairly simple. "My way of
opening and winning an argument," confided Lincoln,
"is to first find a common ground of agreement." Lin-
coln found it even when he was discussing the highly
inflammable subject of slavery. "For the first half
hour," declared The Mirror, a neutral paper reporting
one of his talks, "his opponents would agree with every

139
                     MARINO THE TALK TO CONVINCE  137

 word he uttered. From that point he began to lead
 them off, little by little, until it seemed as if he had got
 them all into his fold."
     Is it not evident that the speaker who argues with
his audience is merely arousing their stubbornness, put-
ting them on the defensive, making it well-nigh impos-
sible for them to change their minds? Is it wise to start
by saying, "I am going to prove so and so"? Aren't
your hearers liable to accept that as a challenge and re-
mark silently, "Let's see you do it"?
    Is it not much more advantageous to begin by
stressing something that you and all of your hearers be-
lieve, and then to raise some pertinent question that ev-
eryone would like to have answered? Then take your
audience with you in an earnest search for the answer.
While on that search, present the facts as you see them
so clearly that they will be led to accept your conclu-
sions as their own. They will have much more faith in
some truth that they have discovered for themselves.
"The best argument is that which seems merely an ex-
planation."
    In every controversy, no matter how wide and bitter
the differences, there is always some common ground
of agreement on which a speaker can invite everyone
to meet To illustrate: On February 3, 1960, the prime
minister of Great Britain, Harold Macmillan, addressed
both houses of the Parliament of the Union of South
Africa. He had to present the United Kingdom's non-
racial viewpoint before the legislature body at a time
when apartheid was the prevailing policy. Did he begin
his talk with this essential difference in outlook? No.
He began by stressing the great economic progress
made by South Africa, the significant contributions
made by South Africa to the world. Then, with skill
and tact he brought up the questions of differing view-
points. Even here, he indicated that he was well aware
that these differences were based on sincere conviction.
His whole talk was a masterly statement reminding one
of Lincoln's gentle but firm utterances in the years be-

140
138              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

fore Fort Sumter. "As a fellow member of the Com-
monwealth," said the Prime Minister, "it is our earnest
desire to give South Africa our support and encourage-
ment, but I hope you won't mind my saying frankly
that there are some aspects of your policies which
make it impossible for us to do this without being false
to our deep convictions about the political destinies of
free men to which in our own territories we are trying
to give effect. I think we ought as friends to face to-
gether, without seeking to apportion credit or blame,
the fact that in the world of today this difference of
outlook lies between us."
    No matter how determined one was to differ with a
speaker, a statement like that would tend to convince
you of the speaker's fair-mindedness.
    What would have been the result had Prime Minister
Macmillan set out immediately to emphasize the differ-
ence in policy rather than the common ground of
agreement? Professor James Harvey Robinson's en-
lightening book, The Mind in the Making, gives the
psychological answer to that question:

        We sometimes find ourselves changing our
    minds without any resistance or heavy emotion,
    but if we are told we are wrong we resent the im-
    putation and harden our hearts. We are incredibly
    heedless in the formation of our beliefs, but find
    ourselves filled with an illicit passion for them
    when anyone proposes to rob us of their compan-
    ionship. It is obviously not the ideas themselves
    that are dear to us, but our self-esteem which is
    threatened. . . . The little word my is the most
    important one in human affairs, and properly to
    reckon with it is the beginning of wisdom. It has
    the same force whether it is my dinner, my dog,
    and my house, or my faith, my country and my
    God. We not only resent the imputation that our
    watch is wrong, or our car shabby, but that our
    conception of the canals of Mars, of the pronunci-

141
                      MAKING THE TALK TO CONVINCE  1 39

     ation of "Epictetus," of the medicinal value of
     salicine, or of the date of Sargon I, are subject to
     revision. . . . We like to continue to believe what
     we have been accustomed to accept as true, and
     the resentment aroused when doubt is cast upon
     any of our assumptions leads us to seek every
     manner of excuse for clinging to it. The result is
     that most of our so-called reasoning consists in
    finding arguments for going on believing as we al-
    ready do.



 third/ SPEAK WITH
                  CONTAGIOUS ENTHUSIASM

    Contradicting ideas are much less likely to arise in
the listener's mind when the speaker presents his ideas
with feeling and contagious enthusiasm. I say "con-
tagious," for enthusiasm is just that. It thrusts aside all
negative and opposing ideas. When your aim is to con-
vince, remember it is more productive to stir emotions
than to arouse thoughts. Feelings are more powerful
than cold ideas. To arouse feelings one must be in-
tensely in earnest. Regardless of the petty phrases a
man may concoct, regardless of the illustrations he may
assemble, regardless of the harmony of his voice and
the grace of his gestures, if he does not speak sincerely,
these are hollow and glittering trappings. If you would
impress an audience, be impressed yourself. Your
spirit, shining through your eyes, radiating through
your voice, and proclaiming itself through your man-
ner, will communicate itself to your audience.
   Every time you speak, and especially when your
avowed purpose is to convince, what you do deter-
mines the attitude of your listeners. If you are luke-
warm, so will they be; if you are flippant and
antagonistic, so will they be. "When the congregation

falls asleep," wrote Henry Ward Beecher, "there is

142
 140              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

only one thing to do; provide the usher with a sharp
stick and have him prod the preacher."
    I was once one of three judges called on to award
the Curtis medal at Columbia University. There were
half a dozen undergraduates, all of them elaborately
trained, all of them eager to acquit themselves well.
But—with only a single exception—what they were
striving for was to win the medal. They had little or no
desire to convince.
    They had chosen their topics because these topics
permitted oratorical development. They had no deep
personal interest in the arguments they were making.
And their successive talks were merely exercises in the
art of delivery.
    The exception was a Zulu Prince. He had selected as
his theme "The Contribution of Africa to Modern Civ-
ilization." He put intense feeling into every word he ut-
tered. His talk was no mere exercise; it was a living
thing, born of conviction and enthusiasm. He spoke as
the representative of his people, of his continent: with
wisdom, high character, and good will, he brought us a
message of his people's hopes and a plea for our un-
derstanding.
    We gave him the medal, although he was possibly no
more accomplished in addressing a large group than
two or three of his competitors. What we judges recog-
nized was that his talk had the true fire of sincerity; it
was ablaze with truth. Beside it, the other talks were
only flickering gas-logs.
    The Prince had learned in his own way in a distant
land that you can't project your personality in a talk to
others by using reason alone; you have to reveal to
them how deeply you yourself believe in what you say.

143
                                                                                     1

                     MAKING THE TALK TO CONVINCE  14

 fourth/ SHOW RESPECT AND AFFECTION
                  FOR YOUR AUDIENCE

    "The human personality demands love and it also
demands respect," Dr. Norman Vincent Peale said as a
prelude to speaking of a professional comedian. "Every
human being has an inner sense of worth, of impor-
tance, of dignity. Wound that and you have lost that
person forever. So when you love and respect a person
you build him up and, accordingly, he loves and es-
teems you.
    "At one time I was on a program with an enter-
tainer. I did not know the man well, but since that
meeting I read that he was having difficulty, and I
think I know why.
    "I had been sitting beside him quietly for I was
about to speak. 'You aren't nervous, are you?' he asked
    " 'Why, yes,* I replied. T always get a little nervous
before I stand up before an audience. I have a pro-
found respect for an audience and the responsibility
makes me a bit nervous. Don't you get nervous?'
    " 'No,' he said, *Why should I? Audiences fall for
anything. They are a lot of dopes.*
   " T don't agree with you,' I said. They are your sov-
ereign judges. I have great respect for audiences.' "
   When he read about this man's waning popularity
Dr. Peale was sure the reason lay in an attitude that
antagonized others instead of winning them.
   What an object lesson for all of us who want to im-
part something to other people!


fifth / BEGIN IN A FRIENDLY WAY

   An athetist once challenged William Paley to dis-
prove his contention that there was no Supreme Being.
Very quietly Paley took out his watch, opened the
case, and said: "If I were to tell you that those levers
and wheels and springs made themselves and fitted

144
                                                                                        —
142              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

themselves together and started running on their own
account, wouldn't you question my intelligence? Of
course, you would. But look up at the stars. Every one
of them has its perfect appointed course and motion
the earth and planets around the sun, and the whole
group pitching along at more than a million miles a
day. Each star is another sun with its own group of
worlds, rushing on through space like our own solar
system. Yet there are no collisions, no disturbance, no
confusion. All quiet, efficient, and controlled. Is it
easier to believe that they just happened or that some-
one made them so?"
    Suppose he had retorted to his antagonist at the out-
set: "No God? Don't be a silly ass. You don't know
what you are talking about." What would have hap-
pened? Doubtlessly a verbal joust—a wordy war would
have ensued, as futile as it was fiery. The atheist would
have risen with an unholy zeal upon him to fight for
his opinions with all the fury of a wildcat. Why? Be-
cause, as Professor Overstreet has pointed out, they
were his opinions, and his precious, indispensable self-
esteem would have been threatened; his pride would
have been at stake.
    Since pride is such a fundamentally explosive char-
acteristic of human nature, wouldn't it be the part of
wisdom to get a man's pride working for us, instead of
against us? How? By showing, as Paley did, that the
thing we propose is very similar to something that our
opponent already believes. That renders it easier for
him to accept than to reject your proposal. That pre-
vents contradictory and opposing ideas from arising in
the mind to vitiate what we have said.
    Paley showed delicate appreciation of how the hu-
man mind functions. Most men, however, lack this
subtle ability to enter the citadel of a man's beliefs arm
in arm with the owner. They erroneously imagine that
in order to take the citadel, they must storm it, batter it
down by a frontal attack. What happens? The moment
hostilities commence, the drawbridge is lifted, the great

145
                     MAKING THE TALK TO CONVINCE    143

 gates are slammed and bolted, the mailed archers draw
 their long bows—the battle of words and wounds is on.
 Such frays always end in a draw; neither has convinced
the other of anything.
    This more sensible method I am advocating is not
new. It was used long ago by Saint Paul. He employed
it in that famous address of his to the Athenians on
Mars Hill—employed it with an adroitness and finesse
that compels our admiration across nineteen centuries.
He was a man of finished education; and, after his con-
version to Christianity, his eloquence made him its
leading advocate. One day he arrived at Athens—the
post-Pericles Athens, an Athens that had passed the
summit of its glory and was now on the decline. The
Bible says of it at this period: "All the Athenians and
strangers which were there spent their time in nothing
else but either to tell or to hear some new thing."
    No radios, no cables, no news dispatches; those
Athenians must have been hard put in those days to
scratch up something fresh every afternoon. Then Paul
came. Here was something new. They crowded about
him, amused, curious, interested. Taking him to the
Aeropagus, they said: "May we know what this new
doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is? For thou bringest
certain strange things to our ears: we would know
therefore what these things mean."
    In other words, they invited a speech; and, nothing
loath, Paul agreed. In fact, that was what he had come
for. He probably stood up on a block or stone, and,
being a bit nervous, as ill good speakers are at the
very outset, he may have given his hands a dry wash,
and have cleared his throat before he began.
   However, he did not altogether approve of the way
they had worded their invitation; "New doctrines . . .
strange things." That was poison. He must eradicate
those ideas. They were fertile ground for the propa-
gating of contradictory and clashing opinions. He did
not wish to present his faith as something strange and
alien. He wanted to tie it up to, liken it to, something

146
144            PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

they already believed That would smother dissenting
suggestions. But how? He thought a moment; hit upon
a brilliant plan; he began his immortal address: "Ye
men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are very
superstitious."
    Some translations read, "Ye are very religtous." I
think that is better, more accurate. They worshipped
many gods; they were very religious. They were proud
of it He complimented them, pleased them. They be-
gan to warm toward him. One of the rules of the art of
effective speaking is to support a statement by an illus*-
tratiorL He does just that:
    "For, as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I
found an altar with this inscription, to the unknown
god."
   That proves, you see, that they were very religious.
They were so afraid of slighting one of the deities that
they had put up an altar to the unknown God, a sort of
blanket insurance policy to provide against all uncon-
scious slights and unintentional oversights. Paul, by
mentioning this specific altar, indicated that he was not
dealing in flattery; he showed that his remark was a
genuine appreciation born of observation.
   Now, here comes the consummate lightness of this
opening: ''Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, Him
declare I unto you."
    "New doctrine . . . strange things?" Not a bit of it
He was there merely to explain a few truths about a
God they were already worshipping without being con-
scious of it Likening the things they did not believe,
you see, to something they already passionately ac-
cepted—such was his superb technique.
    He pronounced his doctrine of salvation and resur-
rection, quoted a few words from one of their own
Greek poets; and he was done. Some of his hearers
mocked, but others said, "We will hear thee again on
this matter."
    Our problem in making a talk to convince or impress
others is just this: to plant the idea in their minds and

147
                      MAKING THE TALK TO CONVINCE   145

 to keep contradicting and opposing ideas from arising.
 He who is skilled in doing that has power in speaking
 and influencing others. Here is precisely where the
 rules in my book How to Win Friends and Influence
People will be helpful.
    Almost every day of your life you are talking to
people who differ from you on some subject under dis-
cussion. Aren't you constantly trying to win people to
your way of thinking, at home, in the office, in social
situations of all kinds? Is there room for improvement
in your methods? How do you begin? By showing Lin-
coln's tact and Macmillan's? If so, you are a person of
rare "diplomacy and extraordinary discretion. It is well
to remember Woodrow Wilson's words, "If you come
to me and say, c
                           Let us sit down and take counsel to-
gether, and, if we differ from one another, understand
why it is that we differ from one another, just what
the points at issue are,' we will presently find that we
are not so far apart after all, that the points on which
we differ are few and the points on which we agree are
many, and that if we only have the patience and the
candor and the desire to get together, we will get to-
gether."

148
                  CHAPTER TEN


                  Making
                 Impromptu Talks



                  Not long ago a group of business lead-
ers and government officials met at the dedication of a
pharmaceutical corporation's new laboratory. One after
another, half a dozen subordinates to the research
director arose and told of the fascinating work being
done by chemists and biologists. They were developing
new vaccines against communicable diseases, new anti-
biotics to fight viruses, new tranquilizers to ease ten-
sion. Their results, first with animals and then with
human beings, were dramatic.
    "This is marvelous," an official said to the research
director. "Your men are really magicians. But why
aren't you up there, speaking, too?"
    "I can talk to my feet—not to an audience," the
research director said gloomily,
   A little later, the chairman took him by surprise.
   "We haven't heard from our director of research,"
he said. "He doesn't like to give a formal speech. But
I'm going to ask him to say a few words to us."
   It was pitiful. The director stood up and managed no
more than a couple of sentences. He apologized for not
speaking at length, and that was the gist of his con-
tribution.
   There he was, a brilliant man in his field, and he
seemed as awkward and confused as a man could be.
                                       146

149
                        MAKING IMPROMPTU TALKS         147

This was not necessary. He could have learned to
speak impromptu on his feet. I have never seen a
serious and determined member of our classes who
couldn't learn this. At the start, it takes what this
research director hadn't given it—a resolute and brave
rejection of one's defeatist attitude. Then, perhaps for
quite a while, it takes an unwavering will to do the job
no matter how hard it may be.
    "I get along all right if I've prepared my talk and
                                                <c
practiced it," you may say. But I'm at a loss for
words if I'm asked to talk when I don't expect it."
    The ability to assemble one's thoughts and to speak
on the spur of the moment is even more important, in
some ways, than the ability to speak only after lengthy
and laborious preparation. The demands of modern
business and the current casualness with which modern
oral communication is carried on make it imperative to
be able to mobilize our thoughts quickly and verbalize
fluently. Many of the decisions that affect industry and
government today are made, not by one man, but
around the conference table. The individual still has his
say, but what he has to say has to be forcefully stated
in the forum of group opinion. This is where the ability
to speak impromptu comes alive and produces results.


first/ PRACTICE IMPROMPTU SPEAKING

   Anyone of normal intelligence who possesses a fair
portion of self-control can make an acceptable, often a
brilliant, impromptu talk—which simply means talk-
ing off the cuff." There are several ways you can im-
prove your ability to express yourself fluently when
called upon suddenly to say a few words. One method
is to use a device that some famous movie actors used.
    Years ago Douglas Fairbanks wrote an article for
American Magazine in which he described a game of
wits he, Charlie Chaplin, and Mary Pickford played al-
most every night for two years. It was more than a

150
 148              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

 game. It was practice in that most difficult of all speak-
ing arts—thinking on one's feet. As Fairbanks wrote,
the "game" went like this:

         Each of us would write a subject on a slip of
     paper. Then we folded the slips and shook them
    up. One would draw. Immediately he would have
    to stand and talk for sixty seconds on that subject
    We never used the same subject twice. One night
    I had to talk on "lampshades." Just try it if you
    think it is easy. I got through somehow.
        But the point is all three of us have sharpened
    up since we began the game. We know a lot more
    about a variety of miscellaneous subjects. But, far
    better than that, we are learning to assemble our
    knowledge and thoughts on any topic at a mo-
    ment's notice. We are learning how to think on
    our feet

    Several times during my course the class members
are asked to talk impromptu. Long experience has
taught me that this kind of practice does two things:
(1) it proves to the people in the class that they can
think on their feet, and (2) this experience makes
them much more secure and confident when they are
giving their prepared talks. They realize that, if the
worst should happen and they experience a blackout
while giving their prepared material, they still can talk
intelligently on an impromptu basis until they get back
on the track again.
    So, at one time or another, the class member hears,
"tonight each of you will be given a different subject
on which to talk. You won't know what it is until you
stand up to speak. Good luck!"
    What happens? An accountant finds he is called on
to speak about advertising. An advertising salesman
has to talk on kindergartens. A schoolteacher's topic
may be banking, and a banker's topic may be school-
teaching. A clerk may be assigned to talk on produc-

151
                        MAKING IMPROMPTU TALKS         149

tion, and a production expert may be asked to discuss
transportation*
    Do they hang their heads, and give up? Never! They
don't pretend to be authorities. They work the subjects
around to fit their knowledge of something familiar to
them. In their first efforts, they may not give a fine
talk. But they do get up; they do talk. For some it is
easy; for some it is hard, but they don't give up; they
all &id that they can do far better than they'd thought
they would. This is thrilling to them. They see that
they can develop an ability which they didn't believe
they had.
    I believe that if they can do this, anybody can do
it—with will power and confidence—and that the more
often one tries to do it, the easier it will be.
    Another method we use to train people to speak on
their feet is the linkage technique of impromptu speak-
ing. It is a stimulating feature of one of our class
sessions. One class member is told to begin a story in
the most fantastic terms he can invent. For instance he
might say, "The other day I was piloting my helicopter
when I noticed a swarm of flying saucers approaching.
I started to descend. But a little man in the nearest
                                                ."
saucer started to open fire. I . .
   At this point a bell sounds indicating the end of this
speaker's time, and the next class member in line must
continue the story. By the time everyone in the class
has contributed his share, the action may end along the
canals of Mars or in the halls of Congress.
   This method of developing skill in speaking without
preparation is admirable as a training device. The more
such practice a person gets the better he will be quali-
fied to meet the real situations that may arise when he
has to speak "for keeps" in his business and social life.

152
 150              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

second/ BE MENTALLY READY
                   TO SPEAK IMPROMPTU

    When you are called on to speak without prepara-
tion usually you are expected to make some remarks
about a subject upon which you can speak with author-
ity. The problem here is to face up to the situation of
talking and to decide what exactly you want to cover in
the short time at your disposal. One of the best ways to
become adept at this is to prepare yourself mentally for
these situations. When you are at a meeting keep
asking yourself what you would say now if you were
called upon. What aspect of your subject would be most
appropriate to cover at this time? How would you
phrase your approval or rejection of the proposals now
being put forth on the floor?
    So the first bit of advice I offer is this: condition
yourself mentally to speak impromptu on all occasions.
    This requires thinking on your part, and thinking is
the hardest thing in the world to do. But I am certain
that no man ever made a reputation as an impromptu
speaker who did not prepare himself by devoting hours
of analysis to every public situation in which he was a
participant Just as an airline pilot readies himself to
act with cool precision in an emergency by continually
posing to himself problems that could arise at any mo-
ment, the man who shines as an impromptu speaker
prepares himself by making countless talks that are
never given. Such talks really are not 'Impromptu";
they are talks with general preparation.
    Because your subject is known, your problem is one
of organization to fit the time and the occasion. As an
impromptu speaker you will naturally speak for only a
short time. Decide what aspect of your topic would fit
the situation. Don't apologize because you are un-
prepared. This is the expected thing. Launch into your
topic as soon as possible, if not immediately, and
please, I beg you, follow this advice.

153
                       MAKING IMPROMPTU TALKS        151

third/ GET INTO AN EXAMPLE
                 IMMEDIATELY

    Why? For three reasons: (1) You will free yourself
at once of the necessity to think hard about vour next
sentence, for experiences are easily recounted even in
an impromptu situation. (2) You will get into the
swing of speaking, and your first-moment jitters will fly
away, giving you the opportunity to warm up to your
subject matter. (3) You will enlist the attention of
your audience at once. As pointed out in Chapter
Seven, the incident-example is a sure-fire method of
capturing attention immediately.
   An audience absorbed in the human interest aspect
of your example will give you reassurance when you
need it most—during the first few moments of speak-
ing. Communication is a two-way process; the speaker
who captures attention is immediately aware of it. As
he notes the receptive forces and feels the glow of ex-
pectancy, like an electric current play over the heads
of his audience, he is challenged to go on, to do his
best, to respond. The rapport thus established between
speaker and audience is the key to all successful speak-
ing—without it true communication is impossible. That
is why I urge you to begin with an example, especially
when you are called on to say a few words.


fourth/ SPEAK WITH ANIMATION
                 AND FORCE

    As has been said several times before in this book, if
you speak with energy and forcefulness, your external
animation will have a beneficial effect upon your men-
tal processes. Have you ever watched a man in a con-
versational group who suddenlv begins to gesture as he
speaks? Soon he is talking fluently, sometimes bril-
liantly, and he begins to attract a group of eager listen-
ers. The relation of physical activity to the mind is a

154
152              PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

close one. We use the same words to describe manual
and mental operations; for instance, we say "we grasp
an idea," or "we clutch at a thought." Once we get the
body charged up and animated, as William James
pointed out, we very soon will get the mind functioning
at a rapid pace. So my advice to you is to throw your-
self with abandon into your talk and you will help to
insure your success as an impromptu speaker.



fifth/ USE THE PRINCIPLE OF
                   THE HERE AND NOW

    The time will come when someone will tap you on
the shoulder and say "How about a few words?" Or it
might come without warning at all. You are relaxed
and enjoving the remarks of the master of ceremonies
when suddenly you realize he is talking about you. Ev-
erybody turns in your direction and before you know it
you are introduced as the next speaker.
     In this kind of situation your mind is apt to shoot
off, like Stephen Leacock's famous but befuddled
horseman, who got on his horse "and made off in all
directions." Now, if ever, is the time to remain calm.
You can get a breather as you address the chairman.
Then it is best to stay close to the meeting in the re-
marks you make. Audiences are interested in them-
selves and what they are doing. There are three
 sources therefore, from which you can draw ideas for
 an impromptu speech.
     First is the audience itself. Remember this, I pray
 you, for easy speaking. Talk about your listeners, who
 they are and what they are doing, especially what spe-
 cific good they perform to the community or for hu-
 manity. Use a specific example.
     The second is the occasion. Surely you can dwell on
 the circumstances that brought the meeting about. Is it
 an anniversary, a testimonial, an annual meeting, a po-
 litical or patriotic occasion?

155
                          MAKING IMPROMPTU TALKS       153

     Lastly, if you have been an attentive Kstener, you
  might indicate your pleasure in something specific an-
 other speaker said before you and amplify that The
 most successful impromptu talks are those that are
 really impromptu. They express things that the speaker
 feels in his heart about the audience and the occasion.
 They fit the situation like hand in glove. They are tai-
 lor-made for this occasion, and this occasion alone.
 Therein lies their success: they flower out of the mo-
 ment and then, like rare-blossoming roses, they fade
 from the scene. But the pleasure enjoyed by your audi-
 ence lives on, and sooner than you think you begin to
 be looked upon as an impromptu speaker.


sixth/ DONT TALK IMPROMPTU—
                  GIVE AN IMPROMPTU TALK

    There is a difference as implied in the statement
above. It is not enough just to ramble on and string to-
gether a series of disconnected nothings on a flimsy
thread of inconsequence. You must keep your ideas
logically grouped around a central thought which might
well be the point you want to get across. Your exam-
ples will cohere to this central idea. And again, if you
speak with enthusiasm, you will find that what you say
off the cuff has a vitality and punch that your prepared
talks do not have.
    You can become a competent impromptu speaker if
you take to heart some of the suggestions made in this
chapter. You can practice along lines of the classroom
techniques explained in the early part of this chapter.
   At a meeting you can do a little preliminary plan-
ning and you can keep yourself aware of the possibility
of being called upon at any moment. If you think you
may be asked to contribute your comments or sugges-
tions, pay careful attention to the other speakers. Try to
be ready to condense your ideas into a few words.
When the time comes, say what you have in mind as

156
1 54             PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

plainly as you can. Your views have been sought. Give
them briefly, and sit down.
    Norman Bel-Geddes, the architect and industrial de-
signer, used to say that he couldn't put his thoughts
into words unless he was on his feet. Pacing up and
down his office, as he talked to associates about com-
plex plans for building or exhibit, he was at his best.
He had to learn how to speak when sitting down, and
of course he did.
    With most of us, it's the other way around; we have
to learn to speak standing up, and of course we can.
The chief secret lies in making a start—giving one
short talk—and then making another start, and an-
other, and another.
    We will find that each successive talk comes more
easily. Each talk will be better than its predecessors.
We will realize in the end speaking impromptu to a
group is merely an extension of the same thing we do
when we speak impromptu to friends in our living
room.

157
                      MAKING IMPROMPTU TALKS               155



The Purpose of Prepared and Impromptu Talks

CHAPTER VH. MAKING THE SHORT TALK
                      TO GET ACTION


    1. Give Your Example, an Incident from Your
         Life
         Build Your Example Upon a Single Personal Ex-
            perience
         Start Your Talk with a Detail of Your Example
         Fill Your Example with Relevant Detail
         Relive Your Experience as You Relate It

    2. State Your Point, What You Want the Audi-
         ence to Do
         Make the Point Brief and Specific
         Make the Point Easy for Listeners to Do
        State the Point with Force and Conviction
    3. Give the Reason or Benefit the Audience May
         Expect
         Be Sure the Reason Is Relevant to the Example
        Be Sure to Stress One Reason—and One Only

CHAPTER Vm. MAKING THE TALK TO INFORM


    1. Restrict Your Subject to Fit the Time at Your
        Disposal
   2. Arrange Your Ideas in Sequence
   3. Enumerate Your Points as You Make Them
   4. Compare the Strange with the Familiar
         Turn a Fact into a Picture
        Avoid Technical Terms
    5. Use Visual Aids

CHAPTER IX. MAKING THE TALK TO CONVINCE


    1. Win Confidence by Deserving It

    2. Get a Yes-Response
    3. Speak with Contagious Enthusiasm

158
1 56               PREPARED AND IMPROMPTU TALKS

           4. Show Respect and Affection for Your Audience
           5. Begin in a Friendly Way

      CHAPTER X. MAKING IMPROMPTU TALKS


           1. Practice Impromptu Speaking
           2. Be Mentally Ready to Speak Impromptu
           3. Get mto an Example Immediately
           4. Speak with Animation and Force
           5. Use the Principle of the Here and Now
           6. Don't Talk Impromptu—Give an Impromptu
                Talk

159
                       PART FOUR

                                   < > >


                   The Art of
          Communicating




The chapter which makes up this part is devoted en-
tirely to the subject of delivery.

Here again, stress is laid on the fundamentals of effec-
tive speaking as projected in the first part of this book.
Expressiveness is the result of earning the right and
having an eager desire to share the message with the
audience. Only in this way will delivery be spontaneous
and natural.

161
                  CHAPTER ELEVEN


                  Delivering the Talk




                   Would you believe it? There are four
ways, and only four ways, in which we have contact
with the world. We are evaluated and classified by these
four contacts: what we do, how we look, what we say,
and how we say it. This chapter will deal with the last
of these—how we say it.
    When I first started to teach public speaking classes,
I spent a great deal of time on the use of vocal exer-
cises to develop resonance, increase the range of voice,
and enhance inflectional agility. It wasn't long, how-
ever, before I began to see the utter futility of teaching
adults how to project their tones into the upper sinuses
and how to form "liquid" vowels. This is all very fine
for those who can devote three or four years to im-
proving themselves in the art of vocal delivery. I real-
ized that my students would have to settle for the vocal
equipment they were born with. I found that if I ex-
pended the time and energy I formerly devoted to
helping class members to "breathe diaphragmatically"
and worked on the far more important objectives of
freeing them from their inhibitions and general reluc-
tance to let themselves go, I would achieve quick and
lasting results that were truly amazing. I thank God I
had the sense to do this.
                                  * * *
                                         159

162
1 60               THE ART OF COMMUNICATING

feist/ CRASH THROUGH YOUR SHELL
                 OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

   In my course there are several sessions that have as
their purpose the freeing of tightly bound and tense
adults. I got down on my knees, literally, to implore
my class members to come out of their shells and find
out for themselves that the world would treat them
with cordiality and welcome when they would do so. It
took some doing, I admit, but it was worth it. As Mar-
shal Foch says of the art of war, "it is simple enough
in its conception, but unfortunately complicated in its
execution." The biggest stumbling block, of course, is
stiffness, not only of the physical, but of the mental as
well, a kind of hardening of the categories that comes
with growing up.
   It is not easy to be natural before an audience. Ac-
tors know that When you were a child, say, four years
old, you probably could have mounted a platform and
talked naturally to an audience. But when you are
twenty-and-four, or forty-and-four, what happens when
you mount a platform and start to speak? Do you re-
tain that unconscious naturalness that you possessed at
four? You may, but it is dollars to doughnuts that you
will become stiff and stilted and mechanical, and draw
back into your shell like a snapping turtle.
    The problem of teaching or of training adults in de-
livery is not one of superimposing additional character-
istics; it is largely one of removing impediments, of
getting them to speak with the same naturalness that
they would display if someone were to knock them
down.
    Hundreds of times I have stopped speakers in the
midst of their talks and implored them to "talk like a
human being." Hundreds of nights I have come home
mentally fatigued and nervously exhausted from trying
to drill members of my classes to talk naturally. No,
believe me, it is not so easy as it sounds.
    In one of the sessions of my course I ask the class to

163
                             DELIVERING THE TALK             161

 act out portions of dialogue, some of which is in di-
 alect I ask them to throw themselves into these
 dramatic episodes with abandon. When they do, they
 discover to their amazement that, though they may
 have acted like a fool, they didn't feel badly when they
 were doing it The class too is amazed at the dramatic
ability some of the class members display. My point is
 that once you let your hair down before a group you
are not likely to hold yourself back when it comes to
the normal, everyday expression of your opinions
whether to individuals or before groups.
    The sudden freedom you feel is like a bird taking
wing after being imprisoned in a cage. You see why it

is that people flock to the theater and the movies—*e-
cause there they see their fellow human beings act with
little or no inhibition, there they see people wearing
their emotions prominently displayed on their sleeves.


second/ DON'T TRY TO IMITATE OTHERS-
                 BE YOURSELF

    We all admire speakers who can put showmanship
into their speaking, who are not afraid to express
themselves, not afraid to use the unique, individual,
imaginative way of saying what they have to say to the
audience.
    Shortly after the close of the First World War, I met
two brothers in London, Sir Ross and Sir Keith Smith.
They had just made the first aeroplane flight from Lon-
don to Australia to win a fihy-thousand-dollar prize of-
fered by the Australian government. They had created
a sensation throughout the British Empire and had
been knighted by the King.
   Captain Hurley, a well-known scenic photographer,
had flown with them over a part of their trip, taking
motion pictures; so I helped them prepare an illus-
trated travel talk of their flight and trained them in the
delivery of it They gave it twice daily for four months

164
1 62                 THE ART OF COMMUNICATING

in Philharmonic Hall, London, one speaking in the af-
ternoon, the other at night.
    They had had identically the same experience, they
had sat side by side as they flew halfway around the
world, and they delivered the same talk, almost word
for word. Yet, somehow it didn't sound like the same
talk at all
    There is something besides the mere words in a talk
which counts. It is the flavor with which they are de-
livered. It is not so much just what you say as how you
say it
    BruHoff, the great Russian painter, once corrected a
pupil's study. The pupa looked in amazement at the al-
tered drawing, exclaiming: "Why, you have touched it
only a tiny bit, but it is quite another thing." Brulloff
replied, "Art begins where the tiny bit begins." That is
as true of speaking as it is of painting and of Pad-
erewskfs playing.
    The same thing holds true when one is touching
words. There is an old saying in the English Parliament
that everything depends upon the manner in which one
speaks and not upon the matter. Quintilian said it long
ago, when England was one of the outlying colonies of
Rome.
    "All Fords are exactly alike," their maker used to
say, but no two men are just alike. Every new life is a
new thing under the sun; there has never been anything
just like it before, and never will be again. A young
man ought to get that idea about himself; he should
look for the single spark of individuality that makes
him different from other folks, and develop that for all
he is worth. Society and schools may try to iron it out
of him; their tendency is to put us all in the same
mold, but, I say, don't let that spark be lost; ifs your
only real claim to importance.
    All that is doubly true of effective speaking. There is
no other human being in the world like you. Hundreds
of millions of people have two eyes and a nose and a
mouth; but none of them looks precisely like you; and

165
                             DELIVERING THE TALK              163

 none of them has exactly your traits and methods and
 cast of mind Few of them will talk and express them-
 selves just as you do when you are speaking naturally.
 In other words, you have an individuality. As a
 speaker, it is your most precious possession. Cling to it
 Cherish it Develop it It is the spark that will put force
 and sincerity into your speaking. "It is your only real
 claim to importance." Please, I beg you, do not at-
 tempt to force yourself in a mold and thereby lose your
 distinctiveness.



 third/ CONVERSE WITH YOUR AUDIENCE

    Let me give you an illustration that is typical of the
fashion in which thousands of persons talk. I happened
on one occasion to be stopping in Murren, a summer
resort in the Swiss Alps. I was living at a hotel oper-
ated by a London company; and they usually sent out
from England a couple of lecturers each week to talk
to the guests. One of them was a well-known English
novelist Her topic was "The Future of the Novel." She
admitted that she had not selected the subject herself;
and the long and short of it was that she had nothing
she cared to say about it to make it worthwhile ex-
pressing. She had hurriedly made some rambling notes;
and she stood before the audience, ignoring her
hearers, not even looking at them, staring sometimes
over their heads, sometimes at her notes, sometimes at
the floor. She unreeled words into the primeval void
with a far-away look in her eyes and a far-away ring in
her voice.
   That isn't delivering a talk at all. It is a soliloquy. It
has no sense of communication. And that is the first es-
sential of good talking: a sense of communication. The
audience must feel that there is a message being de-
livered straight from the mind and heart of the speaker
to their minds and their hearts. The kind of talk I have
just described might as well have been spoken out in

166
  164                  THE ART OF COMMUNICATING

 the sandy, waterless wastes of the Gobi desert. In fact,

 it sounded as if it were being delivered in some such
 spot rather than to a group of living human beings.
     An enormous amount of nonsense and twaddle has
 been written about delivery. It has been shrouded in
 rules and rites and made mysterious. Old-fashioned
 "elocution" has often made it ridiculous. The business-
 man, going to the library or book shop, has found
 volumes on "oratory'* that were utterly useless. In spite
 of progress in other directions, in almost every state in
 the Union today, schoolboys are still being forced to
recite the ornate "oratory of 'orators* "—a thing that is
as useless as a squirrel-headed tire pump, as out-of-
date as a quill pen.
    An entirely new school of speaking has sprung up
since the twenties. In keeping with the spirit of the
times, it is as modern and as practical as the automo-
bile, direct as a telegram, businesslike as a telling ad-
vertisement The verbal fireworks that were once the
vogue would no longer be tolerated by an audience to-
day.
    A modern audience, regardless of whether it is fif-
teen people at a business conference or a thousand
people under a tent, wants the speaker to talk just as
directly as he would in a chat, and in the same general
manner he would employ in speaking to one of them in
conversation, in the same manner, but with greater
force or energy. In order to appear natural, he has to
use much more energy in talking to forty people than
he does in talking to one, just as a statue on top of a
building has to be of heroic size in order to make it ap-
pear of lifelike proportions to an observer on the
ground.
    At the close of one of Mark Twain's lectures in a
Nevada mining camp, an old prospector approached
him and inquired: "Be them your natural tones of elo-
quence?"
    That is what the audience wants: "your natural
tones of eloquence," enlarged a bit.

167
                             DELIVERING THE TALK              165

     The only way to acquire the knack of this enlarged
 naturalness is by practice. And, as you practice, if you
 find yourself talking in a stilted manner, pause and say
sharply to yourself mentally: "Here! What is wrong?
Wake up! Be human." Then mentally pick out a per-
son in the audience, someone in the back or the least
 attentive person you can find, and talk to this person.
Forget there is anyone else present at all. Converse
with this person. Imagine that he has asked you a
question and that you are answering it, and that you
are the only one who can answer it. If he were to stand
up and talk to you, and you were to talk back to him,
that process would immediately and inevitably make
your speaking more conversational, more natural, more
direct So, imagine that is precisely what is taking
place.
    You may go so far as actually to ask questions and
answer them. For example, in the midst of your talk,
you may say, "and you ask what proof have I for this
assertion? I have adequate proof and here it is. . . ."
Then proceed to answer the question. That sort of
thing can be done very naturally. It will break up the
monotony of one's delivery; it will make it direct and
pleasant and conversational.
    Speak to the Chamber of Commerce just as you
would to John Henry Smith. What is a meeting of the
Chamber of Commerce, after all, but a collection of
John Henry Smiths? Won't the same methods that are
successful with those men individually be successful
with them collectively?
   Earlier in this chapter was described the delivery of a
certain novelist In the same ballroom in which she had
spoken, we had the pleasure, a few nights later, of
hearing Sir Oliver Lodge. His subject was "Atoms and
Worlds." He had devoted to this subject more than
half a century of thought and study and experiment
and investigation. He had something that was essen-
tially a part of his heart and mind and life, something
that he wanted very much to say. He forgot that he

168
 166                 THE ART OF COMMUNICATING

was trying to make a "speech." That was the least of
his worries. He was concerned only with telling the au-
dience about atoms, telling us accurately, lucidly, and
feelingly. He was earnestly trying to get us to see what
he saw and to feel what he felt.
    And what was the result? He delivered a remarkable
talk. It had both charm and power. It made a deep im-
pression. He was a speaker of unusual ability. Yet I am
sure he didn't regard himself in that light. I am sure
that few people who heard him ever thought of him as
a "public speaker" at all.
    If you speak in public so that people hearing you
will suspect that you have had training in public speak-
ing, you will not be a credit to your instructor, es-
pecially an instructor in one of my courses. He desires
you to speak with such intensified naturalness that your
audience will never dream that you have been
"formally" trained. A good window does not call atten-
tion to itself. It merely lets in the light A good speaker
is like that He is so disarmingly natural that his
hearers never notice his manner of speaking: they are
conscious only of his matter.


fourth/ PUT YOUR HEART
                  INTO YOUR SPEAKING

    Sincerity and enthusiasm and high earnestness will
help you, too. When a man is under the influence of
his feelings, his real self comes to the surface. The bars
are down. The heat of his emotions has burned all bar-
riers away. He acts spontaneously. He talks spontane-
ously. He is natural.
    So, in the end, even this matter of delivery comes
back to the thing which has already been emphasized
repeatedly in these pages: namely, put your heart into
your talks.
    "I shall never forget," said Dean Brown in his Lec-
tures on Preaching before the Yale Divinity School,

169
                             DELIVERING THE TALK              167

 "the description given by a friend of mine of a church
 service which he once attended in the city of London.
The preacher was George MacDonald; he read for the
Scripture lesson that morning the eleventh chapter of
Hebrews. When the time came for the sermon, he said:
You have all heard about these men of faith. I shall
not try to tell you what faith is. There are theological
professors who could do that much better than I could
do it I am here to help you believe.9 Then followed
such a simple, heartfelt, and majestic manifestation of
the man's own faith in those unseen realities which are
eternal, as to beget faith in the minds and hearts of all
his hearers. His heart was in his work, and his delivery
was effective because it rested upon the genuine beauty
                                99
of his own inner life.
    "His heart was in his work." That is the secret Yet
I know that advice like this is not popular. It seems
vague. It sounds indefinite. The average person wants
foolproof rules, something definite, something he can
put his hands on, rules as precise as the directions for
operating a car.
    That is what he wants; that is what I would like to
give him. It would be easy for him and it would be
easy for me. There are such rules, and there is only
one little thing wrong with them: they just don't work.
They take all the naturalness and spontaneity and life
and juice out of a man's speaking. I know. In my
younger days, I wasted a great deal of energy trying
them. They won't appear in these pages for, as Josh
Billings observed in one of his lighter moments: "There
ain't no use in knowin' so many tilings that ain't so."
   Edmund Burke wrote speeches so superb in logic
and reasoning and composition that they are today
studied as classic models of oratory in the colleges of
the land; yet Burke, as a speaker, was a notorious fail-
ure. He didn't have the ability to deliver his gems, to
make them interesting and forceful; so he was called
"the dinner belT of the House of Commons. When he

170
168                  THE ART OF COMMUNICATING

arose to talk, the other members coughed and shuffled
and either went to sleep or went out in droves.
    You can throw a steel-jacketed bullet at a man with

all your might, and you cannot make even a dent in his

clothing. But put powder behind a tallow candle and
you can shoot it through a pine board. Many a tallow-
candle speech with powder makes, I regret to say,
more of an impression than a steel-jacketed talk with
no force, no excitement, behind it



fifth/ PRACTICE MAKING YOUR VOICE
                   STRONG AND FLEXIBLE

    When we are really communicating our ideas to our
listeners we are making use of many elements of vocal
and physical variety. We shrug our shoulders, move
our arms, wrinkle our brows, increase our volume,
change pitch and inflection, and talk fast or slow as the
occasion and the material may dictate. It is well to
remember that all these are effects and not causes. The
so-called variables, or modulations of tone, are under
the direct influence of our mental and emotional state.
That is why it is so important that we have a topic we
know and a topic we are excited about when we go be-
fore an audience. That is why we must be so eager to
share that topic with our listeners.
    Since most of us lose the spontaneity and natural-
ness of youth as we grow older, we tend to slip into a
definite mold of physical and vocal communication. We
find ourselves less ready to use gestures and animation;
we rarely raise or lower our voices from one pitch to
another. In short, we lose the freshness and spontaneity
of true conversation. We may get into the habit of talk-
ing too slowly or too rapidly, and our diction, unless
carefully watched, tends to become ragged and care-
less. In this book you have been repeatedly told to act
natural, and you may suppose that I therefore condone
poor diction or monotonous delivery provided it is

171
                            DELIVERING THE TALK              1 69

natural. On the contrary, I say that we should be
natural in the sense that we express our ideas and
express them with spirit. On the other hand, every
good speaker will not accept himself as incapable of
improvement in breadth of vocabulary, richness of
imagery and diction, and variety and force of ex-
pression. These are areas in which everyone interested
in self-improvement will seek to improve.
    It is an excellent idea to evaluate oneself in terms of
volume, pitch variation, and pace. This can be done
with the aid of a tape recorder. On the other hand, it
would be useful to have friends help you make this
evaluation. If it is possible to secure expert advice, so
much the better. It should be remembered, however,
that these are areas for practice away from the audi-
ence. To concern yourself with technique when you are
before an audience will prove fatal to effectiveness.
Once there, pour yourself into your talk, concentrate
your whole being on making a mental and emotional
impact on your audience, and nine chances out of ten
you will speak with more emphasis and force than you
could ever get from books.

172
170                 THB ART OF COMMUNICATING






   The Art of Communicating

   CHAPTER XL DELIVERING THB TALK


       1. Crash Through Your Shell of Self-Conscious-
            ness
       2. Don't Try to Imitate Others—Be Yourself
       3. Converse with Your Audience
       4. Put Your Heart into Your Speaking
       5. Practice Making Your Voice Strong and Flex-
            ible

173
PART FIVE

                                            < i >


              The Challenge of

           Effective Speaking





        In this part we relate the principles and techniques of
        this book to everyday speaking, from social conversations
        to formal public address.

        We assume now that you are about to make a talk out"
        side of a training situation, ft will be one of two types,
        either an introduction of another speaker or a longer
        talk. For that reason we include a chapter on making
        the speech of introduction and one on organizing the
        longer talk, from introduction to conclusion.

        The final chapter emphasizes again that the principles of
        this book are useful in everyday speech as well as in
        public speaking situations.

175
                  CHAPTER TWELVE


                  Introducing Speakers,

                  Presenting and
                  Accepting Awards



                   When you are called upon to speak in
public, you may introduce another speaker or make a
longer talk to inform, entertain, convince, or persuade.
Perhaps you are program chairman of a civic organiza-
tion or a member of a women's club and you face the
task of introducing the main speaker at your next
meeting, or perhaps you are looking forward to the
time when you will address the local PTA, your sales
group, a union meeting, or a political organization. In
Chapter Thirteen, I will give you hints on preparing
the longer type of talk, and this chapter will help you
to prepare a speech of introduction. I shall give you
also some valuable hints on presenting and accepting
awards.
    John Mason Brown, the writer and lecturer, whose
lively talks have won audiences everywhere in the
country, was speaking one night with the man who was
to introduce him to his audience.
    "Stop worrying about what you are going to say,"
the man told Mr. Brown. "Relax. I don't believe in
preparing a speech. Nope, preparation's no good.
Spoils the charm of the thing; kills gaiety. I just wait
for the inspiration to come to me when I'm on my
feet—and it never fails."
   These reassuring words let Mr. Brown look forward
                                         173

176
                                                                                        —

 1 74       THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

to a fine Introduction, he recalls in his book, Accus-
tomed As I Am. But when the man arose to make it, it
came out this way:

        Gentlemen, may I have your attention, please?
    We have bad news for you tonight. We wanted to
    have Isaac F. Marcosson speak to you, but he
    couldn't come. He's sick. (Applause.) Next we
    asked Senator Bledridge to address you . . . but
    he was busy. (Applause.) Finally we tried in vain
    to get Doctor Lloyd Grogan of Kansas City to
    come down to speak to you. (Applause.) So, in-
    stead, we have—John Mason Brown. (Silence.)

    Mr. Brown, recalling this disaster, said only: "At
least my friend, that inspirationalist, got my name cor-
rectly."
    Of course you can see that this man, who was so
sure his inspiration would carry him through, couldn't
have done much worse if he had tried to do so. His in-
troduction violated every obligation he had both to the
speaker whom he was introducing and to the audience
which was to hear the speaker. There aren't many of
these obligations, but they are important, and it is as-
tonishing how many program chairmen fail to realize
this.
    The speech of introduction serves the same purpose
as a social introduction. It brings the speaker and the
audience together, establishes a friendly atmosphere,
and creates a bond of interest between them. The man
who says, 4<You don't have to make a speech, all you
have to do is introduce the speaker," is guilty of under-
statement. No speech is more mangled than the speech
of introduction, probably because it is looked upon as
unimportant by many chairmen who are entrusted with
the duty of preparing and delivering it.
    An introduction—that term was fashioned from two
Latin words, intro, to the inside, and ducere} to lead
ought to lead us to the inside of the topic sufficiently to

177
                                                                                    —

                          INTRODUCING SPEAKERS          175

make us want to hear it discussed. It ought to lead us

to the inside facts regarding the speaker, facts that
demonstrate his fitness for discussing this particular

topic. In other words, an introduction ought to "sell"
the topic to the audience and it ought to "sell" the
speaker. And it ought to do these things in the briefest
amount of time possible.
    That is what it ought to do. But does it? Nine times
out of ten, no—emphatically no. Most introductions
are poor affairs, feeble and inexcusably inadequate.
They do not have to be. If the speaker making the in-
troduction realizes the importance of his task and goes
about doing it in the right way he will soon be in de-
mand as a chairman or master of ceremonies.
    Here are some suggestions to help you make a well-
organized speech of introduction.



first/ THOROUGHLY PREPARE
                 WHAT YOU ARE GOING TO SAY

    Even though the introductory talk is short, hardly
ever exceeding one minute, it demands careful prepara-
tion. First, you must gather your facts. These will cen-
ter around three items: the subject of the speakers
talk, his qualifications to speak on that subject, and his
name. Often a fourth item will become apparent
why the subject chosen by the speaker is of special
interest to the audience.
   Be certain that you know the correct title of the talk
and something about the speaker's development of the
subject matter. There is nothing more embarrassing
than for the speaker to take exception to the introduc-
tion by disclaiming part of it as untrue of his stand on
the subject. This can be obviated by making sure you
know what the speaker's subject is and refraining from
trying to predict what he will say. But your duty as in-
troducer demands that you give the title of the
speaker's talk correctly and point out its relevancy to

178
   176        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

  the audience's interests. If at all possible, try to get this
  information directly from the speaker. If you have to
  rely oh a third party, a program chairman, for instance,
  try to get the information in writing and check with the
  speaker just before the meeting.
      But perhaps most of your preparation will involve
  getting the facts on the speaker's qualifications. In some
  cases you will be able to get an accurate listing from
  Who's Who or a comparable work, if your speaker is
 nationally or regionally well known. On the local level
 you can appeal to the public relations or personnel of-

 fice of the concern where he works, or in some cases
  verify your facts by calling a close friend or a member
 of his family. The main idea is to get your biographical
 facts correct People close to your speaker will be glad
 to furnish you with material.
      Of course, too many facts will become boring, es-
 pecially when one degree implies the speaker's acquisi-
  tion of lesser degrees. To say that a man received a B.S.
 and an M.A. degree is superfluous when you indicate
 that he is a Doctor of Philosophy. Likewise, it is best
 to indicate the highest and most recent offices a man
 has held rather than to string out a catalogue of the
 positions he has held since leaving college. Above all,
 do not pass over the most distinguished achievements
 of a man's career instead of the less important
      For example, I heard a well-known speaker—a man
A\ho ought to have known better—introduce the Irish
 poet W. B. Yeats. Yeats was to read his own poetry.
 Three years prior to that he had been awarded the No-
  bel Prize in literature, the highest distinction that can
  be bestowed upon a man of letters. I am confident that
  not ten per cent of that particular audience knew of the
  award or its significance. Both ought, by all means, to
  have been mentioned. They ought to have been an-
  nounced even if nothing else were said. But what did
  the chairman do? He utterly ignored these facts, and

179
                           INTRODUCING SPEAKERS         177

wandered off into talking about mythology and Greek
poetry.
    Above all, be certain of the speaker's name and be-
gin at once to familiarize yourself with its pronuncia-
tion. John Mason Brown says that he has been
introduced as John Brown Mason and even John Smith
Mason. In his delightful essay, "We Have with Us
Tonight," Stephen Leacock, the distinguished Canadian
humorist, tells of one introduction he received in which
the introducer said:

        There are many of us who have awaited Mr.
    Learoyd's coming with the most pleasant antici-
    pations. We seemed from his books to know him
    already as an old friend. In fact I do not think I
    exaggerate when I tell Mr. Learoyd that his name
    in our city has long been a household word. I
    have very, very great pleasure in introducing to
    you—Mr. Learoyd.

   The main purpose of your research is to be specific,
for only by being specific will the introduction achieve
its purpose—to heighten the audience's attention and
make it receptive to the speaker's talk. The chairman
who comes to a meeting poorly prepared usually comes
up with something as vague and soporific as this:

       Our speaker is everywhere recognized as an au-
   thority on,—on, his subject We are interested in
   hearing what he has to say on this subject, be-
   cause he comes from a,—a great distance. It gives
   me great pleasure to present, let's see now,—oh,
   here it is,—Mr. Blank.

   By taking a little time to prepare we can avoid the
sad impression such an introduction makes upon both
speaker and audience.

180
1 78        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

second/ FOLLOW THE T-I-S FORMULA

    For most introductions, the T-I-S formula serves as
a handy guide in organizing the facts you have col-
lected in your research:


    1. T stands for Topic. Start your introduction by
         giving the exact title of the speaker's talk.
    2. I stands for Importance. In this step you bridge
         over the area between the topic and the particu-
         lar interests of the group.
    3. S stands for Speaker. Here you list the speaker's
         outstanding qualifications, particularly those that
         relate to his topic. Finally, you give his name,
         distinctly and clearly.

    There is plenty of room in this formula for using
your imagination. The introduction need not be cut and
dried. Here is an example of an introduction that fol-
lows the formula without giving the effect of a formula
at all. It was given by a New York City editor, Homer
Thome, when he introduced a New York Telephone
Company executive, George Wellbaum, to a group of
newspaper men and women:

        Our speaker's topic is "The Telephone Serves
    You."
        It seems to me that one of the world's big mys-
    teries—like love and a horse player's persis-
    tence—is the mystery of what happens when you
    make a telephone call.
        Why do you get a wrong number? Why can
    you sometimes make a call from New York to
    Chicago quicker than from your own home town
    to another town just over the hill? Our speaker
    knows the answers, and all the others to telephone
    questions. For twenty years it has been his job to
    digest all sorts of details about the telephone
    business and to make this business clear to other

181
                           INTRODUCING SPEAKERS         179

    people. He is a telephone company executive who
    has earned his title by work.
        He will speak to us now about the ways his
    company serves us. If you are feeling friendly
    toward the service today, look on him as a patron
    saint. If you've recently been annoyed by your
    telephone, let him be a spokesman for the de-
    fense.
        Ladies and Gentlemen, the vice-president of the
    New York Telephone Company, Mr. George
    Wellbaum.

    Notice how cleverly the introductory speaker gets
the audience thinking about the telephone. By asking
questions he excites their curiosity and then indicates
that the speaker will answer these questions and any
others the audience may have.
    I doubt that this introduction was written out or
memorized. Even on paper it sounds conversational
and natural. An introduction should never be memo-
rized. Cornelia Otis Skinner was once introduced by a
chairman of the evening whose memorized words she
forgot as she began. She took a deep breath and then
said: "Due to the exorbitant price of Admiral Byrd, we
have with us this evening, Miss Cornelia Otis Skinner."
   The introduction should be spontaneous, seemingly
arising out of the occasion, not strait-laced and severe.
   In the introduction of Mr. Wellbaum, quoted above,
there are no cliches, such as, "it gives me great
pleasure,' and "it is a great privilege to introduce to
you." The best way to present a speaker is to give his
name or to say, "I present/* and give his name.
    Some chairmen are guilty of talking too long and
making the audience restive. Others indulge in flights
of oratorical fancy in order to impress the speaker and
the audience with a sense of their importance. Still oth-
ers make the sad error of dragging in "canned jokes,"
sometimes not in the best taste, or of using humor that

182
180         THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

patronizes or deprecates the speaker's profession. All
of these faults should be avoided by the man who is
desirous of achieving the purposes of an effective intro-
duction.
    Here is another example of an introduction that
closely follows the T-I-S formula and yet has an indi-
viduality all its own. Note especially the way Edgar L.
Schnadig blends the three phases of the formula as he
introduces the distinguished science educator and edi-
tor, Gerald Wendt:

        "Science Today," our speaker's topic, is a seri-
    ous business. It reminds me of the story of the
    psychopathic patient who suffered from the hallu-
    cination that he had a cat in his insides. Unable to
    disprove this, the psychiatrist simulated an oper-
    ation. When the man came out of the ether, he
    was shown a black cat, and was told his troubles
   were over. He replied, Tm sorry, doctor, but the
    cat that is bothering me is gray."
        So it is with science today. You reach for a cat
    called U-235, and you come up with a flock of
    kittens called neptunium, plutonium, uranium 233
   or something else. Like a Chicago winter, the ele-
   ments are overpowered. The alchemist of old, the
   first nuclear scientist, on his deathbed begged for
   one more day to discover the secrets of the uni-
   verse. Now scientists produce secrets of which the
   universe never dreamed.
        Our speaker today is one who knows about
    science as it is, and as it may be. He has been a
   professor of chemistry at the University of Chi-
   cago, dean of the Pennsylvania State College,
   director of the Battelle Institute of Industrial
   Research at Columbus, Ohio. He has been a
    scientist in the government service, and editor and
    author. He was bom in Davenport, Iowa, and re-
    ceived his professional degree at Harvard. He

183
                                                 t

                            INTRODUCING SPEAKERS        181

    completed his training in war plants, and has trav-
     eled extensively in Europe.
        Our speaker is author and editor of numerous
    textbooks in several sciences. His best-known
    book is Science for the World of Tomorrow, pub-
    lished when he was director of science at the
    World's Fair in New York. As consulting editor to
    Time, Life, Fortune, and March of Time, his in-
    terpretation of scientific news reached a wide au-
    dience. The Atomic Age by our speaker appeared
    in 1945, ten days after the bomb hit Hiroshima.
    His pet phrase is "The best is yet to come," and
    so it is. I am proud to present, and you will be
    happy to hear, the editorial director of Science
    Illustrated, Dr. Gerald Wend

    Not many years ago it was a kind of oratorical fash-
ion to over-praise the speaker in the introduction. Bou-
quets of flowers were heaped upon the speaker by the
chairman. The poor speaker was often overwhelmed by
the heavy odor of flattery.
    A popular humorist, Tom Collins, of Kansas City,
Missouri, told Herbert Prochnow, author of The Toast-
master's Handbook, that "it is fatal to a speaker who
intends to be humorous to promise his audience they
soon will be rolling in the aisles with uncontrollable
mirth. When a toastmaster begins to mumble about
Will Rogers, you know you might just as well cut your
wrists and go home, because you are ruined."
    On the other hand, don't under-praise either. Stephen
Leacock recalls the time he had to respond to introduc-
 3ry remarks that ended in this manner:

        This is the first of our series of lectures for this
   winter. The last series, as you all know, was not a
   success. In fact, we came out at the end of the
   year with a deficit So this year we are starting a
    new line and trying the experiment of cheaper tal-
    ent May I present Mr. Leacock.

184
 1 82       THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

    Mr. Leacock dryly comments: "Judge how it feels to
crawl out in front of the audience labelled 'cheaper tal-
ent.'"



third/ BE ENTHUSIASTIC

    In making an introduction of a speaker, manner is
quite as important as matter. You should try to be
friendly, and instead of saying how happy you are, be
genuinely pleasant making your talk. If you give the in-
troduction with a sense of building to a climax at the
end when you announce the speaker's name, the sense
of anticipation will be increased and the audience will
applaud the speaker more enthusiastically. This display
of the audience's good feeling will in turn help to stim-
ulate the speaker to do his best
    When you do pronounce the speaker's name at the
very end of the introduction it is well to remember the
words, "pause," "part," and "punch." By pause is
meant that a little silence just before the name is given
will give an edge to anticipation; by part is meant that
the first and last names should be separated by a slight
pause so that the audience gets a clear impression of
the speaker's name; by punch is meant that the name
should be given with vigor and force.
    There is one more caution: please, I beg of you,
when you do enunciate the speaker's name, don't turn
to him. but look out over the audience until the last
syllable has been uttered; then turn to the speaker. I
have seen countless chairmen give fine introductory
speeches that were ruined at the end because they
turned toward the speaker, pronouncing his name for
him alone and leaving the audience in total ignorance
of his identity.

185
                            INTRODUCING SPEAKERS         183

 fourth/ BE WARMLY SINCERE

     Lastly, be sure to be sincere. Do not indulge in dep-
 recatory remarks or snide humor. A tongue-in-cheek
 type of introduction is often misinterpreted by some
 members of the audience. Be warmly sincere, because
 you are in a social situation that demands the highest
kind of finesse and tact You may be on familiar terms
with the speaker, but the audience isn't, and some of
your remarks, innocent though they be, may be mis-
construed.


fifth/ THOROUGHLY PREPARE
                  THE TALK OF PRESENTATION

    "It has been proved that the deepest yearning of the
human heart is for recognition—for honor!"
    When Margery Wilson, the author, wrote this she
expressed a universal feeling. We all want to get along
well in life. We want to be appreciated. Someone else's
commendation, if it is only a word—let alone a gift
presented at a formal affair—lifts the spirit magically.
    Althea Gibson, the tennis star, managed to get this
"yearning of the human heart" most aptly into the title
of her autobiography. She called it, / Wanted To Be
Somebody.
   When we make a speech of presentation, we reas-
sure the recipient that he really is somebody. He has
succeeded in a certain effort He is deserving of honor.
We have come together to pay him this honor. What
we have to say should be brief but we should give it
careful thought It may not mean much to those who
are used to receiving honors, but to others less fortu-
nate it may be something to be remembered brightly all
the rest of a lifetime.
    We, therefore, should give serious consideration to
our choice of words in presenting the honor. Here is a
time-tested formula:

186
 1 84       THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

     1. Tell why the award is made. Perhaps it is for
          long service, or for winning a contest, or for a
          single notable achievement. Explain this simply.
    2. Tell something of the group's interest in the life
          and activities of the person to be honored.
     3. Tell how much the award is deserved and how
          cordially the group feels toward the recipient
    4. Congratulate the recipient and convey everyone's
         good wishes for the future.

    Nothing is so essential to this little talk as sincerity.
Everyone realizes this, perhaps without saying so. So if
you have been chosen to make a speech of presentation
you, as well as the recipient, have been honored. Your
associates know you can be trusted with the task that
demands a heart as well as a head. This must not
tempt you to make certain mistakes that some speakers
make. They are mistakes concerned with exaggeration.
    At a time such as this, it is easy to exaggerate some-
one's virtues far beyond their real measure. If the
award is deserved, we must say so, but we should not
add words of over-praise. Exaggerated praise makes
the recipient uncomfortable and it doesn't convince an
audience which knows better.
    We also should avoid exaggerating the importance of
the gift itself. Instead of stressing its intrinsic value, we
should emphasize the friendly sentiments of those who
are giving it


sixth/ EXPRESS YOUR SINCERE FEELINGS
                  IN THE TALK OF ACCEPTANCE

    This should be even shorter than the speech of
presentation. It certainly shouldn't be anything we have
memorized: yet being ready to make it will be an ad-
vantage. If we know we are to be given a present, with
a speech of presentation, we shouldn't be at a loss for
words of acknowledgment that will be a credit to us.

187
                           INTRODUCING SPEAKERS         1 85

    Just to mumble, "Thank you" and "greatest day in
my life" and "most wonderful thing that ever happened
to me," is not very good. Here, as in the speech of
presentation, a danger of exaggeration lurks. "Greatest
day" and "most wonderful thing" take in too much ter-
ritory. You can express heartfelt gratitude better in
more moderate terms. Here is a suggested format:


    1. Give a warmly sincere "thank you" to the group.
    2. Give credit to others who have helped you, your
         associates, employers, friends, or family.
    3. Tell what the gift or award means to you. If it is
         wrapped, open it and display it. Tell the audience
        how useful or decorative it is and how you intend
        to use it
    4. End with another sincere expression of your
        gratitude.

   In this chapter we have discussed three special types
of talks, any one of which you may be called upon to
give in the course of your work or your affiliation with
some organization or club.
   I urge you to follow these suggestions carefully when
making any of these talks and you will have the satis-
faction that comes from saying the right thing at the
right time.

188
                 CHAPTER THIRTEEN


                Organizing the
                 Longer Talk



                  No sane man would start to build a house
without some sort of plan; but why will he begin to
deliver a talk without the vaguest notion of what he
wishes to accomplish?
   A talk is a voyage with a purpose, and it must be
charted The man who starts nowhere, generally gets
there.
   I wish that I could paint this saying of Napoleon's in
flaming letters of red a foot high over every doorway
on the globe where students of effective speaking fore-
gather: "The art of war is a science in which nothing
succeeds which has not been calculated and thought
out"
   That is just as true of speaking as of shooting. But
do speakers realize it—or, if they do, do they always
act on it? They do not Many a talk has just a trifle
more plan and arrangement than a bowl of Irish stew.
   What is the best and most effective arrangement for
a given set of ideas? No one can say until he has
studied them. It is always a new problem, an eternal
question that every speaker must ask and answer him-
self again and again. No infallible rules can be given;
but we can, at any rate, indicate the three major phases
of the longer talk to get action: the attention step, the
                                       186

189
                                                            .

                       ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK  187

 body, and conclusion. For each, there are some time-
 tested methods of developing each phase.



 first / GET ATTENTION IMMEDIATELY

     I once asked Dr. Lynn Harold Hough, formerly
 president of Northwestern University, what was the
 most important fact his long experience as a speaker
has taught him. After pondering a moment, he replied,
 "To get an arresting opening, something that will seize
favorable attention immediately." Dr. Hough struck at
the heart of the matter of all persuasive speaking: how
to get the audience 'tuned in" right from the speaker's
first words. Here are some methods which, if applied,
will give high attention value to your opening phrases.


    BEGIN YOUR TALK WITH AN INCIDENT-
                                  EXAMPLE

    Lowell Thomas, who has made a world-wide reputa-
tion as a news analyst, lecturer, and motion picture
producer, began a talk on Lawrence of Arabia with
this statement:

       I was going down Christian Street in Jerusalem
    one day when I met a man clad in the gorgeous
   robes of an oriental potentate. At his side hung
    the curved gold sword worn only by the descend-
    ants of the prophet Mohammed. . .

And he was off—off with a story from his experience.
That is what hooks attention. That kind of opening is
almost foolproof. It can hardly fail. It moves, it
marches. We follow because we identify ourselves as
part of a situation and we want to know what is going
to happen. I know of no more compelling method of
opening a talk than by the use of a story.

190
 1 88        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

     One of my own talks which I have given many times
begins with these words:

         Just after I had finished college, I was walking
    one night down a street in Huron, South Dakota,
    and I saw a man standing on a box talking to a
    crowd of people. I was curious, so I became part
    of the group listening to him. "Do you know," the
    speaker was saying, "that you never see a bald-
    headed Indian? Or you never see a bald-headed
    woman, do you? Now, I'm going to tell you
    why. . . .»       '


No stalling. No "warm-up" statements. By launching
directly into an incident, you can make it easy to cap-
ture an audience's attention.
    A speaker who begins a talk with a story from his
experience is on safe ground, for there is no groping
for words, no loss of ideas. The experience he is relat-
ing is his, a re-creation, as it were, of part of his life,
the very fiber of his being. The result? A self-assured,
relaxed manner which will help a speaker establish
himself on a friendly basis with an audience.


                           AROUSE SUSPENSE

    Here is the way Mr. Powell Healy began a talk at
the Penn Athletic Club in Philadelphia:

        Eighty-two years ago, there was published in
    London a little volume, a story, which was des-
    tined to become immortal Many people have
    called it "the greatest little book in the world"
    When it first appeared, friends meeting one an-
    other on the Strand or Pall Mall asked the ques-
    tion, **Have you read it?" The answer invariably
    was: "Yes, God bless him, I have."
        The day it was published a thousand copies

191
            .


                      ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK   1 89

     were sold. Within a fortnight the demand had
     consumed fifteen thousand. Since then it has run
     into countless thousands of editions and has been
     translated into every language under heaven. A
     few years ago, J.P. Morgan purchased the original
     manuscript for a fabulous sum and it now reposes
     among the priceless treasures in his magnificent
     art gallery. What is this world famous book? It
    is..

    Are you interested? Are you eager to know more?
 Has the speaker captured the favorable attention of- his
 listeners? Do you feel this opening has held your atten-
tion, heightened your interest as it progressed? Why?
Because it aroused your curiosity and held you in sus-
pense.
    Curiosity! Who is not susceptible to it?
    Perhaps you, too! You are asking just who is the au-
thor and what is the book mentioned above? To satisfy
your curiosity, here is the answer: The author: Charles
Dickens: the book: A Christmas Carol
    Creating suspense is a sure-fire method of getting
your listeners interested. Here is how I try to arouse
suspense in my lecture on "How to Stop Worrying and
Start Living." I begin like this: "In the spring of 1871,
a young man who was destined to become a world-fa-
mous physician, William Osier, picked up a book and
read twenty-one words that had a profound effect upon
his future."
   What were the twenty-one words? And how did
these words affect his future? These are the questions
your listeners will want answered.


                STATE AN ARRESTING FACT

   Clifford R. Adams, director of the Marriage Coun-
seling Service of the Pennsylvania State College, began
an article in The Reader's Digest, entitled "How to Pick

192
 190        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

a Mate," with these startling facts—facts that make
you gasp, facts that make an arresting opener:

        Today the chances that our young people will
    find happiness through marriage are slim indeed.
    The rise of our divorce rate is frightening. One
    marriage in five or six landed on the rocks in
     1940. By 1946, it is expected to be one in four.
    And if long-range trends continue, the rate in fifty
    years will be one in two.

Here are two other examples of "arresting facts"
openers:
    "The War Department predicts that, in the first
night of an atomic war, twenty million Americans will
be killed."
    "A few years ago, the Scripps-Howard newspapers
spent $176,000 on a survey to discover what customers
disliked about retail stores. It was the most costly, the
most scientific, the most thorough survey ever made of
retail selling problems. Questionnaires were sent into
54,047 homes in sixteen different cities. One of the
questions was: *What do you dislike about the stores in
this town?'
    "Almost two-fifths of all the answers to that ques-
tion were the same: Discourteous clerks!"
    This method of making startling statements at the
beginning of a talk is effective in establishing contact
with the listener because it jars the mind. It is a kind of
"shock technique" that enlists attention by using the
unexpected to focus attention upon the subject matter
of the talk.
    One of our class members in Washington, D. C,
used this method, arousal of curiosity, as effectively as
anyone I have ever heard. Her name, Meg SheiL Here
is her opening:
    "I was a prisoner for ten years. Not in an ordinary
prison, but in one whose walls were worry about my
inferiority and whose bars were the fear of criticism."

193
                      ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK   191

    Don't you want to know more about this true-life
 episode?
    A danger of the startling opener must be avoided,
that is, the tendency to be over-dramatic or too sensa-
 tional I remember one speaker who started his talk by
shooting a pistol into the air. He got attention all right,
but he also blasted the eardrums of his listeners.
    Make your opening conversational in manner. An
efficient way to discover whether you have an opener
that is conversational is to try it out across the dinner
table. If the way you open your talk isn't conversational
enough to be spoken across the dinner table, it proba-
bly won't be conversational enough for an audience ei-
ther.
    Frequently, however, the opening of the talk that is
supposed to get the listeners' interest is, in reality, the
dullest part of the talk. For example, I recently heard a
speaker begin like this: "Trust in the Lord and have
faith in your own ability . . " A preachy, obvious way
to begin a talk! But note his second sentence; it is in-
teresting: it has heart throb in it "My mother was left
a widow in 191 8 with three children to support and no
money . . " Why, oh why, didn't that speaker begin in
his first sentence by telling about the struggles of his
widowed mother with three little children to support!
   If you want to interest your listeners, don't begin
with an introduction. Begin by leaping right into the
heart of your story.
    That is what Frank Bettger does. He is the author of
How I Raised Myself From Failure to Success in Sell-
ing. He is an artist when it comes to creating suspense
in his first sentence. I know, because he and I traveled
together all over the United States giving talks on sell-
ing under the auspices of the United States Junior
Chamber of Commerce. I always admired the superb
way he opened his talk on enthusiasm. No preaching.
No lecturing. No sermonizing. No general statements.
Frank Bettger leaped right into the heart of his subject

194
                                                                                   "

 192        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

in his first sentence. He began his talk on enthusiasm
like this:
    "Shortly after I started out as a professional baseball
player, I got one of the biggest shocks of my life."
    What effect did this opening have on his audience? I
know, I was there. I saw the reaction. He had every-
one's attention instantly. Everyone was eager to hear
why and how he was shocked, and what he did about
it


                  ASK FOR A SHOW OF HANDS

    A splendid way to get interested attention is to ask
the audience to raise their hands in answer to a ques-
tion. For example, I have opened my talk on "How to
Prevent Fatigue" with this question:
    "Let's see your hands. How many of you get tired
more quickly than you feel you ought to?"
    Note this point: When you ask for a show of hands,
usually give the audience some warning that you are
going to do so. Do not open a talk with: "How many
people here believe the income tax should be lowered?
Let's see your hands." Give the audience a chance to
be ready for the vote by saying, for instance: "I am go-
ing to ask for a show of hands on a question of impor-
tance to you. This is the question: 'How many of you
believe that trading stamps benefit the consumer?'
    The technique of asking for a show of hands gets a
priceless reaction known as "audience participation."
When you use it, your talk is no longer a one-sided af-
fair. The audience is participating in it now. When you
ask, "How many of you get tired more quickly than
you feel you ought to?" everyone starts thinking of his
favorite topic: himself, his aches, his fatigue. He lifts
his hand and possibly looks around to see who else has
his hand up. He forgets that he is listening to a talk.
He smiles. He nods to a friend sitting next to him. The

195
                      ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK   193

 ice is broken. You, the speaker, are at ease, and so is
 the audience.


    PROMISE TO TELL THE AUDIENCE HOW
   THEY CAN GET SOMETHING THEY WANT

    An almost unfailing way to get alert attention is to
promise to tell your listeners how they can get what
they want by doing what you suggest. Following are
some illustrations of what I mean:
    "I am going to tell you how to prevent fatigue. I am
going to tell you how to add one hour a day to your
waking life."
    Tin going to tell you how you can materially in-
crease your income."
    "I promise that, if you will listen to me for ten
minutes, IT1 tell you one sure way to make yourself
more popular."
    The "promise" type of opener is sure to get atten-
tion because it goes straight to the self-interests of the
audience. All too often speakers neglect to tie their
topics to the vital interests of their hearers. Instead of
opening the door to attention, they slam it shut with
dull openings that trace the history of the subject
matter or laboriously dwell upon the background
necessary to an understanding of the topic.
   I remember one talk I heard a few years ago on a
topic which, in itself, was important to the audience:
the necessity of periodic health examinations. How did
the speaker begin his talk? Did he add to the natural
attractiveness of his subject by an effective opening?
No. He started with a colorless recital of the history of
his topic and the audience began to lose interest in him
and in his subject An opening built around the
"promise" technique would have been admirably ap-
propriate. For instance:

196
                                                      .

 194        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

        Do you know how long you are expected to
    live? Life insurance companies can predict this by
    means of life expectancy tables which have been
    compiled from the lives of millions of persons.
    You can expect to live two-thirds of the time be-
    tween your present age and eighty . . . now, is
    this long enough for you to live? No, no! We are
    all passionately eager to live longer and we want
    to prove that this prediction is wrong. But how,
    you ask, can this be done? How can I extend my
    life beyond the shockingly small number of years
    statisticians say remain for me? Well, there is an
    answer, a possible way this can be done, and I
   .shall tell you how to do this . .


    I leave it to you to decide whether this type of open-
ing captures your interest, if it compels you to listen to
the speaker. You must listen to him because he not
only is talking about you, about your life, but he has
promised to tell you something of the most intense per-
sonal value to you. No dull recital of impersonal facts
here! Such an opening as this is almost impossible to
resist.


                              USE AN EXHIBIT

    Perhaps the easiest way in the world to gain atten-
tion is to hold up something for people to look at Al-
most any creature, from the simplest to the most
complex, will give heed to that kind of stimulus. It can
be used sometimes with effectiveness before the most
dignified audience. For example, Mr. S. S. Ellis, of
Philadelphia, opened one of his talks in one of our
classes by holding a coin between his thumb and fore-
finger, and high above his shoulder. Naturally everyone
looked. Then he inquired: "Has anyone here ever
found a coin like this on the sidewalk? It announces
that the fortunate finder will be given a lot free in such

197
                      ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK   195

 and such a real estate development. He has but to call
 and present this coin. . . ." Mr. Ellis then proceeded
 to condemn the misleading and unethical practices in-
 volved.

    All of the foregoing methods are commendable.
They may be used separately or they may be com-
bined. Recognize that how you open a talk largely de-
termines whether the audience is going to accept you
and your message.


 second/ AVOID GETTING
                  UNFAVORABLE ATTENTION

    Please, please, I urge you, remember that you must
not only capture the attention of your audience, but
you must capture their favorable attention. Please note
that I said favorable attention. No rational person
would begin a talk by insulting his audience or by mak-
ing any obnoxious or disagreeable statement that would
turn them against him and his message. Yet how fre-
quently speakers begin talks by attracting attention
through the use of-one of the following devices.


           DO NOT OPEN WITH AN APOLOGY

   To begin a talk with an apology does not get you off
to a good start either. How often we all have heard
speakers begin by calling the attention of the audience
to their lack of preparation or their lack of ability. If
you are not prepared, the audience will probably dis-
cover it without your assistance. Why insult your audi-
ence by suggesting that you did not think them worth
preparing for, that just any old thing you had on the fire
was good enough to serve them? No, we don't want to
—hear apologies; we want to be informed and interested
   to be interested: remember that. Let your opening

198
196         THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

sentence capture the interest of your audience. Not the
second sentence. Not the third sentence. The first!


        AVOID THE "FUNNY" STORY OPENING

    You may have noticed that there is one method of
opening a talk, and one much favored by speakers, that
is not recommended here: the so-called "funny" story
opening. For some lamentable reason, the novice feels
that he ought to "lighten up" his talk by telling a joke;
he assumes that the mantel of Mark Twain has de-
scended upon his shoulders. Do not fall into this trap;
you will discover to your embarrassment the painful
truth that the "funny" story is more often pathetic than
funny—and the story may be known to persons in your
audience.
    A sense of humor, though, is a prized asset for any
speaker. A talk need not begin, nor be, heavy-footed,
elephantine, and excessively solemn. Not at all. If you
have the ability to tickle the risibilities of your audience
by some witty reference to a local situation or to some-
thing arising out of the occasion or the remarks of a
previous speaker, then by all means do so. Observe
some incongruity. Exaggerate it. That type of humor is
more likely to succeed than stale jokes about Pat and
Mike, or mothers-in-law, or shaggy dogs, because it is
relevant and because it is original.
    Perhaps the easiest way to create merriment is to tell
a story on yourself. Depict yourself in some ridiculous
and embarrassing situation. That gets down to the very
essence of humor. Jack Benny has used this device for
years. He was one of the first major radio comedians to
"poke fun" at himself. By making himself the butt of
jokes concerning his ability to play the violin, his
miserliness, and his age, Jack Benny works a rich vein
of humor that keeps his ratings high from year to year.
    Audiences open their hearts, as well as their minds,
to speakers who deliberately deflate themselves by call-

199
                      ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK   197

 ing attention to some deficiency or failing on their part,
 in a humorous sense, of course. On the other hand,
 creating the image of the "stuffed shirt" or the visiting
expert with all the answers leaves an audience cold and
unreceptive.



third/ SUPPORT YOUR MAIN IDEAS

    In the longer talk to get action you will have several
points; the fewer the better, but all of them will require
support material. In Chapter Seven we discussed one
method of supporting the Point of a talk, which is what
you want the audience to do, by illustrating it with a
story, an experience out of your life. This type of exam-
ple is popular because it appeals to a basic drive in
people, summed up by the slogan, "Everybody Loves a
Story." An incident or happening is the kind of exam-
ple most often used by the average speaker, but it is by
no means the only way your point can be supported
You might also use statistics, which are nothing more
than illustrations scientifically grouped, expert testi-
mony, analogies, exhibits, or demonstrations.


                             USE STATISTICS

   Statistics are used to show the proportion of In-
stances of a certain kind. They can be impressive and
convincing, especially as evidence where an isolated ex-
ample might not do as welL The effectiveness of the
Salk anti-poliomyelitis vaccine program was measured
by statistics gathered in all parts of the country. Isolated
cases of ineffectiveness were the exceptions that proved
the rule. A talk based on one of these exceptions
would not, therefore, convince a parent that the Salk
vaccine program would not protect his child.
    Statistics, of themselves, can be boring. They should
be judiciously used, and when used they should be

200
 198        THE CHALLENGE OP EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

clothed in a language that makes them vivid and
graphic.
     Here is an example of how statistics can be im-
pressive by comparing them with tilings familiar to us.
In backing up his point that a vast amount of time is
lost by New Yorkers1 neglecting to answer telephones
promptly an executive said:

         Out of each one hundred telephone connections
    made, seven show a delay of more than a minute
    before the person called answers. Every day 280,-
    000 minutes are lost in this way. In the course of
    six months, this minute delay in New York is
    about equal to all the business days that have
    elapsed since Columbus discovered America,

Mere numbers and amounts, taken by themselves, are
never very impressive. They have to be illustrated; they
ought, if possible, to be put in terms of our experi-
ences. I remember listening to a lecture by a guide in
the vast power room under Grand Coulee Dam. He
could have given us the square-foot figures of the
room's size, but that would not have been so convinc-
ing as the method he used. He told us that the room
was large enough for a crowd of 10,000 people to view
a football game on a regulation field and, in addition,
there would be room left over for several tennis courts
at each end!
    Many years ago, a student in my course at the
Brooklyn Central YMCA told in a talk the number of
houses destroyed by fire during the previous year. He
further said that, if these burned buildings had been
placed side by side, the line would have reached from
New York to Chicago, and that if the people who had
been killed in those fires had been placed half a mile
apart, that gruesome line would reach back again from
Chicago to Brooklyn.
    The figures he gave I forgot almost immediately but

201
                      ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK   199

 yean have passed, and, without any effort on my part,
 I can still see that line of burning buildings stretching
 from Manhattan Island to Cook County, Illinois,


            USE THE TESTIMONY OF EXPERTS

    Frequently you can effectively back up the points
you want to make in the body of your talk by the use
of the testimony of an expert Before using testimony it
should be tested by answering these questions:

    1. Is the quotation I am about to use accurate?
    2. Is it taken from the area of the man's expert
         knowledge? To quote Joe Louis on economics
         would obviously be exploiting his name but not
         his forte.
    3. Is the quotation from a man who is known and
         respected by the audience?
    4. Are you sure that the statement is based on first-
        hand knowledge, not personal interest or preju-
        dice?

   One of the members of my class at the Brooklyn
Chamber of Commerce many years ago opened a talk
on the need for specialization with a quotation from
Andrew Carnegie. Did he choose wisely? Yes, because
he accurately quoted a man, who was respected by the
audience as one who had earned the right to speak on
business success. That quotation is still worth repeating
today:

       I believe the true road to pre-eminent success
   in any line is to make yourself master in that line.
    I have no faith in the policy of scattering one's
    resources, and in my experience I have rarely if
    ever met a man who achieved pre-eminence in
    money-making—certainly never one in manufao

202
 200        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

     turing—who was interested in many concerns.
     The men who have succeeded are the men who
     have chosen one line and stuck to it.


                               USE ANALOGIES

    An analogy, according to Webster, is a "relation of
likeness between two things . . . consisting in the re-
semblance not of the things themselves but of two or
more attributes, circumstances, or effects."
     The use of an analogy is a fine technique for support-
ing a main idea. Here is an excerpt from a talk on
"The Need for More Electric Power," by C. Girard
Davidson when he was Assistant Secretary of the In-
terior. Note how he employs a comparison, an analogy,
to back up his point:

        A prosperous economy has to keep moving for-
    ward or it goes into a tailspin. There is a parallel
    with the airplane, which is a useless collection of
    nuts and bolts standing still on the ground. When
    moving forward in the air, however, it comes into
    its own and serves as a useful function. To stay
    up, it has to keep going forward. If it doesn't
    move, it sinks—and it can't move backward.

    Here is another, perhaps one of the most outstand-
ing analogies in the history of eloquence; it was used
by Lincoln in answer to his critics during a crucial
period of the Civil War:

        Gentlemen, I want you to suppose a case for a
    moment. Suppose that all the property you were
    worth was in gold, and you had put it in the
    hands of Blondin, the famous rope-walker, to
    carry across the Niagara Falls on a tightrope.
    Would you shake the rope while he was passing
    over it, or keep shouting to him, "Blondin, stoop

203
                                 :


                       ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK   201

     a little morel Go a little faster!" No, I am sure
     you would not You would hold your breath as
     well as your tongue, and keep your hands off until
     he was safely over. Now the government is in the
     same situation. It is carrying an immense weight
     across a stormy ocean. Untold treasures are in its
     hands. It is doing the best it can. Don't badger it!
     Just keep still, and it will get you safely over.


           USE A DEMONSTRATION WITH OR
                      WITHOUT AN EXHIBIT

    When executives of the Iron Fireman firm were talk-
 ing to dealers, they needed some way of dramatizing
the fact that fuel should be fed into a furnace from the
bottom rather than from the top. So they hit on this
simple but striking demonstration. The speaker lights a
candle. Then he says                                               t

    See how clearly the flame burns—how tall it is.
    Since virtually all the fuel is being converted into
    heat, it gives off practically no smoke.
        The fuel of the candle is fed in from below, just
    as the Iron Fireman feeds fuel into a furnace.
        Suppose that this candle was fueled from
    above, as hand-stoked furnaces are. (Here the
    speaker turns the candle upside down. )
        Notice how the flame dies down. Smell the
    smoke. Hear it sputter. See how red the flame is
    because of incomplete combustion. And finally the
    flame goes out, as a result of inefficient fueling
   from above.

    Some years ago, Henry Morton Robinson wrote an
interesting article on "How Lawyers Win Cases" for
Your Life magazine. In it, he describes how a lawyer
named Abe Hummer is credited with a telling dramatic
demonstration of showmanship while representing an

204
 202         THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

 insurance company in a damage suit The plaintiff, a
 Mr. Postlethwaite, stated that as a result of falling
 down an elevator shaft his shoulder had been so
 severely injured that he was unable to raise his right
 arm.
     Hummer appeared to be gravely concerned. "Now
 Mr. Postiethwaite," he said confidently, "show the jury
 how high you can raise your arm." Gingerly, Postle-
 thwaite brought his arm up to ear level "Now show us
 how high you could raise it before you were injured,"
urged Hummer. "As high as this," said the plaintiff,
 6hooting his arm at full length over his head.
     You may draw your own conclusion regarding the
reaction of the jury to this demonstration.

     In the longer talk to secure action you might make
three, or at most, four points. They could be uttered in
less than a minute. To recite them to an audience
would be dull and boring. What makes these points
come alive? It is the support material you use. This is
what gives sparkle and interest to your talk. By the use
of incidents, comparisons and demonstrations, you
make your main ideas clear and vivid; by the use of
statistics and testimony you substantiate the truth and
emphasize the importance of your main points.



fourth/ APPEAL FOR ACTION

    I dropped in to talk a few minutes one day with
George F. Johnson, the industrialist and humanitarian.
He was President of the great Endicott-Johnson Cor-
poration at the time. More interesting to me, though,
was the knowledge that he was a speaker who could
make his hearers laugh, and sometimes cry, and often
remember for a long time what he said.
    He didn't have a private office. He had a corner of a
big, busy factory, and his manner was as unpretentious
as his old wooden desk.

205
                       ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK   203

     "You've come at a good time," he said as he stood
 up to greet me. Tve just got a job out of the way. I've
 jotted down what I want to say at the end of a talk I'm
 going to give to the workers tonight"
     It's always a relief to get a talk ship-shape in your
 mind from beginning to end," I told him.
     "Oh, I haven't got it all in mind yet," he said. "Just
 the general idea and the specific way I want to finish
 it."
     He was not a professional speaker. He never went in
for ringing words or fine phrases. From experience,
 however, he had learned one of the secrets of success-
ful communication. He knew that if a talk is to go over
 well, it has to have a good ending. He realized that the
conclusion of a talk is the part toward which all that
precedes it must reasonably move if an audience is to
be impressed.
    The close is really the most strategic point in a talk,
what one says last, the final words left ringing in the
ears when one ceases—these are likely to be remem-
bered longest Unlike Mr. Johnson, beginners seldom
appreciate the importance of this; their endings often
leave much to be desired.
    What are their most common errors? Let us discuss
a few and search for remedies.
    First, there is the man who finishes with: 'That is
about all I have to say on the matter, so I guess I shall
stop." This speaker usually throws a smoke screen over
his inability to end a talk satisfactorily by lamely saying
"thank you." That is not an ending. That is a mistake.
It reeks of the amateur. That is almost unpardonable.
K that is all you have to say, why not round off your
talk, and promptly take your seat and stop without
talking about stopping. Do that, and the inference that
that is all you have to say may, with safety and good
taste, be left to the discernment of the audience.
   Then, there is the speaker who says all he has to
say, but he does not know how to stop. I believe it was
Josh Billings who advised people to take the bull by

206
                    .

 204         THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

 the tail instead of the horns, since it would be easier to
 let go. This speaker has the bull by the frontal extremi-
 ties, and wants to part company with him, but try as
 hard as he will, he can't get near a friendly fence or
 tree. So he finally thrashes about in a circle, covering
 the same ground, repeating himself, leaving a bad im-
pression. . .
     The remedy? An ending has to be planned some-
time, doesn't it? Is it the part of wisdom to try to do it
after you are facing an audience, while you are under
the strain and stress of talking, while your mind must
be intent on what you are saying? Or does common
sense suggest the advisability of doing it quietly, calmly,
beforehand?
    How do you go about bringing your talk to a climac-
tic close? Here are a few suggestions:


                                  SUMMARIZE

    In the longer talk a speaker is very apt to cover so
much ground that at the close the listeners are a little
hazy about all his main points. However, few speakers
realize that They are misled into assuming that be-
cause these points are crystal clear in their own minds,
they must be equally lucid to their hearers. Not at afl.
The speaker has been pondering over his ideas for
some time. But his points are all new to the audience;
they are flung at the audience like a handful of
shot Some may stick, but most are liable to roll off in
confusion. The hearers are liable, in the words of
Shakespeare, to "remember a mass of things but noth-
ing distinctly."
    Some anonymous Irish politician is reported to have
given this recipe for making a speech: "First, tell them
what you are going to tell them; then tell them; then
tell them what you have told them." It is often highly
advisable to "tell them what you have told them."
    Here is a good example. The speaker, a traffic man-

207
                      ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK    205

 ager for one of Chicago's railways, ends his talk with
 this summary:

         In short, gentlemen, our own back-door yard
     experience with this block device; the experience
     in its use in the East, in the West, in the North;
     the sound operating principles underlying its oper-
     ation; the actual demonstration in the money
     saved in one year in wreck prevention—move me
    most earnestly and unequivocally to recommend
    its immediate installation on our Southern branch.

     You see what he has done? You can see it and feel
it without having heard the rest of the talk. He has
summed up in a few sentences, in sixty-two words,
practically all the points he had made in the entire talk.
    Don't you feel that a summary like that helps? If so,
make that technique your own.


                            ASK FOR ACTION

    The closing just quoted is also an excellent illustra-
tion of the ask-for-action ending. The speaker wanted
something done: a block device installed on the South-
ern branch of his road. He based his request for action
on the money it would save, on the wrecks it would
prevent The speaker wanted action, and he got it. This
was not a mere practice talk. It was delivered before
the board of directors of a railway, and it secured the
installation of the block device for which it asked.
   In your final words of a talk to secure action the
time has come to ask for the order. So ask for it! Tell
your audience to join, contribute, vote, write, tele-
phone, buy, boycott, enlist, investigate, acquit, or what-
ever it is you want them to do. Be sure to obey these
caution signs, however:
    Ask them to do something specific. Don't say, "Help
the Red Cross." That's too general. Say, instead, "Send

208
 206        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

your enrollment fee of one dollar tonight to the Ameri-
can Red Cross, 125 Smith Street in this city."
    Ask the audience for some response that is within
their power to give. Don't say, "Let us cast our ballot
against the Demon Rum." It can't be done. At the mo-
ment, we aren't ballotting on the Demon Rum. You
could, instead, ask them to join a temperance society
or to contribute to some organization which is fighting
for prohibition.
    Make it as easy as you can for your audience to act
on your appeal. Don't say, "Write your congressman to
vote against this bill." Ninety-nine per cent of your lis-
teners won't do it They are not vitally interested; or it

is too much trouble; or they will forget So make it
easy and pleasant to act How? By writing a letter
yourself to your congressman, saying, "We, the under-
signed, urge you to vote against Bill No. 74321." Pass
the letter around with a fountain pen, and you will
probably get a lot of signers—and perhaps lose your
fountain pen.

209
                  CHAPTER FOURTEEN


                  Applying What You
                  Have Learned



                   At the fourteenth session of my course
I have often heard with pleasure students tell how
they used the techniques in this book in their every-
day lives. Salesmen point to increased sales, managers
to promotions, executives to a widened span of control,
all due to the increased skill with which they gave
instructions and solved problems using the tools of
effective speech.
    As N. Richard Diller wrote in Today's Speech:
Talk, the type of talk, the amount of talk, and the at-
mosphere for such talk . . . can act as the very life
blood of an industrial communication system." R. Fred
Canaday, in charge of the General Motors Dale Carne-
gie Course in Effective Leadership, wrote in the same
magazine: "One of the basic reasons we at General
Motors are interested in speech training is our recogni-
tion that every supervisor is a teacher to a greater or
lesser degree. From the time he interviews a prospec-
tive employee, through the orientation phase of early
   iployment, on through regular assignment and pos-
sible promotion, a supervisor is continually called upon
to explain, describe, reprimand, inform, instruct, re-
 iew, and discuss myriads of subjects with each person

  i his department.**
   As we proceed up the ladder of oral communication
                                         207

210
                                                                                        —

 208        THB CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

 to those areas that come closest to public speaking
 discussions, decision-making, problem-solving and pol-
 icy-formulating conferences—we see again how the
 skills of effective speaking as taught in this book can be
 transferred to everyday speech activities. The rules for
 effective speaking before groups are directly applicable
 to conference participation and conference leadership.
     Organization of the idea to be presented, the choice
of the right words to launch it, the earnestness and en-
thusiasm used in delivering it are elements that will
guarantee the idea's life in the final stage of solution. All
these elements have been thoroughly discussed in this
book. It remains for the reader to apply what he has
learned in every conference in which he participates.
    Perhaps you are wondering when to begin applying
what you have learned in the previous thirteen chapters
of this book. You may be surprised if I answer that
query by one word: Immediately.
    Even though you are not planning to make a speech
in public for some time, if at all, I am certain you will
find that the principles and techniques in this book are
applicable every day. When I say start using these
techniques now, I mean in the very next speaking situ-
ation in which you find yourself.
    If you analyze the speaking that you do every day,
you will be amazed by the similarity of purpose be-
tween your daily speaking and the type of formal com-
munication discussed in these pages.
    In Chapter Seven, you were urged to keep in mind
one of four general purposes when you speak before
groups; you may want to give them information, enter-
tain them, convince them that your position is right, or
persuade them to take action of some kind. In public
speaking we try to keep these purposes distinct, both as
to the content of the talk and the manner of our de-
livery.
    In daily speaking, these purposes are fluid, merging
with one another and constantly changing through the
course of the day. At one moment we may be indulging

211
                  APPLYING WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNED 209

in friendly chitchat and then suddenly we may be using
speech to sell a product or persuade a child to put his
spending money in the bank. By applying the tech-
niques described in this book to everyday conversation
we can make ourselves more effective, get our ideas
across more efficiently, and motivate others with skill
and fact



first/ USE SPECIFIC DETAIL
                 IN EVERYDAY CONVERSATION

    Take just one of these techniques, for instance.
Remember in Chapter Four I appealed to you to put
detail in your talk. In that way you make your ideas
come alive, in a vivid and graphic way. Of course I
was thinking mainly of speaking before groups. But
isn't the use of detail just as important in everyday
conversation? Just think for a moment of the really
interesting conversationalists of your acquaintance.
Aren't they the ones who fill their talk with colorful,
dramatic details, who have the ability to use pic-
turesque speech?
   Before you can begin to develop your conversational
skills you must have confidence. So almost all that was
said in the first three chapters of this book will be use-
ful in giving you the security to mix with others and to
voice your opinions in an informal social group. Once
you are eager to express your ideas even on a limited
scale, you will begin to search your experience for
material that can be converted to conversation. Here a
wonderful thing happens—your horizons begin to ex-
pand and you see your life take on new meaning.
    Housewives, whose interests may have become some-
what restricted, have been most enthusiastic in report-
ing what happens when they begin to apply their
knowledge of speaking techniques to small conversa-
tional groups. "I realize that my newly found confi-
dence gave me courage to speak up at social

212
210        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

functions," Mrs. R. D. Hart told her classmates in Cin-
cinnati, "and I began taking an interest in current
events. Instead of withdrawing from the give and take
of the group I eagerly joined it. Not only that, but ev-
erything I did became grist for the conversational mill
and I found myself becoming interested in a host of
new activities."
    To an educator there is nothing new in Mrs. Hart's
grateful report Once the drive to learn and to apply
what has been learned is stimulated, it starts a whole
train of action and interaction that vivifies the entire
personality. A cycle of achievement is set up and, like
Mrs. Hart, one gets the feeling of fulfillment, all
through putting into practice just one of the principles
taught in this book.
    Though few of us are professional teachers, all of
us use speech to inform others on many occasions dur-
ing the day. As parents instructing our children, as
neighbors explaining a new method of pruning roses, as
tourists exchanging ideas on the best route to follow,
we constantly find ourselves in conversational situations
that require clarity and coherence of thought, vitality
and vigor of expression. What was said in Chapter
Eight in relation to the talk to inform is applicable in
these situations as welL



second/ USE EFFECTIVE SPEAKING
                   TECHNIQUES IN YOUR JOB

    Now we enter the area of the communicative process
as it affects our jobs. As salesmen, managers, clerks,
department heads, group leaders, teachers, ministers,
nurses, executives, doctors, lawyers, accountants, and
engineers, we are all charged with the responsibility of
explaining specialized areas of knowledge and giving
professional instructions. Our ability to make these in-
structions in clear, concise language may often be the
yardstick used by our superiors in judging our compe-

213
                  APPLYING WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNED 211

tence. How to think quickly and verbalize adroitly is a
skill acquired in presenting speeches of information,
but this skill is by no means limited to formal speak-
ing—it can be used every day by every one of us. The
need for clarity in business and professional speech
today is highlighted by the recent spate of oral com-
munications courses in industry, government, and pro-
fessional organizations.



third/ SEEK OPPORTUNITIES
                 TO SPEAK IN PUBLIC

    In addition to using the principles of this book in ev-
eryday speech, where incidentally you will reap the
greatest rewards, you should seek every opportunity to
speak in public. How do you do this? By joining a club
where public speaking of some sort goes on. Don't just
     an inactive member, a mere looker-on. Pitch in and
  dp by doing committee work. Most of these jobs go
  egging. Get to be program chairman. That will give
  du an opportunity to interview good speakers in your
community, and you certainly will be called upon to
make speeches of introduction.
   As soon as possible, develop a twenty- to thirty-
minute talk. Use the suggestions in this book as a
guide. Let your club or organization know that you are
prepared to address them. Offer your services to a
speaker's bureau in your town. Fund-raising campaigns
are looking for volunteers to speak for them. They
provide you with a speaker's kit which will be of great
help in preparing your talk. Many speakers of conse-
quence have begun in this way. Some of them have
risen to great prominence. Take Sam Levenson, for ex-
ample, the radio and TV star and a speaker whose
services are sought all over the country. He was a high
school teacher in New York. Just as a sideline he be-
gan making short talks about what he knew best, his
family, relatives, his students, and the unusual aspects

214
 212        THE CHALLENGE OP EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

 of his job. These talks took fire, and he was soon asked
 to address so many groups it began to interfere with his
teaching chores. But, by this time, he was a guest on
network programs and it wasn't long before Sam Lev-
enson transferred his talents entirely to the entertain-
ment world.



fourth/ YOU MUST PERSIST

    When we learn any new thing, like French or golf or
speaking in public, we never advance steadily. We do
not improve gradually. We do it by waves, by abrupt
starts and sudden stops. Then we remain stationary a
time, or we may even slip back and lose some of the
ground we have previously gained. These periods of
stagnation, or retrogression, are well known by all psy-
chologists: they have been named "plateaus in the
curve of learning." Students of effective speaking will
sometimes be stalled, perhaps for weeks, on one of
these plateaus. Work as hard as they may, they cannot
seem to get off it The weak ones give up in despair.
Those with grit persist, and they find that suddenly, al-
most overnight, without knowing how or why it has
happened, they have made great progress. They have
lifted from the plateau like an airplane. Abruptly they
have acquired naturalness, force, and confidence in
their speaking.
    You may always, as has been stated elsewhere in
these pages, experience some fleeting fear, some shock,
some nervous anxiety, the first few moments you face
an audience. Even the greatest musicians have felt it in
spite of their innumerable public appearances. Pad-
erewski always fidgeted nervously with his cuffs imme-
diately before he sat down at the piano. But as soon as
he began to play, all of his audience-fear vanished
quickly like a mist in August sunshine.
    His experience will be yours. If you will but perse-
vere, you will soon eradicate everything, including this

215
I                       APPLYING WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNED 213

      initial fear; and that will be initial fear, and nothing
      more. After the first few sentences, you will have con-
      trol of yourself. You will be speaking with positive
      pleasure.
          One time a young man who aspired to study law
      wrote to Lincoln for advice. Lincoln replied: "If you
      are resolutely determined to make a lawyer of yourself,
     the thing is more than half done already. . . . Always
     bear in mind that your own resolution to succeed is
     more important than any other one thing."
         Lincoln knew. He had gone through it all. He had
     never, in his entire life, had more than a total of one
     year's schooling. And books? Lincoln once said he had
     walked and borrowed every book within fifty miles of
     his home. A log fire was usually kept going all night in
     the cabin. Sometimes he read by the light of that fire.
     There were cracks between the logs in the cabin, and
     Lincoln often kept a book sticking there. As soon as it
     was light enough to read in the morning, he rolled over
     on his bed of leaves, rubbed his eyes, pulled out the
     book and began devouring it
         He walked twenty and thirty miles to hear a speaker
     and, returning home, he practiced his talks every-
     where—in the fields, in the woods, before the crowds
     gathered at Jones* grocery at Gentryville; he joined
     literary and debating societies in New Salem and
     Springfield, and practiced speaking on the topics of the
     day. He was shy in the presence of women; when he
     courted Mary Todd he used to sit in the parlor, bashful
     and silent, unable to find words, listening while she did
     the talking. Yet that was the man who, by faithful
    practice and home study, made himself into the
     speaker who debated with the most accomplished ora-
     tor of his day, Senator Douglas. This was the man
    who, at Gettysburg, and again in his second inaugural
     address, rose to heights of eloquence that have rarely
     been attained in all the annals of mankind.
         Small wonder that, in view of his own terrific handi-
     caps and pitiful struggle, Lincoln wrote: "If you are

216
 214        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

 resolutely determined to make a lawyer out of yourself,
 the thing is more than half done already."
     An excellent picture of Abraham Lincoln hangs in
 the President's office in the White House. "Often when
 I had some matter to decide," said Theodore Roose-
 velt, "something involved and difficult to dispose of,
 something where there were conflicting rights and in-
 terest, I would look up at Lincoln, try to imagine him
in my place, try to figure out what he would do in the
same circumstances. It may sound odd to you, but,
frankly, it seemed to make my troubles easier of solu-
tion."
    Why not try Roosevelt*s plan? Why not, if you are
discouraged and feeling like giving up the fight to make
a more effective speaker of yourself, why not ask your-
self what he would do under the circumstances? You
know what he would do. You know what he did do.
After he had been beaten by Stephen A. Douglas in
the race for the U.S. Senate, he admonished his follow-
ers not to "give up after one or one hundred defeats."


fifth/ KEEP TOE CERTAINTY OF REWARD
                  BEFORE YOU

    How I wish I could get you to prop this book open
on your breakfast table every morning until you had
memorized these words from Professor William James:

        Let no youth have any anxiety about the up-
    shot of his education, whatever the line of it may
   be. If he keeps faithfully busy each hour of the
    working day, he may safely leave the final result
    to itself. He can, with perfect certainty, count on
    waking up some fine morning to find himself one
    of the competent ones of his generation, in what-
    ever pursuit he may have singled out

217
                   APPLYING WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNED 215

     And now, with the renowned Professor James to fall
 back upon, I shall go so far as to say that if you keep
 right on practicing intelligently, you may confidently
 hope to wake up one fine morning and find yourself
 one of the competent speakers of your city or commu-
 nity.
     Regardless of how fantastic that may sound to you
 now, it is true as a general principle. Exceptions, of
 course, there are. A man with an inferior mentality and
 personality, and with nothing to talk about, is not go-
 ing to develop into a local Daniel Webster; but, within
 reason, the assertion is correct
    Let me illustrate: former Governor Stokes of New
Jersey attended the closing banquet of one of our
classes at Trenton. He remarked that the talks he had
heard that evening were as good as the speeches that
he had heard in the House of Representatives and Sen-
ate at Washington. These Trenton "speeches" were
made by businessmen who had been tongue-tied with
audience-fear a few months previously. They wore not
incipient Ciceros, these New Jersey businessmen; they
were typical of the businessmen one finds in any Amer-
ican city. Yet they woke up one fine morning to find
themselves among the competent speakers of their city,
and probably in the country.
    I have known and carefully watched literally thou-
sands of persons trying to gain self-confidence and the
ability to talk in public. Those that succeeded were, in
only a few instances, persons of unusual brilliancy. For
the most part, they were the ordinary run of business-
men you will find in your own home town. But they
kept on. More exceptional men sometimes got discour-
aged or too deeply immersed in money-making, and
they did not get very far; but the ordinary individual
with grit and singleness of purpose, at the end of the
road, was at the top.
   That is only human and natural. Don't you see the
same thing occurring all the time in commerce and the
professions? John D. Rockefeller, Sr., said that the first

218
216        THE CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

essential for success in business was patience and the
knowledge that reward is ultimately certain. It is like-
wise one of the first essentials for success in effective
speaking.
    A few summers ago, I started out to scale a peak in
the Austrian Alps called the Wilder Kaiser. Baedaker
said that the ascent was difficult, and a guide was es-
sential for amateur climbers. A friend and I had none,
and we were certainly amateurs; so a third party asked
us if we thought we were going to succeed. "Of
course," we replied.
    "What makes you think so?" he inquired.
    "Others have done it without guides," I said, "so I
know it is within reason, and / never undertake any-
thing thinking defeat/9
    That is the proper psychology for anything from
speaking to an assault on Mt. Everest.
    How well you succeed is largely determined by
thoughts you have prior to speaking. See yourself in
your imagination talking to others with perfect self-
control.
    It is easily in your power to do this. Believe that you
will succeed. Believe it firmly, and you will then do
what is necessary to bring success about.
    During the Civil War, Admiral Dupont gave half a
dozen excellent reasons why he had not taken his gun-
boat into Charleston harbor. Admiral Farragut listened
intently to the recital 4<
                                         But there was another reason
that you have not mentioned," he replied.
    "What is that?" questioned Admiral Dupont
    The answer came: "You did not believe you could
doit."
    The most valuable thing that most members acquire
from training in our classes is an increased confidence
in themselves, an additional faith in their ability to
achieve. What is more important for one's success in
almost any undertaking?
    Emerson wrote, "Nothing great was ever achieved

219
                   APPLYING WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNED 217

 without enthusiasm." That is more than a well-turned
 literary phrase; it is the road map to success.
     William Lyon Phelps was probably the most beloved
 and the most popular professor ever to teach at Yale
University. In his book The Excitement of Teaching,
 he states, "With me, teaching is more than an art or an
occupation. It is a passion. I love to teach, as a painter
loves to paint, as a singer loves to sing, as a poet loves
to write. Before I get out of bed in the morning, I think
with ardent delight of my group of students."
    Is there any wonder a teacher so filled with enthusi-
asm for his job, so excited about the work ahead of him;
achieved success? Billy Phelps exerted a tremendous
influence on his students, largely by the love and ex-
citement, by the enthusiasm, he put into his teaching.
    If you put enthusiasm into learning how to speak
more effectively you will find that the obstacles in your
path will disappear. This is a challenge to focus all
your talent and power on the goal of effective commu-
nication with your fellow men. Think of the self-reli-
ance, the assurance, the poise that will be yours, the
sense of mastery that comes from being able to hold
the attention, stir the emotions, and convince a group
to act. You will find that competence in self-expression
will lead to competence in other ways as well, for train-
ing in effective speaking is the royal road to self-confi-
dence in all the areas of working and living.
    In the manual for the guidance of instructors who
teach the Dale Carnegie Course are these words:
"When class members discover that they can hold the
attention of an audience and receive an instructor's
praise, and the applause of the class—when they are
able to do that, they develop a sense of inner power,
courage, and calm that they have never before experi-
enced. The result? They undertake and accomplish
things that they never dreamed possible. They find
themselves longing to talk before groups. They take ac-
tive parts in business and professional and community
activities, and become leaders.,r

220
218        THB CHALLENGE OP EFFECTIVE SPEAKING

    The word "leadership" has been used often in the
chapters that have gone before this one. Clear, force-
ful, and emphatic expressiveness is one of the marks of
leadership in our society. This expressiveness must
govern all die utterances of the leader from private in-
terview to public pronouncements. Properly applied,
the material in this book will help to develop leader-
ship—in the family, the church group, the civic organi-
zation, the corporation, and the government

221
                APPLYING WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNED    219




The Challenge of Effective Speaking


 CHAPTER XII. INTRODUCING SPEAKERS, PRESENTING
                       AND ACCEPTING AWARDS

     1. Thoroughly Prepare What You are Going to
         Say
    2. Follow the T-I-S Formula
    3. Be Enthusiastic
    4. Be Warmly Sincere
    5. Thoroughly Prepare the Talk of Presentation
    6. Express Your Sincere Feelings in the Talk of
         Acceptance



CHAPTER Xm. ORGANIZING THE LONGER TALK


    1. Get Attention Immediately
        Begin Your Talk with an Incident—Example
        Arouse Suspense
        State an Arresting Fact
        Ask for a Show of Hands
        Promise to Tell the Audience
           How They Can Get Something They Want
        Use an Exhibit
   2. Avoid Getting Unfavorable Attention
        Do Not Open with an Apology
        Avoid the "Funny" Story Opening
   3. Support Your Main Ideas
        Use Statistics
        Use the Testimony of Experts
        Use Analogies
       Use a Demonstration with or without an Exhibit
  4. Appeal for Action
       Summarize
       Ask for Action

222
220         THB CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVB SPEAKING

     CHAPTER XIV. APPLYING WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNED


         1. Use Specific Detail in Everyday Conversation

         2. Use Effective Speaking Techniques in Your Job

         3. Seek Opportunities to Speak in Public
         4. You Must Persist

         5. Keep the Certainty of Reward Before You

223
                  Acknowledgments




    Appreciation is expressed for permission to quote
from: Accustomed As I Am, by John Mason Brown
(W.W. Norton & Co., Inc.); The Elements of Style, by
Strunk and White (The Macmillan Co.); Freedom's
Faith, by Clarence B. Randall (Little, Brown—Atlan-
tic Monthly Press); Life Is Worth Living, by Bishop
Fulton J. Sheen (McGraw-Hill Book Co.); Mark
Twain in Eruption, edited by Bernard De Voto (Har-
per & Bros.); My Discovery of England, by Stephen
Leacock (Copyright, 1922, by Dodd. Mead & Co.,
Inc.); "Random Reflections on Public Speaking," by
Norman Thomas (Quarterly Journal of Speech); ser-
mons by Norman Vincent Peale (Foundation for
Christian Living); and speeches by R. Fred Canaday
and Richard Diller (Today's Speech).

    Information regarding the Dale Carnegie Course in
Effective Speaking and Human Relations may be ob-
tained from Dale Carnegie & Associates, Inc., 1475
Franklin Avenue, Garden City, New York 1 1530.





                                        221

224
    DALE CARNEGIE-
       THE MAN WHO HAS HELPED
                MILLIONS TO GREATER
   ACHIEVEMENT-CANHELPYOU!

           Start enjoying your job, your personal

          relationships-every aspect of your life-
           more fully with these classic self-help

      books. Check the ones you want and use

                      the coupon below to order.


            _74607-3 HOW TO DEVELOP SELF-
                             CONFIDENCE AND INFLUENCE
                             PEOPLE BY PUBLIC SPEAKING $5.99

              70826-0 HOW TO ENJOY YOUR LIFE AND
                             YOUR JOB $5.99

              73335-8 HOW TO STOP WORRYING AND
                             START LIVING $5.99

             72400-2 THE QUICK AND EASY WAY TO
                             EFFECTIVE SPEAKING $5.99

              72365-0 HOW TO WIN FRIENDS AND
                             INFLUENCE PEOPLE $5.99

                                                                                        POCKET
                                                                                        BOOKS
Simon & Schuster, Mail Order Dept. DCR
200 Old Tappan Rd., Old Tappan, N.J. 07675
Please send met* books I have checked above. I am endosJng $ (please add 75* to cover postage
and handling for each order. Please add appropriate local sales tax). Send check or money order-no cash or
C.0i).'s please. Aflow up to six weeks tordeivery. For purchases over $10.00 you may use VISA: card number,
expiration dale and customer signature must be inducted.



Address

G*                                                       State/Zip

VISA Card No                                   Exp. Date

Signature                                                                                  2*1-13

225
        FINANCIAL SUCCESS!
        CAREER SUCCESS!

        POCKET BOOKS
        BRINGS YOU THE BEST!


                     COMPLETE RESUME BOOK AND
                     JOB-GETTERS GUIDE
                     Dr. Juvenal L Angel 72564-5/$4.95


                     THE ART OF NEGOTIATING
                     Gerald I. Nierenberg 70499/$5.99


                     TOTAL RECALL
                     Joan Menninger, Ph.D. 69134-1/$5.99


                     THE SUCCESS SYSTEM THAT
                   'NEVER FAILS
                     W. Clement Stone 73265/$5.99


                     THE SILVA MIND CONTROL METHOD
                     FOR BUSINESS MANAGERS
                     Jose Silva & Robert B. Stone, Ph.D.
                     73968-X/$5.99






                                                                                                     POCKET
Simon & Schuster, Mall Order Dept. FCS                                    BOOKS
200 Old Tappan Rd., Old Tappan, N.J. 07675

Please send me (he books I have checked above. I am enclosing $ (please add 75< to cover
postage and handing for each order. Please add appropriate local sales tax). Send check or money
order-no cash or C.O.O.'s please. Allow up to six weeks lor delivery. For purchases over $10.00 you may
use VISA: card number, expiration dale and customer signature must be included.

Name

Address

Citv                                                                             State/Zip

VISA Card No.                                                           Exp. Dale

Signature                                                                                                     121-13

226
                                      FIND A BETTER JOB!

                                  IMPROVE
                                 YOUR PRESENT ONE!

                               SECURE
                            YOUR FINANCIAL FUTURE!

                           Get the guidance and understanding
                                   you need in these top-sellling
                                            books of advice, analysis
                                                     and how-to-do-it expertise!




                   72564-5 COMPLETE RESUME BOOK AND
                                       JOB-GETTERS GUIDE
                                       by Dr. Juvenal Angel $4.95




                 ,68375-6 COMPLETE REAL ESTATE ADVISOR
                                       by Daniel J. deBenedictis $4.95




                   67431-5 MANAGERIAL WOMAN
                                       by Margaret Hennig and
                                      AnneJardim $4.95


Simon & Schuster. Mail Order Dept. FAB                                 BOOKSffiiffi
200 Old Tappan R<J., Old Tappan, N.J. 07675

Please send me It* books I Itave checked above, t am enclosing $ (please add 75c to cover postage
and kandiing tor each order. Please add appropriate local sales tax). Send check or money order-no cash or
C.0.D.*s ptease. Alow up k) six weeks lor delivery. For purchases over $10.00 you may use VISA: card
number, eqpkalbn date and customer signature must be included.

Name

Address

City                                                                 State/Zip

VISA Card No.                                              Exp. Date

Signature                                                                                            274-05

228
      PUT YOUR IDEAS ACROSS EFFECTIVELY
       AND YOU'LL PUT YOURSELF ACROSS
                     AT THE SAME TIME!

      Now streamlined and updated, the book
          that has put literally millions on the
      highway to greater accomplishment and
         success can show you how to have
   maximum impact as a speaker—every day,
         and in every situation that demands
    winning others over to your point of view:

         Chairing or addressing a meeting
      Convincing a purchasing committee
                 that your product is best
 Teaching a method or explaining a subject
           Making a tund-raising speech
                   Accepting an award
           Speaking at social gatherings

       Exchange self -consciousness for self-

    confidence. Learn how to persuade, to get

           action, to inform, to impress and
convince, to entertain. Dale Carnegie's easy-to-
         master five-step program will show
  you how to be a powerful, effective speaker.



                                              72400




               o ,'76714"00599, o

              ISBN D-b71-72M0Q-2

