4
 BRIAN FRIEL

Philadelphia,
Here I Come! 

5
For my Father and Mother

6
                                       Contents



Title Page
Dedication
First Performance
Cast
Locations
Episode I
Episode II
Episode III
About the Author
By the Same Author
Copyright

7
The first performance  of PhiladelShia,   Here  I Come!  was given  at
the Gaiety  Theatre,  Dublin,   on 28  September  1964 by  Edwards-
MacLiammoir:   Dublin  Gate Theatre Productions Ltd  in  association
with the  Dublin  Theatre Festival  and Oscar Lewenstein Ltd.  It  was
directed by Hilton  Edwards, and the setting was by  Alpho  O’Reilly.
The cast was as follows:

Madge Maureen O’Sullivan



S. B. O’Donnell Éamonn Kelly
Kate Doogan Máire Hastings
Senator Doogan Cecil Barror
Master Boyle Dominic Roche
Lizzy Sweeney Ruby Head
Con Sweeney Tom Irwin
Ben Burton Michael Mara
1ed Éamon Morrissey
7om Brendan O’Sullivan
Joe Emmet Bergin
Canon Mick O’Byrne Ale[ McDonald

8
                                                      Cast


Madge Housekeeper



S. B. O’Donnell  Gar’s father
Kate Doogan/Mrs  King  Daughter of Senator Doogan
Senator Doogan
Master Boyle Local  teacher
Lizzy Sweeney Gar’s aunt
Con Sweeney Li]]y’s  husband
Ben Burton  Friend of the Sweeneys




Canon Mick  O’Byrne  The parish priest
There is an interval at the end of Episode I and at the end of Episode II.

9
Time:  the  present  in   the  small   village   of   Ballybeg   in  County
Donegal, Ireland.  The  action  takes place on  the night  before,  and
on the morning of,  Gar’s departure for Philadelphia.

When the curtain  rises  the only  part  of  the stage  that  is lit   is the
kitchen, i.e.  the  portion  on  the left  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
audience. It is  sparsely and comfortlessly  furnished  –  a bachelor’s
kitchen. There are two  doors; one left  which  leads to the shop, and
one upstage leading to  the scullery  (off). Beside the shop door  is  a
large deal table,  now set for  tea without  cloth and  with rough  cups
and saucers. Beside the  scullery  door is  an  old-fashioned  dresser.
On the scullery wall  is a large  school-type clock.
Stage right, now in  darkness, is Gar’s  bedroom. Both  bedroom and
kitchen should be moved upstage, leaving  a generous apron.  Gar’s
bedroom  is   furnished   with   a   single   bed,  a   wash-hand   basin
(crockery jug  and bowl),  a table  with a  record-player  and  records,
and a small chest of drawers.
These two areas – kitchen and  Gar’s bedroom –  occupy more  than
two-thirds of  the stage. The remaining portion  is fluid:   in Episode  I
for example, it represents a room in  Senator Doogan’s home.
The two  Gars, Public   Gar  and Private   Gar, are  two  views of  the
one man. Public Gar  is the Gar  that people  see, talk to, talk  about.
Private Gar  is the unseen man, the man within,  the  conscience, the
alter  ego, the  secret  thoughts,  the  id.  Private   Gar,  the spirit,   is
invisible  to  everybody,  always.  Nobody except  Public   Gar  hears
him talk.  But  even Public   Gar,  although  he  talks  to  Private  Gar
occasionally,  never sees him and  never looks  at  him.  One cannot
look at one’s alter ego.
                                                Music
Mendelssohn’s Violin Concerto  in E Minor,  Op. 64

10
Ceilidh music
‘All Round My Hat’ – First Verse.
‘She Moved through the Fair’ – Second Verse.
‘California, Here I Come!’
‘Give the Woman in the Bed more Porter’

11
                                             Episode    I

Kitchen  in  the  home of  County  Councillor   S.  B. O’Donnell    who
owns a general shop. As the  curtain  rises Madge, the  housekeeper,
enters from   the scullery   with   a  tray  in   her  hands  and  finishes
setting the table.  She is a woman in her  sixties. She walks as if  her
feet were precious. She pauses on her way past the shop door.

Madge  Gar! Your tea!

PuElic  (off) Right!

    She finishes setting the table and is about to go to the scullery door when
    Public Gar marches on stage. He is ecstatic with joy and excitement:
    tomorrow morning he leaves for Philadelphia.

Gar  (singing)
‘Philadelphia, here I come, right back where I started from …’
(Breaks off and catches Madge.) Come on, Madge! What about an old time
walt]!

Madge  Agh, will you leave me alone.

    He holds on to her and forces her to do a few steps as he sings in walt]
    time.

PuElic
‘Where bowers of flowers bloom in the spring’ –

Madge  (struggling) Stop it! Stop it! You brat you!

PuElic  Madge, you dance like an angel. (Suddenly lets her go and springs
away from her.) Oh, but you’d give a fella bad thoughts very Tuick!

Madge  And the smell of fish of you, you dirty thing!

    He grabs her again and puts his face up to hers, very confidentially.

PuElic  Will you miss me?

12
Madge   Let me on with my work!

PuElic   The truth!

Madge   Agh, will  you Tuit it, will  you?

PuElic   I’ll  tickle you till  you sTueal for mercy.

Madge   Please, Gar …

PuElic   (tickling her) Will  you miss me, I said?

Madge   I will  – I will  – I will  – I –

PuElic   That’s better. Now tell me: What time is it?

Madge   Agh, Gar –

PuElic   What time is it?

Madge   (looking at clock) Ten past seven.

PuElic   And what time do I knock off at?

Madge   At seven.

PuElic   Which means that on my last day with him he got ten minutes’
overtime out of my hide. (He releases Madge.) Instead of saying to me:
(grandly) ‘Gar, my son, since you are leaving me for ever, you may have
the entire day free,’ what does he do? Lines up five packs of flour and says:
(in flat dreary tones) ‘Make them up into two-pound pokes.’

Madge   He’s losing a treasure, indeed!

PuElic   So d’you know what I said to him? I Must drew myself up and
looked him straight in the eye and said to him: ‘Two-pound pokes it will be’
– Must like that.

Madge   That flattened him.

    She goes off to the scullery. He stands at the door and talks in to her.

PuElic   And that wasn’t it all. At si[  o’clock  he remembered about the
bloody pollock, and him in the middle of the Angelus. (Stands in imitation
of the Father: head bowed, hands on chest. In flat tones –) ‘Behold-the-

13
handmaid-of-the-Lord-Gut-and-salt-them-fish.’ So by God I lashed so
much salt on those bloody fish that any poor bugger that eats them will die
of thirst. But when the corpses are strewn all over Ballybeg, where will I
be? In the little old 8SA!  Yip-eeeeee! (He swings away from the scullery
door and does a few exuberant steps as he sings –) ‘Philadelphia, here I
come, rightah backah where Ah started from –’

    He goes into his bedroom, flings himself down on his bed, rests his head
    on  his   hands,  and  looks  at   the   ceiling.   Sings  alternate  lines   of
    ‘Philadelphia’  – first  half – with Private (off).

PuElic   It’s all over.

Private   (off, in echo-chamber voice) And it’s all about to begin. It’s all
over.

PuElic   And all about to begin.

Private   (now on) -ust think, Gar.

PuElic   Think …

Private   Think  … 8p in  that big bugger of a Met, with its snout pointing
straight for the States, and its tail belching smoke over Ireland; and you
sitting up at the front (Public acts this) with your competent fingers poised
over the controls; and then away down below in the Atlantic you see a
bloody bugger of an Irish boat out fishing for bloody pollock and –

    Public nose-dives, engines screaming, machine guns stuttering.

PuElic   Rat-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat.

Private   Abandon ship! Make for the life-boats! Send for Canon Mick
O’Byrne!

    Public gains altitude and nose-dives again.

PuElic   Rat-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat.

Private   To hell with  women and children! Say an Act of Contrition!

PuElic   Yip-eeeee! (He finishes taking off the shop coat, rolls it into a
bundle, and places it carefully on the floor.)

14
Private   It looks as if – I can’t see very well from the distance – but it
looks as if – yes! – yes! – the free is being taken by dashing Gar O’Donnell
(Public gets back from the coat, poises himself to kick it) pride of the
Ballybeg team. (in commentator’s hushed voice) O’Donnell is now moving
back, taking a slow, calculating look at the goal, I’ve never seen this boy in
the brilliant form he’s in today – absolute magic in his feet. He’s now in
position, running up, and –

    Public kicks the shop coat into the air.

PuElic   Ya-hoooo! (Sings and gyrates at same time.) ‘Philah-delph-yah,
heah Ah come, rightah backah weah Ah stahted from, boom-boom-boom-
boom –’

    He breaks off suddenly when Private addresses him in sombre tones of a
    judge.

Private   Gareth Mary O’Donnell.

    Public   Springs to  attention,  salutes,  and  holds this   absurd military
    stance. He is immediately inside his bedroom door, facing it.

PuElic   Sir.

Private   You are full conscious of all the conseTuences of your decision?

PuElic   Yessir.

Private   Of leaving the country of your birth, the land of the curlew and
the snipe, the Aran sweater and the Irish Sweepstakes?

PuElic   (with fitting  hesitation) I-I-I-I  have considered all these, Sir.

Private   Of going to a profane, irreligious, pagan country of gross
materialism?

PuElic   I am fully sensitive to this, Sir.

Private   Where the devil himself holds sway, and lust – abhorrent lust – is
everywhere indulged in shamelessly?

    Public winks extravagantly and nudges an imaginary man beside him.

15
PuElic   Who are you tellin’? (poker-stiff again) Shamelessly, Sir,
shamelessly.

    Madge has entered from  the scullery,  carrying  an  old suitcase and  a
    bundle of clothes.

Private   And yet you persist in e[posing yourself to these frightful
dangers?

PuElic   I would submit, Sir, that these stories are slightly e[aggerated, Sir.
For every door that opens –

    Madge opens the bedroom door.

Madge   Oh! You put the heart across me there! Get out of my road, will
you, and Tuit eeMiting about!

PuElic   Madge, you’re an aul duck.

Madge   Aye, so. There’s the case. And there’s a piece of rope for I see the
clasp’s all rusted. And there’s your shirts and your winter vests and your
heavy socks. And you’ll need to air them shirts before you – Don’t put them
smelly hands on them!

PuElic   Sorry!

Madge   See that they’re well aired before you put them on. He’s said
nothing since, I suppose?

PuElic   Not a word.

Private   The bugger.

Madge   But he hasn’t paid you your week’s wages?

PuElic   £3 15s – that’ll carry me far.

Madge   He’ll  have something to say then, you’ll see. And maybe he’ll slip
you a couple of e[tra pounds.

PuElic   Whether he says good-bye to me or not, or whether he slips me a
few miserable Tuid or not, it’s a matter of total indifference to me, Madge.

16
Madge   Aye, so. Your tea’s on the table – but that’s a matter of total
indifference to me.

PuElic   Give me time to wash, will you?

Madge   And another thing: Must because he doesn’t say much doesn’t mean
that he hasn’t feelings like the rest of us.

PuElic   Say much? He’s said nothing!

Madge   He said nothing either when your mother died. It must have been
near daybreak when he got to sleep last night. I could hear his bed creaking.

PuElic   Well to hell with him –

Madge   (leaving) Don’t come into your tea smelling like a lobster-pot.

PuElic   If he wants to speak to me he knows where to find me! But I’m
damned if I’m going to speak to him first!

    Madge goes off to the scullery.

(Calling after her.) And you can tell him I said that if you like!

Private   What the hell do you care about him. Screwballs! Skinflint!
Skittery Face! You’re free of him and his stinking bloody shop. And
tomorrow morning, boy, when that little ole plane gets up into the skies,
you’ll stick  your head out of the window (Public acts this) and spit down on
the lot of them!

    S. B. appears at the shop door. He is  in his late  sixties. Wears a hat, a
    good  dark  suit,  collar   and  tie,  black  apron.  S.  B.  O’Donnell   is  a
    responsible, respectable citi]en.

S.B.  Gar!

    Public reacts instinctively. Private keeps calm.

Private   Let the bugger call.

S.B.  (louder) Gar!

    Instinct is  stronger than reason: Public rushes to his door and opens it.
    But  as soon as he opens it  and looks out  at his  father  he assumes in

17
    speech and gesture a surly, taciturn gruffness. He always behaves in this
    way when he is in his father’s company.

PuElic   Aye?

S.B.  How many coils of barbed-wire came in on the mail-van this
evening?

PuElic   Two. Or was it three?

S.B.  That’s what I’m  asking you. It was you that carried them into the
yard.

PuElic   There were two – no, no, no, three – yes, three – or maybe it was
… was it two?

S.B.  Agh!

    S.B. retires to the shop. Public and Private come back into the bedroom.

Private   What sort of a stupid bugger are you? Think, man! You went out
and stood yarning to -oe the Post; then you carried one coil into the yard
and came out with the sack of spuds for the parochial; then you carried in
the second coil… and put it in the corner… and came out again to the van
… and …

    Public skips into the air.

Ah,  what  the   hell  odds!  That’s   his  headache, old  Nicodemus!   After
tomorrow a bloody roll  of barbed-wire will  be a mere bagatelle to you. (in
cowboy accent) Yeah, man. You see tham thar plains stretchin’s far th’eye
can see, man? Well, tham thar plains belongs to Garry the Kid. An’  Garry
the Kid  he don’t go  in for  none of your  fancy fencin’.  No  siree. (His eye
lights on the fresh laundry Madge brought in.) And what’ll you wear on the
plane tomorrow, old rooster, eh?

    Public picks up a clean shirt, holds it to his chest, and surveys himself in
    the small mirror above his wash-hand basin.

Pretty smart, eh?

PuElic   Pretty smart.

18
Private   Pretty sharp?

PuElic   Pretty sharp.

Private   Pretty ou-la-la?

PuElic   Mais oui.

Private   And not a bad looker, if I may say so.

PuElic   You may. You may.

Private   (in heavy 8S accent) I’m Patrick Palinakis, president of the
biggest chain of biggest hotels in the world. We’re glad to have you, Mr
O’Donnell.

PuElic   (sweet, demure) And I’m glad to be here, Sir.

Private   Handsomely said, young man. I hope you’ll be happy with us and
work hard and one day maybe you’ll be president of the biggest chain of
biggest hotels in the world.

PuElic   That’s my ambition, sir.

Private   You are twenty-five years of age, Mr O’Donnell?

PuElic   Correct.

Private   And you spent one year at 8niversity College Dublin?

PuElic   Yes, Sir.

Private   Would you care to tell me why you abandoned your academic
career, Mr O’Donnell?

PuElic   (with disarming simplicity) Well,  Must before I sat my First Arts
e[am, Sir, I did an old Irish turas, or pilgrimage, where I spent several
nights in devout prayer, Sir.

Private   St Patrick’s Pilgrimage – on Lough –?

PuElic   St Harold’s Cross, Sir. And it was there that I came to reali]e that a
life of scholarship was not for me. So I returned to my father’s business.

19
Private   Yeah. You mentioned that your father was a businessman. What’s
his line?

PuElic   Well, Sir, he has – what you would call – his finger in many pies –
retail mostly – general dry goods – assorted patent drugs – hardware – ah –
ah – dehydrated fish – men’s king-si]e hose – snuffs from the e[otic East …
of Donegal – a confection for gourmets, known as Peggy’s Leg – weedkiller
– (Suddenly breaking off: in his normal accent: rolling on the bed.)
Yahoooooo! It is now si[teen or seventeen years since I saw the 4ueen of
France, then the Dauphiness, at 9ersailles –

Private   Let’s git packin’,  boy. Let’s git that li’l  ole saddle bag opened and
let’s git packin’. But first let’s  have a li’l ole music on the li’l ole
phonograph. Yeah man. You bet. Ah reckon. Yessir.

    Public puts a record on the player: first movement, Mendelssohn’s Violin
    Concerto. Public is  preening himself before his performance, and while
    he is flexing his fingers and adjusting his  bow-tie, Private announces in
    the reverential tones of a radio announcer.

The main  item  in  tonight’s  concert is  the first   movement of  the  9iolin
Concerto in E  minor, opus 64, by  -acob Ludwig  Feli[   Mendelssohn. The
orchestra is conducted by Gareth O’Donnell and the soloist is the Ballybeg
half-back, Gareth O’Donnell. Music critics  throughout the world claim that
O’Donnell’s  simultaneous wielding of baton and bow  is the greatest thing
since Leather Ass died. Mendelssohn’s 9iolin Concerto, third movement.

    Private sits demurely on the chair. Public clears  his throat. Now Public
    plays the violin, conducts, plays the violin, conducts, etc. etc. This keeps
    up for some time. Then Private rises from his chair.

Agh, come on, come on, come on! Less aul foolin’. To work, old rooster, to
work.

    Public  stops. Turns player down low and  changes from the first  to the
    second movement. Takes a look at the case Madge brought in.

Ah,  hell,  how  can  any bloody  bugger  head into   a Met plane with  aul’
cardboard rubbish like that!

20
    Public examines the surface.

Damnit, maybe you could give it a lick of paint! Or wash it!

    Public spits on the lid and rubs it with his finger.

God, you’ll  rub a hole in  the damn thing if  you’re  not careful! Maybe  aul
Screwballs’ll slip you a fiver tonight and you can get a new one in Dublin.

PuElic   What a hope! (He opens the case and sniffs the inside.)

Private   Oh! Stinks of cat’s pee!

    Public lifts  out a sheet of faded newspaper.

PuElic   (reads) The Clarion – 1st -anuary 1937.

Private   Precious medieval manuscript … my God, was it? … By God it
was – the day they were married – and it (the case) hasn’t been opened
since their honeymoon … she and old Screwballs off on a side-car to
Bundoran for three days …

PuElic   O God, the Creator and Redeemer of all the faithful, give to the
soul of Maire, my mother, the remission of all her sins, that she may obtain
…

Private   She was small, Madge says, and wild, and young, Madge says,
from a place called Bailtefree beyond the mountains; and her eyes were
bright, and her hair was loose, and she carried her shoes under her arm until
she came to the edge of the village, Madge says, and then she put them on
…

PuElic   Eternal rest grant unto her, O Lord, and let perpetual light shine …

Private   She was nineteen and he was forty, and he owned a shop, and he
wore a soft hat, and she thought he was the grandest gentleman that ever
lived, Madge says; and he – he couldn’t take his eyes off her, Madge says
…

PuElic   O God, O God the Creator and Redeemer…

Private   And sometimes in that first year, when she was pregnant with you,
laddybuck, the other young girls from Bailtefree would call in here to dress

21
up on their way to a dance, Madge says, and her face would light up too,
Madge says …

    Public puts the newspaper carefully inside the folds of a shirt.

… And he must have known, old Screwballs, he must have known, Madge
says, for many a night he must have heard her crying herself to sleep … and
maybe it was good of God to take her away three days after you were born
… (suddenly boisterous) Damn you, anyhow, for a bloody stupid bastard! It
is now si[teen or seventeen years since I saw the 4ueen of France, then the
Dauphiness, at 9ersailles! And to hell with that bloody mushy fiddler!

    Public  goes Tuickly to  the record-player  and sings boisterously  as he
    goes.

PuElic
‘Philadelphia, here I come –’

Private   Watch yourself, nut-head. If you let yourself slip that way, you
might find that –

PuElic
‘– right back where I started from.’

    Public has taken off the Mendelssohn and is now searching for another.

Private   Something lively!  Something bloody animal! A bit of aul
thumpety-thump!

    Public puts on the record.

An’  you Mist keep atalkin’ to you’self  all  the time, Mistah,  ’cos once you
stop atalkin’ to you’self  ah reckon then you Mist begin to think kinda cra]y
things –

    The record begins – Any lively piece of ceilidh Band music.

Ahhhhh!

PuElic   Yipeeeeeeeee! (Public dances up and down the length of his
bedroom. Occasionally he leaps high into the air or does a neat bit of foot-

22
work. Occasionally he lilts. Occasionally he talks to different people he
meets on the dance floor.)
Righ-too-del-loo-del-oo-del-oo-del-oo-del-oo-del-ah,     Rum-ta-del-ah-del-
ah-del-ah-del-ah-del-ah-del-agh. Hell of a crowd  here the night, eh? Yah-
ho! Man, you’re looking powerful!  Great!

    Private sits on the chair  and watches. When he speaks his voice is soft.
    Public pretends not to hear him.

Private   Remember – that was Katie’s tune. You needn’t pretend you have
forgotten. And it reminds you of the night the two of you made all the
plans, and you thought your heart would burst with happiness.

PuElic   (louder) Tigh-righ-tigh-righ-scal-del-de-da-del-ah, come on! A
dirty big swing! Yaaaaaaaaaaah!

Private   (Tuietly, rapidly insisting) Are  you going to take her photograph
to the States with you? When are you going to say good-bye to her? Will
you write to her? Will you send her cards and photographs? You loved her
once, old rooster; you wanted so much to marry her that it was a bloody
sickness. Tell me, randy boy; tell me the truth: have you got over that
sickness? Do you still love her? Do you still lust after her? Well, do you?
Do you? Do you?

PuElic   Bugger! (Public suddenly stops dancing, switches – almost knocks
– off the record-player, pulls a wallet out of his hip pocket and produces a
snap. He sits and looks at it.)

Private   Shhhhhhhhhhhhh …

PuElic   (softly) Kate … sweet Katie Doogan … my darling Kathy Doogan
…

Private   (in same soft tone) Aul bitch, (loudly) Rotten aul snobby bitch!
-ust like her stinking rotten father and mother – a bugger and a buggeress –
a buggeroo and a buggerette!!

PuElic   No, no; my fault – all my fault –

Private   (remembering and recalling tauntingly) By God, that was a night,
boy, eh? By God, you made a right bloody cow’s ass of yourself.

23
    Public goes off right.

Remember – when was it? –  ten months ago? – you  had Must come back
from a  walk out  the Mill   Road, and the pair  of you  had the whole  thing
planned: engaged at Christmas, married at Easter, and fourteen of a family –
seven boys and seven girls. Cripes, you make me laugh! You bloody-well
make me die laughing. You were going to ‘develop’ the hardware lines and
she was going to take charge of the ‘drapery’! The drapery! The fishy socks
and the shoebo[ of cotton spools and rusted needles! And you – you were
to  ask  Screwballs  for   a   rise  in   pay  –   ‘in   view   of   your  increased
responsibilities’! And you were so far gone that night, Laddybuck –

    Public and Kate enter from the left and walk very slowly across the front
    of the stage. They stop and kiss. Then they move on again.

– So bloody-well astray in the head with  ‘love’  that you went and blabbed
about your secret egg deals that nobody knew anything  about – not  even
Madge! Stupid bloody  get! O  my  God, how you  stick yourself  I’ll   never
know!

PuElic   Kate – Kathy – I’m mad about you! I’ll  never last till Easter! I’ll  –
I’ll  – I’ll  bloody-well  burst! (He catches her again and kisses her.)

Private   Steady, boy, steady. You know what the Canon says: long
passionate kisses in lonely places …

PuElic   Our daughters’ll all be gentle and frail and silly, like you; and our
sons – they’ll be thick bloody louts, se[y goats, like me, and by God I’ll
beat the tar out of them!

Kate   But £3 15s Gar! We could never live on that.

PuElic   (kissing her hair) Mmmm.

Kate   Gar! Listen! Be sensible.

PuElic   Mmm?

Kate   How will  we live?

Private   (imitating)  ‘How  will  we live?’

24
PuElic   Like lords – free house, free light, free fuel, free groceries! And
every night at seven when we close – e[cept Saturday; he stays open till
damn near midnight on Saturdays, making out bloody bills; and sure God
and the world knows that sending out bills here is as hopeless as peeing
against the wind –

Kate   Gar! No matter what you say we Must couldn’t live on that much
money. It – it’s not possible. We’ll need to have more security than that.

PuElic   Maybe he’ll die – tonight – of galloping consumption!

Kate   Gar …

PuElic   What’s troubling you?

    He tries to kiss her again and she avoids him.

Kate   Please. This is serious.

Private   ‘Please. This is serious.’

PuElic   (irritably)  What is it?

Kate   You’ll  have to see about getting more money.

PuElic   Of course I’ll see about getting more money! Haven’t I told you
I’m going to ask for a rise?

Kate   But will  he –?

PuElic   I’ll  get it; don’t you worry;  I’ll  get it. Besides (with dignity) I have
a – a-a source of income that he knows nothing about – that nobody knows
nothing about – knows anything about.

Kate   (with joy) Investments? Like Daddy?

PuElic   Well … sort of … (Tuickly) You know when I go round the country
every Tuesday and Thursday in the lorry?

Kate   Yes?

PuElic   Well, I buy eggs direct from the farms and sell them privately to
McLaughlin’s Hotel – (winks) – for a handsome profit – (Tuickly) – but he
knows nothing about it.

25
Kate   And how much do you make?

PuElic   It varies – depending on the time of year.

Kate   Roughly.

PuElic   Oh, anything from 12s 6d to £1.

Kate   Every Tuesday and Thursday?

PuElic   Every month. (Grabs her again.) God, Kate, I can’t even wait till
Christmas!

Kate   Shhhhh.

PuElic   But I can’t. We’ll  have to get married sooner – ne[t month – ne[t
week –

Private   Steady, steady …

PuElic   Kate … my sweet Katie … my darling Kathy …

    They kiss. Suddenly Kate breaks off. Her voice is urgent.

Kate   We’ll  go now, rightaway, and tell them.

PuElic   Who?

Kate   Mammy and Daddy. They’re at home tonight. (She catches his arm
and pulls him towards the left.) Come on. 4uickly. Now, Gar, now.

PuElic   (adjusting his tie) God, Kathy, I’m in no – look at the shoes – the
trousers –

Kate   What matter. It must be now, Gar, now!

PuElic   What – what – what’ll I say?

Kate   That you want their permission to marry me ne[t week.

PuElic   God, they’ll wipe the bloody floor  with me!

Kate   Gar!

    She kisses him passionately, Tuickly,  then breaks off  and goes.  Stage
    right,  now lit. A room in Doogan’s house.

26
PuElic   God, my legs are trembling! Kathy …

Kate   Anybody at home? Mammy! Daddy!

    Public hesitates before entering Doogan’s house. Private is at his elbow,
    prompting him desperately.

Private   Mr  Doogan … Senator Doogan – I want to ask your permission
… O my God! …

Kate   Yo-ho!

Private   Mrs Doogan, Kate and I have to get married rightaway – Cripes,
no! –

Kate   Where is everybody! Yo-ho-yo-ho!

Private   If  the boys could see you now!

    Kate comes back to him, gives him a Tuick kiss on the cheek.

Kate   Don’t look  so miserable. Here … (Fixes his tie.)

PuElic   Kathy, maybe we should wait until – until – until ne[t Sunday –

Kate   (earnestly) Remember, it’s up to you, entirely up to you.

Doogan  (off)  That you, Kate?

Kate   (rapidly)  You have £20 a week and £5,000 in the bank and your
father’s about to retire. (Turning and smiling at Doogan who has now
entered.) -ust Gar and I, Daddy.

    Doogan, lawyer, senator, middle forties.

Doogan  Hello,  Gareth. You’re a stranger.

Private   Speak, you dummy you!

Kate   (filling  in) Where’s Mammy?

Doogan  She’s watching T9. (to Gar) And  how are things with you,
Gareth?

PuElic   Mr Doogan, I want –

27
Private   Go on.

PuElic   I won’t be staying long.

Doogan  (to Kate) Francis arrived when you were out. Took a few days off
and decided to come north.

Private   Cripes!

Kate   He – he’s – he’s here – now?

Doogan  Inside with  your mother. Ask them to Moin us, will you?

    Kate gives Public a last significant look.

Kate   You talk to Daddy, Gar.

Private   God, I will,  I will.

    Kate goes off right.

Doogan  You’ve  met Francis King, haven’t you, Gareth?

PuElic   Yes – yes –

Private   King  of the bloody fairies!

Doogan  We don’t want to raise Kate’s hopes unduly, but strictly between
ourselves there’s a good chance that he’ll get the new dispensary Mob here.

PuElic   Kate’s hopes?

Doogan  Didn’t  she tell you? No, I can see she didn’t. Of course there’s
nothing official yet; not even what you might call an understanding. But if
this post does fall into his lap, well, her mother and I … let’s say we’re
living in hope. A fine boy, Francis; and we’ve known the Kings, oh, since
away back. As a matter of fact his father and I were class-fellows at school
…

    Doogan  goes on  and  on.  We  catch an  occasional  word.  Meantime
    Private has moved up to Public’s elbow.

Private   Cripes, man!

28
Doogan  …  and then later at university when he did medicine and I did
law, we knocked about Tuite a bit …

Private   O God, the aul bitch! Cripes, you look a right fool standing there
– the father of fourteen children! – Get out, you eeMit you! Get out! Get out
Tuick before the others come in and die laughing at you! And all the time
she must have known – the aul bitch! – And you promised to give her
breakfast in bed every morning! And you told her about the egg money!

Doogan  …  your father, Gareth?

Private   He’s talking to you, thick-skull.

PuElic   What – what – what’s that?

Doogan  Your father – how is he?

PuElic   Oh he – he – he’s grand, thanks.

Private   Get out! Get out!

PuElic   Look Mr Doogan, if  you’ll e[cuse me, I think I’d  better move on –

Doogan  Aren’t  you waiting for supper? The others will be along in a
moment for –

PuElic   No, I must run. I’ve got to make up half-a-hundredweight of sugar
bags.

Private   Brilliant!

PuElic   Say good-bye to –

Doogan  Certainly  – certainly. Oh, Gareth –

    Public pauses.

(awkwardly,  with   sincerity)  Kate   is  our   only  child,   Gareth,  and  her
happiness is all that is important to us –

Private   (sings)
‘Give the woman in the bed more porter –’

29
Doogan  What I’m  trying to say is that any decision she makes will be her
own –

Private
‘– Give the man beside her water,
Give the woman in the bed more porter –’

Doogan  -ust in  case you should think that her mother or I were … in case
you might have the idea …

PuElic   (rapidly) Good night, Mr  Doogan. (Public rushes off.)

Doogan  Good-bye … Gareth.

    Doogan stands lighting his pipe. Kate enters down right of  Doogan and
    sees that Gar is no longer there.

Kate   Where’s Gar?

Doogan  He didn’t  seem an[ious to stay.

Kate   But didn’t  he – did he –?

Doogan  No, he didn’t.

    He crosses Kate to exit down right as light fades to blackout.
         Black  out  Doogan’s room.  Public  and  Private  move  back  to  the
    bedroom  where Public   is  putting  away  the  photograph  and  begins
    washing.

Private   (wearily)  Mrs Doctor Francis King. September 8th. In harvest
sunshine. Red carpet and white lilies and Sean Horgan singing ‘Bless This
House’ – and him whipped off to Sligo Mail two days later for stealing turf.
Honeymoon in Mallorca and you couldn’t have afforded to take her to
Malahide. By God, Gar, aul sod, it was a sore hoke on the aul prestige, eh?
Between ourselves, aul son, in the privacy of the bedroom, between you and
me and the wall, as the fella says, has it left a deep scar on the aul skitter of
a soul, eh? What I mean to say like, you took it sort of bad, between you
and me and the wall, as the fella says –

PuElic   (sings)
‘Philadelphia, here I come, right back –’

30
Private   But then there’s more fish in the sea, as the fella says, and they’re
all the same when they’re upside down; and between you and me and the
wall, the first thing you would have had to do would have been to give the
boot to Daddy Senator. And I’m thinking, Gar, aul rooster, that wouldn’t
have made you his pet son-in-law. Mister Fair-play Lawyer Senator Doogan
– ‘her happiness is all that is important to us’! You know, of course, that he
carries one of those wee black cards in the inside pocket of his Macket,
privately printed for him: ‘I  am a Catholic. In case of accident send for a
bishop.’ And you know, too, that in his spare time he travels for maternity
corsets; and that he’s a double spy for the Knights and the Masons; and that
he takes pornographic photographs of Mrs D, and sends them anonymously
to reverend mothers. And when you think of a bugger like that, you want to
get down on your knees and thank God for aul Screwballs. (Imitating his
father’s slow speech.) So you’re going to America in the morning, son?

    Public  carries on with  his washing and  dressing and at the  same time
    does this dialogue.

PuElic   Yes, Father.

Private   Nothing like  it to broaden the mind. Man, how I’d love to travel.
But there’s some it doesn’t agree with – like me, there.

PuElic   In what way, Father?

Private   The bowels, son. Let me move an inch from the house here – and
they stall.

PuElic   No!

Private   Like  the time I went to Lough Derg, away back in ’35. Not a
budge. The bare feet were nothing to the agonies I went through. I was
bound up for two full weeks afterwards.

PuElic   It taught you a lesson.

Private   Didn’t  it Must? Now I wouldn’t even think of travelling.

PuElic   Anchored by the ass.

Private   Bound by the bowels.

31
PuElic   Tethered by the toilet. Tragic. (Public has now finished dressing.
He surveys himself in the mirror.)

Private   Not bad. Not bad at all. And well preserved for a father of
fourteen children.

PuElic   (in absurd Hollywood style) Hi, gorgeous! You live in my block?

Private   (matching the accent) Yeah, big handsome boy. Sure do. PuElic
Mind if  I walk you past the incinerator, to the elevator?

Private   You’re welcome, slick operator.

    Public is facing  the door of his bedroom. Madge enters the kitchen from
    the scullery.

PuElic   What’ya say, li’l chick, you and me – you know – I’ll  spell it out
for ya ifya like. (Winks, and clicks his tongue.)

Private   You say the cutest things, big handsome boy!

PuElic   A malted milk at the corner drug-store?

Private   Wow!

PuElic   A movie at the downtown drive-in?

Private   Wow-wow!

PuElic   Two hamburgers, two cokes, two slices of blueberry pie?

Private   Wow-wow-wow.

PuElic   And then in my apartment –

    Madge enters the bedroom.

Madge   Gee, Mary, and -ay! Will you Tuit them antics!

PuElic   Well, you should knock anyway before you enter a man’s room!

Madge   Man! I bathed you every Saturday night till you were a big lout of
fourteen! Your tea’s cold waiting.

    She moves towards door.

32
         She goes into the kitchen. Public and Private follow her.

PuElic   How was I to know that?

Madge   Amn’t I  hoarse calling you? Dear, but you’re in for a cooling when
you go across! (As she passes through the shop door on way to scullery:)
Boss!

Private   (in imitation)  ‘Boss!’

    She pauses at the scullery door. With shy delight:

Madge   I forgot to tell you. Nelly  had a wee baby this morning.

PuElic   Go on!

Madge   A wee girl. Seven pounds four ounces.

PuElic   How many’s that you have now?

Madge   Four grandnieces and three grandnephews. (Pause.) And they’re
going to call this one Madge – at least so she says.

PuElic   I’ll  send it a–a–a–an elephant out of my first wages! An elephant
for wee Madge!

Madge   I had a feeling it would be a wee girl this time. Maybe I’ll take a
run over on Sunday and sTuare the place up for her. She could do with some
help, with seven of them.

PuElic   You’re a brick, Madge.

Madge   Aye, so. (As she goes to scullery:) Wee Madge, maybe …

    Public sits at the table. Private leans against the wall beside him.

Private   And now what are you sad about? -ust because she lives for those
Mulhern children, and gives them whatever few half-pence she has?
Madge, Madge, I think I love you more than any of them. Give me a piece
of your courage, Madge.

    S.B. enters from the shop and goes through his nightly routine. He hangs
    up the shop keys. He looks at his pocket watch and checks its time with
    the clock on the wall. He takes off his apron, folds it carefully, and leaves

33
    it  on the back of his  chair. Then he  sits down to  eat. During  all  these
    ponderous jobs Private keeps up the following chatter:

And  here comes your  pleasure, your  little   ray of   sunshine. Ladies and
Gentlemen, I give you – the one and only – the inimitable – the irrepressible
– the  irresistible –  County  Councillor  –  S –  B  – O’Donnell!   (Trumpet–
hummed–fanfare. Continues   in   the   smooth,  unctuous   tones   of   the
commentator at  a  manneTuin parade.) And   this  time  Marie  Celeste is
wearing a cheeky little  head-dress by Pamela of Park  Avenue, eminently
suitable for cocktail parties, morning coffee, or Must casual shopping. It is of
brown  9iennese  felt,   and  contrasts  boldly   with   the   attractive  beach
ensemble, created by Simon.  The pert  little  apron  is detachable –  (S.B.
removes apron) – thank you, Marie Celeste – and underneath we have the
tapered Italian-line slacks in ocelot. I would draw your attention to the large
collar stud which  is highly  decorative and can be purchased separately at
our boutiTue. We call this seductive outfit ‘Indiscretion’. It  can be worn si[
days a week, in or out of bed. (in polite tone) Have a seat Screwballs.

    S.B. sits down at the table.

Thank you. Remove the hat.

    S.B. takes off the hat to say grace. He blesses himself.

On again (hat on.)

Perfectly trained;  the most obedient father  I  ever had. And  now  for  our
nightly lesson in the English language. Repeat slowly after me: Another day
over.

S.B.  Another day over.

Private   Good. Ne[t  phrase. I suppose we can’t complain.

S.B.  I suppose we can’t complain.

Private   Not bad. Now for a little  free conversation. But no obscenities,
Father dear; the child is only twenty-five.

    S.B. eats in silence. Pause.

34
Well, come on, come on! Where’s that old rapier wit  of yours, the toast of
the Ballybeg coffee houses?

S.B.  Did  you set the rat-trap in the store?

PuElic   Aye.

Private   (hysterically)  Isn’t he a riot! Oh my God, that father of yours Must
kills me! But wait – wait – shhh-shhh –

S.B.  I didn’t  find as many about the year.

Private   Oooooh God! Priceless! Beautiful! Delightful!  ‘I  didn’t find as
many about the year!’ Did you ever hear the beat of that? Wonderful! But
isn’t he in form tonight? But isn’t he? You know, it’s not every night that
Mewels like that, pearls of wisdom on rodent reproduction, drop from those
lips! But hold it – hold it  –!

    S.B. takes out  a  handkerchief, removes his  teeth, wraps  them  in  the
    handkerchief, and puts them in his pocket.
         Private exhales with satisfaction.

Private   Ah!  That’s what we were waiting for; complete informality; total
rela[ation between intimates. Now we can carry on. Screwballs. (Pause.)
I’m addressing you, Screwballs.

    S.B. clears his throat.

Thank you. (As the following speech goes on all trace of humour fades from
Private’s voice. He becomes more and more intense and it is with an effort
that he keeps his voice under control.) Screwballs, we’ve eaten together like
this for the past twenty-odd years, and never once in all that time have you
made as much as one unpredictable remark. Now, even though you refuse
to acknowledge the fact, Screwballs, I’m leaving you for ever. I’m going to
Philadelphia,  to  work   in   an  hotel.   And  you   know   why  I’m    going,
Screwballs, don’t you.  Because I’m twenty-five,  and you  treat me as if  I
were five   –  I   can’t  order  even  a  do]en   loaves without   getting  your
permission. Because you pay me less than you pay Madge. But worse, far
worse than that Screwballs, because – we embarrass one another. If one of
us were to say, ‘You’re looking tired’ or ‘That’s  a bad cough you have’, the

35
other would  fall   over  backways with   embarrassment. So tonight  d’you
know what I want you to do? I want you to make one unpredictable remark,
and even though I’ll   still   be on  that plane  tomorrow  morning, I’ll   have
doubts: Maybe I should have stuck it  out;  maybe the old codger did have
feelings; maybe I have maligned the old  bastard. So now, Screwballs, say
… (Thinks.) … ‘Once upon a time a rainbow ended in our garden’ … say, ‘I
like to  walk across the White Strand when there’s a misty rain  falling’  …
say, ‘Gar, son –’ say, ‘Gar, you bugger you, why don’t you stick it out here
with me for it’s not such a bad aul bugger of a place.’ Go on. Say it! Say it!
Say it!

S.B.  True enough …

PuElic   (almost inaudibly) Aye?

S.B.  I didn’t  find as many about the year.

PuElic   (roars) Madge! Madge!

S.B.  No need to roar like that.

PuElic   The – the – the – bread’s done. We need more bread.

S.B.  You know where it’s kept, don’t you?

    Madge at scullery door.

PuElic   Can we have more bread, Madge … please …

Madge   Huh! Pity you lost the power of your legs.

PuElic   I’ll  – I’ll  get it myself – it doesn’t matter …

    Madge comes over to the table and takes the plate from Public. She gives
    S.B. a hard look.

Madge   (irony) The chatting in this place would deafen a body. Won’t the
house be Tuiet soon enough – long enough? (She shuffles off with the plate.)

Private   Tick-tock-tick-tock-tick-tock.   It is now si[teen or seventeen years
since I saw the 4ueen of France, then the Dauphiness, at 9ersailles … Go
on! What’s the ne[t line?

36
    S.B. produces a roll of money from his pocket and puts it on the table.

S.B.  I suppose you’ll be looking for your pay.

PuElic   I earned it.

S.B.  I’m  not saying you didn’t. It’s all there – you needn’t count it.

PuElic   I didn’t say I was going to count it, did I?

Private   Tick-tock-tick-tock-tick-tock   –

PuElic   More tea?

S.B.  Sure you know I never take a second cup.

Private   (imitating)  ‘Sure you know I never take a second cup.’ (brittle and
bright again) Okay, okay, okay, it’s better this way, Screwballs, isn’t it? You
can’t teach new tricks to two old dogs like us. In the meantime there’s a
little matter I’d like  to discuss with you, Screwballs … (with exaggerated
embarrassment) it’s – it’s nothing really … it’s Must something I’m rather
hesitant to bring up, but I’m advised by the very best Church authorities
that you’ll be only too glad to discuss it with your son. Admittedly we’re
both a bit late in attacking the issue now, but – ha – you see –

    Madge enters with a plate of bread. Private makes a very obvious show
    of changing the subject.

Oh marvellous weather – truly wonderful for  the time of year – a real heat
wave – all things considered –

Madge   A body couldn’t get a word in edgeways with you two!

Private   Madge has such a keen sense of humour, don’t you agree? I love
people with a sense of humour, don’t you? It’s the first thing I look for in a
person. I sei]e them by the throat and say to them, ‘Have you a sense of
humour?’ And then, if they have, I feel – I feel at home with them
immediately … But where was I? Oh, yes – our little talk – I’m beginning
to wonder, Screwballs – I suspect – I’m afraid – (in a rush, ashamed) – I
think I’m  a se[-maniac! (Throws his hands up.) Please, please don’t cry,
Screwballs; please don’t say anything; and above all please don’t stop
eating. -ust – Must let me talk a bit more – let me communicate with

37
someone – that’s what they all advise – communicate – pour out your pent-
up feelings into a sympathetic ear. So all I ask for the moment is that you
listen – Must listen to me. As I said, I suspect that I’m an s-m. (rapidly, in
self-defence) But I’m not the only one, Screwballs; oh indeed I am not the
only one, Screwballs; oh indeed I am not; and all the boys around – some of
them are far worse than I am. (As if he had been asked the Tuestion.) Why?
Why do I think we’re all s-m’s? Well, because none of us is married.
Because we’re never done boasting about the number of hot courts we
know – and the point is we’re all virgins. Because –

    Voices off.

Shhhh! Someone’s coming.  Not  a word  to  anybody. This  is  our  secret.
Scouts’ honour.

    Enter Master  Boyle from the scullery. He  is around sixty, white-haired,
    handsome, defiant. He is shabbily dressed; his eyes, head, hands, arms
    are constantly moving – he sits for a moment and rises again –  he puts
    his hands in his pocket and takes them out again – his eyes roam around
    the room but see nothing. S.B. is barely courteous to him.

S.B.  Oh, good night, Master Boyle. How are you doing?

PuElic   Master.

Boyle   Sean. Gar. No, no, don’t stir. I only dropped in for a second.

PuElic   Sit over and Moin us.

Boyle   No. I’m not stopping.

S.B.  Here’s a seat for you. I was about to go out to the shop anyway to
sTuare up a bit.

Boyle   Don’t let me hold you back.

S.B.  I’ll   be in again before you leave, Master.

Boyle   If you have work to do …

Private   (to S.B.) Ignorant bastard! (Looking at Boyle.) On his way to the
pub! God, but he’s a sorry wreck too, arrogant and pathetic. And yet

38
whatever it is about you …

Boyle   Tomorrow morning, isn’t it?

PuElic   4uarter past seven. I’m getting the mail van the length of Strabane.

Boyle   You’re doing the right thing, of course. You’ll never regret it. I
gather it’s a vast restless place that doesn’t give a curse about the past; and
that’s the way things should be. Impermanence and anonymity – it offers
great attractions. You’ve heard about the latest to-do?

PuElic   Another row with the Canon? I really hadn’t heard –

Boyle   But the point is he can’t sack me! The organi]ation’s behind me and
he can’t budge me. Still, it’s a … a bitter victory to hold on to a Mob when
your manager wants rid of you.

PuElic   Sure everybody knows the kind of the Canon, Master.

Boyle   I didn’t tell  you, did I, that I may be going out there myself?

Private   Poor bastard.

Boyle   I’ve been offered a big post in Boston, head of education in a
reputable university there. They’ve given me three months to think it over.
What are you going to do?

PuElic   Work in an hotel.

Boyle   You have a Mob waiting for you?

PuElic   In Philadelphia.

Boyle   You’ll do all right.  You’re young and strong and of average
intelligence.

Private   Good old Boyle. Get the dig in.

Boyle   Yes, it was as ugly and as sTualid as all the other to-dos – before the
whole school – the priest and the teacher – dedicated moulders of the mind.
You’re going to stay with friends?

PuElic   With Aunt Li]]y.

39
Boyle   Of course.

Private   Go on. Try him.

PuElic   You knew her, didn’t you, Master?

Boyle   Yes, I knew all the Gallagher girls: Li]]y,  8na, Rose, Agnes …

Private   And Maire,  my mother, did you love her?

Boyle   A long, long time ago … in the past … He comes in to see your
father every night, doesn’t he?

PuElic   The Canon? Oh, it’s usually much later than this –

Boyle   I think so much about him that – ha – I feel a peculiar attachment
for him. Funny, isn’t it? Do you remember the Christmas you sent me the
packet of cigarettes? And the day you brought me a pot of Mam to the digs?
It was you, wasn’t it?

Private   Poor Boyle –

Boyle   All children are born with generosity. Three months they gave me to
make up my mind.

PuElic   I remember very well –

Boyle   By the way – (producing a small book) a – little something to
remind you of your old teacher – my poems –

PuElic   Thank you very much.

Boyle   I had them printed privately last month. Some of them are a bit
mawkish but you’ll not notice any distinction.

PuElic   I’m very grateful, Master.

Boyle   I’m not going to give you advice, Gar. Is that clock right? Not that
you would heed it even if I did; you were always obstinate –

Private   Tch, tch.

Boyle   But I would suggest that you strike out on your own as soon as you
find your feet out there. Don’t keep looking back over your shoulder. Be

40
one hundred per cent American.

PuElic   I’ll  do that.

Boyle   There’s an inscription on the fly-leaf. By the way, Gar, you couldn’t
lend me ten shillings until – ha – I was going to say until ne[t week but
you’ll be gone by then.

PuElic   Surely, surely.

Boyle   I seem to have come out without my wallet …

Private   Give him a Tuid.

    Public gives over a note. Boyle does not look at it.

Boyle   Fine. I’ll  move on now. Yes, I knew all the Gallagher girls from
Bailtefree, long, long ago. Maire and 8na and Rose and Li]]y and Agnes
and Maire, your mother …

Private   You might have been my father.

Boyle   Oh, another thing I meant to ask you: should you come across any
newspapers or maga]ines over there that might be interested in an
occasional poem, perhaps you would send me some addresses –

PuElic   I’ll  keep an eye out.

Boyle   Not that I write as much as I should. You know how you get caught
up in things. But you have your packing to do, and I’m talking too much as
usual.

    He  holds  out his  hand  and  they  shake hands. He  does  not  release
    Public’s hand.

Good luck, Gareth.

PuElic   Thanks, Master.

Boyle   Forget Ballybeg and Ireland.

PuElic   It’s easier said.

Boyle   Perhaps you’ll write me.

41
PuElic   I will  indeed.

Boyle   Yes, the first year. Maybe the second. I’ll – I’ll miss you, Gar.

Private   For God’s sake get a grip on yourself.

PuElic   Thanks for the book and for –

    Boyle embraces Public briefly.

Private   Stop it! Stop it!  Stop it!

    Boyle breaks away and goes Tuickly off through the scullery. He bumps
    into Madge who is entering.

Madge   Lord, the speed of him! His tongue out for a drink!

Private   4uick!  Into  your room!

Madge   God knows I don’t blame the Canon for wanting rid of that –

    Public rushes to the bedroom. Private follows.

Well! The manners about this place!

    She gathers up the tea things. Public stands inside the bedroom door, his
    hands up to his face. Private stands at his elbow, speaking urgently into
    his ear.

Private   Remember – you’re going! At 7.15. You’re still going!  He’s
nothing but a drunken aul schoolmaster – a conceited, arrogant wash-out!

PuElic   O God, the Creator and Redeemer of all the faithful –

Private   Get a grip on yourself! Don’t be a damned sentimental fool!
(Sings.)
‘Philadelphia, here I come –’

PuElic   Maire and 8na and Rose and Agnes and Li]]y and Maire –

Private   Yessir, you’re going to cut a bit of a dash in them thar States!
Great big se[y dames and night clubs and high living and films and dances
and –

PuElic   Kathy, my own darling Kathy –

42
Private   (sings)
‘Where bowers of flowers bloom in the spring –’

PuElic   I don’t – I can’t.

Private   (sings)
‘Each morning at dawning, everything is bright  and gay A sun-kissed miss
says Don’t be late –’
Sing up, man!

PuElic   I–I–I–

Private   (sings)
‘That’s why I can hardly wait.’

PuElic   (sings limply)
‘Philadelphia, here I come.’

Private   That’s it, laddybuck!

7ogether
‘Philadelphia, here I come.’

    Curtain

                                  END OF EPISODE I: FIRST INTER9AL

43
                                            Episode     II

A short time  later. Public  is lying  on the  bed, his hands  behind his
head. Private is  slumped in the  chair, almost  as if  he were do]ing.
Public sings absently.

PuElic  (sings)
Last night she came to me, she came softly in,
So softly she came that her feet made no din,
And laid her hand on me, and this she did say,
‘It will not be long love till our wedding day’.

    When the singing stops there is a moment of silence. Then, suddenly,
    Private springs to his feet.

Private  What the bloody hell are you at, O’Donnell? Snap out of it, man!
Get up and keep active! The devil makes work for idle hands! It is now
si[teen or seventeen years since I saw the 4ueen of France, then the
Dauphiness, at 9ersailles.

    Public goes off the bed and begins taking clothes from the chest of
    drawers and putting them into his case.

Private  (lilting to a mad air of his own making) Ta-ra-del-oo-del-ah-dol-
de-dol-de-dol-del-ah – (Continuing as rapidly as he can speak.) – Tell me
this and tell me no more: Why does a hen cross the road?

PuElic  Why?

Private  To get to the other side. Ha-ha! Why does a hen lay an egg?

PuElic  Why?

Private  Because it can’t lay a brick. Yo-ho. Why does a sailor wear a
round hat?

PuElic  Why?

44
Private   To cover his head. Hee-hee-hee. Nought out of three; very bad for
a man of average intelligence. That’s the style. Keep working; keep the
mind active and well stretched by knowing the best that is thought and
written in the world, and you wouldn’t call Daddy Senator your father-in-
law. (Sings.)
Give the woman in the bed more porter
Give the man beside her water
Give the woman in the bed more porter
More porter for the woman in the bed.
(confidentially) D’you  know what I think laddie; I mean, Must looking at you
there.

PuElic   What?

Private   You’d make a hell of a fine President of the 8nited States.

    Public  straightens up and for  a second surveys the room with the keen
    eye of a politician. Relaxes again.

PuElic   Agh!

Private   But you would!

PuElic   You need to be born an American citi]en.

Private   True for you. What about Chairman of General Motors?

    Public shrugs indifferently.

Boss of the Teamsters’ 8nion?

    Public shrugs his indifference.

Hollywood – what about Hollywood?

PuElic   Not what it was.

Private   Damnit but you’re hard to please too. Still, there must be
something great in store for you. (Cracks his fingers at his brainwave.) The
8S Senate! Senator Gareth O’Donnell, Chairman of the Foreign Aid
Committee!

    He interviews Public who continues packing his clothes busily.

45
Is there something you would  like to  say, Senator, before you publish the
findings of your committee?

PuElic   Nothing to say.

Private   -ust a few words.

PuElic   No comment.

Private   Isn’t  it a fact that suspicion has fallen on Senator Doogan?

PuElic   Nothing further to add.

Private   Did  your investigators not discover that Senator Doogan is the
grandfather of fourteen unborn illegitimate children? That he sold his
daughter to the king of the fairies for a crock of gold? That a Chinese spy
known to the FBI as Screwballs –

PuElic   Screwballs?

Private   Screwballs.

PuElic   Describe him.

Private   Tall, blond, athletic-looking –

PuElic   Military  moustache?

Private   – very handsome; uses a diamond-studded cigarette-holder.

PuElic   8sually accompanied by a dark seductive woman in a low-cut
evening gown?

Private   – wears a monocle, fluent command of languages –

PuElic   But seldom speaks? A man of few words?

Private   – drives a cream convertible, villas in Istanbul, Cairo and
Budapest –

PuElic   (declaims) Merchant Prince, licensed to deal in tobacco –

Private   An’  sowl! That’s me man! To a T! The point is – what’ll we do
with him?

46
PuElic   Sell him to a harem?

Private   Hide his cascara sagrada?

    Madge comes into the kitchen to lift the tablecloth.

PuElic   (serious) Shhh!

Private   The boys? Is it the boys? To say good-bye?

PuElic   Shhhh!

Private   It’s Madge – aul fluke-feet Madge.

    They both  stand listening  to  the sound of  Madge flapping  across the
    kitchen and out to the scullery.

PuElic   (calls softly) Madge.

    Private drops into  the armchair. Public  stands listening until  the sound
    has died away.

Private   (wearily)  Off again! You know what you’re doing, don’t you,
laddybuck? Collecting memories and images and impressions that are going
to make you bloody miserable; and in a way that’s what you want, isn’t it?

PuElic   Bugger!

    Private springs to his feet again. With forced animation.

Private   Bugger’s right!  Bugger’s absolutely correct! Back to the Mob!
Keep occupied. Be methodical.

Eanie-meanie-minie-mow

Catch-the-baby-by-the-toe.

Will all  passengers holding immigration visas please come this way.

    Public produces documents from a drawer. He checks them.

Passport?

PuElic   Passport.

Private   9isa?

47
PuElic   9isa

Private   9accination cert.?

PuElic   9accination cert.

Private   Currency?

PuElic   Eighty dollars.

Private   Sponsorship papers?

PuElic   Signed by Mr Conal Sweeney.

Private   8ncle  Con and Aunt Li]]y.  Who made the whole thing possible.
Read her letter again – strictly for belly-laughs.

PuElic   (reads) Dear Nephew Gar, -ust a line to let you know that your
8ncle Con and me have finali]ed all the plans –

Private   8ncle  Con and I.

PuElic   – and we will meet you at the airport and welcome you and bring
you to our apartment which you will see is located in a pretty nice locality
and you will have the spare room which has T9 and air-conditioning and
window meshes and your own bathroom with a shower –

Private   AdMacent to RC church. No children. Other help kept.

PuElic   You will begin at the Emperor Hotel on Monday 23rd which is
only about twenty minutes away.

Private   Monsieur, madam.

PuElic   Con says it is a fine place for to work in and the owner is Mr
Patrick Palinakis who is half-Irish –

Private   Patrick.

PuElic   – and half-Greek.

Private   Palinakis.

PuElic   His grandfather came from County Mayo.

48
Private   By the hokey! The Greek from Belmullet!

PuElic   We know you will like  it here and work hard.

Private   (rapidly)  Monsieur-madam-monsieur-madam-monsieur-madam –

PuElic   We remember our short trip to Ireland last September with happy
thoughts and look forward to seeing you again. Sorry we missed your father
that day. We had Ben Burton in to dinner last evening. He sends his regards.

Private   Right sort, Ben.

PuElic   8ntil  we see you at the airport, all love, Elise.

Private   ‘Elise’!  Damnit, Li]]y    Gallagher, but you came on in the world.

PuElic   P.S. About paying back the passage money which you mentioned
in your last letter – desist! – no one’s crying about it.

Private   Aye, Ben Burton was a right skin.

PuElic   (remembering) September 8th.

Private   By God Li]]y   was in right talking  form that day –

PuElic   ‘You are invited to attend the wedding of Miss Kathleen Doogan of
Gortmore House –’

Private   (snaps) Shut up, O’Donnell! You’ve got to Tuit this moody
drivelling!  (Coaxing.) They arrived in the afternoon; remember? A
beautiful Tuiet harvest day, the sun shinning, not a breath of wind; and you
were on your best behaviour. And Madge – remember? Madge was as huffy
as hell with the carry-on of them, and you couldn’t take your eyes off Aunt
Li]]y,  your mother’s sister – so this was your mother’s sister – remember?

    Three people have moved into the kitchen: Con Sweeney, Li]]y Sweeney,
    and Ben Burton.  All three are  in the fifty-five  to sixty region.  Burton is
    American, the Sweeneys Irish-American. Con Sweeney sits at the kitchen
    table with  Ben Burton. Li]]y  moves around in the centre of  the kitchen.
    Public stands at the door of his bedroom. Private hovers around close to
    Public.  The three guests have glasses in their  hands. None of them  is
    drunk, but Li]]y  is more than usually garrulous. She is a small energetic

49
    woman,  heavily  made-up, impulsive.  Con,  her  husband,  is  a  Tuiet,
    patient  man. Burton, their  friend,  sits smiling  at his  glass most of  the
    time. As  she talks Li]]y   moves from one to  the other, and she has the
    habit of putting her arm around, or catching the elbow of, the person she
    is addressing. This constant physical touching is new and disTuieting to
    Public. A long laugh from Li]]y.

Lizzy   Anyhow, there we are, all sitting like stuffed ducks in the front seat
– 8na and Agnes and Rose and Mother and me – you know – and Mother
dickied up in her good black shawl and everything – and up at the altar rails
there’s Maire all by herself and her shoulders are sorta working – you know
– and you couldn’t tell whether she was crying or giggling – she was a
helluva one for giggling – but maybe she was crying that morning – I don’t
know –

Con   Get on with the story, honey.

Lizzy   (with dignity)  Would you please desist from bustin’ in on me?

    Con spreads his hands in resignation.

But listen to this – this’ll  kill   you – Mother’s here, see? And Agnes is here
and I’m here. And Agnes leans across Mother to me – you know – and she
says in this helluva loud voice –  she says – (laughs) – this really does kill
me –  she says –  in  this  whisper  of  hers  –  and you  know  the  si]e  of
Bailtefree chapel; couldn’t  swing a cat in  that place –  (suddenly anxious)
That chapel’s still there, isn’t it? It hasn’t fell down or nothing, has it?

Con   (dryly) 8nless it fell  down within the last couple of hours. We drove
up there this morning. Remember?

Lizzy   (relieved) Yeah. So we did. Fine place. Made me feel kinda – you
know – what the hell was I talking about?

Ben  Agnes leaned over to you and said –

    Li]]y  puts her arm around him and kisses the crown of his head.

Lizzy   Thanks, Ben. A great friend with a great memory! I’ll tell  you, Gar,
Ben Burton’s one hundred per cent. The first and best friend we made when
we went out. (to Con) Right, honey?

50
Con   Right.

Lizzy   Way back in ’37.

Con   ’38.

Lizzy   (loudly)  October 23rd, 19 and 37 we sailed for the 8nited States of
America.

    Con spreads his hands.

Nothing in our pockets. No Mob to go to. And what does Ben do?

Con   A guy in a million.

Lizzy   He gives us this apartment. He gives us dough. He gives us three
meals a day – until bon]o (Con) finally gets himself this Mob. Looks after us
like we were his own skin and bone. Right, honey?

Con   Right.

Lizzy   So don’t let nobody say nothing against Ben Burton. Then when he
(Con) gets this Mob in this downtown store –

Con   First Mob was with the construction company.

Lizzy   Would you please desist?

    Con spreads hands.

His first Mob was with Young and Pecks, hauling out them packing cases and
things; and then he moved to the construction company, and then we got a
place of our own.

PuElic   You were telling us about that morning.

Lizzy   What’s he talking about?

PuElic   That day my father and mother got married.

Lizzy   That day! Wasn’t that something? With the wind howling and the
rain slashing about! And Mother, poor Mother, may God be good to her, she
thought that Must because Maire got this guy with a big store we should all
of got guys with big stores. And poor Maire – we were so alike in every

51
way, Maire and me. But he was good to her. I’ll say that for S.B. O’Donnell
– real good to her. Where the hell is he anyhow? Why will S. B. O’Donnell,
my brother-in-law, not meet me?

Con   He (Public) told you – he’s away at a wedding.

Lizzy   What wedding?

Con   Some local girl and some Dublin doc.

Lizzy   What local girl? You think I’m  a stranger here or something?

Con   (to Public) What local girl?

PuElic   Senator Doogan’s daughter.

Private   Kathy.

Lizzy   Never heard of him. Some -ohnny-hop-up. When did they start
having Senators about this place for Gawd’s sakes?

Ben  (to Public)  You have a senate in Dublin, Must like our Senate, don’t
you?

Lizzy   Don’t  you start telling me nothing about my own country, Ben. You
got your own problems to look after. -ust you leave me to manage this
place, okay?

Ben  Sorry, Elise.

Lizzy   Ben! (She kisses the top of his head.) Only that I’m a good Irish-
American Catholic – (to Public) and believe me, they don’t come much
better than that – and only that I’m stuck with Rudolph 9alentino (Con), I’d
take a chance with Ben Burton any day (kisses him again) black Lutheran
and all that he is.

    Madge  appears at  the  door  of  the shop.  She refuses to  look at   the
    visitors. Her face is tight with disapproval. Her accent is very precise.

Madge   Are there any Clarions to spare or are they all ordered?

PuElic   They’re all ordered, Madge.

Lizzy   Doing big deals out there, honey, huh?

52
Madge   Thank you, Gareth. (Madge withdraws.)

Lizzy   ‘Thank you, Gareth!’  (She giggles to herself.)

Con   Honey! (to Public) You’ll  think about what we were discussing?

PuElic   I will,  8ncle Con.

Con   The Mob’s as good as you’ll get and we’d be proud to have you.

Lizzy   Don’t  force him.

Con   I’m not forcing  him. I’m only  telling him.

Lizzy   Well now, you’ve told him  – a do]en times. So now desist, will
you?

    Con spreads his hands.

PuElic   I will  think about it. Really.

Lizzy   Sure! Sure! Typical Irish! He will  think about it! And  while he’s
thinking about it the store falls in about his head! What age are you?
Twenty-four? Twenty-five? What are you waiting for? For S.B. to run away
to sea? 8ntil the weather gets better?

Con   Honey!

Lizzy   I’m  talking straight to the kid! He’s Maire’s boy and I’ve got an
interest in him – the only nephew I have. (to Ben) Am I right or am I
wrong?

Ben  I’m  still  up in Bailtefree chapel.

Lizzy   Where? (confidentially to Con) Give him no more to drink.
(patiently to Ben) You’re sitting in the home of S. B. O’Donnell and my
deceased sister, Maire, Ben.

Con   You were telling us a story about the morning they got married,
honey, in Bailtefree chapel.

Lizzy   Yeah. I know, I know, but you keep busting in on me.

PuElic   You were about to tell us what Agnes whispered to you.

53
Lizzy   (crying)  Poor Aggie – dead. Maire – dead. Rose, 8na, Li]]y – dead
– all gone – all dead and gone …

Con   Honey, you’re Li]]y.

Lizzy   So what?

Con   Honey, you’re not dead.

Lizzy   (regarding Con cautiously) You gone senile all of a sudden?
(confidentially to Ben) Give him no more to drink. (to Con) For Gawd’s
sakes who says I’m dead?

Ben  You’re  very much alive, Elise.

    She goes to him and gives him another kiss.

Lizzy   Thank you, Ben. A great friend with a great intellect. Only one
thing wrong with Ben Burton: he’s a black Baptist.

Ben  -ust for  the record, Gar, I’m Episcopalian.

Lizzy   Episcopalian – Lutheran – Baptist – what’s the difference? As our
pastor, Father O’Flaherty, says – ‘My dear brethren,’ he says, ‘let the whole
cart-load of them, and the whole ]oo of them, be to thee as the Pharisee and
the publican.’

Con   Honey!

Lizzy   But he’s still the best friend we have. And we have many good,
dear, kind friends in the 8S: Right, honey?

Con   Right.

Lizzy   But when it comes to holding a candle to Ben Burton – look –
comparisons are – he’s not in the halfpenny place with them!

Ben  (laughing)  Bang on, Elise!

Lizzy   Am  I right or am I wrong?

Con   Honey!

54
Lizzy   (to Public)  And that’s why I say to you: America’s Gawd’s own
country. Ben?

Ben  Don’t  ask me. I was born there.

Lizzy   What d’ya mean – ‘Don’t ask me’? I am asking you. He should
come out or he should not – which is it?

Ben  It’s  Must another place to live, Elise. Ireland – America – what’s the
difference?

Lizzy   You tell him, honey. You tell him the set-up we have, (now with
growing urgency, to Public) We have this ground-floor apartment, see, and
a car that’s air-conditioned, and colour T9, and this big collection of all the
Irish records you ever heard, and 15,000 bucks in Federal Bonds –

Con   Honey.

Lizzy   – and a deep free]er and – and – and a back yard with this great big
cherry tree, and sTuirrels and night-owls  and the smell of lavender in the
spring and long summer evenings and snow at Christmas and a Christmas
tree in the parlour and – and – and –

Con   Elise …

Lizzy   And it’s  all so Gawd-awful because we have no one to share it with
us … (She begins to sob.)

Con   (softly) It’s okay, honey, okay …

Lizzy   He’s my sister’s boy – the only child of five girls of  us –

Ben  I’ll   get the car round the front. (He goes off through the scullery.)

Lizzy   – and we spent a fortune on doctors, didn’t we, Connie, but it was
no good, and then I say to him (Con), ‘We’ll go home to Ireland,’ I says,
‘and Maire’s boy, we’ll offer him  everything we have –’

Private   (terrified)  No. No.

Lizzy   ‘–  everything, and maybe we could coa[ him – you know –’ maybe
it was sorta bribery – I dunno – but he would have everything we ever
gathered –

55
Private   Keep it! Keep it!

Lizzy   – and all the love we had in us –

Private   No!  No!

Con   Honey, we’ve a long drive back to the hotel.

Lizzy   (trying  to control herself) That was always the kind of us Gallagher
girls, wasn’t it … either laughing or crying … you know, sorta silly and
impetuous, shooting our big mouths off, talking too much, not like the
O’Donnells – you know – kinda cold –

Private   Don’t  man, don’t.

Con   Your gloves, honey. It’s been a heavy day.

Lizzy   (to Public, with  uncertain dignity) Tell your father that we regret we
did not have the opportunity for to make his acTuaintance again after all
these –

PuElic   (impetuously) I want to go to America – if you’ll have me –

Private   Laddy!

Con   Sure. You think about it, son. You think about it.

PuElic   Now – as soon as I can, Aunt Li]]y – I mean it –

Lizzy   Gar? (to Con, as if for confirmation) Honey?

Con   Look son –

Lizzy   To us, Gar? To come to us? To our home?

Con   Ben’s waiting, Elise.

PuElic   If you’ll  have me …

Lizzy   If  we’ll  have him, he says; he says if we’ll have him! That’s why
I’m here! That’s why I’m  half shot up! (She opens her arms and
approaches him.) Oh Gar, my son –

Private   Not yet! Don’t  touch me yet!

56
    Li]]y  throws her arms around him and cries happily.

Lizzy   My  son, Gar, Gar, Gar …

Private   (softly, with happy anguish) God … my God … Oh my God …

    Black out.
         When the bedroom light goes up  Public and  Private are  there. The
    kitchen is empty. Public bangs the lid of his case shut and Private stands
    beside him, jeering at  him. While  this taunting  goes on Public  tries to
    escape by fussing about the room.

Private   September 8th, the sun shining, not a breath of wind – and this
was your mother’s sister – remember. And that’s how you were got! Right,
honey? Silly and impetuous like a Gallagher! Regrets?

PuElic   None.

Private   8ncertainties?

PuElic   None.

Private   Little  tiny niggling  reservations?

PuElic   None.

Private   Her grammar?

PuElic   Shut up!

Private   But, honey, wasn’t it something?

PuElic   Go to hell.

Private   Her vulgarity?

PuElic   Bugger off.

Private   She’ll  tuck you into your air-conditioned cot every night.

    Public,  so that  he won’t hear, begins to  whistle  ‘Philadelphia,  Here  I
    Come’.

And croon, ‘Sleep well, my li’l  honey child.’

57
    Public whistles determinedly.

She got you soft on account of the day it was, didn’t she?

    Public whistles louder.

And because she said you were an O’Donnell – ‘cold like’.

PuElic   It is now si[teen or seventeen years since I saw the 4ueen of
France –

Private   But of course when she threw her arms around you – well, well,
well!

PuElic   – then the Dauphiness, at 9ersailles –

Private   Poor little orphan boy!

PuElic   Shut up! Shut up!

Private   (in child’s voice) Ma-ma … Maa-ma.

    Public flings open the bedroom door and dashes into the kitchen. Private
    follows behind.

PuElic   Madge!

Private   (Tuietly, deliberately) You don’t want to go, laddybuck. Admit it.
You don’t want to go.

    Madge enters from the scullery.

PuElic   (searching for an excuse) I can’t find my coat. I left it in my room.

    Madge gives him a long, patient look, goes to the nail  below the school
    clock, lifts  down the coat, and hands it to him. He takes it from her  and
    goes towards the scullery door.

If you would  only learn to  leave things where you find them you wouldn’t
be such a bad aul nuisance.

    Public and Private go off.

Madge   (calls) Don’t you dare come home drunk!

58
    Public’s head appears round the door.

PuElic   (softly) I’m  going to say good-bye to the boys over a Tuiet drink or
two. And how I spend my nights is a matter entirely for myself.

Madge   ‘The Boys!’  Couldn’t even come here to say good-bye to you on
your last night.

Private   Straight to the bone!

PuElic   -ust you mind your business and I’ll mind mine.

Madge   How many of them are getting the pension now?

PuElic   And in case you’re in bed when I get back I want a call at half-si[.

Madge   The clock’ll  be set. If you hear it well and good.

    Public disappears. Madge fusses about the kitchen until S.B. enters from
    the shop. He has a newspaper in his hand and sits at the top of the table.
    She watches him as he reads. She adjusts a few things. She looks back at
    him, then suddenly, on the point of tears, she accuses him.

Madge   You sit there, night after night, year after year, reading that aul
paper, and not a tooth in your head! If you had any decency in you at all,
you would keep them plates in while there’s a lady in your presence!

S.B.  (pu]]led)  Eh?

Madge   I mean it. It – it – it – it Must drives me mad, the sight of you! (The
tears begin to come.) And I have that much work to do: the stairs have to be
washed down, and the store’s to be swept, and your room has to be done out
– and – and – I’m telling you I’ll  be that busy for the ne[t couple of weeks
that I won’t have time to lift my head!

    She dashes off. S.B. stares after her, then out at the audience. Then, very
    slowly, he looks down at  the paper again –  it has been upside down –
    and turns  it right  side up. But he can’t  read. He  looks across at Gar’s
    bedroom, sighs, rises, and  exits very slowly  to the  shop. Silence for a
    second after   S.B. leaves.  The  silence  is  suddenly  shattered by  the
    boisterous arrival   of   the boys  and  Gar.  We hear  their  exaggerated
    laughter and talk outside before they burst in. When they enter they take

59
    over the kitchen, sprawling on chairs, hunting for tumblers for stout they
    produce from their  pockets, taking long, deep pulls  on their  cigarettes,
    giving  the impression that they are busy, purposeful, randy gents about
    to embark on some exciting adventure. But their bluster is not altogether
    convincing.  There  is  something  false  about  it.  TranTuillity   is   their
    enemy: they  fight  it  valiantly.  At  the  beginning of  this  scene Gar  is
    flattered that the boys have come to him. When they consistently refuse
    to   acknowledge his   leaving  –   or  perhaps   because he  is   already
    spiritually  gone from them – his good humour deserts him. He becomes
    apart from  the others. 1ed  is the leader of the group.  7om is  his feed-
    man, subserviently watching for every cue. Joe, the youngest of the trio,
    and not yet fully committed to the boys’ way of life, is torn between fealty
    to  Ned and Tom and a  spontaneous and simple loneliness over  Gar’s
    departure. Nothing  would  suit  him better  than  a grand  loud  send-off
    party.  But  he cannot  manage this,  and  his  loyalty  is  divided. He  is
    patently gauche, innocent, obvious.

1ed   There’s only one way to put the fear of God up them bastards –
(points to his boot) – every time – you know where.

Joe  Who’s the ref. Ned?

7om   -immy Pat Barney from Bunmornan. (guardedly to Public) Where’s
the aul fella?

PuElic   Haven’t a bloody clue. Probably in the shop. Rela[, man.

1ed   That (the boot) or the knee – it’s the only game them gets can play;
and we can play it too.

7om   (relaxing) They’ve a hell of a forward line all the same, Ned.

1ed   They’ll  be in crutches this day week. By God, I can hardly wait to get
the studs planted in wee Bagser Doran’s face! (He crashes his fist into the
palm of his hand.)

7om   All  the same, -immy Pat Barney’s the get would put you off very
Tuick.

1ed   He won’t say a word to me. He knows his match when he meets it.

60
    Tom laughs appreciatively. Madge appears at the scullery door.

Madge   (coldly) -ust thought I heard somebody whispering. So youse
finally made it.

Joe  (holding up glass) True to our word, Madge, that’s us!

PuElic   (happily) They were on their way here when I ran into them.

Madge   Aye, so.

    Ned belches.

Mister Sweeney, too; gentlemanly as ever.

1ed   (slapping his knee) Come on away over here and I’ll take some of the
starch out of you, Madge Mulhern. How long is it since a fella gripped your
knee? Haaaaaaaaaaa!

Madge   None of your smutty talk here, Mister Sweeney. And if the boss
comes in and finds them bottles –

PuElic   I’ll  keep them in order, Madge.

Madge   ‘Boys’!  How are you! (She goes out.)

7om   (calling) You’re Mealous because you’re past it – that’s what’s wrong
with you. Right, Ned?

PuElic   (raising glass) Well, boys, when you’re lining out on the pitch, you
can think of me, because I’ll be thinking of you.

Joe  (earnestly) Lucky bloody man, Gar. God, I wish I was in your –

1ed   (Tuickly) By the way, lads, who’s the blondie thing I seen at the last
Mass on Sunday?

7om   A big red-head?

1ed   Are you bloody-well  deaf! A blondie! She wouldn’t be Maggie
Hanna’s niece, would she?

7om   There was two of them, sitting over near the bo[?

1ed   I seen one.

61
7om   ’Cos they’re English. Staying at the hotel. But the big red thing –
she’s one of Neil McFadden’s girls.

1ed   Annie? Is Annie home?

Joe  Aye, she is. So I heard the mammy saying.

1ed   Bloody great! That’s me fi[ed  up for the ne[t two weeks! Were any
of youse ever on that Mob?

Joe  No, I wasn’t, Ned.

7om   For God’s sake, she wouldn’t spit on you!

1ed   Game as they’re going, big Annie. But you need the constitution of a
horse. I had her for the fortnight she was home last year and she damned
near killed me.

PuElic   Big Annie from up beyond the Tuarry?

Joe  You know, Gar – the one with the sTuint.

1ed   (with dignity)  Annie McFadden has no sTuint.

PuElic   Away and take a running race to yourself, Ned.

1ed   (with Tuiet threat) What do you mean?

PuElic   You were never out with big Annie McFadden in your puff, man.

1ed   Are you calling me a liar?

Private   (wearily)  What’s the point.

7om   (Tuickly) Oh, by God, Ned was there, Gar, manys and manys the
time. Weren’t you, Ned?

PuElic   Have it your own way.

Joe  (nervously) And maybe she got the sTuint straightened out since I saw
her last. All the women get the sTuints straightened out nowadays. Damnit,
you could walk from here to Cork nowadays and you wouldn’t see a
woman with a –

1ed   I Must don’t like fellas getting snottery with me, that’s all.

62
    There follows an uneasy silence during which Private surveys the group.

Private   The boys … They weren’t always like this, were they? There was
a hell of a lot of crack, wasn’t there? There was a hell of a lot of laughing,
wasn’t there?

7om   (briskly) Bit  of life about the place ne[t week, lads – the Carnival.
Too bad you’ll miss it, Gar. By God it was a holy fright last year, night after
night, (to Ned) Remember?

1ed   (sulkily) Bloody  cows, the whole bloody lot of them!

7om   Mind the night with the two wee Greenock pieces?

1ed   (thawing) Aw, stop, stop!

7om   Talk about hot things!

1ed   Liveliest wee tramps I ever laid!

7om   And the fat one from Dublin you picked up at the dance that night –
the one that hauled you down into the ditch!

1ed   I was never the same since.

7om   (to Public) Whatever it is about him (Ned), if there’s a fast woman in
the country, she’ll go for Ned first thing. Lucky bugger! (Pause.) Aye, lucky
bugger!

    Another  brief  silence. These silences occur like  regular  cadences. To
    defeat them someone always introduces a fresh theme.

PuElic   I’m for  off tomorrow, boys.

1ed   (indifferently) Aye, so, so …

7om   Brooklyn, isn’t  it?

PuElic   Philadelphia.

7om   Philadelphia. That’s where -immy Crerand went to, isn’t it?
Philadelphia …

63
1ed   (Tuickly) Mind  the night -immy and us went down to the caves with
them Dublin skivvies that was working up at the Lodge? (to Public) Were
you? – No, you weren’t with us that night.

Joe  Was I there, Ned?

1ed   You mind the si]e of -immy? – five  foot nothing and scared of his
shadow.

PuElic   Best goalie we ever had.

1ed   One of the women was Gladys and the other was Emmy or something
–

7om   Damnit, I mind now! Gladys and Emmy – that was it, Ned!

1ed   Anyhow the rest of us went in for a swim –

7om   In the bloody pelt!

1ed   – and your man -immy was left in the cave with the women; and what
the hell do they do but whip the trousers off him!

Joe  No, I wasn’t there that night.

1ed   And the ne[t thing  we see is wee -immy coming shouting across the
White Strand and the two Dublin cows haring after him.

7om   Not a stab on him!

1ed   – and him sTuealing at the top of his voice, ‘Save me, boys, save me!’

7om   Never drew breath till he reached home!

1ed   You (Gar) missed that night.

7om   ‘Save me, boys, save me!’

1ed   I don’t  think we went to bed that night at all.

7om   You may be sure we didn’t.

1ed   Powerful.

    Another silence descends. After a few seconds Private speaks.

64
Private   We were all there that night, Ned. And the girls’ names were
Gladys and Susan. And they sat on the rocks dangling their feet in the
water. And we sat in the cave, peeping out at them. And then -immy
Crerand suggested that we go in for a swim; and we all ran to the far end of
the shore; and we splashed about like schoolboys. Then we came back to
the cave, and wrestled with one another. And then out of sheer boredom,
Tom, you suggested that we take the trousers off Crerand – Must to prove
how manly we all were. But when Ned started towards -immy – five foot
nothing, remember? – wee -immy sTuared up and defied not only the brave
Ned but the whole lot of us. So we straggled back home, one behind the
other, and left the girls dangling their feet in the water. And that was that
night.

PuElic   If the ground’s not too hard, you’ll do well on Sunday.

1ed   Hard or soft – (examining his boot) – I’ve a couple of aul scores to
settle.

PuElic   You’ll  never get as good a half-back as the one you’re losing.

1ed   (Tuickly, with pretended interest) D’you know what I’m thinking?
We’d better see about transport.

7om   Damnit, you’re right. I’ll   get the aul fella’s van easy enough. Can you
get your Charlie’s lorry?

1ed   -ust maybe. I’d better try him the night.

Joe  What about a song from Gar, boys, before we break up?

1ed   What time is it?

Joe  It’s early in the night yet.

7om   Twenty past nine.

1ed   We’d better move then; Charlie was talking about going to a dance in
Ardmore.

7om   Damnit, that’s an idea!

Joe  We’ll  all go – a big last night for Gar!

65
1ed   Ardmore? Are you mad? Bloody women in that place don’t know
what they’re for!

7om   True for you. Scream their heads off if you laid a hand on them.

1ed   But I’ll  tell  you what we’ll do – call in home first to see Charlie and
then go on to the hotel for a dirty big boo]e-up.

Joe  I don’t  like drinking in  that place.

1ed   Them two English bits – what’s their name?

7om   Them strangers? Agh you wouldn’t have a chance there. They do
nothing but walk and look at weeds and stuff –

1ed   Who wouldn’t  have a chance?

7om   I know, Ned. But them two – they’re sort of stiff-looking – like  – like
they worked in a post-office or something.

1ed   They’re women, aren’t they?

7om   Damnit, we might! … Still  I don’t know  … They knit a lot … (to
Public) What’d you think?

Joe  I vote we stay here.

PuElic   And you can count me out. I’ve an early start.

1ed   Ten pounds to a shilling I click with one or other of them!

PuElic   I won’t be here to collect my winnings.

1ed   Come on! Any takers? Never clapped eyes on them and I’m offering
ten notes to a bob!

7om   Cripes, I know that look in his eyes!

1ed   Wise bloody men! The blood’s up, lads! Off to the front! Any
volunteers for a big boo]e-up and a couple of women?

7om   Did he say women? Sign me on!

Joe  I don’t  think I’m  in form the night, boys –

66
1ed   We’ll  show them a weed or two, eh?

7om   Out to the sand-banks! Get them in the bloody bent!

1ed   We’re away – Wait! Wait! – How much money have you?

    They both produce their money – a fistful of small coins.

7om   2s 6d … 2s 11d … 3s 3d … 3s 5½ d.

1ed   And I have 6s 2d. It’ll  have to do. Say a prayer they’re fast and
thrifty.

7om   Dirty aul brute! Lead the way, Bull!

1ed   I’m  telling you – the blood’s up!

7om   Coming, lads?

PuElic   I’m getting up at half si[.

1ed   (casually from the door) So long, Gar. You know the aul rule – If you
can’t be good …

7om   Send us a pack of them playing cards – the ones with the dirty
pictures on the back!

1ed   And if  the women are as easy as the money out there, we might think
of Moining you. (to Tom) Right, old cock?

7om   Bull on regardless! Yaaaaaaaaaaah!

    They open the door. Ned hesitates and begins taking off the broad leather
    belt with the huge brass buckle that supports his trousers.

1ed   (shyly, awkwardly) By the way, Gar, since I’ll not see you again
before you go –

7om   Hi! What are you at? At least wait till you’re sure of the women!

1ed   (impatiently to Tom) Agh, shut up! (to Public) If any of them Yankee
scuts try to beat you up some dark night, you can … (Now he is very
confused and flings the belt across the room to Public.) You know …
there’s a bloody big buckle on it … manys a get I scutched with it …

67
7om   Safe enough, lads: he has braces on as well!

1ed   I meant to buy you something good, but the aul fella didn’t sell the
calf to the Mobbers last Friday … and he could have, the stupid bastard, such
a bloody stupid bastard of an aul fella!

PuElic   (moved) Thanks, Ned … thanks …

Joe  Damnit, I have nothing for you, Gar.

7om   (Tuickly) Are we for the sand-banks or are we not?

1ed   You’ll  make out all right over there … have a …

7om   I know that look in his eyes!

    Ned wheels rapidly on  Tom, gives him a more than playful  punchy and
    says savagely:

1ed   Christ, if there’s one get I hate, it’s you!

    He goes off Tuickly.
         Tom looks uncertainly after him, looks back at Public,  and says with
    dying conviction:

7om   The blood’s up … Oh by God, when he goes on like that, the … the
blood’s up all right … (Tom looks after Ned, then back to Joe and Gar, as if
he can’t decide which to join, then impetuously he dashes off after Ned,
calling:) Hi!  Ned, Ned, wait for me …

    There is a silence. Public is looking at the belt. Joe begins to fidget. Now
    Public becomes aware of him.

PuElic   What the hell are you waiting for?

Joe  Damnit, man, like it’s your last night and all, and I thought –

PuElic   Get to hell and run after them.

Joe  Sure you know yourself they’ll hang about the gable of the hotel and
chat and do nothing.

PuElic   For God’s sake, man, those English women will be swept off their
feet!

68
Joe  (uncertainly) You’re  taking a hand at me now.

PuElic   I’m telling  you, you’re missing the chance of a lifetime.

Joe  Maybe – eh? – what d’you think?

PuElic   Go on! Go on!

Joe  God, maybe you’re right. You never know what’ll happen, eh? You
finish that (drink) for me! God, maybe we’ll click  the night! Say a wee
prayer we do! Cripes, my blood’s up too! Where’s my cap? (He grabs the
cap, dashes to the door, remembers he won’t see Gar again.) Send us a card,
Gar, sometimes, eh?

PuElic   Surely, -oe.

Joe  Lucky  bloody man. I wish I was you.

PuElic   There’s nothing stopping you, is there?

Joe  Only that the mammy planted sycamore trees last year, and she says I
can’t go till they’re tall enough to shelter the house.

PuElic   You’re stuck for another couple of days, then. Away off with you,
man.

Joe  Good luck, Gar. And tell Madge that the ne[t time she asks us up for
tea we’d bloody well better get it.

PuElic   She asked you?

Joe  That’s why I was Moking her about us keeping our word. As if we
wanted tea, for God’s sake! But I’d better catch up with the stirk before they
do damage … So long, aul cock! (He runs off.)

PuElic   Madge … Oh God …

    Private  moves over beside him.  He  speaks Tuickly, savagely at  first,
    spitting  out the first  three lines. Gradually  he softens, until  the speech
    ends almost in a whisper.

Private   They’re louts, ignorant bloody louts, and you’ve always known it!
And don’t pretend you’re surprised; because you’re not. And you know

69
what they’ll do tonight, don’t you? They’ll  shuffle around the gable of the
hotel and take an odd furtive peep into the lounge at those English women
who won’t even look up from their frigid knitting!  Many a time you did it
yourself, buckoo! Aye, and but for Aunt Li]]y  and the grace of God, you’d
be there tonight, too, watching the lights go out over the village, and
hearing the front doors being bolted, and seeing the blinds being raised; and
you stamping your feet to keep the numbness from spreading, not wanting
to go home, not yet for another while, wanting to hold on to the night
although nothing can happen now, nothing at all … -oe and Tom and big,
thick, generous Ned … No one will ever know or understand the fun there
was; for there was fun and there was laughing – foolish, silly fun and
foolish, silly laughing; but what it was all about you can’t remember, can
you? -ust the memory of it – that’s all you have now – Must the memory; and
even now, even so soon, it is being distilled of all its coarseness; and what’s
left is going to be precious, precious gold …

    There is a knock at the door. Public goes off to answer it.

Kate   (off) Hello, Gar.

Private   Kate!

Kate   (on) This isn’t a healthy sign, drinking by yourself.

Private   Talk! Talk!

PuElic   What – what are you doing here?

Kate   I hear you’re off to America.

PuElic   First thing in the morning.

Kate   You wouldn’t think  of calling to say good-bye to your friends, I
suppose?

PuElic   I was going to, but I – Private Careful!

PuElic   – it went clean out of my mind. You know how it is, getting ready
…

Kate   I understand, Gar.

70
Private   She’s a married woman, you bugger!

Kate   Philadelphia?

PuElic   Yes. Take a seat.

Kate   To an aunt, isn’t it?

PuElic   That’s right. A sister of mother’s.

Kate   And you’re going to work  in a hotel.

PuElic   You know as much about it as I do.

Kate   You know Baile Beag – Small Town.

PuElic   I’ll  probably go to night-school as well – you know, at night –

Private   Brilliant.

PuElic   – do law or medicine or something –

Private   Like  hell! First Arts stumped you!

Kate   You’ll  do well, Gar; make a lot of money, and come back here in
twenty years’ time, and buy the whole village.

PuElic   9ery likely. That’s my plan anyhow.

Private   Kate … Kathy …

PuElic   How’s your father and mother?

Kate   Fine, thanks. And Mr O’Donnell?

PuElic   Grand, grand. Is Dr King well?

Kate   I hear no complaints.

Private   Then the Dauphiness of 9ersailles. And surely never lighted on
this orb, which she hardly seemed to touch, a more delightful vision. I saw
her Must above the hori]on, decorating and cheering the elevated sphere she
Must began to move in –

PuElic   (a shade louder than necessary) I’ll come home when I make my
first million,  driving a Cadillac and smoking cigars and taking movie-films.

71
Kate   I hope you’re very happy there and that life will be good to you.

PuElic   (slightly louder) I’ll  make sure life’s good to me from now on.

Kate   Your father’ll  miss you.

PuElic   (rapidly, aggressively) That’s his look out! D’you know
something? If I had to spend another week in Ballybeg, I’d go off my
bloody head! This place would drive anybody cra]y! Look around you, for
God’s sake! Look at Master Boyle! Look at my father! Look at the Canon!
Look at the boys. Asylum cases, the whole bloody lot of them!

Private   (pained) Shhhhhh!

PuElic   Listen, if someone were to come along to me tonight and say,
‘Ballybeg’s yours – lock, stock, and barrel,’ it wouldn’t make that (cracks
his fingers) much difference to me. If you’re not happy and content in a
place – then – then – then you’re not happy and content in a place! It’s as
simple as that. I’ve stuck around this hole far too long, I’m telling you: it’s a
bloody Tuagmire, a backwater, a dead-end! And everybody in it goes cra]y
sooner or later! Everybody!

Private   Shhhhhhhh …

PuElic   There’s nothing about Ballybeg that I don’t know already. I hate
the place, and every stone, and every rock, and every piece of heather
around it! Hate it! Hate it! And the sooner that plane whips me away, the
better I’ll like  it!

Kate   It isn’t  as bad as that, Gar.

PuElic   You’re stuck here! What else can you say!

Private   That’ll  do!

PuElic   And you’ll  die here! But I’m not stuck! I’m  free! Free as the
bloody wind!

Kate   All  I meant was –

PuElic   Answerable to nobody! All this bloody yap about father and son
and all this sentimental rubbish about ‘homeland’ and ‘birthplace’ – yap!

72
Bloody yap! Impermanence – anonymity – that’s what I’m looking for; a
vast restless place that doesn’t give a damn about the past. To hell with
Ballybeg, that’s what I say!

Private   Oh, man …

Kate   I’d  better go. Francis’ll be wondering what’s keeping me.

PuElic   (recklessly) Tell him I was asking for him. Kate Good-bye, Gar.

PuElic   (in same tone) EnMoy yourself, Kate. And if you can’t be good –
you know?

    Public goes off with Kate.

(off) Be sure to call the first one after me.

    She is gone. Public returns and immediately buries his face in his hands.

Private   Kate … sweet Katie Doogan … my darling Kathy Doogan …

    Public  uncovers his face and  with trembling  fingers  lights  a cigarette
    and takes a drink. As he does:

(very  softly)  Oh  my  God,  steady man,  steady  –  it  is  now   si[teen  or
seventeen years since I saw the 4ueen of France, then the Dauphiness, at
9ersailles, and surely  never lighted  on this  orb –  Oh God,  Oh my  God,
those thoughts are sinful – (Sings.)
As beautiful Kitty one morning was tripping with a pitcher of milk  – 

    Public  attempts to  whistle  his song ‘Philadelphia,   Here I  Come’.  He
    whistles the first phrase and the notes die away. Private keeps on talking
    while Public attempts to whistle.

We’ll go now, right  away, and tell them – Mammy  and Daddy – they’re at
home tonight – now, Gar, now – it must be now – remember, it’s up to you
entirely up to you  – gut and salt them fish –  and they’re going to call  this
one Madge, at least so she says –

    Public makes another attempt to whistle.

– a little something to remind you of your  old teacher – don’t keep looking
back over your shoulder, be one hundred per cent American – a packet of

73
cigarettes and  a pot  of   Mam – seven boys  and  seven girls  –  and  our
daughters’ll be all gentle and frail and silly like you – and I’ll never wait till
Christmas – I’ll burst, I’ll   bloody-well burst – good-bye, Gar, it isn’t as bad
as that – good-bye, Gar, it isn’t  as bad as that – good-bye, Gar, it isn’t  as
bad as that –

PuElic   (in whispered shout) Screwballs, say something! Say something,
father!

    Quick curtain.

                                END OF EPISODE II: SECOND INTER9AL

74
Episode III

75
                                          PART    ONE

A short time later.  The rosary is  being said. Public  is  kneeling with
his back to the audience. S.B. kneeling  facing the  audience. Madge
is facing   the shop  door.  Private  kneels  beside Public.   Madge  is
saying her decade, and the other three –  S.B., Public and  Private  –
are  answering.   The  words   are  barely   distinct,   a   monotonous,
somnolent drone.  After   a  few  moments Private   lowers  his  body
until  his  rear  is  resting  on  the backs  of  his  legs. We cannot  see
Public’s face. While  Private talks, the rosary  goes on.

Private  (relaxing, yawning) Ah-hoho-ho-ho-ho. This time tomorrow
night, bucko, you’ll be saying the rosary all by yourself – unless Li]]y and
Con say it. (Joins in a response in American accent.) – Holy Mairy,
Mother of Gawd, pray for us sinners now and at the hour … (He tails off
as his mind wanders again.) No, not this time tomorrow. It’s only about
half-four in Philadelphia now, and when it’s half-nine there it’ll be the wee
hours of the morning here; and Screwballs’ll be curled up and fast asleep
in his wee cot – (to S.B) – right, honey? And when he’s dreaming, you’ll
be swaggering down 56th Street on Third at the Munction of 29th and
Seventh at 81st with this big blonde nu]]ling up to you – (Suddenly kneels
erect again and responds in unison with Public. Keeps this up for two or
three responses and slowly subsides again.) You’d need to be careful out
there, boy; some of those Yankee women are dynamic. But you’ll never
marry; never; bachelor’s written all over you. Fated to be alone, a man
without intimates; something of an enigma. Who is he, this silent one?
Where is he from? Where does he go? Every night we see him walking
beneath the trees along the bank of the canal, his black cloak swinging
behind him, his eyes lost in thought, his servant following him at a
respectful distance. (in reply) Who is he? I’ll tell you who he is: The
Bachelor. All the same, laddybuck, there are compensations in being a
bachelor. You’ll age slowly and graciously, and then, perhaps, when
you’re Tuite old – about forty-three – you’ll meet this beautiful girl of

76
nineteen, and you’ll fall madly in love. Karin – that’s her name – no – ah –
ah – Tamara – (caressing the word) Tamara – grand-daughter of an e[iled
Russian prince, and you’ll be consumed by a magnificent passion; and this
night you’ll  invite her to dinner in your penthouse, and you’ll be dressed
in a deep blue velvet Macket, and the candles will discover magic fairy
lights in her hair, and you’ll say to her, ‘Tamara,’ and she’ll incline her
face towards you, and close her eyes, and whisper –

    From a few seconds back the droning prayers have stopped. Now Madge
    leans over to Public and gives him a rough punch.

Madge   Your decade!

    Private and Public jump erect again and in perfect unison give out their
    decade. Gradually, as the prayers continue, they relax into their slumped
    position.

Private   When you’re curled up in your wee cot, Screwballs, do you
dream? Do you ever dream of the past, Screwballs, of that wintry morning
in Bailtefree, and the three days in Bundoran? …

    Public  stays as he is. Private gets slowly to  his feet and moves over to
    S.B. He stands looking down at him.

… and of  the young, gay girl  from beyond the mountains who sometimes
cried herself to  sleep? (softly, nervously, with growing  excitement) God –
maybe – Screwballs – behind those dead eyes and that flat face are there
memories of precious moments in the past? My God, have I been unfair to
you? Is it possible that you have hoarded in the back of that mind of yours –
do you remember – it was an afternoon in May  – oh, fifteen years ago – I
don’t remember every detail but some things are as vivid as can be: the boat
was blue and the paint was peeling and there was an empty cigarette packet
floating in  the water at the bottom between two trout  and the left rowlock
kept slipping and you had given me your hat and had put your Macket round
my shoulders because there had been a shower of rain. And you had the rod
in your left hand – I can see the cork nibbled away from the butt of the rod
– and maybe we had been chatting – I don’t remember – it doesn’t matter –
but between us at that moment there was this great happiness, this great Moy
– you must have felt it too – it was so much richer than a content – it was a

77
great, great happiness, and active, bubbling  Moy – although nothing  was
being said – Must the two of us fishing on  a lake on a showery day –  and
young as I was I felt, I  knew, that this was precious, and your hat was soft
on the top of my  ears – I can feel it  – and I shrank down into  your coat –
and then, then for  no  reason at all e[cept  that  you were  happy too, you
began to sing: (Sings.)

All round my hat I’ll  wear a green coloured ribbono,

All round my hat for a twelve month and a day.

And if anybody asks me the reason why I wear it,

It’s all because my true love is far, far away.

    The rosary is over. Madge and S.B. get slowly  to their  feet. Public and
    Private are not aware that the prayers are finished. S.B. does the nightly
    job of winding the clock.

Madge   Will  you take your supper now?

S.B.  Any  time suits you.

    Madge goes to Public, still kneeling.

Madge   And what about St Martin de Porres?

PuElic   Mm? (He blesses himself hurriedly, in confusion, and gets to his
feet.)

Madge   Supper.

PuElic   Yes – yes – please, Madge –

Madge   (going off) I suppose even the saints must eat now and again, too.

    Pause. S.B. consults his pocket watch.

S.B.  What time do you make it?

PuElic   4uarter to ten.

S.B.  It’s  that anyhow. Private Go on! Ask him! He must remember!

78
S.B.  The days are shortening already. Before we know we’ll be burning
light before closing time.

Private   Go on! Go on!

PuElic   (in the churlish, off-hand tone he uses to S.B.) What ever happened
to that aul boat on Lough na Cloc Cor.

S.B.  What’s that?

Private   Again!

PuElic   That aul boat that used to be up on Lough na Cloc Cor – an aul
blue thing – d’you remember it?

S.B.  A  boat? Eh?

    Voices off.

The Canon!

Private   Bugger the Canon!

    The Canon enters; a lean, white man with  alert eyes and a thin  mouth.
    He is talking back to Madge in the scullery.

Canon   Hee-hee-hee – you’re a terrible woman.

S.B.  Well, Canon!

Canon   That Madge … hee-hee-hee.

PuElic   Good night, Canon.

Canon   She says I wait till the rosary’s over and the kettle’s on … hee-hee-
hee.

S.B.  She’s a sharp one, Madge.

Canon   ‘You wait,’  says she, ‘till the rosary’s over and the kettle’s on!’

Private   Hee-hee-hee.

S.B.  Pay no need to Madge, Canon.

Private   And how’s the O’Donnell  family tonight?

79
Canon   And how’s the O’Donnell family  tonight?

    Public sits when the Canon sits.

S.B.  Living  away as usual. Not a thing happening.

Private   Liar!

Canon   -ust so, now, Must so.

S.B.  Will  we have a game now or will we wait till the supper comes in?

Canon   We may as well commence, Sean. I see no reason why we
shouldn’t commence.

S.B.  (setting the board) Whatever you say, Canon.

Canon   Hee-hee-hee. ‘You wait,’ says she, ‘till the rosary’s over and the
kettle’s on.’

Private   She’s a sharp one, Madge.

S.B.  She’s a sharp one, Madge.

Canon   It’ll  be getting near your time, Gareth.

PuElic   Tomorrow morning, Canon.

Canon   -ust so, now. Tomorrow morning.

Private   Tomorrow morning.

Canon   Tomorrow morning.

S.B.  Here we are.

Canon   Powerful the way time passes, too.

S.B.  Black or white, Canon?

Canon   (considering the problem) Black or white …

Private   Black for  the crows and white for the swans.

Canon   Black for the crows and white for the swans.

Private   Ha-ha! (He preens himself at his skill in prophecy.)

80
S.B.  Have a shot at the black the night.

Canon   Maybe I will  then.

Private   Can’t take the money off you every night.

Canon   Can’t take the trousers off you every night. Hee-hee-hee.

Private   (shocked) Canon O’Byrne!

S.B.  You had a great streak of luck last night, I’ll grant you that.

Canon   (a major announcement) D’you know what?

S.B.  What’s that, Canon?

Canon   You’ll  have rain before morning.

S.B.  D’you  think so?

Canon   It’s in the bones. The leg’s giving me the odd Mab.

S.B.  We could do without the rain then.

Canon   Before the morning you’ll have it.

S.B.  Tch tch tch. We get our fill of it here.

Canon   The best barometer I know.

S.B.  Aye. No want of rain.

Canon   Before the morning.

S.B.  As if  we don’t get enough of it.

Canon   The Mabs are never wrong.

Private   (wildly  excited) Stop press! News flash! Sensation! We interrupt
our programme to bring you the news that Canon Mick O’Byrne, of
Ballybeg, Ireland, has made the confident prediction that you’ll have rain
before the morning! Stand by for further bulletins!

Canon   ‘You wait,’  says she, ‘till the rosary’s over and the kettle’s on!’

S.B.  8sual  stakes, Canon?

81
Canon   I see no reason to alter them.

S.B.  What about putting them up – Must for the first game?

Canon   The thin end of the wedge, eh, as the Bishop says? No, Sean, the
way I see it, a half-penny a game’ll neither make nor break either of us.

    Enter Madge with cups of tea and a plate of biscuits.

Madge   Have you begun already?

S.B.  Shh!

Madge   If it  was turkeys or marble clocks they were playing for they
couldn’t be more serious!

S.B.  4uiet!

Madge   Agh!

    She leaves their tea beside them and brings a cup over to Public.  They
    talk in undertones.

Wouldn’t you love to throw it round them!

PuElic   Scalding hot!

Madge   And raise blisters on their aul bald pates! – God forgive me!

PuElic   Madge.

Madge   What?

PuElic   Why don’t you take a run over to see the new baby?

Madge   I’ve more on my mind than that.

PuElic   I’ll  put up the Mars and wash up these few things.

Madge   And this the last night we’ll have you to torment us?

PuElic   Go on. Go on. We won’t start swapping the dirty stories till we get
you out of the road.

S.B.  Shhhhhhh!

82
PuElic   Hurry up. Nelly’ll  be wondering why you didn’t  show up.

Madge   Aye, so.

PuElic   Your own namesake, isn’t it?

Madge   So she says.

PuElic   Get a move on. You’ll be back before bedtime.

Madge   What d’you think?

PuElic   4uick!

Madge   I’m away! (She takes a few steps away and comes back.) Don’t
forget: them shirts isn’t right aired. (Just when she is at the scullery door.)

PuElic   Madge.

Madge   What is it?

Private   Don’t!  Don’t!

PuElic   Why did my mother marry him (S.B.) instead of Master Boyle?

Madge   What?

PuElic   She went with both of them, didn’t she?

Madge   She married the better man by far.

PuElic   But she went with Boyle first, didn’t she?

Madge   I’ve told you before: she went with a do]en – that was the kind of
her – she couldn’t help herself.

PuElic   But is that what started Boyle drinking?

Madge   If it  was, more fool he. And any other nosing about you want to
do, ask the Boss. For you’re not going to pump me. (She goes off.)

Private   What the hell had you to go and ask that for! Snap, boy, snap! We
want no scenes tonight. Get up and clear out of this because you’re liable to
get over-e[cited watching these two dare-devils dicing with death.

    Public takes his cup and goes towards his bedroom.

83
Into your  survival  shelter and brood, brood, brood.  (As if  replying to  the
draught players – who have not noticed his exit:) No,  no, I’m  not leaving.
-ust going in here to have a wee chat with my Chinese mistress.

    Public goes into his bedroom, leaving the door open. Private stays in the
    kitchen.  Public  in  the  bedroom mimes the  actions of   Private  in  the
    following  seTuence. Private stands at the table between S.B. and Canon.

Private   Canon battling tooth and nail for another halfpenny; Screwballs
fighting valiantly to retain his trousers! Gripped in mortal combat! County
Councillor versus Canon! Screwballs versus Canonballs! (Stares intently at
them.) Hi, kids! Having fun, kids? (Gets to his feet, leans his elbow on the
table, and talks confidentially into their faces.) Any chance of a game, huh?
Tell me, boys, strictly between ourselves, will you miss me? You will? You
really will? But now I  want you both to close your eyes – please, my
darlings – don’t, don’t argue – Must do as I say – Must close your eyes and
think of all the truly wonderful times we’ve had together. Now! What’ll  we
chat about, eh? Let’s – chat – about – what? No, Screwballs, not women;
not before you-know-who. (Looking at Canon.) Money! Agh, sure, Canon,
what interest have you in money? Sure as long as you get to Tenerife for
five weeks every winter what interest have you in money? But I’m wasting
my time with you, Canon – Screwballs here is different; there’s an affinity
between Screwballs and me that no one, literally, no one could understand –
e[cept you, Canon (deadly serious), because you’re warm and kind and soft
and sympathetic – all things to all men – because you could translate all this
loneliness, this groping, this dreadful bloody buffoonery into Christian
terms that will make life bearable for us all. And yet you don’t say a word.
Why, Canon? Why, arid Canon? Isn’t this your Mob? – to translate? Why
don’t you speak, then? Prudence, arid Canon? Prudence be damned!
Christianity isn’t prudent – it’s insane! Or maybe this Must happens to be one
of your bad nights – (suddenly bright and brittle again) – A pound to a
shilling I make you laugh! (Dancing around, singing to the tune of ‘Daisy’:)
‘Screwballs, Screwballs, give me your answer do.
I’m half cra]y  all for the love of you.
I’m off  to Philadelphey, and I’ll leave you on the shelfy –’

    S.B. gives a short dry laugh.

84
A pound you  owe me! Money  for  aul rope! And  you, Canon, what about
giving us a bar or two?

Canon   Aye.

Private   You will?  Wonderful! What’ll  it be? A pop number? An aul
Gregorian come-all-ye? A whack out of an aul aria?

Canon   I had you cornered.

Private   ‘I  had you cornered’ – I know it! I know it!  I know it!  Okay.
(Sings in the style of a modern crooner.) I had you corneredThat night in
CasablancaThat night you said you loved me – all set? Boys and girls, that
top, pop recording star, Kenny O’Byrne and the Ballybeg Buggers in their
latest fabulous release, ‘I Had You Cornered’. (Private stands with his head
lowered, his foot tapping, his fingers clicking in syncopated rhythm, waiting
for the Canon to begin. He keeps this up for a few seconds. Then in time to
his own beat he sings very softly, as he goes to the bedroom:)
Should aul acTuaintance be forgot
And never brought to min’?
Should aul acTuaintance be forgot
And days o’ lang-syne?
Yah-ooooo.

    Public suddenly sits up in bed.

Mendelssohn! That’s the bugger’ll tear the guts out of you!

    Public   puts on  a  recording   of  the  second movement  of  the  Violin
    Concerto. Private, now almost fren]ied, dashes back to the kitchen.

Give us a bar or  two, Mendelssohn, aul fella. Come on,  lad; resin the aul
bow and spit on your hands and give us an aul bar!

    The record begins. Private runs to the table and thrusts his face between
    the players.

Listen! Listen! Listen!  D’you  hear it? D’you know what the music say? (to
S.B.) It says that once upon a time a boy and his father sat in a blue boat on
a lake  on  an  afternoon in   May,  and on  that  afternoon  a great  beauty
happened, a beauty that has haunted the boy ever since, because he wonders

85
now did it  really take place or did he imagine it. There are only the two  of
us, he says; each of us is all the other has; and why can we not even look at
each other? Have pity on us, he says; have goddam pity on every goddam
bloody man Mack of us. (He comes away from the table and walks  limply
back to the bedroom. When he gets to the bedroom door he turns, surveys
the men.) To hell with all strong silent men!

    He  goes into  the bedroom, drops  into the  chair,  and  sits motionless.
    Public sinks back on the bed again. Silence.

Canon   What’s that noise?

S.B.  What’s that, Canon?

Canon   A noise of some sort.

S.B.  Is there?

    They listen.

I don’t hear –

Canon   Wait.

S.B.  Is it –

Canon   It’s music – is it?

S.B.  Music?

Canon   Aye. It’s music.

S.B.  That’ll  be Gar then.

Canon   Oh.

S.B.  Playing them records of his.

Canon   Thought I heard something.

S.B.  All  he asks is to sit in there and play them records all day.

Canon   It makes him happy.

S.B.  Terrible man for the records.

86
Canon   -ust so, now. It’ll be getting near his time, he tells me.

S.B.  Tomorrow morning.

Canon   Tomorrow morning.

S.B.  Aye, tomorrow morning. Powerful the way time passes, too.

Canon   ‘You wait,’  says she, ‘till the rosary’s over and the kettle’s on.’

S.B.  A  sharp one, Madge.

Canon   Ah-hah. There’s hope for you yet.

S.B.  I don’t  know is there.

Canon   No. You’re not too late yet.

S.B.  Maybe … maybe …

Canon   No. I wouldn’t  say die yet – not yet I wouldn’t.

    Slow curtain.

                                      END OF EPISODE III, PART ONE

87
                                                PART  TWO

The small hours of the morning. The kitchen is dimly lit. In the kitchen, just
outside the bedroom door, are Gar’s cases, and lying across them are his
coat, his  cap, and  a large  envelope containing  his ;-ray    and visa.  The
bedroom is in  darkness: just enough light  to  see Public  on  the bed and
Private in the chair. S.B. comes in from the scullery carrying a cup of tea in
his hand. He is dressed in long trousers, and vest, a hat, socks. He moves
slowly towards the  table, sees the cases, goes over to  them, touches the
coat, goes back towards the table, and  sits there, staring  at the  bedroom
door. He coughs. Immediately Private is awake and Public sits up sleepily
in bed.

Private   What – what – what’s that? (Relaxing.) Madge probably. Looking
to see is the door bolted.

    Public gets out of bed and switches on the light. Looks at his watch.

You’ll not sleep again tonight, laddo.

PuElic   Bugger. (He looks at himself in the mirror and then sits on edge of
bed.)

Private   Four more hours. This is the last time you’ll lie in this bed, the last
time you’ll look  at that pattern (on the floor), the last time you’ll listen to
the silence of Ballybeg, the last time you’ll –

PuElic   Agh, shut up!

Private   It is now si[teen  or seventeen years since I saw the 4ueen of
France. Go into the shop, man, and get yourself a packet of aspirin; that’ll
do the trick. (Looking up at ceiling.) Mind if  I take a packet of aspirin,
Screwballs? Send the bill to the 8SA, okay? Out you go, boy, and get a
clatter of pills!

    They both  go  into the  kitchen.  Public  stops dead when  he sees S.B.
    staring at him.

My God! Lady Godiva!

88
PuElic   Is this where you are?

S.B.  Aye – I – I – I – I  wasn’t sleeping. What has you up?

    Public goes to where the key of the shop is hung up.

PuElic   I – I wasn’t sleeping either. I’ll get some aspirins inside.

S.B.  It’s  hard to sleep sometimes …

PuElic   It is, aye … sometimes …

S.B.  There’s tea in the pot.

PuElic   Aye?

S.B.  If  it’s a headache you have.

PuElic   It’ll  make me no worse anyway.

    Public  goes into the scullery. Private  stands at the door and  talks into
    him.

Private   Now’s your time, boy. The small hours of the morning. Put your
head on his shoulder and say, ‘How’s my wee darling Daddy?’

    Public puts his head round the door.

PuElic   You take some?

S.B.  Sure you know I never take a second cup.

Private   Playing hard to get. Come on, bucko; it’s your place to make the
move – the young man. Say – say – say, ‘Screwballs, with two magnificent
legs like that, how is it you were never in show bi]?’ Say, ‘It is now si[teen
or seventeen –’ – Say – oh my God – say – say something.

    Public enters with a cup of tea.

PuElic   You’ll  need a new tyre for the van.

S.B.  What one’s that?

PuElic   The back left-hand one. I told you. It’s done.

S.B.  Aye. So you did.

89
PuElic   And – and –

Private   What else?

PuElic   – and don’t forget the fencing posts for McGuire ne[t Wednesday.

S.B.  Fencing posts.

PuElic   Twelve do]en. The milk lorry’ll   take them. I spoke to Packey.

S.B.  Aye … right  …

Private   Go on! Keep talking!

PuElic   And if you’re  looking for the pliers, I threw them into the tea chest
under the counter.

S.B.  Which tea chest?

PuElic   The one near the window.

S.B.  Oh, I see – I see …

Private   You’re doing grand. Keep at it. It’s the silence that’s the enemy.

PuElic   You’ll  be wanting more plug tobacco. The traveller’ll be here this
week.

S.B.  More plug.

PuElic   It’s finished. The last of it went up to Curran’s wake.

S.B.  I’ll   – I’ll  see about that.

PuElic   And you’ll  need to put a new clasp on the lower window – the
tinkers are about again.

S.B.  Aye?

PuElic   They were in at dinner time. I got some cans off them.

S.B.  I Must thought I noticed something shining from the ceiling.

PuElic   It’s the cans then.

S.B.  Aye.

90
PuElic   That’s what it is. I bought si[ of them.

S.B.  They’ll  not go to loss.

PuElic   They wanted me to take a do]en but I said si[ would do us.

S.B.  Si[  is plenty. They don’t go as Tuick as they used to – them cans.

PuElic   They’ve all got cookers and ranges and things.

S.B.  What’s that?

PuElic   I say they don’t buy them now because the open fires are nearly all
gone.

S.B.  That’s it. All  cookers and ranges and things these times.

PuElic   That’s why I wouldn’t  take the do]en.

S.B.  You were right, too. Although I mind the time when I got through a
couple of do]en a week.

PuElic   Aye?

S.B.  All  cans it was then. Maybe you’d sell a kettle at turf-cutting or if
there’d be a Yank coming home …

    Pause.

PuElic   Better get these pills and then try to get a couple of hours’ sleep –

S.B.  You’re getting the mail-van to Strabane?

    Public gives him a Tuick, watchful look.

PuElic   At a Tuarter past seven.

S.B.  (awkwardly) I  was listening to the weather forecast there … moderate
westerly winds and occasional showers, it said.

PuElic   Aye?

S.B.  I was thinking it  – it – it – it would  be a fair enough day for going up
in thon plane.

PuElic   It should be, then.

91
S.B.  Showers – Must like the Canon said … And I was meaning to tell you
that you should sit at the back …

Private   It is now si[teen  or seventeen years – the longest way round’s the
shortest way home –

S.B.  So he was saying too … you know there – if there was an accident or
anything – it’s the front gets it hardest –

PuElic   I suppose that’s true enough

S.B.  So he was saying … not that I would know – Must that he was saying
it there …

Private   (urgently, rapidly) Now!  He might remember – he might. But if he
does, my God, laddo – what if he does?

PuElic   (with pretended carelessness) D’you know what kept coming into
my mind the day?

S.B.  Eh?

PuElic   The fishing we used to do on Lough na Cloc Cor.

S.B.  (confused, on guard) Oh, aye, Lough na Cloc Cor – aye – aye –

PuElic   We had a throw on it every Sunday during the season.

S.B.  That’s not the day nor yesterday.

PuElic   (more Tuickly) There used to be a blue boat on it – d’you remember
it?

S.B.  Many’s the fish we took off that same lake.

PuElic   D’you remember the blue boat?

S.B.  A  blue one, eh?

PuElic   I don’t know who owned it. But it  was blue. And the paint was
peeling.

S.B.  (remembering) I mind a brown one the doctor brought from
somewhere up in the –

92
PuElic   (Tuickly) It doesn’t matter who owned it. It doesn’t even matter
that it was blue. But d’you remember one afternoon in May – we were up
there – the two of us – and it must have rained because you put your Macket
round my shoulders and gave me your hat.

S.B.  Aye?

PuElic   – and it wasn’t that we were talking or anything – but suddenly –
suddenly you sang ‘All Round My Hat I’ll  Wear a Green Coloured
Ribbono’ –

S.B.  Me?

PuElic   – for no reason at all e[cept that we – that you were happy. D’you
remember? D’you remember?

    There is a pause while S.B. tries to recall.

S.B.  No …  no, then, I don’t …

    Private claps his hands in nervous mockery.

Private   (Tuickly) There! There! There!

S.B.  ‘All   Round My Hat’? No, I don’t think  I ever knew that one. It wasn’t
‘The Flower of Sweet Strabane’, was it? That was my song.

PuElic   It could have been. It doesn’t matter.

Private   So now you know: it never happened! Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha.

S.B.  ‘All   Round My Hat’? – that was never one of mine. What does it go
like?

PuElic   I couldn’t tell  you. I don’t know it either.

Private   Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha.

S.B.  And you say the boat was blue?

PuElic   It doesn’t matter. Forget it.

S.B.  (justly, reasonably) There was a brown one belonging to the doctor,
and before that there was a wee flat-bottom – but it was green – or was it

93
white? I’ll  tell you, you wouldn’t be thinking of  a punt – it could have been
blue – one that the curate had down at the pier last summer –

    Private’s  mocking laughter  increases. Public   rushes Tuickly  into  the
    shop. Private, still mocking, follows.

– a fine sturdy wee punt it was, too, and it could well have been the …

    He sees that he is alone and tails off. Slowly he gets to his feet and goes
    towards the scullery  door. He meets Madge entering. She is dressed in
    outside clothes. She is very weary.

Madge   What has you up?

S.B.  Me? Aw, I took medicine and the cramps wouldn’t let me sleep. I
thought you were in bed?

Madge   I was over at Nelly’s. The place was upside down.

S.B.  There’s nothing wrong, is there?

Madge   Not a thing.

S.B.  The baby’s strong and healthy?

Madge   Grand – grand.

S.B.  That’s all that matters.

Madge   They’re going to call it Brigid.

S.B.  Brigid  – that’s a grand name … Patrick, Brigid, and Colmcille …

    She takes off her hat and coat. S.B. hesitates.

Madge …

Madge   You’ll  get a cold padding about in yon rig.

S.B.  Madge, I’ll  manage rightly, Madge, eh?

Madge   Surely you will.

S.B.  I’ll   get one of Charley Bonner’s boys to do the van on Tuesdays and
Thursdays and I’ll manage rightly?

94
Madge   This place is cold. Away off to bed.

S.B.  It’s  not like in the old days when the whole countryside did with me; I
needed the help then. But it’s different now. I’ll manage by myself now. Eh?
I’ll  manage fine, eh?

Madge   Fine.

S.B.  D’you  mind the trouble we had keeping him at school Must after he
turned ten. D’you mind nothing would do him but he’d get behind the
counter. And he had this wee sailor suit on him this morning –

Madge   A sailor suit? He never had a sailor suit.

S.B.  Oh, he had, Madge. Oh, Madge, he had. I can see him, with his
shoulders back, and the wee head up straight, and the mouth, aw, man, as
set, and says he this morning, I can hear him saying it, says he, ‘I’m not
going to school. I’m going into my daddy’s business’ – you know – all
important – and, d’you mind, you tried to coa[ him to go to school, and not
a move you could get out of him, and him as manly looking, and this wee
sailor suit as smart looking on him, and – and – and at the heel of the hunt I
had to go with him myself, the two of us, hand in hand, as happy as larks –
we were that happy, Madge – and him dancing and chatting beside me –
mind? – you couldn’t get a word in edge-ways with all the chatting he used
to go through … Maybe, Madge, maybe it’s because I could have been his
grandfather, eh?

Madge   I don’t know.

S.B.  I was too old for her, Madge, eh?

Madge   I don’t know. They’re a new race – a new world.

S.B.  (leaving) In the wee sailor suit – all the chatting he used to go through
… I don’t know either …

Madge   (looking at case) Tomorrow’ll be sore on him (Gar): his heart’ll
break tomorrow, and all ne[t week, and the week after maybe … Brigid –
aye, it’s all right. (Trying out the sound of the name.) Brigid – Biddy –
Biddy Mulhern – Brigid  Mulhern – aye – like Madge Mulhern doesn’t
sound right – (trying it out) – Madge Mulhern – Madge Mulhern – I don’t

95
know – it’s too aul’-fashioned or something … Has he his cap? (Finds it in
the pocket of the coat. Also finds an apple.) … Aye, he has. And an apple, if
you don’t mind – for all his grief. He’ll  be all right. That Li]]y   one’ll  look
after him well, I suppose, if she can take time off from blatherin’. Garden
front and back, and a T9 in the house of lords – I’ll believe them things
when I see them! Never had much time for blatherin’ women …
(Remembering.) An envelope … (She takes two notes from her pocket, goes
to the dresser, and finds an envelope. She puts the money into the envelope,
and slips the envelope into the coat pocket.) That’ll get him a cup of tea on
the plane. I had put them two pounds by me to get my feet done on the fair
day. But I can wait till ne[t month. From what I hear, there’s no big dances
between now and then … (She stands looking at the bedroom door.) So. I
think that’s everything…. (She raises her hand in a sort of vague
Benediction, then shuffles towards the scullery.) When the boss was his
(Gar’s) age, he was the very same as him: leppin, and eeMitin’ about and
actin’ the clown; as like as two peas. And when he’s (Gar) the age the boss
is now, he’ll turn out Must the same. And although I won’t be here to see it,
you’ll find  that he’s learned nothin’ in-between times. That’s people for you
– they’d put you astray in the head if you thought long enough about them.

    Public and Private enter from the shop.

PuElic   You down too? Turning into a night club, this place.

Madge   I’m only  getting back.

PuElic   Well, how’s the new Madge?

Madge   Strong and healthy – and that’s all that matters. Were you and the
boss chatting there?

PuElic   When’s the christening?

Madge   Sunday. After last Mass.

PuElic   Madge Mulhern. Are you proud?

Madge   I’m Must tired, son. 9ery tired.

PuElic   You’re sure there’s nothing wrong, Madge?

96
Madge   If there was something wrong, wouldn’t I tell you?

Private   Of course she would. Who else has she?

PuElic   Did you tell her she’s getting an elephant out of my first wages?

Madge   Aye, so. The Mars are up?

PuElic   They are.

Madge   And the dishes washed?

PuElic   All  done.

Madge   I’ll  give you a call at half-si[,  then.

PuElic   Madge – Madge, you’d let me know if – if he got sick or anything?

Madge   Who else would there be?

PuElic   -ust in case … not that it’s likely – he’ll outlive the whole of us …

Madge   Good night.

PuElic   Sleep well, Madge.

Madge   Sleep well yourself.

    Madge goes off. Public and Private watch her shuffle off.

Private   Watch her carefully, every movement, every gesture, every little
peculiarity: keep the camera whirring; for this is a film you’ll run over and
over again – Madge Going to Bed On My Last Night At Home … Madge
…

    Public and Private go into bedroom.

God, Boy, why do you have to leave? Why? Why?

PuElic   I don’t know. I – I – I  don’t know.

    Quick curtain.

97
                            About    the  Author



Brian Friel was born in Omagh, County Tyrone, in 1929. His plays
include Philadelphia, Here I Come!, Translations, Faith Healer,
Making History and Dancing at Lughnasa.

98
                             By  the Same Author



                            THE ENEMY WITHIN
                    PHILADELPHIA, HERE I COME!
                   THE LO9ES OF CASS MAG8IRE
                                       LO9ERS
                                  9OL8NTEERS
                              LI9ING 48ARTERS
                      THE FREEDOM OF THE CITY
                       THREE SISTERS (Chekhov)
                                  ARISTOCRATS
                     THE COMM8NICATION CORD
                              MAKING  HISTORY
               FATHERS AND SONS (after Turgenev)
      THE LONDON 9ERTIGO (after Charles Macklin)
        A MONTH IN THE CO8NTRY (after Turgenev)
                        DANCING AT L8GHNASA
                        WONDERF8L TENNESSEE
                              MOLLY SWEENEY
                     GI9E ME YO8R  ANSWER, DO
                                TRANSLATIONS
                                 FAITH HEALER
                            THREE PLAYS AFTER
                              THE HOME PLACE
                        8NCLE 9ANYA  (Chekhov)
                               PERFORMANCES

                        BRIAN FRIEL: PLAYS ONE
 (Philadelphia,   Here I Come!, The Freedom of  the City,
Living Quarters,  Aristocrats,  Faith  Healer, Translations )

                        BRIAN FRIEL: PLAYS TWO

99
(Dancing at Lughnasa, Fathers and Sons, Making History,
               Wonderful Tennessee, Molly Sweeney) 


                                 also available
              FABER CRITICAL G8IDE: BRIAN FRIEL
           (Philadelphia, Here I Come!, Translations,
              Making History, Dancing at Lughnasa) 

100
                                         Copyright




                                    First published in 1965
                                    by Faber and Faber Ltd 
                                       Bloomsbury House 
                                 74–77 Great Russell Street 
                                      London WC1B 3DA 
                      This ebook edition first published in 2013 

                                        All  rights reserved
                                       © Brian Friel,  1965 

The right of Brian Friel to be identified as author of this work has been
 asserted in accordance with Section 77 of the Copyright, Designs and
                                         Patents Act 1988

 All  rights in this play are reserved by the Proprietor. Applications for
 professional rights should be addressed to The Agency (London) Ltd,
  24 Pottery Lane, Holland Park, London W11 4LZ. Applications for
 amateur rights should be addressed to Samuel French Ltd, 52 Fit]roy
    Street, London W1P 6-R. No performance may be given unless a
                               license has first been obtained.

 This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
        in any way e[cept as specifically permitted in writing by the
 publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it
   was purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law.
     Any unauthorised distribution or use of this te[t may be a direct
       infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights, and those
                    responsible may be liable in law accordingly

                                 ISBN 978–0–571–30097–6

