2
PRAISE	       FOR	   THE	    MATTHEW	          HOPE	     SERIES

“A	 master.	He	 is	 a	 superior	stylist,	 a	 spinner	of	 artfully	  designed	and
sometimes	macabre	plots.”	—Newsweek

“He	is,	by	far,	the	best	at	what	he	does.	Case	closed.”	—People

“McBain	 has	a	great	 approach,	great	attitude,	terrific	style,	 strong	plots,
excellent	dialogue,	sense	of	place,	and	sense	of	reality.”	—Elmore	Leonard

“It’s	hard	to	think	of	anyone	better	at	what	he	does.	In	fact,	it’s	impossible.”
—Robert	B.	Parker

“The	Matthew	Hope	novels	do	for	the	world	of	Florida	sleaze	what	the	87th
Precinct	books	do	for	big-city	 vice.	The	reader	is	hooked	and	given	not	a
moment’s	letup.”	—New	York	Times	Book	Review

Jack	&	The	Beanstalk
“A	   cracking	 good	  read...a	 solid,	   suspenseful,	swiftly-paced	  story.”
—Pittsburgh	Post-Gazette

The	House	That	Jack	Built
“Deft	 plotting,	  crisp	 dialogue,	and	 intriguing	  characters	rack	up	 solid
entertainment.”	—San	Diego	Union
	
“When	McBain	sets	his	tale	to	wagging,	he	commands	close	attention.”	—Los
Angeles	Times

Three	Blind	Mice
“Matthew	Hope,	the	suave	Florida	lawyer,	is	back	in	the	latest	of	McBain’s
series	  of	   cynically	    titled	   nursery-rhyme	   and	  fairy-tale	    themed
novels....McBain	is	 an	undisputed	master	of	 the	 genre—slick,	wry,	 and
satisfying.”	—Booklist

There	Was	a	Little	Girl
“McBain	does	it	 again!	A	 brilliant	 piece	of	writing...and	you	 won’t	put	 it
down.”	—Larry	King,	USA	Today

Cinderella
“The	first	page	of	a	McBain	novel	is	 like	the	first	potato	chip:	It	 whets	the
appetite	for	more.”	—Newsday

3
Snow	White	&	Rose	Red
“Guaranteed	to	raise	 the	hackles	you	 didn’t	 know	 you	 had.”	 —Kansas	City
Star

4
ALSO	     BY	   ED	  McBAIN...

                                       THE	87TH	PRECINCT	NOVELS
Cop	Hater	(1956),	The	Mugger	(1956),	The	Pusher	(1956),	The	Con	Man
(1957),	Killer’s	Choice	(1957),	Killer’s	 Payoff	(1958),	Lady	 Killer	 (1958),
Killer’s	Wedge	(1959),	’Til	Death	(1959),	King’s	Ransom	(1959),	Give	the
Boys	a	Great	Big	Hand	(1960),	The	Heckler	(1960),	See	Them	Die	(1960),
Lady,	Lady,	I	Did	It	(1961),	The	Empty	Hours	(1962),	Like	Love	(1962),	Ten
Plus	One	(1963),	Ax	(1964),	He	Who	Hesitates	(1964),	Doll	(1965),	Eighty
Million	Eyes	(1966),	Fuzz	(1968),	Shotgun	(1969),	Jigsaw	(1970),	Hail,	Hail
the	Gang’s	All	Here!	(1971),	Sadie	When	She	Died	(1972),	Let’s	Hear	It	for
the	Deaf	Man	(1972),	Hail	to	the	Chief	(1973),	Bread	(1974),	Blood	Relatives
(1975),	So	Long	As	You	Both	Shall	Live	(1976),	Long	Time	No	See	(1977),
Calypso	(1979),	Ghosts	(1980),	Heat	(1981),	Ice	(1983),	Lightning	(1984),
Eight	Black	Horses	(1985),	Poison	(1987),	Tricks	(1987),	Lullaby	 (1989),
Vespers	(1990),	Widows	(1991),	Kiss	 (1992),	 Mischief	 (1993),	And	 All
Through	the	House	(1994),	Romance	(1995),	Nocturne	(1997),	The	Big	Bad
City	(1999),	 The	Last	Dance	(2000),	 Money,	Money,	Money	(2001),	Fat
Ollie’s	Book	 (2002),	The	 Frumious	Bandersnatch	(2004),	Hark!	  (2004),
Fiddlers	(2005)

                                      THE	MATTHEW	HOPE	NOVELS
Goldilocks	(1977),	Rumpelstiltskin	(1981),	Beauty	and	the	Beast	(1982),	Jack
and	the	Beanstalk	(1984),	Snow	White	and	 Rose	Red	(1985),	Cinderella
(1986),	Puss	in	Boots	(1987),	The	House	That	Jack	Built	(1988),	Three	Blind
Mice	(1990),	Mary,	Mary	(1992),	There	Was	a	Little	Girl	(1994),	Gladly	the
Cross-Eyed	Bear	(1996),	The	Last	Best	Hope	(1998)

                                               OTHER	NOVELS
The	April	 Robin	Murders	(with	 Craig	 Rice)	(1958),	 The	Sentries	(1965),
Where	There’s	Smoke	(1975),	Doors	(1975),	Guns	(1976),	Another	Part	of	the
City	(1986),	Downtown	(1991),	Driving	 Lessons	(2000),	Learning	to	 Kill
(2005),	Transgressions	(2005)

5
AND	    BY	   EVAN	    HUNTER...

The	Evil	 Sleep!	(1952),	Don’t	Crowd	 Me	(1953),	The	 Blackboard	Jungle
(1954),	Second	Ending	(1956),	Strangers	When	We	Meet	(1958),	A	Matter	of
Conviction	(1959),	Mothers	and	Daughters	(1961),	Buddwing	(1964),	The
Paper	Dragon	(1966),	A	Horse’s	Head	(1967),	Last	Summer	(1968),	Sons
(1969),	Nobody	Knew	They	Were	There	(1971),	Every	Little	Crook	and	Nanny
(1972),	Come	Winter	(1973),	Streets	of	Gold	(1974),	The	Chisholms:	A	Novel
of	the	Journey	West	(1976),	Walk	Proud	(1979),	Love,	Dad	(1981),	Far	from
the	Sea	(1983),	Lizzie	 (1984),	Criminal	  Conversation	(1994),	Privileged
Conversation	(1996),	Candyland	(2001)

                                                      PLAYS
The	Easter	Man	(1964),	The	Conjuror	(1969)

                                                 SCREENPLAYS
Strangers	When	We	Meet	(1960),	The	Birds	(1963),	Fuzz	(1972),	Walk	Proud
(1979)

                                                   TELEPLAYS
The	Chisholms	(1979),	The	Legend	of	Walks	Far	Woman	(1980),	Dream	West
(1986)

                                             CHILDREN’S	BOOKS
Find	 the	Feathered	Serpent	(1952),	The	Remarkable	Harry	 (1959),	 The
Wonderful	Button	(1961),	Me	And	Mr.	Stenner	(1976)

                                       SHORT	STORY	COLLECTIONS
The	Jungle	Kids	(1956),	The	Last	Spin	&	Other	Stories	(1960),	Happy	New
Year,	Herbie	(1963),	The	Easter	Man	(a	Play)	and	Six	Stories	(1972),	The
McBain	Brief	 (1982),	McBain’s	 Ladies:	The	 Women	of	the	87th	 (1988),
McBain’s	Ladies,	Too	(1989),	The	Best	American	Mystery	Stories	(2000),
Running	from	Legs	(2000),	Barking	at	Butterflies	(2000)

8
The	characters	and	events	portrayed	in	this	book	are	fictitious.	Any	similarity
to	real	persons,	living	or	dead,	is	coincidental	and	not	intended	by	the	author.


                             Text	copyright	 ©1990	HUI	 Corporation


  No	part	of	 this	book	may	be	reproduced,	or	stored	in	a	retrieval	system,	or
         transmitted	 in	any	form	or	by	 any	means,	electronic,	mechanical,
photocopying,	recording,	or	 otherwise,	without	express	written	permission	of
                                                  the	publisher.


                                    Published	by	Thomas	&	Mercer
                                                P.O.	Box	400818
                                            Las	Vegas,	NV	89140


                                        ISBN-13:	 9781612182629
                                              ISBN:	1612182623

10
                                                                      CONTENTS

Chapter	1
Chapter	2
Chapter	3
Chapter	4
Chapter	5
Chapter	6
Chapter	7
Chapter	8
Chapter	9
Chapter	10
Chapter	11
Chapter	12
About	the	Author

11
                                                                                                                         1


YOU	WOKE	up	every	morning	on	sodden	sheets,	the	air	heavy	with	moisture,	the
bloodred	line	 of	 the	 thermometer	 already	standing	 at	seventy-five	 degrees,
and	you	knew	 the	temperature	would	 climb	 high	into	 the	nineties	before	 the
day	was	done.	In	August,	the	heat	was	relentless.
   It	 rained	every	 afternoon,	whether	for	 five	 minutes	or	 an	hour.	Torrents	of
rain	 spilling	  from	  a	 swollen	  black	 sky.	  The	 asphalt	 steamed	 under	 the
onslaught	of	  the	 rain.	 Great	 clouds	 of	 steam	 rising.	 But	  the	 rain	 cooled
nothing,	and	the	heat	persisted.
   There	 was	no	relief	 at	 night	either.	 Even	with	 the	sun	 gone,	the	humidity
was	there,	a	twin	to	the	heat.	In	August,	 there	wasn’t	a	breath	of	air	 to	be	had
anywhere	in	Florida,	day	or	night.	 You	suffered.
   The	room	 smelled	of	blood.
   Blood	 wasn’t	 supposed	to	smell,	but	 the	aroma	was	palpable.	Or	 maybe	it
was	only	the	 stink	of	 torn	yellow	  flesh.	Outside	in	 the	palmettos,	the	 insects
chattered.	Full	moon	tonight,	a	person	could	clearly	read	the	dial	of	a	watch	in
the	moonspill.	 Eleven-twenty.	 And	 ticking.	  Waiting	 for	 Ho	 Dao	 Bat	to	 get
home	from	The	Pagoda.	Waiting	to	bid	him	good	night.
   The	other	two	 were	already	dead	to	the	world.
   A	 joke,	grant	me	my	little	 joke.
   So	solly,	 sleep	tight.
   Ho	 Dao	Bat	was	next.
   Dead	on	a	hot,	moist	night	 in	the	middle	of	 August.	So	solly,	plick.
   The	 house	 was	in	 a	 section	 of	 Calusa	 known	 as	Little	  Asia,	 so-named
because	of	the	many	Orientals	who’d	 settled	here	over	the	past	several	years.
In	a	city	not	 particularly	 famous	for	its	 hospitality	 to	nonwhites,	any	Chinese,
Japanese,	Korean,	or	Vietnamese	 who	 came	here	invariably	  drifted	  to	this
area	between	Tango	and	Langhorn,	just	west	of	the	Tamiami	Trail.	At	 the	turn
of	the	century	there’d	 been	only	a	whorehouse	and	a	saloon	on	these	two	and
a	half	 acres	of	 land.	 Now	 there	 were	 more	than	 three	dozen	 tiny	 wooden
houses	strewn	 among	the	 palmettos.	 Brimming	  with	  Orientals.	 Night	 like
tonight,	they	were	 all	outdoors,	vainly	 hoping	 for	a	breeze	to	remind	 them	of
a	mountain	village	halfway	 across	the	world.
   So	solly,	 no	bleeze.
   Only	 knife.
   See	plitty	 knife?
   The	 blade	of	the	 knife	glittered	 in	 the	moonlight	 spilling	 through	the	 open

12
window.	The	two	 little	 men	lay	 dead	and	bleeding	on	the	floor,	 one	on	either
side	of	 the	 bed	closest	to	 the	 door.	Three	 single	 beds	in	 this	 ground-floor
room,	the	stink	 of	yellow	  everywhere,	the	stink	 of	red,	the	 stink	of	 blood.	A
calendar	on	the	wall,	pretty	 Chinese	girl	 on	it,	wearing	 a	kimono	and	smiling
shyly	over	 a	fan.	The	kimono	 was	 red,	the	color	 of	luck,	 the	color	 of	 blood,
where	was	Ho	Dao	Bat?	The	job	would	not	be	done	until	Ho	 got	his.
   Another	 look	at	the	watch.
   Eleven-thirty.
   Come	on,	Ho.	 Come	meet	the	knife.
   Somewhere	 outside,	 there	was	 laughter.	 Drifting	  on	 the	 stillness	 of	 the
night,	floating	 in	 through	the	 window	 and	into	 the	room	where	 the	two	 men
lay	unhearing	 on	the	 floor.	 A	 voice	singsonged	something	 unintelligible	  on
the	night,	and	there	was	more	laughter,	men	and	women	 laughing,	foreigners
from	another	world	 enjoying	 the	 steamy	Florida	night,	 come	meet	the	 knife,
Ho,	come	say	hello	to	the	knife.
   Waiting.
   Time.
   The	buzz	of	 a	fly	discovering	 the	blood	on	the	corpses.
   Ho	 would	 be	here	soon.	Ho	Dao	Bat,	the	third	little	  man	in	the	triumvirate.
The	leader.	A	follower	 tonight,	 in	 that	the	other	two	 had	already	led	the	 way
to	perdition,	  the	other	 two	 were	 now	 on	 the	 floor	 waiting	  sightlessly	 and
mutely	for	 Ho	 to	join	 them.	Come	 on,	Ho,	 come	join	 the	party,	see	how	the
other	two	are	enjoying	the	food?
   Another	 little	 joke,	you	must	forgive	 me.
   More	 flies	now.
   Buzzing	  in	 through	the	 open	window	  where	a	 moment	earlier	 there	 had
been	the	rush	of	laughter	and	the	babble	of	voices,	a	squadron	of	flies	buzzing
in	and	seeking	the	runway,	circling	 the	faces	with	their	bleeding	 sockets,	their
bleeding	towers,	 Fly	 One	 to	 Tower,	request	 permission	to	 land.	 The	 room
buzzed	with	 flies	 greedily	 drinking,	  a	veritable	 fly	 frenzy,	 try	 that	 on	your
Asian	tongue,	try	this,	Ho	Dao	Bat!
   And	 thrust	the	knife	at	the	air.
   This!
   Again.
   There	were	sudden	footsteps	on	the	gravel	path	outside.
   Someone	was	approaching	the	front	door.



Detective	Morris	  Bloom	 stood	 tall	 and	wrinkled	  and	grizzled	 in	 the	 early-
morning	sunlight	 streaming	into	the	room.	No	 time	to	shave	this	morning,	 not
when	the	 7:00	a.m.	 call	 from	 downtown	 had	reported	 three	dead	men	 in	 a
room	that	reeked	of	ritual	 murder.	No	time	to	search	in	his	closet	for	 a	freshly

13
dry-cleaned	 suit.	 Time	  only	 to	  throw	 on	 a	 clean	 shirt	  and	 the	 rumpled
seersucker	draped	over	the	chair	near	the	dresser,	time	only	to	quickly	 knot	 a
tie	and	then	telephone	Rawles	to	pass	on	the	address	of	the	crime	scene.
   The	 two	detectives	stood	side	by	side	in	 the	sunlight.	 Across	the	room,	the
Medical	Examiner	 kept	trying	 to	shoo	the	flies	 away	from	the	corpses.	It	was
a	thankless	job.	Rawles	looked	 bandbox	fresh.	Tan	tropical	 suit,	pale	 lemon-
colored	shirt,	striped	brown	 and	gold	tie,	 dark	brown	 loafers.	He	resembled	a
stylish	cop	 on	the	defunct	 Miami	 Vice,	but	 this	was	 Calusa,	on	the	opposite
coast.
   Rawles	 was	bigger	and	heavier	than	Bloom.	 Some	six	 feet	four	 inches	tall
and	weighing	 in	 at	 two	 forty,	 he	 was	the	 kind	 of	 mountainous	 black	 man
people	down	 here	 crossed	the	 street	to	 avoid.	 Bloom,	 at	 six-one	 and	 two
twenty,	with	a	broken	nose	and	the	oversize	knuckles	of	a	streetfighter,	wasn’t
the	kind	 of	person	 you’d	 care	to	meet	in	 a	dark	 alley,	either.	 Together,	they
made	a	formidable	pair,	except	that	it	 was	almost	impossible	for	 them	to	play
good	cop/bad	cop,	since	they	 both	looked	 like	bad	 cops.	Well,	perhaps	there
was	a	slight	difference.	In	 Bloom’s	 dark	and	somber	eyes,	there	was	always	a
look	of	ineffable	 sadness,	an	unfortunate	failing	for	a	police	detective.
   “Mighty	  pretty,”	 Rawles	said.
   He	  was	 not	 normally	  given	 to	 irony,	  but	 the	 bodies	 across	 the	 room
demanded	a	certain	 dryness	of	 humor.	 Either	 that,	 or	 you	 went	outside	 to
throw	up.	The	 only	time	 he	had	thrown	 up	recently	was	on	 a	rough	cruise	to
romantic	 Bermuda,	 which	 he’d	  taken	with	  a	 girl	 who	  worked	 as	 a	legal
stenographer	at	the	courthouse.	Bloom,	 on	the	other	hand,	 had	been	married
for	 a	good	 long	 time	 now	 and	did	  not	take	 too	 many	 cruises	to	 romantic
Bermuda.	The	last	time	he’d	 thrown	 up	was	Saturday	night,	when	 he’d	eaten
a	bad	fish	at	Marina	 Lou’s.	 This	 was	now	Tuesday	morning,	 and	he	felt	 like
throwing	up	again.
   The	three	men	across	the	room	had	had	their	throats	slit.
   And	 their	eyes	gouged	out.
   And	 their	penises	cut	off	and	stuffed	into	their	 mouths.
   Rawles	 had	seen	things	like	 this	in	 the	jungles	of	 Vietnam.	The	 Cong	had
done	things	like	this	 to	the	grunts	in	Vietnam.	 It	was	he	who’d	 suggested	that
maybe	these	were	intraracial	 murders.	 This	being	 an	Asian	 community	 and
all,	and	the	way	 the	bodies	had	been	mutilated.	 Alex	 McReady,	the	 sergeant
who’d	 first	responded	to	the	radio	 call	from	 the	car	patrolling	  Charlie	sector,
was	of	the	 opinion	 that	these	were	drug-related	 murders,	probably	 Jamaican
in	origin.	  The	Jamaican	posses	that	 had	filtered	 into	 some	parts	 of	 Florida
were	particularly	 vicious	 in	their	 killing	 techniques.	And	 it	was	a	known	 fact
that	in	their	homelands,	Asians	smoked	dope	as	a	matter	of	course.
   Bloom	  wondered	about	the	 validity	 of	 this.	 To	him,	 this	business	did	 not
seem	drug-related,	Jamaican	or	otherwise.	Rawles	may	have	had	a	point	about

14
it	being	 linked	 to	 something	in	 the	 community,	 but	 then	again	you	 did	 not
have	to	be	Asian	to	 do	unspeakable	things	to	a	 fellow	 human	being,	dead	or
alive.
   He	 walked	over	to	where	the	ME	 was	closing	his	satchel.	Flies	swarmed	up
around	the	ME’s	head	as	he	got	to	his	feet.	Both	men	shooed	them	away.
   “For	  the	record,”	 the	ME	 said,	“as	 if	 you	 didn’t	 know,	all	 three	had	 their
jugulars	severed.	The	eyes	and	the	rest	of	it	undoubtedly	came	later.”
   “Skilled	  or	what?”
   “The	 surgery,	you	mean?”
   “Yes.”
   “A	  butcher.	By	 the	way,	 I	found	 all	 but	 one	of	 the	eyes.	They’re	 in	 a	jar
there	on	the	windowsill.	 You	might	want	to	send	them	along	with	 the	bodies.”
   Bloom	 wanted	to	throw	 up	all	over	again.
   “Take	 a	look	at	this,”	 Rawles	said,	coming	over.
   He	 was	holding	a	man’s	leather	billfold	 in	his	hand.



The	telephone	was	ringing	  when	Matthew	 Hope	 got	out	 of	 the	shower	 that
Thursday	morning.	He	 wrapped	a	towel	around	 his	waist,	said,	“I’m	  coming,
I’m	 coming,”	 and	 rushed	dripping	 wet	 into	 the	bedroom.	 He	picked	 up	the
receiver	just	as	the	answering	machine	clicked	in.
   “Hello,	  you’ve	reached	349-3777,”	his	voice	 said.	“If	 you’ll—”
   “Hang	 on,”	 he	said,	“I’m	 here.”
   “—leave	 a	message—”
   “I’m	  here,”	he	said.
   “—when	 you	 hear	the	beep—”
   Damn	 machine,	he	thought.
   “—I’ll	   get	back	to	you	as	soon	as	I	can.	Thank	you	for	calling.”
   “I’m	  still	 here,”	he	said.	“Please	hang	on.”
   The	machine	beeped.
   “Hello?”	  he	said.
   “Dad?”
   He	 visualized	her	on	the	other	end	of	the	line.	 Long	and	lanky	 and	bursting
with	adolescent	energy,	hair	a	brighter	gold	after	a	summer	in	the	sun,	eyes	as
blue	as	a	Caribbean	lagoon.	His	 daughter,	Joanna.	Who	wanted	to	be	a	brain
surgeon	and	who	practiced	tying	 knots	inside	matchboxes.	Joanna.	Whom	he
loved	to	death.
   “Hi,	  honey,”	 he	said,	beaming.	“I	  was	going	 to	call	 you	later	 today.	How
are—”
   “Promises,	 promises,”	she	said.
   An	 impish	grin	 on	her	mouth,	no	doubt,	promises,	promises.	Fourteen	years
old	and	already	sounding	like	a	stand-up	comic.

15
   “I	 mean	it,”	he	said.	“I’ve	got	a	ten	o’clock	meeting	with	a	potential	client,
but	I	planned	to—”
   “Still	 chasing	ambulances,	Dad?”
   The	grin	again,	he	was	certain	of	that.
   “I	 gather	you’re	enjoying	your	summer,”	he	said.
   “I	 adore	it	up	here,”	she	said.	“But	there	are	no	boys,	Dad.”
   “I’m	 sorry	to	hear	that.”
   “Well,	 there	are	two	of	them.	One’s	a	nerd	and	the	other	is	twelve.	I	met	a
nice	girl,	though.	Her	name	is	Avery,	which	I	think	is	sort	of	neat,	and	she’s
on	her	high-school	swimming	team	in	New	York.	Did	 you	know	 they	had
swimming	teams	in	New	York?	I	didn’t.	She’s	teaching	me	a	lot	of	things	I
didn’t	know,	as	for	example	how	to	swim	in	very	choppy	water.	Do	you	know
how	cold	the	water	is	up	here?	Well,	she’s	in	the	ocean	every	day	for	at	least
an	hour,	and	it	doesn’t	faze	her	at	all.	Waves	chopping	everywhere	around
her,	she’s	an	actual	shark,	Dad,	you	should	see	her.	Avery	Curtis,	remember
that	name,	she’s	going	to	win	Olympic	gold	medals	one	day.	Also,	she’s	a
Libra,	her	birthday’s	the	fifteenth	of	October.”
   “Birth	 date	of	great	men,”	Matthew	said,	but	did	not	amplify.
   “Mom	 says	to	tell	you	hello,	she’s	making	pancakes.”
   “Tell	her	hello	back.”
   “Would	you	like	to	talk	to	her?”
   “Sure,”	Matthew	said,	“why	not?”
   “Just	a	sec.”
   Susan	Hope,	Matthew’s	former	wife.	Dark,	brooding	eyes	in	an	oval	face,
brown	hair	cut	in	a	wedge,	a	full,	pouting	mouth	that	gave	an	impression	of	a
sullen,	spoiled,	defiant	beauty.	To	their	mutual	surprise	and	delight,	he	had
begun	dating	her	again	some	years	after	the	divorce.	But	that	was	in	another
country,	he	thought	now,	and	besides	the	wench	is	dead.	The	other	country
had	been	right	here	in	old	Calusa,	Florida,	but	it	had	seemed	like	shining	new
terrain,	a	pristine	landscape	glistening	with	promise.	And	the	wench	wasn’t
really	dead,	merely	gone	from	his	life	again.	For	now,	at	any	rate.	Matthew
was	not	the	sort	of	man	who	took	bets	on	the	future.	Not	concerning	Susan,
anyway.	Not	after	the	tempestuous	rekindling	of	their	passion	years	after	the
divorce.
   “Hello?”	 she	said.
   Susan	Hope.
   “Hi,”	 he	said.	“I	hear	you’re	making	pancakes.”
   “Terrific,	 huh?”	she	said,	and	he	visualized	her	pulling	a	face.	Cooking	had
never	been	Susan’s	favorite	pastime.
   “How’s	the	summer	going?”	he	asked.
   “No	boys,”	she	said.
   “Pity.”

16
   “Mmm.	 Why	don’t	you	come	up	for	a	weekend?	The	house	is	huge.”
   “Too	dangerous,”	he	said.
   “Who	says?”
   “You.”
   “True.”
   “We’d	fight	in	front	of	the	child.”
   “Probably.”
   “For	sure.”
   “I	 sometimes	miss	you,”	she	said.
   “Me,	too.”
   “Not	 often,	but	sometimes.”
   “Me,	too.”
   “I	 think	it’s	sad	we	can’t	get	along	for	any	reasonable	amount	of	time.”
   “Yes.”
   “But	 I	guess	it’s	better	this	way.”
   “Yes.”
   “Don’t	 you	think?”
   “I	 do.	What’s	bothering	you,	Susan?”
   “I	 don’t	know.	But	we	did	have	some	good	times	together.	And	this	doesn’t
seem	like	a	vacation	house	with	just	me	and	Joanna	in	it.”
   “Well,”	 he	said.
   “So	if	you	should	find	yourself	up	in	old	Cape	Cod	one	of	these	days...”
   “I	 don’t	think	I	will.”
   “You	could	get	to	see	me	making	pancakes.”
   “Uh-huh.”
   “I’m	 wearing	only	high	heels	and	an	apron.”
   “Sure,”	he	said.
   But	the	words	had	their	desired	effect.	He	immediately	conjured	her	in	high
white	patent-leather	pumps,	a	short	white	apron	tied	at	the	waist,	the	 bib
partially	exposing	her	breasts,	the	tails	of	the	sash	hanging	down	over	her
naked	buttocks.	She	also	had	a	spatula	in	her	hand.
   “Put	Joanna	back	on,”	he	said.
   “Chicken,”	she	said,	but	he	knew	she	was	smiling.
   He	was	smiling,	too.
   “Did	 you	two	get	it	all	out	of	your	systems	again?”	Joanna	asked.
   “None	of	your	business.”
   “I’ll	  never	understand	either	of	you.”
   “Yes,	you	 will,”	  Matthew	promised.	“When	you’re	 sixty	 years	old	and
we’re	both	dead.”
   “Don’t	 even	joke	about	it!”	she	said.
   “Honey,	I	have	to	get	dressed,	I’ll	call	you	this	afternoon,	okay?”
   “No,	 Avery	and	I	are	going	to	this	dumb	social	in	the	vain	hope	some	new

17
boys’ll	 show	up.	 I’m	 beginning	 to	think	 the	 twelve-year-old	 is	kind	 of	 cute,
can	you	believe	it?”
   “I’m	  beginning	to	think	 you’re	kind	 of	cute,”	 Matthew	said.
   “Sweet	 talker,”	she	said.
   Grinning	  again,	he	guessed.	Like	her	mother.	“Honey,	 good-bye,”	 he	said.
“I’ll	  call	whenever.”
   “Love	 you,	 Dad.”
   “Love	 you,	 too,”	he	said,	and	hung	up	and	looked	at	the	dresser	clock.
   Frantically,	 he	began	dressing.



Matthew	had	never	 met	a	man	who	 looked	comfortable	 in	 jailhouse	threads.
Stephen	Leeds	did	not	look	comfortable	in	them	now.	A	 well-built	 blond	man,
six	feet	four	 inches	tall	 and	weighing	 some	two	 hundred	pounds,	he	seemed
straitjacketed	in	the	undersize	denim	garments	the	city	had	provided.	Bail	 had
been	denied	because	of	the	heinous	nature	of	the	crimes.	He	would	be	dressed
this	way	for	quite	some	time.
   This	  was	 the	sixteenth	 day	 of	  August,	 two	 days	 after	 Charlie	 car	 had
responded	to	a	call	 from	 a	Chinese	dishwasher	who	had	 stopped	by	at	1211
Tango	to	pick	up	his	three	friends	so	they	could	all	drive	 to	work	together.
   “Did	  you	kill	 them?”	Matthew	 asked.
   “No,”	  Leeds	said.
   “At	  the	trial,	you	threatened	to	kill	 them.”
   “That	  was	at	 the	 trial.	 That	 was	 right	 after	 the	verdict	  was	read.	 I	 was
angry.	People	say	things	when	they’re	angry.”
   “Dangerous	 thing	to	say.	That	you’d	kill	  them.”
   “I	 realize	that	now.”
   “But	 now	 you	say	you	didn’t.	 Kill	 them.”
   “That’s	 right.”
   “Any	  idea	who	might	have	killed	 them?”
   “No.”
   “You	 didn’t	 hire	someone	to	kill	 them,	did	you?”
   “No.”
   “Or	 ask	anyone—out	of	 friendship,	or	debt,	or	for	 whatever	possible	reason
—to	kill	 them	for	you?”
   “No.	 I	 had	nothing	to	do	with	killing	  them.”
   “You’re	  sure	about	that,	are	you?”
   “Positive.”
   “Tell	 me	where	you	were	on	Monday	 night.	The	night	of	 the	murders.”
   “At	  home.	With	my	wife.”
   “Anyone	 else	there?	Besides	the	two	of	you?”
   “No.	 Why?	 Won’t	her	word	be	good	enough?”

18
   “She’s	 your	wife,”	 Matthew	 said	simply.
   Studying	 the	man.	 Trying	 to	find	 innocence	or	 guilt	 in	 those	blue	eyes	of
his.	He	would	not	represent	him	if	 he	thought	he	was	guilty.	As	simple	as	that.
In	this	 world,	 there	were	enough	lawyers	 willing	 to	 represent	murderers	and
thieves.	Matthew	Hope	was	not	one	of	them.	Nor	would	 he	ever	be.
   “You	 realize	how	this	 looks,	don’t	you?”	 he	said.
   “Yes.”
   “Your	 wallet	 is	found	at	the	scene	of	the	crime...”
   “I	 don’t	 know	how	 it	got	there.”
   “But	 it’s	 unmistakably	yours,	isn’t	 it?”
   “Yes.”
   “Your	 driver’s	 license	is	in	it...”
   “Yes.”
   “Your	 credit	 cards...”
   “Yes.”
   “Unmistakably	  yours.	 The	state	attorney	could	 make	a	case	on	that	alone.
Your	wallet	 found	on	the	 floor	 in	a	room	 where	three	men	accused	of	raping
your	wife—”
   “I	 wasn’t	 anywhere	near—”
   “—and	 later	acquitted—”
   “But	 they	did	 it.”
   “Not	 according	 to	the	jury.”
   “The	 jury	 was	wrong.	They	raped	her.”
   “Whether	  they	did	 or	not	is	 academic.	Last	Friday,	 all	three	of	 them	were
acquitted.	And	 last	 Friday,	 you	 jumped	 to	 your	 feet	and	 threatened	to	 kill
them,	in	 the	 presence	of	 hundreds	 of	 witnesses.	And	  Monday	 night,	 they
were,	in	fact,	killed.	 And	your	wallet	 was	found	at	the	scene.”
   “Yes.”
   “So	 why	should	I	 defend	you?”
   “Because	I’m	 innocent,”	 Leeds	said.
   Eyes	as	clear	as	still	water.	Sitting	on	the	edge	of	his	narrow	cot,	looking	 up
into	Matthew’s	 face.	 Matthew	standing	 opposite	him,	 against	the	white	 wall
of	the	cell	covered	with	 graffiti	 left	 by	the	army	of	 prisoners	who’d	 been	here
before	Leeds.	Innocent	or	guilty?	 Decide.	Because	once	you	agreed	to	take	it
on,	you	were	committed	to	it,	 you	owed.
   “Any	  idea	how	your	wallet	 got	in	that	room?”
   “No.”
   “Had	 you	missed	your	wallet	 at	any	time	Monday?”
   “No.”
   “When’s	 the	last	time	you	saw	it?”
   “I	 don’t	 remember.”
   “When’s	 the	last	time	you	used	money	that	day?	Or	a	credit	card?”

19
   “I	 guess...while	I	was	renting	the	video.”
   “When	was	that?”
   “On	my	way	home	to	the	farm.	I’m	a	farmer.”
   An	 understatement.	Leeds	had	inherited	three	 thousand	acres	of	 rich
farmland	on	Timucuan	Point	Road	from	his	father,	Osgood,	who’d	died	six
years	ago.	He	was	the	grandson	of	Roger	Leeds,	who—as	one	of	the	first
settlers	here	in	southwest	Florida—had	bought	up	hundreds	of	thousands	of
acres	when	land	was	still	going	for	peanuts.	The	family	still	 owned	trailer
parks	in	Tampa	and	choice	sections	of	real	estate	in	downtown	Calusa.
   “I	 was	visiting	my	broker,”	Leeds	said.	“He	has	an	office	on	Lime.”
   “Small	world,”	 Matthew	said,	and	smiled.	“So	do	I.”
   “I	 go	there	every	day.”
   “Yes,	so	do	I.”
   “For	an	hour	or	so,”	Leeds	added.
   Explaining	the	meaning	of	the	word	rich.
   Matthew	got	back	to	why	he	was	here.
   “What	time	did	you	see	your	broker	on	Monday?”	he	asked.
   “Around	three.	Jessie	asked	me	to	pick	up	a	movie	on	the	way	home...”
   Jessica	Leeds.	Who	had	called	Matthew	late	yesterday,	after	the	grand	jury
had	brought	in	a	true	bill	and	the	judge	had	denied	bail.	Telling	him	she’d
heard	he	was	the	best	criminal	lawyer	in	Calusa—a	premise	Benny	Weiss
may	have	hotly	 contested—and	asking	if	he	 would	defend	her	 husband.
Which	was	why	he	was	here	this	morning.
   “So	I	stopped	by	at	the	video	store—”
   “Which	one?”
   “Video	 Town?	Video	World?	They	all	sound	the	same	to	me.	It’s	on	the
Trail,	near	Lloyd.	Just	before	the	cutoff	to	the	Whisper	Key	Bridge.”
   “Which	video	did	you	rent?”
   “Casablanca.	Jessie	loves	those	old	movies.	We	watched	it	together	that
night.	After	dinner.”
   “Did	 you	leave	the	house	at	any	time	that	night?”
   “No.”
   “What	time	did	you	go	to	bed	that	night?”
   “Around	eight-thirty.”
   “Isn’t	 that	early?”
   “We	got	into	bed	to	watch	the	movie.”
   “You	didn’t	sleep	in	your	clothes,	did	you?”
   “No.	My	 clothes?	Of	course	not.	My	clothes?”
   “You	undressed	before	you	went	to	bed,	isn’t	that	right?”
   “Yes,	of	course.”
   “What’d	you	do	with	your	wallet?”
   “Well,	I...I	 suppose	I...”

20
   Matthew	watched	him.	Sudden	uncertainty.	A	simple	act	someone	performs
every	day	of	the	week.	Uncertain	about	it	now	because	his	life	might	depend
upon	what	had	happened	to	that	wallet.	In	the	state	of	Florida,	the	penalty	for
first-degree	murder	was	death	in	the	electric	chair.	Matthew	waited.
   “I	  normally	put	it	 on	 the	dresser,”	Leeds	said.	“With	my	 keys	and	my
change.	I	guess	I	did	the	same	thing	that	night.”
   “But	 you’re	not	sure.”
   “Well,	actually,	I’m	not.	Because...”
   Again,	a	slight	hesitation.	Then:
   “I	 was	out	on	the	boat	that	afternoon,	and	I	may	have	left	it	there.”
   “The	boat?”
   “Yes,	I	 own	a	thirty-nine-foot	Med.	I	 took	it	out	for	 a	spin	before	dinner
that	night.”
   “And	 you	think	you	may	have	left	the	wallet	on	the	boat?”
   “Possibly.”
   “Have	you	done	that	before?”
   “I	 sometimes	stow	it	below.	So	it	won’t	accidentally	fall	in	the	water.”
   “But	 have	you	ever	left	it	on	the	boat	before?”
   “Only	 on	one	other	occasion.”
   “You	forgot	your	wallet	on	the	boat?”
   “Yes.”
   “And	 you	think	you	may	have	done	that	Monday	night?”
   “Well,	 yes.	And	someone	probably	took	it	from	the	boat.	Otherwise,	how
could	it	have—”
   “When	did	you	discover	it	was	missing?”
   “Tuesday	morning.	When	the	police	showed	it	to	me.	When	they	came	to
the	house.”
   “What	time	was	that?”
   “At	 about	nine.	They	showed	me	the	wallet	and	asked	me	if	it	was	mine,
and	when	I	said	it	was,	they	asked	me	to	come	downtown	with	them.”
   “Which	you	did,	of	course.”
   “Yes.”
   “Without	any	resistance.”
   “Yes.”
   “Mr.	 Leeds,	are	you	familiar	with	the	area	of	Calusa	known	as	Little	Asia?”
   “I	 am.”
   “Have	you	ever	been	there?”
   “Yes.”
   “When?”
   “When	they	were	arrested.”
   “Who?”
   “The	three	men	who	raped	Jessie.”

21
   “Do	 you	know	 where	1211	Tango	Avenue	is?”
   “Yes.”
   “Is	 that	where	you	went	when	these	men	were	arrested?”
   “Yes.”
   “So	 you’re	familiar	 with	 the	address.”
   “Yes.”
   “Familiar	  with	the	house.”
   “Yes.”
   “Have	 you	ever	been	inside	that	house?”
   “No.	  All	 I	 did	was	 drive	by.	 To	see	where	they	lived.	 To	 see	where	those
animals	lived.”
   “You	 were	not	in	that	house	on	the	night	of	the	murders?”
   “I	 was	not.”
   “Or	 at	any	time	before	the	murders?”
   “I	 was	not.”
   “How	  old	are	you,	Mr.	Leeds?”
   “Forty-one.”
   “Were	 you	ever	in	the	armed	forces?”
   “Yes.”
   “When?”
   “During	  the	Vietnam	War.”
   “Were	 you	in	combat?”
   “Yes.”
   “Did	  you	 ever	witness	bodies	mutilated	 the	way	 the	bodies	 of	these	three
victims	were	mutilated?”
   “They	 got	what	they	 deserved.”
   “But	 did	 you	ever—”
   “I	  resent	your	calling	 them	 victims!	They	 raped	my	 wife!	  Whoever	killed
them	should	get	a	medal!”
   Blue	 eyes	shooting	 laser	beams,	lips	 skinned	back	over	 even	white	 teeth,
fists	clenched.	Put	him	 on	the	witness	 chair,	have	him	 say	what	he	just	 said,
and	the	next	chair	he’d	be	sitting	in	would	 be	wired.
   “Mr.	  Leeds,	in	combat,	did	you	ever—”
   “Yes,	 I	saw	American	soldiers	in	 the	same	condition.”
   “Eyes	 gouged	out...”
   “Yes.”
   “Genitals...”
   “Yes.	 Or	 the	trigger	 finger.	The	 gooks	used	to	cut	 off	trigger	 fingers,	 as	a
warning.	And	 sometimes	 tongues.	We’d	find	  corpses	with	 their	tongues	cut
out.”	He	hesitated	and	then	said,	“We	did	the	same	thing	to	them.	A	guy	in	my
company	made	a	necklace	out	of	gook	ears.	He	used	to	wear	the	necklace	into
combat.”

22
   “Did	  you	ever	do	anything	like	that?”
   “Never.”
   “Are	 you	 sure?”
   “I	  never	did	anything	 like	 that.	It	 was	bad	enough	without	 doing	 anything
like	that.”
   There	was	a	long	silence.
   In	 the	corridor	 outside	the	cell,	Matthew	 could	hear	two	policemen	 talking.
One	of	them	laughed.
   “Mr.	  Leeds,”	he	said.
   Looking	  directly	 into	 his	 eyes	again.	Searching	those	 eyes.	Had	the	 man
killed	 his	wife’s	 accused	rapists?	In	order	to	correct	what	he’d	 perceived	as	a
miscarriage	of	justice?	Or	had	his	wallet	 been	planted	at	the	scene	of	murders
that	had	been	committed	for	 whatever	other	reason	or	 reasons,	by	whichever
other	person	or	persons?
   “Mr.	  Leeds,	tell	me	again	that	you	didn’t	kill	 those	three	men.”
   “I	 didn’t.”
   “Say	 the	whole	thing.”
   “I	 did	 not	kill	 those	three	men.”



In	Calusa,	Florida,	 during	the	summer	 months,	a	person	was	lucky	 to	get	off
with	 only	 two	 showers	and	two	 shirt	 changes	a	day.	 On	particularly	  sticky
days,	three	was	the	rule.	 One	at	 home	in	 the	morning,	 another	at	 the	office
after	lunch,	 and	a	third	 at	home	again,	at	 the	end	of	 the	working	 day.	In	 the
shower	that	evening,	Matthew	wondered	if	he’d	 made	the	right	decision.
   The	 rain	 had	started,	it	 always	came	sometime	 during	 the	afternoon,	 you
could	set	 your	calendar	 by	 it,	 if	 not	your	 watch.	 A	 torrential	 downpour,	 as
always.	Florida	never	did	anything	 halfheartedly.	When	the	wind	blew,	it	 blew
at	hurricane	force.	 When	the	 sun	decided	to	shine,	 it	cooked	 you	to	 a	crisp.
And	when	the	rains	came,	they	came—in	bucketsful.
   Probably	 shouldn’t	  even	be	 in	 the	shower,	 he	thought.	 Lightning	  bolt’ll
come	in	through	 the	window	 and	sizzle	 me	on	the	spot.	Benny	 Weiss	would
secretly	chuckle	over	the	freak	 accident	and	then	express	deep	public	sorrow.
State	Attorney	 Skye	 Bannister	 would	 tell	  the	press	 that	Hope	 had	 been	a
worthy	 opponent,	credit	 to	 the	community,	 tremendous	loss,	 a	good	lawyer
and	a	good	man.	 His	former	 wife,	 Susan,	would	 weep	huge	crocodile	 tears.
The	several	women	he’d	 known	since	the	divorce	 would	 come	to	the	funeral
wearing	black.	 They	would	 toss	tear-stained	red	 roses	onto	his	coffin.	  Alas,
poor	Matthew,	I	knew	him	 well.	Struck	 by	lightning	 in	his	prime.
   Alas,	 poor	Matthew.
   Especially	 if	he’d	 made	the	wrong	decision	today.
   He	 turned	on	the	needle	spray.	Washed	away	the	soap	and	the	grime.	Tried

23
to	wash	away	the	lingering	doubts	as	well.	The	 man’s	knowledge	of	the	crime
scene,	his	wallet	in	 the	room,	his	brutalizing	  experience	in	Vietnam,	his	 rage
over	what	had	happened	to	his	wife,	 his	public	 expression	of	 that	rage	in	the
form	 of	 a	death	 threat	directed	 at	all	 three	 men—put	 all	 of	 that	 in	 Skye’s
hands,	and	the	state	would	one	day	have	a	big	electric	bill.
   He	 turned	off	the	shower.
   Climbed	 out	of	 the	tub,	reached	for	a	towel,	 caught	a	glimpse	of	himself	 in
the	mirror	 over	the	sink,	 and	shook	his	head	in	 disapproval.	He’d	 gained	ten
pounds	on	his	recent	trip	 to	 Italy.	It	 showed,	too.	 Six	feet	 tall,	you’d	 think	 a
few	extra	pounds	might	have	distributed	 themselves	more	evenly	over	all	that
length.	But	 no,	they’d	  gathered	exclusively	 around	his	 middle,	 that’s	where
they	were,	all	ten	of	 them.	Why	 did	men	and	women	 gain	weight	in	 different
places?	For	men,	 it	 was	always	 the	middle.	  For	women,	 it	 was	 the	ass.	A
phenomenon	of	nature.	His	 face	looked	the	way	 it	 had	before	he’d	made	the
trip,	 though,	a	narrow	 fox	 face	with	  dark	brown	 eyes	that	matched	 the	hair
now	clinging	  wetly	 to	 his	 forehead.	In	 a	 world	 of	 spectacularly	 handsome
men,	Matthew	considered	himself	only	 so-so.	Ma	che	posso	fare?	he	thought,
and	grinned	at	his	own	image	in	the	mirror.
   When	 he’d	returned	to	the	office	on	Monday,	he’d	 said,	“Well,	 I’m	back.”
   His	  partner,	Frank,	 had	 said,	 “Some	 of	 us	didn’t	  even	 know	 you	 were
gone.”
   That	 was	on	Monday.
   And	 yesterday,	Jessica	Leeds	had	called.
   Welcome	home,	and	once	more	unto	the	breach,	dear...
   There	 was	the	sound	of	screeching	brakes	on	the	street	outside.	And	then	a
tremendous	bang.	 Something	 hitting	  something.	 Metal	  against	 metal.	 He
grabbed	for	the	white	terry	 robe	hanging	on	the	back	of	the	door,	pulled	 it	on,
and	ran	barefooted	out	 of	 the	bathroom	 and	through	 the	house	and	into	 the
street.	He	had	left	his	new	Acura	Legend	at	the	curb.	Instead	of	 pulling	 it	into
the	garage.	Because	he	knew	he’d	be	 going	out	 again	tonight,	 and	he	didn’t
want	to	go	to	all	the	trouble	of...
   Brand-new.
   $30,000	on	the	hoof.
   He’d	 taken	delivery	 on	it	two	 weeks	ago,	just	before	he’d	left	for	 Venice.	A
replacement	for	 the	 Karmann	 Ghia	 he’d	 been	driving	  for	 God	 knew	 how
many	years.	Low	  and	sleek	 and	smoky	 blue,	 with	 leather	seats,	and	 a	sun
roof,	 and	a	computer	 that	 told	 you	when	 your	 gas	tank	 was	almost	 empty.
When	you	hit	 the	pedal	on	that	baby,	you	 zoomed	from	zero	to	 sixty	in	 eight
seconds	flat,	a	rocket	to	the	moon.
   “Oh	 dear,”	the	woman	said,	getting	out	of	 the	little	red	Volkswagen	that	had
smashed	into	the	left	rear	fender	of	the	brand-new	smoky	blue	 Acura	that	had
cost	Matthew	thirty	 grand	two	weeks	ago.

24
   He	 came	thundering	down	the	walk	from	 the	front	door	to	the	curb,	fuming,
wanting	to	strangle	her	even	if	 she	was	tall	and	leggy	and	blond	and	beautiful
and	blue-eyed	 and	standing	 without	  an	 umbrella	 in	 the	 pouring	 rain.	 She
looked	now	from	 the	fender	of	 the	Acura	to	 the	grille	 of	the	VW,	 and	then	to
the	skid	marks	 on	the	wet	 asphalt.	The	marks	clearly	 defined	 the	course	her
little	 car	 had	 taken	 before	wreaking	  its	 havoc.	 She	shook	 her	 head	as	 if
amazed	by	the	 wonder	of	 it	 all.	 Red	 silk	 dress	to	 match	the	 car,	red	 high-
heeled	shoes,	rain	spattering	the	roadway,	rain	pelting	everywhere	around	her,
long	blond	 hair	 getting	wetter	 and	wetter	 and	wetter;	 Matthew	 was	glad	 he
was	wearing	a	terry	robe.
   “I’m	  awfully	 sorry,”	 she	said.
   “Sorry,	 my	ass,”	he	said.
   “I	 didn’t	 want	to	hit	 the	cat,”	she	said.
   “What	 cat?”	he	said.
   And	 anyway,	he	thought,	 hit	the	 damn	cat!	And	 was	immediately	 sorry.	A
cat	he	had	loved	with	all	 his	heart	had	long	ago	been	hit	by	a	car—and	killed.
So	no,	he	would	 not	 have	preferred	her	 hitting	 the	cat	 instead	of	his	 brand-
new	low,	sleek,	smoky	blue	automobile,	but	Jesus!
   “He	 ran	out	 into	the	road,”	 she	said,	still	 talking	 about	the	damn	cat.	“I	 hit
the	brake	and...I’m	sorry.	Really.	I	am.”
   Brand-new,	 he	was	thinking.
   Thirty	 thousand	dollars.
   “I’m	  an	attorney,”	she	said,	“I	know	 what	we	have	to—”
   “So	 am	I,”	 he	said.
   “Well,	  good,	 that	should	 make	 it	 simple.	 Can	I	 please	see	your	 driver’s
license...or	some...your	insurance	card...some	identifi—”
   “Are	 you	 okay?”	he	asked	at	once.
   “Yes,	 I’m	 fine.	Thank	you.	A	 little	wet,	 but	fine.”
   “Would	 you	 like	to	come	inside?	We	can	exchange	all	the—”
   “No,	 thank	you,	 I’m	due	at	a	party.”
   “I	 thought...out	 of	the	rain...”
   “Well,	 I	 can’t	get	any	wetter,	can	I?”	she	said.
   She	 was,	in	 fact,	thoroughly	  wet.	Dress	soaked	through	 to	 the	skin.	 This
was	the	scene	where	they’re	 in	 Africa,	 he	 thought,	and	 the	gorgeous	starlet
falls	in	a	pool	near	a	waterfall,	 and	when	she	gets	out	of	the	water	you	can	see
her	nipples	through	 her	wet	 clothes.	Matthew	 could	 see	her	nipples	through
the	wet	red	dress.	He	looked	away.
   “Why	  don’t	 we...uh...at	least	get	in	 the	car,	okay?	 Out	of	 the	rain.	 Really.
There’s	no	sense	standing	here	in	the	rain.	The	papers’ll	get	all	wet.”
   “Yes,	 you’re	right,”	 she	said.	“I	 hadn’t	thought	of	that.”
   He	 went	around	the	VW	 to	 the	door	on	the	driver’s	 side	of	 the	Acura,	 and
was	starting	to	open	the	door	when	he	realized...

25
   “It’s	  locked,”	he	said.	“My	 keys	are	in	the	house.	My	wallet,	 too.”
   I	 normally	 put	it	on	the	dresser.	With	my	keys	and	my	change.
   “Well,	  okay,”	she	said,	and	reached	down	to	take	off	first	one	shoe	and	then
the	other.	 “These	 are	totally	  ruined,”	 she	said	 as	she	 followed	 him	 to	 the
house,	walking	barefooted	through	the	puddles	that	had	gathered	on	the	walk,
a	shoe	in	each	hand.	“Brand-new,”	she	said.	“Two	hundred	dollars.”
   Brand-new,	 he	thought.
   And	 took	 another	look	at	where	the	VW	 had	its	 nose	buried	in	the	Acura’s
fender.	Shaking	his	head,	he	opened	the	door	of	 the	house	and	stepped	aside
to	let	her	by.
   “Come	 in,”	 he	said.	“Please.”
   And	 realized	 by	 the	sound	of	 his	voice	 that	 he	hadn’t	 quite	succeeded	in
quashing	his	anger.
   She	caught	the	tone.
   “I	 really	 am	sorry,”	she	said.
   She	 looked	like	 a	 drowned	rat.	 Hair	 hanging	straggly	 and	 limp	 on	either
side	of	her	 face,	mascara	running	under	her	 blue	eyes,	dress	hanging	on	her
like	a	sack.	He	felt	a	sudden	wave	of	sympathy.
   “It	 was	an	accident,”	he	said	gently.	“Accidents	 happen.”
   “Oh	 shit!”	 she	said.
   He	 looked	at	her,	startled.
   “My	  purse	is	 in	the	car.	With	 my	 driver’s	 license	in	 it.	 And	my	 insurance
stuff	is	in	the	glove	compartment.”
   “I’ll	   go	get	it,”	he	said.
   “No,	 don’t	 be	ridiculous,”	 she	said.	“I’m	 soaking	wet	as	it	is.”
   “So	 am	I.”
   “Well,	 that’s	true,	but—”
   “I’ll	   be	right	back,”	he	said,	and	went	out	into	the	rain	again.
   He	 shook	his	 head	as	he	came	around	the	rear	fender	of	 the	Acura	 where
the	VW	  was	 still	  snuggled	up	 against	 it,	 brand-new,	 he	 thought.	 On	 the
passenger	seat	he	found	a	beaded	red	handbag,	and	in	the	glove	compartment
he	found	a	 folder	 containing,	among	 other	papers,	the	car’s	 registration	and
insurance	card.	He	came	out	into	the	rain	again,	the	terry	robe	soaked	through
now,	his	hair	plastered	to	his	head,	this	was	truly	ridiculous.
   She	was	standing	just	 inside	the	door	 to	the	house	when	he	came	in.	 As	if
afraid	 of	 intruding	  further	 on	 his	 privacy.	 He	 placed	a	 call	 to	 the	 police,
reporting	  the	 accident,	  and	 then	  they	 exchanged	 driver’s	   licenses	 and
insurance	cards,	 which	  is	  when	 he	 learned	 that	  her	 name	 was	 Patricia
Demming,	 and	that	 she	was	thirty-six	  years	 old,	 and	that	 she	lived	 at	 407
Ocean,	which	was	on	Fatback	Key.
   It	 had	 stopped	raining	 by	the	 time	 the	police	 car	arrived.	 One	uniformed
officer	in	 it;	 in	Calusa	the	police	patrolled	 solo.	They	gave	him	 all	the	details

26
of	the	 accident,	and	 then	they	 ascertained	that	Patricia	 Demming’s	 car	was
still	 drivable,	 and	 Matthew	 watched	 her	as	she	 backed	its	 nose	out	 of	 his
fender	and	drove	off	up	the	street	to	her	party.
   Brand-new,	 he	thought	again.

27
                                                                                                                         2


“I’M	 THE	only	black	man	in	Calusa	with	 a	 high-top	fade,”	 Warren	Chambers
said.
   Matthew	 thought	 he	was	talking	 about	an	automobile.	 A	High-Top	 Phaed.
Some	kind	of	 foreign	 convertible.	Automobiles	 were	 very	much	on	 his	mind
this	Friday	morning.	 He	was	waiting	for	 a	call	from	his	insurance	adjuster.
   “Next	  one	I’m	 going	to	get	 will	 be	a	ramp,”	 Warren	said,	and	ran	his	hand
over	the	 top	of	 his	 head.	It	 was	then	 that	Matthew	 realized	 he	was	 talking
about	his	 haircut.	 A	 high-top	  fade.	Which	  looked	 like	 a	 flowerpot	  turned
upside	down	 and	sitting	 on	 top	of	 Warren’s	 head,	the	hair	 below	 it	 shaved
very	close	to	the	scalp.	He	did	not	want	to	ask	what	a	ramp	might	possibly	 be.
He	figured	a	man’s	 hair	was	as	sacrosanct	as	his	castle;	too	many	battles	had
been	fought	over	hair	in	the	sixties.	This	was	the	here	and	now.
   “How	  was	your	trip?”	 Warren	asked.
   “Wonderful.”
   “So	 you	 came	back	to	 this,	huh?”	 Warren	said,	and	 indicated	the	copy	 of
the	Calusa	 Herald-Tribune	   lying	  on	 Matthew’s	 desk.	 There	 was	 another
picture	of	 Stephen	Leeds	on	the	 front	 page;	the	paper	had	been	running	 his
picture	every	 day	since	his	 arrest.	The	headline	 read:	WITNESSES	SAW	LEEDS.	The
subhead	read:	WIFE	QUESTIONED	AGAIN.
   “Who’re	  these	witnesses?”	Warren	asked.
   “Bannister	 hasn’t	yet	sent	me	his	list.	I’ll	  be	stopping	by	there	later	today.”
   “You	 think	 they’ve	really	 got	anyone?”
   “I	 hope	not.”
   “Why	  do	they	keep	questioning	the	wife?”
   “She’s	 his	alibi.	But	 there’s	also	a	rumor	running	around	town.	To	the	effect
that	they	were	in	it	together.	Leeds	and	the	wife.”
   “Uh-huh,”	   Warren	 said,	and	 nodded	thoughtfully,	  giving	  the	 impression
that	the	idea	might	be	worth	consideration.
   He	 was	a	soft-spoken	man	in	his	mid-thirties,	 his	shy,	reserved	manner	and
horn-rimmed	 glasses	giving	 him	 the	 look	 of	 an	 accountant	(even	 with	 the
high-top	fade)	 rather	than	what	one	imagined	 a	private	 eye	should	look	 like.
Beanpole	tall	  and	 thin,	 a	 former	  basketball	 player	 for	  the	 University	  of
Missouri—which	 he’d	 attended	for	two	years	before	joining	 the	St.	Louis	 PD
—Warren	still	  moved	like	  an	athlete	and	 somehow	appeared	graceful	 even
when	he	was	sitting,	 as	he	was	now.	He	was	a	meticulous	 investigator	 and	a
dead	shot;	Matthew	had	seen	him	put	away	a	raccoon	and	a	human	being	with

28
equal	aplomb.	His	 eyes	were	the	color	 of	 his	skin,	 as	dark	as	loam,	 pensive
and	serious	now.
   “How’d	  the	rumor	start?”	he	asked.
   “In	 yesterday’s	Trib.	 Some	guy	wrote	a	letter.”
   “A	 nut?”
   “Sure.	 But	you	know	 the	Trib.”
   “And	  this	time	around	they’ve	got	a	real	ax	to	grind.”
   “Oh?”
   “Leeds’s	 father	once	tried	a	hostile	takeover.	This	was	ten	years	ago,	before
he	died.	 A	big	 chain	 in	 the	South	 won	 out.	But	 the	 publisher’s	 still	 pissed
about	the	old	man’s	move.”
   “Where’d	  you	learn	this?”
   “At	  the	Trib’s	morgue,”	Warren	said,	and	grinned.
   “So	 you	think	 we	may	be	in	for	a	media	trial,	huh?”
   “Let’s	  say	you	might	 start	thinking	 about	a	change	of	venue.	How’d	 Leeds
explain	his	wallet	at	the	scene?”
   “He	 said	he	may	have	left	it	on	his	boat.”
   “When?”
   “The	 afternoon	of	the	murders.”
   “Very	  flimsy,”	  Warren	 said,	shaking	 his	 head.	“If	  a	 person	 plans	to	 do
murder,	he	doesn’t	 first	 go	to	 the	Leeds	boat	 on	the	 off	 chance	he’ll	 find	 a
wallet	there.”
   “Not	 necessarily	a	wallet.	Anything	 personal.”
   “Even	 so.”
   “Something	 he	could	 plant	at	 the	scene.	To	link	 the	murders	to	Leeds.	It’s
easier	to	get	onto	a	boat	than	into	a	house,	Warren.”
   “Granted.”
   “We’ve	  got	to	 find	 out	how	 that	wallet	 got	at	the	 scene.	Because	if	Leeds
himself	dropped	it	there...”
   “Good-bye,	 Charlie,”	 Warren	said.
   “Mm,”	  Matthew	 said,	and	nodded	gravely.	“So	what	I’d	 like	you	to	do—”
   “Where	 does	he	keep	the	boat?”	Warren	asked.



In	the	city	 of	Calusa,	Florida,	 the	state	attorney’s	office	used	to	be	a	motel.	 It
still	 sat	across	the	street	from	 a	 ballpark	 that	once	 was	used	for	 big-league
spring	 training	   before	  the	 team	  moved	 to	  Sarasota;	 nowadays,	  teams
sponsored	by	beer	 companies	played	there.	 The	old	 motel	 sat	 behind	what
used	to	be	the	biggest	hotel	in	town.	You	could	 still	 see	the	twin	white	towers
of	the	hotel—now	 an	office	 building—from	  a	 courtyard	surrounded	by	 what
used	to	be	motel	units	but	were	now	offices	for	the	state	attorney’s	staff.
   The	 sun	at	11:00	a.m.	that	Friday	morning	 beat	down	unmercifully	 into	 the

29
courtyard.	The	 motel-now-office	  units	served	to	 form	 a	sort	 of	 wall	 around
the	courtyard,	preventing	 any	circulation	  of	air,	 boxing	in	 the	area,	giving	 it
the	feel	of	a	small,	suffocatingly	 hot	prison	cheerfully	 planted	with	palm	trees,
bougainvillea,	and	hibiscus	the	color	of	 blood.	The	sign	outside	read:

                                           OFFICE	OF	THE	STATE	ATTORNEY
                                              TWELFTH	JUDICIAL	CIRCUIT
                                                  Skye	Bannister
                                          807	Magnolia	 Boulevard
                                      Office	 Hours	Monday–Friday
                                                8:30	A.M.–5:00	P.M.

   Matthew	 was	relieved	 to	discover	 that	the	air-conditioning	 system	in	 Skye
Bannister’s	office	 was	working;	 in	 Calusa’s	government	offices,	bureaucratic
red	tape	often	 made	 a	mockery	 of	 maintenance.	Bannister’s	 receptionist,	 a
dark-haired	girl	 in	her	early	 twenties,	asked	him	if	 this	was	about	the	witness
list	and	statements.	Matthew	told	her	it	was.
   The	 receptionist	 said	the	 case	had	been	turned	 over	 to	an	 assistant	state
attorney,	and	added	that	Matthew	could	go	next	door	to	see	her	if	he	liked,	her
office	was	in	room	17.
   The	Assistant	SA	 was	Patricia	Demming.
   “Oh	 dear,”	she	said.
   She	looked	 a	lot	less	wet	this	 morning	 than	she	had	last	night.	Long	 blond
hair	pulled	 back	into	a	neat	ponytail	 fastened	with	 a	ribbon	 that	matched	her
blouse,	her	tailored	suit,	and	her	startling	 blue	eyes.	She	was	wearing	as	well
high-heeled	 blue	 leather	 pumps,	 blue	 pantyhose	 (he	 guessed),	and	 silver
earrings	with	turquoise	 stones.	No	mascara	or	eye	shadow	here	at	work,	only
lipstick.	 She	 looked	 cool	 and	 efficient	  and	 very	 state	attorney–ish,	 albeit
enormously	surprised	to	discover	 that	Matthew	 was	defending	the	man	she’d
been	assigned	to	prosecute.	Matthew	 was	 thinking	 that	 Skye	Bannister	 had
been	confident	 enough	 of	 his	 case	to	 turn	 it	  over	 to	 an	assistant.	A	 new
assistant,	at	that;	Matthew	came	in	and	out	of	the	state	attorney’s	offices	on	an
almost	daily	basis,	and	he’d	never	seen	her	here	before.
   “How’s	  your	car?”	she	asked,	and	smiled.
   “I’m	  supposed	to	hear	from	the	adjuster	today,”	Matthew	said.
   “I	 barely	 made	it	home	from	the	party	last	night.	 They	think	I’ll	  need	a	new
engine.”
   “I’m	  sorry	to	hear	that.	How	was	the	party?”
   “Very	 nice.	Do	you	 know	the	Berringers?”
   “End	 of	the	street.	Yes.”
   “Nice	 people.”
   “Yes.	 A	doctor,	isn’t	 he?”
   “A	 dentist,”	 she	said,	and	smiled	again.	“You’re	 here	about	the	witness	list,

30
I’ll	 bet.	And	the	statements.”
   “Yes,”	he	said,	and	took	off	the	gloves.	“Miss	Demming,”	he	said,	“I	have
to	tell	you	that	I	don’t	like	to	be	surprised	by	newspaper	stories.”
   “I’m	 awfully	sorry	about	that,	really,	but—”
   “Because,	you	know,	Miss	Demming,	it’s	a	little	disconcerting	to	learn	that
documents	are	being	released	to	the	press—”
   “No	one	released	any	documents	to	the—”
   “—even	before	the	man’s	attorney	has	seen—”
   “Mr.	 Bannister	merely	answered	some	questions	put	to	him	by—”
   “Is	Mr.	Bannister	prosecuting	this	case,	or	are	you?”
   “I	 am.	As	of	this	morning.	But	yesterday—”
   “But	 yesterday	Mr.	Bannister	was	handing	out	press	releases,	right?”
   “Wrong.	A	reporter	called	to	ask	if	there’d	been	any	witnesses	to	the—”
   “So	the	state	attorney	felt	it	was	okay	to	release	this	information	before	I
had	the	witness	list,	before	I	had	the	witness	statements.”
   “I	 admit	that	may	have	been	premature.	Are	you	looking	for	a	fight,	Mr.
Hope?”
   “I’m	 looking	to	protect	my	client,”	Matthew	said.
   “I	 was	only	assigned	the	case	this	morning.	I	didn’t	even	know	you	were
the	defense	attorney	till	you	walked	in	here.	In	any	event,	I	planned	to	send
the—”
   “I’m	 here	now.	May	I	have	them	please?”
   “I’ll	  ask	my	secretary	to	get	them,”	she	said.
   “Thank	you.”
   She	picked	up	the	phone	receiver,	pressed	a	button	in	its	base,	and	asked
someone	named	Shirley	to	bring	in	the	Leeds	witness	list	and	statements.
Putting	the	receiver	back	on	its	cradle,	she	looked	up	at	Matthew	and	said,	“It
doesn’t	have	to	start	this	way,	you	know.”
   “Okay,”	he	said.
   “Really.	 If	 you	like,	 I’ll	 ask	Mr.	 Bannister	to	let	me	handle	any	further
contact	with	the	press.”
   “I’d	 appreciate	that.”
   “Done.”
   “Tell	me	something.”
   “Sure.”
   “Why’d	 he	turn	the	case	over	to	you?”
   “Why	 not?	I’m	a	very	good	lawyer.”
   “I’m	 sure,”	Matthew	said,	and	smiled.
   “Besides,	it’s	a	sure	thing.”
   “All	 the	more	reason	for	Mr.	Ambitious	to	try	it	himself.”
   “Maybe	he’s	got	bigger	fish	to	fry,”	 she	said,	and	then,	immediately,	“Oh
dear,	forgive	me.	That	was	unintentional.”

31
   “What	  can	 be	bigger	 than	 a	 pillar	 of	 the	 community	  killing	  three	little
Vietnamese	immigrants?”
   “Watch	 the	newspapers,”	she	said,	and	smiled	secretively.
   The	door	 opened.
   A	 redhead	came	in	 carrying	 a	sheaf	of	papers.	She	put	 them	on	 the	desk,
asked	if	there	was	anything	else	before	she	went	to	 lunch,	and	then	smiled	 at
Matthew	and	 went	out	 again.	Matthew	 looked	 at	the	cover	 sheet	on	the	top
batch.	The	 witness	  list.	 He	 glanced	 at	 the	 other	 stapled	 papers.	Witness
statements.	Two	of	them.	Asian	names	on	both.
   “What	 nationality	 are	they?”	he	asked.
   “Vietnamese.”
   “Do	 they	speak	English?”
   “No,	  you’ll	 need	an	interpreter.	Also,	 one	of	 them’s	out	 of	town	 just	 now,
visiting	his	son	in	 Orlando.”
   “When	 will	 he	be	back?”
   “I’m	  sorry,	I	don’t	 know.	Would	you	care	for	 some	coffee?”
   “Thank	 you,	Miss	 Demming,	but	I	 have	an	early	lunch	date.”
   “Patricia,”	  she	said.
   He	 looked	at	her.
   “The	  other	stuff	 is	 for	 the	movies.	 We	 can	be	antagonists	without	  being
enemies,	can’t	we?”
   “I’m	  sure	we	can,”	he	said.	“Patricia.”
   “Good.	 What	do	people	call	you?	Matthew?	Matt?”
   “Matthew,	 usually.”
   “Is	 that	what	you	prefer?”
   “Actually,	  yes.”
   “May	  I	call	you	Matthew?”
   “Please,”	 he	said.
   “Matthew,”	  she	said,	“I’m	 going	to	put	your	man	in	 the	electric	chair.”



From	a	 pay	phone	 on	 the	sidewalk	 outside,	 Matthew	 called	 his	office	  and
asked	the	firm’s	receptionist,	Cynthia	 Huellen,	to	 put	him	through	 to	Andrew,
please.	Andrew	 was	Andrew	  Holmes,	 twenty-five	  years	old,	 a	recent	 law-
school	graduate	who	had	taken	his	Florida	bar	exams	last	month	and	was	now
waiting	 to	 learn	 whether	 he’d	 passed	them	 or	 not.	 Andrew	  had	his	 Juris
Doctor	 degree	from	 the	 University	 of	 Michigan	  and	was	 currently	 earning
forty	thousand	dollars	a	year	as	a	so-called	legal	assistant	at	Summerville	and
Hope,	with	  the	promise	 that	 they’d	 jump	 him	 to	 fifty	  the	moment	 he	 was
accepted	to	the	bar—a	foregone	conclusion	in	that	Andrew	 had	been	editor	of
the	Law	Review	at	U	Mich	and	had	graduated	from	the	school	with	honors.
   He	 came	onto	the	phone	sounding	breathless.

32
   “Sorry,	 I	was	down	the	hall,”	 he	said.
   “Andrew,	 I	 need	everything	you	can	get	me	on	Patricia	Demming,	 she’s	the
ASA	who’s	 been	handed	the	Leeds	case.	I	 want	to	 know	where	 she	went	to
law	 school,	where	 she	practiced	 before	she	came	 to	Calusa,	 whether	she’s
ever	handled	a	murder	case,	what	her	track	record	is,	her	courtroom	style,	and
so	on.”
   “Demming,	  did	you	say?”
   “Demming.	  Double	m,	i-n-g.”
   “How	  old	is	she,	would	you	say?”
   “Thirty-six.”
   “When	 do	you	need	this?”
   “I’ll	   be	back	in	the	office	by	two.”
   “Mmm,”	  Andrew	 said.
   “Also,	  line	up	a	Vietnamese	interpreter	for	me,	I’m	 going	to	need	one	when
I	talk	to	these	witnesses.”
   “Vietnamese	 interpreter,	right.	Easy	to	come	by	in	old	 Calusa.”
   “Do	 I	 detect	a	touch	of	sarcasm,	Andrew?”
   “No,	 no,	Vietnamese	interpreter,	right.”
   “Switch	  me	over	to	Frank,	will	 you?”
   “Hold	  on.”
   There	 was	clicking	 on	 the	line,	and	 then	Cynthia’s	 voice	saying,	“Hello?”
and	Andrew	 asking	her	to	 transfer	the	 call	to	 Mr.	 Summerville’s	 office,	 and
then	Cynthia	 saying,	“Just	a	 sec,”	and	then	Frank’s	 voice	saying,	 “Matthew,
where	are	you?”
   “I	   just	 came	 out	 of	 the	 SA’s	  office.	 Bannister’s	  assigned	the	 case	 to
someone	named	Patricia	Demming.	Ring	a	bell?”
   “Never	 heard	of	her.”
   “I’ve	  got	Andrew	 running	 her	down.	I	 had	to	pry	loose	the	witness	list	 and
statements—”
   “I	 saw	the	Trib	this	 morning.”
   “Two	 witnesses,	Frank.	Both	Vietnamese.”
   “We’ll	  be	fighting	 the	goddamn	war	all	over	again.”
   “Did	  the	mail	come	in	yet?”
   “Hours	 ago.”
   “Anything	  on	my	demand	for	discovery?”
   “Little	  early	for	 that,	Matthew.”
   “I	 just	 don’t	want	to	read	all	about	it	 in	the	paper	again.”
   “Want	 me	to	call	Skye?”
   “No,	 I’ll	  take	care	of	that.”
   “Where	 are	you	headed	now?”
   “To	 the	farm,”	 Matthew	said.

33
The	farms	 out	  on	Timucuan	  Point	 Road	 were	rapidly	  succumbing	 to	 the
developers’	 bulldozers.	  Where	 once	 fruit	   and	 vegetables	 had	 grown	  in
abundance,	there	were	now	 artificial	  lakes	surrounded	by	 houses	with	 their
own	swimming	  pools	 and	tennis	 courts.	Country	 estates,	they	 were	called.
Once	upon	a	time,	 you	could	 drive	three	miles	 east	out	of	 Calusa	and	you’d
be	in	 real	country.	 Now	 you	 had	to	 drive	 out	 at	least	 twenty	 miles	toward
Ananburg	before	you	 began	seeing	the	ranches	and	the	citrus	groves	and	the
farms.
   Jessica	Leeds	had	invited	Matthew	to	a	twelve	o’clock	 lunch.
   He	 got	to	the	farm	 at	ten	minutes	before	the	hour—in	 August,	 the	roads	in
and	around	town	were	virtually	 deserted—drove	through	the	wooden	posts	on
either	side	of	 the	main	gate,	and	then	parked	his	 rented	Ford	alongside	a	red
Maserati.	The	 customized	license	 plate	on	 the	car	read	 JESSIE	1.	He	assumed
there	was	a	JESSIE	2,	but	it	was	nowhere	in	sight.	Out	on	the	fields,	 a	tractor
moved	slowly	against	a	vast	blue	sky.	Not	a	cloud	in	sight.	Not	 yet.
   The	 farmhouse	 was	a	 vast	and	 sprawling	 one-story	building,	  the	 sort	of
structure	 that	 had	been	 added	 onto	 over	 the	 years,	room	  by	 room,	 with
connecting	links	and	passageways	that	jigged	and	jogged	this	way	and	that	to
create	an	architectural	labyrinth.	 There	were	 several	doors	here	and	there	on
the	rambling	 facade,	 but	 the	front	  door	 was	clearly	 identifiable,	  painted	 a
bright	 red	 that	 announced	itself	  as	the	 entrance.	Matthew	  went	 to	 it	 and
pressed	the	bell	 button.	Chimes	 sounded	within.	 He	 waited	 in	 the	noonday
heat,	hoping	the	closed	door	signaled	air	 conditioning	 inside,	hoping	 too	that
Jessica	Leeds	would	ask	him	 to	take	off	 his	jacket	 and	loosen	his—the	 door
opened.
   She	was	 a	woman	in	 her	late	 thirties,	 he	supposed,	several	years	younger
than	her	husband,	tall	and	slender	and	tanned	by	the	 sun,	casually	dressed	in
sandals,	skirt,	and	a	white	blouse	that	revealed	one	bare	shoulder.
   “Mr.	  Hope?”	she	said,	and	extended	her	hand.	“Please	come	in.”
   Wedge-cut	 auburn	hair,	 green	eyes,	high	 cheekbones,	a	wide	 mouth,	 her
grip	firm	 and	dry.	 They	shook	hands	briefly,	 and	she	led	him	 into	 the	house,
her	sandals	slapping	on	 a	cool	 lemon-colored	 tile	 floor.	 He	 had	expected	a
wooden	floor.	 Pegged.	This	was	the	country,	 this	was	a	farmhouse.	But	 now
there	was	modern	 furniture,	 all	 leather	and	 stainless	steel,	another	surprise.
And	what	 looked	 like	 a	genuine	Miró	 was	 hanging	on	 the	living	 room	 wall
over	a	leather	sofa	the	color	of	milk	chocolate.
   “Something	 to	drink?”	 she	asked.
   “No,	 thank	you.”
   “Lemonade?”
   “Well,	 yes.”

34
   “Allie?”	    she	 called,	  and	 a	 young	  woman	 came	 from	  what	  Matthew
supposed	was	the	kitchen.	She	was	wearing	jeans	and	a	white	blouse	with	red
embroidery	 decorating	  its	 scalloped	  scoop	 neck.	 In	  her	  early	 twenties,
Matthew	 guessed.	“Could	you	 bring	 in	 the	lemonade,	please?”	Jessica	said,
and	the	girl	  smiled	 and	said,	“Yes,	 ma’am,”	  and	went	 out	into	 the	 kitchen
again.
   “You	 don’t	 know	how	happy	you’ve	 made	me,”	Jessica	said.
   “Oh?”
   “Taking	 on	the	case.	Sit	down,	please.	Take	off	your	jacket,	won’t	 you?”
   “Thank	  you,”	  Matthew	 said,	 and	 took	 off	 the	 jacket	 and	 folded	 it	 and
draped	it	over	one	of	the	leather	easy	chairs.	Jessica	sat	at	one	end	of	the	sofa,
tucking	her	 long	legs	 under	her.	Matthew	 sat	opposite	her,	in	 the	other	 easy
chair.	The	 sliding	 glass	doors	 behind	her	 showed	acres	 and	acres	of	 fields
rolling	  away	 toward	 the	 horizon.	 He	  could	 no	 longer	 see	 the	 tractor.	 A
sprinkling	 system	watered	rows	and	rows	 of	plants	growing	 in	 the	sun.	Allie
came	back	with	  a	tray	 bearing	 a	pitcher	 of	 lemonade	 and	two	 tall	 glasses
brimming	 with	 ice.	 She	set	the	tray	 down,	 said,	“Lunch	  is	ready	when	 you
are,	ma’am,”	and	went	 back	into	 the	kitchen.	Jessica	poured.	She	handed	the
glass	to	him.	He	waited	for	 her	to	pour	 her	own	glass	full,	 and	then	they	both
drank.
   “Good,”	  he	said.
   “We	 have	more	sugar,	if	you’d—”
   “No,	 no,	perfect	this	way.”
   “I	 should	have	asked	her	to	bring	in	the	bowl.	 And	some	spoons.”
   “Really,	 it’s	 fine.”
   “We’ll	   eat	 whenever	you	 like,”	   she	said.	 “It’s	  a	cold	  lunch,	 just	 some
cucumber	soup	and	chicken	and	our	own	tomatoes,	of	course.”
   “Sounds	 lovely.”
   “Whenever	 you	like,”	 she	said.
   It	 occurred	to	him	that	she	was	extremely	nervous.
   “This	 is	a	tomato	farm,	 you	know,”	she	said.
   “No,	 I	 didn’t	know	 that.”
   “Yes,”	  she	said.	“Well,	 we	also	plant	 squash	and	cucumbers,	but	tomatoes
are	our	real	crop.	Fresh	market	tomatoes.	We’ve	got	three	thousand	acres—”
   “That	 I	did	 know.”
   “—of	  arable	land,	 with	 thirty-six	 full-time	  people	on	salary.	Including	  the
migrant	workers	who	 do	our	picking,	 we	employ	 some	three	to	four	thousand
people	a	year.	That’s	a	big	operation.”
   “Sounds	 like	it,”	 Matthew	 said.
   “Yes,”	 she	said.
   Behind	  her,	way	 off	  in	 the	 distance,	the	 tractor	 came	 into	 sight	 again,
plodding	its	 way	across	the	fields.	And	 now,	far	 out	on	the	horizon,	 Matthew

35
could	see	the	first	faint	beginning	 of	the	rain	that	would	 come	later	in	the	day,
the	sky	darkening	to	the	north.
   “We’ve	  got	 twenty-three	of	 those	tractors,”	 she	said,	 nodding	 toward	the
fields,	 “and	 almost	as	many	 trucks,	 including	  four	 ten-wheelers.	There	 are
bigger	farms,	of	 course,	but	not	 many	out	 here	on	Timucuan	 Point.	And	 not
many	of	them	have	their	own	greenhouses	and	packing	house,	the	way	we	do,
out	near	Ananburg.	That’s	where	our	 sales	office	is,	too,	 Ananburg.	We	grow
good	tomatoes—prune	them,	 stake	them,	 and	tie	 them,	same	as	 they	do	 in
Arkansas.	We	don’t	 let	them	ripen	 on	the	vine	 the	way	 they	do	up	 there,	we
harvest	them	 green.	But	 ours	 are	 better,	if	  you	 ask	me.	 Well,	 maybe	 I’m
biased.	We	  do	 a	 sixty-million-dollar	    annual	  gross,	 though,	 and	 we	  net
something	like	 thirty	 million,	  so	those	have	got	 to	be	pretty	 good	 tomatoes,
wouldn’t	 you	say?”
   “I	 would	 guess	so.”
   “Not	 many	 people	in	Calusa	like	us	making	so	much	money—well,	 nobody
really	likes	rich	 people,	do	they?	Especially	if	the	wealth	was	inherited.	 That’s
why	the	newspaper’s	after	us,”	she	said,	and	fell	silent.
   They	 sipped	at	their	lemonades.
   The	 horizon	 seemed	suddenly	 darker,	the	 storm	moving	  in	 more	swiftly
than	Matthew	had	anticipated.
   “Have	 you	seen	today’s	paper?”	she	asked.
   “Yes.”
   “They	 say	they	have	witnesses.”
   “I	 know.	 I	already	have	their	names.”
   “Oh?”	 she	said,	surprised.
   “They	 have	to	 supply	them,”	 Matthew	said.	“Anyone	  they	plan	to	call.	 We
have	to	do	the	same.”
   “Who	 are	they?”
   “Two	  Vietnamese	men.	One	of	them	saw	your	 husband	going	in,	the	 other
saw	him	coming	out.”
   “They	 say.”
   “Yes,	   of	  course.	 And,	  of	   course,	 we’ll	   contest	  anything	  they	  say.
Meanwhile,	they	have	him	going	 in	at	eleven—”
   “That’s	 absurd.	He	was	lying	asleep	beside	me	at	that	time.”
   “And	  coming	out	at	a	little	after	 midnight.”
   “Stephen	 didn’t	 leave	the	house	all	night	long.	 We	had	dinner,	watched	the
movie	he’d	brought	home—”
   “Which	  movie	was	that?”	Matthew	 asked.
   “Casablanca,”	  she	said.
   Exactly	 what	her	husband	had	told	him.
   “He	  fell	  asleep	watching	  it,	 in	 fact.	 He	  was	asleep	 by	 nine-thirty,	  ten
o’clock.”

36
   “What	 time	 did	he	go	out	on	the	boat?”	Matthew	asked.
   “Around	  five,”	 she	said.
   “And	  came	back	when?”
   “Well,	 we	 had	dinner	at	six-thirty,	seven.	So	he	was	home	before	then.”
   “Just	 took	the	boat	out	for	a	spin,	he	told	me.”
   “Yes,	 that’s	right.”
   “He	 also	said	he	may	have	left	his	wallet	aboard.”
   “That’s	 a	possibility,	 I	suppose.”
   “He	 thinks	someone	may	have	found	it	on	the	boat.”
   “Well...that	 seems	farfetched,	doesn’t	it?”
   “How	  do	you	think	it	 got	at	the	scene?”
   “I	  don’t	know.	 I’ve	 been	going	over	that	 same	question	again	and	again	in
my	mind.	 I	 have	no	answer.	Stephen	was	here	 with	 me.	But	 they	found	 his
wallet	in	that	house	with	those	three—”
   She	bit	 off	 the	word	 before	 it	left	 her	 mouth.	But	 her	flashing	 green	eyes
said	the	word.	The	curl	of	her	lip	 said	the	word.
   “Mrs.	  Leeds,”	Matthew	 said,	“the	 prosecution	is	 going	to	 make	a	big	 deal
about	 you	 being	 your	  husband’s	only	  alibi.	  Now	 that	  they’ve	 got	  these
witnesses...”
   “Who	 are	they?	What	are	their	names?”
   “I’m	  sorry,	they’re	 difficult	  names	to	remember.	I’ll	 phone	you	 when	I	get
back	to	the	office,	if	 you—”
   “No,	  I	 was	 merely	 wondering	 if	  they’re	 relatives	 or	 anything.	 Half	  the
Vietnamese	in	Calusa	are	related.	If	these	two...”
   “That’s	 a	good	point.”
   “Because	 they	couldn’t	 possibly	 have	seen	Stephen	going	in	or	out	 of	that
house.	That’s	flatly	impossible.	They	 have	to	be	lying.”
   “Or	 merely	 mistaken.”
   “Then	  they	 should	 have	 kept	 their	 mouths	 shut!	  If	 they	 weren’t	  sure!
Because	I	  hope	 you	  know...I	  hope	  you	 realize	  that	 those...those	 three
bastards...”
   She	shook	her	head.
   Kept	 shaking	it.
   “Forgive	 me,”	 she	said.	“I’m	 sorry.”
   He	 said	nothing.	 He	kept	 watching	 her.	Her	head	was	bent	 now.	She	was
staring	at	her	hands.	Behind	her,	the	clouds	were	rolling	in	swiftly.	 The	tractor
was	heading	back	in	this	direction.	The	rain	would	 soon	be	here.
   “They’re	  saying	I	was	with	him,	 aren’t	they?”	she	said	at	last.
   Her	 head	was	still	bent.	She	kept	twisting	her	fingers,	one	hand	in	the	other,
long	fingers	with	 bloodred	nails.
   “There’s	 a	rumor	to	that	effect,”	 Matthew	said.
   “What	 do	the	witnesses	say?	Did	they	see	two	of	us?”

37
   “No.	 Only	 your	husband.”
   “Does	 that	make	me	innocent?”
   “A	 man	writing	 a	letter	to	a	newspaper...”
   “Well,	 I’m	 guilty,”	  she	said.	“In	my	heart,	I’m	 guilty.”
   She	lifted	 her	head.	Her	eyes	met	his.
   “In	  my	 heart,	 I	 would	 have	 done	 the	same	 thing,”	 she	 said.	“Slit	  their
throats,	put	out	their	eyes,	cut	off	their—”
   She	turned	away	sharply.
   A	 flash	of	lightning	 sundered	the	summer	sky.	A	man	in	a	straw	hat	and	bib
overalls	was	 running	 toward	 the	house,	 the	abandoned	tractor	 behind	 him.
There	was	thunder	on	the	left.
   “Shall	 we	have	lunch	now?”	 she	asked.



The	rain	came	in	over	the	water	 in	blinding	 sheets.	Warren	stood	in	the	small
marina	office	 and	waited	for	 Charlie	 Stubbs	to	come	back	 in	from	 where	he
was	pumping	 gas	into	 a	twenty-five-foot	   Boston	Whaler.	 Warren	liked	  this
about	Florida.	The	drama	of	 it.	There’d	 been	drama	in	St.	Louis,	 too,	by	way
of	tornadoes,	but	 down	 here	the	action	 was	more	 varied.	 And	 sudden.	One
minute	you	had	sunshine	that	could	 scorch	your	eyeballs,	and	the	next	it	 was
pouring	down	raindrops	 the	size	of	quarters.	Pelting	the	wooden	dock	outside
the	office,	banging	 on	the	tin	roof,	 sliding	 down	the	louvered	 glass	windows,
lashing	into	 the	canvas	on	sailboats	caught	unawares.	This	was	one	hell	 of	 a
frog	strangler.
   Stubbs	 was	 wearing	 an	orange	 poncho,	one	 of	 those	 plastic	 things	 that
weren’t	worth	 a	damn	in	 a	true	storm.	The	poncho	 kept	whipping	 around	his
knees,	the	 wind	 trying	  its	 best	to	 rip	 it	  clear	 off	 him.	 Stubbs	 knelt	 there
unperturbed,	a	dead	cigar	between	his	lips,	 the	hose	in	 his	hands,	the	nozzle
stuck	into	the	open	mouth	of	 the	Walkaround’s	tank.	Warren	was	happy	to	 be
inside.
   The	 owner	 of	the	 boat	was	 wearing	gray	 walking	 shorts,	a	 white	 T-shirt,
and	brown	Top-Siders.	He	was	soaked	through	to	the	skin.	 He	kept	talking	 to
Stubbs	as	he	filled	 the	tank,	the	words	 lost	to	 Warren,	Stubbs	nodding	every
now	and	then	 to	let	 the	man	know	 he	 was	listening.	 Finally,	 Stubbs	got	up,
hung	the	hose	back	on	the	pump,	put	the	cap	back	on	the	boat’s	tank,	gave	it	a
tightening	twist	 with	 his	key,	and	then	came	walking	 back	swiftly	  toward	the
marina	office,	 his	poncho	flying	 all	 orange	and	angry	around	him,	 the	boater
following	 him,	drenched.
   Stubbs	was	talking	 as	they	came	in.
   “...wait	 it	 out	the	ten	minutes	or	so,	I	was	you,”	he	was	saying.
   “Looks	  to	me	 like	 it’s	 gonna	be	longer’n	 that,”	 the	 other	man	said.	 “You
take	American	Express?”

38
   “Just	 Visa	or	MasterCard,”	Stubbs	said.
   “I’ll	   have	to	give	you	cash	then,”	the	man	said,	and	glanced	at	Warren,	and
then	took	out	his	billfold	 and	said,	“What’s	 it	come	to?”
   “Eleven-sixty,”	  Stubbs	said.
   “Can	 you	 break	a	 twenty?”	 the	man	 asked,	and	turned	to	 look	 at	Warren
again.	“Somethin’	interestin’	 you	here?”	he	said.
   “You	 talking	 to	me?”	Warren	said.
   “Ain’t	  but	 three	of	us	here	in	this	room	and	I’m	 lookin’	 straight	at	you,	now
ain’t	I?”
   “I	 suppose	you	are,”	Warren	said.
   “This	 money	transaction	interestin’	 you?”
   “Oh,	 yes,”	 Warren	said.	“What	 I	 plan	to	 do	is	hit	 you	upside	the	head	and
steal	your	big	twenty-dollar	 bill.”
   Stubbs	burst	out	laughing.
   “What’s	 so	funny?”	 the	man	asked.
   “Nothin’,	  ”	 Stubbs	said,	still	laughing.
   “Man’s	 standin’	 there	watchin’	me	take	out	my	money...”
   “Come	 on	now,	come	on,”	Stubbs	said	soothingly.
   “How’s	  a	person	to	know	whut’s	goin’	on	inside	his	head?”
   He	 handed	the	bill	 to	Stubbs	and	stood	there	glowering	 while	 Stubbs	rang
up	the	 sale	and	made	 change	from	 the	 register.	He	 seemed	to	be	 debating
whether	he	wanted	 to	 start	up	 with	 Warren	or	 not.	He	 was	still	  debating	it
when	Stubbs	brought	 back	 his	change.	 He	counted	 it,	 gave	Warren	a	 dirty
look,	and	went	 out	into	 the	rain.	 His	transom	 hit	one	of	 the	pilings	 while	 he
was	backing	the	boat	out.	Good,	Warren	thought.
   “You	 get	a	lot	of	that?”	 Stubbs	asked.
   “Enough,”	  Warren	said.
   “I	 thought	 that	was	history.”
   “Sure.	 Where?”
   “I	 just	 thought	it	was.	That	kind	of	 bullshit.”
   “Well,”	  Warren	said,	and	let	it	go.	“You	 were	telling	 me	about	Leeds	taking
the	boat	out...”
   “Right.”
   “This	 was	Monday	 afternoon,	correct?	Sometime	Monday	afternoon.”
   “Around	  a	quarter	to	five.	 Was	when	he	drove	 in.	Time	 he	untied	the	boat
and	went	off,	it	was	maybe	ten	minutes	later.”
   “What	 time	 did	he	come	back	in?”
   “Around	  six?	Thereabouts?”
   “Tied	 up	here	at	the	dock?”
   “Same	as	usual.	His	usual	slip.	Number	 twelve.”
   “What	 time	 did	you	leave	the	marina	that	night?”
   “I	  don’t	leave	 it.	 Not	 any	night.	 My	 house	is	 right	 there	past	 the	storage

39
sheds.	I’m	here	all	the	time.”
   “Would	 you	 have	seen	anyone	going	onto	Mr.	Leeds’s	boat	after	 he’d
brought	it	in	that	night?”
   “Except	him,	do	you	mean?”
   “Yes,	I	mean	after	he	brought	it	in.”
   “I	 know,	but...”
   “Anyone	else	is	what	I	mean.”
   “I	 know.	But	what	I’m	 saying	is,	I	was	asleep	after	he	tied	up	the	second
time.”
   Warren	looked	at	him.
   “He	took	the	boat	out	twice,”	Stubbs	said.
   “What	do	you	mean?”
   “Once	in	the	afternoon,	and	again	later	that	night.”
   “When	later	that	night?”
   “Well,	he	called	me	around	nine	o’clock—”
   “Leeds?”
   “That’s	right,	 Mr.	Leeds.	Told	me	he’d	be	taking	the	boat	out	again	for	a
little	moonlight	spin,	said	I	wasn’t	to	be	alarmed	if	I	heard	him	out	there	on
the	dock.”
   “And	 did	you	hear	him	on	the	dock?”
   “I	 did.”
   “At	 what	time?”
   “He	drove	in	sometime	between	ten	and	ten-thirty.	Like	he	said	he	would.”
   “You	saw	him	drive	in?”
   “I	 saw	his	car.”
   “Did	 you	see	him	getting	out	of	the	car?”
   “Yes,	I	did.	Moonlit	 night,	it	was	Mr.	Leeds,	all	right.	Locked	the	car	and
went	straight	to	the	boat.”
   “What	time	did	he	bring	the	boat	back	in?”
   “I	 don’t	know.	I	was	asleep	by	midnight,	it	had	to’ve	been	after	that.	Boat
was	here	in	the	morning	when	I	woke	up,	tied	up	as	usual.”
   “What	kind	of	a	car	was	Mr.	Leeds	driving?”
   “A	 red	Maserati,”	Stubbs	said.

40
                                                                                                                         3


TALL	AND	blond,	with	   an	 engaging	 smile	  and	 an	  even	 year-round	  tan,
Christopher	Howell	  was	 old	 enough	at	 forty-one	 to	 appear	beatable	to	 the
male	players	at	Calusa	Bath	and	Racquet.	He	 was	also	young	enough	at	 that
age	to	appear	attractive	to	the	female	members	of	 the	club.	The	fact	 was	that
he	could,	and	did,	 beat	the	best	players	the	club	 had	to	offer.	 But	he	seemed
aware	of	the	fact	that	no	one	liked	a	tennis	pro	 who	came	on	with	the	married
ladies,	 and	 so	his	  manner	 with	 the	  thirtysomething	  young	 mothers	 who
flocked	to	 take	lessons	from	 him	 was	entirely	 businesslike	and	circumspect.
As	a	result,	the	men	did	 not	feel	 threatened—except	by	his	devastating	serve
and	 his	  ferocious	  backhand—and	  the	 women	  respected	  his	 courteous
professionalism.	 Born	  and	 bred	 in	  Boston,	 Kit—as	  he	 preferred	  calling
himself—had	moved	 to	Calusa	almost	a	year	ago,	and	his	speech	still	carried
the	regional	inflections	 of	his	native	 city,	giving	 him	a	courtly	 sound	that	was
entirely	  becoming.	 Matthew	  liked	  him	  a	 lot,	  even	 if	   he	 normally	  felt
inadequate	in	his	presence.
   This	 Saturday	morning,	he	felt	particularly	 inferior.
   Perhaps	because	he’d	 overslept	and	 hadn’t	 had	enough	time	 to	 shave.	A
man	needing	a	shave	looked,	and	felt,	 particularly	 unkempt	 in	tennis	 whites.
The	 club’s	 idiotic	   rule	 was	 whites	  only.	  Kit	  looked	 magnificent	  in	  his
spanking-clean	 whites	 and	  his	 glorious	  tan.	 He	  was	 also	 clean-shaven.
Perhaps	because,	being	blond,	Kit	 didn’t	 need	to	shave	as	often	 as	Matthew
did.	Altogether	he	looked	like	 some	kind	of	Viking	  ready	to	smite	an	inept	foe
with	 his	battle-ax.	 The	fact	 that	he	 was	three	years	older	 than	Matthew	  did
nothing	to	change	the	uneven	equation.
   According	  to	 Matthew’s	 partner,	 Frank,	 a	man’s	 life	  ran	in	 twenty-year
cycles.	Twenty	years	old	 was	young.	 Forty	 was	middle-aged.	Sixty	 was	old.
And	 eighty	 was	dead.	Finito.	  With	 women,	 it	 was	slightly	  different.	 Their
lives	 ran	 in	 fifteen-year	 cycles.	 Fifteen	 years	 old	 was	 young.	 Thirty	  was
grown	up.	 Forty-five	 was	experienced.	Sixty	 was	 middle-aged.	Seventy-five
was	old.	And	ninety	was	still	 alive	and	kicking	 and	hanging	in	there.
   Maybe	 Frank	was	right.
   Matthew	  knew	 that	 if	  he	himself	  had	his	 preference,	 men	 and	women
would	remain	respectively	and	eternally	 thirty-seven	and	twenty-nine.	He	was
now	thirty-eight.	 Over	the	hill,	 he	guessed.
   “...against	 a	left-handed	player,”	Kit	 was	saying.
   Showing	 off,	 of	 course.	He	 was	a	natural	 right-hander,	but	 he	could	 play

41
with	either	 hand	at	will.	  There	were	some	players,	in	 fact,	who	 said	his	left-
handed	serve	was	even	more	powerful	 than	his	normal	 serve.	Today,	he	was
going	to	 teach	 Matthew	 how	 to	 play	 against	a	 left-hander.	Matthew	  could
hardly	wait.	 The	inside	waist	button	 on	his	tennis	shorts	had	popped	while	he
was	putting	  them	 on,	and	 they	 were	 now	 fastened	 only	 with	  the	 outside
button.	Matthew	  felt	 certain	 they	would	  fall	 down	 the	moment	 he	 tried	 to
return	one	of	Kit’s	 aces.	Kit’s	teaching	technique	was	simple.	No	 mercy.	Take
no	prisoners.	He	played	 against	you	as	if	 you	 were	facing	 each	other	across
some	 disputed	 battlefield.	  It	  worked.	  Matthew’s	  game	 had	 improved	  a
hundredfold	since	he’d	begun	taking	lessons	last	October.
   “There	  are	a	 lot	 of	 things	 you	 have	 to	 remember	about	 playing	 a	 left-
hander,”	Kit	 said,	“but	  we’ll	 cover	 only	the	 two	 most	important	 ones	today,
okay?”
   “Sure,”	 Matthew	 said.
   He	 was	 wondering	 how	many	 others	there	 were.	Two	 seemed	like	 more
than	enough.
   “The	 first	 thing	 is	that	 he	is	left-handed,”	 Kit	 said.	“You’ve	  put	on	a	 little
weight,	haven’t	you?”
   “Yes,”	 Matthew	 said,	and	sucked	in	his	gut.
   “I	 thought	 so,”	Kit	 said.
   Which	 made	Matthew	feel	even	more	terrific.
   “Most	  of	the	 people	you	play	 against	are	right-handed,”	 Kit	 said,	“so	 you
know	exactly	 where	to	put	your	 serve,	you	know	exactly	 where	the	backhand
is	because	you’re	in	the	habit	of	hitting	 the	ball	to	it,	of	 avoiding	the	forehand.
So	you’ve	 got	to	 set	your	mind	 immediately	 to	 the	fact	that	 this	guy	 is	left-
handed,	and	he’s	going	 to	remain	 left-handed	 for	 the	rest	of	 the	 game,	that
isn’t	going	to	change	one	damn	bit.”
   Unless	you’re	 Christopher	Howell,	 Matthew	 thought.	Who	 is	ambidextrous
and	can	change	handedness	midstream.
   “A	 lefty	 is	 a	lefty	is	 a	lefty,”	 Kit	 said,	smiling,	 “and	if	 you	have	to	 hesitate
for	even	a	single	 second	to	remember	that,	then	he’s	got	 an	edge	on	you.	So
the	thing	 you	have	to	 do	from	 minute	 one	is	drum	 that	into	 your	 head,	he’s
left-handed,	he’s	left-handed,	and	never	for	 a	minute	forget	it.	 That’s	the	first
thing.”
   Matthew	 could	hardly	 wait	to	hear	what	the	second	thing	might	be.
   “The	  second	thing,”	 Kit	  said,	“is	  that	a	 lefty	 has	a	 natural	 curve	on	 his
forehand	shot.	You	 can	see	that	ball	 curving	 in	 over	 the	net	like	  a	baseball
curving	in	 over	the	plate.	If	 you	don’t	 set	yourself	for	 it,	you’re	 going	 to	be	a
little	 off	 on	all	 your	returns.	 So	for	 now	just	 keep	those	two	things	 in	 mind,
okay?	He’s	left-handed,	 he’s	left-handed—which	 means	you’ve	 got	to	figure
out	where	his	 backhand	is	from	 minute	 one—and	he	 has	a	natural	forehand
curve.	Want	to	start?”

42
   He	 was	merciless.
   He	 drilled	 his	fierce	 left-handed	serves	into	Matthew’s	 backhand	each	and
every	time,	 the	ball	 hitting	 the	 surface	and	sending	up	 a	little	 spurt	 of	 gray
dust,	and	then	bouncing	up	high	and	almost	out	of	 reach.	It	took	 almost	a	full
set	before	Matthew	 could	 return	 any	of	 Kit’s	 serves,	and	then	 only	 to	have
them	pounded	back	at	him	in	 that	“natural	 forehand	curve”	 he’d	been	talking
about,	 or	 in	 a	 backhand	 that	  was,	 if	 anything,	  more	 powerful	  than	 the
forehand.	Matthew	  kept	telling	  himself	 that	 his	 opponent	was	 left-handed,
left-handed,	 left-handed,	 but	 the	 more	 he	 repeated	 this	 in	  his	 mind	 and
signaled	it	 to	his	arm,	 the	more	confused	he	 became	over	where	Kit’s	 damn
backhand	was.	Whaaaap,	and	the	ball	would	 come	back	at	him,	looping	 over
the	net	in	 a	low,	 wide	 curve	that	didn’t	  seem	at	all	 natural	to	 Matthew,	that
seemed	in	fact	 pretty	 damn	unnatural	 if	 you	 asked	him,	 and	 then	it	 would
bounce	and	spin	away	out	of	reach,	leaving	him	standing	there	flatfooted.
   And	 when	Matthew	 did	remember	where	Kit’s	 damn	backhand	was,	served
his	hardest	serve	to	that	backhand,	watched	it	zipping	over	the	net	at	what	had
to	be	three	thousand	miles	an	hour,	low	and	hard	and	to	the	right-hand	 corner
for	the	deuce	court	or	the	midline	for	 the	ad	court,	a	serve	worthy	of	the	men’s
singles	at	Wimbledon,	Kit	 just	 stood	there	cool	and	tall	and	tanned	and	blond
in	his	 still-immaculate	  whites,	 bouncing,	 and	setting	 himself,	 and	 bringing
back	his	racket	 in	that	 fierce	one-handed	grip,	 and	whaaaaap,	those	zinging
strings	collided	 with	 that	 yellow	 ball	 and	it	 came	roaring	 back	over	 the	net
like	an	 express	train	racing	 down	 the	middle	 of	 the	track,	 making	 Matthew
want	to	get	out	of	 its	way	 before	it	 tore	his	head	off,	trying	 to	 walk	around	it
so	he	 could	 lay	 his	 forehand	 on	 it,	 getting	 caught	 in	 the	 middle	  instead,
pulling	 his	racket	in	 close	against	his	 chest	and	watching	 the	ball	 go	past	to
Milwaukee,	Wisconsin,	 where	it	sent	up	another	small	triumphant	puff	 of	gray
dust	just	inside	the	baseline.
   By	 the	 end	of	 the	hour,	 Matthew	 was	exhausted.	His	 shirt	 was	drenched
with	 sweat,	his	hair	was	wet	 and	plastered	to	his	 forehead,	his	face	was	red,
his	tennis	shoes	were	gray,	and	 he	felt	 as	if	he’d	 lost	 five	 of	the	 ten	pounds
he’d	gained	 in	 Italy.	 He	was	 shaking	hands	with	  Kit	 over	 the	net	 when	he
spotted	a	woman	who	 looked	very	 much	 like	 Jessica	Leeds	approaching	the
fenced-in	teaching	 court,	and	 then	blinked	 when	 he	realized	 it	 was	Jessica,
and	suddenly	felt	 even	sweatier	and	smellier	 and	stubblier	 and	shoddier	and
shabbier	and	more	showerless	than	he’d	felt	a	moment	 earlier.	As	his	client’s
beautiful	redheaded	wife	 approached	the	court	in	 a	pleated	skirt	that	 showed
her	long	legs	to	splendid	advantage,	crisp	white	 cotton	shirt	with	 a	Head	logo
just	over	 the	left	 breast,	smiling	 and	waving	 to	another	woman	 as	she	came
closer,	Matthew	wished	 a	spaceship	would	swoop	down	 and	carry	him	 off	to
Mars.
   And	  then	 he	 wondered	 what	 the	 hell	  she	was	 doing	  out	 here	 on	 the

43
Saturday	after	her	 husband	had	been	charged	with	 murder,	 wondered	about
the	propriety	 of	 her	playing	 tennis	 while	 he	languished	 in	jail,	  wondered	if
anyone	from	 the	 Calusa	 Herald-Tribune	  was	 out	 here	today,	 wondered	if
mention	of	 her	appearance	would	be	printed	 in	tomorrow’s	  morning	edition,
wondered	if	  her	 being	 here	could	 possibly	  hurt	 his	 case,	such	as	 it	 was,
wondered	why	 she	hadn’t	 first	  discussed	with	 him	 the	advisability	  of	 this,
wondered	too	damn	many	 things	in	 the	several	moments	it	took	 her	to	 reach
the	gate	in	the	fence	and	unlatch	 it	and	open	it.	 “Hello,	  Mr.	Hope,”	 she	said,
and	smiled.	“Looks	like	 Kit	 gave	you	a	workout.”
   “Yes,”	 Matthew	 said.
   “He	 played	a	good	game,”	Kit	 said.
   Praise	from	 the	Thunder	God.
   “I’m	  sorry	I’m	 late,”	 Jessica	said.
   “No	 problem,”	 Kit	 said.
   “Nice	  seeing	you,	 Mrs.	 Leeds,”	 Matthew	 said,	and	then	 to	Kit,	  “Thanks,
Kit,	see	you	next	week.”
   “Look	  forward	to	it,	 Mr.	Hope.”
   Matthew	 put	his	racket	 into	its	cover,	zipped	it	 up,	draped	his	towel	around
his	neck,	and	started	off	toward	the	men’s	locker	 room.	Behind	 him,	he	could
hear	the	steady	cadences	of	Kit	 and	Jessica	warming	up,	the	solid	 thwack	of
racket	 against	 ball,	 the	 softer	  thud	 of	  the	 ball	 bouncing	  on	 the	 court’s
synthetic	surface.	He	wondered	again	if	it	 was	wise	of	her	to	 have	come	here.
But	here	she	was,	for	 better	or	 for	 worse,	and	there	was	 nothing	to	 be	done
about	it	now.
   He	 headed	for	the	showers.



“It	 sounds	like	you’ve	 picked	yourself	another	winner,	 doesn’t	it?”	 Frank	said
sourly.
   They	 were	in	 his	office	 at	Summerville	 and	Hope,	a	corner	office	 befitting
his	position	 as	senior	 partner	 of	 the	firm,	  although	he	 was	only	 two	 years
older	than	Matthew.	Frank	did	 not	like	 having	to	work	 on	a	Saturday.	Neither
did	he	 like	 what	 Warren	 Chambers	had	just	 told	 them.	 Apparently,	 a	 man
named	Charlie	Stubbs—who	owned	a	marina	called	Riverview	  on	Willowbee
Creek—had	seen	Stephen	Leeds	driving	up	in	 a	red	Maserati	 at	ten-thirty	 on
the	night	of	the	murders.
   “Unless	 he	was	mistaken,”	Matthew	 said.
   “It	  is	not	 likely	 that	anyone	 could	mistakenly	 identify	 a	red	 Maserati	or	 a
red	anything,”	Frank	 said,	and	rose	from	behind	his	desk,	and	came	around	it,
and	walked	toward	 where	Matthew	 was	sitting,	 and	pointed	his	 forefinger	 at
him	like	 a	 prosecutor	about	to	 badger	a	hostile	witness.	 “Certainly	 not	 on	a
clear	moonlit	 night,”	  he	said.	 “Which	 means	that	 your	 man	was	out	 of	 the

44
house	at	ten-thirty	and	not	home	asleep,	as	he	claims	he	was.”
   “My	  partner’s	playing	devil’s	 advocate,”	Matthew	 explained	to	Warren.
   “I’m	  doing	 nothing	of	 the	sort,”	 Frank	said.	“I’m	  advising	 you	to	drop	 the
case	right	this	instant.	Your	man	is	as	guilty	as	homemade	sin.”
   Frank	  Summerville	 often	  got	 his	 southern	expressions	 wrong;	 this	 one
should	have	been	as	ugly	 as	homemade	sin.	But	he	 was	a	transplanted	New
Yorker	who	 still	  had	trouble	 with	 local	 dialect	 and	custom	 and	who	 spoke
constantly	about	going	back	one	day	 to	the	only	 real	city	 in	the	 entire	world.
London,	  Paris,	  Rome,	  Tokyo,	   all	   were	  penny-ante	  burgs,	  to	  Frank
Summerville’s	New	 York	frame	of	 mind.	Calusa?	Don’t	 even	ask.	A	fly	speck
on	 a	 pile	  of	  elephant	 dung	  was	 Calusa,	 Florida.	  A	  city	  with	  cultural
pretensions,	a	lousy	climate	for	 most	of	 the	year,	and	a	population	composed
of	eighty	percent	rednecks	and	nineteen-point-ninety-nine	 percent	immigrants
from	 the	 Midwest.	  He	 hated	 Calusa.	 Hated,	 too,	 what	  it	 did	  to	 people.
Thinned	the	blood	and	addled	the	brain.
   “How’s	  his	eyesight?”	Matthew	asked.
   “He	 wasn’t	 wearing	 glasses,	if	that’s	 what	you	 mean,”	Warren	said.	“And
he	was	able	to	read	what	was	on	that	license	plate.”
   “Which	  was?”
   “JESSIE	1.”
   “Worse	 and	worse,”	Frank	said,	shaking	his	 head.	“His	wife’s	 name.	Worse
and	worse.”
   There	 were	people	who	 said	that	Matthew	 and	his	 partner	looked	alike.	 It
was	true	that	they	both	had	dark	hair	and	brown	eyes,	but	aside	from	that—
   Matthew	  was	thirty-eight,	  Frank	 had	 just	 turned	forty.	  Matthew	 was	 an
even	six	 feet	 tall	 and	 weighed	 a	hundred	 and	 eighty-seven,	with	  his	 new
Italian	 pounds;	his	partner	 was	five-nine	 and	a	 half	 and	weighed	a	 hundred
and	sixty.	 Matthew’s	 face	 was	long	 and	 narrow,	 what	 Frank	called	 a	 “fox
face,”	in	 contrast	to	his	 own	full,	  round	“pig	 face.”	 Moreover,	 Matthew	 was
originally	 from	 Chicago—which	 Frank	would	 not	even	admit	was	the	second
city.	To	him,	 there	were	no	second	cities;	there	was	 only	New	 York	and	then
every	other	city	in	the	world.
   “Why	  would	he	have	driven	his	wife’s	 car	over	there?”	Matthew	asked.
   “Because	he	was	out	doing	murder,	is	why,”	 Frank	said.
   “If	   he	was	 out	 on	 his	 boat,”	 Matthew	 said,	 “then	 he	 wasn’t	 out	 doing
murder	in	Little	 Asia.”
   “Unless	  he	parked	 the	 boat,	and	 got	 off	 the	 boat,	and	 then	 went	 to	 do
murder,”	Frank	said,	jabbing	his	finger	 at	the	air	again.
   “Why?”	  Warren	said.
   “Why?	 Because	they	raped	his	wife,	why	do	you	 think	why?”
   “Why,”	  Warren	repeated,	“would	 he	go	 clear	around	his	 ass	to	scratch	his
elbow?”

45
   “Meaning	 why	 didn’t	 he	drive	straight	to	Little	 Asia?”	 Matthew	said.	“Why
all	the	hugger-mugger	with	the	boat?”
   “He	 was	going	 out	to	kill	 three	people,”	 Frank	said.	“Did	  you	want	 him	to
leave	a	trail	even	a	Boy	Scout	could	follow?”
   “He	 did	 that	anyway,”	Matthew	 said.	“A	 red	Maserati	with	 his	wife’s	 name
on	the	 plate?	That’s	 leaving	 a	 trail,	 Frank.	 That’s	 leaving	 a	 highly	 visible
trail.”
   “No,	 that’s	leaving	 an	alibi,”	 Frank	said.	“You	 said	it	yourself,	 not	a	minute
ago.	If	he	was	out	on	that	boat,	then	he	couldn’t	 have	been	over	in	Little	 Asia
committing	murder.”
   The	room	 went	silent.
   “You	  shouldn’t	 have	taken	this	 case,”	 Frank	said.	 “I	 know	 I’ve	 said	 that
about	other	cases	you’ve—”
   “Oh?	  Have	 you?”	 Matthew	  asked,	and	 opened	his	 eyes	 wide	 in	 mock
surprise.
   “Yes,	 smartass,	I	have,”	Frank	 said.	“But	 this	time	 you	seem	to	have	gone
out	of	your	way	to...”
   “No,	 this	 is	much	better	than	the	last	one,”	Matthew	 said.	“Don’t	 you	 think
so,	Warren?”
   “Oh,	 definitely,”	  Warren	said.	“The	last	one,	the	man’s	fingerprints	were	all
over	the	murder	weapon.	This	one,	there’s	only	his	wallet	at	the	scene.”
   “Yes,	 wonderful,	 make	light	 of	it,”	 Frank	 said.	“Ha,	ha,	wonderful.	 But	 for
someone	who’s	made	a	credo—”
   “Credo,	 get	that,	Warren.”
   “Credo,	 yes,	of	defending	only	 people	you	think	are	innocent—”
   “I	 do	think	 he’s	innocent,	Frank.”
   “Why,	  of	 course	he’s	 innocent,”	 Frank	 said,	his	 voice	 dripping	 sarcasm.
“Any	 fool	can	see	he’s	innocent.	His	wallet	is	laying	on	the	floor—”
   “Lying	  on	the	floor,	Frank.”
   “—alongside	 three	guys	whose	throats	are	grinning	from	ear	to	ear—”
   “Please,	Frank,	don’t	 be	gross.”
   “—whose	  eyeballs,	for	 Christ’s	 sake,	are	rolling	  around	on	 the	floor	 like
marbles—”
   “Really,”	  Matthew	said,	“that	 is	gross,	Frank.”
   “You	  want	gross?	How	 about	 an	enraged	husband	cutting	 off	 their	 dicks
and	stuffing	them	in	their	 mouths?”
   “I	 hope	he	at	least	got	the	right	 mouths,”	Warren	said,	and	he	and	Matthew
burst	out	laughing.
   “Laugh,	  go	ahead.	Ha,	ha,	 very	funny,	 laugh,”	 Frank	 said.	“But	 wait	 and
see	what	the	state	attorney	does	with	those	three	dicks.”
   “That’s	  a	sexist	 remark,	 Frank.	The	 state	attorney	 happens	to	 be	a	 very
beautiful	young	woman.”

46
   “Even	  better.	Can	 you	 imagine	 a	 beautiful	 young	 woman	 telling	 a	 jury
about	three	blind	guys	sucking	their	own	cocks,	for	Christ’s	 sake!”
   “Disgusting,”	  Matthew	 said,	and	began	laughing	again.
   “Ha,	 ha,	go	ahead,	laugh.	Laugh,	clown,	laugh,”	 he	said,	dramatically.	“But
don’t	come	crying	to	 me	later.”
   “Frank?”	 Matthew	 said.
   “Yes,	 what?”
   “Why	  would	he	need	the	boat	for	an	alibi?”
   “What?”
   “He	 already	had	an	alibi.	He	 was	home	with	his	wife	 all	night	long.	 So	why
the	boat?”
   “Because	  he’s	  a	 goddamn	  liar,”	   Frank	  said,	 and	  nodded	  his	  head
emphatically.	“And	 a	murderer,	too,”	 he	said,	and	nodded	again.	“And	 you’re
a	fool	for	defending	him.”



His	tan	hadn’t	 yet	faded,	but	 he’d	been	here	in	jail	 only	 since	Tuesday.	Give
him	another	week	 or	so,	 and	the	pallor	 would	 begin	to	 set	in.	 And	 the	look
would	 accompany	it.	 The	 caged	look	 that	claimed	 a	person’s	 eyes	the	first
time	he	got	locked	 up.	A	 look	 just	this	side	 of	panic.	 A	trapped	and	helpless
look.	Leeds	wasn’t	wearing	that	look	 yet.	It	would	 come	later.	With	the	pallor.
   The	  mark	 of	  an	 habitual	  offender	 was	 that	  he	 wore	 his	  pallor	  with
something	close	to	arrogant	pride	 and	never	wore	a	caged	look	 after	the	first
time	he	was	arrested.	A	murderer	 was	something	else	again.	Most	 murderers
were	one-shot	offenders.	They	acquired	the	pallor	and	the	look	 and	either	lost
both	when	they	were	acquitted	or	kept	both	for	a	long,	 long	time.	In	 Florida,	a
convicted	murderer	kept	them	only	until	 he	was	executed.
   “I	  want	you	 to	 tell	 me	every	 place	you	went	 and	everything	 you	 did	 last
Monday,”	 Matthew	said.	“From	 the	 moment	you	left	 your	 broker’s	office	 till
the	moment	you	went	to	sleep	that	night.”
   “Why?”	  Leeds	asked.
   “I’d	  like	to	 know,	please,”	Matthew	said.
   Leeds	sighed	heavily,	 as	if	being	asked	to	tell	 his	attorney	where	he’d	been
and	what	he’d	done	on	the	day	of	 the	murders	was	certainly	 burdensome	and
probably	unnecessary.
   “It	  was	 raining,”	  he	said.	 “This	  was	around	 three	 o’clock.	  When	I	  left
Bernie.	Bernie	Scott,	my	broker.	Coming	 down	in	sheets...”
   ...drenching	 the	sidewalks	 and	the	streets,	running	into	 sewers	and	drains,
flooding	 the	 roads.	Leeds	has	always	 felt	 uncomfortable	 driving	  his	 wife’s
Maserati,	it	is	 too	jazzy	a	vehicle	 for	him,	 it	 promises	a	playboy	when	only	 a
farmer	is	behind	the	wheel.	The	car	is	called	a	Spyder,	with	a	y,	and	it	lists	 for
$48,000,	though	Jessie	bargained	the	dealer	down	to	$44,500.	Zero	to	sixty	in

47
six	 seconds,	 black	 leather	  convertible	  top,	 wood	  facings	 on	  the	 doors,
dashboard,	and	console,	wood	handles	on	 the	hand	brake	and	gearshift.	 Tan
leather	and	suede	on	the	seats,	rich	black	 carpeting	on	 the	floor,	 all	 too	rich
for	Leeds’s	blood.
   He	 feels	even	 less	comfortable	driving	  it	 in	the	 rain,	but	 his	own	 car	has
been	in	the	shop	for	 the	past	week,	and	they	have	only	 the	two	 cars,	his	and
Jessie’s,	and	they’ve	temporarily	  been	sharing	the	 more	expensive	one.	 His
own	car	is	a	ten-year-old	 Cadillac	Seville,	 in	the	shop	for	 a	new	transmission
at	a	cost	of	 twenty-one	hundred	 dollars,	but	 he	loves	that	car,	the	 look	 of	it,
the	luxurious	  feel	 of	 it,	  he	 would	 trade	 ten	 Maseratis	 for	 his	 steady	 old
Cadillac.
   He	 stops	at	 the	 video	 store	on	 the	South	 Tamiami	 Trail,	 just	 off	 Lloyd,
between	 Lloyd	   and	 Lewis,	   he	 remembers	  the	  name	 now,	  it’s	  called
VideoTime.	The	man	 who	owns	the	store	has	only	 one	eye,	he	wears	a	black
patch	over	the	other	one,	his	name	is	Roger	Carson.	Just	running	from	the	car
to	the	front	 door	soaks	Leeds	to	the	skin.	 The	shop	is	almost	empty	 at	three-
fifteen,	 which	 is	when	 he	gets	there.	A	 woman	 with	 a	baby	strapped	to	 her
back	is	 shopping	the	 racks	of	 tapes.	Carson	 himself	 is	 behind	the	 counter,
staring	glumly	 out	 at	the	 rain.	 Leeds	remembers	wondering	 whether	rain	 is
good	or	bad	for	the	video	business.
   He	 tells	 Carson	what	he’s	 looking	 for—he	 has	come	here	specifically	 for
Casablanca,	this	 is	 the	 movie	 Jessie	wants	 to	 watch	tonight—and	  Carson
comes	out	from	  behind	the	 counter	and	 leads	him	 over	 to	a	 section	called
Classics,	or	Movie	 Classics,	or	something	similar.	He	locates	the	tape	at	once
and	then	asks	Leeds	if	 he’s	ever	seen	the	movie,	and	Leeds	says	he	saw	it	 a
few	times	on	television,	 and	Carson	asks	him	does	he	know	what	the	best	line
in	the	movie	 is?	Leeds	immediately	 says,	“Round	up	 all	the	usual	suspects!”
and	both	men	 burst	out	 laughing.	 The	rain	 slithers	down	 the	windows.	 The
lady	with	the	baby	browses.
   The	 rain	is	beginning	 to	taper	at	three-thirty	 as	he	drives	south	on	the	Trail
to	Timucuan	and	then	turns	the	car	eastward,	toward	the	farm.	The	clouds	are
breaking	off	 in	 tatters,	blue	 is	beginning	 to	show	 in	 patches	here	and	there.
The	road	is	wet	and	black	ahead,	the	low	red	car	hugging	it,	engine	humming,
tires	hissing	on	 the	asphalt.	He	 could	get	 to	like	 this	 car,	he	supposes,	if	 he
could	ever	 bring	 himself	 to	 be	unfaithful	  to	the	 Caddy.	He	 is	beginning	 to
think	he	might	 take	the	boat	out.	If	 it	clears	up.	Drive	 over	 to	the	marina,	dry
off	the	seats,	take	her	out	for	a	little	spin.	Maybe	run	her	up	to	Calusa	Bay	and
back.	Half-hour	each	way.	If	the	weather	clears.
   By	 four	 o’clock,	 you’d	 never	know	it	 had	rained	at	all.	It	 is	that	way	 down
here	in	Calusa	during	 the	 month	of	 August.	 It	 happens,	and	then	it	 is	gone,
and	the	heat	is	 still	 with	  you	even	 though	the	 fields	 lie	 emerald	green	and
sparkling	under	 a	late-afternoon	 sun	and	 the	sky	 has	been	swept	clean.	 He

48
asks	Jessie	if	she’d	like	 to	come	 out	with	 him	 on	the	boat,	 but	she	tells	him
no...
   “She’s	 not	 a	boat	person,”	 he	tells	 Matthew	 now.	“Never	 got	 the	hang	of
running	it,	never	enjoyed	being	on	it...”
   ...so	 he	drives	 all	 the	way	 back	 into	 Calusa	again.	It	 takes	 about	twenty
minutes,	this	 time	of	 year,	door	 to	door	 from	 the	farm	 to	the	marina.	 In	 the
wintertime,	 when	the	snowbirds	are	down	and	the	roads	are	packed,	it’ll	  take
a	half	hour,	sometimes	forty	 minutes.	Those	are	the	times	he	wishes	he	had	a
little	 house	on	a	deepwater	canal,	keep	the	boat	right	there	at	the	dock,	take	it
out	whenever	he	wanted	to.	Come	and	go	as	he	pleased.	Free.	But	the	farm	is
his	business,	of	 course,	his	livelihood.	  He’s	 a	farmer.	 The	farm	 is	 what	his
father	left	 him.	 His	 sister	in	 Tampa	got	 the	trailer	 parks,	and	 his	brother	 in
Jacksonville	got	 the	 downtown	 real	estate.	The	 farm	 is	a	 big	 moneymaker,
Leeds	has	never	regretted	his	inheritance.
   The	 marina	is	off	 Henley	 Street,	just	past	the	big	Toys	 “Я”	 Us	warehouse.
You	go	down	 the	Trail	 heading	 south,	and	you	 make	a	right	 on	Henley	 and
follow	 it	around	past	Twin	Tree	Estates,	and	then	you	take	the	little	dirt	 cutoff
leading	down	to	the	creek.	Charlie	 Stubbs	calls	his	marina	Riverview,	 but	it’s
really	on	 a	little	 creek,	is	 all	it	 is,	leading	 out	to	 the	Intercoastal.	Willowbee
Creek,	it’s	 called.	Sometimes	 the	water’s	 so	shallow	 you	can’t	 get	anything
but	a	raft	 up	 it.	 Got	to	 check	the	 tides,	give	 Charlie	 a	call,	 ask	him	 how	 it
looks,	can	you	move	a	boat	up	the	creek?	No	such	problem	now	when	it’s	just
quit	raining,	 and	the	tide’s	 coming	in,	 and	the	draft	 on	his	 boat	is	only	 three
feet	four	inches.
   The	 boat	is	a	thirty-nine-foot	 Mainship	 Mediterranean.	Powered	with	a	pair
of	freshwater-cooled	 Crusader	inboards,	the	Med	 is	capable	of	 doing	almost
thirty	miles	 an	hour,	but	Leeds	has	never	pushed	it	that	far.	He	loves	this	boat
almost	as	much	as	he	loves	the	Caddy.	To	him,	the	boat	spells	luxury.	Well,	 it
should	spell	luxury,	it	 cost	him	close	to	$145,000.	The	Caddy	is	a	comfortable
old	shoe,	but	the	boat	is	a	diamond-studded	glass	slipper.
   It	 is	one	of	those	afternoons.
   Matthew	 knows	 just	what	 Leeds	is	talking	 about;	 he	himself	has	been	out
on	a	boat	on	a	day	like	the	one	Leeds	is	now	describing,	the	sky	a	soft	powder
blue,	the	water	 still	 and	smooth	and	 golden	green,	a	bird	 crying	 somewhere
off	 to	the	 right,	 shattering	the	 silence,	the	 cry	 echoing,	drifting,	  and	at	 last
fading	entirely.	 And	 all	 is	 still	 again.	There	 is	only	 the	 sound	of	 the	boat’s
idling	engines.
   Mangroves	 line	the	shore	on	either	side	of	the	creek,	reflecting	in	 the	water.
Beyond	these,	receding	into	the	landscape,	there	are	palmettos,	a	scattering	of
sabal	palms,	a	hummock	of	 oaks	trailing	 moss.	The	boat	glides.	A	 great	blue
heron	stalks	the	edges	of	the	shore,	delicately	lifting	 one	spindly	 leg	after	 the
other.	There	are	signs	on	slanted	wooden	posts	in	the	water,	NO	WAKE.	Gliding.

49
Gliding,	 IDLE	SPEED	ONLY.	The	Burma-Shave	signs	of	boaters	everywhere	in
America.
   Leeds	stands	at	the	 helm,	a	grin	 on	his	face.	 He	is	wearing	 jeans	and	a	T-
shirt,	 Top-Siders	and	 a	nylon	 mesh	 cap	that	 was	 part	of	  a	giveaway	 two,
maybe	three	years	ago,	when	 the	Brechtmann	 Beer	people	 down	here	 were
making	a	big	push	for	 their	new	Golden	 Girl	 Light.	 The	cap	is	yellow,	 with	 a
pair	of	 interlocking	  red	 B’s—for	  Brechtmann	Brewing—back	  to	 back	in	 a
circle	above	 the	peak.	The	 cap	is	 perfect	for	 boating,	 Leeds	wears	 it	 every
time	he	goes	out.	If	 it’s	 a	chilly	  day,	he	also	wears	a	yellow	 windbreaker	 he
bought	at	Sears.	It	 is	 not	a	chilly	  day	today.	 It	 is	a	normal	 day	 for	 August,
insufferably	hot	 and	humid.	But	out	 here	on	the	water,	it	is	also	heartachingly
beautiful.
   He	 hates	to	take	the	boat	back	in.
   He	 cruises	all	the	way	up	to	Calusa	Bay,	moves	slowly	under	the	big	bridge
there,	and	 makes	a	 wide	 arcing	 turn	 on	virtually	  deserted	 water.	He	 feels
utterly	alone	in	the	world.	 Alone	with	 God.	Who	 is	being	exceedingly	good	to
him.	And	 he	 forgets,	for	 a	little	  while	 at	least,	 that	there	is	 anything	 in	 the
world	but	peace	and	solitude.
   He	 gets	back	to	the	marina	 at	twenty	past	six	 and	then	drives	the	Maserati
out	to	 the	 farm	 again.	 He	 arrives	 there	at	 a	 quarter	to	 seven,	 somewhere
around	that	time.	Pete	is	just	 coming	in	 from	 the	fields,	 he	waves	hello	from
the	tractor	 and	 Leeds	 waves	hello	  back.	Pete	 Reagan—no	relation	  to	 the
former	president,	whom	 Leeds	hates,	by	the	way—is	 his	foreman,	one	of	 the
thirty-six	 regulars	employed	 by	Leeds	and	his	 wife,	 an	indispensable	part	of
what	 has	become	a	 vast	 and	 very	 profitable	 operation	 since	 the	 death	of
Osmond	Leeds	six	years	ago.
   For	 dinner	that	night,	 Jessie	has	asked	their	housekeeper/cook,	Allie—who
is	Pete’s	 wife—to	  prepare	steamed	lobster,	 corn	 on	the	 cob,	 and	a	 mixed
salad.	The	corn	comes	right	 from	 their	 own	 farm,	 as	does	the	lettuce	in	 the
salad,	but	none	of	 these	is	a	cash	crop	 like	 the	tomatoes	that	are	also	in	 the
salad.	They	sit	down	 to	dinner	on	 the	screened	patio	overlooking	 the	pool.	It
is	still	 stiflingly	   hot,	but	 the	water	 promises	relief	 if	 the	 heat	and	humidity
become	unbearable,	and	the	icy-cold	beer	in	 tall,	frosted	 steins	does	much	to
dissuade	thoughts	of	 the	 weather.	Besides,	 Leeds	feels—and	 Jessie	agrees
with	 him	on	 this	point—that	 lobsters	demand	to	 be	eaten	outdoors	at	a	long
wooden	table.
   It	 is	still	 a	good	day	for	Stephen	Leeds.
   God	 is	still	being	good	to	him.
   “When	 did	you	 go	out	on	the	boat	again?”	Matthew	asked.
   “The	 boat?	What	do	you	mean?”
   “What	 time	 that	night	did	you	go	out	on	the	boat	again?”
   “I	 didn’t.”

50
   “You	didn’t	drive	over	to	Riverview—”
   “No.”
   “—in	 your	wife’s	car—”
   “No,	I	 didn’t.”
   “Didn’t	 you	call	Charlie	Stubbs?”
   “Charlie?	No.	Why	would	I	call	him?”
   “To	tell	him	you’d	be	taking	the	boat	out	for	a	moonlight	spin—”
   “A	 moonlight	spin?”
   “A	 moonlight	spin,	yes.	That’s	what	Charlie	Stubbs	says	you—”
   “He’s	mistaken.”
   “You	didn’t	call	him?”
   “I	 did	not	call	him.”
   “You	didn’t	ask	him	not	to	worry	if	he	heard	someone	starting	the	boat—”
   “I	 just	told	you	I	didn’t	call	him.”
   “He	says	you	called	around	nine.”
   “No,	I	 was	already	in	bed	by	then.”
   “He	says	you	arrived	at	the	marina	around	ten-thirty—”
   “I	 told	you,	he’s	mistaken.	Or	lying,	either	one.	Jessie	and	I	had	an	after-
dinner	drink,	and	then	we	got	into	bed	and	turned	on	the	video.	I	must’ve
fallen	asleep	watching	it	because	the	next	thing	I	knew—”
   There	is	a	loud	knocking	at	the	door.	And	the	bell	is	ringing.	The	knocking
and	the	ringing	overlap.	Leeds	struggles	up	out	of	sleep,	opens	his	eyes	to	see
Jessie	putting	on	a	robe.	Sunlight	is	streaming	through	the	bedroom	window.
The	ringing	and	the	knocking	suddenly	stop.	As	Jessie	rushes	out	of	the	room,
he	hears	voices	from	below.	And	then	Allie	calling	up	the	steps,	“Missus?	It’s
the	police.”
   Two	of	them,	one	bigger	than	the	other.
   A	black	cop	and	a	white	cop.
   Is	 this	your	wallet?	Is	this	 your	wallet?	Is	this	 your	wallet?	Is	this	 your
wallet?
   It	is	his	wallet.
   It	is	indeed	his	wallet.
   God	has	stopped	being	good	to	Stephen	Leeds.



The	detective’s	name	was	Frank	Bannion,	and	he’d	been	working	out	of	the
state	attorney’s	office	for	the	past	three	years	now.	Prior	to	that	he’d	worked
for	the	Calusa	PD,	and	before	that	he’d	been	a	uniformed	cop	and	then	a
detective-sergeant	in	Detroit.	He	told	all	 the	other	detectives	on	the	SA’s
squad	that	he	had	once	done	research	for	Elmore	Leonard	back	in	Detroit.
What	happened,	actually,	was	that	Leonard	was	hanging	around	the	station
house	asking	questions,	soaking	up	atmosphere	for	one	of	his	books,	and	he

51
asked	Bannion	a	few	questions,	and	Bannion	gave	him	a	few	answers.	So	now
Bannion	walked	 around	as	if	 he’d	 coauthored	the	damn	thing	 with	 his	good
old	buddy	Dutch.
   Bannion	 was	also	proud	 of	 the	fact	that	 he	still	 had	his	own	 teeth	and	his
own	hair.	He	told	anyone	who	would	 listen	that	all	 the	men	in	his	family—his
father,	his	brothers,	 his	cousins	on	 his	father’s	 side—had	 lost	their	 hair	 and
their	teeth	by	the	time	 they	were	forty.	 Bannion	 was	forty-two	 years	old,	and
he	still	 had	his	own	teeth	and	his	 own	hair.	 He	attributed	this	 to	the	fact	 that
he	had	once	bit	a	 burglar	on	the	 ass.	The	burglar	was	going	 out	the	window
when	Bannion	grabbed	him	and	bit	him.	He	 had	pictures	of	his	teeth	marks	on
the	burglar’s	 ass	as	proof	 because	the	defense	attorney	had	 tried	 to	get	 the
case	kicked	out	by	showing	Bannion	had	used	unnecessary	force.
   Bannion	  was	telling	  Patricia	 Demming	  what	 he	had	 learned	 out	 at	the
Riverview	 Marina.	 Patricia	 had	 sent	him	 there	because	Stephen	Leeds	had
suggested	to	arresting	detectives	Bloom	and	Rawles	that	perhaps	he’d	left	his
wallet	 on	the	boat	 when	he’d	 taken	 it	out	 on	 the	afternoon	 of	the	 murders.
Patricia	wanted	to	 find	 out	if	 Leeds	had	truly	 been	out	on	 the	boat.	Because
(a)	if	 he	hadn’t,	then	he	couldn’t	 possibly	 have	dropped	his	wallet	 there,	and
(b)	if	he	hadn’t,	then	he	was	lying,	 and	if	he	was	lying	about	one	thing	then	he
could	be	lying	about	everything.	 Or	so	she	would	try	to	convince	a	jury.
   She	was	now	hearing	that	he	had	taken	the	boat	out	twice	that	day.
   “This	 is	 what	Stubbs	told	me,”	 Bannion	said.	“Charlie	 Stubbs,	he	owns	the
marina,	sixty-two	 years	old,	a	grizzled	guy	looks	like	 Jonah	and	the	whale.”
   “Told	 you	Leeds	took	the	boat	out	twice?”
   “Twice,”	  Bannion	said.	“First	 time	 in	the	afternoon,	around	four-thirty,	 tide
was	still	 good,	 second	time	at	 night	 around	ten-thirty,	 tide	 coming	 back	in,
Leeds	could’ve	got	the	boat	in	and	out	easy.”
   “Did	  Stubbs	see	him	both	times?”
   “Saw	 him	 both	times,”	 Bannion	said.	“Talked	 to	him	 the	first	 time,	but	not
the	time	at	night.”
   “Does	 he	seem	like	a	reliable	witness?”
   “Is	 my	mother	reliable?”
   “I’m	  sure	she	is,”	Patricia	said,	“but	how	 about	Stubbs?”
   “Very,	  you	 ask	 me.	 Sober,	 sharp,	a	 very	  good	 witness,	 you	 want	 my
opinion.”
   “What’d	  they	talk	about?”
   “They	 talked	twice	 actually.”
   “I	 thought	 you	said—”
   “Three	 times,	in	fact.”
   Patricia	 looked	at	him.
   “He	  drives	 over	in	 the	 afternoon,	 he	parks	 the	car,	 stops	by	 the	 marina
office	 to	 tell	 Stubbs	he’s	taking	 the	 boat	 out,	they	 chat	 about	how	 hot	 it’s

52
been,	 Leeds	 takes	 off.	  Stubbs	 watches	 him	  go	  up	  the	 creek	 into	  the
Intercoastal,	he	hangs	a	right,	which	means	he’s	heading	north	toward	 Calusa
Bay.	He	 comes	 back	 in	 around	 six,	 talks	 to	 Stubbs	again,	 tells	 him	 how
beautiful	 it	 was	out	 there	on	 the	water	 with	 God,	 and	so	on.	 That	 was	the
second	time.”
   “And	  when	was	the	third	time?”
   “Nine	 o’clock	  that	night.	Stubbs	is	still	 in	the	marina	office,	 catching	up	on
his	paperwork,	 the	phone	rings,	 it’s	Leeds	 on	the	other	 end.	He	tells	 Stubbs
it’s	such	a	beautiful	night,	 he’s	thinking	 of	taking	the	boat	out	for	 a	moonlight
spin,	doesn’t	want—”
   “Were	 those	his	exact	words?”
   “Exact.	 There	was	a	moon	the	night	of	the	murders,	by	the	way.”
   “Okay.”
   “Tells	 Stubbs	he	doesn’t	want	him	 to	be	alarmed	if	 he	hears	the	boat	going
out—”
   “Was	 that	the	word	Leeds	used?	Alarmed?”
   “Yeah,”	 Bannion	 said,	and	looked	at	her,	puzzled.	“Why	is	that	important?”
   “I	 like	 to	know	exactly	 what	people	say,”	Patricia	said.
   “That’s	  exactly	 what	  he	said.	 Alarmed.	 Or	  at	least	 that’s	 exactly	 what
Stubbs	said	he	said.”
   “Okay.”
   “True	  to	his	 word,	 Leeds	shows	up	 around	ten-thirty.	 Stubbs	is	 home	by
then,	he	lives	in	this	 little	 house	behind	the	sheds	where	they’ve	got	boats	up
on	trailers	for	storage.	He	sees	the	car	pulling	in—”
   “What	 kind	 of	car?”
   “A	  Maserati.	 Stubbs	told	 me	it’s	 the	 wife’s	 car.	It’s	 got	 her	name	on	 the
license	plate.	A	red	Maserati.”
   “What	 does	the	plate	say	exactly?”
   “Her	 name,	Jessie,	and	then	the	number	one.”
   “Spelled	 out?	The	number?”
   “I	 didn’t	 ask	him.”
   “Ask	 him.	 And	then	check	the	plate	with	 Motor	Vehicles.”
   “Okay.	 So	Leeds	gets	out	 of	the	 car	and	goes	straight	to	where	 his	boat	is
tied	up—”
   “What’s	 the	name	of	the	boat?”
   “Felicity.”
   “What	 a	pissy	name,”	Patricia	said.
   “Yeah.”
   “Was	 it	backed	into	the	slip?”
   “No.	 Not	 when	I	was	there.”
   “Then	 Stubbs	couldn’t	have	seen	the	name	on	the	transom,	right?”
   “From	  his	 house,	do	you	 mean?	I	 don’t	 think	 so.	He	 was	 in	the	 kitchen

53
getting	himself	a	bottle	 of	beer	when	Leeds	backed	out.	The	kitchen	windows
face	the	dock	area,	but	I	don’t	think	he	could’ve	 seen	the	name.”
   “What	 I’m	 looking	 for—”
   “I’m	   with	 you.	 You	 want	 to	 know	 did	 Stubbs	 see	Leeds	get	 on	 a	boat
named	Felicity	instead	of	some	other	guy	getting	on	a	boat	named	Lucky	Lady
or	Serendipity.”
   “You’ve	  got	it.”
   “I’ll	   go	back	later,	check	out	the	sight	lines,	talk	to	him	again.”
   “Also,	  if	Stubbs	didn’t	 speak	to	Leeds—”
   “Yeah,	 how	did	he	know	it	 was	Leeds	and	not	some	other	dude?”
   “Did	  he	say?”
   “He	 said	it	was	Leeds.”
   “But	 how	 did	he	know	it	was	Leeds?”
   “The	 hat.	And	the	jacket.”
   “What	 hat?	What	jacket?”
   “A	  hat	Leeds	always	wears	on	 the	boat.	This	 yellow-billed	  cap	some	beer
company	was	giving	out	a	few	years	back.	He	wears	it	all	the	time.”
   “And	  the	jacket?”
   “A	  yellow	 windbreaker.	 One	of	 these	with	  snaps	up	the	front	  and	at	the
cuffs.	Leeds	was	wearing	it	the	night	of	the	murder.”
   “Get	 a	search	warrant	this	afternoon—”
   “Can’t	 do	that	till	 Monday	 when	the	courts—”
   “No,	 do	it	 today.	Find	yourself	a	circuit	 court	judge—”
   “They	 don’t	 like	being	disturbed	on	Saturday,	Miss	Demming.”
   “And	  I	don’t	like	 evidence	being	destroyed	on	Saturday.”
   “I	 understand	where	you’re	coming	 from,	but—”
   “Someone	has	to	be	covering	at	the	courthouse—”
   “Well,	 I’ll	  try,	but—”
   “Don’t	  try,	Bannion.	 Do	it.”
   “Yes,	 ma’am.”
   “And	  then	go	out	to	the	farm	and	get	that	jacket	and	hat	for	me.”
   “Yes,	 ma’am.”
   “Unless	 the	wife’s	already	burned	them,”	 she	said.

“Patricia	Lowell	 Demming,”	 Andrew	 said,	“thirty-six	  years	old—”

   “She	 looks	younger,	though,”	Matthew	 said.
   “Born	  in	 New	Haven,	 Connecticut,	 where	her	grandfather	 was	a	superior
court	judge.	Lowell	 Turner	Demming.	Ring	 a	bell?”
   “No.	 Is	that	where	she	got	the	middle	name?”
   “Presumably,”	  Andrew	 said.	“On	 the	other	hand,	Lowell	  means	‘beloved’
in	the	Anglo-Saxon,	so	perhaps	her	parents	named	her	adoringly.”

54
   “Perhaps.”
   “Knew	  she	wanted	to	be	 a	lawyer	when	 she	was	seven	years	old	and	saw
Gregory	Peck	in	To	Kill	 a—”
   “Where’d	  you	get	that?”
   “In	  an	interview	 she	gave	to	the	Herald-Tribune	 when	 she	joined	the	state
attorney’s	office.”
   “Which	  was	when?”
   Andrew	  lifted	   his	 glasses	onto	  his	 forehead	 and	 consulted	 his	 notes.
Wearing	the	glasses,	he	looked	scholarly,	almost	judicial.	 With	 the	glasses	on
his	forehead,	 he	looked	 like	 an	eager	 cub	reporter.	 Dark	 curly	 hair,	brown
eyes,	an	aquiline	nose,	a	somewhat	androgynous	mouth	with	 a	thin	 upper	lip
and	a	pouting	 lower	 one.	Cynthia	 Huellen	 once	 told	 Matthew	 that	Andrew
reminded	her	of	 Mick	 Jagger.	Matthew	said	he	 could	not	 see	a	resemblance.
Sexwise,	Cynthia	said,	and	went	back	to	her	typing.
   “Joined	 the	staff	just	before	Christmas,”	 Andrew	said.
   “Where	 was	she	before	that?”
   “I’ve	  got	this	in	chronological	 order,”	Andrew	 said.	“It’d	 be	easier	if	I—”
   “Okay,	 fine.”
   “She	 graduated	from	high	school	at	the	age	of	sixteen—”
   “Smart.”
   “Very.	 Attended	Yale	University	  for	two	 years	and	was	kicked	out	one	fine
spring	semester	for	smoking	dope	in	class.”
   “Dumb.”
   “Very.	  She	went	 from	 there	to	 Brown,	 no	less,	 where	she	graduated	 Phi
Beta.	There	was	only	one	incident	there—”
   “Dope	 again?”
   “No,	 no.	A	 fistfight.	 With	a	football	 player	who	called	her	Pat.”
   “Where’d	  you	get	that?”
   “Brown	  faxed	me	an	article	from	 the	school	paper.	The	incident	made	her	a
celebrity.	Apparently	this	 oaf—her	word,	oaf—”
   “Nice	 word,	 oaf.”
   “Very.	 This	 oaf	 came	up	to	 her	and	said,	‘Hi,	  Pat,	my	 name’s—’	and	 she
popped	off	and	hit	 him.	She	later	told	 the	paper	that	pat	was	what	 you	did	 to
the	head	of	a	child	or	 a	dog,	or	Pat	was	a	drunk	sitting	 at	the	bar	with	 his	pal
Mike,	 but	Pat	was	not	 what	 you	called	 someone	you	didn’t	 know	 when	 her
name	was	Patricia,	which,	by	the	way,	means	‘of	the	nobility’	 in	Latin.”
   “Did	  she	say	that?”
   “Not	  the	nobility	 stuff,	 that’s	mine.	But,	 yes,	she	said	the	rest,	I’m	 quoting
directly	 from	the	Brown	 Daily	 Herald.	 She	also	said	that	 even	the	nickname
Trish	offended	her.”
   “Touchy.”
   “Very.	 Went	to	law	school	at	NYU	 in	New	 York—”

55
   “Law	 Review,	of	course,”	Matthew	 said,	and	rolled	his	eyes.
   “Surprisingly,	  no.	But	top	ten	percent	of	the	class.	Passed	the	California	bar
three	 years	later	  and	 was	 hired	  immediately	  by	 a	 firm	  called	  Dolman,
Ruggiero,	Peters	and	Dern.	Ring	a	bell?”
   “No.”
   “Stayed	 there	 for	 two	 years,	 earned	the	nickname	 Wicked	 Witch	  of	 the
West,	a	sobriquet	apparently	premised	on	her	courtroom	manners.	She	moved
from	there	to	New	York,	 the	firm	of	 Carter,	Rifkin—”
   “—Lieber	  and	Loeb.	Bombers.”
   “Apparently.	  That’s	where	she	made	her	rep.”
   “As	 what?”
   “Really	  ruthless	defense	attorney.	Strictly	 criminal	 law.	 She’s	successfully
defended	crooked	oil	company	execs,	Mafia	 bosses,	Colombian	drug	dealers,
tax	fraud	specialists—”
   “How	  about	murderers?”
   “Three.	 Tough	 cases,	too.	One	was	a	 woman	charged	with	 strangling	 her
six-month-old	baby	in	 his	crib.”
   “What’d	  she	cop	to?”
   “She	 didn’t.	She	went	for	 an	acquittal...and	got	it.”
   Matthew	 looked	at	him.
   “Tough	 lady,”	 Andrew	said,	and	nodded.
   “What’s	 her	courtroom	 style	like?”
   “Flamboyant,	   seductive,	 aggressive,	 unrelenting,	 and	 unforgiving.	   You
make	one	slip,	and	she	goes	straight	for	the	jugular.”
   “When	 did	she	cross	over?”
   “Left	  Carter,	Rifkin	  for	the	 New	York	 DA’s	 office,	 worked	there	for	 three
years	before	moving	here	to	Florida.	Apparently	 she	wasn’t	getting	where	she
wanted	to	go	fast	enough.”
   “Where	 does	she	want	to	go?”
   “Washington	 is	my	 guess.	Eventually.	With	 Florida	politics	 as	the	stepping
stone.”
   “Like	  her	boss.”
   “Yes,	 sir.”
   “Who	  handed	her	this	 one	because	he’s	got	 even	bigger	 fish	 to	 fry.	 You
haven’t	seen	anything	in	the	paper	about	that,	have	you?”
   “No,	 sir.	What	am	I	 supposed	to	be	looking	for?”
   “God	 knows.	Have	you	found	 me	a	translator?”
   “Yes,	 sir.”
   “Good.	 Check	on	the	running	time	 of	Casablanca	for	me.”
   “Casablanca,	 yes,	sir.”
   “And	  find	 out	what	 time	the	tides	came	in	 and	went	out	 on	the	day	 of	the
murders.”

56
   “Yes,	 sir,	the	tides.”
   “What’s	 the	translator’s	name?”



Mai	 Chim	 Lee	had	been	airlifted	  out	of	 Saigon	in	 April	  of	1975,	 when	she
was	fifteen	 years	old	and	all	 was	chaos	and	confusion.	 She	remembered	her
father	rushing	her	to	the	embassy	through	thronged	and	deafening	streets,	her
sweaty	hand	clutched	in	 his	firm	  grip,	remembered	him	 hoisting	 her	up	into
the	arms	 of	 a	 black	 American	  sergeant,	the	 helicopter	 lifting	   off,	 people
clinging	to	the	landing	 skids,	clawing	for	 purchase.
   She	had	 not	seen	her	father	since	 that	day.	He	had	 worked	for	 the	United
States	government	as	 a	translator;	 the	 Vietcong	 executed	him	 the	 moment
they	occupied	Saigon.	She	did	not	know	 where	her	mother	was	now.	Perhaps
they	had	killed	 her,	too.	She	did	not	know.	Three	years	later,	when	Mai	 Chim
was	eighteen,	 her	 mother	 stopped	 answering	 her	 letters.	 A	 letter	  from	 a
neighbor,	a	woman	she	had	called	Auntie	 Tan,	said	only	 that	her	mother	 had
gone	away,	she	did	not	know	where.	Mai	Chim	could	 only	imagine	the	worst.
   She	remembered	her	 mother	as	a	woman	who	 smiled	 a	great	deal.	Out	 of
happiness,	she	supposed.	She	remembered	her	father	as	a	stern	disciplinarian
who	would	 smash	teapots	to	the	floor	if	 his	 hot	tea	wasn’t	ready	and	waiting
whenever	he	wanted	it.	 But	 he’d	managed	to	get	 her	on	that	helicopter.	 Mai
Chim	 herself	  now	 worked	  as	 a	 sometime	 translator,	 although	 her	  main
occupation	was	bookkeeping.
   She	told	 all	 this	 to	Matthew	 as	they	drove	 in	 his	rented	car	to	 Little	 Asia
late	that	Saturday	afternoon.
   She	also	told	him	 that	her	true	name	was	Le	Mai	Chim,	the	family	 name	Le
—one	 of	 the	 three	 most	 common	 in	  her	 native	 land—having	  descended
proudly	from	 the	dynasty	 that	had	begun	in	 the	fifteenth	 century,	the	middle
name	Mai	  meaning	  “tomorrow,”	  and	  the	 personal	 name	 Chim	 meaning
“bird.”	 Her	 two	older	brothers,	Hue	 and	Nhac,	had	been	soldiers	in	the	Army
of	the	 Republic	of	 South	 Vietnam.	Both	 were	killed	  in	 the	Tet	Offensive	 in
1968.
   Mai	 Chim	 Lee—they	called	her	“Mary”	  at	the	office	where	she	worked,	but
she	preferred	 her	own	 name—had	 been	in	 America	  for	 five	  years,	in	 the
hands	of	one	governmental	 agency	or	 another,	before	she	struck	 out	on	 her
own.	At	 the	 age	of	 twenty	she	left	 Los	 Angeles,	 traveling	 cross-country	by
bus	to	 settle	 at	 last	 in	 Florida—first	  in	 Jacksonville,	  next	 in	 Tampa,	and
finally	 here	in	Calusa.
   She	was	now	thirty-one	 years	old,	and	although	she	spoke	English	fluently,
there	was	still	a	trace	of	singsong	in	her	speech,	and	occasionally	she	misused
idiom	 or	slang.	A	 stranger	in	a	strange	city,	 virtually	 alone	 in	the	world,	 she
dressed	like	 an	American—high	  heels	today,	 and	a	 linen	 suit	 the	 color	 of

57
wheat,	to	complement	 her	shining	black	 hair	 and	dark	eyes—but	she	moved
as	if	she	were	gracefully	 and	delicately	padding	on	sandals	over	the	stones	of
an	ancient	village,	and	in	her	eyes	there	was	a	look	of	lingering	sorrow.
   She	herself	did	not	live	 in	Little	 Asia.
   She	rented	a	condominium	out	on	Sabal	Key.
   The	 people	who	lived	 here	in	the	development,	she	explained,	were	mostly
newcomers,	most	  of	 them	 working	   in	 restaurants	 as	either	  dishwashers,
busboys,	or	waitresses.	Many,	 too,	worked	 in	 light-industry	 factories,	 where
they	performed	 unskilled	 labor	 for	 minimum	 wages—or	 less,	if	 the	owners
could	get	 away	with	 it.	 Ten	or	 twelve	 people	often	 shared	these	one-family
wooden	shacks	that	had	been	thrown	up	in	the	early	twenties,	when	there	was
still	 an	 important	 fish	 cannery	 in	 Calusa	and	 housing	 was	needed	for	  the
cheap	black	labor	imported	from	Georgia	and	Mississippi.
   The	 shacks	sprawled	across	the	 scruffy	 land	in	 fading,	 flaking	 Christmas
colors,	some	green,	some	red,	all	 up	on	stilts	 because	flooding	was	common
in	 Calusa	even	 this	 far	 from	 the	 Gulf.	 An	 automobile	  was	essential	here;
public	 transportation	 existed,	but	 buses	were	 infrequent	 and	unpredictable.
One	of	the	first	 things	these	immigrants	bought	was	a	car,	usually	chipping	 in
for	one	they	could	 share	on	their	way	 to	and	from	 work,	 a	wreck	as	faded	as
the	shacks	 in	 which	 they	 lived.	  Mai	 Chim	  wondered	 why	 so	 many	 poor
people	 drove	  faded	 blue	  automobiles.	  Always	  faded.	  Always	  blue.	  A
phenomenon.	On	 her	 lips,	  the	word	  sounded	Oriental.	  Phenomenon.	She
smiled	when	she	said	it.	A	phenomenon.	The	smile	illuminated	 her	entire	face
and	set	 her	 brown	  eyes	to	 dancing.	  Matthew	 could	  imagine	 her	 mother
beaming	this	same	smile	in	a	safer,	more	innocent	time.
   Tran	 Sum	Linh,	one	of	the	men	who’d	 claimed	he’d	 seen	Stephen	Leeds	on
the	night	of	 the	murders,	lived	 in	 one	of	 these	shacks	with	his	 wife,	 his	six-
year-old	son,	and	three	cousins—two	of	them	male,	one	of	 them	female	and	a
cousin	 only	  by	 marriage—who	   had	 recently	 moved	  cross-country	 from
Houston,	Texas.	 He	was	 thirty-seven	 years	 old,	 a	former	 lieutenant	 in	 the
ARVN,	 who	had	escaped	Vietnam	by	 boat	to	Manila	 shortly	 after	 the	fall	 of
Saigon.	He	was	certain	that	if	 ever	he	went	 back	to	his	 country,	he	would	 be
arrested	and	executed.	He	 was	trying	  to	make	 a	life	  here.	He	worked	 in	 a
supermarket	at	  the	 South	 Dixie	  Mall,	  stacking	  and	 sprinkling	  fruit	  and
vegetables	in	the	 produce	department,	for	 which	 he	earned	four	 dollars	 and
twenty-five	 cents	an	 hour.	He	 did	not	 like	 getting	 involved	 in	 this	 business
that	had	happened,	this	murder	 of	his	 three	countrymen,	but	 he	knew	 it	was
his	obligation	  to	 tell	 the	truth.	 He	 said	 all	 this	 to	 Mai	 Chim	 in	 his	 native
tongue;	he	spoke	only	several	words	of	English.
   They	 were	sitting	 outside	Tran’s	 shack,	he	on	the	 low	steps	that	 led	up	to
the	front	door,	Mai	 Chim	and	Matthew	 on	folding	 chairs	he	had	carried	out	of
the	 house.	 Tran	 was	  wearing	 thong	  sandals,	 gray	 shorts,	  and	 a	 white

58
Disneyworld	   T-shirt	  emblazoned	  with	   a	  picture	   of	  the	  minarets	   of
Fantasyland.	Matthew	 was	wearing	a	 suit	and	a	 tie;	he	felt	 like	 a	 jackass	in
this	heat.
   “This	  was	at	 eleven	o’clock,	  or	 perhaps	a	little	  past	eleven,”	 Mai	 Chim
said.	“It	was	quite	hot,	do	you	know,	 that	night—”
   —translating	  simultaneously	  and	 apparently	 literally,	  judging	  from	  her
stilted	and	somewhat	formal	phrasing—
   “—almost	   identical	  to	  that	 of	  my	  own	  country	  during	  the	  summer
monsoon,	the	rainy	season,	do	you	know?	The	rain...”
   —is	 heaviest	between	June	and	November,	when	typhoons	blow	 in	 off	the
South	China	Sea.	But	there	are	monsoons	winter	and	summer,	and	there	is	no
true	“dry”	  season,	except	relatively.	 All	  of	 Vietnam	 lies	 entirely	 below	 the
Tropic	of	 Cancer,	and	the	climate	 is	therefore	hot	 and	humid	all	 of	 the	time,
some	eighty	 degrees	Fahrenheit	every	month	 of	 the	year,	 heavy	rainfall	  all
year	round	except	during	April	 and	May.
   “Vietnam	  is	tropical,	 do	you	 know?	So	we	 have	mosquitoes	and	ticks	and
leeches,	same	as	the	 Malay	  Peninsula.	And	  we	 have,	too,	 crocodiles	 and
pythons	and	cobras	and	tigers	and	leopards	and	wild	dogs...”
   In	 the	Mekong	Delta,	where	Tran	grew	up	as	a	boy	and	fought	as	a	teenager
and	a	man,	the	land	was—and	 still	 is—extremely	 fertile	 and	well	 cultivated.
Tran’s	father	was	a	 farmer,	as	was	his	father	 before	him	 and	Tran	after	 him.
Rice	was	their	crop.	Their	little	 village—situated	 on	a	levee	close	by	the	Song
Vam	Co	 River—consisted	  of	 bamboo	 houses	with	 thatched	 roofs,	 narrow
streets	laid	out	in	a	grid	pattern,	a	bamboo	fence	around	the	entire	site.	During
the	summer	monsoon,	when	the	land	was	flooded,	the	only	dry	ground	was	on
the	levees	and	the	dikes.	Whenever	there	 was	a	break	in	 the	rain,	the	family
would	sit	 outside	the	farmhouse	 with	 its	small	 vegetable	garden.	Often	 on	a
hot,	steamy	night,	 Tran	would	 look	 out	 over	the	 flooded	rice	 paddies	to	the
mountains	beyond	Saigon	and	dream	of	wisdom	beyond	years,	wealth	beyond
imagination.	On	just	such	a	night,	in	the	city	 of	Calusa,	Florida...
   He	 has	been	sitting	 outside	 with	 the	others	 in	 his	family	  for,	 oh,	it	 must
have	been	almost	two	 hours,	do	you	 know?	 His	wife—two	  years	older	 than
he,	but	this	is	considered	auspicious	according	to	the	horoscope—has	already
put	their	son	 to	bed	and	then	gone	to	 bed	herself	because	she	must	be	at	the
factory	at	 eight	tomorrow	 morning.	 Tran	 sits	outside	with	  his	three	cousins.
The	men	are	smoking.	The	woman,	who	 is	quite	homely,	 is	dozing.	In	 a	little
while,	she	and	her	husband,	Tran’s	older	cousin,	also	go	inside	to	bed.
   Tran	and	the	other	man	talk	softly.
   Smoke	from	 their	cigarettes	swirls	up	on	the	air.
   On	 US	41,	not	two	 blocks	away	from	 the	development,	there	is	the	hum	of
traffic,	 trailer	 trucks	 heading	 south	to	 pick	 up	 Alligator	  Alley	  for	 the	 east
coast,	passenger	cars	 driving	  down	 to	 nearby	 Venice	 or	 farther	 south	 to

59
Naples	or	Fort	Meyers.
   The	night	 is	gentle.
   Soft.
   Tomorrow	 there	will	 be	deadly	 dull	toil	 for	 subsistence	wages,	but	for	now
there	is	the	soft,	gentle	night.
   At	 last,	Tran’s	younger	cousin	rises	and	yawns	and	goes	into	the	house.	The
screen	door	 slams	shut	 behind	 him.	 Tran	 sits	alone	 on	 the	 steps	with	 his
thoughts	and	 the	 hot,	 still	  moistness	 of	 the	 night.	 The	 moon	 is	 full.	  He
remembers	nights	like	this	 on	the	delta,	the	 rice	fields	 stretching	away	to	 the
horizon	under	an	orange	moon	floating	above.
   He	 smokes.
   He	 drifts.
   He	 sees	the	man	first	from	the	corner	of	his	eye.
   A	 flicker	 of	 bright	 color,	almost	 as	if	 a	sliver	of	 moon	 has	broken	off	 and
fallen	to	earth,	glowing	 for	an	instant	and	then	gone.
   The	 house	Tran	and	his	family	 are	renting	is	situated	one	row	 east	and	one
house	south	of	the	 one	shared	by	the	three	 men	who	were	 first	 accused	and
later	cleared	of	 raping	 that	farmer’s	 wife.	 In	 his	 native	Vietnam,	 before	 the
Communists	took	 over,	murder	and	aggravated	assault	were	among	the	most
serious	crimes,	punishable	by	from	five	 years	in	prison	to	 death	by	guillotine,
a	means	of	execution	inherited	from	the	French	occupiers.	Tran	further	knows
that	rape	in	 his	country	 was	 considered	aggravated	assault,	and	he	assumes
that	the	crime	is	equally	serious	here	in	his	adopted	land.
   He	 does	not	know	how	the	Communists	deal	with	such	matters	now,	and	he
cannot	possibly	 know	 that	sexual	 battery—as	rape	is	 politely	 known	 in	 the
Bible	Belt	 state	of	 Florida—is	 punishable	by	anywhere	 from	 fifteen	years	to
death	in	 the	 electric	 chair,	 depending	upon	 the	 age	of	 the	 victim	  and	the
amount	of	 force	threatened	or	applied.	 But	 it	is	 his	strong	 belief	that	 crimes
committed	 by	 any	 member	 of	 an	 ethnic	 or	 racial	  group	 reflect	 upon	 all
members	of	that	group,	and	therefore	 he	is	pleased	that	his	countrymen	 have
been	exonerated	of	the	crime.	He	 knows	them	 only	slightly,	 but	 he	thinks	of
them	 as	decent,	 hardworking	  men,	 which—he	  freely	 admits	  to	 Matthew
through	Mai	Chim—may	 be	a	biased	opinion.
   There	is	another	burst	of	color	 on	the	night.
   Sudden.
   Catching	 the	eye.
   And	 then	disappearing	again.
   It	  is	very	 definitely	  a	man,	 tall	 and	broad-shouldered,	 very	definitely	  an
American	  man.	 Tran	  himself	  is	  slender	  and	 slight,	   his	  physique	 not
uncommon	in	a	nation	where	the	average	height	for	a	grown	man	is	a	bit	more
than	five	 feet	and	his	 weight	some	fifty-five	   kilos.	 The	man	running	 toward
the	house	where	the	three	men	live	is	easily	six	feet	tall...

60
   Matthew’s	 heart	begins	sinking.
   And	 he	weighs	at	least	ninety	kilos...
   Which	 Matthew	 calculates	at	two-point-two	  pounds	per	kilo,	 for	 a	total	 of
two	hundred	pounds.
   And	 he	is	wearing	a	yellow	 hat	and	a	yellow	jacket—
   And	 Matthew’s	 heart	sinks	entirely.
   “—going	  into	the	house,”	 Mai	Chim	 translates,	“where	the	three	men	were
found	murdered	the	next	morning,	do	you	know?”
   Matthew	 knew.

61
                                                                                                                         4


MONDAY	MORNING,	the	twentieth	day	of	August,	dawned	hot	and	humid	and
hazy.	Matthew	awoke	 with	 the	sun	at	ten	 minutes	past	seven	and	was	in	 his
pool	swimming	  laps	when	 the	telephone	 rang.	He	 swam	over	 to	 the	steps,
picked	up	the	modular	 phone,	hit	the	 TALK	button,	and	said,	“Hello?”	It	could
not	have	been	later	than	a	quarter	to	eight.
   “Mr.	 Hope?	It’s	 me.	Andrew.	I	have	that	information	 you	wanted.”
   “Yes,	 Andrew,	go	ahead.”
   “Running	  time	 of	 Casablanca	is	 a	hundred	 and	three	minutes.	 That’s	 an
hour	and	forty-three	minutes,	sir.”
   “Yes,	 Andrew.”
   Leeds	 had	 told	  him	 they’d	  started	 watching	 the	 tape	 after	 dinner.	 He
wondered	now	if	 Jessica	had	watched	it	all	the	way	 through.	Or	had	she,	like
her	husband,	fallen	asleep	somewhere	along	the	way?
   “High	  tide	was	at	one-thirty	 that	Monday	afternoon,”	 Andrew	 said,	“low	 at
seven	fifty-four	 that	evening.”
   Which	 meant	Leeds	still	 would	have	had	good	water	when	he	took	the	boat
out	that	afternoon,	and	he’d	have	beat	the	outgoing	tide	when	he	came	back	in
at	six,	six-thirty.	 His	story	checked	out.
   But	 Charlie	Stubbs	had	claimed—
   “High	  again	at	one-forty-two	on	Tuesday	morning,”	 Andrew	 said.
   There	it	 was.
   The	 boat	could	 have	gone	 out	again	at	 ten-thirty,	 as	Stubbs	had	claimed,
when	the	 tide	was	 midway	 between	high	 and	 low	 and	the	 water	still	  good
enough	for	 passage.	And	 if	  the	boat	 had	 come	back	 in	 early	 on	 Tuesday
morning,	it	 would	 have	caught	the	tide	 almost	at	full	 again.	Matthew	 had	no
defense	based	on	the	navigability	of	Willowbee	Creek.
   “Thank	 you,	Andrew,”	 he	said,	“that	was	very	helpful.”



An	 addendum	 to	 the	 state	 attorney’s	 response	to	 Matthew’s	  demand	 for
discovery	 was	waiting	  on	his	 desk	 when	 he	got	 to	 the	office	  at	 nine	that
morning.
   Where	 Matthew	 had	 asked	for	 the	names	and	 addresses	of	persons	with
information	  relevant	 to	 the	  offense,	 Patricia	 Demming	  was	 now	  adding
Charles	N.	Stubbs	to	her	former	list	 of	witnesses.	She	undoubtedly	planned	to
have	him	testify	that	he	had	seen	Leeds	taking	the	boat	out	at	ten-thirty	on	the

62
night	of	 the	murder.	 Exactly	what	 Matthew	 himself	 would	 have	done	in	 her
position.	No	surprises	thus	far.	Matthew	hated	surprises.
   Where	  Matthew	 had	 asked	 for	 any	  written	 or	  taped	verbatim	  witness
statements	made	 to	 the	 police,	 Patricia	  now	 included	  a	 written	  copy	 of
Stubbs’s	 statement	taken	  by	 one	 Detective	  Frank	  Bannion	 of	  the	 state
attorney’s	office	on	Saturday,	August	18,	two	days	ago.
   Where	 Matthew	 had	asked	for	a	list	 of	any	 tangible	paper	or	objects	 to	be
used	at	the	hearing	 and	trial,	 Patricia	 now	 listed:	 “One	 billed	 yellow	 nylon
mesh	cap	with	interlocking	 BB	monogram	in	 red	and	one	yellow	windbreaker
with	nylon	 shell	and	insulated	lining.”
   This	 was	a	surprise.
   Matthew	 picked	 up	the	 phone	and	asked	Cynthia	 to	get	 Jessica	Leeds	for
him.	She	buzzed	a	moment	later	to	say	that	Mrs.	Leeds	was	on	the	line.
   “Good	 morning,”	 Matthew	 said.
   “Good	 morning,	 I	was	just	about	to	call	you.”
   “When	 were	they	there?”	Matthew	 asked.
   “Do	 you	mean	the	police?”
   “Yes.”
   “Late	 last	night.”
   “Did	  they	have	a	search	warrant?”
   “Yes.”
   “Who	 was	it?	Rawles	and	Bloom	 again?”
   “No.	 A	 detective	from	the	state	attorney’s	office.”
   “Did	  you	get	his	name?”
   “Frank	 Bannion.”
   “Was	 he	looking	specifically	 for	the	jacket	and	hat?”
   “The	 search	warrant	called	them	‘evidence	or	fruits	 of	the	crime.’”
   “But	  did	 it	  say	something	 like	  ‘Affiant	  specifically	  requests	warrant	 to
search	for,’	something	like	that?”
   “Yes.	 The	jacket	and	hat.	The	warrant	described	them	in	detail.”
   “Did	  it	also	describe	the	farm	as	the	location	for	the	search?”
   “Yes.	 The	exact	location	of	the	farm.”
   “Did	  Bannion	sign	as	affiant?”
   “I	 think	 so.”
   “Who	 granted	the	warrant?”
   “Someone	named	Amores?”
   “Amoros.	 With	 an	o.	Manuel	Amoros,	 he’s	a	circuit	court	judge.”
   “Yes,	 that	sounds	right.”
   “Okay,	 so	now	she’s	got	the	jacket	and	hat.”
   “She?”
   “Patricia	  Demming.	 The	 assistant	SA	who’ll	  be	 trying	 the	 case.	Tell	 me
again,	Mrs.	Leeds.	Are	 you	 sure	your	husband	didn’t	 leave	 the	house	at	any

63
time	on	the	night	of	the	murders?”
   “I’m	  positive.”
   “Were	 you	at	home	all	night	long?”
   “Yes.	 All	 night	long.”
   “You	 didn’t	 go	out	for	 a	walk	or	anything,	 during	which	 time	your	 husband
might	have—”
   “No,	 I	 was	home.	We	were	home	together.	Stephen	fell	asleep	watching	the
movie,	but	I	 watched	it	all	 the	way	through,	and	then	I	 watched	television	for
a	while	before	going	to	sleep.”
   “And	  slept	the	night	through.	Both	of	you.”
   “Yes.”
   “Until	  you	were	awakened	by	the	police	at	nine	the	next	morning.”
   “Yes.”
   “Can	 you	remember	the	last	time	you	saw	that	jacket	and	hat?”
   “Stephen	 was	wearing	 the	hat	when	he	 came	in	off	 the	boat	 that	evening.
Before	dinner.”
   “And	  the	jacket?	Was	he	wearing	the	jacket,	too?”
   “No.	 It	 was	a	very	hot	day.”
   “Where	 does	he	normally	keep	the	jacket?”
   “In	 the	hall	 closet.”
   “And	  the	hat?”
   “The	 same	closet.	On	the	shelf	there.”
   “Is	 that	where	he	put	the	hat	when	he	came	in	that	evening?”
   “I	  suppose	so.	 I	 really	 don’t	 remember.	 He	was	 wearing	 it,	 but	 I	 don’t
remember	whether	he	 put	it	 in	 the	closet	 or	not.	 I	 didn’t	 know	 the	hat	 was
going	to	be	important.	 Why	 is	it	 suddenly	so	damn	important?	 Why	did	 they
come	for	it?”
   “Because	they	claim	 he	was	wearing	it	when	he	committed	the	murders.”
   “He	 didn’t	 commit	the	murders.	He	was	here	with	me	all	night	 long.”
   “You’re	  sure	of	that.”
   “How	  many	times	do	I—”
   “Are	 you	 a	very	deep	sleeper,	Mrs.	Leeds?”
   “Yes.”
   “Did	  you	wake	up	at	any	time	that	night?”
   “No.”
   “You	 slept	soundly	the	whole	night	 through?”
   “Yes.”
   “Can	 you	say	for	certain	that	your	 husband	didn’t	get	out	of	bed	at	any	time
that	night?”
   “Well,	 I—”
   “Because	that’s	what	the	state	attorney’s	going	to	ask	you,	Mrs.	 Leeds.”
   “I	 can’t	 say	that	for	certain,	no.”

64
   “Then	he	might	have	got	out	of	bed—”
   “I	 suppose	that’s	possible—”
   “—and	gone	downstairs	to	put	on	that	yellow	jacket	and	hat—”
   “Yes,	but—”
   “—and	driven	your	Maserati—”
   “No.”
   “Why	 not?”
   “I	 didn’t	hear	the	car	starting.	I	would	have—”
   “But	 you	were	sound	asleep.”
   “Well...yes.”
   “So	you	wouldn’t	have	heard	the	car	starting.”
   “I	 guess	not.”
   “So	you	really	can’t	say	for	sure	that	your	husband	was	home	with	you	all
night	long.”
   “Whose	side	are	you	on?”	Jessie	snapped.
   “Yours,	Mrs.	Leeds.	Your	husband’s.”
   “I	 was	beginning	to	wonder.”
   “No,	 don’t	 ever	wonder	about	that.	I’m	 only	asking	you	 what	the	SA’s
going	to	ask.	You’re	his	only	alibi.	If	she	can	cast	doubt	on	your—”
   “My	 husband	did	not	kill	those	men!”	Jessie	said	sharply.	“I	may	have	been
asleep,	yes,	I	may	not	 have	heard	everything	happening	in	this	goddamn
house,	but	I	know	he	did	not	go	out	to	kill	those	men!”
   “How	 can	you	know	that?”	Matthew	asked.
   “I	 just	know	it!”
   “How?”
   “Because	he—”
   She	cut	herself	off.
   There	was	a	silence	on	the	line.
   Matthew	waited.
   “Yes?”	he	said	at	last.
   “He—”
   And	another	silence.
   “Yes,	he	what?”
   “He	rejected	the	idea,”	Jessie	said.
   “What	idea?”
   “Of	 having	them	killed.”
   “What	do	you	mean?”
   “I	 wanted	them	killed.”
   Oh,	no,	please,	Matthew	thought.
   “I	 wanted	to	find	someone	who’d	kill	them.”
   No,	you	didn’t,	he	thought.	Please.
   “Have	you	mentioned	this	to	anyone	else?”	he	said.

65
   “Of	 course	not.”
   “But	 you	 did	mention	it	 to	your	husband?”
   Say	no,	he	thought.	Tell	me	you	 didn’t	suggest	it	to	your—
   “Yes.	 I	told	 him	I	 wanted	to...to	start	asking	 around...discreetly.	Find	out	if
there	was	someone...anyone...who	would	 kill	 those	 animals	for	 me.	Rid	 the
earth	of	them.	 There	are	such	people,	aren’t	 there?	Who	 do	these	things	 for
money?”
   “Yes,	 there	are	such	people,”	Matthew	said.
   “But	  Stephen	said	no.	He	 said	the	men	who	 raped	me	would	 have	to	live
with	their	 consciences	for	the	rest	of	their	 lives.	That	 was	God’s	punishment,
he	said.	And	God’s	punishment	was	enough.”
   Try	 selling	that	to	 a	jury,	Matthew	thought.
   “Mrs.	  Leeds,”	 he	said,	“at	 the	trial,	  your	husband	didn’t	  sound	quite	that
magnanimous.	He—”
   “Yes,	 his	outburst,	I	know.	But	 that	was	in	anger,	and	this	was	much	later.”
   “How	  much	later?”
   “We	 heard	the	verdict	on	Friday.	This	was	on	Sunday.”
   “The	 day	before	the	murders.”
   “Yes.”
   “Yes,”	 Matthew	 said.
   There	was	another	silence	on	the	line.
   He	 was	thinking,	Please	don’t	let	Demming	 get	her	hands	on	this.
   “My	  husband	did	not	 kill	 those	men,”	 Jessie	said.	“Believe	 me,	I	know	 he
didn’t.	He	couldn’t	 have.”
   But	 Matthew	was	thinking	 he	could	have.



The	name	of	the	place	was	Kickers.
   Until	  just	 two	 months	 ago,	 it	 had	been	 a	seafood	restaurant	 called	 The
Shoreline	Inn,	 and	six	 months	 before	that	 it	 had	been	a	 steak	house	called
Jason’s	Place,	and	three	months	before	that	it	had	been	known	as	The	Purple
Seahorse,	which	served	Continental	food	as	precious	as	its	name	in	an	interior
all	done	up	in	violet	 and	lavender.
   Kickers	 had	 opened	at	the	beginning	 of	 June,	not	an	auspicious	month	 in
that	the	tourists	 usually	left	 shortly	 before	 Easter	and	the	native	 trade	down
here	could	not	 in	itself	 support	a	 restaurant.	If	you	 hoped	to	get	 through	the
dog	days	of	summer,	you	raked	in	 your	chips	 from	November	 through	April,
and	then	either	 closed	for	 part	 of	 the	off-season	or	 contented	yourself	 with
eking	out	 a	 bare	existence	till	  the	snowbirds	 flew	 down	 again.	 Opening	 at
such	a	lousy	time,	 Kickers	 should	 have	followed	 the	sad	tradition	 of	 all	 the
hard-luck	 joints	 that	 had	 come	and	 gone	on	 this	 spot,	 the	 exterior	 of	 the
building	 remaining	while	 the	name	and	the	interior	 decor	changed	every	few

66
months	or	so.
   But	  against	all	 odds,	 it	 seemed	to	 be	 surviving,	 possibly	 because	Salty
Pete’s—a	rowdy	 saloon	favored	 by	 year-round	residents	of	 Whisper	 Key—
had	considerately	burned	 to	the	ground	 shortly	 after	Kickers	  threw	open	its
doors.	There	 were	 those	who	 voiced	 suspicions	 that	 Michael	  Grundy,	 the
owner	 of	 Kickers,	  had	himself	  engineered	 the	unfortunate	  blaze	at	 Salty
Pete’s,	but	neither	the	 police	nor	 the	fire	 department	had	found	 the	slightest
proof	of	arson.
   Smack	 on	 the	 Intercoastal,	Kickers	  inhabited	 a	big	 old	 white	  clapboard
building	 with	  a	huge	 outdoor	deck	 overlooking	  the	water	 and	 a	dock	 that
could	accommodate	some	ten	to	twelve	boats,	depending	on	their	size.	It	 was
the	site,	 of	course,	 that	had	 encouraged	all	 those	previous	entrepreneurs	to
rush	right	 in	 where	angels	might	 have	feared	 to	tread.	And	 with	 a	 splendid
view	 like	 this	 one—the	waterway	 at	one	 of	 its	widest	 bends,	the	 bridge	 to
Whisper	in	 the	near	distance,	lazy	boat	traffic	  constantly	drifting	  by	in	 a	no-
wake	zone—the	mystery	was	why	all	those	other	places	had	failed.
   Grundy	  had	 opted	 for	  the	 casual	 air	 of	  a	 honky-tonk	  saloon,	 wisely
recognizing	Salty	 Pete’s	(before	it	 burned	down)	 as	his	only	 competition	 for
the	key’s	  steady	drinking	  crowd.	  He	 hired	 a	 flock	  of	 fresh-faced	 young
barmaids—six	of	them	altogether,	four	 behind	the	long	bar	in	 the	main	dining
room,	two	 behind	 the	circular	 bar	 on	the	 deck—and	dressed	them	in	 white
blouses	low	 enough	and	black	 skirts	short	 enough	to	delight	 men	 while	 not
offending	 women.	 And	 for	  balance	he	 hired	 a	horde	 of	 handsome	 young
waiters	and	a	 piano	player	 with	 a	Gene	 Kelly	 grin,	 and	he	 dressed	them	in
black	 trousers	and	 open-throated	 white	 shirts	 with	  puffy	  sleeves	and	 red
garters.	And	then	he	made	damn	sure	he	was	serving	generous	drinks,	choice
cuts	of	meat,	and	the	freshest	fish	he	could	 buy,	all	at	reasonable	prices.	And
before	you	 could	 shout	 eureka,	he	 had	himself	  a	place	 that	 looked	 like	 a
saloon	but	behaved	like	  a	restaurant,	attracting	 customers	day	and	night	 by
land	and	by	 sea.	A	Calusa	success	story.	Of	which	 there	were	 not	too	 many
these	days.
   When	 Frank	Bannion	 arrived	 at	noon	that	 Monday,	the	 place	was	already
beginning	to	fill	 up	for	 lunch,	and	many	of	 the	customers	looked	like	banking
people	who	had	driven	over	from	 the	mainland,	a	sure	harbinger	of	longevity.
He	parked	his	car—prominently	 marked	with	 the	state	attorney’s	seal	on	both
front	  doors—alongside	 a	  silver	  Lincoln	  Continental	  that	  looked	 like	  a
beached	shark,	and	then	he	followed	the	sound	of	a	whorehouse	piano	into	an
interior	bright	 with	sunshine	but	nonetheless	managing	to	convey	the	look	and
feel	of	 a	friendly,	 bustling,	 happy,	cozy	joint	 that	 had	been	here	for	 the	past
hundred	years	and	would	be	here	as	long	as	good	food	 and	drink	 were	being
served	anywhere	in	 the	 state	of	 Florida.	 No	 small	 accomplishment	for	 this
jinxed	location.

67
   Bannion	  nodded	his	 head	in	 appreciation	 and	 walked	 through	 the	 main
dining	room	 and	out	onto	the	deck,	where	round	white	 tables	shaded	by	huge
brown	umbrellas	overlooked	 the	water.	A	 boat	under	sail	was	gliding	 past	on
the	wind.	 Boats	made	 you	want	 to	 be	on	them,	 Bannion	 thought,	until	  you
actually	got	on	them.	He	sat	at	the	bar	and	began	chatting	up	the	redhead	who
took	his	order	 for	a	gin	 and	tonic.	 He	was	here	to	talk	 about	the	night	 of	 the
murders.	He	had	a	choice	of	 coming	 right	out	 and	saying	he	was	a	detective
working	 for	 the	state	attorney,	or	else	he	could	 just	 pretend	to	be	somebody
curious	about	what	 had	happened.	Sometimes	if	 you	 came	on	like	 the	Law,
they	froze.	On	 the	other	hand,	 if	 you	came	on	like	 a	 snoop,	they	sometimes
told	you	to	fuck	 off.	 Six	of	one,	half	 a	dozen	of	the	other.	He	decided	to	show
his	shield.
   The	girl	 was	impressed.
   “Wow,”	  she	said.
   Twenty-three	 years	 old,	 twenty-four	 maybe,	 with	 an	 amazing	suntan	 for
somebody	with	 red	hair.	Bannion	 figured	the	 hair	color	 had	been	poured	out
of	a	bottle.	Brown	 eyes.	Little	 button	nose.	Her	name	was	Rosie	Aldrich,	  she
told	him.
   “I	 hate	the	name	Rosie,	don’t	you?”	she	said.
   She’d	 come	down	 from	 Brooklyn	 for	 a	few	 weeks	last	 winter,	decided	 to
stay	awhile.	She	loved	 working	 here	at	Kickers,	 she	told	him.	 What	 she	did,
she	alternated	days	and	nights,	which	gave	her	a	chance	to	spend	time	on	the
beach.	She	loved	the	beach.	Loved	the	sun.	Also,	with	 a	job	like	 this,	she	got
to	meet	a	lot	 of	 interesting	 people.	Like	 detectives	from	 the	 state	attorney’s
office,	wow.
   Bannion	 told	her	he	had	once	bitten	a	burglar	on	the	backside.
   Out	 of	deference	to	her	youth,	he	didn’t	say	ass.
   He	 showed	her	the	photograph	of	the	burglar’s	behind	to	prove	it.	 His	tooth
marks	on	the	burglar’s	behind.
   The	girl	 shook	her	head	in	awe	and	admiration.
   Bannion	 asked	her	 if	 she’d	been	working	  here	on	Monday	 night,	 August
thirteenth.
   “Why,	 what	happened	then?”	she	asked.
   Brown	 eyes	saucer-wide.
   “Routine	  investigation,”	 Bannion	 said.	“Would	  that	have	 been	one	of	 the
nights	you	were	working?”
   “What	 night	 would	that	have	been,	the	thirteenth?”	she	asked.
   “A	 Monday,”	 Bannion	said.
   He	 was	 beginning	 to	 get	 the	feeling	  she	was	 kind	 of	 stupid.	 A	 sort	 of
airheaded	look	in	those	brown	eyes.	Or	maybe	she	was	on	something.	A	lot	of
kids	these	days,	you	figured	them	for	dimwits,	 they	were	in	fact	stoned.
   “Yeah,	 but	which	Monday?”	 she	said.

68
   Today	was	Monday,	the	twentieth	 of	August.	One	of	those	flip-up	 calendars
behind	 the	  bar	 displayed	  the	  date	 in	  big	  white	  numbers	 on	  a	 black
background.	 So	what	  Monday	 could	 the	 thirteenth	  have	been	 if	  not	 last
Monday?
   “Last	 Monday,”	 he	said.
   “Oh,”	  she	said.
   He	 waited.
   “When	 was	that?”	she	said.
   “Last	 Monday,”	 he	explained.	“The	thirteenth.	 Last	Monday	night.”
   He	 was	thinking	that	even	if	 she	had	seen	anything,	Demming	would	never
put	a	dope	like	her	on	the	stand.
   “Were	 you	working	 that	night?”	he	asked.
   “Gee,	 no,”	she	said.	“I	don’t	 think	 so.”
   “That’s	 too	bad,”	 he	said,	relieved.
   “Yeah,”	 she	said.
   “Do	  you	 know	 who	 would’ve	 been	working	  that	night?	 Out	 here	on	 the
deck?”
   “Why	  out	here	on	the	deck?”	she	asked.
   “Would	 you	 know?”	he	asked,	and	smiled	pleasantly	and	patiently.
   “I’ll	   ask	Sherry,”	she	said.
   Sherry	 turned	out	to	 be	the	dark-haired	girl	 serving	drinks	 at	the	other	end
of	the	bar.	She	was	very	tall,	 five-ten	or	 -eleven,	Bannion	guessed,	giving	the
long-legged,	high-heeled	 impression	 that	her	 skirt	 was	even	 shorter	than	 it
actually	 was.	She	 listened	intently	  to	 what	 Rosie	 was	telling	  her,	glanced
down	to	where	Bannion	was	sitting	and	nursing	his	gin	 and	tonic,	nodded,	and
then	came	over	to	him.
   “How	  are	you?”	she	asked.
   “Fine,”	  he	said.	“I’m	 from	the	state	att—”
   “Yeah,	 Rosie	told	me.	What’s	this	about?”
   Intelligence	 flashing	 in	 her	dark	 eyes,	thank	God;	 he	hated	stupid	people.
Sharp	nose	that	gave	her	the	look	of	a	fox	on	the	scent	of	a	hare.	Wide	mouth,
full	 lips.	 Actually,	  quite	 attractive,	 he	thought.	 Twenty-seven,	 twenty-eight
years	old,	in	there.	He	 wondered	if	 she	knew	his	teeth	and	his	 hair	were	still
his	own.
   “I’m	  investigating	 a	murder,”	he	said.
   Impress	her	flat-out.
   “Uh-huh,”	  she	said.
   “Were	   you	 working	   out	  here	 on	  the	  deck	 last	  Monday	  night,	  the
thirteenth?”
   “Uh-huh,”	  she	said.
   Watching	 him.	 Gauging	 him.	 Was	he	 for	 real,	or	 was	 this	some	 kind	 of
pitch?	Bannion	 was	sure	 she	got	guys	 in	 here	pretending	 to	be	 all	 sorts	of

69
things	they	weren’t.	He	figured	 he’d	better	show	her	his	shield.
   “Okay,”	  she	said,	and	nodded.
   “Okay?”	  he	said,	and	smiled.
   He	 felt	he	had	a	very	nice	smile	because	all	of	his	teeth	were	his	own.
   “I	 said	okay,	didn’t	 I?”	 she	said,	and	returned	the	smile.
   She	had	a	nice	smile,	too.
   “So	 what’s	this	murder?”	 she	asked.
   This	 morning,	Bannion	 and	the	SA	had	studied	a	nautical	chart	together	and
had	decided	that	 the	closest	 landing	 to	Willowbee	  Creek	 was	right	 here	at
Kickers,	just	off	 marker	63.	Good	dock	space,	even	on	a	crowded	night,	and	a
Monday	night	 wouldn’t	 have	been	that	 crowded.	Pull	 the	boat	in,	 tie	her	up,
get	into	 a	car,	and	 then	drive	 over	to	 Little	 Asia,	 not	 fifteen	 minutes	 away.
Leeds	had	to	have	pulled	in	 here.	Stubbs	had	seen	him	turning	left	 out	of	 the
creek,	heading	south.	The	 next	place	for	 docking	 a	boat	would’ve	  been	The
Captain’s	Wheel,	off	 marker	38,	 too	far	south	to	 have	made	it	back	by	 car	to
the	 scene	 of	  the	  murders	 within	   the	 time	  estimated	  in	  the	 coroner’s
postmortem	 interval.	 No,	 Leeds	 had	 to’ve	  got	 off	  his	 boat	 right	 here	 at
Kickers.
   “Were	 you	here	around	ten-thirty,	eleven	o’clock	 that	night?”	he	asked.
   “Yeah?”	 she	said.
   “Working	  the	bar	here?”
   “Yeah?”
   “You	 can	see	the	dock	from	the	bar	here,	can’t	you?”
   “Yeah?”
   “I’m	   looking	 for	 a	 boat	that	 would’ve	 come	 in	 around	ten-thirty,	  eleven
o’clock.	  Would’ve	  been	 coming	  down	  the	 Intercoastal	 from	  Willowbee
Creek.”
   “Marker	  72,”	she	said,	and	nodded.
   “Are	 you	 a	boater?”
   “I’ve	   been	on	 a	few	 boats,”	 she	said,	 raising	 her	eyebrows	 slightly	  and
somehow	conveying	the	 impression	that	she	had	done	 some	very	interesting
things	on	boats	in	 waters	hither	 and	yon.	 Their	eyes	met.	 Bannion	suddenly
felt	he	had	a	shot	at	bedding	this	woman.
   “I	 know	 the	Willowbee	 Creek	marker,”	she	said.
   “This	  boat	 would’ve	  been	a	 thirty-nine-foot	  Mainstream	 Mediterranean,
coming	 down	the	 waterway	 south	from	  Willowbee.	 White	 boat	 with	 black
trim,	 the	name	Felicity	  painted	 on	the	 transom.	Guy	 at	 the	helm	 would’ve
been	wearing	a	yellow	jacket	and	hat.”
   “Sure,”	 Sherry	said.	“What	 about	him?”



Emma	Hailey	 had	worked	 in	 what	the	 Calusa	County	 Courthouse	called	its

70
Records	Division	  since	1947,	 when	the	 town	 was	relatively	  unknown	 as	a
resort.	Now	  in	 her	late	 sixties,	 Emma	 wondered	 how	 it	 had	ever	 become
popular.	 The	  weather	  here	 was	  iffish	   at	  best	 in	  the	  wintertime	   and
swelteringly	 hot	 in	  the	summer,	 which	  melted	 directly	 into	  the	hurricane
season.	There	was	none	of	the	lushness	one	associated	with	tropical	climates,
nor	for	 that	matter	any	of	 the	riotous	 show	of	 color	you	 got	in	 Atlanta	 when
the	magnolias	 were	 blooming,	  or	 Birmingham	 or	 Tulsa	 when	 the	 azaleas
popped,	or	anywhere	in	summertime	Connecticut	 when	the	daylilies	 bloomed
orange	and	red	 and	yellow	  along	 every	country	  lane.	Even	 the	springtime
blooming	of	Calusa’s	jacaranda	trees	was	pale	by	comparison	to	the	exuberant
purple	explosion	on	virtually	 every	Los	Angeles	street	at	that	time	of	 the	year.
   Here,	  there	  were	 listless	  bougainvillea	   and	 limp	   hibiscus,	  tame	 by
Caribbean	standards.	The	cluster	of	gold	 trees	that	bloomed	 in	the	spring	 on
US	41,	down	near	Marina	Lou’s	 and	the	bridge	to	Sabal	Key,	were	admittedly
impressive,	but	their	glorious	 show	of	color	 was	short-lived.	 Most	of	 the	year
—and	 especially	  during	 the	  summer—Calusa’s	 foliage	  looked	  faded	 or
scorched,	and	no	 one	seemed	to	give	 a	 damn.	Easier	to	 go	 fishing	 than	to
water	a	garden.	Why	prune	a	bush	when	you	could	 hop	on	a	boat	and	sail	out
into	the	 Gulf?	The	 lack	of	 concern	showed.	Calusa	 looked	like	 an	elegantly
dressed	woman	whose	soiled	and	tattered	slip	was	showing.
   Emma	thought	 of	it	as	drab.
   Matthew’s	 partner	thought	of	it	 as	tacky.
   Matthew	 wondered	if	 they’d	ever	exchanged	views.
   “The	  trial	 went	on	 for	 three	weeks,”	 Emma	 was	telling	 him.	 “We’ve	 got
1,260	pages	of	transcript	here,	are	you	sure	you	want	to	read	them	all?”
   “If	  it’s	no	trouble,”	 Matthew	 said.
   “Long	 as	you	carry	’em	 over	to	the	desk,	it	makes	no	difference	to	me,”	she
said.
   Emma	 was	a	stout	 woman	with	 gray	 hair	and	a	 faint	 limp.	 She’d	had	the
limp	  ever	 since	 Matthew	  had	 known	  her.	 He	 supposed	 it	  was	 from	  a
childhood	  injury.	   Or	  perhaps	  undetected	 polio;	   he	  remembered	 with
something	like	surprise	 that	polio	had	once	been	the	scourge	of	the	 earth.	He
followed	 her	between	 rows	and	rows	 of	 filing	  cabinets	marked	in	 a	system
only	Emma	 herself	could	 fathom.	 The	cabinets	were	 of	the	 old	oaken	style,
heavy,	sturdy-looking;	 he	remembered	with	additional	mild	 surprise	that	once
upon	a	time	 many	 things	had	 been	fashioned	of	 wood	 rather	than	 metal	or
plastic.	It	goes	by	too	fast,	he	thought.	Where	was	the	kid	with	 hair	in	his	eyes
who	played	 sandlot	 baseball	in	 Chicago,	Illinois?	  Where	 were	the	 sandlots
anymore?
   “Transcript’d	  be	in	the	 People	Versus	section,”	Emma	said.	“Have	 you	got
the	names	of	them	three?	They	were	tried	together,	weren’t	they?”
   “Yes,”	 Matthew	 said.

71
   The	 defense	team,	of	course,	had	tried	to	 obtain	separate	trials,	sever	each
defendant	out,	present	each	individually	as	a	confused	young	man	in	ill-fitting
clothes,	a	poor	put-upon	immigrant,	  sitting	at	the	 defense	table	with	his	 eyes
wide	in	bewilderment.	 Ladies	and	gentlemen	of	the	jury,	 I	ask	you,	could	 this
shy,	unassuming	creature	possibly	have	committed	rape?	Skye	Bannister	 had
prevailed.	The	 three	had	been	tried	 together.	But	 the	state	had	lost	 the	case
anyway.
   “Ngo	  Long	 Khai,”	  Matthew	  said,	reading	 from	 the	 slip	 of	 paper	 in	 his
hand.	“Dang	Van—”
   “Hold	  it,	hold	it,”	 Emma	said.	“Let	 me	see	that,	willya,	please?”
   He	 handed	her	the	slip	of	paper.	She	studied	it	in	consternation,	shaking	her
head	all	 the	 while,	  and	then	 limped	 down	 the	 aisle	 between	 the	rows	 of
cabinets.	“Let’s	try	 the	Ho	one,”	 she	said.	“I	have	a	feeling	I	 filed	it	 under	the
Ho.”
   Matthew	 could	only	 imagine	why.
   But	 sure	enough,	she	found	the	 transcript	filed	 under	Ho	 Dao	Bat,	 People
vs.	 and	 flagged	 for	  reference	 to	  Ngo	 Long	  Khai	  and	 Dang	  Van	 Con,
codefendants.
   “Can’t	 even	lift	 it,”	 she	said.
   An	 exaggeration,	even	if	it	was	a	thick	 file—or	 rather	files,	in	that	the	1,200
some-odd	 pages	of	  transcript	 had	 been	 separated	 into	 four	  more	 easily
handlable	bundles,	 each	 packaged	between	 stiff,	  pale	 blue	 board	 binders
secured	with	  brass	paper	 fasteners.	Matthew	  took	 the	 binders	 out	 of	 the
drawer	one	at	a	time,	stacking	them	on	top	of	 the	cabinet,	and	then	closed	the
drawer	and	hoisted	the	stack	off	into	his	hands	and	his	arms.
   “Thank	 you,	Emma,”	 he	said.
   “Call	  me	when	you’re	done,	okay?”	 Emma	said.	“I’ve	 got	to	sign	’em	 back
in.”
   He	 followed	  her	 down	 the	aisle.	 She	snapped	out	 the	 fluorescent	 lights
behind	them.	The	old	oaken	cabinets	vanished	in	a	wink,	as	if	dismissed	again
to	a	remote	and	silent	past.	Ahead	was	a	room	with	long	windows	 and	a	high,
beamed	ceiling,	  another	 throwback	 to	 the	 turn	  of	 the	 century,	 when	 the
courthouse	was	built.	A	 long	oaken	table	stood	on	stout,	 round	legs.	A	furled
American	 flag	was	 in	 one	corner	of	 the	 room.	 A	framed	 picture	 of	 George
Washington	was	 on	 the	 wall	  beside	it.	  Early-afternoon	 sunlight	  streamed
through	 the	windows,	  burnishing	 the	 tabletop’s	 golden	 finish.	 Dust	 motes
lazily	 climbed	  the	slanting	  shafts	of	 sunlight.	  The	 room	 was	utterly	  still.
Matthew	suddenly	remembered	why	he’d	become	a	lawyer.
   Alone,	 he	sat	at	the	table	and	opened	the	first	of	the	binders.



It	is	four	days	before	Christmas.

72
   The	 weather	here	in	Calusa,	Florida,	is	 wonderful	 for	this	 time	of	 year.	No
one	can	complain	 about	temperatures	that	hover	in	 the	mid-seventies	during
the	daytime	and	 then	drop	to	 a	good	bedtime	 low	 of	 fifty-two	  or	-three.	 No
need	for	 air	 conditioning,	 you	 simply	 throw	 open	 the	windows	 and	 let	 the
prevailing	winds	 blow	 right	on	 through.	During	 the	day,	the	sun	smiles	down
beneficently,	and	Calusa’s	miles	and	miles	 of	 white	sand	beaches	are	littered
with	 the	 bodies	of	 toasting	 tourists,	 the	waters	 of	 the	 Gulf	 sprinkled	 with
bobbing	heads.	Not	 a	single	 native	is	 in	 the	water;	 to	Floridians,	 this	 is	the
winter,	and	only	madmen	go	swimming	 in	December.
   The	 downtown	  streets,	the	 parking	 lots	 of	 the	 malls,	 are	all	  hung	with
Christmas	decorations	that	 seem	out	 of	 place	here	 in	 this	climate.	 What	 is
Santa	Claus	doing	on	a	sleigh	 down	 here	where	there	has	never	been	snow?
Why	are	there	antlered	 reindeer	in	a	climate	 better	suited	to	 alligators?	Why
doesn’t	Frosty	the	Snowman	melt?
   But	  the	  neo-Floridians	 who	  have	 migrated	  from	  distant	 places	 north
perhaps	still	remember	the	bite	 of	a	clear	 December	day	with	 a	hint	of	 snow
in	the	 air,	and	 those	who	 were	born	 and	bred	 here	have	heard	 tall	 tales	of
fabulous	Christmas	 blizzards,	 the	family	  snowed	in	 while	 the	 turkey	roasts
and	the	fire	crackles	on	 the	grate,	and	suddenly	at	the	door,	 arriving	 with	 his
arms	laden	with	gifts...“Son!	 We	knew	you’d	 make	it!	Merry	 Christmas!”
   And	  so	there	is	 the	same	 frantic	 shopping	mania	 here	in	 the	 subtropical
Southland	as	there	is	away	up	 north	in	 frigid	 Eagle	Lake,	 Maine.	So	 what	if
the	Christmas	trees	are	sprayed	white?	 So	what	 if	 the	shoppers	are	wearing
shorts	and	T-shirts?	 In	 only	 four	 days,	 it	 will	  be	Christmas	 morning.	 And
peace	on	earth	will	come	to	men	of	goodwill.
   Women,	too.
   Maybe.
   There	will	  be	no	peace	on	earth	for	Jessica	Leeds	tonight.
   Tonight,	 Jessica	Leeds	will	be	raped.
   “The	 mall	 closed	at	ten	o’clock.	I...”
   A	  transcript	 consists	of	 cold	 type,	 the	 words	 of	 questioner	 and	witness
reduced	to	something	less	than	conversation,	a	dialogue	lacking	 inflection	  or
nuance.	Matthew	  can	 only	 guess	at	 the	 fury	  underlining	  Jessica	Leeds’s
testimony,	the	anger	she	is	controlling.
   She	describes	a	Chinese	restaurant	adjacent	to	the	mall.
   Cold	 type.
   The	 restaurant	is	still	open	at	ten...a	little	 after	ten,	actually,	by	the	time	she
reaches	the	car.	She	has	parked	it	behind	the	restaurant,	which	is	shaped	like	a
pagoda,	and	which	in	fact	is	named	The	Pagoda.	The	car	is	an	expensive	one,
and	this	is	four	 days	before	Christmas.	 With	 all	the	traffic	  in	the	mall’s	 lot	 a
dented	fender	is	a	distinct	possibility,	 and	so	she	has	chosen	this	deserted	spot
behind	The	 Pagoda,	 alongside	a	 low	 fence	 beyond	 which	 is	 undeveloped

73
scrubland.	As	  she	walks	  toward	 the	 restaurant,	 the	 mall’s	 parking	  lot	 is
rapidly	 emptying	  of	 automobiles,	 except	 for	  those	parked	 row	  after	 row
outside	the	movie-theater	 complex	at	 the	far	 end.	It	 is	ten	 minutes	past	ten,
she	supposes,	when	 she	 places	 in	 the	 trunk	  of	 her	 Maserati	 the	 several
Christmas	gifts	she’s	bought.
   There	 are	lights	 here	behind	the	Chinese	restaurant.	It	 is	not	 what	anyone
would	call	brightly	 lighted,	 but	there	is	illumination	 enough	to	provide	a	sense
of	security.	 And	 besides,	there’s	 a	moon.	 Not	 quite	 full,	 just	 on	 the	wane.
Anyway,	it	 is	only	 a	little	 after	 ten,	this	is	 not	the	dead	of	night,	 this	is	 not	a
town	where	 a	woman	alone	 needs	to	be	afraid	 of	unlocking	  the	door	of	 her
automobile	in	an	adequately	lighted	 parking	space	behind	a	brilliantly	 lighted
restaurant	on	a	moonlit	 Thursday	night	 four	 days	before	Christmas.	Besides,
there	are	three	men	standing	 behind	the	restaurant,	smoking.	 All	  of	them	 in
shirtsleeves.	Wearing	 long	 white	 aprons.	Restaurant	 help.	She	 unlocks	 the
door	of	 the	car,	closes	and	locks	 it	 behind	her,	turns	on	 the	lights,	 starts	the
engine,	and	is	backing	 away	from	 the	low	 fence	when	she	realizes	she	has	a
flat	tire.
   She	tells	 this	to	the	state	attorney,	and	she	repeatedly	tells	it	 to	the	defense
attorneys	who	come	at	her	one	after	the	other,	trying	to	shake	her	story.	In	the
transcript,	each	attorney	is	initially	  identified	 as	he	begins	his	cross,	and	then
the	form	 reverts	to	 a	simple	Q	 and	A,	 so	that	 it	 is	not	 necessary	each	time,
over	and	over	again,	to	 indicate	MR.	AIELLO	for	Tran’s	attorney	or	MR.	SILBERKLEIT
for	Ho’s,	or	MRS.	LEEDS	for	Jessica	herself,	it	is	Q	and	A,	Q	and	A,	Q	and...
	
A:		I	got	out	 of	the	car	to	change	it.	I	didn’t	 realize	I	was	going	to	be	raped.
Q:		Objection,	Your	Honor.	 We	are	here	precisely	to	determine	whether—
A:		Yes,	yes,	sustained,	Mr.	Aiello.	The	jury	 will	 please	ignore	the	witness’s
         answer.
	
   The	 “A”	  this	time	 is	 from	 the	circuit	 court	 judge	hearing	the	 case,	a	man
named	Sterling	Dooley,	who	has	a	reputation	as	a	hanging	judge.	The	team	of
defense	attorneys—there	are	eight	of	them	sitting	at	the	defense	table—would
have	preferred	a	different	 judge.	They	did,	 in	fact,	 ask	for	a	change	of	 venue
because	of	the	 publicity	  the	rape	 (or	 alleged	 rape,	as	they	 would	 have	 it)
generated	in	the	media,	but	 their	request	was	denied.	So	 they	are	stuck	with
Dooley,	who	now	asks	the	clerk	to	please	read	Aiello’s	question	again—
   “What	 did	 you	do	when	you	discovered	the	flat	tire?”
   —and	 the	Q	and	A	continues.
	
A:		I	got	out	 of	the	car	to	change	it.
Q:		Yourself?
A:		Yes,	myself.	I	was	alone.

74
Q:		I	mean...don’t	you	belong	to	any	club	 offering	emergency	road	service?
A:		No,	I	 don’t.
Q:		Couldn’t	 you	have	called	a	garage?
A:		I	know	 how	to	change	a	tire.
Q:		But	the	way	you	were	dressed—
A:		The	way	I	 was	dressed	has	nothing	to	do	with	changing	a	tire.
Q:		I	merely	thought...high	 heels...a	short	skirt—
A:		Objection,	 Your	Honor.
	
   This	 from	  the	state	attorney.	 Skye	 Bannister	himself.	 In	  person.	Hair	 as
golden	 as	wheat,	 eyes	 the	 color	 of	 his	  given	 name.	 Tall	 and	 rangy	 and
enormously	good-looking.	 Undoubtedly	leaping	to	his	feet	in	 high	dudgeon.
	
A:		Sustained.	Leave	off	that	line	of	 questioning,	please,	Mr.	Aiello.
Q:		Couldn’t	 you	have	called	your	husband	to	help	you?
A:		I	didn’t	 want	to	get	him	 out	of	bed.
Q:		You	knew	he	was	in	bed,	did	you?
A:		He	had	a	cold.	He	was	in	bed	when	I	left	 the	house	that	night.
Q:		And	this	was	now	what	time?
A:		A	quarter	after	ten.
Q:		So	naturally,	you	didn’t	 want	to	get	him	out	of	 bed.	Was	it	a	quarter	after
         ten	exactly?
A:		I	can’t	 say	exactly.	I’m	assuming	it	took	 me	ten	minutes	or	so	to	walk	to
         the	car	and	put	my	packages	in	the	trunk.
Q:		And	you	say	there	were	three	men	standing	outside	the	back	door	to	the
         restaurant	when	you—
A:		Yes.	The	defendants.	The	three	men	sitting	right—
Q:		I	haven’t	asked	you	to	identify	 anyone,	Mrs.	Leeds.
A:		Well,	that’s	 who	they	were.
Q:		Your	Honor...
A:		Yes,	strike	all	that.	Witness	will	 please	not	offer	testimony	 unless	it	is
         asked	for.
Q:		Did	you	speak	to	these	men?
A:		No.
Q:		Had	you	seen	these	men	prior	to	this	time—a	quarter	after	ten,	you	say	it
         was?
A:		Around	 a	quarter	after	ten.	No,	I	hadn’t	seen	them	before	then.
Q:		That	was	the	very	first	time	 you	saw	them.
A:		Yes.
Q:		But	you’re	 not	sure	it	was	a	quarter	after	ten	exactly.
A:		Not	exactly.	But	 certainly	around	then.
Q:		Could	it	have	been	half	past	ten?

75
A:		I	don’t	think	so.	It	wouldn’t	have	taken	me	that	long	to	walk	back	to	the
        car.
Q:		How	about	twenty	to	eleven?	Could	it	have	been	twenty	to	eleven?
A:		No.
Q:		Or	ten	to	eleven?	Could	it	have	been	ten	to	eleven?
A:		No.	I	told	you,	it	was—
Q:		Or	a	quarter	after—
A:		No,	it	was—
Q:		Let	me	finish	the	question,	please.
A:		I	thought	you	were	finished.
Q:		Could	it	have	been	a	quarter	after	eleven?	Rather	than	a	quarter	after	ten?
A:		No,	it	was	a	quarter	after	ten.
Q:		Mrs.	Leeds,	what	time	did	you	arrive	at	the	mall	that	night?
A:		Around	eight	o’clock.
Q:		To	do	your	shopping.
A:		Yes.
Q:		Was	it	dark	when	you	arrived?
A:		Yes.
Q:		And	did	you	park	your	car	behind	The	Pagoda	at	that	time?
A:		Yes.
Q:		Were	there	lights	behind	the	restaurant?
A:		Yes.
Q:		Was	there	anyone	standing	out	back	at	that	time?
A:		I	didn’t	see	anyone.
Q:		Didn’t	you	see	three	men	standing	there,	smoking	cigarettes?	Under	the
        light	over	the	back	door?
A:		No,	I	didn’t	see	anyone.
Q:		Didn’t	you	see	the	three	men	you	later—
A:		No.
Q:		Your	Honor,	may	I	please	be	allowed	to	complete	my	question?
A:		Mrs.	Leeds,	please	listen	to	the	entire	question,	won’t	you,	before	you
        answer?	Go	ahead,	Mr.	Aiello.
Q:		At	eight	o’clock	that	night,	when	you	parked	your	car	behind	the
        restaurant,	didn’t	you	see	the	three	men	you	later	claim—
A:		Objection,	Your	Honor.
	
   Skye	Bannister	again.
   “Mrs.	 Leeds	has	already	stated	that	she	did	not	see	anyone	standing	behind
the	restaurant.	Mr.	Aiello	is	merely	asking	the	same	question	in	a	different
guise.	And	it	has	already	been	answered.”
   “Mr.	 Aiello?”
   “Your	Honor,	we	have	heard	a	previous	witness	testifying	to	the	fact	that	a

76
conversation	took	place	between	Mrs.	 Leeds	and	the	three	defendants	shortly
after	 she	parked	 her	 car	 that	 night.	  We	have	 heard	 from	  the	 defendants
themselves	what	the	content	of	 that	conversation	 was.	I	am	 merely	trying	 to
refresh	Mrs.	Leeds’s	memory	of	the	exchange.”
   “I’ll	   allow	the	question.”
	
Q:		Mrs.	Leeds,	isn’t	it	 true	that	as	you	were	getting	out	of	your	car,	you
         turned	to	the	three	defendants	and	said,	‘Good	evening,	boys’?
A:		No.
Q:		You	didn’t	 see	them,	so	naturally	you	couldn’t	have	said	anything	like	that
         to	them.
A:		I	wouldn’t	  have	said	anything	to	them	in	any	case.
Q:		Well,	‘Good	 evening’	is	only	a	form	 of	greeting,	isn’t	 it?	Nothing
         provocative	about	that.	Nothing	 seductive.	Why	couldn’t	 you	have	said,
         ‘Good	evening,	boys’?
A:		Because	I’m	not	in	 the	habit	of	talking	 to	strange	men.
Q:		Especially	when	they’re	 invisible,	isn’t	 that	so?
A:		I	don’t	 understand	your	question.
Q:		Well,	you	said	they	weren’t	 there,	didn’t	you?	That	means	they	were
         invisible.
A:		No,	that	means	they	weren’t	there.
Q:		You	only	saw	them	later.
A:		Yes.
Q:		These	same	three	men.
A:		Yes.	No.	I	didn’t	 see	anyone	at	eight	o’clock,	I	only	 saw	these	men	when	I
         came	back	to	the	car.
Q:		At	a	quarter	after	ten—
A:		Yes.
Q:		—or	a	quarter	after	eleven,	whenever	it	was.
A:		It	 was	a	quarter	after	ten.	I’ve	already	told	you—
A:		Really,	Mr.	 Aiello.
Q:		I’m	 sorry,	Your	Honor,	but	if	 you’ll	 allow	 me—
A:		Where	are	you	going?
Q:		I	am	trying	 to	show,	Your	Honor,	that	the	witness’s	account	of	what
         happened	at	what	time,	or	what	was	said	at	what	time,	is	confusing	at
         best.	And	if	 she’s	confused	about	the	basic	facts	of	the—
A:		I’m	 not	confused	about	anything	that	happened	that	night.	You’re	the	one
         who’s	trying	 to	confuse	the	facts!
Q:		Your	Honor,	may	I	please	proceed?
A:		Let’s	hear	where	you’re	 going,	Mr.	Aiello.
Q:		Thank	you.	Mrs.	Leeds,	you	say	these	three	men	were	standing	outside	the
         back	door	of	the	restaurant,	smoking	under	the	light	back	there,	when

77
         you	returned	to	your	car	at	a	quarter	after	ten.
A:		Yes.
Q:		You	heard	them	testify	earlier,	did	you	not,	that	they	were	in	 the	kitchen	at
         that	time,	washing	dishes?
A:		I	heard	them,	yes.
Q:		One	of	you	must	be	mistaken,	don’t	you	think?
A:		Not	me.
Q:		You	heard	them	testify,	did	you	not,	that	the	only	time	 they	saw	you	was
         at	eight,	when	you	parked	the	car?
A:		I	heard	them.
Q:		Are	they	mistaken	about	that,	too?
A:		Or	lying.
Q:		And	were	they	lying	 when	they	said	you	showed	a	great	deal	of	leg	while
         you	were	getting	out	of	 the	car—
A:		No	one	was	there	when	I	got	out	of	 the	car!
Q:		And	that	you	said,	‘Good	 evening,	boys.’	Was	that	a	lie?	The	testimony	of
         all	three	men	to	that	effect?
A:		It	 was	a	lie.
Q:		Did	you	hear	the	testimony	of	 the	chef,	Mr.	Kee	Lu,	to	the	effect	that	these
         three	men	were	in	the	kitchen	washing	dishes	at	a	quarter	past	ten	and
         could	not	possibly	have	been	outside	smoking	at	that	time?
A:		I	heard	him.
Q:		But	he	must	be	mistaken,	too.	Or	lying.	 Or	both.
A:		If	 he	says	they	weren’t	outside,	then	he’s	lying.
Q:		You	alone	are	telling	the	truth.
A:		About	 that,	yes.
Q:		But	not	about	anything	else?
A:		I’m	 telling	 the	truth	about	everything.
Q:		As,	of	course,	you’ve	sworn	 to	do.	But	you	say	these	others	are	lying.
A:		If	 they	claim—
Q:		Everyone’s	lying	 but	you,	is	that	it,	Mrs.	 Leeds?	But	isn’t	it	possible	that
         you’re	confusing	 what	happened	at	eight	o’clock	with	 what	happened	at
         a	quarter	past	ten?
A:		I	wasn’t	 raped	at	eight	o’clock!
Q:		Nor	has	anyone	said	you	were.	But,	tell	me—were	you	worried	 about
         getting	raped	when	you	parked	the	car?
A:		No.
Q:		While	you	 were	parking	the	car,	you	weren’t	concerned	about	the
         possibility	 of	rape?
A:		No,	I	 didn’t	even	consider	that	possibility.
Q:		Because	if	you	had,	you	might	have	parked	the	car	elsewhere,	isn’t	that
         so?

78
A:		There	weren’t	very	many	spaces	left	when	I	got	to	the	mall.	Anyway,	it’s
        an	expensive	car,	I	was	worried	it	might	get	damaged.	So	I	parked	it
        away	from	the	other	cars.
Q:		But	if	you’d	considered	the	possibility	of	rape,	you	might	have	parked
        elsewhere,	isn’t	that	so?
A:		No,	it	was	only	a	short	walk	to	the	mall.
Q:		You	weren’t	worried	about	getting	raped	on	your	short	walk	from	the	car
        to	the	mall,	were	you?
A:		No.
Q:		Or	on	your	walk	back	to	the	car	after	the	mall	closed,	were	you?
A:		No.
Q:		So,	really,	Mrs.	Leeds,	you	weren’t	worried	at	all	about	getting	raped
        there	where	you’d	parked	the	car,	were	you?
A:		No,	I	did	not	expect	to	be	raped.
Q:		When	you	came	back	to	the	car,	did	you	expect	to	be	raped	then?
A:		No.
Q:		Even	though	there	were	three	men	standing	there	behind	the	restaurant?
A:		I	knew	they	worked	there.
Q:		How	did	you	know	that?
A:		They	looked	like	kitchen	help.
Q:		Isn’t	it	possible	that	you	weren’t	afraid	of	getting	raped	at	a	quarter	past
        ten	because	there	was	no	one	there	to	rape	you	at	that	time?
A:		Oh,	they	were	there,	all	right.
Q:		But	not	when	you	say	they	were	there.
A:		Objection!
A:		Was	that	a	question,	Mr.	Aiello?
Q:		I’ll	rephrase	it,	Your	Honor.	What	time	was	it	when	you	claim	to	have
        seen	these	three	men?
A:		A	quarter	past	ten!	How	many	times	do	I—
Q:		While	they	were	washing	dishes	in	the	restaurant	kitchen!
A:		No!	While	they	were	raping	me	on	the	hood	of	the	goddamn—
Q:		Objection!
A:		Sustained.	Please	answer	the	question,	Mrs.	Leeds.
A:		That’s	the	only	time	I	ever	saw	them.	The	only	place	I	ever	saw	them.
        While	I	was	being—
Q:		No	further	questions.
	
       But	of	course	there	were	further	questions.

79
                                                                                                                         5


SHE	WAS	sitting	out	by	the	pool	when	Matthew	arrived	at	three	that	afternoon.
Green	maillot	  swimsuit	 to	 match	 her	 eyes,	 reddish-brown	 wedge-cut	 hair
catching	the	late-afternoon	sunshine,	a	green	terry	band	across	her	forehead,	a
faint	sheen	of	perspiration	 on	the	sloping	 tops	of	 her	breasts	above	the	suit’s
bodice.	She	asked	if	 he’d	 care	for	 a	 lemonade.	Or	 something	stronger.	She
herself	was	having	a	gin	 and	tonic.	He	 said	that	sounded	good,	and	she	went
inside	to	prepare	it	for	him.
   He	 sat	watching	the	fields	and	the	distant	yellow-gray	 sky.	The	rain	had	not
yet	come	today;	 someone	must	have	forgotten	 to	 set	the	alarm.	 Jessica	was
back	not	five	minutes	later.	She	had	wrapped	a	short	filmy	 green	scarf	around
herself,	knotted	it	above	her	breasts.	She	handed	him	the	drink,	and	then	sat	in
the	chair	opposite	 his.	The	drink	 tasted	cold	 and	tart	and	sparkly.	 Especially
after	hours	of	reading	transcripts	in	a	room	streaming	sunlight.
   “I’m	  sorry	to	bother	you	this	 way,”	he	said,	“but	I	 have	some	questions.”
   “No	 bother	at	all,”	 she	said.	“With	 Stephen	in	jail—”
   She	let	the	sentence	hang.
   “I	 was	reading	the	trial	 transcript	this	afternoon,”	 he	said.
   “Something,	 wasn’t	it?”
   “You	 know	 why	they	were	acquitted,	don’t	 you?”
   “Sure.	 Guilt.”
   He	 looked	at	her.
   “Not	  theirs,”	 she	said,	“ours.	Our	 massive	American	 guilt.	 For	the	horrors
we	committed	in	Vietnam.	 This	was	compensation	for	that.”
   “Well,	  maybe	so,”	 Matthew	 said.	“But	  I	think	 there	 was	a	more	practical
reason.”
   “And	  what	was	that?”
   “Time,”	  he	said.
   “Time?”
   “The	 jury	 couldn’t	reconcile	 the	contradictions	of	time.”
   “The	  three	of	 them	 were	 lying,”	  she	said.	“About	  everything.	 Including
time.”
   “How	  about	the	chef?	Was	he	lying,	too?”
   “He	 was	a	friend	of	theirs.	 Yes,	he	was	lying.”
   “And	  the	police?”
   “I	 don’t	 know	what	you	 mean.”
   “The	 police	 dispatcher	who	 testified	at	the	 trial	said	 that	he	took	your	 call

80
at	12:40	a.m.—”
   “Yes,	 that’s	right.”
   “And	  that	 the	responding	police	 car—that	 would	 have	been	 David	 car—
reached	you	some	five	minutes	later—”
   “Those	 seem	to	be	the	correct	times,	yes.”
   “But,	 Mrs.	 Leeds...the	mall	closed	at	ten.”
   “Yes?”
   “And	  you	  yourself	 testified	 that	 you	 began	 changing	 that	 flat	 tire	 at	 a
quarter	past.”
   “Yes?”
   “Don’t	  you	see	what	confused	the	jury?”
   “No,	 I’m	 sorry,	I	 don’t.”
   “You	  called	the	police	 two	 hours	and	twenty-five	  minutes	after	 the	attack
started.	And	during	that	time—”
   “During	  that	time,	I	was	being	raped!”
   “That’s	 what	the	jury	 couldn’t	 accept.	The	duration	of	the	rape.”
   “That’s	 how	long	 it	lasted.”
   “Mrs.	 Leeds,	the	movie	broke	at	eleven	o’clock—”
   “I	 don’t	 give	a—”
   “—people	 would	 have	been	walking	back	to—”
   “—damn	 about—”
   “—their	  cars,	they’d	have	seen—”
   “—the	 goddamn	movie!”
   They	 both	stopped	talking	at	the	same	moment.	Jessica’s	eyes	were	blazing.
She	picked	up	her	drink	and	took	a	long	swallow.	Matthew	 watched	her.
   “I’m	  sorry,”	he	said.
   “No,	  you’re	 not,”	 she	said.	 “You	don’t	 accept	 the	contradictions	 of	 time,
either.	Isn’t	that	true?”
   “I’m	  only	trying	 to	understand	what	happened.”
   “No,	 you’re	 trying	 to	find	 out	who	 was	lying,	 me	or	those	men.	I’m	 telling
you	I	was	consecutively	 and	repeatedly	raped	for	more	than	 two	hours,	yes!”
She	shook	her	head	angrily	and	then	took	another	swallow	 of	 the	drink.	“But
what	difference	 does	it	make?”	 she	said.	“They	 were	 tried	and	acquitted,	 so
what	difference	does	it	make	if	I	 was	raped	or	not?”
   “No	 one	for	 a	moment	ever	questioned	the	fact	that	you	were	raped.”
   “No,	  they	only	 questioned	whether	or	not	 those	three	bastards	could	 have
done	it.	Okay,	they	reached	their	verdict.	Not	guilty.	 So	who	cares	anymore?”
   “Patricia	 Demming	 does.”
   “Who’s	 Pa—oh,	the	state	attorney.”
   “Yes.	 I	feel	certain	she’ll	 be	calling	you	as	a	witness.”
   “To	 what?”
   “To	 your	own	 rape.”

81
   “Why?”
   “Because	 she	has	to	 show	that	 your	husband	killed	  those	men	in	 a	blind
rage.	And	 the	best	way	 to	do	 that	is	 to	have	 you	describe	 the	rape	all	 over
again.”
   “Can	 she	do	that?”
   “Sure.	 To	demonstrate	motive.	Moreover,	she’ll	 try	 to	show	that	the	verdict
was	a	just	one.	She’ll	 say	those	three	innocent	little	 boys	did	 not	in	 fact	rape
you,	could	not	possibly	have	raped	you	at	the	time	you	say	they	did.”
   “But	 they	did!”
   “She’ll	  say	you	saw	them	 at	eight	o’clock,	 while	 you	were	 parking	the	car
—”
   “There	 was	no	one	there	when	I—”
   “Exchanged	 a	few	words	with	 them—”
   “No,	 no,	no—”
   “—and	  remembered	 them	incorrectly	  as	 the	men	 who	 later	 raped	 you.
She’ll	play	 that	rape	trial	for	all	 it’s	worth,	 believe	me.	If	she	can	convince	the
jury	that	those	men	were	indeed	innocent	as	found,	then	she	can	also	convince
them	that	your	husband’s	crime	was	doubly	 heinous.	Not	only	 did	 he	commit
foul	 and	bloody	 murder,	he	 committed	 it	 in	 error.	Do	 you	 understand	what
I’m	saying?”
   “Yes.”
   “I	 want	 you	to	tell	me	everything	 that	happened	that	night.”
   “You	 read	the	transcript,	you	know	what—”
   “Can	 you	tell	 me	again	what	happened?”
   “I	 told	 it	all.”
   “Please	tell	 it	again,	can	you?”
   She	shook	her	head.
   “Can	 you?”
   She	kept	shaking	her	head.
   “You’ll	  have	to	tell	 it	again	in	 court,	Mrs.	Leeds.	She’ll	 make	sure	of	that.	I
want	to	be	ready	for	her.”
   Jessica	sighed.
   He	 waited.
   She	turned	her	head	away,	avoiding	his	eyes.
   “I	  got	 out	of	 the	mall	 at	 ten	o’clock,”	  she	said,	 “and	 walked	over	 to	 the
restaurant.	It	 was	still	 open	 at	ten...a	little	  after	 ten,	actually,	 by	 the	time	 I
reached	the	car...”
   She	has	parked	it	behind	 the	restaurant,	which	is	shaped	like	a	pagoda,	and
which	in	 fact	is	 named	The	Pagoda.	The	car	is	an	expensive	one,	 and	this	is
four	 days	before	 Christmas.	 With	 all	 the	 traffic	 in	 the	 mall’s	 lot	  a	dented
fender	is	a	distinct	possibility,	 and	so	she	has	chosen	this	deserted	spot	behind
The	Pagoda,	alongside	a	low	 fence	beyond	which	 is	undeveloped	scrubland.

82
As	she	walks	toward	the	restaurant,	the	mall’s	parking	 lot	is	rapidly	 emptying
of	 automobiles,	except	 for	 those	 parked	row	 after	 row	 outside	 the	 movie-
theater	complex	at	the	far	 end.	It	is	ten	 minutes	past	ten,	she	supposes,	when
she	places	in	  the	 trunk	 of	 her	 Maserati	 the	 several	 Christmas	 gifts	 she’s
bought.
   There	 are	lights	 here	behind	the	Chinese	restaurant.	It	 is	not	 what	anyone
would	call	brightly	 lighted,	 but	there	is	illumination	 enough	to	provide	a	sense
of	security.	 And	 besides,	there’s	 a	moon.	 Not	 quite	 full,	 just	 on	 the	wane.
Anyway,	it	 is	only	 a	little	 after	 ten,	this	is	 not	the	dead	of	night,	 this	is	 not	a
town	where	 a	woman	alone	 needs	to	be	afraid	 of	unlocking	  the	door	of	 her
automobile	in	an	adequately	lighted	 parking	space	behind	a	brilliantly	 lighted
restaurant	on	a	moonlit	 Thursday	night	 four	 days	before	Christmas.	Besides,
there	are	three	men	standing	 behind	the	restaurant,	smoking.	 All	 of	 them	 in
shirtsleeves.	Wearing	 long	 white	 aprons.	Restaurant	 help.	She	 unlocks	 the
door	of	 the	car,	closes	and	locks	 it	 behind	her,	turns	on	 the	lights,	 starts	the
engine,	and	is	backing	 away	from	 the	low	 fence	when	she	realizes	she	has	a
flat	tire.
   “That	 was	when	the	nightmare	began,”	she	tells	Matthew	 now.	“I	 got	out	of
the	car.	I	 was	wearing...well,	 you	 read	the	 transcript,	you	 know	 what	 I	was
wearing,	the	defense	made	me	describe	everything	I—”
	
Q:		Is	it	true	that	you	were	wearing	black	 bikini	 panties	that	night?
A:		Yes.
Q:		Lace-edged?
A:		Yes.
Q:		And	a	garter	belt?
A:		Yes.
Q:		Was	this	garter	belt	black?
	
   “Your	 Honor,	I	 must	object!”
   Skye	Bannister,	on	his	feet.	At	 last.
   “Yes,	 where	are	you	going	with	this,	Mr.	 Silberkleit?”
   “It	 will	  become	clear,	Your	Honor.”
   “It	 had	better.	Witness	may	answer	the	question.	Read	it	back,	please.”
	
Q:		Was	this	garter	belt	black?
A:		It	 was	black,	yes.
Q:		And	were	you	wearing	seamed	nylon	stockings?
A:		Yes.
Q:		Black,	too,	weren’t	 they?
A:		Yes.
Q:		And	a	short	black	skirt?

83
A:		Yes.
Q:		A	tight	black	skirt,	wasn’t	it?
A:		Not	exceptionally	tight,	no.
Q:		Well,	it	wasn’t	a	pleated	skirt,	was	it?
A:		No.
Q:		Or	a	flared	skirt?
A:		No.
Q:		It	was	a	sort	of	tube	skirt,	wouldn’t	you	call	it?
A:		I	suppose	so.
Q:		In	any	event,	it	was	short	enough	and	tight	enough	to	reveal—
A:		Objection.
A:		Sustained.	Get	to	it,	Mr.	Silberkleit.
Q:		Were	you	also	wearing	black	patent-leather	high-heeled	pumps?
A:		Yes.
Q:		What	color	was	your	blouse,	Mrs.	Leeds?
A:		White.
Q:		Sleeveless,	wasn’t	it?
A:		Yes.
Q:		Silk?
A:		Yes.
Q:		With	little	pearl	buttons	down	the	front,	isn’t	that	so?
A:		Yes.
Q:		Were	you	wearing	a	brassiere	under	this	sleeveless	silk	blouse?
A:		Objection,	Your	Honor!
A:		Witness	may	respond.
Q:		Were	you	wearing	a	brassiere,	Mrs.	Leeds?
A:		No.
Q:		Tell	me,	Mrs.	Leeds,	is	this	the	way	you	normally	dress	when	you’re
        going	out	to—
A:		Objection!
Q:		—do	your	Christmas	shopping?
A:		Your	Honor,	I	object!
A:		You	may	answer	the	question,	Mrs.	Leeds.
A:		That’s	what	I	was	wearing,	yes.
Q:		Thank	you,	we	know	what	you	were	wearing,	don’t	we?	But	that	was	not
        my	question.
A:		What	was	your	question?
Q:		Is	this	the	way	you	normally	dress	when	you’re	going	out	to	do	your
        Christmas	shopping?
A:		It’s	the	way	I	normally	dress,	yes.
Q:		When	you’re	going	out	to	a	mall,	is	that	right?
A:		Yes.

84
Q:		You	wear	a	short,	tight	black	skirt	 with	black	seamed	stockings	and	high-
         heeled	patent-leather	shoes...by	the	way,	how	high	were	the	heels	on
         those	shoes?
A:		I	don’t	 know.
Q:		Well,	I	have	here	a	list	of	the	clothing	 you	were	wearing	that	night,	and
         the	shoes	are	described	as	having	three-inch	heels.	Would	you	yourself
         describe	them	that	way?
A:		Yes.
Q:		Shoes	with	three-inch	heels.
A:		Yes.
Q:		For	walking	 around	a	mall	doing	shopping.
A:		I	feel	 perfectly	comfortable	 in	high-heeled	shoes.
Q:		And	no	doubt	you	also	feel	comfortable	 in	black,	lace-edged	bikini
         panties,	and	a	black	garter	belt,	and	black	seamed	stockings—
A:		Yes,	I	do.
Q:		And	a	white	silk	 blouse	with	no	bra	under	it—
A:		Yes!
Q:		In	other	words,	you	feel	comfortable	 in	clothes	that	can	be	found	in	the
         pages	of	Penthouse!
A:		No!	 Clothes	that	can	be	found	in	the	pages	of	Vogue!
Q:		Thank	you	for	the	distinction,	 Mrs.	 Leeds.	Clothes,	in	any	event,	that	any
         man	might	find	 provocative	and	seduct—
A:		Objection!
A:		Sustained.
Q:		Mrs.	Leeds,	didn’t	 you	specifically	 go	to	the	mall	that	night	in	 search	of—
A:		No.
Q:		Let	me	finish	 the	question,	please.	Didn’t	you	go	there	in	search	of
         adventure?
A:		No!
Q:		And	didn’t	 you	attempt	to	find	 this	adventure	by	blatantly	flirting	  with
         three	young	boys—
A:		Objection!
Q:		—who	turned	down	 your	advances—
A:		Objection!
Q:		And	whom	you	 later	accused	of	having	raped	you!
A:		Objection!	 Objection!	 Objection!
	
   She	knows	 how	to	change	a	flat	 tire,	she	has	changed	many	of	them	in	 her
lifetime,	 she	is	not	one	of	 these	helpless	little	 women	who	 eat	bonbons	on	a
chaise	longue	while	  reading	romance	novels.	 She	takes	the	 jack	 out	of	 the
trunk,	lifts	 out	the	spare,	lays	it	flat	on	the	ground	behind	the	rear	bumper,	and
then	kneels	beside	the	right	rear	tire	 to	loosen	the	lug	 nuts	on	the	wheel.	She

85
has	removed	one	of	them	and	placed	it	in	the	inverted	hubcab,	when—
   From	 the	very	first	instant,	there	is	no	mistaking	 the	intent.
   Someone	seizes	her	from	 behind,	 yanking	 her	over	backward,	 away	from
the	wheel.	She	drops	the	wrench	 on	the	ground.	 An	 arm	is	around	her	 neck,
choking	 her,	 stifling	   the	 scream	 that	 comes	 bubbling	  up	 onto	 her	  lips.
Someone	else	twists	her	arm.	The	pain	rockets	clear	up	into	her	skull.	There	is
no	mistaking	 the	intent,	 this	is	 rape,	she	is	about	 to	be	raped.	She	is	 falling
backward,	backward.	 The	 man	 behind	her	 steps	away,	 releases	her	as	she
falls.	The	back	 of	her	head	hits	the	 asphalt	pavement.	She	almost	blacks	out,
but	danger	 shrills	 its	 warning	 to	 her	 brain,	 and	she	regains	 control	 of	 her
senses	at	once.
   There	are	three	of	them.
   The	three	who	were	standing	behind	the	restaurant.
   One	 on	 each	 side	of	  her,	holding	  her	 arms.	The	 third	  one	behind	 her,
crouching	now,	 one	hand	over	 her	mouth,	 the	other	twisted	 in	 her	hair.	She
hears	their	voices,	unintelligible,	  urgent,	everything	 is	happening	 so	quickly,
they	are	speaking	what	she	believes	to	 be	Chinese,	and	somehow—she	does
not	know	why—this	  knowledge	triggers	the	 vain	hope	that	she	is	wrong,	 this
is	not	a	rape,	all	they	want	is	her	money.
   She	  starts	 to	 tell	  them	 they	  can	 take	 anything	  in	  her	 handbag,	 but
everything	 is	 happening	so	 quickly,	  one	of	  them—he	 has	a	 straggly	 new
mustache	over	his	 upper	lip,	  he	is	 the	leader—stuffs	 a	 soiled	handkerchief
into	her	mouth	and	then	slaps	her	lightly	 as	a	warning	 against	trying	to	 spit	it
out.	Slaps	her	on	the	left	 cheek,	using	his	 right	 hand,	he	is	right-handed,	she
must	remember	this,	the	slap	stinging	but	not	bruising—
	
Q:		Isn’t	it	 true,	Mrs.	Leeds,	that	when	you	were	removed	by	ambulance	from
         the	police	station	to	the	hospital,	the	examining	physician	 could	find	 no
         bruises	anywhere	on	your	body?
A:		No,	that’s	not	true.
Q:		It’s	not?	Well,	I	 have	here	the	medical	report—
A:		There	were	bruises	on	my—
Q:		Yes?
A:		Breasts.
Q:		Ah?
A:		And	 thighs.
Q:		I	see.	But	you	didn’t	 suffer	a	broken	nose,	for	example,	did	you?
A:		No,	but	there	was	a—
Q:		Or	even	a	bloody	nose?	Was	your	nose	bleeding	when	you	got	to	the
         police	station?
A:		No.
Q:		Had	any	of	your	teeth	been	knocked	out?

86
A:		No.	But	 there	was	a	bump	at	the	back	of	my	head,	from	where	I	hit	it	on
         the—
Q:		Were	your	eyes	blackened?
A:		No.
Q:		Any	black-and-blue	 marks	anywhere	else	on	your	body?
A:		I	told	 you.	My	 breasts	and	my	thighs	were—
Q:		You’re	not	saying,	are	you,	that	those	bruises	on	your	breasts	and	thighs
         were	the	result	of	being	punched?
A:		No,	but—
Q:		Or	kicked?
A:		They	didn’t	 kick	 me,	no.
Q:		Did	they,	in	fact,	harm	you	 physically	in	 any	way	whatsoever?
A:		Yes!	They	raped	me!
Q:		Mrs.	Leeds,	did	these	men,	who	happened	to	be	in	the	kitchen	at	the	time
         you	say	you	were—
A:		Objection!
A:		Strike	it.
Q:		Were	you	beaten	up	by	these	men	who	allegedly	raped	you?
A:		No,	but	they—
Q:		Yes,	if	you	can	tell	us	what	they	did	do,	without	 repeating	over	and	over
         again	that	they	raped	you,	I’m	sure	we’d	 all	love	to	hear	it.
A:		They	held	me	down.
Q:		I	see.
A:		And	 they	put	a	gag	in	my	mouth.
Q:		What	sort	of	gag?
A:		A	handkerchief.
Q:		I	see.	Do	you	watch	a	lot	of	movies,	Mrs.	 Leeds?
A:		Objection.
A:		Sustained.
Q:		What	else	did	they	do	to	you?
A:		They...threatened	me.
Q:		Oh?	In	what	language?
A:		At	 the	time,	I	didn’t	 know	what	language.	I	only	knew—
Q:		Oh?	You	mean	you	don’t	speak	Vietnamese	fluently?
A:		I	knew	 what	they	meant!
Q:		How	could	you	 possibly	have	known	what—
A:		I	knew.
	
   She	 knows	 that	 the	 one	with	  the	 new	mustache	 is	 giving	 them	 orders,
whispering	urgent	directions	to	 the	other	two.	Tear	off	her	panties,	he	must	be
telling	 them,	 because	on	either	side	 of	 her	they	 grasp	the	 legholes	and	 rip
upward	toward	her	crotch,	leaving	 her	open	to	their	hands.	Another	command

87
and	she	is	 suddenly	 being	 lifted	 off	  the	ground	 and	 onto	 the	hood	 of	 the
automobile.	She	tries	to	 say	something	around	the	 filthy	 handkerchief	 in	her
mouth,	tries	to	 say	I’m	 a	respectable	married	woman,	please	don’t	 do	this	 to
me,	please,	but	the	leader,	the	one	with	the	mustache,	slaps	her	sharply	across
the	cheek	again,	and	then	whispers	something	to	the	other	two.
   “This	  was	Ho.	The	 one	giving	 the	orders	was	Ho.	 I	memorized	 his	face,	I
could	see	it	clearly	in	the	moonlight,	 he	was	the	leader.”
   They	 rip	  open	her	 blouse,	 the	little	  pearl	 buttons	 flying	  upward	 on	the
night,	 catching	little	  glints	 of	 moonlight	  as	they	 explode	and	 fall	 onto	 the
hood	of	the	 car,	rattling	 there,	rolling	 off.	 Two	 of	them	 grasp	her	thighs	and
yank	her	legs	apart.	Ho,	the	leader,	steps	between	her	open	legs,	she	hears	the
whisper	of	his	zipper	 in	the	dark.	The	other	two	 whisper	encouragement.	One
of	them	 laughs	softly,	 almost	 a	girlish	 giggle.	 The	 other	leans	into	 her	 and
kisses	her	on	the	breast.	Something	gleams	on	his	face,	she	realizes	all	at	once
that	he	has	a	glass	eye,	the	eye	is	catching	the	moonlight,	reflecting	it...
   “This	    was	 Ngo.	   The	  one	  with	   the	  glass	  eye.	  He	  was	  the	  one
who...who...hurt	me	the	most.	Later.	When	they...they...”
   One	after	the	other,	they	violate	 her.
   The	 Maserati,	 her	cherished	luxury	 automobile,	 becomes	a	bed	of	 torture
for	her,	she	will	 hate	this	car	for	 the	rest	of	her	life.	 The	hood	is	a	convenient
height	for	these	men.	Whichever	one	is	between	her	legs	forces	her	open	as	he
pumps	furiously	 into	her,	his	fingers	digging	 into	 her	thighs	until	 she	screams
silently	in	 pain	around	the	handkerchief	in	 her	mouth.	The	other	two	 hold	her
wrists	 pinned	to	 the	 hood	of	 the	 car	on	 either	 side	of	 her.	 With	 their	 free
hands,	they	brutally	  knead	her	 breasts;	she	will	  later	show	 the	emergency-
room	doctor	 the	angry	 bruises	their	 fingers	 have	left,	 especially	 around	the
nipples.	Her	black	panties	hang	in	 tatters,	both	stockings	are	torn	now,	one	of
them	undone	from	its	garters	and	falling	to	her	knee.
   When	 the	last	of	them	is	finished	with	 her...
   “Dang	 Van	 Con,	the	youngest	one.	Eighteen,	 I	learned	later,	when	 he	was
arrested,	when	they	caught	him	and	the	other	two.	 He	was	the	one	who...who
went	last	when	I	was...when	I	was	on	my	 back	and	they	were	hold...they	were
holding	 my	legs	 open.	And	 then,	when	 they...when	they	were	 finished	 with
me	that	way...they...they...”
   Ho	 is	giving	 orders	again.
   The	other	two	 roll	 her	over,	face	downward,	on	the	hood	of	the	car.
   She	screams	No.
   But	 they	will	 not	stop,	they	will	 not	stop.
   “For	  more	than	 two	 hours,	they...they	 did	what	 they	 wanted	to	 me,”	 she
said,	her	face	still	turned	away	from	 Matthew.	“At	 the	trial,	 they	tried	to	show
that	I	 was	out	 looking	 for	  trouble	and	 finally	  found	it—but	  not	 with	 those
three.	I	was	 mistaken,	the	rapists	were	 three	others.	Those	three	were	in	 the

88
kitchen.	They	couldn’t	 have	been	outside	raping	me,	I	was	mistaken.”
   She	turned	to	him	 at	last.
   There	were	tears	in	her	eyes.
   “But	  no,”	 she	said,	“I	 was	not	mistaken.	They	 were	there.	And	 they	raped
me.”
   She	 had	repeated	those	words	 endlessly	at	 the	trial,	 they	 raped	me,	 they
raped	 me,	 they	  raped	 me—to	  no	 avail.	  Those	 words	  seemed	 to	 echo
accusingly	on	the	air	now,	they	raped	me...they	raped	me...they	raped	me.	The
pool	made	a	steady,	soothing	trickling	  sound,	and	in	 the	distant	clouds	there
was	the	 low	 hum	 of	  an	unseen	airplane.	 But	  the	words	 hung	 on	 the	 air,
seeming	to	smother	all	other	sound,	they	raped	me,	they	raped	me,	they	raped
me.
   “I	  still	  have	 nightmares	 about	 what	 happened,”	 she	said.	 “For	  months
afterward,	I’d	 take	two	sleeping	pills	before	I	 went	to	bed	each	night.	But	they
only	made	me	sleep,	they	didn’t	stop	the	nightmares.”
   She	turned	to	look	 out	over	the	pool	 again,	beyond	the	pool,	over	the	fields
stretching	to	 the	 horizon	 and	the	 yellow-gray	 sky.	 Her	 face	in	 profile	  was
magnificent,	 the	classic	 nose	and	jaw,	 the	 russet	hair	swept	 back	 from	 her
burnished	forehead	and	cheeks.
   “I	 wonder	 if	the	nightmares	will	 ever	go	away,”	 she	said.	“Now	that	they’re
dead,	will	the	nightmares	go	away?”
   “Mrs.	  Leeds,”	Matthew	 said,	“did	 you	 take	any	sleeping	pills	 on	 the	night
of	the	murders?”
   She	turned	to	him.
   “Did	  you?”
   “No,”	  she	said.
   “But	 there	are	sleeping	pills	 in	the	house.”
   “Yes.”
   “Prescription	 pills?”
   “Yes.”
   “Who	 prescribed	them?”
   “My	  doctor.	Dr.	Weinberger.	Marvin	Weinberger.”
   “Here	 in	Calusa?”
   “Yes.”
   “Is	 the	prescription	in	 your	name?”
   “Yes.”
   “Refillable?”
   “Yes.”
   “When’s	 the	last	time	you	refilled	 it?”
   “I	 don’t	 remember.”
   “Would	 you	 know	how	many	pills	 are	left	in	the	bottle?”
   “I	 really	 don’t	know.	 I	haven’t	taken	them	in	a	while.”

89
   “Would	 you	 say	it	was	half	full?	 Three-quar—”
   “Half,	  I	guess.”
   “And	  you’re	sure	you	didn’t	 take	any	on	the	night	of	the	murders?”
   “Positive.”
   Can	 you	say	for	certain	 that	your	husband	didn’t	 get	out	of	bed	at	any	time
that	night?
   Well,	I—
   Because	that’s	what	the	state	attorney’s	going	to	ask	you,	Mrs.	Leeds.
   I	 can’t	say	that	for	certain,	 no.
   “Mrs.	   Leeds...did	 your	 husband	 know	 there	 were	 sleeping	 pills	  in	 the
house?”
   “I...guess	 so.	Why?”
   “He	 told	 me	you’d	 both	had	an	after-dinner	 drink	 before	you	settled	down
to	watch	the	movie.	Do	you	remember	what	you	were	drinking?”
   “I	 had	a	cognac.	I	don’t	know	 what	he	had.”
   “And	  after	that,	you	watched	the	movie.”
   “Yes.”
   “And	  he	fell	asleep.”
   “Yes.”
   “And	  you	went	to	sleep	sometime	later.”
   “Yes.”
   “And	  slept	soundly	through	the	night.”
   “Yes.”
   I	 didn’t	hear	the	car	 starting.	I	would	 have—
   But	 you	were	sound	asleep.
   Well...yes.
   So	you	wouldn’t	 have	heard	the	car	starting.
   I	 guess	not.
   So	you	 really	can’t	 say	for	 sure	that	 your	husband	was	home	with	 you	all
night	long.
   Matthew	 was	wondering	if	 Bloom	 and	Rawles	had	seen	that	half-full	bottle
of	 sleeping	pills	 anywhere	 in	 the	 bedroom	on	 the	 morning	 they’d	 arrested
Leeds.	He	was	wondering,	 too,	if	 Patricia	 Demming	knew	 that	a	Dr.	 Marvin
Weinberger	somewhere	here	in	Calusa,	Florida,	 had	prescribed	sleeping	pills
for	 Jessica	Leeds,	and	that	 those	pills	  were	still	  floating	 around	 the	house
somewhere.	He	hoped	she	didn’t	know,	and	he	hoped	she	never	found	out.
   Because	 then	 she	might	  start	 thinking	 that	 the	 reason	 nightmare-prone
Jessica	Leeds	had	slept	the	whole	night	through	after	downing	an	after-dinner
drink	was	that	her	husband,	Stephen	Leeds—
   But	 Matthew	himself	 did	not	want	to	 start	thinking	that	way.

90
The	body-repair	 shop	was	called	 Croswell	 Auto,	 and	it	 was	in	 one	of	 those
industrial	parks	 that	blighted	 the	Calusa	landscape	east	of	US	41.	 Straddling
the	major	  east-west	arteries	 that	 connected	 the	 city	 to	 its	  suburbs,	these
conclaves	of	  commerce	 consisted	 more	 often	 than	 not	 of	  World	 War	 II
Quonset	 huts	 sitting	  cheek	 by	  jowl	  with	  long,	  low,	  peaked,	 tin-roofed
buildings	 that	gave	 each	busy	complex	 a	 further	 resemblance	to	a	 military
staging	area.
   In	 each	of	these	greenless	“parks”—Matthew	 found	 the	very	label	 onerous
—one	could	 find	 little	 unadorned	 spaces	specializing	in	 picture	 framing,	 or
television	 repair,	 or	 appliance	sales,	or	 pet	 boarding,	 or	 pool	 cleaning,	 or
plumbing	supplies,	 or	pest	control,	 or	marine	 engines,	or	roofing	 and	siding,
or	any	one	 of	a	 thousand	little	 enterprises	eking	 out	small	 existences	where
the	rents	were	low	and	the	maintenance	minimal.
   The	 owner	 of	Croswell	 Auto	 was	 a	man	named	Larry	  Croswell	 who	had
come	down	 from	  Pittsburgh,	 Pennsylvania,	long	  before	it	  was	ranked	 the
number-one	city	 in	America	 by	 Rand	McNally’s	  Places	Rated	Almanac.	 He
did	not	regret	the	move.	Florida	in	 general,	and	Calusa	in	particular,	suited	his
lifestyle	 right	down	 to	the	ground.	 Croswell	 was	a	fat	man	with	 a	sunburned
bald	pate,	 bright	 blue	 eyes,	white	  sideburns,	fringes	 of	 white	  hair	 curling
around	his	ears,	and	a	white	beard	stubble	on	his	Pillsbury	 Doughboy	 cheeks
and	chin.	He	was	wearing	either	a	gray	tank	top	undershirt	or	else	a	very	dirty
white	tank	 top	undershirt.	 He	was	also	 wearing	blue	 shorts	and	white	 socks
and	high-topped	workman’s	shoes,	and	he	was	holding	a	can	of	Coors	beer	in
the	stubby	fingers	of	his	right	 hand.	He	was	telling	Matthew	and	the	insurance
adjuster	just	how	much	it	 would	cost	to	repair	the	Acura.	 The	adjuster’s	name
was	Peter	 Kahn.	 He	 was	a	 thin,	 gray-haired	 man	 who	 moved	 among	 the
debris	of	 wrecked	 autos	like	  a	wading	 bird	 who’d	  mistakenly	 landed	 in	 a
metallic	marsh.	As	Croswell	 spoke,	Kahn	jotted	notes	onto	a	pad	attached	to	a
clipboard.
   “What	  we	got	here,”	 Croswell	 said,	“we	 got	a	whole	 new	quarter,	plus	 an
inner—”
   “What’s	 a	quarter?”	Matthew	 asked.
   “The	  quarter	panel	back	 here,”	Kahn	 explained.	“Where	  the	other	car	 hit
you.”	  He	 even	 moved	 his	  head	 like	  a	 bird,	  Matthew	 noticed,	  bobbing
whenever	he	spoke.
   “Plus	 the	inner	 panel,”	 Croswell	said,	 and	took	a	sip	 at	his	beer.	“Plus	 we
got	 to	 repair	 the	unibody	  where	 it’s	 bent,	 and	you’re	  gonna	 need	a	 new
taillight	 and	 bumper,	and	 a	new	 wheel—the	 wheel	 alone’s	gonna	 cost	you
three	hundred	bucks—plus	 new	 molding.	 She	done	 a	nice	 job	on	 you,	 this
lady.”
   Matthew	 nodded	sourly.
   “So	 what’s	your	estimate?”	Kahn	 asked.

91
   “You’re	  lucky	there	wasn’t	no	damage	to	the	trunk,”	 Croswell	said.
   “How	  much?”	Kahn	asked.
   “I’ve	  got	to	figure	 three	thousand,	including	the	frame	repair.”
   “Let’s	 make	it	 two	thousand,”	Kahn	said.
   “There’s	 other	body	shops,”	Croswell	 said.
   “Don’t	   sleep	me	all	 over	 town,	 Larry.	 Twenty-two	 five	  and	we’ve	 got	 a
deal.”
   “Twenty-five	  hundred	sounds	okay,”	Croswell	said.
   “You’ve	  got	it,”	 Kahn	said.
   “When	 will	 I	 have	my	car	back?”	Matthew	asked.
   “Two	 weeks,”	 Croswell	said.
   “Why	  so	long?”
   “Lots	 of	 labor	involved.	 Also,	we’re	 backed	up.”
   “Who	 pays	for	 the	rental?”	Matthew	asked	Kahn.
   “We	 do.	Just	send	us	the	receipts.”
   “Let	  me	 see	if	 I’ve	  got	 all	 the	 keys	I	 need,”	 Croswell	  said,	and	 began
moving	toward	the	office.
   “There’s	 only	 one	key,”	Matthew	 said.	“Do	 you	 pay	me	or	him?”	 he	asked
Kahn.
   “We’ll	  pay	him	directly,	 if	that’s	okay	 with	you.”
   “Fine.”
   The	 office	 was	 the	size	 of	 a	walk-in	  bedroom	 closet.	There	 was	a	 desk
behind	which	sat	an	attractive	woman	in	 her	early	forties,	brown	 hair	piled	on
top	of	 her	head,	pencil	 stuck	in	 it,	 one	long	 earring	dangling	 from	 her	right
ear.	She	was	sitting	behind	an	Apple	computer.	The	wall	behind	her	contained
a	hand-fashioned	calendar	with	huge	squares	for	each	date.	Into	each	square	a
name	was	lettered,	followed	by	 the	name	of	a	car	in	 parentheses.	Hanging	on
the	wall	alongside	the	 calendar	was	a	wooden	board	with	 cup	hooks	screwed
into	it.	 Car	keys	dangled	from	the	hooks,	each	key	labeled	with	 a	small	white
tag.	Croswell	 went	to	 the	board,	 found	a	key	 tagged	HOPE,	nodded,	and	then
said,	“You	sure	this	one	key	opens	the	trunk,	too?”
   “Positive,”	  Matthew	said.
   “’Cause	 we	may	have	to	get	in	there.”
   “The	 ignition	 key	opens	the	trunk	and	also	the	glove	compartment.”
   “Okay,	  if	  you	 say	 so,”	 Croswell	  said.	 “	  ’Cause	 I	 hate	 having	 to	 call
anybody	about	keys.	I	get	people	in	here,	they	have	two	cars,	they’ll	 leave	the
keys	to	the	wrong	car.	Or	else,	they’ll	call	 me	to	say	they	left	the	house	key	on
the	ring,	they	 can’t	get	in	 their	own	 house,	would	I	 please	stay	open	till	 they
got	here?	You	be	surprised	the	shit	I	have	to	go	through	with	keys.	When	did	I
say?”
   “Two	 weeks,”	 Kahn	said.
   “Mark	   that,	 willya,	  Marie?	 Hope,	 the	 Acura	  Legend,	two	  weeks	 from

92
today.	That’s	when?”
   Marie	  rose	from	  behind	 the	 desk	and	 behind	 the	computer.	 She	 was	a
compact	woman	 with	  a	tight,	 well-formed	  body.	 Kahn’s	 eyes	went	 to	 her
backside.	So	 did	 Matthew’s.	 Croswell	  was	spoiled;	 he	 sipped	 at	his	 beer.
Marie	ran	her	hand	down	the	calendar,	her	finger	stopping	on	the	Monday	two
weeks	from	today.	The	third	of	September.
   “You	 figuring	 on	Labor	Day?”	 she	asked.
   “What?”	  Croswell	said.
   “That’s	  Labor	Day,	 that	Monday,”	 Marie	 said.	“September	 third.	We’ll	  be
closed,	won’t	we?”
   “So	 make	it	the	Tuesday,”	Croswell	said.
   “What	 time?”	 Matthew	asked.
   “End	 of	the	day,”	Croswell	 said.	“Four,	five	 o’clock?”
   “Which?”
   “Five’d	  be	good,”	Croswell	 said.
   “Who’s	 driving	 the	rental?”	 a	voice	behind	them	said.
   Matthew	  turned	  to	 the	 door.	  A	 man	  in	 paint-spattered	 coveralls	  was
standing	just	outside	the	office,	one	hand	on	the	doorframe,	leaning	into	it.
   “The	 Ford?”	 Matthew	asked.
   “That’s	 the	one,”	 the	man	said.	“Could	you	 please	move	it,	I	gotta	get	a	car
out.”
   “Sure,”	 Matthew	 said.	“Are	 we	finished	here?”	he	asked	Kahn.
   “If	  you’ll	 just	sign	this	release,”	Kahn	said.
   Matthew	 read	the	paper	swiftly.	It	 granted	boilerplate	approval	of	 the	repair
work	 to	 be	 done	 on	 the	 car,	 and	permission	  to	 make	 direct	 payment	 to
Croswell	 Auto.	 The	man	 in	 the	coveralls	 waited	patiently	 in	 the	 doorframe
while	Matthew	 signed	and	dated	the	form,	 shook	hands	with	 Kahn,	 and	then
told	Croswell	he’d	 see	him	on	the	fourth.
   “Five	 o’clock,”	  Marie	said,	without	 looking	 up	from	her	keyboard.
   “Five	  o’clock,”	  Matthew	  said,	and	 followed	 the	 man	 out	to	 where	 he’d
parked	the	rented	 car.	A	 Mazda	 with	 a	bashed-in	 trunk	 was	parked	behind
him.	Matthew	got	 into	the	Ford,	started	it,	moved	it	forward	 until	 he	had	room
for	 a	turn,	 and	then	 drove	out	 of	 the	driveway	  and	out	 of	 the	park.	 As	 he
stopped	for	the	 traffic	 light	 on	US	 41,	some	seven	blocks	 away,	he	realized
that	he’d	 be	driving	  this	damn	 car	longer	 than	he’d	 hoped.	 Nothing	 wrong
with	that,	 he	supposed,	except	that	it	was	 a	rental.	Who’s	driving	 the	rental?
And	a	rental	wasn’t	 a	$30,000	smoky-blue	Acura	Legend	coupe	with	 genuine
leather	seats	and	a	sun	roof	and	a	zero-to-sixty-in-eight-seconds	capability.	He
had	planned	on	getting	away	for	 the	Labor	 Day	weekend,	maybe	drive	 down
to	Lake	 Okeechobee.	Now	he’d	 have	to	 make	the	 trip—if	 he	made	 it—in	 a
rented	Ford.	And	 probably	alone.	He	 did	not	 want	to	go	 on	another	vacation
alone.	He’d	been	to	Italy	alone.	Alone	 was	lonely.

93
   The	light	 changed.
   He	 made	his	left	turn	and	headed	home.



He	was	in	 bed	when	 the	telephone	rang	at	 eleven	that	night.	 He	recognized
the	voice	at	once;	the	only	Vietnamese	woman	he	knew	was	Mai	Chim	Lee.
   “Mr.	  Hope,”	she	said,	“I’m	 sorry	to	bother	you	so	late	at	night—”
   “Not	 at	all,”	 he	said.
   “Thank	 you,”	 she	said.	“I	 know	 you	are	anxious,	however,	 to	talk	to	 Trinh
Mang	Duc,	and—”
   “Is	 he	back?”
   “Yes,	 this	is	why	I	 am	calling.	A	woman	I	 know	in	 the	community—”
   He	 realized	she	was	referring	to	Little	Asia.
   “—telephoned	  just	 now	 to	 say	he	is	 home	 from	 Orlando.	 Shall	 I	 try	 to
arrange	an	interview	for	sometime	tomorrow?”
   “Please,”	 Matthew	said.
   “All	  right,	 then,	I	 will.	  And	excuse	me,	again,	for	 calling	 so	late.	I	 hope	I
didn’t	wake	you	 up.”
   “No,	 no.”
   “Well,	  good	 then,	I’ll	  talk	  to	you	 tomorrow.	 Good	 night,”	  she	said,	and
hung	up.

94
                                                                                                                         6


“THIS	WAS	a	little	past	midnight,”	 Trinh	 Mang	 Duc	 said.	“I	  could	 not	sleep
because	I	was	so	worried	about	 my	son	in	 Orlando,	why	 he	had	not	 sent	for
me	as	he’d	promised.”
   He	 was	speaking	 in	 the	tongue	of	 his	 Vietnamese	village,	 a	local	 dialect
that	had	given	Mai	 Chim	 difficulty	  at	first,	 but	which	 she	had	finally	 got	 the
hang	of.	This	was	eleven	o’clock	 on	Tuesday	morning	and	Trinh	 was	packing
all	of	 his	 worldly	 possessions	for	the	 final	 move	 to	Orlando,	 where	his	 son
and	daughter-in-law	 were	 opening	a	 takee-outee	Vietnamese	restaurant.	He
would	 not	be	 moving	 till	 later	 this	week,	 but	 he	was	taking	 no	 chances	on
being	left	 behind;	he	would	 be	packed	and	ready	whenever	the	car	 was.	The
same	nephew	who	had	driven	him	up	there	and	back	would	be	driving	 him	up
there	again.
   Trinh	 looked	 like	 any	one	of	 the	old	men	 you	saw	on	television	 while	 the
Vietnam	 War	 was	 raging,	  squatting	 outside	 a	 thatched	 hut,	 pained	 eyes
squinting	 into	 the	camera,	except	 that	 he	wasn’t	 wearing	 the	typical	  black
cotton	shorts	and	shirt	 and	the	conical	 straw	hat.	He	was,	 instead,	wearing	a
striped	short-sleeved	sports	shirt,	khaki	 trousers,	and	sandals.	But	he	had	the
same	narrow	weather-lined	face	with	the	high	 cheekbones	and	brownish	skin,
the	same	 dark	 eyes	 with	 the	 Mongolian	  single	  fold	 of	  eyelid,	 the	 same
straggly	 white	 beard.	 Bustling	  about	 from	 cardboard	 carton	 to	 cardboard
carton,	putting	into	 each	his	clothing	and	the	few	precious	possessions	he	had
carried	halfway	 across	the	world,	 he	talked	about	what	 had	happened	on	the
night	of	the	murders.
   Last	 Monday	night.
   The	thirteenth	 of	August.
   He	 had	not	been	able	to	sleep	because	his	son	and	daughter-in-law	had	left
for	Orlando	 the	week	 before,	to	 find	 suitable	lodgings	 for	 the	entire	 family,
and	they	had	promised	to	send	for	him	 immediately,	but	 he	had	not	yet	heard
from	them,	and	he	was	worried	that	they	had	abandoned	him.
   Trinh	 was	sixty-eight	 years	old.
   In	 Vietnamese	tradition,	 this	was	a	time	 of	life	 to	 be	spent	with	one’s	 own
family;	 a	time	of	 peace,	introspection,	and	preparation;	a	time	to	be	passed	in
visiting	 or	 receiving	  friends;	 a	 time	 to	 choose	 an	expert	 geomancer	 who
would	advise	upon	the	exact	location	of	 one’s	tomb	and	the	purchase	of	one’s
coffin.
   But	 this	was	America.

95
   And	 Trinh	 had	heard	that	in	 this	country,	 the	elderly	were	 often	left	 to	die
alone,	or	 else	 were	 transported	to	 homes	 where	people	 other	 than	 family
would	reluctantly	 tend	to	 their	needs.	So	who	 could	say	that	 his	son	had	not
wearied	of	supporting	an	old	man	who	could	 contribute	nothing	 but	legendary
tales	to	the	family’s	 wealth?	Who	could	say	that	the	move	to	Orlando	 was	not
merely	a	ruse	to	rid	themselves	of	him?	So,	yes,	he’d	 been	extremely	worried
on	that	night	a	week	ago—
   Mai	 Chim	 said	something	to	him	in	 Vietnamese,	apparently	correcting	him,
because	he	nodded	at	once,	and	said,	“Yes,	eight	 days	ago,	that	 is	so.	I	 was
worried,	as	I	told	you—”
   —because	it	had	been	a	while	now	 since	his	son	left	for	 Orlando,	and	there
are	people	here	 in	 the	community	  who	 have	telephones	 (although	 there	is
none	in	this	house),	and	they	are	willing	  to	take	messages,	so	why	has	he	not
called	to	say	they	are	having	difficulty	 finding	 a	suitable	home,	or	else	there	is
some	problem	 with	 acquiring	 the	restaurant,	or	 whatever	 the	circumstances
may	be?	Why	leave	an	old	man	here	to	worry	and	wonder?
   He	 thinks	he	hears	a	scream.
   He	 thinks	it	is	perhaps	the	scream	that	awakens	him.
   But	 perhaps	not.	 He	has	been	tossing	 and	turning	 ever	since	ten	 o’clock,
when	he	 went	 to	 bed.	 Perhaps	it	 is	 only	 his	 own	 restlessness	that	at	 last
nudges	him	awake	to	the	sounds	of	the	night.	 A	faraway	 train	whistle.	 A	 dog
barking.	A	scream?
   In	 the	darkness,	he	looks	 at	the	luminous	 dial	of	 his	wristwatch,	 which	 he
purchased	at	the	US	Army	PX	 in	Honolulu	 before	beginning	his	 long	journey
to	the	mainland,	a	journey	that	has	taken	him	to	four	 states	and	seven	cities,	a
journey	that	may	 yet	end	in	 prosperity	in	 Orlando,	 Florida,	the	 second	home
of	Mickey	 Mouse.
   His	 watch	reads	ten	minutes	past	midnight.
   The	night	 is	sticky	and	hot.
   His	 sheets	are	soggy	with	the	moisture	of	the	night	and	the	dampness	of	his
own	anxiety.	He	 throws	back	 the	top	one	and	 then	swings	his	thin	 legs	over
the	side	of	 the	narrow	bed,	 goes	to	the	door	of	 the	house,	peers	out	through
the	screen	door,	and	sees—
   A	 man.
   Running.
   “Through	  the	screen?”	Matthew	 asked.	“Did	  he	see	this	 man	through	the
screen?”
   Mai	 Chim	 asked	the	question	in	Vietnamese.	Trinh	answered.
   “Yes,”	 Mai	 Chim	said.	“Through	 the	screen.”
   Then	it’s	 possible	his	view	was	distorted,	Matthew	 thought.
   “I	  could	see	him	 sharply	in	 the	moonlight,”	  Mai	 Chim	said,	translating	 as
Trinh	spoke	again.	“He	was	wearing—”

96
   —a	 yellow	cap	and	a	yellow	 jacket.
   A	 tall,	broad	man.
   Running	 toward	the	curb.
   There	 was	an	 automobile	parked	 at	the	 curb.	The	 man	ran	around	 to	 the
driver’s	side	of	the	car,	opened	the	door—
   “Did	  he	see	the	man’s	face?”	Matthew	asked.
   Mai	 Chim	 translated	this,	and	then	listened	to	Trinh	again.
   “Yes,”	 she	said.	“A	white	 man.”
   “Was	 it	Stephen	Leeds?”
   She	 translated	this	into	 Vietnamese,	listened	 to	Trinh’s	 answer,	and	fed	 it
back	to	Matthew	in	English.
   “Yes,	 it	was	Stephen	Leeds.”
   “How	  does	he	know	that?”
   Again	 she	translated,	and	again	she	listened.
   “He	 identified	 Leeds	in	a	lineup.”
   And	  now	 the	dialogue	 seemed	to	 flow	  back	and	 forth	 between	 her	and
Matthew,	the	necessary	translations	forming	 only	 a	singsong	counterpoint	 to
the	main	theme—which	happened	to	be	this	matter	of	positive	identification.
   “How	  many	men	in	the	lineup?”
   “Seven	 altogether.”
   “All	  of	them	white?”
   “Three	 white,	three	black,	one	Asian.”
   Loaded,	Matthew	 thought.	Only	 two	other	whites	besides	Leeds.
   “They	 didn’t	 have	him	wearing	that	yellow	 jacket	and	hat,	did	they?”
   “No.	 All	 of	 the	men	were	wearing	jailhouse	clothing.”
   Then	the	lineup	 had	to	have	taken	place	between	Leeds’s	arrest	on	Tuesday,
August	 fourteenth,	  and	 Trinh’s	  departure	 for	  Orlando	 on	  Thursday,	 the
sixteenth.	Matthew	himself	 had	read	about	the	witnesses	in	Friday	 morning’s
Herald-Tribune.
   “When	 did	this	 lineup	take	place?”	he	asked.
   “The	 day	before	I	left	 for	Orlando.	A	 Wednesday.”
   “The	 fifteenth.”
   “Yes,	 I	think	 that	was	the	date.”
   “Prior	  to	that	time,	 had	you	 seen	any	pictures	of	Leeds	in	 the	newspaper?
Or	on	television?”
   “No.”
   “Do	 you	watch	 television?”
   “Yes.	  But	 I	 did	 not	 see	any	 pictures	 of	 the	 white	  man	who	 killed	  my
countrymen.”
   “How	  do	you	know	Leeds	killed	 them?”
   “It	 is	 said	he	killed	them.”
   “Said	 by	whom?”

97
   “Said	 in	the	community.”
   “Said	 in	the	community	 that	a	white	 man	named	Stephen	Leeds	killed	your
countrymen?”
   “Yes.”
   “But	 is	it	 said	in	the	community	 that	the	white	man	you	identified	 is	the	one
who	killed	 your	countrymen?”
   “Yes,	 this	is	also	said.”
   “Was	 this	said	before	you	made	identification?”
   “I	 do	not	understand	the	meaning	of	your	question.”
   “I’m	  asking	if	 prior	to	 the	lineup	you	discussed	Stephen	Leeds	with	anyone
who	may	have	seen	pictures	of	him	in	the	newspaper	or	on	television?”
   “I	 discussed	the	murders,	yes.”
   “With	  anyone	who’d	seen	a	picture	of	Leeds?”
   “Possibly.”
   “And	  was	he	described	to	you?	Did	anyone	tell	you	what	he	looked	like?”
   “No,	 I	 don’t	think	 so.”
   “Do	 you	know	 a	man	named	Tran	Sum	Linh?”
   “I	 do.”
   “Prior	 to	 the	lineup,	had	you	discussed	the	murders	with	Tran	Sum	Linh?”
   “I	 may	have.”
   “Did	  he	tell	you	 he’d	seen	a	man	wearing	a	yellow	 hat	and	jacket	 entering
the	house	where	the	three	murder	victims	lived?”
   “No,	 he	did	not.”
   “Before	 the	lineup,	 then,	no	one	had	described	Stephen	Leeds	to	you,	from
pictures	they’d	seen	in	the	paper	or	on	television—”
   “No	 one.”
   “And	  Tran	Sum	Linh	 did	not	 mention	that	he’d	 seen	a	man	in	a	yellow	hat
and	jacket	earlier	that	night?”
   “He	 did	not.”
   “So	 the	first	time	 you	saw	this	man	was	at	ten	minutes	past	twelve—”
   “Yes.”
   “On	  the	  night	 of	  August	  thir—well,	  actually	  the	 morning	  of	  August
fourteenth,	is	that	right?”
   “Yes.”
   “Running	 to	the	curb,	where	an	automobile	was	parked.”
   “Yes.”
   “Running	 from	 where?”
   “From	  the	house	where	my	 three	countrymen	 lived.	 My	 countrymen	 who
were	murdered.”
   “You	 actually	 saw	this	man	coming	out	of	their	house?”
   “No.	 But	 he	was	coming	from	the	direction	 of	their	house.”
   “I	 see.	And	running	to	 this	automobile.”

98
   “Yes.”
   “What	 kind	 of	automobile?”
   “I	 am	not	familiar	 with	 American	 cars.”
   “Are	 you	 familiar	 with	Italian	 cars?”
   “No.	 Not	 those,	either.”
   “What	 color	 was	this	car?”
   “Dark	 blue.	Or	 green.	It	was	difficult	 to	tell	 in	the	dark.”
   “But	 there	was	a	moon.”
   “Yes,	 but	the	car	was	parked	under	a	tree.”
   “So	 it	was	either	a	dark	blue	car	or	a	green	car.”
   “Yes.”
   “Not	 a	red	car.”
   “It	 was	not	a	red	car.”
   “Was	 it	a	sports	car?”
   “I	 do	not	know	 what	a	sports	car	is.”
   Mai	   Chim	 translated	  this	 to	  Matthew	  and	 then	 went	  into	  a	 lengthy
dissertation	in	  Vietnamese,	presumably	 explaining	  what	 a	sports	 car	 was.
Trinh	listened	 intently,	 nodding	in	 understanding,	and	finally	  said,	“No,	  this
was	not	a	sports	car.	It	was	just	an	ordinary	car.”
   “Two-door	  or	four?”
   “I	 did	 not	notice.”
   “But	 you	 did	notice	Stephen	Leeds’s	face.”
   “Yes.	 I	am	better	with	faces	than	with	cars.”
   “What	 else	did	you	notice?”	 Matthew	asked.
   Trinh	 answered	the	question	in	Vietnamese.
   Mai	 Chim	 nodded.	Her	face	was	noncommittal.
   “What?”	  Matthew	said.
   “He	 noticed	the	license-plate	number,”	she	said.



They	were	lunching	at	Kickers.	 Sitting	 on	the	deck	outdoors,	under	one	of	the
big	green	umbrellas.	Patricia	 Demming	 and	her	investigator,	 Frank	Bannion.
Bannion	was	thinking	 they	made	a	nice	couple.	He	was	wondering	 if	 she	had
a	boyfriend	 or	anything.	 He	was	 feeling	very	 attractive	 after	last	 night.	Last
night,	he	 had	taken	 Sherry	Reynolds	 to	bed.	 He	always	 felt	 attractive	 after
he’d	scored.	Made	him	 feel	he	was	devastating.	Especially	if	 the	woman	was
on	the	youngish	side.
   Sherry	 had	told	him	 in	 strictest	confidence	that	she	had	just	celebrated	her
thirtieth	 birthday	 two	 weeks	ago.	 This	was	 while	 she	was	 blowing	 him.	 In
order	to	 prove	that	 older	women	 knew	 how	to	 do	certain	 things	 better	than
teenage	girls.	To	Bannion,	thirty	 was	young.	 He	told	 her	so.	He	also	told	 her
that	he	 was	forty-two	  years	 old	 and	still	  had	his	 own	 hair	 and	 teeth.	She

99
seemed	to	find	this	quite	impressive.
   Today	was	Sherry’s	day	off.
   She	 had	told	 him	 last	 night	 that	 she	had	all	 day	 off	 tomorrow	 and	 they
could	do	whatever	they	 wanted	all	night	 long	or	even	all	 day	tomorrow	 since
she	didn’t	  have	 to	  be	 back	 at	 work	  till	  ten-thirty	  Wednesday	 morning.
Bannion	told	her	he	had	to	be	back	at	work	 at	nine	tomorrow,	 but	they’d	 give
it	their	 best	shot	anyway.	It	 was	now	 twelve-thirty	  tomorrow,	 actually	today
already,	actually	Tuesday	already,	and	here	he	was	at	a	table	overlooking	 the
water,	sitting	with	 a	very	 good-looking	 blonde	who	 happened	to	be	his	boss,
but	about	 whom	 he	 was	 nonetheless	entertaining	 libidinous	 thoughts.	 The
weather	down	here	did	that	to	you.	 Down	 here	in	this	sticky	 heat,	it	was	very
easy	to	get	horny	and	to	feel	devastating.
   “This	 is	where	the	boat	pulled	in,”	 he	said.
   “What	 time?”	 she	asked.
   “About	  a	quarter	to	eleven.”
   “Which	  would’ve	 been	about	right,	wouldn’t	 it?”	Patricia	 said.
   “Coming	  out	of	 Willowbee	 at	ten-thirty,	 sure,	Leeds	could’ve	made	it	 here
easy	in	fifteen	minutes.”
   “Did	  she	actually	see	it	coming	down	the	channel?”
   “Yep.	 And	 she	knows	 the	water.	 She	didn’t	 see	it	 coming	 off	 marker	72,
that’s	too	far	north.	But	she	picked	it	up	on	its	 approach	to	the	dock	here.”
   “Saw	 it	from	 where?”
   “The	 bar	there.	Clear	shot	of	the	channel.”
   Patricia	 looked.
   “Okay,”	  she	said.	“Did	she	describe	the	boat?”
   “Down	  to	the	cleats.”
   “Saw	 the	name	on	the	transom?”
   “No.	 He	pulled	 in	bow	first.”
   “Which	  slip?”
   “Second	 from	the	end.	On	your	right.”
   Patricia	 looked	again.
   “Still	  a	clear	shot	from	the	bar,”	Bannion	 said.	“And	even	though	she	didn’t
see	the	name...”
   “Felicity,”	   Patricia	said,	and	shook	her	head.
   “Sucks,	 don’t	 it?”	Bannion	 said,	taking	a	chance.	Nothing	crossed	her	face.
He	considered	that	 a	good	 sign.	“But	  even	if	 she	couldn’t	 see	it	 ’cause	the
transom	was	away	from	her,	she	knows	boats,	all	 kinds	of	 boats,	and	she	can
describe	this	one	in	court.	Better	yet,	she	can	describe	him.”
   “Leeds?”
   “Maybe,	  I	don’t	 know,	 we’ll	  have	to	run	 a	lineup	 for	 her.	But	 certainly	 a
guy	in	a	yellow	 jacket	and	hat.”
   “Driving	  the	boat?”

100
   “Driving	  it,	 tying	it	 up,	going	up	the	steps	on	the	side	of	the	dock	there,	and
walking	straight	into	 the	parking	lot.”
   “This	 was	at	what	time?”
   “Let’s	 say	ten	to	eleven.”
   “That	 checks	out.	When	did	she	lose	him?”
   “When	 he	got	in	the	car	and	drove	off.”
   “What	 kind	 of	car?”	Patricia	asked,	leaning	forward	 intently.
   “A	 green	Oldsmobile	 Cutlass	Supreme.”
   “And	  the	license	plate?”
   “She	 couldn’t	see	it	from	 the	bar.”
   “Shit,”	  Patricia	said.
   Which	 Bannion	found	 not	only	exciting	 but	also	terribly	 promising.
   “Shall	 we	order?”	 he	asked,	and	smiled	his	most	devastating	smile.



“There’s	yet	another	way	to	look	 at	this,”	Mai	 Chim	said.
   She	 and	 Matthew	  were	 sitting	 in	  a	 restaurant	some	 seven	miles	  from
Kickers,	where	Bannion	 had	just	identified	 the	make	of	 the	automobile	Trinh
Mang	Duc	 had	been	able	to	describe	only	 as	an	ordinary	 dark	blue	 or	green
car.	But	 Trinh	 had	 seen	the	license	 plate.	A	 Florida	  plate,	he’d	 said.	 Very
definitely	 a	Florida	plate.	And	 Matthew	 had	written	down	 the	number	on	that
plate.	2AB	 39C.	Find	the	 car,	he	was	thinking,	 and	we’ve	got	 the	man	in	the
yellow	jacket	and	hat.
   “Another	  way	of	looking	 at	what?”	he	asked.
   He’d	 been	surprised	and	pleased	when	she’d	accepted	his	lunch	invitation,
and	he	was	satisfied	now	to	see	her	enjoying	the	meal	 so	much.	He’d	frankly
wondered	whether	Italian	 cooking	would	 appeal	to	a	woman	who’d	 spent	the
first	 fifteen	  years	of	 her	 life	  in	 Saigon.	 But	 she	 ate	as	 if	 famished,	 first
demolishing	 the	 linguine	  al	 pesto,	 and	 now	 working	  actively—and	  with
seemingly	dedicated	intensity—on	the	veal	piccata.
   “The	 murder,”	 she	said.	“The	rape.	Whether	or	not	they’re	linked.”
   “Do	 you	think	 they’re	 linked?”
   “Not	  necessarily.	I	 think	 those	men	raped	her,	yes,	but	 that	doesn’t	 mean
—”
   “You	 do?”
   “Oh,	  yes.	Mind	 you,	the	 Vietnamese	immigrants	 in	this	 city	 would	 prefer
having	it	the	other	way	 round.	They	were	very	pleased	when	the	verdict	came
in.	 Not	 guilty	  was	 what	  they’d	 been	 praying	  for.	 There	 is	 not	 a	 single
Buddhist	temple	in	 all	 of	Calusa,	did	 you	know	 that?	It	makes	it	 difficult	  for
many	Asians	coming	here.”
   “Are	 you	 Buddhist?”	Matthew	 asked.
   “Catholic,”	   she	said,	 shaking	 her	 head.	“But	  many	 of	 my	 friends	 were

101
Buddhist	when	I	was	growing	 up.	What	are	you?”
   “Nothing	  right	now.”
   “What	 were	you?”
   “Whitebread	 Episcopalian.”
   “Is	 that	good?”
   “I	  guess	if	you’re	going	 to	be	anything	 in	America,	 it’s	best	to	be	a	WASP,
yes.”
   “What’s	 that?”
   “WASP?	 White	Anglo-Saxon	 Protestant.”
   “Is	 Episco—could	 you	say	it	again	for	me,	please?”
   “Episcopalian.”
   “Episcopalian,	  yes,”	she	said,	 and	then	tried	 it	 again,	rolling	 the	 word	 on
her	Asian	tongue.	“Episcopalian.	Is	that	a	form	 of	Protestant?”
   “Yes,”	 Matthew	 said.
   “And	  is	Whitebread	a	form	of	Episcopalian?”
   “No,	  no,”	  he	said,	 smiling,	 “Whitebread	  is...well...WASP,”	  he	said,	 and
shrugged.	“They’re	synonymous.”
   “Ah,”	  she	said.
   “Yes,”	 he	said.
   “Then	 Whitebread	Episcopalian	is	redundant,”	 she	said.
   “Well,	 yes.”
   “I	  like	 that	word.	 It’s	 one	of	my	 favorite	 English	 words.	Redundant.	How
old	are	you?”	she	asked	abruptly.
   “Thirty-eight,”	   he	said.
   “Are	 you	 married?”
   “No.	 Divorced.”
   “Do	 you	have	any	children?”
   “One.	 A	daughter.	She’s	up	in	Cape	Cod	this	summer.	With	her	mother.”
   “What’s	 her	name?”
   “Joanna.”
   “How	  old	is	she?”
   “Fourteen.”
   “Then	 you	were	married	very	 young.”
   “Yes.”
   “And	  is	she	quite	beautiful?”
   “Yes.	 But	all	fathers	think	 their	daughters	are	quite	beautiful.”
   “I’m	  not	sure	my	father	felt	 that	way	about	me.”
   “He	 got	you	on	that	helicopter.”
   “Yes,	 he	did,”	she	said.
   “And	  you	are,”	Matthew	said.	“Quite	 beautiful.”
   “Thank	 you,”	 she	said,	and	fell	silent.
   He	 wondered	if	she	knew	this.	How	 very	beautiful	 she	was.	Or	had	she	lost

102
all	sense	of	self	during	those	war-torn	 years	in	Vietnam?	Or	in	 all	those	years
of	constant	move	and	 change	since	her	father	had	lifted	 her	into	 the	arms	of
that	black	  Marine	 sergeant?	Was	 there	 in	 Mary	 Lee	 the	 bookkeeper	 any
semblance	of	 the	 little	 Vietnamese	 girl	 Le	 Mai	  Chim	 once	had	 been?	He
wondered.
   “Who	   do	  you	 think	   killed	  them?”	  she	 asked,	 shifting	  ground	  quite
suddenly,	as	 if	  wanting	 to	 distance	 herself	 from	  whatever	 thoughts	 their
immediate	conversation	had	provoked.	 Her	eyes	shifted,	too.	Away	 from	 his.
Avoiding	 contact.	He	felt	 awkward	 all	at	once.	Had	 she	mistaken	his	sincere
compliment	for	 a	clumsy	pass?	He	hoped	not.
   “It’s	  not	my	job	to	 find	a	killer,”	  he	said.	“I	only	 have	to	show	that	my	man
didn’t	do	it.”
   “And	  do	you	believe	he	didn’t	do	it?”
   Matthew	 hesitated	for	only	 an	instant.
   “Yes,	 I	 do,”	 he	said,	but	at	the	 same	moment	Mai	 Chim	said,	 “You	 don’t,
do	you?”	so	that	their	words	overlapped.
   “Let’s	 say	I’m	 still	 looking	 for	evidence,”	he	said.	“To	support	my	 belief.”
   “Will	  the	license	plate	help?”
   “Maybe.”
   “Provided	 Trinh	 was	seeing	correctly.”
   “I	 have	no	reason	to	believe	he	wasn’t.	 Unless...are	your	numbers	the	same
as	ours?”
   “Oh,	  yes,	our	numbers	are	Arabic.	 And	 for	 the	most	 part,	our	 alphabet	is
the	same,	too.	 Give	 or	 take	 some	missing	 letters	 and	 a	million	  diacritical
marks.”
   “What’s	 a	diacritical	 mark?”	 Matthew	asked.
   She	looked	at	him.
   “I	 don’t	 know	what	it	 is,”	 he	said.
   “You	 could	have	bluffed,	 you	know,”	 she	said,	and	smiled.
   “Sure.	 But	then	I’d	 never	know.	What	is	it?”
   “It’s	  a	tiny	 little	 mark	that’s	added	to	a	letter	 to	give	it	 a	different	 phonetic
value.”
   “Ah-ha.”
   “Do	 you	understand?”
   “Yes.	 Like	the	cedilla	 in	French	or	the	umlaut	in	German.”
   “I	 don’t	 know	what	those	are.”
   “You	 could	have	bluffed,	 you	know,”	 he	said.
   “Yes,	 but	what	are	they?”
   “Diacritical	  marks,”	 Matthew	said.
   “Okay.”
   “I	 think,”	  he	said,	and	smiled.
   He	 liked	the	way	she	said	okay.	She	made	it	sound	foreign	somehow.	Okay.

103
This	most	American	of	 words.
   “The	  Vietnamese	language	is	 very	difficult	   for	 a	foreigner	 to	 learn,”	 she
said.	“This	was	one	trouble	when	the	American	 soldiers	were	there.	It	is	 not	a
language	you	can	easily	 pick	 up.	And	 where	there	 is	no	 common	language,
there	is	suspicion.	And	mistakes.	Many	mistakes.	On	both	sides.”
   She	shook	her	head.
   “This	  is	why	 the	Vietnamese	here	were	so	happy	with	 the	verdict.	 If	 these
men	were	not	guilty,	then	there	would	 be	less	suspicion	of	the	foreigners,	less
abuse.”
   “Is	 there?	Abuse?”
   “Oh	 yes.	Sure.”
   “Of	 what	 sort?”
   “Everyone	   in	  America	  forgets	  that	  everyone	 here	  once	 came	  from
someplace	else.	Except	the	Indians.	Maybe	they	were	here	to	begin	with.	 The
rest	came	from	all	over	the	world.	 But	they	forget	 this.	So	if	ever	an	argument
starts	between	an	American	and	someone	who	is	new	here,	the	first	 thing	the
American	says	is,	‘Go	back	where	you	came	from.’	Isn’t	 this	so?”
   “Yes,”	 Matthew	 said.
   Go	 back	where	you	came	from.
   He	 wished	he	had	a	nickel	for	 every	time	 he’d	heard	those	words	tumbling
from	the	lips	of	 a	so-called	native	American.
   Go	 back	where	you	came	from.
   “Which	  is	what	I	meant	earlier,”	Mai	 Chim	 said.
   “About	  what?”
   “About	  another	way	of	looking	 at	this,”	she	said.
   “And	  what’s	that?”
   “That	 the	rape	and	the	murder	are	totally	unrelated.”
   “That’s	 what	our	approach	has	been,	actually.”
   “Then	  you	 believe	  as	I	  do,”	 she	 said.	 “That	 someone	 was	 telling	  the
Vietnamese	in	Calusa	to	go	back	where	they	came	from.”
   He	 looked	at	her.
   “This	 is	the	South,	you	know,”	 she	said.
   He	 kept	looking	at	her.
   “Where	 I	understand	crosses	are	sometimes	burned	on	lawns.”



It	 took	the	 jailer	 ten	minutes	 to	 get	Stephen	Leeds	to	 the	 telephone.	When
finally	 he	picked	up	the	receiver,	he	sounded	cranky	and	irritable.
   “I	 was	napping,”	 he	said.
   Matthew	 looked	 at	his	watch.	Three-twenty.	 He	had	left	 Mai	 Chim	at	two-
thirty,	 and	then	had	 driven	 home	to	 pick	 up	his	 Sony	tape	 recorder.	It	 was
sitting	on	his	desk	now.

104
   “I’m	  sorry	I	woke	you,”	he	said,	“but	there	are	a	few	more	questions	I’d
like	to	ask.”
   “Have	you	 been	reading	the	papers?”	Leeds	said.	“They’ve	already	tried
and	convicted	me.”
   “That	may	work	in	our	favor,”	Matthew	said.
   “I	 don’t	see	how.”
   “Change	of	venue,”	he	said.
   “Meanwhile,	everyone	in	this	town	thinks	I’m	a	murderer.”
   “That’s	 exactly	what	I	mean.	How	can	you	pick	a	jury	 when	everyone’s
already	made	up	his	mind?”
   “Yeah,	well,”	Leeds	said	dubiously.
   “Mr.	 Leeds,	I	 want	 to	check	some	things	you	 told	 me.	If	 I	 remember
correctly,	your	own	car	is	a	Cadillac,	is	that	right?”
   “That’s	right.	A	Cadillac	Seville.”
   “What	color	is	it?”
   “It’s	 got	a	black	top	and	silver	sides.”
   “Could	the	color	be	mistaken	for	a	dark	blue?	Or	a	green?”
   “I	 don’t	see	how.”
   “At	 night,	I	mean.”
   “Even	so.	The	silver	is...well,	it’s	silver,	it’s	metallic.	Dark	blue	or	green?
No.	Definitely	not.”
   “What’s	the	license-plate	number,	do	you	know?”
   “I’m	 not	sure.	W	something.	WR...I	don’t	remember.	I	always	have	to	look
at	this	little	tag	I	have	on	my	key	ring.”
   “Would	the	number	be	2AB	39C?”
   “No.	 Definitely	 not.	It	starts	with	a	W,	I’m	 sure	of	that.	And	 I	think	 the
second	letter	is	R.	WR	something.”
   “Not	 2AB...”
   “No.”
   “...39C?”
   “No.	Why?”
   “One	of	the	witnesses	says	he	saw	you	getting	into	a	car	with	that	license
plate.”
   “When?	Where?”
   “Outside	Little	Asia.	At	a	little	past	midnight	on	the	night	of	the	murders.”
   “Good,”	Leeds	said.
   “I	 gather	it	wasn’t	you.”
   “Damn	right,	it	wasn’t.	Do	you	know	what	this	means?”
   “Yes,	of	course,”	Matthew	said.
   “If	 we	can	track	down	that	car,	we’ve	got	whoever	killed	them!	Jesus,	this
is	the	first	good	news	we’ve	had	on	this	case!	I	can’t	wait	to	tell	Jessie.	The
minute	you	hang	up,	I’m	going	to	call	her.”

105
   “I’ll	  let	you	know	what	we	come	up	with.	Meanwhile,	I	want	you	to	repeat
something	after	me.”
   “Huh?”	Leeds	said.
   “First	 listen	to	 all	 of	it,	 and	then	repeat	it	 when	I	 give	you	 the	signal,
okay?”
   “Sure,”	Leeds	said,	but	he	sounded	puzzled.
   “Hello,”	 Matthew	said,	“this	is	Stephen	Leeds.	I’ll	be...”



In	Calusa,	Florida,	you	paid	for	your	license	plate	in	the	tax	collector’s	office,
either	by	mail	or	in	person.	And,	similarly,	you	either	picked	up	the	plate	or
else	it	was	mailed	to	you.	The	tax	collector’s	office	was	on	the	second	floor	of
the	new	courthouse	building,	adjacent	to	the	Public	Safety	Building	and	the
city	 jail.	 At	 four	 o’clock	 that	Tuesday	afternoon,	Warren	Chambers	was
telling	Fiona	 Gill—whose	 official	 title	 was	Supervisor	of	 Motor	 Vehicle
Taxation—that	his	boss	was	looking	for	an	owner	identification	on	a	license-
plate	number	in	his	possession.
   “Who	are	you	working	for	these	days?”	Fiona	asked.
   She	was	an	extremely	good-looking	black	woman,	her	eyes	the	color	of
anthracite,	her	skin	the	color	of	mocha,	her	lips	painted	with	a	ruby-red	gloss
that	caused	them	to	shine	wetly	and	invitingly	here	in	the	dim	drabness	of	this
unusually	grim	government	office.	She	was	wearing	a	bright	yellow	dress	that
Warren	guessed	was	linen,	buttoned	up	the	front	to	the	third	button	down,
gold	loop	earrings,	a	gold	chain	hanging	around	her	neck,	the	letter	F	nestling
in	the	clefted	shadow	of	her	breasts,	partially	revealed	in	the	open	V	of	the
dress.	Warren	thought	she	was	an	altogether	fine	piece	of	work.	He	wondered
if	she	thought	he	was	too	young	for	her.	Many	women	her	age—he	guessed
she	was	forty-two	or	thereabouts—found	men	his	age	immature.
   “Summerville	and	Hope,”	he	said.	“Do	you	know	them?”
   “No,”	 she	said.	“Should	I?”
   “Not	 unless	you’ve	been	in	trouble	lately,”	he	said,	and	smiled.
   Fiona	took	this	as	innuendo,	which	it	was.
   She	had	worked	with	Warren	Chambers	before	and	had	found	him	lacking
in	only	one	quality:	age.	Fiona	was	forty-six	years	old,	and	she	guessed	that
Warren	was	in	his	mid-to-late	thirties.	But	other	than	his	callow	youthfulness,
she	could	find	no	fault	with	him.	Except	perhaps	his	new	haircut,	which	made
him	look	even	younger	than	she	suspected	he	was.	But	now—innuendo.	Well,
well,	well.
   “Not	 the	kind	 of	trouble	requiring	a	lawyer,”	 she	said.	“Or	a	real	estate
agent,	if	that’s	what	they	are.”
   “No,	you	were	right	the	first	time.”
   “Last	time	I	needed	a	lawyer	was	when	I	got	my	divorce,”	Fiona	said.

106
   Warren	considered	this	unsolicited	 and	welcome	information.
   “How	  long	ago	was	that?”	he	asked.
   “Fourteen	 years,”	she	said.
   “And	  now	you’re	happily	 married	again,”	he	said.
   Which	 Fiona	considered	a	fishing	expedition.
   Which	 it	 was.
   “Nope,”	  she	said.	“I’m	  happily	  playing	 the	field.	 Though,	 to	tell	 you	 the
truth,	Warren—”
   This	 was	the	first	time	she’d	ever	used	his	given	name.
   “—all	  the	available	men	in	Calusa	are	either	married	or	gay.”
   “Not	 me,”	 Warren	said.
   Fiona	 arched	an	eyebrow.
   “Good-looking	   fella	 like	  you	 must	 be	involved,	  though,”	 she	 said,	 and
decided	to	lay	her	cards	on	the	table.	“With	a	woman	more	your	own	age.”
   “I’ll	   tell	 you	the	 truth,	Fiona,”	 he	said,	 using	her	given	 name	for	 the	first
time.	“I	 find	most	women	my	 age	a	bit	adolescent.”
   “You	 do,	huh?”
   Eyes	meeting.
   “I	 prefer	more	mature	women,”	 he	said.
   “Indeed,”	 she	said.
   “Indeed,”	 he	said.
   Both	 of	 them	nodding.	Slow	 nods	in	the	afternoon	stillness.	 Somewhere	in
the	dim	 recesses	of	 the	 room,	 a	typewriter	  began	clacking.	  And	 then	 fell
abruptly	silent	again.	Warren	was	wondering	whether	he’d	get	shot	down	if	 he
asked	her	 out	 to	 dinner.	 She	was	 wondering	 whether	 she	 should	 suggest
discussing	his	age	preferences	over	a	drink	later	this	afternoon.	Neither	said	a
word.	 The	 opportunity	 hung	 there	 expectantly,	 hovering	 on	 the	 air	 like	 a
Spielberg	spaceship,	all	shining	with	 promise.	And	 then,	unassailed,	it	drifted
off	 into	 a	galaxy	 of	 glittering	  dust	motes,	and	 the	distant	 typewriter	 began
clacking	again,	 shattering	the	stillness,	 destroying	the	moment.	 It	 was	Fiona
who,	embarrassed,	broke	eye	contact.
   “So	 what	kind	of	 license	plate	has	your	boss	come	up	with?”	she	said.
   Warren	dug	 into	his	pocket	 and	fished	out	his	notebook.	He	 leafed	through
it	until	 he	came	to	 the	page	upon	which	 he’d	scribbled	 the	number	Matthew
had	given	him	on	the	phone.
   “Here	  you	 go,”	 he	 said,	and	 handed	it	 across	the	 counter	 to	 her.	Fiona
looked	at	it.
   “No	 such	animal,”	 she	said.
   “What	 do	you	mean?”
   “We	 don’t	have	plates	beginning	with	 a	number.	Not	here	in	Florida.”
   “This	 is	what	 the	man	saw,”	Warren	said.
   “Then	  the	 man	 saw	 wrong.	 Here	 in	 Florida,	  we	 use	three	 letters,	 two

107
numbers,	and	 then	 a	 single	 letter.	 The	 computer	 chooses	 the	 letters	 and
numbers	 at	  random,	  automatically	   eliminating	  any	  already	  designated
sequence.	You	 can	have,	 oh,	 CDB	  34L,	 or	 DGP	 47N,	  or	 AFR	 68M,	  or
whatever.	But	what	you	can’t	have	is	the	sequence	here	on	this	paper.”
   “You’re	  sure	about	that,	huh?”	Warren	said.
   “Am	  I	 sure	that	my	 unlisted	 phone	number	is	 381-3645?”	she	asked,	and
arched	her	eyebrow	again.

108
                                                                                                                         7


THE	POLICE	gym	was	the	size	of	 a	 good	 college	 gym,	 well	  equipped,	 air
conditioned,	and	relatively	empty	 at	five	o’clock	 that	Tuesday	afternoon.	Save
for	Matthew	and	Bloom,	 there	were	only	two	other	people	in	the	vast,	echoing
room:	a	runner	 tirelessly	circling	  the	overhead	track	and	a	bare-chested	man
in	blue	 trunks,	 pumping	 iron.	 Late-afternoon	sunlight	 streamed	through	 the
long,	 high	 windows.	 It	  had	not	 yet	 rained	 today.	 It	 had	 not	 rained	 at	all
yesterday.	Everybody	in	Calusa	was	saying	that	the	Russians	were	monkeying
with	the	weather.	This	in	 spite	of	glasnost.	Some	ideas	were	slow	to	take	hold
in	the	state	of	Florida.
   Bloom	 was	wearing	 gray	sweatpants	and	sweatshirt,	the	Calusa	PD	seal	in
blue	on	the	front	of	 it.	Matthew	 was	wearing	black	warmup	 pants	and	a	white
T-shirt.	 Both	 men	 were	 wearing	  sneakers.	Bloom	  had	 an	 inch	 or	 so	 on
Matthew,	in	height	and	in	reach,	and	some	forty	pounds	in	weight.	 But	he	was
here	to	  teach	him	  tricks	 that	  automatically	 rendered	 physical	 superiority
meaningless.
   “You	 put	on	some	weight,”	 he	said.
   “Ten	 pounds,”	Matthew	 said.
   “That’s	 a	lot.	You	got	 a	little	paunch,	Matthew.”
   “I	 know.”
   “You	 ought	to	come	here	every	afternoon,	run	the	track.”
   “I	 should.”
   “Those	 two	cowboys	 catch	you	with	 a	paunch,	they’ll	 roll	 you	down	41	 all
the	way	to	Fort	Meyers.”
   He	 was	 referring	 to	 Matthew’s	 private	 specters,	two	 Ananburg	 cowboys
who’d	once	made	chopped	liver	 of	 him	in	 a	Calusa	bar,	and	whom	he’d	later
caught	up	with	 and	all	 but	crippled.	 His	 nightmare	was	that	they	 would	 find
him	again	one	day,	and	next	time	 he	wouldn’t	 be	quite	 so	lucky.	Bloom	 kept
telling	him	 it	 wasn’t	a	matter	of	 luck,	it	 was	skill.	 Knowing	 how	 to	break	the
other	guy’s	 head	before	 he	broke	 yours.	Bloom	 said	 that	learning	 to	 maim
somebody	was	merely	a	matter	of	 how	much	fear	 you	had	inside	you.	 If	 you
didn’t	care	whether	two	cowboys	 beat	the	shit	out	of	you	and	maybe	buggered
you,	then	forget	learning	 how	to	 fight	 dirty.	For	 Matthew,	the	personification
of	fear	was	 Two	Cowboys.	 This	was	fear	 incarnate.	Beat	the	Two	 Cowboys,
and	you	vanquished	fear.	But	to	beat	them,	you	had	to	know	how	to	gouge	out
an	eye	or	crack	a	man’s	spine.
   “You	 want	to	dance	around	a	little	before	we	start?”	 Bloom	asked.

109
   The	 men	 moved	onto	 the	 mat.	Bloom	 was	 very	 fast	for	  a	man	his	 size.
Matthew,	with	 his	 paunch—well,	 it	wasn’t	 quite	 a	paunch—was	slower,	and
therefore	more	 susceptible	 to	 the	 open-handed	slaps	 Bloom	 kept	 landing.
Puffing,	out	of	 breath,	he	danced	around	Bloom,	caught	him	with	 a	good	left-
handed	slap	to	the	jaw—
   “Good,”	  Bloom	said.
   —and	 then	followed	 up	with	 a	right-handed	slap	to	Bloom’s	biceps,	which,
had	it	been	a	punch,	would	have	hurt	him	badly.
   “So	  we’re	  on	 opposite	 sides	 again,	 huh?”	 Bloom	  said,	 moving	  away,
feinting,	and	then	slapping	a	fast	one-two	 to	Matthew’s	 face.	The	slaps	stung.
Matthew	backed	off,	circling,	 circling.
   “You	 took	the	Leeds	case,	huh?”
   “I	 took	 it.”
   “You’re	  getting	a	reputation,”	Bloom	 said.
   “For	 what?”
   “Defending	 sure	things.”
   Bloom	 was	smiling.	 This	 was	a	joke.	The	 last	three	had	been	anything	but
sure	things.
   “We	 make	these	wonderful	arrests	we	think’ll	 stick,”	 Bloom	 said,	“and	then
you	come	along	and	knock	us	on	our	asses.	Tell	me,	Matthew,	why	 don’t	you
make	my	life	simple?”
   “How?”
   “Run	 for	 state	attorney.	Then	we	can	work	these	cases	together.”
   “Oh?”	 Matthew	 said.	“Is	Skye	quitting?”
   Across	 the	gym,	 the	weight	 lifter	 had	begun	working	 out	 on	the	punching
bag.	A	steady	rhythmic	background	 patter	now	accompanied	their	dance	over
the	mat,	both	 men	 moving	 around	each	other,	 constantly	jabbing,	 slapping,
moving	 in	again,	 backing	 away,	circling,	 great	 blots	of	 sweat	staining	 their
shirts,	rivulets	of	sweat	running	down	 their	faces.
   “Skye’s	 looking	 northward	to	Tallahassee,”	Bloom	said.
   “What’s	 this	big	 one	he’s	sitting	on,	Morrie?”
   “What	 big	 one?”	Bloom	asked	innocently.
   “I	 hear	something’s	in	the	wind.”
   “Who	 told	 you	that?”
   “A	 little	 yellow	 bird.”
   “Me,	 I’m	 deaf,	dumb,	and	blind,”	 Bloom	 said.
   “Supposed	to	break	in	 the	paper.	I’m	still	 waiting.”
   “Maybe	 we’re	 still	 waiting,	too.”
   “For	 what?”
   “Ask	 your	 little	 yellow	bird.	 You	had	enough	of	this?”
   “Sure,”	 Matthew	 said.
   They	 walked	over	 to	where	they’d	 put	their	bags	against	the	wall,	 took	out

110
towels,	wiped	their	faces	and	necks.	Both	men	were	breathing	hard.
   “Can	 I	ask	you	some	questions?”	Matthew	said.
   “Not	 about	that.”
   “No,	 about	the	Leeds	arrest.”
   “Sure.”
   “Tell	 me	what	happened	that	morning.”
   “Nothing.	    We	  went	  there	  with	   a	 wallet	   we	  found	   at	  the	  scene.
Unmistakably	 Leeds’s.	He	 was	in	 his	 pajamas	when	 we	 talked	to	 him.	 He
identified	 the	wallet	 as	belonging	 to	him,	 and	we	asked	him	 to	 come	along.
Interviewed	 him	in	 the	captain’s	 office,	 pulled	Skye	 in	 when	we	figured	 we
had	real	meat.”
   “When	 was	that?”
   “You	 mean	when	we	knew	we	had	him?”
   “Yes.”
   “When	 we	got	the	call	from	 Tran	Sum	Linh.”
   “Saying?”
   “Saying	 he’d	seen	the	man	who’d	murdered	his	friends.”
   “And?”
   “We	 ran	a	lineup	for	him.	 He	identified	 Leeds	as	the	man	he	saw	going	into
the	house	that	night.”
   “When	 did	you	 get	your	other	witness?”
   “The	 next	day.	After	 Leeds	was	already	charged.”
   “Wednesday.”
   “Whenever.”
   “The	 fifteenth.”
   “I’m	  winging	  this,	but	 the	dates	and	times	are	pretty	 much	 okay,”	 Bloom
said.	“911	clocked	 the	call	 in	at	six-fifty	  on	 the	morning	 of	the	fourteenth,	 a
Tuesday.	From	this	 guy,	whatever	 his	 name	was,	these	fucking	 Vietnamese
names	drive	me	crazy,	he’d	gone	over	there	to	pick	up	his	pals	and	drive	them
to	work,	  found	 all	 three	 of	 them	 dead.	They	 were	 working	  two	 jobs,	 the
victims.	 A	factory	 during	 the	day,	 the	restaurant	at	night.	 I	 guess	you	know
that.	Anyway,	the	dispatcher	sent	Charlie	car	over,	which	 radioed	back	with	 a
confirmed	triple	 homicide.	 The	captain	called	me	 at	home,	and	I	met	Rawles
over	there,	 it	 must’ve	  been	eight,	 a	 little	 after.	 The	 minute	 we	 found	 the
wallet,	we	 drove	out	 to	the	Leeds	farm.	 I	 didn’t	 know	 farmers	were	so	 rich,
did	you?”
   “Some	 of	them.”
   “Mmm,”	   Bloom	said,	and	picked	 up	the	life	 vest	he’d	carried	into	 the	gym
with	 him.	Orange,	with	 orange	ties,	 stamped	across	the	back	with	 the	words
PROPERTY	OF	US	COAST	GUARD.	“Anyway,	Tran	identified	him	that	same	afternoon,
and	we	zeroed	in	on	 the	second	witness	the	next	day.	So	you’re	 right,	 it	 was
Wednesday	the	fifteenth.	You	know	why	I’m	 putting	 on	this	life	 jacket?”

111
   “Because	the	gym	is	 about	to	sink,”	Matthew	 said.
   “That’s	 very	 funny,”	 Bloom	 said,	but	 he	didn’t	 laugh.	“I’m	  putting	 this	on
because	it’s	padded	around	the	shoulders	 and	neck,	and	that’s	 where	you’re
going	to	hit	me	a	lot.”
   “Tell	  me	something,	Morrie.	 When	 you	went	 out	to	 the	farm,	 did	you	 see
any	signs	of	forced	entry?”
   “We	 weren’t	looking	 for	 a	burglar,	Matthew.”
   “But	 did	 you	see	any	marks	around	any	of	the	doors	or	windows?”
   “I	 told	 you.	We	weren’t	looking	 for	any.”
   “I’m	  going	to	send	somebody	out	there	to	do	a	check.”
   “Sure.	 Just	let	Pat	know	if	you	find	 anything.”
   “Better	 not	call	 her	Pat,	Morrie.”
   “But	  I’ll	 tell	 you,	Matthew,	 you’ll	 be	wasting	your	 time.	Look,	 I	 know	just
where	you’re	 heading—you	 think	 somebody	may	 have	broken	 in	 there	and
stolen	that	jacket	 and	hat,	don’t	 you?	 And	 then	returned	them	 to	the	 closet,
right?	But	 did	 somebody	also	steal	 Mrs.	 Leeds’s	car	keys?	And	 then	 return
them	to	her	handbag	in	the	upstairs	closet?	Or	the	duplicate	set	of	keys	Leeds
was	using,	 which	  were	then	 returned	 to	 the	 top	 of	 the	 bedroom	 dresser?
Because	as	I’m	sure	you	already	know—”
   “Yes,	 Charlie	Stubbs	saw—”
   “Yes,	 he	saw	Leeds	drive	up	in	the	Maserati	at	around	ten-thirty	that	night.”
   “If	 it	 was	Leeds.”
   “Then	 who	was	it	if	 not	Leeds?”
   “It	 was	a	man	in	a	yellow	 hat	and	a	yellow	jacket.”
   “Which	  Leeds	just	happens	to	own.”
   “The	  hat	was	 a	 giveaway	 item,	 and	the	 jacket	 came	from	  Sears.	There
could	be	a	hundred	people	in	this	town	with	that	same	damn	jacket	and	hat.”
   “And	  are	there	a	 hundred	people	in	 this	 town	 who	also	 have	keys	 to	the
Maserati	this	person	in	the	yellow	jacket	and	hat	was	driving?”
   “Well,	 I	 admit—”
   “And	 keys	to	the	boat?”
   Matthew	 sighed.
   “Yes,”	  Bloom	 said.	“Matthew,	  I	know	 I	 was	 wrong	the	 last	time	 around.
But	this	time,	 there’s	too	damn	much.	 Cop	a	plea,	Matthew.	 Demming’s	new
and	eager,	she’ll	 make	 it	 easy	for	  you.	Do	  me	that	 favor,	 will	  you?	Save
yourself	a	lot	of	embarrassment.	Please?”
   Matthew	 said	nothing.
   “Come	 on,”	 Bloom	said.	“I’ll	  teach	you	how	to	paralyze	me.”



There	were	 two	 messages	on	 Matthew’s	 answering	 machine	 when	 he	got
home	that	night.	The	first	 was	from	 Warren	Chambers,	telling	 him	what	 he’d

112
learned	about	the	number	on	the	license	plate.
   “Shit,”	  Matthew	said.
   The	 second	was	from	Jessica	Leeds,	asking	him	to	 call	back	as	soon	as	he
could.	Standing	in	 his	workout	 clothes,	wanting	 nothing	more	than	a	shower,
he	opened	his	directory	to	the	L’s,	found	the	number	at	the	farm,	and	dialed	it.
Jessica	picked	up	on	the	third	ring.
   “Mrs.	 Leeds,”	 he	said,	“Matthew	Hope.”
   “Oh,	 hello,	 I’m	 so	glad	you	got	back	to	me,”	 she	said.	“Stephen	phoned	me
this	afternoon,	right	after	you	left	 him.	He	was	so	excited.”
   The	goddamn	license	plate,	he	thought.
   “Well,”	  he	said,	“it	 turns	out	we	were	a	bit	premature.”
   “What	 do	you	mean?”
   “There’s	 no	such	number	in	the	state	of	Florida.”
   “Oh	 no,”	 she	said.
   “I’m	  sorry.”
   “This	 is	so	disappointing.”
   “I	 know.”
   “Could	 it	 possibly	have	been	an	out-of-state	plate?”
   “Trinh	  is	sure	it	was	a	Florida	plate.”
   “This’ll	  kill	 Stephen,	it’ll	 positively	 kill	 him.”
   “Did	  he	tell	you	what	the	number	was?”
   “Yes,	 he	did.”
   “Does	 it	mean	anything	to	you?”
   “Mean	 anything?”
   “You	  wouldn’t	 have	 seen	a	car	with	 that	 plate	driving	  past	the	 farm—or
cruising	the	neighborhood—anything	 like	that?	Looking	 over	the	place?”
   “Oh.	 No,	I’m	 sorry.”
   “Because	if	 someone	did	break	in	there—”
   “Yes,	 I	know	 exactly	 what	you	mean.	But	 we’re	so	isolated	 here...I	think	 I
would’ve	 noticed	something	like	that.	A	car	driving	 by	slowly—”
   “Yes.”
   “—or	  making	a	turn	in	the	driveway—”
   “Yes.”
   “But	 no,	there	was	nothing.”
   “Incidentally,”	   Matthew	said,	“I’ll	  be	sending	someone	there	to	check	your
windows	 and	doors.	His	 name’s	Warren	 Chambers,	I’ll	  ask	him	 to	call	 you
first.”
   “My	  windows	and	doors?”
   “For	 signs	of	forced	entry.”
   “Oh,	 yes,	what	a	good	idea.”
   “He’ll	  call	 you.”
   “Please.”

113
   She	was	silent	for	 a	moment.
   Then	she	said,	“I	 don’t	know	 how	to	tell	this	 to	Stephen.”
   Neither	 did	Matthew.
   “I’ll	   do	it,”	he	said.	“Please	don’t	worry	 about	it.”



Warren’s	photographic	memory	had	served	him	 well	 for	the	better	part	 of	his
life.	  In	 high	  school—and	 later	  during	  his	 short	 stint	  in	 college—while
students	everywhere	around	him	were	scribbling	crib	notes	on	their	shirt	 cuffs
or	the	palms	of	 their	hands,	he	was	memorizing	 pages	and	pages	of	material
that	he	could	 later	call	 up	 in	an	 instant.	In	 its	entirety.	 A	 photograph	of	 the
page	suddenly	popping	into	 his	mind’s	 eye.	Exactly	 as	it	had	appeared	when
he’d	 read	it.	 Phenomenal.	 The	 trick	 worked	 beautifully	  for	 faces	 as	well.
When	he	was	on	the	St.	Louis	police	 force,	he’d	 look	at	a	mug	shot	once	and
only	once,	and	there	it	was	in	his	 head,	recorded	forever.	See	that	same	cheap
thief	on	the	street	two	years	later,	he’d	 follow	 him	 for	blocks,	 trying	to	 figure
out	what	no-good	mischief	he	was	up	to	now.
   If	 Warren	had	seen	that	license	plate	on	the	night	of	the	murders,	you	could
damn	 well	  bet	 he	 wouldn’t	  have	 remembered	 it	  wrong.	  It	 would	  have
registered	on	the	camera	of	his	 eye,	click,	 and	it	would	 have	been	etched	on
his	mind	forever,	in	 living	 color,	orange	and	white	for	 the	colors	of	 the	state’s
plates.
   Mr.	 Memory,	that	was	Warren	Chambers.
   Except	 for	tonight.
   Tonight,	 he	 could	 not	for	 the	 life	 of	 him	 remember	Fiona	 Gill’s	 unlisted
telephone	number.
   Am	I	 sure	that	my	unlisted	phone	number	is	381-2645?
   Was	what	the	lady	had	said.
   Wasn’t	 it?
   But	  when	he	 dialed	 381-2645,	he	 got	 a	man	 who	 sounded	like	 a	caged
beast,	spitting	and	snarling	 because	Warren	had	woken	him	up	in	 the	middle
of	the	night.	 Except	that	it	 was	only	eight-thirty.	 So	he’d	 dialed	the	number	a
second	time,	certain	that	his	renowned	memory	could	not	 be	at	fault,	thinking
he’d	merely	made	an	error	 punching	out	the	numbers,	and	lo	 and	behold,	the
same	roaring	monster	telling	him	to	quit	 calling	this	number	or—
   Warren	hung	up	fast.
   He	 knew	he	wasn’t	 wrong	about	 the	381	because	that	was	one	of	Calusa’s
seven	prefixes	and	none	of	the	others—349,	342,	363,	and	so	on—came	even
close.	So	381	it	 had	to	be.	So	 how	had	he	goofed	 on	the	last	 four	numbers?
Had	he	remembered	them	 in	 improper	sequence?	If	 so,	how	 many	possible
combinations	of	the	numbers	2,	6,	4,	and	5	could	there	be?
   Calling	   up	  a	  page	  from	   a	 long-ago	   college	  textbook	  chapter	  on

114
permutations	and	combinations,	he	conjured	the	formula	 4	X	 3	X	 2	X	 1	=	X,
and	came	up	with	 4	X	 3	 =	12	X	 2	 =	24	 X	1	 =	24,	 and	calculated	that	there
were	twenty-four	 possible	ways	 of	arranging	 the	numbers	2,	6,	 4,	and	5.	He
had	  already	  dialed	  2645—twice,	    no	  less—so	  that	  left	   twenty-three
possibilities.
   He	 started	with	 2654,	and	went	 from	 there	to	2564	 and	2546,	and	next	to
2465	and	2456.
   No	 Fiona	Gill.
   So	 he	moved	 on	 to	the	 next	 sequence	of	six,	 this	 time	 starting	with	  the
number	6	itself,	 and	dialing	 first	 6245	and	then	6254,	 and	on	and	on	and	 on
until	he	ended	the	sequence	with	6542,	and	still	no	Fiona	Gill.
   It	 was	now	almost	nine	o’clock.
   He	  figured	 it	  was	 taking	 him	 about	 thirty	  seconds	 to	 punch	 out	 each
telephone	number,	  let	 the	 phone	 ring	  three,	 four,	 however	  many	 times,
discover	there	was	no	one	named	Fiona	 Gill	 at	that	 number,	thank	the	party,
and	then	hang	up.	Six	 different	phone	numbers	in	 each	sequence.	A	hundred
and	eighty	seconds	altogether.	Three	minutes,	give	or	 take,	depending	on	the
length	 of	 each	conversation.	 It	  was	 five	 after	 nine	 when	 he	 finished	 the
sequence	beginning	with	the	number	5.	Still	  no	Fiona.	He	went	 on	to	the	last
sequence.
   381-4265.
   Brrr,	 brrr,	 brrr...
   “Hello?”
   “May	  I	speak	to	Fiona	Gill,	please?”
   “Who?”
   “Fiona	 Gill.”
   “Nobody	 here	by	that	name.”
   And	 then	381-4256...
   And	 381-4625...
   And	 down	 the	line	till	 he	came	to	the	last	possible	combination,	 381-4562,
the	phone	ringing,	ringing,	ringing...
   “Hello?”
   A	 black	woman.
   “Fiona?”
   “Who?”
   “I’m	  trying	 to	reach	Fiona	Gill.”
   “Man,	 you	 got	the	wrong	number.”
   And	 click.
   He	 sat	 there	despondently,	 his	pride	 in	 his	 fabled	 memory	 considerably
shaken.	Now	listen,	he	thought,	there	has	got	to	be	some	mistake	here.	Maybe
she	gave	me	the	 wrong	 number.	Maybe	 she	was	so	 excited,	she	forgot	 her
own	telephone	number,	that	is	a	distinct	possibility.	 So	how	can	I	get	the	right

115
number	if	 it’s	an	unlisted	 one?	He	picked	up	 the	receiver	again,	punched	the
O	for	Operator,	let	the	phone	ring	once,	twice...
   “Operator.”
   “Detective	 Warren	Chambers,”	he	said,	“St.	Louis	 Police	Department.”
   “Yes,	 Mr.	Chambers.”
   “We’re	 trying	 to	locate	the	sister	of	a	homicide	victim	 here—”
   “Oh,	 my,	a	homicide,”	 the	operator	said.
   “Yes,	 her	name	is	Fiona	Gill,	her	number	seems—”
   “The	 victim.”
   “No,	 the	sister.	She	lives	down	there	in	Calusa.	I	was	wondering—”
   “How’s	  the	weather	up	there?”
   “Terrific.	   Lovely.	 Lovely	  summer	 weather.	Fiona	 Gill,	  that’s	G-I-L-L.	   I
don’t	have	an	address.”
   “Just	 one	 moment,	sir,”	 the	 operator	said.	 She	was	off	  the	line	 for	 what
seemed	ten	seconds.	When	she	came	back,	she	said,	“I’m	sorry,	sir,	 that’s	an
unpublished	number.”
   “Yes,	 I	know	that.”
   “We’re	 not	per—”
   “This	 is	a	homicide	 here,”	Warren	said.
   Which	 always	worked.
   “I’m	  sorry,	sir,	it’s	our	 policy	not	to	give	 out	unpublished	numbers.”
   “Yes,	 I	realize	that.	May	I	 speak	to	your	service	assistant,	please?”
   “Yes,	 sir,	one	moment,	please.”
   Warren	waited.
   “Miss	 Camden,”	 a	woman	said.
   “Detective	 Warren	Chambers,”	 he	said.	“We’re	working	 a	homicide	 here	in
St.	Louis,	and	I	 need	to	get	in	touch	 with	a	woman	 named	Fiona	Gill	 in	your
city.	Can	you	please	ask	your	floor	manager	to—”
   “Working	  a	homicide	where?”	Miss	Camden	said.
   “St.	 Louis,”	 Warren	said.
   “You’ve	  got	to	be	kidding,”	 she	said,	and	hung	up.
   Warren	looked	 at	the	mouthpiece.
   Okay,	so	sometimes	it	didn’t	 work.
   He	 put	  the	phone	 back	 on	 its	 cradle,	 thought	 for	 a	 moment,	 and	 then
opened	his	personal	directory.	On	the	last	case	he’d	worked	for	Matthew,	he’d
hired	two	 rednecks	from	 the	Calusa	PD	 to	do	 some	moonlight	 housesitting.
One	of	 them	had	 got	himself	  killed	 on	 the	job,	 but	 the	other	 one	was	 still
alive,	and	he	and	Warren	still	 shared	a	sort	of	 tentative	relationship,	 the	only
kind	 a	redneck	 could	 offer	 a	 black	 man	in	 this	 town.	 He	 looked	 up	 Nick
Alston’s	home	number,	glanced	at	his	watch—twenty	past	nine—and	dialed.
   “Hello?”	  a	voice	said.
   “Nick?”

116
   “Yeah?”
   “Warren	Chambers.”
   “How	 you	doin’,	Chambers?”
   Just	overjoyed	to	be	hearing	from	him	again.
   “I	 need	a	favor,”	Warren	said.
   “Yeah?”
   Still	wildly	 enthusiastic.
   “A	 phone	number,”	Warren	said.	“This	case	I’m	working.”
   “Where?”
   “Here.	Calusa.”
   “The	number,	I	mean.”
   “That’s	what	I’m	talking	about,	the	number.	It’s	unlisted.”
   “No	shit?	When	do	you	need	it?”
   “Now.”
   “I	 ain’t	at	work.”
   “Can’t	you	get	somebody	up	there	to	call	it	in	for	me?”
   “Maybe.	Where	are	you?”
   “Home.”
   “Where’s	that?	Newtown?”
   Naming	the	colored	section	of	Calusa.
   “No,	here	on	Hibiscus.”
   “Give	me	the	number	there,”	Alston	said.
   Warren	gave	him	the	number.
   “What’s	this	person’s	name?”
   “Fiona	Gill,”	 Warren	said.
   “She’s	in	the	tax	collector’s	office,	ain’t	she?”	Alston	said.
   “That’s	right.”
   “Motor	 Vehicles,	right?”
   “Right.	I’m	 trying	to	get	a	line	on	a	license	plate.”
   “So	you	have	to	call	her	at	home,	right?”
   “Right,”	 Warren	said.
   “Yeah,	right,	shit,”	Alston	said.	“I’ll	get	back	to	you.”
   He	got	back	some	ten	minutes	later.
   “The	lady’s	number	is	381-3645,”	he	said.
   “Ahhhh,”	 Warren	said.
   “Yeah,	ahhhh,”	Alston	said.	“Ahhh	what?”
   “A	 three.	Instead	of	a	two.”
   “Which	 is	 supposed	to	make	sense,	huh?	I	don’t	 usually	run	 a	dating
service,	Chambers.	I	hope	you	realize	that.”
   “I	 owe	you	one.”
   “You	bet	you	do.”
   “I	 won’t	forget.	Thanks	a	lot,	Nick,	I	really	app—”

117
   “You	 remember	my	partner?”	 Alston	said.	“Charlie	 Macklin?	 Who	got	 shot
when	we	was	sittin’	that	house	on	the	beach?”
   “I	 remember	him,	 yes,”	Warren	said.
   “I	 still	 miss	him,”	 Alston	 said.
   There	was	a	silence	on	the	line.
   “Let’s	 have	a	beer	sometime,”	Warren	said.
   “Yeah,”	 Alston	 said.
   There	was	another	silence.
   “I’ll	   talk	to	you,”	 Warren	said.	“Thanks	again.”
   “Yeah,”	 Alston	 said,	and	hung	up.
   Warren	 put	the	receiver	 back	on	 the	cradle.	It	 was	twenty-five	  minutes	to
ten;	he	wondered	if	 it	was	too	 late	to	try	 her.	While	he	was	debating	this,	 the
telephone	rang.	He	picked	up	the	receiver.
   “Hello?”	  he	said.
   “Warren?”
   “Yes?”
   “Hi,”	  she	said.	“This	is	Fiona	Gill.”



In	Calusa,	Florida,	 the	beaches	change	with	the	seasons.	What	in	May	 might
have	been	a	wide	strand	of	pure	white	sand	will	 by	November	 become	only	a
narrow	strip	 of	 shell,	seaweed,	and	twisted	 driftwood.	 The	 hurricane	season
here	is	dreaded	as	much	for	the	damage	it	will	 do	to	the	condominiums	 as	for
the	havoc	it	might	wreak	upon	the	precious	Gulf	 of	Mexico	 shoreline.
   There	 are	five	 keys	off	 Calusa’s	mainland,	but	 only	 three	of	them—Stone
Crab,	Sabal,	and	Whisper—run	  north-south,	paralleling	 the	 mainland	shore.
Flamingo	 Key	  and	Lucy’s	  Key	  are	situated	 like	  massive	 stepping-stones
across	the	bay,	connecting	the	mainland	first	 to	Sabal	and	then	to	Stone	Crab
—which	 normally	  suffers	 most	 during	  autumn’s	 violent	 storms,	 precisely
because	it	has	the	least	to	lose.	Stone	Crab	is	the	narrowest	of	Calusa’s	keys,
its	once-splendid	beaches	eroded	for	decades	by	water	 and	wind.	 September
after	September,	Stone	Crab’s	two-lane	blacktop	is	completely	 inundated,	the
bay	on	one	side	and	the	Gulf	on	the	other	joining	over	it	to	 prevent	passage	by
anything	 but	  a	  dinghy.	 Sabal	  Beach	 historically	   suffers	 least—perhaps
because	there	is	a	God,	 after	 all.	 It	 was	on	 Sabal	that	the	 law-enforcement
officers	of	 the	City	 of	Calusa	looked	the	other	way	 when	it	 came	to	so-called
nude	bathing.
   Well,	 not	quite	the	other	way.
   The	 women	on	Sabal	were	permitted	 to	splash	in	the	water	or	 romp	on	the
beach	topless.	But	 let	one	 genital	area,	male	 or	 female,	be	 exposed	for	 the
barest	fraction	of	an	instant,	 and	suddenly	a	white	police	 car	with	a	blue	 City
of	Calusa	PD	seal	on	its	 sides	would	magically	 appear	on	the	beach’s	access

118
road	and	a	 uniformed	 minion	 of	 the	law	 would	 trudge	 solemnly	 across	the
sand,	head	ducked,	 eyes	studying	 the	 terrain	 (but	 not	 the	offending	  pubic
patch)	to	make	an	immediate	arrest	while	citing	 an	ordinance	that	went	all	the
way	back	to	1913,	when	the	city	was	first	 incorporated.
   Tonight,	 Warren’s	old	Buick	 was	the	only	 car	on	the	access	road.	The	main
parking	lot	was	far	 off	down	 the	beach,	adjacent	to	the	public	pavilion,	 where
each	night	Calusa’s	 teenagers	gathered	to	practice	their	 peculiar	 tribal	 rites.
Someone	off	 there	in	  the	distance	was	 playing	 an	 acoustic	guitar;	  tattered
snatches	of	an	 unintelligible	  tune	drifted	  listlessly	 on	the	 humid	 air.	 Not	 a
breeze	was	stirring.	Warren	was	very	nervous.
   The	 last	time	he’d	 been	this	nervous	was	in	St.	Louis,	 when	a	sniper	up	on
the	roof	was	 shooting	down	 into	the	 street	and	Warren	and	four	other	 police
officers	in	vests	went	up	there	and	kicked	in	 the	metal	fire	door	and	barged	on
out	there	into	 a	spray	of	 rifle	 fire.	 That	was	when	 the	nervousness	turned	to
sheer	terror.	Man	behind	the	rifle	  looked	like	 a	raving	idiot.	 Hair	 sticking	 up
on	top	of	 his	head,	eyes	wild.	Blue.	 Blue	eyes	flashing	 in	the	sunshine.	Man.
He	had	been	the	most	 frightening	 human	being	Warren	 had	ever	seen	in	his
lifetime	 up	 till	  then.	He	 had	since	 met	 even	more	 frightening	 people—the
world	 was	 full	  of	  lunatics	 who	 caused	your	  heart	 to	 stop	 cold—but	  his
definition	  of	 terror	 would	  always	 be	linked	  to	 that	 blue-eyed	 white	 man
spraying	bullets	across	a	sunwashed	black	rooftop.
   Tonight,	 he	wasn’t	terrified,	 he	was	merely	nervous.
   Because...
   Well...
   On	 the	telephone,	 Fiona	had	apologized	 for	 calling	 so	late,	 and	then	had
told	him	 how	nice	 it	had	been,	seeing	him	again	 this	afternoon,	and	then	she
mentioned	how	hot	the	weather	was...
   “I	 don’t	 recall	it	 ever	being	so	hot	down	here,	do	you?”
   “No,	 I	 don’t,”	 Warren	said.
   “No	 rain	 the	past	two	days,”	she	said.	“Must	be	the	Russians.”
   “Must	 be.”
   He	 was	wondering	why	she’d	called.
   “This	  would	 be	a	lovely	 night	 for	 a	swim,”	  she	said,	“except	 that	I	 don’t
have	a	pool.	Do	you	happen	to	have	a	pool?”
   Warren	told	 her	he	was	living	in	 a	studio	apartment	on	the	second	floor	of	a
converted	bank	on	Hibiscus,	 and	no,	he	did	 not	have	 a	pool.	She	told	 him	 it
was	too	bad	neither	of	them	had	a	pool	because	this	was	such	a	splendid	night
for	a	swim,	although	it	 was	probably	too	late	for—
   “No,	 I	 don’t	think	 it’s	too	late,”	 he	said.
   And	 glanced	quickly	 at	his	wristwatch.
   “No,	 it’s	 only	nine-forty,”	 he	said.
   “Little	  moonlight	 swim,”	 she	said.

119
   “Yes,	 that	might	be	nice,”	he	said.
   “Yes,	 mightn’t	 it?”	she	said.
   There	 was	 a	silence	 on	 the	line.	 Like	  that	 silence	in	 the	 tax	 collector’s
office	this	 afternoon,	when	the	air	 had	crackled	with	 possibilities	 about	to	be
lost.
   “So,”	  Fiona	said	at	last,	and	he	would	 never	know	the	kind	 of	courage	this
had	required,	“do	you	think	 you	might	like	 to	come	on	down	here	and—”
   “Yes,”	 he	said	at	once.
   “—pick	  me	up—”
   “Yes,	 I	would,”	 he	said.
   “And	  we	can	drive	over	to	Sabal	together?”
   Sabal,	he	thought.
   Which	  is	when	 his	 heart	had	 begun	pounding	 and	his	 hands	had	got	 all
clammy.
   Because	 Fiona	 might	 have	 suggested	any	 one	 of	 the	 other	 beaches	in
Calusa	for	their	moonlight	 swim—and	there	was	a	moon	tonight—but	 she	had
chosen	Sabal.	And	Sabal	was	the	one	and	only	topless	beach.
   She	 was	wearing	 sandals	and	a	blue	 jumpsuit	 zippered	up	 the	front.	 She
took	off	  the	sandals	as	Warren	 locked	 the	car	 and	held	 them	in	 one	 hand,
dangling	 from	 the	 straps.	 He	 was	wearing	 jeans	 and	 a	cotton	  sweatshirt,
loafers	without	 socks.	He	went	around	to	the	trunk,	 unlocked	it,	 and	took	out
towels,	a	blanket,	and	a	cooler	on	a	strap.	Resting	on	the	ice	inside	the	cooler,
there	was	a	capped	orange	juice	bottle	 filled	 with	 martinis,	 a	can	 of	country
pâté	Warren	had	bought	 at	The	 French	Château	on	 Gaines	Street,	a	 box	of
water	biscuits,	 some	paper	plates,	plastic	 cups,	and	 utensils,	and	a	 Colt	 .38
Detective	Special.
   “Help	 you	 with	anything?”	 Fiona	asked.
   “If	  you	could	take	the	towels,”	 he	said.
   “Sure,”	 she	said.	“Let	me	have	the	blanket	too.”
   “No,	  that’s	 okay,”	 he	said,	 and	handed	 the	towels	 to	 her.	Slamming	 the
trunk	shut,	he	noticed	his	own	license	plate	as	if	for	the	first	 time:
   DTU	 89R.
   Three	letters,	two	 numbers,	and	then	another	letter.
   Just	as	the	lady	had	told	him.
   He	 set	the	cooler	down	 for	a	moment,	 took	off	 his	 loafers,	and	then	threw
the	blanket	 over	 his	 shoulder	 like	  a	serape.	 Picking	 up	 the	 cooler	 again,
slinging	it	 from	 the	strap,	he	followed	 Fiona	 out	onto	the	sand.	The	tide	 was
just	coming	in.	Not	 a	hint	of	 surf	tonight,	the	waves	gently	 nudging	the	shore,
whispering	in.	They	 found	a	spot	on	dry	sand	some	twenty	feet	back	from	 the
shore	and	spread	the	blanket.	There	was	no	need	to	anchor	it;	there	was	not	a
semblance	of	a	 breeze.	Warren	looked	 up	 and	down	 the	beach.	Not	 a	 soul
anywhere	in	sight.

120
   Fiona	 was	unzippering	the	jumpsuit.
   “I	 was	just	about	to	call	 you,”	he	said,	“but	 you	beat	me	to	it.”
   “Liar,”	  she	said.
   “No,	 really.”
   Unzippered	 to	the	waist	now.	She	shrugged	it	off	 her	shoulders,	lowered	it,
stepped	out	of	it.	She	was	wearing	a	skimpy	green	bikini.
   “I	 was	going	to	 ask	you	to	have	dinner	with	me,”	he	said.
   She	looked	spectacularly	beautiful.
   “This	  is	 much	better,”	 she	said,	 and	grinned,	 white	 teeth	 flashing	 in	 the
moonlight,	 and	then	turned	 suddenly	and	ran	 toward	the	 water.	He	watched
her	go.	So	beautiful,	he	thought,	 and	wondered	how	many	hours	she	put	in	at
aerobics.	He	unbuckled	his	belt,	took	off	 the	jeans	and	then	the	sweatshirt.	He
felt	suddenly	foolish	 wearing	 boxer	trunks.	He	should	have	put	 on	something
sexier	tonight,	one	of	those	Italian-made	swimsuits	that	looked	 like	a	jock	 and
came	in	fire-engine	 red,	 midnight	 black,	 and	navy	 blue.	 But	he	 didn’t	 own
one.
   She	watched	him	from	 the	water.
   Tall	 and	wiry,	the	body	of	 an	athlete.
   So	beautiful,	 she	thought.
   He	 came	running	across	the	beach,	long	 strides,	sand	splashing	up	behind
him,	entered	 the	water	 running,	 knees	pumping,	 took	a	 long,	 shallow	 dive,
and	surfaced	grinning	some	ten	feet	from	where	he’d	gone	under.
   “Water’s	 even	warmer	than	the	air,”	he	said.
   “Yes,”	 she	said.
   “Lovely,”	  he	said.
   He	 was	talking	about	her.
   “Lovely,”	  she	said.
   She	was	talking	about	him.
   “I	 didn’t	 call	 because	I	forgot	your	number,”	he	said.
   They	 were	treading	water,	facing	each	other.	Moonlight	 rippled	the	surface,
silver	coins	floating	 everywhere	around	them.
   “Shame	on	you,”	 she	said.
   “My	  memory	is	usually	very	 good.”
   “Maybe	 you	wanted	to	forget	 it.”
   “No,	 no,	why	 would	I	 want	to	forget	it?”
   “I	 don’t	 know.	Maybe	you’re	 scared	of	me.”
   “No,	 no.”
   “Because	I’m	 an	older,	more	experienced	woman.”
   “I’ll	   bet,”	he	said.
   “I’ll	   bet,”	she	said,	and	smiled	mysteriously.
   “You’re	  very	beautiful,”	 he	said.
   “So	 are	you.”

121
   They	 kissed	in	the	moonlight.
   Only	 their	lips	 touching.
   Floating	 on	that	sea	of	coins,	lips	touching.	Gently.
   She	said,	“Mmmm.”
   He	 said,	“Yes.”
   They	 swam	for	some	ten	minutes,	the	memory	 of	that	single	kiss	lingering,
the	night	laden	with	expectation.
   “So	 how	 were	 you	about	 to	call	 me?”	 she	asked.	“If	  you’d	 forgotten	 the
number?”
   “Oh.	 I	got	 it	from	a	friend	 of	mine	in	 the	Calusa	PD.”
   “Went	 to	all	that	trouble.”
   “Yes.”
   “My	  my,”	she	said.
   “381-3645,”	  he	said.
   “That’s	 it,	 all	right.”
   “Emblazoned,”	  he	said,	and	ran	a	forefinger	across	his	forehead.
   “All	  that	trouble,”	 she	said,	and	kissed	him	again.
   They	 were	standing	in	shallow	 water	this	time.	He	put	 his	arms	around	her,
drew	her	 closer	 to	 him.	 She	lifted	  her	arms,	 circled	 his	 neck.	Kissed	 him
harder.	His	hands	cupped	her	buttocks.	She	moved	in	closer	to	him.
   “Oh	 my,”	 she	said.
   They	 walked	 out	of	 the	 water	hand	in	 hand.	He	 looked	up	 and	down	 the
beach	again.	Still	empty.	A	crescent	moon	in	the	star-drenched	sky.	They	were
alone	in	the	night,	alone	in	the	universe.
   “I	 mixed	 martinis,”	 he	said.
   “So	 thoughtful,”	 she	said.
   He	 removed	the	lid	 from	the	cooler,	 reached	in	for	the	tin	 of	pâté,	snapped
off	the	key	 fastened	to	its	top,	inserted	it	 into	 the	groove,	said,	“These	things
never	work,”	 and	then	swiftly	  and	without	 difficulty	  peeled	back	the	top.	“A
miracle,”	  he	 said.	 She	 was	 watching	  him.	 She	 was	 thinking	   how	 very
handsome	he	looked	  in	 his	 boxer	 trunks	 and	 his	 high-top	 fade.	 She	was
wondering	 if	 she	should	 take	 off	 the	 top	 of	 her	bikini,	  this	 was	 a	topless
beach.	No,	she	thought,	let	him	take	it	off.
   He	 opened	the	box	of	biscuits,	and	then	took	from	the	cooler	a	white	plastic
knife	and	a	pair	of	 translucent	plastic	cups.	“I’ll	  pour	if	 you	fix,”	  he	said,	and
handed	her	a	white	paper	plate.	She	began	spreading	pâté	on	the	biscuits.	He
watched	her,	thinking	how	long	 and	slender	and	elegant	her	fingers	were,	how
studious	she	looked	with	 her	head	bent,	concentrating	on	the	biscuits,	 evenly
spreading	the	pâté,	moonlight	catching	her	high	 cheekbones	and	perfect	nose.
You’re	the	most	beautiful	woman	I’ve	 ever	seen,	he	thought.
   “You’re	  the	most	beautiful	woman	I’ve	 ever	seen,”	he	said.
   “That’s	 very	nice	 of	you,”	 she	said	softly,	and	looked	up	at	him.

122
   “These	 aren’t	the	best	glasses	for	martinis,”	he	said.	“Plastic.”
   He	 seemed	suddenly	embarrassed.
   “They’re	  fine,”	 she	said.
   “I	 forgot	 to	bring	olives,”	 he	said.
   “Who	 needs	olives?”	she	said.
   He	 poured	the	drinks.
   “I	 love	 martinis,”	 she	said.
   “So	 do	I.”
   “Silver	  bullets,”	she	said.
   “Mmm,”	  he	said.
   They	 put	the	 lid	back	 on	the	cooler,	using	 it	as	a	low	 table,	 the	plate	with
the	crackers	on	it,	 the	orange	juice	 bottle	with	 what	 was	left	 of	the	martinis.
Moonlight	 touched	her	hair.	Moonlight	 touched	the	sloping	tops	of	her	breasts
above	the	skimpy	 green	bikini	  top.	He	 wondered	if	 she	would	 take	 off	 that
top,	this	was	a	topless	beach.	He	thought	he	would	die	if	 she	took	off	 the	top.
He	hoped	she	would	not	take	off	 the	top.	Somehow,	that	would	be	cheap,	and
Fiona	Gill	 was	not	a	cheap	woman.
   “Did	  you	see	From	Here	to	Eternity?”	she	asked.
   “I	 think	 so.	The	movie,	do	you	mean?”
   “Yes.”
   “Yes,	 I	saw	it	on	television.”
   “I	 don’t	 mean	the	miniseries	they	made...”
   “No,	 no,	the	movie.	With	 Burt	 Lancaster	and	Deborah	Kerr.”
   “Yes.	 These	are	very	good,	Warren.”
   “Thank	 you.”
   “Strong	 but	good.	This	reminds	me	of	 that	movie.”
   “It	 does?”
   “The	 scene	in	that	movie.”
   “Which	  scene,	Fiona?”
   “Where	  they’re	on	 the	beach	making	 love,”	 she	said,	 “and	the	 waves	are
rushing	in.”
   His	 heart	began	pounding	hard	again.
   “The	 waves	rushing	 in,”	 she	said,	and	looked	out	 over	the	sea.	“Have	 you
ever	noticed,”	 she	said,	“that	there	aren’t	 too	many	scenes	with	 black	people
making	love?	In	 the	movies,	I	 mean.	Well,	forget	television,	 can	you	imagine
Bill	 Cosby	making	love?	But	you’d	 think	in	 the	movies...”
   “Well,	 I	 think	I’ve	 seen	love	scenes,”	Warren	said.
   “Where’d	  you	see	them?”	she	asked.	“These	scenes.”
   “I	 think	 I	saw	Gregory	Hines	doing	 some	love	scenes.	I	think.”
   “Did	  you	ever	see	Eddie	Murphy	kissing	anybody?”
   “I	  think	 so,	yes.	In	the	one	where	 he’s	this	African	  chief	coming	 to	find	 a
bride	here.	I	think	he	kisses	her.”

123
   “Kisses	 her.”
   “Yes.”
   “Why	  don’t	you	kiss	me?”	she	said.
   He	 kissed	her.	Long	and	hard.	They	put	 down	their	drinks.	 He	lowered	 her
to	the	blanket	and	kissed	her	again.
   “I	 love	 kissing	you,”	 she	whispered.
   “I	 love	 kissing	you,”	 he	whispered.
   His	 hand	moved	 under	the	flimsy	  green	top,	found	 her	naked	 breast.	The
nipple	was	hard.	From	the	water,	he	guessed.	But	the	water	wasn’t	cold.
   “It’s	  because	they’re	afraid	of	it,”	 she	said.
   “Of	 what?”	 he	said.
   “Of	 showing	 sex	between	two	black	people,”	she	said.
   “I’ll	   bet	that’s	it,”	he	said.
   “They’re	  afraid	 we’ll	  incite	 the	 populace	to	 riot,”	  she	said,	 and	laughed
softly.
   He	 kissed	the	laughter	from	 her	mouth.	And	 untied	the	top	of	 her	suit.	Her
breasts	spilled	free.
   “Yes,”	 she	said.
   He	 kissed	her	nipples.
   Her	 hand	slid	down	inside	his	trunks.
   “Do	 you	suppose	it’s	true	what	they	say	about	black	men?”	she	asked.
   Which	 meant	she’d	 never	been	to	bed	with	 a	white	 man,	and	had	no	basis
for	comparison.	He	 hoped.	For	that	matter,	he	hoped	she’d	never	been	to	bed
with	anyone	but	her	ex-husband,	hoped	she	was	a	virgin	except	for	him,	knew
this	was	impossible,	almost	asked	her	if	it	was	possible,	but	didn’t.	 Instead	his
hand	moved	flat	over	 her	belly	and	down	 into	the	bottom	 of	the	green	bikini,
his	fingers	questing.
   “It	 must	be	true,”	 she	said,	“what	they	say.”
   “Mm-huh,”	  he	said.
   “About	  black	men,”	she	said.
   “Mm-huh.”
   Finding	 her.
   “That	 must	be	why	they’re	 so	afraid	of	doing	a	real	sex	scene,”	she	said.
   “Mm-huh,”	  he	said.
   Touching	 her.
   “They’re	  afraid	black	men’ll	 run	out	into	 the	streets	with	their	big	cocks—”
   Grabbing	 him	hard	as	she	said	this,	illustrating	her	point.
   “—and	 rape	all	the	white	 women	in	the	nation.”
   “I’ll	   bet	that’s	it,”	he	said	again,	breathlessly.
   “Don’t	  you	want	to	kiss	me	again?”	she	asked.
   He	 kissed	her	again.
   He	 got	dizzy	kissing	her	again	and	again.

124
   “I	 think	 you’d	 better	be	careful,”	he	said.
   “Mmm,”	  she	said.
   “What	 you’re	 doing,”	 he	said.
   “Yes,”	 she	said.
   “Because—”
   “They’ll	   do	 all	 these	steamy	sex	scenes	between	two	 white	 people,”	 she
said,	her	hand	moving	recklessly,	“but	 never	between	two	blacks,	yes,	there	it
is,	now	 you’ve	  got	 it,	 mmm.	 Oh	 maybe	a	 little	 kissyfacy,	 mmm,	 yes,	 but
never	the	real	thing,	 oh	no,	oh	yes,	right	 there,	oh	God,	 yes,	never	a	real	sex
scene,	oh	Jesus!”	she	said,	and	suddenly	lifted	her	hips	to	him.	He	yanked	the
bikini	 pants	down	over	her	thighs	 and	her	knees.	She	kicked	them	away	onto
the	sand	and	spread	herself	wide	for	him	 on	the	blanket.	 He	was	naked	in	an
instant,	rolling	 onto	her.
   “Never	 anything	 like	this,”	 she	said,	“oh	Jesus,	never!”

125
                                                                                                                         8


YOU	CAME	down	into	the	marina	 on	 a	 dirt	  road	behind	 the	 Toys	 “Я”	  Us
warehouse	off	Henley	 Street	on	 the	South	 Tamiami	Trail,	 skirting	  the	Twin
Tree	Estates	development	along	the	wetlands	bordering	Willowbee	Creek,	the
pampas	grass	moving	gently	in	 the	welcome	 early-morning	 breeze.	You	saw
first	the	fenced-in	 boats	up	on	trailers	 under	the	storage	sheds,	their	tin	roofs
rusting	in	 the	sunshine.	Beyond	 the	sheds	was	the	asphalt-shingled	house	in
which	 Charlie	Stubbs	 lived	 with	 his	wife	  and	a	pet	 golden	retriever	 named
Shadrach.	The	house	was	on	the	water,	and	it	commanded	a	good	view	of	the
twenty-one	 slips	 he	rented	 to	 boaters.	 On	 the	night	  of	 August	 thirteenth,
Stephen	Leeds	was	supposed	to	have	climbed	onto	a	boat	named	Felicity	at	a
slip	numbered	twelve	and	cruised	off	into	 the	night	to	do	multiple	 murder.
   “We	 had	three	of	 them,	one	time,”	 Stubbs	told	Matthew.	 “A	 female	named
Meshach	and	another	male	named	Abednego.”
   He	 was	bending	 over	 to	stroke,	 tug,	scratch,	and	 twist	 the	ear	of	 the	 big
golden,	who	sat	loving	 it	 all,	 his	tongue	hanging	out	 and	his	eyes	closed,	his
giant	lion	 paws	solidly	 planted	on	the	wooden	planks	of	 the	dock.	They	were
standing	 just	 outside	 the	 marina	  office.	 Through	  the	 open	 marina	 door,
Matthew	could	 see	boat	keys	hanging	on	hooks,	each	key	identified	 by	a	slip
number	crudely	painted	onto	the	wooden	rack.	He	wondered	if	 the	office	door
had	been	locked	on	the	night	of	the	murders.
   “This	  was	when	 we	 were	still	  living	 up	 north,	 you	 familiar	 with	  a	little
town	 in	Vermont	 called	 West	Dover?	 Pretty	 country	 up	there,	 but	 you	can
freeze	your	butt	in	the	wintertime.	 Me	and	my	wife	 come	down	here	in	’forty-
seven,	looking	to	buy	ourselves	a	motel,	ended	up	with	 a	marina,	didn’t	know
a	damn	thing	 about	boats.	Anyway,	 one	winter	 up	there	in	 Vermont	 the	two
other	ones	disappeared,	Meshach	and	Abednego.	 We	figured	 some	skier	 up
from	New	 York	had	kidnapped	 them,	there’s	a	big	market	 in	pedigreed	dogs,
you	know.	 They	 were	 beauties,	too,	the	 pair	 of	 them.	Figured	 they’d	 been
stolen.	My	  wife	  was	 brokenhearted.	She	 loved	 them	 dogs,	especially	  the
bitch.	Anyway,	 come	springtime,	 I	get	a	call	 from	 the	caretaker	at	one	of	the
lodges	up	there,	he	tells	 me	he	was	 cleaning	some	fallen	 branches	and	such
out	of	the	lake,	and	he	looked	down	and	saw	what	he	thought	was	a	couple	of
deer	on	the	bottom,	but	 it	turned	out	 to	be	two	 big	dogs.	He	knew	 to	call	 me
’cause	of	the	tags	on	their	 collars.	It	 was	them,	all	right.	 The	way	 we	figured
it,	they	must’ve	 been	playing	on	 the	ice,	you	know,	 just	frisking,	 and	crashed
on	through.	Couldn’t	 find	 a	way	 to	get	up	again,	couldn’t	 find	 their	 way	out,

126
you	know.	It	must’ve	 been	a	bad	way	to	die,	don’t	you	think?”
   Matthew	 wondered	if	 there	were	any	good	ways	to	die.
   “My	  wife	loved	 them	two	dogs,”	Stubbs	said.
   The	 way	he	said	it,	the	forlorn	 sound	of	his	voice,	 the	way	he	kept	working
the	dog’s	ear,	caused	Matthew	to	believe	that	Stubbs	himself	 had	loved	those
dogs	more	than	his	wife	had.
   “Mr.	 Stubbs,”	 he	said,	“I’m	 sorry	to	bother	you	this	way...”
   “No	 bother	at	all.”
   “But	 there	are	just	a	few	more	things	I’d	 like	 to	go	over.”
   “Sure.”
   “First,	  can	you	 tell	me...those	are	 boat	keys,	aren’t	 they?	Hanging	 on	the
rack	there	inside	the	office	door?”
   “Yes,	 they	are.”
   “Identified	  by	slip	number,	isn’t	 that	right?”
   “Twenty-one	 of	 them,	that’s	right.”
   “Mr.	 Stubbs,	was	the	office	locked—”
   “It	 was.”
   “—on	 the	night	 you	saw	Stephen	Leeds	take	his	boat	out?”
   “It’s	  locked	every	night.	Owners	have	their	own	keys,	all	 we	keep	in	there’s
the	spares,	for	when	we	have	to	move	the	boats,	one	reason	or	another.”
   “Then	 Stephen	Leeds	would’ve	 had	his	own	key	when	he	took	the	boat	out
that	night?”
   “Had	 to’ve	 had	his	own	key.	The	spare	was	right	there	in	the	office,	and	the
office	was	locked.”
   “Mr.	  Stubbs,	would	you	 mind	if	 I	 sent	someone	around	to	check	the	office
doors	and	windows?”
   “For	 what?”
   “For	 signs	of	forced	entry.”
   “Be	 my	 guest,”	Stubbs	said,	and	shrugged.	“Wasn’t	 anyone	broke	in	there,
though,	I’d’ve	  noticed.	 What	 is	 it,	 boy?”	 he	 said	to	 the	 dog.	“You	  gettin’
hungry	again?	Your	 mama	just	 fed	 you	this	 morning,	 didn’t	 she?	Old	 Shad
here’d	eat	us	out	of	 house	and	home,	we’d	let	 him,”	 he	said	to	Matthew,	 and
then	turned	 to	 the	 dog	 again	 and	said,	 “Come	  on	then,	 ’fore	  you	 die	 of
starvation.”
   He	 walked	into	 the	marina	office,	 Matthew	 and	the	dog	following.	  From	a
shelf	in	 one	of	the	wall	 cupboards,	he	took	 down	 a	big	bag	of	 dog	food	 and
poured	generously	into	a	plastic	cup	bigger	than	the	dog’s	head.
   “There	  you	 go,	boy,”	 he	 said,	and	 patted	him	 on	 the	 head	and	watched
appreciatively	as	the	 dog	began	eating.	Outside,	 a	fifty-foot	  Sea	Ray	with	  a
sedan	bridge	was	pulling	  in	 to	one	 of	the	 slips.	 Stubbs	turned	his	 attention
from	the	dog.
   “Man	 there’s	learning	 how	to	drive	a	boat,	bangs	my	dock	up	every	time	 he

127
comes	in.	Watch	him	now.”
   Matthew	 watched.	There	was	on	the	captain’s	face	a	look	of	panic	Matthew
had	seen	a	hundred	times	before,	a	look	that	had	been	on	his	own	face	all	too
often.	 The	  look	  said	 that	  an	 irresistible	  force	  was	 about	  to	 strike	  an
immovable	 object	  and	 there	 was	  nothing	 that	  could	 be	  done	 about	 it.
Absolutely	 nothing.	Twist	 the	wheel,	tug	 at	the	gearshift	levers,	pull	 back	on
the	throttle,	nothing	could	stop	this	damn	boat	from—
   “There	 she	goes,”	Stubbs	said,	and	winced.
   The	 starboard	side	of	the	boat	 slammed	into	the	slip	 piling,	 bounced	off	 it
with	 a	 thudding	 lurch.	 The	 captain	threw	 his	 gears	into	  reverse,	panicked
again,	twisted	the	wheel	 in	the	 wrong	direction,	 and	whapped	into	 the	piling
yet	another	time.	 A	 young	blond	 girl	 in	 a	 black	bikini—either	  the	 captain’s
daughter	or	his	girlfriend,	 you	never	could	tell	down	 here	in	southwest	Florida
—stood	on	the	bow	trying	 to	keep	her	balance	as	the	boat	whacked	the	piling
once	again.	There	was	an	astonished	look	on	her	face,	as	if	she	were	trying	to
understand	whether	this	was	the	way	you	 were	supposed	to	dock	a	boat.	The
captain	finally	 got	 the	boat	alongside	and	 yelled	for	 the	girl	 to	 jump	 ashore.
She	hesitated	a	moment,	and	 then	leaped	the	two	 feet	 to	the	 dock,	popping
one	of	  her	breasts	 out	 of	 the	 scant	 bikini	  top,	 recovering	 it	 quickly	  and
without	embarrassment,	and	then	bracing	herself	 to	catch	the	line	 the	captain
tossed	to	her.
   “Better	 go	help	him,”	 Stubbs	said,	“before	that	nitwit	 falls	 in	the	water.”
   He	 stamped	out	 of	 the	office	 and	walked	 swiftly	  to	 the	dock.	 Gently,	 he
said,	“I’ll	 take	that,	miss,”	 and	accepted	the	line	from	her	and	then	swiftly	 and
automatically	looped	 it	 around	the	piling	 in	 a	series	of	half	 hitches.	“Let	 me
have	the	other	one,”	he	called	to	the	captain,	and	then	went	 through	the	same
routine	on	the	port	side	of	the	boat.
   “Think	  I’ll	 need	lines	aft?”	the	captain	asked.
   “’Less	 you	want	 her	banging	around	all	day,”	Stubbs	said.
   It	 took	 him	 some	ten	 minutes	to	 make	the	 boat	secure.	The	girl	  watched
him	all	 the	while,	 trying	 to	learn	something.	 Matthew	figured	 she	was	in	 her
early	twenties.	 Seven	or	eight	 years	younger	 than	Mai	 Chim.	 He	 wondered
why	Mai	 Chim	 had	suddenly	popped	into	 his	mind.	 Perhaps	because	the	girl
on	the	dock	looked	so	indigenous	to	Florida,	and	Mai	 Chim	looked	like	 a	total
stranger.
   Stubbs	came	stamping	 back	up	the	dock.	 He	looked	at	 the	captain	and	the
girl	as	they	 walked	off	 toward	where	 their	car	was	parked,	and	then	he	came
back	into	the	office	again.
   “He’d	  spend	less	time	screwing	that	little	  girl	 and	more	time	learning	 how
to	park,	 he’d	 be	a	better	 seaman	all	 around,”	 Stubbs	said.	“First	  thing	 you
learn	when	you	 come	down	 from	 the	north	 is	 there’s	only	 two	 things	to	 do
here	in	Florida.	 Screw	and	drink.	 He’s	from	 Michigan,	 and	he’s	learned	how

128
to	do	both	real	well.”
   Stubbs	shook	his	head.
   “When’s	 this	door-and-window	 man	gonna	show	up?”	he	asked.
   “I’ll	   talk	to	 him	when	I	 get	back	to	the	office,”	  Matthew	said.	“His	 name’s
Warren	Chambers,	he	was	here—”
   “Right,	  last	week,”	 Stubbs	said.	“Nice	 young	 feller.	 Smart	as	a	whip,	 too.
Anybody	 gonna	find	 anything	 here,	 it’ll	  be	him.	 Look	 at	 that	 dog	go,	 will
you?	Think	 he	 hadn’t	 been	fed	in	 a	 month.”	 He	 shook	his	 head	again	and
watched	the	dog	in	silent	amazement.	Then	he	looked	up	at	Matthew	and	said,
“Well,	if	 that’s	it,	 I	got	work	 to	do.”
   “Just	  one	other	 thing,”	  Matthew	 said.	 “I	  wonder	 if	 you	 could	 listen	 to
something	for	me.”
   “Listen?”
   “Yes,	 sir,”	  Matthew	 said,	and	 took	 from	 his	 pocket	the	 small	 Sony	tape
recorder	he’d	carried	to	the	office	yesterday.
   “What	 is	it?”	 Stubbs	asked.
   “A	 tape	I	made.”
   He	 pressed	the	REWIND	button	to	make	sure	the	tape	was	fully	rewound,	said,
“Listen,”	 and	then	hit	the	PLAY	button.	The	tape	began	unreeling.
   “Hello,	  this	is	Stephen	Leeds,”	a	man’s	voice	said.	“I	just	wanted	to	tell	 you
I’ll	 be	 taking	the	 boat	out	again	 for	 a	little	 moonlight	 spin,	 around	ten,	ten-
thirty,	 and	I	 don’t	 want	 you	to	 be	alarmed	 if	 you	hear	 me	out	 there	on	 the
dock.”
   Stubbs	looked	at	the	recorder.
   There	was	silence	now.
   The	reel	kept	unreeling.
   “Was	 that	the	man	who	called	you	last	Monday	night?”	 Matthew	asked.
   “Can	 you	play	it	 back	for	me?”	Stubbs	said.
   “Happy	 to.”
   Matthew	 rewound	the	tape.	He	hit	the	play	button	again.
   “Hello,	  this	is	Stephen	Leeds.	I	just	wanted—”
   “Sure	 as	hell	sounds	like	Mr.	Leeds.”
   “—to	  tell	 you	I’ll	  be	taking	 the	boat	out	 again	for	 a	little	 moonlight	 spin,
around	ten,	ten-thirty,	and	I	 don’t	 want	you	to	 be	alarmed	if	 you	hear	me	out
there	on	the	dock.”
   Stubbs	was	nodding	now.	“Yep,”	 he	said,	“that’s	Mr.	 Leeds,	all	right.”
   “That’s	 not	 what	I	 asked	you,”	Matthew	 said.	“I	 asked	if	 that	was	the	man
who	called	you	last	Monday	night.”
   “Oh,”	  Stubbs	said.	“Play	it	again,	willya?”
   Matthew	 played	it	again.
   “Hello,	  this	is	Stephen	Leeds.	I	just	wanted	to	tell	you—”
   “No,”	  Stubbs	said.

129
   Matthew	 stabbed	at	the	STOP	button.
   “That’s	  Mr.	 Leeds,	 all	 right,”	  Stubbs	said,	 “but	 that	 ain’t	  the	man	 who
called	me	last	Monday.”
   At	 last,	Matthew	 thought.	One	for	our	side.



More	damn	 doors	here	than	you	 could	 find	 in	a	 Broadway	farce.	 Windows,
too.	 Everyplace	 you	 looked.	 A	 burglar’s	  paradise.	You	 told	 your	  average
junkie	burglar	 there	was	a	farm	 out	here	on	Timucuan	 with	 no	burglar	alarm
system	 and	 all	 these	 windows,	  he’d	  wet	 his	  pants	 in	 glee.	 Even	  your
sophisticated	burglar	 would	 appreciate	 a	vacation	 from	 having	 to	 work	 so
hard	getting	into	a	place.
   Your	 junkie	 burglar	 went	 for	 the	windows.	 All	  he	knew	 was	crack,	man.
Got	to	get	the	crack,	man.	Smash,	grab,	got	to	 get	the	crack.	Even	if	 he	knew
how	to	 pick	 a	lock	 or	 loid	 a	door,	 which	 he	didn’t,	 he	 couldn’t	 waste	time
fooling	around	with	 such	things.	Easier	to	smash	the	window	with	 a	brick	or	a
hammer,	climb	on	in,	take	all	the	shiny	stuff,	 and	split	to	the	crack	house.
   Your	 sophisticated	burglar	knew	 locks	and	alarms.	There	 wasn’t	a	door	 he
couldn’t	open	or	 an	alarm	he	couldn’t	 circumvent.	Break	a	window?	 No	 way.
Everybody	knew	the	sound	of	breaking	glass.	Guy	asleep	in	his	bed	five	miles
away,	snoring	to	 beat	the	band,	he	hears	breaking	glass	he	jumps	 up	in	 bed,
knows	right	away	 something’s	happening,	reaches	for	the	phone.	You	broke	a
window,	 it	 was	like	 banging	 a	pair	 of	 cymbals	 together,	announcing	to	 the
world	at	large	that	a	burglary	was	in	progress.	Your	sophisticated	burglar	went
in	and	out	through	doors.	 Warren	had	once	read	a	book	with	that	title.	 Doors.
About	a	burglar.	He	forgot	who	 wrote	it.
   Here	 at	the	Leeds	farm,	you	didn’t	 have	to	be	any	kind	 of	burglar	to	 get	in.
A	 two-year-old	 kid	 still	  learning	 to	 walk	 could	 get	 into	 this	 house.	Not	 a
single	one	of	the	windows	was	locked.	The	front	 door	and	the	two	other	doors
on	the	entrance	side	of	the	house	had	Mickey	 Mouse	locks	on	them,	 the	kind
with	 the	little	 buttons	you	 pushed	in	to	 lock	 them,	what	 you	usually	 saw	on
the	inside	 of	 a	 bathroom	door,	 worthless	 against	forced	 entry.	 The	 sliding
doors	on	the	back	of	the	house	were	equipped	only	with	 thumb	locks	 fitted	to
their	 handles.	You	 could	 open	 them	 from	 the	 outside	 with	 a	 screwdriver.
Warren	was	 looking	  for	 tool	 marks	 that	 would	  conclusively	 show	 forced
entry,	but	he	knew	he	wouldn’t	 find	 any.	You	didn’t	need	tools	to	get	into	 this
place.	All	you	 needed	was	determination.	And	not	much	of	that,	either.
   He	 was	trying	a	door	he’d	missed	at	the	side	of	the	house—
   More	 damn	doors.
   —twisting	   the	  knob,	 unsurprised	 when	  the	 door	  opened	 without	  the
slightest	re—
   “Help	 you?”	 the	voice	behind	him	said.

130
   Warren	turned.
   He	 was	looking	 at	a	very	big,	very	 good-looking	 white	man	in	 bib	overalls
and	high-topped	  work	  shoes.	Six	  feet	 two	 inches	 tall,	  he	 guessed.	Two
hundred	and	twenty	 pounds	at	least.	 Twenty-six,	 twenty-seven	years	old,	 in
there.	Bulging	   biceps	 showing	 where	 his	 short-sleeved	 blue	  denim	 shirt
ended.	Tattoo	of	a	mermaid	on	his	 right	forearm,	 all	bare-breasted	and	scaly-
bottomed.	Shock	of	red	hair	hanging	on	his	forehead.	Glittering	 green	eyes.	A
wide	grin	 on	his	face.	The	grin	was	not	 friendly,	but	 it	was	reasonable.	It	was
saying	a	thief	had	been	caught	in	 the	act.	Maybe	it	 was	even	saying	a	nigger
had	been	caught	 in	 the	act.	 Sometimes	you	 couldn’t	 tell	  from	 grins	 alone,
however	reasonable	they	appeared.	Not	down	 here,	anyway,	where	everyone
was	oh	so	friendly	and	polite.
   “Mrs.	 Leeds	knows	I’m	 here,”	 Warren	said	at	once.
   “I’ll	   bet	she	does,”	the	man	said.
   “My	   name	is	 Warren	 Chambers,	I	 work	 for	  Matthew	 Hope,	 the	 lawyer
who’s	defending	Mr.	Leeds.”
   The	man	kept	looking	 at	him,	still	 grinning	 reasonably.
   “Ask	 your	 boss,”	Warren	said.
   “I	 will.	  Want	to	come	along	with	me?”
   The	look	 added,	Or	I’ll	 break	your	 arm.
   Like	 two	 old	buddies	out	 for	a	short	morning	 stroll,	 they	ambled	around	to
the	back	of	the	house	together.	Not	half	 an	hour	earlier,	Warren	had	talked	 to
Jessica	Leeds	on	the	terrace	here.	She’d	been	having	her	morning	coffee	at	 a
round	glass-topped	table	overlooking	 the	pool.	Wearing	 a	jungle-green	nylon
wrap,	short	nightgown	 under	it.	 Barefooted.	Legs	crossed.	She’d	offered	 him
a	cup	of	coffee.	He’d	 politely	 declined,	saying	he	wanted	to	 get	to	work	 right
away.	That	 was	when	 he	thought	 he’d	 be	busy	 with	 tool	 marks.	 That	 was
before	he	learned	the	house	was	a	cracker	box.	 Mrs.	Leeds	was	no	 longer	at
the	table.	Even	the	breakfast	things	were	gone.
   “I	 spoke	to	her	right	 here,”	Warren	said.
   “Uh-huh.”
   “I’m	  a	private	investigator,”	 Warren	said.	“Let	me	show	you	my	 license.”
   “I’d	  sure	like	to	see	it,”	the	man	said.
   He	 watched	Warren	as	he	fished	into	 his	side	pocket.	His	 look	 said,	You’d
better	not	pull	a	knife	 or	anything.	All	 Warren	pulled	 was	a	wallet.	He	opened
it,	found	his	 plastic-encased	ID	card,	and	showed	it	to	the	guy	 in	the	overalls.
The	card,	 together	with	 a	 class-A	license	 to	 operate	a	private	 investigative
agency	in	  the	 state	of	  Florida,	  had	 cost	 him	 a	 hundred	 bucks	 and	 was
renewable	each	year	 at	midnight	 on	 the	 thirtieth	 day	 of	 June.	He	had	 also
posted	a	 five-thousand-dollar	  bond	 for	  the	privilege	  of	  being	 allowed	 to
investigate	and	to	 gather	information	  on	a	 wide	range	 of	matters,	 public	 or
private.	The	guy	in	the	overalls	seemed	singularly	unimpressed.

131
   “Why	  were	you	going	in	the	house?”	he	asked	evenly.
   A	 field	 nigger’s	supposed	to	stay	in	 the	fields,	 his	look	 said.	Only	a	 house
nigger’s	allowed	to	go	in	 the	house.
   “I	  wasn’t	going	 in	 the	house,”	Warren	said.	 “I	 was	trying	 the	door.	May	 I
have	that	back,	please?”
   The	guy	 in	the	overalls	handed	the	card	back.
   “Why	  were	 you	 trying	 the	 door	if	  you	 weren’t	 going	 in	 the	house?”	 he
asked	reasonably.	His	 reasonable	grin	  was	back,	 too.	 Warren	 was	already
figuring	 out	his	defense.	With	 somebody	this	size,	you	 went	immediately	 for
the	balls.
   “I’m	  checking	for	 forced	entry,”	he	said.
   “Uh-huh.”
   “We’re	  trying	  to	 find	  out	 if	  someone	got	 in	 here	 on	 the	 night	  of	 the
murders.”
   “Uh-huh.”
   “Look,	  get	Mrs.	Leeds,	will	 you?	She’ll	straighten	this	 out	in	a—”
   “Oh,	 I’m	  sure	she	will.	 But	 I	think	 maybe	I	 ought	to	 get	the	cops	instead,
don’t	you?”
   “Sure,	 do	that,”	Warren	said,	and	sighed	heavily.
   “Ned?”
   Her	 voice.	Our	Lady	of	 Redemption.	Calling	 from	inside	the	house.
   “What’s	 the	trouble,	Ned?”
   “No	 trouble	 at	all,”	he	called	over	his	shoulder.
   Ned.	 Perfect	name	for	an	asshole	in	bib	 overalls.	What’s	 the	trouble,	Ned?
No	trouble	at	all.	Just	going	to	break	this	man’s	arm,	is	all.
   “Mrs.	 Leeds?”	 Warren	called.	“Can	you	please	come	out	here	a	minute?”
   Silence	from	 within.
   Had	 she	forgotten	the	private	investigator	was	here?
   Had	 she	mistaken	him	 for	 someone	here	to	 cut	back	 the	palms?	Do	 your
trees,	lady?	Ten	bucks	a	tree?	Well,	okay	then,	my	second	price	is	six-fifty.
   “Just	 a	moment,”	she	said.
   They	 waited.
   Ned	 grinning.
   Warren	looking	 out	over	the	fields.
   It	 did	 not	take	a	moment,	it	 took	more	like	 ten	moments.	When	 finally	 she
appeared,	she	was	wearing	tailored	 jeans	 and	an	emerald-green	T-shirt	 that
echoed	the	color	of	her	eyes.	Green	was	the	lady’s	color,	Warren	guessed.	He
also	figured	that	the	reason	she’d	taken	so	long	was	that	she’d	 been	dressing.
But	she	was	still	barefooted.	And	there	was	no	bra	under	the	thin	cotton	shirt.
   “Did	  you	need	some	help?”	she	asked	him.
   Paraphrasing	what	young	Ned	here	had	asked	not	ten	minutes	ago.
   “Ned	 thinks	I’m	 a	burglar,”	 Warren	said.

132
   “Oh?”
   She	seemed	amused.
   Green	eyes	twinkling,	 smile	forming	 on	her	lips.
   “Saw	 him	trying	 the	side	door,”	Ned	said.
   “I	 knew	 he	was	here,	Ned.”
   “Well,	  just	 thought	I’d	  make	sure,”	 he	said,	and	 shrugged.	“Strange	man
trying	a	door	to	the	house.”
   Strange	black	man	was	what	he	meant.
   “This	 is	Warren	Chambers,”	Jessica	said.	“Ned	Weaver.”
   “Delighted	  to	meet	 you,”	 Warren	said,	but	 did	not	 offer	his	 hand.	Neither
did	Weaver.
   “Warren’s	  trying	  to	 find	  out	 if	  anyone	 broke	 into	 the	 house,”	  Jessica
explained.
   “Tell	  me,	Mrs.	 Leeds,”	 Warren	said,	“do	 you	 ever	lock	 any	doors	 around
here?”
   “We’re	 safe	here	in	the	country,”	she	said.	“Aren’t	 we,	Ned?”
   Something	 passed	between	them.
   A	 look?
   No,	 nothing	quite	that	blatant.
   Something,	 though.
   “Very	 safe,”	Weaver	said.
   The	something	again.
   Ineffable.
   But	 there.
   All	  at	once,	Warren	wondered	if	young	Ned	 here	was	diddling	the	farmer’s
wife.
   The	 eye	contact—or	 whatever	 it	 had	been—between	Jessica	and	Weaver
broke	like	delicate	crystal.	 Weaver	brushed	the	lock	of	hair	 from	his	eyes,	the
mermaid	on	his	forearm	 catching	the	sun	as	if	 she	were	breaking	the	 surface
of	shining	water.	Warren	glanced	at	the	tattoo.	Weaver	caught	the	glance.
   “Nice	 tattoo,”	 Warren	said.
   “Thanks,”	  Weaver	said.
   The	  eyes	grazed	 again,	 his	 and	 hers,	 green	 brushing	 green,	 touching,
veering	away.
   Press	it,	Warren	thought.
   “Navy?”	  he	asked.
   “Nope,”	  Weaver	said.
   “I’ve	   always	 wanted	 a	tattoo,”	  Warren	 said.	“Did	  you	 get	 that	 here	 in
Calusa?”
   “San	 Diego,”	 Weaver	said.
   But	 not	Navy,	Warren	thought.
   “Big	  Marine	base	there,	right?”	he	said.	“San	Diego?”

133
   “I	 wouldn’t	know,”	Weaver	said.	“I’ve	never	been	in	the	service.”
   Which	left	only	one	other	thing	Warren	could	think	of.
   “You’ll	 excuse	me,	won’t	you?”	Jessica	said,	and	turned	and	went	back	into
the	house.
   “I	 just	want	to	check	a	few	more	doors,”	Warren	said	to	her	green-shirted
back.
   “I	 got	work,	too,”	Weaver	said,	and	left	him	standing	there	in	the	sun,	still
wondering.



Patricia	Demming	was	sitting	in	Matthew’s	outer	office	when	he	got	back	at
three	that	afternoon.	She	was	wearing	a	dark-blue	tropical	suit	with	a	white
silk	 blouse	and	 medium-heeled	blue	leather	pumps.	She	 was	thumbing
through	what	looked	like	the	Calusa	telephone	directory	but	which	was	only
Vogue’s	Fall	Preview	issue.	The	window	behind	her	was	running	with	rain-
snakes.	The	rains	had	returned,	and	with	them	the	assistant	state	attorney.	She
put	down	the	oversize	magazine.
   “Hi,”	 she	said,	and	smiled.	“I’ve	been	waiting	for	you.”
   Matthew	remembered	how	Andrew	Holmes	had	described	her	courtroom
style:	flamboyant,	seductive,	aggressive,	unrelenting,	and	unforgiving.	He
wondered	what	she	was	doing	here.
   “Come	on	in,”	he	said.
   “Sure.”
   She	rose,	smoothed	her	skirt,	followed	him	past	Cynthia	Huellen’s	desk—
Cynthia	giving	her	the	once-over	as	she	went	by—and	then	down	the	corridor
to	Matthew’s	office.
   “Have	a	seat,”	he	said.
   “Thanks.”
   “Coffee?”	he	asked.	“Soft	drink?	Anything?”
   “Nothing,	thanks.”
   “So,”	he	said.
   “So,”	she	said.
   “To	what	do	I	owe	the	honor?”
   Patricia	crossed	her	legs.	Blue	pantyhose.	Sleek	legs.	Long	blond	hair,
electric	blue	eyes.	A	beautiful	woman	altogether.
   “I	 thought	you	might	be	ready	to	talk	a	deal,”	she	said.
   Matthew	looked	at	her.
   “Am	 I	wrong?”
   “You	are	wrong,”	he	said.
   “That’s	not	the	impression	I	got.”
   “From	whom?”
   “I	 won’t	play	games,	okay?	Morris	Bloom	told	me	you’d	discussed	the	case

134
with	him—”
   “I	 didn’t	discuss	a	deal.”
   “I	 know	that.	But	he	told	you	that	I	might	be	ready	to	make	one,	isn’t	that
so?”
   “He	mentioned	something	like	that,	yes.	We’re	friends.”
   “I	 know	that,	too.”
   “He	was	afraid	I	might	not	have	a	case.”
   “Didn’t	 want	to	see	his	friend	get	burned	by	the	Wicked	Witch	of	the	West,
huh?”
   “He	never	once	called	you	that.”
   “But	 you	know	the	nickname,	don’t	you?”
   “I’ve	 heard	it.”
   “Because	you	had	someone	research	me,	didn’t	you?”
   “Yes.”
   “And	 you	 learned	that	my	first	 job	 was	in	 Los	 Angeles	with	Dolman,
Ruggiero—”
   “Yes.”
   “—where	I	was	called	the	Wicked	Witch	of	the	West.”
   “Apparently.”
   “Because	I	was	such	a	mean	bitch,”	Patricia	said,	and	smiled.	“I’ve	had	you
researched,	too,	by	the	way.	I	can	tell	you	anything	you	want	to	know	about
yourself.”
   “Uh-huh.”
   “Graduate	of	Northwestern,	where	you	also	got	your	law	degree,	married
quite	young	to	a	nice	Chicago	girl,	divorced	her	several	years	ago,	picked	up
again	with	her	sometime	later,	ended	it	yet	again	sometime	after	that.	You’ve
got	a	fourteen-year-old	daughter	who’s	said	to	be	a	 quote	Brainy	Beauty
unquote	and	who	now	attends	a	private	school	in	Massachusetts.	You	came	to
the	practice	of	criminal	 law	 rather	late	in	 your	career,	having	specialized
before	then	in	real	estate,	divorce,	and	what-have-you.”
   “Right,	what-have-you,”	Matthew	said.
   “Right.	 But	 from	what	I	 understand,	you’ve	had	a	remarkable	string	of
successes	till	now—”
   Matthew	did	not	miss	the	“till	now.”
   “—defending	murderers	like	Stephen	Leeds.”
   “Objection,”	he	said,	and	smiled.
   “Sustained,”	she	said,	and	returned	the	smile.	“In	fact,	there	are	people	in
town	who	say	you’re	even	better	than	Benny	Weiss,”
   “I	 take	that	as	a	compliment.”
   “You	should.	He’s	a	shark.	But	so	am	I.”
   “So	I	understand.”
   “In	 which	case,	you	should	consider	yourself	fortunate,”	she	said.

135
   “About	  what?”
   “My	  presence	here.	To	offer	you	a	deal.”
   “My	  man’s	innocent.”
   “No,	 no,	Matthew.”
   “Yes,	 yes,	Patricia.”
   “Ah,	  he	remembers	my	name.	Hear	me,	 will	 you,	 please?	You	know	what
I’ve	got,	you’ve	 seen	all	the	discovery	material.”
   “Yes.”
   “Well,	 now	 I’ve	 got	even	more.”
   “Want	 to	tell	 me?”
   “Sure.	 I’ve	 got	 a	witness	 who	saw	 Leeds	parking	 his	boat	at	 a	restaurant
named	Kickers—”
   “I’m	  assuming	I’ll	 be	receiving—”
   “Yes,	 all	in	 due	course,	name,	statement,	bra	size,”	she	said,	and	rolled	her
big	blue	eyes.	“She	also	saw	Leeds	getting	into	the	car	one	of	my	 Vietnamese
witnesses	described.	A	green	Oldsmobile	Cutlass	Supreme.”
   “He	 didn’t	 know	the	make.”
   “But	 he	described	it	accurately	otherwise.”
   “No,	 he	wasn’t	sure	about	the	color,	either.”
   “He	 said	dark	blue	or	green.	And	my	 new	witness	nailed	it	as	green.”
   “Did	  she	also	nail	that	nonexistent	license	plate?”
   Patricia	 looked	at	him.
   “There’s	 no	such	plate	in	the	state	of	Florida,”	 he	said.
   “I	 assume	you’ve	checked.”
   “Oh,	 yes.”
   “You’re	  better	than	I	thought,”	she	said.
   “I	 try,”	 he	said.
   “But	 I’ve	 still	 got	enough	to	cook	him.”
   “Maybe.”
   “Take	 my	deal,	Matthew.”
   “Why?	 If	 your	case	is	so	wonderful—”
   “I	 want	 to	save	the	state	money.”
   “Please,”	 he	said.	“No	bullshit.”
   “Okay.	 Skye	wants	this	one	put	away	fast.”
   “Why?”
   “Ask	 him.”
   “Me?	 I’m	 still	 waiting	for	 the	morning	edition	 to	break.”
   “Here’s	 the	deal,”	she	said.	“You	plead	your	man	guilty	 to—”
   “I	 don’t	 even	want	to	hear	it.”
   “Come	 on,	Matthew,”	  she	said,	and	smiled	again.	“I	 got	caught	in	 the	rain
walking	over	here,	the	least	you	can	do	is	hear	me	out.”
   “You	 always	seem	to	be	getting	caught	in	the	rain.”

136
   “Bad	failing,	I	know.	What	do	you	say?	Give	me	a	break,	huh?”
   Blue	eyes	wide.	Little	Miss	Innocence.
   “If	 I	hear	your	deal,	I’d	be	obliged	to	report	it	to	my	client.”
   “If	 you	know	I’m	ready	to	deal,	you’re	obliged	to	report	that,	too.”
   Matthew	looked	at	her.
   “Let	me	hear	it,”	he	said.
   “You	plead	him	guilty	to	three	counts	of	murder	one,	we	agree	to	waive	the
penalty	proceeding.”
   “Meaning?”
   “Meaning	your	man	gets	life	and	becomes	eligible	for	parole	in	twenty-five
years.”
   “Times	three,”	Matthew	said.
   “Oh	 dear,”	she	said,	“that’s	right.	There	are	three	separate	counts,	aren’t
there?”
   As	if	just	discovering	this.
   “But	 we	 can	always	stipulate	that	the	sentences	be	served	concurrently,
can’t	we?”	she	said,	and	smiled.
   “Uh-huh,”	he	said.
   “Which	 would	make	him	eligible	 in	twenty-five,	 wouldn’t	it?	 How	does
that	appeal	to	you,	Matthew?”
   “What	makes	you	think	a	judge	would	grant	a	proceeding	waiver?”
   “The	 state	attorney	herself	pleading	clemency	for	the	defendant?	Reeling
off	 mitigating	  circumstances?	No	 significant	 history	 of	  prior	 criminal
activity...under	the	influence	of	extreme	mental	or	emotional	disturbance...oh,
yes,	it	would	fly,	Matthew.”
   “Maybe,”	he	said.
   “I	 could	make	it	fly,	believe	me.”
   “Uh-huh.”
   “I’m	 good,	Matthew.”
   “And	 modest,	too.”
   “Tell	your	client,	okay?”
   “That	you’re	good?”
   “No,	 that	I’m	offering	him	an	opportunity	to	breathe	fresh	air	again	before
he’s	an	old	man.”
   “In	 twenty-five	years,	he	will	be	an	old	man.”
   “Which	is	better	than	being	a	dead	man.”
   “Unless	he’s	innocent,”	Matthew	said.



Stephen	Leeds	was	eating	his	dinner	when	Matthew	got	there	that	evening.	In
the	Calusa	jail,	they	served	dinner	at	five-thirty.	Lights-out	was	at	nine.
   “The	routine	gets	to	you	more	than	anything	else,”	Leeds	said.

137
   He	 was	moving	 some	amorphous-looking	stuff	 around	on	his	 tray.	It	stuck
to	his	fork	like	 glue.	“You’d	 think	 in	jail,”	  he	said,	“they’d	figure	 since	there’s
nothing	 to	do,	 they	 might	 as	well	 let	 you	 go	 to	 bed	late,	 sleep	late	 in	 the
morning.	But,	 no,	there	has	to	be	a	routine.	So	they	turn	the	lights	out	at	nine,
and	they	wake	you	up	at	six.	 On	the	farm,	 the	only	people	who	 are	up	at	that
hour	are	the	people	who	work	for	me.	Look	 at	this	stuff,	will	 you?”
   He	 held	up	the	fork.
   The	 Thing	 From	 Another	 Planet	 clung	to	 it	 tenaciously.	 It	 was	green.	It
might	have	been	spinach.
   “One	 of	 the	prisoners	here,	he’s	been	in	and	out	 of	jail	 all	 his	life,”	  Leeds
said,	“he	 told	 me	 they’re	 only	 allowed	 three	dollars	 and	 sixty-five	  cents	a
meal.	That’s	what	 the	city	 gives	 them	to	 spend.	What	can	you	 get	for	 three
sixty-five	 nowadays?	 Look	 at	 this	stuff,”	  he	 said	again,	 and	put	 down	 the
fork.	It	 seemed	to	move	across	the	tray	 of	its	 own	volition,	  but	perhaps	he’d
only	set	it	down	crookedly.
   “My	  stockbroker	 was	here	yesterday,”	he	said.	 “He	 comes	every	day,	just
the	way	I	used	to	go	to	his	office	 every	day.	Except	that	he	can	only	come	see
me	during	visiting	 hours,	which	 are	from	eleven	to	twelve	in	 the	morning	and
three	to	four	in	the	afternoon.	The	routine	again,	right?	You	 can	come	anytime
you	want,	 of	 course,	 but	you’re	  my	 attorney.	Bernie	 usually	 comes	 in	 the
morning,	before	lunch.	Lunch	 is	at	least	edible.	They	get	it	 from	McDonald’s,
there’s	no	way	 anyone	can	 screw	up	 a	hamburger	and	fries.	 Breakfast	 isn’t
bad,	either.	But	dinner?	Look	at	it,”	 he	said	again,	and	shook	his	head.
   Matthew	 looked	at	it.
   The	fork	 seemed	to	be	corroding.
   But	 perhaps	it	had	been	rusty	to	begin	with.
   “Anyway,	  Bernie	 comes	here,	and	 we	discuss	my	 portfolio,”	  Leeds	 said.
“But	 it	isn’t	 the	same	as	when	I	was	going	there	every	afternoon	 at	two,	two-
thirty,	 it	  just	 isn’t	 the	 same.	 I	 sit	 there	 listening	  to	 him	 telling	  me	 how
Motorola	 is	 doing	 now	  that	 they’re	 supplying	 telephones	 to	 Japanese	car
makers,	and	I	 wonder	 if	 I’ll	   ever	make	 a	call	 from	 a	 car	telephone	 again.
There’s	a	telephone	in	the	Caddy,	I	 had	it	 installed	after	 I	had	a	flat	 out	near
Ananburg	 one	night,	  not	 a	garage	 open,	not	 a	 phone	booth	 anywhere	 on
Timucuan,	I	 figured	the	hell	 with	 this.	Had	 a	phone	put	in	 the	next	morning.
Bernie	sits	 there	 and	tells	 me	 about	car	 telephones,	and	 I’m	 wondering	 if
they’ll	 let	me	make	a	last	call	from	the	electric	chair.”
   “You’re	  not	going	to	the	electric	chair,”	 Matthew	said.
   This	  would	 have	 been	a	 good	 time	 to	 tell	  him	 about	 the	deal	 Patricia
Demming	had	offered,	 but	he	held	 back	because	his	man	was	talking	and	he
wanted	to	keep	him	talking.	 When	they	talked,	 they	sometimes	came	up	with
something	they	 hadn’t	thought	 of	 earlier,	information	  that	often	 could	 blow
the	prosecution’s	case	out	of	the	water.	Matthew	hoped	Leeds	would	come	up

138
with	that	elusive	something	now.	Let	 him	talk,	 let	him	ramble,	and	meanwhile
listen	 hard.	Benny	 Weiss	 had	taught	 him	 this.	 But	 that	 was	before	 they’d
become	such	fierce	competitors.
   “I	 keep	forgetting	 things,”	 Leeds	said.	“From	my	 real	life.	 The	routine	here
becomes	a	life	 in	 itself,	 you	 see.	So	you	 remember	things	 from	 this	 life—
wake-up	at	six,	 roll	 call	at	 six-ten,	showers	at	six-fifteen,	  breakfast	at	seven,
exercise	in	the	yard	at	eight,	 and	so	on—but	you	start	to	 forget	the	important
things,	the	things	from	 your	 real	life.	 I’ve	 been	meaning	to	tell	 Jessie	for	the
past	three	days	now	that	 my	car	 is	ready.	The	Caddy.	It	 was	supposed	to	be
ready	Monday	 morning,	and	this	 is	already	 late	Wednesday,	three	days	have
gone	by.	But	I	keep	forgetting	 to	tell	 her.	Somebody’s	got	to	pick	 it	up,	either
her	or	Ned.	I	 don’t	 want	it	 sitting	 there	at	the	garage,	it	might	 get	banged	up
or	vandalized.	There’s	a	lot	of	that	stuff	 going	on	in	 Calusa	these	days,	there’s
dope	everywhere	in	America,	 and	where	there’s	dope,	there’s	crime.	Did	 you
ever	think	it	 would	 come	to	this?	Did	 you	ever	in	 a	million	 years	imagine	 an
America	 that	could	 sink	 so	 deep	into	 the	 slime?	It	  makes	me	ashamed.	It
makes	me	want	to	cry.”
   He	 fell	suddenly	silent.
   It	  seemed	possible	that	 he	would,	 in	 fact,	 begin	 crying	 in	 the	very	 next
moment.
   Keep	them	talking,	 Benny	Weiss	had	advised	Matthew.
   And	 if	 they	stop	talking,	prod	them.
   “I	  played	that	voice	 tape	for	Stubbs	early	 this	morning,”	  he	said.	“He	 told
me	it	wasn’t	 the	voice	 he’d	heard	on	the	 telephone	the	night	of	 the	murders.
Which	 confirms	  that	 someone	 else	took	  your	 boat	 out.	  Or	 at	 least	 that
someone	else	called	to	say	he	was	taking	the	boat	out.”
   “Which	   still	 doesn’t	 distance	me	 too	 very	 far	 from	  the	chair,	 does	it?”
Leeds	said.	He	 was	on	 the	 edge	of	 tears	now.	 Keep	him	 talking,	  Matthew
thought.	Listen	for	that	one	sharp	note	sounding	in	the	mist.
   “Who	 knows	 where	you	keep	your	boat?”	he	asked.
   “Dozens	 of	people.”
   “Tell	 me	about	each	and	every	one	of	them.”
   “All	  of	 our	friends	know	the	marina	I	 use,”	Leeds	said.	“Most	of	 them	have
been	on	the	boat	with	us.	But	none	of	them	would	set	me	up	for	murder.”
   “How	  do	you	know?”
   “A	  person	knows	 his	friends.	 They’re	 not	 his	 friends	if	  he	doesn’t	know
them.”
   “I’ll	   want	 a	 list	 of	 their	 names	 anyway.	Before	 I	  leave.	All	  the	 people
who’ve	been	on	the	boat	or	who	know	where	you	keep	it.”
   “Sure,”	 Leeds	said.	But	there	was	total	despair	in	his	voice;	he	was	thinking
this	would	be	a	worthless	exercise.
   “My	  investigator	 tells	 me	you	can	 get	into	 your	house	with	 a	can	 opener.

139
Correction.	Even	without	 a	can	opener.	Were	all	the	entrance	doors	locked	on
the	night	of	the	murders?”
   “I	 don’t	 know.”
   Again	 the	sound	of	 defeat.	They	were	already	strapping	him	 into	the	chair.
A	man	with	 a	black	 hood	over	his	head	was	standing	near	the	wall,	 his	 arms
folded	across	his	 chest,	waiting	 to	step	into	 the	other	 room	where	 he	would
look	through	a	glass	panel	and	throw	the	switch.
   “Do	 you	normally	 lock	 the	doors	before	you	go	to	sleep?”	Matthew	asked.
   “Not	 always.	 We’re	in	the	country,	there’s	never	been	any	trouble	out	there.
Besides,	Ned	sleeps	in	the	guesthouse	just	down	the	road,	he’d	hear	anything
that—”
   “Ned?”
   “Jessie’s	brother.	Our	manager.	Ned	Weaver.”
   “Your	 manager	is—”
   “Yes,	  my	 brother-in-law.	  My	  wife’s	  maiden	 name	 was	 Weaver.	Jessie
Weaver.	Ned’s	been	working	for	us	ever	since—”
   There	 was	a	slight	 pause.	Hardly	long	 enough	to	notice—unless	 you	were
listening	for	that	single	 sharp,	piercing	note.
   “—last	 summer,”	 Leeds	said.
   Matthew	 looked	at	him.
   Their	 eyes	met.
   What?	Matthew	 thought.
   What’s	 here?
   “So	  you	 feel	 it	 isn’t	 necessary	to	 lock	 the	 doors,”	 he	 said.	 “With	  your
brother-in-law	living	  in	the	guesthouse.”
   “He’s	 a	very	big	man,”	 Leeds	said.
   “How	  far	away	is	the	guesthouse?”
   “Down	  the	end	of	the	road.”
   “How	  far	is	that?”
   “Two,	 three	hundred	yards.”
   “Then—if	  the	doors	were	unlocked—someone	could	 have	got	in,	 isn’t	that
so?	Without	Ned	hearing	them?”
   “Well,	  I	 suppose	so.	 But	 you	don’t	  think	 something	 like	 that’s	 going	 to
happen,	you	know.	Someone	breaking	into	the	house—”
   “Or	 just	walking	 in,	actually,	if	 the	doors	were	unlocked.”
   “Yes,	 but	you	don’t	think	 of	that	out	in	 the	country.”
   “I	  suppose	not.	 Mr.	 Leeds,	 when	 you	 took	 your	 car	 in	 for	 service...the
Cadillac—”
   “Yes?”
   “Did	  you	leave	them	your	keys?”
   “Yes,	 I	did.”
   “Which	  keys?”

140
   “Well,	my	key	chain.”
   “Were	your	house	keys	on	that	chain?”
   “Well...come	to	think	of	it,	yes,	I	suppose	they	were.”
   “You	left	your	house	keys	at	the	garage?”
   “Well...yes.	I’ve	 been	taking	it	to	the	same	place	for	the	past	God	knows
how	long.	I	trust	those	people	completely.”
   “You	trust	them	with	your	house	keys?”
   “I’m	 sure	Jimmy	doesn’t	leave	keys	out	in	the	open.	I’m	sure	he’s	got	this
metal	box	he	puts	them	in.	Hanging	on	the	wall.	With	a	lock	on	it.”
   “Jimmy	who?”
   “Farrell.	He	owns	the	garage.”
   “What’s	the	name	of	the	garage?”
   “Silvercrest	Shell.	On	the	Trail	near	the	Silvercrest	Mall.”
   “Any	 other	keys	on	that	ring?	Beside	your	car	keys	and	your	house	keys?”
   “Well,	the	keys	to	Jessie’s	car,	too,	I	guess.”
   Matthew	looked	at	him.
   “It’s	 a	hard	ring	to	get	keys	on	and	off	of,”	Leeds	said.
   Matthew	kept	looking	at	him.
   “Well,	it	 is.”
   “So	 what	we’ve	 got	here,”	Matthew	said,	“is	 a	 situation	where	anyone
could	have	taken	those	keys	from	the	garage—”
   “No,	I’m	 sure	Jimmy	locks	them	up.”
   “But	 if	 someone	did	get	hold	of	them,	he	could	have	got	into	your	house
even	if	the	doors	were	locked—”
   “Well,	yes,	I—”
   “—and	then	driven	away	in	your	wife’s	Maserati.”
   “Yes.	I	suppose	so.”
   “How	 many	people	knew	you’d	taken	your	car	in	for	service?”
   “I	 really	don’t	know.	I	spoke	about	it,	I	guess—”
   “To	friends?”
   “Yes,	I	suppose	so.”
   “I	 really	do	want	that	list,	Mr.	Leeds.	Who	else	would	have	known?”
   “Well,	 everyone	on	the	farm.	The	people	who	work	for	me.	They’d	have
known	the	Caddy	was	gone.	But	I	don’t	think	they’d	have	known	where	it
was.	The	garage	I	took	it	to.	They	couldn’t	have	known	that.”
   “Your	boat	key	wasn’t	on	that	key	ring,	was	it?”
   “No,	no.”
   “I	 didn’t	think	it’d	 be.	What	have	you	got?	One	of	these	little	flotation	key
chains?”
   “Yes,	shaped	like	a	buoy—”
   “The	kind	that	comes	apart?”
   “Yes.”

141
   “So	 you	can	put	your	registration	inside	 it.”
   “Yes.	 Red	and	white.”
   “Mine’s	  green	and	white.	Where	do	you	keep	that	key,	Mr.	Leeds?”
   “In	 my	 study.	At	the	farm.”
   “Where	 is	that?	The	study?”
   “Just	 to	the	left	 of	the	entrance	door.	You	take	 two	steps	down,	and	you’re
in	the	study.”
   “And	  the	key	would	be	where?”
   “On	 a	brass	key	holder	fastened	to	the	wall.	Alongside	 the	door	leading	out
to	the	garage.	We	keep	the	car	keys	on	it	and	also	the	boat	keys.”
   “Any	  spares	to	that	boat	key?”
   “One.”
   “Where?”
   “At	  the	marina.	In	case	they	have	to	move	the	boat.”
   “And	  those	are	the	only	boat	keys?	The	 one	on	the	wall	 in	your	 study	and
the	one	at	the	marina?”
   “Yes.”
   “After	  you	took	 the	boat	out	on	the	afternoon	 of	the	murders—did	 you	put
that	key	back	in	your	study?”
   “Yes.”
   “Would	 you	 know	if	 it’s	still	 there?”
   “How	  could	I?	I	was	arrested	the	next	morning.”
   “Would	 Jessica	know	where	to	find	 that	key	if	I	 asked	her?”
   “I’m	  sure	she	would.	It’s	right	 on	the	wall.”
   “Who	 else	knows	where	you	keep	that	key?”
   “You	 have	to	understand—”
   “Yes?”
   “Whenever	 we	 invited	 friends	 on	the	 boat,	they’d	 come	to	 the	farm	 first.
We’d	gather	there,	do	you	see?”
   “Yes?”
   “And	  the	last	thing	 I’d	 do	before	 we	left	 for	 the	marina	was	take	that	 key
off	the	 wall.	 I’m	 sure	any	number	of	 people	saw	where	 I	kept	 it.	It	 wasn’t	 a
secret.	It	was	just	 the	key	to	the	 boat.”	Leeds	shrugged.	“I	 mean—you	 don’t
expect	something	like	this	to	happen.”
   “No,	 you	don’t,”	  Matthew	said.
   You	 don’t	 expect	murder	to	 happen,	he	thought.	Only	 when	it	 happens	do
the	keys	to	 a	boat	and	 a	house	and	a	red	 Maserati	become	important.	 Only
when	it	happens	do	you	realize	 that	any	number	of	 people	could	have	gained
entrance	to	a	house	as	accessible	as	the	Gulf	of	Mexico.	And	taken	a	boat	key
and	a	car	key	from	that	house.	And	 driven	off	 to	the	Riverview	 Marina	 in	the
red	Maserati	Stubbs	later	 saw.	Any	 number	of	 people.	Which	 was	 the	same
thing	as	saying	anybody.	And	when	you	had	anybody,	you	had	nobody.

142
   Matthew	sighed	heavily.
   “Mr.	 Leeds,”	he	said,	“Patricia	Demming	came	to—”
   “Patricia	Demming?”
   “The	state	attorney	who’s—”
   “Oh,	yes.”
   “She	offered	a	deal,”	Matthew	said.	“I’m	obliged	to	tell	you	what	the	offer
was.”
   Leeds	nodded,	said	nothing.
   “You	plead	guilty	to	three	counts	of	murder	one—”
   “I	 didn’t	kill	 those	men,”	Leeds	said.
   “You	 plead	guilty	and	the	state	will	consolidate	the	three	indictments	and
ask	for	a	waiver	of	the	penalty	proceeding.”
   “What	does	that	mean?”
   “They’ll	 agree	to	life	imprisonment.	If	the	judge	goes	for	it.”
   “I	 didn’t	kill	 those	men.”
   “You’d	be	eligible	for	parole	in	twenty-five	years.”
   “I’d	 be	sixty-six	years	old.”
   “You’d	be	alive.”
   “But	 I	didn’t	kill	those	men.”
   “What	shall	I	tell	her?”
   “Tell	her	to	go	to	hell.”
   “That’s	what	I	wanted	to	hear,”	Matthew	said.	“Thank	you.”



From	a	phone	booth	outside	the	Calusa	Safety	Building,	Matthew	dialed	the
state	attorney’s	office	number	from	memory	and	asked	for	Patricia	Demming.
It	was	several	moments	before	her	voice	came	on	the	line.
   “Hi,”	 she	said	pleasantly.
   “Hello,	 Patricia,”	he	said.	“I	just	talked	to	my	client.”
   “And?”
   “He	says	to	tell	you	he	didn’t	kill	those	men.	He	doesn’t	want	your	deal.”
   “I’m	 sorry	he	feels	that	way,”	she	said.
   She	did	sound	genuinely	sorry.
   “It’s	 not	what	he	feels,”	Matthew	said,	“it’s	what	he	knows.	He	did	not	kill
those	men.”
   “We	think	otherwise,”	Patricia	said.
   “Yes,	that’s	why	there	are	courts	of	law,”	Matthew	said.
   “Well,	 fine,”	she	said,	her	voice	going	suddenly	harsh.	“You	prove	it	in	a
court	of	law,	okay?”
   “You’ve	got	it	backward,	Patricia.	You’re	the	one	who	has	to	prove—”
   “Which	I	 will,”	 she	said.	“Good-bye,	Matthew.”
   There	was	a	click	on	the	line.	Matthew	looked	at	his	watch.	He	opened	the

143
telephone	directory	hanging	from	a	plastic-shielded	metal	cord—miraculously
still	 here	in	 this	day	 and	age	of	pointless	 vandalism—found	 the	number	 for
Silvercrest	 Shell,	 deposited	 a	 quarter,	and	 dialed	 it.	  The	 young	 kid	  who
answered	the	phone	told	 him	 that	 Jimmy	 Farrell	 was	gone	for	 the	 day	and
wouldn’t	 be	back	till	tomorrow	 morning.	 Matthew	left	 his	name	and	said	he’d
call	again.
   He	 looked	through	the	directory	again.
   He	 dug	into	his	pocket	for	another	quarter.
   He	 hesitated.
   What	 the	hell,	he	thought,	and	dialed.



The	old	 man	was	in	 the	habit	 of	 taking	a	 little	 stroll	 after	dinner.	 Tradition.
Gobble	your	 rice,	vegetables,	and	fish,	 and	then	take	 a	little	 stroll	 along	the
levee.	Look	off	 to	the	mountains	beyond	Saigon.	Except	that	this	 was	Calusa,
Florida,	and	 the	nearest	mountains	were	in	 North	 Carolina.	 Plenty	of	 water,
though.	If	 you	 walked	the	 block	and	 a	half	from	 Little	  Asia	 to	the	Tamiami
Trail,	and	then	took	a	left	 and	followed	US	 41	where	it	curved	northward	 past
the	Memorial	 Gardens,	you	suddenly	 caught	a	view	 of	 Calusa	Bay	 that	was
enough	to	make	your	 heart	stop	dead.	Sailboats	out	 there	on	the	water	 or	in
the	slips	at	Marina	 Lou’s,	the	 Sabal	Key	Causeway	stretching	out	 toward	the
barrier	 islands	 and	  the	 Gulf,	  the	 setting	  sun	 staining	  the	 sky	  and	 the
burgeoning	massed	clouds—breathtaking.
   The	old	 man	had	to	die.
   Tonight.



“Actually,	 I	was	glad	you	called,”	 Mai	 Chim	said.
   “I’m	  glad	you	weren’t	 busy,”	Matthew	said.
   “Oh,	 I’m	 never	busy,”	she	said.
   They	  were	sitting	  at	a	 window	  table	in	  Marina	 Lou’s,	 not	 four	 or	 five
blocks	from	 where	 Trinh	 Mang	 Duc	was	 walking	 northward	 on	US	 41,	his
hands	behind	his	back,	 his	head	turned	to	 the	left	 as	he	looked	 out	over	 the
bay,	a	wistful	  smile	 on	his	 face.	Matthew	 and	 Mai	 Chim	 were	looking	  out
over	this	same	vista,	the	short	peninsula	of	 the	city	 park	in	 the	near	distance,
the	bay	 beyond	festooned	with	  the	colors	 of	 sunset	and	busy	with	  evening
boat	traffic.	 The	sun	was	just	dipping	 behind	 the	nearest	barrier	island,	man-
made	Flamingo	Key.	Within	 the	 half	hour,	darkness	would	 claim	the	bay	and
the	night.
   Matthew	 was	wearing	 one	of	his	Third	 World	 Outfits,	 the	label	his	 partner
Frank	gave	to	the	assorted	cotton	trousers	and	shirts	he	bought	 in	a	shop	not
far	from	the	house	he	was	renting.	Made	in	Guatemala,	or	Korea,	or	Malaysia,

144
or	Taiwan,	 the	clothes	 were	casual	and	lightweight,	  perfect	 for	 the	summer
heat.	They	 were	 also	 loose-fitting	  and	therefore	 perfect	 for	 a	 man	 who’d
gained	ten	pounds	stuffing	his	face	with	 pasta	in	Venice,	Florence,	and	Rome.
This	morning	  the	scale	showed	 that	Matthew	 had	 lost	 two	 of	those	 excess
pounds.	He	 hoped	to	 get	down	 to	 his	 fighting	  weight	 within	 the	 next	 two
weeks.	Tonight	he	had	ordered	 a	simple	grilled	 fish.	 Low	 in	 cholesterol,	fat,
and	calories.
   Mai	 Chim	 was	digging	 into	a	steak	the	size	of	 her	native	country.	She	was
wearing	a	pink	 skirt,	 low	 white	 sandals,	and	a	pastel-blue	blouse	cut	 in	a	 V
over	her	breasts.	Her	long	black	hair	fell	loose	on	either	side	of	her	face.	Long
silver	earrings	dangled	from	 her	ears.	A	thick	 silver	 bracelet	circled	her	 right
wrist.	 She	 looked	 very	 American	  and	 very	 Asian.	  She	also	 looked	  very
beautiful.	 And	she	was	 eating	like	 a	 truck	driver.	 Her	 appetite	continued	 to
astonish	him.	But	what	astonished	him	even	more	was	the	fact	that	she	was	so
slender.	He	wondered	if	she	ate	anything	at	all	when	she	wasn’t	with	 him.	 He
wondered,	 too,	 what	 she’d	 meant	 about	 never	 being	 busy.	 A	 woman	  as
beautiful	as	she	was?
   “It	  took	 me	a	 long	time	 to	 learn	how	 to	 use	a	knife	 and	 fork,”	 she	said.
“I’ve	 learned	pretty	well,	 don’t	you	think?”
   Commenting	 on	 her	 own	voracious	 appetite,	 making	 a	joke	 about	it.	 He
suddenly	wondered	if	she’d	ever	gone	hungry	in	Vietnam.	Or	 afterward.
   “I’m	  a	pig,	 I	 know,”	 she	said	cheerfully,	 and	forked	another	 slice	of	 steak
into	her	mouth.	Chewing,	she	said,	“I	 was	going	to	call	you,	in	fact.”
   “Oh?”	 Matthew	 said.	“Why?”
   “To	 teach	you	some	Vietnamese,”	she	said,	and	smiled	mysteriously.



The	old	 man	 had	been	 off	 by	 only	 a	 hair,	but	 it	 wouldn’t	  be	 long	 before
someone	got	him	talking	about	that	license	plate	he’d	 seen,	got	him	rambling,
and	bingo!	Someone	would	make	the	connection.
   Seeing	the	car	hadn’t	been	part	of	the	plan.
   The	 car	was	supposed	to	remain	the	big	secret,	pick	 it	up	 at	Kickers,	drive
it	to	 Little	 Asia,	 park	it	 in	the	 shadows	under	the	big	 pepper	trees	lining	 the
street,	and	then	 go	 in	 all	 yellow	 and	 bright	 to	 do	bloody	  murder.	The	 car
wasn’t	meant	to	be	seen.	Only	the	yellow	 jacket	 and	hat.	In	and	out,	slit	 your
throats,	good	night,	boys,	sleep	tight.	Put	out	your	eyes,	cut	off	your	 cocks,	oh
what	a	horrible	sight.
   But	 the	old	man	had	seen	the	license	plate.
   Seen	it	 wrong,	 as	it	happened,	but	 seen	it	nonetheless,	close	but	no	 cigar.
So	now	the	old	man	had	to	go.	No	witness,	no	license	plate,	no	tracing	it	 back
to	you	know	 who.	 Good-bye	and	good	 luck,	please	give	 my	regards	to	 your
recently	departed	countrymen.

145
   There.
   Walking	 past	the	marina	entrance	now.
   Getting	 dark	out	there	on	the	bay.
   Wait.
   Wait	 for	blackness.



“Do	 you	 remember	my	 telling	 you	 about	 diacritical	 markings?”	  Mai	 Chim
said.
   “Yes.	 The	cedilla	and	the	umlaut.”
   “Which,	  by	the	way,	I	looked	up.	And	 you	were	right,	that’s	what	they	are.”
   “Yes.”
   “Yes,	 you	told	 me.	But	 I	thought	our	 marks	would	 be	easier	to	understand
if	you	 could	 see	them.	Some	of	them,	anyway.	 So	I	xeroxed	 the	Vietnamese
alphabet	from	an	old	grammar	I	 have.	Which	is	why	 I	was	going	to	call	 you,”
she	said,	and	smiled.	“Would	you	care	to	have	a	look?”
   On	 her	 tongue,	the	words	 care	 to	have	a	 look	 seemed	foreign	somehow.
Just	a	trifle	off	the	money.
   “Sure,”	 he	said.
   She	put	down	 her	fork	and	knife	 and	reached	for	the	handbag	hanging	over
the	back	of	her	chair.	She	unclasped	the	bag,	took	out	a	folded	sheet	of	paper,
unfolded	it,	said,	“I	 copied	it	at	work,”	 and	handed	it	to	him:

                     a	ă	â	b	c	d	đ	e	ê	g	h	i	k	 l	m	n	o	ô	σ	p	 q	r	s	t	u	 u’	v	x	y

   The	 alphabet	seemed	foreign,	too,	 just	a	trifle	  off,	 even	though	the	letters
were	written	just	as	in	English.	Perhaps	the	marks	accounted	for	that.
   “Of	  course,	 this	 only	 shows	the	 basic	 order,”	 she	said.	 “There	 are	also
marks	for	 tonal	 distinctions.	 I	 can	draw	 them	for	 you,	 if	 you	 like,	 but	they
would	only	 look	like	 chicken	tracks.”
   “Hen	 tracks,”	 he	said.
   “Yes,”	  she	said.	“It’s	  a	very	 complicated	 language,	I	 told	 you.	A	 million
marks	in	it.	Well,	 not	that	many.	But	plenty.	You	can	keep	that,	if	you	like.”
   “Thank	 you,”	 he	said,	and	refolded	it	and	slipped	it	into	 his	pocket.
   “For	 your	 next	visit	to	Saigon,”	 she	said,	and	rolled	her	eyes	heavenward	to
show	how	remote	a	possibility	 this	was.	She	picked	up	 her	utensils	again,	cut
another	slice	of	 steak,	and	was	raising	 it	 to	her	mouth	 when	 she	asked	with
sudden	and	genuine	concern,	“Is	the	fish	okay?”
   Okay.
   The	way	 she	said	it.
   The	lilt	 of	 it.
   A	 bit	strange.	A	bit	foreign.	 Like	everything	 else	about	her.

146
   “Only	  so-so,”	Matthew	 said.	“My	 partner	says	it’s	impossible	to	 get	a	good
fish	anywhere	in	 Florida.	 The	boats	have	to	 go	out	too	 far	for	 it,	 and	by	 the
time	they	 come	 back	in,	 the	fish	 isn’t	  really	 fresh	anymore.	 So	speaks	the
oracle.”
   “I	  never	eat	fish	 here,”	 she	said.	“In	  Vietnam,	I	 ate	fish	 all	 the	 time,	but
never	here.	The	fish	is	not	so	good	here.	I	think	your	partner	is	right.”
   “So	 do	I,	actually.	But	 please	don’t	tell	him.”
   “Do	 you	like	 him,	your	 partner?”
   “Oh,	 yes.	Very	much.”
   “Is	 he	married?”
   “Yes.”
   “Happily?”
   “Well...let’s	  say	they’re	still	 working	 on	it.”
   “Were	 you	happily	married?”
   “No.”
   “Which	  is	why	you	got	divorced.”
   “Actually,	  it	was	more	complicated	than	that.”
   “That	 means	there	was	another	woman.”
   “Yes.”
   “And	  is	there	a	woman	now?	In	your	life?”
   “No	 one	serious.”
   “Someone	unserious?”
   “Just	 a	few	women	I	enjoy	seeing.”
   She	 had	 finished	  her	 steak,	 and	 now	  she	 placed	 her	 fork	  and	 knife
horizontally	 on	her	plate,	the	way	 someone	had	undoubtedly	taught	her	to	do
here	in	America,	and	sat	sipping	her	beer	and	looking	 out	over	the	bay,	where
the	sky	had	turned	a	violent	 purple.	In	 moments,	the	sun	would	 drop	into	 the
sea,	and	it	would	 be	 dark.	She	was	silent	 for	 what	 seemed	a	long	time,	 the
color	of	the	sky	growing	 steadily	deeper	behind	her.
   “You	 see,”	she	said	at	last,	still	 staring	out	over	the	blackening	 water,	“I’ve
been	wondering	why	you	called.”
   “Because	I	 wanted	to	know	you	better,”	 he	said.
   She	nodded.
   And	 was	silent	again.
   And	 then	 she	turned	to	him	 and	said,	“Does	 that	mean	you	 want	 to	go	to
bed	with	me?”
   Her	 gaze	demanded	honesty.
   He	 risked	honesty.
   “I	 guess	so,”	he	said.	“Eventually.”
   “When	 is	eventually?”	 she	asked.	“Tonight?	Tomorrow?	Next	 month?	Next
year?”
   “Whenever,”	 he	said.	“If	 ever.”

147
   “And	 when	is	that?”
   “Only	 if	and	when	we	both	want	to.”
   “And	 if	I	don’t	want	to?”
   “Then	we	won’t.”
   “And	 then	we’ll	never	get	to	know	each	other	better.”
   “No,	I	 didn’t	say	that.”
   “I’m	 Asian,”	she	said.
   “I	 know.”
   “Is	that	why	you	want	to	go	to	bed	with	me?	Because	I’m	Asian?”
   “I	 haven’t	asked	you	to	go	to	bed	with	me,”	he	said.	“I	asked	you	to	dinner.
And	that	had	nothing	to	do	with	your	being	Asian.”
   “Because	there	are	men	who	want	to	go	to	bed	with	 me	for	that	reason
alone,	you	know.	The	fact	that	I’m	Asian.”
   He	felt	as	if	he’d	been	led	down	a	jungle	path	by	a	beautiful	woman	who’d
suddenly	turned	Vietcong,	raising	her	hands	high	over	her	head	to	reveal
primed	hand	grenades	tucked	under	her	arms.
   He	said	nothing.
   “I	 hope	that	isn’t	the	case	with	you,”	she	said.
   He	still	said	nothing.
   “Because	I’ve	never	been	to	bed	with	anyone	in	my	 life,”	 she	said,	and
turned	away	again	as	blackness	completely	devoured	the	bay.



The	old	man	was	standing	by	the	sidewalk	railing	some	ten	feet	from	 the
streetlamp,	looking	out	over	the	boats	in	their	marina	slips.	On	one	of	the
boats,	someone	was	playing	a	ukulele.	The	instrument	sounded	tinny	on	the
night,	something	from	another	time	and	place,	like	the	old	man	himself.	There
were	lights	on	many	of	 the	boats.	The	lights	reflected	in	 the	black	water.
There	were	soft	voices	on	the	night.	The	ukulele	kept	plinking	its	notes	onto
the	sticky	night	air.	The	old	man	stood	listening	in	seeming	fascination,	his
head	bent.	Then,	at	last,	he	turned	away	from	the	railing	and	began	moving
away	from	the	lamppost—
   This	way,	come	on.
   —his	hands	behind	his	back	again,	head	still	bent,	leaning	slightly	forward,
moving	well	beyond	the	marina’s	lighted	orbit—
   Yes,	come	on.
   —coming	closer	and	closer,	the	streetlamp	behind	him	now,	the	sidewalk
ahead	of	him	as	black	as	the	night,	moving	into	the	blackness	of	the	night,
moving	into	the	blackness	where	the	knife	waited,	where	the	knife—
   Yes!

148
                                                                                                                         9


FRAMED	PHOTOGRAPHS	of	the	detective	squad	he’d	commanded	up	north	in
Nassau	County	lined	  Morris	 Bloom’s	 office	  in	 the	Public	 Safety	 Building.
They	shared	the	 wall	 space	with	 a	citation	 plaque	from	 the	 Nassau	County
Chief	of	 Detectives;	a	pair	of	 laminated	front-page	stories	from	 the	New	York
Daily	News	and	Long	 Island’s	Newsday,	headlining	the	daring	 capture	of	two
bank	robbers	in	 Mineola,	 Long	 Island,	 by	a	police	 officer	 named	 Morris	 L.
Bloom;	 and	several	framed	 photographs	of	 his	 wife.	 A	 boxing	 trophy	 he’d
received	while	serving	in	the	US	Navy	 sat	on	top	of	his	bookshelf,	alongside	a
Snoopy	 doll	 his	  nineteen-year-old	 son	 had	 given	 him	 last	  Father’s	 Day.
Hanging	around	the	beagle’s	neck	was	a	hand-lettered	sign	that	read	TO	THE	BEST

BLOODHOUND	IN	THE	WORLD.	LOVE,	MARC.
   Bloom	  was	 looking	  at	 the	 headline	 of	 that	 morning’s	  Calusa	 Herald-
Tribune.
   The	headline	read:

                                            BIGGEST	 FLORIDA
                                             DRUG	 BUST	EVER

   “I	 thought	 World	War	III	 was	starting,”	Matthew	 said.
   “Mmm,”	  Bloom	 said.
   “The	 size	of	that	type.”
   “Mmm.”
   The	  bylined	  story	  under	 the	  headline	 went	  on	 to	  reveal,	  somewhat
hysterically,	that	 the	largest	cocaine	 seizure	ever	made	in	 southwest	Florida
had	taken	place	yesterday	morning,	August	 21,	and	that	the	arrests	of	 twelve
men	in	 the	so-called	Bolivian	  sector	of	 Calusa	might	 very	well	  have	put	an
end	to	all	 trafficking	 in	 this	 part	of	 the	state.	The	article	 went	on	to	 say	that
the	four-month-long	 investigation	  had	been	initiated	 by	 Skye	Bannister,	 the
state	attorney,	and	that	detectives	from	 his	office	 had	worked	 in	 conjunction
with	 the	DEA,	 the	Calusa	PD,	 and	the	Calusa	Sheriff’s	 Department	 to	bring
about	a	 successful	 conclusion	 to	 the	 covert	 operation.	 Together	 they	 had
confiscated	in	the	 early-morning	 raid	thousands	of	kilos	 of	 cocaine,	millions
of	dollars	 in	 cash,	and	 enough	handguns,	rifles,	  and	automatic	 weapons	to
start	a	war	in	Central	 America.	Skye	Bannister	 was	quoted	as	saying,	“If	 you
do	drugs,	you	will	 be	caught.	And	 when	you’re	caught,	you	 will	 be	punished.
These	men	will	be	going	away	for	 a	long,	long	time.	I’ll	  see	to	that	personally.

149
We	will	 not	tolerate	drugs	in	this	city.	We	will	 not	tolerate	drugs	in	this	state.”
   “So	 this	is	what	was	cooking,”	 Matthew	 asked.
   “This	 is	what	 was	cooking,”	Bloom	 said.
   “Skye’s	 rocket	to	Tallahassee.”
   “Let’s	 say	it	 couldn’t	hurt,”	 Bloom	 said.
   “Which	  is	why	he	wants	to	sweep	the	murder	case	under	the	rug.”
   “So	 to	speak.”
   “Make	 an	offer,	get	his	conviction	 fast,	and	dance	on	home	with	Mama.”
   “Uh-huh.”
   “Because	if	 he	loses	this	one—”
   “Big	  one	to	lose,	Matthew.”
   “Oh	 yes.”
   “He	 loses	this	one,	it’s	good-bye,	Tallahassee.”
   “I’m	  going	to	make	sure	he	loses	it,	Morrie.”
   “Aluvai,”	  Bloom	 said.	“But	 I	don’t	think	 you	have	a	chance.”
   “No,	 huh?	Was	my	man	out	of	jail	 and	roaming	the	waterfront	last	night?”
   “A	 copycat	murder,	Matthew.	 Plain	and	simple.”
   “The	 party	line,”	 Matthew	 said.
   The	 murder	was	buried	 on	page	fourteen	of	 the	paper,	in	a	brief	 story	that
ran	for	half	 a	column	on	the	left-hand	side	of	 the	page,	adjacent	to	an	almost-
full-page	ad	for	 the	Curtis	Brothers	Department	Store.	The	story	 reported	that
Trinh	 Mang	  Duc,	 sixty-eight	  years	 old,	  an	 unemployed	 immigrant	  from
Vietnam,	residing	 at	1224	 Tango	Street,	had	 been	found	 dead	on	the	North
Tamiami	 Trail,	 near	 Marina	 Lou’s,	 at	 five	 minutes	 past	 2:00	a.m.,	 by	 the
motorized	police	officer	 patrolling	 that	sector.
   When	 certain	apparent	similarities	were	pointed	out	to	Patricia	 Demming—
the	assistant	 state	attorney	 prosecuting	 the	 sensational	case	 involving	  the
murder	and	mutilation	  of	three	Vietnamese	immigrants	 recently	 acquitted	of
rape	charges—the	young	 prosecutor	told	 reporters	 that	such	incidents	 were
not	uncommon.	“It’s	 extremely	unfortunate	that	so	many	murders	are	imitated
by	 impressionable	 people	 who	  commit	  the	 same	 crime	 in	  the	 identical
manner,”	she	said.	“We	call	 them	copycat	murders.	 The	slaying	of	 Mr.	 Trinh
is	just	such	a	horrible	tragedy.	He	was	the	innocent	victim	 of	 a	twisted	person
seeking	 dubious	 fame	  through	 the	 repetition	  of	  a	 previous	  murder—or
murders,	as	 the	case	happens	to	 be	 here.	There	 is	 no	 doubt	 in	 my	 mind,
however,	that	the	murders	 are	related	only	 in	that	 way.	We	already	 have	the
man	who	 committed	 the	earlier	 murders,	and	 I’m	 certain	 the	Calusa	police
will	 find	the	man	or	woman	who	 committed	this	most	recent	outrage.”
   “Some	 mouth	on	her,”	Bloom	 said.
   “Some	  baloney,”	 Matthew	  said.	“Who	  was	 responsible	 for	 burying	 the
story?”
   “Not	 me,”	 Bloom	said.

150
   “I	 didn’t	think	you.”
   “I	 didn’t	even	catch	the	squeal.	Palmieri	was	on	last	night.”
   “Was	the	body	mutilated	in	the	same	way?”
   “Identical.”
   “To	make	sure	we	think	copycat,	right?”
   “I	 do	think	copycat.”
   “The	murderer	just	happened	to	pick	one	of	Demming’s	witnesses,	right?”
   “No,	he	deliberately	picked	him.”
   “Why?”
   “Who	 knows	 why?	Maybe	 because	Trinh	was	related	to	 the	previous
murders.	Who	knows	what	goes	on	in	 a	copycat’s	head,	Matthew?	These
people	are	nuts,	do	you	think	they	know	what	they’re	doing?	They	don’t	know
what	they’re	doing,	 believe	me.	I	 had	a	 copycat	in	Nassau,	when	I	 was
working	up	there,	he	went	around	killing	old	ladies	because	some	other	poor
lunatic	had	killed	his	eighty-year-old	mother	the	week	before.	Made	headlines
all	over	New	York.	But	the	copycat	picked	only	gray-haired	ladies.	Because
his	own	mother	had	gray	hair.	So	never	mind	the	first	guy’s	mother	had	hair
even	blacker	than	yours.	The	copycat’s	mother	had	gray	hair,	so	he	went
looking	for	gray-haired	victims.	A	meshuggener,”	Bloom	said.
   “No	motive,	is	that	what	you’re	saying?”
   “Fame	maybe,	Demming	was	right	about	that.	A	lot	of	them	do	it	’cause
they	think	it’ll	make	them	as	famous	as	the	guy	they’re	imitating.”
   “How	 about	this	for	a	motive,	Morrie?	Trinh	saw	the	license	plate	on	the
murderer’s	car.”
   “There’s	no	such	plate	in	Florida,”	Bloom	said,	and	shook	his	head.
   “I	 know.	But	do	you	think	I’d	 have	left	it	there?	Do	you	think	I	wouldn’t
have	gone	after	him	till	he	remembered	what	he	saw?”
   “I	 guess	you	would	have,”	Bloom	said,	and	shrugged.
   “And	 you	don’t	think	the	murderer	realized	that?”
   “I	  don’t	know	 what	he	did	 or	didn’t	 realize,	if	 it’s	 a	he	to	 begin	with.
Murderers	don’t	think	the	way	you	or	I	do.	In	murders,	there’s	nothing	neat,
take	my	word	for	it.	Murders	are	messy.	And	the	people	who	commit	murders
don’t	read	Agatha	Christie.	They’re	not	all	crazy,	Matthew,	but	this	one	is,
believe	me.	This	is	a	classic	copycat	murder.	And	the	person	responsible	will
do	another	one,	and	maybe	another	one	after	that,	and	he’ll	keep	doing	them
till	 we	catch	him.	We’ll	 catch	him,	Matthew,	wait	and	see.	And	he’ll	 be	a
copycat.	And	him	and	your	man’ll	be	sitting	together	on	death	row.”
   “I	 promised	him	otherwise,”	Matthew	said.
   “You	shouldn’t	have,”	Bloom	said.



They	were	both	drinking	coffee	and	eating	scrambled	eggs	and	bacon	in	a

151
Sabal	Key	joint	 called	The	Miami	 Deli.	 There	was	something	wrong	 with	 the
air	  conditioning	   today,	  the	  waitress	  explained.	  This	   meant	  that	  the
temperature	 inside	  the	 place	  was	 something	  like	  a	  hundred	 and	  four
Fahrenheit.	Warren	had	wanted	to	leave	at	once,	find	 another	place,	but	Nick
Alston	said	he	didn’t	 mind	 the	heat.	A	fat	 lady	in	 pink	shorts	and	a	pink	 tube
top	sat	near	the	windows,	fanning	herself	with	 a	laminated	menu.	On	the	road
outside,	an	 occasional	 car	 went	 by,	 heading	 north	  toward	 Sabal’s	 public
beach.	Alston	was	enjoying	his	eggs.
   “What	 is	it	 you	want	this	time?”	 he	asked.
   “Computer	 work,”	 Warren	said.
   He	 had	always	operated	on	the	theory	that	if	 you	were	going	to	 ask	a	favor
you	asked	it	straight	out,	without	 doing	 a	little	 tap	dance	around	the	mulberry
bush.	Saved	a	lot	of	time	all	around.	And	 maybe	generated	a	little	respect.	He
had	told	Alston	 on	the	phone	that	he	needed	another	favor.	Alston	had	sourly
agreed	to	meet	him	 and	had	hinted	that	 this	time	 there’d	 be	a	price	tag.	 But
now,	 seeing	the	 man,	 Warren	 wasn’t	 so	 sure	 he	 wanted	 to	 get	 down	 to
business	quite	so	fast.
   Alston	 didn’t	 look	too	terrific.
   He	 had	never	been	what	anyone	would	 call	handsome,	but	his	 brown	eyes
were	now	shot	with	red,	and	his	craggy	face	looked	puffy	 and	bloated,	and	his
straw-colored	hair	 looked	stringy,	 and	there	was	a	beard	stubble	on	his	 face,
and	it	 was	plain	 to	 see	he’d	 already	 been	drinking	  this	morning.	 Only	  ten
o’clock,	and	the	smell	of	 alcohol	on	his	breath	was	overpowering.	He	had	told
Warren	that	today	was	his	day	off,	but	now	Warren	wondered	if	 he	drank	even
on	the	days	he	was	working.
   “How	  have	you	been,	Nick?”	he	asked.
   “What	 kind	 of	computer	work?”	 Alston	 said.
   “You	 been	all	right?”
   “Well,	 you	 know.”
   He	 kept	 his	eyes	on	 his	plate,	 cutting	 into	 the	eggs	with	  the	edge	of	 his
fork,	lifting	 the	fork	 to	his	mouth,	repeating	the	operation.
   “There’s	 a	new	guy	in	Frank	sector,”	he	said.
   “How	  is	he?”
   “Okay,	 I	guess.”
   He	 kept	eating.	Warren	signaled	to	the	waitress	for	 more	coffee.	She	was	a
plain-looking	 blonde	 with	 spectacular	legs.	She	wore	her	skirt	 very	 short,	to
show	off	 the	 legs.	Both	 Warren	and	Alston	  noticed	the	 legs.	It	 would	 have
been	impossible	not	to	notice	those	legs.
   “Throw	  a	flag	over	her	face,”	Alston	 said,	“fuck	 for	Old	Glory.”
   An	 old	joke,	but	 Warren	smiled.
   “He’s	  the	other	 car	in	 the	 sector,”	Alston	  said.	“The	 car	 that	used	 to	be
Charlie	 Macklin’s.	  We	ride	 solo,	 you	 know.	 But	  there’s	two	  cars	in	 each

152
sector,	we	can	get	 pretty	quick	 backup	 if	 we	need	it.	 I	 don’t	 know	 him	 too
good	yet,	but	he	ain’t	no	Charlie	Macklin,	 I	 can	tell	you	that.”
   “How	  long	had	you	known	Charlie?”
   “Oh,	 Jesus,	we	go	back	for	years.”
   Present	tense.	As	if	he	were	still	alive.
   “Must	 be	difficult,”	  Warren	said.	“Losing	 a	partner.”
   “Yeah.	 Well,	  you	 know,	we	 really	 got	 along	 good	 together.	I’da	  trusted
Charlie	with	 my	 life—well,	 hell,	 that’s	exactly	 what	I	 did	do,	 more	times’n	 I
can	count.	It	 ain’t	 the	same	without	 him,	 Chambers,	I	 can	tell	 you	that,”	 he
said,	and	nodded,	and	picked	up	his	coffee	cup.
   Warren	watched	him	 for	a	moment.
   Go	 on,	he	thought,	take	a	chance.
   “You	 been	drinking	 much?”	he	asked.
   “A	 little,”	  Alston	said.
   “You	 should	try	 to	cut	back.”
   “What	 business	is	it	of	yours?”
   “None.”
   “Then	 butt	out.”
   “I	 thought	 maybe	I	could	help,”	 Warren	said.
   Alston	 looked	across	the	table	at	him.
   “Come	 on,”	 he	said.
   “I’m	  serious.	If	there’s	anything	I	 can	do	to—”
   “Come	 on,	I	hardly	 know	you.	Why	 should	it	matter	to	you?”
   “I	 don’t	 like	to	 see	anyone	in	trouble.”
   “I’m	  not	in	trouble.”
   “You’ve	  been	drinking	already	this	morning,	 haven’t	you?”
   “Nothing	  to	speak	of.	What	are	you,	a	minister?”
   “I’d	  like	 to	help,	Nick.	 Call	me,	okay?	You	ever	feel	like	 talking,	 give	me	a
call.”
   “Come	 on,”	 Alston	said,	embarrassed.
   “Instead	 of	turning	 to	the	bottle,”	Warren	said.
   “I	 guess	I	have	been	drinking	some,”	Alston	 said,	and	shrugged,	and	looked
away.	Across	 the	room,	 the	 waitress	was	 leaning	over	 the	 fat	 lady’s	 table,
refilling	 her	coffee	cup.
   “You	 ever	see	wheels	like	that?”	Alston	 asked.
   “Never.”
   “Competition-class	 wheels,	those	are.”
   “Indeed,”	 Warren	said.
   “Man,”	  Alston	 said,	and	shook	his	head	in	admiration.
   Both	  men	 were	 silent	 for	 several	 moments,	 looking	  at	 the	girl’s	  long,
splendid	legs.
   “It’s	  just	I	 sometimes	start	thinking	 about	what	 happened,”	Alston	said.	 “I

153
didn’t	 think	I’d	 miss	 him	this	 much,	you	know?	 Charlie.	I	 mean...we	used	to
have	breakfast	together	every	 morning	 before	we	 went	 out	in	 the	cars...and
we’d	 stop	for	 coffee	 two,	three	 times	during	 the	 shift,	 and	then	grab	 a	bite
when	the	 tour	 was	 over,	and	 we’d...we’d	  talk	 about	 all	 different	 kinds	 of
things.	Women,	the	job,	places	we	been,	things	we	wanted	 to	do,	it	 was	good
to	be	able	to	talk	to	somebody	like	 that.	Because	this	job,	you	know,	it	 gets	to
you	after	 a	while.	 All	 the	 stuff	you	 see.	All	 the	stuff	 that	 goes	down	in	 this
city,	especially	nowadays	with	drugs	calling	 the	tune.	You	read	the	papers	this
morning?	What	bullshit!	  The	SA	makes	one	lousy	 drug	bust,	he	thinks	 that’s
the	end	of	it.	 He	 oughta	come	ride	the	 sector	with	 me	some	night,	 I’ll	 show
him	the	end	of	nothing.”
   “They	  think	  they	 can	nickel-and-dime	  the	 drug	 lords	 out	 of	 business,”
Warren	said.
   “The	  drug	 budget	is	 a	laugh,”	  Alston	 said.	 “I	 try	 to	 explain	 that	 to	 my
girlfriend,	 she’s	a	dispatcher	down	the	Building,	 she	understands	police	work
a	little.	But	 not	the	underbelly,	you	 know?	What	you	 have	to	deal	with	 day	in
and	day	out.	You	need	a	partner	to	talk	to	about	that.”
   “Somebody	 who	knows	the	work,”	 Warren	said.
   “Sure.	  Otherwise,	you’re	  out	 there,	you	 start	 thinkin’,	  what	 am	 I	 doing
here?	Who	even	cares	whether	I’m	here	or	not?”
   “I	 used	to	be	in	the	job,	you	know,”	 Warren	said.
   “No,	 I	 didn’t	know	 that.”
   “Yeah.	 St.	Louis	PD.”
   “So	 then	you	know.”
   “Oh	 sure.”
   “That’s	 interesting,”	 Alston	 said.	“You	being	a	St.	Louis	cop.”
   “Ever	 been	to	St.	Louis?”
   “No,	  but	 I	 hear	 the	women	 there	 got	 diamond	 rings,”	 Alston	  said,	and
smiled.
   “They’ve	  got	other	things,	too.”
   “But	  not	legs	like	 this	one’s	got,”	 Alston	 said.	“I’d	  like	to	 lick	 my	way	 up
those	legs	all	the	way	to	the	crotch,	starting	with	the	toes.”
   She	was	coming	 back	to	their	table	now.	High	 heels	clicking	 on	the	asphalt
tile	floor.	Long	 stride	on	her.	Proud	of	those	magnificent	legs.
   “Anyone	 for	 more	coffee?”	she	asked.
   “You	 got	a	sister	for	my	friend?”	 Alston	 asked,	and	winked	at	Warren.
   The	 girl	smiled.	 She	didn’t	 know	quite	how	 to	handle	this.	Salt-and-pepper
team	at	the	table	here,	what	could	she	say?	She	played	it	safe.
   “Anyone	 for	 more	coffee?”	she	asked	again.
   “You	 might	 want	to	 hotten	mine	a	bit,”	 Alston	 said,	and	winked	 at	Warren
again.
   “Mine,	  too,”	Warren	said.

154
   The	 girl	 poured	coffee	into	 both	cups.	She	was	truly	 very	 plain	except	 for
those	legs.	 And	  those	legs	 probably	 had	 brought	 her	 the	 wrong	  kind	 of
attention	ever	 since	puberty.	 Men	 equated	legs	like	 those	with	  sexuality.	It
was	a	 fact	of	  life,	 not	 entirely	 discouraged	by	 television	  commercials	and
magazine	ads.	But	she	sure	knew	she	had	those	legs.	Head	high,	 she	clicked
away	from	the	table	like	a	racehorse.
   They	 watched	her	go.
   “Mmmm-mmmm,”	  Alston	 said.
   “Indeed,”	 Warren	said.
   They	 sat	there	sipping	 their	coffee.	 The	fat	 lady	got	 up	and	walked	 to	the
cash	register.
   “I	 like	 mine	better	than	yours,”	Alston	 said.
   Both	 men	grinned	like	schoolboys.
   “I	 meant	what	I	 said,	you	know,”	Warren	said.
   “Okay.”
   “You	 ever	feel	like	 talking	to	somebody,	give	me	a	call.”
   “Okay,	 I’ll	 keep	that	in	mind.”
   “I	 mean	it.”
   “I	 hear	you.”
   “Good.”
   “What	 do	you	need	from	the	computer?”	 Alston	asked.
   “What	 does	a	tattoo	mean	to	you?”
   “Armed	  robber,”	Alston	 said	at	once.
   “A	 lot	 of	them,	anyway,”	Warren	said,	nodding.
   “Most	 of	 them,”	Alston	 said.	“In	 fact,	every	one	of	them	I	ever	come	across
had	a	tattoo	one	kind	or	another.”
   “I’m	  looking	  for	 whatever	you’ve	 got	 on	a	man	named	Ned	 Weaver.	San
Diego	may	be	a	place	to	start.”
   “What	 else	can	you	give	me?	The	computer	likes	the	more	the	merrier.”
   “He’s	  in	his	 late	 twenties,	big	 guy	 around	six-two,	 two-twenty	  or	-thirty,
looks	like	  he’s	done	 some	weight	 lifting.	   Red	hair,	 green	eyes,	 no	visible
scars.	The	tattoo’s	on	his	right	forearm.	 Big-titted	 mermaid	with	 a	long,	 fishy
tail.	He	says	he	wasn’t	in	the	service,	but	you	may	want	 to	check	the	FBI	files
anyway.”
   “I’ll	   go	down	the	Building	 soon	as	we	finish	here.”
   “Let	 me	know	 how	much	time	you	put	in,	 will	 you?”
   “Why?”
   “So	 we	can	figure	out—”
   “Don’t	  be	a	jackass,”	Alston	said.
   “On	 the	phone,	you	told	me...”
   “That	 was	then,	this	is	now.”
   Warren	looked	 at	him.

155
   “Okay?”	  Alston	said.
   “Okay,”	  Warren	said.



Jimmy	Farrell	was	bent	over	the	open	hood	of	a	Chrysler	LeBaron	convertible
when	Matthew	 came	into	 the	 garage	at	eleven	that	 morning.	 He	had	 called
ahead,	and	 Farrell	 was	 expecting	 him.	  But	 he	 took	 his	  own	 sweet	 time
straightening	up.	Matthew	disliked	 him	 at	once.	It	had	to	have	been	his	looks,
because	the	man	hadn’t	yet	opened	his	mouth.
   He	 was	bearded	and	bald,	five-ten	 or	-eleven	inches	tall,	 a	bit	shorter	 than
Matthew,	but	much	 more	solidly	 built.	 He	was	wearing	a	red	T-shirt	 with	 the
Shell	company’s	 yellow	 scallop	 logo	across	its	 front.	 The	shirt	 rippled	 with
well-defined	 pectorals,	and	muscular	 biceps	bulged	below	 the	short	 sleeves,
one	of	 which	  was	rolled	  up	around	 a	 package	of	 cigarettes.	He	 had	 dark
brown	eyes	and	shaggy	brows	 that	matched	the	full	  beard,	altogether	a	very
hairy	fellow	  except	for	  the	entirely	 bald	 and	undoubtedly	 shaven	head.	He
looked	as	if	  he	ate	spark	plugs	 and	spit	 out	 pistons.	He	 looked	like	 one	 of
those	phony	 wrestlers	 on	 television.	 Matthew	 was	 willing	  to	 bet	 he	 went
hunting	a	lot.
   “Matthew	  Hope,”	he	said.	“I	 called.”
   He	 did	not	extend	his	hand;	Farrell’s	hands	were	covered	with	grease.
   “Does	 he	know	the	Cad’s	ready?”	Farrell	asked.
   “Yes.	 He	was	going	to	talk	to	his	wife	 about	it.	Or	his	 brother-in-law.”
   “That	  turd,”	 Farrell	 said,	 but	did	 not	 amplify.	 “When’s	  somebody	gonna
pick	it	 up?	I	got	limited	 space	here,	and	also	I	wouldn’t	 mind	 getting	paid	for
work	already	done.”
   “The	 man’s	in	jail,”	 Matthew	 said	evenly.
   “Tough,”	  Farrell	 said.	“He	 shoulda	 been	more	careful,	 he	wouldn’t	  be	in
jail.”
   “Mr.	  Farrell,	I	 wonder	if	 you	can	show	me	 where	you	keep	the	keys	to	the
cars	you	service.”
   “Why?”
   “It	 might	 be	important	to	Mr.	 Leeds’s	case.”
   “He	 thought	 he	was	still	  in	the	 jungle,	didn’t	 he?”	 Farrell	 said.	“Where	 it
didn’t	matter	shit	what	 he	did.	He	forgot	he	was	back	in	civilization.”
   A	 Vietnam	 vet,	Matthew	 realized.	 Just	about	the	right	 age—thirty-nine	 or
forty—and	in	 his	eyes	a	look	Matthew	 hadn’t	noticed	earlier.	A	 bitter,	cynical
look	that	 said	he	and	others	like	 him	 had	done	things	luckier	 mortals	 hadn’t
been	forced	to	do.
   “I	 don’t	 think	he	killed	 those	men,”	Matthew	 said.
   “If	  he	didn’t,	 he	should’ve,”	  Farrell	said.	“Only	  with	 a	little	 finesse.	I	 still
don’t	know	why	 you	want	to	see	the	key	box.”

156
   “Is	 there	a	box?”
   “Hanging	  right	there	 on	the	wall,”	 Farrell	 said,	and	pointed	 to	a	long	 gray
metal	box	screwed	to	 the	wall	 just	inside	 the	door	that	led	 to	the	office.	 The
panel	door	of	 the	box	 was	standing	wide	 open,	a	key	 jutting	 out	of	 its	lock.
There	were	perhaps	half	a	dozen	sets	of	car	keys	hanging	on	hooks	inside	the
box.
   “Is	 the	box	open	like	that	all	 day	long?”	Matthew	 asked.
   “Nobody	 here	but	us,”	 Farrell	said.
   Plus	whoever	wanders	into	 the	garage,	Matthew	thought.
   “When	 do	you	lock	 it?”
   “When	 we	leave	at	night.”
   “But	 all	 day	long	the	key	just	sits	there	in	the	lock,	is	that	it?”
   “Safest	 place	for	it,”	 Farrell	said.	“Might	  get	lost	otherwise.”
   “Where	 do	you	put	that	key	when	you	 lock	the	box	at	night?”
   “In	 the	cash	register.”
   “What	 time	 do	you	normally	leave	here?”
   “Around	  six.”
   “Everybody?”
   “Usually.	  Every	now	and	then,	somebody’ll	 be	working	 on	a	car,	he’ll	 stay
a	little	later.	But	we	stop	pumping	 gas	at	six.	That’s	it.	Life’s	 too	short.”
   “Do	 you	know	 what	night	the	murders	took	place?”
   “Couple	 of	weeks	ago,	wasn’t	it?”
   “The	 thirteenth.	A	 Monday	night.”
   “Uh-huh.”
   “Do	 you	remember	what	time	 you	left	here	that	night?”
   “Around	  six,	I	guess.	Same	as	usual.”
   “Did	  you	lock	that	box	when	you	 left?”
   “I	 did.”
   “Was	 Leeds’s	key	ring	in	that	box	when	you	 locked	it?”
   “I	 guess	so.	No	reason	to	have	taken	it	out.”
   “Do	 you	know	 what	keys	are	on	that	ring,	Mr.	Farrell?”
   “Yep.	 I	called	about	it,	 in	fact.	Spoke	to	that	dumb	fuckin’	 brother-in-law	 of
his,	told	 him	 I	 wasn’t	 gonna	be	 responsible	for	 all	 those	keys	 on	 the	ring,
looked	like	 a	house	key	and	what-not.	He	 said	he’d	stop	by	 to	pick	 them	up.
Do	you	see	him	here?”
   “Mr.	  Farrell,	who	else	knows	there’s	a	house	key	on	that	ring?”
   “You	 mean	people	working	here?”
   “Yes.”
   “If	  you’re	thinking	 somebody	used	that	key	to	get	into	the	Leeds	house—”
   “I’m	  thinking	 that’s	a	possibility,	yes.”
   “I’m	  thinking	 it	ain’t.”
   “I’d	  still	 like	to	talk	 to	anyone	who	had	access	to	those	keys.”

157
   “There’s	  only	 three	of	 us	here,”	 Farrell	 said.	 “The	 high-school	 kid	 I	 got
pumping	gas	don’t	 come	 in	till	  after	school,	 three,	three-thirty.	 He’s	sixteen
years	old,	and	he	didn’t	break	into	anybody’s	house.”
   “How	  big	is	he?”
   “Why?”
   “Because	somebody	big	 was	wearing	Leeds’s	jacket	and	hat	on	the	night	of
the	murders.”
   “Danny’s	 five-seven,	 and	he	weighs	around	a	hun’	sixty,”	Farrell	said.	“So	I
guess	he	ain’t	the	 one	who	broke	 into	 Leeds’s	house	and	stole	his	goddamn
clothes.”
   “Who	 said	his	clothes	were	stolen?”
   “If	  somebody	was	wearing	them,	then	they	were	stolen.”
   “Who	 else	works	here?”	Matthew	 asked.
   “I	  got	 a	mechanic	 helping	 me	out,	 that’s	 all.	 And	 he’s	 six-two,	 which	 I
guess	makes	you	happy.”
   “Where	 is	he?”
   “Out	 gettin’	 some	coffee	for	us.”
   “I’ll	   wait	for	him,”	 Matthew	 said.



The	 computer’s	 name	 was	 Bessie.	Alston	  wondered	 why	  somebody	 had
named	it	Bessie.	He	also	wondered	if	computers	everywhere	in	 the	world	had
women’s	names.	Fat	women’s	names.	The	girl	 with	the	legs	back	there	in	 the
deli	wouldn’t	 be	caught	dead	with	 a	name	like	 Bessie.	Face	that	could	stop	a
clock	on	 that	girl,	 but	 legs	he	would	 never	forget	 in	 his	entire	lifetime.	  You
didn’t	 name	any	computers	after	 a	girl	 with	 legs	like	 that.	 Bessie.	All	 right,
let’s	go,	Bessie,	let’s	see	what	you’ve	got	on	Mr.	Ned	Weaver.
   He	 was	sitting	 alone	in	 the	computer	 room	of	 the	Public	 Safety	Building,
the	computer	  screen	not	 a	 foot	 and	 a	 half	 from	  his	 face,	 his	 big	 hands
hovering	 over	 the	 keyboard,	 the	 forefingers	  poised	 to	 type.	 Like	  a	 man
playing	“Chopsticks”	 on	a	toy	 piano,	he	pecked	out	the	letters	that	opened	the
file,	and	then	hit	the	RETURN	key.
   The	screen	asked	him	which	of	 several	categories	he	wanted	searched.
   He	 tapped	out	the	letters	CR,	for	“criminal.”
   The	machine	whirred.
   The	screen	said	SELECT	ONE:

   1)	 CITYWIDE
   2)	 STATEWIDE
   3)	 NATIONWIDE
   4)	 OTHER	SPECIFIC	STATE

158
   He	 knew	 that	 if	 he	 hit	 the	 numeral	3	 for	 the	 nationwide	 search,	Bessie
would	tap	into	 FBI	files	 and	he’d	be	sitting	 here	all	day.	He	hit	 the	numeral	4
instead,	calling	 for	  a	specific	 state	search	 outside	Florida,	  and	at	 the	next
prompt	he	typed	in	the	letters	CA	for	California.
   The	machine	whirred	 again.
   A	 single	word	appeared	on	the	screen:
   YEAR?
   He	 typed	?	for	“unknown.”
   SEARCH	SPAN?
   Chambers	had	 told	him	 the	 subject	was	in	 his	late	 twenties.	Alston	 knew
there	were	kids	who	 got	in	trouble	 before	they	could	 tie	their	 own	shoelaces,
but	the	longer	the	span,	the	longer	he’d	 be	here.	He	figured	 a	ten-year	search
was	long	 enough.	Weaver	would’ve	  been	sixteen,	seventeen	years	old	 back
then,	nice	age	to	run	afoul	of	 the	law,	and	the	search	would	continue	on	up	to
the	current	 year.	He	typed	 in	 the	numerals	 1-0,	and	then	 hit	 the	RETURN	key
again.
   LAST	NAME?
   He	 typed	in	W-E-A-V-E-R.
   FIRST	NAME?
   He	 typed	in	N-E-D.
   MIDDLE	NAME?
   He	 typed	?	again.
   The	screen	asked	is	NED	AN	ALIAS?	TYPE	“Y”	OR	“N”
   He	 typed	N.	For	no.
   The	machine	whirred.
   The	  words	  NO	CRIMINAL	RECORD	NED	WEAVER	STATE	OF	CALIFORNIA,	and	then
immediately	and	again	asked	IS	NED	AN	ALIAS?	TYPE	“Y”	OR	“N”
   This	 time	he	typed	Y.
   The	screen	said	SELECT	ONE:

   1)	 NED	FOR	EDMUND
   2)	 NED	FOR	EDWARD
   3)	 NED	FOR	NORTON
   4)	 ALL	OF	THE	ABOVE

   He	 typed	4.
   A	 hundred	goddamn	Edmund,	Edward,	 and	Norton	Weavers	popped	up	on
the	screen.
   Alston	 had	his	work	cut	 out	for	him.



Farrell’s	 mechanic	was	 indeed	six	 feet	 two	 inches	 tall.	 Wrinkled	  and	sun-
browned,	 swinging	  his	 arms,	 he	 came	ambling	  past	 the	 gasoline	 pumps
toward	the	office.	 There	was	a	brown	paper	bag	in	his	 right	hand.	A	 cigarette

159
dangled	from	his	mouth.	 A	peaked	baseball	cap	was	perched	on	his	head.	He
was	tall	 for	sure.	But	 he	was	 also	a	scarecrow	of	 a	man	in	 his	early	 sixties,
and	he	could	not	have	weighed	more	than	a	hundred	and	fifty	 pounds.	Access
to	house	keys	or	 not,	 it	was	 impossible	to	 believe	 that	this	 man	could	 have
overpowered	and	murdered—with	a	knife,	no	less—three	young	men.
   “This	  is	Avery	 Shoals,”	Farrell	 said.	“Ave,	 the	man	here’d	 like	 to	ask	you
some	questions.”
   “Sure	  thing,”	 Shoals	 said.	 He	 put	 the	brown	  paper	bag	 on	 the	counter
alongside	the	cash	register,	dragged	on	his	cigarette,	eyes	squinted,	and	said,
“Only	 bought	two	coffees,	though.	Didn’t	 know	 we	had	company.”
   “That’s	  okay,”	  Farrell	 said,	 and	 smiled.	 “I	  don’t	  think	 Mr.	  Hope’ll	  be
staying	very	long.”



Warren	Chambers	was	waiting	for	 him	 when	he	got	back	to	 the	office	 at	one
that	afternoon.	Neither	 of	 the	men	had	yet	had	lunch.	 They	 walked	up	 Main
Street	toward	the	new	little	mall	 in	the	reconstructed	Burns	Building.	 The	size
of	a	tennis	court,	the	mall	 occupied	the	street-level	floor	 of	a	four-story	 office
building,	one	of	 the	oldest	in	downtown	 Calusa,	surrounded	now	by	the	city’s
modest	version	of	skyscrapers.	The	mall’s	restaurants	were	of	the	takee-outee
variety,	except	that	you	didn’t	 take	the	food	home	with	you.	Instead,	you	lined
up	at	various	counters	for	your	hamburgers	or	hot	dogs	or	pasta	or	Mexican	or
Chinese	food,	and	 then	you	 carried	the	food	 and	your	 beer	or	 soda	or	 milk
shake	to	these	little	 round	 tables	in	 a	sort	of	 open	courtyard.	 Canned	music
piped	through	 hidden	speakers	relentlessly	flooded	 the	courtyard,	 but	it	 was
impossible	to	tell	 which	 songs	were	being	played.	There	was	only	 a	sense	of
music,	a	constant,	low-key,	muted	background	din.
   Warren	had	good	news.
   Depending	 upon	how	you	looked	at	it.
   He	 told	 Matthew	 first	 about	the	 tattoo	on	 Ned	Weaver’s	 arm,	and	 how	a
large	percentage	of	armed	robbers	wore	tattoos.	This	happened	to	be	a	fact,	he
said,	even	though	it	was	news	to	Matthew.	 Weaver’s	reluctance	to	discuss	his
sexy	mermaid	had	piqued	Warren’s	 curiosity,	so	he	had	asked	a	friend	 of	 his
on	the	Calusa	PD	to	crank	up	the	computer	and	see	if	there	was	anything	on	a
Ned	Weaver	 in	San	 Diego,	 because	this	was	 where	Ned	 Weaver	said	 he’d
picked	up	the	tattoo.
   What	 he’d	 also	picked	 up	in	 San	Diego	 was	twenty-two	 thousand	dollars
and	 change	from	  a	 bank	 he’d	  robbed	 with	  a	 buddy	  of	 his	  named	 Sal
Genovese,	who	was	wheelman	 on	the	job.	 Actually,	 the	 holdup	would	 have
been	a	great	success	if,	first,	one	of	the	bank	guards	hadn’t	 been	silly	enough
to	draw	his	 pistol	 while	 looking	 down	the	 muzzle	of	 a	.44-caliber	 Magnum.
Naturally,	 Weaver	had	to	 shoot	him.	 The	man	 missed	death	by	an	 ace.	The

160
several	rounds	 from	 Weaver’s	 weapon	 ripped	 into	 the	 guard’s	 left	 biceps
some	three	inches	from	his	heart	and	almost	tore	off	his	arm.
   Even	 so,	and	in	spite	of	this	 slight	setback,	the	job	still	 might	 have	worked
out	well	  if,	 second,	the	 getaway	car	 hadn’t	 got	stuck	 in	 downtown	 traffic.
There	was	another	unfortunate	shootout	between	the	fleeing	bank	robbers	and
the	San	Diego	 police,	 which	 this	 time	 the	 police	 won.	 Norton	 (which	 was
Ned’s	full	 given	 name)	and	 his	good	 buddy	Salvatore	(which	  was	his)	both
went	to	 prison	for	 a	long,	 long	time.	 The	prison’s	 given	 name	was	Soledad.
Last	summer—
   Here	it	 is,	Matthew	thought.
   Last	 summer,	Weaver	was	paroled,	and	he	moved	here	to	Florida.
   Exactly	  what	  Leeds	 had	 told	  him	  yesterday.	 But	 only	  after	  a	 slight
hesitation.
   “Ned’s	 been	working	for	us	ever	since—last	summer.”
   Had	 he	been	about	to	say,	“ever	since	he	got	out	of	prison”?
   Possibly.	 Which	 knowledge	  might	 have	pleased	Matthew—as	  it	 pleased
him	  now—especially	   since	  he	 already	  knew	   that	  Jessica	 Leeds	 had
contemplated	hiring	  someone	to	 kill	  the	 three	men	 who’d	  raped	her.	 Her
brother	hadn’t	quite	killed	 that	bank	guard,	but	not	for	lack	 of	trying.
   “I	  wonder	where	young	 Ned	was	on	the	night	 of	the	 murders,	don’t	you?”
Warren	asked.
   “Indeed	 I	do.”
   “Because	  there	 may	 be	 wheels	 within	   wheels	 here,	 Matthew.	 As	  for
example,	suppose	 Weaver	didn’t	  like	  the	 idea	 of	 those	 three	Vietnamese
punks	getting	away	 with	the	 rape	of	his	sister,	and	suppose	he	decided	to	do
something	about	it.	A	man	spends	nine	years	in	prison—”
   “Was	 that	it?”
   “He	 was	nineteen	when	he	went	 up.	Nine	years	is	a	long	 time	behind	bars,
Matthew,	especially	 for	 somebody	 who’s	 a	hothead	to	 begin	 with.	 So	now
he’s	out,	 and	he	 sees	these	three	punks	getting	 away	 with	 rape,	he	 thinks,
‘Hey,	man,	this	 is	my	sister	 here!’	This	 isn’t	a	bank	guard	 getting	in	 his	way,
this	is	three	punks	who	raped	his	sister.	So	maybe—I’m	 only	saying	maybe—
maybe	he	got	it	in	his	head	to	go	after	them.”
   “Especially	 if	 his	sister	suggested	it,”	Matthew	 said.
   “Well,	 we	 don’t	know	that	she	did,”	 Warren	said.
   “She	 explored	the	possibility	 with	her	husband.”
   “She	 did?”
   “Yes.”
   “Mmm.”
   “Mmm	  is	right,”	 Matthew	said.
   “So	 let’s	say	young	Ned	did	do	the	job—”
   “No,	 Warren,	it	 won’t	wash.”

161
   “Why	  not?”
   “Leeds’s	 wallet	was	at	the	scene.”
   Both	  men	were	 silent	 for	 a	 moment.	Warren	 was	 eating	enchiladas	 and
drinking	 beer.	Matthew	was	eating	a	hamburger	and	drinking	a	Diet	 Coke.	At
a	nearby	table,	two	 young	 women	 were	trying	 to	 eat	with	 chopsticks.	 Food
kept	dropping	 back	onto	their	 plates.	They	giggled	 each	time	another	morsel
escaped	the	chopsticks.
   “One	 thing	you	learn	in	 prison,”	Warren	said.
   Matthew	 looked	up.
   “It	 ain’t	 good	to	get	caught.”
   “Meaning?”
   “Meaning,	 how	 did	Weaver	get	along	with	his	brother-in-law?”
   “Good	 question.”
   “Because	 if,	 let’s	say,	he	 didn’t	 like	 him	so	 much—then	why	 not	 set	him
up?	Juke	the	three	punks	and	make	it	look	like	Leeds	did	it.”
   “That	 would	 be	hurting	his	sister,	too.	I	don’t	 think—”
   “The	  man	 did	 time,”	  Warren	 said.	“In	  the	 slammer,	 you	 learn	 a	code,
Matthew,	you	learn	 a	different	kind	 of	 law.	This	law	 says	you	rape	my	sister,
I’m	 gonna	get	 you.	 This	law	 says	I	 hate	 my	 brother-in-law,	 I’m	 gonna	 get
him,	too.	That’s	the	kind	of	 law	you	learn	in	jail,	 Matthew,	and	it’s	got	 nothing
to	do	with	the	kind	 of	law	you	practice.”
   “I’ll	   talk	to	Leeds—”
   “I’m	  only	saying	it’s	 possible.”
   “—try	  to	find	 out	what	kind	of	 relationship	they	had,”	Matthew	 said.
   “Because	 here’s	a	 man	can	go	 in	 and	out	 of	 that	house	at	 will,”	  Warren
said.	“Take	Leeds’s	jacket	and	hat,	he	wants	to,	grab	his	 sister’s	car	keys,	the
boat	keys,	whatever	the	hell	he	needs	to	do	the	murders	and	pin	a	rose	on	his
brother-in-law.	But	 I	may	be	wrong.”
   “Can	 you	get	me	a	tape	of	his	telephone	voice?”	Matthew	asked.



It	kept	bothering	Bannion.
   The	license	plate	the	old	gook	 had	seen	on	the	getaway	car.
   2AB	 39C.
   No	 such	 plate	in	 the	 state	of	 Florida.	 But	 that	hadn’t	 stopped	somebody
from	killing	  him.	 Bannion	 wished	he	 could	see	eye	to	 eye	with	 his	boss	on
this	one,	but	he	just	couldn’t	 accept	her	belief	that	this	 was	a	copycat	murder.
Not	when	 the	 victim	 was	 one	of	 the	state’s	 witnesses,	no	sir.	 Bannion	 had
been	in	police	work	too	long	 not	to	know	the	difference	between	a	crazy	and	a
crazy	crazy.	 To	 his	 way	 of	 thinking,	  anyone	who	  committed	 murder	 was
crazy.	But	the	ones	who	did	 it	without	 rhyme	 or	reason,	those	were	the	crazy
crazies.

162
   The	 person	who	 had	killed	  Trinh	 Mang	 Duc	did	 not	 strike	 Bannion	 as	a
certified	 nut.	 A	copycat	 murderer	 wouldn’t	 have	 gone	to	 all	 the	trouble	 of
seeking	out	Trinh	  in	Little	  Asia,	 and	then	 following	  him	 all	 the	way	 up	to
Marina	Lou’s.	 Your	garden-variety	lunatic	 copycat	murderer	would’ve	 settled
for	any	 gook	 walking	 the	streets	of	 Calusa,	never	 mind	 a	witness	 who	had
seen	the	murderer	getting	into	 a	car	with	 a	license	 plate	that	did	 not	exist	 in
this	state.	Any	 gook	would’ve	  satisfied	the	 need,	short,	tall,	 fat,	skinny,	 old,
young,	it	 wouldn’t	 have	mattered	to	 the	copycat.	Grab	him	 from	 behind,	slit
the	poor	bastard’s	throat,	poke	out	his	eyes,	cut	off	his	 cock	and	stick	it	 in	his
mouth.
   But	 this	guy	had	deliberately	sought	out	Trinh	 Mang	Duc.
   Had	 to’ve	  read	his	 name	 in	 the	 paper—that	was	 the	 first	 mistake,	 you
didn’t	go	putting	 a	witness’s	name	in	the	paper.	Unless,	of	course,	you	already
had	your	alleged	murderer	behind	bars,	which	happened	to	be	the	case	here.	If
he	was	the	right	man.
   Bannion	  wasn’t	 paid	to	 make	 trouble	 for	 his	 own	 boss.	His	 job	 was	 to
compile	 information	 that	 would	 help	 her	prove	 beyond	 a	reasonable	doubt
that	the	man	they’d	 charged	with	three	counts	of	 murder	was	the	 man	who’d
actually	committed	 those	murders.	 But	 it	was	 also	Bannion’s	 job—or	 so	he
saw	it—to	 make	sure	Patricia	Demming	 didn’t	 make	 a	damn	fool	 of	herself.
And	if	 she	had	the	wrong	man	in	custody	while	the	real	murderer	was	still	 out
there	someplace	killing	a	witness	who	had	seen	the	license	plate	on	his	auto—
   But	 there	was	no	such	plate.
   Not	 if	it	 was	a	Florida	plate.
   Trinh	 Mang	Duc	 had	said	it	was	a	Florida	license	plate.
   2AB	 39C.
   Which	 he	had	seen	through	a	closed	screen	door.	At	night.	 Well,	 the	moon
was	still	 almost	full.	 But	 the	car	was	parked	under	a	leafy	 pepper	tree.	Some
distance	from	where	 he	was	standing	inside	his	 house	looking	 out	through	 a
screen	door.
   2AB	 39C.
   So	either	it	 wasn’t	a	Florida	plate...
   Which	 was	a	fairly	 distinctive	plate,	orange	letters	on	a	white	field...
   Either	 it	 wasn’t	a	Florida	 plate,	 or	else	Trinh	 had	seen	it	 wrong.	Read	the
numbers	and	the	 letters	 wrong.	 In	 which	 case,	why	 kill	  him?	 If	 he	 had	it
wrong,	then	as	a	witness	he	wasn’t	worth	a	rat’s	ass.	So	why	bother	with	him?
Let	the	man	live.	Unless...
   Unless	 he’d	been	damn	close	to	what	the	 numbers	and	letters	on	that	plate
actually	were.	 In	 which	 case,	he	might	 have	 remembered	them	correctly	 if
prodded	long	enough.	And	 if	he’d	 eventually	remembered	them,	those	letters
and	numbers	might	have	led	not	to	the	man	Patricia	 Demming	had	in	jail,	 but
to	the	man	or	woman	 who’d	 actually	slit	 those	gooks’	throats.	In	which	 case,

163
Trinh	had	to	go.	Now.	 Before	he	remembered.	So	long,	sir,	it	was	nice	having
you	here	 in	 Florida,	 may	 your	 ancestors	welcome	 you	 with	  joy	 and	 your
descendants	mourn	you	eternally.
   2AB	 39C.
   What	 could	he	have	seen	instead?
   Bannion	 picked	up	a	pencil	 and	began	writing	the	numbers	and	letters	over
and	over	again—




















   —and	 all	at	once	he	realized	what	it	 was	that	Trinh	Mang	 Duc	had	actually
seen,	and	knew	in	that	same	instant	why	 it	had	been	necessary	to	kill	 the	old
man.
   He	 pulled	the	telephone	to	him	and	began	dialing.

164
                                                                                                                     10


THE	PALLOR	had	set	in.	And	so	had	the	gloom.
   This	 was	Stephen	Leeds’s	tenth	 day	in	 jail,	 and	the	routine	 he	had	earlier
described	to	Matthew	 was	taking	its	 toll	 on	him.	Send	this	 man	to	prison	 for
any	extended	length	 of	 time,	 and	he	would	 be	 destroyed	as	surely	 as	if	 he
were	strapped	into	the	electric	chair.
   He	 was	sitting	at	the	far	end	of	a	long	table	in	what	 was	called	the	PCR,	the
letters	standing	 for	 private	 consultation	room,	 a	 bleak	cubicle	 set	 aside	for
prisoner-lawyer	conferences.	There	 was	a	single	 barred	window	 set	high	 up
on	the	 wall	 behind	him.	 It	 was	 raining	 steadily	 at	nine	 o’clock	 that	 Friday
morning.	 You	could	 hear	 the	rain	 pelting	 the	fronds	 of	 the	 palm	 trees	that
lined	the	sidewalk	outside	the	jail.	 The	small,	tight	room	 felt	almost	cozy	with
the	rain	beating	down	outside.	Leeds’s	big	 hands	were	clasped	on	the	table	in
front	of	 him.	He	was	listening	 intently	 to	Matthew,	 who	was	asking	him	 if	he
and	his	brother-in-law	got	along	well,	 or	was	there—
   “I	 hate	his	guts,”	Leeds	said.
   “Why?”
   “I’m	  a	farmer,	and	he’s	a	convicted	felon.	 That’d	be	reason	enough,	even	if
there	weren’t	other	things.”
   “Why’d	  you	hire	him?”
   “Jessica	wanted	him	here.”
   “Why?”
   “To	  keep	him	 out	of	 trouble,	 was	what	 she	said.	If	 you	 ask	me,	 he’s	the
kind	who’ll	  always	 be	in	 trouble	 of	 one	sort	or	 another.	That	 bank	robbery
wasn’t	the	first	 crime	he	committed,	you	 know.	It	was	just	 the	first	one	he	got
sent	away	for.”
   “What	 were	the	others?”
   “You	 name	them,	he	did	them.”
   “Like	  what?”
   “Drugs,	 assault,	rape,	burgla—”
   “Rape?”
   “Rape.”
   “When	 was	this?”
   “Which?”
   “Start	 from	 the	beginning.”
   “The	 first	 dope	arrest	was	 when	he	was	thirteen,	 fourteen,	in	 there.	Judge
took	pity	 on	 him,	gave	him	 a	suspended	sentence.	He	looks	so	damn	 clean-

165
cut,	you	know,	so	apple	pie,	American	 boy	next	door,	it’s	 hard	to	believe	 he’s
a	vicious	son	of	a	bitch.”
   “Tell	 me	about	the	assault	and	the	rape.”
   “The	 assault	was	when	he	was	sixteen.	He	mugged	an	old	lady	in	 the	park,
ran	off	 with	  her	purse.	 Jessie	says	the	old	 lady	 identified	  the	wrong	  man.
Maybe	 she	did.	 They	  searched	high	 and	low	  for	 her	 handbag,	 threw	 the
apartment	and	especially	Ned’s	room	upside	down,	but	they	never	did	find	it.”
   “How	  about	the	rape?”
   “Ned	 was	seventeen,	the	girl	was	thirteen.	And	retarded.”
   “And	  he	got	away	with	it?”	 Matthew	asked.
   “Jessie	 says	he	 didn’t	 do	 it.	 The	 jury	 said	 so,	too.	 His	 lawyer	 had	 five
witnesses	who	claimed	 Ned	 was	out	 bowling	  with	 them	at	 the	time	 of	 the
rape,	and	the	jury	believed	them.”
   Wheels	within	 wheels,	Warren	had	said.
   Ned	 Weaver	charged	with	 rape	when	he	was	 seventeen	years	old.	And	an
acquittal.
   His	  sister	the	 victim	  of	 multiple	 rape	 all	 these	years	later.	 And	 another
acquittal.
   “He	 wasn’t	 so	lucky	the	next	time	 around,”	Leeds	said.	“That	 was	the	bank
holdup.	Jessie	claims	he	was	forced	into	it.	Ned	owed	this	Italian	 fellow	 some
money,	the	man	forced	him	to	go	along	on	the	robbery,	to	 square	matters,	you
know?	That’s	 what	Jessie	says	it	was.	 Just	a	matter	of	 trying	 to	settle	 a	bad
debt.	Which	doesn’t	explain	why	 Ned	shot	that	bank	guard,	does	it?”
   “No,	 it	 doesn’t.”
   “He	  shot	him	 because	he’s	a	vicious	 son	of	 a	bitch,	 is	why.	 But	even	 so,
look	 at	the	sentence	he	got.	 Out	 in	 nine	years.	He’s	 been	lucky	 all	 his	 life
when	it	comes	to	kindhearted	judges	and	pushover	juries.”
   “But	 your	 wife	doesn’t	feel	 that	way,	does	she?”
   “Oh,	 no,	 according	to	her,	he’s	Mr.	 Clean.	Just	had	a	string	 of	bad	luck,	 is
all.	He’ll	 get	in	 trouble	again,	though,	you	wait	 and	see.	And	next	time	I	hope
they	lock	him	up	for	 good.”
   “Were	 all	of	these	arrests	in	California?”	 Matthew	asked.
   He	 was	wondering	 why	 the	computer	had	 located	only	 the	one	arrest	and
conviction.
   “The	 early	ones	were	in	South	Dakota,”	 Leeds	said,	“while	 he	was	growing
up.	Growing	 up	rotten.	It’s	 hard	to	 believe	him	 and	Jessie	are	from	the	same
stock.	She’s	 seven	years	older	 than	 he	 is,	 you	 know,	 she’s	thirty-six.	  Her
parents	were	killed	in	a	car	crash,	she’s	like	a	mother	to	him.	Which	 I	guess	is
why	she	wanted	him	here	on	the	farm.	But	 they	didn’t	 move	to	San	Diego	till
he	was	eighteen,	after	the	rape	episode.	Just	in	time	to	 get	in	trouble	 all	over
again,	right?	Clean	slate	in	a	new	town,	might	as	well	shit	all	 over	it.”
   “Is	 that	where	you	met	her?	In	San	Diego?”

166
   “No,	 no,	we	met	right	 here	in	Florida.	She	used	to	model,	you	know.”
   “No,	 I	 didn’t	know	 that.”
   “Oh,	 yes.	She	was	doing	a	trunk	show	here	at	the	Hyatt.	We	started	talking,
I	asked	her	out...and	that	was	it,	I	guess.”
   “When	 was	this?”
   “We’ve	 been	married	for	almost	 six	years	now.”
   The	gloom	 settled	over	his	face	again.
   Marriage.	 Memories.	A	shining	 past.
   And	 a	future	that	seemed	as	dark	as	the	rain	outside.
   “Didn’t	  even	know	 she	had	a	brother,”	 he	said.	“He	 was	in	 prison	 when	I
met	her,	she	never	once	mentioned	him.	The	first	I	 knew	of	him	 was	when	he
showed	up	on	our	doorstep	last	summer.	It	 was	one	of	the	hottest	days	of	 the
year,	I	remember...”
   ...the	 sun	sitting	 in	 the	sky	 like	 a	ball	 of	 fire,	 the	 sprinklers	 going	in	 the
fields,	a	Yellow	 Cab	from	 town	coming	 up	the	road	and	throwing	 dust	a	mile
into	the	sky.	Leeds	is	in	the	barn	doing	 something,	he	doesn’t	remember	what
just	now,	perhaps	stitching	a	torn	 cinch	on	a	saddle,	he	has	always	been	very
good	with	 his	hands,	even	when	he	was	a	kid,	 and	he	loves	repairing	 things.
He	can’t	imagine	 why	a	taxi	 has	come	out	here	to	Timucuan	Point	Road,	and
he	has	no	idea	who	the	man	getting	out	of	the	cab	might	be.
   He	 puts	down	the	saddle	girth—that’s	 what	he’d	 been	working	 on,	he	now
remembers	clearly—and	 goes	 out	 to	 where	 the	 young	 man	 is	paying	  the
driver,	the	driver	 making	 change,	the	dust	still	 rising	on	 the	air	around	them.
It	occurs	to	him	 that	the	young	man	has	the	same	coloring	 as	his	wife.	Green
eyes,	red	hair—well,	 hers	is	 a	bit	 more	on	the	brown	 side,	a	 reddish	brown.
But	this	 is	 just	a	fleeting	  observation,	and	he	 makes	no	real	 connection,	he
never	once	thinks	they	might	be	brother	and	sister.
   The	young	 man	turns	and	extends	his	hand.
   He	 is	wearing	 a	short-sleeved	shirt	 open	at	the	throat,	 blue	jeans,	western
boots.
   There	is	a	mermaid	tattoo	on	his	right	 forearm.
   The	 mermaid	 has	long	yellow	  hair	and	 blue	eyes	and	 bright	 red	lips	 and
red-nippled	breasts	and	a	blue-scaled	tail.
   I’m	 Ned	Weaver,	the	stranger	says,	hand	still	extended.
   Which,	  of	 course,	is	 Jessica’s	maiden	name,	 Jessica	Welles	Weaver,	the
Welles	 for	 her	  mother’s	 maiden	 name—is	  this	 young	  man	 a	 cousin	 or
something?
   But	 no,	he	is	not	a	cousin.
   Because	 a	cry	 of	 joy	 sounds	 from	 within	  the	house,	 and	Jessica	comes
bounding	out	in	 cutoff	 shorts	and	a	green	T-shirt,	barefooted,	running	toward
the	young	man,	 who	drops	the	 duffel	 he’s	been	holding	 in	 his	left	 hand	and
turns	to	her	and	opens	both	arms	wide	to	 her,	and	clasps	her	to	him,	her	long

167
reddish	hair—she	was	 wearing	her	hair	 long	 then—cascading	over	his	 arms
behind	 her	 back,	 showering	  the	 mermaid’s	  yellow	  hair	 and	 red-nippled
breasts.	Oh,	Ned,	she	cries,	oh	God,	how	happy	I	am	to	see	you!
   “She’d	 been	writing	 to	him	all	 the	while	he	was	in	prison,”	 Leeds	said	now.
“Had	 herself	a	 PO	box	 in	 town,	 he’d	 send	his	 letters	to	 her	there.	 I	 didn’t
know	she’d	 offered	him	 a	job	 till	  all	the	 introductions	 and	the	laughing	 and
the	oh	 my	Gods	 were	out	 of	 the	way	 and	we	 were	 sitting	 around	the	 pool
drinking.	 I	didn’t	 know	 he	was	a	jailbird	 until	that	 night	in	bed	when	 she	told
me	his	sad,	sad	history.	Always	the	innocent	victim,	  that	brother	of	hers,	dear
little	Ned,	pure	as	the	driven	snow.	Norton	Albert	 Weaver,	named	for	Jessica’s
father,	who’d	been	lucky	 enough	to	die	long	before	his	only	son	turned	rotten.
Norton	Albert	  Weaver,	a	vicious	 son	of	 a	bitch	 if	 ever	there	was	 one,	but	 I
didn’t	know	 that	until	the	day	with	 the	dog.	This	must’ve	been...”
   ...late	 October	last	year,	the	hurricane	season	all	but	gone,	Ned	settling	into
his	duties	on	the	farm.	 The	man	has	a	thumb	can	turn	a	ripe	 tomato	blue,	but
he’s	now	one	of	 the	foremen	around	here,	barking	 out	orders,	strutting	 like	a
peacock	for	 the	women	 in	 the	fields,	 making	 pass	after	 pass	at	pretty	 little
Allie	 in	the	kitchen,	who	loves	her	husband	to	death	and	who’s	so	flustered	by
Ned’s	unwanted	 attentions	that	 she’s	tempted	to	 give	 up	the	 only	 good	job
she’s	ever	had.	She	speaks	to	Jessica	about	it,	and	Jessica	promises	to	talk	to
her	brother.	 But	 privately,	 she	tells	 Leeds	 that	 their	 housekeeper	has	been
flirting	 with	 Ned.
   That	 day	with	the	dog...
   The	 dog	belongs	to	Allie	 and	her	husband,	Pete,	who	before	Ned	took	over
as	foreman	 was	 doing	 a	fine	  job	 of	 running	 things	 by	 himself.	  Pete	is	 a
Vietnam	vet,	 thirty-five	  years	old—it’s	  difficult	  to	 realize	 that	anyone	 who
was	a	veteran	of	that	war	 would	now	 have	to	be	at	least	thirty-three,	 but	 that
is	actually	 the	case.	He	is	a	soft-spoken	 man	who	 lowers	his	 eyes	whenever
he’s	addressed,	as	though	he	is	fearful	a	person	might	look	into	those	eyes	and
see	reflected	 there	all	 the	 things	 he	 has	seen—and	done.	 It	 is	 difficult	  to
imagine	this	man	ever	killing	  anyone.	But	 he	is	alive	today.	And	 if	 you	were
in	combat	 in	 Vietnam,	 as	was	 Pete,	and	you	 did	 not	 kill	 people,	 then	you
would	not	be	alive	today.	The	equation	is	a	simple	one.
   Whenever	he	drives	his	truck	 out	there	in	the	fields,	his	dog	is	sitting	 beside
him	on	the	front	 seat.	The	dog’s	name	is	Jasper.	He	is	a	spotted	something-or-
other;	no	one	has	ever	been	able	to	determine	his	ancestry	with	any	accuracy,
but	it’s	 reckoned	he	is	at	least	part	Dalmatian,	 a	dog	with	 a	somewhat	sappy
look	on	his	face	and	a	manner	as	gentle	as	his	master’s.
   On	 that	day	in	October...
   It	 is	 one	of	 those	crisp,	glistening	 days	that	infrequently	  bless	this	part	of
Florida,	 causing	all	 those	 settlers	who	 moved	 from	 colder	 climes	 to	thank
their	 lucky	 stars	 all	 over	 again	 for	 the	 wisdom	 of	  their	 decision	 and	the

168
beneficence	of	the	Lord	 Almighty.	  The	cloudless	sky	 stretched	taut	over	 the
bountiful	 acres	of	the	farm	is	as	blue	as	Monday,	and	a	fair	wind	is	blowing	 in
off	 the	Gulf	  and	carrying	 inland.	  There	is	 a	man-made	 pond	on	 the	 farm,
stocked	with	trout,	 stalked	by	water	birds	that	take	immediate	 wing	whenever
an	alligator	puts	in	a	sudden	and	unwanted	appearance.
   It	 is	against	the	law	to	shoot	alligators	in	the	state	of	Florida.
   Alligators	  are	a	protected	species.
   Occasionally,	 a	 farmer	or	 an	 orange	grower	 will	  take	a	shot	 at	one,	 and
occasionally	alligator	 steaks	will	appear	on	the	dinner	table—but	 no	one	talks
about	that	much.	 In	 the	state	of	 Florida,	 there	 are	a	great	many	 things	 that
people	don’t	talk	about.	Rainy	 weather	is	one	of	those	things.	Cold	weather	is
another.	Shooting	 alligators	 or	 ospreys	is	 yet	 another.	 But	 over	 the	years,
Leeds	has	shot	 and	 killed	  and	later	 grilled	  and	eaten	 three	alligators	  that
decided	to	make	a	home	in	his	trout	pond.	A	fourth	 alligator	is	in	 that	pond	on
this	bright,	shining	day	in	 October.
   “We	 all	heard	Jasper	screaming,”	Leeds	said.	“Sounded	like	a	human	being.
A	baby.	Screaming	and	screaming.	And	then	the	screaming	stopped.	We	were
all	on	our	 way	down	 to	the	pond	by	 then.	The	alligator	 was	still	 gnawing	 on
that	poor	dog.	Snout	all	covered	with	 blood—have	 you	ever	seen	the	teeth	on
an	alligator?	Someone	had	tied	Jasper	to	an	old	oak	tree	near	the	edge	of	 the
pond.	The	 rope	 was	 still	 wound	 around	 the	 trunk	 of	 the	 tree.	 Jasper	had
circled	and	circled	 the	tree	trying	 to	get	away	from	 that	’gator,	 and	then	he’d
run	out	of	 rope	and	the	’gator	 just	 took	him.”	 Leeds	shook	 his	head.	“It	 was
my	brother-in-law	 who	tied	that	dog	to	the	tree.”
   “How	  do	you	know	that?”
   “He	 all	but	 said	so.”
   “When?”
   “Right	  after	the	trial.	We	were	all	pretty	 upset	about	that	verdict,	you	know,
letting	those	men	go	free	after	 what	they	did	 to	Jessie.	Ned	said	if	he	had	his
way,	he’d	go	 after	all	 three	of	them	 and	drag	them	down	to	 the	pond	and	tie
them	to	that	 old	oak,	 the	way	someone	had	done	with	 Jasper.	That’s	when	 I
knew	he	was	the	one	who’d	 done	it.	 I’d	 suspected	it	all	along—we	 all	 did—
but	that	was	when	I	 knew	for	 sure	it	was	him.	 I	could	 see	it	right	there	in	 his
eyes.”
   “So	 what	he	said,	in	effect,	was	that	he	wanted	to	kill	those	men.”
   “Well,	 yes.	But	 the	point	is	he	wanted	to	kill	 them	the	way	Jasper	had—”
   “Yes,	 I	understand	that.	Did	he	sound	serious	when	he	said	this?”
   “As	 serious	as	any	of	us,”	Leeds	said.	“We	all	 wanted	them	dead.”
   “Yes,	 but	 what	I’m	  asking...do	you	 think	 this	 was	more	 than	just	 an	idle
threat?	What	your	brother-in-law	 said?”
   “About	  going	after	them,	do	you	mean?”
   “Yes.	 Do	you	think	 he	did,	in	fact,	go	after	them?”

169
   “Well,	 I—”
   “Do	 you	think	 he	killed	 them?”
   It	 was	evident	 that	the	thought	 had	never	once	entered	Leeds’s	mind.	 Ned
Weaver	as	his	sister’s	avenger?	Ned	Weaver	as	the	Midnight	Vigilante?	But	if
so...
   “Do	 you	mean...”
   He	 was	 sorting	out	 the	 implications.	 If	 indeed	 Ned	had	 gone	after	 those
men,	if	indeed	 Ned	had	killed	 them,	then	Ned	 had	also	dropped	his	wallet	 at
the	scene,	Ned	had	set	him	up.
   “The	 son	of	a	bitch,”	 he	said.
   “Could	 he	have	done	it?”	Matthew	 asked.
   “He’s	 mean	enough,	that’s	for	sure,”	Leeds	said.
   “Did	  you	see	him	at	any	time	on	the	night	of	the	murders?”
   “Yes,	 he	stopped	by	right	after	dinner.”
   “Was	 he	in	the	habit	of	stopping	by?”
   “Well,	 yes.	Jessie’s	his	sister,	you	know.	They’re	very	close.”
   “Stopped	 by	for	what	reason?”
   “Just	 to	 say	good	night.	 This	must’ve	 been	a	little	 before	 eight,	we’d	 just
finished	dinner.	We	were	getting	ready	to	watch	the	movie.”
   “How	  long	did	he	stay?”
   “Just	 a	few	 minutes.	Jessie	offered	him	a	drink—we	  were	having	an	after-
dinner	drink	outside—but	 he	said	no,	he	had	some	things	to	do.”
   “What	 things?”	 Matthew	asked.
   “Didn’t	  say.”
   “What	 time	 did	he	leave?”
   “Eight	  o’clock?	A	 little	 after?	No	later	than	that.	We	were	still	 sitting	 at	the
table	out	back,	by	the	pool.”
   “Did	  someone	show	him	to	the	front	door?”	Matthew	 asked.
   “No.	  What	do	you	 mean?	He	knows	the	way,	he’s	in	 and	out	of	 our	house
all	the	time.”
   “Went	 to	the	door	by	himself	 then?”
   “Yes.”
   “Did	  he	go	through	the	house?”
   “I	 believe	so,	yes.”
   “Went	 through	the	house	to	the	front	door.”
   “Yes.”
   “And	  you	and	Jessie	stayed	out	back.”
   “Yes.”
   “How	  long	did	it	 take	him	to	leave?”
   “I’m	  sorry,	I	don’t	 know	what	you	 mean.”
   “He	 said	 good	night	to	 you	out	 back	and	walked	 through	the	house	to	 the
front	door...”

170
   “I	 assume	he	did.”
   On	 the	night	 of	 the	murders,	someone	had	driven	 Jessie’s	Maserati	to	the
marina	and	boarded	Leeds’s	 boat.	The	someone	had	been	wearing	 a	yellow
jacket	and	hat,	and	he	was	seen	later	that	 night	both	 at	Kickers	 and	in	 Little
Asia.	Leeds’s	yellow	 jacket	 and	hat	had	been	hanging	in	 the	hall	 closet,	just
inside	the	entrance	to	the	house.	The	study	was	off	to	the	left,	two	steps	down.
The	keys	to	Jessie’s	Maserati	had	been	hanging	on	a	brass	holder	fastened	to
the	study	wall.	The	keys	to	Leeds’s	boat	had	been	hanging	on	that	same	wall.
   “Did	  you	hear	the	front	door	close	behind	him?”	Matthew	 asked.
   “I...really	  can’t	say.”
   “Then	 you	 don’t	know	 how	 long	he	was	in	 the	house	after	he’d	 said	good
night.”
   “No,	 I	 don’t,”	 Leeds	said.
   Matthew	 nodded.	It	was	at	least	possible.
   But	 the	look	of	 gloom	had	settled	on	Leeds’s	face	again,	clouding	 his	eyes,
causing	his	mouth	to	 go	slack.	He	 knew	what	 Matthew	 was	thinking,	 but	he
wasn’t	buying	it.	 Not	any	of	it.	 His	eyes	revealed	only	despair.
   “We	 don’t	have	to	find	 the	real	murderer,	you	know,”	Matthew	 said.
   “I	  know,”	 Leeds	said,	 and	clasped	his	hands	in	 front	 of	 him	 on	the	 table
again.
   “We	 only	have	to	show	you	couldn’t	 have	done	it.”
   “Yes.”
   “And	  we’re	well	 on	the	way	to	doing	that.”
   “Are	 we?”
   “Well,	  sure,”	Matthew	 said.	“We’ve	 got	 a	witness	who	saw	a	license	 plate
that	doesn’t	ex—”
   “A	 dead	witness,”	 Leeds	said.
   “What	  Trinh	 said	 is	still	  on	the	 record.	We	 have	his	 statement.	And	 his
murder	only	helps	our	case.”
   “I	 don’t	 see	how.”
   “Because	whoever	killed	 him	 may	have	killed	the	others	as	well.”
   “The	 papers	are	saying	it	was	a	copycat.”
   “The	 papers	are	saying	what	the	state	attorney	wants	them	to	say.”
   “They	 hate	my	father,”	 Leeds	said.	“Because	he	tried	to	buy	them	out.”
   “I	  know	that.	So	don’t	 worry	 about	what	the	papers	are	saying.	The	papers
aren’t	a	judge	and	jury.”
   “It	 feels	like	 they	are.”
   He	 looked	down	at	his	 clasped	hands.	Head	bent.	Behind	him	the	rain	kept
riddling	 the	palm	fronds.	His	gloom	 was	palpable.	Matthew	didn’t	 know	 what
he	could	say	to	dispel	it.
   “We’ve	 also	turned	Stubbs	around,”	he	said.
   No	 answer.

171
   “He’s	 ready	to	testify	 that	the	man	who	called	him	wasn’t	you.”
   No	 answer.
   “Which	  is	very	good	news.	He	was	one	of	their	best	witnesses.”
   No	 answer.	Just	sat	there	looking	at	his	 hands,	the	rain	falling	 behind	him.
And	 then,	without	 looking	  up,	in	 a	voice	 so	 low	 that	Matthew	 had	 trouble
hearing	him,	he	said,	“Be	nice	 if	it	 was	Ned,	wouldn’t	 it?	But	 when	I	 think	of
the	victims	 he	picked	for	 himself”—and	 now	 he	was	shaking	his	head—“not
the	bank	guard,	that	was	just	someone	who	got	 in	his	way.	 But	the	others”—
still	 shaking	his	 head,	looking	 down	 at	his	 hands—“an	old	 lady...a	 retarded
girl...that	sweet,	gentle	dog...”
   He	 looked	up	at	last.
   His	 eyes	were	brimming	with	 tears.
   “No,	 Mr.	 Hope,”	he	said.	“I	 don’t	think	 it	was	Ned.	He	just	doesn’t	have	the
balls.”



There	was	a	message	that	Mai	 Chim	 Lee	had	called.	 Matthew	 looked	at	his
watch.	It	 was	a	little	 before	 noon.	Hoping	 he’d	 catch	her	before	 she	left	for
lunch,	he	dialed	the	number	 she’d	left,	 let	it	 ring	six	 times,	and	was	about	to
hang	up	when	a	woman’s	voice	said,	“Longstreet	 and	Powers,	good	morning.
Or	afternoon.	Whichever	it	 is.”
   “Morning,”	   Matthew	said.	“For	 the	next	five	minutes.”
   “Thank	 God	someone	has	the	right	time.	Is	your	power	still	 on?”
   “Yes,”	 he	said.	“Well,	 I	don’t	 know,	just	 a	minute.”	He	snapped	on	his	desk
lamp.	“Yes,	it	is,”	 he	said.
   “There	 are	some	lines	 down,	we’ve	 been	out	 since	ten	this	morning,”	  she
said.	“But	enough	of	my	 troubles.	How	can	I	help	you?”
   “May	  I	speak	to	Miss	Lee,	please?”
   “Mary?	 Sure,	just	a	minute.”
   Mary,	 he	thought,	and	waited.
   “Hello?”
   The	singsong	voice.	The	somewhat	sorrowful	 lilt	 of	it.
   “Mai	  Chim?	It’s	Matthew.”
   “Oh,	 hello,	Matthew,	 how	are	you?	I’m	 so	happy	you	called	back.”
   “Is	 everything	 all	right?”
   “Yes,	 fine,	thank	you.	Did	 you	read	about	Mr.	Trinh?”
   “I	 did,	 yes.”
   “Such	 a	nice	old	man,”	she	said.
   “Yes.”
   “Matthew,	 I	 feel	very	bad	about	the	other	night.”
   “Why	  should	you?”
   “Because	I	 behaved	so	foolishly.”

172
   “But	 you	 didn’t.”
   “So	 very	foolishly.”
   “No.”
   “Like	  a	child.”
   “I	 didn’t	 think	 so	at	all.	Really,	Mai	 Chim—”
   “I’m	  almost	thirty-one	 years	old,	Matthew.”
   “I	 know	 that.”
   “That’s	 not	a	child.”
   “I	 know.”
   “Matthew,	 would	 you	care	to	have	dinner	with	me	tomorrow	 night?”
   “I’d	  love	to	have	dinner	with	 you,”	 he	said.
   “Please	understand	that	I’m	the	one	who’s	asking	you.”
   “Yes,	 I	realize	that.”
   “Good,	 then	 that’s	settled.	I	 think	 I	know	 a	very	 nice	place.	Can	you	 pick
me	up	at	eight?”
   “Eight	 sounds	fine.”
   “Perhaps	we	will	 get	to	know	 each	other	better,”	she	said,	and	hung	up.
   Matthew	 looked	at	the	mouthpiece.



Warren	Chambers’s	answering	machine	had	a	recording	capability	 that	 made
it	 relatively	  simple	 to	 tape	 a	 conversation	 without	 the	 knowledge	  of	 the
person	on	the	 other	end	of	 the	 line.	All	  you	 had	to	 do	was	 hit	 the	PLAYBACK
button,	 dial	 your	  number,	and—when	  your	 party	 started	 talking—hit	   the
RECORD	and	START	buttons	simultaneously.	No	beeps	would	sound	to	alert	the
party	on	the	other	end.	The	operation	was	what	was	known	as	covert.
   He	  was	making	  his	 call	 from	  the	 small	 office	  that	 used	 to	 belong	 to
Samalson	Investigations	before	Otto	 Samalson	himself	went	 out	of	 business.
Otto	went	out	of	 business	because	someone	shot	him	dead.	Getting	shot	dead
in	the	private-eye	 business	usually	happened	only	in	 novels	and	 movies,	but
Otto	had	 somehow	managed	the	trick	  in	 real	life.	 The	 Chinese	lady	 who’d
worked	for	 him—Warren	 couldn’t	 remember	her	name,	but	she’d	been	damn
good—left	  for	  Hawaii	  shortly	   afterward,	 and	  the	 office	   had	 remained
unoccupied	until	  Warren	 recently	 took	  over	 the	 lease	and	 bought	 all	 the
furniture	from	 the	man	to	whom	Otto’s	children	 had	sold	it.
   The	 frosted-glass	door	 to	the	 Chambers	Detective	 Agency	opened	onto	 a
reception	room	that	 measured	six	by	 eight	feet,	 into	which	 were	 crammed	a
wooden	 desk	with	  a	 typewriter	  on	 it	  and	a	 wooden	 chair	  behind	 it,	 an
upholstered	  easy	 chair	   opposite	  it,	  green	  metal	   filing	   cabinets	  and
bookshelves,	and	a	Xerox	machine	and	a	coatrack,	all	enclosed	by	walls	 now
hung	with	  photographs	 of	 Warren’s	 mother	 and	 his	 two	 sisters	 and	 their
families	 back	in	 St.	Louis.	 Warren	 figured	 that	if	  someone	wasn’t	going	 to

173
hire	you	 because	you	had	 pictures	of	 your	 black	 family	  on	the	 walls,	 then
maybe	he	ought	to	look	across	the	desk	and	discover	that	you	were	black,	too.
   Warren	 did	 not	as	yet	 have	a	 receptionist;	his	 answering	machine	 served
that	purpose.	Whenever	he	put	on	 temporary	help,	whichever	 investigator	 he
hired	normally	 worked	 out	of	 the	reception	area.	His	 own	private	 office	 was
larger	than	the	outer	office—eight	 by	ten	as	opposed	to	six	by	eight—but	 just
as	cluttered.	It	enjoyed	the	advantage	of	a	window,	however,	which,	combined
with	its	few	 extra	feet,	made	it	seem	spacious	by	comparison,	even	if	the	only
view	from	 it	was	of	a	bank	building	 across	the	street.
   Rain	 streaked	that	window	as	Warren	dialed	the	number	at	 the	Leeds	farm.
Jessica	Leeds	herself	answered	on	the	 third	 ring.	 Warren	told	 her	 who	was
calling,	 and	they	 exchanged	some	small	 talk	 about	 the	awful	  weather,	and
then	he	asked	if	he	might	speak	to	Mr.	Weaver,	please.	He	did	not	say,	“May	I
speak	to	your	brother,	 please?”	He	felt	 that	allowing	 her	to	 assume	he	didn’t
yet	know	 this	 fact	 was	the	 safest	course	to	 follow.	 She	asked	him	 to	 wait,
please.	He	waited.	While	 he	waited,	 he	hit	both	 the	RECORD	and	START	buttons.
He	was	now	 recording	 dead	air.	But	 better	that	than	 any	telltale	 click	 when
Weaver	came	on	the	 line.	 Rain	slithered	 down	 the	windowpane.	 He	looked
across	at	the	bank	building.	Everything	 looked	gray	and	bleak	and	dismal.	He
kept	waiting.
   “Hello?”
   You’re	 on	the	air,	he	thought.
   “Hello,	  Mr.	Weaver?”
   “Yes?”
   “It’s	  Warren	Chambers,	I	hope	I’m	not	catching	you	at	a	bad	time.”
   “Nope.”
   “I	 wanted	 to	apologize,	first	 of	all,	 for	our	little	 misunderstanding	the	other
day.	I	can	see	how—”
   “Okay.”
   The	man	was	a	monosyllablist.
   “I	  can	see	how	a	person	who	 looked	as	if	 he	 was	trying	 to	break	into	 the
house—”
   “I	 said	okay.”
   Three	 words	 this	time.	 Not	 bad.	Warren	 wondered	if	 he’d	 like	 to	 try	 for
four.
   “If	  you’ve	got	a	minute—”
   “Sure.”
   “—there	 are	a	few	questions	I’d	like	 to	ask	you.”
   “Sure.”
   “Mr.	  Weaver,	had	you	ever	known	Mr.	Leeds	to	take	his	boat	out	for	 a	little
moonlight	spin?”
   “A	 what?”

174
   “A	 little	moonlight	spin.”
   “Sure.	All	the	time.”
   “You	understand	what	I	mean,	don’t	you?”
   “Sure.	A	little	moonlight	spin.”
   Good.	He’d	repeated	the	exact	words	Stubbs	had	heard	on	the	telephone.
“A	little	moonlight	spin.”	He	was	making	remarkable	progress,	having	come
as	far	as	five	full	words	in	a	row.	If	Warren	could	get	him	up	to	six,	or	maybe
seven,	or	maybe	even	a	complete	sentence	with	a	subject	and	a	predicate,	and
from	there	to	a	full	paragraph—the	possibilities	were	limitless,	the	horizons
boundless.
   “What	time	would	you	say	he	went	out	for	these	little	spins?”	he	asked.
   “Varied.”
   Back	to	single-syllable	utterences	again.
   “Seven-thirty?”
   “Later.”
   “Eight-thirty?”
   “Sometimes.”
   “What	time	would	you	say?”
   Say	ten,	ten-thirty,	Warren	thought.	Say	the	words	ten,	ten-thirty.
   “Eleven,	eleven-thirty,”	Weaver	said.	“That’d	be	a	moonlight	spin,	around
that	time.	If	there	was	a	moon,	of	course.”
   Little	 bit	of	humor	there.	Little	bit	of	jailhouse	jokery.	And	certainly	more
words	than	Warren	had	heard	from	him	 since	they’d	 started	talking.	But
Weaver	hadn’t	said	the	words	Warren	wanted	to	hear,	which	would	have	been
nice,	since	ten,	ten-thirty	was	the	ETA	the	caller	had	given	Stubbs	on	the
telephone.
   “You	weren’t	worried	when	he	took	the	boat	out	at	night,	were	you?”
   “Nope.”
   “It	 being	dark	and	all.”
   “Not	 with	a	moon.”
   More	jailhouse	jollity.	 Must’ve	been	a	card	out	there	on	the	yard,	young
Ned.
   “But	  when	there	wasn’t	 a	moon,	 if	 he	 took	 the	boat	 out	for	 a	 little
moonlight	spin	when	there	wasn’t	a	moon—would	that	have	alarmed	you?”
   Say	the	word,	Warren	thought.
   “Alarmed	me?”
   Bingo.
   “Yes.	Would	that	have	alarmed	you?”
   “Nope.”
   “How	 come?	You	know	what	I’m	saying,	don’t	you?”
   Say	it	again	for	me,	Warren	thought.
   “Sure,”	Weaver	said.	“Would	I	be	alarmed.”

175
   Thank	 you,	Warren	thought.
   “Yes,”	 he	said.	“Him	 being	out	in	the	dark	and	all.”
   “Man	  knows	how	to	 run	a	boat,	don’t	he?”	 Weaver	said,	and	Warren	could
visualize	him	shrugging	on	the	other	end	of	the	line.
   “Well,	  thanks	for	 clearing	 that	 up,”	 he	said.	 “We	were	 a	little	  concerned
about	it.”
   “Why?”	  Weaver	asked.
   “Something	 in	the	papers	the	state	attorney	sent	over,”	Warren	said.
   “Oh,”	  Weaver	said.
   “So	 thanks	again,	you’ve	been	a	big	help.”
   “Yeah,”	 Weaver	said,	and	hung	up.
   Now,	 you	 little	  prick,	 Warren	thought,	 let’s	 see	if	 you	 were	 making	 any
phone	calls	on	the	night	of	August	thirteenth.



In	Chicago	 when	he	was	a	boy,	 Matthew	 used	to	run	along	 the	lake,	hoping
one	day	to	be	fast	enough	to	qualify	 for	 the	track	 team	at	school.	He’d	 never
got	fast	enough.	Too	light	 for	 football,	 too	slow	 for	 track,	he’d	opted	 instead
for	ice	 hockey	 and	had	broken	 his	leg—or,	 rather,	 had	it	 broken	for	 him—
during	the	first	 game	of	 the	season.	The	leg	still	  hurt	when	the	 weather	was
bad.	 Like	  today.	  Running	  around	 the	  track	 at	  the	  police	 gymnasium,
undisputed	and	unlimited	 admission	courtesy	of	Detective	 Morris	 Bloom,	the
leg	hurt	like	hell.	 But	he	could	feel	the	pounds	melting	away.
   This	 morning	 at	eight,	after	he’d	 swum	a	hundred	laps	in	the	pool—and	 in
the	rain—he’d	 weighed	a	hundred	and	eighty-four	 pounds.	That	was	close	to
eighty-four	 kilos	 in	Rome,	 where	he’d	 put	on	 some	of	the	 weight,	and	 a	bit
more	than	thirteen	stones	in	London,	where	he’d	 stopped	on	the	way	home	to
see	a	lawyer	 friend	 of	 his	who	 now	 spent	much	 of	 the	year	 in	Hawkhurst,
Kent.	Tomorrow	 morning,	 if	 it	didn’t	  rain,	he	had	another	tennis	lesson	with
Kit	 Howell,	  who	  had	demolished	 him	  last	 Saturday.	This	 time,	  Matthew
hoped	to	be	at	least	six	pounds	lighter	and	a	lot	faster	on	his	feet.
   The	 steady	pounding	of	his	sneakers	on	the	track’s	synthetic	surface,	rather
than	lulling	 him	 to	sleep,	provided	 a	rhythmic	 background	to	his	 thoughts.	It
worked	the	same	way	 whenever	he	was	at	a	concert.	 He	wondered	why	 this
should	 be	  so.	  Why	  mindless	  physical	  exertion	  stimulated	  thought	  as
effectively	 as	sitting	in	a	concert	hall	 with	 wave	after	wave	of	 sound	washing
over	him.	There	were	two	 other	runners	on	the	track	ahead	of	him,	 one	a	tall,
hefty	man	 wearing	a	 black	warmup	 suit,	 the	other	a	 slender	man	some	five
feet	nine	inches	tall,	 wearing	a	gray	 sweatshirt	and	sweatpants,	a	blue	watch
cap	pulled	down	over	his	ears.	Matthew	did	not	try	 to	pass	either	of	them.	Nor
did	either	of	 them	seem	intent	on	breaking	any	speed	records.	The	hefty	 man
was	out	in	front,	 the	smaller	man	some	thirty	 feet	behind	him,	 Matthew	some

176
thirty	feet	 or	so	in	the	rear.	They	kept	up	the	steady	pace,	the	regular	distance
between	them,	like	strangers	in	a	big	city	 on	a	cinder	track	 in	a	park.	But	 this
was	indoors	at	the	police	gym,	with	the	rain	still	 drilling	  the	streets	outside.
   He	 wondered	why	Trinh	had	been	killed.
   This	 was	the	single	most	significant	 development	in	the	case,	the	murder	of
the	man	who	 had	seen	the	killer	  entering	 an	automobile	 parked	at	the	 curb
outside	Little	   Asia.	 This	 information	  had	 been	 reported	 in	 Calusa’s	 own
lovely	rag,	the	Herald-Tribune:	 “Trinh	 Mang	 Duc,	one	of	the	key	witnesses	in
the	Stephen	Leeds	murder	case,	is	reported	to	have	seen	the	license	plate	on
the	automobile	allegedly	driven	 by	the	murderer.”	 There	it	was.	An	 invitation
to	slaughter.	And	good	enough	reason	to	petition	for	a	change	of	venue.
   But	 then	 why	hadn’t	 the	murderer	 also	gone	after	 Tran	Sum	Linh,	 who’d
shared	a	smoke	on	his	 front	 step	with	 one	 of	his	 many	cousins,	 and	who’d
seen	a	man	in	yellow	running	 through	the	moonlit	 night	 toward	the	house	the
victims	 shared?	He,	too,	was	a	witness,	 the	essential	before	to	 Trinh’s	 after.
Why	go	after	one	and	not	the	other?	Or	was	Tran	next	on	the	killer’s	list?
   The	runners	ahead	were	picking	up	the	pace.
   Matthew	   increased	 his	 own	  pace,	 keeping	  the	 same	 steady	 distance
between	himself	and	the	nearest	runner;	the	man	in	 the	blue	woolen	 cap	was
now	drenched	 with	 sweat,	great	black	 blots	 spreading	over	 the	back	 of	 his
gray	sweatshirt	and	the	backs	of	 his	thighs	in	 the	gray	sweatpants,	sneakered
feet	pounding	the	track.	Matthew	 was	similarly	 soaked,	contentedly	awash	in
perspiration.	Tomorrow	 morning,	 he	 would	 step	out	 on	that	 tennis	court	 as
svelte	and	as	swift	as	Ivan	Lendl.	 Whack,	his	racket	would	 meet	the	ball,	and
swisssssssh	the	ball	would	 zoom	 over	the	 net—and	it’s	 yet	 another	ace	for
Matthew	Hope,	folks,	 the	fourth	in	this	exciting	 set,	Fat	Chance	Department.
   It	 had	to	have	been	the	license	plate.
   Trinh	 seeing	the	plate.
   Seeing	 it	erroneously,	 as	it	 turned	out,	 but	seeing	it	 nonetheless.	Because
otherwise,	if	 the	 killer	  was	covering	 his	 tracks,	he’d	 be	going	 after	 all	 the
witnesses:	Tran,	who’d	seen	him	at	a	little	after	 eleven,	and	the	woman	they’d
named	in	yesterday’s	paper—this	 time	 after	Matthew	 had	received	 from	 the
SA’s	office	  her	name	 and	sworn	 statement,	 thank	God	 for	  small	 favors—
someone	named	Sherry	Reynolds	who	worked	at	Kickers	and	who	claimed	 to
have	seen	the	ubiquitous	man	in	the	yellow	 jacket	 and	hat	getting	off	 a	fifty-
foot	Mediterranean,	which	 happened	to	be	the	very	sort	of	boat	Leeds	owned.
Saw	 him	 disembarking	  at	 ten-thirty	  that	 night	  and	 getting	 into	  a	 green
Oldsmobile	Cutlass	Supreme,	which	later	 on	turned	up	in	Little	 Asia,	 bearing
the	license	 plate	Trinh	 and	 only	 Trinh	 had	 seen,	which	 was	an	 impossible
plate	in	the	state	of	Florida.
   So	why	 kill	 him?
   The	plate	he’d	 seen	simply	did	not	exist.

177
   But	  the	killer	  couldn’t	  have	known	  this	 because	the	newspapers	hadn’t
revealed	the	numbers	and	letters	on	the	plate;	 Patricia	Demming	 had	at	least
kept	back	that	much.
   So	the	killer	 did	not	 know	Trinh	had	made	a	mistaken	identification.
   The	 killer	  knew	  only	 that	 Trinh	  had	seen	 the	license	 plate,	 Trinh	  had
identified	 the	 car,	and	if	  the	state	 attorney	knew	 this,	 then	 the	police	 also
knew	this,	and	the	ball	game	was	over.
   But	 then	why	kill	 Trinh?
   Why	 not	get	the	hell	out	of	 Calusa	as	fast	as	his	feet	could	carry	him,	run	to
China,	run	 to	the	North	 Pole,	get	 out	of	 town	 before	they	 traced	the	license
plate	directly	to	his	front	 door?
   Something	 was	wrong	here.
   Because...
   If	 the	killer	  thought	the	state	attorney	and	the	police	 were	in	possession	of
his	correct	license	plate	number,	then	the	 cat	was	already	out	of	 the	bag,	and
he	would	have	run	for	 his	life.	Or	 given	himself	 up,	one	or	the	other.	What	he
would	not	 have	done	was	go	after	Trinh	 Mang	Duc	 to	shut	him	 up	after	he’d
already	revealed	what	he’d	seen.	There	was	no	sense	to	that.
   So	 maybe	Bloom	 and	Patricia	 were	both	 right,	 maybe	this	 was	a	copycat
murder.
   Or	 maybe	the	killer	 knew—but	how	 could	he?—that	Trinh	 had	given	them
the	wrong	 numbers	and	 letters,	and	 maybe	he	figured	 he	 had	to	 get	rid	  of
Trinh	before	he	remembered	the	right	ones.
   Damn	 it,	that	had	to	be	it.
   The	killer	 had	to	have	known—
   The	collision	 came	suddenly	and	unexpectedly.
   One	 moment	Matthew	 was	running	along	at	a	steady	pace,	lost	in	 thought,
losing	weight	 and	minding	 his	own	 business,	and	the	next	minute	the	sweat-
stained	man	ahead	of	him	 stopped	dead,	and	before	Matthew	 could	 stop	his
own	 forward	 momentum,	 he	crashed	into	  him.	 They	 went	 tumbling	 down
together	in	 an	awkward	 embrace,	 Matthew	 pushing	out	 with	 his	 arms	in	 a
vain	attempt	 to	 prevent	the	 crash,	the	 other	man	 partially	 turning	 when	 he
realized	he’d	been	hit	from	behind,	 meeting	the	full	force	 of	the	blow	 with	his
hip,	the	 track	 coming	up	 fast	to	 meet	them	 both.	 “Oh	 shit!”	 the	 other	man
said,	and	Matthew	 recognized	the	voice	 and	realized	that	 the	tangle	of	 arms
and	legs	in	the	gray	sweatshirt	 and	sweatpants	was	none	other	than	Assistant
State	Attorney	Patricia	(“Do	 Not	Call	 Me	Pat	or	Even	Trish”)	 Demming,	 even
before	she	rolled	  over	 into	 a	sitting	  position	 and	 yanked	the	 blue	 woolen
watch	cap	from	her	head	to	reveal	a	mass	of	sodden	blond	hair.
   “You,”	  she	said.
   “We	 keep	colliding,”	 Matthew	 said.
   They	 were	sitting	in	 the	center	of	the	track	now,	both	of	them	out	 of	breath,

178
facing	each	other,	 knees	up,	sneakered	feet	almost	 touching.	Her	 sweatshirt
was	drenched.
   “This	 time	 it	was	your	fault,”	 Patricia	said.
   “No,	 you	stopped	dead.”
   “My	  shoelace	was	untied.”
   “You	 should	have	signaled.”
   “I	  didn’t	  know	 anyone	 was	 behind	 me,”	 she	said,	 and	 got	 to	 her	feet.
Matthew	got	up,	too.	 The	other	runner	had	already	circled	the	track	again	and
was	bearing	 down	 on	 them.	 He	 was	red-faced	 and	 puffing	  hard,	wearing
headphones	and	flapping	 his	 arms	at	 them	like	 a	 swimmer	 doing	 a	frantic
breaststroke,	urging	 them	 to	 clear	 the	 track	 before	 there	 was	yet	 another
collision.	 He	 went	 by	like	  a	locomotive	  on	the	 way	 to	Albuquerque,	  New
Mexico,	 wherever	 that	 was,	sweat	 flying	 from	  his	face	 and	 his	neck,	 feet
pounding	the	track,	while	Patricia	 and	Matthew	crowded	the	rail	for	 dear	life.
   “You’re	  soaking	wet,”	she	said.
   “So	 are	you.”
   “Seems	like	 old	times,”	 she	said,	and	grinned.
   He	 was	remembering	her	in	 the	red	silk	 dress.	Her	nipples	 threatening	the
red	silk.	Both	of	 them	standing	in	the	rain.
   “I	 think	 I	know	 why	Trinh	 was	killed,”	 he	said.
   “Don’t	  you	ever	sleep?”	she	said.
   “Want	 to	discuss	it	over	a	drink?”
   “No,	  Counselor,”	she	said,	“it	 was	nice	seeing	you	again,”	 and	slapped	the
woolen	 watch	 cap	 against	her	 thigh	  and	walked	  swiftly	  toward	 the	 door
leading	off	the	track,	shaking	her	head.
   The	6:01	 express	was	coming	around	again.
   Matthew	 got	out	of	 its	way.



Policemen	standing	in	 the	rain	 look	 the	same	all	 over	the	 world.	 Especially
when	they’re	  standing	there	 looking	  down	 at	a	 corpse.	You	 won’t	  see	an
umbrella	 anywhere	in	 evidence.	 The	uniformed	  cops	may	 be	wearing	 rain
slickers,	and	the	 plainclothesmen	may	be	 wearing	trench	 coats,	but	blues	or
suits,	 it	 doesn’t	 matter,	  you’ll	  never	 see	 an	 umbrella.	 There	 were	 eight
policemen,	 some	of	 them	 suits,	 most	 of	 them	 blues,	 standing	 around	 the
corpse	in	the	drainage	ditch.
   This	 was	still	 only	 nine	 o’clock	 that	Friday	 night,	 the	weekend	hadn’t	 yet
begun	in	 earnest.	None	of	 the	 cops	had	been	expecting	 a	 corpse	quite	this
early.	Anyway,	 in	 this	 city,	 the	corpses	were	few	 and	 far	between.	 Oh	yes,
several	more	per	month	now	that	crack	was	on	the	scene,	but	crack	was	on	the
scene	everywhere	in	America,	crack	 was	the	shame	of	the	nation,	a	thousand
points	of	light	 shining	down	on	cocaine	you	could	inhale	from	 a	pipe,	this	was

179
some	shining	city	on	a	hill,	 this	nation.
   Detective	 Morris	 Bloom	 was	 one	of	 the	cops	standing	around	 the	corpse.
He	was	wearing	 a	blue	 suit	 and	a	white	 shirt,	 dark-blue	 tie	with	  a	mustard
stain	on	it.	 The	rain	 had	tapered	off	to	 a	slow,	lazy	 drizzle.	 He	stood	hatless
and	coatless	in	the	light	rain,	looking	down	 at	the	corpse.	An	assistant	medical
examiner	was	kneeling	 beside	the	 corpse.	The	 drainage	ditch	 had	a	 curved
bottom.	The	 corpse	was	lying	 on	 its	 side	facing	 the	rear	of	 the	 ditch,	away
from	the	road.	No	one	had	touched	the	body	yet.	No	 one	wanted	to.	The	skull
was	all	 crushed	in.	 There	was	 blood	 all	over	 the	 ditch,	 blood	on	 the	shiny
black	road	where	the	body	had	been	dragged	before	it	was	dumped.
   The	 assistant	ME	 was	having	 trouble	 with	 the	curving	 sides	of	 the	ditch.
The	ditch	was	slippery,	 and	he	kept	losing	 his	footing	 as	he	tried	 to	examine
the	body.	No	one	had	yet	looked	for	any	identification	 of	 any	kind.	They	were
all	waiting	 for	the	ME	to	 finish	here.	Or	better	yet,	to	get	started	here.
   Cooper	 Rawles	walked	 over	 from	 where	 he’d	been	talking	  to	the	 officer
who’d	first	 responded.	Like	Bloom,	 he	was	hatless	and	coatless.	But	he’d	just
come	off	 a	plant	at	 a	homosexual	bar	where	 crack	was	allegedly	 being	 sold
over	the	 counter	 like	 jelly	  beans,	and	he	 was	 wearing	 tan	tailored	 slacks,
tasseled	brown	loafers,	a	pink	V-necked	cotton	sweater	over	a	bare	chest,	and
a	gold	earring	in	his	right	ear.
   “You	 look	 stunning,”	Bloom	 said.
   “Thanks,”	  Rawles	said	drily.	“The	 man	in	George	car	says	the	motorist	was
gone	when	he	got	here.”
   “What	 motorist?”
   “The	 one	who	called	it	 in.	Gave	the	location	and	then	split.”
   “Small	 wonder,”	 Bloom	 said.	“It’s	the	earring	that	does	it,	you	know.”
   “I	 thought	 the	earring	was	a	nice	touch,	too,”	Rawles	said.
   The	 captain	in	 command	of	 Calusa’s	detective	bureau—a	new	 man	called
Rush,	for	  Rushville,	  Decker—came	 walking	  over	  from	 the	 Criminalistic
Unit’s	mobile	 van.	He’d	 only	 recently	replaced	the	bureau’s	Captain	Hopper,
whom	 Bloom	  used	to	 call	  His	 Royal	 Shmuck.	  Behind	 his	 back.	 Decker
seemed	like	a	good	man.	So	far.
   “How	  we	doing	here?”	he	asked	the	ME.
   “Can	 you	get	me	some	more	light?”	the	ME	 said.
   The	 cars	 were	angled	 so	that	 their	 headlight	 beams	were	 pointed	 at	the
scene,	and	they	had	 also	set	up	 a	generator	and	some	 lamps—the	road	 out
here	near	the	 fairgrounds	 was	normally	  pitch	 black—but	 there	 still	 wasn’t
enough	illumination.	  The	 men	milled	  about	the	 spot	where	 the	corpse	 had
been	dumped,	casting	long	shadows,	the	light	refracted	by	the	falling	rain.
   “Let’s	 get	the	Doc	some	more	light	 here,”	Decker	said,	and	two	of	the	blues
in	orange	rain	 slickers	 walked	 over	from	 the	 knot	 of	police	 cars	and	 shone
their	 long	 torches	 into	 the	 ditch	 and	 onto	 the	 corpse.	A	 car	 with	  a	state

180
attorney’s	office	 seal	on	the	 door	pulled	 to	a	 stop	behind	the	other	 vehicles,
and	a	man	Bloom	 hadn’t	 met	before	 walked	over	 and	introduced	himself	 as
Dom	 Santucci,	 Assistant	 SA.	 Decker	 shook	 hands	 with	  him	 and	 in	 turn
introduced	him	to	both	Bloom	 and	Rawles.
   “Messy	 one,”	Santucci	said.
   Bloom	 had	seen	worse.
   “Any	  idea	what	did	it?”	 Decker	asked	the	ME.
   “Some	 kind	 of	blunt	 instrument,”	 he	answered.	He	was	still	 kneeling	 over
the	body,	seemingly	more	comfortable	with	 his	position	now.	The	two	officers
in	the	orange	slickers	kept	their	torches	shining	 at	the	back	of	the	stiff’s	 head,
where	the	hair	was	all	matted	with	blood	around	the	craters	in	the	skull.
   “Like	  what?”	Decker	asked.	“A	 hammer?”
   “Hard	 to	 say.	Whatever	it	was,	it	was	wielded	 with	considerable	force.	 Can
someone	give	me	a	hand	here,	help	me	roll	him	over?”
   No	 one	seemed	eager	to	give	him	a	hand.
   “Give	  the	 Doc	a	 hand	there,”	 Decker	 snapped	to	the	 two	 officers	 in	 the
orange	slickers.
   Both	  men	put	 down	 their	 torches	 and	straddled	 the	ditch.	 Lying	  on	 the
roadway,	the	 torches	cast	a	 crazy	kind	 of	 splayed	 light	 into	 the	 blackness.
Legs	widespread,	the	officers	tested	for	 purchase	and	then	looked	for	a	place
to	grab	the	body;	neither	of	them	wanted	to	get	blood	on	his	hands.
   “One,	 two,	three,	ho!”	 one	of	them	said,	and	they	rolled	the	body	over.
   “Light,	  please,”	the	ME	said.
   The	officers	 picked	up	the	torches,	shone	them	on	the	corpse’s	face.
   The	man	from	 the	SA’s	office	let	out	a	short,	sharp	gasp.
   “That’s	 Frank	Bannion,”	 he	said.

181
                                                                                                                     11


HIS	SCALE	this	morning	had	read	a	hundred	and	eighty-two	pounds;	he’d	been
hoping	for	  a	hundred	 and	eighty.	 He’d	 swum	 another	hundred	 laps	before
breakfast,	and	now,	at	twenty	minutes	to	eight,	he	was	in	his	tennis	whites	and
ready	to	  drive	 to	  the	 club,	 feeling	  somewhat	more	  fit	 than	 he	 had	 last
Saturday,	when	Kit	Howell	 had	taught	his	devastating	left-handed	lesson.
   There	was	something	immensely	 satisfying	about	getting	 up	at	the	crack	of
dawn,	awake	with	  the	sun	and	the	 birds,	and	 breakfasting	before	 there	was
any	sound	of	life	 in	 the	streets.	The	front	lawn	 was	sparkling	with	 dew	 as	he
backed	the	rented	car	out	 of	the	garage.	There	went	 Mrs.	 Hedges	across	the
street,	walking	 in	 her	robe	to	 get	the	newspaper	from	 the	mailbox.	 A	 wave.
Morning,	 Mrs.	  Hedges.	Morning,	  Mr.	 Hope.	 Long	 pink	 robe,	 floppy	  pink
slippers—he	wondered	 what	 Patricia	 Demming	 looked	 like	 at	 a	quarter	 to
eight	in	the	morning.	 If	she	looked	terrific	  sopping	wet	in	the	rain	 or	dripping
sweat	in	a	running	 suit,	 how	bad	 could	she	look	 in	 the	morning?	 Don’t	 you
ever	sleep?	she’d	asked	him.	 But	that	 was	before	Frank	 Bannion’s	skull	 got
crushed	with	something	blunt.
   There	 was	a	peaceful	calm	to	 the	club’s	parking	 lot.	 Matthew	wondered	 if
the	 early-morning	  players	 walking	  from	  their	  automobiles	 had	 read	 the
headlines	today.	He	 wondered	if	 they	 even	knew	 who	 Frank	 Bannion	 was.
The	morning	was	sunny	 and	bright	after	 yesterday’s	rain,	not	too	 terribly	 hot
as	yet,	 it	 was	going	 to	 be	 a	lovely	  day.	Who	 wanted	 to	 think	 about	dead
investigators	on	 a	 day	like	  today?	He	 wondered	 if	 Patricia	 Demming	 was
thinking	 about	 her	 dead	 investigator.	 He	 wondered	 if	  she	still	  thought	 a
copycat	murderer	was	on	the	loose	while	Stephen	Leeds	languished	in	jail.
   He	 went	into	the	men’s	locker	 room	to	pee	one	last	time,	washed	his	hands
afterward	at	the	sink,	looked	at	himself	 in	the	mirror,	 and	thought,	You	can	do
it,	Hope.	 You	 can	beat	Kit	 Howell.	  He	nodded	 at	his	 own	image,	 dried	 his
hands,	picked	up	his	racket,	and	strode	confidently	to	the	teaching	court.



“The	trouble	 with	 your	game,”	Kit	 was	saying,	 “is	that	 you	don’t	 plan	ahead.
You	have	to	plan	at	least	two,	three	moves	ahead.	Otherwise,	you’ll	always	be
surprised	by	what	happens.”
   “Six–love	  was	a	big	surprise,	all	right,”	 Matthew	said.
   They	 were	sitting	 in	 the	club’s	 coffee	shop,	a	screened-in	area	adjacent	to
the	 swimming	  pool.	  This	 was	 Saturday	  morning,	 the	  pool	 was	 full	   of

182
squealing	kids.	Most	 of	the	men	hadn’t	 yet	come	in	from	 their	 early-morning
doubles	games,	the	shop	was	full	of	women	waiting	to	play.	On	Saturdays	and
Sundays,	men	were	given	preference	for	morning	court	time.	Unless	a	woman
could	prove	she	was	a	working	woman.	Nine	 to	five.	 Like	 Patricia	Demming.
Don’t	you	ever	sleep?
   Matthew,	 and	at	least	a	dozen	other	men	he	could	name,	had	voted	against
the	proposed	rule,	 but	 the	majority	  had	prevailed.	 His	 former	 wife,	  Susan,
nonetheless	decided	that	Calusa	Bath	and	Racquet	was	an	overtly	sexist	club
and	switched	her	membership	to	the	Sabal	Key	 Club,	even	though	 it	meant	a
fifteen-minute-longer	 drive	 from	 the	house	he	once	had	shared	with	her.	Her
protest	seemed	mild;	there	were	 some	women	in	 Calusa	who	would	 tear	out
your	throat	if	 you	so	much	as	opened	a	door	for	them.
   When	 Matthew	 was	a	little	 boy,	 his	mother	 had	taught	him	 to	open	doors
for	women.	 Ladies,	she’d	 called	them.	 Another	taboo,	 he	guessed,	the	word
ladies.	She’d	 said	it	 was	good	 manners	to	open	 a	door	for	 a	 lady.	She	said
gentlemen	opened	doors	for	ladies.	Nowadays	 only	 sexist	pigs	opened	doors
for	women.	When	was	the	second	stage	going	to	get	here,	Betty?
   Everywhere	 around	him	and	Kit,	 there	was	female	conversation,	bright	 and
lively	 at	this	hour	of	 the	morning,	 punctuated	with	laughter.	He	 realized	with
a	start	that	 half	 the	young	 mothers	sitting	  here,	chatting	 and	laughing	 over
their	coffee	cups,	could	 beat	him	 one-to-one	on	a	tennis	court.	 Or	was	this	 a
sexist	observation,	too?	The	hell	 with	 it,	he	thought;	 it’s	too	 damn	dangerous
to	live	in	these	trigger-happy	times.
   “If	  you	plan	only	for	 the	moment,”	Kit	 was	saying,	“you’ll—”
   “Who	 says	I	plan	at	all?”	 Matthew	 said.
   “Well,	 you’ve	 got	to	have	some	kind	of	plan,”	 Kit	 said,	surprised.
   “Not	 very	 often.”
   “At	  least	in	that	split	second	before	you	hit	the	ball.”
   “Well,	 yes.”
   “You’ve	  got	some	idea	of	where	you’re	trying	 to	place	it,	haven’t	you?”
   “Yes.	 Not	that	it	always	goes	there.”
   “I	  understand	that.	But	what	I’m	 saying	 is	you’ve	 got	to	think	 of	 the	game
as	a	logical	 succession	of	shots.	If	 you	 hit	the	 ball	 to	a	specific	 place,	there
should	be	only	one	possible	shot	I	can	make	to	return	it,	and	you	should	know
where	that	place	has	to	be,	and	you	should	be	waiting	 there	for	 the	ball.	 And
because	I’m	where	I	 am,	then	your	 plan	should	 include	where	 you’ve	 got	to
return	it	so	I	can’t	get	to	it,	 do	you	follow	 me?”
   “Yes.	 But	I	 have	enough	trouble	just	 getting	the	ball	 back.	Without	 having
to	worry	two	 shots	ahead.”
   “That’s	  exactly	my	 point.	 You’re	 having	trouble	 getting	 it	 back	because	I
do	have	a	plan.	I	 hit	the	 ball	here,	you	 have	to	return	it	 here,”	 he	said,	using
the	tabletop	 as	a	 court,	 moving	 the	tip	  of	 his	index	 finger	  back	and	 forth

183
across	it.	“You	don’t	 have	a	choice.	You	either	 return	the	ball	 the	only	way	 it
can	be	returned,	 or	you’ll	  miss	it	 entirely.	 So	it	 comes	back	 here,”	he	 said,
using	his	finger	again,	“and	I’m	 waiting	 for	 it,	so	I	hit	 it	here,	where	you	can’t
possibly	get	to	it.	But	let’s	 say	you	do	manage	to	get	all	the	way	cross-court	in
time,”	 he	said,	moving	 his	finger	 swiftly	  to	the	 other	side	of	 the	table,	 “and
you	reach	the	ball,	you	 actually	get	your	 racket	on	it.	The	 only	place	you	 can
possibly	hit	it—because	the	ball	 is	here	on	your	 backhand—is	down	 the	line.
And	I’m	 waiting	 for	it	because	I	know	that’s	your	only	 possible	shot.	So	I	drill
it	to	the	other	side	of	the	court,	and	the	point	is	mine.”
   “You	 make	it	sound	easy,”	Matthew	said.
   “It	 is	 easy,	if	you	have	a	plan,”	 Kit	 said.	“It’s	 like	chess,	in	a	way.	The	best
player	 is	 the	 one	 who	  can	think	  the	 most	 moves	 ahead.	 Tennis	 is	 less
predictable,	of	course,	the	moves	aren’t	fixed	in	tennis...well,	 maybe	that’s	the
wrong	comparison,	 chess.	Tennis	is	more	like	 a	battle.	 You	don’t	 just	return
fire	haphazardly	 unless	you	suddenly	 find	 yourself	 in	 deep	shit,	excuse	me.
But	if	 this	is	 a	planned	maneuver,	if	for	 example	you	know	 where	the	enemy
is	out	there,	and	you	 know	approximately	 how	 many	of	 them	there	are,	then
you	 can	situate	 your	 platoon	 so	 that	 this	 specific	 fire	 forces	 this	 specific
response,”	again	 moving	 his	 finger	 across	the	 table,	 “while	  you’re	 all	 the
while	moving	 your	 people	to	another	position,”	  the	finger	moving	 again,	“so
they	can	lob	 in	 a	 mortar	from	 the	 left,	 or	 rush	the	 flank	 from	 the	right,	 or
whatever.	It’s	all	 a	matter	 of	calculating	 what	choices,	 if	 any,	the	enemy	has
for	his	response,	and	then	being	ready	for	those	choices	so	you	can	step	in	and
cream	him.	A	plan,”	Kit	 said.	“Simple.”
   “Sure,”	 Matthew	 said.
   “I	 mean	it.	 Figure	out	a	plan	for	 next	Saturday,	okay?	Work	it	out	on	paper,
if	you	have	to.	Your	shot,	and	where	you	think	 it’ll	 land	 on	my	side	of	the	net,
and	what	 my	  possible	 responses	might	 be,	 and	 where	 you’d	 have	 to	 be
standing	to	be	ready	for	my	 return,	and	where	you’ll	 put	 the	next	shot	to	take
advantage	of	my	 position	 on	the	 court,	and	 so	on.	Figure	 a	plan	 for	 maybe
five	or	six	shots	ahead,	okay,	and	we’ll	try	 it	next	week.”
   “Okay,”	  Matthew	said	dubiously.
   “It’ll	   work,	 wait	and	see,”	Kit	 said,	and	smiled	 and	looked	at	his	 watch.	“I
have	to	go,”	he	said.	“Next	Saturday	at	eight,	okay?”
   “See	you,”	 Matthew	 said.



The	call	came	at	a	little	 before	ten	that	 morning,	while	 he	was	in	 the	shower.
He	climbed	 out	of	 the	tub,	 wrapped	a	towel	 around	his	 waist,	went	 running
into	the	study,	and	picked	up	the	receiver.
   “Hello?”	  he	said.
   “Matthew?”

184
   “Yes?”
   “Patricia	 Demming,”	 she	said.
   “Naturally,”	  he	said.	“I’m	 dripping	 wet.”
   “Sorry,	 is	this	a	bad	time,	have	you	seen	the	papers	this	morning?”
   “Yes.”
   “What’d	  you	think?”
   He	 hesitated.	She	was	the	 enemy,	and	this	morning	 Kit	  had	taught	him	 a
few	things	 about	dealing	effectively	 with	 the	 enemy,	either	on	a	tennis	court
or	a	battlefield.	 Moreover,	when	 the	lady	who	 was	trying	 to	cook	 your	client
called	at	ten	 in	the	morning	 wanting	 to	 know	 what	you’d	 thought	 about	the
murder	of	her	investigator...
   “What’d	  you	think?”	 he	asked.
   Lob	 a	mortar	 from	 the	left,	 he	thought.	 Then	hit	 the	ball	 to	 her	backhand
and	when	she	 returned	it	 down	 the	line,	 smash	it	 cross-court	 to	 where	she
wasn’t.
   “I’d	   like	 to	 talk	 to	you,”	  she	said,	 surprising	 him	 completely.	 “Can	 you
meet	me	at	my	office	in	an	hour	or	so?”
   “All	  right.”
   “Thanks,	 Matthew,”	 she	said,	and	hung	up.
   Matthew	 wondered	what	her	game	plan	was.



On	the	 baseball	field	 adjoining	 the	 renovated	motel	 that	now	 served	as	the
state	attorney’s	office	  complex,	 some	kids	 were	 playing	 pickup	 ball.	 Their
voices	carried	on	 the	stillness	of	 the	Saturday-morning	 air,	floating	  out	over
the	ballpark	 fence	and	drifting	 in	 over	the	 motel	courtyard.	 In	the	 tick	 of	an
instant,	the	 voices	carried	 Matthew	 back	to	 Chicago.	 The	house	the	 family
had	lived	in,	 the	school	he’d	gone	to,	 the	park	he	and	his	sister	had	played	in
as	children,	all	appeared	in	his	mind	like	 browning	snapshots	in	an	old	album.
He	had	not	spoken	to	his	 sister	in	more	 than	a	month	now.	He	 realized	all	 at
once	how	much	 he	missed	her.	The	voices	from	 the	ballpark	 soared	up	over
the	fence.	 Summer	voices.	 Baseball	 voices.	He	 sighed	 as	if	 burdened	 and
walked	quickly	 toward	Patricia’s	unit.
   It	 was	still	 relatively	 cool	for	 this	time	 of	day,	but	 the	air	conditioning	 was
on	in	her	office.	 She	was	dressed	casually:	jeans,	sandals,	a	white	T-shirt,	her
long	blond	 hair	 pulled	 back	into	 a	ponytail.	 This	 was	her	 day	off,	 the	 state
attorney’s	offices	 were	officially	  closed	for	 the	weekend.	Except	 for	the	 two
of	them,	 the	place	was	empty.	 It	 felt	 strange	being	here	without	 typewriters
clacking	and	phones	ringing,	people	running	 around	with	 papers	in	blue	legal
binders.
   “I’d	  have	asked	you	to	my	house,”	she	said,	“but	I’m	 being	painted.”
   “407	 Ocean,”	he	said.	“Fatback	Key.”

185
   “Good	 memory,”	 she	said.
   “It’s	  a	shorter	ride	here.”
   “Whisper’s	  much	closer,	that’s	true.”
   “But	 Fatback’s	much	nicer.”
   “Well,	 I’m	 not	 so	sure.”
   “Wilder,	  anyway.”
   “Still	  a	bit	wilder,	 yes,”	she	admitted.	“More	 Florida.”
   A	 common	expression	down	here.	More	Florida.	 Meaning	as	yet	unspoiled.
Florida	as	it	used	to	be.	People	down	here	were	always	sighing	for	the	Florida
that	used	to	be.	Hoping	to	find	it	 somewhere.	But	it	wasn’t	 here	anymore.	Not
even	in	the	Everglades.	Maybe	no	place	in	America	was	“here”	anymore.
   “I	 need	your	help,”	 she	said.
   He	 raised	his	eyebrows.
   “This	 isn’t	 a	trick,	Matthew.”
   He	 waited.
   “I’ve	  never	been	as	confused	about	a	case	in	my	life,”	she	said.
   He	 kept	waiting.
   “If	  I’ve	 already	got	the	real	killer	 in	 jail,”	 she	said,	“then	he’s	a	very	stupid
man.	But	if	the	real	killer	 is	still	 out	there,	he’s	very	stupid,	too.”
   “He’s	 out	there,	I’m	 sure	of	that,”	Matthew	 said.
   “Then	 why	 is	he	still	 killing	 people?	We’ve	already	charged	someone,	why
doesn’t	he	just	leave	well	enough	alone?”
   “Nobody	 says	a	killer	 has	to	be	a	nuclear	physicist.”
   “Granted.	 My	 point	is—”
   “I	 understand	your	point.”
   “If	  he’s	already	home	free—”
   “He	 may	not	think	 so.”
   “But	 why	 would	he	play	against	such	odds?”
   “Maybe	 he’s	worried.”
   “About	  what?	A	witness	who	didn’t	 even	see	the	right	license	plate?”
   “But	  maybe	Trinh	 was	close	enough.	Maybe	 the	killer	  was	worried	 about
that.”
   “This	 is	all	 arguendo,	you	realize.”
   “I	 realize.”
   “Because	I’m	 not	admitting	 there	is	a	killer	 out	there.”
   “Right,	 we’re	 just	exploring	 the	possibility.”
   “And	  I’ll	 be	getting	to	your	man	in	 a	minute.”
   “I	 figured.”
   “But	  let’s	say,	arguendo,	that	we’ve	 made	a	mistake,	okay?	We’ve	 got	the
wrong	man.	Arguendo.”
   “Arguendo.”
   “And	  let’s	say,	I’ll	 even	give	you	 this,	let’s	say	he	was	worried	 about	Trinh

186
having	seen	that	license-plate	number,	and	he	went	out	to	kill	 him.	 Witnesses
are	killed	all	the	time,	 you	know...”
   “Yes.”
   “...so	 it’s	 not	an	unlikely	 scenario.	But	if	 he	thought	we	were	 in	possession
of	the	 right	 number,	why	 didn’t	  he	just	 get	the	 hell	out	 of	 town	 before	we
pounced	on	him?	Why	kill	 Trinh?	That	doesn’t	make	sense,	does	it?”
   “No,	 it	 doesn’t.”
   “And	  why	go	after	Bannion	 next?	An	investigator	 for	the	SA’s	office?	 That
doesn’t	make	sense,	either.	The	man	would	have	to	be	crazy.”
   “Maybe	 he	is.”
   “So	 I	 can’t	find	 any	reasons	out	there,	Matthew.	It	 all	 seems	too...suicidal.
We’ve	already	got	 a	man	in	 jail	 for	 the	crimes,	why	 cast	doubt	on	 the	case?
Which	brings	me	to	Leeds.”
   “Leeds	 is	in	jail,	 you	just	said	so.	He’s	not	out	on	the	streets	murder—”
   “His	  wife	 isn’t	in	 jail,	 Matthew.	And	 his	brother-in-law	  isn’t	in	 jail,	 either.
Who	happens	to	have	a	record,	did	you	know	that?”
   “Yes,	 I	know	it.”
   “Nice	 family.”
   “They’re	  not	related	by	blood,	if	 that’s	what	you’re	suggesting.”
   “Cheap	 shot,	forget	it.	What	I	 am	suggesting—”
   “Don’t	  say	it,	Patricia.”
   “Hear	 me	out,	we’re	exploring.”
   “All	  right,	 explore.	Cautiously.”
   “Let’s	 say	Leeds	is	guilty	 of	the	crimes	as	charged.	Let’s	say,	further—”
   “Maybe	 we	ought	to	 quit	right	there.”
   “We	 are	not	in	a	fucking	courtroom,	 Matthew!”
   He	 looked	at	her.
   “Okay?”	  she	said.
   “Okay,”	  he	said.
   “Good.	  Let’s	 say	 Leeds	 realizes	he	 hasn’t	 got	 a	 chance	of	 beating	 the
rap...no	reflection	on	your	ability—”
   “Thanks.”
   “—but	  he’s	seen	what	we’ve	got,	and	he’s	read	the	writing	on	 the	wall,	and
he	knows	the	next	stop	is	the	electric	 chair.	Okay,”	she	said,	and	nodded,	and
began	nibbling	her	lip.	 She	was	reaching	for	 ideas,	he	realized,	searching	her
mind,	her	brow	 furrowed,	 actually	trying	 to	 dope	this	thing	 out.	He	suddenly
trusted	her.	To	a	degree.
   “Let’s	 say	his	wife	 is	still	 furious	about	the	bum	verdict	 the	jury	brought	 in.
By	 the	 way,	 Matthew,	 we	 tried	 our	 best	on	 that	 one.	 She	was	 raped,	 no
question	about	it.	And	 we	 indicted	the	right	 people	for	 the	crime.	 It	was	 just
her	tough	luck—and	ours—to	 come	up	against	a	bleeding-heart	jury.”
   Matthew	 nodded.	“Let	 me	hear	the	rest,”	he	said.

187
   “The	  rest	is	 the	brother-in-law.	  Weaver.	Who’s	 done	hard	 time	 and	who
knows	a	trick	or	 two	about	hurting	 people.	He’s	never	gone	the	distance,	true,
but	that’s	an	easy	step	to	take,	isn’t	it?	If	you’ve	 already	tried	to	 kill	 someone,
then	actually	killing	 someone	is	a	breeze.”
   “Maybe.”
   “Trust	 me	on	that.”
   “Okay.”
   “So	 Leeds	has	an	angry	wife	and	a	violent	brother-in-law.	 And	if	 he	can	get
them	to—”
   “You’re	  saying—”
   “I’m	  saying	he	could	have	engineered	those	murders	from	his	jail	cell.”
   “But	 he	didn’t.”
   “How	  do	you	know?”
   “I	 know.”
   “Have	 you	asked	him?”
   “No.”
   “Then	 you	don’t	 know	for	 sure.”
   “He’s	 innocent	of	 the	first	murders.	Why	would	 he—”
   “Because	the	state	doesn’t	believe	he’s	innocent,	Matthew,	the	state	has	him
behind	bars,	the	state’s	going	to	try	him	for	three	counts	of	murder!”
   “The	 state’s	wrong.”
   “Yes,	 Matthew,	 the	state’s	 wrong,	I’m	  wrong,	 you’re	 the	only	 one	 who’s
right.	But	you’re	 not	listening.”
   “Oh,	 I’m	 listening,	 all	right.”
   “Isn’t	  it	at	least	conceivable?”
   “No,	 damn	it!”
   “Then	 convince	me.”
   “One,”	  Matthew	said,	“there’s	 no	love	 lost	between	Leeds	and	his	brother-
in-law.	The	very	notion	 of	Weaver	doing	a	favor	for	 him	is	ridiculous.	 No	 less
a	favor	like	murdering	 two	people.”
   “How	  about	the	wife?”
   “She	 weighs	what?	A	 hundred	and	twenty	 pounds,	max?	Can	you	imagine
her	and	Bannion—”
   “Okay,”	  Patricia	said.
   “Which	  is	the	second	thing.	I	 guess	you	noticed	that	Bannion	wasn’t	 killed
with	a	knife.”
   “Sarcasm	doesn’t	become	you,	Counselor.”
   “If	  your	theory’s	going	to	 hold—”
   “Yes,	 yes,	I	see	where	you’re	going.	In	fact,	it’s	 a	good	point.”
   “Thank	 you.”
   “In	 fact...maybe	more	than	just	good.”
   She	was	nibbling	 her	lip	 again.	He	had	to	remember	this	habit	for	when	the

188
case	eventually	came	to	 trial,	 if	 it	 ever	came	to	 trial.	 Whenever	 she	started
nibbling	her	lip,	 she	was	searching	for	something.	And	when	she	found	it...
   “Bannion	 had	to’ve	 surprised	him,”	she	said.
   Her	 eyes	met	Matthew’s.
   “The	 killer,”	 she	said.
   Their	 eyes	held.	Blue	locked	into	brown.
   “Because	otherwise...,”	 she	said.
   “He’d	  have	used	a	knife,”	Matthew	said.



Charlie	Stubbs	was	working	 on	a	boat	engine	when	Warren	got	to	 the	marina
at	a	little	before	noon	that	day.
   “Just	 about	to	take	my	lunch	break,”	he	said.	“You’da	 missed	me	again.”
   The	 parts	of	the	 engine	were	scattered	all	about	 him	on	 the	concrete	floor
of	 the	tin-roofed	  shed	adjacent	 to	 the	 office.	 Rods,	 pistons,	 valves,	 roller
tappets,	rocker	arms,	camshaft,	crank—Warren	 wondered	how	 he’d	ever	put
all	those	pieces	together	again.	He	himself	had	never	been	good	at	assembling
jigsaw	puzzles.
   “Had	 to	go	to	a	funeral	up	in	 Brandentown	yesterday,”	Stubbs	said.	“Which
is	why	I	wasn’t	 here	when	you	stopped	by.”
   “Your	 son	told	me,”	 Warren	said.
   “All	  that	rain	yesterday,	perfect	day	for	a	funeral,	wasn’t	 it?”
   “If	  you’ve	 got	to	have	one,	I	suppose	you	ought	to	have	rain	to	go	 with	it,”
Warren	said.
   “Seems	 like	 more	and	more	 of	 my	friends	 are	having	 them	all	 the	time,”
Stubbs	said.	“With	 or	 without	 rain.	Seems	like	 the	current	 thing	to	 do,	have
yourself	a	little	 funeral.”
   He	 was	wiping	 his	grease-stained	hands	on	what	looked	like	 a	pair	of	 torn
lady’s	 bloomers.	Not	 panties.	 Bloomers.	 Very	 large	 bloomers.	 Warren	had
never	met	Stubbs’s	wife,	but	if	the	bloomers	were	any	indication...
   “Man	 who	 got	buried	yesterday	moved	down	 here	to	Florida	’cause	he	was
afraid	 he’d	 catch	pneumonia	 and	die	 up	 there	in	 Cleveland,	 easy	to	 get	 a
bronchial	disease	where	the	climate’s	so	harsh.	Either	that,	or	he’d	slip	 on	the
ice	and	land	on	 his	spine,	be	an	invalid	 for	 life,	 something	like	 that.	 He	was
scared	to	death	 of	 all	 the	 terrible	 things	 can	happen	to	 you	 up	 north.	 Get
mugged	by	a	street	gang,	something	like	 that.	Get	shot	by	 accident	in	a	dope
war,	something	 like	 that.	It’s	 terrible,	 the	 things	 that	can	happen	to	 you	 up
north.	But	you	know	 how	he	died	down	here?”
   Warren	shook	his	head.
   “He	 drowned,”	 Stubbs	said.
   He	  tossed	the	 soiled	 bloomers	 into	 a	 gasoline	 drum,	 said,	 “Guess	 this
engine’ll	 keep	 for	 a	 while,”	  and	 walked	 Warren	 down	 toward	 the	 docks.

189
“There’s	Mr.	 Leeds’s	boat	right	there,”	he	said.	“Felicity.	  Slip	number	twelve.
Ain’t	 been	a	soul	on	her	since	that	night	he	took	her	out.”
   “You’re	  still	pretty	 sure	it	was	him,	huh?”	Warren	said.
   “Well,	  no,	I’m	 not	 at	all	 sure	anymore,”	Stubbs	said.	 “Not	 after	Mr.	 Hope
played	that	tape	for	 me.	Because	it	 sure	as	hell	wasn’t	 that	voice	 I	heard	on
the	telephone.	So	I	got	to	figuring	 maybe	it	wasn’t	Mr.	 Leeds	going	out	on	the
boat	neither.	Sure	looked	like	him,	though.	I	got	 to	tell	you,	it’s	 puzzling.”
   “Maybe	  this’ll	 help,”	 Warren	said,	and	 took	a	tiny	 tape	cassette	out	of	his
pocket	and	held	it	up	between	his	thumb	and	forefinger.
   “Not	 another	one,”	Stubbs	said.
   “If	  it’s	no	trouble,”	 Warren	said,	and	took	a	microcassette	recorder	from	his
other	 pocket.	   He	  was	 wearing	   a	 floppy	   sports	  jacket	  made	  out	  of
handkerchief-weight	Irish	 linen,	 guaranteed	to	wrinkle	under	 even	the	best	of
conditions.	The	jacket	 was	pink.	His	 Miami	 Vice	look.	It	 had	wide	 lapels	and
deep	pockets.	He	had	 ordered	it	 from	 a	store	 in	 New	 York,	and	 it	 had	just
arrived	yesterday.	He	could	 not	 wait	for	 Fiona	 to	see	it.	 The	recorder	was	a
Realistic	Micro-27,	  small	 enough	to	 fit	 in	 the	palm	 of	his	 hand,	capable	of
playing	tapes	recorded	on	his	 answering	machine.	He	 opened	the	load	panel
and	snapped	in	the	tape.
   “Few	 key	 words	I	 want	 you	to	 listen	for,”	 he	 said.	“Little	 moonlight	 spin,
and	alarmed,	and	thirty.	  All	 those	words	 were	 used	by	the	 man	who	 called
you,	do	you	remember?”
   “Sort	 of,”	 Stubbs	said.
   “Well,	 what	 he	said	was,	‘I	just	wanted	to	tell	 you	I’ll	 be	taking	the	boat	out
again	for	a	little	  moonlight	 spin,	around	ten,	ten-thirty,	 and	I	 don’t	 want	you
to	be	alarmed	if	you	hear	me	out	there	on	the	dock.’	Do	you	remember	that?”
   “I	 guess,”	Stubbs	said.
   “What	  you’re	 going	to	 hear	won’t	 be	that	 whole	thing,”	  Warren	said,	“so
just	listen	 for	 the	key	 words,	 all	 right?	 Little	 moonlight	 spin,	 alarmed,	 and
thirty.	This’ll	  be	a	bit	more	difficult	 than	what	Mr.	 Hope	played	for	you.”
   “Sounds	 that	way,”	Stubbs	said,	and	looked	at	the	recorder	suspiciously.
   “But	  if	you	 want	to	 hear	anything	again,	I	 can	stop	the	tape	whenever	you
say.	Let	me	know	when	you’re	ready,	okay?”
   “I’m	  ready	now,”	Stubbs	said.
   Warren	hit	 the	PLAY	button.
   The	 telephone	conversation	with	Ned	 Weaver	had	been	a	stop-and-go,	fits-
and-starts,	tooth-pulling	 battle	to	get	him	 to	say	some	of	 the	words	the	caller
had	used	on	the	night	of	the	 murders.	Warren	wasn’t	too	sure	about	the	word
thirty,	 but	he	was	hoping	that	at	 least	the	words	alarmed	and	little	  moonlight
spin	were	distinctive	enough	to	allow	 for	positive	 identification.
   Weaver	did	 not	say	the	words	little	 moonlight	 spin	until	 thirty-two	  seconds
of	tape	had	elapsed.

190
   “Play	 that	back,”	 Stubbs	said.
   Warren	rewound	the	tape	and	then	played	the	conversation	again:
   Mr.	 Weaver,	had	you	ever	known	Mr.	 Leeds	to	take	his	boat	out	 for	a	 little
moonlight	spin?
   A	what?
   A	little	 moonlight	 spin.
   Sure.	All	 the	time.
   You	understand	what	I	mean,	don’t	you?
   Sure.	A	little	 moonlight	spin.
   Warren	hit	 the	stop	button.
   “Recognize	 the	voice?”	he	asked.
   “I	 can’t	 say	for	sure.	Let	me	hear	some	more.”
   Warren	 started	the	tape	again.	It	 was	not	 until	 twenty-seven	seconds	later
that	Weaver	said	the	word	alarmed.
   Stubbs	squinted	at	the	tape	recorder.
   Six	 seconds	later,	Weaver	said	the	word	again.
   “Play	 that	section	back	for	me,”	 Stubbs	said.
   Warren	played	it	 back:
   But	 when	there	wasn’t	a	moon,	if	 he	took	the	boat	out	for	a	 little	 moonlight
spin	when	there	wasn’t	a	moon—would	that	have	alarmed	you?
   Alarmed	 me?
   Yes.	Would	that	have	alarmed	you?
   Nope.
   How	 come?	You	know	what	I’m	saying,	don’t	you?
   Sure.	Would	I	be	alarmed.
   Yes.	Him	being	out	in	the	dark	and	all.
   Man	 knows	how	to—
   Warren	stopped	the	tape.
   “What	 do	you	think?”	 he	asked.
   “That’s	 not	the	man	who	called,”	 Stubbs	said.
   “Are	 you	 sure?”
   “Positive.	  The	 man	 who	 called	 had	 a	 funny	 way	 of	  saying	 that	 word.
Alarmed.	I	didn’t	 think	 of	it	at	the	time,	maybe	because	he	told	me	he	was	Mr.
Leeds,	but	listening	to	that	tape...this	man	just	doesn’t	 say	that	word	the	same
way.	Alarmed.	I	can’t	do	it	 the	way	the	man	on	the	phone	did,	but—”
   “Well,	 was	it	 some	kind	of	accent?	Is	that	what	you’re	saying?”
   “No,	 no.”
   “Like	  a	Spanish	accent?”
   “No.”
   “Or	 an	English	accent?”
   “No,	 nothing	 like—”
   “French?”

191
   “No,	 nothing	 foreign	 at	all.	I	 wish	I	could	 do	it	for	 you,	but	 I’m	 no	good	at
that	sort	 of	  thing.	 It	 just	 sounded...different.	 The	 way	 he	 said	 that	 word.
Alarmed.	”
   “Not	 the	way	 this	man	on	the	tape	said	it,	huh?”
   “No,	 not	at	all	 like	that.”
   Wonderful,	 Warren	thought.
   “He	   sounded	 like	  somebody	 famous,”	  Stubbs	 said.	  “I	  wish	  I	  could
remember	who.”



“Yours	is	the	rental	car,	right,	sir?”	 the	valet	said.
   “Yes,”	 Matthew	 said.
   The	 kid’s	 a	 mind	 reader,	he	 thought.	There	 was	nothing	  on	the	 Ford	 to
identify	 it	  as	a	 rental,	 not	 a	 bumper	 sticker,	 not	 a	 windshield	 decal,	 not
anything.
   “They	 all	 know	 it’s	a	rental,”	 he	said	to	Mai	 Chim.	“It’s	  the	mystery	of	the
ages.”
   “Maybe	 there’s	something	on	the	keys,”	she	said.
   “Must	 be.”
   But	 the	man	at	the	body	shop	this	past	Monday	hadn’t	seen	the	keys.
   Who’s	driving	 the	rental?
   Was	what	the	man	had	said.
   Could	 you	please	move	it?	I	gotta	get	a	car	out.
   Mai	  Chim	 was	 wearing	 a	 short	 beige	 skirt	 and	 a	long-sleeved,	 cream-
colored	silk	blouse	buttoned	up	the	front,	 the	top	two	 buttons	undone	to	show
a	pearl	necklace.	High-heeled	shoes,	long	legs	 bare;	this	was	summertime	 in
old	Calusa,	 and	the	 formality	  of	 pantyhose	or	 stockings	seemed	foolish	  in
such	withering	  heat.	She	 had	been	 chatty	 and	relaxed	 all	  through	 dinner,
perhaps	because	she’d	drunk	 two	 tropical-looking,	  fruity	  confections	 laced
liberally	 with	rum,	 and	had	also	shared	with	Matthew	a	bottle	of	Pinot	 Grigio.
Dreamily,	she	looked	out	over	the	water	 now,	her	arm	looped	through	his,	her
head	on	his	shoulder,	watching	the	lights	 of	the	boats	cruising	 past	on	Calusa
Bay.
   The	  valet	 pulled	  the	 rented	 Ford	  up,	 hopped	 out,	 ran	 around	  to	 the
passenger	side,	and	opened	the	door	for	her.
   “Thank	  you,”	 she	 said,	and	got	 into	 the	 car.	Her	 skirt	 rode	 up	onto	 her
thighs.	She	made	no	motion	to	lower	it.
   Matthew	 gave	the	valet	a	dollar	and	came	around	to	the	driver’s	side.
   “Thank	  you,	sir,”	 the	 valet	said,	and	 turned	to	 a	gray-haired	man	 coming
out	of	 the	 restaurant.	“Yours	 is	 the	Lincoln,	  right,	 sir?”	  he	said,	 doing	his
mind-reader	act	again.
   Matthew	  closed	the	 car	door	 and	 immediately	 snapped	on	 the	 overhead

192
light.	 Reaching	down	 for	 the	 keys,	he	 looked	at	 the	plastic	 tag	 attached	to
them.	Sure	enough,	 the	name	of	 the	 rental	company	 was	on	 it.	 Which	 still
didn’t	explain	 the	man	at	the	body	shop.
   Who’s	driving	 the	rental?
   “I	 hate	mysteries,”	he	said	to	Mai	 Chim,	and	turned	off	the	light.
   “I	 hate	raccoons,”	 she	said	mysteriously.
   He	 wondered	if	she	was	slightly	drunk.
   “We	  didn’t	 have	raccoons	 in	Vietnam.	 We	 had	a	 lot	 of	 animals,	but	 not
raccoons.”
   Matthew	 drove	 the	car	around	the	circle	 in	front	 of	 the	restaurant	entrance
and	then	headed	out	toward	the	main	road.	One	of	the	valets	had	switched	the
radio	to	 another	station.	He	 hated	when	they	did	 that.	It	 conjured	 images	of
strangers	sitting	in	 his	car	 listening	 to	the	radio	 and	wearing	 out	the	 battery
while	he	was	having	dinner.	 He	hit	the	button	for	 the	jazz	station	he	normally
listened	to,	the	only	jazz	station	in	Calusa.
   “Do	 you	like	 jazz?”	he	asked.
   “What’s	 jazz?”	 she	said.
   “What	 we’re	 listening	to,”	 he	said.
   She	listened.
   Gerry	 Mulligan.
   “Yes,”	 she	said	and	nodded	somewhat	vaguely.	“In	Vietnam,	there	was	only
rock,”	 she	said.	“The	streets	of	 Saigon	were	full	 of	 rock	music.	 I	hate	rock,”
she	said.	“I	hate	raccoons,	too.	Raccoons	look	like	big	rats,	don’t	you	think?”
   “Only	  down	here,”	he	said.	“Up	north	 they	look	cute	and	furry.”
   “Perhaps	I	 should	move	up	north,”	she	said.
   The	word	 perhaps	came	out	somewhat	slurred.
   “Lots	 of	 good	cities	up	north,”	 he	said.
   She	nodded	again	and	then	fell	 silent,	as	if	seriously	 considering	the	move.
“My	 father	hated	soldiers,”	 she	said	abruptly.	The	word	 soldiers	also	seemed
a	little	thick.	 “Which	 meant	he	hated	all	men,”	she	said.	“Because	in	Vietnam,
that’s	 all	 there	 was.	Soldiers.	 Our	  soldiers,	 their	 soldiers,	 your	  soldiers.”
Having	 a	lot	 of	 trouble	 with	 that	 word	 soldiers.	 “My	  father	wouldn’t	  let	 a
soldier	come	 near	me.	He	 once	got	 into	 a	fight	 with	  an	American	 corporal
who	smiled	at	me.	That’s	all	 he	did	was	smile.	My	 father	actually	hit	 the	man.
My	 father,	can	 you	imagine?	 This	 skinny	 little	 man,	hitting	  this	big,	 husky
soldier.	The	soldier	laughed.”
   Soldier	 again.	Tough	word	to	wrap	her	tongue	around.
   “Could	 we	go	to	my	 apartment,	please?”	she	asked.
   They	 drove	in	silence.
   The	 sound	of	Mulligan’s	  saxophone	flooded	the	automobile.	 Matthew	was
thinking	he’d	 love	to	know	how	 to	play	saxophone	like	that.
   “I	  was	afraid	of	 them,”	 Mai	 Chim	said.	 “Soldiers.	 My	 father	taught	me	to

193
fear	them.	He	 said	they	would	 rape	me.	They	 raped	many	Vietnamese	girls,
the	soldiers.	I	was	afraid	they	would	rape	me,	too.”
   Everything	 that	goes	around	comes	around,	he	thought.
   Vietnamese	girls	 being	raped	by	American	soldiers.
   An	 American	woman	 being	raped	by	three	Vietnamese	men.
   “But	 I’m	 not	afraid	 of	you,”	 she	said.
   “Good,”	  he	said.
   But	 he	was	thinking,	 Not	so	good.	 He	was	thinking	 she’d	had	too	 much	to
drink,	and	if	 what	she’d	told	him	 earlier	was	true,	he	didn’t	want	 to	be	the	one
who	made	love	to	her	for	the	first	 time,	not	while	 she	was	drunk	or	close	to	it.
Oscar	Peterson’s	piano	burst	into	the	rented	Ford	like	 a	mortar	explosion.	 He
thought	 suddenly	  of	  Chicago	 and	  the	 backseat	 of	  his	  father’s	  steamy
Oldsmobile	where	 a	sixteen-year-old	girl	 named	Joy	Patterson	lay	 back	with
her	eyes	closed	and	her	 breath	heavy	with	 the	 smell	of	 booze,	and	 her	legs
spread,	either	 really	 drunk	 or	 feigning	 drunkenness	 while	 he	 explored	the
ribbed	tops	of	 her	nylon	stockings	 and	the	soft	white	 thighs	above	them,	and
drew	back	his	trembling	hand	when	at	last	it	touched	the	silken	secret	patch	of
her	undefended	panties.	Pulled	it	back	 with	the	 certain	knowledge	that	if	 Joy
was	drunk,	then	this	was	rape.
   If	 he	made	love	to	Mai	Chim	 tonight,	it	 would	be	rape.
   Everything	 that	goes	around	comes	around.
   They	 had	reached	the	condo	she	lived	in	on	 Sabal	Key.	Zoning	restrictions
out	here,	since	changed,	had	kept	the	condos	at	a	maximum	five-story	height.
You	could	actually	see	the	ocean	beyond	them.	He	pulled	into	a	space	marked
VISITORS	and	turned	off	the	ignition	and	the	lights.
   “Will	  you	come	up	for	 a	night	hat?”	she	asked.
   This	  was	  not	 inebriation,	  this	  was	 merely	  an	 unfamiliarity	   with	  the
language.	And	 where	 there	 is	 no	 common	 language,	 she’d	 said,	 there	 is
suspicion.	And	 mistakes.	Many	mistakes.	On	 both	sides.	He	 wondered	if	 he
was	about	to	 make	a	mistake	 now.	 But	he	 thought	of	 something	 else	she’d
said,	the	last	time	 he’d	seen	her	Is	that	 why	you	want	 to	go	 to	bed	with	 me?
Because	I’m	 Asian?	 And	 he	 wondered	about	 that,	 too,	 while	 the	 question
hung	between	them	in	 the	silence	 of	the	 rented	car,	Will	 you	 come	up	for	 a
night	hat?	 and	he	thought,	 No,	 Mai	 Chim,	 I	 don’t	 think	 I’ll	  come	 up	for	 a
night	hat,	not	 tonight	 while	 you’re	 feeling	all	 that	booze	and	maybe	 not	any
night	because	yes,	I	think	maybe	that’s	 why	I	 do	want	to	 go	to	bed	with	 you,
only	 because	you’re	Asian	 and	I’ve	  never	been	to	 bed	with	 an	 Asian.	And
that’s	no	reason	to	go	to	bed	with	anyone,	not	if	I	 plan	to	look	at	myself	 in	the
mirror	tomorrow	 morning.
   “I	 have	an	early	day	tomorrow,”	 he	said.	“Can	I	take	a	rain	check?”
   A	 puzzled	look	crossed	her	face.	She	was	unfamiliar	with	the	expression.
   “Rain	 check,”	 he	said,	and	smiled.	“That	means	some	other	time.”

194
   She	kept	looking	 into	his	face.
   “I’ll	   walk	you	up,”	 he	said	gently.
   He	 came	around	to	 the	other	side	of	 the	car,	opened	the	door	 for	 her,	and
then	offered	her	his	hand.	She	came	out	of	 the	car	unsteadily,	looking	 a	trifle
disoriented	and	somewhat	surprised	to	 find	 herself	home	already.	He	put	 his
arm	around	her	to	support	her.	She	leaned	into	him.
   “Thank	 you,”	 she	whispered.
   At	 the	 front	door,	 she	searched	in	her	handbag	for	a	key,	inserted	 it	in	 the
lock,	turned	to	him,	 looked	up	into	 his	face	again,	and	said,	“Will	  there	really
be	some	other	time,	Matthew?”
   “I	 hope	so,”	he	said.
   And	 wondered	if	he	meant	it.



Warren’s	car	 was	sitting	 at	 the	 curb	outside	 his	 house.	Warren	was	 sitting
behind	 the	 wheel,	 asleep.	 The	 window	  on	  the	 driver’s	  side	 was	 down.
Matthew	reached	in	and	gently	 touched	his	shoulder.	Warren	jumped	up	with
a	start,	his	 hand	going	 under	 his	jacket	 to	 a	shoulder	 holster.	A	 very	 large
pistol	suddenly	appeared	in	his	hand.
   “Hey!”	  Matthew	 shouted,	and	backed	off.
   “Sorry,	 you	scared	me.”
   “I	 scared	you,	huh?”
   Warren	 holstered	the	pistol	 and	got	out	 of	the	car.	They	 went	up	 the	front
walk	together.	Matthew	unlocked	the	door	and	snapped	on	the	lights.
   “Something	 to	drink?”	 he	asked.
   “A	  little	  scotch,	please,	no	 ice,”	 Warren	 said.	 “Can	 I	 use	your	 phone	 a
minute?”
   “Sure.	 On	the	wall	there.”
   Matthew	 looked	 at	the	clock.	A	 quarter	past	ten.	He	wondered	if	 he	should
call	Mai	 Chim,	apologize	or	 something.	But	for	 what?	At	the	kitchen	 counter,
Warren	was	already	 dialing.	 Matthew	 went	to	 the	dropleaf	 bar,	lowered	 the
front	panel,	and	poured	some	Black	Label	into	a	low	 glass.	He	wondered	if	he
felt	like	 a	martini.	 He	 wondered	if	 he’d	done	the	 right	 thing	tonight.	 Warren
was	talking	 to	someone	named	Fiona.	 Matthew	 wondered	if	 she	was	 black.
Fiona?	Could	 be	Irish.	 Fiona	was	 an	Irish	 name,	wasn’t	 it?	He	 wondered	if
Warren	was	sleeping	with	her.	If	 she	was	Irish,	 if	she	was	white,	 was	Warren
sleeping	 with	  her	 only	 because	 she	 was	 white?	 He	 wondered.	  Back	 in
Chicago...
   Back	 in	Chicago,	in	his	high-school	 English	class,	there’d	been	a	gloriously
beautiful	black	 girl	 named	Ophelia	 Blair.	 And	 he’d	 taken	her	to	 the	movies
one	night,	and	for	ice-cream	sodas	later,	and	then	he’d	led	her	into	his	father’s
multipurpose	Oldsmobile,	  and	he’d	 driven	 her	to	 a	deserted	stretch	of	 road

195
near	the	football	field	 and	plied	 her	with	 kisses,	his	hand	fumbling	 under	her
skirt,	pleading	with	 her	to	let	 him	“do	 it”	 because	he’d	never	in	his	life	 “done
it”	with	 a	black	girl.
   Never	 mind	 that	 at	the	age	of	 seventeen	he’d	 never	done	it	 with	 a	 white
girl,	 either.	His	supreme	argument	was	 that	she	was	black	and	 he	was	white
and	oh	what	 a	glorious	 adventure	 awaited	them	 if	 only	 she’d	 allow	 him,	 a
latter-day	Stanley	exploring	Africa,	 to	 lower	her	panties	and	spread	her	lovely
legs.	It	never	occurred	to	him	 that	he	was	reducing	her	to	anonymity,	denying
her	very	 Ophelia-ness,	equating	her	 with	 any	other	 black	 girl	 in	 the	world,
expressing	desire	for	her	only	 because	she	was	black	and	not	merely	herself,
whoever	 that	might	  have	been,	 the	 person	he	 had	not	 taken	 the	 slightest
amount	of	 trouble	to	 know.	He	 was	baffled	 when	she	pulled	 down	 her	skirt
and	tucked	her	breasts	back	 into	her	 brassiere	and	buttoned	her	blouse,	 and
asked	him	 very	 softly	 to	 take	her	home,	 please.	He	 asked	her	out	 a	dozen
times	after	that,	and	she	always	refused	politely.
   Chicago.
   A	 long	time	ago.
   He	 had	not	made	that	same	mistake	tonight.
   He	 had	not	denied	Mai	Chim	her	selfness.
   But	 he	wondered	if	she	realized	this.
   “Whenever	 I’m	 done	here,	Fiona,”	Warren	said	into	the	phone.
   Fiona.
   White?	 Black?	Vietnamese?
   Ophelia	 Blair	  had	 been	very	 black,	 a	 truly	 beautiful	  girl.	 He	 wondered
where	she	was	now,	what	she	was	doing.	 He	suspected	she	had	grown	up	to
be	an	extravagantly	beautiful	 woman.	 He	imagined	 her	living	 in	 a	luxurious
home	on	Lake	 Shore	Drive.	 She	would	 be	hostessing	a	formal	 dinner	 party,
the	men	in	 tuxedos,	 the	women	 in	long,	 shimmering	 gowns.	 Ophelia	 Blair.
Who,	once	upon	a	time,	he’d	hurt	severely.
   He	 turned	his	 back	toward	the	 kitchen	counter,	where	 Warren	was	still	 on
the	telephone,	 and	began	 mixing	 himself	  a	martini.	  Had	 he	similarly	  and
stupidly	and	 for	exactly	 the	opposite	reason	hurt	 Mai	 Chim	 tonight?	Had	he
made	yet	another	damn	mistake?	In	 trying	 to	do	the	right	 thing,	 had	he	done
the	absolutely	wrong	thing?	 He	dropped	an	olive	 into	 the	glass.	And	 another
one.
   “Warren,”	 he	said,	“are	you	almost	finished	 there?”
   “Right	  this	second,”	Warren	said,	and	then,	into	the	phone,	“See	you	later,”
and	hung	up.
   “There’s	 one	call	I	 have	to	make,”	 Matthew	said,	and	carried	his	martini	 to
the	telephone	in	the	study.	He	took	a	sip	of	the	drink,	pulled	 the	phone	to	him,
and	dialed	Mai	Chim’s	number.	She	answered	on	the	fourth	ring.
   “Hello?”	  she	said.

196
   “Mai	 Chim?”
   “Yes?”
   “It’s	 Matthew.”
   “Oh,	hello,	Matthew.”
   “Are	 you	all	right?”
   “Yes,”	she	said.	“But	drunk.”
   “Well,	maybe	a	little	tipsy.”
   “What’s	that?	Tipsy?”
   “Drunk,”	 he	said.
   They	both	laughed.
   And	suddenly	the	laughter	stopped.	And	there	was	silence	on	the	line.
   “Thank	you	for	not	hurting	me,”	she	said.
   He	wondered	if	she	knew	what	she	was	saying.	Wondered	if	the	English
word	hurt	meant	to	her	what	it	meant	to	him.	Because	he	felt	he	had	hurt	her.
Stupidly	and	foolishly	hurt	her.
   And	where	there	is	no	common	language,	there	is	suspicion.	And	mistakes.
Many	mistakes.	On	both	sides.
   “Matthew,	did	someone	pay	the	check?”	she	asked.
   “Yes,”	he	said.	“You	did.”
   “Oh,	thank	God,	I	couldn’t	remember.	I	thought,	oh	boy,	he’s	my	guest	and
I	let	him	pay	for	it.”
   Oh	boy.	So	alien	on	her	tongue.	So	completely	charming.
   “I	 drank	too	much,”	she	said.	“I’m	not	used	to	drinking	so	much.”
   “Please	don’t	worry	about	it,”	he	said.
   “I	 was	so	afraid,	you	see.”
   He	said	nothing.
   “It	 was	that	I	thought...if	I	drink	a	little,	I	won’t	 be	so	afraid.	Of	soldiers,”
she	said.
   Soldiers.	No	thickness	of	the	tongue	this	time.	No	slurring.	Soldiers.
   “Men,”	 she	said	softly,	and	fell	silent.
   They	were	both	silent.
   “We’ll	 try	again,”	he	said	at	last.
   “Yes,	some	other	time,”	she	said.
   “When	we	really	know	each	other	better,”	he	said.
   “Will	 we	ever	know	each	other	better?”	she	asked.
   “I	 hope	so,”	he	said,	and	this	time	he	meant	it.	“I	don’t	want	this	to	be—”
   “Yes,	 just	white	 and	Asian,”	 she	said,	and	he	wondered	if	 they	didn’t
already	know	each	other	much	better	than	they	suspected.
   “I’ll	  call	you	soon,”	he	said.
   “You	must	come	for	your	raincoat,”	she	said.
   “Rain	check,”	he	said,	and	smiled.
   “Yes,	rain	check,”	she	said.

197
   “Sleep	 well,”	 he	said.
   “I	 still	 dream	of	helicopters,”	 she	said.
   There	was	a	click	 on	the	line.
   He	 picked	up	 the	martini	 glass	and	went	out	 into	the	 kitchen.	Warren	was
still	at	the	kitchen	counter.	The	glass	of	scotch	was	now	in	his	right	 hand.
   “Learning	 your	 p’s	and	q’s?”	he	asked.
   “What?”	  Matthew	said.
   Warren	 indicated	the	 slip	of	 paper	tacked	to	 the	small	cork	 bulletin	 board
near	the	phone:

                     a	ă	â	b	c	d	đ	e	ê	g	h	i	k	 l	m	n	o	ô	σ	p	 q	r	s	t	u	 u’	v	x	y

   “Oh,”	  Matthew	said.	“That’s	 the	Vietnamese	alphabet.”
   “It’s	  missing	a	lot	of	letters,	did	you	 notice	that?”
   “No,	 I	 didn’t.”
   “That’s	  why	I’m	  a	detective	and	you’re	 not.	 There’s	no	 F,	J,	or	W.	 No	Z,
either.	But	 there	are	 three	A’s,	 two	 D’s	 and	E’s,	 three	O’s,	 two	 U’s,	 and	a
partridge	in	a	pear	tree.	What	do	you	call	these	funny	little	 marks?”
   “Diacritical.”
   “That	 serious,	huh?”	Warren	said,	and	raised	his	glass	in	a	toast.	“We	struck
out,	Matthew,”	 he	said,	and	drank.	“Ahhhh,”	 he	said,	“delicious.	 Weaver	isn’t
the	man	who	made	that	phone	call.”
   “Cheers,”	  Matthew	 said	 sourly,	 and	raised	 his	own	 glass	 in	 a	toast.	 He
drank,	looked	into	the	glass	appreciatively,	and	then	said,	“Who’s	Fiona?”
   “Fiona	  Gill,”	  Warren	said.	“Lady	 who	 works	 in	 the	tax	collector’s	  office.
She’s	the	one	who	told	me	we	had	a	bad	make	on	that	license	plate.”
   “White?	 Black?”
   “Black.	  Why?”
   “Just	 wondered.”
   “You	 seeing	a	black	lady?”	Warren	asked.
   “No,	 no.”
   “Sounds	 like	it.”
   “No.”
   But	 close,	Matthew	thought.
   In	 American	 movies,	Asian	 women	 were	permissible	substitutes	for	 black
women.	The	white	hero	was	allowed	 to	have	a	meaningful	love	 affair	with	 an
Asian	 woman,	 but	 never	with	  a	black	 woman.	 This	  was	how	 courageous
American	film	 producers	broke	 the	taboo.	It	was	okay	 for	the	 hero	to	kiss	an
Asian	woman	but	if	 he	kissed	a	black	woman,	watch	it,	 mister.	As	for	 a	black
man	kissing	 a	 white	 woman,	 that	 was	science	 fiction.	  Matthew	 wondered
what	it	 would	  be	like	 to	 kiss	 Mai	 Chim.	 Maybe	 he	 could	 get	some	 brave
Hollywood	 movie	producer	to	film	 their	 first	kiss.	Tastefully,	of	 course.

198
   “Want	  to	 share	 the	 joke?”	 Warren	 said,	 and	 Matthew	 realized	 he	 was
smiling.
   “I’m	  just	a	little	 tired,”	 he	said.	“What	else	did	Stubbs	tell	you?”
   “Only	  that	the	man	on	the	phone	sounded	famous.”
   “Famous?”
   “Famous.	 When	he	said	the	word	alarmed.”
   “How	  do	famous	people	say	alarmed?”	Matthew	asked.
   “You	  got	me,	pal,”	 Warren	said,	 and	sighed	heavily.	 “I’d	  better	be	on	my
way,	Fiona’s	expecting	 me.”	 He	hesitated,	and	then	said,	 “Are	 you	sure	you
don’t	want	to	talk	 about	anything?”
   “No,	 thanks	a	lot.”
   “If	  you	change	your	 mind,	here’s	where	I’ll	  be,”	 Warren	said,	and	wrote	a
number	onto	the	pad	under	the	phone.	He	drained	the	glass,	shook	hands	with
Matthew,	and	went	out.	Matthew	could	 hear	him	starting	the	Buick	outside.	In
a	little	 while,	the	sound	of	 its	engine	faded	on	the	 night.	Now	 there	was	only
the	hum	of	the	 air	conditioner.	He	 carried	his	glass	to	the	counter,	sat	on	 one
of	the	stools,	and	looked	at	the	number	Warren	had	written	for	him:





   The	 381	prefix	 told	him	 that	Fiona	lived	 on	the	mainland.	He	tore	the	page
from	the	 pad	and	tacked	it	to	 the	bulletin	 board,	just	 under	the	alphabet	Mai
Chim	had	xeroxed	for	 him.	When	he	was	in	 college	at	Northwestern,	a	friend
of	his	began	dating	 a	Chinese	girl	 whose	father	ran	a	restaurant	on	La	 Salle.
The	guy’s	 name	was	Nathan	Feinstein,	 the	girl’s	 name	 was	Melissa	Chong.
Nathan	and	Melissa	 shared	what	Nathan	called	 an	Eemie-Wess	relationship,
which	was	 shorter	and	easier	to	say	than	 an	East-Meets-West	relationship,	a
tongue-twister	on	anybody’s	lips.
   Matthew	 picked	up	the	pencil	alongside	the	pad	and	wrote:




   He	 looked	 at	the	hyphenated	word.	 It	 conjured	 a	multimillion-dollar	   film
starring	Le	Mai	 Chim	 and	Matthew	 Hope—not	necessarily	in	 that	order.	The
first	 scene	would	open	 with	 a	shot	of	 a	green	 Oldsmobile	 Cutlass	Supreme
parked	under	a	pepper	tree	outside	Little	 Asia	in	 lovely	 downtown	Calusa.	A
couple	would	  be	necking	 on	 the	 front	 seat.	 They	 would	 be	 our	 hero	and
heroine,	Leslie	 Storm	and	Lotus	 Blossom	Wong,	 as	their	names	were	 in	the
picture.	The	camera	would	cut	 away	from	a	close	shot	of	 their	torridly	  joined
lips	to	 an	antiseptic	 close	shot	 of	an	 orange-and-white	Florida	 license	 plate

199
over	the	rear	bumper.	The	numbers	and	letters	on	 that	plate	would	 read	2AB
39C.
   On	 the	pad,	Matthew	wrote:






   He	 looked	at	what	he’d	written.	 And	then	he	wrote	it	again:






   And	 again	and	again	and	again	and	again...

















   And	 kept	 writing	 it	 over	 and	over	again,	 faster	and	faster	and	 faster	until
the	last	several	times	he	wrote	it—











   —the	 numeral	2	resembled—
   There’s	no	F,	J,	or	W.	No	Z,	either.
   His	 eyes	darted	to	the	alphabet	pinned	to	the	board.

200
                   a	ă	â	b	c	d	đ	e	ê	g	h	i	k	l	m	n	o	ô	σ	p	q	r	s	t	u	u’	v	x	y

   No	 Z	in	it.	 But	a	2	 in	the	language,	for	sure,	“Oh,	yes,	our	numbers	are
Arabic.”	No	Z,	but	a	2!	And	if	 you	were	seeing	a	Z	through	a	screen	door	at
night,	and	you	didn’t	know	what	the	hell	a	Z	 looked	like	in	 the	first	place,
then	you	could	easily	mistake	it	for	a	2!	Ike	and	Mike,	they	look	alike,	a	Z
and	a	2!	Trinh	had	seen	ZAB	39C,	but	his	eye	and	his	brain	had	automatically
translated	it	into	something	familiar,	2AB	39C.
   Matthew	yanked	the	receiver	from	its	cradle	and	dialed	the	number	Warren
had	left	him.	It	rang	once,	twice...
   “Hello?”
   “Miss	Gill?”
   “Yes?”
   “This	is	Matthew	Hope—”
   “Yes,	Mr.	Hope.”
   “I’m	 sorry	to	be	calling	at	this	hour—”
   “Don’t	 be	silly.”
   “Is	Warren	there	yet?”
   “No,	he	isn’t.”
   “I	 wonder	if	you’d	ask	him	to	call	when	he...as	a	matter	of	fact,	maybe	you
can	help	me.”
   “Happy	to.”
   “Are	 there	any	license	plates	in	Florida	that	begin	with	the	letter	Z?”
   “Oh,	yes,”	Fiona	said,	“Y	and	Z	both.	Those	are	the	letters	we	set	aside	for
rental	cars.”
   “Rental	cars?”
   A	rental	car,	he	thought.	A	goddamn	rental	car!	No	wonder	the	killer	had	to
—
   “Hertz,	Avis,	Dollar,	 what-have-you,”	Fiona	said.	“The	plates	on	all	those
cars	begin	with	either	a	Y	or	a	Z.	Check	it	out.”
   “I	  will,”	 he	said.	“Thank	 you	very	 much,	Miss	Gill,	 I	 really	appreciate
this.”
   “Not	 at	all,”	she	said.	“Did	you	still	want	Warren	to	call	you?”
   “Not	 unless	he	wants	to.”
   “I’ll	  tell	him.	Good	night,”	she	said.
   “Good	night,”	he	said,	and	put	the	receiver	back	on	the	cradle.
   A	 rental	car,	he	thought.	That’s	how	those	mind	readers	knew	what	I	was
driving—they	looked	at	the	license	plate.	He	pulled	the	telephone	directory	to
him,	opened	it	to	the	yellow	pages,	and	was	running	his	finger	down	the	page
with	the	listings	for	 AUTOMOBILE	RENTING	&	LEASING	when	the	phone	rang.	He
picked	up	the	receiver.
   “Warren?”	he	said.

201
   “Mr.	 Hope?”	a	man’s	voice	said.
   “Yes,	who’s	this,	please?”
   “Charlie	Stubbs.	I’m	sorry	to	be	bothering	you	at	home,	but	I	tried	to	reach
that	other	feller	and	there’s	no	answer	there.	I	remember	now	who	that	voice
sounded	like.	Remember	I	said	it	sounded	like	somebody	famous?	Or	did	he
tell	you?”
   “Yes,	he	told	me.”
   “Well,	I	 remember	who	it	was.”
   “Who	was	it,	Mr.	Stubbs?”
   “John	F.	Kennedy,”	Stubbs	said.

202
                                                                                                                     12


HE	LIVED	in	one	of	those	little	shacks	up	on	stilts	that	lined	the	beach	just	north
of	Whisper	 Key	 Village.	 At	 this	 time	of	 year,	and	 especially	at	this	 time	 of
night,	there	 was	a	 ghostly	silence	 shrouding	 the	strip	 of	 wooden	 structures
standing	in	a	row	 on	the	edge	of	the	sea.	During	 high	season,	there	would	be
music	into	the	empty	hours	of	 the	night,	laughter,	the	sounds	of	young	people
flexing	 their	 muscles	and	their	 hormones.	Tonight,	 all	 was	still.	 The	 shacks
stood	on	their	 stilts	 like	 tall	 wading	 birds,	 silhouetted	 against	the	shoreline
sky.	It	  was	almost	 midnight,	  but	 a	 light	 was	 burning	 in	 the	 second-story
apartment.	Matthew	climbed	the	steps	and	knocked.
   “Who	 is	it?”
   The	 distinctive	 voice,	 plainly	 evident	 when	you	 were	listening	 for	 it.	 The
John	F.	Kennedy	voice.
   “Me,”	  he	said.	“Matthew	 Hope.”
   “Just	 a	minute,	please.”
   Puzzlement	in	 that	voice	now;	it	 was	almost	midnight.
   The	door	 opened.
   He	 was	 wearing	 only	 tennis	 shorts.	 Bare-chested,	barefooted.	Forty-one
years	old,	but	still	 looking	 like	 a	boy,	the	way	many	 athletes	that	age	looked,
the	well-defined	 muscles	on	his	arms,	legs,	and	chest,	the	tousled	blond	 hair,
the	welcoming	 grin.	 Your	 average,	garden-variety	 All-American	  Boy.	 Who
had	only	done	murder	five	times	over.
   “Hello,	  Kit,”	 Matthew	 said.	“Sorry	to	be	stopping	by	so	late.”
   “No,	 that’s	okay,”	 he	said.	“Come	on	in.”
   Matthew	 stepped	into	the	apartment.	A	studio	with	 a	tiny	kitchen	area	and	a
closet	space	defined	by	a	rod	with	a	hanging	curtain	on	it.	 Double	bed	against
the	windows	 on	 the	ocean	side.	Framed	 photographs	on	the	 walls.	 Most	 of
them	of	  Christopher	 Howell	 in	  action	 on	 a	tennis	 court.	 One	 of	 them	 of
Christopher	 Howell	  in	 an	 army	 uniform,	  posing	 with	 half	  a	 dozen	other
American	soldiers,	 all	of	 them	grinning	 into	 the	camera,	all	of	 them	wearing
combat	helmets	and	bandoliers,	some	of	them	holding	assault	weapons.	In	the
corner,	several	 tennis	rackets	 stood	 on	end	 against	 the	wall.	  There	was	 a
thriftshop	 easy	 chair	 slip-covered	 in	  a	paisley	  pattern.	A	  telephone	 on	 a
nightstand	beside	the	bed.	A	lamp	on	the	nightstand.	The	lamp	 was	on.	There
was	no	 air	conditioning,	  the	 windows	 were	wide	 open.	 Outside,	 the	ocean
rushed	in	against	the	sand.
   “I	 think	 I’ve	 worked	out	a	game	plan,”	Matthew	 said.

203
   Howell	 blinked.
   “Would	 you	 like	to	hear	it?”
   “Well...”
   This	 is	midnight,	his	face	said.
   “Sure,”	 he	said.
   “Did	  you	know,”	  Matthew	 said,	“that	 in	the	state	of	 Florida,	 all	rental-car
license	plates	begin	with	either	a	Y	or	a	Z?”
   Howell	 looked	 at	him.
   “No,	 I	 didn’t	know	 that,”	he	said.
   “A	 little-known	  fact,”	Matthew	 said,	and	smiled.	“But	 true.”
   “I	 see,”	Howell	 said.
   “Did	  you	 further	 know	 that	rental-car	 companies	keep	 records	on	all	 the
cars	they	rent?	Names	of	renters,	addresses,	and	so	on.”
   “Uh...excuse	 me,	Mr.	Hope,”	 Howell	 said,	“but	it	is	late,	and—”
   “Later	 than	you	think,”	 Matthew	 said.
   Outside,	 an	incoming	 wave	broke	 with	 a	thunderous	crash.	There	was	the
whispering	sound	of	the	ocean	retreating.	And	then	silence	again.
   “I	  made	some	phone	calls	before	coming	 here,”	Matthew	 said.	“To	 all	 the
rental-car	companies	in	town.	 Well,	 not	all	 of	them—I	 struck	 pay	dirt	 on	the
sixth	call.”
   “Mr.	 Hope,	 I’m	sorry,	really—”
   Blue	 eyes	wide	with	innocence.	Puzzled	boyish	look	 on	his	face.
   “—but	  I	just	don’t	 know	what	you’re	 talking	about.”
   “I	 think	 you	know	 what	I’m	 talking	about,	Kit.”
   “No,	 really,	 I—”
   “I’m	  talking	 about	the	car	you	rented.”
   “Car?”
   The	way	 he	said	that	single	word.	The	regional	dialect.	Caah.	Paak	the	caah
in	Haavaad	Yaad.	 The	same	way	 he	must	 have	said	 alarmed	when	 he	was
talking	on	the	phone	to	Stubbs.	Alaaamed.
   “The	 one	you	rented	on	August	 thirteenth,”	 Matthew	said.	“An	 Oldsmobile
Cutlass	Supreme	with	the	license	plate	ZAB	39...”
   The	  racket	 was	in	  Howell’s	  hand	 before	 Matthew	 could	  complete	 the
sentence.	His	right	hand.	Shake	hands	with	 the	racket.	The	racket	firm	 in	 his
grip.	He	had	a	powerful	 forehand	 and	a	devastating	backhand,	and	moreover
he	was	ambidextrous.	 Matthew	 suddenly	 knew	which	  blunt	 instrument	had
crushed	Frank	Bannion’s	skull.
   “So	 let	 me	 hear	your	 game	plan,”	 Howell	  said,	and	 swung	the	 racket	at
Matthew’s	head.
   Matthew	 had	no	game	plan.
   The	 racket	 came	at	him	 edgewise.	Howell	  wasn’t	 trying	 to	hit	 a	 ball,	 he
wasn’t	concerned	about	 meeting	a	 ball	 solidly	 on	the	 strings,	never	 mind	 a

204
sweet	spot,	the	sweet	spot	was	Matthew’s	 head.	Howell	 was	concerned	only
with	  inflicting	   damage.	The	  aluminum	  frame	 of	  the	  racket,	 for	  all	  its
lightness,	was	thick	 enough	 and	dense	enough	and	strong	 enough	to	 knock
plaster	out	 of	  the	wall.	  Which	  is	 exactly	 what	 it	 did	  in	 the	 next	 second
because	Matthew	did	the	only	 thing	he	could	 do,	he	sidestepped	and	ducked.
The	plaster	 flew	 out	 in	 a	large	solid	 chunk,	 exposing	 naked	lath	 and	what
looked	like	 chicken	wire	 behind	it.	 Howell	 danced	away,	positioning	 himself
for	his	next	shot.
   “Guess	 which	 hand?”	he	said,	 and	grinned,	and	 tossed	the	racket	into	 his
left	hand	and	then	 immediately	 tossed	it	back	to	 the	right.	 He	was	bouncing
on	his	bare	feet.	Priming	himself	 for	 the	big	match.	Matthew	 did	not	want	his
skull	to	become	the	US	Open.
   If	 your	opponent	is	armed,	and	you’re	not...
   Bloom’s	 voice.	In	 the	gym	this	past	Tuesday.	Teaching	him	the	tricks	of	the
trade.	Teaching	him	a	game	plan.
   Don’t	 try	to	disarm	 him.	You’ll	be	dead	before	you	figure	out	how.
   Howell	  was	bouncing.	Circling.	 Tossing	the	racket	back	and	forth	 between
his	hands.	Guess	which	hand?	Where	will	it	be	coming	 from?	The	right	 or	the
left?
   Forget	 the	weapon.
   But	 the	next	one	was	going	to	be	an	ace.
   The	next	 one	was	going	to	crush	Matthew’s	skull.
   Go	 for	the	man.
   Howell	  was	pulling	 the	racket	back	 for	the	shot.	 It	was	going	 to	be	a	left-
handed	shot,	and	it	was	going	 to	be	a	backhand	shot.	Matthew	 had	seen	that
backhand	in	action.	 Its	force	 could	tear	off	 his	 head.	Arm	 crossing	Howell’s
chest	now,	racket	coming	 back,	 mouth	set	in	 a	tight	 line,	 eyes	blazing,	 arm
coiled	like	 a	spring,	 in	a	 moment	he	would	 unleash	the	shot,	the	 arm	would
unfold,	the	edge	of	the	racket...
   Matthew	 hit	him	 while	the	racket	was	still	 back.
   Threw	 his	shoulder	into	 Howell	 while	his	weight	 was	still	 on	the	back	foot.
Surprised,	Howell	  staggered	for	 an	instant,	 trying	 to	 keep	 his	balance,	 the
racket	still	back,	the	weight	on	that	right	 foot,	the	proper	form	 for	the	shot,	his
full	body	 weight	working	 against	him	now,	fighting	 against	gravity	 and	losing
as	he	went	crashing	to	 the	floor.	 He	landed	 solidly	 on	his	 right	hip	 and	was
rolling	 over	when	Matthew	 stomped	on	his	 groin.	He	 did	not	kick	 him	in	 the
groin,	he	stomped	him.	He	did	 not	use	the	point	of	his	 shoe,	he	used	the	heel.
Stomped	his	balls	flat	into	the	carpet,	the	way	Bloom	 had	taught	him.
   Breathing	 hard,	Matthew	went	to	the	telephone.
   Howell	 was	still	 writhing	 on	the	floor.

205
It	was	a	little	 after	 two	in	 the	morning	when	 he	got	to	the	farm	 on	Timucuan
Point	Road.	 Not	 a	light	  showing	 in	 any	of	 the	 buildings.	 Not	 in	 the	 main
house,	not	in	the	guest	cottage	at	the	far	 end	of	the	 road,	where	Ned	Weaver
lived.	Matthew	 rang	 the	doorbell.	 He	kept	 ringing	 it.	 A	 light	 went	on	 at	the
other	end	of	the	house.	The	bedroom.	He	kept	ringing	the	doorbell.
   “Who	 is	it?”
   Jessica’s	voice.	Just	inside	the	door.
   “Matthew	  Hope.”
   “What?”
   “Please	open	the	door.”
   “What?	 What?”
   Incredulously.	 This	was	two	o’clock	 in	 the	morning.
   “Please	open	the	door,	Mrs.	Leeds.”
   Silence.
   Then:	 “Just	a	minute.”
   He	 waited.	 It	 took	almost	 five	 minutes	for	 her	to	 open	the	 door.	She	had
undoubtedly	gone	back	to	the	bedroom	to	 put	on	the	robe	she	now	wore	over
her	nightgown.	Green	nylon.	 Over	white	 nylon.	 Barefooted.	The	way	Howell
had	been	barefooted	when	he’d	opened	the	door	to	his	place.
   “Do	 you	know	 what	time	it	 is?”	she	asked.
   “Yes,	 I	do,”	 Matthew	said.	“May	 I	come	in?”
   “Why?”
   “Because	the	police	 have	just	arrested	Christopher	Howell	and	charged	him
with	 five	 counts	of	 homicide.	There	 are	some	questions	I’d	 like	 to	 ask	you,
Mrs.	Leeds.”
   “What	 questions?”	she	said.
   “We	 both	 want	your	 husband	cleared,”	he	 said.	“I	 just	 want	to	 make	sure
Howell	doesn’t	try	 to	implicate	 him.”
   He	 was	lying.
   “Howell?”	  she	said.	“Kit,	 do	you	mean?	The	tennis	pro	at	the	club?”
   She	was	lying,	 too.
   “May	  I	come	in,	please?”	he	said.
   “Yes,	 certainly.	Forgive	me,	I...I	 was	asleep...all	that	ringing...I	 didn’t	 mean
to	be	rude.	Kit,	did	you	say?	What	does	he	have	to	do	with	any	of	this?”
   From	 the	 switch	 panel	 just	 outside	the	 entrance	to	 the	living	  room,	 she
turned	on	the	lights	and	then	led	him	 in.	She	sat	on	the	leather	sofa.	He	sat	in
a	leather	easy	chair	opposite	her.	There	was	a	large	 green	pillow	 behind	her,
the	color	 of	 her	 eyes,	the	color	 of	 her	 robe.	 He	remembered	that	 the	 lady
favored	green.
   “I	 just	 drove	out	from	 the	police	station,”	 he	said.	“They’re	 trying	 to	locate
Skye	Bannister	so	he’ll	be	there	for	the	formal	 Q	and	A.	He’s	down	in	 Sanibel
for	the	weekend,	they’re	not	sure	where.”

206
   “Skye...?”
   “Bannister.	  The	  state	 attorney.	 His	  office	  is	 going	  to	  have	 a	 lot	  of
explaining	to	do.”
   “I	 still	 don’t	 understand...”
   “Howell	  confessed	to	the	murders.”
   “Kit?”
   “Yes.”
   “Amazing.”
   “Isn’t	  it?”
   “Such	 a	quiet,	unassuming	person,”	she	said.
   “Yes.”
   “Why	  would	he	have...are	you	saying	he	killed	all	 of	them?”
   “Yes.”
   “He’s	 admitted	that?”
   “Yes.”
   “Amazing,”	  she	said	again.
   The	 room	went	silent.	The	house	was	still.	 She	sat	in	the	center	of	the	sofa,
looking	 at	him,	 her	hands	clasped	in	 her	lap.	 He	sat	 opposite	her,	watching
her.
   “And	  you	think	he	may	try	to	 implicate	Stephen?”	she	said.
   “Yes.”
   Lying	 again.
   “How?”
   “He	 might	 claim	Stephen	put	him	up	to	it.”
   “Has	 he	done	that?”
   “No.	 Not	 yet.”
   “Well...what	  has	he	said?”
   “I	 told	 you.	He’s	confessed	to	killing	 the	three	men	who	raped	you—”
   “Yes,	 I	understand	that	part	of	it.”
   “And	 the	old	man	who	saw	the	license	plate	on	the	rented	car—”
   “One	 of	the	Vietnamese	witnesses.”
   “Yes.	 And	also	 the	investigator	who	 learned	what	the	number	on	that	plate
really	was.	He	 killed	 all	 five	 of	them.	 He’s	already	made	a	statement	to	 that
effect.”
   “I	  see.	I’m	  sorry,	 but	 I’m	 not	 familiar	  with...which	  investigator	 do	 you
mean?”
   “You	 didn’t	 see	this	morning’s	newspaper?”
   “No,	 I’m	 sorry.”
   “This	  was	an	 investigator	 from	 the	state	attorney’s	 office.	 A	 man	named
Frank	Bannion.”
   “And	  he	learned...what	was	it	he’d	learned?”
   “He	 figured	 out	what	the	license	plate	was.”

207
   “I	 see.”
   “Which	led	him	to	Howell.”
   “I	 see.”
   “The	same	way	it	led	me	to	Howell.”
   “I	 see,”	she	said,	and	hesitated.	“Did...?”
   And	hesitated	again.	Wondering	quite	how	to	put	this.
   “Did	 Kit	say...why	he’d	committed	these	murders?”
   “Yes,”	he	said.
   “Why?”	 she	said.
   “For	you,”	he	said.
   “For	me?”
   She	seemed	almost	amused.
   “For	me?	I	hardly	know	the	man!”
   “Mrs.	Leeds...”
   “That’s	perfectly	ridiculous,”	she	said.	“For	me?	Is	the	man	crazy?”
   “Mrs.	Leeds,	outside	of	the—”
   “He	said	he	did	it	for	me?”
   “—various	lawyers	and	law-enforcement	people	working	on	this	case—”
   “I	 can’t	believe	he—”
   “—only	 two	other	people	knew	that	license-plate	number.”
   She	looked	at	him.
   “The	number	Trinh	thought	he	saw.”
   She	kept	looking	at	him.
   “You	and	your	husband,”	Matthew	said.
   “No,”	 she	said.
   “Yes,”	Matthew	said.	“I	told	your	husband,	and	he	told	you.”
   “I	 don’t	remember	hearing—”
   “You	and	I	talked	about	it	later,	Mrs.	Leeds.	You	knew	the	number,	and	you
—”
   “I	 did	not!”
   “—gave	it	to	Howell.”
   “You’re	mistaken.	I	don’t	even	know	the	man,	except	as—”
   “He’s	admitted	it.”
   She	looked	at	him	again.
   “He	said	you	gave	it	to	him.”
   She	kept	looking	at	him.
   “He	said	he	killed	Trinh	because	of	that	number.”
   And	suddenly	she	was	crying.



Tonight,	she	cannot	get	enough	of	him.
   This	 is	four	days	before	Christmas,	the	twenty-first	day	of	December,	a

208
Thursday.	In	 the	motel	 room,	 she	is	 insatiable.	 She	knows	 she	will	  not	 be
seeing	him	over	the	holidays;	 she	and	her	husband	are	going	up	to	New	York
on	the	twenty-sixth	  and	will	  not	return	 until	 the	second	of	 January.	And	 so
tonight’s	 lovemaking	 must	hold	 her	 until	 then,	 a	junkie’s	 last	 desperate	fix
before	an	anticipated	shortage	of	supply,	she	cannot	get	enough	of	him.
   She	is	dressed	provocatively	 for	him.	 She	always	dresses	provocatively	for
him.	 Black	 bikini	  panties,	 lace-edged.	A	 black	 garter	 belt.	 Black,	 seamed
nylon	 stockings.	No	 brassiere.	Black	 high-heeled	 patent-leather	pumps.	 He
tells	her	she	looks	like	a	hooker	in	the	Combat	Zone.	That’s	an	area	in	Boston,
he	explains.	Where	all	 the	hookers	parade.	She	asks	if	he’s	 ever	been	to	bed
with	 a	hooker.	Only	 in	 Nam,	he	says.	He	tells	 her	he	 killed	 seven	people	in
Nam.	This	 excites	her.	The	 idea	that	he	 has	killed	 people.	Her	 husband	has
killed	people,	too,	 in	the	same	war,	in	the	same	place.	But	when	Kit	 describes
cutting	off	 cocks,	it	excites	her.
   She	has	been	seeing	him	for	 almost	a	year	now,	ever	since	he	took	 the	job
at	the	club.	A	 sun	god.	Walking	 out	onto	 the	court,	his	 head	bent,	blond	hair
glowing,	looking	 up	suddenly,	blue	eyes	flashing,	Good	morning,	 Mrs.	Leeds,
I’m	Christopher	 Howell.	 They	call	me	Kit.
   Well,	 hello,	Kit,	 she	thinks.
   Aren’t	 you	 lovely,	Kit.
   Are	 you	ready	for	your	 lesson?	he	asks.
   Oh	 yes,	she	thinks,	I	am	ready	for	my	lesson,	Kit.
   He	 has	been	giving	her	lessons	for	almost	a	year	now,	on	and	off	 the	court.
She	cannot	imagine	what	her	life	was	like	 before	he	entered	it.	He	is	the	same
age	as	her	husband,	but	by	comparison	Stephen	seems	far	older.	Stephen	and
his	boat.	Always	 the	damn	boat.	Felicity.	 She	hates	the	name	of	the	boat.	He
comes	in	off	 the	boat	tasting	 of	salt.	 Kisses	her	tasting	of	 salt.	She	hates	his
kisses,	they	make	her	want	to	wash	out	her	mouth.	Stephen	is	a	big	man	going
to	fat.	Kit	  is	the	same	age,	they	both	 fought	in	 the	same	war,	but	 Kit	 is	lean
and	hard	and	savage,	and	she	cannot	get	enough	of	him.
   They	 talk	 a	 lot	 about	her	 leaving	 Stephen.	Divorcing	  him.	 But	 Florida’s
courts	aren’t	quite	as	liberal	with	 alimony	 as	they	are	elsewhere	in	the	United
States.	Most	judges	 down	here	 will	 grant	 alimony	 for	 a	so-called	 period	of
adjustment	and	then	you’re	on	your	own,	 sink	or	swim.	 She	is	trying	to	figure
out	some	way	to	get	him	to	 put	the	farm	in	 her	name.	She	has	told	him	that	if
something	happened	to	him,	 God	forbid,	  the	estate	taxes	would	murder	 her,
they’d	 be	giving	 the	government	 enough	money	to	 invade	Grenada	all	 over
again.	Over	 and	 over	 again,	 she	 hits	 on	 the	 Grenada	theme.	 He’d	  hated
Reagan	when	he	was	president,	hated	the	invasion	 of	 Grenada,	the	bombing
of	Libya,	 a	 man	who’d	 killed	  people	himself,	 it	 was	strange.	Try	 to	get	 the
farm	in	her	name.	The	farm	was	the	fortune.	Get	him	to	 put	it	in	her	name	and
then	kiss	him	off,	 spend	the	rest	of	 her	life	 lying	 in	the	sun	with	 Kit,	 making

209
love	to	Kit.	 They	 talk	about	that	 tonight,	too.	 They	always	talk	 about	that.	In
each	other’s	arms,	they	talk	about	her	leaving	Stephen	once	the	farm	is	in	 her
name.
   Their	 watches	are	on	the	dresser,	lying	side	by	side,	hers	tiny	and	gold	with
a	slender	black	strap,	his	massive	and	steely,	with	digital	 readouts	and	stubby
little	studs.
   Their	 watches	toss	seconds	into	the	room.
   Minutes.
   More	 minutes.
   On	 the	bed	across	the	room,	they	are	making	 love	again,	lost	 in	their	 need
for	 each	 other,	savoring	  these	last	 passionate	moments	 before	 their	  long
separation,	she	cannot	get	 enough	of	 him.	 And	 at	last	 they	lie	 back	 on	the
pillows,	 her	head	close	to	his,	his	arm	lying	 across	her	breasts,	spent,	content,
silent.	A	fire	engine	races	past	on	US	41,	its	siren	howling.
   Fire	 someplace,	she	says.
   Mmmm,	 he	says.
   They	 listen	 to	the	 sound	of	 the	siren	 fading,	 and	then	it	 is	 gone,	and	the
room	is	 silent	 again	 save	for	 the	 ticking	 of	 her	 watch	 on	the	 dresser.	She
wonders	aloud	what	time	it	is,	and	gets	out	of	bed	naked,	and	walks	flatfooted
across	the	room	and	picks	up	the	watch	and—
   Jesus!
   It’s	 a	quarter	past	eleven!
   This	 is	when	the	nightmare	begins.
   Not	 later.
   Now.
   This	 instant.
   It	 will	 take	at	least	fifteen	 minutes	to	get	back	to	the	mall.	 This	will	 put	 her
in	the	Maserati	 at	eleven-thirty,	 an	hour	 and	a	half	 later	than	she’d	 planned.
It’ll	  take	another	half	 hour	 to	 get	back	to	 the	 farm,	she	won’t	  be	home	 till
midnight!	 Never	mind	 him	putting	 the	farm	in	 her	name,	he’ll	kick	 her	out	of
the	house	if	she	walks	in	 there	at	midnight!	 He’ll	 throw	 her	out	on	the	street!
He’ll	  file	 for	  divorce	 tomorrow	  morning!	  How	 could	  they	 have	been	 so
stupid,	wasn’t	 somebody	watching	the	 time?	She	is	 saying	all	 this	 to	 Kit	 as
she	dresses,	hastily	 putting	 on	 the	 garter	 belt	 and	then	 the	 seamed	nylon
stockings,	and	fastening	the	 stockings	to	the	 garters,	He’ll	 kill	  me,	she	says,
and	stepping	into	 the	black	 lace-edged	bikini	  panties,	I	 can’t	believe	 we	let
this	happen,	and	then	putting	on	the	short	black	skirt	 and	the	sleeveless	white
silk	blouse,	and	buttoning	 the	little	 pearl	buttons	up	the	 front,	What	 can	I	tell
him,	she	says,	what	can	I	possibly	say	to	him?
   The	 mall	has	been	closed	for	an	hour	 and	a	half	by	the	time	 they	reach	the
parking	lot.	 There	is	an	hour	and	a	half	 she	must	account	for.	The	 movie	has
already	let	out,	even	the	restaurant	is	closed,	its	neon	sign	dark,	its	front	plate-

210
glass	windows	black.	The	parking	 lot	is	empty,	everything	 is	dark,	everything
is	still,	 save	for	a	single	light	 hanging	over	the	rear	door	of	 the	restaurant	and
a	light	  shining	 through	 a	 narrow	 window	  beside	the	 door.	 Kit	 drives	 her
directly	to	 where	she’s	parked	the	car.	She	does	not	even	kiss	him	as	she	gets
out.	She	is	thinking	  ahead.	She	is	still	 wondering	 what	she	can	possibly	 tell
her	husband.	She	is	thinking	 there	is	no	possible	way	 to	explain	 a	time	lapse
of	an	hour	 and	a	half,	 it’s	 all	over,	 finished	 and	done,	he’ll	 kill	  her.	Swiftly,
she	unlocks	the	door	to	the	Maserati.
   She	has	parked	it	behind	 the	restaurant,	which	is	shaped	like	a	pagoda,	and
which	in	 fact	is	 named	The	Pagoda.	The	car	is	an	expensive	one,	 and	this	is
four	 days	before	 Christmas.	 With	 all	 the	 traffic	 in	 the	 mall’s	 lot	  a	dented
fender	is	a	distinct	 possibility,	  but	this	 was	not	her	 prime	concern	when	 she
chose	this	deserted	spot;	she	is	a	married	woman	having	an	affair,	and	moving
from	 car	to	 car	is	 the	 most	dangerous	time.	 So	 she	has	parked	it	 far	 from
where—if	 she’d	been	back	here	on	time—there	 would	 have	been	other	cars,
parked	it	 instead	 here	 behind	The	 Pagoda,	alongside	 a	 low	 fence	 beyond
which	 is	undeveloped	scrubland.	 She	climbs	 in	behind	 the	wheel,	 locks	 the
door,	and	starts	the	engine.
   The	dashboard	clock	reads	twenty	minutes	to	twelve.
   The	 sound	of	the	engine	tells	Kit	 that	everything’s	okay,	but	 she	flashes	her
headlights	anyway,	signaling,	 and	 he	flashes	his	 own	headlights	 in	 farewell
and	begins	backing	his	car	 away	from	 the	fence.	She	puts	the	gearshift	lever
in	reverse.	Kit	makes	a	wide	turn	and	then	begins	driving	 toward	the	exit.	It	 is
best	not	to	follow	  him	 too	closely,	the	 night	has	eyes.	She	waits	until	 in	 her
rear-view	mirror	  she	sees	him	turning	 out	 of	 the	lot.	 Then	she	steps	on	 the
accelerator,	and	begins	backing	her	own	car	away	from	the	fence,	and	realizes
almost	at	once	that	she	has	a	flat	tire.
   The	nightmare	 is	about	to	escalate.
   She	knows	 how	to	change	a	flat	 tire,	she	has	changed	many	of	them	in	 her
lifetime,	 she	is	not	one	of	 these	helpless	little	 women	who	 eat	bonbons	on	a
chaise	longue	while	  reading	romance	novels.	 She	takes	the	 jack	 out	of	 the
trunk,	lifts	 out	the	spare,	lays	it	flat	on	the	ground	behind	the	rear	bumper,	and
then	kneels	beside	the	right	rear	tire	 to	loosen	the	lug	 nuts	on	the	wheel.	She
has	removed	one	of	them	and	placed	it	in	the	inverted	hubcab,	when...
   The	first	 thing	she	hears	is	the	rear	door	of	the	restaurant	opening.
   And	 then	voices.
   Foreign	 voices.
   Well,	 a	Chinese	restaurant,	she	figures	they’re	Chinese	voices.
   And	  then	three	 men	come	 out	 of	 the	restaurant,	 through	the	 back	 door,
talking	 and	laughing,	 and	she	recognizes	 them	as	the	 men	who’d	  been	out
back	here	smoking	 earlier	 tonight	 when	she’d	 parked	the	car,	 eight	o’clock
tonight	when	 she’d	parked	 the	car,	three	hours	 and	forty	 minutes	 ago	when

211
she’d	parked	the	 car.	Three	 young	men	 out	back	 smoking.	 “Good	 evening,
boys,”	she’d	 said	cheerfully—well,	  perhaps	a	bit	flirtatiously,	  too;	she	was	a
woman	on	her	 way	to	 meet	her	lover,	 and	a	 woman	with	 a	lover	 thinks	 the
whole	world	  is	dying	  to	fuck	 her.	 “Good	 evening,	 boys.”	 Three	hours	 and
forty	minutes	ago.	A	nightmare	ago.
   One	of	 them	reaches	in	to	snap	off	 the	inside	lights.	There	 is	only	the	light
over	the	door	now.	 Another	one	pulls	 the	door	shut.	 The	sound	of	the	spring
bolt	 clicking	 into	 place	 is	like	  a	rifle	 shot	 on	 the	night.	 The	 three	are	still
talking	 among	themselves,	their	 backs	are	to	her,	 they	haven’t	 yet	seen	her.
One	  of	   them	  laughs	   softly.	   And	   then	  they	   turn	  from	   the	   door,
and...and...they...they...
   “They	  were	starting	 to	 move	away	 from	 the	restaurant,”	 she	said,	“when
they	  saw	 me.	  And	   they...stopped	 and...and...one	 of	   them...the	  leader,
Ho...smiled	at	me	 and...and	said	in	his	singsong	English,	 ‘Oh,	 good	evening,
boys,’	imitating	 me,	mocking	me!	And	then	they...”
   She	fell	 silent.
   She	took	a	tissue	from	a	box	on	 the	coffee	table,	dabbed	at	her	eyes	and	her
cheeks.
   Matthew	 waited.
   “You	  know	the	 rest,”	she	said,	 “I	 told	 you	the	 rest.	I	 had	to	lie	 about	the
time,	but	the	rest	was	all	true.”
   “So	 you	risked	a	conviction—”
   “Yes.”
   “—to	  protect	your	lie.”
   “To	 protect	my	life!”
   “You	 let	three	rapists	go	free—”
   “They	 were	my	alibi.”
   “Your	 what?”
   “Stephen	 believed	it,	 that’s	all	 that	mattered.	He	believed	 I	left	 the	mall	 at
ten	and	was	raped	fifteen	minutes	later.	He	believed	it.”
   “The	 jury	 didn’t.”
   “That	 was	a	chance	I	had	to	take.	Otherwise,	I’d	have	lost	everything.”
   “You’ve	  still	lost	 everything.”
   “No,	 I	 don’t	think	 so,”	she	said.	“Stephen	will	 still	believe	me.”
   “The	 state	attorney	won’t.	Kit	 told	 the	police	you	planned	it	together.”
   “Oh?	 Planned	what	together?”
   There	was	a	faint	 smile	on	her	face	now.	He	had	seen	this	smile	before.	On
the	faces	of	 people	who	 had	 decided	to	 bluff	 it	 through	 because	there	was
nothing	 worse	  that	  could	 possibly	  happen.	 Kit	   Howell	  had	  told	  them
everything;	Jessica	Leeds	would	tell	them	nothing.
   “They	 have	his	sworn	statement,”	Matthew	 said.
   “He’s	 lying.	 Besides,	he’s	a	tennis	bum.”

212
   “Whatever	 he	is,	he	signed—”
   “Tell	 me,”	 Jessica	said.	“If	an	infatuated	tennis	bum	 goes	out	on	his	own	to
redeem	the	honor	of	a	farmer’s	wife...how	is	the	lady	 to	blame?”
   “Where’s	 the	lady?”	 Matthew	asked,	and	walked	out.



The	Q	 and	A	 took	place	 in	Captain	 Rushville	 Decker’s	 office	 in	 the	Public
Safety	Building	 at	 6:25	a.m.	that	 Sunday	morning,	 August	 26.	Present	were
the	captain	himself,	 in	cleanly	 pressed	blues	and	looking	 wide	 awake	at	this
early	hour;	 Christopher	 Howell	 in	 jeans	and	a	blue	 T-shirt;	 Skye	Bannister,
who’d	 finally	 been	located	 at	his	 sister’s	house	in	 Sanibel,	and	 who	looked
tall	and	blond	 and	suntanned	and	elegant	in	a	dark-blue	tropical	 suit	and	silk
rep	 tie;	 Patricia	  Demming,	 who	  was	 dressed	now	  in	 a	 gray	 pin-striped
business	suit	and	low	heels,	looking	 extremely	 beautiful	 but	also	very	 grave;
Matthew	Hope,	 who	 had	not	slept	 at	all	 the	night	 before	and	 who	needed	a
shave	and	who	was	still	 wearing	 the	clothes	he’d	 lived	 in	 all	day	 yesterday;
and	 a	 uniformed	  police	 stenographer,	 who	  was	 operating	 the	 recording
machine	and	 taking	 backup	shorthand	 notes	and	looking	  essentially	bored.
Bannister	read	Howell	 his	rights,	 confirmed	 that	he	understood	them,	further
confirmed	that	 he	did	not,	 repeat	not,	wish	a	 lawyer	present,	and	then	began
the	questioning:
	
Q:		Can	you	tell	me	your	full	 name,	please?
A:		Christopher	Leslie	 Howell.
Q:		Where	do	you	live,	Mr.	 Howell?
A:		At	 2115	Ocean	Drive,	Whisper	Key.
Q:		Any	apartment	number?
A:		2A.
Q:		Mr.	Howell,	 earlier	today	you	made	a	voluntary	statement	to	a	Detective
         Howard	Saphier	of	the	Calusa	Police	Department,	is	that	true?
A:		That’s	true.
Q:		I	show	you	this,	and	ask	if	it	 is	a	true	representation	of	the	statement	you
         made?
A:		It	 is.
Q:		Is	this	your	signature	at	the	bottom	of	the	statement?
A:		It	 is.
Q:		And	is	the	date	alongside	your	signature	the	correct	date?	A:	It	is.
Q:		Mr.	Howell,	 with	 your	permission,	I’d	 like	to	 go	over	some	of	the	things
         you	told	Detective	 Saphier.	To	make	sure	we’ve	got	them	right.
A:		Sure.
Q:		You	told	Detective	Saphier,	did	you	not,	 that	on	the	night	of	August
         thirteenth,	you	drove	a	rented	automobile	to	so-called	Little	 Asia	 and

213
         ambushed	and	murdered	three	Vietnamese	men	named...Pat,	have	you
         got	those	names,	please?
A:		(from	Ms.	Demming)	 Yes,	Mr.	Bannister,	right	here.
Q:		Let’s	see	now...that	would	be...Ho	Dao	Bat...and	Ngo	Long	Khai...I’m	  not
         sure	I’m	pronouncing	 these	correctly...and	Dang	Van	Con?	Are	those
         the	men	you	say	you	murdered?
A:		Not	in	 that	order.
Q:		Pardon?
A:		Ho	was	last.
Q:		Mr.	Howell,	 perhaps	it	would	be	helpful	 to	go	over	the	events	of	that	night
         chronologically.	 I’m	 still	 talking	about	August	thirteenth,	 the	night	these
         three	men	were	murdered.
A:		Where	do	you	want	me	to	start?
Q:		You	told	Detective	Saphier	that	you	called	the	Riverview	 Marina—
A:		Yes.
Q:		And	identified	 yourself	as	Stephen	Leeds—
A:		Yes.
Q:		And	spoke	to	a	man	named	Charles	Stubbs—
A:		Yes.
Q:		At	approximately	 nine	o’clock	 that	night.
A:		Yes.	To	tell	him	I’d	 be	taking	the	boat	out.
Q:		Where’d	you	make	this	call	 from?
A:		My	 apartment.
Q:		What’d	you	 do	then?
A:		I	waited	 for	Jessie’s	call.
Q:		By	Jessie,	do	you	mean	Jessica	Leeds?
A:		Yes.
Q:		What	was	the	nature	of	her	call?
A:		She	told	me	it	was	okay	to	come	on	over.
Q:		Come	on	over	where?
A:		The	farm.
Q:		Do	you	mean	the	Leeds	farm?
A:		Yes.
Q:		What	did	you	do	after	you	 received	her	call?
A:		I	drove	out	 there.
Q:		Why	did	 you	go	there?
A:		To	pick	up	some	things.
Q:		What	things?
A:		Jessie’s	car,	for	one.	The	Maserati.
Q:		What	else	did	you	pick	up?
A:		Her	husband’s	jacket	and	hat.
Q:		Stephen	Leeds?

214
A:		Yes.
Q:		Anything	 else?
A:		The	boat	keys.	And	his	wallet.
Q:		Whose	wallet?
A:		Her	husband’s.
Q:		Did	you	go	into	 the	Leeds	house	to	pick	up	all	these	items?
A:		Not	the	car.	The	car	was	parked	outside.
Q:		Why	are	you	smiling,	 Mr.	Howell?
A:		Well,	the	car	couldn’t	 be	in	the	house,	could	it?
Q:		You	find	that	amusing,	do	you?
A:		Yes.	That	you	asked	if	I	had	to	go	in	the	house	for	the	car.
Q:		How	about	the	other	items?	The	jacket	and	hat,	the	wallet,	the—
A:		Yes.
Q:		You	went	into	the	house	to	gather	those,	did	you?
A:		Yes.
Q:		Where	were	Mr.	and	Mrs.	Leeds	while	 you	were	doing	all	this?
A:		Jessie	was	helping	me.	Her	husband	was	asleep	in	the	bedroom.
Q:		Asleep	all	the	while	 you	were	in	the	house?
A:		Asleep	till	 sometime	the	next	morning.
Q:		Mr.	Howell,	 did	you	tell	 Detective	Saphier	that	you	knew	Mr.	 Leeds
         would	be	asleep	because	his	wife	had	administered	sleeping	pills	to
         him?
A:		Two	pills.	 In	his	drink.	 They	were	having	an	after-dinner	drink	 when	the
         movie	started.	She	called	me	the	minute	he	went	off.
Q:		Would	you	know	 what	kind	of	 pills	these	were?	The	name	of	the	drug?
A:		They	were	prescription	 pills.	That’s	all	 I	know	 about	them.
Q:		Which	movie	 are	you	referring	to?
A:		A	rented	movie.	They	 were	watching	it	after	dinner.
Q:		So	Mr.	Leeds	was	asleep	when	you	got	there—
A:		Yes.
Q:		What	time	was	that?
A:		About	 ten	o’clock.
Q:		Was	he	asleep	when	you	left	the	farm?
A:		Yes.
Q:		How	did	 you	leave	the	farm?
A:		In	Jessie’s	car.
Q:		The	Maserati.
A:		Yes.
Q:		You	left	your	 car	there?
A:		In	the	garage.
Q:		What	time	was	it	when	you	 left	the	farm?
A:		About	 ten	after	ten.

215
Q:		Where	did	you	go	then?
A:		To	the	Riverview	 Marina.	On	Willowbee	 Creek.
Q:		Why	did	 you	go	there?
A:		To	take	out	the	boat.	I	was	wearing	his	jacket	and	hat...
Q:		Mr.	Leeds’s	jacket	and	hat?
A:		Yes.	I	was	hoping	whoever	saw	me	taking	the	boat	out	would	think	 it	was
         him.	That	was	the	plan.	To	have	people	see	me	and	think	it	was	him.
         Because	I’d	called	ahead,	you	see.	We’re	about	the	same	size,	you	see.
         He’s	a	bit	heavier,	but	basically	we’re	 the	same	size.
Q:		When	you	say,	“That	was	the	plan”—whose	plan	 do	you	mean?
A:		Jessie’s.	And	mine.	Our	plan.
Q:		To	be	mistaken	for	Stephen	Leeds?
A:		Yes.	That	was	the	whole	idea.	That	was	why	I	went	to	all	 the	trouble	of
         calling	the	marina	and	telling	 them	I’d	 be	taking	the	boat	out,	and	then
         wearing	his	clothes,	you	know,	and	dropping	his	 wallet	where	it	was
         sure	to	be	found.	That	was	all	part	of	the	plan.
Q:		When	did	you	concoct	this	plan?
A:		Monday	 morning.
Q:		Monday	morning?	The	day	of	 the	murders?
A:		Yeah.	That’s	my	day	off.	 Monday.
Q:		Why	are	you	grinning	 now,	Mr.	Howell?
A:		I	just	 think	it	 was	a	good	plan	to	have	thought	up	on	the	spur	of	the
         moment	like	that.
Q:		You’re	saying	that	you	sat	down	with	 Mrs.	Leeds	on	Monday	morning—
A:		We	were	in	bed,	actually.
Q:		I	see.
A:		Mondays	were	when	we	usually	 got	together.
Q:		I	see.	And	you	figured	out—
A:		Yeah,	all	of	it.	 The	whole	plan.	Two	birds	 with	one	stone.
Q:		What	do	you	mean	by	that?
A:		Get	the	gooks	who	raped	her,	and	get	rid	of	her	husband	at	the	same	time.
Q:		So	you	drove	to	the	marina	in	Mrs.	Leeds’s	car—
A:		Yeah,	that	was	part	of	it,	too.	To	make	sure	somebody	saw	the	car.
Q:		Wearing	Mr.	Leeds’s	jacket	and	hat—
A:		Yeah.
Q:		And	you	took	 his	boat	out—
A:		Felicity,	 yeah.	I	had	the	keys,	you	see.
Q:		And	went	where	with	 it?	Where	did	you	take	the	boat,	Mr.	Howell?
A:		To	Kickers.	 That’s	a	place	just	south	on	the	Intercoastal.	Just	past	marker
         63,	near	the	south	bridge	to	Whisper.	Willowbee	is	just	 off	72,	it’s	 a
         quick	run	down,	 especially	at	night	when	there’s	no	traffic	 on	the	water.
         Kickers	is	 where	we	dropped	the	rental	car	that	afternoon.

216
Q:		We?
A:		Me	and	Jessie.	I	rented	the	car	and	drove	it	to	Kickers,	and	then	she	drove
         me	back	to	my	place.
Q:		Why	did	 you	leave	a	rented	car	at	Kickers—is	that	the	correct	name?
         Kickers?
A:		Kickers,	 yeah.	To	pick	up	when	I	got	off	 the	boat.	Because	we	didn’t	want
         the	Maserati	to	be	seen	where	those	gooks	lived.	Little	Asia.
Q:		Is	that	where	you	drove	in	the	rented	car?
A:		Little	 Asia,	yeah.
Q:		And	what	did	 you	do	there?
A:		I	took	 care	of	the	gooks.
Q:		By	the	gooks,	do	you	mean	the	men	we	mentioned	earlier?	Pat,	would	you
         read	those	names	again,	please?
A:		(from	Ms.	Demming)	 Ho	Dao	Bat,	Ngo	Long	 Khai,	and	Dang	Van	Con.
A:		(from	Mr.	 Howell)	Yeah,	the	three	gooks.
Q:		What	do	you	mean	when	you	say	you	took	care	of	them?
A:		I	stabbed	them.	And	blinded	 them.	And	cut	off	 their	cocks.	Excuse	me,
         miss.
Q:		And	then	what?
A:		I	dropped	the	wallet	 on	the	floor.
Q:		Mr.	Leeds’s	wallet?
A:		Yes.
Q:		And	then?
A:		I	drove	back	to	Kickers	 and	left	the	rental	car	in	the	parking	 lot	there,	and
         got	back	on	the	boat,	and	took	it	back	to	Willowbee.	 Then	I	drove	the
         Maserati	out	to	the	farm	and	went	back	home	in	my	 own	car.	And	that
         was	that.
Q:		Why	are	you	grinning	 again,	Mr.	Howell?
A:		Because	it	worked	out	so	neat.	It	would’ve	 worked	out,	anyway,	if	 that	old
         gook	hadn’t’ve	 seen	me	getting	in	the	Olds	and	driving	off.	 He	got	the
         plate	wrong,	but	he	wasn’t	off	 by	much,	and	I	figured	 it’d	 come	back	to
         him	sooner	or	later.	So	I	had	to	go	after	him,	too.	Actually,	 Jessie	and	I
         discussed	that,	and	we	figured	he	had	to	go.	Had	to	be	killed.	So	I	did	it.
Q:		You	seem	not	to	have	any	remorse	about	killing	these	people.
A:		Well...they	 were	gooks.	You	know.
Q:		By	gooks,	do	you	mean	Vietnamese?
A:		Gooks.	Yes.
Q:		Is	that	an	expression	you	learned	in	Vietnam?
A:		Yes.	Well,	sure.
Q:		During	the	war?
A:		Yes.
Q:		You	served	in	Vietnam	during	the	war?

217
A:		I	was	in	the	Army,	yes.
Q:		Did	you	see	any	combat?
A:		I	did.
Q:		How	long	were	you	over	there?
A:		I	got	there	in	time	for	the	Tet	Offensive.
Q:		I	see.
A:		Something	wrong	with	that?
Q:		No,	no.
A:		Nothing	wrong	with	a	man	serving	his	country.
Q:		I	was	simply	wondering...you	haven’t	expressed	any	remorse	for	killing
        Mr.	Bannion,	either.	Now,	certainly,	he	wasn’t	what	you’d	term—
A:		That	was	different.
Q:		Different	how?
A:		He	was	there!	The	man	shows	up	on	my	fucking...excuse	me,	miss,	I’m
        sorry.	He	shows	up	on	my	doorstep,	flashes	his	badge,	tells	me	it’s	all
        over,	he	knows	I’m	the	one	who	rented	that	fucking	car,	excuse	me.
        What	was	I	supposed	to	do?	Let	him	take	me	in?	Blow	the	whole	thing?
        We	were	home	free,	don’t	you	see?	The	gooks	were	dead	and	Jessie’s
        husband	was	in	jail	for	the	murders.	She’d	get	the	farm,	she’d	get
        everything.	It	was	a	terrific	plan,	I	mean	it.	Sure,	a	few	things	went
        wrong,	but	that	doesn’t	mean	it	wasn’t	a	good	plan.	It	should’ve
        worked.	I’d	have	bet	my	life	on	that	plan.
Q:		You	did.
A:		What?
Q:		Mr.	Howell,	is	there	anything	you’d	like	to	add	to	what	you’ve	just	told
        us?
A:		No,	nothing.
Q:		Any	corrections	you’d	like	to	make?
A:		No.
Q:		No	additions	or	corrections?
A:		No.
Q:		That’s	it,	then.	Thank	you.
   The	stenographer	snapped	off	the	tape	recorder.	Captain	Decker	pressed	a
button	on	his	 desk	and	a	uniformed	cop	came	into	 the	room.	He	 merely
nodded	to	the	cop.	The	cop	went	over	to	Howell	and	said,	“Let’s	go,	mister.”
Howell	got	up	from	where	he	was	sitting,	and	then,	to	no	one	in	particular,
said,	“It	was	a	good	plan,”	and	went	out	with	the	cop.
   “You’d	better	send	someone	to	pick	up	the	woman,”	Bannister	said.
   “Right	away,”	Decker	said,	and	went	to	his	phone.
   Bannister	turned	to	Matthew,	a	penitent	look	on	his	face;	he	was	going	to
make	a	good	politician.

218
   “What	 can	I	 say?”	he	asked,	his	arms	outstretched,	his	hands	palms	up,	the
fingers	widespread.
   “You	 can	say	you’re	dropping	 all	charges	against	my	client,”	Matthew	 said.
   “Well,	  of	 course	we	are.	 We’ll	 start	the	 formal	 machinery	 at	once,	won’t
we,	Pat?”
   “Yes,	 sir,”	Patricia	said.
   “Appreciate	  your	 getting	 down	 here	so	 early,”	 he	 said,	and	 put	his	 arm
around	her	and	gave	her	shoulder	 a	brief	 comradely	squeeze.	“Matthew,”	 he
said,	extending	his	hand,	“you’re	 a	good	lawyer	 and	a	good	man.	I’ve	always
known	that.”
   “Thanks,”	  Matthew	said	drily,	 and	shook	hands	with	him.
   “Let	 me	know	 if	there’s	any	problem,	Rush.”
   “Will	  do.”
   “Talk	 to	you	 tomorrow,	Pat,”	he	said,	and	walked	out.
   Patricia	 glared	at	his	retreating	back.
   “I’ll	   walk	you	down,”	 she	said	to	Matthew.
   The	sun	had	been	up	for	almost	half	an	hour.
   Everything	 outside	was	wet	with	 early-morning	dew.
   Everything	 smelled	so	sweet	and	clean	and	fresh.
   Everything	 looked	so	very	Florida.
   “Want	 to	have	breakfast	with	me?”	Patricia	 asked.
   He	 looked	at	her.
   “My	  painters	 are	gone,”	 she	said.	“I’ll	   open	some	champagne.	Celebrate
your	victory.”
   He	 looked	at	her	a	moment	longer.
   Then	he	said,	“Thanks,	 but	I’m	 exhausted.	Some	other	time,	okay?”
   “Sure,”	 she	said.	“See	ya.”
   He	 watched	her	as	she	walked	toward	 the	parking	 lot	behind	 the	building.
Confident	swing	 to	 her	hips,	long	 stride,	blond	 hair	 reflecting	 sunlight...Will
there	really	be	some	other	time,	Matthew?
   Will	 we	ever	know	each	other	better?
   There	was	a	pay	phone	on	the	corner.
   He	 dialed	 Mai	 Chim’s	 number	 from	 memory.	 She	answered	on	 the	fifth
ring.
   “Hello?”	  she	said.
   The	singsong	voice,	fuzzy	 with	 sleep	now.
   “Want	 to	have	breakfast	with	me?”	he	asked.

219
                             About	         the	    Author















                                         Photograph	©	Dragica	Hunter

Born	in	New	 York,	Evan	Hunter	(1926–2005)	wrote	the	screenplay	for
Hitchcock’s	The	Birds	in	1963.	He	received	the	Grand	Master	Award	from	the
Mystery	Writers	of	America	and	is	one	of	three	American	writers	to	be
awarded	the	Diamond	Dagger	for	a	lifetime	of	achievement	by	the	British
Crime	Writers	Association.
   Under	the	name	Ed	McBain,	he	authored	the	sprawling	87th	Precinct	series
—the	longest,	most	varied	crime	series	in	the	world—which	includes	fifty-
five	novels	about	a	fictional	team	of	policemen,	and	thirteen	novels	in	the
Matthew	Hope	series	featuring	an	up-and-coming	lawyer	in	the	Florida	Gulf
Coast.	Known	for	tackling	controversial	content	with	a	thoughtful	eye,	he	is
the	author	of	over	eighty	novels.

