2
The ImSortance 
of Being Earnest
 

A TriYial Comedy for Serious PeoSle
 

by Oscar Wilde

3
 

THE PERSONS IN THE PLAY
 

       -ohn Worthing, -.P.
       Algernon Moncrief f
       Rev. Canon Chasuble, '.'. 
       Merriman, Butler 
       Lane, Manservant 
       Lady Bracknell 
       +on.  *wendolen  )airfax 
       Cecily Cardew 
       Miss Prism,      Governess
 

THE SCENES OF THE PLAY
 

ACT I. Algernon Moncrieff's  )lat  in +alf-Moon  Street, W.
ACT II. The *arden  at the Manor +ouse, Woolton. 
ACT III.  'rawing-Room   at the Manor +ouse, W oolton.
                                                                                       

TIM(: The Present. PLAC(: London.

4
                                                FIRST  ACT
 

SC(1(

Morning-rooP in  Algernon's flat in Half-Moon Street. The rooP is
luxuriously and artistically furnished. The sound of a Siano is heard in the
adMoining rooP.

[LANE is arranging afternoon tea on the table, and after the Pusic has
ceased, ALGERNON enters.]

AL*(R121.      'id   you hear what I was playing, Lane?

LA1(.   I didn't think  it polite to listen, sir.

AL*(R121.      I'm sorry for that, for your sake. I don't play accurately – any
one can play accurately – but I play with wonderful expression. As far as
the piano is concerned, sentiment is my forte. I keep science for Life.

LA1(.   Yes, sir.

AL*(R121.      And, speaking of the science of Life, have you got the
cucumber sandwiches cut for Lady Bracknell?

LA1(.   Yes, sir. [Hands theP on a salver.]

AL*(R121.      [InsSects theP, takes two, and sits down on the sofa.] 2h!…
by the way, Lane, I see from your book that on Thursday night, when Lord
Shoreman and Mr. Worthing were dining with me, eight bottles of
champagne are entered as having been consumed.

LA1(.   Yes, sir; eight bottles and a pint.

AL*(R121.      Why is it  that at a bachelor's establishment the servants
invariably drink the champagne? I ask merely for information.

5
LA1(.  I attribute it to the superior quality of the wine, sir. I have often
observed that in married households the champagne is rarely of a first-rate
brand.

AL*(R121.    *ood  heavens! Is marriage so demoralising as that?

LA1(.  I believe it is a very pleasant state, sir. I have had very little
experience of it myself up to the present. I have only been married once.
That was in consequence of a misunderstanding between myself and a
young person.

AL*(R121.    [Languidly.] I don't know that I am much interested in your
family life, Lane.

LA1(.  1o, sir; it is not a very interesting subject. I never think of it myself.

AL*(R121.    9ery natural, I am sure. That will do, Lane, thank you.

LA1(.  Thank you, sir. [LANE goes out.]

AL*(R121.    Lane’s views on marriage seem somewhat lax. Really, if the
lower orders don't set us a good example, what on earth is the use of them?
They seem, as a class, to have absolutely no sense of moral responsibility.

[Enter LANE.]

LA1(.  Mr. (rnest Worthing.

[Enter JACK.]

[LANE goes out.]

AL*(R121.    +ow  are you, my dear (rnest? What brings you up to town?

-AC..  2h, pleasure, pleasure! What else should bring one anywhere?
(ating as usual, I see, Algy!

AL*(R121.    [Stiffly.] I  believe it is customary in good society to take
some slight refreshment at five o'clock. Where have you been since last

6
Thursday?

-AC..   [Sitting down on the sofa.] In the country.

AL*(R121.      What on earth do you do there?

-AC..   [Pulling  off his gloves.] When one is in town one amuses oneself.
When one is in the country one amuses other people. It is excessively
boring.

AL*(R121.      And who are the people you amuse?

-AC..   [Airily.]   2h, neighbours, neighbours.

AL*(R121.      *ot  nice neighbours in your part of Shropshire?

-AC..   Perfectly horrid! 1ever  speak to one of them.

AL*(R121.      +ow  immensely you must amuse them! [Goes over and
takes sandwich.] By the way, Shropshire is your county, is it not?

-AC..   (h?  Shropshire? Yes, of course. +allo! Why all these cups? Why
cucumber sandwiches? Why such reckless extravagance in one so young?
Who is coming to tea?

AL*(R121.      2h!  merely Aunt Augusta and *wendolen.

-AC..   +ow  perfectly delightful!

AL*(R121.      Yes, that is all very well; but I am afraid Aunt Augusta won't
quite approve of your being here.

-AC..   May I ask why?

AL*(R121.      My  dear fellow, the way you flirt with *wendolen  is
perfectly disgraceful. It is almost as bad as the way *wendolen flirts with
you.

7
-AC..   I am in love with *wendolen.  I have come up to town expressly to
propose to her.

AL*(R121.      I thought you had come up for pleasure?… I call that
business.

-AC..   +ow  utterly unromantic you are!

AL*(R121.      I really don't see anything romantic in proposing. It is very
romantic to be in love. But there is nothing romantic about a definite
proposal. Why, one may be accepted. 2ne usually is, I believe. Then the
excitement is all over. The very essence of romance is uncertainty. If ever I
get married, I'll certainly try to forget the fact.

-AC..   I have no doubt about that, dear Algy. The 'ivorce Court was
specially invented for people whose memories are so curiously constituted.

AL*(R121.      2h!  there is no use speculating on that subject. 'ivorces are
made in +eaven – [JACK Suts out his hand to take a sandwich.
ALGERNON at once interferes.] Please don't touch the cucumber
sandwiches. They are ordered specially for Aunt Augusta. [Takes one and
eats it.]

-AC..   Well, you have been eating them all the time.

AL*(R121.      That is quite a different matter. She is my aunt. [Takes Slate
froP below.] +ave some bread and butter. The bread and butter is for
*wendolen. *wendolen  is devoted to bread and butter.

-AC..   [Advancing to table and helSing hiPself.] And very good bread and
butter it is too.

AL*(R121.      Well, my dear fellow, you need not eat as if you were going
to eat it all. You behave as if you were married to her already. You are not
married to her already, and I don't think you ever will be.

-AC..   Why on earth do you say that?

8
AL*(R121.    Well, in the first place girls never marry the men they flirt
with. *irls don't think it right.

-AC..  2h, that is nonsense!

AL*(R121.    It  isn't. It is a great truth. It accounts for the extraordinary
number of bachelors that one sees all over the place. In the second place, I
don't give my consent.

-AC..  Your consent!

AL*(R121.    My  dear fellow, *wendolen is my first cousin. And before I
allow you to marry her, you will have to clear up the whole question of
Cecily. [Rings bell.]

-AC..  Cecily! What on earth do you mean? What do you mean, Algy, by
Cecily! I don't know any one of the name of Cecily.

[Enter LANE.]

AL*(R121.    Bring me that cigarette case Mr. Worthing left in the
smoking-room the last time he dined here.

LA1(.  Yes, sir. [LANE goes out.]

-AC..  'o   you mean to say you have had my cigarette case all this time? I
wish to goodness you had let me know. I have been writing frantic letters to
Scotland Yard about it. I was very nearly offering a large reward.

AL*(R121.    Well, I wish you would offer one. I happen to be more than
usually hard up.

-AC..  There is no good offering a large reward now that the thing is found.

[Enter LANE with the cigarette case on a salver. ALGERNON takes it at
once. LANE goes out.]

AL*(R121.    I  think that is rather mean of you, (rnest, I must say. [OSens
case and exaPines it.] +owever, it makes no matter, for, now that I look at

9
the inscription inside, I find that the thing isn't yours after all.

-AC..   2f  course it's mine. [Moving to hiP.]  You have seen me with it a
hundred times, and you have no right whatsoever to read what is written
inside. It is a very ungentlemanly thing to read a private cigarette case.

AL*(R121.      2h!  it is absurd to have a hard and fast rule about what one
should read and what one shouldn't. More than half of modern culture
depends on what one shouldn't read.

-AC..   I am quite aware of the fact, and I don't propose to discuss modern
culture. It isn't the sort of thing one should talk of in private. I simply want
my cigarette case back.

AL*(R121.      Yes; but this isn't your cigarette case. This cigarette case is a
present from some one of the name of Cecily, and you said you didn't know
any one of that name.

-AC..   Well, if you want to know, Cecily happens to be my aunt.

AL*(R121.      Your aunt!

-AC..   Yes. Charming old lady she is, too. Lives at Tunbridge Wells. -ust
give it back to me, Algy.

AL*(R121.      [Retreating to back of sofa.] But why does she call herself
little Cecily if  she is your aunt and lives at Tunbridge Wells? [Reading.]
')rom little  Cecily with  her fondest love.'

-AC..   [Moving  to sofa and kneeling uSon it.] My dear fellow, what on
earth is there in that? Some aunts are tall, some aunts are not tall. That is a
matter that surely an aunt may be allowed to decide for herself. You seem to
think that every aunt should be exactly like your aunt! That is absurd! )or
+eaven's sake give me back my cigarette case. [Follows ALGERNON
round the rooP.]

AL*(R121.      Yes. But why does your aunt call you her uncle? ')rom little
Cecily, with her fondest love to her dear 8ncle -ack.' There is no objection,

10
I admit, to an aunt being a small aunt, but why an aunt, no matter what her
si]e may be, should call her own nephew her uncle, I can't quite make out.
Besides, your name isn't -ack at all; it is (rnest.

-AC..   It isn't (rnest;  it's -ack.

AL*(R121.      You have always told me it was (rnest. I have introduced
you to every one as (rnest. You answer to the name of (rnest. You look as
if your name was (rnest. You are the most earnest-looking person I ever
saw in my life. It is perfectly absurd your saying that your name isn't
(rnest. It's on your cards. +ere is one of them. [Taking it froP case.] 'Mr.
(rnest Worthing, B. 4, The Albany.' I'll  keep this as a proof that your name
is (rnest if  ever you attempt to deny it to me, or to *wendolen, or to any
one else. [Puts the card in his Socket.]

-AC..   Well, my name is (rnest in town and -ack in the country, and the
cigarette case was given to me in the country.

AL*(R121.      Yes, but that does not account for the fact that your small
Aunt Cecily, who lives at Tunbridge Wells, calls you her dear uncle. Come,
old boy, you had much better have the thing out at once.

-AC..   My dear Algy, you talk exactly as if you were a dentist. It is very
vulgar to talk like a dentist when one isn't a dentist. It produces a false
impression,

AL*(R121.      Well, that is exactly what dentists always do. 1ow, go on!
Tell me the whole thing. I may mention that I have always suspected you of
being a confirmed and secret Bunburyist; and I am quite sure of it now.

-AC..   Bunburyist? What on earth do you mean by a Bunburyist?

AL*(R121.      I'll  reveal to you the meaning of that incomparable
expression as soon as you are kind enough to inform me why you are (rnest
in town and -ack in the country.

-AC..   Well, produce my cigarette case first.

11
AL*(R121.      +ere it is. [Hands  cigarette case.] 1ow produce your
explanation, and pray make it improbable. [Sits on sofa.]

-AC..   My dear fellow, there is nothing improbable about my explanation at
all. In fact it's perfectly ordinary. 2ld  Mr. Thomas Cardew, who adopted me
when I was a little boy, made me in his will guardian to his grand-daughter,
Miss Cecily Cardew. Cecily, who addresses me as her uncle from motives
of respect that you could not possibly appreciate, lives at my place in the
country under the charge of her admirable governess, Miss Prism.

AL*(R121.      Where in that place in the country, by the way?

-AC..   That is nothing to you, dear boy. You are not going to be invited… I
may tell you candidly that the place is not in Shropshire.

AL*(R121.      I suspected that, my dear fellow! I have Bunburyed all over
Shropshire on two separate occasions. 1ow, go on. Why are you (rnest in
town and -ack in the country?

-AC..   My dear Algy, I don't know whether you will  be able to understand
my real motives. You are hardly serious enough. When one is placed in the
position of guardian, one has to adopt a very high moral tone on all
subjects. It's one's duty to do so. And as a high moral tone can hardly be
said to conduce very much to either one's health or one's happiness, in order
to get up to town I have always pretended to have a younger brother of the
name of (rnest, who lives in the Albany, and gets into the most dreadful
scrapes. That, my dear Algy, is the whole truth pure and simple.

AL*(R121.      The truth is rarely pure and never simple. Modern life would
be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete
impossibility!

-AC..   That wouldn't be at all a bad thing.

AL*(R121.      Literary criticism  is not your forte, my dear fellow. 'on't   try
it. You should leave that to people who haven't been at a 8niversity. They
do it so well in the daily papers. What you really are is a Bunburyist. I was

12
quite right in saying you were a Bunburyist. You are one of the most
advanced Bunburyists I know.

-AC..   What on earth do you mean?

AL*(R121.      You have invented a very useful younger brother called
(rnest, in order that you may be able to come up to town as often as you
like. I have invented an invaluable permanent invalid called Bunbury, in
order that I may be able to go down into the country whenever I choose.
Bunbury is perfectly invaluable. If it wasn't for Bunbury's extraordinary bad
health, for instance, I wouldn't be able to dine with you at Willis's to-night,
for I have been really engaged to Aunt Augusta for more than a week.

-AC..   I haven't asked you to dine with me anywhere to-night.

AL*(R121.      I know. You are absurdly careless about sending out
invitations. It is very foolish of you. 1othing  annoys people so much as not
receiving invitations.

-AC..   You had much better dine with your Aunt Augusta.

AL*(R121.      I haven't the smallest intention of doing anything of the kind.
To begin with, I dined there on Monday, and once a week is quite enough to
dine with one's own relations. In the second place, whenever I do dine there
I am always treated as a member of the family, and sent down with either
no woman at all, or two. In the third place, I know perfectly well whom she
will place me next to, to-night. She will place me next Mary )arquhar, who
always flirts with her own husband across the dinner-table. That is not very
pleasant. Indeed, it is not even decent… and that sort of thing is enormously
on the increase. The amount of women in London who flirt with their own
husbands is perfectly scandalous. It looks so bad. It is simply washing one's
clean linen in public. Besides, now that I know you to be a confirmed
Bunburyist I naturally want to talk to you about Bunburying. I want to tell
you the rules.

-AC..   I'm not a Bunburyist at all. If *wendolen  accepts me, I am going to
kill my brother, indeed I think I'll  kill  him in any case. Cecily is a little too
much interested in him. It is rather a bore. So I am going to get rid of

13
(rnest. And I  strongly advise you to do the same with Mr… with your
invalid friend who has the absurd name.

AL*(R121.      1othing  will  induce me to part with Bunbury, and if you
ever get married, which seems to me extremely problematic, you will be
very glad to know Bunbury. A man who marries without knowing Bunbury
has a very tedious time of it.

-AC..   That is nonsense. If I marry a charming girl like *wendolen, and
she is the only girl I ever saw in my life that I would marry, I certainly
won't want to know Bunbury.

AL*(R121.      Then your wife will.  You don't seem to realise, that in
married life three is company and two is none.

-AC..   [Sententiously.] That, my dear young friend, is the theory that the
corrupt )rench 'rama  has been propounding for the last fifty years.

AL*(R121.      Yes; and that the happy (nglish home has proved in half the
time.

-AC..   )or  heaven's sake, don't try to be cynical. It's perfectly easy to be
cynical.

AL*(R121.      My  dear fellow, it isn't easy to be anything nowadays.
There's such a lot of beastly competition about. [The sound of an electric
bell is heard.] Ah! that must be Aunt Augusta. 2nly relatives, or creditors,
ever ring in that Wagnerian manner. 1ow, if I get her out of the way for ten
minutes, so that you can have an opportunity for proposing to *wendolen,
may I dine with you to-night at Willis's?

-AC..   I suppose so, if you want to.

AL*(R121.      Yes, but you must be serious about it. I hate people who are
not serious about meals. It is so shallow of them.

[Enter LANE.]

Lady Bracknell and Miss )airfax.

14
[ALGERNON goes forward to Peet theP. Enter LADY BRACKNELL and
GWENDOLEN.]

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      *ood  afternoon, dear Algernon, I hope you are
behaving very well.

AL*(R121.      I'm feeling very well,  Aunt Augusta.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      That's not quite the same thing. In fact the two
things rarely go together. [Sees JACK and bows to hiP with icy coldness.]

AL*(R121.      [To GWENDOLEN.] 'ear   me, you are smart!

*W(1'2L(1.         I am always smart! Am I not, Mr. Worthing?

-AC..   You're quite perfect, Miss )airfax.

*W(1'2L(1.         2h!  I hope I am not that. It would leave no room for
developments, and I intend to develop in many directions. [GWENDOLEN
and JACK sit down together in the corner.]

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      I'm sorry if we are a little late, Algernon, but I was
obliged to call on dear Lady +arbury. I hadn't been there since her poor
husband's death. I never saw a woman so altered; she looks quite twenty
years younger. And now I'll have a cup of tea, and one of those nice
cucumber sandwiches you promised me.

AL*(R121.      Certainly, Aunt Augusta. [Goes over to tea-table.]

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Won't you come and sit here, *wendolen?

*W(1'2L(1.         Thanks, mamma, I'm quite comfortable where I am.

AL*(R121.      [Picking  uS ePSty Slate in horror.] *ood heavens! Lane!
Why are there no cucumber sandwiches? I ordered them specially.

LA1(.   [Gravely.]  There were no cucumbers in the market this morning, sir.
I went down twice.

15
AL*(R121.    1o  cucumbers!

LA1(.  1o, sir. 1ot even for ready money.

AL*(R121.    That will do, Lane, thank you.

LA1(.  Thank you, sir. [Goes out.]

AL*(R121.    I  am greatly distressed, Aunt Augusta, about there being no
cucumbers, not even for ready money.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    It really makes no matter, Algernon. I had some
crumpets with Lady +arbury, who seems to me to be living entirely for
pleasure now.

AL*(R121.    I  hear her hair has turned quite gold from grief.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    It certainly has changed its colour. )rom what cause
I, of course, cannot say. [ALGERNON crosses and hands tea.] Thank you.
I've quite a treat for you to-night, Algernon. I am going to send you down
with Mary )arquhar. She is such a nice woman, and so attentive to her
husband. It's delightful to watch them.

AL*(R121.    I  am afraid, Aunt Augusta, I shall have to give up the
pleasure of dining with you to-night after all.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    [Frowning.] I hope not, Algernon. It would put my
table completely out. Your uncle would have to dine upstairs. )ortunately
he is accustomed to that.

AL*(R121.    It  is a great bore, and, I need hardly say, a terrible
disappointment to me, but the fact is I have just had a telegram to say that
my poor friend Bunbury is very ill again. [Exchanges glances with JACK.]
They seem to think I should be with him.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    It is very strange. This Mr. Bunbury seems to suffer
from curiously bad health.

AL*(R121.    Yes; poor Bunbury is a dreadful invalid.

16
LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Well, I must say, Algernon, that I think it is high
time that Mr. Bunbury made up his mind whether he was going to live or to
die. This shilly-shallying with the question is absurd. 1or do I in any way
approve of the modern sympathy with invalids. I consider it morbid. Illness
of any kind is hardly a thing to be encouraged in others. +ealth is the
primary duty of life. I  am always telling that to your poor uncle, but he
never seems to take much notice… as far as any improvement in his ailment
goes. I should be much obliged if you would ask Mr. Bunbury, from me, to
be kind enough not to have a relapse on Saturday, for I rely on you to
arrange my music for me. It is my last reception, and one wants something
that will encourage conversation, particularly at the end of the season when
every one has practically said whatever they had to say, which, in most
cases, was probably not much.

AL*(R121.      I'll  speak to Bunbury, Aunt Augusta, if he is still conscious,
and I think I can promise you he'll be all right by Saturday. 2f course the
music is a great difficulty. You see, if one plays good music, people don't
listen, and if one plays bad music people don't talk. But I'll run over the
programme I've drawn out, if you will kindly  come into the next room for a
moment.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Thank you, Algernon. It is very thoughtful of you.
[Rising, and following ALGERNON.] I'm sure the programme will be
delightful, after a few expurgations. )rench songs I cannot possibly allow.
People always seem to think that they are improper, and either look
shocked, which is vulgar, or laugh, which is worse. But *erman sounds a
thoroughly respectable language, and indeed, I believe is so. *wendolen,
you will accompany me.

*W(1'2L(1.         Certainly, mamma.

[LADY BRACKNELL and ALGERNON go into the Pusic-rooP,
GWENDOLEN rePains behind.]

-AC..   Charming day it has been, Miss )airfax.

*W(1'2L(1.         Pray don't talk to me about the weather, Mr. Worthing.
Whenever people talk to me about the weather, I always feel quite certain

17
that they mean something else. And that makes me so nervous.

-AC..   I do mean something else.

*W(1'2L(1.         I thought so. In fact, I am never wrong.

-AC..   And I would  like to be allowed to take advantage of Lady
Bracknell's temporary absence…

*W(1'2L(1.         I would  certainly advise you to do so. Mamma has a way
of coming back suddenly into a room that I have often had to speak to her
about.

-AC..   [Nervously.] Miss )airfax,  ever since I met you I have admired you
more than any girl… I have ever met since… I met you.

*W(1'2L(1.         Yes, I am quite well aware of the fact. And I often wish
that in public, at any rate, you had been more demonstrative. )or me you
have always had an irresistible fascination. (ven before I met you I was far
from indifferent to you. [-AC.    looks at her in aPazePent.] We live, as I
hope you know, Mr Worthing, in an age of ideals. The fact is constantly
mentioned in the more expensive monthly maga]ines, and has reached the
provincial pulpits, I am told; and my ideal has always been to love some
one of the name of (rnest. There is something in that name that inspires
absolute confidence. The moment Algernon first mentioned to me that he
had a friend called (rnest, I knew I was destined to love you.

-AC..   You really love me, *wendolen?

*W(1'2L(1.         Passionately!

-AC..   'arling!   You don't know how happy you've made me.

*W(1'2L(1.         My  own (rnest!

-AC..   But you don't really mean to say that you couldn't love me if my
name wasn't (rnest?

*W(1'2L(1.         But your name is (rnest.

18
-AC..   Yes, I know it is. But supposing it was something else? 'o you
mean to say you couldn't love me then?

*W(1'2L(1.         [Glibly.]   Ah! that is clearly a metaphysical speculation,
and like most metaphysical speculations has very little reference at all to the
actual facts of real life, as we know them.

-AC..   Personally, darling, to speak quite candidly, I don't much care about
the name of (rnest… I don't think the name suits me at all.

*W(1'2L(1.         It suits you perfectly. It is a divine name. It has a music of
its own. It produces vibrations.

-AC..   Well, really, *wendolen,  I must say that I think there are lots of
other much nicer names. I think -ack, for instance, a charming name.

*W(1'2L(1.         -ack?… 1o,  there is very little music in the name -ack, if
any at all, indeed. It does not thrill. It produces absolutely no vibrations… I
have known several -acks, and they all, without exception, were more than
usually plain. Besides, -ack is a notorious domesticity for -ohn! And I pity
any woman who is married to a man called -ohn. She would probably never
be allowed to know the entrancing pleasure of a single moment's solitude.
The only really safe name is (rnest.

-AC..   *wendolen,  I must get christened at once – I mean we must get
married at once. There is no time to be lost.

*W(1'2L(1.         Married, Mr.  Worthing?

-AC..   [Astounded.] Well… surely. You know that I love you, and you led
me to believe, Miss )airfax, that you were not absolutely indifferent to me.

*W(1'2L(1.         I adore you. But you haven't proposed to me yet. 1othing
has been said at all about marriage. The subject has not even been touched
on.

-AC..   Well… may I propose to you now?

19
*W(1'2L(1.       I think it would be an admirable opportunity. And to spare
you any possible disappointment, Mr. Worthing, I think it only fair to tell
you quite frankly before-hand that I am fully determined to accept you.

-AC..  *wendolen!

*W(1'2L(1.       Yes, Mr. Worthing, what have you got to say to me?

-AC..  You know what I have got to say to you.

*W(1'2L(1.       Yes, but you don't say it.

-AC..  *wendolen, will you marry me? [Goes on his knees.]

*W(1'2L(1.       2f  course I will, darling. +ow long you have been about
it! I am afraid you have had very little experience in how to propose.

-AC..  My own one, I have never loved any one in the world but you.

*W(1'2L(1.       Yes, but men often propose for practice. I know my
brother *erald does. All my girl-friends tell me so. What wonderfully blue
eyes you have, (rnest! They are quite, quite, blue. I hope you will always
look at me just like that, especially when there are other people present.
[Enter LADY BRACKNELL.]

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    Mr. Worthing! Rise, sir, from this semi-recumbent
posture. It is most indecorous.

*W(1'2L(1.       Mamma! [He tries to rise; she restrains hiP.] I must beg
you to retire. This is no place for you. Besides, Mr. Worthing has not quite
finished yet.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    )inished what, may I ask?

*W(1'2L(1.       I am engaged to Mr. Worthing, mamma. [They rise
together.]

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    Pardon me, you are not engaged to any one. When
you do become engaged to some one, I, or your father, should his health

20
permit him, will  inform you of the fact. An engagement should come on a
young girl as a surprise, pleasant or unpleasant, as the case may be. It is
hardly a matter that she could be allowed to arrange for herself… And now
I have a few questions to put to you, Mr. Worthing. While I am making
these inquiries, you, *wendolen, will wait  for me below in the carriage.

*W(1'2L(1.         [ReSroachfully.] Mamma!

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      In the carriage, *wendolen! [GWENDOLEN goes
to the door. She and JACK blow kisses to each other behind LADY
BRACKNELL'S back. LADY BRACKNELL looks vaguely about as if she
could not understand what the noise was. Finally turns round.] *wendolen,
the carriage!

*W(1'2L(1.         Yes, mamma. [Goes out, looking back at JACK.]

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      [Sitting down.] You can take a seat, Mr. Worthing.
[Looks in her Socket for note-book and Sencil.]

-AC..   Thank you, Lady Bracknell, I prefer standing.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      [Pencil and note-book in hand.] I feel bound to tell
you that you are not down on my list of eligible young men, although I have
the same list as the dear 'uchess of Bolton has. We work together, in fact.
+owever, I am quite ready to enter your name, should your answers be what
a really affectionate mother requires. 'o you smoke?

-AC..   Well, yes, I must admit I smoke.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      I am glad to hear it. A man should always have an
occupation of some kind. There are far too many idle men in London as it
is. +ow old are you?

-AC..   Twenty-nine.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      A very good age to be married at. I have always
been of opinion that a man who desires to get married should know either
everything or nothing. Which do you know?

21
-AC..   [After soPe hesitation.] I  know nothing, Lady Bracknell.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      I am pleased to hear it. I do not approve of anything
that tampers with natural ignorance. Ignorance is like a delicate exotic fruit;
touch it and the bloom is gone. The whole theory of modern education is
radically unsound. )ortunately in (ngland,  at any rate, education produces
no effect whatsoever. If it did, it would prove a serious danger to the upper
classes, and probably lead to acts of violence in *rosvenor Square. What is
your income?

-AC..   Between seven and eight thousand a year.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      [Makes a note in her book.] In land, or in
investments?

-AC..   In investments, chiefly.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      That is satisfactory. What between the duties
expected of one during one's lifetime, and the duties exacted from one after
one's death, land has ceased to be either a profit or a pleasure. It gives one
position, and prevents one from keeping it up. That's all that can be said
about land.

-AC..   I have a country house with some land, of course, attached to it,
about fifteen hundred acres, I believe; but I don't depend on that for my real
income. In fact, as far as I can make out, the poachers are the only people
who make anything out of it.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      A country house! +ow many bedrooms? Well, that
point can be cleared up afterwards. You have a town house, I hope? A girl
with a simple, unspoiled nature, like *wendolen, could hardly be expected
to reside in the country.

-AC..   Well, I own a house in Belgrave Square, but it is let by the year to
Lady Bloxham. 2f  course, I can get it back whenever I like, at six months'
notice.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Lady Bloxham? I don't know her.

22
-AC..  2h, she goes about very little. She is a lady considerably advanced
in years.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    Ah, nowadays that is no guarantee of respectability
of character. What number in Belgrave Square?

-AC..  149.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    [Shaking her head.] The unfashionable side. I
thought there was something. +owever, that could easily be altered.

-AC..  'o   you mean the fashion, or the side?

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    [Sternly.] Both, if necessary, I presume. What are
your politics?

-AC..  Well, I am afraid I really have none. I am a Liberal 8nionist.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    2h, they count as Tories. They dine with us. 2r
come in the evening, at any rate. 1ow to minor matters. Are your parents
living?

-AC..  I have lost both my parents.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    To lose one parent, Mr. Worthing, may be regarded
as a misfortune; to lose both looks like carelessness. Who was your father?
+e was evidently a man of some wealth. Was he born in what the Radical
papers call the purple of commerce, or did he rise from the ranks of the
aristocracy?

-AC..  I am afraid I really don't know. The fact is, Lady Bracknell, I said I
had lost my parents. It would be nearer the truth to say that my parents
seem to have lost me… I don't actually know who I am by birth. I was…
well, I was found.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    )ound!

-AC..  The late Mr. Thomas Cardew, an old gentleman of a very charitable
and kindly disposition, found me, and gave me the name of Worthing,

23
because he happened to have a first-class ticket for Worthing in his pocket
at the time. Worthing is a place in Sussex. It is a seaside resort.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Where did the charitable gentleman who had a first-
class ticket for this seaside resort find you?

-AC..   [Gravely.]  In a hand-bag.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      A hand-bag?

-AC..   [Very seriously.] Yes, Lady Bracknell. I was in a hand-bag – a
somewhat large, black leather hand-bag, with handles to it – an ordinary
hand-bag in fact.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      In what locality did this Mr. -ames, or Thomas,
Cardew come across this ordinary hand-bag?

-AC..   In the cloak-room at 9ictoria Station. It was given to him in mistake
for his own.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      The cloak-room at 9ictoria Station?

-AC..   Yes. The Brighton line.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      The line is immaterial. Mr. Worthing, I confess I
feel somewhat bewildered by what you have just told me. To be born, or at
any rate bred, in a hand-bag, whether it had handles or not, seems to me to
display a contempt for the ordinary decencies of family life that reminds
one of the worst excesses of the )rench Revolution. And I presume you
know what that unfortunate movement led to? As for the particular locality
in which the hand-bag was found, a cloak-room at a railway station might
serve to conceal a social indiscretion – has probably, indeed, been used for
that purpose before now – but it could hardly be regarded as an assured
basis for a recognised position in good society.

-AC..   May I ask you then what you would advise me to do? I need hardly
say I would do anything in the world to ensure *wendolen's happiness.

24
LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      I would strongly advise you, Mr. Worthing, to try
and acquire some relations as soon as possible, and to make a definite effort
to produce at any rate one parent, of either sex, before the season is quite
over.

-AC..   Well, I don't see how I could possibly manage to do that. I can
produce the hand-bag at any moment. It is in my dressing-room at home. I
really think that should satisfy you, Lady Bracknell.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Me, sir! What has it to do with me? You can hardly
imagine that I and Lord Bracknell would dream of allowing our only
daughter – a girl brought up with the utmost care – to marry into a cloak-
room, and form an alliance with a parcel? *ood morning, Mr. Worthing!

[LADY BRACKNELL sweeSs out in PaMestic indignation.]

-AC..   *ood  morning! [ALGERNON, froP  the other rooP, strikes uS the
Wedding March. Jack looks Serfectly furious, and goes to the door.] )or
goodness' sake don't play that ghastly tune, Algy. +ow idiotic you are!

[The Pusic stoSs and ALGERNON enters cheerily.]

AL*(R121.      'idn't   it  go off all right, old boy? You don't mean to say
*wendolen refused you? I know it is a way she has. She is always refusing
people. I think it is most ill-natured of her.

-AC..   2h,  *wendolen is as right as a trivet. As far as she is concerned, we
are engaged. +er mother is perfectly unbearable. 1ever met such a
*orgon…  don't really know what a *orgon  is like, but I am quite sure that
Lady Bracknell is one. In any case, she is a monster, without being a myth,
which is rather unfair… I beg your pardon, Algy, I suppose I shouldn't talk
about your own aunt in that way before you.

AL*(R121.      My  dear boy, I love hearing my relations abused. It is the
only thing that makes me put up with them at all. Relations are simply a
tedious pack of people, who haven't got the remotest knowledge of how to
live, nor the smallest instinct about when to die.

25
-AC..  2h, that is nonsense!

AL*(R121.    It  isn't!

-AC..  Well, I won't argue about the matter. You always want to argue
about things.

AL*(R121.    That is exactly what things were originally made for.

-AC..  8pon my word, if I thought that, I'd shoot myself… [A Sause.] You
don't think there is any chance of *wendolen becoming like her mother in
about a hundred and fifty years, do you, Algy?

AL*(R121.    All  women become like their mothers. That is their tragedy.
1o man does. That's his.

-AC..  Is that clever?

AL*(R121.    It  is perfectly phrased! and quite as true as any observation
in civilised life should be.

-AC..  I am sick to death of cleverness. (verybody is clever nowadays. You
can't go anywhere without meeting clever people. The thing has become an
absolute public nuisance. I wish to goodness we had a few fools left.

AL*(R121.    We have.

-AC..  I should extremely like to meet them. What do they talk about?

AL*(R121.    The fools? 2h! about the clever people, of course.

-AC..  What fools!

AL*(R121.    By the way, did you tell *wendolen the truth about your
being (rnest in town, and -ack in the country?

-AC..  [In a very Satronising Panner.] My dear fellow, the truth isn't quite
the sort of thing one tells to a nice, sweet, refined girl. What extraordinary
ideas you have about the way to behave to a woman!

26
AL*(R121.      The only way to behave to a woman is to make love to her, if
she is pretty, and to some one else, if she is plain.

-AC..   2h,  that is nonsense.

AL*(R121.      What about your brother? What about the profligate (rnest?

-AC..   2h,  before the end of the week I shall have got rid of him. I'll say he
died in Paris of apoplexy. Lots of people die of apoplexy, quite suddenly,
don't they?

AL*(R121.      Yes, but it's hereditary, my dear fellow. It's a sort of thing
that runs in families. You had much better say a severe chill.

-AC..   You are sure a severe chill isn't hereditary, or anything of that kind?

AL*(R121.      2f  course it isn't!

-AC..   9ery well, then. My  poor brother (rnest to carried off suddenly, in
Paris, by a severe chill. That gets rid of him.

AL*(R121.      But I thought you said that… Miss Cardew was a little too
much interested in your poor brother (rnest? Won't she feel his loss a good
deal?

-AC..   2h,  that is all right. Cecily is not a silly romantic girl, I am glad to
say. She has got a capital appetite, goes long walks, and pays no attention at
all to her lessons.

AL*(R121.      I would rather like to see Cecily.

-AC..   I will  take very good care you never do. She is excessively pretty,
and she is only just eighteen.

AL*(R121.      +ave you told *wendolen  yet that you have an excessively
pretty ward who is only just eighteen?

-AC..   2h!  one doesn't blurt these things out to people. Cecily and
*wendolen are perfectly certain to be extremely great friends. I'll bet you

27
anything you like that half an hour after they have met, they will be calling
each other sister.

AL*(R121.      Women only do that when they have called each other a lot
of other things first. 1ow, my dear boy, if we want to get a good table at
Willis's, we really must go and dress. 'o you know it is nearly seven?

-AC..   [Irritably.]   2h!  It always is nearly seven.

AL*(R121.      Well, I'm hungry.

-AC..   I never knew you when you weren't…

AL*(R121.      What shall we do after dinner? *o to a theatre?

-AC..   2h  no! I loathe listening.

AL*(R121.      Well, let us go to the Club?

-AC..   2h,  no! I hate talking.

AL*(R121.      Well, we might trot round to the (mpire  at ten?

-AC..   2h,  no! I can't bear looking at things. It is so silly.

AL*(R121.      Well, what shall we do?

-AC..   1othing!

AL*(R121.      It is awfully  hard work doing nothing. +owever, I don't mind
hard work where there is no definite object of any kind.

[Enter LANE.]

LA1(.   Miss )airfax.

[Enter GWENDOLEN. LANE goes out.]

AL*(R121.      *wendolen,  upon my word!

28
*W(1'2L(1.       Algy, kindly turn your back. I have something very
particular to say to Mr. Worthing.

AL*(R121.    Really, *wendolen, I don't think I can allow this at all.

*W(1'2L(1.       Algy, you always adopt a strictly immoral attitude towards
life. You are not quite old enough to do that. [ALGERNON retires to the
fireSlace.]

-AC..  My own darling!

*W(1'2L(1.       (rnest, we may never be married. )rom the expression on
mamma's face I fear we never shall. )ew parents nowadays pay any regard
to what their children say to them. The old-fashioned respect for the young
is fast dying out. Whatever influence I ever had over mamma, I lost at the
age of three. But although she may prevent us from becoming man and
wife, and I may marry some one else, and marry often, nothing that she can
possibly do can alter my eternal devotion to you.

-AC..  'ear  *wendolen!

*W(1'2L(1.       The story of your romantic origin, as related to me by
mamma, with unpleasing comments, has naturally stirred the deeper fibres
of my nature. Your Christian name has an irresistible fascination. The
simplicity of your character makes you exquisitely incomprehensible to me.
Your town address at the Albany I have. What is your address in the
country?

-AC..  The Manor +ouse, Woolton, +ertfordshire.

[ALGERNON, who has been carefully listening, sPiles to hiPself, and
writes the address on his shirt-cuff. Then Sicks uS the Railway Guide.]

*W(1'2L(1.       There is a good postal service, I suppose? It may be
necessary to do something desperate. That of course will require serious
consideration. I will communicate with you daily.

-AC..  My own one!

29
*W(1'2L(1.       +ow  long do you remain in town?

-AC..  Till Monday.

*W(1'2L(1.       *ood!  Algy, you may turn round now.

AL*(R121.    Thanks, I've turned round already.

*W(1'2L(1.       You may also ring the bell.

-AC..  You will let me see you to your carriage, my own darling?

*W(1'2L(1.       Certainly.

-AC..  [To LANE, who now enters.] I will see Miss )airfax out.

LA1(.  Yes, sir. [JACK and GWENDOLEN go off.]

[LANE Sresents several letters on a salver to ALGERNON. It is to be
surPised that they are bills, as ALGERNON, after looking at the enveloSes,
tears theP uS.]

AL*(R121.    A  glass of sherry, Lane.

LA1(.  Yes, sir.

AL*(R121.    To-morrow, Lane, I'm going Bunburying.

LA1(.  Yes, sir.

AL*(R121.    I  shall probably not be back till Monday. You can put up my
dress clothes, my smoking jacket, and all the Bunbury suits…

LA1(.  Yes, sir. [Handing sherry.]

AL*(R121.    I  hope to-morrow will be a fine day, Lane.

LA1(.  It never is, sir.

30
AL*(R121.    Lane, you're a perfect pessimist.

LA1(.  I do my best to give satisfaction, sir.

[Enter JACK. LANE goes off.]

-AC..  There's a sensible, intellectual girl! The only girl I ever cared for in
my life. [ALGERNON is laughing iPPoderately.] What on earth are you so
amused at?

AL*(R121.    2h,  I'm a little anxious about poor Bunbury, that in all.

-AC..  If you don't take care, your friend Bunbury will get you into a
serious scrape some day.

AL*(R121.    I  love scrapes. They are the only things that are never
serious.

-AC..  2h, that's nonsense, Algy. You never talk anything but nonsense.

AL*(R121.    1obody ever does.

[JACK looks indignantly at hiP, and leaves the rooP. ALGERNON lights a
cigarette, reads his shirt-cuff, and sPiles.]

31
                                              SECOND ACT
 

SC(1(

Garden at the Manor House. A flight of grey stone steSs leads uS to the
house. The garden, an old-fashioned one, full of roses. TiPe of year, July.
Basket chairs, and a table covered with books, are set under a large yew-
tree.
 

[MISS PRISM discovered seated at the table. CECILY is at the back
watering flowers.]
 

MISS PRISM. [Calling.]  Cecily, Cecily!  Surely such a utilitarian
occupation as the watering of flowers is rather Moulton's duty than yours?
(specially  at a moment when intellectual pleasures await you. Your *erman
grammar is on the table. Pray open it at page fifteen. We will repeat
yesterday's lesson.

C(CILY.  [CoPing  over very slowly.] But I don't like *erman.  It isn't at all a
becoming language. I know perfectly well that I look quite plain after my
*erman lesson.

MISS PRISM. Child, you know how anxious your guardian is that you
should improve yourself in every way. +e laid particular stress on your
*erman, as he was leaving for town yesterday. Indeed, he always lays stress
on your *erman when he is leaving for town.

C(CILY.  'ear  8ncle  -ack is so very serious! Sometimes he is so serious
that I think he cannot be quite well

MISS PRISM. [Drawing  herself uS.] Your guardian enjoys the best of
health, and his gravity of demeanour is especially to be commanded in one
so comparatively young as he is. I know no one who has a higher sense of
duty and responsibility.

32
C(CILY.  I suppose that is why he often looks a little bored when we three
are together.

MISS PRISM. Cecily! I  am surprised at you. Mr. Worthing has many
troubles in his life. Idle merriment and triviality would be out of place in his
conversation. You must remember his constant anxiety about that
unfortunate young man his brother.

C(CILY.  I wish 8ncle  -ack would allow that unfortunate young man, his
brother, to come down here sometimes. We might have a good influence
over him, Miss Prism. I am sure you certainly would. You know *erman,
and geology, and things of that kind influence a man very much. [CECILY
begins to write in her diary.]

MISS PRISM. [Shaking her head.] I do not think that even I could produce
any effect on a character that according to his own brother's admission is
irretrievably weak and vacillating. Indeed I am not sure that I would desire
to reclaim him. I am not in favour of this modern mania for turning bad
people into good people at a moment's notice. As a man sows so let him
reap. You must put away your diary, Cecily. I really don't see why you
should keep a diary at all.

C(CILY.  I keep a diary in order to enter the wonderful secrets of my life. If
I didn't write them down, I should probably forget all about them.

MISS PRISM. Memory, my dear Cecily, is the diary that we all carry about
with us.

C(CILY.  Yes, but it usually chronicles the things that have never happened,
and couldn't possibly have happened. I believe that Memory is responsible
for nearly all the three-volume novels that Mudie sends us.

MISS PRISM. 'o   not speak slightingly of the three-volume novel, Cecily. I
wrote one myself in earlier days.

C(CILY.  'id   you really, Miss Prism? +ow wonderfully  clever you are! I
hope it did not end happily? I don't like novels that end happily. They
depress me so much.

33
MISS PRISM. The good ended happily, and the bad unhappily. That is what
)iction  means.

C(CILY.  I suppose so. But it seems very unfair. And was your novel ever
published?

MISS PRISM. Alas! no. The manuscript unfortunately was abandoned.
[CECILY starts.] I use the word in the sense of lost or mislaid. To your
work, child, these speculations are profitless.

C(CILY.  [SPiling.]  But I  see dear 'r. Chasuble coming up through the
garden.

MISS PRISM. [Rising and advancing.] 'r.   Chasuble! This is indeed a
pleasure.

[Enter CANON CHAS8BLE.]

C+AS8BL(.    And how are we this morning? Miss Prism, you are, I trust,
well?

C(CILY.  Miss Prism has just been complaining of a slight headache. I think
it would do her so much good to have a short stroll with you in the Park, 'r.
Chasuble.

MISS PRISM. Cecily, I have not mentioned anything about a headache.

C(CILY.  1o, dear Miss Prism, I know that, but I felt instinctively  that you
had a headache. Indeed I was thinking about that, and not about my *erman
lesson, when the Rector came in.

C+AS8BL(.    I hope, Cecily, you are not inattentive.

C(CILY.  2h, I  am afraid I am.

C+AS8BL(.    That is strange. Were I fortunate enough to be Miss Prism's
pupil, I would hang upon her lips. [MISS PRISM glares.] I spoke
metaphorically. – My metaphor was drawn from bees. Ahem! Mr.
Worthing, I suppose, has not returned from town yet?

34
MISS PRISM. We do not expect him till Monday afternoon.

C+AS8BL(.    Ah yes, he usually likes to spend his Sunday in London. +e
is not one of those whose sole aim is enjoyment, as, by all accounts, that
unfortunate young man his brother seems to be. But I must not disturb
(geria and her pupil any longer.

MISS PRISM. (geria? My  name is Lætitia, 'octor.

C+AS8BL(.    [Bowing.]  A classical allusion merely, drawn from the Pagan
authors. I shall see you both no doubt at (vensong?

MISS PRISM. I think, dear 'octor,  I  will  have a stroll with you. I find I
have a headache after all, and a walk might do it good.

C+AS8BL(.    With pleasure, Miss Prism, with pleasure. We might go as far
as the schools and back.

MISS PRISM. That would be delightful. Cecily, you will  read your Political
(conomy in  my absence. The chapter on the )all of the Rupee you may
omit. It is somewhat too sensational. (ven these metallic problems have
their melodramatic side.

[Goes down the garden with DR. CHAS8BLE.]

C(CILY.  [Picks uS books and throws theP back on table.] +orrid Political
(conomy!  +orrid  *eography!  +orrid,  horrid *erman!

[Enter MERRIMAN with a card on a salver.]

M(RRIMA1.    Mr. (rnest  Worthing has just driven over from the station.
+e has brought his luggage with him.

C(CILY.  [Takes the card and reads it.] ‘Mr. (rnest Worthing, B. 4, The
Albany, W.’ 8ncle -ack's brother! 'id   you tell  him Mr. Worthing was in
town?

M(RRIMA1.    Yes, Miss. +e seemed very much disappointed. I mentioned
that you and Miss Prism were in the garden. +e said he was anxious to

35
speak to you privately for a moment.

C(CILY.  Ask Mr. (rnest  Worthing to come here. I suppose you had better
talk to the housekeeper about a room for him.

M(RRIMA1.    Yes, Miss. [MERRIMAN goes off.]

C(CILY.  I have never met any really wicked person before. I feel rather
frightened. I am so afraid he will look just like every one else.

[Enter ALGERNON, very gay and debonair.] +e does!

AL*(R121.      [Raising his hat.] You are my little cousin Cecily, I'm sure.

C(CILY.  You are under some strange mistake. I am not little. In fact, I
believe I am more than usually tall for my age. [ALGERNON is rather
taken aback.] But I am your cousin Cecily. You, I see from your card, are
8ncle -ack's brother, my cousin (rnest, my wicked cousin (rnest.

AL*(R121.      2h!  I am not really wicked at all, cousin Cecily. You mustn't
think that I am wicked.

C(CILY.  If you are not, then you have certainly been deceiving us all in a
very inexcusable manner. I hope you have not been leading a double life,
pretending to be wicked and being really good all the time. That would be
hypocrisy.

AL*(R121.      [Looks at her in aPazePent.] 2h!  2f  course I have been
rather reckless.

C(CILY.  I am glad to hear it.

AL*(R121.      In fact, now you mention the subject, I have been very bad in
my own small way.

C(CILY.  I don't think you should be so proud of that, though I am sure it
must have been very pleasant.

AL*(R121.      It is much pleasanter being here with you.

36
C(CILY.  I can't understand how you are here at all. 8ncle -ack won't be
back till Monday afternoon.

AL*(R121.      That is a great disappointment. I am obliged to go up by the
first train on Monday morning. I have a business appointment that I am
anxious… to miss?

C(CILY.  Couldn't you miss it anywhere but in London?

AL*(R121.      1o:  the appointment is in London.

C(CILY.  Well, I know, of course, how important it is not to keep a business
engagement, if one wants to retain any sense of the beauty of life, but still I
think you had better wait till 8ncle -ack arrives. I know he wants to speak
to you about your emigrating.

AL*(R121.      About my what?

C(CILY.  Your emigrating. +e has gone up to buy your outfit.

AL*(R121.      I certainly wouldn't let  -ack buy my outfit. +e has no taste in
neckties at all.

C(CILY.  I don't think you will  require neckties. 8ncle -ack is sending you
to Australia.

AL*(R121.      Australia! I'd  sooner die.

C(CILY.  Well, he said at dinner on Wednesday night, that you would have
to choose between this world, the next world, and Australia.

AL*(R121.      2h,  well! The accounts I have received of Australia and the
next world, are not particularly encouraging. This world is good enough for
me, cousin Cecily.

C(CILY.  Yes, but are you good enough for it?

AL*(R121.      I'm afraid I'm not that. That is why I want you to reform me.
You might make that your mission, if you don't mind, cousin Cecily.

37
C(CILY.  I'm afraid I've no time, this afternoon.

AL*(R121.      Well, would you mind my reforming  myself this afternoon?

C(CILY.  It is rather 4uixotic  of you. But I think you should try.

AL*(R121.      I will.  I feel better already.

C(CILY.  You are looking a little worse.

AL*(R121.      That is because I am hungry.

C(CILY.  +ow thoughtless of me. I should have remembered that when one
is going to lead an entirely new life, one requires regular and wholesome
meals. Won't you come in?

AL*(R121.      Thank you. Might I  have a buttonhole first? I never have any
appetite unless I have a buttonhole first.

C(CILY.  A Maréchal 1iel? [Picks  uS scissors.]

AL*(R121.      1o,  I'd sooner have a pink rose.

C(CILY.  Why? [Cuts a flower.]

AL*(R121.      Because you are like a pink rose, Cousin Cecily.

C(CILY.  I don't think it can be right for you to talk to me like that. Miss
Prism never says such things to me.

AL*(R121.      Then Miss Prism is a short-sighted old lady. [CECILY Suts
the rose in his buttonhole.] You are the prettiest girl I ever saw.

C(CILY.  Miss Prism says that all good looks are a snare.

AL*(R121.      They are a snare that every sensible man would like to be
caught in.

38
C(CILY.  2h, I  don't think I would care to catch a sensible man. I shouldn't
know what to talk to him about.

[They Sass into the house. MISS PRISM and DR. CHAS8BLE return.]

MISS PRISM. You are too much alone, dear 'r. Chasuble. You should get
married. A misanthrope I can understand – a womanthrope, never!

C+AS8BL(.    [With a scholar's shudder.] Believe me, I do not deserve so
neologistic a phrase. The precept as well as the practice of the Primitive
Church was distinctly against matrimony.

MISS PRISM. [Sententiously.] That is obviously the reason why the
Primitive Church has not lasted up to the present day. And you do not seem
to realise, dear 'octor, that by persistently remaining single, a man converts
himself into a permanent public temptation. Men should be more careful;
this very celibacy leads weaker vessels astray.

C+AS8BL(.    But is a man not equally attractive when married?

MISS PRISM. 1o married man is ever attractive except to his wife.

C+AS8BL(.    And often, I've been told, not even to her.

MISS PRISM. That depends on the intellectual sympathies of the woman.
Maturity can always be depended on. Ripeness can be trusted. Young
women are green. [DR. CHAS8BLE starts.] I spoke horticulturally. My
metaphor was drawn from fruits. But where is Cecily?

C+AS8BL(.    Perhaps she followed us to the schools.

[Enter JACK slowly froP the back of the garden. He is dressed in the
deeSest Pourning, with craSe hatband and black gloves.]

MISS PRISM. Mr. Worthing!

C+AS8BL(.    Mr. Worthing?

39
MISS PRISM. This is indeed a surprise. We did not look for you till
Monday afternoon.

-AC..   [Shakes MISS PRISM'S hand in a tragic Panner.] I have returned
sooner than I expected. 'r. Chasuble, I hope you are well?

C+AS8BL(.    'ear  Mr. Worthing, I  trust this garb of woe does not betoken
some terrible calamity?

-AC..   My brother.

MISS PRISM. More shameful debts and extravagance?

C+AS8BL(.    Still leading his life of pleasure?

-AC..   [Shaking his head.] 'ead!

C+AS8BL(.    Your brother (rnest dead?

-AC..   4uite  dead.

MISS PRISM. What a lesson for him! I trust he will profit by it.

C+AS8BL(.    Mr. Worthing, I offer you my sincere condolence. You have
at least the consolation of knowing that you were always the most generous
and forgiving of brothers.

-AC..   Poor (rnest! +e  had many faults, but it is a sad, sad blow.

C+AS8BL(.    9ery sad indeed. Were you with him at the end?

-AC..   1o.  +e died abroad; in Paris, in fact. I had a telegram last night from
the manager of the *rand +otel.

C+AS8BL(.    Was the cause of death mentioned?

-AC..   A severe chill, it seems.

MISS PRISM. As a man sows, so shall he reap.

40
C+AS8BL(.    [Raising his hand.] Charity, dear Miss Prism, charity! 1one
of us are perfect. I myself am peculiarly susceptible to draughts. Will the
interment take place here?

-AC..   1o.  +e seems to have expressed a desire to be buried in Paris.

C+AS8BL(.    In Paris! [Shakes his head.] I fear that hardly points to any
very serious state of mind at the last. You would no doubt wish me to make
some slight allusion to this tragic domestic affliction next Sunday. [JACK
Sresses his hand convulsively.] My sermon on the meaning of the manna in
the wilderness can be adapted to almost any occasion, joyful, or, as in the
present case, distressing. [All sigh.] I have preached it at harvest
celebrations, christenings, confirmations, on days of humiliation and festal
days. The last time I delivered it was in the Cathedral, as a charity sermon
on behalf of the Society for the Prevention of 'iscontent among the 8pper
2rders. The Bishop, who was present, was much struck by some of the
analogies I drew.

-AC..   Ah! that reminds me, you mentioned christenings I think, 'r.
Chasuble? I suppose you know how to christen all right? [DR. CHAS8BLE
looks astounded.] I mean, of course, you are continually christening, aren't
you?

MISS PRISM. It is, I regret to say, one of the Rector's most constant duties
in this parish. I have often spoken to the poorer classes on the subject. But
they don't seem to know what thrift is.

C+AS8BL(.    But is there any particular infant in whom you are interested,
Mr. Worthing? Your brother was, I believe, unmarried, was he not?

-AC..   2h  yes.

MISS PRISM. [Bitterly.]  People who live entirely for pleasure usually are.

-AC..   But it is not for any child, dear 'octor.  I  am very fond of children.
1o! the fact is, I would like  to be christened myself, this afternoon, if you
have nothing better to do.

41
C+AS8BL(.    But surely, Mr. Worthing, you have been christened already?

-AC..   I don't remember anything about it.

C+AS8BL(.    But have you any grave doubts on the subject?

-AC..   I certainly intend to have. 2f course I don't know if the thing would
bother you in any way, or if you think I am a little too old now.

C+AS8BL(.    1ot at all. The sprinkling, and, indeed, the immersion of
adults is a perfectly canonical practice.

-AC..   Immersion!

C+AS8BL(.    You need have no apprehensions. Sprinkling is all that is
necessary, or indeed I think advisable. 2ur weather is so changeable. At
what hour would you wish the ceremony performed?

-AC..   2h,  I might trot round about five if that would suit you.

C+AS8BL(.    Perfectly, perfectly! In fact I have two similar ceremonies to
perform at that time. A case of twins that occurred recently in one of the
outlying cottages on your own estate. Poor -enkins the carter, a most hard-
working man.

-AC..   2h!  I don't see much fun in being christened along with other
babies. It would be childish. Would half-past five do?

C+AS8BL(.    Admirably!  Admirably!  [Takes out watch.] And now, dear
Mr. Worthing, I will  not intrude any longer into a house of sorrow. I would
merely beg you not to be too much bowed down by grief. What seem to us
bitter trials are often blessings in disguise.

MISS PRISM. This seems to me a blessing of an extremely obvious kind.

[Enter CECILY froP the house.]

C(CILY.  8ncle -ack!  2h, I am pleased to see you back. But what horrid
clothes you have got on! 'o go and change them.

42
MISS PRISM. Cecily!

C+AS8BL(.    My child!  my child! [CECILY  goes towards JACK; he kisses
her brow in a Pelancholy Panner.]

C(CILY.  What is the matter, 8ncle -ack? 'o  look happy! You look as if
you had toothache, and I have got such a surprise for you. Who do you
think is in the dining-room? Your brother!

-AC..   Who?

C(CILY.  Your brother (rnest. +e arrived about half an hour ago.

-AC..   What nonsense! I haven't got a brother.

C(CILY.  2h, don't say that. +owever badly he may have behaved to you in
the past he is still your brother. You couldn't be so heartless as to disown
him. I'll tell  him to come out. And you will shake hands with him, won't
you, 8ncle -ack? [Runs back into the house.]

C+AS8BL(.    These are very joyful tidings.

MISS PRISM. After we had all been resigned to his loss, his sudden return
seems to me peculiarly distressing.

-AC..   My brother is in the dining-room? I don't know what it all means. I
think it is perfectly absurd.

[Enter ALGERNON and CECILY hand in hand. They coPe slowly uS to
JACK.]

-AC..   *ood  heavens! [Motions ALGERNON away.]

AL*(R121.      Brother -ohn, I have come down from town to tell you that I
am very sorry for all the trouble I have given you, and that I intend to lead a
better life in the future. [JACK glares at hiP and does not take his hand.]

C(CILY.  8ncle -ack, you are not going to refuse your own brother's hand?

43
-AC..   1othing  will  induce me to take his hand. I think his coming down
here disgraceful. +e knows perfectly well why.

C(CILY.  8ncle -ack, do be nice. There is some good in every one. (rnest
has just been telling me about his poor invalid friend Mr. Bunbury whom he
goes to visit so often. And surely there must be much good in one who is
kind to an invalid, and leaves the pleasures of London to sit by a bed of
pain.

-AC..   2h!  he has been talking about Bunbury, has he?

C(CILY.  Yes, he has told me all about poor Mr. Bunbury, and his terrible
state of health.

-AC..   Bunbury! Well, I  won't have him talk to you about Bunbury or about
anything else. It is enough to drive one perfectly frantic.

AL*(R121.      2f  course I admit that the faults were all on my side. But I
must say that I think that Brother -ohn's coldness to me is peculiarly
painful. I expected a more enthusiastic welcome, especially considering it is
the first time I have come here.

C(CILY.  8ncle -ack, if  you don't shake hands with (rnest I will never
forgive you.

-AC..   1ever forgive me?

C(CILY.  1ever, never, never!

-AC..   Well, this is the last time I shall ever do it. [Shakes with
ALGERNON and glares.]

C+AS8BL(.    It's pleasant, is it not, to see so perfect a reconciliation? I
think we might leave the two brothers together.

MISS PRISM. Cecily, you will  come with us.

C(CILY.  Certainly, Miss Prism. My little task of reconciliation is over.

44
C+AS8BL(.    You have done a beautiful action to-day, dear child.

MISS PRISM. We must not be premature in our judgments.

C(CILY.  I feel very happy. [They all go off exceSt JACK and
ALGERNON.]

-AC..   You young scoundrel, Algy, you must get out of this place as soon
as possible. I don't allow any Bunburying here.

[Enter MERRIMAN.]

M(RRIMA1.    I have put Mr. (rnest's things in the room next to yours, sir. I
suppose that is all right?

-AC..   What?

M(RRIMA1.    Mr. (rnest's luggage, sir. I have unpacked it and put it in the
room next to your own.

-AC..   +is luggage?

M(RRIMA1.    Yes, sir. Three portmanteaus, a dressing-case, two hat-boxes,
and a large luncheon-basket.

AL*(R121.      I am afraid I can't stay more than a week this time.

-AC..   Merriman, order the dog-cart at once. Mr. (rnest has been suddenly
called back to town.

M(RRIMA1.    Yes, sir. [Goes back into the house.]

AL*(R121.      What a fearful liar you are, -ack. I have not been called back
to town at all.

-AC..   Yes, you have.

AL*(R121.      I haven't heard any one call me.

45
-AC..   Your duty as a gentleman calls you back.

AL*(R121.      My  duty as a gentleman has never interfered with my
pleasures in the smallest degree.

-AC..   I can quite understand that.

AL*(R121.      Well, Cecily is a darling.

-AC..   You are not to talk of Miss Cardew like that. I don't like it.

AL*(R121.      Well, I don't like  your clothes. You look perfectly ridiculous
in them. Why on earth don't you go up and change? It is perfectly childish
to be in deep mourning for a man who is actually staying for a whole week
with you in your house as a guest. I call it grotesque.

-AC..   You are certainly not staying with me for a whole week as a guest or
anything else. You have got to leave… by the four- five train.

AL*(R121.      I certainly won't leave you so long as you are in mourning. It
would be most unfriendly. If I were in mourning you would stay with me, I
suppose. I should think it very unkind if you didn't.

-AC..   Well, will  you go if I change my clothes?

AL*(R121.      Yes, if you are not too long. I never saw anybody take so
long to dress, and with such little result.

-AC..   Well, at any rate, that is better than being always over-dressed as
you are.

AL*(R121.      If  I am occasionally a little over-dressed, I make up for it by
being always immensely over-educated.

-AC..   Your vanity is ridiculous, your conduct an outrage, and your
presence in my garden utterly absurd. +owever, you have got to catch the
four-five, and I hope you will have a pleasant journey back to town. This
Bunburying, as you call it, has not been a great success for you.

46
[Goes into the house.]

AL*(R121.      I think  it has been a great success. I'm in love with Cecily,
and that is everything.

[Enter CECILY at the back of the garden. She Sicks uS the can and begins
to water the flowers.] But I must see her before I go, and make
arrangements for another Bunbury. Ah, there she is.

C(CILY.  2h, I  merely came back to water the roses. I thought you were
with 8ncle -ack.

AL*(R121.      +e's gone to order the dog-cart for me.

C(CILY.  2h, is he going to take you for a nice drive?

AL*(R121.      +e's going to send me away.

C(CILY.  Then have we got to part?

AL*(R121.      I am afraid so. It's a very painful parting.

C(CILY.  It is always painful to part from people whom one has known for
a very brief space of time. The absence of old friends one can endure with
equanimity. But even a momentary separation from anyone to whom one
has just been introduced is almost unbearable.

AL*(R121.      Thank you.

[Enter MERRIMAN.]

M(RRIMA1.    The dog-cart is at the door, sir. [ALGERNON looks
aSSealingly at CECILY.]

C(CILY.  It can wait, Merriman for… five  minutes.

M(RRIMA1.    Yes, Miss. [Exit MERRIMAN.]

47
AL*(R121.    I  hope, Cecily, I shall not offend you if I state quite frankly
and openly that you seem to me to be in every way the visible
personification of absolute perfection.

C(CILY. I think your frankness does you great credit, (rnest. If you will
allow me, I will copy your remarks into my diary. [Goes over to table and
begins writing in diary.]

AL*(R121.    'o   you really keep a diary? I'd give anything to look at it.
May I?

C(CILY. 2h no. [Puts her hand over it.] You see, it is simply a very young
girl's record of her own thoughts and impressions, and consequently meant
for publication. When it appears in volume form I hope you will order a
copy. But pray, (rnest, don't stop. I delight in taking down from dictation. I
have reached ‘absolute perfection’. You can go on. I am quite ready for
more.

AL*(R121.    [SoPewhat taken aback.] Ahem! Ahem!

C(CILY. 2h, don't cough, (rnest. When one is dictating one should speak
fluently and not cough. Besides, I don't know how to spell a cough. [Writes
as ALGERNON sSeaks.]

AL*(R121.    [SSeaking very raSidly.] Cecily, ever since I first looked
upon your wonderful and incomparable beauty, I have dared to love you
wildly, passionately, devotedly, hopelessly.

C(CILY. I don't think that you should tell me that you love me wildly,
passionately, devotedly, hopelessly. +opelessly doesn't seem to make much
sense, does it?

AL*(R121.    Cecily!

[Enter MERRIMAN.]

M(RRIMA1.  The dog-cart is waiting, sir.

AL*(R121.    Tell it to come round next week, at the same hour.

48
M(RRIMA1.    [Looks at CECILY, who Pakes no sign.] Yes, sir.

[MERRIMAN retires.]

C(CILY.  8ncle -ack would be very much annoyed if he knew you were
staying on till next week, at the same hour.

AL*(R121.      2h,  I don't care about -ack. I don't care for anybody in the
whole world but you. I love you, Cecily. You will  marry me, won't you?

C(CILY.  You silly boy! 2f  course. Why, we have been engaged for the last
three months.

AL*(R121.      )or  the last three months?

C(CILY.  Yes, it will be exactly three months on Thursday.

AL*(R121.      But how did we become engaged?

C(CILY.  Well, ever since dear 8ncle -ack first confessed to us that he had a
younger brother who was very wicked and bad, you of course have formed
the chief topic of conversation between myself and Miss Prism. And of
course a man who is much talked about is always very attractive. 2ne feels
there must be something in him, after all. I daresay it was foolish of me, but
I fell in love with  you, (rnest.

AL*(R121.      'arling!    And when was the engagement actually settled?

C(CILY.  2n the 14th of )ebruary last. Worn out by your entire ignorance
of my existence, I determined to end the matter one way or the other, and
after a long struggle with myself I accepted you under this dear old tree
here. The next day I bought this little ring in your name, and this is the little
bangle with the true lover's knot I promised you always to wear.

AL*(R121.      'id   I  give you this? It's very pretty, isn't it?

C(CILY.  Yes, you've wonderfully good taste, (rnest. It's the excuse I've
always given for your leading such a bad life. And this is the box in which I

49
keep all your dear letters. [Kneels at table, oSens box, and Sroduces letters
tied uS with blue ribbon.]

AL*(R121.      My  letters! But, my own sweet Cecily, I have never written
you any letters.

C(CILY.  You need hardly remind me of that, (rnest. I remember only too
well that I was forced to write your letters for you. I wrote always three
times a week, and sometimes oftener.

AL*(R121.      2h,  do let me read them, Cecily?

C(CILY.  2h, I  couldn't possibly. They would make you far too conceited.
[ReSlaces box.] The three you wrote me after I had broken off the
engagement are so beautiful, and so badly spelled, that even now I can
hardly read them without crying a little.

AL*(R121.      But was our engagement ever broken off?

C(CILY.  2f  course it was. 2n the nd of last March. You can see the entry
if you like. [Shows diary.] ‘To-day I  broke off my engagement with (rnest.
I feel it is better to do so. The weather still continues charming.’

AL*(R121.      But why on earth did you break it of? What had I done? I
had done nothing at all. Cecily, I am very much hurt indeed to hear you
broke it off. Particularly when the weather was so charming.

C(CILY.  It would hardly have been a really serious engagement if it hadn't
been broken off at least once. But I forgave you before the week was out.

AL*(R121.      [Crossing to her, and kneeling.] What a perfect angel you
are, Cecily.

C(CILY.  You dear romantic boy. [He kisses her, she Suts her fingers
through his hair.] I hope your hair curls naturally, does it?

AL*(R121.      Yes, darling, with a little help from others.

C(CILY.  I am so glad.

50
AL*(R121.      You'll never break off our engagement again, Cecily?

C(CILY.  I don't think I could break it off now that I have actually met you.
Besides, of course, there is the question of your name.

AL*(R121.      Yes, of course. [Nervously.]

C(CILY.  You must not laugh at me, darling, but it had always been a girlish
dream of mine to love some one whose name was (rnest. [ALGERNON
rises, CECILY also.] There is something in that name that seems to inspire
absolute confidence. I pity any poor married woman whose husband is not
called (rnest.

AL*(R121.      But, my dear child, do you mean to say you could not love
me if I had some other name?

C(CILY.  But what name?

AL*(R121.      2h,  any name you like – Algernon – for instance…

C(CILY.  But I don't like the name of Algernon.

AL*(R121.      Well, my own dear, sweet, loving little darling, I really can't
see why you should object to the name of Algernon. It is not at all a bad
name. In fact, it is rather an aristocratic name. +alf of the chaps who get
into the Bankruptcy Court are called Algernon. But seriously, Cecily…
[Moving to her]  … if my name was Algy, couldn't you love me?

C(CILY.  [Rising.] I  might respect you, (rnest, I might admire your
character, but I fear that I should not be able to give you my undivided
attention.

AL*(R121.      Ahem! Cecily!  [Picking uS hat.] Your Rector here is, I
suppose, thoroughly experienced in the practice of all the rites and
ceremonials of the Church?

C(CILY.  2h, yes. 'r.   Chasuble is a most learned man. +e has never written
a single book, so you can imagine how much he knows.

51
AL*(R121.      I must see him at once on a most important christening – I
mean on most important business.

C(CILY.  2h!

AL*(R121.      I shan't be away more than half an hour.

C(CILY.  Considering that we have been engaged since )ebruary the 14th,
and that I only met you to-day for the first time, I think it is rather hard that
you should leave me for so long a period as half an hour. Couldn't you make
it twenty minutes?

AL*(R121.      I'll  be back in no time.

[Kisses her and rushes down the garden.]

C(CILY.  What an impetuous boy he is! I like his hair so much. I must enter
his proposal in my diary.

[Enter MERRIMAN.]

M(RRIMA1.    A Miss )airfax  has just called to see Mr. Worthing. 2n very
important business, Miss )airfax states.

C(CILY.  Isn't Mr. Worthing in his library?

M(RRIMA1.    Mr. Worthing went over in the direction of the Rectory some
time ago.

C(CILY.  Pray ask the lady to come out here; Mr. Worthing is sure to be
back soon. And you can bring tea.

M(RRIMA1.    Yes, Miss. [Goes out.]

C(CILY.  Miss )airfax!  I suppose one of the many good elderly women who
are associated with 8ncle -ack in some of his philanthropic work in
London. I don't quite like women who are interested in philanthropic work.
I think it is so forward of them.

52
[Enter MERRIMAN.]

M(RRIMA1.    Miss )airfax.

[Enter GWENDOLEN.]

[Exit MERRIMAN.]

C(CILY.  [Advancing to Peet her.] Pray let me introduce myself to you. My
name is Cecily Cardew.

*W(1'2L(1.         Cecily Cardew? [Moving to her and shaking hands.] What
a very sweet name! Something tells me that we are going to be great
friends. I like you already more than I can say. My first impressions of
people are never wrong.

C(CILY.  +ow nice of you to like  me so much after we have known each
other such a comparatively short time. Pray sit down.

*W(1'2L(1.         [Still  standing uS.] I may call you Cecily, may I not?

C(CILY.  With pleasure!

*W(1'2L(1.         And you will  always call me *wendolen,  won't you?

C(CILY.  If you wish.

*W(1'2L(1.         Then that is all quite settled, is it not?

C(CILY.  I hope so. [A Sause. They both sit down together.]

*W(1'2L(1.         Perhaps this might be a favourable opportunity for my
mentioning who I am. My father is Lord Bracknell. You have never heard
of papa, I suppose?

C(CILY.  I don't think so.

*W(1'2L(1.         2utside the family  circle, papa, I am glad to say, is entirely
unknown. I think that is quite as it should be. The home seems to me to be

53
the proper sphere for the man. And certainly once a man begins to neglect
his domestic duties he becomes painfully effeminate, does he not? And I
don't like that. It makes men so very attractive. Cecily, mamma, whose
views on education are remarkably strict, has brought me up to be
extremely short-sighted; it is part of her system; so do you mind my looking
at you through my glasses?

C(CILY.  2h!  not at all, *wendolen. I  am very fond of being looked at.

*W(1'2L(1.         [After  exaPining CECILY carefully through a lorgnette.]
You are here on a short visit, I suppose.

C(CILY.  2h no! I  live here.

*W(1'2L(1.         [Severely.] Really? Your mother, no doubt, or some female
relative of advanced years, resides here also?

C(CILY.  2h no! I  have no mother, nor, in fact, any relations.

*W(1'2L(1.         Indeed?

C(CILY.  My dear guardian, with the assistance of Miss Prism, has the
arduous task of looking after me.

*W(1'2L(1.         Your guardian?

C(CILY.  Yes, I am Mr. Worthing's ward.

*W(1'2L(1.         2h!  It is strange he never mentioned to me that he had a
ward. +ow secretive of him! +e grows more interesting hourly. I am not
sure, however, that the news inspires me with feelings of unmixed delight.
[Rising and going to her.] I am very fond of you, Cecily; I have liked you
ever since I met you! But I am bound to state that now that I know that you
are Mr. Worthing's ward, I cannot help expressing a wish you were – well,
just a little older than you seem to be – and not quite so very alluring in
appearance. In fact, if I may speak candidly –

C(CILY.  Pray do! I think that whenever one has anything unpleasant to say,
one should always be quite candid.

54
*W(1'2L(1.         Well, to speak with perfect candour, Cecily, I wish that
you were fully forty-two,  and more than usually plain for your age. (rnest
has a strong upright nature. +e is the very soul of truth and honour.
'isloyalty   would be as impossible to him as deception. But even men of the
noblest possible moral character are extremely susceptible to the influence
of the physical charms of others. Modern, no less than Ancient +istory,
supplies us with many most painful examples of what I refer to. If it were
not so, indeed, +istory would be quite unreadable.

C(CILY.  I beg your pardon, *wendolen, did you say (rnest?

*W(1'2L(1.         Yes.

C(CILY.  2h, but it is not Mr.  (rnest Worthing who is my guardian. It is his
brother – his elder brother.

*W(1'2L(1.         [Sitting  down again.] (rnest never mentioned to me that
he had a brother.

C(CILY.  I am sorry to say they have not been on good terms for a long
time.

*W(1'2L(1.         Ah!  that accounts for it. And now that I think of it I have
never heard any man mention his brother. The subject seems distasteful to
most men. Cecily, you have lifted a load from my mind. I was growing
almost anxious. It would have been terrible if any cloud had come across a
friendship like ours, would it not? 2f  course you are quite, quite sure that it
is not Mr. (rnest Worthing who is your guardian?

C(CILY.  4uite sure. [A Sause.] In fact, I am going to be his.

*W(1'2L(1.         [InTuiringly.]   I beg your pardon?

C(CILY.  [Rather shy and confidingly.] 'earest  *wendolen,  there is no
reason why I should make a secret of it to you. 2ur little county newspaper
is sure to chronicle the fact next week. Mr. (rnest Worthing and I are
engaged to be married.

55
*W(1'2L(1.       [4uite  Solitely, rising.] My darling Cecily, I think there
must be some slight error. Mr. (rnest Worthing is engaged to me. The
announcement will appear in the Morning Post on Saturday at the latest.

C(CILY. [Very Solitely, rising.] I am afraid you must be under some
misconception. (rnest proposed to me exactly ten minutes ago. [Shows
diary.]

*W(1'2L(1.       [ExaPines diary through her lorgnettte carefully.] It is
certainly very curious, for he asked me to be his wife yesterday afternoon at
.0. If you would care to verify the incident, pray do so. [Produces diary
of her own.] I never travel without my diary. 2ne should always have
something sensational to read in the train. I am so sorry, dear Cecily, if it is
any disappointment to you, but I am afraid I have the prior claim.

C(CILY. It would distress me more than I can tell you, dear *wendolen, if
it caused you any mental or physical anguish, but I feel bound to point out
that since (rnest proposed to you he clearly has changed his mind.

*W(1'2L(1.       [Meditatively.] If the poor fellow has been entrapped into
any foolish promise I shall consider it my duty to rescue him at once, and
with a firm hand.

C(CILY. [Thoughtfully and sadly.] Whatever unfortunate entanglement my
dear boy may have got into, I will never reproach him with it after we are
married.

*W(1'2L(1.       'o   you allude to me, Miss Cardew, as an entanglement?
You are presumptuous. 2n an occasion of this kind it becomes more than a
moral duty to speak one's mind. It becomes a pleasure.

C(CILY. 'o  you suggest, Miss )airfax, that I entrapped (rnest into an
engagement? +ow dare you? This is no time for wearing the shallow mask
of manners. When I see a spade I call it a spade.

*W(1'2L(1.       [Satirically.] I am glad to say that I have never seen a
spade. It is obvious that our social spheres have been widely different.

56
[Enter MERRIMAN, followed by the footPan. He carries a salver, table
cloth, and Slate stand. CECILY is about to retort. The Sresence of the
servants exercises a restraining influence, under which both girls chafe.]

M(RRIMA1.    Shall I lay tea here as usual, Miss?

C(CILY.  [Sternly, in a calP voice.] Yes, as usual. [MERRIMAN begins to
clear table and lay cloth. A long Sause. CECILY and GWENDOLEN glare
at each other.]

*W(1'2L(1.         Are there many interesting walks in the vicinity, Miss
Cardew?

C(CILY.  2h!  yes! a great many. )rom the top of one of the hills quite close
one can see five counties.

*W(1'2L(1.         )ive  counties! I don't think I should like that; I hate
crowds.

C(CILY.  [Sweetly.] I suppose that is why you live in town?
[GWENDOLEN bites her liS, and beats her foot nervously with her
Sarasol.]

*W(1'2L(1.         [Looking  round.] 4uite  a well-kept garden this is, Miss
Cardew.

C(CILY.  So glad you like it, Miss )airfax.

*W(1'2L(1.         I had no idea there were any flowers in the country.

C(CILY.  2h, flowers are as common here, Miss )airfax, as people are in
London.

*W(1'2L(1.         Personally I cannot understand how anybody manages to
exist in the country, if anybody who is anybody does. The country always
bores me to death.

C(CILY.  Ah! This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression, is it
not? I believe the aristocracy are suffering very much from it just at present.

57
It is almost an epidemic amongst them, I have been told. May I offer you
some tea, Miss )airfax?

*W(1'2L(1.         [With elaborate Soliteness.] Thank you. [Aside.]
'etestable girl!  But I  require tea!

C(CILY.  [Sweetly.] Sugar?

*W(1'2L(1.         [SuSerciliously.] 1o,  thank you. Sugar is not fashionable
any more. [CECILY looks angrily at her, takes uS the tongs and Suts four
luPSs of sugar into the cuS.]

C(CILY.  [Severely.] Cake or bread and butter?

*W(1'2L(1.         [In  a bored Panner.] Bread and butter, please. Cake is
rarely seen at the best houses nowadays.

C(CILY.  [Cuts a very large slice of cake, and Suts it on the tray.] +and that
to Miss )airfax.

[MERRIMAN does so, and goes out with footPan. GWENDOLEN drinks
the tea and Pakes a griPace. Puts down cuS at once, reaches out her hand
to the bread and butter, looks at it, and finds it is cake. Rises in
indignation.]

*W(1'2L(1.         You have filled my tea with lumps of sugar, and though I
asked most distinctly for bread and butter, you have given me cake. I am
known for the gentleness of my disposition, and the extraordinary
sweetness of my nature, but I warn you, Miss Cardew, you may go too far.

C(CILY.  [Rising.] To save my poor, innocent, trusting boy from the
machinations of any other girl there are no lengths to which I would not go.

*W(1'2L(1.         )rom  the moment I saw you I distrusted you. I felt that
you were false and deceitful. I am never deceived in such matters. My first
impressions of people are invariably right.

C(CILY.  It seems to me, Miss )airfax, that I am trespassing on your
valuable time. 1o doubt you have many other calls of a similar character to

58
make in the neighbourhood.

[Enter JACK.]

*W(1'2L(1.       [Catching sight of hiP.] (rnest! My own (rnest!

-AC..  *wendolen! 'arling!   [Offers to kiss her.]

*W(1'2L(1.       [Draws back.] A moment! May I ask if you are engaged to
be married to this young lady? [Points to CECILY.]

-AC..  [Laughing.] To dear little Cecily! 2f course not! What could have
put such an idea into your pretty little head?

*W(1'2L(1.       Thank you. You may! [Offers her cheek.]

C(CILY. [Very sweetly.] I knew there must be some misunderstanding,
Miss )airfax. The gentleman whose arm is at present round your waist is
my guardian, Mr. -ohn Worthing.

*W(1'2L(1.       I beg your pardon?

C(CILY. This is 8ncle -ack.

*W(1'2L(1.       [Receding.] -ack! 2h!

[Enter ALGERNON.]

C(CILY. +ere is (rnest.

AL*(R121.    [Goes straight over to CECILY without noticing any one
else.] My own love! [Offers to kiss her.]

C(CILY. [Drawing back.] A moment, (rnest! May I ask you – are you
engaged to be married to this young lady?

AL*(R121.    [Looking round.] To what young lady? *ood heavens!
*wendolen!

59
C(CILY.  Yes! to good heavens, *wendolen, I mean to *wendolen.

AL*(R121.      [Laughing.]  2f  course not! What could have put such an
idea into your pretty little head?

C(CILY.  Thank you. [Presenting her cheek to be kissed.] You may.
[ALGERNON kisses her.]

*W(1'2L(1.         I felt  there was some slight error, Miss Cardew. The
gentleman who is now embracing you is my cousin, Mr. Algernon
Moncrieff.

C(CILY.  [Breaking away froP ALGERNON.] Algernon Moncrieff!  2h!
[The two girls Pove towards each other and Sut their arPs round each
other's waists Srotection.]

C(CILY.  Are you called Algernon?

AL*(R121.      I cannot deny it.

C(CILY.  2h!

*W(1'2L(1.         Is your name really -ohn?

-AC..   [Standing rather Sroudly.] I could deny it if  I liked. I could deny
anything if I liked. But my  name certainly is -ohn. It has been -ohn for
years.

C(CILY.  [To GWENDOLEN.] A gross deception has been practised on
both of us.

*W(1'2L(1.         My  poor wounded Cecily!

C(CILY.  My sweet wronged *wendolen!

*W(1'2L(1.         [Slowly  and seriously.] You will call me sister, will you
not? [They ePbrace. JACK and ALGERNON groan and walk uS and
down.]

60
C(CILY.  [Rather brightly.]  There is just one question I would like to be
allowed to ask my guardian.

*W(1'2L(1.         An admirable idea! Mr. Worthing, there is just one
question I would like to be permitted to put to you. Where is your brother
(rnest? We are both engaged to be married to your brother (rnest, so it is a
matter of some importance to us to know where your brother (rnest is at
present.

-AC..   [Slowly and hesitatingly.] *wendolen  – Cecily – it is very painful
for me to be forced to speak the truth. It is the first time in my life that I
have ever been reduced to such a painful position, and I am really quite
inexperienced in doing anything of the kind. +owever, I will tell you quite
frankly that I have no brother (rnest. I have no brother at all. I never had a
brother in my life, and I certainly have not the smallest intention of ever
having one in the future.

C(CILY.  [SurSrised.] 1o brother at all?

-AC..   [Cheerily.]  1one!

*W(1'2L(1.         [Severely.] +ad you never a brother of any kind?

-AC..   [Pleasantly.] 1ever. 1ot  even of any kind.

*W(1'2L(1.         I am afraid it is quite clear, Cecily, that neither of us is
engaged to be married to any one.

C(CILY.  It is not a very pleasant position for a young girl suddenly to find
herself in. Is it?

*W(1'2L(1.         Let us go into the house. They will hardly venture to come
after us there.

C(CILY.  1o, men are so cowardly, aren't they?

[They retire into the house with scornful looks.]

-AC..   This ghastly state of things is what you call Bunburying, I suppose?

61
AL*(R121.      Yes, and a perfectly wonderful Bunbury it is. The most
wonderful Bunbury I have ever had in my life.

-AC..   Well, you've no right whatsoever to Bunbury here.

AL*(R121.      That is absurd. 2ne has a right to Bunbury anywhere one
chooses. (very serious Bunburyist knows that.

-AC..   Serious Bunburyist! *ood  heavens!

AL*(R121.      Well, one must be serious about something, if one wants to
have any amusement in life. I happen to be serious about Bunburying. What
on earth you are serious about I haven't got the remotest idea. About
everything, I should fancy. You have such an absolutely trivial nature.

-AC..   Well, the only small satisfaction I have in the whole of this wretched
business is that your friend Bunbury is quite exploded. You won't be able to
run down to the country quite so often as you used to do, dear Algy. And a
very good thing too.

AL*(R121.      Your brother is a little off colour, isn't he, dear -ack? You
won't be able to disappear to London quite so frequently as your wicked
custom was. And not a bad thing either.

-AC..   As for your conduct towards Miss Cardew, I must say that your
taking in a sweet, simple, innocent girl like that is quite inexcusable. To say
nothing of the fact that she is my ward.

AL*(R121.      I can see no possible defence at all for your deceiving a
brilliant, clever, thoroughly experienced young lady like Miss )airfax. To
say nothing of the fact that she is my cousin.

-AC..   I wanted to be engaged to *wendolen, that is all. I love her.

AL*(R121.      Well, I simply  wanted to be engaged to Cecily. I adore her.

-AC..   There is certainly no chance of your marrying Miss Cardew.

62
AL*(R121.    I  don't think there is much likelihood, -ack, of you and Miss
)airfax being united.

-AC..  Well, that is no business of yours.

AL*(R121.    If  it was my business, I wouldn't talk about it. [Begins to eat
Puffins.] It is very vulgar to talk about one's business. 2nly people like
stock-brokers do that, and then merely at dinner parties.

-AC..  +ow can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this
horrible trouble, I can't make out. You seem to me to be perfectly heartless.

AL*(R121.    Well, I can't eat muffins in an agitated manner. The butter
would probably get on my cuffs. 2ne should always eat muffins quite
calmly. It is the only way to eat them.

-AC..  I say it's perfectly heartless your eating muffins at all, under the
circumstances.

AL*(R121.    When I am in trouble, eating is the only thing that consoles
me. Indeed, when I am in really great trouble, as any one who knows me
intimately will tell you, I refuse everything except food and drink. At the
present moment I am eating muffins because I am unhappy. Besides, I am
particularly fond of muffins. [Rising.]

-AC..  [Rising.] Well, that is no reason why you should eat them all in that
greedy way. [Takes Puffins froP ALGERNON.]

AL*(R121.    [Offering tea-cake.] I wish you would have tea-cake instead.
I don't like tea-cake.

-AC..  *ood  heavens! I suppose a man may eat his own muffins in his own
garden.

AL*(R121.    But you have just said it was perfectly heartless to eat
muffins.

-AC..  I said it was perfectly heartless of you, under the circumstances.
That is a very different thing.

63
AL*(R121.      That may be. But the muffins are the same. [He seizes the
Puffin-dish froP  JACK.]

-AC..   Algy, I  wish to goodness you would go.

AL*(R121.      You can't possibly ask me to go without having some dinner.
It's absurd. I never go without my dinner. 1o one ever does, except
vegetarians and people like that. Besides I have just made arrangements
with 'r.   Chasuble to be christened at a quarter to six under the name of
(rnest.

-AC..   My dear fellow, the sooner you give up that nonsense the better. I
made arrangements this morning with 'r. Chasuble to be christened myself
at .0, and I naturally will take the name of (rnest. *wendolen would
wish it. We can't both be christened (rnest. It's absurd. Besides, I have a
perfect right to be christened if I like. There is no evidence at all that I have
ever been christened by anybody. I should think it extremely probable I
never was, and so does 'r. Chasuble. It is entirely different in your case.
You have been christened already.

AL*(R121.      Yes, but I have not been christened for years.

-AC..   Yes, but you have been christened. That is the important thing.

AL*(R121.      4uite  so. So I know my constitution can stand it. If you are
not quite sure about your ever having been christened, I must say I think it
rather dangerous your venturing on it now. It might make you very unwell.
You can hardly have forgotten that some one very closely connected with
you was very nearly carried off this week in Paris by a severe chill.

-AC..   Yes, but you said yourself that a severe chill was not hereditary.

AL*(R121.      It usen't to be, I know – but I daresay it is now. Science is
always making wonderful improvements in things.

-AC..   [Picking uS the Puffin-dish.]  2h, that is nonsense; you are always
talking nonsense.

64
AL*(R121.    -ack, you are at the muffins again! I wish you wouldn't.
There are only two left. [Takes theP.] I told you I was particularly fond of
muffins.

-AC..  But I hate tea-cake.

AL*(R121.    Why on earth then do you allow tea-cake to be served up for
your guests? What ideas you have of hospitality!

-AC..  Algernon! I have already told you to go. I don't want you here. Why
don't you go!

AL*(R121.    I  haven't quite finished my tea yet! and there is still one
muffin left. [JACK groans, and sinks into a chair. ALGERNON still
continues eating.]
 

                                                  Curtain

65
                                                THIRD  ACT
 

SC(1(

Morning-rooP at the Manor House.

[GWENDOLEN and CECILY are at the window, looking out into the
garden.]

*W(1'2L(1.         The fact that they did not follow us at once into the house,
as any one else would have done, seems to me to show that they have some
sense of shame left.

C(CILY.  They have been eating muffins. That looks like repentance.

*W(1'2L(1.         [After  a Sause.] They don't seem to notice us at all.
Couldn't you cough?

C(CILY.  But I haven't got a cough.

*W(1'2L(1.         They're looking at us. What effrontery!

C(CILY.  They're approaching. That's very forward of them.

*W(1'2L(1.         Let us preserve a dignified silence.

C(CILY.  Certainly. It's the only thing to do now. [Enter JACK followed by
ALGERNON. They whistle soPe dreadful SoSular air froP a British
OSera.]

*W(1'2L(1.         This dignified  silence seems to produce an unpleasant
effect.

C(CILY.  A most distasteful one.

*W(1'2L(1.         But we will  not be the first to speak.

66
C(CILY.  Certainly not.

*W(1'2L(1.         Mr. Worthing, I  have something very particular to ask you.
Much depends on your reply.

C(CILY.  *wendolen,  your common sense is invaluable. Mr. Moncrieff,
kindly answer me the following question. Why did you pretend to be my
guardian's brother?

AL*(R121.      In order that I might have an opportunity of meeting you.

C(CILY.  [To GWENDOLEN.] That certainly seems a satisfactory
explanation, does it not?

*W(1'2L(1.         Yes, dear, if you can believe him.

C(CILY.  I don't. But that does not affect the wonderful beauty of his
answer.

*W(1'2L(1.         True. In matters of grave importance, style, not sincerity is
the vital thing. Mr. Worthing, what explanation can you offer to me for
pretending to have a brother? Was it in order that you might have an
opportunity of coming up to town to see me as often as possible?

-AC..   Can you doubt it, Miss )airfax?

*W(1'2L(1.         I have the gravest doubts upon the subject. But I intend to
crush them. This is not the moment for *erman scepticism. [Moving to
CECILY.] Their explanations appear to be quite satisfactory, especially Mr.
Worthing's. That seems to me to have the stamp of truth upon it.

C(CILY.  I am more than content with what Mr. Moncrieff said. +is voice
alone inspires one with absolute credulity.

*W(1'2L(1.         Then you think we should forgive them?

C(CILY.  Yes. I mean no.

67
*W(1'2L(1.       True! I had forgotten. There are principles at stake that one
cannot surrender. Which of us should tell them? The task is not a pleasant
one.

C(CILY. Could we not both speak at the same time?

*W(1'2L(1.       An excellent idea! I nearly always speak at the same time
as other people. Will you take the time from me?

C(CILY. Certainly. [GWENDOLEN beats tiPe with uSlifted finger.]

*W(1'2L(1       and C(CILY [SSeaking together.] Your Christian names
are still an insuperable barrier. That is all!

-AC.  and AL*(R121    [SSeaking together.] 2ur Christian names! Is that
all? But we are going to be christened this afternoon.

*W(1'2L(1.       [To JACK.] )or my sake you are prepared to do this
terrible thing?

-AC..  I am.

C(CILY. [To ALGERNON.] To please me you are ready to face this fearful
ordeal?

AL*(R121.    I  am!

*W(1'2L(1.       +ow  absurd to talk of the equality of the sexes! Where
questions of self-sacrifice are concerned, men are infinitely beyond us.

-AC..  We are. [ClasSs hands with ALGERNON.]

C(CILY. They have moments of physical courage of which we women
know absolutely nothing.

*W(1'2L(1.       [To JACK.] 'arling!

AL*(R121.    [To CECILY.] 'arling!  [They fall into each other's arPs.]

68
[Enter MERRIMAN. When he enters he coughs loudly, seeing the situation.]

M(RRIMA1.    Ahem! Ahem! Lady Bracknell!

-AC..   *ood  heavens!

[Enter LADY BRACKNELL. The couSles seSarate in alarP. Exit
MERRIMAN.]

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      *wendolen!  What does this mean?

*W(1'2L(1.         Merely that I am engaged to be married to Mr. Worthing,
mamma.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Come here. Sit down. Sit down immediately.
+esitation of any kind is a sign of mental decay in the young, of physical
weakness in the old. [Turns to JACK.] Apprised, sir, of my daughter's
sudden flight by her trusty maid, whose confidence I purchased by means of
a small coin, I followed her at once by a luggage train. +er unhappy father
is, I am glad to say, under the impression that she is attending a more than
usually lengthy lecture by the 8niversity (xtension Scheme on the
Influence of a permanent income on Thought. I do not propose to undeceive
him. Indeed I have never undeceived him on any question. I would consider
it wrong. But of course, you will clearly understand that all communication
between yourself and my daughter must cease immediately from this
moment. 2n this point, as indeed on all points, I am firm.

-AC..   I am engaged to be married to *wendolen Lady Bracknell!

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      You are nothing of the kind, sir. And now, as
regards Algernon!… Algernon!

AL*(R121.      Yes, Aunt Augusta.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      May I ask if it is in this house that your invalid
friend Mr. Bunbury resides?

AL*(R121.      [StaPPering.]  2h!  1o!  Bunbury doesn't live here. Bunbury
is somewhere else at present. In fact, Bunbury is dead.

69
LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    'ead!  When did Mr. Bunbury die? +is death must
have been extremely sudden.

AL*(R121.    [Airily.]  2h!  I killed Bunbury this afternoon. I mean poor
Bunbury died this afternoon.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    What did he die of?

AL*(R121.    Bunbury? 2h, he was quite exploded.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    (xploded! Was he the victim of a revolutionary
outrage? I was not aware that Mr. Bunbury was interested in social
legislation. If so, he is well punished for his morbidity.

AL*(R121.    My  dear Aunt Augusta, I mean he was found out! The
doctors found out that Bunbury could not live, that is what I mean – so
Bunbury died.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    +e seems to have had great confidence in the
opinion of his physicians. I am glad, however, that he made up his mind at
the last to some definite course of action, and acted under proper medical
advice. And now that we have finally got rid of this Mr. Bunbury, may I
ask, Mr. Worthing, who is that young person whose hand my nephew
Algernon is now holding in what seems to me a peculiarly unnecessary
manner?

-AC..  That lady is Miss Cecily Cardew, my ward. [LADY BRACKNELL
bows coldly to CECILY.]

AL*(R121.    I  am engaged to be married to Cecily, Aunt Augusta.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    I beg your pardon?

C(CILY. Mr. Moncrieff and I are engaged to be married, Lady Bracknell.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    [With a shiver, crossing to the sofa and sitting
down.] I do not know whether there is anything peculiarly exciting in the
air of this particular part of +ertfordshire, but the number of engagements
that go on seems to me considerably above the proper average that statistics

70
have laid down for our guidance. I think some preliminary inquiry on my
part would not be out of place. Mr. Worthing, is Miss Cardew at all
connected with any of the larger railway stations in London? I merely desire
information. 8ntil  yesterday I had no idea that there were any families or
persons whose origin was a Terminus. [JACK looks Serfectly furious, but
restrains hiPself.]

-AC..   [In  a clear, cold voice.] Miss Cardew is the grand-daughter of the
late Mr. Thomas Cardew of 149 Belgrave Square, S.W.; *ervase Park,
'orking,   Surrey; and the Sporran, )ifeshire, 1.B.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      That sounds not unsatisfactory. Three addresses
always inspire confidence, even in tradesmen. But what proof have I of
their authenticity?

-AC..   I have carefully preserved the Court *uides of the period. They are
open to your inspection, Lady Bracknell.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      [GriPly.]  I  have known strange errors in that
publication.

-AC..   Miss Cardew's family solicitors are Messrs. Markby, Markby, and
Markby.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Markby, Markby, and Markby? A firm of the very
highest position in their profession. Indeed I am told that one of the Mr.
Markby's is occasionally to be seen at dinner parties. So far I am satisfied.

-AC..   [Very irritably.]  +ow  extremely kind of you, Lady Bracknell!  I have
also in my possession, you will be pleased to hear, certificates of Miss
Cardew's birth, baptism, whooping cough, registration, vaccination,
confirmation, and the measles; both the *erman and the (nglish variety.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Ah! A life  crowded with incident, I see; though
perhaps somewhat too exciting for a young girl. I am not myself in favour
of premature experiences. [Rises, looks at her watch.] *wendolen! the time
approaches for our departure. We have not a moment to lose. As a matter of

71
form, Mr. Worthing, I had better ask you if Miss Cardew has any little
fortune?

-AC..   2h!  about a hundred and thirty thousand pounds in the )unds. That
is all. *oodbye, Lady  Bracknell. So pleased to have seen you.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      [Sitting down again.] A  moment, Mr. Worthing. A
hundred and thirty thousand pounds! And in the )unds! Miss Cardew seems
to me a most attractive young lady, now that I look at her. )ew girls of the
present day have any really solid qualities, any of the qualities that last, and
improve with time. We live, I regret to say, in an age of surfaces. [To
CECILY.] Come over here, dear. [CECILY goes across.] Pretty child! your
dress is sadly simple, and your hair seems almost as 1ature might have left
it. But we can soon alter all that. A thoroughly experienced )rench maid
produces a really marvellous result in a very brief space of time. I
remember recommending one to young Lady Lancing, and after three
months her own husband did not know her.

-AC..   And after six months nobody knew her.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      [Glares at JACK for a few PoPents. Then bends,
with a Sractised sPile, to CECILY.] .indly  turn round, sweet child.
[CECILY turns coPSletely round.] 1o, the side view is what I want.
[CECILY Sresents her Srofile.] Yes, quite as I expected. There are distinct
social possibilities in your profile. The two weak points in our age are its
want of principle and its want of profile. The chin a little higher, dear. Style
largely depends on the way the chin is worn. They are worn very high, just
at present. Algernon!

AL*(R121.      Yes, Aunt Augusta!

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      There are distinct social possibilities in Miss
Cardew's profile.

AL*(R121.      Cecily is the sweetest, dearest, prettiest girl in the whole
world. And I don't care twopence about social possibilities.

72
LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    1ever speak disrespectfully of Society, Algernon.
2nly people who can't get into it do that. [To CECILY.] 'ear child, of
course you know that Algernon has nothing but his debts to depend upon.
But I do not approve of mercenary marriages. When I married Lord
Bracknell I had no fortune of any kind. But I never dreamed for a moment
of allowing that to stand in my way. Well, I suppose I must give my
consent.

AL*(R121.    Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    Cecily, you may kiss me!

C(CILY. [Kisses her.] Thank you, Lady Bracknell.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    You may also address me as Aunt Augusta for the
future.

C(CILY. Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    The marriage, I think, had better take place quite
soon.

AL*(R121.    Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

C(CILY. Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    To speak frankly, I am not in favour of long
engagements. They give people the opportunity of finding out each other's
character before marriage, which I think is never advisable.

-AC..  I beg your pardon for interrupting you, Lady Bracknell, but this
engagement is quite out of the question. I am Miss Cardew's guardian, and
she cannot marry without my consent until she comes of age. That consent I
absolutely decline to give.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    8pon what grounds may I ask? Algernon is an
extremely, I may almost say an ostentatiously, eligible young man. +e has
nothing, but he looks everything. What more can one desire?

73
-AC..   It pains me very much to have to speak frankly to you, Lady
Bracknell, about your nephew, but the fact is that I do not approve at all of
his moral character. I suspect him of being untruthful. [ALGERNON and
CECILY look at hiP in indignant aPazePent.]

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      8ntruthful!  My  nephew Algernon? Impossible! +e
is an 2xonian.

-AC..   I fear there can be no possible doubt about the matter. This
afternoon during my temporary absence in London on an important
question of romance, he obtained admission to my house by means of the
false pretence of being my brother. 8nder an assumed name he drank, I've
just been informed by my butler, an entire pint bottle of my Perrier--ouet,
Brut, ’89; wine I was specially reserving for myself. Continuing his
disgraceful deception, he succeeded in the course of the afternoon in
alienating the affections of my only ward. +e subsequently stayed to tea,
and devoured every single muffin. And what makes his conduct all the
more heartless is, that he was perfectly well aware from the first that I have
no brother, that I never had a brother, and that I don't intend to have a
brother, not even of any kind. I distinctly told him so myself yesterday
afternoon.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Ahem! Mr. Worthing, after careful consideration I
have decided entirely to overlook my nephew's conduct to you.

-AC..   That is very generous of you, Lady Bracknell. My own decision,
however, is unalterable. I decline to give my consent.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      [To CECILY.] Come here, sweet child. [CECILY
goes over.] +ow old are you, dear?

C(CILY.  Well, I am really only eighteen, but I always admit to twenty
when I go to evening parties.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      You are perfectly right in making some slight
alteration. Indeed, no woman should ever be quite accurate about her age. It
looks so calculating… [In a Peditative Panner.] (ighteen,  but admitting to
twenty at evening parties. Well, it will not be very long before you are of

74
age and free from the restraints of tutelage. So I don't think your guardian's
consent is, after all, a matter of any importance.

-AC..   Pray excuse me, Lady Bracknell, for interrupting you again, but it is
only fair to tell you that according to the terms of her grandfather's will
Miss Cardew does not come legally of age till she is thirty-five.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      That does not seem to me to be a grave objection.
Thirty-five  is a very attractive age. London society is full of women of the
very highest birth who have, of their own free choice, remained thirty-five
for years. Lady 'umbleton  is an instance in point. To my own knowledge
she has been thirty-five ever since she arrived at the age of forty, which was
many years ago now. I see no reason why our dear Cecily should not be
even still more attractive at the age you mention than she is at present.
There will be a large accumulation of property.

C(CILY.  Algy, could you wait for me till  I was thirty-five?

AL*(R121.      2f  course I could, Cecily. You know I could.

C(CILY.  Yes, I felt it instinctively, but I couldn't wait all  that time. I hate
waiting even five minutes for anybody. It always makes me rather cross. I
am not punctual myself, I know, but I do like punctuality in others, and
waiting, even to be married, is quite out of the question.

AL*(R121.      Then what is to be done, Cecily?

C(CILY.  I don't know, Mr. Moncrieff.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      My dear Mr. Worthing, as Miss Cardew states
positively that she cannot wait till she is thirty-five – a remark which I am
bound to say seems to me to show a somewhat impatient nature – I would
beg of you to reconsider your decision.

-AC..   But my dear Lady Bracknell, the matter is entirely in your own
hands. The moment you consent to my marriage with *wendolen, I will
most gladly allow your nephew to form an alliance with my ward.

75
LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      [Rising and drawing herself uS.] You must be quite
aware that what you propose is out of the question.

-AC..   Then a passionate celibacy is all that any of us can look forward to.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      That is not the destiny I propose for *wendolen.
Algernon, of course, can choose for himself. [Pulls out her watch.] Come,
dear, [GWENDOLEN rises] we have already missed five, if not six, trains.
To miss any more might expose us to comment on the platform.

[Enter DR. CHAS8BLE.]

C+AS8BL(.    (verything  is quite ready for the christenings.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      The christenings, sir! Is not that somewhat
premature?

C+AS8BL(.    [Looking rather Suzzled, and Sointing to JACK and
ALGERNON.] Both these gentlemen have expressed a desire for immediate
baptism.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      At their age? The idea is grotesque and irreligious!
Algernon, I forbid you to be bapti]ed. I will  not hear of such excesses. Lord
Bracknell would be highly displeased if he learned that that was the way in
which you wasted your time and money.

C+AS8BL(.    Am I to understand then that there are to he no christenings at
all this afternoon?

-AC..   I don't think that, as things are now, it would be of much practical
value to either of us, 'r.  Chasuble.

C+AS8BL(.    I am grieved to hear such sentiments from you, Mr.
Worthing. They savour of the heretical views of the Anabaptists, views that
I have completely refuted in four of my unpublished sermons. +owever, as
your present mood seems to be one peculiarly secular, I will return to the
church at once. Indeed, I have just been informed by the pew-opener that

76
for the last hour and a half Miss Prism has been waiting for me in the
vestry.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      [Starting.] Miss  Prism! 'id   I bear you mention a
Miss Prism?

C+AS8BL(.    Yes, Lady Bracknell. I am on my way to join her.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      Pray allow me to detain you for a moment. This
matter may prove to be one of vital importance to Lord Bracknell and
myself. Is this Miss Prism a female of repellent aspect, remotely connected
with education?

C+AS8BL(.    [SoPewhat indignantly.] She is the most cultivated of ladies,
and the very picture of respectability.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      It is obviously the same person. May I ask what
position she holds in your household?

C+AS8BL(.    [Severely.] I am a celibate, madam.

-AC..   [InterSosing.] Miss Prism, Lady Bracknell, has been for the last
three years Miss Cardew's esteemed governess and valued companion.

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      In spite of what I hear of her, I must see her at once.
Let her be sent for.

C+AS8BL(.    [Looking off.]  She approaches; she is nigh.

[Enter MISS PRISM hurriedly.]

MISS PRISM. I was told you expected me in the vestry, dear Canon. I have
been waiting for you there for an hour and three-quarters. [Catches sight of
LADY BRACKNELL, who has fixed her with a stony glare. MISS PRISM
grows Sale and Tuails. She looks anxiously round as if desirous to escaSe.]

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      [In a severe, Mudicial voice.] Prism! [MISS PRISM
bows her head in shaPe.] Come here, Prism! [MISS PRISM aSSroaches in
a huPble Panner.] Prism! Where is that baby? [General consternation. The

77
CANON starts back in horror. ALGERNON and JACK Sretend to be
anxious to shield CECILY and GWENDOLEN froP hearing the details of a
terrible Sublic scandal.] Twenty-eight years ago, Prism, you left Lord
Bracknell's house, 1umber 104, 8pper *rosvenor Street, in charge of a
perambulator that contained a baby of the male sex. You never returned. A
few weeks later, through the elaborate investigations of the Metropolitan
police, the perambulator was discovered at midnight, standing by itself in a
remote corner of Bayswater. It contained the manuscript of a three-volume
novel of more than usually revolting sentimentality. [MISS PRISM starts in
involuntary indignation.]  But the baby was not there! [Every one looks at
MISS PRISM.] Prism! Where is that baby? [A Sause.]

MISS PRISM. Lady Bracknell, I admit with  shame that I do not know. I
only wish I did. The plain facts of the case are these. 2n the morning of the
day you mention, a day that is for ever branded on my memory, I prepared
as usual to take the baby out in its perambulator. I had also with me a
somewhat old, but capacious hand-bag in which I had intended to place the
manuscript of a work of fiction that I had written during my few
unoccupied hours. In a moment of mental abstraction, for which I never can
forgive myself, I deposited the manuscript in the bassinette, and placed the
baby in the hand-bag.

-AC..   [Who has been listening attentively.] But where did you deposit the
hand-bag?

MISS PRISM. 'o   not ask me, Mr. Worthing.

-AC..   Miss Prism, this is a matter of no small importance to me. I insist on
knowing where you deposited the hand-bag that contained that infant.

MISS PRISM. I left it  in the cloak-room of one of the larger railway
stations in London.

-AC..   What railway station?

MISS PRISM. [4uite  crushed.] 9ictoria.  The Brighton line. [Sinks into a
chair.]

78
-AC..  I must retire to my room for a moment. *wendolen, wait here for
me.

*W(1'2L(1.       If  you are not too long, I will wait here for you all my life.
[Exit JACK in great excitePent.]

C+AS8BL(.  What do you think this means, Lady Bracknell?

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    I dare not even suspect, 'r. Chasuble. I need hardly
tell you that in families of high position strange coincidences are not
supposed to occur. They are hardly considered the thing.

[Noises heard overhead as if soPe one was throwing trunks about. Every
one looks uS.]

C(CILY. 8ncle -ack seems strangely agitated.

C+AS8BL(.  Your guardian has a very emotional nature.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    This noise is extremely unpleasant. It sounds as if
he was having an argument. I dislike arguments of any kind. They are
always vulgar, and often convincing.

C+AS8BL(.  [Looking uS.] It has stopped now. [The noise is redoubled.]

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    I wish he would arrive at some conclusion.

*W(1'2L(1.       This suspense is terrible. I hope it will last. [Enter JACK
with a hand-bag of black leather in his hand.]

-AC..  [Rushing over to MISS PRISM.] Is this the handbag, Miss Prism?
(xamine it carefully before you speak. The happiness of more than one life
depends on your answer.

MISS PRISM. [CalPly.] It seems to be mine. Yes, here is the injury it
received through the upsetting of a *ower Street omnibus in younger and
happier days. +ere is the stain on the lining caused by the explosion of a
temperance beverage, an incident that occurred at Leamington. And here,
on the lock, are my initials. I had forgotten that in an extravagant mood I

79
had had them placed there. The bag is undoubtedly mine. I am delighted to
have it so unexpectedly restored to me. It has been a great inconvenience
being without it all these years.

-AC..   [In  a Sathetic voice.] Miss Prism, more is restored to you than this
hand-bag. I was the baby you placed in it.

MISS PRISM. [APazed.] You?

-AC..   [EPbracing  her.] Yes… mother!

MISS PRISM. [Recoiling in indignant astonishPent.] Mr.  Worthing! I am
unmarried!

-AC..   8nmarried!  I do not deny that is a serious blow. But after all, who
has the right to cast a stone against one who has suffered? Cannot
repentance wipe out an act of folly? Why should there be one law for men,
and another for women? Mother, I forgive you. [Tries to ePbrace her
again.]

MISS PRISM. [Still  Pore indignant.] Mr.  Worthing, there is some error.
[Pointing to LADY BRACKNELL.]  There is the lady who can tell you who
you really are.

-AC..   [After a Sause.] Lady Bracknell, I hate to seem inquisitive, but
would you kindly inform  me who I am?

LA'Y    BRAC.1(LL.      I am afraid that the news I have to give you will not
altogether please you. You are the son of my poor sister, Mrs. Moncrieff,
and consequently Algernon's elder brother.

-AC..   Algy's elder brother! Then I have a brother after all. I knew I had a
brother! I always said I had a brother! Cecily, – how could you have ever
doubted that I had a brother? [Seizes hold of ALGERNON.] 'r. Chasuble,
my unfortunate brother. Miss Prism, my unfortunate brother. *wendolen,
my unfortunate brother. Algy, you young scoundrel, you will have to treat
me with more respect in the future. You have never behaved to me like a
brother in all your life.

80
AL*(R121.    Well, not till to-day, old boy, I admit. I did my best, however,
though I was out of practice. [Shakes hands.]

*W(1'2L(1.       [To JACK.] My own! But what own are you? What is your
Christian name, now that you have become some one else?

-AC..  *ood  heavens!… I had quite forgotten that point. Your decision on
the subject of my name is irrevocable, I suppose?

*W(1'2L(1.       I never change, except in my affections.

C(CILY. What a noble nature you have, *wendolen!

-AC..  Then the question had better be cleared up at once. Aunt Augusta, a
moment. At the time when Miss Prism left me in the hand-bag, had I been
christened already?

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    (very  luxury that money could buy, including
christening, had been lavished on you by your fond and doting parents.

-AC..  Then I was christened! That is settled. 1ow, what name was I
given? Let me know the worst.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    Being the eldest son you were naturally christened
after your father.

-AC..  [Irritably.]  Yes, but what was my father's Christian name?

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    [Meditatively.] I cannot at the present moment
recall what the *eneral's Christian name was. But I have no doubt he had
one. +e was eccentric, I admit. But only in later years. And that was the
result of the Indian climate, and marriage, and indigestion, and other things
of that kind.

-AC..  Algy! Can't you recollect what our father's Christian name was?

AL*(R121.    My  dear boy, we were never even on speaking terms. +e
died before I was a year old.

81
-AC..  +is name would appear in the Army Lists of the period, I suppose,
Aunt Augusta?

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    The *eneral was essentially a man of peace, except
in his domestic life. But I have no doubt his name would appear in any
military directory.

-AC..  The Army Lists of the last forty years are here. These delightful
records should have been my constant study. [Rushes to bookcase and tears
the books out.] M. *enerals… Mallam, Maxbohm, Magley, what ghastly
names they have – Markby, Migsby, Mobbs, Moncrieff! Lieutenant 1840,
Captain, Lieutenant-Colonel, Colonel, *eneral 1869, Christian names,
(rnest -ohn. [Puts book very Tuietly down and sSeaks Tuite calPly.] I
always told you, *wendolen, my name was (rnest, didn't I? Well, it is
(rnest after all. I mean it naturally is (rnest.

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    Yes, I remember now that the *eneral was called
(rnest, I knew I had some particular reason for disliking the name.

*W(1'2L(1.       (rnest! My  own (rnest! I felt from the first that you could
have no other name!

-AC..  *wendolen, it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly that
all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth. Can you forgive me?

*W(1'2L(1.       I can. )or I feel that you are sure to change.

-AC..  My own one!

C+AS8BL(.  [To MISS PRISM.] Lætitia! [EPbraces her]

MISS PRISM. [Enthusiastically.] )rederick! At last!

AL*(R121.    Cecily! [EPbraces her.] At last!

-AC..  *wendolen! [EPbraces her.] At last!

LA'Y   BRAC.1(LL.    My nephew, you seem to be displaying signs of
triviality.

82
-AC..  2n the contrary, Aunt Augusta, I've now realised for the first time in
my life the vital Importance of Being (arnest.
 

                                               TABLEA8

83
                     Table   of  Contents

ACT I.
ACT II.
ACT III.

