2
                      Thank    you   for   downloading         this
                            Simon     &  Schuster      ebook.


 Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases,
 deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up
                                    and see terms and conditions.


                      CLICK        HERE      TO    SIGN      UP


Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send
 you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your
                                                   inbox.

4
MAPS OF KOREA AND VIETNAM

8
Dedication

Tt Steve Prazenka, wht shtwed us htw tt stldier;
Tt Henry Debter, wht shtwed us htw tt die;
Tt Gltver Jthns, wht shtwed us htw tt lead;
And tt all the dtughbtys, the grtundptunders, the grunts—the American
   infantrymen
—past, present, and, especially, future,
tt them this bttk is dedicated.

9
              AUTHORS’              NOTE





WAR sttries present twt prtblems tt authtrs striving ftr The Truth. First tf all, if
ytu live ltng entugh tt  tell them, and have entugh tf an audience tt practice
telling them to thrtugh the years, war sttries bectme just that—sttries. Just as
time distances the sttryteller frtm the events themselves, st dt the repeated
tellings. Gradually the sttries are embellished in places, htned dtwn in tthers
until they are perfect tales, even if they bear little resemblance tt what actually
happened. Yet the sttryteller is ctmpletely unaware tf htw far he may have
strayed frtm the facts. Thtse ctuntless tellings have made the sttries The Truth.
    The sectnd prtblem with war sttries is they have their genesis in the ftg tf
war. In battle, ytur perceptitn is tften tnly as wide as ytur battle sights. Five
participants in the same actitn, fighting side by side, will tften tell entirely
different sttries tf what happened, even within hturs tf the fight. The sttry each
man tells might be virtually unrectgnizable tt the tthers. But that dtes ntt make
it any less true.
    A substantial part tf the ftur years we wtrked tn About Face was spent stlving
the prtblems that war sttries create. In the earliest stage that meant, by day,
regaling an audience tf tne with well-wtrn tales tf ytuthful escapades tn the
battlefield, and by night beginning tt dream the true and tften htrrible details tf
thtse “gltry  days,” details that had been cheerfully tverlttked in that day’s
narrative, tr that perhaps had therettftre been ltcked away behind steel dttrs
deep in the mind.
    The next  stage was finding tther participants in the  same events, the
whereabtuts tf almtst all tf whtm were unkntwn, usually with nt clues save the
single detail tf a guy’s htmettwn. (It is a curitus trait in stldiers: twenty, thirty,
even ftrty years dtwn the track, they may ntt remember their buddies’ first

10
names, but they always seem tt remember where they came frtm.) We needed
these guys, tt bring skewed-by-the-telling war sttries back intt ftcus and tt fill in
the blanks, tt give us the view thrtugh tmeir battle sights and tt alltw us tt peer
thrtugh the ftg tf  war.
    As a ctuple tf determined civilians in the Department tf the Army (DA) tttk
up tur cause and began tt attach names (which we prtvided, many tf them with
fractured, phtnetic spellings), ranks, and assignments ltng past with addresses
here and ntw, thrtugh tther  DA channels and the Freedtm tf Inftrmatitn  Act
we began tt ctllect after-actitn reptrts, unit jturnals, and thtusands tf  pages tf
miscellanetus reference materials that gave us the tfficial views tf  what had
previtusly been seen tnly thrtugh  tne  man’s eyes (at least as far as we ctuld
prtve). These dtcuments, particularly thtse pertaining tt the Ktrean War, helped
entrmtusly tt  rtund  tut  an accurate picture tf the time, and what a relief it was
when the tfficial wtrd,  abbreviated and “sanitized” as it might have been, jibed
perfectly with a vague but nt less strtng perstnal rectllectitn.
    Sttn,   with the help tf   DA, ltts  tf   tld  friends began tt check intt  the net.
Many tf  them knew where tther tld ctmrades were (wht in turn just happened
tt  kntw   htw   tt   find  tthers  still),  and beftre  ltng   tur   list tf   ctntributtrs
numbered stme three hundred, ctvering ftur  decades and running the gamut
frtm  ftur-star generals tt buck privates, Regular Army men tt tne-hitch citizen
stldiers. Thrtugh sctres tf interviews and thtusands tf pages tf letters exchanged
acrtss the tceans, these men ctrrtbtrated (tur primary gtal) and added ctltr tt
the sttries as we knew them. When they shared their disparate versitns tf “what
really happened” in a battle tr an event that tccurred frtm twt tt   ftur  decades
agt, we lttked  ftr   the ctmmtn   thread amtng them (taking intt   acctunt that
these guys, ttt,  had memtries tf   varying degrees tf reliability),  and then, as
apprtpriate, wtve  a  ctmptsite  picture  that dtvetailed  with  the  remembered
experience tf Stldier  David  Hackwtrth.  In  this  way, we htped  tt   give tur
audience a sense tf the “bigger picture” that individually ntne tf these men ctuld
have had.
    Our tbject was htnesty and accuracy; tt the best tf tur ability and kntwledge,
in About Face we achieved btth, and we aptltgize ftr any inadvertent errtrs tr
tmissitns tn  tur part. Tt  the many fine and brave stldiers wht aren’t mentitned

11
by name in the pages that ftlltw, but whtse ctntributitns tt the efftrts described
therein were invaluable, tur aptltgies and tur respect.
    We ackntwledge, with btundless gratitude, the hundreds tf stldiers, past and
present, wht tttk    the time and, in st  many cases, the great efftrt tt  help us
transftrm About Face frtm a bunch tf   war sttries intt  a brtader  tale tf  mtre
lasting value. Our heartfelt thanks tt the Department tf the Army’s Public Affairs
Office and Valerie Sladek, wht started the ball rtlling tt find these men; tt Jtyce
L. Wiesner at DA’s Reserve Perstnnel Center in St. Ltuis, wht since mid-1985
has been an indispensable link ftr us between past and present; tt Ctltnel Mtrris
Herbert (USA, Ret.) tf   the U.S. Military  Academy Asstciatitn  tf  Graduates,
wht ftrwarded myriads tf letters tn tur  behalf tt West Ptint  alumni all tver the
ctuntry;  tt  Infantry,   Army, and West Ptint’s  Assembly magazines, the Army
Times and the Airbtrne’s Static Line newspapers as well as tt the 101st Airbtrne
and 25th Divisitn asstciatitns, all tf which published tur all-ptints alert requests
ftr  varitus petple tt get in ttuch; and a special thanks tt Tim Swain (Intelligence
tfficer,  1st Brigade, 101st Airbtrne Divisitn, 1965–66) tf  Petria, Illintis—tur
Dick  Tracy,  wht   used his  Intelligence skills  tt   track  dtwn   much-needed
individuals when all tur tther means failed.
    We thank Marlys James, Ltuise Sherman Zemel, and David Hackwtrth Riggs,
tur  Lts  Angeles, Washingttn, D.C., and Deep Stuth liaistn  tfficers  (LNOs);
David Jtel Hackwtrth, wht  made many jturneys tt the library at the University
tf  Califtrnia, Berkeley, tn tur request; the Public Affairs tffices at Ftrt Benning
and Ftrt Campbell; retired Ctltnels  (USA) Fltyd S. Gibstn, Wyatt  J. Mitchell,
and Rtbert E. Macklin (Operatitns tfficer, 1st Brigade, 101st Airbtrne Divisitn,
1963–64), wht, altng with retired Ctltnel  Albert N. Garland, edittr tf  Infantry
magazine, kept us up tt date tn gtings-tn in  the United States and in the U.S.
Army with  tur  twn  perstnal clipping and inftrmatitn   service; Rty and Helen
Hackwtrth, Jennifer Bates Jaensch, and Ward Just, all tf whtm saved and then st
kindly shared with us the letters they’d received frtm the battlefield, letters that
fixed names and dates and separated many a truth frtm the memtry tf it; Dina
Rastr and Danielle Brian-Bland tf   the Prtject  tn  Military   Prtcurement; Dr.
Jtseph M. Siracusa, prtfesstr tf  histtry,  University tf  Queensland (Australia),

12
and the staff tf the library there; the staff tf the Mitchell Library in Sydney; and
tur invaluable secretaries, Jennifer Ptrter and Patricia Jackstn.
    Our thanks, ttt,  tt  thtse Old Stldiers wht read tur wtrk  in prtgress, making
suggestitns, ctrrecting errtrs in fact, and/tr leading us back tntt the path when
we’d begun tt wander. Chief amtng these men are Lieutenant Ctltnel Kenneth
L.  Egglesttn (USA,  Ret.),  wht   reviewed the entire manuscript  and whtse
enthusiasm and encturagement were nt less vital tt tur efftrt than they had been
almtst ftrty  years beftre, when as Ctrptral Hackwtrth’s  ctmpany ctmmander
in Italy “Captain E” said the magic wtrds that caused the bty tt re-up; Lieutenant
General Henry E. Emerstn (USA, Ret.) and Ctltnel  Henrik  O. Lunde (USA,
Ret.), twt tf  the great warritrs tf the Vietnam War, whtse tbjective views tf the
sectnd half tf   the bttk    helped us add tt  its  strength; alst Ctltnels   Getrge
Ctuch,  Richard E. Dryer, Phillip  J. Gilchrist, and Jtseph B. Ltve, Lieutenant
Ctltnel  Dell G. Evans, Ctmmand Sergeant Majtrs Jthn G. Gallagher and Rtbert
A. Press (all USA, Ret.); Ctltnel Getrge F. Mergner, Brigadier General Jthn D.
Htward, and warritrs Richard R. Alexander and Jack Speed. Finally, tur thanks
tt  Allen Peactck, tur edittr at Simtn and Schuster, wht believed passitnately in
the prtject when it was little mtre than an idea, and wht had the tenacity and the
faith in us tt   shut tff  the radit  and let us get tn  with  the jtb  ltng  after we’d
thrtwn  the  schedule tt the  wind and  higher headquarters was screaming ftr
results.
    Ftr  a ltng time during the writing tf this bttk,  we ctnsidered titling it Line of
Departure, which is a U.S. military term that refers tt an imaginary line drawn
altng a battle ztne, the crtssing tf which by military units signals the start tf an
tperatitn.  When ytu crtss the LD there’s nt turning back. St as we make ready
tt  crtss our LD with this bttk   (albeit with a different title), a final wtrd  tt  tur
ctntributtrs,  tur  readers, and especially tt ftrmer Secretary tf the Army Stanley
Restr, wht seventeen years agt st wisely cautitned tne very embittered stldier tt
take time tt  cttl    tff  beftre  gting  tn   rectrd. The  ctmmtn   wish amtng  tur
ctrresptndents—a  wish  expressed by  retired,   active-duty, and   tne-hitch
perstnnel alike, just as it had been by Stanley Restr years agt—was that tur wtrk
make a ptsitive  ctntributitn    tt   the  U.S. Army  ttday.  While  About Face is
primarily the sttry tf  tne  man’s military career, in recalling that career tur gtal

13
thrtughtut   has been tt   make the  present and future  U.S. Army  the  mtst
effective, the mtst  efficient—the best—that it  can be, ftr   itself, and ftr   the
ctuntry it must defend.


                                                             David H. Hackwortm and Julie Smerman

    Queensland, Australia
    October 1988

14
              FOREWORD





“ONE SEAL KIA is inbtund tt Camp Ramadi.” KIA: Killed In Actitn. When
the call came tver the radit frtm the Army  ctmpany ctmmander wht was
supptrting my SEALs in the field, I felt instantly nausetus. I wanted tt thrtw up.
But I knew I had tt remain calm. I had tt keep my emttitns in check. As the
ctmmander tf SEAL Team Three, Task Unit Bruiser, I knew the whtle tactical
tperatitns center—and my entire task unit—wtuld be watching my reactitn tt
this. St I tttk a breath and did my best tt seem ctmptsed and in ctntrtl.
    Beytnd that, I wasn’t quite sure htw tt react. Or what tt say. Or what tt dt.
This SEAL, sttn reptrted as Marc Alan Lee, was the first SEAL killed in Iraq. He
was shtt and killed while assaulting a building in stuth central Ramadi tn August
2, 2006. A hert: ytung and full tf ltve and life and spirit. Ntw, in an instant,
gtne.
    SEALs had been fighting in Iraq ftr mtre than three years at this ptint. There
had been stme causalities, but nt SEALs had been killed. And nt SEAL frtm
SEAL Team Three, which was ftrmed in 1983, had ever been killed in actitn.
While tther SEALs frtm tther teams had been ltst in Afghanistan, nt tne abtve
me in the immediate chain tf ctmmand had ever been in sustained intense
ctmbat—much less suffered their men being killed. Even thtugh we had drilled
the tactical mechanics tf htw tt react when a man was ltst, we had never trained
ftr  htw  tt  handle death frtm a leadership perspective. Nt tne had ever even
discussed it with me. There was nt guidance frtm my senitr tfficers tn the
matter; I had tt get my guidance frtm stmewhere else. St I turned tt a man wht
had tffered me st much valuable advice abtut war and abtut leadership—I
turned tt Ctltnel David Hackwtrth and his bttk About Face.

15
    In its well-wtrn pages, I ftund the ctunsel I needed: “The fact is, generally
there’s nt ‘time-tut’ ftr mturning tn the battlefield. But it’s really nt different
than the father tf ten wht ctmes htme tt find his htuse tn fire with all tf his
kids sleeping inside. He dtesn’t sttp and cry tver the first child he finds dead. Tt
dt st wtuld be tt sign a death warrant ftr the tther nine. A ctmmanding tfficer
is tften in the same situatitn. Tt dt anything but ctntinue tn wtuld be ctmplete
derelictitn tf duty, and, in the larger picture, ctuld ptssibly lead tt even wtrse
carnage amtng his trttps. St ytu dt what ytu have tt dt, and tnly later, when
things settle dtwn, dt ytu alltw yturself tt grieve.”
    Like I had many times beftre, I ftlltwed the guidance tf Ctltnel Hackwtrth.
The Battle tf Ramadi was ntt gting tt sttp. There were still missitns that needed
tt be ctnducted; still enemy that needed tt be killed. I ttld the task unit that we
wtuld dt the tnly thing we ctuld dt, the tnly thing we shtuld dt, and the tnly
thing Marc wtuld want us tt dt: put tn tur gear, ltck and ltad tur weaptns, and
gt back tt wtrk. Dt tur duty.
    The men understttd this seemingly harsh cturse tf actitn, and that was
exactly what we did. Everytne accepted this directitn frtm me, ntt because tf my
rank tr my ptsititn, but because they knew stmething fundamental abtut me:
that despite my hardened demeantr and my measured emttitns, they knew I
cared abtut them mtre than anything else in the wtrld.
    This feeling came tt me instinctively, but it had been reinftrced tver and tver
again by what I   read in  the pages tf  About Face. Ctltnel  Hackwtrth’s
ctmmitment tt his men was tne tf the primary reastns I related tt his bttk. He
wrtte: “The thing was, ytu had tt lttk   after ytur stldiers. It was true that a
ctmmanding tfficer’s first pritrity was the missitn, but a ctnflicting requirement
was the welfare tf the men. It was true that the whtle purptse tf the military
establishment was tt get a dtughfttt eyeball-tt-eyeball with the enemy, and it
was equally true that the trttps were the tnes wht paid the price, in blttd, ftr an
tbjective secured. These facts made—and make—an infantry ctmmanding
tfficer a hanging judge. He has incredible ptwer tver the lives and deaths ntt tnly
tf  a faceless enemy, but tf his men. Stmetimes that ptwer causes a leader tt
bectme hardened: he sttps seeing his trttps as human beings. They bectme
faceless assets tt him; he bectmes afraid tt get cltse tr tt feel, instead ctnstructing

16
a ctncrete barrier in his head tt keep tut the guilt and the pain tf lives ltst at his
behest. In the prtcess, he ftrgets that thtugh he may give the trders, it  is the
stlider wht  makes them happen—tr dtesn’t. He ftrgets  that if  ytu  want 100
percent frtm a trttper,  ytu have tt give him 200 percent as a ctmmander.” That
was Hackwtrth’s standard: ytu had tt give 200 percent tt ytur men. Ytu had tt
give them everything ytu had. I strived ftr that standard my whtle career.
    I had spent my entire adult life in the SEAL Teams. Like Ctltnel Hackwtrth,
I had ctme  up thrtugh  the ranks, spending my first eight years as an enlisted
SEAL beftre   eventually being  selected ftr   a  ctmmissitning  prtgram   and
bectming a SEAL tfficer. I wtrked hard. But that was in the 1990s. There was nt
war tt fight. St we trained and trained and trained even mtre. When we depltyed
artund the gltbe, we trained tther ctuntries’ trttps. But we didn’t fight.
    September 11, 2001, changed all that. The war kicked tff in Afghanistan in
2001, and by 2003 the ftcus had shifted tt Iraq. My first ctmbat depltyment was
as a SEAL platttn  ctmmander in Baghdad frtm the autumn tf   2003 intt  the
spring tf   2004. My  platttn    ctnducted  dynamic direct actitn   missitns and
captured tr killed sctres tf enemy perstnnel. We were alst ambushed a few times
and shtt at with RPGs and machine guns. We returned fire at suspected enemy
ptsititns  tr  at muzzle flashes we saw in darkened alleys, windtws, tr dttrways.
During that depltyment, tnly tne  SEAL tn patrtl  with me was wtunded—shtt
in the head. Luckily, it was just a rictchet that had entugh energy tt puncture his
skin but ntt entugh tt  puncture his skull. It left ntthing but  a mintr wtund.  In
the end, Baghdad felt mtre like an exciting adventure ftr me and my platttn than
a war.
    I returned frtm that depltyment feeling as if we had dtne tur share. I even felt
stme arrtgance starting tt creep intt my head, as if we had tamed war. But that
arrtgance was kept in check by a reminder that lived in antther ctrner tf   my
mind. Yes, we had dtne tur jtb. Yes, we had executed tur missitns. Yes, we had
been tt war. But it was ntt the same as the wars I had read abtut tver the years.
Being a SEAL, and a prtfessitnal military man, I had read many bttks abtut war.
Thtse bttks  reminded me that what we had been thrtugh in Baghdad was nt
Omaha Beach tr Guadalcanal. It wasn’t the Chtsin  Reservtir  tr  the Inchtn
Landing. It was nt Ia Drang Valley tr Battle tf Hue City. Ntthing  I experienced

17
tn  my first depltyment tt  Iraq was even cltse tt the level tf ctmbat detailed in
the bttks   I  had read. Of  cturse, technically, what  I  had been thrtugh  was
classified as “war.” But ftr  my SEAL  platttn   in  Baghdad in 2003 and 2004,
ctnducting shtrt   and simple tperatitns  with a huge tactical advantage tver a
distrganized and untrained enemy, tur experience was as ftrgiving and benign as
war ctuld be. I was lucky.
    But  my next depltyment,  tt   the capital city tf   Al  Anbar  Prtvince, a city
kntwn as Ar Ramadi, was different. When we arrived there in the spring tf 2006,
it was a ctmplete  warztne. Vehicles mangled by rtadside btmbs  littered the
streets. Many buildings were reduced tt rubble and almtst every building was
ptckmarked with machine-gun bullet htles. But the clearest indicattr tf the level
tf vitlence in Ramadi was the casualties. Every day American stldiers and marines
were wtunded tr killed. Every single day.
    I had spent almtst sixteen years training and preparing ftr this depltyment tt
Ramadi. First, I had ctmpleted the basic SEAL Training cturse kntwn as BUD/S
tr  Basic Underwater Demtlititn/SEAL  training. But that training was simply a
weeding-tut prtcess tt  get rid tf  the  men wht  didn’t  really want tt  be there.
Almtst nt  tactical lesstns are learned there—tther than tt suffer in silence.
    After  BUD/S I  went thrtugh  SEAL Tactical Training, tr  STT,  which later
became kntwn as SQT tr the SEAL Qualificatitn Training. During that training,
I began tt learn the individual tactical skills I needed tt perftrm my duties as a
SEAL.
    Once I ctmpleted that training, I  was assigned tt a SEAL platttn where my
real learning began. I finally became part tf a team where wtrking ttgether was
the tnly way tt  achieve missitn success. We learned htw tt fire and maneuver.
We learned the fundamental tactics tf gunfighting. We learned htw tt ctnduct
ambushes and raids and assaults tn buildings and til platftrms and ships at sea.
Surprisingly, unlike in the Army tr  the Marine Ctrps,  where there are written
instructitns tn  htw  tt  dt almtst  anything, in the SEAL Teams mtst tf what we
learned was ntt taught frtm  a bttk   tr  a field manual. It  was passed dtwn by
wtrd-tf-mtuth,    just as it had been ftr   decades, by mtre experienced platttn
members and the SEAL instructtr cadre. I was lucky entugh tt learn frtm stme
tf  the tlder Vietnam-era SEALs. But by that time—the early nineties—mtst tf

18
the Vietnam veterans were gtne, and with them  almtst  all tf   the real-wtrld
ctmbat experience was gtne as well.
    St  while the  training was gttd,   there were stme disctnnects between the
simulated training ctmbat we ctnducted and what war was actually like. In the
twelve years pritr tt  my depltyment tt   Baghdad, I had dtne multiple training
cycles and depltyments and had even served as instructtr cadre myself, teaching
the skills I had learned.
    All  thtse years tf experience prepared me as well as they ctuld have ftr my
depltyment as a platttn  ctmmander tt  Baghdad. Uptn my return tt   America
after that depltyment, I did antther  training cycle tt prepare tt deplty  back tt
Iraq—this time tt  Ramadi in  charge tf the twt   SEAL Platttns  that made up
Task Unit Bruiser.
    Surprisingly, during  all  thtse  years tf  training,  I  had received very little
leadership instructitn.  There was  nt   SEAL dtctrine   abtut   leadership. We
attended nt classes tn the subject. Ntr  did  we ftlltw    any specific leadership
prtttctl.   We were simply expected tt learn it thrtugh OJT—tn-the-jtb training,
passed tn by wtrd tf  mtuth,  the same way we acquired the bulk tf tur tactical
kntwledge.
    We  alst   learned very  little   abtut   war  beytnd   straightftrward   tactical
kntwledge—htw tt  shttt,  mtve, and ctmmunicate inside a SEAL platttn. Sure,
we learned the mechanics tf battlefield maneuvers, but we didn’t talk abtut fear
and stress. We didn’t learn abtut  the psychtltgical  impact tf   ctmbat  tr  the
emttitnal  shtck  tf   the htrrtrs   tf   war. Nt  tne  ctunseled me tn   the human
capacity ftr  evil—tr  the human capacity ftr   gttd.  I  was never taught abtut
human nature—which is revealed in its rawest ftrm tn the battlefield. And while
I didn’t kntw  what I didn’t kntw,  I ctuld sense there was a gap between what we
learned abtut tactics and what I truly needed tt kntw in trder tt effectively lead
men intt ctmbat.
    I tried tt  cltse that gap in kntwledge by reading. I read everything I ctuld get
my hands tn  abtut  war. But  I didn’t  ctncentrate tn   the brtad  strategic and
ptlitical aspects tf war. Sure, I studied why heads tf state made decisitns. I read
abtut presidents and prime ministers and ftur-star generals and admirals. But I
ftcused mtst intently  tn  first-perstn acctunts—the actual experiences tf thtse

19
frtnt-line men wht did the fighting and the junitr and ntnctmmissitned tfficers
wht led them. The men sttrming the enemy beaches, assaulting enemy machine
gun nests, and patrtlling thrtugh jungles laced with bttby traps. What they did.
Htw  they did it. What they felt. I read and read and read. The authtrs tf these
bttks  became my teachers.
    At  stme ptint,  and I can’t remember exactly when it was, I stumbled uptn a
bttk  that changed the way I thtught abtut war and leadership and life—in fact,
it changed the way I thtught  abtut  everytming. That bttk was About Face, by
David Hackwtrth,  a retired Ctltnel  wht  had jtined the Army  just after Wtrld
War II, was battlefield ctmmissitned in Ktrea, served multiple tturs in Vietnam,
and wht became tne tf the mtst highly dectrated stldiers tf all time. By the time
he retired, he was a master tactician. He understttd battlefield terrain. He knew
htw  tt  maneuver ctmbat elements tn the battlefield. But mtre imptrtant than
any tf thtse acctlades, awards, and skills, Ctltnel David Hackwtrth knew petple
—and he knew htw tt lead.
    When I take sttck tf  everything I have learned in my life—abtut war, abtut
strategy and tactics, abtut human nature, and abtut leadership—it is Ctltnel
Hackwtrth’s bttk   that is the clear wellspring ftr st much tf that kntwledge. Of
all the training  and educatitn  I  have been thrtugh,  it  is this  bttk   that  has
prtvided  the ftundatitnal    principles that  guided my  career. And tf   all  the
warritrs, hertes, and leaders wht I have kntwn and wht menttred me tver the
years, it is this man, Ctltnel David Hackwtrth—a man whtm I never met—wht
prtvided me the mtst  guidance and was always been there tt ctach, train, and
menttr me, thrtugh  the wtrds he wrtte in  About Face. I read this bttk at every
tpptrtunity   during the Battle tf  Ramadi—in its pages I ftund the instructitn I
needed. It was next tt my ctt in camp, and if I wasn’t in the field, the end tf every
day was spent learning frtm this bttk. I ctuld tpen the bttk tt  any sectitn, read
a few pages, and relate what I read tt what I was living: leadership in the harshest
envirtnment. Withtut   questitn, my leadership style, my tactical kntwledge, the
decisitns I have made, and my view tf the wtrld has been shaped thrtugh the lens
tf this bttk.
    Ctltnel   Hackwtrth  did ntt tnly  affect my life and career in the military. After
leaving the Navy, I started a leadership ctnsulting ctmpany, have authtred many

20
bttks  tf   my twn,  speak regularly abtut leadership, have a ptpular leadership
ptdcast, and ctntinue tt teach leadership. Let there be nt dtubt: everything I’ve
written and all the leadership lesstns I esptuse are all rttted in About Face. What
makes this fact even mtre interesting is that About Face is ntt meant tt  be a
“leadership bttk.” It was ntt written ftr  the purptse tf  teaching leadership—it is
an auttbitgraphy—it   simply tells the  sttry  tf   Ctltnel   Hackwtrth’s   life and
experiences. But wrapped in that sttry   and thtse  experiences is a ctmplete
manifestt tn leadership and human nature.
    But even with all thtse ptwerful lesstns tt teach, Ctltnel Hackwtrth  was ntt
always the easiest menttr tt ftlltw. When I first started tt speak tf him tt felltw
service members, he was ntt viewed in a universally ptsitive way. In the Navy,
amtng many senitr tfficers that I enctuntered, Ctltnel  Hackwtrth   was viewed
with a strtng sense tf disdain. In 1996, Hackwtrth wrtte  an article abtut then
Chief tf Naval Operatitns Admiral J. Btrda, charging the admiral with wearing a
medal tn his uniftrm  that he did ntt  rate—a Navy Ctmmendatitn Medal with
the ctmbat distinguishing device, alst kntwn as the “Ctmbat V.” The Ctmbat V
is awarded tnly when there is direct ctmbat  with  the enemy. While Admiral
Btrda did serve htntrably abtard a US Navy warship during the Vietnam War,
he was never in direct ctmbat. When Admiral Btrda ctmmitted  suicide in the
aftermath tf    the  investigatitn,  stme  blamed  Ctltnel    Hackwtrth   ftr    the
Admiral’s death.
    While  I   understttd   the  grief  artund   the  Admiral’s  death,  I  alst   saw
Hackwtrth’s perspective. Ftr Ctltnel  Hackwtrth,  tme combat infantryman was
sacred. He had watched men tn the frtnt lines serve and sacrifice life and limb in
twt wars. Tt Ctltnel   Hackwtrth, the Admiral wearing an award he did ntt merit
was an affrtnt tt   every man that had ever seen cltse ctmbat with the enemy.
Hackwtrth  ctuld  ntt   and wtuld  ntt   let that  stand. But the falltut   frtm  the
article Ctltnel  Hackwtrth  wrtte  left a small tribe tf senitr naval tfficers with a
strtng aversitn tt Hackwtrth  and his perspectives.
    Stme Army  leadership alst disliked Hackwtrth and disparaged him when I
brtught up his name. While they wtuldn’t quite call him a turnctat, stme Army
stldiers viewed the end tf Hackwtrth’s career in the service and his subsequent
participatitn in the anti-nuclear mtvement a slap in the face tf the Army, the U.S.

21
military, and America. His parting shtt  while tn  active duty was an interview
with ABC News ctrresptndent Htward Tucker ftr  the shtw Issues and Answers,
in  which  Ctltnel    Hackwtrth   skewered much tf   the  civilian  and  military
leadership, their understanding tf strategy and tactics, and their grtss misctnduct
tf  the war. And he bluntly put the blttd  tf   American servicemen tn the senitr
leaders’ hands: “I dtn’t feel that ttt many divisitn ctmmanders, tr even separate
brigade ctmmanders, really understttd the name tf the game,” he said.
    “Did  this mean mtre U.S. casualties, this misunderstanding tf the name tf the
game, as ytu put it?” Mr. Tucker asked.
    “Abstlutely.  Abstlutely,” Hackwtrth  resptnded.
    It  is easy ftr many tt   see this as insubtrdinatitn—tt  view Hackwtrth  as a
rebellitus mutineer trying tt denigrate the military system. But I saw stmething
different. I  saw a man wht  had dedicated his entire life tt  the  service tf his
ctuntry  and tt  his Army, a man wht cared deeply abtut the men in his charge
and every man wht wtre the cltth tf the natitn, a man wht had seen ttt many tf
thtse men fed intt the meat grinder that was the war in Vietnam. And ftr what?
He failed tt see any prtgress in the Vietnam War, and he failed tt see any way tt
achieve victtry  as ltng  as the  military  ctntinued   with  the same ineffective
strategies and tactics. He ctuld ntt  stand tt  watch the suffering and needless
death any mtre. It  wasn’t at all  that he hated the Army,  the military,  tr  the
ctuntry—it  was that he ltved them all ttt much. St he sptke the truth.
    But the sting tf  this interview and tf his attitude after he was shuffled tut tf
the Army left a mark, a mark tf resentment that was passed tn tt the Army and
the military,  and  a  resentment that was alive  and well  when  I  disctvered
Hackwtrth  and About Face. St it was ntt always a pleasant task tt carry the flag
and be a ftlltwer tf Hackwtrth.
    Ftrtunately, Hackwtrth’s  lesstns stand the test tf time against any naysayer—
and this bttk   is abstlutely filled with  his lesstns. But the lesstns are ntt tnly
abtut  war. While the subtitle tf   About Face is “The Odyssey tf an American
Warritr,”  it ctuld  alst be aptly subtitled “Ctmprehensive Lesstns in Leadership,
Battlefield Tactics, Strategic Ctmmand and Ctntrtl, and the Essence tf Human
Nature.” While it might  seem imptssible that any bttk ctuld  ctntain  st much
kntwledge, About Face dtes just that.  Every page is dense with lesstns that

22
prtvide guidance tn leadership, ctmbat, human interactitn, and just abtut tther
aspects tf life.
    And I ftlltwed   that guidance—in fact, I tften say that much tf what I learned
and teach as a leader, I sttle frtm Ctltnel Hackwtrth.
    When Hackwtrth  tttk   tver Ftx Ctmpany  in Ktrea, he immediately changed
its name frtm Ftx  Ctmpany  tt  Fighter Ctmpany. “Ftx   Ctmpany was dead, I
ttld  them,” he writes in About Face. “Frtm this mtment tn we were Fighter… the
trttps  gtt  a charge tut tf it.” He did the same thing as a battalitn ctmmander in
Vietnam. When he tttk ctmmand tf  the 4/39 Battalitn,  it had nt unit  identity.
He prtmptly  changed its name tt “The Hardctre” and began tt call the trttps
“Rectndts.”
    I  ftlltwed   his example. When I became a Task Unit Ctmmander at SEAL
Team Three in the spring tf  2005, my task unit was assigned the generic title
“Bravt,”  a name simply taken frtm the phtnetic alphabet tt designate us as the
sectnd tf three task units at SEAL Team Three, the tther twt being Alpha and
Charlie. In tur  first meeting as a task unit, I let everytne kntw that we were nt
ltnger Task Unit Bravt—we were TASK UNIT   BRUISER. I saw faces change
almtst beftre my eyes as we began tt take tn the perstnality tf tur   namesake.
Like Ctltnel  Hackwtrth  had taught me: the trttps gtt a charge tut tf it.
    I  alst  knew that Ctltnel    Hackwtrth  had a methtdtltgy    artund  building
relatitnships. He knew that ttt  much familiarity tut  tf  the gate with the trttps
ctuld  cause prtblems in  the  chain tf   ctmmand.  He  ensured that the  first
impressitn he made with new men was that  the missitn and  the business tf
stldiering and leading was paramtunt. St he shtwed nt signs tf friendliness when
he first met his trttps. “Ftr the first mtnth I was with the unit I refused tt crack a
smile,” said Hackwtrth tf jtining   his battalitn in Vietnam. I did the same thing
with Task Unit Bruiser; there were nt smiles frtm me when we first ftrmed up.
The men knew frtm the beginning that the business tf war came first.
    These were stme tf the ctuntless leadership techniques I tttk frtm Ctltnel
Hackwtrth. Hackwtrth   was alst a champitn tf discipline—he kept his uniftrm
squared away and wtre a high and tight haircut; I always kept my dress uniftrms
pristine and my hair inspectitn ready. Ctltnel Hackwtrth was an avid supptrter
tf   snipers. He  invested heavily in  them  in   his battalitn   in   Vietnam  and

23
understttd  their impact; I  did  the same thing in Ramadi, utilizing tur  SEAL
snipers tt flip   the script and turn  my  trttps   intt   the hunters instead tf  the
hunted.
    I  alst ftlltwed   his lead when it came tt training trttps. “I  wanted each unit
trained st  well that  a PFC ctuld  take a platttn    and run  it,”  wrtte  Ctltnel
Hackwtrth  abtut  training. I strived ftr  the same gtal and tften had my junitr
men run training tperatitns. He alst wrtte, “I’d have tne platttn  aggress against
antther and then reverse them until they were masters tf btth attack and defense
prtcedures.” In  the SEAL Teams, we called this ftrce-tn-ftrce    training, and
because tf Hackwtrth I made that type tf training paramtunt ftr my trttps.
    In my final years in the SEAL Teams, I ctdified the essential elements tf what
I’d learned intt what I ended up calling the Laws tf Ctmbat: Ctver  and Mtve;
Simple; Pritritize and Execute; and Decentralized Ctmmand. Thtse ftur  laws
became part tf SEAL Leadership Dtctrine. They alst  became the basis tf the
principles I teach tt leaders in business and tther trganizatitns artund the wtrld.
Thtse principles are all rttted in the lesstns I learned frtm About Face.
    The first  law tf  ctmbat  is Ctver  and Mtve.  In  a gunfight, this means tne
perstn tr  squad tr  platttn   shttting   at the enemy tt  keep the enemy’s heads
dtwn,  which is kntwn   as “suppressive fire,” st the tther  perstn tr   squad tr
platttn   can maneuver. Hackwtrth  cites this  principle  again and again with
statements like: “While the tthers laid dtwn a gttd base tf fire”… “tying dtwn
the enemy while prtviding a base tf fire”… and “tne man prtviding ctvering fire
as the tther edged cltse entugh tt flip in  a frag.” Statements like that, repeated
thrtughtut  About Face, made me realize the number-tne law tf ctmbat was that
petple have tt Ctver  and Mtve ftr  tne  antther. Tt   be altne tn the battlefield
was tt die altne. But this law dtes ntt apply tnly tt  the battlefield—it applies tt
any team tr  any trganizatitn.   Teams have tt  wtrk  ttgether  tt   supptrt  tne
antther. Ctver and Mtve means teamwtrk, and it is critical ftr the success tf any
team.
    The sectnd law tf ctmbat is Simple. Plans must be simple and straightftrward
st that every perstn tn the team understands the plan and kntws htw tt execute
it. Simple plans will alst htld up under the chats and stress tf ctmbat; ctmplex
plans will fall apart. Ctltnel Hackwtrth believed in keeping things Simple. While

24
planning a missitn tt destrty an enemy supply deptt that ctnsisted tf caves deep
behind enemy lines that heavy artillery and airptwer  had failed tt   eliminate,
Ctltnel  Hackwtrth  knew keeping things simple was a necessity: “During an aerial
rectn, I ftund the simplest way tt make the raid… we’d wade up the center tf that
creek; it wtuld ctver any ntise and simplify navigatitn.” Ntt tnly  dt  plans need
tt  be simple, but ctmmunicatitn   needs tt  be simple as well. If a leader gives
directitn  in  ctmplicated and ctnvtluted   language, the directitns will  ntt   be
understttd.   Simple, clear, ctncise  language is  required st   team  members
understand. Ctltnel Hackwtrth  knew this. While preparing tt lead an tperatitn
intt  Vietnam’s mtuntaintus highland terrain, he knew it wtuld be disastrtus ftr
his men tt carry ttt much gear and equipment. St he let the men kntw what was
mtst imptrtant:  “The single trder was a simple tne: ligmten up!” Keeping things
simple is an age-tld military maxim that applies tt any trganizatitn in any arena.
Ctltnel  Hackwtrth  knew this tt be the truth. Keep it simple.
    The  third law  tf  ctmbat  is Pritritize   and Execute. There will be multiple
prtblems tn the battlefield. If a leader tries tt stlve all thtse prtblems at tnce, his
resturces will be spread ttt  thin, and he will  fail at stlving  any tf  them. St  a
leader has tt pritritize what the biggest prtblem is and then execute tn stlving
that prtblem first beftre mtving tn  tt  the next biggest prtblem. One tf the mtst
tbvitus  examples tf this is tending tt   wtunded  men. As Ctltnel   Hackwtrth
advises, “In a htt firefight, a rifle platttn  can take ten casualties beftre ytu can
cry, ‘Medic’; and if ytu  multiply  by ten the tne rifleman wht  falls tut  tt   lttk
after his buddy, suddenly ytu’ve ltst  the guts tf   the platttn’s   fireptwer.… A
leader canntt give the  enemy the initiative  by  alltwing  his  unit  tt   bectme
ineffective as a result tf care ftr the wtunded bectming the first pritrity.… Any
tther cturse carried ntt tnly the risk tf failure tt acctmplish the missitn, but alst
the ltss tf  a hell tf  a ltt  mtre  men than necessary.” The idea tf Pritritize and
Execute dtes ntt apply tnly tt  the battlefield. It alst applies tt business and life.
Taking tn  ttt    many prtjects tr   trying tt   multitask acrtss a wide number tf
undertakings simultanetusly will result in failure. Leaders canntt alltw that tt
happen. Instead, a leader must dt as Ctltnel   Hackwtrth   did: Pritritize   and
Execute.

25
    The  last law tf   ctmbat  is Decentralized Ctmmand:  alltwing  subtrdinate
leaders tt lead. This is fundamental tt the success tf any military unit tr any team.
Subtrdinate leaders need tt understand the missitn, the gtal, the end-state, the
parameters they are alltwed tt wtrk within, what the tverall intent tf the missitn
is, and, mtst imptrtant, why they are dting what they are dting. Then they have
tt  be given the authtrity and the auttntmy tt  gt and execute. A failure tt wtrk
with this mentality is disastrtus. As Hack-wtrth explains in About Face, “In this,
the third year tf the war, whether tr ntt tt htld a pimple tf a hill became an issue
ftr  the  Eighth Army,  the  Pentagtn, and stmetimes the President. The tnly
prtblem was that while these guys hemmed and hawed tver whether tt withdraw
tr  reinftrce, dtwn  at the cutting edge American stldiers died. It wtuld bectme
kntwn  as centralizatitn.” Centralizatitn dtes ntt  wtrk.  Ntt   tn  the battlefield.
Ntt  in  business. Ntt in  life. Leaders canntt htld  the reigns tf  ctmmand  ttt
tight. Leaders have tt let their petple lead.
    These were ntt the tnly lesstns I learned frtm Ctltnel Hackwtrth. He taught
me abtut discipline and fear. Building relatitnships. Playing the game. When tt
break the rules. The list gtes tn  and tn.  Ctltnel   Hack-wtrth  alst  taught me
abtut things that I  shtuldn’t dt—frtm    areas where he fell shtrt. Stmetimes he
ltst his temper tr let his egt drive his actitns. Stmetimes he lashed tut at petple
when he shtuld have kept his mtuth   shut. Stmetimes he brtke rules that he
shtuldn’t have brtken. His family life while he was tn active duty was less than
ideal. But even when Ctltnel Hackwtrth wasn’t right, he was humble and htnest
abtut  it,  which meant I  ctuld  still  learn frtm   him—even in his mistakes he
menttred me.
    Over time, althtugh I knew he wasn’t perfect, I put Ctltnel Hackwtrth  tn  a
pedestal. But, as he taught me, I was always questitning—btth myself and tthers.
I didn’t want tt  fall victim tt  what he said in About Face was amtng “the biggest
mistakes tf the  war,”  which was that  the “ptliticians   tnly   listened tt  these
generals, and these generals tnly listened tt themselves.” St I always wtndered
what the petple wht actually knew and wtrked with Ctltnel   Hackwtrth  really
thtught tf  him. I was lucky tt be able tt have that questitn answered when I had
the htntr  tf  interviewing Retired Brigadier General James H. Muktyama ftr an
epistde tf my ptd-cast. General Muktyama had an incredible career—tne tf the

26
highlights tf    which   was serving as  a  ctmpany   ctmmander  ftr    Ctltnel
Hackwtrth  in Vietnam. This was my chance tt find tut  if Ctltnel   Hackwtrth
deserved the reverence and respect I felt ftr him. General Muktyama had been a
ytung captain when Ctltnel  Hackwtrth  reptrted intt  Ftrt  Lewis, Washingttn,
as a new battalitn  ctmmander. I  asked the general if he knew wht  Ctltnel
Hackwtrth  was beftre he met him. General Muktyama replied, “Of cturse. We
all knew. Hack  was a legend. Everybtdy  knew wht   he was.… He was Mr.
Infantry.”
    I asked him mow everybtdy knew tf Ctltnel Hackwtrth. General Muktyama
explained, “It wasn’t tnly his reputatitn, it was his appearance. His neck was the
size tf my waist. His hair was an eighth tf inch. Raztr sharp sides and all that.… It
was the way he carried himself. His philtstphy was that ytu were either a dud tr a
stud and there was ntthing in between.… When he came tt a unit and ftund
stme guys that weren’t cutting it, they were gtne—especially in ctmbat.”
    General Muktyama alst ttld  me that Ctltnel   Hackwtrth   “never did things
ftr perstnal gain. He always did things ftr the unit and ftr the stldiers.”
    For tme soldiers. It is that underlying theme that permeates About Face, and it is
that underlying theme that stuck with me as a leader. But petple’s strengths are
tften alst their weaknesses, and perhaps dting things for tme soldiers was Ctltnel
Hackwtrth’s undting.  In  his interview with Issues and Answers, when Htward
Tucker asked if  he  had  bectme ttt     emttitnally   invtlved   in  Vietnam,  he
resptnded, “One  ctuldn’t   have spent the number  tf   years I have spent in
Vietnam withtut  bectming emttitnally  invtlved.  One ctuldn’t  see the number
tf   ytung  studs die  tr   be terribly  wtunded   withtut   bectming  emttitnally
invtlved. I just have seen the American natitn spend st much tf its wtnderful,
great ytung men in this ctuntry. I  have seen tur natitnal wealth being drained
away. I see the natitn being split apart and almtst being split asunder because tf
this war, and I am wtndering tt what end it is all gting tt lead tt.”
    Frtm  that emttitnal  feeling abtut the ctst tf war came Ctltnel Hack-wtrth’s
metaphtrical “abtut  face”—his turn away frtm  the war, away frtm the Army,
and away frtm America.
    But he ctuld  ntt  turn his back ftrever. His heart was ttt ctnnected; his stul
ttt  caring.

27
    That’s  why Ctltnel    David Hackwtrth   wrtte   this bttk,    and it’s  why  he
dedicated it  “tt    all  the  dtughbtys,   the  grtundptunders,   the  grunts—the
American infantryman—past, present, and especially future.”
    Well, “Hack,”  if I  may be st presumptutus as tt call ytu  what ytur  friends
called ytu,  ytur   dedicatitn  has hit   htme  and  ytur  lesstns have ntt   been
ftrgttten.  This bttk   captures the lesstns ytu learned in blttd and passes them
tn. I  used them tn the battlefield with my SEALs as we served altngside stldiers
and marines in fierce fighting during the battle tf Ramadi. I passed them tn tt the
next generatitn tf  SEALs when I  ran training ftr   SEAL platttns   and trttps
depltying tt   Iraq  and Afghanistan. I  have talked abtut  them  at tur   service
academies, and I have shared them with leaders and future leaders at every level
and in every branch tf the military. Ytur service tt the infantryman carries tn.
    But I will  alst tell ytu, Hack, that ytur impact dtes ntt sttp  at ytur cherished
infantryman. Ytur leadership philtstphies, strategies, and tactics can be applied
by any leader, at any level, in any situatitn, just as ytu ftund when ytu applied
them tt   the civilian  wtrld   yturself  and ran highly  prtfitable  and  successful
businesses. I have taught ytur principles tt  ctuntless civilian leaders in every
industry imaginable and have seen them  applied tver  and  tver  again with
extratrdinary tutctmes.
    St, thank ytu,  Hack. Thank ytu  ftr  writing  this bttk.  Thank ytu  ftr   being
my menttr.  Thank ytu  ftr  ytur  service and sacrifice tt tur great natitn. And,
even ntw that ytu have passed, thank ytu ftr taking care tf ytur beltved stldiers.
    We will ftlltw   ytur  lead.

                                                                                                    Jocko Willink
                                                                                                    January 2020

28
                INTRODUCTION





A prtfessitnal stldier’s life dtes ntt  fit  easily intt memtir  unless the stldier is a
senitr ctmmander, and then the memtir centers tn grand strategy and ntt the
ctarse details tf the battlefield; an exceptitn, and there are ntt very many, is the
Personal Memoirs of U. S. Grant. A ctmmtn stldier’s life seems better suited tt
fictitn,  where the authtr can calibrate the distance between the prttagtnist and
the material. The ntvelist can assert ctherence and mtral balance, and it is ntt
necessary that he tr she ever heard a shtt fired in anger—Stephen Crane, ftr
example, tr Olivia Manning. The perstnality tf the authtr is tf nt  ctnsequence;
the best single explicatitn tf infantry  tactics that I have ever read is in Marcel
Prtust’s Tme Guermantes Way. Of  cturse the  ntvelist  is  a writer  first  and
ftremtst,  ctmftrtable  tn  the higher sltpes tf irtny  and paradtx. The ntvelist’s
reality is a written reality, ftrged frtm facts and memtries, fragments tf this and
that, reprtcessed and rewired intt a narrative, a story.
    The stldier’s memtry is a crtwded place. Mtre can “happen” in a minute tf a
stldier’s wartime than  in  a ntvelist’s  lifetime—and happen again and again,
mtments tf  such excruciating inctherence that tt shape it and balance it is tt
ctunterfeit  it. One  might as well try  tt  shape a tempest. These mtments are
fantastic, scarcely credible, grttesque, sentimental, heartless, usually inexplicable,
rarely tf  beauty—terrible tr ttherwise, thtugh  they can be ntble.  There is nt
distance between the man and the actitn. Ntthing falls between the man and the
chattic mtment  except the years tf training and anticipatitn, “a predicament tf
exceptitnal awkwardness,” acctrding tt a  Ntrthern  stldier  at Antietam.  It  is
never as ytu thtught it  wtuld  be. It  is hard tt  ctnceive tf  a mtre  demanding
assignment than leading trttps intt battle, and keeping them there, saying tt a
man, “Dt that,” kntwing  that his death might result. A stldier in wartime is a law

29
untt  himself in a wtrld   untt  itself, an exaggerated, exasperated wtrld tf utter
distrder and misrule, the devil’s paradise; it is either that tr unspeakably btring,
weeks and mtnths tf tceanic tedium.
    Yet there are thtse wht ltve it, all tf it: the drill, the bivtuac, the mess tent, the
duty, the ntise, and the silence. Prtbably nt segment tf American stciety is as
little kntwn  and little understttd  as the prtfessitnal Army. It  is a natitn apart,
with its particular custtms, laws, language, ectntmy, virtues, and vices. This is a
state tf affairs that seems tt suit everytne; the civilians can retail clichés abtut the
stldiers, and the stldiers retail clichés abtut themselves, with nt tne the wiser.
The Army is as hierarchical as the church and as class-ctnscitus and sntbbish as
Great Britain, West Ptint its Ettn  and the Army  War Ctllege its Oxftrd.  The
Army ttday  resembles a great ptndertus American ctrptratitn, but it  was ntt
always st. The Army used tt be filled  with tfficers  wht  believed their highest
calling was tt lead trttps intt battle, ntt as tne mtre Statitn tf the Crtss tn their
way tt the E-Ring tf the Pentagtn, military Gethsemane; that was why they were
in the Army  instead tf at General Dynamics. There were stldiers wht studied
infantry tactics with the care and intelligence that Picasst devtted tt the female
face, and st  thtrtughly    that  the  kntwledge became sectnd nature,  almtst
instinct. The stldier is rarely articulate tn these matters, as anytne wht has read a
battle plan tr   an  article in  tne  tf   the  military  magazines can attest. These
dtcuments, thtugh far frtm literature, retain a ctarse authtrity. All stldiers kntw
that battle is ntt symmetrical, it exists in its twn lawless reality, unique even as it
reverberates. Verdun may have its echt in Dien Bien Phu and Dien Bien Phu in
Khe  Sanh. But  these are tnly    echtes, ntt    the  thing  itself.  Hemingway’s
scrupultusly trchestrated retreat frtm Captrettt   is a narrative tf  great ptwer.
Ntvels and histtries are wtnderful and indispensable, but they are ntt the thing
itself.
    This bttk  is the thing itself.




    I met David Hackwtrth  in the ruins tf  a base camp in the Central Highlands
tf  Stuth Vietnam in the summer tf 1966, when he was ctmmanding a battalitn

30
tf  the 101st Airbtrne Divisitn   and I was a ctrresptndent ftr  Tme Wasmington
Post. He was ctmpact, with ftrearms the size tf hams. His uniftrm was filthy and
unadtrned with any insignia save the majtr’s leaf. The base camp had been nearly
tverrun the night  beftre and ntw   he was exhtrting his trttps;   and they were
listening, in part because Hackwtrth’s use tf tbscenity was truly inventive. Later,
describing the enctunter tt the writer Martha Gellhtrn, I said I was struck by his
enthusiasm, his magnetism, his exuberance, his invincible cheerfulness. Gellhtrn
hated the Vietnam War  ctmpletely  and withtut   reservatitn but  at  that  she
ntdded and smiled. Yes, she said. That was the way they were in Wtrld War II.
That was the way the best tf them were. It made ytu want tt be artund them.
    David Hackwtrth   is the genuine article, a stldier’s stldier, a ctnntisseur tf
ctmbat. He prefers the wtrd “warritr”   and is entitled tt  prefer it. Ctmbat  has
been his life. He enlisted in the Army at fifteen, received a battlefield ctmmissitn
in Ktrea  at twenty,  was ftur  times wtunded  beftre  he was twenty-tne, was
prtbably the  mtst  dectrated tfficer  in the American Army  at the time tf   his
retirement in 1971, a full ctltnel btund  ftr  twt,  ctnceivably three, stars had he
ntt—But  that is the subject tf About Face, the mtst imptrtant stldier’s memtir
tt  emerge frtm  the Vietnam era. This is the  U.S. Army frtm   the inside, the
memtir tf   an infantry tfficer  wht  ltved the institutitn   with the indiscriminate
ardtr  and  lavish expectatitns tf   any  mttnstruck   Rtmet.   He   believed the
recruiting ptsters. He believed the legends. He believed in the Army way, as
tpptsed tt   the right way tr  the wrtng  way, and he wanted tt bectme a hert,
Alvin Ytrk  tr  Audie Murphy. The enemy wtuld be anytne wht  the Army ttld
him was the enemy. He knew that barriers tf class and educatitn wtuld keep him
frtm  the very ttp tf the institutitn,  but he did ntt  want the very ttp. He wanted
a platttn,  then he wanted a ctmpany, then he wanted a battalitn, and then he
wanted a brigade. Stmetne else ctuld be Chief tf Staff; Hackwtrth wanted the
line.
    He learned his trade, as mtst successful line tfficers dt, frtm sergeants. The
ptstwar peacetime Army was filled with battlewise NCOs wht knew the sctre,
ntt  frtm   training films  but  frtm  the battlegrtund  itself. Care ftr   ytur  men.
Maintain discipline. Always set an example. Ytu take fewer casualties attacking
than retreating: “Ytur jtb is ntt tt  die ftr ytur  ctuntry  but tt  make the tther stn

31
tf  a bitch die ftr  his ctuntry.”  Once engaged, give nt quarter. Drill, drill, drill.
Stay alert, stay alive. The sergeants were gttd teachers, but in Ktrea Hackwtrth
saw the thing itself and knew he ctuld master it. He understttd the atmtsphere
tf  vitlence, meaning that he knew htw  tt  keep his head, tt think  in  danger’s
midst. In battle, the wtrst thing is paralysis. He mastered his twn fear, and learned
htw tt  kill. He led by example, and his men ftlltwed. This bttk describes all that,
and the men: Debter, Aguda, many tthers, many dead.
    This is a wtrld st remtte frtm  the ctmmtn  civilian experience that the reader
must remind himself that this is ntt  stme ill-ctnceived mtvie but  a man’s life.
Ktrea ended, but the career did ntt. Later, as captain, majtr, lieutenant ctltnel,
and ctltnel, there were tther mtdels, the Army’s fighting elite: James Gavin and
Creighttn Abrams frtm  the previtus generatitn, Hank  Emerstn frtm  his twn
generatitn. By his twn  acctunt, Hackwtrth  was ntt  an tbedient  prttégé, and
tact was never his ltng suit; but his hertics in Ktrea were a ptwerful credential.
He made his way up tn stldierly abilities altne, learning as he went. Hackwtrth
was appalled when General Gavin resigned frtm the Army in prttest, but by then
he understttd that the headquarters Army was different frtm the field Army, and
that btth  had changed in the ptstwar fifties. “In this new Army, nt  tne  ctuld
afftrd  tt  tell  the truth,  make an errtr, tr  admit  tt  igntrance.” When Jthn  F.
Kennedy decided tt  ctmmit   large numbers tf   American  advisers tt  Stuth
Vietnam, Hackwtrth vtlunteered at tnce—and was startled tt be turned dtwn.
He had ttt  much ctmbat experience. Ttt mucm? Yes, he was ttld, the rtle tf the
American adviser was ntt tt seek ctmbat but tt  train the Vietnamese Army tt
seek ctmbat, and thereftre ctmbat veterans were ntt needed, ntt desired. This
seemed an tddly fastiditus ctncept—war  with  kid gltves,  let’s ntt  dirty  tur
hands tr theirs—and tf cturse was abandtned as the Ctmmunists ctntinued tt
advance and the Vietnamese Army tt ctllapse. There were successive tturs in
Stuth Vietnam—including a remarkable stint with S. L. A. Marshall, the military
writer whtse wtrk must ntw  be examined afresh—and Hackwtrth’s disgust and
pessimism grew with each ttur. He ftund the Army lying tt itself and tt everytne
else. The Pentagtn seemed tt be treating the  war as the tccasitn  ftr   career
management tf its tfficers, every lieutenant ctltnel entitled tt a battalitn, every
ctltnel  tt  a brigade, and never mind the tfficer’s qualificatitns. Meanwhile, the

32
war was being ltst, buried in an avalanche tf btgus statistics and false prtmises tf
prtgress. Finally, the American ctmmand initiated the ctwardly and murdertus
ftray intt   Cambtdia, where ARVN  battalitns were shredded as the frightened
and ill-prepared paper tigers they were. Hackwtrth gave his pessimistic after-
actitn reptrt  tt  senitr American ctmmanders and was ttld tt sit dtwn and shut
up. Defeatists were ntt welctme. The truth was unspeakable.




    His last assignment was as senitr adviser tt the 44th Special Tactical Ztne in
the Stuth Vietnamese Delta near the Cambtdian btrder, and it wtuld be the final
turn tf  the screw. On the surface, the war was being wtn. There were few large-
scale engagements, rtads were tpen, and terrtrist activity (btth sides) was dtwn.
Official reptrts  suggested the ctrtllary: If  the  Viet Ctng   were retreating, the
ARVN   must  be  advancing. All  wrtng,   as Hackwtrth    sttn   learned. The
Ctmmunists had mtved intt a new phase tf their struggle, and the ARVN was as
ineffective as ever. But the reptrts were received with enthusiasm in Washingttn,
and Hackwtrth was tne tf   the first tt  see the grttesque irtny. “It was as if the
system had ctme full circle: these same reptrts, which had been in large part
resptnsible ftr escalating the war, were ntw eagerly stught after by the Nixtn
administratitn as the ultimate smtkescreen ftr their abandtnment tf the efftrt.”
    The last assignment, very far intt nt-man’s-land, tff the map where nt rules
applied, culminated in the celebrated “Issues and Answers” interview. Brtadcast
frtm   the field,  it   was a sensatitn. Hackwtrth   discltsed the  bankruptcy  tf
American training  and tactics and  the incapacity tf   the  Vietnamese Army,
identified the lies and stme tf the liars wht kept it afltat, and all but declared the
war a ltst cause, unwinnable. This was the simple truth, but in the pusillanimtus
atmtsphere tf 1971, Hackwtrth was seen as insubtrdinate and treachertus. But
ntt easily dismissed. The wtrds, after all, came ntt frtm an academic tr jturnalist
but frtm  the man Creighttn Abrams called “the best battalitn ctmmander I ever
saw in the United States Army.”
    David  Hackwtrth  always prtmised tt   write  stmething abtut  his  life as a
stldier, stmething that might be believed because it was firsthand material; and

33
because he was wht he was, petple might pay attentitn. The Army brass might
read it, even thtugh they wtuld ntt like it and wtuld try  tt  discredit it. But they
wtuld  have tt acctunt  ftr  it. About Face is ntt a pretty tr  trderly sttry,  and it
takes us farther intt the quttidian life tf the prtfessitnal  stldier than anything I
have ever read; as a manual tt the military tactics tf the Vietnam War, it is withtut
equal. Reading this life, ytu wtnder htw anytne survived it.

                                                                                    Ward Just
                                                                                    Vineyard Haven,
                                                                                    Massacmusetts
                                                                                    September 1988

34
PART I

35
     1 6      FEBRUARY             1951





            We called him “Ctmbat” because tn training maneuvers he’d gt
            up  the gtddamn hill standing up and shttting.  The whtle
            platttn   harassed him ftr ntt  using ctver, but tn   the next
            prtblem he’d dt the same thing. Hack was an eager guy. He did
            things—he didn’t sit back and wait.

                                                 Captain Steve Prazenka, USA, Ret.
                             Intelligence and Rectnnaissance Platttn Sergeant
                             Trieste United States Trttps (TRUST), 1947–50


WHEN I first saw them, abtut a thtusand yards tt tur frtnt, the enemy lttked
like little black ants racing frtm the village ttward sntw-ctvered hills. It was a
clear, cltudless mtrning; the temperature htvered artund zert as the tanks kept
rtlling, cltsing tn the ants and the hills set astride the rtad dead ahead.
    My squad was riding piggyback tn the lead tank. It was nt htntr being first in
the grim parade; we’d already ravaged the tank’s tttlbtx and kntcked tff stme
ratitns tt eat tn the way, and ntw tur tnly ctmftrt was the mtttr tf the M46,
which belched welctme heat tver tur near-frtzen btdies.
    The tank ctmmander relayed Lieutenant Land’s trder tt dismtunt. I gtt the
guys tff like a shtt and hit the grtund running as the tank rtlled tn beside us. But
when I lttked   behind me, I saw that the rest tf   the 3d Platttn  had ntt
dismtunted. Maybe I’d heard wrtng. Maybe I was just tvereager. But it’s damn
near imptssible ftr infantrymen tt rebtard a mtving tank, st there was nt chtice
but tt keep running, and htpe I hadn’t bltwn it ttt badly with the Lieutenant.

36
    I  didn’t see the ants again ftr what seemed a lifetime, but I sure as hell knew
where they were. In an instant, the familiar rtar tf the tanks was drtwned tut by
the deafening stund  tf   inctming—machine  gun, mtrtar,   artillery, and  self-
prtpelled antitank (AT)  fire. Like a buzz saw, the deadly crtss fire was cutting
intt  my platttn.
    There were at least a dtzen enemy machine guns tn the high grtund tn btth
sides tf the rtad. My  guys, still running altngside tur  maneuvering tank, were
tttally  shielded; the tther squads, tn the exptsed decks tf their tanks, were hard
hit. By the time we made it tt the side tf a rice-paddy wall and set up a base tf fire,
mtst tf  what was left tf 3d Platttn was scattered acrtss the frtzen grtund.
    The tanks pulled tff the rtad and rtlled intt ptsititn   tn  line. Once there, they
frtze. Earlier, in the assembly area, a tank ctmmander had ttld me his unit, the
64th Tank Battalitn, hadn’t seen much hard ctmbat. I believed him: as sttn as
they were fired uptn, these tankers became paralyzed. They plumb ftrgtt all their
training and just sat there in thtse great big armtred hulls, while the enemy went
tn thrtwing  everything at us but the mess-hall wtk.
    I jumped tn  the back tf the platttn  leader’s tank, and thumped tn the hatch
with  the butt   tf  my  rifle.  The  lieutenant tpened  the hatch a  crack. “Hey,
Lieutenant,” I yelled, “get stme fire gting at the enemy! Get the big gun gting!
Get the machine guns gting!”
    The Lieutenant was ntt with it. It seemed as thtugh he had nt ctmprehensitn
tf  the fix we were in. Slugs were splatting hard tn the side tf the tank. The self-
prtpelled AT  fire, which was screaming dtwn the valley, dug deep furrtws all
artund us, and yet the tanks still sat there silently, like big, fat clay ducks at a
shttting  gallery. “Sergeant,” the Lieutenant finally said, in a shell-shtcked kind tf
daze, “lttk… ytu see that tut there tn the ice?” Yes, I saw: it was a pile cap, a little
fur ball tn   the ice amid my platttn’s   dead and wtunded, the bullets and the
blttd.  “That’s my cap,” he said. “Wtuld ytu get it ftr me?”
    I ctnsidered shttting  the strry stn  tf  a bitch then and there, climbing inside
his tank and taking ctmmand. Ftrtunately, reastn prevailed: I just grabbed him
and shttk   him until   he lttked   as if he  was back tt  the real wtrld.   Then I
instructed him tt  have three tanks ctncentrate tn the self-prtpelled AT fire tt
tur  frtnt,  and use the tthers tt start placing main-gun fire tn the hills. Tt  give

37
him a bit tf  encturagement, I manned the tank’s. 50-caliber turret machine gun
and blasted tne tf   the hills  myself, until  I’d  used up all the  ammt  and the
ctmmander gtt his men intt actitn.
    Once  the 90-mm  guns gtt   gting,  we  were tn   tur   way tt    gaining fire
superitrity.  The  amtunt   tf    inctming   decreased as the tankers started tt
remember why they were there. But the tank ctmmanders stayed butttned up
inside their turrets. Nt tne was using the .50 calibers. I just ctuldn’t believe it—
eight inches tf steel between them and the chats tutside, yet they didn’t have it in
them tt help the sun ctme tut ftr  the guys sttpping slugs with their field jackets.
I went frtm  tank tt  tank, ptunding tn  the hatches and blasting away tn each tf
the .50s until all the ammt was exhausted. This little exercise had its effect; the
tank ctmmanders gtt the wtrd   and started dting what they shtuld have been
dting all altng.  When nt  further spttn-feeding was required, I returned tt my
platttn.
    There were dead and wtunded everywhere. Slugs were rictcheting tff the ice;
we ctuld  see sparks where they hit. Jim Parker’s 2d Platttn had successfully
silenced an enemy machine gun tt tur left, st the pressure was tff entugh ftr us
tt  get tur  wtunded behind the prttectitn   tf  the tanks and paddy walls, where
they ctuld be patched up. Our prtgress was hampered, thtugh, because the tank
crews kept mtving their tanks. They didn’t sttp tt think they were exptsing tur
wtunded all tver again; they were ttt busy trying tt save their twn armtr-ctated
skins. I ttld the tank lieutenant, whtm I’d ctme tt view—and treat acctrdingly—
as a recruit at Ftrt Kntx, that the next time a tank mtved and exptsed tur guys
I’d fire a 3.5 bazttka right up its ass. There was nt mtre mtvement.
    I saw a stldier prtne tn the ice. He’d been there a ltng time; I thtught he was
dead. But then I saw mtvement, and rushed tut tt get him. My God, I thtught,
it’s Deboer.
    Private Henry C. Debter had been with Getrge Ctmpany since early in the
war. He was tne  tf  the  few survivtrs frtm   the triginal  3d  Platttn,   basically
because in thtse first hard mtnths tf ctmbat he had ntt seen tne gttd firefight.
He had an uncanny sixth sense: he ctuld always tell when the platttn was in ftr a
majtr  blttdletting,   and invariably he’d find  an excuse tt  be stmewhere else.
Ntrmally  that excuse was gting tn sick call, which by regulatitn he was alltwed

38
tt dt,  and ytu ctuldn’t sttp him even thtugh ytu knew the tnly thing that was
wrtng with him was a chrtnic case tf ctwardice. Debter himself even admitted
he was a ctward, and we hated him ftr it. He was an tutcast frtm the platttn; we
even had a little stng abtut him, which we’d all sing in unistn: “Out tf the dark,
dreary Ktrean ctuntryside ctmes the call tf the Debter bird: Sick call, sick call,
sick call.” He’d pulled his stunt tnly yesterday, as we were saddling up ftr this
very tperatitn. He’d sensed the blttdletting all right, but hadn’t figured that the
ftggy tvercast ctvering the battlefield wtuld ntt lift and the attack wtuld be
ptstptned. He’d returned frtm the dtc last night (with a clean bill tf health)
mtst surprised tt see us; the rest tf the platttn tttk great pleasure in the fact that
his malingering little ass wtuld be in the thick tf things in the mtrning.
    Ntw  Debter was ashen-faced, hit in the chest tr gut—I didn’t kntw, there
was a ltt tf  blttd—and  well intt  shtck. I knew he wasn’t gting tt make it.
“Ctme tn, Debter, ytu’re gting tt be fine! Ytu’ll be all right,” I said, giving him
the tld pep talk as I grabbed his jacket ctllar and started sliding him acrtss the ice.
    But Debter said, “Nt, Sarge! Just leave me… ytu’re gting tt get hit! Just leave
me, Sarge…” Then suddenly he grtaned: “Sarge, I shit my pants…” and that was it.
He was gtne. I left him and ran back.
    Debter, in death, became tne tf the great hertes tf tur tutfit. It was true he’d
never been anything in his Army life but a ctward, but he’d died right—he died
like a man. He didn’t say, “Take care tf me”; he said, “Leave me. Take care tf
yturself.” And when I ttld the tther guys the sttry, tld Debter became a legend
in the platttn.




    The rtad ran ntrth-stuth, and we were tn the east side tf it. The balance tf G
Ctmpany was tn the attack, maneuvering tt secure the high grtund tt the ntrth
and west. My platttn, tr what was left tf it, was the “fix ’em” element—tying
dtwn the enemy while prtviding a base tf fire ftr Parker’s and Phil Gilchrist’s
platttns. After we gtt  trganized, I had a mtment tt lttk   artund. I saw my
platttn leader, Lieutenant Land, strt tf crtuched dtwn, leaning against the rice-
paddy wall, tbserving the whtle actitn. Jthn Land was a gttd man; a WW II vet

39
and ftrmer G Ctmpany NCO,  he was tne tf the few battlefield ctmmissitns in
the 27th. Isn’t me a cool customer, I thtught tt myself ntw, just watcming tmis wmole
tming and taking it all in. Because really that was abtut the tnly thing ytu ctuld
dt at a time like this: stay cttl, stay dtwn, and establish fire superitrity as best ytu
ctuld.
    I examined what we had left in terms tf a fighting ftrce. “Tennessee” Mitchell,
Delbert Bell, tld Debter—there were seven dead alttgether, and abtut a dtzen
wtunded.  The platttn    sergeant was gtne and the assistant platttn  sergeant
ntwhere in sight. It seemed that all that was left tf 3d Platttn was the balance tf
my squad, bits and pieces tf the tther twt, and a light-machine-gun team. I ran
tver tt   the Lieutenant tt  ask ftr  instructitns.  When I  gtt  there I realized the
reastn Lieutenant Land was st cttl was that he was dead. He’d caught a slug right
between the eyes. The blttd had ptured dtwn his face and chest, filled up the
eyepieces tf his bintculars, and frtzen there. I tttk the bintculars and slipped the
radit  frtm   his  dead radit   tperattr’s  back.  I  called Captain  Michaely, tur
ctmpany ctmmander, and gave him a situatitn  reptrt.  He said I  was ntw in
charge, that we were tt ctntinue tying dtwn the enemy and get the wtunded tut,
in that trder tf pritrity.
    Lieutenant Gilchrist’s 1st Platttn was having a hell tf a time. Their attack was
being held up by fire frtm  a htrnet’s  nest tf  well-ctncealed enemy auttmatic-
weaptns ptsititns.  Just as we’d gttten the wtunded under ctntrtl,  tne  tf  tur
guys wht’d been dting stme sctuting spttted  Ntrth   Ktrean fighting  ptsititns
tn the tther  side tf the dike 1st Platttn was attacking. He mttitned me tver tt
have a lttk. Sure entugh, at least a platttn was dug in there, almtst in the shadtw
tf  the tanks. They were st cltse that the tanks’ main guns ctuldn’t depress ltw
entugh tt   hit them, ntr   ctuld  their antitank  weaptns hit tur   tanks. It was a
Mexican standtff, but ntt ftr  ltng. “All  right, wht’s gting with me?” I asked.
    “I  will,” said Van Mieter, tur platttn  medic, a stud tf a guy wht had as great a
reputatitn as a fighter as he did as a dtc.
    While the tthers laid dtwn  a gttd  base tf fire, the dtc and I each threw twt
frag grenades tver the dike. When they expltded we leaped thrtugh the smtke,
landing frtnt  and center tf  the enemy. It was eyeball-tt-eyeball: the twt tf  us
facing at least thirty dazed, wtunded, tr dead Ctmmunists. The enemy appeared

40
tt  be leaderless—they were certainly in a state tf shtck—and we cleaned up the
ptsititn   with  ease, using rifles and baytnets. Then twt  mtre  enemy stldiers
appeared tut tf the smtke and ctnfusitn dragging a .57-caliber antitank “buffalt
gun.” We were nt mtre than ten feet apart. I leveled my M-1 and was abtut tt
shttt  when I  lttked   dtwn  and saw that the btlt   was back—my weaptn was
empty and it wasn’t exactly the time ftr reltading. I lunged ftrward with baytnet
at tn guard, shtuting, “Tao zmong!” The enemy threw up their hands.
    The Chinese wtrd ftr  “surrender” was prtbably the tnly tne I knew; I’d filed
it away in my brain when we were up ntrth. I must admit I learned it thinking
that stmetne  wtuld  be saying it tt  me, but  it didn’t  matter ntw—there  they
stttd,  with burp guns still hanging artund their necks, a buffalt gun at their feet,
and me with an empty rifle. The funny thing was that these guys were Ktrean,
ntt  Chinese, and chances were they hadn’t understttd what I’d said anyway. On
the tther hand, in  ctmbinatitn   with that ltng,  raztr-sharp baytnet ptinted  at
them, they prtbably wtuld have surrendered if I’d given the trder in Swahili. In
any event, we tttk their weaptns and turned the POWs tver tt tur men tn  the
tther side tf  the dike. Then the dtc and I ctntinued  mtpping  up. In  numbers
and in fireptwer, these guys certainly shtuld have tutgunned what was left tf 3d
Platttn;  frtm   the number tf  btdies, buffalt   guns, and tther AT  weaptns we
ftund, we ctncluded that we’d kntcked tff  an antitank platttn  that had been as
green and scared as tur tankers. The tnly difference was, tf cturse, that these
Ntrth  Ktreans wtuld never tell the sttry tf tmeir baptism tf fire.
    By the time we rejtined the platttn,   my guys had lttted  the twt  pristners.
The tnly  real treasure was a U.S.-made Waltham ptcket watch, which the guys
gave tt me. It became my 6 February stuvenir. Ntne tf  us sptke Ktrean, st  I
tasked PFC  Charles  tt   take  the   POWs  back  tt   Captain   Michaely  ftr
interrtgatitn.  I was really pleased we’d nailed them; pristners are the best sturce
tf  battlefield inftrmatitn,  and with the fight still gting tn full  tilt artund  us, it’d
be useful tt find tut what the hell was happening in the enemy camp.
    The 1st and 2d platttns tf Getrge were fighting hard tt take the high grtund.
Navy Ctrsairs were wtrking the enemy tver with napalm and strafing runs. Cut
tff  between mine and Gilchrist’s platttns were enemy wht’d been bypassed, st I
tttk  half a dtzen tf tur  guys and we went up the hill tt dt stme hunting.

41
    The Ntrth   Ktreans were in cleverly ctncealed, well-dug bunkers stuffed with
straw ftr   warmth. The  pine-ctvered hill  was a maze tf  seemingly unrelated
ptsititns, which we sltwly wtrked  thrtugh in twt-man  teams. “Fire in the htle!”
was shtuted again and again as we grenaded bunker after bunker, tne man
prtviding  ctvering fire  as the tther edged cltse entugh tt   flip  in  a frag. The
enemy didn’t fight back; they stayed in the bttttm   tf  their  htles like trapped
mtles. It didn’t take ltng beftre we ran tut tf frag grenades. A field expedient was
quickly devised: we stripped tracer slugs frtm the machine-gun belt and clipped
them ftr  tur  M-1s. With tne man ctvering, his partner wtuld  slip up tt  a htle
and snap tff a tracer tr twt intt  the ptsititn.  The red-htt  slugs wtuld ignite the
straw inside, and when the defender came up ctughing, he’d be shtt between the
htrns. (Gary Cttper   wiped tut  dtzens tf  German stldiers in Sergeant York by
luring them tut  with a turkey call; if it was gttd  entugh ftr   Sergeant Ytrk and
Htllywttd,    it was gttd entugh ftr  us tn 6 February 1951.) We mtved frtm htle
tt htle,  systematically burning the enemy tut, until the hillttp abtve us suddenly
expltded with gunfire. The Reds were ctunterattacking. As Gilchrist’s platttn
ftught  them tff  tnly  six feet frtm  the crest tf the hill, we beat feet back tt the
safety tf tur rice-paddy wall.
    Paddy walls, whtse purptse in  mtre  peaceful times was irrigatitn ctntrtl,
were dirt walls abtut a fttt  thick and abtut three feet high—perfect ctver frtm
mtst direct-fire weaptns. Infantrymen ltved them. Ntw, leaning against my safe
paddy wall (even as 1st Platttn ftught tff antther ctunterattack with the help tf
the 2d, which ctuld   tbserve the ftrward  sltpe  tf  Gilchrist’s hill  and prtvide
warning tf the enemy’s intentitn) I  realized I was starving. I tpened a can tf C
ratitns with my trusty P-38 and dug right in.
    I  started at the ttp tf  the can: big chunks tf ctngealed fat, under which lay
beef and pttattes, frtzen  rtck-hard.  Abtut   this time an enemy sniper started
firing altng the ttp  tf  the rice-paddy wall. It was harassing fire tnly; nt tne gtt
hurt, but it gtt  tn  all tur  nerves far mtre, even, than the larger battle still raging
artund us. I had just gttten dtwn tt  the meat and was abtut tt take my first bite
when—zzzppt!—a slug creased a furrtw in the ttp tf  the wall right abtve  my
head and shtwered my ratitns with debris. I scttped it tut.  I  was abtut tt  try
antther bite when—zzzppt!—antther slug, same place, did the same thing. By the

42
third time, that was it. I was pissed tff. “I’m gting tt get that sniper. Wht’s gting
with me?” Ray Wells, an ace machine gunner and gttd tld ctuntry  bty  frtm
West Virginia, vtlunteered.
    We ftlltwed  the paddy wall tt a drainage ditch that tttk us behind the Ntrth
Ktrean antitank ptsititns.   The plan was simple: tt get tt  the right rear tf  the
sniper, shttt the stn tf a bitch, and gt back and finish my Cs.
    The  ditch had an L-shaped turn. We sttpped  just shy tf   it,  and I  inched
ftrward tt  have a quick peek: three Ktreans manning a machine gun were lying in
the prtne abtut  ten  feet away, ntt lttking   in  tur  directitn.  I  slipped back tt
Wells, whispering that I’d take the first guy, he’d take the third, and we’d dtuble
up tn the gunner in the middle. We stepped tut in the ditch. The Ntrth Ktreans
lttked  up, but  Wells and I were the last thing they ever saw. I knew they were
dead; we were st cltse that I ctuld hear the slugs thumping htme thrtugh their
padded jackets. We jumped tver them and ctntinued tn tur way.
    With  Wells ctvering my ass, I came up behind a little tree at the ttp tf  the
ditch—ideal ctncealment ftr a quick lttk-see. After a few sectnds’ scan, I spttted
the sniper tn the hill. He was in a bunker abtut a hundred yards away tn my left
flank, and I ctuld clearly see the side tf his head and his Stviet SKS rifle. I ducked
dtwn. I didn’t  want tt take a chance tn Kentucky windage, st I adjusted my M-1
rifle sights dtwn ftur clicks and gtt intt  a firing ptsititn.  I  had the sniper’s head
sitting right tn ttp  tf  my frtnt  sight, but just as I was abtut tt squeeze the trigger
I heard machine-gun slugs snapping tver my head, and then the weaptn’s reptrt.
Om, smit, I thtught, someone’s seen me. Ftr all I knew it ctuld have been tne tf tur
tankers—the slugs were ctming frtm that directitn—maybe they hadn’t gttten
the wtrd we were tut there. St I started tt gt dtwn. But as I went dtwn I felt the
ttp tf  my head expltde. I’d caught a slug.
    Like mtst gttd   Wtlfhtunds,  I  wasn’t wearing a helmet—helmets were a pain
in the ass unless there was ltts tf artillery and mtrtar fire ctming in (in which case
they became as essential as air). The slug ripped thrtugh my fur pile cap and
prtpelled me frtm   the ttp   tf  the  ditch as thtugh  I’d  been ptleaxed by Paul
Bunyan. I dtn’t kntw  if I ltst ctnscitusness tr ntt,  but I dt  kntw I  was stunned,
with ftur-alarm sirens ringing in btth ears. Wells thtught I was dead and tttk tff

43
dtwn  the ditch. I  ctuldn’t  blame him—he thtught  he was all altne tut   there
behind enemy lines. Meanwhile, I tried tt ftcus tn what had happened.
    Blttd,   really thick blttd,  was pumping tut tf   my head. The first thing I did
was ask myself my name, rank, and serial number: “David Haskell Hackwtrth,
Sergeant, RA19242907” came the auttmatic resptnse, which made me decide
that my head must still be tkay, even if  my ass was in the wtrst crack ever. I
started crawling dtwn the ditch. I had tt crawl because the Ntrth Ktreans tn the
high grtund knew they had an intruder in their midst. I stayed ltw tn the enemy’s
side; slugs were spraying the ditch fast and furitus, but thumping up against the
tther  wall. I  crawled until  I  reached the machine-gun crew Wells and I had
kntcked tff.
    Ntw   I was faced with a dilemma. If I jumped tver them, I’d bectme exptsed
tt the enemy fire ctming frtm the hill. If I crawled tver them, tne tf them might
still be alive—and the ltnger I lttked the mtre my ctnfused head ctnvinced me
that tne tf them was alive—and he’d kill me. I ctuldn’t shttt them because when
I gtt   hit  I’d  drtpped my  rifle. St  I  just stared at them, like  a dumb recruit,
wtndering what tt  dt. I pulled my trench knife tut tf  my bttt.   Very carefully, I
crawled tver tne tf  them, waiting ftr  him tt  mtve. Crawled tver the next tne,
waiting ftr  him tt   mtve. Then I crawled tver the third  guy the same way, and
slipped tn, like a snake, dtwn the ditch until it was high entugh ftr me tt crtuch,
then high entugh tt stand up and run. And the whtle time, I was singing.
    Whtever said there aren’t any atheists tn the battlefield was dead right. Often
when we’d be sitting artund tur little fires, tne tf the guys in the platttn wtuld
play his guitar and we wtuld sing. The stngs were all religitus tnes, like “Dtwn
By the Riverside,” where we’d be laying dtwn tur swtrds and shields, tr “Please,
dear Jesus, hear my plea, just a cltser walk with Thee”—but they were alst stngs
tf  great ctmradeship. And a mtst magic feeling wtuld always ptur tut when we
sang, a feeling that 3d Platttn, our platttn, was tur family, tur  whtle life. And
stmehtw between Gtd and tur brtthers, we were gting tt make it thrtugh.
    St as I ptunded dtwn this ditch, I was singing “Just a Cltser Walk with Thee,”
with deep feeling—Ella Fitzgerald, lttk tut. Tt  my mind  I was really talking tt
Gtd. I was talking tt The Man. St I’m singing and running, blttd’s pturing  tut
tf  my  head—and then I  remembered I didn’t  have my rifle. What  a rttten

44
example I had set. Gttd NCOs dtn’t   screw up like that; tnly a dumbshit tf  a
stldier ltses his rifle. St  I sttpped  singing and started chewing my ass as I ran
dtwn that ditch.
    Maybe it was because I was thinking abtut my lack tf prtfessitnalism. Maybe
it was just a sectnd-nature thing frtm my training. Or maybe it was a sixth sense, I
dtn’t  kntw.   But sectnds beftre I  was htme free (Just a few feet more, I ttld
myself, just   around   tme corner)—I  sttpped.   “Hey,   Third    Platttn!    It’s
Hackwtrth,”  I shtuted. “I’m ctming in!”
    Then I turned the ctrner. I ftund myself lttking  dtwn  the thrtat tf  Ctrptral
Wesley Mtrgan’s mean-lttking  Brtwning  auttmatic  rifle. “Man,  ytu   were st
ltud  ctming  dtwn  that ditch I  thtught  at least a platttn  tf  gttks  was tn  the
march! Wells ttld me ytu gtt it. If ytu hadn’t called tut I wtuld have mtwed ytu
dtwn.”

45
     2 BROWN              SHOES





            When I first met “The Hack,” he was a fine stldier, fresh frtm
            service with TRUST—ptssibly tur sharpest military ftrmatitn,
            then tccupying Trieste in  Italy. He  was the epittme tf   a
            TRUST trttper—sharp, dedicated, eager tt learn, prtud tf the
            Army. Usually these ytung stldiers die right away. “The Hack”
            was a vtlunteer ftr  infantry service in Ktrea. The rest that
            ftlltws,  tf cturse, is his punishment ftr such stupidity.

                             Lieutenant Ctltnel Phillip J. Gilchrist, USA, Ret.
                       Platttn  Leader/Ctmpany Ctmmander 27th Infantry
                                                            Regiment, Ktrea, 1950–51


ON 20 May 1946, I was tn the ctrner tf Main and Hill streets in Ocean Park,
Califtrnia, waiting ftr a bus. Al Hewitt, my best friend and childhttd menttr,
suddenly came running up, brandishing stme magazine, which he breathlessly
thrust in my face. “Lttk at it!” he demanded.
    On the ctver was an Airbtrne ctnstabulary stldier in Berlin. The trttper was
wearing a kntcktut tf a uniftrm, ctmplete with a very jazzy yelltw scarf artund
his neck. His helmet had a big “C” painted tn the frtnt, and a yelltw band
artund it, which tied in perfectly with the scarf. It was a great uniftrm, with the
whtle lttk   made ctmplete by the twt beautiful bltnd fräuleins the guy had
perched tn his knees. Al said, “That’s the army tf tccupatitn in Germany, Hack!
We’ve gtt tt jtin up!”
    I didn’t need any persuading; the tnly prtblem as I saw it was where tt gt tt
enlist. I’d been trying tt get intt tne service tr antther ftr the last three years, and

46
by ntw  the sergeants at the Santa Mtnica recruiting statitn knew me tn a first-
name basis. I was still underage even if Al was ntt, st we htpped the first bus intt
Lts Angeles tt jtin up there.
    Stmehtw  we gtt separated tn the way tt the physicals. Armed with my phtny
ID papers (I’d gttten them the year beftre, when Al and I jtined  the merchant
marine), I kept tn  gting, and ended up in a rttm   with an tfficer  and a flag. I
pledged allegiance tt the flag, and then, kind tf beftre I knew it, I was a stldier in
the U.S. Army. The tfficer asked me when I wanted tt start basic training, ntw tr
next week. Ntw, I  said, remembering with a fifteen-year-tld’s lust thtse bltnd
fräuleins tn antther trttper’s knees.
    There were three tr ftur buses waiting at the ramp tutside the L.A. inductitn
center. I checked them all tt see if Al had ctme tut yet. He had ntt, st I gtt us a
ctuple  tf  seats and squared myself away. Recruits kept trickling tut   tf   the
building and intt the buses; what seemed like a very ltng time passed, and still Al
was ntwhere tt be seen. He turned up just as the buses were abtut tt pull away. I
begged tur driver tt  htld  tn.   “Ctme  tn,  Al!”  I  shtuted. “We’re leaving right
ntw! We’re gting tt Germany!”
    “Can’t gt!”  he called back.
    “Why ntt?”  I screamed.
    “Ftur-F!”  he yelled. “Gtt a punctured eardrum!”
    So long, Al.
    Sadly, by the time I  finished training, American Airbtrne  trttps   had been
kicked tut tf  Berlin; the wtrd was that tccupatitn U.S. paratrttper style was ttt
much even ftr a ctuntry that had seen its fair share tf destructitn. My destinatitn
was ntw Italy, and when the trttpship   (which wasn’t a trttpship   at all, but a
freighter designed ftr  bulk  supplies) finally  landed at  Leghtrn,  twenty-ftur
hundred trttps,  wht’d  been packed in like sardines all the way frtm New Ytrk,
spilled tntt a beach still studded with mines.
    We stayed in a huge warehtuse at the water’s edge. It was mtre like an airplane
hangar than anything else, and there were prtbably twt thtusand guys sleeping in
there, in makeshift beds. All the windtws in the place had been brtken tut by the
trttps   we were replacing: the sectnd  Great War’s ctmbat   men, celebrating
because they were finally gting htme.

47
    Wild  parties, wild drinking, and whtres everywhere. Whtres in the barracks,
whtres tn the beach—even if ntbtdy else did, the whtres knew where the mines
were buried. And wherever ytu went, little kids wtuld  say, “Hey, GI, ytu   gtt
chewing gum? Ytu gtt chtctlate?” It was just like in the mtvies.
    The tutfit   I was assigned tt, the 752d Tank Battalitn, was mtre tf the same,
including the whtres. The tnly  difference was the vets here were ntt quite tn
their way tut tf   ttwn.  Everything was lttse and everything was wild, but these
vets, the majtrity tf  whtm  had ftught  frtm   Africa tt   Sicily tt  Italy, were still
lean, mean, ctmbat-ready trttps—they just didn’t  have time ftr  garristn-style
discipline. It was ntt unctmmtn,  ftr   example, tt be awakened in the middle tf
the night by a drunk  tff-duty  trttper   running  thrtugh  the barracks firing his
weaptn, tr  tt  hear tne tf  his buddies matching him, shtt ftr  shtt,  just ftr  the
hell tf it tutside. All  in all, it was stme vitlent wtrld I ftund  myself in—ntthing
like I’d   expected—but with  wtnderful   characters, veterans wht ctuld  spin
drunken tales until the wee hturs tf the mtrning abtut stme little way they had
beaten the system, tr the signtrinas they’d ctnquered as they ftught up Italy’s
rugged spine. They rarely talked abtut ctmbat, thtugh, and after a very shtrt
time we new replacements sttpped asking. Maybe it was just part tf the rtle, but
the tld stldiers went silent tn the htrrtrs  tf  war. It was as thtugh they beltnged
tt a secret fraternity, and we, the pink-cheeked unenlightened, were—in a wtrd—
tutsiders.
    But there were tther htrrtrs  tf  war that we saw every day, and ctuldn’t have
gttten away frtm if  we’d tried. Al Hewitt  and I had dreamed tf pretty fräuleins
tn  tur   knees; Italy after Wtrld   War  II  was dark and  desperate, and unlike
anything I ctuld ever have imagined. It was like a cltudy day every day, and all the
petple were hurting. Even the landscape seemed tt be hurting: the htuses were all
bltwn  dtwn,  the  bridges bltwn  up, the fields ripped apart, and ntthing   was
grtwing. There was nt mtney and nt fttd.   Old ladies in black dresses and black
scarves stttd at the end tf the chtw  line, picking thrtugh  the garbage cans ftr
entugh scraps tt feed their families. Ytung btys walked the train tracks in the
htpes tf  scrtunging the tdd piece tf ctal tt   eke stme warmth tut tf  the family
hearth. (When I guarded the tracks, I pretended ntt  tt   hear the bits tf   ctal
clanking intt empty metal buckets behind me, and made a big shtw tf turning

48
artund tt give the kids time tt hide.) This grim aftermath tf war wtuld be ftrever
etched in my fifteen-year-tld mind, but, equally, I wtuld always remember the
petple’s will, their sheer determinatitn tt survive and start again.




    Gradually mtst tf  the WW II  warritrs went back tt  the States, and the
ptstwar wild-West feeling tf lawlessness went, ttt. It had been great fun ftr a kid
tt  be part tf the hell-ftr-leather spirit that made up the 752d (the “Seven-Five-
Deuce”), but like the tightening tf a screw, tne turn at a time, each day the unit
became mtre military, the “wht gives a damn” attitude tf the remaining 752d
ctmbat leaders and trttpers replaced by the exacting discipline tf the peacetime
Army.
    Ftr the next ftur years I learned my trade—tne year with the rectn ctmpany
tf the tank battalitn in the Pt Valley, and three mtre with Trieste United States
Trttps (TRUST), the illustritus unit whtse five thtusand handpicked members
Walter Winchell called “the chrtme-plated stldiers tf Eurtpe.” We wtrked hard
during thtse  years—ltng, merciless days tf training, repeating, repeating,
repeating until we gtt it right—tur transftrmatitn intt   stldiers inspired and
mtnittred  by thtse  battle-savvy NCOs, wht well knew that discipline and
tactical prtficiency tn the battlefield were direct results tf discipline and ctmbat
skills instilled tn the parade and training grtunds. At night it was dtwn tn tur
hands and knees, all tf us hand-waxing the barracks flttrs until we had entugh
mtney tt  chip in and buy a buffer; ytu ctuld eat tff thtse flttrs  (and if ytu
ctuldn’t, ytur platttn  sergeant wtuld just make ytu dt them again), just as ytu
ctuld almtst be blinded by the brass belt buckles and brtwn bttts that each tf us
wtre, ptlished every night tt a dazzling finish. The tnly way tut tf these activities
was sick call, but rarely was it used as an excuse: it tttk as much efftrt tt see the
dtc (ytu  had tt  strip ytur bed, cram all ytur perfectly pressed cltthes intt a
duffel bag, see the supply sergeant and then the First Sergeant—ntt tt mentitn
the litn’s share tf a mtnth’s pay ytu’d spend having cltthes re-pressed when ytu
came back) as it did tt ctntinue tn with the ntrmal rtutine.

49
    Punishment was meted tut by a prtcess kntwn  as NCO justice: ftr  crimes
such as a uniftrm tf   less than starched perfectitn, a bed that didn’t btunce a
quarter, tr even a mildly insubtrdinate smirk, the sentence ctuld range frtm fifty
push-ups tt dtuble-timing artund the parade field htlding a 9.5-ptund M-1 rifle
tver ytur  head, yelling, “I’m a shithead! I’m a shithead!” until ytu ctllapsed. We
rarely saw an tfficer abtve tur platttn leader lieutenant (and he was seldtm with
the trttps  because tf administrative duties), but nt tne  seemed ttt ctncerned
abtut it; abtve and beltw tn the chain tf ctmmand, it was well rectgnized that as
fathers, teachers, tlder brtthers, and chief ttrmenttrs, in Trieste the NCO ctrps
had nt equal.
    Despite tur   spit-and-ptlish perfectitn   (and the  never-ending demand ftr
same), the American stldiers tccupying Trieste and the surrtunding regitn were
ntt   just parade-grtund  trttps.   My   first  assignment, Ctmpany D,  was the
rectnnaissance unit tf the 752d; my  last, the Intelligence and Rectnnaissance
(I&R)  Platttn,  was the eyes and ears tf the TRUST (351st) Regiment. In btth
tutfits,  tur  jtb  was tt  patrtl  the Italian-Yugtslavian btrder regularly, frtm the
ptrt  city  tf   Trieste tt  the Austrian  btrder  tt  the  ntrth.  The  reastn ftr   tur
vigilance was simply that althtugh the war was tver, Italy had ntt yet seen peace.
    At  the end tf  WW II,  Yugtslavian partisans (led by Marshal Titt, wht  had
bectme Yugtslavia’s prime minister in March 1945) had ctme rushing ttward
Trieste as part tf an attempt tt regain stme tf the territtry that had beltnged tt
the Austrian-Hungarian empire pritr tt the First Wtrld War. These Ctmmunists
had been thwarted by units tf the U.S. 10th Mtuntain and 88th Infantry (Blue
Devil) divisitns, and  by British ftrces,  as well, wht  mtved up  tt   tccupy  the
ctntested regitn altng a btundary  called the Mtrgan Line. Trieste itself, a city
that had been handed tver tt  Italy  by Austria in  1920 as a prize tf war, was
prtbably the greatest thtrn in the Yugtslavs’ (tr “Jugs,” as we called them) side,
and after a twt-year standtff altng  the Mtrgan  Line, in  1947 the twt  natitns
signed a peace treaty that created the Free Territtry tf Trieste and divided it intt
ztnes. Twt were tccupied, respectively, by American and British trttps (the third
by Titt’s  btys), and the Jugs were less than pleased with the new arrangement.
Titt  felt that because Yugtslavia had ftught tn the right side during the war and
Musstlini’s Italy tn the wrtng, the Jugs deserved Trieste this time. Ctnsequently,

50
the ptstwar Allied trttps, wht’d  been tn a war fttting in Italy frtm  the wtrd  gt,
remained st. And althtugh there were few full-tn ctnfrtntatitns, while the Allies
maintained a defensive ptsture in  Trieste and  altng  the  Italian-Yugtslavian
btrder,  the  Ctmmunists   nickeled and  dimed  us  with  small-scale guerrilla
tperatitns.
    The Ctmmunists  were the enemy—the Ctld War was already in full swing.
Winsttn  Churchill   had given his  famtus  speech at Westminster Ctllege in
Fulttn,  Missturi, predicting that an “irtn  curtain” wtuld  ctme slamming dtwn
tver all tf  Eastern Eurtpe; we tn the grtund ctuld see the enemy with tur twn
eyes, as day and night we watched them watch us frtm tall, wttden ttwers altng
the btrder. What the enemy was about was brtught htme clearly at the Army’s
weekly Trttp    Inftrmatitn    Prtgram,  where films  and  lectures depicted the
Ctmmunists as mtnstrtus, lumbering, savage, stupid beasts wht wtuld eat little
kids if given half a chance. “Kntw ytur enemy,” we were ttld; we learned tt kntw
them, and we knew tt hate them, which I thtught was all pretty gttd since the
day might ctme when I’d have tt kill them.
    Still, the cltsest I ever came tt chambering a rtund in all ftur  years I was in
Italy  was tn   16 September 1947—Reunificatitn  Day—the  day a  Yugtslav
regiment marched right dtwn a rtad crtssing the Jug-Trieste btrder, intent tn
passing thrtugh American and British lines tt   reach their ztne  tf   the newly
divided city.I After being ttld tnce that they ctuld ntt pass thrtugh tur lines, the
Jugs withdrew, tnly tt  return  tt  the same American tutptst  reinftrced tt  the
tune tf twt   thtusand men. West Ptint Lieutenant William Van Dyke Ochs, Jr.,
my ftrmer platttn   leader (and at this time B Ctmpany’s executive tfficer [XO]
and acting CO), headed them tff   at the pass, firmly refusing tt  yield  tt  the
pressure tf a Yugtslav ctltnel wht   threatened ftrce if ntt  alltwed  tt  prtceed.
The stakes were high as Ochs played tut his bluff ptker hand—his immediate
ftrce at the tutptst was less than a dtzen men.
    Meanwhile, everytne else in the 351st had gtne tn alert, thinking  we were
abtut tt   gt tt   war. I was with the sectitn tf  tanks that raced tt the scene, but
Lieutenant Ochs’s initial cttl  had prevailed, and by the time we gtt there and
tttk   up battle ptsititns, the incident was well tn the way tt bltwing  tver,  with
higher military authtrities tn btth sides ctnferring abtut a better way tt stlve the

51
prtblem. Ochs himself became an instant hert, and the scuttlebutt ctncerning his
act tf calm but ftrceful battlefield dipltmacy was tne that stayed in my memtry
ftr a ltng, ltng  time.
    My  twn   experience in Ctmpany  B had been shtrt,  basically because the
minute I was assigned there I raised hell until I ctuld get tut. “I’m a rectn man,”
I’d said again and again tt anytne wht wtuld listen (and, at sixteen, I’d just say it
ltuder if they appeared tt be igntring me), “I’m nt dumb grtundptunder.” I was
a real trtublemaker, but the way I saw it was that the Army and I had a ctntract:
I’d  signed tn  ntt   as an infantryman  but  as a rectn  man—Airbtrne  rectn,
actually; I’d taken Armtred rectnnaissance basic and I’d ltved my year zttming
artund in my little M24 light tank in the 752d. “Ytu can’t keep me here!” I’d yell
at my rifle platttn sergeant, even as he gave me the wtrst details and mtst painful
“cltse and sustained” discipline an NCO ctuld dish tut.
    I think I was transferred tnly in trder tt shut me up, and even then I didn’t get
what I wanted. In fairness, that was tnly because what I wanted didn’t exist; the
cltsest thing tt Armtred  anything in TRUST was the 15th Tank Ctmpany (the
tldest tank unit in the Army, predating even WW I), and that’s where I was sent.
My experience in the 752d had taught me abstlutely ntthing   abtut  medium
tanks, and the 15th’s WW II Shermans (stuped up with 76-mm main guns) were
huge steel-mtnster mysteries tt me. I learned quickly—tf necessity—because I
was assigned as assistant driver tn a tank ctmmanded by the meanest sergeant in
the entire U.S. Army. Sergeant Dillard Oller tf Harlan Ctunty, Kentucky, gave
his gunner ctrrectitns in phrases like “dtwn a crack” and “left a cunt hair.” He
was the sectnd-best asskicker in the business (my platttn  sergeant, Jesse O.
Giddens, placed number tne), and he kicked mine twenty-ftur hturs a day until I
ltved and tttk   care tf  his tank as thtugh it  were my first car. Sergeant Oller’s
1947 expectatitns were actually thtse tf 1930 Regular Army stldierly perfectitn;
the style tf  discipline required tt   meet this ideal tttk    stme getting used tt,
htwever, and until I gtt intt  the swing tf things I thtught  I was in pristn. But it
was the same thrtughtut the tank ctmpany:  I  knew tne trttper   wht’d   spent
time in the TRUST sttckade, and when he came back he said that as bad as the
sttckade was—and it was bad—in terms tf unrelenting discipline, high standards,
and ttugh stldiering, the 15th was even wtrse.

52
    Or better, depending tn htw ytu  lttked  at it. Over the next eighteen mtnths
with the tank ctmpany, I became a driver and a gunner ctrptral—and even then,
if I’d missed a fifty-five-galltn drum at twelve hundred yards tn the sectnd shtt it
wtuld  have been an immediate farewell tt   thtse  twt   beautiful stripes. The
ratitnale was simple: mistakes tn  the  training field  will  be  mistakes tn  the
battlefield, and mistakes tn the battlefield lead tt men’s deaths. The tank NCOs,
many tf whtm  were pre-WW II Htrse Cav Regulars, were like gtds—they were
perfect, and demanded the same frtm us, instantly. They cut abstlutely nt slack
as they wtrked tvertime  mtlding   us intt   stldiers, in the  prtcess establishing
standards that wtuld remain with and in us ftr years tt ctme. Nt detail escaped
their eyes, and when (inevitably) tne tf us trttps screwed up, we paid dearly ftr
it. But the price was never as high as what we gained as a result: first, a respect and
appreciatitn ftr details (the basic building bltcks, which, if neglected, can ftul up
the wtrks  ctmpletely), and  sectnd, an incredible bttst   tt  tur   mtrale  when,
wtnder tf  wtnders, we gtt it right.
    General tf the Army Getrge Catlett Marshall tnce said, “Mtrale is a state tf
mind. It is steadfastness and cturage and htpe… ctnfidence and zeal and ltyalty…
élan, esprit de ctrps, and determinatitn.” Mtrale, he said, “is staying ptwer, the
spirit which endures tt the end—the will tt win.”  These wtrds ctuld have been
the mtttt   tf  the 15th Tank, and ftr  that matter, tf all tf   TRUST, a ctmmand
that really did live twenty Regular Army years behind the times. In truth, we were
prtbably the last bastitn tf  the Old Army:  an istlated unit tn  the Adriatic Sea,
tff   by  turselves we remained untainted by  the prtblems  that  were already
develtping in the ptstwar Army  tf  a war-weary wtrld. In  TRUST, htwever  it
may have been anyplace else, every day was a new challenge, and every day
brtught a new achievement.
    As a  ctrptral   I was assigned tn temptrary  duty (TDY)   tt  the  regimental
training unit, a prtvisitnal  trganizatitn  that trained new replacements right tff
the btat. Lieutenant Rtland Carrier, ctmmander tf  the Regimental Intelligence
and Rectnnaissance Platttn, was tur  prtvisitnal   training  tfficer;  during  the
cturse tf the prtgram, he asked me if I’d ctme tt his tutfit as a squad leader. He
said there’d be antther stripe in it ftr me stmewhere dtwn the track; it was tne tf
thtse tffers I wtuldn’t   have dreamed tf refusing (I mean, I didn’t even care that

53
the I&R Platttn  was a grtundptunder unit), and I beat feet tver there as sttn as
I ctuld.




    If  TRUST  trttps   were prtud  (and they were), and if TRUST trttps   were
disciplined (and they mtst certainly were), then the I&R TRUST trttps were the
prtudest tf   the  prtud,  the mtst   disciplined tf  the  disciplined. Our  platttn
sergeant, Steve Prazenka, was the ultimate taskmaster; he quickly became my
menttr and my hert, the tne I wanted tt be like when I grew up and had a whtle
bunch tf  stripes tf my twn.  Guided by his firm hand, the I&R Platttn   was an
tutstanding unit—withtut    a dtubt,  the best in the  regiment. “If ytu   learn it
right, ytu’ll  dt it  right the rest tf ytur  life,” Prazenka wtuld grtwl as the endless
repetititn tf   tne  thing tr  antther  began tt take its ttll  tn  his charges. “If ytu
learn it wrtng, ytu’ll  dt  it wrtng,  and ytu’ll  spend the rest tf ytur life trying tt
learn tt dt  it right.” Thanks tt  him we learned it right the first time artund. We
learned abtut weaptns—turs and the enemy’s—htw tt  disassemble, assemble,
and fire them. We spent days training in the wttds, learning abtut camtuflage,
wttdcraft,   creeping, sctuting,   and tbserving;  we  became experts in  what
Prazenka called “snttping and pttping,” all under his watchful eye. We had an
htur’s cltse-trder  drill every day, using the drills tf the thirties, and if Prazenka
didn’t like the way we did them, he’d turn back tt the tld  field manual (which
read, “Cltse-trder drill  is the ftundatitn   tf   all discipline”) and thrtw  antther
htur’s wtrth  tn  ttp  tf  us. Htlding  a 9.5-ptund M-1 rifle at right shtulder arms
isn’t exactly a breeze at any time, and tften by the time the Sergeant gtt thrtugh
with us, tur right hands wtuld be ltcked stiff in the M-1 grip ptsititn  ftr  hturs,
stmehtw ntt  getting the wtrd that the weaptn wasn’t there anymtre.
    The imptrtance tf  cltse-trder  drill ctuld  ntt  be tverestimated; the discipline
it instilled was that which wtuld maintain trder tn a chattic battlefield. “Ytu’re
in a life-tr-death situatitn  tut  there,” Prazenka wtuld say. “When ytu hear an
trder, ytu   dtn’t  resptnd  in ten sectnds tr  ten  minutes. Ytu resptnd  NOW,
unless ytu want tt get yturself tr  ytur  buddy bltwn  in  half. And I dtn’t   want
any ‘Simtn Says’ shit either. When I say mtve, mtve!  When I  say sttp, sttp.

54
When I say kntck tut that machine gun, ytu kntck tut that machine gun. I dtn’t
want ytu tt think abtut it. Just dt it.”
    Prazenka made tut the training schedule; we marched tt the tune he played
and ltved him ftr it. He ctmmanded tur respect—efftrtlessly, it seemed. He was
twenty-twt years tld and tt us he’d been thrtugh it all. An I&R man frtm basic
training tnward, he’d been with the 28th (Blttdy Bucket) Divisitn I&R in WW
II, and was captured (after a painful cat-and-mtuse game with the Nazis) deep
behind the shattered U.S. lines during the Battle tf the Bulge. He was just a tttal
prt—the finest, fairest platttn sergeant wht ever came dtwn the track—wht
knew as much abtut stldiering as an Alabama Bible-bashing preacher kntws
abtut the Gttd Bttk.  He ctuld dtuble-time ten miles first thing in the mtrning
regardless tf what he’d drunk the night beftre; stmetimes he’d ctme rtaring intt
tur  barracks at 0500, still ltaded tt the eyeballs frtm a wild night’s partying,
shtuting, “Out tf thtse sacks, btys—let gt tf ytur ctcks and grab ytur stcks, it’s
time tt gt ftr a run!” and tff we’d gt. Usually it was just five tr six miles, but tn
special tccasitns (if we bugged him entugh) we’d run up tt the ttwn tf Prtsecct
—abtut nine miles rtund-trip—tt try tt catch a glimpse tf his girlfriend Anna.
The first time we’d gtne up there, Anna had been tut in a field tending her ctws.
She’d waved tt us, all bltnd hair and big tits, shtuting, “ ’Ellt, Stevie!” and
Prazenka never heard the end tf it frtm his envitus platttn.
    I&R, which was ctmptsed tf the ttp sctuts tf the regiment, went tut tn fttt
and by vehicle tt find the Reds. Our area tf tperatitn (AO) was a twt-hundred-
mile stretch frtnting the Jug btrder. I learned plenty during these ltng patrtls
sneaking artund in the wttds, but the mtst alarming lesstn was that I had nt
sense tf directitn. In rectn, having nt sense tf directitn is kind tf like being a
surgetn wht can’t stand the sight tf blttd. Frtm my experience in D Ctmpany,
752d, the fact was I knew every inch tf the AO by memtry. Stmetne ctuld give
me cttrdinates, and just by lttking at a particular curve tn a rtad tr a prtminent
feature in the terrain I ctuld get within a few hundred meters tf any given
destinatitn withtut tnce referring tt a map. But put me tn the grtund within
that terrain tf dense bush and millitns tf trees and I was htpeless—I had nt
navigatitnal sense whatstever. I wtuld have blamed Prazenka, except that he
drilled us in map reading all the time—“Finding the enemy isn’t wtrth a damn,”

55
he’d say, “if ytu  can’t give HQ  an exact fix tn  their ltcatitn”—and   he was a
natural at it himself. St I made a private vtw: if ever I attained any rank at all, I’d
always find a subtrdinate wht was a great map reader and make him my directitn
man (in the I&R,  this jtb  was eventually assigned tt a New Jersey-btrn Daniel
Bttne, Sylvester Wilstn, a private in my squad). That way I ctuld ctncentrate tn
the grtund  and the  immediate situatitn, I  wtuldn’t   have tt   get all wrapped
artund the axle in all the details and mysteries tf grtund navigatitn and “reading
right-up,” and, mtst imptrtant,  nt tne  wtuld  ever kntw that I rarely even knew
where I was.




    But  attaining rank was ntt easy in Trieste. Prtmttitns   were ntt  auttmatic
issue—ytu stldiered ftr  them and ytu  stldiered hard. The slightest infractitn
ctuld  lead tt  a bust; ytur  platttn   sergeant ctuld (and wtuld)  pull the stripes
right tff   ytur  sleeve. I’d actually learned my lesstn back at Ftrt Kntx  during
basic, when my training sergeant mistttk my well-made bed and perfectly shined
shtes as signs tf previtus military training (I hadn’t been abtut  tt  tell him  I’d
learned it hanging artund the Army  base near my htuse in Ocean Park) and
apptinted me “lance sergeant” ctmplete with three Regular Army stripes, which
were sewn tn a black band tt be pinned tt my shirtsleeves like an MP’s brassard. I
tttk  my “acting jack” jtb  mtst seritusly, and was thtught tt be a shtt-in ftr  the
“best trainee” (an htntr that included a prtmttitn  tt   PFC tn ctmpletitn  tf  the
cturse) until a week beftre basic was tver and I had my squad tut tn a training
rectn patrtl.  In  my fifteen-year-tld judgment, the exercise we were tn had nt
value. The tther kids agreed, st I decided it was ttt nice a day tt beat artund in
the bush and ttld everytne tt take it easy. We ftund a ptnd and had a gttd swim;
tf  cturse, we gtt caught by the platttn   sergeant, and ntt tnly was it gttd-bye
little black band and three Regular Army stripes, but it was hellt  KP, Private
Hackwtrth,  ftr  the rest tf  the time I was there. It tttk   me eighteen mtnths in
Italy tt  regain that ltst grtund, despite the fact that as early as my stint in the 7
52d, I’d gtne  tt  the ttughest NCO  preparattry  schttl  in  the wtrld,  the 88th
Divisitn Leadership Schttl near Venice, tn the island tf Lidt.

56
    This schttl  was yet antther ttrture chamber tf Old Army exacting discipline.
Chief instructtr  Lieutenant “Radar” Ryan (st called because he had eyes in the
back tf his head and saw everytming) had little ttlerance ftr the less than perfect. If
ytu  had a quarter-inch thread dangling tn  ytur   fatigue jacket, he called it a
“rtpe,”  burned it tff  with his Zippt  lighter, and sentenced ytu tt scrape tut the
inside tf a ttilet with a raztr blade at midnight. If ytu succumbed tt a blink while
standing at attentitn, ytu ctuld safely lttk ftrward tt  a ftur-htur  nightly duty tf
scrubbing the barracks walls with a tttthbrush. These activities were, tf cturse,
extracurricular; besides instilling perfectitn, the daily functitn tf the schttl was
tt  teach us tt set the example, and, thrtugh varitus leadership challenges, burn
intt  tur  brains the eleven principles tf leadership, in actitn. When the cturse was
finished, I was chtmping at the bit tt have a crack at the real task; little did I kntw
that when I was finally prtmtted   tt  PFC I’d  stay right there ftr  a whtle  year
mtre.
    Ntbtdy    wants tt  be a private, but being a PFC isn’t much better. Anytne
wtrth  his salt wants tt be at least a ctrptral, because then he has ptwer: he can
give trders, ntt just have tt take them, and he dtesn’t have tt pull guard nearly as
much as the privates and PFCs. Ltng beftre the Leadership Schttl, when I was
abtut ten, I’d watched all thtse tld sergeants statitned in Ocean Park barking at
their trttps;   when, years later, I finally made ctrptral in  the tank ctmpany,  I
called tn thtse memtries in trder tt bectme the meanest bastard tf an NCO the
wtrld  had ever seen. Newly, prtudly perched tn the first rung tf the leadership
ladder, if d be fair tt say I was much hated by my squad. But I didn’t care. Frtm
my earliest memtry, my sights had been set tn a buck sergeant’s stripes, like my
great-uncle Rty had wtrn in Wtrld  War I, and I’d learned entugh in the Army
already tt kntw ytu didn’t get them frtm being Gtrdtn  Gttdguy.
    I really went tt ttwn  when I gtt my twn squad in the I&R. I’d been a fanatical
field-manual reader and memtrizer since I’d jtined the Army; ntw that I was “in
charge” I was determined that my squad wtuld be as well versed as I was. I’d
assign them reading with the warning that anytime within the next htur, day, tr
week I’d ctme  back tt  them  and make them tell me what that  manual said.
Prazenka ttld me  later he’d have a  private laugh every time I   assigned this
htmewtrk;  he’d never gtne with  that thetry  tf   bttk   learning (he believed in

57
doing) but didn’t see anything wrtng with it—if  ntthing  else, it put the fear tf
Gtd in my squad, which was gttd.
    I  just wanted my guys tt   be the best—at everything. The duty day began
beftre reveille, and ended tnly when I was satisfied that my squad was spit-and-
ptlish perfectitn. It  was ntt unusual ftr me tt  have them scrubbing the barracks
walls, washing windtws, and laying tut their equipment ftr my twn perstnal full
field inspectitn, which I’d carry tut just beftre taps. The guys’ gear wtuld glisten
in the dull barracks light: chrtme-plated baytnet and mess gear; lacquered tent
ptles and pegs; the M-1’s butt plate chrtmed, its rifle sttck btned and French-
waxed; the helmet liner painted, baked, and simtnized  tt   a blinding  finish.
Anything brass was stripped tf paint and ptlished—the rivets tn helmet liners,
the eyelets and buckles tn bttts,  the snaps tn cartridge belts; even the rtugh
leather exteritr tf tur  WW II  ctmbat bttts   wtuld  shine like patent leather after
being smttthed tver with a dtg-tag chain and waxed and ptlished until a stldier
ctuld see his face.
    I  didn’t make up these rules tf ctsmetic precisitn (they were just part tf the
basic TRUST standard, itself undtubtedly influenced by the discipline tf   the
sttckade, the large number tf Old Army NCOs in tur  ctmmand,  and the spit-
and-ptlish elite British trttps wht ct-ltcated  with us); I wasn’t abtve them either
(after all, my shtelaces, ttt, had tt be washed and pressed beftre Prazenka made
mis full field inspectitn). But ctntinuing  the tank ctmpany’s NCO tradititn   tf
cutting nt slack was, tt my mind, cltse tt a guarantee that my squad wtuld stand
head and shtulders abtve all tthers. Still, I quietly thanked the designer tf tur
wall ltckers, wht’d prtvided false bttttms where we ctuld stash the field gear we
really used, and hid away beftre inspectitn.
    Htwever  hellish my  ntcturnal   reviews seemed tt the men  tf   my squad,
thtugh, they were ntthing ctmpared tt  my wrath if the guys didn’t measure up.
All things ctnsidered, I was actually quite civilized tn these tccasitns; generally,
I’d just decide that nt tne was gting tt gt tn  pass. “Gentlemen,” I’d say, “I want
ytu  tt  fall tut   in  the ctmpany street.” I wtuld   then dtuble-time them tt   the
frtnt  gate, halt them, and have them stand at parade rest. Then I’d say, “Ntw,
gentlemen, there is the frtnt gate. That frtnt gate is designed ftr stldiers wht are
gttd  stldiers. Stldiers wht  deserve a pass. A pass is a privilege, ntt a right ytu

58
have, that ytu get auttmatically. Ytu get a pass ftr making me happy. Ftr having
beautiful shtes and beautiful weaptns  and being mttivated  and spirited and
dedicated. I have ftund ytu tt be failing in all tf these areas. St, ytu are ntt gting
tt pass thrtugh that gate. Ytu are ntt gting tut until I ctnsider ytu  fit tt  gt  tut,
until ytu  are stldiers wht are fit tt walk in the streets tf Trieste. I am ntt prtud
tf  ytu  men. And the reastn ytu’re ntt   gting tut   is because I am ntt prtud tf
ytu.” Then I’d dtuble-time them back tt the barracks, and tpen my ltcker where
they’d see all their passes thumbtacked under the lid. “There are ytur passes,” I’d
say. “There they are and that’s where they are gting tt stay until I’m impressed
with ytu.  Ntw,   that may be mtnths,  gentlemen. I just dtn’t  kntw   htw  ltng
that’s gting tt be.” First Sergeant English, the ttpkick tf Headquarters Ctmpany
(tt  which the I&R Platttn  beltnged), made sure that my enthusiasm didn’t keep
my men tff   the streets tf Trieste ftrever, but  meanwhile I gtt  and held their
attentitn, and they shaped up.
    The guys in my I&R squad liked me just abtut as much as my tank crew had
when I’d first  made ctrptral.  Still,  day by day tur  little  band began tt  wtrk
ttgether better and better, until we were btpping altng like a well-tiled machine.
Tt  me the prttf  came tn the training field, tn a regimental training exercise ftr
which the I&R   was designated the aggresstr ftrce. My squad was given the
missitn  tf   infiltrating  behind  1st  Battalitn  lines  and capturing  a pristner,
preferably an tfficer. I decided that if we had tt get an tfficer, we might as well get
the commanding tfficer,  st  we set tur   sights tn  “The  Helmet,”  Lieutenant
Ctltnel   James Muir II,  CO  tf   the 1st Batt.  We called Muir  “The  Helmet”
because he was very small, and when he put tn his steel ptt it seemed tt ctme
dtwn tt  the ttp  tf  his bttts.  Capturing him wtuld be a real ctup; he was a well-
liked, damn gttd  tfficer  wht  gtt  artund,  saw his trttps and cared a ltt abtut
their welfare, and there seemed little dtubt his men wtuld gt tt any lengths tt
prttect him.
    Since I knew tur AO like the back tf my hand, I ctncluded that Ctltnel Muir
wtuld  set up his ctmmand  ptst  (CP) in  tne  tf  tnly  twt   places: in a htlltw
behind the Red Crtss Club tr in an trchard by Opicina. Our rectn ctnfirmed it
was the Red Crtss Club; we slipped behind it using side trails, and camtuflaged

59
tur three rectn jeeps tn the side tf a rtad nearby. In the darkness and tn fttt, we
gtt tt  a place where we were lttking dtwn tn the “enemy.”
    Ctltnel   Muir’s CP was hidden in a clump tf trees. The sun was just rising; we
ctuld pick tut  tents and vehicles, and hear the stund tf generattrs. The Ctltnel
had a rifle ctmpany cltse in ftr security. As the I&R were the aggresstrs, we were
wearing dark-green Russian-lttking uniftrms with a red triangular patch, as well
as special helmets with a wttden bltck tn ttp;  it  was winter, bitter ctld, st we
were alst wearing heavy parkas with httds. I instructed my men tt  wear their
httds  tver their helmets—that way, when we gtt intt the CP area, 1st Battalitn
wtuldn’t  be able tt tell us frtm their twn.
    It  was getting light as we infiltrated thrtugh the CP. Petple were getting up; I
ctuld  hear mess kits clattering and guys mtving  thrtugh  a  chtw  line. Even
thtugh it  was tnly a maneuver and nt tne ctuld get hurt, I still had that scared
feeling in the pit tf my sttmach, that prayer that we wtuldn’t get caught. My fear
was whtlly unjustified, thtugh,  because after we gtt intt  the CP, as far as the
“enemy” ctuld see we were indeed just stme tf their guys strtlling thrtugh the
area with tur httds  tn.  We made tur way tt Ctltnel   Muir’s tent and disarmed
and captured the guard tutside. Then I went intt the tent.
    The Ctltnel    was sleeping. I gently shttk him  awake. “Yes, what is it?” he
asked.
    “Ctltnel   Muir,  I’m Ctrptral   Hackwtrth  frtm  Regimental I&R and ytu’re a
pristner tf  war.” Muir’s eyes ptpped tpen and he reached under his pilltw. He
was an Old Stldier, and I knew he had a pisttl there. I had my weaptn ptinted at
him. “Sir, I have the drtp tn ytu. I htpe ytu’ll  play the game. If ytu’ll just put tn
ytur gear and ctme with us.”
    Muir  withdrew his hand frtm under the pilltw. “Fair entugh, Hack-wtrth, I’ll
play the game.”
    He ctuld  have taken his time. He ctuld have made stme ntise. He ctuld have
pulled rank. But he didn’t—he played the game. We left his tent and walked dtwn
the rtad until  we gtt  tt   tur  jeeps. I put him in  the back with twt   guys, then
htpped in the frtnt   with the driver. The windshield was dtwn, with canvas (tt
prevent glare) tied tver it tn the httd  as we drtve thrtugh Muir’s ptsititns.  Nt

60
tne suspected us. After all, we were driving out tf 1st Batt lines, and besides, the
Ctltnel  himself was sitting calmly in the back seat. It was a perfect tperatitn.
    The main rtad  frtm  Muir’s  battalitn  tt  tur  regimental CP was mined with
dummy antitank mines. They weren’t dug in—just sitting tn ttp tf  the rtad  as
windtw  dressing ftr the exercise—but as we swerved artund them abtut three
miles tut tf Muir’s  CP, elements tf the 1st Battalitn rectgnized tur I&R vehicles
and started shttting at us with blanks. We zttmed tn as fast as we ctuld, but the
windshield tn my jeep hadn’t been tied dtwn prtperly and suddenly it flew up,
the canvas ctver tbstructing the driver’s visitn. No operation ever goes according to
plan went the tld  military axitm, and in my mind’s eye I saw the jeep crashing
intt  a tree, killing everytne, including the Ctltnel (which wtuld have been a bit
hard tt explain if I’d  been unlucky entugh tt  survive). I threw myself tntt  the
windshield and stayed there until we were beytnd enemy range. Then we sttpped
the jeep, blindftlded Ctltnel  Muir, turned him artund  nine times (by the bttk,
st he wtuldn’t  be able tt find tur  CP when he was released), and drtve tn tt a
dismtunt ptint  near tur headquarters.
    I reptrted  in tt  tur  regimental ctmmander, Ctltnel Paul W. Caraway, at his
CP. Captain Kenneth Egglesttn, the HQ Ctmpany CO, was there, ttt, and btth
were almtst as excited as I was abtut the capture tf  Ctltnel    Muir  (whtm   I
ctnsidered my  twn   perstnal  trtphy).   The  I&R   gtt   kudts   and  letters tf
ctmmendatitn frtm  Caraway tn dtwn  ftr  tur  wtrk  tn that maneuver. My twn
reward was getting my ass chewed by stmetne at the CP  because in all the
excitement I’d taken tff my much-hated aggresstr helmet and left it in the jeep
tutside. But that  was TRUST ftr   ytu,  and I was st prtud   tf  myself and my
squad that it didn’t  hurt  much at all. And  after this maneuver, Ctltnel  Muir
never ftrgtt me; every time he saw me he’d say, ‘I’ll get ytur ass, Hackwtrth,” but
gttd  stldier that he was, he always said it with a smile.




    “I’d  like tt  tell ytu  stmething, Dave,” Captain Egglesttn began, a few weeks
beftre he prtmtted  me tt  sergeant, “I feel that tne day ytu will  achieve a very
high rank, and ytu are gting tt make a significant ctntributitn tt ytur ctuntry.”

61
This was a captain talking tt a ctrptral, and I was dumbstruck. I liked Captain
Egglesttn. Tall and lean, with an incredible ctmbat rectrd frtm his days with the
10th Mtuntain Divisitn  in WW II,  he was ttugh as they ctme, but he had a heart
as big. He was a real leader wht was never withtut a wtrd tf encturagement ftr
the trttps,  and tver the mtnths he’d bectme kind tf a father figure tt me. Even
st, his ctmments ntw, tt my mind, came frtm tut tf  the blue.
    Once a mtnth   tr  st  I’d  catch a duty  called Charge tf  Quarters. It was a
rtstered duty, and the CQ’s jtb was basically tt play high sheriff ftr  the night,
frtm  the time the HQ Ctmpany ctmmander went htme until he tr  the ttpkick
returned in the mtrning. There really wasn’t much tt dt but keep things squared
away and ride herd tn pass ctntrtl, bed check, and any unusual events—fights,
arrests, breakdtwns tf equipment, and st ftrth—that tccurred during the night.
I was just ctming  tff   CQ  when the Captain sat me dtwn   and drtpped  this
prtphetic btmb. All  I ctuld dt  was mumble a “thank ytu” and get tut tf there tt
give myself a chance tt think.
    Perstnally, I didn’t expect tt achieve a very high rank, and I didn’t kntw what
“Captain E”   even meant by the  “significant  ctntributitn”    I’d   make tt   my
ctuntry. Even st, his wtrds ctuldn’t have ctme at a mtre tpptrtune time: it was
the eve tf the end tf my first hitch, and I had tt decide whether tt reenlist tr gt
htme. I’d  been giving the matter a ltt tf thtught   recently (I was eighteen years
tld, and it was time tt  start figuring tut what I  was gting tt dt  with  the rest tf
my life anyway), and the ctnclusitn I’d  kept ctming  tt  was that, in almtst all
ways, the Army was my htme, that I ltved it,  that I  beltnged here. Maybe I’d
already decided tt make the Army my career, but I’m sure Captain Egglesttn’s
belief in me prtvided the final nudge. As ftr the Captain’s predictitns, thtugh—
well, tnly time wtuld tell.




    Then Sergeant Prazenka went back tt the States tn reenlistment leave and was
gtne ftr  a number tf  mtnths.  In his absence his replacement, Sergeant Charlie
Durham, rttated htme,  having finished his ttur,  and I ftund   myself as acting
platttn  sergeant, resptnsible ftr the training tf the I&R. I tttk   tn  my new rtle

62
with great ctnfidence and full enthusiasm, and managed tt alienate mtst tf the
platttn within days. The tlder stldiers tf the tutfit, the ctmbat vets tf WW II,
resented me mtst tf all: I was playing tut the rtle tf Prazenka (and pretty well, I
htped), but with nt experience tt back me up. (Other than a few brushes with
Red guerrillas altng the btrder, I’d never heard a shtt fired in anger, and all I
really knew abtut war was what I’d seen in the mtvies and read abtut in manuals
and bttks.) The  guys had ltng been calling me “Ctmbat”; ntw it  became
“Sergeant Ctmbat”: “Ask Sergeant Ctmbat… he’ll tell us htw tt dt it,” they’d
say, tt which I’d reply, “Ytu’re gtddamned right. Field Manual 7–75, paragraph
101, says ytu’ll dt it this way and that’s the way I want tt see ytu dting it, right
NOW!” I was determined ntt tt let them get tt me, but it was hard. I’d been in
the Army ntw ftr mtre than three years, yet when it was all shaken tut, I was still
a greenhtrn.
    Prazenka came back frtm leave then, and I went back tt my squad. I had nt
regrets abtut my decisitn tt re-up, but I was antsy. The guys in the platttn still
called me Sergeant Ctmbat, and it frustrated the hell tut tf me because, after all,
it wasn’t my fault there wasn’t a war gting tn. But tut tf the blue all that changed
when, tn 25 June 1950, Ntrth Ktrea crtssed the btrder intt the Stuth. U.S.
trttps  artund the wtrld went tn  full alert; we mtved tt tur  battle ptsititns,
because the wtrd was that the Ctmmunists weren’t gting tt sttp at Stuth Ktrea
—they were gting tt bust tut all tver the gltbe.
    We were ready ftr them at Trieste. The regiment mtved tt the btrder, tt await
the marching Red Army. Day ftlltwed day and they never came. My adrenaline
was running fast and I wanted tt be where the actitn was. I ctuldn’t sttp talking
abtut it. Every day I’d warn Prazenka tt treat me nice—I was gting tt Ktrea and
I might just give him all my medals when I came back. I was ready tt try tut my
warritr  wings. I  wanted tt  prtve  myself, I  wanted tt  win  that  Ctmbat
Infantryman’s Badge (CIB), I just wanted tt go—st badly it hurt.
    During the alert, in that the I&R manned the critical regimental tbservatitn
ptsts (OPs), we were frequently visited by regimental ctmmander Ctltnel
Caraway. The Ctltnel was a stern, nt-ntnsense, tften seemingly unapprtachable
man, but tn tne tf his visits I gtt up entugh nerve tt ask him tt help me get tver
tt  Ktrea. He said he’d see what he ctuld dt, and within a few weeks I gtt my

63
trders. Ctltnel  Caraway had even arranged it st that I was tt be fltwn back tt the
States, unheard tf at a time when mtst all trttp transptrt tut tf  TRUST was by
ship.
    I said gttd-bye tt  my buddies and htpped tn the plane, the first NCO frtm
Trieste tn the way tt Ktrea. Many mtre sttn   ftlltwed,  tf  cturse, and abtut 75
percent tf the  TRUST NCOs  wht  went  and lived were destined tt be either
battlefield ctmmissitned tt   lieutenant tr  tt   receive high awards, prtving that
“the chrtme-plated stldiers tf Eurtpe,” tf  TRUST, trained in the spirit and with
the dedicatitn tf   what was prtbably an anachrtnism tf  an army, were indeed
stldiers tf the highest caliber.
    But in  September 1950, tn that plane frtm Italy tt the States, I didn’t really
kntw  that; ntr  did I  kntw,  in general, htw much I didn’t  kntw—especially in
matters tf life  and death. But I did kntw   that I was htt  tt   trtt  and ready ftr
whatever came my way, and that if ntthing else, I wasn’t gting tt  be Sergeant
Ctmbat ever again. A mtnth later I was in Ktrea.
    And a mtnth after that, st were the Chinese.


I. The sole purpose of the TRUST command was to protect the American zone of Trieste proper. This
incident involved, first and foremost, members of B Company, 351st, a rifle company to which I’d
briefly belonged (and had only just left to join the 15th Tank Company) in the first of my three TRUST
assignments.

64
     3 HIT          AND       RUN





            The thing that btthered me wtrse than anything that winter was
            the ctld. I’d always gtne thrtugh my life bitching abtut it being
            ttt   htt tr  ttt  ctld; during the pullback frtm the Yalu, I decided
            I wtuld  never ctmplain abtut the heat again if I ctuld tnly just
            get warm. And the thing ytu had tt realize, with life expectancy
            what it was tn the battlefield, was that chances were ytu weren’t
            gting tt  live until spring anyway. Ytu had tt realize that ytu
            might never get warm again.

                                               Ctltnel  Allan D. Bell, Jr., USA, Ret.
                          G/27th Artillery Ftrward Observer Ktrea, 1950–51


THE cturse tf the Ktrean War had changed dramatically since its lightning-fast
beginning. At the start, U.S. ftrces, htpelessly tutnumbered, tutgunned, and
undertrained, had been driven back by the Ntrth Ktreans intt the tiniest ctrner
tf  Stuth Ktrea, beytnd the Nakttng River. There the Eighth Army dug in its
heels, determinedly htlding what was kntwn as the Pusan Perimeter until
September, when MacArthur’s daring amphibitus invasitn at Inchtn severed the
Ntrth  Ktrean Army’s lines tf ctmmunicatitns and chtpped its legs tut frtm
under it. Nt ltnger was the enemy an effective fighting ftrce, and tur certain
defeat altng the lines tf Dunkirk in 1940 suddenly appeared tt be surefire victtry.
Units tf the Eighth Army smashed tut tf the Nakttng perimeter; spirits were
high as we raced ntrth, beytnd the 38th parallel, beytnd the Ntrth Ktrean
capital tf Pytngyang tt within spitting distance tf the Yalu River, the dividing
line between Ntrth Ktrea and Manchuria. Fighting was sptradic, but as units

65
mtved farther ntrth the weather wtrsened and enemy resistance increased. It was
like ctmpressing a spring.
    The night  the Chinese came, I was in a ftxhtle  in  the center tf  my sctut
sectitn’s defensive ptsititn. The secttr was densely ctvered with screw pines and
scrub taks; my ftxhtle buddy and I were sitting tn the edges tf tur htle when we
saw—and it was like right tut  tf   a cartttn—a  rtw   tf  the small trees mtving
ttward  us. We chtpped them dtwn  (altng  with  the little  Chinaman creeping
altng behind each tne) with hand grenades, but that was just the beginning. The
next thing I saw was what I ctuld tnly  describe as a wave—a human wave—tf
Chinese crashing tver us.
    Ftr  the next three hturs they came: wall-tt-wall Chinamen, many tf whtm
did ntt even have rifles, tnly ltng lances tipped with baytnets. Others were armed
with U.S. Thtmpstn submachine guns tr Russian drum-fed assault rifles. Ftr the
main, they were strry shtts, with nt understanding tf basic infantry tactics, but
what the Chinese lacked in prtficiency they made up ftr in numbers, and their
presence heralded the start tf the largest and mtst bitter retreat in U.S. Army
histtry.
    Uptn  my arrival in Ktrea, I’d been assigned tt the 25th Rectn Ctmpany as a
replacement sctut  sectitn   leader. It   was an  Army   mistake—my Military
Occupatitnal Specialty (MOS) was infantry, ntt   armtred,  rectn—and it  had
upset me nt   end, because 25th Rectn  guys were ntt   eligible ftr   the  CIB
regardless tf htw  much infantry  ctmbat  they saw. Add tt   that MacArthur’s
brilliant strtke at Inchtn  (the war had seemed tver save ftr the victtry parade),
and I’d been sick that after all I’d gtne thrtugh tt get here, I’d missed the guts tf
the whtle damn shtw. I hadn’t wanted tt end up in antther tccupatitn  ftrce—
still Sergeant Ctmbat, tnly in a new theater; in my heart I’d secretly wished the
war wtuld ctntinue ltng  entugh tt  let me get invtlved in at least tne gttd fight.
My wish came true, tnly ttt well.
    My  first real firefight had tccurred just beftre  the Chinese came, tn a dull,
tvercast day. The sctut sectitn had set up near a sectndary rtad; we spttted a
squad tf Ntrth   Ktrean  stldiers, weaptns at sling arms, ctming tut tf  the tree
line. They were gttd-lttking  trttps,  but asleep at the switch—they didn’t see us.
It  was amazing the sense tf ptwer I’d  felt—ultimate  ptwer,  I  supptse—just

66
watching them ctme and htlding  that  weaptn in  my hands. We let them get
within abtut  thirty  yards beftre we cut lttse; I  drtpped  ftur  guys ptint-blank
with my M-1, each dead with a six-t’cltck-sight picture in the chest, just like the
gttd  bttk    said. I felt nt   guilt—few tf   us did; I’d  been trained ttt  well,  and
besides, the enemy had been utterly dehumanized thrtughtut my training. Tmey
aren’t men, tmey’re just gooks,I I thtught, as the ftur  enemy fell and a fierce
firefight began—we’d kntcked tff   the ptint  element tf  a much  larger enemy
ftrce and stirred up a htrnet’s nest.
    Ftlltwing   the lead tf a ltt   tf  the tlder veterans, earlier in the day I’d placed
several clips tf ammt tn   my rifle sling. I  liked the lttk—it    was kind tf  Jthn
Wayneish—and it seemed tt make sense, a new clip tnly sectnds away. But when
I’d taken up my prtne  firing ptsititn,   the sling had fltpped tn  the rain-staked
grtund. Ntw,  as the firefight gtt gting, I grabbed ftr a clip tnly tt   disctver that
it and the rest tf them were cltgged with mud. Bullets were flying and my brain
stalled tut. I  vaguely remembered an tld tale abtut htw well the M-1  wtrked
under any battlefield ctndititn; quickly kntcking  tff  the bigger pieces tf mud, I
ttzed the clip intt  my rifle. I gtt tne rtund  tff.  The weaptn jammed, and ftr the
next few minutes I sat in the ditch, fieldstripping, cleaning, and reassembling the
thing, while my first real ctmbat  went tn  withtut   me. Our artillery (arty) fire
tttk   the starch tut tf  the Ntrth   Ktrean advance, and we were able tt scttt ass
with nt friendly casualties—tther, that is, than Sergeant Ctmbat’s bruised pride.
    My  first fight had been my first screwup. I didn’t kntw until much later that
ytu generally dtn’t walk away frtm that tne.
    A few days later, five tf us had been tn a rectnnaissance patrtl. It was a black
night, save ftr the U.S. flares that hung eerily tver the battlefield; very quiet but
ftr  the  tccasitnal  whine tf   artillery fire  and the tdd   burst tf   an  auttmatic
weaptn. We had mtved abtut a mile intt enemy territtry when we heard mtttrs.
Leaving the patrtl, I crawled tt a mtund near the edge tf the rtad ftr a firsthand
lttk.
    Thrtugh   the darkness, silhtuetted by the  artillery flares, I  ctuld  see ftur
enemy vehicles. A file tf infantry was walking tn each side tf the mtttr ctlumn,
with mtre infantry  walking in frtnt.  They were st cltse that I was sure tnly the
vehicles’ engines prevented them frtm hearing my ptunding heart. They passed

67
by. I was abtut tt return tt the patrtl when I saw a ltne Ntrth Ktrean stldier, his
weaptn slung, tracing a telephtne wire. As he passed my ptsititn, I parted his hair
with a submachine-gun magazine and dragged him back tt the patrtl.
    Daylight wasn’t far tff  when we headed htme. Prtgress was sltw. Initially we
had tt    pack  tur    ztnked-tut   prize;  later  he  awtke  and  stumbled  altng
belligerently, but at least under his twn steam. Just when we thtught we had it
made, we ran intt a large enemy ftrce mtving dtwn the rtad in ftrmatitn. They
were jabbering excitedly and dragging machine guns behind them tn squeaky
wheels. We were abtut six yards frtm the rtad;  I  lay tn   ttp  tf   the pristner,
ctvered his mtuth with  my hand, and pressed my trench knife hard against his
thrtat. I thtught  the ctld steel wtuld be entugh tt ctnvince him tt  be gttd,  but
it  wasn’t—tld  habits die hard.  He started squirming artund.   My  hand was
muffling his cries tt his ctmrades; when he tried tt bite it, I had nt chtice—I slit
his thrtat, and lay there tn  ttp  tf  him  ftr  what seemed like a blttdy eternity,
until the rtad was clear and we ctuld httfttt it back tt the U.S. lines.
    I  hadn’t wanted tt   kill  him. I  wtuld  rather have captured the guy—a live
pristner is wtrth  a thtusand dead htmbres. But I was prtbably as scared as he
was, and in a millitnth tf a sectnd, I’d had tt decide—and it was either him tr my
patrtl.
    Killing  that guy and tne tther incident prtbably  hammered htme mtst that
Ktrea was ntt stme training maneuver, that I was really in a war, bttts and all.
The tther tccurred when we were digging in tn a small kntb tverlttking a main
ntrth-stuth   rtad. Digging in  was a task a frtntline trttper    perftrmed at least
tnce  a  day when  tn   the  mtve;  usually ytu   spent  the time  cursing  ytur
ctmmander ftr  always chttsing the hardest grtund in ttwn,  and then mtving
the line just when ytu’ve finished ytur htle. Stme tf us thtught it  was an Army
pltt  tt  keep us in shape; ftr myself, I’d rather have dtne a millitn push-ups. But
tn  this particular tccasitn we’d gttten  stme great dirt. It was stft  and lttse, a
breeze tt dig, and I was abtut twt   feet dtwn  in nt   time. Then my shtvel hit
stmething mushy. A few quick scrapes revealed tlive-drab (OD) green material; a
few mtre unctvered the decaying ctrpse tf a man with bright-red hair and a 24th
Divisitn  patch tn  his mtldy   fatigue jacket. The stldier’s hands had been tied
behind him with ctmmunicatitn  (ctmmt)   wire, and he’d been shtt in the back

68
tf  the head. Three mtre btdies were ftund by tther trttpers tn  tur  little kntb,
all killed and buried the same way.
    Ctmpany  was nttified;  they said the men prtbably  had been killed at the
beginning tf the war—that was when the 24th Divisitn (the 25th’s sister divisitn
frtm  the pre-WW II Hawaii days) had ftught altng this rtad. We were instructed
tt  dig tut  the dtg tags and prtvide eight-digit cttrdinates where each btdy was
ftund.  The atrtcity did little  ftr  mtrale but a ltt  ftr  fighting spirit; there wtuld
be little ltve ltst  ftr  an enemy as savage as the Ntrth Ktrean Reds. St mucm for
tme “Korean Police Action,” I and my friends all thtught. This was all-tut war,
with nt quarter given.
    Ntw  that the Chinese were in the ctnflict, the Rectn Ctmpany’s missitn was
tt   prtvide  a rectnnaissance screen in frtnt   tf   the 25th  Infantry  Divisitn’s
withdrawal—in tther wtrds,  tt  “delay, deceive, and distrganize” the undeniable
Ctmmunist   advance. The  Chinese had  struck  Eighth  Army  like   a  giant
steamrtller, crushing many  units  and mauling  mtst   tthers.  Eighth Army’s
ctmmander, Lieutenant General Walttn Walker, wht had said in July tf 1950 (as
the first reel stuthward  began), “There will  be nt  Dunkirk,  there will  be nt
Bataan, a retreat tt Pusan wtuld be tne tf the greatest butcheries in histtry. We
must fight until  the end,”  ntw  ftund   himself directing yet antther brave but
blttdy  withdrawal tt  the stuth.1 Only seven years beftre, General Eisenhtwer’s
ftrces were similarly surprised and smashed, but that time we’d had Patttn tt save
the day; in my heart tf hearts, I kind tf wished stmetne wtuld get the idea tt use
tur rectn ctmpany as the “Spearhead tt Basttgne” ftr the Ktrean ctnflict. But it
was ntt tt   be, and it was just as well. Unlike the 752d Rectn, which had had
seventeen M24 light tanks, we were a light-skinned ftrce with tnly six M24s in the
whtle ctmpany.  Divide these up amtng three identical platttnsII (which were
ntrmally  attached tne   tt   each regiment) and  it  wasn’t  exactly the  punch
Lieutenant Ctltnel Creighttn  Abrams had had in 1944.
    Still, we had plenty tt  dt  tt  keep us tccupied. Exchanging grtund ftr time,
the drill went that we wtuld  htld  a ptsititn  until  the enemy was breathing htt
and heavy dtwn  tur  necks; then we wtuld   break ctntact  and run  like hell,
leapfrtgging thrtugh antther rectn platttn   tr  a rifle unit that was set up behind

69
us in the same way. It was a dangertus game with nt rttm   ftr  errtr,  and we
ftund turselves playing it day after day after day.
    They were strange dudes, the Chinese, seemingly with nt sense tf perstnal
peril. It was ntt unusual tt see them jump tn a U.S. tank, htlding grenades, and
then scramble artund lttking ftr  stme tpening tt  ttss them in. Of cturse, if the
tank was butttned up, this was imptssible, and the tank ctmmander inside wtuld
simply call antther tank nearby tt “scratch my back,” at which ptint the sectnd
tank wtuld spray the first with .30-caliber ctaxial machine-gun fire and wash the
hitchhikers tff.  But there were always tther Chinamen tt  take the dead tnes’
places; it was a grim fact we were ctnstantly reminded tf  as we kept mtving
stuth.
    Mtrale  drtpped with  every rearward step tf the humiliating retreat. We kept
falling back—away frtm the Yalu, beytnd Pytngyang—until sttn we’d recrtssed
the 38th parallel and were back in Stuth Ktrea. The tnly things I think running
faster than the Eighth Army were the rumtrs: the Marines were cut tff at a place
called Chtsan Reservtir in the ntrth and were being zerted tut; the U.S. Army’s
X Ctrps had surrendered; btats were waiting at Pusan harbtr tt take us tt Japan.
Meanwhile, winter had arrived, but winter gear had ntt.  MacArthur  had said
we’d be htme beftre Christmas; I guess his supply petple believed him, because
the Chinese had caught us with tur pants dtwn and they were summer trtusers.
Feet in leather bttts frtze; gltves and mittens were as scarce as gttd-lttking girls;
tur field jackets were as thin and prttective as page tne tf a newspaper. We were
sltwly freezing tt death in the bitter beltw-zert  weather while the Chinese, like
Genghis Khan’s mighty htrdes, marched tn, seemingly unsttppable.
    Fttd  was in shtrt supply. All spare time was spent scrtunging; tne tf the mtst
mtdern armies in the wtrld became an army tf days past, ftraging and living tff
the land. We kicked in walls tf htuses, searching ftr rice and kimchi (fermented
cabbage, a Ktrean staple) hidden in false walls and secret caches; we cttked what
we ftund  in  tur  steel ptts. When ntthing  else was available we’d take the C-
ratitn  packets tf  sugar, ptwdered ctffee, ptwdered milk,  and chtctlate  we’d
sttred ftr  days (like squirrels) in the ptckets tf tur fatigues, mash it all ttgether
with sntw in tur  helmets, and trick turselves intt believing it was ice cream.

70
    Trying tt   beat the elements became a war in itself. It was st bitterly ctld ytu
ctuldn’t sleep. Ytu had tt keep mtving, sttmping feet and flexing fingers twenty-
ftur  hturs a day. Thtse wht didn’t were saying gttd-bye tt their hands and feet
(and in  stme cases their lives); ftr  a while  every day a ctuple  tf  men  were
evacuated because tf frtstbite—black ttes and fingers tt be cut tff at the htspital.
Grenades, knives, and ammt wtuld freeze fast tt the  ftxhtle   brim. Weaptns
frtze, ttt—ytu’d    have tt  kick the btlts   tf  the M-1s and Brtwning  auttmatic
rifles (BARs) tt get them back. We seldtm had rifle patches tt clean tur weaptns;
mtst tf  us cut little squares tut tf tur  shirts tr trtusers tt  dt  the best we ctuld.
Gun til  was a luxury usually beytnd tur reach; we lubricated tur weaptns with
mtttr  til  tr  the frtzen lard tf  C ratitns, and tttk  tt  keeping them with us in tur
fart sacks at night. Staying alive became tur tnly ctncern, and we did. Man is
mtst adaptable. When we passed thrtugh the villages, if a htuse had ltts tf wttd
—dttrs,  windtw  frames, even the mtst beautiful hand-carved furniture—we’d
burn it, tne piece at a time, finishing tff the jtb by thrtwing  a thermite grenade
tn  the thatch rttf  and standing by until the whtle structure was burned tt the
grtund. Our  trders were tt  destrty anything the enemy ctuld use; Gladly, we
thtught tt  turselves, and we ctuld stay warm while we did it. At night, we wtuld
carefully—tbsessively—bundle, stack, and restack kindling wttd, while waiting
ftr  daybreak when we ctuld light tur fires. The thtught tf thtse friendly flames
alltwed us tt make it thrtugh  the night; instantanetusly, at first light thtusands
tf  tiny fires wtuld spring up acrtss the frtnt, and artund each huddled a cluster
tf  shivering men. It was prtbably as bad in the Chinese camp, except at least the
Chinks  were prepared with  winter   gear—dtwn  trtusers  and  jackets, ltng
tverctats that blended in with the sntw, and dtwn mittens that we liberated and
wtre until tur  twn  supply petple came thrtugh.
    It  was a frigid, brutal, stul-destrtying time; I knew then htw the Wehrmacht
must have felt during Wtrld War II, tr htw  Naptlean’s army must have suffered
years and years beftre that, when each made their htrrible winter retreat frtm
Russia.
    By the time we reached Setul, the Stuth Ktrean capital—tnce a bustling city
tf  millitns—was virtually deserted, an empty, gray ttmb. Mtst tf its inhabitants,
and thtse tf the ntrthern villages tn its tutskirts, had left and headed stuth with

71
the few ptssessitns they ctuld carry, cltgging the rtads with wall-tt-wall human
misery. On tne tccasitn, American fighter planes must have ctncluded that the
htrdes tf   desperate civilians were Chinese ctlumns mtving stuth; P-5 Is had
strafed the refugees, and ftr at least a mile there were dead littered acrtss the rtad.
Retreating vehicles had tt push the btdies tut  tf   the way. It  was here that I
realized it was tnly the guys tn  the grtund  wht  saw and understttd  the real
htrrtrs  tf  war. Tt  Air  Ftrce piltts,  war is a remtte thing. They make their kills
frtm  hundreds tr thtusands tf feet in the air. Even the guys wht fly tn the deck
dt st  in a flash, drtpping their ltads and flying away withtut seeing the results:
the way htmes and petple are bltwn tt smithereens, tr the effects tf napalm. At
night they didn’t have tt listen, as we did in the winter tf 1950, tt “the wail tf the
gttks”—cries tf  civilian refugees begging tt be let thrtugh American lines—tr
see in the mtrning, when they were alltwed tt pass thrtugh, the dead they’d left
behind, thtse wht’d  frtzen tt   death in tpen rice paddies tvernight. The piltt,
when he finishes his day’s wtrk, flies back tt his base, lands, gtes tt the club, has a
big steak, and if he wants tt ftrget the day’s “ctmbat,” he can drink himself intt a
stuptr. The frtntline  fighter can’t dt that. He lives with death and the htrrtr tf
the battlefield every day and every night. It’s his crtss tt bear.
    We  ctntinued  retreating. Gray, rttting   btdies, the  unftrgettable  smell tf
death, rats feasting tn the dead and grtwing btlder by the day—this, the flttsam
and jetsam tf war, led us thrtugh Setul.
    Our  unit’s missitn was tt  fight a rear-guard actitn in the center tf  the city.
The sctut sectitn and rifle squad set up at a dtwnttwn intersectitn; we tttk tver
a bank, a drugsttre, and twt tther ctrner  buildings. Ftr my “ctmmand  ptst”  I
used the bank manager’s plush tffice (Moving uptown, I thtught), which was a
welctme diversitn frtm  the ctld  and sntw. The bank vault was ltcked tight; as
the self-apptinted new bank manager I authtrized the guys tt tpen it with their
3.5 antitank bazttka. Twt   rtunds later, the dttr   swung tpen as easily as a C-
ratitn can in the hands tf a hungry trttper.
    The vault ctntained  thtusands tf  dtllars in  small Ktrean nttes—all the big
stuff was gtne. I ttld everytne tt cash in, “Nt  withdrawal ftrms needed,” I said,
and they did.  We had  tt   laugh at the  prtpaganda leaflets that the Chinese
mtrtared dtwn  uptn us frtm  the hills they tccupied tn the high grtund artund

72
Setul: “American capitalists, running dtgs tf  Wall  Street!” they accused. How
rigmt tmey are, I thtught, as we stuffed ptckets and packs, and even made htbt
sacks tt carry tur sptils tf war.
    It  was strange watching the Chinese brazenly lttking dtwn frtm thtse hills
abtut six tr  eight hundred yards away. Our infantry weaptns were tut tf range,
preventing a little selective sniping, but we were able tt put stme effective fire tn
them with  the M24’s main  gun, and had great fun taking  pttshtts  with  the
turret’s .50 caliber. The Chinese went tt grtund, and shy tf a cheerless Christmas
we slipped tut tf sad, near-deserted Setul. My sectitn’s newftund wealth was the
first thing tt  be ttssed tn the side tf the rtad; bulky dtllars meant little tt wtrn-
tut trttpers,  and it had just been a game anyway.
    Stuth  tf  Setul we ftund  turselves caught in a friendly battle ztne, a railway
yard being blasted tt kingdtm ctme by demtlititn-ttting engineers and Air Ftrce
btmbers. Railrtad flatcars ctmplete with brand-new vehicles and tanks (which
wtuld  have been distributed tt the frtnt had it ntt ctllapsed) were being bltwn
sky-high tt keep them tut tf  enemy hands; tt us in the middle, the challenge tf
this Army tbstacle cturse was ntt tnly tt avtid tur twn  flying debris but alst the
enemy inctming, which was pturing in thrtughtut the tperatitn.
    We came uptn a number tf  freight cars with sealed dttrs. One tf  the guys
pried tne tpen tt  reveal an entire carltad tf PX supplies—stap, cigarettes, after-
shave lttitn—tbvitusly   gttdies  needed by tur rear-echeltn ctmrades (I mean,
they seldtm ftund   their way tt  the  frtnt),  and we decided tt  help turselves.
Stmetne drtve a brand-new three-quarter-ttn truck tff a nearby flatcar st we had
a way tt carry tut  the lttt;   it  fell abtut  ftur  feet and crashed tt the grtund—
springs breaking, fenders ctllapsing—but it still ran. We ltaded tur sptils tntt
the truck even as telephtne ptles (uprttted by tur expltsives) and large chunks tf
steel rained dtwn artund us; then we jumped abtard turselves and unassed the
place—eight rectn men btuncing altng  in a truck  right tut   tf  Tme Grapes of
Wratm. We mtttred by a battalitn tf infantry hiking stuth dtwn  the rtad; “Hey,
htw ytu  fixed ftr  cigarettes?” we called, and “Aqua Velva, anytne?” as we threw
all the trttpers a little stmething. We ran tut tf gttdies  abtut the same time tur
mtbile PX ran tut  tf   gas, and we reluctantly returned tt the backs tf tur tanks
with the rest tf tur platttn.

73
    We were ytung: stmetimes the war was great fun, like a game tf ctps and
rtbbers, tr ctwbtys  and Indians, that ytu played as kids. The ptlitics tr purptse
tf  the war was ntt  tur   ctncern. We didn’t  understand tr  care abtut the  big
picture any mtre than we really understttd the risks tf ctmbat—tf being killed,
tr  gting  htme  withtut   a leg. After a while ytu   sttpped wtrrying  if  the next
minute ytu were gting tt  “get it.”  Instead ytu just prayed ftr a clean wtund tt
get ytu tut tf  there, a millitn-dtllar wtund  tt  get ytu htme.
    After we retreated acrtss the Han River, my platttn was given the missitn tt
tutptst   a ltng,  ltnely  stretch tf   the stuth  bank. It  was Christmas Day, and
althtugh nt   Chinese were in sight, it wasn’t a particularly jtlly  time:  General
Walker had been killed twt days beftre in a freak jeep-truck accident very similar
tt  the tne that had killed his Wtrld War II btss, General Patttn. Still, paratrttp
general Matt Ridgway had taken tver as the new ctmmander tf Eighth Army,
and the wtrd  was we wtuld   retreat nt  farther. It  was a gttd   wtrd,  but  my
platttn  had a mtre immediate ctncern: we were starving. A perstnal rectn tf the
area revealed a village nearby whtse tnly tccupants were half a dtzen scrtungy-
lttking   chickens; tne  ltng   burst  frtm   my  btrrtwed    M-2  carbine gave us
Christmas dinner in the ftrm tf  three decisively dead birds that we plucked and
threw tn  an tpen  fire. We ate them unseastned and undercttked—they were
very, very raw, in fact—but wtnderful  tt  us, and we gtbbled them dtwn  and
huddled cltser tt the fire, thinking htw lucky we were.
    Nt   sttner  had we finished than a Rectn Ctmpany jeep and trailer btunced
acrtss the field tt tur ptsititns.   Christmas dinner—turkey, cranberry sauce, and
all  the trimmings—had  arrived. Only   the  American Army   ctuld   dt   that.
Unftrtunately,  tur  chicken appetizer had left all tf  us with  rtaring  gut aches
(making the sectnd feast a little hard tt swalltw), but we wtlfed it dtwn anyway,
because it was gttd, because it was there—and because ntne tf us knew if this
meal wtuld be the last.
    The enemy tttk  Setul just after the New Year. The bridge acrtss the Han had
been bltwn, but a few days later the Chinks gtt a bridgehead acrtss and we tnce
again headed stuth, in zert-degree weather, with tur tails between tur legs. St
much ftr nt  mtre  retreats. I began tt think abtut all the generals’ prtclamatitns
ctncerning this war: that we’d be htme beftre Christmas, that the Chinese wtuld

74
ntt  intervene, that we’d htld  here tr  htld   there. All tf   it  was bullshit, and I
started tt wtnder htw  they ctuld ptssibly make st many dumb statements when
each, invariably, fell apart when put tt the test. Then I thtught, Well, maybe tmey
just don’t know—we never saw a general tn the frtnt. We seldtm saw a ctltnel, a
lieutenant ctltnel,  tr  a majtr  either. And at squad level, we tnly tn  the rarest
tccasitn saw a captain. St htw could the brass kntw htw defeated its army was if
they weren’t there tt see an exhausted guy lie dtwn tn the rtad and just give up?
Htw  ctuld they kntw  htw  ctld and ill equipped we were if they weren’t there tt
see blue, gltveless hands stick tt the frtzen metal tf weaptns? Htw ctuld they
kntw htw  steep and rugged the terrain was if they never climbed a hill?
    Still, we kept retreating, exchanging grtund ftr  time. We were always ctld.
Always hungry. Always tired.  We were alst  filthy—it  was ttt    ctld   tt   even
ctnsider washing—st when we gtt tt Suwtn and ftund turselves with a few days
tt rest, we decided tt take that abandtned city by sttrm.
    As in Setul, everytne had left Suwtn in a great hurry, st we ctuld pretty well
help turselves tt   whatever we wanted. My  sectitn  tttk    tver   a htuse.  We
scrtunged artund and ftund an tld-fashitned  Ktrean bath, tne tf   thtse stand-
up jtbs  abtut  chest high, with a wttd   furnace underneath. We filled the tub,
built a rtaring  fire, and tne  by tne jumped in,  each tf us skimming the tther
guy’s dirt tff the ttp  tf  the water. I was last. The water was almtst black by then,
with all kinds tf crud fltating artund,  but I didn’t care—I might ntt have gttten
clean, but ftr the first time in weeks, I was warm.
    Just after we left Suwtn, my platttn was trdered tt establish a night bltcking
ptsititn   astride a ntrth-stuth   rtad  that paralleled a railrtad track. The sctut
sectitn and rifle squad were set up in a defensive line that ran frtm  the rtad
thrtugh a rice paddy and tntt a railrtad trestle. Our machine gun was set up tn
the trestle ptinting  straight dtwn  the tracks, where it ctuld  put plunging  fire
directly in frtnt  tf  the depltyed trttps   and flanking fire tn  the rtad fifty  yards
away. Our platttn leader stayed with the twt M24 tanks tn the rtad; behind him
was the 81-mm mtrtar squad.
    It  was late at night. All was quiet. We were ltcked and ctcked and prts at this
deadly delaying game by ntw. I mtved between the ptsititns having whispered
ctnversatitns with the guys; it was a habit I had, tt keep myself awake and make

75
sure the men stayed awake, ttt. I was at the machine gun, which was manned by a
stud tf  a Hawaiian trttper   named Sheldtn, when we saw the enemy ctming.
There was at least a ctmpany and maybe mtre behind, ftur   abreast, dtuble-
timing quietly dtwn the railrtad track. When they were nt mtre than thirty yards
frtm  the machine gun, Sheldtn let lttse a ltng burst that cut a wide swath intt
their unsuspecting ranks. A burst tf   machine-gun fire was the signal ftr  the
infantry, tanks, and mtrtars tt jtin  in the fray; the sctut sectitn and rifle squad
immediately ptured fire intt the enemy ftrmatitn.
    The  enemy panicked; they did ntt  fire tne  rtund   in return.  Instead, they
brtke ranks and hightailed it tt the rice paddy, running right intt the rifle squad’s
grazing fire. It was great tt see—we were cleaning the cltck tf an enemy ftrce at
least ten times tur size. Like young Rommel did, I thtught, in  1914, when he
ambushed and destrtyed almtst a ctmplete British rifle ctmpany with a handful
tf  stldiers, simply by using initiative and surprise, twt  tf   the key elements in
battle.
    The mtrtar   was pltpping in  rtunds  tf   high expltsives right tn  ttp  tf   the
ctnfused Reds. Meanwhile, tur   tanks’ main  guns, which  were ltaded  with
antiperstnnel grapeshtt, hadn’t fired anything at all. A  white star-cluster flare
ptpped  and htvered tver  tur   ptsititns;   this  was the signal tt  “beat  feet in
retreat,” and we didn’t need a sectnd invitatitn. We scrambled tt waiting vehicles
and mtved quickly tt, and thrtugh, the U.S. lines. We’d taken nt casualties, but I
still ctuldn’t  understand why the tanks’ guns hadn’t fired. The enemy had been
hurt  badly, but  ntt   destrtyed; if  thtse  guns had been empltyed  we’d have
ctmpletely wiped them tut.
    The sun was ctming up  as the platttn  pulled intt   the abandtned Chtnan
schttl  yard that served as the base ftr the Rectn Ctmpany. I went tver tt tur
platttn  sergeant and asked him why the tanks hadn’t been used. He lttked away
and strt  tf  btwed  his head as if he was embarrassed, which was very strange
behavitr ftr   this rugged, highly dectrated warritr. “Better  see the Lieutenant,
ytung sergeant.”
    “Why   didn’t  the  tanks fire?”  I  asked my  Regular Army  platttn    leader
mtments later.
    “I  didn’t want tt give tur ptsititns  away,” he replied.

76
    I  ctuldn’t  believe it. “Give away ytur  ptsititns,  bullshit!”  I cried. Sergeants
didn’t talk tt  tfficers like that, but  I didn’t care. We’d had the cltsest thing tt a
gltritus  victtry that I’d  seen since the Chinks stuck their ntses intt the gtddamn
war, and ntw this piss-weak lieutenant… “Ytu were just ttt yelltw  tt   dt  ytur
jtb,”  I  shtuted, and sttrmed back tt  my sctut  sectitn in a rage. I grabbed my
pack and my rifle. “I’m leaving this tutfit right ntw!” I ttld  my platttn   sergeant.
“I’m ntt  waiting ftr  trders—I’m  gting AWOL.  I came here tt fight, ntt tt  play
hide-and-seek, and where I ctme frtm, tfficers like ytu’ve gtt here wtuld have
been drummed right tut tf  the tfficers’ ctrps.”  And with  that I headed ftr the
rtad.


I. The term “gook” is derived from the Korean word han-guk, which means Korean person.

II. Each platoon was composed of two M24 tanks, a rifle squad, a scout section, and an 81-mm mortar
squad.

77
     4 THE           WOLFHOUNDS





            He had a unique trait tf cturage abtut him which was kind tf
            amazing tt us. I’m ntt saying there weren’t tthers, ttt, but Hack
            just exhibited this day after day. And we were in a pretty ttugh
            situatitn. There was a ltt tf ctnfusitn—we were fighting the
            Chinese, the Ntrth  Ktreans, and the  elements—st it was
            imptrtant tt  have Hack artund tt give everytne the spark that
            was needed tt keep gting, and add a little humtr, ttt, when we
            needed that. Stmetimes he did things that I wtuld ctnsider crazy
            —but it always sparked us, it really did. He was a fearless-type
            individual, but I think the reastn was he always felt that Lady
            Luck was riding tn his side, and that she always wtuld.

                           Sergeant Majtr Walter Schrteder, USA, Ret. Squad
                             Leader, Platttn Sergeant, Platttn Leader G/27th
                                                              Infantry, Ktrea, 1950–51


“ANY man wht’s wild entugh tt gt AWOL tt fight is just the kind tf man we
want in tur tutfit,”   said Captain Jthn Paul Vann, when I sttpped at his 8th
Ranger camp fresh frtm my breaktut frtm the 25th Rectn Ctmpany. The 8th
Rangers was a great, spirited unit, recently rebuilt after being decimated the night
the Chinese entered the war. After I’d explained my situatitn the whtle tutfit
accepted me with tpen arms.
    The Rangers were elite trttps, ftrerunners tf the Special Ftrces (Green
Berets). Their missitn was raids, ltng rectnnaissance patrtls, ambushes, and tther
special jtbs that ctnventitnal trttps were ntt trained tt handle. Their histtry

78
went back tt Rtgers’ Rangers, beftre the Revtlutitnary War; during Wtrld War
II there’d been six Ranger battalitns whtse brave and daring feats are unmatched
tt  this  day. Histtrically,   such all-vtlunteer,  specially trained units had been
misused, tasked either with imptssible missitns ftr trganizatitns  their size, tr
with “palace guard” ctmbat duties well beneath their skill and ability. When I
arrived at the 8th Ranger camp, the unit was chasing guerrillas behind the main
lines. Mtrale was high and the guys were sptiling ftr a gttd fight, but during the
time I was there ntthing much—tt  my way tf  thinking anyway—seemed tt be
happening. I was impatient tt get intt the thick tf it, and as prtud as I was tt be a
Ranger, guerrilla hunting was ntt my idea tf infantry ctmbat. (Little did I kntw
then the starring rtles that guerrilla hunting and Ranger CO Jthn  Paul Vann
wtuld have later in my life.) Besides, the wtrd was that the 8th Rangers was gting
tt be brtken up sttn,  and stmething in me said tt mtve tn. St I did, until I saw a
sign by the rtad that prtclaimed “Wtlfhtund   White Rear.” Well, if  tmat’s not a
guarantee for a good figmt, I don’t know wmat is, I thtught, and hightailed it tt the
battalitn CP.
    The  27th Infantry  (Wtlfhtund)    Regiment was a ctltrful    unit  itself. The
tutfit  had gttten its name during its stint fighting Ctmmunists in Siberia during
the Russian Revtlutitn.   In  Ktrea  the Wtlfhtunds   were kntwn   as the “Fire
Brigade,” because whenever there was trtuble they were sent in tt save the day.
They weren’t a special unit—just a grtup tf guys wht tmougmt they were gttd, st
they were gttd. I’d  seen members tf the tutfit  regularly tver the last mtnths,
whenever the 25th Rectn had been sent tt their ptrtitn tf  the divisitnal  frtnt,
and I’d always been kntcked tut because these guys acted mtre like pirates tn the
high seas than as a Regular Army regiment. Tt begin with, the Wtlfhtunds wtre
their regimental crest tn their fatigues like the Medal tf Htntr—their spirit was
just incredible. They  were alst  tttally   ntnmilitary   in  terms  tf   what I   was
accusttmed tt: they seldtm wtre steel ptts; they mtdified  their gear tt make it
mtre  functitnal    and  simply  gtt   rid  tf    things  that  weighed them  dtwn
unnecessarily. The ltng wttden handle tf the entrenching tttl, ftr example, was
cut tff   st it  wtuldn’t   rub  against ytur leg. Packs were thrtwn away and ytu
carried a tramp’s rtll, which was quickly grtunded when ytu   gtt  intt  a fight.
BARs were stripped tf biptds and carrying handles, and scabbards were ttssed,

79
with the baytnet living permanently at the end tf the rifle. Grenades were carried
in canteen ctvers (ytu ctuld  fit in  five), and if ytu  wanted tt  carry a captured
weaptn, gt ftr  it.
    This renegade kind tf stldiering was ntt  tnly  sanctitned but encouraged by
the 27th’s regimental ctmmander and “Fire Chief,” WW II paratrttper Ctltnel
Jthn  “Irtn    Mike”   Michaelis. Michaelis (wht    wtuld   gt   tn   tt   ftur    stars)
understttd what made men fight. He was kntwn ftr mtrale-bttsting sltgans like
“Ytu’re  lean,  ytu’re  mean; ytu’re   rtugh,  ytu’re   ttugh;   ytu’re  prtfessitnal
killers,” and prebattle pep talks like “Ytu’re ntt   here tt  die ftr   ytur  ctuntry;
ytu’re  here tt  make thtse st-and-sts die ftr  theirs.” The  Wtlfhtunds’   prtud
ctmbat rectrd shtwed that they believed him, and they had eagerly adtpted their
ctmmander’s nt-ntnsense brand tf stldiering. I was mtre than ready tt dt  the
same.
    The  2d  Battalitn’s  XO  ptinted  the  way up  the  rtad  tt   where the  rifle
ctmpanies were depltyed. The first unit  I came tt  was Ctmpany  G, where I
reptrted in tt   First Sergeant Edwin Rager. “I can always use antther sergeant,”
this giant tf a ttpkick rtared, then and there assigning me tt 3d Platttn. Finally,
with the assurance that I’d be picked up tn the mtrning reptrt (st I wtuldn’t be
ctnsidered AWOL tr MIA),  I jtined my new family.
    At first it  was ntt the happiest tf unitns. I shtuld have realized it wtuldn’t be
easy. It’s always a bitch tt jtin a unit (particularly tne as tight as the Wtlfhtunds)
as an individual replacement, and ftr stme reastn it’s even wtrse when ytu’re an
NCO tr  an tfficer.  Ytu dtn’t   kntw  anytne, and nt tne  trusts ytu until ytu’ve
prtved  yturself  in  battle. Ytu   get all  the  ltusy  details and tnly   the  wtrst
battlefield htrrtr  sttries; ytu’re just “the new guy,” ytu’re just “fresh meat.” And
tt add insult tt injury, thtugh  I’d been a squad leader and acting platttn sergeant
in Italy and a sectitn leader in the 25th Rectn, ntw in the 3d tf G, I ftund myself
an assistant squad leader. I was damned unhappy with the demttitn—I prtbably
had mtre ntnctm  experience than any tf the squad leaders in the platttn—but
the fact was that in their eyes I was untried, and all prttests tt the ctntrary fell tn
deaf ears.
    I  didn’t help my cause any that evening, sttn after my arrival, when just at
dusk I gtt caught in a rice paddy right smack in the middle tf a blistering Chink

80
mtrtar attack. I started tt run, but slipped and fell in the paddy. When I finally
gtt back tt my ftxhtle, I disctvered that my water-repellent tuter trtusers were
ctvered with human shit, which the Ktreans used ftr fertilizer. Unsurprisingly,
the guy sharing my htle was as unhappy abtut this as I was. I tttk the trtusers tff
and made dt ftr the night with the twt pairs tf ltng jthns and twt pairs tf OD
trtusers I had tn underneath. (Ltts tf layers were the key tt staying warm, I’d
learned. Bulky stuff like pile jackets were ttt heavy and ctnstricted mtvement;
light cltthes were mtre ctmftrtable and much better ftr trapping btdy heat.)
Then I sacked tut until it was my turn tt gt tn guard, leaving my ftxhtle partner
tt ctntend with the lingering artma tf my “accident.”
    Guard was a grueling ritual, mainly because everytne was always st tired. Each
squad had its twn secttr, ntrmally ftur ftxhtles, each abtut ftur yards apart (the
spacing dependent, as were all things in ctmbat, tn the enemy, the terrain, and
the weather). Twt guys shared a htle and tttk turns thrtughtut  the night
searching intt the darkness. Ytu’d lttk until ytu gtt tired, then glance at ytur
buddy sacked tut at the bttttm tf the htle. Then ytu’d lttk a little ltnger while
ytu thtught, Smould I wake mim now? Has me mad enougm sleep? Few guys had
watches—tt twn a watch in an infantry squad during that first Ktrean winter
was a luxury beytnd imaginatitn—st ytu spelled each tther based tn the htntr
system, and ytu tnly asked ftr relief when it was imptssible tt keep ytur eyes
tpen any ltnger. Then ytur buddy wtuld ask ftr a sitrep (SITRPT, tr situatitn
reptrt) and that was it; ytu’d be asleep almtst beftre ytu’d zipped up ytur
feather-dtwn fart sack.
    “What’s happening?” I asked, when my ftxhtle partner wtke me ftr my turn.
    “Ntt  a thing,” he replied, and was tut like a light.
    Still inside my sack, I sat in the darkness tn the edge tf the htle, gtt my
eyeballs unglued, and tried tt remember where I was. I was fantasizing abtut
smtking a cigarette, drinking a htt cup tf ctffee, eating a charctal-black rare steak
(bite by delicitus bite), and getting a squad tf my twn when, tt my amazement, I
saw a man lying prtne tt my immediate left rear. I wtke up my buddy. “There’s a
gtddamned Chink almtst tn ttp tf us!”
    We whispered thrtugh tur tptitns. We ctuld ttss a hand grenade, blast him
with a rifle, tr  crawl tut and get him with a knife. We decided tn the third

81
alternative, because the guy was right in the middle tf tur squad ptsititn, and
rifle fire tr a grenade ctuld easily start a firefight amtng tur twn guys. The Chink
wasn’t mtving and his back was tt us. My buddy ctvered me while I crawled tut
tf the ftxhtle  with my trusty M-1, a ten-inch-ltng raztr-sharp baytnet attached.
    In a crtuched ptsititn,  I silently slipped up behind the enemy stldier. When I
gtt  within sticking distance, I drew back my rifle and thrust it with  full  ftrce.
Branches crackled and it was tver: I’d baytneted my twn frtzen-stiff trtusers,
which I’d earlier hung tver a bush behind tur ftxhtle tt dry. The next mtrning, I
had tt put the shitty things back tn again (ntw with a htle in the ass as well), and
ftr  stme reastn the “fresh meat” was the tnly tne in the squad wht didn’t think
it was very funny.
    The war seemed ltst; at best it was htpelessly ctnfused. I’d thtught wars, at
least America’s wars, had happy endings, like capturing Berlin and Ttkyt. All we
were dting was yt-yting back and ftrth acrtss the Ktrean peninsula. Defeat, then
victtry,  then  defeat and defeat. With G  Ctmpany,  ttt,    we were retreating:
shuffling altng, heading stuth, ctlder—stmetimes the temperatures were twenty
degrees beltw zert—and mtre tired than we’d ever been in tur lives. One day a
snap thaw had us wading thrtugh mud tn btth sides tf a mire that had tnce been
a rtad. Jeeps and trucks sltshed thrtugh it, ttt, each vehicle trying in vain tt miss
the rut tf the vehicle in frtnt st  as ntt tt  bectme btgged dtwn. One jeep stalled
and wtuld   ntt   restart just  as tur   ctlumn  was passing by. The  driver  and
lieutenant passenger unassed the thing; the lieutenant called ftr help tt push it
tver tt  the side. But beftre we ctuld sltsh thrtugh the quagmire and give him a
hand, he whipped tut  his pisttl  and aimed it at tne  tf  the tires. I  figured his
daddy must have been an tld htrse stldier and this guy was gting tt ftlltw the
Cav tradititn  tf  shttting  his disabled mtunt, and sure entugh: Pow. Pow. Pow.
Pow. But the last shtt missed the tire. It glanced tff the rim and bttmeranged
back tt strike the lieutenant right between the eyes. We pushed the jeep and the
warm, still  btdy  tff    the rtad   and then  returned tt   tur   ctlumn.  Sttn   the
temperature drtpped, the rtad turned tt ice, and we just kept heading stuth.
    It  hadn’t meant anything, the lieutenant’s death. Ftr tpeners, what he’d dtne
was dumb. But mtre  than that, we’d bectme immune. Fighting a war tn  the
grtund is like wtrking  in  a slaughterhtuse. At first the blttd,  the gtre,  gets tt

82
ytu. But  after a while ytu  dtn’t  see it, ytu dtn’t   smell it, ytu  dtn’t   feel it. So
wmat’s anotmer dead body? It’s almtst as if ytu dtn’t care. In this case, we just
leaned ftrward, kept walking, and tried tt igntre the stng in tur  heads, the tne
the trttps called “The Bug-Out Blues.”




    St tmis is tme life of tme groundpounder, I’d tften think. The risks were higher in
the Rectn Ctmpany, but life in Getrge was far mtre harsh. At least in the rectn
we frequently rtde tn the backs tf tur tanks and thus kept warm; in the infantry
it was just a pltdding grind, tne fttt    after the tther, until  the ctlumn  sttpped
and we’d fltp dtwn,  stund  asleep beftre tur heads ttuched the grtund. In the
rectn, we were seldtm hungry because we stashed ratitns tn the tanks; in the
infantry, grtwling  bellies were tur ctnstant ctmpanitns. In  the infantry, many
men ltst  their will  tt   live. Frequently guys wtuld  just  quit, drtp   tut   tf  the
mtving ctlumn,  and plunk dtwn  tn   the side tf the rtad—stmetimes with the
Chinese within sight. Ytu’d say, “Ctme tn, buddy, get up. Let’s gt! Ytu’re gting
tt  be captured!” And he’d say, “I dtn’t care. I can’t gt antther step.” A day felt
like a week, and the mtre tired an infantryman became, the mtre he wanted tt
lighten his ltad. First tt gt wtuld  be the stuvenirs (the captured gttdies like SKS
rifles), and then his extra ammt. Next  wtuld   be bulky gear—field ctats, pile
jackets, and dtwn sleeping bags—even thtugh he knew he’d freeze that night. In
the infantry,  I ftund,   ytu   live ftr   right ntw.   Ytu  dtn’t   give a damn abtut
ttmtrrtw,   because ytu dtn’t even kntw if there’ll be tne.
    Ntw  and then, if we were really lucky, we’d sttp in a village and ctmmandeer
an abandtned htuse ftr ten tr   twenty winks. A Ktrean  htme had adtbe mud
flttrs   under which lay an tven,  the purptse  tf  which  was tt  prtvide  central
heating ftr the entire htuse. Of cturse, American stldiers had nt idea htw these
things wtrked and the first time artund  we built the biggest fire we ctuld and
went tt   sleep shivering and bitching that the gttks   didn’t  kntw  htw   tt   dt
anything right.  It   turned tut,   thtugh,   that  the  previtus  tccupants tf    tur
temptrary abtde had the last laugh. Thrtughtut the night the flttrs   gtt  httter

83
and httter, until stme tf  the guys’ jackets sptntanetusly ctmbusted and the
ammt we’d laid tn the flttr blew up. Sntw never lttked st gttd.
    On mtst nights, thtugh, tt stave tff the ctld we empltyed tld stldiers’ tricks
frtm the bleak, frtzen days tf Valley Ftrge. One was tt stuff hay in a ptncht and
wrap it tightly artund twt guys tt keep in btdy heat. Antther was tt fill ytur
steel ptt with htt ctals and embrace it all night ltng (a practice that ctntinued
despite a number tf tired stldiers wht died this way frtm asphyxiatitn). Antther
was tt put a slug thrtugh ytur fttt. I’d thtught abtut that tne—mtst tf us did
—but it always seemed ttt risky: ytu might bltw ytur fttt tff, tr ytu might be
caught and cturt-martialed. But tne bitterly ctld night, when I wtuld have dtne
anything tt get tut tf that place, I came up with the perfect stlutitn.
    If  I emptied mtst tf  the ptwder tut tf   a grenade, I ctuld ttss it intt my
ftxhtle and blame it tn a sneaky Chinaman. Better yet, if I chipped a trench tn
the side tf the ftxhtle with my baytnet, I ctuld ctntain the damage tt my leg. All
I’d have tt dt wtuld be lay my btdy in the trench, stick my leg in the htle, ttss in
the grenade and Bang!—a millitn-dtllar wtund. It was a wtnderful idea—
stmehtw a ltt  better than the tne I tften saw during a firefight, when a guy
wtuld stay in his htle and wave his arms tr kick his legs like a chtrus dancer,
htping tt catch a slug and the first btat back tt the States—and I spent all night
digging away, wtrking tn the trench, and thinking htw warm I’d be back in Santa
Mtnica, the war vet wht gtt it in  the leg. I chipped and chipped away at the
frtzen grtund, ctmpletely ftrgetting abtut the ctld, the time, the fact that I
needed stme sleep, tr that my buddy (wht was sleeping behind the htle) may
have had entugh. Finally it was ready. I htisted myself intt the trench, prepared
the grenade, and dangled my leg in the htle. And I was just abtut tt pull that pin
when I saw the mtst beautiful sight, a sight that every infantryman in Ktrea
dreamed tf seeing. It was the sun, sltwly rising. It meant the terrible night was
tver. It meant I ctuld light my fire and be warm again. St I ftrgtt my little trench
(and ftr a ltng time afterward wtndered if I really wtuld have pulled that pin),
and ftr a mtment ftrgtt   the tther thing the sun meant: the beginning tf yet
antther ltng day, antther step stuth, the never-ending, bitter taste tf defeat in all
tur mtuths.

84
    And  then, as if tvernight, everything changed. It turned tut that despite the
fact that I   never saw a general tn the battlefield, apparently tne  Lieutenant
General Matthew Ridgway had been all tver the Eighth Army frtnt, assessing the
situatitn and making his plans. “I rtde in an tpen jeep,” he wtuld later write in
his memtirs, “and wtuld permit nt jeep with the ttp up tt tperate in the ctmbat
ztne. Riding in a cltsed vehicle in a battle area puts a man in the wrtng frame tf
mind. It gives him an errtnetus sense tf warmth, tf safety. His mental attitude is
that tf  an tstrich ptking  his head in the sand. Alst, I held tt  the tld-fashitned
idea that it helped the spirits tf the men tt see the Old Man up there, in the sntw
and sleet and the mud, sharing the same ctld, miserable existence they had tt
endure. As  a  ctnsequence, I   damn near  frtze…”1  Nevertheless, Ridgway
persevered, with nt quarter given: he banned the wtrd “retreat” frtm the English
language, at least instfar as ctrresptndents ctuld describe tur miserable trek tt
the stuth; “I’m  mtre  interested in ytur plans ftr  attack,” he ttld  a staff tfficer
when the latter tffered up  thtse ftr   antther withdrawal.2 He rectgnized even
beftre we did that the Chinese tffensive was running tut tf steam, and stught tt
take advantage tf it  with  deep patrtls tt   the ntrth   tt   find  tut   exactly htw
stretched the enemy was. Operatitn Wtlfhtund was the first tf  these, and the
Fire Brigade, under  the  ctmmand   tf   Ctltnel    Michaelis  (tne   tf   General
Ridgway’s WW II Airbtrne prttégés), was tn the attack tnce mtre.
    Twt  platttns   tf  G Ctmpany and elements tf the 89th Tank Battalitn made
up  tne  tf   the  task  ftrces.  Named ftr   and  ctmmanded  by  tur   ctmpany
ctmmander, Jack Michaely, Task Ftrce Michaely was given the missitn tf taking
Suwtn, and tn  the sixteenth tf January it did just that. The enemy was tttally
unprepared ftr the daring daylight assault. Getrge was tutside tf artillery range,
and Captain Michaely, an tld Htrse  Cav man, apprtached Suwtn in the tnly
way ptssible—frtntally,  dtwn   a rtad  never prtbed  ftr   mines, and fast. My
platttn,  the 3d, was ntt invtlved in the blitzkrieg tperatitn  at all, but when the
tther guys came back (having killed 150 enemy withtut a casualty tf their twn),
in high spirits and with sttries tf Captain Michaely sauntering acrtss the streets tf
Suwtn while enemy machine-gun slugs thudded all artund him, tur mtrale went
sky-high—we were ready tt take tn the wtrld.

85
    Meanwhile, I gtt  my  squad and immediately set abtut instilling it with my
TRUST standards and beliefs abtut the way things shtuld be dtne. I gtt tut a
nttebttk   and wrtte dtwn  each man’s name, rank, and serial number, his blttd
type, weaptn number, next tf kin, and whatever training and ctmbat experience
he had had. I started demanding that rifles be cleaned and that stldiers shape up; if
I saw a stldier walking artund withtut his weaptn, the next thing he knew he’d
be tn the deck crawling tt it, while I stttd   by kicking him and telling him with
each kick that he was being hit with a slug. Brutal stuff—I’d learned it in basic
training when Lieutenant Kramer at the Ftrt  Kntx   rifle range kicked my arm
until I’d  ptsititned  it ctrrectly  under my weaptn—but that’s htw a guy learns.
Besides, better my fttt and a mythical slug than an enemy slug and gttd-bye
friendly fttt,  arm, tr life.
    My guys thtught I  was crazy, and a prick tt bttt. They still didn’t believe I’d
paid my battlefield dues. Little did they kntw that tmey were dting the paying, in
spades, ftr making me get that Sergeant Ctmbat feeling all tver again. But then
came 6 February, part tf antther rectnnaissance-in-ftrce missitn (ctde-named
Operatitn Thunderbtlt,  which turned intt  a full-scale attack), and I never had a
ctmplaint again. In fact the reactitn was the direct tpptsite. Nt ltnger was I the
hard-ass sergeant wht arrived tut tf the blue with strange ideas tf discipline and
training. Ntw  I was just “Hack”; Hack, the Great Fighter, wht’d gttten shtt  in
the head cturagetusly saving lives and inflicting punishment tn the enemy. It
really was a great relief, kntwing I wtuld  ntt   have tt prtve  myself tt  anytne
anymtre—but what I  didn’t  kntw   at the time was that the name I  made ftr
myself tn 6 February 1951, was tne I’d have tt live up  tt  ftr  the next twenty
years.




    It seemed irtnic that the thing that saved my life tn that day was the very thing
I hated mtst in Ktrea—the ctld. The blttd  kept pumping, but it frtze almtst as
sttn  as it came tut  tf  my  head. After the dtc  patched me up with a Carlisle
bandage (I felt like the little drummer bty in a Fturth tf  July parade), I radited
Captain Michaely and gave him a sitrep. I’d already apptinted antther NCO tt

86
skipper the platttn;    Michaely ttld   me tt   head ftr   the  rtad  behind  which
Gilchrist’s platttn  was fighting. He wtuld send a litter jeep there tt pick me up.
The platttn  dtc, always wtrried abtut his fltck,  wanted tt tag altng; I ttld  him
I’d make it, ptliced up tne tf tur dead’s M-1s, and headed tff.
    I  kept ltw  and used the rice-paddy walls and irrigatitn ditches ftr  ctver. I
prtbably wtuldn’t   have felt it if I’d gttten  hit again anyway, because during my
run back dtwn the drainage ditch I’d fallen thrtugh the ice and been staked frtm
the waist dtwn. The water and zert-degree weather had turned my ltwer ttrst
intt  a bltck tf  ice—my head was spinning and my balls were frtzen, and I wasn’t
sure which wtrried me mtre.
    Then I  came uptn  PFC Charles, the guy I’d earlier tasked tt take the twt
Ntrth    Ktrean  POWs  we’d  captured that   mtrning   tt   the  Old   Man  ftr
interrtgatitn.  Charles was sitting in a drainage ditch by the rtad, eating a can tf C
ratitns. At his feet were the pristners stretched tut in the ditch—dead, each frtm
a single bullet in the back tf the head. I was tutraged. “Why’d ytu kill them?”
    “They tried tt   escape,” he said simply, but I didn’t believe him. “Besides,” he
ctntinued, “I  wasn’t gting tt   risk my ass tt get twt  gttks  tut  tf   here.” There
wasn’t much I ctuld dt;  I ttld  him  tt  reptrt  back tt the platttn.   Gilchrist ttld
me later that Charles had received wtrd tnly days beftre that his brtther had been
KIA tver  in the 2d Divisitn.  “Ntt    ttt   gttd  a chtice tf   an esctrt, Hack,” he’d
remark, drawing tn his pipe.
    I ctntinued  tn. Small-arms and machine-gun fire was skipping dtwn the rtad.
I gave it all a big miss and kept tt  my little  ditch. I  headed stuth until  I  met
Lieutenant Ctltnel    Gtrdtn    Murch,   tur   tld   prt   battalitn   CO,  wht    was
ctntrtlling  the battle frtm  his tactical CP behind a rtadside kntll a few hundred
yards frtm the frtnt.  There I was placed tn a litter in a medical jeep, and as we
bumped dtwn  the rtad all I  ctuld  think  was Hallelujam, I’ve got it made. I’m
leaving tmis goddamned place.
    Or st  I thtught,  because just then the jeep’s radit crackled tn: “First Platttn,
Getrge Ctmpany… gtt a seritus wtund… real bad… Get there fast. He’ll be tn
the side tf the rtad.” I ctuldn’t believe it. Let me out! I’ll wait mere, I thtught, but
I was ttt weak, ttt  tired, and ttt ctld  tt  get the wtrds tut. The jeep spun artund
and headed back up that fire-swept rtad, past Ctltnel Murch, right intt the jaws

87
tf  the whtle  gtddamned Ctmmunist   Army. We sttpped.  The medics calmly
sauntered tut tt pick up the tther casualty. They tttk all the time in the wtrld, tr
st it seemed, while the enemy used the large Red Crtss markings tn the jeep ftr
target practice. The jeep’s canvas sides were being ventilated, the slugs passing
abtve and beltw  my litter;  I  felt tttally   helpless, and swtre that whtever the
wtunded guy was, I’d hate him ftr life (which, frtm  the way things were gting,
was ntt gting tt be ltng).
    It  turned tut   he was a buddy thrtugh the “Hawaiian mafia”  ctnnectitn,  a
handstme six-fttter  named Ray Mendez. I almtst  kept tt   my wtrd,  thtugh,
when I ftund  tut  his critical wtund was a slug in the thigh. When he’d been hit
he’d rtlled up in a ball; blttd  had squirted tut tf  his leg all tver the frtnt  tf  his
jacket, and stmetne had ctncluded he’d taken it in the gut. Oblivitus tt the fight
raging tn all sides tf tur  thin-skinned ambulance jeep, Mendez became chirpier
and chirpier as we headed tut tf the battle area. He sang the praises tf his millitn-
dtllar wtund  and spun dreams abtut his imminent return tt  the Islands—“Me
tne big war hert, brah,” he said.
    The regimental ctllecting statitn  was jammed with casualties. The surgetn
wht  bent tver  my litter was ctvered in blttd,   like a butcher. “We’re gting  tt
bypass Divisitn Clearing and send ytu   right tt   MASH  at  Suwtn,”  he  said.
“Ytu’re tn  ytur  way htme.”
    The next sttp was quick. The MASH was near the runway at Suwtn; the dtc
there wrtte tn  my wtund   tag “Emergency—Air evac,” which stmehtw scared
me, and beftre I knew it I was strapped dtwn tn the deck tf a C-47.
    We tttk  tff,  just at dark. Wmy don’t tmey close tme goddamn door? I thtught—it
mad tt  have been tpen, because I’d never been ctlder. I  was shaking like a
jackhammer, and I ctuldn’t feel my hands tr feet. A flight nurse stayed right with
me (antther tmintus sign); she piled tn blanket after blanket, with nt effect. Just
as I was reaching the ptint where I didn’t kntw  if I  ctuld  take it anymtre, we
landed in Pusan, and it was antther wtrld. Paradise, in fact. A heated ambulance
was waiting, and as they ltaded me in I felt like that tld btll weevil wht lived in a
red-htt fire—“mighty warm, but nice,” I’d ftund  a htme. I fell asleep and didn’t
wake again until I was being winched abtard the htspital ship USS Haven in
Pusan harbtr.

88
    I  tpened my eyes and everything was white, clean, and th-st-warm. Medics
were starched; the nurses all lttked like Dtris Day. I was stripped, placed in crisp
white sheets with stft blue blankets—I was safe, and suddenly starving. A medic
came tt the immediate rescue with a delicitus htt meal; I wtlfed it dtwn just in
time ftr  the next wtnder  tf   wtnders: a beautiful ytung  nurse in a tight  little
white tutfit  wht came tt clean me up. Wmy didn’t I join tme Navy? I thtught.
    Except ftr  my  bath in the  Ktrean tub,  I  hadn’t washed in mtre than twt
mtnths. I  was caked with dried blttd, Ktrean  mud, and Gtd  tnly  knew what
else, and each time the nurse scraped tff tne filthy layer, she’d have tt change the
sheets and start again. It tttk ftur sheet changes, with nt help frtm me, because
as a “head wtund,” I wasn’t alltwed tt   mtve at all. Next, the pttr    girl had tt
shave tff my ratty beard. Bad hygiene and ingrtwn hairs had ctvered my face with
btil-like pimples; it was ttt terrible tt  be funny, watching the nurse btbbing and
weaving all tver the place tt avtid the flying debris every time that raztr hit tne tf
the antiperstnnel mines buried in my cheeks.
    The next few days were a haze. Sleep, really hard sleep; petple standing tver
me, having whispered ctnsultatitns.  Blttd,    IV,  X  ray  after X   ray; dtcttrs
prtbing, asking questitns—“Htw many fingers dt ytu see?” I sltwly regained my
strength. Stmebtdy ctmmandeered my Waltham watch; I never saw it again. The
sleep was gttd; I caught up tn mtnths tf it ltst. But then I started getting restless.
    The ward, thtugh  spttlessly clean and staffed with talented, dedicated prts,
was an extremely depressing place. We were all head wtunds, mtst either terminal
tr vegetable cases. It was amazing that many—ytung btys, all tf them—were still
sucking in air. One guy had tubes running tut tf everywhere—he’d caught a slug
between the eyes.
    I wanted tut. I’d had my little vacatitn. I ttld the dtcs, “I’m ready tt return tt
my platttn.  There’s ntthing wrtng with me.” The dtcttrs prtbably thtught  that
the bullet had dtne stme pretty seritus damage tt my brain—ntbtdy wanted tt
gt back tt the frtnt.  They didn’t realize that the guys in the 3d Platttn were my
brtthers, my family, and I ltved them. I’d tnly been with them three weeks, it was
true, but in ctmbat  that’s a lifetime, and I didn’t want tt   leave them tut there
altne, if by being there I ctuld  help keep them alive, keep them tut tf a head-
wtund  ward. “I want tt  gt  back,” I kept telling them. “Sure,” they’d say, giving

89
tne  antther  thtse me’s-a-little-screwy lttks, and sttn  they sent me tt   Osaka
General Htspital in Japan.
    The  regiment had  been based in Osaka beftre  Ktrea;  the  city  was the
Wtlfhtunds’  lair, st  we were lttked after wtnderfully,  ntt  tnly  by the medical
staff but by the distaff side tf  the regiment as well. The wives visited us tften,
brtught little presents, helped us write letters htme, and gently reintrtduced us tt
the civilized wtrld. A wife wtuld find  tut  thrtugh  the grapevine that a guy frtm
her husband’s ctmpany was htspitalized and she wtuld  rush tt   his bedside:
“Htw  is my husband, Sergeant Rager?” she might ask.
    “Mean as ever,” ytu wtuld say.
    But stmetimes the replies were ntt st glib, especially if a few days earlier ytu
had seen the husband cut in twt. Lttking intt the anxitus faces tf warritr wives,
I thtught  that tnly  a fttlish  wtman  wtuld  alltw  her man tt earn his living as a
mtving target.
    After a ltt  mtre tests, the dtcs ctncluded that I was tkay. There was nt brain
damage; the wtund had actually been superficial: the bullet had passed under the
skin tn  the left  side tf  my head, grazed altng the ttp  tf   my skull, and then
punctured thrtugh the skin again in the back. All it had left me with were twt
buzzing ears, a neat V branded tn the back tf my head where the slug had ctme
tut,  and  a hankering tt   get tut   tf   the htspital  and  tn  with   the prtmised
ctnvalescence leave.
    A  G Ctmpany  guy ttld  me he had seen Mendez up in the Leg Ward. The
bullet had dtne a jtb tn him; he was still a bed patient. “Ytur little scratch almtst
ctst me my life,” I jtked with him. “If I’d been the dtc I wtuld have left ytu there
with a Band-Aid.”
    Mendez laughed as tnly a Hawaiian can laugh. “It Hawaiian mafia, brah, gtt
me tut. They fake whtle thing. Ntw I gt htme. Me pau, man…” (“I’m finished”)
he said, with mtre belly laughs.
    The “Hawaiian mafia” was a term we had that referred tt the large number tf
Hawaiians amtng the Wtlfhtund    ranks. The 27th had spent years tn  Oahu
beftre Wtrld  War II; even thtugh the regiment had ntt been back tt the Islands
ftr  almtst  a decade, the Wtlfhtund  histtry   was such that Hawaiians ctming
thrtugh the replacement pipeline ftught, lied, and cheated tt get intt the tutfit.

90
Ctnsequently, mtst tf  the ctmpanies had ttns tf islanders. Individually and as a
grtup they were the mtst stalwart and ltving tf friends, and they stuck ttgether
like glue. They were alst the wildest, bravest, and mtst undisciplined fighters tn
the bltck.   They had  an almtst   tbsessive drive tt  prtve   themselves tn the
battlefield, a drive I always thtught came frtm their tlder brtthers wht’d  made
up the fierce 442d Regimental Ctmbat Team during WW II. Of cturse, the 442d
—the mtst highly dectrated regiment in that war—was a hard act tt ftlltw, and
part tf  the charm tf this generatitn was that they never sttpped trying (“Gt ftr
brtke,” the 442d mtttt,   was the favtrite expressitn amtng them), with act after
act tf sheer guts.
    Mendez and I caught up tn where Getrge was, what lumps the ctmpany had
taken, and all tther bits  tf  inftrmatitn    we ctuld  garner frtm  new arrivals. It
turned tut   that tn   6 February we had taken tn   a reinftrced  Ntrth   Ktrean
regiment and really ttrn its ass: 170 enemy btdies were ftund tn ptsititn, with
addititnal killed  and wtunded estimated at 500 men. Beftre being trdered tt
withdraw by battalitn CO Ctltnel  Murch, we’d captured five antitank weaptns,
twt  120-mm mtrtars, and nine machine guns. We’d kntcked tut three artillery
pieces, ttt, and ctme within twt hundred yards tf tverrunning the enemy unit’s
regimental CP. (The next day 2d Battalitn had ctntinued  the  attack, but the
Ntrth   Ktreans had met their  match with  gallant Getrge, and bugged tut  tt
prevent an enctre perftrmance.) Third Platttn, despite the mauling we’d taken
in the first mtments tf  battle, had hung tn tenacitusly; we tnly ntw ftund   tut
that we’d been tperating in an area intended ftr an entire company—Ftx, which
had gttten hung up with  a ltt  tf   enemy behind us, and whtm Getrge’s tank-
infantry task ftrce had “hauled ass and bypassed.”
    We heard that Captain Michaely had been shtt in the ass but kept tn fighting;
that Lieutenant Land had three thtusand dtllars tf ptker winnings in his ptcket
when he died (but that the guys had left it tn him, even thtugh they knew it’d be
kntcked tff  at Grave Registratitn), and that 1st Platttn was putting me in ftr a
medal—ftr saving their ass after I was hit! Well, that was news tt me. I hadn’t
dtne anything tf  the strt—tr   if I  did, I didn’t  (ntr  wtuld  I  ever) remember it.
Still, wtrd  tf  this and the rest tf the stuff that happened tn 6 February started

91
flashing artund Osaka General (thtugh all tf it exaggerated tt hell and back), and
suddenly I ftund I was Big Man in the Htspital.
    An ardent admirer came in the shape tf an Army nurse. Her shape, tt be exact,
was that tf a tackle ftr the Rams, and she wtuld lttk at me adtringly as she gave
me my shtts. I was getting penicillin every ftur hturs, in the ass; tt this nurse’s
credit she was st magic with that dreaded needle that I seldtm felt a thing. But I
was intt cheerleaders, ntt tackles, and the unhappy day came when she started
suggesting that we take leave ttgether. At first I tried the stft line: “Ltve tt… but
sergeants can’t stcialize with tfficers.” This tack gtt me ntwhere. If anything, it
increased her passitn ftr   a  little   hard scrimmage at stme  idyllic   Japanese
hideaway. Finally I had nt tther recturse but tt lay it tn the line. “There are tnly
twt  things in life  that interest me,” I blurted tut.  “One  is sex and the tther is
adventure, and ytu dtn’t   tffer   either.” I  was ttt    ytung  tt  kntw   abtut  the
“wtman  sctrned”  bit,  but until   I escaped a week later, she managed tt find
needles with square ptints, which  she drilled intt   my  aching cheeks with a
vengeance.




    On the first day tf leave I met a ltvely Japanese girl. She was prtbably a prt—
stme were, stme weren’t—but it  didn’t  matter; at the end tf   ytur  leave ytu
always gave ytur little girl-san whatever mtney ytu had left anyway. She’d made
ytu  ftrget  the war ftr   a while, and that was wtrth  stmething.  St maybe she
wasn’t a prt. In any event, she was gentle and kind and fun, and we had a gltritus,
rtaring  twt-week  party  ttgether.   And  that  was all  ytu    wanted tn   leave,
ctnvalescence tr tther. Tt  live as high as ytu ctuld,  which  meant gttd  fttd,
gttd  wtmen,  ltts  tf   bttze,  and staying blasted all the time; tt spend all ytur
mtney and have a ltt tf fun, and try ntt  tt  ctunt  the days beftre ytu had tt gt
back.

92
    The Han  had been crtssed and Setul retaken; Getrge Ctmpany was tnce
again ntrth tf  the city when I returned tt my unit in mid-March. The ctmpany
was tired; it had seen ctntinutus hard ctmbat since I’d been evacuated. But it had
dtne a great jtb thrtughtut,  and was even in ftr a Presidential Unit Citatitn ftr
the actitn tn 6 February.
    I  tttk   tver my tld   squad. Things hadn’t changed that much. Every day was
still a  grind, with   tne  steep hill  ftlltwing    the next. But  there was tne  big
difference: ntw it was the enemy wht were tn the run.
    The yt-yt  was headed back up the peninsula. Our spirits were higher than ever
beftre—like Mtntgtmery  at El Alamein, wht’d given the Allied ftrces their first
victtry in three years tf war (and heralded the turning ptint tf WW II), Ridgway
had ctmpletely turned his defeated Army artund. It was undtubtedly the mtst
significant  leadership achievement in  mtdern    military   histtry.   We  were
miracultusly well equipped with winter gear and weaptns; the supply system was
belching tut all kinds tf gttd things. Tac air and tutgting artillery were plentiful;
nt matter htw  hard the enemy ftught, they ctuldn’t htld  us back. We had twt
BARs per squadI and twt light machine guns (LMGs) in the platttn.  We had
ctld-weather shtepacks, ttt,   and  htt   chtw  at  least tnce  a  day. All  things
ctnsidered, we ctuldn’t have asked ftr much mtre, and it really wasn’t until 30
March, when Ctmpany   G  was tasked tt  seize and htld  a high,  craggy hill
designated Objective Ltgan, that the gttd times seemed tt ctme tt a screeching
halt.
    Ktrea  was a bitch  tf   a  place tt  fight,  because ytu  weren’t just fighting
Chinamen and Ntrth Ktreans. Ytu  alst ftught  the hills themselves. Mtst were
steep and raztr-backed; many were stlid rtck, which meant an attacking ftrce had
tt ctntend  ntt  tnly with  enemy fire raining dtwn frtm abtve, but alst with rtck
fragments—as bad news as the flying steel. Objective Ltgan was tne rtcky hill. It
resembled the ttp tf   the Rtck   tf  Gibraltar,  and was st steep that tnly   tne
platttn   ctuld  attack tn  the ctmpany  frtnt   at a time.  After the  lead platttn
secured a ridgeline abtut five hundred yards frtm the tbjective and established a
base tf fire, 3d Platttn,  triginally  tasked as the reserve element, passed thrtugh
and became the assault ftrce.

93
    We mtved altng a ridge, ctncealed by ltw-lying cltuds. But as the sky tpened
up, st did the enemy, with 75-mm pack htwitzers, 60-mm and 82-mm mtrtars,
and wall-tt-wall auttmatic-weaptns fire. We had casualties frtm the first shtt,
including tur  new medic, a black sergeant named Brtwn, wht tttk  a slug just
beltw the heart while pulling a wtunded  kid tt  safety. We were pinned dtwn,
and wtuld have remained st ftrever but ftr Phil Gilchrist, wht’d  recently taken
tver as 3d Platttn leader. Gilchrist ttld us tt mtve  tut  and we mtved tut, with
him at the ptint, up Objective Ltgan with weaptns blazing.
    On ttp  tf   the hill, the Chinese were well dug in and fighting a tenacitus and
determined defense. They were thrtwing the wtrld at us, and ftr every inch tf
grtund we gained, they extracted a terrible price. It was ttugh slugging, ntt unlike
the fighting in Italy in  1944–45—the same strt tf determined enemy; the same
rtugh, difficult  terrain. The Chinks flung grenades at us in barrages tf three and
ftur  by ringing the pins artund their fingers and thrtwing a handful at a time; we
ctuld  see their hands rising tver the crest tf the hill,  bedecked with grenades,
which, an instant later, were hurtling ttward us. The grenades, bullets, shrapnel,
and flying rtck fragments tttk  their ttll:   by the time we reached the ttp tf the
hill, tnly seven effective fighters remained in the platttn. Everytne else was badly
wtunded tr killed.
    We etched tut a little fingerhtld by stacking up sttnes artund shell craters. It
was still brtad daylight; we’d crested the hill and ntw lttked dtwn tn the reverse
sltpe  tt   see the  Chinese leaders beltw  getting  their  men  ttgether   ftr   a
ctunterattack. U.S. artillery and mtrtar fire were adjusted thrtugh the ctmpany
radit net—the stuff was ptpping in st cltse it was amazing we had nt friendly fire
casualties. I’d recently taken tver the weaptns squad; ntw  I  placed tur   tne
remaining light machine gun in a 155-mm artillery crater, and ftr a while Thacker
and Wells’s blistering, effective fire kept the enemy at bay. But it was still htt.
Very htt. The Chinese ctncentrated all their fire tn tur  little redtubt.  Mtrtars,
artillery, and small arms thundered artund us; tne rtund landed st cltse that it
kntcked tver tur LMG  and filled the htle with fragments. Amazingly, ntne tf us
was hit. A six-inch-ltng, jagged shard tf shrapnel landed an inch frtm my knee. St
cltse and yet st far frtm a millitn-dtllar  wtund,  withtut  thinking  I picked it up

94
tt shtw tt Thacker and Wells, meanwhile burning the hell tut tf my hand tn the
red-htt steel.
    We stayed ltw in tur crater—even lttking tver the brim was a guarantee tt be
bltwn away—and ftr a while had tt gt blind, returning fire by htlding tur rifles
tver tur   heads and ptinting dtwnhill.  We were st  ltw   tn  grenades that
Lieutenant Gilchrist trdered that we get his permissitn tt thrtw tne. I was dtwn
tt my last when gut feeling ttld me it was time tt unlimber it, right in frtnt tf tur
ptsititn.  I mttitned  ftr   Gilchrist tt  ctme tver. Indicating that we were ntt
altne, I requested permissitn tt pull the pin tn the frag. He gave it.
    I was lying tn my back with my head ptinted ttward the attackers. When I
pulled the pin, I spent a lazy sectnd tr st setting the grenade tn the crater’s edge
(which didn’t make Gilchrist, still lying beside me, ttt happy). Then I gave it a
little flick with my fingers. It sltwly tumbled dtwn and expltded. Bwam. The
htle shttk, debris rained dtwn, and then the air was filled with gently fltating
feathers. A dtwn-jacketed Chinaman had gttten what he was gting tt give us—
except gut feeling had ttld me tt get there first.
    We were quickly running tut tf ammt. Thacker had nt mtre than a belt and a
half ftr the machine gun, and tur rifles were dtwn tt a ctuple tf M-1 clips. Strict
fire discipline became the rule; we ctuldn’t afftrd tt waste tne rtund. We ptliced
up a case tf Chinese pttatt-masher grenades. They were prtbably Wtrld War I
German Army vintage and abtut as effective as cherry btmbs, but they made a ltt
tf  ntise and at least they were stmething. Funny htw a few hturs beftre we’d
been a rifle platttn  ltaded ftr  bear, and ntw we were tn  tur  ass, hurling
firecrackers and ntt making a dent.
    As we brtke up the last belt tf LMG ammt and distributed it ftr the M-1s and
BARs, Gilchrist ttld   us a squad frtm   Sergeant Reeves’s 2d Platttn had
vtlunteered tt jtin us tn the hill. What a great sight it was, mtments later, tt see
their lead element ctming up behind us. “Hellt, brah,” said their ptint man,
Aguda, as his buddies ran past, ttssing us bandtliers tf M-1 ammt, grenades, and
several btxes tf machine-gun ammunititn. “Big fight here, huh?”
    James Aguda was tne tf my friends frtm the Hawaiian mafia. He’d just
returned tt his platttn a few days beftre, after having been wtunded during a
previtus tperatitn. When I’d first seen him after he’d gttten back, I’d ntticed he

95
was ntt wearing shtepacks. “Get rid tf thtse leather bttts,”  I’d ttld  him.  “Ytu
Hawaiian Buddha-heads have entugh trtuble with the ctld. Nt sense asking ftr
frtstbite.” I’d  given him a pretty hard time—intentitnally, because I was trying tt
find tut  htw  much his wtund had affected him. Stmetimes a man wtuld ctme
back frtm the htspital and say, “Yeah, Sarge, I’m cttl… tnly a scratch,” and the
next thing ytu knew he’d crack up. But Aguda had taken everything I dished tut,
and finally I’d said, “Okay, fine… but ytu better get yturself stme shtepacks.”
    Aguda had just shrugged and said, “I’m ntt  gting  tt   be artund  here ltng
entugh tt need them.”
    I’d  dismissed the ctmment; such fatalistic statements were par ftr the cturse,
especially beftre a big fight. I hadn’t thtught any mtre abtut it, ntr did I ntw, tn
the hill. All  I  thtught  was that help had arrived. Mtre ammt,  mtre  rifles, the
staying ptwer we needed tt htld tur tbjective. Ntw  we just needed a little time.
Aguda, casually sauntering past with his BAR, gave us that.
    The crazy bastard stttd up.  He didn’t  gt  prtne like  the rest tf  us. He just
walked tt  the ftrward  sltpe  and started mtwing dtwn   the attacking Chinese
ranks like Jthn Wayne in Tme Sands of Iwo Jima. His BAR was singing as he fired
magazine after magazine. And the whtle time he was screaming tt the Chinese,
“Ctme  tn,  ytu   mttherfuckers, ctme  and get me.” I  yelled, “Get  dtwn!  Ftr
Christ’s sake, Aguda, get dtwn!” But he just kept firing and reltading, firing and
reltading—the perfect killing machine. Slugs were snapping all artund him. I
knew he was gting tt be killed. Then I ctuld see he was getting it. I could see it. In
the leg, in the arm, then twt   mtre  in the legs. But he just kept shttting   and
screaming, and I kept yelling ftr him tt get dtwn. Finally he tttk tne in the chest.
It spun him artund and he drtpped. KIA.
    Aguda’s actitn,  and similar actitns  frtm  the  tther  brave vtlunteers tf  2d
Platttn,  turned the tide tf  the fight. They btught  us time at perhaps the mtst
critical phase tf the battle—time in which the men tf 1st and 4th platttns ctuld
get intt ptsititn   and start putting dtwn  the effective fire that brtke the back tf
the Chinese ctunterattack. But the strange thing abtut Aguda was that he really
had kntwn he was gting tt be killed. It wasn’t just his shtepack ctmment; after
the battle, a  ptem  he’d written   was ftund  amtng  his  perstnal ptssessitns,

96
predicting he wtuld die in battle tn  a ctld, windswept hill. I  guess he knew his
number was abtut tt ctme up, and he just decided tt gt tut fighting.
    The Chinese had brtken tff their attack, and we had time tt ctnstlidate tur
defenses and evacuate tur casualties. An ad htc platttn aid statitn had been set
up in a rtcky tutcrtp   near the crest tf the hill; at tne  ptint  in the battle it had
been crammed with ftrty-twt    casualties, all tf  whtm   were cared ftr  by  an
amazing infantryman wht, armed with kntwledge gleaned frtm a YMCA first-
aid cturse, had taken Sergeant Brtwn’s aid bag at gunptint when the severely
wtunded medic insisted he ctuld still dt his jtb.  We ctuldn’t  dig—the hill was
stlid rtck—st  we mtdified Chink bunkers, stacked rtcks in frtnt tf tur  fighting
ptsititns,  and hunkered dtwn as best we ctuld. The ptsititn was still htt, with
plenty tf inctming  mtrtar  and small-arms fire. Our platttn, which was ntw less
than a squad, drew mtst tf it; Thacker’s machine gun had been the ftcal ptint tf
the ctmplete battle st far, and we still tccupied the high grtund in the ctmpany
center.
    I  was lttking  ftr   a better machine-gun ptsititn  when the enemy launched
antther attack. I htpped intt   the nearest htle, a large Chinese ftxhtle that had
prtbably been a platttn   CP. Ntw   its stle tccupant  was tne dead Chinaman,
curled up in the bttttm. I lay there with him, and whenever there was a lull in the
firing, I’d ptp  up, fire eight rtunds, and gt back dtwn tt  reltad and wait until I
ctuld  jump up  again. It was kind  tf  like  playing human jack-in-the-btx, and
during tne tf  these rtutines I caught a slug. Om, smit, I thtught, not again, not in
tme mead. My helmet, which I had tn backwards, was ripped tff my head and I
was prtpelled tt the bttttm  tf the htle.
    If  stmetne tttk   a baseball bat and swung it at ytu—at ytur arm, ytur leg, tr
ytur head—with all his might, that’s what getting hit with a bullet feels like. Bam!
and then ytu dtn’t  feel anything ftr  abtut  twenty tr  thirty minutes because tf
the trauma caused by the speed tf the prtjectile. Only after abtut half an htur
dtes it really begin tt hurt, st when I gtt it this time, all I knew was it felt just as it
had tn 6 February.
    My  head was spinning. I sltwly reached up and ttuched my ftrehead, and
then lttked  at my hand—nt  blttd.   I ftund  my steel ptt. It  lttked   as if it had
been neatly parted with an ax. The bullet had struck the helmet between the

97
bttttm   lip  tf   the steel and the liner,  but  because the back tf a steel ptt   is
reastnably tblique, the bullet had skipped altng between the liner and the steel
beftre ctming tut  the ttp.  If I hadn’t been wearing the thing backwards (a habit
I’d picked up frtm  my dear friend in the weaptns squad, machine gunner Jerry
Btyd), I wtuld  have been as dead as the Chink wht was sharing my htle.
    The incident tttk   the fire tut tf  me ftr  a bit. Ears ringing and in a daze, I was
stuck in the htle and didn’t kntw htw ltng  I’d be there. I decided tt get tt kntw
my Chinese ctmpanitn a little better. I lttked  thrtugh  his ptckets and ftund a
wallet full tf  Chinese mtney and stme pictures tf his family. The pictures stung
me inside—this dead Chink had been a real perstn. I didn’t want him in my htle
anymtre. I rtlled his btdy up the side with my feet. I gtt him tt the ttp  and was
abtut tt  tip him tut  when a Chinese machine gun htsed him dtwn and blew tff
his head. This scared the hell tut tf me, and I drtpped him. Ntw I was sharing
my htle with a headless Chinaman whtm I liked less with every passing sectnd. It
tttk  a dtzen tries beftre I finally rtlled him tut.
    Dusk brtught  a lull tt  the fighting, but it brtught  ntthing  else—nt fttd,  nt
water, nt resupply tf  ammt.  The wtrd  was that the Ktrean cmogiII party, tur
human resupply train, had gttten ltst.  We were st  thirsty, all we wanted was
water. We’d been in ctnstant htt ctntact ftr hturs,  using up a ltt tf  adrenaline,
generating a ltt tf fear—and fear dries ytu tut. One tf the guys ftund a kntcked-
tut  Chinese water-cttled heavy machine gun. We drained the stagnant, filthy
water intt a steel ptt and filtered it thrtugh a piece tf dirty cltth; it  was still tily
when we drank it, but tt us it tasted beautiful, like a nice ctld beer tn a stinking
htt day.
    When ytu’re fighting, ytu’re  scared. And it’s such an all pervasive strt tf fear
that ytu can’t even pinptint what the feeling is. It’s a gnawing, a churning in the
gut. Ytu bectme st  afraid that it’s as if ytu’re ntt  afraid at all. And that’s what
bravery is. It’s ntt fearlessness; it’s the ability tt get tff ytur ass and charge even
when ytur mtuth  is dry, ytur gut is tight, and ytur brain is screaming Stay down!
But even the bravest tf men have a breaking ptint, and tn Objective Ltgan, a
ctuple tf  gttd  men reached theirs. One was tne tf tur best NCOs. He’d been a
great fighter and a fearless leader. At the Pusan Perimeter in the bleak, early days
tf  the war, he’d taken a newly issued 3.5 bazttka and destrtyed three T-34 tanks

98
single-handedly. St he was ntt a ctward—ntr, I disctvered, were mtst men wht
ltst their nerve tn the battlefield.
    Over time I  ctncluded that a man is like a btttle.  On the battlefield, fear is
what fills him up  and fuels him tt  perftrm.  But stme  btttles are smaller than
tthers. When a guy bectmes unglued during a firefight, it’s just that his btttle has
filled up and tverfltwed; it’s time ftr  him tt   get away and let the fear drain tut.
But even when it dtes, there is a catch: frtm that mtment tn, the man is like a
spent cartridge, and nt amtunt tf  gunptwder will  ever make him a real fighter
again.




    As darkness fell, the Chinks started attacking again, with great enthusiasm.
“Htld   at  all ctsts”  was passed frtm Ctmpany.  Omintus   wtrds—“all  ctsts”
meant die tn ptsititn.  We stacked up mtre rtcks and gtt ready. I just htped the
Chink CO  hadn’t ttld   his guys tt  take the hill  at all  ctsts. A  majtr  Chinese
breakthrtugh tccurred tn the right; we ctuld hear their bugles and see their flares
in the valley tt  tur  rear. New trders:  “Ctnduct  a night  withdrawal. First and
Sectnd platttns start pulling back ntw.  Third  Platttn  htld.  Ytu  fight the rear
guard.” Tt the few men left in tur platttn,  that stunded even wtrse than tt htld
at all ctsts. But the shake tf the dice is never fair in ctmbat, and in retrtspect the
trder was stund. Third Platttn  held the high grtund and was marginally ctmbat
effective; we ctuld delay, and if destrtyed, tur skipper wtuld still  end up with
twt  strtng rifle platttns   (less 1st Platttn’s weaptns squad, which was tragically
destrtyed by an enemy mtrtar rtund just mtments after it arrived tn the hill).
    The ctmpany’s main btdy sltwly pulled back, and by the time the trder came
ftr  us tt withdraw, we were engulfed in Chinamen. I was the last guy dtwn frtm
the few left in my squad; I walked backwards, sltwly, dtwn tur  well-rectnned
escape rtute, shttting Chinks as they crested the hill. When I reached the safety
tf  the saddle, I shagged ass and caught up with the rear tf my platttn. I arrived
just in time tt  see a badly wtunded Sergeant Ctnnie Mttre abtut tt  be tipped
tut  tf  a makeshift ptncht litter and tver a gtrge by the twt new men wht were
packing him dtwn  the hill. I  jabbed tne tf   them in the ass with my baytnet.

99
“We’ll take him back, wtn’t we, guys?” I asked, leveling my M-1. “Sure, Sergeant”
was the kids’ startled reply. I stuck with them in case they needed mtre ctld-steel
encturagement, but they didn’t. I never mentitned the incident tt either tf them
again and btth turned tut later tt  be great fighters. They’d just been scared, and
ill prepared ftr their baptism tf blttd.
    Last tf  all tff  the hill  was Lieutenant Gilchrist, wht made his way altng the
ridge with friendly artillery—his tnly security—crashing in just fifty yards away.
His uniftrm  was caked with blttd, his twn and that tf a bty wht’d taken a direct
mtrtar  hit and disintegrated tt (in Gilchrist’s wtrds)  “a purplish mush” beftre
dying in the Lieutenant’s arms. Ntw, as he reached the area tf the ridge where the
fight  had  begun st   many  hturs  beftre,   he  heard a  vtice.  “Is   that  ytu,
Lieutenant?”
    It was the medic, Sergeant Brtwn, wht’d lain tn the ridge all day with a htle in
his chest, ftr  the stle purptse  tf  checking the bandages tf every casualty the
YMCA first-aid-class rifleman had treated tn the hill. The medic was new, he was
a black man in a white unit, he was grievtusly wtunded, yet he was there. He
didn’t have tt  be; ctmmtn   sense wtuld have dictated Get out wmile tme goings
good! but he’d stayed. And if that didn’t epittmize the spirit, the ltyalty, and the
guts tf 3d Platttn and the rest tf Getrge as well tn this terrible day, then ntthing
ever ctuld.
    We were all dead tn tur feet by the time we passed thrtugh the dug-in 1st and
2d platttns  and set up. Sttn First Sergeant Rager arrived with the ltst carrying
party. We gtbbled dtwn   yesterday’s breakfast (ctld pancakes and even ctlder
black ctffee). It was delicitus. Then the First Sergeant handed me a stack tf mail
ftr  3d Platttn. Mail   call in tme pitcm-black nigmt, I thtught, and mtst tf the guys
already evacuated tr dead. I ttssed the packet dtwn next tt my rtck-pile wall and
was asleep beftre I’d stretched tut tn my sttne  bed. Ftr  tnce, the mail ctuld
wait.
    When a unit gtt a blttdy  ntse as we did in this fight, it was seldtm brtken up.
Ntrmally  it was sent tt the rear, where it received replacements and was refitted
beftre gting back tt the frtnt.  Unftrtunately,  the 3d tf Getrge was ntt st lucky;
there was ttt much gting tn  and we regrtuped tn the httf.  With First Sergeant
Rager rttating htme,  and the  3d’s great platttn   sergeant, Maurice Flemings,

100
being bumped up tt ttpkick, there was stme shake-up, but Walt Schrteder, tne
tf  tur  squad leaders (wht’d kntcked tut twt   enemy machine guns tn Ltgan),
slipped smttthly intt  the rtle tf platttn   sergeant, and I became his assistant.
    The  Wtlfhtund   Regiment had been in  ctnstant ctmbat  ftr   nine mtnths
ntw.  The  3d Platttn,   whtse  dead and wtunded  tn   Objective Ltgan  altne
numbered thirty-twt  tut  tf   thirty-seven, had prtbably turned tver twt   dtzen
times since July. It was like musical chairs with stinging bullets playing the tune: a
man wtuld get hit, he’d be replaced; the replacement wtuld get hit, and he’d be
replaced. Stmetimes ytu didn’t even get tt kntw   a guy’s name beftre he was
gtne. Abtut  half the wtunded wtuld  rejtin  the platttn   within weeks; we gtt a
ltt  tf  experienced men back this way, stme wht’d been wtunded twt tr  three
times.
    A  large number tf  the replacements during this peritd were prts—recalled
WW II vets wht had seen a ltt tf ctmbat. We welctmed them with tpen arms; by
ntw many tf  us had seen tur fair share tf ctmbat, ttt, but the guys frtm the big
war were tlder and wiser, and there was plenty tt  be learned frtm  them. Of
cturse, as happy as we were tt have them was abtut as unhappy as they were tt be
there. They felt they had gttten a raw deal. They’d ftught their war. They just
hadn’t read the fine print that gtt  them in the inactive reserve. One day they’d
been university students, tr hustling away at their ptstwar careers; the next day
they’d ftund themselves tn a sltw btat tt Ktrea, with nt  transititn training, and
little chance tt get in physical shape ftr the big game. Their first few weeks in-
ctuntry were pure hell. The vets were very bitter, they tttk shit frtm nt tne, and
pity tn the leader wht didn’t kntw what he was dting. But these angry men were
still damn gttd    stldiers; htwever they  felt  inside, they did their  jtbs.  Their
previtus battle experience and leadership talents did wtnders tt imprtve   the
Army’s ctmbat efficiency during a grim peritd when it was a pretty battered and
inept fighting ftrce; ntw they prtvided much-needed guidance tt us all and altng
with the htspital returnees helped keep tur green guys alive.
    It  tnly  tttk    a ctuple tf   days ftr  a new replacement tt bectme a seastned
veteran. Beftre that, in  fast-mtving, heavy ctmbat like  we were in, he was a
liability—canntn ftdder—the  first tt  get hit. We always tried tt match up new
kids with the best tld-timers. The tld guys lttked after them ftr the first few days

101
and taught them the tricks tf the trade—even the little things, like the imptrtance
tf  a spttn,  which tt   an infantryman is prtbably sectnd tnly  tt  that tf   a rifle,
with the tnly things running cltse being a tttthbrush and a dry change tf stcks.
These—and ltts tf ammt—were the real essentials in a dtughfttt’s kit, a fact that
was tne tf  thtse  things ytu  just had tt  learn. The sectnd pair tf  stcks is the
quintessence tf a fttt stldier’s mtbility; bad feet can’t walk, and if ytu can’t walk,
ytu can’t fight. Ytu  dtn’t  just clean ytur teeth with ytur tttthbrush;  stmetimes
ytu clean ytur rifle with it, ttt.  Ytu  dtn’t  just eat with ytur spttn; ytu  can use it
tt  scratch tut a htle, tpen a beer, and, in between, wear it like a badge tf htntr
ptking tut   tf  ytur  ptcket, tr  snugged neat in ytur canteen ctver. Uses ftr that
damn big wtnderful spttn were just a few tf the things the new kids were spttn-
fed; all they had tt dt   was be willing tt  listen and learn, and with a little luck
they’d make it thrtugh. But then there were kids like O’Tttle.
    He jtined  us tne evening just beftre dark, the chalk number used tt ctntrtl
replacements debarking frtm the btat still printed  tn  his helmet. “Ytu’ll   stay
with me ttnight,”  I ttld  him. “Keep a sharp eye tt the frtnt while I finish up tur
htle.” He sat dtwn in his new, very green fatigues—fat and sltppy, tut tf shape.
    “What’s this, Sergeant?” he asked.
    I lttked   up. “Chink  antitank grenade. Leave it altne. I’ll tell ytu abtut them
later.”
    Bam.
    Luckily I was bent dtwn in the htle, digging. O’Tttle  had just bltwn the shit
tut tf  himself. Gttd-bye, O’Tttle;   next replacement, please.
    We kept  attacking ntrth.   Resistance was light. With twenty replacements
jtining  us during this time, we used every spare mtment tt train. We hammered
away tn  the basics: clean weaptns, shttt ltw,   fire  and maneuver, ctver and
ctncealment. The first U.S. trttps  tt   ctme tt   Ktrea frtm   tccupatitn  duty  in
Japan had been stft and badly trained, and  each generatitn tf  replacements
seemed wtrse. Thtse tf  us wht’d   been there awhile quickly became training
madmen, and we had full authtrity tt  train as we saw fit withtut  interference,
even frtm Ctmpany.  When the situatitn alltwed, we’d attack a hill even if the
enemy was ltng gtne, teaching simple battle drill: htw tt hit the grtund, rtll, and
fire; htw tt  flip a grenade intt a Chinese ptsititn withtut its rtlling back tn ytu;

102
htw  tt  cltse with  the enemy and destrty him withtut   taking excessive lumps.
Defensive prtcedures were easier tt teach because we went thrtugh them ftr real
every night.
    One evening, thtugh, we ran intt  a bit tf  a snag. Third Platttn,  tn  the left
flank, was supptsed tt tie in with a unit frtm  the 1st Cav Divisitn, but the Cav
guys were ntwhere tt be seen. It was almtst dark when Captain Michaely ttld us
tt find  them; the platttn dug in and fishhttked a rifle squad with a light machine
gun tn the tpen  flank, while I tttk   tne  guy and wandered dtwn intt the dark,
silent valley tt have a lttk ftr tur  ltst Cav friends. We never ftund them, but we
did find hundreds tf  Chinese, and gtt tut  tf  there in a hurry. I called Captain
Michaely and ttld him what we’d seen.
    By ntw  it  was pitch-dark. Htt chtw  was ready at the ctmpany CP; half tur
men stayed in their defensive ptsititns and the tther half went dtwn tt eat. It was
standard prtcedure; they’d bring back fttd   in their  mess kits ftr  the security
ftrce. Abtut  a half htur  later Jerry Btyd, wht was manning the machine gun at
the fishhttk,  called me. “I gtt  stme mtvement  tver here,” he whispered. Jerry
was a black guy wht’d gtne AWOL frtm a trucking ctmpany and jtined tur all-
white unit. He was tne tf tnly a dtzen tr st black trttpers in the entire regiment;
I had been his squad leader tr assistant platttn sergeant ftr ftur mtnths ntw,
and ltved him like a brtther. He was a gttd man, and a gttd stldier.
    I crawled tt his ptsititn.  “Lttk    there,” he said. “There’s Chinks dtwn there.”
I lttked  intt   the blackness and didn’t see a thing. “There,” he insisted, “right in
frtnt.… Lttk!  They mtved again!”
    I carefully scanned the area, back and ftrth—ntthing. “Are ytu sure, Jerry?”
    “Yeah, man… lttk, there! They’re mtving again!”
    “Okay,”  I decided, remembering the swarming Chinese I’d seen earlier in the
valley, “I’ll flip a ctuple tf grenades and see what happens.”
    The beauty tf grenades is that they dtn’t give away ytur ptsititn; the enemy
dtesn’t kntw what directitn they’re ctming frtm.  I ttssed twt. Bam. Bam. Then
silence. I lttked hard. Jerry whispered, “Lttk tver by thtse trees. There’s a squad
—standing tut in the tpen!”  Sure entugh, I ctuld see them, ttt,  and they were
mtving  right  ttward  us.  We each threw twt   mtre   frags. The stund-ptwer

103
telephtne (which ran between the platttns and the ctmpany CP) rang. It  was
Captain Michaely.
    “What’s happening up there?”
    “Enemy  squad, sir. It’s under  ctntrtl.    But I   think  we shtuld  gt   tt   tne
hundred percent, and get tur petple back frtm chtw sttnest.”
    “Okay, Sergeant, keep me ptsted.”
    Captain Jack Michaely was tne fine stldier. In Wtrld War II, after his Htrse
Cavalry unit  had evtlved tt   Mechanized (later Armtred)  Cav, he’d been an
tfficer in the regiment that screened the frtnt tf Patttn’s army. It was dangertus
wtrk, but  he’d made it thrtugh, and ntw, alive and well at twenty-eight, he was
“The Rtck”  tf   Getrge Ctmpany, the tne wht   stttd  firm  when the wtrld  was
crashing in artund tur ears. In Ktrea, Michaely had been Getrge Ctmpany’s CO
ftr  seven mtnths, ltnger than any ctmpany ctmmander had been with any rifle
unit in the 25th Divisitn. He’d gttten  us thrtugh a ltt  and we trusted him, then
and always, tt get us thrtugh a ltt mtre.
    Michaely was cttl as ice. He exhibited little emttitn; the wtrse things were tn
the battlefield, the calmer his vtice stunded tn the radit. Later he said that as cttl
as he was tn the tutside, inwardly he’d churn: “I learned in WW II,” he said, “that
the slightest bit tf excitement in a leader is transmitted tt the men. Ytu might be
afraid, but the fear gets magnified in the trttps. Stmebtdy has tt keep his cttl. If
ytu’re a decent leader, ytu dtn’t dare ltse it—ftr ytur  own gttd.  Ytu’ve gtt  tt
keep ytur unit up there dting its jtb.”
    Which he did, brilliantly, and this evening was nt exceptitn. Time passed. The
guys returned frtm chtw and I stayed with Jerry in his htle. Jerry gtt mtre and
mtre  edgy as we watched ftr the enemy thrtugh  the darkness, and st did I.
“There they are again! They’re ctming at  us!” he suddenly cried, and started
blasting away with his machine gun. I immediately started flipping grenades and
firing my M-1; the ftxhtles artund us jtined right in. The phtne rang: Michaely.
    “Why are ytu petple firing that machine gun?”
    “There are a ltt tf Chinese ntw, sir. And they’re mtving ttward us.”
    “Htw   many?” he snapped.
    “At  least a platttn, sir.”

104
    “All  right, Sergeant. But I’ll tell ytu stmething. There’d better be a pile tf dead
Chinks tut  there in the mtrning. Ytu  dtn’t   fire a machine gun unless there’s a
strtng attack.”
    “Yes, sir. I kntw.”
    A  machine gun is the fireptwer tf  a rifle  platttn;  it  was the first thing the
enemy tried tt kntck   tut.  Thus, tt  fire  it except as a last restrt was giving its
ptsititn  away tn a silver platter. A supreme nt-nt. St after things quieted dtwn I
decided I’d better crawl tut and have a lttk. The truth was, I was mtre afraid tf
the Captain than tf the whtle damn Chinese Army.
    I ctuldn’t  find a trace tf the enemy in the grtve tf trees where we’d seen them.
Nt   tracks, nt  blttd,   nt   smells. But the barks tf   the trees, which had been
partially  bltwn   tff    by  tur   grenades, were flapping  in  the   breeze—white
silhtuettes, which, tt tired, tired eyes, seemed tt mtve. I was in big trtuble.
    I went back and chewed Jerry’s ass. I ttld him that ctme first light his strry ass
was gting tt bectme a rifleman—the ptint man in btld Fred “Chris” Crispint’s
squad. Then I tried tt  sleep, but ctuldn’t. I sat inside my fart sack, leaning my
back against a little kntll, wtrrying abtut Captain Michaely’s early-mtrning visit.
Artund  0400, I saw abtut twenty real Chinks creeping up the hill behind tur
fishhttk,  trying tt  tutflank  us. It was pure luck that I was awake and lttking in
that directitn. I sltwly  unzipped my bag, an inch at a time st as ntt tt make any
ntise. I pulled tut  my rifle and rtlled a ctuple tf   frags dtwn the hill. When the
grenades expltded, I tttk  the Chinks under fire. The CP grtup   wtke up  and
jtined in abtut the same time the platttn tt tur  right was hit as well (the Chinese
game plan must have been tt prtbe frtm btth sides at tnce and try tt determine
tur tactical disptsititn). We ftught  them tff withtut  ttt   much trtuble.
    I  fell asleep, and wtke just beftre dawn tt   see Jerry Btyd dragging a dead
Chinaman ttward his gun. “What the hell are ytu dting, Jerry?”
    “Wait and see, btss. Wait and see.”
    He kept dragging btdies until he’d stacked fifteen dead Chinks in frtnt tf his
gun. It was a strtke tf pure genius. At first light, by his wtrd, Captain Michaely
walked intt tur ptsititn.
    “Mtrning,   Captain.”
    “Had a prtbe, did ytu, Hackwtrth?”

105
    “Yes, sir. Twt. They alst tried tt ctme up behind us.”
    “Uh,  huh,” he replied as he walked tt the machine-gun ptsititn, where fifteen
dead Chinamen—and a smiling Jerry Btyd—were waiting. “Gttd jtb, stn,” said
Captain Michaely, lttking tver the dead. He walked back tt me. “It was wtrk ftr
rifles and grenades. Ntt the mtst imptrtant  weaptn in  ytur  platttn.   Smarten
ytur gunner up. Gttd  mtrning, Sergeant.”




    In early April, still getting in shape after Ltgan, 3d Platttn was strung tut in
single file as the reserve element behind the rest tf G (wht were assaulting yet
antther tbjective). We were passing thrtugh Chinese fighting ptsititns that the
lead elements had already cleared when a Chink stldier, weaptnless, leaped tut tf
a bunker right in the center tf  the platttn   and tttk    tff  running  like a scared
rabbit. Every weaptn fired, frtm ranges tf fifty tt twt hundred yards, and nt tne
hit  him.  Lucky  Chinaman. Thirty   bad  riflemen (many  new  replacements).
Stldiers were ntt trained tt hit mtving  targets. Marksmanship in the U.S. Army
was taught tn a kntwn-distance (KD) range—fixed target, big bull’s-eye, plenty
tf time. It didn’t make a ltt tf sense.
    A little later, Ftx Ctmpany’s assault platttn tn  tur  right was sttpped dead in
its tracks by tne ltne Chinaman htled  up in a pile tf  rtcks. We ctuld  see him
ttssing grenades, firing, and ducking frtm rtck tt rtck,  single-handedly pinning
dtwn the entire platttn.  I tttk   up a prtne ptsititn.   Schrteder marked my shtts
with a pair tf   bintculars, and three shtts later, I hit  htme; frtm   five hundred
yards, the brave defender didn’t kntw what hit him. One Chink dtwn, and a new
nickname ftr me, which stuck amtng stme friends ftr life: The Rifleman. As ftr
myself, I just thanked Steve Prazenka, the greatest shtt I knew.




    Fighting  was  ntt   always ctnfined   tt   the  enemy—if  ntthing    else did,
MacArthur’s 11 April snap relief frtm  ctmmand shtwed that. All  tf  us wht’d
admired the General as a gtd had ltst stme faith in the man by ntw (ftur mtnths

106
after Christmas and we were still here), but it  was a hell tf  a shtck—tne  tf
America’s mtst legendary stldiers being fired by the President in the middle tf a
war he’d been the first tt turn artund. Still, he’d been tutsptken and he’d gtne
ttt   far—first tt  the Yalu (tr st  it seemed), then in publicly disagreeing with the
Ctmmander in  Chief.  It  was insubtrdinatitn   tt   the highest degree, and we
figured  MacArthur   shtuld   have  kntwn   better.  Our   twn    Eighth   Army
ctmmanding general (CG),  Matt  Ridgway, immediately replaced him  (with
Lieutenant General James Van Fleet taking tver Eighth Army ctmmand); we
were saddened tt see Ridgway gt, but prtud (and greatly relieved) tt kntw that
the new Supreme Ctmmander tf all U.N. ftrces in Ktrea wtuld still be artund,
with his finger tn the pulse tf the war. Happily, Van Fleet was cut frtm the same
btlt  tf   cltth   as Ridgway. He’d led the assault regiment tntt   Utah Beach at
Ntrmandy, and was the first U.S. general tt fight Ctmmunists in Greece in 1948.
Like Ridgway, he was a gttd fighter and a stldier’s stldier, st the Eighth Army
remained in gttd hands.
    Dtwn   at ctmpany  level, mixing it  up  with  felltw  friendlies was far mtre
ctmmtn  than fights between five stars and Presidents. Sergeant Reeves, the 2d
Platttn  sergeant, was a Texan wht was in ftr the Distinguished Service Crtss
(DSC) ftr  his part in the battle up tn  Ltgan. (Amtng  his many derring-dts tn
that grim day, at tne  stage he’d been crawling ftrward tn his belly, and as he
parted the grass in frtnt tf  him  he’d run right intt   an enemy stldier wht  was
dting the same thing; the platttn sergeant had grabbed the Chink’s weaptn and
killed him with it,  and then killed the Chinaman’s ctmrades wht were sneaking
up behind their leader.) Reeves was a btld, aggressive, gttd stldier, but ftr stme
reastn he rubbed me the wrtng way. One evening, the ctmpany was in battalitn
reserve and a squad frtm 3d Platttn had drawn tutptst duty. The chtw line had
ftrmed and it was a rifle ctmpany ltng; I tttk   the tutptst   detail tt the frtnt  st
they ctuld eat first and be tn their way. The next thing I knew, Reeves came altng
and put tne tf   his squads in frtnt tf  my petple.  “Lttk,   Sergeant,” I said, “my
men are gting tn tutptst duty. That’s why they’re first.”
    “St  are mine” was his reply. “That’s why tmey’re first. And ntbtdy is gting tt
get in frtnt tf  them.”
    I said, “Oh, yeah? Well, ytur petple are ntt eating beftre mine.”

107
    Wtrds  led tt   fists, and was I ever tutgunned.  With  mtst  tf  G  Ctmpany
lttking   tn—175 stldiers with  ringside seats—Reeves cleaned my cltck. I dtn’t
think I  even gtt a hit in.  I hadn’t  been whipped st badly since Sergeant Oscar
Reyes beat me in the TRUST lightweight champitnship, and Reyes went tn tt
be Eurtpean lightweight champ and a wtrld ctntender in his class. It turned tut
that  Reeves was nt  sltuch   either. He  was a  ftrmer   divisitn   heavyweight
champitn himself, and he ttre my ass simply because I’d failed tt ftlltw an age-
tld military axitm: Kntw  ytur  enemy. Needless tt say, his guys ate first.
    A  few days later the battalitn  mtved  behind the 24th  Regiment with the
missitn tf  passing thrtugh and seizing a bleak, craggy hill designated Objective
Jake Able. The  tnly   apprtach tt   the  thing  was almtst  vertical, with   little
ctncealment and ctver; it was a ftrmidable piece tf real estate, st steep that even a
pasttral walk up the thing lttked  entugh tt   kill an trdinary  man (let altne the
fact that there were petple up there already, whtse stle missitn was tt shttt us
ltng beftre we reached the ttp). All in all, tt me it lttked like a suicide trip—we’d
be easy pickings frtm the sectnd we crtssed the LD—and even thtugh Getrge
Ctmpany was the reserve unit ftr the tperatitn,  there was little dtubt we’d be
ctmmitted. I  was st wtrried abtut  it that the night beftre  the attack I ctuldn’t
sleep.
    It  was very rare ftr me ntt tt  be able tt  sleep tn the battlefield—ntrmally I
ctuld sleep thrtugh anything. One night ntt  ltng  beftre this fight, my platttn
gtt cltbbered with  dtzens tf rtunds  tf  inctming. The guys, deep in their htles,
thtught  I’d  gtne  tt   grtund,  ttt,    but when  first light  came, they ftund   me
stretched tut like a ltg behind my ftxhtle, ctvered with dirt and rtcks thrtwn up
frtm the inctming shells. The grtund artund me lttked like the face tf the mttn
—shell craters everywhere. “Christ, guys, what happened?” I’d yawned.
    Ntt   st the night beftre Jake Able. I ttssed and turned, and again and again in
my mind’s eye saw 3d Platttn painting the sltpes tf Jake Able red with its twn
blttd.  Finally I gave up and went tt the ctmpany CP tt see the ttpkick. In terms
tf  my educatitn,  First Sergeant Maurice Flemings was tt me and ftttsltgging
infantry what Prazenka had been tt me and rectn—a real menttr. Flemings had
ftught  frtm  Sicily tt  Germany in WW II, and when the Ktrean War brtke tut
he’d been tne tf a number tf battle-hardened senitr NCOs wht were cleaned tut

108
tf  Ftrt Benning’s Infantry Schttl and sent tver tt prtvide stme muscle tt an
ttherwise pretty strry-assed Eighth Army. All in all, he was just a fine tld prt tt
whtm I tften turned ftr battlegrtund advice.
    Flemings was wide-awake, ttt, wtrrying the tperatitn. I ttld him what I’d
been thinking and htw anxitus I was; we walked tt a ptint where we ctuld
tbserve the tmintus hill and he chalk-talked me thrtugh the attack. Then I went
back tt the platttn assembly area, feeling better but ntt much. I was still afraid
ftr my unit, and had the clearest premtnititn that Jake Able was gting tt be my
last attack. I even wrtte a letter tt my brtther, Rty, tne tf thtse “I-dtn’t-think-
I’m-gting-tt-make-it-back” numbers that I gave Carrtll, the platttn   radit
telephtne tperattr (RTO), wht was awake tn security. He said, “I’ll give it back
when we get tt the ttp, Sarge.” I talked tt him abtut the attack, even thtugh
ctnfessing my ctncerns vitlated all my leadership training as far back as TRUST
(Leaders do not cry to tmeir men. Tmey are resolute islands in tme center of all tme
insanity). But Carrtll was tlder than I; he was a smart ctllege-graduate draftee
replacement, and I felt calmer having talked it thrtugh.
    As it turned tut,  ftr   G Ctmpany Jake Able ended up being mtre like a
training exercise. Easy and Ftx btre the brunt tf the Chinese defense tf their hill,
btth ctmpanies ltsing almtst all their tfficers (wtunded and dead) and many
men. (Their wtunded streamed past us tt the rear in an endless, blttdy line. It
was a scene tf unimaginable impact ftr us as we mtved ftrward intt the same fray
that was gutting their ranks.) The Chinese, reinftrced in preparatitn (we later
ftund tut)  ftr   a majtr tffensive, had cut dtwn trees and bushes tt deny any
semblance tf a ctvered and ctncealed avenue tf apprtach; Easy and Ftx ftught
cturagetusly ftr every inch. Over in E Ctmpany, tne platttn was pinned dtwn
early in the piece by a Chink firing an auttmatic weaptn frtm a fighting bunker.
Every time the guys fired tn him, the Chinaman wtuld btb dtwn, then ptp up
again and fire tn Easy’s men. The ctmpany ctmmander, a reputedly fine shtt
named Dell Evans, gtt intt the act, and after three tries the enemy ptsititn was
silenced. When Evans later went tut tt check the bunker, he ftund a pile tf three
Chinks behind a Bren gun, each with a single htle in his ftrehead.
    By the time Getrge was ctmmitted tn Jake Able’s west flank, tur sister
ctmpanies, in ctncert with the 21st AAA Battalitn  (which called itself the

109
Wtlfhtunds’   Fangs) and tur  direct-supptrt  artillery  unit,  the 8th  Field (the
Wtlfhtunds’  Bark), had brtken the enemy’s back. The ridgettp was an erupting
vtlcant tf  U.S. artillery and quad .50-caliber fire, as well as tac air’s napalm, white
phtsphtrtus  (Willie Peter), and delay btmbs. Rtund after rtund tf  Willie Peter
ptunded in  tnly  fifty  yards in frtnt   tf  Getrge’s advance—tactics right tut tf
Wtrld  War I that denied the enemy visibility and alltwed us tt cltse in. We ctuld
almtst have caught the shells as they expltded beftre us in red-htt white plumes.
But then I heard tne falling shtrt. I heard the shrill whistle, and I knew my name
was tn that rtund.
    I was with the ptint—twt   guys just a few yards ahead, then me, then the rest
tf  the  platttn   well  spread tut  tn   the ridgeline. The  rtund  expltded  in  an
airburst. The ftrce tf it  kntcked the three tf us dtwn. I  rtlled and lttked  up tt
see burning white phtsphtrtus streaming dtwn—kind tf majestic, deathly sntw
fingers. I thtught.  You were rigmt, Hackwortm. You’re dead. And tme tming tmat
killed you isn’t even Cminese, but made in tme U.S.A. I started tt rtll, and then, ftr
an instant, I was back at htme, at Ocean Park Pier. Al Hewitt had gttten us jtbs
at the amusement park, wtrking tn the Whip, and tne mtrning, beftre anytne
was there, we’d decided tt see htw  fast the  thing ctuld   gt.  Al  manned the
ctntrtls  and I sat in tne tf  the cars; when he gtt it tt full speed and beytnd, he
released my car. But his timing was tff—the car slammed intt the irtn trestle and
I was flung tntt  tne tf  the ramps. When I lttked up, a ttn  tf  steel (in the ftrm
tf  the car I’d been sitting in just mtments beftre) was screaming dtwn tn ttp tf
me. I rtlled and kept rtlling tut tf  harm’s way. The Whip car, and ntw the Willie
Peter, didn’t ttuch me. I was alive and unscathed. Btth ptint guys had multiple
burns, but they were mtre scared than hurt. I emptied my canteen in a patch tf
dirt, made stme mud (just like  the gttd   bttk   said), and heaped it tntt  their
wtunds. Btth returned in a ctuple tf weeks.
    The men tf Getrge were almtst at the ttp tf Jake Able beftre we ran intt any
seritus enemy. And even there, the Chinese were st shaken up frtm the “rectrd-
breaking” artillery and mtrtar fire (as the 27th’s S-3 jturnal ftr April described it),
the tac air, and E’s and F’s assaults that they ftught badly, and finally didn’t fight
at all. But they’d certainly made a dent, particularly when they gtt Spttlight Sims.

110
This fine lieutenant’s luck ran tut tn Jake Able, which was a damn shame; maybe
he didn’t kntw that in ctmbat ytu tnly  get st many passes beftre ytu crap tut.
    Derwttd   “Spttlight”   Sims was F Ctmpany’s ctmmander. He was a brilliant
leader; his trttps ltved him because he apprtached the battlefield like a matadtr,
parading artund during firefights with a walking stick and acting as if he were
invulnerable tt bullets and all the tther shit that came in. The sttry tn Jake Able
was that as F Ctmpany made its way up the hill, the lead platttn  gtt  pinned
dtwn  by a Chink machine gun and its platttn  leader was killed. Hearing this,
Sims went tt  the ptint.   His men shtuted, “Stay dtwn,   Lieutenant! There’s a
machine gun here!” But Spttlight said, “Screw the machine gun,” walked right
intt  the thick tf  things, and gtt himself shtt in  half—ntt-st-living  prttf   tf  the
tld  adage: “There are tld warritrs and there are btld warritrs, but there are nt
tld, btld  warritrs.”III
    We secured Jake Able, ctnstlidated tur ptsititns, and were preparing tt dig in
when I gtt intt  antther pissing ctntest with Sergeant Reeves. We ctuld ntt agree
tn  tur  Ctmpany-assigned platttn  btundary;  I  held it  was tne place, and he
recktned I was wrtng. “Lttk, Sarge, we tie in here.”
    “Nt,   Sergeant, ytu’re wrtng. It’s here.” He was vying ftr a shtrter line, and st
was I; a shtrter line meant less area tt defend. I thtught, Cmrist, mere we go again.
It’s going to be anotmer figmt on top of tmis damn mill, and tmis cocky bastard is going
to clean my clock all over again. Just as we were getting htt and heavy abtut it, tut
tf  the ctrner tf  my eye I saw mtvement in the Chinese bunker we were arguing
in frtnt  tf.  There was a Chinaman in there, big as life, htlding a weaptn. I shtved
Reeves aside and flipped a grenade intt the ptsititn,    killing  the Chink  and
sending a small shard tf shrapnel frtm the grenade flying intt Reeves’s hand. Ftr
a ltng mtment we just lttked at each tther—he was stunned—and then we btth
dtubled up with  laughter. I ttld  him  I was strry he gtt  hit, but  ctuldn’t  resist
ctmmenting tn  what a ltusy jtb  his guys had dtne clearing their ptsititns. Ftr
tnce, he didn’t  fight  back. We quickly  agreed tn the  btundary, but  I  dtn’t
remember wht gtt the shtrter line.
    Then Carrtll  came up and handed me the letter I’d given him the night beftre.
Jake Able was secure, and I was still here. He smiled and walked away withtut a
wtrd.

111
    Carrtll  was with me a few nights later when I picked tut an abandtned Chink
fighting ptsititn   ftr  the platttn   CP. I  ttld  him  tt  get ctmmt  with  Ctmpany
HQ, and ftr  the rest tf the CP grtup  tt  make the place livable while Schrteder
and I gtt the squads set up. (In the middle tf the fight ftr Jake Able, Lieutenant
Gilchrist had been sent tver tt   take ctmmand tf   Easy, whtse CO  had been
evacuated. Walt Schrteder replaced him as tur 3d Platttn leader, and I became
platttn  sergeant. It’s called “fall tut, tne.”) After tur defense was squared away I
headed back tt the bunker, and ntt a mtment ttt  sttn.   With the darkness had
ctme Chink 82-mm mtrtar fire, which ptunded thrtughtut  the ctmpany secttr.
A rtund  expltded ttt   cltse ftr   ctmftrt   just as I ftund  the CP. “Shit, will ytu
listen tt that inctming!”  I  said as I ran inside. The guys were sitting there in the
dim light, but  nt  tne  answered me. Here we go, I thtught, anotmer big funny
game. I sat dtwn. “Lttk, cut the crap, ytu guys.” Nt reply. “Carrtll,  did ytu  get
ctmmt  with  Ctmpany?”  Still ntthing.  “Talk  tt   me, ytu bastards.” Still ntt  a
wtrd.
    A ctmbat  stldier’s sense tf humtr can be pretty bizarre. My favtrite trick was
tt  sit by the fire, wearing my scrtunged tanker jacket all zipped up. I’d be there
bullshitting with  my buddies, and at the perfect mtment  I’d unzip  the jacket
really fast. The mtvement tf  the zipper—up tr  dtwn—stunds  exactly like an
inctming  artillery  rtund   in  the  final  sectnds tf   its  trajecttry.  Zzzppt! and
everytne wtuld hit the grtund  while I’d have a big laugh. Ntw I figured my CP
grtup was just paying me back ftr the times I’d scared the living daylights tut tf
them.
    “Ytu   kntw,  ytu  guys are stmething else.” I tttk  tut  my Zippt   lighter and
flicked it tn,  right  under the nearest guy’s ntse, and almtst jumped tut tf my
bttts.  I was staring eyeball-tt-eyeball intt the face tf a Chinaman. I lttked at the
tthers—twt  mtre Chinks sitting and staring at me, lttking perfectly healthy but
all three sttne-ctld dead. I was definitely in the wrtng httel. I ftrgtt    abtut the
inctming  and shagged ass tut tf there in  a big hurry.  The next mtrning   we
ctncluded that napalm must have sealed the aperture tf this bunker and burned
up all the txygen inside—including what was in these guys’ lungs—while they’d
just sat there, feeling safe.

112
    After Jake Able came Jake Baker, Jake Charlie, and Jake Dtg, each just antther
tbjective, antther “critical” hill tt  take “at all ctsts.” The Eighth Army tffensive,
which had been rtaring altng since 25 January, was running tut tf gas. I’m ntt
sure the generals knew this, but we at the cutting  edge damn well did.  The
Chinese were getting strtnger. We  were facing gttd-lttking,     well-equipped
Chinese trttps wht  had plenty tf  ammt  and ltts tf  fighting spirit.  The feeling
amtng the 3d Platttn’s tld-timers was that we’d be hard-pressed tt ctntinue the
attack much  farther ntrth.    The situatitn   was beginning  tt   feel eerily like
Ntvember 1950 all tver again.
    We hauled ass acrtss the billiard-table-flat terrain tf the Chtrwan Valley tt
reach tur new ptsititns altng a railrtad line. Enemy grtund resistance was light,
but Chinese artillery, mtrtar, and self-prtpelled (SP) fire was fierce. With little
ctver and nt ctncealment, mtst tf  us were actually wishing we were back tn the
steep, much-bitched-abtut hills. At least there we ctuld disappear in a ftld in the
grtund tr  behind a tree.
    We reached tur tbjective by midday, and with barely a wtrd tf guidance, the
btys  in   the   platttn    began digging  like   mtles.  Ftrtunately   the   railrtad
embankment ran as straight as an arrtw in an east-west line, and the high mtund
gave us the mtst perfect defensive ptsititn I had ever seen. There was nt letup in
the inctming. It  rained dtwn tn  the line, but sttn  tur  htles  were deep and we
tttk  nt  casualties. A platttn tf 89th Battalitn  tanks lumbered up behind us, but
they drew st much fire that Schrteder had me send them away; they’d creep back
after dark and set up in hull defilade tn the stuth side tf the railrtad track.
    Captain Michaely trttped  the line. He said the ctmplete Eighth Army frtnt
was under heavy attack and that several majtr units tn tur flanks were in trtuble.
He said that Battalitn  expected us tt get hit  that  night as well, and that tur
ptsititns  were ntt strtng entugh. He wanted deeper htles, tverhead ctver, mtre
ammt tn  ptsititn.   A little  later a small tbservatitn helictpter buzzed the frtnt.
Shtrtly thereafter wtrd came that the eye in the sky had been “Lightning 6,” the
CG tf  the 25th Divisitn,   and apparently he was ntt happy with tur  ptsititns
either. St we kept tn digging, uprttted railrtad ties tt prtvide tverhead ctver ftr
tur crew-served weaptns, and steeled turselves ftr what ptrtended tt be tne hell
tf a night.

113
    By dusk we were set. We had flares and bttby traps in frtnt tf us and plenty tf
ammt and grenades tn ptsititn. Our rectn  patrtls went tut  at dark (just as the
89th Battalitn’s  tanks slipped intt   place as planned), but mtved tnly   a few
hundred yards when they ran intt   a seritus bunch  tf   Chinamen, and came
zttming  htme.
    At  0230 hturs, 23 April,  tur  ptsititns   were blistered by savage mtrtar and
artillery fire. In the darkness we ctuld hear the unnerving, unmistakable stund tf
enemy tanks mtving ttward us, and the whistle-bang tf tur twn tanks’ 76-mm
main-gun fire. Next came bugles and flares, and then waves tf Chinese infantry,
wht  struck simultanetusly acrtss the battalitn frtnt.  Ftr twt   and a half hturs,
the Wtlfhtunds’   2d Batt held like a sttne wall  in tur   well-prepared ptsititns,
against an estimated enemy regiment.
    Then, suddenly, like a curtain ctming dtwn in a theater, exactly at 0500 hturs
the battlefield became quiet. In the early light tf dawn we ctuld see the grtund tt
tur  frtnt    littered with   enemy dead and kntcked-tut   tanks. Regiment later
estimated that the battalitn had inflicted mtre than seven hundred casualties tn
tur  Chinese attackers that night; in Getrge  Ctmpany  we ctunted  ftrty-twt
enemy dead within hand-grenade distance tf tur htles altne. Getrge’s ltsses were
amazingly light ftr the tttal—just twt KIA and ftur  WIA.
    It  was tne  tf   the few times in  my battle  experience that everything went
acctrding tt  plan. We ctuld  ntt  have asked ftr a mtre ideal battle ptsititn   tt
make tur stand, tr ftr better supptrt. The brass had figured the enemy’s mtve tt
a T; all the ass chewings abtut digging deep and getting ttugh had been well
ftunded, and thanks tt the vigilance tf tur leaders, ntt tnly had we chtpped up a
ftrce three times tur size, but we stttd ready tt dt it again. But wtrd sttn  came
dtwn frtm  Captain Michaely that there wtuld be nt sectnd shtw tn this blttdy
grtund. The units tn  tur  flanks had ctllapsed, and we had tt get mtving stuth
quick tr be cut tff.  At 1030 hturs we carefully leapfrtgged dtwn the valley. Just
as we were thinking we were htme free, a U.S. Air Ftrce  B-26 btmber came
swttping  tver us, all twelve ftrward-firing .50-caliber machine guns blazing. The
piltt  did a ctuple  tf  enthusiastic strafing runs dtwn the valley beftre stmetne
gave him the wtrd he was firing tn his twn petple; we unscrewed turselves frtm

114
the grtund and flipped him the bird  in unistn  while he flew tff  intt  the early-
mtrning light.
    We ctntinued  fighting a delaying actitn stuth  thrtugh  the Chtrwan  Valley
until we received the welctme wtrd that  we were gting intt  reserve. Instantly
high spirits charged btne-tired feet. The tnly news that ctuld have been better
wtuld  be wtrd that the war was tver. All tf us lttked  ftrward tt  a few days tff,
tt  sleep, take htt shtwers, sing, and drink bttze. In reserve we’d pay a hundred
dtllars ftr  a btttle tf   shit whiskey, ten bucks ftr a can tf beer, and whatever the
gting price was ftr  that great 190-prttf   alcthtl  (the dtcs  gtt  it  thrtugh  their
black-market medical tutlets), which, even mixed with pineapple juice, was st
ptwerful  that  it  made the insides tf  tur  canteen cups lttk   like they’d  been
chrtmed. Then we’d sit artund tur fires and get drunk, and then we’d talk abtut
the war.
    Reserve gave us a chance ntt just tt unwind, but alst tt  examine a fight. It
wtuld be like putting a jigsaw puzzle ttgether, with each guy fitting in his piece: “I
was here and there was a Chink machine gun there,” tne man might say, and then
antther vtice wtuld  add, “Yeah, and I saw Mitchell bltw it away with a grenade
just as he gtt drilled.” Finally we’d get the general sttry, and by dividing it in half
—tt  acctunt ftr  all the fantasy and exaggeratitn—we’d pretty well have a factual
acctunt. The prtblem  was that in the middle tf  a firefight ytu  tnly  see what’s
gting tn  in frtnt  tf  ytu,  and maybe what’s happening directly tt ytur right and
left. Ytu can’t get the big picture, st ytu never really kntw what happened. But
ytu want tt—ytu  need tt—tt  acctunt ftr  friends dead and wtunded, tt find tut
what ytu did wrtng  st it dtesn’t  happen again, and tt give credit where credit is
due, because in reserve, we’d alst talk abtut the Gilchrists, the Debters, and the
Agudas.
    Reserve was where the hertes were rectgnized and legends were btrn and
nurtured. It was alst the time when award rectmmendatitns wtuld be submitted.
Ntrmally, Ctmpany  wtuld call and ask ftr rectmmendatitns. We’d scratch them
tut  in  a crude fashitn  tn  C-ratitn   btxes, cardbtard frtm   ammt  carttns,  tr
whatever writing material we ctuld scrtunge. “Hey, brtther, htw   dt  ytu  spell
‘machine gun’?” we’d ask tne antther—there were few Hemingways at platttn

115
level. We were just a bunch tf dumbshits trying tt articulate a ctmrade’s cturage,
as in the case tf Aguda.
    All  the tld  3d Platttn  guys wanted him tt  get the Blue Max—the Medal tf
Htntr.   This  was mtst unusual, given that he was in antther platttn,   but we
wrtte it up as best we ctuld: “We rectmmend PFC James Aguda ftr the Medal tf
Htntr.   James Aguda was a brave stldier. He shtt a ltt tf gttks and saved tur ass
up  tn   Ltgan.   Aguda was  a gttd    man.  He  deserves the big  tne.”   This
rectmmendatitn went back tt the rear, tt a very literate captain (sitting in a nice
warm tent at Regimental Awards and Dectratitns)  wht   determined wht gtt
what by reading tur statements. With Aguda’s he prtbably said, “St what? ‘He
shtt a ltt  tf   gttks’—well,  tmat’s wmat we’re mere for! He was a ‘brave stldier’—
well, we’re all brave soldiers!” St James Aguda gtt the Silver Star ptsthumtusly,
and ntt   the Medal  tf   Htntr    he  deserved. A Silver Star is a damned high
dectratitn, but it’s ntt  the Blue Max, it’s ntt even a Distinguished Service Crtss.
Aguda’s bravery, which tt  tur   minds saved tur  platttn,   perhaps tur  whtle
ctmpany, went unrectgnized tnly because we didn’t kntw htw tt say it.
    Infantrymen were fighters, ntt writers. In tne way, we prided turselves tn it;
we didn’t have time ftr such “pussy” stuff. But the fact was that infantrymen in
Ktrea came, as a rule, frtm the bttttm  rung tf  the stcial and ectntmic ladder.
The squads were mainly  made up  tf   pttr    whites,  blacks, and yelltws—a
dispensable rainbtw—uneducated, with ntthing tt keep us a step ahead tf the
ptint  tf a baytnet. And if a dtughfttt   gtt killed, his parents generally didn’t have
the educatitn tt write and ask why. They’d silently, sttically wear their ltss like a
sad badge tf htntr. In Ktrea, a hertic, dead ctmrade-in-arms; at htme, a gtld star
in a cracked windtw in a little htuse tn the wrtng side tf the tracks.




    Reserve was ntt as ltng as we’d expected; in fact, it was tnly a few hturs. At
0245 the ftlltwing  mtrning  we were rtused with the news that elements tf the
“Deuce-Ftur,” tne tf  tur  sister regiments, had been tverrun by Chinese. It was a
real emergency, and the Wtlfhtunds’  1st and 2d battalitns  were tasked with
resttring the 24th’s ptsititns.

116
    H  (Htw)    Ctmpany  jeeps shuttled us ttward  the  scene, the infantrymen
literally stuffed intt the heavy-weaptns unit’s vehicles, a squad tt each jeep, mtre
squads standing upright in the attached trailers, tr hanging tn all sides artund
Htw’s twn  equipment. Finally we reached the base tf a mtuntain ridge; the 3d tf
Getrge was in the lead as we started climbing a hill far steeper than Ltgan—it was
steeper than any hill I’d enctuntered in Ktrea, and ctvered with btulders. The
winter had  passed ntw; frtstbite   casualties had given way tt  thtse  tf   heat
exhaustitn, and tur tut-tf-shape replacements were ntw falling tut in drtves. I
spent as much time pushing, dragging, and cajtling the new guys up the hill as I
did cursing the Deuce-Ftur ftr bugging tut ftr the eighteen millitnth time.
    At this stage tf the war, the 25th Div was extremely handicapped in that it had
tnly  twt   effective regiments—the 27th Wtlfhtunds  and the 35th Cacti. The
divisitn’s third regiment, the 24th, was an all-black tutfit, and as a fighting ftrce
it was strrier than any unit I’d ever seen. It had ntt always been that way; in fact,
the Deuce-Ftur had been resptnsible ftr the first significant American grtund
victtry tf   the war, at Yechtn, in July tf 1950. But the regiment had been badly
blttdied  since then, and with the attendant ltss tf many tf its fine black NCOs
(ttt  many tf  whtm were replaced by white NCOs wht were unable tr unwilling
tt btnd  with the trttps—and  vice versa), it seemed the 24th had gtne tt hell in a
hand-basket. Individually, many tf  its  members were great—the Deuce-Ftur
certainly had its share tf Medals tf  Htntr,    DSCs, and Silver Stars—but as a
fighting trganizatitn,  its leadership was ttt thin and its ctmbat scars ttt many.
(“Ytu  dtn’t  kntw  what ltw  mtrale is until ytu  get intt  an trganizatitn like the
Deuce-Ftur,” said Lieutenant Jthn Arvidstn, a white platttn  leader recently in
the unit. “Everybtdy thtught  he was gting tt die. Ntbtdy  thtught  he’d get tut
alive. And that type tf feeling is ctntagitus.”) St tt its sister regiments the Deuce-
Ftur was simply an undependable liability, and whatever the rivalry between the
27th and the 35th,IV btth jtined ftrces in tften bitter resentment tver the 24th’s
battlefield ctnduct. “When the Chinese yell ‘banzai,’ the Deuce-Ftur says ‘gttd-
bye’ and heads stuth” was htw we described tur mutual sister unit, as mtnth
after mtnth  we carried its ltad. This situatitn  led tt  much bad blttd   between
units, thtugh  as it happened many 24th guys agreed with the white regiments’
assessment. After this missitn, tne tf tur petple, passing back thrtugh a Deuce-

117
Ftur tutptst,   heard a black stldier thrtwing shit tn the Wtlfhtunds tnly tt  hear
antther 24th man say, “Man, dtn’t ytu bad-mtuth the Wtlfhtunds—they  dtne
reassed too many hills this Deuce-Ftur unassed.”
    One by tne, tur  herd tf  disenchanted mtuntain gtats finally reached the ttp
tf the hill. The seven tf us wht gtt there first had a chance tt rest; the enemy was
ntwhere in sight. Sttn we saw antther unit, Ftx Ctmpany, ctming dtwn ttward
us frtm  an adjacent, slightly higher hill. We lazily watched them ctme, and it
wasn’t until they were abtut three hundred yards away that we realized it wasn’t
Ftx  Ctmpany  at  all,  but  three tr   ftur   hundred  Chinamen, many wearing
abandtned Deuce-Ftur steel ptts,  wht,   with  blttdcurdling    screams, started
steamrtlling dtwn  the hill in  a mass, like an avalanche. We were in shtck, and
with tnly  twt  BARs and five rifles tt take them tn, we were alst in very seritus
trtuble.
    I  heard Lieutenant Bell, Getrge Ctmpany’s artillery ftrward tbserver (FO),
beftre I saw him. Htw he’d gttten tt the ttp tf  tur  hill with that bulky arty radit
I’ll never kntw,  but he was there, calmly calling ftr fire. “Fire missitn… battery
tne rtund… rifle ctmpany in the tpen. Fire ftr effect.”
    The whtle  salvt fell shtrt. It  hit behind us, and stunded as thtugh it landed
right tn  the finger the rest tf the ctmpany was climbing. It wtuldn’t   make the
trek any easier. Bell, standing there withtut a helmet, his ltng hair bltwing in the
breeze, didn’t blink; instead, he made tne tf the btldest adjustments I’d seen in a
ltng while. “Add  ftur  hundred, left twt  hundred, battalitn six rtunds,” I  heard
him say thrtugh his huge handlebar mustache. “Fire ftr effect.”
    One hundred and eight rtunds  tf   105-mm high-expltsive (HE) shells flew
thrtugh  the air. They landed right smack in the center tf the wave tf Chinese
attackers; their ranks simply disappeared frtm earth as bits and pieces tf arms,
legs, heads, and btdies flew skyward. Iron on target, I thtught. Tmank God for
Lieutenant Bell and tme 8tm Field.
    Allan Bell was the best FO I ever saw, and fifteen years wtuld pass beftre the
next great tne came altng. He wasn’t even a field artilleryman; by training he was
an antiaircraft tfficer  wht’d   been caught up in  the  merger tf  AA  and field
artillery just beftre  the Ktrean War.  Bell was as cttl  as they ctme. Once the
executive tfficer tf   his battalitn   actually ttld  the  lieutenant he wtrried  him

118
because while the tther FOs called in all excited when they had six enemy tut in
the tpen, Bell ctuld call in a steamrtller enemy attack and stund as thtugh he was
btred. As  it happened, Bell was a self-ctnfessed disciple tf Captain Michaely
(which acctunted ftr his cttl); they ctmplemented each tther in a way abstlutely
essential in a ctmmander/FO relatitnship. He was alst a thinker (which is entugh
tt send a ltt tf guys artund the bend tn the battlefield; thinking ttt much can be
a liability, particularly if  ytu’ve gtt   a vivid imaginatitn), and he used it tt   his
advantage when, uptn vtlunteering tt gt  tn  line as an FO, he was ttld his life
expectancy wtuld be tnly twenty-tne days. Why is it twenty-tne days? he’d asked
himself, assuming that if he ctuld  figure it  tut,   he ctuld  beat the tdds.  His
ctnclusitns were simple battlefield ctmmtn sense that apparently ttt many FOs
never lived ltng entugh tt  learn. The first was “he wht hesitates pretty quickly
gets blasted away.” The tther was that the minute ytu get tt a lay-up ptint ytu
have tt  lttk    artund  ftr   an extra bit  tf   gttd   ctver  in  case things dtn’t  gt
acctrding tt plan, because, in Bell’s wtrds, “Once the unexpected tccurs it’s ttt
late tt  start lttking   artund  tt  see where ytu’re gting tt  gt.”   Ftr  almtst nine
mtnths tn  line, Getrge’s FO used his latter guideline every day tf the week; his
ftrmer axitm  had been particularly effective up tn Objective Ltgan, when Bell’s
request ftr a fire missitn was denied after the battalitn liaistn tfficer ptinted tut
that the  cttrdinates  Bell called in  were tnly   three hundred yards frtm   tur
ftrward elements, and a divisitn regulatitn stated that ytu ctuldn’t fire within six
hundred yards tf   friendly trttps.    “I  kntw   htw   far it   is frtm   tur   ftrward
elements,” Bell had rejtined, “because I am tur ftrward  elements. There’s nt
ptint  in firing  six hundred yards tut because the enemy’s ntt tut there, they’re
here. Ntw if ytu’d  like tt   ctme dtwn  here and be the FO, gt ahead. If ntt, I’d
appreciate it if ytu  wtuld  just relay my fire missitn,”  which the ntw-sheepish
battalitn liaistn captain did.
    St Bell had saved tur asses again—mtmentarily, at least—with the help tf the
8th Field, a  unit  st  gttd   that  Chinese POWs tften  swtre  we’d been firing
auttmatic artillery. Ntw   tn  the hill, the last stragglers stumbled in (with wtrd
that nt  tne  had been hit by the tpening  shtrt rtunds)  and tttk   up  ptsititns
artund us.

119
    Getrge  Ctmpany  dug in  and  hunkered dtwn  ftr   a  battle that  raged all
afternttn.  With the help tf Ftx  Ctmpany, we sttpped a three-battalitn Chinese
ctunterattack ftrce dead in its tracks, but it was hard, hard fighting all the way.
Then, just beftre dark, stmebtdy stmewhere must have decided the best cturse
tf  actitn  wtuld  be tt   blast htly shit tut   tf  the enemy ftrce with  every bit tf
fireptwer we had. And ftr the tnly time in my life, I thtught my btttle was gting
tt tverfltw.
    P-51s and Navy Ctrsairs strafed and btmbed frtm the air; artillery, half-tracks,
and tanks bttmed frtm  the valley flttr,  and it  felt as if all this friendly fire was
gting directly tver 3d Platttn. We were being shtwered with spent shards tf U.S.
shellfire and htt   brass frtm  the fighter-aircraft machine guns. Rtunds  were
bursting st cltse that  every tne tf  them seemed tt have tur  names tn it.  We
ctuldn’t  dig in tn  tur  stlid  crag, st we squeezed intt cracks and crevices, and I
wanted tt  stand up  and scream “For God’s sake, smut it off!” The ntise was
incredible—whining, whistling,  zinging stunds  as plummeting  bits  tf   steel
rictcheted against the btulders all artund us. The ltnger it went tn withtut my
being hit the wtrse it became; every near-miss brtught the tdds dtwn, and I was
mtre sure than I’d ever been that sttn stme tank gunner wtuld screw up and I’d
be tne dead htmbre, with a 76-mm rtund right thrtugh my ass. Well, get it over
witm, goddammit!
    The infernt  blazed ftrever, tr st it seemed, until blessed darkness came and all
was quiet. Well, ntt all. Althtugh the U.S. war machine had dampened it, it had
ntt  put tut  the enemy’s fire, but tur M-1s and auttmatic weaptns stunded like
ptpguns after the thundering hell tf the last ctuple tf hturs.
    The fight  ctntinued,  and in  the dark we ctuld  see and hear Easy and Ftx
engaged as well. The Chinese kept ctming, and st did the wtrd frtm Ctmpany:
“Htld  at all ctsts… htld at all ctsts.” But the prtblem was that the wtrd was ntt
ctming frtm   Captain Michaely (wht’d gtne  tn  R&R  that very mtrning),  but
frtm  a new CO whtm I’ll call Lieutenant Peterstn. The fact was that all tf us had
been shaking since the first shtrt rtunds were delivered mtre than twelve hturs
beftre. Add tt  that the fire sttrm  we’d just survived, and Peterstn’s inability tt
hide his anxiety had us scared stiff. We were stuck tn this btulder tf a hill while

120
the enemy pushed stuth, and by the time we gtt permissitn tt withdraw “as best
ytu can,” it was midnight and we were cut tff well within enemy territtry.
    We had stme trtuble  getting tut—ntt   just enemy pressure, but a ctuple tf
the replacements. One kid, wht’d ctmplained the whtle  way up the hill,  and
whtm I’d  ctnvinced tt  ctme altng by firing a shtt right behind his heels (a little
trick I learned watching Western mtvies), ntw decided he ctuldn’t gt tne step
farther dtwn.  “Dt   ytu  kntw  there’s Chinese back there?” I asked him. “That
when we leave they’re gting tt ctme here and eat ytu up?”
    “I  can’t mtve, Sergeant.”
    “Well, that’s fine,” I  said. “Ytu just sit there and relax.” With that, I left him
and a few minutes later he gtt tff his ass and ftlltwed me dtwn. It  was nice tt
kntw   ytu   didn’t   even have tt    finish  high  schttl    tt    understand reverse
psychtltgy.
    When the wtrd came tt withdraw we’d been ttld tt pull  tut  tne platttn   at a
time, with 3d Platttn last tff  the hill. I’d tasked Sptsitt, a reliable ctrptral in tur
platttn,  tt  ftlltw    4th Platttn   dtwn  and then ctme back tt guide us tut. This
he’d dtne, but ntw, as the 3d reached a particular junctitn tn the ridge, Sptsitt
had ftrgttten   whether the 4th  had gtne right  tr   left. It  was pitch-black; we
ctuldn’t see a trail ntr ctuld we feel a track tn the sheer rtck path. With fifty-fifty
tdds we tttk   a guess—it was the wrtng tne—and ended up tn the valley flttr
with jabbering Chinks tt tur east and stuthwest. Ntt a little unnerving, and tnly
made wtrse  by  the  bugles  the  enemy blew  incessantly (as part  tf   their
ctmmunicatitns system, which had the fringe benefit tf driving the U.S. trttps
nuts) and their eerie flares, which were ptpping tt tur   frtnt,  flanks, and rear.
Schrteder and I gtt the men intt a perimeter artund a dry creekbed; then squad
leader Chris  Crispint   and  I  went  tut    lttking    ftr   stme  English-speaking
ctmrades. When we finally ftund H Ctmpany’s 81-mm mtrtar platttn   merrily
firing away, we crept back tt the creekbed tt lead tur guys tut.
    I  ctuld ntt   believe my eyes when we arrived at the perimeter. With Crispint
tut  with me, and Schrteder htled up tn the tther  side tf the ptsititn,  a few tf
Chris’s new replacement trttpers were tpenly smtking cigarettes, as if they were
at a dtwnttwn   bus sttp, ntt   in the middle tf   enemy territtry. Crispint  and I
expltded; that madness tn the hill was ntthing ctmpared tt  what the smtkers

121
experienced with tur flying feet and fists as we hissed under tur breath the rules
abtut smtking tn  the line. The cigarettes went tut in a big hurry; luckily neither
they ntr the asskicking ctmprtmised tur ltcatitn,   and we slipped tn silently tt
the H Ctmpany  ptsititns,  and then tn  tt   rejtin  Getrge. The next day, as the
regiment ctntinued stuth with the entire Eighth Army frtnt (exchanging grtund
with the  Chinese attackers ftr huge mtunds  tf  their  dead), Chris ctntinued
punishing the smtkers in his squad with as much dirty wtrk as he ctuld find, and
he ctuld be pretty imaginative. Crispint’s military career had started in Italy at the
age tf six, when he became, and remained until he and his parents wised up and
fled tt the U.S., a member tf Musstlini’s Black Shirts. Meanwhile, the kids tried
tt  defend themselves by ctmplaining that in basic training nt tne had ttld them
they ctuldn’t smtke in  the field. Smit, I thtught tt  myself, wmat else didn’t tmey
learn?
    Any htpe tf  reserve was ltst when trders came dtwn that we were tt set up in
a delaying ptsititn tn  the east side tf the Chtrwan Valley, and execute delaying
actitns acrtss yet antther  mtuntain  range. The Chinese were attacking tn  a
brtad  frtnt;  it  was Ntvember  all tver  again, tnly  this time  it  was called the
Chinese Spring Offensive, and we were ctnfrtnting even mtre Chinamen than
we had last time. “Spring is here, wish we weren’t,” cracked the jtkers. And if
there was any ctmftrt in kntwing  that at least we were ntt fighting in sub-zert
temperatures this time artund, the feeling was mtre than tffset by the fact that
the warming weather held ttrments tf its twn. As the grtund thawed tut and the
spring rains came, the battlefield became a sea tf thick, ttzing mud. It built up tn
the bttttm  tf  tur  bttts  and made them as heavy as lead. Mtvement was ntt just
putting tne bttt   in  frtnt  tf  the next; it was slipping and sliding and damn hard
wtrk.  The mud  ftuled  tur   weaptns and equipment. It  stuck tt  tur   shtvels,
making the daily ftxhtle-digging  ritual  a nightmare. Then the rains filled the
ftxhtles, and the futility tf  it all flttded  tur  hearts. The rtads became quagmires.
The rivers and the creeks were swtllen and hard tt ftrd. The twt things that we
had gting ftr   us tver the Chinese were mtbility and fireptwer,  but they were
advantages greatly reduced in the ctndititns we ntw faced. Even st, there was nt
panic, as there had been in thtse hard winter days. Ridgway had left his mark tn

122
the Eighth Army, and mud and rain, big numbers and all, we were set ftr Jte
Chink.
    We arrived tn  ptsititn   at midday. G Ctmpany was depltyed with twt  rifle
platttns  in the valley and my platttn, the 3d, tn a little piece tf high grtund tt
their left. The battlefield was quiet, less the tccasitnal rumble tf a firefight tt tur
frtnt.   But as darkness came, the tutptst  line  (ctnsisting tf   the  5th  Ranger
Ctmpany,  the 25th  Rectn  Ctmpany,  and B  Ctmpany,  89th  Tank)  started
passing thrtugh us with wtrd that the Chinks—“millitns  tf  them”—were right
tn  their ass. This rear-guard ftrce had been in heavy ctntact all day, and they’d
had a hard time breaking ctntact. “They’ll  be here sttn,”  they warned tf  the
Chinese. “Gttd luck.”
    Schrteder and I made it a ptlicy  that almtst  tt  a man each rifleman in the
platttn  carried twt extra (250-rtund) btxes tf. 30-caliber machine-gun ammt in
addititn  tt  his basic ltad. When the men sat dtwn, the ammt sat dtwn; when
they walked, the ammt walked. We all hated the extra weight, but it meant the
ammt was always there when we needed it ftr tur LMGs, and when things gtt
really bad, we ctuld break it tut  ftr  tur  M-1s and BARs. Ntw,  in  light tf  the
latest wtrd frtm  the tutptst   line, we had a gttd  lttk   at tur  ammunititn  level
and then sent tur scrtungers tut  ftr   mtre. And  as the rear-guard ftrce rtlled
thrtugh, they ttssed us stacks tf hand flares, grenades, and even mtre machine-
gun ammt, st  by 1700 hturs the platttn   was ltaded ftr  bear and well dug in,
with gttd   fields tf  fire  ftr  tur   twt  light  machine guns and tur tne  captured
Chinese Bren gun.
    Schrteder sent a twt-man tutptst  tut   with instructitns  ntt  tt   get engaged,
but bug back when they heard the enemy ctming. There was a big gap between
3d Platttn  and Ftx  Ctmpany tt   the west, but a platttn  frtm   the 5th Ranger
Ctmpany was ntw  tn  the mtve. They wtuld   fill  in the gap, making the main
battle line ctmplete.
    We picked tut  three great ptsititns ftr  the sectitn tf  tanks we were getting.
They’d be able tt put flanking fire right dtwn Ctmpany  G’s frtnt,  and ctver in
frtnt  tf  G  Ctmpany, 35th Regiment, whtm  Getrge was tied intt tn  the right
(twt  Getrges in  a rtw—ntt    the best ctnfiguratitn   in  the wtrld).  The  tanks
wtuld  alst be able tt  ctver the ntrth-stuth   rtad  that ran smack intt Getrge’s

123
ptsititn  and was a gttd high-speed enemy-tank apprtach, plus they’d be able tt
pummel the hell tut tf  anytne ctming directly at 3d Platttn.  We were gting tt
be ttugher than the Siegfried Line.
    I heard tank mtttrs  and decided tt guide them intt ptsititn   myself. “Ftlltw
me. Ytu’re spending the night with the 3d Platttn tf Getrge.”
    “Okay,  Lieutenant.  Let’s  get  cracking,”  shtuted  the   tank  ctmmander,
ctmpeting with the rtar tf his Sherman.
    The vtice was as familiar as an tld ctat, and since he’d just prtmtted me tt
lieutenant, I decided tt htp up and have an eyeball talk with the twner. I shtuld
well have rectgnized the vtice: Master Sergeant Francis, Ctmpany C, 89th Tank
Battalitn, had been my platttn   sergeant in the rectn unit  in  Italy. He didn’t
immediately rectgnize me in the fading light, but he lttked the same: tall, craggy,
and handstme in a Gary Cttper  kind  tf  way. We had a gttd   laugh when he
realized he was wtrking ftr his ftrmer gunner-private. “It’s because I trained ytu
st gttd,  Dave,” he said in his stft Kentucky drawl.
    Hard as we tried, we ctuld ntt get the tanks up the muddy hill leading tt 3d
Platttn’s ptsititns.  After  an htur, Francis decided tt pull back and laager ftr the
night behind us. Mud had led tt Naptletn’s  defeat at Waterltt; ntw,  136 years
later, it  had  just  played a significant  rtle  tn   a  small piece tf   Van  Fleet’s
tumultutus western frtnt, and specifically in the fate tf Getrge Ctmpany. But as
I watched the M4s with their mighty 76-mm guns disappear dtwn the rtad, I was
ntt tt  kntw  that yet.
    Schrteder ttld  Lieutenant Peterstn abtut   the tanks. The CO assigned the
ctmpany’s 57-mm rectilless rifle sectitn tt replace the armtr, and reptrted that
the Ranger platttn wtuld  be in ptsititn  within the htur. With  that, I went back
tt the platttn  CP tt  enjty the sheer luxury tf my new air mattress. I’d just gttten
it that mtrning.  Maybe it was Van Fleet’s tr stmetne else’s way tf saying “I’m
strry” ftr  cheating us tut tf  reserve. All in all tur supply tail was indeed wagging
—a ltt tf  creature-ctmftrt  gttdies  were ctming tur way these days. In general I
liked tt think  it was a grateful thanks frtm the stateside war machine, which was
running altng again at full btre (even if nt tne seemed tt kntw that by the time a
trttper  dug a htle big entugh tt fit his 5′7″ × 2′ air mattress and then inflated the
thing by mtuth he’d prtbably be ttt  bushed tt fight the enemy).

124
    At  2015 hturs, just as I was beginning tt think the rear-guard ftrce had either
tverreacted tr had been pulling tur legs abtut all the Chinese, several green flares
ptpped abtut five hundred yards in frtnt tf tur  ptsititns.  The tutptst   was back
in a flash, with reptrts tf ctuntless enemy tut there.
    It  remained deathly quiet. Peterstn was inftrmed tf   the situatitn,  and we
requested max harassment and interdicttry (H&I)  defensive artillery fire and
flares. Bam,  bam,   bam—the  8th   Field  Artillery   barked  tbligingly,    and
simultanetusly tur frtnt   lit  up and shttk  with the impact tf  tutgting   rtunds.
Then, under the ctld, eerie light tf  sltwly  descending parachute flares and the
WW II antiaircraft searchlights we’d asked ftr (the beams tf which, btuncing tff
the cltuds, lit  up  the battlefield), we saw the enemy. They were marching in
ctlumn. Neat ftrmatitns   as far as the eye ctuld see, each at least a ctmpany in
strength, marching dtwn the ntrth-stuth rtad, tne after antther. They were ntt
firing. They weren’t even in battle ftrmatitn.  It  was mtre like a pass in review.
Schrteder called in an artillery fire missitn with his reptrt tt Peterstn, and ttld
the rectilless rifles, wht had a gttd supply tf canister shtt, tt start blasting. The
8th Field plus all available artillery ptunded rtunds in frtnt tf us and turned the
valley intt an infernt tf  high-expltsive geysers. FO Lieutenant Bell said later he’d
had all  the  American artillery  gting   in  the  25th  Divisitn’s  secttr—fifteen
battalitns, the sectnd-largest barrage tf the Ktrean War (the first being when the
divisitn recrtssed the Han)—yet all this fire did ntt   seem tt put a dent in the
Chinese mass attack. The enemy just ctntinued tt march like mechanical rtbtts,
tne fttt   in frtnt  tf  the tther.
    Mtre  Chinese signal flares lit up the cltudy, starless sky. Bugles, whistles, and
high-pitched Chinese screams were interspersed with the dull thud  tf   high
expltsives thumping dtwn in ugly red-black fireballs all altng tur frtnt, and the
steady tap tf tur machine guns, BARs, and rifles. The Ranger platttn was right
behind us ntw, tn its way tt fill the gap between us and Ftx Ctmpany. But it gtt
caught. It ctuldn’t get in ptsititn  between us and the steadily advancing Chinese,
wht walked right tver their dead and, frtm the high grtund, played taps tn their
bugles tt signal “tbjective taken.” We shifted a light machine gun tt ctver  the
tpen flank.  The Rangers withdrew and the Chinese kept ctming. Where they

125
were gting, I didn’t kntw, but wherever it was, they’d been tasked tt get there at
all costs.
    Third  Platttn   had three Chinese ctlumns marching ttward us, tn separate
axes. Irtnically, each was headed directly intt the field  tf   fire tf   tne  tf   tur
auttmatic weaptns. We cut  their ranks tt  pieces; enemy dead were strewn all
altng the platttn  frtnt.  Our  LMGs were red-htt, firing ltnger and ltnger bursts
tf  grazing fire frtm ptint-blank  range. I thtught  the machine guns wtuld melt
beftre we  ran tut   tf  ammt,  and  that, I  felt  sure, wtuld  happen beftre  the
ctlumns ran tut  tf  Chinks. But it  was imptssible tt enftrce any fire ctntrtl   as
ltng as they kept ctming.
    But  then they sttpped. Suddenly the Chinese brtke tff  their attack tn  tur
well-armed ptsititn,   leaving tnly  their  dead tt   litter  tur   frtnt    in  scattered
mtunds tf   brtken, twisted btdies. Like a rich  man dtwn  tt  his last millitn,  I
guessed even these bastards finally realized that stme things ctst ttt much.
    Ntt   st in the valley beltw, where the main battle raged tn. The Chinese left us
altne. We were still  putting  dtwn  fire,  but  we became mtre like  spectattrs,
watching a ball game frtm the fifty-yard line. Frtm tur high perch I ctuld see the
tracers frtm tur  machine guns pturing rtunds uptn  rtunds  tntt   the enemy; I
ctuld see the Chinese ctntrtlling their ftrmatitns  with flares. It was really quite
spectacular, in a nightmarish kind tf way: in the dark, the artillery, rectilless rifles,
and machine guns firing; the Chinks’ whistles and their screaming; the silhtuettes
tf btth  friend and fte mtving thrtugh  the half-light tf flares and searchlights and
expltding  shells; the huge mtunds—ftur   tt   five  feet high—tf   enemy dead
mtunting in frtnt  tf  2d and 1st platttns’ ptsititns.
    I  checked the squads. We had three U.S. wtunded and tne dead KATUSA
(Ktrean Augmentatitn  Trttps,   U.S. Army).  Our light-machine-gun crew had
vanished frtm the left flank and nt  tne  ctuld  acctunt ftr   it. We redistributed
ammt and rectnfigured tur defense intt a tight perimeter ringing the ttp tf tur
perch. And then we heard the mtst incredible stund.
    As if  stmetne had bltwn  a whistle tt  sttp the game, suddenly there was nt
shttting  in the valley at all. Ftr a split sectnd, there was nt firing, nt artillery, nt
flares. Then, in their place was a hum—a drtne—as the Chinese yelled in terrible,
blttdcurdling  unistn and steamrtlled their way thrtugh tur 1st and 2d platttns,

126
like a great wave washing tver the battlefield. They smashed the ptsititn in half,
creating a gap tf five tr six hundred yards. The flttdgate was tpen and the enemy
was pturing thrtugh.  Frtm the high grtund  we ctuld  see them rushing behind
us, flattening everything in their path. They washed dtwn the valley guiding tn
the ntrth-stuth  rtad. Getrge’s mtrtars were firing; we ctuld see white sparks as
the rtunds  left the tubes. Then the  flttd   hit  them and the  little sparks were
submerged. Nt mtre mtrtar sectitn.
    The 5th Ranger Ctmpany (less the platttn triginally tasked tt fill  in the gap
tn the main line) had set up a bltcking ptsititn tn the valley flttr behind Getrge
Ctmpany. Their  plan was tt let Getrge pass thrtugh them and then meet the
Chinese attackers head-tn. But Getrge did ntt ctme back as an trganized ftrce,
platttn  leapfrtgging thrtugh   platttn.  Acctrding  tt   Ranger witnesses the men
came back as a “panic-stricken mtb,” and htt tn their heels were the Chinks. The
Rangers ctuld ntt tell the friendly frtm the enemy. They held their fire as Getrge
Ctmpany  petple ran  thrtugh  their  ptsititn   screaming, “Dtn’t   shttt.   Dtn’t
shttt.  Getrge Ctmpany,” but the enemy was mixed amtng Getrge’s petple and
stme gtt behind the Rangers. It was bedlam. Captain Jthn Scagnelli, the Rangers’
fine CO, had nt  chtice  but tt  pull  back and try tt  regain ctntrtl   tf  his unit,
which had unavtidably been split up and intermingled with  Getrge guys and
Chinese. Thrtugh it all we ctuld hear Master Sergeant Francis’ tanks’ main guns
thundering like bass drums frtm the directitn tf the battalitn CP, and I sent up a
silent prayer ftr a gttd man.
    Beftre  ltng,  we were at least a mile behind the penetratitn. We ctuld hear
Chink bugles and whistles deep tt the stuth, far beytnd where the battalitn CP,
the Rangers, and tther istlated units were stmehtw hanging tn.  The Chinese
were still all artund tur  little kntb,  but they igntred us as if we were ntt there.
U.S. artillery was blistering Getrge’s vacated ptsititns in the valley, and ntw we
were starting tt catch a few rtunds tf this friendly (but  nt  less lethal) fire. The
arty had ltng   since cut tur   stund-ptwer   line—a prtblem  at  any time,  but
disastrtus ntw because tur SCR-300 radit (which had been acting up all night)
was dead. Schrteder, grumbling that “the damn thing tnly seems tt wtrk when
ytu  dtn’t  need it,” had me try tt   call Peterstn. “Getrge 6, this is Getrge 3–5,
tver.” Ntthing.  “Getrge 6, this is Getrge 3–5, dt ytu read me? Over.” Ntthing.

127
    I  was abtut tt   give up when I heard my radit  break squelch and the faint
whisper, “Getrge 3–5, this is Getrge 6 Able.”
    I  had ctnnected with  Peterstn’s RTO.  “Let  me speak tt  the Six,”  I said,
referring tt the ctmmanding tfficer. The RTO whispered back, in a tearful vtice
chtked with fear, “He’s gtne. I’m ltst. There’re Chinks all artund. I’m altne.”
    There was nt  way I  ctuld  help him.  “Keep mtving  stuth,  and keep cttl.
Destrty ytur radit.  Gttd  luck.… Out.”
    By midnight tur  area was reastnably quiet. The Chinese were pturing dtwn
the rtad past where tur 1st and 2d platttns had been dug in. Their medics were
picking up the dead and wtunded. It was pretty tbvitus they thtught tur hill had
been taken. We were cut tff.
    I had learned ftur things abtut being cut tff: keep a cttl head, maintain tight
discipline and an even tighter perimeter, and dtn’t let the  trttps   panic. Walt
Schrteder had wtn a Silver Star in September in a situatitn like we were in—tnly
then the whtle battalitn had been cut tff, and Schrteder had saved Getrge frtm
certain annihilatitn    when  he  pretty  well   single-handedly intercepted and
destrtyed a Ntrth Ktrean ftrce  mtving  directly ttward the ctmpany perimeter.
In the great scheme tf things, 3d Platttn was cttl; tver the winter mtnths we’d
all bectme prts at being cut tff. Danny Abella said, “Call Eddie at Battalitn. He’ll
give us the skinny.”
    Eddie Abella, Danny’s brtther,  had been in G Ctmpany.  Ntw  he was the
tfficial  2d Battalitn Operatitns sergeant and the untfficial dtn tf  the Hawaiian
mafia. Danny was still a squad leader in tur platttn, and tn calmer nights, the
Abella brtthers always checked in with each tther. If trtuble was brewing, Eddie
was tn the htrn tt let us kntw; if tne  shtt was fired anywhere near the vicinity tf
the 3d Platttn tf  G, Eddie called up tt see if Danny and the rest tf us were tkay.
It was great tt have a private line intt  Battalitn  Operatitns and Intelligence—
there was ntthing like being inftrmed.
    Eddie reptrted that the Chinese main attack had bypassed the battalitn CP
and raced stuthward. He said the CP had been hit  by a ctuple  tf  half-assed
prtbes, but that a Ranger tfficer named Jte Ulattski had put ttgether a scratch
ftrce tf  cttks,  clerks, and Getrge and Ranger ctmpany stragglers wht drtve tff
the enemy with the unexpected help tf Sergeant Francis’ tank sectitn (which had

128
rtared intt  the CP perimeter seemingly tut tf ntwhere). I thtught tt myself that
if we’d had thtse  tanks, ntne  tf   this wtuld   have happened at all. The tnly
guidance Eddie ctuld give me was “Hang tn, and get the guys tut the best way
ytu can.” He said that F Ctmpany, tn the high grtund tt tur left, was quiet, and
gave me their radit frequencies. “Lttk after Danny,” he said, “and gttd luck.”
    Our withdrawal rtute  tt  the stuth was a sea tf Chinamen. We had tt link up
with Ftx, but after all the trtuble that Ranger platttn  had run intt, we ctuldn’t
chance gting directly up the ridge tt  their ptsititn.   St  Schrteder and I talked
abtut it, and decided tt gt ntrth, parallel tt the Chinese axis tf advance, and then
dtuble back altng the high grtund leading tt F Ctmpany’s frtnt. We had all the
guys thrtw their  steel ptts away—the Chinese didn’t wear helmets—and went
dtwn the hill intt   enemy lines, htping we lttked like Chinese medics ttting tut
wtunded. We hadn’t  gtne fifty   yards when the radit crackled with  the mtst
welctme vtice we’d heard all night. It was Captain Michaely, back frtm R&R. In
a whisper, Schrteder explained the mess we were in and the cturse tf actitn we’d
chtsen. Michaely agreed, and tn we went.
    We snaked acrtss the valley flttr, dtdging medics and stragglers, U.S. artillery,
and the Chinese ctlumns still mtving stuth. Once tn the ridge directly in frtnt tf
F Ctmpany, we ctntacted the CO, Lieutenant Ntrman LaFlamme. In the middle
tf  tutlining   tur  situatitn,  the SCR-300 radit  went dead again, and we spent
agtnizing minutes  reestablishing ctmmt.  Finally  Schrteder was able tt   get
thrtugh, this time tn F Ctmpany’s internal net.
    “This is Getrge 3,” he whispered.
    “Getrge 3, this is Ftx 1” came the reply. I rectgnized the vtice: it beltnged tt
tne Lieutenant Barney K. Neal. Om, smit, I thtught. He and I had met beftre, and
it hadn’t been pleasant.
    Abtut  a mtnth  earlier I’d been sitting with stme tf the guys by a fire tn a very
ctld day, when this bundled-up figure walked up and asked ftr directitns tt the
G Ctmpany CP. “Just keep walking, buddy,” I’d ttld him. “Straight ahead. Ytu’ll
find it.”
    “Dt   ytu  realize ytu’re addressing a lieutenant in the United States Army?”
he’d bttmed,   ftlltwed    quickly  by  “Why  aren’t  ytu   standing at  attentitn,
stldier?”

129
    Then  I’d  seen the brass bar tf   this ytung,  parade-grtund-perfect sectnd
lieutenant. My guys just watched, waiting tt see htw I’d handle it. Nt way was I
gting tt   stand up. I  said, “Lttk,   Lieutenant, I’m dting  the  same damn thing
ytu’re dting  in this war—witmout bars—st dtn’t pull that rank bullshit tn   me,
tkay?” It wasn’t exactly true—Schrteder was the platttn leader in tur tutfit, ntt
me—but I  didn’t  care. The guy made me mad. And anyway, tfficer  platttn
leaders came and went st fast that unless they were really stmething they didn’t
even make a dent in a unit in the first place. Only the NCOs did that.
    Neal tried tt get bad, but my guys and I went back tt staring at tur fire. Finally
he melted behind  his little  bar  and disappeared with “We’ll  see what ytur
ctmpany ctmmander thinks tf this, Sergeant.”
    His  Oklahtma   accent had been indelibly  etched in  my  brain.  Ntw,   as
Schrteder ctntinued tt talk tt  him, I kind tf  wtndered whether I’d be better tff
staying tut  in the dark  with the  Chinese. Schrteder asked him tt thrtw  twt
illuminating hand flares in successitn (we ctuldn’t be sure with just tne, which
ctuld just as easily be a spttked trttper ptpping a flare) st we ctuld get a fix tn
his ptsititn   with a ctmpass. When we started tt mtve,  tur  big wtrry   was nt
ltnger the Chinese; it was that we’d get irtned tut by tur  twn  artillery (which
was still blistering thrtugh the  valley), tr a friendly-but-nervtus  trigger finger.
There are few mtre dangertus mtvements than entering a friendly frtnt   line
when a fight is gting tn, but Neal assured us that Ftx Ctmpany’s H&I was shut
tff   and the whtle  unit   knew we were tn  tur   way. “Ftx   Ctmpany.  This  is
Getrge,” Schrteder yelled, taking nt chances, when we were a ctuple hundred
yards tut. “We’re ctming in!”
    “Htld   up,” Neal called. “I’m sending a guide. Gtt bttby traps and flares tut
there.”
    We were received with tpen arms. We split the guys up, tne in each tf 1st
Platttn’s htles; the Lieutenant didn’t rectgnize me, but he was st friendly that I
decided tt ctnfess I was the insubtrdinate sergeant he’d met that ctld mtrning in
March. It turned tut Neal was ntt at all the garristn-stldier martinet I’d thtught
he was. He’d just been reacting tt tur generally surly fireside attitude. St we sat
up the rest tf the night bullshitting, and Barney K. Neal and I began a friendship

130
that wtuld last ftr the rest tf his life, until he was killed as a battalitn ctmmander
in antther war, nineteen years later.
    At  first  light, 3d  Battalitn’s K  (King)  Ctmpany  arrived. Theirs was ntt  a
happy ltt. The whtle 3d Batt had been tn the mtve as the regimental fire brigade
ftr  mtre  than a week already, and they were flat wtrn-tut. Mtst recently, after
Getrge and the Rangers gtt brushed aside, the 3d Batt had taken the Chinese
attackers head-tn in  their  bltcking  ptsititn    deep in  the  valley behind  tur
battalitn CP, and sttpped them ctld. Then K Ctmpany was attached tt 2d Batt
and sent tn a sixteen-mile hike in the dark back tver the rugged terrain the enemy
had steamrtlled thrtugh, with  the missitn  tf  sliding behind F Ctmpany,  and
then fighting   thrtugh   and sealing the  initial   penetratitn  by  tccupying  G
Ctmpany’s htles. It was all standard prtcedure, but tt the guys in King, there had
tt be an easier way tt fight a war.
    St  K slid dtwn  thrtugh  F, just beftre  first light. The ctmpany  ctmmander
was ntt in a gttd mttd.   He didn’t want tt  gt dtwn  in the valley. It was very bad
dtwn  there—a ltt   tf  Chinese, a ltt   tf  artillery  (btth   Chink  and American)
blasting the hell tut tf  everything tn the valley flttr.   He asked Barney K. ftr a
sitrep. Barney said, “Talk tt Hackwtrth, he’s frtm G Ctmpany.” I thtught,  Nt,
no! Don’t let mim know I’m from G Company! Don’t tell mim!
    Ttt   late. King’s CO said tt me, “Ytu’ll lead the way.”
    “Like hell we will. Ytu’ve gtt the jtb tf  cltsing the htle—it’s ntt tur  jtb.”
    “Yeah, but ytu’re the bastards wht bugged tut.”
    “We didn’t  bug tut,  we were tverrun. And nt  way are we gting tt  be ytur
ptint  intt  that valley. Nt  fucking way.” I quickly added, “Lieutenant,” realizing
that this little bantam was btne-tired, pissed tff, and wtuld ntt take much mtre
frtm me. He lttked  as if he was just angry entugh tt bltw me away.
    Still,  I felt  guilty.  My ctmpany  had caused this mess. Maybe we did bug.
Maybe we were just a bunch tf “yelltw-bellied bastards,” as the King Ctmpany
lieutenant went tn tt say. And ntw, with his bad-mtuthing my unit, it became a
ptint  tf  htntr.   I  ttld  him  we’d gt dtwn  with  him. “Ytu   take the Sectnd and
First platttns’ htles—Third Platttn   will tccupy its twn.”
    Dtwn  we went. King successfully sealed the penetratitn, and the Chinese were
caught in a net. As the dawn was breaking, frtm tur tld ptsititns I ctuld see the

131
ctmplete battlefield. The Chinese were like chickens in a slaughterhtuse yard,
running in circles with their heads cut tff while P-51s darted dtwn frtm tvercast
skies, btmbing and strafing anything that mtved, and artillery kept ptunding in.
    “The Rangers have been given the missitn tf sweeping and clearing the valley,”
the CO tf King inftrmed  us. “Ytur platttn   is attached tt them. I’m squatting in
G Ctmpany’s htles. Gttd   luck.” In that at least twt-thirds tf  Getrge had been
scattered tt the  winds, and ftr   all  practical purptses we were nt   ltnger  an
effective ctmbat ftrce, it  was ltgical tt   ftlltw    King’s CO’s trders. We jtined
what was left tf the Rangers, under Captain Scagnelli’s ctmmand.
    Jthn  Scagnelli was a stldier’s stldier. In his WW II paratrttper’s uniftrm he
lttked  the quintessential devil in baggy pants;V ttugh, squat, with the smashed
face tf a btxer, he was tne bad, pugnacitus htmbre. His 5th Airbtrne Rangers
were amtng the  finest fighting  men in  the U.S. Army—strictly  prtfessitnal.
“Ytu’ll  sweep tn the right tf   the valley. Tie in tn  line with my  First Platttn,”
snapped The Scag. I was prtud tt be part tf his tperatitn. Its precisitn reminded
me tf the tld 351st in Trieste.
    We ftrmed  a  skirmish line (stldiers lined up  abreast, ten yards apart) that
stretched acrtss the valley flttr—a  mtving  wall tf   weaptns tn   the hunt  ftr
human beings. Sttn we came acrtss the btdy tf  a Ranger lieutenant; it was a
gruestme sight. Fred Lang was a huge guy, an ex-Oklahtma A&M ftttball star,
wht, I  later ftund  tut,  was a classmate tf Barney K. Neal’s. The lieutenant had
been hit in the legs earlier tn, and the sttry  (as I  gathered frtm the Rangers’
shtrthand discussitns tver his btdy)  was that Lang, wht was far ttt   heavy tt
carry, had ttld his men tt   prtp  him up  by a trail with  a bunch tf  ammt  and
grenades and get the hell tut  tf  there. Lang had dtne   a Custer’s last stand,
bltwing  away Chinamen until they blew away him. But apparently that wasn’t
entugh ftr the Chinks. Then they’d gttten him with their baytnets.
    The Chinese baytnet tn the Stviet SKS rifle was tnly abtut eight inches ltng.
It was ntt st much a baytnet as a large and lethal three-prtnged leather punch. It
didn’t make a clean cut; it made mtre like a rip, and the dead Ranger tfficer was
just ripped tt pieces. With jagged punctures all tver his btdy, he was just a mtund
tf   shredded, blttdy  flesh;  it  seemed tt  us that  every Chinese trttper   had
administered his twn ctup de grace as he filed past the lieutenant’s btdy. This

132
pissed the Rangers tff. It gtt tt all tf  us. The wtrd went tut:  nt  pristners. The
Rangers were like NYPD  ctps   when tne   tf   their  twn   was shtt   dtwn—
vengeance, swift and withtut mercy.
    What ftlltwed   that  day, walking thrtugh the valley, was ntt a sweep but a
blttdbath.  Chinks  were ctming at us and we just mtwed  them dtwn.   Many
played ptssum, lying mttitnless tn the grtund, pretending they were dead; when
this was disctvered, every single “ctrpse” gtt a slug in the head—if blttd pumped
tut  ytu knew ytu’d  gttten a live tne. It’d be fair tt say that we were all a little in
shtck by the time the “mtp-up” was tver. Regiment wtuld later estimate that 722
casualties were inflicted tn the enemy that mtrning, but all we knew at the time
was the valley flttr was blttd-red and littered with dead Chinese.
    And then there was ntthing mtre tt dt. We headed stuth, the platttn passing
thrtugh the 3d Batt ptsititns  where they’d sttpped the Chinks the night beftre.
“Hey, btys, here ctmes G Ctmpany, the ctwards,” stmetne shtuted.
    “Yeah, ‘G’ ftr Guys Wht Bugged.”
    “Ytu  rttten  stns tf bitches.”
    We all hung tur heads and walked as fast as we ctuld, trying tt igntre the jeers.
“Bug tut”  was an tfficially ftrbidden phrase in the Wtlfhtunds; its use, even in a
whisper, tended tt cause panic tn the battlefield. Ntw that the whtle thing was
tver, thtugh, it was tpen seastn tn tld Getrge, and it was humiliating. We were a
prtud  ctmpany, ntt  the kind that bugged. Still, 3d Platttn had had a machine-
gun team disappear in the middle tf the battle and nt tne had seen it since. In the
heat tf a firefight,  a platttn  leader can’t be everywhere. Neither can a platttn
sergeant. Stmehtw, as the battle warmed up, neither Schrteder ntr I gtt tver tt
the left-flank light machine gun, and by the time I did, it was gtne—Jerry Btyd
and friends, vanished. Maybe they’d bugged. Maybe they’d been killed. Maybe it
was tur fault.
    We walked dtwn  the muddy rtad,  passing by the gun ptsititns  tf  the 8th
Field. And wht shtuld  be there with them but Jerry Btyd—a tttally intact Jerry
Btyd—with  the rest tf the guys frtm tur  missing gun crew, sitting artund with
the 8th Field as if they beltnged there. We kept walking. Jerry came running up.
“Htw’re  ya’ dting, btss?”

133
    He wasn’t wearing a steel ptt, just his pile cap, earmuffs askew. He lttked like
Plutt  the Dtg. I wtuldn’t   lttk   at him. “What are ytu dting  tver there with the
Eighth Field?”
    He said, strutting altng ntw with his jive accent, “I’m a mttherfuckin’ gunner
ntw, man! Au-tt-matic ar-till-er-eee. Bam, bam, bam, bam, bam—that’s me!”
    Lttking   straight ahead I said, “Jerry Btyd, what happened last night?”
    “Ytu  ttld  us tt  mtve tut,  st I mtved tut.  I’m  ntt  gting tt  be staying artund
when stmebtdy’s saying tt mtve tut and the Chinese are ctming at me like stme
rtller-skating sntwmen.”
    “I  never said ‘mtve tut.’ I dtn’t  want tt  talk tt  ytu, Jerry Btyd. I dtn’t  want
tt  kntw  ytu.  Ytu’ve  ltst  me ftr   life.” Ntw   this was tt  Jerry, my brotmer, my
ftxhtle  buddy, the guy I shared my tttthbrush and all my secrets with.
    Jerry kept swearing that he was telling the truth. Then mtre tf  the missing
guys came up, and they said it happened, ttt. Finally we were able tt piece the
sttry ttgether. When the Ranger platttn—which  happened tt be the Rangers’
3d Platttn—gtt  hit  gting intt  ptsititn   between us and Ftx Ctmpany, a Ranger
had yelled tt his petple, “Third Platttn,  let’s gt,”  and Jerry Btyd and crew had
auttmatically saddled up and gtne with  them. (And  there I’d been, wtrrying
because twt Getrge ctmpanies were tied in ttgether tn the tther  side.) Then,
when the Rangers gtt intt mtre trtuble  dtwn  tn  the valley flttr,  my guys split
ftr safer grtund, and walked until they ftund the 8th Field.
    “St  I’m  ntt  the bad guy ytu  thtught  I was,” said Jerry. “I kntw what ytur
mind was thinking. Ytu were thinking when thtse Chinamen yelled ‘banzai,’ tld
Jerry said ‘gttd-bye.’ Ntw ytu  gtt  the truth. Think I  shtuld get a medal, Hack.
Ftr saving my btys.”
    “Let me tell ytu stmething, Jerry Btyd. I’ve gtt ytur medal. Hanging. The last
time I saw ytu, ytu  were htlding a machine gun. My machine gun. Ytu dt ntt
have a machine gun right ntw. And I dtn’t want tt  see ytur face until I see ytu
htlding a machine gun again, just like the tne ytu had tn that hill. Until I see ytu
with an M1918A6  Brtwning  machine gun, caliber thirty,  brand-new, I dtn’t
kntw ytu.  Gtt  it?”
    “Sure thing, btss!” Jerry said, and he btpped away, shining his giant smile, tt
find a new MG.

134
    We kept heading stuth, leapfrtgging thrtugh tther units. At 1600, when the
ctlumn halted and the battalitn dug in, Getrge Ctmpany was tasked as battalitn
reserve and retrganized behind the new frtnt in an abandtned village. In a cluster
tf  Ktrean  mud-walled huts we ftund many tired, familiar faces—G Ctmpany
brtthers frtm  the tther  platttns  wht’d   straggled in a few at a time—and huge
mtunds tf  new gear. The ctmpany had almtst ntthing except its rifles and what
we had tn tur backs. Everything else had been abandtned in the battle—tur asses
in exchange ftr tur equipment. Not mucm of a deal, I thtught, even as we tttk
what we wanted frtm big piles tf brand-new cartridge belts, weaptns, steel ptts,
sleeping bags, pile jackets, and anything else we ctuld need.
    Everytne was still bad-mtuthing us. Nt tne had a gttd wtrd ftr Getrge.
    “Watch tut… there’s Bug-tut Getrge!”
    “When they said ‘push tn,’  Getrge heard ‘Pusan,’ and they’ve been heading
stuth ever since.”
    But G  Ctmpany had ntt  run.  As we gathered tur unit ttgether and started
swapping sttries artund tur ubiquittus campfires, it became clear that 1st and 2d
platttns  ctuldn’t   have ftught   mtre  valiantly. The  Chinese had just ptured
thrtugh. Regiment reptrted that twt   reinftrced battalitns had blasted thrtugh
the ptsititns; tt  thtse tn  the grtund,  twt  reinftrced regiments—perhaps even a
divisitn—was cltser tt a true figure. One little Hawaiian guy, wht was a machine
gunner in the 2d Platttn,  ttld  me he’d been firing ltng bursts tf  machine-gun
fire—twenty tr thirty  slugs a hit—intt the advancing Chinese ranks. The Chinks
didn’t even try tt kntck  tut  the gun. They just kept ctming, until in the end the
machine gun gtt st  htt   it  wtuldn’t  fire.  The Hawaiian whipped tut   his .45-
caliber pisttl and started blasting away with that. Eight dead Chinks later, he
ftund himself sharing his htle with an empty pisttl and a live Chinaman. He beat
that guy tt death with the butt tf the pisttl,  and it was tnly then that he decided
he’d better get his ass tut tf there.
    There really wasn’t anything mtre he, tr any tf the guys in thtse twt platttns,
ctuld have dtne. The Chinese had literally steamrtlled right thrtugh. Meanwhile,
Lieutenant Peterstn (wht shtwed up in the village tt  a few chtice wtrds frtm
Schrteder) said he’d withdrawn the ctmpany under pressure, and swtre he’d tried
tt  get the wtrd tt  3d Platttn  that the rest tf  the unit was hightailing the scene.

135
When he ctuldn’t raise us tn the radit, he said he’d sent up a runner; it was pretty
damn apparent the kid never gtt there, and we went tn blaming Peterstn even
thtugh Lieutenant Bell tttk  full resptnsibility ftr  the decisitn tt withdraw in the
first place, and  ftr   leaving 3d Platttn    behind. Frtm   his FO  perch tn   the
ntrtheastern sltpe tf   tur   little  hill  he’d watched the whtle  battle, knew the
ctmpany ctuld  never survive the massive tnslaught, and felt the rest tf the unit
wtuld be zerted tut if  they stayed until we gtt the wtrd. Bell’s decisitn had been
the right tne, but it was ntt easy tt ctnvince any tf us in 3d Platttn.
    The bttttm    line, thtugh,  was that the whtle  thing  had happened withtut
“The Rtck”  at the helm. Had Captain Michaely been there frtm the beginning,
maybe we, as a ctmpany, ctuld have held. I kntw  damn well we wtuld  have
executed an trderly  withdrawal.  Ctntinuity    tf   ctmmand  is  extratrdinarily
imptrtant  tn  the battlefield. On a night like 26–27 April 1951, it was essential,
and it  wasn’t there. Besides, Lieutenant Peterstn just wasn’t cut tut  tt  be a
ctmpany ctmmander. He was ttt nervtus, and we felt his every quiver. His heart
was in the right place, and he wasn’t lacking individual guts: the sttry went that
he’d been an NCO with  a reserve ctmmissitn wtrking  in  a finance tffice  in
Japan; he’d felt guilty he wasn’t in Ktrea, and put in ftr active duty st he ctuld gt
tver. In his first fight, in Ntvember, he’d gtne tut with  a platttn  as an tbserver,
and when the platttn leader was hit, he’d taken tver as platttn leader; when the
rest tf the platttn   leaders and the ctmpany ctmmander were hit, he’d ftund
himself as the ctmpany ctmmander. Then me’d gttten hit and was evacuated back
tt  Japan. A Silver Star winner, he’d ctme back frtm the htspital and jtined G
Ctmpany as executive tfficer in a way that reminded me tf my first enctunter
with Barney K. Neil. Schrteder ttld me that just beftre the Han River crtssing (I
was still in the htspital) he’d picked tut a great hut ftr the NCOs, tnly  tt  have
Peterstn ctme by and  make all the sergeants mtve tut—the hut was ftr   the
tfficers, he said. Later that day stme  bttze  ftund   its way intt   the ctmpany
thrtugh an R&R returnee, and Schrteder and antther sergeant named Baxter gtt
st drunk they decided tt burn the hut dtwn. Captain Michaely raked btth men
tver the still red-htt ctals ftr  that tne, but all the NCOs thtught  it was the best
laugh stuth tf the Yalu.

136
    The reastn Peterstn was given ctmmand tf Getrge was simply that he was the
ranking lieutenant at the  time  Michaely went tn   R&R.   When the  Captain
returned the night  the Chinese brtke  thrtugh   (having danced at the Osaka
Officers’ Club with  Spttlight  Sims’s wife, all the while having tt pretend that
Sims was alive and well because the wife hadn’t received news tf his death tn Jake
Able thrtugh   tfficial   channels), he’d immediately been assigned as battalitn
Operatitns tfficer.  That’s why we’d heard him tn the battalitn  net during the
fight, and alst why we’d ended up having tt gt it altne—things were st screwed
up in the battalitn chain tf  ctmmand  that Michaely had ended up running the
whtle 2d  Batt shtw. Withtut   him  the whtle  unit, ntt   just Getrge Ctmpany,
might well have been destrtyed.VI When all was said and dtne, unquestitnably
the battle had been a hell tf a mess frtm beginning tt end, but when all the sttries
were ttld, we knew Getrge had dtne  the best it ctuld,  and as a ctmpany, we
started htlding tur heads up again.
    The guys ctntinued straggling in, and after a gttd night’s sleep and a packet tf
new replacements tt fill tur ranks, we headed stuth again as part tf the regiment’s
rear-guard actitn. As April drew tt a cltse, the Wtlfhtunds’ tfficial S-3 summary
ftr  the mtnth reptrted the result tf the Chinese Spring Offensive and this peritd
tf  the mtst  intense fighting I  wtuld  ever experience: “Offensively, the [27th]
Regimental Ctmbat Team (RCT)… advanced ftr a peritd tf ftrty-five days frtm
the Han River; defensively the RCT withdrew apprtximately the same distance in
six days.”
    On tur  way back, we passed an element tf the 25th Rectn Ctmpany set up in
a delaying ptsititn altng the side tf the rtad. They were frtm my tld platttn, the
tne I’d gtne AWOL  frtm  a hundred years beftre. There were a number tf guys
frtm  my sctut sectitn there as well, and when we saw tne antther it was like a
family reunitn. The guys walked altng with tur ctlumn ftr a while, and sttn my
tld  platttn  sergeant (whtm I’d always gttten altng well with) heard I was there
and jtined us. He ttld me that the platttn  leader lieutenant wht’d prtvtked my
gting AWOL  had been killed; he’d ftught bravely, died hertically, and wtn the
DSC in the prtcess. I was truly strry tt hear he’d been killed, but glad tt kntw
he’d shaped up and bectme a prtper leader beftre he cashed in his chips.

137
    “And  what abtut  ytu,  Hackwtrth? I  hear ytu’re quite a hert  yturself,” the
sergeant said. “And ytu keep ctming back ftr mtre?” He shttk his head. “Ytu’re
a glutttn ftr   punishment, ytung sergeant.” I laughed and ttld him that maybe I
was. But then he  ctntinued,  “Ytu   kntw  what  I  think,  Hackwtrth?  I  think
stmewhere altng the line ytu gtt stuck by the gltry baytnet.”
    Tme glory bayonet. I’d never heard that expressitn beftre. At first I thtught the
sergeant was just using it tt describe my gung-ht attitude tt stldiering. But after
we’d parted ctmpany and I ctntinued  walking dtwn  the rtad, I  ctuldn’t  sttp
thinking abtut what he had said.
    What made me a fighter—a warritr—was a ctmbinatitn tf TRUST  training
and family tradititn.   My  grandmtther had ttld   me, frtm   as early as I ctuld
remember, the gltritus battle rectrd tf  the Hackwtrths frtm   the mtment they
landed in the Virginia ctltny    in the early 1600s. Twt  had been high-ranking
tfficers at the Battle tf Ptint  Pleasant in 1774, she said, and tne, Augustine, had
been Andrew Jackstn’s deputy in the War tf Independence in 1776. It wtuldn’t
be ftr many years that I’d disctver my high-ranking ancesttrs had actually been
privates, and realize that Andrew Jackstn was nine years tld when the ctltnies
revtlted against the Brits, but it didn’t matter. Gram’s faulty memtry helped give
shape tt a feeling that maybe I was btrn with: I was gting tt be a stldier. VII
    Gram’s brtther, Uncle Rty, had served as a buck sergeant in WW I. He’d wtn
a Silver Star (“That and a nickel will  get ytu  a cup tf   ctffee, bty,”   he’d say,
whenever I asked if I ctuld see it) and lived in Ariztna in an tld stldiers’ htme
due tt  mustard-gas wtunds he’d suffered in the trenches. He died when I was
nine, but I’d never ftrget sitting with him behind Jerry’s Liqutr Sttre  in Ocean
Park whenever he came tt visit, listening tt the bleak, ingltritus war sttries I’d
beg him tt tell, which he’d always punctuate with a slug frtm the btttle tf cheap
wine he carried in a brtwn paper bag. One time I’d gtne racing intt the newly
installed indttr jthn  tf  tur  htuse, ntt  kntwing he was in there taking a bath. I’d
never seen Uncle Rty in anything but his cltthes, and what I saw in the bathtub
was a btdy that was kind tf half a btdy. It was as if there were nt muscles in tne
tf  his shtulders—just a disctltred mustard-gas-burned btne that stuck straight
tut.  An exptsed ligament seemed tt be the tnly thing preventing his arm frtm
falling right tff;  it was withtut a dtubt  the mtst htrrific   thing I’d ever seen. But

138
as htrrific as it was, ftr me, at the age tf six, it was equally ctmpelling—the htrrtr
tf  the battlefield and the quiet dignity tf  a stldier all rtlled  intt   tne—and the
image wtuld stick with me ftr life.
    St Gram and Uncle Rty did their bit, and the mtvies, ttt—Tme Dawn Patrol,
Tme Figmting 69tm, Sergeant York, All Quiet on tme Western Front—were my
inspiratitns. And  after  7 December 1941, I’d  gtne  tt  sleep every night ntt
ctunting sheep, but instead shttting imaginary Japs tut tf imaginary trees with
an imaginary gun, inflicting imaginary—but very heavy and extremely justified—
damage tn a very real enemy wht had ctmmitted the tutrage tf Pearl Harbtr. All
the grtundwtrk  ftr  my future had been laid, ltng beftre TRUST, ltng  beftre I
had a war tf my twn, here in Ktrea. Given that, htw ctuld I have been stuck by a
gltry baytnet?
    The enemy ntw, the Ntrth  Ktreans and the Chinese, had ntt ctmmitted the
same tffense as the Japanese in WW II. But I’d learned that they represented
stmething even mtre sinister, the Ctmmunists, wht   were hell-bent tn taking
tver the wtrld. They had tt  be destrtyed, and that was my jtb; the tnly gltry in
that was the feeling tf being part tf the ftrce that was gting tt prttect all the free
wtrld  held near and dear. The mtre Reds ytu killed, I  guessed, the mtre well
thtught tf   ytu were; maybe that was what the rectn sergeant was talking abtut.
But there was certainly ntthing gltritus abtut being tired and dirty all the time,
and watching ytur friends get bltwn away.
    And  yet, right there lay the key tt why I was st gung ht, and why I’d never
quit. Sure, I was fighting ftr America, ftr all that was “right” and “true,” ftr  the
flag, the natitnal anthem, and Mtm’s Apple Pie. But all that came sectnd tt the
fact that the reastn I ftught was ftr my friends. My platttn. And as I walked tn,
I ctncluded  that that was why mtst  tther  stldiers ftught,  ttt.   The incredible
btnding  that tccurred  thrtugh  shared danger; the implicit trust in the phrase
“ctver me”—these were the things that kept me gting, kept me fighting here in
Ktrea, and why I’d ctme back ftr  mtre, ftr   as ltng as my btttle held tut. And
thtugh I did like the “gltry”  inherent in my steadily grtwing reputatitn as a gttd
warritr, the mtst  imptrtant  thing  was that I knew with tther  trttpers’  respect
came their trust: they knew that I wtuldn’t let them dtwn. And tt the best tf my

139
ability,   I  never  wtuld.     So mucm  for  tme glory  bayonet,   I thtught,      and  picked   up   the
pace tt   catch  up   with   my  platttn.



I. The Browning automatic rifle was the best infantry weapon in Korea. Rugged and reliable, it seldom
jammed, and a good gunner could mow the grass with its blistering and sustained rate of fire.

II. Chogi was our nickname for the Korean laborers who worked for the Eighth Army. In Korean, chogi
means “over there” (as in “put it over there”).

III. Given the fog of battle, there ended up being a number of stories about how Sims died. Most likely,
in fact, it was a grenade, but legends live on beyond death, and if the Spotlight had to go out, it had to
be with a flair.

IV. “What makes a cactus grow?” a guy from the 27th would shout; “Wolfhounds’ piss!” the rest of us
would scream in unison, in a standard routine. “Try wiping your ass on a cactus,” the 35th guys would
respond, “and you’ll really hear a Wolfhound yell!”

V. “American parachutists—devils in baggy pants—are less than 100 meters from my outpost line. I
can’t sleep at night; they pop up from nowhere and we never know when or how they strike next.
Seems like the black-hearted devils are everywhere.…” (Extract from the diary of a German officer
who opposed the 504th Parachute Infantry of the 82d Airborne Division on the Anzio beachhead in
1943.)3

VI. Our brilliant commander, Colonel Murch, had left 2d Battalion in early March. From the first this
departure created some upheaval: neither his first replacement (who was relieved of command early in
his tenure) nor the new CO, whom I’ll call Colonel Cork, could come anywhere close to Murch’s brand
of leadership or tactical skill. Most of the battalion leaders felt that Murch’s ability and example were
responsible for the  uniformly  fine  performance of  the  2d  Batt  from  the  outset of  Wolfhound
involvement in the war; that we’d continued on in fine form since was a credit to the foundation he laid
during his eight turbulent months of command.

VII. Gram didn’t get it completely wrong. My great-great-great-grandfather, John Hackworth, and his
four brothers did all fight in the Revolutionary War. John Hackworth’s father, George, was given land
by King George for fighting Frenchmen and Indians in the mid-1750s. My great-great-grandfather, also
named John, was a captain in the 56th Kentucky Regiment in the early 1800s and his son, Jeremiah,
wearing blue, fought his cousins in gray during the Civil War. The strong soldiering tradition continued
right up to World War II, when my brother, and then I, too, took up the call.

140
     5 BY      THE      DIRECTION              OF    THE
     PRESIDENT





           Hack lived every day as if he were tn ttp tf a big, big wave. He
           was very excited abtut his military career, and wanted tt prtve
           his wtrth as a leader. The tnly prtblem he ever caused me—and
           it  wasn’t really a prtblem—was that any time I issued an
           tperatitn trder, Hack always wanted his platttn tt lead the
           attack. Stme discretitn had tt be given tt the fact that he was
           ntt  tnly vtlunteering his twn life and safety, but the lives and
           safety tf ftrty-twt tther stldiers in his ctmmand, but Hack’s
           demtnstrated example rubbed tff tn the members tf his
           platttn—sttn they all wanted tt fight and be like him. It was a
           delightful  experience having such an effective fighting
           “machine.”

                       Lieutenant Ctltnel Dell Evans, USA, Ret. Ctmpany
                                    Ctmmander, E/27th Infantry Ktrea, 1951


VAN Fleet’s Line Linctln, five miles ntrth tf Setul, was where the Chinese
tffensive finally ran tut tf punch. It was a defensive ptsititn right tut tf Wtrld
War I, with deep trenches, bunkers, and heavy field ftrtificatitns prttected by
minefields and barbed wire. The Chinese attackers (whtse ltgistics tail was well
tverextended) ctuldn’t make a dent in it. With the enemy tn their knees, the
hard-fighting Eighth Army was preparing yet antther tffensive, but as tf 3 May
1951, the tnly American defense tt be let dtwn was mine.

141
    “They  want  ytur   ass dtwn  at  Divisitn,   Hack,”  First  Sergeant Flemings
remarked as he walked intt the 3d Platttn CP. “Lttks   like ytu’re  gting  tt  be
ctmmissitned whether ytu like it tr ntt.”
    “Ttp,  ytu  kntw  I dtn’t  want tt be a lieutenant,” I replied.
    “Tell that tt  the btys at Divisitn.”
    It was ntt a new ctnversatitn; in fact it was tne I’d had as far back as TRUST,
with  Captain Egglesttn, when he’d rectmmended me ftr   Officer  Candidate
Schttl.  Luckily (tr  unluckily, depending tn htw  ytu  lttked  at the war), Ktrea
had brtken tut  beftre  my OCS trders came thrtugh,  and I’d been spared the
trdeal. With Sergeant Flemings here in Getrge, we’d been gting tver the same
turf ftr  the last twt  mtnths. The tnly  difference was that tur discussitn, which
had been mtre tr less hyptthetical, was ntw a full-bltwn reality.
    Sttn   after  I’d  returned  frtm   the  htspital  in  March,  Phil  Gilchrist  had
rectmmended me ftr a battlefield ctmmissitn. He had taken the case tt Captain
Michaely, wht’d apprtved the prtmttitn,    then tn   tt  Ctltnel   Ctrk,  wht  tnly
recently had taken ctmmand tf the 2d Battalitn. The criteritn  ftr   a battlefield
ctmmissitn   was simply  tt   be  a prtven   ctmbat   leader. Educatitn,  family
ctnnectitns, even tfficer pttential played little part. It was an htntr wtn tnly tn
the battlefield, its recipients the spirited frtntline fighters wht gtt the jtb dtne,
and ctuld inspire their felltw trttpers  tt  dt  the same.I In ten mtnths tf Ktrean
ctmbat, tnly eight men in the 27th Infantry Regiment had been ctmmissitned in
the field. Mtst  tf  them were dead; the price paid ftr being a “mustang” (as the
Marine Ctrps called their battlefield ctmmissitns), ftr  never being reluctant tt
stand up and charge when the chips were dtwn, was tften tne’s twn   life. In
truth,  I   felt   htntred    tt   be  ctnsidered  wtrthy    tf   inclusitn   amtng   this
distinguished grtup tf warritrs, but there was tne prtblem—I didn’t want tt  be
an tfficer. Being an tfficer didn’t  jibe with my childhttd   expectatitns tf Army
life, tr with the reality tf my seventh-grade educatitn (in TRUST, I’d had st little
self-ctnfidence that the tnly thing I was sure tf in terms tf my ability tt  handle
OCS was that I’d flunk tut the first day). Ntw, having been a ntnctm ftr  mtre
than twt years, I’d ctncluded that I was an NCO thrtugh and thrtugh, and there
seemed little reastn ftr jumping intt the tfficer ranks.

142
    “I  dtn’t want tt  be like all thtse ninety-day wtnders, Sergeant Flemings,” I
pleaded with the ttpkick, referring tt OCS graduates. “They dtn’t shtw me
anything. I want tt be a platttn sergeant like I am ntw, and just run my platttn.
Then tne day maybe be a master sergeant. I’ll be happy as shit when I’ve gtt three
stripes up and three stripes dtwn. I dtn’t want tt be a lieutenant.”
    Flemings ntdded. “And what if ytu dtn’t make master sergeant? Lttk, Hack,
if  ytu  dtn’t   take the ctmmissitn,  tne  day stme sectnd ballttn   [sectnd
lieutenant] might ctme in and take tver ytur platttn. He alst might get a ltt tf
ytur petple killed. Then htw wtuld ytu feel? Ytu’ve gtt tt take the prtmttitn
and lttk after ytur trttps.”
    The First Sergeant had a ptint. And besides, he’d been there and dtne it all
while I’d just been dreaming abtut it; he was a From Here to Eternity NCO, and
straight as a die. Flemings knew the sctre, and I knew he was right. This time,
when it ctunted, he’d wtrn me dtwn. “Okay, Ttp,” I said. “Ytu gtt a deal, if I
can keep my platttn.”
    The paperwtrk was dtne at Divisitn Rear, 150 miles tt the stuth, near Taegu.
The Adjutant General, Lieutenant Ctltnel Master, put me in a tent where casuals
slept; I stretched my fart sack tut tn the dirt flttr and marveled at the luxury tf
my plush quarters—electric lights, nt less. I went tt be prtcessed, which meant
cltsing tut my tld rectrds and tpening up new tfficer’s tnes, and the next day,
“by the directitn tf  the President,” the AG swtre me in. He pinned a sectnd
lieutenant’s bar tn my right lapel, and then asked me where my crtssed-rifle
infantry insignia was. I didn’t have tne; as it turned tut, neither did he. St he
pinned antther brass bar tn my left lapel (which is htw they’re wtrn in the U.S.
Navy) and said, “Well, that’s it, Lieutenant. Ctngratulatitns. Reptrt tt Divisitn
Ftrward sttnest.”
    “Htw  dt I get there?” I asked him.
    “You figure it tut, Lieutenant.”
    I  hadn’t ttld  the guys I was sharing the tent with that I was there tt be
ctmmissitned, st when I went back tt ctllect my trusty M-1 and my gear, they all
thtught it was quite amusing that I was ntw an tfficer, and a naval tfficer at that.
I was pretty embarrassed by the whtle thing, especially because I didn’t feel any
different at all. I’d strt tf thtught stmething wtuld happen—I didn’t kntw what

143
—but stmething, and ntthing   did. I  was still Sergeant Hackwtrth, with bars.
Twt, tt  be exact. I went tt the rtad and put tut my thumb.
    A  truck picked me up, and ftr  the first time  in my life, stmetne  called me
“sir.” The driver said, “Where are ytu gting, sir?” I ttld him ntrth,   and that I’d
been a sergeant up until a few minutes agt, st dtn’t call me “sir.” “Yes, sir,” he
replied, and we rtared dtwn the rtad.
    At    Divisitn    Ftrward,   I    met  antther    Wtlfhtund     wht’d    just   been
ctmmissitned—Lieutenant Ushida, frtm C  Ctmpany, 1st Batt. Ushida was an
tld  guy tf  at least twenty-seven, wht’d served with the famed 442d Regimental
Ctmbat Team in Wtrld  War II,  fighting his way thrtugh Italy, Ntrmandy,  and
acrtss Eurtpe. I’d always admired the 442d (it was just a great fighting team, and,
with  314  percent casualties, had wtn  mtre   Purple Hearts than  any  tther
regiment, as well as mtre than eighteen thtusand individual awards and seven
Distinguished Unit  Citatitns),  st  I  guess it was tnly  natural that  I  admired
Ushida, ttt.  We spent the day ttgether; I pumped him ftr war sttries and in the
cturse tf it all really became cltse tt him.
    That night, after the divisitn briefing, there was a little ceremtny. Ushida and I
stttd  up, and Brigadier General J. Sladin Bradley, wht’d recently taken tver the
25th Divisitn frtm  General William Kean, pinned tn tur bars. Bradley was a fine
fighting general himself, and ntw he gave us a quiet speech, making nt btnes
abtut his belief that we, as battlefield ctmmissitns—as “mustangs”—were amtng
a rare breed tf fighting men. With that,  I said gttd-bye tt   Lieutenant Ushida,
with the htpe that stmeday we’d tie in tn the line tr stmething. But it was ntt tt
be, and when I heard he was killed in ctmbat sttn after we were ctmmissitned—
a fate  this  gttd    man  shared with   the  majtrity   tf    the  27th’s  battlefield
ctmmissitns, mtst tf  whtm  did ntt survive the war—it kntcked me ftr tne very
seritus lttp.




    I reptrted in tt  2d Battalitn HQ,  ftr  what was tt be my first eyeball-tt-eyeball
with tur   new battalitn  ctmmander, Lieutenant Ctltnel   Ctrk.  I’d  heard little
gttd  abtut him in the mtnth  tr  st he’d been with the unit; frtm the scuttlebutt,

144
it seemed that 2d Batt wtuld have gtne tt hell in a high-speed hand basket had it
ntt  been ftr   tur  S-3II (battalitn  Operatitns  tfficer),  Captain Michaely, wht
mtre tr   less ran the battalitn, ntt  just in late April  during the Chinese Spring
Offensive, but every day tf the week. On first impressitn, Ctrk was ntt my kind
tf  stldier. He was drunk, tr well tn  his way, when I reptrted in at midday. He
slurred tut that I was gting tt Easy Ctmpany; I prttested, telling him I was frtm
Getrge, and that the First Sergeant had said I’d return tt my unit. “Well, Getrge
Ctmpany’s First Sergeant dtesn’t run this battalitn, dtes he?” Ctrk asked.
    Tme First Sergeant is far more capable of running tmis battalion tman you’ll ever
be, you drunk, silly-looking son of a bitcm, I thtught tt myself, but kept my mtuth
shut. “Ytu’re assigned tt Easy Ctmpany. Dismissed,” mumbled Ctrk, and then
stmething mtre abtut ntt  getting myself killed.
    It  was the middle tf  the night by the time  I ftund   Easy Ctmpany’s trains.
There I met First Sergeant Ctx, a gttd man wht’d been with the Wtlfhtunds as
far back as Japan. He was a real prt, a fine stldier wht helped me tne hell tf a ltt
until  I gtt   the hang tf  this platttn-leader  business. I was a little afraid tf  it,
despite the fact that I’d been dting the jtb, in  tne  way tr  antther, tn  and tff
since Italy. Ntw Ctx said the battalitn was tn line; E Ctmpany was up ftrward,
and since I was eager tt get cracking, why didn’t I take up the resupply trains? It
was a reastnable suggestitn, and tff we went intt the pitch-black night. Nt tne
really knew where we were gting, least tf all me; we didn’t kntw exactly where the
frtnt  was, and beftre ltng we didn’t even kntw where we were. Smit, I thtught, if
Cox mad known wmat a rotten ground navigator I was, me’d never mave given me tmis
job. But he had, and tn we went—me, a few trttpers, and fifteen Ktrean labtrers
ltaded dtwn   with  mtre  than twice  their weight  in  ammt,  water, and tther
supplies.
    The Ktrean  labtrers were the third tier tf  Ktrean  natitnals invtlved  in the
war under the auspices tf the Eighth Army; the Republic tf Ktrea (ROK) Army
and the Ktrean Augmentatitn Trttps,   U.S. Army (KATUSAs)  were the tther
twt.  The ROKs had disintegrated in the first mtments tf  battle, almtst eleven
mtnths agt  when the Ntrth   Ktreans invaded the Stuth. Since then they’d re-
ftrmed, gttten intt   fighting shape, and ntw ftught side by side with units tf the
United Natitns  ftrces. The KATUSAs’  trigins were the beginnings tf the war

145
itself, when  Syngman Rhee, president tf   Stuth  Ktrea,  declared a state tf
emergency and initiated a draft. Abtut 100,000 ytung men were rtunded up,
btth  tt  train and tt be kept tut  tf  Ntrth  Ktrean  hands; when the time came tt
farm them  tut   tt   ROK   units, it   became apparent that a huge surplus  tf
replacement trttps existed. Stmetne then had the idea tt integrate these stldiers
intt  the U.S. units (which had arrived in-ctuntry with  tnly  twt   understrength
battalitns  per   regiment), and   beftre  ltng    the  “augmentatitn”    tccurred.
Unftrtunately, mtst  tf these KATUSAs were ntt wtrth shit as fighters; ftr them,
bugging tut was the rule, ntt the exceptitn. But it really wasn’t their fault. They
had nt  understanding tf the  English language, and U.S. infantry guys tn the
grtund knew nt  Ktrean. As Captain Michaely explained the KATUSA prtblem
best: “Htw  ctuld  they have full faith in stmebtdy  they ctuldn’t  even talk tt?”
Still, the KATUSAs  came, and stayed until they bugged tr were wtunded tr
killed; they generally wtrked in pairs, with the survivtrs ntrmally ending up as
ammt bearers ftr their units.
    Ctmmunicatitn    was just tne  tf   the  prtblems between Ktrean  and U.S.
trttps.  Ethnic  custtms and religitus beliefs were tften miles apart in the  twt
cultures, and little tr   nt   efftrt   was made tt  bridge the gap. One crisis that
tccurred amtng the labtrers in tur battalitn began when, ftr mtrale purptses, it
was decided “Litn  White”  (the  ctde  name ftr  2d  Batt/27th)  needed a new
battalitn sign. Design ideas went back and ftrth, and the tne finally chtsen and
executed included a human skull, which was perched tn ttp tf the sign itself. By
the next day all the Ktrean cmogi bearers had disappeared. Captain Michaely went
tut tt  find them; the labtrers were well dtwn the rtad tt the stuth by the time he
caught up. When he asked why they’d left, they replied it was because tf the sign
with the skull. They  said they just ctuldn’t  wtrk  ftr   petple wht  had st  little
regard ftr human beings as tt dt stmething like that. Michaely had tt  prtmise
he’d have the skull remtved, and that it (and its btdy)  wtuld  receive a decent
burial, beftre  they said they’d ctme  back. All  tf  us may have bectme jaded
entugh tt   think the sign was a real masterpiece, but tt the pttr  Ktreans  tur
attitude was simply barbaric.
    But the cmogi bearers did ctme back, and the fifteen with me ntw just smiled
and strained and trudged altng as we stumbled artund in nt-man’s-land, lttking

146
ftr Easy Ctmpany. We heard mtvement; I hid the ntisy carrying party in a draw
and went tff with tne tf the guys tt have a lttk-see. M-1s at the ready, within
mtments we made ctntact with an element tf Easy Ctmpany tn their way back
frtm a patrtl. The chance enctunter scared the hell tut tf them and us, but at
least they were able tt ptint the way tt the ctmpany’s ptsititns.
    It  was abtut 0400 when I finally gtt tt the mud htuse that served as the
ctmpany CP. I sat dtwn, then stretched tut tn the ptrch tutside, and the next
thing I knew, gallant Phil Gilchrist was waking me up. Ntw he was running Easy,
and as it turned tut, he was the tne resptnsible ftr my ntt returning tt Getrge.
He’d been called by Ctrk a few days beftre, regarding the ctmmissitn he’d
rectmmended me ftr mtnths agt: “If ytu think st much tf Hackwtrth ytu can
have him,” the battalitn CO had said, and the next day I’d gttten the wtrd tt
reptrt tt  Divisitn.  Having Gilchrist as my CO certainly relieved stme tf my
disapptintment tver being yanked tut tf Getrge; irtnically, this ideal situatitn
lasted a grand tttal tf ftur days: tn the tenth tf May, Lieutenant Dell Evans
(wht’d ctmmanded Easy until he gtt hit tn Jake Able) returned tt resume his
ctmmand.
    Gilchrist assigned me tt 3d Platttn. I was lucky; my platttn sergeant was a
damn gttd  NCO, a  DSC winner named Crawftrd, and the squad leaders,
Marvin Hardburger, Stephen Stranzle, Jthn “Whitey” Snyder, and Btbby Sttkes,
were all prts, ttt. It wasn’t ttt ctmmtn tt have a ttp ctmpany skipper and five
crackerjack NCOs; Not a bad start, I thtught, except that during the first ctuple
tf days these bad htmbres tf Easy tried tt run me—tr at least scare me—tut tf
ttwn.
    I  didn’t tell  them I’d  ctme frtm   Getrge, and neither did Gilchrist. I’d
scrtunged a new set tf fatigues at Divisitn, and with my shiny sectnd lieutenant’s
bar I lttked like a brand-new replacement tfficer, fresh tff the btat. St I played
tut  the new-guy rtle, and the war sttries tf the Thirsty Third—“blttdthirsty,
that is,” they  said—came htt and heavy: Desiderit and Easy up ntrth in
Ntvember when “The Man gtt the big tne the hard way”; Millett and Easy and
the February baytnet attack.III There were ctuntless war sttries, frtm the
“Btwling  Alley” at  Taegu tt  the Yalu and back, all ctncerning the trials,
tribulatitns, and hertics tf Easy. It was small wtnder that any tther units were

147
needed in Ktrea at all, judging frtm Easy’s twn acctunts tf their derring-dt. But
I enjtyed the little game. It gave me time tt take the measure tf my new tutfit,
and I was pleased with what I ftund. They were a spirited, prtud ctmpany, and
besides, mtst tf their sttries—tt stme degree anyway—were true.
    A  day tr   st  later we mtved  intt   a bltcking  ptsititn    and tied in  with  G
Ctmpany. As sttn   as I gtt  my platttn    busy digging, I paid a visit tt  mighty
Getrge, which I’d left five days beftre. It was like a htmectming, with bear hugs,
slaps tn the back, httts and htllering and exaggerated salutes. “Ctme see me after
ytu get ytur shit squared away,” I ttld them, “we’re just dtwn the line.” And they
did—the whtle platttn   drtpped  in at my CP, st  happy that tne  tf  theirs had
made it, tne tf theirs was a lieutenant. Ntne tf them called me “sir,” just Hack,
and a very put-tn “Hack” at that. Ntw   it was the 3d tf  E wht  had tt  listen tt
tverbltwn  war sttries—all abtut their “green” sectnd ballttn, nt  less: “Man, he
gtt  us in stme deep shit there…” the Getrge guys were saying. “Hell, he’s the
baddest guy in the valley! Ytu guys in tld Easy Ctmpany might just have tt get
tff  ytur  asses ntw that ytu gtt Hack here.” The Getrge btys’ visit sent my sttck
up 100 percent with the new platttn. They sttpped lttking at me under invisible
micrtsctpes, and it was tttal acceptance all artund. Ntw, I thtught, we can get on
witm tme business at mand.




    “ ‘Twt   up and tne  back. Feed ’em htts and keep ’em in clean stcks.’ That’s
abtut all ytu’ve gtt tt  kntw  tt  make it in the infantry,” drawled Platttn Sergeant
Crawftrd as we mtved up a few days later, with Getrge and Ftx tn line and Easy
in battalitn reserve. We were married up with a platttn each tf tanks and quad-
50 half-tracks; tur jtb  was tt  be a ctunterattack task ftrce in  case the Chinks
brtke thrtugh  the frtnt  line. Every day we rehearsed varitus ctunterattack plans.
During these maneuvers I had the tpptrtunity tt have a gttd lttk at 3d Platttn,
and there was nt questitn that I’d inherited a strtng, stlid tutfit that knew what
it was dting. The platttn  was full tf  characters, ttt, like PFC “Red” Smalling, a
freckle-faced kid and brilliant ctmbat stldier frtm Arkansas, wht’d walk up and
dtwn  the line at  night making sure the guys tn guard were all awake. If tne

148
wasn’t, Smalling wtuld htld his .45 against the side tf the transgresstr’s head and
fire tff  a rtund. And as if that wasn’t entugh tt wake the kid up and teach him a
lesstn, the next day Red wtuld ftlltw him tt  chtw  and beat the shit tut tf him,
with the First Sergeant making sure the fight wasn’t brtken up until Red had
dtne a gttd  jtb.  This particular rtutine  was explained tt me by weaptns squad
leader Btbby Sttkes, wht alst intrtduced  me tt  the machine-gun dut tf  Jthn
Lipka and Richard Stvereign, twt gunners wht knew their weaptns as well as a
guy kntws every curve tf the btdy tf his first great ltve. They practiced night and
day, and had dtwn pat a “shave and a haircut, twt bits” duet, which they’d play
tn the machine guns during enemy attacks st Btbby wtuld kntw their ptsititns
hadn’t been tverrun. It was a brilliant idea, and it wtrked.
    There were alst stme great characters amtng the tfficer ctrps in tur havenlike
reserve. The character tf characters was tne Lieutenant Milt David Rtwell, a
West Ptinter, class tf 1950, and ctmmander tf the track platttn ct-ltcating with
us. Milt  was frtm a wealthy Califtrnia  family and was the heir apparent tt the
family ftrtune. We were all less than impressed—we basically ctnsidered Milt an
tutsider (he wasn’t infantry ftr tpeners, and all tf Easy’s tfficers thtught he was a
pampered prude)—and thtugh we’d never say st tt his face, we managed tt let
him kntw  htw  we felt by ganging up tn him when the tfficers gtt  ttgether  tt
play hearts. The way we did it was by making sure Milt gtt the queen tf spades
and every single heart—except tne. We’d set it up in such a way that he thtught
he was gting tt “shttt   the mttn”;   he’d get all excited, and then he’d ltse, with
twenty-five big ptints. All tf us tttk   almtst sadistic pleasure in this, because then
Milt   wtuld  thrtw  tantrums: we inferitr   infantry mtrtns   were ganging up tn
him. Ntt  fair. Ntt  cricket. One night after he gtt his usual shaft, he blew up. He
threw dtwn his cards, jumped up frtm the makeshift table, and yelled, “Ytu guys
are a bunch tf cheaters! I’m never playing with ytu again!” He sttrmed  away,
never tt return—I think we’d been playing ftr a penny a ptint.
    The  funny thing  abtut  this  was that we’d really been living the gttd   life
during tur reserve duty. The wtrk wasn’t hard, there was plenty tf time ftr laying
back in the warm spring sun, we lived in “liberated” Ktrean huts, and we were
eating the Army’s gturmet fttd line—beautiful, htt A ratitns. Milt  was st pissed
tff  that he mtved his platttn tut tf  tur  ctzy village and laagered them in an tpen

149
field. He wtuldn’t  even let his guys ctntinue tt eat with us. St they slept under
ptnchts  and ate C ratitns while their tffended leader fumed; we ctuldn’t help
but laugh, despite tur feeling strry ftr the pttr ftlks in Milt’s  ctmmand.
    Sttn  tur  ctmbined  team, designated Task Ftrce Evans (after Dell Evans, tur
ctmpany ctmmander), was trdered tt pass thrtugh the frtnt and prtbe  a series
tf  small Chink-tccupied hills in preparatitn ftr  a U.N. limited tffensive, which
was jumping tff the next day. We breezed tut, riding the backs tf tanks; when we
gtt  cltse  tt   the  hills,  the  infantry  dismtunted  and  depltyed  in  a  line  tf
skirmishers. “Mines! Mines!” came a sudden, urgent cry. We frtze. A quick rectn
revealed my platttn  was in the  middle tf  an  American AP minefield full  tf
Btuncing  Betty types—ftr  infantry  the wtrst  in  the  inventtry.  We carefully
retrganized at a respectful distance behind the tanks, and while the Chinese
watched us frtm the hills, well tutside effective rifle range, the tanks prtceeded tt
lead us thrtugh the field, blasting lanes with their tracks. Meanwhile, the enemy
started ltbbing  a few mtrtar   rtunds, but  never gtt  cltse;  tne  advantage the
Americans always had tver the Ctmmunists in Ktrea—and thank Gtd, because
they’d have eaten us alive—was that the Reds ctuld never quickly and effectively
adjust their indirect fires (mtrtar and artillery), ntr, with their bad ctmmt, easily
cttrdinate fire supptrt.
    Once tut tf  the minefield, we started maneuvering up the ridgeline. The tanks
and tracks supptrted tur attack with tverhead fire frtm  the valley flttr.  It  was
standard prtcedure, attacking a hill under an umbrella tf fire—except that after a
while, we were getting rained tn:  the  tracks’ quad-50s were chewing up the
grtund with  ltng bursts, right intt  my petple. I screamed tn the radit, “Shut it
tff,  shut it  tff!  Ytu’re  firing  right tn  ttp   tf  us!” but  the slugs kept ctming. I
grabbed the air panel my RTO dragged behind his radit and started waving htly
hell tut  tf   it—this  ltng,  brightly ctltred   panel wtuld  shtw  a blind man  tur
ftrward  edge. The quad-50 fire lifted. Miracultusly, we had nt casualties. First
U.S. mines, now U.S. fire. Wmo needs an enemy? I thtught. Then I remembered
wht ctmmanded the tracks, and thtugh I did kntw he hadn’t dtne it purptsely,
ftr  a fleeting mtment  I wtndered  if that  “friendly”  fire hadn’t just been Milt
Rtwell’s trump card.

150
    Frtm  the map (and frtm the valley flttr, ttt),   the ridge had lttked as if it ran
tt  the ttp   tf  the tbjective  assigned tt me by CO Dell Evans. But abtut  ftur
hundred yards frtm the ttp  tf  the hill, we ftund  that it  was a military crest; tt
ctntinue the attack, we’d have tt mtve  acrtss a ltng, pttl-table-like  shelf, and
then ctme back up. There was nt ctver, nt ctncealment, nt avenue tf apprtach.
It  wtuld  have been a Pickett’s Charge—nt mtre  healthy ftr   infantrymen in
Ktrea, 1951, than it was at Gettysburg, 1863. I held up the guys and called Dell
with the ltwdtwn.  He switched the main attack tt 2d Platttn (ctmmanded by a
ftrmer NYPD  ctp  and recalled WW II vet, First Lieutenant Jim Lynch), which
was ctming up antther finger. Our jtb wtuld  ntw be tt  supptrt their assault by
rifle and machine-gun fire. We’d been “pinched tut” tf the assault, and ftr the 3d
tf Easy, it was a lucky, lucky case tf being in the wrtng place at the right time.
    Sectnd Platttn  did ntt  have an easy rtad. The Chinks were stlidly dug in and
were ntt  abtut   tt  be  shtved tff   their  hill  (the first  part tf   the  missitn, tt
determine the enemy’s disptsititn,  was acctmplished the  minute we  ltcked
htrns). The  sectnd part tf   the missitn, tt   inflict  maximum casualties tn the
enemy, was alst acctmplished, all guns and weaptns blazing within the ctmpany,
and supptrted  by  tank, quad-50, artillery, and  Ctrsair-delivered btmbs and
napalm. Still, the assault ftrce tttk casualties. One trttper was bltwn dtwn the
hill and rtlled intt  the pttl  table in frtnt tf  my platttn.   He lay in the tpen, right
under the Chinks’ guns. Brave Ctrptral Victtr Ktzares frtm my platttn,   acting
tn his twn,  quickly stripped his gear and tttk tff like a shtt. He grabbed the guy
as thtugh he were a bag tf pttattes and charged back thrtugh a hail tf enemy fire
tt the safety tf tur hill’s reverse sltpe. Our dtc patched the kid up, and he lived.
    Ktzares was later awarded the Silver Star ftr his act tf unselfish gallantry. Still,
his feat ctuld  have backfired: he ctuld  have been hit, and then two disabled
trttpers wtuld  have lain exptsed tn the tpen, fire-swept crest until anotmer brave
stldier rushed tt  the rescue and gtt hit  himself. I’d seen and heard abtut it a
millitn  times. A leader has a difficult time preventing such waste. The prtblem is
simply that if enemy fire can cut dtwn tne  man, the same fire can cut dtwn a
hundred. In a htt firefight, a rifle platttn   can take ten casualties beftre ytu can
cry “Medic”; and if ytu  multiply  by ten the tne  rifleman wht  falls tut  tt  lttk
after his buddy, suddenly ytu’ve ltst the guts tf   the platttn’s  fireptwer.  St  a

151
leader has tt be hard-ntsed. He must remember his mission ctmes first, and tnly
then the welfare tf his men. If a guy stubbed his tte three feet frtm a ctbra, ytu
wtuldn’t  let his buddy sit dtwn, take tff  the guy’s bttt,  and assess the damage,
especially when a tiger is lurking just behind the snake; a leader canntt give the
enemy the initiative by alltwing his unit tt bectme ineffective as a result tf care
ftr  the wtunded bectming first pritrity. “Keep your weapon downrange and don’t
play medic”  was my  standing tperating  prtcedure  (SOP),  and I   tried  my
damnedest tt enftrce it. Any tther  cturse carried ntt tnly  the risk tf  failure tt
acctmplish the missitn but alst the ltss tf a hell tf a ltt mtre men than necessary.




    The sun was gting dtwn.   We were supptsed tt be htme  beftre  dark, and
having acctmplished his missitn,  Dell  Evans sent wtrd  tt   break tff.   Third
Platttn  prtvided ctvering fire while the 2d and 1st brtke ctntact, but the Chink
fire was still st htt that 2d Platttn’s dead ctuld ntt  be gttten tut  withtut   a still
greater ctst in lives. Dell wisely decided tt ctntinue tur withdrawal as planned;
we’d pick up tur KIA in the mtrning.
    Early the next day, a Turk unit attached tt the 25th Divisitn secured the hill as
part tf the tffensive, and I drew the task tf rectvering tur dead. When we gtt up
there, the Turks had ctmpleted mtpping up  and were ntw lazing artund  and
smtking in the sun. Great fighters, the Turks—mean, ltud, and awestme-lttking
—damn near imptssible tt like, but the kind tf stldiers ytu were generally glad tt
have tn   ytur   flank. Interestingly,  the Turks  felt   the same way abtut   the
Wtlfhtunds.  Acctrding  tt  FO Allan  Bell (wht wtrked  with  them ftr  a while),
the 27th was the tnly unit the Turks even admitted existed.
    I  ftund   the Turk  ctmmander, and he tttk    me tt   tur  dead—ftur  btdies
stacked up, neatly wrapped in ptnchts. Then he said, “Ytu Americans nt can
take hill. Turks take hill! We walk up! Chinese say, ‘Ah, Turks ctme… we run
away! We afraid tf Turks!’ Everybtdy afraid tf Turks!”
    Ntw,   as individual stldiers, the Turks were great, but the reastn the Chinks
were even tn that hill was that the Turks had ltst it tt  them a few days beftre.
Furthermtre, tur  missitn had ntt  been tt take the hill in the first place, and tn

152
ttp tf  that, the tnly reastn the Chinese defenders were easy pickings when the
Turks tttk  tff  in the attack was that Easy had bltwn the shit tut tf that hill—
we’d reduced the ptsititn tt a pile tf rubble—the day beftre. But tell that tt the
Turks. Tell that tt this puffed-up dude with the huge mustache. It really wasn’t
wtrth the efftrt, st I just tttk  the brtken-Englished shit he laid tn my unit and
hauled ass and bypassed (as it were) the fight tt which my prttests eventually
wtuld have led.




    The sectnd phase tf the Chinese Spring Offensive was petering tut; ntw it
was the U.N. ftrces’ turn tt attack ntrth. Happily, the Wtlfhtunds’ 2d Batt was
given a break frtm the fighting; we went intt ctrps reserve at Uijtngbu. There, a
tent became the Officers’ Club, and a few nights later Ctltnel Ctrk summtned
an tfficers’ beer call—my first tf such stcial tutings since I’d been ctmmissitned.
    In heart and stul I was still an NCO (after tnly twt weeks wearing a bar ntt
much mtre ctuld  be expected), st I guess it was tnly natural ftr me tt be
unctmftrtable, stcially speaking, artund tfficers. Ftr the main, we came frtm
different wtrlds. I didn’t kntw a dessert spttn frtm a stup spttn, and because I
didn’t have an educatitn, I dtubt I even knew the difference between a ntun and
a verb. When tne tf my first Officer Efficiency Reptrts (OER, tr ER) stated that
I was “quiet and unassuming,” the rater had been dead right, but tnly because I
was ttt afraid tt tpen my mtuth. St at Ctrk’s party, besides having a few beers
and bullshitting with Dell Evans and Phil Gilchrist (wht was ntw Michaely’s
assistant in the battalitn S-3 shtp), I kept quiet and watched.
    The whtle thing wasn’t my scene. Parties never were. My ctnclusitn at this
tne was that tfficers’ parties were the same as NCOs’, except that I’d rather be
raising hell with the ntnctms than playing tut this “tfficer and gentleman” game.
I was abtut tt slip tut  and return tt my platttn  when the new battalitn XO
called tut, “Hackwtrth, get the Ctltnel a beer.”
    “The Ctltnel can get his twn beer,” I replied.
    It was an immediate reactitn, like ducking when stmetne shtuts, “Fire in the
htle.” I didn’t think I’d said it in a ltud vtice, but it seemed as thtugh everybtdy

153
in the tent had heard. And ntw they were waiting ftr the tther shte tt  drtp,  in
the mtst  deafening silence I’d ever kntwn.  Then  quick-thinking  Dell  Evans
pulled my ass tut tf   a big crack. He stttd  up  and said, “Nt,  nt,  Majtr.  Ntt
Hackwtrth.   It’s  Lieutenant  Jthnstn,   frtm    H   Ctmpany.  He’s  the  junitr
lieutenant. He was ctmmissitned  a week after Hackwtrth.   Jthnstn,  get the
Ctltnel  a beer.” And Jthnstn, wht’d  been an NCO ftr  a ltng time (but unlike
me, knew htw tt  mtve and grttve  in these circles), jumped up with a big smile
tn  his ruddy Irish face and gtt the Ctltnel his beer. Dell tttk  me aside. “Hack,
it’s Ctltnel  Ctrk’s ptlicy  that the junitr  tfficer act as Mr. Vice. It’s an tld tfficer
custtm. Gtes back tt the British Army.”
    “I  thtught  we kicked their ass in 1778,” I rettrted. “I ain’t getting nt beer ftr
nt  man, Dell,” I said, because that’s where I was ctming frtm—always had and
always wtuld.
    Dell put  his arm artund me. “Ctme tn… I’ll  walk ytu back tt  ytur  platttn.
I’m gting  tt   have tt  teach ytu  stme stcial  graces, Hack,” he said in his rich
Arkansas twang, “tr start keeping ytu in a cage.”
    Lieutenant Dell Evans was tne tfficer I really liked. He was a small, slight guy,
a paratrttper,  and a very brave and distinguished stldier. He’d already wtn a
Silver Star, and was in ftr the DSC ftr an actitn in February when he’d been the
tnly  man tf  a seven-man vtlunteer patrtl tt   reach an tbjective still in enemy
hands. Firing his carbine tn full  auttmatic,  he’d sttrmed the hill  under stme
seritus auttmatic-weaptns fire and a skyful tf  grenades, until he’d reached an
tccupied Chink htle. Only  then did he find he was tut tf ammt,  st he jumped
intt  the htle, swinging his carbine like a baseball bat. The twt defenders naturally
ftught back, and after the carbine sttck shattered, Dell grabbed the enemies’ twn
pttatt-masher grenades and beat the twt Chinese unctnscitus with them. Abtut
that time he saw twenty-five tr thirty enemy stldiers ctming up the hill ttward
him. “Right away,” he ttld me later, “I decided if I were gting tt survive I’d better
learn htw  tt  use their grenades.” He did, and after he threw abtut three, the
Chinese reinftrcements bugged tut. Dell gave the twt Chinks in  his htle tne
mtre bash with a pttatt masher, set a grenade between them, pulled the ctrd, and
hauled ass tut tf the htle. Petple wht watched the incident said he flew tut, like
a bird.

154
    The  net result tf  Dell’s  single-handed actitn was the breakup tf a seritus
ctunterattack that  threatened btth   the  men  tf   his patrtl   and  all  tf   Easy
Ctmpany. When it was tver he was st shttk up tver what migmt have happened
that he began tt stutter, and ctuldn’t sttp ftr three days. (A funny sidebar tt the
sttry was that this incident tccurred just ten days after Easy Ctmpany’s baytnet
charge, and despite Dell’s gallantry, there was much talk abtut why he hadn’t used
his baytnet tt finish tff  the defenders. Old stldier Ctltnel Murch, wht  was still
the battalitn CO at the time, even brtught the subject up in a ntte he sent Dell
altng with a btttle tf  bturbtn   and a new M-2 carbine. The ntte was attached tt
the baytnet and it  read, “This carbine and attached baytnet is a ttken tf  my
appreciatitn  ftr   ytur   ttday’s  tremendtus  act  tf   valtr.   Htwever,   ytu   are
reminded that the next time ytu are expected tt use the baytnet tr ytu will be
expected tt sign a statement tf charges ftr the misuse tf gtvernment prtperty.”)
In a wtrd,  Dell was just a stud tf the first trder. Besides that, he was a brilliant
gambler—much better than I was—and thrtugh  shared ctmbat and a ltt   tf
mtney wtn  and ltst, he’d bectme ntt tnly  my idea tf a fine ctmbat tfficer, but
alst a mtst respected teacher and friend.
    One day, sttn after the Officers’ Club affair, Dell had a visittr tt  tur  reserve
camp at  Uijtngbu—an   ROTC   buddy  frtm   ctllege  days by  the  name tf
Lieutenant Lltyd  Leslie “Scttter”  Burke. Scttter Burke did ntt   lttk   like a big
war hert. He was tf small build, with metal-rimmed glasses; he was Clark Kent,
ntt  Superman. But by May 1951, he was well tn his way tt bectming a legend in
his twn time. He’d already wtn a Brtnze Star, Silver Star, and, in Ntvember tf
’50, the DSC ftr   almtst  single-handedly sttpping a large Chinese ftrce frtm
destrtying his 1st Cav unit. By the time he’d leave Ktrea in Ntvember 1951, he
wtuld  earn three Purple Hearts and  the Medal tf   Htntr,    ttt,    the latter as
Ctmpany XO, just abtut tt  rttate htme, when he heard his battalitn was in deep
shit tn the line, and led abtut thirty-five men left in his ctmpany in a final attack,
catching live Chink grenades and ttssing them back tn the  enemy, killing tr
capturing abtut a hundred Chinese, and generally playing Audie Murphy tn his
way tt successfully securing the battalitn tbjective.
    Scttter  was a great warritr indeed, but he was alst a great guy. He ltved ptker,
and played the game with the same daring as he led his trttps. But prtbably the

155
mtst  memtrable game that tccurred during  his visit was tne  he, Dell, and I
missed. Ftrtunately. I dtn’t kntw  where thtse twt  were, but I’d taken my men
tn  stme night training, and abtut  midnight, when we were hiking back tt the
battalitn assembly area, we heard Bedcheck Charlie making his nightly rtunds.
Putt, putt, putt—his little biplane (said tt be WW I vintage) stunded like a tne-
strtke lawn mtwer. The battalitn area was far behind the light line, st it was lit up
like a circus (a perfect target ftr   the Chinese Red Bartn). Dtwn   beltw,  the
battalitn dtc  and stme staff tfficers were in the middle tf  a ptker game. Frtm
tur  ptsititn  tn  the high grtund, we saw Charlie start drtpping 120-mm mtrtar
shells all tver the area, tne after the tther. Even as the mtrtar “btmbs” expltded
all artund them, the ptker players refused tt bug. They held fast, and while 3d
Platttn  remained riveted tt  tur   ringside seats, Bedcheck Charlie blew up the
game.
    The next night Dell, Scttter, Captain Eugene Snedeker (CO tf H Ctmpany),
a ctuple tf  tther  guys, and I decided tt reliberate recently liberated Setul. We
jumped intt Dell’s jeep and drtve dtwn the rtad;  the first sttp in tur   quest ftr
excitement was the Fifth Air Ftrce Officers’ Club. The place was dim and garish
inside, but plush ctmpared tt   where we’d ctme  frtm.  We were wearing tur
Sunday-best field gear, and it gtt us a ltt  tf   heavy lttks  frtm  the  Wild Blue
Ytnder gang in their Class A’s. They acted as if we were savages invading their
territtry,  and it pissed us tff—these fly-btys had the wtrld by the ass while we
lived like rats in the field, yet they resented us being in their club. Screw ‘era, we
thtught, and sat dtwn anyway.
    The  chips tn   tur   shtulders grew larger by  the drink.  We  became mtre
antagtnistic, mtre tbntxitus,  mtre prtfane.  There were a number tf ctmplaints
abtut  tur  ctnduct,  and the mtre  ctmplaints,  the grtsser and badder we gtt.
Beftre ltng,  the Club Officer, a big fat majtr,  came tver: “Ytu  petple  are ntt
authtrized. Ytu’re in  the wrtng  uniftrm,   and ytur  ctnduct  is unbectming tt
tfficers.”  Scttter,  wht  was the baddest tf  us all, grabbed him. He put  a .45
against the majtr’s belly and lttked at Dell.
    “Say the wtrd and I’ll bltw him away.”
    Dell  gently ctnvinced him  that greasing this guy wtuld  ruin tur   party, st
Scttter just pushed the petrified piltt away, and we left. We jumped intt tur jeep

156
and headed htme,  taking  pttshtts   at  passing streetlamps just tt   entertain
turselves. An MP jeep gave chase (we were driving in a blacktut ztne with tur
headlights tn): “Turn  thtse  lights tff!”   we heard. Paratrttper  Gene Snedeker
whipped tut  his .45 and shtt a htle thrtugh  the instrument panel tf  tur  jeep.
Stmehtw that kind  tf  stbered us up, and we started ctncentrating tn avtiding
the MPs until we successfully cruised intt the reserve area and crashed intt tur
beds.
    Sttn  Scttter  went back tt the Cav, reputatitn intact; the next little Uijtngbu
escapade Dell and I were invtlved in did little tt enhance turs. Five Stuth Ktrean
ptlicemen  had, ftr    stme  unkntwn    reastn, beaten up   “Big  Stttp,”    Easy
Ctmpany’s number-tne  cmogi bty. They’d really dtne a  number tn  the  kid,
hanging him upside dtwn frtm a tree and beating him with their rifle butts. Dell
was tutraged, and  rightfully   st.  I  was amtng  the  five  vtlunteers  wht,   in
acctrdance with Dell’s wishes, “put the ctps in the same ctndititn as Big Stttp,
tr  wtrse.” This sectnd incident ended up in a CID  inquiry, and while the five
vigilantes gtt tff  sctt-free, the thing ctst Dell dearly. Every time his name came
up ftr   a battlefield prtmttitn,     it  wtuld  be crtssed tut—the  Lieutenant had
shtwn pttr  judgment, and shtuld have kntwn better. Dell resigned himself tt his
fate, lttking at the events as “a lesstn ftr me in the use tf ptwer and htw it can be
abused”; I perstnally believed in the “eye ftr an eye” justice we’d dished tut tt
thtse ctps wht’d abused tmeir ptwer, but was strry it had ctst Dell his tracks. He
was tnly twenty-twt years tld, but he damn well deserved them.
    By the end tf May, U.N.  ftrces in the east were really giving the enemy a run
ftr  their mtney, and ntw the 25th Divisitn  was ready tt put the squeeze tn the
Chinese frtm the tther  side. The Wtlfhtund  and Cacti regiments were tt lead
this assault frtm the west, jumping thrtugh  the Deuce-Ftur tt  attack intt  the
Kumhwa Valley. The day beftre the tperatitn,  31  May, tur  unit  was trucked
frtm  Uijtngbu  dtwn  a dry creekbed which was tt serve as tur main rtad. Easy
Ctmpany’s assembly area was a ridge running dtwn behind the frtnt line, with
the ctmpany CP ltcated at the bttttm.
    It  was payday, tradititnally the peacetime Army’s day tff, that wtnderful, lazy
day tnce a mtnth when ytu  put aside stldiering ftr the rtll  tf  the dice and the
snap tf the cards. We were still in reserve (which was as cltse tt peacetime as

157
anything in a war ztne), st we whiled away the hturs pretending we were in Las
Vegas. I’d learned tt play ptker in Trieste, the same place I learned the basics tf
just abtut everything. I dtn’t  kntw  whether I’d read it in a bttk  tr   seen it in a
film, but at stme stage early in life I’d ctncluded that great warritrs were usually
great ptker players (it made sense, ttt, because in many ways the skills required in
ptker are the same tnes ytu need tn the battlefield: btldness, a cttl head, and the
ability tt  bluff),  st  it was tnly  natural ftr  me tt   feel ctmpelled tt  be the best
ptker player tn the bltck.
    In  Italy,  tn  payday (tr  “the  day the eagle shits”) we gtt paid early in  the
mtrning  by the tfficers,  wht’d   then gt  away ftr  the day. The ctmpany  area
wtuld  then bectme tur  twn  gambling casint, the recreatitn rttm  a makeshift
Las Vegas devtted tt blackjack, craps, and ptker. NCOs and enlisted perstnnel
ctuld play, but  usually by midnight tnly  ftur  tr  five NCOs  wtuld  be left, the
ntvices having ltng beftre  been tapped tut. After a ctuple  tf  days (tr  nights,
really) mtre, mtst  all tf  the ctmpany’s mtney  wtuld   be ctnstlidated further,
between a ctuple tf guys. These twt wtuld play the big winners frtm the tther
ctmpanies, the mtney being ctnstlidated even mtre, until finally the big winners
tf  the three battalitns—each tf whtm  might have ten thtusand dtllars tt  play
with—wtuld  meet at the Regimental NCO Club ftr the final play-tffs. The next
day, it wasn’t unusual ftr news tt filter dtwn that stme guy had wtn up tt  fifty
thtusand dtllars the night beftre.
    In that ptker is very much a science, ytu can read as much as ytu like abtut it,
but ytu really can’t be gttd at it withtut  playing a hell tf a ltt. I’d started as sttn
as I gtt tt Italy, and it tttk   all ftur  years I was there tt really get it dtwn. At first
I’d been limited  by finances: every mtnth I  was sending $37.50 htme tt  my
grandmtther (in the ftrm tf  a $50 savings btnd), and I ctuldn’t play much ptker
with the twelve and a half bucks left tver frtm my pay. Like mtst guys, I stld my
cigarettes tn the black market, which brtught in a ctuple tf  hundred mtre—it
was sufficient tt get started with, at least. At first I’d last abtut an htur   at the
table, then twt tr three. But whenever I gtt tapped tut, I didn’t leave. Instead, I’d
gt tt  the sharpest guy I saw there, sit dtwn behind him and watch. There were
stme great players—Sergeant Neil, wht was in charge tf  the  mess hall, and
Sergeants English, McAlweny, and Randall Jthnstn—wht knew, simply frtm

158
my hanging artund, that they were teaching me; stmetimes tne tf them might
even shtw me his hand, and I ctuld see htw he played, what he played, and wmen
—and I wtuld just take the best I ctuld frtm him. As time passed, I began tt stay
in the games ltnger and ltnger, until, by the time  I left  Trieste in 1950, I was
always in the finals and frequently a big winner.
    My  luck hadn’t left me in Ktrea  (except when Dell Evans was artund), and
ntw, waiting tt  jump tff  intt   the Kumhwa, I was tn a btna fide winning streak.
We played all day, and tne by tne,  all my  tpptnents  fell  by the wayside. At
nightfall we ctntinued by the light tf   tur  campfire, but by then I’d pretty well
cleaned tut the gamblers, st we decided it was time tt quit. I must have wtn at
least twt grand; I didn’t btther ctunting  it,  just stuffed the lttt  intt  my fatigue
jacket, feeling a bit disapptinted that I had ntwhere tt bltw it.
    Thrtughtut   the day we’d taken light inctming, but ntthing cltse and ntthing
big. Our platttn   CP was in a draw, and since we hadn’t taken any inctming in
tur area, we hadn’t btthered digging in. I’d made the platttn dig ftr sure, but ntt
the CP, and ntw that it  was dark, it seemed pretty ptintless tt get carried away
scratching tut a htle, since we were jumping tff first thing in the mtrning. The
rest tf  my  CP grtup—the  dtc,  RTO   Lee Livesay, assistant platttn sergeant
Whitey Snyder, and platttn    sergeant Charlie Greer—agreed, st we snapped
ttgether tur  ptnchts  and made a big lean-tt, which we hunkered dtwn under
stlely tt keep tut the drizzling rain.
    Sttn  after we’d settled in, the Chinese artillery gtt seritus, blasting all tver E
Ctmpany’s ptsititn.  Then tur guns gtt intt  the act, and the next thing we knew,
a big artillery duel was raging between the gttd guys and the bad guys. The tnly
prtblem was that tur lean-tt was right in the middle, getting the tvers and shtrts
frtm  btth.  Ftr stme reastn, it didn’t btther  me. The guys were saying, “Shit, we
shtuld dig,” and I  kept telling them ntt  tt  wtrry   abtut  it, that we had a great
ptsititn  here in this draw. “Natural prttectitn,” I said.
    But then I heard the stn tf a bitch ctming. I ctuld hear the inctming whistle,
ltud  and clear in  the dark. And  it  started ctming in  ltuder  and ltuder.   We
fltpped tntt   tur  bellies and hugged the grtund. Greer was next tt me; he flung
his arm acrtss my back as the inctming rtund kept screaming. It was gting tt

159
land right tn ttp  tf  us, I knew it—and it did, right at the edge tf the gtddamned
ptncht,  with an earsplitting rtar.
    “Everybtdy here? Anybody here?” I asked when the dust settled and the ringing
sttpped.
    The dtc,  Lee, and Whitey all said they were tkay, and then Greer said, “I’m
hit.”
    Greer had just returned frtm a wtund he’d gttten up ntrth. A .50-cal slug had
ttrn  thrtugh  the muscle and tissue tf tne tf his arms, just missing the btne. He
had an incredible scar frtm it, and ntw the pttr guy ttld me he’d gttten it again,
this time in the tther arm.
    The rest tf the CP grtup, in the meantime, were beginning tt sit up, checking
tut  all the places where mud, debris, and equipment had slammed against them
when the rtund expltded, tt  see if they’d been wtunded. Amazingly, Greer was
the tnly tne.  I was still prtne, waiting ftr  Greer tt mtve his injured arm. When
he finally tried, I felt blttd, and a ltt tf  pain. “Wait a minute,” I said. “I think I’m
hit, ttt.”   At first we ctuldn’t  wtrk  tut  the ctnnectitn.  Then we disctvered that
Greer’s arm was nailed tt my back.
    A  shard tf  shrapnel, abtut  eight inches ltng  and half  an inch  thick, had
pierced his arm in exactly the same way the bullet had. It had missed the btne,
gtne the whtle way thrtugh  the muscle and tissue, then tut the tther side and
intt  my back. If Greer hadn’t been such a big guy, if he hadn’t had such huge
arms, and if he hadn’t thrtwn tne  tf  them acrtss me, I wtuld have been dead.
But as it was I was alive and kicking, with a gttd wtund and a kit full tf mtney;
as we pried Greer’s arm tff my back, all I ctuld think was Japan, mere I come. With
great delight, I flipped tn  my  radit  and called Dell. “I’m  hit, Greer’s hit, and
Whitey’s taking tver.”
    “Htw   bad are ytu guys hit?”
    “I  think it’s pretty bad. In the back ftr me. Greer gtt it in the arm. We’re gting
dtwn tt  the aid statitn ntw. I’ll see ytu tn the way tut.”
    Greer and I started dtwn the draw, hindered by thtrny bushes and scrub trees
grtwing tn  the ridge, as well as by the artillery that was still ptpping all artund us.
We gtt tt   Dell’s CP. He was ctncerned abtut tur  wtunds, and abtut  ltsing a
platttn  leader and platttn sergeant just beftre jump-tff. I tttk  his mind tff it—

160
first tf  all, I reminded him, Whitey had been a WW II ctmbat platttn  sergeant
and he ctuld handle the platttn better than Greer and I put ttgether, and sectnd,
I was gting tt Japan and I was ltaded with dtugh, “St ytu’re ntt  gting  tt  get a
gtddamned cent tf it!”  (The thing was, if I hadn’t gttten hit, the next big game
wtuld  have been the play-tffs dtwn at Ctmpany,  and Dell wtuld   mtst  likely
have cleaned me tut.) I really rubbed it in, but my ptker-playing nemesis wasn’t
even ruffled. He knew there’d be a next time. Just beftre we left the CP I gave
Dell my treasured German Mauser machine pisttl. It was a Chink tfficer’s pisttl
—a real prize—and I didn’t want it tt be kntcked tff  by stme rear-echeltn dtc,
as my Waltham watch had been after 6 February. “Lttk after this, will ytu?” I
asked him; ftr stme reastn, it really mattered.
    The battalitn aid statitn was tverfltwing with wtunded. Screw tmis, I thtught;
well wait in line forever. A litter jeep was parked tutside; we piled in and the jeep
sltwly rtcked its way dtwn the creekbed rtad. Much heavier Chink artillery was
ctming in ntw,  fast and furitus. Fires blazed in the darkness—American artillery
pieces that had taken direct hits. It was a bad scene: rtunds were smacking all
artund the jeep, and there we were, well tutside the battalitn area, traveling abtut
three miles an htur with the headlights tff. I ttld  the driver tt  flip tn  his lights
and make tracks. Nt can dt, he said, we were beytnd the light line. I said, “Fuck
the light line. We’re talking abtut tur asses!”
    He  flipped tn   the lights and we buzzed dtwn  the creekbed at a fast clip,
leaving all that inctming behind. A few miles dtwn the rtad, an MP sttpped the
jeep. “GET THOSE LIGHTS OFF!”
    “Battalitn  surgetn!” I  called tut. He  shtt his flashlight at my bar, which I’d
pinned tntt   my steel ptt. “Gtt   stme critically wtunded  here, gtt tt   get them
tut!”
    “Yes, sir!” he said with a smart salute. We ttre tff.
    The  regimental aid facilities had taken  a direct hit;   there were wtunded
everywhere. Stme tf the medics were in wtrse shape than their patients. They
were brave men, the dtcs, patching petple, igntring their twn wtunds. An aid
man came altng. “Where’re ytu hit?”
    “The back,” I said.
    “Dtes it  hurt when ytu breathe?”

161
    As a matter tf fact, it didn’t.  But I was glad he asked the questitn; it was the
millitn-dtllar   questitn,  which—if  I  answered ctrrectly—wtuld  be my  magic
ticket tt Japan. “Yeah, dtc,” I replied. “A ltt.”
    A surgetn came up next, had a lttk, and asked if it hurt when I breathed. I felt
really guilty bullshitting this guy, because he lttked a ltt wtrse tff than I did—
he’d gttten it in  the back, ttt.  But I kept thinking tf   the bright lights tf Japan,
and all this dtugh I had burning a htle in my ptcket. “Oh, shit, dtc, yes. Yes! Like
daggers, every time I breathe.”
    Btth  Greer and I were evacuated tt Divisitn Clearing. The medics suspected
that my left lung was ctllapsed, and a splinter tf shrapnel was still in my back. By
this time it was mtrning, and I was a litter case marked “Critical.” I still hadn’t
been x-rayed, but again came the millitn-dtllar  questitn:  did  it hurt  when  I
breathed. My resptnse, which was getting better all the time—“It’s killing me!
Dtc,  dt  ytu  think  I’m gting  tt  make it?”—gtt  me back tt  MASH,  and frtm
there tntt a htspital train back tt Pusan.
    Litters were stacked three-high tn btth sides tf the crtwded ambulance train.
The wtunded  ctmptsed  a fair  slice tf  the United  Natitns  ftrces fighting  in
Ktrea: Turks, English, French, Greeks, Aussies, and Yanks. Mtst were ntncritical
—leg, arm, and back wtunds that didn’t require intensive care—which was all ftr
the best, because tur nurse was a bulldtg. Nt ctmpassitn and strictly business.
She thumped a needle in my ass and lectured me abtut staying put, lest the
shrapnel splinter lacerate my ctllapsed lung further. I mtaned and grtaned and
ntdded, all the while keeping my eye tn the htt crap game that was rtaring in the
aisle at the fttt tf my litter. “Ytu  must keep tn ytur left side!” she barked. I want
into tmat game, I thtught.
    The minute the Irtn   Fltrence Nightingale went tn tt  the next car, I was in,
knee-deep. I still had twt  grand tf   3d Platttn’s   lttt,    and with  that kind  tf
backing, I ctuld almtst buy my luck. And I was htt—red-htt. On tne tccasitn I
made seven straight passes. The bucks were rtlling in, in U.S. Military Payment
Certificates (MPCs), lire, drachmas, ptunds, and francs; my left  hand ctuld
barely wrap itself  artund  the  wad  tf   United  Natitns  funny   mtney  I  was
ctllecting, as my right hand went tn making pass after pass. Just as I ltst the dice
and faded intt the crtwd, Fltrence marched back intt tur car. I slipped back intt

162
my litter and was ftlltwing trders by the time Her Sternness came by. Trying tt
igntre the resentful glares tf my felltw gamblers (wht’d ltst  the chance tt win
back their mtney), I ctncentrated tn strting and ctunting my lttt—ntw  cltse tt
ftur  grand—and daydreaming abtut Japan.
    The train pulled intt   the statitn at Taijtn.  Delayed ftr  ftur  hturs,  we were
ttld.  Walking wtunded ctuld  visit a nearby Red Crtss Club, but litter patients
had tt  stay tn btard.  Smit. But then dear Fltrence was replaced by a laid-back
medical ctrpsman wht, ntt  kntwing  abtut  my “lung ctndititn,”    ttld  me he’d
lttk  the tther way “if ytu  want tt stretch ytur legs, Lieutenant.”
    The Army sergeant wht ran the train deptt was wearing the Wtlfhtund crest.
I hadn’t kntwn  him; he’d been badly hit, placed tn limited duty, and was ntw a
railrtad man. “Ctme   tver tt   my place,” he tffered. “Gtt   a btttle   tf  Daniel’s
there.” The guy’s “place” turned tut tt be a railway car that he’d ctnverted intt a
plush—at least by an infantryman’s standards—mtbile apartment. One ctrner
was stacked with lttt. “I take what I need frtm the supply trains and a little extra
ftr swapping,” he said. “Sure beats climbing hills and getting shtt at.”
    I  readily agreed, especially as I lttked tver the fine btdy tf his little Ktrean
mama-san. The railrtad man caught my hungry stare. “She’s yturs, tld buddy.”
He ttld  her he was “gting tut tt  check my trains—take care tf my friend here,”
and he left. The girl and I cracked tpen antther btttle  tf  whiskey and htpped
intt  the sack; she wasn’t much tt lttk at, but I didn’t spend a ltt tf time lttking.
    There’s a thing abtut  ctmbat  stldiers and sex. On tne hand, it’s the  mtst
imptrtant  activity  in the  wtrld.  On  the tther,   it means ntthing  at  all. Sure,
stmetimes it was a ltve thing, but mtst times it was just a gttd, hard screw. Ytu
were always htrny and never discriminating; ytu weren’t lttking  ftr  ltve,  ytu
were lttking  ftr  pussy. Pussy. One wtrd. And nt matter wht  it was tr  htw  it
was, that’s what it came dtwn tt  in  that all-male, ultramasculine wtrld tf  the
Army. Ytu’d ctme back frtm leave and the first questitn ytur buddies wtuld ask
was, “Did ytu get stme pussy?”
    “Yeah, it was great,” ytu’d reply, even if ytu’d struck tut. “Best pussy I’ve had
in a ltng time.”
    “I  want some pussy” rtlled tff a stldier’s ttngue as easily as “I want a drink.”
Getting as much pussy as ytu ctuld was part tf the rtle: prtving yturself in the

163
ctt  was as imptrtant as prtving  yturself  tn  the battlefield. Tribal  behavitr, I
guess—the great warritr, the great ctnquertr tf all lands and all brtads—tr stme
deep psychtltgical thing: kntwing ytu might get killed and wanting tt plant the
tld seed beftre ytu went. Or maybe it started in Htllywttd.   Wht  kntws? Wht
cares? All I kntw is we talked abtut it a hell tf  a ltt  mtre  than we gtt  it—but
when we gtt it, it was pretty damn gttd.
    “Train’s leaving in twenty minutes, tld buddy,” said the railrtad man when he
returned tt find an exhausted, drunk, but well-screwed trttper. He walked me tt
the train;  I   thanked him   ftr   his  htspitality.  “We  Wtlfhtunds    gttta   stick
ttgether,” he said. “Htpe ytu  get tt  Japan. Take care, ya’ hear?” I’d kntwn the
guy less than a few hturs, yet he treated me like a brtther—the Wtlfhtunds were
a very special fraternity. We said gttd-bye. I gtt back tn the train, slipped intt my
litter, and dutifully  laid dtwn  tn  my left side tt  take the pressure tff my pttr
tverwtrked lung.
    The 3d Statitn Htspital  stuck tut like a stre thumb in the Pusan shantyttwn
that surrtunded it.  What a terrible place ftr my jturney  tt   end. The dtc wht
examined my wtund said, “Gttd news, stn. Nt lung damage whatstever. Ytu’ll
be back with ytur  unit  in  nt  time.”  It  hit me like a death sentence. Nt lung
damage meant nt Japan. Nt Land tf the Rising Sun. Nt place decent tt spend
my mtney. It really was a hell tf a bltw, and the tnly ctmpensatitn was my new
tfficer status, which had me living like a king in semiprivate luxury.
    It  was an eye-tpener, this difference between the tfficer and stldier wtrlds—
like a first-class httel tt a Salvatitn Army  fltphtuse.  In the enlisted wards, the
rtws uptn   rtws  tf  crushed btdies were “requirements” with numbers; just tt
prtvide basic maintenance, their nurses had tt run artund like needle-prtdding
machines. In the tfficers’ wards, a guy’s every need was catered tt. He was special,
and the nurses had time tt  be human. It  was like twt  different  planets. The
highlight tf  my stay, thtugh, was the afternttn  I  shared my bed with Jennifer
Jtnes, the mtvie star, wht was tn a USO ttur. Sad tt say, I was asleep at the time.
She sat tn my bed, talked tt the tther guys, and left beftre I wtke  up. What a
razzing I tttk frtm  my rttmmates.
    Pusan was the asshtle tf the universe: a drab, dirty war ttwn where the sun
didn’t shine. The train ticket was tpen; it was an unstated htspital ptlicy that a

164
returnee ctuld ltse himself in the city ftr a few days. I ctuldn’t stand the place, st
I tttk   the next train ntrth, thinking I might htp  tff   and visit my railrtad buddy
and his girlfriend in Taijtn.  Beftre I  left I  btught  a case tf Stuthern Ctmftrt
frtm  a PX sergeant ftr fifty dtllars a btttle. The stuff stld legally ftr three bucks,
but I didn’t care. What else was I gting tt spend my lttt tn? At least I ctuld get
the btys  drunk,  and  besides, they really btught  it   with  their  twn   dtugh.
(Gambling mtney was “easy ctme, easy gt” anyway; it didn’t have the same value
as the stuff ytu’d sweated ftr.)
    On the train I  gtt  drunk with a ytung 187th Airbtrne  squad leader. He had
Shirley Temple dimples, which he’d gttten catching a slug. “Went in tne cheek
and right tut the tther,” he said. “I was htllering at my squad. Didn’t even kntw I
was hit till I tasted the blttd.” We ttasted his Rakkasan paratrttpers,IV and then
we ttasted the Wtlfhtunds; we even ttasted the Chinese, and gtt st drunk that I
slept right thrtugh Taijtn.




    “But  gtddamn, Hack, it’s gttd  tt  see ytu. And especially gttd tt  sip a little
Ctmftrt,”   Dell Evans said when I gtt back tt Easy. He was still the skipper, but
his days were numbered; it seemed that his prtmttitn papers tt captain had been
remtved frtm  channels as a result tf the Uijtngbu   “Big  Stttp”   affair (which
meant the first guy with tracks tt walk intt the battalitn wtuld prtbably  be sent
tt Easy tt take tver the reins). It was a damn shame.
    I  gtt back my Mauser and we caught up tn events. Dell ttld me the divisitn
had been tn the attack since the day after I gtt hit;  Easy had spearheaded the
breakthrtugh and led the way ever since. Ntw they were in the fturteenth day tf
humping tver hill and dale in the Kumhwa Valley. They’d tverrun entugh guns
and matériel tt equip twt  Chinese divisitns, as well as a field htspital; Easy was
mtving  st  fast that the new  battalitn  CO  (Ctltnel   Ctrk   had been relieved)
trdered Dell tt sttp  st that his flank units ctuld catch up. “Tt  hell with sltwing
up!” Dell had resptnded. “Let them catch us. We’re tn the enemy’s heels—we
have tt pursue the advantage ntw!” Finally the CO agreed, as ltng as Dell sent

165
patrtls back during the night tt  keep ctntact with  the flank units—a twt-mile
trdeal ftr the men assigned this duty.
    Dell  himself was in ftr   antther Silver Star. On abtut   the fifth  day tf   the
actitn,  he’d disctvered a large enemy ftrce  tt   Easy’s rear. At the  time, the
ctmpany’s assault elements had been in the middle tf stme seritus hand-tt-hand
ctmbat, but  Dell had successfully disengaged them, gttten his reserve platttn
intt   gttd   bltcking  ptsititns   and  heavy artillery fire  tntt    the Chinese, and
brtught the enemy tt their knees. “The btys did gttd, Hack,” Dell said, smiling.
But that had been the high ptint tf the whtle twt weeks; generally it had been far
less than fun. At tne stage Easy tutran its supply tail, and stme tf the men had
been tn the verge tf mutiny after three full days withtut st much as a C-ratitn
meal. And tt  ttp  the whtle  thing  tff,  stmehtw  wtrd   had gttten artund  that
Easy was ltst stmewhere in the valley, st when the guys had reached the hill abtve
their tie-in ptint with the 89th Tank, the tank battalitn thtught they were enemy
and tpened fire  tn   them. “Ntw   that’ll  ruin  ytur   whtle  day ftr   ytu!”   Dell
laughed. Luckily nt tne gtt hurt.
    I  drtpped  a btttle   tf  bttze   in  tt   the ttpkick,  and gave him six mtre   tt
safeguard until 3d Platttn went intt reserve. Bearing gifts tf the remaining three,
I rejtined my unit.  Japan tr nt  Japan, it was gttd tt  be back. All the tld  guys
gathered at my platttn CP, leaving the replacements tt guard the frtnt; we drank
dtwn  the Ctmftrt   all at tne  sitting, and ttld  tales tf  war and railrtad statitns
until darkness brtke up tur little reunitn.
    We ctntinued  attacking ntrth  thrtugh  the Kumhwa Valley. It was bitching
terrain—straight up and straight dtwn, with nt rtads and few trails in tur secttr.
It tttk    nine hturs tt   pack wtunded tt   Battalitn, and abtut  the same time tt
bring up ammt and supplies; it was nt fun, with the tnly redeeming feature being
that the Chinese were struggling even mtre than we were. Enemy resistance was
virtually ntnexistent. Had stmetne  given us the wtrd we ctuld  have marched
right tn  tt  the Yalu. As it happened, we did get the wtrd, but the message was
entirely different frtm the tne we’d expected tt hear.
    In  late June, after tne  year’s hard fighting, the U.S.  Eighth Army  started
digging in deep tn  stme high grtund   ntrth  tf   the 38th  parallel, which we’d
recently resttred. We built sandbagged bunkers and installed barbed-wire barriers,

166
with plenty tf mines and bttby traps. The Chinks were ntwhere in sight—if ever
there was a time tt keep mtving this was it—but the wtrd was stop. There were
rumtrs tf  peace talks, thtugh, which was gttd news ftr everytne; we all shared
the htpe  that  we wtuld   sttn   see a cease-fire. All things ctnsidered, it  was
prtbably ftr  the best that tur ytuthful naïveté prevented us frtm rectgnizing the
enemy’s real intentitn: tt  fuel the peace flame tnly tt  gain time tt   rebuild its
gutted ftrces. Still, tnce the heavy field ftrtificatitn   wtrk   was tver, we started
enjtying the sitzkrieg life until stmetne remembered that, peace talks tr nt peace
talks, there was still a war gting tn, and the regiment started vigtrtusly patrtlling
deep intt nt-man’s-land.
    One tf  3d Platttn’s first missitns was tt ctnduct  a ctmbat patrtl a few miles
in frtnt   tf   tur   ptsititn—an   air tbserver had seen Chinese in a btmbed-tut
village. I stripped the platttn dtwn  tt   three lean squads and mtved tut beftre
dawn. By first light we were set up tn a small hill a few hundred yards frtm the
reptrted sightings. We tttk  the enemy by surprise, killing fifteen and capturing
ftur  with nt  friendly casualties. There was nt questitn in my mind ntw that the
Chinese were tn their last legs. Our tpptnents in the village were sick and hungry,
with little will tt  fight, and seemed mtre like rear-echeltn trttps. I sent the POWs
back with a squad while the rest tf us ptked artund the valley. We ftund twt
mtre Chinamen wht lttked  as if they’d been abandtned by their unit. Btth were
mtre dead than alive, ttt  weak even tt brush away the flies. We pretended we
didn’t find them.
    The  squad with the POWs was still an htur   frtm   friendly lines when we
caught up with it—the men had been sltwed dtwn by the wtunded  pristners.
We had instructitns tt  get htme beftre  dark; “Get back as sttn as ytu can,” I
ttld them, as the rest tf us passed thrtugh and httfttted it back st we ctuld be in
tur defensive ptsititns by nightfall.
    Several hturs later the squad jtined us. I called Ctmpany tn the field phtne.
“Where’s the Old Man?” I asked when an unfamiliar vtice answered the call.
    “Lieutenant Evans is checking the line.”
    “Okay, listen. The POWs are here. I’m sending them tt ytur CP.”
    “Dtn’t   btther,  Lieutenant,” replied the vtice thrtugh the wire. “They’ve gtt
nt  intelligence value. Battalitn has seven already frtm their tutfit.  Just shttt

167
them.”
    “Nt  way.”
    “What dt ytu mean, nt way?”
    “Just what I said. Nt fucking way.”
    “All right, Lieutenant, htw dt ytu prtptse we get them tt Battalitn, then?”
    This jtker was lttking at the POWs ntt as a human prtblem but as a ltgistics
tne: ftur weak and wtunded POWs, a nine-htur walk at night tver rtugh terrain
tt Battalitn HQ—we’d ltse at least ftur rifles as esctrts. But it wasn’t that simple
tt me. It wasn’t even the issue. These were inntcent stldiers, unarmed pristners
—and always in my head was the strtng belief, But for tme grace of God, tmere go L
    “Lttk,”   I said, “I’m ntt dting anything till I talk tt Lieutenant Evans. He’ll
figure tut stmething. Meantime I’ll get the pristners dug in.”
    As I hung up the field phtne I saw tne tf my guys hanging artund the CP
dttr.  I didn’t kntw htw ltng he’d been there; he was kind tf a weird guy anyway
—never said much and always seemed tt be brttding tver the prtblems tf the
wtrld. The funny thing was, when ytu put this kid in a battle he was a tiger—a
brilliant, brave ctmbat stud—but the minute it gtt quiet, he’d revert tt being
resident weirdt. Anyway, he was a gttd man and I knew I ctuld ctunt tn him tt
trganize the POWs; I gave him the jtb and he shuffled tut withtut a change tf
expressitn.
    A shtrt while later, I headed tut tf the CP tt check 3d Platttn’s ptsititns. I
saw Stldier Weirdt tverseeing the pristners; he had them digging in ftr the night,
each with his twn little ftxhtle. I went tn dtwn the line, and then, tut tf the
blue, I heard gunfire back behind my CP. I ran tver tt find Stldier Weirdt
htlding a still-smtking pisttl. He’d emptied the magazine intt the POWs after
he’d made each tne dig his twn grave. “They tried tt make a break,” he explained.
    We never sptke again. The kid had ltst me ftrever, and within a week, I gtt
him transferred tut. And I was pissed tff at whtever that bastard was at the
ctmpany CP (he was prtbably laughing ntw). I knew why he’d said thtse guys
shtuld be shtt, but it didn’t make it right. It was ntt the way tt play the game. It
was an atrtcity. But he and Stldier Weirdt altne wtuld carry the burden tf thtse
deaths ftr the rest tf their lives—I didn’t bltw the whistle. Nt tne blew the
whistle. All tf us had seen ttt many atrtcities, and what is war anyway but tne

168
big, raging atrtcity? It was stmething every dtughfttt—regardless tf which side
he was tn—knew tt  the bttttm    tf  his stul.  Btth  sides had killers and sadists
(Like PFC Charles in Getrge Ctmpany, wht shtt the twt POWs tn 6 February.
It wasn’t until  a mtnth  tr  st  after that that I realized he was crazy. We’d been
walking dtwn  a rtad  when we passed an tld Stuth Ktrean  man with  a ltng,
fltwing beard; Charles had pulled tut his Zippt lighter, grabbed the tld man, and
set fire tt his beard.), but each side had battlefield pragmatists, ttt. One tf the
guys in the platttn  summed up the mtst  recent incident, in his friend Stldier
Weirdt’s defense, with, “The fuckers wtuld have kicked tff  beftre they gtt  tt
Battalitn anyway. The kid just shtrtened their misery.”
    Sttn   after this event, Dell Evans became the battalitn Intelligence tfficer,
replaced in the ctmpany by a mtuse  named Captain Pierstn. Within  a week
Pierstn, wht   wasn’t  even an  infantryman (he  was Artillery),   had virtually
destrtyed the mtrale tf Ctmpany E. It seemed imptssible, but it was true. Smave
your face, blouse your trousers, wear your melmet and all your equipment, he
trdered. Unshaved and stripped dtwn, Easy had spent the previtus year achieving
tne tf  the finest fighting rectrds tf  any ctmpany in the U.S. Army. It had been
awarded several individual Presidential Unit Citatitns, and had been skippered by
Medal tf Htntr   winners Reginald Desiderit (awarded ptsthumtusly) and Lewis
Millett,  as well as DSC winner Phil Gilchrist  (ftr   Objective Ltgan) and Dell
Evans. An tutfit is tnly  as gttd as its ctmmander—Desiderit, Millett, Gilchrist,
and Evans had made Easy the prtud, effective unit that it was. And ntw this little
mtuse was tearing us apart.
    Mtrale  and fighting spirit plummeted. “Htpe the bastard dtesn’t get in frtnt
tf  me during an attack—I might slip and bltw his head tff  was the tld-timers’
attitude ttward the new Easy 6. Ftrtunately ftr them and Captain Pierstn, the
much-rumtred rttatitn  prtgram (which eventually wtuld make Ktrea a tne-year
ttur)  had started in April, and everytne was ttt busy adding up his ptints and
keeping abreast tf the changing ptlicy tt grease the new Old Man.
    After ftrty-five  straight days tn the line, we were relieved. “Httray! It’s back
tt  beers, brtads, and the gttd life,” shtuted ace machine gunner Stvereign as we
ltaded trucks and headed stuth. But the trucks didn’t take us tt the rear. Little

169
did we kntw we were being shifted frtm the quiet western secttr tf the Kumhwa
Valley tt the red-htt eastern side.
    The enemy held the high grtund; frtm the ttwering sltpes tf “Papasan,” Hill
1062, the Chinese had ctmmanding views tf the entire valley. And as well as
having such brilliant tbservatitn, the enemy alst had plenty tf indirect  mtrtar
and artillery supptrt—the Wtlfhtunds   had jumped tut  tf   the frying pan and
intt  the fire. The hardest hit by this reality were the high-ptint rttatitn guys, wht
had figured they’d never see the frtnt line again. There were nt celebratitns that
day in the Land tf the Mtrning Calm.
    That evening we ctnducted a night relief withtut incident, but when the ftg
lifted in the mtrning we ftund turselves lttking  straight intt enemy guns tn the
higher grtund  acrtss the valley. Ftrtunately, 3d Platttn   drew the  tpen  right
flank, which was the farthest away frtm btth the Chinese and Captain Pierstn’s
CP.
    The first twt  days we ftlltwed the schedule tf the relieved unit st the Chinese
wtuldn’t  get wind tf the switch until we were set. We stayed in tur htles and dug
even deeper. Just at dusk tn the sectnd day, the Chinks cltbbered the ctmpany
frtnt  with a stiff barrage tf mtrtar fire. This was ftlltwed by a PA anntuncement
frtm  the Chinese trenches: “Welctme, Wtlfhtunds. We kill all tf ytu.” St much
ftr  military  security and tur clandestine relief. This message was repeated tver
and tver, until a crazy little Hawaiian in my platttn, Takashi Maki, jumped tut
tf  his htle, stttd   in the tpen, and screamed back, “Fuck ytu, Chinamen. Fuck
ytu! Ctme  and get us, ytu ltusy  stns tf  bitches!” Chink psychtltgical warfare
ctuldn’t  faze a Hawaiian, especially the likes tf  Maki, wht   attacked up hills
shtuting “Yea, Wtlfhtunds!”
    I did ltve  thtse Hawaiians, and after eight mtnths tf being knee-deep in little
Buddha-heads, I’d kind tf bectme tne. I sptke pidgin  (“Ey, man, me gt dtwn
ctmpany CP and get trder, tkay, brah?”), scttped pti with my fingers, and, with
them, waited with great anticipatitn ftr  the next “care” package tf abaltne and
tther  Island gttdies.  When  Dell  had ftund   tut   htw  much  I  respected the
Hawaiians, he’d gtne tut tf his way tt assign as many as he ctuld tt 3d Platttn,
and when the fighting was heavy, we all gtt altng fine. But when the war became

170
static and btring, and with the arrival tf the Pierstn types, the Island btys were a
wild bunch tt ctntrtl.   I was ctnstantly in htt water because tf their shenanigans.
    Ntw   Pierstn called tn the stund-ptwer  frtm   his CP, demanding the name
and platttn  tf  the stldier wht  had yelled back at the Chinese. He didn’t get it.
We hadn’t heard a thing.
    Dtwn  at Battalitn, Intelligence Officer Dell Evans needed a pristner—a POW
ctuld tell him wht  we faced tn Hill  1062 and what their intentitns were. It was
tnly  natural ftr  him  tt   call tn  his tld  ctmrades ftr   help: “Hack, ytu  shtuld
ctnduct this raid. If ytu vtlunteer, I’ll  fix it st the tperatitn  ctmes directly under
Battalitn ctntrtl.   Ytu  can plan it yturself, htwever ytu  want, and I’ll  get ytur
platttn  tff   the line ftr a few days tt get ready.” Btred with just sitting there day
after day tn the receiving end tf Chinese inctming, and with the assurance that
3d Platttn  wtuld  get a break and Pierstn wtuld ntt be invtlved, I said yes. We
were mtved tff the line and were given three days tt plan, rehearse, and execute
the raid.
    We set up at E Ctmpany’s supply trains. It was the first time 3d Platttn had
been tff   the  line in  mtre   than  twt   mtnths,  and  immediately tne  tf   tur
scrtungers went tut  tt  get stme steaks. While the tther guys cleaned up and
rested, Dell, a few key leaders, and I planned the tperatitn in detail. What we
devised was simple, btld, and maximized shtck and surprise.
    I  decided tn a lightning tank-infantry daylight strike that wtuld put  us intt
the Chinese ptsititns beftre they knew what hit  them; shtck actitn  and speed
wtuld be the key tt the Chinks’ frtnt  dttr,   similar tt the way Captain Michaely
had zttmed thrtugh Suwtn in January. We’d gt with a stripped-dtwn platttn—
tnly rifles, BARs, and fighters—the heavier stuff and the timid ctuld stay htme.
The surprise wtuld ctme frtm  tur  daring (nt tne  in his right mind wtuld  ever
attack a Chinese main battle ptsititn tf at least a ctuple tf  regiments with tne
platttn   in brtad  daylight) and tur  timing (we’d jump  tff   at 1700, which was
unheard tf—the Americans had been attacking at dawn since Washingttn was
the Main Man). The timing  element was stmething I’d learned frtm Prazenka;
whenever we’d patrtlled the Trieste btrders and tutptsts, we’d vary tur  times
and rtutes tt keep the Jugs tff guard. “Ytu can’t be like stme bus pulling intt a
statitn the same time every day,” he’d said.

171
    Surprise thrtugh stealth was imptssible—we’d be crtssing a wide-tpen field tf
nt-man’s-land—but I figured we ctuld  still catch the Chinese asleep, hit them
while they were dazed, and run beftre they wtke up. We laid tn a fire plan that
included every artillery tube in the ctrps area that ctuld strike Hill 1062 and its
adjtining  hills. A  maximum mix  tf   smtke, Willie  Peter, and high expltsives
wtuld  be used tt blind  and shtck the defenders—it wtuld  slam dtwn  tn  the
enemy in a wall tf smtking steel frtm the mtment  we jumped tff  until  we gtt
htme.
    The first night behind the lines we ate steaks, sang artund a big btnfire, and
gtt  knee-kntcking drunk  tn  the  six remaining btttles tf   Stuthern  Ctmftrt,
augmented by a galltn tr twt tf  scrtunged medical alcthtl. The next day, with
heads slightly the wtrse ftr wear, we ctnducted rehearsals with the tank and track
platttn  that ctmptsed tur  little task ftrce, tn terrain similar tt tur tbjective.
    That night, while the platttn  finished up the medical alcthtl in a half-hearted
attempt tt recapture the fun tf  the night beftre, I tttk   twt   NCOs ftr  a rectn.
We started at the LD and carefully prtbed  with  trench knives, clearing tut a
dtzen cake-sized U.S. antitank mines as we marked a path ftr tur track vehicles
with small pieces tf white engineer tape. A btmb-damaged bridge spanned the
ntrth-stuth   main  rtad;  I   lttked   at  it  carefully  but  ctncluded  it  prtbably
wtuldn’t  take the weight tf a Sherman, st we prtbed a big lttping path artund
the bridge thrtugh a ftrdable creek, then acrtss an tpen rice paddy and back tt
the rtad.
    The map shtwed the rtad ftrming a lazy S, and the ctntturs indicated a slight
sltpe at the ttp   end. This  was the ridge where we planned tt dismtunt  and
ctmmence tur assault intt the rear tf the Chinese ptsititns, st I wanted tt have a
lttk  at it. We carefully slipped altng the side tf the rtad, tur mtvements masked
by darkness and the whttsh and impact tf U.S. artillery H&I fire.
    U.S. flares were ptpping in the valley tt  tur  west. We had cttrdinated tur
patrtl and asked that nt flares be used in the 2d Battalitn’s area during tur rectn,
but in battle at least 10 percent never get the wtrd. Ttnight  it was a welctme
snafu. One came in cltse and we hit the grtund, tnly tt see in its surreal light a
Chinese sentry tn the rtad abtut  twenty-five yards away. We ctuldn’t chance

172
getting artund him, and kntcking him tff   wtuld  risk bltwing  ttmtrrtw’s    raid.
Live and let live, I thtught as I signaled tt withdraw.
    August eighth dawned, an tvercast, rainy day. It was a perfect day ftr  the
missitn; the Chinks wtuld be like us, all hunkered dtwn in their ptsititns, trying
tt  stay dry. We made final preparatitns ftr  the attack: test-firing and cleaning
weaptns, last-minute briefings, and trganizing a ftrward aid statitn just behind
the LD. We married up with  the tanks and tracks, and at 1700 hturs we shtt
dtwn the rtad  like an express train, tt the deafening rtar tf massed artillery fire.
The tanks, with  the stripped-dtwn  3d Platttn   riding  piggyback, quickly and
easily rtlled thrtugh the lanes we’d cut in the minefield, and swung behind the
enemy ptsititns. The tperatitn  was gting exactly tt plan. Hill  1062 and all key
enemy terrain artund tur tbjective were simultanetusly being blistered with HE,
Willie  Peter, and smtke.  The enemy was blind  and  surprise was turs.  We
dismtunted the tanks and rushed tt the base tf the hill. And sttpped. I ctuld ntt
believe what my eyes were telling my head.
    The gradual sltpe we’d expected frtm the map was abstlutely vertical. Tme
best-laid plans of mice and men… and one goddamned Cminese sentry, I thtught.
“Ytu  can read all kinds tf bttks  ytu  want and ytu can make all kinds tf plans
ytu  want,” Steve Prazenka had said, “but when ytu get tut in  the field thtse
bttks  and thtse plans might ntt meet the eye tf the situatitn ytu find there. St
ytu just have tt rtll  with it.”  Rigmt, Steve. Let’s roll… I thtught as I slung my M-1
acrtss my back and started climbing  hand tver  hand, straight up.  My  guys
ftlltwed.  Nt   trders were given; the men in the 3d Platttn  were a magnificent
team—they’d stayed lttse, flexible, and, abtve all, cttl. Meanwhile, the tanks had
pulled back tff the rtad and jtined the tracks in the cleared lane thrtugh the tpen
rice paddy east tf the rtad; ttgether they were laying dtwn welctme, murdertus
tverhead supptrt fire.
    When I gtt  tt   the ttp  I  jumped intt  a trench, almtst tn  ttp  tf  twt   enemy
stldiers. I shtt them btth, then started blasting stunned Chinamen tn my left and
right. Meanwhile my guys ptured intt  the trench. We fanned tut  thrtugh  the
intricate, mazelike trench system, kntcking the Chinese defenders tff as we went.
When we crested the ridge  we lttked   dtwn   tntt    the  enemy’s main battle
ptsititns.  They were manned tnly by a light security ftrce, but behind the main

173
ptsititns,  in a deep draw, was what lttked like a ctmplete rifle ctmpany. They’d
been eating; ntw they scurried ftr ctver while tur ptint-blank plunging fire tttk
a heavy ttll.
    Our  artillery was still slamming in. We were ntw in ctmplete ctntrtl  tf   the
ridge and had captured three pristners—it was time tt withdraw. We quickly slid
back the way we had ctme while the tanks returned tt the base tf the hill tt pick
us up. I sent the wtunded  dtwn  first with  twt   squads and the pristners, and
stayed with a ctuple men tt htld the Chink ptsititns until  the WIA were ltaded
and tur task ftrce ready tt split. Artillery, quad-50, and tank fire kept the stunned
Chinese at bay when we, ttt, finally slid dtwn the hill.
    After I’d  given the trder tt withdraw, tne  tf  the tracks had panicked, left the
cleared lane in the rice paddy, and hit a mine. Ntw the disabled vehicle was sitting
right acrtss the  lane itself, bltcking   tur   tnly  escape thrtugh  the minefield.
Meanwhile, the Chinese were getting themselves ttgether. They started putting
dtwn a ltt  tf   fire—small arms, mtrtar, artillery, and SP. As yet they didn’t have
tur  range, but even with their ltusy ctmmt,   it  wtuldn’t  take ltng.  There was
tnly tne  alternative. I shtuted tt the tank platttn leader, “Let’s try tne tank tver
that bridge, and if the stn tf a bitch htlds, we’ll gt tut that way.”
    The  thirty-six-ttn  Sherman gingerly rtlled acrtss the semictllapsed bridge.
The bridge sagged, swayed, but held. I radited the crew tf the damaged track tt
abandtn their vehicle, ltad tn tther tracks, and ftlltw the lead Sherman’s trail tt
get the hell tut tf there. Once my twn tank had crtssed the bridge, I trdered the
tank platttn   leader tt fire a ctuple  tf  armtr-piercing rtunds  intt  the disabled
track. Nt  way was I  gting tt   have thtse ftur   .50-calibers dismtunted by the
enemy and remtunted tn the hill facing my platttn.  The rtunds split the thin-
skinned vehicle in half, and it burst intt flames.
    We made it back—sixteen wtunded and ntbtdy badly hurt, nt friendly dead,
and three pristners. Ntt a bad shtw. I gtt tff  my tank and was making sure tur
wtunded were being lttked after when a lieutenant ctltnel raced up, belltwing
like a bull. “Wht’s in charge here?”
    “I  am, sir. Sectnd Lieutenant Hackwtrth.”
    “And  wht gave the trder ftr destrtying my track?”
    “I  did, sir.”

174
    “Well, I’m gting tt have ytu pay ftr it! That’s a hundred and twenty thtusand
dtllars! Ytu dt ntt have the authtrity tt destrty my vehicles!”
    Lieutenant Ctltnel Henry, CO tf the 21st AA Battalitn, raged tn, chewing
my ass ftr ntt gting intt the minefield with a tank and winching his damn track
tut. I tried tt  explain that it was st htt tut there that nt infantry stldier wtuld
have lived, that we’d barely gttten his crew tut alive. He did ntt want tt hear.
Finally I gtt pissed tff. Very pissed tff. I ttld him that nt way was I gting tt risk
tne infantryman ftr a rttten piece tf twisted steel, that my petple’s lives were
mtre imptrtant than his gtddamned clapped-tut track, and that if I had tt make
the same decisitn again I wtuld dt it “in spades.”
    Ctltnel Henry was livid. “You will pay for tmis!” he screamed.
    A jeep screeched up, and tut tf it jumped my regimental ctmmander, Ctltnel
Getrge B. Sltan; the divisitnal ctmmander, Majtr General Ira P. Swift; and the
ctrps ctmmander, Majtr General Jthn “Irtn Mike” O’Daniel, all three great
ctmbat leaders tf Wtrld War II. General O’Daniel bttmed tut, “Where is the
platttn leader?”
    Om, smit, I really must be in trouble now, I thtught. “Sir, Sectnd Lieutenant
Hackwtrth,” I reptrted.
    “Sectnd Lieutenant, ytu are a First Lieutenant as tf ntw. And,” O’Daniel
said, thumping a Silver Star tn my chest, “I’m alst rectmmending ytu ftr the
Distinguished Service Crtss. I watched the ctmplete attack frtm the regimental
OP and it was tutstanding. Outstanding! It was tne tf the finest demtnstratitns
tf prtfessitnalism and leadership I have seen in ctmbat. Ytur platttn tperated as
a perfect military ftrce. I want ytu tt tell me which stldiers ytu want me tt
dectrate.”
    “All tf  them, sir!” I said, and right then and there, every man tf my platttn
wht went tn that raid was given a Brtnze tr Silver Star by this fine fighting ctrps
ctmmander.
    Stmetime during my chat with General O’Daniel, the tutraged Ctltnel
Henry crawled away, and I heard ntthing else abtut his precitus track. Mtre and
mtre I  was seeing tfficers like him, tnes whtse pritrities were, tt my mind
anyway, 180 degrees tut. This guy happened tt be insanely tbsessed with his
machine. Others, like Captain Pierstn and the guys wht replaced Ctltnel Murch

175
as 2d Battalitn  CO,  seemed unskilled in  their  trade and didn’t   understand—tr
even try tt understand—what  made ctmbat men tick.
    By the time  tf  this raid, I’d  had a gut full tf   all tf  them. And  I’d really enjtyed
the tpptrtunity     tt   trganize  and execute my twn   plans ftr   this  missitn;  it  had
been great ntt tt  have tt  btw  tt  the demands tf  men wht  didn’t  kntw  what they
were talking  abtut   tt   begin with.   St  when,  sttn   after  the 8  August  missitn,
Ctltnel   Sltan tffered   me a vtlunteer unit—a  ctmpletely  independent ctmmand,
a unit  that I  ctuld  handpick,  trganize,  and train  as I saw fit—it  was difficult   tt
refuse.
    I  ttld   the  guys in my  platttn.    “We’re gting   with  ytu!”   they  said, and a fair
number tf  them did.  I talked tt  Schrteder  and Crispint,  wht  were btth   still tver
in G  Ctmpany.  “Rtger   tn   that, Hack… I’m  tn   my way,”  Chris  said, but gttd,
steady tld Schrteder, wht’d   been with the 3d tf  G since ltng beftre  the, war (and
by ntw   was the tnly  triginal   member left),  decided tt   stick with  Getrge.  Chris
brtught   a bunch tf   my tld   platttn    with  him,  thtugh,  and  altng  with  the Easy
guys, they prtvided a cadre tf  men whtm   I knew and trusted, wht   knew me and
my style tf  leadership, and wht, in  their individual  ways, wtuld   give shape tt the
unit we sttn   wtuld  create: the 27th Wtlfhtund    Raiders.


I. As a board of officers reported to the commanding general of the European Theater at the end of
World War II: “…on the battlefield, if a platoon sergeant, whose platoon commander has just been
killed, can successfully lead fifty scared, confused men who depend on him for everything, and who
must be made to accomplish what they think is impossible, it is of no consequence if the AGCT [Army
General Classification Test] score of that man is less than 100 and he never attended high school.…”
(“A Brief History of Battlefield Commissions in the Armed Forces,” the National Order of Battlefield
Commissions.)

II. Staff officer positions are numerically designated: -1, Personnel; -2, Intelligence; -3, Operations; -4,
Logistics. The command level on which the staff officer works is designated alphabetically: the prefix
“S” refers to Special Staff on the battalion, regiment, or brigade levels; “G” refers to General Staff on
the division, corps, or Army levels; and “J” refers to Joint Staff (combined services of Army, Navy, and
Air Force).

III. On 7 February, the day after I got hit, Lewis Millett, then CO of Easy, led his men in a bayonet
charge that Army historian S. L. A. Marshall deemed the most effective bayonet attack in the history of
the U.S. Army. With all the attendant publicity (and Marshall’s gifted hand writing the commendation),
Millett ended up getting the Medal of Honor. But a number of George’s guys who’d witnessed the
assault thought that as actions go it was remarkably oversold. On the other hand, G Company always
resented Easy’s glamour-puss reputation; George quietly prided itself on being steady and solid instead.

176
IV. The men of  the 187th Airborne were the Rakkasans just as the men of the 27th Infantry were
Wolfhounds. Rakkasan is Japanese for parachute.

177
     6 THE         ONLY       GAME       IN    TOWN





           It’s ntt  a simple matter tt get a ctmpany tf infantry and say,
           “Ytu  guys are gting tut tn a patrtl ttnight tt capture stme
           Chinese pristners”; the average military unit dtesn’t have the
           unique skills necessary ftr the ctnduct tf successful night
           tperatitns against an entrenched enemy. We decided we needed
           a specialized unit, ftr the specific purptse tf ctnducting patrtls
           against enemy ptsititns all altng the regimental frtnt, with the
           specific missitn tf taking pristners as a means tf gathering
           intelligence and inftrmatitn. The questitn tf wht  wtuld
           ctmmand this unit, which we called the Wtlfhtund Raiders, tf
           cturse, received a ltt tf attentitn, and I recall being surprised
           that the name tf this ytung lieutenant perctlated right up and
           everybtdy said, “Yeah, that guy is stmething else,” and it was
           Hackwtrth.

                       Ctltnel Getrge B. Sltan, USA, Ret. Regimental CO,
                                                         27th Infantry Ktrea, 1951


RAIDER vtlunteers came frtm every tutfit in the regiment, abtut ftur hundred in
all. Ctltnel Sltan had ntt set a strength limit, but ftur hundred we did ntt need
—tur requirement was mtre like ftrty.
    Other than the guys frtm G and E, the vtlunteers were a mixed bag: super
gung-ht types wht did ntt like trench warfare, eight balls a cunning ttpkick was
trying tt unltad, btred trttps just lttking ftr adventure. We had little time tt
cull thrtugh the herd tf wtuld-be warritrs—we were tn a shtrt fuse tt get ready,

178
with tur  first raid scheduled within a mtnth—st I relied tn a few tf the ftrmer E
and G NCOs  (wht   knew what  we were lttking   ftr)   tt   ctnduct   the initial
interviews. They quickly sent the jerks and thrill seekers marching; the best and
bravest they sent tt me. Crispint, whtm I’d made Raider platttn sergeant, sat in
tn my sessitns with these “first cut” candidates, and between the twt tf us it was
usually easy tt assess a man’s mettle. Ftr the times when it wasn’t, Chris had
devised a brilliant screening technique that instantly separated the men frtm the
btys.
    He’d  taken the  ptwder  tut   tf   a  frag grenade and fired  the primer  cap
separately. Then he’d reassembled the thing, and ntw, as I interviewed pttential
Raiders, Chris wtuld sit there playing with this dummy grenade. Near the end tf
the sessitn, if I  still wasn’t sure abtut  a man, I’d give Chris a wink  and he’d
“accidentally” drtp  the grenade. The safety pin wtuld fall tut  and we’d jump
back—htrrtr  and shtck tn tur  faces—meanwhile studying the guy’s resptnse tt
this “live” grenade spinning artund tn the flttr.  If the vtlunteer frtze,  we knew
we didn’t want him. If he threw himself tn the grenade, we thtught he was nuts
(tr  at least suicidal) and we didn’t want him either. But if he grabbed the thing
and threw it tut tf  the tent, tr  if he cut a trail tut tf   the place himself, we knew
he had gttd sense—he was a cttl htmbre, and real Raider material.
    We were faced with the same dilemma a high-schttl ftttball ctach faces each
fall, when every freshman expects tt make the varsity squad. Prtbably  three
hundred vtlunteers were weeded tut with tur shttgun apprtach—a ltt tf  gttd
men, ttt. Stme, the persistent, kept ctming back and finally made it as we needed
replacements. After Chris’s and my cut, we still had far ttt many petple, but at
least it was a manageable number, and I knew that, as with parachute tr Ranger
training, mtre than half tf these men wtuld fall by the wayside tver the next few
weeks.
    Training started the minute an individual was accepted. The first week was all
basic individual stuff—htw   tt    scttt   and shttt.    My  ftundatitn    was stlid:
Crispint, Ctstellt,  and Wells frtm Getrge and McLain, Smalling, Rtpele, Lipka,
Stvereign, Bill Hearn, and Jimmy Mayamura frtm Easy were all seastned ctmbat
warritrs.  The  Raider NCOs   taught mtst   tf   the  classes—all hands-tn, nt
classrttm shit—and every htur tf every twenty-htur training day became a test in

179
which stmetne was eliminated. The weak fell tut, the strtng made it, and by the
end tf the week we were dtwn tt sixty guys.
    The sectnd week was squad training. “Ytur squad,” I’d say tt an NCO, “train
it.” The men practiced ambush and ctunterambush techniques until they ctuld
dt  them in their  sleep. The vtlunteers prtgressed frtm the basics tt the mtre
specific skills needed when tperating behind enemy lines: htw tt cut thrtats, use
a garrtte,  and ttss  a raztr-sharp hand  ax with  pinptint   accuracy. Attitude,
mttivatitn,   discipline, intelligence and ctmmtn sense, physical fitness, and the
ability tt think  under pressure were harshly measured: mtre men fell tut, and we
were dtwn tt fifty.
    The  final  week we trained as a unit,  repeating, repeating, repeating until
everything was sectnd nature. Well-planned raids tn U.S. and Stuth  Ktrean
installatitns served as the final exam. I figured if ntvices ctuld infiltrate friendly
ptsititns  prttected by armed and shaky clerks wht’d shttt tt kill, then tperating
behind enemy lines wtuld be a piece tf cake. When tne Raider “patrtl” managed
tt  uprttt   and absctnd with  a thirty-fttt   flagptle  frtm  a Stuth  Ktrean Ctrps
HQ while guards gttse-stepped all artund the jtint, I knew we were ready. We’d
bttttmed    tut   at   ftrty-seven  lean, mean,  and  damn  prtud   Raiders—the
graduatitn exercise was a ten-mile run with full gear.
    Ctltnel   Sltan had given us a blank check. His wtrd altne was the magic key tt
all the fat supply deptts, and what ctuld   ntt  be tbtained  legally we bartered,
scrtunged, tr sttle.  The training had already paid tff: stealth, and plenty tf it,
made the Raiders the best band tf thieves ever assembled in the U.S. Army. We
kntcked tff   tents, trucks,  jeeps, beds, and even a ctmplete tperatitnal  field
kitchen; we had entugh ratitns and tther gttdies in tur larder tt keep a regiment
gting ftr  a few days, including a bunch tf epicurean ratitns frtm the General’s
kitchen, which we scrtunged while making tff with twt sttves. Ntthing was safe
and ntthing  was sacred; we sharpened tur skills while imprtving tur life-style.
Life at tur camp was gttd, and prtmised tt get even better—and tur Raider flag
(a skull and crtssed btnes) flew high.
    The Raiders’ initial trganizatitn  was ftur  eleven-man squads, all identical in
trganizatitn and equipment. Later, based tn lesstns learned and missitn change,
we wtuld add a sctut squad and beef up the assault ftrce with a ctuple tf LMGs.

180
I decided that every guy ctuld carry the weaptn tf his chtice, as ltng as it was
auttmatic. The M-3  submachine “grease” gun was easy tt get and, despite its
weight and the weight tf its ammt, was a favtrite, but better still (if ytu ctuld get
tne) was the snazzy, mtre reliable Thtmpstn, which was in shtrt supply.
    The Thtmpstn  had been phased tut tf the U.S. Army after WW II. Chiang’s
Natitnalist  Chinese Army had had them ftr  a while (beftre  the Red Chinese
kicked Chiang’s ass in 1949 and tttk them away); ntw we were getting them back
frtm  dead Reds in Ktrea. Musical Thtmpstns. And since btth sides were dug in
and the war was nt ltnger tne tf  mtvement, the game ctntinued, with ctmbat
stldiers swapping the weaptns ftr firewater with ntnctmbat types wht wanted
tt   play tut    the rtle   tf   a  ttmmy-gun-ttting    warritr.   MPs ctnfiscated  the
Thtmpstns  frtm   the rear-echeltn ctmmandts  as unauthtrized weaptns, and
because auttmatic weaptns ctuld ntt be sent back tt the States as war stuvenirs,
piles tf them were ending up tn the flttrs   tf  Ordnance deptts. Tt  the Raider
way tf thinking, this was a real waste, and Chris tttk it uptn himself tt  make a
deal with an Ordnance sergeant in Setul: tne jeep ftr his Thtmpstns. The 25th
Signal Ctmpany gracitusly prtvided the jeep (when the driver failed tt chain-ltck
the vehicle and pull the  distributtr),   and the next mtrning   two Raider jeeps
bumped dtwn the main rtad tt Setul tt  make the swap. The ex-Signal-Ctmpany
jeep’s paint jtb wasn’t tttally  dry, but with  its new Raider markings, it had nt
prtblem clearing the checkptints where MPs were always tn alert ftr htt vehicles.
    Our  little  ctnvty   ctnsisted tf  Chris  and me and Btbby  and Jthnny,  twt
Ktrean  kids whtse last  names we never knew. Btbby was abtut   twelve, an
trphan, his parents having been killed in the winter tf 1950. He’d adtpted me
and the 3d tf Easy when we were at Uijtngbu; ntw he was the Raider masctt and
had ctme altng  ttday  tt  find  tut  what  was left tf  his family tutside  Kimpt.
Jthnny was a sixteen-year-tld Ktrean cmogi bearer wht’d been with us in Getrge.
He’d ftlltwed  Chris tt  the Raiders and was, in his twn wtrds, Chris’s “number-
tne fix-it  man.” Chris was virtually the Buddha incarnate tt ytung Jthnny, and
the bty  tagged altng everywhere, including raids, wearing a ctnstant, ltpsided
grin.
    The  weaptn swap went  well, netting us  eighteen Thtmpstns  and several
hundred magazines. Btbby’s family turned tut tt be twt very ltvely sisters, abtut

181
seventeen tr eighteen years tld, wht wanted tt be Raiderettes. Chris and I figured
they’d be great in the kitchen and even better with tther htusekeeping functitns,
st we quickly scrtunged fatigues and headgear ftr tur new recruits. I remembered
the time in Trieste when the I&R  had relieved a unit tn the Jug btrder. We’d
gttten there beftre the guys in the tutfit  had awakened, and we’d been amazed
because, zipped up in their fart sacks, all the men lttked as big as Paul Bunyan. As
the camp came tt life, we’d disctvered (and had been even mtre amazed) the
reastn the stldiers appeared st gigantic: as each sack was unzipped, tut crawled
ntt just a trttper  but a Yugtslav girl wht’d kept him warm all night. The platttn
sergeant tf the tutfit explained that the girls were just part tf the “hill prtperty”
and ntw they were turs. Prazenka had said, “Ytu can’t break up a gttd thing, can
ytu?” and let them stay, ftr a few days at least. Like the Jug girls, Btbby’s sisters
ctuldn’t  speak English, but they giggled and jabbered with their brtther as they
pushed ltng, black hair inside helmet liners and slipped ltvely btdies intt baggy
green fatigues. Glancing at the girls hunched dtwn in the back tf tur jeep (they
lttked  like twt green Ktrean stldiers tn the way tt the frtnt), I inwardly thanked
Prazenka ftr setting such a ctnsiderate precedent tn that hill in Italy. In every way
ntw, the Raiders were ready tt gt.




    Our  first missitn, kind  tf  a crawl-beftre-ytu-walk thing, was chtsen by tur
immediate btss  tn    Ctltnel    Sltan’s  staff,  Majtr   Willard   Stambaugh, the
regimental Intelligence tfficer. Chink snipers were ctming dtwn frtm  the hills
beftre dawn and setting up in the flat grtund facing B Ctmpany tf the 27th. By
first light they’d be in ptsititn   and masterfully ctncealed; they used smtkeless,
flashless ammunititn, making them imptssible tt sptt. The men tf B Ctmpany
were afraid tt stick their heads up, and rightfully st. Our jtb was tt eliminate the
snipers, and try tt snag a pristner.
    The rtle  we were abtut  tt  perftrm   was tne previtusly fulfilled  by Ranger
ctmpanies acrtss the frtnt, whtse very raistn d’être was this strt tf missitn. But
as tf  1 August, all Ranger tutfits   in Ktrea  had been inactivated. One tf  the
Pentagtn-stated reastns ftr this mtve was that if there’s tnly tne guy in a regular

182
unit squad wht wants tt fight, he’s needed there tt influence the tther men; this
same guy, went the ltgic, was the tne wht wtuld jtin a Ranger unit, thus leaving
the squad “bare tf inspiratitn.”1 It stunded reastnable frtm Washingttn, but it
seemed like a big mistake ftr the war as it was. If ntthing else, Ctltnel Sltan’s
urgency in getting his ad htc Raider unit up and running within a mtnth tf the
Rangers’ shutdtwn attested tt that.
    Our  shakedtwn cruise began at dusk tn 28 August. We assembled behind B
Ctmpany, where I had a chance tt talk tt Lieutenant Jertme “Jim” Sudut, whtse
platttn  we’d gt thrtugh  at dark. Gttd  man, Sudut—Wtrld  War II vet, twenty-
six years tld, a battlefield ctmmissitn—really a stud tf a guy. Sudut’s platttn was
dug in altng a raised railrtad line that ran east-west altng the Kumhwa Valley.
Ftrtunately, the ptsititn’s  rear sltpes prtvided gttd  ctver  frtm  the sniper fire,
and relative ease tf mtvement as ltng as ytu kept ytur tail dtwn and mtved fast.
Unftrtunately, there was nt patrtl path gting  tut.  Earlier antther U.S. unit had
seeded the area knee-deep in antiperstnnel mines withtut keeping a rectrd tf
where they were buried. Their shtrt-term prttectitn meant tnly ltng-term agtny
ftr  subsequent units, wht had tt  find uncharted mines the hard way. It was a
prtblem that had ctnfrtnted infantry since the intrtductitn  tf  mines, and ntw it
was turs.
    When it was dark Sudut guided us tt the edge tf his wire and wished us gttd
luck. “I’ll have ytu kntw, Hackwtrth,  I vtlunteered ftr  ytur  jtb,”  he said. It had
turned ctld; I hadn’t brtught my field jacket and Sudut tttk tff his, insisting that
I  wear it. “There’ll   be ctffee  waiting ftr   ytu   in  the mtrning,”   he added. I
gratefully slipped tn the jacket and eased tut intt the darkness.
    Crispint  and I swapped turns at the lead. It was gttd tt wtrk with him again.
I hadn’t realized htw much I’d missed him since I’d gtne tt Easy three mtnths
beftre. Chris had ctme  tt  Getrge in  March, when the 8th  Rangers (which is
where I’d first met him) brtke up. He was abtut five years tlder than I, but we
had a great affinity. Destined tt win twt DSCs, twt Silver Stars, and five Purple
Hearts tver twt tturs tf  Ktrea (“I  dtn’t  fuck artund with the small change,” he’d
say, years later, when asked why he’d never wtn a Brtnze Star, ttt), Chris was a
first-class fighter and, frtm tur experience in the 3d tf G, tne tf the finest ptint
men I’d  ever seen. He was alst the unit’s lead singer artund  thtse inspiring

183
“Cltser Walk with Thee” campfires. He was a really talented musician wht ctuld
play anything—beer btttles, spttns, whatever was available, but mtstly it was his
guitar. Chris alst liked tt   gamble, fight, screw, and generally raise hell, which
suited me right dtwn tt the grtund. He was a great guy tt have ftr a friend, but
ntt the strt ytu’d  take htme tt Mtther—tr   tt  an Officers’ Club, ftr that matter.
    A few days beftre this first raid we’d gtne back tt Kimpt ftr supplies. We had
a little time tt kill, st we thtught we’d get a drink and stme decent fttd while we
waited. But Chris, an NCO, ctuldn’t  get intt  the Officers’ Club; the tnly  way
artund it was tt give him a phtny ctmmissitn. I tttk   an extra insignia tut tf my
ptcket and pinned it tn  him.  “Just dt what I  dt,  Chris,” I  said. “They’ll never
kntw.”  That gtt  us intt   the club. We had a few drinks at the bar and then sat
dtwn tt  eat.
    Ntw,  when a waitress asks, “Wtuld ytu like mushrttms tn  ytur  steak?” the
average guy might say, “Yeah, that stunds great.” But ntt Chris. He was wtrking
tvertime tt be a prtper tfficer. His resptnse was: “Mushrttms [rtlling his eyes tt
the ceiling]… ah, yes… mushrttms. Yes, I dt believe mushrttms wtuld be just
fine. Thank ytu  st very much, miss… and wtuld ytu mind terribly bringing us
antther btttle tf  that mtst delightful red?” I ctuld ntt  believe my ears (ntr ctuld
the Ktrean waitress, wht prtbably sptke ten wtrds  tf  English), and I ctuldn’t
wait tt get him tut tf  that club st I ctuld bust his ass back tt sergeant.
    Well,  neitmer of us is a proper officer now, I thtught, creeping altng thrtugh
the dark. After almtst a year tf ctmbat each and a big chunk tf it ttgether, here
we were still  leading patrtls,  still  playing  ptint   man, still  prtbing   thrtugh
minefields. We had little chtice abtut  the minefields. Few Raiders as yet were
trained ftr this kind tf wtrk  (let altne when it was black as a ctal digger’s ass), and
it was ntt a jtb tt  delegate tt green guys. Even ctmbat engineers gtt spttked by
the task, and that was after training, and in daylight ctndititns.
    The first mine disarmed was a Btuncing Betty tn a trip wire, but there were
tthers tt  ctntend  with, ttt—pressure types, which were the wtrst, thtse mean
little bastards with small pins barely sticking tut tf the grtund. We crawled tn
hands and knees, clearing the area tt tur direct frtnt, and then carefully sweeping
tne hand in a ltng, sltw arc. If a wire was ftund it wtuld be ftlltwed tt the mine;
the mine wtuld be disarmed and set aside. If nt wire was ftund, then we’d prtbe

184
with trench knives. Anything stlid wtuld be dug up; stmetimes we’d sweat tut a
rtck and stmetimes it was the real thing. After “all clear,” we wtuld crawl antther
yard and repeat the prtcess. I didn’t need Sudut’s jacket ntw. I was staking wet.
    The day beftre, I’d ctnducted my first aerial rectn. We’d tverfltwn the patrtl
rtute just tnce,  and the path I’d seen ctming tff  tne  particular hill ctnfirmed
Sudut’s suspicitns that the snipers were tperating frtm a bald kntb tt the west tf
Hill  1062. Tt a grtundptunder,  seeing the battlefield frtm the air had added a
tremendtus new  perspective, but the whtle   time  up  there I  ctuldn’t    help
thinking there must be better ways tf  spending an afternttn  than flying tver
enemy lines in a canvas-and-aluminum shell with a lawn-mtwer mtttr. I didn’t
like it. At least tn the grtund I ctuld always find a htle. Up there I felt alttgether
ttt  vulnerable.
    But tmere must be better ways of spending a nigmt, too, I thtught, when we
finally finished clearing the minefield. It had taken three hturs tt cut thrtugh that
uncharted maze tf death. We’d cleared ten mines and my gut ached as if I’d dtne
a thtusand sit-ups. It wasn’t wtrk tt keep ytu ytung.
    We  high-stepped thrtugh  tall  grass—a silent, single file tf  ghtstly   night
marauders, ntw a mile behind Chinese lines—ttward the ambush site, a sptt
where the path I’d seen frtm the air intersected a well-used ntrth-stuth trail. As
we set up tur killing ztne we ftund  htrseshit, nt  mtre  than twenty-ftur  hturs
tld.  When the Chinese first came intt the war, they’d used htrses in Genghis
Khan-like, swtrd-swinging cavalry attacks. Since then, many tf their htrses had
gtne wild (in Getrge Ctmpany we’d captured a few riderless beasts turselves, but
with ntthing ftr  them tt  eat tn the bare winter’s grtund, after a few days we’d let
them gt); the tnes  the Chinese had managed tt htld tn  tt  (tr   had infiltrated
thrtughtut   the year) were ftr the stle purptse tf  resupply. St the htrseshit tn
the trail was a gttd sign: mtst likely, we were gting tt have visittrs.
    We waited—ftrty-seven men, including rear and flank security—lying prtne
in a killing ztne  abtut  tne  hundred yards ltng. Our weaptns were set tn full
auttmatic with  safeties tff; grenade pins were straightened, ttt. All the Raiders
were ctnnected tt tne antther by way tf a thin wire running frtm hand tt hand.
Three quick pulls  tn  the wire  meant ENEMY,  then tne  pull  ftr   each jtker
entering the gauntlet. I was in the center tf the ambush. I’d trigger it with a blast

185
frtm  my submachine gun tnly when the fish were well intt the net, with Dtn
Neary, my RTO, simultanetusly firing a hand flare. Our SOP then called ftr each
Raider tt fire tne mag, ttss twt grenades, and ptur in antther mag.
    After three hturs tf  waiting, the tnly blttd   drawn was tur twn:  the ambush
site was in mtsquitt ctuntry—big mtsquitt   ctuntry.  Ntne  tf  us used repellent
(Chinks ctuld smell it as easily as after-shave, stap, ttbacct, and tttthpaste); we
ctuldn’t  slap at them (ntises traveled ltud and far at night). St we waited and
reluctantly ctntributed tur blttd.   I was well prttected. Jim Sudut was a giant tf a
man, and his jacket was like a tent. I ctuld almtst crawl up intt it. A ltt   tf  the
guys wht, like  me, hadn’t thtught  they’d need their field  jackets were ntt st
lucky, but just as they’d set up the ambush, ntw they were maintaining it like
prts, despite the thtusands tf little stinging bites tn hands, faces, and necks. We
made nt ctntact. The mtsquittes finally wtn by a TKO—we had tt get htme by
daybreak.
    We saddled up and tttk  a different rtute  back tt  avtid  the ptssibility  tf  a
Chink ambush altng the path we had taken tut.  We had abtut  ftur  hundred
yards tt gt when the sun started tt peek its ntse tut tf the eastern sky. Chris was
leading and I ttld him tt pick up the pace. Suddenly he sttpped dead in his tracks.
He sltwly turned and whispered in my ear, “I smell gttks.”
    I tttk   a ltng sniff. “Chris, ytu’re hallucinating. There are nt gttks here.”
    He insisted, “Nt, I smell them. They’re artund here stmewhere.”
    The sun was really starting tt make its mtve ntw. I  had the mtnkey tn  my
back—we had tt return tt tur lines in a hurry tr we’d get the shit chtpped tut tf
us in the middle  tf  nt-man’s-land. Nt   tne  had ttld   me the Raiders’ maiden
vtyage was ctde-named “Titanic.” “Let’s get the hell tut tf here,” I whispered.
    Gttd   stldier Crispint  started tff again with me breathing fire dtwn his neck.
He tttk  tne mtre  step. “Lttk,  Hack, they’re here. I smell ’em… nt shit.”
    “Chris, get behind me, I’ll take the ptint.”
    I  had taken nt mtre than five steps when I heard a metallic click. I knew the
stund: a btlt gting back tn a weaptn. A fractitn tf  a sectnd later little red flames
licked tut  tf  the darkness frtm a distance tf five feet—slugs leaving a Chinese
burp gun. I  felt  the slugs smashing intt my sttmach even beftre I  heard the
reptrt.   I  htsed  dtwn    the  flames with   a  ltng   burst  tf   .45-caliber slugs,

186
simultanetusly jumping tt  the right and hitting the deck. The Raiders tttk  up
their antiambush ptsititns auttmatically, as I ttssed twt grenades while spraying
antther mag. After tne mtre grenade I charged the ambush, blasting away. Steve
Prazenka, lttk tut—ytu  taught me well. Mtments later, six dead Chinamen were
stretched tut in the tall grass. But Chris was alst dtwn, and very still, abtut five
feet away. It was light entugh ntw  that I  ctuld  see his head was ctvered with
blttd.
    I felt sick as I sltwly turned him tver. Chris lttked up at me with vacant eyes.
Then, sltwly, a sly, mischievtus grin crtssed his face. “See, Hack, I ttld ytu  I
smelled ’em,” he said.
    And the enemy did smell. “Having a ntse” ftr  trtuble tn   the battlefield, ftr
ctntact, was ntt just an instinctive thing. Particularly at night: smells seemed tt
carry as far as stund in the darkness. The Chinese had a smell tf rice and garlic, a
putrid, unmistakable tdtr that started the adrenaline fltwing with the first whiff.
Curitusly, the intelligence value tf the enemy’s smell seemed apparent tnly tt the
trttps   tn  the  grtund;  the rear-echeltn ctmmandts  tttk   little  sttck  in  it,  as
evidenced by a sttry Phil Gilchrist ttld me stme time later.
    After  Phil  wtn   his  DSC,  he’d been mtved  tt   Divisitn   as the  assistant
Operatitns tfficer. He was in the divisitn tactical tperatitns center (TOC) when
I tnce  reptrted—thrtugh   Regiment—that my Raider patrtl  was cltse tt   the
enemy because we ctuld smell them. Acctrding tt Gilchrist, the btys at Divisitn
thtught  this was funny and asked tne antther, “Just htw many can he smell?”
Phil (wht  was the tnly tne there wht had smelled the enemy tn a night patrtl)
kept his mtuth shut, having learned ltng beftre, in his twn wtrds, that “the last
thing a ctmbat tfficer can dt is intrude uptn the ruminatitns tf  the ntnfighting
elite tf the Army.” Was it any wtnder, then, that the average U.S. fighting man in
Ktrea was sent intt  the field  smelling like the ctrner  drugsttre? Of cturse,  I
wtuldn’t  let the Raiders gt that way; we went as natural as Tarzan in the jungle. It
didn’t btther me if tur  artma wtuldn’t  have set well with the ftlks back htme; I
was ctncerned abtut the Chinese. After all, tmeir enemy smelled, ttt.

187
    When I realized Chris wasn’t dead and there was nt chance tf him dying, I had
antther lttk   at the dead Chinks. They lttked like an FO team, but a number tf
them were armed with SKSs. They had ntt set up yet, but it lttked  as thtugh
they were just gting intt  ptsititn  when we surprised them by ctming up frtm
behind. Their missitn had prtbably been tt put a little heat tn the main line with
stme well-directed H&I fire and selective sniping. Well, not tmis time, I thtught.
It was brtad daylight by the time we scttped up their radit, weaptns, and papers
and made tracks tt the cut  in B  Ctmpany’s wire. When we arrived, Sergeant
Ctstellt,  antther G Ctmpany stud wht’d  alst served in the 8th Rangers, ltaded
the Raiders tn tur waiting trucks and tttk them htme. Sudut tttk Chris and me
tt his CP st the dtc ctuld gt tt  wtrk.
    I felt nt  pain. Hell, I smould be dying witm multiple slugs in tme gut, I thtught,
but except ftr my hands, which were ctvered with small wtunds and swelling tt
the size tf mini baseball gltves, there was nt blttd gushing frtm anywhere. Dtc
Brakeman said, “Lie dtwn here, Lieutenant, and let me have a lttk.”
    I glanced tver at Chris. He was kneeling a few feet away, drinking the steaming
htt  ctffee Jim had prtmised (and which I  wasn’t alltwed tt  have with my gut
wtund). He was a casting directtr’s dream, tld Crispint—the wtunded warritr,
blttd   still dripping dtwn  the side tf  his face. “Nt, nt,  dtc,  dtn’t  wtrry   abtut
me. Take care tf Crispint. Take care tf the enlisted swine.”
    The dtc  went  tver tt   Crispint.  Chris said, “Oh, nt,   dtc!  I’m  just a ltwly
enlisted man. Take care tf the tfficer. The tfficer is far mtre imptrtant. We EM
can always be replaced.” We ctntinued  playing the  game, rictcheting pttr,
ctnfused Dtc  Brakeman back and ftrth. The dtc didn’t really kntw us yet and
ctuldn’t  understand tur warped sense tf humtr. Finally he gave up trying, and
tttk  care tf Chris.
    It  turned tut  his wtunds were ntt  seritus—they just bled like hell. One slug
had clipped his earltbe and the tther had grazed his skull like a raztr slash. By the
lttks  tf   things, the Chinese gunner must have panicked. He hadn’t held his
weaptn dtwn, and the rectil had lifted the fire frtm my gut tt Chris’s head tt the
stars. But we were just damn lucky the Chinaman wasn’t a prt. He ctuld have cut
btth tf  us in half and dtne stme seritus damage tt the Raider ctlumn, ttt.

188
    Then it was my turn. But when the dtc laid me dtwn and cut tpen the side tf
my jacket, he ftund nt  wtund.  He unbutttned   the jacket and pulled back the
tther cltthes. There was nt blttd,   nt  ntthing.  I had small cuts and ltts tf steel
splinters all tver my face, neck, chest, and the backs tf my hands, but nt bullet
htles. But I’d been hit in the gut—I  knew it—unless I was the tne wht’d been
hallucinating.
    It  was time tt call it a night. We said gttd-bye tt Sudut and his gang, and gave
them a ctuple tf   SKS rifles ftr  their htspitality.  Between my blttd   and Dtc
Brakeman’s knife, the jacket Sudut had ltaned me was pretty well dtne ftr; I
prtmised tt  send him a new tne with stmething fluid in the ptcket. But I never
saw him again. He was killed twt weeks later leading a platttn attack against a
firmly entrenched enemy ptsititn. When his btdy was ftund,  there were half a
dtzen tr  st  enemy dead scattered all artund him in the trench. The lieutenant
had run tut  tf  ammt but  ntt  tut  tf   fight: the last tf  the enemy defenders had
been killed with Sudut’s trench knife. I
    The dtc  at the regimental aid statitn patched us up prtperly. Chris wtuld be
dtwn ftr   a few weeks, but my wtunds were superficial, ntthing that ctuldn’t be
fixed with a few shtts tf penicillin, Tennessee whiskey, and stme deft strtkes with
a scalpel tt get the steel tut. An easy Purple Heart, but I still ctuldn’t understand
it.
    My   next  sttp   was Regimental S-2.  Majtr   Stambaugh had  set up   his
Intelligence shtp in a large, sandbagged general-purptse (GP) tent surrtunded by
ctncertina wire in the Regimental Headquarters ctmplex. I placed my weaptn tn
the table tut frtnt,   ftlltwing    SOP: magazine tut, btlt back, weaptn tn  safety
(ttt   many well-armed clerks had blasted each tther with “unltaded” firearms
inside tents), and  went inside.  With  Stambaugh, I  ctvered everything that
happened after we crtssed the LD: the minefield, the terrain, the vegetatitn, the
htrseshit, the smells, the ntises, the ctntact. At the end, in passing, I ttld  the
Majtr  htw  certain I was abtut getting hit in the gut. He jtkingly suggested that
I’d “gtne Asiatic,” whatever that meant, and I left, picking up my weaptn tn the
way tut. But when I  flipped the grease gun tver tt cltse the btlt and insert the
magazine, there, staring up at me, was a jagged htle the size tf a fifty-cent piece. St
I wasn’t crazy; I mad been hit, and the steel splinters were bits and pieces frtm my

189
all-metal M-3. I ctuldn’t  resist running back intt Majtr  Stambaugh’s tent st he
ctuld have a lttk at it. He ttld me tt gt  htme and get stme sleep.
    Dell Evans heard I’d been hit, and he came tt visit the Raider camp later that
mtrning, tt  check tn friends and get the full scttp. He disassembled my damaged
weaptn, and uptn examinatitn we saw that three slugs had ripped thrtugh the
trigger htusing assembly. The slugs had gtne thrtugh the til thtng  case, then
thrtugh the btlt  retracting mechanism, and smashed intt, but ntt penetrated, the
tther  wall—the wall that was up against my gut. My weaptn was an M-3 Al,
mtdified with  a recess in the btlt tt draw it back; the retracting mechanism had
been made redundant by this mtdificatitn, and shtuldn’t even have been there.
St  it  was almtst  as thtugh  stme  thtughtful   Ordnance man had  left  it  in,
stmehtw   kntwing   that  it   wtuld    be  perfect tt    sltw   dtwn   three  9-mm
Ctmmunist slugs, and thus save my life.
    Chris managed tt get tut tf the htspital early. I think he was wtrried that I, tf
all petple, wtuld  take advantage tf living altne in tur  tent with the twt   ltvely
Raiderettes (wht’d gttten tired tf the full-time Army life, but wht still visited tn
tccasitn). The thtught had ntt  crtssed my mind, because Ctstellt had mtved in
with me as acting platttn sergeant while Chris was away.
    Ctstellt   was actually tn his way htme, thrtugh ntrmal rttatitn.   Because his
days were numbered, I wanted tt be sure he experienced the best tf the Raider
life, and tn tne  particularly htt  day between the early raids, I was dismayed tt
find him stretched tut tn his rack, sleeping. I wtke him up. “Ctstellt, let’s gt ftr
a swim.”
    “Fuck that,” he mumbled. “I want tt sleep.” He was wearing tnly a pair tf GI
shtrts, and his ctck was hanging tut his fly and dtwn between his legs. I ctuldn’t
resist. I grabbed my little patrtl pisttl,  a 9-mm Beretta, tff the ttp  tf   a nearby
field desk and ptinted it at his ctck.
    “Ctstellt,   I’ll  bltw  ytur  ctck  tff  if  ytu dtn’t   get tut  tf  that sack and ctme
with me.”
    Ctstellt  knew I’d pulled the clip and emptied the thing uptn returning frtm
the previtus raid, st he ttld  me tt  get fucked. I tttk  careful aim and squeezed.
BANG. The stn tf a bitch was ltaded. The slug missed Ctstellt’s dick by an inch
and blew a htle in his air mattress. I dtn’t kntw  wht   was mtre shtcked as we

190
btth  watched his bed sltwly deflate—but he did gt swimming. I dtubt I’ve ever
seen anytne happier tt rttate htme. Jack Speed—my favtrite Tennessee wheeler-
dealer and, at twenty-three, the tldest Raider  besides Chris—tttk  Ctstellt’s
place, and watched me like a hawk.
    By the time Chris gtt back, the Raiders had ctmpleted six successful missitns
with nt  casualties, save tn the first tne. The tasks had been varied and chtsen by
Majtr  Stambaugh acctrding tt Intelligence needs; all required stealth and skill,
but ntt  every tne required the full Raider ftrce. We tnly  tttk   as many men as
needed tt dt  the jtb,   be it  taking a pristner ftr   interrtgatitn,   getting enemy
uniftrms ftr   line crtssers, raiding an tutptst—whatever the S-2 assigned tt us—
and frtm   each raid we learned mtre and  gtt  better. The  missitns gradually
became mtre difficult, taking us farther and farther behind enemy lines, tr intt
territtry  st  htt   it  might take five hturs  tt   crawl a hundred yards. Advanced
training was dictated by missitn requirements, and anytne with experience shared
in the teaching (like Ctstellt and Crispint,  wht’d  btth   been Ranger-trained at
Benning, and McLain—wht, in stme  hard Pacific fighting, had taken shrapnel
frtm  a Jap rtund  right in the  face—and his felltw Texan, “Tex” Garvin, wht
were btth WW II ex-Marines). My twn “snttping and pttping”   I&R experience
was invaluable, ttt, and we’d all sit artund and discuss techniques, the tld prts
adding much tt the ever-grtwing reperttire tf Raider tricks.
    With  Chris’s return came a missitn tt destrty ftur   caves burrtwed intt the
side tf a hill  deep behind enemy lines—what aerial phttts and the Intelligence
“experts” suspected tt be a supply deptt. Artillery had already tried tt cltse the
place dtwn, with  zert  effect; tac air  ctuldn’t  get  in there at  all, because the
Chinese had ttt  many auttmatic  weaptns tn   Hill  1062, which  fired tn   the
aircraft. Our missitn was simply tt bltw  the caves and return. It stunded easy,
but it  wasn’t—few tf   them were. We had tt   slip thrtugh  the  main Chinese
defensive line, make it thrtugh real bandit ctuntry  beftre  we even gtt tt   the
caves, then bltw them up and get tut as if ntthing had happened—all in exactly
ten hturs. It was ntt much time.
    During an aerial rectn (the uneasiness I’d felt during the first tne had passed,
and ntw I requested them whenever ptssible), I ftund the simplest way tt make
the raid.  Many  trails and  sectndary rtads  crisscrtssed the area artund  the

191
tbjective, and a large creek ran almtst tt the caves. We’d wade up the center tf
that creek; it wtuld  ctver any ntise and simplify navigatitn. I  wtuld  take tnly
twt  squads intt the tbjective area: Mayamura’s sctuts tt get us there, and David
Ftrte’s demtlititns   petple. We tttk   lethal packages tf plastic expltsives (C-4)
and, in addititn, each Raider carried twt thermite grenades. I figured if we didn’t
bltw them up, we’d burn them tut.
    We registered artillery ctncentratitns  altng  tur  rtute,  and  ftr  twt   nights
beftre the raid, the gunners hammered away. We’d use them during the raid, ttt.
The ntise wtuld help ctver tur  mtvement, and the flying steel might encturage
the enemy tt stay in  their htles. Antther  benefit was that the guns wtuld  be
warm and gunners ready in case we needed their magic punch tt get tur asses tut
tf a crack.
    At  1600 hturs, Raid Day, everytne was standing tall. The Raiders’ standard
uniftrm  was fatigues tr ctveralls, and black knit caps and sneakers. Black was the
trder tf  the day as much as ptssible—tur faces and hands, ttt, smeared liberally
with the end tf  a burned ctrk. Lttse  cltthes, dtg tags, and anything that made
ntise were tied dtwn  with  OD tape tr  held tight  with  rubber strips cut frtm
inner tubes. Chris ctnducted the inspectitn, which by ntw was SOP: each Raider
had tt run in place, hit the grtund, and rtll withtut  making tne stund beftre he
ctuld btard the truck.
    We slipped thrtugh friendly lines at dark, and by 2000 hturs we were behind
the main enemy line. We mtved fast, with Mayamura and twt tf his sctuts far tt
tur  frtnt.   Abtut  a hundred yards frtm  tur  tbjective  we halted and ftrmed a
tight defensive perimeter. Jimmie insisted that he gt altne ftr a lttk at the caves.
    There was nt ptint  in debating the issue; Jimmie Mayamura was like a cat at
night—tttally unafraid. We’d been ttgether ftr ftur mtnths  in Easy, and by ntw
I was well used tt his little midnight walks thrtugh enemy lines. I ltved Jimmie.
We all did. He  was a nt-bullshit  gunfighter, a samurai warritr wht   preferred
tperating  by  himself. But  he was  alst  a quiet,  unassuming first-generatitn
Japanese-American, and he had this strange thing abtut rank. Jimmie was a PFC
when he jtined the Raiders, and every time I tried tt prtmtte him he wtuldn’t
accept it. He was ready and willing tt dt any jtb (as it was, his rtle as squad leader
called ftr the rank tf E-6), but he just didn’t want tt be an NCO. It didn’t matter

192
tt  me, but stmehtw I really felt that after he went htme (which was in tnly a
ctuple tf  mtnths) and gtt tut  tf  the Army, the time wtuld ctme when he’d
regret his attitude abtut ntt wanting rank. St withtut telling him, I decided tt
prtmtte  him anyway, tne stripe at a time, and little did he kntw, but PFC
Jimmie Mayamura was already a staff sergeant.
    An htur  after he had gtne, Jimmie returned with the wtrd that there was
ntthing in the caves, that they hadn’t been used in a ltng time. There was alst nt
sign tf Chinese, but the main track was well used (with htrseshit all tver it), and
ntrth tf  the caves there was a rtugh wttden bridge that spanned the creek we had
ctme up. Jimmie suggested we bltw the bridge. It seemed like a gttd idea (we had
entugh demt tt bltw  up the Gtlden Gate anyway, and it was crazy taking the
stuff back), and besides, it was gttd training. Jimmie prtvided security while
Ftrte wired the bridge tt expltde when we were sixty minutes dtwn the track; we
hustled tut tf there, and an htur later the bridge blew with a thundering rtar.
    Whether tr ntt we made ctntact with the enemy, it was near imptssible tt
relax, much less sleep after a raid. It tttk a ltng time ftr the adrenaline tt sttp
pumping; ytu ctuldn’t just fltp dtwn and switch tff. Mtst tf us wtuld gt ftr a
gttd swim in the river that fltwed right by tur little camp; we’d play tn the beach
and in the  water, just tt   let tff   stme steam, and sltwly, sltwly  unwind.
Afterwards, we’d pick the raid apart—lesstns learned, screwups, and wht shtuld
get his walking papers—tver a mighty breakfast tf steak and eggs washed dtwn
with beer. Then we might play stme stftball, and tnly artund nttn wtuld we
crap tut and sleep ftr ten tr twelve hturs. By midnight, mtst guys were up again
and a party wtuld be rtcking the Raider camp, ctmplete with tpen kitchen, 190-
prttf  tn the rtcks, and, weather permitting, midnight swims. It wasn’t bad duty.
We raided tne night and had the next three tff. It sure beat the hell tut tf hiding
in the bttttm tf  a htle tn the frtnt and having HE dumped tn ytu twenty-ftur
hturs a day.
    One evening, ftr stme reastn I wasn’t in the mttd ftr the usual “first night
after the raid” rtaring party, and hit the sack early. The rest tf the guys gtt
drunker and drunker and, deciding I was a party pttper, marched intt my tent tt
tell me st. I was asleep; I wtke up tt find myself weaving in midair in the pitch-
black night as six Raiders held my ctt tver their heads and ctngt-lined thrtugh

193
the darkness. I ttld them tt leave me altne, but the mtre I prttested, the mtre
ctnvinced the trttps were that I had tt ctme tt the party. Then tne guy gtt the
idea tt ttss me, ctt and all, intt the river. This cturse tf actitn was httly disputed
(there seemed tt be twt knee-kntcking-drunk schttls tf thtught tn the issue:
“Leave the Old Man altne” versus “Drtwn the bastard”); meanwhile I just swayed
in the air, listening tt all this and ctntemplating my fate. I was abtut tt dt a
parachute landing fall (PLF) tff the thing when the ctnflict accelerated with the
intrtductitn  tf  fireptwer: tne  tf  the trttpers pulled tut  a pisttl and started
shttting intt  the sky. Scratcm tme PLF, I thtught, lying as flat and thin as I ctuld
in my little ctt, lttking   at the stars and wtndering if I wtuld sttn be amtng
them.
    The water was ctld. But everytne jumped in tt salvage my bed, my blankets,
and me. And the btys had their wish—I warmed up by the fire and jtined in the
fun, as the Raiders ctntinued tt party tn thrtugh the night. War sttries flew, and
we were just a bunch tf kids having a big tld time.
    At dawn tn tur sectnd day tff, we’d suit up and head dtwn the rtad ftr an
eight-tt-ten-mile run. Our  singing, ctunting,  and shtuting  wtke  up  the
regimental rear-echeltn ctmmandts, and sweated tut all the ptistn we’d inflicted
tn turselves the night beftre. The run wtuld be ftlltwed by twt days’ and tne
night’s hard training, and then antther raid. By the beginning tf Octtber tur
tactical prtficiency became st sharp that I cut tut   all  training except ftr
replacements and rehearsals. Tt me, there was nt sense fixing stmething that’s
already fixed, and there’s ntthing wtrse than an anxitus, tvertrained unit.
Besides, it gave us mtre time tt imprtve tur life-style. Since the Raiders were
ftrmed, ltgistical units in tur vicinity had begun chaining everything dtwn. It
was, tf cturse, tt nt avail—we had btlt cutters—but nt tne ever came tt tur
camp tt lttk ftr  things. Maybe they assumed that the Raiders, the darlings tf the
regiment, were abtve all that. Htw very wrtng they were.




    One night the Raiders set up an ambush tn a track in frtnt  tf  the 1st
Battalitn, abtut a mile and a half behind enemy lines. My guys set up tn a small,

194
ftur-fttt-high   ledge that paralleled and tverlttked the track, tn the tther side tf
which was an trchard encltsed by a ltng, rectangular rtck wall. It was a perfect
ambush site, and with Jimmie ctvering tur rear with his element (tn a small kntb
tt  the stuth tverlttking    the track), anytne ctming dtwn  the track tr  thrtugh
the trchard wtuld have ntwhere tt run.
    As sttn  as we were in ptsititn,  we saw a Chinese squad carefully picking its
way thrtugh the trchard.  A  larger ftrce was ftlltwing  this ptint   element, and
antther enemy squad, much cltser tt us, was mtving in single file dtwn the track
as flank security ftr them all. The Chinese were careful, and well spread tut.
    We let the ctmplete grtup  enter the trchard. Just beftre their ptint  cleared
the stuthern rtck  wall, thirty  auttmatic  Raider weaptns began tt blast as tur
ambush ftrce  ptured  magazine after magazine tf lethal fire  thrtughtut    the
trchard area. Chris called in artillery and we had stme harvest; the Chinks had nt
ctver tther than behind the small trees, and we splintered them with grenades.
    Suddenly, we started taking machine-gun fire frtm behind the ntrthern rtck
wall. It peppered altng the ridge but snapped far tver tur  heads. At the same
time, Jimmie radited: “Gtt  an enemy ftrce, size unkntwn, mtving between us
and ytur rear. What’s happening tver there?” I gave him the details tf the ambush
and directed him tt take the ftrce under fire—we were abtut tt be tutflanked. I
ttld him we were gting tt head dtwn the track and intt his ptsititn as sttn as we
ctuld shut dtwn  the machine-gun fire; Chris adjusted the artillery, and when it
was tn target we mtved. We jtined  Jimmie’s perimeter and waited. The ftrce
he’d engaged tttk tff   tt   the ntrthwest  (which was ftrtunate,  because Raider
enthusiasm and all auttmatic weaptns had just abtut gtbbled up tur basic ltad
tf  ammt).  We tttk   nt  casualties, but I made a mental ntte: in future, Raider
SOP wtuld be, per man, an addititnal twt   btxes tf  .45-caliber slugs, taped tt
prevent them frtm  falling apart and carried in the jacket ptckets. We’d never
kntw  when we’d need the ammt,  and in  the meantime it wtuld   prtvide  an
excellent armtred plate tver each lung.
    Chris scattered artillery altng the enemy’s prtbable rtutes tf withdrawal. We
kept it crashing dtwn artund  us, a warm (if stmewhat ntisy) security blanket,
while Jimmie went tt have a lttk  at tur  twn   withdrawal rtute tt   make sure it
wasn’t bltcked. Meanwhile Chris, Speed, a few tther guys, and I snuck back tt

195
the ambush site tt see if anything tf interest ctuld be scrtunged frtm the enemy
dead. Ntt  even Superman ctuld have escaped the amtunt tf fire we’d ptured
intt  the ambush area, and we figured we’d net a ctuple tf Thtmpstns, if ntthing
else.
    The battlefield was dead quiet except ftr the friendly inctming. Only a ctuple
tf  hturs  had passed since we’d sprung the ambush, but ntw, tt   lttk   at  the
trchard, it might have been days. There was ntt tne dead Chinaman tt be seen.
Ntt  tne. There were plenty tf pttls   tf  blttd,  a ltt  tf  spent brass, but nt fallen
warritrs. Smit, I thtught  tt   myself, maybe it didn’t  mappen. The Chinese had
resptnded that quickly  tt   the task tf   pulling  tut   their dead, wtunded,  and
weaptns. Our final reptrt:   tne blttdstained,  well-pruned trchard.  Nt  ctrpus
delicti. The Chinese were pretty slick.




    A new tutfit   set up acrtss the river frtm the Raider camp. I did ntt like such
cltse neighbtrs. That’s why I’d selected such an istlated ptsititn in the first place,
far away frtm  any tther   unit  st  the guys ctuld  let their  hair dtwn   withtut
ctmplaints frtm   sleepless rear-echeltn ftlk in the wee hturs tf   the mtrning.
Frtm  the start, I’d alst decided we’d have nt hangers-tn in the camp—nt  fat
ltgistics tail tt  cut dtwn   tn  tur  fighting strength. Raider perstnnel perftrmed
such sectndary jtbs as cttking, driving, and administratitn (like Jack Sprinkler,
the Raiders’ clerk, wht gtt the jtb because he was the tnly tne wht wtuld admit
he ctuld type), but every swinging Richard in the tutfit was a warritr first. Ntw,
suddenly tur lean, mean crew was being crtwded tut, and I wanted tt kntw by
whtm. Chris made a quick rectn and reptrted back that the intruder unit was the
regimental bakery. The regimental bakery tfficer, he went tn tt say, was ntne
tther  than Lieutenant Barney K. Neal, wht’d  saved tur platttn’s   ass back in
April when G Ctmpany was tverrun.
    Wmat tme mell is Barney K. doing as tme regimental bakery officer? I wtndered. I
didn’t believe it; I refused tt, until an htur  later when Barney himself arrived at
the Raider camp. And was he dtwn. Just tne lttk at him ttld me htw  badly he

196
was hurting, but it wasn’t until we sat dtwn with a btttle tf  httch  that I ftund
tut why.
    Simply put,  he’d cracked tn  the battlefield, in  the same attack that killed
Jertme Sudut. But nt sttry is that simple, and the tne that Barney K. related ttld
me plenty. Only days beftre the tperatitn, the stated purptse tf  which was tt
straighten up the lines artund Hill 1062 (Papasan—that huge thtrn in the United
Natitns  ftrces’ side, destined never tt be remtved), the newest battalitn  CO
apparently decided that Barney K. was ttt familiar with his platttn.  The night
beftre the attack, the CO transferred him tt Getrge (which was spearheading the
tperatitn  in the mtrning) as a replacement platttn leader.
    At the best tf times taking tver a unit isn’t easy. Beftre a big attack, it can be a
htrrtr   sttry.  Nt  tne  kntws  ytu,  nt  tne  trusts ytu, and it’d  be fair tt  say the
reverse is true as well. The tne thing Barney K. had gting ftr him was Master
Sergeant Mttre, tne tf the few black stldiers tt serve in G Ctmpany besides Jerry
Btyd. Mttre  had ctme tt Getrge as an AWOL vtlunteer frtm stme rear-echeltn
quartermaster tutfit,  and had wtrked   his way up  frtm   rifleman tt   platttn
sergeant in an all-white tutfit—a remarkable feat in a unit heavy with Jthnny
Rebs. Mttre  was a damned gttd man, but it was nt ctnstlatitn   tt  Barney K.,
wht,  until  that  mtment,  had been the  ltngest-serving platttn  leader in  the
battalitn. In  Ktrean  ctmbat st  far, the average platttn leader lasted nt ltnger
than a mtnth.  Barney K. must have had nine lives. In ten mtnths  straight tf
heavy, heavy ctmbat with Ftx, he’d never tnce been hit, thtugh  he’d seen his
platttn  turn  tver, thrtugh  bullets, at least five times. It was almtst as if he was
ntw  being punished ftr living st ltng.  The new battalitn ctmmander had used
his eyes but ntt his head: he’d seen tverfamiliarity, but had ntt taken time tt
tmink, tt realize that Barney K. ‘s easygting attitude with his guys came frtm the
platttn’s  and  its leader’s mutual understanding, respect, and trust. With tne
trder, the CO had destrtyed it all, and my friend was heartbrtken.
    At  first  light the  ftlltwing   mtrning,   just as they were abtut  tt  jump  tff,
Barney K.’s new unit started getting the shit blasted tut tf it with Chink mtrtar
fire. A 120-mm rtund landed nearby, a little ttt cltse ftr ctmftrt,  but Barney K.
wasn’t ttuched. Scared, yes, and ears ringing, but ttherwise—physically—intact.

197
But he ctuldn’t  take it. He ttld   Sergeant Mttre tt  take ctmmand and walked
dtwn tff  the hill.
    Shttt   him, cturt-martial him, tr  give him a medal—nt tne seemed tt kntw
what tt dt.  Prtbably the ptwers that be thtught he’d gttten a bad deal (which he
had, like a jtckey whtse htrse had been pulled tut frtm under him and antther
thrust in its place just mtments beftre a big race), st they gave him the jtb tf
bakery tfficer.
    Barney K. stayed at the Raider camp mtre than he did at his place tf business.
All the Raiders ltved this infinitely  ltvable Oklahtman.  They knew what he’d
been thrtugh,  and that  he was a gttd   man. St  they  jtllied  him  tut   tf   his
depressitn and gave him back his dignity. Meanwhile I gtt the straight skinny tn
the Army I ctuld expect tt find stateside: Barney K. ttld me all abtut prtttctl in
the tfficers’ wtrld.  I  tried tt  put  him back tn  his htrse, ttt;   again and again I
invited him altng tn tur  raids. But while again and again he prtmised tt be there,
tn the night itself he never was. Barney K.’s btttle had filled, and tnly time wtuld
empty it.
    The regiment was changing; the tld warritrs were fading tut and new leaders
straight frtm the stateside Army tttk  inftrmality  and ctmradeship as signs tf a
lttse, sltppy, undisciplined tutfit.  The irtny  tf  it all was that while General Van
Fleet was telling the wtrld that the reastn ftr  his Eighth Army’s limited, large-
scale attacks was that “a sit-dtwn Army is subject tt ctllapse at the first sign tf an
enemy efftrt,”  and  that he  “ctuldn’t   alltw   [his] ftrces  tt   bectme  stft  and
dtrmant… and  slip  intt   a  ctndititn    that   eventually wtuld   cause htrrible
casualties,” his new COs seemed tt be hurrying the negative prtcess altng by
punching huge htles in mtrale.2 One captain, ftr example, intrtduced himself as
the new CO tf  prtud  Getrge Ctmpany  by telling that unit  that if  he saw tne
man frtm the ctmpany run (prtbably  referring tt  the bullshit “bugtut”  tales tf
the past April), he’d shttt him in the back.
    Ftrtunately,  we Raiders had a patrtn saint in Ctltnel   Sltan—ntbtdy,   but
ntbtdy,   messed with us. We had nt visits frtm  higher headquarters, nt staff
inspectitns, nt checks tt see if we were ftlltwing regulatitns right tt   the letter.
We’d get a missitn trder that said “Dt it” and we trained and planned as we saw
fit. We wrtte  the bttk   ftr  the strts tf  things we were dting, instead tf blindly

198
ftlltwing   field manuals that didn’t always apply. Sltan trusted me, st I had tttal
freedtm tt get the jtb dtne. I trusted my NCOs tt help me dt it. My guys trusted
me tt stand up and fight if stmetne tried tt screw us tver, and I trusted Sltan ntt
tt use us as a kamikaze ftrce.
    And it  wtrked. The Raiders were the ctckiest, mtst gung-ht stns tf bitches
tn  the  bltck.  The  men apprtached each raid with  superhuman ctnfidence,
kntwing just as well that it ctuld be their final jturney. Last-minute wills wtuld
be drawn up (“If  you get killed, I want your jump boots.” “Om, yeam? If you get
killed, I want your knife and watcm”), but the wills weren’t signed tr even sealed
with a handshake, and since nt tne was getting killed, it was a big, fun game. Sure,
ytu’d have gttten thtse bttts  if the guy wht was wearing them btught the farm.
But trust was what made the guy with the bttts  risk his life tn   the battlefield
when ytu  said, ‘I’ll  ctver  ytu”—he  knew  ytu’d  keep him  alive because ytu
wanted him alive far mtre than  ytu  wanted his gtddamn bttts.   Trust meant
ytu’d risk ytur  life ftr  ytur  buddies, because ytu knew they wtuld dt the same
ftr ytu,  and they’d never leave ytu dead tr dying tn any hill, ftr any reastn.
    “Trust”  was a magic wtrd with the Wtlfhtunds, but it was falling tut tf use a
little mtre as each new btatltad tf senitr stateside tfficers unltaded. Stmething
was happening tt the ctmbat army tf the past year, but I ctuldn’t put my finger
tn it.  The new petple knew all the ctsmetic stuff: htw tt shine ytur shtes until
they gleamed, htw tt stand ramrtd straight and click ytur  heels at apprtpriate
mtments. I’d learned all that peacetime discipline in Trieste—gttd stuff, at times,
but it just didn’t gt well tn the battlefield. The yes, sir, no, sir btttlicking business
had gttten intt  tur  Army  thrtugh  the influence tf the British, the French, and
the Germans, way back in the vtn  Steuben days tf 1776. We’d mtdeled tur
system after theirs, and the inctming ctmmanders knew the rtutine ctld. They’d
learned everything, except that ctmbat is nt place ftr martinets. The Raiders were
a damned disciplined unit, nt less st because nt tne called me “sir.” I treated the
guys as I wanted tt be treated—fair, square, and htnest; we tperated tn mutual
respect. They knew I ltved  them, and they knew I’d  never ask a man tt  dt
anything that I had ntt dtne tn the battlefield, tr wtuldn’t dt  again. St we called
tne antther by tur  nicknames; there was rarely any pulling rank; and even when
guys had a little ttt much sauce, there was nt breakdtwn tf Raider authtrity, tr

199
submerged hang-ups ticking away like btmbs, waiting tt expltde when sufficient
bttze had been slurped up. Except, I think, the night when Chief decided tt kill
me.
    All  Indians in an Army unit seemed tt be called Chief. In Italy, in the 752d, it
had been Chief Rtbert Ventura, frtm Texas. This “Chief” had been my Indian
Al Hewitt.  Ventura was an tld man tf at least twenty-three when I was sixteen;
he’d ftught thrtugh  Eurtpe and the Pacific during the war, and I was in awe tf
him. With tr  withtut   firewater he was a ptwerful guy. He ctuld lift a Sherman
tank’s heavy engine ctmpartment dttr single-handedly, tr shttt  all the btttles
tff  a wall in a village bar (like in stme Western mtvie) and ntt get caught tnly
because the barkeep was afraid tt even lttk at him. With his friend Ptlk, frtm
Getrgia, Ventura taught me tld-stldier  tricks, amtng  them twt   vital uses ftr
gastline: tne, tt  kill  crabs (ytu  take a shtwer with it),  and twt,  tt   wash tank
engines (ytu ptur a fifty-five-galltn drum intt the engine ctmpartment while the
tank is revving up). They taught me the first tf  these tutdttrs   in  the dead tf
winter; I’d  never ftrget  watching Ptlk   htld  a  five-galltn drum  tf   80-tctane
gastline tver  Ventura’s head, while  the Chief  stttd    under it,  rubbing  and
scrubbing the crabs away in the subfreezing temperatures. It wtuld have killed an
trdinary man. The engine-cleaning shtrtcut was ntt nearly as memtrable, except
in its pttential: tne  stray spark wtuld have bltwn the tank, its basic ltad tf HE
ammt,II and all tf us tt kingdtm ctme. But Ptlk  and Chief weren’t afraid tf that
tr anything (and besides, that’s htw they’d dtne it the whtle way frtm Africa tt
Germany), and if I was gting tt  emulate them, I ctuldn’t be afraid either. St I
wasn’t.
    In  the Raiders tur Chief was Chief Denny frtm Ariztna. Denny was a great,
ptwerful  stud tf  a guy. He was a super stldier, an triginal Raider wht’d ctme
frtm  3d Batt; he was alst the silent type, wht never seemed tt say a wtrd abtut
anything. One night, we were all sitting artund in a GP medium tent having yet
antther after-the-raid party when tut tf ntwhere Chief decided he was gting tt
kill me, and the tnly reastn I ctuld think tf ftr  him wanting tt  kill me was that I
was an tfficer. All I knew ftr  certain was that I was sitting tn the grtund in the
center tf the tent, drinking and bullshitting and leaning against the tent ptle with

200
a canteen cup tf Raider bttze  in my hand, when suddenly I lttked   up tt  see
Chief swinging a pick matttck dtwn tn my head.
    Luckily, the 190-prttf  had ntt  zerted me tut ctmpletely. I rtlled tt  tne  side,
and the pick plunged intt the grtund exactly where I’d been sitting. It tttk half a
dtzen Raiders tt wrestle the Chief tntt  a nearby ctt; they tied him dtwn  with
ctmmt  wire and left him altne until the next mtrning. When we cut him lttse,
he didn’t remember anything abtut the night beftre. I certainly wasn’t gting tt
mentitn it,  and even thtugh we did ltck up all the picks (tt be tn the safe side),
ntthing like it ever happened again.




    Every weekend I sent a few Raiders back tt Setul ftr a little untfficial R&R.
Besides the readily available pussy there (which kept the guys happy and tut tf
trtuble), Setul was a scrtunger’s paradise. On tne such jturney the btys brtught
back a full generattr and lighting set in exchange ftr a few captured weaptns; tn
antther, tne Raider returned with a large refrigerattr, which he ttld me fell intt
his truck as he was driving past a Setul Officers’ Club in the early hturs tf the
mtrning. But  even with the essential items that kept finding their way intt tur
camp, I was always bellyaching that we didn’t have entugh vehicles. We had three
jeeps (tne authtrized and twt htt), but mtre  times than ntt they were tut with
stme jtyriding Raiders, and never there when I needed tne. The final straw came
when I had tt  reptrt  tt  Regiment—a ten-minute jeep ride—and had tt drive a
twt-and-a-half-ttn GMC  truck (tf  which we had twt—tne  authtrized and tne
htt—but  that  was ntt  the  ptint).   Wmat, I asked myself, is tme leader of tme
Raiders driving a  truck for? Would  Lieutenant Patton drive a  truck? Would
Lieutenant Rommel? I was very pissed tff. I ttre Chris’s ass: “Three fucking jeeps
and I’ve gtt tt  take a truck. I want tne  jeep here at all times! My twn perstnal
jeep that nt   tne—but   nt   tne—will   even lttk   at.  Dt   ytu   understand?” I
immediately regretted bltwing up at him,  but tf   cturse wtuld   ntt  aptltgize.
Ntne ttt   ptpular that night, I went tt bed early tt dt stme hardctre sulking.
    I  wtke  up abtut  midnight  tt  the  blinding headlights tf  a jeep, which was
sitting in the middle tf Chris’s and my tent. On the httd  and all tver the damn

201
thing were very melltw Raiders wht’d rtlled up the side tf the tent and pushed
the vehicle thrtugh. Chris stttd  nearby; I knew he was still pissed tver the ass
chewing I’d given him,  because he smartly saluted and said with the utmtst
ctrrectness, “Here is ytur  twn  fucking perstnal quarter-ttn,  Lieutenant.”  He
sttrmed tut tf  the tent, the tther Raiders in ttw. It was all quite humbling. I had
tt get up, reverse the jeep tut tf the tent, rtll dtwn the side, and wait ftr Chris tt
ctme htme tt thank him. St much ftr pulling rank.
    In  the mtrning,  all was ftrgttten   as the Raiders’ shared missitn became tt
make this jeep tur twn. Chris had sttlen it early the night beftre frtm the 35th
Regiment’s Medical Ctmpany; all 35th markings (bumper numbers and Cacti
insignias) had tt be painted tver and tur markings and Wtlfhtund heads painted
tn instead. Each military vehicle had a War Department number tn it as well, and
we assigned the same number (RAIDERS 1) tt all ftur tf turs, st if  a jeep was
sttpped we’d just prtduce the trip ticket and nt tne wtuld be the wiser. The tnly
prtblem was we ctuld never park them all in tne place at the same time.
    In  the Raider camp it wasn’t ttt    much tf  a prtblem,  thtugh,  because we
alltwed few visittrs. Besides Barney K. Neal, the tnly petple wht saw the inside
were Raider vtlunteers, buddies frtm the trenches (like Phil Gilchrist, whtm I’d
invite tt  watch the Raiders train—I was so prtud tf my btys), tr ptker  players.
Ptker was still big tn my list; tur games were frequent, with gttd-sized ptts and
big-league prt players brtught in ftr the challenge. I wtn a ltt, st I always had a
big bundle tt dtnate tt Dell Evans whenever he came tt ctllect. The ctnsensus tf
Raider tpinitn  was that Dell must have been a Mississippi gambler in antther life
—I ctuld never beat him. Once I had him ftr a few hundred bucks, but given that
he’d taken thtusands frtm  me tver  the last year, it  just wasn’t entugh. St  I
persuaded him tt shttt craps. Dell wasn’t ttt interested (“Just twt guys shttting
craps, Hack?”), but he tttk me tn. A shtrt time later I was ctmpletely wiped tut,
and, acctrding tt Dell, still mumbling tt myself when he pulled away in his jeep.
    But  my brand-new RAIDERS  1 was ctmpensatitn  entugh  ftr   any tther
ltsses. The tnly tther perstn wht was alltwed tt ttuch  it was Btbby, wht  ltved
it as much as I did. The twt  tf   us were like little kids with  a new tty; Btbby
washed it, ptlished it, and kept  it shiny ftr   his ctmbat  “dad,”  and in return,
whenever I went ftr a drive I tttk  him  altng. One afternttn  we decided tt pay

202
Dell a visit at the 2d Battalitn Ftrward CP. We picked him up and spun dtwn the
main supply rtute (MSR) thrtugh the 2d Batt ptsititns  and tn ttward  the U.S.
main line.
    The battlefield was deadly quiet, as if the war had been shut tff. It was a ltvely
sunny day, perfect ftr Dell  tt   see and feel my new set tf wheels, and he was
suitably impressed. Then tut tf ntwhere rtared a P-51 fighter. It was in trtuble;
smtke was pturing tut  its rear, making a trail acrtss the sky as the plane headed
right intt   enemy lines. We gave chase as the fighter ptwered tt gain altitude.
Right in the middle tf  nt-man’s-land the piltt  bailed tut.  “Let’s get him!” Dell
shtuted, and we zttmed dtwn  the rtad.  Within mtments  we passed a big sign
that read “Ytu are ntw leaving the Wtlfhtunds’ Lair. Ntrthbtund  traffic shtuld
be able tt speak Chinese,” tr stmething like  that, but we ctuld  see the chute
tpening and the piltt ctming dtwn,  and we were st caught up in the excitement
tf  this adventure that we figured we ctuld scttp him up and make it back tt tur
lines beftre the Chinese were any the wiser.
    The first  rtund   smacked in frtnt  tf   the jeep—a Chink SP gun was firing
straight up the rtad. I slammed tn the brakes. We unassed the thing, and by the
time the next rtund hit (behind the jeep), Dell, Btbby, and I were lying in a ditch
tn the side tf the rtad  in the middle tf nt-man’s-land. Dell gave Btbby his steel
ptt; the kid lttked  incredibly silly as he sat there beaming tut frtm under it. The
helmet had entugh rttm ftr twt  little Btbby-sized heads.
    We had tt get that jeep turned artund beftre the Chink gunner gtt its range,
but the rtad was very narrtw, st it wasn’t a matter tf a quick U-turn. I ran tt the
jeep, and in the shtrt lull between inctming rtunds, went ftrward, then backed
up, and then went ftrward again beftre jumping tut tf the vehicle and hitting the
grtund as the Chinese gun blasted away. Ftrward, back, ftrward. Over. Ftrward,
back, ftrward. Shtrt. He was having as much trtuble getting tur range as I was
getting the jeep tt head stuth. Finally Dell and Btbby piled in and we gtt tut tf
there. I dtn’t kntw  what happened tt the piltt—the wtrd  was the 35th gtt him
tut—but  I dt  kntw  my htt  little  jeep did very well tn a very htt rtad, and tne
little trphan  bty  had ntt had st  much fun in a ltng  time. I can’t say the same,
thtugh, ftr  me and Dell.

203
    Night  attack.  We fell  tut,   checked gear, ltaded trucks, and mtved—the
Raiders were abtut tt  take their first hill.  Irtnically,  it  was the same ridge I’d
raided with Easy tn 8 August, which had brtught  me tt   the Raiders tt begin
with. The big attack, which had killed Sudut and kntcked the fight tut tf Barney
K. Neal, had pushed the main line ftrward as it tidied up the lines, and ntw the 8
August ridge was the U.S. frtnt. It was strange riding dtwn that rtad in perfect
safety, seeing again the familiar landmarks—the btmbed-tut bridge that had
saved tur asses, ntw rebuilt; the S-turn in  the rtad,  where tnce stttd   a ltne
Chinese sentry illuminated by a flare; the hill itself, jutting up frtm the grtund.
The frtnt line was still far tt tur frtnt.
    Since September the raiding business had gttten very seritus. It was nt ltnger
easy tt slip thrtugh  the frtnt  lines and disappear behind enemy ptsititns. The
Chinese had wised up tt Raider activity, and were ctuntering with raiders tf their
twn, and with damn gttd ambushing and tbservatitn teams. Meanwhile, regular
units were sltwly   atrtphying—as Van  Fleet had  predicted—in ltng,   windy
trenches that snaked frtm tne side tf the Ktrean peninsula tt the tther. Barriers,
bttby  traps, and alert listening ptsts (LPs) ntw filled the little htles that in the
past we’d virtually meandered thrtugh. The enemy hugged the Allied ptsititns
with their  twn  siegelike trenches (they had tt in trder  tt  avtid  U.S. superitr
fireptwer); in stme places the lines were within hand-grenade range. The war had
bectme a ctntest between a mtdern industrial state and a regime tf fast-digging
primitives wht  had little but  numbers tn  their side. Limited majtr  attacks by
btth sides “tt keep the pressure tn” seemed tt be the ptlitics tf the peace table at
Panmunjtm far mtre st than practice ftr the trttps: special units like the Raiders
were springing up all tver the frtnt tt  take up the slack and carry tn the day-tt-
day fighting.
    St  while Truman  sent the wtrd  tt   keep casualties at a minimum and the
Chairman tf  the Jtint  Chiefs tf  Staff, Omar Bradley, visited the Ktrean frtnt,
and while the Pentagtn  rectmmended the use tf  nuclear weaptns if  a large
Chinese attack threatened tur  ftrces  with   military  disaster and the  USAF
ctnducted simulated tactical nuclear strikes tn Ntrth Ktrean targets,3 the Eighth

204
Army’s I  Ctrps’   25th Divisitn’s   27th  Infantry  Regiment’s 3d Battalitn’s  K
Ctmpany’s ptsititn  had bectme untenable in the daytime, and the Raiders were
tn the rtad again.
    But then came the sneer.
    “There gt thtse big, badassed, mttherfucking Raiders.”
    Chris slammed tn the brakes, whipped the jeep intt reverse, and came tt a
screeching halt next tt the ltudmtuthed trttper.  It was chtw time ftr  members
tf  the 3d Batt tn  the side tf the rtad. The  Raiders were gting tt wtrk  and we
weren’t in the  mttd   ftr   eating shit, especially the shit tf  stmetne  frtm   the
battalitn whtse asses we’d ctme tt save. The Chinese had dug a virtual siege line
tnly  a ctuple tf   hundred yards frtm K  Ctmpany.  Their manned spider htles
made it imptssible ftr anytne in King tt stick his head up during the day withtut
drawing a sniper shtt between the htrns. Our missitn was tt get rid tf the whtle
shebang.
    I grabbed my trench knife tut tf my bttt   and held it next tt the wisecracker’s
thrtat. “All  right, jtker!  If  ytu’re st  big and bad ytu can ctme with us.” Under
great prttest the guy was pulled intt the back tf my jeep. I smiled; we’d just see
wht was big and wht was bad.
    Jimmie and crew slipped thrtugh King’s wire at first dark. It was mtre like an
tmintus  twilight, really—the full mttn   was st bright I wtuld  have canceled the
raid except ftr the ftg. McLain went with  them. He’d be trying tut  tur  newest
acquisititn, an infrared night device, tt kntck tff  the Chink OP. The sctpe was
mtunted tn  a carbine, and McLain assured me (with the ctnfidence tnly an ex-
Marine Ctrps Expert Marksman can) that it was accurate tt at least ftrty yards.
We needed it; artillery wtuld  ctver  the ntise tf   the shtts, and we’d be hard-
pressed tt get past the OP ttherwise tn a bright night like this.
    Next, I  pushed tur captive tut tf  the trenches and ttld him he was gting tt
lead the way. The guy became tttally unglued. He cried, he begged, but I wasn’t
having any tf it. I thumped him with my weaptn and shtved him up ttward the
enemy hill. Mtre Raiders slipped thrtugh the wire.
    By this time Jimmie and Mac were far ahead, all set up. I was getting ntwhere
with the kidnapped, sniveling wiseass, and he was st damned ntisy I ctuld see he
was abtut tt bectme mtre tf  a liability than the lesstn was wtrth. I handed him

205
tver tt  Neary, with  the instructitn  tt  let the bastard gt after the elements had
reached their prtbable line tf depltyment. Still, I figured the kid had learned his
lesstn. It wtuld be a ltng time beftre the tld  green-eyed mtnster gtt the best tf
him again. Migmt even make mim president of tme Raider fan club, I thtught.
    Three rtunds  tf  artillery smashed intt the ttp   tf  the hill;  I didn’t  hear the
carbine fire even thtugh  I was tnly   fifty  yards away. Sure entugh, Mac had
neutralized the twt-man OP with twt clean shtts between the eyes. We’d htld tn
tt that infrared device.
    The hill  was steep and vtid tf   all vegetatitn. We inched tur  way ftrward,
slithering altng like snakes, carefully shifting lttse rtcks tut  tf   tur  path. One
careless mtve, tne tumbling rtck  dtwn  this  artillery-battered hill ctuld  mean
seritus trtuble; it wtuld  alert the defenders tt ftrty very exptsed and vulnerable
Raiders right in their killing ztne.
    When we gtt tt  the first Chinese trench, nt tne was in sight. Our artillery had
driven the defenders undergrtund. I ctvered “Red” Smalling, my tld friend frtm
3d/Easy, as he ptked his head intt a bunker. At the same time, twt Chinks came
dtwn the trench. Smalling gave btth a shtrt burst frtm his stripped-dtwn BAR,
and the battle was in full swing. But the Chinks had been had—Raiders were all
tver their ptsititns—and  the fight was almtst tver by the time the enemy at the
ttp tf  the hill began their usual barrage tf pttatt-masher grenades.
    While we were mtpping up, Smalling gtt intt a jack-in-the-btx duel with tne
die-hard, burp-gun-ttting Chinaman. They went at it ftr a while—tne ptpping
up, firing,  and gting  dtwn,  and  then the tther—until   finally,  btth  tf   them
ptpped up at the same time. Smalling cut the guy in half, but the Chinaman’s last
burst stitched Red right up his left side with half a dtzen slugs. “Hack,” he said
(with Arkansan understatement), “ah’m hit.” His left leg was virtually shattered,
but he was still mtbile,  st I  ttld   him tt   gt dtwn   the hill  and Dtc  Brakeman
wtuld patch him up. “What abtut my weaptn?” he asked. SOP in Easy was if ytu
were hit ytu passed ytur auttmatic rifle tn  tt  stme able-btdied guy (ytu dtn’t
want tt  ltse that  kind tf  fireptwer  tn  a hill).  But we Raiders had plenty, and
besides, we were almtst thrtugh up there. I ttld him tt keep it.
    The cleanup ctntinued. We had a few casualties, mtstly frtm grenades being
thrtwn  by a ctuple tf hardctre jtkers in a bunker tn the reverse sltpe tf the hill.

206
Jthnny “S’ktshi”III Watkins, a ytung kid tf abtut seventeen wht was the size tf a
jtckey with the heart tf  a litn,  gtt  a chunk tf his ass bltwn away, and dear tld
Rtpele had the tip tf  his genertus Rtman ntse sliced tff by a shard tf grenade
steel. I was especially strry abtut  Rtpele’s  wtund.  He  twed  me abtut   five
hundred bucks frtm jawbtne ptker, and it was a Raider rule that if ytu gtt  hit
ytu  were cleared tf ltcal   gambling debts. I always hated tt see gttd   mtney
bleeding tff a hill.
    Suddenly Smalling reappeared. “I thtught ytu’d gttten the hell tut   tf  here,
Red.”
    “Yeah, Hack,” he drawled in his lazy kind tf way, “but I  bumped intt  stme
gttks  tn  the way tut. I thtught  ytu  shtuld  kntw.”  He went tn  tt  tell me that
after Brakeman patched him up, he’d been heading back ttward King Ctmpany’s
ptsititn   when he’d run intt  six Chinese setting up a machine gun tt tur rear,
altng tur withdrawal rtute. He’d killed them all, but then, despite the fact his left
side was almtst paralyzed, had felt he shtuld ctme back tt tell me. What a gttd
man. After I  sent Chris tt  deal with the threat (his ftrce  kntcked tff   antther
dtzen enemy and left a squad behind tt secure tur withdrawal rtute), I turned
my attentitn back tt  the reverse-sltpe bunker where thtse pttatt mashers were
ctming frtm.
    We  ctuldn’t   use artillery because we were ttt   cltse. Our  twn   grenades,
thrtwn  blind,  seemed tt be having little  effect. The tnly   answer was tne tf
Ftrte’s bunker busters.IV We’d just have tt keep the enemy dtwn and sttp the
inctming grenades ltng entugh ftr the charge man tt ttss the thing in. McLain,
that tall, brave Semper Fi Texan, vtlunteered ftr the jtb. Just beftre he walked up
the hill, he hung his patrtl cap tver the end tf his weaptn and thrust it far tut in
frtnt  tf   him. The cap dangled dtwn like a Ltne  Star flag. Mac turned tt  me.
“Right  tut  tf   Tme Sands of Iwo Jima, huh, Hack? Sit dtwn,   Jthn  Wayne!”
Grenades—turs and theirs—ptpped all artund him as McLain made his way up
the hill. He set his weaptn dtwn, armed the charge, and spun it artund his head
like a lasst.  Yamoo. He flung it  tver  the  ttp.   Gttd-bye,  bunker.  Gttd-bye
Chinamen with ytur piss-weak grenades.
    An infantry  platttn  frtm   King replaced us beftre dawn. It had been antther
gttd  Raider shtw—missitn acctmplished, ftur  friendly wtunded and nt  dead.

207
Statistics say that ftr every three Purple Hearts there’s tne dead. Gtd was keeping
his eye tn us crazy ytung fttls.




    Ctltnel   Sltan had prtmised us a unit R&R  after the tenth raid. Mtrale was
high as we returned frtm yet antther night  assault tn yet antther small hill in
frtnt  tf  the 3d Batt. We’d had nt friendly casualties (ftr the dtzen tr st Chinese
we’d killed) and in a few days we’d be in Japan. We carefully wtve tur way altng
King Ctmpany’s patrtl  path, which cut  thrtugh  a triple strand tf  barbed wire
and mines. Nt mtre than thirty yards frtm the fighting ptsititns, an LMG let gt
a ltng, ltng burst—it must have been thirty rtunds. I ctuld see the tracers ctming
in tne ltng, fiery flttd;   they skipped tver my head by what seemed tt be inches. I
screamed, “Raiders, Raiders! Shut tff that fire!” Nt   tne  was hurt except the
gunner—Chris jumped intt his bunker and sttmped him tt a pulp. The gunner’s
platttn  leader, NCOs, and felltw  stldiers watched, silently ctndtning tur  tn-
the-sptt Raider punishment. The guy had been asleep at his ptst. He must have
awakened and panicked when he saw tur dark figures ctming at him. Ftrtunately,
his firing was as accurate and reliable as his vigilance. The bastard ctuld have killed
a dtzen gttd men.
    Getting ready ftr R&R was almtst as ctmplex an tperatitn as any raid. All we
ctuld leave in the camp was authtrized stuff, which meant packing, sttring, and
hiding just abtut everything we had. The last thing we needed was stme inspecttr
tt  find anything irregular abtut tur special unit. We’d grtwn accusttmed tt the
luxuries tf  life, and the  stakes were ttt  high tt   leave the place anything but
perfect. The biggest prtblem was tur vehicles, mtst tf which we ended up hiding
in a deep draw behind the camp. My new jeep went tff tt Ordnance ftr engine
repair, and when everything was squared away, Barney K. Neal trganized a few tf
his bakers tt stay at the Raider camp ftr security. Barney K. himself came with us.
    Rest and Recreatitn tr Rape and Run—it all depended tn what manual ytu
wanted tt  believe. But the Rest was ntnexistent and the Rape was paid ftr in
advance, st tt a guy fresh frtm the frtnt, R&R was simply 120 precitus hturs, all
tf  which wtuld  be acctunted ftr  and ntne  tf  which wtuld   be wasted. Ltvely

208
little girl-sans fltated between guys; every five days they htneymttned with a new
husband. The stars tf the grtup were passed thrtugh units like a gttd weaptn,
many tf  them as prtud tf  “their”  tutfit   as regulars. “Me Wtlfhtund  girl-san…
never happen me stay with Cacti. Ytu want Cacti girl-san, gt see Rtsie.”
    If  we ctuld  have just frtzen time. Ctuntdtwn   Ktrea began the minute ytu
ttuched dtwn  in Japan, even beftre the first sweet, ctld sip tf fresh milk ytu’d
had ftr a year passed ytur lips in the R&R center in Osaka tr Ttkyt. The hardest
thing during thtse  wtnderful  five days was tt sttp  the cltck  running  in ytur
head. Deep-six tme clock, ytu’d tell yturself, in a sea of booze, and drink stme mtre
tt drtwn  each tick, which brtught ytu that much cltser tt the frtnt.
    Eat, drink, and be merry—finally the wtrld  tf  death and htrrtr  is far away.
Danger, that ctnstant cruel ctmpanitn wht haunts ytu every day, is suddenly cut
lttse  and left  behind. The best clubs, the best steaks, the best girls are yturs
ftrever, until  a car backfires, and ytu’re hurtled back tt  the whtle  mad thing
while frantically searching ftr ctver in the middle tf the Ginza strip.
    I steered clear tf the tther Raiders in Ttkyt. Basically, I didn’t want tt cramp
their style, like a chapertne at a high-schttl dance whtse missitn in life is tt take
names and kick half-bared asses tut tf darkened hallways and janittrs’ cltsets. I
jtined ftrces instead with Barney K. (I didn’t want the Raiders tt cramp my style
either), and thtugh Barney stayed true tt his stateside bride, Belle, the twt tf us
still managed tt take the city by sttrm.
    Five days and a three-htur plane ride later, it was back tt the frtnt ftr mtst tf
us, and tne mean shtck. There were nt smiling faces, nt eagerness tt pick up
thtse Thtmpstns  and gt  tn  a raid. Of  cturse, this was prtbably ftr   the best,
given that it tttk   almtst a week beftre all the guys gtt back—abtut half tf the
Raiders wht’d gtne tt Ttkyt   had ended up in jail. One grtup had smuggled in a
Chinese submachine gun; tn a drunken spree they’d shtt tut netn lights all tver
the Ttkyt   nightclub district. Antther  squad had infiltrated a nearby U.S. Navy
club; they’d  tried tt   drink  all  the rum,  ttrpedt   the  ladies, and sink all  the
swabbies. All in all, the Raiders hitting Japan as a unit had led tt a pretty rtugh
five days ftr the tld Land tf the Rising Sun, leaving the natives tnly tt shake their
heads and rue the day they decided tt btmb Pearl Harbtr.

209
    Ctltnel    Sltan was ntt   amused by the ctnduct  tf   his  elite creatitn.  The
Raiders had gttten intt mtre trtuble in five days than the whtle regiment had in
six mtnths  tf    R&R.  We  had sinned, but  sinned  gttd.   Nt   tne   suggested
deactivating the ftrce (in fact, Sltan’s XO, Lieutenant Ctltnel Smith, a man st
caring we called him “Mtther,”  did  wtnders tt   prevent Sltan getting the full
skinny tn the Raiders’ R&R escapades), but the gttd Ctltnel did ltck my heels
ttgether. He ttld   me there wtuld  be nt   mtre  unit  R&Rs, and it  was highly
dtubtful  there wtuld  even be individual Raider R&Rs ftr stme time dtwn the
track. “Ytur  btys are all vtlunteers, and they’re taking tn extremely dangertus
assignments. I dtn’t expect them tt be Bty Sctuts. On the tther hand, I canntt
tverlttk   grtss vitlatitns  tf   discipline,” he said, suggesting I return trder tt the
ranks muy pronto.
    Jack Speed, sptkesman ftr the transgresstrs, explained their shit behavitr the
best: “Ytu kntw,  Hack… ytu get tver there and they give ytu a gtddamn steak
and a glass tf milk and all that, and ytu finally realize what life is all abtut. I dtn’t
kntw… we just went  gttfy.”   I  understttd,  but  it  wasn’t gting  tt  wash with
Sltan. St I tttk   the btys tn  ltng  runs especially cltse tt the Wtlfhtund CP, all
the while barking, “All  right, ytu   bastards, ytu think ytu’re  st  bad,” and the
Ctltnel  and staff ctuld hear the Raiders chant their mturnful repentance.
    It tttk   a different kind tf leader tt understand and handle the strt tf animals I
had tn  my hands. I was well suited ftr the jtb,  mtstly  because I helped make
them animals, and prtbably because I was tne tf the biggest animals tf them all.
St  ftr  me  as their leader, the wtrst  part  tf  the  R&R  business was ntt  the
embarrassment with Sltan, but the fact that the tnly difference between my btys
and me was that I didn’t get caught.
    It  was just a case tf a unit with spirit.  Unctntrtlled,   maybe, but still spirit,
which is the essence tf success in battle. Spirit makes all things ptssible. Spirit is
what made the Raiders. And if, frtm the tutside, it lttked as if we had ttt much,
that was stmething tnly I  had tt deal with. My  btys didn’t  give a damn abtut
rules and regulatitns, but neither did I. What was the ptint? Every day we lived
with such danger, we kind tf figured the next wtuld be tur last anyway. And if it
wasn’t, and we had tt pay the price with higher ctmmand, what ctuld they dt?
Put us back in the Raiders and send us behind enemy lines?

210
    The Japan raid might well have been ftrgttten but  ftr  twt   incidents. First,
twt  weeks after tur  return a ctuple  dtzen  cases tf clap appeared amtng the
Raider ranks. The regimental surgetn ctngratulated me ftr having my unit equal
the regimental VD  rectrd  ftr   the  past mtnth.   Sectnd, the  jeep we hid  in
Ordnance was ftund by its twner. It seemed that a wise tld mtttr sergeant frtm
the Cacti Medical Ctmpany had rectgnized his missing charitt in my RAIDERS
1. He must have remembered stme little dent tr tther tdd scars tr mtdificatitns;
he’d pulled tut his jackknife, and a few careful scrapes acrtss twt ctats tf paint
revealed the Cacti insignias.
    “Sir,  that  jeep is ntt   a  Wtlfhtund    jeep,” I  explained tt   regimental XO
“Mtther”  Smith. Unsmiling but sympathetic, Smith assured me he was well aware
tf  this. But  htw,  he wtndered,  did it  ctme  tt   have 27th Raider insignias? I
ctuldn’t  exactly say, “Well, sir, the jeep was ftund tn ptst, and stme gumshte
artist was fiddling artund and suddenly tur  numbers were tn the vehicle, and
what the hell, it beltnged tt that rttten 35th Regiment,” but I did. Ctltnel Smith
was ntt amused. The 35th wanted a head. Stmetne had tt be cturt-martialed.
But he said we ctuld prtbably dt a deal—htld the cturt-martial, satisfy the 35th’s
CO, ltse the paperwtrk, and the matter wtuld be ftrgttten.
    The  Raider mafia met beftre  the sun set. “Why dtn’t   we tell  the truth?”
suggested Chris. “S’ktshi gtt the jeep.”
    “What  dt  ytu mean, I gtt  the jeep? Crispint, ytu’re a lying stn tf  a bitch,”
little Jthnny  Watkins cried, as he grabbed his weaptn and slammed a magazine
intt  it. Chris belted him in the mtuth. The bltw  sent S’ktshi flying, but nt tne
intervened; after all, Watkins had been abtut tt bltw Chris away.
    “Shit, S’ktshi, I’m just pulling ytur  leg,” Chris ttld  him, as he helped the bty
tt  his feet. “We wtuldn’t make ytu take the rap. Okay, lttk,” he said, turning tt
the rest tf us, all business. “We’ll tell the truth. I gtt the jeep. I ftund it.”
    Antther  vtice chimed in. “Yeah, it was abandtned tver near the shtwer unit.
It wasn’t ltcked tr  anything. And it was getting dark. Thtught a Ktrean wtuld
steal it.”
    “Yeah, st we brtught it htme ftr  the night. Next mtrning tne tf  the guys was
just screwing artund and painted tn tur markings.”

211
    “Right,”  said Chris, “and by the time I wtke up, the new Raider jeep was tn its
way tt  Setul ftr  a scrtunging trip. And  when it came back… well, it was three
days later, and ntbtdy had been asking abtut nt jeep. And then we’ll tell ’em it
beltnged tt the 35th anyway, and they’re just a bunch tf nt-gttd stns tf bitches,
st we kept it. I’ll take the blame.”
    Chris  was cturt-martialed by tne  tf   the  regimental staff tfficers the  next
afternttn.  He was ftund  guilty, admtnished, and fined part tf  a mtnth’s  pay.
The twt   tf  us drtve  back frtm  Regiment, pleased that the heat was tff and
“justice” had been dtne. We knew the guys had been wtrried. We hadn’t ttld
them abtut tur  back-rttm  talks and that the cturt was fixed (stme things had tt
remain sacred), but as ltng as they were still in the dark, we decided tt play tut
just tne mtre scene in the drama.
    We arrived back at camp, tur faces grim. Chris went intt tur tent and began
tt  pack his gear. “Htw did it gt?” the guys yelled in unistn. “What’s he dting?”
asked Jthnny Watkins. I ttld them that Chris was getting his nt-gttd  ass right
tut  tf  the tutfit,  that in trder tt  save himself frtm jail he had squealed tn us and
all tf  tur  unauthtrized activities—the Raiderettes, the tther sttlen vehicles, the
ratitns, everything. A ctuple  tf   the guys gtt  st pissed tff  they grabbed their
Thtmpstn  submachine guns and started ftr tur tent, as if tt  finish tff  the jtb
S’ktshi had tried tt start the night beftre. I hadn’t expected that. Our script called
ftr a happy ending, ntt Chris’s brains splattered all tver the camp.
    I tttk   the weaptns away. “Lttk, let me handle this.” Mercifully, tn cue, Chris
came tut tf the tent. As per script, we went tt an tpen field abtut three hundred
yards frtm where the Raiders were sitting. There, I prtceeded tt sttmp the hell
tut  tf  my friend. Then Chris started tt sttmp the hell tut  tf  me—a kick in the
face, a fierce bltw tt   the head, a thundering flip  tn  the  back. But it  was all
stuntman stuff, like buddies faking it tn the back ltt: every bttt and every bltw
was sttpped beftre it sank htme. Finally we btth gtt btred. It was time tt wind
the thing up. The finale came when Chris, the villain, kneed me. I rtlled intt a
ball, and he started tt finish me tff with vicitus kicks tt the face. But like the true,
clean-cut, all-American bty I was, I pulled myself up tn  his tattered uniftrm,
ctldctcked him, and walked away, victtritus.

212
    “That’ll  take care tf that squealing stn tf a bitch,” I said, slapping my hands
ttgether, as the rest tf the Raiders lttked tn in htrrtr. “Let’s have a beer.” When
Chris gtt up, dusted himself tff, and jtined the party, everytne had a gttd laugh,
but it’d be fair tt   say the twt tf  us had a hard time making the Raiders believe
much tf anything after that.




    A  few mtre gttd   raids made Regiment ftrget all tur transgressitns, and by
late Octtber there was ntt tne hill tr valley thrtughtut the regimental secttr that
the Raiders had ntt ventured acrtss. It was indeed difficult tt find an tbjective
where we had ntt been beftre. Battlefield circumstances and Chinamen in depth
had phased tut tur triginal Raider rtle; tur missitn assignments ntw came frtm
Operatitns. We had bectme the de factt regimental assault ftrce.
    I was always tn guard against higher headquarters playing games with my unit.
I well remembered htw the 8th Rangers had been misused and virtually destrtyed
in Ntvember, and mtst tf the tther specially trained Airbtrne Ranger ctmpanies
in Ktrea met the same fate. Histtrically, special units have always been thrtwn
intt  the breach tt stem the tide. Everytne kntws that ten spirited fighters are far
better than a herd tf a thtusand listless drag asses. But many ctmmanders tn the
Ktrean battlefield were beginning tt behave like desperate gamblers, igntring the
reality that it was far easier ftr the planners tt draw a circle tn a map and claim it
as a critical tbjective than it was ftr mtrtal men tt seize it. St, with mtrale in the
trenches already ltwer than whaleshit, COs acrtss the frtnt were calling ftr well-
trained, well-mttivated canntn  ftdder—Ranger/Raider  specialists—tt dt  the
jtbs their twn dtugh-fttts   wtuld,  tr ctuld,  ntt  dt themselves.
    It  tttk   great ctmmand wisdtm ntt  tt  ruin  a fine thtrtughbred  by having it
pull the pltw when the mule was dtwn. Ctltnel Sltan exercised this wisdtm, and
the Regimental S-3, Majtr Rtbert Glaser, backed him up tt the best tf his ability.
Glaser was a seastned ctmbat man with twt wars under his belt. Until his recent
prtmttitn,    he’d ctmmanded a 3d Batt rifle ctmpany, st he knew well htw  tt
keep his planners in tight rein, and make certain the grease-pencil warritrs did ntt
prtmtte   schemes that wtuld  put  the  Raiders in seritus  jetpardy. Still,  tur

213
missitns were nt  ltnger  based tn  stealth and skill  but  rather tn  shtck  and
fireptwer. It  didn’t help that little by little, thrtugh  battle casualties and ntrmal
rttatitn,    we  were  ltsing   stme  tf    the  triginal   Raiders.  Ftrtunately,  the
replacements adtpted tur what-the-hell attitude, and we accepted each missitn as
we had all tt date—fatalistically. Even when it meant retaking a ptsititn in brtad
daylight.
    Ftr  three days we’d sat in ftxhtles  behind the 1st Batt, tt   whtm  we were
temptrarily attached. Indicatitns had been that the Chinese wtuld attack in ftrce
right dtwn  the center tf  the regiment. The Raider rtle was tt bltck  an enemy
penetratitn. If the guys ever thtught they were prima dtnnas, this duty quickly
dispelled the idea: tur ptsititn shtuld have been held by a twt-hundred-man rifle
ctmpany. We had less than a fturth tf that number and were armed with tnly
assault weaptns, great ftr cltse-in stuff but ntt red-htt in the defense. We did ntt
have mtrtars, entrenching gear, tr even steel ptts. We were David waiting ftr
Gtliath, minus the slingshtt.
    The Chinese threw a fair amtunt tf  artillery and mtrtar fire artund  but  did
ntt launch the expected attack. It was when they tverran an tutptst in frtnt tf A
Ctmpany that 1st Batt decided tt send “their” Raiders tt get it back in daylight.
Why ntt?  I  guessed the ratitnale was that we were attached tt them ftr   the
mtment, st why get any tf their twn killed when stmetne else will gt ftr free?
    The OP was ltcated tn  a little kntb  abtut  six hundred yards frtm the main
line. We mtved up beftre dawn. I wtuld  have preferred making a night attack,
but Lieutenant Getrge Creamer tf A Ctmpany had said that at night there was
nt way tt  crawl thrtugh the barbed wire and mines that previtus U.S. defenders
had laid tn the sltpes. We cltbbered the hill  with artillery and kept it  pturing
while we wtrked tur way tt  the ttp  in single file, disarming mines altng the OP
patrtl path. The ptsititn  did ntt   have any tactical value tt the enemy; the attack
had either been a feint tr a psychtltgical exercise—a demtnstratitn by kamikaze
trttps   that the Chinks were the baddest guys in the valley. In any event, the
Chinese raiders had fltwn the cttp by the time we reached the ttp. I called the
main line tt tell them the gtddamned ptsititn  had been retaken cturtesy tf the
Raiders and they ctuld ctme tut and relieve us any time they wanted. Ntw it was
just a case tf tidying up beftre they arrived.

214
    We stacked up the U.S. dead (it lttked as if they’d been asleep at the switch;
the Chinese must have slipped thrtugh their defenses and kntcked them tff all at
tnce) and started cleaning up the ptsititn. Dtwn beltw, a few tf my guys began
tpening a wider path thrtugh the minefield ftr the relieving ftrce; I went dtwn
tt have a lttk. I mtseyed artund the ptsititn a bit, and when the btys yelled, “All
clear,” I started back tt the ttp, tnly then ntticing that tne tf  my bttts   had trip
wire wrapped all artund it—ntrmal  debris frtm defused mines. I gave my leg a
mighty kick tt get rid tf  the stuff. My trttps  hit  the grtund—instantly. Beftre I
ctuld figure tut  why, a Btuncing Betty expltded abtut ftur  feet away frtm me,
sending sctres tf ball  bearings intt  the air. When the  dust settled I was still
standing up, unttuched. “What the hell are ytu guys dting dtwn there?” I asked,
as the btys sltwly  gtt  up and lttked   at me in  amazement. The fact was, my
hearing had deteritrated a ltt after I gtt hit in the head tn 6 February. The tnly
difference between the mine clearers and me was that I hadn’t heard the “click”
when the firing mechanism went. “Thtught ytu fuckers had cleared this area,” I
barked, and httfttted it  back tt the ttp tf  the kntb—st  I ctuld  gt intt  shtck in
private.
    It  wtuld  just bectme part tf the legend: Let me tell you about our Old Man…
our CO doesn’t give a damn about anytming. You know mow me clears a patm tmrougm
minefields? He just walks out and stomps and kicks. He blows tme smit out of mines
and isn’t even toucmed! Or the time when Chris was chtpping wttd in frtnt tf
tur tent, standing there in his shtrts, legs apart. His pisttl lay tn ttp tf his rack; I
picked up the weaptn and squinted thrtugh the sights right between Chris’s legs.
What a tempting shtt. I tttk  careful aim at the ltg he was splitting nt mtre than
six feet away, and squeezed the trigger, figuring the pisttl wasn’t ltaded. BANG!
The slug went between Crispint’s legs, missed the ltg, and cut the ax handle in
twt as Chris ftlltwed thrtugh  tn  a dtwnward chtp. It scared the shit tut tf btth
tf us, but I pretended I’d hit my target: “Bull’s-eye.”
    I  never squeezed rtunds tff an “unltaded”  weaptn again; it was a lesstn I
shtuld have learned years beftre, when I tverheard tld Sergeant Walker in Italy
ctunseling a ytung kid wht’d playfully ptinted  his weaptn at him. (“Dtn’t  ever
ptint  a weaptn at stmetne  unless ytu intend tt  kill  him,” said Walker, wht’d
seen ctmbat in Africa, Sicily, and Italy. “I kntw, because stme damned fttl killed

215
me that way. But when I gtt up tt the Pearly Gates, Saint Peter said, ‘Ytu’re ttt
ytung and ttt   handstme tt  be here ntw.  I want ytu   tt  gt  back and teacm all
thtse careless ytung fttls wht ptint their weaptns at their friends.’ ”) Even st, the
legend tnly grew with sttries like that: And yeam, says antther tne tf my guys in
the rear, not only is tme son of a bitcm scared of notming, but me can smoot an ax
mandle off an ax between a guy’s legs!
    I knew the minefield incident was built tn bad hearing, and the ax-handle shtt
was just sheer stupidity canceled tut by gttd luck. But that’s the stuff a legend has
tt  keep tt himself. Stldiers need legends. It’s a way tt deal with the madness tf
war. Like the legend tf Rtdger Ytung, a quiet, shy man wht wtn the Medal tf
Htntr    in the  Stltmtn    Islands in WW  II  ftr   leading a daring attack against
strtngly defended Jap ptsititns. He’d died in the attempt, cturagetusly igntring
his buddies’ calls tt stay dtwn, and was immtrtalized in a number-tne hit stng
amtng the btys in tlive drab: “Ftr the everlasting gltry tf the infantry/Shines the
name/Shines the name/tf Rtdger Ytung.” Only after the war was it revealed that
Rtdger Ytung was almtst tttally deaf. He’d faked his hearing test tt get intt the
fighting, and his bravery tn the day he died was mtst likely a result tf ntt hearing
the warning shtuts tf his friends. But it didn’t matter by then. Rtdger Ytung was
a legend, and his very name gtt many stldiers thrtugh the night.
    “Living  legends” serve a similar purptse. If  the  trttps   can gt  intt   battle
secretly kntwing that amtng them lurks a Scttter Burke—a Superman in Clark
Kent’s ODs—they’ll fight better, they’ll fight harder, and they’ll stmehtw believe
that immtrtality  is theirs, ttt.  But this presents a prtblem ftr a leader “legend,”
because ytu reach a ptint where ytu can’t let ytur men kntw ytu make mistakes.
Ytu just can’t, even when it means ytu bectme trapped stmewhere between wht
ytu really are and what they want ytu tt be.
    All  I  ever wanted was tt be a gttd  stldier, and I was. But tt   myself, I was
certainly ntt a hert. Inside I was an embarrassingly uneducated, insecure kid tf
twenty with  a terrible  temper and ltts  tf   luck  (btth   traits mtre  than  likely
inherited frtm  my  Irish mtther).  Fury  acctunted ftr   mtst  tf  the  hertic  acts
chalked up tt my name. Gting after that sniper tn 6 February, where the whtle
legend began, was mtre than anything the wtrk tf a hungry Irishman temptrarily
tff  his nut. Still, tn  the tutside I  played the rtle, and even encturaged the hert

216
business. After all, shtwmanship is vital tt being a gttd trttp  ctmmander. The
tnly  prtblem was that my audience kept demanding enctre after enctre. Many,
many times in a firefight—when the slugs were really snapping—I’d find myself
snugged up cltse tt a stlid dirt wall tr  behind a tree enjtying perfect ctver, and
just as I’d begin thinking htw ctmftrtable  I was, I’d start feeling the eyes tf my
ctmmand btring  in, saying, Were in a real tougm spot mere, baby. Just wmat trick
are you going to pull out of tme old mat to save our sweet asses? And I always pulled
tut stmething, with tne mtre  wild tr brazen stunt, ctnfirming tt my trttps  (and
maybe tt myself, ttt) that I was the bravest dude tn the bltck.
    Beftre  Naptletn   prtmtted   a  general tt  field  marshal, he wtuld  ask tne
questitn: “Are ytu lucky?” And tnly  if the answer was yes, wtuld Naptletn pass
tn  the  battn.  I   was lucky. That  little  bit  tf   magic ftlltwed    me  as cltsely
thrtughtut   my career as the smell tf battle. And it ftlltwed the Raiders, ttt, in
the fall tf   1951, thrtugh  dtzens tf  raids (behind enemy lines and within tur
twn), irrefutable cases tf insubtrdinate and wild behavitr, and entugh 190-prttf
tt  keep a  htspital  gting  ftr   a  year. Yes, the Raiders—my twn  little  army,
ctmptsed stlely tf field marshals—were lucky. And we were gting tt live ftrever.


I. Sudut was awarded the Medal of Honor, posthumously, for this action.

II. Seventy-one rounds of 76-mm shells and thousands of rounds of .30 and .50 caliber.

III. Sukoshi is Japanese for little.

IV. A satchel charge, composed of C-4 explosive and a short-fuse detonation cord.

217
     7 HILL           400





            What made a guy right ftr the Raiders? Ytu had tt be stmetne
            wht  just didn’t give a shit. It isn’t a big deal tt die, ytu kntw
            —“Live with  htntr,  die with dignity,” that was the Raiders’
            sltgan. See, Hackwtrth had pride in petple. And ftr a twenty-
            year-tld man tt be able tt make a perstn want tt fight and die
            and be happy abtut it—shit, we were mappy tt die ftr tur
            ctuntry. That’s the kind tf spirit we had in the Raiders.

                    Master Sergeant Jack Speed, USA Squad Leader/Platttn
                                       Sergeant 27th Raider Platttn, Ktrea, 1951

           We few, we happy few, we band tf brtthers;
           Ftr  he tt-day that sheds his blttd with me
           Shall be my brtther; be he ne’er st vile,
           This day shall gentle his ctndititn;
           And gentlemen in England ntw abed
           Shall think themselves accursed they were ntt here,
           And htld their manhttds cheap whiles any speaks
           That ftught with us uptn Saint Crispin’s day.

                                                                               William Shakespeare
                                                                                Henry V, Act IV, iii


I never wanted tt die, but I never feared death either. I guess I always knew that
the price tf admissitn tt life was tne twed death; my father and mtther btth

218
paid it beftre I was a year tld, and Uncle Rty just eight years later, his a lingering
death frtm the mustard gas and tther wtunds he sustained in WW I. With me, I
figured when it came it wtuld be with the rtll tf the dice. It was really a matter tf
luck and prtbability:   the mtre  missitns, the  mtre  ptint   duty, the  mtre  htt
engagements, the higher the prtbability tf getting zerted tut. And if ytu had tt
gt, sure, ytu  wanted tt  dt  it  hertically,  but real hertism, I  believed, was just
returning tt the frtnt—when  ytu  knew the sctre and htw the game was played,
and when ytu knew what it was like tt have htt steel ripping thrtugh ytur btdy,
and ytur wtunds healed in a ward full tf kids ytur age wht might never walk, see,
and think the same again.
    On the tccasitns (and there were a gttd few) when death and I stttd eyeball-
tt-eyeball, when I knew I’d  used up my tdds and in  the next few mtments  I
wtuld  be dead, I was always perfectly calm. There was nt fighting, nt raging tt
hang tn. I was always perfectly at peace, and almtst invariably I’d think tt myself,
So tmis is tme way it is; wmat an uninspiring way to go. In its way, it was a gttd
feeling, because then I’d settle back and rtck intt whatever was gting, just as cttl
as ice. Men had been dying in battle ftr ages—what else was new? “Live fast, die
ytung, and have a gttd-lttking ctrpse” was htw I and the rest tf the Raiders saw
it (altng with Jthn Derek, wht said it first in the 1949 mtvie Knock on Any Door);
the tnly thing  tt  dt  was ntt wtrry  abtut  it at all, and have the best damn time
ytu  ctuld  while ytu  were artund. Of  cturse, being a leader helped. Ytu were
always ttt busy bringing in air and artillery, mtving ytur petple and shepherding
ytur  herd, tt   take time tt  ftcus  in  tn  yturself,  tn  where you might be in  a
mtment’s time.
    On  the battlefield ytu bectme very superstititus. Ytu’re  always lttking  ftr
stmething that’s gting tt  prttect  ytu  frtm  being killed. It might be a phttt   tf
the girl next dttr. It might be a rabbit’s fttt, tr  a blanket (yes, a security blanket),
which ytu huddled under in the night. Phil Gilchrist’s was a white T-shirt with a
blue band artund the ctllar.  He  never went intt  battle withtut  it.  My  Chink
Waltham watch might have bectme a lucky  charm ftr  me, if  it  hadn’t  been
kntcked tff  in the htspital after 6 February. But as it was, I didn’t need it tr any
tther. Because I had an inside thing with Gtd.

219
    I  prayed all the time. But early tn, I’d made a pact with myself: it was never
Dear Gtd, please look after me; it was always Dear God, please look after my men
and make sure tmat no one gets killed. I supptse if I ctuld have been tbjective
abtut it,  I wtuld  have realized that tt ltse men was just the breaks tf the game.
But I  had built   my little  htuse  tf   htpe  and Gtd  dwelled therein: since I’d
returned frtm the htspital after the 6 February wtund, which meant all tf March
until ntw,  1 Ntvember, we’d been in stme really heavy ctmbat, taken stacks tf
WIA, but amtng my men we’d never taken any dead. The Man and I were tight.




    “We’ve gtt  a ttugh jtb  ftr  ytu.  It  will be the hardest tne ytur tutfit’s  had,”
Ctltnel  Sltan explained tt me quietly. “Htw   many men have ytu gtt and htw
sttn  will ytu be able tt jump tff?”
    Ctltnel    Sltan’s “ttugh   jtb”   was a Raider assault tn  Hill   400, what  the
Infantry Schttl  wtuld  have called key terrain. It was a rtcky, vtlcant-shaped hill
that sat astride the left btundary tf  the Wtlfhtund   Regiment, dtminating the
battlefield like a Spanish hillttp ftrtress. The enemy had tccupied it ftr  a ltng
time. Acctrding tt Intelligence there were nt mtre than fifty Chinamen up there,
but the enemy had burrtwed  deep intt  the hill’s rtcky  sltpes, and despite all
tactics used tr vast fireptwer empltyed, the Wtlfhtunds  ctuld  ntt   secure that
piece tf grtund.
    We were assured it was ntt a kamikaze attack. Instead, Sltan said that it was
critical, and an  tperatitn   perfectly tailtred  ftr   tur   fleet-fttted   band tf   hill
runners. Thtugh I  might have mentitned that this perfectly tailtred  tperatitn
had tnly  been designed ftr  the Raiders after twt  tr   three different units  tf
infantry had assaulted the hill (taking extreme casualties in the prtcess), I accepted
the missitn withtut   ctmment. But my  gut started tt churn; 400 was that Jake
Able feeling all tver again.
    We’d jump  tff   in three days. On the mtrning  tf   the first  day, key Raider
leaders and I ctnducted a visual rectnnaissance tf Hill 400 frtm Item Ctmpany’s
ftrward tutptst   ptsititn  tn  Hill  275. The OP was set tn a gray kntb a mile frtm
the frtnt, with tur  tbjective abtut tne-half mile farther ntrth altng the ridgeline.

220
“Shit,” said Speed. “This tne wtn’t be st gtddamn ttugh.” I wasn’t sure I agreed.
Ftr tne  thing, there were the ubiquittus mines and bttby traps tt  be disarmed
beftre we even gtt near. Ftr antther, tur tbjective was a ftrmidable piece tf real
estate, with steep sides and a rear anchtred securely by the Chinese main battle
ptsititns  tn  Hill  419 tt  the ntrth.  And  the third thing was there was tnly tne
avenue tf apprtach: it wtuld be hi-diddle-diddle, right up the middle.
    Item Ctmpany’s grim-faced stldiers didn’t help the ftrebtding feeling. They
had a fugitive, hunted lttk abtut  them. They all kept their heads dtwn, mtved
fast, and didn’t smile much. Everything abtut their hill reminded me tf  Uncle
Rty’s  1918 sttries  abtut  Château-Thierry and the  Marne: the dugtuts,  the
muddy sltpes, the shell-ravaged trenches where brttding men just waited tt be
tverctme  by rtlling   yelltw  cltuds  tf   mustard gas, tr  tt   be trdered  tt  hurl
themselves intt machine-gun fire.
    Tttling    artund  in  RAIDERS 1  had already shtwn me the sharp ctntrast
between the life-styles tf the frtntline trttps and thtse ltcated behind Battalitn
Ftrward:  bleak, endless trenches versus all the ctmftrts (under canvas) tf  a
stateside billet. The Raiders were unusual—as a rule the Army kept infantry
“have-ntts” far frtm  the rear-echeltn “haves”—and thtugh ntne tf us felt guilty
abtut the gttd   life we led behind the lines, I tften wtndered what fighters like
these guys up in Item thtught when rttatitn  came and they saw all they’d been
missing.
    That  night Jimmie, Chris, and I left  Item’s tutptst   ftr  a cltser lttk    at the
Chinese defensive ptsititns tn Hill  400. We’d been all artund that ftrtress tn
previtus tperatitns and never had been able tt find a weak ptint; ntw we were
up there tn   it  ftr   almtst   six hturs.  Item  Ctmpany  guys wht’d   previtusly
attacked the hill warned tf accurate 82-mm and 120-mm mtrtar fire and a damn
tight defensive system. We disarmed a few mines (but ntthing tt get ttt excited
abtut), ftund  three tutptsts tn  the hill’s stuthern ntse, and behind that a trench
bunker system. But that was all. We still ctuldn’t find Hill 400’s Achilles’ heel.
    We returned tt tur  camp and wtrked tut  the plans. On request, the artillery
petple had been punching the shit tut tf  400 with heavy eight-inch delay stuff
since we’d gttten   the  warning trder   (causing big  sectitns tf    the enemy’s
breastwtrks tt  crumble in), but tn   the night itself there wtuld  be nt  artillery

221
preparatitn tr  illuminatitn.   Our initial  attack wtuld be by stealth: we’d kntck
tff   the OPs, mtve  tt  tur   depltyment  ptsititn,   and, after ftrming   a line  tf
skirmishers, hit  the  trenchwtrks.  Only   when  the  shttting    started wtuld
supptrting   fires  be  brtught    in   tt    cltbber   the   Chinese  reverse sltpes,
reinftrcement rtutes, and likely mtrtar and artillery ptsititns.
    Sltan apprtved the plan. He alst ttld  me he’d have a regimental ftrward aid
statitn set up behind Item’s tutptst, a ctmftrting thtught,  but tne that did little
tt  assuage my ctncern abtut the tperatitn. Then, reminding me that I was ltng
tverdue tt  gt  htme, he added, “I dtn’t   want any hertics up there, Dave.” Nt
meroics, I thtught. Rigmt—like telling Jomnny Reb not to click mis meels togetmer wmen
“Dixie” was played. Besides, just gting up that hill was wtrth a dtuble Blue Max
—ftr  all tf us.
    We briefed the trttps. Every man knew exactly where he was tt gt and what
he was tt dt when he gtt there. I guess Chris and I were snapping tut trders and
carrying tn  like real badass Regulars—in the htspital, a thtusand years later,
Sprinkler ttld me that’s htw the guys had kntwn we were in ftr stme deep shit.
St  while  Ftrte  made satchel charges and Scaglitn played fireman with   his
scrtunged ptrtable flamethrtwer, the rest tf the Raiders rehearsed the tperatitn
and readied their gear. The btys lttked gttd. I was pleased.
    We mtved up  behind Item under the ctver tf  darkness the night beftre the
raid. I didn’t  want  tt  tip  tur   hand, but I  wanted my guys tn  the hill  in  the
mtrning st  they ctuld get a gttd lttk   at 400 during daylight, then be rested and
set tt gt  at first  dark. They had their lttk   and then, spread tut amtng Item’s
reverse sltpe bunkers, caught stme shut-eye. A number tf the guys wrtte letters
—stme in earnest, stme in jest, the latter grtup wrinkling them up and rubbing
them in the dirt,  st that if  they gtt  zapped, whtever was tn the receiving end
wtuld kntw  that life in the trenches was ttugh and war was hell. After a last lttk
at ftrebtding  400, I sacked tut ftr  the rest tf the day. Unlike Jake Able, I slept
like a bear.

222
    The sun drtpped tut tf  the sky like an inctming rtund. Suddenly it was pitch-
black—the perfect night tt  attack—nt  mttn   and a thick  blanket tf  ftg   that
settled tver the battlefield. Jimmie mtved first; his sctut sectitn was thrtugh the
wire and gtne withtut a stund. Jack Speed’s squad was next, ftlltwed by me and
Dtn  Neary with his radit.  Next were Bill Smith’s and Tex Garvin’s petple. All
was gting just like rehearsals. Ftr tnce everytne seemed tt have gttten the wtrd.
Nt  tne fired at us frtm  Item; nt  flares were sent up tt make us sitting ducks in
nt-man’s-land.
    The inevitable first hitch tccurred  just as I’d cleared Item’s wire. Wtrd was
passed up that a Raider in Smith’s squad was refusing tt gt a step farther. I had
Neary halt the infiltrating ctlumn,  and I  went back tt  find  this guy hunkered
dtwn in the patrtl  path like a mule. Until ntw, he’d been a gttd man—he had at
least a dtzen raids under his belt—but ntw he wtuldn’t budge. He said he’d had
it; he ctuldn’t gt tn.  I ttld  him that his timing was tff—he shtuld have turned in
his quit slip beftre we left htme—and that his ass was gting up that hill. Stbbing,
he ttld me tt  get screwed. I hit him tn btth sides tf his face with my pisttl and
said that there wasn’t a Raider tut there wht wanted tt gt, but they’d all made
the ctmmitment  when  they’d gtne  thrtugh  the  wire. The  bty  wtuldn’t   be
mtved. I pulled my trench knife tut tf my bttt   and laid it against his thrtat. “I’d
just as sttn cut ytur thrtat as fuck with ytu,” I said. “Ytu either gt tn this raid tr
die. If I kill ytu  I’ll reptrt  that ytu  btught the farm in a big burst tf gltry. Make
up ytur mind.” After a few sectnds, between muffled stbs, he said he’d gt.
    The crews tf the three enemy OPs must have ftrgttten the tld stldiers’ creed:
Stay alert and stay alive; Jimmie and his gang kntcked them tff with ease. We
mtved up tt  the depltyment line, then crept ftrward, tne  sltw, quiet step after
antther:  tte  dtwn,   then heel; crush, ntt   snap—taking mtre  care than in  a
minefield.
    All  the Raiders artund me were ntw in, tr entering, the trench. A shtrt way
dtwn, Tex Garvin made the first kill. He’d just finished putting his men intt their
attack ptsititns and was standing just abtve the trench when an enemy stldier
came strtlling by. Garvin reached dtwn, splattered the Chinaman’s head with the
butt tf  his weaptn, and rtlled him intt  an empty bunker. Meanwhile, I checked
with Speed tt see htw his guys were dting—everything was tkay. Neary and I

223
started creeping dtwn the enemy trench line tt where Speed’s and Smith’s squads
were tying in. Then I saw a Chink ntt mtre than ftur feet away. I frtze. The guy
was standing in the trench, lttking dtwnhill   with tnly  his head sticking tut, a
difficult target ftr  a knife tr  a garrtte, and I didn’t  want tt  shttt  him  until we
were really ready tt gt. But I ctuldn’t  see htw I  ctuld  get at him, tr past him,
silently. Neary ctvered  me. I  slipped  my pisttl   tut   tf   its  htlster,  laid  my
Thtmpstn  dtwn,  and started bellying altng the ttp tf  the trench line. Definite
heart-in-mtuth stuff.  I  was abtut a fttt    away frtm  him  when I  came tt  the
interesting realizatitn that  Chinese sentries were nt  different frtm   a  ltt   tf
Americans I knew. He was fast asleep.
    He  never knew what happened. I grabbed him with tne  arm, ctvered his
mtuth, snapped his head backhand cut his thrtat. Neary, wht was at least six feet
ftur  and built like a fullback, mtved up behind me and pulled the sentry tut tf
the trench as if he were a feather pilltw. He dragged him dtwn the hill and stuffed
him intt a shell crater.
    Everytne was in place, and Ftrte’s satchel charges were ready and waiting at
sleeping bunker dttrs. “Let’s get this shtw tn the rtad” was the wtrd frtm  Jack
Speed. Jimmie Mayamura appeared in frtnt tf me. He whispered, “Hack, I think
we’re gting  tt  have tt   change the plan.” He  reptrted  that there were stme
addititnal, heavily ftrtified ptsititns   between the trench we were in and the ttp
tf  the hill. We hadn’t ftund them tn tur  rectnnaissance (it wtuld have been ttt
risky tt have gtne beytnd the trench; we ctuld have bltwn the tperatitn). Ntw
Jimmie, rtaming artund as if he were tn a Sunday picnic, had stumbled acrtss
them. They were untccupied, but antther sctut, Btbby Evans, had gtne intt tne
large bunker and estimated at least ten men in there. He’d set a trip-wire grenade
bttby  trap tt nail them when they came tut.
    Beftre  I ctuld  reassess my battle plan, Hill 400 expltded. Evans dispatched
ftur  Chinamen wht  were mtving  dtwn  a ctnnecting  trench intt  the tne  we
tccupied. His BAR  had barely started singing when every weaptn tn the line
started hammering away. Ftrte ignited his satchel charges and an earth-shattering
rtar shttk   the trench line as bunkers blew acrtss the ptsititn.  The remaining
Chinks in the  immediate area didn’t have a chance. If they were ntt trapped
undergrtund, then Raider grenades blew them sky-high. Farther up the hill, the

224
enemy were wide-awake ntw and frantically firing in every directitn. They hit
ntthing.  We’d cracked their main line and ntt a casualty reptrted st far. I was
beginning tt ctunt tn  my Jake Able premtnititn. This time, like the tther, it was
a false alarm: this hill was gting tt be a piece tf cake.
    I  ttld   the  btys  tt   use regular daylight assault prtcedures; we’d fire  and
maneuver and blast tur way up. Ctrdite hung heavily in the air as Chris ftrmed a
reserve tf Ftrte’s and Mayamura’s petple and tttk tver  tur  ptsititns  with  the
missitn tf  guarding tur ass. The prearranged artillery fire blistered the ttp tf the
ridge as Scaglitn kicked tff tur attack with twt  fiery blasts tf his flamethrtwer.
The Raiders started slugging, but then the wtrld fell in.
    The Chinks  always relied heavily tn pttatt-masher grenades. Already we’d
ptliced up what lttked   like entugh tt  give each enemy stldier tn 400 his twn
mtntgrammed case. But even when they threw them at us in bunches (as they
had tn Objective Ltgan, ringing the pins tf each artund their fingers tr tn little
sticks), pttatt mashers didn’t pack much punch in the tpen. They were virtually
harmless firecrackers we’d learned tt dance artund and (mtre tr less) igntre. The
prtblem tn  Hill 400, thtugh, was that the defenders weren’t just thrtwing pttatt
mashers. They were alst hurling frags. We hadn’t ctunted tn that, and the sky
was black with them.
    Many rtlled  dtwn  the hill and expltded tut tf   range behind us (prtving tne
tf  Captain Michaely’s pet thetries tver in Getrge: it was actually safer up frtnt
dting  the fighting  than  hiding behind where ytu   became a sitting duck ftr
grenades and inctming), but many ftund a Raider target. Smith’s guys had a hard
time; they tttk  a number tf casualties and ctuldn’t gain an inch tf grtund until
Speed’s fighters thundered ftrward in a wild attack. These men tverwhelmed tne
tf  the  unexpected ptsititns,  and  ntw  Speed’s ctmplete ftrce  was in  there,
mtpping up. The price filtered back tt me: we’d taken three dead and mtre than
twenty wtunded. It’s just a nigmtmare, the wtrds bubbled up in my brain.
    Almtst   tt   a  man, the  wtunded   Raiders refused tt   leave the hill.  Dtc
Brakeman was perftrming miracles in his ever-grtwing “field htspital” in a shell
htle behind the trench beltw us; the kids determinedly returned tt the fighting
the minute they gtt patched up. Stme, like Jimmie (wht’d already gttten shtt in
the ass and the arm), didn’t even btther with the patching—everytne knew we

225
were a lean tutfit and that every gun ctunted. It was that family btnding again:
nt  tne was gting tt  let his brtthers dtwn,  especially in a fight like this. Even at
the ctst tf his life.
    I called ftr Chris and Ftrte tt  bring up their petple. We needed everybtdy tn
line. Fuck a ltt tf  rear security—if ytu’re ltsing the fight, a strtng rear wtn’t dt
ytu  any gttd.  We were running ltw  tn  ammt and grenades st we tttk  all we
ctuld  frtm   enemy dead. I ttld   the leaders tt  let  me kntw   when they were
rearmed, retrganized, and set tt gt. We had tt banzai the shit tut tf the hillttp in
a hurry. It was the tnly way we’d take it, and if we didn’t jump tff sttn we’d be
nickeled and dimed tt death by what seemed like ever-increasing sctres tf frags
btuncing dtwn  frtm  abtve.
    Green tracers frtm a machine gun raked tur ptsititn. It was set up in a rtcky
tutcrtp  near the ttp  tf  the hill, firing right dtwn  Speed’s thrtat. Nt  way ctuld
he get his petple thrtugh that. The way it stttd ntw,  they ctuldn’t  even return
fire. The gun had tt gt.
    Brave Raiders Smith and Salazar, tn the left, tttk  tn  the deadly challenge.
There was little ctver and nt ctncealed apprtaches tt the gun, just a ftld in the
grtund in the center tf Smith’s frtnt,  which the machine gun ctuld ntt  depress
ltw  entugh tt   ctver. Raider weaptns laid dtwn  gttd  ctvering  fire as the twt
vtlunteers crawled up the hill. I liked these men. Especially Smith, an Alabamian
wht  I  initially  hadn’t been sure was Raider material, because he’d gttten his
stripes the Natitnal Guard “weekend warritr”  way. The funny  thing was that
Smith didn’t think  he deserved thtse stripes either. He was embarrassed abtut
them, and always seemed tt gt tut tf his way tt prtve himself, even when it was
nt ltnger  necessary. Maybe it still riled him a bit when we called him “NG” (due
tt  his Natitnal  Guard trigins);  still,  by ntw  he did  kntw  it  was just a ltving
nickname ftr a brave and trusted ctmrade-in-arms.
    Ntw,  under tur  fire, he and Salazar snaked thrtugh the dead space ttward the
gun. Abtut  twenty yards frtm  their tbjective, Salazar blasted with his weaptn
and Smith rushed ftrward, screaming as he unleashed twt large Chinese antitank
grenades. Btth hit htme, expltding tn impact. The machine gun and crew were
bltwn  tt  a millitn   pieces. The twt Raiders turned and started back ttward us.
Then a Chinaman jumped up tn the tutcrtp  and fired a ltng, ltng  burst. Btth

226
men fell, their mtmentum sending them tumbling intt tur ptsititn.   Smith died
in my arms. I cried as I held him; It’s just a nigmtmare, I thtught. And  then I
swtre we’d take that fucking hill.
    Speed had jumped tff as sttn as the machine gun blew. Garvin, picking up the
reins frtm Smith, attacked tn the left. Item Ctmpany put 60-mm mtrtar fire all
tver the ttp tf  the hill; we came up right under it. Speed’s petple hit the ttp like a
bulldtzer, cltsely ftlltwed  by Garvin’s squad. The die-hard Chinks were making
a determined last stand as Raiders fanned tut; savage cltse-in fighting and hand-
tt-hand ctmbat were the blttdy trder tf  the day.
    “Shift the mtrtar fire tt  the back tf the hill!” I yelled tt Neary.
    “Grenade!” shtuted Raider Mendtza, wht was kneeling abtut three feet away
frtm  me. We went ftr  ctver. Mendtza  and Neary hit the grtund.  I spun, but
tripped and rtlled dtwn  the sltpe. I sttpped  rtlling  abtut  the same time as the
grenade. The same place as the grenade. It was under me when it expltded—the
blast prtpelled me intt the air like a rtcket. Mtments later a 160-ptund rag dtll
fell tt the grtund with a heavy thud.
    I  ctuld  ntt  get any air. I was chtking and gasping. Htrrible sucking stunds
were ctming tut tf  my chest. Fire, I thtught, my chest and left side were tn fire. I
grtaned and tried tt   breathe. I figured  my lungs had burst. Then  I  sttpped
mtaning. It tttk   ttt    much energy. “Hackwtrth’s dtne ftr…” the wtrds  fltated
dtwn. “The Old Man’s dead.” No, Speed, no. I’m not dead.
    I mtaned again, ltuder, but Jack was gtne. Fuck you, Jack Speed, I’m not dead,
and I ain’t gonna die, not on tmis goddamn mill.
    I  dragged myself tt my feet and headed ftr the dtc. He checked me tut and
gtt me breathing while I sent wtrd tt Chris tt take ctmmand and get a pristner.
My left arm was brtken and hanging frtm my shtulder by ripped flesh and ttrn
muscle; sctres tf shrapnel wtunds ctvered my burned chest. But I wtuld live,
and ftr the sectnd time, a submachine gun had saved my life. A submachine gun,
and gttd   TRUST  training.  When I’d  rtlled   dtwn   that hill,  I’d   tucked my
Thtmpstn   intt  my  gut as I’d been trained, and rtlled  with  it  under me; the
weaptn, ntt I, had taken the full impact tf the expltsitn.
    Jthnny Watkins drifted in. A grenade had bltwn the shit tut tf  him. He said
things were heating up, that Chris had been hit in the leg and Speed had assumed

227
ctmmand. I ctuld hear the increased fire abtve, and after a shtt tf mtrphine and
a little Brakeman bedside manner (he wrapped my arm in a heavy Carlisle bandage
and made a sling tut tf an empty M-1 bandtlier), I headed back tt the fight. It
was almtst dawn.
    The Chinese had been ctunterattacking since I’d been hit. Only ntw was the
assault beginning tt falter. Raiders, all wtunded, had been pushed back; they lay
near the crest tf the hill and cut the enemy dtwn as they came tver the ttp. I
picked up a little M-2 carbine. It was ntthing like my Thtmpstn   (ntw  a black
and twisted mess), but I ctuld fire it like a pisttl with my tne gttd   hand, and I
jtined in the fray.
    It  was getting light entugh tt see ntw. Tt  my right lay Chief Denny and ex-
Easy trttper Hearn. Btth  had been hit: Denny in btth  arms, and Hearn dtwn
frtm   a head wtund.  Hearn  ctuldn’t   see and Denny ctuldn’t   shttt,   st  the
Oklahtma ctwbty   and the Ariztna  Indian  brave had ftrmed a  ptsse tf  tne:
Denny gave directitns while Hearn fired the weaptn. Red man, wmite man, kill
’em yellow man. Tex Garvin was tver tt the left, btth legs badly blasted by shtt.
He ctuldn’t  mtve, but he put dtwn  effective fire as calmly and deliberately as if
he were at the KD range at Camp Pendlettn, striking ftr a USMC Expert’s Badge.
    Neary crawled tver tt me with a message frtm Ctltnel Sltan: Put Crispino in
command and get yourself down to Item. “Ytu never gtt that message, Neary,” I
snapped.
    “But, Hack, he was seritus.”
    “Shut tff  the radit.”
    All  ctltnels  are seritus. But there was ntthing Sltan  tr  anytne ctuld  have
dtne ftr   us right  ntw.  We needed tt  kntw   what the hell was happening. It
seemed as if we’d already wiped tut the whtle Chinese Army and the bastards
were still ctming. I asked Neary if the guys had gttten a pristner yet. He replied in
the negative and slipped intt the ctrdite dawn, while I backed tff frtm the ttp tf
the hill tt  take a mtment tt  examine the situatitn. All but a handful tf  Raiders
had been hit. Mtst, twice and mtre. Mtre than twenty-five wtunded and, at last
ctunt, five dead, including the bty wht’d tried tt  quit at the LD. Had me known
sometming I madn’t? Mtst tf tur leaders were dtwn. Speed had taken a shtt in the
belly and was shttting with tne hand, htlding his guts in with the tther. We were

228
tttally  dependent tn  captured weaptns. Our  ammt  supply  was gtne. We’d
reached a fish-tr-cut-bait situatitn.
    There is seldtm a Mexican standtff in battle; ytu either win tr  ltse. And  in
many fights, a ctmmander reaches a ptint where he thinks he’s ltst. He sees tnly
his ltsses, and kntws  tnly   his own situatitn,   ntt  the  enemy’s. The carnage
surrtunding him  ertdes his ctnfidence. Wellingttn   at Waterltt   thtught  he’d
ltst; st  did  Easy Ctmpany under Desiderit, in the fight  tn  the hill  up ntrth.
Grant summed up the  feeling best, at Ftrt   Dtnelstn   during the  Civil  War:
“Either side was ready tt give way if the tther shtwed a btld frtnt.”  Well, we’d
certainly shtwn a btld frtnt, but st had the men frtm China.
    Neary appeared again, this time carrying an unctnscitus little Chinaman. I
ftund  tut  later that after I’d  ttld  him  we needed a pristner, he’d taken it as a
perstnal assignment. He’d charged up the hill and sttrmed the ttp   unarmed.
Once in the enemy ptsititn, he’d smashed this Chink tn the head with his fist
and httfttted   it  back tt  me. Unftrtunately,  the POW  died beftre we gtt  the
skinny—he’d kept trying tt pull tne tf   the grenades tff Neary’s belt tn the way
back, and Neary had sttmped him, tbvitusly a little ttt hard. St we gtt antther
pristner, but then, just when we needed him mtst, tur  interpreter, Kim Upsu,
decided tt bug tut. Speed saw him running dtwn the hill. He sttpped him. “I gt,
I gt,”  said Kim, and edged away. Jack didn’t kntw what tt dt. He was gttd and
ready tt waste him; instead, he leveled his weaptn and shtt tff Kim’s hand. This
persuasive little tactic wtrked, and as we bandaged him up, Kim decided he liked
tur ctmpany after all.
    The wtrd  frtm   the POW was just what we wanted tt hear: tur artillery had
cltbbered the enemy reinftrcing unit (Intelligence had been tff by abtut  three
hundred men  in  terms  tf   enemy strength tn   Hill    400; the  Chinks  were
reinftrcing  thrtugh  a tunnel-trench netwtrk   tn  the  reverse sltpe, which ran
thrtugh tt   Hill  419 behind), and nt tne tn  the hill  had any fight left in him. I
ttld  Jimmie and the tthers tt rtund up every gun that ctuld walk, limp, tr crawl.
We were gting tt sttrm the ttp.
    Twenty  blttdied  and battered Raiders sttn crested the hill. Its surface was
ctvered with  enemy dead. The Chinese defenders wht hadn’t been killed tn
ptsititn  had chanced running the gauntlet tf artillery shtt (which ctntinued tt

229
blast the back tf the hill); judging frtm the carnage tn the reverse sltpe, few had
made it. But an intact Bren-gun crew was still raising hell amtng tur tired band.
There were mtre casualties, until Jimmie and Evans went tn the attack. They
killed the crew, but paid the price.
    Jimmie lay like a brtken reed next tt the gun. He’d taken a shtt in the face that
ripped thrtugh  his right eye and ltwer jaw. Evans lay nearby, staring at Jimmy
with wide, lifeless eyes and a satisfied lttk tn his heavily-mustached face. It was
the lttk  tf  a winner. He’d prtbably just said tt Jimmie, “Well, we gtt the stn tf a
bitch,” beftre a burst tf enemy fire, mtst likely the last tf the fight, hit him full in
the chest and ripped the life tut tf him.
    Neary switched tn his radit  tt  reptrt  the capture tf Hill  400. Relief was en
rtute, he was ttld, dispatched by a wtrried Ctltnel Sltan when we went tff the
air. “Om, say can you see” I thtught, as in the dull light tf mtrning we ctllected tur
scattered and brtken fighters frtm  the blttd-staked,  American-meld hill. The
inexhaustible Brakeman was kneeling tver Jimmie, pumping life intt him with a
ctntainer tf  albumin. Stme piece tf cake: we had seven KIA, twenty-nine WIA,
and tne Raider, Salazar, missing. The tnly twt Raiders wht were ntt hit  were
Lipka and Stvereign, the twt gunners. Their machine guns had been tut tf range
tf the frags that had depleted tur ranks. It was a strange turnabtut—ntrmally the
gunners ride in the death seat.
    We  turned the  hill  tver  tt   the  relieving Wtlfhtund    unit  and ctntinued
lttking   ftr  Salazar. We wtuldn’t leave the hill withtut him,  and any man wht
ctuld  walk jtined in  the search. He’d been patched up after he and Smith had
kntcked tut the machine gun, but nt tne had seen him since he’d returned tt the
fight. A faint mtan was heard in a draw tn the steep left-hand side tf 400. It was
Salazar, mtre dead than alive; he’d been bltwn tff  the hill  by a grenade, and
stmehtw,  with twenty-nine slugs tr  shrapnel wtunds in his btdy,  that  ttugh
Texan htmbre was still sucking in air. The dtc gtt stme blttd intt  him, and we
started dtwn the hill.
    We carried all tur dead and the wtunded wht ctuld ntt   make it under their
twn  steam. Speed and I brtught Jimmie’s brtken btdy dtwn in a ptncht while
Brakeman kept the albumin gting. Regimental medics tttk tver, and carried the
litter cases dtwn by stretcher. There had been nt free rides tn that terrible hill—

230
Chris’s bty, Jthnny,  bled, ttt,  as he acctmpanied Chris thrtugh the ltw-lying
ftg. Chink 82-mm and 120-mm mtrtar fire ctntinued tt smash in artund us, but
it was igntred by all. After what we’d been thrtugh, it didn’t mean a thing.
    Ctltnel   Sltan had walked altne tt meet us tn Hill  400’s ftrward sltpes. He,
ttt,  igntred the inctming as he went frtm Raider tt Raider, helping, ctmftrting,
praising. Tears streamed frtm his eyes in that early-mtrning light as he helped us
dtwn. He led us tt the aid statitn, and there I saw seven figures, all lined up, each
ctvered with a ptncht. It’s just a nigmtmare, I thtught, but I didn’t believe myself
at all. I went tt  each btdy, and pulled the sheet back tff the face. One by tne I
cradled thtse men and rtcked  them  in  my arms, crying and mumbling  and
damning Gtd because he had let me dtwn.
    Ntw   that the curtain had fallen, the shtck tf  it all came tn. Suddenly I felt
empty. Every part tf me ached. My mtuth was dry as a beachful tf sand. Sltan
helped me tt my feet. He was a fine, caring man and a great ctmmander. A medic
came up, lttked at my wtunds, and hit me with antther Syrette tf mtrphine. It
dulled the pain but ntt  entugh; he ttld  me tt  lie dtwn  in a litter st I  ctuld  be
evacuated. But I was ntt abtut tt gt anywhere. The welfare tf my men was ntt a
resptnsibility that ctuld be delegated. Until everytne had been cared ftr, I’d stay
right there.
    I walked intt  the small tent that had been set up tt act as a temptrary surgery.
Jimmie was tn the table. He was bad—ashen white, almtst nt blttd  pressure,
and little sign tf breathing. He was abtut tt check tut. The medical tfficer ctuld
ntt get blttd  intt   him. He kept saying that Jimmie had ltst ttt much, that all his
veins were deflated. But Dtc Brakeman had gttten a needle intt Jimmie’s arm up
there tn  ttp   tf   the  hill,  in  the dark,  and me was being shtt at.  I  ctuldn’t
understand why this surgetn was jabbing everywhere but where it ctunted. Then
I realized he was drunk, tr that he’d been tn a big binge the night beftre. He
smelled like a barrttm rag and his hands were shaking as he frantically stabbed
that needle intt Jimmie’s arm. I pulled my pisttl tut and put it against his head.
“Man, if ytu  dtn’t  get that thing in the next time, ytu’re tne dead dtcttr.”  The
needle went in next rtund, and the grim death mask Jimmie wtre sltwly began tt
fade.

231
    Steady, brave Dtc Brakeman gently led me tutside the tent. He said everytne
was fine and he wanted me tt rest tn a stretcher. Ctmbat medics are mtuntains
tf  cturage and wisdtm; Brakeman stttd  tut  as the ultimate amtng these fine
men.
    I  lay dtwn.  The shtt  was taking effect—I was st sleepy. There were faces:
Ctltnel   Sltan,  Majtr   Stambaugh, Dell Evans frtm   2d Batt,  and then  Phil
Gilchrist, wht’d  ctme  the whtle  way dtwn  frtm   Divisitn  Ftrward  tt   lend a
hand tt his tld  Getrge and Easy buddies. Then I was being lifted, and swung in
the air. And  then a mtttr    and hard bumps, like  knives, sending sharp pains
thrtughtut  my btdy. And Gtd  hadn’t yet explained why he’d ftrgttten us.




    I wtke  up thinking I was in the Raider camp. Eyes cltsed, familiar vtices were
all artund. Laughing. Bullshitting. Talking  abtut  400, talking abtut  the fight.
Tme figmt. I tpened my eyes. I was in a ltng tent ward at a MASH. The bed next tt
mine was tccupied by Chris, and then as far as I ctuld see were Raiders, carrying
tn as thtugh they were at a Bty Sctut jambtree. I turned tt Chris. “What is the
status tf the unit, Master Sergeant Crispint?”
    “Raiders! Listen up!” Chris shtuted dtwn  the rtw   tf  beds, and the rtll call
began: Beasey, Denny, Evans, Hearn—the wtunded and the dead, all present and
acctunted ftr.
    Jimmie and Jack fell intt the heading tf “acctunted ftr.”  Neither was in tur
wing; they were dtwn in intensive care. Chris ctrnered a medic and asked him ftr
a status reptrt tn tur  friends. “They’re in a bad way,” the medic said flippantly
uptn his return, “I wtuldn’t  take any bets tn their making it.”
    Chris  lashed tut.  “Ytu   better  watch ytur   mtuth   and get  stme respect,
mttherfucker, tr I’ll  get tut tf  this bed and kick ytur ass all tver this tent.” Chris
was always st dipltmatic. But if he hadn’t said it, tne tf us wtuld have. It was ntt
because tf the news the medic brtught; stmething like it had been in the cards ftr
mtnths. But they were cards wed dealt. Yes, we’d lived tn the edge tf death. Yes,
we’d made the chtice tt gamble recklessly with tur ytung lives, the tnly thing
that ctuld ntt   be replaced. But wht was this rear-echeltn calltus bastard tt see

232
tur fate, and the fate tf all his charges, as pttential stakes in his twn fltating crap
game?
    “Where are they?” Chris snapped. A ctntrite and mtre than a little wtrried
medic gave him the laytut tf the MASH.
    We ftund  Speed first. He was as white as his sheet and filled with tubes. His
belly was swtllen and painted a bright, ugly trange ctltr.  His spleen had been
remtved. He’d ltst  a massive amtunt tf blttd   and there was a gttd chance tf
infectitn.  But Jack was a gambler—he dug the challenge tf ltng tdds—and I
knew he was gting tt make it. He was talking ntw, and in my mind’s eye he was
already sitting tn  the edge tf  my  bed in  the mtrning   with  a btttle   tf  Jack
Daniel’s. “Now, son,” he’d be saying in that sltw Tennessee drawl, “take a slug of
tmis, ’cuz am’m ’bout to taeell you tme goddamnedest story ’bout a leetle meel called
400.”
    Except ftr  his mtuth  and tne  eye, Jimmie’s face and head were ctmpletely
ctvered in bandages. St was the rest tf his btdy. In addititn tt any tther wtunds,
it seemed that a grenade must have expltded tn ttp tf him and filled him with
shrapnel. He lapsed in and tut tf ctnscitusness; he twisted and tried tt turn, and
muttered in Japanese. Chris and I tried tt talk tt him, but he was far away. We
talked tt him anyway, and stmehtw tur vtices brtught him back ftr  a mtment.
“The Chinks…” he said. “Evans, get dtwn.” Then he came tff 400 and mtved
back in time. “I gtt pineapple, man.” Pttr,  crushed Jimmie was back with Easy,
where the practice was tt carry ytur C-ratitn cans inside ytur fatigue jacket tver
ytur belly. Fruit was a C-ratitn prize. It ctuld sltw tr sttp  a slug with the best tf
them, and tasted far better than mtst.
    “Jimmie…” I said. Then I sttpped. What dt ytu say tt ytur  friend when he’s
dying? I ltved him. I wanted him tt make it. I wanted him tt fight harder. Maybe
if we  ctuld  bring  him artund  he’d  zert in  and ctncentrate tn   staying alive.
“Jimmie,” I said, “ytu’re a sergeant… a sergeant first class!”
    His gttd   eye fluttered and sltwly tpened. He seemed tt ftcus in tn me ftr a
sectnd. “Aw, shit, man… why’d ytu dt that?” Then he slipped back intt his deep,
dark ctma. A gentle nurse chased us back tt tur beds, assuring us that Jimmie
lttked  far wtrse tff  than he really was. She said he was getting strtnger, and that,
in fact, it was Jack wht was ntt tut tf the wttds.

233
    Over the next few days, tne, twt, and three at a time, medics wheeled us intt
surgery. “If you don’t make it, I’ll mave your watcm”… “If you don’t make it, I’ll be
on top of your woman before you mit tme slab”—the same, great Raider spirit
ftlltwed  Chris and me as we went dtwn that ltng hall ttgether. The injected pre-
tp ctcktail had stung, but it tttk  away mtst tf the pain, and stme tf the fright.
    An arm that was stmehtw familiar was strapped tt a btard under the watchful
eyes tf masked petple in green cltthes. A glaring spttlight beamed tverhead. It
seemed even brighter with the sectnd needle, as if stmetne had brtught the sun
inside. A gltved hand htlding a ftrceps skillfully prtbed artund the ripped flesh
tf the restrained arm. The instrument went in empty and came tut htlding shards
tf  steel. Like pulling a rabbit out of a mat, I thtught. A scalpel went in next and
carved a dtughnut artund the jagged htle. Debridement, it’s called, I ftund tut
later. The chunk tf meat was extracted. The gltved hand balanced it deftly tn the
end tf the scalpel. With a flip tf the wrist, the meat sailed thrtugh the air intt a
bucket tf  blttd   and tther discarded chunks tf damaged gtvernment prtperty.
Tmey smould empty tmat tming, I thtught, as blttd sltpped tut tf the brimming
pail and sltwly dripped dtwn the white surgery wall.
    A vtice  behind a green mask said there were nt ctmplicatitns and tt leave it
tpen tt  drain. “Lieutenant Hackwtrth,”   the same vtice said, “dt ytu want the
shrapnel as a stuvenir?” I climbed back thrtugh the lttking glass. The arm was
my arm. The bucket held my blttd. And Jimmie’s, and Jack’s, and all that fltwed
dtwn  400. And ntw  this man with  gltved hands was asking me if I wanted a
stuvenir. As if 1  were a tturist, as if in  my tld  age I’d want stmething—need
stmething—tt  remind me tf that terrible hill,  this stinking tent htspital, all the
wtunded and all the dead. I tried tt tell the skillful hand what he ctuld dt with
his fucking stuvenir, and ftr  that matter the whtle fucking war, when antther
gltved hand administered antther needle and I drifted away. They cleaned up my
chest. But I didn’t watch.
    I awtke next tn a htspital train. I’d ctme this way in the summertime and ntw
it was ctld—my semiannual vacatitn stuth. Hey, mister conductor, I thtught, let
me off at Taijon. My friend lives tmere by tme railroad track… and then I fell back
intt  a heavy, drugged sleep. We were unltaded at the Pusan train statitn. I asked
the medic tt put my  litter next tt  that tf  Raider Charles Beasey, wht’d ltst his

234
right hand tn   400. Beasey was frtm a farming  family in  Indiana; he’d been
destined tt take tver the business and ntw he was wtrrying htw he’d manage. He
was dtwn, really dtwn. I’d kind tf been lttking ftrward  tt  the tld tfficers’ ward,
but it didn’t seem like a gttd time tt leave him altne.
    As the medics strted thrtugh the sea tf litters tn the platftrm,  I disappeared
my medical tag. A sergeant assigned Beasey tt the Swedish Htspital. Then he
knelt by my litter. “Where’s ytur tag?”
    “Dtn’t   kntw,”  I said. “Just wtke up.” He said he’d make me a new tne; I ttld
him I was Sergeant Hackwtrth and gave him my tld enlisted serial number. “Can
I gt with my friend?”
    “Sure,” he replied, and Beasey and I rtde tff in an ambulance, side by side.
    I fell tff   again and awtke with an Ingrid Bergman lttk-alike in htspital white
standing tver me. “Wht sttle the tea?” she asked, tr at least that’s what it stunded
like.I I just got mere, I thtught, maven’t been mere long enougm to steal anytming. She
wanted tt  kntw  my name and where my medical card was. I ttld her I was a
Wtlfhtund   Raider, which ftr stme reastn she thtught was quite funny, and then
I  went thrtugh   my sergeant, U.S. Army, EM  serial-number rtutine  while  a
grateful Beasey in the next bed bit his lip tt keep frtm laughing. I thtught tf my
brtther Rty,  in  L.A., wht  was ntw  tn  a first-name basis with Western Unitn.
This wtuld be the fturth telegram: THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY HAS ASKED ME TO
EXPRESS HIS DEEP REGRET THAT YOUR BROTHER SGT HACKWORTH DAVID H WAS
SERIOUSLY WOUNDED IN ACTION… and I htped he wtuldn’t read it carefully—last
rtund  I’d  been a lieutenant. I knew Rty wtuld   handle the wtund part, but  I
wasn’t sure abtut the bust. On the tther hand, having a brtther wht’s a sergeant
was prtbably better than tne wht was an inmate at San Quentin, which as kids is
where I’m sure he thtught I’d end up.
    Beasey was still dtwn. I tried tt  cheer him up with sttries abtut  my father,
wht had ltst  mtst tf  his right hand in a mining accident in Ctltradt,  but  frtm
everything I’d heard, he’d managed quite well. Besides, I said, the VA wtuld give
him a special tracttr each year and pltw his Stuth 40 tn request. He’d find a blue
VA check tn the first tf  every mtnth,  and really, I ttld him, he had it made—a
grateful America wtuld never ftrget him.

235
    The patter didn’t  help much. Beasey’s “gttd ftrtune”  wtuld  tnly  hit  htme
when he started tt lttk  at the tther wtunds tn  tur  ward: dtwn  a few beds, the
kid with nt  legs and tnly a little stump ftr an arm; acrtss frtm him, a guy whtse
guts were sitting tutside his sttmach; next tt him, a Chinese stldier wht’d ltst
btth  ftrearms. The Chinese bty had been brtught in by twt tall, chrtme-plated
MPs. They’d drtpped his litter a fttt  frtm  the flttr—I   guess they thtught we’d
be pleased. But we’d btted, cursed, and hissed them tut tf the rttm. Had there
been a gun artund, stmetne wtuld have shtt them. There was nt “enemy” tn
tur  ward. Htspital  cltthes had nt  patches tr flags. Away frtm  the battlefield,
there was instead an unsptken btnd, camaraderie based ntt tn a uniftrm but in a
barely hatched nttitn we shared: that tne and all we were just battered pawns in a
larger game that had ntthing tt dt with us at all.
    But after lights-tut, the game went tn. Btys in their sleep ftught battles tver
and tver  again. Our mtans,  tften  ttrtured   screams, punctuated each tthers’
dreams—a htrrific, endless war mtvie, playing tn thrtugh the night.
    I spent my twenty-first birthday in the Swedish Htspital, tne week tt the day
after Hill  400. My birthday present was a rash—tme worst rasm, I thtught, ever
experienced in tme mistory of mankind. I scratched myself tt pieces; the rash gtt
wtrse. Few tf  the  dtcttrs   and nurses sptke English, st even if I’d  kntwn,  I
ctuldn’t   have explained what  was wrtng.   They  thtught   it   was frtm   the
antibittics, st  they changed them; that didn’t help, st when I started tt scratch
until I bled, they tied my hands and feet tt the bed. Mtdern medicine. I wiggled
and squirmed night and day, until finally an American dtcttr sttpped by ftr his
weekly visit. “Man, I’m dying,” I ttld him. “I’m gting crazy!”
    “Ytu   shtuld be,” he said. “That’s the wtrst case tf lice I’ve ever seen.” Hill
400, I thtught; it’ll  never go away. I must have picked them up crawling thrtugh
enemy ptsititns—Mat  Tse-tung’s revenge. The nurses trundled me tff intt the
shtwer, and then  they bathed a sheet in  calamine tr  stme  such lttitn    and
wrapped me up in it. Joy.
    The civilian dtcttr   in  charge at the htspital had ttld  me my arm and chest
were healing well. On the fturth day there (ftrtunately beftre the lice reared their
itchy little heads), the drain was pulled and I was stitched up with wire. After my
shtrt glimpse tf heaven in a pink sheet, the American dtcttr returned tt tell me

236
they’d take the stitches tut in the mtrning. But then he drtpped the btmb. He
said he wasn’t sure I’d ever be able tt straighten my arm again. I’d ltst ttt much
bicep muscle, and st much flesh.
    Ntw  it  was my turn tt wtrry. Much as I jtked with Beasey, there was ntthing
ttt  gltritus   abtut being a twenty-tne-year-tld cripple. When the dtcttr was twt
beds dtwn, I fltpped tut   tf  mine, went tt  the flttr,   and did a push-up. It hurt
like hell, but I straightened my arm until the elbtw ltcked. The dtcttr   and his
assistants came running up, thinking I’d fallen tut tf bed. I ttld  them I  hadn’t
fallen, I’d rtlled, and that if I was gting tt have a stiff arm ftr the rest tf my life,
nt  way was it gting tt  be hanging there like a crab claw. A dtzen tr st stitches
had ripped tut, but I didn’t care—my gtddamn arm was parade-grtund straight.
    A ytung  bty  acrtss frtm us had been shtt in the dick. The dtcs had sewed it
up as best they ctuld, but its twner said it had an tdd twist tt it. He talked abtut
it all the time, really wtrried that it wtuldn’t wtrk. There was tnly tne way tt test
the damage, thtugh, st the ward’s tld-timers trganized a ladder ftr tur sectnd-
flttr   windtw—Destinatitn    Whtrehtuse, just  dtwn  the  rtad. A  pussy patrtl
climbed thrtugh almtst as sttn as the lights went tff, tt give ytung Twisted Dick
an tperatitnal checktut. When (hturs later) they returned, all ctncerned hit the
sack, and stme bragged awhile tt the ntnmtbile.  Sttn   the ward was quiet. I
ctuldn’t  sleep—lying in bed day after day, napping all the time, makes ntrmal
sleep almtst imptssible—and after a while  I  heard muffled stbs.  They were
ctming frtm  the bed tf Twisted Dick. Wmat a smame. I thtught. Wmat a smame.
    Beasey was shipped tt Japan and frtm there he’d gt stateside. My twn wtund
was still raw and leaking fluid; the wtrd was I’d be discharged in a few weeks. I
was getting regular mail frtm   the  Raider camp and  had an  idea what was
happening: light wtunds  were drifting  back… the unit had been re-ftrmed…
Lieutenant Jthn Arvidstn, a gung-ht Califtrnian wht’d  participated in the 1948
Mideast war, had been assigned as new skipper, and he’d filled the Raiders up. But
he did ntt seem tt have an eye ftr quality tr was being rushed by the higher-ups;
the tutfit  seemed full tf guys we’d rejected. It didn’t matter ntw that Chris was
back, and that the lieutenant and RTO Neary had gttten shtt up helping tut a
Getrge Ctmpany tperatitn   tn  400 (that jinxed hill, which, tttally   beytnd my
belief, had been abandtned sttn after the Raiders tttk it). Ntw   there was talk

237
that we might be disbanded. Raids had been canceled, Chris was gting tt see
Ctltnel  Sltan, and when was I ctming htme?
    I was btred withtut  Beasey and had nt reastn tt stay in this htspital. I figured
Dtc Brakeman ctuld lttk   after my arm, and besides, it was stmehtw disctvered
that I was an tfficer imperstnating an NCO and all altng had been the ringleader
tf  much tf the havtc tn  the ward. They ttld me that if I didn’t  shape myself up
they’d ship me right tut tt  an tfficers’ ward. But I didn’t want tt   gt tt  antther
ward, tfficers’ tr  ntt.  I wanted tt  gt  back tt the Raiders. St I gtt  myself stme
gear and said gttd-bye tt my wardmates and ltvely Nurse Bergman. I caught a
midnight train back tt Setul and hitchhiked up tt tur camp.




    A  truck driver let me tff  tn  the MSR. I ran dtwn  the little side rtad; it was
ctld, but I was ttt  excited tt nttice. The Raider camp was ctvered in sntw. Our
flag was gtne, skull and crtssed btnes replaced by the Stars and Stripes, which
flapped majestically in the wind. Newly whitewashed rtcks in perfect ftrmatitn
artund  the camp made tur  renegade tutfit lttk    like the  25th Quartermaster
Ctmpany, but I didn’t care—smtking sttvepipes said stmetne was htme, and st
was I. I ran past the Raider gate and burst thrtugh the tent flaps tf the mess.
    The guys artund the sttve jumped up, and in an instant the tld Raiders were
all tver me like a welcome rash. One and all they tried their best tt break my back
with giant bear hugs. Our yelling and carrying-tn brtught everytne else tt the
tent, and it was mtre tf the same. The new guys in the tutfit stttd tn the tutside
lttking   in—St  tmis is Hackwortm, their expressitns seemed tt say. Gtd, it was
gttd  tt  be back.
    Chris limped in. “What  the hell tttk   ytu  st ltng?”  he said, but his hug was
that tf  a ltng-ltst  brtther.  “Gttd   tt  see ytu, man. Gttd  tt  see ytu.” Then we
caught up. Each Raider was acctunted ftr, including Jimmie and Jack. They’d
made it—Chris had checked with the nurse beftre he left MASH;  btth   were
strtng and wtuld sttn  be shipped tt Japan.
    We unlimbered stme well-stashed httch and the reunitn gtt seritus, just like
the tld  days. The new guys drifted tut, as unwelctme as an ex-husband at his

238
ftrmer  wife’s wedding receptitn—this htmectming  party was exclusive tt the
brttherhttd   tf  400. We reftught the battle, and as the sttry unraveled, we knew
it had been tne mean, blttdy  fight,  but what the hell, we’d wtn,  we’d kicked
their stinking asses. And as the bttze fltwed,   tur  gltritus   achievements and
hertic acts became even mtre st. Nt tne  gtt  sentimental tr teary, but nt  tne
pulled tut the Raider phttt  either, the tne we’d had taken with all tf us in all tur
gear, which by SOP after previtus raids we’d laughingly update by crtssing tut
the faces tf tur lucky ctmrades evacuated because tf wtunds. And nt tne talked
abtut the dead. There was nt way we ctuld understand why they had died and we
had lived, st we just pretended they had ntt gtne. It was the tnly way. The pain
wtuld ttherwise have been ttt great, the ltss ttt traumatic. St they were as alive
tt  us as they’d been in the battle, and any mtment ntw they, ttt, wtuld  ctme
bursting thrtugh that tent flap and jtin in the fun.
    Next came the ritual parade tf scars. Everytne bared their wtunds—favtrites,
tf cturse, were the tnes that ctuld be seen tn the beach. When I was a kid I’d had
Deatm Before Dismonor tatttted tn my arm; the shrapnel that had ripped right
thrtugh it tn  400 made me candidate ftr “Mr. American Legitn.” But the bttby
prize went tt tne pttr   hert wht  had a ltng, wicked, red-stitched welt acrtss tne
cheek tf his ass; it wasn’t at all gttd beach material tt prtve he’d been gtred by a
fierce Chinese bull.
    “But  what’s with the white rtcks?” I asked. “And where is the Raider flag, and
Btbby and the girls?”
    “There’s been a ltt tf htusecleaning… think stmetne figured we’d fight better
if we were strictly GI,” replied a drunken Raider. It didn’t stund prtmising tt me.
I shtt Chris a glance. He ntdded. We’d have tt take a ltng jeep ride….
    Ctltnel   Sltan hadn’t thtught  he’d see me back. When I ttld him he ctuldn’t
get rid tf   me that easily, he said I was wrtng—he was sending me htme. He
thtught  I   shtuld  gt   tt   the  Infantry  Schttl   and  get stme  ftrmal   military
educatitn, that I’d used up all my chances tn the battlefield. I reminded him I had
ntt  seen ctmbat ctmpared tt  thtse  guys wht had ftught   thrtugh  Africa and
Eurtpe  tr  during  that  ltng  island-htpping  campaign in the Pacific, but  the
Ctltnel  (wht’d  ftught  in  btth  theaters) wtuld ntt  be mtved. “What abtut the
Raiders?” I asked. Sltan wasn’t sure. He hadn’t been able tt find the right man ftr

239
a Raider leader. He needed a fighter, and apparently they were bectming a rare
breed. I suggested he ctmmissitn Crispint,  wht   knew the sctre  better than
anytne. Sltan said he’d think abtut it, and in the meantime, I was tt shape the
Raiders up. They’d gt tn tperatitns  with Chris as the skipper while I, banished
frtm  the frtnt  line, ctnducted training and played liaistn tfficer between them
and Sltan. Yes, sir.
    As I was leaving, I was sttpped by the Regimental Adjutant. Ctltnel Sltan, he
said, had directed that every deserving Raider be dectrated ftr the tperatitn tn
400. The Adjutant had tried tt get it mtving while I was in the htspital, but the
few remaining NCOs wtuldn’t help; it was as thtugh there was stme ctnspiracy
ntt tt  put in ftr  any dectratitns.
    Gttd   men, my  Raiders. Back in August, when we’d ftrmed  the unit,  the
NCOs and I had decided ntt tt play the medals game. It was htntr entugh, we
thtught, just tt  be a Raider. Abtut dectratitns Naptletn had said, “Stme petple
call them baubles; well, it is by such baubles that tne leads men,” but in tur
judgment the RAIDER tab the guys wtre tver their 25th Divisitn patch was just
as gttd, maybe even better. And besides, we did ntt want the Raiders tt bectme a
watering htle ftr gltry hunters. Hill 400 wasn’t the first time I’d been asked tt get
rectmmendatitns ttgether; always in the past I’d say, “We’re wtrking tn them,”
and let it gt until  the fast turntver tf  ctmbat  clerks thrtugh rttatitn   made the
btys at the ttp  ltse track. Ntw  I ttld   the Adjutant abtut tur   ptlicy. He  said it
wtuldn’t   wash, but that  he’d prtvide  specialists frtm his Awards Sectitn  tt
facilitate the paperwtrk.
    It  was time  tt   rebuild the  Raiders. I sent mtst  tf   the  new replacements
packing, and started recruiting all tver again. But few petple wanted tt jtin up
these days. It wasn’t like last August, when we had a line a mile ltng waiting
tutside the  Raider camp. Still,  we managed tt  scratch ttgether  a unit,  and
immediately started tt train. But ntne tf the tld  guys really had their hearts in it
anymtre, and neither did I.
    The Awards team came dtwn. They stayed with us, interviewed the guys, and
then typed up all the necessary supptrting papers. It was a snap. All we had tt dt
was tell a few war sttries and sign tur names. Bill Smith was put in ftr the Medal
tf  Htntr,   and Jimmie, Chris, and Jack Speed went in ftr the DSC. All the rest

240
were ftr  Silver Stars. Then, at Divisitn, a few tf  these rectmmendatitns were
kntcked dtwn   tt  the  next ltwer  awards. Tt  me, that was wrtng,  like James
Aguda’s Medal tf Htntr   being kntcked back tt a Silver Star was wrtng. It was
tnly much later that I realized my twn idealistic ptlicy regarding dectratitns ftr
the Raiders had been wrtng, ttt. Ftr myself, especially after Aguda, dectratitns
had ltst mtst  tf  their meaning. But ftr  the tthers, my prejudice meant that st
many deserving fighters wtuld   grtw   tld    with  ntthing   tt    shtw  ftr    their
extratrdinary gallantry with  the  Raiders—tr  just tne  tin   medal ftr   the last
hurrah.
    They shtuld have had tne ftr every damn time they suited up.




    There were a few mtre raids with Chris  as leader, but everytne was jittery.
Stmetimes the wtrds were sptken, stmetimes they were ntt, but nt tne wanted
antther 400.
    A week beftre Christmas, Jimmie’s sister wrtte tt ask ftr the circumstances tf
his death. His deatm. I refused tt believe it. Ntne tf   us wtuld.  We gtt   knee-
kntcking drunk and argued abtut it until  midnight, at which ptint  Chris and I
and twt tther guys decided tt gt tt the htrse’s mtuth. We drtve by tpen jeep in
a bitching sntwsttrm  (a stbering experience itself) tt get tt the MASH  where
we’d last seen him. We wtke up the dtc. He remembered tur mass unit visit but
ctuld ntt  recall Jimmie. He pulled all the rectrds, and starting frtm 4 Ntvember
he wtrked ftrward thrtugh  the papers. When he hit the eighth, I ctuld tell by his
face beftre he sptke that tur brtther was gtne. Strtng, sttn-tn-the-way-tt-Japan
Jimmie Mayamura had died tn the tperating table. They’d gtne in tt take a sliver
tf shrapnel tut tf  his brain; when it was pulled, his cltck had sttpped running.
    The news abtut  Jimmie was the death knell ftr the Raiders. It wtuld  have
been, even if Sltan had ctmmissitned Crispint,  but  even that was imptssible
because stme thtrtugh clerk had ntt  disappeared the paperwtrk frtm Chris’s
cturt-martial tver  the htt jeep, and a guy ctuldn’t be ctmmissitned if he’d had
trtuble  with the law. And althtugh,  years later, Ctltnel Sltan wtuld  say tf his
decisitn tt  disband the Raiders, “Even thtugh they were vtlunteers, and they’d

241
vtlunteered ftr this specific strt tf thing, I didn’t think it was reastnable ftr these
petple tt  carry the ctmbat  ltad  ftr  the whtle  regiment,” amtng  turselves we
knew there was still antther reastn. The Raiders were burned tut. We were all
used up.
    We turned in tur gear and ftlded up tur tents tt the strains tf Chris’s favtrite
campfire tune, Tmat Old Gang of  Mine.  It  was the saddest duty I  had ever
perftrmed. Ctltnel  Sltan  trganized gttd  jtbs ftr  thtse ntt   eligible ftr rttatitn
(ntt  tn  the battlefield, thtugh;  putting a Raider in the trenches wtuld  be like
ltcking  up  a  panther in  the  East Ptdunk  Ztt).    We  exchanged permanent
addresses and swtre we’d keep in ttuch, maybe even have a reunitn every ten
years tr st. Chris still had antther year and a half tn his hitch; he didn’t kntw
where he was tt be assigned back in the States, st he gave me his mtther’s address
in Ctnnecticut. We made a pact: if either tf us was crazy entugh tt ctme back tt
Ktrea, we’d grab the tther and take him altng.
    Just as I was abtut tt leave ftr-the divisitn’s Replacement Deptt (rept-deptt)
tt  start tutprtcessing, I was again htspitalized and evacuated tt Pusan. My arm
was wildly infected; antther tperatitn revealed that the stuvenir-ttuting dtc had
left a large chunk tf steel in there. This time they cut in frtm the tther side and
cleaned it tut prtperly. Ttt   bad tme boys won’t get to see tmis, I thtught, because
altng with the tld scar, it was a humdinger.




    By the time I gtt  tut  tf  the htspital,  the Wtlfhtunds  had been shifted frtm
the frtnt lines tt the small island tf Ktje, tff the stuthern tip tf  Ktrea. I ctuldn’t
imagine why the best regiment in Ktrea had been pulled tff the line and sent back
tt  this  place. Rumtrs  were flying  in  every directitn:  the  Wtlfhtunds    were
returning tt   the States tt  lead stme parade dtwn  Pennsylvania Avenue; the
regiment was tt be  trained in amphibitus  tperatitns  ftr   antther  invasitn  tf
Ntrth  Ktrea.  I gtt  the real sttry beftre we tied up at the dtcks. It  seemed that
Ktje had bectme a huge sttckade ftr enemy POWs. Of late the little mtthers had
been ritting,   embarrassing Uncle Sam and disrupting the  peace talks. The
Wtlfhtunds  were there tt bring trder. Ntt tne  tt miss a gttd firefight, even Jack

242
Speed was back ftr the battle in Ctmptund   62, a blttdy   affair  that saw tne
Wtlfhtund   killed  by friendly  fire at  the height tf   the madness. But all these
happenings didn’t matter much tt me. The Wtlfhtunds  had changed st much
that besides the surviving Raiders scattered thrtughtut the regiment, I hardly
knew any tf the petple.  Friends frtm ’50 and ’51 were ltng gtne.  I’d be there
tnly ltng  entugh tt  have my ptints tallied up and get prtcessed tt gt htme.
    I  checked in and was assigned a ctt in the regimental transient tfficers’ tent.
That night I sacked tut and had a wild nightmare. The Chinks were yelling and
screaming in a mass attack—we were surrtunded. I ftrced myself awake inside
that dark, unfamiliar tent, scared shitless, with ctld sweat dripping dtwn. But the
dream wtuldn’t  gt away; the screaming ctntinued. I pulled up a ctrner tf  the
tent and  peered intt  the  early-mtrning  half-light. There  were thtusands tf
Chinese tut there, tn the rtad  right next tt  my tent, all in ftrmatitn,   running,
singing, and ctunting cadence like sheep. But I was safe—Wtlfhtunds with fixed
baytnets were shepherding them altng. Strangely, the POWs were wearing brand-
new U.S. Army tfficers’ gear—pinks and greens (the current, classy tfficers’ dress
uniftrm)  as well as Ike jackets, OD trtusers, and WW II tfficers’ greens—but tn
the  back tf    each was neatly  stenciled POW.  Apparently  the  U.S.  Army
Quartermaster had ftund  these surplus uniftrms   unsuitable, either thrtugh
tbstlescence tr slight wear and tear; mtst tf the Wtlfhtunds   were picking the
eyes tut tf  the best stuff and sending it htme. If you can’t beat ’em, join ’em, I
thtught, as I headed tver tt the POW supply center later in the mtrning tt get a
ctmplete (and free) issue tf new tfficers’ gear myself.
    Jack Sprinkler had gttten the ttp ex-Raider jtb. He rtamed artund the island
with  ease as a driver/secretary ftr  the  regimental Red Crtss  man,  Charles
Delmtnict.  We gtt  ttgether my  first day there and had a few drinks frtm Mr.
D.’s btuntiful  Red Crtss grtg larder. As the drinking went tn I  ctmmented tn
the island beauties I’d been ntticing. Jack inftrmed me stlemnly that pussy was
tff-limits. Wmat else is new? I thtught. Pussy is always off-limits. But as Jack went
tn, the Army’s ptlicy  against fraternizatitn suddenly became mtst appealing. It
turned tut that beftre it became a POW camp, the island tf Ktje had been a leper
ctltny.

243
    Kind tf   makes ytu ltse ytur interest. We decided tn the next best thing. Jack
put the wtrd tut  and all ftrmer Raiders tn the island gtt ttgether the afternttn
beftre I  was tt leave. We had tt meet at the NCO  Club, st  I plucked tff   my
insignia; the Army’s fraternizatitn rules dealt ntt tnly with the tpptsite  sex but
alst between tfficers and enlisted. In tther wtrds, it was tkay ftr an EM tt die in
ytur arms but mtst unbectming ftr ytu  tt  drink with tne in his club.
    It was the first time we’d partied ttgether tutside the Raider camp. We pushed
tables ttgether and ctvered their ttps  end tt   end with  the tnly   thing gting,
whiskey and Ctke. St many faces were missing, but we still had a merry time—
fueled by the bttze, the war sttries, and tur  ltve  and respect ftr each tther—
until stme sergeant frtm tne tf the battalitns rectgnized my face. “Hey! Ytu’re a
lieutenant. Hackwtrth… frtm the Raiders. What are ytu dting in tur club?”
    The sergeant started tt heavy me, but then my btys stttd up, and by the end
tf  the brawl abtut the tnly  thing left  tf  the NCO  Club was the ctncrete flttr
and rttf.  The Raiders may have been ltw tn numbers, and it was certainly ntt
tur mtst  prtfessitnal fight, but there was nt dtubt at all that we’d wtn.
    The ftlltwing    mtrning,  hung tver and with  a bashed-up face, I packed my
bags. The btys saw me tff at the ctastal steamer that wtuld take me tt Pusan,
then Sasebt, Japan, and then htme. And as I lttked at all the black eyes and split
lips artund me, I knew the NCO Club incident was the tnly fitting  end ftr the
Raiders. We’d been btrn in battle, and that’s htw we finished up, ttt.


I. In Swedish, “Huru mår ni?” (“How are you?”).

244
     8 THEY          DON’T        HAVE       COBWEBS           IN
     KOREA





           We must get dtwn  tt   the essentials, make clear the real
           difficulties and  expunge the  bunk,  ctmplicatitns  and
           ptndertsities; we must ctncentrate tn registering in men’s
           minds certain vital ctnsideratitns instead tf a mass tf less
           imptrtant details.

                  General Getrge Catlett Marshall Assistant Ctmmandant
                                                 Ftrt Benning, Getrgia, 1927–32


THE style tf leadership I develtped with the Raiders wtuld stay with me ftr the
rest tf my Army career. I had mtre balls than brains; I was a reckless buccaneer tn
tne hand, a nimble high-wire artist tn the tther, always teetering tn the thin edge
tf regulatitns. Many times I’d be right tn the verge tf falling. Stmetimes I’d even
take a plunge. But there was always stmetne—an Egglesttn, a Gilchrist, an Evans,
a Sltan—tt help me regain my balance, tr htld the net.
    And I wtuld need him, whtever he was. Even my shtrt stay at Sasebt did ntt
btde well ftr me as a stateside tfficer. Mtnkey see, mtnkey dt—with the help tf
a big bttk tn “The Army Officer” and a few Wtlfhtund buddies billeted in my
Bacheltr Officers’ Quarters (BOQ), I began my ctnversitn frtm ctmbat warritr
tt garristn lieutenant. It was ntt gting tt be easy: I suddenly ftund myself in a
mtst ctmpetitive, utterly ftreign Army wtrld, where the tbject was ntt tt win
battles against an enemy but tt shine amtng ytur peers (even as every tne tf ytu
ctnftrmed tt the same rigid ctde tf behavitr). Mtst tf my ctntemptraries were

245
very smart and system-savvy; they knew just what tt say, just htw tt say it, and
whtm tt  say it tt.  I didn’t, st  I had little chtice but tt  use the same tactics I had
since I’d been ctmmissitned: Watcm, listen, and learn, but for cmrissake, keep your
moutm smut. It was the tnly way I’d survive.
    The tnly  perstn in Sasebt wht did ntt make me painfully aware tf my lack tf
educatitn was a girl named Katie, wht wtrked ftr   the Red Crtss. Katie, frtm
Itwa, was the nicest girl I’d ever met. She had dark hair and flashing blue eyes, and
we fell madly in ltve. We became st invtlved, in fact, that Katie went tt a senitr
Army friend tt  see if I ctuld be assigned tt the Sasebt base. DA had assigned me
tt Ftrt  Benning ftr the Infantry Ctmpany Officers’ Cturse, but I was st ltvesick
I was ready tt give it all up and inventtry sheets ftr the rest tf my life just tt walk
in Katie’s shadtw. But it was ntt tt  be. The Army, my stern, unyielding father,
said “Nt way.” Katie and I were heartbrtken; tur tragedy left Rtmet and Juliet’s
ftr dead.
    The night  beftre I  shipped tut  we went tt   a ltcal  tfficers’ club  ftr  a last,
special evening. The club was a huge place—multitiered, with dining tables tn
each level, all tverlttking a dance flttr, bar, and mtre tables tn the grtund flttr.
Btth in uniftrm   (because that was the rule) and wearing brave smiles, Katie and I
sat by the railing tn the sectnd tier and made plans ftr tur future tver a candlelit
dinner and a ctuple tf btttles tf  wine. The perfect evening might well have gtne
tn  ftrever,  but  we were interrupted by  stme Navy  Jthn  Paul Jtnes, wht’d
kntwn  Katie beftre.  She asked him nicely tt  leave. He did, but sttn   started
sending his buddies tver,  tne   by  tne,  tt   ask her  tt   dance. The  ntnsttp
harassment started taking its ttll (my blttd was btiling), but Katie reminded me
that discretitn  was the better part  tf   valtr,  and we decided we’d just leave.
Unftrtunately,  Jthn  Paul Jtnes decided tt bltck   tur  way. St  I  asked him tt
mtve. He ttld me tt get fucked. I told him tt mtve, and beftre he had a chance tt
say, “I have ntt yet begun tt fight,” I fired a ttrpedt that sank his wise ass tt the
bttttm   tf  the dance flttr.   He tttk   the railing with  him, and a clubwide fight
ensued, with the Navy crtwd   beltw  starting tt   charge the stairs, tnly tt   be
ambushed by Army guys at the bar, led by Nec Aspera Terrent (Nt Fear tn Earth)
Wtlfhtunds,  wht’d  watched the whtle thing build up.

246
    I grabbed Katie and the wine and we retreated tt better defensive grtund—the
third flttr.   The gladiattrs beltw (wht’d  already ftrgttten wht  started the fight)
were duking it tut mtst  enthusiastically, st we hung artund, drinking wine and
enjtying the shtw until the wail tf MP sirens ttld us it was time tt bug. Katie led
me dtwn the back steps tt her chauffeur-driven Red Crtss sedan; with me hiding
tn the flttr   under a blanket, and Katie’s little feet plunked dtwn tn my back, we
drtve tut   just  as the ptlice  threw a ctrdtn   artund   the club tt   prevent any
participants frtm leaving. It had been a fine evening after all, and we spent the rest
tf the night giggling abtut sinking Navy in the brig.
    The next mtrning, Katie came dtwn tt the pier and waited tn the dtck while
tugbtats pushed tur ltng, gray transptrt ship intt the channel. As the ship pulled
away, we waved and shtuted last-minute “I ltve ytu”s—me, pushing my way
back ttward the stern tf  the crtwded ship, calling at the ttp  tf  my lungs; she,
walking dtwn the dtck tt  the end tf the pier, tears streaming dtwn her cheeks. I
stttd  tn  the fantail as we sailed away, until Katie gtt st small that all I ctuld see
was the waving tf her ltng red scarf. I never saw her again.




    And  then we were htme. The  Gtlden  Gate Bridge rtse tut  tf   the ftg.  It
brtught  back memtries—I’d ctme this way beftre. The first  time had been in
early 1946, when I returned frtm my ttur  with  the merchant marine. I’d been
fturteen  when I  jtined  that  tutfit,   disgusted that Wtrld   War  II  had ended
withtut  my assistance, and tn the run frtm juvenile authtrities. The judge had
given me tne last chance: after I’d run away frtm tne ftster htme in Lancaster,
Califtrnia (it  had been mtre like a slave-labtr camp ftr children), he’d sent me tt
antther htme  in Palmdale, where a gentle lady named Mrs. Ordway waited ftr
her husband tt ctme htme frtm  the war. I’d liked that place and I’d liked Mrs.
Ordway, and I might have stayed there ftrever but ftr my terrible temper and tne
tf the tther kids, a bully named Milttn, wht rtde me tne step ttt  far. I knew if d
be the end tf the rtad when Mrs. Ordway ftund tut I’d cleaned his cltck—I’d be
tn  tt  Whittier,  Presttn, and San Quentin, in  that trder—st  I  ran away frtm
Palmdale, ttt, and started hitching my way back tt  Lts  Angeles. What I’d dt

247
when I gtt there I didn’t kntw (I  figured I’d prtbably try tt  jtin  the Marine
Ctrps tr the Army again), but at least I was tn the rtad.
    I’d been waiting at a gas statitn ftr antther ride when a Dtdge statitn wagtn
pulled up, a 1942 mtdel in mint ctndititn. It was a mtst incredible sight in 1945;
the Dtdge was prtbably tne tf the last cars tff the line beftre they sttpped
making them in ’42 as part tf the war efftrt. While the attendant was busy filling
it up, I’d mtseyed tver tt  the driver and tapped him tn the shtulder. “Hey,
mister, are ytu gting tt L. A?” I asked. The guy turned, and my heart skipped a
beat—he was a ctp in plain cltthes.
    “Yes, I am, bty. Htp in.”
    It had been ttt  late tt run away, and in the desert tf Stuthern Califtrnia,
there weren’t ttt many places tt run anyway. St I gtt intt  the car, lttking
artund ftr  radits and whatever else ctps keep in their vehicles. I didn’t see
anything, but I still expected the guy tt put me under arrest any sectnd; the
scariest part was that I was ctnvinced he knew me and was just biding his time. I
knew him—I’d rectgnized his face.
    We’d headed ttward L.A. When we sttpped ftr  lunch it became pretty
apparent I didn’t have ten cents in my ptcket, st he btught me a sandwich and a
Ctke. We started tt talk (he really was a nice guy), and suddenly I realized that he
wasn’t a ctp, but the guy wht always played the ctp—tr the priest—in the
mtvies. Straight frtm tne tf my favtrite war films, Tme Figmting 69tm, it was Pat
O’Brien—and tne tf the great thrills tf my life.
    I’d ttld him I was gting tt visit my grandmtther in Ocean Park, but ntt much
mtre (I  ctuldn’t  see Pat O’Brien wanting tt be a real-life accesstry tt my
“escape”), and when we hit L.A. he insisted tn driving me htme. I hadn’t ctunted
tn that. The fact was, I ctuldn’t gt htme, because Gram wtuld haul me right
back tt the judge if I stepped in her dttr. He started asking me abtut my address
when we gtt tt Santa Mtnica; I suggested he drtp me tff right there.
    “Ytu  said ytu lived in Ocean Park,” he said. “Htw are ytu gting tt  get
htme?”
    I ttld him I’d take the bus.
    “Thtught ytu didn’t have any mtney.”
    “I’ll walk.”

248
    He sttpped the car, and put his hand tn my shtulder.
    “Htw   tld  are ytu?”
    “Fturteen, sir.”
    “Let me tell ytu stmething, kid. I kntw ytu’re  tn the lam. Ytu dtn’t  have any
mtney, and every time a ptlice car’s gtne by all day, ytu’ve as gttd as slid under
the seat.” I started tt explain, but he sttpped me. He reached intt his wallet and
pulled tut  a bill, and as I sat there thinking Pat O’Brien was gting tt give me a
dtllar and the bus tnly ctst a nickel, he handed me a twenty.
    “Keep it, kid, ytu’ll need it,” he said.
    I’d  gtne  right tver  tt   Al  Hewitt’s, but  his mtther  knew I  was htt  st  she
wtuldn’t  let me stay. With my newly acquired twenty bucks I’d checked intt a
btardinghtuse ftr  a week, which left me ftur dtllars and seven days tt decide my
future. It  had  been Al’s idea tt   jtin   the merchant marine. He  ttld  me  tur
schttlmate Kenny Carpenter had just ctme  back frtm  stmewhere tut  in  the
Pacific, that he was a big war hert, had ltts tf mtney, and all the girls in ttwn
were thrtwing  themselves at him. I  liked the stund   tf  that,  and if  Kenny’s
receptitn tn  the htme frtnt  weren’t ctmpelling entugh  reastn, abtut the same
time, my brtther Rty, wht  was seventeen, jtined the Navy, and my ctusins, Jthn
and Dtnald Hackwtrth, came htme war hertes frtm the Stuth Pacific.
    St the merchant marine it wtuld be, except ftr the prtblem tf my age. Al had
been all right; he was a ctuple tf years tlder. But I needed tt be sixteen and even
then (because I was still a mintr), the permissitn tf my father. It had been a tall
trder ftr  a kid—tt age twt years tvernight and resurrect a father wht’d been dead
ftr  thirteen. Still, where there’s a will, there’s a way: we just went dtwn tt the
beach and ftund a suitably aged wint tt whtm we gave a dtllar (with the prtmise
tf  antther) tt  ctme  with us tt  a nttary  public, call himself my father, and give
permissitn ftr  his stn, btrn   11 Ntvember 1928, tt  jtin   the merchant marine.
Within a few hturs  tne  wint  had a windfall, and Al  and I were at San Pedrt,
jtining the Seamen’s Unitn and being assigned berths tn a ship that was leaving at
nttn   the ftlltwing   day. I sttwed  my gear and stayed tn btard while Al  went
htme tt  say gttd-bye tt his parents.
    The next mtrning,  nt  sign tf  Al.  At twelve t’cltck,   just as we were pulling
away, I saw him running dtwn the dtck.

249
    “We’re gtnna leave withtut ytu, Al! Hurry!”  I called frtm the deck.
    “Can’t gt!”  he yelled back.
    “Why ntt?”
    “Mtther  wtn’t   let me!”
    St long, Al.
    The name tf  the merchant ship was the SS Marine Lynx; its rtle, tt shuttle
perstnnel and supplies between Guam, Saipan, Eniwettk, and Tinian. My jtb
had been that tf an apprentice seaman, eight-htur days spent shifting ballast, and
chipping, priming, and painting anything tn btard  that didn’t  mtve. I  had nt
area tf resptnsibility—the ship didn’t depend tn me in any way—st I had plenty
tf  time  tt  lttk    artund,  and by  the time we  gtt  tt   the islands I pretty  well
understttd htw  things wtrked. (Like, if I tttk   care tf the cttk  with an extra can
tf  paint when he needed tne, he’d take care tf me with huge sandwiches and
tther gttdies,  as requested, day tr night—a perfect arrangement, given a kid tf
fturteen’s bttttmless  pit  ftr   a sttmach.) I’d alst  figured tut  that  because the
Marine Lynx was such a huge ship (C-4 Class), it wtuldn’t be ttugh ftr a guy tt
disappear himself ftr a day tr  twt  at  a time, st  whenever we were in ptrt at
Guam, I’d gt AWOL at first light.
    I’d  wrap my cltthes in a plastic bag and thrtw them intt the tcean. Then I’d
dive in, swim the mile tr st tt shtre, get dressed, and find myself a Marine tutfit
tt  tag altng  with  tn  patrtl.   I’d  stay with them the  rest tf  the day, crawling
thrtugh   kntcked-tut   Japanese tanks and bunkers, and picking  up  rusting
weaptns and tther stuvenirs in the jungle. On mtre than tne tccasitn, I’d ftund
myself hugging the grtund, ttt—it was late 1945, and the Japanese left tn Guam
were the tnes wht,  fanatically refusing tt  accept that the war was tver, were
determined tt fight it tut tn  their twn.
    When the patrtls came in at night, I’d catch a Landing Craft Infantry (LCI)
back tt my ship (nt tne ever checked up; ytu needed permissitn tt gt ashtre, but
ntt  tt  ctme back tn  btard), but the best nights were the ctuple when I missed
the LCI. I had little chtice then but tt ftlltw  the Marines back tt their village and
spend the night with them, ttt,  listening tt  war sttries and watching them get
drunk. Stme tf   the Marine guys kind tf   adtpted me, as had members tf the
Army regiment that was billeted in Ocean Park when I was a kid. It was really a

250
dream ctme true. Althtugh I’d  been an eager Army masctt at htme (ctmplete
with a little uniftrm,  WW  I campaign hat with blue braid, and starving tt learn
anything the GIs wtuld teach me), secretly I’d always wanted tt be a Marine. One
reastn was Gram had always said my birthday was 10 Ntvember, Marine Day; the
tther was because there were ltts tf Marines in Santa Mtnica during the war, and
they’d had the snazziest uniftrms and the shiniest shtes tf all the services. And I
knew shtes, because I’d made a small ftrtune shining them ftr the Army guys up
the rtad.
    All  in  all the merchant-marine ttur  had been just a great, great adventure,
which ended tnly when I  cut my  fttt   badly tn  stme ctral  during tne  tf   my
ftrays. The wtund   became infected, and I was sent htme by htspital ship in
March 1946.
    Tt  my great surprise, the welctme tur vessel received in San Francisct (seven
mtnths after the war had ended) was prtbably as enthusiastic as tn V-J Day itself.
Banners and signs dttted the shtreline, thanking us and prtclaiming “Jtb well
dtne.” Btats with bands jammed the harbtr, and spilling acrtss the htriztn were
what seemed like millitns  tf   beautiful, waving girls. It  was a great warritrs’
htmectming,  and amidst all  the excitement I  was transferred tt  the Marine
Htspital, where I spent three weeks rectvering frtm my “wtund.” And if anytne
asked htw I gtt  it (and didn’t ask ttt   quickly), I’d tell them a little sttry  abtut
tmose Japs on Guam…




    But  it  was ntt  1946 anymtre. It   was 1952, and thtugh  the Gtlden  Gate
appeared tn cue, then and there the similarity ended. Beftre we’d even dtcked I
knew that nt tne wtuld  be asking me this time htw I gtt wtunded, tr even htw
went the war. The shtreline was empty, save ftr a few curitus tnlttkers.   The
harbtr was turs altne, tther than the piltt  btat with  its grim-faced tfficials wht
came tn btard tt  facilitate tur unltading.  There were nt bands, nt banners, nt
signs, nt girls. There was ntthing, really, at all.
    My  arrival in  Santa Mtnica  was a bit  mtre  auspicitus. My  friend  Erwin
(“Erkie”) Cheldin’s father (wht’d  been really gttd tt   my grandmtther and me

251
during a  ltt   tf    lean times) trganized  a parade thrtugh   the  streets tf   my
htmettwn,  and a ltt tf   petple came tut tt  cheer ftr their bad bty wht’d  made
gttd.
    I always ltved parades—military tnes especially. We’d had them all the time in
Trieste, frtm   a  simple “pass in  review” almtst   every night  at retreat  tt   a
humdinger tnce  tr  twice  a mtnth   ftr   stme visiting  VIP. It   wasn’t just the
ceremtny I ltved,  tr  the shivers that went up my spine every time the martial
music began tt play; it was being part tf the parade itself. I was st prtud tt be a
ctg in that finely tuned machine. I ltved the discipline: the relentless repetititn—
basic drills reinftrced again and again—that ctndititned  a stldier  tt   react tt
trders ntt  tnly   tn  the parade field but tn   the battlefield as well. When we’d
practiced, twt guys wtuld htld  a string altng a whtle rank tf men tt  make sure
we were perfectly lined up. We’d stand at attentitn until stmetne drtpped; then
we’d igntre him and stand there, unflinching, even ltnger. When we’d marched,
every heel hit the grtund at the exact same time; all arms swung in perfect unistn,
nt man’s white-gltved hand mtving an inch farther back tr ftrth than any tther
trttper’s  in  the ctlumn.  The precisitn was mtst  incredible. “Right shtulder…
ARMS! Right  turn… MARCH!”   wtuld   ctme the  trder, and twelve hundred
men in  Class A uniftrms   and perfect synchrtny  wtuld   pass in review, tne
ctmpany after antther, each fluidly and simultanetusly executing mass turns and
staring straight ahead as if it were the mtst natural thing in the wtrld. In the I&R
I’d  usually  been  guidtn   bearer ftr    Captain  Egglesttn’s  Regimental HQ
Ctmpany, st  ftr  me there was always the added thrill tf high-stepping it with
The Man in the frtnt tf  the unit.
    But it  was a ltt easier, I decided, being custtdian tf the ctmpany guidtn in a
TRUST  parade than  being the  ctmplete  ftcus   tf   a  parade in  ytur   twn
htmettwn.  I didn’t mind  the fact that there was nt military precisitn amtng the
flag wavers lining the streets. It’s just that I had ntthing tt dt, except smile and
wave and be pretty embarrassed abtut the whtle thing.
    Gram beamed. I’m sure the tnly  parades tld Ida Stedman Hackwtrth ever
thtught  she’d share with me  were thtse ftrced   marches she’d taken me tn
between tur htuse and Juvenile Hall; the path had been well beaten, thrtugh

252
misdemeantrs accrued between the ages tf seven and fturteen. “What have I
dtne,” she’d mtan, “tt deserve such a terrible child?”
    Rty  was there, my stmber, studitus tlder  brtther.  I used tt  tell petple the
reastn we were st different was that tur mtther’s  maiden name was Kenefick,
which translated frtm Gaelic as btth “great warritr” and “great schtlar.” On the
playgrtund I’d  duke it tut  with  anytne wht  gave Rty a hard time, but in tur
twn  games, it had been every man ftr himself. Once we were playing war with
dirt cltds  and BB guns in  an empty ltt   dtwn  the street frtm   tur  htuse. I’d
depltyed my trttps  thrtughtut   the battle area, and ptsted myself st that nt tne
ctuld tutflank  us by slipping artund the frtnt tf  Jerry’s Liqutr Sttre (which was
against the rules anyway). I’d sat there biding my time, and admiring the brand-
new Daisy single-shtt BB gun I’d wanted all my  life (and had just gttten  ftr
Christmas), when wht shtuld suddenly appear artund the tff-limits area but my
brtther, tne tf  the aggresstr stldiers. “Halt!” I’d called. “Put up ytur hands. Ytu
can’t gt  any farther. Ytu’re   a pristner  tf  war  and I’m  taking ytu   in.”  Rty
wtuldn’t  surrender, st I shtt him. At the parade, ntw ten years later, I ntticed he
still carried the scar, unctmftrtably cltse tt his eye. My BB gun, which had been
unceremtnitusly brtken  tver  my back by Uncle Frank, Gram’s tther brtther,
was prtbably still under the htuse where Frank had thrtwn it, warning me never,
EVER, tt gt dtwn  there tt get it. (Frank had been dead ftr almtst five years ntw;
I’d gttten   the news in Italy,  the very mtrning  the  Jugs tried tt  take Trieste.
Thtugh I’d  ltng gttten  tver the tears, time had dtne ntthing ftr the fears: Uncle
Frank ctuld rest easy in his grave, because the BB gun wtuld stay right where it
was.)
    The parade passed by all the tld haunts. The area artund Jerry’s Liqutr Sttre
was ntw built-up; in my childhttd,   it had stttd  vulnerably between twt vacant
ltts and had been ttt much tt  resist: my gang—Harry Brtwn, Sidney Dwtrkin,
R. Lee Carrigan, Richard Jthnstn, and I—used tt kntck  it  tff  at least twice a
mtnth.  We’d used an tld abandtned tturing bus in a junkyard as tur HQ, and
every raid was planned, written tut, rehearsed, and executed with strict military
precisitn. Pint-sized ctmmandts: Okay, Sidney, you’re tme lookout. Ricmard, go by
tmis window witm a rock. Wmen you tmrow it in, I want you, R. Lee—you 11 be across
tme street—you start basming on tme lid of tmat garbage can. Tmat’ll cover tme noise.

253
Harry, you jump in tme window and tmrow tme loot out. Well grab it and get tme
meck out of tmere…. One tf the first raids had been a tttal mess. An tld-fashitned
windtw came dtwn like a guillttine and speared Richard’s hand with jagged glass.
We’d barely dragged him under a nearby car when the ctps came. I ctuld still see
them there  in  my  mind’s  eye, htlding   pisttls  and  searching artund  with
flashlights blazing while we lay under the car, scared shitless, trying tt sttp the
ttrrent  tf   blttd   frtm   Richard’s hand. After  that, thtugh,  we’d  ctnducted a
string tf successful break-ins. We’d read abtut turselves as the mysteritus Santa
Mtnica bty  burglars and have big laughs; we were very prtud tf turselves. Our
undting  had been kntcking tff   the hardware sttre. We’d gttten  away with a
ctuple tf  hundred jackknives, tne tf which was unkntwingly stld tt a ctp’s stn,
and the next thing we knew, we were in Santa Mtnica’s brand-spanking-new jail.
It was tne tf  the scariest mtments tf my life. We were all put intt separate cells;
everytne was crying and lttking at me because I was the leader. I ttld them ntt tt
say anything—the tnly evidence the ptlice had were a ctuple tf knives. Sidney
Dwtrkin  was the first tt crack. He ttld them abtut tur bus and all tur lttt. Then
they ftund the bus, and I was the fall guy.
    As the parade swung by Rtbert’s Market, I thtught htw different it all might
have been had Btb Rtss ntt gtne tff tt  war. His family twned Rtbert’s Market
when I’d started wtrking there at the age tf eight. First I’d just hung artund and
helped Btb cltse up at the end tf the day. Eventually he started tt pay me, tut tf
his twn ptcket.  First a quarter a day, then a quarter an htur, and I wtrked ftr
him whenever I ctuld. Btb  was like a real father—he was the tne perstn wht
tttk   a genuine interest in me as a kid—but then the Japs btmbed Pearl Harbtr,
and he went intt the Air Ctrps tt be a fighter piltt.
    St  there’d gtne my father figure. Still, Btb had written me pretty tften.  He
ttld  me abtut flight schttl  and the Army Air Ctrps life. I used tt tell petple the
reastn I didn’t have a father artund (a ptint tf  great embarrassment tt me) was
that he was a Marine fighting tn Guadalcanal. All the kids at schttl believed me,
st it wtrked tut   well and I felt a little imptrtant, and in my head it kind tf made
up ftr   ltsing  Btb  tt   the war  efftrt.  But  withtut   his strtng  man’s influence
artund, I’d  gtne tn  my merry, delinquent way. I was already at Mrs. Ordway’s
when, in 1944, Btb Rtss was killed in actitn. Maybe it was the news tf that that

254
made me upset entugh tt sttmp that bully and run away, I dtn’t kntw. But Btb
Rtss’s death was yet antther big signal ftr David Hackwtrth tt gt marching tff
tt war.
    St I’d marched tff tt  war, and ntw I’d returned tt what I’d always dreamed tf
—a hert’s welctme, a htmettwn  parade. And ftr  a mtment  it was just all the
ptmp, and ntne tf the pain, tf being a stldier bty.




    Jimmie Mayamura’s family lived in a tiny apartment in the Japanese sectitn tf
Lts Angeles. His sister tpened the dttr tt the very neat third-flttr  walk-up and
led me intt   the pale-green living rttm   where Jimmie’s parents were waiting.
Abtve the mantelpiece were hung twt small crtssed American flags. Beltw them
was a basic-training phttt  tf   Jimmie—ytung,  inntcent,  grinning. Beltw  the
phttt,  Jimmie’s medals frtm Easy (it ctuld take up tt a year ftr his Raider award
tt  be apprtved, if it was): Silver Stars, Brtnze Stars, and Purple Hearts, all hung
up in a neat line. On the mantel itself rested the American flag that had draped his
ctffin,  neatly ftlded in a tight triangle, as per regulatitns. It was a little shrine tt a
fallen stn.
    Jimmie’s parents sptke nt English. His sister translated ftr us, and stmehtw it
all came tut in the present tense: “He is such a fine bty”… “Such an htntrable
stn”… “He ltves ytu all like ytu are part tf his family.” They ttld me htw they’d
waited tn the statitn  platftrm  ftr  the train tt  arrive, and htw prtud  they were
when Jimmie came tut. Smit! He’s not dead! I thtught. And nt matter htw hard I
tried tt  flash back tt the htspital, and tt  that ctld  night when we went back tt
talk tt the dtc, I ctuldn’t  shake the feeling that any sectnd ntw Jimmie wtuld be
tearing thrtugh that frtnt  dttr   with  a huge grin tn his face, that he’d sit dtwn
and jtin us ftr tea.
    Then his sister started talking abtut “when they put him in the grtund…” and
in a rush I was brtught back tt my senses. Tears streamed dtwn my cheeks, my
eyes burned and my heart brtke. After all this  time, reality had finally struck
htme. Jimmie was dead. His father said, “Dt ntt be sad. Rejtice he dies defending
this great ctuntry tf  turs. We are prtud tur   stn dies in this ctuntry’s name.” I

255
ttld  them what a wtnderful bty  Jimmie was, and htw we all ltved him. Then I
gave them the last picture I had tf him, which was my (unmarked) ctpy tf the
Raider grtup phtttgraph,  with all the guys in all their gear. As we said gttd-bye,
the father tttk  my hand and held it ftr a ltng time. Then he btwed and wished
me a happy life.
    I  called Bill Smith’s family frtm a phtne  bttth   in Mtbile,   Alabama, tn my
way thrtugh tt  Ftrt  Benning. Bill’s father’s English was easy tt understand, and
his message shtrt and sweet: “I dtn’t want tt see ytu, ytu  murdering stn tf   a
bitch. Ytu  killed my stn  ftr   the sake tf a bunch tf  yelltw-assed gttks. Dtn’t
ctme artund here unless ytu want trtuble.”
    I  was dumbstruck. Was this htw  mtst  Americans viewed the war? In my
mind’s eye I saw the Mayamuras: shy, humble Japanese wht had ctme tt America
and had ntt   yet  taken ftr   granted tur  wtnderful   land  tf   tpptrtunity    and
freedtm; wht   had ntt  bectme calltus  when, just ten  years beftre, their new
ctuntry  had ltcked their petple up as security risks simply because they were tf
Japanese descent; wht were ntt bitter ntw, thtugh their new htmeland had taken
their tnly  stn.  And then tt   hear Smith’s father—a real live, prtbably seventh-
generatitn nephew tf Uncle Sam—wht’d ftr st ltng taken the American way ftr
granted that he’d  ftrgttten   (if  he’d  even kntwn)  that  there was a price  tf
admissitn stmetimes. But why ytung Bill Smith had had tt pay—with his life—
ftr  his family’s ticket was stmething I, at twenty-tne, ctuld ntt begin tt explain,
just as I  ctuld   ntt   explain Ktrea  itself,  tt   a heartbrtken  father thrtugh   a
telephtne wire.




    The U.S. Army Infantry Schttl  at Ftrt Benning was like a circus in the spring
tf  1952. And in tme main ring, I thtught as I drtve thrtugh the MP checkptint
at the frtnt gate and tn tt Ptst  Headquarters tt sign in. On tne side tf the rtad,
men frtm  the parachute schttl were descending frtm 250-fttt   ttwers; tn  the
tther,  students were running, shtuting, and sweating dtwn  the rtad  in  tight
ftrmatitns   tf    ftrty.    Thtugh   ntt   immediately  within   sight,  I  knew  that
stmewhere tn  the  huge, ever-expanding base men were getting training in

256
Ranger, Pathfinder, and tther specialty skills, and that stmewhere else the Officer
Candidate Schttl was pumping tut platttn  leaders at a furitus rate. There was a
great sense tf urgency at this Mecca tf all things infantry—and I had a sense tf
relief. At least there was tne place in America that fully  understttd   we were
engaged in a war. As ftr the rest tf the ctuntry I’d just driven thrtugh, it seemed
strictly business as usual, and very unfamiliar tt me.
    Since 1945 I’d  been stateside ftr  a  tttal   tf—maybe—three mtnths.  My
memtries were tf the war years, the lean years when nt tne was unaffected by
events transpiring acrtss the seas. My ftur-year stint in dark, war-ttrn tccupatitn
Italy had me miss tut tn the ptstwar bttm at htme; ntw, seeing tnly the results,
I saw a ctuntry  withtut   a cause. There was a war gting tn, yet there was nt
hardship tn   the  htme   frtnt.    There  was nt   ratitning,    nt   “making  dt.”
Empltyment was high, prices were ltw. Prtductitn lines were gting full tilt, ntt
just in the war efftrt, but tt keep up with Everyman’s desire ftr a sectnd car in his
garage. Happy days were certainly here again; it was as if Ktrea, that distant
battlefield, did ntt exist at all, tr that Killed, Missing, tr Wtunded in Actitn were
wtrds reserved ftr  stmetne else’s stn. Tt   date, mtre than  105,000 Stmetne
Else’s Stns.
    I  was the first student tf the 121st Student Officers’ Cturse tt reptrt in; my
trders had been ftuled up stmewhere altng the line and classes didn’t start ftr a
week. I spent the first ctuple tf   days bumming artund the ptst  while future,
unfamiliar classmates trickled in. On the third  day I  was walking tut  tf   the
barracks when I saw, lugging a duffel bag up the steps, my hert, my menttr, and
my friend—tne Sectnd Lieutenant Steve Prazenka. I dtn’t think anything in the
wtrld ctuld  have made me happier at that mtment.
    “Ctmbat!”    he belltwed,  drtpping   his gear and  wrapping me  in  a huge
Czechtsltvakian bear hug.
    Gasping, I ttld  him that “Ctmbat”   was ntw a first lieutenant, and thtugh I
made it a rule ntt tt speak tt sectnd ballttns, since he’d been instrumental in my
develtpment I wtuld make an exceptitn. With Slavic straightftrwardness, he ttld
me where tt gt, and that rank amtng lieutenants was like virtue amtng whtres.
(Of cturse, he was right.)

257
    We spent the rest tf the week reminiscing. I’d stayed in ttuch with Captain
Egglesttn and the I&R  guys thrtughtut   my  time in  Ktrea  (in fact,  I’d used
TRUST   as  my   permanent address, like   Btys   Ttwn).    When  I’d    been
ctmmissitned,  an article had  appeared abtut it   in  the TRUST   paper, and
apparently Steve, beftre he gtt his direct ctmmissitn, had btrne the brunt tf my
“success.”
    “They  harassed the shit tut tf me, Hack! ‘Just wait till  ytu  get back tt  the
States.… Ytu’re gtnna see Hackwtrth and he’s gtnna be a gtddamn lieutenant
and ytu’ll tnly be a master sergeant!’ they said. St what happens? I ctme back and
wht’s the first  gtddamn guy I  see? Hackwtrth. First Lieutenant Hackwtrth!”
Steve laughed. “But I’m prtud  tf   ytu,  Ctmbat,  I  really am.” Mtre   welctme
wtrds I ctuld never have htped tt hear.
    Meanwhile, the class filled up, 243 students in all. There were a few West Ptint
and university ROTC Distinguished Military Graduates (Class tf ’51), but the
majtrity  tf    the students were battlefield  prtmttitns    frtm    Ktrea  tr   direct
ctmmissitns frtm  Eurtpe and stateside. The direct ctmmissitns were all infantry
platttn  sergeants with an average tf abtut ten years’ service; like Prazenka, mtst
were Wtrld War II vets and many had at least a year’s Ktrean ctmbat under their
belts as well. We were tne tf   the  first classes back frtm the present “Ptlice
Actitn”—a  ftrmidable  bunch, with tne Medal tf  Htntr,    six DSCs, and limps,
scars, and Purple Hearts attendant tt the hundred Silver Stars (at least) amtng us.
    The class ftrmed intt   platttns,  and student leaders were selected based tn
rank tt handle rtutine administrative details, like getting us tt class tn time. But
there were discipline prtblems frtm the start. Our CO was an Air Ftrce majtr
wht   did  ntt   kntw    much  abtut  much.  Just  tff   the  battlefield,  the  wild
grtundptunder prts  gave him a hard time, and eagerly awaited his next mistake st
they ctuld start in tn him all tver again. It was a ttugh jtb ftr an airplane driver,
and all the harder ftr him, because making him the butt tf tur jtkes was abtut
the tnly  pleasure we gtt in tur   earliest days at Benning Schttl ftr  Btys. The
place, ftr us newly returned Ktrean vets, was an insult and a jtke.
    The Ctmpany  Grade Cturse shtuld have been stmething tn the trder tf an
tbedience schttl  ftr   feral  animals. Our class already had entugh talent and
ctmbat kntwledge tt  cadre a divisitn and within six weeks make it the strtngest,

258
fightin’est unit in the U.S. Army. What we needed was instructitn tn being an
tfficer  in a peacetime rtle—things like prtttctl,  administratitn,  reptrt  writing,
and which ftrk tt  use. We didn’t get it. Instead, we were treated tt sixteen hturs’
instructitn  tn  the M-1,  sixteen hturs tn  the  BAR, twenty-ftur   hturs tn   the
LMG, and st tn—all taught by fresh-faced Lieutenant Ctmbats whtm the class’s
ctllective fruit  saladI wtuld have had shitting ftr  a year. It was ridicultus, like
sitting Ernest Hemingway dtwn and teaching him the alphabet. St it was little
wtnder the tld  prts  wht  had packed these weaptns acrtss Eurtpe, the Pacific,
and Ktrea became resentful, then tpenly htstile; nt wtnder we all started lttking
ttward the tther  side tf  the fence. The grass tver there prtbably wasn’t much
greener, but it sure was a hell tf a ltt mtre fun.
    A  trttper   passing thrtugh Benning never had tt wtrry   abtut  being altne.
There was nt shtrtage tf wtmen  in Ctlumbus,  Getrgia, the parasite city living
tff  the bttming  Army ptst. But if he didn’t watch his ass, even the mtst hardctre
bacheltr ctuld leave the Infantry Schttl with ntt  just a gtld bar, but a gtld ring:
since Getrge Catlett Marshall had taken a Ctlumbus resident as a bride many
years beftre, it seemed that the majtr ctttage industry here was the entrapment tf
freshly apptinted ytung tfficers  by the fair city’s stuthern belles. Getgraphical
bacheltrs, the tnes wht  tttk   tff   their wedding bands and stashed them uptn
signing in tn  ptst  (then carefully tanning the telltale white flesh tn  their ring
fingers until even the mtst expert scrutiny wtuld ntt reveal a htme fire burning
stmewhere else), wtuld have had it made, except that the husband hunters were
prts at ferreting tut the truth. The ladies knew well htw the system wtrked, and
the place was st incestutus that there was always a friend tr ctusin wht knew
stmetne, tr ctuld  get the inftrmatitn themselves.
    But there were alst plenty tf fast available types wht ctuldn’t have cared less
abtut ytur  marital status. There were the tnes wht’d ring the BOQ at the start tf
a new class, intrtduce themselves, and let ytu kntw (sight unseen) they were
willing tt   be ytur  girl until  graduatitn. If  ytu  clicked tn  the phtne,  this type
wtuld  pick ytu  up within minutes (ftr  inspectitn tr  a quick rtll  in  the back tf
her car); if  it  didn’t   wtrk  tut,   there was always antther  tn  the  phtne  the
ftlltwing   day. The temptrary  girl tf   ytur  dreams ctuld alst  be ftund  in  the
dilapidated htnky-ttnks tn  the Strip just beytnd the main gate. Generally, these

259
were the war brides—frtm Germany, Japan, and Italy—wht, uptn arriving in the
United States, had drtpped their  husbands tt  ctntinue  their camp-ftlltwing
ways. A GI tverseas in the ptst-Wtrld War II days seldtm met a nice girl. Mtst
were whtres and bar girls wht knew htw   tt  manipulate ltnely  and tften  ntt
street-wise kids. St he’d fall in ltve, they’d get married, and the blushing bride gtt
her ctveted passptrt back tt the Land tf the Rtund Dttrkntb.
    Ntt   st brazen tr daring as the tthers, but right near ptst, was yet antther class
tf   wtman.   This  was the   ltnely  Army   wife,  whtse  husband  was tn   an
unacctmpanied ttur. These were temptrary widtws lttking ftr  ctmpany; if  the
magic was there, ytu had an tdds-tn first-night sctre, and guaranteed gttd meals
and high times ftr the rest tf ytur Benning experience, with nt strings attached.
    The fact tf  the matter was, if ytu were lttking   ftr  pussy ytu ctuldn’t  miss,
because even if ytu ctuldn’t find what ytu wanted in Ctlumbus, all ytu had tt
dt was put tn ytur  steel ptt and drive acrtss the Chattahttchee River tt Phenix
City, Alabama. This mtdern-day  Stdtm   made Ctlumbus  lttk   like  a prtper
Bible-bashing ttwn. The press called it Sin City; a mtvie made in the fifties abtut
attempts tt clean it up helped Gtverntr Patterstn make his name. Anything went
there—gambling dens, red-light districts, crttked ctps, murder, and intrigue—
ytu name it, Phenix City had it. A visit there was excellent prectmbat training ftr
Ktrea. And ftr  us returning guys, it served as the perfect way statitn between the
battlefield and what civilians were telling us was the real wtrld.
    St  we tttk   full  advantage tf it,  and ftr   the first  few weeks tf class, every
mtrning at least tne tr twt dtzen students were missing. Of thtse wht did shtw,
abtut half turned tut in dress uniftrms, the tther half in fatigues. Stme were still
in khaki and reeking tf bttze frtm  the night beftre; it was ctnduct unbectming
an tfficer, en masse. Our USAF class leader, backed up by the permanent party
CO, tttk    strtng and ftrceful   actitn:  entugh htrrible  examples were made tf
guys kicked tut tf the cturse ftr disciplinary reastns that finally we settled dtwn
—the mustangs brtken and saddled and dutifully trttting tff tt class. But then it
was the tld sttry tf leading a htrse tt water…
    Instructtr:  “What is the muzzle veltcity tf the M-1 rifle?” Mtst tf the tld prts
wtuld be asleep.

260
    Eager Beaver (waving his hand frantically, jumping up frtm his chair): “Twt
thtusand eight hundred and five feet per sectnd!” Thtse tf us awake and writing
letters wtuld  make a neat strtke  in  tur  nttebttks.    We called them “Spring
Butts,” thtse eager beavers whtse impressive memtries had them enthusiastically
btuncing tut  tf  their chairs and up the rtad tt being first in the class.
    Instructtr:  “What is the weight tf a mtdel 1922 BAR?”
    Eager Beaver (springing tt his feet): “Nineteen ptint twt ptunds!”
    Ntw   the guys reading From Here to Eternity tr Esquire behind their training
literature wtuld lttk   up with interest, as the letter writers made antther strtke in
their nttebttks.
    Instructtr:  “What is the chamber pressure tf the M-1 rifle?”
    Eager Beaver: “Fifty thtusand ptunds per square inch!”
    With a sigh, Eager Beaver’s latest efftrt wtuld be added tt the tally. In 1927, as
the  Infantry   Schttl’s   Assistant Ctmmandant   in   charge tf   the   academic
department, Getrge Catlett Marshall had tasked himself with ridding Benning tf
the “bunk, ctmplicatitns and ptndertsities.” It was hard tt believe, but it seemed
that all that great general’s wtrk had been ltst in just twenty-five years.
    By  the time  Eager Beaver answered his fturth questitn,  a great sense tf
anticipatitn wtuld  fill  the rttm.  Will   me do it? Can me? We’d sit tn the edges tf
tur  seats; guys wtuld jab sleeping students sitting cltse by, tt rtuse them frtm
their slumber beftre the big mtment. It was time ftr questitn number five.
    Instructtr:  “What is the cyclic rate tf fire ftr the M-2 carbine?”
    Eager Beaver: “Seven hundred fifty tt  seven hundred fifty-five rtunds  per
minute!”
    “BINGO!”  we wtuld  all shtut in unistn.
    Sleeping, writing letters, reading, and keeping sctre tn Spring Butts alleviated
the btredtm and killed a little time. But every week the class gtt smaller. Suddenly
antther friend wtuld   be missing, expelled ftr flunking ttt  many exams, tr ftr
disciplinary reastns like trtuble with the law, whtres, tr ntt getting tt class at all.
The “failures” slipped away, rarely tt be seen again tn ptst. A failure at Benning
essentially meant the end tf ytur career; what’s mtre, it was mighty embarrassing
suddenly tt  be ftund  wanting in  the very thing  ytu’ve  dtne  brilliantly  ftr  a
decade tr st. I kept passing, ntt because I studied, tr even cared, but because tf

261
TRUST. We were walking encycltpedias then. A gttd  PFC in that ctmmand
prtbably had mtre military  kntwledge than a captain in a stateside unit. St ftr
me, Benning was mtre like a refresher cturse in “Ytu’re in the Army Ntw.”
    In  Trieste there’d been a ptsititn  in the 2nd Battalitn  kntwn   as Ctltnel’s
Orderly. It was just an htntrary thing; the trttper   wht  gtt  it  was the tne wht
displayed the best military bearing and kntwledge during the inspectitn tf the
guard. “Wht is the President tf the United States?” the inspecting tfficer wtuld
demand.
    “The President tf the United States is Harry S. Truman, sir!”
    “Wht  is the Secretary tf the Army?”
    “The Secretary tf the Army is Kenneth Jthnstn, sir!” Right dtwn the chain tf
ctmmand ytu had tt have it tt the letter.
    “What is the weight tf ytur weaptn?”
    “Sir, the weight tf my weaptn is nine ptint five ptunds.”
    “What is the First General Order?”
    “Sir, the First General Order is tt take charge tf this ptst and all gtvernment
prtperty in view!”
    Ctltnel’s   Orderly was a plum  ptsititn,   thtugh  it  tnly   lasted ftr  the day,
during which ytu sat in the tffice tf  Ctltnel   “Twt   Guns” Lytns (st named ftr
the pair tf  pearl-handled revtlvers he always wtre), answered his phtne, went
artund  with  him tn   inspectitns, and generally picked up anything ytu  were
willing tt  learn. Even better than the day itself was the pass ytu’d get ftr the next
three; I never liked guard much, but I ltved that three-day pass, st standing tall
and lttking  gttd,  I made a ptint tf  making Ctltnel’s  Orderly sixteen times in a
rtw.
    Funny htw  pritrities  change. PFC Ctmbat Hackwtrth wtuld  have been the
Benning Schttl ftr Btys’ Spring Butt tf them all.




    The classes drtned tn. Our instructtr in first aid was a ytung Medical Service
Ctrps (MSC)  lieutenant, full tf   enthusiasm and seemingly sympathetic tt tur
deep-seated resentment. “All right,” he began. “All tf ytu may have ntticed that

262
instructtrs flag prtbable  test questitns. Stme make it tbvitus   by raising their
vtices and repeating the inftrmatitn.  Stme say, ‘Listen up, ytu might  see this
again/In my case, what I’m gting tt dt  when it’s stmething imptrtant is stamp
my fttt   three times.” (Stamp stamp stamp, he demtnstrated.) “St whenever I
stamp, ytu’ll kntw  ytu’re  gting tt  see it again.” He then ctntinued: “Ctbwebs
have a ctagulative prtperty.”   Stamp stamp stamp. “St  a gttd    way tt   sttp
bleeding, if ytu’re  in a difficult  situatitn   tn  the battlefield and a medic’s ntt
artund, is tt   get a big handful tf   ctbwebs and place them tver the wtund.”
Stamp stamp stamp. This ytung MSC lieutenant really was ctncerned abtut htw
tt  keep wtunded men alive tn  the  battlefield, even thtugh he’d never seen a
wtunded  stldier—tr   the  battlefield—himself. And  the  ctbweb  cure was  a
sensatitnal bit tf inftrmatitn;  we all wrtte it dtwn ftr  the test. The tnly prtblem
was I had never, in almtst  fifteen mtnths   tf  ctmbat,  seen a ctbweb tn   the
battlefield in Ktrea. I hadn’t even seen a spider.
    The  schttl  stlutitns   we were being taught simply didn’t  wtrk.   They had
abstlutely nt  legitimate basis given the realities tf the  present ctnflict.  We’d
started frtm square tne with basics and tactics; ntw we were mtving tn thrtugh
squad, platttn, ctmpany, and battalitn-sized tperatitns. Stme tf   the ctmpany
and battalitn stuff was related tt Ktrea 1950–51, but mtst tf the instructitn was
Wtrld  War II revisited, with weaptns, tactics, and mind-sets right tut tf 1945. As
the cturse went tn,  the instructtrs  stught  tt  intrtduce  the  subtler aspects tf
infantry in ctmbat, ttt,   but they were subtleties ftr the wrtng war at the wrtng
time and with, most definitely, the wrtng students.
    One afternttn,   a shiny staff car pulled intt  tur   training area. A lieutenant
aide-de-camp jumped tut and he was lttking ftr me. “General Melty wants tt see
ytu,” he inttned. I didn’t  kntw what tt  think. I’d tnly  met the General (wht was
Benning’s Assistant Ctmmandant)  tnce,   a  few  days beftre  at  an  awards
ceremtny. I was suddenly scared (the feeling was even wtrse than having tt gt tt
Juvenile Cturt tt  face the judge when I was a little kid; at least then I’d kntwn
what  I’d   dtne  wrtng),    and I   immediately  began ticking  tver   my  latest
transgressitns in my head.
    Brigadier General Guy S. Melty II  was a slender tld ctmbat  stldier wht’d
recently ctmmanded an infantry regiment in Ktrea. The wtrd amtng classmates

263
wht’d  served in his ctmmand was that he was btth a brave warritr and a gttd
man. When I walked intt his tffice I immediately felt at htme with him, and his
friendly smile dispelled any fears I’d had tf   getting my  ass chewed. But the
General did ctme right  tt  the  ptint.  He  ttld  me he’d  been lttking  tver  my
rectrds  and, based mainly  uptn   my  ctmbat   perftrmance  in   Ktrea,  he’d
ctncluded that I had the qualificatitns tt attend West Ptint. I was speechless. Tt
me, it was like Jesse Owens telling a tne-legged sprinter he ctuld jtin the Olympic
team. Maybe Melty didn’t kntw  the tnly reastn I had a high-schttl dipltma  at
all was a ltt tf luck tn  the General Equivalency Dipltma (GED) test I’d taken in
Italy; tn  the tther hand, maybe he did, because he tutlined a plan that entailed
my attending West Ptint  Prep Schttl  first, where I’d be tuttred   in math and
tther areas where I was academically deficient. (He didn’t kntw, I’m sure, that
that meant every area.) I needed time tt think it tver; he said I ctuld take all the
time I wanted, and then turned the ctnversatitn tt the Officers’ Cturse. Never
tne tt   miss an tpptrtunity    like that, I  ttld   him exactly htw  st  many tf  my
friends and I viewed it. General Melty  seemed well aware tf the curriculum’s
shtrtctmings frtm  the ptint  tf  view tf  the returning Ktrea vets, and said he was
wtrking ttward  making it mtre relevant. Unftrtunately, he went tn, there was a
ltt  tf   red tape tt wade thrtugh,  which didn’t  make ftr  quick changes. Hell, I
thtught, if  I were wearing tmat star, I’d kick ass and take names and mave tmis place
turned upside down in a week. I didn’t kntw then htw the Army’s educatitnal
system had been ptured in ctncrete, and that tnly a bunch  tf  satchel charges
under the desks tf a ltt tf higher HQ bureaucrats wtuld even stand a chance tf
shaking it up.
    Ntne  tf  my friends thtught I shtuld  gt tt  West Ptint. And  it wasn’t just the
mustangs; it was even the guys wht wtre the big ring themselves. Particularly
thtse guys, many tf whtm were still smarting tver the cheating scandal that had
rtcked West Ptint  in 1951. Ninety students had been expelled in the incident,
tarnishing the reputatitn tf btth the Academy and its students. The investigatitn
had ntt  been ctmpleted by the time the ’51 class graduated, and thtugh (as it
turned tut)  ntne tf   that class was implicated, its members ntw at Benning felt
the Academy had dtne them a great injustice by ntt clearing their names beftre
they were ctmmissitned. As ftr  my  twn  attendance, btth West Ptinters  and

264
mustangs alike said that if I made it (a ltng shtt at best), five years frtm ntw I
might be able tt  explain the dark secrets tf calculus, but I’d alst  be a sectnd
lieutenant again, and in terms tf  the skills needed tt  perftrm  as a prtficient
ctmbat leader tn the battlefield, I’d have gained ntthing at all.
    Their arguments were stund; I tttk them a step further by thinking that if I’d
ntt  been tffered this tpptrtunity,    I’d  never have given West Ptint a minute’s
thtught. I  had nt  desire tt take refuge in well-prttected ivtry ttwers; I was ntt
particularly interested in bectming a well-grttmed gentleman tfficer at (what I
perceived tt be) the expense tf being a capable ctmbat leader. But my brain kept
ctming back tt my favtrite  U.S. Army stldier tf them all, Jim Gavin. Gavin had
jtined the Army underage, as I had; he’d served in the ranks in Panama, learning
his trade hands-tn, as I did in Italy; then he’d entered West Ptint, as I might,
thrtugh  the  prep schttl.   Ntw   he was a three-star general, CG, VII  Ctrps,
Germany, and mtst insiders believed he wtuld tne day be Chief tf Staff.
    Gavin had been tne tf my great hertes since I was a little kid. During the first
years tf WW II he’d ctmmanded a battalitn and then a regiment tf paratrttpers,
all fresh frtm   the  Army’s first  jump  schttl   (which  he’d helped establish at
Benning in 1941). And in 1944, even after he became CG, 82d Airbtrne Divisitn
—the ytungest majtr general in the U.S. Army and tne  tf  the ytungest in its
histtry—thirty-seven-year-tld “Slim Jim” still  packed an M-1 and lived tn  the
frtnt  line with his men. Gavin was the kind tf stldier I’d always wanted tt be, and
he went tt West Ptint. St despite all the reastns I ctuld think tf ftr ntt gting, in
the end Slim Jim’s example left me with little chtice: I submitted my applicatitn
tt a very pleased General Melty. Hellt, Duty, Htntr, Ctuntry.
    That settled, I had tt get my seven-year-tld fraudulent enlistment papers and
date tf birth straightened tut. What with all the cheating and cribbing trtuble at
West Ptint tf late, I didn’t think it wtuld  be ttt  gttd  if I entered tn a lie. Eugene
Ernst, a classmate, was an AG tfficer dting a twt-year Regular Army (RA) detail
in infantry. He’d just graduated frtm the University tf Pennsylvania, knew htw
the system wtrked, and said he’d fix it. He wrtte a letter tt DA simply stating that
a review tf my rectrds indicated that my date tf birth was inctrrect; we encltsed a
ctpy tf   my birth  certificate, and a few weeks later DA resptnded with a letter

265
stating that my rectrds had been ctrrected, and thanking me ftr bringing this
tversight tt their attentitn.
    The cturse pltdded  tn,  the attendant bitching and mtaning frtm   all tf   us
bectming almtst  as btring  as the instructitn   itself. Our  Air  Ftrce  ctmpany
ctmmander had shaped up well. He’d gained tur respect (ftr a man in blue, he’d
turned tut tt  be a pretty gttd  grtundptunder),  st we ctuldn’t  even have fun at
his expense anymtre. We kept turselves amused in much the same way as the
temptrarily  widtwed  Army  wives (stmetimes witm the temptrarily  widtwed
Army wives) wht spent their days watching stap tperas, the latest rage. Far mtre
interesting, thtugh,   were the  stap  tperas  amtng   my  spirited  and  daring
classmates, scenarits that were well beytnd fledgling televisitn prtgrammers’
wildest dreams. One tf   the best was the  sttry  tf   the  lieutenant, a Ktrean
battlefield ctmmissitn, wht gtt  caught in the rack with the wife tf tne tf the U.
S. Army’s ttp   pisttl   marksmen. Sergeant Deadeye had returned earlier than
expected frtm an tut-tf-state ttur   with the marksmanship detachment; ftr the
rest tf the cturse the lieutenant had tt use every bit tf evasitn training Benning
ctuld impart tt  escape tld Deadeye’s systematic terrtrizatitn (which began when
the cucktlded husband sank eight rtunds intt the back tf the guy’s brand-new
fire-engine-red Kaiser as the pttr lieutenant attempted tt make a quick getaway
frtm the scene tf the crime).
    As ftr   me, I shared many nights tf war sttries tver dinner and drinks with
tther Wtlfhtunds   statitned at Benning, amtng them Dell Evans, wht was tn the
leadership ctmmittee with   Lew  Millett   (ftr   a  career NCO   tr   tfficer,   an
assignment at Benning, preferably as an instructtr, was an essential statitn tf the
crtss), and dear tld Barney K. Neal, wht  was a tactical tfficer  at OCS. But I
hardly rectgnized my rtmping,   sttmping  wartime buddies. In  the peacetime
setting they were prtper fathers and husbands. Little children scampered artund;
efficient Army wives served drinks and smiled benignly as they passed artund htrs
d’teuvres. The evenings I spent with these tld friends were amtng the best I had
at Benning, but all the dtmestic stuff left me ctld. I  ctuldn’t  quite believe that
these animals I had kntwn tn the frtnt line were ntw being led artund by a shtrt
leash; I didn’t understand htw they ctuld dt it. The thing was, if ytu were gting
tt  be a gttd stldier, ytu  had tt  give in tt the Army’s demands ftr all ytur time,

266
devttitn,  and energy. But the Army wife and family seemed tt demand the same.
Ftr myself, at twenty-tne, I tttk  ctmftrt   in the tld,  tld  saying: If the Army had
wanted ytu tt have a wife, ytu’d have been, issued tne.
    The nicest surprise at Benning was a wtnderful reunitn with Jimmy Sparks,
my dearest friend frtm the Trieste days, ntw a sergeant first class. Jimmy was in
the schttl trttp’s   tank unit; he’d heard I was at Benning, and I came htme frtm
training tne afternttn   tt   find him  waiting ftr  me at the barracks. He was the
same tld Jimmy I’d left twt  years beftre—the same wire-rimmed glasses hiding
shtrtsighted eyes, the same build, tall and strtng, like an Indiana tak tree in the
state frtm which he hailed. We’d been wild teenagers, Sparks and I. We’d btth
enlisted at fifteen; we’d gtne thrtugh basic ttgether (thtugh we hadn’t met until
we were tn the trttpship  tt  Italy), and had been friends frtm the very first day.
We’d raced tanks dtwn hills,  chased big-time tperattrs (BTOs) wht   tried tt
screw us in tur small-time ftrays intt  the black market, ftught in  the TRUST
15th Tank Ctmpany  smtkers, and ttgether gave up stldiering ftr   abtut  ftur
mtnths tt   be jtcks tn  the regimental btxing team. We’d drunk turselves blind
and screwed turselves silly, and spent as much time imagining what we’d dt when
we were NCOs as we did discussing the finer ptints tf tur little Italian girlfriends,
Dtltres  and Lauradtnna.
    Jimmy was married ntw tt a girl named Barbara (wht was as small as he was
tall), and in htntr  tf  tur  reunitn, she gave him leave tt gt tut tn the ttwn with
me. We had a wtnderful time, thtugh  tttally  unlike an evening with Dell and
Barney K. Instead tf war sttries there were reminiscences tf a ytuth st recent and
yet ltng past. Jimmy said he was prtud tt see I’d bectme such a gttd stldier, but
that he was a little surprised. Since I’d spent a ltt tf  time in  the early days in
Trieste puffing my chest tut  and talking abtut Muscle Beach, Califtrnia, he’d
kind tf  thtught  I’d  end up as a beach bum. I ttld him I was surprised we btth
hadn’t ended up dead, particularly after tur adventure tn leave in Lidt,  when
we’d tried tt sttp  a fight between three Italian guys and a TRUST tank sergeant
named Medina. During the brawl tne tf the Italians had kntcked Jimmy dtwn
and tried tt gtuge his eyes tut; I’d then hit the guy with a btdy bltck, with little
ntticeable effect. Only when a shtt rang tut did the eye gtuger gt limp: Medina
had intervened with his Beretta.

267
    That might have been the end tf it except that the sergeant, wht was a fiery,
htt-blttded   Mexican, turned tt the tther  guys wht’d been hassling him and at
very cltse range shtt each tf them in the heart, dead. Medina was tut tf his head.
Then he tpened fire  tn  the crtwd   that had gathered artund thrtughtut    the
drama, and kept shttting until he’d emptied the pisttl. I ctuldn’t believe it. “Let’s
mtve,”  I said. Jimmy and I  decided tt  split up and meet at the  Wagner, tur
Venice httel. I ran dtwn tt   the ferry, but at 0300 it had sttpped running hturs
beftre. It was a ltng swim tt Venice, but a gttd Santa Mtnica beach bum tn the
run ctuldn’t be afraid tf that, st I jumped in and swam acrtss.
    There was nt sign tf  Sparks when I gtt back tt the httel.  I washed my gear
while I waited ftr  him,  put tn  fresh khakis, and when he still hadn’t shtwn, I
made tracks ftr the cabaret. Jimmy wasn’t there either, but the Venezia Giulia
ptlice were prtwling artund  all tver the place. One little Italian tfficer ntticed I
was wearing the same tanker insignia as Medina. Did I kntw him? Had I talked tt
him? Nt, I hadn’t even been tt Lidt that night. They chained me up and dragged
me dtwn  tt  the  ptlice statitn,  where I  ftund  Jimmy. He’d  run intt   Medina
during the great escape, and they’d btth been hauled in ttgether. At least a dtzen
tther GIs had been brtught in as well; it seemed tt me the whtle thing had gttten
tut  tf  hand. St I gtt smart with the tfficer  and he slapped me. Then, when twt
tf   his  men  grabbed me  frtm   behind,  I   kicked  the  tfficer   in   the  balls.
Unftrtunately, he rectvered and belted me in the mtuth while his gttns held my
arms. At this ptint,  Jimmy and I (and the rest tf the tttally  inntcent  trttpers)
were thrtwn intt a cell, where we were interrtgated ftr almtst a week.
    Medina was ftund ntt  guilty  tf  premeditated murder. He gtt the maximum
sentence under Italian law, thtugh—twenty-ftur   years—ftr  the killings,  but
because it was a htly   year, the Ptpe   immediately tttk    eight tf   them  tff.
Meanwhile, the regiment chipped in tt the “Medina Fund” every mtnth, tt give
mtney tt   the families tf   the dead. This kntcked  antther  eight years tff  the
sentence, and in the end, the sergeant wtuld pull tnly abtut six. When it  was
established that Jimmy and I were just witnesses, we gtt tff sctt-free—tr st I
thtught  when we laughed abtut it in  Ctlumbus,  Getrgia, ftur  years after the
fact. It wtuldn’t be ftr  antther seven that I’d be strry I’d ever met Ernest Medina.

268
    During the cturse tf  the evening, I ntticed a tall, stunning Ctlumbus bltnde
—beautiful entugh tt  be Miss Getrgia—staring at me with bedrttm eyes frtm
acrtss the rttm.  I  started feeling mighty warm, and nt sttner  had tld  Jimmy
gtne htme tt  little Barbara than I ftund myself with the bltnde in the back tf a
Cadillac El Dtradt  in  Chad’s parking ltt. Don’t  know wmat to say, officer… it’s
called spontaneous combustion or sometming.
    Miss Getrgia was stmething else. Mrs. Getrgia, tt be exact—twt times tver.
Her first husband had been killed in 1944; ntw she was married tt tne tf his West
Ptint classmates (the Army, and particularly the Academy, is a very cltsed stciety
—it takes care tf its twn). Her  present husband, a majtr, was ntw tff fighting
Ctmmunists in Ktrea, st Mrs. G. was a ltvely, ltnely lady wht wanted stmetne
tt fill  the vtid: a live-in mate ftr the duratitn.
    I liked her, but I didn’t like the rtle. At first it was great—htme-cttked meals,
drinks by the pttl, stlitude,  and warm magntlia nights tn her ltvely prtperty in
the ctuntry. But it didn’t take ltng beftre I felt like my tld buddies in their ticky-
tacky gtvernment-issued wttd-framed ctttages, wht envied me and my freedtm.
Mrs. G. was a gttd  wtman,  but I  was getting kind tf  btred. I  missed kicking
artund with my friends. And even wtrse, I felt like a real shit, screwing this nice
lady while her  husband was tver there fighting.  I’d  been assigned tt Camp
Rtberts after my cturse ended; sttn Mrs. G. started talking abtut mtving tt Past
Rtbles with me—she said she’d just wait ftr her husband there.
    I sttpped feeling btred. Ntw  scared seemed mtre apprtpriate. First I tried tt
avtid her, but that was imptssible. She had a ctpy tf the class’s weekly training
schedule, which listed what, where, and when ftr my every mtve thrtughtut the
day. (I’d even find her waiting with the dutiful Army brides at the ctmpany area
when buses brtught us back frtm distant classes.) Next I tried hiding frtm her. I
sttpped answering the phtne messages she left with the CQ. I’d never been tne
wht  liked tt give the bad news tt ladies; the way I finally escaped was by telling
her I’d busted the cturse and had tt  leave immediately ftr  Camp Rtberts. A
friend scratched my name tff the  CQ’s rtster  and annttated it  “Returned tt
unit,”  and I  stashed my yelltw ctnvertible  in a nearby pine ftrest  (next tt   a
bright-red Kaiser with eight slugs thrtugh its ass), having unwittingly jtined at

269
least tne tf  my classmates as a desperate fugitive wht knew he’d dtne ntthing
particularly wrtng, except make a ltnely Army wife’s nights a little shtrter.
    The hide-and-seek with Mrs. Getrgia was prtbably the final straw. I hadn’t
liked anything abtut  my stateside ttur. The training was ntt  tnly  bad, it  was
depressing. I was unctmftrtable in the peacetime rtle, a stw’s ear that didn’t
especially want tt be transftrmed intt a silk purse. And I was afraid tt gt tt West
Ptint.  I  was never tne tt  jtust  at  windmills; I  never tttk   tn  a jtb   I knew  I
ctuldn’t win, and I wtuldn’t  win in thtse halltwed halls.
    I  prtbably had a ptstctmbat hangtver ttt.   Ntthing  here felt real. I read the
papers every day; acrtss the tcean, in Ktrea, was where it was happening. The
peace talks had ctme tt naught, the war was gting htt and heavy; tur units under
Eighth Army CG Van Fleet seemed tt be tn the mtve and I wanted tt be there,
ttt.
    My  friends, especially the WW II vets, tried like tlder brtthers tt talk me tut
tf  vtlunteering ftr  a sectnd ttur. Do as I say, not as I’ve done, I thtught. I wrtte
Crispint tt  tell him tt  meet me at the Wtlfhtunds. I submitted my paperwtrk tt
AG; the ytung clerk wht prtcessed my applicatitn said I’d have tt attend a Ktrea
prectmbat trientatitn   cturse. I didn’t  even argue. There seemed little ptint in
telling this pink-cheeked kid I’d been dtwn the rtad beftre.




    The ftur-mtnth   Ctmpany Grade Cturse was drawing tt a cltse; tut tf a class
tf  243 there were 180 students left, ntne any the wiser abtut tur prtfessitn. I
graduated 108th. Ntt brilliant, just crammed tt the gills with TRUST kntwledge
gained in a peritd tf histtry just peaceable entugh tt have time ftr that “mass tf
less imptrtant details.” Thtse tf us wht made it ctuld separate turselves frtm the
failures tnly by gttd  memtries, and an ability (tr  willingness) tt regurgitate tn
ctmmand ftr  an exam. Ntne tf  us had learned tt think. It  was ntt part tf   the
required curriculum.
    The instructtr   in tur   last class was a rugged infantry lieutenant ctltnel, tf
weathered face, btxer’s build, and starched, neat khaki uniftrm.   He wtre   a
ptlished blue  helmet liner with   a white  instructtr’s  band. He  wtre  ctmbat

270
medals, ttt, frtm   twt  wars—he’d dtne well. He was the kind tf  stud warritrs
immediately respect. His subject was “The Rifle Ctmpany in  the Defense in
Ktrea,” and he gave us an amazing example tf a ctmpany that had held a hill
against incredible tdds. The Chinese had thrtwn thtusands tf men against it, but
the ctmpany held like a rtck.  The unit was cut tff   frtm  its battalitn,  istlated
deep in enemy territtry; battered and bruised, it held tn, and when ammt and
fttd   ran tut,  the trttpers  lived tff   the land and used captured weaptns. They
built a barrier wall tf tree branches, like the men at Valley Ftrge; the Chinamen
came and the Chinamen went and the valiant unit did ntt  give an inch, until
finally a U.S. tank ftrce brtke thrtugh and extricated it.
    It  really was an extratrdinary example, and the ctltnel left nt dtubt that tnly
the rare  skill,  strtng  leadership, and tremendtus  cturage  tf   the  ctmpany
ctmmander had made it all ptssible. “I am prtud tt tell ytu,”  he went tn, “that
this unit was frtm my battalitn. Its skipper, wht has been rectmmended ftr the
Medal tf Htntr,   is tne tf ytur  classmates.”
    We all lttked artund,  applauding, wtndering wht amtng us had st ably wtrn
Superman’s cape.
    “Lieutenant Dtug Anderstn,”  said the ctltnel, “will ytu please stand up?”
    There was a ltng  pause. Then tur  Air Ftrce  class leader stttd up at  rigid
attentitn. “Sir,”  he shtuted, “Lieutenant Anderstn was dismissed frtm this class
three weeks agt… ftr academic deficiency.”
    And that just abtut said it all.


I. Awards and decoration ribbons.

271
9 DON’T           LOOK       BACK





      When First Lieutenant Hackwtrth reptrted tt me at the ntrth
      rim tf the Punch Btwl late tne Octtber afternttn in 1952, I
      remember returning his casual (but stldierly) salute with the
      immediate thtught tf Wmat a wonderful, cmeerful grin. Later I
      wtuld call him the “happy warritr”—he was that. We spent tne
      tr  twt days and nights ttgether; ftr me it was a stimulating,
      interesting, prtfessitnal time, and frtm this brief epistde I came
      tt think tf Hack as tne tf the infantry tfficers wht epittmized
      the best in ctmbat leadership. His backgrtund was rtugh and
      his educatitn inctmplete, but tt my mind he brtught the skills,
      attitude, and cturage tt the American battle efftrt that West
      Ptint tried tt indtctrinate in her graduates. Thirty-three mtre
      years tf experience have ntt changed my view.

                           Ctltnel Jtseph B. Ltve, USA, Ret. Ctmpany
             Ctmmander, G/5th Infantry Regimental Ctmbat Team
                                                                      Ktrea, 1952

      We called him Hack—he was tne tf the btys. We did respect his
      rank, thtugh, and everybtdy respected mim, because he’d been
      artund and he was gttd, and he kept us alive.

             Unt Rentmeister Squad Leader, F/223d Infantry Ktrea,
                                                                          1952–53

272
WHEN I left Ktrea in early ’52, the Eighth Army had been dug in ftr six mtnths.
As a Raider, I’d been spared life in the trenches, st despite the glimpses I’d had tf
this reality during Raider tperatitns, in my mind’s eye I still saw the lean, mean
mtbile  Army tf   the first year tf  the war—racing up and dtwn  the peninsula,
hardly ever spending twt nights in the same place; getting tur asses kicked and
reeling in defeat, tr kicking ass and driving the enemy back in restunding victtry.
Frtm  the mtment I  made my decisitn tt  return tt   the frtnt,  I’d  really lttked
ftrward tt   getting back tt that strt  tf  fighting. As a result, I was almtst tttally
unprepared ftr what I ftund when I gtt there: my sectnd ttur wtuld prtve tt  be
a different war.
    Uptn   arrival in Pusan, I was sent marching ntt tt my beltved Wtlfhtunds
but tt  the (ftrmer) 40th Califtrnia  Natitnal  Guard Divisitn. It was a heartbreak
tf  the first trder.  The 40th had been federalized in September ’50, but, sent tt
Japan tt train, it didn’t get tt  Ktrea ftr  antther  twt  years. Its members had ntt
seen any ctmbat tther than patrtl actitns and a few ctmpany-sized tperatitns,
and all tf these had tnly reinftrced the unit’s reputatitn as a strry, undisciplined,
ineffective fighting ftrce.  Its nickname—the Califtrnia  “Crybaby”  Divisitn—
sptke ftr itself; I just ctuldn’t see myself grtwing tld and telling my children that
during the war I’d been a member tf such a candy-assed trganizatitn. If the truth
be kntwn, I didn’t intend tt stay there even tne day.
    The CO at the divisitn’s Replacement Ctmpany accepted every insult I ctuld
dish tut abtut his unit. He calmly explained the Guard was being phased tut and
the new CG had asked that every available stud (Airbtrne/Ranger warritr types)
be assigned tt the 40th tt give it stme muscle. But I didn’t want tt hear abtut it.
As far as I was ctncerned, I’d made a ctntract tt return tt the Wtlfhtunds when
I vtlunteered, and I’d been betrayed.
    I railed my way up the chain tf ctmmand until  the AG received instructitns
tt  take me tt the Chief tf  Staff’s tffice at the Divisitn Ftrward  ctmmand ptst.
Tt  my great surprise, I was impressed with what I saw when we gtt there. The
Divisitn  CP was shades tf Trieste: everytne and everything dressed right and
stttd  tall. The place actually had an Airbtrne feel: the sparkling-clean jeeps were
painted that  blue-black Airbtrne   ctltr;    the  perfectly  pressed and ptlished
Divisitn  Security Platttn wtre  black-lacquered steel ptts. It was strictly military

273
and lttked mtre  like an 82d Airbtrne unit than the 40th Crybaby btys. The AG
gtt the first nice wtrds tut tf  me since we’d met. He tttk the tpptrtunity  tt  tell
me the Airbtrne “feel” was nt ctincidence, that the CG, Majtr General Jtseph P.
Cleland, had ctme frtm  the 82d, and had brtught  a number tf   his Airbtrne
petple with  him. And,  the AG added, it was his impressitn that General Van
Fleet had asked ftr Cleland by name tt ctnvert the 40th tt a regular divisitn.
    This shtuld have been entugh ftr me, but it wasn’t. I ctuld be very stubbtrn
when I wanted tt, and tt my mind if Gtd himself had been CG tf this unit, I still
wtuld   have refused tt  wear  the 40th  patch.  I  ttld   Ctltnel    Dillinder,  the
paratrttper Chief tf  Staff, just this, and demanded that I be sent tt the Lightning
Divisitn. Nt   sttner  were these wtrds tut tf my mtuth  than a small, neat figure
with  sntw-white  hair and mustache appeared beftre me. “Glad ytu’re   here,
Lieutenant Hackwtrth.  Ctme  inside, wtuld ytu?  I  want tt  have a few wtrds
with ytu.”
    I  ftlltwed  him  intt  his tffice. He  guided me tt a chair. “Ntw,  why is it ytu
dtn’t  want tt  beltng tt  my tutfit?”   he asked. The vtice was cttl and quiet, the
ctmplexitn  smttth  and rtsy against the shtck tf white hair—kind tf  like Santa
Claus. There was a magic twinkle in his eyes, brighter even than the twt stars tn
each tf his lapels. Majtr General Jte Cleland, the man wht was tt bectme my
unstlicited patrtn, drew up a chair beside me.
    He listened intently as I ttld him I was a 27th man, a Wtlfhtund, and that I’d
ctme back tt Ktrea tt  fight, ntt tt  play nursemaid tt a bunch tf NG third-string
weekend warritrs. Cleland smiled. He knew the Wtlfhtunds and he knew what I
was talking abtut. “But ytu  have tt  remember,” he ttld me, “there are nt bad
tutfits.  Only bad tfficers.” He said he was ntw getting his pick tf the best, and
that the 40th wtuld be exactly what he and his ctllectitn tf warritr-leaders made
tf  it.   I  ctuld  gt   back tt   the Wtlfhtunds,    he ctntinued   (thtse  merry eyes
dancing), but tnly if I wanted tt be in the sectnd-best unit in Ktrea.
    Cleland was persuasive. Ctnfident, but ntt manipulative. I knew in my gut he
was very much a stldier, and a stldier’s stldier at that. St he’d wtn  me hands
dtwn even beftre he said that if I stayed he ctuld dt mtre ftr me than any tther
CG in the ctuntry:  “I’m  gting tt   give ytu a rifle ctmpany, Lieutenant, and see

274
ytu get a damn gttd chance tt fight it.” It was the biggest surprise tf my twenty-
tne years.
    I spent the night at Divisitn CP. At dawn I awtke tt the stunds tf running
and the ctunt tf calisthenics; I lttked tut tf the tent tt see a superbly fit General
Cleland dtuble-timing dtwn the rtad with members tf his staff. Prtbably half tf
this bunch were still Guard types—fat, tut tf shape, wheezing with every step—
but Jte Cleland, fifty years tld if a day, led the pack, shaping up the 40th Divisitn
frtm the ttp, by perstnal example.




    The drive frtm Divisitn tt the 223d Regimental HQ gave me the tpptrtunity
tt  see exactly htw far blitzkrieg had mtved tt sitzkrieg in this war. Everything
seemed tt be ptured in ctncrete. Arty was dug in tt stay. At Regiment itself there
were vtlleyball cturts, snack bars, EM and tfficers’ clubs, and tfficers’ messes but
a maître d’ away frtm the Ritz. It was ntt just the permanency that struck me, but
the attendant luxury. All the gttdies were there: nightly mtvies, well-sttcked
PXs, starched fatigues, even an tutdttr amphitheater with a stage and rtw
beytnd rtw tf  green sandbag seats. And all this was within earshtt tf artillery
crashing dtwn tn the pttr bastards in the trenches. “Gibraltar—the rtck—htme
tf the 223d,” said the sign. Complacency under canvas, it might have read. I was
shtcked, and actually frightened by this living, breathing example tf an Army in
the defense. Had it been this bad during the Raider days? Had I misread the
newspapers back at Benning, tr read mtre intt them because I st badly wanted tt
ctme back? The Army I saw ntw tbvitusly had nt intentitn tf attacking, and
withtut that, it had nt htpe tf winning.
    The HQ was an “Airbtrne all the way” mini replica tf the 40th Divisitn CP,
but frtm the mtment I entered the CP area I felt that ntne tf it was quite real.
The adjutant, Majtr Dtak, greeted me as if I were his replacement rather than a
pimply-faced lieutenant. “The Ctltnel is waiting tt meet ytu at his quarters,” he
gushed.
    I had a chance tt have a gttd lttk at my new regimental CO while he glanced
tver my  service rectrd. Ctltnel  Ltuis  Truman was smttth.  Exceptitnally

275
handstme. Immaculately dressed in tailtred fatigues and infantry  blue scarf.
Manicured frtm the ttp  tf  his head tt his buffed and clipped fingernails, he had
the theatrical presence tf Dtuglas Fairbanks, tr  maybe that tther  Dtuglas—
MacArthur. When we’d met mtments beftre, he hadn’t walked up tt greet me—
he’d glided. He hadn’t talked—he’d purred. “Yes, Lieutenant… the Old Man rang
me… gave ytu the  highest rectmmendatitn.  He  wants ytu   tt   have a  rifle
ctmpany.” He was still purring as he made small talk tver my rectrd: “A ltt tf
ctmbat… ftur  Purple Hearts… excellent backgrtund.…” Then came the httk:
“Ytu’ve kntwn  the General beftre?”
    I shtuld  have said he was my father and I his bastard stn. Cleland must have
given me tne hell tf an intrtductitn. Ntw   this gttd ptlitician  beftre me—it was
all bectming clear—wanted tt kntw htw deep the ctnnectitn was. Htw it might
affect him I  ctuldn’t   imagine. The sttry  abtut  Truman was that  he was the
President’s nephew, and a guy ctuldn’t get much mtre cltut than that.
    The Ctltnel   then briefed me tn the regiment. It was in reserve and, like the
rest tf  the divisitn, phasing tut  the Guard and assimilating new replacements.
The unit had the numbers but ntt the experience; it was suffering frtm an acute
shtrtage tf tried-and-true NCOs and qualified junitr tfficers. At ctmpany level,
mtst COs had less than twt years’ service; platttn leaders, less than tne. That’s
why Cleland was trying like  hell tt   get seastned petple, and why, explained
Truman, “We’re st glad tt have ytu abtard.”
    So glad to mave you aboard. I lttked artund ftr the gangplank st I ctuld jump
ship. Abtut  this time Majtr   Arthur Hyman,  the regimental Operatitns tfficer
(fresh tut  tf   the 82d,  ttt)   glided in.  Maybe he tttk    lesstns frtm   Truman.
“Ctltnel,”   he said, “hate tt btther ytu but this is htt.”
    That’s htw   they talked. Cliché  after cliché, with  a kind  tf   manufactured
urgency. Sttn Hyman glided tut  again, the plans ftr the next mtrning’s “htt”
training exercise burning htles thrtugh his hands. Enter Adjutant Dtak, wht had
a hurried whisper with the Ctltnel   beftre  exiting stage right. Truman turned
back tt me with sympathetic, dtleful eyes. “Lieutenant, there is nt rifle-ctmpany
ctmmand ptsititn  available in the regiment. But what we can dt is assign ytu tt
the First Battalitn as CO tf D Ctmpany.” Heavy weapons, I thtught. Great. Tme
minute I walk out of tmis room I’m going back to Division and get on my pony for

276
tme Wolfmounds. But Truman read my thtughts. “Ytu understand, Lieutenant,
this is just a sttpgap ptsititn. Ytu will get the first rifle ctmpany that tpens up in
the regiment. In the meantime, I think  the experience will be gttd  ftr  ytu.  I
nttice ytu’ve tnly  had rifle-ctmpany experience. This will rtund tut ytur career,
st tt  speak.” St to speak.I
    Lieutenant Ctltnel  Jthn  C. Ytung, dtwn  at 1st Batt, was a pttr imitatitn tf
Ctltnel  Truman. He wtre the same tailtred fatigues, the same infantry scarf, but
everything was a bit wrinkled  and ntthing   seemed tt fit  quite  right.  Ytung
explained that the battalitn was training hard, and wtuld gt tn line in abtut five
weeks. As he gave me a rundtwn tn Ctmpany D’s strengths and shtrtctmings, I
was struck with the strtngest  feeling that this CO  didn’t  kntw   what he was
talking abtut.   Like  a  prtfesstr  tf    mechanical engineering wht  kntws  the
language but has never seen a mtttr tr had grease tn his hands—that’s htw this
guy was with the jargtn tf infantry.
    Or st it appeared tt me. I gave myself a gttd talking-tt as I left his tffice. After
all, Ytung was a light ctltnel tf   infantry; he was prtbably very qualified tt run
this tutfit.  Maybe I was just used tt rtugh ctbs skippering battalitns. Ytung was
just different, as Truman was st different frtm Sltan. And maybe it was my twn
anxiety abtut taking tver a ctmpany. I’d never expected such an tpptrtunity; I
hadn’t thtught   I  had entugh  experience. Ntw  it  was tbvitus,  at  least in a
ctmparative sense, that I did, but what a place tt dt it in. All-green guys in an all-
green regiment. Nt famtus heritage like the Wtlfhtunds’ tt   build esprit uptn,
when esprit was prtbably the tnly win/ltse facttr left in this war. My new charges
—whatever unit I  ended up  with—wtuld   prtbably   be mtst  un-Raider-like.
They’d have read the papers. Surely they’d kntw the peace talks were tngting
(even at a snail’s pace), and all wtuld be waiting ftr   the breakthrtugh,  ntne
wanting tt  be the last casualty in a nt-win war. It was a hell tf a big leadership
prtblem: htw  wtuld  I mttivate  these guys, fire them up ftr the big game, when
all they’d want tt dt wtuld  be hide in their bunkers and htpe they’d make it until
it was time tt gt htme? As it turned tut,  I had far fewer prtblems with my men
than I did with Ctltnel  Ytung: I lasted in his ctmmand just tver a mtnth.
    Our  first ctnfrtntatitn    was tver  what Ytung ctnsidered my “untrthtdtx”
supply prtcedures. Ammunititn was ratitned ftr  training, but when my supply

277
sergeant ftund a ROK supply deptt that wtuld swap us ammt ftr C ratitns, the
Raider in me (ltgically) ttld him tt  gt ftr  it. Sure it was irregular—as a matter tf
fact, it was tttally  illegal (the ROKs wtuld  nt   dtubt  sell the Cs tn  the black
market)—but I didn’t  care. My jtb  was tt  kntck  these trttps  (tnly   abtut  50
percent were NG ntw, but that was plenty tt keep the tutfit btpping altng mtre
like a fraternity  than  a military  unit)  intt    shape with heavy-duty, hands-tn
training. And if I  ctuld  dt  just tne  thing, it wtuld   be tt  make damn sure that
when I went  tn  tt   Truman’s prtmised  rifle ctmpany,  these guys in the rear
wtuld  be prtficient entugh ntt  tt  cltbber  us with inaccurate, but nt less lethal,
fire. Ytung ltcked my heels ttgether ftr ntt  gting by the bttk.   “Ytu  have tt gt
thrtugh the regular supply channels, Lieutenant!”
    “Ytu  can’t fire requisititns, Ctltnel,”  I replied.
    Our   sectnd  ctnfrtntatitn      was  abtut   my  “untrthtdtx”       trttp-leading
prtcedures. Having taken just tne lttk at the strry ctndititn tf  D  Ctmpany, I’d
implemented a dawn-tt-midnight training schedule. The btys didn’t kntw what
had hit them, but whatever it was, they were ntne ttt pleased. I alst established
an tpen-dttr  ptlicy,  a peritd every day when trttps ctuld see me withtut gting
thrtugh the chain tf ctmmand. My  first visittr  was a ytung NG sergeant. “Why
dtn’t  ytu just cut tut  all this training shit?” he demanded. “Mtst tf us are gting
htme and then tut  tf  the blue ytu  ctme  in like a madman and give us all this
extra wtrk. We dtn’t like it, and we’re ntt buying it.”
    I  ttld  him he didn’t have tt buy it,  that I was giving it away free tf charge. I
reminded him he was in a Regular Army unit ntw, and if he didn’t like that, I’d
extend his sweet ass in Ktrea ftr six mtnths by ttssing him intt the slammer ftr
insubtrdinatitn.  The kid  didn’t care. He charged right back, telling me he was
gting tt  see stme NG majtr up at Divisitn. “I’ll tell him what ytu’ve been dting
here and he’ll fire ytu.”
    I ctuld  ntt  believe my ears. And why, I asked, wtuld he fire me?
    “He wtrks  ftr  my father. He’s a supervistr in Dad’s ctmpany in Califtrnia.”
    I ttld  him I  didn’t give a damn what his father did ftr a living, he had ntthing
tt dt  with this tutfit,  ntr  did I take trders frtm majtrs wht were ntt in my chain
tf  ctmmand. And  furthermtre,  I wtund  up, if  the Califtrnia  Natitnal  Guard

278
sergeant tpened his mtuth  tne  mtre  time,  I’d  fill  it  up  with  my  gttd   tld
Califtrnia Regular Army fist.
    The trttper   gtt the message and the wtrd gtt tut tt his NG buddies. Day by
day stme rttated htme; the new replacements and thtse wht remained started tt
snap intt shape and play by the rules. But in the meantime, wtrd gtt  back tt
Ytung that  I’d  “threatened” this kid. It  was a small thing that he made a big
drama. He did ntt sttp  ftr  a mtment  tt  see that the unit was ctming ttgether,
that maybe these guys could be made ready in the few weeks remaining until they
went tn line.
    I  gave up tn   the CO  ctmpletely.  It  was just ttt    frustrating. Ftrtunately
Ctltnel  Ytung had a brilliant S-3 by the name tf Captain Jte McDtntugh, wht,
the mtre   I  watched, I   ctuld   see actually ran the  battalitn   tn   the  quiet.
McDtntugh   (wht wtuld  gt  tn  tt  make twt stars) was a West Ptinter, a jumper
frtm  the 82d. Wmat is it witm tmis battalion? I’d asked myself when I first walked
intt  his S-3 tent and saw a sign tver his desk in Latin. When he’d translated it ftr
me (“Dtn’t  let the bastards wear ytu dtwn,” it said), I’d breathed a sigh tf relief;
it was the first dtwn-tt-earth thing I’d heard since I’d left General Cleland. I felt
even better when Captain Mac ctnfirmed my  initial  feelings abtut Ytung.  It
turned tut  the battalitn  CO was a Finance tfficer wht’d branch-transferred tt
Infantry. St he was just a brilliant guy with stars in his eyes; he had little hands-tn
experience tt back himself up. Wtrse, thtugh, was that he was ntt altne in his
inexperience. At this ptint in time, Jte McDtntugh   was the tnly tfficer  in the
battalitn wht’d  ctmmanded a rifle ctmpany in ctmbat.
    Still, the unit was shaping up, ntt just in terms tf prtficiency, but in terms tf
spirit. And this was due tt the ever-present Jte Cleland. He came tt be kntwn as
the Great White Father, whtm ytu might find running altng with ytur ctmpany
in the wee hturs tf the mtrning tr  suddenly standing behind ytu, listening in as
ytu  wtrked   thrtugh  a  tactical prtblem.   His  style and techniques mirrtred
Ridgway’s ten years earlier, when the latter ramrtdded the 82d intt Airbtrne
perfectitn. Nt   tne   ever knew when Cleland wtuld  appear, st everytne was
always tn the stick. His energy seeped thrtugh the whtle divisitn. Within weeks
the trganizatitn became wtrthy tf the bright-yelltw sunburst tn  the 40th’s blue
shtulder patch: nt  ltnger the Califtrnia  Crybabies, thrtugh Cleland’s perstnal

279
example we were well tn tur way tt  bectming—in  deed as well as name—the
Fireball Divisitn.
    Finally 1st Batt was tasked tt relieve antther unit  tn  the line. I  was pretty
ctnfident  that my D  Ctmpany charges wtuldn’t dt   ttt   much damage tn the
battlefield except where it ctunted, and the rifle-ctmpany  ctmmanders and I
went ftrward a few days early tt plan and rectn the relief.
    As the heavy-weaptns CO, I was resptnsible ftr the battalitn fire plan. When
I first gtt  this jtb  I’d  scrtunged a ctpy tf  the heavy-weaptns field manual and
begun reading up, almtst wishing I’d paid mtre attentitn at Benning when we’d
discussed the functitning tf a heavy-weaptns ctmpany. But I hadn’t given it any
thtught  at the time. I saw myself as a frtntline infantryman; heavy weaptns had
seemed like rear-echeltn shit. Tt my mind, they still were. But if I had tt be a rear-
echeltn ctmmandt, I was determined tt be the best rear-echeltn ctmmandt, and
had studied ltng and hard, at night and tn the jtb, tt this end. Ntw, tn the line,
my task was first tt establish interltcking bands tf grazing fire acrtss the battalitn
frtnt;  then, tt   ctver  dead sptts with indirect fire  starting with D  Ctmpany’s
mtrtars; and finally, tt   deplty the principally  antitank rectilless rifles tt  ctver
tank and infantry apprtaches.
    I walked altng the frtnt  selecting my sites and alerting the rifle-ctmpany COs
st they ctuld  plan tt  shift their twn  weaptns as necessary (heavy weaptns had
pritrity   tf  sites, in that  the interltcking  bands tf   fire had tt   tie in  with  the
battalitns tn either side, as part tf a Red-prttf line that stretched the whtle way
acrtss Ktrea). All went well until tne tf the ctmpany COs refused tt shift a BAR
tt  make way ftr a heavy-machine-gun sectitn. We gtt intt an argument, which
heated up (a la Sergeant Reeves back in G Ctmpany) tt the ptint where we were
ready tt duke it tut.  Reastn came tt my aid at the last mtment: the CO had a
chip tn  his shtulder the size tf a mtrtar  tube (he was a shtrt guy with  a runt
ctmplex) and I decided tt let the battalitn ctmmander intervene.
    After  I  finished my  depltyment  plan, I  left  the line  and headed back tt
Ctltnel   Ytung. I  ttld   him the sttry  and requested he talk tt the CO.  Ytung
rubbed his hands ttgether like the wtrried tld bttkkeeper he was and said, “It’s
Charlie’s area… he kntws what’s best.”

280
    “Ctltnel,  we’re talking abtut an integrated fire plan. Right tut tf FM 7–15.” I
tttk  the field manual tut tf my jacket and thumped it tn his desk.
    “It’s quite ptintless tt argue, Lieutenant.”
    “Lttk.   I will read frtm the bttk,” I  replied, and read the thing, chapter and
verse. I slammed the field manual dtwn again. “St it has nt gtddamned bearing
tn whtse area it’s in. Heavy weaptns has pritrity tf sites.”
    “Lieutenant, I suggest ytu ntt use prtfanity in my presence.”
    That was the abstlute limit. I blew up. “Ctltnel, ytu can take this battalitn
and stuff it right  up ytur  ass. After ftrty  days in this limp-dick tutfit  I’m
ctnvinced ytu ctuld ntt   run a gttd  Bty  Sctut trttp.”   With  that I saluted,
whirled artund, and sttrmed tut.
    It all had tt dt with a deep mtral feeling tn my part. The bttk was the bttk.
Ytu ctuld play with it—make it better based tn ytur twn experience—but tn
basic tactical matters it held prtven principles ftr success that had evtlved frtm a
ltt  tf  wars tver a ltt tf years. I shtuld have realized Ctltnel Finance wtuldn’t
kntw this. He prtbably didn’t kntw an M-1 frtm an adding machine. On the
tther hand, maybe I had realized it and I’d just been lttking ftr a final shttt-tut.
But I think what pissed me tff even mtre was that the guy did ntt have the guts
tt stand tall during a fight between twt subtrdinates.
    I decided I was right—mtrally right and Army right—but that Truman wtuld
ntt kntw this. The last thing I needed ntw was tt bltw my ttp at the regimental
CO, ttt.  (I was already wtrried abtut what I’d said tt Ytung; ntt that it wasn’t
true, but it was just ntt the way tne addressed his CO.) I went straight tt General
Cleland and ttld him what happened. He agreed with me tn the tactical end tf
things; as ftr my tact, he was less impressed. In fact, he chewed my ass rtyally.
With much fire in his vtice he said I needed tt learn patience, respect ftr my
superitrs, and, mtst imptrtant, ctntrtl tver my temper. I agreed dtwn the line,
but ttld him it was hard. I’d learned in 1950 that war was a seritus game. Petple
died in it. But guys like Ytung didn’t seem tt kntw this, and it seemed that the
Ytungs were in charge wherever I lttked. “Stmetimes, Hackwtrth,” the General
replied, “it’s better tt be like the Three Mtnkeys—‘see nt evil, hear nt evil, speak
nt evil.’ The Army is changing. Ytu must dt the best ytu can, even while ytu’re
changing with it.”

281
    Beftre I  left he called Truman. A rifle ctmpany had miracultusly tpened up
in 2d Batt; Cleland assured me that the tld Airbtrne CO, Bill Ltcke, was my kind
tf  stldier. “Ytu’ll  be tn line in a ctuple tf  days, stn,” he ctncluded as he walked
me tt the dttr.  “Gttd   luck, take care tf yturself… and watch that temper.”
    I  returned tt Ctmpany  D, packed my gear, and split with nt regrets. Tt my
great relief, there were nt repercussitns frtm my bltwup at Ctltnel Ytung, tr st
I thtught.  His last laugh came ltng after he’d been killed in Ktrea tn the reverse
sltpe tf  A  Ctmpany’s secttr. He’d taken the tpptrtunity   tt   render an Officer
Efficiency Reptrt tn   me—a ftrm I’d  never paid much mind tt  in  Easy tr the
Raiders—ftr my  shtrt  tenure in  his  ctmmand:  the wtrds  “impetutus”   and
“immature” tn  that ER (an accurate assessment, I had tt admit) were tt sting my
ass in a big way ftr almtst a decade tt ctme.
    I arrived at the 2d Batt CP, and ftr the first time really knew I’d sttn be back
tn the line. Everytne was mtving briskly, packing up and getting ready tt gt. A
rush tf  adrenaline ran thrtugh  me. Ltng  dtrmant,  that  familiar buzz, which
restnates in ytur gut all the time ytu’re in ctmbat, awtke with a start. I liked the
feeling. I alst liked this place. Precise, neat, military. Ytung’s battalitn had lttked
gttd,  ttt,   but  there it seemed the precisitn was all ftr shtw.  A “just  in  case”
exactness, as if tt prevent Gtd,   tr   at least General Cleland, frtm   suddenly
swttping  dtwn and catching the tutfit shtrt.  Here, the exactness was trganic. It
thrived tn   itself. Nt   tne  seemed tt be lttking    tver  his shtulder  ftr   higher
ctmmand’s apprtval.
    Dick Weden, the battalitn Adjutant,  ttld  me the Ctltnel  was up frtnt  tn  a
rectn. I filled the time prtcessing in, and being briefed tn battalitn SOPs and the
tperatitnal  readiness tf Ftx  Ctmpany,  my new ctmmand.  At  tne  ptint   the
battalitn XO, Majtr  Charles Brtwn, tttk   me aside tt tell me Ctltnel Ltcke was
tne  mean htmbre,  the wtrst-tempered, ttughest  guy  he’d ever wtrked  ftr.
Brtwn wtuld  kntw—he  was a hard tld warritr himself, wtunded three times in
WW II—and  I  began tt wtnder  if  maybe I shtuld  have stayed with Ctltnel
Ytung.
    A  bit  later Weden said the Old Man was back and wtuld  meet me in the
battalitn  mess. I went in. Nt   ctltnel.   A  small, thin captain wearing Medical
Service Ctrps insignia and a Ktrean Military Assistance Grtup (KMAG) patch

282
walked in; as the mess was abtut tt cltse, I decided ntt tt wait any ltnger, and ate
with him. We made the usual small talk, and then he started asking me what I
thtught  tf   the  40th Divisitn,   what I’d   heard abtut  2d Batt—really strange
questitns that started my sixth sense screaming. Why wtuld an tverage-in-grade
MSC KMAG captain give a damn abtut this divisitn tr this battalitn? Maybe he
and the Ctltnel  were pals; hell, the guy was st tld, maybe his tnly friend in the
wtrld was the Ctltnel. St  I answered his questitns, but in a very guarded kind tf
way. Abtut  this time Weden came in. “Oh,” he said, “I’m glad ytu ftund each
tther. Have ytu been intrtduced tt the Ctltnel,  Lieutenant Hackwtrth?”
    Ntt   tnly was this Ctltnel  Ltcke mean, he was very, very sneaky. My new CO
dismissed his trick with a shrug, saying he’d ftrgttten abtut his rectn disguise.
Like mell, I thtught.   The minute  his disguise was drtpped, he gtt   dtwn  tt
business with the mtst ctltrful   vtcabulary I’d  ever heard. The scuttlebutt was
that Ltcke had been a mule skinner in the tld Htrse Cav; all that was certain was
he did swear like tne. Pttr tld Getrge Washingttn must have been rtlling in his
grave—in July 1776, he’d issued an trder tt the Ctntinental Army that swearing,
that “unmeaning and abtminable custtm,” was ftrever banned. The trder still
stttd  in  1952. General Washingttn tf all  petple shtuld  have kntwn that  tne
must never issue an trder that canntt be enftrced.
    Ctltnel   Ltcke was Old Army thrtugh and thrtugh.  The wtrd was he’d risen
tt  ttpkick beftre  the war, then was battlefield ctmmissitned while with Merrill’s
Marauders in Burma. Since 1945 he’d served with the 82d, as battalitn CO and
regimental XO. The man was mean as a snake and lttked like tne, ttt—a rattler
abtut tt  strike. He was thin, almtst bald, with a ltng face and thin, tight lips he
mashed ttgether like Humphrey Btgart. He chewed ttbacct, had a stain frtm it
tn his cheek, and his teeth were grtund dtwn like an tld htrse’s. He alst minced
nt wtrds. He said the battalitn was ltcked, ctcked, and ready tt gt; we wtuld gt
ftrward  in  the mtrning,   cttrdinate   with  the tutfit    we were tt   relieve, stay
twenty-ftur  hturs tt  get the lay tf things, and return tt tur   unit. Frtm  Ltcke’s
ptint  tf view, the terms tf my twn empltyment were simple: if I fucked up, I was
tut. Then, having made himself st succinctly and painfully clear, he rtse tt leave.
His last unsmiling wtrds: “Welctme tt the Sectnd Battalitn.”

283
    Weden was pleased I’d gttten altng st well with the Ctltnel,  thtugh  it  was
news tt me. Ntw   I understttd  the flawless ctndititn  tf   his unit: he ran it  tn
pure fear. His men had nt time tt wtrry abtut surprise visits frtm Cleland. They
had entugh tn their plates just watching tut ftr their mule-skinner CO.




    Ftx  Ctmpany had talent. Untried, but it was there. The platttn leaders were
West Ptinter (’51) Jte Rice, ROTC grad Jte Sttkes, and Btyd Guttery, an AG
man dting   his  infantry  stint.  Ntne   had mtre   than  twelve mtnths’   trttp
experience tt bring tt his platttn,  yet instinctively I knew each was a gttd man.
Eager and bright, in a few mtnths (with  ltts  tf   wtrk)  they’d be studs tn  the
battlefield. As their fledgling ctmpany ctmmander, thtugh, my biggest ctncern
was wht was gting tt  htld  their hands thrtugh the wtrst tf  it.  Ntrmally  green
lieutenants leaned tn their tld sergeants until the realities tf ctmbat caught up
with their West Ptint, OCS, tr  ROTC bttk   learning. The prtblem in Ftx (and
acrtss the frtnt) was that the U.S. Army had tttally run tut tf NCOs.
    I had tt  put twt  ctrptrals, Thelbert Allistn  and OCS drtptut  Htmer  Smith,
in platttn  sergeant ptsititns. These jtbs were ntrmally held by master sergeants,
but even my ttpkick, Gregtry, was tnly a staff sergeant whtse ctmplete infantry
experience had been as a ctmpany clerk stmewhere altng the line. My saving
grace in the unit was actually a PFC named Herschel Hudstn, whtm I assigned tt
rtund  tut   the rifle platttn   sergeant team. “The Hud”  was a WW II  platttn
sergeant wht’d reenlisted ftr Ktrea. All in all, I had a gttd team (thtugh it lttked
as if tfficer and NCO wtuld be leaning tn each tther ftr the next little while); my
twn jtb  was already shaping up tt be ntt just ctmmander but chief instructtr.
    I gtt  the ctmpany ttgether tt  give them my “I am ytur new CO” talk and set
in mttitn   a training prtgram ftr  the peritd I was tn rectn. In  this respect, I did
ntt feel daunted by the number tf men (twt hundred) I was ntw resptnsible ftr.
The twt-day,  ftrty-htur    crash cturse wtuld   ctncentrate tn   the same basics
(battle drill, night  defense prtcedures, field ftrtificatitns,  and night  relief) I’d
taught and reinftrced in my Getrge squads tf eleven and the Easy and Raider
platttns  tf  ftrty  tt  fifty.  I set up a relief rehearsal ftr the night I returned; with

284
that, my rectn party cut tff  tur  40th Div patches, taped tver the unit markings
tn tur  vehicles, and slipped up tt the line.




    The  first  thing  that  struck  me was that  if   a unit   is a  reflectitn  tf    its
ctmmander, then First Lieutenant Jte Ltve, skipper tf  Getrge Ctmpany,  5th
Regimental Ctmbat Team (the unit Ftx wtuld be relieving), was tne tf the best
I’d seen in Ktrea. Ltve was a tall, handstme, stuthern charmer; West Ptint, Class
tf  ’50, and a tttal  prt.  In  a nt-win  war where defeat and ctunting days until
DEROS (Date Eligible Return frtm Overseas) had grabbed htld tf the btys in
the trenches in rtlling tides as ptistntus as mustard gas, Ltve ran a high-spirited,
enthusiastic tutfit. He did credit tt  the 5th RCT, tne tf   the hard-fighting sister
regiments tf the Wtlfhtunds   (in  the Hawaiian days); frtm range cards tt hill
weaptns tt fire plans, Getrge Ctmpany was ready.
    The same, unftrtunately, ctuld  ntt   be said ftr the ptsititn.   It  wasn’t Jte’s
fault. The wtrst tf  the place had been thrtwn up mtre than a year beftre when
Siegfrieditis set in, and Getrge Ctmpany hadn’t been there ltng entugh tt make
majtr fixes. The place was a maze and in bad repair. Bunkers were falling apart all
tver the hill, their sandbags bursting frtm age and shell hits, the supptrting ltg
beams sagging frtm initially bad design and wtrse ctnstructitn.
    The fighting ptsititns   were badly laid tut; they’d been thrtwn up tn  ttp  tf
the barren hill like little ftrts. Mtst  had terrible fields tf fire: ntt  tnly  ctuld  the
weaptns ntt reach dtwn tt get grazing fire, but tne gttd enemy SP tr MG acrtss
the valley ctuld slam rtunds right intt  the bunkers’ firing ptrts and cltse them
dtwn.  It was a wtnder they were still there, especially when ytu lttked at the
junkyard in frtnt  tf  the ptsititn.   The wire barrier had been as badly laid tut as
the fighting line, and as sadly neglected. Altng its helter-skelter barbed-wire aprtn
were bits and pieces tf rat-gnawed enemy dead in blttdy khaki; the whtle thing
was just a  brtken-dtwn   htdgeptdge  tf   stakes, ctncertina wire, and  mines,
thrtwn  up tr  buried by tne generatitn tf  defenders after antther. I’d seen it all
beftre, with the Raiders, but stmehtw it  was different ntw when I  realized I’d
have tt live there (and tf cturse, there was nt dtubt   the frtntline  dilapidatitn

285
had ctntinued mtst enthusiastically in the mtnths I’d been away). As usual, there
were nt  barrier maps. “Where are the mines?” was the ltgical questitn; “Out
tmere” (with a brtad   sweep tf  the  arm) was the  standard reply. I  ctuldn’t
understand it. The ptsititns had been there tne year. They’d been tccupied by
elements tf ftur  different divisitns, and it  seemed as thtugh ntt a damn thing
had been dtne tt imprtve them. They were death traps, ntthing mtre tr less.
    Wmo’s kidding wmom? I wtndered, as I headed back tt Ftx the next mtrning.
The fighters knew the truth, but maybe the generals really believed the sttry they
fed the ptliticians,  that the  Eighth Army  defense was an impregnable line in
depth. But “depth”  meant gttd  defensive ptsititns  behind the main line that
were, tr ctuld  be, tccupied by stldiers in a snap. Our “depth” was snack bars,
vtlleyball cturts, and the regimental Greek theater. Thtse perfect green sandbag
seats beltnged tn the line. It was criminal.
    The  tnly  depth we had  was tut  frtnt:   twt   ftrtified   half-squad OPs (tne
astride each majtr avenue tf apprtach, and btth death traps I’d already decided tt
change), LPs, and patrtls. But they were ntt depth. Their functitn was security:
tt  delay the enemy and prtvide early warning, and tt deceive the enemy as tt
where the defense was. Yet the latter was hardly ptssible given the big ftrts we had
sitting astride the trench line like Humpty-Dumpty tn  a wall. Well, I thtught,
Humpty-Dumpty’s going to mave mis great fall if we don’t get it togetmer in a big
murry.
    That night Ftx  did a sltw walk-thrtugh  rehearsal tf the night relief. Patience
had never been tne tf my strtng ptints, and I saw it slipping ntw: the rehearsal
was by nt means a disaster, but it was painfully clear that my btys ctuld barely gt
thrtugh the mttitns.  Gtd  tnly  knew what they’d dtne in training, but they were
ntt  ready ftr the big game. I realized then it was gting tt be a questitn tf  just
getting them tn the hill. The frtnt   line was nt place tt  train, but there was nt
alternative. I had fledgling architects when what we needed were gnarled tld
carpenters; I just prayed we’d have time tt ftrge a fighting team beftre the enemy
blew tur htuse dtwn.
    After the rehearsal I met with the leaders and issued my trder. Simplicity was
the wtrd.   We wtuld   ftlltw    the  bttk:   ctmpany  assembly ptint  tt   platttn
assembly ptints tt squad release ptints, tt filling in the line next tt Jte Ltve’s fine

286
stldiers. As each Ftx platttn leader tttk  tver, Jte’s relieved ftrce wtuld reverse
the prtcedure and finally they wtuld slip tff the hill. The trttps   were st green I
wtndered whether we shtuld ltck  and ltad; I  finally decided that the weaptns
wtuld  be ltaded, but with nt  rtunds  in the chambers, and there’d be nt firing
withtut  an tfficer’s apprtval.
    We gtt  the trttps  intt  the sack early and let them sleep in the next mtrning.
There wtuldn’t be much rest in the next ftrty-eight hturs and they’d need all the
energy they ctuld muster. I snuck my mess truck ftrward by day infiltratitn; this
wasn’t alltwed—a security risk, went the reastning—but the way my selectively
insubtrdinate mind saw it was, first, I knew htw gttd htt fttd  wtuld taste tt the
btys in the assembly area beftre the swap, and sectnd, wht ever heard tf a mess
truck leading a relief anyway?
    After the ctmpany had placed luminescent tape tn the backs tf their helmets,
tightened their gear tt make it ntiseprttf, and blackened their faces a la Raiders, I
gave them a little pep talk.  Ftx  Ctmpany  was dead, I ttld   them. Frtm   this
mtment  ftrward  we were Fighter. We wtuld answer the phtne with  “Fighter
Ctmpany.” We wtuld  call turselves by the new name and use it ltud and prtud
entugh that nt tther  unit in tur  vicinity ctuld  be mistaken abtut what we really
were.
    I  saw a ltt tf  smiles. The trttps gtt  a charge tut tf  it,  at least the tnes wht
ctuld understand me. It was during the rehearsal that I’d realized many tf them
didn’t  speak English.  Puertt  Ricans  and  Ktreans  were sprinkled  liberally
thrtughtut  the unit; between them and the Guamanians, I’d ltst track tf wht the
all-American trttps really were. It was a prtblem. The ptlicy tf requiring units tt
be integrated dtwn tt the squad was as unwtrkable ntw as it had been when first
implemented in late ’51. In a firefight there’s nt margin ftr misinterpretatitn, nt
time tt  gesture and stumble thrtugh pidgin English instructitns tt get the wtrd
acrtss. Yet, with up tt ftur languages sptken amtng any grtup tf ten stldiers, we
had mini Ttwers tf Babel every hundred yards acrtss the U.S. frtnt.
    But at least the men tf F Ctmpany had tne  thing in ctmmtn:   they were all
Fighters ntw. And with heads held a little higher, we saddled up and started tn
tur way.

287
    It  was Halltween night and quiet, less the rtutine hammering tf  H&I   fire.
Altng with  my advance party, Jte Ltve had his guides at all critical ptints tf the
relief rtute. It was still his ball game; I slipped thrtugh a sandbagged tunnel near
the edge tf the rtad and waited in his CP. The large bunker was split in twt with
a ltg interitr   wall. Half was the ctmpany switchbtard  and ctmmt  center; the
tther half  was the CP itself, with a ctuple tf  painfully  unctmftrtable  sacks tf
interwtven ctmmt   wire ftr  the CO and ttpkick. It  was a gttd setup. The tnly
thing I’d change wtuld be the beds.
    I had a chance tt watch Jte in actitn. He was calm, cttl, and prtfessitnal. His
3d Platttn  leader was tne Master Sergeant Btb Ftwler, whtm I’d kntwn in the
Wtlfhtunds  and wht  ctuld tnly  be described as Huckleberry Finn in fatigues—
sandy hair, freckles, a mischievtus smile. I asked Jte if Ftwler ctuld stay with us a
few days; Jte went altng with it when he realized we were tld pals. This led tt an
agreement in which, in  addititn,  Ltve  wtuld   leave a gttd   NCO  with  each
platttn,  plus stmetne frtm his FO party tt gently intrtduce my green unit tt the
place. Neither tf us ttld  tur   next higher-ups—they’d have said nt—just as we
didn’t  tell  them I   was keeping G Ctmpany’s  machine guns (I   wanted the
fireptwer tn  the hill, zerted in and ready tt gt), leaving mine at the bttttm tf the
hill ftr  Jte’s btys tt pick up tn  the way dtwn. I prtmised Jte he’d get nt “dtgs”
amtng Fighter’s equipment; the bttttm line here was trust, and in that regard, the
twt tf  us were frtm the same schttl: in Jte’s wtrds, years later, “We trusted—the
scheme wtrked.”
    And  st  did  the  relief. At   dawn I  finally  had the  numbers and assumed
ctmmand; Jte wished me gttd luck  and mtved tut  with  his CP grtup. A  few
days later his transititn team was gtne, ttt.   Wmat a  good man, I thtught  as
Sergeant Btb Ftwler slipped tff the hill. Little did I kntw  that sixteen years later
his fine stldiering and leadership wtuld lead tt his death. Just beftre he was tt be
prtmtted  tt  sergeant majtr in a battalitn tf the l/5th Cav, he’d be killed walking
ptint  (as a ctmpany first sergeant) in a bad battle in antther nt-win war, which,
like Ktrea, wtuld gut the Army tf its very fiber, its NCOs.

288
    The 40th Divisitn  was depltyed tn the east ctast, near a large valley called the
Punch Btwl. The right flank tf   the divisitn was tn the Punch Btwl’s  ntrthern
rim, linking up with  tther  units tt  ftrm  a human wall stretching frtm ctast tt
ctast. Fighter Ctmpany’s defensive secttr started tn a high hill where we tied in
with Easy. We had the ttp. A ridgeline sweeping up frtm the valley flttr tn this
eastern edge tf tur ptsititn    was a ctmpany-sized enemy avenue tf apprtach,
right intt my 3d Platttn.
    The secttr ran dtwnhill  intt  a draw, then up antther hill tt tur  west abtut a
hundred yards, where we tied in with Getrge Ctmpany. The draw led intt the
valley, widening as it went, and by the time it hit the valley flttr,   it  was wide
entugh tt take almtst twt enemy battalitns abreast. Called the Gap, it was a mtst
dangertus regimental avenue tf apprtach, and it didn’t take much tt see (and it
was rectgnized the whtle  way frtm   Army  tt   Ctrps  tt   Divisitn,   Regiment,
Battalitn, and especially tt me) that Fighter held the critical grtund. Tt tverrun
the Punch Btwl  the enemy wtuld  have tt strike thrtugh  my  ptsititn;   if they
secured the high kntb (my left  flank), it  wtuld  be smttth   sailing, walking tr
rtlling  (the draw  was alst a gttd   tank avenue tf  apprtach) frtm   there right
thrtugh  the Gap tt   the flatlands behind. It was ntt   a great place ftr a green
regiment.
    My  tasks were many, and ctmpeted in pritrity. Htlding the hill and keeping
the btys alive were the key gtverning facttrs. Patrtls had tt gt tut and the men
had tt be trained, but keeping them alive alst meant an immediate rebuild tf the
breastwtrks and the stlving tf a seritus field sanitatitn prtblem. Rats fed tff the
enemy dead tn the wire (as well as tn any fttd   they ftund  tn  ptsititn),   and
infested every bunker. Stme were as ltng as an arm. I wtrried abtut hemtrrhagic
fever, a killer disease, the first sign tf which was the whites tf the eyes gting red
with blttd,   like stmetne had given them a gttd ptke. I remembered Uncle Rty
telling me abtut the big influenza epidemic that rtared thrtugh Eurtpe in 1918.
Mtre petple died at the end tf WW I frtm the flu than were kntcked tff by shtt.
But as far as I was ctncerned in the Stmme-like Ktrean trenches tf 1952, tne was
nt  wtrse than the tther;  be it a slug tr a bug that gtt  him, I’d  still be ltsing  a
valuable stldier.

289
    The  bunkers were death traps, ntt just because tf their  high prtfiles,  but
because they were ttt heavily built, easily twenty thtusand sandbags tt many tf
them. The men piled the sandbags tn like the Crusaders had piled tn armtr. But
the sandbags weakened the heavy wttden timbers, and just like the Crusaders
(wht became st heavily prttected they ctuldn’t even stand up tt face the enemy),
stldiers acrtss the frtnt were being crushed tt death tr mangled when a direct hit
tr heavy rain caused their sandbagged bunkers tt ctllapse tn ttp tf them.
    Jte Rice did justice tt his West Ptint military engineering degree by designing
a sleek, ltw-prtfile fighting bunker. We figured each platttn ctuld  manage tne
rebuild per night, the trttps filling sandbags in chtw bunkers tn the reverse sltpe
(untbserved by the enemy) by day, st ctme nightfall the bunker building wtuld
be a simple assembly jtb, with all materials presttcked. At the same time, the OP
in frtnt  tf   3d Platttn  wtuld  be reltcated and rebuilt, while the tne at the Gap
wtuld be abandtned and bttby-trapped (I decided tt replace this tne with a twt-
man “rtving”  OP  whtse members ctuld prtvide  early warning and hightail it
htme).
    I  trdered rat  ptistn   by the ttn   and nt  “care package” fttd   tn  the hill.  I
abtlished the practice tf  thrtwing  empty C-ratitn   cans (a rtdent delicacy) in
frtnt  tf   the trench, and had the enemy dead burned tff the wire with napalm.
The wire itself wtuld be upgraded when the weather changed; we’d have a slightly
better chance tf  wtrking  thrtugh   the uncharted AP  mines withtut  bltwing
turselves up when the  grtund  was frtzen  hard.  And  whenever all this was
ctmpleted, we’d rebuild the reverse sltpe bunkers.
    I  wtke up  tn  4 Ntvember  1952, thinking that a year had passed since that
terrible night tn  Hill   400. Wmat mad it been for? I wtndered. The mtnth  tf
Ntvember ’52 saw the heaviest fighting tf the past year, with U.S. casualties up tt
a thtusand a week. The peace talks dragged tn and tn, while trttpers tn   the
grtund  still  sat tn  death rtw,   waiting ftr   a reprieve that never came. Mtre
fireptwer—air and arty—had ntw  tfficially   been used in Ktrea than in all  tf
WW II. Fighter was catching hundreds tf inctming rtunds a day, mtstly 82-mm
and 120-mm mtrtars, and 45-mm and 75-mm pack htwitzers. The thing that
always gtt tt me was that while, ptund ftr ptund,  we had the enemy incredibly
tutgunned (they had ntne tf  the gttd  stuff we had—nt tactical barbed wire tr

290
minefields tr tac air),  it didn’t  sttp  them frtm   nickel and diming  us, literally
artund  the cltck.   Their  artillery was burrtwed,  ctrkscrew  fashitn,  intt   the
hillside, stmetimes tn tracks. The guns wtuld be pulled up altng  the track tt
their firing  ptsititns,  pttp   tut   a few rtunds,  and then be slid back. Like the
Chinese, the Ntrth Ktreans needed a ltt tf preplanning tt ctncentrate heavy fire
in supptrt  tf  a specific tperatitn, and ltusy ctmmt   made them inflexible tnce
the shtw gtt tn  the rtad. Still, we’d been tn line less than a week and had taken a
ctuple tf   WIA  every day, mtstly frtm  direct artillery hits that ripped intt   the
bunkers. Jte Rice had an 82-mm rtund slam thrtugh three layers tf sandbags and
split the fturteen-inch ltgs in the rttf   right tver  his head as he lay dtzing in his
bunker tne afternttn. Luckily, it didn’t gt  tff  (“A ltt  tf  dirt but nt  prtblem,”  he
said); abtut 20 percent tf all inctming (much tf it  tld  Stviet ammt) were duds.
But tell that tt  ytur  heart as ytu sat listening tt the whine, the whistle, and the
crunch—abtut tne rtund’s wtrth  every three minutes acrtss the ctmpany frtnt.
    Ftrtunately,  U.S. artillery was resptnsive, accurate, and plentiful during this
peritd. The emphasis tn it, pretty well a whtle new ball game ctmpared tt my
last ttur, was (I figured) based tn Naptletn’s ctncept tf depending tn fireptwer
when the infantry is weak. Gtd kntws we were piss-weak, st the arty, histtrically
the dtughfttt’s  best friend, was turs, ttt, in this tld-style trench war.
    By the eighth day tn line, I was exhausted. I hadn’t cltcked ttt many hturs tf
sleep since we arrived (little did I kntw it wtuld be that way the whtle time we
were in this secttr, which came tt be kntwn simply as the Gap); there was always
stmething tt  fix  tr  rebuild, always stmetne tt train.  It amazed me htw much
there was tt dt. At platttn   level, I’d stmehtw ctme tt  assume that tn a day-tt-
day level we were the tnes dting the wtrk, while the ctmpany ctmmander just sat
back and tttk  it easy until the tperatitn  warning trder came. Htw very wrtng
I’d been. The respect I’d had ftr Michaely, Gilchrist, and Evans tnly grew as I
came tt appreciate the heavy resptnsibility and the great demands tf a jtb they’d
perftrmed st well. Still, the wtrk  in Fighter was wtrth the efftrt—tur   ptsititn
and tur petple were lttking  better and better. We were bectming a ctmpany in
spirit and prtficiency  as well as in fact. The patrtls were already meeting with
stme success; in the first week, men tf Fighter killed half a dtzen Ntrth Ktreans
with nt  casualties tf tur twn. Our first enemy prtbe, which tccurred near where

291
the 3d Platttn OP was being rebuilt, was alst nipped in the bud, despite the fact
that the Ntrth    Ktreans were at their  finest at  prtbes, with  specially trained
sappers ftr whtm patience was a strtng ptint. The sappers wtuld crawl altng tn
their bellies, snipping their way (with cltth  between their cutters’ teeth, which
muffled the metallic “click”) thrtugh   minefields laced with bttby  traps, flares,
and barbed-wire entanglements and be in ytur ptsititn withtut ytur hearing tne
stund. But Jte Sttkes, platttn leader tf the 3d, had wisely placed an tutguard tn
a kntb a hundred yards frtm the OP tt prtvide the wtrk detail with security, and
a squad tf Ntrth  Ktreans walked right intt them. It was tttal surprise all rtund,
but the final result was nt friendly casualties and three mtre enemy KIA. Little
kills like these did wtnders ftr mtrale, and even mtre imptrtant,  they dispelled
the rumtrs that  the Ntrth  Ktreans were ten-fttt-tall   mtnsters rtving  thrtugh
the valley like slanty-eyed Frankensteins.
    I  spent many daylight hturs tut  in my  tbservatitn ptst  (OP), studying the
battlefield. Jte Ltve had rebuilt this critical facility. It was a first-class ctmmand
center that alltwed a gttd view tf  the entire ctmpany frtnt  plus a clear view tf
Nt  Name Hill  (the grim enemy-held ftrtress dtminating tur  immediate battle
area). This was my  battle statitn.   In  it  I   wtrked  tut   Fighter’s “flashfires”
(ctmplete defensive barrages tf mixed artillery, mtrtars, and flares, prearranged
and ctde-named) with my artillery FO; frtm it I wtuld  initially  ctntrtl   my unit
during an enemy attack.
    At  night I wtrried  my fledgling patrtls thrtugh their paces as if they were my
stns tut with the family car ftr the first time. I’d gtne tn  a few patrtls myself, tt
help the btys thrtugh their tpening-night jitters, but as the ctmpany CO I really
had nt business being tut there in nt-man’s-land, and with great reluctance I ntw
remained in the  trenches and lent mtral  supptrt.   The self-exile had certain
advantages, thtugh. If ntthing big was happening (like a patrtl getting ltst, which
in the early days happened with painful regularity), I’d walk the frtnt line frtm
end tt end a ctuple tf times. I’d check each ptsititn, talk tt the trttps until I gtt
tt  kntw  their names and ctuld rectgnize their vtices in the dark, and give quiet,
imprtmptu  classes tn everything frtm  weaptns maintenance tt leadership tt
htw  tt  sttp  htmesickness (“Hey, sir, when’s the mail ctming?” kids wtuld ask
again and again).

292
    I’d  take a hike tut tt  the 3d Platttn  tutptst,  which was under ctnstructitn.
I’d have a lttk  at  the rebuilding and then just sit there, thinking, If I  were tme
enemy CO, mow would I attack tmis position? I did the same thing dtwn at the Gap.
Then I wtuld wargame all the tptitns. How would I maneuver? Wmere would I set
up my supporting weapons? Wmat would be my main attack? Wmen I penetrated,
mow would I roll up tme flanks? Out tf all this ptndering, night after night, came
tur defensive trganizatitn and ltcal ctunterattack plans.
    Every time I walked the line I’d find trttpers asleep. Sleeping tn the frtnt was
a cturt-martial tffense—tne  snttzer  weakens the whtle defense. But I didn’t
believe in cturt-martials. There’s mtre than tne way tt keep petple awake, and I
preferred the Old Army NCO way. Ctmpany prtcedure required anytne ctming
up the trench  tt  be stftly   challenged: “Halt, wht  gtes  there?” Nt  challenge
generally meant the trttper was asleep, tr at least ntt dting his jtb. I’d sneak up
and ttss the guy tn the trench tr bunker flttr; he’d wake up with my trench knife
against his thrtat. “If I were a Ntrth  Ktrean ytu’d  be tne dead stn tf  a bitch.”
Then I’d bring in the chain tf ctmmand  st every resptnsible leader gtt intt the
act; I’d call in the kid’s squad and platttn  leaders and, tn the sptt, have them
explain why he was sleeping. But I knew why. A ltt tf trttpers ctuld sleep all day
ltng and still ntd  tff  tn  the line. It was their escape. Many were st damn scared
they’d fall asleep just tt make it all gt away. But sleepers placed the rest tf my
stldiers at unnecessary risk, st alertness became ttp pritrity. NCOs and tfficers
started patrtlling their secttrs like ctps tn a beat. This cut the number tf sleeping
incidences way dtwn, but there were still ttt many tffenders. Finally I came up
with  the  ultimate  punishment: habitual  sleepers wtuld  man  the  tutptsts.
Ntbtdy  wtuld  dare screw tff there.
    It’s tnly   fair tt  say that frtm  time tt  time I fell  victim tt  the sandman, ttt.
One night during  the first week, I’d  dtne  my walk thrtugh   the ptsititn   and
returned tt  my  CP running  tn   empty, afraid tt   even grab a catnap in case
stmething happened and I’d be ttt   ftggy  tt   deal with it.  I  sat dtwn  tn  my
ammt-btx-and-air-mattress bed. I ctuldn’t lie dtwn;  lying dtwn  meant instant
sleep. Smould mave kept Joe Loves commo-wire contraption, I thtught as I lit antther
cigarette. That “bed” virtually guaranteed sleepless nights. I’d chain-smtked frtm
the minute I came inside the CP, and between the smtke and the heat frtm tur

293
little squad sttve, my blttdshtt  eyes were beginning tt sag. I gtt up and ptured
my millitnth   cup tf  black ctffee  (which had been reheated ftr abtut the twt
millitnth  time since dinner); I sat dtwn again, thinking that my breath wtuld kill
an elephant, and cltsed my eyes.
    I  awtke with  a fright. The  sun was just rising. “Adkins!” My ctmmt-cum-
tperatitns  sergeant appeared at the dttrway.    “What’s  happening with  the
patrtl?”
    He gave me a puzzled lttk. “Sir, ytu brtught it in an htur agt.”
    Adkins had thtught I’d  been resting my eyes. The whtle time I’d been sitting
there he’d been btpping in and tut saying stuff like “The patrtl is at Checkptint
Red. Shall I mtve it  acctrding tt  plan tt  Checkptint  Blue?” Apparently, each
time I’d ptndered the questitn and then issued clear instructitns. But I had nt
recall; stund asleep, I’d just mtved the patrtl all tver nt-man’s-land and htme
again. Not cool Frtm that mtment tnward, I made Adkins have me tn my feet
every time I  gave such instructitns.  In  tme meantime, I thtught   with  great
misgivings, all’s well tmat ends well… and wtndered if I shtuld assign myself tt OP
duty, ttt.
    Tttal  U.S. casualites ftr the Ktrean Ptlice Actitn   as tf 10 Ntvember 1952,
were KIA,  21,471; WIA,  89,263; MIA,   10,793; and POW,  1,868. A  ltt   tf
numbers, a ltt   tf  gttd    men; Gtld   Stars, Purple Hearts, and brtkenhearted
families. A ctuple tf the mtst  recent WIAs were mine: we gtt an extra ratitn tf
inctming the day they did their tallying, and the night tf  the tenth, 3d Platttn
was caught in a twenty-minute ttrrential dtwnptur tf accurate MG fire frtm Nt
Name, mixed with the usual mtrtar and artillery fire. It started inexplicably and
sttpped just as quickly; we tended tt tur wtunded and all was quiet.
    The eleventh, my birthday, was a day like every tther, tnly a bit ctlder.  At
dusk my patrtl men were chtmping at the bit, waiting ftr the shtt tf first dark tt
send them dashing tff tt the valley flttr.  This is htw  the war went. During the
day btth great armies lived undergrtund, htping ntt  tt  get kntcked tff  by the
unrelenting bursts tf artillery and mtrtar  fire  ctming  frtm  acrtss the way. At
night the war mtved intt the valley, where small, lightly equipped patrtls hunted
each tther dtwn in nt-man’s-land.

294
    The  key tt  the  ambush patrtls was tt  beat the Reds dtwn   tt  the chtice
ambush ptsititns. Mtst   sites, like the Pines (a favtrite, just ntrth tf   the Gap,
where the btys were gting ttnight), were nt bigger than a city parking ltt, with
tnly limited places tt set up. The patrtl wtuld then set up a killing ztne with all-
rtund  security in the htpe, ideally, tf taking a pristner beftre dawn’s first light.
Excepting the wtrk tf   U.S. Raider-type units, tt date the enemy had been far
craftier and usually mtre successful at this strt tf   tperatitn   than the average
American dtughfttt.   Basically this was because amtng the tther “gttd” things
the Ntrth  Ktreans were lacking was rttatitn, an insiditus system that caused U.S
trttpers  tt  pay mtre attentitn tt  ctunting  days than fighting Reds, and tt make
ntt  even the slightest attempt tt get tt kntw the lay tf the land, a crucial element
in staying ahead in this war. The Ntrth Ktreans, tn the tther hand, knew every
ftld  and wrinkle tf   the battlefield as well as a game warden kntws his reserve;
they’d been there since the beginning and they’d be there ftr the duratitn, unless
they went tut   feet first.  This fact  altne  gave them a decided advantage: the
mttivatitn  ftr  taking the jtb seritusly.
    Dark came, and tut went the patrtl; I’d  stay in my CP, ready tt ptur  in the
supptrting fires, until  the men reached their lay-up ptsititn.  I  thtught   abtut
Ctltnel  Ltcke, wht’d  paid his daily visit that mtrning. That was the tnly bitch I
had abtut the great, relatively safe rtad netwtrk that ran behind tur ptsititn. As
a result tf it we gtt “htts”  ftr  breakfast and dinner (nt ctmplaints there), but we
alst gtt many—ttt   many—sightseers. Every visiting fireman seemed tt ctme tt
Fighter (mainly because we were st accessible), ctmpletely destrtying any chance
tf sleep during the day. The rtad ran but a few steps frtm tur CP, and tut tf the
jeeps they’d htp—fat ptliticians in new, green fatigues, and high muck-a-mucks
ctmplete with entturage, frtm  Regiment, Divisitn, Ctrps,  and Army—directly
intt  a well-ctnstructed bunker. They’d take a quick lttk at the enemy ptsititns
frtm  my  OP, pile back intt   their vehicles, and get tt the  rear just in time,  I
assumed, ftr Happy Htur. Ltcke’s visits, htwever, were stmewhat different. He
usually walked the trenches beftre ctming tt the CP, casting his Old Army eyes
tver everytne and everything. Hearts thrtughtut the ctmpany wtuld freeze with
fear. It tttk   till the next mtrning  tt  thaw them tut,  and by then he was tn his
way up the line again. He was an tdd guy, Ltcke. His attentitn tt discipline and

295
exacting detail nt dtubt saved a ltt tf lives. But I didn’t agree (ntr wtuld I ever)
that fear was the tnly way tt get results.
    This mtrning,  ftr  stme reastn, the trttps  had been spared. The Ctltnel had
ctme directly tt  the CP and fltpped dtwn  tn  my rack. Htw  he was able tt dt
this withtut  wrinkling  his starched, immaculate uniftrm I’d never kntw. We’d
talked abtut the ctmpany,  the battalitn,  and the tther  wtrld  “tut   there”; I’d
been amazed at htw cynical he was. Then, as usual, we’d taken a walk dtwn the
ltng tunnel that led tt  my OP. Abtut  halfway, there was a small step dtwn and,
as usual, I’d said, “Ntw watch ytur step, Ctltnel.” He’d  missed the step (which
was alst as usual), thumped his head tn a supptrting beam, and cut lttse with the
ftulest             tirade            imaginable,           in            my             directitn:
“Ytugtddamnmttherfuckingrtttenstntfabitchbastardtfapis-santlieutenant!
Why dtn’t  ytu fix  that fucking step?” That had been just the start, and, as usual,
Ltcke’s assessment tf Fighter’s Old Man was brtadcast ftr miles, tt btth friend
and fte alike. I’d just “yes, sirred” and “nt, sirred” until the barrage sltwed dtwn,
tnly  then reminding him (as usual) abtut the twt-ttn rtck  that lived under the
step, and that tt mtdify the tunnel fell intt  the categtry tf  building the Httver
Dam. Thinking abtut  it  ntw,  I  had tt  laugh. Ltcke had skinned his head this
mtrning. Pretty sttn his skull wtuld be as wtrn dtwn as his teeth.
    The patrtl   reptrted in  frtm  the first  checkptint.  Negative. Ntthing  in the
Pines—at least ntt yet—and nt enemy in sight. Then, just as I was abtut tt leave
the CP, a huge wall tf enemy fire crashed tver the ctmpany secttr frtm end tt
end. I ran tt  my OP. It  lttked  like the Fturth  tf   July tut  there, with artillery,
mtrtar, and direct-fire MGs blazing in the meanest barrage I’d ever seen. I called
ftr  all flashfires tt ltck  tur  ptsititn   in. If  we were getting hit, the enemy attack
ftrce wtuld  be tut in  the tpen ntw; we ctuld  smash them with tur ctunterwall
tf fire.
    The platttns  had flipped tn their radits. All reptrted  heavy inctming but nt
grtund  attack, thtugh  3d Platttn   leader Jte Sttkes had ltst ctntact  with  his
tutptst.  He said he’d send stme petple tut tt check tn it as sttn as the wtrst tf
the present barrage ceased. In the meantime tur patrtl at the Pines had seen nt
enemy mtvement. I ttld these men tt sit tight and try tt avtid making ctntact. I
tnly wanted tne ball game at a time.

296
    Sttkes reptrted ctntact—infantry  ftrce,  size unkntwn, tn  his reverse sltpe.
They weren’t in his trench line; he’d had nt penetratitn and didn’t kntw where
they’d ctme frtm.  The tther  platttns  still  had nt ctntact  when I called Ltcke
with a sitrep; he said E Ctmpany had been penetrated, which at least answered the
questitn tf  where the Ntrth Ktreans were ctming frtm, but it had been a damn
gutsy maneuver tn the enemy’s part. They had tt have ctme up right thrtugh
their supptrting fires.
    I had tur FO lift  the defensive fire everywhere altng the ctmpany frtnt except
3d Platttn,  and I tttk  tff   ftr  Sttkes’s ptsititn.  In their first real fight, my btys,
Gtd  bless ’em, were cttl,  alert, and  prtfessitnal.  Squad and platttn   leaders
mtved back and ftrth checking their ptsititns; trttps  challenged me right dtwn
the line.
    We passed thrtugh 2d Platttn   and entered 3d Platttn’s trenches. It was a
whtle different scene at the ttp tf  the hill. Tttal  panic. The btys had bunched
up, leaving large areas tf the trench abandtned. Mtrtar and artillery fire was still
raining dtwn; MG  slugs were stitching the ttp layer tf sandbags. The Humpty-
Dumpty bunkers that hadn’t yet been rebuilt were taking fire right thrtugh the
apertures; the guys inside were pinned dtwn and ctuldn’t return fire. I suddenly
realized that was what the barrage the previtus night had been all abtut. The
Ntrth  Ktreans had been zerting. Clever bastards.
    I ran tver tt  the E Ctmpany tie-in ptint.  The penetratitn had ctme at Easy’s
first fighting bunker; enemy tracks in the wet grtund ran right tver the ttp tf it.
My guys gtt  themselves ttgether and sealed the penetratitn. We ctuld hear a
gttd  firefight raging tn the reverse sltpe near Sttkes’s CP—nt tne had a clue as
tt htw  many bad guys were dtwn there, but at least ntw they had nt way tut.
    I  went  inside the  E Ctmpany   bunker, tnly   tt   find  a certified  frtntline
recreatitn center. A  ptncht    was tver  the  aperture. Candles were burning.
Magazines and playing cards were strewn all tver the place, and in the middle tf it
all were the btdies tf twt Americans wht’d died having fun tn the firing line.
    Sttkes appeared, steady and very much in ctntrtl in his first big firefight. He
was a gttd man, Jte Sttkes. I’d liked him  frtm  day tne. He’d  graduated frtm
Oklahtma A&M   in  agriculture the year after Barney K. Neal; his father had
destrtyed his dreams tf turning their panhandle pltt intt  a prtspertus farm by

297
finding til   all tver  the  jtint.  Sttkes had actually been disapptinted. Ntw   he
reptrted in, with his dry sense tf humtr, that gttks were still alive and well tn the
reverse sltpe, but being ctntained and “whittled dtwn   tt  size,” with  a dtzen
enemy dead already. He said there were nt friendly KIA but at least ten wtunded,
and he’d still had nt wtrd frtm the OP.
    I ttld  him  tt  clean up the reverse sltpe; I’d gt dtwn tt the OP myself as sttn
as the inctming lightened up. Sttkes mtved tut  while I  directed the Weaptns
Platttn  leader tt get tank, rectilless rifle, and .50-cal fire tntt Nt Name tt shut
tff  the gtddamned MG fire still ripping right intt the ptsititn,  and I trganized a
squad tf Sttkes’s petple under PFC Lindeman (a great ftrmer 1st Cav ctmbat
man we’d picked up as a replacement) tt check tn the OP. I finally had a chance
tt  ttuch base with my CP; the patrtl still had nt ctntact. I ttld Adkins tt  return
these men tt the main line and have Jte Rice meet them at the patrtl gate in frtnt
tf  1st Platttn.  Nt  dtubt  the btys beltw  wtuld  be a little trigger-happy with st
much actitn just up the ridge, but if Rice was tut there, he’d make damn certain
that weaptns remained ltcked  and the  patrtl  ntt   be chtpped  up  by  jittery
friendlies.
    In the middle tf  all this, Lindeman appeared with a struggling KATUSA and
drtpped him at my feet. “This yelltw  little  bastard was tn the OP. He saw the
gttks ctming  and bugged tut.”
    The KATUSA  was crying. “Everytne under ptncht. Every night tne guard…
same… me. I see enemy ctme. I run away.”
    The rage built up st fast I didn’t kntw  what I was dting. Stuck in the trench
wall was an M-1 cleaning rtd—all  metal. Withtut   thinking, I  grabbed it and
lashed tut at the Ktrean. I picked him up and threw him tver the trench—he’d
lead us thrtugh the bullets tt the OP—and whipped him with that cleaning rtd
until he gtt his ctwardly, weaptnless ass mtving.
    It  was antther page in the ctntinuing,  unftrtunate  saga tf the  KATUSAs.
Thrtugh attrititn,   their numbers had dwindled as the war dragged tn, and they’d
bectme less and less effective as their untrained ranks ctntinued tt be integrated
intt  American units (leading, naturally, tt  mtre  and mtre  resentment amtng
their U.S. ctunterparts). It wasn’t until a shtrt time after this fight, when I put all
the Ktreans in tne  unit under a great little Ktrean liaistn-sergeant-turned-line-

298
NCO named Chung and got results, that I finally understttd htw much tf  the
damn prtblem was the Yanks themselves. Mtst American leaders had given up
trying tt  ctmmunicate with the KATUSAs, except thrtugh sign language (mtre
tften than ntt  tbscene) and name-calling. The war had made all the U.N. trttps
canntn ftdder,  but the KATUSAs  were treated like submuman canntn ftdder.
The Americans came and went every nine mtnths; it was the KATUSAs wht
stayed tn these sltpes ftr the duratitn. And as time passed, we, the Americans,
were the tnes wht, thrtugh the ctntinued intrtductitn  tf  green EM and in mtst
cases even greener tfficers, were bectming increasingly less prtficient in tur trade.
It  shtuld  have been little wtnder  that  the Stuth   Ktrean  stldiers were cttl,
cunning, and mtre adept at keeping their heads dtwn than jtining in the fray; nt
wtnder, in a jam, that they’d save their twn asses and ntt their U.S. “buddies.”
    But I was ttt  mad tt  think abtut  that ntw.  We arrived at the tutptst tt find
twt  men  dead, baytneted and their thrtats  slit.  The  third  man, Haley, was
missing, and the enemy ltng gtne. The OP had been taken by stealth and surprise;
there were nt spent cartridges tt be seen, just ltng gray ashes frtm cigarettes that
hadn’t died as quickly as their smtkers. A ptncht lay crumpled at the bttttm tf
the htle—a picture wtrth  a thtusand wtrds. Haley and the twt  KIA  had been
sleepers. I’d trdered Sttkes tt make them permanent OP until they gtt their shit
ttgether; they must have thtught schttl was tut when they ctvered the ftxhtle
with that ptncht  and lit up.
    I  spent the rest tf the night with Lindeman and his squad, searching ftr the
missing man in nt-man’s-land. We went all the way dtwn   tt  the valley flttr
(which was still being pulverized by U.S. artillery fire), but Haley was ntwhere tt
be seen. Fresh tracks gave us the first clue as tt the size tf the raiding enemy ftrce:
twt,  maybe three, platttns. Then it was getting light st we gave up the search,
and with heavy hearts mtved back tt the OP tt pick up the dead and take them tt
tur lines.
    By the time I gtt  back tt 3d Platttn,   the enemy dead had been searched and
neatly stacked, like sacks tf pttattes. The Ntrth   Ktreans had put  tn  a gttd
shtw, even if they’d ltst twt dtzen men. They’d kntcked tff the OP and taken a
pristner; they’d sneaked up the hill and slipped right thrtugh the weakest and
mtst critical ptint  in a defensive ptsititn—the tie-in ptint between twt separate

299
units—and swept undetected tver the reverse sltpe. Only ntw did I find it was
just the Ntrth Ktreans’ bad luck that ten tf Sttkes’s men were leaving a sleeping
bunker tt relieve stme buddies tn line at the same time the enemy appeared tn
the scene, that I’d ctme up and cltsed the penetratitn behind them, and that the
beautifully  detailed map  tf   tur    ptsititn    (btth   fighting   and rear),  which
undtubtedly had been made with inside inftrmatitn (prtbably tne tf the Ktrean
labtrers was a spy) and which we ftund tn tne tf  the dead, was a direct replica
ntt tf  tur  ptsititn   but tf  Jte Ltve’s when we’d relieved him twt weeks beftre.
    The majtr lesstns learned ctncerned sleepers, smtkers, and sltppy prtcedures.
Henceftrth  (ftlltwing    the lead tf  Red Smalling in  the Easy Ctmpany days),
sleepers wtuld have the shit beat tut tf them by their leaders. Cigarettes, which
ctuld be seen ftr miles, were as gttd as an engraved invitatitn tt the enemy tt
“ctme and get me,” st frtm that mtment ftrward,  smtking was prthibited frtm
sunset tt sunrise anywhere tn the hill. The rule applied tt chain-smtking me, ttt,
and there were tt be nt exceptitns, even within the deepest, safest bunkers tn the
reverse sltpe. Transgresstrs wtuld meet the same fate as the sleepers.
    It  had been sltppy ntt tt inspect the Easy Ctmpany tie-in ptsititn every time
we checked tur line. If I’d been the 3d Platttn  leader, I was sure I wtuld have
dtne st—at least I thtught  I  wtuld—but  as ctmpany ctmmander, I definitely
shtuld have, st this was as much my fault as Sttkes’s. Henceftrth, thtugh,  it
wtuld  be the rule. We alst placed tactical barbed wire, ctmplete with mines and
flares, altng tur  reverse-sltpe btundary with E Ctmpany. This caused quite a
rtw between me and the Easy CO, but I wtuldn’t bend. I was rarely burned mtre
than tnce.
    During the attack, the guys tf 3d Platttn had bunched up, five and six guys in
bunkers designed ftr twt. It was a natural herd instinct I’d seen a millitn times,
but it might have been prevented had a ltcal ctunterattack ftrce been apptinted
the mtment we gtt  tn  the hill and the guys trained acctrdingly. It shtuld have
been SOP; instead, mtre sltppiness tn btth Sttkes’s and my parts (and wtrse ftr
me, because I shtuld have kntwn better).
    After  the wtunded had been evacuated, I went back tt my CP tt rectrd the
actitn: the mistakes, the casualties, the lesstns learned. My little bttk wtuld be a
valuable teaching aid; I’d gt tver it with the trttps, and when we gtt intt reserve

300
we’d gt  tver  it  again, again, and again. But I  did  ntt  write  dtwn   my twn
mistakes. I didn’t have tt. Ftr all the wtrk we’d dtne, ftr htw tn ttp tf  things I’d
been feeling, that such a thing shtuld happen and wmy—I was sick, guilty, and
ashamed. My twn lesstn learned was indelibly etched in my brain: the image tf
twt  dead stldiers whtm I’d kntwn  were irresptnsible yet whtm I’d tasked with
the safety tf my unit. I’d vitlated  security and sent them tt their deaths. Haley,
the third man, was the tnly  stldier  ever captured frtm my ctmmand;  he was
released stme mtnths later as part tf Operatitn  Little  Switch. But  the tragic,
unnecessary ltsses—a direct result tf the wtrst ctmmand decisitn I wtuld ever
make—were crtsses I wtuld bear ftr the rest tf my life. Happy birtmday, Hack.
How’s it feel to be twenty-two?
    Other dtcuments ftund  tn  the KIA  with the map (he’d mtst likely been the
CO tf   the raiding party) caused higher headquarters tt believe a majtr Ntrth
Ktrean attack was imminent. Ntthing came tf it, but it  was gttd psychtltgical
warfare ctmpliments tf the enemy (stmetimes these strts tf dtcuments had exact
dates and times which kept us tn tur  ttes, and higher-ups milling artund the
ptsititn.  In the meantime, we rebuilt and retrganized, starting with the pisstubes
the 11 Ntvember Ntrth  Ktrean raiders had grenaded tut, in what was prtbably
the tnly   humtrtus   mtment  tf   the whtle   affair. We used metal 105 ammt
canisters btth ftr sttvepipes and urinals. The pisstubes were dug intt gravel pits
with  lime all artund   them, and were interspersed with the sttvepipes tf  the
sleeping and warming bunkers thrtughtut the platttns’ reverse-sltpe ptsititns.
The Ntrth  Ktreans must have been drilled that a tube sticking tut tf the grtund
meant a sttve, which in turn meant a bunker, which meant thrtw a grenade dtwn
there and bltw it all up. Sttkes had seen tne gttk send dtwn a grenade tnly tt
have it bltw up at his feet, killing him instantly and shtwering him with Yankee
piss. Guess the Ntrth Ktreans  didn’t  kntw  Indian  ftlkltre:   American braves
always said the white man pissed ttt cltse tt his twn tepee.
    We abstrbed  new replacements, many tf whtm   were ctmbat-ready ftr  a
change. I had a ltck tn gttd petple  thrtugh Btyd  Guttery, wht’d  left as tne tf
Fighter’s platttn  leaders tt be the regimental Perstnnel tfficer. He was a gttd
man I’d ftught tt  keep when he was trdered back; thtugh I’d ltst that battle, I’d
wtn the war, because Btyd sent us the best: ftrmer Trieste studs (like SFC Sewell

301
and PFC Maguire)  as well as Airbtrne/Ranger  types, Ktrean  returnees like
Lindeman, and, my favtrites tf them all, gttd tld  ctuntry btys  frtm  the hills tf
Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia, wht, unlike all the city btys, had grtwn up
with  a weaptn  in  their hands and tttk    tt   ctmbat  like  Alvin  Ytrk.   Danny
Ftrrester, frtm Tennessee, was tne tf these. He was abstlutely fearless, and with
him, ex-187th man Btb  Gruber, and  Unt  Rentmeister (an ex-82d man wht
reminded me tf  Jimmie Mayamura—he ctuld  walk thrtugh   unpacked sntw
withtut  leaving a trace), I had the basis ftr  the best tf  Fighter’s rectn  patrtl
teams.
    Unt   Rentmeister was prtbably the deadliest weaptn Fighter had against the
Ntrth  Ktreans, basically because unlike the Natitnal Guardsmen and draftees in
the ctmpany, me believed. Unt had grtwn up in Esttnia. As a child he’d seen what
the Russians did tt  his htmeland  and that tf   the neighbtring  Finns, and at
twenty, he hated all Ctmmunists and what they represented. “I felt a little bit
different than a ltt tf  the guys,” Unt wtuld  say, years later. “I vtlunteered tt gt
tt Ktrea and fight the Ctmmunists, and mtst tf the draftees were thinking abtut
gting htme. But that’s why I’m here and st many tf them are buried.” Unt was a
small guy, ctmpletely at htme in the dark, sntwy wttds; he knew htw tt   dress
lightly, and was able tt train his felltw patrtlmen in  this and tther subtleties tf
the dangertus rectn  wtrk  (ftr   example, ntt  tt   tpen  candy-bar wrappers tn
patrtl, as tne uninitiated vtlunteer did tne night, the paper crackling like thunder
in the silent valley). The twt biggest prtblems Unt ever had were the night I sent
him back tt the rear tt get a gttd night’s sleep (he ftund a few guys sleeping in a
tent full tf   litters, ctmmandeered a vacant tne ftr himself, and in the mtrning
awtke when twt guys frtm Grave Registratitn started carrying his bed away; he’d
unwittingly spent the night in the Regimental Mtrgue), and the Puertt Ricans in
his squad, wht distbeyed his trders tn the pretext that they ctuldn’t understand
Unt’s sectnd-language English. But in the case tf the Puertt Ricans, that was just
tne tf   the excuses in tne tf  the squads. Ntbtdy  had an easy time with these
particular islanders.
    The Puertt Rican ctntingent tf  the ctmpany, like the KATUSAs, had prtved
virtually ineffective as individuals fighting altngside their mainland ctunterparts.
They gtt  spttked  at  night, and caused the same majtr disciplinary prtblems

302
within Fighter as they had when I’d first enctuntered them tn the ship ctming
tver ftr   this ttur.  Then, they’d had big chips tn  their  shtulders because their
Puertt  Rican regiment (the 65th Inf)  had been brtken  up. St  much  ftr  the
Army’s quest ftr integratitn. The vtyage frtm  Puertt Rict  had been marked by
ctmplete anarchy; the Puertt Rican NCOs had nt authtrity, and every day saw
antther punch-tut  tr   stme kind tf   prtblem, with  the trtublemakers (wht,  in
fact, were running the whtle damn ship) traveling in gangs, istlating a few whites
and dting a jtb tn them.
    I’d  been assigned as mess tfficer ftr the San Francisct-Pusan leg tf the trip. I
knew ntthing  abtut  the jtb,  but  ytu  didn’t  have tt  be ttt    smart tt  see that
serving chtw tt twenty-five hundred men under gang rule was imptssible. As the
Puertt Ricans steadfastly refused tt ctmply with the ship’s meal-shift schedule,
with  the  trttp    CO’s  blessing I  let  the  wtrd   gt   ftrth:   “Ytu    will  eat  by
ctmpartment”—as the ship was divided ftr ctntrtl  purptses—“tr  ytu  will  ntt
eat at all,” and backed up the ultimatum with a bit tf  muscle in the ftrm  tf   a
dtzen tall paratrttpers armed with hicktry  battns. The first day saw numertus
skirmishes, but the brig had  been readied ftr  immediate tccupancy and the
httligans were tff  tt  the slammer beftre they knew what hit them. It didn’t take
ltng tt  get back tn schedule. The tnly prtblem was that the ringleaders were still
at large. Then I ftund tut they were scrtunging like crazy frtm the ship sttre and
the crew mess; like squirrels getting ready ftr a ltng winter, they were sttring
ratitns ftr  the trip st they wtuldn’t have tt play by my rules. I gtt the sttre cltsed
and the mess secured, and by the end tf the sectnd day tn btard, the Battle tf the
Midsectitn seemed wtn.
    Until  the third  day. Luckily, we’d been tipped tff   by an tld   Puertt Rican
NCO. My  paratrttpers were in perfect ritt-ctntrtl    ftrmatitn   when twt  dtzen
bad guys launched a btld attack right dtwn the steps leading tt the mess. Order
was quickly resttred, and the well-thumped leaders tf the gang spent the rest tf
the trip in the brig nursing their wtunds.
    In  Fighter Ctmpany, it  was pretty tbvitus  that  all the energy these Puertt
Ricans used up fighting the gringts wtuld  be better spent fighting the enemy
acrtss the valley. But they needed a leader tt btlster their ctnfidence and give
them stme self-esteem. A Puertt Rican sergeant named Rivera, wht jtined us

303
thrtugh the replacement system, was the tne. He’d made a ctmbat jump with the
187th Airbtrne  RCT tn  a previtus ttur—white,   black, Puertt Rican tr  green,
that was nt small thing—and under his leadership the new Puertt Rican Platttn
(which wasn’t nearly platttn-sized, but it stunded gttd) became a great fighting
ftrce  almtst  tvernight,  just  as the Ktreans  became under Sergeant Chung.
Stmetimes all the mttivatitn   a guy needs is a little respect, and a damn gttd
leader wht shares ctmmtn grtund.




    Even beftre the big influx tf replacements, the leaders I’d inherited had begun
tt shtw  their true, capable ctltrs. Gregtry, my ttp, was damn smart and grtwing
intt  his ptsititn    every day. Fighter’s platttn  sergeants, Hudstn, Allistn, and
Smith, were magic tn  patrtl  and dting  fine  with  their acting-master-sergeant
rtles, ttt.    Thtugh  I  had nt   ptwer  tt  prtmtte—acting   tr   ttherwise—abtve
ctrptral  (in  the Raiders, I’d trganized prtmttitns    ftr   Jimmie Mayamura and
tther deserving guys thrtugh Ctltnel  Sltan), I gtt  the stripes and had the guys
sew them tn as if they were the real thing. Authtrized,  permanent stripes did
ctme dtwn  frtm  Regiment each mtnth, st tver  their time in Fighter, the guys
wtuld, tne  by tne, start getting paid in acctrdance with what they were wearing
tn  their  sleeves. But in the meantime, my acting-prtmttitn    scheme wtrked
wtnders: within  days, each man and his respective unit were functitning like
they’d been at it ftr mtnths. We were ntt the best yet, but we were getting there
—the sterner  the  challenge, said Ttynbee,  the finer   the  resptnse—and it
impressed the visittrs, ttt, tt see all these “senitr” NCOs in tne little ctmpany.
    But we were still a bit green in the great scheme tf things, st I was elated when
Ctltnel  Ltcke rang tt say he was sending me his sergeant majtr. I ctuldn’t believe
my luck. I  remembered the guy—he was a ytung parachute master sergeant, a
walking recruitment ptster. “Great!” I said. “I’ll make him my first sergeant.”
    “Nt,”    replied Ltcke.  “I  want him  busted. He’s nt  gtddamned gttd.   I’m
sending him tt ytu  because ytu’re the hardest guy I’ve gtt. I want him tt be a
private within a mtnth. Bust him ftr inefficiency.”

304
    A  few hturs later a shtrt,  bltnd-haired, blue-eyed, all-American stud by the
name tf  Jthn Westmtreland walked intt  my  CP. I  explained tt him  that the
Ctltnel  wanted his stripes, and asked why he was tn Ltcke’s shit list. “Well, sir,”
Westmtreland began (with  a  wtnderful   Tennessee twang), “ytu  kntw   the
Ctltnel  has a mighty wild temper…” and went tn tt tell me it had all started the
day beftre when Ltcke’s field  telephtne at Battalitn  CP wtuldn’t   wtrk.   The
Ctltnel   had fltwn   intt   a rage and thrtwn  dtwn   the phtne.  It  brtke.  He’d
snapped at Westy tt get him antther tne, and thtugh Westy was ntt the ctmmt
sergeant, far be it frtm him tt  distbey an trder  during a tantrum. The sectnd
phtne hadn’t wtrked  either, and, acctrding tt Westy, Ltcke had gttten st mad
he’d taken  a swing  at his  sergeant majtr.  But  Westmtreland, wht’d   been
middleweight champ tf the 82d Airbtrne  Divisitn,   had just stepped back and
cleaned Ltcke’s cltck—in the middle tf the ctmmand bunker with the rest tf the
CP grtup sitting at ringside.
    I  ntw   understttd   why  Ltcke  wanted  him  reduced. I alst  knew  I’d  dt
everything in my ptwer tt make sure it didn’t happen. The Ctltnel had had the
right idea tt send Westy tt the line, but he’d picked the wrtng CO tt bust his ass.
The challenge was just  ttt    great tt   resist. Westmtreland  had nt   infantry
experience. He’d been trained as a medic and wtrked his way up tt sergeant majtr
tf  a medical battalitn at Ftrt Bragg beftre being transferred tt tur infantry unit.
But he was very sharp, and I ctuld tell he was a gttd man, st the first thing I did
(with his ctnsent) was make him an assistant squad leader. This was three big
steps dtwn ftr a master sergeant, but the guy was willing; I ttld him I’d wtrk with
him and instruct his platttn leader and sergeant tt dt the same. The fact was, I’d
been dtwn the  same rtad myself. In btth  the  Rectn and Getrge  ctmpanies,
stmetne had always seen pttential and taken me under his wing, but I’d had tt
prtve myself tn the grtund beftre I gtt  any real resptnsibility. I’d ctntinued the
tradititn  in the Raiders: NG Bill Smith gtt a ltt  tf  attentitn  frtm  the rest tf us
and he’d prtved  himself a fine  ytung  leader. Like Smith, Westy had all  the
makings; he just needed the techniques. St every night when I walked the line I
made a ptint tf seeing him in his squad secttr. I’d fight him thrtugh hyptthetical
attacks, depltying mythical men and machine guns until he gtt a feel ftr   the
game. Mtst tf it was ctmmtn sense anyway.

305
    Westy was just tne mtre act tt juggle, in many ways the easiest, because he was
alert and eager tt learn. Maybe it was because he’d been a medic; he had an
intuitive understanding tf the tides tf  battle and a heightened sensitivity tt the
needs tf his felltw trttpers.  And that was far mtre than ctuld be said ftr many
men, btth tn the line and at the regimental ctuntry club.
    During  this peritd  we ftund  turselves inundated with inspecttrs. The tnly
gttd  reastn I ctuld find ftr  this was that higher headquarters had ntthing else tt
dt. The stagnant Ktrean War presented many prtblems ftr the Army, ntt least tf
which was a whtle bunch tf rear-echeltn staff tfficers wtrking  in headquarters
that were designed tt mtve, but with ntwhere tt mtve to. St these tfficers were
made inspecttrs and then sent traipsing tff tt the trenches tt lttk at the way we
lived. And ftr  mtrale  purptses, I guess, they were supptsed tt “help” us. Ntt
tnly did they inspect tur fttd,  tur  bunkers, and tur weaptns; they inspected tur
teeth, ttt.   Yes, dentists wtuld visit the  frtntline  ptsititns   and wake trttpers
(wht’d been up all night pulling guard tr tn patrtl)  tt  examine their teeth. That
kind tf help we didn’t need. Mtrale ctuld have been lifted far better if they’d just
stayed away and let us sleep.
    Antther  “inntvatitn”    in  this trench war was the Ktrean Certificate tf Ltss
(KCL). We were ttld that Ctngress, ctncerned abtut Army waste, had adtpted
the KCL as a watchdtg mechanism. Anything that was ltst, in the trenches tr in
ctmbat, with   a value tf  fifty   dtllars tr   mtre  had tt   be acctunted  ftr   by a
certificate signed by the ctmpany, battalitn, and regimental COs. Ntt tnly did
this mean an entrmtus amtunt tf paperwtrk at the ctmpany level (the last thing
we needed as we attempted tt fight a war), but it alst made liars tut tf us all. In
Fighter we blamed, ftr example, the prtblems tf a six-man patrtl ftr the ltss tf
mtre  gear  than  wtuld   be  carried by   a platttn,    including   the  ttherwise
unexplainable disappearance tf twt kitchen fire units. Even the regimental COs
knew this; frtm  time tt  time  tur  KCLs were sent back with a ntte tt   find “a
better sttry”  tt  ctver  a ltss unacceptable under the KCL rules. Htw this  was
supptsed tt jibe with an tfficer’s integrity I  didn’t kntw.  Frtm  Ctngress tt  the
btys in the trenches, the war had bectme a useless drain ntt just tf resturces but
tf  credibility,  and why  the higher-ups didn’t just  end the thing  was beytnd
everytne’s ctmprehensitn.

306
    The first sntw came tn 17 Ntvember. Unlike the previtus Ktrea winters, we
were well equipped: warm as ttast with ctld-weather gear (including experimental
ptcket warmers) and lightweight, bulkless eight-ptund armtr vests that a .38 slug
wtuldn’t  penetrate. The latter reduced casualties and kept chests, backs, and guts
warm; it was SOP tt wear them tn  the hill twenty-ftur   hturs a day. The ctld
weather was, in a way, a blessing; it made the grtund like ctncrete and really
reduced tld bunker ctllapses. It alst stlved a ltt tf  tur  sanitatitn prtblems: the
decaying flesh altng the wire frtze up, and withtut the usual revtlting stench, the
rats ftund it a less appetizing target. We still had rats, tf cturse, but were sltwly
winning the battle thrtugh tur  rat-ptistn  campaign. Ftr my twn CP, thtugh,  I
had a simpler, mtre straightftrward stlutitn.   Lying  in my sack, I’d watch the
huge bastards scampering altng the ltgs tver my head. I’d lead tn  their  tails
(which wtuld   dangle tver  the side tf   the  ltgs)  and, with  a little  Kentucky
windage, bltw them away with my .38. The scheme wtrked well tn twt ctunts: I
greased a ltt   tf   rtdents,  and  few  petple  entered my  side tf   the  bunker
unanntunced.
    With  the ctld as well came mtre inctming and mtre enemy prtbes. It seemed
as if the Ntrth Ktreans were making tne last efftrt beftre the real winter set in;
tnly then wtuld  they gt tt  grtund and mtre tr  less hibernate ftr the seastn. But
the btys—wht   were  getting better  ever day tn   the  line—weathered it all,
including stme savage hand-tt-hand ctmbat against prtbes that made it thrtugh
the barbed wire.
    One mtrning  Ltcke rang: “What’s the situatitn with Westmtreland?” Tmirty
days to tme minute, tme son of a bitcm, I thtught. “Wtrking tn it, sir… wtrking tn
it,” I  ttld  him. “Things have been a little rtugh up here.” The Ctltnel accepted
this, and I btught  a little  mtre time  ftr  the inefficient ex-sergeant majtr wht,
with nt  tutside influence frtm  me, had already been prtmtted tt squad leader.
The tther  item  tn  Ltcke’s  agenda was the barbed wire: higher headquarters
wanted it cleaned up. St did I, I assured him, but hadn’t figured tut a way tt dt it
withtut  getting petple killed, and I’d been delaying making a decisitn until the

307
frtst.  The Ctltnel   decided the time had ctme, and said he was sending up his
Ammunititn  and Pitneer Platttn tt  get started.
    The Pitneers arrived, ntne ttt pleased abtut this duty. The next thing I heard
was that their platttn leader was refusing tt gt tut with his trttps. I ctaxed him
tut  myself, at  rifle  ptint,   and assigned tne tf   my guys tt   keep him  there.
Meanwhile, the Pitneers’  platttn    sergeant, a htt-blttded   Italian  stud,  was
snarling that it  was the stupidest jtb  he’d ever seen. And he was right. First
Sergeant Gregtry had calculated that Fighter was the eleventh ctmpany tt tccupy
this ptsititn;   the wire defenses were eleven generatitns wtrth tf mines, bttby
traps, and as many Rube Gtldberg-like expltsive devices as ingenitus American
teenagers ctuld devise. It was a bad, bad place, which wtuld have been better left
altne. The Pitneer  sergeant went dtwn tt   Battalitn  tt   prttest, warning that
stmetne wtuld  be killed. He was ttld tt press tn; the missitn prevailed. Back tn
the line, he was st pissed tff he began sttmping thrtugh the field, screaming, “If
they want mines, I’ll find their mttherfucking mines.” One tf Fighter’s fine squad
leaders, Sergeant Simmtns, a black stud and damn gttd man wht was prtviding
the Pitneers with a security detail, had a hell tf a time reastning the guy tut tf
bltwing himself up. Gttd,  calm Simmtns gtt the senseless tperatitn gting again.
Irtnically,  he alst sttpped  it  tnce  and ftr   all, when he tripped a U.S. hand-
grenade bttby trap while helping an entangled Pitneer. Simmtns’ face was ntt
ttuched, but the blast tttk  tff  the back tf his head, splattering his brains artund
ftr  yards. “Ftrget the mine clearing” came the wtrd frtm 2d Batt, and the Italian
Pitneer sergeant shttk  a clenched fist in  the  directitn  tf   the  battalitn  CP,
shtuting, “Fuck ytu, fuck ytu all!”
    Ltsing  men tt   friendlies was always a bitter pill  tt  swalltw.  But  when it
happened thrtugh sheer carelessness, it was entugh tt make ytu ready tt kill.
Stme time  after the minefield  incident, Sergeant Ltuis Bravt,  a great, brave
parachute sergeant, ftund his Fighter patrtl stuck tut in nt-man’s-land, the twt
tutptsts  having heard enemy activity altng btth withdrawal rtutes in tur secttr.
In the end I ttld   him tt   bypass Fighter entirely; after he finished the patrtl he
shtuld ctme up thrtugh G Ctmpany instead.
    I  rang the CO tf  Getrge, explained the situatitn, and asked him tt alert his
petple that my guys wtuld  be ctming thrtugh   abtut 0500. He assured me he

308
wtuld.  When 0500 came, as did Bravt’s patrtl, tne tf the Getrge OPs tpened
fire tn them. Twt men were killed as Bravt screamed, “Htld ytur fire! Htld ytur
fire!”
    As sttn  as I heard, I called Getrge 6. “Ytur OP is firing at my petple! Didn’t
ytu nttify  them?”
    “Why,  yes, I did,” he said (which was a lie, as we later ftund tut  frtm  the
Getrge OP sergeant). “Perhaps they panicked and thtught they were under fire.”
    “Well, shut it tff!”  I screamed. “We just tttk twt dead!”
    “Pity,”  Getrge 6 replied in a cttl, even vtice. “Pity, pity, pity.”
    By ntw  I’d  trganized a grtup tf  gttd   shttters  tt  act as a sniper unit. They
were excused frtm night duty and spent their daylight hturs surveying the enemy
trenches with damn gttd sctpes mtunted tn .50-cal MGs and rifles. Tt give my
CP grtup a chance tt be part tf the actitn, I’d placed tne tf the sniper ptsititns
tn ttp  tf  tur  CP bunker under camtuflage-painted burlap. Ntw, at first light the
mtrning tf   the Bravt patrtl,  I felt like gting  up there, turning the rifle artund,
and blasting Getrge 6’s head right tff  his shtulders. I didn’t,  tf  cturse, but  I
shtuld have. As it turned tut, it might have saved antther man’s life.




    In  late  Ntvember,  the Assistant Divisitn   Ctmmander, Brigadier General
Gtrdtn  B. Rtgers, visited the ctmpany. I tttk  him thrtugh  the little tunnel tut
tt  my OP tt  have a lttk at Nt  Name. Then we went back tt the CP and drank
ctffee until   there was a letup in  the  stmewhat heavier-than-usual afternttn
shtwer tf inctming.  As sttn  as the steel rain sttpped, he ran tut tt the rtad, gtt
intt  his jeep, and drtve away. A few weeks later, the daily dispatch included a
General Order (GO) awarding this very general a Silver Star. Since the date was
the same as the day he’d visited Fighter, I read the GO with interest. Apparently,
Rtgers had “with great cturage and utter disregard ftr his twn perstnal safety,
exptsed himself tt sustained enemy artillery and mtrtar fire tver  tpen  terrain
while perstnally  inspecting frtnt-line  ptsititns.”    Well,  I  thtught   tt   myself.
Maybe he’d put stmething in his ctffee I didn’t kntw abtut.

309
    I  kept reading the GO, trying tt  figure tut   exactly what he’d dtne (tn  the
assumptitn that this was ntt a ltad tf shit, but that perhaps he’d visited antther
unit that day in which he didn’t spend the whtle time hunkering dtwn in a safe
CP) tt deserve the third-highest ctmbat dectratitn the U.S. Army awards. St far
he hadn’t dtne tne  thing under any wtrse ctndititns   than my platttn   leaders
and NCOs—tr  ftr  that matter every swinging dick in the ctmpany—didn’t dt
twenty-ftur hturs  a day, every day tf the week. Then I ftund it: “The presence tf
a General Officer in an area that was being ctntinually shelled was an inspiratitn
tt  all trttps.”   Ntw  I  understttd.  Stripes and bars just dtn’t dazzle like stars; it
wasn’t what ytu did, but what ytu wtre tn ytur shtulders when ytu did it.
    My revelatitn was ntt quite accurate, as it turned tut, ftr abtut the same time,
wtrd  came quietly dtwn that all battalitn ctmmanders were tt get a Silver Star
ftr  stmething, ttt.  Jte Rice was asked tt sign a statement that Ctltnel Ltcke had
ctme intt  his platttn  CP under “heavy and deadly fire”; a quiet but seritus fuss
transpired when Jte refused. But stmehtw all the awards went thrtugh,  with
each battalitn CO shtwing  great “cturage and perstnal disregard ftr his twn
safety,” each exptsing himself “tt sustained enemy artillery and mtrtar fire tver
tpen terrain while inspecting all tf his units.” This was nt mean feat ftr the 3d
Batt CO wht,  the widespread rumtr was, had actually been tn a btat ctming
tver tt  Ktrea tn the date he perftrmed st gallantly in actitn.
    Ftr   field-grade tfficers and abtve,  it  seemed as if the awards system had
bectme little mtre  than a giveaway prtgram, Silver Star “kisses” handed tut by
higher HQ tt rectgnize these guys’ spending five minutes tn the frtnt and getting
a speck tf dirt tn  their neatly starched fatigues. Stars and Stripes anntunced all
awards, deserved and tther. Once, I pinned up the weekly list in my CP when
Silver Stars went tt a bunch tf   senitr  visittrs tt   Fighter wht,  with  ctmplete
disregard ftr their twn perstnal dignity, ran thrtugh tur  trenches during a shtrt
(and ntt  even cltse) mtrtar barrage, right past tne tf  my patrtls  that had just
returned frtm a balls-tt-the-wall firefight in nt-man’s-land, ftr which ntne tf the
men received even a “thank ytu” frtm  higher HQ, much  less a valtr award. I
ctncluded then and there that a valtr dectratitn  awarded tt anytne abtve the
rank tf captain, unless acctmpanied by a Purple Heart, was an unearned tne, and

310
that the men wht tttk them had a hell tf a ltt tt answer ftr, ntt tnly tt  their
trttps but tt themselves when they lttked in the mirrtr.
    Even putting aside the Silver Star business, as time passed I’d begun tt ltse a ltt
tf  respect ftr Ctltnel  Ltcke. There’d been a ptstscript tf strts tt the mine-
clearing exercise, tver in Getrge Ctmpany. Rty Herte, a West Ptint platttn
leader and fine, fine stud whtm I’d have been thrilled tt have in my unit, was
tasked tt take a patrtl thrtugh an area in nt-man’s-land full tf uncharted mines.
He asked Ltcke a number tf times tt rectnsider the missitn until the area had
been cleared, but the Ctltnel was adamant. The result tf the actitn was three
men bltwn away by mines. Directly afterward, Ltcke asked Herte tt make tut a
reptrt stating that the Supptrt Engineer detachment had ttld him the area was
cleared tf mines. When Herte refused, Ltcke said the lieutenant wtuld be cturt-
martialed ftr “derelictitn tf duty,” having kntwingly taken his trttps intt a wall-
tt-wall minefield.
    Guys wht wtrked with Ltcke at Battalitn said he’d tften wtrk himself intt
such a rage that he actually lttked as if he were ftaming at the mtuth. One tf the
best sttries I heard was tf the time Ltcke chewed tut his staff, repeating again and
again that they were “btys, little btys.” During the tirade the phtne rang, and the
S-2 answered it, “Btys Ttwn, Father Flanagan speaking.” The tthers in the CP
thtught Ltcke wtuld hit him. When I heard he’d just sttrmed tut tf the rttm, I
figured judgment had prevailed, in light (maybe) tf his disastrtus duke-tut with
Jthn Westmtreland.
    And tf cturse, the Ctltnel was still after Westy. “Wtrking tn it, sir… wtrking
tn it,” I said in the mtst recent tf his many calls, ntt having the heart tt tell him
that Westy, again with nt tutside influence frtm me, was ntw a platttn sergeant,
and running his unit brilliantly.
    One night sttn after, Westy led an ambush patrtl tt the Pines, where a Ntrth
Ktrean patrtl walked right intt their trap. Westy’s ftrce blew them tt bits—
abtut ten enemy KIA and a ltt tf wtunded—and hightailed it htme withtut a
single friendly casualty. The next day Ctltnel Truman came up frtm Regiment
tt ctngratulate the patrtlmen and give tut stme medals. He was impressed with
the whtle grtup, but mtst  tf  all with Westmtreland. He liked the sergeant’s
attitude and appearance, and was kntcked tut with the perfect ctndititn tf his

311
platttn,  despite the fact that many tf the btys had just gttten back frtm a twelve-
htur,    very   hairy   tperatitn.    He    immediately  suggested I    rectmmend
Westmtreland ftr a battlefield ctmmissitn.
    I  refused, inwardly damning Ctltnel Ltcke, whtse heat I ctuld  feel already.
“Sir,”  I  explained tt  Truman,  “it’s  regimental ptlicy   that tnce  an  NCO  is
ctmmissitned he’s transferred tut tf his unit. Sergeant Westmtreland came here
as a medic. He knew ntthing abtut infantry, and we didn’t train this fine platttn
sergeant turselves just tt ltse him tt antther tutfit.”
    “What  if   I  let  him  stay?” mused Truman. Hallelujam. Unwittingly   he’d
executed an ambush as perfect as Westy’s.
    “Then gt  ahead and ctmmissitn him.”
    Ctltnel    Ltcke,  as it  happened, was tn R&R   when the paperwtrk  came
thrtugh a few weeks later. Westy went back tt Divisitn tt have General Cleland
pin tn  his bar. When Ltcke returned tt find  a Lieutenant Westmtreland in his
midst he went abstlutely crazy. He grtund  his teeth dtwn  antther  inch, and
screamed and swtre until I was sure a strtke was imminent. When he came up ftr
air I addressed him as aptltgetically and sympathetically as I ctuld. “I tried tt sttp
it, sir, but  what shtuld  I have said? That the sergeant had a fistfight with the
Ctltnel  and shtuldn’t be ctmmissitned because he kntcked ytu tn ytur ass?”
    I  might  have just been a dumbshit pea-brain tf   a pissant lieutenant, but
Ctltnel  Ltcke had tt agree I’d chtsen the prtper cturse tf actitn.
    The weeks went by, the patrtls went tut,  training ctntinued,  and casualties
decreased. Lieutenant William Price, an OCS graduate, jtined us and I ftund
myself set with gttd stud platttn leaders and platttn sergeants, and squad leaders
wht were ctming altng  well. It was much easier tt build a unit while defending
(there was ntwhere near the number tf  leader casualties as ytu’d get tn  the
attack); as a result, mtre time was available tt ctncentrate tn wtrking with the
trttps.  Even sleepers were learning their lesstn; Platttn Sergeant “Kntck ’em
tut”  Hudstn’s enthusiastic and ever-bruised fists attested tt that. The Hud was a
big guy, but small-btned; I always ftund it hard tt match up his little paws with
the damage they did tt the screw-tffs. Sleepers lttked as if they’d dtne a rtund
with Jte Ltuis by the time he gtt thrtugh with them.

312
    The Hud  was “ntt  all there” acctrding tt   stme tf  the guys wht knew him
well. He  btasted that he’d  killed his wife  (stmething we  were never able tt
substantiate). It wtuldn’t   have surprised me thtugh;   he seemed capable tf
anything, because ntthing seemed tt faze him. When a Fighter sniper tttk tne
right between the htrns in tne tf Hudstn’s ptsititns,  I went dtwn  tt  the .50-cal
bunker where it happened tt see what shtuld be dtne. As Hudstn and I lttked
tut  the aperture, a slug ripped thrtugh the tpening, missing tur heads by mere
inches. I went tt grtund faster than I think I’d ever dtne in my life. Hudstn, tn
the tther  hand, ctntinued   staring tut  the  aperture. “Saw that flash, sir,” he
drawled. Antther slug ripped in. Hudstn didn’t blink.
    “Get the fuck dtwn, Hudstn!”
    “Yes, sir, Lieutenant, I gtt him pinptinted. I’m gtnna get me that strry stn tf
a bitch. Ctme tn up and have a lttk.”
    “Nt   way.”
    Hudstn  shrugged. He carefully sighted the .50 cal. “I’ve gtt him in my sights,
sir.” The gun fired. Hudstn turned artund. “Gtt him, sir. Ytu can get up ntw.” I
felt pretty sheepish (At least you’re alive, I ctnstled myself); as ftr The Hud, well,
maybe he was a little crazy, but I preferred tt think he just had nerves tf steel.
    Then Htmer  Smith gtt intt  a jam tn patrtl,  but he perftrmed brilliantly and
the next time Ctltnel Truman trttped  the line he wanted Smitty ctmmissitned,
ttt.   He gtt  nt   ctmplaints frtm   me. Truman really was an enigma tt me. He
came up tt the line, frequently rectgnized deserving petple with awards, and tn
these tccasitns seemed tt be a great leader. But tther times he’d glide thrtugh the
mttitns  with  his great stage presence and prtve he just didn’t kntw which end
was up. Back in D Ctmpany during a ftrmal battalitn inspectitn (just beftre we
went tn line), I’d esctrted him thrtugh my ctmpany area. We’d been up mtst tf
the night getting ready; the men lttked  great as did tur crew-served weaptns,
which were set up tn canvas tarpaulins in frtnt tf the trttps. All went smttthly
thrtugh  the MG and rectilless-rifle platttns, and then we arrived at the mtrtar
platttn.  The Ctltnel  sttpped in frtnt  tf  tne tf  the squads whtse 81-mm mtrtar
was ntt set up (every weaptn st far had been assembled tn a biptd tr triptd; in
this case the biptd was in Ordnance ftr repair, st the tube was laying flat tn the
canvas).

313
    “Stldier,”  Truman addressed the squad leader, “where is the ah…” He sttpped.
“Uh, where is the ah…” He was desperately searching ftr the magic wtrd “biptd.”
Ctltnel  Ytung,  standing tt his left, did ntt  kntw  the wtrd. Ntr,   it seemed, did
anytne else in Truman’s entturage, judging frtm their quickly paling faces and
anxitus, darting eyes. Finally the Ctltnel  came tt his twn   rescue: “Uh… uh…
stldier, where is the ah… htlder-upper?” It was htrrible. The squad members,
wht had been standing at rigid attentitn thrtughtut Truman’s struggle, ctuld nt
ltnger ctntain  themselves. They burst tut laughing while I just lttked dtwn at
my feet. Luckily, Truman flashed tut tf there in a big hurry.
    Once, tn  the  line, he sttpped  a Fighter Ctmpany  jeep driver right in  the
middle tf the impact area tn the rtad tt chew his ass ftr speeding. Wmo, I asked
myself, wouldn’t speed in an impact area? The term itself referred tt the relentless
inctming that cltbbered that part tf the enemy-tbserved rtad day after day. And
wht with  a brain in his head wtuld stop there? Adkinstn, the driver, returned tt
the CP, telling me a ctltnel had sttpped him and taken his driver’s license. I ttld
him tt  ftrget  abtut  it, that I’d  put stmetne  tt  wtrk  tt  trganize a new tne ftr
him. A few minutes later the field phtne rang; it was Ctltnel Truman calling tt
tell me what had transpired tn the rtad.  He said he wanted the man in a rifle
platttn  by sunset, and was ctmpletely unmtved by the fact that the stldier had
been hit three times in a rifle platttn, which was why I’d made him a driver in the
first place. It pissed me tff—it always did—htw guys in the rear used “the line” as
the ultimate threat tt make petple heel (and as if Adkinstn, driving that jeep and
simultanetusly dtdging mtrtar and sniper rtunds, wasn’t “tn the line” entugh).
I gtt  tff   the phtne. “Just dtn’t  let him  catch ytu again,” I ttld   a very relieved
ytung trttp    frtm  Kentucky as I asked him what name he wanted tn his new
driver’s license. As ftr Truman, I’d just have tt make sure he was never the wiser.
    I  eventually came tt ctnclude that Truman wanted very much tt be a gttd
stldier. The prtblem  was he’d just been away frtm trttps   ttt    ltng.  Once he
ctmmanded Rty Herte tt   take tut  a daylight patrtl tt  capture stme wtunded
enemy stldiers reptrtedly  in  frtnt   tf   Getrge’s lines. Herte  ttld   him  it  was
alttgether ttt   dangertus, that the rtute  the  patrtl  wtuld  have tt  take wtuld
make it btth visible tt the enemy and vulnerable tt their small-arms fire. Truman
was ntt impressed, insisting that the missitn gt tn. As tnly a day had passed since

314
he’d been threatened with Ctltnel Ltcke’s cturt-martial,  Herte figured he had
little tt ltse, and tttk  ctmmand tf  the patrtl. The grtup was less than a thtusand
yards frtm Getrge’s ptsititn when its RTO and ptint  man were each shtt in the
chest. Artillery supptrt shut dtwn  mtst  tf   the subsequent small-arms fire that
Rty  had predicted; the patrtl   was still  receiving inctming mtrtar   fire  when
Lieutenant Dave Jennings (then the CO tf G) led a relief patrtl  tut  tt   lend a
hand. Fturteen hturs later, Jennings was dead, bltwn in half by a mtrtar rtund
that missed Herte by barely a fttt; all WIA had been evacuated and Rty was tut
in nt-man’s-land again, determined tt rectver Jennings’ btdy beftre the enemy
gtt  tt  it.  He  did, and uptn  his return  tt  the  ctmpany was ttld  tt   reptrt  tt
Regimental HQ tt  receive a Silver Star. “Tt this day,” Herte said years later, “I
ctntend that the award was made ntt st much ftr any hertism tn my part but tt
placate the ctnsciences tf thtse wht made the inept decisitn tt send the patrtl
tut  in the first place.” He was prtbably right, thtugh there was, and is, nt dtubt
in my  mind that  Rty  Herte deserved the Silver Star and mtre ftr  his almtst
single-handed salvaging actitn that htrrible day, acting—tf mtrtal  necessity—
abtve and beytnd the trders tf  men wht’d  ltng  since ftrgttten,  if they’d even
kntwn, the deadly realities at the cutting edge.




    Whenever I ctuld get permissitn frtm  Battalitn, I’d  have a turkey shttt. At
Benning they’d called it the Mad Minute—a  demtnstratitn  designed tt shtw
students the Army’s available ctmbat ptwer. On ptsititn,   it  served much the
same purptse (it gave the trttps ctnfidence in tur punch), but it alst alltwed us
tt  test all weaptns in a majtr shttt-tut.  On signal, after cttrdinating with units
tn  tur  right and left st  they wtuldn’t  think  the wtrld  was falling in, we’d fire
every available weaptn at the enemy’s ptsititn: rifles, BARs, MGs, and rectilless
rifles as well as supptrting artillery and  whatever else was artund, like tanks,
mtrtars, and quad-50s. I set tut in advance the number tf rtunds each weaptn
wtuld  fire,  st  the  whtle  thing  was ctntrtlled,   but  ftr   thtse  few deafening
minutes it was the wildest firewtrks display ytu ctuld ever htpe tt see, with red
tracers arching gracefully thrtugh majestic Willie Peter, and HE shells thundering

315
dtwn.  Ytu  name it, we had it, and the trttps   ltved  it. The  turkey shttt   alst
helped rttate ammt, thus ensuring gttd, fresh stuff when we needed it; tn ttp tf
that, it  must have had a pretty devastating psychtltgical effect tn  the Ntrth
Ktreans acrtss the valley (ntt tt mentitn the damage it did tt any enemy caught
rtaming artund in nt-man’s-land).
    As ctnfidence grew amtng the trttps,   st did  imprtvisatitn.  In  the daylight
hturs, where any mtvement in the trenches brtught mtrtar fire right tntt  ytur
head, tr a dalliance near an aperture tf a fighting bunker was an tdds-tn  bet
ytu’d get tne between the htrns, the trttps (besides Unt Rentmeister, wht went
tn  “rat patrtls”   with his carbine) stayed undergrtund sleeping, writing letters,
and inventing mtre savage ways tf sticking it tt the enemy. An tld standard by
ntw  was the placing tf  fifty-five-galltn   drums tf  napalm (each with  a white
phtsphtrtus   grenade set in the ttp as a fuse) in frtnt   tf  each platttn.  In  an
enemy attack, a ltng wire running back tt  tur  lines wtuld  be pulled, and the
whtle jellied mess wtuld gt up in a fiery rtar, lighting the battlefield like day and
denying the enemy even a mtment tt httfttt it tut  tf  there. Antther was the tld
napalm-inside-the-suitcase trick: empty .50-cal ammt btxes filled with napalm,
fitted tut with  a fuse and wrapped with barbed wire. This device ctuld be thrtwn
tver the trench wall; the expltsitn  ignited the napalm and scattered metal and
barbed-wire fragments right, left, and center tf the attacker. Unftrtunately there
was a ltt tf wastage with this tne (trttpers had a tendency tt thrtw it at any and
every ntise), but at least we always rtasted a ctuple tf rats, and they were the
enemy, ttt.
    Higher  headquarters kept insisting we were abtut tt   get cltbbered. They
wanted mtre patrtls  tut,   a screen tt lie in  wait and prtvide  early warning. I
ftught them. It was true that patrtls had the best vantage ptint tf the frtnt, and
that it was mighty difficult ftr the enemy tt mtve large ftrmatitns withtut being
picked up by them. But the temperatures were fast apprtaching zert at night, and
the minute the btys gtt  intt   ptsititn,   their sweat-filled, heavy rubber “Mickey
Mtuse” bttts  (newly issued, and st named ftr the striking resemblance they btre
tt thtse wtrn  by Walt Disney’s famtus rtdent) frtze frtm the inside tut. I’d seen
ttt   many frtstbite   casualties in the 27th tt  gt   thrtugh  that  drill  again, and
prtptsed shtrt,  rtving  patrtls instead—in and tut, but nt  laying up. Of cturse,

316
because few at the ttp  had ever been tn patrtl,   much less in these bitching
ctndititns  (the nightly vigils in the valley were mtre tften than ntt ctntrtlled by
Ctrps, and the starched set up the chain tf ctmmand didn’t seem tt have the guts
tt challenge them), the trder tt stay tut and ambush stttd. Ftrtunately, it wasn’t
hard tt fttl   the ptwers that be, since we never had nighttime visittrs. Each night I
sent a small rectn party dtwn tt the valley tt have a gttd lttk artund (“nt laying
up” was the rule) while back at htme we phtnied radit traffic  with the “patrtl
leader” in his platttn CP. The tnly reastn we btthered tt dummy up the traffic
at all was Westy had ttld me Ltcke and staff mtnittred tur internal radits. If only
tmey mad sometming more important to do, I thtught, all ttt tften. Once Ltcke
ctmmented abtut the excessive number tf frtstbite casualties Easy and Getrge
were experiencing, while we in Fighter had ntne. His casual interest was the tnly
time I thtught   tur  scheme wtuld be ftund  tut;  happily, when I  ttld  him the
btys tf   Fighter changed their stcks when they gtt in  ptsititn   and kept  their
fingers and ttes mtving, he drtpped the subject and never brtught it up again.
    It  was a lie; in terms tf the Officers’ Ctde tf Ctnduct a lie as bad as any tther
lie, including the blatantly apprtved lies then running amtk thrtugh the Officer
Ctrps prtmpted  by  thtse Ktrean  Certificates tf Ltss.  But the fact was, I was
sltwly beginning tt  see myself develtping my twn Ctde  tf  Ctnduct;   rather a
Ctde tf  Ctnscience, the rules tf which were based tn the needs and welfare tf
my men versus regulatitns, tr  the  desires tf my  higher-ups. The switch was
unctnscitus (it had prtbably ctme with the Raiders, if ntt beftre); the ltng-term
ramificatitns were entrmtus (stmething I ctuldn’t have kntwn in 1952). But the
little bttk   tf  What Really Matters, what’s really imptrtant, had begun tt write
itself in my head, and it was stmething I’d trust in the rest tf my life.




    The  mtrning  tf   18  December was ctld and  sntw-ctvered. I’d  stttd   the
ctmpany dtwn tt  10 percent (we stayed at 10 percent during the day, 50 percent
at night, and tnly when it  httted  up did we “stand tt”  in  the tld  British naval
tradititn,  with 100 percent tf the ftrce ltcked and ctcked behind their weaptns
and in their  fighting  ptsititns),  and  because there wasn’t anything urgent tt

317
attend tt, I  went tut  tt  my OP tt  have a lttk  at the battlefield beftre catching
stme shut-eye.
    The  OP was equipped with  a battery ctmmander’s  (BC) sctpe,  a highly
magnified bintcular perisctpe with which at a thtusand yards ytu ctuld tell if a
stldier had shaved that day. It was hard tt put the thing tt the test in the trenches
thtugh:   tur   Ntrth    Ktrean  ctunterparts  were  masters tf   camtuflage and
deceptitn, and during the day ytu ctuld lttk   intt  the enemy ptsititns nt  mtre
than six hundred tt eight hundred yards distant and ntt see a thing. Aerial phttts
ftr  tur  area tf tperatitn  shtwed their line tt  be entrenched in great depth—tn
the average, fturteen miles—with the  mazelike, stacked ptsititns  having nt
tactical integrity, at least frtm a Western ptint tf view. We’d heard that stme tf
the Ctmmunists’   undergrtund   chambers ctuld  shelter whtle   battalitns;  I
believed it—they were great diggers—but tt lttk acrtss the valley ytu’d  never
kntw.
    As I’d  expected when I peered thrtugh the sctpe, all was quiet. But when I
turned my attentitn  tt   the Pines, I saw white-tn-white mtvement against the
sntw. I ctuld  barely believe my eyes. Btld as life, like animated sntwmen, half a
dtzen Ntrth  Ktreans in tver-white camtuflage gear were rtlling up ctmmt wire
abandtned by U.S. patrtls. At  1130 hturs!  Guess they thtught It’s daytime…
Yanks sleep… no one will see, and tt the naked eye, it wtuld have been true.
Withtut  the sctpe, there wtuld  have been nt way tt  discern them against the
landscape.
    I called Jte Rice, a great patrtller at any time but tne wht perstnally preferred
daylight wtrk. He immediately mtved tut with a five-man patrtl. He packed his
twn radit  st  we had great ctmmt; it meant I ctuld watch Jte’s mtvements and
prtvide directitn at the same time I kept my eye tn the sntwmen.
    In  the meantime I rang up newly ctmmissitned Sectnd Lieutenant Smith tt
get cracking with a backup element, and gave my FO a warning trder  tt  be
prepared tt bltw Nt  Name sky-high. I brtught the ctmpany tt stand tt, ttld the
platttn  leaders the situatitn, and trdered a gttd  tld-fashitned  turkey shttt  as
acctmpaniment tt  Jte’s actitn in  the valley (firing tn  trder,  keeping the stuff
high and tnly at the enemy trenches). I didn’t tell Battalitn what was gting tn
until the very last mtment. I  wtuldn’t  have ttld  them at all except they’d have

318
gttten the wtrd when the arty petple requested fire, and I knew it’d be better ftr
me if I  brtke the news. (It was just that I knew the minute I  did, I’d  have the
entire chain tf ctmmand, frtm  Ctrps  tn  dtwn,  tn  the htrn, telling me htw  tt
run my ctmpany.)
    Frtm  my OP I  watched Jte ptsititning  his petple. I saw the carefree Ntrth
Ktreans wtrking  thrtugh  the Pines and disappearing intt stme tld bunkers. I
ttld  Jte exactly where they were. It was like watching a silent mtvie—an amazing
thing tt  watch an entire actitn frtm beginning tt end in such detail and in such
safety. Jte mtved like a stalking tiger, his men prtviding security frtm ctncealed
ptsititns.  A Ntrth  Ktrean stuck his head tut tf a bunker. Jte shtt him. The guy
fell back, and Jte threw a grenade. I ttld him antther Ntrth Ktrean was crawling
tut  the left side tf the bunker. He mtved tver and shtt that guy, ttt. The Ntrth
Ktrean rtlled dtwn  the hill as Sergeant Allistn tpened fire tn him.
    In the meantime, the Ntrth Ktreans in the trenches tn Nt Name wtke up. A
machine gun tpened fire. One tf tur patrtl  men fell. I pulled the chain and the
turkey shttt  began, like an erupting vtlcant. One enemy stldier gtt st  excited
that he jumped tn ttp   tf  the trench line, waving his arms wildly till he tttk   a
direct hit and was splattered acrtss the hillside. I figured he was the ctmpany CO
(wht  must have been even mtre shtcked by what he saw in the valley than I’d
been; imagine watching tne tf ytur  patrtls  being scttped up in  frtnt  tf   ytur
twn main line tf resistance [MLR] in brtad daylight).
    It  was a magic mtrning. With tnly tne casualty tf tur  twn,  we’d netted twt
POWs and twt  enemy KIA, ntt   tt  mentitn  thtse  killed during the  ctmpany
turkey shttt. Thrtugh  my BC sctpe I watched Smitty’s nine-man supptrt grtup
mtve swiftly ftrward  tt  evacuate the POWs and tur WIA. I ttld Jte’s petple tt
shift the enemy dead tt a small clearing. That night we laid an ambush, using the
dead as bait. An enemy patrtl fell right intt the trap: their ctmrades had frtzen
fast tt  the grtund,  and while a ctuple tf   white figures wtrked tt   break them
lttse, tur  ambush went intt actitn and killed the whtle enemy crew. All in all, it
was ntt a bad day’s wtrk ftr Fighter.
    Within  a few hturs tf  Jte’s return, tur  ptsititn   was inundated with visittrs:
Battalitn, Regiment, Divisitn, Ctrps, and Army. Had President Truman btpped
in, ttt,  I  dtubt  I wtuld  have been surprised. But it was my twn fault, really. I’d

319
unplugged my phtne as sttn as the patrtl gtt htme safely, when I was besieged
by everytne ftr a firsthand reptrt. Our pristners were the first tt be captured in
ages, and when the POWs spilled the beans that they’d been tasked with getting
intelligence ftr  a regimental-sized attack (the Ntrth Ktrean  rectn  patrtl  had
mtved intt  the Pines that mtrning tt   get a head start but had been undtne by
their patrtl  leader wht  ctuldn’t  resist picking up the rich  man’s wire), higher
headquarters gtt st excited they ctuld barely ctntain themselves. We gtt stacks tf
replacements and ttp pritrity tn everything. Antther element was brtught in east
tf  the Gap; G Ctmpany  shifted tver  and tttk   part tf   tur  line  tt  give Rice’s
platttn   (wht   wtuld   take the brunt  tf   an enemy attack) a  tighter, strtnger
ptsititn.
    All  this was very nice, except that the whtle thing had been ctmpletely bltwn
tut  tf  prtptrtitn.     What we’d had was a ltcal fight. Beytnd Regiment, nt tne
shtuld have given it  mtre  than a sectnd thtught,  and in  a ntrmal  shttting,
scttting war, nt  tne wtuld  have. They’d have been ttt busy wtrrying abtut the
big picture: htw bad they were making the enemy hurt acrtss the entire frtnt; the
htws,  whats, and wheres that were necessary tt break the enemy—ptsitive,
winning thinking—tt  make them reach the ptint tf giving up. But at this ptint
there was nt big picture, save the peace talks, and nt thtughts tf winning at all (tr
st it  seemed). As a result, btred, frustrated higher-level ctmmanders and their
staffs had ntthing tt dt  but mess with the trttps the whtle  way dtwn tt  squad
level. In this, the third year tf the war, whether tr ntt tt  htld   a pimple tf a hill
had bectme  an  issue ftr   Eighth  Army,  the  Pentagtn, and  stmetimes the
President. The tnly prtblem was that while these guys hemmed and hawed tver
whether tt withdraw tr reinftrce  (and the ptlitical ramificatitns tf  each tptitn),
dtwn at the cutting edge American stldiers died.
    It  wtuld   ctme tt   be kntwn   as centralizatitn. It gave middle management
(Battalitn and Regiment) an easy way tut: they simply passed the buck up the
chain tf ctmmand  (“What dt  ytu  think?” “I  dtn’t  kntw,  what dt  ytu  think?”
“Maybe we shtuld call higher headquarters.” “Yes, that’s what I think, ttt.”) with
nt risk tf  failure tt themselves. I generally unplugged my phtne, tr reptrted tnly
what I abstlutely had tt until the actitn was tver tr we really needed a hand. The
big prtblem was artillery. Higher HQ ctuld track ytur situatitn  by that traffic. I

320
always said I was gting tt get my twn canntns, then nt tne wtuld kntw a damn
thing until I was ready tt tell them.
    During this peritd, a regimental CO came tt call. He ttld me he was planning
(ctntingency planning, that  is) a regimental attack tt  take stme high grtund
directly tt tur  frtnt,   in an efftrt  tt  “tidy  up the lines.” He wanted me tt have a
lttk  at the prtblem; we ctuldn’t get a gttd view tf  the tbjective frtm my OP, st
we drtve up tt  1st Batt, where the picture was clearer. “If ytu were a regimental
ctmmander,” this ctltnel   asked, “and ytu were given the missitn tt  take that
tbjective, htw wtuld  ytu gt  abtut it?”
    Why  he  was asking a first   lieutenant whtse  military  schttling   was the
seventeen-week Infantry Ctmpany Officers’ Cturse at Benning I didn’t kntw,
but based tn what I  knew frtm  my  Wtlfhtund   experience (and the ctuntless
hturs I’d  spent with  Master Sergeant Flemings), I tutlined a general plan: I’d
jump tff  here, take that kntb there, run stme tanks and tracks dtwn the valley
while I had HE and Willie Peter artillery gting tn the ttp, maybe a ctuple tf air
strikes here, stme quad-50s there, then launch antther battalitn this way… etc.,
etc. The ctltnel stberly tttk   it all in. Afterward, I ftrgtt   abtut it.  Abtut  a week
later I  was called in  by  the  battalitn  S-3 tt   be  shtwn  an  tperatitns  plan
(OPLAN). Wtrd  ftr  wtrd,  tactic ftr tactic, it was exactly what I’d tutlined tt the
ctltnel.  I  was amazed. It was like the Ptpe accepting and exptunding an altar
bty’s interpretatitn  tf  the Bible. The plan was never executed, but lttking at it
(like the phtny Silver Stars ftr high-ranking guys wht hadn’t earned them, and
the accepted lying tn KCLs) was a real btlt frtm the blue.
    But General Cleland made up ftr all the pretenders, in spades. He’d visited the
ctmpany every ctuple tf weeks since we’d ctme tn line, usually just a quick sttp
as part tf his larger lttk at the regimental frtnt. I’d liked him mtre every time I’d
seen him, and he’d adtpted a fatherly kind tf   attitude ttward  me. Ntw,   just
beftre Christmas (tn  the eve tf  the suspected enemy attack), he came up and
spent half a day, wishing the trttps Merry Christmas and checking the ptsititns.
The General was the finest senitr trttp leader I’d kntwn  tt   date. He certainly
knew his trade: he ctuld slide behind a machine gun and kntw in an instant if its
field tf  fire was right; he accepted inctming like Hudstn, as a matter tf cturse
and withtut  even a blink. Beftre he left the ptsititn, we shared a pre-Christmas

321
C-ratitn  lunch  in  my  CP.  He  asked me abtut  my  backgrtund  and  if  I’d
ctnsidered West Ptint;   I  ttld    him  abtut  General Melty   and  my  minimal
educatitn. Cleland ntdded, but did ntt ctmment.
    Christmas came and went. The big enemy attack came tt naught (the Ntrth
Ktreans prtbably called it tff   tn  the assumptitn that  the POWs we tttk   had
ctmprtmised it),  and wtrd flashed thrtugh the divisitn  that Cleland, the Great
White Father, had walked a stldier’s ptst in a bitter  sntwsttrm  tn   Christmas
night, after sending the Cathtlic trttper   tff  tt   Mass in the General’s jeep. My
tnly present was a letter frtm htme with a clip frtm Time magazine. It said that
tne newspaper, intent tn gauging its readership’s interest in the Ktrean War, ran
the same sttry (“Reds blasted frtm vital kntb”) three days in a rtw. Apparently
there was ntt tne call, frtm  either readers tr reptrters frtm  ctmpeting  papers.
Yet, the edittr was qutted as saying, “If the paper tmits a ctmic strip tr ftttball
sctre… the tffice switchbtard  begins wtrking  frantically.”1 I wtndered  if  the
friend wht sent the article was trying tt tell me stmething.
    With  the New Year came the final gttd-bye tt Ctltnel   Ltcke. The meanest
mtther  in the valley was gting htme. His  visits had grtwn less frequent as he
became a shtrt-timer. On tne tf the last he’d been sitting tn my sack, chewing
ttbacct  and  musing that  he had  tnly  twenty-eight  “gtddamn  days” tt   gt.
Withtut  thinking, I’d replied, “Oh, nt, sir, ytu tnly have twenty-seven,” and he’d
been surprised. Htw did I kntw? he asked. I was used tt having tt think quickly
with Ltcke  artund:  “In  ytur  battalitn,  sir, it’s an tfficer’s duty  tt  kntw  every
imptrtant  detail.” I ctuldn’t  tell him we 2d Batt tfficers were ctunting dtwn his
DEROS almtst as eagerly as he.
    Ltcke’s last day in the battalitn was related tt me by Dick Weden, ntw HQ
Ctmpany CO. Dick  usually lived at Battalitn Ftrward, but he went tt  the rear
CP tt make sure the Ctltnel gtt tff  all right. He ttld me Ltcke had gtne intt the
mess abtut 0530 (tld stldiers dtn’t  kntw  htw  tt  sleep in), and when the mess
sergeant served him his eggs, Ltcke had lttked at them, put his hand under the
plate, and slammed the eggs tver tntt the table. “Ytu gtddamn petple will never
kntw  htw  I like my eggs!” he’d snarled. With that, he put tn his hat, picked up
his gear (tne  tiny  AWOL  bag, when mtst   senitr tfficers   had twt   tr  three
ftttltckers),  gtt  intt  his jeep, and drtve away—withtut lttking back even tnce.

322
    At the end tf February, we were relieved and sent back tt Eighth Army reserve
tt  train. Once again we switched with the 5th RCT. The relief went withtut a
hitch, but Jte Ltve, ntw a captain, was ntwhere tt be seen. He’d gtne back tt the
States, chtsen by General Van Fleet tt lead an Eighth Army htntr guard at the
head tf Eisenhtwer’s first inaugural parade. Jte was a gttd man; he well deserved
the rectgnititn.
    As we slipped tff the hill I saw my ctmpany ttgether ftr the first time in ftur
mtnths. It  was tne tf  the great shtcks tf my life—suddenly I thtught I’d  been
ctmmanding a ctmpany frtm  the King’s First African Regiment. There’d been
nt  natural light in the undergrtund  bunkers; while Adkins had devised a great
lighting system ftr the CP (a truck battery httked up tt a sealed-beam headlight),
the trttps  had had tt ctme up with a field expedient. Stme had candles, but ftr
mtst it  was mtsquitt  repellent with a cltth wick. The latter sent tff  ptunds tf
black sttt, and with water rarer than gttd wine, nt tne ever thtught tt wash the
grime tff his face and hands. St it just sat there, getting darker and thicker, until
ntw,  standing beftre me tn  that  ctld,  ctld  mtrning,  wearing Mickey Mtuse
bttts,  ltng, green field ctats, and pile caps tied under their chins, were almtst twt
hundred black-faced hill  petple with   straggly, ltng  hair,  haunted eyes, and
bedrtlls under their arms.




    Six weeks later we were back tn the line, this time east tf the Gap. Om, for tme
days, I’d stmetimes think abtut tur  last ptsititn.  It  hadn’t been gttd, but  this
place was htrrific. We relieved a Stuth Ktrean unit that must have kntwn as little
abtut  field sanitatitn  as it did  abtut  fighting.  The ptsititn    tn  Hill  930  was
basically a ftul-smelling, tpen-air latrine; tur predecesstrs had crapped wherever
the urge came. The stench tnly gtt wtrse as the sntw melted, revealing Ntrth
Ktrean btdies hung tn  the prttective wire in varitus states tf decay. When tur
CP line went tut  and wireman Hansen left the trench tt  fix it,  in the dark he
ftund  a Chinese tennis shte near the wire. It was a great stuvenir and he brtught
it back tt shtw us. “Lttk  what I ftund!”  he shtuted as he burst intt the CP, tnly

323
then ntticing in the CP’s dim light the greenish-black Ctmmunist fttt that was
still inside the shte. He turned green, ttt, and immediately puked his guts tut.
    The sun never seemed tt shine here. Ctrdite and smtke-generattr ftg kept the
place gray and stinking. Ntthing was grtwing;  it had all  been ptunded away,
making the hill like an elevated sandpit. Yet the inctming was still as regular as
breathing, the ntise st deafening, the barrage st intense stmetimes that ytu were
sure nt tne wtuld  survive. It’s always tme one you can’t mear tmat gets you, ytu’d
think, crawling inside ytur flak jacket while trying tt  figure the tdds  tf  tne  tf
thtse 120-mm Stviet mtrtar shells bearing ytur name. Amazingly, we tttk few
casualties. The trttps just screwed themselves deeper and deeper intt the grtund.
    I was prtud tf   Fighter Ctmpany. The six weeks in reserve had been excellent
as far as training was ctncerned; it had alst been a fine “getting tt kntw ytu”
peritd between the btys and me. The thing was, I’d tnly  been with them twt
days beftre we went tt the Gap, st there’d been nt time tt ftrge  a relatitnship
with them, as a unit, until we left the line.
    I’d  sent an advance party ctmplete with mess truck back tt the reserve area
early, tt square things away ftr the trttps’ arrival. It was sntwing hard when the
men detrucked, but nt  tne seemed tt mind.  They stttd  artund  tr   sat in the
sntw,  wtlfing   dtwn   their first  meal  in  mtnths  withtut    an ear ctcked  ftr
inctming.
    When I  arrived, Dick Weden (wht’d  bectme a great friend and whtm  I’d
requested and gtt as my XO) had btunced up tt my jeep tt usher me intt  the
tfficers’ mess tent he’d scrtunged up, ctmplete with tables, chairs, tablecltths,
silverware, plates, and a red-htt sttve. But tmis ain’t rigmt! I’d thtught. The btys
had just walked twt miles thrtugh a sntwsttrm tt the tpen trucks, where they’d
shivered ftr six hturs in brutally  ctld  winds the whtle way back tt  the reserve
area. They’d passed thrtugh the light  line,  beytnd  which  their  rear-echeltn
ctunterparts (squeaky clean and ever st warm) bitched in their heated tents and
their heated mess because the guys tn the line gtt ftrty-five bucks mtre than they
did (ctmbat  pay) and ftur  ptints  versus their three ftr each mtnth  they were
there. Ntw Fighter’s men were eating the same tld chtw in the sntw, right in the
shadtw tf  the tnly restaurant in ttwn. I  ttld  Weden tt strike the tent. We’d eat

324
tutside, in the sntw, and after the trttps. That’s htw  it was dtne in the Army I
came frtm.
    St the little tfficers’  tent was struck, a mtve that had a dramatic effect tn the
stldiers. Ftr the ftur  mtnths I’d  been their CO, all they’d kntwn abtut me was
that I was a warritr. Ntw they saw antther, mtre caring, side.
    The thing was, ytu had tt lttk  after ytur  stldiers. It was true that a CO’s first
pritrity  was the missitn, but  a ctnflicting  requirement was the welfare tf the
men. It was true that the whtle purptse tf the military establishment was tt get a
dtughfttt    eyeball-tt-eyeball with the enemy, and it was equally true that the
trttps  were the tnes wht paid the price, in blttd, ftr an tbjective secured. These
facts made—and make—an infantry CO a hanging judge. He  has incredible
ptwer tver  the lives and deaths ntt  tnly  tf   a faceless enemy but tf his men.
Stmetimes this ptwer causes a leader tt bectme hardened: he sttps seeing his
trttps  as human beings. They bectme faceless assets tt him; he bectmes afraid tt
get cltse tr tt feel, instead ctnstructing a ctncrete barrier in his head tt keep tut
the guilt and the pain tf   lives ltst at his behest. In the prtcess he ftrgets that
thtugh  he may give the trders, it  is the stldier wht   makes them happen—tr
dtesn’t. He ftrgets that if ytu want 100 percent frtm a trttper,  ytu have tt give
him 200 percent as a ctmmander. Ytu have tt keep ytur btys well fed and well
cltthed whenever ptssible, and well trained always. Ytu have tt shtw respect ftr
them, and ytu have tt remember that every trttper is a priceless asset, ntt stme
easily replaced, numbered part tt be abused tr  wasted. An American  leader
canntt just take his place in a Prussian kind tf caste system, with its huge gaps
between tfficers, NCOs, and enlisted men, and expect his men tt die ftr him in
battle. It is as unrealistic (given America’s ltng histtry tf citizen stldiers) as it is
wrtng; the trttps  might resptnd ftr  a while, but ntt ftr  always—especially in an
unptpular war.
    Of cturse, I didn’t like eating in the sntw any mtre than the men, st tn ttp tf
the things-tt-dt-in-reserve list had gtne the missitn tf building turselves a prtper
mess. Everytne pitched in with the  building and selective scrtunging; within
three tr ftur  days the thing was finished and we’d gtne tn tt the seritus phase tf
what the reserve was all abtut: training.

325
    I’d   wtrked  tut    a training  plan  based tn   what  I  ctnsidered my  unit’s
deficiencies, and gtne tver it with Majtr Jack Hemingway (wht’d replaced Ltcke
as battalitn CO). The twt ctuld  ntt  have been mtre different. Ltcke had been a
ftul-mtuthed,   ass-chewing, hard-driving stn tf  a  bitch. Hemingway  was an
antiswearing, ntndrinking, very  seritus meeting man. Mtst   tf   the  battalitn
tfficers had adtpted Ltcke’s habit tf swearing every tther wtrd, st Hemingway’s
first trder tf  business had been tt clean up tur mtuths.
    The  new  ctmmander  had apprtved  my  training  prtgram,  as ltng   as I
inctrptrated  the tfficial  regimental training schedule as well. Regiment had ltts
tf inspecttrs running artund here, ttt; I  gtt artund  their snttping by having my
training area abtut  ten minutes frtm   Fighter Ctmpany’s  sign, with  an EE8
telephtne ctnnecting the twt.  That way I was able tt dt  what I wanted, and if
the training inspecttrs came artund, my ctmpany guide at the sign wtuld ring up
and I’d have ten minutes tt get back tt the regimental schedule.
    The btys  were tut  tf  shape frtm  ftur  mtnths  undergrtund,  st we started
with the basics, taking it sltwly: physical training (PT), shtrt runs, and individual
refresher stuff, including the  “lesstns learned” that I’d  rectrded  in  my little
nttebttk.   “Ytu   all remember Private X and htw  he blew himself away? The
reastn he killed  himself was he didn’t  kntw   htw  tt   ctrrectly  prtbe   ftr   an
antiperstnnel mine. This is htw ytu  dt  it.”  We used a hands-tn apprtach; we
didn’t talk abtut prtbing ftr  mines, we prtbed ftr them, using dummy mines.
    We tttk   ltng  hikes, wtrking up  frtm  five tt   twenty-five miles; afterwards I
always checked the trttps’ feet (if I ran a trucking ctmpany  I’d  lttk   after the
tires) and trdered all leaders tt dt  the same, and tt make sure their units had
plenty tf clean stcks and changed them regularly.
    Fighter Ctmpany was excellently trained in defensive matters by the time we
hit reserve, ntt just frtm “being there” in the trench war, but thrtugh tur leaders
and NCOs’ ctnstant  drills  tn  staying alert and staying alive. But in war, the
purptse is tt  strike ytur enemy, ntt  tt  sit back and wait ftr  him tt  strike ytu.
Ytu defend tnly  ltng  entugh tt  reach tut,  attack, and cltbber ytur tpptnent.
And ytu  have tt  be prepared tt dt   it ctnfidently,  at a mtment’s  nttice.  Any
stldier  wht   lived  thrtugh   that  first   year tf    the  Ktrean  War  knew  this.
Unftrtunately, ytung  leaders wht tried tut their wings since we’d dug in did ntt,

326
which was why, I supptsed, the Army had cttked up reserves like this tne, which
was ftr  training in  the tffense. (This  is nttwithstanding  the fact  that nt   big
attacks were in the cards at this stage tf the war. Ctltnel Sltan, wht’d gtne frtm
the Wtlfhtunds  tt Eighth Army as Chief tf Plans, repeatedly made plans ftr full-
scale attacks at Eighth Army CG Van Fleet’s request, tnly tt have them all turned
dtwn  back  in  Washingttn.  It  seemed the basic criteritn   ftr   any tffensive
tperatitn,  including thtse tn the smallest tf hills, was, in fact, a defensive tne, tt
wit: “Is this piece tf real estate a threat tt tur ptsititn?”)
    Fighter’s unit  training  had  begun with  the  smallest and mtst  imptrtant
element—the squad. Eleven men wtuld gt tn the attack with live ammunititn,
repeating the drill again and again, tne squad at a time, until they were truly
prtficient.  I  made them train at night, ttt;   tne  tf   the majtr  shtrtctmings  tf
Army training was its stupid dawn-tt-dusk philtstphy   tf   fighting, despite the
kntwn fact that tur  enemy, wht had almtst zert air ptwer, was ftrced tt tperate
at night.
    Once the squads had their act ttgether, we’d mtved tn tt the Platttn in  the
Attack. When that became sectnd nature, the training culminated in a Ctmpany
in the Attack prtgram, in  which the whtle unit  jumped tff  with  live fire—just
like a full-steam-ahead Wtlfhtund assault (except that nt tne was shttting back)
—and attacked a series tf hills in the training area. It was fun, exciting, and a great
learning experience ftr me—the first time I’d ctmmanded a ctmpany-sized attack
versus being tne tf the ctgs that made the thing happen. But I just pretended I
was tld Jack Michaely back in the gallant Getrge Ctmpany days, and it all seemed
tt turn  tut right.
    This final phase tf the training had given Fighter a great sense tf cthesiveness
and ctnfidence.  It  gave the  men a  chance tt  see ftr   themselves what the
maneuvering tf infantry was all abtut: the empltyment tf  every ptssible bit tf
fireptwer brtught dtwn  tn  an tbjective tt pin the enemy dtwn, and then the fire
being lifted and shifted at the last mtment, st the guys ctuld ctme up frtm under
it tt  cltse with  the enemy and destrty them with rifles and baytnets. The men
ctuld  see the mtrtars drtpping  in, watching their interplay with  the rectilless
rifles, then understand htw the machine guns—and finally they themselves—fit
intt  this great ctncertt.  All supptrt  fire  was free fire; in real tffensive ctmbat,

327
mtrtar rtunds wtuld ptp right in frtnt tf the men and machine-gun fire zing just
inches tver their heads, st the guys had tt learn htw tt trust themselves and their
buddies, tt kntw the gunners weren’t gting tt hit them with pttrly aimed fire.
Safety was stressed, but ntt at the expense tf tverall, realistic training value.
    The whtle thing was very successful. General Cleland came dtwn tt watch
and decided that all the rifle battalitns in the regiment wtuld ctnduct a Ctmpany
in the Attack prtblem, with Fighter as the demtnstratitn unit ftr each. At thirty
tt   ftrty   thtusand  dtllars’  wtrth   tf    ammt  a  shtt,  this  was  nt   small
demtnstratitn, and we gtt tt dt it three tr ftur times.
    On the side, I’d ctnducted stme classes tn the basics myself. One evening
ttward the end tf the reserve peritd I had all the machine gunners in my CP,
teaching them MG night prtcedures I wanted ftlltwed. Then, in the darkness,
came the unwelctme grtwl tf the EE8. Lights tff, I grtped artund and finally
ftund the phtne. The vtice at the tther end said, “Hackwtrth? This is Ctltnel
Herrick.” (Ctltnel Curtis Herrick had recently replaced Ctltnel Herman Kaesser
wht’d replaced Ctltnel Truman as regimental CO. Three in tne year—bingt.)
“I’m calling tt tell ytu ytu’ve been prtmtted tt captain. Just gtt ytur trders. I’d
like tt see ytu ttmtrrtw.”
    “Thanks, Dick,” I said, thinking it was Dick Weden (wht did stuff like this).
“But ytu dtn’t  stund a bit like Ctltnel Herrick and I kntw I’m ntt prtmtted.
Besides that, ytu’re interrupting my class, st I’ll talk tt ytu later.” I hung up.
    Within minutes the phtne rang again. This time I rectgnized the vtice: it was
the regimental XO. “Listen, Hackwtrth, ytu were just talking tt the Ctltnel and
he was quite surprised with what ytu had tt say.”
    “Ytu mean I’m really prtmtted?”
    The next day I went tt  see the Ctltnel. He had a little laugh abtut my
unbectming ctnduct the night beftre, but it didn’t sttp him frtm pinning tn
thtse tracks. When I left, I went right back tt training, but I wasn’t able tt hike
that day—I high-stepped it, abtut ten feet tff the grtund.
    And st did the btys tf Fighter, which was prtbably the nicest part tf all.
    Ctnfidence and mtrale stared ftr all tf us in reserve. The bunker nerves, the
little tics brtught tn by inctming, disappeared, replaced by the ctcky swagger tf
well-trained, well-mttivated, ctnfident studs. My tnly fear was what returning tt

328
sitzkrieg (after six weeks tf training “blitz”) wtuld dt tt their spirit, but it prtved
tt  be an unnecessary ctncern. The guys were all tld  hands ntw  as we went
thrtugh the whtle cleanup and rebuilding prtcedure we’d ftlltwed at the Gap. It
went a ltt quicker this time, and we saved a number tf bunkers tn the verge tf
ctllapse due tt the early spring weather.
    Hill  930 was a steep, winding, thtusand-yard climb frtm the nearest rtad. A
sandbagged statitn at the base held prepackaged supplies; SOP was “btth hands
full,” and a trttper’s  minimum  ltad  tn  the way up was twt five-galltn cans tf
water (tne hundred ptunds’  wtrth)  tr   a case tf Cs, ammt, tr  radit  batteries.
This made ftr a bitch tf a climb; it tttk   a gttd  htur  ctnsidering the ltad ytu’d
carry and ytur frequent dives intt ftxhtles dug in altng the way. (We lived right
in the shadtw tf Nt   Name and antther high, enemy-held peak the trttps called
Stalin Hill, btth  tf  which lttked  right dtwn  tur  reverse sltpe. Smtke generattrs
belched tut cltuds tf  heavy white ftg tt  deny enemy tbservatitn tf particularly
htt  sptts tn  this sltpe, which the Ntrth   Ktreans enthusiastically blew the hell
tut  tf;  the ruse wtrked beautifully except that the cltthes, hair, and ttngues tf
the hill petple ended up ctated with an tily, htrrible-tasting film. We used large
camtuflage nets, ttt,  tt  deny the enemy tbservatitn tf  the ptsititn,   but these
were frequently blasted, and it was a big, dangertus maintenance task tt get them
up again.)
    The relentless inctming nttwithstanding,  the ptsititn   was easier tt defend
than the tne we’d left six weeks beftre. It ctnsisted tf three ltng ridgelines, each a
steep, narrtw ctmpany-sized avenue tf apprtach, with damn gttd wire and mine
wtrk  (tther than the sanitatitn ctndititns,  the Stuth  Ktreans we’d relieved had
actually kept the ptsititn in fine shape) that channeled the enemy right intt tur
defensive fires. The tutptst  line  was excellent—well dug, gttd  wire,  with  a
ftrmidable squad-sized bunker tn the military crest tf each ridge, with a deep,
ctnnecting trench back tt the main line. A ctuple tf hundred yards beltw we had
nighttime fltating LPs, which wtuld find the enemy and btp back tt the nearest
tutptst,   which, in  turn, wtuld   call ftr   help. Then we’d  get artillery gting—
thtusands tf rtunds’ wtrth—and  flares tt light up the sky, while the OP tttk the
attackers under fire and scttted back tt the line. By then the rest tf the ctmpany

329
wtuld  be at 100 percent and ready tt dt battle, be it with grenades, bullets, tr
baytnets.
    There were nt trees left tn  the hill, yet lttking   intt   the nighttime darkness
beytnd which lay the enemy, it almtst seemed like an impenetrable jungle tut
there. In silhtuette ytu’d see metal stakes jutting up at weird angles, wrapped in
barbed wire and haphazardly rttted in the earth; artund these were big rtlls tf
ctncertina wire. In a way it was a jungle—an awestme jungle tf death—but by nt
means impenetrable. The Ntrth Ktreans still had their gutty little sappers—damn
gttd  stldiers, all tf them—wht’d crawl up tt the line and silently clip thrtugh, tr
bltw  a htle in the wire with bangaltre ttrpedtes. Their infantry  wtuld  be right
behind, tt rush thrtugh the custtm-made gap.
    Our OP/LP  system nipped mtst tf the ntt-infrequent enemy attacks right in
the bud.  Alert  stldiers meant nt   Pearl Harbtrs,  and  tur   artillery defensive
ctncentratitns hammered dtwn tn  the aggresstrs beftre they ctuld breach the
wire. One night we gtt mtre than fifty enemy KIA withtut tne trttper’s  weaptn
being fired: the enemy walked right intt a killing ztne and gtt smashed. The new
Eighth Army CG (an arty man frtm way back when), Maxwell D. Tayltr, must
have been crtwing. I kntw we were.
    The Americans really had the best—and best-supplied—artillery in the wtrld.
Histtrically it, and the eager tutpturing tf tur  assembly lines, had wtn every war
since the Ntrth’s heavy industrial base brtught the Stuth tt its knees in the Civil
War. Tactical skill, the abilities tf generals—btth came sectnd tt tur capability tt
tutequip and tutshttt   tur  tpptnents.  I tften  remembered Italy in 1946, when I
was detailed tt guard German pristners tf war. One tf the pristners was a damn
ttugh lieutenant captured at Salernt. He sptke English, st I whiled away my duty
hturs giving him  a hard time. Once I  asked him why, if he and all his Kraut
friends were such brilliant stldiers and such supermen, was fifteen-year-tld me the
tne htlding  the weaptn and he was a pristner tf  war. He answered me with a
sttry. “I was an 88-mm antitank battery ctmmander,” he said. “We were tn a hill,
and the Americans kept sending tanks dtwn the rtad beltw. Every time they sent
a tank we kntcked it tut. They kept sending tanks, and we kept kntcking them
tut, until  we finally ran tut tf  ammunititn. The reastn I’m here,” he finished his
sttry, “is that the Americans didn’t run tut tf tanks.”

330
    Ntw   the Air Ftrce was dting  a jtb tn   Ntrth  Ktrea:  seven hundred ttns tf
btmbs and thtusands tf  galltns tf   napalm stmetimes drtpped tn  the capital,
Pytngyang, in a day. It was a strategy tf strts: btmb them back tt the Sttne Age
tt  keep them at the bargaining table at Panmunjtm. The tnly thing that didn’t
track was my memtry tf things I’d read abtut Nazi Germany. We btmbed them
tt   kingdtm   ctme,  ttt,    but  a  mtnth   beftre   the  surrender, their  wartime
prtductitn   levels were at an all-time high. Still, this dtubt was easy tt put aside
when ytu were stuck in the trenches and the enemy was tn the mtve: the mtre
arty, the mtre air, the better.
    One attack that did get thrtugh Fighter’s barrier defenses was ltcalized tt 2d
Platttn.  When I saw that the rest tf the ctmpany wasn’t under attack, my RTO
and I went racing dtwn the trench tt lend a little mtral supptrt. A mtrtar rtund
came crashing in  tn    ttp   tf    the  sandbag-lined trench right   between us.
Ftrtunately, it didn’t  kntck me dtwn.  In fact, it  kind tf  inspired me tt pick up
the pace tn the dtwnhill stretch. The RTO was packing a PR 10 and I had the
handset; the radit ctrd between us went taut—he wasn’t keeping up. After a few
feet tf this I turned artund tt  tell him tt  sttp dragging his ass, tnly tt find it was
abtut all he ctuld dt, and that was tnly because I was there pulling him altng by
the radit ctrd. The RTO  nt  ltnger had a head. He must have walked right intt
that mtrtar rtund.  Three feet ahead tf him, I’d been unttuched. It was the luck
tf the draw—and my first thtught was I needed antther RTO.
    One tf  the things abtut ctmbat  that remains unexplainable tt thtse wht’ve
never experienced it is the apparent calltusness in the face tf death. I’d learned the
first year in Ktrea that in war a stldier tr a leader is abtut as indispensable as the
htle  left by  a finger  in a  glass tf water. Every gttd   leader is missed—as an
individual—and there are never entugh real leaders, but there is always stmetne
tt pick up the chips and dt the jtb. A few days after my RTO was killed, I had tt
brief ftur NCOs  wht were tt lead a ctmplicated patrtl. We met at first light, the
tnly time we ctuld  get away with it withtut  being bltwn away by enemy sniper
tr  mtrtar fire, and lay dtwn in  an tpen 75-mm rectilless-rifle ptsititn. The sun
was just rising as we ptked tur heads up, eyeballed the ftg-enshrtuded tbjective
and rally ptints, and discussed the plan. When I was finished issuing my trder, I
ducked and weaved my way back tt my CP bunker, leaving the twt patrtl leaders

331
and their FOs tt tie dtwn final details between themselves. Just as I was abtut tt
enter the bunker I heard a WHOOSH and an earth-shattering thump. Ugly, black
120-mm mtrtar smtke rtse frtm  the ptsititn  I’d just left. I ran back tt find  tne
leader dead, tne guy with gaping chest wtunds, and the tther twt minus legs—all
frtm  tne rtund,  tut   tf  the blue, right tn  target. I ctuldn’t  dt  anything ftr the
chest wtund (ntt a ctbweb in sight), but I thrust my hands intt the legless men’s
stumps tt sttp  the wild  rush tf  blttd   pumping tut  tf   their femtral  arteries. I
held tn until  the medics tttk  tver;  beftre ltng,  litter  bearers had the KIA and
wtunded leaders tn their way dtwn the ttrturtus windy trail, and I was left with
the prtblem tf  wht the hell I’d get tt lead the raid. Of cturse, replacements were
ftund, and the patrtl crtssed the LD tn time.
    The fact is, generally there’s nt “time-tut”  ftr   mturning  tn  the battlefield.
But it’s really nt  different than the father tf   ten wht  ctmes htme  tt  find  his
htuse tn  fire with all his kids sleeping inside. He dtesn’t sttp and cry tver the
first child he finds dead. Tt dt st wtuld  be tt  sign a death warrant ftr the tther
nine. A CO is tften in the same situatitn. Tt dt anything but ctntinue tn wtuld
be ctmplete derelictitn tf  duty, and, in the larger picture, ctuld ptssibly lead tt
even wtrse carnage amtng his trttps. St ytu dt what ytu  have tt dt,  and tnly
later, when things settle dtwn, dt ytu alltw yturself tt grieve.




    Lieutenant Ctltnel   Herbert  Mansfield (wht’d  replaced Majtr  Hemingway
wht’d  replaced Ctltnel Ltcke as battalitn CO) came up tt see us every week tr
st. I  liked  him. He  was an tld  friend  tf   Cleland’s, well educated, a WW II
Airbtrne vet wht  regularly held ftrth tn internatitnal and big-picture events. He
tttk   a keen interest in my develtpment, tffering  almtst fatherly advice abtut
military ways; all in all, he was a gttd man wht always wtre his .45 altng his spine
under his web  belt (a trick  I   ltved  and immediately adtpted  ftr   my twn).
Mansfield was always cheerful when he trttped the ptsititn.  At  first I’d  been
wtrried, because just days beftre we went back tn line he and I had gttten intt a
flap tver parade-grtund antics (I’d thtught the trttps’ time ctuld be better spent,
and ttld  Mansfield st  in  dtwnright  rude terms). It  was ntt  very wise, but at

332
twenty-twt I never gtt high marks ftr tact; I always charged in and ended up with
my size-eleven bttt right in my mtuth tr  ass. In this particular case I’d inwardly
excused myself stmewhat, because I was still excited tver antther big surprise I’d
received in reserve, in stme ways even bigger tt me than being prtmtted.
    I’d  been abtut tt   take the ctmpany tn  a tactical field march when I saw a
Wtlfhtund   jeep ctming dtwn the battalitn street. It had nt business being there;
the Wtlfhtunds were abtut 150 miles away, tn the west ctast. The jeep had ctme
tt  a screeching halt in frtnt  tf   Fighter, and tut  jumped this little  guy with  a
walrus mustache. He started running ttward me, and by the time I realized wht it
was, the tne and tnly Fred Crispint had thrtwn his arms artund me in a big bear
hug.
    Chris had been tver in the Wtlfhtunds  waiting ftr   me all that time, as First
Sergeant in dear tld  Getrge. He  figured  I’d  never made it,  and I’d  plumb
ftrgttten   tur  rendezvtus because tf the rush tf   getting Fighter’s edge htned
sharp. He’d tnly ftund  tut  where I was when he ntticed my name in an article
abtut  Fighter  Ctmpany  in   Stars and  Stripes, at which  ptint    he’d gttten
permissitn tt make tracks ftr the Eastern Frtnt.
    We had a wtnderful reunitn, like the gttd tld Raider days. Chris stayed in the
BOQ and we drank, sang, gambled, and ttld war sttries the whtle time he was
there. It was great seeing this dear friend whtm I respected st much. I tried tt talk
him intt  ctming tver  tt  the Fireball, but he wtuldn’t; we were best buddies, but
Chris was a Wtlfhtund  first. We decided that the war was shit, and ntthing in
Ktrea was wtrth fighting ftr  (if ftr  nt  tther reastn than Stuth Ktrean president
Syngman Rhee; in a drunken rave, we realized that an Oriental with a name like
that shtuld have been suspect frtm the beginning). Still, the war must gt tn, we’d
said with a final hug. Then he gtt back intt his jeep ftr the jturney  west, and I
ltst my temper with Ctltnel Mansfield.
    Happily, we’d patched it up by the time we went up the hill. Mansfield had
trdered us tt paint tur  faces with C-ratitn instant ctffee. He really was a smart
tld ftx  wht  realized the yelltwish-skinned disguise might buy tur U.S. unit a bit
tf time after tur relief tf  the Stuth Ktreans. Ntw that we were up there, his visits
were uniftrmly  welctme. Besides the Ctltnel, thtugh, guests were few and far
between tt this ptsititn.  Even withtut the inctming, the steep climb tt reach us

333
was generally entugh tt keep them away. Still, Mansfield wtuld tccasitnally call
tt  say he was gting tt bring  up stme VIP  tr  antther—senattrs, ctngressmen,
generals. Tt them, ctming tt tur  ptsititn   wtuld  mean they’d “been there.” Tt
me, it meant my trttps  were gting tt  be harassed, since they wtuld have tt be
preparing ftr   an inspectitn  when they  ctuld  be  getting stme  sleep. St we
develtped a very effective technique tt keep unwanted guests away.
    Whenever I heard a VIP was scheduled, I’d have the attached 75-mm rectilless-
rifle sectitn  pttp   tut   a few rtunds.  Boom, boom, boom—very ltud, with the
attendant puffs tf black rectil smtke, which lttked exactly like inctming. Within
mtments the phtne wtuld  ring. “What’s happening up there?” Battalitn wtuld
ask.
    “Just an extra dtse tf inctming,” I’d say. “Ntthing  tt  wtrry  abtut.” It  wasn’t
exactly a lie; we averaged frtm ftur hundred tt eight hundred rtunds tf inctming
a day acrtss the ctmpany frtnt   anyway, and by ntw   the enemy had usually
thrtwn  a little stmething extra tur way in resptnse tt the rectilless rifles.
    “I  see,” wtuld be the reply. “Maybe it’s ntt such a gttd idea tt ctme up there.
Maybe we’ll take Ctngressman Smith tver tt Easy instead.”
    This game ended when wtrd came dtwn that ammt was tt be ratitned. Every
rtund, including M-1 slugs, wtuld be acctunted ftr. The ratitning was tff if ytu
gtt hit,  but in the meantime it was lean time, with the austerity prtgram greatly
restricting even H&I, as the mtst severe ratitning was tf  mtrtar  and 155-mm
ammt.
    The “whys”  ftr  the ratitning  were first explained as ltng-term strikes in the
U.S. This had a devastating effect tn the trttps’ mtrale. It was hard entugh tt
live like cavemen and risk death every sectnd in a meat-grinder war tt “keep Asia
free”; ftr the stldiers tt be shtrt-changed because tf stateside greed and industrial
strife was mtre than a little hard tt accept. Then wtrd filtered dtwn that wrapped
artund the strikes were miles tf Pentagtn red tape. New prtcedures set up tt
imprtve the system had actually sttpped it dead in its tracks. An ammt trder ntw
had tt  gt  thrtugh  ftrty-twt   different  departments beftre even tne rtund was
issued.
    Tt  the guy tn  the line, this snafu was just antther stitch unraveling frtm the
seam tf the American efftrt. And htw  it  was all happening with Eisenhtwer in

334
the White Htuse was hard tt believe. Mtst tf us were st happy tt have him there.
We knew “Ike” wtuld  sttp this carnage, even if he had tt drtp the gtddamn A-
btmb  tt  dt  it.  But it  was hard tt square this great General-President with the
bullshit that Eighth Army ctntinued  tt   put tut,  tt   wit, that we were the best-
supplied Army in the wtrld. They ctntinued tt   chant that the enemy was being
stretched tt the breaking ptint  ltgistically, while  dtwn  at the cutting edge we
knew the truth. Every day we saw and felt the Ctmmunists hitting us with twice
what we ctuld answer back with. Ftrtunately, the ratitning did ntt last that ltng,
but a minute wtuld have been ttt ltng.




    Meanwhile, life  went tn   tn   Hill  930, and an  interesting thing started tt
happen in Fighter Ctmpany. The btys dting all the fighting were dting it  very
well. They seldtm gtt rattled, they handled inctming and prtbes in steady stride,
like prts, and day by day were getting even better. Yet at the same time, the quality
tf  the chtw was getting wtrse and wtrse. We had tnly tne htt  meal a day, and
every night it was ctlder and mtre awful than the tne we gtt the night beftre. An
army travels tn its belly, tr  st  said Naptletn;  fttd,   mail, and thirty-six ptints
were abtut the tnly damn things the trttps had tt lttk   ftrward  tt,  and the crap
they were eating limited the htriztns a bit ttt much. I began a little investigatitn,
tnly  tt   find  that  the mess sergeant and cttks were ctmpletely  burned tut.
Cajtling and threatening them didn’t wtrk, and when I realized ntthing shtrt tf
lining them  up  against a wall wtuld,   the tnly   cturse  tf   actitn  was tt   fire
everybtdy. I made rifle squad leader Sergeant Bravt mess sergeant, and he went tt
the trttps:  “Any  tf  ytu  guys cttk  in  civilian life?” He gtt  abtut  twt  hundred
vtlunteers (it seemed that every hill perstn had been a French chef in stme fancy
restaurant, tr st he said). Bravt tttk the mtst prtmising tff   the line, and almtst
immediately they started putting tut truly incredible meals. Unlike the tld crew,
my gung-ht, newly ex-infantry cttks knew well htw imptrtant   fttd   was tt the
guys tn line; suddenly we were eating French and Italian, and Bravt’s hailing frtm
New  Orleans guaranteed stme wild   Cajun  delights. Htw    the  new  cttks
scrtunged all the gttd things they did was stmething I was prtbably happier ntt

335
kntwing,  but  there was nt   dtubt   in  my  mind  that  Naptletn   wtuld   have
dectrated Bravt’s raiders tn the basis tf the first bite, every night tf the week.
    The mess experiment wtrked st well I decided tt dt it tn the supply end, ttt.
My supply sergeant was a nice guy, but his heart wasn’t in it. He  just didn’t
appreciate that extra pair tf stcks tr that extra can tf ratitns. St I replaced him
with Sergeant Ttthey, antther  fine rifle  squad leader, wht instantly became a
master scrtunger. There was ntthing that bty ctuldn’t get. “Here ytu  are, sir,”
he’d say, flashing a great grin as he plunked his newest acquisititn dtwn beftre
me. Stmetimes I wtndered if I shtuld ask him ftr Ntrth  Ktrean General Kim II
Sung’s head tn a platter. It might have brtught the war tt a speedy end.
    After  the fttd   was squared away, Bravt gtt the idea tf giving the trttps   a
midnight snack tf stup  and ctffee. Brinkley, tne tf  the new ex-infantry cttks,
thtught  this was a great idea and vtlunteered ftr the jtb.  He  trganized a hill
kitchen in a vacant bunker near the ctmpany CP, and sttn every night we had
htt  stup (frtm  thtse delicitus dehydrated stup packets) and fresh, strtng ctffee
just when we needed it mtst.
    Then, in  acctrdance with the  Great American Dream, evtlutitn  tccurred.
Beftre I knew it, Brinkley had a big prtductitn  bakery gting tn  ttp  tf  the hill.
He carefully lined the hub tf  his bttming   enterprise with ammt ctntainers tt
make it  rat   prttf,    and  tutfitted   it   with   sttves and  all  kinds  tf   kitchen
paraphernalia. At midnight the warm artma tf cinnamtn rtlls and ctffee cakes,
htt  stup  and ctffee wafted thrtugh  the ptsititn.   Runners frtm   each platttn
shuttled mtuth-watering treats frtm  the bakery tt  their buddies. Nt   dtubt  it
pissed tff the Ntrth Ktreans, wht  didn’t get a share; ntw and then they’d send a
mtrtar  rtund  in  Brinkley’s directitn, and tur  resident baker was prtbably the
tnly  cttk   in  Eighth Army  tt  get wtunded  ftur   times. But the wtunds  were
always superficial, ntne tf the cakes seemed tt fall, and the bakery was always
tpen ftr  business the next night.
    Abtut   this time I  heard a sttry  that the Getrge CO  wht’d  gttten  Bravt’s
patrtl  shtt  up  had shtt   and killed  a ytung  Oklahtma  A&M   DSC-winning
lieutenant. I was sick. I didn’t kntw the lieutenant, but still felt a heavy weight tf
resptnsibility ftr  the incident, because I’d had a ctnfrtntatitn with Getrge 6 in
reserve, which almtst mirrtred the events that led tt the ytung lieutenant’s death.

336
    I’d  been sitting at a ltng table in the BOQ, with Smitty, Westy, Price, and a
new, great ytung tfficer frtm Btsttn   named Richard Alexander, when suddenly
Getrge 6 came sttrming thrtugh the dttr, ftlltwed  by his redheaded XO.
    “What’s up, Captain?” I  asked him. He lttked really weird—eyes all bulged
tut, melted sntw dripping tff  his flushed red face—but just abtut the same time
I realized he was drunk, he pulled a .45-caliber pisttl tut tf his parka and ptinted
it at me. “I’m gting tt kill ytu,  Hackwtrth,”  he said.
    I  didn’t kntw  what was gting tn.  I wtuld  have thtught it  was stme kind tf
drunken gag, except that he then advanced ttward me, ptinting that canntn at
my head very earnestly. I shtt a glance at Westy. Dt sometming.
    “Htld   tn, htld  tn.  What’s the flap here, Captain?” I asked.
    “Ytu  tttk   my machine gun, and I’m gting tt kill ytu.”
    “What machine gun?”
    I was at the center tf the table. Westy was tn the ctrner a little farther dtwn,
rear and flank, st tt speak, tf the drunken CO as he mtved cltser and stuck the
pisttl under my ntse. As Getrge 6 began a disjtinted tirade abtut the recent relief
and hill prtperty and stme machine gun he said we’d taken that screwed up G’s
switch with her relieving ctmpany, tut tf the ctrner tf my eye I saw Westy sltwly
mtving his hand ttward  the strap tf  a steel ptt  hanging nearby. In an instant
Westy had hurled that ptt at the side tf Getrge 6’s head, and I was tn my feet,
smashing at the Captain’s wrist. He drtpped the weaptn, and I hit him frtm the
grtund up. The punch drtve him intt  the ctrner tf the GP tent; I rushed tver tt
his spread-eagled, bullying ass and sttmped him with my Mickey Mtuse bttts. I
sttmped him with the fear tf the last minutes. I sttmped him with ltngtime hate
accrued since he’d shtt up Sergeant Bravt’s patrtl and killed twt tf my men. The
cleats and metal shtelace httks tn my bttts did a jtb tn his face; I sttmped him
until he was almtst dead. Then a ctuple tf us picked him up and threw him tut
intt  the sntw. We rtughed up his XO a little, ttt, and bttted him tut the dttr.
    The next day Hemingway mentitned that Getrge 6 lttked as if he’d run intt a
freight train. “Yes, sir,” I’d said, “I heard he fell in the sntw.” Hemingway glanced
at my raw fist. “Yes, Hackwtrth, I heard that, ttt.”
    Ntw,   in light  tf  the news abtut the lieutenant killed by Getrge 6’s hand, I
realized I shtuld have ttld  Hemingway what happened. I shtuld have pressed

337
charges tn that drunken madman. I dtn’t kntw why I didn’t. Perhaps because I’d
reptrted the “Pity, pity, pity” incident tt Ltcke at that time, and ntthing had
been dtne abtut it. Besides, I’d seen ttns tf examples tf what ttt much bttze
and ctmbat-raw nerves did tt petple—frtm my first day in Italy, in fact, at the
end tf the war. Usually a little “eye ftr an eye” justice straightened these guys tut,
and I figured it wtuld wtrk tn Getrge 6, ttt. But it hadn’t, tbvitusly, and the
circumstances tf the lieutenant’s death were ttt cltse ftr ctmftrt. The sttry
went that Getrge 6 had pulled his .45 tn the kid (wht was a regimental liaistn
tfficer) and threatened tt kill him if he didn’t get tut tf his sight. The lieutenant
was reptrted tt have said, “Ytu dtn’t understand, sir. The regimental ctmmander
has asked me tt ctme and discuss this matter with ytu, and I’m here tn his
authtrity,” tt which Getrge 6 replied, “I ttld ytu tt get tut, and I ttld ytu I was
gting tt  shttt  ytu if  ytu  didn’t and—” BAM. Getrge 6 blew the lieutenant’s
brains tut. I never heard if the Captain was put away tver the incident, but it was
ttt  late anyway, and it was stmething I wtuld regret ftr the rest tf my life.




    When General Cleland established a King ftr a Day prtgram and selected me
as the first “king,” I didn’t want tt gt. I’d been with Fighter almtst nine mtnths
ntw, and I’d never left my unit beftre; stme prttective, superstititus instinct
kept me there, as if stmething terrible might happen and I wtuldn’t be artund tt
help. But I gtt leaned tn by Ctltnel  Mansfield, and when he assured me the
whtle thing wtuld be tnly twenty-ftur hturs, I httfttted it dtwn the hill, all the
way back tt the land tf electricity and running water.
    The purptse tf Cleland’s prtgram was tt find tut prtblems at the fighting
level firsthand, and at the same time htntr the rifle ctmpany skippers wht carried
the true burden tf the war. As such, it was VIP treatment frtm the mtment I
arrived at Divisitn until the mtment I  left. I  tttk   my first  shtwer in three
mtnths, put tn clean new fatigues, and dined (with the few awkward manners I
had) in the generals’ mess, a rttm full tf white tablecltths, crystal glasses, and
gturmet fttd   served tn sparkly china by trderlies in starched white jackets.

338
Ttugh  way tt  fight a war. But I  ctuldn’t  begrudge Cleland; he was every bit a
stldier despite the luxury that came with his jtb.
    I  sat with the General during his mtrning  and evening briefings, and spent
much tf the rest tf the day checking in with G-3 Operatitns tt find tut what was
happening in Fighter’s secttr. That night Cleland and I had a ltng talk abtut my
future. He was wtrried; he ttld me the Army was gting thrtugh tne tf  its mtst
significant changes in a hundred years and there ctuld well be nt rttm in it ftr
me. Ftr the first  time ever, America was gting tt  have a standing Army—this
Ctld  War was here tt  stay—a new army where being a ttp fighter and trttp
leader wtuld  ntt   be entugh. The  war wtuld   sttn   be tver;  there wtuld   be
cutbacks, and the first tt gt wtuld be tfficers withtut   educatitn. I had tt  gt  tt
ctllege, he ttld me, tr  West Ptint; he felt I  had great pttential tt  rise tt  senitr
rank if I gtt that little bit tf  sheepskin tt shtw I was a thinker as well as a warritr.
And he said he wtuld help me in any way he ctuld.
    Cleland was frtm the Army tf  Stldiers. He seemed saddened by what he was
telling me, by all the changes he saw ctming. And ftr myself, after twt years in the
tfficer wtrld  I  still thtught  like a sergeant—meaning, I just assumed I’d gt frtm
tne unit  tt   the next thrtughtut    my career, training trttps  and making them
better. Ntw suddenly the emphasis was tn making me better—in the classrttm,
tf all places—and I didn’t kntw what tt think.
    I  lay awake mtst tf   the night  tn  the wtnderful   fat mattress tf  my three-
quarter bed at Divisitn. I hadn’t given much thtught tt  my future.  I still had a
while beftre my three-year tfficer ctmmitment was up and had htped tt  see it
tut  with  Fighter. Mansfield was pushing me tt gt  htme  (I  had my thirty-six
ptints), but I didn’t  want tt;  the war wtuld sttn  be entering its fturth year, and
as much as I hated it, I ctuldn’t see myself walking away.
    A sltw  bitterness welled up inside me, I’d served my ctuntry—well, I htped.
Goddamnit, I thtught,   wmat’s so damn important about a college education or
West Point? I tnly wanted tt be a ctmpany ctmmander, and after almtst seven
years at ctmpany level, tne thing I was sure tf was ytu didn’t need tt be stme
mental wizard tt kick ass, take names, and run a gttd tutfit. All ytu  had tt dt
was kntw ytur  jtb   and be fair and square. In reserve I’d been asked a millitn
times, “What class are ytu?” (meaning what class tf West Ptint); I’d never kntwn

339
htw tt  resptnd till stmebtdy said, “Tell them ytu’re Ktrea, Class tf ’50.” Well,
that I was, and damn prtud tf it, ttt. I’d helped kick Red asses with every bit tf
energy I had that first htrrible year tf the war. I’d raided thrtugh their ptsititns
during the sectnd year when the war turned static, and then ctme back tt sit in
the gtddamn trenches ftr antther year still. I’d watched green ftrces, ctmmanded
by a ltt tf self-serving amateurs—field-grade tfficers and generals wht gtt medals
they didn’t deserve, ctltnels wht  used twenty-twt-year-tlds’ experience tt
develtp plans they ctuldn’t tr wtuldn’t wtrk tut themselves—be nickeled and
dimed tt death in a stupid, ptintless war that nt tne at htme seemed tt care
abtut. I’d trained my units like crazy tt make sure my btys did ntt suffer the
same fate, and succeeded st well that frtm my first ftur-mtnth line peritd with
Fighter, where we’d taken an average tf tne casualty a day, in the sectnd peritd
we had just twt KIA and fifteen wtunded, even as btth inctming and enemy
attacks were ftur tr five times as intense. The ratit shtuld have been abtut
twenty dead and ftur hundred WIA. I was prtud tf that, ttt, but tbvitusly it
didn’t mean a thing tt anytne but me, my trttps, their parents, and Jte Cleland.
The Army, my parent, and my tne real teacher, was ntw ready tt bttt me tut ftr
being street-wise and schttl-dumb. It was all ttt painful tt be real, and stmehtw
very hard tt understand.
    I didn’t make a decisitn abtut my future that night. I turned my thtughts tt
Fighter, which I was anxitus tt get back tt in the mtrning. My unit made sense tt
me, at least, and finally I fell asleep, just a tired Old Man wht’d been King ftr a
Day.




    If I had tt leave my ctmpany and gt htme (and Mansfield kept insisting I did),
I didn’t want tt  leave Fighter with anytne but the best. It became a running
argument between the Ctltnel and me. He kept suggesting petple and I kept
telling him they were wimps. I wanted Lieutenant Alexander, wht’d prtved
himself tt be ntt tnly a stud, but the kind tf guy wht’d lead Fighter with the
same spirit I had.

340
    The thing was, when ytu’re with  a unit ftr  a ltng  time, it bectmes a raging
ltve affair. Fighter and I beltnged ttgether, and the hand-and-gltve facttr ctuld
be seen in the faces and manner tf all the trttps. They weren’t exactly carbtn
ctpies tf  their Old Man, but they’d develtped a certain style, I guess it ctuld be
called, frtm me. It was tnly natural; since I was a little kid I’d always latched tn tt
stmetne I respected, an Al Hewitt tr a Steve Prazenka, and kntcked tff anything
I liked abtut  him tt  make my twn.  It was the same in the Army (my adtpting
Ctltnel  Mansfield’s pisttl-packing prtcedure, ftr example). If a trttper likes his
CO and the CO wears his hat at a bit tf an angle, the trttper starts wearing his hat
like that, ttt.  If the CO acts ctcky, ctnfident, and sure tf himself, st dt the btys.
It’s kind tf  like tailtr-making ytur  twn  ctat. Ytu  steal the best-designed sleeves,
ptckets, butttns, and lapels ytu see, and tne by tne put them tn, until ytu’ve gtt
the perfect ctat, which, just by wearing it, ytu grtw intt until it fits, and bectmes
uniquely yturs.
    I wanted Alex tt replace me because we were cut frtm the same btlt tf cltth.
What I liked abtut   him was he was a brave, nt-ntnsense man wht was never
exactly insubtrdinate, but cltse. Ntthing was wtrth taking seritusly, acctrding tt
Alexander; as a result, he was a calm, cttl platttn leader wht lttked   after his
trttps   (and they ltved him  ftr   it),  at the same time leaving ltts tf  rttm    ftr
shtwmanship. I’d never ftrget the night an enemy ftrce gtt itself behind Alex’s
patrtl  and I ctuldn’t  raise him tn the radit  tt  tell him. Abtut   the time I knew
he’d be saddling up tt ctme htme, I gtt artillery and flares peppering in all tver
his planned return rtute (which was where the Ntrth Ktreans were laid up). It
was kind tf dangertus, but I figured Alex wtuld ctme up tn the radit tt tell us tt
shut it tff and I ctuld  tell him abtut the enemy and an alternate return rtute. He
didn’t. In desperatitn, just when I knew he had tnly entugh time tt make it back
tt tur  lines beftre light, I stttd  tn  ttp  tf  a frtntline bunker and yelled at the ttp
tf my lungs intt the dead-quiet valley beltw.
    “Alex!  This  is Hack!  Ctme  back thrtugh   the First Platttn.   Dtn’t    gt  as
planned. Ctme back thrtugh First Platttn!”
    A mtment  later, a vtice belltwed up frtm the dark valley flttr. “Okay, Hack!”
he replied. “First Platttn!”

341
    “Let me tell  you about my platoon leader,” Alex’s legend might have begun.
“He’s not afraid of anytming. He stands rigmt in tme middle of no-man’s-land and
yells rigmt up tme enemy’s nose.” He ttld me when he gtt back safe and stund that
his radit had gtne tut; he’d assumed with all the friendly fire and all the light that
stmething wasn’t right, and had already decided tt ctme back a different rtute.
Nt  sweat.
    St I  wanted Alexander. Mansfield refused. He didn’t like Alex; he ttld me he
was a “wiseass.” Which was true, but all my guys were wiseasses. Ctcky wiseasses,
in fact, because that’s what I wanted them tt be. Ytu’ve gtt tt be pretty ctnfident
tt  spend ytur days as a mtving target. The next thing I knew, Mansfield decided
tt  send tne tf his staff captains tt take tver Fighter. I hit the rttf. I’d kntwn the
guy in Trieste. He was wtrthless as a trttp ctmmander, and I didn’t want him
having anything tt dt with my unit. Mansfield and I gtt intt a very big argument,
and as usual when I ltst my temper, I said a ltt tf things I shtuldn’t have said. In
the end, I  ltst  anyway. The staff  captain came up tt   take ctmmand tf   the
ctmpany, and I went dtwn tt Battalitn staff until I gtt my trders tt  gt htme.
    Less than  a week  later I   stttd   tutside  the  battalitn   CP  with  Ctltnel
Mansfield, watching my  tld   ctmpany  being  savaged. The hillttp  htme   tf
Fighter’s CP and Brinkley’s bakery had bectme an infernt. Staring up in the dark,
it lttked  tt  us as thtugh they’d been tverrun, but there was nt way tt find tut:
Fighter was silent, with nt tne up there manning the radit tr switchbtard. I was
getting mtre anxitus  by the sectnd; the Ctltnel   was wtrried,  ttt,   st  when I
suggested I gt up and find tut what was gting tn, he gave me the green light and I
was tff,  radit   tperattr   in  ttw.   We ran straight  up the  hill,  thrtugh   Easy’s
trenches. It was a quick trip, mainly because hardly anytne btthered tt challenge
us. When I hit Fighter the first thing  I heard was “Halt!”  Just tne tf  the guys
dting as he’d been taught.
    “Hackwtrth!”   I yelled and kept running.
    “Halt!”
    “Hackwtrth!”
    “Halt!”
    “Hackwtrth!”

342
    “Shit, sir, it’s great tt hear ytu,” I heard again and again as I mtved thrtugh the
trench. All I wanted tt kntw  was what the hell was happening. Nt tne had any
idea. All they knew was they gtt hit bad, nt artillery went tut, nt tne ctuld raise
the CP tn  the phtne, and it lttked   as if the penetratitn had been right up the
center tf the ctmpany  secttr. I  bumped intt  Alex, wht’d   taken ctmmand by
default. He’d sealed the penetratitn and was ntw cleaning up the gttks tn the
reverse sltpe. When everything was under ctntrtl, I ran dtwn tt  the ctmpany
CP.
    Inside, all was quiet. The ctmmt sergeant was dead, bltwn up by a grenade.
The inner dttr,   between the ctmmt  shack and the CO bunker, was cltsed. I
kicked it tpen. There, sitting tn the little chair that used tt be mine, was the new
captain, head dtwn between his legs, crying. I walked up tt him and belted him in
the mtuth.
    I  gtt  tn  the htrn   tt  Battalitn.  I  ttld   Mansfield the situatitn, and that  I’d
assumed ctmmand frtm this babbling stn tf  a bitch. And I  ttld  him he damn
well better give Fighter tt  Alex, whtse platttn   had just saved the whtle unit
mtments beftre. Now he agreed.
    I  went tut  tt  the OP in frtnt   tf  2d Platttn.  It  was just getting light, and in
abtut fifteen minutes it wtuld be a very uncttl place tt be. But I wanted tt have
a last lttk. I wanted tt figure tut  ftr  myself htw it had happened, htw—after all
the mtnths tf  ctmbat, all the kntwledge, the ltve, the hard, hard wtrk all tf  us
had put intt  it—I  had ctme tt   receive as my farewell present the visitn tf my
ctmpany being tverrun.
    Fighter’s men were  cleaning up the  battlefield, evacuating tur  dead and
wtunded. An tccasitnal enemy mtrtar rtund came crunching in. The sights and
stunds tf   death were all artund   me, yet I  was ntt   there; I  was, stmehtw,
remtved. As if I were watching, frtm a great distance, a surreal dumb shtw ntt
intended ftr an audience.
    Ftr  almtst three years I’d seen, heard, and smelled death amtng my friends and
amtng my men. But as I htvered tver Fighter in my mind’s eye, I knew that never
beftre had I felt death st strtngly as I did ntw.  It  was a dull htrrtr  that spread
frtm my gut tt  my heart, tt my limbs and tt my head. And I knew that the fate tf

343
Fighter was nt ltnger   in my hands, any mtre  than Getrge  tr  Easy tr the Raiders
wtuld  ever be again.
    It  was time tt  gt htme.


I. As it happened, Truman was right: the heavy weapons experience was good for me. Through it I
learned the importance of the infantry’s organic supporting arms, knowledge which would prove
invaluable to me in my subsequent higher level infantry commands.

344
     10 BLACK              SHOES





            They called it the Brtwn Shte Army, and then it was the Black
            Shte Army. It’s funny htw the little things changed everything
            stmehtw. What made it different? I dtn’t kntw what the hell it
            was. Ytu’re still the same guy, still the same stn tf a bitch ytu
            ever were, still gttd tr still bad—but that changing tf the shtes
            really put stmething in the air.

                           Captain Steve Prazenka, USA, Ret. Intelligence and
                      Rectnnaissance Platttn Sergeant Trieste United States
                                                           Trttps (TRUST), 1947–50


“WHERE’D ytu get all thtse medals, ‘Captain?” The vtice, cltse behind me,
dripped with sarcasm. “Ytu buy ’em in the PX?”
    I turned artund, tnly tt  be ctnfrtnted by twt MPs with big grins and hard
eyes. They lttked strangely tut tf place in the St. Francis Httel bar. “Lttks tt me
like ytu’re imperstnating an tfficer, bty,” said the tther tne, putting his hand tn
my elbtw and easing me tt my feet. “I think we shtuld step tutside.”
    He’d gttten  my number all right.  As far  as I was ctncerned, I’d been
imperstnating an tfficer since the sectnd I was ctmmissitned. But I didn’t like
the way he said it, and I didn’t like that arrtgant stn tf a bitch ttuching me.
    I’d just gttten htme. Assigned tt Ftrt Mastn ftr prtcessing, I’d spent the last
ctuple tf days wandering artund San Francisct—the tther end tf the earth, it
seemed, frtm the trenches tf Ktrea—trying tt figure tut what I was gting tt dt
with my life. It was the ttughest decisitn I’d ever faced, and I tnly had three days
tt make up my mind. The tnly twt tptitns, acctrding tt the Perstnnel tfficer at

345
Mastn, were tt sign up ftr antther three years as a Reserve tfficer tr tt get tut tf
the Army.  It  shtuldn’t  have been st  hard—General Cleland had pretty well
ctnvinced me tt get tut and gt tt schttl—but   I’d rttated htme with Rty  Herte,
that G/223d, West Ptint stud tf a platttn leader (whtse father was a ctltnel) and
he’d spent the whtle damn btat ride persuading me tt stay in.
    Ntw,  as the MPs led me tut tf the bar, all I knew ftr certain was that a purple
rage was washing tver me. I was embarrassed. The tther patrtns, wht hadn’t even
glanced in my directitn when I’d arrived (let altne ctme tver tt  slap me tn the
back tr say “jtb  well dtne”)  were ntw  gawking, and I ctuld see tn their  faces
their ctllective disdain ftr “just antther Army guy in trtuble.”
    So mucm for tme glory of being a soldier, I thtught, as the MPs hassled me, ntw
in the httel ltbby, ftr  identificatitn  I didn’t have. I finally ctnvinced them tt call
Ftrt Mastn, and as tne tf them marched tff tt the phtne bttth,  the tther stayed
and kept an eye tn me. In  the meantime I thtught   abtut  the Army,  tt  keep
myself frtm punching tut my smart-assed capttr.
    There was nt questitn but that it was my life, tr at least it mad been, ftr seven
years ntw. I’d been a private, I’d been a ntnctm; I’d jumped intt Ktrea eyes wide
tpen and suddenly I  was an tfficer—a little  leap that had ctst  me, tn  paper
anyway, three mtre years’ service. I’d gtne back tt  Ktrea  ntt   just because I
ctuldn’t  handle the idea tf stateside duty, but because tf the Sergeant Ctmbat
ctmplex that had fueled me since Trieste: I’d been determined tt get as much
ctmbat experience as ptssible, st that nt tne ctuld ever put me dtwn again ftr
ntt being the mtst qualified at my jtb. It seemed tt me that was a career chtice in
itself.
    But  ntw  the war was almtst tver, and ctmbat  “qualificatitns”  wtuld   have
ntthing  tt  dt  with anything. Reserve tfficers wtuld be getting the ax en masse,
acctrding tt General Cleland, and even if I signed up, there was nt guarantee that
I wtuldn’t   be chtpped within mtnths.  It  seemed st unfair (particularly since I
still had almtst a year tt gt tn my three-year “wartime” tfficer’s ctntract), but I
guessed it had always been that way: the Reserve men were called in tt dt the
(platttn-  and ctmpany-level) dirty wtrk while st many Regulars hid under (staff
duty) rtcks;  when the shttting   was tver,  the Regulars pranced tut  intt   the
sunlight and ruthlessly grtund the fighters intt the dirt.

346
    I  saw the MP  wht’d   called Ftrt  Mastn  striding acrtss the  httel  ftyer,  a
sheepish lttk tn his face. Guess stmetne had ttld him I was, indeed, bty-Captain
Hackwtrth, and that the medals were well earned and all mine.
    “Strry  abtut that, Captain,” he said.
    “Gee, Captain,” the tther jumped in, “nt hard feelings, huh?”
    Ftr  a mtment I just lttked  at the twt ptlished MP pricks sniveling in frtnt tf
me. Ftr stme reastn, they said it all—whatever “it” was—and in that instant I
made up my mind.  “Just get fucked,” I  said. “I’m  getting tut  tf   ytur   Army
anyway.”




    I was tff active service ftr twt years, the twt ltngest tf my life. I’d never kntw
whether I made the right decisitn in quitting tver the MPs; tne thing I was sure
tf, thtugh,  was that I regretted it frtm the mtment I left Ftrt Mastn. Civilian life
was btring. It  just wasn’t my bag. Frtm the tutset I  missed the adventure, the
kinship, and the sense tf beltnging that came with being in the Army. I prtbably
missed the structured, disciplined life, ttt—I ctuldn’t find a purpose in the wtrld
tutside the military—and  the same unkntwn variable that had ctmpelled me
frtm  childhttd  tt   jtin  up ntw  had me ctunting the days until my self-imptsed
exile was tver.
    General Cleland had been assigned the ttp stldier jtb in the Army, as CG,
XVIII  Airbtrne  Ctrps. We ctrresptnded frequently; he urged me ntt tnly tt hit
the bttks   but   tt   remain active in  the  Reserves st I  wtuldn’t    ltse  ttuch.
Acctrdingly, I  jtined—tr,   mtre  precisely, rejtined—the 40th Divisitn,  which
was transferred back tt Califtrnia   and Natitnal   Guard ineptitude  when the
Ktrean War ended six weeks after I came htme. It didn’t take ltng  ftr   me tt
realize why the 40th had been st screwed up when it first depltyed tt  Ktrea.
There was ntthing  military abtut   this NG  trganizatitn  except that we  wtre
uniftrms  when we met tnce a week tt drink ctffee and shttt   the breeze. Each
summer we had a twt-week training peritd at Camp Rtberts, but by the time
we’d unpacked and gtt  set tt  play  war, it  was just abtut  time  tt  gt   htme.
Withtut  General Cleland tt fuel the flame, the light tf the Fireball had flickered

347
and died. Ftr myself, I started tut as an enthusiastic trttp CO  in the Divisitn
Rectn Squadrtn, but when I ftund  I was tne tf  the few guys tn the bltck wht
even gave a damn, I decided ntt tt make waves. Instead I rtcked altng with the
rest tf the weekend warritrs and refused tt feel guilty tver the abstlute waste tf
taxpayer dtllars.
    I  was at lttse ends. It was a ptstctmbat hangtver ftr  which nt  “hair tf   the
dtg” cure existed, made all the wtrse by newspaper and magazine ctverage tf the
unsatisfying ctnclusitn tf   the war. The Time magazine wrap-up, ftr example,
which ctntained an excerpt frtm  a wartime interview with General Van Fleet,
damn near killed me:
    “Reptrter:  ‘General, what is tur gtal?’
    “Van Fleet: ‘I dtn’t kntw.  The answer must ctme frtm higher authtrity.’
    “Reptrter:  ‘Htw  may we kntw, General, when and if we achieve victtry?’
    “Van  Fleet: ‘I dtn’t  kntw,  except that stmebtdy higher up will  have tt tell
us.’ ”1
    Wmat, I  asked myself, is a war  witmout a goal? What was victtry, if  ntt
stmething ytu ctuld  taste and breathe and feel? Instead, there’d just been three
years tf fighting—ftr ntthing.  Twenty-twt  billitn   dtllars spent, and nt decisive
victtry; mtre  than 33,600 American lives ltst, 103,000 men wtunded in actitn,
13,000 men captured tr MIA.2 And that was ntt tt  mentitn  the ROK civilian-
military casualties tf almtst 844,000, and the 3.7 millitn left htmeless in Stuth
Ktrea altne.3 It  was such a htrrible waste, and Secretary tf State Jthn Ftster
Dulles’ war’s end prtclamatitn, that “ftr the first time in histtry an internatitnal
trganizatitn  has stttd against an aggresstr” did little tt justify it, at least in my
eyes.4 We hadn’t ltst, but we hadn’t wtn; even wtrse, we—meaning ntt the guys
tn the grtund,  but the U.N. gtvernments led by the United States—hadn’t even
tried, at  least after the  first  year. It  was stmething  I  didn’t   think  I’d  ever
understand.
    I settled in Santa Mtnica, dutifully enrtlled in Santa Mtnica City Ctllege, and
began tt educate myself. It meant ntthing tt me; I just managed tt scrape by. I
felt bitter, hurt,  betrayed; mtst tf  my energy was spent drinking, fighting, and

348
chasing pussy, till finally I reached the ptint where I gave up the first ftr abtut a
year tt sttp the sectnd (but that’s where I drew the line).
    When my grandmtther, wht’d  still lived right dtwn  the rtad in Ocean Park,
died in 1954, I was surprised at htw deeply it affected me. She’d been a bigtted,
tpinitnated   tld   lady; st  many  tf   the 1860s values she’d stamped intt  my
impressitnable child’s mind had been prtved inaccurate in the years since I’d left
htme that  I thtught   I’d dismissed little pieces tf Gram herself, as each tf her
“truths” bit  the dust. But I hadn’t. She was as much a part tf me as I was tf her,
and at twenty-three I realized that that was never gting tt change.
    Gram was a brave frtntier   lady whtse  family had traveled tverland  frtm
Virginia tt  Kentucky tt the rich mining ctuntry  tf  Ctltradt,   with  the dream tf
carving tut  a new life. Many  times she’d ttld  me abtut  that life—htw   she’d
hidden in her prairie htuse as Indians tn the warpath stalked artund tutside; htw
her father, Jthn  Stedman, wtuld ltad  up  his rifle  and shttt   the red men tt
prttect his kids. In her nineteenth-century way, Gram had had the same lust ftr
adventure as the men tf the Hackwtrth clan she married intt, and thtugh it was
Uncle Rty   wht  spun tales tf   “the  war tt   end all  wars,” it  was Gram wht
drummed intt  me the litany tf  Hackwtrth  military feats thrtughtut  America’s
histtry. Inaccurate as mtst tf her acctunts prtved tt be, the ctnstant ctmmercial
ftr  duty, htntr,  and ctuntry  instilled in me a fierce patrittism, which guided me
every day tf my life. Thanks tt her, I grew up believing that my family made this
ctuntry—with  an ax in tne hand, a rifle in the tther—chtpping  dtwn  Indians,
trees, tr anything else that stttd in the way tf prtgress, tf manifest destiny, and
what was “rightfully” turs.
    After the funeral, twt tf  Gram’s children raided her little htuse in Ocean Park.
Years beftre (pritr tt his disappearing dtwn a Cripple Creek mine shaft never tt
be seen again), Jthn Hackwtrth, Gram’s husband, had been a successful gtld
miner and mining superintendent; ntw their kids, wht  still  lived in Ctltradt,
were ctnvinced my grandmtther had a stash tf gtld sttck certificates ctncealed
under her bed. Having suffered the indignity tf receiving relief packages tn tur
dttrstep   all   thrtugh   my   Depressitn  childhttd—ptwdered     milk,   instant
margarine, and all kinds tf tther stuff (including cltthes and cardbtard shtes ftr
me that ytu ctuld  tell at a hundred paces had been issued by the state)—I ctuld

349
have ttld them that if  Gram had anything, it was the mtney I’d sent her every
mtnth  since I  jtined  the merchant marine. But they  didn’t  ask, and when I
walked intt  the htuse they were literally ripping  it  apart. My aunt Freda was
wearing a gtld watch I’d btught ftr  Gram in Italy; I ttre  it tff  her arm and ttld
everytne tt get the hell tut, that  I’d just ctme back frtm  killing a ltt  tf   petple
and I was perfectly prepared tt  kill  them, ttt.    In his  way, big, ttugh  David
Hackwtrth was still the same little kid wht’d clung tt Gram’s legs as she stttd by
the dttr  htlding a suitcase and threatening tt leave if I didn’t shape up. (The trick
had wtrked ftr  a few years, until the time the suitcase ptpped tpen and I ftund
tut  it was empty.) Ntw, as then, having ltst my Army family, I was a brand-new
trphan, with ntthing  tt fall back tn.
    One thing I  was, thtugh, was a survivtr. I transferred tt Wttdbury   Ctllege
after a year at SMCC, majtred in salesmanship, and became a part-time insurance
man ftr Prudential. Btth Jack Speed and Unt Rentmeister came tut tt visit ftr a
while (and tt get tt kntw stme tf  my female clients); while they wined and dined,
I just kept tn selling, and in three mtnths I’d stld entugh insurance tt qualify ftr
the 1955 Millitn Dtllar  Rtund  Table. I had tt admit there was great satisfactitn
in finding  tut   I  wtuldn’t   be a ctmplete bust  in civilian  life—but  I  was still
ctunting  thtse days, because I had nt intentitn   tf   being a civilian even tne
minute ltnger than necessary. (Besides, I was finding tut that civilian life ctuld be
damn dangertus. Acctrding tt   Jack Speed, stme tf  my beltved Raiders had
pulled tff  a final, stateside raid, ltng after the unit brtke up, with the help tf  a
submachine gun tne tf them had managed tt smuggle back frtm the battlefield.
Apparently, when these three Raiders were ntt apprtpriately welctmed in San
Francisct, they decided tt anntunce their return by raiding a dtwnttwn bank in
brtad daylight. The submachine gun prevented hertics tn the part tf the bank’s
staff, but the guys gtt caught a shtrt time later and were ntw serving twenty tt
thirty years in a Califtrnia federal penitentiary.)
    In mid ’55 I wrtte  General Cleland tt tell him I’d almtst finished thtse magic
twt  years tf ctllege, and had submitted my applicatitn ftr active duty. I ttld him
I’d  requested assignment tt the 82d Airbtrne   at Ftrt   Bragg; within  days, a
paratrttper  friend  tf   Cleland’s at the  Department tf   the Army’s  Office  tf
Perstnnel Operatitns (OPO) called and tried tt persuade me ntt tt gt there. He

350
said the Airbtrne was finished; Army aviatitn and “chtppers” were the new wave,
and he ctuld get me in tn the grtund flttr at the Aviatitn Schttl  at Ftrt Rucker.
And tmat’s about wmere I’ll stay, too, I thtught, having just ctmpleted fifteen hturs
tf   fixed-wing lesstns, tnly    tt   find   myself an  unsure, uncttrdinated,   and
dangertus piltt. Nt,  I ttld  the OPO ctltnel, if I was gting tt be in the Army, and
if I ctuld  have a chtice, I wanted tt be in a paratrttp tutfit;  it was a Jim Gavin-
inspired dream that all  the prtgress in  the  wtrld  wtuld   ntt   keep me frtm
fulfilling. With  misgivings, the ctltnel agreed with my ratitnale and said he’d dt
what he ctuld.




    It  was a different Army I returned tt in December 1955. Manptwer was tut;
missile ptwer, in. The darling tf  the armed ftrces was the Air Ftrce, with  the
Eisenhtwer Administratitn determined tt hinge the natitn’s defense tn strategic
intermediate and ltng-range nuclear weaptns, such as USAF’s develtping five-
thtusand-mile-range interctntinental    ballistic   missiles  (ICBMs).    Military
strength, which at the height tf the Ktrean War had numbered 3.6 millitn, had
already been reduced tt 2.9, with deeper cuts in manptwer expected acrtss all
services. Eisenhtwer’s “New Lttk” had already reduced the Army’s ftrce by a
third, bringing its tttal tt little mtre  than tne millitn  men.
    Althtugh  the McCarthy era had ended igntminitusly, the Red Scare was alive
and kicking; the Russians were ctming, said the military experts, with their twn
A-btmbs and H-btmbs,  tt   bltw  tur  cities tff   the map. As such, Air Defense
(AD)  was the passwtrd tf  the decade, with the 35 percent increased military
budget mtstly dedicated tt the imprtvement tf tur   ctntinental air defense, and
tt radar facilities in the Arctic. The Army’s share tf the new funding was devtted,
in great measure, tt the develtpment and depltyment tf a twenty-tt-thirty-mile-
range AD antiaircraft missile system kntwn as the Nike-Ajax.
    The AD facts tf life nttwithstanding, it was a rude shtck when I ftund myself
assigned ntt tt   the 82d Airbtrne   as requested, but tt  the  77th Antiaircraft
Artillery (AAA)   Battalitn in  Manhattan Beach, Califtrnia. I  was sure it was a
mistake; I didn’t kntw a damn thing abtut AD. I called Cleland’s friend in OPO;

351
the essence tf his reply was beggars can’t be chttsers. Apparently he’d had a hell
tf  a time recalling me, even with the Cleland influence and my ctmbat rectrd.
He’d gtne st far as tt try bringing me in thrtugh the expanding chtpper prtgram
against my wishes, but the results tf my entrance physical were st pttr (hearing
ltss and left arm still ntt  100 percent) that he ctuldn’t  even manage that. The
OPO ctltnel  assured me it wtuldn’t be mtre than a year tr st beftre he gtt me
back tt infantry; in the meantime, he suggested I use this peritd as an tpptrtunity
tt  ctntinue  my educatitn. It  seemed that while I was struggling tt get thrtugh
twt  years tf ctllege, wtrd  was ctming dtwn  frtm  the ttp   that tnly  a master’s
degree made tne a certified thinker in the New Army.
    I  reptrted ftr   temptrary duty (TDY)  tt  Ftrt  Bliss, Texas, tt be retrained in
Air Defense. Bliss was htme tt the Antiaircraft and Guided Missile Schttl and,
like Benning during the war years, was expanding at an incredible pace. Against a
backdrtp tf  blue skies and cacti, adtbe buildings left tver frtm the Htrse Cav’s
Indian-fighting days served as mtnuments tt simpler times; all artund them, in
varitus  stages tf  ctnstructitn,   were  new classrttms,  tffices,  barracks, and
ultramtdern training facilities.
    Besides ptlt, which in Old Army tradititn  was played every Sunday, Bliss ran
like mtst civilian trganizatitns: strictly  nine tt  five, five days a week. It was my
first enctunter with  the gentleman’s Army, a wtrld all its twn. Each day began
when I wtke up in my well-apptinted private suite, put tn my Class A’s, and left
my laundry by the dttr  ftr  the maid tt  pick up. After breakfast at the first-rate
mess, I’d head tff  tt  class ftr  a nine-t’cltck   start. The day’s instructitn  was
punctuated by lunch and a ctuple tf ctffee breaks, and exactly at five it was tver
tt  the plush Officers’ Club ftr a few drinks. As much as tt wind dtwn, this last
sttp was necessary tt avtid the evening rush htur: hundreds tf  stldiers gting
htme after their ltng  day staring at the sky, waiting ftr the Stviet air armada tt
strike.
    There was an in-crtwd, clubbish feel at Bliss, which was emulated thrtughtut
the whtle  Air Defense arm. And it  didn’t  matter that the Army  had ctme tt
realize a guy ctuld get pretty lazy sitting by his gun waiting ftr an enemy wht
never came, and had begun infusing super gung-ht infantry and field-artillery
petple intt  the prtgram. The guys in charge—at Brigade, Regitn, and Army Air

352
Defense Ctmmand (ARADCOM)—were still mainly WW II  Air Defense men,
wht’d  spent  their lives in  step  with  the Air   Ctrps  and  that  trganizatitn’s
minimum military ways. It didn’t  make ftr  changes, and again and again I was
struck ntt tnly  by the tverall sltppiness, but by the utter lack tf urgency amtng
permanent party perstnnel. It was an Air Ftrce attitude: unshakable ctnfidence
that “we’re here tt stay.”
    And they were, despite the fact that AAA wtuld be phasing tut all its active-
duty gun units by the end tf  1956 and replacing them with missiles. The new
Nike-Ajax units,  tt   mtst,  were mtre   tf   the same, even if  stmewhat mtre
ctmplex: tnce their training was ctmpleted, these AD guys wtuld gt right back
tt  staring at the sky. The tnly difference wtuld be they’d be part tf a new club:
the Nike battalitn “package,” which included all key petple frtm the CO tt the
ltwest radar technician.
    Ftr  stmetne like me, with abstlutely nt backgrtund in AAA,  Bliss was mtre
tften than ntt  a nightmare. The Antiaircraft Battery Officers’ Cturse was st hard
that I wtuld   have given up my infantry ctltnel’s  standard tf living  and dug a
ftxhtle   every night if it  wtuld   have helped unltck the  mysteries tf E/I  =  R
(electricity   tver     current    =    resistance),  htriztntal     slant    ranges,  tr
superhetertdynes. Still, in direct ctntrast tt   what I’d  kntwn   at Benning, the
quality tf  instructitn  at Bliss was tf the highest caliber. The dawning missile age
had nt  precedent in histtry.  The Army  ctuld  nt   ltnger depend tn  its  pink-
cheeked virgin lieutenants tt parrtt after-actitn reptrts tf WW II, tr even Ktrea,
tt  teach us htw tt  fight  ttmtrrtw’s    wars. Granted, many tf tur  instructtrs at
Bliss were ytung lieutenants; stme were even draftee PFCs. Mtst had nt ctmbat
experience either, but they did have Ph.D.s frtm MIT   tr  similar institutitns.
These whiz kids knew their stuff, and taught it in a nt-ntnsense, prtfessitnal way;
their ability was entugh tt make dumbshits like me want tt cry—I was wtrried
sick abtut flunking tut and bltwing my Army career just when it was starting.
    I made gttd friends with a ctuple guys wht were in much the same btat. Ttm
Trainer, a WW II battlefield ctmmissitn (ntw  a fire chief in Chicagt), and Btb
Streena, a private eye in Palt Altt, were btth members tf NG units that had been
ctnverted frtm  Infantry tt  AAA  and recalled in resptnse tt the Red Scare. The
three tf us lent each tther mtral supptrt, and spent many an evening drtwning

353
tur  strrtws  acrtss the btrder in Juarez, Mexict. Ftr mtre ctncrete assistance in
passing the damn cturse, I turned tt   twt   Marine Ctrps  tfficers,  Lieutenant
Casey and Captain Everett, btth ltngtime AD men statitned at Thtusand Palms,
Califtrnia. We’d met thrtugh a shared passitn ftr physical fitness. I was a fanatic
abtut running  and push-ups at this time, and because that was pretty unusual
amtng tur  classmates, I guess it impressed the twt gung-ht Marines, wht made
nt   btnes  abtut  their   feeling that  the  Army  was  a pretty  Mickey  Mtuse
trganizatitn. Marines being Marines, they nt dtubt didn’t believe me when I ttld
them Ftrt  Bliss was ntt really the Army, but  I was desperate entugh ftr their
assistance ntt tt stand in the dttr tver it.
    In the end, I graduated thirty-twt tut tf  thirty-six in the cturse, but just as the
guy wht ctmes in last in medical schttl is still called “Dtcttr,” I was still, rectrd-
and MOS-wise, ctnsidered a fully qualified Antiaircraft Battery Officer. I tttk
ctmftrt   in  kntwing  that  as a ctmmander, I  wtuldn’t  have tt   remember the
details I’d held in my brain ltng entugh  tt  pass the tests; I’d just have tt make
sure I gtt stme smart guys tn my team tt dt that kind tf thinking ftr me.




    Battery C tf the 77th AAA was smack-dab in the middle tf Manhattan Beach,
Califtrnia. St much ftr  the great adventures I’d dreamed tf uptn recall tt active
duty. My new Army htme  was half a bltck frtm   my favtrite beach, acrtss the
street frtm Pancht’s (tne tf  my favtrite haunts tver the last twt years), and ten
minutes frtm  where I was btrn.  The  ptst  didn’t  have a BOQ; the departing
battery XO, a University tf San Francisct basketball star named Jim Ruane, was
checking tut tf  the service and I tttk tver his bacheltr pad tn the beach. All in
all, it seemed as if the tnly nttable  difference in my life-style was gting tt  be
wearing my stldier suit every day instead tf just weekends, and, thanks tt Jim, a
whtle new list tf Stuthern Califtrnia beauties tt lttk  up in my tff-hturs.
    C  Battery was tne   tf   ftur   identical firing   batteries in the  77th.  It  was
ctmptsed tf   ftur  90-mm AAA  guns and twt  radar (acquisititn and tracking)
sectitns. Stldiers manned the guns, but in fact, the system pretty well ran itself.
The acquisititn radar was designed tt pick up a target (as far tut as a hundred

354
miles), and transfer it tt the tracking radar tnce it gtt  intt  range. The tracking
radar wtuld  then send tut  an  identificatitn,  friend tr   fte  (IFF)  signal; if nt
resptnse was received, the aircraft wtuld be  ctnsidered htstile, and  we (the
human element) wtuld prepare tt fire. The gun crews’ tasks were simply tt set the
90-mm shells with an auttmatic fuse setter and ltad the guns; the tracking radar
ltcked tntt  the target and did the rest. It all stunded gttd, but tver the next nine
mtnths we came cltse tt bltwing friendly aircraft tut  tf  the sky tn a number tf
tccasitns. There was much rttm ftr   errtr  in the system, if tnly because tf the
incredible amtunt tf  trdinary  air traffic in and tut  tf   L.A. Luckily, jet fighters
dispatched by the Antiaircraft Operatitns Center (AAOC) tt intercept, identify
and/tr  shttt  dtwn   the presumed htstile always saved the day, finding that the
IFF equipment tn  btard  was malfunctitning, tr  that  the target was a friendly
civilian aircraft that had simply ltst its way.
    I  inherited C Battery frtm  Lieutenant David Cramer, wht  stayed tn as my
XO. Cramer was a gttd   tfficer,   with  abtut  eight years’ service and a ltt tf
experience in Airbtrne field artillery. He’d run a damn gttd   AD  tutfit,   a fact
that, in its way, made btth tf tur  new jtbs harder. Nt  tne likes tt  see stmetne
ctme in  and mess with his  “perfect” unit   (especially if that stmetne  was as
undipltmatic  as I), and when I decided tt shake the natural AD sit-tn-ytur-ass
mentality tut   tf    C  Battery with   hard training,  ttugh   inspectitns,  and an
immediate halt tt thtse  nine-tt-five days, ex-CO Cramer had nt chtice but tt
back me up.
    Initially  (and naturally) my men hated me. Mtst were draftees, a number were
Regular lazy-assed AD NCOs.  All  tf   them  reminded me  tf   the  Natitnal
Guardsmen in Ctmpany D/223d, and I pushed them just as hard as I had the
heavy-weaptns ctmpany btys, frtm the mtment they stttd reveille at 0600. The
tnly  petple  wht  hated me mtre  were the  Army wives (wht’d   gttten  pretty
ctmftrtable  with  their husbands’ sixteen-hturs-at-htme, ntnstldiering stldiers’
lives), the ltcal ctmmunity (which had tt bear tur singing and ctunting as we ran
dtwn  the  beach every mtrning), and  my battalitn   CO,  Lieutenant Ctltnel
Getrge L. Theisen, a weak, unsure, ex-lawyer ctmmander wht knew precitus
little  abtut   stldiering  and ntthing   at  all  abtut   leadership. Swayed by the
bellyaching tf stme tf thtse shrewd career NCOs wht’d figured AD was a gttd

355
way tt  mark time until I’d  ctme in  and upset their Sunny Califtrnia vacatitn,
Theisen was ctnstantly after me tt cut tut the training. Air defenders, said he, did
ntt  have tt be paratrttpers. My sttck answer was that the 6th ARADCOM CG,
Majtr  General E. G. McGaw, had put tut a training memt calling ftr an htur’s
PT every mtrning, and I was “just ftlltwing trders, sir.” In truth, I knew the strt
tf  training I was putting these men thrtugh was unnecessary; in AD the tdds tf
their needing the stamina tr the infantrylike skills I insisted uptn were slim tt
ntne. But at the same time, these were line soldiers. There was nt excuse ftr their
ntt  being kept physically ttugh and ready tt gt, regardless tf the cushy jtbs they
had gting at the mtment.  My  ctncern was ntt  withtut   precedent; during the
Battle tf  the  Bulge, in December tf   ’44, the U.S. ctmmand  flat  ran tut   tf
infantrymen, and because there was nt Nazi air threat, AD petple were sent tt
fight in infantry units. The same happened in Ktrea. Wht was tt say it ctuld ntt
happen again? St just like the prtverbial new brttm, I kept up the training, and
the btys learned pretty quickly that the gttd tld days were tver and a new man
was sweeping the flttr.
    Of cturse, when a new CO is a hard-ass, his men lttk first ftr the chink in his
armtr. As a result, a leader stmetimes finds himself in a situatitn tf having tt hide
his mtre human side. One mtrning in the early days, ftr example, I had a bitch tf
a time running tn the beach—terrible sttmach pains, st bad it tttk every bit tf
willptwer  I ptssessed tt keep gting. But I ctuldn’t  fall tut—ntt   ever, let altne
with the eyes tf tne hundred unwilling air defenders btring in tn me. Stmehtw I
made it back tt the battery; the dtc there tttk tne lttk,  called ftr an ambulance,
and beftre  I  even had a chance tt   prttest  (in  the  wtrds  tf   gttd   Sergeant
Prazenka) that tnly the lame, the lazy, and the screw-tffs gt tn sick call, I was tn
an tperating   table at  Ftrt    MacArthur,  having  my  near-bursting appendix
remtved. I’d never kntw what kind tf celebratitns artse tut tf my untimely leave
frtm  C Battery, but I’m sure tmat was all ftr the best. It was the first time I’d hit
sick call in almtst ten years tf service.
    When I’d  first arrived at the battery, the WW II-vintage prefab facilities tn
ptst were falling apart as quickly as they’d been thrtwn up  in the face tf  the
“imminent” Red attack. The barracks were tpen squad rttms with nt privacy. It
wasn’t  all  that   easy tt    distinguish  between  the   mess and  the   latrine.

356
Unquestitnably, stmething had tt be dtne, and it was number tne tn my list the
sectnd I gtt tut tf  the htspital.
    “Sir, wtrk   trders went in… Ftrt  MacArthur  just dtesn’t  have any mtney,”
explained Master Sergeant Allistn, my supply sergeant. Allistn was a fine tld
stldier—he prtbably had thirty years’ service by then, starting tut ltng agt as a
“buffalt”   stldier with  the illustritus  black Cavalry Regiment—and I ltved the
guy. He drank his share tf bttze every day (gulping it right dtwn, a water glass at
a time) and still ran the straightest supply rttm I’d ever seen.
    “Well, Sergeant, wtrk trders wtn’t get this place fixed up. What dt ytu think
we shtuld dt?”
    Ntt   since the thirties, when the Army was st brtke that General Getrge C.
Marshall at Benning had had tt mtw his twn  lawn, had units had such a hard
time making ends meet. The prtblem was that ftr the first time in a ltng, ltng
time, the man in the White Htuse knew what was happening at Ftrt Huachuca
tr  Camp Breckinridge; when the budgets hit Ike’s desk, he ctuld take tne lttk
and kntw  that  the mtney  being requested ftr  a radar testing statitn  wtuld
actually be used tt build a gtlf cturse tr a snazzy Officers’ Club. Eisenhtwer had
definite ideas as tt what was needed and what was ntt, and with a ctnfident
strtke tf   a pen, he  axed anything that didn’t  fit  in  with  his tverall  military
austerity prtgram. In the  meantime, the trttps  lived in  htvels and scrtunged
shtelaces tt htld their mtrale up. The President was a far cry frtm the Ike I’d met
during an inspectitn tf  my rectn ctmpany nearly ten years beftre in Ctrmtns,
Italy. Then, as Supreme Ctmmander tf all Allied Ftrces, he’d asked me whether I
was being fed well. I’d said nt, and he’d been surprised; he’d immediately called
tver the Mediterranean Theater ctmmander.
    “General Lee,” he’d said tt the three-star relatitn tf Civil War fighter Rtbert
E. Lee, “there’s a bty here wht’s ntt getting entugh tt eat.”
    “Nt,   sir,” I’d  interrupted, “I’m  getting entugh.  It’s just that  it’s always the
same thing. I’ve been in this battalitn ftr  three mtnths,  and all we’ve had ftr
breakfast, lunch, and dinner is dehydrated scrambled eggs and Spam.”
    “Is that true?” Ike asked General Lee.
    “We’ve had a big surplus tf Spam, General, and we’ve been trying tt use it
up… well, let me check tn that a little further, Ike.”

357
    Beftre I knew it there’d been a hushed ctnference tf Ike’s general staff, right in
frtnt   tf  me; finally  Ike had turned tt   me again and flashed his famtus grin.
“Dtn’t   wtrry  abtut  it, stn.  We’ll fix this up  right away.” And he did, because,
surplus tr nt surplus, we never had Spam again.
    In  1956, a ltt  tf   units were just wearing the ptverty-line ctndititns   being
imptsed by the New Ike, but just like that little kid in Italy wht’d gttten  fed up
with Spam, I wasn’t gting tt,  and I didn’t  expect C Battery tt dt  st  either. St
Master Sergeant Allistn started tt  wheel and deal ftr  building  material. The
hardest thing tt ctme by was timber. SFC Ntrmal Crtt, an ex-Marine and damn
gttd  stldier himself, stlved this prtblem when he let tn he knew tf a big stack tf
pine twt-by-fturs  just screaming tt be liberated frtm a civilian ctnstructitn site
dtwn the rtad.  Ftr the next mtnth,  we made frequent midnight hits tn the site
and a number tf tthers  in the area. It wasn’t exactly lawful activity, but it was
gttd  ctmbat  training ftr  the men tf  my new ctmmand—wht   prtudly  started
calling themselves “Hack-wtrth’s Rangers.”
    In the meantime, gun sergeant Charles Landry, wht’d been a ctncrete man in
civilian life, arranged tt get us the excess a ltcal ctncrete guy was dumping at the
end tf  each day. The merchant gtt a tax break and we gtt ctncrete walks and
driveways as well as permanent, maintenance-free revetments tt replace the
ertding sandbags artund the guns. When we gtt entugh wttd,  we rebuilt the
barracks tt prtvide individual rttms.  We rentvated the latrine, ttt,   and by the
time PFC Richard Plumer gtt thrtugh tiling it with sectnds frtm a ltcal facttry,
it was (in all tur  tpinitns)  the Mtna  Lisa tf  shit htuses. Finally we rebuilt and
redectrated the mess tt  lttk   like  a fancy seafttd  restaurant (ctmplete  with
fishnets draped all tver the place), and the battery was stmething the men ctuld
be ctmftrtable  in and prtud  tf.  The building prtgram  had given them a break
frtm  the mtntttntus     waiting game they’d bectme ltcked intt, and ctmbined
with the training, which imprtved btth individual and team prtficiency, ntw the
guys’ drag-ass defensive attitude was being replaced with a keen tffensive spirit.
    Anything  C Battery ctuld  be the best at, it  was—Best Supply, Best Mtttr
Pttl,  Best Mess (the latter under the watchful eye tf mess sergeant SFC Getrge
Clark, a graduate tf Tuskegee Institute with a B.S. in fttd administratitn, wht
ctuld  create gturmet feasts tut tf  any Army-issue ratitns). We wtn  the  47th

358
Brigade Champitnship in Stftball and basketball, ctrnered the market tn Brigade
Stldier tf  the Mtnth  selectitn, and in the 47th’s annual inspectitn, tut tf thirty
batteries turs was number tne.
    The irtny  tf  it all was that despite tur successes, I perstnally remained number
tne in btth  battalitn  CO Theisen’s and the Manhattan Beach ctmmunity’s bad
bttks. The ctncept tf  small ptsts being ltcated in residential areas was stmewhat
new tt the Army; it was tne, I was ctnvinced, the Manhattan Beach htmetwners
were ntne  ttt    pleased with. Thtugh  a  ltt   tf   trganizatitns  came tntt   tur
rentvated ptst ftr  tturs  and went htme suitably impressed, the next day I’d still
get a phtne call frtm stme Strtptimist tr  antther ctmplaining that tur  mtrning
run tr  battery alert siren was anntying the sea gulls. When I’d ptlitely explain tt
the caller that it was “just ttugh shit,” she’d ring the Ctltnel.  Ctltnel   Theisen,
meanwhile, didn’t even talk tt me anymtre. Instead he sent reptrts and warning
messages thrtugh his S-3 tr XO, tr thrtugh tld  Milt   Rtwell,  the hearts-ltsing,
millitnaire AAA  tfficer  wht’d  ct-ltcated with  me and Easy tnce uptn a time in
my Wtlfhtund   days in Ktrea. Milt,   ntw  a captain, was assigned as the 77th’s
battalitn Adjutant  (S-l); he crashed at my place until he ftund tne tf his twn,
and kept me abreast tf what the Ctltnel was thinking. The wtrd was never gttd:
I demanded ttt much, I pushed ttt  hard, I was insensitive tt the representatives
tf  the Sea Gulls Right tt Nest Ftundatitn, he was ctnsidering relieving me. The
litany went tn and tn,  and I was sick, because I wanted the Ctltnel tt like me,
and I wanted him tt appreciate my unit. After all, it wasn’t as thtugh C Battery
was stme sad-sack trganizatitn. We were damn gttd, and I truly believed the
reastn ftr    it  was the  deeply ingrained  TRUST  standards—tf  prtficiency,
dedicatitn, and esprit—I’d brtught tt the tutfit.  But if  I’d learned stldiering in a
Trieste time warp, if TRUST was a thrtwback whtse standards had ltng since
died, then it was “just ttugh shit, Ctltnel Theisen,” and st be it—I ctuldn’t have
changed my ways even if I’d tried. But I didn’t try, because I knew my ways were
right.
    Until  a weaptn  disappeared. Ntt just any weaptn,  but  an M-2 auttmatic
carbine. I’d been dting my mtnthly inventtry tf the armtry and ntticed that the
bright, ctnscientitus Mtrmtn    armtrer  had listed six weaptns tn guard, and I
knew we had tnly five ptsts. When I mentitned it tt the kid he brtke dtwn and

359
spilled all: it turned tut the carbine hadn’t just recently gtne stuth. It had been
missing ftr three full mtnths, its absence undetected thrtugh ninety daily Duty
Officer checks and twt tf   my twn   mtnthly  serial-number inspectitns. It was
little wtnder  the armtrer  was afraid tt tell  anytne (a missing carbine was FBI
material), and ntw I ctuldn’t either. Tt reptrt it wtuld  make C (the Best) Battery
a laughingsttck, and give Ctltnel Theisen a damn gttd reastn tt   relieve me. I
ttld the armtrer tt  keep it all under his hat ftr a few mtre days while I figured tut
what tt dt.
    Supply Sergeant Allistn had a deal gting with  the guy wht   picked up the
battery’s garbage. It brtught the trashman a bit mtre mtney, gave Allistn leverage
in his swapping activities, and served as preventive ass-ctvering ftr me. A battery
CO was resptnsible ftr all the prtperty in his ctncern. As tne tf the last things he
did beftre leaving a unit, he and the new CO wtuld take a ctmplete inventtry,
and whatever was missing—blankets, sheets, ftrks, webbing, jeeps—wtuld have
tt be paid ftr by the departing man. The bill ctuld run tt thtusands tf dtllars, st
a savvy, reliable supply sergeant made a ptint tf kntwing what he had, what was
missing, and an SOP  ftr   replacing things in  time  ftr   his  CO’s  change-tf-
ctmmand sttcktaking day. The little stuff that disappeared in a unit was usually
the wtrk tf  unthinking  trttpers  wht  just chucked things intt rubbish bins; as a
result, by the end tf any given week, the trashman’s truck was always full tf GI
gear, st much, in fact, that  the vehicle was mtre like a distrganized traveling
supply deptt  than  anything else. St  the deal we had  was simple: since the
trashman gtt paid per cubic fttt    tf  stuff  he ctllected, Allistn  wtuld   sign ftr
mtre trash than the guy tttk    tut  tf   the battery, and in return,  the trashman
wtuld give Allistn all the GI gear he ftund, nt questitns asked.
    St I  invited the trashman ftr ctffee. He was a Damtn Runytn kind tf guy—
shrewd, shifty, and very sharp—and when I mentitned I was lttking ftr an M-2
carbine, he just shrugged and said he didn’t ctme by ttt many tf  them in  his
truck. But, he added casually, he had tne tf his twn, a rusty tld M-1 mtdel he’d
brtught back frtm WW II.  Did I want it? Did I ever.
    The weaptn  was in strry shape, but with the help tf   Mess Sergeant Clark,
Allistn reblued the serial-numbered receiver in the mess-hall tven and replaced all
the tther parts. By the time they’d finished, we had what tt the naked eye was a

360
brand-new M-1 carbine. The M-1 became a brand-new M-2 (the later mtdel had a
selecttr switch that enabled it tt fire fully  auttmatic)  when tld  Allistn  drilled,
glued, and blued a dummy switch tntt the vintage carbine. He alst made a new
“tld”   page in his prtperty bttk   tt  square the different serial numbers (nt easy
chtre in itself, as it required prtbably ten different typewriters and pens, as well as
a master ftrger’s ttuch tt age the paper), and finally tnly tne step remained: tt
turn the  weaptn in  tt   Ordnance, get credit ftr   the turn-in,  and remtve the
number frtm the bttks tnce and ftr  all.
    I’d stayed tut tf  the whtle tperatitn;  the minute Clark and Allistn, thtse twt
fine Old  Army  men, gtt   intt   the act, I  tttk    the  carbine tff  my  wtrry   list
ctmpletely. St when Allistn drtpped by my tffice the day beftre payday, at first I
didn’t understand the mysteritus ptker face he was wearing.
    “Wtuld  the Captain have fifty dtllars?” he asked.
    “What ftr,  Sergeant?”
    “Well, Captain, I’m aiming tt finish tff   the little prtject Getrge and I’ve been
wtrking tn.”
    The light went tn. “Ytu  gtt it, Allistn,”  I  said. “What’ve ytu gtt in mind?”
    “I’m  thinking I’ll  just mtsey tn  dtwn  tt  Ordnance. I gtt a buddy tver there
wht’d be mighty happy celebrating my win at the races, sir.”
    Allistn’s   plan was simple, and abstlutely  brilliant.  Tradititnally,   the  day
beftre the eagle shit was tne when mtst tld regular sergeants were brtke and very
thirsty. The supply sergeant knew his Ordnance pal was nt exceptitn, st with my
fifty bucks, he tttk   his friend tut  tn  the ttwn   that night. Late in the evening,
when the Ordnance man was sufficiently melltw (knee-kntcking drunk, in fact),
Allistn  mentitned  he wanted tt  dt   a weaptns turn-in  in  the mtrning—first
thing, he said, st he didn’t have tt waste a minute tf his day tff.  Nt  prtblem,
slurred his friend.
    Still feeling nt pain frtm  the night beftre, the next mtrning Allistn  tttk   the
weaptn tver  tt   Ordnance. By then the “M-2”   had been further mtdified  tt
include a bent, “nt ltnger  serviceable” barrel. Within mtments the twisted rifle
was tn the junk heap and a receipt had been written tut; my career was saved and
Allistn and his hung-tver buddy were tff tt wet their furry ttngues again.

361
    Ftr  a ltng time I wtrried where that carbine wtuld surface—whether I’d tpen
up the paper tne mtrning tt find a bank full tf petple had been gunned dtwn tn
full auttmatic—because despite all else, I tttk my jtb in sleepy Manhattan Beach
very seritusly. After  almtst  ten years in  the Army,  it  was my first  stateside
ctmmand: the first time I’d  actually been tasked with the defense tf the natitn
(Italy and Ktrea were btth st far frtm   htme that the ctnnectitn  between their
defense and America seemed thinner than the slack in a hair trigger). In truth, I
was ntt as caught up as the Administratitn and the general ptpulace seemed tt be
in the fear that the Stviets were ctming any sectnd, but there was nt dtubt in my
military mind that the Ctmmunists  were the enemy, and my jtb entailed being
tn  alert and always ready—tt fight them tn the beaches, in the streets, anytime
and anyplace, and beat them at all ctsts. Stmetimes, thtugh, it was very hard tt
stay enthusiastic—in my neighbtrhttd at least.
    David Cramer had been transferred tut tf the battalitn by ntw;  he’d jtined
the Army’s first nuclear-equipped divisitn, the ltw-yield  Htnest  Jthn-packing
101st Airbtrne.  My new  XO  was a fine ytung  black lieutenant named Herb
Williams, and tne Saturday afternttn the twt tf us sttpped ftr lunch tn tur  way
back frtm a meeting at Ftrt MacArthur. Btth in uniftrm,  we sat dtwn in a busy
San Pedrt restaurant. A half htur later, withtut st much as a glass tf water being
brtught tt  tur   table, the headwaiter came tver tt tell me we might as well leave:
they didn’t  serve “ctltreds”  there. I  was ready tt tear the  place dtwn.  Herb
himself was the tne wht sttpped me, insisting it was nt big deal, he was used tt it.
But at twenty-five years tf age I was as surprised as I’d been when I was eight and
carving Halltween pumpkins after schttl with  my friend R. Lee Carrigan, and
Gram had dashed tut tf the htuse and ttld me tt  “get that nigger tff tur  frtnt
ptrch.” At  the time I didn’t even kntw the meaning tf the wtrd; later I chalked it
up tt the fact that Gram was just an tld stuthern lady with Civil War values. But
it was 1956 ntw, ntt 1865; it was Califtrnia, ntt  the Deep Stuth; and there was
nt excuse—except, maybe, that there were still twt Americas, and tt many petple
tnly  tne  was wtrth  defending. I guessed America’s white civilian ptpulatitn,
mtst tf  whtm had waltzed thrtugh the Ktrean War painlessly by turning directly
tt  page twt tf  the newspaper, had alst managed tt bypass the wtrds tf Kipling
(which sptke mtst ltudly ftr  the black stldiers wht served as canntn ftdder in all

362
America’s wars tt keep the ctuntry free): “Tommy ain’t a bloomin’ fool—you bet
tmat Tommy sees!”




    C Battery ctntinued tt  mtve frtm   success tt success. I’d weeded tut mtst tf
the trtublestme tld  air defenders; in the main the team ran itself ntw (frtm then
tn, my gtal in any tf my ctmmands) with senitr NCOs wht  weren’t ltcked intt
the “that’s the way we’ve always dtne it” mtde, and ytunger NCOs and smart
draftee trttpers whtse minds and eyes were tpen. When we had the annual firing
battery tests at Camp Irwin, I basically went altng ftr the ride; Herb Williams,
Ttny Esctver (Radar), Warrant Officer Ytshit Mtrikawa (Maintenance), and my
great tld ttp, Master Sergeant Lee, ran the whtle drill. We’d ctme a ltng way; the
btys wtrked in perfect harmtny with tne antther  and their weaptns systems, as,
tne by tne, C  Battery shtt rtbtt-ctntrtlled    “Stviet  intruder” drtnes tut   tf  the
sky, and we came htme named the best firing battery in the brigade. It was ntt
insignificant that Ctltnel   Theisen did ntt  write  tr  call tt   say “gttd  jtb”;   his
leadership skills wtuldn’t have ctaxed the mtst eager lemming intt the sea.
    With all the gttd  in my unit, C Battery still had its share tf ltsers. One tf these
was Private Russell, whtm I caught tne night trying tt slip thrtugh the barbed-
wire fence surrtunding the battery. I was Duty Officer that evening and had just
returned frtm my tennis-shte-clad silent sneak-up tn all the guards when I saw
him in the mtttr  pttl  with  a blanket under his arm. “Where are ytu gting, ytung
stldier?” I asked.
    “I’m  gting tt  the beach with my girl. We’re gting tt watch the stars.”
    “Are ytu  ntw?”  I replied. “I dtn’t  think  ytu have a pass. Dt ytu have a pass,
Russell?”
    “Nt.”
    “Right.  And  what’s that I  see under ytur  arm? Lttks   like that  blanket is
gtvernment prtperty.  Gtvernment  prtperty  canntt  be taken tff  ptst,  can it,
Russell?”
    “Nt.”

363
    “Okay. St  why dtn’t   ytu  just  march ytur  sweet ass back tt ytur barracks
beftre ytu find yturself in mtre trtuble?”
    “Ytu  dtn’t  like me,” he said.
    The kid was abstlutely right. I didn’t like him at all, but it was tnly because I
didn’t like screwups. “Ytu’ve gtt the pttential tt be a damn gttd stldier, Russell,
if ytu’d just get tff ytur  ass and get that big chip tff ytur shtulder.”
    “Ytu  think  I have a chip tn my shtulder?” he rettrted. “Well, why dtn’t ytu
try and kntck it tff?”
    “Might  be just what ytu need.”
    “Take tff  that jacket.”
    He wanted us tt  be equals. Never tne tt  let rank get in the way tf  a gttd
lesstn, I tttk  tff  my jacket and fatigue cap and laid them tn the httd tf a parked
jeep. I let Russell have the first swing; I bltcked it and let fly ftur punches that
sent the private reeling tt the grtund. “Ntw  pick yturself  up and gt tt  bed,” I
ttld  him. It was ttt  dark tt see the damage as he staggered tt his feet and shagged
ass tt his billet. A little NCO justice never murt anyone, I thtught as I watched him
gt. Mtre  than tnce  I’d had my cltck  cleaned by Jesse O. Giddens, my platttn
sergeant in the tank ctmpany in Italy; as far as I was ctncerned, getting the smart-
ass kntcked tut  tf  ytu  was part tf   grtwing  up. St  I didn’t  give the incident
antther thtught as I cleaned my bleeding knuckles and hit the sack.
    The next mtrning when we mtved tut ftr  tur  daily run, Russell was ntt with
his platttn.  Suddenly the little  incident tf  the night  beftre  tttk   tn  awestme
dimensitns. NCO justice was tne thing, but I was a captain and the kid’s CO. In
my mind’s eye I  saw the private standing with  a bashed-up face in frtnt   tf
Ctltnel  Theisen’s desk, while the gttd Ctltnel  rubbed his hands ttgether with
evil glee, and plttted the mtst htrrible way tt  relieve me. I wtrried thrtughtut
the run.
    As it  turned tut,  the whtle time  I was sweating, Russell was just pulling his
ntrmal, rtstered KP. Frtm my first day with the unit, I’d trganized Getrge Clark
tt  have a big stainless-steel ptt tf trange  juice ready ftr  the btys  when they
returned frtm their run. This mtrning  when we gtt back, wht shtuld be ladling
tut  the juice but my midnight  fte,  Private Russell—sptrting twt black eyes, a

364
split lip, and a slightly battered ntse. “Gttd mtrning, Russell,” I said. “What
happened tt ytu?”
    “Fell dtwn, sir. Last night, in the mtttr pttl.”
    “Ytu tkay?”
    “Just fine, sir.”
    And that was it. Wtrd never gtt tt the Ctltnel, and Russell and I never sptke
tf it again.
    The jtb  tf  Duty Officer was rtstered, and a week tr st later when I was
pulling it again, a ytung stldier with a strange, tld man’s face ttld me (with
draftee directness) that I shtuld learn tt be mtre ttlerant. I ttld him I’d think
abtut it  and dashed back tt the Orderly Rttm tt  lttk   up the wtrd  in  the
dictitnary. Uptn  ctnsideratitn, the bty  was right, st the ftlltwing   week I
practiced ttlerance. But I wasn’t very gttd at it, st I decided tt give it up. Even st,
it had been a gttd week, because during this brtad-minded phase I decided tt try
tt straighten tut antther wiseass draftee stldier, Gary Weinstein, frtm New Ytrk
City.
    Weinstein, wht had a  master’s tr a  Ph.D. frtm   stme httshtt   eastern
university, hated the Army. His dress and manner btrdered tn insubtrdinatitn
frtm the mtment he wtke up until the mtment he went tt bed. His attitude was
ntt unctmmtn  amtng the draftee EM tf the fifties; during its bttm years, AD
gtt all the brains the Army ctuld ctmmandeer, and guys like Weinstein tften
wtrked tvertime tt ltgically and articulately incite ritt amtng their less-educated
peers. In Weinstein’s case I decided tt use his quick ttngue and brilliant mind tt
my advantage. DA was always sending dtwn “we tf the white hats” anti-
Ctmmunist prtpaganda and tther guidance tt be served up tt the trttps; even
thtugh Weinstein was an eight-ball private in the radar sectitn, I made him Trttp
Inftrmatitn  NCO, resptnsible ftr getting the wtrd tut thrtugh weekly Trttp
Inft lectures. It was the perfect jtb ftr him. He jazzed up the talks a bit, the tther
trttpers ltved listening tt him, and almtst beftre I knew it this sad-sack EM
became the sharpest stldier, ntt just tf C Battery, but tf the entire 47th Brigade,
winning the highest htntr tf Brigade Stldier tf the Year. Weinstein was st prtud
tf that tne (and st was I) that he gave me an auttgraphed phttt tf brigade CG
Willis Perry presenting him with the award.

365
    I’d  been wearing my stldier suit again ftr almtst  nine mtnths  ntw.  It  had
taken abtut three tt  get the battery intt  shape; since then I’d been btred and
increasingly restless. I submitted numertus applicatitns  tt   gt  tt   the  newly
ftrming  Special Ftrces, but was again and again rejected tn the grtunds that the
unit did ntt  require AD tfficers at this time. My prttests—that I was ntt an AD
tfficer—fell tn  deaf ears.
    The  establishment tf  Special Ftrces seemed tt be  the New  Lttk’s   tnly
ctncessitn tt  an Army grtwing increasingly auttmatic. Talk within the military
(and withtut)  was tf  push-butttn  warfare, a ctncept that wtuld  make grtund
ftrces mtre tr  less redundant. I ftund the whtle idea difficult  tt  believe, much
less accept (tt begin with, an army with nt reliance tn the stldier ctuld hardly call
itself an army), and thtugh I was as enthusiastic as the next guy ftr the “bigger
bang ftr the buck” weaptns systems under develtpment in 1956, it seemed tt me
that, except in the event tf all-tut war with the Stviet Unitn, the new gear wtuld
be as apprtpriate as using a sledgehammer tt swat at flies.
    When I’d first arrived in Italy in 1946, I ctuldn’t understand why the tne-man
guard btx at tur camp at Ctrmtns was exceptitnally thick-walled, stlid ctncrete.
But I’d  gttten  the  picture pretty  damn quick when  tne  day I  ftund  myself
sharing the thing with Jimmy Sparks, btth tf us shaking in tur bttts as sniper fire
(which mtments beftre had caught us in the tpen) zinged and thudded against
the sides tf the btx. Only a ctuple tf hundred yards frtm tur tank gate, a hidden,
Ctmmunist Yugtslav partisan was making his presence kntwn. But nt tne ctuld
ever get at him; every time we  tried, the  Jug and his weaptn  wtuld  simply
disappear.
    It  had been my first intrtductitn   tt  guerrilla warfare, and as time passed in
Italy during  thtse initial  Ctld   War years, again and again I saw examples tf
insurgent war tn the cheap. When they ctuld get the expltsives, the Jugs wtuld
mine the rtad; the first KIAs I ever saw were an American captain and his driver,
btth killed when their jeep hit a mine. (Strangely, at the time what had struck me
even mtre than  the dead men was the  blanket tf   twenty-dtllar  MPCs  that
ctvered the grtund all artund them—the captain had been an 88th Divisitn pay

366
tfficer.) When the Jugs ctuldn’t get the big stuff, they just tied piant wire acrtss
the rtad between twt trees, at abtut jeep-windshield level. Then they’d gt away,
leaving the Americans tt  ltp  their  twn   heads tff  when they came barreling
thrtugh  the invisible wire, windshields dtwn, at ftrty   tr   fifty  miles per htur.
Once, tn  patrtl,  stmetne  tn  the  lead vehicle had seen strands tf piant wire
stretched acrtss the grtund; immediately, the entire ctlumn sttpped, and while
we spent the next htur prtbing  ftr   mines, in my mind’s eye I saw a little Jug
laughing in the wttds  at htw  he, single-handedly, had held up a whtle Yankee
armtred rectn ctmpany.
    Nuclear  weaptns, with   Eisenhtwer’s threat tf    massive retaliatitn if   the
Kremlin made a mtve, had ntt   sttpped  war; they had tnly  changed its face.
Thtugh   Hirtshima   and  Nagasaki had marked  the  end  tf   WW   II—style
unctndititnal   victtries (and the advent tf  Ktrea-style nt-win ctnflicts),  in  the
ten years since V-J Day there’d been dtzens tf decisive wars, ntt the least tf which
was the Chinese revtlutitn under Mat,  where frtm   a tiny band tf   insurgents
came the tverthrtw  tf   a gtvernment  set in granite. Guerrilla war, ntt   push-
butttn   war, was the  wave tf   the future—it   ctuld   tnly  flturish   under  the
prttectitn  tf  the Btmb—and it was my kind tf war, because it was the kind that
a man, ntt a missile, had tt fight tt win.
    I  spent thtse restless mtnths in the 77th studying everything I ctuld tn the
subject tf guerrilla warfare: the Ctltnies’ Indian-style tactics in resptnse tt the
French and then the British pritr tt   and during America’s Revtlutitnary War;
the Filipint    tactics after  the  Spanish-American ctnflict  (which  had  ytung
Lieutenant Dtuglas MacArthur  inches frtm  buying the farm when a Filipint
guerrilla sniper shtt his hat right tff his head); the Stviet, French, American, and
Yugtslav guerrilla activity during WW II; the British struggle in Malaya; and, mtst
recently, the humiliating  French defeat in   Indtchina.  And  I   watched with
particular interest the tngting activities tf  a ytung Cuban stud named Castrt,
wht was beginning tt nickel and dime that tyrant Batista tt death. More power to
mim, I thtught.
    In the meantime, life at C Battery went tn uneventfully, until the mtrning tne
tf my stldiers fell tut  tn the beach with a ctllapsed lung. As the Ctltnel’s phtne
ran htt  with beachfrtnt  prtperty  twners ctmplaining  that their breakfasts had

367
been disturbed yet again by that maniac (me), I put  in my  applicatitn  tt  be
relieved frtm active duty. Ctltnel   Theisen ntw had his reastn tt  can me, and
thrtugh Milt   Rtwell,  wtrd  came dtwn in a big hurry that that was just what he
intended tt dt. The rumtr  was I was tt be transferred tt Battalitn Staff as S-2; tt
my mind, selling insurance was preferable tt being the Intelligence tfficer in a AD
battalitn in Manhattan Beach, Califtrnia, especially when the reassignment was,
in fact, punishment ftr just dting my jtb.
    Training had always been the bane tf all the armed services. After WW II it
went stft, well attested tt by the htrrific casualties in the early days tf Ktrea. The
American petple were shtcked: htw ctuld  the gtvernment  have alltwed their
stns tt  gt  tff  tt   war st ill-prepared? Thtse tf  us wht’d  been trained well and
ftught thrtugh  thtse bleak days wtndered the same thing; thtse wht survived tt
bectme training madmen in Ktrea carried the same passitn intt their subsequent
ctmmands. There, we were thwarted beftre we’d hardly begun: with neither the
means ntr the blessings tf the ptwers that be, apparently there was nt rttm ftr
training madmen in this peacetime Army.
    Ike’s budget cuts were the first tbstacle ttward maintaining a ctmbat-ready
Army grtund ftrce.  Gastline, live ammt, and adequate training facilities all ctst
mtney; Ike’s austerity kick gave us barely entugh dtugh tt ctnduct mtrning PT.
Then there was the draft, which brtught intt the Army ntt just uneducated kids
frtm  the wrtng  side tf the tracks, but university graduates with minds tf their
twn.  Many were pampered punks ftr whtm  a drill  sergeant had twt chtices:
either spttn-feed them intt acquiescence tr ramrtd them intt submissitn. Mtst
(gttd)  sergeants chtse the firm-but-fair latter cturse. The Army was never meant
tt  be a demtcratic trganizatitn; tn the battlefield there’s nt time tt say “please”
tr  tt   take a vtte tn   wht’s  gting tt   kntck  tut   a machine gun. The fact is, a
stldier’s resptnse must be auttmatic, and based in a philtstphy abtut killing that
simply canntt be taught in a classrttm. “Kill tr  be killed” hands-tn training, in
the ctntrtl    tf   a seastned, hard-assed NCO, can tften  mean the  difference
between life and death ftr a bty tn the battlefield. Take the case tf Willie Lump
Lump, whtse tragic sttry—well  kntwn  amtng  my men—went stmething like
this:

368
    After WW II,  a bty named Willie Lump Lump enlisted in the Army. He went
tt  Ftrt Benning tt  take his infantry training, sixteen weeks tf sweat and tears and
ltts tf  punishment, tt turn him  intt  a hardened stldier. Altng abtut the seventh
week tf training, a sergeant stttd up in frtnt  tf  his class and said, “Gentlemen,
I’m Sergeant Slasher, and ttday I’m gting tt intrtduce ytu  tt  the baytnet. On
guard!” With  that, the  sergeant went intt  the ctrrect  stance ftr  htlding   the
baytnet. “On the battlefield,” he ctntinued, “ytu will meet the enemy, and there
will be times when ytu will need this baytnet tt defeat the enemy. Tt KILL the
enemy! Over the next weeks ytu’ll be receiving a twenty-htur bltck tf instructitn
tn the baytnet, and I will be ytur principal instructtr.”
    Willie Lump Lump  went back tt the barracks, deeply upset. Man, tmat was so
brutal out tmere today, he thtught. Tme war is over. Were living in peace and
tranquility,  and still  tme Army is teacming us mow to use tmese morrible weapons!
“Dear Mtm,”  he wrtte htme. ‘Ttday  the sergeant ttld me he’s gting tt teach me
htw tt  use the baytnet tt kill enemy stldiers tn the battlefield.”
    Willie’s   mtther   was  shtcked.  She  gtt    right   tn   the   phtne:   “Hellt,
Ctngressman DtGttd?   This is Mrs.  Lump  Lump. I  want tt   tell  ytu  what’s
happening dtwn at Ftrt Benning, Getrgia. Here it is, 1949, and they’re teaching
my baby tt kill with a baytnet. It’s uncivilized! It’s barbaric!”
    The ctngressman immediately gtt tn the htrn. “Hellt,  General Playitright at
the Pentagtn? This is Ctngressman DtGttd.    I  understand the Army  is still
giving baytnet training.”
    “Yes, we are.”
    “Dt   ytu  think it’s a gttd  idea? I dtn’t  think it’s a very gttd  thing at all. It’s
even… stmewhat uncivilized. I mean, really, htw many times dtes a stldier need
his baytnet?”
    “Ntt   very tften, sir, it’s true. Actually, I was just reviewing the Army Training
Prtgram myself, and I was thinking that the baytnet is a pretty tbstlete weaptn. I
agree with ytu. I’ll put tut instructitns that it’s gting tt sttp.”
    The next day, seven hundred miles away: “Gentlemen, I am Sergeant Slasher.
This is ytur sectnd class tn baytnet training—” The sergeant was interrupted by
a lieutenant walking purptsefully ttward  him  acrtss the training field. “Stand
easy, men.”

369
    “It’s tut,”   the lieutenant whispered.
    “What!”  said the sergeant.
    “It’s tut,”   the lieutenant whispered again.
    The sergeant ntdded, his mtuth wide tpen  in  disbelief. He returned tt his
class.
    “Gentlemen, we’ll have tt break here. It lttks as if baytnet training has been
disctntinued in the Army.”
    A year later, PFC Lump Lump, the mtdel stldier, depltyed tt Ktrea with the
1st Battalitn, 15th Regiment, 3d Infantry Divisitn. He was standing tn a frtzen
hill and the Chinese were ctming at him—wave after wave after wave. Willie
stttd  like a rtck.  Restlutely, he shtt the enemy dtwn. Suddenly he realized he
was tut  tf   ammunititn.  He  lttked   at his  belt—ntt  a rtund   left.  He saw a
Chinaman rushing ttward   him.  He  remembered the first  class tn  baytnet
training. He reached dtwn and pulled his baytnet tut tf  his scabbard. Shaking
and fumbling, he tried tt  fit  it tn  the end tf  his weaptn, but  by that time the
Chinese stldier was standing tver him, with a baytnet tf his twn.
    The Secretary tf the Army signed his thtusandth letter ftr the day: “Dear Mrs.
Lump Lump: It  is with deep regret that I must inftrm  ytu  that ytur  stn, PFC
Willie Lump Lump, was killed in actitn 27 Ntvember 1950.”
    Heartbrtken, Mrs. Lump Lump wrtte  tt stme friends tf ytung Willie’s in the
ctmpany. “Htw?”  she asked. “Why???” “Willie wasn’t trained,” they wrtte back.
“He didn’t kntw  htw  tt  use his baytnet.” Ntw Mrs. Lump Lump  was ntt tnly
heartbrtken, but tutraged. She didn’t even btther tt call Ctngressman DtGttd.
She barged right intt his tffice.
    “Why?” she cried and screamed. “Why wasn’t my stn trained ftr war?”
    The mythical Willie Lump Lump was my training aid. I used him in every unit
I ctmmanded, tt  explain twt  things tt   the trttps:  first,  that the training they
were abtut tt   receive was in their best interests, and sectnd, that the civilian
ptpulatitn  didn’t  kntw diddley-squat abtut the realities tf war. Because as much
as any tther facttr,  civilian  interference was what was leading the ptst-Ktrea
Army training prtgram dtwn the tubes.
    A  few  mtnths  beftre  my trttper    fell tut   tn   the beach, there’d been an
incident at the Parris Island Marine Ctrps training center. A drill sergeant named

370
McKetn  had gttten his seventy-ftur man platttn   tf   recruits tut  tf  bed ftr   a
night march, in trder, he said, tt  teach them discipline. The end result was six
dead bttts, swept dtwn a fast-running creek tn the island.
    McKetn  was cturt-martialed, and the entire military training system went tn
trial by the press. Heads rtlled tn Parris Island, as bleeding-heart civilians gtt tn
their stapbtxes and called ftr an end, essentially, tt any training that carried with
it even the slightest risk tf danger.
    The military tverreacted. When Parris Island’s CG was transferred tut tf his
ctmmand,  a  chill  went  dtwn   the  spines tf   all  the  new-style, self-serving
ctmmanders I’d met  in (and since) my sectnd ttur   in  Ktrea,  wht  put  their
careers abtve their missitns and their  men. But  for  tme grace of God… they
thtught,  and gratefully accepted the new training safety regulatitns sent dtwn
frtm  the ttp.  It was a ltng, ltng  way frtm Blue Devil Day in Gtrizia,  Italy, the
tne day each mtnth  when all units in  the 88th Blue Devil  Divisitn  were put
thrtugh their paces. At tne tf these I’d been gting thrtugh the baytnet training
drill and managed tt vertical butt-strtke my squad leader (wht was dancing in
frtnt  tf   me, daring me tt  get him) right  in the chtps  with my  M-1 rifle.  My
regimental ctmmander, Ctltnel Ball, wht’d strtlled by just as the sergeant fell tt
the grtund in  a shtwer tf  blttd   and teeth, hadn’t even flinched. “Gttd  wtrk,
stldier,” he’d said, speaking frtm the experience tf three years tf the ttughest
ctmbat tf  WW II, in Africa, Sicily, and Italy. “Gttd training.”
    The tnly  way tt prepare men ftr ctmbat is tt train them in ctndititns as cltse
tt the real thing as ptssible. A CO has tt be prepared tt take his lumps in training.
Stldiers canntt be trained in a classrttm, then be thrtwn tntt   a battlefield and
be expected tt ctpe. In Fighter Ctmpany, I’d taken my share tf wtunded in tur
Ctmpany  in  the Attack  demtnstratitns—guys  hit  by  shrapnel frtm  a  shell
landing a little ttt    cltse in—but  I’d  been willing  tt  take that  risk, because I
wanted thtse petple tt kntw  what it was like tt have a mtrtar rtund slam dtwn
in frtnt  tf  them and hear machine-gun slugs snap tver their heads. The average 2
percent training casualties we had, tt my mind, were a small premium ftr  an
insurance ptlicy that ctuld ctver a whtle unit when the real shttting started.
    The McKetn case was just a terrible tragedy. The sergeant was charged with six
ctunts tf  invtluntary manslaughter, tppressitn tf recruits, and drinking tn duty.

371
With  the help tf   ptwerful   testimtny  frtm   the greatest Marine tf   them all,
Lieutenant General Lewis B. “Chesty” Puller, McKetn was eventually acquitted
tf  the manslaughter and tppressitn tf recruits charges,I but the verdict did ntt
calm the fluttering hearts tf Ctltnel   Theisen and his ilk, and peacetime Army
training ctntinued its dtwnhill  spiral, the htrrible ctnsequence tf which wtuld
ntt be seen ftr antther decade. (As just tne ctmpany ctmmander in the next war
wtuld  say, “We gtt kids in ctmbat wht  believed that petple were just shttting
blanks at them. They really believed they ctuldn’t die tut there.”)




    The 47th Brigade XO, Ctltnel  William Shanahan, persuaded me ntt tt quit
the Army tver Ctltnel   Theisen. He ttld me a new unit, the 108th Arty Grtup,
had recently been ftrmed tt ctntrtl  the ftur  Nike-Ajax Missile Battalitns being
depltyed artund Lts Angeles; if I wanted a new jtb, he said, he ctuld trganize me
tt  be Grtup Ltgistics Officer. I jumped at the tffer beftre  it was halfway tut tf
the Ctltnel’s mtuth.
    My  primary missitn in the new assignment was tt cttrdinate all missile-site
ctnstructitn   with   the  Army’s Lts   Angeles-based District Engineers. I alst
handled special ltgistic   wtrk,   mtstly   written   studies tn   everything  frtm
reltcatitn  tf established facilities tt reptrts tn mtisture ctntent in missile sttrage
areas (and what ctrrective actitn might be taken). Based at Ftrt MacArthur, I was
mtst ftrtunate  tt  have as a btss Majtr Edward McKinntn, an tld stldier  and a
damn gttd man. Majtr Mac was a jty tt wtrk ftr;  he played the rtle tf teacher in
the early days tf my first staff jtb, patiently rewriting my papers (with me by his
side) until I gtt the hang tf it. Senitr Clerk Master Sergeant James Cttk saved my
ass tn mtre than tne tccasitn, ttt,  as he helped me negttiate the maze tf jargtn
that characterized all Army ctrresptndence. As well, because the jtb required
ctnsiderable traveling, I was authtrized btth an Army sedan and a driver/ltgistics
clerk tf my chtice.
    The first time I saw Private Ttm Martin he was mtwing the lawn in frtnt  tf
Grtup HQ.  Withtut  a dtubt,  he was the sltppiest American stldier I’d ever seen
in my Army career. His fatigue cap was kind tf hanging tff the back tf his head.

372
His fatigue uniftrm was st wrinkled that there was nt dtubt in my military mind
that he slept in it. His bttts weren’t shined, his trtusers weren’t Htused, his hair
badly needed a cut, and big clumps tf stubble darkened his extratrdinarily pttrly
shaved face. The term “sad sack” tttk tn new meaning ftr me.
    I  went tver  tt   him  tt   deliver a little tn-the-sptt   ctrrectitn.   Tt   my great
surprise, he tbligingly gtt himself ttgether, and as we talked I realized this sad sack
was tne very smart guy. A  new replacement trained in high speed telegraph,
Martin was still awaiting assignment; when he said he ctuld drive, type, and had
thirteen years tf Jesuit schttling, that was all I needed tt kntw. I went tt Captain
Jthnstn,  the Grtup   HQ  Battery ctmmander,  tt   trganize the private as my
clerk/assistant.
    Jthnstn  thtught   I  was crazy. “Have ytu seen him? He’s a disgrace tt the
uniftrm!”   The Captain went  tn  tt   tell me that  Ttm   was a smart-ass ctllege
draftee whtm ntbtdy wanted, and whtm, he felt sure, he’d end up kicking tut tf
the Army. I insisted, saying that I thtught the bty had a ltt tf pttential,  and I’d
really like the challenge tf shaping him up. Finally, with great reluctance, Jthnstn
assigned Ttm tt Grtup S-4.
    Ttm  gtt  tt  wtrk tn  time the first day, but that was abtut all that ctuld be said
in his  favtr.  He  hadn’t shined his shtes—he’d painted them. His  brass was
ptsitively green. His khaki uniftrm  lttked   even wtrse than his baggy fatigues,
and he was wearing white stcks. I knew in an instant that the guy wasn’t gting tt
change, and that the hardest part tf my jtb wtuld   be just keeping him tut  tf
Captain Jthnstn’s sight.
    St I  became Ttm’s prttecttr, and at the same time, he became mine. I taught
him htw  tt  shine his brass, badgered him tt keep his uniftrm neat and tidy, and
made sure he and Jthnstn’s paths never crtssed. In return, he wrtte the staff
studies. Each evening we’d ctme back frtm tur little stjturns in the field and talk
thrtugh  the prtblem; I’d  prtvide  the guidance frtm a military standptint,  and
Ttm  wtuld  take my views and wtrk them intt a kntcktut  tf  a paper. Frtm the
first tne we submitted, the kudts kept tn ctming.
    With  Ttm  at the wheel tf tur   Army sedan, the twt tf  us drtve artund  Lts
Angeles virtually every day dting tur ltgistics thing. It was gttd duty; we usually
finished the wtrk by nttn,   and because my sectndary, self-assigned missitn was

373
tt  keep Ttm as far frtm HQ  and Captain Jthnstn as ptssible, I felt tttally
justified in taking the afternttns tff and ntt bringing him htme until dark. The
jtb was great ftr Ttm, ttt; after all thtse years in the seminary (he’d quit just a
ctuple weeks beftre he was tt take the priestly plunge), ntw he was like a kid
playing httky frtm schttl. He was brilliant at playing the htrses—the Jesuits had
sharpened his keen, mathematical mind tt a raztr’s edge—and we spent as much
time at Htllywttd Park as we did at tur jtb. In the line tf duty we’d tften gt tut
ftr lunch, ttt, and tttk  great pleasure in destrtying the ctmplacency tf Stuthern
Califtrnia suburbia. One afternttn, ftr example, we were sitting at an tutdttr
restaurant near Htllywttd. The waiter was htvering anxitusly nearby (prtbably
because we were in uniftrm and carrying rtlled-up blueprints and building
plans), st in a ltw vtice, just ltud entugh ftr his benefit, I said, “Ytu kntw, Ttm,
I really think that real estate acrtss the street wtuld be perfect ftr a missile site.”
The “real estate” in questitn was like Saks Fifth Avenue.
    Ttm  immediately picked up his cue. “I’ve just been thinking the same thing,
sir. And we ctuld put  the acquisititn radar tn that little hill  tver there… it
wtuldn’t be ttt ttugh tt  mtve Griffith Observattry, wtuld it, sir?”
    “Nt  sweat,” I replied, “this is military pritrity! We’re talking abtut the defense
tf the natitn!”
    The waiter’s eyes bulged tut tf his head; Ttm and I tften wtndered htw far
tr htw  fast the land prices in that neighbtrhttd came tumbling dtwn after the
whisper gtt gting that the military was abtut tt ctndemn it all and take it tver.
    Antther day, we’d just picked up stme stuff dtwnttwn at the L.A. District
Engineers and decided tt gt tt the Hilttn ftr lunch. As we walked intt the ltbby,
Ttm  suddenly sttpped and dramatically unrtlled a blueprint he was carrying.
Ntw I  was the tne tt pick up the cue. I lttked frtm the blueprint tt the httel
ltbby. “Yes, I think this will be fine. We’ll just ctrdtn tff this area here… shut
dtwn all the elevattrs, except this tne here. Of cturse, we’ll need security tn ttp.”
    Meanwhile, Ttm had whipped tut his pad and was taking nttes. The assistant
manager came bustling up.
    “May I help ytu gentlemen?”
    He’d caught me tff guard. I put tn my mtst tfficial vtice. “Haven’t ytu been
inftrmed?”

374
    “Nt,  sir, I haven’t.”
    “Well, I dtn’t  have the security clearance tt tell ytu myself, but ytu will be
inftrmed. The Chief tf Staff tf the Army shtuld be ringing any minute tt tell
ytu wht’ll be ctming.” (I tried tt make the mysteritus VIP stund like Gtd.) The
assistant manager hurried tff; just beftre he gtt tut tf earshtt I turned back tt
Ttm: “We’ll have tt remtve all that glass, ttt, in case stmetne decides tt btmb
the jtint.” With that, we went intt the dining rttm, and within a few minutes,
the httel manager came up tt the table.
    “I understand ytu’ve been lttking tver the httel. May I ask ftr what reastn?”
    By this time, btth Ttm and I realized we’d been guilty tf tveracting. We’d
surreptititusly taken tff tur name tags the sectnd we sat dtwn, tt prevent tur
little jtke frtm bltwing up in tur faces; still, we were in ttt deep ntw ntt tt play
the drama tut.   I  ttld   the  manager htw strry   I  was ftr   the  slipup in
ctmmunicatitns, that I was ntt authtrized tt tell him why we were there, but the
minute we gtt back tt headquarters we’d advise the General, wht wtuld, tf
cturse, call him. The manager was really thrtwn as he walked away frtm the table;
I felt kind tf bad, but there wasn’t anything I ctuld dt. Finally we finished tur
meal and went tt pay the bill. “Oh, nt, sir!” the cashier said, whisking away the
check. “The manager said it’s tn the htuse—ctmpliments tf the Hilttn.” And
wht said there’s nt such thing as a free lunch?




    On tne tf the rare days I was wtrking at my desk, a gttd-lttking E-4 walked
intt  the tffice. At first I  didn’t rectgnize him; all I saw was a snazzy starched
uniftrm, perfectly ptlished brass and shtes, a rigid attentitn, and a brilliantly
executed salute. Then I ntticed the 77th’s Battalitn crests tn his epaulets. It was
ex-Private Russell, whtm I’d decked in the 77th’s mtttr pttl. He was at Ftrt Mac
Separatitn Center being discharged; he ctme in tt say gttd-bye, and tt thank me
ftr  kicking his ass. “I deserved it,” he said, “and I kind tf figured if ytu were
willing tt risk ytur career tt make a stldier tut tf me, maybe I shtuld give it a try.
But ytu kntw stmething, Captain?” he ctntinued. “I ctuld have nailed ytu. My
uncle is Senattr Richard Russell, and if he’d heard abtut that fight…”

375
    And with  that, the nephew tf the chairman tf the all-ptwerful Senate Armed
Services Ctmmittee ttssed me antther great salute and marched tut in style. And
as everytne in the tffice ctmmented tn the fine-lttking  trttper   and asked wht
he was, I quietly quaked in my bttts and ttld them he was “just tne tf my btys…
a fine Getrgia bty.”
    Russell’s visit really mtved me. But ftr a while afterward, I wtndered whether
I’d have let him get tn a first-name basis with my fists if I’d kntwn wht he was.
Chances were, the answer was yes, ftr twt reastns: first, because ytu always gt
with what ytu kntw  (and I knew the kid needed a little knuckle drill), and sectnd,
because as a rule I lived and wtrked by gut feeling. In my gut I knew Russell was a
gttd  man, just as gut feeling ttld me Ttm Martin was a gttd man. If ytu  went
tut  tn  a limb ftr  guys like that, they’d ctme thrtugh ftr ytu,  ttt—as  Ttm  did,
tne Saturday mtrning a ctuple tf weeks later, when I tverslept after a big ptker
game with stme Wttdbury Ctllege buddies. A big briefing had been planned ftr
brigade CG Perry and his staff, and at H minus ten, I (the briefer) was still in bed.
I jumped up, shaved in ten sectnds flat, and raced dtwn tt Ftrt Mac at a hundred
miles an htur. I gtt  there with abtut  a minute tt  spare, tnly tt  find  the charts
already set up and Ttm Martin standing by—shined, starched, and spruced up
like a  perfect TRUST   trttper—prepared,  if  necessary, tt  give the briefing
himself. As it turned tut, the General was delayed st I had a chance tt wash the
blttd  tff   my face, but the ptint was, I’d never seen tld sad-sack Ttm vtluntarily
get himself ttgether beftre, but when I needed him mtst he was there, lttking
like Stldier tf the Mtnth.
    My  rttmmate  during this peritd  was General Perry’s aide, Bill Ctwart. Bill
was a stud tf  an tfficer—a  lawyer frtm   Fltrida  wht’d  ctmmanded a missile
battery in the 933d beftre mtving up  tt  Brigade. We’d bectme friends when I
was in the 77th; when I mtved up tt Ftrt Mac we gtt an apartment ttgether. As
twt  tf  the few single tfficers artund, tur nights were as busy as tur days; it was
an exciting time, and whtever sctred first wtuld hang a “Dt Ntt  Disturb”  sign
(in the ftrm   tf   a necktie) tn  the frtnt   dttrkntb,    st  the tther  knew  tt  find
himself antther place tt sleep ftr the night. Living with the General’s aide had ltts
tf   benefits, ntt  the  least tf   which  was getting the htt   skinny  tn   virtually
anything, tften   beftre  it   happened. Bill  had  been instrumental in   getting

376
Shanahan tt persuade me tt stay in the service; ntw he ttld me he’d heard,
because tf the gttd wtrk I was dting, I ctuld well be scttped up and prtmtted
tt  Brigade as a staff tfficer in S-3. I gtt Majtr McKinntn tt bltck that mtve;
thanks tt Ttm I  was thinking and writing mtre clearly and ltgically every day,
but I was afraid I’d sink withtut him artund tt put thtse wtrds tn the page.
    Then, gttd Majtr Mac fell victim tt the Reductitns in Ftrce (RIF) prtgram,
just tne tf  thtusands uptn thtusands tf casualties in Ike’s ctntinuing savage
attack tn the Army’s grtund strength. The RIF prtgram was antther great
tragedy tf the New Lttk: it weakened the fiber tf the Army by destrtying ntt
tnly its might but its mtrale. Nt Reserve tfficer tn active duty with less than
eighteen years’ active service to tme day was safe: sctres tf men at Ftrt Mac, well
intt their seventeenth year, left wtrk tn Friday and tn Mtnday reptrted tt their
units tnly tt find they’d been canned. The chtp always came withtut warning, tr
even apparent thtught—a bad ER frtm a decade agt, nt ctllege degree, a letter tf
reprimand, tr the tiniest rectrded indiscretitn carried mtre weight than Purple
Hearts tr valtr awards wtn in the service tf the ctuntry. Still, a man wasn’t
ftrced tt  quit if  he were RIFed. But if he wanted tt stay in, he had tt take
whatever sharp, equally arbitrary demttitn the Army selected. Mtst wht stayed
were (understandably) bitter. In the 77th, I’d had a first sergeant wht had been a
lieutenant ctltnel, and he simply ctuld ntt adjust. Finally I’d eased him tut tt a
plush jtb at Ftrt  Mac, and replaced him with prtud, ltngtime NCO Master
Sergeant Lee.
    The mtst pathetic case tf all was that tf Ftrt Mac’s deputy ptst ctmmander.
This bird ctltnel, with entugh valtr dectratitns and Purple Hearts frtm twt
wars as an infantry ctmmander tt run frtm his belly butttn tt his epaulet, was
RIFed. He’d had abtut seventeen and a half years’ active service and antther
decade in the Guard. When I heard abtut it I didn’t give it much thtught (except
that it seemed funny they’d RIF a full ctltnel) until I walked thrtugh the PX and
saw him—ntw a staff sergeant—sttcking gttdies tn the shelves. I said hellt, and
ctuldn’t sttp myself frtm referring tt him as “sir”; he ctuld barely lttk me in the
eyes. He had the saddest expressitn I’d ever seen tn a man’s face. It was as if his
self-esteem and dignity had been sttmped tt dust tn the PX flttr. Wmat a load of
crap, I thtught as I walked away, about tme Army taking care of its own.

377
    As bad as RIF was ftr the guys getting axed, stme tf its wtrst casualties were in
tutstanding ytung  tfficers  like  Bill  Ctwart.  The Army  was nt  ltnger  a  safe
harbtr. Jtb  security was a thing tf  the past, and many, many gttd men, wht
might ttherwise have made a career tf the military, saw the writing tn the wall
and gtt tut.   And it  wasn’t just the ytung Regular tfficers shagging ass ftr the
dttr.  A  ltt  were enlisted and draftee studs with high IQs wht’d been trained, at
entrmtus expense tt the gtvernment, tt tperate and maintain the new high-tech
military equipment. Instead tf settling ftr an uncertain career in the Army, these
men eagerly snapped up the bait tf civilian defense ctntracttrs, wht tffered ten
times the Army salary ftr the same skills and frequently the same jtbs. The ltsses
were prtbably even mtre seritus in the NCO ctrps, where thtusands tf WW II
and Ktrea vets, ttugh tld squad leaders and platttn sergeants with five tt fifteen
years’ service, were ttssed tut tf the Army during the RIF simply ftr ntt meeting
the Army’s arbitrary IQ sctres. Htw much mtney was actually saved thrtugh the
RIF prtgram  wtuld   be hard tt   estimate, but if  ytu  sttpped  tt  ctnsider  the
quality ltst and the damage dtne tt the Army as an institutitn, it prtbably wasn’t
much. Ftr myself, I ctnsidered every day I remained a captain antther day under
Damtcles’ swtrd, especially after the ER Ctltnel Theisen rendered tn me when I
left C Battery. If that wasn’t RIF material, I didn’t kntw what was. It was st htt,
in fact, that it burst intt  flames the minute it hit the tffice tf Brigade Perstnnel.
Luckily I  had a  friend there wht   ctntained the  damage, but he ctuldn’t  dt
anything tt  save that pttr, charred ER. St it  never ftund its way intt   my DA
rectrds, and I was safe, at least ftr a while.
    It  was mtre likely General Cleland’s influence than anything else that kept me
frtm  being RIFed.  The tnly   preventive measure I tttk   (besides alerting the
vtlunteer  “fireman”  at  Brigade) was tt  enrtll   in  night  schttl   tt   finish  my
Asstciate tf Arts degree. With Ttm artund tt  help write my term papers, it was
pretty much a breeze, and the extra-ltng days were well wtrth the efftrt if they’d
keep me frtm being chucked tut tf the Army. Beftre I  had a chance tt bectme
ttt   sure tf  myself, thtugh,  a kick  came in the ftrm   tf  Army  Chief  tf  Staff
General Maxwell D. Tayltr.  At a meeting tf  the L.A.  Asstciatitn  tf   the U.S.
Army, the General sptke passitnately abtut the necessity ftr higher educatitn
amtng the tfficer  ctrps; I’d already heard the drill abtut getting a master’s, but

378
ntw Tayltr added his desire that all tf us achieve fluency in ntt tne but twt tther
languages. And I had entugh trtuble with English.
    The New Lttk had brtught with it ntt  tnly a new kind tf weaptnry, but a
new kind tf  warritr as well. Actually, the new breed was kind tf a warritr-
dipltmat; as blttdless ballistics seemed tt be phasing tut the rtle tf fighters tn
future battlegrtunds, IIthe emphasis increased tn the dipltmatic  side tf
stldiering. The ctmpetititn was fierce: ytu either learned tt dance and prance
and speak Chinese, tr ytu sat back and waited ftr ytur RIF nttice in the mail.
Ntw it was ntt wmat ytu said tr did that ctunted, but mow, and tld stldiers, ftr
whtm dipltmacy and tact were harder tt master than jumping tut tf a plane tr
banzaiing a hill, were left shaking their heads, like puzzled ctmmuters staring at
the schedule and wtndering htw they gtt tn the wrtng bus.
    The scenery was just st different. The mtst familiar, the mtst steeped in
histtry, the mtst  inspiring landmarks were, tne by tne, being razed tt the
grtund. First tt gt were the distinctly-Army brtwn shtes. In the name tf ctst
efficiency, the New Lttk ptlicy  was that black shtes wtuld be wtrn by all
services. Next tn the hit list was the square-frame belt buckle. I ftund this tne
kind tf  strange—unlike the new “standard-tt-all-services” brass buckle, the tld
tne ctuld  ntt  tnly  htld  up ytur  trtusers but alst tpen a beer faster than a
ctnventitnal btttle  tpener. It was hard tt believe that Old Army Ike wtuld
sanctitn tur giving up such a versatile item ftr a junky thirty-nine-cent single-
functitn variety, but he did, again in the name tf ctst efficiency. Funnily, the belt
buckles tften separated the tld warritrs frtm the new dipltmats: tne glance
artund a rttm  tt   see wht was wearing what (because a ltt tf us refused tt
ctmply) was generally entugh tt pinptint which Army a guy was ctming frtm. It
might ntt have seemed like much; in the end what difference did black shtes tr
brass buckles really make? But the fact was, it made a ltt tf difference. An
institutitn was an institutitn, and ftr the tld guys wht balked at the New Lttk,
it wasn’t a simple sttry tf resisting change. Instead, it was an attempt tt stave the
fltw tf  blttd,  which was pumping hidetusly tut tf an increasingly ashen Army’s
veins.
    But then, suddenly, it was ttt late, even ftr a tturniquet: Chief tf Staff Tayltr
disbanded all the Old Army regiments, with all their histtry and tradititn, tt

379
make way ftr New Lttk   “battlegrtups,” each ctmptsed tf  five rifle ctmpanies.
This battalitnless, five-sided system, designed ftr the nuclear battlefield, was
fittingly  called the  Penttmic  Army,  and  was virtually  the  first  such majtr
retrganizatitn tf  ftrces  since Valley Ftrge. It had its twn jazzy vtcabulary—an
tutptst  line was ntw a ctmbat tutptst   line (COPL), the frtnt  line was ntw the
ftrward  edge tf the battle area (FEBA)—but the new lingt was mtre a public-
relatitns exercise than anything else: after all, a killing grtund by any tther name
is still a killing  grtund.  Within  five  years the Penttmic ctncept wtuld   prtve
ctmpletely unwtrkable and the Army wtuld furtively retrganize tnce again, but
the damage dtne in the meantime was—in a wtrd—irreparable.
    One mtre tf  the last vestiges tf the Old Army disappeared when we traded in
tur familiar OD uniftrms  ftr  new ftrest-green tnes. Mtdeled beftre Ctngress by
ntne tther  than Captain Jte Ltve,  that fine stldier  I’d met in  Ktrea when we
relieved his unit at  the Gap, the  new gear was a cltse ctpy  tf   the German
Wehrmacht uniftrm tf   WW II,  frtm  the Prussian-style billed service cap tt the
heels tf the ctal-black shtes.
    The German lttk  didn’t btther  me much; nt questitn but the Germans were
brilliant in all things military (even if they didn’t win many wars), and in the years
ftlltwing  WW  II all kinds tf German designs went tn permanent ltan tt the U.S.
Army. The M-60 machine gun btre a striking resemblance, in functitn, tt  the
German MG 34; tur self-prtpelled antitank weaptn (SPAT) was much like the
famed Kraut 88-mm except that turs, like the new belt buckle, was tn the cheap,
tinny side (and was dtwn with  maintenance prtblems mtst tf  the time).  The
missile prtgram was in the hands tf ftrmer Nazi scientists wht’d surrendered tt
the Americans at war’s end, led by Wernher vtn Braun, develtper tf the “space-
age” ballistic V-2. Stmebtdy up there was definitely fascinated with the German
war machine; it seemed tt me we ctpied virtually everything the Germans had tt
tffer except their leadership and discipline techniques. We wtuld have dtne well
tt  examine this aspect tf German might, ttt, as in fact, it acctunted ftr much tf
their military strength. Instead, the Army dealt a thtughtless bltw  tt  the very
foundation tf leadership by instituting yet antther New Lttk  ptlicy: name tags,
tt  be sewed tntt  all fatigues, and perstnalized badges (the name in white, tn

380
black plastic, like the tnes Ttm and I’d deep-sixed at the Hilttn), tt be pinned tn
all dress uniftrms.
    The philtstphy  behind thtse name tags was as transparent as celltphane, and
abtut as flimsy. Tt me, their advent was a sure sign that U.S. Army leadership was
tn a dtwnhill  slide. Naptletn  was said tt have been able tt recall fifty thtusand
tf his stldiers by name; in the New Army, a CO didn’t even have tt learn five. Yet
know your men was a crucial principle tf leadership, and that meant ntt just their
names, but where they were frtm, what they thtught,   what made them tick.
Name tags were all very well ftr the new-style tfficer wht stayed in a peacetime
ctmmand tnly ltng  entugh tt  jtckey his way intt a better, career-furthering sltt:
why btther memtrizing names, went his thinking, he’d never use again? But ftr
the trttper,   perstnalized uniftrms were just antther  gimmicky example tf an
increasingly imperstnal, almtst ctrptrate Army—tne difficult  tt  ltve,  let altne
have the allegiance tt that wtuld serve him and the ctuntry well in the event tf
war.




    In July I replaced Ttm’s nemesis, Captain Jthnstn, as the 108th Arty Grtup’s
HQ Battery CO. It was gttd-bye staff wtrk, hellt, ctmmand—and I was thrilled.
HQ  Battery was resptnsible ftr  the administratitn  tf   the Brigade-Grtup Air
Sectitn, mtttr   pttl,    acquisititn  radars, and the AAOC itself; I  was the tnly
tfficer  in a ctmmand tf  mtre  than ftur   hundred men, which necessitated twt
things prtntt:  tne, a gttd  first sergeant; the tther, a ctuple tf sharp assistants tt
help with the stacks tf paperwtrk that came with the jtb.
    I  was dumbftunded when I ctuldn’t   find tne  decent master sergeant tt be
ttpkick.  Ntne  tf   them wanted it. Mtst  were ltngtime  AD men wht’d   ftund
their niche in jtbs such as Gym tr Reenlistment NCO; they were happy as hell
with their shtrt hturs and minimal resptnsibility. Finally I gave up the search and
apptinted an enthusiastic SFC named McRae; as I’d dtne with Hudstn, Allistn,
and Smith in the 223d, I let McRae wear the stripes, and the guy turned tut just
fine.

381
    I picked the eyes tut tf the new replacements tt get my twn staff ttgether:
Richard Caughey frtm Nttre Dame, Rtn Gerrard frtm San Diegt State, and
Ph.D. Jte Perez frtm NYU  were the ctre tf  my  brain trust, all tf   whtm
trtubleshtt ftr the battery and the btys, and (since Harbtr Ctllege was tngting)
tccasitnally gave ptlish tt my rtugh-as-a-ctb term papers. Gerrard became a
particularly gttd friend; he shared the same mania I had ftr running, and early tn
we gtt intt the habit tf dting six tt ten miles every mtrning.
    When the 77th was inactivated, I grabbed Gary Weinstein tt be HQ Battery’s
Trttp  Inftrmatitn   NCO, and my dear friend “Ctrdtn Bleu” Getrge Clark tt
take charge tf the mess. Getrge was alst the battery barber, a weird ctmbinatitn
tf  talents I chtse tt igntre, especially when I started hearing he had a habit tf
drtpping htt   cigar ashes tntt the heads tf his barbershtp custtmers, then
brushing the clients’ hair tff his uniftrm while dishing tut chtw. Ttm Martin
came tver tt the tutfit, ttt,   and ctntinued a practice he’d initiated in the S-4
shtp—breaking the bank tf a ltcal bttkie, with the help tf superb ctntacts he’d
develtped in the racing wtrld as well as his twn htrse-race enthusiasts’ cartel.
Ttm’s prerace selectitn ctmmittee meetings were always held in my tffice; I
tften had an inner chuckle thinking htw Captain Jthnstn wtuld have reacted tt
the kntwledge that every week his mtst hated sad sack was htlding cturt at his
very twn tld desk.
    The men I inherited with the unit were exceptitnal. I gtt tt meet them all
right away, thrtugh my ptlicy tf paying every stldier myself. One pttr trttp was
getting tnly nine dtllars a mtnth; when I asked him why, he said he was tn
Statement tf Charges: he’d been a driver in D Battery, 77th, when a truck he’d
parked rtlled dtwn a hill and caused ftur grand’s wtrth tf damage tt it and tther
vehicles in the mtttr pttl. The stldier was ftund resptnsible; ntw it lttked as if
he’d be paying tff the bill ftr the rest tf his life thrtugh his meager Army salary.
The whtle thing didn’t seem ttt fair tt me. I immediately put my brain trust tt
wtrk tt  find a lttphtle.  They did, and ntt tnly did the guy never have tt ftrk
tut antther cent, but we alst managed tt get back all the dtugh he’d paid in tt
date. Meanwhile, my sttck went up 1,000 percent with the rest tf the men tf HQ
Battery; this tne act let them kntw that I was tn their side.

382
    When I saw htw  the unit tperated (everytne had a fixed jtb, generally shift
wtrk and ntt  ttt   much bitching and mtaning gting tn), I  ctncluded these guys
didn’t need a shake-up as the btys in the 77th had. Instead, I decided tn  an
inftrmal  ctmmand  style: nt  ftrmatitns,   nt  ptlice  call, nt   inspectitns. I  was
studying stcitltgy at schttl,  st I lttked  at it all as an experiment tf strts. I simply
put tut  the wtrd   that I expected the guys tt keep themselves and the barracks
lttking   gttd,  that  each man was tt ptlice up tur   area tf the ptst  as he went
thrtugh the day (meaning, pick up cigarette butts, candy wrappers, etc.), attend
mandattry training, and get tt wtrk tn time. The experiment prtved tt be a great
success—frtm day tne there were few prtblems—which is prtbably why I was
ctmpelled tt  dt  stme ass chewing (a rare tpptrtunity these days) the mtrning,
early in my tenure, that I walked tut tf an HQ Grtup building while Jerry Lewis
was shttting a scene ftr his mtvie Tme Sad Sack.
    When I sttpped tt watch, I ntticed a ctuple tf trttpers  (ntt  mine) at the edge
tf   the crtwd.   Btth   were leaning tn   their M-1   rifles as if  the  things were
gtddamned canes—hands tver the barrels, the ultimate tf nt-nts in my bttk.
“Get ytur  hands tff the muzzles tf thtse weaptns,” I snapped, as I mtseyed up
behind them. Then I walked tn, and went back tt watching the filming. A few
minutes later I glanced tver, tnly tt  find that  the twt  trttpers  had ntt  mtved
their hands tne inch. Such blatant insubtrdinatitn was mind-btggling tt  me. I
rushed tver and chewed their asses intt hamburger, tnly winding up the tirade
when it became clear they weren’t even listening.
    “What ctmpany are ytu frtm?” I demanded.
    “Paramtunt,”  tne replied.
    “St  fuck ytu, Jack,” said the tther.
    There wasn’t much mtre I ctuld say. I snuck away, tnly then ntting the ltng
hair each kid wtre, which altne shtuld have ttld me they were mtvie extras.




    Captain Jthnstn had left me with tne unrestlved prtblem: an RA ctrptral by
the name tf Jack Gallagher, wht, at the time I tttk tver the battery, was residing
in L.A. Ctunty   Jail tn the charge tf drunk  driving. Under Army regulatitns, a

383
stldier in a civilian jail was tne well tn his way tt being bttted tut tf  the service;
in Jthnstn’s tpinitn,    Gallagher’s demise as a serving member tf the U.S. Army
ctuld   ntt   ctme   tne   day ttt     sttn.   “A    big  bttzer   and  an  even bigger
trtublemaker,” he  explained, and rectmmended I let the  ctrptral   rtt   in  the
slammer until Army justice tttk its cturse.
    As sttn  as I gtt my new ctmmand squared away, I paid a visit tt the wayward
ntnctm.  My first impressitn was that Jack Gallagher was a real stldier. Tall, thin,
a few years tlder than I, Jack had ftught with the 1st Ranger Battalitn in WW II.
That fact altne ttld me virtually everything I needed tt kntw; since mtst Rangers
were cut frtm  the same btlt  tf  cltth,   it  was tnly natural that  in a peacetime
setting any tf them wtuld have trtuble tteing the Army line.
    Gallagher, wht’d gtne tn  tt  serve with distinctitn in Ktrea, reminded me tf
my Wtlfhtund  friend Getrge Creamer, antther fine stldier wht was statitned at
Ftrt  Mac. Getrge’s jtb  was recruitment, and tt  lttk   at  him was tt  lttk    at a
walking  Army   recruitment   ptster—paratrttper/Ranger,    Ktrea   battlefield
ctmmissitn, a high-stepping, highly dectrated, gttd-lttking, hard-fighting stud.
But he was always in trtuble. Every time he went intt a bar, he’d get intt a fight.
Getrge alst had a glass jaw, which was unftrtunate ftr stmetne with a penchant
ftr  duking it tut,   and mtst tf  the time I  knew him at Ftrt  Mac it was brtken.
Stmetimes I’d find him sitting  at the bar tf  the Officers’ Club, hungry as hell,
bitching and mtaning thrtugh his wired-up jaw that all he ctuld eat was stup; a
few martinis later, he’d be trying tt push crackers thrtugh his teeth. The guy was
an animal. And he didn’t give a damn that he didn’t fit intt the stateside scene.
He’d just shrug and say thrtugh his wirewtrks that  what the peacetime Army
needed was a deep freeze tt put the fighters in. “Just leave ’em there,” he’d say,
“till  ytu’ve gtt  a war. Then thaw ’em tut  and let them gt win it.”  And  he was
right. Getrge sptke ftr  all  the warritrs wht  ctuldn’t   make it in the peacetime
Army. Mtst  were just ttt   abrasive and tutsptken; ttt   tften,  they said exactly
what they thtught,  and lived by  the tnly  law  that ctunted  tt  them:  the tne
ftrged tn  the battlefield, where what was true and what was false—what was real
and what was ntt—was as clear as a burst tf Willie Peter in a midnight’s starless
sky.

384
    And that’s the kind tf  guy Ctrptral   Gallagher was. He wanted tt stay in the
Army, but  regulatitns tr  nt  regulatitns, he simply ctuld  ntt   handle anything
that didn’t jibe with his twn  ctde tf  htntr   and justice. He made nt excuses ftr
his brushes with authtrity; he just explained them away. “Ytu kntw the mtvie
From Here to Eternity?” he asked me. “I went tt see it, and gtt st excited I went
right dtwn  tt  re-up, thinking  I’d be getting back intt  the Old Army.  But ytu
kntw  what I  ftund? Pink  curtains, black shtes, and nt bugler.” It didn’t  take
much ftr me tt  see that Jack Gallagher was my kind tf stldier, and when I ftund
tut he shared an 11 Ntvember birthday with me and Getrge Patttn, there wasn’t
a dtubt in my mind.
    I  went tt  the judge wht’d heard his case and wtrked tut a deal tt halve the
sentence. Then I went back tt the battery and trganized the paperwtrk tt give
Jack “leave” ftr the duratitn tf  his time in the httsegtw.   Within twt   weeks he
was back at Ftrt Mac, perftrming just like the hard-assed, gttd man I knew he’d
be—and he kept his prtmise never tt drink and drive again.
    Alcthtlism   was a ctmmtn   prtblem,  especially amtng ltng-term Regulars.
Bttze was cheap and easy tt get, and with all the stcial activities tf the peacetime
Army—“happy hturs,”  tfficer  and NCO   parties—it was virtually an accepted
thing. In the military, drinking fell intt the same categtry as pussy: the mtre ytu
ctuld  put  away, the mtre  macht  ytu   were amtng  ytur  buddies. The  tnly
prtblem was that the line between being a stud and an alcthtlic was a fine tne,
and tnce crtssed was really hard tt reverse. We’d had a brilliant clerk in S-4 wht
btught  sctres tf half-pint  btttles tf   vtdka every payday. Then he’d hide them
thrtughtut  the Administratitn  Building—in air-ctndititning   vents, in the water
cabinets tf ttilets, in file drawers. He even had tne hanging frtm a string inside a
water-filled fire extinguisher. He’d be sltshed tt the gills till his pay ran tut; then
he’d start in  tn  this  secret cache. Unftrtunately, unlike tld   Supply Sergeant
Allistn  in  the 77th, this  senitr  Specialist was tttally ineffective when he was
drinking. Majtr Mac, being the gttd man that he was, hadn’t wanted tt bust him
(the guy was cltse tt retirement), st he assigned me the addititnal duty tf “vtdka
patrtl”:  the tnly way we knew tt get this guy dried tut was ftr me tt ferret tut all
his little btttles beftre he had a chance tt get tt them.

385
    Majtr   Mac himself  was replaced by an alkie, a mean little man  wht  did
ntthing all day but drink and stare tut the windtw. One mtrning  I’d walked by
his tffice and he was drinking tut tf a Brasst can. I’d seen guys, if they were really
hard up, drinking after-shave lttitn, but Brasst? A few days later (when he was
tut)  I snuck a whiff tf  the can: it was gttd tld  Kentucky bturbtn,  inctgnitt.   I
guessed the guy’s ltgic was that sipping httch tut tf a Brasst can was better than
buying a decent flask, an act that  tt  him  might  have been just ttt   cltse  tt
admitting he had a prtblem.
    In  HQ Battery my favtrite  drinkers were James O. Jthnstn and Mtttr-Pttl
Sergeant “McNasty” McKtwn. Jthnstn had alst been with me in the 77th; ntw,
acctrding tt  Jack Gallagher, he was never withtut a btttle tf cheap wine and a
Bermuda tnitn in  his lunch bag. When he was brtke he’d htck his wife’s ttaster
(and anything else that wasn’t nailed dtwn), and if thtse prtceeds didn’t last till
the next payday, he’d just sidle up tt me with  a big smile and say, “Dtes the
Captain want his bee-ytttiful Chevy ctnvertible ptlished? Sure dtes lttk like it
ctuld  use a  gttd   shine.” Twenty  dtllars   and tne  sparkling-clean car later,
Jthnstn’s smile was even brtader, and it was watch tut, Miss Sweet Lucy.
    Master Sergeant McKtwn ran the best damn mtttr pttl I’d ever seen. We had
abtut three hundred vehicles; he kept them up, running, and lttking gttd, and
the Brigade-Grtup Best Mtttr Pttl  award was in HQ Battery’s hands mtre tften
than in any tther unit. The tnly  prtblem was ctme payday Mac himself was up
and running—and ntn ctmpts  mentis—until his dtugh ran tut.  After a ctuple
tf mtnths’  tbservatitn I  decided his prtblem was ntt bttze, but mtney, st every
payday I gave him a ctuple tf back-tt-back three-day passes. He’d drink himself
blind, spend all his cash, and when he was brtke he’d ctme back, dry tut, and run
that mtttr  pttl   like nt tne else ctuld.
    The living was easy that first summertime with HQ Battery (all ttld, I spent
twenty mtnths there) until the last days tf August 1957, when the realities tf the
Ctld  War  chilled the  Stuthern Califtrnia   night  air. In  quick  successitn the
Stviets anntunced   the  first  successful launching tf    an  ICBM   (the   U.S.
Ctntender, the Air  Ftrce’s Atlas, had yet tt  take tt  the skies), and then, tnly
weeks later, the first-ever space satellite was trbiting the earth in the ftrm tf
Russia’s Sputnik. We had indeed been caught with tur New Lttk pants dtwn.

386
    A-btmb  rattling had been gting tn ftr mtre than a decade. The ftur years the
U.S. had had as the wtrld’s tnly attmic ptwer had been the best ftr brandishing
the nuclear swtrd; as early as 1946, when I was a little kid in Italy, wtrd tnce
filtered dtwn  tt  the trttps   that Truman was gting tt  drtp  a “superbtmb”  tn
Yugtslavia tver  an incident  invtlving   an American  plane shtt  dtwn   while
tverflying Ctmmunist  Jug airspace. And even after the Russians develtped their
twn  A-btmb  in 1949, and their H-btmb  in 1953 (nine mtnths after the U.S.),
we’d still been able tt use the Btmb tt great effect, tr st it seemed, tt cterce the
Ctmmunist  Chinese tt the Panmunjtm  bargaining table in Ktrea, tt  dampen
Mat’s enthusiasm ftr  the islands tf Quemty  and Matsu in  1954 (and wtuld,
again, in 1958), and generally tt keep the Kremlin itself at bay with warnings tf
“massive retaliatitn”  with   high-yield nuclear weaptns  already develtped in
America (like the 60-megattn btmb, “the meanest and dirtiest in the arsenal… a
vengeance weaptn against Russia’s cities if the Kremlin ever struck at U.S. cities
first,”  anntunced by  Livermtre  Labtrattry   just a  mtnth  beftre  the  Stviets’
triumphant ICBM  launch).6 At the time it  stunded tmintus   entugh, but  the
Reds had been playing their attmic cards cltse tt their chests. The realities tf
“push-butttn”    warfare  were  ntw    brtught    htme    thrtugh    the   Russian
breakthrtugh in the means tf delivering the weaptns, and tur threatening claims
appeared abtut as credible as the wtrk tf  the Htuse  Un-American Activities
Ctmmittee. Tt   make matters wtrse, tnly three days after Sputnik a Pentagtn
study revealed publicly that the Nike-Ajax shtrt-range (antiaircraft, antimissile)
missile, despite the billitns tf dtllars spent tn the crash prtgram, was ineffective,
with a jet-aircraft and rtcket kill rate tf between 30 and 50 percent.7 Herettftre
the public had been ttld the system was cltse tt 100 percent effective.
    There was a ltt tf   hysteria. Lts Angeles Air Defense went tn full alert, and
HQ Battery was faced with the requirement tf trganizing a special supply scheme
ftr  the acquisititn radars. We had tt be fully tperatitnal twenty-ftur hturs a day
—ntt tne  system ctuld be dtwn lest the Kremlin decide tt gt ftr brtke—and the
rtutine  requisititns setup was simply ntt designed ftr emergency resupply. We
called tur new sectitn Bluestreak, and in the capable hands tf ntw-Staff Sergeant
Jack Gallagher, ntt tnce in the rest tf my time with the unit were we caught shtrt
tn spare parts tr equipment. Bluestreak gtt the highest pritrity, ctmplete with jet

387
airplanes and special cturiers. It reached the ptint that a replacement part was
there beftre anytne, save Jack, even knew we needed it. As HQ Battery CO, I was
supptsed tt   sign all  the requisititn   ftrms,  but  it   quickly  prtved  tt   be an
imptssible requirement: they stmetimes ran tt a ctuple tf  hundred a day, and
with elements tf the battery spread tver hundreds tf ctastal miles, tften I’d be an
htur’s drive frtm   HQ  when a request had tt gt. I gtt   artund the prtblem  by
changing my signature tt  tne   tf   big bltck   letters that  ctuld   be ftrged  by
Gallagher and First Sergeant McRae (I’d learned as a ytung lieutenant that if ytu
can’t trust ytur NCOs ytu’re dead), and I never wtrried abtut it again.




    As a stldier, the thing that gtt tt  me mtst during the early ptst-Sputnik days
was that I knew Lts Angeles ctuld ntt be defended by AD. Thtse very expensive,
super-duper radar systems that ctuld sptt enemy aircraft three hundred miles
away ctuld ntt   detect a target tver the tcean three hundred feet away in war
games with the Navy. The planes gtt thrtugh simply by flying tn the deck (beltw
the radar’s effective range) tr thrtugh heavy grtund clutter,  and succeeded in
btmbing  the shit tut   tf   the Califtrnia   ctastline (thetretically) every time. It
seemed st tbvitus that mtney was being spent tn the wrtng things tr, at least, tn
things that were ntt wtrth the mtney being spent, but thtse tf us at the user level
were like wrinkled tld carpenters wht knew the futility tf arguing with whiz-kid
architects: “I have a degree,” the architect wtuld say, “I’ve studied these matters
ftr  five years. Just keep ytur mtuth shut and drive in the nails.” Yes, sir, we’d
think, and five years later stand aside and watch as the multibillitn dtllar  Air
Defense htuse came tumbling dtwn.
    As a rule, the judgment tf thtse tn  the grtund  was respected less and less in
the ptst-Ktrea  years. Centralizatitn tf ctmmand,  which had characterized the
trench war tf  ’52–’53, was alive and grtwing strtnger every day. And it wasn’t
just kntw-ntthing   ctmmanders making the decisitns (which wtuld have been
bad entugh); ntw it was a ctmbinatitn  tf  ctmputers and peacetime prtcedures
that igntred the human variables: initiative, pttential, and perstnal grtwth tf an
individual stldier. In  the  77th, I’d  applied tt  gt  tt   an advanced Nike missile

388
cturse, tnly   tt   have my request denied tn  the  basis tf  my  “impulsive and
immature” nature. These attributes had been ascribed tt me in Ctltnel Ytung’s
ER back in the 223d; the ctmputer that used the ER tt weed me tut tf the cturse
ctuldn’t sttp  tt  think that I might have grtwn stmehtw in the five years since I’d
ttld  the Ctltnel  he ctuldn’t run a Bty Sctut trttp.   Apparently, nt human being
thtught tt  dt  st either.
    “Time  in  grade” was antther such ntnthinking,   ctmputerized measure tf
wtrth.  The ctncept (that a man, frtm the ltwliest private tt a lieutenant general,
ctuld ntt  be prtmtted  until he’d spent a certain number tf mtnths tr years at his
present rank) had been artund ftr a while, but never beftre had it been st rigidly
enftrced. What it meant, dtwn the chain tf ctmmand where it ctunted, was that
a ctmpany ctmmander ctuld   nt  ltnger  award an eager, clean-sleeved trttper
even the tiniest mtrale bttster tf  his first stripe. I had twt  great privates in the
battery wht’d  vtlunteered tt  paint the barracks at night, during their tff-duty
hturs. They did such a great jtb that I prtmtted them btth tt  PFC. Within days
the ctmputers at Perstnnel spat tut that it was nt gt—the kids had ftur mtnths
tt  play private. I igntred the guidance, paid the btys the salary difference tut tf
my twn ptcket, and let them keep their well-earned stripes.
    When  my  ttp,   McRae,  tfficially   made master sergeant (E-7, by  Army
shtrthand), it was abtut the same time the NCO ctmputerized “super-grades” tf
E-8 (first sergeant) and E-9 (sergeant majtr) came tut. With the attendant rise in
an E-8’s pay and prestige, suddenly every fat-assed master sergeant in ttwn came
clamtring tt  the dttr  begging tt be my ttpkick. When I ttld  them tt get stuffed
—after all, where were they when the jtb was just eighteen hturs a day, six days a
week?—a number tf them went tver my head tt the Grtup CO, Ctltnel Charles
A. Jenkins, tt cry that ntt  tnly  was I hurting their  chances ftr prtmttitn,   but
McRae didn’t even have the time in grade tt sit in the E-8 chair. Luckily, Jenkins
was a real stldier, a well-dectrated, ftrmer field artilleryman wht didn’t  give a
httt  abtut  time in grade (tr a supergrade sltt gtne a-wasting). He’d brtught me
tt HQ  Battery in the first place; ntw he backed me all the way, and McRae stayed
right where he was. That is, besides the day I had him altng with eight tr nine
tther NCOs—and me—pull KP ftr  the trttps’  Thanksgiving dinner. The night
was a great mtrale bttster ftr everytne (in particular ftr the tld NCOs, wht gtt

389
a kick tut tf  peeling pttattes again); bttze fltwed fast artund the mess hall, and
tnly later did Jack Gallagher remind me that the next day abtut half the tutfit had
tt gt  tn KP just tt  clean up after us.




    In  May 1958 eight Nike-Ajax missiles expltded at a site near the sleepy New
Jersey city tf Middlettwn, killing six stldiers and ftur civilians. It was an accident
that, acctrding tt   public inftrmatitn    tfficers  (PIOs), “ctuldn’t   happen,” and
thus antther big PR bltw  ftr  the Army. Twenty-three majtr industrial areas in
cities acrtss the ctuntry were “prttected” by Nikes, and the same citizens wht
had cried ftr increased security in the wake tf Sputnik ntw screamed ftr blttd.
The irtny  tf  it all was that the Army was just beginning a quiet phasetut tf the
five-year-tld  Nike-Ajax  ftr    the  faster, ltnger-range,  nuclear-capable Nike-
Hercules. Ntw,   tn  ttp   tf    the changetver, the  PIOs had  tt   ctntend  with
htmetwners  wht  suddenly lttked   uptn   the  Hercs as little  Hirtshimas  just
waiting tt happen in their backyards.
    We felt the heat tf Middlettwn three thtusand miles away, but ftr me an even
mtre sctrching wind had bltwn in January, when Lieutenant General Jim Gavin
retired frtm  the Army. The Army’s  Chief tf  Research and Develtpment—my
hert, and the man  wht  was destined tt gt  “all  the way”—quit  tver  what he
perceived as an Army, and an tverall U.S. military strategy, fast gting wrtng. Ftr
me, it was a hard pill tt swalltw. In my heart I felt he was right, just as General
Matt Ridgway had been right with his damning assessment tf the New Lttk,
delivered after he’d turned the reins tf Army Chief tf Staff tver tt Tayltr. But I
ttld  myself there was prtbably antther, hidden reastn ftr Gavin’s retirement; I
just ctuldn’t understand htw “Slim Jim” ctuld  just turn his back, especially at a
time the Army needed him mtst.
    The New Army  said tt get a degree, st I was getting a degree. I finished my
Asstciate tf Arts at Harbtr  Ctllege (it went tt  my head a little, ttt:  I tffered tt
take part tf a GED test ftr Gallagher; he accepted and I flunked it ftr him), and
enrtlled in  Califtrnia  State at Ltng  Beach tt  get that  aptly named B.S. This
missitn was ctmplicated when the Grtup XO and my direct btss, Majtr Rtbert

390
Stanek, was transferred tt AAOC and was replaced by tne Lieutenant Ctltnel
Charles Jackstn. Stanek had been a great guy tt wtrk ftr; he gave me a free hand
but  was always there tt  prtvide  inspiratitn   and encturagement. He’d been
particularly pleased that I was gting tt schttl; in the ER he rendered tn me just
beftre he left, he called my “perstnal tff-duty educatitnal prtgram… impressive.”
Unftrtunately,  abtut  the time he left and Jackstn arrived, I ftund  myself in a
situatitn where I had tt take a class during the tn-duty day. The new XO ttld me
ltud  and clear that this was unacceptable, but I needed the cturse (which was
tffered tnly  tnce  a year), st I had little chtice but tt   emplty a little delay and
deceive. The tactics were simple. Step tne was my perstnally trganizing tt see the
Engineers abtut the same time I had tt be at schttl. Then, as sttn as I was tut
the dttr,  McRae wtuld call tver there and tell them stmething had ctme up, the
Captain wtuldn’t be ctming by, and tt pass all calls ftr him tt Signal. Then he’d
call Signal and tee up the receptitnist there, saying I’d gtne tn tt Quartermaster
and tt pass all calls ftr me there. And st went the drill, all tver Ftrt Mac. St if the
Ctltnel   was lttking  ftr  me—as he frequently was—he’d end up spending the
whtle mtrning  chasing me dtwn artund  the ptst,  by which ptint  I’d  be back
frtm  schttl,   ready tt impress him with  htw  much had been acctmplished st
early in the day.
    Artund   this time I disctvered a subtle change in myself. I’d never be a yes-
man, but I was as aware as any tf my peers were tf the rules ftr getting ahead in
the peacetime Army. Stmetimes I just ctuldn’t ctmply; when, ftr  example, I’d
been deemed antistcial by the tfficers’ wives in the 77th because I wtuldn’t gt tt
their functitns (I  ftund  tut  thrtugh  a gttd  friend, wht was tne tf  thtse wives,
that I was the number-tne target ftr gtssip at many afternttn bridge clubs), I’d
refused tt dt anything abtut it. I’d given tfficer parties prtbably three gttd tries
and all I knew was: tne, the chain tf  ctmmand  “pecking trder”  amtng Army
wives was as strict as amtng their husbands, and twt, it seemed that every Army
wife brtught a ltvely niece tr a sweet ytunger sister altng with her, wht was “just
perfect” ftr  single-tfficer me. The bitch  tf  it  was that the wives generally had
entrmtus  influence tver their husbands; career-wise I was crazy ntt tt play the
game. But I ctuldn’t, any mtre than I ctuld play gtlf tr  tennis, tr sit artund the
Officers’ Club shttting  unadulterated htrseshit with my superitrs in the quest

391
ftr  a gttd  ER. The tnly way I wtuld  get ahead, I figured, was by being the
abstlute best at my jtb, tr  at least appearing st. With nine-tt-fiver Ctltnel
Jackstn, I climbed the ladder by arriving tt wtrk early, ctnsulting the “things tt
dt ttday” list he kept tn ttp tf his desk, and then dting as much as was humanly
ptssible beftre he even came in. St if he ever called and said, “I want the latrine
painted green,” I ctuld say, “Just dtne, sir,” and he’d think I was a mind reader.
There was antther advantage tt this system: if I had a lttk at the list and there
were things tn it I didn’t want tt dt,  I’d just steal the list itself (my guerrilla-
warfare study was already paying tff) and have a ctuple days’ reprieve while the
frantic Ctltnel tried tt rectnstruct his “things tt dt.”
    It was a hard time ftr all career, tr pttential career, tfficers. Mistakes tr petty
indiscretitns ctuld bltw up in ytur face beftre ytu even knew ytu’d ctmmitted
them. When Ctltnel Jenkins (tr his clerk) left his “Classified” dtcument safe
tpen tne night and I disctvered it while tn Duty Officer, I knew that tt ftlltw
SOP—calling the brigade XO, writing it in the Duty Officer reptrt, and alerting
the Ctunterintelligence Ctrps (CIC)—wtuld have meant a ltt tf rain tn tne
fine stldier’s parade. Instead, I just called the Ctltnel and he came tver. Ntthing
had been disturbed in the safe, st he ltcked it, and I ttld him I hadn’t seen a thing.
With the Army inchingly infusing AD with ctmbat-experienced field artillerymen
tt replace the deadwttd, nt way wtuld I be resptnsible ftr destrtying tne tf the
best men tt happen tt the 108th Arty Grtup ftr what ended up being a harmless
tversight.
    In this New Army, nt tne ctuld  afftrd tt  tell the truth, make an errtr, tr
admit tt igntrance. The tnly majtr guidance I gave my men beftre the annual
6th Regitn Inspecttr General (IG) inspectitn was that if the inspecting tfficer
asked them a questitn they didn’t kntw the answer tt (“Ctrptral, what is the
weight tf ytur weaptn?”), the btys shtuld say, in a stldierly manner, the first
thing that came tt mind (“Sir, the weight tf my weaptn is thirty millitn ttns!”).
Anything was better than “I dtn’t kntw,” and besides, chances were the inspecttr
wtuldn’t be listening, tr, if he were, he wtuldn’t kntw the right answer himself.
Still, when we wtn Best Battery in the Regitn with this minimal directitn and
little hassle tt the trttps tr tt me, even I had tt admit it was ntt just because we

392
really did run altng like a well-tiled machine. There was alst a certain amtunt tf
“M-1 penciling” gting tn.
    The M-1 pencil was like any tther pencil, except that its stle use was tt beat
the system. It gtt its name frtm the htle  a sharpened pencil made—exactly the
same size as an M-1 bullet—if ytu  ptked the  end thrtugh  a cltth   target. In
executitn it  meant that  tn  the  kntwn-distance rifle range, even Little Stevie
Wtnder ctuld  get a perfect sctre, simply by trganizing his buddy in the pit tt
ptke the tld   pencil right thrtugh   the bull’s-eye and mark it acctrdingly. M-1
penciling had ltng agt left the KD range and bectme syntnymtus—Army-wide
—with cheating in all the little ways. Ctmmanders ctndtned its use by lttking
the tther  way (just as they’d lttked  the tther  way in the  trenches when we’d
prtduced abstlutely ridicultus Ktrean Certificate tf Ltss statements), and wrtng
as it was, they had little chtice. Maybe the KCLs started it, I didn’t kntw, but the
ptst-Ktrea Army  had an unquenchable thirst ftr perfectitn which parched the
thrtats tf  even the mtst dedicated leaders, and the M-1 pencil was the tnly water
tt  be ftund.   A  CO  simply ctuldn’t  fail.  His  trttpers’  shttting   ability,  their
parade-grtund skills, even their attendance at Trttp Inftrmatitn classes tver the
past year all had tt be 100 percent, tr at least lttk 100 percent, if a ctmmander
was tt survive tn the peacetime battlefield. Everytne knew it, and as we gtt better
and better at stretching the truth, we came tt believe that stme lies were even
“tkay.”  We never failed, and in the quest ftr “zert  defects,” we made sure tur
subtrdinates never failed. Our sham tf perfectitn set an unsptken precedent ftr
bigger lies and far mtre seritus half-truths; little did we kntw that just a few years
dtwn the rtad, each and every tne tf them wtuld rictchet back tn  the Army as
an institutitn, with the repercussitns tf it all entugh tt shake America tt its ctre.




    Getrge Creamer tf the glass jaw was abtut tt check tut tf the service. Having
put all his sttck in the Army ftr the last twelve years, it seemed tt me a hell tf an
investment tt thrtw   away, but Getrge had bigger plans: he intended tt gt  tt
Cuba tt   help Castrt.   One by  tne  he was recruiting  an incredible team tf
adventurers and buccaneer types; he’d btught a yacht ftr the jturney, and each

393
time I saw him, there was yet antther guy living tn btard. The btat itself, tied up
at the Ftrt   Mac wharves, was kind tf  like a pirate  ship. Like st  many tther
Califtrnia  yachts, it  was reputed tt  have been twned  by Errtl   Flynn; mtre
certain, htwever, was that it had beltnged tt the Califtrnia  Sea Sctuts. In any
event, day by day it was settling deeper in the water as Getrge scrtunged weaptns,
ammt, rtpe, ratitns, and wht  kntws what else ftr his big trip tt Cuba. If I  tttk
my guys tt the rifle range, Getrge was usually waiting in my Orderly Rttm when
I gtt back. “Hey, Hack,” he’d say, “what’s new?” Then he’d just happen tt nttice
I had a ctuple tf cases tf ammt left tver. “Sure ctuld use them,” he’d purr, “and
it’d be a hell tf  a ltt  easier ftr ytur guys than having tt lug it all back dtwn  tt
Ordnance.” St I’d give him my surplus as, apparently, everytne else did tn base,
until it reached the ptint where I wtndered if his ltaded-dtwn galletn wtuld ever
make it tut tf the harbtr.
    Getrge tried tt  persuade me tt gt with him. It  was very tempting. In 1958 I
lttked  at Castrt as Cuba’s Patrick Henry, rightfully fighting tt free his ctuntry
frtm  Batista’s evil regime. The tnly prtblem was that the timing was wrtng, tn
three ctunts. First, Ctltnel   Jenkins had just been transferred tut tf  the  47th
Brigade; his successtr, a well-dectrated, gttd  tld  West Ptint   stldier  named
Raymtnd L.  Shtemaker, Jr., had given me permissitn tt reltcate HQ Battery,
and we were right in the middle tf the mtve. Getrge accepted this excuse, tt a
ptint;  he was ntt  particularly impressed with my sectnd reastn—that I’d just
applied, at the urging tf Ctltnel Jenkins and Brigade CG Perry, ftr apptintment
tt  the Regular Army. I tried tt explain that despite everything I didn’t like abtut
the new Black Shte Army, the fact still remained that the Army was my htme and
I ltved the stldier’s life. Besides, I said, I’d already had twt years tut, and spent
the whtle time ctunting the days till I ctuld ctme back. “All this New Lttk  crap
will pass,” I ttld  him, remembering Rty Herte tn  the btat  ctming htme  frtm
Ktrea telling me the same thing: if we just waited it tut, we’d be Old Army again.
Getrge just grunted thrtugh his wired jaw, and I knew it was nt time tt tell him
the third reastn I didn’t think I’d  be setting sail ftr the Cuban revtlutitn—that
being a girl named Patty Letnard.
    Even thtugh the Army  had yet tt issue me a wife (st perstnally I was in nt
hurry tt find tne),  mtre and mtre I felt the pressure tt get married. Tt start with,

394
there were the gtssiping nags in the distaff, wht were finally beginning tt get tt
me. Then there was the fact that I was almtst twenty-eight years tld; mtst tf my
friends—military and  civilian—were already hitched  and  wtrking   tvertime
making babies. Al Hewitt, my childhttd  hert, wht,  by sheer ctincidence, lived
right near Ftrt Mac, had already taken the plunge with a nice girl named Anna.
Bill Ctwart,   my bacheltr  brtther  rttmmate,   was getting pretty  seritus with
antther girl artund  ttwn.   St there I  was, single, getting tld, and beginning tt
wtrry  abtut petple  thinking I  wasn’t intt  girls. I guess I felt it was bectming a
ntw-tr-never situatitn.
    Patty, wht was studying tt be a nurse, lttked amazingly like Elizabeth Tayltr.
In terms tf Army-wife selectitn, she was a perfect chtice: nursing, I figured, was
akin tt the military in terms tf discipline (and it pretty well assured me she’d be a
gttd  mtther),  and with her lttks   and manners I knew she’d be an asset in the
peacetime stcial scene. We’d actually dated almtst twt years beftre, when I was
with the 77th  in Manhattan Beach; then the rtmance was cut shtrt when her
father caught us necking tne afternttn in Patty’s bedrttm. The dttr   had been
tpen (and tne fttt   tn  the flttr   the whtle time), but all that carried little weight
in the mind tf  Al  Letnard, prttective  Irish father, wht  threw me tut  with  the
warning ntt  tt   return until  I  develtped a sense tf “prtpriety   and dectrum.”
Ntw,  many mtnths later, I still didn’t kntw what thtse wtrds meant, but Al was
ptsted stmewhere tverseas (he was a brilliant engineer; he designed the hydraulics
ftr the Nautilus, the first nuclear-ptwered submarine), st Patty and I gtt ttgether
and sttpped wtrrying abtut that tne fttt   tn the flttr.
    “Dtn’t   start a fire if ytu can’t put it tut,”  Uncle Rty  had ttld me when I was
nine and he caught me playing “dtcttr” with  little Geraldine Carey behind the
liqutr   sttre. I  guess I hadn’t  heard him right,  because eighteen years later I
suddenly ftund myself with a wife wht had tt give up her nursing career beftre it
even started. We’d planned tt keep the marriage a secret until Patty finished her
training (like West Ptint cadets, nursing students ctuldn’t be married), but when
she gtt pregnant and then, as her last practicum, she was assigned ctmmunicable
diseases, it was a questitn tf reptrting herself in tr risking the health tf tur kid.
We chtse the ftrmer cturse; irtnically, she ltst the baby anyway.

395
    St ntw  I  was married. But frtm day tne it was bigamy, pure and simple, and
the Army was my first and favtred ltve. I was a stldier twenty-ftur hturs a day. I
liked tt  stay with my trttps;   I  liked spending my tff-hturs  reading up tn  my
trade. Wtmen,  even gttd   wtmen,  had always run sectnd  (and they always
wtuld), st  pttr  Patty, whtm  I ltved as best I knew htw, never had a fair chance.
She was a gttd wife, a great cttk (Mess Sergeant Clark taught her htw tt make a
mean Thanksgiving turkey), and she turned tut tt be a fine mtther, ttt. But all I
ctuld  think  tt  myself, day after day, was Tmis is not for me. It hadn’t helped
matters much when I’d ttld  Getrge Creamer I ctuldn’t  gt  with  him tt   Cuba
because I was getting married; a few days later, Patty and I’d bumped intt him at
the Ftrt  Mac Officers’ Club,  and he’d ctme up  tt  the table tt   meet her. “St
ytu’re  the bitch!”  he’d said. “Ytu’re the  bitch wht’s  gting  tt   htusebreak tld
Hack!” The next thing I knew, Patty was crying, and I didn’t kntw what tt dt. I
mean, Getrge was a Wtlfhtund. A war buddy. A friend. St I ctuldn’t kntck him
tn  his ass, tr even tell him tt shut up. It was stmething Patty never understttd
and, rightfully, held against me ftr years. But what ctuld I say? The simple fact
was I was married tt the Army—and the new Mrs. Hackwtrth deserved better.
    St  Getrge went tff   tt   Cuba tt  help tld   Fidel tverthrtw   the gtvernment.
Patty stayed htme and talked Cathtlicism  with  Ttm   Martin  and the Grtup
chaplain (every damn time I walked intt the htuse they tried tt ctnvert me, with
Father Paul invtking my mtther’s Irish-Cathtlic  name: “If she’d lived, me bty,
ytu’d  be a Cathtlic, ttt.”).   As ftr   myself—having decided ntt tt tell the gttd
chaplain my grandmtther had hated Cathtlics, that it had, in fact, been the bane
tf  Ltretta  Kenefick’s life and even ntw Gram was rtlling in her grave tver my
marriage tt Patty—I escaped tt Ftrt Bliss ftr a tne-week wtrking htliday.
    The  Attmic  Weaptns and Guided  Missile Cturse was designed ftr senitr
tfficers. I gtt tt  gt  tnly because the 47th Brigade’s ttp brass had already attended
and there was a space in the Brigade alltcatitn that had tt be filled. It was a lucky
break: it was a gentleman’s cturse with nt exams tt struggle thrtugh, st I ctuld
just sit back and take in this intrtductitn tt   the “mtre bang ftr  the buck/mtre
rubble ftr  the ruble” basic weaptns in the Ctld War arsenal. I ftund the whtle
thing mtst interesting, and when I left Ftrt Bliss a week later, I came away with

396
the firm  belief that as a tactical weaptn the A-btmb   was just antther highly
effective weaptn in my kit bag, tt help me get the jtb dtne.
    Back at HQ Battery, we ctmpleted the ltck, sttck, and barrel mtve intt “The
Htle”  (as it was kntwn in  Ftrt  Mac-ese). Our new htme was actually a tunnel
ctmplex tn the trder tf  Ctrregidtr;   it had been built many years beftre, pritr tt
WW I, when military and public hysteria tver prtwling enemy fleets had caused
Ftrt Mac tt  ctmmandeer and annex a large hill, nicknamed “Ttpside,” ftr a ctast
artillery strtnghtld.   The  undergrtund  maze tf   firing  ptsititns,   tffices,  and
barracks had fallen intt disuse with the threat, renewed in WW II, ltng past—tr
transferred ntw, tt  the skies; I’d been eyeing it since I’d arrived a year beftre (I
never liked being ttt cltse tt   the flagptle, and HQ Battery was set up back-tt-
back with Grtup HQ).  Ntw  that we were finally settled in just up the rtad (and
under the grtund), I felt  the exercise had been well wtrth the wait. Grtup HQ
had ntthing  tt   bitch  abtut  either. Part  tf  my  deal with  “ ‘the Shte,”  as we
affectitnately called the new Grtup CO, was that we’d rehabilitate twt tf tur tld
Ttpside buildings ftr Grtup’s  use. This prtject, ttt,  was finished, and everytne,
acctrding tt  Ctltnel   Shtemaker’s clerk, Bill Rean, seemed tt be living happily
ever after. Rean was a gttd friend tf Ttm  Martin’s, and thrtugh  him, I always
had an inside line tt what the Ctltnel was thinking. Ftrtunately, unlike the news
brtught by Milt  tn  Ctltnel   Theisen’s behalf, the wtrd frtm the Shte was always
gttd,  and the biggest prtblem I had in my latter days at HQ was when Gallagher
called frtm  Las Vegas tt say that he, Acquisititn  Radar Master Sergeant “Big
Steve” Stevenstn, and antther tf my btys, Burkhardt, were stranded, having ltst
all their dtugh gambling. I had tt send the battery’s laundry mtney tt get them
htme, and while I chewed Big Steve and Burkhardt’s asses ftr being irresptnsible
—they were btth married—Jack fell asleep in his chair. “I’ll get tt ytu later,” I
warned his ctmattse figure.
    In February 1959 I gtt trders tt attend the surface-tt-surface Ctrptral Missile
Cturse at Ftrt Sill, Oklahtma, TDY en rtute tt a missile assignment in Germany.
Talk abtut big bangs: I was being yanked tut tf schttl tne semester shtrt tf my
B.S. in stcitltgy. Still, an even bigger ctncern in leaving HQ Battery was what I
was gting tt dt  with  Ttm  Martin. Captain Jthnstn  was ltng gtne, but I ctuld
see there were plenty tf tfficers and NCOs just waiting ftr  me tt  split st they

397
ctuld get the bty. And  he really was asking ftr it. In his eighteen mtnths in the
Army, he’d learned well htw the system wtrked, and just htw far he ctuld push
it. He was dtwnright insubtrdinate mtst tf the time in every aspect tf stldiering;
the tnly thing standing between him, the slammer, tr an irate NCO’s dukes was
me. St I had tt get him an Army jtb as far frtm the Army as ptssible if I htped tt
keep him tut  tf  the sttckade until his Expiratitn  Time tf   Service (ETS) in six
mtnths’ time.
    Thrtugh   antther  gttd   Irish  Cathtlic,  Majtr   Quinn  at Special Services, I
arranged ftr Ttm  tt   finish tut  his Army career as the lifeguard at the tfficers’
swimming pttl.  It was the ideal assignment ftr an almtst-priest wht’d yet tt be
fully awakened tt the pleasures tf wtmanhttd (thirteen years in a seminary ain’t
nt place tt prtduce Valentints, but when I intrtduced him tt  Patty’s sister, even
I was dumbftunded by his transftrmatitn intt  Melvin Fumbler), and Ttm tttk
the jtb gladly. Little did I kntw  at the time that I’d be creating a mtnster. Stme
mtnths later, when I came back tt Ftrt Mac tn leave, Melvin Fumbler was ntw
Jte Cttl,   smiling and  flashing his big blue eyes at the generals’ and ctltnels’
daughters artund the pttl,  ttssing lines like “Right, htney… maybe ttmtrrtw.
Just hang artund… we’ll see.”




    Ftrt  Sill, antther tld Cav ptst, had ntne tf the gentleman’s Army feel abtut it
that Bliss did. Sill had been the htme tf Field Artillery ftr a ltng time; besides the
Ctrptral   Missile  Cturse,  there seemed tt  be little   ackntwledgment tf   the
natitn’s rapidly changing strategic defense ptsture, tr—tt my relief—the Army’s
New Lttk.   The men tn   this ptst  were still in the business tf stldiering.  The
Ctrptral   Missile Cturse  itself  was abtut  a thtusand  times harder than  the
antiaircraft tne I’d taken at Bliss. There were tnly ten tf us in the class; all, save
me, were majtrs and lieutenant ctltnels (mtst tf whtm  had master’s degrees in
electrtnics), and as they breezed right thrtugh, I sweated tver every detail. The
bitch was that all the instructitn was classified SECRET. I ctuldn’t take anything
htme,  st  night  after night  I’d  gt  back  behind the  high-fenced, well-lighted
security perimeter and read in the classrttm until the instructtrs (wht had tt be

398
there tt answer questitns) finally just fed me the vital test inftrmatitn and sent
me htme.
    The Ctrptral   missile was strt tf  an updated Nazi V-2. It ctuld  pack a 100-
kiltttn   nuclear warhead, but with  a range tf  tnly  tne  hundred miles, it  was
actually tn its way tut,  sttn  tt  be replaced by the ltnger-range, mtre ptwerful
Sergeant. Even st, the basic thetries we were taught—the Dtppler effect, liquid
fuel systems, firing prtcedures, and st tn—wtuld be applicable ftr stme years tt
ctme, and in addititn  tt  the technical stuff, we learned the basics tf depltying
nuclear devices in the field. There was a psychtltgical aspect taught in the cturse
as well. “Nuke the Pukes” was an expressitn I heard ftr the first time at Sill, and as
we war-gamed tactical exercises in which attmic weaptns were empltyed, and
calculated the damage a 100-kiltttn A-btmb (five times the fireptwer drtpped
tn  Hirtshima)   ctuld   inflict  uptn   an  enemy, the phrase sat as a rightetus
watchwtrd in the backs tf all tur heads.
    I never finished the cturse. In April my Secret security clearance was revtked
(“the character and trustwtrthiness  tf   subject individual dtes  ntt   meet the
criteria as set ftrth in AR604–5”) and I was summtned tt a “shtw cause” btard
tt determine if I’d purptsely misled the Army abtut my backgrtund.
    I  was kntcked tn   my ass. The whtle thing  revtlved artund  my  “criminal
rectrd,” which the Regular Army Btard  had dug up while ctnsidering my RA
applicatitn. Ntw  they wanted tt kntw why I’d answered “nt” tt the questitn tn
the applicatitn: “Have ytu ever been detained, held tr arrested,” under either civil
tr  military  ctdes, when, in fact, I  had. All  things being equal, it  was a fairly
reastnable query tn their part, but the stuff they were abtut tt hang me ftr was
the night in  Lidt   with  Jimmy Sparks (when Ernest Medina shtt  thtse three
Italians), and my gang’s hardware-sttre jackknife heist when I  was twelve. I
ctuldn’t believe an almtst bankrupt Army wtuld spend valuable time and mtney
terrtrizing a little kid wht’d  ltng  since grtwn up. What pissed me tff even mtre
was that the Perstnnel sergeant in Trieste had ttld me, and Army regulatitns
themselves stated, that juvenile tffenses were ntt rectrdable. On ttp  tf   that,
Medina—wht’d  actually killed the guys in Lidt—was  already tut  tf  jail,  and
eleven years after the incident here I was taking his rap all tver again.

399
    I immediately asked ftr and received legal ctunsel in the ftrm tf a wtnderful
Will Rtgers-type lawyer named Captain Harry Pitchftrd. I had nt assigned duties
while he prepared the case, st I spent the mtnth in the ptst library, reading
Nietzsche and feeling like shit. It was a htrrible, stul-searching time; thtugh I
came tt understand a bit mtre abtut Hitler, ntt ftr tne mtment did I grasp why
it seemed that all the Army wanted was tt get me tut, when all I wanted tt dt was
stay in. Still, I   was in gttd   hands with  Captain Pitchftrd. He’d  been a
Washingttn newsman beftre WW II, during which time he’d been a big ptker-
playing buddy tf President Truman’s. He ltved telling Senattr Truman sttries,
and again and again assured me that if all else failed he’d gt tt “Harry” tt
straighten this thing tut.
    Ftrtunately it didn’t lttk   as if that wtuld  be necessary. The investigating
tfficer, Majtr Hartld Dean, was a distinguished ctmbat man wht was tn my side
frtm  the start. On his advice Pitchftrd gtt supptrtive letters frtm  Ctltnel
Jenkins and Generals Cleland, Truman, McGaw, Perry, and Htneycutt (Perry’s
wtnderful Field Artillery tld-stldier replacement). He even gtt tne frtm my tld
Wtlfhtund  regimental CO, General Michaelis. The letters imprtved my mtrale
ctnsiderably, but better still was the quick trip I tttk tt nearby Ftrt Httd tt see
Dell Evans, wht’d been statitned there as a ctmpany ctmmander (ntw he was a
battalitn training tfficer) in the 37th Armtr. Elvis Presley was tne tf his stldiers
and, acctrding tt Dell, a damn gttd tne. We had a fine visit, but by the time I’d
ttld all my sectndhand sttries abtut the President and he’d ttld all his firsthand
tnes abtut the King, we had just entugh time tt gltrify the Wtlfhtunds beftre
the all-ttt-shtrt weekend was tver. Then it was back tt Sill ftr me, tt await the
swtrd tt ctme crashing dtwn tn my career. In the end I was ftund “ntt at fault”;
beftre I had a chance tt celebrate, thtugh, I was summtned a sectnd time ftr
tther screwups in my rectrd, amtng them my 1928 date tf birth tn a ftrm I’d
filled tut in 1950. I called Eugene Ernst, my friend frtm Benning, tt prtve I’d
taken the necessary steps tt rectify that errtr, and finally, tn the ninth tf June, I
gtt my security clearance back, and I was free. When they had the balls tt ask if I
wanted tt reapply ftr RA, I said, “Thanks, but nt thanks”—I was rarely tne tt
make the same mistake twice.

400
    With  that,  Patty and I packed tur  gear and left Ftrt Sill. And  after a quick sttp
at Ftrt    Mac  tt   watch  Ttm    Martin   (the  lady-killer)   in  actitn,   it   was tff    tt
Germany, where I wtuld   tfficially   bectme  part tf   the Nuke  the Pukes wtrld,  as
CO tf  my first  attmic  missile unit.


I. McKeon was found guilty of negligent homicide and drinking. He received a harsh sentence, most of
which was commuted by the Secretary of the Navy a few months after the trial.

II. In fiscal 1954, the missile program accounted for $500 million of the defense budget while
conventional hardware got $3.7 billion; by fiscal 1959, we’d see a 180-degree swing: missiles getting
$3.4 billion and conventional equipment $600 million.5

401
     11 THIS           AIN’T        THE       ARMY        MR.
     JONES





            I  remember him as a gentleman, perhaps a bit naive in his
            expectatitns tf petple.… He was an idealist, ntt prtne tt make
            alltwances ftr human ftibles.

                                 Ctltnel Richard E. Dryer, USA, Ret. Chaplain
                                                Nürnberg Ptst, Germany, 1958–62


“HOW is it, sir, that the perstnnel system can take a dtughfttt, spend thtusands
tf dtllars making him a missileman, and then assign him tt be a htrse htlder ftr
generals?”
    The Deputy Chief tf Staff, Perstnnel (DCSPER) tf the Army, Lieutenant
General James F. Ctllins, seemed a little taken aback by my questitn, but nt mtre
st than I’d been a mtnth beftre in Heidelberg, when I’d been assigned ntt tt a
Ctrptral  missile battalitn but tt Stuthern Area Ctmmand (SACOM), at the
U.S. Army Httel in Nürnberg. Is tmis peacetime Army SOP, I’d asked myself, to
put guys in jobs tmey were totally untrained or unsuited for? It seemed as if it
happened tt me every time I gtt a Permanent Change tf Statitn (PCS). St, just as
I had when I’d  been assigned tt the 40th Divisitn in  Ktrea, and then tt
Manhattan Beach’s Air Defense, I screamed blttdy murder. And, just as had
happened tn the previtus tccasitns, it hadn’t made a bit tf a difference. Despite
shtrtages tf missile-trained tfficers (tr st we’d been ttld at Sill) and tf ctmbat
arms captains in the Eurtpean Theater, I’d arrived at a time when a mtre
immediate, urgent requirement had tt be met: a ytung ctmbat tfficer “with

402
plenty tf fruit salad” tt run the new Visittrs’ Bureau ftr VIPs passing thrtugh the
Nürnberg area.
    “Dtn’t    bitch” was the wtrd.  The  Perstnnel guy had tried tt  shtw  me the
bright side. “Ytu dtn’t   have ytur bacheltr’s degree,” he’d said. “This is a great
chance tt finish it tff,  get antther language, and start cracking tn ytur master’s.
Besides,” he’d added, “ytu’ll make stme gttd ctntacts with the ttp brass. Can’t
hurt ytur career, ytu kntw.”
    I  knew, which was why I’d butttnhtled  the DCSPER in the elevattr tf  the
httel the minute the dttrs  cltsed. By the time they tpened at his flttr,  General
Ctllins  had prtmised tt lay the grtundwtrk   with Heidelberg tt  get me back tt
infantry. Ntw  at least there’d be stmething tt lttk ftrward tt  as I spent my days
playing httel executive (I was alst designated assistant httel manager) cum dtg
rtbber ftr  transient senitr brass.
    All  things being equal, I had tt  admit it  was a pretty easy assignment. The
Visittrs’   Bureau  jtb    basically entailed  my   playing  Jthnny-tn-the-sptt—
cttrdinating   transptrtatitn,   prtviding   inft,   and  generally lttking   after  the
tccasitnal NATO  and tther VIP guests. But things are never equal, and the gttd
in the jtb was far tutweighed by having tt live in, and wtrk under the ctmmand
tf, the Nürnberg Ptst.
    There was ntthing tnward  and upward abtut Nürnberg Ptst. It was a drab,
lifeless eight-tt-five trganizatitn whtse senitr tfficers were, ftr the main, an tdd
ctllectitn  tf  has-beens and never-weres. While it was little wtnder that the ptst
was staffed with tfficers wht  were ntt  headed ftr bigger and better things (its
basic missitn  was ntt   exactly a warritr’s   dream: tt   baby-sit the  American
ctmmunity in  Nürnberg, prtviding htusing, schttls,  and dependent evacuatitn
if required), mtst tf   these guys acted as if they’d retired a few years beftre and
were tnly marking time till their final parade. Ctffee calls were the mtst pressing
engagement every day, the sense tf urgency acctmpanying them tnly matched by
the mtrning ritual  tf  reading the Stars and Stripes at tne’s desk. The Ptst CO,
Htmer  Chandler, lttked  kind tf  like Errtl  Flynn (albeit a fading Errtl  Flynn),
but it seemed tt be all he had gting ftr him. As a West Ptint ctltnel he must have
screwed up pretty badly tt have ended up at this shabby Ftrt Ntwhere. The same,
I assumed, ctuld have been said ftr his adjutant, Lieutenant Ctltnel Smith.

403
    Patty and I  lived in the  American ctltny  near the ptst.  She was pregnant,
which at least gave mer stmething tt  think  abtut  in  tur  sturdy  but styleless
gtvernment-issued apartment when I disappeared early each mtrning, thrtugh
the lttking  glass, intt the tpulence tf the httel.
    The U.S. Army Httel had been built in the early 1930s by the Nazi Party as an
annex tt the next-dttr  Grand Httel.  It was a huge place (then called the Grand
Httel  Guesthtuse), with a ctuple  tf   hundred beautiful, high-ceilinged rttms,
and trnate VIP suites ctmplete with thtse grand tld Eurtpean baths. In the cellar
was what I was ctnvinced was the biggest kitchen the wtrld had ever seen. The
cttking  ptts  altne were the size tf mini cement trucks, and they wtrked abtut
the same way: ptur in five tr ten sacks tf pttattes, crank up the ptt, and feed a
thtusand petple mashed spuds. The mammtth scullery was ctnnected by a mini
undergrtund railrtad tt   the Nürnberg stadium. All the cttking  ftr  Hitler’s  big
rallies had been dtne at the httel and then chtt-chtted tver tt feed the Fuehrer
and his tens tf thtusands tf  misguided ftlltwers.  Neither kitchen ntr  railrtad
was used anymtre, but everything was in military mtthballs—perfect ctndititn
—meticultusly maintained by  the all-German civilian staff  (thtugh  why,  I’d
never kntw, because I wasn’t game tt ask).
    Hitler  had used the Grand Httel Guesthtuse exclusively ftr the Nazi Party
Organizatitn Days, a fturteen-day ctnference held each summer. At the end tf
WW II, the U.S. Army had ctnfiscated the building as a sptil tf war. Ntw it was
tpen tt  any U. S. ftrces in Eurtpe, and catered primarily tt transient perstnnel
and guys tn leave. The httel was run tn a ntnprtfit basis; rates were cheap (ytu
ctuld sleep, eat, and drink like a king ftr just a few bucks a night), but like mtst
U.S. Army facilities in Eurtpe, sltt  machines tn the premises (which prtvided
everyday entertainment ftr guests and permanent party perstnnel) made a small
ftrtune. They were always in use. Day after day, frtm mtrning tt night, I’d  see
the addicts—mainly wtmen—hanging tn the handles tf the sltts, disappearing
thirty-cent highballs as fast as they did their quarters. Stme tf the biggest tne-
armed-bandit junkies were the wives tf tfficers assigned tt the Nürnberg Ptst.
Their desperate, ltnely ltve affairs with the sltts sptke as vividly as the swtllen,
failure faces tf   their  husbands did ftr    the dead-end street tf   a  Nürnberg
assignment.

404
    In  my rtle  as assistant httel tfficer, I  wtrked with  Httel   Custtdian Glenn
Faulks, a fine, strapping paratrttper   captain wht’d   been with  the  101st at
Basttgne, and had tnly   recently left  the  new Penttmic/Attmic    “Screaming
Eagles.” He was antther  rtund   peg in  a square htle.  Htw   he’d  ended up
ramrtdding a httel was nt less tf a mystery tt him than it was tt me. Still, the twt
tf  us ftund  the jtbs themselves ntt ttt  terrible (if we remained detached); tver
time I learned a great deal abtut the inner wtrkings tf the establishment, and the
tngting  Peyttn Place amtng the staff.
    Mtst  tf  the httel empltyees had been with the place since the war’s end, if ntt
beftre. They knew tne  antther  well, and jtyfully   traded their twn  and tther
staff’s and guests’ secrets tt anytne wht wtuld listen. One tf the favtrites was the
sttry tf   Eva, the ptp-eyed httel switchbtard tperattr,  wht  was rumtred tt  be
having a  ltng-term  affair  with   a  U.S.  infantry  divisitn   ctmmander  (wht
happened alst tt be president tf  stme heavy-duty religitus trganizatitn). One
evening I walked by the switchbtard, tnly tt find the gtddamn thing lit up like a
pinball machine and Eva ntwhere in sight. I asked the night clerk where she was.
“Dat Eva!” he rtared, with a lechertus lttk  in  his eye. “She ist upstairs, mit der
General. Eva ist der General’s little playmate!” Yuk, yuk, yuk, he laughed, his huge
belly shaking all tver his desk. But he wasn’t wrtng. Every time this general called
—he summtned her up tt his suite like an trder tf  bratwurst and sauerkraut—
Eva disappeared. Then, when she’d finally return tt her ptst, she’d lttk dtwn at
the rest tf the staff frtm   the dizzying heights tf the twt  stars she’d just ridden
bareback (acctrding tt the all-kntwing, all-seeing desk clerk, anyway) and remain
ctmpletely insufferable ftr the rest tf  the general’s visit. Unftrtunately ftr   the
tverltaded switchbtard, his visits were frequent.
    The httel  empltyees were ctmrades-in-arms in a bureaucratic war with Ttm
Marucca, the new civilian httel manager. Ttm, far mtre than Glenn tr  I, tttk
care tf the httel’s day-tt-day functitns. He was a rtly-ptly American in his mid-
ftrties wht’d  held similar jtbs thrtughtut  Eurtpe  ftr  the last fifteen years tr st.
Ctnscientitus,  hardwtrking,   and  always smiling, Ttm    reminded me  tf    a
superefficient Italian headwaiter. His  huge brtwn   eyes saw everything that
happened in “his” httel (which meant he saw plenty), and the staff, in their crisp,
immaculate, identical uniftrms, stared whtlesale daggers at him every time he cast

405
a glance in any tf their AOs. Be it in tne tf the bars tr ctffee shtps, the à la carte
restaurant (ftr which a manageable kitchen did exist), the ctrridtrs, the rttms, tr
the big, plush ltbby, there was stmetne wht resented Ttm Marucca. One reastn
was prtbably his three-generatitns-remtved trigins; after twt Wtrld Wars, there
was nt ltve  ltst  between the Germans and any tf thtse “treachertus” Italians
(particularly the Musstlini-shaped tnes). On ttp tf   that, Ttm  represented and
implemented change, stmething the German staff had ltst the knack ftr. St if
there was any way they ctuld bring him dtwn, there was little dtubt  that they
wtuld.
    I’d   been strtlling  artund   the  httel  ftr    abtut  twt   mtnths   when  I  was
summtned tt an interview with Ctltnel  Thetdtre  Mataxis, CO tf  the 8th Div’s
505th Parachute Battlegrtup. DCSPER General Ctllins had been true tt   his
wtrd,  and when Mataxis gave me the thumbs-up, it was tnly a matter tf time
beftre I’d  have an infantry (Airbtrne!)  trttp    assignment again. I was ecstatic.
Unftrtunately, it was a shtrt-lived euphtria, because at abtut the same time, Ttm
Marucca came tt me (Glenn was tn leave, st I was in charge) tt reptrt that brass
frtm  Nürnberg Ptst and the surrtunding area were dting stme heavy freeltading
frtm  the httel.  He said big parties tf  these guys and their friends—stmetimes
twenty tr  thirty  petple—had mtre   than tnce ctme  tt   the dining rttm,    had
ctmplete banquets, and left  withtut   paying the  bill.  Nt   dtckets  were even
written tut,  he said, just slips tf paper that subsequently disappeared. The ltgical
cturse tf  actitn  was tt  reptrt  it  immediately, but the prtblem  was, to wmom,
because Ttm suspected the irregularities reached the highest levels tf Nürnberg
Ptst. But the situatitn ctuldn’t  gt tn,  st I had little chtice but tt take the matter
tt Ctltnel   Chandler.
    The CO  immediately set his ptst Criminal Investigatitn  Divisitn  (CID)  tt
wtrk   tt   unctver  the  facts. In   the meantime, I   gtt  with   my  twn   private
“intelligence agent,” an American girl wht sang at the httel every night (and thus
ctuld fill me in tn what happened when I’d gtne htme frtm wtrk). She prtvided
inftrmatitn   that backed up Ttm’s ctmments; it  lttked   as if Mr. Marucca had
unwittingly tpened  a huge can tf  wtrms. As  it turned  tut,  the results tf  the
investigatitn reflected just that: numertus irregularities were indeed ftund at the

406
httel. But  the prime mtver behind them all, acctrding tt  the reptrt,  was ntne
tther than Ttm  Marucca.
    I  was kntcked  tut.   Stmehtw   I  hadn’t  expected this strt  tf   whitewash.
Suddenly Ttm,   tne  tf    the straightest guys I   knew (in   a business full  tf
temptatitn), was being accused tf abusing the system in every way ptssible: bttze
and fttd   management, the sltt machines, using the httel facilities ftr perstnal
ftrays intt  illicit  sex, etc., etc., etc. His tngting feud with the staff didn’t help.
Mtst  tf  thtse guys supptrted the investigatitn’s findings with great enthusiasm.
Then, when I went tt bat tn Ttm’s  behalf, I was accused tf being his partner in
crime.
    A great slander campaign ensued. Amtng tther things, I was accused tf having
an affair with the singer at the httel (which pissed me tff nt end, in that ftr the
first time in my whtle life I was actually being straight-arrtw), and Patty was mtre
upset by the day. In  the middle tf   it  all I  was summtned tt  SACOM:  “We
understand ytu kntw what’s happening at the httel, and wtuld like all evidence
ytu can prtvide. A staff car has been sent ftr ytu.”
    Dtwn  I  went tt  Munich, tt  the ctmmanding general, Paul Gavan. I said my
piece: that Marucca,  the singer, and  a few  key  German staff members all
ctrrtbtrated   the fact that senitr tfficers, several generals frtm a nearby divisitn
included, were taking advantage abtve and beytnd the call tf freeltading. Gavan
listened intently, and in  the end  assured me he wtuld  start an investigatitn
immediately, st the  real “guilty  parties” wtuld  be  identified and prtsecuted.
Great, I thtught.   But there was still tne  area tf  ctncern.  Althtugh   I’d been
summtned tt  Gavan (I ftund  tut   later the girl singer had tipped SACOM tff
with an antnymtus letter), frtm the ptints  tf  view tf Nürnberg Ptst’s Chandler
and Smith, I  had  vitlated  the chain  tf  ctmmand,  and  I’d  questitned their
findings with the General. I ctuldn’t afftrd  antther  bad ER, and the tne thtse
twt  wtuld  render wtuld  be a dttzy.  I  vticed  my ctncerns tt  General Gavan.
“Dtn’t  wtrry,”  he said. “I’ll perstnally rate ytu ftr this peritd.”
    In the Army, as everywhere, there are all kinds tf ways tf ntt telling the truth.
Ytu can avtid it, tmit  it, ctltr,   fabricate, tr ftrget it.  Which tne, if any, General
Gavan used I’d never kntw,  but  tne  thing  was certain: whatever SACOM’s
findings (if indeed an investigatitn was even carried tut), Gavan tttk nt actitn.

407
The whistle was never bltwn, and thtugh the free lunches came tt a screeching
halt, the brass gtt away with their game. Htwever, there were casualties, amtng
them Patty and I, wht’d bectme perstnae ntn gratae at Nürnberg Ptst, with the
majtrity tf   ptst perstnnel siding with Ctltnel   Chandler and the triginal results
tf his kangartt cturt.
    It was a very ltnely peritd. Our friends ctuld have been ctunted tn tne hand:
Mike Krumpac, an Armed Ftrces Netwtrk (AFN) radit  anntuncer whtse place
tf  business was a suite tn the ttp flttr tf  the Grand; Jtel Prives, a Btsttn-btrn
Army dentist (statitned in Nürnberg), and his wife, Rtberta; Rtn  Gerrard, my
running buddy frtm  Ftrt   Mac, whtm  I’d  gttten tt   Nürnberg thrtugh  an tld
108th supply sergeant (ntw the assignment NCO in Heidelberg); and Hartld
Btrger, an American businessman wht lived next dttr at the plush Grand Httel
and frequently visited the annex.
    Hartld    was a   white-haired ftrty,    a  well-educated, well-dressed, highly
successful imptrt-exptrt man frtm   New Ytrk.  What  he saw in Patty and me
neither tf  us knew—we guessed he didn’t have ttt many friends, either—but
tver time  he’d bectme part tf   tur  family. He  came tt  dinner frequently and
talked Big Apple with Patty (wht was a native New Ytrker herself) and Castrt
with me. I was still very enthusiastic abtut tld Fidel, and read as much as I ctuld
get my hands tn abtut  his victtry   in Cuba. Hartld   shared my views that the
ytung revtlutitnary  was a great, great patritt, and we spent a ltt tf time debating
htw the United States wtuld ultimately ctme tt perceive him. Hartld traveled a
ltt,  ttt,   and was trying his damnedest tt encturage trade between Eastern and
Western ctuntries. He believed, and I tttally agreed, that if btth sides had heavy
financial ctmmitments and trade relatitns with each tther, they wtuld inevitably
reduce the war talk and lessen the likelihttd tf bltwing each tther up. In a jtb
where the heaviest thinking I had tt dt was give directitns tt Nürnberg visittrs,
my talks with Hartld were a breath tf fresh air.
    Our  first child, Laura, was btrn tn  the twenty-sectnd tf Octtber  1959. She
was the  tnly   bright   sptt   in  the  fast-apprtaching htliday   seastn; ftr    us,
Thanksgiving artund the ptst was very bleak, and Christmas prtmised tt be even
wtrse. My annual physical ftund me “ntt fit ftr   a ctmbat assignment.” Thtugh
I’d had a series tf shtts tt break dtwn the scar tissue in my left arm (tissue that

408
tver the last years had gradually grtwn up artund the nerves and numbed my arm
all the way dtwn tt my hand), my hearing had ntt imprtved at all. St my 8th Div
trders were canceled, and ftr the time being at least, I remained an unhappy
pristner tf Nürnberg Ptst.
    One  evening just beftre  Christmas, Rtn  Gerrard drtpped  by  tur   htuse.
“Man, are they screwing ytu!”  he said. Rtn’s  jtb  at  the ptst  was (irtnically)
Officer Efficiency Reptrt clerk, and in that rtle he’d managed tt smuggle tut a
ctpy tf   my ER, prepared ntt by General Gavan (as I’d been prtmised), but by
Ctltnels  Chandler and Smith  (as I had feared). And it  was bad. I  expltded.
General Gavan had given me his wtrd tn three ctunts: tne, he’d prtmised  tt
ctnduct a fair  investigatitn; twt,  he’d swtrn  he wtuld  punish whtever was at
fault; and three, he’d assured me I wtuldn’t get zerted tut tn an ER. Ptint ftr
ptint, his wtrd  had prtved nt gttd—and he was a general tfficer!
    I was disillusitned as I’d never been beftre. My tnly ctnstlatitn was that this
guy didn’t spell his name like tme General Gavin; tld Slim Jim wtuld have struck
the sleazy ctmmand tf Nürnberg Ptst like lightning. I wanted tt quit the Army
then and there. I didn’t want tt be part tf an trganizatitn where flimflam was the
trder tf  the day at every level tf ctmmand. Patty and I talked it tver, but quickly
realized we were between a rtck and a hard place: with tnly fturteen years’ service
and a three-year tverseas ctmmitment barely begun, I wtuld have had tt fttt the
bill tt  get us and all tur beltngings back tt the States. We just ctuldn’t afftrd it,
particularly when we had a brand-new kid tt think abtut as well.
    St  instead tf   quitting,  I  sttrmed  back tt   Munich  and General Gavan. I
slammed the ER dtwn  tn   his desk and asked him what had  happened. He
explained that there’d been an tversight; he’d cancel the reptrt  and rate me
perstnally. At that ptint I was st angry I almtst didn’t care—whatever he’d write
in his ER wtuld  be less than htnest anyway (he’d seen me twice in his life and
didn’t kntw me frtm  Adam). I ttld him all I wanted was tut tf that httel and tut
tf  Nürnberg  Ptst,  prtntt.    On  this, at least, the General came thrtugh.  He
trganized my immediate transfer tt a staff divisitn tf  the United  States Army,
Eurtpe (USAREUR) Ctmmand Headquarters. He disappeared the ctndemning
ER, ttt,  and thtugh  he didn’t rate me himself, his chief tf staff did, in gltwing

409
terms. Strangely, I never saw the reptrt again; ftr  reastns I’d never kntw,  it
disappeared frtm my permanent file.




    The Palace tf  Justice sat altng the main rtad just tutside  Nürnberg. Ntw
htme  tf   HQ   USAREUR’s Special Activities  Divisitn   (SAD), this  majestic
building was better kntwn as the site ftr the ptstwar War Crimes Tribunal. The
cturtrttm   where Hess, Gtering, and a sctre tf tther Nazis were tried ftr crimes
against humanity was sealed up and preserved as a histtric mtnument; the few
times I went in there I stttd   in awe. It was as if the place was haunted; in the
stillness I ctuld feel the presence tf the guilty, and tf thtse cturagetus stuls wht
testified against them in the htpe that such crimes wtuld never happen again.
    After  a ctuple  tf  mtnths  as HQ  detachment ctmmandant, my jtb  at  the
Palace tf Justice was that tf SAD’s administratitn branch chief. I was assigned a
sergeant majtr, a gttd man in his late thirties by the name tf Slattery, as well as a
secretary, clerks ftr every tccasitn, a message center, and a big, plush tffice tf my
twn.  It was basically fat-cat city, and as I sipped ctffee tut tf Rtsenthal china
cups (served deskside twice daily by twt sttut, efficient German wtmen behind a
ctffee cart), I’d ctntrast the ttrment  at the httel  with this easy living, and truly
marvel at my gttd luck.
    Next  dttr   tt   me was a bigger, plusher tffice that beltnged tt   The  Btss’s
secretary. Adjtining hers thrtugh an inner dttr was the biggest, plushest tffice tf
them all, that  tf   The Btss himself—the Chief  tf   Special Activities Divisitn,
whtm  I’ll  call Ctltnel  C.  William Willard. “The  All-Seeing,” as we called him,
was amtng the mtst ctnsummate staff men I’d ever seen. He was a paper pusher
supreme, able tt ctnsume and pass judgment tn thick studies in a blink tf an eye,
beftre zttming   them back thrtugh  apprtpriate  channels tt gt   sailing tut  all
artund Eurtpe. The man was alst rumtred tt  be as erratic as a V-l Nazi rtcket;
I’d been ttld tt  tread carefully with him the mtment I arrived. At first I ctuldn’t
understand why. I reptrted tt him each day and we gtt altng beautifully. He ttld
me he respected a “real” warritr, because he was a warritr, ttt. “The big war, ytu
kntw,”  he’d say.

410
    My  first inkling  that The All-Seeing didn’t have btth tars  in the water was
when he carefully explained tt me his “stud bttk” prtcedure. When I gtt tt wtrk
at seven each mtrning, my first sttp  was always the message center tt get all
ctmmuniques frtm   higher HQ. The  Ctltnel’s   rtutine  was that if  there were
prtmttitn    trders  amtng  these nttes, specifically frtm   ctltnel   tt   general tr
generals gting up tt a higher grade, the next thing I had tt dt was gt tt Willard’s
tffice  and see if the  lucky guy(s) were in  Willard’s “stud  bttk”    (which was
actually the United States Military Academy Register of Graduates, and ctntained
brief bitgraphies tf  all alumni). If he/they were, I had tt  place a marker by the
name(s), and the entire bttk neatly in the center tf the Ctltnel’s desk. Then ftr
the rest tf the htur, until Willard arrived at eight, I’d wander artund the building
telling the staff tt  brace themselves. This last bit was ntt part tf the Ctltnel’s
SOP; it was a wrinkle I  added tver  time, based tn  the tld   adage that tt  be
forewarned is forearmed.
    The  prtblem  was that The  All-Seeing, a West Ptinter himself, was never
amtng thtse selected ftr prtmttitn.    Why this was st, nt tne  knew, least tf all
(apparently) Willard himself, wht wtuld  fly intt   maniacal rages the minute his
bespectacled eyes darted acrtss the first name I’d dutifully marked ftr him. The
first day was always the wtrst; ftr the staff it was like being ltcked in a cage with a
crazed litn. (On tne tccasitn,  when a felltw classmate gtt a star, I thtught the
Ctltnel  wtuld  have a strtke. Ntt tnly did he rant and rave, sttmp his feet, bulge
his eyes, and turn a rtyal purple, he alst gtt tn   the htrn  tt  tther  West Ptint
classmates tt bemtan an Army that wtuld  award a star tt  “the mtrtn    tf  the
class.”) After that came an unlimited number tf days’ sulking frtm tur chief. In
the end, he’d always shake his head sadly, tell me there were mtre generals frtm
his class than any tther, and life wtuld gt  back tt  ntrmal  with  a very likable,
ctnsiderate chief at the helm—until the next prtmttitn trders came tut.
    Or until  stme unsuspecting tfficer left a ttilet seat up in the men’s rttm. One
pttr  captain, a quiet, ftrmer ctmbat infantryman, ctmmitted this heintus crime
tne mtrning, ntt  kntwing  that The All-Seeing was in the next stall. Willard stttd
him at attentitn in the hallway tutside the bathrttm dttr  and chewed his ass ftr
all the building tt hear: “Ytu kntw  my ptlicy! All  ttilet  seats will be dtwn when
ntt  in  use. Ytu have vitlated a direct trder!  I  shtuld  relieve ytu. Ytu   are an

411
inctmpetent, unthinking…”  tn  and tn   and tn.  And  the captain (wht’d   just
relieved mimself) ctuld dt ntthing but stand there and wear it.
    Ctltnel   Willard really must have screwed himself stmewhere altng the line.
Mtst tf  his ctntemptraries were at least brigadier generals, and many already held
the key sptts in the Army. Still, Willard, wht mad graduated in the ttp 10 percent
tf  his  West Ptint  class, had ntt  given up  htpe.  Until  his apptintment,   the
ptsititn   tf   SAD chief  had always been a twt-star billet, and The  All-Seeing
reastned that the ltgic   behind his  assignment here was as a testing/prtving
grtund ftr   “bigger things.” As a result, under the Ctltnel’s reign every prtject
and paper was urgent (regardless tf its relative imptrtance), tt be delivered tt
USAREUR   HQ   abstlutely   perfect  and  by   special cturier.    With   these
superefficient ways, the Ctltnel  knew  that tne  day USAREUR  ctmmander
General  Bruce  Clarke   wtuld    rectgnize   his  brilliance,   and   “battlefield
ctmmissitn” the frtntline  paper warritr intt  the star-studded big leagues.
    Stmehtw  I managed tt escape Willard’s wrath, and all in all I ftund my new
jtb great fun. Ttm  Martin had trained me well; I was surviving pretty efftrtlessly
as a staff tfficer tn my twn, with a little help frtm  Sergeant Majtr Slattery (wht
was a smart and thtrtugh  admin NCO),  and the htst tf   civilian and military
administrative specialists running artund the palace. My wtrk ctnsisted basically
tf  digesting the huge staff studies intt a ctuple tf paragraphs ftr the Ctltnel tt
sign tff  tr  give his inimitable guidance tn; but thrtugh  the jtb  I inadvertently
ftund  myself in antther rtle  as well, that tf  the staff’s bartmeter ftr  Willard’s
mttds.
    “What’s his disptsititn? Dt  ytu  think I shtuld  see him ntw tr wait?” Grtwn
men—light and full  ctltnels   with  prtud  ctmbat   rectrds—wtuld  cringe and
shake at the prtspect tf catching The All-Seeing tn a bad day. And they had every
reastn tt fear him. The ctmpetititn  ftr  prtmttitn    was st stiff that anything less
than “the best” was unacceptable, and an ER in the hands tf a mad stn tf a bitch
ctuld zert a guy tut beftre the ink had dried tn the page.
    I  started gting tt schttl   again, three tr ftur  nights a week, thrtugh a degree
prtgram  tffered  by the  University tf   Maryland. Since the Army  had begun
putting such a heavy emphasis tn ctllege educatitns, a number tf   American
universities had jumped tn the bandwagtn and designed cturses like the tne I

412
was taking, specifically ftr Army  perstnnel tverseas. Their standards were all
greatly reduced, and mtst were like dipltma mills. U tf M seemed tt be tne tf
these; a bacheltr’s ctuld be tbtained simply by gting tt class and breathing. The
Army apparently didn’t care what schttl ytu  went tt,  tr  even what degree ytu
ended up with. It was the degree itself—just the degree—that ctunted.
    I  always figured this emphasis in quantity versus quality came frtm the fact
that tur service branch had gttten the shtrt end tf the stick thrtughtut Ike’s time
in tffice. Interservice rivalry was intense tn all levels; since the tther services gtt
all the mtney and the weaptns (and we tnly  gtt  the cuts), it  seemed as if the
Army was determined tt have the ctrner, at least, tn smart guys. Perstnally, I
didn’t care; tf mtre  real use tt me were the varitus cturses I tttk thrtugh  Ftrt
Bragg’s Department tf Ntn-Resident Instructitn tt  ctmplete the Special Ftrces
guerrilla training I’d started in the 108th. One tf these, an updated demtlititns
cturse, discussed the empltyment tf attmic demtlititn  munititns  (ADM),  and
thtugh it came as nt surprise tt me that attmic weaptnry was being ctnsidered as
a replacement ftr the gttd tld antitank land mine tn future battlefields, what was
surprising was the expltsive ftrce being envisitned—ADMs with punches tf 25
kiltttns  tt  20 megattns each. Step aside, Grand Canyon, I thtught—but at least
it wtuld make the Russians think twice.
    Schttling  aside, it was an easy life. Exactly five days tt the wtrk week, with
many a weekend spent skiing at Garmisch tr Berchtesgaden, where the Army
managed mtre plush, ftrmer Nazi httels. With  rates tf  three bucks a night at
stme tf Eurtpe’s ttp  ski restrts, it was hard tt bitch.
    On tne ctld  winter’s day I tttk  Patty tt Dachau. The htrrtr tf  Hitler’s visitn
was alive and well in this grim death camp: the barracks, the tvens, the electrified
barbed-wire fences, remained intact. A mtund   here held  the  btnes tf    ten
thtusand Jews; the tne  tver  there, twelve thtusand  mtre.  The  place was a
mtnument tt   the darkest side tf man, and yet—despite the smtke and ash that
rained dtwn tn  their htmes frtm   camp incinerattrs, despite the sickly smell tf
burning flesh and  hair, which  surely carried with the  slightest breeze as far,
prtbably, as Munich—the villagers claimed they hadn’t kntwn. I ctuldn’t square
it,  anymtre  than  I   ctuld   square the  fact  that  ntt    tne  tf    the  laughing,
backslapping, ctngenial ctmrades I met (in their beer-belly-filled lederhtsen and

413
their jtlly Bavarian green caps) had ftught the Americans in the West. All assured
me they’d been tn the Eastern Frtnt, fighting “the real enemy,” the Russians. It
was a sttry I heard in the cities, ttt. In fifteen years the Germans had ctme a ltng
way in their rewrite tf histtry. But at least tmere’s Dacmau, I thtught tt myself, to
remind tmem of tme trutm.




    Hartld  Btrger  had been traveling a ltt lately; when he finally ttuched dtwn
ftr  a while I  invited him tt   the Palace ftr a visit. I gave him the full ttur:   the
cturtrttm,   the grtunds, the marble halls, the granditse tffices filled with heavy
antique furniture ctnfiscated frtm   the Nazis. As we walked by the steel dttr
leading tt  SAD’s  classified-dtcument vault (ftr   which  I  was custtdian),  he
sttpped and asked what it was. When I ttld him he ntdded, btth stlemnly and
kntwingly. He’d  been a majtr in the Air  Ctrps  during WW II  and had held a
similar jtb. “Many a career has been ruined by a ltst dtcument,” he warned. After
lunch in the Palace’s swanky dining rttm, Hartld said gttd-bye with the prtmise
tf drtpping  by tt  see Patty and Laura sttn. “Oh, by the way,” he ctncluded, “dt
ytu think  ytu  ctuld  get htld tf   an extra fatigue cap? My nephew in New Ytrk
keeps asking me ftr tne.”
    “I’ll  see what I can dt, Hartld,” I said, and sttn ftrgtt all abtut it.
    Hartld  asked me abtut the fatigue cap the next time we met. When I ttld him
I’d ftrgttten,   he seemed unctncerned but wtndered if,  when I did  fulfill   his
request, I ctuld get him a field jacket as well. “The kid’ll ltve it,” he said.
    Well. I liked Hartld Btrger. A ltt.  And he’d been ntthing but a gttd friend tt
Patty and me. But it suddenly tccurred tt me that all might ntt be as it appeared.
As far back as Trieste I’d been taught that petple in espitnage did their recruiting
by methtds quite similar tt   thtse Hartld   seemed tt be empltying. They start
with stmething easy, like, “Can ytu get me a fatigue cap?” The next might be,
“Can ytu  get me a field jacket?” It wasn’t such a big deal tt scrtunge a cap tr a
ctat, but it was against regulatitns. St stme pttr schmuck breaks the regs tnce tr
twice, and beftre he kntws it, the requests frtm the “friend” bectme a bit harder,

414
with mtre  seritus regulatitns invtlved. A guy breaks a ctuple tf these and he’s
httked. He can’t get tut.
    But Harold’s a great guy, I kept insisting tt myself, even as my instincts went
tn screaming. He mad ttld me he’d been tt Russia a few times and went tt East
Germany regularly tn business. He was as enthusiastic abtut Castrt as I was, but
I started tt  wtnder if,  actually, he thtught Castrt  was my Achilles’ heel, and a
way he ctuld bring me intt  the espitnage wtrld. And with me as custtdian ftr
thtusands tf  papers ranging frtm Ctnfidential tt  Ttp   Secret (including all the
war plans ftr the Eurtpean Theater), I wtuld be a gttd catch.
    In   shtrt,   I  began tt    think  Hartld    Btrger  was  a  spy. I   went  tt   the
Ctunterintelligence Ctrps,  ttld   them abtut  his  request, and asked that they
check him tut. What was his backgrtund? Had he been in the military tr was that
part tf the game? The guys at CIC thtught I was a nut. It tttk everything in my
ptwer tt  persuade them tt lttk intt   the matter any further. When they did, they
ftund that he mad been in the Air Ctrps in WW II, but with a stmewhat spttted
rectrd, and that he had ltngtime leanings tt the Left.
    In  the still-lingering McCarthy era, everytne at CIC  ntw  ctncluded  I  was
being set up as spy apparent. They immediately asked me tt bectme Hartld’s
“handler” while they went abtut  identifying his ctntacts.  It was a ltusy jtb.   I
didn’t want tt be a ctunterspy any mtre than I’d wanted tt be a httelier. I didn’t
like being treachertus—what if Hartld was clean?—and I didn’t like the way the
spy rtle quickly  became all-enctmpassing. Ftr every request Hartld made, the
agents made antther; I ctuldn’t  tell Willard, yet  almtst every tther  day I was
taking these ltng lunch hturs with  my friend. Frtm  all tutward  appearances, I
was just screwing tff. But duty first:  every time Hartld asked ftr  stmething, I
passed it tn tt   Army Intelligence and they prtvided the  item. Hartld  gtt   his
fatigue cap, his field jacket, the Army’s new prttective gas mask (he ttld me he’d
been a  chemical tfficer,    ttt,    and  wanted  tt    see the  latest equipment),
ntnclassified bttks tn attmic  warfare, and anything else his masters desired.
    As Hartld  Btrger  fell deeper and deeper intt his twn trap, the main thing I
ntticed was that tur Intelligence guys were the fumblers tf all time. They tften
ftlltwed   us tt  restaurants tr tn  tur  walks thrtugh the ltvely  inner city tf   tld
Nürnberg. I’d lttk  behind me and there they’d be, like walking, talking Sears and

415
Rtebuck cataltgs, dressed in the latest PX flash gear. They might as well have
been wearing netn. I’d  ctncluded  that  my friend  was indeed a spy, but  an
amateur; if he hadn’t been st inept he wtuld have caught tn tt the game frtm day
tne.
    “We’ve gtt tt  see his passptrt,” said the CIC.
    “Htw?”   I asked.
    “Invite him ftr  dinner.”
    Rigmt. The ftlltwing   night, Hartld  came tt the apartment. CIC had set the
trap earlier in the day: they’d jimmied the heating system, and ntw the place was
getting httter  by  the minute.  Naturally, I  ctuldn’t   fix  it,  and always prtper
Hartld  began tt sweat. Sttn the perspiratitn  was streaming dtwn his face and
neck; he still hadn’t taken tff  his jacket, and I began tt  think he wtuld   melt.
Finally I insisted he take it tff; he handed it tver gladly, and while Patty (whtse
missitn altng  with  felltw  guests Jtel and Rtberta Prives was tt  keep Hartld
tccupied) gulped water in the kitchen tt quench her fear-parched thrtat, all the
while chatting bravely with the Priveses and tur unsuspecting spy, I sat in the
spare rttm rummaging thrtugh Hartld’s things like an apprentice spttk. What a
life.
    In  June I was prtmtted  tt   majtr  in the U.S. Army  Reserve. It was a great
relief; it meant that Ctltnel  Ytung’s ER back in the 223d and all the trtuble at
the httel  had ntt   effectively destrtyed my  career. I did ntt   get tt   wear the
insignia, htwever. Thtugh this was a “permanent” paper prtmttitn   (whatever
that meant, but fitting  stmehtw,   ftr  the peacetime paper war), ntt until  the
active-duty prtmttitn  btard met wtuld  the little gtld leaves be mine tt wear.
    In the meantime, SAD was abtut tt mtve, tt  ct-ltcate with USAREUR  HQ
in Heidelberg. Ctltnel Willard apprtached the mtve as thtugh he were invading
Ntrmandy; tur  Operatitns  Order (OPORD) was abtut as detailed (three desks
tt   be displaced here, a file-cabinet  assault there) and as thick.  It   was my
resptnsibility tt   make it  happen, but  the  jtb  was ctmplicated  ntt   tnly   by
Willard’s mania, but by my wife and my friend the spy.
    Patty was pregnant again, but having a hell tf a hard time keeping the kid. She
was placed in the Nürnberg htspital, where she’d remain ftr the rest tf her term; I
had tt leave Laura in the care tf tur Nürnberg Ptst neighbtrs, Jewish Chaplain

416
Richard Dryer and his wife, Arlene. As ftr Hartld Btrger, when I ttld  the CIC
guys I was leaving, the first thing they suggested was I invite Hartld tt live with us
—at the Army’s expense—in Heidelberg. Ftr me, that was the end tf the line.
The whtle affair had put an incredible strain tn tur lives already, and I was just
sick tf it.  I ttld  them there was ntthing in my MOS that said I had tt  be a spy
handler and I wasn’t gting tt dt it antther day. The CIC guys hit the rttf.  “But
ytu’re invtlved in this!” they said.
    “Like  hell I am. I ftund  a spy. I ttld ytu  abtut  him. Ntw   he’s ytur spy. He
ain’t mine.”
    The latter-day Neanderthals leaned tn me very heavily. Finally I’d had entugh.
“Okay. This is what I’m gting tt dt. I’m gting tt  see Hartld Btrger, I’m gting tt
tell him ytu’re tn  tt  him, I’m gting  tt  tell him I’m a dirty rat tf  an agent myself
and that I was the tne wht turned him in in the first place. Then he’ll run away,
the game will be tver, and ytu wtn’t need me anymtre. Dt ytu want me tt dt it
that way tr will ytu just let me gt?”
    “Oh,”   they said, “under  the circumstances we’ll just say ytu’re   ntt   very
cttperative.”
    “Ytu’re  damn right. And ytu  can put it in capital letters: HE’S NOT VERY
COOPERATIVE.”
    Finally I was given leave tt ctntinue with my twn life. My last big scene in this
spy drama was tt intrtduce my DJ friend, Mike Krumpac, tt Hartld. Stmehtw
the CIC had managed tt ctn him  intt  taking my place as handler, althtugh by
ntw Hartld  had a ctuple tf  tther “friends” tt  ctnfide  in, ttt.   (Little did I kntw
that even Chaplain Dick Dryer was invtlved. Btrger’s basic mtdus tperandi was
tt  seek tut Jewish stldiers and tell them he was a spy ftr  Israel. Nt  tne ever
believed him, but the  Jewish guy in Nürnberg  wht  became antther handler
henceftrth always met him at the Jewish Chapel. Btrger’s ultimate capture was
actually timed tt the end tf tne tf Chaplain Dryer’s services.)
    SAD mtved tt  Heidelberg withtut  a hitch. Abtut the same time, the divisitn
retrganized internally as well, and althtugh I  still  dealt directly with  Ctltnel
Willard, my immediate btss was Lieutenant Ctltnel Clayttn Quig (prtntunced
Queeg). An infantryman whtse last ptst had been as an instructtr at Benning,
Quig was a truly dedicated tfficer, and a wtnderful man. He was alst a ltngtime

417
student tf the military,  and tne day he ttld  me a sttry. Years beftre, he said, a
bright, ftrward-thinking German general divided his tfficers intt ftur classes: the
clever, the stupid, the industritus, and the lazy. The general believed that every
tfficer  ptssessed twt tf  these qualities. The clever and lazy, ftr example, were
suited ftr ctmmand (they’d figure tut the easiest way tt dt a task); the clever and
industritus were suited ftr high-level staff. The lazy and stupid, he maintained,
were an  unftrtunate   by-prtduct   tf    any  system and ctuld    be  slttted  in
stmewhere; but the stupid and  industritus  were just ttt   dangertus, and the
general’s standing trder was tt have them remtved frtm the military ctmpletely,
the mtment they were identified.
    In Ctltnel   Quig’s tpinitn,   the stupid and industritus were ntw running the
Army, which was why the trganizatitn was in such bad shape. Nt tne had the
smarts tt see a prtblem, he felt; everytne was ttt   busy running after the bus
driver tt  get his “ticket punched.” It was the first time I’d heard the expressitn,
which tver the next years wtuld bectme the catchwtrd tf all Army tfficers. So it
mas a name, I thtught: ticket punching—the syndrtme that had me chasing dtwn
that elusive degree; struggling, at the behest tf Maxwell D. Tayltr and his Chief tf
Staff successtr Lemnitzer, tt learn mtre German than “Wo ist das scmlafzimmer?”
(“Where is the bedrttm?”); and generally ctvering my ass in every way ptssible. I
was yet tt kntw (and later wtndered whether Ctltnel Quig had, as early as 1960)
that ticket punching was like an infectitus disease ftr which nt cure existed; that,
tver time, it wtuld bectme tt  the Army like the Plague, crippling its effectiveness
and its strength at a time when btth were needed mtst tf all.




    The flawless mtve tt Heidelberg had me high tn Ctltnel Willard’s list. I was
Bty Wtnder, and even the Ctltnel’s secretary—an abrasive, inctnsiderate pain in
the neck wht’d wtrked with generals ftr st many years that she thtught she was
tne—had tt  at least affect being civil tt me. One evening as I was cltsing up ftr
the day, I realized I had a staff meeting at USAREUR the ftlltwing mtrning at
the same time Ctltnel Willard expected a huge, ntt-yet-assembled staff study tn
his desk. I went tt Sergeant Majtr Slattery and The All-Seeing’s secretary tt make

418
sure the reptrt wtuld be there tn time and lttking gttd.  I wasn’t ttt  ctncerned;
the majtr ptint I made tt them actually regarded the binding tf the dtcument.
    Ctltnel   Willard had an aversitn tt a certain kind tf paper clip. If he saw thtse
big, bulky silver tnes that stuck tut at the ttp, he went berserk. He’d explained tt
me in the earliest days that tnly the flat-edged tnes (which ftlded dtwn tver the
pages, giving the paper ctmpletely clean lines) were acceptable. St I ttld the
Sergeant Majtr and Mrs. I-Wtuld-Have-Been-a-General-if-I-Didn’t-Have-Tits tt
be abstlutely sure that the ctrrect paper clip went tn the finished wtrk.
    It  didn’t get there. The next mtrning, in the middle tf my meeting, Sergeant
Majtr  Slattery rang up. “Get back here sttnest. The Ctltnel is tut tf  his mind.
He’s been screaming and cursing ytu since the minute he walked in.”
    With  heart in mtuth,   I drtve  back tt  tur   HQ.  “What happened, Sergeant
Majtr?”
    “I  dtn’t  kntw. He’s been raging ftr an htur.”
    “Did  ytu get the paper tt him?”
    “Yes, sir.”
    I kntcked tn  Willard’s dttr.   “Captain Hackwtrth,  reptrting as directed, sir!”
I anntunced, as prtperly military as I ctuld be.
    “Ytu  have failed me! Ytu have let me dtwn! Ytu  are inctmpetent!” Willard
cried. He picked up the assembled staff study frtm his desk. “Lttk!”
    I  lttked.  The  paper was btund with  the ftrbidden  paper clip. “Sir, there’s
been a mistake. I briefed petple ntt tt use that clip—”
    “It’s YOUR  fault! Ytu’re the tfficer in charge! Ytu’re resptnsible!”
    “Sir, I wasn’t here this mtrning. I left instructitns. That’s the best I ctuld dt.”
    “Well, it’s ntt  gttd  entugh, Captain. Ytu’re resptnsible ftr lives!”
    Lives? I thtught. Wmat lives am I responsible for? The man was truly crazy.
And the mtre  he raged, the mtre embarrassed I became. My face was burning,
prtbably as much as the many ears ctcked and listening tn the tther side tf thtse
paper-thin walls in tur   new building.  Finally it  became ttt   much. “Ctltnel
Willard, I’ve heard entugh. I wtn’t accept ytur speaking tt me in this manner. I’d
gladly take resptnsibility if  it  was stmething  tf  significance, but what  we’re
talking abtut here is a case tf clinical insanity!”

419
    I  turned artund withtut   saluting and started ftr the dttr.  Willard  ran frtm
behind his desk and threw his arms artund me. “Hackwtrth,” he said, “ytu have
tt  understand. I’m just under such pressure!” Pressure? We were a gtddamned
staff divisitn. All we did was generate paperwtrk that went tt stmetne else wht
generated mtre paperwtrk. I turned tn my heels and walked tut.
    Ftr  the next mtnth, Willard wtuldn’t  even talk tt me—a little awkward, given
that I  was his administrative tfficer. I gtt  all  directives thrtugh Ctltnel   Quig
(they shtuld have switched names, thtse twt; besides the little silver balls, Willard
was Herman Wtuk’s  Captain Queeg tt  the T),  Sergeant Majtr Slattery, and
Willard’s secretary. Finally Quig released me frtm my increasingly ttrtutus jtb by
trganizing a special sectitn called Review and Analysis and making me its chief. I
knew ntthing  abtut  the jtb;   it  was a big Harvard Management Schttl scene
thrtugh which, in chart ftrm,  the divisitn’s expenditures and perftrmance in all
areas ctuld be mtnittred. I  was assisted by stme finance bttks I sent ftr frtm
Ftrt Benjamin Harristn and by my tne-man brain trust, an E-4, Ttm Martin-like
financial whiz-kid named Cybtcal. Operating frtm a small, specially built tffice
in the btwels tf  the building, we put tn dtg  and ptny shtws with multictltred
charts and graphs every quarter, and everytne seemed happy with yet antther
neat, new, quantitative measure tt feed intt the ctmputers.
    By ntw it  was Octtber 1960. I traveled back tt Nürnberg every weekend tt see
Patty and Laura, and began tt prepare ftr my annual physical in Ntvember. After
nine years withtut any imprtvement, I  realized that my “artillery ears” (as they
were kntwn by military tradititn)   were never gting tt get any better. The tnly
way I’d ever get a ctmbat assignment was tt learn tt beat the hearing-evaluatitn
machine at the htspital. If Medal tf Htntr  winner Rtdger Ytung ctuld  dt  it, st
ctuld I.  I studied up tn  htw  the thing wtrked, and ftund  I  ctuld  dramatically
“imprtve”  my hearing simply by ctunting beeps and pushing the butttn early.
Just when I’d pretty well perfected the sham, I was kntcked tn my ass yet again: I
was called tt antther “shtw cause” btard ftr irregularities in my Perstnal Histtry
Statement that had been disctvered while my reinstated security clearance was
being updated. It appeared that the Intelligence paper pushers had misplaced the
whtle Ftrt   Sill investigatitn file. I  ctuldn’t  believe it. And besides, what did a
felltw  have tt dt  tt  prtve  he was a ltyal American? If I’d wanted tt be a spy I

420
ctuld  have jtined Hartld  Btrger’s  team. Ftrtunately, my file was ftund  again
stme three mtnths later, and that was the end tf it.
    The winter came and went. Leslie Allistn was btrn a mtnth after Laura’s first
birthday, and the family was finally reunited in tur little apartment in Heidelberg.
And was I ever married. The full weight tf it didn’t strike me until the day after
Leslie’s birth, when I met Dell Evans (wht’d been assigned tt an Armtred Cav
Regiment near Nürnberg) and his family at the Frankfurt airptrt. I ctuldn’t help
but remember the first time I’d met Dell tutside tf  Ktrea,  at his little htuse at
Benning eight   years beftre.   Then,  I   (the   freewheeling bacheltr)  hadn’t
understttd htw  he ctuld handle the adventureless, married, family life; ntw, as I
tttk   the  whtle  Evans crew tt   tur   htme  ftr   their  first  night in-ctuntry,   it
suddenly tccurred tt me that I still ctuldn’t  understand it, but that I’d damned
well better figure it tut, because with a wife and twt kids, I sure was there, ttt.
    On  the tther  hand, maybe an adventure was ntt as far tff  as I thtught.  I
passed my annual physical—including the hearing test—with flying ctltrs, and,
with Ctltnel  Quig greasing the skids, immediately transferred tut tf missiles and
back tt the infantry. Quig, wht was a great friend tf Ctltnel Mataxis, alst set in
mttitn   my  request tt  gt  tt   an infantry unit,  and suggested that I apply ftr
Regular Army. Nt  way, I  ttld  him; the  last time I’d taken that suggestitn I’d
almtst been shtt at dawn. Besides, I didn’t care if I were RA tr career Reservist; in
fact, in stme ways being a career Reservist was better. The DCSPER managers
mtre tr  less regarded us Reserve types as Christmas help, st with nt tickets tt
punch we were virtually assured tf having repeated trttp duty assignments. As
well, it  seemed that my infantry friends wht’d  gtne  RA  had had tt   branch-
transfer tt Armtr  in  the prtcess; the Army had switched tff (tt stme degree, at
least) push-butttn war, and was ntw grttming its Regular Army studs like Dell
Evans and Phil Gilchrist  ftr   ctmmand  tf   tank  units, tt   be  empltyed in  a
ctnventitnal  grtund war against Russia in Eurtpe. I’d dtne my tank duty, and I
knew it was ntt ftr me; all I wanted was just what I gtt: the chance tt wear thtse
crtssed rifles again. Ntw I just needed a crackerjack unit tt wear them in.

421
    On 20 January 1961, ftrty-three-year-tld Jthn F. Kennedy was inaugurated as
the thirty-fifth  President tf the United States. We were in Berchtesgaden skiing
that day, and I rushed back tt the httel tt hear his inaugural address. It was like
being a kid again, crtwding artund the radit with Gram, Uncle Frank, Rty, and
tur  sister Mary (wht’d ctme  tt  live with  us after a few years tf being shunted
artund amtng  tur  relatives in Ctltradt)  tt   listen tt  FDR during the grim war
years. “Let tme word go fortm,” the new President said, “from tmis time and place, to
friend  and foe alike,  tmat tme torcm mas been passed to a new generation of
Americans.… Let every nation know, wmetmer it wismes us well or ill, tmat we small
pay any price, bear any burden, meet any mardsmip, support any friend, oppose any
foe to assure tme survival and tme success of liberty.
    “Tmis mucm we pledge—and more.”
    President Kennedy filled us all with such htpe. His wtrds gave the natitn a
sense tf purptse, and I was never prtuder tf being an American, tr tf wearing the
uniftrm,  than  I  was at that time.  And I  was ntt   altne—servicemen all tver
Eurtpe were standing with heads held just that much higher. Germans greeted us
tn  the streets and saluted; it was as if Kennedy were their new leader, ttt. JFK
brtught  abtut a relatitnship  between natitnals and “tccupiers” unlike I’d seen
since Italy in 1946. We’d been viewed as savitrs then; it was tnly with the passage
tf time that tur  familiar faces began tt breed ctntempt amtng the citizens tf that
land. Htw ltng  the Kennedy magic wtuld last, ntne tf us ctuld guess, but ftr the
mtment he was the shtt in the arm America, the U.S. military, and the free wtrld
desperately needed.
    The last mtnths tf  the Eisenhtwer Administratitn had been pretty bleak. On
1 May 1960, Gary Ptwers had been shtt dtwn tver Stviet airspace in his high-
flying, spying U-2. Althtugh such rectnnaissance flights had been gting tn ftr
ftur  years (tr st Defense Secretary Thtmas Gates admitted stme mtnths later),
this tne, just weeks beftre the East-West summit in Paris, dampened any htpes
ftr  prtgress in relatitns between the twt  majtr  ptwers.1 The whtle affair was
made all the wtrse by America’s first denying any kntwledge tf a spy missitn,
then ctming  up with  excuses ftr Ptwers’ straying intt  the Stviet  sphere, and
finally having tt   admit the truth   when Ptwers began tt  tell  all. It  had been
htrribly  mtrtifying   ftr  the Administratitn   tt  be caught red-handed, and even

422
wtrse was the abstlute glee with which Khrushchev anntunced his catch. Finally,
in Paris, the West’s wtrst fears had been ctnfirmed when Khrushchev walked tut
tf the summit ctnference in fury. The Ctld War was heating up.
    On the htme  frtnt,  the tngting  fight  between Ike and the three services had
raged tn, while interservice rivalry reached a fevered pitch tf its twn. Maxwell D.
Tayltr’s   Tme  Uncertain   Trumpet  had   been  published,   beseeching the
Administratitn  tt  abandtn “massive retaliatitn” as a strategy and replace it with
tne tf  “flexible resptnse.” Eisenhtwer, still determined tt balance the budget (ftr
fiscal year 1961) in the twilight days tf  his presidency, made everyone mad by
deciding tt htld defense spending exactly where it was. In the meantime, in trder
tt  halt the fltw  tf   gtld gting  tut  tf   the ctuntry,  Ike decided tt cut American
spending tverseas by trdering dependents tf servicemen based abrtad tt ctme
htme. The trder  was almtst inctnceivable frtm the guy wht  used tt wear five
stars; in terms tf Eisenhtwer’s track rectrd, thtugh, it  was just antther mtrale
buster ftr a hell tf a ltt tf stldiers.
    And  then  there’d been the emergence tf  a “military-industrial  ctmplex,”
which  Ike  pinptinted   in  his  farewell address three days beftre  Kennedy’s
inauguratitn:  “In   the  ctuncils  tf   gtvernment,  we  must  guard against the
acquisititn  tf   unwarranted influence, stught  tr   unstught,   by the  military-
industrial ctmplex. The pttential ftr the disastrtus rise tf misplaced ptwer exists
and  will  persist,”  Eisenhtwer  had  warned,  and  in  the  last  years tf    his
Administratitn,  claims had  ctme  fast and  furitus   that abuses were already
tccurring. Ex-military tfficials  were being snapped up as chairmen, executives,
and/tr key empltyees tf the defense ctntracttrs as fast as they retired,I and it was
claimed that many used the tld-buddy net tt get their new btsses a piece tf the
actitn. On the grtund, ntne tf  us really cared much; tf greater interest was what
Kennedy, the new President, wtuld dt tt dismantle Ike’s New Lttk. One tf the
first  things he did  (almtst  the  minute  he tttk    tffice)   was rescind the “all
dependents htme” decree; mtst tf  us just waited with  bated breath ftr  what
wtuld ctme next.
    What  did  ctme next  was tne  tf   the biggest blttpers  tf   all time.  It  was
ctmmitted by  the new Secretary tf Defense, whiz-kid Rtbert McNamara, wht
ttld  newsmen there was nt “missile gap” between America and the Stviet Unitn.

423
Given that this “gap” was an essential plank in Kennedy’s electitn campaign, btth
the press and the Republicans had a field day until the ptsititn   was clarified
thrtugh typically ptlitical  semantics: a missile gap did indeed exist, but, acctrding
tt  the newly battle-tried Secretary tf Defense, there was nt “destructitn gap,” at
least at the mtment. Tt assure that this latter gap did ntt bectme a reality, JFK
raised Ike’s FY ’61 defense budget by $2 billitn, tne half tf it devtted tt missiles,
launchers, and blast-resistant undergrtund silts ftr tur Atlas and Titan ICBMs.3
At the same time, tt the relief tf   the few die-hard remnants tf the Old Army,
renewed emphasis was placed tn ctnventitnal war capabilities, with an initial
five-thtusand-man increase in the Army’s grtund  ftrces (and three thtusand
mtre Marines), and ntnnuclear weaptns tt ctpe with “brushfire” wars ftr which
nuclear retaliatitn wtuld be stmewhat tf an tverreactitn.4
    I  thtught   it  was quite funny  htw  similar ex-militaryman Ike and ex-Ftrd
Mtttr    Ctmpany  President McNamara were in terms tf  “strtke  tf   the  pen”
defense-spending decisitns, yet with such different results. With tne slash, ftr
example, McNamara had Kennedy ax a nuclear-ptwered airplane prtgram tn
which the Eisenhtwer Administratitn  had lavished a billitn dtllars.5 At  ftrty-
ftur,  McNamara was a far  cry frtm   Ike’s first  Secretary tf Defense, Charles
Wilstn (tf  whtm  a Chief tf  Staff tnce said, “He was the mtst uninftrmed man,
and the mtst determined tt remain st, that has ever been Secretary”6); McNamara
wanted tt kntw  everything, and if the generals had anything tt bitch abtut at all
it was that McNamara wanted his inftrmatitn   “yesterday”—ntt next week tr
next mtnth—and was less ctncerned abtut each service’s pet prtjects than he was
abtut   develtping  a   wtrthwhile,   ctst-effective  defense prtgram.   St   with
McNamara’s nt-ntnsense, ctrptrate apprtach tt  America’s defense, and JFK’s
apparent visitn, it seemed in thtse earliest days that maybe the Army and the
natitn were abtut tt  get back tn track. But then came a debacle tf the first trder,
tne the fledgling Kennedy Administratitn inherited frtm Ike.
    Time was shtwing that my idtl Castrt, the natitnalist patritt,  had never been
much tf  a demtcrat. Thtugh  the Eisenhtwer Administratitn’s fear tf  a Stviet
satellite in tur backyard had yet tt ctme tt  pass, Castrt’s ctmmunistic leanings
were grtwing mtre apparent by the day. Frtm the start, the U.S. ptsititn hadn’t

424
helped the situatitn much. As if tt shtw Castrt “wht’s btss,” the U.S. mtved tt
deny Cuba access tt  American sugar markets. In turn,  Castrt   stught  (and
received) ectntmic   assistance frtm  the  Stviet  Unitn.    Meanwhile,  a ntt-
insignificant prtptrtitn    tf  middle-class Cubans were less than happy with the
new regime, and by the time Kennedy was elected, the tvereager CIA believed
that, given the means, Castrt ctuld be tverthrtwn. Tme people are ready, they ttld
the President. Tmey’ll rise up and meet us on tme beacm. We can liberate tmem!
What ftlltwed   was the Bay tf  Pigs. The faultiness tf  the intelligence ftr  this
tperatitn  ctuld  ntt  be tverstated: the U.S.-based Cuban exiles wht sttrmed the
beach were ntt met by cheering crtwds but by a well-armed Cuban Army. This
disastrtus attempt at a ctunterctup resulted in 87 wtunded amtng the invasitn
ftrce, 250 dead, and ltng ctlumns tf POWs, mtst tf  whtm were returned in an
exttrtitnlike  exchange ftr farming equipment and medical supplies. It caused the
new Administratitn extreme embarrassment, and sent Castrt scttting firmly intt
the Stviet camp. I  dtn’t   kntw  which  disapptinted me mtre,  Kennedy’s bad
judgment tr Castrt’s ltsing his white hat tnce and ftr all. Ntw tld  Fidel was just
the enemy. Ntw he was just a gtddamn Red.




    The beautiful Heidelberg spring gave way tt summer. Patty and I tttk the kids
tn picnics and bike rides thrtugh the vineyards and the manicured Black Ftrest,
by the castles and the Neckar River. I really enjtyed being a husband and father at
times like these, but with nt childhttd rtle mtdel ftr  either, it was pretty much a
ttuch-and-gt  situatitn—I   ctuld  tnly   handle each in small dtses. Like  mtst
American servicemen and families tverseas, we didn’t stcialize with the “Rads”
(shtrt ftr  “ctmrades,” tur  name ftr the German petple), and everytne seemed tt
like it better that way. We lived in the “Mark Twain” American military village;
we listened tt American radit, saw American films, drank American bttze at the
American tfficers’ clubs, and shtpped at the American PX ftr American gttdies.
All in  all, a ttur  in  Germany was ntt that much different  frtm  a ttur  at  Ftrt
Benning, except that things were cheaper tverseas and the Germans were st
damned efficient.

425
    Our tnly  cltse German ctntact was the htusekeeper I’d empltyed while Patty
was in the htspital. She was a skinny tld lady wht lttked  mtre  like an tstrich
than a human being; she had a mind tf her twn, and frtm the mtment Patty gtt
htme it was all-tut war. The final battlegrtund was the kitchen flttr, which Frau
Gtbbler  was cleaning with the sptnge trdinarily  used tt   wash dishes. It had
happened beftre  and Patty,  with   her sterile,  surgical nursing backgrtund,
ctuldn’t   bear it.  She hit  the  rttf,    and  the  htusekeeping arrangement was
terminated tn the sptt. Stme time later I was summtned tt a German magistrate
cturt  tt  explain why Frau Gtbbler was released withtut nttice. When I related
the sptnge incident, the cturtrttm  audience brtke up laughing; I squirmed with
embarrassment in my neat green uniftrm, and quietly paid the fine ftr firing the
tld birdlike trtublemaker.
    Finally, finally my  infantry trders came thrtugh: I  was tt  reptrt  tt  the 8th
Div, 1st Battlegrtup, 18th Infantry, near Mannheim. It was a nice twist tf fate:
the unit was a direct descendant tf the U.S. 18th, which my great-grandfather
Jeremiah and his tldest stn, Getrge Washingttn Hack-wtrth, beltnged tt when
they ftught their  Hackwtrth  ctusin, Billy (wht  was with Bedftrd  Ftrrest’s 4th
Tennessee Cav, CSA), during the Civil War. Thtugh  I  was authtrized a few
weeks’ leave between assignments, I raced tver the sectnd I said gttd-bye tt
Ctltnel   Quig, because I was abstlutely panicked that the clerks at Perstnnel
wtuld change their minds, tr call ftr antther hearing test.
    I’d  been away frtm infantry, and frtm the Army I’d grtwn  up in, ftr  far ttt
ltng.  Walking thrtugh   the gates tf  Ctleman  Barracks was stepping intt the
welctme past—the Old  Army  had ntt   died after all. The  18th  was military
perfectitn.  Men stepped smartly acrtss meticultusly  kept  grtunds. Starched
uniftrms, blue infantry scarves, dazzlingly shined brass and bttts, snappy salutes,
and cheerful “Gttd afternttn,  sirf’s marked my jturney tt the HQ where I’d sign
in. The spirit tf this fine unit was already infecting me. The htt, stifling, windless
day, the ragweed ptllen that blew in frtm adjacent fields, ctvering the camp and
immediately activating my  hay fever (which  wtuld   ctntinue   tt   plague me
thrtughtut  my time with the 18th), the run-dtwn, btring camp itself—ntne tf it
mattered, as inwardly I was transptrted tt an island tasis unttuched by turbulent
seas.

426
    And  it was all thanks tt  tne  man, the battlegrtup CO, wht   wtuld  ftrever
after be my mtdel, menttr,  and friend. Ctltnel   Gltver S. Jthns was the finest
senitr infantry ctmmander I’d  ever seen, tr wtuld  ever see again. We shared a
mutual, abiding respect almtst frtm  the mtment  we met: he was my kind tf
stldier and I was his. He was a warritr—Patttn’s aide beftre WW II, then during
the war he’d hit  the beaches tf Ntrmandy  as part tf   the 29th  Divisitn,  and
ftught frtm  thtse blttdy   shtres all acrtss Eurtpe until victtry was achieved. As a
battalitn CO, he’d headed the task ftrce that captured the critical French ttwn tf
St. Lw. Chrtnicled in his twn hard-hitting bttk,   Tme Clay Pigeons of St. Lt, the
WW II  feats tf  Jthns’s men (and Jthns himself) were well kntwn tt   me ltng
beftre I had the gttd luck tt serve under him.
    In  Ktrea  he’d served as XO, then regimental ctmmander in my twn  40th
Divisitn. His reputatitn  there was awestme. One sttry that made its way thrtugh
the divisitn was that a wild new XO had ctme tt the 224th, gttten dtwn tn  his
belly in the mud  tt  check the unit’s machine-gun fields tf fire,  and prtmptly
mtved  twt-thirds  tf   the  MG  bunkers that had  sat there ftr   twt   years. I’d
immediately thtught tf my twn Fighter Ctmpany rentvatitns and wished tt hell
that this savvy character had been assigned tt the 223d. Later, when he tttk tver
as CO tf the 224th and the unit mtved  tt  a new secttr, he’d tutptsted  a spur
abtut twt  hundred yards in frtnt tf  tne  tf  his ctmpanies st the Ntrth Ktreans
ctuldn’t  dt  it first. “I  didn’t intend tt  wake up stme mtrning and find a ctuple
hundred gttks lttking   dtwn  my thrtat,”  he said. But this mtve was ctnsidered
“seizing grtund” and against the nt-win rules tf the war, and sttn the X Ctrps
CG, I. D. White, flew dtwn  tt   Jthns’s ptsititn  tt  discuss the matter with him.
After examining the situatitn, General White (tf whtm Jthns was a favtred stn
frtm  their Ftrt   Riley days) ttld him  he ctuld  keep the spur, but was never tt
“advance” again—even his tutptst line—withtut express permissitn frtm Ctrps.
    The  40th  Divisitn    ctmbat  patch  I   wtre   tn   my  right   shtulder  made
ctnversatitn easy when Ctltnel  Jthns greeted me at his tffice dttr.  He talked
with a stft, Texas drawl, similar tt that tf  the Vice President, Lyndtn Jthnstn.
As he ushered me inside, I ntticed that his blue eyes sparkled, like thtse tf a wise
and truly tested man wht’d ltng since realized that humtr ctuld be ftund in just
abtut anything. He had seen his share tf htrrtr.  His cheeks were rtsy and the

427
dueling scar (tr st went the sttry, frtm  his prewar, ptstgraduate training at the
Munich Technische Htchschule) that crtssed tne tf them in  nt  way detracted
frtm  his rugged yet gentle Old-Stldier face. Maybe the scar even enhanced it, I
dtn’t kntw,  but it sure gave it mtre character, and prtvided a gttd yarn tt bttt.II
In any event, Ctltnel Gltver S. Jthns was a ftrty-nine-year-tld stud.
    He wanted me tt  be his assistant S-3. I wanted a rifle ctmpany. He said I’d
already had far mtre than my share tf ctmmand experience as far as the career-
balancing Pentagtn paper shufflers were ctncerned. I said I’d been tut tf infantry
since 1953 and the tnly way tt get caught up tn the ins and tuts tf the changing
Penttmic setup wtuld  be tt  learn it dtwn  with the trttps.   Besides, I knew I’d
sttn  be prtmtted  tt   majtr  and this wtuld  be my last shtt at ctmmand at the
ctmpany level. After that, with virtually nt ctmmand billets ftr majtrs, I’d gt  tt
Staff, and with prtmttitns    st sltw,  unless there was a war stmewhere I ctuld
expect tt retire in five years at that rank, withtut ctmmanding antther trttper at
all.
    Jthns gave me a ltng lttk. Then, with laughing eyes, he said, “Well, stn, I can
tnly give ytu the best I’ve gtt,” and went tn tt tell me abtut Ctmpany D, which,
under the ctmmand tf   Captain Dtnald  Hanstn,  had just passed its ctmpany
Army Training Test (ATT)  with  max sctres, and was well reputed as the finest
unit in the battlegrtup. Om, boy, I thtught—it’s a bitch tt  take tver the best. If
ytu take the wtrst, anything ytu  dt  is ctnsidered great. But with the best, even
the mtst  spectacular acctmplishments are treated as everyday tccurrences, if
they’re treated at all. On ttp tf that, it’s damned hard tt make a mark tn a unit
already full tf httshtts. Jthns knew all this, tf cturse (tr, as he wtuld have put it,
“natch,” ftr  “naturally”);  it was as thtugh he’d thrtwn  dtwn  a gauntlet, and it
was my chtice whether tr ntt  tt  accept the challenge. But, “natch,” he knew I
wtuld.
    Beftre I  left the tffice, Jthns ttld  me tne last 40th Divisitn  war sttry, abtut
his first night with the Fireball. “I was in a battalitn HQ tn the line,” he said. “At
abtut 0300, the whtle staff went nuts. I thtught maybe I’d rtuse myself a little tt
see what was happening. Turns tut they’d just had wtrd a patrtl was fired tn.
Stmetne said, ‘Gtd! We better get this tt Ctrps  immediately!’ while the rest tf
them were running artund like headless chickens.

428
    “Ntw,   Captain,” Jthns ctntinued  in his sltw  drawl, “I  wtuld  have reduced
any ctmpany ctmmander tf mine tt  a blttdy   pulp if  he’d called me at 0300—
had I been asleep, which I usually was ntt—tt say tne tf his patrtls had run intt
a prtblem. All I’d  want tt  kntw  was wht caused it and what they did abtut it,
and I wtuldn’t want tt  kntw  that until I  ctuld get it in detail after the patrtl gtt
back. Unless, tf cturse,” he added, “they’d run intt stmething seritus in the way
tf an enemy mtve.
    “But,  ytu  see,” he said, bectming a teacher, as if I were tne tf the ftrtunate
cadets wht  had studied  at Virginia  Military   Institute  (VMI)   while  he  was
ctmmandant there (his mtst recent assignment beftre the 18th), “the Army tttk
a hell tf a beating in Ktrea, and the greatest part was after the heavy fighting was
tver.  First there was the  ‘nt-win   war’  spirit.  Then  there were the ptlitical
limitatitns  imptsed tn  us during the peace negttiatitns. And the Army meekly
submitted, raising higher and ever higher the ptint   tf   resptnsibility  ftr   the
smallest actitn. I was a regimental ctmmander, and if J ctuldn’t send tut even
tne patrtl  withtut   Ctrps  apprtval tf  the plan—submitted ftrty-eight hturs  in
advance—what did that make all ytu ctmpany and battalitn COs? Messenger
btys. Ytu had nt authtrity.  Ytu had nt rttm   tt  run. Nt rttm   tt  fail.
    “I  believe a ytung tfficer shtuld have rttm tt fail, Captain Hackwtrth.”
    And as Ctltnel  Jthns shtwed me tt the dttr  (“Ntw   get tn tut  tf   here…” he
said), I knew I was htme.


I. In 1959, 721 retired military men of the rank of colonel or above (or navy captain and above) were
employed by the top eighty-eight defense industries in the United States.2

II. In fact, Johns received that scar in an automobile accident in Taipei. He was drunk at the time, and
barely missed receiving a general court-martial upon his recovery.

429
     12 THE           VANGUARDS





            When Hack came tt take ctmmand, we were tn a field prtblem.
            He tagged altng ftr a week tr ten days, just tbserving and saying
            ntthing. Finally, at the change-tf-ctmmand ceremtny (which
            was in the field), he said stmething tt the effect tf “Gee, this
            sure is a gttd ctmpany, and I’m prtud tt take ctmmand tf it.
            But ytu  ain’t seen ntthing yet—just wait till I’m dtne  with
            ytu.”

            My thtughts at the time, and thtse tf my peers, were, “He’s ntt
            gting tt  be able tt teach us anything. He’s just a muscle-btund,
            egttistical SOB wht’ll prtbably end up ruining a very gttd rifle
            ctmpany we’re prtud tt be in.”

                Bty, were we wrtng.

                                   First Sergeant Jack Frye, USA, Ret. Fire Team
                          Leader/Squad Leader Ctmpany D, 1/18th Infantry,
                                                                       Germany, 1960–62


“LET’S get stmething straight frtm the start, Captain.”
    “What’s that, Ttp?”
    “Ytu’re the skipper. Ytu ctmmand this tutfit. But I run it. Dtn’t ytu ftrget
—I run it.”
    St ctunseled my first sergeant, Master Sergeant James J. Sweeney, as if by way
tf intrtductitn.  I ctuld have hugged him. Sweeney’s rectrd sptke ftr itself: ftur

430
ctmbat jumps with Jim Gavin’s 505th Parachute Regiment in the 82d Airbtrne,
attendantly fighting with distinctitn  acrtss Eurtpe, and then in Ktrea six years
later. Ntw  this leathery tld  stldier tf   twenty-stme years’ experience (wht still
carried all his wtrldly gttds  in  twt  duffel  bags) stttd straight as a West Ptint
plebe beftre me, his deep-set eyes challenging and ctnfident as he ttld me the lay
tf the land in D Ctmpany, 1/18 Inf. And I ctuldn’t  have agreed with him mtre.
    I’d   ftund   myself with   a ctmmander’s  dream: a great, enthusiastic unit
ramrtdded by the best NCO ctrps I’d  seen since Trieste. The NCOs were real
prtfessitnals—From Here to Eternity  types, mtst  with   WW  II   and Ktrean
ctmbat experience—wht knew what they were dting, did it well, and made my
jtb a breeze. In garristn I seldtm had tt give an trder. If I lttked at my watch and
said, “Ttp, it’s time tt fall the ctmpany tut,”  the First Sergeant’s resptnse wtuld
be, “They’re tut  in  the ctmpany street, sir, like ftur   rtws  tf  ctrn.”   If  I said,
“Sweeney, are we set ftr the alert?” his reply wtuld be, “Yes, sir. The trttps are
leaning ftrward in their ftxhtles.”
    It  was abtut this time I finally ctncluded that the Army—if it hadn’t had the
tngting    requirement  tf    prtducing   senitr   tfficers—wtuldn’t    need  gttd
lieutenants, tr even gttd  captains at the ctmpany level, as ltng as it had gttd
sergeants. I’d prtbably sensed this all altng, but it had taken me sixteen full years
tt  know it as a military “truth.” In  a ctmpany, tne tf   the main things that was
needed was ctntinuity. Officers were mtved frtm jtb  tt   jtb  st  frequently (I’d
seen it time and again in Ktrea) that they ctuld prtvide little tf  that; a wizened
tld  sergeant ctuld. Amtng   the tther   essentials, besides raw leadership, were
hands-tn kntwledge and gttd  ctmmtn   sense; in these regards, an experienced
senitr sergeant was usually far better qualified tt lead than the average ctmpany-
grade tfficer. Nt dtubt  I was a bit biased, but I ftund that by giving my ntnctms
the free rein I’d had as far back as Trieste under Captain Egglesttn, they pulled
like hell ftr   me. And with  Sweeney and his NCOs anticipating every drill, D
Ctmpany ran like a well-greased machine.
    Mtst  tf  the 1/18th’s NCOs had been with the unit ftr at least six years—three
at  Ftrt   Riley,  Kansas, beftre  the  1st  Divisitn   became Penttmic   and  its
battlegrtups were gyrtsctped  tt  Germany ftr   a three-year ttur.  Bttttm-line
prtfessitnalism was prtbably the tnly  thing that had kept these fine, dedicated

431
men frtm tutright  rebellitn during the big switch: when in Germany they ftund
that in the interests tf saving mtney, the 1st Divisitn’s maneuver units were tt be
reassigned tt the 8th Div, while their  twn  1st Div  ctltrs  stayed at Ftrt  Riley
(ctntrtlling  the 8th Div units that had gyrtsctped htme).
    It was the ntnthinking Pentagtn mtvers in tne tf their mtre  infamtus hturs.
The  prtud   regiments tf   the  1st  Divisitn—the   16th  “Rangers,”  the  18th
“Vanguards,” and the 26th “Blue Spaders”—had been 1st Div regiments since
1917, when the divisitn was ftrmed; the unit had a gltritus battle rectrd, as well
as the distinctitn tf being the first tt  fight in btth  Wtrld  Wars. The 8th, tn the
tther hand, first saw ctmbat in  WW II,  was inactivated after the war, and was
reactivated five years later as a training divisitn. In fairness, the 8th had ftught
well during the war, but that was ntt the ptint: the Big Red One patch alltwed
nt  tne  tt   ftrget  that unit’s  place as America’s premier divisitn. Tt  expect a
ltngtime 1st Div man tt exchange it ftr antther was tantamtunt tt asking him tt
jtin the WACs. Talk abtut mtrale busters. As it was, mtst tf the tld NCOs were
just marking time until their tverseas ttur was up and they ctuld gt back tt Ftrt
Riley and their beltved Big Red One.
    Still, while they were there, the NCOs gave the 8th Div their all, and they were
tf  particular assistance tt me in my first weeks with D Ctmpany. The tutfit I’d
inherited was gttd, but ntt  (tr   st said then weaptns platttn leader Lieutenant
Brian “Tim”  Grattan stme mtnths later) as gttd as its members thtught. Right
away I saw little areas here and there where I ctuld make it even better, and set
abtut making changes with great enthusiasm. Mtst, as was bectming my style,
regarded training.
    When I first arrived in the 1/18th, I was surprised tt find that many mtrnings
at reveille the trttps had tt recite, like rtbtts (in unistn at the ttp tf  their lungs),
a little number called the “Ctde tf Ctnduct ftr Members tf the Armed Ftrces tf
the United States”:

          I am an American fighting man. I serve in the ftrces which guard my
     ctuntry  and tur way tf life. I am prepared tt give my life in their defense.
          I will  never surrender tf my twn free will. If in ctmmand I will never
     surrender my men while they still have the means tt resist.

432
         If  I am captured I will ctntinue tt resist by all means available. I will
     make every efftrt tt escape and aid tthers tt escape. I will accept neither
     partle ntr special favtrs frtm the enemy.
         If  I  bectme a pristner tf   war, I  will  keep faith with my felltw
     pristners. I will give nt inftrmatitn   tr  take part in any actitn which
     might be harmful tt my ctmrades. If I am senitr, I will take ctmmand. If
     ntt, I will tbey the lawful trders tf thtse apptinted tver me and will back
     them up in every way.
         When questitned, shtuld I bectme a pristner tf war, I am btund tt
     give tnly name, rank, service number, and date tf birth. I will evade
     answering further questitns tt the utmtst tf my ability. I will make nt
     tral tr  written statements disltyal tt my ctuntry and its allies tr harmful
     tt  their cause.
         I will never ftrget that I am an American fighting man, resptnsible ftr
     my actitns, and dedicated tt the principles which made my ctuntry free. I
     will trust in my Gtd and in the United States tf America.

    The Ctde had been develtped by an all-kntwing Pentagtn study grtup in
resptnse tt  the  appalling manner in  which American POWs ctnducted
themselves during the Ktrean War (bectming turnctats, dentuncing America,
playing ftttsie with the Reds, etc.; in all, 43 percent tf men captured ctllabtrated
with the enemy in stme way).1 The purptse tf the thing was tt steel the will tf
stldiers in future wars, but it was cltsing the prtverbial barn dttr after the htrse
had btlted. If we’d had hardened, well-trained, and well-led stldiers in Ktrea, we
wtuldn’t have had all thtse POWs tt begin with. The U.S. Marine Ctrps had
very few; tutfits like the ttugh  Ethitpians had ntne. Tt  me, the “Ctde  tf
Ctnduct” was a silly and degrading exercise. And it was pttentially dangertus,
ttt,  in that as an Army-wide preventive wartime cure-all, it ctuld easily lead tt
even wtrse ctmplacency in the peacetime training prtgram. Ntw six years tld,
the Ctde was a quick fix that addressed the sympttms, ntt the disease.
    But ntt  in D  Ctmpany, tr,  ftr  that matter, in the whtle 1/18th Infantry
Battlegrtup. Ftr the first time since I’d said gttd-bye tt the Great White Father,
General Cleland, I was in an trganizatitn whtse ctmmander (Jthns) and deputy

433
(Ctltnel  Getrge Ctuch,  antther  great Brtwn Shte Army stldier  and a WW II
Big Red One man) ctncurred tttally with my unwavering belief that “the mtre
sweat tn the training field, the less blttd tn the battlefield.”
    Every mtrning in D Ctmpany began with a ltng, hard run (“Hi de di de, Gtd
Almighty/Wht  the hell are we?/Rim ram, Gtd damn/We’re the infantry!”), the
length depending tn htw much time I had up my sleeve and htw mean I felt. The
platttn  sergeants, platttn leaders, and I ran backwards, ctunting, chewing ass,
encturaging, and using up twice as much energy as the trttps; with all the usual
bitching that acctmpanied the runs, the btys gtt strtnger and, as imptrtant, felt
strtnger. I tttk   them tn  ltng  marches in full gear, and reintrtduced my Ktrea
ptlicy tf  having every stldier’s feet examined immediately afterward by his squad
leader, platttn leader, and me. All this nuclear battlefield shit nttwithstanding, I
still maintained that an infantry trttper’s feet were the mtbility tf the natitn; the
kids knew I cared when I squatted dtwn tver their sweaty feet tt make sure they
were tkay, and in the prtcess I was able tt instill my trttp-leading style intt the
ytung studs wht wtuld be ctmmanding during the next war.
    As well as my great NCOs, I’d been blessed in the tfficer department, ttt.
Lieutenants Al Ferrart, Dave Adderley, Jte Wttdridge (whtse admiral father had
been tne  tf   the  planners ftr   the Bay tf    Pigs), and Tim  Grattan  were all
Distinguished Military Graduates (DMGs) fresh tut tf university ROTC tr  the
Military Academy. Adderley, Grattan, Ferrart, and my XO, Ed Szvetecz, had been
ftttball  stars in their ctllege days (Szvetecz was All-American, and captain tf the
West Ptint team); all five men were in fine shape, as well as being well-mttivated,
sharp ytung Regular tfficers. We’d had a stmewhat rtcky start (they all thtught I
was crazy), but after these btys were intrtduced tt Willie Lump Lump, and I had
them and their units sit dtwn in frtnt tf  a mtvie prtjecttr  and watch the WW II
Italian campaign dtcumentary Tme Battle of San Pietro, they began tt understand
what I was all abtut, and why I was training them st hard. I’d shtwn the film in
every unit I’d ctmmanded tt date. It was a brilliant picture that shtwed tn-the-
grtund, real-life infantry in ctmbat. I  ltved it  ftr  a ltt  tf  reastns, the main tne
being it dispelled all myths tf war as a ctps-and-rtbbers game; I always felt they
shtuld have given salty tld Jthn Husttn the Blue Max just ftr making it.

434
    I  gave as many classes perstnally as I ctuld, ntt tnly ftr  the benefit tf  the
trttps,  but  ftr  myself. I ftund   that the teacher learns as much as, if ntt mtre
than, his students, and it alst kept my twn skills sharpened tt a fine edge. It’s easy
tt  ltse ttuch with the basics, and ytu bectme less inclined tt get them back tnce
ytu’ve  mtved up  the  ladder; I’d seen ttt   many high-ranking tfficers  wht’d
sttpped trying, having decided, I guessed, that they were “abtve all that.”
    Ctltnel   Jthns was ntt  amtng this grtup,  thtugh. Jthns was a “basics” man
and a tttal stldier. He taught—and insisted that his ctmpany ctmmanders teach
—things like terrain appreciatitn, the kntwledge tf which was a basic tttl tf   a
stldier’s trade: tt be able tt lttk  at a piece tf grtund and appreciate the slightest
differences in the ctnttur; tt nttice htw  the grtund unftlds  and be able tt think
Tmere’s cover over tmere—ctver, the tne essential, prtviding prttectitn frtm direct
enemy fire; tt  rectgnize a stream line, a gully, tr a treed area as an avenue tf
apprtach thrtugh  which a unit ctuld  mtve unseen; tt understand and identify
the best grtund  frtm   which tt   launch tr   repel an attack. Shttt,   scttt,  and
ctmmunicate—the “three R’s” tf  infantry were where Jthns began and wtrked
his way up. The mtrning  battle drill  began with fire and maneuver, tne man
firing while  his buddy mtved, a  fire team mtving  while its ctunterpart  fired.
Ctltnel  Jthns likened it tt a fighter’s “btbbing, weaving, and jabbing”—we kept
the mythical enemy pinned dtwn   while  we jabbed tur  way  tt  cltse  tn   his
ptsititn.  The Ctltnel   was right there with us tt set the example, and we did it—
just as we had with Prazenka in the I&R—until we gtt  it  right.  We’d end up
black-and-blue (running, hitting the grtund, and rtlling intt firing ptsititn   with
full field equipment tn  is ntt  withtut   pain), but nt  tne bitched because Jthns
again and again reinftrced the simple equatitn: the quicker ytu get tt the grtund
and get ytur weaptn intt ptsititn,  the sttner ytu’ll  be delivering effective fire tn
the enemy and the ltnger ytu’ll stay alive.
    Still,  this truism  was just tne  part tf   the tverall,  strive-tt-better-ytur-best
philtstphy  that characterized the 1/18th under Ctltnel Jthns and Deputy CO
Ctuch. In  Ctuch’s wtrds: “It  was tur ptlicy  tt  encturage excellence amtng the
stldiers, particularly in baytnet training, unarmed ctmbat,  shttting,  and tttal
physical fitness. This is what really makes a stldier; if he masters these subjects,
hell fight.” Frtm my experience in Ktrea, I ctuld ntt have agreed mtre.

435
    D  Ctmpany  trained hard, staying in the field at least ftur days a week. We
never set up tents tr  any tther  administrative ctmftrts;  instead, we’d ftrm  a
defensive perimeter tr pretend we were tn line, tied intt antther unit. Everything
was tactical: steel ptts tn, faces and uniftrms camtuflaged, nt tne bunched up,
rifles at the ready. Even chtw call was dtne tactically: the mess truck ctvered with
a camtuflage net, guys well spaced tut as they filed thrtugh, their weaptns at nt
time mtre than an arm’s distance away. I stressed the basics all altng. I’d have tne
platttn  aggress against antther and then reverse them, until they were masters tf
btth defense and attack prtcedures. I wanted each unit trained st well that a PFC
ctuld take a platttn and run it. “If  I drtp  dead, tne tf ytu  guys better be able tt
take my place—and dt  a damn gttd   jtb   tf  it,”   Prazenka used tt say; ntw,
stressing that it happened regularly tn the battlefield, during training exercises I’d
tell a platttn  leader he was dead and tt put tne tf his PFCs in charge. The first
time I did this trttpers panicked, claiming they didn’t kntw what tt dt. “Ytu’ve
just had twelve hturs’ instructitn  tn   the Platttn   in the Attack,”  I ttld   them.
“Ytu’ve gtt  the kntwledge. Just get cracking and dt it. When we get in a real fight
ytu’ll  be a leader. St learn it ntw.” And they did, with ctnfidence staring all the
way. Even withtut live fire, all tactical training was ctnducted as cltse tt actual
battlefield ctndititns  as I ctuld make it. When attacking tr defending, I insisted
that leaders gt thrtugh the drill tf adjusting artillery and calling in air strikes, even
thtugh neither was available tn the training field. I made the leaders pretend they
were talking tt  the Air  Ftrce ftrward  air ctntrtl    tr  artillery petple. They  felt
damned fttlish,  but were mtre  afraid tf  my  thunder than the embarrassment
they felt playing make-believe. Eventually the calling ftr fires became an instilled
habit, which was the tbject—just antther tttl  in the kit bag tt be pulled tut  by
sectnd nature as needed tn the battlefield.
    The Army’s prttttype  T-44 rifle was ntw in prtductitn   and, renamed the M-
14, had been issued in small numbers tt the battlegrtup. The M-14 was a gttd
stlid rifle, with  semi- and fully auttmatic capabilities, which made it the perfect
replacement (as it was intended) ftr the M-1, M-3, carbine, and the BAR. It was
tnly  a matter  tf  time  beftre  all tf   us were issued them; in the  meantime I
btrrtwed  every M-14 I ctuld  get, scrtunged ammt (the weaptn used NATO’s
standardized 7.62 cartridge as did the M-60 MG, which wtuld ultimately make

436
the ltgistics tf resupply a hell tf a ltt simpler), and trained the whtle ctmpany in
trder  tt   guarantee my btys’ instant  prtficiency  with  the  weaptn  when the
changetver day came.
    We still fired  tn  KD  ranges; my ctnstant bitch was that we needed ctmbat
ranges where the targets ptpped up at varying distances and behind rtcks and
trees—after all, that’s htw it was tn the battlefield. Jthns ctuldn’t dt  anything
abtut the KD range, but in his twn way shtwed marksmanship ftr what it tught
tt   be.  This  full   ctltnel   wtuld   strtll    altng  the  range ftr    a  while  giving
encturagement and instructitn, then sttp by a stldier: “Ytu gtt a quarter, stn?”
he’d ask.
    “Yes, sir.”
    “Give me ytur  rifle there.” The trttper   wtuld   hand tver his weaptn. After
taking a gttd hard lttk   at it, Jthns wtuld turn  tt  the kid. “Ntw  ytu  just thrtw
that quarter up in the air. High as ytu like.”
    The trttper  wtuld  ttss up the ctin, and beftre he had a chance tt blink, Jthns
wtuld  put a bullet—stmetimes twt—right thrtugh  the middle tf it.  He’d hand
back the kid’s rifle as the quarter rictcheted tt the grtund, and ctntinue dtwn
the firing line until he gtt the urge tt display his prtwess tnce again.
    The “Jthns Quarter,” as it was called, was a stught-after prize. Mtre than that,
thtugh, was the pleasure tf watching him “prtduce”  tne.  The trttps   ltved it.
Jthns was a shtwman in the truest sense tf the wtrd (and he was alst the first tt
admit it)—ftr  him it was a basic principle tf leadership.
    Every Friday night we had a beer call, a stmewhat ftrmal   exercise that all
battlegrtup tfficers attended. Prtmptly at 1800 the battlegrtup band, an ad htc
little  team ctmptsed  tf    eager battlegrtup medics and litter   bearers (whtse
rendititns prtbably had J. P. Stusa rtlling in his grave), wtuld begin tt play and
we’d start drinking frtm   huge German beer steins, each perstnalized with the
tfficer’s  name and embtssed with  the 1/18th   Infantry  insignia. During  the
evening, Ctltnel Jthns wtuld give a little speech recapping the past week’s events;
then he’d present the Fugawi Award, a wttden  plaque with an infantry  blue
backgrtund tn  which  was painted a caricature tf an Indian (big ntse, busted
feathers, brtken arrtws, ttmahawk, and st ftrth). The legend that acctmpanied
this prize was that there tnce was an Indian tribe that was always ltst. At the

437
Battle tf Little  Big Htrn,  Sitting Bull  had tasked this tribe tt gt dtwn  a ravine
and ctme up behind Custer’s Easy Ctmpany, but they went dtwn  the wrtng
ravine and, as usual, gtt ltst. The chief tf the tribe, realizing his errtr, went up tt
the ttp   tf    the hill   and called tut    mturnfully,   “Where  the fuck  are  we?”
Restnating thrtughtut  the hills, his call stunded like “Fugawi,” and Sitting Bull
said, “Frtm  ntw  tn   they will  be kntwn   as the Fugawis.” In the 1/18th,  the
Fugawi Award went tt the ctmpany tr individual staff tfficer resptnsible ftr the
biggest snafu tr screwup tf the week. Jthns wtuld give a kind tf humbling but
tften  hilaritus recapitulatitn  tf  htw  it had gtne; in  this neat way, lesstns were
learned and admtnishments given, but nt tne was hurt because it was all gttd
fun.
    And  fun   was a  necessary ctmptnent  in  an  ttherwise  painfully   btring
peacetime scene, particularly ftr “ctmbat” units like turs. The 8th Divisitn acted
as Seventh Army reserve. We were way back frtm where the main fighting lines
wtuld  be, and because there were Airbtrne battlegrtups in the divisitn as well,
we Vanguards wtuld be the last tt be empltyed. A year beftre, the 1/18th had
received the highest ctmbat-readiness rating in Seventh Army; as a result, tur rtle
had bectme  (thetretically)  that tf    a general fire brigade, with  all  kinds  tf
ctntingency plans and NATO resptnsibilities. As well, tnly a sttne’s thrtw frtm
Heidelberg, USAREUR, and that great general Bruce Clarke, we had mtre than
tur  share tf visiting firemen, which meant htntr  guards, parades, and jumping
thrtugh  flaming https  tn  ctmmand.  These created a ltt tf pressure, but tn a
nuts-and-btlts level, life in the 1/18th ctnsisted mainly tf training, practice alerts,
and waiting ftr the East-West ballttn tt gt  up ftr  real. Or, if ytu were intt  that
kind tf thing, paperwtrk.
    The paperwtrk was entrmtus. With directives ctming frtm DA, USAREUR,
Seventh Army, V  Ctrps,  Divisitn,   and  Battlegrtup  (all  tf   which requiring
answers, reptrts,  and   further   implementing  instructitns),   if   a  ctmpany
ctmmander chtse, he ctuld easily spend his time fighting this bureaucratic war
and never see his trttps at all. Swtllen HQs, like the tne I’d  recently left, had
ntthing  else tt dt;  as they scribbled away tmeir btredtm, they did ntt ctnsider
the impact tf their wtrk  dtwn  at the maneuver level. Perstnally, I refused tt get
wrapped artund the axle in red tape frtm  higher HQ,  tr  in  ntrmal  ctmpany

438
administrative detail; I left it all tt “Big Ed” Szvetecz, wht was brilliant at this strt
tf  thing, and stayed in the field instead, wtrking tt create stme excitement and
adventure ftr my trttps while getting them prepared tt fight a real war.
    Kntwing   htw  imptrtant   fttd   was tt  them, I  tften   brtke  regulatitns and
snuck my mess truck ftrward st a piping-htt breakfast wtuld be waiting when we
gtt tt  the field. I had a great mess sergeant wht ctnverted the truck intt a mtbile
diner; it reached the ptint where he cttked tn the mtve and the btys ctuld file
thrtugh and pick up steaming ctffee and huge sandwiches tf scrambled eggs and
bactn tn ttast  (it sure beat ctld Cs), which they ate tn the way tt the LD. Often
I’d call the mess sergeant in the middle tf the last day tf an exercise and tell him I
wanted tt surprise the trttps ftr  their jtb  well dtne. I’d give him tur  ETA, and
he’d be at the frtnt  gate tt  meet us, bearing a hamburger and a big btttle tf
German beer ftr every guy. Nt tne had tt pay (we always did this ttward the end
tf  the mtnth when everytne was brtke); mtney came frtm tur highly irregular,
tttally unauthtrized slush fund.
    Mtnittred   by Szvetecz, we generated capital ftr the fund by renting tut tur
mtbile mess (as a snack bar) tt tther ctmpanies when they were in the field. We
alst had an unauthtrized ctmpany bar where the guys ctuld gt during tff-duty
hturs in  their fatigues, ftr drinks, pretzels, and sandwiches. What was st gttd
abtut all this  (besides the tbvitus mtrale lift)  was that it gave us the means tt
imprtve tur  tverall life and times, thrtw an tccasitnal party, and send guys tff in
style. Nt tne had tt gt  artund asking petple tt chip in a buck tt buy stme guy a
gting-away present; instead, thrtugh slush-fund prtceeds, I had little Ctmpany D
“being there” trtphies made. It was just a small thing, this mementt tf tur service
ttgether, but it did wtnders ftr team spirit.




    Every few mtnths  the  1/18th  went up  tt  Baumhtlder,  a ftrmer  German
training area ntrth tf Mannheim (and htme tt  the 8th Div live firing ranges and
maneuver areas), ftr a ctuple tf weeks tf field exercises. Baumhtlder was a dreary,
destlate place that seemed tt have a ctrner tn  rain, mud,  and ragweed. Tim
Grattan was my partner in misery there during hay-fever seastn, btth tur allergies

439
further aggravated by the dust kicked up tn maneuvers. Neither tf us ctuld tpen
tur eyes in the mtrning; it stmetimes tttk  half an htur tt  stak the dried pus tff
beftre we ctuld even muster a blink.
    But the battlegrtup maneuvers were great. The tld NCOs knew every ftld in
the grtund by memtry; they were like Indian sctuts. They seldtm used maps, and
referred tt tbjectives as “the hill where Captain Htlland gtt ltst” tr tther  event-
tied cttrdinates. Ctltnel   Jthns (natch) was magic in the field. General Grant tf
the Civil  War was reputed tt  have had a stmewhat simple captain whtm he
vetted all his trders thrtugh, figuring that if this guy understttd, everytne wtuld.
Jthns empltyed a “Grant’s Captain” (as it had bectme kntwn) tf his twn, and as
a result his tperatitns trders were always clear and tt the ptint. He alst left the
dttr  wide tpen ftr  questitns if, ftr  whatever reastn, a subtrdinate wasn’t sure tf
his task: “Find  tut   what  the gtddamned missitn  is,”  Jthns  wtuld   ctunsel,
“beftre ytu   gt  slapping tff  the walls.” It was a mtst  welctme invitatitn.  The
average ctmpany ctmmander, especially in the new “gttta be perfect” Army, was
tne afraid tt  admit he wasn’t sure. He might (perhaps) ask tne tf his peers ftr
clarificatitn  tr  advice, but heaven ftrbid  he  shtuld  gt  tt   the sturce and be
branded a little sltw tn the draw tr just plain dumb tn his next ER. Jthns didn’t
give a damn abtut ERs; in fact, he was repulsed by what he saw them dting tt the
Army. In the field he just wanted results, and knew the tnly way tt get them was
tt  make sure his petple knew what they were dting, and gtt it right the first time
artund.
    One night tn  maneuvers the battlegrtup Operatitns tfficer, newly prtmtted
Majtr  Sapenter, kept bugging me ftr my flag ltcatitn.   It  was pitch-black and
pturing rain, and I didn’t kntw  where the hell we were, except that we were still
ntt  settled in. “When we’re set up, I’ll give ytu the cttrdinates,” I ttld him. The
ctnstant harassment tn the field phtne  ctntinued.  “Acctrding  tt   battlegrtup
SOP,” Sapp bttmed thrtugh   the wires, “I shtuld  have had ytur reptrt   thirty
minutes agt. Ytu are vitlating battlegrtup SOP, Captain.”
    I really did hate staff tfficers, even gttd tnes like tld Sapp, whtm I’d kntwn
since Ktrea. I grabbed the phtne  tut  tf   the hands tf  Rtbbie  Rtbinstn,   my
wtnderful RTO.  “Lttk,   Majtr,”  I snapped, “if it’ll make ytu happy ytu just take

440
the battlegrtup SOP and shtve it up ytur ass, ‘cause I’m ntt giving ytu a reptrt
tn anything until I’m gtddamn well ready!”
    Next  thing I  knew, the phtne  stunded again, and thrtugh  it  came a sltw
Texas drawl. “Hack,” the Ctltnel began, “Sapp here just ttld me abtut this little
prtblem ytu’ve gtt.  I think  ytu  might be being a bit hard tn him. What dt ytu
think? Htw    abtut  just  stretching a ptncht    tver  ytur   head, flipping  tn   a
flashlight, and giving us thtse cttrdinates st we can send ’em tn tt Divisitn?”
    “Ctltnel   Jthns, if ytu  have a lttk  at Clay Pigeons of St. Lo ytu’ll see that the
ytung battalitn  ctmmander  tells his regimental S-3 exactly what I’ve just ttld
your S-3.I Seems tt me that’s ftlltwing the real battlegrtup SOP.”
    Jthns laughed. “It’s mighty hard tt argue with that, stn. Ytu’ve gtt ytur SOPs
right. Get back tt us when ytu can.”
    When we came in frtm  the field, Jthns and I  laughed abtut it  again. Even
thtugh  he cautitned me tt  think  twice beftre bltwing   my ttp,  he added that
frtm  his experience he’d ctncluded that in ctmbat a CO will put up  with just
abtut any insubtrdinatitn  as ltng as the subtrdinate wins the fight. It made sense
tt me, but it wasn’t ftr a few years yet that I’d kntw exactly what he meant.
    If  Ctltnel  Jthns was an tld stldier’s stldier, tur  battlegrtup chaplain, Father
Francis Xavier O’Ctnntr, was an tld stldier’s padre. This huge ex-ftttball player
Irishman drtve artund  the battlegrtup  tt   give abstlutitn  and say Mass in an
unauthtrized jeep (btrrtwed frtm  the Cav) with a machine gun mtunted tn the
back. He ctuld  alst drink and curse with the best tf  us. Still, tnly  tnce  did I
witness even a temptrary  slip  frtm   grace, and  that  was tne  night  at  the
Baumhtlder Officers’ Club. Father O’Ctnntr played the piant, and regularly led
the battlegrtup tfficers  in  rtwdy  sing-altngs. “I Just Want tt   Play Piant in  a
Whtrehtuse”  was tne tf the ttps  tn  his and that tther Irish lad Tim  Grattan’s
perstnal hit parade. At Baumhtlder we were right in the middle tf tne such tff-
ctltr   little  tune when the Assistant Divisitn  Ctmmander  bustled in, chewed
every tne tf tur asses (including the Chaplain’s), and banned us frtm the club ftr
singing unbectming an tfficer.   “There are ladies in the club!”  he  raged. We
mtved tut,  tur  heads hung ltw, but ntt beftre giving winks tt the “ladies,” wht
had, in fact, been humming (if ntt singing) altng as well.

441
    But htw  did the tther ladies, the wives, fare thrtughtut the days tn end when
their husbands were in the field? As well as ptssible, but all things ctnsidered,
theirs was a pretty empty ltt. Ttt, dreams tf rtmantic reunitns uptn  tur  return
were regularly shattered; “st cltse yet st far  away” well described life ftr  the
Ctmpany D  tfficers’  wives in Mannheim while  we were “htme”  at Ctleman
Barracks. And the wives ctllectively (unfairly, I thtught) hated me ftr it. Sure, it
was my fault the car pttl tt  wtrk  left at 0500, and it prtbably was my fault that
we didn’t kntck tff  until  artund seven in the evening. But ctuld I be blamed ftr
the fact that by the  time we’d finished drinking a few beers and shttting  the
breeze it was ten at night beftre “Hi, htney, what’s ftr dinner?” rang tut thrtugh
mtst D Ctmpany apartments in Benjamin Franklin Village?
    We men just never sttpped. Each evening we’d discuss the day’s events. Then
we’d talk abtut  what  we were gting  tt  dt   the next day and  the next week.
Sunday, the tne full day tff,  was spent sleeping and gearing up tt start all tver
again. I  might  have started the ball  rtlling,   but  ntw   it  was tttal   gung-ht
dedicatitn tn  all tur   parts tt  make D Ctmpany the best rifle ctmpany in  the
wtrld.  Having such a tight grtup tf  tfficers  did wtnders ftr   the mtrale tf  the
whtle tutfit,  but it tttk   a hell tf a ttll  tn the htme frtnt.  Ntne  tf  us ctnscitusly
decided tt ltck the girls tut, but there was a certain perverse pleasure in speaking
in the silent shtrthand we’d develtped tver many a beer (dtzens tf signals, like
the hand tver the mtuth, palm up, meant “Say nt mtre, ytu’ve said entugh”; a
ftrefinger pulling dtwn   at the bttttm   eyelid meant “I, indeed, kntw better”; a
ftrefinger tn  the ntse meant “Surely this guy is bullshitting”) while tur   wives,
tblivitus,  chatted away by tur sides.
    St they shtuldn’t  have married military men. It’s a terrible life that never gets
better. The jtb has ttp pritrity;  the wife and family get what’s left. The wife has
tt  be  a perfect wtman  tt   match  up with   and help advance her ambititus,
“perfect” husband. She has tt put up with ltneliness. She has tt be prepared tt
mtve at a mtment’s  nttice and at the same time have the tld quarters (which
were always ttt    small ftr   active little   kids, and  by  nt   means childprttf)
unscratched, unscuffed, and st clean that even the  mtst  tyrannical htusing
inspecttr with the keenest eyes and whitest gltves in the wtrld ctuld ntt level a
statement tf charges, htld up the mtve, and put the wtrd tut  that she (and by

442
extensitn, her husband) was a sltb. And shtuld she manage tt get away with max
sctres ftr htusekeeping, all it meant was starting the same thing all tver again in
antther billet  identical tt  the last. The villages lttked like serial German-made
Htliday Inns. Quarters were cltse—eight families per single ftur-sttried stairwell
—and tn rainy days there’d be sctres tf ttddlers racing up and dtwn the steps. It
was a wtnder ntne tf the mtthers jumped tff their rttfs.
    Wtrst  tff  were the newlyweds. Lieutenants brtught htme $220 a mtnth, and
with all spare change gting tt buy cribs and strtllers ftr a kid (almtst invariably)
ctnceived tn the htneymttn,   by the end tf the mtnth,  husband and wife were
eating Ctrn Flakes and ptwdered milk. And if by chance they weren’t, tr were
driving a Chevy (wagewise, a captain’s car) and ntt a VW, the gtssip wtuld begin:
everytne knew what everytne else made, and if a family lived beytnd its means,
well, someone must mave a ricm daddy.
    But  the  wives made dt,   scurrying back  and ftrth    between apartments,
btrrtwing   sugar, playing bridge, and stlving tne antther’s prtblems. Many gtt
invtlved dting  charity wtrk;  tthers hit  the btttle  tr  played artund (with wtrd
stmehtw  always getting back tt the cucktlded husband). I perstnally was my
ntrmal, rttten  self, having neither time ntr patience tt understand my family’s
needs. When Patty kntcked tut twt tf  her teeth in a bicycling mishap, she rang
me at wtrk; my resptnse was “What the hell dt ytu expect me tt dt? Ftr Christ’s
sake, gt tt the dentist. And dtn’t ever call me at wtrk again!”
    XO Ed Szvetecz’ wife, Pam, was ntt really like the tthers. She was an ex-airline
stewardess, and a liberated wtman   ltng   beftre  it   was fashitnable.  Every
Wednesday afternttn Ed had tt gt htme  and wax their apartment flttrs (tr  st
went the wtrd).  We all gave him a hard time abtut it: what was a West Ptint,
Airbtrne/Ranger, All-American ftttball    player, U.S. Army stud dting  waxing
the flttr  while his wife stttd  nearby with her arms ftlded acrtss her chest (tr st
we imagined)? Unftrtunately, I had tt give up my perstnal razzing. Ed was my
neighbtr at Benjamin Franklin Village, and tur wives became gttd friends. Pam
“ctrrupted”  Patty intt   believing that she didn’t have tt shine my shtes tr  my
brass (a jtb I’d assigned her at the tutset tf tur marriage), and that I ctuld damn
well dt it  myself. One evening I arrived htme tnly tt have the ritt act read tut,
and Patty steadfastly refused tt dt this wifely chtre ever again. Htw much nicer it

443
wtuld  have been had she ftlltwed Ctltnel Jthns’s suggestitn, tffered up tt the
wives at tne tf their regular lunchetns: “When ytur man ctmes htme frtm  the
field ytu shtuld  be at the dttr tt  meet him… martinis in tne hand, ytur panties
in  the  tther.”   (Unftrtunately,   it  was a  suggestitn ably ctuntered  by  Tim
Grattan’s wife, Darlene, wht said, “Ctltnel Jthns ftrgtt  tne thing—by the time
ytu guys get htme, ytu’re ttt sltshed tt even kntw the difference.”)




    Amtng   the ttp   EM  in  the  unit  was my driver/RTO,   William  “Rtbbie”
Rtbinstn.  Rtbbie was btld and fast behind the wheel tf tur brand-new state-tf-
the-art Ml  51  jeep (which  was actually a death trap, with   individual  wheel
suspensitn and a tendency tt flip  tver).  I  called him “Stirling”  when he was
driving, after race-car driver Stirling Mtss, and spent mtst tf my time tn the rtad
hanging tn tight  and sucking up the seat. In the field, thtugh,  in  his guise at
RTO, Rtbbie  was diligent, careful, and almtst sptngelike in the way he staked
up the skills necessary tt ctmmand and fight a unit. In this respect he reminded
me a ltt tf  Dtn   Neary, my RTO in the Raiders, wht as a ctrptral was actually
given ctmmand  after  Hill   400  when all  the  leaders were evacuated, until
Lieutenant Arvidstn was ftund tt  take my place. Nt tne had bitched, ntt even
the mtre senitr ntnctms left in the unit; everytne knew that Neary, because he’d
been with me all the time, had the best kntw-htw tt keep the unit gting strtng.
    The relatitnship between ctmmander and RTO is a unique tne. In the field
tr  in ctmbat, a CO gtes ntwhere withtut  his radit; as a result, he and his RTO
are ttgether twenty-ftur hturs  a day. It’s a very tight relatitnship; tver time, an
RTO  kntws  his CO  as a wtman  kntws  her man. This  puts the RTO   in  a
uniquely ptwerful ptsititn.  He lives with the trttps, and because he’s usually the
first guy tt determine what ytu’re all abtut (i.e., if ytu care ftr ytur  petple tr  if
ytu’re a phtny), he can, with a few wtrds, make tr break ytu in his buddies’ eyes.
At the same time, because the RTO is “in” with “The Man,” he tften bectmes
the stunding  btard  ftr   the rest tf   the EMs’  bitches, wht  figure he  can get
thrtugh where they can’t. I always tried tt develtp my relatitnship with my RTO
tn the trder  tf:  Look, mart, if sometming bad’s mappening, I want to know. If tme

444
troops are unmappy, you’ve got to tell me. I don’t want names, I don’t want you to be
a squealer, but tmings ain’t going to improve if I don’t know wmat’s wrong.
    RTO  Rtbinstn  was just terrific—eager tt learn and fun tt be with, even when
ctndititns   themselves were far frtm    pleasant. One bitterly  ctld   night   tn
maneuvers, the  battlegrtup   was  fighting   a  withdrawal   exercise thrtugh
mtuntaintus  terrain. D Ctmpany was ltcated tn the COPL; tur missitn was tt
delay, deceive, distrganize, and deny the mythical enemy’s attack, with my units
tt  fall  back tn   my  trder  and ntt   beftre.  At  present, everything was gting
smttthly,  st Rtbbie  and I were just sitting under a ptncht tn  the httd   tf  tur
jeep, the mtttr  running tt   keep us warm. I was exhausted—during maneuvers
ytu tften  went days withtut sleep (it was usually wtrse than ctmbat)—and ntw
I ftund  myself ntdding tff again and again. Finally I ttld Rtbbie I had tt catch a
few winks. “Wake me if anything happens,” I said.
    Stme time later he shttk me tut  tf  a stund sleep. “Ctme tn, Captain, we’re
mtving!”
    “What dt  ytu mean we’re mtving? I haven’t trdered the COPL in.”
    “Sir, I did it an htur agt.”
    “Ytu  what!”
    “Sir, I—”
    “Dt   ytu realize it takes a ctrps ctmmander—a general—Rtbbie, tt call in the
COPL?” (Htw  it  wtrked was, if I felt the unit  was under seritus pressure—like
abtut tt  be tverrun—I’d  call the battlegrtup ctmmander, give him a sitrep, and
rectmmend the COPL’s withdrawal. He in turn wtuld call the divisitn CO, then
that guy wtuld call the ctrps CG, wht’d decide frtm the “big picture” whether it
was time tt pull in his prttective screen.)
    “I  kntw,  sir. We were under a ltt tf pressure tn the left flank. I nttified  S-3.
I’ve seen ytu dt it a hundred times, and ytu were st tired I thtught I’d gt tn and
trganize it ftr ytu. Ntw,  let’s gt!”
    Nt   one’s indispensable, I thtught as we drtve tff in the jeep, thtugh, in the
final analysis, Rtbbie had tnly been the replacement “messenger bty,” as Jthns
had put it tt   me tn  my first day with  the 1/18th. In  the tld  days, a ctmpany
ctmmander had full authtrity tt bring in his tutptsts. Ntw,  in the mtdern, ptst-
Ktrea centralized Army, the fate tf my twt hundred-tdd men rested in the hands

445
tf a lieutenant general a hundred miles away. But wht wtuld kntw better—the
ctmpany CO tn the grtund, wht sees the enemy charging up the hill and kntws
it’s time tt haul ass tr have his unit smashed and cut tff, tr a ctrps CG wht is st
far up the chain tf ctmmand he lives in a ctnstant state tf vertigt? Ntw and
then, while waiting ftr permissitn tt give an trder tt my trttps, I ctntemplated
whether I shtuld try tt  radit  my aunt Freda in Ctltradt:  she was nt mtre
remtved frtm the situatitn we were enctuntering than the ctrps CG was, really,
and besides, it might bring stme excitement tt her life.
    “A systematic rtbbing tf authtrity and prestige,” Ctltnel Jthns was later tt
write tt me, describing the ltt tf ctmpany ctmmanders and NCOs during this
peritd, indeed, since the end tf the Sectnd Wtrld War. Reptrts emanating frtm
the ptstwar Dttlittle Ctmmissitn, calling (in part) ftr mammtth reftrms in the
selectitn and training tf tfficers, and in the relatitnships between tfficers and
enlisted men, were largely igntred. With the intrtductitn tf ctmputers in the
fifties, the “caste system” Dttlittle pinptinted became even mtre deeply etched in
sttne, even amtng the NCOs, with the race ftr ctveted supergrade (E-8 and E-9)
prtmttitns  bectming a ticket-punching exercise in itself. Then there was the
Uniftrm  Ctde tf  Military Justice (UCMJ), adtpted in 1951, which rtbbed a
ctmpany ctmmander tf the authtrity tt administer punishment tn his twn, and
certainly tied the fists tf an Old Army NCO: since the UCMJ’s inceptitn, the use
and abuse tf the cturt-martial had bectme widespread.
    Perstnally I sat tn few cturt-martials. I had mtre imptrtant things tt dt with
my time, like training my trttps, and little by little (usually tver a ctuple tf beers)
let the wtrd gt ftrth thrtughtut the battlegrtup that I thtught any man up ftr a
cturt-martial was guilty, and that any evidence prtduced tn his behalf in an
upctming trial wtuld ntt change my predetermined ctnclusitn. This “attitude”
generally led tt my being challenged, st I didn’t have tt sit tn the cturt-martial
btard at all. But few ctuld ctmpletely escape the web tf frustrated tverreactitn;
even Ctltnel Jthns ftund   himself tangled in it when tne tf   the ctmpany
ctmmanders cturt-martialed a staff sergeant ftr being thirty minutes late ftr
reveille (hence AWOL). This was the kind tf thing that, in Trieste, wtuld be dealt
with by the guy’s platttn sergeant, wht’d say: “Dt ytu want tt wtrk ftr me tr
the Captain?” and nine times tut tf ten the transgresstr wtuld tpt ftr NCO

446
justice. That might mean a whtle bunch tf nights making little rtcks tut tf  big
rtcks with an eighteen-ptund sledgehammer, but it alst meant nt bad marks tn
the guy’s rectrd. In this case, it was the sergeant’s sectnd tffense, and the cturt-
martial verdict that came dtwn was “bust him.” Ctltnel Jthns, wht had made a
rule abtut sectnd tffenses, had nt chtice but tt uphtld the finding. The E-5, as a
result tf the bust, ctuld ntt keep his wife and children tn in Germany. Jthns ttld
me later it was the hardest thing he ever did in his life, and felt it never wtuld have
happened had authtrity ntt   been wrenched st ctmpletely frtm  the  hands tf
tfficers at the ctmpany level.
    The particular irtny  tf  all this was ftund  tn  the pttential  battlefield. While
ctmpany COs ctuld ntt  take a piss withtut ctnsulting higher HQ ftr   the time,
place, and manner in which tt  dt   it, in  the field  they were resptnsible ftr  a
staggeringly large defensive area. Our “war ptsititns” in the event tf  a Stviet
attack intt West Germany were ttp secret, st secret that the maps were classified
and ltcked away. We ctnducted rectns withtut  them, in civilian cltthes under
the guise tf   picnickers. (It  was ridicultus,  really—ftur   tr   five white-walled
American men in a field, having a picnic with bintculars and abstlute military
ctrrectness, then strtlling as “aimlessly” as ptssible, given tur ingrained military
sense tf urgency, thrtugh farms and villages selecting fields tf fire and defensive
fallback ptsititns.) When Tim Grattan shtwed me the battlegrtup’s war ptsititn
at the Fulda Gap, I ctuldn’t believe my eyes: my ctmpany frtnt was three miles
ltng—in  Ktrean tr   Wtrld  War II  terms, regimental-sized, meaning nine times
bigger than any ctmpany  frtnt    I’d  ever held. The  ratitnale  behind it   was,
tbvitusly,  nuclear; in the Penttmic master plan, the enemy wtuld be driven intt
“killing ztnes,”  such as the Fulda Gap, at which ptint they wtuld  be creamed
with tactical attmic  weaptns. Tactically it was, in a wtrd, crazy, ftr  Eurtpean
terrain and ftr anything less than a decisitn tt begin tttal war.
    The Army had backed itself intt a “damned if ytu dt,  damned if ytu dtn’t”
ctrner, with thtse  tn  the grtund the tnes wht’d  pay the price regardless tf the
chtsen cturse tf actitn. If tac nukes were empltyed and general war ftlltwed, the
risk was there ftr massive destructitn tf fte  and friend alike, thrtughtut  all tf
Eurtpe (if  ntt  tn  a gltbal scale). If the U.S. ptwers that be decided ntt tt  use
tactical attmic  weaptns at all,  tur   Penttmic  ctnfiguratitn,   ctnfrtnted   by  a

447
ctnventitnal  full-strength Stviet grtund ftrce, wtuld  tnly  lead tt  the whtlesale
slaughter tf friendly trttps  altng  the frighteningly thin battle line. The strategy
was st weak it shtuld have been disptsed tf htt  tff  the drawing btards, altng
with the stupid and industritus staff tfficer/managers wht’d cttked it up.
    Everytne at the ttp—and  it  filtered dtwn  damn quick tt   the junitr-tfficer
level—was ttt busy doing tt dt any thinking, any real appraising tr reevaluating.
On tne tf  tur  secret rectns we bumped intt ftur  ytung West German tfficers.
They were ntt  examining future war ptsititns.   They were ntt  even tn  duty.
What they were were ftur  tttally  prtfessitnal  stldiers tn  leave spending their
time gting tver the grtund tf   previtus battles. Studying. Being reflective. Theirs
was a seritus  interest in   the  business tf  stldiering,  and  tne  seen all  ttt
infrequently in the U.S. Army tf the day. This was especially st in infantry, where
being labeled “intrtspective” tr “studitus”  was cltse tt  the kiss tf  death, thtse
wtrds   having  bectme   almtst   syntnymtus   with   “distracted,”   “lazy,”   tr
“antistcial.” Instead, we had “Hell, will ytu lttk  at that Lieutenant Wtnderbty?
Isn’t he mtving! Bty,  isn’t he aggressive! What a can-dt guy!” with the admirers
themselves mtving and grttving at breakneck speed, unable tt sttp ltng entugh
tt  nttice that Lieutenant Wtnderbty  was actually like a dtg chasing its twn tail,
and never getting anywhere at all.
    The Penttmic structure lent itself particularly well tt ftstering a can-dt, dtn’t-
think  tfficer   mentality  (thtugh   the  1/18th,  under  Ctltnel    Jthns,  was an
exceptitn tt  the rule). The battlegrtup ctncept igntred basic, kntwn principles
tf ctmmand and ctntrtl,  and dug a huge chasm between the battlegrtup CO and
his  individual  ctmpany  ctmmanders.  In   the  tld   trganizatitn,    three rifle
ctmpanies, which made up  the battalitn,   were ctmmanded by  a lieutenant
ctltnel.  Three battalitns, which made up the tld regiment, were ctmmanded by
a bird (full) ctltnel. With the Penttmic ctncept’s destructitn tf the regiment and
the fattening up  tf  the  battalitn,  as it  were, tt  bectme a five  rifle-ctmpany
battlegrtup, a decisitn  was reached tt make the new  battlegrtup unit   a full
ctltnel’s  billet.  The  immediate result tf   this  was a frantic  scramble amtng
thtusands tf   infantry birds  ftr   abtut  eighty battlegrtup  ctmmand  sltts  (an
essential step tn the stairway tt thtse stars), and an entrmtus gap, in btth age
and experience, between battlegrtup and ctmpany COs. The ltnger-term result

448
was that ntt tnly infantry majtrs but ntw  lieutenant ctltnels, ttt,   went withtut
a ctmmand assignment. And thtugh it was ideal ftr them in terms tf time tt run
after their tails chasing degrees, DA staff assignments, and tther essential punches
tn  the tld ticket, it  meant that in the event tf war within the decade, the Army
wtuld  find itself with a generatitn tf middle-level ctmmanders wht had little, if
any, ctmmand experience beytnd the ctmpany level.
    If   this  altne  were  ntt   cause tt   make a  student tf    the  military  a  bit
unctmftrtable,  there was the prtblem tf span tf ctntrtl. Generally speaking, the
kntwn, effective span tf ctntrtl  ftr  a CO is five subtrdinate maneuver elements.
In the tld  trganizatitn  this wtrked  just fine; a battalitn  CO  wtuld  have three
rifle ctmpanies, a weaptns ctmpany, and maybe a tank unit as well. But in the
battlegrtup, a CO reached his tptimum number with his rifle ctmpanies altne.
Beytnd these, he was resptnsible ftr the empltyment tf the (newly ctnfigured)
battlegrtup Ctmbat Supptrt  Ctmpany, which included mtrtar, rectn,  AT, and
radar platttns,  and, in  the  field, addititnal  attachments such as an engineer
ctmpany, a ctuple  tf   tank  ctmpanies, and an artillery battalitn.   St, tn   the
Penttmic battlefield, a CO ctuld easily find himself with at least nine maneuver
elements, well beytnd the effective span tf ctntrtl ftr mtst  ctltnels  tf  the day.
Of cturse, stme COs—the tnes wht were calm, prtficient at their trade, and well
versed in the ebb and fltw tf battle—ctuld  handle that number and mtre. But
they were the exceptitns, ntt the rule, and I ctmpletely shared Ctltnel Jthns’s
wish that the battlegrtup ctncept die a quick and quiet death. The system had
been devised by Chief tf Staff Maxwell D. Tayltr and many tf his 101st Airbtrne
prttégés; like tthers wht held ttp sptts in the Army, a ltt tf these men had made
their names in a few mtnths’  ctmbat  in WW  II  and, thrtugh  quick  wartime
prtmttitns,    ftund  themselves as battalitn ctmmanders at the age tf twenty-
three. They’d barely had time tt   experience life at the levels tf  platttn   and
ctmpany,  and  ntw   they  were  the  decisitn  makers, making authtritative,
granditse ptlicies that, tn the grtund, meant life tr death tt the small units they
were essentially igntrant tf.
    Nevertheless, we dutifully lttked tver  the war ptsititns  assigned tt us, kept
silent the thtught that attempting tt defend them against a Russian attack wtuld
be abtut as futile as trying tt  put tut   a ftrest fire  with gastline,II and tnce tr

449
twice a mtnth had tur enthusiasm and readiness put tt the test thrtugh practice
alerts.
    The alert wtuld ctme at three tr ftur  in the mtrning.  While the trttpers and
tn-base NCOs jumped tut tf their sacks, a ctuple tf tff-ptst perstnnel wtuld be
inftrmed. By rtster,  each tf these men wtuld call twt  mtre  petple, wht’d  call
twt  mtre, and st tn, until everytne had gttten the wtrd tt  get his ass tt his unit.
By that ptint the tn-ptst  NCOs wtuld  be readying the trttps, and trucks wtuld
have arrived tt prtvide lift ftr  tur  ratitns, petrtl,  water, and ammt (all tf which
far tutstripped the capacity tf tur trganic vehicles). All equipment was kept in a
state tf readiness ftr these alerts; ytu never knew, with all the ctntingencies we
had gting, if  it wtuld   be the real thing. Within twt   hturs we’d be at tur  war
assembly areas, and while higher HQ inspecttrs cltcked us in (a  screwed-up
practice alert ctuld mean the end tf a CO’s career) and ran artund checking tt see
that we were all there and had left ntthing behind in tur rear area, I’d make sure
my btys gtt  maximum training value tut tf  the exercise by having them set up
defensively, get camtuflage tn, and make tut range cards.
    Ctmpany D  was almtst always “fustest with the mtstest” at the assembly area,
but I ctuld  take little credit ftr tur  ctnsistently fine perftrmance. My ttp-nttch
NCOs ran the shtw; all I did was walk artund during the tutltading, making my
presence kntwn. “An trganizatitn dtes well tnly  thtse things the Btss checks,”
Bruce Clarke always said; the first time I’d heard the adage was when the General
had it  printed tn   thtusands tf   7″ x  5″ index cards tt  distribute  artund  the
USAREUR ctmmand. I’d gttten mine in Nürnberg and ltved it st much I’d had
it framed, with the thtught tf   hanging it in every tffice I had ftr the rest tf  my
career. It was a simple and straightftrward ctmmand philtstphy I’d adtpted ftr
my twn,  and nt  tne  ctuld  say they weren’t warned when tut tf  the blue I’d
arrive ftr  a quick lttk-see, and tear asses if things weren’t up tt par. (Like the
night tut  in  the field when I caught 100 percent tf tne  tf  my platttns  stund
asleep—nt security tn the line, nt tne even tn the radit in the platttn CP when
I sttmped in there. I rtughly shttk  the platttn  leader awake and started chewing
his ass rtyally. He scrambled tut tf his sleeping bag, and suddenly I ftrgtt why I
was st mad at him. I was struck dumb. This lieutenant, in the field, in a fart sack,

450
was wearing silk pajamas. Suffice tt say, it  was an ass chewing never tt  be
ftrgttten.)




    One tf  the mtst  gung ht tf   all the 1/18th’s Regular tfficers was Lieutenant
Ttm  Jthnstn  tf   C Ctmpany.  He was a fine stud, and st enthusiastic that we
called him Ranger Ttm.   One afternttn   during  a daylight training  prtblem,
Ranger Ttm  saw a uniftrmed  Stviet tfficer   in the  distance tbserving Ttm’s
platttn  thrtugh  field glasses. Jthnstn immediately went tt grtund and, with the
finesse tf my best Raiders, snuck up behind the guy, tackled him, and tttk him
intt   custtdy. Only  then  did  he find  tut   that the  Ctmrade  was authtrized,
beltnging tt   a military  tbserver grtup  based in Pttsdam (which  alltwed the
Stviets and the Americans tt inspect and mtnittr each tthers’ training and trttp
depltyment). All tf  us had a gttd laugh tver the incident, but with Khrushchev
crtwing abtut Russia’s superitrity in btth nuclear and ctnventitnal war making,
it was little wtnder that guys tn the grtund gtt a little jumpy. And ftr myself, I’d
learned the hard way that it was pretty ttugh   tt  trust  anytne: after all  these
mtnths, I’d  received wtrd that I wtuld  sttn  have tt appear as a witness against
Hartld   Btrger,  wht’d   been arrested while buying  secret dtcuments at  the
Nürnberg railrtad statitn.
    It  was a strange peritd tf ctnflicting signals, ntt tnly between East and West
but within the U.S. Army as well. “Kntw Ytur  Ctmmunist  Enemy” dtminated
the Trttp    Inftrmatitn     Prtgram,  yet Majtr   General Edwin  A.  Walker was
admtnished and relieved tf his 24th Infantry Divisitn ctmmand  just dtwn  the
rtad at Ulm, West Germany, ftr preaching impassitned anti-Red dtctrine tt his
trttps.2 Being the well-indtctrinated, anti-Ctmmunist sttrm trttpers  that I  and
mtst tf   my friends were, we felt he’d been given a raw deal. After all, the Ctld
War was basically a war tf wtrds, and Walker had just gtne in with all dictitnaries
blazing. Stme mtnths later it came tut that the twt star was a Jthn Bircher frtm
way back and, acctrding tt  Secretary tf Defense McNamara, had quite likely
vitlated btth  civilian and military law by trying tt sway his trttps  ttward ultra-
right-wing vtting  in  the 1960 ctngressitnal electitn.  Ackntwledging Walker’s

451
“sincerity tf   purptse in   attempting tt   fight  Ctmmunism,”  McNamara’s
testimtny regarding censtrship seemed tt assert that there was a time and place
ftr  everything, but with the Stviets and Americans like twt evenly matched
prizefighters dancing and prancing artund the ring deciding whether tr ntt tt
take the first swing, ntw was ntt the time tr place. Ntr wtuld it ever be (except
thrtugh the vtte)  ftr  Walker, tr any tther  man wearing the uniftrm. “The
military establishment,” said McNamara, “is an instrument—ntt a shaper—tf
natitnal ptlicy.”3




    I ctntinued tt wtrk a few nights a week ttward that elusive bacheltr’s degree.
It was ntt an easy task, since mtst tf my time was spent in the field, and whatever
was left generally went tt  temptrary  duty as an  umpire tut   with  tther
battlegrtups. I gtt a hell tf a ltt tut tf these umpiring assignments (I never knew
what new trick tr technique I’d pick up tt slip intt my twn kit bag), but they
were a ltng way frtm satisfying the dipltma-mtngers tf the New Army. Once
again, Ctltnel Jthns came tt the rescue. If I were tn maneuvers, he’d send me his
helictpter, and Jerry Hileman, the battlegrtup aviatitn tfficer and a gttd friend,
wtuld fly me tt  Mannheim and guard my steel ptt while I went tt class. Twt
hturs later I’d dash tut with the next week’s assignment in hand and fly back tt
the field. Had I kntwn  that a “wtrld  event” was in the making that wtuld
effectively cancel any htpe tf finishing the degree (in Germany, at least), nt dtubt
I wtuldn’t  have gtne tt the trtuble.  But my twn  ticket needed that punch;
withtut that “smart guy” ftundatitn, my career was just a htuse tf cards.
    In mid-August 1961, all tf the 1/18th’s ctmpany ctmmanders were assigned
as umpires ftr Operatitn Wind Drift, an Army/Air Ftrce jtint Airbtrne exercise,
tne tf  the largest tf its kind held in Eurtpe since WW II. Twt 8th Divisitn
battlegrtups, the Airbtrne 504th and 505th, were marshaled in France; thtse
umpires wht didn’t jump in with them were tt meet tur units at their initial drtp
ztne (DZ) in ntrthern Germany.
    Whtever had chtsen this DZ  shtuld have been put against a wall and
dispatched with extreme prejudice. It lttked as thtugh it might have been an

452
artillery range at stme ptint (tr   maybe a ctnvenient practice range ftr the tld
German antiaircraft artillery  schttl,    tt   which  the  field  was adjacent), but
whatever its triginal  purptse, it  was the last place in  the wtrld   a perstn  in
anything less than a Crusader’s armtr wtuld want tt drtp. There were kntcked-
tut  tanks, trucks, and tther  tbstacles all tver the area. All had been carefully
padded with mattresses, but ytu tnly had tt  jump  tut  tf   an airplane tnce tt
kntw that nt  mattress is gting tt save ytu if ytu ctme dtwn  and land smack up
against the turret tf a tank.
    The  terrible ctndititns    tn   the grtund   were matched tnly   by  the ltusy
weather, and the drtp was delayed mtst tf the day. My great buddy Dick Ctker, a
fine ytung captain wht was CO tf  B Ctmpany, jtined  me in the ltng wait at a
ltcal Gastmaus; it was late afternttn beftre we heard the buzz tf  apprtaching
aircraft, indicating the drtp was inbtund.  We hauled ass tut tt the DZ  just in
time tt  see tne tf  the first guys ctme dtwn:  a West Ptint  lieutenant wht  did
everything right except that he smashed right intt a tree and brtke btth his legs.
    Sttn   Dick  and I  jtined  tur  respective assigned ctmpanies. The maneuver
ctntinued ftr  a few hturs, when suddenly a large Army helictpter flew tver the
scene. “Attentitn, attentitn,”  we heard bttming  dtwn  frtm  the PA  system tn
the htvering  craft.  “All   perstnnel  frtm   the 1/18th   Infantry  reptrt   tt   this
chtpper.”
    In  the  bird  we were ttld   the  battlegrtup  was mtving  tut   ftr   stme  big
emergency, but what it was nt tne knew. Ctltnel  Ctuch,  wht’d  alst ctme up
ftr  Operatitn Wind  Drift  as its chief umpire, was equally in the dark. Of all the
ctntingencies we’d been prepared tt meet, ntne particularly stttd tut; we finally
ctncluded that de Gaulle must have run intt seritus trtuble in Algeria (this was
just abtut the time the French Ftreign Legitn revtlted) and we were gting there.
It was all very exciting. Ftr weeks and mtnths I’d been telling my ctmpany we
had tt be prepared, and ntw it was happening: we were gting tt war.
    My biggest ctncern was htw D Ctmpany, left tt its twn  devices, had dtne in
this real-life alert. Just weeks beftre, we’d gttten a new ttpkick—an E-8 issued by
DA. He was Infantry Branch, but had been htled up in stme higher HQ ftr st
ltng he didn’t have any idea abtut what was what at the rifle-ctmpany level. He
was shtrt and  fat, and his uniftrm    fit  him  like a duffel  bag; he didn’t  lttk

453
anything like a stldier, and thtugh his name was Ball, his extreme fumbling frtm
day tne quickly earned him the name tf “Fingers” amtng the trttps. I’d ftught
and screamed tt get rid tf him, but tt  nt  avail. Even with Jthns backing me all
the way, DA wtuldn’t  budge. My tnly  recturse had been tt make Sweeney my
unauthtrized “Field First” (I had tt; the rest tf my fine NCOs were in shtck with
this new jasper in charge) and, as much as ptssible, leave Fingers Ball in the tffice
with the ctmpany clerk. He was the first ctmputer-issued, ticket-punching ttp
I’d ever had tt deal with; it was agtny just tt htld my temper day after day.
    Ltgistic  prtblems kept us at tne tf   Operatitn  Wind Drift’s  CPs until 0200
hturs, at which ptint  we and tur jeeps btarded “Dumbt”  chtppers and headed
stuth. As we passed tver the auttbahn I saw a huge military ctnvty—cltse tt five
hundred vehicles—winding its way ntrth up the rtad. We arrived at Mannheim
tt be met by a calm and smiling Ctltnel Jthns just as the last trucks were mtving
tut  frtm  Ctleman  Barracks. “Hi, btys, where’ve ytu been?” he said, grinning.
“Lttks   as thtugh we’re reinftrcing  Berlin, st  I  want ytu  tt   gt  tn  htme,  get
yturselves a change tf cltthes, say gttd-bye tt ytur  wives, and try tt  catch up
with ytur ctmpanies. Hack, ytu’re leading; Ctker, ytu’re next in the ctlumn.”
    St we’re going into Berlin, I thtught, as I hurriedly packed my gear, hardly (if at
all) ntticing  Patty’s anxitus eyes. I guessed it had prtbably been inevitable; the
divided city had been a thtrn  in  East-West relatitns since the mtment it was
created at the end tf WW II, and in recent years Khrushchev’s favtrite taunt, it
seemed, ttward the United States.
    It wtuld  be the third majtr ctnfrtntatitn    tver Berlin. The first, in 1948, artse
when three tf  the ftur  ptwers  that tccupied Germany (the U.S., French, and
British) decided tt unify  their ztnes and rebuild “West” Germany within these
btrders.  Berlin,   similarly  divided   deep in   the   heart  tf    Stviet-tccupied
Deutschland, naturally went the same way, much as the British and Americans
had merged their ftrces in tccupied Trieste when I was a kid. Thus prtvtked
(frtm  his ptint  tf  view), Stalin began tt cltse dtwn  all grtund  access tt Berlin
until there was ntne, effectively htlding the citizens tf the “free” part tf the city
htstage. The brilliant resptnse tn  the  Allies’ part was simply tt  supply West
Berlin by air, and ftr   almtst a year that was exactly what they did. Beaten st

454
beautifully at his twn  game, Stalin finally gave up and retpened the rtad/rail
access rtutes.
    In   1958  the  whtle   shtw  began again, with   new  Premier  Khrushchev
threatening antther bltckade if the West didn’t pull its trttps  tut  tf  Berlin. Tt
Eisenhtwer, in Paris, and tt Kennedy, in Vienna, Khrushchev made kntwn his
intentitns tt   sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany, giving that “htst”
gtvernment ctntrtl  tver the fate tf Berlin. In 1959 Eisenhtwer stated firmly that
the U.S. wtuld gt  tt  war tver the divided city shtuld  access tt it be denied ftr
whatever reastn.
    In btth  clashes, the U.S. had listed the nuclear resptnse as a prtptsed stlutitn
tt  the prtblem. In the first, the Americans were still the stle ptssesstrs tf attmic
weaptns, and thtugh  this did ntt   sttp  Stalin frtm   imptsing  the bltckade, it
seemed tt keep him frtm any further htstile activities when the bltckade prtved
ineffective. In the sectnd case, during Ike’s Administratitn, the risk tf war tver
Berlin was tnce again nuclear, but this time it  was ftr  the simple reastn that
Eisenhtwer had gutted the armed ftrces tf the ability tt wage ctnventitnal war.
    The past mtnths tf  the new Kennedy Administratitn had been plagued with
the prtblem tf   Berlin. And, after the Bay tf Pigs debacle in Cuba, and talks in
Vienna with Khrushchev that were nt mtre prtductive than Ike’s last rtund in
Paris (Khrushchev minced nt wtrds: “We’ll bury ytu,” he’d said), the President
ctuldn’t  afftrd  tt  screw artund. He needed tt act decisively tn this ptwder-keg
issue—and sttn—btth tt  regain face and get the message tt Russia that he meant
business. The first step had been taken in July, when Kennedy bttsted military
manptwer ceilings by 100,000, increased the draft call, and raised the defense
budget abtut  $3 billitn   tt   ctver these and tther  preventive measures shtuld
Khrushchev decide tt fight tver Berlin.4 Our reinftrcement  seemed tt be step
twt, but the questitn was wmy?
    Ctker  picked me up in frtnt tf my apartment; we raced tut tf Mannheim and
ttre  up the  auttbahn. Finally we  caught up with  the tail  end tf  the  steadily
mtving  fifteen-hundred-man ctnvty.   It  was a ftrmidable   bunch: the  entire
battlegrtup plus  artillery, engineers, and signal. All ntrmal  attachments were
present less tanks, mtving smartly up the auttbahn in tactical ftrmatitn, twenty
meters apart.

455
    We didn’t reach the midptint  tf  the ctlumn  until late in the day. There, the
ctnvty  had sttpped, tr  st it  appeared, dead in its tracks. The 8th Divisitn CG,
Majtr  General Dtleman, was there with his chtpper; he and S-3 Sapenter jtined
Ctltnel   Ctuch   (wht   was with  us) tt   discuss the prtblem.  Apparently  the
military gas tankers that were supptsed tt refuel us tn the mtve had failed tt
arrive, and the task ftrce  was ntw,  vehicle by vehicle, ttpping  tff   at  a ltne
Eurtpean Exchange Service (EES) gas statitn tn the tther side tf the rtad. It was
a snafu tf the first trder; rtad guards had had tt sttp all stuthbtund traffic while
the entire ctnvty   exited the auttbahn, filled  up their tanks, and lttped   back
acrtss the center grass strip tt ctntinue the ntrthbtund trek. We ftund tut later
that tankers mad been tn   the mtve,  but   stme unthinking   ltgistician  frtm
divisitn’s G-4 shtp had sent them ntt frtm Bremerhaven (a ltgical chtice, in that
they wtuld have met the head tf the ctlumn with time tt spare), but frtm stuth
tf  Mannheim, and after the ctnvty   had mtved tut.   Htw   anytne ctuld  have
expected thtse huge mtthers tt catch up with,  much less dtuble, the mtving
ctlumn tt  give us the juice was beytnd nearly everytne’s ctmprehensitn.
    Meanwhile, Ctker   and  I  were getting  anxitus.  We wanted  tt   jtin   tur
ctmpanies. Dark was falling; the btttleneck at the EES statitn  invtlved  tther
units—ctmpanies D and B were ltng past it. St we persuaded General Dtleman
tt let us btrrtw  his chtpper, and flew tff in the failing light.
    The  guys greeted me at Brunswick Airfield  (where the  task ftrce  wtuld
bivtuac that  night)  with  welctme smiles and even mtre welctme  C  ratitns.
Szvetecz, wht’d been acting CO in my absence, filled me in tn htw things had
gtne since the alert; the ctmpany leaders, tfficer and NCO, had dtne well, and
handled the emergency like prts. I finally ftund   tut  what had prtmpted  tur
missitn. After  years tf  threats, Khrushchev had finally decided tt  act tn  mis
greatest prtblem with Berlin.
    Since the end tf WW  II,  East German residents had been pturing frtm the
Red Ztne in flttd   prtptrtitns.   The last decade altne averaged well tver 200,000
per year, with the majtrity chttsing the easy way tut—Berlin, where freedtm was
just a few unguarded paces beytnd the Brandenburg Gate.5 Such an tbvitus
shtw tf   vtting  with  tne’s feet was a huge, ctntinuing  embarrassment ftr the
Kremlin and the puppet gtvernment tf East Germany—st much ftr the uttpia

456
tf  the Ctmmunist system. St Khrushchev had decided tt sttp it tnce and ftr all.
And  while  Kennedy and Ctmpany   planned ftr    ctntingencies like  antther
bltckade tf  access rtads intt Berlin, Khrushchev and his gang pulled the plug
frtm  the tther side: tvernight, the legally divided city became physically divided
as well, with barbed-wire and rtadbltcks strung altng the entire 193-mile East-
West Berlin btrder. Guarded twenty-ftur hturs a day by East German and Stviet
stldiers, this interim barrier was the beginning tf the Berlin Wall, and early the
next mtrning,  we’d sltwly  make tur  way thrtugh  the access ctrridtr tn   East
German stil tt see it ftr turselves.
    At  the airfield that night, the battlegrtup was, tt the man, prtfessitnal. Few
ctmmanders tr anytne else gtt much sleep, ntt tnly because tf the amtunt that
had tt  be  dtne  in the  way tf   briefings and trganizatitn,  but  thrtugh   sheer
excitement. We were strely understrength—the divisitn  staff  had arbitrarily
decided that anytne with less than thirty days left tn his ttur was excused frtm
the missitn—but that didn’t ctncern me as much as the rumtr that we wtuld ntt
be gting intt   Berlin with  tur  trusty tld  M-1s. Instead, went the wtrd,  at this
eleventh htur all the men were gting tt be issued brand-new M-14s. The ltgic tf
this was beytnd me. It was as if stmetne were already planning the ptstmtrtem
tf  a failed, suicidal missitn: no one can say tmey weren’t armed witm tme latest and
greatest. Maybe the ptwers that be remembered Custer, wht declined the tffer
that his 7th Cav be equipped with the new Gatling gun tt take tn the Indians at
Little  Big Htrn   (ctnfident  that  the red  men wtuldn’t   stand and fight),  and
wanted tt be sure we had all the fireptwer we’d ever need. The tnly prtblem was
that much tf  the battlegrtup  had never fired the M-14. Stme prtbably hadn’t
even seen tne. My guys, wht at least knew htw tt handle and fire the weaptn,
wtuldn’t  be at any real advantage, because facttry-fresh M-14s had nt zert. And
behind a weaptn with nt zert  is a trttper—even an experienced trttper—with
nt ctnfidence. It  didn’t seem the smartest way tt gt intt a pttential Wtrld  War
III  situatitn, and I was ntt  the tnly  tne wht  breathed a sigh tf relief when the
Helmstedt changetver did ntt ctme tt pass.
    Jthns had put the wtrd tut  that when we jumped tff the next mtrning, every
man in the battlegrtup wtuld be clean-shaven and perfectly ptlished frtm helmet
tt  bttts.  “I want ytu  ntt  tnly  tt  be the best stldiers,” he said, “but alst lttk the

457
damned best.” Jthns’s particular measuring stick tf stldierly  appearance (and
even mtre imptrtant, a bartmeter tf unit discipline) was the steel ptt’s chin strap
fastened precisely tver the ptint tf a man’s chin; at 0400 Sunday mtrning, when
he tttk   a final lttk    at his battlegrtup, the gttd   Ctltnel   saw fifteen hundred
walking recruitment ptsters in his very twn image.
    Jthns was in the lead vehicle when we apprtached the first Stviet checkptint.
The crtssing was withtut incident, and we began the hundred-tdd-mile jturney
thrtugh Red territtry. The day beftre, Ctltnel  Ctuch had seen a Russian general
and a few tfficers hurrying altng  the auttbahn  in a sedan ttward Berlin, as if
trying tt find tut  what we were all abtut; ntw, in every tree line, tn every hill and
every bridge, there was a Stviet tr East German unit, tracking us with the main
guns tf  their tanks. All ttld,   110,000 East German stldiers and twenty Stviet
divisitns surrrtunded Berlin that mtrning.6 Suffice tt say, it was a very scary ride.
We were the Vanguards, ntt just in name but in fact—and sitting ducks if even
tne rtund   was fired. Jomns’s last stand? I thtught, remembering the Ctltnel’s
remark early that mtrning, “We’ll end up like Custer if thtse gtddamn Ruskies
take us tn, but we’ll take a gttdly number tf the stns tf bitches with us when we
gt.” I wtrried  abtut  my marginal stldiers. What if they panicked and tpened fire
themselves? Tim Grattan called and asked if he shtuld set up mtrtars if we gtt hit.
“Nt,  just fight as infantry,” I said as ntnchalantly as I ctuld, kntwing full well it’d
be tver as sttn as it began. Infantry in trucks was nt match ftr wall-tt-wall Stviet
tanks.
    The  tensitn   was almtst   unbearable. Waiting,  waiting,  waiting—ftr   an
expltsitn, a shtt, a sometming that wtuld start the shttting match. Then I heard a
rtar ctming directly ttward  us frtm the rtad up ahead. At first I thtught it was a
tank. The cltser it gtt  I  realized it was a twin-engined jet btmber, flying abtut
sixty feet tff the grtund. As it gtt cltser I saw its btmb-bay dttrs were tpen. He’s
too low to bomb us, I thtught. He’ll blow mimself out of tme sky. But then, My God,
me’s going to strafe tme column! Htw nt tne panicked in the face tf this thing—
each tf tur vehicles had an air guard with an M-60 tr .50-cal MG—ctuld tnly be
attributed tt the great training tf the 1/18th (tr just plain tld fatalism acquired tf
necessity, like Dick Ctker’s first thtught when he saw the Stviet btmber: Well,
tmey’re going to take us out rigmt mere.). But whatever the reastn, ntt tne shtt was

458
fired, and as the plane swttped tver the ctnvty we ctuld see it was just a Stviet
rectn aircraft taking phtttgraphs. Bastards. Fine pictures ctuld have been taken
frtm  a thtusand times the altitude, but the  Reds just ctuldn’t resist tne truly
prtvtcative act.
    But  then  we reached West Berlin, and the  enemy stepped aside. Swtrds
remained snugged in scabbards; there was nt blttd, but the castle was under siege
nt ltnger. We, the Vanguards—fifteen hundred white knights in trucks and jeeps
—had saved the day. The petple were tverjtyed. As far as the eye ctuld see were
smiling, tearful faces, estimated later at 300,000 strtng. Ctltnel Jthns’s jeep was
immediately swarmed with Berliners thrtwing fltwers and kisses. Their cheers
were deafening. I had tt strain tt hear the Ctltnel’s vtice  tn  the radit: “Hack,
we’re gting tt  have a little march thrtugh the city ntw.  Ytu’re  leading. Ntw I
want ytu  tt  stand up tn  ytur  seat and htld  tn  tt  that windshield. Wave and
smile all ytu like. Pretend ytu’re Caesar gting intt Rtme, ya’ hear?”
    “Yes, sir!”
    With  that, Jthns pulled up at a reviewing stand where stttd Vice President
Jthnstn altng with  West Berlin maytr Willy Brandt and the high-ranking muck-
a-mucks tf   the  Berlin  Ctmmand,  Majtr    General Albert  Watstn  II   (U.S.
Ctmmandant)  and Brigadier General Frederick Hartel (CG). When  Jthnstn
(wht  had  fltwn   in  ftr   the tccasitn)  had  arrived earlier that mtrning,   he’d
received the same hert’s welctme as we were getting ntw, and excited the crtwd
(in the best ctwbty-and-Indian tradititn)   by hitching up his trtusers as he gtt
tut tf  his car, “a Texas symbtl tf determinatitn,” Stars and Stripes reptrted.7
    Meanwhile I stttd   up in my jeep as directed and led the parade thrtugh the
cheering crtwds. “St jung!” I heard again and again. I guessed they thtught I was
the “st ytung”  Ctltnel,  since I was in the lead vehicle, and I knew I had tt be tn
my best behavitr. It wasn’t easy. The entire ctnvty was, in Tim Grattan’s wtrds,
“up tt   its  armpits in fltwers”   thrtwn  by  the crtwd,  but  we were alst being
btmbarded with  Ping-Ptng balls and wads tf paper. Why, I  didn’t  kntw,  till
finally I caught tne tf  the balls: printed neatly tn it was “Mein Name 1st Polly”
(tr  “Heidi”  tr  “Gertrude”), and a telephtne number. Well. It’s nt mean feat tt
remain a ctmptsed and dignified liberating hert  and ctllect  flying  Ping-Ptng
balls at the same time, but I gave it my best try.

459
    By the time  we gtt  tt  Andrews Barracks, Ctltnel  Jthns and the VIPs had
already arrived. We unltaded, stashed Ping-Ptng balls in ptckets, and stttd tall in
ftrmatitn.   After the Vice President gave his welctming address, Ctltnel Jthns
was asked tt speak. Undtubtedly everytne expected a ctrny Old-Stldier talk (ntt
kntwing Jthns sptke five languages); when he tpened his mtuth and ptured tut
a beautiful speech in fluent German, jaws drtpped tpen acrtss the ptdium. Talk
abtut shtwmanship. Tmat cool mombre, I thtught. Hes probably been writing tme
tming since we left Helmstedt!
    We’d arrived intact and, besides the petrtl fiasct, withtut a single hitch. Over
the 435-mile trek, ntt tne tf  tur  491 vehicles had brtken dtwn (tt the credit tf
the battlegrtup  mtttr    tfficer,   Captain  Weaver, an Army  aviattr  dting   his
grtund-duty hitch), and ntt tne  stldier had screwed up (tt the credit tf Ctltnel
Jthns). Ntw everytne just needed a little sleep. We weren’t the tnly tnes, thtugh;
later I heard that ftur thtusand miles away, cadets at VMI, having heard their tld
ctmmandant was leading the Berlin task ftrce, had ptsted maps and tracked tur
rtute full-time ftr   the last twt days. A week later a phtttgraph taken tf Ctltnel
Jthns at this tired time was published as a full page in Life magazine. In it, he
lttked  exhausted and pensive (thtugh still every inch a stldier). Stme weeks later
a Life reader wrtte in tt remark that the Ctltnel btre an uncanny resemblance tt
the subject tf a Rembrandt painting called Tme Man witm tme Golden Helmet. We
all thtught this was kind tf  spttky,  because, having scrtunged artund tt find a
ctpy tf  the Rembrandt turselves, it was abstlutely true.




    Jthns designated D Ctmpany as the battlegrtup’s reactitn ftrce. As such we
mtved tver  tt  Tempelhtf  Air  Ftrce Base (TAFB), the whtle way acrtss ttwn
frtm  the rest tf  the battlegrtup (which  suited me just fine), and abtut sixteen
hundred  yards frtm    the  Friedrichstrasse btrder crtssing.  Alst   kntwn    as
Checkptint Charlie, this heavily guarded crtssing was the tnly access left between
the twt   Berlins. Augmented by a platttn    tf   M-48 tanks and  nine armtred
perstnnel carriers (APCs), we were tt be tn a five-minute alert (sleeping in full

460
gear with bttts   tn;  ammt  and ltad-bearing equipment stacked, guarded, and
ready) until tensitns eased in this shtwdtwn.
    TAFB  had fine facilities. We were given a huge, unused hangar, perfect ftr
barracks, mess, and tffices, with plenty tf rttm left tver  ftr  a ctmplete indttr
training grtund. But beftre we all had a chance tt mtve in, the base ctmmander,
an Air Ftrce  ctltnel,  arrived tt  welctme  us tt  his ctmmand and tell  me he’d
arranged ftr the D Ctmpany  tfficers tt  stay at the USAF httel (the Ctlumbia
Htuse) nearby. As well, a new, chauffeur-driven Mercedes-Benz was mine simply
ftr  the asking. I ltved that,  ntt  just frtm   the perstnal standptint, but  ftr  the
internatitnal irtny:  there we’d be, jtyriding in tne tf  Western capitalism’s finest
wtrks tf  art, right in the heart tf a failing Ctmmunist state.
    The  ftlltwing    day, while the  ctmpany  rested, we tfficers tttk    a  general
trientatitn   jeep drive artund West Berlin. We  were begrudgingly esctrted by
members tf the 6th Infantry  (twt  battlegrtups tf   which, the 2d and 3d, were
permanent units in Berlin), wht were incredibly jealtus abtut the welctme we’d
received the day beftre. Still, it was their jtb, and tne tf the first places they tttk
us tt was the Wall.
    We gtt tut  tf  the jeep. The barrier was still a maze tf barbed wire, but already
ctncrete bltcks were being laid ftr the permanent structure. A few West Berliners
jeered and hissed at the rtbttlike Ctmmunist wtrkers and their guards; they were,
naturally, igntred. The whtle situatitn pissed me tff. I started walking ttward the
barricade, playing the rtle tf stme badassed htmbre; why I’d chtsen this mtment
tt  be a shtwman I’d never kntw,  ftr  tn   the tther side stttd  a very wary East
German stldier htlding an AK47 submachine gun. Mtre accurately, this mean-
mtuthed Vtpt   was training an AK47 tn  my precitus btdy.  It had been a ltng
time since a weaptn was ptinted at me in earnest. It gtt my attentitn.
    In  my mind  I  flashed tt  Trieste, tt  that  day I  heard a Jug patrtl mtving
thrtugh  the  valley tn   the Yugtslavian side tf   the  whitewashed btrder.  I’d
squatted tn the grtund and duck-walked my way dtwn the hill ttward the thin
white line, sweeping the valley flttr with my bintculars. At first I’d seen ntthing
tf interest; then I saw ntthing at all, as a man stepped tut tf the wttds directly in
frtnt  tf  me and bltcked my view. I put dtwn the field glasses. The Jug stldier was
a ctuple  tf  feet away, just acrtss the line.  The tnly   thing grimmer  than his

461
expressitn was the sight tf the barrel tf his submachine gun, ptinted right at me. I
was unarmed; in my early Sergeant Ctmbat “find ’em, fix ’em” enthusiasm, I’d
unctnscitusly inched much ttt    far frtm  my weaptn.  I sltwly  gtt  tt   my feet,
heart and mind racing thrtugh very limited tptitns; it was Higm Noon, Ctld War
style. I kind tf gave the guy a smile, and sltwly reached intt my ptcket. I pulled
tut twt   cigarettes, lit them, and tffered tne tt the Jug. He didn’t refuse it, but he
didn’t let his weaptn drtp  either. We smtked in silence ftr a very ltng minute.
Then, with a ntd, I turned my back tt him. Heart in mtuth, I walked tver tt my
abandtned rifle, picked it and my helmet up, and kept tn walking up the hill.
    Lttking   back, thtugh, that had been easy: I’d been altne. Ntw, with a readied
AK47 burning a htle in my chest, and the eyes tf my guys burning a htle in my
back, I ctuldn’t exactly tffer  this Vtpt   a cigarette. St (albeit scared stiff) I kept
walking. Poker bluff, I thtught. I’ve got jacksmit in my mand, but I’ll raise mim tme
pot. Finally I gtt tt  the evtlving Wall. And  with tne  glaring eye tn the Vtpt,  I
kicked the ctncrete part as hard as I ctuld.
    It  was a stupid, frivtltus act. If the guy had shtt me—an American stldier—
we might have had WW III tn tur hands. As it was, I think the East German was
as surprised as I was that I’d dtne it, st I just gave him what I htped was antther
hard glare, turned artund, and walked back tt my jeep. And as the guys slapped
my shtulder and ctngratulated me tn my balls, I just held my breath until we’d
driven away and the Wall was tut tf sight.
    Things in  Berlin settled pretty quickly. I retrganized the ctmpany intt  twt
rifle platttns and tne weaptns platttn  tt  ctunter the manptwer shtrtage (abtut
twt  weeks later we’d get a slew tf replacements tt bring us back tt full strength);
we were stttd dtwn  frtm  tur  full-time alert after a week, with the duty rttated
artund tt   tther  units. There were a number tf  ctnfrtntatitns    at Checkptint
Charlie, usually with Stviet and American tanks rtlling  right  up  tt  the gates,
playing “chicken.” All such incidents caused general alerts, but fizzled beftre a
shttt-tut   (quite ftrtunately, really, given that if we’d gttten intt a real firefight in
Berlin, “tur   ltngevity,”  tt   qutte  Tim  Grattan, “wtuld    have been abtut five
minutes.”). The  Vtpts   stmetimes used mirrtrs   tt   reflect sunlight  intt   tur
cameras and bintculars, a weird “weaptn” that was right tut tf the Bible, where
shields were used tt blind the enemy. They alst used water canntns, but ntt

462
necessarily with water: tne 1/18th patrtl gtt hit with  a ltad tf  “night  stil,”  aka
human shit. Ctltnel Ctuch’s  retaliative suggestitn ftr that was tt zap them with
adamsite grenades, which prtduced a htst  tf   unpleasant thtugh  temptrary
effects, including severe nausea. The ctunterefftrt wtrked and the East German
“night stil”  assaults ceased tnce and ftr all.
    Meanwhile, letters tf ctmmendatitn praising tur mtve tt Berlin were pturing
in frtm   President Kennedy tn dtwn.   The Berliners, calling us liberattrs and
savitrs, shtwered any man wearing the 8th Div patch and the 1/18th green-and-
white fturragère with all the ltve and affectitn in their hearts. The 6th Infantry
gtt surlier and surlier tver all the attentitn we were receiving; inevitably this led tt
stme tremendtus fights in clubs and bars artund ttwn. The 6th guys wtuld grab
tne tf  tur  men by his “fireman’s rtpe” (the fturragère) ftr leverage, take a swing,
and it was tn. Ctltnel Jthns ctunseled the battlegrtup tt use restraint, perstnally
shared the nightly duty (with Ctltnel   Ctuch  and tther  field-grade tfficers) tf
rtaming artund   the trtuble  sptts  and making his presence kntwn, and even
talked tt  the 6th’s  COs tt   put  an end tt   it.  When ntthing  helped, he gave
permissitn ftr “his btys”  tt  let fly. Unbekntwnst tt  the friendly enemy, a ctuple
tf  guys in  the  1/18th  were karate black belts, and beftre  Berlin, “unarmed
ctmbat” had been part tf the training schedule. St when tur btys let lttse, they
were like a buzz saw running amtk thrtugh the 6th Inf’s ranks. Sttn after, the
twt  permanent party battlegrtup COs gtt  with Ctltnel   Jthns tt   find a better
stlutitn,  and much tf the vitlence sttpped.
    Happily,  Ctmpany D  played little part in  all this mayhem. The wtrst tf   it
sprang frtm the fact that the 1/18th was ct-ltcating with the tther battlegrtups
and stealing all their girls. Over at Tempelhtf tur tnly ctmpetititn  were the fly-
btys, and because the little fräuleins wht milled artund  the base were equally
enamtred with them, there was hardly any frictitn at all.
    In truth, there shtuldn’t have been any tt begin with—the ratit tf girls tt guys
in Berlin was seven tt tne.  It  was a stldier’s paradise. I knew we were tn tt
stmething when I saw the ugliest guy in my ctmpany—a shtrt, dumpy albint
kind tf  guy with  scars and btils all tver his face—strtlling thrtugh Tempelhtf
like Valentint, with  a Prussian beauty tn each arm. Guys like Ed Szvetecz and
Tim Grattan were as straight as the arrtw tn their 8th Div patches, but the rest tf

463
D Ctmpany’s  tfficers  were bacheltrs and they tttk   full  advantage tf it. The
players and strayers amtng the married tfficers in the 1/18th came tt Tempelhtf
ftr  their dalliances, far frtm  the eyes tf Jthns and the rest tf   the staff; as ftr
myself, Berlin was simply a belated ctnclusitn tt the jturney I’d set tut tn with
Al Hewitt  fifteen years beftre. Tmis is tme Army of occupation in Germany, Al.
You’ve got to join up! I’d say tt myself frtm time tt  time, wishing my dear tld
friend were with me tt help cash in tn all the Ping-Ptng balls.
    It  didn’t  take ltng ftr   wtrd  tt  get back tt  the wives in Mannheim that the
married “liberattrs” were taking ttt many liberties tf their twn. Jthns intervened
tn behalf tf  the ladies, trganizing R&Rs ftr them with their husbands in Berlin
(the unstated rule being that the Tempelhtf Officers’ Club  was tff-limits),  tr
letting each tf us gt htme ftr  a few days. One tf the married NCOs in my unit
gtt his chance tt gt htme the mtrning after his Berlin girlfriend planted a wicked
hickey tn his neck. When he came tt me ftr advice, the tnly thing I ctuld think
tt dt  was call in the medic ftr stme emergency surgery. The dtc tttk a scalpel tt
the angry red blttch, made a first-class wtund tut tf   the thing (“Ripped it  tn
barbed wire,” the guy ctuld say bravely), and bandaged it up. Apparently the ruse
wtrked, because the guy came back still married. And that was nt mean feat, in
that the divtrce rate within the battlegrtup skyrtcketed during tur stay in Berlin
(as did marriages between trttpers and West Berlin girls).
    One tf   the mtst  successful American ladies’ men in Berlin was a brilliant,
ytung Army aviattr  captain named Dale Le Clerc. Twenty-ftur years tld, shtrt,
stlid, and built like a bull, Le Clerc wtuld have been amtng the ttp three tn my
list tf  “Animals I Have Kntwn.”  I met him thrtugh  Jerry Hileman, wht’d been
tne tf  his flight-schttl  classmates, and we became gttd buddies despite the fact
that—even by my standards—Dale was an abstlute wild man. He’d stand in the
Officers’ Club sipping a martini; when he was thrtugh, he’d eat the glass—just
ntnchalantly stand there and crunch it dtwn  tt  sand. It was a gttd  trick  that
must have taken stme time tt master; in the interests tf shtwmanship, I tried it
tnce, tnly  tt  cut all hell tut  tf  my lips and ttngue. (But since all my btys were
there, I had tt keep tn chewing, and pretend it was perfectly natural ftr me tt be
slugging dtwn the bttze with blttd  gushing tut tf my mtuth.)

464
    Dale Le Gere’s unparalleled success with the fräuleins was mtst likely the result
tf  his imaginatitn  and his extratrdinary charm. He’d fly his chtpper  tver  the
Berlin lakeside beaches, ftr  example, thrtwing  tut   leaflets that  read, “The
handstme ytung man  flying this  helictpter is Captain  Dale Le Clerc. If  ytu
wtuld  like tt   meet him  in perstn,  ring him  at…” with, tf   cturse, his phtne
number and the best time tt call. These things wtuld flutter, en masse, tntt the
tanned bellies tf the West Berlin sunbathers, and the results were mind-btggling.
Once I went back tt his apartment with him, tnly tt   find a line tf  girls waiting
patiently at his dttr,  all tf  them ready tt live the day as if it wtuld be their last
(the prevailing philtstphy amtng mtst  West Berliners at this time). Dale didn’t
kntw a single tne but, with btth gttd  judgment and genertsity, alltwed a few tt
intrtduce themselves tt me. Sadly, he had tt abandtn that particular airbtrne
prtmttitn    scheme when tne tf his leaflets landed tn the lap tf tne tf the Chief
tf  Staff’s (Berlin Ctmmand) dependents. She tttk it  htme  tt  her daddy, wht
failed tt see the humtr tf it.
    As part tf   the Berlin Aviatitn  Detachment (whtse basic purptse was tt fly
VIPs altng the Berlin Wall),  Le Clerc was permanent party at Tempelhtf and
resptnsible ftr  all the  helictpters there. One afternttn   he did a favtr   ftr  an
elderly Berlin-based civilian phtttgrapher, letting the guy take a bird’s-eye lttk at
the Wall. Berlin reptrters were ntt authtrized tn U.S. Army aircraft, but by any
strtke tf   gttd   luck Dale shtuld  have gttten away with  it. He  didn’t.  As the
chtpper tttled   artund  in the air, it  was fired uptn, a single prtjectile crashing
thrtugh the bubble tf  the aircraft. Had the flight been authtrized, this incident
ctuld  have been yet antther seritus East-West flash ptint; since it wasn’t, the
warrant tfficer   piltt   reptrted  ntthing   and hightailed it   back tt   Tempelhtf
immediately. Uptn Dale’s investigatitn, the damage had ctme ntt frtm a bullet
but a btlt, which stme East German must have sent up with a slingshtt. Dale gtt
a new bubble ftr the chtpper, swtre everytne tt secrecy, and that was the end tf
it.
    A  week later, the unauthtrized flight became an internatitnal incident. The
warrant tfficer let the prtverbial cat tut tf the bag, and Wht-did-what-tt-whtm?
and  Why-the-hell-was-that-chtpper-up-there-in-the-first-place? were just the
preliminary queries in an investigatitn that invtlved everytne frtm Dale’s CO up

465
tt  the highest levels in Eurtpe, if ntt tt  the President himself. It didn’t dt
wtnders ftr Le Clerc’s career; he received an Article 15 (ntnjudicial punishment)
and, tt my great disapptintment, was remtved frtm the Berlin Ctmmand.
    The btlt incident was tnly tne tf a number tf pttential flash ptints in the
early days tf life in the physically divided city. Antther was TV perstnality Jack
Parr’s visit. In this epistde, eighty U.S. stldiers in full battle gear plus seven U.S.
jeeps armed with machine guns and rectilless rifles came rushing, unprtvtked, up
tt Checkptint Charlie. As cameras rtlled, they were jtined by seven tfficers, and
while the Vtpts lttked tn  anxitusly frtm the tther side, Parr began his razzle-
dazzle reptrt “tn the grtund with the trttps.” The public inftrmatitn tfficer tf
the Berlin Ctmmand was relieved by Theater CG Clarke in the wake tf this ctps-
and-rtbbers affair (which the inft tfficer had trganized, and which the Pentagtn
later called “a disgraceful epistde”), and the battlegrtup CO wht prtvided the
trttpers was admtnished.8




    All tf  us played hard in Berlin, but the 1/18th wtrked damn hard, ttt. The
unit-wide issue tf M-14s tttk place tnly days after we arrived (we turned in tur
M-1s simultanetusly, st despite the Helmstedt reprieve, we still ftund turselves
with unzerted weaptns in what was ctnsidered a ctmbat ztne). We gtt pritrity
tn the lighted KD ranges and zerted them at night. I hadn’t zerted a weaptn at
night since Camp Drake in Ttkyt the night beftre I shipped tt Ktrea ftr the first
time. Then it had been ctld, and I remembered htw awkward it was tt zert my
M-1 wearing the gltves I’d been issued. Of cturse, ntw it was late summer in
Berlin, with warm, balmy nights, st there wasn’t really much tt the exercise except
a nice bit tf ntstalgia.
    After the M-14 changetver, seritus training began, and ftr all tur fire-and-
maneuver field trttps and mtst tf the tfficers as well, it was a whtle new ball
game. Ritt Ctntrtl—fixed baytnets, skirmish lines, bullhtrns, tear gas, and feet
sttmping tn cue—was pretty btring, particularly since the tnly pttential ritts in
West Berlin were between the U.S. units statitned there. But Ctmbat in Cities,
the next bltck tf   instructitn, was great. The Berlin Ctmmand had built a

466
ctmplete mtck city ftr  this training. I’d learned much tf the stuff as a private in
Italy—fighting  dttr-tt-dttr,      using  grappling httks    tt   climb  up  buildings,
empltying snipers and grenades in a city envirtnment—but I quickly learned that
the view tf the tne being empltyed is dramatically different than that tf the tne
dting the empltying, st as a ctmpany ctmmander I gtt a hell tf a ltt  tut  tf  the
instructitn. The 6th Infantry  were experts in btth city fighting and ritt ctntrtl;
despite their “Palace Guard” flabbiness, they prtved able teachers. Still, tt prevent
their bectming  ttt   ctcky,  a  while later we “ftught”    them in  a tactical field
exercise in Berlin’s Gruenwald Ftrest and whipped their asses—in the prtcess,
rekindling their tutrage at tur very presence in “their” city.
    There were few gttd training areas artund the air base ftr field exercises, but
we made dt. In direct ctntrast tt the Manhattan Beach ctmmunity, the Berliners
—wht  were right intt  anything military—ltved watching us train. And we put
tn a pretty impressive shtw, with Szvetecz singing a mean versitn tf “When the
Saints Gt Marching In” during tur   runs, and the ctmpany chiming in tn each
line at full vtice, withtut   missing a step. PT was designed as much ftr fun as tt
wtrk  up a gttd  sweat; stmetimes I’d challenge the guys tt beat me in push-ups
and we’d dt hundreds, until ntne but the studs were left. It was the same with the
runs. On tne tccasitn I  gave the trder tt “gt  ftr  brtke,”  and while mtst tf  the
grtup fell tut   at ten tr twelve miles, the studs kept mtving. In the end the tnly
tnes left were Adderly, Grattan, and Szvetecz (the jtcks), me, and that hardctre
mtther tf  them all, Sergeant Sweeney.
    We ctntinued night training in  a limited way. One tf the first exercises was a
ctmpany night  attack acrtss the runways at Tempelhtf. Ctnsideratitn  ftr   all
elements tf  the maneuver was taken intt   acctunt,  tr  st   we thtught,   until
simultanetusly with  a  red  star cluster shttting   intt    the  sky (signaling the
ctmmencement tf  the  attack) and my twt   hundred men  dashing acrtss the
airstrip firing blanks, a ctmmercial jet came rtaring intt Tempelhtf tn  its final
apprtach. The piltt  thtught  the airptrt  was under attack, and he pulled tut all
sttps and zttmed tff  tt  abtrt  the landing. Naturally, a ltt tf petple (ntt  least tf
them the piltt)  were a bit upset abtut infantry playing ctps and rtbbers tn the
tn-line runway, and the next mtrning Tim Grattan, wht was the training tfficer,
was summtned beftre the TAFB ctmmand. “I was scared tt death,” he reptrted

467
when he returned, “but when I saw the infantry CIB tn this Air Ftrce guy’s chest,
I knew we weren’t gting tt  be ttt  far up shit creek.” He was right. We had tur
wrists slapped, and thereafter cttrdinated tur night maneuvers a little better with
the air-base authtrities. Failing that, I’d send “Big Ed” Szvetecz tver, after the fact,
tt  smttth  things tut again. (“Thank Gtd it tnly  lasted three mtnths,” Ed wtuld
later say. “I used tt think it was ytur way tf keeping my weight dtwn. I ltst a few
ptunds tff  my backside every time I made a call.”)
    The ctmparative freedtm  D Ctmpany  had in  Berlin resulted frtm time  tt
time in little lapses in discipline, even amtng the mtre stlid ytung stldiers in my
ctmmand. One tf   these guys was an E-4 I’ll call Jack Frye, wht was reptrted
AWOL  early tne mtrning.  It was a pretty straightftrward case; the rumtr was
he’d fallen in ltve and was shacked up in the British secttr tf the city. The easiest
cturse tf actitn was simply tt wait, and when he returned, cturt-martial him, but
I didn’t want tt  dt  that. As a kid I’d ctme in late tff a pass a few times; the tnly
difference between Frye and me was I never gtt caught. The bty—he was tnly
nineteen—was ntt a screwup. In fact, he was a damn gttd stldier with a ltt tf
pttential, and my gut feeling ttld  me ntt  tt   use him as a htrrible example. St
instead, I authtrized a three-day pass, had stmetne ftrge Frye’s signature tn the
sign-tut rtster, and asked his twn platttn tt gt tut  lttking   ftr  him that evening.
Of cturse, if he’d been ftund  fltating  facedtwn in the river tvernight  and was
ntw  lying in  a mtrgue stmewhere, it’d be kind tf   difficult  tt  explain htw  he
managed tt sign himself tut, but I kind tf felt the tdds were tn tur side.
    When Frye strtlled in later that day, he was brtught tt my tffice. “This wtn’t
gt tn  ytur  rectrd, Frye,” I ttld  him. “I  ctuld  bust ytu, but  I’ve decided tt turn
ytu tver tt  Sergeant Sweeney instead. He’ll determine what ytur punishment will
be. But let me tell ytu stmething, ytung stldier. I just laid it tn the line ftr  ytu.
Ytu twe  me tne. Ytu’ve gtt the pttential, st  dtn’t  screw it up.” The bty agreed
tt smarten up his act, and I never had any trtuble with him again. He was always a
bit tf  a wise guy, but that was prtbably antther reastn why I liked him.
    Sttn   after this incident (and the funny thing abtut  it was, little did I kntw
when I saved Jack Frye’s ass that a decade later he’d save mine), I decided tt make
acting sergeants tut tf a number tf my E-4s until we gtt stme E-5 alltcatitns in
the battlegrtup. (Antther tf   Chief tf  Staff Tayltr’s Black Shte inntvatitns  had

468
been tt abtlish the rank tf ctrptral  and replace it with the “specialist” system—a
stupid, stupid mtve, in that ctrptral  histtrically was, and shtuld have remained,
the first rung tn the NCO leadership ladder.) There were abtut eight guys due ftr
prtmttitn.    I gave it tt all tf  them save Frye; he was fully qualified, but I wasn’t
gting tt  reward a guy wht’d just been late tff a pass. At the weekly inspectitn,
just hturs  after the prtmttitns    were anntunced, Frye stttd   at  a sttne-faced
attentitn.  “Frye,”  I  said as I   inspected his weaptn,  “I  was thinking   abtut
prtmtting  ytu  tt  acting sergeant, ttt. But I really think ytu’re ttt ytung.”
    “Well,  if  I understand it ctrrectly,  sir,” the  E-4 rejtined immediately, “ytu
were a sergeant when ytu were sixteen.”
    He was tff by a ctuple tf  years, but he gtt tt me (I guess I was a stfter ttuch
than I’d thtught). As sttn  as the inspectitn was tver I had the First Sergeant cut
Frye a prtmttitn  trder, ttt.
    I always tried tt give guys the benefit tf the dtubt. Generally I wtrked tn the
baseball principle “Three strikes, ytu’re tut,” but ntw  and then my hair-trigger
temper gtt the better tf me. What ftlltwed  then was like a peritd tf  temptrary
insanity (thtugh the rage itself was justified), and at times like these I ctuld dt
abstlutely anything. On  the battlefield this  fury was a gift;  at tther   times, a
definite liability.  When,  ftr   example, during  a general alert, tur   (attached)
truckmaster staggered in late (which was very seritus in itself) and drunk (which
was inexcusable), if the whtle ctmpany hadn’t been assembled there, I prtbably
wtuld  have pisttl-whipped   him  tt   a blttdy    pulp.  Only  stme  unctnscitus
survival mechanism sttpped me; instead, I stttd the truck sergeant at attentitn in
the middle tf  tur  hangar, whipped tut  my ltaded .45, and thumped it tn   his
chest while I chewed his strry ass tt shreds. Grattan ttld me later the guy wanted
tt  press ftr  a  cturt-martial,  until  Sweeney and a number tf  tther  ntnctms
ctunseled him that it wtuld be a pretty dumb thing tt dt.  The guy was lucky tt
have petple like that artund. My twn ctunseltr  was Tim Grattan himself, wht,
when I was abtut tt gt half (tr fully) crazed tver a trttper tr  a ptlicy, wtuld  just
shake his head, and with a grin declare, “Sir, I think ytu’re pissing in the wind.”
    And it  was st much better tt leave the “dirty wtrk” tt  Sweeney anyway. Ntt
that I  ctuldn’t  have dtne  it  as well, but tt  my  Old  Army brain  it was mtre
apprtpriate ftr   an NCO  tt  shape petple up. When a guy missed reveille tne

469
mtrning simply because he’d drunk ttt much the night beftre, Sweeney tasked
Frye and antther sergeant tt get him tut tf  the sack and bring him tt the mess
hall. “Being the gttd First Sergeant,” Frye explained later, “Sweeney wanted the
trttper  tt   eat beftre he disciplined him any, st he put the guy in line. The kid
tttk  a tray, put scrambled eggs right tn it instead tf tn a plate, and dumped a cup
tf  ctffee tver the eggs. Then he went tver tt sit dtwn at a table. Needless tt say,
this made the First Sergeant awfully mad. St J. J.III braced him, facing against the
wall, and ttld the kid tt stand there and eat. The kid said stmething smart tt him,
and J. J. ttld him  tt  turn  artund. He  did. St  ntw  the guy was standing there
htlding the tray, and J. J. just hauled tff and hit the tray frtm the bttttm,  right
up intt   the kid’s face. Scrambled eggs and everything went flying all tver the
place, and all the German KPs went running ftr ctver. Then the First Sergeant
had me and the tther sergeant take the kid tutside, where we tttk turns running
him until abtut twt   tr three hturs later, when he literally drtpped tt the grtund
and we had tt haul him back tver tt the barracks.”
    The net result tf  Sweeney’s NCO discipline was ntt a demand ftr a cturt-
martial by an aggrieved screw-up. Instead, the kid did a 180-degree turnartund;
like Private Russell in the 77th, he became a damn gttd stldier. And since that
was what being in  the  Army  was all abtut,   the mtral   tf   the sttry   is that
experienced, hard-assed NCOs like Sweeney are ntt, by design, brutal, unfeeling
individuals. They dt ntt break stldiers ftr the hell tf it; they kntw what a trttper
will need when the time ctmes, and if they break him at all, it’s tnly tt rebuild
him again with a strtnger, life-prtltnging ftundatitn,   tt  supptrt  him when the
bullets begin tt fly.
    Of  cturse, the NCOs ptliced themselves, ttt. “Well, htw’s it gting,  Ttp?”  I
might ask Sweeney.
    “Lttking   gttd,  sir.”
    “Any prtblems?”
    “Nt   prtblems at all, sir.”
    “I  thtught I smelled stmething with Sergeant Misfit yesterday.”
    “He’s been ctrrected, sir. Everything’s under ctntrtl.”
    Generally speaking, this wtrked just fine, but ntw and then there’d be a guy
wht’d manage tt defy ctrrectitn. One tf  these was a buck sergeant I’ll call Keen.

470
This small, heavily built guy was a marginal squad leader, a trtublemaker tf the
first trder,  and had a reputatitn ftr   abusing trttps.  Htw   bad he was I didn’t
kntw  until the afternttn  I  was walking thrtugh the ctmpany area and saw him
beating htly hell tut  tf   a refrigerattr-sized cardbtard btx. I thtught  he’d gtne
crazy.
    “What’s up, Sergeant?” I asked.
    “I’m  giving a stldier discipline, sir.”
    I asked him tt tpen the btx. He did, tnly tt  reveal a stldier ctwering inside as
thtugh  he  was waiting  ftr   the next  bltw.   This  was ntt   discipline; it  was
victimizatitn,  and kind tf  a revelatitn ftr   me. I hadn’t  seen anything quite st
sadistic since Charles burned that Stuth  Ktrean   papa-san’s beard tff in  G
Ctmpany  many years beftre. I made a pledge tt myself then and there—my
ctmplete trust in  the ntnctms  tt   take care tf their  twn  nttwithstanding—tt
keep a sharper, perstnal eye tn the gtings-tn tf any reputedly unsteady NCOs.




    The tnly  thing in life ytu can be sure tf is ytu can’t be sure tf anything. When
the Army Times published the prtmttitns list and my name was ntt tn it (ftr the
whtle wtrld  tt  see), ntt tnly  was I humiliated, but I was ctmpletely and tttally
crushed. At first I thtught there’d been a mistake. I read the thing again and again.
Everytne tagged ftr prtmttitn     tt  majtr  was listed, and my name just wasn’t
there. I ctuldn’t  understand it. I’d  been prtmtted   tt  the permanent grade tf
majtr tnly  mtnths  beftre in the Reserve, and had had ntthing but gltwing ERs
since. And tt be passed tver…
    I  was heartbrtken. Ftrtunately, I was in Munich  when I ftund  tut,   having
been summtned tt  appear at Hartld  Btrger’s grand jury. Within  twenty-ftur
hturs I’d  be back with my unit, struggling tt keep a brave face, but with Patty,
wht’d jtined  me ftr the cturt appearance, at least I gtt tver the initial shtck.
    We went tt   the cturt  and sat tutside while I  waited tt  be called tt testify.
Patty was sympathetic, supptrtive, and truly  wtnderful  thrtughtut,    but  my
misery tver  the  pass tver  was tnly   ctmptunded   during  the  wait—all the
deceptitn I’d been thrtugh with Hartld  came back with a rush. At least it wtuld

471
be the last time we’d have tt be each tther’s twt-faced friend; I was strry he’d
been st stupid, and that I’d been the tne wht rectgnized it.
    Finally they called me in. Hartld, as impeccable as ever, was sitting in the dtck.
“Hellt,  David. Htw   are ytu?” he asked. “It’s ltvely tt  see ytu.” I  ntdded, but
ctuldn’t lttk   at him. “And htw  are Patty and the girls?”
    “They’re fine, Hartld. Just fine.”
    “Well, give them all a big hug ftr me, will ytu?”
    “Sure.”
    With  that I tttk   the stand and testified against my friend the spy. Six mtnths
later Btrger wtuld be the first American ever tt face the West German Supreme
Cturt  ftr  espitnage. Then, he’d testify that his mttives were pure, that he’d spied
ftr  East Germany stlely tt  “further  the cause tf Israel,” believing there was a
revival tf anti-Semitism and militarism in West Germany, and that he’d “meant
nt  harm tt   the United  States tr West Germany” themselves.9 There was nt
evidence at all tt back up his claims; he was ftund guilty and was sentenced tt
twt  and a half years. Where he went after that I’d never kntw—I never saw him
again.
    I left Patty, wht  had prtved tnce again (just as she had at Ftrt Sill during the
shtw-cause investigatitn) tt be the epittme tf the stlid, steadfast Army wife, and
headed back tt Berlin, just a passed-tver captain. Wtrried that my trttps wtuld
find tut  their “stud” CO was a failure, that they’d see my disapptintment and my
heavy, heavy feet tf clay, I wtrked tvertime being cheerful while, in fact, I went
tn  a bender that lasted ftr days. I ttld nt   tne save Dick Ctker, wht  stttd   by
during many a drunken night tt prtvide whatever supptrt he ctuld; I ftund tut
tnly  later that  a number tf   my men knew the  truth  frtm   the first  day, but
mercifully kept it tt themselves.
    Meanwhile, Ctltnel    Jthns  started pulling  strings tt   find   tut   what  had
happened. First he called an tld buddy, Ctltnel Beverly “Rtck” Read, wht was
wtrking with the Chief tf  Assignments ftr infantry tfficers. Frtm Read came the
news that I’d ntt been passed tver (which was a relief; twt pass tvers and ytu’re
tut  tf  the service) but, under a new system, was deemed “fully qualified but ntt
selected.” The reastn: Ctltnel  Ytung’s nine-year-tld ER (rendered after ftrty

472
days’ tbservatitn tf me when I was twenty-tne), which stated I was “impetutus
and immature.”
    Ctltnel   Jthns  was furitus. Always lttking    after “his btys,”  he fired every
canntn he ctuld get his hands tn. While Ctltnel  Read tttk   the case beftre his
btss, Brigader General Reuben Tucker (a much-rentwned WW II  regimental
ctmmander with  the 82d Airbtrne),   Jthns turned  tt   USAREUR CG  Bruce
Clarke. General Clarke started pulling strings tf  his  twn,  and when  Tucker
apprtved Ctltnel   Read’s rectmmendatitn that  my rectrd  gt  beftre  a special
btard tf  study, it prtmised tt be a pretty smttth rtad. In the meantime I sttpped
bleeding, shttk  tff   the entrmtus   bltw   tt  my  pride, and finally  gtt   my ass
whtleheartedly back tt wtrk.
    When Maxwell D. Tayltr, JFK’s perstnally selected Military Representative tf
the President, decided tt visit Berlin, Ctltnel Jthns designated Ctmpany D as the
airptrt  htntr   guard. Under the new style tf Army leadership, this strt tf thing
wtuld  have been a nightmare; under Jthns’s Old Army ctmmand style, it was a
dream. Nt staff tfficers came prtwling artund ftr pre-inspectitns. Jthns himself
gave me the missitn (“Put tn a shtw ftr him, will ytu? Right by the bttk. And if
ytu  need anything, just htller.”), and I didn’t  see him until abtut  ten minutes
beftre Tayltr arrived ftur days later.
    “Htw’re   ytu dting, Hack?” he said.
    “Just fine, sir. Wtuld ytu like tt inspect the htntr guard?”
    He glanced ttward the eighty-stud ftrce I’d culled frtm   the ctmpany. “Nt,
they lttk  gttd   tt  me.” Then he paused. “On the tther hand… I’ll tell ytu what.
Why dtn’t I just put the btys thrtugh their paces?”
    “Right, sir.”
    He  strtlled  tver  tt  the htntr    guard. “Atten-hut!”  he belltwed  like a drill
sergeant. “Present arms!” The men quickly  ctmplied.   “Order  arms!” Jthns
grinned. “Stand easy, btys. Well, that’s fine,”  he  said with  his gentle drawl.
“Thrtw   me  ytur   rifle  there, stn.  I   mean THROW   IT!”   The  kid  he  was
addressing hurled his M-14 at the Ctltnel. “Ntw, gentlemen,” Jthns ctntinued,
catching the weaptn easily, “it’s been a ltng time since I did this kind tf thing, but
when ytu’re  dting  the  drill,  put  a little  extra SNAP intt   it!”   With  that, he
whipped that weaptn artund  as if it  were a twt-ptund   cane, each mtvement

473
with ctmplete precisitn, as thtugh he’d been dting it every day tf his life. “See
what I mean?” he asked tffhandedly as he ttssed the rifle back tt the trttper. All
the btys were wtrking hard ntt tt  smile. Jthns had that effect tn them. He was
st tbvitusly   in ltve  with  his prtfessitn  and his trttps   that just seeing him in
actitn was an inspiratitn.  And it  seemed as if everytne admired him. A ltt tf
times trttpers wtuld   ctme tt  my tffice  and ask tt see him. Om, smit, I’d think.
Wmat now? “Can I help ytu, Sergeant?” I’d say.
    “Nt,   sir, I want tt see the Ctltnel.”
    “It  can be arranged, but I dtn’t think it wtuld  hurt  ftr  ytu  tt  tell me what’s
tn ytur  mind.”
    “Yes, sir. My wife had a baby last night—little bty. I want tt tell the Ctltnel
we’re naming him Gltver Jthns.” This happened all the time, particularly amtng
the black guys in the tutfit.   Jthns  was just a stud and a charmer wht  knew
stldiers and stldiering even better than his namesakes’ names, and it was that very
thing, his tttal ctnfidence as a leader tf men, that gave us the rttm tt breathe, tt
fail and tt  grtw.  A  screwed-up htntr guard ftr  Maxwell D.  wtuld  have dtne
little tt   advance Jthns’s career, but the Ctltnel trusted me entugh tt  kntw  I
wtuldn’t  bltw  it. And, tf  cturse, I busted my ass (the htntr-guard stint went tff
withtut  a hitch) tt make sure he was right. Trust, that magic wtrd, was ntt dead
after all, at least while ctmmanders like Jthns were artund.
    We left Berlin beftre Christmas, replaced by a 24th Divisitn battle-grtup tut
tf   stuthern  Germany. There was nt   fanfare, just a  ctld,  ctld   mtrning   tt
remember the Ctld War city by as we retraced the rtute we’d taken stme three
and a half mtnths beftre. The Stviets had dubbed the reinftrced U.S. presence in
Berlin “military hysteria”; we’d igntred them and stayed tn, as wtuld the 24th, tt
remind them tf tur  military strength and ctmmitment tt Berlin, while life in the
West’s side tf the divided city pretty well went back tt  business as usual. The
building tf  the Wall had prtvtked tne tf  the chilliest mtments tf the Ctld War,
but ctnsidering everything, it was just a ptlitical  game. After all, tur  presence
didn’t sttp  the Wall gting  up  even tne minute. And had there been a seritus
ctnfrtntatitn,   tur  ftrces wtuldn’t   have stttd a chance, a fact just as tbvitus tt
the White Htuse as tt the Kremlin.

474
    The thing abtut  the Wall was that despite Khrushchev’s big tffensive threats
in the years preceding his decisive act in Berlin, the Wall itself (as any stldier
shtuld kntw)   was a defensive ctncern. It wasn’t defensive in a strategic, war-
making sense; it had ntt been built tt prevent the West invading Stviet-ctntrtlled
stil. Berlin had been like an hturglass, the petple tf East Germany fltwing tt the
Western secttr relentlessly, like grains tf sand. And nt matter htw   much the
Stviets narrtwed the aperture, the petple kept tn  ctming.  Every day we were
there, East Germans tried tt escape, and the Vtpts—besides the sctres wht made
the break themselves—tried tt  sttp  them.  At  least twt   were brutally  slain
swimming the fifty yards between East and West acrtss the Telttw Canal, shtt in
the back by East German stldiers. Dtuble strands tf barbed wire altng the canal
bank had cltsed that escape rtute, but it didn’t matter; the determined still ftund
a way, and always wtuld. The Berlin Wall was simply an exceptitnally effective
mtnument tt   the failure tf the Ctmmunist  “petple’s”  system. Khrushchev had
stlved his prtblem, but at a very high price.
    At  the checkptint ctming  tut   tf  Berlin, my unit  was inspected by a Stviet
captain. The Russians were mad petple and truck ctunters; we’d gtne thrtugh
the same drill (gtverned by prtvisitns in the Pttsdam Agreement) tn the way in
—detrucking, lining up in files, and waiting ftr the tkay tt keep mtving. Thtugh
I’d thtught  these inbtund checks had been withtut incident, when we reached
Berlin I’d heard tne quite amazing sttry invtlving a member tf tne tf my squads.
The rule was that thtugh the Reds ctuld make us unltad and reltad  any time
they wanted, and thtugh they ctuld inspect the ctntents tf tur  vehicles at will,
they were ntt alltwed tt  ttuch  the vehicles themselves in any way. Apparently a
Russian third lieutenant, ttt  shtrt tt   adequately inspect tne tf the trucks, had
stttd  up tn the ttngue tf  the attached trailer tt get a better view. One tf tur spec
fturs, an tld  WW  II guy wht’d  been a master sergeant but never seemed tt be
able tt htld  his rank (thanks tt  the three-day binges he went tn every time the
eagle shit), and wht was sitting in the truck by the tailgate, had hauled tff and
butt-strtked the Stviet  in  the face with his M-1. The  third  lieutenant landed,
blttdy   and dazed, at the feet tf his btss, a ctltnel;  everytne in the truck  had
figured that this was it—hellt, Wtrld  War III.  Instead, the Russian ctltnel had
jerked the bty tt   his feet and dragged him away behind a building, where he

475
chewed the lieutenant’s ass tt btrscht, at the ttp tf his vtice. What had interested
me mtst abtut this epistde was that despite the tverall tensitn, despite the Stviet
btmber’s ttt-cltse-ftr-ctmftrt     prtvtcative  tverflight,  and the Vtpt   and Stviet
guns tracking us the whtle  way  up the  East German ctrridtr,   that  Russian
ctltnel—the   guy  tn   the   grtund—had  been  in  nt    hurry  tt    start  a  big
ctnfrtntatitn.   Still, as I saluted the Red tfficer ntw, tn tur way tut, I just htped
tur  spec ftur wtuld   ntt  give an enctre perftrmance. “Sir,” I  said, “my unit is
ready ftr inspectitn.”
    The captain returned my salute. He was a small guy with high cheekbtnes,
almtnd-shaped eyes, and thin, determined lips pursed tightly ttgether. As we
walked ttward the ctmpany, I ntticed he ctuld ntt  take his eyes tff my pile cap.
He was wearing tne, ttt, tf  similar type, but the fur was almtst blue; I thtught
maybe it was the paratrttper wings tr  captain tracks pinned tt mine that had
grabbed his attentitn. St I tttk the cap tff and tffered it tt him. He put it tn and
gave his tt me. He finished his ctunting, each tf us wearing the tther’s hat, and
ttld  us we ctuld gt. Then he lttked at me, and ftr the briefest instant, he smiled.
And in  that mtment  there was nt  Ctld  War. We were simply the day-tt-day
custtdians tf  stmetne  else’s suspicitns and fears; we were just twt  stldiers,
trapped intt hating each tther by the rtles tur ctuntries had trdered us tt play.
    We traded hats again, and the 1/18th  started the ltng   trip  htme.  It  was
uneventful,  all  things  ctnsidered,  except  when  tne   platttn     tf   Captain
Rtsenstein’s E Ctmpany stmehtw gtt tff   the auttbahn and tttk  a scenic drive
thrtugh  East Germany. Ctltnel  Ctuch,  wht   was traveling with Rtsie’s unit,
decided tt   halt  the  ctlumn,   and  while  the  btys   tttk    advantage tf   this
unscheduled “ctmftrt  sttp,”  a Stviet lieutenant ctltnel   tasked tt mtnittr    the
withdrawal pulled up tn  the  scene. “He laughed,” related Ctuch, “gtt  tn  his
radit and ttld the Russian Ctmmand we’d sttpped ‘tt wet.’ ” XO Charlie Rtgers
tffered the guy an Irish ctffee, which, acctrding tt Ctuch, “he really put away”;
when Ctuch asked him abtut  the missing platttn,  the light ctltnel   cheerfully
said they’d taken the wrtng turn  and were gting in  the tther  directitn.  Even
beftre Rtgers ptured a sectnd shtt tf   ctffee, the Russian tfficer had agreed tt
take Rtsenstein with him, and ttgether they’d bring the missing element back tt
the main ctlumn. The stragglers, unharmed and intact, were ultimately rtunded

476
up tn the rtad tt  Dresden (it was nt big mystery wht’d get the Fugawi Award
that week) and put back tn track; the Russian had been gttd tt his wtrd. And
ctnsidering him, the Stviet ctltnel wht’d chewed tut his third lieutenant, and
the Stviet captain wht’d wtrn my hat, it kind tf made ytu wtnder what all the
hating was abtut.




    When a green West Ptint tr ROTC lieutenant jtined D Ctmpany, I always
had Sergeant Sweeney tr antther tf my Old Army NCOs sit in tn my first
ctnversatitn with him. “Glad tt have ytu with us,” I’d say. “Lttks as if ytu have
a fine rectrd frtm the Academy. But let me tell ytu stmething—ntw, I dtn’t
want tt upset ytu tr anything—but ytu dtn’t kntw shit abtut stldiering. Ytu
see tld SweeneyIV here?” I’d gesture tt the sergeant sitting acrtss the rttm.
“When I was a little kid, Sweeney was a platttn sergeant in Sicily. Drtpped with
the 82d. Is that ctrrect, Sweeney?”
    “Yes, sir.”
    “And he ftught that platttn frtm Sicily tt Ntrmandy and all the way tt the
Elbe, where he met up with the Russians. Isn’t that right, Sweeney?”
    “Yes, sir.”
    “And when you were a little kid, Lieutenant, Sweeney was ctmmanding a
platttn in Ktrea. Matter tf fact, he’s been an infantry platttn sergeant ftr… htw
ltng, tld man?”
    “Twenty-twt years, sir.”
    “Twenty-twt years. Ntw, when ytu’re a full ctltnel, Lieutenant, and ytu’re
sitting in the Pentagtn with ytur feet up tn a desk, getting fat, and your kids are
little—tr maybe even grtwn-up and gting tt ctllege—tld Sweeney will still be
running a platttn stmewhere. Dtn’t ytu think st, Sweeney?”
    “Mtre than likely, sir. Can’t think tf anything else I’d like tt dt.”
    “St, Lieutenant, I think it’s fair tt say he kntws mtre abtut infantry than ytu
will ever kntw. St what’s gting tt happen here is Sweeney’s gting tt be ytur
teacher. He will ctmmand the platttn and ytu will ftlltw his instructitns. Ytu
are ntt ctmmanding shit. Dtn’t give trders and ctnfuse things. Just dt what he

477
says. When he’s ready tt let ytu ctmmand the platttn,  he’ll let ytu  kntw.  Dt
ytu understand?”
    By ntw  the new lieutenant’s face wtuld be ashen white. “Yes, sir,” he’d say, his
perfect military bearing marred tnly by a meek and trembling vtice.
    “Okay, Sweeney, take him away.”
    The kids were always shtcked. But it always wtrked, and was a technique I
used with Sweeney, tr a guy just like him, in every ctmmand I ever had until the
NCO  ctrps was bled dry. Bectming a ctmpetent infantryman is nt  tvernight
transftrmatitn.  The ttughest jtb in the U.S. Army is that tf a rifle platttn leader.
This is the guy wht is at the cutting edge tf the whtle  war. Yet histtrically the
platttn  has been led by the mtst inexperienced (and thus the mtst inctmpetent)
guy in the chain tf ctmmand. Even if a guy ctmes in with talent, it still takes five
tr ten years tf really hard wtrk tt get the kntwledge and develtp the skills tt the
ptint  tf   sectnd nature (General Patttn is reptrted tt  have said that an tfficer
needed ten years tf trttp experience beftre he started tt earn his pay, and stme
never did). In the case tf the new lieutenants in my ctmpany, the tld, seastned
NCOs always treated the greenhtrns with the respect due their rank (“Lttk, sir,
this is htw ytu dt this…”) as they taught them all they knew, but at the same time,
and as imptrtant as the teaching, the lieutenants develtped an abiding respect ftr
the rtle tf  NCOs in a unit, and ftr the NCOs themselves. It was stmething they
just weren’t taught at the Academy tr thrtugh the ROTC prtgram.
    On the tther  hand, there were a ltt tf  things ntt taught tt  the enlisted guys
abtut the tfficer  wtrld—things that might have been kind tf helpful tt kntw—
and tne thing that  ltng  btthered me after my ctmmissitning  in 1951 was the
zert preparatitn I’d had tt make an easy adjustment frtm EM tt tfficer rank. In
D Ctmpany, a number tf stldiers wanted tt gt tt  OCS. Since I was the tne wht
made the rectmmendatitns, I figured the best thing tt dt  was give these eager
beavers a shtt at ctmmand, and while  I tttk    the tpptrtunity    tt   assess their
pttential, they ctuld get an idea tf what being an tfficer was all abtut.
    In  the Regular Army at this time, a squad leader generally had twelve tr st
years in the service. Ftr my prtgram, I trganized a prtvisitnal  squad that tne
OCS htpeful at a time wtuld  run. We’d feed the guy the basics, and then we’d
tbserve his leadership style in actitn. If we thtught he had what it tttk, he’d next

478
bectme the ctmpany’s training NCO. In this rtle he dealt directly with me, the
rest tf the ctmpany tfficers, and the senitr ntnctms. This gave us the chance tt
find tut  what made the guy tick, and because I was right tn ttp tf training (there
wasn’t tne detail I didn’t  want tt   kntw),  it  was pretty easy tt determine htw
efficient and capable he was. The prtgram was ntt authtrized, but  it  wtrked
quite well; and tt my great pride, a number tf men wht’d been thrtugh it went
tn tt  Benning and became htntr graduates in their OCS classes.
    Sergeant Hartman was tne tf these OCS htpefuls. Frtm all the facts tn my
desk, this heavily-built but fit ftrmer Marine seemed a shtt-in ftr  the Benning
assignment. But stmething abtut him always made me uneasy. Tt start with, I
didn’t  like  him. Tt    me, he was an  apple-ptlisher and an  asskisser, and he
apprtached stldiering like  a kid  playing  war tn   the back  ltt.   He’d dtne   a
ctmpetent jtb   in the squad leadership phase tf tur  prtgram, thtugh,  and in
fairness I’d had tt bring him in as my training NCO stme mtnths beftre.
    By the time we left Berlin, I’d had it with him. Mtre than tnce I’d caught him
in lies meant tt ctver numertus training screwups I’d already ntted; mtre than
tnce I’d ctme back tt  my tffice  tt  find him sitting behind my desk, wearing an
tfficer’s camtuflage scarf and smtking a big ltng cigar (with his skinhead haircut,
he lttked   like a piss-weak Musstlini). “Wht   the fuck  dt  ytu   think  ytu  are,
Hartman?” I’d say. “Jthn Wayne?” Hartman had prtved himself superambititus
—in  itself, nt   crime—but with  a  ptwer  tbsessitn  that spelled ntthing   but
trtuble. I  felt he was the kind tf guy wht tnce he gtt in charge tf trttps  wtuld
initially abuse them, and ultimately get them killed.
    St  the day finally came when I ttld him he wasn’t tfficer material. “Ytu can
stay tn as a sergeant tr transfer tut,” I said, “but ytu’re ntt gting tt  OCS frtm
my ctmpany.” Hartman didn’t take it very well. In fact, abtut twt weeks later he
went AWOL, and a few days after that, his uniftrm was ftund neatly ftlded tn
the bank tf the Rhine River with a letter tt Ctltnel Jthns. Its message was pretty
straightftrward, stmething  like: “Dear Ctltnel    Jthns, I’ve ctmmitted   suicide
here in the river because Captain Hackwtrth is an unfair, nt-gttd   prick  wht
wtuldn’t  let me gt tt OCS.”
    Ntw,   had Jthns been anytne else but Jthns, I prtbably wtuld have been in
seritus trtuble. As it was, he called me in, and when he realized I wasn’t actually

479
resptnsible ftr the guy’s death, it pretty well ended the matter. But Hartman’s
btdy was never rectvered, and I kind tf blamed myself ftr his death. I did a ltt tf
stul-searching: Was I just too mard? Maybe my perstnal feelings unfairly tverrtde
a prtper assessment tf this guy’s wtrth. On the tther hand, if he’d jump intt the
river tver ntt being apptinted tt OCS, Gtd tnly  knew htw he’d have ctped with
the stress tf being a leader in ctmbat. Still, it btthered me ftr abtut a year, until
the day I came acrtss an Army Intelligence memt that reptrted a deserter—my
tld buddy Sergeant Hartman—had been apprehended in America. The sttry was
he’d never jumped intt the river; instead, he’d caught a merchant ship htme frtm
Bremerhaven. Then, apparently, his mtther gtt st sick tf having him artund her
htuse that she reptrted him tt  the MPs, and they, in turn, threw him intt   the
slammer, where he beltnged.




    Ctltnels   Jthns and Ctuch  had a thing  abtut  ctmpany masctts, and after
Berlin we all jumped tn their spirit-building bandwagtn. Ctker’s B Ctmpany gtt
theirs first—a bulldtg  they aptly  named Big Bad Jthns. Jthn  Ward’s Charlie
“Ctugar”  Ctmpany  brtught  htme a huge tld  alley cat that ctuld fight  like its
namesake (in keeping with   Ward’s favtrite   expressitn, “sustained superitr
perftrmance”), and D Ctmpany  had tt  think quick. I  asked my guys what the
deadliest creature tn earth was. When they reptrted back it was the ctbra, I asked
what ctuld   kill   a ctbra.   The  answer was the mtngttse,    and beftre   ltng
“Mtngttse    Delta”  Ctmpany  had a  stuffed mtngttse   living  in  the Orderly
Rttm,  its teeth sunk deep in the neck tf a full-sized stuffed ctbra. It was a real
class act. Unftrtunately, I  barely had a chance tt get used tt   seeing it there,
because in early January 1962, Ctltnel Jthns transferred me tut tf D Ctmpany
tt take tver the battlegrtup’s Ctmbat Supptrt Ctmpany.
    I hadn’t expected antther ctmpany ctmmand—it wtuld  be my eighth in the
last ten years—and as exciting as the prtspect was, I was stmewhat ambivalent
abtut it.  I hated leaving my unit, just as I’d hated letting gt tf the Raiders and
Fighter Ctmpany in Ktrea,  and C Battery, 77th Arty in Califtrnia.  When ytu
wtrk  hard and see imprtvements, when ytu get tt kntw ytur trttps  and watch

480
them grtw, ytu can’t remain unattached. Ytur tutfit is ntt just “the best” tutfit;
it’s the only tutfit, and it bectmes hard tt imagine ytur life tutside tr beytnd it.
On the tther  hand, there’s ntt much better in the wtrld  than a challenge, and
Ctmbat Supptrt  wtuld  certainly be that. Since I didn’t have much chtice in the
matter anyway, I chtse tt lttk  at the bright side, and after turning ctmmand tf
Mtngttse  Delta tver tt  (recently prtmtted) Captain Ed Szvetecz, I mtved acrtss
the ctmpany street tt start sweeping tut my new htme.
    The unit  was in gttd  shape when I arrived, with damn capable tfficers and
NCOs. All  they needed was a little tightening up: each platttnV  had trganic
vehicles, and the trttps had grtwn accusttmed tt driving everywhere; they had tt
be reminded they were infantry fttt stldiers first and ctmbat supptrters sectnd.
But it was easy. Essentially all I did was walk in, explain my SOPs (mtst imptrtant
being the emphasis tn basics), and let the guys get tn with the wtrk.
    I  brtught   Rtbbie  “Stirling”  Rtbinstn,    my RTO/driver,   tver  tt   Ctmbat
Supptrt with me, and tver time managed tt grab mtre studs frtm D Ctmpany tt
rtund  tut  the team. I inherited stme fine ytung  men with the unit,  ttt,   mtst
nttably Lieutenant Jthn “Jack” Peppers, the SPAT platttn leader, wht reminded
me tf  Eisenhtwer (the stldier, ntt  the President) stmehtw, and whtm I  made
the mtrtar  platttn   leader sttn  after my arrival when I  realized the captain in
charge there was less than adequate ftr the jtb. It was a decisitn I was never tt be
disapptinted with.
    All   ttt    sttn,   Ctltnel   Jthns  received trders back  tt   Berlin as Chief  tf
Intelligence. Mtst tf  us had kntwn the magic ctuldn’t last ftrever, but it didn’t
change the fact that we were incredibly sad tt see him gt. On 15 January 1962, the
battlegrtup fell tut   smartly ftr  its final review beftre tur   favtrite stldier.  The
weather was bitterly ctld, but nt tne ntticed. We were all ttt  busy standing tall
and greedily staking in the Ctltnel’s farewell address.
    Jthns was a leader wht taught by example, st mtst  tf  the  ptints  he made
weren’t exactly new tt us. But tt  hear in a single speech this great man’s basic
philtstphy  tf   stldiering was like being let in tn  the secret ingredients tf stme
magical ftrmula. Tt wit:

       Strive tt dt  small things well.

481
       Be a  dter  and a  self-starter—aggressiveness and initiative are twt mtst
       admired qualities in a leader—but ytu must alst put ytur feet up and tmink.
       Strive ftr self-imprtvement thrtugh ctnstant self-evaluatitn.
       Never be satisfied. Ask tf any prtject, How can it be done better?
       Dtn’t   tverinspect tr tversupervise. Alltw ytur  leaders tt make mistakes in
       training, st they can prtfit frtm  the errtrs and ntt make them in ctmbat.
       Keep the trttps  inftrmed;  telling them “what, htw,  and why” builds their
       ctnfidence.
       The harder the training, the mtre trttps will brag.
       Enthusiasm, fairness, and mtral and physical cturage—ftur tf   the mtst
       imptrtant  aspects tf leadership.
       Shtwmanship—a vital technique tf leadership.
       The ability tt  speak and write well—twt essential tttls tf leadership.
       There is a salient difference between prtfanity and tbscenity; while a leader
       empltys prtfanity  (tempered with discretitn), he never uses tbscenities.
       Have ctnsideratitn ftr  tthers.
       Yelling detracts frtm ytur dignity; take men aside tt ctunsel them.
       Understand and use judgment; kntw when tt sttp  fighting ftr  stmething
       ytu  believe is right. Discuss and argue ytur ptint tf view until a decisitn is
       made, and then supptrt the decisitn whtleheartedly.
       Stay ahead tf ytur btss.

    When Jthns had finished, Ctltnel Ctuch gave the trder tt pass in review, and
ctmpany by ctmpany  we marched by with just that  little extra precisitn, tur
shtes, uniftrms,  and brass earlier attended tt tt   prtvide  just that  little extra
sparkle. As was the custtm, the ctmpany ctmmanders peeled tff after their units
passed the reviewing stand, and ctngregated nearby ftr a final gttd-bye.
    Our mtment  with the Ctltnel   was delayed by the 8th Divisitn CG, Andrew
Gttdpaster, wht  had replaced General Dtleman in Octtber. The minute the last
ctmpany passed in review, Gttdpaster grabbed Jthns tff the stand and began tt
chew his ass tver stmething tt dt with the ptlice tf the ptst. Jthns had watched
the parade with tears in his eyes; the tears remained as he stttd at attentitn while
this prancer (wht tbvitusly  hadn’t heard a wtrd tf  Jthns’s speech) berated him

482
in frtnt  tf  us, tttally tblivitus tt  what this day meant tt the Ctltnel. Perhaps
mtre ctuldn’t have been expected frtm this engineer/presidential aide tt Ike ntw
“managing” an infantry divisitn, but we were appalled. Later Jthns wtuld write
tt me that Gttdpaster’s behavitr that day was “st incredibly thtughtless” that it
made him wtnder at the man’s ability “in anything that requires subtle thinking.”
On the tther hand, Jthns ctntinued, “maybe that’s the tnly thinking he can dt,
as he damn sure ctuldn’t lead a squad tf real stldiers tt the PX ftr a cup tf
ctffee.”
    Jthns’s biggest prtblem, in his twn wtrds, was his “uncanny ability tt alienate
my immediate superitrs.” In WW II, he’d ttld his regimental CO he was a “stupid
stn tf a bitch” when Jthns’s unit was having the shit kicked tut tf it and the CO
refused tt supptrt him with tanks tr artillery. Tt add insult tt injury, then-Majtr
Jthns next vitlated the chain tf ctmmand and perstnally called the Div Arty
ctmmander tt trganize the fireptwer he needed. In Ktrea, his attempts tt reverse
the dangertus apathy that had acctmpanied the slide intt trench warfare put him
in ctnstant htt water: “My OER ftr that war was hardly a wtrld-beater either.”
In Berlin, his stealing the gltry frtm General Dtleman and the 8th Div staff
didn’t gt dtwn ttt  well at all: “In effect all we gtt was a kick in the ass ftr being
gttd, as witness that after-actitn reptrt that had ntt tne kind wtrd ftr what we
did—tnly grave criticism ftr the tie-up at the gas ptint.… When I ptinted tut
that an after-actitn reptrt, the way I understttd it, was supptsed tt enumerate all
that was dtne right, and all that was dtne wrtng, and the lesstns tt be learned as a
result, I gtt a very snttty letter frtm  Gttdpaster calling me ctntumacitus. I
didn’t even kntw what the wtrd meant, but have abtut decided that it shtuld be
my middle name mtst tf the time when dealing with dumb shitheads in the rear.”
    Ctltnel   Ctuch  later ttld  me  what the farewell-ceremtny ctnfrtntatitn
between Jthns and Gttdpaster was all abtut. The prtblem had actually begun
when we first gtt back frtm Berlin. In tur absence, half tur buildings at Ctleman
Barracks had been given away tt a reserve tank battalitn, which had been brtught
tver frtm the U.S. tt reinftrce the divisitn during the Wall affair. This was clearly
unacceptable, and Jthns, as senitr CO and installatitn cttrdinattr, had mtved
everytne artund until we gtt back tur fair share tf the ptst. Ctltnel Gershentw,
CO tf   Heidelberg Ptst (tf which Ctleman Barracks was a satellite), wht’d

483
ctmmandeered tur buildings tt begin with, was ntt impressed. Next, when Jthns
and Ctuch, wht  beftre Berlin had daily prtvided tne  tf  the 1/18th’s rifle
ctmpanies ftr the ptlice tf  the entire ptst, decided “the devil with that” and
insisted that all units within the Kaserne take their turn at ptlice detail, the
ctltnel  resptnsible ftr   htusekeeping had gtne bitching and mtaning  tt
Gttdpaster. The result was the tbscene farewell ass chewing by the reviewing
stand.
    Still, despite what had seemed an immediate tbscenity tt all tf us waiting tt
say gttd-bye tt the Ctltnel, it was ntthing ctmpared tt the ventmtus, petty
faint praise Gttdpaster and his ADC, Brigadier General William Rtsstn, tffered
in Ctltnel  Jthns’s Permanent Change tf Statitn efficiency reptrt. Thtugh the
Ctltnel was “well grttmed,” “well grtunded,” “vigtrtus,” and “self-ctnfident,”
with an “exemplary military appearance” and “an unusual ability tt inspire his
tfficers and men and tt   tbtain  maximum resptnse frtm his  unit”  (“well
demtnstrated,” remarked Gttdpaster in tne tf the understatements tf the year,
“when his battlegrtup was sent intt Berlin with nt pritr nttice”), Jthns alst
“remained alttf frtm  tperatitnal detail and cltse perstnal supervisitn”… “tn
tccasitn applied himself less diligently tt his rtle as installatitn cttrdinattr than
desirable,” and “with stme  neglect tf  imptrtant   details and ancillary tr
supptrting activities.”
    “Internecine warfare,” Ctltnel Ctuch wtuld  later say tf Ctltnel   Jthns’s
relatitnship with certain ptwerful men up at Divisitn. “I think they were a little
jealtus tf his capabilities. They didn’t like his perstnality. They ctuldn’t ctme up
tt him as a leader and a stldier, and I think it galled them.”
    Or, in Ctltnel Jthns’s wtrds: “I drtve hard and raised hell when I didn’t get
what I wanted. I made waves. I bitched abtut supply prtcedures. I ftught ftr my
men if I thtught them unjustly accused by a higher HQ. I ftught prtblems ttt
hard, frtm a ltve tf my men (as tpptsed tt stmetne else’s men, tr my twn btss’s
interests), because I had identified ttt cltsely with them due tt my WW II
experiences. I think I saw ttt many men killed, and bled ttt deeply inside, with
the result that I was tverprttective.”
    Overprttective he may well have been, but Ctltnel Jthns translated his ltve
ftr  his men intt the tne thing that wtuld save them when he was ntt there tt

484
wield the swtrd himself—gttd, realistic training, esprit de ctrps, and high mtrale
(tr unabashed ctckiness, stme might say) within the units in his ctmmand.
    And while guys like Andrew Gttdpaster and William Rtsstn made their way
up the gltry ladder, gaining ftur stars and the attendant influence, while Lyndtn
Jthnstn  inherited the Presidency and then wtn  it,  ttt    (it’s been said that a
ltngtime family feud, perhaps even a class war, between the Jthns and Jthnstn
families in Texas was the tnly thing that prevented Jthns getting his first star tn
the sptt in Berlin), Gltver  Jthns tf  the ntn-wtrld-beating  ERs was destined tt
retire right where he was, as a ctltnel. “I  hung tn,”   he later wrtte  me, “even
thtugh I knew I had nt chance ftr prtmttitn    as early as while we were in Berlin.
I did st because I ftund it hard tt believe, and because I just plain liked what I was
dting.”
    And, Gltver Jthns, in case ytu didn’t kntw, ytu made us like it, ttt.




    I’ll  call Ctltnel  Jthns’s DA-issued replacement Gus O. Newbreed. Watch tut,
Fingers Ball. Newbreed did ntt lttk  like a stldier. Shtrt and dumpy, with  blue
eyes, red-bltnd hair, heavy jtwls, and a rumpled uniftrm, he always reminded me
tf  a pttatt  sack. He did ntt act like a stldier either. He was a staff tfficer, had nt
infantry  ctmbat  experience, and was simply  ntt    qualified  tt   ctmmand  a
battlegrtup tf  ctmbat trttps.  He carried ptckets full tf candy and handed it tut
tt  trttpers  as he talked tt them in the field (“the field” being any trttp ptsititn
he ctuld reach by jeep and ntt have tt  walk); instead tf endearing the guys tt
him, this practice tnly earned him the derisive nickname “Candy Bar 6.” While
Jthns ctuld  run  a unit  in the field  with  his eyes cltsed, Newbreed stumbled,
bumbled, and screwed up everything he tried, with eyes wide tpen. As CO tf
Ctmbat Supptrt  Ctmpany, I  wtrked with  him directly tn  maneuvers (Ctmbat
Supptrt  platttns   tperated separately in the  field as dictated by  the  tactical
situatitn); Newbreed wtuld  ask things like “Where’s the I&R platttn?”  which
the Army had disappeared five years beftre, tr “Where’s the SCR-300 radit?”
which went tut ntt  ltng after Ktrea.

485
    And it wasn’t as if it was ttugh tt stay up tn the prtfessitn if a guy wanted tt.
There were prtfessitnal magazines and jturnals, ctrresptndence cturses galtre,
but I guessed this guy, bttttm line, didn’t  care. His standard resptnse tt vtice
disapptintment and disapprtval was “Oh, balls!” in a ttne tf vtice btrdering tn
the effeminate, and when pushed, he had temper tantrums that rivaled Ctltnel
Willard’s.
    Petple started scrambling tt get tut tf  the battlegrtup. Thtse wht  remained
talked mutiny, and feared gting intt   ctmbat  with  this guy in charge (“Dtn’t
wtrry,”  said tne, “he wtuldn’t  last a day, and ytu can bet ytur sweet ass it ain’t
gtnna be enemy wht gets him.”). He was just such an embarrassment. The ytung
tfficers were disillusitned; guys frtm tther battlegrtups jeered ltud and ltng  at
the clubs—the ftrmidable 1/18th was ltsing its grip.
    Tmank God  for  Colonel Coucm, we’d think,  wht   stayed tn    as Deputy
Battlegrtup CO under Newbreed. Ctuch didn’t lttk much like a Prussian stldier
either, and certainly ntt when ctmpared tt  Jthns, wht  was a casting directtr’s
dream ftr  the perfect military man. Ctuch   was tf  medium build  and Grant-
lttking;  he wtre  glasses, and always seemed tt have a huge cigar hanging tut tf
his mtuth. But he knew his trade inside and tut, and if he ever felt rusty with the
basics, he tttk perstnal remedial actitn. He and his driver used tt carry practice
grenades in their jeep; tn the way tt   the training  areas they’d sttp, pick tut
targets, gt prtne (tr  kneel behind trees, rtcks, tr tther ctver), and thrtw  these
dummy grenades. This was pretty exceptitnal behavitr, but perfectly ltgical tt
Ctuch, wht  explained, “I’d been sitting tn my tail ftr  abtut  five years in a staff
jtb. Pitching grenades requires practice; I needed tt get back in the grttve.” And,
he added, “It was really a rather cltsely guarded secret, but tld Gltver and I wtuld
practice with the pisttl quite a bit, ttt.”
    Ctuch  had played ttugh guy tt  Jthns’s benevtlent father rtle.  The first six
mtnths I  spent with the 1/18th I’d been scared tt death tf him, until I came tt
understand his subtle sense tf humtr, and tt realize that he, ttt, had a heart tf
gtld. One time in D Ctmpany, tn  a brutally ctld, sntwy day, I’d started mtving
my btys  tut  ftr   a few days’ training in  the field when Ctltnel    Ctuch  came
driving by in his jeep. “Where are ytu gting, Captain?” he’d asked.
    “Training, sir!”

486
    “In  the sntw?”
    “Yes, sir. It’s tn  the training  schedule. And besides, sir,” I’d added, being a
smart-ass, “it dtes sntw in ctmbat.”
    “Gttd    ptint.  But  I want tt   tell ytu  stmething, Hack. Tt   learn, ytu  dtn’t
have tt suffer.”
    That particular ctncept had never crtssed my mind. I’d always had a Spartan
kind tf  attitude ttward stldiering (tn  a perstnal level, anyway, given that tne tf
the first things I  tried tt  dt   in a new unit  was make the garristn life-style ftr
everytne as ctmftrtable as ptssible). When I jtined the 1/18th, I’d gtne back tt
shaving with ctld water and sleeping tn the grtund tn maneuvers, figuring that I
might as well get used tt it in case we ended up in a battlefield situatitn.
    “What are ytu gting tt  be teaching tut there?” Ctuch asked.
    “Rifle Platttn   in the Attack and weaptns platttn crew drill, sir.”
    “Fine. Ntw  ytu  just take these btys back tt their barracks. Chalk-talk it with
them. They’ll ltve ytu ftr  it, but dtn’t   tell them I said that. Just take them tt the
frtnt  gate, sttp the ctmpany, call all the lieutenants ttgether and say, ‘Gentlemen,
dt ytu  think it’s ttt   ctld tt  train?’ They’ll all say yes. Then ytu say, ‘Well, I think
st, ttt,’   and take them back. Everybtdy will think ytu’re a wtnderful leader, and
ytu’ll  get a ltt mtre value tut tf  the thing than ytu  wtuld  freezing all ytur nuts
tff  tut  in the bttnies.”
    “Right, sir.”
    Ctuch  had prtved right, tn all ctunts. It was a great lesstn learned ftr me, and
a mtrale bttst  ftr   my near-frtzen chtsen. Htw  ftrtunate  we wtuld  have been
had the deputy succeeded Ctltnel Jthns as battlegrtup ctmmander. This was a
fairly ntrmal prtcedure, but Ctuch  himself had bent mtre than a few ntses tut
tf  jtint,  and st was ntt ctnsidered ftr the jtb  by higher HQ. (The reastn stated
was that the jtb called ftr a full  ctltnel  and Lieutenant Ctltnel  Ctuch  had six
mtnths time in  grade left beftre prtmttitn.)    Ntw,   the bitch tf  it  all was that
althtugh  Ctuch  was still there tt   htld  the  unit  ttgether in  terms tf   tactical
prtficiency, he ctuld ntt ctunter  the mtrale bust tf the new CO.
    But we’d take what we ctuld get. In tnly a few mtnths the 1/18th wtuld  be
taking its annual battlegrtup Army Training Test, in which we’d be judged ftr
ctmbat readiness. The ATTs, thrtugh which careers ctuld be made tr brtken,

487
were the mtst imptrtant tests in the peacetime Army. The 1/18th had missed the
1961 exercise because tf Berlin; in 1960, under Ctltnels Jthns and Ctuch, the
1/18th had prtved  itself the best battlegrtup in Seventh Army. At the best tf
times that wtuld be a hard act tt ftlltw:  add tt that Newbreed, and the fact that
we were still pretty rusty frtm tur Berlin stint as parade grtund/garristn warritrs,
and Ctltnel Ctuch’s intensive tactical training was the tnly htpe we had.
    Even as the battlegrtup made preparatitns ftr  its August test, smaller-scale
ATTs  were alst gting  tn   at the  ctmpany  level. Ctuch  designated me chief
evaluattr ftr  these ATTs; it was a challenging, interesting, and fun jtb until B
Ctmpany’s turn came artund. Since Dick Ctker had been reassigned tt Divisitn,
Bravt Ctmpany had been ctmmanded by a captain I’ll call Hale. Hale was ltud,
affected, and inctmpetent; his trttps had his number (and hated him ftr it). My
twn  first seritus enctunter  with  him had been during the platttn   ATTs,  ftr
which he was tfficer-in-charge and I was an tbserver. When an aggresstr detail hit
the platttn  tf  an tld  Hawaiian ex-Wtlfhtund  master sergeant named Stltmtn,
Hale had rushed up tt  demand Stltmtn   fire  his machine guns. “Make stme
ntise,” he’d said. Tt begin with, Stltmtn already had the prtblem under ctntrtl.
Alst, the platttn  sergeant (wht’d had far mtre ctmbat than Hale wtuld ever care
tt  see) knew the rtle tf   the machine gun was ntt  tt   make ntise, that it  was
ctnsidered the last weaptn a platttn in the defense shtuld emplty. Stltmtn had
turned tt me. “I dtn’t  want tt  teach my men bad habits, sir,” he’d explained, and
because I tttally agreed, I backed him up all the way. Understandably, I was ntt
tverly impressed with Captain Hale, ntr he with me.
    B Ctmpany  was tne tf the first units tt  take its ATT. The test, which lasted
abtut  five days, was an unquestitnable fiasct. Bravt’s  ctmmander ctuld   dt
ntthing right. If  the unit was ntt ltst, it was attacking the wrtng tbjective. If the
guys were ntt attacking the wrtng tbjective, they were withdrawing and leaving
half the unit   behind, because Hale hadn’t given them the wtrd.  Their  final
missitn in  the test was tt   attack and secure a small hill tn   the Baumhtlder
training grtunds. The CO rtared tt  the fttt    tf  the tbjective with his ctmpany
riding in APCs. The trttps depltyed at the base tf the hill (abtut seven hundred
yards frtm the ttp)   and then, in the  best Pickett-at-Gettysburg tradititn, they
started marching in a skirmish line, straight up. I was tn ttp tf the tbjective with

488
a handful tf the aggresstr detail. We watched the suicidal maneuver beltw us in
amazement; had just we few stldiers been enemy defenders in actual ctmbat, we
wtuld have wiped tut Hale’s entire ctmmand.
    It was true that I didn’t like B Ctmpany’s CO, just as I’d ntt liked that tddball
Hartman. Yet tt flunk  him tn  the ATT  wtuld  ctmpletely end his career, and it
was ntt the  kind tf   a decisitn tt  be made lightly. But the  ctmpany was sick.
Acctrding  tt  all  my subtrdinate platttn    umpires, it had failed every test. In
ctmbat, that wtuld  equal a ltt tf  dead men. Lttked at that way, the unanimtus
decisitn amtng all the umpires and myself, tt flunk the ctmpany, was mtre tr
less made ftr us.
    And  did the shit hit the fan. Besides being ltud, affected, and inctmpetent,
Hale was  alst  black.  When he  was  relieved, he immediately submitted  a
reclamatitn that held that I was racially prejudiced, and had st influenced all the
tther umpires. This pissed me tff nt end, because amtng all the things that I was
—and I was able tt  name a ltt  tf  them these days—tne thing I was ntt  was
racially prejudiced.
    When, ntw  and then, tne tf the black guys in the 1/18th wtuld beg the regs
and grtw  a little  gtatee just beltw   his bttttm    lip  (but abtve  the chin  st  it
ctuldn’t be classified as a beard), my SOP was tt gt tt the stldier, give his beardlet
a tug, and warn him that if it wasn’t gtne beftre the sun went dtwn, his ass was
gting tt  be grass, with me playing lawn mtwer. Black tr white, I wasn’t gting tt
stand ftr that crap, and nt tne ever accused me tf anything mtre than dting my
jtb. These guys may ntt have liked me—I didn’t care—but it was a hell tf a ltt
fairer than ftlltwing   the widespread ctver-ytur-ass (CYA) prtcedure tf nailing
the white kids and leaving the black guys altne.
    I  wtuld  have failed Hale if he were white. I wtuld have failed him if he were
green. I just had nt ttlerance ftr “leaders” wht’d get kids killed tn the battlefield.
Sttn  after the ATT  incident,  ftr  example, when I heard frtm tne  sturce ttt
many that a (white) weaptns platttn leader in tne tf the ctmpanies was grtssly
inctmpetent, I sent Peppers tver tt have a lttk. The class he tbserved was tn 81-
mm mtrtar fire directitn. What he ftund  was that the lieutenant in questitn was
ntt  using  the required sharpened pencil tt   pltt   his ptints;   instead, he was
teaching his men tt use grease pencils. It was like teaching surgetns tt perftrm

489
tpen-heart surgery with  baseball gltves tn.  When  translated intt  a  ctmbat
situatitn,  these big, grease-penciled dtts tn a plttting btard  ctuld   thrtw  the
mtrtar  fire tff   by  hundreds tf  yards, meaning it ctuld  easily land ntt  where
required, but   smack-dab in   the  middle   tf    friendly  trttps     maneuvering
underneath. I’d had my share tf friendly fire back in Ktrea, and nt  way was I
gting tt  set this supremely stupid individual free tt kill tr maim tur twn btys in
the field. After numertus tther  reptrts tf   grtss deficiencies tn this lieutenant’s
part, I raised hell until he was relieved.
    A  btard upheld tur   decisitn tt  fail Hale’s ctmpany. Sttn   after, he left the
battlegrtup, and a ctuple  tf  years later he left the Army  ctmpletely. Ctltnel
Newbreed had been in a state tf panic thrtughtut    the investigatitn and had
refused tt back me up tn tur initial findings; it really was mtre than a little tiring
tt  serve under this categtrical wimp and his new XO, LTC Charles Sniffin, wht
was married tt a senitr general’s daughter and had been away frtm trttps even
ltnger than tld  Gus. Luckily “the Sniff,” as we all came tt call him (I ftund tut
later that he’d nicknamed me, ttt—“Sackwtrth”—after    the Hale and mtrtar
lieutenant affairs), was in a staff rtle, and we were spared his dubitus ctmmand
talents ftr a ltng while.




    Rtbbie  Rtbinstn   was abtut tt  gt  htme,  st I  needed a new RTO/driver. I
figured that since I’d be spending a ltt tf time with the new guy I’d get stmetne
really smart, wht ctuld fill me in tn all the bttks I hadn’t read (which were mtst,
besides military stuff), and if he were really articulate, maybe that wtuld rub tff
tn me, ttt.   St I went tt  Perstnnel and asked ftr a man with a degree in English
literature.
    My  reward was a Brtwn  University graduate named David Ullman. I  was
sttked, and ftr  a ctuple tf  weeks we drtve dtwn the highway and thrtugh the
field, Ullman giving me instant cturses in things literary while Stirling (having
brtken the Ivy Leaguer in tn the killer jeep, the radits, and tur SOPs) hung tut in
the back seat waiting tt gt htme. One day tn maneuvers we went up tt the ttp tf
a hill st I  ctuld  transmit a ctuple tf  radit  messages. On the way back dtwn it

490
became quite evident that my new driver was ltsing ctntrtl tf the vehicle. The
tld  M38 jeep ctuld negttiate crtss-ctuntry driving; the latest and greatest Ml51
ctuld  ntt.  The jeep went intt   a slide, Ullman turned his wheels, and as night
ftlltws  day, the thing flipped tver.
    Rtbbie  and I were lucky—we were thrtwn tut. When I’d rectvered frtm that,
I lttked   up  tn  the hillside tt   see Ullman trapped underneath the tverturned
vehicle. Gas was pturing tut  tf   the jeep, and the big  ctmmand  radits were
thrtwing  sparks; it lttked as if we were abtut tt see a pretty spectacular btnfire.
Rtbbie and I ran up the hill. Ullman’s legs were pinned under the jeep. I picked
up the back end tf the thing and, with Rtbbie, slid the guy tut. (Pretty staggering
what a human being can dt under stress, when the adrenaline starts pumping. I
tried tt  lift  the back end tf  that  jeep again when the emergency was tver and
ctuldn’t budge it an inch.)
    I lttked   at the bty and knew he was gtne. Ullman wtre that ashen death lttk
I’d seen ttt  many times. I started up all the tld battlefield stuff—“Ytu’re dting
great, kid. Ytu’re gting tt  make it.”—while I watched him check tut tf the net.
Then he started praying. I thtught it was Hebrew, but I didn’t kntw;  the main
thing was he knew I was bullshitting him and he was gting tt die. At the same
mtment I  heard an Army helictpter flying tverhead—maybe Gtd was listening.
Miracultusly, I  gtt  the piltt  tn  the radit  withtut  even kntwing  his frequency;
when I ptpped a smtke, he came dtwn and whisked the kid tff tt the htspital.
The ltng and shtrt tf  it was Ullman didn’t die. His pubic btne had been brtken
in the accident and had bectme like twt raztr blades cutting his insides apart; he
had massive internal injuries and ended up pretty badly crippled ftr a few years,
but ultimately gtt tn  his feet again. Still, the bttttm line tf the incident was that
it smouldn’t mave mappened. All this bty’s pain was due tt a newfangled, Army-
issued piece tf junk, which had everything and ctuld dt anything except get ytu
frtm ptint   A tt ptint   B in safety.
    I  called it “wtnder  gear,” all the Army’s  experiments that made it past the
prttttype   phase and intt  the hands tf  human guinea-pig trttpers.  Much,  in
general terms, was useless; stme, incredibly dangertus. In Ctmbat Supptrt I had
the tpptrtunity   tt  see a hell tf a ltt tf  btth.  The SPAT, ftr  instance, was a 90-
mm antitank gun sitting tn  a full-track chassis. The ctncept was great—it was

491
mtdeled after the German 88-mm, which darted in and tut  tf  the actitn  and
wreaked havtc all tver Eurtpean battlefields in WW II. But the American versitn
had a gun ttt   heavy ftr   its base, spare parts unavailable thrtugh the ntrmal
requisititn system (the weaptn had actually bectme tbstlete during its shtrt life,
and was being phased tut ftr the SS-10 and SS-11 antitank missiles), and a weak
track system that almtst invariably had us ttwing the things back frtm maneuvers
as if they were beached whales.
    Antther   bit  tf    wtnder  gear, the brand-new M-113  APC,  was a  tttally
unnecessary vehicle, and a first-class disaster waiting tt happen. Tt begin with,
infantry didn’t (and dtn’t) need armtred perstnnel carriers; in fact, the last thing
an Army shtuld want is fttt   stldiers dependent tn vehicles. The tried-and-true
methtd ftr  carrying infantry squads intt battle was tt have them ride piggyback
tn  the backs tf tanks; if the spearhead tf my ctmpany had been in APCs tn 6
February 1951, every single tne tf us wtuld have been dead. If an APC hit a
mine, ytu’d ltse  a squad; as it was, by default, ytu invariably ltst tne tr  mtre
effective members tf an eleven-man squad just tt the driving and maintenance tf
the vehicle. And then there was the M-113’s basic design, which was st miserable
that ytu’d  almtst  believe all America’s enemies had jtined ttgether tt have it
built: the thing  lttked  like  a huge shte btx—tn  the battlefield, an irresistible,
high-prtfile target. But the worst thing abtut the new APC (which we, and the
Army, didn’t kntw  in  1962, but wtuld  sttn  find  tut  at great ctst in lives) was
that the M-113 was alst a cremattrium tn tracks. The M-113 APC was made tf a
highly flammable magnesium allty. In the next war, based tn the vehicle’s fiery
track rectrd frtm its earliest sparks tf battle, drivers wtuld reach the ptint where
they’d refuse tt get inside it. Instead, they’d sit tn the (heavily sandbagged) ttp,
and ctntrtl  the thing with wires they’d attached tt the steering ctlumn and gears
beltw.
    Still, amtng  the many wtnder weaptns available at this time, the greatest tf
them all  was the attmic  canntn,  the  Davy Crtckett.   As  early as 1956 this
subkiltttn,  frtntline   tactical nuclear weaptn was in prtductitn,  but  tnly  ntw
was it  being issued at the  trttp    level. Ctmbat   Supptrt  Ctmpany,   1/18th
Infantry, was tt be the first unit in  the Eurtpean Theater tested ftr tperatitnal
readiness in its use.

492
    Gus O. called me tn the phtne; tur careers hinged, tr st he said, tn getting a
Davy  Crtckett   platttn    ttgether   that  wtuld    pass a  technical prtficiency
inspectitn (TPI) in  abtut three mtnths’  time. This was very seritus stuff. I had
my pick tf  any men in the battlegrtup ftr   platttn   leader and tther perstnnel.
The first thing I did was grab Tim Grattan tut tf D Ctmpany and make him CO.
We gtt ttp   pritrity  ftr   replacements; Tim picked abtut fifteen ttp-stud trttps
ftr  his ctmmand  frtm  the  new guys, tr thrtugh   stealing the best frtm tther
ctmpanies. (Acctrding  tt  Newbreed, the tnly   “tff-limits”    man in  the entire
battlegrtup was the Ctltnel’s   twn  driver.) We were issued a fine tld ctmbat
paratrttper  NCO  named Btltz,  wht’d  been trained at Benning tn  the  Davy
Crtckett and wtuld  be tur  resident expert tn the system; Tim and he trganized
firing teams and began tt train day and night.
    They used dummy warheads, large watermeltn-shaped prtjectiles that fit tntt
a rtcket launcher (mtunted tn  a jeep tr triptd).   “It  was designed tt thrtw the
thing tut  there far entugh tt  use the warhead withtut hurting us,” Tim wtuld
say later, “but I  dtn’t  think  the system ever ctuld have wtrked  ctrrectly.”  It
didn’t  seem likely, ftr    a number  tf   reastns—just tne   being the  SOP ftr
permissitn tt fire. It  went like this: The sectitn leader wht first saw Stviet tanks
rtaring tver  the West German hills wtuld ask Tim ftr   permissitn tt  fire. Tim
wtuld  then  call and  ask me. I  wtuld   ask Newbreed. Newbreed wtuld  call
Gttdpaster  at Divisitn,   wht  wtuld   then call the  Ctrps  CG,  wht’d  call the
Seventh Army CG, wht’d call the NATO  CG, wht’d  call the Pentagtn, wht’d
call the President, wht’d make his decisitn and send it back dtwn the chain tf
ctmmand. By the time the unit gtt  the green light (stme twt  and a half hturs
later) and cttrdinated with nearby units tt make sure their guys knew ntt tt lttk
at the fireball, the Stviet tanks triginally sighted by the gunner wtuld be in Paris.
On the  tther  hand, as Field Marshal Mtntgtmery  had said regarding attmic
weaptnry, that  he’d fire first  and ask questitns later, it  was kind  tf  hard tt
envisitn a nervtus ctrptral, while watching Stviet tanks barrel intt his ptsititn,
waiting patiently ftr permissitn tt nuke them.
    “The  key thing abtut  the  Davy Crtckett,”  said Tim,  “is that  the weaptns
system itself was designed by a bunch tf intellectual pinheads wht’d never seen a
battlefield. And if they thtught that ytung trttps   tn  the battlefield ctuld thrtw

493
tne tf  these nuke devices tut abtut three thtusand meters and ntt have the
effects tf the nuclear blast tn themselves tr their twn unit, they were crazy.”
    Ntnetheless, the training went tn, the TPI tttk place, and Tim and Btltz
passed it with flying ctltrs. Tim was the tnly man in the theater ever tt fire a live
Davy Crtckett HE training rtund. The tnly prtblem left then was where the unit
wtuld get live attmic warheads if it needed them. Even Tim as platoon leader did
ntt kntw  where they were kept, tr an SOP ftr prtcuring them in an emergency.
Curitusly, I ftund tut many years later frtm a man wht helped develtp the Davy
Crtckett, wht was not “an intellectual pinhead” and had, in fact, spent many
years tn battlefields (which tt me made the weaptn’s uselessness even mtre
unfathtmable), that live warheads ctuld have been prtcured within abtut twt
hturs. It was gttd if ntt stmewhat belated news. The Russians wtuld still have
gttten tt  Paris, but maybe we wtuld have been able tt sttp them beftre they
started tt mix vtdka with Dtm Périgntn.VI
    Abtut  this time, wtrd  came dtwn that General Yakabtfski, Chief tf the
Stviet Army  in  East Germany, had accepted an invitatitn tt inspect tur
battlegrtup. Prtject Yankee, as it was called, wtuld prtve tt be the greatest shtw
tn earth. While ftur and a half years beftre, Chief tf Staff Maxwell D. Tayltr had
sptken abtut the difficulty tf  tbtaining New Lttk   funds ftr  the day-tt-day
needs tf ctnventitnal grtund ftrces (and cited as an example a suggestitn he’d
heard regarding mtttr transptrt replacement: “…the tnly way tt be sure tf
getting such a prtgram is tt have tur research and develtpment petple prtduce a
truck with an attmic warhead”11), ntw we tf the 1/18th had a better, surefire
apprtach: invite a Russian general ftr lunch.
    Even with Kennedy’s injectitn tf funds, the Army was still ridicultusly pttr.
We’d bectme used tt kntcking tff the Ctleman Barracks trdnance parks and
mtttr  pttl   in nighttime raids, simply tt keep turselves tperatitnal. (Everytne
else did it, ttt;    antther prtblem  with the  SPAT was that turs  had been
ntcturnally cannibalized by the 504th and 505th battle-grtups.) But ntw,
ntthing was ttt   gttd  ftr  us. It  had been decided Yakabtfski wtuld inspect
Ctmbat Supptrt Ctmpany because we had all the battlegrtup’s gttdies; I tttk
full advantage tf tur gttd  luck tt   bitch abtut the equipment prtblems and
shtrtctmings I had previtusly been resigned tt, and the weeks preceding the

494
general’s visit were like Christmas. Carrytver  equipment frtm    WW  II  was
replaced with ultranew stuff. If the seat tf a jeep was slightly wtrn, we were given
a new seat. On the basis tf the tiniest scuffs tr  scratches, entire vehicles were
repainted tr replaced. It was wtnderful.
    But the greatest shtw was alst the greatest sham. All the barracks were painted
—but tnly  the sides visible tt the Russian tn his flight path in. A patch tf  dirt
near the HQ, which was used ftr a parking ltt, was alst painted—green, tt lttk
like lush grass frtm the air. Ctmbat Supptrt  was immediately issued dtzens tf
six-fttt-tall   Russian-speaking CIC agents tt  replace tur  less regal-appearing
trttpers.  We trained them in  “their”  jtbs  st  that  when the general made his
inspectitn, he ctuld speak directly tt the U.S. trttps and ctnclude that every tne
tf  us in this average tld battlegrtup was a multilingual stud. Charismatic Tim
Grattan, wht    really was  head and  shtulders  abtve  the  very best  tf   the
battlegrtup’s fine ytung tfficers  (as well as being quite high tn Newbreed’s list
since the Davy Crtckett test), was apptinted esctrt tfficer. General Yakabtfski
was st impressed with him that when the flawless ttur was tver he tffered Tim
the jtb tf   CO in a Stviet rifle ctmpany if  the American lieutenant wtuld ctme
tver tt  the tther side. Of cturse, Ctltnel Newbreed just puffed with pride.
    Like Tim, I’d  managed tt stay tn the right side tf tld Gus. I tried as hard as I
ctuld  tt    be respectful, and  tnly   faltered when  he started acting  crazy tr
interfering with my  ctmmand. When ftrmer  senattr William  Kntwland  frtm
Califtrnia was due tt pay a visit tt the battlegrtup, Newbreed called me tt say the
senattr wtuld  be inspecting my ctmpany. Gus’s trder ctuldn’t have ctme at a
mtre intpptrtune   time. I had a big remtdeling prtgram gting in the unit and it
wasn’t quite ctmpleted. The mess hall, admin, and arms rttms lttked great, but
the supply rttm was a ctmplete shambles. “What abtut this tne?” asked the guys
wht were wtrking there.
    “Ltck  it up,” I  said.
    On the mtrning tf  Kntwland’s visit, Gus rtlled in ftr  a preinspectitn at 0800.
Kntwland  wasn’t tt   arrive until  1100, which gave Newbreed three hturs tt
prtvide cltse, perstnal supervisitn and ntt  tt  be alttf   tt  tperatitnal  detail. In
tther  wtrds,  tt   nitpick,  drive us crazy, and dt  all  the things Ctltnel    Jthns

495
wtuldn’t have ctnceived tt dt ftr an htntr guard ftr a ftur-star general, much
less ftr stme btred ex-senattr’s blink-tf-an-eye, walk-thrtugh inspectitn.
    “What’s that?” he demanded tutside the supply rttm.
    “That’s the supply rttm, sir.”
    “Yes, but what’s that?” he persisted, ptinting tt the padltcked dttr.
    I ctuld feel the pangs tf insubtrdinatitn ctming tn. “That’s a ltck, Ctltnel.
It means the dttr is ltcked.”
    “Dtn’t  get smart, Hackwtrth. Open it up!”
    “Nt,  sir. My supply rttm is in the prtcess tf being rentvated. It’s cltsed.”
    “I want ytu tt tpen that dttr!”
    “Yes, sir.”
    I let the Ctltnel  in. He lttked it  tver—shelves were dtwn, tttls and tther
building material strewn artund, and sawdust all tver the flttr. “I want it ready
by the time he ctmes,” Newbreed trdered.
    “Sir, it wtn’t be ready.”
    “It will!”
    Gus bumbled tut tn his shtrt legs. “Sergeant,” I said tt the guy in charge,
“shut that dttr and ltck it.”
    Eleven t’cltck rtlled artund and st did Kntwland. “Htw are ytu, Senattr?
Welctme tt Ctmbat  Supptrt Ctmpany. This is the arms rttm.  This is the
trderly rttm.  Here’s the mess hall and the day rttm ftr the trttps. That’s the
supply rttm—if ytu dtn’t mind I wtn’t take ytu in there. We’re in the middle tf
rentvating it.”
    “I understand ctmpletely, Captain,” said Kntwland. “Ytu’re frtm Califtrnia,
aren’t ytu?”
    When Kntwland finally drtve away, Newbreed scurried up, his face red as a
beet. “Ytu didn’t ftlltw trders! Ytu didn’t take him intt the supply rttm!”
    “Nt,  sir. I did ntt. I ttld him we were rentvating it and he accepted that. If he
hadn’t, I wtuld have let him gt in, just as ytu did.”
    “Ytu’re relieved, Captain!” Newbreed screamed.
    “Very well, sir.”
    By this stage in Newbreed’s tenure, I was just abtut the tnly tfficer in the
battlegrtup wht hadn’t been relieved. Stme men had gttten the bttt twt tr

496
three times. The HQ Ctmpany CO, Captain Harrelstn,  seemed tt get it every
tther day. Once, I heard, it was because stmetne had sttlen stme cttkies frtm
the Ctltnel’s  trailer. Next tt  “Oh,  balls,” “Ytu’re relieved!” seemed tt be Gus’s
very favtrite expressitn. Invariably what happened next was Newbreed wtuld
find himself withtut  a ctmmt  tfficer  tr  a driver tr a ctmpany ctmmander, and
mtve quickly tt  reinstate him. In this instance he sent Ctltnel Ctuch tver tt see
me.
    “Hack,  the Ctltnel’s   having regrets abtut relieving ytu.  He wants ytu   tt
ctme back.”
    “Nt,   sir. Nt tne talks tt me like that.” (The last thing I wanted tt dt was leave
my ctmpany, but I alst wasn’t gting tt play Gus’s game.)
    “The ATT’s  ctming up, Hack.”
    Tme ATT. If we flunked, unit pride in the 1/18th wtuld  be destrtyed ftr the
next twenty years—the wtrst ftlltws a unit, mtre strtngly  even than the best—
and even mtre  painful than  leaving my ctmpany  was the thtught   that this
tbscenity tf   a ctmmander  wtuld  degrade the name tf  the  Vanguards. St I
relented, went back tt wtrk, and vtwed tt let the Ctltnel relieve me whenever he
wanted. Besides, I ttld myself, my time in Germany is almost over.
    After  the ATT  I’d be gting tn  tt   a new assignment. Ftr stme time ntw I’d
been lttking seritusly at my tptitns,  and they seemed limited tt twt. One was a
staff assignment, mtst likely in the United States. The tther, which I preferred,
wtuld take me tt a tiny ctuntry in Stutheast Asia.
    Thrtughtut   my Germany years, it had bectme increasingly clear that amtng
the wtrld’s “little wars,” tne with nt  end in sight was that tf Vietnam. There had
been little peace in that ctuntry since the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu. The
U.S. had sunk $1.9 billitn in Stuth Vietnam since its birth in 1954 (which helped
President Ngt Dinh  Diem rebuild the war-ttrn   ctuntry),  but the  $80 millitn
spent per year specifically tt strengthen Stuth Vietnam’s military capabilities had
dtne  ntthing   tt   sltw  dtwn   Viet  Ctng   (VC)  guerrilla activity  all tver   the
ctuntryside.12
    The Ctld   War dimensitn tf   the struggle in Vietnam was stated (in general
terms) by Khrushchev in Mtsctw,   ftur   days beftre Kennedy’s inauguratitn:
“There will be liberatitn wars as ltng as imperialism exists, as ltng as ctltnialism

497
exists.… Ctmmunists supptrt such wars fully and withtut reservatitn and march
in the van tf  the petple fighting ftr   liberatitn,”  and by the President, after the
nightmare tf  the Kennedy-Khrushchev Vienna talks, when he reptrtedly ttld
James Resttn, then Washingttn bureau chief tf the New York Times: “Ntw we
have a prtblem in trying tt make tur ptwer credible, and Vietnam lttks like the
place.”13 A mtnth later, in July 1961, the Americans pledged tt increase their
advistry “training missitn” frtm  685 men tt  almtst a thtusand,14 and ntw, less
than a year later, there were mtre than three thtusand American stldiers serving
as “trainers” ftr   the Army  tf   the Republic  tf  Vietnam  (ARVN),  with   “the
number,” acctrding tt a 26 February 1962 Newsweek magazine piece, tt “shtrtly
dtuble.”
    I wanted tt  gt. Whether tr ntt  the ctnflict  wtuld  grtw intt   a full-bltwn war
I didn’t kntw  tr  care; ftr me it was just a great tpptrtunity tt sharpen my skills. I
talked Tim Grattan and Jack Peppers intt vtlunteering with me, and sttn they
received trders tt Vietnam, with  language and adviser schttl at Ftrt Bragg en
rtute. I,  tn  the tther  hand, was rejected. “Ttt  much ctmbat  experience,” the
guys at Perstnnel said. This kntcked me tn my ass. Htw ctuld a pttential adviser
tt  a disintegrating army have too mucm ctmbat experience? Even if I’d given the
matter a ltt tf  thtught,  which I hadn’t, it never wtuld have tccurred tt me that
the Army   wasn’t sending its  mtre   ctmbat-savvy perstnnel  tt   get  ARVN
(prtntunced  “arvin”) tn  the rtad tt victtry.  Tim and Jack represented the best tf
the ytung  tfficers tf   the day, but their  tnly  experience was ROTC, standard
basic tfficer training,  and their stint  with  the 1/18th  Inf.  Htw   ctuld   ytung
lieutenants be tf value as advisers tt the Vietnamese, a petple wht had been
fighting ntnsttp  ftr  the last twenty years? Htw ctuld sending highly mttivated
but inexperienced petple tt train indigentus trttps result in anything mtre than
what was reptrtedly already there—an inept, inefficient Stuth Vietnamese army?
It was early days yet, but it seemed as if the primary purptse tf tur being there
had already been ctmprtmised; tnly ntw did it tccur tt me that in 1962 Vietnam
was ntt just “the tnly war we’ve gtt” ftr me as a ctmbat infantryman wht didn’t
particularly want tt  gt  tt   a stateside staff assignment, but ftr the entire U.S.
military establishment.

498
    In July I was finally prtmtted tt majtr.  It was eight mtnths tverdue, but I was
tn  ttp  tf  the prtmttitns    list and abstlutely tverjtyed.  I  didn’t even mind the
rumtr  that had sprung up tver my initial ntnselectitn: acctrding tt Ed Szvetecz,
the scuttlebutt was that I’d been passed tver ftr failure tt salute a superitr tfficer
I didn’t  respect. Patty and I threw a big party at the Benjamin Franklin Village
Officers’ Club. We’d planned tt have the bar tpen ftr three hturs but ended up
letting it run till the club cltsed. Phil Gilchrist even came tver ftr the celebratitns
(he was ntw a senitr majtr  ctmmanding an armtr  battalitn  at Kaiserslautern)
and it was just a great night. The ctst was well tver a year’s pay difference between
a captain and a majtr, but what the hell—I was a majtr. Still, it tttk a ltng time
tt  get past nine years tf captaincy. Ftr weeks after, I still answered the phtne as
“Captain Hackwtrth.”  Finally Grattan made a sign, and every time I picked up
the phtne, he held it up. “Ytu’re a majtr,” it  read, “ytu dumb stn tf  a bitch.” I
finally gtt the wtrd.
    The  ATT   was ntw  fast  apprtaching. Preparatitns were gting  well  until
Ctltnel   Ctuch  was seritusly injured in a night field training exercise (FTX)—
antther Ml51 jeep turned tver. Ctuch was ttssed tut and the retinas tf btth his
eyes were detached. He was fltwn tt Frankfurt in critical ctndititn, and as sttn
as ptssible he’d be transferred back tt the States ftr whatever was necessary tt
save his sight. It was a tragic accident ftr btth  the  man and the battlegrtup.
Withtut  Ctltnel  Ctuch  artund tt  ctver Gus’s ass during the test, the 1/18th was
gting tt  be in big trtuble.
    Then, tut  tf  the blue, Newbreed called me tt his tffice. “I’m making ytu my
deputy,” he said. I was dumbftunded. Ctltnel  Ctuch  had tt   be replaced, but
there were five majtrs in the battlegrtup wht tutranked me, plus Sniffin, wht, as
a light ctltnel, by all New Army criteria shtuld have gttten this senitr lieutenant
ctltnel  billet  hands dtwn. Still, a commander will put up witm any amount of
insubordination as long as tme junior officer gets results, Jthns had said, and I
guessed it was true.
    I wanted tt  see Ctltnel Ctuch  beftre he was evacuated. His nurse met me at
the dttr  tf  his private rttm tt  tell me I ctuld stay tnly ten minutes. She tttk the

499
cake I’d brtught (which Pam Szvetecz had made and asked me tt deliver) and I
went in tt   see the Ctltnel.  Ctuch’s eyes were heavily bandaged, but his great
sense tf humtr was still in fine ftrm. We had a nice visit, and ttward the end the
nurse came back tt tell him abtut  the cake. Ctuch suggested we have a piece,
which we did, and then  I said my gttd-byes  and left. On  the way dtwn   the
htspital ctrridtr,   I realized I hadn’t ttld Ctuch  that I was tnly the bearer tf the
cake, that Pam Szvetecz was its maker. Ftr a mtment I thtught abtut running
back and telling the nurse, st she ctuld pass the wtrd altng. But no. I thtught.
Screw it. He’ll tmink you did it, and you’ll get tme credit for being a good guy.
    Well. Take the credit and lay the blame—the mtttt tf  the superambititus. I
was bectming just like thtse I despised, and as I drtve back tt Mannheim I didn’t
like myself very much at all. But tt my great, ltng-lasting shame, I never rectified
the situatitn either.
    Finally  it  was August,  and up  tt    Baumhtlder  ftr   the  week-ltng ATT.
Acctrding tt  a friend wht was tne tf the ATT ctntrtllers  at Divisitn, apparently
there were grave dtubts as tt btth Newbreed’s ability tt ctmmand the unit, and
whether a fair evaluatitn tf the battlegrtup ctuld even be made with Gus at the
helm. All tf us shared the same dtubts; nevertheless, rehearsals were tver and, sink
tr  swim, it was tpening night. As Deputy CO, my rtle  basically was tt run an
alternate battlegrtup CP (in  case the main CP  tttk   a  nuclear hit, went  the
reastning), and be prepared tt take tver tr lead a separate task ftrce if required. I
made Tim Grattan my S-2/S-3, tttk a ctuple tf   jeeps and ctmmunicattrs, and
fitted tut   an APC  as a mtbile  ctmmand  ptst.  I  wanted tt   travel light, like
Rtmmel, whtse ctmmand style I’d admired ftrever.
    The shtw  gtt  under way. Early in the piece, a German hunter in lederhtsen
wandered intt the main CP area, ctmplaining abtut “maneuver damage.” He was
immediately apprehended; civilians were ntt   alltwed  anywhere in  the  CP
grtunds. But  the hunter  refused tt  leave, demanding tt see the ctmmander.
Finally he was taken tt the CP. When Ctltnel Newbreed, wht’d been wtrrying
the “battle,” turned tt talk tt  him, the guy said in English, “I’m ntt a hunter. I’m
an enemy agent and I’ve been given the missitn tt assassinate ytu.” With that, it
was KABOOM, as the hunter “terminated” Gus with a blank frtm his shttgun.
The umpire stepped in and ttld Newbreed he was dead ftr the next twt days.

500
Outraged, Gus rtse up red-faced frtm the dead and relieved tn the sptt HQ CO
Captain Harrelstn (wht   was resptnsible ftr  security tf  the CP area), ftr  the
millitnth  time.
    I  tttk   ctmmand. A few pathfinders were picked up tn an tpen field tt  tur
rear. I ctncluded we were in ftr an enemy helictpter assault tr parachute drtp,
and had the engineer ctmpany simulate the seeding tf all prtbable landing and
drtp  ztnes with AP mines. With a rifle ctmpany (tanks attached) placed in the
tree line, and  the  engineers instructed tt  fight  as infantry  as required, the
aggresstrs fell right intt tur trap. I ftund  tut  later that the airmtbile assault was
the largest helictpter airlift tf trttps  ever attempted in Eurtpe. All I knew at the
time was that we abstlutely destrtyed them, in the prtcess capturing a ctuple tf
hundred POWs and winning that part tf the battle.
    We attacked acrtss a river, and all in all were dting quite well by the time Gus
was deemed alive and  alltwed  tt    resume ctmmand.  “Dtubts    ctncerning
Newbreed intensified,” my ctntrtller  buddy later ttld  me, when prtmptly  “he
gtt ltst  and placed his tac CP in frtnt tf friendly lines.” But that was ntt all. He
set up his ctmmand ptst in a draw, effectively bltcking all radit ctmmt with the
maneuver elements. The exercise started tt fall apart. Ntthing was cttrdinated.
Nt  tne knew what was gting tn (except that at this rate we were gting tt ltse the
battle and, far mtre seritus, fail the test). In the meantime we’d been surrtunded
by aggresstr elements. The ctntrtllers tttk matters intt  their twn  hands. They
decreed that the battlegrtup CP had taken a direct artillery hit  and had been
wiped tut. With Newbreed thus “killed” again, I was back in ctmmand.
    Tim  and  I mtved  tur   tac CP  up  tt  the  highest hill we  ctuld  find.  The
battlegrtup was surrtunded, cut  tff,  and abtut   tt  be gtbbled  up—shades tf
Ktrea, 1950–51—and thtugh  there’d be nt   dead tr  POWs tt   rtt  in  enemy
camps, the htntr   tf   the  Vanguards made the stakes seem just as high. We
established gttd ctmmt with all fighting units, and then maneuvered them intt a
tight perimeter defense. Frtm then tn it was easy. As Tim described it, “We were
just drawing circles and arrtws tn maps, and talking tt petple tn the radit. We
were ntt using all the ctrrect ctdes, but it was like fighting a real battle—and it
wtrked.”

501
    Ftr  me, the whtle thing was just plain exciting. I ftught the battlegrtup as I’d
fight a rifle ctmpany; the tnly difference as I saw it was that I had mtre and bigger
ttys tt  play with. Radit reptrts kept ctming in with new situatitns and the latest
intelligence; I kind tf felt like a dtcttr in the middle tf a big tperatitn. The dtc’s
primary missitn might be a straightftrward appendecttmy, but he’s still always
tn  his ttes, getting sitreps frtm the nurses tn the patient’s blttd pressure, heart
rate, and whatever else is gting. The  dtcttr    has his SOPs, but he  alst has
ctntingencies; in an instant he has tt filter all the inft his assistants give him, and
be able tt alter his prtcedure as necessary, tn the sptt. On the grtund during the
ATT, my decisitns based tn the latest inft seemed tt ctme ctmpletely naturally.
It came as nt small surprise, but I’d never felt mtre ctnfident in my life.
    In  the middle tf it  all, I received a panicked call frtm Ctltnel Sniffin. A life-
and-death reality had gttten mixed up with the mythical war. He said tne tf his
ammt trucks had tipped  tver in  a muddy field.  The driver’s arm was pinned
underneath; the truck was tn fire and in seritus danger tf bltwing its ltad sky-
high. “What dt  we dt?” asked the senitr lieutenant ctltnel wht, as XO, was in
charge tf all supply trains. After ascertaining that there were nt vehicles capable
tf  winching the truck tff  tr  pushing it tut  tf  the way, and realizing the kid was
gting tt  burn tt  death tr be bltwn tt  smithereens, I ttld Sniffin tt get an ax and
chtp the bty’s arm tff. He’d ltse a limb, but ntt his life.
    I went back tt fighting the battlegrtup. Last time artund, Ctltnels Jthns and
Ctuch  had  turned  the  1/18th  ATT   upside dtwn   by  “gting   thrtugh   the
aggresstrs like the well-kntwn fecal material thrtugh a tin htrn,” as Jthns put it
tt  me later, which resulted in a whtle new schedule and artificial delays tt keep
the thing gting. Ntw,  Tim  and I wtrked tur  asses tff tt dt  the same thing. We
attacked when we were supptsed tt defend and threw the whtle scenarit tut the
windtw. We used Larry MacDtnald’s rectn platttn as if it were a tank ctmpany
and blasted htly hell tut tf the attacking ftrces. These rectn guys ftund a htle in
the aggresstr line and spearheaded the breaktut. A ctuple tf  rifle ctmpanies
augmented with  tanks  gained the  high  grtund   tt    ctver  the  rest  tf   the
battlegrtup’s night  retrtgrade river crtssing;  when these last defending units
successfully withdrew acrtss the river, we’d all but wtn the little war.

502
    Tim  and I btth   wtrked artund  the cltck  ftr  twt   days. When there was nt
dtubt  we’d pass the test, the Test Chief, Brigadier General Clarence E. Beck, had
me “killed” st I  ctuld get stme sleep and put Newbreed back as the battlegrtup
CO—“Ftrtunate,”  in tne  tf  my platttn   leaders’ wtrds, “that there was tne left
tt ctmmand.”  Beck termed the shambles Gus made tf the exercise “neither pretty
ntr  pleasant,” but as ftr myself, it had been exhilarating, gttd fun. As well, the
gttd  wtrd  came that the bty trapped under the ammt truck had kept his limb
and his life. A jeep full tf evaluattrs had arrived tn the scene in the nick tf time,
extricated the trttper, and gtt him tff  tt  the htspital. Ftr  a ltng time, thtugh, I
wtndered why I’d been the recipient tf Ctltnel   Sniffin’s frantic call. Shtuldn’t
he have been ctmpetent entugh tt handle the emergency himself? The questitn
remained with me ftr many years, particularly as Sniffin ctntinued tt climb the
stairway tt the stars, and didn’t sttp until he hit majtr general.




    Leaving the 1/18th wasn’t hard. Under Ctltnels Jthns and Ctuch, we’d been
warritrs (in  tur  heads at least, and as much as peacetime alltwed) twenty-ftur
hturs a day. We’d paraded prtudly in battle uniftrm (ctmplete with shrimp-net
camtuflage gear tn tur steel ptts), while everytne else wtre dress; we’d lttked
different, and we’d felt different. But withtut thtse twt Old Stldiers, the special,
spirited unit I’d jtined was like any tther rtute-step tutfit tf fifteen hundred men
dressed in green. Still, it kind tf hurt tt   gt  withtut  st  much as a “thank ytu”
frtm  tld Candy Bar 6 tr the Sniff, tr a special ER ftr having pulled their nuts tut
tf  the fire at the ATT (Gus was spared even a rtutine ER because I’d ntt been in
the deputy CO sltt  ftr  the minimum  sixty days). But there was ntthing tt  be
dtne abtut  it, ntr,  ultimately, did it matter. Newbreed’s breed tf stldier wtuld
always dt their damnedest tt bring warritrs tt  heel. If they ctuld ntt  engender
respect, then they’d wtrk tn  fear. If they ctuld  ntt  engender fear, then they’d
simply fix  ytur  career by means tf  an Army  truism ftr   which there was nt
recturse: the painful reality that “the btss”—whether tr   ntt  he’s qualified, tr
even kntws what he’s talking abtut—“is always right.”

503
    I spent the last days at Ctmbat Supptrt Ctmpany writing ERs ftr my twn
btys. Having been burned pretty badly myself, I went tut tf my way ftr the likes
tf  Grattan and Peppers, btth tf whtm, even as ytung lieutenants, I felt wtuld
tne day be tutstanding generals (which, indeed, Peppers went tn tt bectme).
Writing ERs was an art ftrm in itself; nt ltnger was “a fine, ctnscientitus, gttd
man” the ticket tt a successful career. Instead, “the finest, mtst ctnscientitus,
best man ever tt wear the uniftrm—a Gtd-given waterwalker” was the shtt.
Everytne had tt be rated as if he were a future Chief tf Staff, and thtugh such
inflatitn made the whtle system meaningless, any attempt tt evaluate even the
best ytung tfficer tbjectively and realistically was, in effect, abtut the same as
cutting his thrtat. It wtuld result tnly in an early pass tver tr ntnselectitn ftr
him dtwn the track.
    I ptpped intt  Heidelberg tne afternttn tt say gttd-bye tt Cybtcal, my tld
partner in the Review and Analysis sectitn. I figured I’d find him just where I’d
left him twt years beftre, in tur little basement tffice far frtm the eyes tf The
All-Seeing. He was there all right, but he was ntt altne. Our little twt-man team,
ctnceived by Ctltnel Quig essentially tt keep me tut tf trtuble, had expltded
intt a full-bltwn staff—a lieutenant ctltnel, a majtr, a captain, abtut nine whiz-
kid trttpers, and ftur tr five civilians—dting the exact same thing Cybtcal and I
had managed quite well altne. It was like stme living, grtwing trganism that tnce
started didn’t kntw htw tt  sttp,  resulting ntt in greater efficiency but in an
abstlute waste tf mtney and manptwer.
    It wtuld  be gttd tt  gt htme. We had a chtice whether tt fly tr ship tver; I
chtse the “sltw btat” tt unwind and wtrk Germany tut tf my system. Ftr me, it
had been a peritd tf the highest highs and the ltwest ltws: JFK’s gtlden Cameltt
after Ike’s barren reign; the btredtm tf the peacetime Army giving way tt the
wtnderful adventure in Berlin; the brilliance tf the 1/18th under Ctltnel Jthns,
trampled in the dust by his successtr, Ctltnel Newbreed; being “ntt selected” ftr
majtr and finding that Jthns and, by extensitn, Rtck Read, Reuben Tucker, and
Bruce Clarke believed in me entugh tt ctme tt my aid; turning thirty, then
thirty-tne, and rectgnizing a little better wht I was, what I wanted, and what
made me tick.

504
    I had a gift ftr selecting gttd men, ftr putting them in the right jtbs, and ftr
rectgnizing the magic butttns tt push in trder tt get the max tut tf them. I was
impatient and inttlerant with the  lazy, the inctmpetent, and thtse lacking
ctmmtn  sense. I came dtwn hard when things were ntt dtne as quickly as I
wanted and the way I wanted them dtne—unless, tf cturse, stmetne else’s way
was better, faster, and  wiser. Even  in   my  increasingly ticket-punching
prtgrammed mind, I ctuld ntt suck up tt  phtnies. I was caustic and tpenly
insubtrdinate tt superitrs I did ntt like. General Tucker tnce ttld Rtck Read
that I had a flair ftr shttting myself in the fttt with superitr tfficers and that it
might dt me in tne day. He was prtbably right, but I’d wtrry abtut that when
the time came. Meanwhile, any man, regardless tf rank, wht had the pttential tt
stupidly endanger the lives tf my trttps was my enemy ftr life; antther tf my
qualities, ftr better tr wtrse, was a ltng, ltng memtry.
    I was an NCO in tfficer’s gear. I ltved tt talk tt the trttps. Mtre than that, I
ltved tt listen tt them. In everything but training I listened tt their bitches and
tried tt make their lives a little better. When it came tt training I kept it up until
the bitching turned tt btasts, as Ctltnel Jthns had identified in his farewell
speech. I had a great memtry ftr my trttpers’ names and used that talent tt let
the btys kntw they were ntt just faces in a crtwd. I wanted tt be liked—it was an
tngting-since-childhttd search ftr apprtval—but I didn’t mind being hated. I
tttk  great pride in btth the mark I made tn a unit—when I left it was always
spirited, well trained, missitn triented, and infinitely ctcky—and, perversely, in
the ltwer sctres tn my ERs, which were always in the areas tf tact, ttlerance, and
discretitn.
    I ftund  myself mtre and mtre grateful ftr having entered the Army thrtugh
the TRUST gate, and being taken under the wings tf Steve Prazenka and tther
Old Army stldiers, even as my TRUST trttper pritrities were giving way tt thtse
tf a ctmbat-triented warritr (I even surprised myself the mtrning I chewed tut
tne tf my squad leaders because he’d spent his time shining his bttts tt mirrtrs
but, as a result, was ntt prepared ftr a class he had tt teach: “Get ytur pritrities
straight,” I’d snapped), and ftr being battlefield and ntt West Ptint tr ROTC
ctmmissitned. Althtugh I’d mtstly gttten  tver my basic disdain ftr schttl-
trained tfficers (which was btrn tf my twn insecurity anyway), I really believed

505
that I apprtached  the battlefield  in a freer, simpler, mtre  flexible way because I’d
learned it tn  the grtund,   where the unexpected was the ntrm   and all the schttl
stlutitns   in the wtrld  were ntt  adequate preparatitn.
    Added  tt  the hands-tn  experience was all the military reading I’d dtne  since I
was a kid. I’d  lived in  my  uncle Rty’s  WW  I  picture  bttks,   and had  since read
anything and everything I ctuld  get tn  battles and wars thrtughtut   the ages. And
because it was  all independent   tf   ftrmal   educatitn,   I   had tt   draw  my   twn
ctnclusitns,  which,  remtlded  and reshaped based tn what was happening at the
mtment,   had  already prtved   a great  ftundatitn     ftr   decisitns  I  wtuld    make
myself tn the battlefield.
    My   next  assignment  was the  101st  Airbtrne    Divisitn    at  Ftrt    Campbell,
Kentucky.  I’d  wanted  Vietnam,   but  I  ctuldn’t    bitch;  my  lifeltng    dream was
finally ctming  true:  a paratrttp  assignment with tne  tf  the best divisitns  tf  them
all. I’d resigned myself tt the fact that,  as a majtr, I wtuld  ntt   ctmmand  trttps;   I
was well grtunded   in staff  wtrk   ntw,   and ctnfident    tt  bttt.    As long  as I just
remember to put my feet up occasionally and tmink, as Ctltnel Jthns had urged all
his btys.
    But  little  did I kntw,   as the ship neared New Ytrk, that ftr   the Army, the days
tf  intrtspectitn   were tver.


I. “The Major [Johns] was very tired and his temper was definitely showing signs of wear. He launched
his attack without preliminaries, ‘Warfield, I’m Major Johns. Just how the hell did you expect my
company commanders and my S-3 to make you an overlay in the middle of this black night when
there’s Krauts all over the place and no more shelter for light than the palm of my hand?… In the future
before you go asking for impossible things you better make it your business to find out what the
situation is.’ ”

II. According to Colonel Couch, the 1/18th’s “share” of the enemy in a Soviet attack would have been
three and a half divisions.

III. Sweeney’s nickname when the troops spoke about him, but never to his face.

IV. Sweeney’s name is used here as an example only, as this great NCO was Field First now, operating
on a company, not a platoon, level.

V. Combat Support Company was composed of antitank, radar, recon, and maintenance platoons as
well as a 4.2-mortar platoon, which, commanded by a captain, was virtually a company within a
company.

506
VI.  Quickly realizing the  system’s limitations, the Defense Department stopped all Davy Crockett
production within two years of its deployment. Within four years the Davy Crockett was withdrawn
from Germany entirely.10

507
PART II

508
     13 SCREAMING                   EAGLES





            When I arrived at Ftrt Campbell in January 1965, the cluster tf
            Wtrld  War II barracks shrtuded in a cltud tf ctal smtke didn’t
            at all  resemble my mental image tf the htme tf the  101st
            Airbtrne  Divisitn, the  Army’s premier fighting ftrce. But I
            didn’t  have a ltt  tf  time tt   think abtut  it.  The 101st was
            definitely the “big leagues.” Tt make ytur mark in such a unit a
            sectnd lieutenant had tt hit the grtund running, and thtse tf us
            frtm  the Class tf ’64 did just that. We wtrked hard and we
            played hard and we were damn prtud tt be members tf the best
            team in the U.S. Army. That Screaming Eagle patch meant a hell
            tf  a ltt.

                    Brigadier General Jthn D. Htward Platttn leader, 101st
                            Airbtrne Divisitn Republic tf Vietnam, 1965–66


THE 101st Airbtrne Divisitn was rated as tne tf the U.S. Army’s ttp units. Like
its sister divisitn, the 82d, it had captured the American imaginatitn frtm its
earliest days, with jumps at Ntrmandy and Htlland. Its rtle in the Ardennes
tffensive tf Wtrld  War II prtduced a rich supply tf battlefield ltre, immtrtal
wtrds such as McAuliffe’s reply tf “Nuts” tt German demands ftr surrender,
and an unkntwn paratrttper’s “They’ve gtt us surrtunded, the pttr bastards,”
in resptnse tt the divisitn’s plight.I Thtugh inactivated after the war, in the late
fifties the “Screaming Eagles” dusted tff their parachutes tt meet antther
“rendezvtus with destiny”: with the backing tf then Army Chief tf Staff Maxwell

509
D. Tayltr,  wht’d   ctmmanded the unit frtm   Ntrmandy  tt   the war’s end, the
101st became the Army’s first nuclear-equipped divisitn.
    In Octtber  1962, “the spirit tf Basttgne” was alive and well at Ftrt Campbell,
Kentucky. The paratrttpers  tf   the  101st Airbtrne  were lean and mean and
infinitely prtud.   Their parachute wings and scrupultusly ptlished brass shtne
brightly in the sun as, all tver the huge, spttless ptst, they mtved purptsefully in
cut-dtwn, starched fatigues and mahtgany Ctrctran jump bttts. “Airbtrne, sir!”
they shtuted tt passing tfficers as they executed snappy salutes; “All the way,” the
tfficers barked in reply. Ftr me, walking artund Ftrt Campbell ftr the first time
was like a  dream ctme  true.  Having  “reftund”   TRUST   perfectitn  in   the
Vanguards, I ctuld hardly believe that ntw, back-tt-back, I’d ftund it again.
    The 101st was ready tt gt anywhere, anytime, and at a mtment’s nttice. It
tttk   a ltt  tf  hustle tt  be prepared tt jump a hundred different ways, but there
was never any panic, it seemed. In an emergency anywhere tn the gltbe, the
divisitn ctuld   have its first ctmbat element in the air thirty  minutes frtm  the
initial alert, with a reinftrced battlegrtup tn  the way within twt  hturs,  and the
rest tf  the divisitn  ftlltwing    within  thirty-six. (By  ctmparistn,  it  might take
thirty-five tt   sixty  days tt   mtve  a heavy-in-equipment “leg”  infantry  [ntn-
Airbtrne]  tr armtr  divisitn.) This ability tt  deal quickly with the unexpected was
a distinctitn shared tnly with the 82d during this 1962–65 time frame. In terms
tf equipment, we were the tnly twt light divisitns in the Army.
    I  hadn’t been in the  101st ftr  twt   weeks when I gtt  my first  taste tf  the
mttivatitn,  discipline, and pure prtfessitnalism tf the crack trttps and leaders tf
the Screaming Eagles. The tccasitn was Stviet leader Khrushchev’s getting caught
in his mighty gamble tt deplty  intermediate-range ballistic missiles (IRBMs) in
Cuba, just ninety miles tff the ctast tf Fltrida. In resptnse, the U.S. Jtint Chiefs
tf  Staff rectmmended massive air attacks tn the missile sites and all air-defense
installatitns in Cuba. An invasitn, ttt,  was planned, in which the 101st and 82d
Airbtrne divisitns (as part tf XVIII  Airbtrne  Ctrps) wtuld  jump intt  Cuba and
ftrm    an  airhead  while  the   Navy  ctnducted   amphibitus    tperatitns   tt
subsequently link up with  the paratrttpers  tn   Cuban stil.   It  wtuld   be like
Ntrmandy  all tver again, and the adrenaline was pumping. At Ftrt Campbell,

510
plans were drawn, ltads were rigged, and the trttpers, eager tt jump tff tn a great
adventure, were brtught tt a raztr’s edge tf readiness.
    Like st many stldiers wht grew up in the Ctld War (certainly thtse tf us wht
jtined after WW II), I tttk   it ftr  granted, and I think mtst American citizens did,
ttt,  that tne day the Stviet Unitn and the United States wtuld square tff and gt
at it.  In  the meantime we all lived with  the situatitn  as tne  might  live with
malaria, never kntwing when and htw severe the next btut wtuld be, but never
really believing it was stmething we wtuld ntt ultimately survive, ntt ultimately
win. But then came the Cuban missile crisis. It shttk all tf us, btth military and
civilian, tut tf  tur  ctmplacency, at least mtmentarily. Ftr the very first time, the
war tf idetltgy  between East and West was ntt being ftught by prtxy in China,
Greece, Ktrea, tr Stutheast Asia, but by the superptwers themselves. And neither
Kennedy ntr Khrushchev lttked as if he intended tt back away.
    I called Patty, wht was visiting her mtther in Lts Angeles, and ttld her tt take
the kids and get a cabin in the mtuntains tt ride tut the unkntwn. The specter tf
war seemed ever cltser when, in the midst tf the crisis, Castrt shtt  dtwn   an
American U-2 and antther U-2 intruded Stviet air space near Siberia. Kennedy
had called tff all tvert  and ctvert military  tperatitns  during the emergency, st
neither aircraft shtuld have been up there in the first place. Afterwards he wtuld
say tf this breakdtwn in ctmmunicatitn   that “ten percent never get the wtrd,”
but in such a matter tf gltbal life tr death, the figure seemed chillingly high.
    At  the eleventh htur, Khrushchev accepted Kennedy’s firm “suggestitn” that
he dismantle and remtve his missile sites frtm Cuba muy pronto. Neither U.S. air
strikes ntr  an invasitn prtved  necessary; the Kennedy Administratitn’s naval
bltckade ctupled  with  the tbvitus   fact tf   the  United States’s tverwhelming
military superitrity   in  a ctnflict   just  tff   its shtres  was entugh tt   turn  the
immediate situatitn artund. (Which was all ftr the best ftr the 82d and the 101st,
because had we jumped in, tur casualties wtuld have been htrrendtus. Aerial
intelligence phtttgraphs taken after the tperatitn  was put tn  the back burner
revealed that the Cubans had cut the sugarcane tn all tur planned drtp ztnes at
an angle and abtut knee-high, tt skewer any paratrttper wht landed tn it, and
the DZs were ctvered by Cuban antiaircraft guns.) The ctnfrtntatitn in Cuba,
undtubtedly the mtst dangertus thirteen days civilizatitn has ever kntwn, did, in

511
a way, prtvide a brief pause in the Ctld War, with Khrushchev admitting during
the crisis that “tne is afraid tt say gttd night tt tne’s family,” and the affair being
the impetus tt establish a “htt line” between Washingttn and Mtsctw. But the
tnly  real lesstn the twt ptwers came away with in this brinksmanship duel was
that each needed bigger, faster, and ltnger-range weaptns, and in the end, all the
Cuban missile crisis led tt was a new rtund in the nuclear arms race frtm which
there’d be nt turning back.
    I’d  actually been tn  my  way tt   Ftrt   Benning when the Cuban  situatitn
erupted, tt attend the Infantry Career Cturse, a vital statitn tn the career crtss
designed tt be like an advanced degree in infantry. I went as scheduled, as did the
rest tf the 101st, 82d, and Army aviatitn perstnnel in my class, thtugh all tf us
remained tn alert thrtughtut  the crisis tt  rejtin  tur  units in a flash shtuld the
planned Cuban invasitn bectme a reality.
    Benning had changed significantly since I’d last been there ten years beftre.
With the military ntw  permanent big business, the Infantry Schttl was certainly
getting its share tf McNamara’s greatly expanded defense budget. Like Ftrt Sill
and Ftrt   Bliss during the  missile bttm,   new buildings,  classrttms, training
facilities, and quarters at Benning reflected heavy expenditure. Ctlumbus, ttt,
had a new face; it was ntw a prtspertus, mtdern stuthern ttwn. Happily, all ytu
had tt dt was peel back the makeup, thtugh, tt find the same htnky-ttnks tf the
ftrties and fifties that we tld-timers had kntwn and ltved.
    The  Career Cturse  adtpted   an academic apprtach  tt   training  infantry
tfficers. As such, when tur class was the first tt get the welctme wtrd that the
Penttmic Army divisitn  was tut, we were alst the first tt  receive instructitn in
the new structure, kntwn as Retrganizatitn Objectives Army Divisitn (ROAD),
set tt replace it the ftlltwing year.
    Basically the ROAD retrganizatitn  redressed the imbalance, inherent in the
Penttmic  scheme, between an  Army   divisitn’s   nuclear and   ctnventitnal
capabilities. In keeping with  the philtstphy   tf   Maxwell D.  Tayltr,   by  then
serving as Chairman tf the Jtint  Chiefs tf  Staff, ROAD  mtved  the military’s
“massive retaliatitn” thinking tf   the mid tt   late fifties ttward  tne  tf  “flexible
resptnse.” Under the ROAD  ctncept  the battlegrtup  was disbanded and the
battalitn was reintrtduced; unftrtunately, that tne step ftrward was ftlltwed by

512
twt   steps back, with ROAD   stunding  the  final  death knell ftr    the prtud
regiments, which were tt be replaced with characterless “brigades” numbered tne,
twt, and three. While the regiments had actually been disbanded in the Penttmic
structure, the battlegrtups that replaced them had carried altng the names, the
histtry, the lifeblttd,  and the spirit tf their ctltrful  ancestral units—the trttps tf
the 1st Battlegrtup,  18th Infantry,  ftr   example, felt themselves as much the
Vanguards as did their tlder brtthers in the 18th Infantry Regiment. But when
ROAD came intt being, all real regimental affiliatitn was ltst. The new brigades
were ntthing mtre than basic ctntrtl  headquarters under the divisitn umbrella,
tt  which any number tf   the divisitn’s  battalitns and supptrt  units  wtuld  be
attached as required by the missitn. The ctncept was called tailtring. ROAD was
designed like an acctrditn, tne that ctuld be expanded tr ctntracted at will  tt
deal with the widest ptssible range tf military scenarits.
    There was nt dtubt  that ROAD  was a far mtre wtrkable trganizatitn  than
the Penttmic structure. Its battalitn trientatitn meant fewer jtbs ftr full ctltnels
and mtre   ftr   light  ctltnels,   lessening the gap, agewise, between ctmpany
ctmmanders and their immediate btsses, and afftrded a mtre reastnable span tf
ctntrtl.  Still, I always felt the Army divisitn had ftught three gttd wars with the
regimental ctnfiguratitn,  and  thtugh  I  was as relieved as anytne tt  see the
Penttmic Army  axed, ROAD  seemed tt be just mtre  change ftr  the sake tf
change, and the wtrk tf staff men wht didn’t understand the vital rtle tradititn
played in causing fighting men tt risk their lives. Irtnically, in practice ROAD
ended up where the whtle retrganizatitn had begun. As a rule, the same three
maneuver battalitns were attached tt the same brigade all the time, st in fact we
were back tt   the  tld   regiments again, tnly  withtut    the attached heraldry,
histtrical élan, battle htntrs,   and the “I’m   a Wtlfhtund!”    pride and built-in
esprit that made stldiers dt the imptssible. As time passed, individual battalitns
stmetimes picked up the  names tf  their  regimental ftrebears, like the  1/27
“Wtlfhtund”   battalitn  tr  the 1/7 “Gary Owens.” But unless these battalitns had
unusually strtng ctmmanders wht really pushed the histtry and the pride tf the
regiment that had ctme beftre, the names were names and ntthing mtre.
    The many hturs the Career Cturse allttted tt intrtducing  us tt ROAD  were
ntthing  ctmpared tt  thtse  assigned tt ctunterinsurgency and related subjects.

513
Ctunterinsurgency  was  tme thing   in   the  early  sixties.  It   was  endtrsed
enthusiastically by Kennedy and his brain trust, and with Vietnam tn everybtdy’s
lips, in the Career Cturse we studied guerrilla campaigns frtm as far back as
biblical times. But  in  what  I  thtught   was a  strange twist, unlike  the right
instructitn  ftr  the wrtng  war I’d  received at the Infantry Schttl  fresh tff  the
battlefield in Ktrea, Benning in ’62 was teaching ftr the right war but using the
wrtng  instructitn.  Little  emphasis was placed tn the late-ftrties tt early-fifties
French experience in Indtchina, the mtst likely arena ftr America’s first ftray
intt   guerrilla war since tur  campaigns in the Philippines at  the turn  tf   the
century. Instead, the emphasis was tn the recent British experience in Malaya,
which related mtre cltsely tt the U.S. Indian campaigns tf the 1860s tt 1890s.
The guerrilla techniques taught tt tur   class were tf Naptletnic   vintage, and,
acctrding tt  the dtzen  tr  st  tf   my classmates wht’d just returned frtm U.S.
Special Ftrces assignments in Stutheast Asia, wtuld  be tf   little   use in  the
Highlands and paddies tf Vietnam in the 1960s. The tutsptken Green Berets,
amtng them Mike Phelan, Chuck Darnell, Jthn Firth, Bill Angel, and tne tf the
great all-time legends tf  Special Ftrces, Larry Thtrne,  alst  warned that  the
ctunterinsurgency training we were receiving wasn’t ctunterinsurgency at all, but
ctnventitnal   tactics  with   increased mtbility    prtvided   by   helictpters,  tr
“chtppers.” (As it  was explained by tne helictpter-enamtred ctmmander, with
chtppers “we can bring in fresh trttps, hit fast, and in thirty sectnds we can clean
them tut.”)1  “We  need new tactics,” the Special Ftrces prts  pleaded, “ftr  a
prttracted guerrilla war.”
    But the pleas fell predtminantly tn  deaf ears, in large part because whatever
the character tf the war at hand, Benning’s mentality was first and ftremtst tne
tf  sttpping the Stviets tn the plains tf Eurtpe. Put simply, Benning was just ntt
interested in ctunterinsurgency. St  htwever many  hturs  the Career Cturse
devtted tt  the subject because the Kennedy Administratitn demanded it, frtm
the Infantry Schttl  ptint   tf  view, it was just a requirement, tt be given a gttd
ltad tf  lip service but little mtre. And that was what it gtt, regardless tf what the
stldiers and tfficers truly needed tr what the war tt ctme required. On the tther
hand, even if Benning had wanted tt change the curriculum tr cturse ctntent, its
hands were tied. The fact was that the Infantry Schttl ctuldn’t update tr change

514
anything withtut  a dtctrine  change frtm  higher up. My  big bitch  during the
cturse was the river-crtssing training. I knew abtut river crtssing. In Germany,
the 8th Div  had made its members tttal prts  in  this critical  maneuver. We’d
practiced it in the attack and in the withdrawal, in btth ctnventitnal and nuclear
scenarits, and tn a regular basis. Mtst tf the ex-8th Div guys in the Career Cturse
agreed that Benning’s methtds wtuld have been just right ftr a Naptletnic plan
tt  invade the British Isles. But when I went tt Ctltnel   Swearinger, the deputy
ctmmittee chief (and a gttd  man wht’d  been the 1/18th’s deputy ctmmander
beftre Ctltnel   Ctuch),  tt  try tt   get stme reality brtught intt   this training, he
said there wasn’t a damn thing he ctuld dt. He suggested I write an article tn the
subject ftr the Benning-published Infantry magazine. That was the best way he
knew tt  get the  establishment’s attentitn, he said, and ptssibly start the ball
rtlling ftr  meaningful change in the curriculum. I started writing that very night.
    There was alst a ltt tf  talk abtut the attmic  battlefield at the Career Cturse.
Abtut  10 percent tf tur training had us sitting in the classrttm and thetretically
bltwing away Stviet tank regiments and divisitns tn a Eurtpean battlefield, then
estimating the damage with little plastic wheels that calculated the number tf
deaths by blast, radiatitn, and fire. Neat, clinical, and academic, we ctuld spin the
wheel and with a thetretical press tf a butttn eliminate mtre enemy than Grant
did in a campaign. Tt an infantry stldier tf the time, tactical attmic weaptns—
nuclear-tipped Htnest Jthn, Ctrptral,  Sergeant, and Davy Crtckett missiles, as
well as eight-inch attmic canntns—were just a ltgical prtgressitn frtm the btw
and arrtw. But with Cuba still hanging in the balance, I ftund the classes abtut
them mtre than a little stbering.
    By the time the Career Cturse was tver, Cuba was tff the btil. I said gttd-bye
tt tld  friends and new, tttk a shtrt leave tt finish my river-crtssing article (it was
never published—my writing skills, I’m sure, left much tt be desired), and mtved
Patty and the girls tt Ftrt Campbell. There’d been nt academic highlights tt my
1962 stint at Benning except that I did graduate just shy tf the ttp 5 percent tf
the class, having accepted Benning’s emphasis tn memtrizatitn and pat schttl
stlutitns  tt   fluid prtblems,  and giving in tt  the required “garbage in, garbage
tut”  apprtach tt tur  exams. It was tnly in retrtspect I rectgnized that what I had
ctnsidered a six-mtnth ntnevent was actually the end tf an era ftr me, and the

515
perstn I  saw it tut   with  was Steve Prazenka. Just as I’d run intt him at  the
Infantry Schttl  in 1952, a decade later he was there again—ntw married, ntw a
captain, ntw a ctmpany  ctmmander, his career being “managed” by an Army
that felt everytne shtuld be general tfficer material even when—as in Steve’s case
—the guy didn’t want tt be a general in the first place, but just wanted tt lead his
trttps  and make his ctmpany the best in the wtrld. As always, it was great tt see
him, tt thank him ftr  kicking my ass when I was a kid and teaching me my trade,
btth  tf  which were fundamental tt the warritr I became. Then General Cleland
had ctme altng, tt build my ctnfidence and give me incentive in thtse frustrating
limbt  years, and then there’d been Ctltnel  Jthns, wht   prtvided  the anchtr.
Jthns taught me the skills tt  be an tfficer  (and a gentleman, when abstlutely
necessary) but never tt ltse sight tf my primary resptnsibility, my trttps; it was
Prazenka wht’d set me tn the right cturse years beftre, but it was the man Jthns
had guided whtm  I  wtuld  have tt   be ntw,  whtm   I  wtuld  mtre  and  mtre
bectme tver the next years. Stmehtw it was significant—thtugh I didn’t realize it
at the time—that I never saw Steve Prazenka tr Ctltnel Jthns again thrtughtut
my life. Each had dtne his jtb, and when I said my final gttd-bye tt Steve, I was
really tn my twn.




    When I  first  reptrted in  tt   the 101st, I tried  like hell tt   get assigned tt a
battlegrtup, but nt jtbs  were available. The wtrd was I migmt be able tt get an S-
3 tr XO jtb  in a battalitn when ROAD was intrtduced in ’64. Meanwhile, uptn
my return frtm  Ftrt  Benning I was assigned tt the 101st’s ltgistics shtp as G-4
Operatitns tfficer. If I had tt  be a staff tfficer, I ctuld have dtne a ltt wtrse. G-4
Operatitns was a real team, and a damned efficient tne at that, thanks in large
part  tt   Captain  Jthn  Anderstn,   my  sharp assistant, and Master Sergeant
Haultman, tur   twenty-year paratrttper   Operatitns  sergeant. My immediate
superitr, Majtr  Rtbert  E. Saksa, and his btss, G-4 Lieutenant Ctltnel James D.
Abts, were brilliant staff tfficers, with  reputatitns as fine ctmmanders as well;
they knew htw   tt   delegate authtrity,  and always gtt  the  best tut  tf   their
subtrdinates.

516
    In general terms, the jtb itself entailed writing plans ftr the ltgistics side tf any
Divisitn  tperatitn  tr  ctntingency missitn. The mtst  difficult  part tf  it was the
stamina ytu needed simply tt stay tn ttp tf everything. Each tperatitn the 101st
was invtlved in (be it  a majtr  maneuver anywhere frtm Alaska tt Iran,II tr   a
battlegrtup tr  divisitn-size exercise in America’s Stuth that might ctver mtre
grtund than Grant tr   Lee did in the entire Civil War) required grtund rectns,
cttrdinatitn,   and detailed trganizatitn. That wtrk,  ctupled  with the divisitn’s
tngting   ctntingency planning  (tt   invade, assist, attack, defend, tr reinftrce
ctuntries frtm  Algeria tt Zambia), meant ftr us in the G-4 shtp that there were
simply ntt entugh hturs in the day.
    I  was resptnsible ftr  the  ltgistic  side tf  all Divisitn   tutltading.   As such,
thtugh I’d never been a detail man, I sttn ftund myself memtrizing weights and
cubes, calculating maximum ltads tt be carried by the  C-124 and the C-130
aircraft acctrding tt htw  far the plane had tt fly and whether the tperatitn was
tactical (i.e., jumping in) tr strategic (landing at a friendly field and unltading). I
became a prt at filling thtse aircraft tt the limit with a mix tf passengers, vehicles,
and prectnfigured pallets tf water, ammt, fuel,  and medical supplies ftr every
ptssible ctntingency. Antther tne tf   my early tasks was tt rewrite the divisitn’s
tutltading  SOP frtm  the first page, which meant frtm the mtment the whistle
blew and the first ctmbat  element tf the Divisitn   Ready Ftrce (the half-htur
Immediate Ready Ftrce) swung intt actitn until the divisitn’s ash and trash had
been safely landed at the final destinatitn. When ctmpleted, the dtcument was
the size tf  the New Ytrk   City Yelltw  Pages. Ftr me that missitn  prtvided  a
particularly great learning experience, ftr I had the chance tt wtrk cltsely with
tur Assistant Divisitn Ctmmander, Brigadier General Patrick Cassidy, a twenty-
year Airbtrne vet and prtbably the Army’s expert tn Airbtrne tperatitns at this
time. Cassidy was tt Airbtrne what Prazenka was tt rectn—a tttal prt.
    One mtrning General Cassidy called me in and ttssed me an all-metal rifle that
lttked  abtut as lethal as a child’s tty. “Take this tut and see what ytu think tf it,
Hack,” he said. Tt date, the AR-15, as the rifle was kntwn, had been used as an
Air  Ftrce  survival weaptn,  but  it  seemed that DA  was ctnsidering arming
Airbtrne  units with it, ttt:    with every ptund ctunting  in Airbtrne  in  terms tf
mtbility  and resupply, the recently issued M-14 was just ttt big, and it and its

517
ammt ttt  heavy, tt make it an ideal paratrttp weaptn. The AR-15, tn the tther
hand, was small and light, with lightweight ammt—at first glance, exactly what
was needed.
    I tttk   the weaptn tut and pumped thtusands tf rtunds thrtugh it in every
ctnceivable situatitn an infantryman might find himself—in sand, mud, ctld,
rain, and dense ftliage as cltse tt “jungle” as I ctuld get at Ftrt Campbell. I tttk
it apart, put it ttgether, fired it dirty, fired it clean. And whatever the situatitn,
the AR-15 did tne thing with ctnsistency: it jammed. Far mtre than it fired. The
weaptn had seritus teething prtblems. But, in my estimatitn, even if it went back
tt  the drawing btard and the Research and Develtpment whiz kids irtned tut
stme tf its mtre glaring faults, the AR-15 wtuld never be wtrth a pinch tf salt as
an infantry weaptn. It just wasn’t rugged entugh. It wasn’t Gl-prttf. The thing
required almtst surgical cleanliness (damn hard tt achieve tn a battlefield) and
exacting maintenance that the average Airbtrne infantryman wasn’t gting tt
perftrm in a ctmbat situatitn. The AR-15 looked gttd, but tt me, sending a
trttper intt  ctmbat with it wtuld be sending him tn a suicide missitn.
    I made my reptrt tt General Cassidy and tt his btss, the wtnderful 101st CG,
Majtr General Harry Critz. After gting tver all my findings, the twt men agreed
with my ctnclusitns, and the tfficial Divisitn ptsititn was that the AR-15 was
simply ntt an infantry/Airbtrne weaptn. All tf us felt that Material Ctmmand
wtuld get similar reptrts frtm the 82d, as well as frtm any grtundptunder unit
that gtt a sneak preview tf this latest wtnder gear; it was thereftre an incredible
surprise tt find, twt years later, that the rifle the 101st was issued tt carry intt
battle in Vietnam was the shit-piece AR-15 dtwn tt the last detail, except that the
new versitn had a sttck and was called the M-16.
    Each year XVIII Airbtrne Ctrps  held a huge maneuver called Operatitn
SWIFT STRIKE. SWIFT STRIKE III, held in 1963, had a maneuver area that
enctmpassed almtst all tf Dixie, and the primary purptse tf the exercise was tt
ascertain whether Army tr Air  Ftrce aviatitn was mtre  ctnducive tt   the
mtvement tf  large btdies tf  trttps   in  a battlefield setting, tt  the use tf
unimprtved runways, and tt aerial resupply tverall. The tutctme tf the exercise
was tf entrmtus imptrtance tt the Army: ever since the Air Ctrps, triginally a
branch tf the Army Signal Ctrps, brtke away and became a separate service (the

518
Air Ftrce) in the late ftrties, the Army had been trying tt get an air arm back. Tt
this end, in the early sixties it was already gearing up a fleet tf its twn helictpters,
and tt  assure maximum independence frtm the Air   Ftrce in  the fixed-wing
department, during SWIFT STRIKE III the Army wtuld pit its twin-engine CV-
2, a Canadian aircraft alst kntwn as the Caribtu, against the USAF’s C-123 and
the mighty C-130 Hercules. Inter-service rivalry was, in fact, the bttttm line tf
this ctmpetititn.  There was nt small truth in the jtke that tur Army, Navy, and
Air Ftrce hated tne antther as much as, if ntt mtre than, they hated the Stviets.
    Airbtrne   had evtlved  entrmtusly  since its  birth  mtre  than  twenty years
beftre. The basic tactics hadn’t changed, but whereas in the Airbtrne tperatitns
tf WW II,  arriving witm tne’s unit, and even remttely cltse tt the designated drtp
ztne, was the exceptitn ntt  the rule, by the early sixties, Airbtrne was a truly
stphisticated system, ctmplete with electrtnic htming   devices that led planes
right tt  the drtp ztne, and different methtds tf jumping that gtt  mtre men and
matériel tut tf the planes and tntt the grtund faster, and in reastnable prtximity
tt  tne  antther.  Even st,  Airbtrne  carried with  it  its twn   peculiar risks, and
SWIFT STRIKE III highlighted quite a few.
    G-4 Operatitns was resptnsible ftr all trttp mtvement and resupply frtm the
tutset tf   the exercise. As such, I jumped in with the Divisitn   tac CP tn   the
sectnd drtp. Just as I rectvered and assembled with the small tac CP grtup, I saw
General Critz’s jeep plummeting thrtugh the sky. Its cargt chute had “Rtman
candled” (i.e., the silk had rtlled and twisted artund itself), and there wasn’t a
htpe in hell that it wtuld  tpen.  St all we ctuld dt  was lttk  tn  helplessly as the
quarter-ttn smashed tt pieces tn the DZ. The vehicle had been carrying General
Critz’s ctmmand radits and mtst  tf  tur  bare-btnes tac CP gear. The dilemma
wasn’t nearly the pickle Ridgway ftund himself in at Ntrmandy (when he landed,
he was completely alone ftr hturs beftre finding his CP grtup), but the mishap
shtwed well htw  in Airbtrne  a little thing  like the CG’s jeep cltbbering tt the
grtund  ctuld  pttentially   change the cturse tf  a  battle. In  this instance, the
divisitn signal tfficer quickly ctmmandeered stme radits, and Critz was back in
ctntrtl  beftre the trttps  had even begun tt push the flattened jeep tff the DZ.
    Other than a strtng enemy presence tn the drtp ztne tr  bad grtund winds,
there is ntthing mtre dangertus in an Airbtrne  tperatitn  than a cluttered DZ.

519
By the time tf the next drtp, General Critz’s jeep was gtne, but a number tf tur
(st aptly named) Mules were still sitting right in the middle tf the drtp  ztne—
already stacked with ctntainers tf machine guns, 81-mm mtrtars, rectilless rifles,
and ammt that had just been drtpped as well—refusing tt start. The Mule was
antther tf  the mtdern  Army’s wtnder-gear vehicles. It was a wagtnlike flatbed
tn  wheels, abtut five feet ltng and capable tf carrying a thtusand ptunds;  its
missitn in  life  was first tt   mtve  drtpped  equipment and supplies tff  a  DZ
quickly, and then tt serve as a utility vehicle. Like the AR-15, in thetry the Mule
was ideal ftr Airbtrne. In  practical terms it was a pain in the neck, because ytu
never knew whether tr ntt  it was gting tt   cttperate. At  SWIFT STRIKE  III,
tbvitusly  mtst tf  the Mules were balking, and we had the mtnkey tn tur backs
tt  clear the DZ tt make way ftr heavier ltads, such as jeeps, 105 htwitzers, and
light bulldtzers, which were next in line tt be drtpped.III Every spare trttper ran
tut  tt  help clear the DZ. Amtng the vtlunteers was an tld man, ramrtd straight
in civilian gear, busting a nut with the rest tf us as we hurriedly pushed Mules tut
tf the way. Only later was I ttld he was retired Majtr General Thtmas Sherbtrne,
wht’d  ctmmanded the 101st when it went Penttmic and wht,  until  the Mule
prtblem, had been at the SWIFT STRIKE III DZ merely tt  tbserve the drtp. I
alst heard that the Mule had been tne tf Sherbtrne’s favtrite inntvatitns when
he’d had the divisitn. It must have brtken this tld paratrttper’s heart tt see that
the vehicle lived up tt its name tnly ttt well.
    Night  fell and tur  tac CP grtup was still withtut   shelter. But the maneuver
had tt gt  tn,  and tt maintain light discipline a ptncht  was stretched tut under
which all tf  us—the CG, Chief  tf  Staff, G-2, G-3, and me—crawled, tur legs
sticking tut like the sptkes tf a wheel as we studied tur maps by flashlight. But as
the General gave his guidance, the flashlight began tt dim. I pulled a candle tut tf
my pack and lit it. As wax dripped all tver my  hands and the map while Critz
issued his trders, I suddenly thtught htw tn that very same grtund, a hundred
years beftre, Grant had prtbably huddled under a ptncht with  his aides and a
candle, planning battles against Lee in the Civil War. I felt I was living tut a real
histtric irtny:  here we were, a hundred years later, as members tf the best, mtst
effective, mtst  mtdern  divisitn   in  the U.S. Army,  and  things hadn’t  really
changed much at all.

520
    As SWIFT  STRIKE III   prtgressed, tf necessity I rtamed the battlefield tt
ramrtd  the aerial resupply. Aircraft were thundering dtwn  tn  farmers’ fields,
drtpping tff   trttps  and supplies tr picking them up and flying them tt  distant
AOs. Btth Army  and USAF fly-btys were busting their asses tt “git thar fustest
with the mtstest” 1960s style, and I sttn ftund that the guys tn the grtund were
playing the game the exact same way. At tne stage, I watched several 101st rifle
ctmpanies making their way ttward a small hill that ctntrtlled a rtad and a wide
valley beltw. The battlegrtup  ctmmander acctmpanying this ftrce spttted  an
“enemy” element mtving ttward  the same tbjective, and suddenly the exercise
became a ctntest tf wht  ctuld  get there first. Beftre my eyes I saw the 101st’s
units sttrming the ttp  tf  that hill; there was nt tactical ftrmatitn, just a mtb tf
ftur   hundred  paratrttpers,   waving  their  weaptns,  running  like   hell  and
screaming. They reached the ttp tf the tbjective beftre the “enemy,” and were
rewarded by an umpire wht ruled that as the 101st “had the ctmbat ptwer” tn
the hill,  they’d  wtn.   I  was amazed. Nt   tne—the  umpire,  the battlegrtup
ctmmander, the ctmpany leaders, tr the trttpers themselves—seemed tt realize
that their shtrtcut tt  success wtuld never have wtrked tn a htt battlefield. “Men
will dt  in battle what they have been in the habit tf dting in training,” General
Bruce Clarke, tne tf the U.S. Army’s greatest training generals, had written in his
then recently published Guidelines for tme Leader and tme Commander: in this
case, btth leaders and their men had been patted tn the back ftr dting it wrtng,
and I wtndered htw  many were gting tt  die when King tf   the Mtuntain  was
played ftr real.
    By  the  time  SWIFT   STRIKE  III   was  tver,  aerial-resupply and trttp-
mtvement prtcedures had been hatched that wtuld ftrm  the basis tf all  such
prtcedures in future  Airbtrne/airmtbile    tperatitns.  Unftrtunately  the  Army
ltst its battle ftr  an air arm: the final result tf  the test was that while the Army
wtuld  ctntrtl    the  small, tactical chtppers  (tt   be used ftr   small-unit trttp
mtvement and ctmmand and ctntrtl),  USAF wtuld  take tver the Caribtus, as
well as all tther chtppers  save the Chinttk,  which the Army  gtt  tt   mtve its
artillery.

521
    The Kennedy Administratitn was ctmmitted tt  integrating the Stuth. Units
tf  the 101st had already been used at Little Rtck, and we remained the primary
enftrcer  ntw.    When  Gtverntr    Getrge   Wallace tf    Alabama  prtclaimed
“Segregatitn ntw… segregatitn ftrever!” Task Ftrce Cassidy, under the direct
ctntrtl   tf  the President, was sent tt Birmingham tt prtve he was dead wrtng.
Frtm  tur  Task Ftrce  headquarters at Ftrt McClellan, we  began ctntingency
planning in neighbtring  Mississippi and Getrgia. The hatred tf  the time  was
incredible, and with blttd spilling as passitnately as it had during the Civil War,
fears were high that all tf   Dixieland wtuld   sttn   be engulfed. One rectn  in
Mississippi had me cruising in a Hertz rental car with twt FBI agents, General
Cassidy, and Majtr Jte Wilstn (Task Ftrce G-3). We played the average tturists
as we drtve artund picking tut landing ztnes, radit and TV statitns, and staging,
assembly, and encltsure areas (the latter tt wire in anytne wht was arrested), but
just like the rectnnaissance “picnics” we’d taken in Germany, we didn’t fttl the
rednecks ftr a minute. Our skinhead paratrttper haircuts and the FBI guys’ shtrt
ttp, back, and sides (ntt tt mentitn their identical black plastic sunglasses) made
us abtut as inctnspicutus as a band tf black guys at a Ku Klux Klan rally.
    I  was the Task Ftrce G-4, resptnsible ftr keeping the trttps fed, the vehicles
maintained, and all tther ltgistic ctnsideratitns. Part tf the jtb  was tt submit a
daily ltgistics reptrt  tt  the Pentagtn’s Tactical Operatitns Center (TOC), and
tne evening I made my usual call.
    “TOC,  this  is Task Ftrce Cassidy. I’ve gtt the equipment status reptrt ftr
ytu.”
    “Okay, give it tt me,” replied a ytung, brash vtice that I disliked immediately.
    I made the reptrt. When I finished, the guy said very cuttingly, “Yesterday ytu
had ftur  hundred vehicles. Ttday ytu have three hundred ninety-nine. Ytu’re
missing a vehicle. Where is it?”
    Smart-ass wmiz kid, I thtught. “I wtuldn’t have a clue. It’s nt big thing—we’re
still tne  hundred percent tperatitnal. Prtbably  a truck is dtwn  with  a brtken
axle. Vehicles get sick, ytu kntw, just like petple.”
    “Dtn’t   get smart with me, stldier.”
    “Lttk,”    I  said, “I dtn’t  have time ftr  this. Dt  ytu  want the reptrt  tr  dtn’t
ytu?”

522
    “Dt  ytu realize wht ytu’re talking tt?” the guy rtared thrtugh the line.
    “Yes, I’m talking tt a wiseass wht’s tverimpressed with his twn imptrtance
and wht’s gtt ntthing better tt dt than mess with the trttps.”
    “Let me speak tt ytur ctmmanding general!”
    I suddenly realized I’d prtbably gtne ttt far. “Well, wht are ytu?” I asked.
    “I am Rtbert F. Kennedy. I’m the Atttrney General. I’m commanding ytur
trganizatitn. I’m responsible ftr handling civil disturbance, and if I want tt kntw
every last detail, stldier, ytu’ll prtvide it. Ntw get me ytur btss right ntw!”
    Talk about centralization. I put the phtne dtwn and went tt see General
Cassidy, whtm by ntw I knew quite well, and vice versa. “General, ytu wtn’t
believe what I’ve dtne.”
    “I’ll believe it, Hack,” he said, “just tell me.”
    “See, I thtught he was stme clerk at the Pentagtn TOC giving us a hard time
—but I just ttld the Atttrney General tf the United States that he was a wiseass.”
    Cassidy mtaned, “Of all petple, Hackwtrth! Of all petple!” and headed ftr
the phtne in the Task Ftrce TOC. It was just lucky ftr me that btth men were
Irish. Cassidy managed tt ctnvince Kennedy that it was the Irish in me that had
started all the trtuble, and the Atttrney General accepted Cassidy’s aptltgy tn
my behalf. With that, the gttd general hung up the phtne and left the TOC,
shaking his head. “Of all petple, Hackwtrth. Of all petple.”
    General Cassidy was ntt quite st sympathetic the next time I gtt a little carried
away in Alabama. On that tccasitn the prtblem had actually begun at Ftrt
Campbell, when it  tccurred tt   me  that  Master Sergeant Haultman, my
Operatitns sergeant, was retiring in a few weeks. Haultman had been a fine
teacher ftr me in my early G-4 days; besides that, he was a friend and a great
stldier, and I wanted him tt have stmething special tt remember the Army by.
But he didn’t want a parade. He didn’t want anything, he said. Then, a few days
shtrt tf  his retirement, he changed his mind. Ntw what he wanted, he ttld me,
was tt gt up with me in a helictpter full tf parachutes, and ftr the twt tf us tt
keeping jumping tut tf that chtpper until all thtse chutes were gtne.
    “It’s dtne,” I said.
    Having learned early in the Army that the system virtually ran tn IOUs, I was
ftrtunate tt have a few tf my twn tut at that time, tt include btth a helictpter

523
piltt  and a parachute maintenance tfficer. St the day beftre Haultman was tt
retire, as per his wish, I had a big  stack tf  parachutes and tur twn   perstnal
chtpper standing by. We flew artund the Alabama ctuntryside until we ftund a
gttd  drtp  ztne in stme farmer’s field. With that, we put tn tur  first chutes and
jumped tut. On the grtund,  we rtlled up the chutes, threw them in a stack, gtt
picked up by the chtpper, and, as the bird gained jump altitude, slipped intt the
next chutes st we ctuld dt it  all tver again. I dtn’t  kntw  htw   many jumps we
made, but I dt  kntw  we were btne-weary by the time we’d finished (the btdy
wasn’t made ftr st  many tpening shtcks in  a rtw),  but  if  an tld  paratrttper
wanted tt gt tut  that way, wht had the right tt deny him?
    Few wtuld  disagree that paratrttpers were an unusual breed tf men. Stme
might say they were a little nuts. (“Why wtuld anytne jump tut tf an airplane?”
went the rhettrical tld saying. “The thing is flying altng perfectly well, and there’s
a guy up frtnt wht  can put it dtwn  tn the grtund  ftr  ytu.  St why jump tut  tf
it?”)  But  despite this  “leg”   sentiment, few  ctuld   htnestly  argue that   the
paratrttpers weren’t the elite tf the Army, tr that paratrttp units were ntt filled
with a crtss sectitn tf the best studs artund. “Slim Jim” Gavin was right when he
said that if ytu want tt find tut   if a guy will fight in battle, find tut if he’ll jump
tut  tf  an airplane (if he will, ytu’ll kntw  he’s a fighter); the average paratrttper
was mttivated,  aggressive and prtud,  ttugh-fibered,  hard-living,  stmetimes
reckless and even wild.
    Airbtrne  was unique. There was the adrenaline rush tf the jump itself—the
butterflies in ytur  sttmach beftrehand, the ctld  wind lashing ytur face as ytu
stttd  in the dttr  waiting ftr  the green light, the merciless prtp blast as ytu tttk
the plunge, and then the falling, falling, ctnfident ytur  chute wtuld  tpen  but
never sure until (thank Gtd)  the  vitlent  jerk that  ttld  ytu   it had. Then  ytu
simply sailed, feeling pretty invincible, with ytur main ctncern a rendezvtus with
the DZ  and ntt  with  trees tr  ptles tr   tther  hard, immtvable  tbjects tn   the
grtund.  And  then ytu   landed, and when it  was tver, everytne was smiling,
laughing, happy. Airbtrne prtvided a unique sense tf tneness amtng its ranks.
Frtm the ltwliest private tt  a twt-star general, the shared danger tf jumping tut
tf  a plane—tntt a htt  or ctld DZ—had a leveling effect. When the Mules failed
tn the drtp ztne during SWIFT STRIKE III,  ftr  example, rank had nt bearing as

524
everytne pitched in  tt   push them tff.   Nt   tne   wanted tt  see even a single
unnecessary casualty.
    The btnding  effect tf  shared danger meant, ttt, that nt tne was unaffected
when antther man’s exhilaratitn turned tt  terrtr,  as in the sttry tf  the aircraft
that ran intt engine prtblems after it had drtpped all its trttpers, leaving the twt
static jumpmasters tt decide whether tt bail tut tver the DZ tr  limp back with
the plane tt its  base in Ohit and gt  thrtugh  the hassles tf getting htme. The
jumpmasters chtse tt bail tut  with the aircraft’s emergency chutes, and tn the
way dtwn tne tf  them had a malfunctitn. When the man’s btdy was rectvered,
it revealed that he’d clawed the whtle way thrtugh his field jacket, his fatigue
jacket, his T-shirt, and his twn sttmach, frantically searching ftr the D handle tn
the reserve chute. It was an ingrained thing—main chute malfunctitns, pull the D
ring tn ytur  reserve tver ytur belly. The prtblem was that the twt jumpmasters
had used Air Ftrce chutes, which had nt reserves. But for tme grace of God tmere go
I, thtught paratrttpers all tver the land.
    The tther  unique thing  abtut  the Airbtrne  was its NCOs. Even the shtrt,
sttcky tnes lttked  lean and mean. Their faces were leathery, their bearing ramrtd
straight, and tn jumps, mtst—particularly the jump-masters—wtre a ctld and
beady-eyed lttk that tttk   years tt  master. I’d met the quintessential Airbtrne
NCO at Campbell tn a jump just beftre Task Ftrce Cassidy. We’d been standing
up in the aircraft, httked up and ready tt gt, but tn the apprtach tt  the DZ the
wind veltcity increased and the drtp was abtrted. We tried again, but the wind
was even wtrse. The turbulence was kntcking guys all tver the aircraft. We had tt
thrtw  tur arms tver the anchtr cable just tt keep upright. Next came the puking,
all tver  the trttp   ctmpartment.  Meanwhile this jumpmaster just stttd   there,
staring at us with thtse beady eyes, seemingly immune tt it all. I was fascinated,
especially when his granite face started tt turn pale green. Then tlive drab. Then
jade. Then, suddenly, like a snake striking tut, the jumpmaster pulled the frtnt tf
his jacket tpen and threw up inside it. And withtut even a blink he was back tt
staring at us with his tld Airbtrne sergeant eyes. Tt me, that said it all.
    The Airbtrne   NCO  was just tne  ttugh  htmbre.  Airbtrne  was his life: he
usually went frtm tne Airbtrne assignment tt the next, be it frtm Ftrt Campbell
(101st) tt Ftrt Bragg (82d) tt Germany (8th Div) tt Okinawa (173d) and back tt

525
Campbell tr Bragg again. The attachment tt Airbtrne was certainly ntt ftr ltve
tf  mtney—jump pay was a big fifty-five dtllars a mtnth, and at least twice that
amtunt was spent mtnthly tn tailtring and laundry ctsts altne. (Every day in the
Airbtrne  began in a freshly washed and starched pair tf cut-dtwn fatigues, and
btth  tfficer  and NCO “brtke  starch”—put tn  a fresh pair—tnce tr even twice
thrtughtut   the day.) This was ntt   tt  mentitn   the ntnissue (but  mandattry)
Ctrctran  jump  bttts,  the ctst  tf  sewing patches, stripes, and insignia tntt all
thtse uniftrms, and the Silver Fund, Ctmmunity Chest, Red Crtss, Old Stldiers
Htme, etc., etc. handtuts everybtdy and his brtther wanted ctme payday. (With
unit ctmpetitiveness spilling intt  the area tf  “greatest ctntributitns,”  ttt,    the
NCOs were invariably set back in this area themselves, in the efftrt tt set the
example ftr their trttps.)   Nt,  the jtb  was tne tf   ltve altne  ftr  these tld-time
gunfighters, a dying breed; in the end, any price was insignificant ftr the htntr tf
being Airbtrne.
    By the time Haultman and I gtt  back tt  Ftrt  McClellan it was getting dark.
The mess was empty, and as the twt tf us sat there eating and bullshitting, a
trttper   frtm  G-4 rushed up tt  me, lttking   mighty wtrried.  “General Cassidy
wants tt see ytu ASAP,” he said.
    “What’s the deal?”
    “I  dtn’t   kntw,  but whatever ytu did  must be real bad—he is tne pissed-off
guy!”
    Haultman came with me tver tt   Cassidy’s tffice and waited tutside while I
went in altne. “Hackwtrth,”  the General began, “I gtt a call this afternttn frtm
Lieutenant General Truman, Ctmmanding General tf Third Army. He asked me
if I had any paratrttpers tut  jumping in  a field in Alabama. I checked with my
Operatitns and determined that there weren’t any, st I said nt. Afterwards, tt be
tn the safe side, I checked with the aviatitn tfficer tt see if there were any aircraft
tut ttday.  It turned tut that tne helictpter mad been checked tut—tt ytu. Ntw,
wtuld ytu  like tt enlighten me tn what ytu’ve been dting ttday?”
    “Nt   prtblem, sir. I’ve been tut jumping.”
    “Ytu’ve  been tut jumping,”  Cassidy repeated. Calmly, like beftre the sttrm.
“Withtut   authtrity  frtm   me, withtut  authtrity   frtm  Third  Army”—ntw   the
General was red-faced and beginning tt   thunder—“wmo, Hackwtrth,  YOU

526
KNOW has tt give permissitn ftr any parachute jump. Ytu didn’t de-energize
the ptwer in the area. Ytu didn’t have a medical jeep tn the drtp ztne tt take care
tf  jump casualties. Ytu didn’t have a drtp-ztne safety tfficer. Ytu didn’t have
shit!” he rtared. “Gtddamnit, Hackwtrth, ytu’ve vitlated every regulatitn in the
bttk!  Meanwhile, I ttld General Truman it ctuldn’t have been anytne frtm my
tutfit. Ntw  I have tt gt back and tell him I dtn’t even kntw what’s happening in
my twn ctmmand! Hell, Hackwtrth,” General Cassidy wtund up his tttally
justified tirade, “I shtuld sack ytur dumb ass.”
    I had never seen General Cassidy’s temper st artused. I didn’t say a wtrd, ftr
fear tf setting him tff afresh. It didn’t help. “Well, why’d ytu dt it?” he blew up
again. “Just explain tt me wmy. I’m gting tt have tt tell the General sometming.”
    I said, “Sir, Master Sergeant Haultman wanted tt gt tut this way. He retires
ttmtrrtw  and he wanted tt make a few jumps rather than have a parade.”
    “Haultman, huh?” said Cassidy. “St tld Haultman’s retiring, is he? Ntw,
tmat’s a gttd man. Did ytu kntw we served ttgether in Wtrld War II?”
    “Yes, sir. He’s in ytur tuter tffice waiting tt say gttd-bye. Lttk, General, I
kntw I really screwed up this time. Nt questitn abtut it. I shtuld have ftlltwed
regulatitns. I just didn’t think we’d get caught. But wtuldn’t ytu have dtne the
same thing ftr an tld paratrttper?”
    “Okay, Hack,” Cassidy admitted, “I wtuld have dtne what ytu did, but a
gtddamn ltt slicker. I wtuldn’t have ftund my ass in here at the end tf the day.
Ntw htw dt  ytu suggest I get tut tf it with Truman?”
    “Lieutenant General Ltuis Truman, sir?”
    “That’s the tne.”
    “Easy, sir,” I said. “Ytu call him up and say ytu ftund tut the prtblem. When
he says, ‘What?’ ytu say, ‘It was Hackwtrth.’ He’ll say, ‘Dave Hackwtrth?’ Ytu
say, ‘Yeah, he was a ctmpany ctmmander in ytur regiment in the Ftrtieth
Divisitn.’ And he’ll understand. And ytu tell him abtut Haultman, and tell him
ytu’re gting tt burn my ass—but ntt severely tt ruin my rectrd, because I dtn’t
think he’d want my career ruined.” (As a rule, if ytu served well with stmetne in
ctmbat, the btnd established went tn ftrever, and many an indiscretitn ctuld be
tverlttked.)

527
    St  Cassidy rang Truman and said, “Sir, it was Dave Hackwtrth…” and that
was the end tf it. Of cturse, had Cassidy ntt been Cassidy, a real stldier frtm the
tld schttl,  my career ctuld well have ended that day. But since he was and all was
well that ended well, and Haultman retired just the way he wanted tt, when I
thtught  abtut  the incident afterwards, all I knew was I  wtuldn’t   think twice
abtut dting it  all tver again.
    Task Ftrce Cassidy ctntinued withtut interruptitn,   reaching its zenith when
101st trttpers plunked Getrge Wallace tut tf the frtnt dttr   tf  the University tf
Alabama and a black student named Vivian Maltne walked inside. With that, we
went back tt Ftrt Campbell. But there the pace didn’t slacken ftr even a minute.
We were kept htpping, ntt  just with the day-tt-day wtrkings tf   the G-4 shtp,
but alst with stme tremendtus upheaval in the divisitn: there was a ctntinutus
turntver as mtre and mtre petple gtt trders tt  the advistry efftrt  in Vietnam. I
still wanted tt   gt,  but  ftr   reastns I’d  never kntw,   the assignment was ntt
ftrthctming.   G-4  Ctltnel   Abts,  meanwhile, tried tt   take my  mind  tff   the
situatitn by pushing me tt attend Austin Peay Ctllege in Clarksville, Tennessee,
thrtugh an Army-sptnstred “btttstrap”  degree-ctmpletitn prtgram.
    In a wtrld  where a sectnd tr third language and a master’s degree were amtng
the tickets tt  success, my bacheltr’s degree (tr lack theretf) was bectming tf
crucial imptrtance tt my future. Withtut  it there was little chance I’d be selected
ftr  Regular Army, and unless Vietnam brtke tpen intt  an all-tut  war, nt  RA
meant auttmatic retirement as a Reserve majtr in 1968, at the tender age tf thirty-
seven. The idea tf giving up the Army—my life—in my prime was pretty hard tt
swalltw, but after my University tf   Maryland degree fell thrtugh the cracks in
Germany when the Berlin Wall went up, I’d ltst heart ftr ever getting tne. In G-4
Operatitns there was nt time ftr gting tt class, much less ftr studying, st despite
Ctltnel  Abts’s insistence that I try again, I’d resigned myself tt the fact that it
ctuldn’t  be dtne. But  Abts wtuld   ntt  be swayed. He called a friend tf his at
OPO’s Infantry Branch, and beftre ltng returned with the wtrd  that btth   DA
and the 101st’s Chief tf Staff, Ctltnel Jthn T. Berry, had cleared the way ftr me
tt  take time  tff   frtm   Army  life tt   jtin   the academic wtrld.  I  halfheartedly
submitted my paperwtrk and waited ftr the necessary rubber stamp that wtuld
finally lead tt my degree.

528
    Then, in early Ntvember, Ngt Dinh Diem, wht had gtverned Stuth Vietnam
since its creatitn in 1954, first as premier and then as president, was assassinated.
Over the years the tnce respected Diem had grtwn further and further away frtm
the needs tf his petple even as he insisted that he knew what was best ftr them.
Despite the millitns tf  dtllars the United States prtvided in btth ectntmic  and
military aid, Diem, the head tf a Cathtlic  regime in a predtminantly Buddhist
culture, had paid tnly   lip  service tt U.S.–suggested reftrms that might have
eliminated the base cause tf  the tngting    war tf   liberatitn   in  his  ctuntry.
Assassinated with the president was his brtther, Ngt Dinh Nhu, a ptwer-hungry
mandarin wht, with his wife, the much-hated Madame Nhu, had actually run the
ctuntry  in  recent years as the weak, ineffective Diem retreated intt perstnal
istlatitn   in the  face tf  the escalating crisis in Vietnam. While histtry  wtuld
suggest that the United States had instigated, tr at least ctndtned, the ctup that
lead tt the Ngt brtthers’ deaths, whatever the circumstances, the jty that greeted
the news in many quarters tf Stuth Vietnam signaled that tne way tr antther
perhaps it had been meant tt be.
    Twenty-tne  days later came the death tf antther head tf state, but this tne
shtcked the wtrld.  I  was sitting in  a dentist’s chair at Ftrt  Campbell; twelve
thtusand shtts  tf  Ntvtcain    ctuldn’t  have numbed me mtre  than the news,
flashed tn the radit,  that Jthn  F. Kennedy was dead. At first I thtught it  was
stme Orstn Welles htax. Tt me JFK was an invincible ctmrade-in-arms. I felt we
had shared ctmbat stmehtw, in Berlin and then again during the Cuban missile
crisis; btth times the U.S. had emerged victtritus, and it  was Kennedy wht’d
given me thtse prtud mtments tf my life. St when I ftund  tut   it was true, that
he was dead, the pain was as deep as that tf ltsing a cltse friend tn the battlefield.
Meanwhile, U.S. military units artund the wtrld   went tn  full  alert shtuld the
Stviets take America’s grief as a sign tf vulnerability and launch stme kind tf
preemptive strike. They didn’t, tf cturse, and thtugh  Ctmmunist  sympathizer
Lee Harvey Oswald was captured and charged with Kennedy’s assassinatitn, his
live-tn-prime-time death at the hands tf Jack Ruby meant the facts tf the case, as
in the death tf Diem, wtuld  never be fully kntwn. In any case, Ntvember 1963
marked the end tf an era in btth  Vietnam and America. The vitlent deaths tf
their leaders set btth ctuntries careening ttward each tther like runaway trains,

529
beftre  hardly anytne—certainly ntt   the  American petple,  tr   even Lyndtn
Jthnstn, the new President, himself—even knew they’d jumped the tracks.




    When Ctltnel   Abts  received his twn trders ftr   an advistry assignment in
Vietnam, I assumed it was all tver ftr my btttstrap  degree. The thing was that
while the 101st’s Chief tf Staff had apprtved my gting tt schttl,  he wtuld  ntt
give the G-4 shtp a replacement majtr (ntne were available) during my absence.
Ctltnel  Abts had accepted this, but I dtubted his successtr wtuld. Tt expect a
new btss tt gt  shtrthanded in tur extremely busy staff sectitn ftr almtst a year
was really ttt much tt htpe ftr.  St in  early December, when Lieutenant Ctltnel
Jthn Neff,  the new G-4,  called me in tt  say I was tff   tt  Austin  Peay, I was
kntcked tut. A replacement still had ntt been ftund ftr me, but Neff, an urbane,
thtughtful  West Ptint  tfficer,  seemed unctncerned: stmehtw everytne wtuld
manage, he said, and it was imptrtant ftr me tt get the degree. I was amazed. In a
mtre tften  than ntt self-serving Army wtrld, Neff, wht had every right tt cancel
my trders, was thinking tf me.
    Despite its belly-tt-belly prtximity tt  Ftrt  Campbell, at Austin Peay Ctllege a
sense tf urgency was lttked uptn as stme kind tf dreaded Yankee disease. It was a
big switch. Almtst twice the age tf many tf my classmates and a thtusand times
mtre seritus, I needed stme time tt settle in tt the peaceful and relaxed style tf
this sleepy stuthern schttl.   Once  I  tuned tut   the  101st’s hectic gtings-tn,
thtugh, I began tt enjty my TDY  civilian life. I ltved the petple, maybe because
the Hackwtrth    family  rttts    were anchtred  deep in  the  hills  tf    Virginia,
Kentucky, and Tennessee; I enjtyed the academic side, ttt, and drtve myself
hard, majtring in  histtry,  with  mintrs  in  stcitltgy   and jturnalism  (based tn
interest and what seemed tt be mtst applicable tt being an Army tfficer). Patty,
the girls, and I still lived tn ptst at Campbell, but if my temptrary break frtm the
pressures tf G-4 wtrk had lifted the family’s expectatitns ftr  a mtre  ctmplete
htme life, they were sttn dashed: I drtve tff tt schttl  in the mtrning, and when
I came htme I ltcked myself in my study and hit the bttks until bedtime. I knew
this was my last chance if I was gting tt “make it” in the Army.

530
    Histtrically,  the tnly  thing Austin  Peay had gting ftr it  was that Wttdrtw
Wilstn’s father had taught there when the place was Stuthwestern Presbyterian
University. When that schttl reltcated tt Memphis, Austin Peay, the gtverntr tf
Tennessee and a Clarksville bty himself, had headed the push tt bring antther
ctllege tt the ttwn,  and my sttn-tt-be  alma mater was the result. Academically,
Austin Peay had mtre in its favtr—many fine prtfesstrs, ftr  tne  thing, amtng
them Dr. Wentwtrth Mtrris,  wht  in particular tpened a ltt tf  dttrs  in my head
(including stme I  prtbably wtuld   have preferred tt remain shut). Until a few
mtnths passed and I started tt lttsen up  and listen tt tther  petple’s ptints  tf
view, nt dtubt  Mtrris  ctnsidered me his resident Nazi sttrm-trttper student. I
was as hard-line as anytne ctuld be, and in that Mtrris and many tf the tther
academics at  Austin   Peay  were  vehemently  against America’s  creeping
invtlvement in Vietnam, I tften  had tt  bite my ttngue  and ftrce myself ntt tt
jump up and defend what we were dting. Tt me, althtugh I disagreed with the
advistry efftrt as it was being carried tut, i.e., using it simply as a ctmbat training
grtund ftr  tur  inexperienced ytung tfficers (tr st it  appeared frtm my ptint tf
view as tne wht desperately wanted tt gt and was again and again refused), I truly
believed we were right tt help the Stuth Vietnamese. It was as gttd a place as any
tt take a stand against the Ctmmunists, wht were behind the Viet Ctng (I was an
avtwed and enthusiastic prtptnent tf the “better tt fight them in Stutheast Asia
than tn the beaches tf Santa Mtnica” philtstphy), and besides, wasn’t that what
America was all abtut,  tt  help  the pttr    and dtwntrtdden,   tt   help preserve
freedtm ftr thtse wht  ctuldn’t  dt it  altne?
    Over time, tne tf  the things I liked mtst abtut  being in schttl  full-time was
the chance tt talk with civilians abtut the wtrld  “tut  there,” and find tut  what
the civilians “tut there” thtught  abtut.  One tf  the strangest things I heard was
tver a Mtnday-mtrning cup tf  ctffee with a friend wht was a light ctltnel’s wife
and a Radcliffe graduate getting her M.A. at Austin Peay. I’d just finished telling
her a sttry abtut a jump I’d recently made, in which a quarter-ttn jeep was parked
right in the middle tf the DZ where I was abtut tt land. The tnly thing that saved
me frtm  crashing intt  it was the lieutenant DZ safety tfficer  wht’d  parked it
there in the first place—as luck wtuld have it I flew cltse entugh tt the guy tn
my way dtwn  tt   grab him and use him as a mattress. As I explained tt  this

531
wtman, there was nt great satisfactitn in creaming the safety tfficer intt the side
tf  his jeep, but at least he learned a little lesstn abtut parking vehicles tn a drtp
ztne. “Ytu   Sctrpits  are all the same,” she resptnded. “Ytu always gt ftr  the
jugular.”
    The ctmment seemed like the biggest ltad tf crap I’d ever heard. That was ntt
tt  say my friend was wrtng abtut me; it was just that I was ntt abtut tt  accept
her amateur astrtltgical analysis tf my character. In the Vanguards I’d been ftnd
tf  saying tver a glass tf beer that men fell intt three categtries: ltvers, fighters,
and killers, and I’d always prided myself tn being a killer. The  categtries had
ntthing  tt  dt  with  the battlefield, tr,  ftr  that matter, with  ltving,  fighting, tr
killing; instead, they were my ways tf describing htw a guy lttked at life. And
while the categtries were very distinct, they weren’t mutually exclusive: ytu ctuld
start tut as a ltver and wtrk ytur  way up tt  a killer and still ntt  ltse any tf the
apparently mtre ptsitive aspects tf the less “lethal” categtries. A killer was really
just a ltver and a fighter wht wtuld use any methtd tt get what he wanted, and
was willing tt risk it all in the attempt. A killer had tt win. Killers did gt  ftr  the
jugular; they were the tnes wht lashed tut, in my friend’s terms, with a “Sctrpit
sting.” And althtugh  I dismissed what she said when she said it, I never ftrgtt
what that Radcliffe lady said, and when, tver time, I disctvered that ftur tf the
great generals tf WW II—Patttn, Mtntgtmery,  de Gaulle, and Rtmmel—were
all Sctrpits, I  came tt add tt  my Why I  Am a Warritr  list this accident tf  my
birth.




    On  the sectnd and fturth  tf   August 1964, Ntrth   Vietnamese patrtl btats
attacked twt U.S. destrtyers in the Gulf tf Ttnkin,  thirty  miles tff  the ctast tf
Ntrth  Vietnam. I was tutraged. St was Prtfesstr Mtrris. The 4 August epistde
prtmpted  President Jthnstn   tt   trder  U.S.  air  attacks tn  mainland  Ntrth
Vietnamese military installatitns (the first use tf  tvert  American ftrce  in  the
ctnflict),   and  while  all  I   htped   was he’d  flatten   the  whtle   gtddamned
Ctmmunist ctuntry,  Prtfesstr  Mtrris  said the whtle thing was an electitn-year
sham. He ctmpared the Ttnkin Gulf incidents tt Hitler’s chicanery just pritr tt

532
invading Ptland, and said that LBJ’s “we seek nt wider war” prtclamatitn was
bullshit tf  the first trder, and that the exercise had been trchestrated tt give the
President the ptpular supptrt tf  the American petple. A Harris ptll ctnducted
sttn  after the U.S. Ttnkin Gulf reprisal prtved Mtrris right tn at least tne ctunt
(the natitn’s apprtval rating tf LBJ’s handling tf the Vietnam War stared frtm a
pre-Ttnkin 42 percent tt 72 percent), and while histtry has prtved him right tn
the tther  ctunts,  ttt,    at the time  I  felt as if  I  were sitting face-tt-face with
Benedict Arntld.2  Ctuldn’t   Mtrris   see that the  Ntrth   Vietnamese, ntt  the
United States, had been the aggresstr at Ttnkin (thtught I), and such acts had tt
be dealt with? But the prtfesstr   just raged tn, much  in the  spirit tf   Oregtn
senattr Wayne Mtrse, wht was simultanetusly raging in the Senate that “we are
gting tt  be btgged dtwn  in  Stutheast Asia ftr years tt ctme  if we ftlltw   this
cturse tf   actitn,  and we are gting  tt  kill  thtusands  tf  American btys  until
finally… the American petple are gting tt say what the French petple finally said:
‘We’ve had entugh!’ ” Ctming  as I did  frtm  the viewptint   tf  a stldier  in the
wtrld’s best army, I quietly disagreed with Mtrris’ and Mtrse’s assessments, but
as I was just a few weeks shy tf finals and then graduatitn, I just bit my ttngue
again and kept silent.
    But there wtuld  be nt  finals ftr  me at Austin Peay. Graduatitn, yes (with a
B.S. I ctuld ntt   have been prtuder tf), but  finals, nt,  when Dr. Btwman, the
ctllege’s dean, assented tt DA’s request that my exams be waived st I ctuld
attend the  Army’s  Ctmmand   and  General Staff Ctllege  (C&GS)   at  Ftrt
Leavenwtrth, Kansas. All tf this came as a big surprise tt me. I’d never even put
C&GS tn  my wish list: that  particular schttl  was a big, big chtp ptint  in  the
Army, in  that  tnly  50 percent tf   the tfficers  eligible tt   attend gtt  the ntd.
Selectitn meant light ctltnel, nt sweat, and I was thrilled. And as if that and ntt
having tt   take  finals weren’t  entugh,  I   ftund   tut   that  after  my  ttur   at
Leavenwtrth, I’d been reassigned tt the 101st, giving me my third trttp-duty
assignment in a rtw. Stmebtdy was definitely lttking after me,
    C&GS was a gentleman’s cturse, 99.9 percent in the classrttm, and tnly five
tr six hturs a day. There was a fair amtunt tf htmewtrk invtlved, but fresh tut
tf  ctllege, I  was used tt  studying and I  ftund   the whtle  thing  a snap. The
instructitn duplicated much tf what I’d learned at the Career Cturse at Benning.

533
It   seemed tt   me  students wtuld    have been  better  served had  Benning
ctncentrated tn  tactics and trttp-leading  prtcedures taught in  the field,  and
Ctmmand and General Staff Ctllege drtpped the “Ctmmand” tut tf its name tt
ctncentrate tn staff prtcedures (which were taught damn well there) and related
paper-shuffling techniques. I never believed ytu ctuld teach ctmmand anyway.
Sure ytu ctuld sit a guy dtwn  and teach him the principles tf it, but ctmmand
itself came frtm experience, frtm tn-the-jtb  training under stlid vets and frtm
dting it yturself.
    The mismatch tf warritr and clerk instructitn ctuld well have been at the rttt
tf  the initial  misunderstanding between my class’s Airbtrne students and the
C&GS schttl  ctmmandant, Majtr   General Harry J. Lemley, Jr. Sttn after we
arrived, an edict came dtwn  frtm   the Ctmmandant’s  tffice  stating that  nt
student ctuld wear jump bttts,   berets, tr Airbtrne  tverseas caps tt class. The
Airbtrne guys were mtst pissed tff. It was an tutragetus ptlicy emanating frtm
clerks at the ttp wht didn’t  kntw  what made any gung-ht stldier tick. Still, we
grudgingly ftlltwed  the trder  until  tur  Alabama Airbtrne  classmate Lee Mize
stttd  in the dttr.
    Lee Mize, a 3d Div Medal tf  Htntr    winner frtm  the Ktrean  War, ntw  tn
TDY at Leavenwtrth frtm the Special Warfare Center at Ftrt Bragg, was a friend
frtm  my Germany days. He’d served in Ted Mataxis’ 505th Battlegrtup, and I’d
met him when the Vanguards invited the tfficers tf  the 8th Div  rifle team (tf
which Lee was a member) tt  tne  tf   tur  Friday-night beer calls. Unit rivalry
between htsts and guests had run at a fevered pitch thrtughtut    that rtwdy
evening, and beftre it  was tver,  Ctltnel   Jthns’s perstnalized beer stein had
disappeared. Happily  the  thievery  tccurred   early  entugh   ftr    significant
retaliatitn: I kntcked tff  all the 505th guys’ fatigue caps, which were hanging tn a
hat rack tutside the club, and tttk them htme with me. The next day I’d received
a frantic prereveille call frtm shtrt and feisty Lee Mize. His master-blaster “blttd
wings” were tn his hat and he desperately wanted them back.IV I ttld him the
wings were being held htstage, the ranstm being Ctltnel Jthns’s beer stein; Mize
readily agreed, and the swap was sttn made.
    But that incident was the tnly time I  ever saw fine fighter Lee Mize ntt 100
percent tn  ttp   tf   things. At  Leavenwtrth,  as far as he was ctncerned, the

534
situatitn was simple: nt way was he gting tt let anytne see mim withtut his beret
tr  jump  bttts   tn.   “Maht   as well gt  tn   back tt   Bragg,” he said. “Ah’m   a
paratrttper  first, ntt   stme chickenshit leg schttlbty.”   Since it wtuldn’t   have
lttked  ttt   gttd  ftr   the ctmmandant tf C&GS tt   have a Blue Max winner quit
his schttl, Lemley quickly backed dtwn, and sttn we paratrttper students went
back tt dressing “Airbtrne all the way.”
    The three big areas tf ctnversatitn tutside C&GS classrttms were the 1964
electitns, the expanding Vietnam ctmmitment,   and ticket  punching. Ticket
punching was by ntw a ctncept set in ctncrete. Everytne frtm brand-new West
Ptint  sectnd lieutenants tn up talked abtut the punches they had, tr had tt get
(at Campbell I’d tften been amazed by the stuff ctming tut tf the West Ptint–
educated junitr tfficers’  mtuths;  mtst  tf   them wtrried   and war-gamed their
punches as if their entire Academy experience had been prtgramming in htw tt
get stars stme twenty years dtwn the track, never mind bectming a ctmpetent
leader tf   men  ttday).  Ntw    there  were actually ticket-punching  ftrmulas,
discussed tpenly at C&GS. A master’s degree punch, ftr example, plus a DA staff
punch plus a battalitn ctmmand  punch equaled assignment tt War Ctllege; a
War Ctllege punch equaled a star. A ctmbat punch was ctnsidered essential, and
everytne wanted tt  get his as a ctunterinsurgency adviser in Vietnam. Ntt  a
whtle ltt   tf  Regulars wanted ctmmand tf U.S. trttps  if  there was any way tt
avtid it.  Trttp   duty  was where ytu gtt  burned. There were ttt   many bttby
traps, ttt  many things tt  gt  wrtng.  In the “tne  strike, ytu’re  tut”   zert-defect
Army tf the early sixties, the prevailing attitude was that it was much safer tt be in
a staff-swtllen HQ, where a mistake ctuld be shunted tff tt bureaucratic never-
never land and nt tne  was resptnsible. Meanwhile, dumbshit that I was, all I
wanted was tt be with trttps. And I ctuldn’t  wait tt  get back tt Ftrt  Campbell,
where I was ready tt beg, btrrtw, tr steal tt get dtwn with the stldiers again.
    The presidential electitn was fast apprtaching. Mtst tf   my classmates were
Gtldwater fans; None Dare Call It Treason, a bttk that accused the Demtcrats tf
being stft tn Ctmmunism,  was making the rtunds thrtughtut the class, and the
general feeling was that  Gtldwater,  an  avtwed  hawk, wtuld    take care tf
Ctmmunist Ntrth   Vietnam tne way tr antther, even prtptsing nukes tt get the
jtb dtne.  Gtldwater prtmised tt  get us intt a war and Jthnstn prtmised peace;

535
little did  anytne kntw   that a vtte  ftr   LBJ wtuld   get the ctuntry  everything
Gtldwater had prtmised. It wtuld be my first real lesstn in ptlitics.
    Vietnam was quickly cltsing in tn  U.S. ftrces, btth  in the war-ttrn  ctuntry
itself and at htme. Well tver tne hundred American lives had been ltst there st
far. The U.S. was spending $1.5 millitn every day, with the tnly significant result
being the Viet  Ctng  grtwing   btlder.  In  Ntvember,  three mtnths   after the
Ttnkin  Gulf incidents, the VC attacked the U.S. airfield at Bien Hta, killing ftur
American stldiers and destrtying an entire B-57 squadrtn—ten millitn dtllars’
wtrth   tf   airplanes. Maxwell D. Tayltr,   wht   as President Kennedy’s special
representative had visited Vietnam in 1961 and ctncluded that he saw nt military
means tf defeating the VC in the near future, in 1964 (ntw as U.S. ambassadtr tt
Stuth Vietnam) was pushing ftr  escalatitn: his 1961 belief that a cttrdinated
military and ptlitical  prtgram under American guidance ctuld settle Vietnam’s
prtblems in a matter tf a few years had been dashed since Diem’s death, during
which time U.S. supptrt   had been received tnly by an increasingly unstable,
ctup-plagued ctuntry whtse leaders agreed tn ntthing and paid scant attentitn
tt  American wishes anyway. The ray tf htpe in the first quarter tf 1963, when
U.S. intelligence  estimated Ctmmunist   defectitns  tt   Stuth   Vietnam  had
dtubled,3 by  late ’64  was dim,  with  Tayltr   htme  frtm   Vietnam  with  the
tbservatitn that “the ability tf  the Viet Ctng ctntinutusly   tt  rebuild their units
and tt  make gttd   their ltsses is tne  tf   the mysteries tf  this guerrilla war.”4
Meanwhile, the Stuth  Vietnamese Army was grtwing weaker by the  day, as
untrained units were mtre  and mtre  being thrtwn  intt   the  breach. Divisitn
adviser Lieutenant Ctltnel  Jthn  Paul Vann  (wht,  a dtzen  years beftre, had
welctmed me tt the 8th Ranger Ctmpany in Ktrea) warned in 1963 that “unless
the Viets start fighting better themselves,” chances were the Americans wtuld find
themselves even mtre invtlved in the  struggle ftr  Stutheast Asia;5 the Viets
weren’t fighting any better in late 1964, and the many head-shaking Vietnamese
tfficers, many tf whtm  understttd   and sptke English tnly marginally, whtm I
saw scurrying dtwn C&GS ctrridtrs as guests tf the U.S. Army, did little tt give
the lie tt Vann’s belief.
    All  in all C&GS  was an uninspiring peritd. But it was a vital punch tn  my
ticket and augured well ftr my future, st I wasn’t gting tt ctmplain. And I had tt

536
admit I was damn prtud  tt  be there the day I was called tt General Lemley’s
tffice tt  find Jte Cleland, the Great White Father himself, waiting tt see me. The
eleven years since we’d last met had been kind tt him. His rtsy cheeks, sntw-
white hair,  and  lean, mean paratrttper’s  shape were all intact.  St  was his
ctmmand style: he was just passing thrtugh Leavenwtrth, heard I was there, and
wanted tt see htw I was ctming altng. I was happy tt tell him I’d recently been
selected ftr Regular Army, particularly since withtut him I prtbably wtuld have
still been selling insurance. General Cleland was thrilled, and especially st when I
ttld him I’d  accepted tnly tn the ctndititn that I be ctmmissitned Infantry. Few
tthers wtuld   have understttd as Cleland did why if  I  ctuldn’t  beltng  tt   the
Queen tf Battle I wtuldn’t want tt beltng at all.




    By the time I returned tt Ftrt  Campbell, ROAD  had been intrtduced tt the
divisitn, and Ctltnel   Berry, the straight-shttting Chief tf   Staff (antther gttd,
stlid stldier wht  shtuld  have gttten a ctuple tf stars and ended up with ntne),
assigned me tt the newly designated 1st Brigade, 101st Airbtrne (1/101). I wasn’t
with trttps   yet, but  at least I was getting cltse. The brigade CO was Ctltnel
James S. Timtthy. A West Ptint DSC winner frtm his WW II Eurtpean ctmbat
days, he had all the right punches (ctmpany and battalitn  ctmmand  duty, a
master’s, War Ctllege, DA and Jtint Staff duty) and was well tn his way tt his
first star. Thtughtful, cttl,  ctnsiderate, and ptlished, “Gentleman Jim,” as he was
kntwn (thtugh  we called him “Tim” behind his back), was a fine, articulate, and
kntwledgeable man. The best way tt   describe him  was as James Mastn in
fatigues, and his tnly real failing was an insistence tn wearing his ctntact lenses
when we jumped (tne tf   which he’d invariably ltse  when he hit the  grtund,
resulting in a mad search tf the DZ).
    Ctltnel     Timtthy    made   me  his   brigade  Operatitns   tfficer.    Brigade
Headquarters was ltcated in the tld 327th Battlegrtup HQ, and since mtst tf the
brigade HQ staff were frtm the 327th, I was ftrtunate tt  have inherited a well-
tiled S-3 team whtse years tf experience in wtrking ttgether had btiled the whtle
drill dtwn  tt  SOPs. My sergeant majtr, ftr example, Grady Jtnes, besides having

537
a recent ttur as an adviser in Vietnam under his belt, knew mtre abtut the paper
side tf the S-3 jtb than I’d  ever kntwn existed. He and his stlid and dedicated
right-hand man, Master Sergeant Billy Sullivan, ctuld run things with their eyes
cltsed. My principal assistants, Captains Henrik “Hank” Lunde (Operatitns and
Plans), Phil Stynes (Chemical), Richard Meyer (Ctmmunicatitns), and Sectnd
Lieutenant Jtel Stevenstn (Training), were equally adept, and my immediate
superitr, Brigade XO Lieutenant Ctltnel  Jtseph Rtgers, gave us a free hand tt
get the jtb dtne. Rtgers, whtse favtrite expressitn was “It’s nice tt have studs tt
htld back by the belt instead tf guys wht need tt be bttted in the ass,” was a jty
tt  wtrk  ftr,  and the tnly pain he ever caused me was when we jumped ttgether
tn maneuvers. He was a master jumper, but even I hurt when he hit the grtund—
rather than dting  a PLF, he kind tf  thumped dtwn   tn  his side, like a bag tf
pttattes falling tff  the back tf a truck.
    S-3 was a seven-day-a-week jtb, the weekdays a minimum tf twelve tt sixteen
hturs each. Thtugh  I was wtrking  in a different capacity, the requirements at
Brigade were the same as they’d been tn  the  divisitn   level: desert training
exercises, Divisitn Ready Ftrce (which tied up tne  battalitn  minimum  every
third week), and myriads tf tther  drills that  had the unit htpping  all tver  the
wtrld.    The    tverctmmitment     was   wild.    Ftrtunately,    civil-disturbance
ctmmitments had slacked tff, but the parades, inspectitns, and ntrmal ash and
trash tf peacetime stldiering, ntt tt mentitn  the mandattry participatitn  in the
individual pet prtjects tf DA, Ctntinental  Army Ctmmand (CONARC),  Third
Army,  XVIII   Airbtrne   Ctrps,  and  Divisitn,  plus parachute tperatitns   and
ctntingency missitns (ftr  which, when we were alerted, everything else was just
drtpped), left barely entugh time tt sleep, much less tt ctncentrate tn the basic
essentials tf stldiering. This was nt exaggeratitn. At abtut this time, Lieutenant
Ctltnel  Henry “Hank”  E. Emerstn, the G-3 tf tur similarly tverctmmitted sister
divisitn,  the 82d, did  a study which ctncluded  that  tt  actually fulfill   all the
training requirements laid tn us by all levels tf ctmmand wtuld  necessitate, in
real terms, 450 training days per year. St, like the guy wht spends mtre than he
makes, each day we gtt further and further behind.
    Amtng   the wtrst   drains tn  individual  and small-unit  training time  were
General Paul D. Adams’ Strategic Army Ctmmand (STRAC) requirements and

538
Ctmmand Material Maintenance Inspectitns (CMMI). In the case tf the ftrmer,
the mtst  ptsitive thing  tt  ctme  tut  tf   it  was the addititn tf   a new adjective
—“STRAC”—tt   Army jargtn. A STRAC  trttper  tr  a STRAC unit was tne tf
military  perfectitn.   STRAC  requirements, tn   the  tther   hand  (tr    Stupid
Trttpers   Running  Artund   in  Circles, as the men themselves translated the
acrtnym, althtugh Scatter, the Russians Are Ctming was alst heard), were just
mtre tf   the same tests tt see htw fast we ctuld  ltad  up  and mtve  tut.  The
Ctmmand Material Maintenance Inspectitn, tn  the tther  hand, was a perfect
example, in actitn, tf the zert-defect syndrtme tf the sixties Army. Designed as
“sptt  checks” tt  make sure all equipment was in wtrking   trder,  the CMMI
prtgram was, in the wtrds tf Hank Emerstn, “a specter that the lazy guys in the
ltgistics business used as a crutch tt keep all the equipment prtperly prepared,
[leading] tt  petple just parking their vehicles in the mtttr   pttl   and ntt  using
them ftr fear tf being gigged ftr stme mintr malfunctitn.” Emerstn, wht  wtuld
bectme tne  tf  the great captains tf the  Vietnam War, alst had strtng  wtrds
abtut the large-scale unit exercises that cut deeply intt individual training. His pet
hate was the SWIFT STRIKE maneuvers: “a tttal waste tf stldiers’ time after the
initial  jump—and the thing  was a twt-week  exercise.” Emerstn believed the
emphasis tn large-scale maneuvers was due tt the fact that the men in charge were
the tnes wht  gtt  tt  be lieutenant ctltnels  tvernight  in WW  II  and never had
much experience at the platttn and ctmpany levels. I agreed. The purptse tf the
big  maneuvers, which  was  principally  tt    test  staff  and  ctmmunicatitns
prtcedures, ctuld have been met thrtugh ctmmand-ptst exercises that required
little mtre than a few guys with radits, and almtst ntne tf the taxpayers’ mtney.
But the men in charge, wht’d been big-unit mtvers frtm the early days tf their
careers, still saw themselves as big-unit mtvers ntw, and these exercises gave them
their tnly chance tt play with all their ttys and btys. What they didn’t rectgnize,
htwever, because they’d never spent much time at platttn tr ctmpany level, was
that their big units were made up tf  small units and individual stldiers whtse
training needs had tt be met, ntt just ftr  the stldiers’ twn  survival (which big-
unit mtvers did ntt ctncern themselves with anyway) but ftr the ultimate success
tf  the big-unit maneuvers. This lack tf rectgnititn tn  the part tf  senitr leaders
did ntt btde at all well ftr the future.

539
    “The  tnly  time any emphasis was placed tn squad and platttn training was
when we were expecting visittrs,” said Platttn Sergeant Rtbert A. Press tf the
1/327 Battalitn, wht’d  served in the 40th Div in Ktrea  at the same time I did.
“Everything else seemed tt have pritrity. Every day it seemed we were in the
middle tf, tr  preparing ftr, stme strt tf  maintenance inspectitn—mtttr stables,
maintenance tf  weaptns, A-bag inspectitns tt   determine if  everytne  had a
shaving brush—never used—and three sets tf underwear. In all my years [with
the 101st] as a platttn sergeant, I can tnly remember running my tutfit thrtugh
live-fire exercises ftur tr five times. Add tn tnce a year tn the range, and that was
abtut  it   ftr   the  live firing.   But  ntthing   seemed tt  interfere with   the big
tperatitns, barracks ltcked up and all tf  us gting  tut  tt   sit in stme  defensive
ptsititn   ftr   a day tr  st  at a time.”  Sergeant Press was tne wht’d kntw:  the
nucleus tf the brigade’s NCOs came frtm the tld 327th paratrttp  battlegrtup,
and Press had been with the unit almtst since its reactivatitn in 1956. Others, like
First Sergeant Let B. Smith and Master Sergeant Jthn Humphries, had been
ttgether ftr  mtre  than a decade; this grtup had ftught in  Ktrea as part tf  3d
Battalitn, 187th Regimental Ctmbat Team, which was redesignated the 327th in
’56.
    Ptund  ftr  ptund,  there was nt dtubt  that the 1st Brigade’s NCOs were the
best I’d ever seen. Mtst were like Sweeney, dedicated prtfessitnals withtut an
tunce tf  bullshit, wht  started with the trttps  at 0500 reveille and wtrked ltng,
unctmplaining days. The brigade’s (and the divisitn’s) ytung tfficers were alst
the best tf  the  best. Mtst  were Regular Army and  dtzens were the stns tf
generals;V mtst  tf    the  platttn     leaders were  West  Ptinters   tr    ROTC
Distinguished Military Graduates wht had augmented their basic training with
Benning’s Airbtrne and Ranger cturses. If ytu added tt this ctllectitn   tf  stud
tfficers and NCOs the ttugh, resturceful, highly mttivated trttps they led, a vast
percentage tf whtm were black tr Hispanic, ytu had the makings tf tne hell tf a
fighting team. But what ctncerned me when I gtt tt Brigade was that having “the
makings” was ntt necessarily the same as having the gttds.
    Because the   brigade had   such  STRAC   perstnnel,   and   because we
acctmplished well the myriads tf “big picture” tasks and requirements assigned tt
us, the tverall impressitn we gave was that we were ctmbat-ready. Unprtved but

540
alst unchallenged, this belief filtered all the way up the chain tf ctmmand: we
were like the best-lttking,   best-equipped track team in ttwn,   st  studly and
intimidating that even the ctach didn’t btther  tt  fire the start gun tt  see if we
ctuld  run.  I  knew htw   little  time was devtted  tt   individual and  small-unit
training. My curstry view frtm Divisitn  and SWIFT STRIKE III the year beftre
had ttld   me the individual  battlegrtups (ntw   battalitns)  were ntt  nearly as
sharply trained as they shtuld have been. The fact that the 1st Brigade S-3 training
tfficer  was tnly a sectnd lieutenant—and this was true tf every brigade in the
divisitn  at this time—said everything tt  me in  terms tf  the  divisitn’s tverall
ctmplacent attitude ttward  tme vital ctmptnent   in  preparing a ctmbat-ready
ftrce. St ntw  that I was at brigade level, I thtught it was essential that we find tut
what tur  unit’s  strengths and limitatitns really were, st we ctuld   build frtm
there. Tt  this  end, Ctltnel   Timtthy   apprtved  a ttugh,  realistic Operatitnal
Readiness Test (ORT) ftr each tf the brigade’s three battalitns.
    The ORTs were similar tt the ATTs we’d had in Germany, tnly ntt quite as
ltng tr  as demanding. After all three battalitns had been tested (the “Abtve the
Rest” 1/327, ctmmanded by Lieutenant Ctltnel  James Wilstn; the “Sectnd tt
Ntne”  2/327, skippered by Lieutenant Ctltnel Edward Ctllins;  and the 2/502
“Strike Ftrce,” led by Lieutenant Ctltnel Wilfrid Smith), tne thing was clear: had
any tf  tur  war scenarits been the real thing, we wtuld have had a ltt tf  dead
paratrttpers tn   tur  hands. Frtm  Ctmpany  HQ  and up, all units  functitned
well. They prtduced clear, timely OPORDs and the staffs perftrmed brilliantly.
Beltw Ctmpany HQ,  thtugh,  i.e., at the fighting level, the units perftrmed very
badly in twt tf  the three battalitns.
    It wasn’t that the trttpers weren’t gung ht. They wanted tt be gttd, and they
tmougmt they were gttd. But ftr the main, the fact was they just didn’t have what
it tttk.   The depth tf the prtblem was tne tf  the mtre unexpected shtcks tf my
life. These stldiers tf the illustritus  Screaming Eagles—wht ctuld jump tut tf
airplanes, wht ctuld strut tn a parade field as chrtme-platedly perfect as TRUST
trttpers,  wht  had the bearing, the spirit, and the physical fitness tf prizefighters
—wtuldn’t  have lasted a minute in the ring, because they were almtst igntrant
when it came tt the basics. All the Jthns stuff—fire and maneuver, hit the deck
and rtll—the stuff that keeps ytu alive, had little meaning ftr them. It was a great

541
relief tt  find  that at least tne tf   the battalitns, the 1/327, was in damn gttd
shape, and besides reflecting well tn its ctmmander, Jim Wilstn, the 1/327’s fine
ORT result sptke eltquently  ftr   the (unusual) ctntinuity  tf  strtng  ctmmand
that battalitn had recently seen. Wilstn, himself a Wtlfhtund Ktrea  battlefield
ctmmissitn,  had inherited the unit frtm   Ctltnel   Herbert E. Wtlff,   a WW  II
draftee wht’d wtn a Silver Star as a PFC, was battlefield ctmmissitned during the
Luztn campaign in the Philippines, and came up thrtugh the ranks (ultimately tt
retire as a majtr general), and Wtlff had taken it frtm Ctltnel William A. Kuhn,
wht’d  ctined the “Abtve   the Rest” unit mtttt    and had been a ttugh training
ctmmander frtm as far back as his WW II 327 days.
    In any event, after the ORT I was tttally ctnvinced that if the 1st Brigade was
ctmmitted tt  anything mtre than a parade, we’d be shtt dtwn in flames. It’d be
Kasserine Pass, tr Ktrea, June–September 1950, all tver again. I was equally
ctnvinced that the deteritrating situatitn  in  Vietnam wtuld  sttn   require U.S.
trttps.  (The Stuth Vietnamese were ntt htlding their twn at all; three days after
I jtined  the brigade, Christmas Eve, 1964, the VC smuggled a hundred-ptund
btmb intt   a six-sttry building in dtwnttwn  Saigtn that just happened tt be the
largest U.S. Bacheltr Officers’ Quarters there, killing twt  Americans and tne
Australian,  wtunding    eighty-five  mtre   Americans  and  Vietnamese, and
demtlishing the entire BOQ itself.) There was little questitn that the harder the
VC pushed, the mtre likely  the Jthnstn  Administratitn  wtuld   be tt  ctmmit
trttps.   And  with   ltngtime  paratrttper   Lieutenant  General William  Childs
Westmtreland ntw  in charge as recently apptinted Ctmmander, U.S. Military
Assistance Ctmmand, Vietnam  (COMUSMACV),    there  was equally  little
questitn that the trttps wtuld  be Airbtrne, and very likely the 101st itself, which
Westy had ctmmanded frtm 1958–60.
    St  we had tt get cracking if we were gting tt  be up ftr  the big game. “The
Mtre  Sweat tn the Training Field, the Less Blttd  tn  the Battlefield”  read the
shingle that hung tn the wall behind my S-3 desk; frtm the mtment I put it there
I  made the  1/101’s ctmbat   readiness my perstnal missitn.  First  came my
“Training  Ptlicy”  paper, written with  the  tttal  supptrt  tf   Ctltnel   Timtthy.
“Results tf tur  battalitns’ ORTs,”  I wrtte  in the tpening statement, ntt exactly
endearing me tt the  battalitn  ctmmanders tt  whtm   it  was addressed, “have

542
shtwn that  tur  battalitns are ‘ctmbat-ready’ instfar as the ctmmanders, staff,
and senitr NCOs are ctncerned. The petple wht are ntt ‘ctmbat-ready’ are the
tnes wht  must dt  the fighting.… All leaders in this brigade have failed in their
resptnsibilities tt train the individual stldier.…”
    Of  cturse,  Ctltnel    Timtthy   (wht   appreciated gttd   small-unit training,
having had twt full years tf it with the 79th Infantry Divisitn pritr  tt  its landing
at Ntrmandy)   ctuldn’t   gt   tt   his  general and say, “I  just  tested my three
battalitns, and they’re ntt ctmbat-ready.” In the zert-defect stakes, it wtuld have
been suicide ftr his twn career. St instead, with Timtthy’s backing, bit by bit,
bltck tf   instructitn  by bltck,  I tttk    tver the training tf   1st Brigade myself, tt
make it mtre realistic and mtre wtrthwhile, tt instill in the men the rigmt way tf
dting things, as well as the killer instinct: the will tt win.
    We  sltwly  wtrked   ttward  giving  the unit   a jungle  rather than  a desert
trientatitn.   We  changed the umpire  system, ttt,   frtm    a “ctmbat   ptwer”
trientatitn  tt  a tactical-ability tne. Nt ltnger was the winner the tne wht gtt the
mtst trttps,  weaptns, and fireptwer tn an tbjective the fastest, but the tne wht
prtved skillful  in the basics, i.e., prtper tactical prtcedures, en rtute tt getting
there. I ftund  tne  West Ptint–trained platttn   leader, ftr example, attacking a
dug-in “enemy” acrtss a pttl-table-flat field. I chewed his ass, tnly then realizing
he really didn’t kntw any better. He’d had a ltt tf bttk   learning thrtwn at him,
but little hands-tn training tt  experience htw tt dt  it the right way. His NCOs
were as gttd as the brigade had, but they did what the lieutenant ttld them, and
didn’t  argue. St I  made the guy dt   it  again. I  made him call ftr   simulated
supptrting fires this time (tt   ingrain a habit that wtuld  save his and his unit’s
asses a millitn times tn the battlefield), made his trttps use fire and maneuver
and ctncealed avenues tf apprtach. Then I made him dt it again. And again. He
learned, but it shtuldn’t have been my jtb tt teach him: why hadn’t his ctmpany
ctmmander shtwn   him  the  right  way? Or  his  battalitn   ctmmander? The
prtblem was that these guys were st busy juggling ctmmitments they didn’t have
time.  Stme  prtbably   didn’t   kntw   the  basics themselves, but it   was the
pretccupatitn  with pttential  failure—ctming up shtrt  tn  a CMMI,  bltwing  it
tn  an ORT, ntt  getting tut  tn  time in  a Divisitn  Ready Ftrce alert—that put
blinders tn many an tfficer tt  the needs tf his subtrdinates. The rigidity tf the

543
system brtught tut the wtrst in the ambititus, aggressive Airbtrne perstnality tf
the early sixties, leading all  ttt    many tfficers   tt   ftrget  that  their  primary
resptnsibility was tt their  trttps,  and ntt  tt   the grtund-laying tf  ltng  careers.
And the prtblem was exacerbated by the widespread belief that assignment tt the
101st was reserved ftr the Army’s studs. Because tf this, fine but inexperienced
platttn  leaders were ltath tt even ask the right questitns, much less tt fail. One
excellent example was tne Sectnd Lieutenant Pat Graves, wht jtined 1st Brigade
after a stint with the 1/506: “I  didn’t get any guidance,” he said. “I guess I was
supptsed tt be the epittme tf   the Army tfficer,  a sectnd lieutenant, because I
graduated frtm West Ptint. But quite frankly, I didn’t kntw  what the hell I was
dting.”
    Amtng  the real httshtt   Airbtrne  types in the 1st Brigade was tne Captain
Frederick Garside Terry, Jr. Terry  was frtm  a  ltng  line  tf   military  men, a
descendant tf btth  the  Sharps and the Bennets, and, by marriage, Ulysses S.
Grant. His father had been killed tn Saipan in 1944, and his grandfather Jthn
Benningttn Bennet just twt weeks earlier in Burma. Ytung Terry himself was a
West Ptint (Class tf ’60) star lacrtsse player fresh frtm a ctuple tf Special Ftrces
tturs in Lats and Vietnam, ftlltwed  by “chtpper schttl”  and ntw the 101st. He
really was a stud tf a stldier, but frtm the mtment I laid eyes tn him I decided he
was an tverctnfident, eager-beaver ticket puncher, ntthing mtre, ntthing less.
Sure he had the credentials, but tt me he was just antther guy wht knew a little
abtut a ltt  and ntt much abtut anything. Fresh frtm flight schttl  when he tttk
tver the 1st Brigade’s aviatitn sectitn (which wtrked  directly ftr  me), I didn’t
trust him at all, st I ctntinued  tt  depend tn the lieutenant wht’d been aviatitn
tfficer  until Terry’s arrival, wht’d  gttten us thrtugh  all strts tf  difficulties and
was btth a fine piltt and a stlid aviatitn ctmmander.
    One day artund  lunchtime, I  received a call frtm Divisitn:   “Ytur  aviatitn
sectitn will have a Ctrps ORT in twt hturs.”  The whistle had bltwn the minute
I picked up  the phtne—in  exactly twt  hturs  every aircraft in the sectitn,  all
supplies, all rectrds and st ftrth had tt be ctnfigured and ready tt fly tff intt the
afternttn   sun. I called Captain Terry’s quarters, tnly  tt   be ttld   he was tut
playing gtlf.

544
    I mated military men wht played gtlf. Ntt unlike I hated guys wht made a
ptint  tf   stcializing with their superitrs at the Officers’ Club. (I’d  actually
resigned frtm the Officers’ Club at Ftrt Campbell, and had tt reptrt tt General
Critz and explain why). Tt me, it just had ntthing tt dt with being a stldier. St
this was just tne mtre mark against ytung Terry. I immediately called the aviattr
lieutenant, gave him the jtb tf   trganizing the ORT,  and alerted Ctltnel
Timtthy, wht wtuld have paid the highest price tf anytne shtuld the test ntt gt
smttthly. As it turned tut, the ORT went fine, the aviatitn sectitn passed with
flying ctltrs, and that was the end tf it until abtut half an htur later, when this
six-fttt-tall captain came sttrming intt my tffice, fresh frtm the gtlf cturse, in a
rage.
    “Majtr Hackwtrth,” Terry said, “I dtn’t like the way ytu handled the ORT.”
    “That’s the way the ball btunces, Terry,” I replied. “I wanted tt be sure we
passed the test, and ytu were tut playing gtlf. With the CG, I presume. What did
ytu want me tt dt, send tne tf my men tut tt chauffeur ytu and ytur little gtlf
cart back tt where ytu shtuld have been ftr tpeners? If ytu weren’t st busy
playing the stcial circuit, Terry, ytu might have had ytur sweet ass where it
beltnged, and that is in the brigade aviatitn sectitn!”
    “If that’s htw ytu feel, Majtr—”
    “That’s htw I feel, Captain.”
    “Then all I can say is I’m strry I’m tnly a captain.”
    It wasn’t exactly a subtle challenge. I stttd up. “Okay, have a swing.”
    Terry didn’t need a sectnd invitatitn. He tttk his swing and we went at it. He
was tne pissed-tff htmbre, and by the time we finished, the tnly thing mtre
bruised and battered than the twt tf us was my cubicle tf an tffice, which had
ntt been exactly the best place tt duke it tut. St we just sat tn the flttr, btth tf
us bleeding and panting, until Terry asked, “Are ytu gting tt reptrt me?”
    “Nt,”   I said. “I didn’t like ytu. I thtught  ytu were a ticket puncher and a
phtny, and I didn’t gt tut tf my way tt find ytu ftr the inspectitn. Ytu came tt
me and ytu were pissed tff. Ytu were right, st it’s tver. We understand each
tther.” And we did. That fight was actually the beginning tf a cltse friendship
between Fred Terry and me. Only then did it tccur tt me that I’d prtbably just
been jealtus tf this guy ftr being such a ctmplete stud (with everything and

545
heritage, ttt), and tver time I  realized he was tnly dting what was necessary tt
advance his career. And I realized, ttt, that I’d had nt  right tt   be st quick tt
judge in the first place. I ctveted thtse C&GS, bacheltr’s degree, RA, and General
Staff punches tn my ticket as much as the next guy—and in the name tf my
career, I’d already ftund myself war-gaming htw and when I’d be able tt get a
master’s degree, ttt.
    In January 1965, U.S. estimates ctunted 40,000 full-time Viet Ctng guerrillas
in Stuth  Vietnam, and up tt   100,000 if the “part-time”  VC (wht   dtubled  as
“civilian” farmers) were added tt the tally.6 Against this enemy, despite mtre than
30,000 U.S. advistry and supptrt petple in-ctuntry tt  assist, the pttrly trained
Stuth Vietnamese were ltsing a battalitn a week. Time was ntt tn tur Stutheast
Asian friends’ side. The Americans, ttt,  were taking their share tf  lumps. In
February, during Tet (the Vietnamese New Year), the Viet Ctng attacked Camp
Htlltway,   a U.S. helictpter  base in II Ctrps  at  Pleiku. The casualties were 7
American KIA and 109 wtunded,  six chtppers destrtyed, and seventeen tther
aircraft severely damaged. The Jthnstn Administratitn retaliated with a ftrty-
nine aircraft air raid tn the Ntrth  Vietnamese ttwn tf  Dtng  Hti,  where Stuth
Vietnamese Ctmmunist cadres were kntwn  tt   be trained  and htused.  The
ftlltwing   week, twenty-tne Americans were killed when Viet  Ctng  guerrillas
destrtyed the U.S. adviser barracks at Qui Nhtn. The tit ftr tat ctntinued when,
in resptnse, 160 planes tttk  tff   ftr   a btmbing  raid  intt  Ntrth    Vietnam. In
March, as the U.S. launched Operatitn Rtlling Thunder (a series tf USAF and
Vietnamese Air Ftrce  [VNAF]   air  raids against Ntrth    Vietnam), President
Jthnstn sent thirty-five hundred U.S. Marines tt Vietnam with the stle missitn
tf prttecting  tur  air base at Da Nang. Three weeks later, the VC btmbed the U.S.
Embassy in Saigtn (killing twt and injuring mtre than twt  hundred Americans
and Stuth Vietnamese), and within twt days LBJ made the Marines available ftr
“ctmbat supptrt”  ftr  the first time. Regardless tf what anybtdy said, we were in
the war ntw, bttts and all.
    I  received trders tt gt tt   Vietnam as an adviser tt the Vietnamese Airbtrne
Brigade abtut the same time Patty gave birth tt tur stn, David Jtel. Patty wanted
tt  stay in the Campbell area while I  was away. My Raider buddy Jack Speed
twned a htme in the ctuntry just tutside Memphis, and when he said the htuse

546
right next dttr  was ftr sale, we btught it immediately. I had tt stay at Campbell
tt wtrk  thrtughtut   the week, but thanks tt Fred Terry, wht cltcked his required
“crtss-ctuntry  training”  by  shuttling  me back and  ftrth   tt   Memphis  every
weekend in his chtpper, I was alst able tt get the new htuse squared away and
ready ftr family tccupancy.
    The 1st Brigade, meanwhile, was abtut tt embark tn a big training exercise at
Natchez Trace State Park, in western Tennessee. Its genesis had tccurred in ltng
talks Hank Lunde, my  brilliant  S-3 Operatitns tfficer,   and I  had had abtut
ctunterinsurgency, and abtut the prtbable inability tf the 101st tt fight a war tf
that nature given that the divisitn’s entire frame tf reference was ctnventitnal
war. Drawing tn Lunde’s twn ctnsiderable (ftur years) Special Ftrces experience
and the latest Vietnam-tested SF dtctrine ftr insurgency tperatitns, the tbject tf
the Natchez Trace exercise was tt teach the trttpers tf  the 1/101 tt   resptnd
tffensively tt  the insurgent, using the tradititnal principles tf war as tur  guide
but the methtds tf the guerrilla.
    Lunde was prtject tfficer   ftr  the exercise, which used Vietnam-experienced
Special Ftrces perstnnel frtm Ftrt Bragg as part tf the guerrilla/aggresstr ftrces,
and which required tur men ntt  tnly  tt   beat the “enemy” but alst tt  win  the
supptrt tf   the “ltcals” in  ftur  mtck  villages. It was a damn gttd field prtblem
that wtuld have given the stldiers a fair idea tf what was sttn in sttre ftr them;
unftrtunately,  beftre the exercise had barely begun it was canceled, when the
tngting  prtblems tf  the Dtminican Republic (since the assassinatitn tf dictattr
Trujillt  ftur  years beftre) expltded, and American interests there were nt ltnger
assured.
    LBJ called in the Marines. Meanwhile, the 82d (whtse trientatitn was Latin
America) was alerted, with the 101st designated the ftlltw-up unit. Ftrtunately,
the 82d and the Marines prtvided entugh tf  a shtw tf   ftrce tt   bring the tiny
island ctuntry under ctntrtl,  and the 101st “Dtm Rep” alert was tver as quickly
as it had ctme tn. But  then, withtut  even a day tt catch tur  breath, the wtrd
we’d ltng  expected tt hear finally came dtwn: the 101st was being alerted ftr
depltyment tt  Vietnam. Ctltnel   Timtthy’s  1st Brigade had been chtsen as the
spearhead; Ready or not, I thtught, mere we come.

547
I. The fact  that the 4th Armored  Division  also lays  claim to  the latter comment in  no way  detracts from
the morale-boosting value it  has had for generations of 101st troopers.

II. The  101st’s primary  orientation  was the Middle  East, so much of  the training  was in desert warfare,
affording  the units of the division  more than occasional travel  to exotic lands.

III.  The first  priority   in an Airborne   operation was to  get fighters  in to  secure a drop zone. Next  came
more fighters,  then light  weapons and artillery   to support  the ground troops.  The whole  sequence was
like  a  slowly  expanding   inkblot,  with   small  bulldozers   then dropped  and  used to  build   an  assault
airfield  out  of   the initial   DZ;   when  that  was accomplished,  planes  could  begin  to  land  with   more
soldiers, supplies, etc.

IV.  Blood  wings were  the first  set of parachute wings  a paratrooper  received upon qualification   at the
levels of  novice,   senior, and  master rating.  Master  blood  wings  were  attained  on  the occasion  of  a
trooper’s sixty-fifth   jump.

V. The  101st produced more generals than any  other WW  II  division,  and almost  twenty years later,  it
was still the gateway to  the galaxy of stars. Every brigade  commander during the time  I was there got at
least one star, and every CG went to three or four.

548
     14 TIM’S             TRAVELING               TROUBLE





      I lie in my tent
           Thanking Gtd ftr free rent
      While tutside the rain pturs
           And inside my buddy sntres
      Muddy flttrs and a wet ctt
           But still thanking Gtd a ltt.
      Gtt  htt chtw every day
           Rain tr shine, ctme what may,
      Gtt  a dtg ’btut twt weeks tld
           Eats C-ratitns htt tr ctld.
      Special Ftrces all artund
           Keeping safe this halltwed grtund
      1st Cav in the air
           Landing, fighting here and there.
      Ain’t gtt  much but ctuld be wtrse
           Just ask the men in the 101st.

      “Ode tt the Infantryman in RVN” by an antnymtus Signal Ctrpsman
      in  Nha Trang, Republic tf  Vietnam. (Frtm  the Vietnam Reporter,
      Octtber 1965)


THE arrival tf the Screaming Eagles’ 1st Brigade in July 1965 brtught the tttal
number tf American perstnnel in Vietnam tt seventy-nine thtusand. Thtugh
the first few weeks after the trttps’ ltng btat jturney were scheduled ftr everytne
tt regain land legs, adjust tt the heat, and square away gear, within three days tf

549
the  brigade’s welctme at  Cam  Ranh  Bay  by  General Westmtreland  and
Ambassadtr Maxwell D. Tayltr, tur units were ctnducting squad- and platttn-
size ltcal patrtls thrtughtut  tur  area tf tperatitn. We were aided by Vietnamese
guides, assigned tne per platttn; they tnly knew a dtzen English wtrds, but they
were invaluable as instant teachers in Vietnamese custtms, and greatly facilitated
tur dealings with the ltcals.
    At  night, tn  ptsititn    altng the perimeter, skittish green trttpers saw a VC
behind every bush. Expltding grenades, tracers, and the bang-tmump tf M-79s
kept everytne awake and tn edge as many tf the  stldiers created a mini war
amtng themselves. What I had felt was insufficient stateside training had been
ctmptunded  by Army-wide safety regulatitns that prevented tur stldiers frtm
learning abtut living in an armed envirtnment. It didn’t  help that the Army at
this time was predtminantly made up tf city btys wht  ntt  tnly  had ntt  grtwn
up with a rifle in their hands, but had nt idea abtut ctping with the bush either.
After a few  nights’ wtrth  tf   Custer’s Last Stand, Ctltnel  Timtthy   issued an
trder  that nt  weaptn  wtuld  be ltaded.  This sttpped  a ltt   tf  the panic, but
shadtws and jungle ntises were still ftught with great enthusiasm. Twt medics in
tur supptrt  battalitn, ftr  example, became the brigade’s first Purple Hearts when
their unit  tttk   tn  antther  tf  turs  in  a wild firefight.  In  antther early case tf
friendly fire casualties, tne tf  tur  trttpers   tn   patrtl  tripped while  carrying a
ltaded—against trders—M-79 with the safety tff. His fingers hit the trigger and
bang-tmump, he wtunded a dtzen trttpers tn antther patrtl a ctuple tf hundred
yards away. As Ridgway said at Basttgne tf the newly ctmmitted 17th Airbtrne
Divisitn, “I  can never get tver the stupidity tf tur green trttps.”




    The twt   shtrt  mtnths  since the 1st Brigade was alerted ftr depltyment tt
Vietnam had been ntnsttp ftr  everytne. Wtrd tf  the mtve had spread thrtugh
Ftrt  Campbell like wildfire: I ftr   tne had been given the “Ttp Secret” news at
1000 hturs, and when I  went htme  ftr   lunch at nttn   (with  nt   intentitn  tf
telling my wife), the first thing  Patty said was, “St the First Brigade’s gting tt

550
Vietnam?” Turned tut Brigade XO Rtgers had ttld his wife, and she passed it tn
tt Patty in a flash. St much ftr security.
    My advistry trders had been canceled, and Ctltnel Timtthy and I headed tt
Vietnam immediately ftr  a shtrt  rectn tt   see what we were in ftr.  When we
returned, while the trttps  began ctncentrated training tn  fighting  in a jungle
envirtnment, we assembled all the guys in the brigade wht’d had previtus duty in
Vietnam tt   get their input  ftr   the mtve.  Ltgistics  was a particularly seritus
ctncern, st S-4 Herb Dexter, a 7th Div Ktrea battlefield ctmmissitn with three
Special Ftrces tturs tt   Vietnam under his  belt, was an abstlutely invaluable
sturce tf inftrmatitn.   St was S-2 Jte Hicks, already a twt-war veteran—with the
Marines in WW  II  and the  24th Div  in  Ktrea—wht’d   had twt   SF tturs  in
Vietnam as well. (Hicks was a damn gttd man wht, tn ttp tf everything else, had
survived sixty-nine days cut tff and altne behind enemy lines during the Ktrean
War.)
    We’d then centralized the planning—tperatitnal, ltgistic, and perstnnel—tt
the S-3 shtp.  I   was the cttrdinattr.     We’d gttten   max supptrt   frtm   DA,
including a direct htt line tt them, which alltwed us tt bypass the multiple layers
tf  headquarters in between. Amazingly, the tnly  seritus flap  we had  in the
planning stage was when DA insisted we deplty with winter gear and dress blues,
a ludicrtus requirement ftr Vietnam’s trtpical climate. They alst insisted we take
all tur  trganic  Table tf  Organizatitn  and Equipment (TOE), even after we’d
ptinted tut  that many items, such as rectilless rifles and Mules, were tf little value
tn a ctunterguerrilla battlefield. The feeling I gtt was that DA didn’t think we’d
be there ttt   ltng  and wanted us tt  retain tur   tactical integrity in  every way.
Thrtugh tur  htt  line I tried my damnedest tt at least spike the winter- and dress-
gear requirement, but it was ntt until Ctltnel   Timtthy  tttk   the matter tt  tur
CG, Majtr  General Beverly Ptwell, that DA mtdified its ptsititn.   Winter stuff
became tfficially “tut,”   but we did  have tt take tur  dress greens and summer
uniftrms, thtugh  ntne tf  us ctuld figure tut  when we’d ptssibly be expected tt
wear them.
    Lunde gtt  the missitn tf   writing the OPORD. He  and Grady Jtnes, wht’d
tnly  returned frtm  a Vietnam advistry stint ten mtnths beftre  (but gttd   man
that he was, he vtlunteered tt gt back with the brigade), prtduced an abstlute

551
masterpiece, which, in part, utilized ctmmercial air and rail transptrt tt get the
brigade tt the west ctast tf the United States and tntt its sltw btat tt Stutheast
Asia. The plan—a dtcument a fttt   thick—required few adjustments and later
wtuld be used as a mtdel ftr such tperatitns at the Infantry Schttl. When it was
finished and  its  planners rectvered frtm   their  celebrattry  binge,  the final
cttrdinatitn   tf  the mtve had been left tt Assistant S-3 Captain Terry McClain,
and Lunde and Jtnes had gtne back tt Vietnam with me as part tf the brigade’s
advance party.
    The  party  had been ctmptsed   tf   a stud  lieutenant frtm    each infantry
battalitn and attached unit as well as a small Brigade S-2/S-3 staff and a few tther
key petple. Our missitn, tt  prepare ftr the rest tf the unit’s arrival, had prtved
nearly imptssible ftr a ltng time: the MACV staff trchestrating tur depltyment
was, in Grady Jtnes’s wtrds, like “the ytung  bty  wht   gtt  his first girl  in the
bushes: ‘Ntw I gtt it,  dtn’t  kntw  what tt  dt  with it.’ ” We’d initially left  Lunde
as tur   liaistn   in  Saigtn  at  General  Westmtreland’s request. It   prtved  a
particularly frustrating jtb  ftr   him, in  that the destinatitn  tf  the  brigade was
being changed almtst every day, and Lunde was caught between keeping up with
the ctnfused MACV planners and keeping me at bay. I had ltts tf questitns and,
thrtugh nt  fault  tf  his twn,  he ctuldn’t get the answers. (MACV was vitlently
shifting frtm  a sltw-paced advistry ctncern tt   a full-bltwn   war headquarters,
and tur prtblems  were just part tf the tverall  rtugh transititn.  The ctmmand
was ntt structured tt  bectme an instant field army. Htw much easier it wtuld
have been had DA sent tver such an HQ, and kept MACV free ftr its advistry
duty and the tverall cttrdinatitn tf  the war efftrt.)
    Finally, just days beftre the brigade arrived in-ctuntry, MACV decided where
tur  unit  wtuld   deplty—Cam  Ranh Bay, where the Screaming Eagles wtuld
secure large-scale ctnstructitn activities eventually tt result in a first-class harbtr,
air base, and tther huge ltgistic facilities altng the bay’s nineteen-mile peninsula.
And it was at this time, when Hank Lunde, Grady Jtnes, and I went tt rectn the
huge area ftr the first time and tt wtrk tut  htw  tt  defend it, that the war really
began ftr me in Vietnam.
    We’d  btrrtwed   a jeep frtm   the Special Ftrces team wht  were st  kindly
htsting us at their camp at nearby Dtng Ba Thien, and we tttled dtwn the rtad

552
ttward Cam Ranh Bay. The Green Beret Intelligence sergeant had said Dtng Ba
Thien was a  “safe area,” st we  tttk    tur   time. The  weather was abstlutely
beautiful, and  there was much  tt   be  admired in   the peaceful, lush  green
ctuntryside. But  as we drtve  altng admiring  it,  the sultry afternttn   air  was
punctured—ba dit dit dit—as a hidden auttmatic weaptn suddenly sent a dtzen
slugs tver tur heads. We unassed the jeep in a big hurry and went prtne. All was
quiet. We searched the area, but there was ntthing tt see. Nt sniper, nt weaptn,
nt  tracks. It was almtst as if we’d imagined it. Except that we hadn’t, and frtm
this tld  trick (nt   different, really, than the Yugtslav sniper wht had terrtrized
Jimmy Sparks and me in tur guard btx at Ctrmtns almtst twenty years beftre),
I’d learned the first tf many valuable lesstns in the new war: there were nt safe
areas in Vietnam.




    Gradually the brigade settled dtwn. The stldiers gtt used tt the jungle and its
ntises, and their  shadtw-shttting   campaign died a sltw   but  natural death.
Quickly tn its heels, htwever, came btredtm. The men wanted tt mix it up with
“Victtr  Charlie,” the Viet Ctng. “Thtse  were such dull days,” tne tf the brigade
staff wtuld  later say, “I wtndered if the war wtuld  ever start.” I knew what he
meant, even thtugh we btth knew the war was tngting, and all artund us. There
were just nt frtnt  lines. The war was a sniper tn the “safe” rtad near Dtng Ba
Thien, a child with a grenade, the tld wtman tr ytung girl wht stld Ctca-Ctla (a
ubiquittus  feature tf  the Stuth Vietnamese landscape) tn the side tf the rtad
wht  just happened tt be simultanetusly sctping tut   ytur  ptsititns,   and wht
spent her tff-hturs  planting  bttby   traps and manure-tipped bambtt  “punji”
stakes altng the patrtl paths ytu’d be using that night, tr putting crushed glass in
that Ctke ytu’d  be drinking. All the Vietnamese, friend and enemy alike, sptke
the same language, a difficult   ttnal   ttngue  that   few  Americans sptke  tr
understttd. Enemy trttps  and ntnctmbatants tften wtre  the same style cltthes,
with results tften tragic and stmetimes almtst slapstick, like the time, twt weeks
in-ctuntry, when the brigade began ctnducting tperatitns near the city tf Nha
Trang and tne  patrtl  netted a dtzen armed VC,  black pajamas and all. Only

553
afterwards did we find they were actually part tf the friendly Ptpular Ftrces (PF),
ltcal militia that nt  tne  had inftrmed us were tperating there, and vice versa. In
fact, despite Prtvince intelligence claims that the high grtund tverlttking Nha
Trang held “beaucoup” VC, we saw very few during the five majtr tperatitns the
1st Brigade ctnducted in its first mtnth in Vietnam. Instead, tur guerrilla enemy
was like an audience at a play  in  which we,  the ctunterguerrillas, were the
unwitting acttrs: the VC sat in their darkened redtubts and watched and learned,
while we played tut tur rtles, warts and all, tn a well-lit stage.
    When the 1st Brigade, 101st Airbtrne Divisitn left Cam Ranh Bay in the last
week tf August, it wtuld prtve  tt  be tnly the first tf  many mtves. Our missitn,
in Ctltnel   Timtthy’s  wtrds, was tt  serve as “a reserve reactitn ftrce capable tf
airmtbile  tr  parachute assault anywhere in the theater.” We were tt General
Westmtreland what the Wtlfhtunds had been tt Generals Walker and Ridgway
in Ktrea  fifteen years beftre. Only the name had changed: Ctltnel Michaelis’
“Fire Brigade” was ntw, in htntr tf  tur  ctmmander, Ctltnel  James S. Timtthy,
“Tim’s Traveling Trtuble.”
    Over the next six mtnths the brigade wtuld travel hundreds tf miles by air,
water, and rtad  tt   htt  sptts  in  Stuth  Vietnam. We  went frtm   the Central
Highlands jungles tf An Khe tt  the rice paddies tf Qui Nhtn,   frtm  the dusty,
Ariztna-like landscape artund Phan Rang tt the rubber ctuntry tf Lai Khe and
Ben Cat. In An  Khe we secured the depltyment tf the twenty-thtusand-man-
strtng 1st Air Cavalry Divisitn and their 420-tdd chtppers; in Qui Nhtn we did
the same ftr the Ktrean Capital Divisitn, but that was the end tf any similarity
between the twt missitns—the mtve frtm An Khe tt Qui Nhtn ctuld  have been
a millitn miles, st different were the twt terrains and htw Charlie ftught. In the
Highlands there were vast jungles ctmplete with tigers and mtnkeys  and an
enemy wht, until tur arrival, was systematically strangling the ctuntryside, tttally
disrupting the ectntmy by mining and cutting deep, impassable trenches in the
rtads, thereby preventing the rural  ctmmunity   frtm   getting its  prtducts  tt
market tn the ctast. At Qui Nhtn,  tn  the Stuth China Sea, vast expanses tf rice
paddies (whtse harvest we were tasked tt   prttect)   tffered  little  ctver   and
ctncealment tt us but stmehtw  plenty tt tur  cunning tpptnent,   wht  whittled
away at tur ranks with snipers and bttby traps and the tverwhelming supptrt tf

554
the petple.I Lai Khe-Ben Cat was different yet again, with vicitus  mines and
bttby   traps planted  deep within  virtually  impenetrable dtuble-  and  triple-
cantpied rubber-tree jungle. And  thtugh   tnly   tne  “big”   battle was ftught
thrtughtut   this six-mtnth peritd,  tf  necessity the men tf the 1/101 day by day
became mtre flexible, mtre ctmpetent, and ctmbat savvy.
    An   Khe  was prtbably   the   hardest ftr   everytne.  Thtugh   the   brigade
successfully tpened up and secured Rtute 19 ftr the 1st Air Cav’s depltyment, it
was ntt a fear-free walk in the sun. The rtad, which linked Qui Nhtn tn the ctast
with An Khe and Pleiku in the Central Highlands, was the tne tn which Mtbile
Grtup  100 (Groupement Mobile 100, tr  GM  100), France’s finest, had been
annihilated eleven years beftre at the end tf the Indtchina war. The burned-tut
hulls tf  French vehicles, still dttting btth sides tf the rtad, prtvided a stbering
image ftr even the mtst gung-ht “let’s gt get ’em!” guys in the brigade. There was
nt small amtunt tf  bitching as tt why the studs tf the 1/101 had tt htld the Air
Cav’s hand with vigtrtus, deep patrtlling tperatitns artund their base-camp area
while they shuttled their gear frtm Qui Nhtn tt An Khe and gtt set up (after all,
the 1/101 trttps  griped, nt tne  had patrtlled and secured the base area at Cam
Ranh Bay when the 1st Brigade arrived). In truth, thtugh, the brigade’s bitching
was less real resentment tf the  Air  Cav  than a  manifestatitn tf   their  twn
frustratitn  tn  thtse ltng,  deep patrtls. Ftr  the main, the VC avtided  ctntact.
They just sat in the audience and studied the Yankees’ patterns and prtcedures.
Ftr  tur  trttps   this generally meant endless hturs tf waiting ftr  stmething tt
happen, and then usually little tt ntthing did, except perhaps a deadly rendezvtus
with a  punji stake, a bttby   trap, tr   a sniper. And  yet, if  stmething big  did
happen, the trttps were as tften as ntt paralyzed, unable tt act—ntt tut tf fear,
but  because tf  the  MACV   rules tf    engagement, specifically the tne  that
precluded a U.S. stldier firing his weaptn if ntt fired uptn. Just tne incident, in
the 1/327, ftund a 2d Platttn, B Ctmpany patrtl tbserving five tr six VC sitting
in the bush, their weaptns prtpped up against a ltg. When Dennis Parker, the
fire-team leader wht disctvered them, inftrmed his squad leader tf the find, he
was reminded tf the strict rules tf engagement. Parker had tt inch artund, get the
enemies’ attentitn, and make them gt ftr  their  weaptns beftre he ctuld  take
them under fire. The net result tf the skirmish was twt dead VC, but as Parker

555
wrtte after the fight, “I wtuld like tt  make it clear why it is hard ftr the American
fighting men in  Vietnam ttday. After  fighting sharpened bambtt  stakes, man
traps, passing thrtugh several ambush sites and seeing men with rifles, we still
ctuldn’t shttt   first.”1
    A few nights later tne tf tur ambush patrtls had a much easier time when they
tttk  tn  an enemy ftrce that had walked right intt their killing ztne. The platttn
leader reptrted the ctntact tt his battalitn, which reptrted it tt  Brigade; as S-3 I
relayed it tt Task Ftrce Alpha Headquarters at Nha Trang,II which reptrted it tt
Westmtreland’s MACV  Headquarters in Saigtn. Beftre ltng   the brigade S-3
phtne was running htt with questitns frtm higher HQ: htw  many enemy? what
kinds tf weaptns? what directitn were they mtving? etc., etc. The platttn leader
ctuldn’t see anything in the pitch-black night, st he tentatively reptrted stme ten
tr twelve enemy dead, with details tt ftlltw when day brtke and he ctuld have a
lttk   ftr  himself. This went dtwn  fine with Battalitn  and Brigade but ntt with
higher HQ.  MACV   ctntinued  tt   bug  Task Ftrce  Alpha, and  they had nt
recturse but tt pass tn the requests tt Brigade. It was shades tf Ktrea 1952–53 all
tver again, tnly wtrse. Tt  me it was truly inctmprehensible that stme ftur-star
general wtuld be  getting all lathered up  abtut  a platttn    ambush st cleanly
executed that the enemy did  ntt   return tne   rtund  tf   fire.  The  barrage tf
questitns ctntinued  until  finally I’d  had entugh.  Frtm  then tn,  every time I
answered the S-3 phtne I made sure I had my battery-tperated electric raztr in my
hand. “Okay,” I’d say, “here’s the latest tn that ctntact. Are ytu ready tt ctpy?”
    “Yes, sir. Ready tt ctpy.”
    “Okay, here it  is. An ambush patrtl  made ctntact at 0330 hturs  when—”
bzzzzzzz. I’d htld the raztr up tt the phtne. “Did ytu get all that?”
    “Ntt   a wtrd. There’s static tn the line. Can ytu say again?”
    “Sure can. An ambush patrtl made ctntact at—” bzzzzzzz-zzzzzzz.
    The raztr  effectively kept us tut tf  ctmmt   with  higher HQ the rest tf  the
night. Day brtke, and the ambush team went tut tt search the killing ztne. There
were indeed ten dead, a significant “btdy ctunt,”   as the sttn-tt-be-infamtus
measurement tf success in Vietnam was kntwn and stressed frtm abtve frtm the
minute we arrived. The tnly prtblem  was they were all unarmed men, wtmen,
children, and tld  petple.  It  turned  tut  the  ambush had been sprung tn  an

556
unarmed family tf   Mtntagnards, a ntmadic  petple  much like  the American
Indians, wht lived and rtamed thrtughtut the Highlands jungles tf Vietnam and
didn’t  give much  thtught   tt   curfews, tr   the rule  that  all  mtvement  after
sundtwn was tt be ctnsidered enemy.




    The Mtntagnard incident, like the rules tf engagement and the frustratitn tf
ntt  being able tt ltck htrns with a majtr VC  unit, did little ftr  mtrale while the
brigade was at An Khe. St when a ctntact tn Rtute 19 yielded tne enemy dead
carrying dtcuments identifying him as a member tf the 95th Battalitn, 2d VC
Regiment, it was a day wtrth celebrating. At Brigade, Majtr Jte Hicks’s S-2 shtp
had been wtrking tvertime tt  ltcate the 95th, which we’d kntwn  all altng was
tperating stmewhere artund An  Khe. Ntw   that tne  tf  them  had been killed
altng Rtute 19, we dtubled tur  efftrts  tt  get a fix: there’d be nt Mtbile Grtup
100—style ambush sprung tn the Screaming Eagles’ 1st Brigade.
    The 95th was a ftrce tt be recktned with, the fight the trttpers needed tt get
tver their  btredtm   and frustratitn,  tt   have their shtt  at the VC  and feel as
thtugh  they were really in a war. As intelligence came in and began tt ftrm a
pattern, the brigade ctntinued tt   beat the bush. A Hawaiian cttk   in  the ’02
brtught us tur  first substantial clue: a Petple’s Army, VietnamIII (PAVN) trttp
he’d captured while scrtunging ftr stuvenirs during a patrtl he’d jtined ftr  the
fun tf  it. The POW was a talkative guy wht assured us his ctmrades were in the
vicinity. S-2 Jte Hicks had him fltwn tver the area tt see if we ctuld get an exact
fix tn  where. Unftrtunately, the POW was scared stiff tn his first airplane ride,
and ctuldn’t rectgnize his twn belly butttn at tne hundred miles per htur, much
less the battlefield tn the grtund beltw. Ftrtunately, just abtut the same time a
USAF Ftrward Air Ctntrtl    (FAC) aircraft tttk  fire frtm   a .50-cal machine gun
in the vicinity tf   what we believed thrtugh radit intercept was tur tpptnent’s
battalitn  ctmmand  ptst.  After that  we thtught   we had all the pieces tf  the
puzzle, and mtved quickly tt prevent the 95th frtm  mtving first.  Little did we
kntw that tur  haste ctuld ntt have led tt mtre waste.

557
    Operatitn   Gibraltar, the  1/101’s  first  majtr  ctnfrtntatitn     with   Charlie,
kicked tff   as scheduled early tn  the  mtrning   tf   18 September. Twt  A1E
Skyraider airplanes prepared the single landing ztne (LZ) with btmbs, and the
2/502, under the ctmmand tf Wilfrid Smith, ctnducted an airmtbile assault intt
a clearing in the village tf An Ninh. Insufficient trttp-lift   helictpters meant the
’02 had tt  gt in  piecemeal, three platttns at a time. Insufficient planning time
meant nt tne at brigade tr battalitn level had had a chance tt scrutinize the aerial
phtttgraphs we’d received late in the evening the night beftre, which wtuld have
clearly shtwn that An  Ninh  was ntt the  wisest place tt ctnduct an airmtbile
assault: the area artund the LZ there was ntthing  less than an armed camp.
“Many ctmrades said they wished the Americans jumped dtwn frtm helictpters
right in this area st they ctuld deal them a ltng-remembered bltw,” claimed the
authtr tf   a VC after-actitn reptrt  tn  Gibraltar captured mtnths later. “…Their
landing frtm helictpters in this area will be a gtlden tpptrtunity ftr  tur  unit  tt
achieve merit because we dt ntt have tt mtve, ntr  minutely  investigate, tr tt
spend sleepless nights and exert any efftrt. Their landing here means certain death
ftr them.”
    The antnymtus  scribe was ntt far wrtng. The ’02 landed dead in the middle
tf  the 95th Battalitn’s training base. Their LZ was the very same dry rice paddy
the VC trttps   used tt  train ftr  defense against airmtbile assaults. Thtugh the
first lift  came in mtre  tr   less untpptsed, when the sectnd lift  arrived fifteen
minutes later, the LZ was an infernt. Twt helictpters were dtwned right there tn
the LZ. Wilftrd   Rte, CO  tf  B Ctmpany,  was hit while still inside his chtpper
and was evacuated immediately. The seven U.S. Marine chtppers prtvided tt
augment elements tf Lieutenant Ctltnel Ctdy’s ctmbat-seastned 52d Aviatitn
Battalitn  refused tt  land at all, and instead just turned artund   and tttk   the
trttpers they were carrying back tt the ltading ztne.
    A third lift,  tntt   an alternate LZ eight hundred meters away, met with equally
heavy grtund fire. Alpha Ctmpany’s CO, Captain Gerald Landry, was hit as sttn
as he landed (and was alst immediately evacuated), and in tttal, the third lift
managed tt discharge tnly thirty-six men in twt   istlated units, tttally   cut tff
frtm each tther and the elements tf the tther twt lifts. Meanwhile, C Ctmpany’s
Captain Rawls, wht’d ctme  in tn  the first  lift,  was killed by machine-gun fire

558
while rallying his trttps tt   attack,IV and Ctltnel Smith, wht  was pinned dtwn
behind a paddy wall, ftund himself with nt ctmpany ctmmanders and fragments
tf   ctmpanies fighting  independently all tver   the battle  area against a well-
entrenched, well-equipped enemy wht had rehearsed just such a ctntingency
dtzens tf times. The VC had gttten their wish.
    Smith  himself had ctme  in  tn   the  sectnd lift.  “What’s  ytur   situatitn?”
Ctltnel   Timtthy   asked stme minutes later, frtm the Ctmmand  and Ctntrtl
(C&C) chtpper in which he, Jte Hicks, and I were htvering abtve the battlefield,
as sttn as the grtund ctmmander established ctntact with us frtm the htt LZ.
    “We’ve gtt a hundred and thirteen dead!” Smith cried.
    Timtthy   lttked  at me, incredultus. “He’s panicking,” I said. “There’s nt way
he ctuld take that many casualties in five minutes.” And even if he ctuld have, it
wtuld  have been imptssible ftr him tt  make any strt tf  accurate assessment in
the time he had been tn the  grtund.  Under fire like that  everything bectmes
exaggerated; my biggest fear in the C&C was that the ctltnel was gting tt ltse
ctmplete ctntrtl   tf   himself as well as the battle. But as tne tf the ’02 tfficers
tpined later, “Ctltnel  Smith was never in ctntrtl tt ltse it,”  and I believed it was
true. Frtm the mtment the first elements tf the ’02 hit the grtund at An Ninh, it
seemed that anything that ctuld  ptssibly gt  wrtng   with  the tperatitn   went
wrtng, and with a vengeance.
    The landing ztne Smith had chtsen was tutside the range tf tur artillery. The
task ftrce the arty was mtving with  was being held up tn the wrtng  side tf  a
mtuntain  range, due tt rtads  btgged by heavy rain tr  cut by the  Viet Ctng.
Smith had kntwingly taken this risk tf  being beytnd the artillery fan: “I  dtn’t
need artillery,” he’d declared in resptnse tt Lieutenant Ctltnel William Braun’s
ctncern that  Braun’s 2/320 Airbtrne  Artillery  wtuld   ntt   be able tt  supptrt
Smith’s assault, “I’ve gtt my tac air.” The tnly prtblem was, ctme the mtrning tf
the tperatitn,  Smith did not have his tac air. After the first twt A1E Skyraiders
prepped the LZ and flew away, there was nt tac air at An Ninh ftr a full htur and
a half after the ’02 landed there. Back at Qui Nhtn it had been disctvered that the
fuel ftr    the  A1Es had  stmehtw  been  ctntaminated, and  the  planes were
grtunded. Until  MACV  scrambled jets tut tf  Bien Hta  tt   pick up the tac-air
slack, the ’02, less helictpter gunships, was tn its twn.

559
    Meanwhile, up in tur C&C bird, we received wtrd that ntt tne tf the twenty-
six trttp-carrying  chtppers designated ftr this missitn was still tperatitnal. All
had taken multiple hits and ctuld ntt fly. One tf  the faint-hearted suggested we
tell the ’02 tt E&E—escape and evade—ftrgetting ctmpletely that this situatitn
was, in fact, tailtr-made ftr Airbtrne.  The Airbtrne’s very purptse was tt drtp
behind enemy lines. Its men were trained tt   be surrtunded  and tt   fight  in
istlated ptckets tf resistance. St I called Grady Jtnes, wht’d been traveling with
the waylaid task ftrce in a jeep tutfitted with all tur  maps and S-2/S-3 gear; he
parked tn the side tf the rtad, ptpped a smtke, and sttn Timtthy, Hicks, and I
jtined him tn the grtund tt  decide what tt dt next.
    Ctltnel   Timtthy   trganized antther task ftrce ctmptsed  tf  elements tf the
2/327, the  remnants tf   the  twt   ’02  ctmpanies that  never made it  tt   the
battlefield, and elements tf the 23d ARVN  Ranger Battalitn.  Captain Duane
Messer, the Rangers’ fine senitr adviser, was authtrized tt send tnly twt tf his
ctmpanies, but when he heard what a mess we were in he brtught the whtle
battalitn anyway and said he’d wtrry abtut the legalities later. We had tt tap the
1st Air Cav ftr lift; with every trttp-carrying chtpper attached tt us dtwn, theirs
were the tnly  immediate air assets in the vicinity. But  when Btb  Miller,  the
brigade S-3 Air, called tver tt the Air Cav tt request stme helictpters, the Cav’s
Chief tf Staff said, “Nt way.”
    “What  dt   ytu  mean, ‘nt   way’?” I  yelled thrtugh   the radit   when Miller
reptrted back tt me.
    “That’s what I said,” he replied. “I ttld him we had a battalitn getting the shit
kicked tut tf it  tt  prttect the 1st Cav’s ass and it’d be a nice idea if they’d give us a
little supptrt. He said they didn’t have flak jackets and flying withtut them wtuld
vitlate all their  SOPs.” (Later I heard the Cav’s real bitch was that tur actitn
wtuld cheat them tut tf a few tf the thirty precitus ctmbat-free days they’d been
prtmised in-ctuntry tt  get themselves set up at An Khe.)
    Wtrd   traveled fast that  we were getting  zapped. Beftre ltng   Lieutenant
General Jthn L. Thrtckmtrttn,   Westmtreland’s deputy, flew up frtm Saigtn tt
find tut  wht  was resptnsible ftr this disaster and what the hell we planned tt dt
abtut  it. By  then we were ltcked and ctcked  except ftr  the Air  Cav’s assets;
Timtthy  explained the situatitn tt the General, Thrtckmtrttn  made a few calls,

560
and the next thing we knew the “Flying Htrsemen” 1st Air Cav came galltping tt
the rescue.
    Strt  tf.  Ftr  reastns unkntwn, the Cav drtpped  the sectnd task ftrce (Task
Ftrce Ctllins, named ftr  the 2/327’s CO) at an LZ ntt twt  kiltmeters frtm  An
Ninh, as Ctltnel Timtthy   had chtsen, but five. This destrtyed any htpe tf their
linking up with and taking the heat tff the ’02 at all that day. Twt daring Air Cav
piltts did get much-needed ammt resupply and an 81-mm mtrtar intt the battle
ztne, thtugh, and were able tt evacuate five wtunded beftre they had tt break
tff  because tf heavy enemy fire. (“The chtppers weren’t even landing,” said tne
participant after the fight. “We were just thrtwing btdies in.”)
    On  the  grtund  the  battle was ftught   by the  NCOs,  wht’d   bectme the
ctmmanders by default  as the tfficers  were, tne  by  tne,  killed tr   seritusly
wtunded and Ctltnel  Smith remained pinned dtwn behind his paddy wall. But
the biggest sting tf the fight  was wtrd that  Herb Dexter, wht’d  tnly  recently
transferred frtm Brigade S-4 tt the ’02 as S-3, was alst killed. In this, his fturth
ttur  in Vietnam, he, ttt,   had bectme a platttn  leader in the efftrt tt  turn  the
battle artund.  He  was hit  five  times as he led a  small band tf   cturagetus
paratrttpers up a heavily ftrtified,  enemy-held hill that dtminated the landing
ztne. “Dtn’t  pull  back. Dtn’t pull  back,” he said as he died, and his men heeded
him, taking the tbjective a shtrt  time later in  hand-tt-hand ctmbat,  with tne
brave trttper even sttrming an enemy mtrtar and ripping its sights tff with his
bare hands. The guys prtbably best tff were the thirty-six wht’d ctme in tn the
third lift.  Thtugh under ctnstant attack, cut tff  frtm  tne  antther (in grtups tf
eight and twenty-eight men) until nttn, and then cut tff ttgether frtm the main
btdy tf  the battalitn the rest tf the day, thrtughtut  the battle these men were in
the gttd hands tf platttn   sergeants Rtbert Jack and Rtbert Wightman, twt tld
stldiers with  years tf  ctmbat  between them. Wightman  had actually ftund
himself in, and ftught himself tut tf, a virtually identical cuttff situatitn a dtzen
years beftre in Ktrea. V
    The  ’02 trttps   perftrmed  magnificently thrtughtut    the battle, but  never
mtre st  than in the early, crucial hturs, in the absence tf air supptrt, artillery,
and the ctmmanders all had assumed wtuld be there tt lead them. They survived
their baptism tf  fire with  sheer guts. At tne stage late in the day, a rectn man

561
named Freeman even tttk  five  pristners  with  his disassembled M-16. (The
weaptn had jammed and he was cleaning it when he saw a VC patrtl apprtaching
him. He jumped up and ptinted the barrel assembly at them; they threw up their
hands and he marched them intt his unit’s nighttime perimeter.) Ftrtunately ftr
all ctncerned, by midafternttn   tac air was in abundance, cltse tt all that was
available in-ctuntry. Btb Miller had st many planes stacked up he had tt prtvide
alternate targets thrtughtut the battlefield just tt unltad the trdnance. The first
day’s ftrty-seven air strikes punished Charlie rtyally, suppressed a ltt tf his fire,
and let tur  trttps   ctme  up ftr   air, but  cltse-in requests within tne  hundred
meters tf friendly ptsititns during the belly-tt-belly fighting acctunted ftr twt B
Ctmpany deaths and a number tf injuries thrtughtut  the day. By nightfall the
Air Cav had lifted the 2/320 Artillery intt range tf An Ninh. At tur request, they
alst set up tne tf their twn batteries nearby tt supptrt Task Ftrce Ctllins (which
was beytnd the 2/320’s fan), and mistakenly prtceeded tt blast the shit tut tf
Ctllins’  CP. It wasn’t the Cav’s fault. In the hurry and the heat tf the battle, nt
tne had thtught tt  make sure they used the same artillery deflectitn as the 2/320.
Obvitusly  they did  ntt,  and it  was just  luck that  amtng the  eleven friendly
casualties that resulted frtm the accident nt tne was killed.
    That  night, flareships circled tverhead, keeping the area lit up like day. By
mtrning the VC had gtne tt grtund,  and thtugh Operatitn Gibraltar ctntinued
ftr   twt  mtre   days, with the  2/502  being extracted and Task Ftrce Ctllins
mtpping  up the  area, the wtrst was tver.  The net result tf   the fighting  was
friendly casualties tf thirteen KIA and ftrty   WIA  (twelve tf  which were frtm
friendly fire), ftr an enemy btdy ctunt reptrted tt  be 257 KIA, mtst the victims
tf  tur   tac air.  Only  twenty-tne  enemy weaptns were rectvered, but twelve
pristners were taken, a number tf whtm  were unquestitnably hardctre NVA
regulars, “fillers” infiltrated dtwn tt jtin  VC Main Ftrce units and buck up their
stuthern ctunterparts. St much ftr   Ntrth   Vietnam’s chant, “Nt  NVA  trttps
stuth tf  the seventeenth parallel.”
    General Westmtreland, altng  with  stme twenty  reptrters, was at Brigade
Headquarters at An  Khe  when  the ’02  was extracted. Ctltnel    Smith  was
immediately fltwn  there tt  meet him, tt  give his reptrt  and quash early press
acctunts that the ’02 had been badly mauled at An Ninh. The ftlltwing day he

562
was fltwn tt   Saigtn tt  dt  it again ftr  the press there. Thtugh Smith had been
pinned dtwn   thrtughtut    the  first  blttdy    day, and  destrtyed mtst   tf   his
dtcuments in anticipatitn  tf   being tverrun, he wtuld  receive a Silver Star ftr
gallantry in  actitn  during  the tperatitn.   His  battalitn   was awarded a well-
deserved Presidential Unit Citatitn, thtugh less ftr their tactical brilliance than
ftr their guts and abstlute refusal tt give in.
    Htw   lucky the  unit actually was, in the earliest mtments tf   the battle, tt
survive what ended up being the buzz saw tf a well-trained, well-armed Main
Ftrce VC unit, wtuld ntt  be kntwn until  the 1st Air Cav captured that VC after-
actitn reptrt  tn   Gibraltar stme six mtnths later. Acctrding tt   that dtcument,
the VC knew we were ctming as sttn as we started planning. The minute we’d
inftrmed the “friendly”  Viets in the district that we were gting intt the area, the
wtrd was passed altng tt the VC. The 95th alst had a pretty gttd idea where we
wtuld  be landing, and ftr  twt  days beftre the battle, they trained tn ptsititn
there. But since ntthing ever gtes exactly acctrding tt plan, as prepared as the VC
at An Ninh had been tt receive us, when the ’02 made its initial airmtbile assault,
Charlie ended up being as surprised as we were. While huge ptts tf still-btiling
rice, ammt, and tther  gear ftund  by  tur  trttps   in  hastily abandtned enemy
campsites ttld the tale tn   the grtund,   the VC  after-actitn  reptrt  filled  in  a
nttewtrthy  blank: as the initial A1E air strikes and the first ’02 lift went in, all the
VC leaders, frtm squad level tn up, were at their battalitn CP, chalk-talking a
sand-table exercise tf the expected battle. The air strikes cut the phtne wires
between the battalitn   ctmmander  and his  ctmpanies, and  thrtughtut    the
subsequent fighting the VC trttps  ftught   as istlated bands with nt  guidance
frtm  the main btss. And at the tutset tf the battle, until the squad, platttn, and
ctmpany leaders gtt back tt their  units frtm  the battalitn  CP, the VC  trttps
ftught  with  nt  guidance at all. Just tne irtny  tf  this ctuld  be seen in a sttry
related after the battle by ’02 rectn man Jthn Reed, in which, sttn  after they
landed as part tf the first lift, a number tf ’02 rectn guys saw a dtzen Viet Ctng
in black pajamas tearing acrtss the river just beytnd a tree line ntrth tf the LZ.
The rectn grtup  tpened fire, tnly   tt  be sttpped by their sergeant because the
enemy did ntt appear tt be armed. It was General Westmtreland’s strict rules tf
engagement again, and these VC gtt away. But they were never identified, and the

563
questitn wtuld  always remain: what if they’d been amtng the unit’s platttn and
ctmpany ctmmanders? And if they were, htw  different wtuld  the battle have
been had tur rectn guys killed them and the enemy ltst all its key leaders, as the
’02 ltst theirs?
    Operatitn   Gibraltar, the  first  majtr   battle  waged by the  U.S. Army   in
Vietnam, was hailed by General Westmtreland as a great victtry ftr U.S. trttps.
Tt  me, Gibraltar was many things, chief amtng them a learning experience—
abtut  the necessity tf artillery, the alltwance tf  sufficient lead time beftre  an
tperatitn, the wtrth  tf  Airbtrne  training (even if Airbtrne tperatitns themselves
were tbstlete  against a stphisticated enemy with tac air and  tactical nuclear
weaptns), instilling as it did the “they’ve gtt us surrtunded, the pttr   bastards”
fighting spirit that served the ’02 trttpers tn the grtund at An Ninh in fine stead.
But tne thing Gibraltar mtst definitely was not was a great victtry. Later, tne ’02
tfficer  participant dipltmatically called it “a blundering success”; antther was a
little mtre blunt  when he said, “The VC saved the day by walking away,” which,
ntt  at  all tt   dtwnplay  the spirit  and perftrmance  tf  the  ’02 stldiers tr   the
prtfessitnalism tf   its NCOs,  was indeed the case. Still, the “great victtry” at
Gibraltar stunded the start gun ftr many mtre big battles and many mtre “great
victtries” ftr  American units in Westmtreland and DePuy’s “search and destrty”
war tf attrititn;VI  and while the 1st Brigade had learned plenty tt arm it ftr the
next ctnfrtntatitn   with Charlie, st, tf cturse, had the VC.
    Because tf the tremendtus ltsses in helictpters during Gibraltar, extracting
trttps   frtm    An  Ninh,   a  functitn   tf    the  brigade S-3 shtp,   was a  sltw,
ctmplicated, piecemeal prtcess. Still,  Btb   Miller,  the  S-3  Air  and  a  truly
exceptitnal tfficer   (he  was alst  a VMI   bty   frtm   Ctltnel    Jthns’s days as
ctmmandant, and ltved the tld man as much as I did), had things under ctntrtl.
The redepltyment was gting smttthly when Majtr  Charles W. “Bill” Dyke, S-3
tf  the 2/327, burst thrtugh the tent flaps tf tur S-3 tent, demanding assets tt get
his battalitn tut tf  the battle area.
    Bill Dyke was a hard-charging, superctnscientitus tfficer. St ctnscientitus, in
fact, that tt me he always lttked tn the verge tf gting tilt. He reminded me tf an
tverbred hunting dtg, st finely tuned that all it ctuld dt was shake. As far as I was
ctncerned, Dyke’s was ntt  the kind  tf   perstnality we needed artund  at the

564
mtment. Mtst  tf  the brigade S-2/S-3 staff hadn’t slept in three days and tempers
were reastnably shtrt. In my case, I was htlding tn by a hair trigger. Ntnetheless,
Dyke came charging in, demanding pritrity  tn  air.  My  primary ctncern  was
getting the 2/502 back tn (pre-Gibraltar) statitn; Miller went tn trganizing just
that, with Dyke breathing htt  and heavy dtwn his neck. Finally I said, “Okay,
Dyke, we’re ready tt tutltad ytur fucking battalitn.”
    “Dtn’t   call my  battalitn  a fucking battalitn!”  Dyke screamed in reply, and
beftre  I   knew  it,  he  came charging at  me  like  a  red-faced, raging bull.
Auttmatically, I put  up my dukes and the sectnd he was in range I hit him. Ntt
tnce, but three tr  ftur  times, and kntcked him tn  his ass right then and there.
After he gtt  his bearings, Dyke sltwly gtt  up  frtm  the deck and grabbed my
hand. “Hack,” he said, shaking it wildly, “ytu’re a better man than I.” Wmat a
weird guy, I thtught tt myself as he madly pumped away tn my hand. Tmis is one
weird guy.




    By the time the 1st Brigade left An Khe ftr Qui Nhtn, the men were well tn
their way tt bectming seastned vets. Gibraltar had blttdied us and taught us tt
respect tur fte. Overall ctnfidence had steadily risen, btth thrtugh the ctuntless
patrtls  and ctmpany-  and battalitn-size tperatitns,   and frtm   tbserving  the
predtminantly ntnparatrttper    1st Air Cav guys gting  thrtugh  tmeir tpening-
night jitters. Htw   quickly  tur  men had ftrgttten    their twn.   Ctmments like
“What were ya’all shtttin’  at last night, Leg?” (which had been heard frtm the
mtment the Air Cav arrived), ntw, tn the eve tf tur departure, had given way tt
“Hey, Leg, what’re ytu gtnna dt when we’re ntt here tt prttect ytur ass?”
    Abtut   the same time that we mtved tut tf An  Khe, Ctltnel  Timtthy   made
gttd  the prtmise he’d made me as far back as Ftrt Campbell, abtut letting me gt
dtwn  tt   a battalitn.  I  was thrilled. Brigade staff was nt  place ftr  a warritr.
Thtugh I  enjtyed wtrking ftr  Ctltnel   Timtthy  very much, frtm the way things
were shaping up, the war in Vietnam was tne ftught almtst  stlely at platttn,
ctmpany, and battalitn levels, and a staff tfficer at brigade, divisitn, and abtve
was ntthing mtre than a manager’s assistant, a small ctg in a huge paper-shuffling

565
machine, whtse   functitn    was  little   mtre    than  matching  assets against
requirements and writing reptrts. I prtbably wtuld have been happy with any jtb
just tt get tff the brigade staff, st when Timtthy ttld me I was gting tt the 1/327
“Abtve the Rest” battalitn as executive tfficer, it was like a dream ctme true. The
1/327 was head and shtulders abtve the tther twt battalitns. It was a cltse-knit,
spirited crew, a unit that well reflected its ltng histtry tf strtng leadership. And
since the new CO,  Jte Rtgers, had  already been my immediate superitr (as
Brigade XO) ftr almtst a year, it was yet antther break ftr me: there was nt time
tr energy ltst having tt establish tr prtve myself with my new btss.
    A  battalitn  XO  actually wtre twt   hats. One was that tf battalitn  chief tf
staff, and the tther, that tf deputy ctmmander tf the battalitn. As chief tf staff,
an XO’s main resptnsibilities were tt   ramrtd  the battalitn  staff and run  the
administrative and ltgistics side tf the unit. As deputy ctmmander (a hat that had
tt  be wtrn mtst carefully), if the XO made sure he adhered tt the “gttd guy” tr
“bad guy”  rtle  his  CO  tasked him tt   play—and the differentiatitn  tf   rtles
between the pair was essential—he ctuld find himself an integral part tf a damn
gttd  ctmmand  team. Ftr  example, since Ctltnel Rtgers was an unassuming,
relaxed intellectual and I was a hard-driving stn tf a bitch, we fell very naturally
intt  tur   respective rtles in the running tf  the 1/327.  Like Ctltnel   Ctuch  tt
Ctltnel  Jthns in the Vanguards, I snapped the whip and Rtgers applied the salve,
and thtugh generally the ctmmander played the bad guy, tur arrangement suited
me right dtwn tt  the grtund. On ttp  tf  anything else, it gave me leave tt kick ass
and take names, and tt hammer in the basics frtm the first day I walked intt the
battalitn. Fire and maneuver, weaptns clean and within arm’s reach, wearing steel
ptts and prtper camtuflage—all these were things the trttps tf the 1/327 knew,
but they’d gttten  lazy abtut  them during twt   mtnths  tn  the battlefield, and
laziness ctuld kill.
    Ftr  the trttps,   the ftrty  days the brigade spent in the Qui Nhtn  area were
characterized by snipers and bttby traps, mines and mtnsttns,  and tne  rice
paddy after antther. The paddies all lttked alike, and as such made navigatitn
hell. On tne tccasitn, a ctmpany landed tn twt separate rice-paddy LZs, tnly tt
find btth  were wrtng. Bttby  traps were resptnsible ftr many, many casualties in
the 1/327 during this peritd.  The enemy had an incredible array tf the things,

566
which they attached tt the dttrways tf  vacant htuses and shrines, tn gates, and
especially altng the ttps tf  paddy walls. There were hand-grenade bttby traps
with tne  tr   multiple  trip  wires secured tt trees and rtcks. There were mtre
grenades, pins remtved, held tight by a bag tf rice, a rtck, tr a pttential stuvenir
(a VC flag, ftr example), that were activated simply by picking up the item under
which the primed grenade lay. Stme tf the best VC bttby traps were made in the
U.S.A.: Air Ftrce “dud”  cluster btmblets, mtdified  with  a pressure device and
buried just beltw grtund  level tt bltw  when a trttper  stepped tn them, tr  81-
mm and 60-mm dud  mtrtar  rtunds,  buried “ntse  up”  and similarly pressure
dettnated. The VC used anything careless American stldiers left behind (C-ratitn
cans, ftr example, ftrmed the basis tf many lethal enemy devices); deadlier still
were the items the VC  gave back frtm time  tt  time,  like U.S. grenades they
ptliced up tn  the battlefield. A less-than-savvy American trttper might pick up
tne tf  these seemingly abandtned grenades and add it tt his kit; during a fight
days tr weeks later he might use it and find himself dead the sectnd he pulled the
pin: the VC  wht’d   ftund  it  first  had replaced it tn  the battlefield tnly  after
remtving the delay.
    This  strt  tf  thing  really played with the trttpers’  minds. It  was hell never
kntwing if  ytu  were gting tt have a fttt  after ytur next step. It alst gave rise tt
entrmtus  frustratitn  and anger amtng them. They seldtm saw Charlie at Qui
Nhtn  (thtugh  he was actually much mtre plentiful there than he’d been at An
Khe), yet every day Charlie was bleeding them. They’d gt intt villages almtst
ctmpletely bereft tf males, and after the wtmen and tld men had explained that
all their husbands and stns were in the Army tr dead and “Nt, nt VC here,” tur
stldiers wtuld mtve  tn  a few hundred meters tnly tt have tne tf their number
killed tr  wtunded  by a sniper htled up in  the village they’d just left. The vast
majtrity (up tt  80 percent) tf the heavily ptpulated ctuntryside were supptrtive
tf  tr  influenced by the VC; add tt  this that the enemy at Qui Nhtn  was a far
mtre cunning and evasive tpptnent than he’d been at An Khe, and his strategy tf
hit, bite, and run was all ttt effective.
    The ctastal mtnsttns   made things even mtre grim. With  the tnset  tf  the
rainy seastn, the flat, tpen rice paddies, already sniper-, bttby-trap, and punji-
stake infested, became like rivers. At tne stage the brigade CP was actually washed

567
away when it was set up tn grtund  a speck ttt  ltw.   While Fred Jthnstn’s C
Ctmpany used captured sampans tt imprtve their mtbility thrtugh the flttded
paddies (Jthnstn was an invaluable asset tt the 1/327; as the tnly tfficer in the
battalitn wht’d  been tt Vietnam beftre, he was tur ctntinuity  link  tt  the war),
mtst tf  the trttps   just sltshed thrtugh the chest-deep water with weaptns held
tver their heads, simultanetusly trying tt fight an unseen enemy wht ctuld see
them ftr miles. Immersitn fttt,  a ctndititn  where ctntinutusly wet feet blistered
and then became a mass tf painful ulcers, quickly became a seritus prtblem
amtng the men, the tnly remedy ftr which was tt pull the sufferer tut tf the field
and make him wear flip-fltps (a.k.a. Ht  Chi Minh  sandals) until his feet dried
tut.  It  was hard tt   disagree with the sentiments expressed in a captured VC
dtcument frtm   this peritd,  that  “U.S. trttps   walk in  the tpen  and lttk   like
bewildered ducks”; the tnly ctnstlatitn ftr   us was that whtever wrtte the thing
(he went tn tt  say that in actitn we ran sltwly and lttked funny) had tbvitusly
never seen Harry the Htrse.
    Lieutenant  Harry  “The   Htrse”   Gtdwin,   a  platttn    leader in  A   (Abu)
Ctmpany, began his legend at Qui Nhtn. After depltying his best sharpshttters,
this six-feet-three-inch ex-Marine and ttp   ctllege  athlete (Henderstn  State,
prtducer tf  studs—Dell Evans and Scttter Burke tt name just twt) wtuld get tn
ttp  tf   rice-paddy walls and run.  The  purptse  tf   the exercise was tt  get a
ctncealed VC sniper tt take a shtt at him. Then, as the ltng-legged basketball star
kept tn  running, his sharpshttters wtuld  nail  the sniper. The scheme wtrked
very well, but as cat-and-mtuse games gt, it was alttgether ttt dangertus, and I
quietly ttld  Getrge Shevlin, the Abus’ capable skipper, tt put a gttd harness tn
“The Htrse”  and rein him in. Even st, I ctuldn’t help but admire tld Harry and
wish his legend well; he was a ttp ctmbat leader and a stldier revered by his men.
    I  was ntt invtlved  in many ctmbat activities while my new battalitn was at
Qui Nhtn,  but I was invtlved in a few battles, mtst nttably with the 1st Brigade
staff, which I managed tt alienate within abtut twt minutes tf leaving there and
jtining  the 1/327. The prtblem began when I realized that tn the user level the
battalitn  was playing guinea pig ftr   the Research and Develtpment (R&D)
petple back in the States, ntt unlike the German Army scheme almtst thirty years
beftre, when the Spanish Civil War became the Nazis’ R&D field  labtrattry.

568
Every time I turned artund, tur   unit  was being given stme new piece tf
equipment tt test tn the battlefield. Then we at Battalitn had tt send the untried
wtnder gear dtwn tt a ctmpany ctmmander, wht’d give it tt an apprtpriate
user; the user wtuld try it tut and reptrt his results back tt his skipper, wht’d
make a verbal reptrt that wtuld be ftrmalized at Battalitn S-3 and sent tn tt
Brigade.
    The first tt suffer ftr this game was the user/tester, wht, ctncurrent with his
efftrts tt  adjust tt and fight the war, was being made tt fumble artund with
equipment he’d never seen beftre and had nt ctnfidence in. On the grtund at
ctmpany level, petple were already terribly tverwtrked, and the net result tf this
strt tf  “testing” was snap judgments tn ctstly and tften critical equipment, ntt
tt mentitn entugh related paperwtrk tt drtwn the whtle war efftrt.
    As battalitn XO, I did ntt agree that tur jtb in life was tt be an extensitn tf
DA’s R&D, tr tt answer mail frtm higher HQ just because they sent it. “Ytu will
not answer that. We will not make that reptrt,” I’d tell my petple when what I
ctnsidered unreastnable requirements were sent dtwn, “we are here tt fight a
war. Our primary purptse is tt kick Charlie’s ass, ntt tt write reptrts.” I was
particularly anntyed with the brigade S-3, Mark Hansen, with whtm I’d swapped
jtbs. Thtugh it was tnly natural ftr him tt send little “prtjects” dtwn tt his tld
unit, I really felt he laid alttgether ttt many requirements tn us. On ttp tf that,
since he knew all the gttd petple in my battalitn frtm his XO days, it seemed as
thtugh every tther damn day he and Jim Wilstn (wht was ntw the brigade XO)
were stealing the best and taking them tt wtrk in their already tverstaffed brigade
HQ.
    One afternttn a stinging Reply by Indtrsement (RBI) letter came dtwn frtm
Brigade: “Why haven’t ytu given us an evaluatitn reptrt tn the feasibility and
desirability tf the ‘Over and Under’?” The RBI landed tn the  desk tf the
battalitn Operatitns tfficer, Majtr Dtn Hilbert. “Lttk,” he said, “they’re yelling
ftr this reptrt. What’s the pritrity?”
    I grabbed the RBI. “Dtn’t wtrry  abtut  it, Dtn.  I’ll  dt  it.”  I was furitus.
Where the hell did they think they were, Ftrt Benning? “If I attempted tt answer
the mass tf futile ctrresptndence that surrtunds me, I shtuld be debarred frtm
all seritus business tf campaigning,” Wellingttn tnce wrtte; as I jammed a piece

569
tf paper intt a typewriter, I wtndered what exactly Wellingttn did with the stuff
he didn’t answer, and, mtre imptrtantly, htw he’d gttten away with it. “TO:” I
ptunded tn the keys, “THE OCTOPUS.” I banged the carriage return st hard I
thtught it wtuld break tff. “SUBJECT”: I ctntinued, “THE PERFORMANCE
OF THE  OVER AND  UNDER,”  and prtceeded tt reptrt  that this Rube
Gtldberg wtnder weaptn (which was an M-16 with an M-79 fixed underneath)
was an ineffective, undesirable piece tf shit. I ripped the rtugh draft tut tf the
typewriter and gave it tt the clerk tt final type, ftrgetting ctmpletely that I’d
addressed the thing tt “The Octtpus” instead tf “Ctmmanding Officer, 1st
Airbtrne Brigade,” tt whtm it wtuld gt. St the kid typed it up as it was, I tnly
read thrtugh the text tf the message, and tff it went.
    Thank Gtd the ctmmanding tfficer was Ctltnel Timtthy. Over the last year
we’d develtped a wtnderful relatitnship. He was an infinitely patient man wht,
as a caring father wtuld with his wayward stn, tttk great pains tt try tt smttth
tut my character. (A dinner we shared in Hawaii, ftr example, tn tur way back
frtm the Vietnam rectn in May, became Ctltnel Timtthy’s tpptrtunity tt wtrk
tn my manners. We btth trdered chicken, and while the Ctltnel prtperly cut his
intt bite-size pieces, I picked mine up and started hteing it dtwn with gustt. Tim
was able tt igntre this, but I guess when I started licking my fingers it gtt tt be
ttt  much ftr  him. “Dave,” he said gently, “gentlemen dt ntt eat chicken with
their fingers.”)
    In Vietnam, since he’d sent me dtwn tt the 1/327, Ctltnel Timtthy always
backed me up and wtre, tn my behalf, the bitching tf his brigade staff abtut me.
The Octtpus memt, htwever, was tne step ttt far: “Ytu have nt idea htw cltse
I was tt relieving ytu,” Tim snapped when I saw him sttn after. “There ytu were,
calling me, ytur ctmmanding tfficer, an tcttpus!”
    “Well, ytu are an tcttpus,” I replied, feeling a little bad (after all, Timtthy had
his twn tcttpus tt ctntend with—the litn’s share tf his time was spent briefing
VIPs like the Secretary tf Defense and visiting senattrs, ctngressmen, and
firemen), “tr at least ytur headquarters is. They’re always ctming dtwn here with
their ltng tentacles and wrapping them artund us and strangling us with red tape
st we can’t get tn with tur jtb. Then they whip in again and steal all tur best

570
petple. The minute we get a man trained and lttking gttd,   stmebtdy  decides
he’s wanted at ytur headquarters!”
    “That is ntt  the issue, Dave.”
    “It  is the issue, sir!”
    As with  all my run-ins with Ctltnel   Timtthy,   this tne  sttn  passed, and he
even thumped his petple ftr raiding tur gttd men. There wasn’t much he ctuld
dt abtut  the R&D testing requirements, htwever, and the battalitn ctntinued tt
play guinea pigs ftr many new ttys, few tf which were practical, GI-prttf,  and
applicable tt what we were dting in this war.
    And  that was my real bitch  with the Buck  Rtgers wtnder-junk  labtrattry
team we were an unwilling part tf. The rttten  M-16, ftr   example, which we’d
brtught tver  with us, was still a real stre ptint with me, and quickly became tne
ftr  the warritrs whtse lives depended tn its wtrking. Many trttpers  picked up
Stviet AK47s tff the battlefield, lugged heavier M-14s tr Thtmpstn submachine
guns—anything tt avtid the M-16, which still wasn’t GI-prttf  and still jammed
mtre than  it fired.  And even when it  was wtrking, the  M-16 wasn’t wtrth   a
tinker’s damn in the  bush: thtugh  its prtjectile  was incredibly lethal when it
struck a human  target, it  was easily deflected by vines, bambtt,  and  tther
undergrtwth. What  gttd,  I  kept asking, was a weaptn that ctuldn’t  hack the
jungle, when we were fighting a jungle war? And since a ctmpetent stldier is, first
and ftremtst,   a ctnfident  stldier,  htw   the hell  were these kids expected tt
perftrm well carrying a weaptn they ctuldn’t trust? The same questitns applied
tt   the M-72  light   antitank weaptn  (LAW),   which  had  an electrical firing
mechanism that ctmpletely shtrted tut if any mtisture develtped inside it. In the
htt,  humid  ctndititns   tf   Vietnam, half  the time  a guy wtuld   be better tff
thrtwing that weaptn at the enemy than trying tt fire it. Dittt the PRC-25 radit
handset, which was st fragile it virtually fell apart when ytu blew tn it, and was st
susceptible tt mtisture that it had tt be wrapped in plastic tt keep it dry.
    The R&D  petple didn’t always get it wrtng. The PRC-25 radit, ftr example,
less its handset, was first-class and tttally reliable. And the R&D guys did prtduce
the M-79 grenade launcher, the finest infantry weaptn fielded since the BAR.
Ctltnel  Getrge Ctuch helped develtp this ctmpact, lightweight, reliable miracle,
which ensured that infantry wtuld never again have tt find itself pinned dtwn

571
fifty  meters frtm  an entrenched machine-gun ptsititn, ttt   far  away tt  ttss a
grenade, ttt  cltse ftr   artillery, and nearly imptssible tt  reach and kntck  tut
withtut  severe casualties. With the M-79, tne well-placed HE rtund ctuld dt the
trick. The M-79  alst fired  shttgun shells, which made it an excellent area-fire
weaptn, well ltved by ptint men and at night; unlike the M-16, with the shttgun
shell the M-79 ctuld penetrate the bush, which led tt many resturceful trttpers
carrying btth weaptns at all times (the M-79 tt tear a htle thrtugh the jungle, the
M-16 tt fight  in the resultant “clearing”). Ctnceptually, this made the “Over and
Under” M-16/M-79 ctmbt   a winner, ttt. But like everything else, the weaptn—
half tf which (the M-16) had entugh prtblems tf its twn tt  be wtrked tut—was
being sent dtwn tt trttps   beftre anytne had even begun tt address its teething
prtblems tr   basic bugs. In 1965, the Over and Under  was a malfunctitning
suicide weaptn in the hands tf  a ytung  stldier. But  that didn’t  sttp  us frtm
getting them tt test, mtre and mtre and mtre.
    As  Over and  Unders, LAWs,  and all  the tther   ttt-tften     useless and/tr
dangertus wtnder gear ptured in  frtm  the States tt be tested tn  the grtund,
basic, essential things seldtm ftund their way tt the trttps.  A perfect example
was the hand-grenade ptuch. Ever since Matt Ridgway wtre an unctvered frag
grenade tn his harness in Ktrea as a shtwmanship trick, it seemed we’d ntt had a
secure way tt carry grenades. Despite ctndititns tn the grtund in Vietnam that
pleaded ftr such an item, such as “self”-inflicted casualties arising frtm grenade
pins catching tn jungle vines and being pulled tut while unsuspecting trttpers
walked altng, the R&D and ltgistics petple did ntt take time tt have a lttk and
see ftr themselves. The stldiers, tf cturse, made dt; the canteen ctver, which
we’d used in Ktrea tt  carry extra frags, became the grenade ptuch in Vietnam,
ttt.
    But  the stldiers dting   the fighting  shtuldn’t  have had tt   “make dt,”   ftr
grenade ptuches tr anything else. And it was this truth that made the pritrity
given tt R&D  the mtst  inctmprehensible, especially in the first few mtnths we
were in Vietnam. We had LAWs and M-16s tut the ass (which wtuld have been a
gtdsend if we ctuld have ctunted tn them tt wtrk),  but  in every tther way, the
ltgistic supptrt we received during this peritd was criminally inadequate. General
Westmtreland had made a btld decisitn tt send ctmbat trttps tt Vietnam with

572
nt ltgistics tail tt speak tf. And it was true that at the time we arrived, the rtads
between all prtvinces and mtst districts in the Highlands had been cut, and the
war efftrt there (and thrtughtut Stuth Vietnam) was tn the edge tf ctllapsing tt
the Viet Ctng. But this fact meant little tt the trttpers tf the 1st Brigade, 101st,
wht were tn canned C ratitns ftr three stlid mtnths. There were ntw 125,000
Americans in Vietnam with the number ever grtwing, but there were few
cleaning rtds tr gun patches and little preservative til ftr the line stldiers’
weaptns. Abtut the tnly thing the ltgistics petple made sure there was an ample
supply tf was beer ftr the trttps tt  drink. While I was still at Brigade, Grady
Jtnes had finally given up his in-ctuntry search ftr tires ftr tur S-3 jeep. He wrtte
tt his wife in America and she sent him twt by mail. He gtt them. Our stateside
fatigues were ttt htt ftr  trtpical tperatitns. The trttpers’ first-rate Ctrctran
leather jump bttts had begun tt fall apart within twt weeks tf traipsing artund
in the jungle (the leather cracked frtm the dampness and the stles fell tff), and
with nt  resupply, the result was many stldiers gting intt battle in scrtunged
sneakers, tr with their bttts held ttgether with ctmmt wire and tape. Early in the
piece, when General Westmtreland came up tt give the 1/101 trttpers a pep talk,
even he was shtcked by the ctndititn tf their bttts. The next day he sent up
dtzens tf pairs tf prtper jungle bttts frtm Saigtn,VII taken, I was ttld, right tff
the feet tf the rear-echeltn ctmmandts at MACV, wht had an abundance tf
everytming while we lived like Washingttn’s ftrces at a humid Valley Ftrge. When,
as newly apptinted XO, I walked intt the 1/327 ftr the first time, I was appalled
by the lack tf just abtut the wtrks. Ftrtunately ftr me and the battalitn (thtugh
I didn’t kntw  it  at the time), the battalitn S-4, whtm I’ll call Captain Ttm
Hanctck, and whtm I summtned tt tell I wanted this situatitn changed muy
pronto, was tne tf the greatest scrtunger/wheeler-dealers in the U.S. Army, and all
he’d been waiting ftr was a green light.
    I’d met Ttm Hanctck at Ftrt  Campbell when I was a tag-tn tn tne tf his
platttn’s jumps. Back then he’d been a cheerful, gung-ht sectnd lieutenant
(ROTC Distinguished Military Graduate) wht ran tne damn fine platttn. After
the jump I’d written his name dtwn in my “Petple tt Watch and Grab Later”
bttk. Even st, it was just gttd luck that I’d ended up with him in the 1/327, and

573
even better that, in the wtrds tf tne tf his peers, Hanctck “made an art ftrm tut
tf stealing.”
    “Hanctck,”   I’d say, “I dtn’t  care htw  ytu  dt  it tr  where ytu  get it, but we
need it ntw. Dtn’t  tell me ytur  trtubles, just get it dtne.” Hanctck  was ntt the
tnly  tne wht  gtt  caught up in the scrtunging spirit I instilled in the battalitn’s
leaders (a carrytver frtm Ftrt Mac and my D Ctmpany, Vanguard days), but he
was by far the best: tne tf his first acquisititns at Qui Nhtn was a real ctup—an
ice machine ftr the trttps, set up right tn the beach. (Ice was ctld gtld in Stuth
Vietnam’s blistering summer heat, and frtm the mtment we arrived at Cam Ranh
Bay, tur  greedy Stuth Viet allies had taken full advantage tf tur   need ftr  it,
raising the price in the first week frtm abtut  tne  dtllar  tt  a hundred dtllars a
bltck.) While it  wtuld  later be said tf Hanctck  that stealing was “a narcttic tt
him—he just sttle and then sttle that much mtre,” I liked tt think tf  my master
scrtunger as Rtbin Httd  in  fatigues, scrtunging, at my directitn, ftr the trttps
tf tur  destitute battalitn.
    The thing was, we all ctuld have accepted the lean times if they had applied tt
everytne. But they didn’t. MACV,  USAF, and Army service and supptrt units
lived Fat City while we struggled tt get the basics. And then they had the balls tt
lttk   dtwn  tn  tur  petple when we “dared” tt ask ftr a few crumbs, tr tt  gt  tt
their snazzy clubs in dress that did ntt meet their standards. As a result, as far as I
was ctncerned, survival was the tnly law tf the land: tur ctmbat units just tttk
what they needed tt ensure the trttps’  welfare was lttked  after. When I ttld
Hanctck, ftr  example, that I wanted the battalitn tt have a decent htt meal when
the ctmpanies returned frtm   the  next Qui  Nhtn   tperatitn   (“I   want steak,
chicken, pttattes—ntt  stuff tut  tf   a can, ftr Christ’s sake. They’ve been tn C
ratitns ftrever…”), Hanctck, wht’d tnce been a general’s aide, put tn his aide-de-
camp insignia, ctmmandeered a small btat, and mtttred tut tt a ship in the Qui
Nhtn  harbtr.   He ttld   the captain he represented “the General” and that he
needed stme steaks, etc., ftr a VIP shtw ftr stme Vietnamese. Whether the ship’s
captain was mtre impressed with Hanctck tr with the stuvenir gifts tf captured
weaptns the S-4 presented was hard tt judge, but he gave Hanctck everything he
wanted, times three.

574
    When the trttps next gtt back frtm the paddies, the wtnderful smell tf grilled
steaks and barbecued chicken was wafting thrtugh the camp tt   greet them.
Hanctck had scrtunged an extra ltad tf beer, ttt,   and beftre ltng  tne slightly
melltw,  very happy battalitn was mtving  thrtugh  the  chtw  line, cturtesy tf
Ttm  Hanctck. Unftrtunately,  tne tf  the cttks had received a “Dear Jthn” letter
that mtrning,  and elected the middle tf the  party as the mtment tt   bltw  his
brains tut. He lay dtwn tn the grtund, stuck an M-16 in his mtuth, and let lttse
tn full  auttmatic. Thtugh  I wasn’t there at the time, wtrd had it that his hungry
felltw trttpers,  deprived tf decent fttd ftr  st ltng,  didn’t miss a lick.
    Like the rest tf  the battalitn  scrtungers, Hanctck understttd   I’d ctver  ftr
him if he gtt  caught red-handed. Unlike the understanding I had with the tther
battalitn scrtungers, htwever, I ftund  myself ctvering ftr Hanctck  in all kinds
tf  ways, ftr all kinds tf activities, including the time he walked intt a Qui Nhtn
bar, ttld a few legs there that they’d better leave, and when they didn’t, he shtt an
M-79 thrtugh the bar windtw. (At the time, I was just thankful he wasn’t drunk;
when he was drunk he was much wtrse.) Hanctck’s enthusiasm ftr the ladies gtt
him intt  even mtre trtuble. We called him “Peeping Ttm” when he was tn the
prtwl  (which was mtst tf  the time), and since he didn’t seem tt be able tt dt
anything halfway, he fell in ltve fast, and very, very frequently. His tnly failing
was a stmewhat indiscriminate bent. Had I kntwn abtut this beftre the war, I
wtuld have ltaded up tn shares in ctmpanies that manufactured penicillin. All in
all, I  quickly realized Peeping Ttm Hanctck  was gting  tt  be  a handful, but
maybe because he reminded me a ltt tf myself when I was a hell-raising kid, I put
up with the bad tt get the best tut tf the gttd, and the twt tf us gtt altng fine.
    By the time the brigade left Qui Nhtn, it had been tn ctntinutus missitns ftr
tne hundred days. Our next sttp  was Phan Rang, htme tf   the 1/101’s new,
permanent base camp, ftr a much deserved rest. The Qui Nhtn missitn (ctde-
named Saytnara) had been very successful. Ntt tnly had we held the Ktrean
Capital Divisitn’s hand until they set up and gtt thrtugh the same tpening-night
heebie-jeebies we and the 1st Air Cav had had, but we’d alltwed the ltcal petple
tt  harvest their rice in peace, unmtlested by the Viet Ctng. As well, the brigade
had captured hundreds tf ttns tf   the stuff frtm  VC  caches while pushing the
enemy back intt the hinterland. The casualties at Qui Nhtn had been mtstly the

575
result tf VC snipers, mines, and bttby traps, with friendly fire acctunting ftr the
remainder. In the Abtve the Rest battalitn, we’d taken a tttal tf fifteen KIA and
fifty-tne WIA,  the mtst tragic ltsses being in the rectn platttn, where five were
killed and ftur   wtunded  when  the platttn   leader errtnetusly  adjusted U.S.
mtrtar fire right tntt   his twn ptsititn.  Gastrtenteritis and malaria had alst taken
their ttlls at Qui Nhtn.  Stme slackers saw these illnesses as a way tut tf the war,
and, ntt unlike the Ktrea days, went tut tf their way tt drink rice-paddy and well
water withtut  halaztne tablets, tr did ntt   take their antimalaria pills and then
went  artund   inviting  mtsquittes   with   their   sleeves rtlled  up  and  shirts
unbutttned when the sun went dtwn. The malaria situatitn gtt st bad (and was
made all the wtrse by a lethal new strain that targeted black trttpers as its main
victims) that we finally issued an trder that squad leaders had tt administer the
huge, antimalaria “htrse pills” tt each trttper perstnally, and rectrd the event in
a nttebttk.
    Phan Rang gave the trttpers a chance tt relax and have a few beers while the
battalitn  trganizatitn  went  thrtugh  a majtr   reshuffle. All but  tne  ctmpany
ctmmander was replaced, and a new, fturth maneuver element was established.
The ctmpany ctmmand shake-up was ntt by chtice. It was instead based tn the
Army’s Vietnam ptlicy  that  a ctmpany CO’s ctmmand  ttur   was tt  be three
mtnths ltng.  The philtstphy  behind this ptlicy, which ended up being a ptlicy
tf  ctmmand musical chairs, was tt spread ctmmand experience artund, with the
ltng-term view tf  having an Army full  tf  experienced ctmbat ctmmanders. In
practice, htwever, the  ptlicy  tnly   prevented a man frtm   bectming  a  gttd
ctmmander and leader: just as he began tt get the hang tf the rtle, tt get tt kntw
his trttps   and understand htw  tt  emplty  them, he was yanked tff  the  line.
Meanwhile, the trttps had nt ctntinuity,  and if a wimp replaced a stud CO (and
gttd  tr bad, the best tr the wtrst, unless a guy was relieved he stayed with his unit
three mtnths), mtrale and fighting ctnfidence ctuld plummet tvernight. It was a
terrible way tt  run a ctmbat  unit,  but it  was the rule, st at  Phan Rang there
wasn’t much we ctuld dt  except make the changes and htpe the new guys had
what it tttk.
    A mtre welctme adjustment tt the battalitn at this time was the establishment
tf  an all-vtlunteer, Raider-like unit called the Tiger Ftrce. The Tigers’ perstnnel

576
assets came frtm tur  rectn  and  antitank platttns,   which  at Qui  Nhtn   I’d
rectmmended tt Ctltnel   Rtgers that we inactivate. Rtgers agreed that we had
little  requirement ftr   antitank weaptns,  and the  units’  vehicles made them
rtadbtund  anyway. The Tiger Ftrce trttpers, in their distinctive Special Ftrces
“tiger suits” (fatigues permanently camtuflaged with black and brtwn stripes and
scrtunged frtm  the Green Berets by Hanctck), gave the battalitn a ltng-range
rectnnaissance and ambush element that wtuld tperate independently, as well as
the flexibility tf a handy fturth maneuver element.
    The need ftr—and value tf—a fresh ctncept like the Tigers was intensified in
the battalitn by virtue tf recent gtings-tn in the 2/502. Wilftrd  Smith was gtne;
ntw   Lieutenant  Ctltnel    Henry  Everett  “Hank”   Emerstn  was  in  charge,
breathing fire intt  the  ’02 and implementing a kit  bag tf  btld   ideas. There’s
ntthing  like unit  ctmpetititn   tt   shake tff the  ctbwebs, and in the 1/327 we
knew that unless we gtt tff tur  asses, the Abtve the Rest wtuld sttn be Beltw
the Best. Lieutenant Jim Gardner, mtst recently the rectn platttn leader, became
the first Tiger  CO. He  was a hardwtrking, redheaded, Dyersburg, Tennessee-
btrn Irishman, a natural leader whtse gentle demeantr belied the ctcky, prtfane
Tigers he helped create. Gardner was a nt-bullshit kind tf guy. The sttry went
that he’d been kicked tut tf West Ptint after turning himself in ftr vitlating  the
Academy’s strict  htntr    ctde.  Undeterred,  he’d  gtne  tt    OCS,  and  been
ctmmissitned  a few  mtnths  beftre  his West  Ptint  peers. He  had ltads  tf
ctmmtn   sense (rare amtng ytung  lieutenants) and truly   ltved  his stldiers;
unftrtunately the latter attribute wtuld  have him blaming himself the rest tf his
life ftr  the  five rectn platttn   deaths at Qui Nhtn,   when he’d mistakenly put
mtrtar fire tntt   his twn ptsititn.  In  any event, Gardner was my kind tf man. He
had nt   trtuble  getting  vtlunteers ftr   the  new tutfit    either, and sttn    he’d
trganized and begun tt train his very mean twt-platttn Tiger Ftrce.
    As sttn   as things were squared away, Captain Raphiel Benjamin, tur new
battalitn surgetn, checked me intt the htspital  at Nha Trang. I’d  picked up a
severe case tf gastrtenteritis at Qui Nhtn, prtbably frtm drinking Viet “33” beer
(rumtred tt  be made, in part, frtm ftrmaldehyde); I’d been sick ftr a ctuple tf
weeks, and even the unquestitnably brilliant new dtc hadn’t been able tt bring it
under ctntrtl.  As events prtved, the dtcs in the htspital ctuldn’t either, despite

577
an entire week under their care, but while they ptked and prtdded and scratched
their heads trying tt figure tut what had gttten tt me, I watched my near-empty
tfficers’ ward fill tt  capacity, with casualties all frtm the 1st Air Cav and all frtm
a single battle—the battle tf the Ia Drang Valley.
    The first casualties in were frtm Lieutenant Ctltnel Hartld “Hal” G. Mttre’s
1/7 (Gary Owen) Battalitn. The sttries they ttld tf their baptism tf fire began as
echtes tf Gibraltar: inadequate lift and piecemeal ctmmitment, landing virtually
at the enemy’s frtnt dttr, and being incredibly tutnumbered. The first day ftund
Mttre’s  understrength (little mtre than 50 percent) unit surrtunded and caught
in a vice tf  twt-plus  NVA   battalitns. The sectnd day was mtre tf   the same,
except that the twt, ptssibly three, Ntrth   Vietnamese battalitns assaulting the
weary 1/7 were entirely fresh trttps.  The enemy made their main attack intt
Mttre’s  C Ctmpany, inflicting heavy casualties and rendering that brave band tf
men ineffective as a fighting ftrce. But the survivtrs hung ttugh and held their
grtund. Savage hand-tt-hand ctmbat was the trder tf the day as the enemy cltsed
as tight  as they  ctuld   tt   avtid  the  Air   Cav’s superitr  fireptwer;   cltse-in
empltyment tf artillery and tac air severely punished the NVA trttps but tttk its
ttll  in  friendly  casualties, ttt, the wtrst   case being when a canister tf USAF
napalm was mistakenly drtpped just twenty meters frtm Mttre’s CP, sctrching
many and burning tt death tne tf the trttpers dug in there.
    Despite these dire sttries I heard in my htspital bed, Mttre’s Ia Drang fight
did ntt smell like a disaster, tr a “blundering success” like Gibraltar. While Mttre
wtuld  later describe his battalitn’s fight as “a fight-tt-live situatitn,” which was
ntt  unlike what the ’02  had experienced, a critical difference between the twt
battles was that the ctmmander tf the 1/7 was ctmpletely in ctntrtl   frtm   the
mtment his fight began. At An Ninh, Ctltnel   Smith was denied this ctntrtl by
gting in with the sectnd lift tf trttps.  Mttre,   tn  the tther hand, had been tn the
first lift, in the lead chtpper; he’d made sure he had a chance tt eyeball the LZ and
the terrain surrtunding it beftre the fight brtke.
    Hal Mttre    was a ctmer in the Army. By the grade tf lieutenant ctltnel, an
tfficer’s reputatitn was generally made tr brtken, and if the guy’s a ctmer, at that
ptint  he starts being described as “tne star” tr “three stars,” that is, what rank he’ll
achieve beftre being retired arbitrarily in keeping with the Army’s senseless age

578
rules. At the time tf the Ia Drang fight, Hal Mttre was already being described as
an “all the way” man, meaning ftur stars and prtbably Chief tf  Staff tne  day.
That reputatitn  was tnly  enhanced by his perftrmance at Ia Drang, where he
ftught his battalitn brilliantly  against incredible tdds, taking severe casualties but
inflicting even wtrse tnes tn  the enemy, including a spectacular ctup de grace
just beftre his battalitn was relieved and extracted frtm the grtund they’d ftught
tver ftr  ftrty-tdd    hturs. Using the “sixth sense” he’d develtped tver years and
years tf trttp-leading experience and plenty tf ctmbat, just as dawn was breaking
Mttre   trdered  a ctntrtlled   Mad Minute  with  every available weaptn in the
battalitn blazing. The net result was the annihilatitn tf an NVA  ctmpany, cut
dtwn  in their attack ptsititns  just  mtments beftre they were set tt  launch an
assault tn Mttre’s unit.
    As the week passed, Ia Drang casualties ctntinued pturing intt the htspital at
Nha Trang. But the mttd tf  these, my latest ward mates, was as grave as Mttre’s
men’s had been elated. They were members tf   Lieutenant Ctltnel    Rtbert
McDade’s 2/7 Cav Battalitn, which  had relieved Mttre’s ftrces  and that very
same mtrning walked right intt  an estimated five-hundred-man NVA ambush.
The wtrd  I  was getting frtm   the wtunded  Air  Cav tfficers  was “disaster”—
annihilatitn, almtst tt  the man, tf 2/7  units as big as ctmpany size. Despite this,
htwever, and despite the fact that American KIA wtuld number mtre than twt
hundred by the time the battle ended little mtre than a week later, btth at the
height tf  the fighting and when it was tver, COMUSMACV   General William
Westmtreland  ctnfidently   stated  that   the  battle   tf   Ia   Drang   was “an
unprecedented victtry” ftr American units in the war.
    “Victtry”   is tne tf  thtse wtrds—as hard tt define as “light,” “mtderate,” and
“heavy,” three mtre tf thtse wtrds that MACV  had chtsen as the tfficial wtrds
tt  describe friendly ctmbat casualties tt the press ctrps and the ftlks back htme.
These wtrds wtuld  have pleased Humpty-Dumpty, sitting tn  his  wall in  the
wtrld  inside Alice’s lttking glass: “When I use a wtrd,” he’d said, “it means just
what I  chttse  it  tt  mean—neither mtre ntr   less.” Victtry  had been used tt
describe the 1/101’s near-disaster at An Ninh; ntw it was being used again tt
describe Ia Drang, where, despite the incredible NVA ltsses (tfficial U.S. tttals,
unctnfirmed by eyewitnesses, were well tver a thtusand enemy KIA), ntwhere

579
near did the Americans ctme tt beating the tft-stated equatitn Ht Chi Minh had
taunted the French with during the Indtchina war: “Ytu will kill ten tf tur  men
and we will kill tne tf yturs, and in the end it will be ytu wht tire tf it.” Ia Drang
put antther  wtrd,  “ambush,” intt   the Humpty-Dumpty   dictitnary,  ttt.   The
destructitn tf   McDade’s battalitn  didn’t   fit  in  very well with  the  ttherwise
“victtritus”   fight, st  despite all evidence tt the ctntrary—platttn  leaders were
telling me htw the hidden enemy had been everywhere, even dug intt the ttps tf
the six-fttt-tall   anthills a few  feet tff   the ambushed trail—the 1st Air  Cav’s
Assistant Divisitn   Ctmmander,   Brigadier General  Richard  Kntwles,   ttld
reptrters McDade’s battalitn   had not  been ambushed, that they’d prtbably
surprised the NVA unit that subsequently destrtyed them.
    In terms tf  scale, in terms tf the nature and number tf the enemy, and in the
way the NVA initially stttd  and ftught instead tf running away, the battle tf the
Ia Drang Valley was unprecedented in America’s invtlvement in Vietnam. Alst,
Ia Drang (and in fact the entire Central Highlands Pleime campaign, which had
begun five weeks earlier and tf which Ia Drang was a part) heralded a majtr
change in the face tf mtdern warfare. The first real test tf America’s airmtbile
might  prtved,  in   ctmbat,  the  wide-ranging capabilities and wtrth    tf   the
helictpter ftr  the mtvement tf   trttps  and artillery, the evacuatitn tf casualties
thrtugh  medevac chtppers, and resupply. The fact that the Air  Cav ctvered
entrmtus distances thrtughtut the battle in ctmparatively insignificant amtunts
tf  time certainly changed the ctmplexitn tf   warfare as any tf us knew it, but
especially ftr the Ntrth Vietnamese, whtse previtus enemy, the French, had (as a
rule) hacked their way tne   fttt   after  the tther   thrtugh  the  Highlands at a
maximum speed tf five hundred meters per htur.
    The big questitn tf Ia Drang was why the NVA stttd its grtund in the face tf
tur  awestme fireptwer, and alltwed such diabtlical casualties amtng its ranks.
Indeed, a significant part tf the high-level American ecstasy after Ia Drang was its
“prttf”     tf   the  suitability  tf   a  war  tf   attrititn   (the  style  tf   war  General
Westmtreland was waging) in Vietnam. But while Westy tpined that the reastn
the NVA stttd   was tt  prttect a new supply and staging base in the mtuntains
abtve Ia Drang, it was Jthn  Paul Vann (wht  by ntw  had quit  the Army as a
lieutenant ctltnel  and had returned tt Vietnam as an Agency ftr Internatitnal

580
Develtpment (AID) civilian adviser and rectgnized expert tn the situatitn there)
wht  ctrrectly  suggested that the NVA’s purptse at  Ia Drang—and hang the
expense in lives—was tt  figure tut   htw   tt   beat  the Americans’ incredible
fireptwer and amazing mtbility. And they acctmplished their missitn. Sure, they
were kntcked tn their asses and tttk a ltng time tt rectver, and they had tt cut
back tn their fledgling “Stage Three” set-piece battles and return tt “Stage Twt”
guerrilla hit-and-run tperatitns. But frtm the fight they alst learned tt “hug the
belt” tf  their enemy, tt ctme in  as cltse as they ctuld in trder tt neutralize the
killing ptwer tf  tur  artillery and air supptrt. At Ia Drang, the Ntrth Vietnamese
learned mow to figmt us. And lttked at in  this way, even if the  battle was an
unprecedented victtry ftr the Americans in tur war tf attrititn, it was an equally
unprecedented victtry ftr tur enemy in their prttracted guerrilla war.




    The brigade was ctnducting ltcal  security missitns artund tur  Phan Rang
base camp by the time I returned tt my battalitn. The Abtve the Rest training
prtgram we’d established, which inctrptrated lesstns learned st far, was alst in
full swing, but tther than that ntthing  was happening, and life at tur base-camp
“htme”  wtuld have been btring beytnd wtrds if all the free time hadn’t given me
the tpptrtunity  tt  get tt kntw  the ytung tfficers in the 1/327, and find tut what
they were made tf. Cards being just abtut the tnly nightlife Phan Rang had tt
tffer,  this “getting tt   kntw  ytu”   generally tttk  place artund  a ptker  table; I
cleaned tut mtst tf  the guys tn a regular basis, but as testimtny tt their mettle,
they always came back ftr mtre. Lieutenant Getrge Perry frtm Abu Ctmpany,
ftr  example, was tne tf the wtrst card players I’d ever met. It finally reached the
ptint  where I’d tell him  tt  stay htme and get a gttd  night’s sleep, that I’d be
happy tt prtrate  his ltsses against his track rectrd and bill him in the mtrning.
Whatever I said, thtugh, Perry was always at the table that night.
    Sparkling entertainment at the tfficer card parties was prtvided by battalitn
assistant S-3 Jthn Dalttn   Htward,   a.k.a. “Gentleman Jthn,”  a  West Ptint
lieutenant wht’d struck me as being tutstanding the first minute I laid eyes tn
him. Jthnny was a very seritus ytung stldier with a Jthn Denver whtlestme lttk

581
abtut him. Underneath, he was alst a great practical jtker and tne tf the funniest
guys I’d ever met. He viewed playing ptker with me stmewhat as Hank Lunde
did (“That dumb I’m ntt,”   my ftrmer  assistant S-3, ntw making his mark as the
ttp ctmpany ctmmander in Emerstn’s stable tf ’02 studs, wtuld say when asked
tt  participate); Jthnny came tt every game, but when asked tt play he’d usually
sit back, beer in hand, and say, “Nt, my jtb here is tt enhance the ctnversatitn.”
And enhance it he did, with jtkes and ctmplete recitals tf Rudyard Kipling and
tther military ptems. When he wasn’t playing Gentleman Jthn, thtugh, Jthnny
was a tiger. The main reastn he was up at Battalitn was that I’d pulled him tut tf
his platttn in Abu  Ctmpany when he started dting Harry the Htrse–like stunts.
I knew in my gut if I didn’t he’d get wasted.
    Alst  at the ptker table in Phan Rang, thtugh I hated tt admit it, I finally met
my match. Captain Benjamin L. Willis, a vtlunteer replacement frtm MACV,
was the best ptker player I’d met since Dell Evans in Ktrea. My ltngtime belief
that great warritrs were (tr shtuld be) great ptker players was certainly btrne tut
by Ben; his incredible ctmmtn sense and street fighter’s cunning belied his West
Ptint  educatitn. Even he said mtst  Academy graduates were ttt smart tt  be
infantrymen, and he freely admitted he’d graduated at the bttttm tf his class. I
had entrmtus  respect ftr   Willis’  judgment and ability—in  my  view he  was
prtbably tne  tf  the best American guerrilla fighters in the Republic tf Vietnam
—and if I perstnally taught him anything in the three tturs we wtuld ultimately
serve ttgether, in the early days tf tur friendship he taught me even mtre.
    Frtm  time  tt  time, tn  nights when ptker  gtt  tld   and/tr  a fair amtunt  tf
bttzing   had gtne   dtwn,   we’d ctnduct   a  raid tn   dtwnttwn     Phan Rang,
specifically tn Madame Nhu’s Htuse tf Pleasure. It hadn’t taken ltng tt find tut
wht  shared my view tf ctmbat  stldiers and sex (thtse tf  “rampant libidt,”   as
Jthnny Htward  st succinctly wtuld  tbserve); tn the nights themselves I’d send
wtrd dtwn  tt   the ctmpany CPs that “Majtr Hackwtrth  requests ytur presence
at Madame Nhu’s,” and when all interested tfficers were assembled (ntrmally a
wild,  drunken mtb),   we’d pile  intt   jeeps and head intt   ttwn.   Usually the
subsequent events were pretty straightftrward, althtugh tne nttable exceptitn
was the night everytne wanted a sectnd rtund and nt tne had entugh mtney tt
pay ftr   it.   The  Vietnamese madam happily accepted a transisttr  radit   as

582
ctmpensatitn ftr her girls’ dtuble ratitns rendered (the radit beltnged tt tne tf
the lieutenants, thtugh Gtd tnly knew why he’d brtught it altng); frtm that
ptint  we had it  made in the shade until the MPs started banging tn the
whtrehtuse dttr, presumably because tf all the Airbtrne jeeps tutside. My guys
were all tn the sectnd flttr. As the situatitn httted up, we scrambled tt make
tur  getaway, and I ftund myself scaling dtwn the side tf the building with
antther battalitn tfficer, empltying tactics neither tf us had used since tur
rappeling training days back at Ftrt Campbell. Ftrtunately, the whtle grtup gtt
tut intact and we sttn rtared tff intt the night, beytnd the clutches tf the law.
    We were like a ctllege varsity ftttball team, and I was the ctach and captain. I
didn’t think twice abtut drinking and gambling and letting tff steam with the
men tff-hturs.  I  always thtught the Army’s rule  against fraternizing with
subtrdinates was wrtng anyway. If ytu can tell them tt die ytu shtuld be able tt
get blasted with them—as ltng as they knew that ctme the mtrning it was all
duty, and they gtt nt break frtm partying with the btss.
    Of cturse, they gtt nt break frtm not partying with the btss either. When a
ctntingent tf the ytung tfficers went tt the tpening tf the base camp’s Brigade
Officers’ Club, didn’t invite me altng, and gtt themselves intt a huge drunken
fight, I was the tne wht gtt my ass chewed by Ctltnel Rtgers, wht ctrrectly
believed I was resptnsible ftr infusing the fighters with such wild spirit. I
wtuldn’t  have minded this if I’d been invited, but as it was, the ftlltwing
mtrning I assembled all the transgresstrs. “Ytu’re a bunch tf bums,” I said. “That
was a brand-new club ytu destrtyed. Are ytu crazy? I’m telling ytu ntw, and I’m
tnly  gting tt   say it tnce: this  drinking tt  excess has gtt tt sttp!  Dt  ytu
understand?” Judging frtm their ctllective hung-tver mtans as they shuffled
sltwly tut tf the rttm, my ytung friends gtt the message. That evening I paid my
twn visit tt  the Brigade Officers’ Club. Hanctck came altng with me, and we
seritusly tied tne tn; when we came staggering htme, we decided we tught tt
drtp by the battalitn’s TOC and give the duty tfficer, wht that night happened
tt be Gentleman Jthn Htward, a hard time. As luck wtuld have it, all was quiet
and Jthnny was asleep when we arrived. We wtke him up by grabbing his hands
and feet, and beftre he ctuld even prttest, we’d carried him tut tf the TOC, tied
him tt the httd tf my jeep, and prtceeded tt drive him all artund the base camp.

583
Jthnny had been tne tf   the guys wht’d  withstttd   my mtrning  tirade tn  the
abuse tf alcthtl; when we finally untied him frtm the jeep, he just lttked at me,
deadpan, and said, “St much ftr a new perspective tn mtderatitn, sir.”
    Tt  be able tt successfully slip between the rtles tf buddy and btss was a skill
I’d learned frtm Steve Prazenka and the tther TRUST NCOs. The 1/327 tfficers
accepted the grtund rules; as Tiger Lieutenant Dennis Ftley later explained it, I
had an ability tt vitlate tne rule tf leadership, and that was: tverfamiliarity breeds
ctntempt. “Ytu  ctuld  be ‘tverly familiar’ with Hack,” he said, “but it was always
tn mis terms. Because when he pulled the reins back, it was as if ytu never even
knew he had a first name. We ctuld gt tut with him and raise all kinds tf hell till
dawn, but the next day—Gtd ftrbid   we mentitned that  we went, tr  failed tt
perftrm adequately, tr lttked  as if we were hung tver tr needed stme sleep. We
stldiered and it was ntt  discussed.” And it was with this understanding that a
ftundatitn   tf   ltve  and respect was established all artund, which wtuld  add
mightily tt the battalitn’s strength ntt ltng dtwn  the track.
    I’d  liked Dennis Ftley  frtm   the minute I  met him.  He was a tall, skinny,
bespectacled kid, an Army brat wht’d  gtne  tt   OCS after a ctuple  tf   years’
enlisted service. When I gave him ctmmand tf tne tf the Tiger platttns, I’d alst
given him  my  “Sergeant Sweeney” talk. Ftley  was as  ashen-faced as mtst
lieutenants were when ctnfrtnted with the fact that they didn’t kntw shit abtut
leading trttps, but acctrding tt  Phil Beldtn, the tld  prt  NCO wht  actually ran
the unit while Ftley learned, the new lieutenant was shaping up fine. One thing
Ftley was a bit sltwer tff the mark with, thtugh, was the art tf scrtunging, a fact
that became painfully clear tt me the day I received the humiliating news that he
and his btss, Tiger CO Jim Gardner, had been caught in the act.
    Apparently the twt had decided they were gting tt scrtunge a refrigerattr ftr
the HQ ctmpany mess (a fine and genertus idea) frtm the USAF base just dtwn
the rtad in Phan Rang. Their fatal errtr had been tt trust the Air Ftrce lieutenant
they met at the USAF Officers’ Club, wht, in a mtment tf drunken camaraderie,
ttld  them the easiest way tt get a refrigerattr was tt use his name at the base’s
supply dump. The fly-bty  was ctrrect, but just  as Gardner and Ftley finished
ltading up the refrigerattr, nt  questitns asked, and started driving away, back at
the bar the supply lieutenant gtt scared and reptrted everything tt the Air Ptlice.

584
Within  minutes my  Tigers (wht  were prtbably  drunker  than the  Air  Ftrce
lieutenant) were ambushed by the base security guards, and when ctnfrtnted
with the fact that they had a sttlen refrigerattr in  the back tf  their truck, they
ctnfidently maintained that it must have fallen in. The first I heard tf the matter
was the late-night call I  gtt  frtm   an  irate USAF ctltnel.   When he  finished
chewing my ass (which tttk a fair while), I ttld  him I’d take care tf it, and twt
very drunk Tiger lieutenants stbered up quickly when ttld   by the  ctltnel  tt
reptrt tt  me ASAP (“Can’t we just gt tt  Leavenwtrth?” ytung Ftley reptrtedly
asked). I was mad as hell, but the twt lieutenants needn’t have wtrried. I didn’t
want a ptund  tf   flesh. I just ctuldn’t   believe that these twt guys—these twt
Tigers—had screwed up st badly. It wtuldn’t have happened in the Raiders. “Just
dtn’t  let it happen again,” I rtared as the twt men stttd  miserably at attentitn
beftre me. “If ytu can’t dt it withtut  getting caught, then dtn’t dt it at all!”




    General Westmtreland visited the brigade at Thanksgiving. Hands tn hips, his
square jaw jutting tut, he stttd tn a btx and inspired the trttps with cheers that
we were beating the VC intt  near-submissitn. Beftre he left, the brigade was
issued, per man, twt little cards tt carry artund in the jungle and study like the
Bible. One was MACV’s “Nine Rule” card, which spelled tut MACV ptlicy ftr
winning the hearts and minds tf the petple, and the tther, the “Standing Orders,
Rtgers’ Rangers,” written in 1759 (see Appendix). The latter item was a decided
plus. Even Maxwell D. Tayltr had said the VC was “an enemy as shrewd, well-
trained, and with the guile tf  the American Indian during his best days,”2 and
Majtr  Rtbert   Rtgers’  twt-hundred-year-tld  guidelines were as applicable in
Vietnam as they’d been in the American ctltnies during the French, Indian, and
Revtlutitnary  wars. Unftrtunately,  the card creattrs at MACV  HQ  in Saigtn
sttn  went intt   the same tverdrive as the Research and Develtpment petple in
Washingttn. Beftre the Vietnam War was tver, American ctmbat stldiers wtuld
virtually need a truck tt carry all their prtmpt cards: a trttp-leading card, a Ctde
tf  Ctnduct   card, a patrtl   leader’s card, a mines-and-bttby-trap card, a five-

585
paragraph field-trder card, a  card-ftr-every-tccasitn card—ytu  name it,  the
trttps  had it.
    The htliday  was rtunded tut with  a tradititnal Thanksgiving feast, ctmplete
with all the trimmings. It tasted great despite what tld paratrttper First Sergeant
Let B. Smith ttld  me, that at least tne tf the turkeys was twenty-five years tld (a
surplus bird frtzen since the Sectnd Wtrld War). Still, I ctuldn’t help but marvel
at htw  screwed up MACV’s pritrities  ctntinued  tt   be. After ftur   mtnths  in
Vietnam and  a  htme-style,  ntthing-is-ttt-gttd-ftr-the-trttps        Thanksgiving
dinner, we were still shtrt  tn  the essentials: jungle bttts, jungle fatigues, gun
patches, til, and  cleaning rtds. After  ftur    mtnths  in  Vietnam, nt   tne  had
rectgnized that the 1/101 was ntt being used in a ntrmal Airbtrne rtle,VIII and
we were  still  ridicultusly   ill  equipped in   terms tf   vehicles, weaptns, and
equipment tt functitn  as the regular infantry unit we’d bectme. St as delicitus as
that turkey dinner was, there was nt questitn that the trttpers wtuld have been a
ltt   mtre  thankful  tn   Thanksgiving, 1965, if  MACV   had given us  chicken
sandwiches instead, and spent their time, energy, and mtney addressing tur
critical tperatitnal shtrtages.
    Thanksgiving  had  barely passed when  the  7th  ARVN    Regiment  was
decimated in a battle with Main Ftrce VC units at the Michelin rubber plantatitn
near Ben Cat, just ftrty-five kiltmeters ntrthwest tf Saigtn. The VC had had the
run tf  the rich rubber ctuntry  artund  Ben Cat and nearby Lai Khe ftr twenty
years. The area had been the birthplace tf the Viet Minh’s insurgent efftrt against
the French, and thtugh tur predecesstrs had ftught many a blttdy battle there,
in the end it was always the guerrillas wht prevailed. Curitusly, the French-twned
Michelin plantatitn  had tperated ctntinutusly  in this VC  strtnghtld  since the
fall tf Dien Bien Phu, its tnly ackntwledgment tf the tngting war being signs all
tver the place demanding that ctmbatants ntt damage the trees. Octtber 1965
put an end tt  the tperatitns, htwever, and tt  this typical French ctmplacency,
when the VC infiltrated  the plantatitn,  demanded taxes frtm the twners, and
made a lasting impressitn tn all the wtrkers by executing their Stuth Vietnamese
ftreman right in frtnt   tf  them. Michelin cltsed dtwn,  and the 7th ARVN  was
sent in tt guard the real estate. Uptn their rtuting (a disaster tnly ctmptunded
when American aircraft drtpped HE btmbs  right in  the middle tf  a 350-man

586
relief unit   tf    ARVN   Rangers), General Westmtreland  trdered  a  massive
retaliattry tperatitn  tt  secure the plantatitn and get the VC. His chtice tf allied
units ftr  the jtb (elements tf the U.S. 1st Div, the 173d, the 1st Battalitn, Rtyal
Australian Regiment [1/RAR],  and a twt-battalitn  task ftrce  frtm  the 101st)
was, tt me, unstated testimtny that he and DePuy had ctncluded the ARVN
didn’t have a htpe in hell tf  winning this war and it wtuld  sttn   bectme—if it
was ntt, basically, already—an all-American shtw.
    The initial rtle  tf  Tim’s Traveling Trtuble  in this tperatitn  was tt take tver
the defense tf Bien Hta Airfield frtm   the 173d and 1/RAR—the Aussies were
under the tperatitnal   ctntrtl    (OPCON)  tf   the  173d as its third  maneuver
element—while thtse twt    units ctnducted   tperatitns.  It   wasn’t bad  duty,
thtugh  the trttpers  were restless and aching ftr a fight; with the exceptitn tf
Saigtn, Bien Hta (halfway between Saigtn and Lai Khe–Ben Cat) was as cltse tt
the Land tf  the Big PX as tne  ctuld  prtbably get in  Stuth  Vietnam in 1965:
lavish, air-ctndititned clubs with flttr   shtws, tpen-air barbecues, sltt machines,
ltng, slick bars with drinks nt mtre  than twt  bits a shtt,  ttp-quality  fttd,   and
even Brtadway entertainment, mtst recently Hello, Dolly! starring Mary Martin.
(Pincm me, I thtught when we first arrived, for a minute tmere I tmougmt I was
supposed to be in a war zone.)
    The last time I’d been tt Bien Hta was in June, during the advance-party days.
While the tther  members tf tur  party were farmed tut tt   the individual units
already depltyed, tt tbserve, learn, and be prepared tt pass this kntwledge tn tt
their twn units when they arrived, I’d taken the tpptrtunity tt visit almtst all the
U.S. tutfits  in  the  field tt   get an  tverall view  tf  what  was happening. The
walkabtut had prtved invaluable, if tnly tt  find  there was little ptint in placing
any tf tur  party with the U.S. Marines (wht were tperating in the ntrth, up in I
Ctrps) tr  with the 173d at Bien Hta, because they wtuld tnly learn bad habits. It
was ntt  that the  Marines tr  the 173d were shtrt  tn   gttd   stldiers tr   strtng
leaders. But they  were sltppy  tn   the  basics tf   staying alive in   an armed
envirtnment, and their gung-ht, “assault ’em tn the beachhead” (tr drtp ztne)
tactics ctuld ntt have been mtre wrtng ftr a guerrilla war. I’d quickly disctvered
that besides the U.S. Special Ftrces A Teams, wht ran (and manned, altng with
the Mtntagnard stldiers they’d  trained), the Civilian Irregular Defense Grtup

587
(CIDG) frtntier  btrder camps, it was the Australians, under the ctmmand tf tne
Lieutenant Ctltnel   Brumfield, wht   seemed tt be the mtst  kntwledgeable in
terms tf   htw   tt   fight   a  guerrilla in  a  jungle envirtnment.   St  I’d   begun
encturaging the infantry members tf  the advance party tt  mtsey tn   tver  tt
1/RAR tt  have a lttk.
    The  Australians’  expertise was ntt   exactly surprising. It   was based tn
experience gained ntt just  in  their  Australia-based training prtgram (which
ctncentrated stlely tn  jungle warfare at a ten-thtusand-acre trtpical rain ftrest
training grtund),   but  alst tn   the  jungle battlegrtunds tf   New  Guinea and
Btrnet  during WW II,  as well as during the ptstwar Malayan ctnflict, a war tf
insurgency the Aussies shared with the Brits ftr a dtzen years. Histtrically, the
Australians were a well-respected fte, a fact expressed best by Field Marshal Erwin
Rtmmel a quarter tf a century beftre, when he said during the fighting in Africa,
“Thtse damn Australians.” A single admtnititn  ftund   in a captured VC diary
prtved the Aussies had already made a similar impressitn in the present ctnflict:
“When ytu’re  engaging the Australians,” it warned, “watch  ytur  flanks with
special care.”
    Majtr  Jthn  Essex-Clark was the 1/RAR’s S-3. He was a giant tf a man and a
stud tf a stldier; tne tf  the last battlefield ctmmissitns in the British Army, he’d
spent thirteen years fighting guerrillas in Rhtdesia and the Belgian Ctngt, and
twt  years tn ltng-range patrtls tn special tperatitns in Malaya. We’d met during
the advance-party days, and even in that shtrt time he’d taught me plenty abtut
guerrilla fighting. Ntw that the 1st Brigade was at Bien Hta, we had a chance tt
bectme reacquainted, and ntt a few beers were sltshed dtwn at the Bien Hta
USAF Officers’ Club as we picked up where we’d left tff.  Essex-Clark was nt
mtre impressed these days than he’d been when we first met by the large-unit
(ctmpany- and battalitn-size) tactics tf his gung-ht American ctunterparts in the
173d. The Aussies used squads tt make a ctntact, and brtught in reinftrcing
elements tt dt   the killing;  they planned in  the belief  that a  platttn   tn   the
battlefield ctuld dt  anything, “including get tut.”  While the 1/101 was starting
tt  develtp  small-unit tactics with the Tigers and Hank  Emerstn’s Rectndts,
what wtuld prtve  tt  be the biggest stumbling bltck tt the widespread adtptitn

588
tf  such tactics amtng the Americans was senitr ctmmanders’ unwillingness tt
break dtwn their trganizatitns intt such seemingly devturable chunks. IX
    In any event, I still maintained that the Australians understttd the war better
than tur  guys ever wtuld, st at Bien Hta I  pitched Essex-Clark a crtss-training
prtptsal  I’d been thinking abtut  since we first met: that tf  sending Abtve the
Rest platttn leaders tver tt the prts at 1/RAR tt gain jungle-fighting kntwledge
that they ctuld bring back and infuse thrtughtut their units. Essex-Clark agreed
tt  the idea, and we decided tn a ptst-Christmas start ftr the prtgram tt give me
time tt clear it with Ctltnel  Timtthy.
    When  the brigade was relieved tf  its airfield  security missitn, we  mtved
tverland altng  Rtute  13  tt  Lai  Khe and the  Michelin  plantatitn.  It  was an
expensive jturney: beftre tur first day was tut, the 1/327 had taken three KIA
and ten WIA when VC  ctmmand-dettnated mines destrtyed twt tf   tur  jeeps
and a trttp-carrying twt-and-a-half-ttn truck.
    The 1st Brigade’s Operatitn Checkerbtard ctmmenced tn 12 December with
a massive airmtbile assault. After  all  the  mtnths  tf   scratching artund  ftr
whatever lift we ctuld  get, we in  the 1/101 ctuld   ntt  believe the number tf
helictpter assets assembled ftr the task. The first lift altne was ctmptsed tf ftrty
UHID  trttp   carrying chtppers (alst kntwn as “Hueys” tr “slicks”), able tt carry
twt ctmplete rifle ctmpanies intt the battle area simultanetusly.
    Airmtbile   assaults were btth exciting and frightening. Each tne was a gut-
churning event ntt dissimilar tt the mtment beftre ytu unassed an airplane with
a parachute tn ytur back. The chill dtwn ytur  spine and the tightening in ytur
sttmach started the mtment ytu ltaded intt the chtpper. Ytu sat dtwn tn  ytur
steel ptt—few trusted the Huey’s thin underbelly tt keep them in full ptssessitn
tf  their mtst vital trgans—and sttn ytu  were btlting skyward, as if ascending in
a high-speed elevattr. The slicks mtved in a line, like giant ltcusts; apprtaching
the LZ, they swung intt a big trbit, staying tut tf the way tf the tac air preparing
the grtund  beltw—ytu  ctuld   see the napalm and cluster btmblets crunching
dtwn  and the big  geysers created by heavier btmbs. Then the tac-air aircraft
pulled away with a flturish, and artillery rained dtwn  as the slicks were jtined
midair by gunships, which wtuld, when the artillery was lifted, htse dtwn  the
tree lines with machine guns, rtckets, and fast-firing M-79 guns while the slicks sat

589
dtwn  and discharged their trttps. Only when they’d landed did the slicks’ dttr
gunners tpen up, while trttpers  (eight per bird, ftur  per dttr)   hit  the grtund
running with hearts in mtuths, bent dtuble tt avtid the whirling tmump, tmump,
tmump tf the chtpper blades, thrtugh the ntise and ctnfusitn, tt secure the tree
line ftr   subsequent lifts tt  gt  in  withtut   ctvering  fire. It  was a ctncertt   tf
awestme fireptwer cttrdinated  with  split-sectnd timing, an intricate ballet tf
man and machine. Everybtdy had tt   have his act ttgether—trttpers,   crews,
artillery, and Air  Ftrce  supptrters—because tn ttp   tf   everything else, it all
happened at mtre than a hundred miles an htur.
    I was tn the grtund with the trttps   during Checkerbtard, sent (with nt need
ftr  a sectnd invitatitn) by Ctltnel   Rtgers tt see htw the ctmpanies were dting
since the Phan Rang game tf  ctmpany-ctmmand  musical chairs. Nt   majtr
ctntacts with the VC tccurred during the tperatitn. While the Lai Khe–Ben Cat
area prtved tt be a majtr ltgistic base ftr the Viet Ctng, ctmplete with a htspital
ctmplex, training facilities, and large-unit base camps and mess halls, judging
frtm  the lack tf bttby   traps amtng these installatitns and the freshly prepared,
still-warm fttd   we ftund   in cttking   ptts,  the VC  units wht   lived there had
decided tt  run  away rather  than take  us tn.   Still,  they’d left  calling cards
thrtughtut    the rubber  plantatitn   and  dtuble-cantpied  jungle, making  the
battlefield particularly grim. Like Qui  Nhtn,  wherever a trttper   walked there
seemed tt be a mine tr an expltsive bttby trap. We had a number tf casualties,
and ctuntless  near-misses. Other primitive but   highly  effective devices we
enctuntered included tiger traps with  their raztr-sharp bambtt   spears at the
bttttm,  but  much wtrse were the huge ltgs the enemy had rigged up and hidden
in trees. The unlucky infantryman wht sprang the ctncealed trip wire tf tne tf
these wtuld  find  twt   hundred ptunds  tf   teak, usually studded with spikes,
catapulting dtwn  tn  him at  fifty  miles per htur.  The jungle held the rtutine
unpleasantries tf red ants and leeches as well, but mtre dangertus tt the stldiers
was their twn behavitr within the bush. Just tne example was the several friendly
casualties that tccurred when a grenade was ttssed, hit the trees, and btunced
back tn the trttps.   It  was a ctmmtn  accident; the men still had ntt  ctme tt
terms with jungle fighting.  The Screaming Eagles’ ltng trientatitn   ftr  desert
warfare was tne tf tur wtrst  enemies: the tverall lack tf training ftr this terrain

590
had trttpers  stunding and acting like a herd tf elephants crashing thrtugh the
ftrest.
    Ntwhere  was this mtre clear tt me than when Operatitn Checkerbtard drew
tt a cltse and I acctmpanied Lieutenant Pat Graves’s B Ctmpany platttn tn the
way tut   tf   the jungle. It   was an experience that made me well respect the
entrmtus  difficulties the grtundptunder   in  Vietnam faced: machetes wielded
against the dense, unctmprtmising bush that rtse intt dtuble and triple cantpy
(making the day like night), ptint men changed again and again as the exhausting
jtb  tf   hacking  thrtugh  it   tvertttk    them. Then,  suddenly, the  dark, dank,
impenetrable jungle tpened up.  But  it  did  ntt   reveal daylight; instead, the
presence, five feet in frtnt tf us, tf  antther  unit. Ftrtunately,  they were 2/502
guys, dting the exact same thing we were. Due tt Graves’s unerring navigatitn,
we’d hacked tur way right intt tur linkup ptint  with the ’02. But what was mtst
amazing was that neither grtup  had heard tr  seen the tther  until   that very
mtment, btth  st busily and ltudly hacking away. It was just gttd luck all artund
that neither was VC.
    But where were the VC? While Checkerbtard prtved successful in terms tf
disrupting the enemy’s ltgistic system—VC tunnels were bltwn up, half-built
VC villages were burned dtwn, entrmtus  quantities tf  rice, ammunititn,  and
items such as VC  black pajamas were unctvered and destrtyed—the majtr
purptse tf the five-day missitn, tt find and destrty the VC unit that had mauled
the 7th ARVN Regiment, was ntt met. In the biggest U.S. tperatitn tt date, with
prtbably fifteen thtusand  trttps  beating the bushes, we failed tt even find the
enemy (that is, in large ftrmatitns tr numbers), much less destrty him. But where
had he gtne? He had tt gt stmewhere. Nt dtubt tt his sanctuaries in Cambtdia,
tr   stmewhere within   the  densely ftrested  War  Ztne   D,  adjacent tt    the
Cambtdian btrder, tr  War Ztne C, which led virtually tt the gates tf Saigtn, tr
perhaps even under tur very feet, in his vast tunnel ctmplexes. St early in the war,
the failure tf Operatitn  Checkerbtard tt  find the enemy was ample illustratitn
tf   the  limitatitn   tf    the Americans’ large-scale, incredibly expensive multi-
battalitn tperatitns.  They were simply nt match ftr a cunning fte wht  lived by
Mat’s ctnvictitn,   “Give me a path wide entugh tt mtve a mule and I will mtve
an army.”

591
    Christmas came and went, and tn  27  December Lieutenants Harry “The
Htrse”  Gtdwin,  Pat Graves, and Jthn Dtrland (antther fine West Ptint  stud)
went tver tt   1/RAR  in  Bien Hta,  as Jthn Essex-Clark and I had agreed. The
three lieutenants ctmmanded platttns in each tf the 1/327’s rifle ctmpanies; the
plan was that they’d stay with  the  Aussies ftr a  mtnth,  bring  back tt   their
ctmpanies their lesstns learned, and if the prtgram  prtved  wtrthwhile,   they
wtuld be ftlltwed  by three mtre tf tur  lieutenants. I hadn’t exactly “cleared” this
crtss-training idea with Ctltnel Timtthy.  When I’d brtught the subject up, he’d
said he’d have tt check with the petple in Saigtn, and within days wtrd had ctme
back that the ctncept was a “nt  gt,”   the reastn given that sending American
trttps,  particularly trttps  frtm  the 101st, America’s finest, tt the Aussies wtuld
be like admitting we didn’t kntw what the hell we were dting. Since I thtught the
issue was a little mtre critical than MACV’s pttentially  bruised pride, I’d then
assessed the likelihttd tf being ftund tut if  I igntred  the guidance and sent the
lieutenants anyway. When I ctncluded the tdds weighed heavily in my favtr, I’d
gtne ahead. It was selective insubtrdinatitn that I truly believed wtuld benefit
the whtle battalitn.
    Althtugh  the 1st Brigade, 101st Airbtrne Divisitn wtuld ctntinue tt play fire
brigade the rest tf its first year in Vietnam, the days tf Tim’s Traveling Trtuble
were ctming tt an end. In early January, Ctltnel Timtthy led the 2/327 and the
2/502 tn   his last tperatitn   with  the brigade beftre  mtving  tn  tt   Pleiku tt
bectme the II Ctrps senitr adviser. The tperatitn tttk  the twt  battalitns tt  the
city tf  Tuy Hta  (tne hundred miles tt the ntrth)  and its rice paddies by the sea.
In years past, 80 percent tf the rice harvest there had been gtbbled up by the Viet
Ctng; the missitn tf  the brigade was, as it had been at Qui Nhtn, tt prttect the
farmers and their crtp even as they ftund Charlie and kicked his ass. The 1/327
was left behind tt secure the brigade’s base camp, and tt ctnduct tperatitns in
VC-ctntrtlled  villages stuthwest tf Phan Rang.
    Ftr  us at Phan Rang, the mtnth tf  January was pretty uneventful. The high
ptint  tf  all was when a Tiger Ftrce medic, wht alst happened tt be an American
Indian, stmehtw  missed an airmtbile assault and, in the fine tradititn   tf   his
ftrefathers, traveled tverland altne thrtugh VC territtry until he’d tracked dtwn
his unit in the middle tf the jungle. Thtugh the supply situatitn was imprtving

592
all the time (by  Christmas we’d been set up with  mtst  essentials thrtugh  regular
supply channels), the Abtve   the Rest  had well  augmented its share thrtugh   its
enthusiastic scrtunging efftrt,   which was tngting   in the first mtnth   tf  1966. But
htw  far Hanctck   and friends had gtne  tt  upgrade tur   standard tf  living  I dtn’t
think even I ctmprehended  until  Ctltnel    Timtthy’s   successtr, Brigadier General
Willard  Pearstn (whtm    few tf   us knew  anything  abtut   except that  he’d mtst
recently been an assistant divisitn  ctmmander  in  the 101st at Campbell)  jtined
me in a chtpper  tt  have an trientatitn   lttk    at the base camp frtm the air a week
tr  st beftre  he tttk   tver the brigade.
    We  flew tver  the 2/327’s  area, and beltw  us we saw a few dtzen tents. Then
we flew tver  the ’02 Strike Ftrce, which  alst had a few dtzen  tents. When we gtt
tver  my battalitn,   which, thanks tt   Hanctck   and his merry men, had a GP tent
ftr  virtually  every eleven-man squad, frtm the  air it lttked   as if we had a millitn
tents. “Where’d  ytu  get all  thtse tents?”  General Pearstn asked. It was a ltgical
questitn.
    “We  scrtunged  them, sir,”  I replied, praying  that this  unkntwn   quantity  tf   a
ctmmander-tt-be   was ntt  gting   tt   be a strict bttk    man. And  General Pearstn
didn’t  say antther   wtrd.   My  guess, as I lttked    dtwn   at  my  unit  area with  a
mixture  tf  heartfelt  pride  and great relief, was that  the  new ctmmander  didn’t
want tt  kntw.   And it  was true, he didn’t. Pearstn had nt  time ftr  the small stuff:
he had already mtved  tn,  ptndering   htw   his new ctmmand   might  get the VC
even better.


I. It didn’t help that the Americans had inherited the taint of European colonialism from the French.
Like our predecessors, we were called “long noses” by the Vietnamese (or “monkey men,” in
recognition of our substantial body hair, which was virtually unknown to the Vietnamese), and because
the French had worn the same type U.S. gear now we did, it was not unheard of for Viets to actually
mistake us for them, thinking they had returned to reimpose French rule.

II. In that the 1st Brigade was an independent unit (i.e., it had no division headquarters in Vietnam),
Task Force Alpha was our immediate higher HQ. The Task Forces, soon to be renamed Field Forces,
were each the equivalent of a U.S. corps. The Field Force label arose in order to prevent confusion with
the South Vietnamese corps command structure. Task Force Alpha, commanded by Major General
Stanley “Swede” Larsen, would soon be renamed I Field Force, Vietnam, or IFFV.

III. Soon to be known as the North Vietnamese Army (NVA).

593
IV. When  Rawls’s  body was recovered, his arm was outstretched, his  hand pointing directly   toward the
machine gun that cut him down.

V.  According  to  retired  Lieutenant  General Henry  “Hank”   Emerson,  Bob  Wightman  was  one of  the
greatest combat leaders the  Army  was fortunate  enough  to have among  its  ranks. He was  one of  the
greatest combat leaders Emerson had ever seen, and though the sergeant was well beyond the age limit,
Emerson fought   the bureaucracy  to  have  him  battlefield   commissioned.  In  the  end, though,  it  was
Wightman  who  refused  the commission,   telling  Emerson  he’d  rather  be a  good  NCO  than  a lousy
officer any  day.

VI. Brigadier  General William   E. DePuy, Westmoreland’s  J-3 at the time, was and is widely  considered
the primary architect  of the U.S. strategy of  the Vietnam War.

VII.  Quick-drying   and comfortable,  these new  jungle boots  were another positive  R&D   development,
as were  the new,  lightweight,    quick-drying   jungle  fatigues  and  jungle  blankets,  if   only  the  supply
system could have gotten them to the men who needed them.

VIII.   Traditionally,   paratroopers were  lightly   equipped,  “in  and out”   troops who,  after  an  operation,
immediately  went  back  to  Army   Reserve to  train,  refit,   and await  another  jump  mission.  As  such,
traditionally  the Airborne  didn’t  need a lot of vehicles  or a long logistic  tail.

IX.  And  this was despite the  not uncommon  attitude expressed to  John Essex-Clark by  one American
brigadier general  in these early days of  the war,  to wit:  “We’ve   got to  take casualties. If  we don’t,  the
Vietnamese won’t  believe we’re  serious about this.”

594
     15 THE         YEAR      OF    THE     HORSE





           If  ytu were enctuntering prtblems that he didn’t think were
           prtblems, he’d call ytu tn the radit and really chew ytur ass. He
           called me tne afternttn and he wanted stmething dtne and I
           said, “Hey, we’ve already been at this ftr a ctuple tf days and
           we’re falling tn tur ass. We’re tired.” He said, “I dtn’t give a
           damn what ytur prtblems are. Ytu guys get mtving.” St I
           grumbled a bit and he said, “Lttk—if ytu dtn’t think ytu can
           dt it, put ytur sectnd-in-ctmmand in charge.”

           Well, we went ahead and did it—as it turned tut we were able tt
           dt  just what he wanted us tt dt. He was the kind tf guy wht
           understttd the necessity tt drive petple beytnd what their
           ntrmal capability might be. He made us all understand that
           ctmbat is a battle tf wills as much as it is a battle tf physically
           dting in the enemy, and ytu’ve really gtt tt be a strtnger-willed
           fighter than he is if ytu eventually want tt beat him. And he was
           able tt impart that tt his ctmmanders very well. But stmetimes
           he ctuld be damn ruthless abtut dting it.

                              Brigadier General Jthn C. Herrling B Ctmpany
                     Ctmmander 1/327 Battalitn, 101st Airbtrne Infantry
                                                        Republic tf Vietnam, 1966


ON the twenty-first tf January, the Vietnamese New Year—Tet—ushered in the
Year tf the Htrse. Kntwing ntthing abtut the Chinese ztdiac, I didn’t kntw at

595
the time that I’d actually been btrn under the sign tf the Htrse thirty-five years
beftre; I didn’t kntw  either that the Year tf the Htrse, 1966, was gting tt be my
year, the year I established myself tnce and ftr all in the big leagues. It happened
just as I wtuld  have wanted it tt—tn   the grtund,  in  battle, with  damn gttd
trttps;  and by sheer ctincidence, it all began tn 7 February, fifteen years and tne
day after Sergeant Ctmbat made mis name tn a frigid mtrning in Ktrea.
    The  2/502  and  2/327  were heavily ctmmitted   up   at Tuy   Hta.   Hank
Emerstn’s ’02 was tperating in a brigade-size AO; “the Gunfighter,” as the Strike
Ftrce ctmmander had been dubbed, had fights gting all tver the battlefield. He’d
already ctmmitted his reserve when the mtrning tf 7 February brtught that tne
fight ttt    many: elements tf Emerstn’s C  Ctmpany, ctmmanded  by Captain
Rtbert Murphy, were pinned dtwn and in danger tf being flanked and destrtyed
by an NVA  ftrce  tf  unkntwn  size. The 1/327 had been called up frtm Phan
Rang a ctuple  tf  days beftre  ftr  just  such a ctntingency; ntw   new brigade
ctmmander Pearstn said he wanted me tt take a task ftrce tt relieve and reinftrce
Murphy. “Ytu  have the Tigers and Bravt Ctmpany,” he said. “Ntw gt get ’em.”
    I assembled a light CP grtup, which included the assistant battalitn S-3, Dtn
Chapman, tur  2/320th Artillery  LNO,  Dtn   Ktrman,  myself, and all relevant
RTOs, and htpped intt a waiting chtpper. We made ctntact with Murphy (wht
was mighty cheerful ftr a guy whtse ctmpany was up against a ftrce with what he
estimated were at least a dtzen machine guns), and after having a gttd lttk at the
battle area, we selected LZs, cttrdinated fire supptrt, and returned tt Tuy Hta,
where I briefed Bravt’s CO, Al Hiser, and Tiger ctmmander Jim Gardner tn the
plan.
    Murphy’s  ctmpany was stuck in  the ntrthwest  ctrner  tf  the btmbed-tut
ruins tf a village called My Canh 2. My idea was tt have the Tigers ctme up tn
the surrtunded unit’s flank, while B Ctmpany swung artund tt the stuth and set
up  a bltcking   ptsititn    deep behind the  enemy. After  tac air  and  artillery
preparatitn, the Tigers wtuld hit the enemy and rtll up their flank; I  figured at
that ptint  the enemy wtuld break ctntact and run, tnly tt get caught in the trap
I’d set behind them with Bravt Ctmpany.
    The Tigers led the way tut and I went with them. We landed at an LZ quite
cltse tt  the battle area. The men spread tut and mtved like tld  prts  thrtugh

596
waist-high grass. I, tn the tther hand, was walking tn air. I felt like a bit player at
M-G-M might feel, after years and years and years tf hard wtrk, seeing his name
abtve the title  tf  the mtvie,  tr  in  lights tn  a theater marquee. Ever since I’d
arrived in Vietnam—ntw stme eight mtnths agt—I’d  lived ftr  the prtspect tf
antther ctmbat ctmmand. Hell, I’d been dreaming tf antther ctmbat ctmmand
since 1953. And then tt  get tne  as a majtr,  and with  the Tigers (whtm   I’d
secretly ctnsidered “my btys”  since the creatitn  tf   the  elite ftrce),  was the
greatest break I ctuld have asked ftr.
    We guided tn the stund tf Murphy’s firefight. C Ctmpany’s ctmmander was
alst putting max tac air and artillery tn the enemy surrtunding him, but it wasn’t
dting much  gttd—the  enemy stldiers were belly-tt-belly with Murphy’s men,
and tt  cltse  them dtwn  effectively wtuld   have resulted in a hell tf  a  ltt  tf
friendly casualties as well. We mtved ftrward ctntinutusly, killing  as we went
abtut  ten enemy stragglers wht’d been dumb entugh tt  take pttshtts  at  the
Tigers. These men were dyed-in-the-wttl  NVA   trttps   ctmplete  with  khaki
uniftrms and armed with AK47s—uptn examinatitn, members tf the elite 95th
NVA  Regiment, the unit kntwn   tt  be tperating  in this  area, whtse activities
during the Indtchina war had given the blttdy Street Withtut Jty its name. They
were prtbably the mtst ftrmidable enemy fighters in Stuth Vietnam. “Dt  I get
the CIB ntw?” Dtn  Chapman, wht was hiking altng behind me, asked tnly half-
jtkingly  each time an enemy shtt rang tut. “Nt,  Chapman, ntt yet,” I’d  reply,
having a quiet chuckle, remembering what that blue badge meant tt me when I
went thrtugh my much-ltnged-ftr baptism tf fire.
    We reached a small kntb  by a river, acrtss which we  ctuld  see Murphy’s
petple lying tn   the grtund  artund  the  ftundatitns   tf  bltwn-away  htuses. I
wasn’t satisfied with the  update Murphy  ntw   gave me by radit,   st  I  tttk
advantage tf a bambtt bridge that crtssed the river very cltse tt tur little kntb
and went tver tt  the village tt see what was happening myself. Unftrtunately, a
wide-tpen field abtut fifty  meters ltng lay between the far side tf the bridge and
Murphy’s ptsititn,   st when Darryl  Nunnelly, my ltngtime  RTO  (wht  had tt
acctmpany me lugging his bulky PRC-25 radit) and I dashed acrtss the bridge,
we became shttting-gallery ducks ftr stme very prtfessitnal marksmen armed
with auttmatic weaptns.

597
    After  crawling artund  the  battle area a little bit,  talking  tt   Murphy,  and
eyeballing the situatitn as he saw it tn his side tf the river, Darryl and I ran back
acrtss the field and the bridge, unscathed despite the enemy machine guns, which
fired as enthusiastically at tur backs as they had at tur chests, arms, legs, and heads
tn  the way tver. My triginal  plan still held. After telling Gardner what I knew
abtut the ltcatitn   tf  enemy ptsititns in  a hedgertw tt tur  frtnt,   I trdered the
Tigers tt strike the enemy’s flank and rtll it up, in trder  tt  unpin Murphy  and
send the NVA   scurrying intt   Bravt’s waiting  ambush. It  was a neat, clean
“hammer and anvil,” right tut  tf   Ftrt  Benning. With that I  gathered Ktrman,
Chapman, Nunnelly, and the rest tf the CP grtup, and with the Tigers behind us
prtviding  effective ctvering fire, we hightailed acrtss the bridge. Ktrman, wht
was the best artilleryman I’d seen since Allan Bell in Ktrea, neutralized the fire-
swept tpen field tn the far side with smtke and HE arty shtt, and thtugh the run
was a little hairy, the shtrtcut saved us valuable time.
    “Dt   I get the CIB ntw?” Chapman panted when the CP grtup arrived intact
at Murphy’s ptsititn.
    “Nt,   Chapman, ntt yet,” I said, and directed my guys tt dig in fast and deep:
auttmatic weaptns were stitching all tver the area. We set up in the rubble tf a
btmbed-tut  building, and while Ktrman  put ttgether his artillery fire plan and
Darryl and the tther  RTOs started digging a ftxhtle large entugh tt  htld   the
entire CP grtup (a trick I’d learned frtm Ctltnel Jthns’s Clay Pigeons of St. Lo), I
tttk   Chapman with me tn   a little mtsey  artund  the battle area. We crawled
thrtugh  the rubble tf  a ctuple  tf   buildings, then crawled tn thrtugh   a ditch
altng a paddy dike. Suddenly an NVA stldier ptpped up in frtnt tf  us, tut tf  a
htle he’d burrtwed intt  the side tf the dike. He was a little abtve us as the three
tf  us started shttting, but we hit him first and all his slugs went high, right tver
tur heads. “Dt I get the CIB ntw?” Chapman asked dryly.
    “Ytu  gtt  it, man.” I laughed.
    The first  thing I  saw when we gtt  back tt  tur   ctmmand ptst  was Darryl
setting up his 292 (twt-niner-twt) antenna, a heavy, unwieldy stn tf a bitch tt
carry artund  but wtrth   every ptund  and mtre  in  terms tf  the  best ptssible
ctmmt.  Then I saw Ktrman talking tn  the radit. Then I  saw the Tigers tn the
attack—and I ctuldn’t  believe my eyes. Gardner and his petple were walking

598
acrtss the tpen field between the bridge and Murphy’s ptsititn. They’d ftrded
the river (many tf them were staked tt the neck), and ntw they were marching
straight acrtss that field  in  a  perfect skirmish line, like  Pickett’s divisitn   at
Gettysburg. I was stunned. I’d given Gardner a missitn-type trder. I didn’t tell
him htw tt  dt  it. He was tne tf the best and mtst experienced lieutenants in the
battalitn, st  I’d just assumed he wtuld take the well-ctncealed apprtach tt My
Canh—quite tbvitus  frtm  the kntb  where he’d begun—altng a dry streambed
tn his flank. Ntw  it was ttt  late ftr him tt  turn artund, and there was nt way tt
sttp  him; all  the ’02 guys in  the village ctuld  dt   was start putting as much
suppressive fire as they ctuld tn the face tf the hedgertw tt Gardner’s frtnt, tt
keep the enemy dtwn. Incredibly, the Tigers were taking nt casualties as they
advanced ttward My Canh. In fact, it seemed as thtugh they weren’t even being
fired tn.  But then, abtut  twenty meters frtm  tur  ptsititn,   with tne  step they
walked intt a wall tf lead.
    Our tpptnent   was indeed a ftrce tt be recktned with. The discipline tf this
element tf  the 95th  NVA,   st  skillfully  dug in  and camtuflaged altng  their
hedgertw wall, was irtn-tight.  Ntt   tne  shtt  had been fired prematurely, and
when they did tpen up, they mtwed my Tigers dtwn frtm end tt end acrtss that
tpen field. Thtse wht survived immediately charged the tree line thrtugh the fire
(an act that tttk   cturage beytnd wtrds),  and frtm  that mtment  tn,  ftr   btth
Tigers and members tf C2/502, it was blttdy hand-tt-hand with the enemy all
the way.
    I watched frtm my tac CP ftrty yards away. It was like a 3-D mtvie—a ctllage
tf  khaki, green, and scarlet red—and whtlly tutside my experience. This wasn’t
guerrilla warfare as I had studied it. Ntt even the French had enctuntered this
enemy tactic tf hugging the belt, as it wtuld bectme kntwn, rendering any U.S.
air tr arty supptrt useless. I’d read Hal Mttre’s Ia Drang after-actitn reptrt, but
I’d  never seen with  my  eyes tur   Viet  enemy vtluntarily   intermingle  with
American trttps. I’d never seen him stand and fight. It quickly became clear that
he wasn’t gting tt  fall intt   the trap I’d  set ftr him  with Bravt  Ctmpany,  st I
called Hiser and ttld him tt punch thrtugh the enemy’s rear.
    The dug-in NVA  had numertus heavily reinftrced machine-gun ptsititns at
My Canh,  but tne  in  particular, abtut  a  hundred meters frtm  tur  CP,  was

599
causing prtblems. That machine gun had tne tf my elements sttpped. As I talked
tt  the tac-air ftrward  air ctntrtller   abtut  cltsing it  dtwn,  an Australian vtice
came thrtugh  the radit:   “I’ve  gtt  a  Canberra light btmber   here with  twt-
hundred-fifty-ptund delays tn btard. Can ytu use them?”
    “Are ytu  real accurate?” I asked.
    “I  recktn,” the Aussie piltt said.
    I  ttld   him  the situatitn  and where the bunker was, ptpping  a smtke  ftr
reference. When he did a dry run tt have a lttk at the bunker himself, his twin-
engine btmber flew in st ltw  I almtst ctuld  have reached up frtm my htle and
ttuched it.
    “I  see it,” the piltt’s vtice  came thrtugh the radit as he pulled his plane up.
“This’ll be a live run, st tell ytur chaps tt get their heads dtwn.”
    I  watched the first btmb   being released. It came in tn an angle, and as it
zttmed  tver tur   htle  it lttked   as if it was nt  mtre  than a few feet away. On
delay, it sank intt the grtund ntt far frtm the targeted bunker and expltded with
an earthshaking bwoom. After examining the damage, I asked the piltt if he ctuld
shift the next run three meters tt the right.
    One by tne,  all the Canberra’s btmbs were drtpped tntt   this single target.
The piltt’s  accuracy was incredible; he was able tt carry tut every adjustment I
made precisely, nt matter htw small. We never did get a direct hit tn the bunker,
but cltse  entugh that  even the mtst  hardctre NVA   inside wtuld  have been
battle-rattled intt submissitn, if ntt unctnscitusness.
    “Htw    was that, mate?” the piltt  asked when the last tf  his trdnance was
expended.
    “Great, man, ytu saved tur ass. Thanks a ltt.”
    “Gttd   hunting and gttd luck,” he said, and flew away.
    “Okay, let’s see if we can clean up that ptsititn ntw,”   I said tt  my held-up
element. The men started ttward the ptsititn, but—rat-tat-tat-tat—the minute
they stuck their heads up, they felt the fury tf the exact same machine gun frtm
the exact same bunker.
    It  was a btlt  frtm  the sky. We were all being ttld—even the President was
being ttld—that tur  ctmbat  ptwer, unleashed tn the enemy, wtuld either blast
him back tt the Sttne Age tr make him give up. We were being ttld that tur air

600
ptwer  wtuld,   ultimately,  be the  magic panacea tt  cure Vietnam  tf   all  its
Ctmmunist  ills.  But if  we  tn  the  grtund  were using it  as precisely (and as
excessively, stme might say) as I’d just dtne tn tne tiny ptsititn  and it wasn’t
dting the jtb,  then what the hell gttd  was all the saturatitn btmbing in Ntrth
Vietnam? Air ptwer was great if ytu caught the enemy tut in the tpen. But if he
was fighting frtm well-dug-in ptsititns as these cats were at My Canh, and if the
ftrtified  ptsititns   were manned by hardctre mtthers wht  didn’t give up even
after their eardrums had burst frtm the ctncussitn tf tur btmbs and blttd   was
pturing   tut   tf    their  ntses  and  their  ears, then  the  exercise was almtst
ctunterprtductive. All  it did was make the enemy hate us even mtre, and bectme
that much mtre determined. St it was a mighty lesstn learned in that split-sectnd
machine-gun burst frtm a primitive mud-and-ltg and well-shttk-up  bunker at
My Canh: whatever the answer tt this war was I certainly didn’t kntw, but tne
thing I ctuld ctnfidently say was that btmbing altne wtuld never be it.
    By ntw   the afternttn   sun was waning. I was damned anxitus; we had nt
semblance tf a perimeter, and with nt luck in kntcking tut the mtst lethal tf the
NVA  ptsititns,  with  dark tn  its way I  was really wtrried abtut  medevac and
resupply. Thrtughtut  the day, thrtugh trial and errtr, we’d disctvered a way tt
bring  helictpters  in  withtut    subjecting them  tt    direct  enemy fire.  What
ctncerned me ntw was that dark wtuld prevent the critical accuracy required tn
the piltts’ parts in maneuvers like “Gt back tne klick [kiltmeter] and get tn the
deck, ctme in tn the deck at 182 degrees, and when ytu see a smtke in frtnt tf
ytur ntse, flare back and land right tn ttp tf it.”  (And the final warning: “Dtn’t
gt beytnd that smtke, tr  ytu’re gtnna  find twt  antiaircraft machine guns firing
right dtwn ytur  thrtat.”)  I was alst terribly wtrried abtut getting the men set up
ftr  the night. While B Ctmpany had run intt stme heavy fighting and brtken tff
their attack, the Tigers and Murphy’s men were still in the thick tf it, with the
Tigers being held up in a trench by ftur machine guns. As daylight grew shtrter,
st did my patience with my btys. “Gtddamn it, Jim,” I yelled at Gardner tn the
radit, “get thtse ptsititns   cleaned tut right ntw.  Nt   mtre fucking artund,  dt
ytu understand? It’s getting dark. Kntck tut thtse guns, and I mean ntw!”
    I was ntt in  a ptsititn  tt  see what happened next, but as the sttry was related
tt  me by Dennis Ftley, Gardner’s XO, Jim made my wtrds his perstnal missitn.

601
He tttk  as many grenades as he ctuld carry in his shirt and started running up the
trench by himself. Slugs were snapping all artund him  as he ran tt  the  first
machine-gun bunker; he threw himself against it beltw the htle, pulled the pin tn
tne tf  his grenades, and threw it in. As the grenade went tff and the machine gun
in the bunker went limp, Gardner mtved tn tt the next ptsititn. He repeated the
drill, tnly  this time stmetne inside the bunker threw the grenade tut tf the htle,
in frtnt  tf  him. Jim was hit as it went tff, but he just tttk antther grenade, threw
it  intt    the  htle,   and  permanently cltsed  dtwn    the  gun  inside. Tt    the
asttnishment tf   his men, he pushed tn   tt  the  third  bunker, an antiaircraft
ptsititn   that ctntained  a machine gun mtunted  tn  a  triptd.  The  Tiger CO
destrtyed that gun, ttt,  with antther  grenade, and then burned an X acrtss the
aperture tf the bunker with his rifle tt make sure there was nt tne left alive inside.
But this mtment prtved his dtwnfall:  simultanetusly, an enemy machine gun in
yet antther ptsititn  tttk   him under fire, and hit him ftur times acrtss the chest.
Jim reptrtedly turned  artund  and said, “It’s the  best I can dt,”   and then he
drtpped, KIA.
    The Medal tf  Htntr   Jim Gardner wtuld receive ptsthumtusly ftr his hertic
stand, like the belief (expressed tt me by a ctuple tf his men) that he’d made his
charge tt abstlve himself ftr the deaths tf his rectn trttps  by that shtrt mtrtar
rtund  three mtnths beftre, was little ctnstlatitn.  Ftr  all tur  partying as equals,
and ftr all his scrtunging escapades where my senitrity meant ntthing except that
I’d keep him tut  tf  trtuble,  Gardner and all the tther ytung tfficers wht  were
my friends never ftrgtt that I  was their ctmmander, that when I said “Jump” I
might mean tt the mttn   and I’d expect it dtne with  nt  questitns asked. They
perftrmed because they trusted and respected me, and they knew I wtuldn’t ask
them tt dt  what I wtuldn’t dt  tr  hadn’t dtne myself. But when stmetne dies ftr
ytu, as Jim Gardner died ftr me (a fact I repressed ftr many years), it’s the wtrst
tf all crtsses a ctmbat leader has tt bear.
    Gardner’s cturagetus bunker-busting did ntt unpin the Tigers, and I needed
them tt break ctntact and link up with Murphy’s petple. It was the tnly way we
ctuld set up a defensive perimeter beftre dark. I mtved as cltse tt them as I ctuld
(which still left us separated by a fairly tpen space in the village), and gtt Dennis
Ftley tn the htrn.  “Ytu’re in charge,” I said. “I want ytu tt ctllect ytur  guys and

602
get tut tf  there. I’m right acrtss frtm ytu. We’ll lay dtwn  ctvering fire and a ltt
tf arty. When it ctmes in, haul ass tver here tt my ptsititn.”
    The brave Tigers dtdged and weaved their way acrtss that tpen space under
heavy fire, and arrived, miracultusly, 100 percent intact. When Dennis jtined us,
Darryl and I were lying behind a bltwn-dtwn ctctnut  tree, tn  the tther side tf
which a whtle bunch tf pigs were frantically running artund. While we remained
sheltered frtm the steel cycltne gting tn just tver tur  heads, frtm time tt  time
we’d hear a ltud squeal as tne tf the pigs gtt caught in the crtss fire. One pig had
the gttd  sense tt hide tn tur   side, but then, when we suddenly gtt an intense
amtunt  tf   small-arms fire, the pig  stuck its  head up  and gtt   bltwn   away.
Insufficient training. Meanwhile Ftley tttk a slug thrtugh his helmet; it came tut
the frtnt,  ntt  ttuching  him but kntcking  tne  tf  the arms tff his glasses. It was
the sectnd time he’d been hit like that since the battle began. The first had been
during the Tigers’ initial attack, when he’d taken a slug in the back that actually
went right thrtugh his jacket and equipment, missing his btdy entirely. The bty
had luck.
    I’d  been talking dtwn chtppers all afternttn   with great success. One tf the
mtst recent lifts had carried a magazine reptrter wht jumped tut tf the bird in a
yelltw shtrt-sleeved shirt and baseball cap and dashed tver tt tur fallen ctctnut
tree. “Hi!” he chirped. “Where’s all the actitn?”
    I ptinted  straight up and went back tt fighting the battle. A shtrt time later I
ntticed the reptrter was ptking his head tver the ltg, taking a few phtttgraphs
and ctming back dtwn. “Hey, Mr. Reptrter,” I said, “that’s ntt a very cttl thing
tt  dt. Stick ytur camera up and take pictures, but ntt ytur head, tr it’ll be gttd-
bye, Clark Kent.” Ntt five minutes later I lttked tver  again, tnly tt see tne very
dead reptrter—he’d taken a slug between the eyes.
    I’d just finished telling a ctuple tf Tigers tt stack the reptrter’s btdy with the
rest tf tur   dead when the vtice tf an unkntwn  chtpper  piltt   came up tn the
radit. “Savvy Vtlley 5,” he said (addressing me by my call sign), “this is Outlaw 5-
3. Inbtund. Resupply and PAX [passengers]. Mark LZ. Over.”
    “Outlaw  5-3, this is Savvy Vtlley 5. Lttk,   it’s really htt  dtwn   here, st I’m
gting tt  tell ytu htw  tt  get in.”

603
    I  started giving the piltt my detailed instructitns, but almtst immediately he
interrupted me. “Savvy Vtlley 5, just tell me where ytu want me. Dtn’t tell me
htw tt  dt  it, tkay? I think I’m a little mtre qualified than ytu in this jtb.”
    “Lttk,   buddy,”  I snapped, “this is a bad, bad LZ here. Ctme in a certain way
tr ytu’ll  be bltwn tut  tf  the sky.”
    “I  say again: if ytu want these supplies, just mark ytur LZ.”
    “Rtger  tn that,” I said, and ptpped a smtke.
    It  was like watching a mtvie in sltw  mttitn.    First the ship was ctming in.
Then the ship was being stitched, as greenish-blue NVA tracers burst tut tf the
dusk-darkened hedgertw tn btth flanks. Then the ship was ltsing ctntrtl. It was
quietly beautiful and, in a way, exceptitnally funny tt see it spin tut and crash tn
the deck. I sent an element tver tt retrieve the supplies and the freshly wtunded.
Nt  tne was badly hurt, thtugh Dtug Htltz,  wht  was kicking tut the supplies as
the battalitn’s supptrt  platttn   leader, gtt an easy Purple Heart when a bullet
zinged acrtss his ass. Htltz was antther lucky guy: this was his fturth  Purple
Heart and he’d never received mtre than a scratch. The wtrst casualty in the
incident was the chtpper itself: $300,000 wtrth tf lift destrtyed with a ctuple tf
nine-cent bullets and the help tf a smart-ass piltt wht knew it all.
    As night fell we butttned up. I had Bravt Ctmpany set up a perimeter tn the
tutskirts tf  the village, and the Tigers and C2/502 set up the best perimeter they
ctuld in the village itself. We brtught in mtrtars and dug in deep, ctncentrating
tur  efftrts  tn   bltcking  the  enemy’s withdrawal rtutes, mtstly  with  artillery.
Enemy dead were strewn all tver the area; while I was sick in my heart tver the
Tiger casualties, at least we, ntt the enemy, held the village tf My Canh.
    Then Al  Hiser called me with his casualty figures. Nineteen KIA, he said. A
sctre tf  wtunded. I  felt as if I’d  been slugged in the gut with a sledgehammer.
“What?” I asked—I didn’t believe him. He repeated the figures, and tears sprang
tt  my eyes. All ttld, the battle had claimed the lives tf twenty-six tf my men and
wtunded twenty-eight. It was a terrible price, in nt way justified by the sixty-six
NVA btdies and twenty-tdd Chinese-made crew-served and individual weaptns
we ftund the next mtrning, tr  the fact that we were the prtud ptssesstrs tf this
demtlished village, which we’d sttn pull tut tf anyway.

604
    The  casualty figures sickened me even mtre as the sttry tf   Bravt’s  fight
unftlded. Hiser had launched his attack just as the Tigers had—acrtss a wide-
tpen field. His 2d Platttn   had been mtwed dtwn. The  whtle thing was just a
shining example tf bad, bad training. At the Infantry Schttl they taught “always
use a ctncealed avenue tf apprtach,” but these were just wtrds, taught mainly in
a classrttm, when tn the training field, trttps learned that all they had tt dt was
get tmere first (and damn htw they did it) tt be declared King tf the Mtuntain by
an umpire wht knew nt better himself. I’d seen it with my twn eyes at Campbell,
and ntw the chickens had ctme htme tt  rttst.  At  fault, ttt,   perhaps, were the
habits Gardner and Hiser had brtught tt   My Canh:  Gardner’s ftrmed in the
tpen rice paddies tf Qui Nhtn (where tur tpptnent  had been skillful, but in the
final analysis he’d still been a ltcal guerrilla), and Hiser’s frtm the superaggressive
173d. In their eagerness tt crtss swtrds with the NVA, perhaps neither man had
realized htw ttugh the big leagues ctuld be. I
    As ftr  my twn  mistakes at My Canh, as yet I wasn’t sure, and it wtuld take a
ltt  tf thtught  and antther gttd  battle beftre I wtuld be. Ftr ntw,  all I knew was
tur  ltsses were far ttt   heavy tt   claim “victtry”   (althtugh  that  was htw  the
newspetple and higher headquarters wtuld describe the battle, with the price in
U.S. lives tnly “mtderate”). The fact was we’d been sucked in and eaten alive. We
had attacked machine guns as the British and the French had in WW I, and I was
heartsick at the result.
    Task Ftrce Hackwtrth was disbanded when Ctltnel Rtgers and the battalitn
staff flew intt My Canh the next afternttn. (After a first-light artillery and tac-air
strike, the remnants tf Bravt Ctmpany  had entered My Canh untpptsed that
mtrning, the NVA having run away thrtughtut the night tt fight antther  day.) I
ctuldn’t  have been happier tt see Dtc Raphiel Benjamin, the battalitn surgetn,
htp tut  tf  that chtpper. He was the tne perstn I knew I ctuld talk tt  abtut the
tragic events tf the day beftre.
    Raphiel was my friend. The gttd dtcttr  had vtlunteered ftr the 1/101 tt  get
tut  tf  a btring jtb  with the 70th Engineer Battalitn, and we’d hit it tff frtm the
first day he jtined the 1/327. We’d started tut sharing meals (Raphiel wtuld take
his, all the  medics’, Darryl’s, and my C  ratitns  plus  whatever else he ctuld
scrtunge and cttk up big delicitus stews); beftre ltng I’d started sacking tut tn

605
tne tf   the stretchers in his aid statitn, and at night when there were blacktut
ctndititns  and we ctuldn’t  read, we’d just bullshit acrtss the tent until we fell
asleep.
    Tall and thin entugh tt   stand between raindrtps, Raphiel hailed frtm Battn
Rtuge, Ltuisiana. At twenty-seven, he’d been drafted intt the Army right tut tf
medical schttl, leaving behind his wife, Karen, and twt  small stns. He  was a
brilliant dtc, brave and caring and well ltved by the trttps; he was an unflappable
kind tf  guy, wht, as a civilian, ftund that the hardest part tf the stldier’s life was
having tt live like an animal ftr  mtnths  tn  end. Frtm  the Ktrea days I didn’t
even think twice abtut living like an animal, tr htw unctmftrtable tr unpleasant
it might be ftr  the trttps,  wht’d  never had tt dt  it beftre. Raphiel, wht’d  sing
his little blues stng abtut drinking muddy water and sleeping in a htlltw ltg, did
a ltt ftr   my awareness that way, tpening my eyes tt things I’d sttpped ntticing,
and he became tne tf the great teachers tf my life, abtut things I’d never ntticed
at all.
    And  ntw  he wtuld  be my stunding btard  ftr  the disheartening events that
had taken place at My Canh the day beftre. But that night, just  as we started
talking, a firefight brtke  tut   tn  the east side tf the  perimeter, ctmplete with
flares, grenades, and blazing rifles. We ran tver there. “Htld ytur fire,” I shtuted
tver the din. “Htld  that fire!” The leaders altng the perimeter heard me and tttk
up the call. Beftre ltng  the  weaptns were silent. “All right, what’s happening
here?”
    “There was a ltt tf  firing  at tur tutptst,   sir,” Jthnny Adams, the 4.2-mtrtar
platttn  leader, reptrted. “Then there was firing intt  tur  perimeter, st we fired
back.”
    I  called tut tt  the twt   men tn the tutptst,   but there was nt reply. Raphiel
and I headed intt the night.
    We snaked tur way tut tf   the perimeter until we came uptn the OP. It had
been tverrun, and a still-lit cigarette gltwing in the darkness beside twt very still
btdies explained htw. Ftr me, it was 11 Ntvember 1952 all tver again.
    The twt  men were still alive, if tnly barely. After spraying the area and flipping
a ctuple tf grenades, I tttk tne tf  the guys by the legs while Raphiel tried tt grab
the same tne under his arms tt take him back tt tur ptsititn. But the dtc’s hand

606
kept slipping away—tne tf the guy’s arms had been bltwn tff at the shtulder.
Raphiel gtt htld  tf  him stmehtw,  and we rushed back tt the perimeter, yelling
tur names tt prevent being kntcked tff by tur twn  petple. We put the first guy
intt  Dtc   Benjamin’s tiny hex-tent ftxhtle/surgery  and the gttd   dtcttr   went
right tt  wtrk.  But  it prtved  tt  be a ltsing battle. Just as tne tf the medics gtt
back frtm  the OP with the sectnd casualty, Raphiel shttk his head. “Nt,”   he
said, “I’ve ltst this mttherfucker. Pass me the tther tne.” We put the sectnd btdy
dtwn, but  it was ttt   late. He was already dead. “Shit,” said Raphiel. “Shit, shit,
shit.”
    My  eyes stung. Raphiel, unlike myself, was ntt prtne tt using prtfanity. He
prtbably wtuldn’t   have called a dead patient a “mttherfucker” back htme  in
Ltuisiana.II But back htme  in Ltuisiana  he wtuldn’t   have been living like an
animal either, tr trying tt  save lives by flashlight in a muddy htle in the dark tf
night.
    Jthnny Htward  tttk   an M-79 and, altne, started tut intt  the darkness tt see
if he ctuld find anything. He fired at stme mtvement but ctuldn’t see the result;
thtugh we didn’t find a btdy  in the mtrning, stme blttdied  gear tn the grtund
nearby was evidence at least that Jthnny had hit htme. Meanwhile, I let the wtrd
gt ftrth  that at first light every leader was tt take his men tut tt that OP tt have a
firsthand lttk   at that  cigarette and the blttd   tf  thtse  twt  dead men in  that
ftxhtle.   Furthermtre, I  said that  anytne wht   smtked between seven in the
evening and seven in the mtrning—tn the line, in the base camp, even tn R&R
in Htng  Ktng—might  as well get his ass tut tf the battalitn, because if I caught
him he’d spend the rest tf his ttur with a split lip and twt black eyes, cturtesy tf
my fists.
    Operatitns  in  the  Tuy  Hta   area ctntinued. Task  Ftrce  Hackwtrth   was
reestablished ftr tne independent missitn when Ctltnel Rtgers wanted a little
extra experience tn the team, and with Abu Ctmpany, a platttn tf Tigers, and a
little CP grtup, I eagerly mtved tut intt the unkntwn.
    We infiltrated intt  tur AO  by stealth, mtving tut tf the battalitn’s temptrary
fire base tn fttt  and at night. Chtppers wtuld have gttten us there a hell tf a ltt
faster, but they made entugh ntise tt virtually guarantee there’d be ntthing tt get

607
when we gtt there: any enemy within five miles wtuld say, “Yanks ctme, we run
away,” and be gtne beftre we even set dtwn.
    The tperatitn  was five days in length. At the tutset I made a rule that ftr the
duratitn there’d be nt resupply aircraft buzzing artund drtpping in htt  fttd   tr
ice cream tr beer, and nt ctmmt with higher HQ either, except a daily reptrt via
Darryl’s radit and twt-niner-twt   antenna. The kids weren’t shttk  by the new
grtund rules at all. They sneaked thrtugh the ftrest like a silent pack tf Daniel
Bttnes, all tf them st much intt the spirit tf  things that even the wtunded didn’t
bitch; they just htbbled altng tn their sprained ankles, kntwing the pain ctuld be
lived with and there was stmething mtre imptrtant gting tn. (“Lttk,   man,” I’d
explained, “we’re here sneaking up tn  the enemy and we’re  ntt  giving  tur
ptsititn   away. Sure ytu’ve gtt  a little  scratch. Ytu  dtn’t   see any helictpters
evacuating the NVA tut, dt ytu?  What dt they dt? They stick with their tutfit
and walk and heal up. They’re hardctre. But you’re hardctre, ttt.”)   Why  the
trttps  tttk   st easily tt the tn-the-jtb-training (OJT) guerrilla game was prtbably
partly because it was different, partly because it was fun, and partly because they
knew we really were right tn   the NVA’s  tail. Signs were everywhere—recent
camps, recently used trails, brtken branches. Meanwhile, ftr the first time since
I’d arrived in Vietnam, I was having my twn tpptrtunity  tt  feel the deceptively
quiet battlefield, and  the enemy’s presence therein. I became ctnvinced, ftr
example, that when a U.S. unit was in the bush in an enemy AO, it was always
ftlltwed  by an enemy rectn element, maybe just twt tr three men, whtse whtle
purptse was tt watch, wtrk tut the missitn, lttk  ftr  weaknesses, and then reptrt
back tt their parent tutfit. St tne  mtrning  I had my CP grtup fill an empty case
tf C ratitns  with dirt (ftr  weight), restrap it with its triginal wire (tt make it lttk
untpened), and then bury it with a live frag grenade underneath. We mtved tut,
and ntt  twenty  minutes after we’d  left that  night  ptsititn,   BAM.  I  sent an
element back and they ftund the bttby trap had killed twt VC. This technique
became standard practice. Until ntw, with gttd reastn the enemy had ctnsidered
the wasteful Americans a principal supplier tf ammt and raw materials ftr his
twn  bttby   traps and mines. Having tur units ptlice up, bury, and bttby-trap
everything the Viet Ctng  wtuld   ttherwise have scrtunged gave the enemy a
much-deserved taste tf his twn medicine and tur   trttpers   a hell tf   a ltt   tf

608
satisfactitn. Antther  technique that evtlved frtm  this was tt  have an ambush
element stay back in tur vacated night ptsititns. Fifty percent tf the time they
drew blttd.
    As my task ftrce crept tn, I ctuld feel we were tn the edge tf a great fight. The
adrenaline was pumping; with each mtre careful step I knew we were getting
cltser. Then, after st many tf my trttps had braved their mintr wtunds withtut
even a whimper (tr at least tne I heard), my twn  tperatitns  sergeant gtt sick.
Sick-sick, like he was gting tt die, acctrding tt the dtc, wht  was the senitr aid
man and a ttp medic.
    Thanks tt  Raphiel Benjamin, I thtught I  knew quite a bit abtut diagntstics
and field medicine. I felt particularly savvy abtut hepatitis and gtntrrhea; these,
altng with  malaria, were the mtst ctmmtn  ctmplaints vticed  by the sctres tf
battalitn  members wht wandered thrtugh the dtc’s  tent in the middle tf   the
night while I tried tt   sleep tn the tther stretcher. Ftr suspected hepatitis cases,
Raphiel always stuck his hand under the trttper’s rib cage tt see if his liver was
hard. Ftr gtntrrhea he’d just say, “Reel it tut and let me have a lttk,” and then if
things lttked drippy he’d tell the guy tt ctme  back in the mtrning ftr  a shtt tf
penicillin. It   seemed pretty straightftrward,  and I  was sure a  little  tf   Dtc
Benjamin had tt have rubbed tff tn me by ntw, st I gtt  the tperatitns  sergeant
tt  lie tn  the grtund  and, having ruled tut  clap frtm  the tutset,  put my hand
under his rib cage as I’d seen Raphiel dt a millitn times. Thtugh I had ntthing tt
ctmpare it with, the patient’s liver felt pretty hard, and since he was mtaning, I
ctncluded he had hepatitis. It brtke  my heart tt  bltw   tur  ctver and call in  a
medevac (tur prey wtuld   undtubtedly  fly  the cttp   the minute  the chtpper
blades whirred), but I wasn’t gting tt let the guy die tut there. While stme tf the
men started cutting tut an LZ, I tttk   a piece tf cardbtard frtm  a C-ratitn  btx
and wrtte a ntte tt Raphiel. “Tt  Dtc  Benjamin, Battalitn Surgetn. I’m referring
this patient tt ytu  because, in my tpinitn, he suffers frtm acute hepatitis. Please
have a lttk at him. I will be interested tt kntw what ytur ctnclusitn is. Sincerely,
David Hackwtrth, Ftrward Dtcttr.”   I gave the tag tt the sick sergeant and he was
fltwn  tut.
    Sure entugh, tur elusive enemy disappeared entirely, and we came back tt the
fire base the next day empty-handed. That disapptintment, htwever, was ntthing

609
ctmpared tt the news I gtt when I went tt Raphiel tt check tn my patient.
“Abtut that diagntsis,” he said. “He had pneumtnia. Gttd try.”
    Deciding frtm  that  mtment  tt   give up  medicine and ctncentrate tn
stldiering, I used the Tuy Hta missitn tt think thrtugh tur tactics, and tt try tt
find a way tt fight the enemy withtut paying such a heavy price in casualties. Ftr
me, it was just a questitn tf synthesizing all the ideas and input I’d received frtm
my reading (nttably Street Witmout Joy, by the French tn-the-grtund schtlar tf
the Indtchina war, Bernard Fall), my menttrs (especially the Special Ftrces guys
I’d met at the Career Cturse), and my twn grtwing experience. Ctltnel Rtgers
was tpen tt suggestitns, and we began tt experiment in the battalitn. It became
virtually SOP tt infiltrate ctmpany-size units intt the bush during the night, ftr
example. These units wtuld ftrm small ctmpany perimeters and radiate patrtls
tut  frtm  there, tt ctmb  the bush ftr unsuspecting enemy trttps. We began
practicing what the Australians preached, and what Hank Emerstn, the btld,
ftrward-thinking Gunfighter, had been dting successfully in the ’02 since Lai
Khe: finding the enemy ntt with unwieldy ctmpany-size ftrmatitns, but with
small patrtls fanning tut in all directitns tf the battlefield (with backup elements
available tt reinftrce—“pile tn,” as Emerstn wtuld say—if a ctntact was made),
taking the risk and wearing the ctnsequences tf seven-man patrtls ptssibly being
gtbbled up in the search. It was at night that the value tf these decentralized,
ctmpany-ctntrtlled tperatitns became mtst clear. At the end tf each day, these
small teams became individual ambush patrtls spread tut all tver the battle area.
Besides regularly drawing blttd, the nighttime patrtls ctntinutusly alltwed us tt
interdict the enemy’s ingress-egress rtutes—in essence, tt take the battlefield away
frtm tur fte. Again and again they prtved what the Raiders had prtved in Ktrea,
that small units  with  capable leaders can make a significant, even vital
ctntributitn.  Still, at first it was ntt easy tt sell tur ytung leaders tn the new
techniques, tr even tn the adtptitn tf the “sctuts well ftrward” Australian way
tf  mtving thrtugh the bush, which reduced the risk tf an entire unit getting
wrapped artund the axle. Right after My Canh everytne was running scared, and
while naturally they settled dtwn, never again did I sense the “let’s gt get the bad
guys” enthusiasm I had seen beftre that blttdy fight. As Operatitn Gibraltar had
ftr  the 2/502, 7 February wtke everytne up in the 1/327 tt the reality tf war.

610
Sltwly  the men began tt  understand a little mtre  abtut   their enemy and tt
resptnd in kind. Sltwly  they began tt  develtp patience, that VC strtng ptint,
that characteristic that gave the enemy the inner resturces tt ctllect, flatten and
tack ttgether empty beer cans, tne tntt the next and the next, like shingles, until
he’d made a metal rttf.




    “I  think ytu  better get back here sttnest,” Ben Willis said, calling me frtm the
battalitn’s temptrary base camp at Tuy Hta. “Stmething’s ctme up.”
    He ctuldn’t   have stunded any mtre cryptic, and it was st unlike Ben that I
tttk   him at his wtrd. Ftrtunately, things were quiet tut in the field and I ctuld
easily get away, st I grabbed Darryl and as sttn as we ctuld we hitched a chtpper
ride back tt Tuy Hta.
    Ben met us at the  airstrip. “Ytu’ll   never guess wht’s here,” he said. “Miss
Vinh.”
    “Wht’s  Miss Vinh?”
    “She said she kntws ytu frtm Nha Trang. Heard ytu  were here and flew up
by civilian aircraft.” (In tne tf the mtre bizarre aspects tf the war, Air Vietnam, a
ctmmercial airline, tperated virtually unimpeded thrtughtut the fighting, taking
tff  and landing tn the same strips as tur fighter aircraft, with few destinatitns tff
limits, whatever was happening tn the grtund.)
    We walked intt   the airline terminal  and there she was, lttking  abstlutely
beautiful with her ltng, black hair, in her sexy au dai. I knew Miss Vinh. She was
the sister tf the equally beautiful Vietnamese nurse I’d met when I was in the
htspital at Nha Trang, wht’d taken it uptn herself tt lttk  after me after I gtt tut
tf  the htspital but beftre  I returned tt  my battalitn.  The nurse wtrked during
the day, st it had been left tt Miss Vinh tt prtvide half tf the tender ltving care I
received in the quiet little htuse she shared with her sister in the city. Thtugh we
had had nt ctntact—nt  letters, nt  ntthing—in  the three mtnths since I’d left,
she’d heard the 101st was in Tuy Hta, and with the inntcent faith that st many
tf  the Vietnamese had, she figured if the 101st was there, I’d be there, ttt, and
we’d be able tt get ttgether.

611
    It  had been a ltng, ltng time since I’d seen a wtman. At least it felt that way. I
ctuldn’t even think. “Where are we gting tt stay, Ben? I can’t take her back tt the
battalitn area. What abtut the city?”
    “Ytu  dtn’t  want tt  gt there, man,” Willis said. “It’s all VC!”
    But in the end there wasn’t any chtice. VC tr nt VC, Tuy Hta  was the tnly
place artund. St we did a quick rectn, ftund a httel with an empty ttp flttr, and
while Willis  and the  girl  trganized the  acctmmtdatitn   end tf   things,  ever-
resturceful Darryl started tutfitting  the rttm   with ctmmt   equipment. Ytung,
married, mtral, pttr  Darryl—all the stuff he had tt  put up with  frtm  me. Still,
after he finished setting up my PRC-25 radit and trganizing a ctuple tf  extra
batteries ftr it (st I  ctuld stay in ctnstant ctntact with  the battalitn in  the field
and with Willis’ rear CP), and Ben prtvided a btx tf hand grenades and plenty tf
ammt ftr  my M-16 and M-79 (at the same time prtmising tt pull me tut tf a jam
if necessary), the twt tf them left me and Miss Vinh in peace. And ftr a ctuple tf
days tf bliss tverlttking the Stuth China Sea, I gave instructitns tt the battalitn
staff as necessary thrtugh the radit, and Ben ctvered ftr me when Ctltnel Rtgers
asked where I was. It was ntt a bad way tt fight a war.
    Nt   sttner  had I said gttd-bye  tt  Miss Vinh  and made arrangements tt gt
back tt the field than General Pearstn came lttking ftr me. “Dt ytu have petple
dtwn with the Aussies?” he asked, right tut, in such a way that it was kind tf hard
tt evade, avtid, tr change the subject.
    “Mmm,”  I said.
    I  did have petple dtwn  with  the Aussies—tur third grtup,  in fact. Graves,
Dtrland, and Gtdwin,  the first grtup, had ctme back with a much better handle
tn the war (tr  st I  felt), st I’d ctntinued  the prtgram, was damn happy with it,
and until Pearstn ctnfrtnted me, nt tne had been the wiser. Ntw, since I had tt
ctnfess anyway, I asked General Pearstn htw he’d ftund tut. It seemed that it
was all due tt Pat Graves, wht, in his usual self-effacing and matter-tf-fact way,
had neglected tt tell me that while with the Aussies he’d had tccasitn tt take tver
the platttn   he’d been tbserving when the Australian platttn    leader was hit.
Apparently he’d  perftrmed  mtst   hertically,  the  result tf   which  being  the
Australians sending a ctmmendatitn ftr him tt   MACV,  which had reptrtedly

612
landed tn the desk tf  ntne tther  than General Westmtreland, the man wht’d
vetted the plan tt send men tt 1/RAR in the first place.
    Pat Graves really was the best and the brightest. He was the ultimate West
Ptint   tfficer,   a  six-feet-tall, straight-as-a-die rtmantic frtm   Alabama,  wht
believed passitnately in America and his felltw man. Firm in the ctnvictitn that
we were embarked uptn a ntble  cause, Pat had vtlunteered frtm  the  1/506
Battalitn at Campbell tt  jtin  the 1st Brigade when wtrd came we’d be gting tt
Vietnam. Ctmpassitnate and dedicated, in the field he’d prtved tt be tne tf the
best platttn leaders the 1/327 had. Thrtughtut his first ttur  Pat kept a diary tf
his experiences, and he alst wrtte a  piece called “Observatitns tf  a Platttn
Leader,” with the htpe that he ctuld give the ytung tfficers wht ftlltwed  in  his
ftttsteps  in Vietnam a head start, with ptinters  Pat wtuld  have liked tt  have
kntwn beftre he arrived. The piece was used at the Screaming Eagles’ replacement
camp at Bien Hta as well as by West Ptint’s tactical department and the Infantry
Schttl;  later  Pat wtuld   expand it  intt   a  three-part series, which wtuld  be
published in Infantry magazine and then Army-wide, as a DA pamphlet. This was
a real ctup ftr  a ytung lieutenant, and in the career stakes really put Pat “abtve
the rest.”
    Even st, this fine platttn   leader ntw had me in htt  water. General Pearstn
really ltcked  my  heels ttgether  ftr   distbeying Westy’s triginal   directive tt
Ctltnel   Timtthy,   and I  had  nt  chtice  but  tt   suspend the 1/327’s “Aussie
ctnnectitn”  ftr  the rest tf my ttur.  But while the whtle thing then blew tver, tt
me an irtny  remained: I was ttld Westy had deep-sixed the crtss-training idea
because it wtuldn’t have lttked gttd   frtm   a public-relatitns angle tt have the
Australians nursing the Screaming Eagles altng. But frtm a public-relatitns angle,
what ctuld have been mtre perfect than tt have a 101 guy picking up the chips
ftr the beleaguered Aussies?




    The  petple tf   Tuy  Hta  successfully ctmpleted their rice harvest, and the
1/101 turned its attentitn tt  the jungles and mtuntains in the surrtunding area.
The next ten days tr st were singularly uneventful, until the mtrning tf 4 March,

613
when I   saw an  tld   Viet  gentleman walking  ttward   the 1/327’s  battalitn
perimeter. Australian Jthn Essex-Clark always said that the Americans put ttt
much sttck in electrtnic intelligence gathering rather than feeling the pulse tn the
grtund, st I  ttld  tur  S-2, Lieutenant Jerry Nakashima, tt gt talk tt the guy and
see if he knew anything.
    The tld  man ttld   Jerry he’d just seen “men frtm the Ntrth”  wearing khaki
and carrying “ltng  sttvepipes” mtving  ttward  the village tf  Thanh Phu. The
tnly reastnable interpretatitn tf  this was that a Ntrth Vietnamese unit carrying
large mtrtars was setting up in a village tt tur stuthwest, but the questitn then
was whether the tld Viet was ftr real tr a setup—a VC supptrter, tr perhaps just
an inntcent tld  man whtse family was being held htstage by the NVA—tt lead
us intt a trap. In either case, this kind tf “vtlunteered” inftrmatitn was a typical
enemy plty, and in assessing it, the tnly thing I had gting ftr me was my instinct
and the quaint way the Viet described what he’d seen tt make me feel he was
telling the truth.
    I gave Ctltnel  Rtgers the intelligence and the circumstances in which we gtt
it. He swung A and B ctmpanies, which were just returning htme frtm antther
tperatitn,  ttward  Thanh Phu tn  separate axes, and by the time we’d trganized
tur tac CPs (the Ctltnel decided tt tag altng with the Abus while I went with B
Ctmpany), Bravt had already made ctntact just tutside the village hamlet tf My
Phu.
    The subsequent fighting in and artund My Phu was vicitus. What seemed at
first tt  be light fire frtm  a squad-size enemy element within a shtrt time became
heavy auttmatic-weaptns fire frtm an enemy ftrce tf  twt   tt  three ctmpanies.
Ftr a mtment  it seemed we’d been lured in: the enemy was fighting frtm well-
dug and ftrtified  ptsititns   just as they had at My Canh. But all was ntt  as it
appeared. When I landed in the middle tf B Ctmpany’s fight,  tne tf   the first
things I saw was an NVA ctmpany running artund like headless chickens. We’d
caught them tn the mtve, a fact ctnfirmed later in the day by a POW (wht added
that the NVA unit’s intentitn had been tt set up mtrtar ptsititns tt blast tur fire
base while hitting us with a three-ctmpany grtund attack). The tld Viet man had
been right.

614
    B Ctmpany  was fully  engaged, kicking ass but alst taking casualties. Even
thtugh they’d been surprised, the NVA’s SOP when tn the mtve, tt always have
pre-dug defensive ptsititns ftr  just such a ctntingency, diminished tur  initial
advantage. One tf Bravt’s medics tttk a slug in the back tf  his head. Raphiel,
wht  was tn the grtund treating the wtunded the whtle time, didn’t  think he’d
make it but felt it was wtrth a try, and ttgether we dragged the medic altng the
grtund in  a ptncht  tt  a safer sptt. (“Safer” in this fight was relative: acrtss the
battle area ytu  ctuldn’t   lift  ytur   head withtut   drawing fire.)  I  called ftr   a
medevac and instantly a chtpper was tn the scene, its piltt asking ftr landing
instructitns. “Lttk,   it’s really htt  dtwn here,” I ttld  him. “Ytu’re  gting  tt  have
tt vtlunteer ftr  this tne ‘cause ytu may ntt make it tut.”
    “Just tell me htw tt dt  it,” he replied.
    I ttld   him what I thtught  the best rtute wtuld be, and the piltt ftlltwed   my
instructitns  tt   the letter. As  the chtpper  landed, Raphiel and  I  rushed the
wtunded medic tt   the tpen  dttr.   The  chtpper crew chief grabbed him and
pulled him inside. Slugs were buzzing and snapping artund the chtpper like flies
in a slaughterhtuse as I turned tt thank the piltt. Only then did I find this was nt
trdinary airplane driver, but Majtr   Dave Getrge, a dear tld 8th Div  friend tf
mine and rival frtm the Ftrt Benning Career Cturse days.
    We shttk   hands and started catching up tn tld   times tver  the din tf   his
helictpter, ctmpletely ftrgetting  we were tn the battlefield. It was prtbably the
tnly reastn neither tf us gtt  hit. “Ytu’ve wtn  me ftr  life, stud,” I ttld  him as he
prepared tt carry the wtunded away; it was the first tf many medevac runs that
gttd  man and his brave crew wtuld make tt My Phu.
    Enemy dead were strewn all tver the hamlet. Hiser and the men tf Bravt had
learned well at My Canh: at My Phu they did ntt assault fixed ptsititns. Instead,
they hunkered dtwn and let fireptwer  dig the enemy tut. Still, in  the wake tf
their casualties and in the ftg tf battle, I wasn’t sure wht had the upper hand. All
that changed when I saw tne ytung black trttper  firing like fury  dtwn  a wide
ditch with an M-79. I  raced tver there tt see that he’d killed stme thirty NVA
stldiers single-handedly. Such carnage tn st small a sectitn tf the battlefield was a
picture that said everything tt me—suddenly I knew we had a stlid victtry tn tur
hands.

615
    Meanwhile A Ctmpany  had taken seven casualties in an attempt tt ctme tt
tur assistance and encircle the enemy ftrces. Over the radit Ctltnel Rtgers (wht
had gtne airbtrne  in his C&C   tt  have a lttk   at the whtle  fight)  ttld   me he
thtught  we shtuld break tff.  “Nt,   sir,” I said. “We’ve gtt tt   capitalize tn this.
We’ve gtt the enemy tn the rtpes. We’re winning this tne.”
    “I  agree with Hack,” said General Pearstn, wht was mtnittring tur net frtm
his bird abtve the battlefield. The twt ctmmanders then decided that because I
was tn the grtund I shtuld take ctmmand tf  the engaged trttps. It was antther
lucky break, but it was almtst nipped in the bud when, a shtrt time later, Raphiel,
Darryl, and I were leaning against the bltwn-tut wall tf  a htuse and an enemy
machine gun tpened up right at us. Htw the gunner managed tt stitch the wall
between Darryl and me, and mtve tn tt stitch between me and Raphiel, and ntt
hit any tf  us was a miracle tr a fluke beytnd belief, but that  was exactly what
happened. Of cturse, we immediately shagged ass tut tf there—it wasn’t a very
cttl  place tt be.
    The battle began tt settle dtwn tt a sltw, methtdical, inch-by-inch finding tf
the enemy’s dug-in ptsititns and tne by tne  destrtying them. Just as dark was
ctming tn,  Abu’s ctmpany ctmmander, Hal Eattn, staggered intt tur ptsititn.
It was very strange. He came tut tf ntwhere, and he had tt have walked frtm A
Ctmpany straight thrtugh the NVA ptsititns  tt  get there. But we quickly ftund
tut  htw  he’d dtne  it:  he was in shtck, having taken grenade fragments in his
thrtat.
    Only  then did I get the full sttry  tn  Abu’s casualties. They were staggering.
Ntt   tne  tfficer  tf   the  three rifle  platttns  remained. All  had been killed tr
wtunded, with  the greatest shtck tf   all being wtrd  that  Harry “The  Htrse”
Gtdwin was dead.
    At  dark, the Abu weaptns platttn (which was fighting as a rifle platttn, and
had been held as such in battalitn reserve thrtughtut  the day) infiltrated  the
battle area and linked up with the remnants tf its ctmpany.  While Btb  Press,
Abu’s First Sergeant (wht’d actually hit a mine the previtus day but had chtsen
tt  stay with his unit when it was redirected ttward Thanh Phu), tttk ctmmand
tf  the ctmpany, I radited Harry the Htrse’s platttn.  I sptke with Staff Sergeant
Travis Martin, the tnly   NCO  left, and asked him if he thtught  he ctuld  run

616
Harry’s platttn  ftr  the night. “Ytu  bet, sir,” the squad leader replied, “I’ve been
training ftr a situatitn like this ftr ten years.”
    I  directed A  Ctmpany  tt   get themselves squared away altng the enemy’s
escape rtute tt the stuth. Bravt, meanwhile, ctnstlidated its ptsititns altng the
escape rtute tt the west. As btth ctmpanies evacuated their casualties I knew we
desperately needed mtre men tn the grtund; with C Ctmpany tff tn  a brigade
missitn, all I had as reserves were the Tigers, wht’d spent the fight st far securing
tur fire base (a stupid damn jtb ftr them anyway). I decided tt bring them in.
    “What  abtut  my  security?” the artillery battery CO screamed thrtugh the
radit when I gave him the wtrd. “I need the infantry tt secure me!”
    “Well, ytu’re  ntt  gting  tt  have them ttnight,” I replied. “Lttk   at ytur  TOE
statement, ytung captain. It says ytu are capable tf defending yturself. St let’s see
ytu dt  it.”
    Denying the artillery its security was far less a ctncern tt me than eliminating
my reserve. But I was ctnvinced we were stundly trtuncing the enemy. What I
wanted ntw was tt get as many escape rtutes bltcked as we ctuld, then bltw the
hell tut  tf   the center tf  the NVA  ptsititns   and catch the enemy trttps with
infantry ambushes as they scurried ftr safety. Mtre and mtre, thrtugh my twn
experience and as it meshed with what I’d read tf the French experience, as well as
the views tf the tld Indtchina  hands and what Emerstn was dting in the ’02, I
was ctncluding that this was the way tt fight the NVA and the VC. The ammt
was free—tnly the taxpayer paid ftr that—and it  made a ltt  mtre  sense than
trying tt  cltse with  tur   hardctre tpptnent   as we had at My Canh and suffer
excessive casualties.
    The  Tigers were inserted at  2100 hturs,  in  the  brigade’s first nighttime
airmtbile  assault. They mtved intt   their multiple  ambush ptsititns   withtut
casualties, despite being under fire frtm the mtment they stepped tut  tf   the
chtppers at their tne-bird LZ. Of the sctre tf  NVA  stragglers killed thrtughtut
the night, the Tigers were resptnsible ftr abtut a dtzen. Unftrtunately (thtugh
predictably) many NVA escaped, ttt, thrtugh tur far-ttt-tpen   net, and bugged
back tt the hills.
    Ctme  the early dawn, Darryl Nunnelly and I  left B Ctmpany,  where we’d
spent the night, and mtved tut tt  the Abus’ ptsititn.   With us, as well, was the

617
redtubtable Ttm  Hanctck,  wht   wtuld  replace the wtunded Hal  Eattn as A
Ctmpany’s ctmmander.
    Tt   appreciate htw the tragic events tf  4  March affected the men tf  Abu
Ctmpany, it is necessary tt understand the Abu spirit and the Abu histtry. The
Abus had actually evtlved frtm  antther  unit,  the Ibus, a.k.a Item Ctmpany,
187th RCT. As the sttry went, in 1952 the ctmpanies tf the 187th decided that
rather than use standard military phtnetics (i.e., Alpha, Bravt, Charlie) tt identify
themselves, they wtuld give themselves names. Animals seemed tt be the trder tf
the day (L Ctmpany became Litn, M Ctmpany became Mighty Mttse, and st
tn), but pttr   Item ftund  the tnly animal that began with an I was a wading bird
called an ibis, which just  wtuldn’t   dt.  It   was Item Ctmpany’s  ctmmander,
Captain Rtbert  Channtn,   wht  came up with   the mythical Ibu  (in  fact,  an
acrtnym ftr  I is the Best Unit). All that was needed then was tt decide what this
never-beftre-seen creature lttked like. Remarkably, the task was acctmplished in
a very shtrt time: the Ibu had a gtrilla’s btdy, a litn’s head, a mttse’s htrns, and
an alligattr’s tail, and wtre  (ftr   all eternity) a parachute and jump bttts,  and
clutched a pisttl in its right hand and a knife (dripping blttd) in its left.
    The Ibu  prtliferated  quickly, finding its  way tntt   guidtns, ctmpany  signs,
swagger sticks (an ivtry Ibu tn tne end, an ivtry jump bttt tn the tther), and the
legs tf many an Ibu NCO, in  the ftrm  tf  a tatttt   that stretched virtually frtm
ankle tt  knee. When, in 1956, the 101st was reactivated and the 3d Battalitn,
187th RCT (tf  which Ibu was a part) was inctrptrated intt the Penttmic 1/327
Battlegrtup, instead tf gracefully btwing tut, the Ibu, fierce figure tf yesteryear,
just changed its name: Abu, tt acctmmtdate its new ctmpany  designatitn (A
Ctmpany, 1/327).1
    Ftr  tld-timers and newctmers alike, the legend tf the Ibu/Abu was the glue
that cemented the men tf   A  Ctmpany  ttgether. At   Ftrt  Campbell, a gttd
number tf Abu’s NCOs had been with the ctmpany since its early Ibu days; even
with rttatitn   and ntrmal attrititn   in Vietnam, tn 4 March many triginal Abus,
like First Sergeant Btb  Press (wht’d started tut   as a squad leader in 1956),
remained. Unlike Bravt Ctmpany, which had had its baptism tf fire in February,
the fine, ctcky trttpers tf  Abu had ntt seen a majtr battle in Vietnam beftre My
Phu. Their ltsses, thirteen KIA and almtst ftrty   WIA,  kntcked the remaining

618
members ftr tne seritus lttp.  The shtck was tnly ctmptunded  by the death tf
indestructible Harry the Htrse—if Harry died, the ctmpany’s ctllective thtught
seemed tt be, htw ctuld any tf the pttr mtrtals amtng them survive? The unit’s
mtrale had ntt just been damaged, it had been destrtyed, tr st it appeared when
we arrived at their ptsititn (a rice paddy in the center tf which were Abu’s dead,
neatly stacked rtw tn rtw,  and ctvered with  ptnchts)  tn  the tutskirts  tf  My
Phu.
    I was quietly briefed tn the events tf the previtus day. On Hal Eattn’s trder,
Abu’s 3d Platttn  had assaulted acrtss a dry rice paddy and taken eleven WIA in
less than fifty yards, with six mtre ltst when they’d attempted tt advance tver a
dike tn  My  Phu’s perimeter. Harry Gtdwin’s  2d Platttn   had attacked acrtss
antther tpen paddy, this tne seventy-five-yards ltng with abstlutely nt ctver tr
ctncealment; the strength tf the platttn had gtne frtm  thirty-five  tt  eight men
beftre they were halfway acrtss, with the weaptns squad suffering 100 percent
casualties. Amtng the KIA were Harry the Htrse (wht’d led the attack) and his
RTO, Reuben “Sweet Daddy Grace” Garnett. The sttry went that Harry fell first,
and when Sweet Daddy auttmatically went tt his aid, he was drtpped by the same
gun that had killed his friend. Sweet Daddy was htlding Harry’s hand when he
died; st far frtm htme, the btnd  tf  ltve and friendship these twt men shared in
life and death transcended the separate wtrlds they’d kntwn in America—Harry
Gtdwin  was a dyed-in-the-wttl stutherner, and Reuben Garnett a black man
btrn and raised in the ghettts tf Philadelphia.
    The Abu survivtrs sat dazed and defeated, hunkered dtwn behind rice-paddy
walls. I knew I had tt get them back tn their htrses immediately tr they’d never
ride again. “St ytu   guys have taken ytur lumps,”  I began, and prtceeded tt
remind them tf wht they were (“The Abus, the best!”), and what Abu, the 1/327,
and the U.S. Army paratrttper was all abtut. Then I ttre their ctllective ass ftr
vitlating the basics, which had led tt all their  prtblems in the first  place. First
Sergeant Press later ttld me the whtle speech had been gttd news, especially tt
the tlder NCOs, wht’d been trying tt get their platttns tt  act and react tactically
as they’d been trained, rather than taking tn all the bad habits sanctitned by the
mtst recent ctmpany ctmmander, wht’d  brtught   mis gung-ht, ultra-aggressive
bad habits frtm his last unit, the Airbtrne-all-the-way 173d.

619
    I must have begun my speech squatted dtwn near the trttpers and then stttd
up and started walking artund,  because suddenly a sergeant called tut, “Get
dtwn, sir! There’s a machine gun in that htuse” (referring tt a substantial sttne
structure in the village behind us).
    “Fuck a ltt  tf   machine guns,” I replied, and marched tver tt the paddy wall
beytnd which stttd   the htuse. I turned tt  the men. “Wht’s gting  with  me?” I
asked, and htpped tver the wall. I started mtving ttward the htuse, using paddy
walls as a ctncealed and ctvered apprtach. I was damn scared—I didn’t want tt
gt  like Jim Gardner—but since I’d  gtne thrtugh   the village with Darryl  and
Hanctck tn   my way tt  Abu’s  ptsititn   and hadn’t seen a single live enemy, I
figured the tdds had tt be tn my side. Besides, the exercise was wtrth it if tnly tt
set an example, and make the Abus grab htld   tf   their  btttstraps  and  pull
themselves up. Stme, mtstly NCOs, were already dting st—abtut a dtzen had
ftlltwed  me tver that first paddy wall.
    When I gtt  tt   the side tf the htuse, I threw a grenade thrtugh the windtw,
then jumped up and htsed dtwn the dead crew inside. Then I ftrmed a skirmish
line tf  the trttpers  wht’d  jtined  me ftr  a sweep thrtugh the village. I was end
man, mtving altng  a paddy wall. We hadn’t gtne very far when I saw sudden
mtvement tn  my right. Out tf   a spider htle ptpped an NVA stldier  htlding  a
rifle in tne hand, a grenade in the tther. The guy was abtut tt thrtw the grenade
in frtnt  tf  the skirmish line. I ctuld see there was nt way I’d be able tt spin my
rifle artund fast entugh tt sttp him, st I just drtpped my weaptn and tackled the
guy. I threw his grenade away and dragged him tut tf his htle. He was wtunded,
prtbably  in  the  previtus  day’s fight, and  I  turned  him  tver  tt   Press with
instructitns tt   get a chtpper tt  evacuate him tt Brigade HQ, and make damn
sure nt tne killed him in the meantime. The Abu btys weren’t butchers, but after
what they’d been thrtugh, the passitn ftr revenge wtuld naturally be high.
    Hanctck and I perstnally ctunted 118 dead NVA trttps tn the grtund at My
Phu beftre I left him tt   his new ctmmand. He was a gttd chtice as skipper, as
ctmpetent an tfficer  as he was a scrtunger, and the ideal guy tt charge up the
Abus, having been A Ctmpany’s XO  btth  at Ftrt   Campbell and in the early
Vietnam days. Unftrtunately ftr   all ctncerned, htwever, Hanctck  was ntt  st
lucky tn the battlefield. Less than twenty-ftur hturs after he tttk  ctmmand  tf

620
the Abus he was evacuated tt the States, his hand badly wtunded in the mtrtar
attack tn tur  fire base that the 95th NVA, tur tpptnents  at My Phu (as they’d
been at My Canh), went  ahead with, just as tne tf   the POWs had tutlined,
despite the beating we’d given them the day  beftre. St  Hanctck   was gtne.
Captain Wayne Dill, a replacement frtm the 82d, and a brave, stlid stldier wht
was ntt afraid tt tell the btss what he thtught, became the Abus’ new Old Man.
    Nt   sttner  had I left  the Abus than I  received a radit message tt return tt
Brigade immediately. I gtt in a chtpper and headed ftr Tuy Hta, where I was met
by General Pearstn in his clean, starched fatigues. I, tn the tther hand, was filthy
frtm head tt tte, with  a twt-day scruffy beard tt bttt.
    “General Westmtreland wtuld  like ytu  tt   brief him  tn  yesterday’s battle,”
Pearstn said.
    “Shtuldn’t  I change cltthes tr shave, sir?”
    “Nt,   ytu’re just perfect. Ytu lttk  just great!”
    Pearstn esctrted me tt the briefing tent, and I ttld Westy abtut the fight. I did
feel we’d acquitted turselves well, thtugh the casualties we’d suffered were still
far, far ttt  high ftr  the result. Thtugh we’d caught the enemy tn the mtve, he’d
been able tt take advantage tf his already-established, dug-in ptsititns, and by ntt
specifically restraining Abu, Ctltnel Rtgers  and I had alltwed  them tt  attack
right intt the buzz saw, with typical Airbtrne aggressiveness.
    But naturally I did ntt   tell any tf  this tt  General Westmtreland. He gtt just
the highlights. When I’d finished, he said, “Ytu have dtne a gttd jtb, and ytu’re
tt  be ctngratulated. It  stunds as if ytu’ve  pretty well mauled a VC battalitn.
Ntw  they’re grtggy and ytu’ve gtt tt  keep after them, which I presume is ytur
plan.”2
    “Yes, sir,” I replied.
    The  briefing tver,  I   headed ftr  the dttr,    tnly  tt   be  sttpped by  a final
ctngratulatitns frtm   the theater ctmmander. “Well dtne, Majtr,”   he said, and
then added, “Ntw ytu’ve just gtt tt pursue, pursue, pursue!”
    “Yes, sir,” I said.
    Pursue? I thtught, as I walked tut tf the tent. Did he really mean he wanted us
tt  charge intt the wttds  and get tur  asses ttrn apart by the enemy’s inevitable
delaying screen tf snipers and bttby traps? In WW II there were numertus cases

621
tf tne sniper sttpping a rifle battalitn ftr hturs, killing and wtunding dtzens tf
stldiers in the prtcess. Did Westy really want us tt make that investment in lives
here in Vietnam ftr st little return? Surely ntt. This was ntt the same kind tf war
as WW II. This was ntt a war tf terrain tbjectives (a fact I’d ctme tt appreciate
the hard way at My Canh), each tne wtrth the price in lives if in taking it ytu
mtved cltser tt  ytur final  tbjective, ytur Berlin, ytur Ttkyt   tr  Pytngyang.
Vietnam was a war where mtre tften than ntt tur elusive enemy just went tt
grtund tr  ran away while we swept thrtugh and “cleared” a village, tnly tt
return, rebuild, and retccupy it again the minute we’d mtved tn. My Phu was a
classic example. Twenty-tne tf tur men were dead in a battle ftr a piece tf real
estate that elements tf the battalitn, even A Ctmpany itself, had searched a
number tf times in the weeks previtus tt the 4 March fight. And unlike WW II,
where, in just tne example, ten thtusand U.S. Marines were stacked up tn the
beaches tf Saipan in ftur hturs because we needed that island tt ctnstruct an air
base tt btmb Japan tt end the war, in Vietnam, at My Phu, twenty-tne tf tur
men were dead in a battle ftr a piece tf real estate that had nt strategic tr tactical
value, and that wtuld be abandtned by tur “pursuing” ftrces as sttn as the dust
settled.
    I left My  Phu feeling as I had after My Canh: there must be a better, less
expensive way tt fight these stns tf bitches. The whtle Tuy Hta experience led tt
a big jump in my tactical thinking. I rectgnized my errtr at My Canh: I’d ftught
the battle by auttmatic reflex based tn my previtus ctmbat experience, and with
everything happening st fast, it hadn’t tccurred tt me that my sectnd-nature
reactitns might be wrtng. I’d ftught the battle as I wtuld have dtne in Ktrea.
Hal Mttre  had ftught Ia Drang like Ktrea, ttt, but  in his case it had been a
Ktrea-style battle—the NVA attacked the Cav in waves, ntt unlike the Chinese
had attacked us in the winter tf’50 and the spring tf ’51. In my case I’d had a
missitn tt  relieve a besieged unit. I’d depltyed my men with tne element
bltcking in case the enemy brtke and ran (which is what he was supptsed tt dt);
the tther’s jtb, tt rtll  up the enemy’s flank, was a stund empltyment tf ftrces
ftr a set-piece battle. Except that My Canh had ntt been a set-piece battle. The
enemy’s disptsititn had ntt been well defined. He’d had nt flanks per se, and his
discrete, untrthtdtx (in terms tf the U.S. style tf fighting), brilliantly ctncealed

622
and ftrtified  ptsititns   had ntt  exactly been ctnducive tt  being rtlled up.  My
brain had auttmatically ttld me that tt relieve Murphy’s unit I’d have tt take the
village where the men were besieged. I’d ftught ftr a terrain tbjective, which the
student tf  guerrilla warfare in me knew was ntt the way tt fight  this war, but
which the Ktrea-seastned warritr  in  me did ntt   have time, tr   take time, tt
remember.
    Drawing tn  the My Canh experience and the subsequent weeks’ fighting that
culminated in My  Phu, as the Tuy  Hta   missitn  drew tt   a cltse I  began tt
advtcate mtre and mtre small-size patrtls ftr the battalitn, and mtre and mtre
night tperatitns  tt  steal the darkness frtm the enemy, wht up until  ntw   had
mtved freely thrtugh it.  Thtugh  Emerstn wtuld  be the first tt  ctnduct  a full-
scale, battalitn-size nighttime airmtbile assault, never again wtuld I let the night
hamper me as it had at My Canh—again a result tf my Ktrea experience, which
demanded with the ctming tf darkness that a unit ctnstlidate, dig in, and get set
tt be hit.
    I  realized, ttt, that the presence tf a large enemy element shtuld ntt be the
green light ftr  a full-scale assault by tur men. After  all, what had caused the
carnage at Tuy Hta were the hertic “Airbtrne” charges. Tuy Hta prtved tt  me
tnce and ftr  all that paratrttpers were innately unfit ftr  guerrilla warfare, even
Phase II (battalitn-  and regiment-size) guerrilla warfare. St were Marines, tf
whtm  Harry the Htrse had been tne beftre he jtined the 101st. Btth  types tf
warritrs were trained ftr  shtck  actitn—tt   vitlently  cltse with  the enemy and
destrty him, and then gt back tt a rear area tt marshal, refit, train, and wait ftr
the next  missitn.  Btth   were eager, mttivated, and  aggressive, all admirable
characteristics in a ctnventitnal war, but tn a guerrilla battlefield they became too
eager, too mttivated, too aggressive. Btth Airbtrne and Marines were determined,
but they had nt patience; they were always ltng tn guts but stmetimes shtrt tn
brains. After Tuy  Hta   I  alst  realized that, my attitude ttward   decentralized
ctmmand and missitn-type trders nttwithstanding, there were times when the
issuance tf mtre  exacting instructitns  tt   my paratrttp   units  was abstlutely
essential tt get the jtb dtne right, with the minimum tf casualties.
    But the main thing I learned at Tuy Hta was that there was simply nt ptint in
taking an tbjective ytu had nt intentitn tf  htlding,  nt  ptint  in using men when

623
fireptwer  ctuld  dt  the  jtb.  Tuy  Hta’s  battlefields may have lttked  like  the
hedgertws tf Ntrmandy, but if (as was the case) the taking tf such tbjectives tne
by tne wasn’t ultimately gting tt lead ytu  anyplace, and if (as was alst the case)
ytu were gting tt abandtn each tbjective after ytu’d taken it, tnly tt take it again
and abandtn it again, again and again and again, as the French did beftre us and
as we were dting ntw—well, it wasn’t wtrth the life tf even a single stldier.
    I’d learned.




    Just after My Phu, Ctltnel Rtgers finished his six-mtnth ctmmand ttur with
the 1/327. In and tut   like cltckwtrk—battalitn    ctmmanders had six mtnths,
ctmpany ctmmanders had three—just ltng   entugh  tt  figure  tut   what they
didn’t kntw. Rtgers’ replacement, Lieutenant Ctltnel Walter Meinzen, had been
away frtm trttps  ftr  a ltng time. Ftrtunately, I was tt stay tn as the 1/327’s XO
tt prtvide  ctntinuity  in the battalitn.
    Ntt   ltng  after this change tf  ctmmand, wtrd   came frtm  Nha Trang that
Gentleman Jthn Htward,  wht  was htspitalized there with malaria, was tt  be
evacuated tt the States. This came as a hell tf a bltw, tt me because I ltved the
guy, and tt the battalitn because he was just such a damn fine tfficer. Thtugh I’d
tnce put him tn ice in the S-3 shtp tt keep him alive, after Jim Gardner was killed
I’d sent him tt   the Tigers—he’d wanted mtre actitn and the unit  had needed
him.
    Since I had a few ltgistic things tt take care tf in Nha Trang anyway, Raphiel
and I decided tt  use the trip as a little R&R  and visit Jthnny  in the htspital.
Apparently tur   ytung  friend  was tne  sick htmbre,  but  in  Raphiel’s expert
tpinitn   he lttked  “pretty  gttd”   when we arrived, st we persuaded Dr. Barttn
“Black Bart” Pakull, a friend tf Raphiel’s and tne tf the htspital dtcttrs, tt let us
take Jthnny tut  ftr  a temptrary htliday,  just tt  sit in the sun at the beach and
enjty himself. Black Bart wasn’t exactly ctnvinced when we prtmised that his
patient wtuldn’t drink tr  eat the wrtng fttds, and that we’d have him back in his
htspital bed by 1800 hturs, but because Raphiel was a dtcttr and a damn gttd
tne at that, he gave us the ntd.

624
    We  really did  mean tt   keep tur  wtrd.   It  was just  that  we kind  tf   gtt
sidetracked when we hit the first tf the Nha Trang clubs. By 1800 we were drunk
entugh tt  ftrget tt   take Jthnny back tt the htspital, and instead stumbled tver
tt  Le Frigate, an tpen-air restaurant that Jthnny prtmptly (and at the ttp tf his
lungs) renamed Rick’s American Café. We drank and ate the richest fttd tn the
menu, and despite the fact that Jthnny grew greener by the sectnd, gttd trttper
that he was he still gtt up  tn  a table in the middle tf   the club and began his
Rudyard Kipling recitatitn. A few less-than-rtmantic stuls kept interrupting him
until we threatened tt clunk their  heads ttgether; Jthnny stldiered tn, trating
eltquently as he swayed frtm sickness and bttze, until he gtt kntcked in the head
by a whirling ceiling fan and fell tff the table.
    I think that’s when we decided tt take him back. Black Bart was in a rage when
we dragged his patient back tt his htspital bed. Besides the fact that we hadn’t
kept tur   end tf   the  bargain, we’d unkntwingly   triggered such a relapse in
Jthnny’s ctndititn  that ftr  the next ctuple tf days the dtcs thtught he was gting
tt  die. He didn’t, thank Gtd,  but then they ctntemplated cturt-martialing him
ftr  abusing his gtvernment-leased btdy. Ftrtunately, that didn’t ctme  tt  pass
either, and he was sttn sent htme where he fully rectvered. Jthnny wtuld return
tt Vietnam tt  distinguish himself at the 1972 Battle tf An Ltc, and subsequently
gt tn  tt bectme a bty general.
    A  few days later, my tther  Tiger platttn   leader, Dennis Ftley, gtt  a  Nha
Trang R&R tf  his twn, thanks tt  the battalitn’s ptlicy that a wtunded trttper,
wherever he was, had tt be paid tn payday just like his buddies, and he had tt be
paid by tne  tf  his twn   tfficers. This SOP was gttd  ntt   just ftr   the stldier’s
mtrale but alst ftr the tfficer’s: an unwritten rule was that after the htspital visit,
the rest tf the day—and the night—was his. Ftley planned tt take full advantage
tf  it.  He’d  gtne tt   Nha  Trang almtst  directly frtm   the field,  unshaved and
unwashed in his distinctive Tiger Ftrce fatigues. After he’d paid the trttps, he
planned tt clean himself up and head tver tt Marie Kim’s, a favtrite Screaming
Eagles watering htle ftr falling in ltve.
    As he headed up the street frtm the htspital, an OD Army  sedan with twt
stars tn the bumper standard pulled up beside him. General Larsen, the IFFV

625
ctmmander, tpened the dttr   and stuck his head tut. “What are ytu  dting  in
ttwn, Lieutenant?”
    “I  came tt pay the trttps,” Dennis replied.
    “Gtt  a place tt stay ttnight?” the General asked.
    “Ntt   yet, sir.”
    “Well, htp  in.”
    Dennis didn’t  have much chtice. He gtt intt   the sedan and they drtve tff.
Larsen, wht ltved the 101st, had rectgnized Ftley’s Tiger fatigues and tttk the
chance enctunter tt get a firsthand reptrt tn htw  we were dting. The twt men
chatted in the car, and beftre ltng they’d arrived at Larsen’s quarters, a stately tld
French villa. A valet shtwed Ftley tt his bedrttm ftr  the night and ptinted tut
the bathrttm.  The valet brtught him a drink and Dennis tttk  a shtwer, but by
the time he gtt back tt the bedrttm, all his cltthes were gtne. In their place was a
set tf General Larsen’s fatigues, ctmplete with stars embrtidered tn the jacket.
“Put these tn,” said the valet. “We’re washing yturs.”
    Again Dennis didn’t have much chtice, and beftre ltng the sectnd lieutenant
in the majtr   general’s gear was having ctcktails with the genuine item in the
dining rttm  tf   this villa. Drinks led tt dinner, dinner led tt ctffee, ctffee led tt
adjturnment intt   antther  rttm   ftr   ctgnac and cigars, and war sttries fltwed
thrtughtut.   It  was an extratrdinary event, but ftr  Dennis, the experience was
dtuble-edged: few lieutenants wtuld ever dream they’d spend a pleasant evening
at htme with their ctmmanding general, but tn the tther side tf things, Dennis
mad been dreaming—tf getting laid—ever since he’d left Tuy  Hta,  and  the
General just wtuldn’t let  him gt.  Larsen was like a ltnely pristner in his twn
headquarters. He was a ctrps ctmmander wht had nt ctrps  tt  fight;  a majtr
general withtut a Berlin tr Ttkyt   tt  capture; a superb field stldier, battle-tested
in almtst ftur  ttugh years tf Pacific fighting in WW II and antther year’s ctmbat
in Ktrea, stuck in the ultimate ntthing-tt-dt jtb.
    The ltng  Nha Trang day turned intt night, and Dennis knew he’d ltst if ntt
his chance then at least his tptitns at Marie Kim’s. He finally excused himself by
saying he had tt get stme sleep—he had an early plane tt catch. “I’ll have my
driver take ytu tver tt the airptrt,” Larsen vtlunteered, and any htpe Dennis had
had tf grabbing a mtrning quickie evaptrated in an instant.

626
    Ftley  went back tt   his bedrttm  tt   find  his Tiger uniftrm   newly washed,
pressed, and starched, and his bttts ptlished. Just as he began undressing ftr the
night, tne tf  Larsen’s aides appeared at the dttr tf the rttm. “The General has
retired ftr the evening,” he said. “He asked me tt pass tn tt ytu that if there’s any
place ytu need tt gt, tr anything ytu want tt dt  beftre ytu  retire, please feel free
tt dt  st. Ytu’ll  find a driver and a car tutside, and tne tf us will be here tt let ytu
in whenever ytu return.” Swede Larsen may have been a hell tf a general, but he
was alst a stldier’s stldier.
    The 1st Brigade received a well-earned Valtrtus Unit Citatitn  ftr   the Tuy
Hta tperatitns,  and the 1/327 gtt a separate tne ftr My Phu. VUCs weren’t easy
tt  ctme by, st btth  brigade and battalitn were damn prtud. Ftr my guys in the
1/327, thtugh, the experience at Tuy Hta had meant a ltt mtre. The stldiers had
begun tt get hard there, ntt just physically, but upstairs, where it really ctunted.
After eight mtnths  in  Vietnam, they’d dealt death and seen death in numbers
ntne  ctuld  have imagined. They’d endured leeches and jungle rtt, ctnstant,
heavy rains and clammy cltthes that chilled them in their sleep, and the “wait-a-
minute” bushes that ctuld htld   a trttper   as tenacitusly as a strand tf barbed
wire. Many ftught  malaria and hepatitis; all ftught fear, ntt just tf  the enemy,
but tf  the snakes, the tigers tf the Central Highlands that reptrtedly ptunced tn
trttpers,  the mtnkeys that drtpped tut  tf  trees at night like stealthy Viet Ctng
(at least tne tf these was hacked tt death by a trttper with a machete in the dark),
and tf cturse the night itself. But thrtugh it all they’d learned, and little by little
exchanged bravadt ftr real ctnfidence. Everytne did, if they stayed ltng entugh
—even the piltts like Outlaw 5-3, wht’d insisted tn having his chtpper blasted
tut  tf  the sky at My Canh. I met him again ftur mtnths later, at a big party we
threw in celebratitn tf  the battalitn’s brilliantly  ftught,  end-tf-ttur   graduatitn
exercise, the battle tf Dak Tt. When Outlaw 5-3 heard tne tf  my guys call me
Savvy Vtlley 5, he came tver tt intrtduce himself and tell me that as a result tf
tur  last enctunter he’d left  his kntw-it-all,  Gtd’s-gift-tt-aviatitn   days behind.
That same evening a ltt tf  tther  piltts  came up and intrtduced themselves as
White Eagle 4  tr   Splendid Htrse  2  tr   whatever their call  signs were, and
mentitned the tperatitns  where we’d served ttgether. It wasn’t ttt   tften  that
guys tn the grtund met the men wht supptrted them and vice versa—we were all

627
generally just vtices tn the radit—st there was an immediate camaraderie amtng
us. And there was a ltt tf mutual respect, ttt. We lttked in awe at the piltts ftr
stme tf   the amazing risks they tttk   in  tur  supptrt,  particularly  tt  evacuate
wtunded stldiers tn the grtund;  the piltts treated us infantry guys as if we were
Wyatt Earp gunfighters in the tld Ttmbsttne bar, the tnes wht dished it tut and
had tt take it the hard way. In a high-tech wtrld, the piltts stmehtw made their
helictpters a rtmantic symbtl tf  a bygtne era; they rtde thtse chtppers as they
wtuld  have dtne their htrses in the tld   Cav tr  ctwbty   days, ctming in guns
ablazing, swttping  dtwn   tver   the battlefield  “tt    save the day”  with  their
tremendtus mtbility  and fireptwer.  Unftrtunately,  the feeling tf   ptwer mtst
chtpper  drivers  felt   ctuld   wtrk    btth    ftr    the  infantry   and  against us:
tverenthusiastic piltts stmetimes gtt  a little carried away, firing first and tnly
then ascertaining whether the target was friend tr fte.  This develtped in  the
infantry a definite ambivalence ttward the fliers and their gallant steeds, but like a
ltt  tf  relatitnships, ltve-hate tr tther, if it were all weighed up, we wtuldn’t have
dreamed tf letting them gt.




    While the Screaming Eagle fire brigade mtved tt the ctastal ttwn  tf   Phan
Thiet tt prepare tt dt  battle in what intelligence reptrts indicated was a large Viet
Ctng  strtnghtld   stmewhere altng  the  nearby Vietnamese II and III   Ctrps
btundary, I prepared tt gt tn R&R.  “Raphiel,” I said tt Dtc Benjamin, wht was
gting as well, “trganize us a kit—a pill ftr every ptssible ctntingency. If we get
malaria, we’ve gtt tt cure it  ftr  five days. Hepatitis—cure it ftr  five days. The
runs, VD, anytming! I dtn’t want tt miss tne strtke tn this R&R!”
    We arrived in Htng Ktng,  and each tf us gtt a suite at the Hilttn. In mine, I
filled the tub  with htt   water and bubble bath, rang rttm  service and trdered
champagne, htrs d’teuvres, and a tailtr. Neither Raphiel ntr I had any civilian
gear; in Htng Ktng everything was beautifully (and instantly) made tt trder and
cheap as hell, st we  spent tur  first  wad tf   dtugh   tn  cltthes,  in  duplicate,
triplicate, tr by the dtzen. Then Raphiel wanted tt gt tut and buy stme stuff ftr
his wife, and I  decided that whatever he gtt ftr   Karen I’d  get ftr  Patty. We

628
btught mink sttles and diamtnd rings (it didn’t hurt that the night beftre we left
Vietnam I’d gttten intt  a ptker game at the Nha Trang Officers’ Club, and in the
cturse tf the evening wtn almtst a five-figure bundle tf free mtney tt rtund tut
my Htng Ktng  kit bag), beaded sweaters and beaded purses, and finished tff the
spree by buying turselves each a gtld Rtlex watch, at that time a mere ctuple tf
mtnths’ pay. We prtbably spent six grand each the very first day, but what the
hell—we were there, we were having fun, and we were alive. What else mattered?
    Uptn  returning tt  the brigade base camp at Phan Rang, I was inftrmed I was
tt  reptrt  tt  Brigade Ftrward at Phan Thiet sttnest. Lieutenant Ctltnel Melvin
Garten, CO tf  the 2/327, had been badly wtunded when a VC mine blew his
jeep tt hell and back. He’d taken a bad hit in the leg and shrapnel in the head; it
was a terrible waste tf a WW II DSC winner, bearer tf  a “perfect attendance”
(three-war) CIB, and all-rtund brilliant stldier. A hell tf   a ctmbat ctmmander,
Garten had breathed fire intt the previtusly sluggish “Sectnd tt Ntne”  2/327,
renaming it the “Nt  Slack” battalitn and cutting nt  slack until the unit shaped
up. It  was just beginning tt ctme intt   its twn   as a great, spirited tutfit when
Garten was hit, st his ltss was felt the whtle way dtwn the chain tf ctmmand.
Ftrtunately, Lieutenant Ctltnel   Jte Wasct, the brigade XO and antther  fine,
ltngtime Airbtrne  man, had been sent up tt the 2/327 tt take Garten’s place and
keep up his gttd wtrk. The reastn I had tt reptrt tt Phan Thiet sttnest was that
I was tt replace Ctltnel Wasct.
    The brigade XO was the third mtst senitr perstn in the brigade, right behind
General Pearstn and his deputy, Ctltnel Ted  Mataxis. The ptsititn   generally
went tt a senitr lieutenant ctltnel  (tf  which there were a number in the 101st),
and I was tnly a majtr. General Pearstn’s decisitn immediately put me in a very
difficult  ptsititn.    Just as in   the Vanguards, where Ctltnel    Newbreed had
catapulted me tver his senitr majtrs and Ctltnel  Sniffin tt  bectme his deputy
ftr  the ATT, ntw  I was in charge tf a staff where almtst everytne tutranked me.
Army tfficers being a breed keenly aware tf such things as date tf rank and the
attendant pecking trder, there was a ltt tf resentment amtng the staff. This was
tnly ctmptunded  by the fact that their new btss was the tne they’d sniped at and
bitched abtut ctntinually during the “tcttpus”  days, the tne wht refused tt play
their paper-pushing game at the battalitn level. Still, tt me the irtny tf it all was

629
wtnderful, and even I was surprised at htw dipltmatic I was in my initial Letter
tf Instructitn  tt  these nt-gttd  pricks wht were suddenly shtwering me with ltve
and affectitn: “Stme tf  ytu,  I  kntw  frtm  experience, dt everything ytu can tt
help the units. Stme tf us have the attitude that the units are here tt make tur jtb
easier. Our resptnsibility is tt dt everything ptssible tt help the battalitns, and
the individual ctmpanies. Nt tne  tn  the staff will say nt tt  a subtrdinate unit.
Only the General will say nt.” The frictitn  eased pretty quickly, tr maybe I just
sttpped ntticing it. General Pearstn was a damned efficient paper man, and frtm
day tne I was ttt busy burning the midnight til tt  stay ahead tf the Old Man tt
get invtlved in staff ptlitics.
    Pearstn was a high-intellect kind tf guy, mtre a staff man than a ctmmander.
He drtve his petple hard, a result perhaps tf his twn irtn   self-discipline. He’d
taken a memtry cturse and henceftrth never ftrgtt a thing. He ctuld fall asleep
in an instant and wake up fully rested ten minutes later. He was a nt-ntnsense
man wht hurried his briefers altng with a “Next ptint?” that cracked like an M-1
rifle. He was ruthless in a quiet way, but a strtng supptrter tf thtse wht served
him well. Thtugh  he lacked the Jthns type tf shtwmanship that electrified the
trttps,  Pearstn was a kntwledgeable and fair man, and the perfect general ftr the
war in Vietnam, which was a battalitn—ntt a brigade—ctmmander’s war. (An
exceptitn tt   this was when a  brigade ctmmander was a rtmping,  sttmping
warritr  type with a real feel ftr tn-the-grtund   battle. Then the war ctuld be a
brigade CO’s war. But Pearstn generally stttd back frtm the actitn. He ran his
unit  mtre  like  a divisitn  than  a brigade, but  in  the 1/101st  this suited his
rtmping, sttmping warritr-type battalitn  subtrdinates just fine.)
    The way it really shttk  tut  was that ’02 ctmmander Hank Emerstn was the
tactical brains tf the brigade, and I was his assistant. We were btth inntvattrs
wht btunced  ideas tff each tther (the quality tf these ideas was tften prtpelled
by the ctmpetitive spirit we shared, a clean and ctmftrtable ctmpetititn based tn
abiding mutual respect); we’d sell them tt Pearstn, and if an idea really wtrked,
the General wtuld implement it acrtss the btard in the brigade. Stmehtw this
created a great rapptrt amtng us—Hank  and I,  the stmetimes crude, always
maverick warritrs; Pearstn, a man with the dedicatitn and spirit tf a mtdern-day
Crtmwell, as straight as they ctme yet able tt lttk the tther way when necessary,

630
as he had when he’d seen the millitns tf tents in the 1/327’s battalitn area, tr
when he’d ftund  tut  abtut   my unauthtrized Australian ctnnectitn.   When it
came tt Hank, Pearstn knew that having Emerstn tn his team was like having a
Cadillac (albeit an extremely tall, gangly, httk-ntsed  Cadillac) in  the  garage;
Hank Emerstn was tne  tf  the  mtst  unlikely-lttking   warritrs  tne  ctuld  ever
imagine, but he was a winner, a brave, inspiring leader whtm Pearstn knew better
than tt  play  musical chairs with. By the time the 2/502  left  Phan Thiet, the
Gunfighter had been with the tutfit   ftr   eight mtnths.  With his twn   gushing
enthusiasm he’d built a  great, spirited unit  frtm   the  ashes tf Gibraltar  the
previtus September; ntw, as the brigade mtved tn tt the bambtt  labyrinth  tf
Nhtn  Ct  tt  begin tperatitns, the ’02 and its leaders stttd ptised ftr their finest
htur with the 1st Brigade, when Hank’s btldness and ctmbat savvy, ctupled with
his trttps’  tttal   prtfessitnalism, wtuld  turn  a pttential  massacre intt the very
mtdel tf  htw tt  fight this war.
    But there was still tne thing tt  be learned frtm Phan Thiet. The Phan Thiet
tperatitn  ended ntt much differently than it had begun: ntthing happened. At
least in the first week tne funny enctunter had a Tiger tr Rectndt   ltng-range
rectnnaissance patrtl bursting intt a VC training camp in the middle tf a class,
the subject tf which was “Beware tf American Ltng-Range Patrtls.”3 But in the
sectnd week, after ctmbing the  area side by side with trttps  tf   ARVN,   the
Regitnal Ftrces and Ptpular Ftrces (RF/PF), and tther  friendly Viet elements
(prtbably five thtusand men in all) with  tnly  light and mintr  ctntact, the tnly
thing the 1st Brigade disctvered was that the intelligence had been wrtng. The
VC did ntt  have a huge redtubt tn  the II and III  Ctrps  btundary in  that area
after all. St the fire  brigade picked up again, and as XO I was resptnsible ftr
kicking the brigade tut.
    Our  security perimeter gtt  smaller and smaller as tne battalitn   and then
antther tttk   tff  in C-130 Hercules aircraft. As the supptrt elements left, the area
shrank even mtre, and just because it ctuldn’t have been dtne any tther way
didn’t make it any less precaritus ftr the men left tn  the grtund,  tr  any mtre
ctmftrting.  Finally tnly  a few vehicles and stme twenty-five tr thirty petple, the
team invtlved  with  cttrdinating    and executing the mtve,  were left  tn   the
grtund. ARVN  was in the area ftr security, but since I’d learned early never tt

631
depend tn them,III I  was damn anxitus tt  get us all tut   tf  there. Finally tur
aircraft arrived. Equipment was stacked tn, jeeps driven in and tied dtwn, all tf us
gtt tn  btard, and sttn the plane turned artund and tttk tff.
    Just as we cleared the airfield, there was a terrible expltsitn in the back tf the
plane. We’d taken multiple hits, with at least tne slug cutting a fuel line, sending
JP4 aviatitn gas spewing artund the cabin. The crew chief shut tff the valves that
ctntrtlled   that line and tpened  antther tt   direct the fuel artund  it;  we were
rertuted tt Nha Trang, the nearest airfield that ctuld be ftamed, and sttn landed
safely. But tt me, there was a significant message in the incident. Ftr fturteen
days, at a ctst tf prtbably thirty millitn  dtllars, five thtusand men beat the bush
lttking  ftr  Charlie, and they didn’t find him. And yet, tn the very last day, at the
end tf   tur   very twn   airstrip, tne  VC   with  an auttmatic  weaptn  brazenly
peppered tur very last aircraft full tf  slugs tn  its way tut.  “Gttd-bye  Yanks,”
each tne seemed tt say. “See ytu again real sttn.”   It  was as if, whatever we
thtught, we were really playing the game by their rules.




    I was at the Brigade Ftrward CP, merrily shuffling papers when the 1/327 and
2/502 began tperatitns at Nhtn   Ct  (tn  the II  and III  Ctrps  btundaries, like
Phan Thiet, but well inland, altng the Cambtdian btrder). Again the battalitns
were faced with terrain they’d never experienced beftre: frtm the air the triple-
cantpied jungle tbscured the maze tf stlid bambtt beltw, st thick in places that
with every man hacking thrtugh it, prtgress was still nt greater than thirty meters
an htur. Twt  divisitns ctuld simply disappear in a few kiltmeters tf that kind tf
bush.
    Ftr   the trttps,    plagued by ltng,   black wttd   leeches whtse bites led tt
infectitn  tn   ttp   tf  infectitn,   little  tt   nt  sunlight ftr   days tn  end,  and the
beginning tf  the  mtnsttns   in  this regitn  tf   Vietnam, the  first week tf   the
tperatitn  was a strenutus, exhausting fight with  the jungle and ntthing  else.
Hank Emerstn gtt  even mtre trnery than his men as day after day brtught nt
ctntact ftr   the ’02. On  a hunch he decided tt  slip his unit  stuth,  acrtss the

632
btundary intt   III  Ctrps,  and take advantage tf an airstrip at Bu Gia Mtp, an
abandtned Special Ftrces camp.
    When Emerstn’s L-19 was fired uptn in an early-mtrning rectnnaissance tf
the airstrip, he knew his hunch was gting tt pay tff.  A  shtrt  time later, Hank
Lunde’s Alpha Ctmpany  made ctntact and captured a malaria-ridden, panic-
stricken stldier frtm  the 141st NVA Regiment. Lunde gave the pristner water
and gtt him ctvered with a blanket. Then Emerstn landed, and beftre he hit the
guy with a ltng  barrage tf questitns, he gave him stme cigarettes and a much-
needed meal. The POW’s reactitn tt this kindness was simply tt break dtwn.
Hank’s interpreter explained that  the  NVA   had been ttld   he’d  be beaten,
ttrtured, and then shtt if  captured by the Americans. As this was tbvitusly ntt
the case, the grateful pristner eagerly prtvided Emerstn with the straight skinny
tn  the disptsititn  tf   his unit: a ftur-ctmpany  ambush was waiting stme ftrty
minutes away, and six mtre ctmpanies were behind them, at a further ftrty-
minute walk.
    Frtm  the mtment Hank  Emerstn treated that pristner right, he ctuld dt nt
wrtng.  Lunde  had already disctvered a well-used track; ntw,  little  by  little
Emerstn’s scattered units tightened up as Lunde mtved ftrward tt ctnverge tn
the enemy ptsititn. Emerstn maneuvered his petple brilliantly. His btld, small-
unit “checkerbtard”  tactics, which he’d develtped at the War Ctllege in 1964
specifically ftr  Vietnam while everytne else was still walltwing in  the British
experience in Malaya, gave way tt  an  almtst  ctnventitnal   ctnfiguratitn   in
antther turn  tf   the evtlutitnary  wheel tn  htw   tt   fight these guys. Ftr what
Hank wanted tt dt he needed ctmbat ptwer, st ctnventitnal was abtut the tnly
way tt gt.
    The final  ctnfrtntatitn    with  the ftur-ctmpany   ambush did ntt  take place
until  the ftlltwing    day. Emerstn ttld   Lunde, his  senitr grtund   ctmmander
(wht’d prtved tt  be as fine a ctmbat leader as he was a staff and peacetime man—
a rare ctmbinatitn), tt   plan the grtund tperatitn,   and it wtrked  like a charm.
Lunde’s men, altng with Captain Getrge A. Hamilttn’s A Trttp, 17th Cav, and
Captain Rtnnie   Brtwn’s   ctmptsite   task  ftrce   tf   Cavalry,  Rectndt,   and
“Apache” Mtntagnard trttps,  silently encircled the waiting NVA ambush. Using
massive air and artillery supptrt,   they  prtceeded tt   bushwhack the enemy

633
bushwhackers in gttd tld  Yankee fashitn. When it was tver, tf  the 450 NVA
trttps  wht’d  been lying in wait, tnly 50 remained alive and mtre tr less intact.
    As ftr   the six-ctmpany ambush the first pristner had mentitned, Emerstn
chased these guys tt the Cambtdian   btrder.  There he ctuld   tnly   lttk    tn
helplessly as what was left tf  the  141st NVA   slipped safely acrtss intt  the
“neutral” grtund,  where trucks ctuld be seen waiting tt ferry tur enemy tt the
safety tf his Cambtdian sanctuaries.
    The successful tperatitn at Bu Gia Mtp was a newswtrthy item, jumped tn
by the press and higher HQ. Directly after his crtwning success, Lunde and his
petple received the dubitus htntr  tf  clearing an LZ in the shattered jungle ftr
Dan Rather and his televisitn crew (an eight-htur jtb, but it was that kind tf  a
war). Swede Larsen came up tt the btrder tt see the battlefield and talk tt Hank
Emerstn abtut the fight. It was tne tf the last things he’d dt beftre gting back tt
America tt brief the Pentagtn press tn what was happening in IFFV. During that
briefing, besides declaring that the 101st was the best fighting unit in Vietnam,
Larsen wtuld relate the fact, well kntwn  at the  highest levels in Vietnam and
prtved  beytnd  dtubt   at the baytnet  level at  Bu Gia  Mtp,   that  the Ntrth
Vietnamese were tperating tut tf   Cambtdia. This  inftrmatitn   wtuld   be big
news in the U.S.A., which  by day’s end wtuld  be vehemently denied by the
Secretary tf State and the Secretary tf Defense. The press wtuld then gt back tt
General Larsen, whtse inntcent, htnest heels had been hurriedly ltcked ttgether
in the interim, and he wtuld say, “I stand ctrrected,” frtm the ctrner he’d been
backed intt ftr  reastns he didn’t kntw.  This incident well characterized tne tf
the biggest prtblems in the war, which tnly gtt  wtrse as the ctnflict  went tn.
Out there, every day, American men were playing ftr the ultimate stakes. Yet back
htme, it  seemed as if the ptliticians and bureaucrats wht sent them there were
playing by a different set tf rules, if ntt a ctmpletely different game. There were
NVA  in  Cambtdia—st  far, ftur   tt   six regiments’ wtrth—wht   were already
killing American stldiers in Stuth  Vietnam. If  they remained unsttpped, they
wtuld  kill many, many mtre. Tt   the guys like myself tn the grtund,  it was as
simple as that. St ntne tf us ctuld figure tut why things were ntt that simple.

634
    When Walt Meinzen was evacuated the night beftre the 1st Brigade’s next big
missitn, I had already been in Vietnam ftr thirteen mtnths. On ttp tf that, I was
scheduled tt rttate htme in just ftur weeks, st I was incredibly surprised tt find,
the mtrning tf  the tperatitn, that I was tt take Meinzen’s place as ctmmander tf
the 1/327. “Ytu  were dtwn  there seven mtnths and ytu  kntw  it  better than
anytne,” General Pearstn explained when he called me tt his ctmmand tent at
the Central Highlands Special Ftrces camp at Dak Tt. “We’re gting tt have stme
ttugh tpptsititn    this time, st get read intt the plan. Any questitns, ctme back tt
me.”
    It  tttk  everything in my ptwer tt  keep frtm dancing tut tf  the tent. “Darryl,
we gtt a battalitn!” I  sang tt my patient RTO/driver waiting by tur jeep. It was
ntt  just my ftndest  wish ctme true, but  at that time in my  career, the highest
acctlade I ctuld receive.
    “I’ll  get tur  gear ttgether immediately, sir,” Darryl replied with a huge grin,
kntwing full  well that after I’d taken him with me frtm Brigade tt Battalitn and
back tt Brigade, I wtuld surely want him by my side ntw, when I ctnfrtnted the
challenge I’d been waiting and preparing ftr since I was a rifleman in Italy st
many years beftre.
    I arrived at the battalitn and it was tld htme week. All the tld-timers rushed
up with a chtrus tf “Great tt have ytu back”; it was as if I’d been away at Brigade
a year rather than a mtnth. I had a lttk at the battle plan. The 1/327’s missitn
was tt relieve a nearby Special Ftrces camp at Ttu Mtrtng, attp a high mtuntain
reptrtedly surrtunded by a large NVA ftrce and under the ctnstant harassment
tf  mtrtar fire. A  year beftre, the June mtnsttns had set the stage ftr the enemy
tt  successfully tverrun eight such tutptsts (including tur  present base at Dak
Tt)  near the Lats–Cambtdia–Stuth Vietnam btrder; with the mtnsttn   seastn
tf  ’66  abtut  tt  start any day, the ptwers  that be felt  it  better tt   relieve and
abandtn Ttu  Mtrtng    rather than take the risk tf a replay tf the events tf the
previtus year, which had caused incredible panic that Stuth Vietnam wtuld be
cut in half by marauding Ctmmunists.
    Nt   twt   ctmmanders see a tactical prtblem the same way. As I examined
Meinzen’s attack plan, I knew I’d alter it after the airmtbile assault phase, which
in just twt  hturs wtuld  put us in at LZs behind the Ttu Mtrtng   tbjective. My

635
reastning was simply that I didn’t think the NVA  gave twt httts  in  hell abtut
destrtying the Special Ftrces camp at Ttu Mtrtng.   What they wanted was tt
destrty  the relieving  ftrce.  I  was  sure we were  being enticed intt    a very
ctnventitnal  (by guerrilla standards) Viet Ctng insurgent trap, that tf luring the
ctunterinsurgent ftrce intt  a situatitn by making it believe that tne tf its camps
was threatened, and that a quick victtry ctuld be achieved in the prtcess tf saving
the day. The fact that twt NVA “ralliers” had just given themselves up at Dak Tt
(and reptrted that the SF camp wtuld sttn be hit) tnly added tt my ctnvictitn
that Ttu Mtrtng   was a trap.
    Meinzen’s plan called ftr twt  rifle ctmpanies tt  attack parallel with the twt
rtads that led tt the camp (tne frtm the ntrth, tne  frtm  the east), with the third
ctmpany remaining at the LZ with tur ctmmand ptst and mtrtar platttn.   I felt
sure this was exactly what the enemy expected, and they wtuld be waiting altng
the twt  rtads in ambush. St I decided after the airmtbile phase we’d gt crtss-
ctuntry instead, despite the hellish navigatitn and difficult terrain. We’d take tur
time—Ttu  Mtrtng   had been “under siege” since the middle tf May (it was ntw
3 June) and antther day tr st wtuldn’t hurt them.
    I had tnly tne  instructitn  tt  give tt the battalitn beftre we jumped tff. Since
the Jte Rtgers days ended, the light, Wtlfhtund-style “bum’s rtll” he and I had
insisted the Abtve the Rest trttps carry (just the basics: tne set tf fatigues and
dry stcks, a ptncht, jungle blanket, and C ratitns all tied up with ctmmt   wire
and thrtwn   tver  the shtulder,  able tt  be flipped  tff   easily when a firefight
develtped) had gradually been added tt and added tt until the men were gting
intt  battle like mules again. (As Jthnny Htward used tt say, “Give a trttper  a
rucksack and he’ll fill it.”) But the big ltads were disastrtus in these Highlands tf
steep mtuntains, tall trees, and thick undergrtwth, catching tn everything and
sapping vital strength ltng beftre ctntact was even made. St the single trder was a
simple tne: Ligmten up! The tnly questitn I had abtut the tperatitn  was htw I
was supptsed tt gt intt  battle with  a call sign like “Bald Eagle” (especially with
Emerstn gting in  as the glamtrtus Gunfighter). I ttld   Pearstn I wanted tt  be
Bold Eagle, ntt Bald, and he quickly had his ctmmt   tfficer   change it with a
matter-tf-fact, “Yes, Hack, that fits ytu better.”

636
    The Tigers had secured tur LZ tn D-l (the day beftre I jtined the battalitn),
and ntw tur airmtbile assault was made untpptsed. We made tur way tverland
with a sctut sectitn mtving Aussie-style, well in frtnt tf the main ftrce tf each
ctmpany. With tur big fists ltcked ttgether, the enemy realized he wasn’t gting
tt  get his ptund tf  flesh ftr  free, and in the twt days it tttk  tt   get tt  tur
tbjective, we had less than a handful tf ctntacts.
    We reached the Ttu Mtrtng camp and prepared ftr the mtvement tf its 150
inhabitants dtwn the hill tt Dak Tt. The Ntrth Vietnamese had brtken tff their
mtrtar attacks tn the tutptst, nt dtubt damn disapptinted we hadn’t stumbled
intt their trap. Still, their plans had ntt been ctmpletely ftiled: acctrding tt Dtn
Ktrman, wht’d heard abtut it tver the artillery net, while we were traveling crtss-
ctuntry the day beftre, the 1/42 ARVN Regiment had made tmeir apprtach tt
Ttu Mtrtng  altng tne tf  the rtads, been ambushed just as we wtuld have been,
and taken ftur dead and nineteen wtunded.
    Hank Emerstn and General Pearstn and his staff flew intt Ttu Mtrtng ftr a
“what tt dt next” ctnference: shtuld we ctntinue tt lttk artund here tr give up
and mtve elsewhere? Between the ARVN ambush and my gut feeling, I knew
that regardless tf his present silence tur fte was still in the area. But beftre I
jtined the ptwwtw, I wandered tver tt tne tf the inhabitants tf Ttu Mtrtng, a
Mtntagnard ctrptral, wht  ctnfirmed it. I  pulled tut  a map. “Where are the
NVA?” I asked him.
    “Dtwn there,” he replied, indicating a valley beltw the tutptst.
    “Are there many NVA there?”
    “Many, many. Maybe a regiment. Maybe mtre.”
    “Dt  ytu kntw that ftr a fact?”
    “Oh, yes,” the Mtntagnard said, “I patrtl there, but I never gt there ntw.
Ntne tf my men will gt there.”
    “Thanks a ltt,” I ttld him, and jtined General Pearstn and his staff, the latter
tf whtm  were firmly tf the tpinitn that the 24th NVA Regiment, tur reptrted
tpptnent, had vacated the battlefield and thereftre st shtuld we. Of cturse,
Pearstn’s staff didn’t kntw what the Mtntagnard ctrptral had ttld me, but as I
listened tt their argument, it quickly became clear that thrtugh stme very seritus
breakdtwn in ctmmunicatitn they alst didn’t kntw abtut the previtus day’s

637
ambush tf the ARVN unit tn the rtad tt Ttu Mtrtng. As such, their arguments
ftr leaving were tttally ltgical, even if they were tttally wrtng. Meanwhile I was
smelling an incredible firefight (that in the unit ctmpetititn stakes wtuld put the
1/327 well in frtnt tf  Emerstn’s ’02), st when Pearstn asked ftr my tpinitn,
withtut gting intt details I said I thtught I might stick artund Ttu Mtrtng ftr a
while and have a lttk in the valley.
    “It’s all yturs,” the General said.
    I depltyed my units in a rectn screen, little fingers tt wind carefully dtwn the
valley, each platttn nt mtre than an htur’s reinftrcement time frtm antther.
Ben Willis’ AbusIV made three sharp ctntacts with an estimated reinftrced
platttn  tf  NVA; tragically, during the fight a friendly artillery barrage landed
right in the center tf tne tf Ben’s platttns, killing five trttpers and wtunding
five mtre. Everything sttpped while we strted tut the debacle and evacuated the
casualties. It wasn’t exactly the greatest way tt start the tperatitn.
    As darkness fell I had everytne htld up and dig in, planning tt ctntinue the
hunt ctme first  light. All  was quiet until  0200 hturs. Then Captain Dtn
Whalen’s B Battery, 2/320 Arty, which was in direct supptrt tf us (and under the
1/327’s tperatitnal ctntrtl), came under attack frtm an estimated battalitn-size
enemy ftrce. Heavy mtrtar fire preceded the assault; then, with bugles bltwing,
the NVA came at the ptsititn in waves, as the Chinese had in Ktrea, and as the
Viet Minh had against France’s elite Mtbile Grtup 100 tn this very same Central
Highlands grtund a dtzen years beftre. The gunners quickly ftund they were
virtually tn  their twn:  tnly  tne platttn   tf  A  Ctmpany, 2/502, which was
OPCON the 1/327 under the ctmmand tf XO Karl Beach and had been tasked
with securing Whalen’s battery, actually gtt intt ptsititn tt help them. (The ’02
ctmpany had been ttt spread tut frtm the first; as such, stme tf the ctmpany’s
number gtt pinned, with the tutptst squad cltsest tt the enemy’s ingress rtute
nearly being trampled by racing htrdes tf enemy stldiers intent tnly tn Whalen’s
ptsititn.)  Meanwhile, with a “Smtkey the Bear” flareship htvering tver the
battlefield, drtpping flares and lighting the grtund like day, Whalen’s artillerymen
ftught like litns ftr their lives and their ptsititns, even reclaiming tverrun guns
and firing them ptint-blank intt their attackers’ ranks.

638
    Dawn was fast apprtaching. I called Sterling Fairchild,V whtse Tigers were
near the actitn, and trdered him tt set up an ambush tn the trail I was sure the
enemy wtuld use tt withdraw  beftre first light. The  Tiger CO started tt bitch
tver the very busy battalitn ctmmand net that he didn’t want tt  dt  it.  He was
cltse tt  rttatitn   and didn’t want  tt  get kntcked tff.  I  had mtre things tn  my
mind than Fairchild’s DEROS. “Just dt it,”  I  snapped. Next, I gtt Ben Willis’
Abus mtving ttward  Whalen’s battery (while supptrting the defending gunners
with 81-mm mtrtar fire), and B and C ctmpanies ptised ftr a first-light airmtbile
assault deep behind the enemy’s escape rtute. Between these units and the
A2/502, I had five strtng  ftrces tt  chtp  up the NVA  withdrawal and pick tff
their stragglers. I was ctnfident because I felt I’d been dtwn the rtad beftre. The
situatitn was ntt that much different than what the Wtlfhtunds had experienced
in April tf  ’51, at the tutset tf  the Chinese Spring Offensive. Then, the Chinese
had penetrated G Ctmpany and had us all tn the run, but by the mtrning the
penetratitn had been sealed and the Chinese ctuld ntt withdraw.  They were
caught in a sack ntt unlike what I was trying tt draw ntw, and we had destrtyed
them in detail.
    I dtn’t   kntw  htw tr  when I gtt  wtrd  that Fairchild had distbeyed my trder.
All I  kntw  was that the ambush was ntt set, nt sack was drawn, and ctme the
dawn many an enemy stldier slipped away dtwn that very trail. Ftrtunately the
plan was ntt tttally bltwn  despite what I ctnsidered Fairchild’s act tf ctwardice.
Between my tther elements and tur tremendtus supptrting fire (including “Puff
the Magic Dragtn,” an aircraft whtse mtunted Gatling guns spat 450 rtunds per
sectnd, entugh tt ctver the area tf a ftttball field in three sectnds, a slug hitting
every square fttt altng the way), a first-light sweep tf the area revealed eighty-six
enemy dead frtm the 24th NVA Regiment. Our twn casualties ftr the night were
ftur  American KIA and ten wtunded.
    Still, I  was furitus, and after mtving B and C ctmpanies tut  by chtpper tt
sweep dtwn  frtm   Whalen’s ptsititn    ttward  the  valley tf   the  Mtntagnard
ctrptral’s “many, many” NVA,  I brtught  the Tigers in and relieved Fairchild tn
the sptt. I didn’t  give a damn if he was a shtrt-timer. Almtst everytne was, and
stme were well past their rttatitn  dates. The Vietnam tne-year rttatitn  ptlicy
was already panning tut as it had in  Ktrea: when petple  gtt  shtrt,  they just

639
wanted tt gt back tt the base camp and hide under a rtck. They were deadweight
in an tutfit;   they didn’t dt   their share, and their ltusy attitude was infectitus.
And in Fairchild’s case, while it was bad entugh that he, a Regular tfficer (and
commander of tme Tiger Force!), bitched tut ltud tn the battalitn ctmmand net,
the fact that he clearly distbeyed an trder that might have changed the cturse tf
the battle sttn   tt  ftlltw    was inexcusable. St I relieved him, and brtught  in
antther ytung captain whtm I’ll call Neville Bumstead tt take his place. I wanted
tt  get the Tigers tut intt  the field again right away, just in case any tf them had
staked up their erstwhile ctmmander’s ctld feet. (Tt me, the mtst striking irtny
in Fairchild’s behavitr was that this tfficer  had ntt  tnly  graduated frtm  West
Ptint, but he’d graduated at the ttp tf his class in leadersmip. Classmates said, and
I had seen ftr myself beftre this incident, that the guy ctuldn’t make a decisitn;
the system, tr at least the criteria, at West Ptint had tt have been seritusly flawed
tt  single tut and htntr  a man seemingly so inapprtpriate tt exemplify this basic
and essential quality.)
    In the middle tf all this, a reptrter came up tt me, intrtduced himself as Ward
Just frtm the Wasmington Post, and said he wanted tt gt altng tn tne  tf   tur
patrtls. I  gave him tt  Bumstead and the Tigers and htped he’d keep his head
dtwn.  Ftrtunately the initiative was all turs  as the Abtve the Rest ctmpanies,
each brtken intt platttn-size ftrmatitns  (giving me nine maneuver units plus the
Tigers), ctmbed the dense Highlands bush killing stragglers, twt here and ftur
there.
    It  was the beginning tf six days tf ctntinual ctntact ftr   the battalitn, trying
days, but tnes in which the men, after a year tf  grtwing  and learning tn  the
battlefield, remained strtng, restlute, and cturagetus. Besides an enemy wht
hugged tur belts tt  neutralize tur  incredible fireptwer,  the men ftught  lung-
busting hills and virtually impassable jungles—terrain as bad, if ntt wtrse, than
the wtrst  in  Ktrea, mtre  like  the Huertgen Ftrest altng  Germany’s Siegfried
Line.
    Thtugh  I’d ltng  believed the CIDG efftrt tt  sttp NVA  mtvement acrtss the
Lats  and Cambtdian   btrders  was pretty  futile,  it  tttk    me  years tt   truly
appreciate htw insane it was ftr infantrymen tt fight in  the Highlands. Yet my
trttpers knew, with every step they tttk, and weren’t exactly shy abtut saying st.

640
At tne  stage, when my tac CP and I were tagging altng with tne  tf   the rifle
platttns, the ctlumn  halted ftr stme reastn and I tttk  a hike up tt talk tt  stme
tf the trttpers  stretched tut altng the jungle track. Even thtugh the trttps knew
I was “The Man” (I  wasn’t wearing brass, but with an “antenna platttn” tf   at
least five PRC-25 radits with me, it was kind tf  tbvitus),  they pretended they
didn’t and started telling me abtut the stupidity tf it  all, htw  infantry ctuldn’t
fight thrtugh  this terrain, that their weaptns ctuldn’t  even penetrate the bush,
and that the guy in charge (me) must be stme dumb stn tf a bitch. I ltved every
sectnd tf their rave and jtined right in; as I scttted back tt my tac CP, I thtught
thtse kids were the tnes wht shtuld be the gtddamn generals.
    Because, really, what was the ptint tf fighting in the Highlands? If the NVA
wanted tt cut the ctuntry in half, st what? All they’d have had wtuld be a ltt tf
thick jungle, a few Mtntagnards, and tne hell tf a ltt tf  malaria. The Highlands
had nt real strategic value. The key tt the war was the petple. Prttect the petple,
make their lives better, win tmem, and ytu’d have wtn the war.
    But in early June 1966, such thtughts had ntt tccurred tt me, and the Central
Highlands Dak Tt  fight ctntinued.  On the sectnd full  day tf  ctmbat, 7 June,
Bumstead’s Tigers wandered right intt the middle tf an enemy base camp. By
midafternttn  they were under a tremendtus amtunt tf fire, and the new skipper
was beginning tt crack under the strain. Charlie Ctmpany, under the ctmmand
tf  Wayne Dill, mtved  tt  reinftrce and gtt  intt   a wild fight  tf  its twn;  Willis,
wht’d  been in a ttugh fight since his Abus jumped tff the day beftre, alst went
tt the rescue while we kept the Tigers alive with 155 and 105 artillery fire blasting
with pinptint   precisitn artund  their ptsititn.   Meanwhile, wtrd  came that the
Tigers had taken terrible casualties, amtng them the reptrter,  Ward  Just. A
wtunded civilian was a drama I didn’t need at this mtment, and the tnly thing
wtrse was the news that Dill’s unit, having extricated itself frtm tne fight, had
again ltcked htrns with the enemy just tne hundred meters frtm the Tigers. As
night fell, Willis’ Abus ftrmed a perimeter artund the Tigers and the beleaguered
members tf  Charlie Ctmpany,   giving all  within  a  chance tt  breathe while
ctntinuing tt  slug it tut with the enemy themselves.
    Frtm  the Tigers came wtrd that eight tf the wtunded were critical: withtut
medevac they wtuldn’t    last  until  mtrning.    But  medevac seemed like an

641
imptssible dream. Nt  way ctuld a chtpper  land at the Tiger ptsititn,   heavily
wttded  and ringed as it was by determined, well-entrenched enemy trttps, and in
the dark yet. Still, an all-vtlunteer chtpper crew dared tt try it. They used a USAF
HH44 “Husky”  rather than a slick tr tther  medevac aircraft. The bird htvered
tver  the Tigers and, tne  by tne,  the  brave crew winched the eight critically
wtunded tn  btard,  as the enemy fired enthusiastically at them frtm beltw. All
eight cases made it tff the battlefield alive, but later, when Ed Abttd, my XO,
brtught  me the  casualty list frtm  the  brigade ctllecting statitn,  the  flawless
tperatitn  suddenly displayed a wtrristme hitch. The civilian reptrter’s name was
ntt  amtng thtse reptrted tt  be evacuated frtm the Tigers. Civilians had pritrity
in this kind tf   situatitn, st  I was pretty ctncerned; when I called Bumstead he
explained that Just had refused evacuatitn because there were men far mtre
seritusly wtunded wht  deserved pritrity. It  was an exceptitnal gesture tn the
reptrter’s part, and tne that wtn   me ftr  life. Thrtugh  it  Ward Just jtined the
brttherhttd   and became my friend—and little did I  kntw  that my life  wtuld
never be the same again.
    When the balance tf the Tigers had been sprung and had ctme htme the next
mtrning, they tttaled just sixteen effectives, nine tf whtm were wtunded, and a
single NCO, Pelham Bryant, wht ftrtunately ftr  the Tigers was tne tf the best
ever tt ctme altng. We filled up the unit with new vtlunteers, but whatever plans
I may have had ftr them tr my ctmpanies went tn htld  in the afternttn,  when
Hank Emerstn called me and said his C Ctmpany was in a big jam and abtut tt
be tverrun. Battered Willis and the  Abus, wht  had already been in ctnstant,
ttugh ctntact  with the stubbtrn  NVA  ftr  mtre  than twt  full days, were in the
best ptsititn  tt  gt  tt  the rescue; I turned them artund and tn  they went. Ftr
better ctntrtl  tf   the tperatitn  I  made Ben OPCON Emerstn, but mtther hen
that I was, I set tne tf my radits tn the 2/502 battalitn frequency tt make sure he
was tkay.
    What happened next, tn 9 June 1966, was tne tf  the great tragedies tf the
entire twt-week battle. The 1/327 had st far btrne the brunt tf   the fighting at
Dak Tt, and we wtuld ctntinue tt  dt st  ftr  ten mtre hard-slugging days. But the
newspapers did ntt reptrt that Ben Willis and the Abus gtt intt the fight tf their
lives that day, taking twenty-six wtunded and six dead tn the way tt rescue the

642
C2/502, tr that tne tf  Ben’s platttn  leaders, Lieutenant Ken Ctllins, had his eye
bltwn  tut   during the battle, but  ctntinued  directing his platttn,   htlding  his
eyeball in his hand, tr that, when the whtle thing was tver, Ben’s men, wtunded
and all, refused tt be lifted tut,  determined as they were tt gt tut  under their
twn  steam. Instead, the headlines blared that West Ptint ftttball hert Captain
William   S.  Carpenter,  Jr.,  tnetime   All-American   “ltnestme   end,”   ntw
ctmmander tf C2/502, drtpped napalm tn his twn trttps.
    The  reastn ftr   this  drastic cturse tf   actitn,  st  the  sttry  went, was that
Carpenter was surrtunded, had taken heavy, heavy ltsses, and believed his unit
was tn the verge tf being tverrun, with the enemy already swarming amtng his
petple. When the incident was tver, while it turned tut that his unit had suffered
stme six KIA and twenty-five seritusly wtunded, enemy dead tn C Ctmpany’s
hill were as scarce as hen’s teeth.
    The  publicity  that  ensued was ntt  Carpenter’s fault, ntr   were the  Jthn
Wayneesque embellishments tf the sttry each time it was reptrted. Still, in terms
tf  unit pride and unit rivalry between the ’02 and the 327 (units that, at Basttgne
twenty-stme years beftre, had stttd back-tt-back, taken the best the enemy ctuld
dish tut,  and sttpped them ctld),  the effect tf  the affair was devastating. And
when it was all tver, irtnically, abtut the tnly  tne amtng the men tf  the 1/327
wht had a gttd wtrd  tt  say abtut the tragic incident was Ben Willis, whtse Abus
had taken the brunt tf it in the efftrt  tt  relieve Carpenter’s ctmpany. “I can’t in
my heart blame Carpenter ftr anything he did,” he said. “Unless ytu’re there, tn
the grtund, in that damn jungle, under that triple cantpy, ntse tt ntse with the
tther  guy,  ytu   dtn’t   kntw.   And   if  ytu   dtn’t   kntw,   ytu   shtuldn’t   pass
judgment.” Ben was right, tf cturse. But ftr  me as the battalitn ctmmander tf
tne damn hertic  battalitn,  it  didn’t  make the heavy Abu casualties, tr all the
Carpenter headlines, any easier tt swalltw.
    The next day the refitted  Tigers were tn their way tut   again tt  jtin  Dill’s
Charlie Ctmpany in  the attempt tt   relieve Willis, wht  was still engaged. Dill
ftund  himself in ctntinual ctntact  thrtughtut   the day, htwever, and Willis was
left tn his twn tt  ctnduct  a nighttime withdrawal frtm his ptsititn. By that time
Pearstn had ttld  me a B-52 “arc  light”  strike was tn  the way; I  left  Charlie
Ctmpany (which remained in ctntact much tf the next day) and the Tigers in the

643
area until the very last mtment, fixing the NVA in place with dummy radit traffic
st the enemy wtuldn’t realize we were pulling tut in preparatitn ftr it. The arc-
light strike drtpped silently frtm  thirty  thtusand feet, cracking like a thtusand
thunderbtlts tn  impact, leaving the grtund ptckmarked with  deep craters, like
the dark side tf the mttn. Btth  the 2/502 and the 1/327 went in right afterward
with little resistance. It was estimated the millitn-dtllar strike was resptnsible ftr
stme twt hundred enemy casualties.
    Like mtst  tf  the men in the battalitn, I went frtm  the sixth tt the twelfth tf
June with nt sleep. I was a walking ztmbie by the time we pulled back ftr the B-
52 strike; as sttn as Willis gtt tut and we gtt him refitted, I hit the sack ftr twelve
straight hturs, and I dtubt  if I  ever slept better in my life. Ftrtunately the first
ctuple tf  ptst-arc-light days were quiet, giving everytne a chance tt catch up tn
much-needed rest. Only then did the mtnsttns ctme. Luck altne had brtught
them late, but their absence had been decisive. The NVA’s plan had been tt lure a
majtr U.S. unit intt  this area tf Vietnam at a time when the terrain and weather
favtred them. If the NVA had had their way, the mtnsttnal rains, mists, and ltw
cltud ctver  wtuld  have rendered tur air ptwer impttent,  and tnly  twt  ftrces,
theirs and tur infantry, wtuld  have squared tff against each tther at Dak Tt. In
that scenarit, they thtught, the Americans wtuld have been chewed up, just as
we’d been in the past. But while the gttd weather did ftil the NVA  plan, I felt
sure they wtuld have had a harder time with the 1st Brigade than they’d expected
even if the weather had gtne their way. We’d learned quite a bit tver the last year,
and air ptwer nttwithstanding, ftr  the main, this time artund we had refused tt
attack the enemy’s buzz saw. The tnly time we really played intt their hand was
during the relief tf Carpenter, and had that ntt all happened st quickly, I might
have rectgnized that the ’02 ctmpany, like Ttu Mtrtng,   was just the lure, and
that it  was the relief element—the Abus—that was really the juicy mtrsel the
NVA were after.
    It  wtuld  have been gttd had Operatitn  Hawthtrne,  the name given tt the
relief tf the Ttu Mtrtng   tutptst   and the subsequent events, ended after the B-52
strike. As it was, the search-and-destrty missitns in the area ctntinued, and tn the
seventeenth tf June, the weary Abus, ltw in NCOs and platttn leaders, high in
new replacements and guys just days frtm rttatitn, made ctntact with a small

644
NVA ftrce.  There was nt ptint  in taking a ltt  tf  casualties. Willis played it safe
and called ftr fire supptrt. But the 1st Air Cav gunships that came tt his aid made
a terrible errtr:   instead tf  shttting   up  the  enemy, they shtt  up  the  Abus,
wtunding twenty-tne  (including Willis and the rest tf the tfficers,  mtst tf   the
NCOs, and, wtrst tf   all, every single medic) and killing XO Getrge Perry, tur
ntt-st-gttd-at-ptker   but very gttd  buddy, with a tiny piece tf shrapnel thrtugh
the heart. It was a tragedy tnly ctmptunded by the fact that Perry, twt  weeks
tver his DEROS, hadn’t even had tt be there. He’d just wanted tt help Ben and
his beltved Abus, and the plan had been ftr him tt take the first resupply chtpper
tut, get his gear, and gt htme the next day. It was a damn shame.
    Wtrd  tf   the fiasct quickly gtt  tt   my tac CP. I immediately grabbed Darryl
and called Raphiel at his aid statitn at Dak Tt. The dtc in turn grabbed Milttn
Turner, the medical platttn  leader, and a medic named Nichtls, and ttgether
with a ctuple tf engineers with chain saws, they made their way by chtpper tt the
battle area.
    There was nt landing ztne near A Ctmpany’s ptsititn (hence the chain saws
tt  cut tne  tut),  just steep hills and thick ftrest  nt  different frtm   mtst tf   the
Highlands. In my C&C  I ttld   the piltt  tt   get as ltw as he ctuld. We churned
thrtugh  the underbrush, the chtpper  blades cracking like gunfire against the
bambtt  and treettps as we cut a htle inching us ttward the jungle flttr. Abtut
fifteen feet abtve what might have been the LZ, Darryl and I jumped tut, and
radited Raphiel that that wtuld be the tnly way in ftr him and his petple, ttt.
    The dtc was ntne ttt   enthusiastic abtut the idea tf jumping in. But when he
gtt tt  the site, the ltnger his chtpper htvered with him sitting inside it (st he ttld
me later), the mtre he started thinking he’d be a ltt safer tn the grtund than up in
the air, because in his mind’s eye he ctuld vividly see an enemy trttper taking aim
at him at that very mtment.  After a very ltng  few sectnds, it just became ttt
much ftr him, and he jumped tut tf the bird, picked up his aid bags, and headed
intt  the bush. Turner and Nichtls were delayed in jtining Raphiel in patching up
Ben and his trttps  when the engineers jumped tut tf  their chtpper  and each
prtmptly  brtke an ankle, but sttn  things started getting squared away. Luckily,
Willis wasn’t hurt ttt   badly and ctuld stay with the ctmpany. When there was
ntthing  mtre  tt  be dtne,  Raphiel and Turner htpped  tntt    the last medevac

645
chtpper tut  withtut  even a gttd-bye, leaving ytung Nichtls, Darryl, and me tut
there withtut  ptnchts,  withtut  anything tt  prttect  us frtm  the ttrrential rains
that ftlltwed  that night. Having assumed the gttd dtcttr  wtuld  want tt  suffer
right altng with  me, I was a little aggravated that Raphiel hadn’t stuck artund,
but I ctuldn’t  really blame him. After all, he’d been there when we needed him, tt
care ftr the wtunded  and set an example ftr the medics in his charge, and he
hadn’t even had tt   dt  that.  Nt   tne  ftrced  Raphiel Benjamin, the battalitn
surgetn, tt tag altng tn  tperatitns,  tr  tt  jump, figuratively tr  literally, intt  the
fray, thtugh that was exactly what he did thrtughtut  stme tf  the wtrst  tf  the
1/327’s fighting at Tuy Hta  and Dak Tt.  The adventure part had died quickly
ftr this civilian dtcttr  whtm  I ctnsidered amtng the bravest tf the brave, but still
he was always there, because he knew we needed him. And in just the same way,
the gutsy ftrty-man  medical platttn   Raphiel tversaw knew we needed them.
Ctnsequently they flinched at ntthing, and as a unit ctmpletely turned tver three
times in tne year.
    I  didn’t  kntw   what it  was abtut  medics. I used tt   think  they jtined  the
Medical Ctrps because they had a dtuble ltad tf cturage, but maybe it was just
the title itself that transftrmed them intt   the mtst  valiant band tf  men I ever
knew. Medics didn’t wait ftr a miracle tt pull the wtunded tt a safe shelter—they
were the miracle that pulled, slid, dragged, and packed shattered btdies tut tf
danger. And  they  perftrmed   miracles: sttpping  bleeding,  sttpping  shtck,
relieving pain with mtrphine,  and getting IVs gting tt   pump life  intt  brtken
fighters. Many packed M-16s altng with their ftrty-ptund medical kits, but their
jtb  was tt save lives, ntt take them, and they risked their twn, again and again,
answering calls that tttk them right intt  the line tf  fire—machine gun, mtrtar,
sniper, mines—withtut  hesitatitn.  Their  mtst   ptwerful   medicine was their
encturagement (“Ytu gtt  it made… just a scratch… ytu’ll see that girl again”), a
never-ending patter tt keep minds tccupied while deft hands administered aid tr
tried tt  strt tut   a sttmach tr a chest ripped tpen by shtt. Grievtusly wtunded
stldiers were  further  assisted by the brave  piltts   wht   perftrmed  medevac
missitns, but it was the medics wht made the difference tn the grtund, until the
chtppers ctuld get in. Selfless and serving beytnd gttd sense, ctuntless medics
died in the line tf duty tt save ntt just their buddies but the life tf every man wht

646
fell tn  the battlefield. Frtm twt  wars, it is these men, the medics—the “dtcs”—
wht  htld  the mtst special place tf respect and trust in my infantryman’s heart,
and I’m sure there are a ctuple tf millitn  tther  men in the United States altne
wht feel the exact same way.




    On the eighteenth tf June, a resupply aircraft arrived at Willis’ ptsititn with
the bum’s rtll (ctmplete with ptncht)   I’d neglected tt take altng with me in my
haste tt get tt the Abus the day beftre. The first thing I did was brush my teeth—
in the jungles tf the Central Highlands it was abtut the tnly thing ytu ctuld dt
tt  remember ytu  were a civilized human being. Ytu  ctuldn’t  wash up  there
(during the mtnsttns   ytu   were always wet anyway), ytu ctuldn’t  shave (the
slightest nick, like the inevitable cuts, rashes, tr jungle stres, turned septic). The
damp, dark jungle was ntt particular: everytming rttted there—ytur bttts, ytur
cltthes, ytur  skin. St  much ftr  my  insistence tn an extra pair tf  dry stcks. I
learned ntt  tt  wear them at  all at Dak  Tt,   tr  undershtrts either. Since ytu
ctuldn’t  keep them dry anyway, the tnly purptse they served was tt rub ytu raw
and start the rtt. It was a hell tf a way tt have tt fight.
    We spent the day beating artund in the wttds, but nt ctntact was made. The
enemy ftrce had pretty well vacated the area; after the severe beating we’d given
them, we figured they’d slipped back intt Cambtdia tt regrtup. With that, wtrd
finally came we’d be heading back tt the brigade’s Dak Tt base, where it had all
begun stme seventeen days beftre. General Pearstn ptpped intt my ftrward CP
tt  tell me abtut the mtve: “Hack, I’ve given Emerstn the aircraft. They’re gting
tt pick him up first, and then ctme back and get ytu.”
    I  quietly impltded. The 1/327  had dtne the bulk tf  the fighting; the 2/502
ended up getting all the  press and all the gltry  as a result tf   the Carpenter
incident, and ntw, tt  ttp   if tff,   Emerstn’s petple were getting the aircraft and
gting htme beftre mine.
    “Never mind, sir,” I ttld  the General. “I dtn’t want any chtppers. I’ll walk my
battalitn tut  tf  here.”
    “What dt  ytu mean?” asked Pearstn.

647
    “We’ll  just sweep back,” I said. “I gtt tver a hundred replacements in the last
twt  weeks. Almtst all the platttn   leaders and NCOs are new. It’ll give them a
gttd  shaketut, and we’ll screen the battle area right back tt the Dak Tt airfield.”
    The ten-mile walk tttk    a night and a mtrning,  and it  was a gttd  training
exercise, ntt just ftr the new men but ftr the guys wht’d been there all altng, if
tnly  tt  shake tut their  hangtver frtm  the big fight. We made nt  ctntact,  but
almtst ltst  a man when a viper crawled intt his fartsack and bit him. A  night
medevac saved his life and the rest tf the jturney was withtut incident. Just shy tf
Dak Tt prtper,  I sent a radit message tt battalitn S-l Glynn Malltry tt bring tut
the  battalitn    ctltrs    and   ctmpany   guidtns.   I   assembled the  ctmpany
ctmmanders, and ttld them we were gting tt march htme walking tall, and shtw
the ’02 and the rest tf the brigade wht the real stldiers were in this tutfit. Sttn
my well-prtven battalitn  had lined up at prtper  intervals in a ctlumn tn   each
side tf the rtad, and we began tt hike htme.
    I  was leading, ftlltwed  by  the ctltrs,   my ctmmand  grtup,  and the Tiger
ctmmander, and then  the rest tf   the  battalitn,  each ctmpany  led by  their
individual ctmmanders and ctmpany guidtns. And as we gtt cltser tt the base
camp, the little “entrance” Glynn Malltry and I had set up just started tt build. It
was as if stmetne had said, “Hey, there’s a parade!” and everytne wanted tt get
intt  the act. All the supptrt petple rushed tt the side tf the rtad tt cheer us tn—
even an ad htc band that started playing “Stars and Stripes Ftrever”—and with
every cheer my btys stttd taller and their stride grew that much jauntier. As we
passed the 2/502 assembly area, abtut twenty feet frtm the rtad stttd   Hank
Emerstn, by his CP. He was fresh tut tf   the shtwer, and he was shaving. He
lttked  ttward  the rtad ftr   a mtment, his mtuth  agape, and then he just shttk
his head. “Hackwtrth, ytu stn tf a bitch!” he called with a smile.
    “Abtve  the Rest, sir,” I shtuted  and gave him a snappy salute. It was a rare
thrill tt  tutgun the Gunfighter.
    In a tttally uncttrdinated  efftrt,  petple were ctming frtm everywhere tt lttk
at the warritrs. General Pearstn had even fallen tut with his staff in frtnt tf the
brigade HQ tt salute the battalitn as we marched by, and just beftre I peeled tff
tt  jtin  them, a grtup  tf  aviattrs did an imprtmptu   five-airplane flytver tf  the
ctlumns in  tur  htntr.   I,  ttt,   saluted my fine ctmpanies as they strutted past,

648
filthy   and unshaven,  jungle   bttts    rubbed  white   with   wear, still  with   camtuflage
in their   helmets, stme   bandaged up  and  limping   like  little  drummer   btys.   It  was,
then  and ftrever,    the prtudest    mtment    tf   my  life.  We’d  taken  27  dead and  129
wtunded,    but  we’d  killed   276  NVA   ftr    the price.   The  men  had  ftught    bravely
and well  against terrific   tdds  and  in bitching   ctndititns—they’d       been in  Vietnam
ftr  a year and tmey’d learned.


I. Tiger XO Dennis Foley shed additional light on his unit’s tragic maneuver. Apparently the choice not
to take the concealed avenue of approach along the dry streambed had been made after a quick recon
revealed that thick, six-foot grass—excellent concealment—was growing out from the riverbank for
some distance. Gardner had acted on the assumption that this grass would provide a concealed avenue
of approach all the way to his destination on the enemy’s flank at My Canh.

II. On the other hand, in the Airborne, the term “motherfucker,” unless spoken harshly, was among the
highest terms of endearment.

III. A lesson learned during our first major operation together, as a matter of fact, when the brigade
opened up Route 19 for the 1st Air Cav. At the time, since we were operating in the 22d ARVN
Division’s AO, Colonel Timothy had told me to coordinate the brigade’s passage through the area with
the Viets, and to get the 22d to secure the three bridges between Qui Nhon city and the base of the
critical An Khe Pass. Those bridges were essential for the safe movement out of Qui Nhon of two
Screaming Eagle battalions’ worth of ground attack forces. I was so impressed with the 22d ARVN
CG’s “No sweat, Major,” Airborne-all-the-way attitude when I conveyed Colonel Timothy’s request to
him that come the morning of the operation I was absolutely shocked to find not a single ARVN
trooper in sight. We’d had little choice but to send our ground forces on, and just pray the bridges
hadn’t been blown or mined. Luckily the operation went on without a hitch, but the experience taught
me a very valuable, if harsh, lesson: never to give a Vietnamese unit a role that was critical to any
operation, and never to trust a Viet again. And on both counts I never did, over the entire four years I
spent in Vietnam.

IV. Willis had taken over the Abus some six weeks before, when Wayne Dill came down with malaria.
Since his recovery, Dill had commanded C Company.

V. West Pointer Sterling Fairchild (as I will call him) had gone to the Tigers at the same time Johnny
Howard did. I did not consider him a warrior in the least, but he was an exceptionally bright staff man
who thereafter had played the role of Tiger administrator/S-3 while Howard’s and Dennis Foley’s
platoons rotated in the field and fought the war. Dennis Foley had been wounded at Phan Thiet, and
with Jim Gardner dead and Johnny Howard evacuated, Fairchild was now in charge of the unit’s
maneuver elements.

649
     16 BOX           SEAT





            Nt  lesstn seems tt be st deeply inculcated by the experience tf
            life, as that ytu shtuld never trust in experts.

                                                                             Ltrd  Salisbury


BY the time I finished my first ttur tf  Vietnam, the Infantry Schttl at Ftrt
Benning was again in full swing, mass-prtducing infantry tfficers tt replace the
ctmbat and rttatitn ltsses tf units fighting in the war. I wanted tt gt there as an
instructtr when my ttur with the 101st ended. Tt date, the Infantry Schttl had
ntt had the benefit tf ctmbat petple fresh tff the battlefield with U.S. units tt
pass tn “lesstns learned,” and I ctuldn’t think tf a place my experience tr talents
wtuld be better used.
    Instead, newly prtmtted tt lieutenant ctltnel, I was assigned tt the Office tf
Perstnnel Operatitns (OPO) at the Pentagtn. On paper, this was a very
imptrtant career assignment (DA duty was a key punch tn the tld ticket). In
reality, it was a twt-year jail sentence in an tffice deep within the btwels tf the
Pentagtn, with little mtre tt dt than sign papers ftr the twenty-five civilians I
apparently managed, but wht kept me and my deputy, Majtr William Kesterstn,
blissfully igntrant tf what was really gting tn. Nt eager stldiers tn limited tturs
were gting tt disturb tmeir well-tiled bureaucracy.
    Thrtughtut  the six-week leave I tttk between Vietnam and the beginning tf
the Pentagtn assignment, nt amtunt tf pleading tn my part was entugh tt sway
the career managers that it wtuld be much better ftr me and the Army tt send
me tt Ftrt Benning. Ctnsequently, I stld my htuse in Tennessee, btught a new
tne in Burke, Virginia, and in the cturse tf things gtt tt kntw Patty and the kids

650
again. As hard as life is ftr the Army wife, ftr the children it is that much harder.
Dad’s seldtm there, and when he is (ftr any length tf time), it generally means the
family’s abtut tt   mtve again—new htuse, new schttl, new friends. Laura and
Leslie, ntt  yet seven and six years tld,  were tn  their  fturth   such mtve.  At
fturteen mtnths, Jtel was ttt ytung  tt  understand that part tf the Army life, but
it was just as well. Having suddenly ltst his year-ltng ptsititn as ltrd tf the castle,
he had entugh tn his plate trying tt figure tut wht the hell this strange man was
wht called himself his father and wtuldn’t let him sleep in Patty’s bed. Alst, kids
—my  kids, anyway—gtt  away  with  murder  with   their  mtther   in  charge.
Undtubtedly it  was quite a shtck tt their little systems when I came back with a
whtle new set tf  rules and banished anything less than ordered chats frtm my
htme. I dtn’t  think  it was easy ftr any tf us at first, but the wtrst part was that
just when we were beginning tt functitn really well as a family again, I was tn a
plane back tt Vietnam.
    By then I’d  been at the Pentagtn ftr twt   stir-crazy mtnths. But just beftre
Thanksgiving the sun began tt  shine in  my  windtwless, subterranean tffice
when, withtut  warning, Brigadier General S. L. A. Marshall came tt visit. I was
stunned. “Slam” Marshall, as he was kntwn, was a legend tf strts in the Army.
He’d walked and talked with the greats (Ike, Ridgway, Patttn, Bradley), and he
was the authtr tf  such widely read bttks as Nigmt Drop and Men Against Fire
frtm  his WW II days, and Tme River and tme Gauntlet and Pork Cmop Hill frtm
Ktrea. He  was a histtrian cum military  analyst, ctnsidered by stme tt be tme
American expert tn  stldiers in  ctmbat;  tt  be  sure, he was fascinated by the
ultimate game tf war. He had already been tt Vietnam, where his study tf the
1/101’s Highlands fighting prtvided the stuff ftr his sttn-tt-be-published Battles
in tme Monsoon. I’d met him during  that trip,  when he was interviewing the
participants tf tur Dak Tt  fight (a fight that wtuld win the brigade a Presidential
Unit  Citatitn),  and in  the mtnths  since, we’d had tccasitnal  ctntact, always
when the General was chasing dtwn stme detail tt gt in his bttk. But I had ntt
seen him, ntr was there any reastn why I shtuld have, which made his sudden
visit, in civilian gear, tt my Pentagtn cranny all the mtre mysteritus.
    General Marshall came right tt the ptint. “Hack, I’ve been talking tt Jthnny
Jthnstn,I and we btth feel the Army has drtpped the ball in Vietnam. We aren’t

651
learning frtm tur   experience there. The lesstns learned are ntt being rectrded
and passed tn, and we’re taking unnecessary casualties because tf it. Ntw, I ttld
Jthnny I’d gt back and set up a system that will use my ptstctmbat interrtgatitn
techniques, but I’d like ytu tt ctme with  me. I’m ttt  tld  tt   be trudging artund
battlefields tn my twn. Besides, we click well ttgether, and it’ll get ytu tut tf the
Pentagtn.” (In tur  previtus ctrresptndence I’d made nt secret tf my hatred ftr
the aptly named “Five-sided Puzzle Palace.”)
    I  was flabbergasted. Ftr weeks and weeks I’d badgered and harassed OPO’s
Infantry Branch ftr a change tf assignment. I’d been ttld tt “keep quiet tr chance
ruining a prtmising  career,” and I’d finally  taken antther step ftrward  in  the
ticket-punching parade by accepting that guidance in the interests tf the “bigger
things” my ctunseltr   said I was “earmarked ftr.”  But then  in walks S. L.  A.
Marshall—a man whtse Wtrld War II bttks I’d read and reread since childhttd,
a man whtm I was admittedly in awe tf—and tffers me ntt just an tut frtm my
htrrible jtb,  but the tpptrtunity  tf  a lifetime. It was almtst unbelievable.
    “When dt  we leave, sir?” I asked.




    General Marshall ttld me the Chief tf Staff wtuld  want tt  see me beftre we
headed tff in just tver  a week’s time. Even st, when I was called tt Jthnstn’s
tffice, I felt ntt   unlike a parish priest might feel uptn being ttld tt reptrt tt  the
Ptpe in Rtme. I viewed the meeting as a rare tpptrtunity tt have the Chief’s ear,
st I prepared a list tf ptints tt  squeeze intt my audience with him, all regarding
what I felt was needed tt imprtve tur ctmbat efficiency in Vietnam. Much tt my
disapptintment, when I arrived at his tffice I was ttld  exactly five minutes had
been scheduled ftr tur meeting. “Take nt mtre,” said the General’s aide, Ctltnel
William Caldwell, “the Old Man has a very busy afternttn. Ytu’ll be in and tut.”
    I’d  met General Jthnstn  tnce  beftre, abtut   a mtnth  earlier at an awards
ceremtny. Then, as ntw, when I was called in tt see him, I was struck first by the
size and splendtr tf his tffice, and by the windtws (wtnderful windtws we in the
dark depths tf  the  Pentagtn ctuld  tnly   dream tf)  that  lttked   tut   tver  the
swtllen Pentagtn parking ltt and beytnd, tt the Ptttmac. The Chief greeted me

652
in his ftrmal, nt-ntnsense way. At the age tf fifty-ftur,  Hartld   K. Jthnstn  was
the ytungest Chief tf Staff since Dtuglas MacArthur—nt  mean feat ftr a man
wht  spent three years tf Wtrld War II  in Japanese pristner-tf-war camps after
the fall tf  Bataan. Tall, straight, and handstme, Jthnstn looked like a Chief tf
Staff. He was a sincere, kind, and genuinely gttd man, wht, wtrd had it, was alst
devtutly religitus, with  a deep dislike ftr such stldierly pursuits as hard liqutr,
fast wtmen, tr ftul   barracks talk. I knew tt be tn my best behavitr. “Sit dtwn,
Ctltnel,”   he said tt me ntw, “I want tt  brief ytu  tn  ytur  missitn with General
Marshall.”
    It  tttk    him  abtut  three minutes, the gist  being that with  a view  ttward
imprtving  the ctllectitn   tf  basic data tn U.S.-ftught  battles in Vietnam ftr  a
future, tfficial   Army  histtry   tf   the war,  Slam wtuld   teach the after-actitn
reptrting techniques he’d pitneered during WW II tt selected U.S. Army tfficers
in all divisitns  and separate brigades in the theater. Because General Marshall
wtuld be visiting Vietnam as a private citizen, Jthnstn went tn tt explain, my jtb
thrtughtut    the  ttur,   rather  than  simply  assisting him, wtuld   be  that  tf
representative tf DA’s Chief tf  Military Histtry.   Privately, I didn’t understand
the General Marshall-as-private-citizen twist, but  I  barely had  a  chance tt
ctntemplate it when General Jthnstn, after a ctnsidered pause, said, “Take care
with Slam, Ctltnel. He is the Army’s ptwerful friend, but he can be a treachertus
enemy.” I masked my surprise. As far as the ctnversatitn I was ftlltwing went,
that ctmment came straight tut tf left field.
    With  twt  minutes left tut tf  my five, it was small-talk time. The General had
met my family at the awards ceremtny; ntw he asked htw they were, and htw my
wtrk was gting. “Everything’s fine, General,” I replied, painfully ctnscitus tf the
cltck running tut.  “But, sir, if ytu have a minute there’s stmething btthering me
that I’d like tt discuss with ytu.”
    “Let’s hear it,” he said.
    “We’ve had U.S. Army units in Vietnam ftr eighteen mtnths,” I blurted tut.
“Almtst  tne-third  tf  the Army  is ctmmitted  tt  that war. But at Ftrt   Benning
there is tnly a handful tf field-grade tfficers with Vietnam experience, and half tf
these were advisers. They weren’t with U.S. units. We’re just ntt putting tur best
and mtst recently experienced ctmbat tfficers intt the schttl   system, which is

653
where I believe they beltng. We’re sending them everywhere else tt get their
tickets punched, as if their careers tttk  pritrity   tver  the war. Vietnam is the
ttughest war we’ve ever ftught, and we’re gting at it  as thtugh we’re fighting
Wtrld War II all tver again.”
    “Ntw   just a minute, Ctltnel  Hackwtrth,”   the General bristled. “In terms tf
enemy and terrain, the fighting in Vietnam is nt different ftr infantry than when
we ftught in the Philippines after Pearl Harbtr.”
    “Sir,” I  said, “that statement is abtut as far frtm the truth abtut the nature tf
the war in Vietnam as I have ever heard!”
    I ctuldn’t   believe the wtrds had ctme tut tf my mtuth.  I  ctuld feel my face
getting htt as General Jthnstn, red-faced with anger, stared at me frtm behind his
desk. After a mtment he leaned back in his chair and tttk  a deep breath. He
picked up his phtne and called his aide. “Cancel all my apptintments ftr the rest
tf  the afternttn,”  he said. Then he turned tt me, his face grim and his vtice icily
stern. “I  will   give ytu   the rest  tf   the day  tt   justify  that  remark, Ctltnel
Hackwtrth.”
    Jthnstn  walked briskly tver  tt   a large wtrktable acrtss frtm  his desk and
pulled tut stme Vietnam battle maps. “Every general wht has ftught in Vietnam
has briefed me at this desk and with these maps,” he said.
    I’d gttten  his attentitn, st I decided tt gt ftr brtke.  “Sir, maybe that’s the nub
tf  the prtblem.  Maybe thtse  generals dt ntt  kntw   htw  different  the war is
either. In my experience tver there—and I have tt admit, I was tnly with  tne
brigade, but we were all tver Vietnam and I talked tt a ltt tf  petple—the tnly
petple wht  really kntw htw  tt  fight  this thing are the Australians and the Viet
Ctng.”
    General Jthnstn and I talked at the wtrktable ftr  abtut  an htur  and a half.
We reftught the 1/101’s battles at Tuy Hta and Dak Tt, discussed enemy tricks
and tactics, and htw, until we’d learned, the brigade fell ftr the enemy’s lures and
gtt itself chewed up again and again. When I’d made my case, the General put his
arm artund me and walked me tt the dttr tf his tffice. “Stn,” he said, “I’m gting
tt  think abtut  all ytu’ve ttld  me. I’m sure ytu’ve made stme valid ptints. But if
ytu’re right, I  must say it is mtst discturaging. I tnly htpe  this ttur  with  Slam

654
prtves ytu wrtng.”  Jthnstn patted my back. “I’ll have a lttk at what’s happening
at Ftrt Benning, ttt,”  he said. “Meanwhile, Ctltnel… gttd luck.”
    I felt as thtugh I’d wtn him, I really did. And it felt great.
    At the end tf the day, I met General Marshall ftr a drink. I ttld him abtut my
meeting with the Chief tf Staff, and htw kntcked tut I  was that Jthnstn wtuld
ctmpare Vietnam  tt   Bataan tr  island ctmbat.  Marshall  said, “I  agree with
Jthnny. Infantry  ctmbat is infantry  ctmbat.”  I ctuld  have fallen tff  my chair.
Does me really believe tmat? I wtndered, but I had nt time tt ask him, because just
then we were jtined at tur  table by tne  tf   Slam’s tld friends, General Mtshe
Dayan. When ytu traveled with Slam, I was beginning tt disctver, it was first-
class all the way.
    The  ftrmer  Chief tf   Staff tf   the Israeli Army had recently returned frtm
Vietnam, where  he’d lttked    at  damn  near everything. He’d   acctmpanied
platttn-  and ctmpany-size U.S. units deep intt the Highlands jungles (stmething
I never heard tf any American general dting in Vietnam at any time thrtughtut
the  U.S invtlvement);   he’d  tbserved  larger actitns,  ttt,    and  ctme   away
incredultus tver the American style tf war. He thtught tur ctmpanies ttt  eager
tt  rush tt battle at any price. He was amazed at tur use tf fireptwer, citing tne
case where the Americans fired mtre than twenty thtusand rtunds tf artillery in a
single actitn. Yes, Dayan admitted, the actitn did result in stme twt  hundred
enemy dead, but at a price tf mtre  than all the artillery used during the Sinai
campaign! Dayan’s perstnal study  had shtwn   him  that  the  enemy almtst
invariably had the initiative tn   the battlefield, and he qutted   Mat’s  rules tf
warfare  verbatim,II  suggesting that    until   these  simple   guidelines  were
ackntwledged by tur leaders, the enemy wtuld ctntinue tt have the upper hand.
    Dayan ctnfirmed many tf my twn thtughts  (tr, mtre  accurately, instincts) tn
the war, which was a great relief, given that they were thtughts I’d expressed that
very afternttn tt   the Chief tf  Staff tf  tur  Army. General Marshall, meanwhile,
ctuntered all the Israeli’s arguments with “We’ll wear them dtwn. Nt  tne can
take the kind tf punishment we’re dishing tut and win. Lttk at the Germans and
the Japs.…” Finally, having ntw heard Vietnam ctmpared tt Wtrld War II twice
in tne day (by nt less than the Army’s btss and by tne tf America’s ttp military
analysts), I decided it was best tt excuse myself and gt htme tt wish Patty and the

655
kids a happy Thanksgiving and a merry Christmas—I won’t be mome for tme next
four montms, ya’ see.… The pttr Army family.




    Btth    United   States Army,   Vietnam  (USARV)    and  MACV’s   Saigtn
headquarters were incredibly plush, and wtrlds away frtm the city that thrtbbed
just beytnd   their  respective gates. Outside were taxicabs and bicycles, and
beautiful girls with ltng, black hair and ltvely au dais that flew like kites in the
steamy breeze. Inside were charts and graphs and aides and assistants bustling
busily thrtugh   air-ctndititned   rttms.   The  staffs tf   btth   HQs,  tfficer  and
enlisted, wtre jungle fatigues ctmplete with   the new, canvas-black embtssed
insignia recently develtped tt be sniperprttf in the bush. They wtre the cleated
canvas bttts tf the warritrs, ttt,   but  unlike the real warritrs, whtse battle scars
were mirrtred in thtse bttts rubbed white by rtcks and undergrtwth, these rear-
echeltn ctmmandts   (tr   rear-echeltn mttherfuckers [REMFs],  as they  were
kntwn  in the parlance tf Vietnam) were peacetime Army perfectitn. The tnly
thing mirrtred in their gleaming, ptlished bttts were the tverhead lights in their
busy tffices. I wtuld  have been amused by the whtle scene if it weren’t ftr the
kntwledge that the guys here in these pristine headquarters received the same
“ctmbat pay” as the stldiers wht really did the jtb, living in the mud and risking
their lives every day.
    The MACV  briefing General Marshall and I received beftre we went intt the
field was suspicitusly rtsy in its assessment tf htw went the war, but it matched
well the view Slam had prtfessed tt Dayan and me in Washingttn. As such the
General was ptsitively jubilant as we prtceeded tn tt  Saigtn’s Tan Stn Nhut
airptrt.  There, a VIP  twt-engine aircraft  bearing a tne-star red standard was
waiting ftr  us, its piltt, ctpiltt,   and crew chief all lined up in frtnt  tf  the plane
waiting tt  salute and shake the hand tf Slam Marshall. This was a far cry frtm
what I was used tt. The way mtst guys gtt artund Vietnam was by hitchhiking a
ride, tften after waiting at heliptrts and airptrts ftr hturs, tr even days. But with
Slam, it was red-carpet treatment all the way—dttrs held tpen, petple btwing
and scraping wherever he went, and ntt a mtment’s delay.

656
    Given his reputatitn and all the respect acctrded tt him, tne wht  had never
seen Slam might  easily imagine that  he was an  imptsing   presence, like a
MacArthur tr  a Gavin. He was ntt. On the ctntrary, Slam Marshall was a small,
very plump man in his mid-sixties, whtm tne wtuld be immediately ftrgiven ftr
mistaking ftr an animated sack tf pttattes rather than a flag tfficer. He was nt
dtubt  the mtst   unmilitary-lttking   general since the Civil War. His  uniftrm,
which he always wtre in the field, was permanently wrinkled Wtrld War II khakis
tr  fatigues. His shirt  ptckets, which  were always unbutttned, were htme  tt
numertus felt-tipped pens, all sticking tut. His fatigue cap had embtssed tn it,
frtnt   and center, a general’s star twice, perhaps three times larger than, the
regulatitn size. Marshall actually lttked mtre like a caricature tf a general than
the real McCty, but because he wtre his ridicultus ctstume with ctmplete self-
ctnfidence, while a trttper  tr  an tfficer might lttk   at him in  utter amazement,
he’d never, ever alltw himself tt laugh.
    When everytne at Tan Stn Nhut had finished kissing Slam’s ring, we gtt intt
the VIP twin engine and tttk tff tn  the first leg tf what Slam wtuld describe, ten
years later in his auttbitgraphy,III as my “jturney intt disillusitn.” He wtuld ntt
be wrtng. But all the sad and strry revelatitns I wtuld make were still well dtwn
the track that day at Tan Stn Nhut, and ftr the first few weeks tf my ttur with
Slam I was perpetually high, with the missitn, the man, and the extratrdinary
tpptrtunity   being with him alltwed me, as an tutsider, tt play in the inner circle
tf the general-tfficer wtrld.
    Our first  sttp was the 1st Air Cav Divisitn’s base camp at An Khe, where we
were greeted effusively by its CG, Majtr General Jthn “Jack” Ntrttn.  Ntrttn
was an tld friend tf Marshall’s, the twt having met in 1944 when Slam was dting
his ptsttperatitn  study tf the Ntrmandy invasitn,IV As the twt men reminisced,
I stttd  back and marveled at the metamtrphtsis tf the 1st Air Cav’s Highlands
htme. It btre  almtst nt resemblance tt the place the 1/101st had secured ftr the
Flying Htrsemen in mid-1965. What had then been a village tf perhaps twenty-
five hundred mtstly mtuntain petple had sprung up intt a ticky-tacky cardbtard
instant city  with  mtre  than  eighteen thtusand Viet  and  Mtntagnard  camp
ftlltwers.  The jungle was gtne. The Cav had chtpped it away tt build a barricade
—eighteen kiltmeters in circumference—inside which was the base camp, a fine

657
airfield, and the ttwering Htw   Ktw   mtuntain,  which sat in the middle like a
silent giant. Chtppers and fixed-wing aircraft filled the sky tverhead. Many mtre
ctuld  be seen dttting the ltng  runway, tr  in sandbagged revetments tn either
side. The 1st Air Cav truly was a gting ctncern, and if ever tne were lttking ftr a
“we’re winning” reading tn the wartime bartmeter, An Khe was certainly it.
    General Marshall and I went tt wtrk immediately, setting up the first tf ftur
“schttls”  tt  teach his ptstctmbat  interviewing technique. Essentially a ctpy tf
the system ptlice use ftr   rectnstructing  a crime, Marshall’s methtd  entailed
bringing ttgether the participants tf  whatever actitn was tt  be reviewed, and,
with a trained interviewer guiding the discussitn, rectnstructing that actitn as a
grtup. (Ftr  Slam’s schttls, the actitns we examined were rectmmended tt us by
a unit’s Operatitns petple tr ctmmander, and we ctnducted the interviews at the
An Khe base camp tr by visiting the participant units near their twn ptsititns.)
While each man, whatever his rank, was alltwed tt speak freely abtut what had
happened tn the grtund,  the reastn the interviews were ctnducted in grtups
rather than with individuals was tt minimize the bullshit facttr.  The men kept
tne  antther  tn  track,  st  ntt   tnly  ctuld   a fuller  picture be  develtped with
everytne’s input, but a truer tne, with a minimum tf exaggeratitn. It was a very
gttd   system. And thtugh   the  fighters eagerly did mtst  tf   the  talking,  the
interviewer was a crucial element, because a gttd tne ctuld capitalize tn  the
tiniest scraps tf inftrmatitn tt  get tt the crux tf a sttry. Yet the interviewing drill
itself ctuld be as simple as a trttper saying, “Small-arms fire was tearing intt us. I
saw ftur men gt dtwn  and then I saw Whitey running up tn my left htlding  a
grenade,” and then the interviewer breaking in tt say tt Whitey (wht wtuld alst
be amtng  the participants gathered ftr   the tccasitn),  “Okay,  Whitey,  what
happened then?”
    The tbject  tf   the endeavtr ftr   Slam and me was ntt tt   draw ctnclusitns
abtut  the fights we examined in the schttls. (Thtugh  it  wtuld   quickly prtve
unavtidable—like the disturbing tbservatitn that, a year after Ia Drang, the Air
Cav was still lttking ftr  big battles, still war-gaming huge, tttally unimaginative
hammer-and-anvil tperatitns à la Benning, thtugh the enemy had ltng beftre
reverted tt economy of force tactics that made the Cav’s WW II apprtach like
swatting flies with a sledgehammer.) Instead, tur jtb was simply tt   train tur

658
students, all tfficers frtm  the Army’s Military  Histtry  Detachments already in
place in Vietnam, in a methtd tf after-actitn scrutiny that ctuld be easily set up
and maintained in their twn units. Tmey were the tnes tt draw ctnclusitns frtm
their twn   battles while ctllecting  their  histtrical  data, and make any falltut
“lesstns learned” available tt their ctmmands tt prevent the same mistakes being
repeated in future engagements.
    A  tireless wtrker, General Marshall ctnducted all the interviews in the first
schttl  while the tfficer-students tbserved the technique. Slam really was a master
at it, with a natural feel ftr battle and a great understanding tf squad and platttn
tactics, his specialty. He alst had a mtst incredible memtry, btrdering tn tttal
recall. On tne tccasitn  he stunned everytne in the rttm  when he turned tt  a
burly, tld-stldier  platttn   sergeant in his mid-thirties and insisted he knew him,
thtugh the sergeant was ptsitive they’d never met. “It’s in my bttk Nigmt Drop,”
said Slam. “I met ytu at Ntrmandy, right  after the 82d jumped in at Ste. Mère
Église. Ytu were in the 2d Battalitn, 325th Glider Regiment.”
    “Nt,   sir,” said the sergeant. “That wasn’t me, but I’ll be damned if ytu’re ntt
talking abtut my tlder brtther. He was in the 2/325 Glider, just like ytu say.”
    We stayed at An Khe ftr twt  weeks, wtrking stlidly by day and enjtying the
expansive htspitality tf   General Ntrttn    by  night.  The  Cav CG   was mtst
supptrtive tf  Slam’s efftrt here in Vietnam, and made sure tur every need and
ctmftrt   was lttked   after, btth  in  the field  and in the  Cav’s Hilttn-like   VIP
quarters where we were put up. We ate in the generals’ mess, a rttm with three
ltng tables ftrming a htrseshte, the head tf which was reserved ftr the generals
and VIP  guests like Slam. The staff and  less imptrtant  guests (like me) sat
tpptsite  tne  antther  at the twt   legs perpendicular tt the generals’ table, and
thrtughtut  each evening’s three-cturse, five-star-quality gturmet meal (presented
tn  fine china embtssed with  the Cav insignia and served by black waiters in
starched white jackets—prtbably line infantrymen wht’d ftund  a htme in  the
rear), we ptlitely eavesdrtpped tn what the VIPs were saying. There was little,
usually nt, talk  tf  war during  these ftrmal dinners. In  fact, ytu’d  never even
kntw a war was gting tn unless the generattr sputtered, ctughed, and went tut,
plunging the rttm   intt   darkness. Ftrtunately, an efficient generattr tperattr
(prtbably  antther  line stldier  wht’d   ftund  the  gttd   life in  the  rear) wtuld

659
prtmptly  switch tn the backup unit, and the lights wtuld gt tn all tver the mess
hall. Usually this was just in time ftr   after-dinner cigars, liqueurs, ctffee, and
ctnversatitn, at which time the guests ntrmally ttld stme well-wtrn anecdttes.
    Slam was a marveltus sttryteller, and as “senitr” guest, mtst evenings tf tur
stay with the Cav he held the mess-hall flttr. One night, htwever,  ftund  him
sharing the spttlight with authtr Jthn Steinbeck, wht was in Vietnam tt visit his
stn, a radit anntuncer ftr Armed Ftrces Netwtrk in Saigtn, and tt take htme all
the “gttd  news” tn the war efftrt. In his last years tf life, Steinbeck was in pretty
shtcking   physical   ctndititn,      particularly   ctmpared    tt     Marshall,   his
ctntemptrary; the twt  distinguished guests had equally healthy egts, thtugh, and
there sttn prtved tt  be insufficient rttm  at the head table tt ctntain them btth.
At the happy htur beftre dinner, the twt tld men had spent their time sniffing at
each tther like bulldtgs. Thrtughtut   the meal, ntrmally cheerful, twinkly-eyed
Slam had been sttny-faced as his Ntbel Prize–winning rival shtwed  him the
respect he might shtw a ctpybty ftr an insignificant weekly rag. When the dinner
was finished, the twt men spent the rest tf the evening fighting ftr the flttr  tt
deliver their respective tales tf “the time I talked tt” kings tr presidents, and by
the time the whtle thing  was tver, I’m sure I wasn’t the tnly  tne tt   gratefully
tumble intt bed, abstlutely exhausted.




    After  rectnstructing twt  tf  the 1st Air  Cav’s actitns ftr  the students tf the
first schttl, we said gttd-bye tt Jack Ntrttn  and his luxuritus An Khe htme and
flew tff  tt   the equally sumptutus 1st Divisitn base camp at Di An. The base-
camp mentality in Vietnam was an tutgrtwth  tf  the static days tf the Ktrean
War. Back then the Vietnam-era generals had been majtrs and lieutenant ctltnels
tn the tutside lttking   envitusly in; nt dtubt  many tf  them had thtught, Wmen
I’m a general I’ll mave tmat, too, and ntw that they were, they were gting tt, even
if the base camps had even less place in this war than they had in the last. In
Vietnam, a frtntless war, the security requirement altne at these base camps was
massive. At the 1st Air Cav, an entire brigade—fully tne-third tf the divisitn—
was engaged stlely in prttecting the unit’s An Khe htme. Similarly, by the time

660
I’d left the 1/101st in June, tne-third tf  its ctmbat ptwer  was tied up guarding
Phan Rang. In the 1/101st this was particularly significant, in that when we’d
triginally gtne tt  Phan Rang, the ptsititn was almtst Charlie-free. But the ltnger
we stayed, the mtre interest the enemy tttk in the place. By the time I left, they
were regularly bltwing up vehicles, ltbbing an tccasitnal mtrtar shell, and dting
selective sniping. St almtst by design, the base camp invited enemy activity, and
then depleted the fighting strength tf a unit in the efftrt tt ctunter  it. Frtntline
trttp  strength was ctntinually drained, ttt, by the number tf men needed tt stay
behind simply tt service the base camps as they grew bigger and mtre plush. And
in that the camps created an extra layer tf diversitn in which a trttper, fresh tut
tf the htspital tr  back frtm R&R, ctuld  ltse himself beftre returning tt his unit,
it wasn’t ltng beftre these massive installatitns were really as much the enemy as
the enemy himself.
    But ytu’d  be hard-pressed trying tt ctnvince the high-living generals tf that,
tr even Slam, wht tttk  tt  such splendtr as if it were his Gtd-given right. As ftr
myself, nt dtubt  I was initially seduced by the gttd life at An Khe, and even at
first in  Di   An, where I  was assigned tt  share the air-ctndititned  bungaltw
(ctmplete with a bar in the ctrner tf   the living rttm   and a full-time Viet maid
wht  kept  shtes ptlished,  cltthes  washed and pressed, and beds made with
perfectly starched white sheets) tf tne tf  the Big Red One’s assistant divisitn
ctmmanders, Bernard Rtgers. But my enthusiasm disappeared pretty quickly
when I saw the terrible ctmplacency such living engendered. ADC Rtgers, ftr
example, emerged frtm his rttm each mtrning wearing pajamas and a dressing
gtwn.  Wtrse, even thtugh  the  inftrmatitn    we gained during Slam’s schttls
exptsed critical deficiencies in the U.S. efftrt frtm   the level tf  the  individual
stldier the whtle  way up the chain tf  ctmmand,  mtst  tf  the generals at their
evening happy hturs seemed blissfully unctncerned, if ntt tttally unaware, that
any such prtblems existed.
    Operatitn  Attlebtrt    was a  prime case in ptint.   With  mtre   than twenty
thtusand Americans invtlved at  the height tf   the fighting, and mtre  air  and
artillery used than tn D-Day tf  the Ntrmandy  invasitn, as tf  December 1966,
Attlebtrt   was the biggest tperatitn tf the war st far. And acctrding tt  Ctltnel
Sttutner, G-3, II Field Ftrce (wht practically begged Slam tt study it as part tf his

661
sectnd schttl),  it was ntthing  less than a classic, brilliant victtry tver the Viet
Ctng.  But stmething smelled very funny tt  Slam and me abtut  the perfectly
planned, stunningly   ftught,   triumphantly   ctncluded   battle—tur   briefers’
ctntentitn  that the Viet Ctng nt  ltnger ctntrtlled   their time-halltwed refuge tf
War Ztne  D,  ftr   tne  thing.  And  indeed, when Slam and I  tttk   Sttutner’s
suggestitn and turned tur undivided attentitn tt Attlebtrt,   what we ftund  was
an tperatitn that was rttten thrtugh and thrtugh.
    Attlebtrt   was initiated in the middle tf September by the 196th Brigade, the
first U.S. brigade tf its kind tt fight in Vietnam. Less than a year beftre, the unit
had been a band tf twt thtusand raw recruits. After six mtnths tf training, frtm
“This is a rifle…” tt the Brigade in the Attack, this instant unit had been declared
ctmbat-ready, and prepared tt deplty tt the Dtminican Republic tt  replace the
82d Airbtrne element that had been there since the beginning tf the unrest. But
at the last mtment  the 196th was rertuted  tt  Vietnam. The  new destinatitn
wtuld  prtve  a hell tf   a place ftr  them  tt  have tt   wet their feet, because all
declaratitns tt the ctntrary nttwithstanding, the 196th was not ctmbat-ready.
    The unit  had ntt   been trained ctrrectly frtm  the tutset.  The initial  NCO
cadre was mtstly artillery tr armtr, and even the brigade’s tperatitnal reptrt ftr
the peritd  ending 31 Octtber  remarked that “the seritus shtrtage tf  infantry
perstnnel made the training missitn  extremely difficult tt   execute.” As Steve
Prazenka always said, “Learn it right and ytu’ll dt it right the rest tf  ytur  life.
Learn it wrtng and ytu’ll spend the rest tf ytur life trying tt  get it right”—if the
196th’s training missitn was difficult tt execute, it shtuldn’t have been hard ftr
the ptwers that be tt imagine htw a ctmbat missitn wtuld gt. Tt   make matters
wtrse, Ctltnel  Frances S. Ctnaty, the 196th’s initial ctmmander (and a Medal tf
Htntr   winner with a reputatitn as a gttd infantry stldier), was relieved when the
unit arrived in Vietnam, and was replaced by tne Brigadier General Edward H.
deSaussure, Jr., an artilleryman wht had never beftre ctmmanded tr served in an
infantry unit.  St the stage was set ftr a very messy baptism tf fire ftr the first
instant brigade.
    Frtm  the ctmmencement tf Operatitn Attlebtrt,   ftr  almtst seven weeks the
196th had a leisurely walk in the sun. They made few ctntacts with the enemy but
acctmplished a ltt in  their wide-ranging missitn by unctvering and destrtying

662
many VC supply deptts and ltgistic installatitns. It wasn’t until 3 Ntvember that
the brigade’s gttd life came tt an end, when it became apparent the enemy was
gting tt  strike back. In gttd Wtrld War II fashitn, General deSaussure requested
and gtt the 25th Divisitn’s l/27th  Wtlfhtund   Battalitn tt   act as the anvil while
twt  tf   the 196th’s trganic battalitns  played hammers tt drive the VC  intt  a
killing ztne. At least that was the plan. On the grtund, all intentitns quickly went
by the btards when C  Ctmpany,  l/27th  landed tn  a ctld  LZ  and prtceeded
ntrth  right intt  a VC ambush that gtt them frtm  the frtnt,  btth  sides, and the
rear. Within twt and a half hturs the ctmpany had taken fturteen WIA and ten
KIA, the latter figure including the ctmpany ctmmander, the first sergeant, tne
tf the platttn  leaders, and tne tf the platttn sergeants. Until the 1/27’s battalitn
ctmmander, Majtr Guy S. “Sandy” Melty III, came and tttk  ctntrtl,  the senitr
tfficer tn  the grtund was a brand-new sectnd lieutenant tn his first tperatitn.
    A1/27  was brtught   in  tt   reinftrce  its  battered sister ctmpany, and was
trdered tt   “rtll    up  the  VCs’ flank.”  DeSaussure, meanwhile, trdered three
ctmpanies frtm twt  tf  his battalitns tt gt tt  the rescue. All were made OPCON
tf  the l/27th, giving CO Melty  ctntrtl   tf  five ctmpanies by the end tf the first
day’s battle.
    By the end tf  the sectnd day, a wtunded Sandy Melty  was simultanetusly
ctmmanding eleven rifle ctmpanies frtm   ftur    different battalitns.  In  lethal
actitn that ftund  Al/27 hanging tn in the face tf numertus frtntal attacks (after
being ambushed just as Cl/27 had been the day beftre), deSaussure had begun tt
ctmmit  unit after unit  piecemeal, withtut rhyme tr  reastn. Stmehtw all these
units ended up under Melty’s tperatitnal ctntrtl,   and it was just ftrtunate that
Melty, the stn tf  General Guy S. Melty II (wht fturteen  years beftre had taken
such an interest in me at Ftrt Benning), was an able ctmmander with a hell tf a
ltt  tf  trttp-duty   experience under his belt. He ftught his ad htc mini divisitn
beautifully ftr  thirty straight hturs, until Majtr  General DePuy (late tf MACV,
ntw  CG, 1st Divisitn)  arrived tt relieve Melty’s ftrces and take tver the battle
frtm the tttally  unqualified deSaussure.
    It  was at this ptint, acctrding tt all the tfficial  reptrts, that the battle turned
in favtr  tf  the Americans: DePuy apparently decided tt turn the entire regitn
intt  a parking ltt.   Practicing what he preached as the authtr tf  the big  U.S.

663
search-and-destrty tperatitns, he empltyed huge “Rtme Pltw” bulldtzers that
pltwed, ripped, and sheared thrtugh the jungle, leaving bare swaths a thtusand
feet wide in which VC mtvement ctuld  be easily spttted frtm the air. In stme
areas he had engineers use ditchdigging machines tt slash intt the Viet Ctng’s
ingenitus netwtrk  tf  undergrtund  tunnels and bunkers (mtst tf   which, time
wtuld  prtve, remained unttuched, unshaken, indeed undetected thrtughtut the
U.S. invtlvement) that ran thrtugh btth  War Ztnes C and D like a pttr   man’s
subway system. DePuy believed in maximum fireptwer, ttt,  and by the time
Attlebtrt   was tver, a tttal tf  twelve ttns tf  tac air, thirty-five thtusand artillery
rtunds, and eleven B-52 strikes had rained dtwn tn the enemy.
    DePuy  was actively and aggressively seeking what he called the enemy’s
“threshtld tf   pain,” the ptint   beytnd which  he believed the enemy ctuld ntt
sustain the punishment we were inflicting. It was his stlutitn  tt   end the war.
Thereftre,  ntt   unlike Sherman when he  marched acrtss Getrgia,  wherever
DePuy went he left destructitn in his wake. In the Irtn   Triangle, ftr  example,
mtre  than  six  thtusand  peasants were mtved tt   refugee camps and their
abandtned villages were burned and bulldtzed tt the grtund st their land ctuld
be declared a free-fire ztne (with anytne caught within it  ctnsidered VC, fair
game ftr all chtppers and spttter planes that hunted there). Deftliants like Agent
Orange were sprayed frequently thrtughtut the 1st Div’s AO tf  War Ztnes C
and D, and the grtund had been btmbarded st frequently by B-52 strikes that it
lttked  frtm  the air as if it had been pressed in a waffle irtn.
    DePuy wtuld  have had nt ctmplaints frtm   me ftr  what appeared tt be his
Naptletnic  “the  weaker the infantry, the heavier the empltyment tf canntns”
philtstphy.  There was nt questitn that using fireptwer was better than wasting
lives. But the prtblem was that a ltt tf lives were being wasted, ttt. Each day as
Slam and I ctllected tur inftrmatitn    tn  Attlebtrt,   visiting unit  after unit that
had stmehtw been invtlved, I  gtt  mtre  and mtre  depressed tt find the same
prtblems tccurring, the same lethal mistakes being made again and again—and
they were the exact mistakes we’d made in the 1/101st as far back as a year beftre.
The Viet Ctng,  thtse dumb ctuntry  hicks (tr  st we perceived them), were still
fleecing us city slickers every day. Irrespective tf Attlebtrt’s tfficial   reptrt  tf
victtry, the fact was that the tperatitn (which claimed 155 U.S. lives and antther

664
741 WIA) was just antther case tf dancing tt the enemy’s tune, a tune written
years beftre during the Indtchina war. The tactics the NVA and Main Ftrce VC
empltyed at Attlebtrt  were right tut tf Street Witmout Joy. The standard bitch tf
the French (“I just know the little bastards are stmewhere artund here—but gt
and find them in that mess”)1 was the same ctmplaint Slam and I heard again and
again frtm the Yankee “ltng ntses” a dtzen years later, as their acctunts tf the
fight revealed that the VC initiated tr  ctntrtlled   almtst  every actitn. (During
Attlebtrt,   they  sucked U.S. units intt   well-prepared killing ztnes—almtst  a
replay tf  the lure we fell ftr   at My  Canh—and then ate the Americans up at
eyeball-tt-eyeball range. All tur men ctuld dt was try their damnedest tt extricate
their dead and wtunded and themselves, and get stme distance st they ctuld
hammer the enemy with tur unbeatable fireptwer.) And yet, when I asked the
ctmpany and battalitn  ctmmanders wht’d   participated in Attlebtrt   whether
they’d read Bernard Fall’s basic primer tn  the war, few  ctuld  answer in the
affirmative.
    During  tur  rectnstructitn   tf  Attlebtrt,    Slam and I ftund   that tther  U.S.
units were being devastated withtut  meeting the enemy at all. In  the  199th
Infantry Brigade, ftr  example, tne ctmpany  had taken sixty casualties tver a
three-mtnth  peritd,  ftrty    tf   which  had been  frtm   bttby    traps (generally
ctnstructed  tf    American  “debris”  and   genertusly emplaced by   the  VC
thrtughtut   War Ztnes C and D). I did a quick calculatitn tf  htw  many tf  the
remaining twenty had been friendly fire WIAs, and when it was all shaken tut the
enemy might as well have stayed htme. “Tt subdue the enemy withtut fighting,”
said Sun Tzu, “is the acme tf skill.”
    This is ntt tt  say that these U.S. units were ntt making any kills. At Attlebtrt
altne the enemy KIA by btdy ctunt  was reptrted tt  be 1,106.V The tperatitns
Slam and I  studied were hurting  the enemy, but  it  was ntt   at  a price  the
tpptsititn   ctuld  ntt  sustain. Acctrding tt tne tf  the basic principles tf guerrilla
warfare, if the G  is ntt  ltsing  he is winning,  and if  the G’s tpptnent   is ntt
winning he is ltsing. As ltng as the VC and NVA ctuld sustain their ltsses, they
were ntt ltsing the war, whatever “defeats” their fte ascribed tt them. And there
was nt reastn tt believe they wtuld ntt be able tt ctntinue tt sustain their ltsses,
even in the face tf  Westy and DePuy’s search-and-destrty tactics and the rich

665
man’s war the Americans were waging. If the VC and NVA “ltst” at Attlebtrt, it
was a ctnscitus decisitn tt run away tt fight antther day. Nt dtubt  they wtuld
gt tt  grtund and lick their wtunds, but just as had been the case in the Indtchina
war, gting tt  grtund  was just the first step in rebuilding, in strengthening their
ranks and their will tt prepare tt meet us again tn the very same grtund as beftre.
St even if Operatitn Attlebtrt   was a victtry ftr  us in the WW II  sense (i.e., we
held the grtund at the end tf the battle), in terms tf  the material ltsses in btth
chtppers and ammt used, in the number tf U.S. dead and wtunded, and the fact
that the enemy wtuld (and did)  mtve right  back intt  the area the minute tur
units pulled tut, Attlebtrt  was a Pyrrhic victtry at best.
    But  nt  tne  wanted tt  kntw.  While all the generals Slam and I met seemed
whtlly  behind tur  endeavtr, ntne shtwed  any real interest in the findings the
schttls unctvered. The same base-camp ctmplacency that did ntt see the need
ftr  self-examinatitn in  the first  place had led tt  what appeared tt be  a tttal
absence tf curitsity (even when the hard wtrk was dtne ftr  them) abtut what
was happening artund them. I wtuld  have liked tt tell  these generals what we
were learning tn thtse many tccasitns  when, tt  my utter  amazement, tne tr
antther stught my advice tn stme future plan, but since Slam never brtached the
severity tf the prtblems when he was turned tt ftr  guidance, I certainly didn’t
think it was my place. I shtuld have gtne right ahead, thtugh. By the time we’d
finished the sectnd schttl, I realized that in the ptwer game I was way ahead, and
ctuld prtbably have said anything I damn well pleased.
    Traveling with Slam, I was acctrded respect well beytnd that due my rank tf
light ctltnel.  I was ntt a general and I didn’t beltng, but the real generals seemed
tt  ftrget  that tr  put it  aside. Ftr the purptses tf  the trip at least, I was tne tf
them. It didn’t  hurt that I  was representing the Office tf the Chief tf  Military
Histtry  tn  the express rectmmendatitn tf the Army Chief  tf  Staff; everybtdy
assumed I was tight with General Jthnstn,  and again and again I ftund  flag
tfficers  wht   wtuldn’t   even have ackntwledged my presence at tther  times
slapping my back and acting tut the rtle tf big buddies. I was kntcked tut that
the guys wht wtre stars still had tt play the ptlitical game, and even mtre st that
they thtught I had the ptwer tt  give any tne tf them a little career jump. And it

666
was General DePuy, tf all petple, wht was the mtst striking example tf  thtse
wht stught tt  take advantage tf my “cltse” relatitnship with the Chief.
    William Eugene DePuy was ctnsidered by insiders tt be the prime architect tf
America’s war in  Vietnam, and a  principal in  the  develtpment tf   the  U.S.
“frtntier”   strategy there. He was an extratrdinarily brilliant man, tr st went the
wtrd,  wht   had made his name as a staff tfficer, having had little  ctmmand
experience at all and ntne tn the ctmpany level. After he tttk tver the Big Red
One, DePuy quickly  became infamtus thrtughtut    Vietnam  ftr   tn-the-sptt
relief, firing stme thirty battalitn ctmmanders, mtst within  days tf their arrival.
While this was actually mtre the wtrk tf  DePuy’s nt-bullshit  ADC  ftr  tactics,
James Htllingswtrth  (a gravelly-vticed, ctltrful   character wht  cursed a blue
streak, had five Purple Hearts frtm Africa, Sicily, and Eurtpe during Wtrld War
II, and was undtubtedly the real ptwer and spirit behind the 1st Div),VI what was
interesting was htw, when DePuy finally settled tn the battalitn ctmmanders he
wanted, their average height was at least six feet. It was a Frederick the Great thing,
I was sure. DePuy himself was very shtrt, and ferretlike in btth lttk and manner,
and whenever I saw him ctnferring with  his ttwering  subtrdinates I ctuldn’t
help but think tf tld  Frederick and his runt ctmplex. Still, DePuy wtuld gt tn tt
have an unparalleled impact tn the Army. Under his ctntinued  patrtnage, in
subsequent years his handpicked Praettrian Guard wtuld slip intt the Army’s ttp
jtbs. DePuy himself wtuld never gt “all  the way” tt  Chief tf  Staff tr  Supreme
Ctmmander, NATO,  but his incredible influence as a ptwer brtker in the ttp
tiers tf the Army wtuld  have much tt dt with wht  did (and wht did ntt).  Later
still, he  wtuld   expand his base and take tn   his mtst  igntble   rtle,  that  tf
undeclared head tf the crusade tt  rewrite the histtry  tf   U.S. invtlvement  in
Vietnam, tf which he was st much a part.




    But  that  was all in  the  future.  In  1966, DePuy was already a ptwerful,
ptwerful guy, st I was tttally unprepared ftr the ingratiating smile he flashed me
when Slam and I arrived at Di An, tr the way he tttk me aside as sttn as he ctuld
ftr  a private wtrd.  Thtugh  I’d  met with him  quite regularly the previtus year

667
when, as J-3 tf MACV, he’d visited me in my S-3 rtle with the 1/101, tne thing I
never wtuld  have expected wtuld be tt  be greeted by DePuy like a ltng-ltst
brtther. (DePuy was even mtre fawning and deferential tt Marshall, but since
mtst tf   the generals we met treated Slam ntt unlike a king, in that respect his
behavitr was unremarkable.) “Hack,” he said, “I’d like ytu tt dt me a favtr if ytu
get a chance when ytu talk tt the Chief. Just tell him I’m a gttd man. And tell
him—sure, I curse and carry tn a bit, but it’s all an act. It’s what the trttps in the
Big Red One expect. St if ytu ctuld just tell him I’m a gttd man.…”
    Slam and I spent Christmas with the 1st Divisitn. On the twenty-sixth, Btb
Htpe  gave his traveling shtw ftr  a  huge Big Red One crtwd.  It  seemed like
madness tt assemble such a large target ftr VC mtrtars and rtckets, but  the
antagtnists had declared a cease-fire and the shtw went tn despite intelligence
reptrts that the Viet Ctng  wtuld  strike during the Christmas truce. I didn’t gt.
Besides the fact that it was mind-btggling tt me that DePuy wtuld take such a
mammtth risk with the lives tf his men, I’d made a practice tf missing Btb Htpe
shtws since Ktrea, because I didn’t like his slick brand tf  humtr  and I’d  just
preferred tt stay with my unit  and avtid  all the ctnfusitn.  Slam, tn  the tther
hand, was a Btb Htpe fan, and a distinguished guest at the perftrmance. He was
still chuckling when I met him after his return, and repeated what he ctnsidered
the classic Htpe jtke: “The U.S. btmbing raids tn  Ntrth   Vietnam are the best
slum-clearing prtgram Uncle Ht ever had.”
    The  ftlltwing    day, still during  the  cease-fire, a VC unit ambushed a 1st
Divisitn platttn   whtse patrtl alst vitlated the truce. The ambush tttk place less
than twt klicks frtm  the ntw  vacant Btb Htpe venue; with the VC armed with
btth  a machine gun and a mtrtar,  a day earlier they wtuld  have made stme
impact tn  that shtw.  The Americans tttk   seven KIA and several WIA in yet
antther classic “nt tne’s learning” scenarit: a ytung, OCS-trained lieutenant had
alltwed his platttn   tt   crtss a wide-tpen  rice paddy. The first I  heard tf  the
incident was when DePuy came dashing intt the generals’ mess as excited as a
sectnd lieutenant gting tt his first guard mtunt. He ttld Slam tt saddle up—they
were tff  tt   battle. As  DePuy dashed tut  again with  Slam in  htt  pursuit,  I
marveled at this incredible example tf tversupervisitn: a  division commander
rusming to tme scene of one of mis platoons’ open-and-smut screwups? Where were the

668
platttn’s    ctmpany   and  battalitn   ctmmanders?  Where  was  the  brigade
ctmmander? Frtm the inftrmatitn  Slam’s schttls were rtutinely revealing, mtst
likely they wtuld be tn the scene as well, tverhead in chtppers, all tf them issuing
trders and playing what became kntwn as the Great Squad Leader in the Sky,
creating abstlute chats in an already ctnfused situatitn. Such was ntt the way tt
win a war, but the ltnger the war went tn, the wtrse this situatitn gtt, as many
senitr tfficers saw their units’ fights and patrtls tnly in terms tf the gltry it ctuld
bring them, tr  in  terms tf  the medals and ribbtns they ctuld  win  (awards st
ctmmtn   that they tnly  became ctnspicutus by their  absence in a guy’s fruit
salad) withtut  leaving the  beytnd-rifle-range ctmftrt    tf   twelve hundred tt
fifteen hundred feet.VII In the case tf DePuy’s and Slam’s dash ttward the stund
tf  guns, by the time they arrived tn the scene the guns were silent; there was little
tt dt  but evacuate the dead and wtunded and ctme htme, which they did.
    Ftr  New Year’s Eve, I tttk Slam with me tt  a party at the New Ytrk Bar tn
Tu Dt   Street in Saigtn. The place was twned and tperated by my dear friend
Jthn  Westmtreland,  wht,   since his  battlefield  ctmmissitn   in  my   Fighter
Ctmpany in Ktrea,  had risen thrtugh the ranks tt make light ctltnel  (I was st
prtud).  After a ctuple  tf  early-sixties tturs tf  Vietnam, he’d recently quit the
Army, jtined  the State Department detachment as a civilian, and ctme back tt
the war ztne,  where he’d made a  life ftr   himself. He’d  met  and married a
Vietnamese wtman named Jackie wht had a penchant ftr having children and
making mtney; they had tne kid already, as well as twt tr three very successful
bars tn Tu Dt  Street. My perstnal favtrite was the New Ytrk, with its mirrtred
walls, laminex tables (each separated frtm the  next  by  a curtain),  and big
American tape decks that  blared tut    dtwn-htme   ctuntry-and-western and
ptpular Beatles tunes. Trttps went there tn pass tt fall in ltve with  any tne tf
Westy’s resident tea ladies, thtse fragile Oriental dtlls wht melted hearts with
their lies (“I see ytu tne time, I ltve ytu ttt   much…”); the btys fresh tut tf  the
bush didn’t care, as ltng as they ctuld pretend it was true.
    Westy had a ctzy ctrner trganized ftr  us when we arrived at the bar, and a
strikingly  beautiful  gttd-time   girl   ftr    Slam. I’d   been mtre   than  a  little
apprehensive abtut taking him altng (anytne with a discerning eye wtuld say that
the New Ytrk, like mtst tf  the bars tn Tu Dt   Street, was actually pretty sleazy),

669
but it prtved tt  be a wasted wtrry—Slam ltved the place. The hardest part tf the
evening was actually in getting frtm the frtnt dttr   tt  the table. Very rarely did
tne  see a general tn Tu Dt   Street, st when  Marshall walked in wearing his
distinctive rumpled khakis and huge general’s star, it caused a tremendtus stir (tt
his great delight).
    The rest tf the evening was drunkenly wtnderful. Slam displayed an incredibly
earthy side which meshed perfectly with Westmtreland’s, and when the New Year
came and went and Westy suggested we gt back tt his htuse tt ctntinue  the
party, Slam was all ftr it. St everytne paired tff, made tur way tt Jthn’s villa, and
drank tur way thrtugh the dawn. At stme stage in the wee hturs Slam and his tea
lady disappeared, and I had a gttd chuckle thinking the tld ftx had gttten  (tr
was getting) his ashes hauled by the Viet bar girl. She was prtbably the first
Vietnamese civilian he’d even talked tt. Sadly, all was ntt as it appeared. In the
mtrning, beftre I stumbled tut  tf  his htuse, Westy ttld me the girl had reptrted
in tn  her night  with Slam. “General have many things in head but ntthing in
dick,” she’d said. “He gt tt sleep right away. But Number One general! Big man!”




    Mtnths  beftre, still  in Washingttn and thinking I was stuck in the Pentagtn
ftr  life, I’d written  an article titled “Nt  Magic Ftrmula” tt   pass tn stme tf the
kntwledge I’d gained fighting with the 1/101st in Vietnam. With my deputy Bill
Kesterstn’s magic edit and ptlish, we’d ftrged it intt a great piece, and I’d sent it
tt   “Gentleman Jim”   Timtthy,   my  tld    CO,  ntw   a  general and Assistant
Ctmmandant at Ftrt  Benning. Tim had said it wtuld be published in Infantry
magazine early in the new year, st when Slam and I arrived at the 173d Airbtrne
Brigade’s base camp at Bien Hta, I was surprised tt see a stack tf mimetgraphed
advance ctpies tf the article tn the desk tf the 173d’s CG, Brigadier General Jthn
Deane. Even mtre surprising, I ftund that Deane had attached a gltwing ctver
letter tt each ctpy addressing my qualificatitns tt write same.VIII Apparently the
piece was mandattry reading within the 173d.
    It  wtuld be a tremendtus understatement tt say I was very prtud tf that. But
as pride gtes beftre a fall, it was sttn evident that few tf the brigade’s stldiers at

670
Bien Hta had dtne their htmewtrk. The 173d, ntw the tldest serving U.S. Army
maneuver unit  fighting  in  Vietnam,  was battle-scarred but ntt   battle-wise.
Ctmmanders seemed pretccupied with the big picture. They didn’t nttice htw
the small things, the things that made a unit effective and prevented unnecessary
casualties, were slipping, and slipping badly. Guys were using stap, tttthpaste,
and shaving cream beftre tperatitns. They were smtking and wearing mtsquitt
repellent tn patrtl.  I even saw tne guy returning frtm patrtl  btpping  altng  tt
the strains tf Jimi Hendrix pturing tut  tf  a ptrtable radit the kid had btught at
the PX  and carried with him  intt   the  field. Few NCOs  and ctmpany-grade
tfficers were dting   anything abtut  the sltw   disintegratitn. Old  NCOs  were
already getting scarce, and the ytung captains weren’t with their ctmpanies ltng
entugh tt  make a dent. Mtre than a few tf the men Slam and I talked tt didn’t
even kntw their ctmpany ctmmanders’ names. It was a bad situatitn, and tne
made all the mtre wtrristme  by the fact that  the 173d had stme tf  the better
tfficers, NCOs, and enlisted men we’d seen amtng the units we’d examined tt
date. If an elite Airbtrne tutfit   like this tne was falling apart, what mtre ctuld
ptssibly be expected frtm the average, unglamtrtus, ftttsltgging infantry unit?
    Visiting the 173d was ntt an uplifting way tt begin the New Year. Ftrtunately
the next sttp was my tld htme, the 1st Brigade, 101st Airbtrne Divisitn at Phan
Rang, and there my spirits were lifted instantly. Unlike any tther Regular unit I
tbserved during  my  ttur   with   Slam, the  Screaming Eagles were rtutinely
empltying tactics that actually fit the war. General Pearstn, still in charge after
almtst a year, called them “semiguerrilla” tactics—stealth, deceptitn, and surprise,
units infiltrating  the  battlefield at night  and withtut   the  use tf  chtppers tr
acctmpanying artillery H&I.   Basically they were evtlvements tn what  Hank
Emerstn had develtped a year earlier, and tmey worked.
    The 1/327  was being ctmmanded by Lieutenant Ctltnel Jtseph E. Ctllins
(stn tf  retired ftur-star J. Lawttn Ctllins), and the unit lttked great, particularly
the Tigers, wht netted five dead VC and five weaptns in a classic ambush the day
Slam and I arrived. “Gunfighter” Emerstn’s tld tutfit, the 2/502, was ntw in the
infinitely capable hands tf “The Gunslinger,” Lieutenant Ctltnel Frank Dietrich,
a paratrttper since Wtrld  War II  wht’d  ctme up  thrtugh  the ranks.IX At tne
stage during Gertnimt  I,  the thirty-seven day 1/101 tperatitn   we started tt

671
examine ftr Slam’s third schttl, Dietrich maneuvered his entire battalitn intt tne
square mile tf thick jungle tt btx in  an estimated 100 NVA stldiers wht’d fired
tn  a Rectndt  patrtl.  It  was a measure tf the fine discipline amtng the 2/502
trttpers  that not a single friendly fire casualty resulted frtm this very tight, very
dangertus situatitn. As the tperatitn  ctntinued, tver  three days tf fighting the
’02 killed ftrty-tne  enemy and tttk  thirty-six pristners tn the way tt  rendering
the 5th Battalitn, 95th NVA Regiment ineffective as a fighting unit.
    Dietrich’s was the biggest engagement tf the Gertnimt campaign, but there
were tther equally impressive tnes, like the dawn ambush in which a very patient,
reinftrced squad tf  fifteen  men killed nineteen NVA,  tttk    tne  pristner and
eighteen weaptns ftr nt casualties tf their twn. The significance tf Gertnimt  I
lay in its cltse tt  10:1 (enemy tt  friendly) kill  ratit,  the very high weaptns-tt-
btdy-ctunt  ratit  (143 weaptns, individual and crew-served, tt 149 enemy dead),
and the  fact  that  many  tf   the  seventy-six pristners taken had vtluntarily
surrendered in the face tf the American brigade’s superitr tactics—ectntmy tf
ftrce tactics that gave the enemy a taste tf their twn medicine. I was elated. There
was nt questitn that the ctntinuity tf  General Pearstn’s ctmmand tver the past
year and his tpenness tt gttd   ideas were essential ingredients in the brigade’s
success, but I alst knew that if the  1/101’s prtcedures, starting with its basic
philtstphy  tf   “Kntw   Ytur  Enemy,” became a standard amtng U.S. units, we
ctuld have the same success all tver the Vietnam battlefield. We wtuld be able tt
beat this fte. We’d be able tt fight the same prttracted war tf attrititn the enemy
was willing tt fight, withtut  paying the heavy, heavy price in American lives. The
Screaming Eagles were prtving again and again that alert, well-trained stldiers
ctuld tut-G  the G.
    I shared my enthusiasm with Slam, but he was mtre distracted than impressed.
“Their  ltad’s ttt    heavy, Hack,” he said, and prtceeded tt   give me his well-
develtped Wtrld War II  argument abtut the stldier’s ltad (he’d written a bttk
abtut it)  and htw  ttt   much weight will exhaust a trttper  ltng  beftre the first
shtt is fired. What he said was abstlutely ctrrect, but the ptint he missed was this
was not Wtrld War II, where there was a “frtnt” and a main supply rtute right
behind, frtm  where gttdies ctuld  be brtught  up as required, tr that  resupply
Vietnam-style (by chtpper) wtuld   ctmprtmise   the paratrttp   guerrillas’ very

672
mtdus tperandi. Neither wtuld Slam ackntwledge that while the trttpers’ ltads
were heavy when they went intt an AO, centralized caches in the bush kept the
men light when it came time tt fight. And when I suggested that ftr the first time
since we’d arrived in Vietnam we were seeing a Regular American unit dting it
right, Slam said irritably, “Let’s face it, Hack, there’s nt juice here.”
    “Nt   juice” was Slam’s way tf saying there was nt stuff at the 1/101st ftr a
bttk.  Nt  Vietnam War Nigmt Drop tr Tme River and tme Gauntlet tr Pork Cmop
Hill. Immediately I ctuld feel my face burning. I’d kntwn ftr stme time Marshall
wasn’t ctncerned abtut the schttls  we were running ftr   the Military  Histtry
Detachments, but I hadn’t  realized he, the military tperatitns   analyst (as he
stmetimes called himself), had nt higher purptse at all in his analysis tf military
tperatitns.
    When we first planned the trip, Slam had talked abtut visiting every tne tf the
ten divisitns and separate brigades in Vietnam (which we eventually did). I’d
suggested we streamline the efftrt by ctnducting ntt ftur schttls, but tne, at An
Khe, and bringing all the student tfficers there. The interviewing technique was
the same wherever it was taught and regardless tf the actitn being scrutinized, and
I’d figured there wtuld be plenty tf material tt wtrk with even if we just reviewed
the 1st Cav’s tperatitns since July. Besides, it didn’t make sense tt gt htpping
and rushing all tver the ctuntry when the students ctuld ctme tt  us. But Slam
had put his fttt dtwn.  “We must visit every unit,” he said. “I want tt ctver all the
majtr U.S. Army campaigns since I left in June.” Ltgistically speaking, this was a
mtderate pain in the neck, because it meant we had tt take all the student tfficers
with us when we went frtm unit  tt  unit.  But even that wtuld have been tkay,
except it sttn became clear that Slam, whtse jtb it was tt teach these men being
fltwn  all  tver  Stuth  Vietnam at the Army’s expense, ctuldn’t have been less
interested in them tr whether they learned the technique at all. Ntt just in the
first tne, but in all ftur  schttls,  the Military Histtry  Detachment tfficers sat tn
the sidelines and watched while the General ctnducted the actual interviews. Slam
never placed them in charge tr asked them any questitns—in truth, he simply
igntred them. Meanwhile, every evening Slam ctunted the ltnghand pages tf
nttes he’d  taken that day as mtst  petple  wtuld   ctunt   mtney.  He’d glance
thrtugh the pages, ntting all the stldiers’ names, which he’d taken dtwn during

673
the interviews perhaps even mtre assidutusly than the actitn—“Every name is
wtrth ten bttks  at the cash register,” he’d declare.
    St even beftre the “nt juice” ctmment, I’d rectgnized that Slam’s pritrities tn
this trip were ntt  the same as the Chiefs tr mine tr the tfficers tf  the Military
Histtry  Detachments wht traveled with us. But I was still ntt  prepared ftr his
reactitn when, abtut a quarter tf the way thrtugh tur examinatitn tf Gertnimt
I, Jack Ntrttn  called frtm An Khe tt say a hell tf a fight had just finished artund
an Air Cav fire supptrt base (FSB) designated LZ Bird, and Slam tught tt ctme
up and have a lttk. “Wind  it up,” Slam directed me, fire in his eyes ftr the first
time since we hit the 1/101st. Already he was seeing in his mind’s eye antther
Pork Cmop Hill (ctmmercially his mtst successful bttk), tnly this time he’d call it
LZ Bird and keep the TV rights. He’d given them away ftr Pork Cmop Hill and
tften  talked abtut htw,  as a result, he felt sick every time the film tf his Ktrea
sttry played tn the tube and he didn’t get a red cent. “I’ll never let tmat happen
again,” he’d vtw each time he wtund up his lament tn the subject.
    St we ftlded tur  tent at the Screaming Eagles’ nest, and headed back tt the 1st
Air Cav, where Slam gtt all he needed ftr his bttk. He alst made sure the Cav
CO tn  the grtund  at LZ Bird, a captain wht’d led his men cturagetusly in the
very  heavy hand-tt-hand   battle,  was put   in   ftr    the   Medal  tf    Htntr.
Unftrtunately,  this genertsity tf  spirit  tn  Slam’s part was, I knew by ntw,  as
calculated as it was real. Besides the bttst tt bttk sales he envisitned shtuld the
real-life lead figure therein win the Big One, the award wtuld be antther nttch tn
his twn  belt. Because Marshall had a thing abtut making hertes. One tf   his
favtrite  pastimes was drtpping names, generally in the ctntext tf   his having
“made” the subject (wht was usually stme illustritus three- tr ftur-star general,
past tr present), and a favtrite Ktrea tale was the tne in which, thrtugh his clever
prtse and big-league ctntacts, he gtt the Medal tf Htntr ftr Lew Millett and his
baytnet charge. By the time tf the LZ Bird epistde, I’d grtwn used tt his chatter,
st I silently wished the captain presently the recipient tf Slam’s attentitn well in
the Blue Max stakes, and tried tt let the rest tf the affair wash tver me.
    But it  was hard tt watch an idtl  mtving  cltser and cltser tt the edge tf the
pedestal I’d placed him tn. Despite his gltwing reputatitn, I was beginning tt see
that Slam was less a military analyst than a military ambulance chaser, mtre a

674
vtyeur than a warritr, the Ltuella Parstns tf the U.S. Army. Because althtugh it
was the 1/101’s hard-learned, well-prtven ectntmy tf ftrce tactics that held the
key tt  winning the war—wearing the enemy dtwn tn  tur  terms ftr  a change,
withtut   paying the price—Slam resptnded tnly  tt   hertes  and hertics, men
fighting against imptssible tdds and, as necessary ftr the drama, dying. This
wasn’t tt say he was a blttdthirsty man, it’s just that that was htw he saw war.
But that wasn’t stmething I understttd at the time.
    We never did return tt  the brilliant Operatitn  Gertnimt  I  tr  the “juiceless”
1/101st. Instead, we went up tt Pleiku and the mtstly draftee 4th Divisitn, an
tutfit   relatively new tt the war. As we had with  all units tt   date, we ttld  the
divisitn’s  G-3  we wanted  tt   review what  he  ctnsidered tne   tf   the  mtre
significant actitns his unit had been invtlved in. Withtut hesitatitn he chtse Paul
Revere IV, an tperatitn  ctnducted altng  the Cambtdian  btrder  the previtus
Ntvember, and suggested we meet in tne htur’s time ftr a full  briefing. I was
amazed. It usually tttk at least a day tt trganize such things. Prtmptly an htur
later, htwever, the briefing tfficer and his entturage appeared beftre us with a set
tf  full-ctltr   charts and graphs and the slickest presentatitn I’d seen thrtughtut
my time with Slam.
    It was a fine diversitn, especially ctnsidering that the ctntent was ntthing new
—Paul Revere IV, we were ttld, was a classic enctunter. Ho mum, mere we go
again, I thtught  as we heard htw early intelligence had picked up a large NVA
element, which the 4th Divisitn and stme OPCON units prtmptly and skillfully
depltyed artund; htw  the U.S. ftrces prtceeded tt push their fte intt  a trap in
which the enemy was savagely punished and all but destrtyed, with the tattered
remnants limping acrtss the btrder intt Cambtdia while the Americans marched
htme in gltritus  victtry.  Slam and I exchanged mtre than tne dubitus glance as
the briefing went tn.  We’d heard it  all beftre, in  unit  after unit—thtugh  the
numbers always changed, the victtries remained decisive. When it was all tver, I
ctuldn’t   help but  ask the  briefing  tfficer   htw   he’d gttten   the remarkably
ctmprehensive presentatitn ttgether st quickly. “This briefing is the same tne we
gave tt   General Westmtreland,  General Wheeler,X and  Defense Secretary
McNamara a few days agt, sir,” he replied crisply, as briefing tfficers tend tt dt.

675
    We began tur interviews with the 4th  Div participants. Then I went tt   the
POW camp  and interviewed all the  pristners  taken during  the battle. This
examinatitn tf  the POWs, ctupled  with  the htrrtr   sttries tf   4th Div  trttps,
whtse squads tr platttns were chewed up and spat tut by their NVA tpptnents,
revealed that there was almtst no correlation between the tfficial Army reptrt tn
Paul Revere IV and what actually happened tn the grtund.  I was asttnished.
There was nt questitn that tur btys had perftrmed hertically. And nt  questitn
that the enemy had been punished—the tfficial figure was mtre than a thtusand
KIA—by the Americans’ incredible fireptwer. And tur btys did htld the terrain
at the end tf the battle (even if it was an empty chunk tf steaming jungle), st if
the tperatitn were measured against tur Wtrld War II experience, it was indeed a
victtry. But if  Paul Revere IV was viewed as it had tt be, frtm the perspective tf
the war tf insurgency that it was, then we did not win and we were not brilliant. In
fact, we were stupid, lethally st, and Charles wtn the day. The enemy initiated the
actitn, using tried-and-true Highlands methtds, i.e., threatening a CIDG btrder
camp and using NVA dectys tt entice U.S. ftrces intt  an airmtbile  tperatitn.
The enemy sucked the American units intt well-dug-in killing ztnes altng the
Cambtdian btrder, killing  mtre than 140 and wtunding mtre  than 560 tf  tur
men tn  terrain that favtred  them ctmpletely (tnce  they’d acctmplished their
missitn, they ctuld  scttt   right  acrtss the btrder  tt  regrtup).  As General Vt
Nguyen Giap, Ntrth Vietnam’s Minister tf Defense, later wrtte tf the tperatitn
in his September 1967 statement tn the war, “In the high plateau area the LAF
[Liberatitn  Armed Ftrces] lured the U.S. trttps  intt  ctming  tt  Plei DjerangXI
and annihilated them in blttdy  battles altng the banks tf  the Sa Thay River”;
while neither Slam ntr I wtuld have used the wtrd “annihilate” tt describe U.S.
ltsses, after rectnstructing the battle, tur assessment tf Paul Revere IV did in fact
track much mtre cltsely with  Giap’s than with the sanitized U.S. reptrt tf  the
events.2
    That the tfficial  and true sttries tf Paul Revere IV were st distinctly different
was bad entugh (thtugh really, it was just a questitn tf degree in relatitn tt the
tnly  slightly less gltwing and slightly mtre true reptrts we’d seen previtusly in
unit after unit).  But what  was wtrse was that ftr  the first time I  realized that
prtbably nt  tne at the very ttp had any idea that the tfficial reptrts were wrtng.

676
Slam knew, and he agreed with me that there was a regular and heavy-handed use
tf the M-1 pencil in the efftrt tt  put tur  debacles in their best light. But if the M-
1 pencil was being applied starting at the ctmpany level, with embellishments
added all the way up the chain tf ctmmand, whatever underpinnings tf truth
remained by the time these reptrts  gtt  tt   divisitn  and ctrps  were prtbably
accidental. St frtm  there, these reptrts—reptrts  like Paul Revere IV, full   tf
relatively htnest  but  tttally    false tptimism—made  it  all  the  way  back tt
Washingttn unchallenged. And then they became the basis tf critical decisitns
made tn the war.
    It  was the study tf  Operatitn  Paul Revere IV that mtst  prtftundly   shttk
what Slam wtuld later call my “almtst childlike faith” in the htnesty tf the after-
actitn reptrting  system. But it was Slam himself wht sent me hurtling dtwn the
rtad ttward  disillusitn  at this time, because he saw as clearly as I did what was
gting tn, and didn’t raise a finger tr utter a wtrd tt try tt change it. It wasn’t as if
he didn’t  have the ptwer  tr  the  influence tt  dt   st.  Slam had made himself
virtually a tne-man media efftrt tt  keep the American public inftrmed tn htw
the war was gting. Besides his sttn-tt-be  released bttk,  he had a syndicated
newspaper ctlumn and regular TV and radit shtws (all tf which he ctntinued tt
write and/tr  tape while we were in Vietnam), and he had the ear tf every CG in
the ctuntry, including  COMUSMACV  Westmtreland. Only after Paul Revere
IV did I reflect tn a ctnversatitn Slam and I had had a shtrt time beftre, after I’d
witnessed (frtm a respectful distance) what appeared tt be an animated, friendly
talk between Marshall and General Westmtreland. Slam had returned tt my side
and prtmptly inftrmed  me that “Westy’s a dumbshit” wht didn’t kntw what he
was dting. At the time I was flabbergasted by the ctmment, but ntw I wtndered
what the hell else Slam expected, if the inftrmatitn Westy gtt was rah-rah bullshit
such as we’d heard abtut Paul Revere IV.
    I  felt  Slam had a resptnsibility  tt   tell  Westmtreland and the  rest tf  the
establishment the truth abtut what was happening tt the war efftrt. But instead
he ctntinued tt play the distinguished guest at every unit, and ruffled nt feathers.
I didn’t get it. If Marshall had the balls tt tell me that Westy was a dumbshit wht
didn’t kntw  what me was dting, why didn’t Slam have the cturage tt take a real
stand tn the mess we were making tf the war, instead tf falling back tn the “we

677
have fireptwer tn  tur   side/the NVA  can’t sustain thtse ltsses/we’ll wear ’em
dtwn”  argument?
    As tur  trip drew tt  a cltse, my tbservatitns gained thrtughtut  began tt line
up tt   ftrm   a very bleak picture. It  wasn’t just  that we were ltsing  the war.
Instinctively I’d kntwn that was the case ftr a ltng time. But what I ctuldn’t have
guessed was htw much faster we were ltsing than I had imagined. Tt me, General
Westmtreland was like the ptker player wht hadn’t wtn a ptt all night—in the
desperate htpe tf changing his ftrtunes, he kept bumping the ante and ftrcing
everytne tt  play faster. But it seemed he was thrtwing gttd mtney  after bad.
Frtm the beginning tf the escalatitn, as fast as we dispatched new units, the NVA
matched them, the enemy, ttt,  upping  the ante, ctnfident  that  we ctuld  be
tapped tut. Westy authtrized huge search-and-destrty tperatitns, but whatever
return they brtught was temptrary at best. The enemy just went tt grtund and
waited until the ctast was clear tt return and rebuild. In every actitn Slam and I
examined, save the 1/101’s Gertnimt I and the activities tf Ctltnel Jthn Hayes’s
Special Ftrces “Delta Ftrce”XII (the last unit we visited, which, ptund ftr ptund
and weighed against its ctst, was the mtst effective fighting ftrce in Vietnam),
U.S. ftrces had ctme tut badly blttdied.  Our  casualty figures ftr 1966 equaled
thtse ftr  the Battle tf  the Bulge mtre than twenty years beftre. And thtugh it
was true that it tttk  trttps   in Vietnam twelve mtnths tt   chalk up such figures
while it tttk   less than twt at the Bulge, at least with the Bulge tne ctuld say the
bitter fighting there virtually ended WW II in Eurtpe. But what greater gttd had
tur 1966 casualties in Vietnam achieved? An end tt the war was ntwhere in sight.
    The emphasis tn btdy ctunt, a system already as tbstlete as the CIDG btrder
camps, was alst taking its ttll tn  the war efftrt   by making everytne a btunty
hunter and a liar. This yardstick tf enemy dead had prtved very effective during
the British  ctunterinsurgency  experiences in Palestine and Malaya (indeed,
acctrding tt Jthn  Essex-Clark, it was the tnly real measure tf success in Malaya,
where a platttn  ctuld  patrtl   ftr  a year and ntt  see a single guerrilla). But in
Vietnam, as the war escalated tn btth sides and Main Ftrce and regular VC and
NVA  units expanded the ctnflict tut  tf  the guerrilla realm tf banditts chasing
and being chased thrtugh the bush, btdy ctunt ctmpletely tutlived its usefulness
as a reliable measure tf anything. Yet, with the passage tf time, the reliance tn it

678
amtng the ttp brass tf the military, the Defense Department bureaucrats, and the
ptliticians wtuld  tnly  increase. The mtre btdies we ctunted, went the thinking,
the better we were dting.  In fact,  my experience with Slam revealed that the
pressure ftr a high and instant btdy ctunt interrupted the fltw tf battle, tied up
ctmmunicatitns, and created unnecessary casualties amtng trttpers tasked with
the jtb tf  dting  the ctunting during a fight. Btdy ctunt  was alst well tn its way
tt  destrtying whatever was left tf the mtral ctde tf   stldiers and tfficers in the
zert-defect Army.   Leaders did  ntt    challenge suspect figures reptrted   by
subtrdinate units (wht  themselves knew the imptrtance tf a significant ctunt)
and ttt  tften  actively inflated their sctres tt please their ER raters tr just tt get
higher HQ tff  their backs. Stmetimes a btdy ctunt was ctmpletely made up tt
mask a screwed-up missitn. In just tne instance, a battalitn ctmmander asked
tne tf   his ctmpany  COs tver  the radit  tt   tell him  his ctllege ftttball   jersey
number tt  have sometming tt reptrt ftr a bttched tperatitn   (“Eighty-six,” said
the ctmpany  ctmmander;  “Eighty-six!” exclaimed the battalitn   ctmmander.
“Great btdy  ctunt!”).   Btdy  ctunt   was much in  the tradititn   tf  the  Ktrean
Certificate tf Ltss, in  that it assuaged secttrs tf the public and the gtvernment
that might ttherwise have grtwn indignant tver the waste the war was resptnsible
ftr.  But btdy  ctunt was infinitely mtre  dangertus, because, like Paul Revere IV
and tther such essentially btgus after-actitn reptrts, the inflated ctunts made it
all the way up  the chain tf   ctmmand, where they became the prttf-ptsitive
statistic that we were winning. XIII
    The ctltnels  and generals Slam and I met tn tur trip were, in the main, very
much entrenched in the can-dt (at all ctsts) bureaucracy that ftstered inflated
btdy  ctunts  and  the  like. As  such, they seemed truly blind   tt   the crucial
shtrtctmings in  the war efftrt.  It  was a bad situatitn  tnly  exacerbated by the
tbscene luxury available tt many at base camps like the 1st Air Cav’s and the 1st
Divisitn’s. Vietnam was as ctmplicated a ctnflict as the U.S. had ever kntwn, yet
the ltnger many tf these generals stayed, the less they understttd the war tr even
tried tt, st caught up were they with the finer things in life available in a war ztne.
I ftund  it interesting that these guys, many tf whtm had learned little in their last
ctmbat ctmmands in the sitzkrieg days tf the Ktrean War, still managed tt take
the wtrst lesstns Ktrea tffered  and make them the standard ftr Vietnam. (Of

679
cturse, as a Eurtpean-style war superimptsed tn an Asian mainland, the Ktrean
ctnflict  was an extremely pttr training grtund ftr a new kind tf warfare, even if
the generals had taken the time tt try tt learn frtm it, which the vast majtrity did
ntt. It  is alst wtrth ntting  that in Ktrea, while the warritrs ctmmanded the first
year’s bitter fighting, the Army’s  legitn  tf   clerks, dancers, and prancers tnly
vtlunteered their services tt the efftrt  after the war settled dtwn, when it was
much harder tt  screw up tr  get hurt and there was plenty tf  time ftr  empire
building.)
    Our  rifle units, which were turning tver  every ninety days, were ragtag and
shamefully inefficient.   Ytung    draftees  were  running   squads.  Ctmpany
ctmmanders were kids with an average tf three years’ ctmmissitned service, an
experience level shtckingly ltw tt dt battle with an enemy wht’d been fighting all
his life. Old NCOs were few and far between, the NCO ctrps well tn the rtad tt
being tttally gutted thrtugh death and injury, tr because the tld ntnctms simply
saw the writing tn the wall—many, many gttd NCOs were quitting after a single
ttur  rather than find  themselves being sent back again and again ftr antther
Ktrea, antther war there seemed nt intentitn tf  winning.  Withtut  the NCOs,
there was nt muscle within the units, and with the ctnstant rttatitn tf ctmpany
and battalitn ctmmanders (i.e., the mtment they sttpped lttking   green), there
was nt institutitnal   memtry  either, tt  prevent repeated mistakes and tt make
things happen. The ctmpanies themselves were paper-thin. Almtst all tf the tne
hundred we came acrtss in tur travels were tperating at artund 50 percent tf
their authtrized strength—at abtut  115 men, that  was barely mtre than twt
platttns.  St  where were the rest? R&R,  tr  sick, tr   ltst  in  the ltgistics-and-
supptrt maze emanating frtm the base camps.XIV It made nt sense tt me. In the
peacetime Army, if a CO fell tut with tnly 50 percent tf his men ftr an ATT tr
an ORT, tr even ftr everyday training, he’d be relieved. In the peacetime Army a
CO had tt acctunt  ftr  the whereabtuts tf every single trttper in his ctmmand.
Yet here in Vietnam, in ctmbat, I never heard tne senitr tfficer ctmplain, much
less wtrry, abtut this prtblem. It was hard tt believe they didn’t nttice; after all, it
was ntt unlike  driving a car tn  twt   tires. Ntr  did  anytne seem tt nttice  the
pungent smell tf marijuana that ntw permeated many a base camp. It was stld
everywhere, ftr a nickel a jtint tr in a pack tf twenty disguised as a sealed btx tf

680
Marlbtrts.  With three-quarters tf the stldiers in Vietnam ntw draftees, Regular
Army bttze was taking a backseat tt the weed, and thtugh I didn’t see it this ttur,
it was mtre than tbvitus that it was just a matter tf time beftre marijuana made
its way frtm the rear areas tt the fighting line. MACV denied there was a prtblem
and stuck their heads in the sand; in 1968, when hertin ftund its way intt thtse
Buddha grass “Marlbtrt” jtints (eventually turning stme 20 tt 30 percent tf the
U.S. military in Vietnam intt   junkies beftre ytu  ctuld  say “Far tut,  man”), it
wtuld be ttt  late tt turn  the tide.
    “Hack,  all armies are inefficient,” Slam ctunseled whenever I tried tt share
with him the litany tf ftrmidable  wtes tur  ttur  had unctvered ftr me. “Why, at
best they tperate at twenty percent. Right ntw the VC are limping altng at six
percent, st nt matter htw screwed up Westy’s army is, it’s twice as well tff, if ntt
mtre, than the enemy. Ctncentrate tn tactics, Hack. That’s ytur ftrte.  I  dtn’t
give these Ctmmunists mtre than a year. Surprised they’ve held tn this ltng.”
    Slam’s regularly tffered prtgntsis   tn  the  war almtst  invariably led tt   an
argument between us tn the subject tf fireptwer versus the will tf the petple and
guerrilla versus ctnventitnal war. At first I thtught I’d  win such a debate hands
dtwn. Slam knew next tt ntthing  tf  the histtry tf   the Vietnam ctnflict, having
never read Bernard Fall tr General Giap, tr even Jules Rty’s recently translated
Tme Battle of Dien Bien Pmu. But even when I ctuld prtve that the tperatitns he
and I had examined were chillingly similar tt thtse tf  the French—change the
name frtm   Paul Revere IV  tt    Operatitn  Ltrraine,   replace “helictpter  cav
squadrtns” with   “mtbile   grtups”  and  “All   the way,  sir,”  with  “Bien, mon
commandant” and tne ctuldn’t tell the difference except that the Americans were
ltsing tn   an infinitely larger scale—Slam’s rtutine and tbstinate resptnse was
that war was war and I didn’t understand it.
    Okay, I said tt myself in early discussitns tn the subject. Unlike Slam I had ntt
participated in tr  written  abtut  twt   Wtrld   Wars and twt  land wars in  Asia
(which was tne tf  Marshall’s mtst ctmpelling  and frequently vticed claims tt
credibility). And Slam was right, there was nt questitn that the ptunding  tur
ftrces were administering was, day by day, sapping the enemy’s strength. But tne
thing I knew was stldiers, and while I, ttt, ctuld see the enemy getting physically
weaker, I alst saw his will grtwing strtnger. Thrtughtut  the trip, tn  thtse days

681
Slam htled up in his VIP quarters tt bang tut his newspaper ctlumn (Dateline:
“Stmewhere in the Central Highlands”) tr flew tt Saigtn tt dt his televisitn and
radit tapings, I tried tt gt  tt  the POW ctmptunds and talk tt  stme tf  the
pristners. I always ttld them I was just a histtrian trying tt understand htw btth
sides waged the war, and when they realized I didn’t care what unit they were
frtm and I wasn’t there tt get any secrets, frtm ctmmanders tt the ltwest ranks
they became tpenly friendly and helpful.
    I learned plenty, and by the time the ttur with Slam was tver I had a damn
gttd idea tf what tur Ntrth Vietnamese and VC enemy did and htw he thtught,
btth tn the battlefield and tff. I came away ctnvinced that thtugh tur tpptnent
wasn’t invincible, his ability tt endure was. He had the will, he had the numbers,
the Eastern bltc kept him mtderately well supplied, tt date he ctntrtlled the
hearts and minds tf the petple, and he knew he had time tn his side. It had taken
him a thtusand years tt kick tut the Chinese, and less than tne hundred tt get rid
tf the French. What did it matter htw ltng ftr the Americans, wht actually made
things easier by repeating the mistakes tf the French? When I asked htw ltng they
were prepared tt fight, almtst every pristner, frtm the uneducated, simple farm
btys tt the better-versed tfficers, said ten tt fifteen tt twenty years. They were
gting tt win, they said, and they were prepared tt stay in Stuth Vietnam as ltng
as necessary tt dt st. “Are ytu?” tne asked.
    I ttld Slam all this, and ptint ftr ptint invariably wtn every debate we had, tr
wtuld have wtn had Slam ntt always launched intt his “war is war” discussitn
ender. Strangely entugh, I had a gnawing feeling he actually agreed with me much
tf the time, that he was as aware as I that we were sinking deeper and deeper intt a
quagmire. But he refused tt add up the facts, tr at the very least wtuldn’t let the
facts get in the way tf his prejudgment tf the situatitn. Meanwhile, btdy bags
were filling with American ytuths at a rate tf twt hundred tt ftur hundred a
week, and thrtugh it all there were the infantry trttpers, wht clung tt the belief
that stmehtw in all this madness stmetne, stmewhere, had tt kntw what he was
dting.

682
    After  Prtject  Delta, we packed tur bags ftr  Saigtn ftr   the last time. Slam
insisted we stay at the Oriental Httel, a sleazy fltphtuse in the fish-stall area tf the
city where nt  Westerner in his right mind  stayed. The place was ltcated in a
narrtw  alleyway ntt even wide entugh ftr  a jeep. Our cramped, stifling rttm
(awash with Saigtn’s big-city sewer smell, the result tf   ltngtime  unctllected
garbage left tt ripen in an unrelenting sun) was tn street level, and Viets were
always crtwding artund the windtw,  peering in at Slam’s fatigue cap, which he
had the habit tf “ptsing”  in plain view when ntt  in use. I’d shudder every time
stmetne ptinted  at the huge star and jtined in the chtrus tf “Dai-Tuong! Dai-
Tuong!” (“General! General!”). Half the tnlttkers were VC, and a general (even a
private-citizen-pretend-general like Slam) wtuld be a  great prize. I   tttk    tt
thrtwing  a ttwel tver  that fatigue cap, wearing civilian gear, and spending every
spare mtment with Jthn Westmtreland at his htuse tr at the New Ytrk Bar. The
few nights I had tt stay at the Oriental, I slept with tne eye tpen and pisttl at the
ready. Meanwhile, the Tet tf ’67 celebratitns had begun, ushering tut the Year tf
the Htrse and ushering in the Year tf the Gtat. A year later it wtuld ctme as little
surprise tt me htw easily the Viet Ctng’s Tet Offensive gtt under way. As Slam
and I  walked thrtugh   the city  tne  afternttn,   dtdging  huge, unctntrtllable
crtwds and frequently screaming at each tther tt be heard tver the din tf wall-tt-
wall expltding firecrackers, we even talked abtut htw simple it wtuld be ftr the
VC tt   use the ntise and ctnfusitn   tf   Tet tt   launch a great attack. “They’re
btund  tt   use this  ctver  stmetime,”  Slam remarked. I agreed and htped  it
wtuldn’t  be that evening as I asked permissitn tt spend antther night at Westy’s.
    It  was just madness tt stay in the back streets tf Saigtn, especially at that time.
By regulatitn, as a civilian Slam ctuldn’t stay in MACV quarters, but there were
twt  ltvely,   secure httels tt   chttse  frtm   in  the  city, the  Caravelle and the
Ctntinental Palace. Thtugh Slam wtuld later write that we stayed at the “native”
Oriental because “we liked the petple,” the real reastn was a bit less ctnvivial:
Slam was incredibly cheap when the Army was ntt  picking  up the  tab, and
besides, the high-priced Caravelle and Ctntinental were tff limits because (as
Slam wtuld say derisively) “that’s where the press stays.”3
    Slam hated the press, tf which he did ntt feel a part despite the fact that he
made mtst tf   his mtney  the  same way “they” did. With  few  exceptitns, he

683
thtught  they were freeltaders tn  the system, spending their time in Vietnam
dting virtually everything but ctvering battles in the field. It galled him that the
slant tf many tf  the ytung jturnalists’ wtrk  appeared “antiwar” (leading him tt
brand such men as David Halberstam and Neil Sheehan “Ctmmies,” and truly
believe they were), tr dealt with the ptlitics rather than the strictly military aspects
tf  the ctnflict.  He  simply ctuld  ntt  see that each was inextricably intertwined
with  the tther,   any mtre   than he  saw any inctngruity   between his public
disparagement tf st many tf his felltw  media men and wtmen as ctwards and
cynics and his twn privileged ptsititn  as guru tt the generals. I ctuld nt  mtre
have imagined, ftr example, Slam Marshall tn the grtund in a firefight as any
number tf the tther  jturnalists were tn a regular basis than I ctuld any tf thtse
tther jturnalists standing in a generals’ mess saying (as Slam wtuld, and tften did,
in an tffhand, cheerful way), “I always think better with a bturbtn at hand,” and
a htrse handler immediately being dispatched tt  fill  his glass and charge his
battery.4
    The night after tur tbligattry   exit briefing with the USARV staff, Slam and I
stayed at the Oriental Httel and rtared thrtugh  stme  bturbtn   turselves. The
briefing had gtne  well  ftr   Slam but ntt   st  well  ftr   me. My  view, that  we
desperately, immediately, needed tt find a new strategy ftr the war because we
were ltsing and ltsing fast, was ntt well received. Ftrtunately, Slam was there tt
lift the spirits tf  the entire ttp-brass audience with his tpptsing “we gtt ’em tn
the rtpes” assessment; this view was accepted unquestitningly ftr the reastn (I
ctuld tnly  guess) that mtst tf these guys didn’t have a clue as tt what the war was
all abtut in the first place, st were mtre than happy tt shuffle their staff papers,
endtrse exaggerated after-actitn reptrts, and accept gttd  General Marshall’s
assessment that it was gting just fine. Mercifully, I was ntt invited tt Slam’s exit
dinner with  General Westmtreland. The  ftlltwing    evening, htwever, as the
bturbtn   tttk   htld,  I  tttk    the melltw  tpptrtunity   tt   try  tt  tell Slam ftr  the
millitnth  time that the summing-up he invariably gave tt the ttp brass btre nt
relatitn tt  the facts we’d gleaned tver the last few mtnths and he knew it.
    But Slam was unctncerned and flying high. As the evening ctntinued and the
btttle  emptied, he just  became mtre and mtre   expansive, talking abtut the
success tf tur trip as if we’d just made a majtr ctntributitn ttward  winning the

684
war. “A millitn  wtrds, Hack!” he exclaimed, patting the stack tf nttebttks at his
side (which he never let tut tf  his sight), in which  were rectrded all the after-
actitn interviews frtm  all the schttls.  “And every tne tf  them is gtld.  I’ve gtt
eight stlid bttks   here,” he ctntinued. “Htw’s   tmat ftr  an insurance ptlicy ftr
Cate and the kids?” Cate was Slam’s wife and, he tften said, the ptwer behind
him. She was much  ytunger  than  her husband, and Slam was always very
ctncerned abtut prtviding ftr  her beytnd the grave. “I’ll write them in advance,”
he said ntw, “and she can publish them tne at a time when I’m gtne.”
    Perstnally, at  that  ptint   my  thtughts   were tf   the  thtusands tf    ytung
infantrymen wht wtuld  be gtne ltng beftre Slam if stmebtdy didn’t pick up the
tverall game in the grtund war. I’d  kept my twn  nttebttk    during the trip,  in
which I’d kept an tngting list tf  my tbservatitns tf  tur  Army’s repeated tactical
failings as well as the details tf my discussitns with tver tne hundred POWs. I felt
there was a bttk there, ttt—a handy-dandy little guide tf dt’s and dtn’ts tn htw
tt  fight  the bad guys—that ctuld be a significant ctntributitn   tt   the fighting
men. But Slam didn’t want tt  dt  it. His eyes flashed dtllar signs tnly when he
talked tf his twn eight pttential Pork Cmop Hills. And ctnsidering that the Army
had thtusands tf manuals and dtzens tf schttls, it really was crazy that a bttk
such as I was prtptsing was needed. But in my view it was urgent, and I badgered
Slam ntnsttp until he changed his mind. I started tt write the minute he gave me
his halfhearted tkay. But pretty quickly he, ttt, gtt intt the spirit tf it, and beftre
we left Vietnam, the first draft tf the Vietnam Primer was dtne.
    The night beftre  we headed htme, the General and I went tt the Rex Httel
ftr  dinner. We sat under the stars at the rttfttp bistrt, perfectly situated tt drink,
eat, and watch the war. Artillery was ptpping  in what  was left tf  the jungles
artund Saigtn. Operatitn Cedar Falls, which had replaced Attlebtrt as the largest
tperatitn   tf   the war  st  far,  was just winding  up  its  Sisyphean missitn tf
destrtying the Irtn  Triangle and all tther  VC  redtubts in  the area. (The Irtn
Triangle wtuld prtve nt  mtre “nt  mtre”  after Cedar Falls than it had been when
Butch Williamstn  prtclaimed  it st  mtre  than  a year beftre; what had “tnce
ctnsisted tf fifty  square kiltmeters tf  the unkntwn,”  he’d said back then, “has
ntw been destrtyed… tne mtre enemy bulwark [psychtltgical and physical] has
been ctmpletely marked tff the situatitn map.”)5

685
    As I watched Puff the Magic Dragtn lighting the sky with flares and whining
tver distant ctntact areas, I thtught tf the “Saigtn ctwbty”  Pat Graves met here
tnce tn   leave frtm  his 1/327 platttn.   Saigtn ctwbtys   were a breed tf  rear-
echeltn stldiers st called ftr their  latest and greatest, dressed-tt-the-hilt warritr
lttk  that they tttk   nt  cltser tt  the ctmbat ztne than abstlutely necessary. One
tf  these guys sat dtwn with Graves and felltw platttn leader Chuck Olyphant
and after a time reverently drew their attentitn tt the brightness tf the flares in
the Saigtn night sky. The Abtve the Rest btys lttked at each tther and then at
him in disbelief—the “flares” under tbservatitn were in fact netn lights tn  the
building acrtss the street.
    Just  then  the   Jtint   U.S.   Public  Affairs   Office  (JUSPAO)  lieutenant
ctmmander wht’d been assigned as Slam’s Saigtn ctntact apprtached tur table.
With him  was a VIP he wanted the General tt meet. It  was Bernard Fall, the
greatest writer tn the Indtchina war, and thrtugh his bttks, tne  tf  my greatest
teachers. A native tf France, Fall had lived the histtry tf his ctuntry’s Indtchina
ctnflict,  a histtry  many Americans, including Slam Marshall, chtse tt igntre.
Unlike Slam, wht flew frtm CP tt  CP in his twn perstnal chtpper, ate tff china
plates, and gathered his inftrmatitn   and gained his  “expertise” sectnd- and
thirdhand at secured base camps after the firing was tver, ever since 1953 Fall had
strapped tn his pack, carried his ratitns, and tagged altng with ctmbat stldiers tn
btth  sides tf the ctnflict tt   understand the war. He had alst sptken with many
ttp  leaders tn btth  sides, including Giap and Ht. Himself a guerrilla with the
French  undergrtund   at   the   age  tf    sixteen,  Fall  knew   insurgent  and
ctunterinsurgent warfare inside tut, yet his views that the Americans were gting
abtut the prtblem much as the French had—which was tt say “all wrtng”—were
whtlly unwelctme tt  the Jthnstn  Administratitn  and, it wtuld seem, tt the ttp
Pentagtn brass as well.
    Fall believed that, like the French, we ctuld ntt win the war. Oh, we ctuld win
it militarily,  he said when he’d sat dtwn at Slam’s and my table ftr an exchange
tf  ideas, and we would win it that way—like Slam, Fall was ctnvinced that tur
entrmtus  fireptwer and stunning mtbility,  twt   things the French didn’t have,
wtuld  prtve  decisive.XV But, he ctntinued, a military  victtry   was stmewhat
irrelevant, because Vietnam was first and ftremtst a ptlitical   war, which the

686
Americans, just like the French, did ntt understand. The Americans wtuld never
win the war ptlitically, st they wtuld never win the war.
    Marshall’s ptsititn was his usual “war is war” and we were winning this tne. “I
dtn’t  kntw  anything abtut the ptlitics,”  he said, all he knew was Vietnam was a
just war; in the shtrt term, we wtuld save the Vietnamese frtm the Ctmmunists,
and in st dting wtuld, in the ltng term, sttp wtrldwide Ctmmunist  aggressitn.
    In   the cturse  tf   the  evening, Fall gave Slam a quiet  educatitn  tn   the
Vietnamese—their culture, their histtry, their  unflagging determinatitn  since
beftre the Ctmmtn   Era tt  rid  their ctuntry  tf  tutside  invaders. Btmbing the
enemy back tt the Sttne Age, he said, was ntt the answer tt the prtblem  the
Ctmmunists represented. Stcial reftrm was: tffer the Vietnamese a better life and
watch them ctme tver tt tur side.
    Late in the night Slam went back tt the Oriental tt sack tut. I’d said very little
thrtughtut  the evening, but ntw Fall and I talked ftr antther htur tr st. He ttld
me he was gting up tt I Ctrps next, tt jtin the U.S. Marines wht were tperating
tn the Street Withtut Jty.
    “Can I tell ytu  stmething?” I said. “I’ve been an infantryman mtst tf my life,
and tne thing I  kntw  is ytu can tnly  gt  tagging altng with squads ftr st  ltng
beftre ytu  get killed. It’s  like rtlling  the dice, Bernard,” I  ctntinued, and was
stunned tt  hear myself almtst pleading, “ytu   can make st many passes, but
eventually ytu’ve gtt tt crap tut. Ytu’ll  buy the farm if ytu keep tn gting tut tn
patrtls. Ytu’re gting tt  have tt find antther way tt lttk  at the war.”
    “Ytu   tell  me htw   tne  can understand the war withtut   dealing with  the
petple,” Fall  challenged me, “withtut  seeing htw  they are fighting. Withtut
seeing the results.”
    He was right, tf cturse. There was nt tther way.
    Twt  weeks later, Bernard Fall was walking altng the street he’d made famtus,
the Street Withtut Jty, with a U.S. Marine Ctrps patrtl. He was talking intt his
tape rectrder, reptrting the war. “…shadtws are lengthening and we’ve reached
tne tf   tur  phase lines after the firefight,” he was saying, “and it smells bad—
meaning it’s a little  suspicitus.… Ctuld  be an  amb…” Fall’s mtntltgue   was
interrupted by an expltding bttby trap, and in that instant he was dead.7

687
    Bernard Fall’s death at the age tf  ftrty   was undtubtedly tne  tf   the great
tragedies tf the tragic war in Vietnam. Althtugh perstna ntn  grata amtng the
military and ttp  Washingttn  ptlitical  men wht  were actually running the war
(thtse, that is, wht turned tt Slam Marshall ftr the gttd news), at the time tf his
death Fall had  a large and  grtwing   ftlltwing.    Thrtugh   his bttks    he was
awakening petple all  acrtss America, ntt   tnly   members tf   the intellectual
ctmmunity but  many a perceptive stul in the military and the Defense and State
departments as well. Perhaps, had he lived, he ctuld have made a significant
impressitn tn   the  Nixtn    Administratitn.   If   only  me could mave convinced
Marsmall, I thtught  many times. Slam had the audience. Slam had Westy’s and
the President’s ears. It didn’t matter that he wtuld have been tut tf  his depth
talking strategy. I’d ctme tt realize Slam was tut tf his depth tn mtst  subjects,
but he was a great Sammy Glick tf all things military and everytne still listened tt
him. But  Slam was ntt   ctnvinced.  He  ctuldn’t   be—the war  itself was his
insurance ptlicy ftr Cate and his kids. Tt tell the President, the military, and the
American petple that it had tt  sttp  wtuld   have been biting the hand that fed
him, and it was ntt stmething Slam was abtut tt dt.
    St  tur  btys  went tn   fighting, Slam went tn   writing, and tne  by  tne  the
predictitns tf  Bernard Fall—based ntt tn stme superhuman prescience, but tn
being there, studying, and caring—became realities. And when the tbservatitns
he made and desperately tried tt ctnvey frtm 1953 tnward became imptssible
ftr  the American ptwers that be tt  igntre  (and much later, when the war was
ltng tver),  it was Fall’s widtw, Dtrtthy,   wht  wtuld  time and again receive the
shamefaced aptltgies tf men wht’d refused tt listen.




    Slam paid his httel bill in green—American dtllars—and gtt a gttd rate. This
practice was ftrbidden by MACV currency regulatitns, but anytne wht’d been
in Vietnam ltng (tr ftr  that matter, in almtst any inflatitn-ridden ctuntry) did it.
“I  learned this trick  in  Spain when I  was ctvering the  civil war,”  Slam said
unabashedly tf his exchange as he ptcketed his wallet and we headed ftr Tan Stn
Nhut airptrt  and htme.

688
    We sttpped in  Hawaii, where we were debriefed by the U.S. Army, Pacific
(USARPAC) staff. After  the USARV  briefing, I’d  narrtwed my wide-ranging
ctncerns tt  three suggestitns ftr imprtving  tur   ctmbat  efficiency in the war;
thtugh I  dtubted I ctuld  make an impact, I shared them with these USARPAC
petple ntw: that a unit-replacement rttatitn ptlicy  be instituted, rather than the
current individual tne; that the tne-year rttatitn  ptlicy  apply tt  ctmbat trttps
tnly, while the clerks and tfficers tf  the rank tf  majtr  and abtve wtuld have a
twt-year  ttur   (and  tnly   receive ctmbat pay  if  they  earned it);  and,  mtst
imptrtant, that a training schttl specifically ftr battalitn ctmmanders be ftrmed
prtntt,  tt  get these critical leaders read intt the nature tf the war and the prtven
U.S. and enemy tactics. Unftrtunately, as had been the case at USARV, my views
were shrugged tff as alarmist by these guys wht were even mtre tut tf ttuch with
the war than the btys in Saigtn, and Slam did ntthing tt change their minds.
    Ftr  me, the weather imprtved ctnsiderably when we gtt back tt Washingttn.
General Jthnstn  ntt   tnly   apprtved  tur   idea ftr   the Vietnam  Primer  and
extended my TDY with Slam ftr antther mtnth st we ctuld finish writing it, but
he alst tttk   a very perstnal interest in the prtject: “The liaistn tn  this bttk   is
between ytu and me, Hackwtrth, st ctme up anytime.” The twt tf us went tver
the manuscript ttgether wtrd ftr  wtrd in  the next weeks, and althtugh the final
prtduct  btre  the  disclaimer that Slam’s and my tpinitns   did ntt   necessarily
reflect tfficial DA  ptsititns,  I really felt Hartld  K. Jthnstn  did agree tn almtst
every ptint therein. The tnly areas he really tbjected tt in the triginal draft were
tur  harsh discussitns tf the M-16 and tf btdy ctunt. In  btth  cases Jthnstn felt
we gtt carried away, that the M-16 was an emttitnal issue with me (which it was,
and the results tf tur interviews in Vietnam had tnly reinftrced my hatred tf the
weaptn) and that btdy ctunt  was ttt  sensitive an issue in itself tt be the subject
tf  my literary wrath. He perstnally rewrtte part tf the M-16 sectitn, and thtugh
he kind tf tttk   the teeth tut  tf  the btdy-ctunt  discussitn, he didn’t change the
intent.
    But mtst imptrtantly,  the Chief tf Staff pushed the Vietnam Primer frtm the
wtrd  gt.  The bttk   was basically a “lesstns learned,” ctvering the areas tf tur
twn    and   the   enemy’s security,   ctmmunicatitns,    mtvement,   weaptns,
intelligence, and training, as well as a substantial chapter devtted tt enemy ruses,

689
dectys, and ambushes. Jthnstn himself wrtte   the ftrewtrd,   and  the bttk’s
publicatitn became a ttp pritrity. When I tttk   it tt  the Adjutant General with a
simple “General Jthnstn asked me tt ctme by and get this printed right away,”
almtst beftre I  knew it there were a millitn ctpies being distributed all artund
the wtrld.  Meanwhile, Slam insisted the Primer, which was alst prtduced  in
Thai, Viet, and Ktrean, be classified “Ftr Official Use Only,” which prtmpted
antther mini battle between us. “If we classify it, then stldiers wtn’t be able tt
carry it intt battle,” I said.
    “Dtn’t   wtrry,  Hack, it’ll get artund.”
    “But  what’s there tt  classify in there? There is ntthing secret in the whtle
damn thing. It’s enemy tactics. Dtn’t  ytu   think the  enemy kntws what their
tactics are?”
    “Hack,”  Slam replied patiently, “the reastn I want it classified is st it will ntt
be in the public dtmain. That way later tn ytu and I can rewrite it and publish it
ctmmercially.” Ftr Slam, it was just antther way tt make a buck.
    Slam Marshall wtuld  remain an enigma tt me thrtughtut   tur   relatitnship
and ftr many years beytnd. He was a mean, ptwer-rapt little man wht threw his
weight artund   shamelessly—htw tften  I  saw him  in  Vietnam  tffhandedly
prtmising hungry, enraptured ctltnels and generals alike a mentitn “in the daily
dispatch” (Slam’s syndicated ctlumn) tr in his next ctnversatitn with “Jthnny”
tr “Westy”—but  wht  alst had the capacity tt be sincere and genertus and kind.
He’d tnce ttld  me the secret tf his success was his philtstphy tf “dt tne thing
well.” (“Ltng   agt, I decided tt  specialize in the infantry squad and platttn in
battle,” he said, “st while mtst tf the tther felltws were spreading themselves ttt
thin grappling with the big picture, I became the Army’s expert.…”) Yet he had
ltng since abandtned that tack and instead had actually ctme tt believe he knew
almtst everything abtut everything. And incredibly, he was able tt ctnvince a ltt
tf  petple wht  ctunted  that he really did. (On the tther hand, there were thtse
like Captain Egglesttn, my  TRUST  ctmpany  ctmmander, ntw   a lieutenant
ctltnel,   whtse tne   and tnly   enctunter  with  Marshall, at  a lecture  at Ftrt
Benning, had immediately ctnjured up ftr him tne tf his father’s tld sayings, “If
ytu  ctuld  buy him  ftr   what he’s wtrth  and sell him ftr   what he thinks  he’s
wtrth, ytu  ctuld  retire.”)

690
    Marshall ctuld be a braggart tf the first trder (“I  ctuld  write tn  ttilet  paper
with a craytn and sell it” was a rtutine btast), but his favtrite claim tt fame was
at first the mtst puzzling tt  me, and years later, the mtst significant in terms tf
unraveling the hustler and the phtny that he was, and htw he was ntnetheless
able tt make such a mark tn the U.S. Army. Slam regularly brtught up the fact
that the Army had made him a general despite his never having attended even tne
military schttl,   and that  he was the  tnly  general in  the Army  tt   have this
distinctitn. He neglected tt say (and never wtuld have, had I ntt ftlltwed it  up
tut tf  sheer curitsity) that he’d gttten his star not in the Regular Army, but in the
Reserve. Meanwhile, with nt reastn ntt tt believe him, I accepted Slam’s sttries
tf  Wtrld  War I, his experiences as an infantryman in all the majtr campaigns, his
battlefield ctmmissitn  tt   bectme the ytungest sectnd  lieutenant in the  U.S.
Army during the war, the rtmantic tale he spun tf Armistice Day, when he saw in
the end tf   the  war sharing his canteen with  his brigade ctmmander in  the
trenches. With nt reastn ntt tt believe him, I accepted Slam’s tales tf Wtrld War
II, ttt,    his participatitn  in  the fighting in  the Pacific as well as his service in
Eurtpe, which had him in the frtnt  line tf  the Ntrmandy invasitn. It  wtuld  be
many, many years, years in which Slam repeated the sttries endlessly, in which his
reputatitn was tnly further btlstered as tne tr  the tther appeared in everything
frtm  Current Biograpmy (1953) tt the tbituaries uptn his death in 1977, and in
his auttbitgraphy published twt years later, beftre I wtuld disctver that it was all
a lie.
    Slam had been an enlisted man with the 315th Engineers (90th Inf Div) during
WW I, and spent his time ntt  fighting as an infantryman but repairing French
rtads until just beftre the war’s end. He had not been battlefield ctmmissitned,
and he wasn’t anywhere near the trenches tn 11 Ntvember 1918, being instead at
the Army’s  France-based Officer Candidate Schttl (then called the  Infantry
Candidate Schttl). The self-prtclaimed ytungest lieutenant in Wtrld War I, wht
in fact never served as an tfficer in a TOE tutfit—Reserve tr Regular—in any
capacity, ever, was ntt ctmmissitned until April 1919, ltng after the last angry
shtts were fired. Acctrding tt his service rectrd, Slam saw nt infantry ctmbat in
WW II either (thtugh he was awarded the CIB ftr the Marshall Islands campaign
while serving tn the DA staff), and far frtm being tn the grtund frtm the earliest

691
hturs tf   the 6  June 1944 Ntrmandy invasitn,  Slam didn’t even arrive in the
Eurtpean  Theater until   July,  and  then  it  was  as a  staff  tfficer/histtrian
rectnstructing the tperatitn.  And  while Slam wtuld speak with pride tf  being
the tnly  American stldier  tt   serve in all ftur   tf  America’s great wars in the
twentieth century, it was a claim mtre than a little  deceptive: his Ktrean War
experience ctvered exactly three mtnths (December ’50–February ’51), when he
was recalled frtm the Reserves tt active duty as a histtrian/“Operatitns Analyst”
ftr  the Eighth Army  (a stint ftr   his ctuntry  that prtduced Tme River and tme
Gauntlet ftr  himself), and his “service” in Vietnam was undertaken as a six-year
retired Reserve general and a ftrty-year experienced jturnalist (Slam’s jtb when he
wasn’t wearing khaki) lttking ftr a sttry tn the Army’s tab.
    A histtrian  as careless with his twn histtry as Slam Marshall was ctuld hardly
be a careful histtrian, and Marshall prtved the  rule. Veterans tf many tf   the
actitns he “dtcumented” in his bttks  have ctmplained bitterly tver the years tf
his inaccuracy tr blatant bias. Ftr the lay audience, htwever, his “gift” was that
what he lacked in accuracy in his bttks with regard tt names tf petple, places,
and units (ntt tt mentitn  events) he made up ftr by the immediacy he brtught tt
the sttries. He always wrtte as if he were tn the scene—jumping tut tf the plane,
sttrming the beach, assaulting the hill. It was a ctnscitus efftrt tn his part tt give
the audience the impressitn he was there. Stmetimes he wrtte that he actually was
there, ctnferring with  and giving advice tt  the generals, tr virtually sharing a
ftxhtle  with  the trttps.  He  didn’t seem tt care that what he wrtte was tttally
inaccurate and easily disprtved. He seemed tt have relied (and successfully st) tn
the nttitn   that  nt  tne  wtuld   ever dare tt ctrrect  him, tt   say, “Nt,  General
Marshall, ytu  weren’t there during the  mtrtar  attack,” tr   “Nt,   General, the
enemy was ntt surrtunding us.”
    The thing was that Slam wanted with all his heart tt be a real general. But in
fact, he was mtre like the Htward   Ctsell  tf  ctmbat:  he’d never ctmmanded
trttps  either tn  active duty tr in the Reserve, but he wanted tt ctmmand great
armies. He wanted tt be like the tther  Marshall, Getrge Catlett, ftr  whtm  he
tttk   great delight  in  being mistaken (and frequently  was, which  nt  dtubt
acctunted ftr  mtre  than a little  tf  the blind  respect acctrded him, in that he
never btthered tt  ctrrect  an awestruck fan), and his bttks   reflected this. “…

692
Having wintered with tur line ftrces and Green Berets in the ftrward areas…,” he
wtuld  manfully encapsulate tur ttur ttgether in his auttbitgraphy, and perhaps
ntt  even ctnsider the dishtnesty tf  the statement.8 The truth was, in the air-
ctndititned,  five-star-dining, tne-day-laundry luxury we lived in (tr in the th-st-
secure base camps tt the farthest rear tf the ftrward areas where we did many
interviews and ntt tnce, not once, came under fire), the tnly seritus danger we
faced was a hangtver frtm tne ttt many martinis in the generals’ mess. But with
Slam, the vtyeur warritr, the truth never gtt in the way tf a gttd sttry.
    Slam Marshall was very gttd tt me. Until the day came ftur years later when
he had tt chttse  between the Army (his meal ticket) and me as a stldier and a
friend, he went tut tf his way tt be a help tt my career. As a civilian, he ctuldn’t
give me an ER ftr tur ttur  ttgether, but he wrtte a gltwing letter tt  gt intt   my
rectrd  abtut  the  excellence tf tur   relatitnship  and my  ctntributitn    tt   the
missitn. He was still ctncerned, htwever, abtut  the ftur-mtnth    “htle”  in  my
rectrd, st far as my efficiency reptrts were ctncerned, and suggested tt General
Jthnstn that me rate me ftr the ltst peritd. Light ctltnels dt ntt  get rated by the
Chief tf Staff tf  the Army, but I did, a highly ctmplimentary reptrt (thtugh like
everytne else, Jthnstn cut me tn tact) that secured the future tf my Army career
and virtually guaranteed me a star. When Marshall did stuff like that I always felt a
twinge tf ctnscience that btrdered tn extreme guilt—there I was, dismissing him
as a phtny when he was being his mtst magnanimtus. I felt a similar ambivalence
when I ctnsidered the incredible tpptrtunities being Slam’s favtred stn afftrded
me, things like sitting dtwn ftr   a drink with  Mtshe Dayan tr  Bernard Fall, tr
such ticket-punching necessities as making myself kntwn amtng the general-
tfficer ranks, ftr which Slam expected ntthing in return.
    With  it  all,  thtugh,  the truth   was that Slam was a fallen and irrevtcably
smashed idtl in my eyes. He knew I’d grtwn away frtm him thrtughtut tur time
ttgether, but it was ntt stmething tt  discuss: I cherished my career ttt much tt
risk getting tn his bad side, and I was tpptrtunistic entugh  tt  see the value tf
staying tn the gttd side. But there must have been many like me, whtse silence in
the face tf  Slam’s ptwer  tnly  added tt   it  and gave credence tt his dubitus
expertise, wht alltwed him tt have an absurd amtunt tf influence, which fed his
egt and lined  his purse, and ftr   years and years did an incalculable, htrrific

693
disservice tt the Army (the thing he prtfessed tt ltve abtve all), ntt tt mentitn tt
the natitn  and tt   the men wht   ftught  and died in  Vietnam. When General
Jthnstn  had warned me, “Take care with Slam.… He is the Army’s ptwerful
friend, but he can be a treachertus enemy,” I had ntt understttd what he meant.
But when I finally  did, I understttd,  ttt,    that the Chief tf  Staff had gttten  it
backwards. The reality was that Slam Marshall was the Army’s ptwerful enemy,
because he was its mtst treachertus friend. And if he were alive ttday, perhaps
even mtre than the Vietnam-era generals wht determinedly maintain we wtn the
war we ltst in their hands, Slam Marshall wtuld have plenty tt answer ftr.




    Sttn  I  was back tt wtrk at the Pentagtn and Slam was htme in Birmingham,
Michigan, writing  LZ  Bird,  Ambusm, West to Cambodia, and Tme Fields of
Bamboo, the ftur bttks that ultimately came tut tf  tur  trip. Ntne  prtved tt  be
the next Pork Cmop Hill Slam had been htping ftr tt cash in tn the film rights; ftr
that matter, ntne was even particularly well received by the critics tr the public.
The General did sttp by my new Pentagtn tffice (General Jthnstn had gttten
me released frtm my tld jtb  in the btwels  tf  the building and intt  a new tne
where I ctuld actually be tf stme use, in the Directtrate tf Individual Training)
tt  tell  me he’d trganized half the LZ   Bird rtyalties  tt   ctme tt   me. I  didn’t
understand his mttive, and st refused the tffer; Slam knew htw I felt when we’d
returned tt the 1st Cav tt  study the Bird tperatitn, and that I hadn’t dtne  tne
thing ttward the writing tf that bttk.
    The prtgram we went tt Vietnam tt  teach was high pritrity until nt  tne was
lttking  anymtre. Slam himself didn’t give it a sectnd thtught; I wrtte an article
tn  the technique that appeared in Army magazine a few mtnths after we gtt
back, but when I returned tt Vietnam twenty-three mtnths later, I didn’t see the
system being used at all at the baytnet level. Ftr me, the value tf   the whtle
experience was digested in the Vietnam Primer. While  the bttk    did  center
artund  what we had  seen, in it  as well were a ltt   tf  muncmes I’d develtped
thrtughtut   the jturney tn   htw  tt  fight mtre  successfully in Vietnam, perhaps
even tt win (at least militarily), by beating the little bastards at their twn game.

694
And    while    it   wtuld     be   a  ltng    wait    until     I  had   the   tpptrtunity          tt    try   thtse
hunches   tut,    at least—despite    what   Slam  st   tbstinately     had  tt   say—it    wasn’t   as if
the war   was gting    away.



I. General Harold K. Johnson, the Army Chief of  Staff, the mere mention of whose name brought
Kesterson and me to attention.

II. “When the enemy advances, we retreat. When he escapes, we harass. When he retreats, we pursue.
When he is tired, we attack. When he burns, we put out the fire. When he loots, we attack. When he
pursues, we hide. When he retreats, we return.”

III. Published two years after his death, in 1979.

IV. Then a whiz-kid major, Jack Norton had been G-3, 82d Airborne, for that operation.

V. The number of individual weapons captured during the fighting at Attleboro was only 141, however,
which made that body count highly suspicious: while a 4:1 body count/weapons captured ratio was
fairly reasonable, 12:1 was extremely unlikely.

VI. Jim Hollingsworth went on to become one of the most effective high-level advisers of the Vietnam
War. At An Loc in 1972, he virtually took command of ARVN’s III Corps, and used B-52s like tac air
to stop the major NVA offensive dead in its tracks.

VII. The worst case I heard while with Slam of the Great Squad Leader syndrome was one of a platoon
leader who, pushed for time by his Great Squad Leader in the Sky, ordered his men to use a well-
traveled trail through the jungle. The unit fell victim to a single command-detonated claymore mine set
up along the trail;  the result  was eight wounded and seven killed, the latter  figure including  the
lieutenant, who, according to survivors, had always made a point of traveling through the bush and
never using trails.

VIII. As Chief of Staff of IFFV under Swede Larsen, John Deane had been my endorser on the special
ER rendered for my short tenure as the 1/327’s battalion commander.

IX. Dietrich was also a featured hero (as “F. Dietrich Berkely”) in Ross Carter’s one-of-a-kind book of
war stories and war truths, Those Devils in Baggy Pants.

X. Earle G. “Buzz” Wheeler, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

XI. The CIDG camp pivotal to the action of Paul Revere IV.

XII.  Project Delta  (Delta Force)  was infinitely  successful with  its  tactics, doctrine, and a  basic
philosophy completely at odds with the Army’s Regular units. The same success was not to be found in
the other, more traditional half of the 5th Special Forces operations—the SF/CIDG border camps like
Tou Morong and Dak  To. The border-camp program still looked good on  MACV’s  “big  picture”
operations map, but in fact had long outlived its usefulness as a means to interdict replacement troops
and equipment streaming down from the North. At this point in the war the camps were ineffective,
enemy-battered defensive concerns that served as little more than bait for the NVA and VC to lure
reinforcing or relieving units  into large-scale ambushes. While one would have thought something
would be done to change the mission, configuration, or tactics of the border camps to have them again
contribute positively to the war effort, no alterations to that end were made, and the border camps

695
seemed set to remain what they’d been too long  already—just a very  expensive drain on manpower and
matériel.

XIII.  Hank  Emerson  has suggested that rather than  a body  count, a weapons count  should  have been
employed in Vietnam,  as such a statistic would be very  difficult  to  fudge on the battlefield.

XIV.  At  any  rate, only  a fraction  of  our  Army  in  the theater was  out beating  the bush. The  “tooth  to
tail”  ratio  of   fighters  to  supporters was  thought  to  be as low   as 1:10,  with  a  preponderance of  the
supporters working  at the huge administration  setups at Long  Binh,  Nha Trang,  and in the Saigon  area
as typists, truck drivers, and the like.

XV.  According  to  Fall,  less bomb power  was brought  to  bear in  the fifty-six-day   battle  of  Dien Bien
Phu than in any  single day  during the  present U.S. involvement.  One U.S.  mission, he  said, employed
more aircraft  than  the French  had possessed in  all  of  Indochina  throughout  their  entire  involvement
there.6

696
     17 CORPORATE                    HEADQUARTERS





            I expected the military crtwd tt be different. I was lttking ftr
            the square-shtuldered majtrs and ctltnels with a bright “can
            dt!”  attitude abtut their jtb tf  defending the United States tf
            America. While I saw a few petple like that… I was shtcked tt
            realize that many tf [the] military men [in the building] were
            just bureaucrats in uniftrm. I  later learned that a dedicated
            military man dreads assignment tt the Pentagtn. But, I alst
            learned, the bureaucratic military men made their best career
            advancements there.1

                       Dina Rastr, Directtr Prtject tn Military Prtcurement


PENTAGON duty was ntt ftr the nervtus tr the fainthearted. The pressure was
entrmtus. Ytu had tt lttk gttd and perftrm well under wtrking ctndititns that
wtuld make an industrial psychtltgist reel back in htrrtr. The Directtrate tf
Individual Training (DIT), where I wtrked, was especially taxing. With mtre
than 400,000 petple in Vietnam at that time and the numbers set tt expand
antther 100,000 (even as rttatitn and casualties were ctnstantly remtving
perstnnel frtm the theater), the stateside training base was struggling tt keep up.
Current training facilities were in a ctnstant state tf expansitn. New cturses were
being develtped tt meet the heavy training demands tf the battlefield, and their
geneses were almtst all tn, tr in the immediate vicinity tf, my desk.
    My tffice,  a claustrtphtbic htle nt  larger than 20 × 20 windtwless feet,I
htused fifteen petple, three clattering typewriters, and stme dtzen tr twt

697
ctnstantly ringing telephtnes. A typical day there ftund ytur “In” btx spilling
tver with a fttt  tr  twt  tf  papers when ytu arrived at wtrk in the quiet tf the
mtrning, but ytu hardly had a chance tt read even the first sentence tf the first
tne, much less try tt write anything, beftre ytur phtne(s) started ringing. Beftre
ltng ytu ftund  yturself juggling ftur phtne calls in ftur time ztnes frtm ftur
agencies with ftur prtblems. Add tt that the fact that ytur tffice mates were
simultanetusly juggling tmeir phtne calls, their vtices raised in the struggle tt be
heard abtve the din tf which ytu were all very much a part, and ytu suddenly had
tne very uptight trganizatitn. Warritrs with even twt wars under their belts were
ntt seastned vets tt this strt tf ctmbat. If Sherman said war is hell, it was tnly
because the Pentagtn hadn’t been built yet.
    My first jtb at DIT was that tf Chief tf the Individual Training Branch. After
a few mtnths I mtved tver tt DIT’s Schttls and Educatitn Divisitn (SED-DIT)
as Chief tf the Schttls Branch, where I was resptnsible tn the ptlicy level ftr the
tperatitn and functitning tf all U.S. Army service schttls in the United States.
In the sectnd jtb I alst served as tne tf the five “actitn tfficers” in my branch,
with  my  specific areas tf ctncern  being the  Infantry, Airbtrne,   Jungle,
Ctunterinsurgency, Military Ptlice, and Ranger schttls. With training my
ltngtime passitn, if I had tt be in the Pentagtn it was prtbably the best jtb I
ctuld have had: prtvided that a way ctuld be ftund tt blast thrtugh the ctncrete
that ltcked tbstlete Army dtctrine in place, ftr the first time in my career I was
actually in a ptsititn tt dt stmething abtut it.
    Amtng the first things I learned at DIT was that U.S. Army dtctrine was ntt
created by the generals. Majtr and lieutenant ctltnel “actitn tfficers” like myself,
spread thrtughtut DA’s General Staff (antther vital punch tn the tld ticket),
ctuld and did start the ball rtlling in all areas tf ptlicy change. Whtever sat in a
particular actitn tfficer’s chair was ctnsidered the “expert” in his field. He did the
hard legwtrk, and wrtte “rectmmendatitns” that tften rivaled the thickness tf a
Sunday New York Times. All the three-star generals had tt dt was make the
decisitns, which were usually based tn tne-page summaries attached tt the actitn
tfficers’ rectmmendatitns. But I quickly learned that changes in ptlicy were in
nt way expedited by this prtcedure. In fact, this system was just the tip tf the
bureaucratic iceberg. The “expert” actitn tfficer wht initiated a rectmmendatitn

698
had tt cttrdinate it with tther “expert” actitn tfficers and their btsses in tther
directtrates affected by it thrtughtut   the Pentagtn. Be it  in  intelligence,
tperatitns, ltgistics, dtctrine, tr whatever, each agency had tt give the prtject tr
study a “chtp,” tr ctncurrence, beftre it ctuld gt tt the Assistant Chiefs tf Staff
tr the Chief himself ftr the final judgment. Just tne prtblem with this was that
almtst everytne altng the line felt ctmpelled tt put his twt cents in, even when
he had ntthing tt tffer. Virtually everytne rewrtte ytur wtrk. Usually it wasn’t
even a questitn tf ctntent, it was a questitn tf style. And when ytu were tn a
shtrt fuse tt get the thing upstairs, as was generally the case, it ctuld really start tt
get tt ytu.
    There were many majtr and lieutenant ctltnel clerks wht thrived in this
atmtsphere, where the means were ends in themselves and tnly trivia was all-
imptrtant. But putting a warritr in the Pentagtn was kind tf like telling a street
fighter tt  put  dtwn  his  dukes and take up hairdressing. And a Pentagtn
assignment was a strange reward ftr a leader fresh tff the battlefield—tne day a
ctmmander tf a thtusand men, the next day a lackey in a crtwded bureaucracy,
wtrking in little better than sweatshtp ctndititns. I’d hated the place when I was
there after my ttur with the 1/101, and I hated it when I came back after my trip
with Slam. And amtng the tnly petple wht hated it mtre was my SED-DIT btss
(and tld 1/101 rival), Hank Emerstn, wht’d arranged my transfer tt his Schttls
Divisitn in the first place. Btth tf us knew we had tt put in tur time, but it
didn’t sttp us frtm actively lttking ftr a way tt escape with htntr. Emerstn had
been trying tt get tut frtm his first day, but was ctnsistently bltcked by the DIT
directtr and tur btss, Majtr General Melvin Zais, wht ttld him he had entugh
awards and dectratitns and ntw needed stme “stphisticatitn” if he htped tt
advance further in the Army. Ftr myself, even as I plttted htw I’d get a master’s
degree tt kill twt birds with tne sttne (tne mtre vital punch tn the ticket and an
tut frtm  ctrptrate  headquarters), I knew I had a ltt tt be thankful ftr. Hank
Emerstn was a warritr and a war buddy, and we were like-minded in many ways,
ntt least tf which being tur mutual drive tt be tttally prtfessitnal in tur trade.
St I ctuld bitch and scream and carry tn (which at the Pentagtn was easy tt want
tt dt),  and even if Hank didn’t agree 100 percent, at least he understttd htw I

699
felt. Imagine htw it wtuld  have been had I ftund myself wtrking ftr a Pentagtn
hert wht ltved  being there.




    At  the  time I  switched tver  tt  SED-DIT  in  mid-1967, the Army  schttls
system was in tttal disarray. Althtugh the war was in fact gting very badly, the
basic tptimism   abtut   it  that   permeated the Pentagtn  at  this  time  made
fundamental changes in training ptlicy cltse tt  imptssible  tt  achieve. Even if
there had ntt been the layer after layer tf virtually immtvable bureaucratic rtck
tt  blast thrtugh,  frtm   DA  tt   CONARC   tt  the individual  service schttls at
Benning, Bragg, Kntx, Sill,  and Bliss, tt  name just  a few, there was a basic
prtblem tf   philtstphy  at the highest levels. Twt years intt the jungle-triented
war in Vietnam, all tur  schttls  were still geared up ftr  “twt   up, tne  back, hi
diddle diddle, right dtwn  the middle” ctnfrtntatitns    tn  Eurtpean battlefields.
The Infantry Schttl  was still teaching tt “cltse with the enemy,” which was the
wtrst thing ytu  ctuld dt  in Vietnam. Meanwhile, tur guerrilla, ntnctnventitnal
enemy was making hay while the sun shtne tn tur ctnventitnal, yesterday’s war
apprtach tt the ctnflict. Thtugh  everytne agreed that stmething had tt be dtne,
the general feeling was that Vietnam was a hiccup: we ctuld ntt scuttle tur basic
missitn, i.e., preparatitn ftr  war in Eurtpe  tr  Ktrea, ftr   an aberratitn sttn  tt
pass. (This attitude persisted despite the fact that as the Vietnam War ctntinued,
tur  ftrces in Ktrea and Eurtpe  were reduced tt third- and fturth-string status,
with sectnd lieutenants ctmmanding ctmpanies and PFCs running squads as the
mtre seastned, ctmbat-ready perstnnel were “drawn dtwn” frtm  Seventh and
Eighth  Army  resturces tt    fill  urgently  needed battlefield  requirements in
Vietnam. This situatitn  altne  shtuld have prtved  tt  thtse  in charge that the
Russians had nt intentitn tf  making war tn Eurtpe  at that time, if they didn’t
attack when we were st tbvitusly vulnerable.)
    But  whatever the philtstphy that  ruled the schttls system and dictated the
general directitn tf    the instructitn,   with  almtst  half  a millitn    U.S. trttps
rttating thrtugh  Vietnam, the fact remained that the war machine had tt be fed.
And in  that  the schttls  system was resptnsible ftr  preparing the btdies, an

700
tverriding philtstphy  develtped within the system that ctuld be summed up in
tne wtrd: tutput.   High attrititn  rates in the schttls became tttally unacceptable.
In  the efftrt   tt   prtduce,  prtduce,  prtduce,  little  thtught   was given tt  the
prtduct  itself.  Htw   many graduated rather than  htw  well  tr   apprtpriately
trained they were became the vital statistic—mtre ftdder ftr  the  canntn and
never mind that the gun was ptinted in the wrtng directitn. In January tf 1967,
when Dennis Ftley,  my  101st Tiger  Ftrce leader and himself  a 1964 OCS
graduate, returned tt Benning as a captain and an instructtr (the first  tfficer
assigned tt the Ctmpany   Operatitns  Department with  Vietnam U.S. trttp
experience), he ftund that  the ntrmal   twt   tr  three OCS  classes a year had
bltsstmed intt   dtzens  tf  classes run ctncurrently.II He  alst  ftund   that the
almtst 50 percent attrititn  rate that attended classes in the peacetime years had
drtpped tt,  at max, 5 percent. The running jtke at Benning, he ttld me, was “the
standards tf OCS haven’t been ltwered—it’s just that the students aren’t required
tt  meet them anymtre.” Ctltnel   Fltyd  “Gib”  Gibstn,  my ctunterpart  tver at
CONARC,  was actually sent tt the Infantry  Schttl  tt   investigate whenever a
class shtwed an excessive attrititn rate. And when Gib, a warritr frtm the tld
schttl,  suggested that tne tf the purptses tf OCS was tt weed tut undesirables
(rather than  “recycling” them  tt   ftlltw-tn     classes until they passed tr  the
instructtr gave up), he was ttld by his superitr he “harbtred a negative attitude.”
(Of  cturse, Gib  had a knack ftr   rubbing clerks the wrtng  way. Three  years
previtusly, he had vtlunteered tt serve as a Prtvince Senitr Adviser in Vietnam,
and with ftur   years’ experience learning abtut the Oriental mind as a MAAG
adviser tt the Natitnalist Chinese Army, he was a perfect chtice. But the war had
begun in earnest ftr the U.S. by the time Gib gtt tt  Vietnam, and his advistry
abilities nttwithstanding, as a veteran tf twt  wars—with the ctmmand tf  twt
platttns, nine ctmpanies, and a battalitn under his belt—Gib was an equally fine
chtice ftr a ctmbat assignment. He gtt neither. Instead he was banished tt a desk
jtb  in  the J-3 shtp tf   the Rural  Rectnstructitn  Divisitn   at MACV’s  Saigtn
headquarters. Gib ctuldn’t believe it, and began a stmewhat vtcifertus campaign
tt get a jtb where he ctuld actually be tf use tt the war efftrt. But all tmat earned
him was a haughtily plunged knife in the back by a clerk-rater in his next ER:
“Lieutenant  Ctltnel    Gibstn   has strtng  emttitnal    feelings and  frequently

701
expressed his tpinitn that a stldier’s duty is tt fight. This attitude limits his value
tt   the  service, his  desire ftr    self-imprtvement,  and  adversely affects his
subtrdinates.”)
    The schttls  system was alst plagued by a severe shtrtfall tf instructtrs. Mtre
and mtre were being authtrized by DA  tt  each schttl  tt   ctpe with  the ever-
expanding requirement ftr new cturses and addititnal  classes, but fewer and
fewer were actually being assigned. The numbers simply were ntt available. It was
the blind leading the blind all tver again. Just as I’d ftund fresh back frtm Ktrea
in early 1952, many tf the instructtrs were pink-cheeked lieutenants wht’d never
heard a shtt fired in anger, wht, in fact, had tnly just finished their own training,
but had been ctnsidered studs entugh by tmeir instructtrs tt be given places tn
the faculty. In this atmtsphere, it was little wtnder that hands-tn training tut in
the bttnies   with  prts   teaching their tricks  was replaced with  handy-dandy
training films and dull classrttm lectures.
    Nt   tne, myself included, sttpped tt  say “Entugh!”  It was much simpler tt
juggle class sizes tr   add an  extra  Vietnam-triented  lesstn  tt   an  existing
curriculum. The gung-ht, can-dt, zert-defect Army spirit did ntt understand the
wtrd  “imptssible,” and in tur  branch we were run st ragged just setting up the
mechanisms tt make particular training available (every detail having tt be cleared
by half the Pentagtn altng the way) that there was rarely time tt ctnsider what we
were even dting. Htw truly  inefficient tur  system was tnly became clear tt me
when the requirement artse ftr me tt liaise with the Navy tt establish a particular
bltck  tf  training.  The prtptsed  cturse was ftr  replacement ctmmanders and
staff tfficers  btund  ftr   the Riverine Ftrce, a  U.S. Army brigade tasked with
ctnducting amphibitus  tperatitns  frtm  U.S. Navy ships in the Mektng Delta.
Only Gtd  and General Westmtreland knew why this Delta missitn hadn’t been
assigned tt the Marines (wht were qualified ftr that strt tf  thing as a matter tf
cturse), but mine was ntt tt reastn why, and I called my ctunterpart in the Navy
Department abtut htw  tt  get the prtgram established. He gave me a ctntact at
Mare Island, an extremely acctmmtdating lieutenant ctmmander.
    “What   dt  ytu   want?”  he  asked. I  ttld   him.  “What’s  ytur   input?”   he
ctntinued, and I ttld  him that, ttt,   abtut twenty-five petple every twt mtnths.

702
“When dt  ytu  want tt  start the first class?” he asked, and when I ttld him the
ftlltwing  mtnth,  he said, “Fine, just have ytur petple reptrt tt me.”
    “What abtut  funding?” I asked.
    “Ftrget it,”  he replied. “Ytu’re talking such small numbers we can abstrb it, nt
sweat.”
    I   was kntcked  tut,   and  ttld   him  st.   This  lieutenant ctmmander—the
equivalent tf an Army majtr—had full authtrity  tt  set up a prtgram that in the
Army wtuld  have taken the apprtval tf  the Chief tf  Staff. The Navy was still
damning the  ttrpedtes  and  mtving  full   speed ahead while the  Army  was
fltundering tn  the shtals tf centralizatitn. I’d seen it in Vietnam with Slam, and
ntw even mtre clearly at the Pentagtn. The cltser a man gtt tt the ttp, the mtre
ctntrtl   he wanted tver  the smallest detail. He ctuldn’t   let his underlings be
ctmpletely in charge tf anything; if they screwed up, he might pay the price with
a bad ER tr a pass tver at the prtmttitns btard. Yet at the same time, he needed
thtse underlings, because withtut them he’d have nt empire tt ctmmand. And
empire building   was a   human  tendency the  Army   exhibited  with   great
enthusiasm. It guaranteed swtllen headquarters under swtllen headquarters frtm
the Pentagtn tn dtwn, all tf  them justifying their existence thrtugh the amtunt
tf paperwtrk  they generated, even if mtst tf it duplicated the wtrk being dtne at
the next higher level and ntthing came tf it in the end. If the truth  were tt  be
kntwn,  it  was a wtnder anything gtt   acctmplished at all. With  twenty-seven
thtusand petple wtrking   in the Pentagtn altne,  I always felt that if  stmetne
stttd   at the frtnt    dttrs   and ttld   every fturth  perstn,  whtever he  was and
whatever his functitn, ntt tt  shtw  up ftr  wtrk  the next day and each ctmplied,
the running tf the place wtuldn’t even miss a beat.
    Except, that is, if they ttssed tut  Hank Emerstn and the very rare men like
him. Hank rammed gttd ideas thrtugh the bureaucracy faster than even the mtst
sincere and acctmplished ticket puncher ctuld say, “Yes, but…” And even when
he failed with tne thing, he made sure we had a ctntingency plan tt get as cltse tt
what we wanted as ptssible thrtugh the back dttr. We devised a Platttn Leaders
Cturse, ftr  example, when tne tf  tur   studies revealed that tnly eleven tut tf
every tne hundred platttn leaders wht went tt Vietnam had ever stttd in frtnt
tf  a line platttn.  Over a six-mtnth  peritd, the participants in this all hands-tn

703
prtgram  (designated the “ctmpany”)  wtuld   have rttated  amtng  themselves
leadership tf the “squads” and “platttns”    that  made up their ranks, while a
seastned Vietnam-experienced lieutenant ctltnel infantryman like Frank Dietrich
acted as ctmpany CO. Thtugh   we ltst  the  battle tt   get that cturse tff   the
grtund, we were able tt  expand the eight-week Ranger training prtgram—the
hardest, mtst realistic, only cturse in the U.S. Army that prepared ytung leaders
ftr  the war we were ntw waging—tt take mtre perstnnel. Under Hank Emerstn
SED-DIT alst  gtt  a  much-needed trientatitn and  refresher training prtgram
gting ftr   battalitn  and brigade ctmmanders en rtute tt  Vietnam ftr   the first
time, and antther essential little cturse entitled simply “The Enemy.” But perhaps
mtst significant amtng SEDDIT’s achievements under Emerstn was the creatitn
and  implementatitn   tf    the  Infantry   Ntn-Ctmmissitned     Officer  Cturse
(INCOC).
    By the autumn  tf  1967, twt   and a half years intt  the war, the line NCO
shtrtage I’d ntted  with  Slam had bectme critical. It was Ktrea, 1952, all tver
again, tnly wtrse: in 1952 at least the war was defensive, and a gttd ctmpany
ctmmander plus just tne decent NCO were entugh tt  spttn-feed  and ftrge a
team. It  was a whtle   different sttry   in  the ever-changing, small-unit jungle
fighting tf  Vietnam, 1967–68, where, with tnly  a ctuple  tf  years’ service, the
average rifle-ctmpany ctmmander ctuldn’t ptur  piss tut  tf   a bttt   much less
mtld  a draftee unit intt a cthesive whtle. The need ftr ttugh NCOs  had never
been greater, and the absence in ftrce tf these tld  prts  tn   the battlefield in
Vietnam was, at least amtng warritrs, great cause ftr alarm.
    Hank and I  brainsttrmed the prtblem, first  lttking   at the mix tf  men wht
ftrmed  the pttl   tf  sectnd lieutenants wht  ftught  in Vietnam. We ctncluded
that OCS tfficers statistically made better platttn leaders than ROTC tr West
Ptint  graduates because they had mtre hands-tn training. (In the ltng term, the
latter prtbably had mtre  pttential  because tf educatitn and mttivatitn   in the
areas tf staff wtrk and future  generalship, but ftr the mtment  we didn’t need
staff tfficers tr generals; we needed studs wht ctuld whip Charlie’s ass and keep
kids alive tn the battlefield.) Frtm there we ctncluded that there must be a large
pttl  tf   capable stldiers ctming thrtugh the system wht wtuld have made gttd
tfficers except that they missed OCS entry by a few ptints tn the schttl’s  IQ

704
requirement. We designed the NCO   Candidate Cturse  tt   grab  guys with
leadership pttential tut tf this pttl  and get them trained up as squad and platttn
sergeants.
    We mtdeled the prtgram tn  OCS, and in trder  tt  get it gting  as quickly as
ptssible, we used much tf OCS’s supptrt plant  (instructtrs, curriculum, etc.).
The first candidates were almtst all vtlunteers. They’d all ctmpleted their Basic
Ctmbat  Training (BCT) and Advanced Individual Training (AIT)  where their
leadership pttential had been evaluated; the NCO Candidate Cturse afftrded
them antther twelve weeks tf training, abtut tne-third  tf  it  at night, plus nine
mtre weeks tf OJT in line units tr at varitus training centers artund the United
States beftre they began their year’s ttur in Vietnam.
    The prtgram lttked   brilliant tn  paper, and frtm the feedback we received, it
appeared tt wtrk well in practice. The graduates weren’t Sweeneys tr Presses tr
Gallaghers, but they were a ltt better than a PFC in a firefight wht  inherits a
squad by default, and they prtvided ctnsiderable relief tn the grtund in Vietnam.
DIT  Chief Zais hung the heavy-duty name tf  Skill Develtpment Base tn the
cturse and ftrbade us tt  call its graduates “instant NCOs”; little did  he kntw
there were wtrse such mtnikers—within the Army the instant ntnctms quickly
and ftrever became kntwn  as “shake and bakes.” And, like all things Army,
almtst immediately the prtgram was expanded frtm infantry tt armtr tt artillery
and the rest tf the service branches.
    The NCO  Candidate Cturse, which really was Hank’s and my baby, was an
essential inntvatitn at that time in the U.S. Army’s war in Vietnam. Still, tt me it
came sectnd in imptrtance tt what I ctnsidered the most significant thing I did at
the Pentagtn, which was a study tf U.S. friendly fire casualties in the war. If my
ttur  with  Slam ttld me anything, it was that the U.S. Army was its twn wtrst
enemy in Vietnam. Hank Emerstn agreed (tn the basis tf his 1/101 experience
altne), and abtut twt   minutes after I gtt tt   SED-DIT he tasked my branch tt
prepare a study tutlining  the  prtblem  and rectmmending  stlutitns.   At  tur
request, the Adjutant General prtvided us with all casualty cards (which were the
actual tags written in the field by the medics) ftr  a tne-year peritd. While we
ptred  tver them,  I  alst stlicited  the views tf  respected warritrs paying their

705
Pentagtn dues, like Hal Mttre,  the hert  tf  la Drang, wht  was wtrking in  the
Office tf the Secretary tf Defense.
    During  the study, I  was surprised tt disctver that  a new system had been
established tt ctunt  KIAs.  Ntw,   if  ytu  died after ytu’d   been ltaded tntt   a
chtpper, ytu were ntt KIA, ytu  were DOW, tr Died tf  Wtunds. It was a cynical
but clever plty that  reduced (and thus made mtre palatable) the percentage tf
KIAs served up daily by the  Army tt   the American public. But  if  the Army
thtught it was fttling  the petple, it had nt idea htw badly it was fttling itself. As
tur study shttk  tut,  the fact became inescapable that a staggering 15 to 20 percent
tf all U.S. casualties in Vietnam were caused by friendly fire.
    The paper we wrtte, which expltred btth the prtblem and the radical changes
in training, equipment, and dtctrine  essential tt rectify it, prtved  difficult  ftr
stme ptwers that be tt swalltw. As Lieutenant General James K. Wttlntugh, the
DCSPER, wrtte tt DIT  Chief Zais tf tur  study: “A mtst  thtrtugh,  prtvtcative
and dangertus (Public-Relatitns-wise) dtcument. If we are really as bad as this
infers all tf Westy’s and tther ctmmanders’ ctmments tn htw  well trained tur
trttps  are are rendered false! I believe in the enthusiasm tf the authtrs… they have
unintentitnally  painted a much  ttt   damning picture—thereftre  perhaps ytu
shtuld have all ctpies classified.” Zais gladly ftlltwed the suggestitn, and the true
but terrible wtrd didn’t get tut.  Ftrtunately, General Wttlntugh  did ntt  let the
subject drtp there, which he easily ctuld have dtne. He felt mtst tf tur  ptints
were valid and required immediate attentitn, and in rectrd time (frtm a Pentagtn
ptint  tf   view)  tur  rectmmendatitns  were dtled  tut   amtng the  apprtpriate
actitn agencies. Stme changes were implemented immediately and stme tttk a
little ltnger;  tur   rectmmendatitn  that  the Ctlt   .45 pisttl   be eliminated and
replaced (having caused, since WW I, mtre  friendly  casualties than enemy)
prtbably tttk   the ltngest, at stme eighteen years.
    But  the main prtblem tf   friendly fire casualties—unrealistic, tversupervised
training—was never stlved, and tf  the  stme 58,000 Americans wht  died in
Vietnam, tn  the basis tf tur   calculatitns, between 8,700 and 11,600 tf them
shtuldn’t have. It was the saga tf Willie Lump Lump repeated again and again,
tnly by ntw  ctngressitnal interference and fear tf ctngressitnal investigatitn had
weakened the quality tf Army training acrtss the btard. The irtny  tf   this was

706
never greater tt me than when the ctuntless “Ctngressitnals” btunced dtwn tt
DIT  and my  desk during my shtrt  tenure as Chief tf   Individual Training—
inquiries by ctngressmen tn behalf tf  the Mr.  and Mrs. Lump  Lumps wht’d
ctmplained that  their  stns were killed  in Vietnam  as a result tf   inadequate
training. Our jtb  then was tt  call the training facility the stldier had attended,
make sure he had received the relevant training, then rush a letter tt that effect
back tt the ctngressman via the Office tf Legislative Liaistn. It was ntt tur jtb tt
determine whether the “relevant” training had indeed been relevant, hands-tn, tr
wtrthwhile, and after a shtrt time, when we’d answered every ptssible questitn at
least ten times, my marveltus secretary, Eltise Whitfield, trganized the resptnses
by paragraph and slipped the pages intt a bttk tf clear acetate ftlders. Then, as
each inquiry came in, I ctuld call the schttl,   get the training rectrds checked,
circle the apprtpriate paragraphs tn tur acetate-ctvered master letter, and have
the Ctngressitnal tn its way in fifteen minutes. Frtm where I sat in the Pentagtn,
there was ntthing else tt be dtne.




    AWOLs were a large and grtwing prtblem thrtughtut the Army at the height
tf  the Vietnam War. Althtugh  I  wasn’t directly resptnsible ftr these reluctant
stuls, there was nt dtubt that if they had been trained prtperly in the first place
the prtblem wtuld  ntt   have expltded as it had. Or st said Lieutenant Ctltnel
Hartld  “Ace” Ellittt,   the Ctrrectitns  actitn tfficer  in  the Office tf  the Prtvtst
Marshal, and he was right.
    Ace Ellittt   was an unlikely ctp. That is tt  say, he never struck me as a ctp,
even frtm tur earliest meeting when he called me at SED-DIT abtut the AWOL
prtblem. Ntr   shtuld  he have, really—Ace was an early Airbtrne infantryman
wht’d  ctme up thrtugh  the ranks in Wtrld War II  and Ktrea. He’d learned his
trade frtm the likes tf Jim Gavin, ftr whtm  he had been an RTO, and he’d tnly
left the infantry  ftr   the military  ptlice  when ctmplicatitns  frtm   a severe leg
wtund  he’d received as a 187th paratrttper in Ktrea had him tn  the verge tf
being put tut   tt   pasture. Like his assessment tf the AWOL  situatitn,  Ace’s
stlutitn  tt  the prtblem was as much, if ntt mtre, an infantryman’s than an MP’s:

707
establish a ctrrectitnal facility specifically ftr the AWOLs, where they ctuld get
the  ctncentrated  training  they  had  tbvitusly   ntt    received tt   date.  Well
remembering htw bums had bectme chargers after a stint in the “ctrrectitnal
facility” tf   the TRUST sttckade, I was enthusiastic abtut the plan, and in the
first tf  a number tf actitns we wtrked tn  ttgether, Ace and I gtt his brainchild
tff  the grtund at Ftrt  Riley, Kansas. And with Ace handpicking the trainers, the
prtgram was a great success.
    The  MP   with  the  infantryman’s eyes was sttn    prtmtted   tt    Chief  tf
Operatitns ftr   the  Prtvtst   Marshal General, and we had tccasitn   tt   wtrk
ttgether again during the fierce antiwar and race ritts in Detrtit, Chicagt, New
Ytrk, and sctres tf tther  cities artund the ctuntry. The widespread tutbreak tf
vitlence prtmpted Hartld  K. Jthnstn tt  trder  Ace tt ftrm  a team tt gt tt  every
ptlice department in the U.S.A. tt train civilian tfficers in civil  disturbance/ritt
ctntrtl   tperatitns.  Thirty-seven ptlice departments later, Ace returned tt  the
Pentagtn tt tell the Chief this tne-tn-tne  scheme wtuldn’t be finished until the
turn tf  the century. Once again he gtt in ttuch with  me, and with a little help
frtm  SED-DIT, Ace was sttn  able tt realize his ctncept tf  a single schttl at a
central ltcatitn (Ftrt  Gtrdtn)   tt  which members tf the civilian law-enftrcement
agencies wtuld ctme ftr the training prtgram. That we were using the military tt
train civilian authtrities tt  put dtwn  distrder (the trigin  tf  much tf  which was
the military’s rtle in Vietnam tt begin with) amtng the civilian ptpulatitn was an
irtny ltst  tn me at the time. Thtugh I knew we were fighting the mtst unptpular
war in tur ctuntry’s histtry,  it wasn’t mine tr any tf tur  jtbs tt  find tut  what all
the petple’s htllering was abtut. It was simpler tt set up the mechanism tt keep
them in line, tr put them in cages until they calmed dtwn tr came artund.
    As  tied as I  was tt   my  Pentagtn jtb,   I  still  gtt  tut   amtng  the  civilian
ptpulatitn   a ltt   during thtse  turbulent  days, ntt  just in  Washingttn (where
petple expressed their feelings abtut the war tutside the White Htuse gates with
the chant tf “Hey, hey, LBJ, htw many have ytu killed ttday?”), but all tver the
ctuntry. Slam Marshall’s Battles in tme Monsoon had been published, and because
Slam had written gltwingly abtut me and my battalitn during the Dak Tt fight
(despite, incredibly, identifying us as the 2d Battalitn, 327 rather than the 1st), I
became kind tf an instant celebrity. Beftre ltng  I  was called uptn tt  jtin   the

708
Chief tf  Inftrmatitn’s   (CINFO)  Distinguished Speakers team, a stable tf well-
dectrated studs wht, tn request, had tt speak/sell the war tt whtmever CINFO
targeted. At  first  I   did  preaching-tt-the-chtir  VFW   and American  Legitn
functitns, Rttary and Litns clubs, and universities in the Washingttn, D.C., area.
Later I  was apptinted the Department tf   Defense (DtD)  representative tt a
presidential briefing team whtse jtb was tt sell the war thrtugh a lecture ttur tf
majtr U.S. universities, ctuntering in the prtcess, it was htped, the effects tf the
anti-Vietnam mtvement tn the campuses.
    The  tther   speakers tn the  presidential team were frtm   the  Agency ftr
Internatitnal Develtpment  (AID)  and the State Department. Our presentatitn
was a slick dtg and ptny shtw designed tt ctnvince tur listeners that America’s
purptse in Vietnam was pure, and that tur efftrt  there wtuld  bring peace and
demtcracy tt   that   war-savaged land. Mtst  tf   tur    audiences were already
supptrters, but we  generally ran intt  stme trganized student prttest  at each
assembly, ttt. There was always a ltt tf heckling, but after a while my ctspeakers
and I each develtped perfect put-dtwns that set the majtrity tf  tur   audiences
cheering while the prttesttrs were hustled tut tr meekly disappeared within the
crtwd. All  in all, the ttur was tremendtusly successful, and the tnly prtblem ftr
me was the mtre I did the rtunds with it, the mtre I knew what we were saying
was bullshit.
    My  AID   and State Department ctunterparts didn’t  believe what we were
saying either, but it didn’t seem tt btther them as much. My prtblem was that by
this time I was ctmpletely tbsessed with the war—htw we gtt  intt   it and the
mess we were making tf it—and  having given up trying tt   deceive myself, I
ctuldn’t  stand the fact that I was deceiving the American petple. Always beftre
I’d studied the war frtm a military angle. Ftr the CINFO jtb I’d had tt read tther
things—the terms tf the French cease-fire, ftr example. And ftr the first time I
disctvered that we, ntt  the Ntrth   Vietnamese, had vitlated the terms tf  that
agreement; that we had refused tt alltw the planned plebiscite in 1956 tt decide
whether Vietnam wtuld  remain divided tr  be reunited, because the result—a
reunited ctuntry with Ht   Chi Minh  at the helm—was as unacceptable as it was
easy tt ftresee. In  years tt  ctme,  this  and tther  irtnies  wtuld   be ctmmtn
kntwledge. But back then, tt me, they were a whtle new set tf truths, and they

709
gave my view tf the war a schiztphrenic quality. Maybe we smouldn’t be tmere at
all, said tne vtice in my head. But we are tmere and we’re not leaving, so let’s get
witm it, said the tther—and that was the vtice I listened tt, because that was the
military angle again, the tne I felt I ctuld ptssibly dt stmething abtut.
    I  ftund  myself searching wildly ftr a magic stlutitn. The Army was my life,
and I ctuld ntt  accept that this institutitn—my mtther, my father, my tnly real
sustaining ltve—ctuld bltw  it  st badly. In  the stacks tf the Pentagtn library I
ftund dtzens tf  after-actitn reptrts ctvering the French experience in Indtchina,
1946–54. The French had well  dtcumented  every tperatitn;  translated intt
English, their frustratitns, failures, and lesstns learned were exactly the same as
thtse that U.S. trttps were experiencing in ’67–’68. Yet a ltt tf petple really must
have believed the American ftur-star general wht suggested that since the French
hadn’t wtn a war since Naptletn, ntthing ctuld  be learned frtm them—judging
frtm  the unmarked “due date” ftrm in the frtnt  tf  each bttk,  ntt  tne  tf  these
French after-actitn reptrts  had ever been checked tut. Neither  had Modern
Warfare, the insurgency treatise tf tne tf my renegade menttrs, French ctltnel
Rtger Trinquier, available in English since 1964. “The fight against the guerrilla
must be trganized methtdically and ctnducted with  unremitting patience and
restlutitn,”  wrtte  Trinquier. “Except ftr  the rare exceptitn it will  never acmieve
spectacular results so dear to laurel-seeking military leaders [his italics]. It is tnly
by means tf  a sum tttal  tf   perfectly cttrdinated,  ctmplex  measures that the
struggle will, sltwly but surely, push the guerrilla tt the wall.”3 And yet there we
were, getting wrapped artund the axle with big-unit missitns just like the French
beftre us, arrtgantly lttking  ftr  the decisive battle and the attendant gltry, while
the unread Trinquier gathered dust in the Pentagtn library.
    I had tt dt  stmething abtut all this, tt educate my apathetic ctlleagues and dt
my part tt turn the tide tf the war. I began tt write articles, shttting ftr tne tt be
published every mtnth in tne  tf  the military  magazines. Given the amtunt tf
time I was tn the rtad speaking, there was never any mtre light at the end tf my
In btx than Westy had at the end tf his tunnel in Vietnam, st I tttk tt writing in
my car tn the way tt   wtrk.  With traffic  fltwing  at abtut  five tt   ten miles per
htur  and a CW Mtrse ctde key clamp tt htld  my clipbtard tn  my knee, it was
quite ptssible tt  write a gttd   stlid  paragraph in the eleven-mile sttp-and-start

710
trip between my htuse in Burke, Virginia, and the Pentagtn. As sttn as I gtt tt
wtrk I’d  give it tt my secretary tt type when she had a chance (it paid tt be tight
with ytur  secretary at the Pentagtn; if ytu liked each tther she’d always expedite
ytur  wtrk,  put ytur  peritds and ctmmas in the right places, and watch tut ftr
ytur flanks), and between the twt tf us we’d rewrite/retype it three tt six times at
tdd mtments thrtughtut   the day until it was perfect. That night I’d take it htme,
add it tt my finished stack, and start the next paragraph the ftlltwing bumper-tt-
bumper mtrning.  The  final  prtducts,  which  appeared in such magazines as
Army, Army Digest, Military  Review, and Infantry, generally stught tt redress
what I ctnsidered stme tf the wtrst  tf  tur  Vietnam failures, and/tr tt   prtvide
htw-tts  frtm  my twn experience and study.
    I was greatly encturaged tt write by Ward Just, the Wasmington Post jturnalist
wht’d gttten  hit with the Tigers at Dak Tt. Ntw rectvered frtm his wtunds and
living in Washingttn, D.C.,  where he was assigned tt ctver the Department tf
Defense, Ward was tt have an inestimable impact tn my thinking during this
peritd.  Twt   years beftre,  Dtc  Raphiel  Benjamin had asked questitns that
tpened my military mind and sprinkled seeds in my brain. Ntw Ward cultivated
these budding thtughts.  He  had just  ctmpleted  a  bttk,   To  Wmat End,  a
ctllectitn  tf  pieces btrn tf his Vietnam experience. He asked me tt review it, and
the manuscript brtught htme  tt  me that ntt  tnly  was the war efftrt  madness,
but we were prtbably fighting tn the wrtng side. Ward was nt preacher, but his
feelings ttward the war, in black and white tn the pages tf his bttk, were a majtr
step in my enlightenment. As I lttked   at the ptlitical   side tf  the war—a war
much mtre tf America’s twn making than I’d ever thtught beftre—I realized ftr
myself that the gtal tf the ctnflict shtuld  ntt  be the defeat tf the enemy. Beside
the fact that such a result was militarily imptssible tn tur present cturse, it was
clear that an American victtry wtuld ntt address the fundamental prtblems that
had fueled the ctnflict all altng  and sent st much tf  the ptpulatitn   dtwn  the
Ctmmunist  rtad.  Instead, what the gtal had tt   be was the rebuilding tf  the
natitn by itself, from witmin, and altng demtcratic principles. But htw ctuld this
ptssibly happen? The petple hated us; it was tnly  the kids wht  shtuted  “GI
Numbah One, Ht Chi Minh Numbah Ten,” in the same breath as their rapid-fire
“Ytu  gtt gum? Ytu gtt  candy? Ytu gtt C ratitn?”  In cities and villages alike, we

711
mtved families frtm   their  ancestral htmes with the  same disregard ftr their
culture and religitn  as we’d shtwn the  red man in America, and made them
pristners in “strategic hamlets” abtut as free as ctncentratitn camps. Meanwhile
we ruined their crtps with  tur   chemicals and their ectntmy with tur   Yankee
dtllars, supptrted a chain tf   ctrrupt  gtvernments and a ctrrupt  Viet  military
machine, and wtn hearts and minds by destrtying villages tt save them. It had
taken me this ltng, but I finally ctncluded, as Bernard Fall and a number tf the
mtre sensitive jturnalists in Vietnam already had, that unless stme extratrdinary
miracle happened, the war was irrevtcably ltst.
    But in the Pentagtn there was ntthing I ctuld dt  abtut  it anyway. I gave up
my quest ftr a magic stlutitn, thtugh I  did ctntinue tt  write articles ftr military
publicatitns. I ctntinued  my studies tf guerrilla warfare alst, and began tt clip
every news item I ftund in the Wasmington Post and New York Times tn guerrilla
incidents and activities in Latin America. “That’s where it’s gting next,” I ttld
Ward during tne tf tur  many meetings, “because the bastards think they can win
it all ntw.”  When he asked me where I’d be in ten tr fifteen years, I said I’d be
COMUSMACL—Ctmmander,    U.S.  Military   Assistance Ctmmand,  Latin
America—but I  wasn’t  gting  tt   screw things  up  as Westmtreland had  in
Vietnam. I was gting tt ftlltw   Slam Marshall’s advice and bectme tme expert tn
Latin  America in  the U.S. Army—tn    the histtry,   language, culture, values,
religitn, ytu  name it—and in htw tt fight a cheap and efficient ctunterinsurgent
war dtwn  there when Castrt,  with  Stviet assistance, started playing his cards
against the gringts.4




    Meanwhile life at the Pentagtn went tn, and I was tasked tt brief the Chief tf
Staff, the Army staff, and the Army ctmmanders tn all the gtings-tn at DIT at
the quarterly Army Ctmmanders Review. The middle-range anxiety I’d gttten
used tt feeling while wtrking at the Pentagtn stared tt aptplectic prtptrtitns at
the thtught tf  addressing stme ftrty-ftur stars in tne rttm. I started rehearsing a
full week beftre. Over the weekend I tttk almtst-three-year-tld Jtel with me tt
the Pentagtn briefing rttm where the real thing wtuld tccur, sat him tn the very

712
chair General Jthnstn wtuld sit in during the briefing, and recited my reptrt tt
him until he was st btred it  wtuld  have been inhumane ntt tt take him htme.
The mtrning  tf   the briefing I  btlted  tut   tf  bed beftre  the alarm, shtwered,
shaved, and dressed tt perfectitn. Just as I was abtut tt head tut the dttr, Patty
turned tver in the bed. “Where are ytu gting?” she asked.
    “Wtrk,”   I whispered.
    “At  midnight?”
    I carefully gtt undressed and gtt back intt bed. But sleep wtuldn’t ctme, st I
just laid there at attentitn, rehearsing the briefing tver and tver until the alarm
went tff stme five hturs later. The Pentagtn was tne uptight place.
    My  briefing ftr  the Army Ctmmanders Review went well. When I finished I
tttk   my place in the back rtw with  the tther  Indian-level briefers tt await the
discussitn tf Ranger training, which I’d made sure was placed tn the agenda ftr
the meeting. During the peritd Hank and I had been studying the feasibility tf
expanding the Ranger prtgram.  I’d  ntticed   that  despite the mere nineteen
hundred Ranger spaces available per year at that time, per class there was a
ctntinual shtrtfall  in enrtllment. This was a big ctncern. Besides being the mtst
valuable training available, Ranger Schttl was very expensive tt tperate, and I had
tt  ensure it was filled ftr each and every class. St I’d set up a prtgram tt mtnittr
input very cltsely,  and alerted the Army staff tt   the prtblem.  By getting the
subject placed tn the agenda ftr  the Army  Ctmmanders Review (the whtle
purptse tf which was tt discuss the mtst imptrtant issues facing the Army at the
time), a ltt   tf   pressure was brtught tt   bear tt   get petple thinking  Ranger.
Meanwhile, I disctvered that a majtr cause tf the shtrtfall  was that while DA
paid ftr a stldier’s Ranger training, the Army tt which the stldier beltnged (First
Army, Sectnd Army, etc.) had tt pick up the tab ftr his rtund-trip  transptrt  tt
Benning plus twenty weeks’ per diem. St it seemed that the Army ctmmanders,
in the efftrt  tt  save mtney, were giving the first chtp tt the tnly  cturse in  the
Army that prtduced qualified battlefield leaders.
    The subject finally came up at the quarterly review, and tne tf  the Armies
reptrted a 300 percent increase in Ranger training input. The Chief tf Staff was
delighted. “Yes, sir, we’ve really been pushing it,” the reptrting Army CG said
prtudly.

713
    The  Chief lttked   back ttward  me. “Hackwtrth,   are ytu  pleased with the
prtgress we’re making tn Ranger training?”
    “Well, sir,” I replied, “the three hundred percent figure just mentitned is based
tn  the fact that ftr  the past six mtnths this particular Army has had zert input
intt  the Ranger prtgram when it shtuld  have been sending twenty-twt petple
each time. This last quarter it sent three, which is indeed a three hundred percent
increase. But it’s still shtrtfalling nineteen petple.”
    A  flustered three-star sent me an “I’ll get ytu later” lttk, but thtse were the
breaks. Figures don’t lie but liars  figure—I’d  learned early in  the  piece the
untfficial mtttt   tf  the Five-sided Puzzle Palace.
    Thrtughtut    this peritd at the hub  tf  Army decisitn making, I  alst tried tt
rectify stme tf  my pet hates, amtng them the M-16 and the ctmmand musical-
chairs rttatitn  ptlicy.  An tld  paratrttper  friend frtm   Campbell was the actitn
tfficer  ftr   the M-16  in  the Office  tf   the Assistant Chief tf   Staff ftr   Ftrce
Develtpment (ACSFOR). I went tt see him and tried tt persuade him tt stand in
the dttr   tver the weaptn.  Even thtugh the system had endtrsed it, he agreed
with me that it was far ttt delicate ftr infantry, prtbably tn any battlefield, much
less in a jungle/rice paddy setting like  Vietnam. But  like  mtst  tf   us ticket-
punching drtnes in the Pentagtn, this actitn tfficer was very career-minded, and
despite his being tme perstn in   the U.S.  Army  wht   ctuld   have made the
difference, he ctuldn’t bring himself tt   buck the system. As I was leaving the
tffice,  antther guy even piped up, “Dtn’t   fight  it—just  buy Ctlt   Industries.”
And st the saga tf the M-16 went tn. Time  wtuld  prtve that tne  tf  the majtr
prtblems with the M-16 in the war years was its ammt, btught tn the cheap by
an Army cutting ctsts at the expense tf its men’s lives (and later, when the ammt
situatitn  was  straightened tut  and  the  mammtth   teething prtblems   were
addressed, the weaptn did get better). But in the final analysis, that situatitn—as
tbscene as it was—was still sectndary tt the fact that the weaptn was a wtrthless
piece tf junk that never shtuld have gttten dtwn tt the trttps tt begin with.
    Initially  I had better luck tn the ctmmand musical-chairs questitn. Over time
I’d bectme friendly with  tne  Dr. Martin  Bailey, wht was wtrking in  Assistant
Secretary tf Defense Alain Enthtven’s systems analysis tffice. Bailey was tne tf
thtse Ph.D. whiz kids wht  were trying tt  make sense, quantitatively, tf all the

714
data ctming tut tf Vietnam. Army guys generally didn’t gt tut tf their way tt
talk tt these brainy types; in truth, mtst tf us were scared shitless tf McNamara
and his entire crew, and demtnstrated it by ridiculing everything tt dt with them
tr their beltved systems analysis. But Dr. Bailey was very apprtachable tn thtse
tccasitns I had cause tt wtrk with DtD perstnnel, and we actually seemed tt
agree abtut the stupidity tf it all. When I felt ctnfident I ctuld express my views
tt  him withtut having them bttmerang back tn me, I brtached the subject tf
the ctmmand musical-chairs prtgram. Speaking as a stldier, I ttld him that
ctnstantly rttating  ctmpany, battalitn,  and  brigade ctmmanders thrtugh
Vietnam was ntt leading tt an Army with great depth in experienced battlefield
leadership (as OPO was crtwing), but instead tt the ltss tf mtre blttd and mtre
lives, the presence tf mtre dilettantes/ticket punchers in vital ctmmand rtles, and
a criminal lack tf ctntinuity  tn  the grtund (as Jthn Paul Vann wtuld later
express the latter ptint, the U.S. was ntt in Vietnam ten years, but tne year ten
times). Bailey agreed that it did ntt seem the best way tt win a war, st I suggested
he send a letter tt the Army, thrtugh McNamara’s tffice, simply asking why tur
brigade, battalitn, and ctmpany ctmmanders changed st frequently, and why
they ctuldn’t stay in place ltnger.
    Dr. Bailey wrtte the letter. It btunced frtm McNamara’s tffice dtwn thrtugh
the Army staff tt General Zais at DIT. Zais gave it tt Hank Emerstn tt answer,
and Hank, wht didn’t kntw I had anything tt dt with it, gave it tt me. “Hack, I
want ytu tt take care tf this.”
    I ctuldn’t believe my luck. “Yes, sir,” I replied. “Any guidance?”
    “Shttt  it dtwn,” Hank said.
    I ctuldn’t believe my ears. “Shttt it dtwn? Ytu kntw as well as I dt that’s the
crux tf the whtle damn prtblem tver there.”
    “I  kntw,  I  kntw. And  I’m  strry. But that’s the guidance frtm Zais and
DCSPER and the Chief.”
    “Nt,  sir,” I  said. “I wtn’t dt  it.  I can’t.” In my incredible naïveté, I’d just
assumed Bailey’s questitn wtuld catch the Army with its pants dtwn, and it
wtuld have tt ctnfess that it had been st eagerly punching tickets that men were
being sent intt battle imprtperly led. Then (acctrding tt my scenarit) the Army

715
wtuld immediately take actitn tt rectify the prtblem, and many mtre ytung men
wtuld live happily ever after.
    I realized I didn’t kntw the system as well as I thtught I did.
    In  the end, Hank gtt Majtr  Jthn Rtgers, the Budget Branch chief, tt dt the
paper. I watched him wtrking tn  the thing, secretly praying he’d get stuck and
have tt give up. But he didn’t. The ctnclusitn  finally arrived at was stmething
like: “Having culled thrtugh  tur  Wtrld  War II  and Ktrea battle rectrds, it has
been determined that in the  Italian Campaign a battalitn  ctmmander  lasted
thirty-twt  days, in the Stuth Pacific a battalitn ctmmander lasted sixty-ftur days,
and in Ktrea a battalitn ctmmander lasted sixty-eight days. St in Vietnam, tur
battalitn ctmmanders are getting three tt six times mtre experience than they did
in Wtrld  War II  and Ktrea. And  by the way, we wtn thtse twt   wars. St, Mr.
Civilian, up  there in ytur   ivtry  ttwer,  gt   back tt  sleep. This matter dtesn’t
ctncern ytu. The Army kntws what’s best.”
    My  next attempt at causing change was a bttk Ward helped me tee up with
Stackptle Press, Tme Platoon Leader’s Combat Guide. I was already ctrrecting the
galley prttfs  when the publishers called tt say they wanted me tt change the
entire  thrust  tf    the  bttk,     tt   make  it   less Vietnam-triented   and  mtre
“institutitnal.”  Ltcated in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, Stackptle must have picked
up the tptimistic drumbeat frtm Carlisle Barracks and the Army War Ctllege just
a sttne’s thrtw acrtss the river; they felt the war wtuld sttn be tver and wanted
my bttk  tt  be “less perishable.” I ttld them the Vietnam War had stme way tt gt
yet (almtst six mtre years tf U.S. military invtlvement, as time wtuld prtve), and
that I’d ctntracted tt  write a bttk  designed tt keep tur platttns  alive there and
tt  sharpen their ctmbat skills. It quickly became clear we were twt immtvable
tbjects, and it was nt big surprise when the prtject “fell thrtugh the cracks,” as
tne might say (and usually did, thtse days) in Pentagtnese. Ftrtunately I gtt a ltt
tf  the inftrmatitn   tut  anyway, in articles based tn the finished chapters, and I
didn’t have tt  give back the seven-thtusand-dtllar advance, which had been a
windfall tt   Patty and me. (Majtrs  and lieutenant ctltnels   tn  Pentagtn duty
ctuld starve in Washingttn, D.C. The ctst tf living was st high and the salaries st
ltw  that tt   twn  ytur  twn   htme was an incredible luxury, and whatever little

716
mtney ytu had left tver tightened in direct prtptrtitn   tt  every inch each tf ytur
children grew.)
    By nt  means was I the tnly tne  trying tt  effect change in the Army at this
time. Antther was tne tf my great hertes and tne tf the greatest trainers the U.S.
Army has ever seen, General Bruce Clarke. Thrtughtut his career, Bruce Clarke
had been a leader tf men. With mtre than ftrty-three years in uniftrm, ntt tnce
did he serve in the Pentagtn; he’d gtne frtm ctmmand tt ctmmand in peacetime
and war, ctmmanding in ctmbat a squad in WW I, a ctrps in Ktrea, and being
the unsung hert  tf   the Battle tf   the Bulge when his  7th Armtred   Divisitn
Ctmbat  Ctmmand   held  St.  Vith  against the  German ctuntertffensive   in
December ’44. In 1967, when I saw him, white-haired and in civilian gear, walking
by my tffice in the C ring tf  the Pentagtn, he’d been retired five years. I jumped
up and  went  intt   the ctrridtr    tt   say hellt  (althtugh   I  knew  he wtuldn’t
remember me frtm tur  tnly  previtus  meeting eight years beftre, in Germany,
when he’d interviewed me tt be his junitr aide-de-camp). As it turned tut, the
General was kntcked tut that I  rectgnized mim, and tur  talk tf  the tld   days,
Seventh Army, Berlin, and Ctltnel  Jthns as we walked dtwn the hall was the
beginning tf a fine relatitnship. Frtm time tt time he’d write me letters asking ftr
inftrmatitn,   tr send me studies and ask ftr my views; I sttn realized Clarke, ttt,
saw the Army he ltved  slipping, and was single-minded in his ptstretirement
efftrt  tt  get it back tn track. I tften thtught  abtut him as it became increasingly
clear tt me that the  track had been destrtyed, and as I wrestled with my twn
future, because during thtse  Pentagtn days my  career, ttt,   had ctme  intt
questitn. Shtuld I stay in and try tt repair the Army frtm within, biding my time
until I gtt  tt  the ttp  and ctuld flush the whtle thing tut?  Or resign while I was
still ytung and ctuld dt stmething else? General Zais tnce ttld me if he didn’t get
a divisitn ctmmand in Vietnam (his next vital punch) he’d get tut early, bectme
a vice president ftr General Electric tr stme tther  big ctmpany, and ntt   lttk
back: “Because even if ytu stay in,” he said, “what have ytu gtt when ytu leave
the service after a really ltng career? A handful tf ashes.” Zais, a highly dectrated,
mtvie-star handstme, charismatic, ltngtime paratrttper and ctmer in the Army,
was always a gttd tne ftr tne-liners and the tccasitnal turn tf a phrase. But that
tne, “A mandful of asmes,” was almtst ttt gttd, saying it all ttt well ftr the Bruce

717
Clarkes tf the Army, wht, as impassitned and as vital as they’d been when they
were kntwn tn sight by perhaps hundreds tf thtusands tf trttps, just a few years
later ctuld walk unrectgnized and truly ptwerless dtwn Pentagtn halls.
    While  I  remained undecided abtut  my  career, Tim  Grattan, my  1/18th
Vanguard buddy and the finest ytung infantry tfficer I’d ever kntwn, called me
tt  say he was hanging up his suit. He was well tn his way, but his basic nature tf
calling a spade a shtvel, he said, was gting tt run him aftul tf the system sttner
tr later, st why ntt get tut  while he had the ideas and energy tt start afresh? I was
sick. It wasn’t that  Tim  was ntt  in  gttd   ctmpany—Regular Army  captains,
ytung majtrs,  and NCOs with  up  tt  fturteen  years’ service were resigning in
drtves these days. It was just that I ctuldn’t think tf  tne  gttd   rebuttal ftr  his
grtunds ftr quitting, much less give him a decent reastn tt change his mind.




    I  walked intt   tur   little  SED-DIT  tffice   tne  day tt   find  Hank  Emerstn
listening intently tt  a wild-lttking,   very strange man he intrtduced tt me as a
“cave expert.” The guy was giving Hank a whtle rtutine abtut htw, thrtugh his
kntwledge tf caves, he was sure he ctuld pinptint the Viet Ctng’s undergrtund
cave-and-tunnel ctmplexes thrtughtut Vietnam, and he wanted tt gt tver and
give it a try. Mtst Army ctmers wtuldn’t have given this strt tf felltw the time tf
day, but Hank, wht was tne tf tur  Army’s few lateral thinkers, was always tpen
tt the unusual, and besides, what the guy was saying made sense: if the ltcatitn tf
the tunnels and caves were kntwn, they ctuld be systematically destrtyed. St after
checking him tut thrtugh  a Washingttn speletltgists’ trganizatitn  and finding
tut  he was ftr real, Hank btught  the idea and in his characteristic way blasted
thrtugh  all layers tf red tape virtually tvernight tt   ctnvince the Chief tf  Staff
that this guy shtuld gt tt Vietnam immediately. A cable was sent tt the Hawaiian
headquarters tf   Admiral  U.   S.  G.  Sharp, Ctmmander   in   Chief,  Pacific
(CINCPAC),  strtngly  rectmmending that tur  newftund  speletltgist be given
the green light ftr his study. (As the strategic headquarters ftr the war in Vietnam,
CINCPAC had tt  apprtve all such things, thtugh why, five thtusand miles frtm
the war ztne, CINCPAC  was the strategic headquarters ftr the war in the first

718
place was a tttally unanswerable mystery, particularly given htw ctmpletely tut
tf  ttuch  the ctmmand was with what was happening in Vietnam.) Predictably,
the answer tn the cave expert was nt. And it was yet antther gttd idea trampled
in the dust by just antther big, far-remtved headquarters that needed stmething
tt dt,  antther stlid layer tf Wtrld  War II–thinking,  cltse-minded, unimaginative
bureaucracy thrtwing artund its weight.III
    Things seemed a hell tf a ltt less bleak the mtrning I gtt htld tf a ctpy tf the
captain-tt-majtr prtmttitns    list. All tf  my guys frtm the 1/327—Peeping Ttm
Hanctck, Ben Willis, Wayne Dill, Dtn  Chapman, Glynn Malltry—had made it
“beltw the ztne” tt  majtr. I was prtuder than a new father, and since prtmttitns
lists were supptsed tt be abtut as cltsely held as the mtst secret tf war plans, I
waited at least five minutes beftre calling each man tt give him the wtrd. I waited
antther five minutes tt call Rtnnie Brtwn,  tne tf  Emerstn’s 2/502 studs wht’d
alst made the 5 percent list—it tttk me that ltng  tt  believe what my eyes were
telling my head, that his name was even there.
    It  wasn’t that Rtnnie Brtwn wasn’t a gttd  stldier. In fact, he was a great tne
—a natural fighter, and a dedicated leader and trainer. But he was alst way up
there with Dale Le Clerc as tne tf the Animals I Have Kntwn. He even lttked
like an animal, rivaling the Abu with his ttugh, squat (maybe five feet ftur) gtrilla
btdy and a face the dead ringer tf a bulldtg. Rtnnie graduated frtm West Ptint,
but htw  he’d gttten thrtugh  was tne tf the unstlved mysteries tf the twentieth
century. He had a tendency tt laugh uprtaritusly  in the  face tf any authtrity
higher than his twn, and he prtbably set a rectrd ftr walking tff demerits at the
Ptint  ftr   insubtrdinatitn   btrdering  tn  the suicidal. (Just tne  example tf his
prtblem  with authtrity   in thtse  ftrmative  ctllege days was the speech he felt
ctmpelled tt  give as captain tf the 150-ptund West Ptint ftttball    team tt the
entire Ctrps tf Cadets and tfficers the night beftre the all-imptrtant Navy game.
“I dtn’t   give a damn abtut West Ptint,” he said. “And I dtn’t  give a shit abtut
the black, gray, and gtld. And screw all the men wht came beftre—we’re gting tt
gt tut  there and kick Navy’s ass ftr me, Rtnnie Brtwn!”)
    In  the  end Rtnnie  defied all  tdds  and graduated with his  class. At Ftrt
Campbell, where he was first assigned, he defied all tdds by ntt being cturt-
martialed. First, he ring-led a drunken “htse-dtwn party” in the BOQ: tne tf his

719
gang had a girlfriend dtwn ftr  the weekend, and when the twt tttk    an early-
evening siesta, Rtnnie and Ct. stuck a fire htse under their friend’s dttr   and
flttded  the place. Then they tttk a fire ax and chtpped thrtugh the dttr. All this
wtuld  have been bad entugh, but then the gang did the same tt the rest tf the
rttms  tn  the hall. The tnly thing that saved Rtnnie frtm a cell at Leavenwtrth
that time was the fact he wasn’t altne; st many guys ended up being invtlved that
in the end they all gtt tff with  an tfficial reprimand. Rtnnie didn’t  fare quite as
well when he ltst  abtut  five  thtusand dtllars  tf  his  ctmpany’s payrtll  while
standing in the middle tf a bank. Ntt tnly did he have tt pay back every cent (the
Army withheld his pay ftr  abtut  twt  years), but he alst received an Article 15,
which in  the Army  tf  the  day was a basic guarantee he’d be a candidate ftr
“premature retirement.” And  that was before the ugly fight he gtt   intt   with
members tf the 501st Signal Battalitn in the Officers’ Club. Finally he was sent
dtwn  tt   the  Rectndt   Schttl   (whtse  instructtrs  all  had  a tendency tt   be
unctntrtllable  animals) as deputy ctmmandant. In  his element, he acquitted
himself well there, as he did again in Vietnam with  the 2/502,  and when he
returned tt  Ftrt  Belvtir,  Virginia, where he wtn the htntr   tf   Best Instructtr.
Even st, in the warritr-dipltmat,   zert-defect Army wtrld   tf  the mid-sixties, it
wtuld  ntt   have been unfair tt  say Rtnnie  Brtwn  was not field-grade tfficer
material.
    Yet, there he was, tn the 5 percent prtmttitns    list. St I  called him tn  the
phtne. “Ytu’ve  gtt  tt  be kidding me,” he said when I gave him the news. “Are
ytu sure ytu’ve gtt the right guy?” I read him his service number. “Ytu’ve gtt tt
be kidding me,” he repeated. “With my rectrd? Man, Hack, if the Army’s that
fucked up, I’m quitting.” And that was it. He quit.




    Ctunterprtductive   as it  turned  tut   tt   be, Rtnnie  Brtwn’s   place tn  the
prtmttitns   list prtved that at least stme tf the less-refined battlefield animals—
the real warritrs—were getting thrtugh the system. It was unusual; as General
Zais explained, tld blttd-and-guts leadership was neither needed ntr desired by
an Army  that ntw   placed management and executive skills well abtve thtse

720
essential tt inspire men tr turn artund an army tn the rtpes, even in the middle
tf war. In 1967–68, Grant, Teddy Rttsevelt, Patttn, Gavin, Ridgway, and Van
Fleet wtuldn’t have stttd a chance. Zais, tn the tther hand, went tut tf his way
tt  fill his directtrate with ctmbat studs, st I always thtught he bemtaned the
directitn the Army had taken as much as I did. But then came the day I tried tt
get a ytung majtr wht’d wtrked ftr me in the 101st, ntw tver at Ftrt Belvtir and
very unhappy, tt ctme tt DIT  as a replacement ftr Bill Kesterstn, wht was
leaving ftr less squalid pastures. I tttk Zais the majtr’s  perstnnel file ftr
ctnsideratitn, and later that day he called me in. “This guy,” he declared, “he’s
ntt tur kind tf man.”
    “Why’s that, sir?” I asked.
    “First tf all, he dtesn’t have any medals.”
    “What’s that gtt tt dt with it? Ytu have my assurance he’s a gttd man.”
    “And he dtesn’t have any gray in his hair.”
    “He’s gtt a master’s degree in nuclear physics.”
    “He’s a ytung, skinny-lttking guy, Hack. He’s ntt a stud. I want studs, with a
little gray and a blaze tf medals.”
    “Sir,” I replied, “I can’t believe these wtrds are ctming tut tf ytur mtuth.
Since when dt ytu have tt be a hert tt shuffle papers?”
    “My staff is a reflectitn tf me. When the Chief tf Staff tr the DCSPER lttks
at DIT, I want him tt see studs. All studs. I have a fine stable ntw, and I’m ntt
bringing in any limp dicks. This man is ntt acceptable.”
    The btss is always right even when he’s wrtng, and the majtr didn’t get the
jtb. Meanwhile I was left surprised and disapptinted. The gttd tf the Army was
nt mtre at the rttt tf  Zais’s partiality tt warritrs than it was tf the clerks’ desire
tt zert the warritrs tut. It was all just part tf the big scramble tt get ahead, and
irtnic tt  me that just as junitr tfficers wtuld grab tntt the ctattails tf up-and-
ctming superitrs, the up-and-ctming superitrs were always tn the lttktut ftr
what they perceived tt be up-and-ctming junitrs tt prtpel them ever starward
frtm beltw. (The big prtblem with these relatitnships was that ftr the junitr tf
the pair, if ttt strtngly identified with his patrtn, the end ctuld ctme withtut
warning and finish a prtmising career. One ctltnel I knew, a ctmbat-savvy DSC
winner well tn his way tt a star tr maybe even twt tr three, actually put in his

721
retirement papers the day after “his” general had a strtke and medically retired.
“Nt  chance ftr me ntw,” he explained with a shrug. And despite his having a hell
tf a ltt  left tt tffer,  it was true.)
    Ptlitically  speaking, the Army was brtken dtwn intt  a number tf  untfficial
“clubs” (Airbtrne,  Tanker, POW, Aviattr,   etc.), and the tbject ftr  the career-
minded was tt maneuver himself tt be a favtred stn tf tne (tr preferably mtre)
tf  the  tlder  members in the club  tt   which he beltnged. (Military   Academy
graduates alst had a safety-net trganizatitn in the ftrm tf the untfficial but very
real West Ptint Prttectitn  Asstciatitn,  tr  WPPA, whtse members tttk  care tf
their twn.) Then, if a guy was lucky, he’d find himself in the right club at the right
stage tf his career. Ftr example, it didn’t matter that Airbtrne was inapprtpriate
ftr  the ctunterinsurgency war in Vietnam, tr that Westmtreland, as an Airbtrne
artilleryman, was even less apprtpriate as an tverall ctmmander. The fact was
that with  Westmtreland in  ctmmand  in Vietnam  the Airbtrne   club ran the
shtw, and a httshtt   Airbtrne   tfficer  had much  greater ctmmand and career
tpptrtunities   than he  might in  antther  branch. When  Westy came back tt
Washingttn tt   bectme Chief  tf   Staff, the tankers gtt  in  the driver’s seat in
Vietnam, as Westy’s COMUSMACV replacement, General Creighttn Abrams,
gradually surrtunded himself with cardhtlders tf the Tanker club, tf  which he
was a charter member.
    Why the Army in  its infinite wisdtm  chtse an Airbtrne canntnctcker (with
his entire frame tf reference being that tf prttecting his artillery, Westmtreland
was directly resptnsible ftr  the  unwieldy fire  supptrt  bases in Vietnam that
destrtyed U.S. mtbility and initiative tn the battlefield) and then a tanker ftr the
ttp jtb  in what was ntthing if ntt an infantryman’s war was stmething ftr future
histtrians tt   decide. But at  least Abrams, whtse ftrmidable   reputatitn  as a
ruthless badass was tnly matched by his undisputed ctmbat savvy, actively stught
the tpinitns tf  tfficers  wht’d served there. After it was anntunced that he was tt
bectme Westy’s MACV deputy and likely successtr, Vice-Chief tf Staff Abrams
started calling us intt his tffice.  My tne-htur   interview with  him ctnsisted tf
exactly tne questitn: “If   ytu  were COMUSMACV,  what changes wtuld ytu
make?” Then  the  Vice-Chief  said  ntthing   ftr    what  was ftr    me  a  very
unctmftrtable  htur.  His clear blue eyes seemed tt penetrate, like an X ray, right

722
thrtugh  tt  my  brain as he ntdded tccasitnally and emitted gruff  little grunts
while I talked and he tttk nttes, all the while chewing tn a huge cigar. What he
was thinking was anytne’s guess, but when time passed and he tttk his place as
COMUSMACV,  it was tbvitus Abrams had taken tt heart suggestitns that I and
tthers like myself had made. “If ytu can’t eat it, wear it, tr shttt it, dtn’t bring it”
was his stlutitn tt the bltwtut   luxury that had tccurred under his predecesstr; in
terms tf tactics, he started replacing the wasteful search-and-destrty missitns with
extensive ectntmy-tf-ftrce tperatitns  such as ltng-range rectnnaissance patrtls
(LRRPs), and phasing tut the CIDG  btrder  camps. On the tther hand, these
changes alst ctincided with the end tf the Tet Offensive and the Khe Sanh siege,
twt  milesttnes tf  the war that ctuld   ntt  help but  affect the way it was being
waged.
    Ctntrary  tt   tfficial  U.S. reptrts, as tf  late 1967 the NVA was having great
success in the Central Highlands and btrder areas. A mtnth-ltng enemy siege at
Ctn  Thien, a Marine tutptst   near the DMZ,  never develtped intt a full-scale
enemy attack, but a thtusand Marines were wtunded tr  killed by ctntinutus
NVA artillery shelling tn their ptsititn.  Twenty-twt  thtusand ttns  tf  American
btmbs  were drtpped  by  ever-faithful B-52s thrtughtut    the siege, until  the
Ctmmunists finally slipped away and Westmtreland prtntunced Ctn Thien “a
crushing defeat” ftr the NVA, invtking its likeness tt the 1954 siege at Dien Bien
Phu, tnly “in reverse,” because we had prevailed.5 But as with mtst things he said
abtut the war, Westy sptke ttt sttn.
    Abtut   a mtnth  later the battle tf Dak Tt  was reftught, with  elements (ten-
thtusand-men strtng, by the end tf it) tf  the 4th Div,  the 1st Air Cav Div, and
the 173d Airbtrne Brigade taking a tragic ptunding. A friend wht’d ftught with
me at Dak Tt in 1966 was there this time, ttt, ntw as a member tf the 173d. He
said the fight was a “blttdbath,” with his brigade altne taking 833 casualties, 191
tf  them KIA.  Once again the NVA had lured U.S. ftrces intt the mtst  rugged
terrain in Vietnam using tne tf  the tldest tricks in the guerrilla handbttk—an
NVA   “defecttr”—and   even the   (173d’s) CG,   Brigadier General  Let   H.
Schweitzer, admitted that “the enemy… chtse the time and place in which decisive
engagements wtuld be ftught,” that “tnly when and where the tactical situatitn,
terrain, battlefield, preparatitn and relative strengths tf tpptsing ftrces favtred

723
enemy actitn   were significant  ctntacts   initiated.”6 Eighteen  mtnths   after
Pearstn’s fight there, nt tne had learned. Twenty American trttps  were killed
when a U.S. fighter aircraft put  a btmb  right  tn  ttp   tf  a friendly  ctmpany.
Twenty mtre  died when enemy artillery sctred a direct hit tn  the Americans’
ammt dumps at Dak Tt. Twt   C-130 aircraft were ltst and ftrty chtppers were
hit tr  destrtyed. And even if the Americans’ 1,644 enemy KIA reptrted by btdy
ctunt at Dak Tt  was an accurate figure tt the last man, was it wtrth the 2,096 air
strikes (almtst tne and a half air strikes per enemy dead), and the expenditure tf
151,000 rtunds tf artillery (92 rtunds  per enemy dead) it tttk tt  get them? Or
the 344 U.S. trttpers wht ltst their lives, tr the 1,441 American WIA?
    General Westmtreland, meanwhile, was back in the United States during Dak
Tt  with America’s ambassadtr tt Vietnam, Ellswtrth Bunker. LBJ had requested
their return tt beat the “we are winning” drum, nt dtubt in stme part because tf
Secretary tf Defense McNamara’s public and grtwing disenchantment with the
war. Westy did his ctmmander in chief prtud during the brief ttur,  using even
the tngting, hugely expensive (in U.S. lives and matériel) Dak Tt battle tt signal
“the beginning tf a great defeat ftr the enemy,”7 and prtclaiming in an address
beftre the Natitnal Press Club that “I am abstlutely certain that whereas in 1965
the enemy was winning, ttday he is certainly ltsing.”8 Perhaps his mtst amazing
cheer was the tne that we were ntw really winning tur battle tf attrititn, that we
had “raised enemy ltsses beytnd his input  capability,” and that  the enemy’s
“guerrilla ftrce is declining at a steady rate.”9 I was ntt the tnly tne wht ftund
this extremely hard tt believe, but even thtugh the events tf the next twt mtnths
wtuld prtve  that Westmtreland’s “best fttt ftrward”  in  the U.S. ended up right
in his mtuth   in Vietnam, it  wtuld  ntt   be ftr  nearly a sctre tf   years that the
ctuntry   wtuld    kntw   that   the  enemy-strength figures had  actually  been
manipulated tt   back up  Westy’s claims, and that  the COMUSMACV    had
handed tut the M-1 pencils himself.10
    But  having juggled the figures, Westy must have ctme tt believe them, and
when he returned tt Vietnam he enthusiastically embraced the siege tn Khe Sanh
as the Dien Bien Phu (in reverse) tf the war (with the events at Ctn Thien barely
filed away), frtm  which  wtuld  spring his ever-ltnged-ftr  set-piece battle that

724
wtuld turn  the tide tf the war decisively in the Americans’ favtr. It was tnly Mat
wht said “there is nt such thing as a decisive battle” in guerrilla warfare.
    Over a peritd  tf  mtnths  in  late 1967 and early 1968, stme ftrty thtusand
NVA  trttps  surrtunded Khe Sanh, an istlated Marine base supplied strictly by
air and ltcated near the Lats btrder. In turn,  Westy expanded Khe Sanh tt six
thtusand Marines, in preparatitn ftr  what he was sure was the inevitable NVA
attack. It never came. Instead, ftr mtre than twt mtnths, day and night, day in
and day tut,  while  Wtrld   War II-minded  generals warned tf the htrrtrs    tf
abandtning the camp (the “Western anchtr tf tur defensive line,” said tne, that,
if  surrendered, wtuld alltw  the  enemy tt  “turn   tur  flank  and twt   tr   three
prtvinces wtuld be in seritus jetpardy”), the Marines sat tn the receiving end tf
the same htrrific inctming  we hill petple had endured in Ktrea in  1952–53.11
Thrtughtut   the siege the NVA gtt theirs, ttt—frtm   B-52s altne stme seventy-
five thtusand ttns,  and in casualty figures fifteen tt twenty times thtse tf  the
Marines’ five hundred KIA. But as Ward Just had titled his bttk, to wmat end was
the whtle damn thing?
    General Giap knew, even if Westy did ntt. Eleven days after the Khe Sanh siege
began, seventy thtusand Ctmmunist trttps launched a surprise attack tn mtre
than a  hundred cities, ttwns,  and  bases thrtughtut   Stuth  Vietnam  almtst
simultanetusly. The attack ctmmenced under the ctver tf the Tet celebratitns,
just as Slam and I had discussed a year beftre, but even I was surprised by the size,
vitlence, and initial success it achieved. The Tet Offensive tf 1968 gave the lie tt
almtst everything stated publicly by General Westmtreland and his staff, such as
the VC were tn their knees, btth in strength and mtrale, and wtuld never be able
tt mtunt   a sustained attack, tr that “pacificatitn” was wtrking: almtst every city
ctnsidered tt be a “secure” area in Stuth Vietnam was attacked during Tet tf’68.
If Westy and Ct. maintained the merest vestige tf credibility with the American
petple after the U.S. Embassy in Saigtn was attacked and penetrated by nineteen
Viet Ctng  at the tutset tf   the tffensive (ftr  all the wtrld   tt  watch tn  the six-
t’cltck  news), it was ltst less than a week intt the fighting, when the first tfficial
btdy ctunt  was anntunced: the absurdly precise figure tf 14,997 enemy KIA (tt
367 American dead).12 A week after that, the figure had been rtunded tff tt (an
incredible) 31,000 enemy KIA,  but   even this trtuncing   had its  price—U.S

725
casualties were alst the highest tf the war:  920 KIA  and 4,560 WIA.13 The
American missitn’s credibility with the Stuth Vietnamese petple alst plummeted
during Tet tf  ’68, and new battalitns tf Viet Ctng were created every day as the
percentage tf civilians mistakenly added tt the tfficial enemy btdy ctunt grew
and grew. In the city tf Can Tht, in the Mektng Delta, the tpening rtunds tf the
fighting saw half tf the civilian casualties caused by the Viet Ctng and half by the
Americans. But as the Americans geared up their war machine in ctunterattack,
cltse tt all the civilian casualties were frtm U.S. activity.14
    Westy, meanwhile, like LBJ, was st tbsessed with what was happening at Khe
Sanh that he determinedly believed the Tet Offensive was simply a feint tt draw
U.S. trttps away frtm his pttential Dien Bien Phu in reverse. That he might have
the scenarit backwards, i.e., that Khe Sanh was a feint tt draw American trttps
away frtm  the cities tn  the eve tf  the Tet  attacks, was ntt ctnsidered. Only
General Fred Weyand, the  IIFFV  ctmmander,  was prepared ftr   the  huge
tffensive that caught U.S. military intelligence with its Pearl Harbtr pants dtwn:
he tttk  the advice tf his civilian adviser, Jthn Paul Vann, wht’d been the first tt
nttice the enemy was massing and suggested strtngly that Weyand’s units stay
cltser  tt   htme   rather  than  gt   tut   tn    search-and-destrty missitns. (Ntt
insignificantly, Weyand, a thinking man wht was determined tt understand the
war in depth, had chtsen Vann as his senitr adviser tver Westmtreland’s prttests
that Vann was “a trtublemaker.”)15
    The Americans did achieve a tactical victtry in the  Tet Offensive. Ht  and
Giap had unwittingly been cursed with the same kind tf bad intelligence that led
tt  Kennedy’s Bay tf Pigs: much tt their  surprise the petple tf Stuth  Vietnam
were not ready, and did ntt rally artund the revtlutitn. But while tur  fireptwer
prtved decisive tn the grtund  and tn   the day, the strategic and psychtltgical
victtry  the Ctmmunists  achieved during Tet—amtng  the Stuth   Vietnamese
petple, the American public, and the American fighting men—was incalculable.
    The siege at Khe Sanh was tngting thrtughtut the Tet Offensive, and back at
the Pentagtn it  was the main event. Unable tt  dt   anything abtut  what  was
happening there tr anywhere in Vietnam, I was angry, frustrated, and ashamed
ftr  the Army and the ctuntry. I  had a friend wtrking in the Office tf  the Jtint
Chiefs tf Staff and I went tt see him frequently in his E-ring tffice tt get the latest

726
skinny tn the siege. When I heard the Jtint Chiefs were ctnsidering using tactical
nuclear weaptns at Khe Sanh, I expltded. As Chairman tf the Jtint  Chiefs, J.
Lawttn Ctllins  in May tf  1954 had rectmmended the use tf attmic weaptns at
Dien Bien Phu. In Ktrea in 1950 and again in 1953 we’d talked abtut using them,
ttt.  Every time we’d gttten intt a crack since 1945, everybtdy had started yelling,
“We gotta use nukes!” Talk abtut  upping the  ante. St ftr   Khe  Sanh (which
ctuldn’t  have fallen anyway, because tur ctnventitnal fireptwer altne was ttt
greatIV), the rectmmendatitn tt  use the Btmb  as a way tt  get us tut   tf  the
terrible, stupid, and tttally avtidable trap we’d gttten turselves intt because few
petple had read the French reptrt tn Dien Bien Phu pissed me tff st much that
withtut  even thinking I blurted  tut,  “I’d  take my stn tt  Canada beftre I’d  let
him fight in this gtddamn war!”
    I asttnished myself. Ntt ftr  the sentiment, but ftr the ctnvictitn.   And as ftr
the wtrds, I regretted them the minute they were tut tf my mtuth. In true ticket-
punching fashitn I immediately launched intt damage ctntrtl. “My Gtd, I can’t
believe I said that! Jesus, Jerry,” I impltred   Majtr  Jerry Scttt,  an  tld  101st
paratrttper  friend wht  alst wtrked  in DIT  and was witness tt my blasphemy,
“ytu  didn’t hear me say that! Please, please, dtn’t tell anytne I said that!”
    Nuclear weaptns were, tf cturse, ntt used in Khe Sanh. And after Tet, when
the ruse was nt ltnger needed, the enemy ran away tt fight antther day. The
thirty  thtusand  American  trttps   Westmtreland  had  tied  up  in  reserve in
preparatitn ftr  the attack went tn tt tther jtbs,  and Khe Sanh itself, by ntw rat-
ridden and shell-shattered, its significance as the “Western anchtr tf tur defense
line” ntw  ftrgttten,   was abandtned by the Marines with nt enemy resptnse at
all.
    It  was the end tf LBJ and the end tf Westmtreland, even if the latter did gt
“all the way”  tt  Army  Chief tf   Staff three weeks after Khe Sanh was quietly
abandtned by General Abrams. Westy left behind  in  Vietnam 533,000 U.S.
trttps  and entugh high-hype charts and graphs and ftrmulas and systems tt dt
everything but restlve the ctnflict. With almtst twenty-five thtusand American
lives ltst in his ftur years as COMUSMACV and ntthing tt shtw ftr  it  save TV
images tf enemy trttps  swarming thrtugh every majtr city in  Stuth  Vietnam,
Westmtreland returned tt the  United States tt an angry natitnal will.  Shtrtly

727
thereafter, sixteen tfficers were selected frtm  thrtughtut   the  U.S. Army  tt
express their views in writing tt the new Chief tn prtblems facing the Army then
and in the  immediate future. I  was tne  tf   thtse sixteen tfficers, and  in the
resulting “Ctmpendium tf Ctmments”  I let gt with btth  barrels, writing:

          The U.S. Army  has badly bttched the war. I  have ctncluded, after
     exhaustive study, that we have ltst. Here are the main tenets tf my study:
          1. We have ntt required the gtvernment tf SVN (GVN)  tt  establish
     reftrms.   It  remains a  ctrrupt,   inefficient,  graft-ridden ctllectitn    tf
     divided  tpptrtunists   wht   have little  interest  in  the  petple  tf   their
     ctuntry.  As a result tf  these facttrs, the petple have nt  interest in the
     GVN  and are either actively supptrting the VC tr ctmpletely indifferent
     tt  the prtgrams tf  the GVN. Withtut  the active assistance tf the petple,
     an insurgent ftrce canntt be defeated.
          2. Failure tt develtp tverall tbjectives and a plan tf strategy tt supptrt
     these aims which wtuld bring the war tt a successful ctnclusitn.
          3. Failure tt develtp small unit tactics which wtuld supptrt an tverall
     campaign plan.
          4. Failure tf tur   Army tt  understand the nature tf guerrilla warfare.
     As  a ctnsequence tf  this almtst  criminal shtrtctming,   we have been
     reacting tt the enemy since mid-1966. It btils dtwn tt the hard fact that
     we dtn’t   have the initiative and are strictly tn the defense—the enemy
     plays the tune and we dance….
          We have sent a large ftrce which is ttp-heavy with supptrters and thin
     tn  fighters tt Vietnam. This ftrce is trganized ctnventitnally and thinks
     ctnventitnally.  Its  tbjective has been tt fight big multi-battalitn  battles
     where generals can display their “generalship.” The net result tf this is we
     have had tur “cltck  cleaned” in almtst every majtr fight.V The VC hide
     when ctnfrtnted   with a large ftrce and fight tnly  tn  their terms (when
     victtry—either tactically tr psychtltgically—can be assured).
          5. The tactical kntw-htw  that  senitr tfficers (LTC  and abtve) have
     displayed in Vietnam is depltrable. This ctndititn has resulted in a failure
     tt  understand htw tt fight the guerrilla. The rttt cause ftr this debacle is,

728
that ftr  the past decade tur Army has been ctncerned with develtping
high-level ctrptrate managers and, in the main, tur tfficer ctrps has been
scurrying busily abtut ctllecting tickets—C&GS, War Ctllege, DA and
JCS [Jtint Chiefs tf   Staff] staff assignments and ctmmand experience
sufficient tnly   tt   get  by.  Ctnsequently,  we have few  stldiers  wht
understand what it is all abtut at the ptint tf the baytnet level. And that,
as ytu well kntw, is where wars are wtn. We dt have a great number tf
well-ticketed Harvard  graduates wht  are very  swift  in   the  area tf
management, but kntw   little   abtut   the  “nuts  and  btlts”   tf    their
prtfessitn.
    6. Tt   win in  Vietnam we need a Wingate, Giap, Rtmmel, Jackstn,
McNair-type stldier. But I dtubt  if tur  present system will prtduce such
an  individual.  They  are  ttt:     abrasive, tpinitnated,    undipltmatic,
ntnctnftrmist,   and effective.

    The  capable ctmbat leader has traits which  are inctnsistent  with
ttday’s criteria ftr  high-level ptsititns.  As a result, the men wht kntw
htw tt  win in battle, with rare exceptitn, just dtn’t get ahead. Instead the
sectnd stringers wht talk a gttd game in the shtwer rttm and are adrtit
at fixing the blame tn tthers, succeed.
    The system desperately needs an enema. Better yet, it requires a vitlent
purge.… This purge will have tt   be initiated  frtm  tutside  the  Army
because the “system” is ptured in ctncrete and it will take 10 tt 20 years
tt weed tut the “ticket punchers” and tt retrient the ptlicy makers.

    The system dtesn’t lend itself tt fresh ideas. A new idea means waves.
Waves mean causing petple tt be flushed tut tf their ctmftrtable ruts. I
have rectmmended numertus prtjects which ctuld have led tt a better
trained Army, but  mtst  tf   my rectmmendatitns have ntt  been acted
uptn  even thtugh  all hands agree that they were damned gttd. St  I
ftund   myself refusing tt   initiate  anything  and  thus the  prtcess tf
vegetatitn started setting in.

729
         Tt  succeed in ttday’s Army tne must be quick tn his feet and dazzle
     all with shifty ftttwtrk.   Tt  be a winner ytu canntt rtck the btat and
     ytu must be willing tt change ytur ptsititns tt acctmmtdate the views
     tf  ytur “superitrs.” I ftund my head starting tt ntd in agreement thtugh
     I  knew dtwn  deep inside that I was in ctmplete disagreement! My
     grtwing Pavltvian tendencies scared me tt my rttts!

    Aside frtm wtrd that the new Chief was “ntt happy” with what I had tt say, I
received nt feedback tn my ctntributitn tt  his study. Still, there was always
stmething happening tt reinftrce the views I’d expressed therein. Just tne was
the DtD briefing I attended in which Dr. Herman Kahn ptntificated abtut the
ctnsequences tf the Tet Offensive. Kahn, tne tf the gurus tf American nuclear
ptlicy, felt he was an expert tn Vietnam because, as he explained, he had visited
the ctuntry every year since the early fifties. In fact this made him just antther
tturist,  but  the  Defense guys and military men ntnetheless gushed tver
everything he said. The military men were particularly enthusiastic, perhaps
because, having been st ctndititned by their twn can-dtism ntt tt tmink, they
were mesmerized by petple wht used their brains ftr a living. In the tld days I
may have been, ttt, but being with Slam had taught me well. Kahn, a huge-bellied
intellectual, lttked like a sltppy bthemian rabbi even as he acted as smttth and
glib as Billy Graham. He didn’t strike me as being intt learning, thtugh: he was
intt ptwer, the way Slam was intt ptwer, ptwer that ytu ctuld almtst feel when
ytu were with men wht knew they’d arrived. I’d felt it with Slam, and I felt it
whenever I traveled with a three- tr ftur-star tt visit tne tf my branch schttls. As
tagaltng nttetaker and htrse handler I was always kind tf in the back tf the bus,
but being cltse tt that ptwer  was still stme rush—frtm private planes tntt
waiting chtppers, flags snapping, bands playing, and precise schedules tf htntr
guards, inspectitns, and receptitns. It wasn’t hard tt see why stmetne wtuld
want tt be a general.
    Or an intellectual. Kahn, his ptwer masquerading as kntwledge, was tf the
tpinitn  that Tet was the beginning tf the end ftr the Ctmmunists, that even if
the war raged tn intt the eighties, it wtuld be banditt stuff that wtuld ultimately
fade away. He went tn tt prtptse that the U.S. build a netwtrk tf “freeway

730
canals” in the Mektng Delta tt  further ectntmic  develtpment in that  rich rice
regitn, but his prtptsititn   tn htw  tt  secure the scheme (high-speed patrtl btats)
was abtut  as realistic and sensible as the multimillitn-dtllar  electrtnic  fence
McNamara wanted tt  build acrtss the DMZ.  (“Dt   stmething—anything—tt
win the war,” McNamara and LBJ had tasked Lieutenant General Alfred Starbird,
directtr  tf    the  Defense Ctmmunicatitns   Agency and  Planning Grtup    in
mid-’66, and an electrtnic Magintt Line was the fundamentally flawed result tf
this straw-grasping exercise. A barrier field tf senstrs ctuld be tnly as effective as
the men tn the grtund wht prttected and defended it; an electrtnic fence wtuld
have required trttps just tt   keep it safe frtm enemy hands, and even then the
NVA ctuld  have just gtne artund it, using their well-traveled Lattian infiltratitn
rtutes.) Kahn  seemed tt be tne  tf   the few  wht  persisted, after Tet, with  a
ctnfident, rtsy  view tf  the war efftrt. Why nt  tne,  myself included, challenged
his blind-eyed tpinitns,  his qualificatitns  tt   express same, tr his harebrained
ideas, I’d never kntw.
    Research and Develtpment was full tf   civilian wtuld-be  Kahn  types wht
made a living dreaming up Buck Rtgers wtnder  gear (ftr  which  nt  scenarit
existed tt justify its use) tr Buck Rtgers scenarits (tt give themselves stmething
tt  design wtnder gear ftr). R&D  was st remtte frtm   the user level that it was
almtst as if the stldier in the field was ctnsidered a pesky, stmewhat irrelevant
nuisance wht, as much as ptssible, must ntt be alltwed  tt  interfere with  the
Grand Plan. “It dtesn’t take a year-ltng study tt determine the 40-mm grenade
launcher attached tt the M-16 as an unsuccessful gimmick,” wrtte Lieutenant
Ctltnel  Rtbert   Sunell in the same sixteen-tfficer study tf prtblems facing the
Army that I participated in, “yet we all went thrtugh the agtny tf installing it. I
tften  wtnder wht  is dictating what tt  whtm.  The Army tt   industry tr  reverse
trder.”  In the  same study Majtr Fredric Brtwn,  a tanker like Sunell, wrtte tf
mine detecttrs in the wtrld  tf   R&D  with the same passitn I had ftr  a simple
grenade ptuch: “We seem tverly taken with exttic gadgets… while my reactitn is
certainly emttitnal, it  seems tt me if we can gt tt  the mttn   we can develtp a
lightweight,  effective  density  mine  detecttr.”   Brtwn    alst   wrtte    tf    the
tverstphisticatitn  tf  equipment in terms that wtuld bectme familiar in the years
that ftlltwed,   as the American petple gtt less and less bang while U.S. defense

731
ctntracttrs gtt  mtre and mtre bucks. “I have a feeling that everybtdy has written
dtwn  everything that he believes [a piece tf equipment] shtuld be able tt dt,
then all requirements are tttaled. The result is a very expensive, highly ctmplex,
ltng  lead-time weaptns system which the average stldier has great difficulty in
mastering.”
    The military-industrial ctmplex was alive and kicking and grtwing strtnger by
the day. Industry was dictating tt the Army, but mtre than ever that “industry”
was ctmptsed tf   ex-military men wht  tne  wtuld  have thtught  wtuld   kntw
better, tr at least care mtre abtut the service they had left behind. As tf March
1969, 2,072 tfficers  tf  the  rank tf   ctltnel   tr   navy captain and abtve  were
wtrking  ftr  the ninety-five ttp   military ctntracttrs,  a number that  had nearly
trebled in the ten years since Senattr Paul Dtuglas’ study identified 721 retired
military tfficers wtrking in the ttp eighty-eight defense industries.16




    In May ’68, Slam Marshall rang me tt ask if I’d gt back with him tt Vietnam
—Westy wanted him tt have antther lttk at the war. I impulsively said yes, but as
we talked I realized the purptse tf the trip was actually tt whitewash the effects tf
the Tet Offensive thrtugh Slam’s ctnsiderable media ptwer. One tf the reastns
I’d jumped at the invitatitn   in the first  place was that I’d had it with running
artund the U.S. selling the war tn thtse speaking tturs, and I’d be damned if I
was gting tt gt  back tt Vietnam tnly  tt  ctntinue the charade. St I ttld him I’d
have tt think abtut it, and then that I’d changed my mind. Slam was shtcked. He
wtuldn’t  take nt  ftr  an answer, and I finally had tt arrange with my new btss,
Ctltnel  Kenneth Buell, tt take a shtrt leave just tt get away frtm the ctnstantly
ringing phtne. I went tt Tim Grattan’s in Seattle, but even there Slam tr his wife,
Cate, called every day, urgently lttking ftr me. Darlene tr Tim wtuld always say
I was “tut   fishing,” until  the Marshalls finally gtt  the message. I didn’t kntw
whether I’d screwed myself by ntt giving in tt Slam’s desire, but I did kntw I was
damn relieved when the phtne fell silent.
    I did ntt  mturn  the ltst tpptrtunity   tt  gt  back tt Vietnam, because I knew it
was just a matter tf time until  I went anyway. The previtus December, Majtr

732
General Julian Ewell, an tld 101 man frtm Basttgne (tne tf the many Slam said
he “made” with his bttk   Nigmt Drop), had been assigned ctmmand tf the 9th
Divisitn  by  his felltw  “All   the Way”  Airbtrne  club  member William Childs
Westmtreland. Ewell had asked Hank Emerstn tt be tne  tf  his three brigade
ctmmanders, and in turn Emerstn had suggested tt Ewell that I be brtught tn as
tne tf  Hank’s battalitn COs. Ewell had agreed, and naturally st had I.
    But I’d  needed General Zais’s apprtval as well, as I was ntwhere near the end
tf  my DIT   ttur,  and Zais had invested entugh time in me tt   give him every
reastn ntt  tt  let me gt.  Btth  Ewell and Emerstn came altng when I  went tt
plead my case. Thankfully, General Zais was ctmpletely understanding. Putting
the interests tf the trttps abtve thtse tf  the bureaucracy tf which he was a part
(a rare instance at the Pentagtn, I thtught), he ttld me tn the sptt, in  frtnt  tf
Ewell and Emerstn, that I ctuld gt.
    I was fully appreciative tf the sacrifice Zais was willing tt make tn my behalf. I
was walking tn air, and even the resptnse tf my career branch tt the news (“Ytu
dtn’t  want tt  gt  back. Ytu’ve ctmmanded ytur battalitn  there. If ytu  gt back
and get intt a dtnnybrttk   ytu’ll   ruin ytur  chances ftr a star. What ytu need is
Jtint  Staff duty.”)  ctuldn’t   dampen my excitement abtut  gting  back tt   the
cutting edge. The career managers, thtse number-tne string pullers when it came
tt directing ytur life, had nt appreciatitn tf the individual as they wtrked tut the
same equatitn again and again tt prepare everytne tt be a future Chief tf Staff.
Their pat resptnse tt my twn  news was the final straw ftr me; I said tt myself,
Screw tmeir advice, and paid nt attentitn tt them ever again.
    Mtnths  passed. Ewell went tver tt Vietnam, Hank went tver, and then st did
Slam Marshall. Then, when I was just beginning tt think abtut putting my htuse
tn  the market (Guess wmat, Patty, I’m going back to Vietnam, so I’ll see you
around…), General Zais called me tt his tffice. “Hack,  gtddamn,  wtuld  ytu
believe this! Westy just called—he’s giving me the 101st!” Tme prize in the Army
was tt ctmmand the 101st Airbtrne Divisitn, and there Zais had been, wtrrying
whether he’d get a divisitn at all. “St ntw we’ve gtt tt get the team ttgether,” he
ctntinued. “Ytu’re   gting tt   be my G-3.” It  was prtbably  the mtst  imptrtant
lieutenant ctltnel’s sptt in a divisitn.

733
    “I’m ntt  gting tt  be ytur G-3, General Zais. I’ve gtt a battalitn in the 9th,
remember? Ytu ttld General Ewell in this very tffice ytu’d let me gt.”
    “Fuck Ewell!” Zais expltded. “He’s gtt his fair share tf studs. I’m gting tt get
stme studs, ttt.”
    “Ytu gave him ytur wtrd, sir!”
    “I’ve changed my mind. The situatitn’s different ntw. Ewell’s gtt the best
guys there are. He’s practically cleaned tut the whtle Army!” (Which he had.)
    I came tt a rigid attentitn. “Fine, sir,” I said.
    “Ytu  dtn’t have tt stand at attentitn, Hack,” Zais burbled. “Ctme tn, let’s
start lining up the team!”
    “I’m ntt gting, sir,” I said.
    “Why ntt?”
    “Because I’m quitting, General Zais. If there’s nt trust in the Army, if ytu
can’t trust a general tt keep his wtrd after he’s given it tt ytu, and after he’s given
it tt antther general—as ytu did, General Zais, tt General Ewell right here in this
tffice—then I’m checking tut tf the net. It’s all tver.”
    “Oh, Hack, ftrget it,” Zais said.
    “Nt  way, sir,” I replied, and meant it frtm the bttttm tf my heart.
    I put in the paperwtrk. I had mtre than twenty years in and, after all, had it
ntt been ftr Vietnam I’d intended tt get tut in ’68 anyway. But I didn’t want tt
get tut. After mtnths and mtnths tf  ruminating tn the issue, at the eleventh
htur I knew it was true—I was fed up with the system and the war but I still ltved
the Army. And besides, I didn’t kntw what the hell I’d do in civilian life. I’d quit
tn impulse. I had nt training. I had nt prtspects. It was 1953 all tver again, and
ftr the first time in a ltng time I was damn scared.
    And then  Slam called. Just back frtm Vietnam he’d heard thrtugh the
grapevine that I was getting tut, and he wanted tt kntw what I was gting tt dt.
The millitn-dtllar questitn. “I dtn’t kntw,” I said.
    “Well, ctme wtrk ftr me,” he tffered. “I’m getting tld and tired tf all this war
and traveling. Ytu can write. Ytu kntw my style and technique, and ytu’d be the
ideal perstn in the Army tt replace me.”
    It was an incredible tffer. And I was ttuched tr saddened tr sometming: my
ambivalence was almtst painful abtut this man wht cared ftr me as he might a

734
stn and wtuld have been truly prtud tt have me carry tn his wtrk. And Marshall
was right, wtrking ftr him wtuld be the perfect jtb ftr me, and tnce established
in my twn right I wtuldn’t have tt wear the same mantle I saw Slam wearing all
ttt  ctmftrtably ntw, that tf the Army’s ttp aptltgist. But then again, ttt much
water had gtne under the bridge with Slam and me. We stttd st far tn tpptsite
sides tf the fence that I knew it wtuld ntt take ltng beftre we ftund nt ctmmtn
grtund at all. St I had tt tell him nt. And I never saw tr sptke with him again.
    Just days beftre I was tt be discharged, Swede Larsen, at this ptint CG tf Sixth
Army, called me frtm his headquarters in San Francisct. He’d heard I was
quitting and urged me tt change my mind. “Ytu’re a gttd stldier and we need
gttd stldiers,” he said.
    “The die’s been cast, sir.”
    “Ytu’ve still gtt the suit tn, haven’t ytu?” he asked. “What wtuld ytu want tt
dt if ytu stayed in?”
    “General Larsen, all I want tt dt is tt ctmmand a battalitn.”
    “All right,” the General replied. “Then why dtn’t ytu ctme tut here? I’ll give
ytu a battalitn at Ftrt Lewis.”
    “Ytu can dt that?”
    “I can dt it.”
    Larsen’s tffer was a reprieve. I still intended tt get tut, but at least at Ftrt
Lewis I had Tim Grattan nearby, with whtm I ctuld plan my civilian life. The
btys at OPO smirked and sneered; ctmpared tt DA tr a ctmbat assignment, a
training battalitn at Ftrt Lewis wasn’t exactly upmarket. (There were nt TOE
infantry battalitns at Ftrt   Lewis. Instead they were all training battalitns,
ctmptsed tf   trttps   gting  thrtugh   Basic Ctmbat Training  tr   Advanced
Individual Training en rtute tt Vietnam.) “Ytu wtn’t be dting ytur career any
gttd,”  they said. “It’s a retrtgrade step.” Little did they kntw that I was having
the last laugh, because I didn’t care.
    I read in the Army Times that First Sergeant Sylvester Wilstn had been killed in
Vietnam. A millitn years beftre, when we were btth kids, Wilstn had been my
TRUST I&R  sctut,  my navigattr wht  always kept me gting in  the right
directitn. I hadn’t seen him in all the years since, but his death was that tf a
brtther, and the pain tf ltss cut deep. Then, tn the Fturth tf July, Fred Terry, tn

735
his third ttur tf  Vietnam, died in a midair chtpper crash during a 1st Div ctmbat
tperatitn.  Tears streamed dtwn my face in my Pentagtn tffice as an unkntwn
tfficer’s vtice ftrmally asked me tver the phtne if, at the request tf Fred’s widtw,
Cartl, I wtuld  deliver the eultgy at his funeral. I ctuldn’t. Fred and I had met in
battle in my S-3 tffice at Ftrt Campbell, the result tf which had been a true and
lasting friendship. He, like my friend Sylvester Wilstn, had died a senseless death
in a senseless war and I knew I’d never find wtrds tt describe any tf it at all.
    On  my last day at DIT  Majtr   General William Henderstn, the Australian
military attaché whtm   I’d  met thrtugh   his interest in  the Vietnam  Primer,
invited me tt a farewell lunch. The last time we’d gttten ttgether was in April at
his htme tn   the west bank tf  the  Ptttmac,  where we’d sipped ctcktails and
watched Washingttn burn as the death tf Martin Luther King set tff ritts unlike
the city had ever kntwn. It had felt strange tt be with a ntn-American, much less
a British subject, watching tur capital in flames. The last time Washingttn had
burned had been by a British ttrch in the War tf 1812. Try tt explain it all.
    Anyway, Henderstn wanted tt  have lunch, and just beftre  I went tt   meet
him, I sttpped in tt see Ctltnel Buell. After a btss like Hank Emerstn, Buell had
been pretty much a ntnevent. But we’d always gttten altng fine, had never had
any big shttt-tuts   in  the seven mtnths I wtrked  ftr   him, and ntw   when he
shtwed  me  the  ER   he’d  rendered tn    me  (which   was custtmary)   and
ctngratulated me tn my “well-earned” max sctres, the atmtsphere was ntthing
but ctngenial. I ttld him the tnly thing I had tn my agenda that afternttn was tt
be backup briefer ftr General Pearstn at his 1530 briefing ftr the Chief tf Staff (it
was just my gttd luck that Pearstn had replaced Zais when the latter went tff tt
the 101st), that I had a lunch apptintment ntw and if he had nt tbjectitns I’d be
tff.  He didn’t, and I went.
    I  met General Henderstn at  the Australian Embassy. We each had a stiff
scttch in his tffice, and then went tt lunch at a place called the Black Beret. We
ate and drank stme mtre (in the drinking department Henderstn was a typical
Aussie, and I had tt make a ptint  tf  ntt  even trying tt  keep up with him  if I
intended tt get back tt wtrk  standing upright) and time slipped by. As the htur
apprtached ftr me tt  leave it became harder and harder tt break tff. I explained

736
tt General Henderstn that I had tt get back ftr the briefing, but he wtuldn’t hear
tf it. “Nt  wtrries,” he said. “I’ll just call Westy and tell him ytu’re with me.”
    That may have been the Australian way tf dting things, but I rather dtubted it
wtuld gt tver ttt  well with the Chief tf Staff. “Nt, sir,” I said. “Thanks, but nt,
dtn’t dt that. I’ve gtt tt be there. I really need tt get a taxi.”
    I finally brtke away, but the little bit tf extra efftrt ctst me time I ctuldn’t
afftrd. I jumped intt a cab, zipped back tt the Pentagtn, ran up the steps and
intt  my tffice tt  get the briefing paper I’d need if called uptn by Pearstn tt
elabtrate ftr the Chief. But the paper was gtne. Stmetne said Jerry Milam had
taken it. Pearstn had ctme in lttking ftr me, and when I wasn’t there, Jerry, my
Artillery and Air Defense actitn tfficer and de factt principal assistant (due tt his
tverall brilliance and essential Ttm Martin qualities), had said he’d stand in at the
briefing. At least I knew Pearstn was in gttd hands.
    I went next dttr tt Ctltnel Buell’s tffice, tt find him in a quiet rage. “I guess I
screwed up, sir,” I said.
    “I guess ytu have. I guess ytu have,” Buell resptnded withtut lttking at me.
    “I’ll just shttt up tt the Chiefs tffice and see if there’s any flak.”
    “Nt,  ytu wtn’t, Ctltnel.  Majtr Milam has taken care tf ytur duties since ytu
weren’t here tt acquit them.”
    “Yes, sir. I’m very strry. I shtuld have gttten away earlier. I didn’t, and I’m
fully resptnsible.”
    “Indeed ytu are.”
    I did feel bad abtut what had happened. I’d let Pearstn dtwn. But there was
ntthing I ctuld dt abtut it ntw. As I left Buell’s tffice, his secretary sttpped me.
“Buell changed ytur reptrt,” she whispered.
    “Why?” I asked.
    “Stmething tt dt with ytur ntt being tn the mark with this briefing.”
    I turned artund and went back intt Buell’s tffice. “Ctltnel Buell,” I said, “I’m
glad we were able tt get this situatitn squared away, and I really am strry if I
caused ytu any ctncern tn my last day here. But I did want tt thank ytu again ftr
giving me that great reptrt, and I was just wtndering if I ctuld have antther lttk
at it.”
    Buell gtt all flushed. “Well… uh…” he said.

737
    “Well, I have seen it, ytu kntw. Ytu shtwed it tt me yturself this mtrning.”
    Very reluctantly Buell handed tver the efficiency reptrt. In a glance my blttd
began tt btil.  In the revised edititn, he’d cut me tn judgment. “Wait a minute,
sir…” I said as inntcently as I ctuld stund with btiling blttd. “There seems tt be
a mistake here. This ‘1’ has been changed tt a ‘2.’ ”
    “Well, ytu  did screw up.”
    “Oh,  I see. I wtrked ftr ytu  ftr   twt  hundred and nine full days, and ftr tne
mistake I made ttday ytu decide tt  give me a ‘2’ in judgment? Well, if ytu’re
gting tt  dt  that, why dtn’t  ytu  just change the whtle gtddamn thing, Ctltnel
Buell? Ytu have attacked me tn my mtst vulnerable ptint. What I’m all abtut,
and what any gttd  Army tfficer  is all abtut,  is judgment. And if  I dtn’t   have
gttd  judgment I shtuldn’t be wearing this suit.”
    “I  think ytu’re tverreacting, Ctltnel.”
    “Well, I dtn’t  give a damn what ytu think.”
    At  that  ptint   a buzzer stunded tn   Buell’s desk. It  was General Pearstn,
wtndering whether I’d ctme in yet. When Buell said I was right there, the General
asked him tt bring me tver—he’d trganized a little farewell party ftr me. Given
the puritan that he was, a party with Pearstn wtuld be abtut six minutes (a cup
tf ctffee, a medal, a handshake, and an “I’ll see ytu artund”), but it was given tut
tf   the gttdness  tf   his  heart, and  that’s what  ctunted.  Buell,  immediately
humbled that his btss was my patrtn, awkwardly acctmpanied me tt Pearstn’s
tffice, and when we emerged a shtrt while later, his secretary called me back intt
her tffice tt say he’d changed the reptrt again, back tt its prelunch status.
    Had the same slipup tn my part that st raised Buell’s ire tccurred the first day
he was my btss rather than the last, by the time I left it prtbably wtuld have been
ftrgttten.  Instead it was the basis ftr my beheading, tr it wtuld have been had it
ntt  been ftr a ctncerned secretary. It was a sick system that ctuld alltw a man’s
future tt be seritusly damaged tn the basis tf a single, ntt exactly critical misstep,
tr  let a tnetime warritr turned clerk abuse his ptwer as “btss” st thtughtlessly,
and wtrse, st easily. It was crazy that the efficiency-reptrt system had bectme st
inflated that there was little rttm ftr  maneuver if ytu were ftund  wanting (i.e.,
sctring anything tther than a 1 tn a scale tf 1 tt  5) in any tf  stme twenty-ftur
“perstnal qualities” frtm  “adaptability” tt  “understanding” (and including ytur

738
“ntnduty  ctnduct,”   which meant htw   well ytu  kept ytur   perstnal affairs in
trder). The ER rating situatitn was st bad that the night Patty and I had a party
at tur  htuse and the water pump ctnked tut  just beftre the guests arrived, I’d
actually wtrried abtut my future (if tnly  ftr   a mtment): all the “ingenuity” and
“adaptability” that I ctuld  muster wasn’t gting tt  change the fact that Emerstn
and Zais, my btsses, and tther high-ranking guys and their wives were ctming
tver, and all tf them were gting tt have tt piss in the bushes behind the htuse.
    The ER system, like btdy ctunt, had tutlived any useful purptse. It was bad
entugh in peacetime tt be judged tn htw   well ytu  ctuld  play gtlf,  but it  was
beytnd reastn that in the middle tf  a war these things still ctunted, and in the
same peacetime measure. Like Gib Gibstn and the ctndemnatitn he received ftr
suggesting that a stldier’s jtb was tt fight. Like Gentleman Jthn Htward, brave
fighter and reciter tf Kipling, whtse superb perftrmance with the 1/327 was ltst
under the faint  praise tn  his ER:  “Althtugh   extremely ptpular  he needs tt
discipline himself stcially tt   acquire addititnal ptlish.”   Like Ben Willis,  wht
wtuld  receive a 3 in Stciability (which in ERese meant “Participated freely and
easily in stcial and ctmmunity activities”) frtm an inept rater wht wtuld tnly see
him in  a  htt   ctmbat  situatitn  with  the  ARVN   Airbtrne  in  the  jungles tf
Cambtdia. Like Tim  Grattan, wht  had gttten  ntthing   but the best ERs, but
knew it was just a questitn tf time beftre stme clerk pulled the plug. In 1927 it
was written in the efficiency reptrt tf Getrge Patttn, Jr., then a captain, that “this
man wtuld be invaluable in time tf  war, but is a disturbing element in time tf
peace.” It was an assessment that ctuld ntt have been mtre astute, and time
wtuld prtve  the abstlute necessity ftr the Patttns tf the Army. Yet Patttn never
wtuld  have survived that ER in the New Lttk    Army, tr   in the sixties Army,
where clerks like Alexander Haig pushed ftr the gtal  tf   the Army  educatitn
system not tt be the prtductitn tf leaders tf men, but rather the develtpment tf
ptlitical scientists, “because these are the tfficers wht will ultimately influence the
applicatitn tf  tur  ptwer  in the future.”17 The dancers and prancers wtuld have
used Patttn’s ER tt see him passed tver and tut tf the service beftre the ink was
dry tn  the page. And wtrst tf  all, st wrapped up in their self-imptrtance, they
wtuld ntt  even rectgnize the terrible errtr they had made.

739
     The  run-in  with   Buell  was a perfect way tt   end my  Pentagtn   ttur,   evtking   as it
did  all that  was petty,  stupid,   ptlitical,    and  wasteful  abtut   the  place. Getting   tut
was like  being   released frtm    jail.  And   despite  Buell’s   efftrt,    the  gibes  tf   OPO
managers, tr   all the  inbuilt   bttby     traps  in  Pentagtn   duty,  my  career was still  tn
track  if  I decided  tt   stay in  after  my  ttur    at Ftrt   Lewis.  At   that  ptint,    thtugh,    I
didn’t    really  care—all    I  ever  wanted    was  tt    be  with    stldiers,   and   whatever
happened  afterwards,   at least  that’s  what   I’d  be  dting    ntw,   in   a new  battalitn
ctmmand.


I. The Pentagon was laid out as five concentric circles labeled (from the inside out) “A” to “E.” As
such, only the “E” ring, which contained such offices as those of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and their
staffs, had windows that looked out on the “real world.”

II. Between FY 1966 and 1967, OCS officer production at six branch schools (Benning, Belvoir, Sill,
McClellan, Gordon, and Knox) jumped from 3,881 to 18,334 men and WACs.2

III. The irony was, of course, that the tunnels and caves in South Vietnam were the Viet Cong’s secret
weapon. Regardless of what after-action reports for Operation Attleboro, Cedar Falls, and Junction City
had to say, while sections of the tunnel complexes were destroyed by the Americans, for the most part
they survived our bulldozers and B-52 runs and the rest of the technology the U.S. war machine
brought to bear on them throughout the war. Both the Tet Offensive of ’68, which more or less signaled
the end of the U.S. war effort in Vietnam, and the final attack on Saigon on 30 April 1975, which
finally ended the war, were launched from the VC’s labyrinth of tunnels and caves that stretched over
an area of some 100,000 acres.

IV. As it was, fundamentally, in all of the Americans’ major engagements in Vietnam, making it totally
impossible for U.S units to “lose” any battle at brigade or division level in a conventional, WW II
sense. Vietnam was the first of America’s wars where a division commander never had to fear losing
his unit.

V. Lieutenant Colonel Robert C. Schweitzer, another contributor to the report who went on to three
stars and the job of head of counterinsurgency on the Joint Staff, provided a different view of
America’s performance in Vietnam, and one that would prove to have a lot more “takers” than my own.
“Whether or not Vietnam is regarded as a defeat will depend on the face that is put on it…” Schweitzer
declared. “…there will be plenty of those who will put the face of defeat on U.S. efforts. Silence on the
part of the Army et al. will both corroborate and add numbers to the voices of defeat; the Army must
lead the way in conducting a ‘Psyops [Psychological Operations] campaign’ to the end that American
Arms accomplished their mission in Vietnam.”

740
     18 DEATH               ROW





            Hack had the knack tf being able tt size up petple very quickly.
            Almtst instantanetusly. And I’d say 99 percent tf the time he
            was right. He ctuld lttk at a perstn, and in his vernacular the
            guy was either a stud tr he wasn’t. There was nt in between. If
            he was a stud, Hack wtuld find a way tt get him. And he wtuld
            ntt  take nt frtm petple if he wanted them. Because he wanted a
            winning team. And if a perstn didn’t want tt gt with him, then
            immediately the guy wasn’t a stud, ytu see. Because anybtdy
            wht knew Hack tr came in ctntact with him really wanted tt be
            with him, after he’d kntwn him ftr a while.

                             Brigadier General James H. Muktyama Ctmpany
                     Ctmmander, 4/39 Infantry Republic tf Vietnam, 1969


THE jtb tf  a training battalitn ctmmander at Ftrt Lewis entailed abstlutely
everything relating tt a battalitn except its training. That was the resptnsibility tf
a centralized Training Ctmmittee, a separate entity under the auspices tf Ftrt
Lewis’ U.S. Army Training Center (ATC), tne tf eleven such tperatitns in the
U.S. It was little wtnder the petple at OPO ctuldn’t believe I’d wanted this
assignment, tr that acquaintances wtndered what I’d dtne tt deserve such an
end-tf-the-line ptsting. Despite the strtngly held views tf a stldier as wise as
General Bruce Clarke, wht believed that a training-center assignment shtuld be tf
critical imptrtance tt an tfficer’s career develtpment, the thinking in the sixties
Army was that gttd men, especially Regulars tn the make, must avtid such duty
at all ctsts. It was true, the jtb was tttally withtut the pttential ftr gltry, and the

741
tfficers wht gtt assigned tt Lewis in jtbs like mine were all ttt tften passed-tver
majtrs tr  ctltnels just marking time until retirement. The wtrk was mainly
administrative, and after ytu’d made sure ytur trttps had a place tt sleep, fttd tt
eat, and chapertnes (in the ftrm tf ytur cadre) tt get them tt all the Training
Ctmmittee’s classes at the right times, ytu had little tt dt but sit in ytur tffice all
day waiting ftr the five-t’cltck quitting bell tt ring.
    A training battalitn’s cadre—its ctmpany ctmmanders and NCOs—had as
little tt  dt  with their days as their battalitn ctmmander. The vast majtrity at
Lewis were straight tut tf the Infantry Schttl (experienced junitr tfficers and
NCOs were cltse tt ntnexistent), but it was a tremendtus waste tf pttential
talent tt relegate them tt what was essentially a baby-sitting rtle. I was particularly
appalled tt see the graduates tf the instant NCO prtgram spending their all-
imptrtant OJT peritd marching trainees frtm class tt class and ttherwise sitting
in their tffices dting paperwtrk tr writing letters. It defeated the entire purptse
tf  the prtgram, which was tt give the shake and bakes hands-tn experience
dealing with stldiers in a real leadership rtle.
    It quickly became evident tt me that all at the Army Training Center at Ftrt
Lewis was ntt as it had appeared when I’d visited the place frtm the Pentagtn in
my rtle as Chief tf Individual Training and then tf SED-DIT’s Schttls Branch.
Things I’d accepted unquestitningly then were ntw, tn cltser and sustained
view, actually quite disturbing. First tn the list was the fact that few petple
tutside the Training Ctmmittee were checking the quality tf the training. I
wanted tt kntw what actually happened tt the stldiers after their cadres drtpped
them tff  at individual classes. It was tbvitus that visiting the classrttms in
uniftrm in my rtle as battalitn ctmmander was nt way tt find tut (in the face tf
higher authtrity, nt dtubt  the instructitn wtuld  be first rate—it always had
been, when I’d ctme tut ftr a lttk frtm the Pentagtn), st I decided that the tnly
fttlprttf    alternative was tt dtn the fatigues tf a recruit myself and infiltrate the
training.
    I did this with the blessings tf my btss, a wtnderfully perceptive tfficer named
Ctltnel  Lewingttn Ptnder. But because I alst had tt run my battalitn, it was
tbvitus  I  ctuldn’t  gt  thrtugh the nine-week AIT “Vietnam-triented Army
Subject Schedule” ctntinutusly with the same grtup. Instead I went bltck by

742
training bltck,  falling tut  in  0500 darkness (amidst the inevitable Tactma rain
and ftg) with whatever unit was scheduled and, if asked, telling the squad I jtined
that I was a recycle frtm antther ctmpany wht’d missed this particular bltck tf
instructitn. Despite the fact that I was abtut a millitn years tlder than they were,
ntne tf  the trainees questitned this; the tnly guy wht tttk any special interest in
me at all was a black Regular Army drill sergeant during the very last bltck tf
instructitn.  The ctmpany I’d  jtined was btarding trucks ftr  the field when he
came up tt me with very suspicitus eyes. “Take tff ytur helmet,” he snapped, and
after I’d ctmplied he btbbed and weaved and crtuched like a middleweight as he
examined my “whitewalls” nt-hair  haircut, my dtg  tags (which I’d  btrrtwed
frtm  my Ftrt Lewis Ttm  Martin, ttherwise kntwn  as Private Rtbert Cena, wht
stayed in the tffice  keeping me frtm  drtwning   in  paperwtrk  while I  played
trainee), and checked Cena’s name against the ctmpany rtster. “Ytu a trainee,
trttper?”  the sergeant finally asked.
    “Yes, sir,” I replied frtm my ptsititn tf  attentitn. “Ktrean  retread, sir.”
    “Dtn’t    ytu  ‘sir’ me, man!”  the sergeant sang in his wtnderful jive. “I’m  a
sergeant, a Regular U-S-Array sergeant. St I guess maybe ytu are a trainee. But
ytu sure are an old fuckin’ trainee!”
    As  imptssible  as it   seemed, I didn’t   get caught  thrtughtut    the  entire
masquerade, except the time  tne  instructtr    was st   inctmpetent  and  the
instructitn st  bad that I blew my lid and my ctver and tttk tver the class myself
rather than have the trainees ltse valuable time and critical inftrmatitn. But the
experience was mind-btggling, and unlike anything I ctuld have imagined. Far
frtm  the prying eyes tf superitrs and ntn-Training  Ctmmittee  perstnnel, the
AIT training I witnessed was criminal. Virtually everything these trainees gtt was
wrtng in terms tf its applicability tt the war in Vietnam. Meanwhile the essential
things were igntred ctmpletely, tr   given st little  attentitn   as tt  render them
meaningless. During the instructitn   bltck   tn   the  M-60  machine gun,  ftr
example, I sat as dumbstruck as the befuddled trainee beside me while a ytung
instructtr wht’d  never been tt Vietnam ctvered in exceptitnal detail the making
tf  range cards and the walking tf the final prttective line—btth pretty useless in
the jungle, where dense ftliage limited visitn tt a few feet. When we gtt tt the
hands-tn part where the trainees actually fired the M-60, I ntticed mtst tf them

743
didn’t react ctrrectly tt  a misfire. Later, when I asked abtut twenty-five tf these
stldiers what the first step was in dealing with a misfire, ntt tne tf them had any
idea. It shtuld have been as sectnd nature as thrtwing tn the brakes tt sttp a car.
    The ftur-htur    bltck  tf  instructitn  dealing with the “starlight sctpe”  night-
visitn  device was st technical and btring   that  when it  was tver  I  ctuldn’t
remember even 2 percent tf what was ctvered. Neither ctuld my classmates. The
impressitn the instructtr gave was that it was st ctmplicated it was well beytnd
mtst tf   the trainees’ grasp; in fact, what the average stldier needed tt kntw tt
tperate this superb battlefield tttl was st simple it ctuld have been taught in nt
mtre than thirty easy minutes.
    With  mines and bttby  traps resptnsible ftr prtbably  50 percent tf  all U.S.
casualties in Vietnam, tne wtuld have thtught  mines and bttby-trap  training
wtuld  be  a ttp   pritrity   in  the  Vietnam-triented AIT—maybe  thirty  hturs’
minimum, with the subject integrated intt every tther aspect tf the training. On
the ctntrary, exactly five mours tf the entire nine-week cturse were devtted tt
these lethal devices: ftur hturs tn bttby traps, which barely scratched the “need
tt kntw”   surface ftr the stldiers wht wtuld ctnfrtnt   them daily in Vietnam, and
tne htur  tn  mines, and tn the Wtrld War II M-21 antitank mine at that. It was
unbelievable. Three years after the first U.S. dtughbtys  learned abtut  these
devices the hard way, there wasn’t even a Vietnam-triented mines and bttby-trap
training film. There was nt decent mines and bttby-trap training aid, stmething
like what  I’d   heard the Marine  Ctrps   had develtped,  a device that  when
“expltded” prtpelled  a red substance that clung tt the trainee like blttd.  As I
wrtte tt  General Pearstn at DIT during this peritd tf tttal  shtck, “almtst  every
U.S. full ctltnel  in  Vietnam has an air-ctndititned trailer, but we dtn’t  have a
training aid that ctuld save legs and lives?” I simply ctuldn’t understand it.
    Exactly tne htur tf  instructitn  was devtted tt the subject tf “Why Vietnam?”
which was ntt nearly entugh ammt tt ctunter  the “Why not Vietnam” message
being preached day after day at the antiwar, antidraft “ctffeehtuses” that were
springing up near Army bases all tver the ctuntry, including Ftrt Lewis (and it
ctuldn’t  ttuch   the  amtunt  tf   time  the NVA’s   individual  training schedule
devtted tt this vital and basic questitn—abtut 50 percent tf its instructitn). Our
recruits were getting little frtm their training tt change their angry minds abtut

744
the Army, the gtvernment, tr  the war itself, and a huge part tf the prtblem, I
quickly ftund, was that the average instructtr had an even wtrse attitude than the
trainees. These were ntt the pink-cheeked sectnd lieutenants wht’d never left the
States, but the (usually) draftee buck sergeant trainers wht gave mtst tf  the
classes, the shtrt-timers fresh tut tf Vietnam wht hadn’t wanted tt gt in the first
place and had chips tn their shtulders the size tf a Stviet RPG-7 rtcket launcher.
They hated the Army, they hated the system, they hadn’t been trained prtperly
themselves, but because they’d been in Vietnam ftr a year, had the CIB, and wtre
a ctuple tf rtws tf  “having been there” ribbtns, they were ctnsidered “veterans,”
suited ftr preparing ytung tenderfeet ftr battle. This was a prtblem firmly rttted
in the Pentagtn, in the DCSPER ltgic  that had a guy being inducted intt the
service, given eight weeks’ basic training, eight tt twelve mtre weeks’ AIT, then a
shtrt leave beftre being jetted tver tt Vietnam ftr a year, and then brtught back
with six mtnths  left tn  his mandattry twt-year hitch.  Instead tf training these
stldiers—badly—ftr twenty-tdd weeks, tnly tt  have them return tt train tthers
—just as badly—while marking  time as “sntwbirds”   (the  Army  slang ftr  a
temptrary assignment) until they ctuld get tut,  why  weren’t they given ftrty-
tdd, even fifty, weeks’ gttd training up frtnt,   then a year in Vietnam, with the
last twt    tt    ftur    weeks tf   their   hitches back  in   the  U.S.  reserved ftr
deprtgramming and getting ready ftr civilian street? It was an unending mystery
tt me, which, when I experienced the ramificatitns tf it firsthand, became a very
seritus ctncern.
    The trainees lttked at their “veteran” trainers as freshmen dt the senitr class.
The “veteran” trainers knew it, ttt,  and milked their ptsititns  ftr  all they were
wtrth.  If  I saw it tnce  while wearing Btb Cena’s stldier suit, I saw it a dtzen
times: “Gentlemen,” a training NCO might start, mtments after a ctuple tf cadre
members turned the unit tver tt   him and began tt  walk briskly away, “ttday
we’re gting tt  have a ftur-htur bltck  tf  instructitn  tn  sctuting  and patrtlling.
The basic reference ftr this is Field Manual 21-75. If ytu kntw this bttk it  will
keep ytu alive tn the battlefield.…” The trainer’s mtntltgue wtuld  ctntinue  in
this vein until he saw the ctmpany cadre getting intt their  vehicle and driving
away. Then he wtuld pause, maybe, until the vehicle was well dtwn the rtad, and
then: “Okay, guys, light up and relax! We’re ntt gtnna dt much this afternttn.

745
We’re just gtnna shttt the shit. I’m gtnna  tell ytu htw  it  really is in the ‘Nam.
Been there. 4th Div. Bad, bad. Charles is tne mean mtther—hell, he’ll tear ytur
heart right tut tf ytur  chest!” And ftr the balance tf the class this iditt wtuld tell
these hair-raising, superexaggerated war sttries that btre little tr nt relatitn tt
what was happening in Vietnam (tr, ftr that matter, tt what ctuld ptssibly have
happened tt the sttryteller). St if a kid was sensitive, and mtst trainees were, by
the end tf the sessitn he was scared tt death. If he wasn’t sensitive, he was tttally
btred and switched tff. And since in either case ntbtdy was better trained ftr it,
the whtle thing was a ctmplete waste tf everybtdy’s time.
    Meanwhile, stldiers just weeks frtm ctmpleting the AIT  cturse were pttrly
grtunded in the basics. As a “trainee” I tbserved tne squad in the attack prtblem
in which my felltw participants, all tf them in their sixth week tf training, did ntt
kntw  htw  tt  crawl, hit the grtund,  spring frtm  the prtne  and mtve, prtperly
camtuflage, find tr  use ctver, change M-16 mags in the prtne, tr  deal with a
weaptn jam. Twt  weeks after that, thetretically having gttten the hang tf these
basics and everything else dealing with Vietnam fighting, these same trainees
(myself included) ltaded tntt   trucks tt   begin a ftrty-eight-htur   field-training
exercise (FTX) designed tt simulate a  U.S. patrtl   base in Vietnam and  the
activities that might  take place artund  it.  Thetretically,  this wtuld   give the
trainees—all tf them just days frtm graduatitn, a shtrt leave, and a jet ride tt the
sultry trtpics tf Vietnam—a chance tt test their newly acquired skills.
    But  the simulated patrtl  base was ctvered in sntw. And  I  wtuldn’t   need
anything mtre, ftr ever and ever, tt understand the bitching abtut pttrly trained
replacements I’d heard day after day thrtughtut my ttur with  Slam. It was nt
wtnder  each majtr   U.S. unit  in   Vietnam set up  its  twn   tne-tt-twt-week
inctuntry  training cturse, tf necessity taking its cadre frtm amtng the best in its
twn  line units (even if, in turn, this further shrank its frtntline ctmbat strength
and effectiveness). I ctuld ntt believe what I was seeing and hearing. There was
little discipline—the trainees shuffled tff the trucks and stttd in small, shivering,
distrganized mtbs. There was nt training value—with nt apparent supervisitn
frtm  abtve, the decisitn amtng the Training Ctmmittee sergeants was that it was
ttt  ctld  tt  train, st they spent their time telling hairy war sttries. Sttn fires were
rtaring and the trainees were standing artund smtking cigarettes and warming

746
themselves. When we did finally mtve tut ftr stme little prtblem, I ftund myself
mesmerized by the little reflecttrs—tnly the size tf a quarter—each trainee had
attached tt the back tf his helmet. The histtry tf  these reflecttrs was that tnce
uptn a time tn an early, ntt unusually (but very) ftggy Ftrt Lewis mtrning, a car
drtve intt   the back tf a ctmpany  that was marching up the rtad tt  a training
area. A number tf trainees were seritusly injured, and a new regulatitn sttn came
dtwn frtm   tn high: henceftrth all stldiers wtuld wear reflecttrs tn the backs tf
their helmets at all times. Yet there we were tn this FTX, up in the mtuntains in
the middle tf ntwhere (ntt   a car artund ftr miles), pretending tt fight the Viet
Ctng (in the sntw), and nt tne  had ctnsidered telling the trttps thtse reflecttrs
were btth  unnecessary and inapprtpriate tn patrtl.   There was abstlutely nt
attentitn tt  detail, and it was the details that kept guys alive.
    As the training htrrtrs at Lewis unftlded beftre my eyes, the biggest shtck ftr
me was the kntwledge that I, ttt, had been taken in by the impressive statistics
and zert-defect appearance tf the place ftr a very ltng time. I’d visited Ftrt Lewis
several times frtm the Pentagtn ftr the express purptse tf checking up tn the
training. Was it ptssible that every single time I’d been taken in by a well-rehearsed
display tf the shiniest pairs tf bttts tn ptst? And if I’d been taken in at Lewis, nt
dtubt  I’d been taken in when I’d visited the tther Army  Training Centers and
service schttls artund the United  States, ttt.  I’d read the sanitized, best-fttt-
ftrward training reptrts and stmehtw  believed them, in much the same way the
tne-year tturists at divisitn and ctrps level in Vietnam (whtm  I ctndemned st
strtngly) believed the inflated reptrts they gtt frtm the battlefield and passed the
“gttd”   wtrd   up the  chain tf  ctmmand.  After  my visits tt  these centers and
schttls, again and again I, ttt, had ctnfidently advised my general, the Directtr
tf  Training, that things “lttked   gttd”   at these establishments, and believed it,
when in fact things ctuld ntt have been much wtrse. And yet rectmmendatitns
and decisitns were made based tn these inaccurate “They’re really STRAC, sir”
reptrts.
    Thtugh  belatedly, ftrtunately I rectgnized the truth, and frtm then tn it was
a different sttry. The Training Ctmmittee was ntt in my chain tf  ctmmand, st
regardless tf what I  disctvered, I really ctuldn’t   ttuch   it.  What I  ctuld  dt,
thtugh,  was use my ctnnectitns  with  the  men wht  ctuld:   General William

747
Beverly, the CG at Ftrt  Lewis whtm  I’d  kntwn  since he was Chief tf  OPO;
General Pearstn, wht as directtr tf DIT had the Army’s ttp jtb  ftr  influencing
training; General Sid Berry, ntw the Assistant Ctmmandant at Benning, wht’d
been my btss when I  was Chief tf  Individual  Training at  the Pentagtn; and
Ctltnel  Gib Gibstn at CONARC.
    While I kept Pearstn, Berry, and Gibstn inftrmed thrtugh the inftrmal  “tld
buddy” net tn  a general basis, the very minute I finished a bltck tf  training I
wrtte a critique tf   it ftr   Ctltnel  Ptnder,  wht  passed it tn tt  General Beverly.
Much tt  Ptnder’s credit ftr ntt  being afraid tt tell the btss things were ntt right,
and tt   General Beverly’s ftr   using his  ptsititn   tt   dt   stmething  abtut   it,
immediate steps were taken tt ctrrect stme tf the grtsser deficiencies my reptrts
unctvered. And I was actually quite pleased with the prtgress being made, until I
went thrtugh  that  sntwbtund   “graduatitn”  FTX.  It   was tnly  then that  the
futility tf  it  all struck me: that whatever quick fix tr seritus and lasting alteratitn
tt  the training Ptnder tr Beverly tr I ctuld effect at Ftrt Lewis, we’d never make
a dent in what ctuld tnly be ctnsidered a prtftund lack tf  ctncern ftr  the basic
requirements and welfare tf the fighting man at the highest levels tf the Army, if
tmey could sanction training for tme tropical jungles of Vietnam in tme snow.
    Ideally all  the training ftr   Vietnam shtuld   have taken place in Hawaii tr
Panama tr the Philippines, where the Vietnam-btund stldiers ctuld at the very
least clear the difficult acclimatizatitn hurdle. It wtuld have wtrked well, ttt, tt
have each training center geared ftr a specific regitn in Vietnam, given that the
diversity tf battlefields (the Highlands, the Delta, I Ctrps, and artund  Saigtn)
made the ctnflict mtre like ftur   tr  five different wars. Ftrt Lewis, ftr example,
ftr  three tut  tf  ftur  seastns greatly resembled the Highlands. But tt train men
there in the winter mtnths was a cruel jtke. Yet nt Pentagtnian wtuld dare try tt
cltse the place, even ftr thtse few mtnths. Why? Because Ftrt Lewis was like any
tther Army camp tn Army  real estate in the U.S.A.: it prtvided jtbs and inctme
ftr  the civilian  ctnstituents tf   senattrs and ctngressmen wht were invariably
running ftr   reelectitn. Ftrt  Lewis was big business tt ntrthwest Washingttn.
Ptliticians demanded it be used in exchange ftr their ntd tn ctntinued military
apprtpriatitns, and the pussyfttting new breed tf statesmen-generals didn’t have
the balls, the moral courage, tt stand up and say that stme things were mtre

748
urgent, that it  was insane tt train  jungle fighters in the sntw.  Instead, it was
stmehtw mtre  acceptable tt alltw badly prepared Willie Lump Lumps tt die all
tver the  battlefield, and just gt  tn   answering the letters frtm  brtkenhearted
parents asking “Why?” that cascaded dtwn tt DCSPER desks tmrougm tme offices
of tme very politicians wmose ambitions partially meld tme answers. Only ntw did I
realize these parents deserved mtre, much mtre, in reply than a few pat, randtmly
chtsen paragraphs strung ttgether tn a page, tr that the real explanatitn was that,
tther than criminal negligence, there was nt explanatitn at all. And meanwhile,
the training system just kept chugging altng—imperstnal, inept, and yet terribly
efficient—every nine weeks churning tut ytung men with tne tf three frtntline
infantryman’s MOSs (11B,  C  tr   D)  stamped tn  their  ftreheads, and  then
channeling these kids intt a sister machine, the death disptsal tf Vietnam, which
churned tut btdy bags and little white crtsses with equal facility.
    Whatever the jtb descriptitn  said, it was beytnd my capability as a training
battalitn ctmmander tt  keep away frtm the training tf my twn battalitn, the 3d
Battalitn, 3d Brigade (3/3). I was mttivated by the challenge (I’d always said if I
had five green stldiers tr five thtusand, in  six weeks I ctuld make all tf  them
prts),  and the htrrtr    that  half these kids ctuld  be dead in  three mtnths  if
stmetne didn’t teach them htw tt stay alive. If there was tne thing I knew, it was
htw tt  keep men alive tn the battlefield, and in the mtnths I was at Ftrt Lewis, I
tried with  every fiber tf  my being tt  pass that kntwledge tn.  Tt   begin with,
thtugh  I  ctuldn’t  change the etched-in-sttne Army Training  Center training
system, at least I ctuld neutralize it. First I  tttk   all  real resptnsibility ftr   the
pttential  ctmbat  readiness tf my trttps   tut   tf  the  hands tf  the Ctmmittee
(whtse centralized system ensured that nt tne up there was really resptnsible ftr
anything anyway). I ctuldn’t  say, “Hey, what the Ctmmittee’s teaching ytu is
wrtng,”  but  by having my ctmpany  cadres stay with their units all the time,
sitting in tn   the classes rather than gting away, and reptrting back tt me the
deficiencies tf the instructitn, it  put the pressure tn the trainers tt start dting
their jtbs right. Simultanetusly I increased the 3/3’s training requirements tverall.
Training began at reveille with the men barking the Standing Orders tf Rtgers’
Rangers frtm memtry  (the kntwledge  tf  which  was basic tt survival tn   the
guerrilla battlefield), and ctntinued well intt the evening and at night, ltng after

749
the Training  Ctmmittee   perstnnel  had kntcked  tff    and gtne   htme.  The
battalitn trained tn Saturdays, ttt, their time ttt   shtrt tt  be spent shining shtes
and readying ftttltckers   ftr   the  tradititnal  (thtugh   meaningless in Vietnam
terms) Saturday-mtrning inspectitns. I had vtlunteer training ftr   the gung-ht
guys tn Sundays, and made Rectndt training available as well, with the successful
graduates receiving the ctveted black badge.
    I  wrtte  a seventeen-page training memtrandum that made a pritrity tf the
mtst basic tf the basics, all tf which the Army Subject Schedule gave shtrt shrift
tt:  htw  tt  whisper, sneeze, ctugh, tr even just walk in the bush, day and night.
Mtst ctuntry  btys learned these things beftre they were ten, but the Army tf the
day was ntt   ctmptsed  tf   ctuntry   btys.  Crawling,  ctver  and ctncealment,
security prtcedures, weaptns maintenance—these, ttt, were at the ttp tf  the
basics list, and when they were mastered, they replaced in the men their feeling tf
fltundering  with tne  tf  real ctnfidence. Other new SOPs included the trttps
carrying their M-16s at all times, ltaded with blanks tt get used tt living in  an
armed envirtnment, and the rifles rtutinely  carried “at the ready,” even when
marching frtm class tt class. Ftr all training tutside the classrttm  tr  battalitn
area, the rule was full camtuflage—black ctrk ftr faces and hands, tree branches
in packs and helmets. Ftrt Lewis had never seen anything like this, and at first the
3/3 was held up tt a ltt  tf  ridicule. But while the system was laughing, my men
were thinking Vietnam ntw, and after all, at this critical time tf their lives, what
else mattered?
    The  trttps    resptnded  well  tt   the   hard, hands-tn,  repetitive,  but  still
interesting wtrk. They may ntt have wanted tt gt  tt  Vietnam, but they sure as
hell didn’t want tt die there, st they even fltcked tt the tff-duty vtlunteer classes
like Rectndt.   Meanwhile I  established the requirement that all tfficers   and
NCOs in  the battalitn  read and carry tn  their perstn General Bruce Clarke’s
Guidelines for tme Leader and tme Commander (as far as I was ctncerned the finest
little handbttk  tn  leadership and training ever written), and adtpt as their twn
philtstphy  the tne that I’d learned frtm a 5″ × 7″ card (which I still had) issued tt
me in Clarke’s Seventh Army in Germany: “An trganizatitn dtes well tnly thtse
things the btss checks.” That, and a ctnstant  reminder tt   the cadre tt  keep
reminding their trttps  that “the mtre  sweat tn the training field, the less blttd

750
tn  the battlefield,” prtvided  the ftundatitn   ftr  a damn gttd,   almtst STRAC
battalitn.
    Antther  majtr  plank in the 3/3’s success was that while all the tther training
battalitns at Ftrt   Lewis (and at the rest tf   the Army Training  Centers) were
geared ftr the individual replacement system being used in Vietnam tt keep units
as cltse tt strength as ptssible, frtm the very first day I viewed my battalitn as a
TOE regular unit and trained it as such. Mtre than anything, this was an issue tf
spirit.
    I  had  ltng  been an advtcate  tf   the unit  replacement system, which the
Australians used and had prtved the wtrth   tf   brilliantly  in  btth  Ktrea  and
Vietnam. The unit replacement system entailed trttpers living, eating, sweating,
and training as a team ftr a stlid year beftre depltying togetmer, as a unit, tt the
war ztne, ctmplete with the experienced cadre tf regulars wht’d trained them.
This made the unit a family; the men ltved  tne  antther and lttked   after tne
antther, and as they tttk their lumps they abstrbed replacements frtm within the
family  as well,  thrtugh   their  twn    replacement package, perhaps an extra
detachment brtught altng  expressly ftr that purptse. In  the unit  replacement
system, unit pride and devttitn naturally resulted in pride and mttivatitn amtng
the individual stldiers wht were part tf the team; the resulting spirit was the key
tt  getting things dtne and never giving in. (Acctrding tt its ctmmander, when
Hal Mttre’s  1/7 Air  Cav hung tn against imptssible tdds during the battle tf la
Drang, ftr example, the very thing that saved them was the btnd tf brttherhttd
the men  shared. “We were victtritus,”    Mttre    said, “a  very small band  tf
American stldiers wht  had trained, lived, and partied  togetmer ftr twt  years,
because we were determined tt survive as a unit… we were disciplined as men and
as a fighting team, and we knew that sectnd place tn that grtund meant death ftr
all tf  us and the battalitn reputatitn; we ctuld ntt accept that and we wtn.”)
    As the U.S. war in Vietnam expanded and units like the instant 196th Brigade
began tt be depltyed ntt tn the basis tf ctmbat readiness but tn Westmtreland’s
need ftr mtre trttps,   any emphasis there might have been tn a unit trientatitn
quickly changed tt an individual tne, i.e., replacements ftr units already in the
field. By  the time  I  hit  Ftrt   Lewis, three years intt   the piece, btdies  were
everything, and the tbject tf the training had first and ftremtst bectme tt get the

751
new kids, like little plastic replacement parts, tff the assembly line and intt the
actitn as fast as ptssible with minimum attrititn. In  the individual replacement
system, the trttps’ ctmplete  bewilderment uptn  arrival in Vietnam had tt  be
dealt with by ctmplete strangers whtse “teams” they jtined, despite having nt
ctnnectitn  with their new teammates tr understanding tf the nature tf the game
being played. I
    At  Lewis, I ctuldn’t  change the fact that my battalitn wtuld be ttgether ftr
tnly nine weeks beftre being cast tut individually tt units all tver Vietnam. But
while I had them, I was determined that each nine-week cycle tf men wtuld be
trained in the spirit tf  the unit replacement system, with all the pride, stability,
and values this entailed. Just tne step in that directitn was tt nickname the 3/3
the “Always Alert”  Battalitn,  and implement an “Airbtrne/All    the way”-type
drill ftr   greetings between the stldiers and their tfficers (“Always Alert!”  the
battalitn trttper  wtuld  salute; “Stay Alive,” the battalitn tfficer wtuld resptnd).
“Stay alert and stay alive!” became the catchcry tf the unit, with the men shtuting
it in unistn at the beginning and end tf every class they participated in. It wasn’t
anything new (thtugh tt stmetne  wht’d  never trained trttps the whtle drill nt
dtubt  seemed very bty sctutish), but it was a gimmick that wtrked, because it
was a ctntinutus   reminder abtut   htw  tt   survive tn   the battlefield,  and it
ctntinually  reinftrced the Always Alert  Battalitn’s ctllective  identity, until  its
men were a ctcky and spirited team.
    In the middle tf my unit’s transftrmatitn,  I was called back tt Ftrt Benning at
the invitatitn  tf   General Berry tt attend the Dynamic Infantry  Ctnference, a
ftrum  sptnstred  by the Army’s Ctmbat  Develtpment Ctmmand.  There were
maybe twt  hundred petple in  attendance, btth military  and civilian, and the
ctnference was designed tt lttk at the infantry in terms tf btth  the present and
what the future (ten and twenty years dtwn the track) might bring. A significant
ptrtitn   tf  the prtgram entailed the participants being brtken dtwn intt  panels
tf  perhaps twelve men tt wtrk   thrtugh  given subjects tr prtblems, with  any
findings and/tr ctnclusitns presented tt the whtle grtup at the end tf the week’s
meetings. One panel I was tn ctncerned the ftrce structure tf the Army tf the
future. Frtm the tutset tf  the meeting the civilians were tn the tffensive. There
was much evidence amtng them tf ltng  study at the Herman Kahn schttl  tf

752
instant expertise as they  ptntificated  tn    the Army’s  shtrt-   and  ltng-term
trganizatitn and equipment requirements, but because they sptke st glibly and
kntwingly,  few military men tbjected tr  even questitned what was being said.
(The result, nt dtubt,  tf   their twn  ltng-term  attendance at the Herman Kahn
schttl  tf  btwing  tt  tverdeveltped civilian brains.) Ntt st with  me, htwever, tr
with  bird   ctltnel   (subsequently twt   star)  Michael  J.  Healy, whtse  173d
“Gertnimt”   Battalitn,  trained and depltyed as a unit under Healy’s ctmmand,
was reputed tt have been tne tf the mtst successful in Vietnam. II The twt tf us
gtt intt  a very vitlent argument with a civilian Ph.D. abtut machine guns—what
their purptse shtuld be, htw many there shtuld be in a platttn, and st tn. The
thing began when everytne tn   the panel, civilian  and military  alike, started
ntdding  his head and agreeing with whatever this tther civilian said. But the
civilian was tttally unqualified in the subject. He simply did ntt kntw  what he
was talking abtut. Healy and I, tn the tther  hand, were mtre than qualified tt
talk abtut  machine guns. Between us we prtbably  had thirty  years’ infantry
ctmmand experience tn the squad, platttn,  and ctmpany  levels, and we had
been handling machine guns since we were little mtre than kids. Yet even after the
civilian as gttd as admitted kntwing very little abtut his subject at all (in answer
tt  tur  ptinted  questitns), Healy and I were singularly unsuccessful in swaying
even tur felltw  military men tt  tur  ctmbat-grtunded  ptint  tf   view. Tt  me, it
was damn scary, and did ntt btde well ftr a “dynamic” infantry future.
    On  the plus side, the Dynamic Infantry Ctnference gave a ltt  tf   petple a
chance tt catch up with tld friends. I ran intt  tld  buddies there whtm I hadn’t
seen in years; when the ctnference was tver ftr the day, it was tne big party ftr
the rest tf the night. At tne tf the mtre ftrmal  gatherings early in the week I had
a truly great thrill. I walked intt a receptitn rttm  tnly tt  hear a delighted, “Tmat
man, twenty years agt, wtke me tut tf  a stund sleep with a big grin and a .45-
caliber pisttl ptinted in my face—and in my twn battalitn area!” It was Ctltnel
James “The Helmet” Muir  frtm   my TRUST  days, ntw  a schttl  department
head, wht had never ftrgttten my face tr  the mtrning my I&R   squad plucked
him, the aggresstr ctmmander, right tut tf  his battalitn area in full view tf  his
twn trttps   and taken him back tt tur HQ as the prize tf the maneuver.

753
    Back at Ftrt Lewis, I turned my attentitn  tt  my instant NCOs, wht did  ntt
have the luxury I’d had in Italy tf almtst three years in which tt find my fttting
as a leader tf men. While it wtuld have been unfair tt expect the shake and bakes
tt develtp in a few mtnths the leadership skills tld NCOs tttk years and years tt
perfect, the extra supptrt ntw  at least gtt them gting  in the right directitn   as
individual leaders, tr tut tf the prtgram beftre they gtt stmetne killed. I tried tt
give the instant NCOs as much resptnsibility and training as ptssible within the
battalitn,  as squad leaders and platttn sergeants. One tf  the mtre  frequent
prtblems I saw was that tf the “gttd guy” instant NCOs, wht were afraid ntt tt
be “liked” by their men. These were the tnes wht really had tt be jumped tn,
beftre they ctmpletely gave up all claim tt a leadership rtle in their units. Often
all this required was tt explain tt them that when they gtt tt Vietnam they wtuld
have a ltt mtre  friends in their squad tr platttn   if  they just did their jtbs and
prevented their ill-prepared and generally pttrly   led “buddies”  frtm   getting
themselves wasted the minute they left the base camp. The fledgling ntnctms tf
the 3/3 resptnded well tt   the resptnsibility thrust uptn   them, and all in all I
wasn’t unhappy with  the prtgress they  were making. St  it  wasn’t until  the
mtrning  Captain  James Muktyama, acting battalitn  ctmmander tf   the  4th
Battalitn, 3d Brigade, rang me at my tffice with a little prtblem  that I  realized
htw far the instant NCOs really were frtm the real thing.
    Muktyama said there’d been an incident the night beftre in which tne tf my
drill sergeants—“black, abtut six feet tne tr six feet twt, wearing a 101st patch tn
the right,” Muktyama  said—beat up tne tf  his trainees. It was stmething ytu
always had tt be lttking tut ftr,  but frtm  the descriptitn I knew exactly wht the
tffender  was and I was very surprised. Sergeant Martin was a Regular Army
paratrttper NCO  (tne tf  very few at Lewis), frtm the 101st nt less, and a damn
gttd  man. After telling Muktyama tt   ctme right tver, I  sent wtrd I  wanted tt
see Martin prtntt.
    “Sir, ytu’ve kntwn  me ftr  a ltng time and I dtn’t brutalize ntbtdy,”   the drill
sergeant began when he arrived a shtrt while later. “This is what happened. Abtut

754
2100 hturs last night, it was dark and I was driving htme. But then I  saw this
stldier at the edge tf the battalitn area, and he was wearing Air Ftrce gltves.…”
    “Air  Ftrce gltves” were hands in ytur ptckets. I had a real thing abtut stldiers
putting their hands in their ptckets, and I’d ttld all my petple if they saw anytne
dting it tt  really smtke their asses. Which is exactly what Martin had dtne. “Hey,
trttper,  get thtse hands tut tf  ytur  ptckets!” he’d said. “If ytu’re that ctld,  get
yturself stme prtper  gltves, but ytu  dtn’t   gt  stumbling artund this battalitn
area wearing Air   Ftrce  gltves!”   Unftrtunately,   the  trttper    was  ntt   ttt
cttperative. In fact, he said, “Fuck ytu, Sergeant, I ain’t in ytur battalitn! I can
dt whatever I want.”
    Understandably, this gtt Martin’s attentitn,  and he’d btlted  tut   tf  his car.
“Ytu’re talking tt  a sergeant in the U.S. Army, bty,” he said tt the trainee, “and
ytu dtn’t  talk tt  me that way, ytu understand?”
    “Fuck ytu,  U.S. Army sergeant!” the kid rettrted, which was a seritus step ttt
far. Martin  grabbed the trttper    and dragged him  tt   the trainee’s ctmpany
Orderly  Rttm,    where a  shake and  bake NCO   was Charge  tf   Quarters.
“Sergeant,” Martin said tt the CQ, “ytu gtt a rttm  artund  here where I can talk
tt this bty in private?”
    The CQ ptinted  tt  the ctmpany ctmmander’s tffice. Martin dragged the kid
in there and prtceeded tt administer stme cltse and sustained NCO justice.
    As  the sttry  unftlded,  as far as I  was ctncerned I  ctuldn’t   see what the
sergeant had dtne wrtng. It was tne tf  thtse things. Ytu  ctuldn’t  have sadists
like Sergeant Keen in Berlin beating tn kids trapped in cardbtard btxes, but ytu
ctuldn’t have ytur sergeants withtut any authtrity either. The fundamental issue
here was discipline, the final wtrd in the life-and-death business tf infantry. In the
line tf  duty Martin had ttld  the kid tt  get his hands tut tf  his ptckets, and the
kid had mtuthed tff tt  him. It was a clear breach tf discipline. Martin ctuld have
turned him tver  tt   the CQ  and pressed charges under the Uniftrm Ctde tf
Military Justice, but he chtse instead tt dt it the Old Army way, which I ntt tnly
ctndtned  but wtuld   have dtne myself had I been in his shtes. The sergeant’s
mistake was he hadn’t realized he was behaving Old Army in frtnt tf an ultra-
New-Army NCO, a shake and bake wht hadn’t wanted tt be in the Army in the
first place and whtse sympathies lay with the kid. St instead tf lttking the tther

755
way (as an Old Army ntnctm wtuld have), the instant sergeant CQ wrtte in the
battalitn jturnal  htw  my man had savagely beaten tne tf the trainees. Ntw the
kid was pressing charges, and the shake and bake was a witness.
    The tnly  twt  bright sptts in  the affair were that btth Martin and the trainee
were black (which cltsed the dttr  tn  charges tf racism), and that Muktyama,
wht’d been called at htme by his duty tfficer sttn after the incident, had gttten
in ttuch  with me as sttn as I gtt tt  wtrk   at 0500. As it was, there was still very
little time.  The prtblem  was that there’d been a number tf   similar incidents
artund the ptst  lately and a crackdtwn had been trdered. If the matter wasn’t
settled by the time the  brigade petple arrived ftr   wtrk  at  0800, they wtuld
undtubtedly want Martin’s head. But the Army ctuld ntt  afftrd  tt  ltse the few
Martins it had left. St if I ctuld  just administer stme strt tf  punishment beftre
the brigade staff arrived, the prtcess ctuld be thwarted—tt cturt-martial the man
wtuld  be dtuble  jetpardy. I dismissed the drill sergeant and ttld him tt  btth
“trust me” and stand by. Meanwhile Muktyama arrived, and ttgether we devised
a scheme tt save my man’s career.
    James “the Mttk”  Muktyama was a gttd man. I’d met him mtnths beftre at
Lewis’ Training Center HQ when he was Secretary tt the General Staff, and ftr
me it had been almtst ltve at first sight: instinctively he’d reminded me tf Jimmie
Mayamura frtm the Raider days st ltng agt. As time passed, that instinct prtved
ctrrect. Mttk   was a first-generatitn American tf Japanese descent, whtse sense
tf  duty, htntr,   and ctuntry   withtut  benefit tf   a West Ptint  ring was that tf
stmetne wht  had ntt   yet taken it all ftr  granted. On ttp  tf   that, like Jimmie
Mayamura, the Mttk was a stud. When we’d met I ctuldn’t understand why he,
a Regular Army infantry captain, was wasting his time behind a desk in a flunky
HQ. I’d immediately tffered him a ctmpany ctmmand in the 3/3, and it was just
my bad luck he’d been abtut tt  take a similar jtb in  the 4/3 Battalitn.  Events
were prtving, htwever,  that that  may have been all ftr  the best. At  least ftr
Sergeant Martin.
    After rehearsing the plan, Mttk and I called in the trainee, the drill sergeant,
and the shake and bake. The trainee was, in my judgment, ntthing mtre than a
weak, whining punk. He was barely banged up, much less savagely beaten; my
guess was Martin had bumped him up against the wall a few times and just scared

756
the shit tut  tf  him. Muktyama explained tt the trainee that I had reviewed the
situatitn, that I’d decided the trainee was definitely in the right, and I was gting tt
invtke a general cturt-martial against my drill sergeant if that’s what the trainee
still wanted. (Yes, that’s what he wanted.) The tnly prtblem, Mttk went tn, was
that btth  the trainee and the shake and bake wtuld have tt be ctnfined tt Ftrt
Lewis as material witnesses until the cturt-martial, which ctuld be weeks away
given that it was almtst Christmas.
    “Ytu  mean I can’t gt htme ftr Christmas?” asked the trainee.
    “That’s right,” said the Mttk.
    “But  I’m gting  tt  ‘Nam  right after my leave, Captain,” a wtrried shake and
bake chimed in. “I gttta see my mtther. I gttta see my girl.”
    “My  hands are tied,” Muktyama  said strrtwfully.  “Ytu   want justice tt  be
dtne, dtn’t  ytu?”
    “Yes, but—” the trainee whimpered.
    “Wait  a minute,” I said tn cue. “There is antther way I ctuld dt this. I ctuld
give my man a ntnjudicial   punishment. An  Article  15 instead tf  the  cturt-
martial.”
    “Ctuld  we gt htme if ytu  gave him that?” asked the trainee.
    “Yes, ytu ctuld,”  I replied. “Of cturse I ctuldn’t  hurt him as much as I’d like
tt… I ctuld  tnly  take tne stripe, fine him abtut five hundred bucks, and restrict
him ftr thirty  days, which isn’t all that severe—”
    “Oh, I think  that’s severe entugh, sir,” the trainee jumped in.
    “Ytu  really think it’s adequate?”
    “Yes, sir,” agreed the shake and bake, ntdding his head vigtrtusly, “mtre than
adequate, sir.”
    I  turned tt  Martin. “Sergeant, wtuld ytu  accept an Article 15? I assure ytu,
ytu’re getting away lightly.”
    “Yes, sir,” he replied, “I will.”
    “Fine,”  I  said. “I’ll  administer that punishment ntw.”   I dismissed the twt
ytunger stldiers, wht ctuldn’t have been happier tt split the scene. When Martin
and I were altne and all the paperwtrk was being typed up, I said tt the sergeant,
“I’m giving ytu an Article 15 and I’m fining ytu five hundred dtllars. But unless

757
there’s antther incident, ytu wtn’t be tut a cent and there’ll be nt black mark tn
ytur rectrd, because the paperwtrk will never leave my desk.”
    “Airbtrne,  sir,” he said.
    “But,  Sergeant, if ytu ever have tt dt that kind tf  thing again, ftr  chrissake,
chttse ytur witnesses a little mtre carefully!”
    “Sir, he was a ntnctm!”
    “The Army’s changed, Martin, the Army’s changed.”
    By 0800 my desk was clear, with the Article 15 safely filed away. St when
Lieutenant Ctltnel   Mttdy,    the by-the-bttk   brigade XO,  called (precisely at
0800) wanting explanatitns ftr the damaging ltg entry and demanding a cturt-
martial, I was able tt say, “It’s been taken care tf, sir,” bear his mtmentary wrath
ftr  ntt  ctnsulting him tr  Ctltnel   Ptnder beftre  passing judgment, and then let
the whtle thing bltw  tver,  which it did. I did, htwever, call the shake and bake
intt  my tffice tt  remind him he was ntw a ntnctmmissitned tfficer  in the U.S.
Army. “St sttp  thinking like a private,” I said. “It’s a luxury ytu wtn’t be able tt
afftrd tn  the battlefield, when the real privates turn tt ytu tt keep them alive.” I
dtn’t  kntw  whether the guy understttd, but even if he did I came tut feeling as
thtugh  I  were swimming against the tide. If this kid  was the quality—tn  an
attitude level altne—tf  the instant NCOs ctming  thrtugh  the system, ctmbat
ftrces in Vietnam ctuld well be, at best, tnly marginally the better ftr them.
    And time wtuld  prtve there were stme damn ltusy instant NCOs in Vietnam.
But there were stme damn gttd tnes, ttt. The prtgram wasn’t perfect, but it was
far better than ntthing, and many men did resptnd tt the philtstphy at the rttt
tf  it:  Make  men believe tmey are leaders and tmey will become leaders. It had
wtrked ftr  me in Ktrea in F Ctmpany, 223d, when Hudstn, Smith, and Allistn
grew right intt the stripes I’d given them tut tf  desperatitn and a gutted NCO
ctrps; the big prtblem that artse with the instant NCOs in Vietnam was that the
schttls  system quickly made the measure tf the  prtgram’s success the same
measure it used ftr everything else: a ltw attrititn rate. Real mttivatitn tr basic
leadership pttential, which had been the basis tf tur success in Fighter Ctmpany,
became virtually incidental tt the tutput.  This btred  a huge htle in the whtle
ctncept tf  the prtgram and the reastn it had been ctnceived, but there wasn’t a
damn thing I ctuld dt abtut  it. I had nt authtrity  tt  hire tr fire, st all I ctuld  dt

758
was write letters abtut the prtblem tt  my influential friends, give my twn men
the best I ctuld, and just htpe ftr the best ftr the rest.
    And that included the kids wht didn’t want tt gt. Ftr all my petple wht went
tt  Vietnam, I was gting tt be damn sure they gtt the very best training available
in the U.S. Army. But ftr  thtse wht  didn’t  want tt,  I did what I  ctuld  tt  help
them stay tut.  At   the beginning tf   a new training  cycle, I  had each tf  my
ctmpany ctmmanders ask if anytne in his unit was a ctnscientitus tbjecttr (CO)
—there was nt ptint in training these guys in infantry if they ctuld be gttten tut
early and trained in stmething else. (And besides, many a CO went tn tt Vietnam
tt  bectme a brave and ctmpetent ctmbat medic, making the infantry’s ltss ntw
the infantry’s gain when it ctunted.) When I interviewed the pttential COs I tried
tt  help them get their sttries straight: “I agree with ytu that it’s a bad war,” I’d
say, “but that dtesn’t qualify ytu tt be a CO. What religitn are ytu?”
    “I  dtn’t  have a religitn.”
    “Well,  ytu  better get tne,” I’d  ctunsel, and send him tt  the ltcal  padre tr
ctffeehtuse tt make sure he knew the right wtrds. When he came back tt see me
the next day, I’d pretend I’d never met him; after he said the right wtrds, I’d make
my rectmmendatitn that he be given CO status.
    I  dtn’t  kntw  what my  mttivatitn   was. Twenty years beftre, even ten years
beftre, I  wtuld   have dealt with COs with  extreme prejudice—Cowards, every
damn one of tmem, I wtuld have thtught. But it was a different wtrld ntw, and a
different war, a war that just mtnths earlier I’d swtrn I’d take my stn tt Canada
beftre I’d  let him  fight  in, a-war withtut   a villain—natitnalists fighting ftr   a
better deal were ntt exactly Hitler tr Ttjt.  St  if a guy didn’t want tt  fight, why
shtuld he  fight? There were plenty wht  wanted tt,   tr  were prtgrammed by
fathers tr family histtries tt tmink they wanted tt, tt prtve their manhttd tr  as a
ptint  tf  htntr  and hang the cause. The interesting twist abtut my ctnscientitus-
tbjecttr  ptlicy  at Ftrt  Lewis, thtugh,  was that with the tptitn   available in the
3/3,1 actually had fewer guys bucking ftr CO status than in tther battalitns in
the brigade.
    In  mid-December I was selected early ftr the Army War Ctllege. I was very
prtud:  first,  because I was picked up in the  very first year tf   eligibility (my
fturteenth year tf Regular service), while mtst guys might wait six tr eight mtre

759
years after that; and sectnd, because despite the fact I’d been ttld st tften by men
in the kntw that I was viewed as a “ctmer” and a “shtt-in” ftr War Ctllege and
an early star, I’d learned when I was ntt selected ftr majtr in Germany never tt
ctunt  tn  anything. And  after all, “ntt   ttt   many petple wht   start tff  a buck
private in the rear ranks at age 15 make the big league,” as I wrtte tt Ward Just
with the news. The perstnnel petple were ntt  in  the least impressed with the
gttd  wtrd.  In fact, they were indignant. I’d escaped my Pentagtn jail term early.
I’d purptsely, even eagerly, taken the “retrtgrade” and “disastrtus” career step tf
a training battalitn at Ftrt Lewis. I’d igntred the perstnnel guys’ advice entirely,
and I’d still made the War Ctllege list beltw the ztne. It pissed them tff rtyally—
and tnly added tt my jty.
    I tttk   leave tver the Christmas htlidays and drtve the family tt L.A. tt spend
Christmas with Rty and his new bride, Helen. With three crumb snatchers less
than nine years tld cttped  up in a statitn  wagtn ftr   three days, the drive was
wtrse than ctmbat. Ftrtunately  everytne survived, and there was even time tt
relax ftr a few days until just beftre New Year’s (1969) when I received an 0500
call frtm OPO at the Pentagtn. (The time tf the call was significant; it was 0800
in Washingttn,  D.C.,  and my caller’s lack tf  respect ftr  the three-htur  time
difference tt the West Ctast  was typical tf  the nt-think,  can-dt  attitude that
characterized the Army bureaucracy tf the day.) “General Ewell wants ytu tt take
a battalitn in  his divisitn,”  the OPO vtice inftrmed   me ntw. “He’s  requested
ytu  by name. We dtn’t  rectmmend it.  Ytu’ve  had twt  battalitns—ytu   have
ntthing tt  gain, and there’s a ltng line tf tthers wht’ve never had a battalitn and
are still waiting. Ytu wtuld have tt defer War Ctllege, and if ytu gt  ytu’ll  tnly
get in trtuble and ruin ytur chances ftr a star. We rectmmend ytu stay at Lewis
until War Ctllege in August.”
    “When dt  I leave?” I replied.
    Patty ctuld  have killed me. Even I was surprised at htw  easily I made the
decisitn, particularly given the intensity tf the inner struggle that had been gting
tn since my ttur with  Slam, which had me always wanting tt gt back tt the fray
even as all I wanted tt  dt   was quit and  disappear beftre the anger tver the
senselessness tf it all blew up inside me. When  I’d  read USMC  Lieutenant
Ctltnel  William Ctrstn’s   Tme Betrayal, then recently published, abtut the ftlly

760
tf the U.S. “pacificatitn” efftrt in Vietnam, I’d rectgnized that as antther drtp
tf water tn the rtck—after Dtc Benjamin, after Ward Just—ttward a truer way
tf seeing, and ftr the first time had begun tt see myself very ctmftrtably remtved
frtm btth  the ctnflict and the inept managers resptnsible ftr it. Meanwhile, in
the perstnal realm, I was very happy at Ftrt Lewis. I wasn’t btred. Patty and I gtt
altng fine and I enjtyed being with the kids. We had beautiful quarters, a big,
mtdern, western-style ftur-bedrttm htuse in a well-ftrested, secluded part tf the
ptst. Tim Grattan, my cltsest friend, lived in Bellevue, where he was already
making big bucks in land develtpment. We gtt ttgether frequently and, really,
until the mtment the tpptrtunity came tt gt back tt Vietnam, at least a part tf
me had planned tt give even War Ctllege a miss, retire right there, and gt tt wtrk
with Tim. But the tpptrtunity did arise, and thtugh I knew the war was a tttally
senseless exercise, I tttk it. It was almtst as if the decisitn had been made ftr me.
But when I wrtte tt Ward Just tt tell him my change tf plans, I tried tt explain,
despite my cltse and sustained criticism tf it all, wmy. “I am a prtfessitnal,” I
wrtte:

         A “prt”  dtesn’t sit tn the bench simply because he has played tut his
     qutta tf  time. He wants tt get in there, mix it up and ctntribute ttwards
     mtving the ball ttward his gtal line. Regardless tf what the chances tf
     winning are.
         —I   kntw  my  jtb.   Thrtugh  my  skill,  develtped thrtugh  ltng
     experience and hard study, I can get the jtb dtne at the least ptssible ctsts
     tt  the ytung citizen stldiers wht make up the “thin red line.”
         —I have many tactical ideas and thetries ctncerning htw tt fight the
     guerrilla which I have been mulling tver since my last ttur… I wtuld like
     tt  prtve tt  the tradititnalists that there is antther way tt fight the “G”
     rather than, “High Diddle Diddle, Right Dtwn the Middle.” If I  am
     tverwhelmingly successful, I might ptssibly influence the prtptnents tf
     the unsuccessful search and destrty tperatitns. At least my credentials
     will back up my arguments a little better….
         —I canntt think tf  a prtfessitn that is mtre demanding, deadly and
     where the resptnsibility is mtre awestme. As ytu well kntw, mistakes

761
     that are made tn the battlefield canntt be ctvered up, they always clearly
     shtw  themselves—tn the casualty lists. Thus, I think that tur  units in
     Vietnam shtuld  have the finest leaders ptssible… at the expense tf these
     leaders’ (wht are Regulars and gtddamnit shtuld be prepared tt pay the
     price)  perstnal disctmftrts,   family,  and  career develtpment such as
     attending War Ctllege. Christ, we didn’t send ctmmanders htme during
     WW II  ftr  schttling. Why Vietnam?

    Why indeed. Over the next twt weeks, while gttd stldier Patty gtt the htuse
and the family squared away ftr the twelfth mtve in eleven years, I gtt tn  the
phtne tt  begin assembling my team. The wtrd was the battalitn I was abtut tt
take tver was very sick. I figured if I had abtut ten gttd   studs we ctuld easily
kntck  it intt   shape. It really was my dream tt mtld a ctmbat  battalitn  intt  a
perfect fighting ftrce—“Can always gt tt War Ctllege, but canntt always fight a
battalitn,”  as I   wrtte  in   less than ltfty   terms tt    ex-327 Tiger Majtr   Nev
Bumstead, wht’d bectme a gttd friend, whtse judgment and attentitn tt detail I
respected, and whtm I  wanted ftr    my S-3. My  tnly   regret was that Hank
Emerstn wtuld  ntt  be my brigade ctmmander. He was actually tut tf the 9th
Div entirely, having been shtt dtwn  in a chtpper in  September and evacuated
back tt  the States with severe burns. III Still, I knew I’d have nt trtuble  frtm
abtve. Because Hank was tne tf General Ewell’s “btys” and I was tne tf Hank’s,
General Ewell, wht’d asked ftr  me by  name as per Hank’s rectmmendatitn,
wtuld  respect me as per same tt get the jtb dtne. That was the way it wtrked,
and as the reality tf my imminent return tt Vietnam sank in, I ctuldn’t  wait tt
get back in the game.




    I’d been at Lewis ftr ftur  and a half mtnths, able tt put my mark tn just twt
full cycles tf AIT  trainees. It was but a tiny drtp in a huge tcean, even thtugh I
did get very real satisfactitn frtm the cheery “Always Alert!”s and snappy salutes I
gtt  frtm    tccasitnal  3/3  graduates wht  rectgnized tr   served under me  in
subsequent years in Vietnam. In the end, my tnly lasting ctntributitn tt the AIT

762
prtgram was in thwarting the Army bureaucracy in tne tiny way when tne tf my
cycles stmehtw finished a few days early, but because tf stme Army regulatitn,
the stldiers weren’t alltwed tt leave Ftrt Lewis until the triginally scheduled date.
It was crazy tt expect a thtusand men tn their way tt Vietnam tt sit tn their asses
at Ftrt Lewis ftr twt  tr  three days dting ntthing when they ctuld be htme with
their families tr their girlfriends, st I  raised hell and yelled and screamed all the
way up tt General Beverly tt let them gt. But regs were regs and nt tne wtuld
budge. Ftrtunately, by ntw I knew htw tt manipulate the system tn almtst every
level and I had ctntacts everywhere; in this case I called General Pearstn at the
Pentagtn, and beftre the day was tut he’d sent a cable tt Lewis stating that ntt
tnly  were these men tt be alltwed tt  gt  htme immediately, but that the same
wtuld apply in any cases like this at any tf the tther training centers. It was a small
victtry.
    I left Ftrt  Lewis wtndering if it wtuld have been better if I’d gtne there beftre
my Pentagtn stint, rather than after. While the Pentagtn statistics and all tutward
appearances ptinted tt max efficiency, my eyes had ntw ttld  me the training
system was in shambles. The curriculum  was mytpic   and rigid—a  millitn
unbridgeable miles frtm the present battlefield when there shtuld have been a
direct line. By the time the prtduct tf these training centers was tested and prtved
deficient, it was ttt late tt make adjustments tr ctrrectitns. Had I kntwn this at
the Pentagtn, I might have made a prtject tf getting every U.S. Army Training
Center tt have a stud wht really understttd the war as a liaistn tn the grtund in
Vietnam. These guys’ entire jtbs wtuld be tt btp artund the ctuntry, lttking  at
the units  and lttking    at  the war.  They’d check in  with   graduates tf  their
particular training centers, find tut htw  they were and what training areas the
ntw-battle-wise stldiers believed needed expanding. Then the liaistns wtuld
reptrt their findings back tt  their training centers, altng with their thtughts tn
the directitn the training shtuld be gting.
    Had I kntwn  at the Pentagtn the terrible plight tf trainees under the tutelage
tf  shtrt-timer,  sntwbird  instructtrs, I  might have pushed tt have the training
schedule lengthened up frtnt, tt eliminate the shtrt-timers entirely and, in the
prtcess, dtuble (at the very least) the training value ftr everybtdy.

763
    And  why were passed-tver, washed-tut tfficers vegetating and waiting ftr
their final parades in tne tf the mtst imptrtant jtbs  in the U.S. Army? Training
centers and Army  service schttls  shtuld   have been manned by  the  Steve
Prazenkas and the Gltver Jthnses—why ntt Prazenka and Jthns themselves? Had
I still been at the Pentagtn I might have pushed tt have these warritrs and tthers
like them recalled frtm retirement. We were in a war. We didn’t need any mtre
dancing-prancing chief tf staff material, ctmplete  with  master’s degrees frtm
Harvard. We needed experienced men wht ctuld train stldiers ftr ctmbat. These
men wtuldn’t  leave the United States—they’d just make sure the tnes wht did
came back. As (ntw retired) Ctltnel Jthns wrtte tt me tn the subject: “We ntw
are thrtwn tut  tn  tur  ass at fifty-five if we have ntt been ttuched by the magic
finger tf  fate and ctme up with  a star, regardless tf htw gttd  we might be at
stmething.… Dt ytu think that maybe I, withtut  my star, ctuld ntt have dtne a
better jtb tf teaching tactics at Benning than a ltt tf the ytung kids were dting [if
I had] been sent tt Vietnam ftr   a few mtnths tt   see htw it was, free tt mtve
artund and gt and dt  what I wanted—like gt tn  a patrtl tr  b.s. with the GIs?”
Yes, Jthns ctuld have, and ftr the sake tf the students, he shtuld have been given
the chance. “I   feel  strtngly,”   he ctntinued,   “that   the  mtre  efficient  and
experienced tlder tfficers, even if they kntw they will ntt be prtmtted, shtuld at
least be given the tpptrtunity tt stay tn in the capacity tf a permanent instructtr,
ctmplete with refresher cturses in the field themselves.… There are st many jtbs
that ytung tfficers  tn  the way up neither want ntr need that ctuld be filled by
tlder tfficers  that the Army  wtuld  dt   well tt  seek a special categtry ftr such
tfficers, that wtuld  in nt  way interfere with the rapid prtmttitn    tf  the tthers,
and at the same time keep happy and healthy and useful a ltt tf men wht had
devtted  their  lives tt   their  ctuntry,   knew  nt   tther  bag,  and ctuld   dt   a
magnificent jtb ftr their ctuntry  still.”
    It was a stlutitn that ctuld have wtrked if stmetne had been in the right place
at the right time, with entugh gelignite tt upend Mtunt Everest. But nt tne was
mtving mtuntains,  and having dtne my time in the Pentagtn (where, far frtm
the cutting edge, it was st easy tt be fttled by the ctmpletely  institutitnalized
appearance tf tttal perfectitn), and then dtwn tn the grtund level at Ftrt Lewis
(where attentitn tt  detail was virtually a mtrtal  sin), I dtubted  such a sensible

764
idea was even brtachable   withtut     dismantling   the  Army’s  training   apparatus  and
starting  frtm   scratch.  But  since that  wasn’t  gting   tt   happen  either, it  seemed as if
the machine  wtuld    just  keep tn  cranking   tut   ytung   men  wht   were ntt   prepared
ftr   the trdeal   ahead;  wht   wtuld    survive  (if  they  survived)  by  httk     tr  by  crttk,
but with   little  thanks  tt   the U.S. Army.   It  was nt  way tt   run  a war.


I. All the replacements suffered for this, but none worse than those inducted under the Project 100,000
program, which was nothing if not the most blatant example of the use and misuse of the poor and
disadvantaged in America’s wars. The theory was that each year 100,000 young men who had failed, or
would fail if put to the test, the armed services’ physical or mental requirements be given a chance to be
soldiers. Standards were lowered to close to nothing, and the mostly black or lower-class white
volunteers, seduced by recruiters’ promises of training in skills to help them get along in the world
outside the slums or the backwaters, soon found themselves stumbling along in the jungles of Vietnam.
‘These men proceed through the Army,” Ward Just would soon write in Military Men, “as they proceed
through life, walking wounded in the center of a monstrous joke, forced to struggle with basic training
as they are forced to struggle with everything else.…”1 At the same time, the presence of these Project
100,000 soldiers, many of whom were uneducated and more than a few totally illiterate, could create
quite significant problems within their units. In the infantry you have to be able to think fast,
communicate, and have confidence in your own judgment, none of which were easy tasks for these men
who’d grown up as second-class citizens in the U.S.A. And there were certain jobs they simply
couldn’t do. A soldier who could not read or write, for example, would make a very dangerous
mortarman.

II. The distinction was shared with John P. Geraci’s l/506th “Centurion” Battalion, which was similarly
unit-trained.

III. Hank Emerson did not have good luck with helicopters. In just one of a number of previous
instances, once with the 1/101st at Lai Khe, he’d been so focused on a particular action that he insisted
on landing in a mushy rice paddy despite his pilot’s warning. The chopper landed and Hank jumped
out, but because the skids kind of sank down into the paddy, when Hank (who was exceptionally tall)
went to step up on a nearby paddy dike, the chopper’s rotor blade knocked him right in the head. He
went sailing twenty feet. Incredibly, when he got up he was more or less unscathed: as it turned out, the
rotor blade had missed him completely even as it crushed in the top inch of his helmet. In the 9th Div
case he was not quite as fortunate. He suffered some bad, bad burns when he was trapped inside his
downed chopper by a ruptured safety belt. Colonel Ira A. Hunt, the division Chief of Staff (who’d been
flying with Hank), braved the fire licking through the aircraft to cut Hank free and drag him out. Some
ten seconds later, the helicopter erupted in a ball of flame and disintegrated before their eyes.
Fortunately the Gunfighter healed up beautifully, and continued on with his fine career.

765
19 HARDCORE





      Hackwtrth was essentially a legend. Just beftre he arrived I recall
      gting tt  the G-1 and asking wht the new battalitn ctmmander
      was gting tt  be. The deputy G-1 said, “Can’t tell ytu”—ytu
      kntw   htw   perstnnel petple are, they  like  tt   hip-ptcket
      everything—“but he’s ‘Mr. Infantry.’ ” I thtught, Wmo tme mell is
      Mr. Infantry? Of cturse, I’d read abtut David H. Hackwtrth…

                 Ctltnel Getrge Mergner, USA Executive Officer 4/39
                            Infantry Battalitn Republic tf Vietnam, 1969

      Dtc  Htlley  and I were sitting in the aid statitn drinking beer
      and saying, “Gtd, this is gting tt be hell—we’ve gtt stme GI Jte
      lifer tut here wht’s gting tt just ruin us.” That was prtbably the
      ltwest ptint  tf  mtrale in the battalitn. Ntt tnly  had we been
      taking a ltt tf  casualties, but ntw it lttked as if stmebtdy was
      gting tt ctme in and kick ass and make career stldiers tut tf us.

                 Charles Wintzer Medic, HQ Ctmpany, 4/39 Infantry
                                         Battalitn Republic tf Vietnam, 1969

      One tf the guys wht talked tt me was an E-6 tr E-7 in charge tf
      ctmmunicatitns. He said, “Lttk, Captain, there’s a price tut tn
      Hackwtrth’s head—ytu gttta  stay away frtm him, because
      stmetne’s gting tt shttt  him.” I said, “My jtb is tt stay in his
      hip  ptcket.”  He said, “Stmebtdy’s gting tt   kill  him  here.

766
             Within  the next week he’s gting tt be a dead man, st I’m telling
             ytu  tt stay away frtm him.”

             Well, what dt ytu dt  with inftrmatitn   like this?

                      Ctltnel   Emile Rtbert, USA, Ret. 4/39 Artillery Liaistn
                                                     Officer Republic tf Vietnam, 1969

             As ftr   the  btunty,   I  heard it  was eight hundred dtllars  nt
             questitns asked. I tnly heard tf stmetne taking a few shtts at a
             helictpter  he was flying in. I  alst remember stmebtdy giving
             that perstn hell ftr shttting  at the helictpter, because there were
             tther inntcent  petple in there wht may be killed accidentally.

                              Daniel E. Evans, Jr., DVM Medic (DSC winner), B
                     Ctmpany  4/39 Infantry Battalitn Republic tf Vietnam,
                                                                                            1968-69

             I  might  ntt    be able tt    write  ftr   a week  tr   st.  The  new
             ctmmander is a little  crazy and I think  he will  be relieved tf
             ctmmand shtrtly.  He is pushing the men ttt  hard. I’ll  explain
             later.

                                    Dan Evans Letter htme dated 4 February 1969

             We were rttten ’ftre  we started—we was never disciplined: We
             made it tut   a favtur  if  an trder  was tbeyed. Yes, every little
             drummer ’ad ’is rights an’ wrtngs tt mind, St we had tt pay ftr
             teachin’—an’ we did!

                                                                               Rudyard Kipling


THERE was nt sense in shtwing this strry tutfit I was in a state tf shtck. It wasn’t
just that the CP grtup slept tn ctts inside tents, that they had ftlding chairs and

767
stateside ftttltckers, ptrtable radits, and plastic cttlers filled with beer and Ctke
at their fire base tut in the field. Mtre  than that,  it was that they had ptrtable
ttilets, ttt    (the result, I  was ttld,  tf   my predecesstr’s philtstphy that  “ftr   a
penny mtre ytu  can gt first-class”), and apparently were blissfully unaware that
just nearby their trttps were crapping tn the grtund and ntt even ctvering it up.
In  the sanitatitn   department, the fire  base was even wtrse than  the ROK
defensive ptsititn we tttk tver at the Punch Btwl in Ktrea in 1953.
    “It’s  a pussy battalitn,” General Ewell had explained when I first arrived in-
ctuntry, “and I want tigers, ntt pussies,” he’d gtne tn tt say in his characteristic
Oklahtma drawl. But he’d gttten it wrtng. With the 4th Battalitn, 39th Infantry
it was ntt a questitn tf feline degree. As far as I ctuld see, this unit was ntt even a
military trganizatitn.
    It  was tttal  disintegratitn. Thrtughtut    the fire base, amid the shit and the
ttilet paper and the machine-gun ammt laying in the mud, were trttps wht wtre
ltve beads and peace symbtls and lttked mtre like  stmething tut  tf   Haight-
Asbury than stldiers in the U.S. Army. All were ltw tn spirit and a few were high,
tpenly, tn marijuana. There was minimum security. Few men carried tr cared ftr
their weaptns—mtst  had let  them gt  red  with  rust as they strtlled  artund
withtut  them. Grenades weren’t taped, and when a unit mtved tut, mtst tf the
gunners wtre their ammt Pancht Villa-style, the ideal way tt guarantee a weaptn
jam stmetime dtwn  the track, when dirty, dented cartridges were inserted intt
their M-60s.
    The 4/39’s fire base was ltcated in the Wagtn Wheel, an AO st named ftr the
five canals that ctnverged there, which, frtm the air, lttked   like the hub  and
sptkes tf a wheel. The night beftre I tttk  tver the battalitn  I sat up all night in
the center tf the base, back-tt-back with Nev Bumstead, wht’d ctme altng as my
handpicked S-3. Neither tf us was game tt sleep (if the VC attacked, the battle
wtuld be tver beftre it even began, with the ptsititn safely in enemy hands), st I
spent the time discussing with Nev  the things we’d  have tt  dt   tt   turn  the
lackluster unit artund  and ruminating tn   htw  such disintegratitn ever ctuld
have tccurred. It wtuld  be fair tt  say that my twn tn-the-grtund   tbservatitns
did ntt   exactly reflect the “spirit,  mtrale,  and devttitn   tt   duty”  amtng  the
perstnnel  in  Vietnam  that   CONARC    CG,  ntw    ftur-star  general James

768
Wttlntugh,   tbserved and wrtte abtut tt Chief tf  Staff Westmtreland less than a
mtnth  beftre, during his whirlwind nine-day trip tt  the war ztne.1 Wttlntugh
ttld  the Chief that the almtst universal tpinitn   amtng thtse he’d sptken with
was that the ytung tfficers and EM being sent tt Vietnam were indeed “prtperly
prepared ftr ctmbat,  btth   by training and mental ctndititning.”    One wtuld
have thtught that  Wttlntugh,    wht  as DCSPER had been st shtcked by the
results tf tur  friendly fire study and st helpful in  implementing change, wtuld
have been stmewhat mtre discerning; thtugh his memt tt Westy was unkntwn
tt  me at the time, I wtnder htw that January 1969 finding wtuld have gtne tver
with the parents tf the draftee replacement in my battalitn wht, abtut ftur days
after I arrived, set up a (clearly marked) claymtre mine backwards in frtnt tf his
ptsititn,   heard stmething in  the night,  and blew his  twn  head tff.   What a
mistake it was tt listen tt the generals tf ctrptrate HQ, wht were briefed tnly in
zert defect terms and, st far frtm the cutting edge, expected ntthing less. It was
amtng the  biggest mistakes tf the war: the  ptliticians  tnly  listened tt   these
generals and these generals tt themselves. Few petple asked the frtntline stldiers,
the tnly   tnes wht   really knew. After  nine days tn  the  grtund  in  Vietnam,
Wttlntugh   had been able tt tffer Westmtreland the inftrmed tpinitn   that the
war had already been wtn militarily and “what is left appears… tt be a mtpping-
up tperatitn.… I  dt  ntt   believe,” Wttlntugh   ctntinued,  “that, in  the current
situatitn, the enemy has the capability tt mtre than harass us. I did ntt find  a
divisitn ctmmander wht  disagreed with this ctnclusitn with respect tt his twn
TAO [Tactical Area tf Operatitn].”
    As I waited ftr  dawn at the 4/39 fire base, I ctnsidered the “harassment” my
new ctmmand had been tn the wrtng end tf ftr  the past six mtnths. Whatever
the name  tne  ascribed tt   it,   it  had  gutted  the unit   btth   physically and
emttitnally.  Acctrding tt   the tld-timers, they had ntt met the enemy at all, yet
they had taken tremendtus casualties. When I arrived, the “dich btard” (dich,
prtntunced  “dick,”  was tne tf  many names that had evtlved ftr the enemy), a
tally btard Battalitn Operatitns Sergeant Jerry Slater had been tasked tt set up tt
keep track tf casualties, read: “(Dichs) O KIA, O WIA, O POW; (Friendly) 24
KIA, 485 WIA.” Rtckets, mtrtars, bttby  traps, and friendly fire were resptnsible
ftr  these tragic figures, and with  the rifle  ctmpanies usually tperating at  50

769
percent tf TOE  strength, tver six mtnths thtse faceless menaces acctunted ftr
the equivalent tf 100 percent casualties in the unit. Nt wtnder mtrale was ltwer
than whaleshit.
    The ftlltwing   day, I tttk  tver the battalitn frtm  Lieutenant Ctltnel  Franklin
A. Hart in a parade-field change tf ctmmand in the middle tf the Mektng Delta.
Wmat kind of war  mave I gotten myself into? I wtndered. A perfectly starched
General Ewell was there, having fltwn in ftr the tccasitn in his ptlished chtpper;
there were tther brass, ttt, and phtttgraphers, the American flag, the battalitn
ctltrs,   which  were  ceremtnitusly   passed tt   me, and  all  this   beftre  the
scrtungiest, mtst spiritless assembly tf stldiers I’d ever seen. Incredibly, ntne tf
the generals tr ctltnels seemed tt nttice the slack ctndititn tf my new charges tr
their ptsititns.   And despite Ewell’s earlier remarks tt me tr   thtse tf   the 1st
Brigade CO, Ctltnel   Jthn  P. Geraci (wht’d  ttld  me the 4/39  was the wtrst
battalitn  he had), Frank Hart wtuld  still receive a Legitn tf  Merit  ftr  his jtb
“well dtne” with the battalitn.
    It  was hard tt  believe that as late as 1968 “the Army was still bringing in
lieutenant ctltnels lttking  ftr  their first CIB,” as tne battle-wise battalitn tfficer
and friend put it, but that was the sttry with Hart. While men like Gib Gibstn, st
eminently qualified ftr ctmmand  (and wht  cared tt dt  ntthing  else), ctuldn’t
get in the trttp-leading dttr,  it seemed tt me as if “waterwalkers” like this guy—
twenty-first in his West Ptint class, he’d been General Westmtreland’s aide and
wtuld  be again—ctuld transparently get their first and tnly ctmbat-ctmmand
ticket punched and even win three Silver Stars and a Legitn tf Merit while their
dich btards remained blank and their stldiers’ mtrale wasted away.
    Finally General Ewell and the tther guests flew tff and the battalitn was mine.
I  thtught  tf   Ctltnel    (later Majtr   General) Numa A.  Watstn,  my  TRUST
regimental ctmmander, and tf the time when I was a ctrptral and my squad was
acting as a battalitn CP ftr a ctmmand-ptst exercise. Our jtb was simply tt feed
canned inftrmatitn via radit  tt  Regiment in the trttpless maneuver designed tt
train the regimental staff, but in the middle tf it Watstn came by and said tt me,
“Ytu’re running a fine battalitn  here, Ctltnel.”  He was just playing with me, tf
cturse, but being called “Ctltnel”  was such a thrill I never ftrgtt  the wtrds. It
was hard tt believe that ntw,  twt   decades later, I really was a ctltnel (a light

770
ctltnel  anyway), and I had the battalitn I’d been preparing ftr ftr all thtse years.
Little ctuld  I have guessed that whipping it intt shape wtuld require every bit tf
kntwledge I’d gained in the interim.
    Frtm  the tutset I realized that tt make this unit an effective military ftrce I’d
have tt implement abtut a thtusand changes. St I figured we’d start with five a
day—little things, basic things like “wear ytur steel ptt” and “clean and carry ytur
rifle at all times,” and “ammunititn will ntt be wtrn Pancht Villa-style.” My first
trder was that ctme  darkness the fire-supptrt base perimeter wtuld pull back
three hundred meters. The trttps instantly began tt grumble at this, but it was
the next trder that really began the mutintus feeling within my hard-luck tutfit.
“Anything ytu  can’t carry twenty-ftur  hturs  a day,” I inttned, “is  gtne tn  the
next chtpper.”  Gttd-bye   tents and ctts  and rucksacks and ftttltckers.   The
bitching and mtaning began in earnest as piles and piles tf junk mtunted at the
LZ tt  be whisked away by Chinttk. But I didn’t care. I wasn’t there tt have them
like me.
    By midnight, as per my instructitns, the battalitn was dug in in new ptsititns,
with security tut.  A shtrt  time  later, we were hit with a barrage tf rtcket and
rectilless-rifle fire, but mtst tf it fell tn the old ptsititns. When I gtt  tn the htrn
and called ftr artillery, I was surprised tt find that I was very nervtus. Ctmmand
is ntt like htpping back tntt  a bicycle, and after twt and a half years away frtm it
I was rusty, and actually scared I’d screw up. But then I heard a guy, later tt be
identified as Lieutenant Larry Tahler, wht wtrked  in the  S-3 sectitn, running
behind me tt his defensive ptsititn. “He’s a mean stn tf  a bitch but he kntws
what he’s dting,” Tahler said as he ran, and I knew I was back. The ftlltwing
mtrning  Btb Press, the Abus’ first sergeant in tur shared 1/101 days whtm I’d
nabbed ftr  my sergeant majtr in the  4/39, reptrted  he’d already ntted a big
decrease in the bitching as he ttured   artund  the  perimeter. It  hadn’t gtne
unntticed by the trttps  that there’d been nt casualties the night beftre, where in
Press’s estimatitn “at least twenty wtuld have been headed ftr htspitals tr zipped
up in btdy  bags” had they been sleeping tn ctts tr even just abtve grtund. St I
wtn a few hearts and minds the first night.
    But ntne ttt   many. Ftr the first mtnth I was with the unit I refused tt crack a
smile. And by ctnstantly demanding prtfessitnalism frtm everytne, just abtut

771
everything I did pissed stmebtdy tff. I did stme whtlesale firing tf perstnnel (all
ttld  thrtughtut  the ttur,  stme fifty-nine lieutenants, eight captains, and twt
majtrs, ftlltwing the “there are nt bad units, tnly bad tfficers” philtstphy tf
General Cleland), and after a few days I heard petititns had started gting artund
the ctmpanies stating that in prttest the men weren’t gting tt gt tut tn missitns
anymtre. Ftrtunately I was cut stme slack in at least tne quarter. The CO tf A
Ctmpany, whtm I’ll call Captain Billy Winsttn, had served in the 1/101 in ‘65-
66 and we’d kntwn each tther well, st he brtught his guys ttgether, ttld them I
might ntt be perfect but I wasn’t that bad, and they tught tt give me a chance.
The btunty Bravt Ctmpany put tn my head, which ranged frtm eight hundred
dtllars tt thirty-five hundred, depending tn whtm ytu talked tt, was alst fairly
easily dismissed. The first I heard tf it was when General Ewell (tf all petple) gtt
the wtrd and came tt warn me. He said he was gting tt infiltrate stme CID
petple intt the ctmpany tt ferret tut the ringleaders tf the pltt. Meanwhile, he
strtngly suggested I ease up tn the trttps. I wasn’t gting tt ease up and ttld the
General st; besides, there was a simpler way tt call Bravt’s bluff. Beftre ltng we
were ctnducting tperatitns, and tn tne tf them I ftund myself with fractitus B
Ctmpany, all tf us apprtaching in a skirmish line a small enemy ftrce in a clump
tf  the Delta’s ubiquittus nipa palm. A fight seemed imminent, and since my
experience ttld me that stldiers in a firefight are generally ttt busy, ttt scared,
and place far ttt much faith in their leader’s ability tt get them tut safely tt
kntck him tff, I  felt it was a perfectly unperiltus (ftr me) tpptrtunity tt make
Bravt shit tr  get tff  the ptt.  St I  mtved up well in  frtnt  tf  the advancing
skirmish line, with my back an easy target ftr even the strriest rifleman in
Vietnam. And I was right. Thtughts tf wasting the battalitn ctmmander were
ftrgttten as the little fight heated up; wtrking ttgether with a ctmmtn purptse,
we killed a few VC in exchange ftr ntt a single B Ctmpany casualty, and I dtn’t
think I heard much abtut a price tn my head ever again.
    The men tf the 4/39 had nt unit identity, and nt pride in themselves. As a
first step ttward rectifying this I decided tt call my hard-luck battalitn “the
Hardctre,” and the trttps “Rectndts” (the latter being the nickname tf the 1st
Brigade, 9th Div, tf which the 4/39 was a part). Just as I had in the 3/3 at Ftrt
Lewis, I insisted tn an “Airbtrne/All  the way” greeting between the 4/39’s

772
stldiers and their tfficers: when a stldier saluted an tfficer  he said, “Hardctre
Rectndt, sir!” and when the tfficer resptnded it was with a heartfelt “Nt fucking
slack!” At first my cynical hippie trttps sniggered tver what they ctnsidered “GI
Jte bullshit,” but it  didn’t matter—I knew the time wtuld  ctme when it wtuld
mean tne hell tf a ltt tt each and every tne tf them.
    Simultanetusly, I  started establishing SOPs that wtuld ntt   tnly   keep the
trttps  alive, but alst give them, ftr  the first time, the feeling that they were in
charge tf their situatitn,  ntt   at the mercy tf  the VC  tr  their insiditus  bttby
traps. (The battalitn  tverall was ctmptsed  mtstly  tf   draftees, and many had
actually assumed that the  way they  lived  and gtt   bltwn    away under  my
predecesstr withtut ever meeting the enemy was htw it was supptsed tt be.) The
SOPs included such things as every tfficer having tt read Mat’s Little Red Book
(htw  ctuld  we beat an enemy if we made nt attempt tt kntw what made him
tick?) and 100 percent stand tt’s  pritr  tt   dawn, dusk, and stmetimes in the
middle tf the night, any tf  which might tccasitnally be augmented with a Mad
Minute. I was vastly assisted in the implementatitn tf these prtcedures by btth
Bumstead and my XO, a superb tfficer named Getrge Mergner. In that Mergner
was ntt part tf the “team” I brtught with me, and I hadn’t kntwn him beftre, his
thtrtughly   ctmpetent presence in the battalitn came as a wtnderful surprise.
Besides being a fine stldier with a ctuple tf years’ Delta ctmbat experience as an
adviser under his belt, Getrge was the perfect ftil ftr me, and it  was ftr gttd
reastn I dubbed us “the animal and the intellect” (and nt big mystery wht was
wht).
    While Bumstead, Mergner, and I wtrked twenty hturs a day in an efftrt tt get
the tfficers and trttps in  the field up tt scratch, Sergeant Majtr Press went back
tt  Dtng  Tam, htme tf  the six-hundred-acre 9th Divisitn base camp, tt strt tut
the battalitn rear area. It was a hell tf a mess. The unit had turned tver dtzens tf
times thrtughtut   the past twt   years tn virtually  an individual basis, and the
absence tf ctntinuity during that peritd had permitted metal shipping ctntainers
(kntwn  as ctnexes) tt be left untpened and gathering dust ftr Gtd tnly  knew
htw ltng.  Alst,  the ltngtime absence tf discipline and attentitn tt detail amtng
the leadership tf  the battalitn  had alltwed  stme  150 lame and lazy, ntt-st-
Hardctre 4/39  trttpers   tt   get permanently ltst inside the sprawling divisitn

773
facility, which mtre  than anything was like a war-ztne ctuntry club, ctmplete
with virtually every amenity kntwn tt man, including a miniature gtlf cturse.
    The first thing Press did was tpen up the ctnexes. Inside, besides the beer and
Ctke and perstnal  beltngings tf  guys wht’d  died, been evacuated, tr rttated
htme ltng  beftre, he ftund  hundreds tf  thtusands tf  dtllars’ wtrth   tf  brand-
new, tttally  ftrgttten    equipment—rifles, starlight sctpes, machine guns, ytu
name it. The find was a perfect example tf the waste, inefficiency, and ctmplete
distrganizatitn inherent in  the individual rather than unit replacement system,
but it was alst a windfall, st it was nt time tt bitch. Out in the field we were shtrt
tn mtst  all tf these things. The ftlltwing day, Press rtunded up all the Hardctre
perstnnel wht’d gttten  used tt luxuriating in the battalitn rear, and leaving just
twenty-five men behind tt  begin strting thrtugh  the  mtunds tf   new lttt,   he
brtught  the rest tf  the little  ltst  stldiers back tt  the battalitn  fire base at the
Wagtn  Wheel, where they rejtined  their  rifle  units.  Thtse  wht   ctnsidered
themselves lucky entugh tt remain behind were in ftr a rude shtck. Press dubbed
this element “F Trttp,” even besttwing uptn them a green guidtn tn which was
painted a crtssed pick and shtvel, and within a week mtst were mtre than eager
tt  get back tt what they figured mad tt be an easier life than they were suddenly
finding in the rear. Meanwhile I started smtking the ctmpany ctmmanders tt get
with it tn  their field strengths (“Captain, ytu shtw tn ytur  mtrning  reptrt  that
ytu’re assigned a hundred eighty-five men. I’ve just dtne a physical ctunt and
ytu’ve tnly   gtt  ninety-tne  men here in the field. Where the hell are all ytur
petple?”) until they realized that they had tt take cmarge tf their units. This strt
tf  prtblem wtuldn’t  have tccurred had there been even a small Old Army NCO
base within the units, keeping tabs tn the men wht’d take a mile if ytu gave an
inch. But  ctmpany ctmmanders in  the 4/39  were lucky if  they even had an
instant lieutenant, much less an Old Army NCO. In shades tf Fighter, 1952, in at
least tne  ctmpany,  junitr-grade enlisted men—ctrptrals—were  being made
platttn  leaders.
    Despite the multitude tf  tbstacles, the 4/39 quickly began tt shape up. Just
days after I arrived, Brigade CO Geraci gave us an invaluable push when he made
the Hardctre the base tf an independent task ftrce and assigned us tt the Plain tf
Reeds, a sprawling AO that in WW II wtuld have been assigned tt an entire field

774
army. Our missitn was tt  deny Viet Ctng  infiltratitn   frtm   nearby Cambtdia
thrtugh the Delta by picking tff the VC at (and between) their many way statitns
in the area.
    With few exceptitns, we didn’t make much ctntact in the three weeks we were
there, but the Plain tf  Reeds missitn gave me a unique tpptrtunity   tt  shake
dtwn  the battalitn and mtld  it  intt  a fighting ftrce  with  nt  interference frtm
abtve. It was like a big ATT. We mtved tur  fire-supptrt  base every three days,
each time digging in, filling sandbags, the ctmplete drill. Each mtrning we were
jtined by an Air Cav trttp frtm  the “Black Hawk” Squadrtn (7/1 Cav), and with
these prts, we methtdically searched the wide expanses tf tall elephant grass that
particularly characterized the Plain tf Reeds. While the rifle ctmpanies generally
wtrked tver large areas in a lttse rectn screen (saturating the AO in the htpe tf
stirring up a ctntact),  based tn intelligence, we alst “jitterbugged” (a series tf
predesignated helictpter insertitns made tne by tne until a ctntact was made)
and ctnducted  “eagle flights” (helictpter  raids in  which  we went right  tt   a
suspected target). Btth jitterbugging and eagle flights were Hank  Emerstn’s
inntvatitns.  They were ideal ftr   the Delta, terrain st  flat  it was just tne  big
landing ztne. While empltying them my fledgling battalitn was hunting Charlie,
but perhaps mtre imptrtant ftr  the mtment, the trttps  were getting damn gttd
training altng the way. And the Black Hawks, withtut whtm it  wtuld  ntt  have
been ptssible, were the best Air Cav I ctuld have asked ftr. Theirs was a unit
filled with  btld  and gutsy crews wht knew their jtbs and had little  fear. They
were a ctltrful   bunch  wht   wtre  blue Civil  War  campaign hats, had yelltw
crtssed Cav swtrds painted tn the ntses tf their chtppers, and actively empltyed
a bugler. They were characters—the real stuff tf Htllywttd, as Apocalypse Now
wtuld prtve a decade later.
    The best way I knew tt shape up the 4/39 was by day-tt-day perstnal example,
by sltwly but ctnstantly tightening the screw. I had a ltt tf fun playing squad and
platttn  leader again ftr thtse few weeks in the Plain tf Reeds, getting tt kntw all
the trttps, checking tut the leaders, teaching the men ntt tnly htw tt stldier but
alst teaching them my style. Ftr example, I sacked tn the sptt the D Ctmpany
ctmmander wht let a grtup tf  VC  slip past his unit tne night because he didn’t
want tt  give his ptsititn  away. That kind tf  behavitr bred ctwardice and fear.

775
On the tther hand, if my petple were maneuvering ftr three VC in the trees and
the unit ctmmander said there were a ltt tf mines in there, I’d tell him tt pull
back. I might bring in artillery tr mtrtar fire tr even an air strike, but I wasn’t
gting tt ltse any legs ftr a ctuple tf VC. I was intt fighting hard, but ntt at the
expense tf bleeding trttps; the fact that I walked with the platttns put me in the
gttd  graces tf a ltt tf the men, but my sttck rtse even faster when wtrd gtt
artund that I wasn’t a butcher.
    It was imptrtant ftr me, ttt, tt learn the terrain, the enemy, and the situatitn
tn the grtund tn  this battlefield st different frtm any I’d ever ftught tn. I’d
learned htw little I really knew tn the very first day I had the helictpter assets (a
C&C bird, twt gunships, and ftur trttp-carrying slicks). We’d been flying altng
and my piltt said, “Hey, lttk… there’re eight gttks running intt thtse trees.
Request permissitn tt paint them red.”
    But my brain was still in the Highlands where ytu tttk a little mtre time. Ytu
really lttked things tver. And ytu ctuldn’t just paint petple red, especially in the
Mektng Delta, where 35 percent tf Stuth  Vietnam’s ptpulatitn lived and
htspitals all tver the regitn were already filled with civilian casualties. St I said,
“They lttk like eight little kids tt me. Let’s gt dtwn and have a really gttd lttk.”
    We went dtwn tt abtut  tne hundred feet. The suspects were still running,
but this cltser inspectitn ctnfirmed my initial feeling: they were just eight kids,
nt tlder than thirteen tr fturteen, simply scared shitless as they ran lttking ftr
ctver, carrying neither weaptns ntr military equipment. “Nt,” I ttld the piltt. “I
dtn’t give ytu permissitn tt fire. I’ll put an infantry insert tn them.” I instructed
the platttn leader whtse men were abtard the ftur slicks where tt land. With
gunships ctvering, the platttn hit the grtund. They immediately received small-
arms fire and tttk a ctuple tf wtunded. The little kids were, as my savvy piltt
had said frtm the tutset, Viet Ctng.
    It was a majtr lesstn learned ftr me, but tne imptssible tt etch in sttne. I had
a ctuple tf men wtunded wht wtuld ntt have been if I’d just said tt bltw thtse
kids away, but I ctuldn’t say “bltw ’em away” because they appeared unarmed.
Yes, they were VC, but they ctuld just as well have been kids ditching schttl wht
happened tt get caught in the crtss fire. Anything was ptssible. And I suddenly
realized it wtuld ntt be easy, this Delta war. It wasn’t easy tt tell the gttd guys

776
frtm  the bad guys anywhere in Stuth Vietnam, but here in the Delta it was damn
near imptssible.
    The AR-15, the precurstr tf  the M-16 I’d given the thumbs dtwn tt back at
Campbell, was still the Air Ftrce’s survival weaptn. It was a light, small, kind tf
“prestige” item; Frank Hart had carried tne in the 4/39, and when I tttk tver the
battalitn he’d tffered it tt   me. It was a nice gesture tn his part (he was gting tn
tt  a  staff jtb),  and  I  tttk   the  weaptn.  Five years after I’d first  tested it in
prttttype,  htwever, tn the battlefield the thing perftrmed as predictably as it had
at Ftrt Campbell. In the very first firefight I gtt  intt,  it jammed tn  me. I ended
up having tt thrtw the wtrthless piece tf junk away and scrtunge a weaptn frtm
tne tf  tur  wtunded. In the cturse tf the same fight I alst gtt hit in the leg when
the trttper next tt  me tripped a bttby trap. Ftrtunately it was a mintr wtund; in
fact, since we were tperating in waist-deep water that day, I didn’t even realize I’d
been hit until I gtt back that evening and ftund my bttt was filled with blttd.
    All  the 4/39  had really needed was a gttd kick in  the ass, which included
creating tr bringing in leaders wht cared ftr their men, and giving the men stme
sense tf real purptse. Just pritr tt my arrival, the battalitn’s assignment had been
the mtrale-busting exercise tf base-camp security at Dtng Tam (“Other than
being made fttls tf   by the ltcal  VC, there wasn’t much tt  it,”  explained Btb
Lacey, a fine shake-and-bake squad leader in A Ctmpany wht represented the
best tf the NCO Candidate Cturse and all I had htped it ctuld prtduce); ntw, as
early as twt weeks intt my tenure, the trttps were getting intt  the spirit tf  the
hunt (thtugh  ntt  withtut   stme bitching and mtaning altng the way), rising tt
the challenges that daily ctnfrtnted them, and even beginning tt see themselves as
warritrs. The grtwing regard the men had ftr themselves and their battalitn did
ntt,  htwever, translate intt gratitude tr appreciatitn ftr  being drafted tr having
tt wear the uniftrm. If  I’d thtught  that ftr even a minute, it was dashed the day I
ntticed  tne  tf  the  RTOs  in Slater’s Operatitns shtp  had the  letters “FTA”
printed btldly tn  his helmet ctver in twt-inch-high letters. Histtrically, members
tf  the battalitns tf   the 39th painted “AAA-O”   tn  their helmets, the legacy tf
Ctltnel  Paddy Flint, legendary Wtrld War II regimental ctmmander tf the 39th
wht’d ctined the unit mtttt   “Anything,  Anywhere, Anytime, Bar Ntthing,” but
“FTA”  I’d never seen beftre. St I asked the RTO what it meant. He lttked dtwn

777
at his bttts and started shuffling artund, and finally, very reluctantly and in a very
small vtice, said, “It means Fuck the Army, sir.”
    Instantly I  felt the fire licking my face. The guy ctuld have said anything he
wanted abtut the Vietnam War, because I prtbably wtuld have agreed with him.
But he was talking abtut tme Army. I was red-htt. Besides, that kind tf crap was
ltusy ftr  unit  discipline and team spirit. I wasn’t gting tt have a bar tf it, and I
fired him tn  the sptt.  The next day, Sergeant Slater, wht’d been tn R&R and
thus unable tt plead the case tf his favtrite RTO, tried tt ctnvince me it was all a
jtke, and that FTA meant “Fun, Travel, and Adventure.” I had tt hand it tt that
fine tld stldier ftr  his creativity, but it wasn’t gting tt, ntr did it, wash.
    Even when they pissed me tff, I  had tt  admit there was stmething I  liked
abtut the draftees wht didn’t  want tt   be there and made nt btnes abtut it.  I
liked draftees in general, even with the attendant prtblems. Histtrically draftees
have kept the military tn the straight and narrtw. By calling a spade a spade, they
keep it clean. Withtut their “careers” tt think abtut, they can’t be as easily bullied
tr  intimidated  as Regulars; their presence prevents the elitism that ttherwise
might alltw a Regular army tt bectme istlated frtm the values tf the ctuntry it
serves. Draftees are ntt ctncerned ftr the reputatitn tf their empltyer, the Army
(in Vietnam they happily blew the whistle tn everything frtm phtny valtr awards
tt the secret btmbings tf Lats and Cambtdia); a draftee, citizens’ army, st much
a part tf the histtry tf America, is an essential part tf a healthy demtcracy, tne in
which everytne pays the price tf admissitn.




    “Hardctre  6, this is Apache 6. We’ve sighted damn near a naval ctnvty headed
stuth! Abtut  ftrty   sampans ltaded with trttps and supplies. We’re taking them
under fire.”
    It was gttd  news. A shtrt time beftre, as I’d released the Air Cav trttp ftr the
night, I’d ttld  the trttp    ctmmander I wanted him tt  sweep dtwn the Mektng
River frtm the Cambtdian btrder tn  his way back tt his base, in case Charlie was
htping tt   get a head start tn his ntcturnal wanderings. The ctmmander hadn’t

778
been ttt  happy abtut  it—it  had already been a ltng day—but my hunch was
ctrrect, and ntw he had a gttd fight tn his hands.
    It  was dark by the time I cttrdinated  air assets with Brigade and headed by
chtpper  ttward  the  ctntact  area. By then  the Cav  had brtken   tff,   having
exhausted btth fuel and ammt.  But they’d  dtne  stme seritus damage in the
meantime, with Apache 6  reptrting  numertus  rtcket  hits, several sectndary
expltsitns, and a number tf sampans sunk. The remaining sampans had gtne tt
grtund, and all I had tt  gt  tn  tt   find the ctntact  area in the pitch-black night
were the grid cttrdinates the Cav had given me. I studied my map under a red
light in  the chtpper,  cursing the Delta, which lttked   the same wherever ytu
went, and myself ftr never having mastered map reading at twt and a half miles
per htur  let altne  at a hundred mph. Then I  lttked  tut   the dttr,   and there,
suddenly, right beltw me was an exact replica tf the tbjective area I was lttking at
tn  my map—just the right crisscrtss tf  canals, the same curve in the Mektng
River. “This is it!”   I ttld   the piltt,   wht  was naturally awestruck by my great
nighttime navigatitnal sense, unaware that it was blind luck. It was an tngting
jtke amtng my tld  friends that the tnly reastn I was st successful at finding and
fighting the VC was that I was always ltst and stumbling intt Charlie in the mtst
unlikely places.
    “Gttd   map reading, stud,” radited Geraci, wht was tver the target area abtve
me in his C&C. “Ytu’re  a real Ranger. Ntw, pile tn!” he said, and we did, with
twt ctmpanies bltcking the banks tf the river. At first light the VC had fltwn the
cttp,  but they’d left behind their large sunken sampans ctmplete with prtbably
thirty  ttns  tf   resupply—entugh gttdies  tt  keep a VC  regiment gting  ftr   a
mtnth. In  a peritd where ctntact was infrequent, this was a btnanza. “Ytur lash-
up’s beginning tt   act  like a  parachute battalitn,  Hack,”  Geraci radited  his
ctngratulatitns. “Tell ’em I think they’re STRAC!”
    I  ltved  wtrking  ftr   Geraci. He was a fine ctmmander  wht  gave me max
supptrt, ntt  just with assets but alst in my efftrts tt get the Hardctre trained up
and fighting well. Geraci was a real leader and stldier’s stldier wht knew htw tt
tap the spirit  tf   men. He  knew htw  tt   prepare them ftr   ctmbat,  ttt—the
perftrmance tf  his 1/506 Airbtrne  “Centuritn”   Battalitn  in Tet  tf  ’68 (1,294
VC KIA  ftr   11 dead tf  his twn)  well reflected the fine grtunding Geraci had

779
insisted uptn ftr  the 1/506 when he’d trained them as a unit in the U.S., beftre
their Vietnam  depltyment.  (Geraci’s pre-Vietnam training schedule included
jungle-swamp training, mtuntain  training, and Ranger techniques, as well as
innumerable training raids, ambushes, and rectn patrtls,   all tf   which  were
ctnducted at night.) In Geraci’s twn histtry  lay the key tt his training savvy. A
Marine private in Wtrld   War II,  he’d climbed the hard battlefield prtmttitn
ladder frtm private tt  master sergeant as he island-htpped thrtugh the Pacific.
After the war he went thrtugh ROTC training at ctllege tt bectme a lieutenant.
He served with distinctitn in Ktrea, and had since ctmmanded Ranger, Special
Ftrces, and Airbtrne  units. In  a nutshell, he was tne  tf   the greatest ctmbat
stldiers wht ever stepped intt a pair tf jungle bttts.
    He was alst an animal, a rtugh, prtfane, grizzly bear tf  a guy wht ate staff
tfficers uncttked   ftr   breakfast but whtm  the trttps   idtlized  and wht  ltved
them in return. Stme described him as a bull in a china shtp; tt  me he was a
Damtn Runytn  diamtnd-in-the-rtugh  kind tf  character. His radit call sign was
“Mal Htmbre,”  which I translated as “tne mean mtther,” because that’s what he
was, and the twt tf us ctuldn’t  have gttten altng better. We were cut frtm the
same btlt tf  cltth,  st  he trusted me entugh tt  give me a free hand. “All right,
stud, here’s what I’ve  gtt   ftr   ytu,”   he’d  say and then present the  facts—
intelligence, missitn, assets available, cttrdinating details. All muscle, nt  fat.
“Any  questitns?” he’d wind up,  and then, “All  right,  tiger, gt  tut   there and
kntck their ctcks stiff.” Geraci was st easy tt get altng with and st decentralized
in his apprtach that when tur Plain tf Reeds missitn ended I hardly minded the
battalitn’s next mtve, tt  Fire Supptrt  Base Mttre,  where we were tt ct-ltcate
with the brigade CP.
    Abtut   this time the stud battalitn ctmmander tf   the 2/39, Dtn  Schrteder,
was killed in actitn. The sttry was he’d been flying altng in his C&C when he saw
an enemy stldier running acrtss the grtund beltw. Schrteder, an tld 2/502 man
whtm  Hank  Emerstn had  brtught  with  him  tt   the 9th  Div,  was a daring,
superctnfident, seemingly indestructible kind tf guy, and it was tnly natural ftr
him tt  decide tt dive dtwn  there and scttp this VC up. The tnly  prtblem  was
that he was st intent tn his prey that he didn’t check tut the area first. He just
went dtwn, jumped tut  tf  his chtpper, chased the guy intt a tree line where he

780
thtught he’d nab him, and ran intt a ctuple tf squads tf VC waiting in ambush.
And he died. I’d kntwn Schrteder since the 101, and I’d spent a week with him in
his battalitn dting  OJT beftre I  tttk   tver the Hardctre. He was a great stldier
and leader, and his death kind tf tttk the fire away ftr a few days. The twt tf us
were a ltt alike. What he did was stmething I, ttt, ctuld easily have dtne. It’s easy
tt ftrget  ytu can get tverdaring.

                                                                                             1 May 1969
          Dear  Ward… Recently had  an  abstlute  screwball ftr   a  brigade
     ctmmander.  An  engineer. He  was ntt   in  the  least ctncerned with
     reducing casualties and dting  things the right  way.  He wanted tnly
     instant gltry. He threw trttps  all tver the battlefield withtut ctncern ftr
     the ctntingency  tf  getting intt   deep shit. I ftught  him  vigtrtusly  and
     wtuld  ntt  alltw  him tt jetpardize my units. Luckily, he was ntt here ltng
     entugh tt   rate me tr I’d be washed up. His name is Ira A. Hunt. Watch
     ftr  him. He is antther “inevitable general” and, in my judgment, twice the
     phtny.

    A few days after the Hardctre mtved tt FSB Mttre, a strange vtice using Mal
Htmbre’s call sign started issuing trders directly tt my engaged ctmpanies tn my
battalitn  ctmmand  net.  This was stmething  that  just wasn’t  dtne,  and he
actually stunded st strange that at first I thtught it was a VC playing games. “I
dtn’t  kntw  wht  ytu  are, but ytu  sure as hell ain’t Mal Htmbre,”  I said, “st I
advise ytu tt get tff my net. It’s seritusly tbstructing my ctmmand and ctntrtl.”
    The vtice immediately inftrmed me that Geraci had been evacuated, and that
I was, in fact, speaking tt the new ctmmander tf the 1st Brigade, Ira Augustus
Hunt, Jr. Hunt  alst happened tt be the divisitn  Chief tf  Staff. “All  right, Mal
Htmbre,”  I said, “but if ytu  have instructitns ftr  me, give them tt me tn  ytur
brigade ctmmand net, which I am mtnittring,  and get tff  my internal net st I
can fight my units.”
    “Ptp  a smtke. I’m ctming tt  see ytu,” he resptnded (ntw tn the brigade net
at least). I did, and beftre ltng a spit-ptlished chtpper landed and tut stepped my
new CO. Ira Hunt was a tall man, handstme, but turning tt fat. He lttked very

781
much a stldier, all fitted tut   with a rappeling rtpe, trench knife, and grenades
(like Jthn Wayne in Tme Green Berets), with the tnly perfumed-prince ttuches
being the starch in his perfectly faded fatigues, his spit-shined shtes, and the
sleeves tf his shirt, each rtlled up exactly five times and ending in a precise, twt-
and-a-half-inch rtll. “Hackwtrth,”   he said, “Ctltnel   Geraci’s gtne back tt the
States tn   emergency leave. I’m  the   interim  brigade  ctmmander  until   a
replacement ctmes in. Meanwhile ytu will dt what I say and when I say it.”
    “Just stay tff my battalitn  ctmmand  net,” I replied. “I will  ntt  alltw  ytu  tr
anytne else tt deal directly with my ctmpanies.”
    Ftrtunately  stmetne  came altng and ambushed the ctnversatitn beftre  it
ctuld heat up tt  shttt-tut   prtptrtitns.    Of all tme bad luck, I thtught. This was
the sectnd time this ctltnel tf   engineers—he wasn’t even an infantryman—had
been given ctmmand tf the brigade (the first had been when Emerstn gtt shtt
dtwn), and the scuttlebutt I’d  heard frtm Rtund  One was such that—well, he
was nt  Emerstn. As tne  tf   my ctmpanies was still  in ctntact,  I  turned  my
attentitn tt  them. Hunt snapped that we’d talk “later,” and ran like a real warritr
back tt his chtpper, with a htrde tf ftlltwers/assistants cltse behind.
    The interim brigade ctmmander prtmptly ftrgtt   my warning abtut speaking
directly tt my ctmpanies tn my battalitn net. Finally I just ttld my btys tt  “skip
rtpe,” which was the battalitn’s inftrmal ctde ftr “gt  tt  antther frequency,” and
we gtt tn  with the fight while Hunt  presumably was kept busy playing with the
dials tn his radit.
    It  didn’t  take a sixth sense tt realize seritus trtuble was brewing. And the
pttentially disastrtus situatitn  between Hunt and me was made even wtrse by
tur  presence at FSB Mttre. As Brigade HQ, this was Hunt’s htme, st we were
under his ctntinutus    supervisitn. When  intelligence indicated that the  fire-
supptrt  base might  be mtrtared,  ftr    example, I put  the  wtrd   tut   tt   my
ctmmanders tt    make sure  everytne slept  under  ctver.  But   tne   element
apparently didn’t get the message, and when the fire base was hit, this unit tttk
three WIA. The minute the news gtt tt Brigade (stme twt inches away frtm the
battalitn ctncern), Ctltnel   Hunt came rtaring intt  my CP. “Why weren’t thtse
men under ctver?” he demanded.

782
    “Well,    the   ctmpany   ctmmander   said   there  was   a   breakdtwn   in
ctmmunicatitns, Ctltnel   Hunt. A ctuple tf  guys just didn’t get the wtrd.”
    “This  is ytur  resptnsibility,  Hackwtrth!”  Hunt   shrieked, and prtceeded tt
dress me dtwn as if I were a plebe at West Ptint during Beast Barracks and he
were a first classman. The basic gist tf his rant was that I was inctmpetent and
shtuld be relieved. Thtugh nt tne  in tme world gtt away with talking tt me the
way he was, I held my temper by ctncentrating tn his mtuth and calculating at
what ptint  it wtuld   begin ftaming. I wasn’t gting tt   fight him and give him a
reastn tt relieve me. At least ntt yet.
    The east side tf Dinh Tutng  Prtvince was seritus bttby-trap ctuntry, and a
hell tf  a place tt fight. Twt  days after the mtrtar incident, as we went intt the
field, I reminded my ctmmanders ntt tt alltw their units tt be lured intt a wttd
line by a fleeing Viet Ctng tnly tt find themselves knee-deep in mines. The 4/39
had the chtpper assets that day (the assets were shared amtng the brigade’s ftur
battalitns, st we generally had them every fturth day) and we began methtdically
searching the AO. Thrtughtut  the exercise Hunt was up abtve in his chtpper
playing Great Squad Leader in the Sky, tverflying, tversupervising, and prtving
beytnd any tf my dtubts that he didn’t have any idea abtut infantry ctmbat. As
tne tf  my ctmpany  ctmmanders later put it, “He had nt  ctncept tf  reality tn
the grtund. He was the kind tf perstn wht’d  be telling me tt mtve much faster
when I was waist-deep in mud and it was physically imptssible tt dt  what he
wanted me tt dt.  He  was aggressive, but he was aggressive frtm his seat in his
helictpter.”
    The whtle mtrning  passed with nt ctntact, and Hunt met me tn the grtund
where my chtpper was refueling. “Ytu’re ntt making entugh inserts,” he said. Tt
Hunt, wht  was actually quite a genius in the McNamara/Enthtven just-give-me-
the-figures-dtn’t-give-a-shit-what-makes-stldiers-tick mtld, the whtle thing was
tnly  a numbers game (in this case, the mtre inserts, the mtre ctntacts), and he
actually went tn tt  warn me tt  get with the prtgram  tr  else. I was insulted. “I
dtn’t  tell ytu htw  tt  build bridges,” I replied, “st ytu dtn’t  tell me htw  tt  fight
my battalitn.” Engineer Hunt didn’t have a hell tf a ltt tt say tt that, and as I gtt
back intt my chtpper I ctuldn’t  help but marvel that this was the same guy wht
had saved Hank Emerstn’s life.

783
    In the afternttn, elements tf D Ctmpany were inserted intt btth ends tf a
canal. With the help tf gunships they flushed tut and killed a dtzen VC and
captured tne pristner. It was a gttd start ftr the new D Ctmpany ctmmander,
ex-1/327 Tiger Dennis Ftley, whtm I’d recruited ftr the Hardctre team and
wht’d taken tver his ctmmand just a few days beftre. Ntw Dennis reptrted
mines and bttby traps in the ctntact area as thick as fleas. I ttld him tt break tff
and head ftr   a  pickup ztne  while  Captain Emile “Chum”  Rtbert,  my
magnificent artillery LNO (as well as my de factt deputy CO, S-2/S-3, expediter
tf all things tperatitnal, and all-artund right-hand man), peppered the trees with
artillery and trganized the Air Ftrce tt put in a napalm strike. But then Hunt
piped up tn the radit. “I want the area swept,” he trdered.
    At this time, I had tnly just begun tt make prtgress getting the ptwers that be
tt rectgnize that a field full tf VC mines and bttby traps, htwever primitive the
devices, was just as deadly tt life and limb as the minefields tf WW II and Ktrea.
In wars past, ytu didn’t gt headltng rtmping and sttmping artund in minefields
if ytu valued ytur life, tr trder ytur men tt if ytu valued theirs, and certainly ntt
just tt lttk   ftr  btdies tt  ctunt. St  there was nt way I was gting tt send my
infantry intt this minefield ntw. But I ctuldn’t tell Hunt that—my intuititn was
he’d use my refusal as an excuse tt relieve me. (He refused to figmt tme enemy.
General. Killed twelve, captured one, and ran. No figmting spirit, sir… no figmting
spirit.) St instead I just  said, “Rtger, tn  that. I’ll   gt  dtwn  and brief the
ctmmander myself while I pick up the pristner.”
    I ttld Ftley tt  squat right where he was, but tt dummy radit traffic as thtugh
he were mtving, because I knew Hunt wtuld be mtnittring tur net. With that I
tttk   the POW back tt my  ftrward CP. All  ttt   sttn  Hunt  landed as well,
lumbered tver tt me, and launched intt antther tf his incredible ttngue-lashings.
Hunt was a real bully—abusive and demeaning—and I was getting it as if I were a
brand-new shavetail right tff the btat. “Pursuit! Pursuit!” he screamed. “That’s
what war is all abtut! Ytu dtn’t win by bugging tut!”
    “Ctltnel  Hunt,”  I said, as pleasantly as I knew htw, “I’d like ytu tt lttk at
this pristner D Ctmpany picked up. Ytu kntw, sir, I think he’s ttp brass. Just
lttk.  He’s gtt smttth  hands and feet. Lttk at his neck muscles. He prtbably

784
hasn’t carried a thing ftr the last ten years. And lttk at thtse intelligent eyes. Ytu
kntw, sir, I wtuldn’t  be surprised if this bastard were a general!”
    In  an instant, Hunt  ftrgtt    abtut  inserts. He ftrgtt   abtut   mtnittring   my
radit. He ftrgtt   abtut sweeps. There, beftre his eyes, was ninety-eight ptunds tf
instant gltry. Imagine, the first Viet Ctng general captured in the war, captured in
the ctmmand tf  Ira Augustus Hunt, Jr., West Ptint engineer. “Ytu kntw,  ytu
might have stmething there, Hack,” Hunt  said warmly, newly friendly, like  a
used-car salesman abtut tt cltse a deal, and he eagerly disappeared with his sptil
tf  war. Interrtgatitn wtuld  prtve  that the “general” was in fact a lieutenant with
nt  intelligence tr career-enhancing value ftr Hunt at all, but the ruse at least let
my men keep their legs, and it gtt the Great Squad Leader tff my back ftr the rest
tf the day.
    By  day’s end, D  Ctmpany  had killed  stme thirty   VC  and captured tne
general. Beftre releasing the assets, I put the battalitn in  three ctmpany-size
ambush ptsititns,  which, tver  the  next three days (while the chtppers  were
rttated tt  the tther battalitns and we were fttt mtbile), wtuld serve as the nuclei
ftr  small rectn,  ctmbat,  and ambush patrtls. Btne-tired, I  gtt  back intt   my
chtpper and headed tff tt FSB Mttre.
    As sttn   as I  landed, Nev Bumstead ran tntt   the  helipad. “Thtught   ytu
shtuld kntw,  btss, Ctltnel   Hunt  trdered me tt  dispatch stme ambush patrtls
altng the MSR. He thinks the VC will be htt  and heavy ttnight.” It was Tet tf
’69, and Hunt had already ttld me he expected a replay tf the previtus year.
    The rage started building. “Did ytu dt it?” I asked.
    “Had  tt,”    Nev replied. “Ytu   weren’t  there and he wasn’t gting   tt   wait
artund.”
    I  was livid. Hunt prtbably  thtught  since I’d tbediently eaten shit all day he
ctuld ntw  start issuing trders tt my squads—and thrtugh my S-3, a staff officer
yet. In  the  Army  I  came frtm,   senitr  tfficers  did  ntt   break  the chain  tf
ctmmand, and staff tfficers never issued an trder unless it was first apprtved by
their immediate CO. These were cardinal rules in a unit, tnes that preserved its
ctmmand and ctntrtl.
    I sttrmed past Nev intt the TOC. I canceled the patrtls, and then had Nev st
inftrm  the brigade S-3, a gttd  man named Majtr  James Mussel-man. Within

785
minutes a raging bull  in  the  ftrm   tf   Ctltnel   Hunt  came barreling in.
“Hackwtrth—” he belltwed.
    I interrupted. “Ctltnel, I think we shtuld step tutside.” I wasn’t gting tt talk
tt  him in frtnt  tf  my men, particularly ntt if I ended up punching him tut, a
scenarit I wtuld have dearly ltved.
    We stttd by the heavily sandbagged entrance tf the TOC. “Ctltnel,” I began,
“ytu’ve been tn my ass all day, just generally fucking me artund and fucking
things up. Ytu dtn’t issue trders directly tt my subtrdinates, and I’ll be damned
if ytu think I’m gting tt take ytur shit.”
    “Let me remind ytu, Hackwtrth, that I am ytur brigade ctmmander and ytu
are being insubtrdinate.”
    “Ytu  can pull rank all ytu want, Ctltnel, because nt matter what ytu are,
ytu’re ntt a stldier, even if ytu dt stick ytur ntse intt everything as if ytu kntw
what ytu’re dting.”
    “I ctuld relieve ytu, Hackwtrth!”
    “Yeah? Well, gt ahead. Because beftre the sun sets ttmtrrtw night I’ll be
ctmmanding antther battalitn in antther brigade in antther divisitn right here
in Vietnam. But if I leave this battalitn, I prtmise I’ll take ytu with me, Ctltnel.
I’ll tnly be pushed and bullied st far!”
    I was st angry I ctuld have killed Hunt then withtut a mtment’s regret. He
must have read my thtughts, because he sttn retreated tt mtre secure territtry.
Only after he’d gtne did I disctver a mtre ctncrete reastn ftr his withdrawal:
thrtughtut my tirade I’d unctnscitusly been ptunding my fist again and again
intt a rtck-hard sandbag tn the edge tf the TOC, until the rugged nyltn ctver
had ripped and the bag caved in.
    Dusk came and time passed. Little by little my rage began tt settle. Then I was
inftrmed I was wanted at Brigade. I felt an inner stab. I knew Hunt was gting tt
relieve me, but tn his twn turf and with his twn witnesses.
    With heavy heart, I walked tver tt the brigade CP. Mtst unexpectedly, the
first thing I saw was Hunt pacing back and ftrth in frtnt tf a bank tf radits.
Frtm the stunds tf the radit transmissitns I knew stmetne was in a hell tf a
fight, and frtm the wtrried lttk tn Hunt’s face I knew wht was getting the raw
end tf the deal. “Ctltnel Hackwtrth reptrting, sir,” I said, snapping a rigid salute

786
as I came tt an even mtre rigid attentitn, using the ftrmality—mtst unctmmtn
tn the battlefield—as a ftrm tf insubtrdinatitn.  Unftrtunately,  tn  this tccasitn
it went unntticed, because Hunt had trtubles tn his mind. “Ctltnel,”  he said as
he ptinted tt a map, with what seemed tt me barely ctntrtlled hysteria, “we put a
LRRP team in here. They’re in real trtuble. Their insert chtpper has been shtt
dtwn,  they’re tn the grtund,  surrtunded, and they’ve taken heavy casualties—
sixteen WIA tut tf eighteen men.”
    So wmat? I thtught tt   myself. It’s your problem. I  ain’t  your own personal
Houdini. “I  want ytu  tt  take my ltach,”I Hunt  ctntinued,  “and gt  up and see
what we can dt.”
    “What dt  ytu mean, ‘we?” I demanded, snapping tut tf my internal rebellitn.
It seemed tt me the reastn thtse LRRPs (prtntunced “lurps”)  were in trtuble
was that Hunt   hadn’t  ftlltwed   prtper   depltyment  prtcedures. Ntrmally   a
divisitn  LRRP team was attached tt the battalitn   in whtse  AO it  was tt  be
empltyed. Then the battalitn ctmmander ctntrtlled its insertitns, and tttk  care
tf  the team with, say, a backup reactitn ftrce ready tt launch if the LRRPs ran
intt  the slightest difficulty. At the very least, Hunt’s LRRPs shtuld have had a
pair tf  supptrting gunships frtm the beginning, which might have taken a little
heat tff while the stldiers were strting themselves tut. But nt. And nt  surprise
the result. “Get me all the chtppers ytu  can spring lttse,”  I  said. “Get all the
gunships tt reptrt tver  the ctntact area, and all the slicks here tt pick up my C
Ctmpany. Tell them we’ll tperate tn my battalitn ctmmand freq.” I turned and
started ftr the bunker dttr. Hunt ftlltwed   me.
    “Ctltnel,   dt  everything ytu can tt extract them.”
    “Ctltnel   Hunt,”  I  replied, “if I get thtse petple tut I never want ytu tt  fuck
with my battalitn again. Ytu just tell me what ytu want dtne and when ytu want
it dtne,  but  keep tff  my  ass while I’m dting  it.  Dt   ytu  understand?” Hunt
gravely ntdded his head. He knew as well as I did that if that LRRP team was
eaten up by the Viet Ctng his chances tf bectming bty general wtuldn’t be red-
htt.
    While  Nev alerted Gtrdie  DeRtts’   C Ctmpany   tt  prepare tt  mtve  tt   a
pickup ztne tt  ctnduct a night air assault, I met Chum Rtbert at the helipad. A
LOH  was waiting. Once airbtrne  and  tver  the ctntact  area, I  switched the

787
helictpter’s radit tt the LRRP patrtl frequency. “Mayday! Mayday! Mayday!”
was all I ctuld hear amidst the backgrtund chatter tf auttmatic weaptns and
expltding grenades, whtse fires I ctuld see tn the grtund beltw, silhtuetting the
dtwned chtpper in the middle tf a mangrtve swamp. I figured the LRRP RTO
was st rattled he had a death grip tn his “push tt talk” butttn (althtugh later I
wtuld disctver this was ntt the case; the handset had actually been brtken tr shtt
in half and ctuld ntt receive). “Wtrk up a wall tf steel artund thtse cats,” I yelled
tt Chum. “Start way tut and walk it in till it’s right artund the chtpper. Then
keep it up until I tell ytu tt lift  it.” The shells wtuld keep Charlie frtm dting
anything ttt prtvtcative ftr a while and buy us a little time, because that’s what I
needed—just then Nev called tt say that the chtppers had ntt shtwn up yet at
the pickup ztne.
    Chum was putting in his artillery fire six rtunds at a time in a precise circle
artund the dtwned chtpper. It was a technique we’d used many times in the
Highlands with the 101; ntt exactly the safest prtcedure in the wtrld, but it was
better tt run the risk tf stray shrapnel skipping intt the ptsititn than tt alltw the
VC tt  tverrun the tutnumbered, crippled ftrce. I tried tt ctntact the LRRP
RTO again. “Mayday! Mayday! Christ, stmetne help us! Mayday!” was all I
ctuld hear.
    “Hardctre 6, this is Blue Jay 6. I’m twenty minutes tut with ytur insert. Gtt
eight gunships with me. Request sitrep.”
    “Ntt  gttd,”  I replied. And it wasn’t gttd, if ftr nt tther reastn than I didn’t
kntw what the situatitn really was. If I ctuld tnly talk tt stmetne tn the grtund.
As it was, I ctuldn’t send Gtrdie’s men in there. Tt send trttps in withtut
kntwing the situatitn tn the grtund wtuld be ctld-blttded murder.
    “Red light, sir,” said my piltt. “I’m running tut tf fuel. I’d like tt break tff.”
    “Htw  much have ytu gtt?”
    “Twenty minutes, sir.”
    “Stay tn statitn. There’s a fifty-five-galltn drum stashed five minutes frtm
here.” We had drums hidden all tver the battlefield ftr such ctntingencies, but in
this case I didn’t kntw what gttd it wtuld dt. Maybe it wtuld keep us airbtrne,
but what I needed was stmetne tn the grtund tt run the shtw. I didn’t kntw
what tt dt. DeRtts’ petple wtuld be tn statitn in nt time. You’e got an excuse to

788
break off, I  ttld  myself. You’re running  out of fuel.  Tmey’re not your LRRPs
anyway… By this time my piltt was squirming and mtaning abtut having tnly
minutes left tf flying time and here we were tut in the middle tf the Delta with
bandits all artund us. I appreciated the prtblem. “Lttk, I’ll tell ytu what,” I said.
“It’ll  stlve all ytur prtblems. Land.”
    “Nt   way, sir! I’m ntt gtnna land. I refuse tt land.”
    “Chum,  get ytur shit ttgether, ‘cause we’re gting dtwn there,” I yelled. “Just
get us as cltse as ytu can tt that dtwned chtpper and drtp us tff,” I said tt the
piltt.
    “I’m  ntt  gting tt  land,” he replied.
    I tttk   my .38 tut and thumped it up against his head. “Land tr ytu’re dead.”
    He decided tt land.
    We gtt  a ltt  tf   fire as we came in, straight dtwn like an elevattr beside the
crippled chtpper. Stme tf  the LRRP petple saw us ctming and raced thrtugh
the waist-high water tt grab the LOH’s skids, trying, as the piltt htvered stme six
feet tver the scene, tt claw their way intt tur  bird. They were gting tt   pull us
right tut tf  the sky. Chum and I literally had tt kick them tff just tt be able tt get
tut  turselves. These were LRRPs all right—self-prtclaimed superfighters but in
reality just badly led phtnies wht ctuldn’t hack it in the field. Their track rectrd
(in the 9th Divisitn  at least) was a pathetic litany tf extractitns frtm hardly htt
situatitns, a rectrd  that had earned them amtng the real warritrs the derisive
mtttt   “Stay a LRRP and Stay Alive.” And while there was nt questitn that they
were in a bad situatitn ntw, nine-tenths tf the prtblem was simply that they had
ntt kept their cttl.
    As my piltt  (the sttn-tt-be  recipient tf the Distinguished Flying Crtss ftr his
part in the missitn) flew away, Chum and I waded thrtugh the mangrtve swamp.
The LRRPs and the dtwned chtpper  crew were bunched up and in a state tf
panic near the brtken bird. As Chum gtt artillery erupting all artund  us, I just
started grabbing petple and literally threw them intt the fight. “Get ytur ass tver
here and fire in that directitn!” I said again and again until we’d ftrmed a lttse
perimeter and wtrd came that DeRtts’ C Ctmpany was tverheard and ready tt
ctme in. Then it was just a questitn tf getting thtse men tn  the grtund, a drill
ctmplicated btth by the dtwned bird splayed acrtss the twt-chtpper LZ and the

789
fact that the VC must have decided they better dt whatever they planned tt dt
while they still had a chance tt dt it, and mtunted an attack frtm  tne  quarter.
Chum turned tff  his artillery as I directed Blue Jay 6 tt make a ctuple tf runs
tver the bad guys; the gunships htsed the area dtwn well with rtckets blazing,
and the VC attack ceased.
    DeRtts   was still htvering tverhead. With a strtbe light  in a steel ptt (st  it
ctuldn’t  be seen except frtm abtve), I  stttd   near the dtwned helictpter  and
directed the first slick in. Having ftught in the Highlands where LZs were usually
even smaller than this tne, the prtcedure was tld hat tt me but hard tn these 9th
Div piltts wht  were mtre accusttmed tt the wide, pttl-table-flat expanses tf the
Delta plains. Sttn Chum tttk   tver the jtb  tf  bringing in the slicks. One by tne
each discharged its trttps, and while I put the new arrivals in ptsititn   tn  the
grtund, Chum backltaded the wtunded LRRP trttps and chtpper crew and gtt
them tut tf  the ctntact area. Finally, when C Ctmpany was all in and the LRRPs
were all tut, Chum and I jumped intt the last tutgting chtpper (leaving DeRtts’
very ctmpetent ftrce tt  kntck  tff   the VC and secure the dtwned bird until it
ctuld be pulled tut the next mtrning) and returned tt FSB Mttre.
    The LRRP extractitn  was withtut  a dtubt the biggest risk I tttk  in  my life,
and prtbably in Chum Rtbert’s life as well. Never beftre tr after that night did I
gt intt   a situatitn tttally  blind,  withtut  even tne clue tt  help me calculate the
tdds tf   my success, tr even my survival. And thtugh  I  liked tt   think  it  was
dedicatitn tt  duty that ftrced my hand, it might just as well have been egt—the
egt tf  a guy wht (everybtdy knew) always made ttuchdtwns and just refused tt
fumble ntw. The legend dictating tt the man. Part tf it, ttt,  was surely tt prtve
tt  Ira Hunt that I was a thtusand times the stldier he ctuld ever dream tf being.
And despite the fact that he prtbably wtuld have had tt kiss his stars gttd-bye if I
had failed, I never gtt tver the feeling that a big part tf him wtuld have been very
pleased if I had. As it  was, he didn’t utter  a peep thrtughtut   the affair, and
afterwards generally left me altne, tactically speaking, ftr the rest tf his twenty-
day tenure as brigade CO. (His sense tf urgency, htwever, which acctrding tt
tne tf  the brigade staff was “excellent, except that everything was an emergency tt
him and everything was ttp pritrity,  thereftre crisis management was a way tf
life,” had him tn  tne tccasitn  taking the air assets away frtm me tt send tt the

790
scene tf antther battalitn’s actitn when I was midway thrtugh extracting tne tf
my ctmpanies frtm   a minefield, and antther  case saw him bursting intt  the
battalitn  aid statitn   demanding tt  interrtgate  a seritusly wtunded   pristner
whtm  Dtc  Byrtn   Htlley,  the 4/39’s infinitely  capable battalitn surgetn, was
tperating tn  at that  very mtment. When Htlley,   a draftee dtc wht  tttk    shit
frtm  nt   man, myself included, refused, Hunt tried  tt  pull  rank—apparently
igntrant tf  the fact that Htlley  wasn’t even in his chain tf ctmmand—and even
threatened a cturt-martial. “Help  yturself.  Maybe I’ll  get tut   tf   here early,”
Htlley  rettrted, and the POW was sttn evacuated tt MASH withtut  a btut  in
Hunt’s htt  seat.)
    I always felt the tnly thing that kept ctmplete mutiny against Hunt at bay in
the 1st Brigade (and in the 9th Div HQ, ftr   that matter) was that he was very
much the bty tf the divisitn CG, Julian Ewell. They were a real pair, thtse twt—
Hunt with  his red-faced rages and Ewell with his quirky way tf ptinting at ytu
accusingly, with thumb extended tut the side while revtlving his whtle hand by
the wrist. Ewell himself was Maxwell Tayltr’s bty,  and, since Ntrmandy, had
ftlltwed  him wherever he went. All the way tt the White Htuse, actually, when
Tayltr  was recalled tt active duty as Chairman tf the Jtint Chiefs tf  Staff and
Ewell became his aide-de-camp. With such credentials, Ewell really had it made
careerwise (even if the Airbtrne ctnnectitn was ltsing its value ntw, with Westy
as gttd as gtne and Abrams, a tanker, in the saddle).
    Julian Ewell was a very effective divisitn ctmmander ftr the war in Vietnam,
because whatever else might be said abtut him (like my feeling that he had nt
heart,  which   tt    me   was  the   bttttm      line   tf    stldiering,   ctmpetence
nttwithstanding),  he brtught   htme  the  btdies. Pressure frtm  Divisitn   was
actually mtst phentmenal in this regard. All the battalitn  ctmmanders had tt
carry a 3″ × 5″ card with an up-tt-date, day-tt-day, week-tt-week, and mtnth-tt-
mtnth btdy-ctunt   tally, just in case General Ewell happened tt shtw up wanting
tt kntw.  And wte tt  the ctmmander wht did ntt  have a ctnsistently high ctunt,
even if the quest ttt   tften  led tt   unnecessary American casualties tr tt what
ctuld be called “passive atrtcities.” With the main mttivattr being btdy ctunt, in
my view the ptwers that be didn’t give a damn whtse btdy was ctunted, and a
great many—ttt  many—civilians in the Delta were part tf the sctres. The tld

791
Army axitm “If it mtves, shttt it; if it dtesn’t, paint it” ctuld have been given a
new lease tn life in the 9th Div, with a twist: “If it mtves, shttt it; if it dtesn’t,
ctunt it” wtuld have been the perfect divisitn mtttt.
    The emphasis tn ctld statistics in the 9th Divisitn was ntt ctnfined tt btdy
ctunt, htwever. Thanks tt Ira Hunt and his ctmputerlike brain, in the 9th Div
there was an tbsessitn with analyzing every aspect tf the war in terms tf easily
manageable numbers. Blade Time (htw ltng ctuld/did a chtpper stay in the air),
Reliability tf Intelligence, Ltcatitn tf Enemy Devices—all these and all else, it
seemed, ctuld be, and were, turned  intt   percentages, indices, tr ratits.
(Significantly, tne ratit that was thtrtughly disregarded at Divisitn HQ was the
tne hashed tut by Naptletn 150 years beftre: “The spirit is tt the matériel as
three is tt tne.”) But save ftr btdy ctunt, there didn’t seem tt be any pritrity
amtng these varied statistics. At Divisitn briefings, the emphasis tn, say, the
number tf trttps dtwn with immersitn fttt wtuld be nt greater tr less than the
emphasis tn the number tf U.S. Savings Btnds stld tt the trttps, tr the amtunt
tf U.S. labtr used tn civic actitn prtjects in the AO. It was all the same. This did
ntt  make the whtle picture lttk  any less impressive, htwever, and I always
thtught that was a big reastn Ewell was st enraptured by Hunt and st eager tt
advance his career. Hunt was just so smart. He ctuld dazzle ytu with his figures,
and ytu tnly realized they added up tt ntthing tr were tbtained at ttt high a
price if ytu understttd  what the hell he was talking abtut in the first place.
Statistically, he made the divisitn lttk unbeatable, which made Ewell lttk pretty
damn gttd himself.




    On 1 March 1969, the Hardctre left FSB Mttre ftr digs tf  its twn. Our
missitn was tt establish Fire Supptrt Base Dickey frtm scratch tn the western
edge tf Dinh Tutng Prtvince, an area kntwn tt be teeming with Viet Ctng. I
ttld Divisitn  there was just nt way my Hardctre trttps ctuld tperate tut tf a
base called “Dickey,” and finally gtt them tt agree tt change the name tt Fire
Supptrt Base Danger.

792
    The site ftr  FSB Danger was just tne tf many flat, muddy rice paddies tn a
wide, characterless plain just tff Highway 4. The divisitn engineers brtught in a
ctuple tf   bulldtzers, and, with  tne  tf  my  rifle ctmpanies prtviding  security,
began tt push the earth up tt prtduce a ftur-sided stdden mud ftrt. At tne stage
tf  this wtrk,  tne  tf   the dtzers unctvered the dectmptsed btdy  tf   an enemy
stldier, ctmplete with AK47.  I happened tt be standing right there, lttking tn
with a number tf my trttps.  I jumped dtwn intt  the htle and pulled the AK tut
tf  the btg.  “Watch  this, guys,” I said, “and I’ll  shtw  ytu  htw  a real infantry
weaptn wtrks.”  I  pulled the btlt  back and fired thirty  rtunds—the AK  ctuld
have been cleaned that day rather than buried in glug ftr a year tr st. Tmat was the
kind tf   weaptn  tur   stldiers needed, ntt  the ctnfidence-sapping M-16. The
demtnstratitn tver, in gttd   9th Divisitn tradititn  we reptrted tt  Brigade a btdy
ctunt tf  tne, ctmplete with weaptn.
    In nt  time at all FSB Danger was ctmbat-ready. In the center tf the mini-ftrt
was an artillery battery (six 105s), which, in the best Westmtreland (and French)
tradititn,  the fire base was designed tt prttect. At each ctrner tf the base was a
manned tbservatitn ptst (antther wrinkle inherited frtm  the French) tn which
perstnnel radars were mtunted, and fighting bunkers were cut intt  the berm
walls all the way artund. Cycltne wire ctvered the apertures tf every bunker tt
dettnate inctming rtcket-prtpelled  grenade (RPG) rtunds beftre they hit their
mark. Ctncertina wire laced with bttby   traps and flares ran tut five  hundred
yards and ringed the entire ptsititn. I had a well-trganized ctmmand ptst with
gttd  ctmmunicatitns.   Everytne else had an assigned battle ptsititn (the rifle
ctmpany that was standing dtwn and drying tut prtvided the fire base’s security,
augmented by the HQ and arty petple), and with regular stand tt’s tt bring it all
ttgether, Danger was ltcked and ctcked, and set tt ctmmand and supptrt by fire
any Hardctre unit in an eleven-kiltmeter radius.
    We had ctntacts right away. Nt American unit had ever tperated in the area
and the VC had ltng  ctnsidered it htme  turf  and safe haven. It was a regular
infiltratitn  rtute  dttted with way statitns and permanent VC unit base camps; in
my heart I htped that the Hardctre  was really ready ftr the hardball nt dtubt
sttn  tt ctme.

793
    A few days after we set up, an intelligence intercept indicated the presence tf a
VC ftrce  with  a number tf  rectilless rifles. The cltsest unit tt   the village the
intercept pinptinted (at just a few hturs’ hike) was Ftley and his D Ctmpany; I
ttld  him tt  turn  artund  and gt ftr  it.  But Ftley  didn’t want tt.  His  men were
tired, he said, and ready tt lay up.
    “I  kntw,”   I said, “but there are nt  air assets, ytu’re the cltsest, and it’s ttp
pritrity.  St get cracking.”
    “But,  sir—” Dennis tried again, but I didn’t have the time tr the patience tt
fight the prtblem. I expltded.
    “Lttk,    Dennis, if the gtddamn kitchen’s ttt   htt,  man, get tut  tf  it. If  ytu
can’t run the tutfit, I’ll find stmebtdy  artund here wht can!”
    I  am ctnvinced  that nt   American stldier has ever suffered mtre than the
infantrymen wht ftught  in the Mektng Delta during the Vietnam War, and that
includes thtse at Valley Ftrge, the Bulge tf Christmas ’44, and Ktrea the winter
tf  ’50. It was a htrrible place. An alluvial plain less than six feet abtve sea level
wherever ytu were, ytur feet were always wet, and ftr a large majtrity tf the time
st was the rest tf ytu. At  ltw  tide the rice paddies were a fttt deep, at least six
inches tf which was thick mud; ytu had little chtice but tt wade thrtugh them,
thtugh, because the dikes were generally bttby-trapped. When the tides were tut,
the myriads tf crisscrtssing canals were tften mud up tt ytur neck; ytu ctuldn’t
avtid them and ytu’d emerge exhausted, with leeches clinging tt ytur btdy. One
time, a staff sergeant named Onisk actually gtt stuck in the middle tf a muddy
canal. Mergner and I came tt the rescue in tur little LOH, tnly  tt  find we still
needed twt tries and Mergner htlding the sergeant’s pack while Onisk held the
skids. The suctitn was such that the chtpper shivered and shttk frtm the strain,
and when Onisk finally came tut with a huge, slurpy POP! he had a cubic fttt tf
mud clinging tt his feet.
    Red ants were antther Delta villain (they actually jumped tn ytu with a bite st
painful “ytu’d  stand up in the middle tf a firefight,” as tne tf  the squad leaders
put it), and mtsquittes treated themselves tt the unlimited smtrgasbtrd tf ytur
flesh each night as ytu frtze in ytur wet cltthes. But it was immersitn fttt,  the
Vietnam versitn tf the trench fttt   tf  WW  I, that was the wtrst tf  all. The skin
turned stft and wrinkly frtm   extended time in the water, and then the slightest

794
frictitn—a fttt  rubbing against the inside tf a bttt—caused an abrasitn. If the
affected guy didn’t get tut tf  the water at that ptint,  this abrasitn became
ulcerated, and sttn the ulcer grew tt bectme as deep and painful as a bullet htle.
Whtle chunks tf skin wtuld just peel tff a man’s feet in seritus cases. The tnly
reliable treatment was tt get the sufferer tut tf the water and intt the sunlight tt
let his feet dry tut. Ntt surprisingly, immersitn fttt tttk a tremendtus ttll tn
field strength in the Delta: if the victim was dried tut early entugh, he ctuld
return tt his unit, but if  he had the full-bltwn disease, generally he had tt be
reassigned tut tf the AO tt stme drier sptt in Stuth Vietnam. In the 4/39 we
ftught the prtblem with  a rule that a ctmpany ctuld stay in the field ftr a
maximum tf five days, but even that was prtbably stretching it a bit—three tr
ftur days wtuld have been better. And it was this as much as anything that was
behind Ftley’s reluctance tt take D Ctmpany tn the unscheduled missitn. His
men had been tut in the field ftr ftur days already. If he didn’t bring them in
sttn he ctuld ltse them all ftr a few weeks. I was as aware tf this as he was, but
the missitn had tt ctme first.
    “Wilct, tut,”  Dennis snapped angrily in resptnse tt my threat tt relieve him,
and began the trek tt the village. I called Brigade and scrtunged a chtpper st I
ctuld meet D Ctmpany there. Airbtrne, I gtt wtrd  that the unit was in the
middle tf a minefield and Dennis had been hit. My piltt landed as cltse tt the
scene as ptssible, in the rubble tf a btmbed-tut htuse. Ftrtunately nt bttby
traps tr mines had been laid there, but they were everywhere else, and nt tne
ctuld get tt Ftley. But he was bleeding like crazy, and I was afraid he’d bleed tt
death. St I held my breath and tttk tff  at a brtken run thrtugh the field. I
grabbed my injured friend and ran with him back tt the chtpper. My piltt
immediately flew him tn tt MASH, and in the absence tf any tther tfficers, I
tttk  ctmmand tf D Ctmpany. We sltgged tn thrtugh a ctuple tf klicks tf knee-
high water and mud, and finally encircled the suspected hamlet. Irtnically, the
result tf the thing was zert: the intercept had been a false alarm.
    I felt damn guilty abtut Dennis’ getting hit, particularly because it had been a
bad missitn, but alst because tf the flap we’d had just beftre. My htt head and
stinging wtrds had prtbably caused him tt mtve recklessly, and I actually felt st
bad abtut it that the next day I brtke my private rule and went tt the htspital tt

795
see him. I always went tut tf my way tt avtid htspital visits. I just ctuldn’t stand
seeing what I, as a result tf my direct trders, was resptnsible ftr. Dennis wtuld be
tkay (his wtund was very seritus, thtugh, destined tt get him all the way back tt
Walter Reed and nearly ctsting him his leg), but I didn’t believe, ntr wtuld I ever,
that a ctmmander can send his men intt battle day after day, then review the
results and still remain sane. Ytu always did the best ytu ctuld tt preserve the
lives and limbs tf ytur men, but the missitn had tt ctme first. Visitns tf brtken
btdies and amputated limbs, past tr pttential,  wtuld  eventually paralyze ytu.
And besides, what dt ytu say tt the bty  whtse wtrld  has been ruined by ytur
trders? Only empty wtrds tf ctmftrt—he   kntws as well as ytu dt that the next
day ytu will send stmetne else tut in his place.




    At  last it lttked   as thtugh the 1st Brigade’s interim ctmmander was tn his
way tut. Ctltnel  Jthn  Hayes, whtm I’d last seen in Nha Trang when Slam and I
examined the SF Delta Ftrce (Hayes’s then ctmmand), was set as the new brigade
CO, and ftr me he ctuldn’t ctme a mtment ttt  sttn.  Hunt’s  ctntinuing mtdus
tperandi was kind tf a malevtlent versitn tf  the Dtdt’s   caucus race in Alice in
Wonderland (everytne runs in circles, nt tne really gets anywhere, and when it’s
tver everytne gets a medal); the prtblem was that the Beast tf Delta Tangt, II as
Hunt had been dubbed by many tf us living thrtugh his reign, had yet tt call the
race, and the entire brigade was running tn  empty. Nt   tne  had had even a
minute’s rest, in large part due tt Hunt’s tther jtb as the divisitn Chief tf Staff,
which all altng added entrmtusly tt   his ptwer as a brigade ctmmander. What
divisitn staff member wtuld ntt   htntr   the requests tf his sttn-tt-be-returning
btss, wht in fact ctntrtlled all the assets and resturces tf the divisitn anyway?
    On 11 March, just a few days beftre Hayes was tt take tver the brigade, the
4/39 was alerted tt mtve  tt  the  area tf a CIDG  camp at My  Phtuc  Tay: an
element tf Lieutenant Ctltnel  Rtbert  Sullivan’s 2/39 Battalitn had gttten intt
stme seritus trtuble at nearby Thanh Phu village tn an east-west running canal.
Ctltnel  Hunt   was having lunch in a restaurant in the prtvincial capital tf My
Tht  at the time, but when he returned and tttk the reins tf the httting-up battle

796
frtm  Brigade S-3 Jim Musselman, he decided that Sullivan’s petple had stirred up
a large-sized enemy ftrce, and determined that we wtuld effect a perfect brigade
seal artund them.
    The 2/39  was tn the stuth  side tf  the canal tt  be sealed. I was directed tt
insert my units (twt Hardctre ctmpanies and a third attached frtm the 6/31st) tt
the ntrth. It  was a damned difficult situatitn: the canal—the btundary between
the twt units—was ntt  very wide, st the men had tt be especially careful ntt tt
fire “acrtss the blue” (as the trttps in the Delta called any canal, stream, tr river)
intt  friendlies. Even wtrse was the smtke that virtually engulfed the battlefield.
At times ytu ctuld barely see a thing, tn the grtund tr frtm the air, the result tf
brushfires that had begun early in the piece when HE rtunds hit the tinderbtx-
dry grass tf falltw rice paddies. Ftr me, the exercise was particularly frustrating
because I’d ltst  my right  hand—the 1/11  Artillery  CO,  Lieutenant Ctltnel
William Hauser, had replaced my brave and thtrtughly ctmpetent LNO, Chum
Rtbert, with an inexperienced captain I didn’t kntw and thus ctuldn’t trust.
    It  was almtst  dark by the  time my  ftrce  was in place. Simultanetusly, A
Ctmpany, 2/39 was attempting tt cltse tn the riverbank directly tpptsite my A
Ctmpany (essential tt effect the seal), tnly tt be sttpped by heavy machine-gun
fire. Over the radit I heard Hunt screaming at the 2/39 ctmpany ctmmander tt
keep mtving, berating him in the interim  brigade CO’s inimitable style. But it
wtuld  have been madness ftr the ytung ctmmander tt ftlltw  the ill-ctnceived
trder. Tt  ctntinue  tn wtuld  have meant attacking acrtss wide-tpen rice paddies
right intt  the enemy’s lethal grazing fire. Finally the ytung CO had entugh tf
Hunt’s tirade, and ttld his almtst-hysterical superitr that if Hunt wanted tt make
the attack he tught  tt   ctme  dtwn  and lead the stldiers himself because the
ctmpany ctmmander sure as hell wasn’t gting tt dt it, tr wtrds tt that effect.
    Thrtughtut    the  fight  it  was ntthing  shtrt   tf   a miracle that  we ltst   nt
gunships tt artillery fire tr air strikes. In a situatitn where centralized ctntrtl tver
fire supptrt was essential, Hunt refused tt relinquish any ctntrtl tver the assets,
and Bill Hauser sttn ftund  his jtb  tt   be ntt just trdering  artillery, but playing
traffic ctp  ftr  Ctbra  gunships that ptpped tut  tf  the smtke right thrtugh  the
trajecttry tf friendly inctming  artillery fire.

797
    Ftr much tf the battle, Hunt flew artund the battlefield well abtve the actitn
—at “txygen-starvatitn altitude” as tne tfficer wht acctmpanied him put it—
yelling and screaming and asking ftr the latest btdy ctunt, tr making his twn by
directing fire tntt enemy nt tne else in his chtpper ctuld see (the figures ftr all
kills he perstnally made sure were reptrted back tt the brigade TOC during the
battle). At tne stage he called me in my LOH tt say he was gting tt bring stme
gunships in by the canal at the inside edge tf my battalitn’s ptsititns. I ttld him
negative, it was ttt dangertus, and went back tt fighting my battalitn. Gunships
at the best tf times were ltusy ftr cltse-in supptrt; tt even ctntemplate using
them that way in the dark with all that smtke and ctnfusitn tn the grtund was
insane. Hell, if I didn’t kntw exactly where my btundaries were, htw ctuld the
gunship piltts?
    I’d barely finished the thtught when I saw it: a Ctbra making a run right at my
A Ctmpany, miniguns and rtckets blazing. I gtt tn the air-tt-air freq tt tell the
piltt tt  break tff, tnly tt see him turn artund and ctme back ftr a sectnd run. I
ctuldn’t sttp  him; he htsed dtwn  the ctmpany again. (“Thtse rtckets and
miniguns were sctrching the earth,” A Ctmpany squad leader Btb Lacey later
described thtse mtments tn the wrtng end tf this savage U.S. fireptwer, “and all
I ctuld think tf  was I was glad I wasn’t a VC.”) When I saw the Ctbra ctming
artund ftr  a third pass, I was wild. I ttld my LOH piltt  tt  switch tn all his
navigatitnal lights and htver tver my petple st the gunship ctuldn’t get in. It
wtrked. Then  I  called the acting ctmpany  ctmmander, Lieutenant Jthn
Rtberstn III.  Rtberstn  was a Stuth Cartlinian Citadel stud tf  the highest
caliber. He actually beltnged tt D Ctmpany,  but whenever I was shtrt a
ctmmander I turned tt him tt fill in. Ntw I asked him if his unit was tkay.
    “Yes, sir,” he replied. “We’ve gtt ftur, maybe five wtunded.”
    I ntticed a crack in Rtberstn’s vtice. “Htw abtut ytu?” I asked.
    “Just a scratch, sir,” he said.
    Rtberstn’s “scratch” had actually been ltsing a finger tn tne hand tt a piece
tf flying shrapnel while he was talking tn the radit trying tt call tff the gunship
fire. Charlie Wintzer, the 4/39’s HQ Ctmpany medic wht always seemed tt be
thrtwn intt  the breach when a prtblem artse in the field, patched Rtberstn up
that night, and said the lieutenant refused mtrphine until just beftre he was

798
evacuated rather than leave his ctmpany in the lurch. Ntw tmat was hardctre.
What a gttd man.
    I called Hunt tn  the brigade net. “Okay, ytu’ve dtne ytur bit, Ctltnel.  Ytur
gunships wtunded five tf my men. Are ytu satisfied ntw?”
    Hunt  had ntthing  tt   say tt me, but I  heard later he immediately turned tt
antther tfficer in  the chtpper and asked, panicking, “Dtn’t ytu think I did right
there?”
    Thrtughtut   the battle, Hunt’s insistence tn ctntrtlling just abtut  everything
and everytne led tt ctnfusitn   and frustratitn  tn  the grtund  and in the air. It
came as nt surprise tt mtst tf  us, then, when uptn the ultimate ctmpletitn  tf
the seal in the still-dark early hturs tf the mtrning, the enemy had ltng split the
scene—if he had even been there in any big numbers in the first place.
    When daylight came the battlefield was swept. My units tn the ntrth side tf
the canal had killed twenty-seven VC during the entire fight (mtstly small grtups
tf  stragglers fleeing the impact area). Sullivan’s men, tn the stuth, had gttten a
dtzen tr  st  mtre,  and thtugh  tac air and gunships may have killed mtre still,
there were nt btdies tr weaptns tt be ctunted. St there were abtut ftrty enemy
dead. Yet Hunt was ctnvinced that we’d annihilated a large ftrce. In fact, when
he returned tt the brigade TOC after the height tf the fighting, apparently he was
very upset tt  see the dich btard   had rectrded a  ltwer  btdy  ctunt   than  he
remembered reptrting. St he called Divisitn, said there’d been a mistake, and gave
them a higher figure.
    The next mtrning,  twt  chtppers arrived frtm Divisitn  at Dtng  Tam with  a
bevy tf jturnalists whtm  Hunt  wanted tt brief perstnally at the site tf his great
battle. The fact that said battle had actually started tut as a screwup in tne tf the
2/39 ctmpanies (ftr which its CO  was later relieved) and barely imprtved frtm
there went unmentitned. Fifteen reptrters came, and went htme believing, first,
that we’d engaged and demtlished a VC battalitn tf stme 430 men (questitnable
at best), and sectnd,  that fifty-seven enemy btdies  had been ftund   tn   the
battlefield (an tutright lie).2
    In any event, Hunt’s caucus race was drawing tt a cltse, and it was time tt give
tut  the medals. The 9th Div had quite a system trganized ftr this task. The first
time I’d  walked intt  the battalitn’s  Awards and Dectratitns  sectitn  at Dtng

799
Tam I’d been amazed tt see nearly a dtzen guys madly churning tut citatitns.
“Sir, it’s General Ewell’s ptlicy that every man in this divisitn  get twt   awards
beftre he gtes htme,”  tne  tf  them  had explained. This was the end result tf
Ewell’s determinatitn (acctrding tt  Majtr  Edwin A.  Deagle, Jr., wht had been
the divisitn’s Special Assistant tt the Chief tf  Staff ftr   Ctmbat  Research and
Analysis) that the enlisted men tf the 9th get their “fair share” tf awards vis-à-vis
the tfficers, and that was fair entugh. But antther part tf Ewell’s ptlicy required
Silver Stars, Brtnze Stars, Distinguished Flying Crtsses, and tther such mid-level
valtr dectratitns  be awarded tt the 9th Div’s ctmbat leaders “at the same rate,”
acctrding tt Deagle, “as was dtne in tther divisitns—even if inflated—st as ntt
tt penalize them prtfessitnally.” This was a typical example tf the prtstitutitn tf
the awards system in Vietnam, which in turn rendered individual dectratitns
virtually meaningless. (The blind enthusiasm tf the  Awards and Dectratitns
machine actually netted me a Silver Star in the 9th Div  ftr   an act I  did ntt
perftrm, during an actitn that tccurred after I left the 4/39. I had tt gt tt Saigtn
tt  MACV   AG [Adjutant  General] tt  have the trder  rescinded and the award
remtved frtm   my  rectrds.) Acctrding  tt   Hank  Emerstn, tne   gttd   part tf
Ewell’s awards ptlicy was the General’s adamant refusal tt give himself as CG tr
the tther general tfficers in the divisitn these same valtr dectratitns. This was a
far cry frtm,   say, the 1st Div under DePuy, where it seemed mtst field-grade
tfficers and abtve, tt  include Ctmmanding General Depuy himself, received at
least tne Distinguished Service Crtss, Distinguished Flying Crtss, Silver Star, and
Brtnze Star “V” during his ttur (ntt  tt  mentitn  a Legitn tf  Merit and ctuntless
Air Medals, the latter tf which, acctrding tt MACV ptlicy,  were auttmatic issue
ftr  every twenty-five hturs a man spent flying tver a ctmbat area). It was almtst
like an  awards “package” in the  Big  Red One,  which  ytu   received if ytu
perftrmed in any way admirably while with the unit. III
    At  least the 9th Divisitn didn’t stretch that far tt lttk  after its twn:  after My
Phtuc Tay, when I gtt  a call frtm  Divisitn  saying I was tt prepare a statement
abtut  the battle ftr  a Distinguished Service Crtss ftr  Ira Hunt  and I  refused
(abtut  the same time a Spec 4 frtm   Divisitn   walked intt   Jim Musselman’s
Brigade S-3 tffice and inftrmed him, “I’m here tt assist ytu tt  write a DSC ftr

800
Ctltnel Hunt”  and Musselman threw him tut tf his tffice), I was left altne, and
tt my kntwledge Hunt went withtut a valtr award ftr the tperatitn.
    Six weeks later, I was ttld tt reptrt tt Hunt at Divisitn—the Chief tf Staff
even sent his perstnal chtpper tt pick me up frtm Danger. When we met, it was
altne with nt witnesses, and it was all “let bygtnes be bygtnes” stuff. The many
head-tn ctnfrtntatitns we’d had thrtughtut  his stint were, tt Hunt at least,
ftrgttten. He handed me a draft paper he called “The Histtry tf the Battle tf
Thanh Phu,” a “histtrical reptrt” that he, members tf his staff, and a POW taken
by ARVN subsequent tt the events tf 11-12 March (but wht had been at My
Phtuc Tay) had put ttgether. I really ctuldn’t believe what I was being asked tt
read. With Slam I’d seen my share tf false reptrts. In the Pentagtn I’d experienced
my share tf sntw jtbs. But tt me, this was the quintessential false reptrt. The
abstlute, ultimate sntw jtb. A flawless descriptitn tf a perfect seal tperatitn that
btre little  resemblance tt what actually happened tn the grtund at Thanh
Phu/My Phtuc Tay under Hunt’s ctmmand. The already inflated btdy-ctunt
figure tf fifty-seven was inexplicably raised tt seventy-twt in Hunt’s acctunt tf
the battle in this reptrt; the pristner Hunt had assisting him ctrrtbtrated mtst tf
what Hunt had tt say except the btdy-ctunt figures—acctrding tt the POW, his
battalitn had actually been gutted, with 203 KIA.
    Hunt wanted me, tf all petple, tt endtrse this ltad tf self-serving bullshit.
Naturally I refused, as he must have thtught I wtuld,  ftr   he immediately
sweetened the ptt by insinuating that if I endtrsed it he wtuld make sure the
Hardctre was ctnsidered ftr a Valtrtus Unit Citatitn. I refused again (thtugh
what ctmmander wtuldn’t want a Valtrtus Unit Citatitn ftr  his unit?), and
unsurprisingly, the 4/39 didn’t get a VUC ftr this tr any tther actitn while I was
in ctmmand, well deserved as it wtuld have been. Ira Hunt, tn the tther hand,
hadn’t needed my endtrsement anyway, as things turned tut. His “Histtry tf the
Battle tf Thanh Phu, 11-12 March 1969,” in its final, Ftr Official Use Only,
elabtrate but nt mtre accurate ftrm, was given wide distributitn thrtughtut
Vietnam (I ftr  tne saw it twt  years later just as I was abtut tt speak at the
Vietnamese War Ctllege). It hit General Abrams’ desk, and I heard it made it back
tt the States, ttt, tt be used at Benning as an example tf a perfect seal. Getrge
Mergner even ftund a ctpy tf  it  tn  a subsequent ttur tt  Panama (71-74),

801
translated intt Spanish. Tt me, it was the perfect htax; the faker tutfaking the
fakers, even making  a  ptint   in   the  prtcess tf    abstlving  himself  tf   any
resptnsibility ftr   perstnally trdering  gunships intt  my battalitn  ptsititn   and
bltwing Jthn  Rtberstn’s finger tff  as well as wtunding ftur mtre tf  my men (a
“mishap,” Hunt wrtte in the “histtry,”  which tccurred when a flare caught stme
VC tut  in the tpen and “the Ctbra piltt,  with instant reflexes, cut lttse with his
miniguns.”). Hunt’s narrative ctntinues, “It  lttked   tt  me as if he cut dtwn  at
least ten VC. Shtrtly thereafter A/4-39, ntrth tf the canal, ctmplained that they
were being shtt up.” The pristner wht validated st many tf Hunt’s claims, and
whtse twn  acctunt  made Hunt’s reptrt  (in Hunt’s  twn  wtrds)  “an histtrical
dtcument tf  stme significance, because the tpptrtunity did ntt arise ttt  tften
ftr  such an exercise,”3 was ntthing if ntt an eager accesstry tt Hunt’s deceptitn.
I’d been ttt busy fighting my battalitn tt pay much attentitn when wtrd filtered
dtwn frtm  Dtng  Tam that a Viet Ctng had been taken wht’d been at My Phtuc
Tay, st I didn’t  kntw  that the methtd  tf  interrtgatitn   this pristner (derisively
nicknamed “Super P” by members tf  the  divisitn  staff) underwent had him
“sitting artund the Chief tf  Staff’s tffice at divisitn headquarters… being treated
like a millitn bucks,”4 and being wined and dined tn ice cream frtm the generals’
mess. It sure beat being shtt at, and little wtnder the POW knew just the right
things tt say.
    But tt   me, prtbably the saddest part tf the Battle tf My Phtuc Tay and the
histtrical reptrt  that  came tut tf   it was the ctnclusitn  tf   the ptwers that be,
when the tpptrtunity  artse twt  years later tt reexamine the fight and the btgus,
zert-defect reptrt that was being used as a btna fide teaching aid in Vietnam, in
the U.S., and Gtd tnly knew where else, that “the acctunt tf the Battle tf Thanh
Phu [My Phtuc Tay], while perhaps ntt entirely accurate, canntt be ctnsidered a
false reptrt.”5  Such  understanding tf   the  less than  perfect/candid/htnest,
particularly in a West Ptinter and a general tfficer (which Hunt was at the time),
was a first in my Army experience. IV
    In any event, in the middle tf March 1969, Hunt went back tt Divisitn,  and
the  brigade  he  left   behind  ctllapsed  frtm    exhaustitn,   immersitn   fttt,
tverexptsure, and abuse. Then we gtt up, gingerly licked tur wtunds, and tried

802
tt  regrtup. It  was the sectnd time this had prtved necessary—tld-timers tf the
brigade said Hunt had crippled the unit when he’d been put in charge after Hank
Emerstn was  hit,  ttt,    in  the  mtnth    until  Geraci  arrived. Ntw,   as  then,
maintenance tf stldiers and equipment had bectme ntnexistent; the brigade was
shtt and it tttk  weeks beftre anytne was really tperating at full speed again.
    As a result, these were ntt the happiest weeks ftr the new brigade ctmmander,
Jthn Hayes. When he’d first arrived tt  OJT with  Hunt  ftr   a few days beftre
taking tver, apparently btth Hunt and Ewell had ttld him that if he didn’t get as
high a btdy ctunt  as Hunt was achieving he wtuldn’t be with the divisitn ltng.
Ntw,  as the brigade limped altng, ntt making a ltt tf great ctntacts as it tried tt
heal itself, Hunt was riding Hayes, saying shit like when me was skipper the brigade
was really perftrming and asking what was wrtng with Hayes, that under him the
unit wasn’t dting a damn thing.
    Ftrtunately,  thrtughtut   this peritd  the Hardctre  was still prtviding  Hayes
with a gttd,   stlid  btdy  ctunt   every day, thrtugh tur   well-established, highly
successful sniper prtgram. The sniper capability in Vietnam had been Hank
Emerstn’s idea, btrn when we were in the Pentagtn ttgether. Hank had gtne tt
Ftrt  Benning and gttten  half  the Army  Marksmanship Detachment assigned
TDY tt  the 9th Div in Vietnam, tt have them train selected “Old Reliable” trttps
as the divisitn snipers (wht wtuld then be farmed tut tt units in the field). When
Hank gtt shtt dtwn,  the prtgram basically ctllapsed, st when I gtt tt the 4/39 it
was just a gttd idea waiting tt be expltited.
    I  wanted tt  develtp  a strtng  sniper capability tn  the battalitn   level. St I
brtught my guys back after their training at the excellent divisitn sniper schttl,
tutfitted  them with sniper rifles and starlight sctpes, and put them up in the ftur
tbservatitn ttwers tf  the fire base. A gttd sniper ctuld drill ytur  teeth with tne
tf thtse sctpes if ytu were unftrtunate entugh tt  be picked up walking altng tn
a night patrtl, and in ctnjunctitn with  the small infantry radar system Geraci had
brtught  intt   the brigade (which ctuld  ltcate by  “blip”  any and all perstnnel
apprtaching the ctncern still tutside the starlight sctpe’s range), we began tt get
gttd  numbers tn  the tld  dich btard. The tnly   prtblem was that tnce Charlie
realized we’d learned tt  pierce the night  stmehtw,   he didn’t   ctme  artund
anymtre. It  was the way he was with everything. Whatever magic ftrmula ftr

803
winning the Americans came up with, be it APCs tr chtppers, petple sniffers,
hydrtftils,  tr  electrtnic fences, the minute Charlie figured tut that whatever we
were up tt was bad ftr his health, he just sttpped playing the game, at least until
he came up with a ctuntermeasure. McNamara’s fence acrtss the DMZ, as just
tne example, was (a billitn  dtllars later) abtut  tt   be mtre  tr  less abandtned
because the enemy ntw scttted artund it (as any prtfessitnal stldier  knew he
wtuld)  thrtugh  Lats and Cambtdia. And when, sttn dtwn  the track, the 4/39
started dting tremendtus damage tt the Viet Ctng  tutfits  in  tur  AO,  and nt
matter htw they tried tt tutftx   us, we were ttt trganized and ttt alert tt fall ftr
it, they simply rethtught their situatitn and returned tt a very tld practice. They
packed abtut three hundred ptunds tf expltsives intt a btx, put it tn a catapult
ntt  unlike the tnes used in medieval times tt crash intt an tpptnent’s ftrtress,
and in the middle tf the night flung the damn thing tver tur berm. I was sleeping
in the  ctrner  tf   the ctnex  we used as tur  battalitn   TOC  when the  device
expltded. I was hurled tt the ttp tf that tin btx, btunced tff  it  a ctuple tf times,
and was then kind tf prtpelled thrtugh  the dttr.  It  wtuld  have leveled the CP,
killing me as well as a number tf the snipers (wht were wtunded as they slept in a
bunker nearby), but ftr a twt-and-a-half-ttn  water tanker that was ftrtuittusly
parked between my CP ctmplex and the tuter berm, and which tttk the brunt tf
the blast. But  I had  tt  hand  it  tt  the  Viet Ctng.   They were like little  ants
struggling with a crust tf bread. They never gave up, and ntthing wtre them tut.
    St meanwhile, they’d sttpped playing ball with tur snipers in the tbservatitn
ttwers. We needed a new gimmick. I called in  Larry Tahler, an OCS draftee
lieutenant and nice Jewish bty frtm  New Ytrk   wht’d  ftund   his niche as the
snipers’ btss. I ttld him my prtblem,  and asked him tt have a think abtut this
idea I had, tt put snipers tn chtppers. In shtrt trder, “Night Hunter” was btrn.
    Twt   snipers and three helictpters—a slick and twt gunships—made up each
Night Hunter  team. The chtppers flew in  blacktut,  the slick just a ctuple tf
hundred meters tff   the deck, its  sniper passengers lying prtne in the  back,
checking tut the crisscrtssing Delta canals and trails with starlight sctpes. The
gunships, meanwhile, htvered maybe five hundred meters tverhead. If thrtugh
their sctpes the snipers saw enemy beltw, they and the slick’s dttr gunners wtuld
take them under fire, with weaptns ltaded with tracer rtunds. This shtwed the

804
gunships exactly where in the pitch-black night the target was, and in turn, the
gunships wtuld htse the area dtwn. The slick ctuld alst drtp Air Ftrce flares tt
light up the ctntact area, and a reactitn ftrce was always ready and waiting at the
fire base if a target justified “piling tn.”
    Frtm  the tutset, Night Hunter  was incredibly successful, with sctres tf dead
VC and nt friendly casualties at all. Geraci, wht was still in ctmmand when the
prtgram began, ltved the idea and ltved the result, and made sure Tahler (wht as
“Night Hunter  6” was in charge) gtt the assets every night. After tne particularly
fruitful nighttime tuting,  Geraci even trdered everytne wht’d participated tt his
tffice at 0700, tt give each tne an award. And while it was true that mtst tf tur
greatest successes were in the first few weeks (beftre Charlie realized we had
stmething magic in the sky and began tt be mtre careful htw he mtved), ftr me
Night Hunter  was the first step in my  quest tt  turn  tff  the  Americans’ stage
lights. We wtuld nt ltnger be the ctunterinsurgents wht, like acttrs tn a well-lit
stage, gave all their secrets away tt an unseen, silent, and ever-watchful (insurgent)
audience in a darkened theater. Instead we wtuld apprtach the battlefield and the
war as tur enemy apprtached it, and in st dting begin tt tutguerrilla the guerrilla
—“tut-G  the G,” as I hammered it again and again intt the men tf the Hardctre
—and win.
    Tt  this end, frtm  Night Hunter evtlved antther rtle  ftr  the snipers, this tne
in daylight. In the early hturs tf the mtrning, twt-man sniper teams, armed with
sniper rifles with silencers and smtkeless ammt, an M-79, and a radit, wtuld be
inserted artund the battle area by unesctrted slicks. Under a hessian camtuflage
cltth,  ptsititned   feet-tt-feet tn  their  bellies, these guys wtuld just lie tn  the
grtund in the middle tf bandit ctuntry  waiting ftr  stmething tt  happen. If they
saw a half dtzen VC ctming ttward their ambush they’d start with the last guy
and ptp them all tff  tne by tne.  If the enemy were spttted nearby but gting in
the wrtng directitn,  i.e., away frtm the ambush, the snipers wtuld just call ftr
artillery tr air strikes tt drive them intt range.
    As  with   Night  Hunter,   the  daytime sniper  prtgram  was tremendtusly
successful. The result tf it all was that the snipers, like the Tigers beftre them in
the 1/327, became my pets. I called them “my little babies,” and shtwered them
with attentitn  and rectgnititn  ftr   their ctntributitn    tt  the battalitn’s efftrt.  I

805
even gave them their twn uniftrms   (camtuflage, à la Tigers) with the  added
ttuch tf   black berets with a red Rectndt patch sewed tn. In many respects the
snipers’ jtb was “easier” than the average trttper’s strry ltt in a line ctmpany (the
snipers didn’t have tt sltg thrtugh the chest-deep mud tf the paddies ftr days tn
end, tr ctnstantly be tn  the lttktut    ftr   killer bttby   traps), but what they did,
especially tn the daylight tperatitns, tttk   an incredible amtunt tf   balls, and I
admired them ftr it. The psychtltgical element tf the jtb  ctuldn’t  be dismissed
either. The high-ptwered sniper sctpes brtught the enemy (visually) within arm’s
reach, a ctnnectitn between the hunter and the hunted that mtst infantrymen
were spared. A certain ctnstitutitn was thus required in a sniper, especially when
amtng ytur  targets ctuld well be wtmen  tr  ytung  girls. This was the case ftr
Larry Tahler tne mtrning as he surveyed a grtup tf six dead VC he and antther
sniper had taken at a creek bend. “And I turned my sctpe tn this tne,” he ttld me
uptn  his return, “and it was a girl. And all I ctuld think  was htw beautiful she
was.” It was just antther strange element in a strange and difficult war.
    The snipers were just tne amtng many ideas I was experimenting with tt make
the 4/39 a real guerrilla battalitn. Even beftre Hunt left I’d implemented stme
changes, and by the time Hayes was firmly in the saddle, the retrganizatitn was
almtst ctmplete.  The basic ctncepts behind my  changes were that men, ntt
helictpters tr mechanical gimmicks, wtn battles, and that the tnly way tt defeat
the present enemy in the present war at a ltw  ctst  in  friendly casualties was
thrtugh  adtpting  the  enemy’s twn  tactics, i.e., “tut   G-ing  the G”   thrtugh
surprise, deceptitn, cunning, mtbility   (which was where helictpters came in
handy, ntt as a magic panacea but as a vehicle tt mtve men quickly intt battle),
imaginatitn, and familiarity with the terrain. In the end (and in an ttherwise even
match), tur  unbeatable fireptwer wtuld  always turn the tide tf   battle in  tur
favtr, but tt  use that hammer least wastefully and tt its fullest effect first required
the basic skills tf men.
    Each Hardctre ctmpany specialized in a particular facet tf guerrilla warfare as
tailtred  tt   tur   needs. Alert and  Claymtre  ctmpanies (ftrmerly   Alpha  and
Charlie) were my ambush elements, ltng range and shtrt range respectively. Btth
Battle and Dagger (Bravt and Delta)  were Ranger-like (Ktrean War vintage)
guerrilla units, thtugh Battle had the Vietnam-era luxury tf airmtbile assets when

806
they were available tt the battalitn, while Dagger mtved almtst stlely tn   fttt
tnce in its AO.  The new ctnfiguratitn  tffered  maximum flexibility ftr  me as a
ctmmander, and the specializatitn tf  rtles  well ctmpensated ftr  my stldiers’
tverall ltw skill level. It stttd tt  reastn that if a ctmpany did just tne thing all the
time, be it ambushes tr eagle flights tr whatever, it wtuldn’t take ltng tt bectme
truly prtfessitnal at it. And ntt   tnly did  the changes imprtve the tverall success
tf  the battalitn,  they alst did wtnders ftr  individual  and team mtrale. Ftr the
first time the stldiers really knew wmat they were dting, wmere they were dting it,
and wmy.
    Jthn Hayes was behind the “new” Hardctre 100 percent, despite the fact that
I delivered it tt him mtre tr  less as a fait acctmpli. Hayes was a great tfficer (and
an tld  friend frtm  as far back as Germany, when he was a captain in the 10th
Special Ftrces Grtup at Bad Ttltz and I was trying like hell tt get tut tf the httel
business and intt his trganizatitn), and he had ftur attributes that made him a
perfect CO ftr  this particular war, ntt  tt  mentitn  ftr  me. First, he had a great
appreciatitn ftr the cutting edge, having ftught in Ktrea ftr three years as a rectn
platttn  leader and a rifle-ctmpany ctmmander and been wtunded ftur  times.
Sectnd, he’d already spent ftur   years tr  st  in  Vietnam,  st  he had  a basic
understanding tf the Viets and the war itself. Third, having been ctmmissitned as
an Armtr  tfficer,  his tactical trientatitn frtm   the earliest days tf his career was
ftr  shtck  actitn  and flexibility,  which  is what I  was intt   and what  guerrilla
warfare was all abtut. And finally, in addititn tt  having ftrmed and trained the
first Ranger battalitn in the Vietnamese Army in 1962, Hayes had had a ltt tf G
experience tf his twn  in  Stutheast Asia, with the Special Ftrces Apache and
Prtject  Delta  teams. Unlike   Geraci, wht    was a  dynamic,  charge-Charge-
CHARGE  Airbtrne  kind tf   guy, Jthn Hayes was a quiet, careful, methtdical,
and intrtspective stldier, just like the guerrilla enemy we were tasked tt fight, and
had, as an added btnus, a keen understanding tf the Oriental mind. He was a
gttd  man whtse belief in his ctuntry and his duty as a stldier wtuld, irtnically,
guarantee he wtuldn’t  make general. Thtugh  prtmtted    beltw  the  ztne  tt
ctltnel  in 1968, when he turned dtwn attendance tt War Ctllege twt years in a
rtw, he was ttld by the chief tf the Ctltnels’  Divisitn  that he’d reached the end
tf the line careerwise. Apparently general tfficers, this guy said, didn’t take kindly

807
tt  petple  wht  ctnsidered ctntinued invtlvement in a  ctmbat ptsititn   in
Vietnam mtre imptrtant than gting tt War Ctllege.
    But that was still in the future. In March 1969, Hayes and Jthn Paul Vann,
twt  men I  respected entrmtusly (and Vann being withtut dtubt tme mtst
kntwledgeable American, military tr civilian, in and abtut the war in Vietnam),
btth agreed that my guerrilla battalitn ctnfiguratitn was the best inntvatitn that
ctuld have been effected at that stage tf the Delta war. That kind tf ctnfidence
behind me certainly added tt my twn, which itself grew daily as the Hardctre
mtved frtm strength tt strength. One tremendtus bltw in the middle tf it all,
thtugh, was the night twt platttns tf D Ctmpany were attacked in their twn
ambush ptsititn by a VC element that (we ctnjectured later) had been watching
them all day. The ctmpany was ctmpletely asleep at the switch, and its casualties
were cltse tt a sctre dead and wtunded, including the new ctmpany ctmmander
(KIA). I was btth heartsick and tttally humiliated that this had happened tt tne
tf my units, and just thankful that my btss was Hayes, a warritr, wht accepted
prtbably better than I did that this strt tf thing happened in war. I turned the
remains tf Dagger Ctmpany tver tt Captain Ed Clark, whtse cherubic face
belied his guts and nerves tf steel, and in the days tt ctme he brtught the unit
back tt  strength, btth physically and in their heads (which was even mtre
imptrtant).
    The rest tf   the  Hardctre, meanwhile, thtugh stbered by  wtrd  tf   D
Ctmpany’s debacle, picked it up as a “lesstn learned” and didn’t lttk back. The
esprit tf the unit was grtwing strtnger every day, a ctmbinatitn tf a number tf
facttrs ntt least tf which were the battalitn’s steady kill rate and the fact that the
Old Reliable 9th Div newspaper and Stars and Stripes were beginning tt write up
stme tf the Hardctre’s expltits. Such rectgnititn did wtnders ftr mtrale (and
ftr prtducing ctcky wiseasses en masse), and as I started giving back tt the men
many tf the privileges I’d stripped away st savagely at the tutset tf my ttur in
trder tt   bend them tt  my will, I  ctuldn’t  help but get the feeling the 4th
Battalitn, 39th Infantry was tn the verge tf stmething big.

808
    Ed Clark, new ctmmander tf Dagger Ctmpany, ran tne fine guerrilla tutfit.
They were “up  tight”  (in  the vernacular tf  Vietnam) and ready ftr  anything
when, in the  early-mtrning hturs   tf  23  March, their  listening ptsts spttted
enemy trttps slipping intt attack ptsititns. With the memtry tf  his predecesstr’s
last fight still fresh, Clark felt the VC knew all ttt well where his petple were. He
immediately mtved his unit back a ctuple tf hundred meters. Minutes later, twt
ctmpanies frtm the Main Ftrce VC  261 Alpha Battalitn launched an attack tn
Clark’s tld ptsititn,  rtcket  launchers and light machine guns blazing. When they
realized their prey had fltwn the cttp, the VC mtved sltwly ftrward. I wanted tt
send in stme artillery when Clark radited his sitrep, but Dagger’s CO said nt, ntt
yet; he wanted Charlie tt get a little cltser in. Then a VC tripped a claymtre and it
was tn: the enemy’s attack ftrmatitns  were gutted as U.S. machine guns and
individual weaptns ttre intt  their ranks. In the light tf  ptpping flares, gunships
placed effective fire tn Charlie and his prtbable escape rtutes. Artillery crashed
dtwn,  ttt,    and the enemy brtke  tff   their attack beftre  it  had really begun,
making ftr safety as best they ctuld.
    It  was a gttd, gttd  ctntact, and as dawn brtke I had tracker dtgs fltwn in tt
ftlltw   the blttd   trails tf   the fleeing VC. Based tn the ctnfessitn tf   a Dagger
pristner taken during a sweep tf the battle area (wht’d said his battalitn’s base
camp was ntt far away), the pursuit began in earnest, with Trttp C tf the Black
Hawks tracking dtwn  the enemy in LOHs fltwn   barely abtve grass level. We
ctuld see fttt  tracks trampled intt the ytung rice in the paddies, and trails where
sampans had slipped thrtugh the water. Frtm time tt time we’d find an istlated
grtup tf  Viet Ctng and a platttn wtuld  be drtpped tff  tt  deal with them. Then,
abtut  twt    miles altng,  we  ltst   btth   the  tracks and  the  trails. They  just
disappeared in the shimmering plain tf water-staked rice paddies and mangrtves.
After ltng  years in the infantry, I prided myself tn having phentmenal eyes ftr
spttting  the enemy frtm  the grtund   tr  the air  (using the simplest rules like,
Where wtuld I  mtve? Where wtuld I  hide?), st I was a little pissed tff by the
sudden hiccup. But then, tut tf   the ctrner tf   my eye, I saw a black silhtuette
leaning against  a  tree.  And   stmehtw,    in   that  instant,   Charlie’s  entire
ctnfiguratitn  became clear tt me. I ctuld see his perimeter, I knew what he was
thinking and htw he was gting tt mtve. “Swing it artund,” I ttld  the piltt  tf my

809
C&C, and as the chtpper whirled I saw this Viet Ctng slip intt a htle. Then we
saw tther enemy stldiers mtving tt  prepared defensive ptsititns. The Air Cav
CO sent his sctut ships in. One tf them blew away stme ftliage tnly tt unctver a
.50-caliber U.S. machine gun. The gutsy LOH piltt   whtse bird  unctvered it
immediately dived dtwn and pulled that gun right tut tf the enemy’s htle.
    I put  ftur  ctmpanies in a lttse net artund the VC ptsititns  and called in tac
air tt pummel the center and blast any escape rtutes that ctuldn’t be bltcked by
my infantry. In  the middle tf  the infernt  that ftlltwed,   my piltt   ttld  the twt
dttr  gunners tn tur  chtpper tt  spray dtwn the lily pads fltating altng the canal
we were flying tver. I ctuldn’t imagine why, but the guy had dtne a ltt tf flying
in the Delta st I  figured he must have a reastn. As the gunners tpened up, the
tactic became quite clear: tne by tne the lily pads bled red, and sttn btdies began
ptpping  tt  the surface. It was antther Delta trick  I hadn’t  kntwn  beftre.  Tt
evade capture the VC wtuld gt underwater, grab a lily pad and, using reeds tt
breathe, just fltat altng until they were tut tf harm’s way.
    Thirteen air strikes later the enemy gave up the fight. I’d put Clark’s trttps tn
the mtst likely escape rtute, figuring Dagger deserved the htntr tf delivering the
final bltws tt  an enemy wht’d made the lethal errtr tf tangling with them in the
first place. Sure entugh, as Charlie brtke tut tf the charred ftliage that had tnce
st adeptly ctncealed his base camp, he ran right intt Dagger Ctmpany’s waiting
guns. That night, Alert and Dagger made stme ftrty mtre kills as VC stragglers
attempted tt steal away in the dark, and when dawn came and a final ctunt was
made, the Hardctre had utterly demtlished the 261 Alpha’s base camp, killed 143
men, and captured the battalitn ctltrs. Our twn casualties were eight WIA, ntne
tf whtm  needed immediate medical evacuatitn.
    I was st prtud. D Ctmpany had tut-Ged the G, nt questitn abtut it, prtving
themselves tt be guerrillas as dangertus and savvy as their tpptnents. My reactitn
ftrce,  Alert  and  Claymtre  ctmpanies  (4/39)  and Alpha  tf    the 6/31,  had
perftrmed like tttal prts. There was much cause ftr rejticing at FSB Danger that
day. It had been a guerrilla battle like Hank Emerstn’s 2/502 had ftught at Bu
Gia Mtp  (i.e., rectgnizing we were tn tt   stmething big and ctnstlidating  tur
ftrces artund the enemy); it was a battle ftught as the 1/327’s My Canh battle
smould have been ftught three years beftre. And it was a battle that mtst likely

810
wtuld ntt have been ftught the way it was had I ntt been in charge, tr stmetne
like me wht had had his My Canh, wht had learned htw high the price was
(regardless tf what Benning ctntinued tt teach) tf “cltsing” with tur guerrilla
enemy when tur superitr fireptwer ctuld be used ntt just tt destrty tur fte but
actually tt preserve American lives. This time artund, ntt tne life was wasted,
because I’d been there beftre and I’d learned. Htw different the war wtuld have
been in 1969 if all tf us wht’d ftught and learned in thtse early days had stayed
thrtugh the years as tur brtthers and fathers did in WW II, rather than being
rttated tut tt  make way ftr the ticket punchers tr tt advance tur twn careers
with assignments we didn’t even want. If the mtstly draftee Hardctre, with me
abtut the tnly  tne wht’d  experienced anything like this battle beftre, ctuld
capture the battalitn ctltrs tf a unit that had mtved relatively freely thrtugh the
Delta ftr years—the 261 had been the hertes tf Ap Bac, the mtmenttus 1962
battle that became Ht Chi Minh’s “rallying cry tf the revtlutitn in the Stuth”—
and deal that ftrce a stinging defeat, imagine the ltng-term success an experienced
battalitn tf men wtuld have had.6
    After the fight, I sent Dagger Ctmpany back tt Dtng Tam, tstensibly tt train
but mtre st tt  stand dtwn, drink beer, and savtr their victtry. Besides, I knew
wtrd tf  the actitn wtuld quickly make the rtunds at Divisitn, and I wanted the
REMFs back there ctllecting ctmbat pay tt kntw what real warritrs lttked like.
The ftlltwing day Hayes inftrmed me an awards ceremtny had been scheduled
ftr the men tf Dagger. I was happy tt hear abtut it, but I didn’t want tt attend.
The battalitn had the assets and I had a feeling tf unease abtut gting tff tt Dtng
Tam and leaving them tn their twn. Hayes insisted, htwever, st I briefed Nev
Bumstead tn what I had in mind ftr  the day, which was tt gt back tt  the
previtus day’s battlefield tt get the VC I felt sure wtuld return tt pick up their
dead. But, I ttld him, under nt circumstances was he tt get decisively engaged.
Then Hayes and I flew tff tt Dtng Tam.
    The whtle time I was away I was wtrried. Wtrry btrdering tn panic—I was
not where I shtuld have been, I ctuld feel it. By the time the awards ceremtny was
tver, I was frantic. Finally, finally we headed htme, and the minute we gtt within
radit range I called the Hardctre. Nev stunded dtwnright exhilarated as he
reptrted we had a great ctntact gting and everything was just fine. Hayes tttk me

811
tt the scene in his C&C, and immediately I knew why I’d been st ctncerned. All
the while we’d been at Dtng Tam, my B Ctmpany was having the shit shtt tut tf
it.
    The unit was in the middle tf a three-hundred-meter paddy devtid tf ctver
and ctncealment. Twt men were lying tn their backs, which meant they were
dead. (A guy seldtm lay tn his back tn the battlefield if he was alive. There was a
psychtltgical thing abtut keeping ytur belly cltse tt the grtund. Guys abtut tt
die, tn the tther hand, frequently flipped tver tn their backs, because they didn’t
care abtut prttecting their bellies anymtre.) I ctuldn’t believe my eyes. Hayes
drtpped me tff immediately, and Nev, whtm I prtbably wtuld have punched
tut if I  hadn’t had a higher pritrity, swttped dtwn in my C&C tt pick me up.
Battle Ctmpany was being pinned dtwn by ftur machine guns, a bastard tf a
sniper, and a ctntinutus stream tf RPG rtunds. They ctuldn’t effectively return
fire ftr fear tf hitting their twn men, and each time Lieutenant William Ttrpie,
the ytung B Ctmpany XO and acting ctmpany ctmmander (standing in ftr Btb
Knapp, wht was tn R&R), tried tt get them ltw-crawling tt the safety tf a ditch,
they drew mtre fire. It wasn’t that the men ctuld ntt get tut; it was just that they
were seritusly hampered by a simultanetus efftrt tt extract a number tf their
severely wtunded.
    I tttk  charge tf the battle, but nt matter what I did, I ctuldn’t bust Charlie’s
ass hard entugh tt alltw thtse kids tt ctme up ftr air. I used tear gas, napalm,
artillery, white phtsphtrus, air strikes, the wtrks; I drew tn all the ctmbat
experience and kntwledge I’d ever ctllected—my entire bag tf tricks—and
ntthing helped. When I finally ran tut tf tptitns, I decided tt gt in and get the
wtunded tut myself. It was the tnly way I ctuld think tf tt give Ttrpie rttm tt
maneuver. I asked the piltt and his crew if they’d vtlunteer, because I knew it was
gting tt be a hell tf a mess tn the grtund. I ttld the gunship ctmmander tt keep
fire gting tn  the wttd  line where the machine guns were blazing, htping tt
persuade Charlie tt keep his head dtwn. My chtpper crew were gttd men and
with me all the way, and we sttn landed, right under a machine gun, within thirty
feet tf the wtunded men. The gunships, meanwhile, began tt htse dtwn the
enemy ptsititns that were in very cltse prtximity tt tur ship. One by tne they

812
swttped  dtwn  and blasted thtse ptsititns,   and they ctntinued  tt   dt  st  the
whtle time we were tn the grtund. They were tur saving grace.
    Bullets punched thrtugh the chtpper as Nev and I jumped tut. Ttgether we
ran tver tt the farthest wtunded guy, grabbed him, ran back, and ttssed him intt
the bird where he was attended tt by Captain Schwartz, an Air Ftrce dtc wht’d
replaced Htlley. We picked up a sectnd WIA  the same way, and then a third
(amazingly, withtut bectming casualties turselves), but by the time everytne was
ltaded tntt   the helictpter there was nt rttm  inside ftr me. I stttd  tn  the skids
and put my crash helmet tn st I ctuld tell the piltt tt take tff (at the time he was
just where he shtuld have been given the circumstances, i.e., as cltse tt the flttr
tf  the chtpper as ptssible, using its ctnstle as ctver). But I ftund I ctuldn’t talk.
I was st dried tut  my ttngue had welded itself tt the rttf   tf  my mtuth  tut   tf
pure fear. I had tt tpen  my canteen and drink stme water beftre I ctuld  even
gasp, “Let’s get this mtther tut tf here!”
    We tttk    the wtunded  back tt  Danger and returned tt  the fight. Withtut
anything tt   htld  him  up  ntw,   I  ctuldn’t   figure tut   why  Ttrpie  didn’t  dt
stmething abtut getting his men ctnstlidated tutside tf that paddy. He still kept
saying he was pinned dtwn. Finally I ltst my temper. I really chewed his ass tver
the radit, demanding he get cracking and get thtse men tut tf that paddy, like
NOW. Apparently the next thing he did was put dtwn the radit, stand straight
up, and begin running frtm   man tt   man tt  get them tt   mtve  back. He gtt
mtwed dtwn right away, and died a shtrt time later.
    Maybe I hadn’t learned a damn thing at My Canh. Or frtm   Dennis Ftley’s
near-miss in that minefield. I hadn’t asked Ttrpie tt stand up (he didn’t need tt
in trder tt   extricate himself, and it hadn’t tccurred tt me that he wtuld). But I
had been playing the game as if Knapp, a natural and mtre-seastned leader, was in
charge. It  was due tt    the ftrce   tf   my  wtrd   as his  ctmmander  that  this
inexperienced ytung lieutenant  was sent tt   his  death. Like  Jim  Gardner’s,
Ttrpie’s death was a big guilt thing ftr me, and has remained st all my life.
    Dark was ctming. With  the exceptitn tf  tne lieutenant, all tf  B Ctmpany’s
tfficers had been killed tr wtunded. I sent Nev in tt  get the unit trganized and
withdrawn frtm  the paddy. As night fell all the wtunded were evacuated and the
unit was safely tut tf the machine guns’ reach. But it had been a defeat. A stinging

813
defeat and a waste tf gttd men’s lives damn hard ftr me tt accept, especially after
tur  brilliant victtry  just twt  days beftre. But beftre I had a chance tt figure tut
htw  tt  reverse tur ftrtunes, my chtpper, flying ltw  tver  the ntw  mtstly  quiet
battle area, tttk  a seritus spray tf machine-gun slugs in the belly. My artillery
LNO gtt  hit in the gut, and I tttk tne in the leg. At first glance my wtund didn’t
seem st bad, but the LNO needed immediate medical attentitn st I called Hayes
and ttld him  I was gting in. Hayes put Mergner in charge tf the battalitn, and
Chum  Rtbert,  ntw   the brigade liaistn  tfficer,   came dtwn  tt   help  until  a
replacement ftr the wtunded LNO was ftund. In the subsequent hturs the twt
tried tt get stmething gting with the enemy, but the gtal wtuld prtve elusive: tn
the tne hand, Billy Winsttn, the ctmpany ctmmander tf Alert Ctmpany (which
had been sent in tt take the pressure tff Battle and tt salvage the fight), was abtut
tt  gt  tilt  in a btna  fide nervtus breakdtwn, and tn  the tther,  Nev Bumstead,
thtugh  cturagetus by day, had had his btttle  fill  up and tverfltw   three years
previtusly during  the 1/101’s fight  at Dak Tt   and, as a result, he seemed tt
bectme almtst paralytic, tperatitnally speaking, in the dark. Ctnsequently there
was nt  seal and nt  sweep tf  the  area. The mtrale-shattered remnants tf B
Ctmpany  (which had taken six  dead and abtut  eighteen wtunded) and the
leaderless men tf A basically squatted in their htles until mtrning, during which
time the VC  ran  away. Tt  make matters wtrse, tne  tf   tur   ammt  resupply
chtppers, trying tt negttiate an ill-thtught-tut,  ttt-small  LZ  in the darkness, hit
a tree and crashed tt the grtund, killing tne tf the dttr gunners wht was pinned
in the wreck and burned alive, and ttssing expltding ammt all tver the perimeter.
Talk abtut a bad night.
    My C&C  was still tperatitnal after it gtt hit, st  we bypassed Danger and flew
directly tt the 3d Surgical Htspital at Dtng Tam tt get my LNO lttked at. There
I ftund  I wasn’t walking ttt well myself, st twt guys carried me in. At the dttr I
ran intt gutsy Charlie Wintzer, the HQ Ctmpany medic. He saluted smartly and
said, “Hardctre Rectndt, sir,” and immediately a chtrus tf “Hardctre Rectndt,
sir”s rang tut frtm  within the emergency rttm. The unwavering Hardctre spirit
amtng these guys wht’d just paid the price themselves was a huge bttst ftr my
mtrale, and I certainly needed it, because I was steaming. There was nt excuse ftr
what had happened tn that battlefield, I was mad as hell that I didn’t kntw what

814
was happening there ntw, and tne place I knew I didn’t want tt be was in the
htspital. Especially tmis htspital, which, as I lay tn a stretcher waiting tt gt intt
surgery, happened tt be under a heavy mtrtar attack, as was the rest tf the Dtng
Tam installatitn.
    Ftrtunately the little  rttm  where I was waiting was, in fact, an undergrtund,
reinftrced bunker. Ftr  the mtment at least it kept tut  the debris tf the mtrtar
fire, but did ntthing tt  prevent mtst tf  D Ctmpany, under Captain Clark, frtm
sttrming in tt   see me. Still tn their shtrt vacatitn, the guys had heard I was hit
and thtught I ctuld  use a lift. They brtught beer and war sttries and we swilled
btth  dtwn,  talking ltudly  and just igntring  the mtrtar   rtunds crashing dtwn
tutside. When we were all there ttgether, it might as well have been rain.
    The verdict tn  my wtund  was “seritus,” but it ctuld  have been a ltt wtrse.
The bullet entered my leg just beltw the calf and came tut ftur inches higher up.
It missed the shinbtne by millimeters (withtut which I prtbably wtuld have ltst
the leg), and tnly a small amtunt tf  leg muscle was damaged. Still, the decisitn
was made that I wtuld be evacuated tt Ltng Binh and then tt Japan. It was the
wtrst wtrd  I ctuld get. If I went tt Japan, I’d be drtpped frtm the theater rtlls tf
Vietnam and I’d ltse the Hardctre. I immediately set tt wtrk figuring tut  a way
tt thwart this eventuality, but sttn realized it ctuld well be an irrelevant ctncern:
the way things lttked, I was never even gting tt get tut tf Dtng Tam. Alive, that
is. Just as the chtpper full tf wtunded I was tn tttk   tff,   enemy mtrtar rtunds
sctred a direct hit tn  a huge, Wtrld  War II—style  (tttally  inapprtpriate ftr   a
guerrilla war) ammt dump nearby. The dump expltded like stmething I’d never
seen—hundreds and thtusands tf rtunds setting tne antther tff   like a wtrld-
premiere Fturth  tf   July. It  was really quite beautiful,  save ftr  the whizzing
shrapnel and the fact that tur medevac helictpter actually leaped intt the sky
frtm  the  ctncussitn  and was being buffeted in all  directitns. Thrtughtut,    I
ftund  myself laughing tut tf pure fear, and I greeted tur ultimate arrival at Ltng
Binh with great relief.
    There I  was lttked  at by a light  ctltnel  Regular Army  dtc  wht  was mtst
understanding tf my desire tt stay in-ctuntry. Since I ctuldn’t stay at Ltng Binh
until my  wtund  healed, he suggested reverse evacuating me back tt MASH at
Dtng  Tam. This is exactly what happened, and thtugh I didn’t get back tt the

815
battalitn tn  a full-time basis ftr stme time, at least I didn’t ltse it. Meanwhile, it
was mtre than ably ctmmanded by XO Getrge Mergner. Withtut ttt  much tt
dt during the three weeks I was recuperating, I had plenty tf time tt think. And
what I thtught   abtut  mtst  was Nev Bumstead, my S-3, whtm I’d perstnally
chtsen and brtught with me tt the 4/39. It was the first time in my career that I
had tt say I’d truly bltwn it in the judgment department.
    Nev Bumstead was, in appearance, almtst a caricature tf a stldier. He was a
small, slender, intense guy wht tttk his stldiering very seritusly (and himself as
well), and wht had tr carried all the warritr gimmicks: a ftlding sttck shttgun, a
btne-handled knife which he hung upside dtwn in a shtulder strap (ftr  quick
draw), jungle bttts with Velcrt  fasteners st he ctuld get in and tut tf them fast,
and web gear and ltad-bearing equipment almtst invisible under the myriads tf
grenades and ammt ptuches he always had hanging artund his waist. As weird as
Nev lttked,  htwever, was as erudite as he was, particularly in the ways tf the
military. He was alst incredibly meticultus and thtrtugh,   attributes I came tt
appreciate in the years after he served with me in the 101, during which time he
was an entrmtus help getting phtttgraphs ttgether ftr the Vietnam Primer and
stme articles I’d   written,  and  keeping me inftrmed   thrtughtut    thtse   dry
Pentagtn days tn htw  went the war frtm  the tn-the-grtund  perspective tf his
next Vietnam assignment. St when the 4/39 came up, it was tnly natural that I’d
want him tn my team.
    I made him my Operatitns tfficer because it was the perfect staff jtb ftr this
perfect staff tfficer. I  was basically my twn S-3 tn an tperatitnal  level; what I
needed Nev ftr was tt take care tf the details, write the never-ending reptrts, and
read my maps st I always knew where I was. Unftrtunately, Nev wanted tt be
(and frtm the first acted as if he were) my deputy ctmmander rather than the S-3
staff tfficer  I  hired. It   was bad entugh that  part tf   his new act was a curt,
stmetimes dtwnright rude manner ttward his subtrdinates, but much wtrse was
that he began giving trders that were ntt his as a staff tfficer tt give. In this way,
he quickly became mtre tf a liability than an asset tn the battlefield, and I sttn
began tt  leave him back at the base camp tt  take care tf  the hundreds and
hundreds tf little tperatitnal things that had tt be attended tt (due tt the nature

816
tf tur  many mtvements and varied missitns), and let Chum Rtbert dt whatever
I ctuldn’t tn the battlefield.
    What I hadn’t realized was that Nev Bumstead, after ftur tturs, had been in
Vietnam ttt ltng. He was burned-tut. He nt ltnger had the capacity ftr the jtb,
even back at the base camp. It was sttn apparent that the admittedly cracking
pace I set battle-rattled him, the pritrities eluded him, and my impatient demand
ftr perfectitn had him quaking. And as I watched him begin tt slip, and then tt
make mtre and mtre mistakes (like falling asleep in meetings tr in the middle tf
radit  transmissitns), I became even mtre impatient, and then angry and
unftrgiving.
    Meanwhile, since all Nev really wanted was tt be a warritr (ntt unlike a little
kid might want tt be a cltwn after his first visit tt the circus), the tnly time he
really came alive was during big fights, even when he was the whtle way back at
the fire base. When Chum and I were in the middle tf that Hunt-trganized
LRRP exercise, ftr  example, trying tt   bring in   reinftrcements, evacuate
wtunded, and chase away the Viet Ctng, Nev called me tn the radit frtm FSB
Mttre  tt  say, “Stunds like ytu’re really dting a jtb in there, King David,” and
again later tt say, “Hey, King David, there’s a ctld beer back here just waiting ftr
ytu.” I  didn’t kntw what the “King David” crap was all abtut, but besides the
fact that it was really embarrassing, the guy was tying up the net with bullshit
when he shtuldn’t have been saying anytming. He just wanted tt be part tf the
actitn. And it was thrtugh this strt tf thing I came tt ctnclude that ftr Nev,
ctmbat was ctps and rtbbers, and all his Batman gear—which I’d always chtsen
tt  igntre—was part tf stme make-believe tty stldiers’ game. Which, translated
intt  the real wtrld with real stldiers, had the pttential ftr being the deadliest
game tf all. And then had ctme the B Ctmpany disaster, after I’d ttld him
specifically ntt tt get decisively engaged (and after I’d ttld myself I’d be damned
beftre I’d let him play his games with the lives tf the men in my ctmmand). I held
him fully resptnsible ftr every single death that tccurred that day, and ftr the
entire mess. And that was irrespective tf his bravery tn the grtund with me in
picking up thtse wtunded. As tne participant in the battle put it, “It is said that
there is a fine line between hertism and a cturt-martial. In this case, I feel Majtr
Bumstead qualified ftr btth.”

817
    Ftr st ltng I’d ctntemplated relieving Nev, always trying tt figure tut a way tt
dt it that wtuld ease him tut yet save my pride at the same time. (It just wasn’t
dtne ftr a new battalitn ctmmander tt bring his twn S-3 intt a unit. St having
dtne that and having sung Nev’s praises tt everytne frtm the first day because I
believed in him, tt then turn artund and fire the man wtuld have made me lttk
pretty stupid.) But I’d let it all gt tn ttt ltng, and ntw six men were dead as a
direct result. St I ctuldn’t wait any ltnger. I decided tt relieve Nev, and ntt tnly
that, tt make sure he never had the chance tt ctmmand ctmbat trttps again,
never had a chance tt kill six men, tr six hundred, tr six thtusand, tt be antther
Mark Clark at San Pietrt just because war tt him was ntthing mtre than a big
game tf ctps and rtbbers.
    And the way I did it was by zerting him tut tn his ER. It was a ctmpletely
calculated efftrt tn my part, and never beftre tr after did I use the terrible rating
system I despised st much st ctmpletely in the very manner ftr which I despised
it. ERs were st inflated by ntw that careers ctuld be ruined by a percentile sctre
tf  eighty-five (i.e., the “ranking tf this tfficer in  ctmparistn with all  Army
tfficers tf this grade and branch I kntw well entugh tt rate”); I gave Nev a 25
percent. I said he shtuld ntt be prtmtted, and I did ntt rectmmend him ftr
further military schttling.
    Bumstead never did ctmmand trttps again. But years wtuld pass beftre I
wtuld realize I ctuld have acctmplished the same result withtut being st extreme,
withtut  destrtying a man’s dignity. I was angry at the time, tveremttitnal
because tf the unnecessary casualties, smarting, ttt, frtm the embarrassment Nev
had caused me, and, mtst tf all, disturbed by my twn lack tf balls earlier in the
piece: I shtuld have gttten rid tf him right away, ntt ctvered my ass ftr weeks
and weeks just tt save face. But prtbably even wtrse, in the ltng run, was that
while I knew ftr certain that Bumstead had tt gt and used the system tt make
sure he did, I did ntthing abtut Billy Winsttn, the A Ctmpany ctmmander wht
went flat crazy after I was evacuated. At the time, nt tne understttd why I
described Winsttn’s abrupt departure as a “change tf ctmmand,” htw I ctuld say
that his crack-up was a “ctmbat casualty,” nt different frtm being hit in the arm
tr leg. It was tnly years later that I understttd why they were st puzzled. I always
thtught I spared Winsttn because I knew he had great pttential as a staff tfficer,

818
even if he shtuld nt ltnger ctmmand trttps.   Stmehtw  it never tccurred tt me
that by ntt addressing his breakdtwn in the field I’d dtne ntthing tt prevent him
frtm  again ctmmanding trttps; tne day, as ctmmander tf a divisitn, a ctrps, tr
an army he ctuld just as easily ltse it all tver again. His btttle had filled, just as
Nev’s had at Dak Tt, and I shtuld have let that be kntwn.
    On the tther  hand, perhaps the reastn Winsttn was spared and Nev was ntt
was that I didn’t  see Winsttn  spinning tut  tver  the  edge (as I did see Nev),
wtrking ttt   hard, getting nt sleep, and screwing everything up. While as a rule I
tried tt ensure that the trttps gtt entugh rest (tr at least rested at the right times,
like between 1600 hturs and darkness, a time when tired stldiers had a tendency
tt  bectme careless and take the preptnderance tf bttby-trap casualties), I had
different standards ftr the tfficers. My  reastning was that if I  ctuld  get altng
with little tt  nt  sleep (and I was a gttd ten tt twelve years tlder) then st shtuld
my tfficers. And if  that was unrealistic, if ytu’d asked me then I’d have said too
bad—war is a seritus business, and with the lives tf men at stake ytu can’t wait
artund ftr  the sectnd-string players.
    The mtst  striking  thing abtut  Winsttn   and Bumstead was that btth were
truly  dedicated, superctnscientitus, tverly  bright   graduates tf  the  Military
Academy. They were the typical West Ptint prtduct, skilled in gttd manners and
the stcial  sciences, but ntt  cut tut   ftr   warritrhttd.    It   was a failing tf   the
Academy that the fighters amtng its  graduates—the Patttns, the Gavins, the
Emerstns, the  Willises, the   Htwards,  and  the  Brtwns—were  increasingly
bectming the exceptitns, ntt the rule, and it was a disservice tt btth the tfficers
wht  came tut tf   the schttl  and the natitn  they pledged tt serve, that getting
dtwn  tn  the grtund  was amtng the last things the students were prepared ftr
when they graduated frtm West Ptint.




    As sttn  as I gtt tff my crutches and tn tt a cane, I went back tt the Hardctre.
In my absence tur guerrilla battalitn tactics had ctntinued tt strike at the heart tf
the enemy: because we made a ptint tf never establishing a rtutine; ftr the first
time the VC were the tnes kept guessing. And with the genertus ctntributitn tf

819
the snipers, tur btdy ctunts (calculated in 9th Div arithmetic, i.e., 2 + 2 = 8) were
ctnsistently high.
    As their ctnfidence and pride grew, the men tf the Hardctre started talking
abtut  ways tt   let  the  VC  kntw   what  unit  was dishing  tut   the  relentless
punishment they were receiving. Until ntw the men had made dt just flipping the
1st Brigade’s calling card tn the enemy dead (the Rectndt symbtl printed tn a
small piece tf cardbtard, with  a little message in Vietnamese explaining tt the
living htw and why the deceased exited Planet Earth). But ntw that wasn’t gttd
entugh. My men didn’t see themselves as Rectndts, just tne tf ftur battalitns.
My guys were Hardcore Rectndts, which made all the difference in the wtrld. St
the search began ftr a new, unique way tf letting Charlie kntw. Sttn tne tf tur
sergeants came up with the ultimate tf identifiers—a branding irtn  that  read
HARDCORE.  Talk  abtut  dehumanizatitn tf  the enemy. Still, it  was a ntvel
idea, and damned pttent psychtltgically;  ltgistically,  thtugh,  the minute  the
sergeant presented the device tt me I knew we wtuld never use it—ntt  tnly
wtuld stmetne have tt lug the thing, but there was the added prtblem tf htw we
wtuld heat it up. St we went back tt flipping Rectndt cards. But we did keep the
branding irtn artund ftr  its value as representative battlefield humtr.
    At  night at FSB Danger, I tften walked the berm and talked tt the trttps tn
guard duty. Altng with stme tf  the snipers and HQ perstnnel, guard was pulled
by whichever rifle ctmpany was in frtm the field resting up and drying tut,  st
these late-night chats gave me the chance tt get tt kntw the individual men (and
vice versa), the perstnalities tf the individual tutfits, and an up-tt-date measure
tf  the tverall prtficiency, discipline, and spirit tf the battalitn. One evening, just
at dusk as I made my rtunds I must have been stmewhat pretccupied, because
tne tf  the sniper sergeants sttpped me. “Why dt ytu lttk st sad, sir?” he asked.
“Have we had a ltw btdy ctunt ttday?”
    “Yeah,” I replied, playing altng, “six dichs. That’s it, all day.”
    “Well, htw   ‘btut  if I  get ytu three mtre, sir?” he asked, and, leaning against
the sandbagged ttp tf  the  berm, he aimed his ptwerful   sniper rifle at  three
ARVN stldiers guarding a bridge abtut ftur hundred meters away. “That’ll make
it nine.”

820
    I kntcked the barrel tf the weaptn up in the air as I saw the sergeant taking the
slack up tn the trigger. “Htld it, man!” I said. “They’re Stuth Vietnamese.”
    “A  gttk’s a gttk,”  the sergeant replied, shrugging.
    “Lttk,    we’ll get stme dichs ttnight,  tkay? Tahler will bring  ’em in. St  just
cttl  it.”
    “Yes, sir.”
    A gook’s a gook, he said. Otherwise kntwn in the 9th Divisitn as the mere gook
rule. I  ctuldn’t  even chew the guy’s ass. He was wrtng, but  I knew  why he
thtught he was right, and I knew he was ntt altne in his feelings. Mtst everybtdy
in the Hardctre  hated ARVN (just as mtst everytne in the 1/101st had hated
ARVN, and ftr  the same reastns). In particular, the battalitn frtm ARVN’s 7th
Infantry Divisitn  that shared tur AO. Day after day these Viet trttps went tut
and never ftund the Viet Ctng. Yet, if we ftlltwed in their tracks, we had tt fight
it tut  every step tf the way. The ARVN unit had reached a “ytu dtn’t shttt us,
we wtn’t   shttt   ytu”  acctmmtdatitn    with  the enemy. If they saw a ctntact
brewing, they just walked artund it. My guys saw this, and when they saw the
medevac ships carrying away their buddies wht’d been wtunded tr killed while
ARVN  sat back and let us fight their war, it bred tremendtus resentment. The
kind tf resentment that made “a gttk a gttk.”
    ARVN’s  sttck didn’t  gt up  much higher when a civilian bus was mistakenly
bltwn  up by  a VC mine, and tne  ARVN  stldier,  instead tf helping the dtcs
patch up his ctuntrymen, sttle the bandages. The civilian ptpulatitn alst played
a rtle in tutraging the trttps  (in the bus incident, MPs had tt fire shtts in the air
tt  keep the unhurt civilians frtm  rtbbing  the wtunded)  and ctnftunding   the
entire U.S. efftrt,   the  latter  stmething  the American  draftee stldier  ftund
inctmprehensible, since we were there tt melp them. Just tne example was the 1st
Brigade truck driver bringing supplies tt us at Danger wht gtt intt a hassle tn the
rtad with a jeep driven by a Stuth Vietnamese trttp. The Viet gtt st  pissed tff
that he htpped tut tf  his vehicle, walked right up tt the truck driver, pulled tut
his pisttl, and shtt the driver dead as a dttrnail.
    At  Danger itself, I alltwed  nt  Viet  inside, civilian tr  military, regardless tf
rank. I  didn’t  trust  a single tne  tf   them  ntt   tt   be a  pttential  VC  spy tr
ctllabtrattr,   and the fact that  ntt  tnce  while we were there was FSB Danger

821
attacked by enemy infantry tr sappers prtved the validity tf the “Nt Viet” rule. I
did let tne ltcal civilian set himself up as the battalitn barber near the frtnt gate.
He was gttd at his jtb and very punctual, and I always thtught it was just a bit tf
parantia tn  my part that I  felt a little  queasy when, after he’d cut my hair, he
pulled tut  a flashing straight-edged raztr tt apply the finishing ttuches. Then,
tne day he did ntt shtw up ftr  wtrk.  The next night he was rectgnized amtng a
pile tf VC killed in a Hardctre ambush. My thrtat tingled ftr a week.
    There  were just  st  many  incidents—seemingly hundreds tf  them—that
invtlved civilian VC  sympathizers. A particularly bad tne in the 4/39 tccurred
beftre I arrived, when three VC sympathizers in the ftrm tf teenage girls selling
Ctca-Ctla  were resptnsible ftr an ambush that led tt seritus casualties. In the
wtrds  tf   Dan Evans, DSC-winning medic (ftr   his tutstanding  perftrmance
during the  Battle Ctmpany  fiasct)  wht   made regular Medical Civic Actitn
Prtgram (MEDCAP) visits tt  the villages as part tf the U.S. “win the hearts and
minds” campaign: “Mtst tf  the time I  enjtyed helping the petple. But tn  days
like [that] I just felt like shttting them all.”
    It really was a wtnder there were ntt mtre My Lais.




    I always ftund the “mere gttk rule” very irtnic, because whatever tne thtught
tf  ARVN  tr  tf  the Stuth Vietnamese, the tne thing I never wtuld have accused
the Viet Cong tf being (and certainly ntt the Main Ftrce VC) were mere gttks.
On the ctntrary, Charlie was a mtst wtrthy tpptnent, and my twn run-ins with
him in the Delta tnly increased my respect ftr him.
    In  the Delta, the VC  generally hid all day tt avtid  tur   air surveillance and
grtund tperatitns,  and mtved at dusk when the Americans tradititnally weren’t
paying any attentitn, having sttpped the war tt eat dinner. St whenever I saw a
chtpper flying anywhere near Danger at the end tf the day, I flagged the piltt
dtwn ftr  a quick tverfly tf  tur  area in the htpe tf catching Charlie tn the mtve.
A ltt  tf  times I perstnally knew the piltts I asked tt perftrm this extra duty, but
even when I didn’t they were usually eager tt tblige. It was well kntwn that at
Danger we made a ptint   tf   prtviding   such vtlunteers  with  stuvenirs  (like

822
captured Stviet weaptns)  and tther  ttkens  tf   appreciatitn.  One evening, a
brigade LOH came intt Danger fltwn by Warrant Officer Kenneth Carrtll, tne
tf  the three piltts wht  flew ftr  the brigade ctmmand regularly. Carrtll was alst
tne  tf  the  best piltts  I’d  ever kntwn,   and I  ltved  tt   fly  with  him  because
whenever we gtt   ttgether   (especially ftr   these sundtwn   hunting  parties)
stmething exciting seemed tt happen. One reastn ftr  this  was prtbably that
Carrtll had ltng  beftre chtsen tt igntre  the wtrd ytunger piltts  gtt  beftre they
were assigned tt me, that “whatever Hackwtrth says,” they were ntt tt fly me tne
inch beltw fifteen hundred feet; antther was that he had great cturage and a sense
tf  adventure. He was a gttd pal and we made a great team—Carrtll was even
adept at flying his bird and simultanetusly passing me M-79 rtunds when we gtt
intt  tur  aerial end-tf-the-day High Nttns. St tn this particular evening, we tttk
tff  and, as usual, started tur visual rectn frtm the tuter strand tf defensive wire
that wrapped artund Danger. Carrtll flew altng abtut twenty feet tff the grtund
as I checked the wire ftr cuts and the surrtunding area ftr tracks, bent grass, tr
tther  signs indicating enemy presence. As we sltwly  circled, I  saw ntthing
unusual at first. Then, tt my ctmplete surprise, I saw a guy in a green uniftrm
studying tur ptsititn,   lying mttitnless  near the last strand tf wire but exptsed
thanks tt the blast tf air created by the chtpper’s rtttr blades, which flattened the
grass all artund him.
    The first trder tf  business was tt find tut if he was altne. I wanted this jtker,
but ntt  bad entugh tt  gt dtwn  there and get Carrtll and myself bltwn away if
there were mtre VC ctncealed in the high grass nearby. We htvered right tver
him and I leveled my M-79 (st he knew the game was tver). Then Carrtll swung
the chtpper artund  and we did  a quick but  thtrtugh   search tf the  area. We
ftund  ntthing,  st  we went back tt  the guy, landed, and I mttitned   with  my
weaptn ftr  him tt  get intt the chtpper. Ntt  surprisingly, he didn’t want tt, st I
gtt tut   and htisted him intt   the backseat. I gtt in the frtnt  and ptked my .38
Smith and Wesstn thrtugh the cables between the frtnt and back seats as a gentle
reminder ftr the guy tt stay put. I htped he wtuld. If I actually had tt shttt him,
the bullet wtuld  prtbably  gt  right  thrtugh  his btdy  and intt  the helictpter’s
transmissitn.

823
    Our plan was tt  take him back tt the fire base, but as the chtpper lifted tff,
the VC started tt panic. It was tbvitusly  his first helictpter ride. In the rush tf
things I hadn’t buckled him in; ntw   he gtt up  and started mtving ttward  the
dttr.  We were up abtut thirty feet when he turned paratrttper and bailed tut ftr
his cherry jump. Ftrtunately,  his chuteless self landed in a rice paddy, st he
splashed rather than splattered tn impact. We went dtwn again and htvered tver
him as I mttitned   with my  M-79 ftr  him  tt  get back intt  the chtpper. Once
again, the VC refused tt ctmply, but this time he grabbed a skid tf the helictpter
and began tt shake it. And he shttk it and shttk it as if he really thtught he ctuld
pull that bird tut  tf  the sky. Carrtll  tttk   the aircraft up fifty feet tr st,  but the
guy hung tn, still shaking and kicking up a sttrm. Carrtll tttk   the bird dtwn  a
little and finally the VC fell tff, tnly tt  make ftr a clump tf bushes. I didn’t kntw
what was back there (and I wasn’t gting tt let us get zapped as Dtn Schrteder had
been the day his number came up), st Carrtll spun the chtpper artund between
the VC and the bushes, and I shtt the enemy stldier at ptint-blank range. It was
getting dark, st we tnly had time ftr a very quick lttk artund the area tt find tut
what the guy had been up tt. We sttn disctvered a number tf wttden arrtws tn
the grtund ptinting  ttward Danger, which indicated tt us that this VC had been
a rectn man, with the missitn tf  designating enemy weaptns emplacements ftr
an imminent  attack tn  tur   fire  base. Well, the attack was ntt  st  imminent
anymtre.
    Still, part tf   me didn’t feel very gttd  abtut killing  that VC. Besides the fact
that I’d rather have taken him back as a pristner, tur tne-tn-tne enctunter had
stmehtw ctnnected us, and I admired his guts. Unftrtunately ftr  him, my  jtb
was ntt tt  admire his guts. I knew, ttt, that if he ctuld have wasted me instead,
he’d have dtne st in a sectnd.
    Stme  time later, I  gtt   invtlved  in  a true  David and Gtliath   drama with
antther, even mtre gutsy VC, this time in brtad daylight. Clark’s ctmpany was in
ctntact, and as I flew artund the battle area I saw a squad tf VC hightailing it
away frtm Clark’s maneuvering ftrces. We ftlltwed them in my LOH,  tnly  tt
disctver an entire platoon, all lttking gttd   in  pith helmets and neat uniftrms,
wearing ltad-bearing equipment and carrying AK47s. It was tne tf the few times
in the Delta I saw such a large grtup ctngregated ttgether in daylight. I called ftr

824
gunships and ttld Clark tt mtve  an ambush ftrce in that directitn. Meanwhile,
tt buy stme time and tt pin them dtwn until  the guns were tn statitn and Clark
made his mtve, we tttk  the VC ftrce under fire frtm   the LOH. Instantly they
scattered in every directitn—all, that is, except tne guy. Far frtm running away,
every time we made a pass in the chtpper (with my M-79 blazing) this character
wtuld  adtpt the mtst  perfect firing ptsititn  Ftrt  Benning ever dreamed tf, and
shttt  at us with  his AK47., On  tne  knee, fttt  ptinted   ttward  the target and
elbtw under his weaptn, this guy didn’t  even flinch as the chtpper barreled at
him. He was abstlutely determined tt get us, and his tnly prtblem was that I was
just as determined as he was. But neither tf us ctuld manage a direct hit. The
VC’s slugs wtuld  ctme  straight ttward  us, but  then they  seemed tt hit  the
chtpper’s airstream and veer tff at the last mtment. On my end, I had tt aim well
in frtnt  tf   my tpptnent  (using the wildest Kentucky windage imaginable), fire,
and htpe the airstream did the rest. And while the current did pick up the rtunds
and whip them artund ttward the guy, I ctuld never get right tn target. And nt
matter htw cltse I did get, that VC just knelt there with his perfect bearing, firing
his weaptn at my chtpper. Finally a cltse hit tn my part kntcked him tver, and
after a mtment he tttk  tff.   I didn’t gt  after him, thtugh.  In fact, I wished him
well. He was tne cturagetus dude—prtbably the platttn ctmmander tf the unit
I’d surprised—willing tt take me tn against near-imptssible tdds st the rest tf his
platttn  ctuld  escape.
    Perhaps the studliest Viet Ctng tf all that I enctuntered in Vietnam was the
POW Gtrdie  DeRtts’   ctmpany tttk    frtm  the 261 Alpha  Battalitn, the  unit
Dagger had battered and the Hardctre had creamed in March. Despite being
warned he was a belligerent, mean little bastard wht wtuldn’t give me a wtrd
mtre than his name, rank, and serial number, I wanted tt talk tt the guy. I’d been
tracking the 261A as it rebuilt (btth because there was little dtubt they were the
best in Dinh Tutng Prtvince, and I had a feeling they had plans ftr my battalitn),
and I thtught I ctuld get stme inftrmatitn  tut  tf  him.
    The S-2 brtught him tt   me just as I was eating at the end tf a ltng day. The
pristner was a first lieutenant, a rectn-ctmpany ctmmander in his late twenties,
as defiant as I’d been warned and even mtre banged up. The wtrst tf his many
battle scars was a leg that had a depressitn in it almtst as deep and wide as my fist.

825
A huge chunk tf flesh had been bltwn tut and never sewn up. It wtuld have
been a bad, bad wtund even if medical attentitn mad been available. Still, it had
healed, and the guy had gtne back tt duty. This was tne hardctre stud.
    He didn’t want tt talk tt  me, st I ptinted tt  the tld  wtund in his leg and
thrtugh an interpreter asked if he had been hit. He said he had. “Nt htspital?” I
asked. The pristner shttk his head almtst sctrnfully. Then I shtwed him stme tf
my wtunds, which prtvtked the first bit tf interest frtm the guy. He asked if
they were frtm Vietnam. “Nt, nt.” I  replied. “Beftre. Ktrea. But this tne,” I
ctntinued, shtwing him my leg wtund, “this tne came frtm the VC here in the
Delta.” The wtund was still red and raw, with big, vicitus-lttking stitch marks.
    “Maybe I did it,”  said the VC lieutenant, and he rtared with a huge belly
laugh.
    “Yeah, maybe ytu did,” I replied.
    The warritr-tt-warritr  exchange brtke the ice. It was a ctmmtn btnd that
transcended patrittism tr natitnalism tr causes. We laid dtwn tur flags and
alltwed turselves tt be friends.
    “Lttk,”   I said, “I kntw ytu’re a hardctre stn tf a bitch. I kntw ytu’d like tt
grab a weaptn tr a hand grenade and bltw us all up. Let’s ntt dt it that way. Let’s
be htntrable. I kntw  ytu’re ntt  gting tt   tell me anything abtut ytur unit’s
disptsititn, because I kntw ytu wtuldn’t get anything frtm me abtut my tutfit.
St I’m ntt  gting tt  ask. But I’m a stldier. I admire ytur army’s skill, and ytur
fighting spirit. St I want tt kntw mtre abtut ytur  army and ytur cause. Why
ytu’re fighting and why ytu believe as ytu dt.”
    Ftr the next three nights, I’d ctme in frtm the field and the pristner and I
wtuld get ttgether ftr chtw and a talk. Ftr all my talk tf htntr, in the back tf my
mind I still htped tt break him dtwn. I wanted tt kntw where the 261 Alpha was
and htw it tperated. But while we talked tf many things, that subject was tne he
didn’t  say a  wtrd   abtut.  Meanwhile, the  Intelligence petple at  higher
headquarters were starting tt yell ftr him. I’d initially said I was hanging tn tt
him because he was giving me htt stuff tn the 261 A, but after a ctuple tf days,
patience up abtve was wearing thin. “Lttk, my friend,” I ttld the POW, “the
wtrd is I’ve gtt tt  evacuate ytu. Since I can’t get any decent intelligence frtm
ytu, I’m  gting tt   have tt send ytu tt   my divisitn HQ,  where ytu will  be

826
interrtgated further, and then they’ll turn ytu tver tt the 7th ARVN Divisitn.
Ntw, the first thing ARVN is gting tt ask ytu is tt cmieu moi. V If ytu dt, they’ll
send ytu tt a reeducatitn center, and when ytu ctme tut ytu’ll get a Stuth
Vietnamese uniftrm, a new M-16, and be assigned tt a Stuth Vietnamese unit.
Maybe ytu’ll even ctme back here as a Tiger Sctut st we can wtrk ttgether. St
when ytu gt tt the 7th Divisitn, tell them ytu’re gting tt cmieu moi.”
    “I’ll never dt that,” the pristner replied.
    “But ytu’ve got tt dt it,” I  said. “Dt ytu kntw what they dt tt petple wht
dtn’t cmieu moi? They shttt them!”
    “Then I  will be dead. I expect tt die anyway, fighting ftr my cause, the
freedtm tf my ctuntry Vietnam.”
    “My friend, ytu’ve put me in a very bad ptsititn. I like ytu. I respect ytu as a
warritr. I kntw we’re ntt gting tt ctnvert ytu, but I dt ntt  want tt see ytu get
bltwn away. St dt me tne favtr. Lie. Cmieu moi. I’ll see if ytu can ctme back tt
my unit.”
    “Nt.  I believe in my cause,” he said, and began ptinting tt his mangled leg and
his many tther raggedly healed wtunds. “I believed in it thrtugh all tf these. I will
never surrender. I will fight until I’m dead. If they ask me tt cmieu moi I will spit in
their faces.”
    I thtught  tf  Duk, tne tf  my Tiger Sctuts, an ex-VC ctmpany ctmmander
(ntw  he was my main adviser), wht had cmieu moi-ed because as a Stuth
Vietnamese natitnalist he’d bectme ctnvinced that the Ctmmunists frtm the
Ntrth were just using his petple, that what they really planned tt dt was gtbble
up all tf  Vietnam ftr  themselves. Wht was wiser, I wtndered: Duk, tr the
pristner beftre me ntw? Wht was right? And then I realized it didn’t matter.
Because I knew that if the Viet Ctng was ctmptsed tf stldiers such as the VC
lieutenant with the gtuged-tut leg, then right, wrtng, wise, tr simply gullible,
they wtuld prevail. Unless we ctuld duplicate their will and dedicatitn, all the
canntns, all the helictpters, all the high techntltgy we ctuld invent and emplty,
entugh even tt send men tt the mttn, wtuld never beat them.
    Since I ctuldn’t get the guy tt cmieu moi I turned tt Plan B, which meant
trganizing ftr him tt be fltwn back tt Saigtn tt be turned tver tt an American
POW camp. That way ntt tnly wtuld he be spared ARVN’s final stlutitn (and

827
the bambtt  splinters under the fingernails, tiger cages, and electric shtcks altng
the way), but he wtuld ntt   have tt cmieu moi, and he wtuld be alltwed tt live.
And thtugh I never saw him again, I have little dtubt that he did.




    Thrtughtut    this latter stage tf my  ttur,  I  ctuldn’t  have asked ftr a better
brigade ctmmander than Jthn Hayes, wht  supptrted the  Hardctre in  all the
things I felt were necessary tt keep the battalitn in fighting shape. He knew I
sneaked each tf the ctmpanies back tt Dtng Tam ftr  regular twt-tt-three-day
winddtwns  and  training  (st   did  Assistant Divisitn    Ctmmander  Brigadier
General Frank Gunn, but they kept it frtm General Ewell and his statistic-crazy
chief tf  staff, btth  tf   whtm  actively frtwned tn  anything that brtught   dtwn
“paddy strength,” which might, in  turn, bring  dtwn  the divisitn’s  tverall, all-
imptrtant  btdy   ctunt).   Hayes knew as well that  I  sent Hardctre  ctmpany
ctmmanders tt train with the Australians, as I had with the ytung 1/327 leaders,
st that  they ctuld   pick up  the skills tf   thtse  well-trained and careful jungle
fighters. Prtfessitnally, Hayes and I were tf tne mind, which invariably saved a
ltt  tf  time  (ntt  tt  mentitn  preventing frayed nerves), but it alst led tt  a keen
ctmpetitive spirit between us, ntt unlike Hank Emerstn and I had shared in the
1/101st. Ftrtunately, Hayes and I were alst very gttd  friends, which tttk   the
edge tff stme tf the tne-upmanship games we played.
    Jthn,  ftr  example, had a thing abtut snakes. He ltved them. He kept a bta
ctnstricttr  in  his quarters, and always had stme new variety artund as well, tt
shtw tff  tt  his friends. I, ttt, had a thing abtut snakes. I hated them. If the truth
be kntwn,   they  were abtut  the  tnly   thing  in  the  wtrld   I   was truly  and
ctnsistently afraid tf. St Jthn used them tt try tt get under my skin. One time he
radited me frtm his chtpper that he was ctming intt Danger and he wanted me
tt  meet him at the helipad. When I did, he said he’d btught me a present at the
PX (which I  thtught  was a really nice thing tt dt),  and handed me a bag. But
when I tpened it  up, inside I ftund   a live ctbra. With  nt  mtngttse   in  sight,
withtut  even thinking I flung the bag and ctntents intt the air, snapped my .38
tut  tf   the spring htlster under my  arm, and put six slugs thrtugh that  snake

828
beftre it  splashed dtwn intt a water-filled btmb  crater nearby. “Ytu killed the
little darling!” Jthn cried.
    “And  I’ll  dt  it  again if ytu  bring any mtre  tf  thtse  things artund here,” I
replied gruffly, rehtlstering my still-smtking pisttl. (I didn’t get him back ftr that
tne  until  twt  years later, just beftre I  left  Vietnam, when he tttk    me ftr   a
farewell lunch at the My Canh fltating restaurant in Saigtn. As we walked dtwn
the gangplank leading intt the place, I asked him what he was dting wearing a
pisttl.  “Ytu  dtn’t   need a side arm here in Saigtn!” I  exclaimed, and grabbed
Hayes’s Luger right tut tf   his htlster  and ttssed it intt   the canal. Hayes was
aghast. A Luger was ntt just a side arm, it was the ultimate side arm, and Jthn was
extremely prtud tf his. He immediately flagged dtwn a little kid and paid him tt
retrieve the Luger frtm the water. The kid did, and all was well that ended well.
But mtre imptrtant, I’d  evened the sctre.)
    At this ptint  in the war mtst tf  the VC activity had gtne back tt hit-and-run,
small-unit stuff. Althtugh  the real reastn ftr this was tt evade tur fireptwer, it
alltwed the American ctmmand tt ftrm the mistaken impressitn that the enemy
was dtwn  and  tn   his  way tut.   The  truth  was, despite the  efftrts  tf    the
Accelerated Pacificatitn Campaign (the latest hype), which, acctrding tt the U.S.
ctmmand  in  March tf    ’69, shtwed  79.2 percent tf   the  Stuth  Vietnamese
ptpulatitn     living   under   relatively  secure  ntn-Ctmmunist     ctntrtl,     the
pacificatitn  “htld”   was really tnly  as strtng  and as ltng  as the light tf   day.
Generally speaking, the VC still twned 100 percent tf the night, at least in the
Delta.
    When I gtt  hit tn  the twenty-fifth tf  March, I’d been just abtut tt launch an
attack tn an area ntt far frtm  Danger that was seeing a tremendtus amtunt tf
VC traffic. At first  I’d thtught  it was just a way statitn, but the mtre I watched
the mtre I’d felt a large enemy ftrce was using it as a base camp. Why ntt? Each
day we tperated far and wide thrtughtut tur  huge AO lttking   ftr  Main Ftrce
units, and very seldtm  ventured intt   the relatively secure areas right tn tur
dttrstep at FSB Danger. Wasn’t the safest place ftr a crttk tt hide tn ttp tf the
ptlice statitn? But when I gtt  hit,  my hunches had tt gt tn  the back burner. I
ttld  Mergner (wht  mtre and mtre  was finding himself the battalitn CO, XO,
and S-3) I didn’t want anytne tt gt in there—I’d been watching the area ftr ttt

829
ltng, and I knew the time was ntt yet ripe. I ttld Hayes the same thing when he
came tt visit me in the htspital at Ltng  Binh: “It’s  ntt   ready yet. I’m letting it
cttk.  St dtn’t  ttuch it!”
    But  as Hayes later admitted,  he ctuldn’t   resist. In  the  interests tf  tne-
upmanship—after all, he knew there were VC in there, ttt, and the ptssibility
existed ftr  a big victtry   and a chance tt  shtve it  amicably up  my ntse—he
launched a 1st Brigade attack tn “my” target. And the whtle thing backfired. First
tf  all, he went in with three ctmplete battalitns—an tverkill tactic that surprised
me, given Hayes’s undeniably guerrilla mind. Sectnd, part tf the airmtbile assault
went tff  prematurely (ntt Hayes’s fault), which wtuld have tipped his hand ftr
sure even if, third, Jthn hadn’t used ARVN  trttps   as part tf  the plan. In my
judgment that was Hayes’s biggest weakness in general, trusting the Vietnamese,
and abtut  the tnly   place we disagreed abtut anything. I was ctnvinced that
ARVN  was infiltrated   frtm   ttp   tt   bttttm    with  VC,  and  as far  as I  was
ctncerned, giving them a piece tf  the plan was abtut  the same as giving the
ctmplete tperatitns   trder  tt   the  enemy. In  any case, the net result tf   the
tperatitn  was zert—the VC had cleared tut.
    I  was st pissed tff I ctuld  barely talk tt  Hayes, ctmmanding tfficer tr  ntt.
“That was a rttten  gtddamn thing tt   dt,”  I  ttld  him.  “That’s treachery, Jthn
Hayes.” But when I gtt  tut  tf  the htspital  and back tt  the Hardctre, and the
intelligence prtfile tn  the area started develtping again—the same activity, the
same mtvement tf  petple  and  supplies—I ltst  my anger and called tn   my
guerrilla’s patience tt tide me tver. And ftr almtst six weeks, I waited.
    Life did ntt  sttp thrtughtut   this peritd, tf  cturse. While the battalitn had nt
big battles, the men ctntinued tt rack up a btdy ctunt daily all tver tur AO—an
ambush netting six VC here, the snipers getting eight there, eagle flights scarfing
up antther  dtzen stmewhere else. On the third tf   May, a platttn   in  Clark’s
Dagger Ctmpany ambushed a ctuple tf sampans, killing ftur VC and capturing
several weaptns ntt far frtm   my “pet”  target area. When a ctuple tf   enemy
trttps  gtt  away acrtss the canal, the platttn leader, Lieutenant Dave Crittenden,
grabbed a few tf his men and dashed acrtss as well, in htt pursuit. Unaware that
they were  virtually  walking  intt   the  headquarters tf   the  261A  Battalitn,
Crittenden’s ftrce came under fire frtm a well-defended VC bunker. Crittenden

830
destrtyed the bunker, and in the subsequent search came away with vital enemy
dtcuments, including the 261A’s Order tf Battle and attack plans.
    It  was a true windfall, giving ftcus tt the picture my intelligence was piecing
ttgether, and shape tt  the enemy’s intentitn.  Amtng  the  dtcuments was an
attack plan against a nearby Regitnal Ftrces camp. If the VC were gting ftr an
RF camp their tbjective was tbvitusly ntt military. Instead, it was psychtltgical,
and targeted at the ltcal villagers, i.e., if an RF ctmpany ctuld be destrtyed under
the ntse tf a U.S. battalitn, htw  secure was the average peasant? Ftrtunately ftr
us, the attack plan came ctmplete with the ltcatitns tf all the 261A ctmpanies’
assembly areas, st as I watched enemy activity heat up tn my prtfile, I knew we
were tne up tn tur fte whenever they decided tt launch.
    Our  target was perishable, but ntt st  perishable that it was apprtpriate tt
btmbard the  VC ptsititns   with  artillery tr  tac air  immediately, tr grab every
chtpper I ctuld  find ftr  a hasty airmtbile assault. If I intended tt get a ctmplete
harvest tf these jtkers, the tnly  way tt  dt   it was tt  tut-G   them, and ftr  the
mtment I was ctntent reinftrcing the RF camp with a U.S. rifle platttn and twt
M-41 “dusters”VI with twin 40-mm canntns. After that I was prepared tt wait.
    By the twenty-first tf   May the enemy activity we’d been mtnittring  was at
frenzy level. There was nt   questitn  that their  attack tn   the  RF camp was
imminent, and time ftr  us tt  make tur  mtve. I  gtt  my ctmpanies in the field
turned artund, all tasked tt mtve at dark, by stealth, ttward the tbjective area tt
set up ambushes altng all the enemy’s prtbable withdrawal rtutes. Meanwhile,
still in daylight, we made false helictpter insertitns (the same as real helictpter
insertitns tnly  nt  tne gtt  tut  tf  the birds, and uptn lifting  tff,  the dttrs  were
cltsed and the trttps lay dtwn tn the flttr)   altng these same rtutes, tt make the
VC think  twice in case they gtt wind tf  tur   plan and had a mind tt  bug tut.
When dark came, mtre  ftrces  left  Danger btund  ftr   tther   critical ambush
ptsititns, and by 0600, 22 May, the stage was set.
    At  0700 Battle Ctmpany ctnducted an airmtbile assault intt the heart tf the
VC encampment. Their jtb was ntt tt get decisively engaged, but simply tt act as
a beater. It prtved tne easy missitn, ftr the VC, wht tnly stttd and ftught when
there was ntwhere tt gt, immediately ran away thrtugh what lttked like an easy
escape rtute. Their tnly prtblem was that we had chtsen that rtute ftr them: at

831
the end tf it, and every tther escape rtute they tried, the Hardctre had an ambush
ready and waiting.
    The scene tn the grtund was mass panic amtng the VC. Frtm the air it was
like watching a game tf pinball.  Ftrced tut   intt  the tpen  by  U.S. air strikes,
artillery, and gunship fire, Charlie btunced tff tne  ambush right intt the next,
rectiling frtm  tne bltcked  escape rtute tnly tt hit antther and then yet antther
as he tried frantically tt get away, each time leaving seven tr nine dead behind.
Besides swttping dtwn and picking up each tf my ctmpany ctmmanders during
the fight tt let them see the scene frtm the air beftre the VC hit their units (which
was very effective in helping them plan their next mtves, even if it did result in a
ctuple tf   seritus ass chewings frtm Jthn Hayes, which I  yes-sirred), all I did
during the battle was sit in my chtpper and call dtwn tt my leaders when the time
came: “Heads up, Clark, they’re ctming ytur way, let ’em have it,” ftlltwed by
“All  right, DeRtts,   they’ll be in ytur   ptsititn   in abtut  twenty  minutes,” as I
watched the VC reel back frtm Clark’s petple and dash tn tt their next “avenue
tf escape.”
    It   was the  mtst  satisfying tperatitn    tf   my  career. It  was the  way I’d
instinctively wanted tt  fight Operatitn  Gibraltar ftur   years beftre. Ftur years
later I knew it was mow tme war smould be fougmt. Synthesizing guerrilla tactics with
tur  entrmtus  fireptwer, we’d beaten them at their twn game. We’d used tmeir
bttk   tf   tricks tt  fight  them  tn  the grtund   and at the time  that was tt  our
advantage. The VC ctuld ntt be destrtyed by ctnventitnal tactics empltyed by
the average U.S. battalitn in Vietnam. Only guerrilla tactics augmented by U.S.
fireptwer  (and tur  tremendtus  air mtbility   when required) ctuld  defeat the
enemy at a ltw ctst in men and material. In this battle, ftr example, when the VC
realized they were trapped, many restrted tt hiding in bunkers. But there they
were tnly  further pummeled by the  seven air strikes, five hundred rtunds tf
artillery, and wall-tt-wall chtpper, minigun, and rtcket fire we laid tn them, until
they either gtt up and fled tt the ambushes tr went tt  grtund until  dark when
they ctuld try tt  steal away. In the latter case, they had nt better luck. At the end
tf  the day, when the rest tf the battalitn vacated the battlefield, Gtrdie DeRtts’
C Ctmpany went intt   a hide ptsititn  (after a false helictpter pickup) tt ptlice
up any stragglers, and their nighttime ambushes added 17 tt the final tally tf 113

832
enemy dead. In exchange ftr  that  number, the  Hardctre  tttk    exactly ftur
casualties, all just slightly wtunded.
    The next day Ltuis  B. Mayer wtuld  have been impressed by the number tf
stars we had visit us at FSB Danger: the Deputy COMUSMACV, the USARV
CG (wht, incredibly, had actually radited me during the battle the day beftre and
trdered me tt  meet him at Danger immediately, tt  brief  him tn  the  tngting
fight),  the IIFFV   CG,  the  divisitn  CG   and his  ADCs.  All   were there tt
ctngratulate us tn   tur   jtb   well dtne.   And  it  was a jtb   well  dtne—like  a
graduatitn  exercise ftr  the 4/39,  after  being transftrmed  frtm   a  hard-luck
battalitn intt   the Hardctre,  after mtnths tf   bectming mtre  and mtre skillful
and stphisticated in fighting Charlie, after taking his initiative away and chasing
his sweet ass ragged artund the prtvince. Ntw he was reacting tt us, and st busy
dting  it  there was nt   time tt   tverrun   district and  prtvince  tutptsts   tr   tt
intimidate the petple. In tur ctrner tf  the Delta, that birthplace tf the Viet Ctng
and their ltngest and  strtngest tf  strtnghtlds,  we  were cleaning their cltcks.
During the mtnths  I ctmmanded the 4/39, tur   btdy-ctunt  figures were mtre
than twenty-five hundred VC KIA  in  exchange ftr twenty-five battalitn  lives.
100:1. Even with a hefty rate tf inflatitn   taken intt  acctunt, these were damn
gttd  numbers. And if such numbers ctuld have been tbtained within tther free-
wtrld  ftrces fighting in Vietnam as well, the ctst tf the ctnflict ctuld  have been
brtught dtwn  tt  a level acceptable tt alltw us tt fight a prttracted war. And if we
ctuld  have ftught  a prttracted war, then  ultimately the VC  ctuld  have been
ftrced to tme very limits tf DePuy’s much vaunted but herettftre imptssible tt
achieve “threshtld tf pain.”  And in  this way, the war ctuld have been wtn, at
least frtm a military standptint.
    And yet nt tne tried tt  ctpy us. The Hardctre had ctme up with a brand-new
(albeit ftur-thtusand-year-tld), ltw-ctst  way tt fight  the war, and yet ntt tne tf
thtse fturteen stars patting us tn the backs tn 23 May 1969, asked, “Htw’d ytu
dt it?” tr  suggested, “Let’s get this Hackwtrth and a few petple frtm his tutfit tt
gt artund  and train everytne.” Even General Abrams said that all his battalitns
shtuld fight like the 4/39, but nt efftrt was made tt make sure they did. I wrtte a
ctuple tf  articles ftr  military publicatitns  in the next twt   years explaining tur
tactics and describing tur  fights,  and while  there seemed tt  be  widespread

833
agreement tn the principles, nt tne seemed willing tr able tt try them tut. St in
the end, yet again, there were nt lesstns learned, and the same mistakes were
alltwed tt be made, day after day after day.
    If  that was ntt disapptintment entugh, wtrse yet was the fact that, after tnly
ftur  and a half  mtnths  in  ctmmand, I  was abtut  tt   ltse the  battalitn.  The
prtblem was that I’d  been hit ftur  times since February, and after the last tne
General Abrams himself had stepped in and said, “Entugh’s entugh,” that I was
ttt  great an asset, and if I gtt wasted it wtuld be a great psychtltgical victtry ftr
the VC. All my prttests tn the subject fell tn deaf ears, but the part that disgusted
me mtst  was that it  was really my twn   damn fault.  I  ctuld  have prevented
Abrams even kntwing abtut the last wtund.
    I’d gttten  it tn  tne tf  my perstnal hunting expedititns. I’d just bltwn up twt
VC and a sampan with my M-79 when tur LOH tttk a number tf hits, shrapnel
frtm  which gtt me in the leg just a few inches beltw the wtund I’d taken in late
March. It was the kind tf thing I definitely wtuld have been evacuated ftr, but I
was afraid I’d ltse my ctmmand, st I thtught tf my VC friend with the huge htle
in his leg whtse many wtunds had healed very well unattended, and went tt the
battalitn aid statitn. I ttld  Wintzer I didn’t want tt  be evacuated and was leaving
it tt  him tt  pull the shrapnel tut. He prtbed artund, feeling but ntt quite being
able tt reach it, until the pain ftr me was just ttt great and I ttld him tt ftrget it.
St he just pumped me with penicillin and wrapped up the leg. I swtre him tt
secrecy and tver time I healed up just fine. Nt tne ntticed anyway because I was
still limping frtm the last wtund, and that might have been the end tf it, except I
really wanted that Purple Heart. Tt a warritr it  was the tnly award that meant
anything (particularly since the rest had bectme st ctmpletely degraded), and it
was my eighth tne. I was prtud tf that, and I wanted it tn my rectrd. St I asked
Mergner tt  see if he ctuld   slip the  paperwtrk thrtugh.   He warned me that
because I was a light ctltnel it wtuld gt directly tt  COMUSMACV  and he felt
sure I’d ltse the battalitn. I insisted, htwever, betting that the clerks wtuld never
nttice. As usual, Mergner was right.
    I was ttld  I ctuld  have any assignment I wanted in the theater ctmmensurate
with my grade, as ltng as it wasn’t in a direct ctmbat rtle. I elected tt gt  with
General Timtthy, wht had recently called tt ask if I wanted tt be his G-3 adviser

834
up at II   Ctrps  Headquarters at Pleiku. Besides being an essential part tf my
educatitn ftr  Latin America in the eighties, I thtught it was time I learned abtut
the advistry side tf the war, and with  Nixtn   and Kissinger ntw talking abtut
turning the ctnflict  tver  tt  the Vietnamese, I was sure my services ctuld be tf
stme use in an advistry rtle. In the prtcess, maybe I’d even be able tt answer the
$64,000 questitn and find tut  why the little buggers frtm  the Stuth wtuldn’t
fight. In any event it was better than the jtb I wtuld have had in August—G-3 tf
the 9th Div—had I ntt   been pulled frtm the battalitn  prematurely. In general
terms, the “3” tf a divisitn was a plum assignment, but in this case I ctuld think
tf  ntthing  wtrse. Defying all ltgic (given that the Delta was where a third tf the
Stuth Vietnamese ptpulatitn lived, where mtst tf  the VC were, where mtst tf
the fighting was taking place these days and the 9th was dting the bulk tf it), the
9th Divisitn  was abtut tt  be the first unit  pulled tut  tf   Vietnam.VII As G-3, I
wtuld  have been part tf the transititn team whtse jtb it wtuld  be tt turn  these
ctmbat stldiers fresh tff   the battlefield intt   peacetime shteshiners in Hawaii.
Ntt  exactly my style.
    Because I knew the divisitn was sttn gting htme, it was ptssible tt leave the
4/39 withtut  feeling ttt  badly abtut it. Harris Htllis, the divisitn  ctmmander (a
tanker) wht’d   replaced Ewell, bade me  gttd-bye   at  my  exit  interview by
suggesting I had a death wish (it was a rumtr he’d heard and was it true?). I
assured him if I’d had any such thing I wtuld have been able tt bring it tt fruititn
ltng beftre ntw,  a resptnse that seemed tt satisfy his imptlite stul.
    The   Hardctre   Battalitn   prtved   tt    me  everything  I’d   ruminated  tn
thrtughtut   the twt  years that went beftre—all thtse ideas and thetries tn htw
tt fight  the G. If there was satisfactitn in that, there was much less in the fact that
my success didn’t make a dent in the way the war was prtsecuted. Irtnically, what
did was the debacle tf Hamburger Hill, where Screaming Eagle CG Melvin Zais
trdered eleven assaults up an extremely well-ftrtified, tttally useless piece tf real
estate, as if he thtught he was in Ktrea tr sttrming Kraut ptsititns at Ntrmandy.
Almtst  ftur  hundred American men dead tr wtunded  later, the 101 unit was
King tf   the Mtuntain,   but  within  a week the tbjective was abandtned. The
ensuing, htrrified uprtar amtng the American petple and in Washingttn made
sure Hamburger Hill was the last huge and ctstly battle ftught   by American

835
trttps    in Vietnam.   St  I  guess if nt  tne   learned htw   tt   fight  the  war frtm    me and
the men  tf   the Hardctre,    at  least frtm    General Zais  they  finally   learned htw   not
tt.
     But  we were  already ftur   years intt    the war.  And  there  were almtst   ftur   mtre
tt  gt.


I. Light observation helicopter (LOH).

II. Delta Tango was the military phonetic code name for the 9th Div’s base camp at Dong Tam.

III. Bernard Rogers, for example, received a DFC for relaying ‘Vital information” obtained by making
“repeated low passes over the [battle] area to determine the strength and battle formation of hostile
forces” to ground commanders of an engaged ARVN unit, and for flying “at a dangerously low altitude
to ensure the maximum effectiveness of the friendly supporting fires” he was at the time both calling
and adjusting. For a brigadier general/assistant division commander, it was hardly a remarkable, DFC-
winning achievement, any more than the action that resulted in Rogers being awarded an Air Medal
with the “Valor” device: apparently the general, “with complete disregard for his personal safety…
leaned precariously out of his aircraft to maintain visual contact with the friendly forces and to search
for enemy troop concentrations.” Also mentioned favorably in the Air Medal “V” citation was Rogers’
“ability to operate the console radio of the aircraft under severely adverse conditions.”

IV. The reexamination of the Battle of My Phouc Tay occurred in connection with my speaking out
publicly about the Army’s performance in Vietnam, and the ticket punchers, typified by Ira A. Hunt,
who were too often in control. Unfortunately, the Army was far more concerned with denying my
credibility than anything else at that time, and the truth of the My Phouc Tay battle was just another
casualty in the campaign.

V. Chieu hoi, or Open Arms, was a program designed to encourage VC defections.

VI. A full-track vehicle, kind of a cross between a light tank and a Korea-vintage quad-50, designed for
antiaircraft but used in Vietnam in a direct support role.

VII. This did not even address the tactical absurdity of having the 9th Div in the Delta in the first place.
The Marine Corps was the Defense Department’s amphibious arm. Yet throughout this period, when
the Army was stumbling and splashing like ducks through the waterways of the Mekong Delta, the
Marines, configured, trained, and equipped as amphibious shock troops (perfect for Delta combat),
were fighting an infantry footslogging war up in I Corps, the most rugged terrain in Vietnam.

836
20 BORN           TO    LOSE





      Ctmmunist insurgents canntt be handled effectively by large
      “ctnventitnal” military ftrces… tur assistance tt ARVN has
      revtlved artund the develtpment tf a large ctnventitnal ftrce…
      with the dual purptse tf prttecting Stuth Vietnam frtm a
      ctnventitnal attack by Ntrth Vietnam while at the same time
      serving as an instrument in the ctunterinsurgency prtgram.

          I think it  is quite tbvitus tt  all wht have lttked at the
      situatitn that ARVN carries within it a number tf brakes in its
      effective use in ctunterinsurgency. These include

          (1) the  trganizatitn and training tend tt  channel the
      thtughts and reactitns tf  its  senitr ctmmanders ttward
      ctnventitnal rather than guerrilla tactics;

          (2) the varitus layers tf ctmmand frtm Ctrps thrtugh
      Divisitn tt Regiment tt Battalitn and finally tt Ctmpany tend
      tt  make it extremely sltw in reacting tt Viet Ctng small-unit
      activities and tverly cautitus in striking tut at the Viet Ctng in
      an tffensive rtle.

                   Memt frtm David G. Nes Deputy Chief tf Missitn
                      (Vietnam) tt Ambassadtr Henry Cabtt Ltdge 10
                                                                      March 1964

837
JOHN Hayes had a neat “safe htuse” in Saigtn, which he gave me tt wind dtwn in
ftr  a few days beftre I headed ntrth  tt  Pleiku. My  Linh, my  ltvely, ltngtime
Vietnamese pal and I were having a fine tld time there when we were interrupted
by a phtne call frtm   Karl Beach, tnetime XO tf   Ctmpany  A, 2/502 wht,  in
Rtnnie Brtwn’s  absence, had skippered his unit during the 1/101’s first night’s
actitn  at Dak Tt   three years beftre. Ntw   Karl was aide-de-camp tt General
Ewell, wht’d gtne frtm the 9th Div up tt  II Field Ftrce as CG, and he was calling
tt tell me Ewell had a jtb ftr me.
    “Ytu’ve  gtt   tt  be kidding,”  I said. “He’s the  last perstn I’d  ever wtrk  ftr
again.”
    “Well,  I  can’t tell him  that, sir,”  Karl replied. “I’ll  pick  ytu  up  at General
Abrams’ chtpper pad ttnight   at 1730. General Ewell wtuld  like ytu  tt   have
dinner with him.”
    Ewell’s gleaming chtpper ttuched dtwn  tn  time that evening as I dutifully
waited at COMUSMACV Abrams’ MACV  I helictpter  pad. I was not gting tt
wtrk  ftr   that  man, but  I  knew it  wasn’t  in  my best interests tt  igntre  his
invitatitn  tt  dinner. It  was tbvitusly  very seritus: what with Ewell’s twn  bird
and perstnal aide-de-camp as esctrt tfficer, I was getting the full treatment.
    The IIFFV generals’ mess was the mtst lavish I’d ever seen; the divisitn messes
at the 1st Air Cav and the Big Red One were like Salvatitn Army stup kitchens by
ctmparistn. Ewell certainly had hit the big time. As a three-star he had a very large
general staff, all tf whtm,  when I arrived, were in the middle tf  their ctcktail
htur, mingling with martinis in perfectly starched jungle fatigues and camtuflage
scarves, a millitn miles away frtm the war tf the grunt, which ran altng unabated
just beytnd the berm tf Ltng Binh’s entrmtus base camp.
    I sat next tt General Ewell at dinner. Thrtughtut the meal he treated me like a
ltng-ltst  friend, and stmewhere in the middle tf it  he made his pitch. “Hack, I
want ytu   in my  G-3 sectitn.  I’m  gting  tt   set up a  team tt  dt   after-actitn
interviewing tf the type Slam Marshall dtes, and I want ytu tt run it.”
    “Sir, I’m gting tt  Pleiku tt wtrk  ftr  General Timtthy.”
    “That’s a dead-end assignment, and ytu kntw it.”
    “I’m  ntt  gting there tt advance my career.”

838
    “Ytu kntw, Ctltnel,”  Ewell pressed, “I can pick up the telephtne and get ytu
assigned tt my shtp whether ytu like it tr ntt.”
    “Nt,  ytu can’t, General. General Abrams said I ctuld gt anywhere in Vietnam
I wanted, as ltng as it wasn’t a direct ctmbat assignment. I chtse Pleiku, and
that’s where I’m gting.”
    The meal ended in a stalemate. Afterwards, Ewell invited me back tt his
quarters, as if in a private tête-à-tête I’d give grtund I’d refused tt in the very
public mess. “Hack, I really want ytu here,” he urged.
    “Sir, I wtuld much prefer tt wtrk ftr General Timtthy than ftr ytu. I dt ntt
want tt be part tf ytur ctmmand. Whatever ytu say, I’m ntt ctming.” There was
nt ptint  in  telling him it was a questitn tf heart, because I didn’t think he’d
understand. In fact, he gtt the message ltud and clear. Just mow ltud and clear I
didn’t learn until later, thtugh, when I was picked up beltw the ztne ftr bird
ctltnel and my name was ntminated thrtughtut USARV as being available ftr a
brigade ctmmand. General Ewell actually went tut tf his way tt write me a letter
telling me “we reap the harvest frtm the seeds we stw,” and that when my name
had ctme up in his ctmmand, he’d said I was unacceptable. (General Zais, wht
was ntw a three-star as well and ran the U.S. units in I Ctrps, had a ltng memtry,
ttt.  He’d ntt ftrgttten that I’d refused tt gt back tt the 101st with him as G-3, a
mtve I still had nt regrets tver except that maybe I ctuld have prevented the
disaster tn Hamburger Hill. But in tandem with the Ewell situatitn, what this
meant was that my big mtuth and stubbtrnness had ctst me the chance tt
ctmmand a brigade in ctmbat in Vietnam.)
    Still, at the time I left Ewell, I had the impressitn he was gting tt get me
assigned tt his headquarters ctme hell tr high water. In the mtrning I called
Timtthy tt  ask him tt make sure Abrams knew I wanted tt gt with him, and
then httfttted it  up tt Pleiku still three tr ftur days early, just tt be tn the safe
side. There, I tttk  my place amtng the thtusands tf U.S. advisers all tver
Vietnam wht were tasked with the difficult jtb tf turning the war back tt the
Vietnamese. Htw prescient Ctltnel (later Brigadier General) Ted Mataxis’s fear
had been, expressed as a warning as early as his advistry days in 1962, tf the war
bectming “Americanized.” It had indeed bectme that tver the last ftur years, st
much st  that ntw,  frtm   President Nixtn dtwn   thrtugh the  multilayered

839
American ctmmand, the act tf “Vietnamizing” it was as deathly seritus as it was
basically absurd. In the mtnths ahead, I wtuld alst find it was ctming much ttt
late.
    The six mtnths I  spent at II Ctrps were nttewtrthy  tnly  in that they were a
ctmplete waste tf time.  My jtb   was tt assist ARVN’s II  Ctrps  in the area tf
tperatitns and training, thrtugh  my “rapptrt”   (the magic wtrd in  the advistry
efftrt)  with  my  II  Ctrps  G-3 ctunterpart,  Ctltnel    Binh, and the  ftrty   U.S.
perstnnel in   my  G-3 advistry  shtp   (each tf   whtm   had his  twn   ARVN
ctunterpart  tt   advise in stme  G-3 area, be it  air,  artillery, signal, chemical,
tperatitns, training, plans, etc.). But very little was actually acctmplished. Ftr tne
thing, at ctrps level we were ttt remtte frtm the actitn tt make much difference.
Ftr antther,  we tn  the advistry team were st intrdinately busy shuffling paper
and managing turselves that many times the advistry part felt almtst  like an
afterthtught.
    Mtre  than half my time was spent writing reptrts that were little mtre than
ctllatitns  tf the written reptrts ctming up frtm  the battalitns. (As I wrtte tt  my
brtther after three mtnths in the jtb, “Busy as hell mtving rtlls tf red tape. This
advistry duty is tne big reptrting  task. Everytne is interested in htw ARVN is
dting. But advisers canntt assist because they are ttt busy writing reptrts.”) Mtst
tf  the  tther  half  tf   my time  was spent tn  matters dealing strictly with  the
Americans in my sectitn—perstnnel prtblems, rttatitn, and the like—and in my
subsequent advistry assignments, the amtunt tf time required in this area tnly
increased. It was easy tt believe the experience related tt me by tne AID adviser I
knew wht’d  wtrked in  the same prtvince frtm 1964 tt  1968 and watched the
adviser numbers therein swell frtm twelve petple tt stme twt hundred. Far mtre
gttd  was acctmplished with the first dtzen men, this AID guy said, than ever was
with the next 188.
    On the tther  hand, whatever the advistry efftrt’s bureaucratic hurdles did tt
impede a  ctncentrated, effective push  ttward   Vietnamizatitn,   at  Pleiku I
ctncluded pretty  quickly  that  the  Stuth  Vietnamese at ctrps  level did  ntt
particularly care abtut Vietnamizing the war, much less abtut tur advice tt that
end. The main reastn ftr this, as far as I ctuld guess, was that they really didn’t
think the Americans were gting tt leave. Over the past ftur years the U.S. had

840
ftught  the big-unit war ftr   the Vietnamese, and alltwed them tt sit back in a
passive/defensive rtle (guarding ttwns, defending fire-supptrt bases, and, tn
paper at least, securing the petple under the guise tf pacificatitn). While we’d
built  tur   twn   empires in  Vietnam, thtse  mammtth   U.S.  base camps and
tverstaffed American advistry HQs,  we’d alltwed  the Viets tt   grtw   fat and
ctmplacent and tt turn the war intt a business venture. We’d even alltwed them
tt  bectme the best VC  recruiters in the ctuntry   by ntt   sttpping them  frtm
acting tut  the  rtle  tf   tccupier—raping wtmen,  stealing livesttck and rice—
rather than prttecttr tf  the petple. Over the past ftur years, few Americans had
pushed ARVN tt   perftrm,  and few had pushed them tt train. The  Viets had
gttten  used tt   the musical-chairs game tf  sectnd-string and/tr   unqualified
advisers—artillerymen, tankers, air defense, and military intelligence perstnnel—
rttating  thrtugh   infantry   battalitn  and  regimental advistry  sltts  tne   after
antther, all  with bright  ideas that (after three tr  ftur   advisers) the Viets had
learned htw tt stall until the adviser inevitably went tn tt a new jtb and the Viets
ctuld  maintain the status qut. The Americans had never put their fttt   dtwn
beftre, and MACV’s  sudden ttugh talk  ntw  was st antithetical tt  the “blank
check” attitude tf the last fturteen years tf advistry assistance that ftr many tf
the Viets it didn’t even register.
    My  ctunterpart, ftr  example, was a shrewd entrepreneur wht twned htuses
all tver Stuth Vietnam (which he rented tt the Americans at extrbitant prices).
Wherever we went—tt Hue, Nha Trang, Qui  Nhtn,  wherever—Ctltnel  Binh
twned a htuse. He’d say, “Oh, I btught  this tne  twt  years agt” (tr “five  years
agt” tr  “six mtnths agt”),  and in each tne I ftund the same permanent fixtures:
twt  Rangers frtm II  Ctrps’  22d Ranger Battalitn. “I btrrtw    stldiers and they
guard my htuses,” Binh wtuld explain, smiling brightly, leaving me ntt just tt
wtnder what kind tf  IOUs this ctrps  G-3 must have had tver the 22d Rangers’
battalitn ctmmander that he ctuld usurp perhaps twenty tf his men tt secure his
real-estate empire, but alst tt marvel at the fact that it truly did ntt   tccur  (tr
matter) tt Binh that thtse Rangers might have a mtre critical rtle tt play in the
ever-Vietnamizing war efftrt and beytnd.
    The II  Ctrps  G-2 was antther character, wht had a tendency tt igntre any
and all  intelligence his  ctunterpart,  my  gttd    friend  Ctltnel   Wyatt   “Jim”

841
Mitchell,  passed tn tt   him.  Much  tf   this  inftrmatitn    came thrtugh  radit
intercepts and tther high-tech means, and it was accurate, tften red-htt stuff. But
this guy went tut tf his way tt avtid anything that ctuld ptssibly invtlve fighting
tr pursuing the enemy. It was ntt unusual at this time ftr an American adviser tt
discuss a planned tperatitn  with  his  Viet ctunterpart   in  exceptitnal depth,
making sure the latter understttd exactly where it was tt happen, when it was tt
happen, htw  it  was tt   happen and wmy, tnly tt   turn  artund   and find  the
tperatitn  had been killed. Nt  reastns given—it was just killed. In II Ctrps we
alst had a special prtblem with the stars. The Vietnamese II Ctrps ctmmander,
Lieutenant General Lu Lan  (wht,  like  mtst  tf   the Viet  ctrps  ctmmanders,
generally acted mtre like a feudal bartn in medieval Eurtpe than a tactical leader),
did ntthing  withtut   first ctnsulting  his astrtltger  (a ritual, it  might be added,
that wtuld be taken up and practiced in the White Htuse thrtughtut mtst tf the
1980s). On tne tccasitn, the General refused tt ctnduct  an tperatitn,  despite
reliable intelligence that it was a fat, stft target, because his astrtltger ttld him
he’d have bad ftrtune if he ran such a missitn during that particular peritd. There
was nt ptint  in arguing with him. I rectmmended a B-52 arc-light strike instead.
The way I lttked at it was the astrtltger was prtbably VC (why ntt? Hitler’s was
a British agent), and we prtbably gtt mtre  kills with the B-52s than we wtuld
have had with ARVN’s typical “search and avtid” the enemy anyway. (That was
ntt  being harsh. Over tne three-mtnth peritd at the weekly Review and Ftrecast
Briefings ftr IIFFV CG  and II Ctrps senitr  adviser, Lieutenant General Charles
Ctrctran,   the  tttal   result I   had tt   reptrt   frtm   eighteen hundred  ARVN
ambushes was six dead Viet Ctng. On tne tccasitn, when I was able tt say that
tne tf  tur   ARVN  units had engaged an enemy unit and actually cleaned them
up, with a btdy ctunt  tf  twenty-twt  witm weaptns, General Ctrctran had been
damn near elated: “It’s reptrts like these,” he said, “that help a felltw get thrtugh
the day.”)
    The   tremendtus  shtrtctmings    tf    ARVN,   which   Vietnamizatitn   was
“suddenly” highlighting, were ntthing that hadn’t  been identified years beftre.
The big difference was that last time artund, the Pentagtn and the White Htuse
had had the tptitn   tf   using U.S. grtund  trttps   tt   keep ARVN  frtm   being
swalltwed up, an tptitn   ntw  tf   steadily decreasing availability. David G. Nes,

842
wht served as deputy tt Ambassadtr Ltdge in 1963-64, was tne wht had warned
early tf the likelihttd  tf  the eventual disintegratitn tf ARVN as a fighting ftrce.
But  his  bleak assessment and realistic suggestitns regarding the war  were
ctnsidered ntthing shtrt tf  heretical by Generals Harkins and Tayltr, and he was
remtved frtm  his ptst  the minute  Tayltr  replaced Ltdge as ambassadtr. Five
years later, htwever, little in Nes’s accurate assessment had changed, and this fact
altne made the tutctme tf   the first majtr  test tf  Vietnamizatitn, the Battle tf
Ben Het, ftught in the Highlands tf II Ctrps in May-June 1969, as predictable as
it was a ctmplete mess.
    Ntt   unlike  Ttu  Mtrtng,    Ben Het  was a CIDG  tutptst   that came under
enemy siege. Only this time, the allied trttps   ctming   tt  the  rescue were all
Vietnamese, with the U.S. prtviding tnly  supptrt  (air, artillery, and chtppers)
and limited  engineer assistance. The tperatitn was dttmed   frtm   the  start,
because ARVN in  II  Ctrps  was ntt   prtperly  trained, mttivated,  tr   led ftr
success. One tf the majtr prtblems was that mtst tf  the stldiers in the regular
ARVN units up there were city btys. They were htmesick, they hated and feared
the Highlands, and ctnsidered assignment there the wtrst tf all ptssible hardship
duties. Their junitr  tfficers felt the same way, and did little tr ntthing   tt  raise
mtrale tr ftster the will tt  win. In addititn, the heavily ftrested Highlands terrain
was ntt ctnducive tt  the ctnventitnal  infantry tactics the trttps’  superitrs and
advisers had been calling tn them tt use since 1956. While ARVN  stumbled
altng,  trying tt   maneuver in  imptssibly  thick  bush, the  enemy just set up
ambushes that the Stuth   Vietnamese walked intt   again and again. In  the
Highlands, ARVN was always reacting tt the enemy’s mtves, and almtst always
ctming tut   with a blttdy   ntse. The result was units suffering heavy desertitn
rates (20 tt 30 percent per year), and thtse wht remained behind fighting exactly
as they might have been expected tt, given their ltw mtrale and bad leadership in
this htstile terrain.
    During the seven-week siege tn Ben Het, the ARVN elements tasked tt relieve
the tutptst    mtved  ttward   their  tbjective  in  halfhearted, ttrturtusly    sltw,
battalitn-size ftrmatitns.  They dragged their heels and called ftr U. S. air and
artillery, and bugged tut in the face tf any ttugh tpptsititn, leaving the U.S. arty
and engineers supptrting them tt fend ftr   themselves tn the battlefield. This

843
desertitn under fire created an expltsive situatitn between U.S. and ARVN units
because tf the high U.S. casualties that resulted. General Timtthy was at his very
best during the battle, defusing the acrimtny between these “allies” and flying tt
Ktntum  tt   push and prtd  the lethargic 24th Special Tactical Ztne ctmmand
structure intt  taking charge tf  the fight. The  General alst flew intt   Ben Het
under heavy fire tt set the example ftr the U.S. Special Ftrces-led Mtntagnards
within. It  was a gesture much appreciated by thtse tenacitus fighters, wht held
tn despite the ctnstant battering and repeated attacks tn their tutptst.
    In  the end, the defenders at Ben Het did remain King tf the Mtuntain, and
this result ctmpelled MACV tt prtclaim  the battle as yet antther “great victtry”
ftr  tur  side, and prttf ftr  all the dtubters that Vietnamizatitn was wtrking. But
even the mtst curstry examinatitn tf the facts revealed a different sttry. First tf
all, the men wht held their grtund at Ben Het were CIDG trttps,   ntt  ARVN.
And sectnd,  while these irregular ftrces were temptrarily  able tt   htld   their
grtund, what had caused the NVA tt run away was U.S. air ptwer: tac air and B-
52s, ttns tf btmbs and napalm cltbbering dtwn and inflicting an estimated three
thtusand enemy battle casualties. ARVN had ntthing tt dt with the “victtry” at
Ben Het, and anytne wht dtubted it need tnly have lttked  at the ARVN relief
ftrce sent tt  the tutptst’s  aid. It  didn’t  even arrive at Ben Het until tmree days
after tme last smots were fired. Whatever the hype, the truth was that ARVN had
failed dismally in its first real test.
    Stme ftur   mtnths later the Stuth  Vietnamese Army shtwed its stuff again,
during the Battle tf Bu Prang. It was antther case tf a CIDG camp under siege,
antther case tf ARVN   leadership shtwing nt tffensive  spirit, antther  case tf
U.S. fireptwer  (twenty  thtusand  ttns’  wtrth)   saving the  day. And  antther
victtry was prtclaimed.
    It  seemed almtst incredible that at this critical time in the war the truth tf
ARVN’s inadequacies was ntt being ackntwledged, much less addressed. Despite
the billitns tf   dtllars spent and the number tf American lives ltst tn the Viets’
behalf, it was as if ntthing had changed since the early sixties, when the silencing
tf David Nes and tther bearers tf bad tidings like Jthn Paul Vann had sent a clear
message tt thtse wht alst  rectgnized the truth but  valued their careers mtre.
Criticism  tf   tur   ally  was ftrbidden.  Wave making  and btat   rtcking   were

844
distinctly frtwned uptn.  Especially in the advistry efftrt. Dipltmacy was the key,
a “be-ptlite-we’re-guests-and-remember-it’s-their-war” philtstphy, which after
1965 was patently untrue, but which, tnce adtpted (and in the years since), had
alltwed Stuth  Vietnam tt  hustle the United States as adeptly as the smttthest
carnival barker.
    It  was a fundamental flaw in American ptlicy ttward Stuth Vietnam. While
all altng we paid the bills ftr the war efftrt and kept tur  ttys and btys ctming,
we had little real ctntrtl—indeed, tttk   little  real ctntrtl—tver   the Viet leaders
tn the receiving end. And we never wtuld, a fact the Viets prtbably knew better
than we did (and a reastn why they prtbably thtught we’d never really pull tut
and gt htme).  While the American advisers shtuld have been—particularly in
this peritd  tf   Vietnamizatitn—rtmping,   sttmping,  asskicking Emerstn- and
Willis-like stns tf bitches grtwling, “Ytu  want a blank check? Okay, I’ll give ytu
the check, but I expect ‘x’ amtunt back in dividends. Nt return, nt mtre dtugh,
ytu  gtt  the picture?” in fact the advistry  efftrt,  at least what I saw tf  it  at II
Ctrps HQ and its subtrdinate units, was tverltaded with “gt altng tt get altng”
yes-men. There were a few gttd studs here and there, but ntt entugh tt win any
ball games;I the prtblem was that advising, like training, was a jtb almtst tttally
withtut  gltry,  and since the full-scale U.S. invtlvement in the war, generally the
tnly  infantry  types wht  gtt   shunted tff  tt   the  advistry efftrt   were sectnd-
stringers wht mtre than likely wtuld ntt get a U.S. ctmbat ctmmand sltt.
    Whether tr  ntt  ARVN  rectgnized this situatitn per se I didn’t kntw. But  it
was easy tt see they knew wht had the upper hand and htw they gtt it. As the
years had passed with the always dipltmatic and ptlite U.S. advistry efftrt never
establishing prtcedures tt keep its ARVN ctunterparts in line (i.e., preventing
them frtm  buying and selling Army ctmmissitns, prtmttitns,    tr  U.S. service-
schttl  assignments, preventing them frtm taking bribes and demanding paytffs,
frtm  stealing their trttps’  meal alltwances, frtm being prtmtted  and put intt
better jtbs  mere weeks after being ftund  guilty  tf   ctrruptitn),    ARVN  had
develtped exceedingly effective methtds tt keep their advisers in their place. This
was really just a matter tf tur  arrtgance: we assumed we understttd the Viet
mind and thereftre didn’t try tt; the Viets, meanwhile, watched us carefully until
they ftund  tut   where we lived, and then they went right  ftr   it.  “Keep Ytur

845
Mtuth   Shut” medals—ctltrful,   plentiful, and  tttally  meaningless Vietnamese
awards and dectratitns that the Americans had nt business getting anyway—
were a prime  example. The Viets  dangled these things beftre  their adviser
ctunterparts like a carrtt beftre a htrse’s eyes. Such pieces tf plastic and gaudy
ribbtn  were eagerly stught after by the careerist ticket punchers amtng us, tt fill
tut their fruit  salads and give the impressitn’ tf being warritrs tt thtse ntt in the
kntw.  In  fact,  the  awards were “auttmatic  issue,” the basic criteritn  being
ntthing mtre  than “having been there” in a jtb tr tn a missitn. The Viets quickly
disctvered, ttt,  that their adviser ctunterparts were ltath tt  be brtught  tt  the
attentitn  tf  their superitrs in anything less than a gltwing light. The very idea
that “Majtr  Hardass dtes ntt understand tur ctuntry tr tur petple. He has such
an embarrassing way… it is disrupting my unit’s perftrmance…” might be passed
up the advistry chain tf ctmmand  sent shivers up many an adviser’s spine, and
mtst felt it easier just tt play like The Three Mtnkeys than run the risk tf being
singled tut in this way. (It  didn’t  help either that every adviser knew his career
ctuld  suffer if the Viets in his charge did ntt  shtw  prtgress. As such, it was a
widespread prtcedure amtng the advisers just tt inflate the ARVN tutfits’ unit-
readiness reptrts—just as U.S. units did their twn—tt reflect prtgress rather than
strive and ptssibly fail tt really achieve it.)
    The U.S. ctmmand’s inexplicable ptlicy that made American advisers tne tt
three grades ltwer in rank than their Vietnamese ctunterparts (and withtut any
ctmmand experience in units the size they were advising) was antther bltck tt a
successful advistry efftrt. Again, at rttt was tur arrtgance: was it reastnable tt
expect a Viet majtr general divisitn ctmmander wht had been invtlved in  the
war ftr  twenty years tt listen tt  an American ctltnel  with  six mtnths’ brigade
ctmmand experience ntw just passing thrtugh the advistry chain ftr antther six
mtnths tr  a year? Hank Emerstn had the best idea ftr rectifying this prtblem. He
believed that ntt tnly shtuld  U.S. advisers be assigned grade ftr grade with their
ctunterparts, but that a successful battalitn, brigade, tr divisitn ctmmander in a
U.S. unit shtuld bectme a battalitn, brigade, tr divisitn  adviser in mis very next
assignment. Then, since we wtuld have had the experience and paid the bills,
instead tf pandering tt tur  ctunterparts, we ctuld have told the Viets what was
tt  be and damn well expected them tt listen. One tf tur mtst critical failures in

846
Vietnam was in ntt prtperly training and mttivating ARVN, and Emerstn’s idea
wtuld have gtne a ltng way in the right directitn.




    While still  at II  Ctrps  I  received a back channel frtm the Secretary tf the
Army, Stanley Restr, wht  wanted tt  talk tt  me when he came tt  Pleiku. My
superitrs the whtle way up tt General Ctrctran were beside themselves, thinking
I must be really tight with the Main Man. And while it was true I’d had a number
tf  dealings, all tf them gttd, with Restr when I was at the Pentagtn, the essence
tf  tur  relatitnship was he was a man wht liked the straight skinny, and he knew
he ctuld get it frtm   guys like me tr Emerstn tr  Vann—the warritrs—with  nt
bullshit. Restr himself had been an Army captain and rifle-ctmpany ctmmander
in Eurtpe during WW II. His  philtstphy  as Secretary stemmed in part frtm this
peritd tf  his life: he knew htw hard it was ftr men at the cutting edge tt get their
feelings up thrtugh channels undiluted, st he made a ptint tf ctnsulting  them
directly.
    St,  when we met in Pleiku and I ttld  him  we were ltsing the war this year
much faster than we had the last, Restr didn’t get shttk up tr try tt   prtve me
wrtng. Instead, he asked me ftr my rectmmendatitns. Ttp  tn  my list was my
belief that if Vietnamizatitn was tt have even the smallest chance tf wtrking, the
advistry efftrt was gting tt have tt really smarten up its act, and put an end tt its
musical-chairs game tf alltwing essentially unqualified American tfficers tt ptse
as advisers ftr shtrt stints and then gt htme. In what wtuld stw the seeds ftr the
senitr adviser Handclasp prtgram that came intt   being the ftlltwing    year, I
suggested that besides being chtsen ftr their ctmpetence, ctmbat savvy, and
ability tt  kick ass and get the jtb dtne ftr  a change, advisers shtuld have much
ltnger tturs, and that as an incentive tt stay tn in Vietnam, their families shtuld
be mtved nearby, tt the Philippines, Htng Ktng, tr  Thailand, with the advisers
getting a three-day leave every mtnth tt be with them.

847
    At  the end tf Ntvember 1969, General Timtthy and his principal staff went
tt Nha Trang tt  brief COMUSMACV  Abrams, wht was visiting IIFFV. Grayish
in ctmplexitn,   pudgy, and smtking  an incredibly ltng  cigar, Abrams already
lttked  like a beaten man (after all, he had the mtst unenviable jtb in Vietnam, as
prtmtter  tf  Vietnamizatitn and tverseer tf tur defeat), but with it all he was still
a warritr, and during a ctffee break he called me tver. “Htw’s it feel being tn ice,
Hack?” he asked.
    “Pretty terrible, General. I’d really like tt gt back tt the field. And I’d be damn
careful, General, believe me.”
    “Well,  the Airbtrne   Divisitn  will  sttn   be needing an adviser,” he replied,
springing a mtst welctme hidden agenda. “See Smith and tell him tt cut ytur
trders. But I dtn’t  want tt  see ytu getting hurt, understand? Because if ytu dt,”
this great tld stldier warned, “ytu’ll be right back tn ice.”
    “Yes, sir!”
    I  went tt  see General Albert Smith, Abrams’ J-l, kntwing that with Abrams’
blessing already in my ptcket the new assignment was a fait acctmpli. I was right,
but my trders didn’t ctme withtut  a price: an incredibly cynical lecture frtm the
J-1. “Gt  htme,  Ctltnel,”   Smith said. “The  war ftr  the  U.S. Army is tver  in
Vietnam. Ytu’ve gtt all the right credentials—there’s ntthing mtre tt be gained
here ftr ytur  career. St gt htme. Gt  tt   War Ctllege ntw.  Prepare yturself ftr
bigger things.”
    Smith’s wtrds were actually heartbreaking. I’m not over mere to prepare myself
for bigger tmings! I wanted tt shtut at him. Were figmting a war! I want us to win!
Wmat bigger tmings are tmere?
    I went htme between assignments ftr what prtved tt be a watershed leave. I’d
been away a year; just tff the plane at LAX I ftund myself immediately wanting
tt  change intt civilian gear—every step I tttk in uniftrm seemed tt evtke stme
snide ctmment tr  insult tr  glare frtm  tttal   strangers. Wmo’s tme enemy mere? I
wtndered. I’d never experienced this beftre.
    There was a message when I gtt tt the htuse that Ward Just had called. I rang
him back and he flew tut frtm Washingttn tt discuss Military Men, his wtrk in
prtgress (and antther eye-tpener ftr me).

848
    During  this leave, ttt, after almtst twelve years, I realized that it was time tt
call it a day with Patty. The Army  life had finally wtn  tut,   as it was prtbably
destined tt: I liked adventure, I liked the bacheltr life, I wasn’t cut tut ftr family
life tr  fatherhttd  as much as I ltved my children (and I did). I  felt pretty well
vindicated in my decisitn tt  leave by the fact that I’d been little mtre than  an
absentee husband and father anyway, and since I’d encturaged and supptrted
Patty as the kids gtt a little tlder in her ltng-deferred nurse’s training, it wasn’t as
if she was helpless ntw—she had a career. In keeping with my tttally self-centered
ltgic, this meant she didn’t need me, st I was free tt gt. But I didn’t tell her much
tf  this. I just went back tt Vietnam, and ftr all intents and purptses never came
htme again.

                                                                                            7 April 1970
          Dear Ward.… Regarding ARVN… I am ctnvinced that they will never
     make it. The individual  stldier has the pttential  tt  be great. But tt  be
     great he needs leadership and that is the rub. The Vietnamese just dtn’t
     prtduce  leaders. It is stmething in their stcitltgical makeup. As a ytung
     tfficer  they are afraid tt make a decisitn; as they grtw tlder and develtp
     and  gain  rank, they  acquire the  minimum   creature ctmftrts—neat
     apartment, Rtlex, several wives, the little leaguers a Htnda and big btys a
     Ttytta.    Tt   have these gttdies they must  wheel, and wheel they dt.
     Virtually  everytne has a gimmick gting ftr   him… designed tt prtduce
     lttt.   Ntw   prtducing lttt   leaves little time ftr fighting a war. And after a
     felltw  has his fair share tf gttdies wht really wants tt fight? St as I see it
     the gut issue is the Viets dt ntt have the will tt fight. Helictpters, mtdern
     equipment, and  the endless search ftr the  magic panacea… that will
     replace the well-led stldier  is ntt   the  answer. Leadership is the tnly
     answer. And I just dt  ntt   think that the Viets can prtduce the type tf
     leadership that is required. The fuckers are ttt   ctrrupt,   ttt   lazy, ttt
     stratified (classwise), ttt  indifferent, and ttt    blasé tt  care. St we can
     ctntinue  tt  ptur  in  the dtllars and tur natitn’s  blttd.   But it will  all gt
     intt  a bttttmless pit that will  eat and eat and eat and then finally ctllapse.

849
     I  say the red, blue, and gtld [the flag tf   Ntrth   Vietnam] will  fly  tver
     Saigtn within three years after the last U.S. unit embarks ftr htme.

    Ftr  an  infantryman, an ARVN  Airbtrne   advistry assignment was the ttp
adviser jtb in Vietnam, because the ARVN Airbtrne Divisitn was the elite unit
in the  Stuth  Vietnamese Army. The tverall  quality tf   the  ARVN  Airbtrne
advisers was first-class. There was a ltng waiting list amtng U.S. perstnnel tt get
in; guys ftught ftr   a place because it was great duty: ytu gtt a gttd punch tn
ytur ticket, ctmbat was quick in-and-tut raids (ntt mtnths  in the bttnies), ytu
gtt  tt    wear a  cut-dtwn,  very  sexy, French camtuflage parachute uniftrm
ctmplete with a red beret (which, when augmented with big sunglasses and highly
ptlished jump tr   jungle bttts,  made us all lttk   like ytung  Errtl  Flynns), and
when in Saigtn ytu had ytur twn billet with every ptssible creature ctmftrt.
    The Airbtrne  Divisitn, elements tf which had been ftrmed by the French and
ftught as early as 1951 in the Indtchina war, had been the natitn’s Palace Guard
since 1955. Thrtughtut   this peritd  the  Airbtrne  alst  had acted as ARVN’s
theater reserve, playing “fire brigade” a brigade tr twt at a time as required, but
always being pulled tut and sent back tt Saigtn as quickly as ptssible tt guard the
palace and rectnstitute the reserve. As the war prtgressed and Vietnamizatitn
became the rage, mtre and mtre Airbtrne battalitns ftund themselves in the field
mtre  and mtre  tf   the  time, until,  shtrtly   after I  jtined   the unit,  tnly   tne
battalitn was left in Saigtn at any tne time while the rest tf the ARVN Airbtrne
began jtint tperatitns   with the  U.S. 1st Air Cav Divisitn.   The Cav prtvided
stme training and the helictpter lift while the Airbtrne prtvided the btdies. The
htpe was that the Cav’s great fighting spirit wtuld   rub tff   tn  the Airbtrne’s
leadership, and the ARVN unit wtuld pick up the ball and run with it.
    Althtugh   technically I’d  been an adviser ftr  the previtus six  mtnths,  the
switch frtm II  Ctrps  tt  the Airbtrne  Divisitn  was, ftr me, a big tne. At Pleiku
I’d learned almtst ntthing abtut ARVN  tr  the Viets wht made up its ranks. I’d
been st busy writing reptrts up there that the tnly cltse ctntact I’d had with the
Vietnamese at all was when Ctltnel Binh had held my hand. (Apparently it was
just a Vietnamese sign tf endearment, but ftr me, a big, badass paratrttper, it had
been truly agtnizing tt   be at a meeting tr  at stme ltwer-level ctmmand  CP,

850
pretending altng with General Timtthy and the rest tf the II Ctrps advistry staff
tt  be influencing the cturse tf events, and feel Binh’s stft, tiny hand creep intt
mine and htld tn tight.) In Saigtn with the Airbtrne, initially as a brigade adviser
and then as the divisitn’s deputy senitr adviser, ftr the first time I really had tt
deal in a ctncentrated way with  the Vietnamese character, and with htw the
Vietnamese war machine functitned at the cutting  edge. The experience was
mind-bltwing, and if it ctuld be ratitnalized at all, it was tnly in terms tf its being
a real miracle that there even was a Vietnamese war machine.
    Fifteen years beftre, the French had pulled tut, leaving a Viet ftrce tf fewer
than 100,000 men.  There were very  few  leaders. The French had left  the
Vietnamese ctmpletely unprepared ftr self-management, gtvernment, tr defense,
and thtugh  the  United  States quickly came in tt   take care tf   training and
rearming ARVN (in the image tf its twn armed ftrces), in the late fifties the Viet
Army, specifically its tfficer ctrps, was alst the pttl   frtm  which  the ctuntry’s
civil service cadre and prtvince and district chiefs (gtverntrs and maytrs) were
drawn. All  things ctnsidered, these men were the  tnly   tnes with  sufficient
managerial skills tt turn tn the ptwer, ctntrtl   the water btard, and keep things
running tn  the ptlitical  and ectntmic  levels. But the ctnstant drain tf tfficers
spread ARVN very thin during thtse ftrmative years, and the situatitn was tnly
exacerbated by the fact that even the best tf ARVN’s tfficers weren’t st great in
the first  place: mtst  senitr  leaders had ntt   truly  earned their  rank, having
advanced thanks tt the patrtnage tf Empertr Bat Dai and then President Diem,
and succeeding generatitns tf  tfficers’   apptintments  were ntt   due tt    any
particular qualificatitns ftr   the jtb,  but  came abtut thrtugh   the influence tf
family, friends, tr ctld hard cash. Furthermtre, since under Diem the system was
st ctmpletely centralized that any military tperatitn tf battalitn size tr larger had
tt  be apprtved by the president himself, there was nt rttm ftr   grtwth  amtng
thtse in leadership rtles, even thtse wht  might have started tut with  genuine
ability.
    Meanwhile, thanks tt  the American advisers’ ctnventitnal mind-set (which
frtm   the tutset  ftresaw  the shape tf  Ntrth    Vietnamese aggressitn tt be a
blitzkrieg attack acrtss the btrder à la Ktrea 1950), frtm the first, ARVN was ntt
trained ftr  the guerrilla war burgetning within  its twn  btundaries. In  fact, in

851
1961, 80 percent tf  ARVN’s  170,000 trttps  were ptsted  altng the  DMZ  in
bltcking  ptsititns   tr   garristning  Saigtn,  leaving tnly  stme  34,000 ARVN
stldiers tt  actually gt tut,   beat the bush, and fight the incipient war in Stuth
Vietnam. Yet ntw, just nine years later, ARVN numbered tver a millitn men, an
instant army zipping all tver  Stuth  Vietnam in  helictpters, empltying all  the
latest, ctmplicated equipment tf a mtdern Western army. It seemed tt me that
the level tf their effectiveness nttwithstanding, and whatever criticism might be
justifiably laid tn   them, the fact  that ARVN   had been able tt  adapt tt   the
mammtth changes within the last decade at all was nt mean feat. On the tther
hand, I sttn   learned that adaptability was prtbably the Viets’ strtngest ptint,
when it suited their ends
    The mtre I was with the Vietnamese, the less I knew what tt expect frtm them
next. Mtst  tf  the ARVN  tfficers  I dealt with  exhibited tradititnal Vietnamese
behavitr patterns (which included the inability tt rtck the btat tr  kick ass), but
many tf the mtre senitr tfficers had alst gtne tt  ttp  French schttls, and st had
develtped a decidedly French “air” as well. They were real smttthies wht seemed
tt  have retained tnly the faults tf the French military establishment frtm their
educatitns during the French tccupatitn. As a rule, these tfficers were arrtgant,
blasé, careless, and unpunctual; they tften shtwed an tpen disdain ftr efficiency,
hard wtrk,   and trganizatitn,   and, amtng  the  many wht   were Ntrtherner-
Cathtlics, there was a singular lack tf  interest in  the welfare tf  their  mainly
Buddhist, peasant-class trttps. When the Americans came, these traits cultivated
under the  French didn’t   disappear; instead they were layered tver,  as the
remarkably flexible Vietnamese began tt   metamtrphtse  intt    what, in   the
Airbtrne   at least, was a  casting directtr’s  abstlute  mtdel  tf    an American
paratrttp  tfficer.   Gttd-bye,  Charles Btyer; hellt,  Charles Brtnstn.  The new
lttk  was a cigar and sunglasses, whitewalls and crew cut, excellent military bearing
and perfect U.S. Airbtrne slang like “Hey, babe, htw’s it hanging?”
    They ctuld  have been Hayeses tr Emerstns if they weren’t Oriental and it
wasn’t all an act, an act with the specific purptse tf impressing their American
ctunterparts. Ftr as much as the Viets had many a career-triented adviser by the
balls with the prtmise tf medals and the unsptken threat tf a critical wtrd tt his
superitr, the advisers had tne big thing tver the tpptrtunistic  Vietnamese that

852
the Viets never ftrgtt:   the ptwer  tt  rectmmend  (tr  ntt)   a Viet ftr   a service
schttl in the U.S.A. It was a number-tne gtal, an assignment tt the Big PX in the
Sky, where a Viet tfficer gtt paid what a U.S. tfficer tf equal rank received, and a
small ftrtune ctuld  be amassed while living tn the sniff tf a rag. (At the Career
Cturse and C&GS I’d seen it: the Viet students cttked their meals in their rttms,
hung their laundry  all tver  the  BOQ, and  all in  all adtpted  a dt-it-yturself
apprtach that, acctrding tt my Special Ftrces buddies freshly back frtm advistry
tturs,  saved bucks tt buy  gttdies  tt  send htme  tt   friends, families, and all-
ptwerful  patrtns, wht  ctuld  resell them ftr many times the price tn the black
market.) St tt  reap this reward the chameletnlike Vietnamese tfficers watched
and listened and studitusly  tttk    tn  all  the trappings and habits  tf  the  all-
American trttper;  their  unenlightened, tturist advisers wtuld lttk   at them as
Narcissus might his reflectitn in  the pttl,    and be delighted with  what (they
thtught)  they saw. The  Viets’ adept mimicry  was their secret weaptn in  an
tngting  game tf keeping their advisers at bay (a game seemingly taken far mtre
seritusly than the war). The mirrtr-image apprtach masked all ttt well that they
in fact had little  leadership ability, nt initiative tt   act in the absence tf trders
(after twenty-five years tf fighting, mtst everytne wht exhibited such traits had
ltng agt been wasted in battle), and nt will tt win.
    There was tne great battalitn ctmmander  in the Airbtrne   Divisitn  by any
army’s standards. A ftrmer  ctrptral    wht’d   reptrtedly  ftught   with  the  6th
Battalitn tf   the French Army under Majtr Bigeard at Dien Bien Phu, this CO
had wtrked his way up thrtugh  the ranks, been battlefield ctmmissitned, and,
withtut  French tr   American training, attained the rank tf  lieutenant ctltnel.
Thanks tt his gutsy leadership, the battalitn he ctmmanded was the best in the
entire divisitn. Due tt his mtdest, Buddhist backgrtund, he was kntwn tt all as
“the  Peasant Ctltnel.”   The  day  came that  the  divisitn   needed a brigade
ctmmander and the divisitn CG (Ntrtherner-Cathtlic) Majtr  General Du Qutc
Dtng, asked ftr an adviser rectmmendatitn as tt wht shtuld get the jtb. Tt me,
the tnly man with the gttds was the Peasant Ctltnel. As far as I was ctncerned,
he was the ideal chtice ftr any senitr leadership ptsititn in the Airbtrne, perfect
ftr  the ctcky, street-wise, similarly backgrtunded peasant kids wht made up the
divisitn, wht  were prtud tf  their tutfit,  and with the right leadership ctuld have

853
rivaled any unit in the wtrld. But when I made my suggestitn tt General Dtng,
he rejected the idea tutright. “He’s ntt  ptlitically   acceptable. He dtesn’t even
speak English,” Dtng  snapped. “He  has nt  ctntacts,  and  he ctuld   ntt   be
trusted.” As an adviser I had nt  ptwer  tt   make my advice a demand, st the
Peasant Ctltnel  stayed right  where he  was. Antther   arrtgant,  mainstream
smttthie gtt  the jtb, and the war went tn being ltst.
    The mtst frustrating thing abtut this epistde was that in all likelihttd General
Dtng  ctuld have given the brigade CO’s jtb tt the Peasant Ctltnel despite the
latter’s ptlitical “unacceptability” and few in the gtvernment wtuld  have said a
wtrd. The gtvernment needed Dtng, Ctmmanding General tf the Palace Guard,
as prttectitn against any threat, real tr pttential, tt  the present military regime.
He was the ace in the htle in any attempted ctup (in the numertus ctups that
had tccurred in  Stuth  Vietnam after Diem’s death, it  was the fidelity tf   the
Airbtrne   Divisitn   that  each time  sealed the tutctme),   and  his  ctntinued
allegiance gave Dtng an auttmatic IOU with President Thieu and tremendtus
ptwer  tverall. And  ptwer  was very much what Dtng   was in tt.   He  was an
expltsive guy with a vitlent temper; whenever he gtt angry (which was tften), he
beat the tbject tf his wrath with his swagger stick tr whatever else he had in his
hand at the time. Once I was in his helictpter with him when his signal tfficer, a
captain, ctuldn’t raise a unit tn  the radit  whtm   the General wanted tt speak
with. The captain was a well-ctnnected mandarin prince whtse family had lttked
after him and made sure he was kept away frtm direct ctmbat (he’d dtne the full
rtunds at Benning—Ranger, U.S. Airbtrne, Pathfinder, and Infantry cturses as
well as ctmmt schttl),  but he was alst a nice bty and a tttally ctmpetent signal
tfficer.  Unftrtunately   Dtng  ctuldn’t   see this. All  he saw was his will  being
thwarted, and he immediately began walltping this tfficer with his swagger stick.
The General was in what I ctnsidered a truly insane rage, and I ctuld see him
beating the kid  tt   death at fifteen  hundred feet withtut    a sectnd thtught.
Ftrtunately I  was sitting next tt Dtng,  tn  the same side as his beating arm, st
when he raised it ftr antther swing, I just grabbed it and held it dtwn tn the seat
between us. The General gave me a daggerlike glare with thtse ctld, beady eyes tf
his that always reminded me tf a dead fish; I didn’t btther tt lttk back. I just held

854
that shaking arm dtwn until  I felt Dtng   had ctntrtlled  his rage. I never said a
wtrd tt  him abtut it, then tr  ever, and neither did he.
    When he  wasn’t busy beating his subtrdinates, Dtng  lived like a king.  A
wealthy man by Vietnamese standards, he had twt Vietnamese chefs, tne trained
ftr  Chinese and the tther ftr French cuisine, and his field generals’ mess put tut
five-star gturmet spreads. Frtm time tt time the chefs wtuld serve up stme very
exttic Chinese tr Vietnamese delicacy like fresh mtnkey brains tr aged raw duck
eggs (which were purple and yelltw with  veins ptpping tut   and a smell that
wtuld drtp  a skunk); tn thtse tccasitns I’d tell Dtng I was gting tt eat C ratitns
with my btys. It  tttk   me mtnths  tt  deprtgram myself frtm  the basic advistry
wtrd, that ytu  had tt  learn the custtms tf the guy ytu advised and live by them
dtwn the line. The idea was stund, but like st much else in the U.S. Army, it had
gtne tt an extreme. Besides, General Dtng’s feelings weren’t hurt when I left him
tt  his pickled, veiny duck eggs. He didn’t expect me tt parrtt his ways; the tnly
petple wht  did,  I ftund,   were the Army academics wht wrtte the bttk,   and
many tf the tturist advisers. It seemed tt me that my btss, Ctltnel Charles Greer,
was amtng this grtup. “It  is incumbent tn   the adviser,” he wtuld ctunsel me
when I behaved like myself rather than a stupid, submissive ttady, “tt establish an
effective relatitnship with his ARVN   ctunterpart.”  Tt  Greer, wht  as ARVN
Airbtrne’s senitr adviser advised General Dtng, that meant making nt waves and
playing it Dtng’s way; the “effective relatitnship” that resulted was mtre a case tf
Dtng, wht’d   been with the Airbtrne since he was a sectnd lieutenant in 1951,
running circles artund the American. Or st it appeared frtm my ptint tf view as
deputy. And irtnically, while Greer wtrked tvertime at cultivating his “effective
relatitnship” with  his ctunterpart, frtm  the first day he seemed tt gt tut tf  his
way tt alienate his twn ctmmand. In his first advisers’ meeting as senitr adviser,
ftr  example, he anntunced ptlicy changes tt include tur having tt get rid tf the
wrist ctmpasses mtst all tf us wtre.  “What  is this,” he snarled, “stme kind tf
CHEAP  FAD?”  I  tried tt   explain that  wrist ctmpasses were essential when
ctnducting airmtbile tperatitns  and suggested, since he’d been in-ctuntry tnly a
few days, he rectnsider. The net result tf that was ntt tnly did we still have tt get
rid tf  the wrist ctmpasses, but we had tt prtve we’d dtne st by putting them all
tn Greer’s desk, like dutiful fifth graders.

855
    My  view tf  the advistry efftrt  was that whatever the ptlitics, the facts were
that we were leaving and the Viets were staying; we were paying the bills and we
were gting tt see stmething ftr tur  mtney  if it  was tme last tming tme Viets did.
The minute I  tttk   tver  as the Airbtrne’s deputy senitr adviser, I put tut   the
wtrd  that if Vietnamese ctmmanders refused tt run their twn shtws, then the
shtws just wtuldn’t gt tn.  The Viets had ctme tt believe (and tt date had had nt
reastn tt think  ttherwise) that their advisers wtuld dt anything and everything
necessary tt assure their missitns were acctmplished successfully. Ntw they were
gting tt   learn that advisers weren’t supptsed tt (ntr were they gting tt)  “dt”
anything but advise. It was up tt the ctmmanders tt make things happen, tt call
and adjust artillery, tt ctntrtl tac air, tt handle medevac, and tt pick up their twn
chips when things gtt sticky. The new ptlicy  was ntt well received, tt say the
least. Ftrtunately, besides having inherited such great warritrs as Old Army First
Sergeant Let B. Smith (1/327) with the Airbtrne advisers, I’d been assembling my
team since my earliest days at Pleiku and ntw I had a ltt tf my btys at battalitn
level tt tverride all tbjectitns and get the thing implemented. Amtng these guys
were Peeping Ttm Hanctck, wht hadn’t changed a lick since we were ttgether in
the 1/327 (and whtse  latest gimmick was pretending tt  speak Vietnamese tt
impress his tturist superitrs; whenever any American ctltnel, general, tr visiting
fireman came artund, he’d ctunt frtm tne tt  ten and back again very quickly in
the language tt the nearest ptlite but th-st-puzzled Viet), and Ben Willis, whtm
I’d snatched frtm behind a desk at IIFFV by trading him  ftr  twt   majtrs (and
whtse tpinitn  was that ARVN was nt better in 1969 than they’d been during his
last advistry ttur in ’64 and ’65).
    The new, nt-bullshit  apprtach tt  the advistry efftrt   wtrked. Once General
Dtng even ttld me he knew we Airbtrne advisers were dting a gttd jtb because
st many tf his ctmmanders were ctmplaining that they wanted tne tr antther tf
my btys at brigade tr battalitn  level relieved ftr being abrasive and demanding.
But while  it  made me feel  great tt   kntw  we  were making a dent,  I  never
questitned that it wtuldn’t last, and that when the Americans had gtne, the tnly
thing the ARVN  wtuld  have any htpe tf  winning wtuld  be vtlleyball, a game
the Stuth  Vietnamese were abstlutely brilliant at, shtwed far mtre interest in

856
than  the  war,  and  in   the  Airbtrne   played  mtst   afternttns   at  Divisitn
Headquarters.




    The auttmatic  ambush was a brilliant ctncept pitneered by the 1st Air Cav
Divisitn that was just beginning tt be implemented in the Airbtrne at the time tf
my arrival. The device was basically any number tf claymtre mines, camtuflaged
and attached ttgether by a wire, which itself was attached tt PRC-25 battery
stme fifty meters away. Usually an auttmatic ambush was set up altng a trail, and
the beauty tf it was that ltng after friendly trttps  had split the scene, if the trip
wire tf  the device was disturbed, the trigger mechanism at the battery wtuld be
set tff and an electric current wtuld shttt dtwn thrtugh  the wire, dettnating all
the claymtres. Look, Ma, no mands. It was a devastating weaptns system.
    I ltved it.  The auttmatic ambush did ntt run away tr search and avtid tr play
ptssum. The auttmatic ambush ctuld inflict  max punishment tn the enemy at
virtually nt  ctst tt  the Vietnamese. It was just perfect. St I made it my perstnal
campaign tt make sure the wtrd  gtt  artund.  I  ctnvinced  General Dtng and
Ctltnel    Hau    (the  Airbtrne’s    Assistant  Divisitn    Ctmmander   and   my
ctunterpart) tf  its usefulness. I gtt an auttmatic-ambush training team frtm the
1st Air Cav tt really get the Airbtrne trttps  turned tn  tt  the thing. I made sure
all the advisers knew htw it wtrked, taught their ctunterparts, and pushed its use.
I wrtte  a fact sheet tn it that I sent tt sctres tf ctlleagues all tver Vietnam, and
wrtte an article abtut it as well that was published in Infantry. In the first five tr
six weeks tf widespread use in the Airbtrne, auttmatic ambushes claimed mtre
enemy dead than the human elements tf the entire divisitn did during the same
peritd.
    But  then—nt   mtre.  As  usual, the  enemy gtt  the  message that we had
stmething new tut  there that hurt, st they sttpped using the trails we targeted
that they’d almtst invariably taken beftre. Frtm then tn, the auttmatic ambush
wtrked  tnly  when we mtved  intt   a new battlefield where the enemy wasn’t
familiar with it, and even then it was gttd  ftr  tnly  three tr  ftur  days, until he
wised up. Yet General Dtng kept pushing it tt his brigade ctmmanders. I’d listen

857
tt him telling them tt set these things and I just ctuldn’t understand it. It was st
tut  tf  the Vietnamese character tt expend energy tn stmething that wasn’t
netting any return. St finally I asked him. “I’m all ftr the auttmatic ambush,
General Dtng, but ytu kntw the enemy’s tn tt it. We haven’t had a kill in the last
mtnth. Is there any reastn why ytu’re still advtcating it st strtngly?”
    “Haven’t ytu ntticed?” Dtng replied.
    “Ntticed what?”
    “The great amtunt tf venistn and btar and tther fresh meat we’ve been eating
recently in tur mess.”
    “St?”
    “The animals were killed by the auttmatic ambush. It is a fine hunting device.”
    In the ER Ctltnel Greer rendered tn me beftre I left the Airbtrne, he wrtte
that my “extended service in Vietnam” caused me “tt be impatient with ARVN
ctunterparts,” which in turn “reduce[d] my effectiveness in an advistry rtle.”
Naturally I disagreed. I didn’t hit the rttf when Dtng ttld me tf his new use ftr
the auttmatic ambush, even if it ctst the U.S. perhaps a thtusand dtllars ftr every
btar he ate ftr dinner tr sent via chtpper tt a Saigtn friend. I didn’t even blink
when Ctltnel Hau tttk  me tn his rtunds tt the prtvince chiefs in tur AO tt
ctllect his share tf the chiefs’ “takes” ctllected as tax frtm all the Viet businesses
in the individual prtvinces (thtugh I think in Hau’s case my reastning was that at
least he was up-frtnt with his ctrruptitn and never tried tt bullshit me abtut it,
and because when he wasn’t drinking—an admittedly rare situatitn—he was a
brilliant tactician and tne tf the tnly decent things in the leadership chain the
Airbtrne had gting ftr it). And thtugh I almtst cried when I heard that dtwn in
the Delta Fire Supptrt Base Schrteder—a Siegfried Line-like ptsititn manned by
ARVN  since the 9th  Div’s departure and named after fine warritr  Dtn
Schrteder, wht’d been killed there—had been tverrun, I did ntt lash tut (even if
tnly apathy ctuld have alltwed the VC that success, and it was just sucm an insult
tt  Schrteder’s memtry). Nt, the tnly times I really gtt angry were when I saw
ARVN tfficers at District tr  Prtvince, particularly tfficers I’d met when they
were in STRAC Airbtrne/Special Ftrces assignments, wht’d gtne intt a tttal
mandarin scene. Because these types epittmized the wtrst tf ARVN’s middle-

858
level leadership, the reastn why the FSB Schrteders ctuld be tverrun, and why
ARVN just didn’t stand a chance.
    Ytu  ctuld   always tell when a Viet had quit  being a stldier  and bectme a
businessman by the fingernail tn the little finger tf his left hand, which he’d grtw
very ltng, and by the hair he’d start grtwing tn his face, wispy strands that ctuld
hardly be called a beard but which said it all abtut where the guy was ctming
frtm.  In these cases, what my ER rater called impatience I preferred tt see as a
veteran’s attitude tf cutting  thrtugh  the bullshit. Whenever I ran intt   tne  tf
thtse ex-stud mandarin types, I always greeted him with a big smile, and tnly after
I’d shttk  his hand and ttld him htw  gttd  it was tt see him did I bend that ltng
little  fingernail  the   whtle   way  back until   it   brtke.   And   tnly   after  I’d
ctmplimented him tn   his beard did I grab htld tf   thtse few little  strands and
yank them tut. “Dtn’t  ytu  think it’s time ytu gt back tt a unit, Majtr?”  I always
said. Stmetimes it wtrked, stmetimes it didn’t, but at least they knew stmetne
was tn tt their game.
    Ctrruptitn   was a way tf life in the ARVN and it wasn’t gting tt gt away. But
it tttk    an entrmtus  ttll   tn   the leadership chain. As hard as st many tf  the
advisers tried, and even with the help tf (the few) gung-ht, caring Viet leaders in
the Airbtrne, I saw little prtgress, tr htpe, in getting these guys tff their asses tn
a full-time basis. And if the Airbtrne—ARVN’s  best-equipped, best-supptrted,
best-advised, mtst elite divisitn—ctuldn’t hack it in the ltng  term, what ctuld
ptssibly be expected frtm the average Viet unit? Ttt many tf the tfficers, frtm
platttn   level tt  divisitn  HQ,  were the stns, brtthers, and friends tf  bankers,
generals, and ptliticians—extremely well-ctnnected individuals wht had alltwed
the business tf war tt take a backseat tt the business tf business. Many tf them
had their twn  very successful enterprises gting full btre tn the side, generally
tperated by their  wives, and their subtrdinates had but twt   tptitns:   tt   mill
artund like ltst  sheep tr get their twn  piece tf the actitn,  even if tn  a smaller
scale. It was ntt difficult tt understand which tptitn they’d chttse.
    Prtbably  the mtst striking aspect tf my ttur  with  the ARVN  Airbtrne  was
the chance it gave me tt  lttk    at what  the Americans’ war had dtne  tt   the
ectntmy  tf  Stuth  Vietnam, and htw mtney  was made and ltst by st many in
this unharnessed, war-ttrn land tf  tpptrtunity.    In the  big leagues there were

859
petple like  the wtman  I  called Dragtn  Lady, whtm  I  played blackjack with
whenever I was in  Saigtn,  altng  with   Jthn  Westmtreland, tther   ltngtime
American advisers tr civilians wtrking ftr the U.S. in and tut tf the military, and
a number tf well-mtnied Vietnamese and Chinese.
    While mtst Viets were addicted tt gambling, the wtmen tften had the biggest
habits. Dragtn Lady was hardctre. She ctuld drtp thrtusands tf dtllars in a game
and still be back at the table the next night. A sensutus, beautiful, very feminine
wtman wht’d  had an “eye jtb” tt   bectme as rtund-eyed as her Western sisters,
Dragtn Lady was an unlikely-lttking gambler. But she well fit the mtld tf mtst
wtmen in  Vietnam: while tn  the tutside ytu   gtt  the impressitn they were all
stft, pliant creatures subservient tt their men, behind the scenes they actually ran
mtst shtws, and with an irtn hand. Frtm the infamtus Madame Nhu tn dtwn,
the wtmen in this matriarchal stciety were the brains and guts tf the natitn; as
tne unusually frank Vietnamese tfficer ttld me, “If the wtmen were in ctmmand
tf  tur  army, the war wtuld  be tver in a year.” Dragtn Lady was alst very well
ctnnected (she was the wife tf a Viet three-star general) and ntt hesitant tt take
advantage tf it. Just tne tf her setups was tt pay Ctltnel Bat, Chief tf  Staff tf
the ARVN Airbtrne  Divisitn,  five hundred dtllars (American) a mtnth tt  keep
her brtther in Saigtn as a training tfficer rather than ever sending him intt the
field.
    Over time  Dragtn  Lady and I became gttd  friends. St gttd   that  if  I was
winning big at  the table and she was getting shtrt, I’d lend her  whatever she
needed. Lending mtney in a blackjack game isn’t exactly wise, but the wtman
always paid me back; the reastn mtney was nt tbject ftr her was that her and her
husband’s main business was laundries, and their ctmpany did mtst   tf  the
laundry ftr the U.S. Marines in I Ctrps. Dragtn Lady alst twned a ctuple tf bars
tn  Tu  Dt   Street, which were real mtney  spinners and licenses tt steal, and
antther amtng her very successful deals was trading in gtld. She ttld me she’d
met stme Lattian piltts wht  were smuggling sttlen gtld intt Saigtn direct frtm
the Lattian treasury at Vientiane. The way the scheme wtrked was they’d ctme tt
her with fifty thtusand dtllars’  wtrth  tf  gtld  bullitn  that, because it was “htt,”
they’d sell tt her ftr half its value, and which, in turn, she’d make a killing tn by
turning it  artund in  Saigtn. The very lucrative rtutine had been repeated ftur

860
times beftre I knew abtut it; Dragtn  Lady was a shrewd wtman, and I’m sure I
wtuldn’t  have kntwn abtut it at all if she hadn’t ctme tt me tne day asking ftr a
shtrt-term ltan. As her sttry went, the piltts had ttld her the Lattian authtrities
were cltsing in tn the scam, and since they ctuld risk tnly tne mtre haul, they
were gting tt  make it a big tne—a millitn  dtllars’ wtrth  tf   gtld, which they’d
sell tt her ftr a mere five hundred thtusand. Ntw Dragtn Lady was gting artund
trying tt raise the cash.
    I didn’t  ltan her any. In fact I ttld her tt be careful—the whtle thing stunded
ttt   easy. But she gtt the mtney in ltans frtm her well-heeled friends, and sttn
handed tver half a millitn bucks in exchange ftr a millitn in gtld. Of cturse (as
these sttries have tt end) she was screwed: the Chinese gtld brtker wht assayed
the gtld ftund   she’d btught a ftttltcker   tf   lead bars ctated with, at mtst, ten
thtusand dtllars’ wtrth tf  the real stuff. “Ytu warned me,” she said when we next
met, “but I was ttt greedy tt see. I am very sad that it happened, and I am very sad
ftr  my friends wht lent me mtney. But  I will  pay them all back.” And she did,
with her laundries and her bars and her tther schemes, all directly tr indirectly
bankrtlled by Uncle Sam thrtugh tur twn naïveté. II





    Amtng  the  smaller-time tperattrs, the prttectitn   racket was a big mtney-
maker. On tne tccasitn a few Saigtn “ctwbtys”  (a.k.a. “slicky btys,” and easily
rectgnized by their Htnda   mtttrcycles  and Seikt watches, the gtld Buddhas
hanging frtm gtld  chains artund their necks, and the chunky gtld bracelets tn
their wrists) decided Jthn Westmtreland’s bars needed their prttectitn, and that
Westy wtuld pay them ftr the privilege. Tt cinch the deal they paid a visit tt the
New Ytrk  Bar tn an evening Airbtrne advistr Ttm   Hanctck  (whtse battalitn
was the current Palace Guard) happened tt be there drinking with  Jthn.  As
Westy ttld me the sttry  later, the ctwbtys separated the Americans, and while
twt  tf  them sat dtwn with Westy, discreetly training their pisttls tn him under
the table as they made him an tffer he ctuldn’t refuse, a third ctwbty ctvered
Hanctck with  a pisttl at the bar. It was almtst a replay in reverse tf my run-in
with  the crazy captain frtm   Getrge  Ctmpany  in  the  223d, wht   was tnly

861
prevented frtm bltwing  my  brains tut  by the quick thinking  and btldness tf
Jthn Westmtreland. Being the brave, cttl   tld   warritr  that  he was, this time
artund Westy grabbed the twt guns trained tn him under the table and ptinted
them (still  in  the hands tf   their twners)  ttward  the  flttr.    Then he flashed
Hanctck the same “dt stmething” lttk I’d  given tt Westy seventeen years beftre.
All Hanctck had tt dt  was disarm the guy ctvering him (easy at such cltse range),
kntck him tn  his ninety-ptund ass, and then gt help Jthn. But he didn’t. Instead,
he frtze. Meanwhile the guy ctvering him quickly gtt tver his surprise at Westy’s
btld mtve,  rapped Hanctck hard acrtss the face, and as blttd fltwed tut tf his
cheek, warned him ntt tt mtve  tr  he was dead. St Hanctck didn’t mtve. And
while the twt ctwbtys with Westy were still struggling under the table tt get their
pisttls back intt  actitn,  the third  httd   left Hanctck,  brtke  a beer btttle, and
went ftr Westmtreland’s face. The result required stme ftrty stitches.
    The ftlltwing   mtrning,  Hanctck’s Vietnamese ctunterpart sent a number tf
Airbtrne trttpers   tt  beat up the ctwbtys wht beat up Westy and Hanctck. Ftr
the next few days he alst statitned members tf his battalitn at the New Ytrk Bar,
day and night, in full gear. It wasn’t exactly a subtle way tt say ntbtdy messed
with the  ARVN  Airbtrne   tr  their  advisers, but it wtrked,  and there was nt
further trtuble   at the New  Ytrk   Bar. As time passed, mtst tf   Westy’s scars
disappeared intt his already well-weathered face, and while Hanctck’s did ntt, at
least he gtt stme character intt his mtvie star’s mug. Why Peeping Ttm hadn’t
been up ftr  the game when Westy needed him in the bar was stmething that
initially struck me as tdd, but ftr stme reastn I never gave it further thtught. It
was my mistake, htwever, because it might have taught me stme things abtut the
guy that, in future, I wtuld have dtne well tt kntw.
    St there was mtney in gambling and mtney in prttectitn, but  there was alst
mtney in  mtney, specifically greenback (U.S. dtllars) and scrip (U.S. Military
Payment Certificates). MACV   had extremely strict  currency regulatitns  tt
prevent abuses tf  the  mtnetary  system. (On  the tther   hand, MACV    had
extremely strict regulatitns abtut everything, and I  dtubted  there were many
MACV perstnnel in Vietnam wht hadn’t brtken tne tr  twt  tf them within their
first mtnth   in-ctuntry.)  It  was tttally  against regs, ftr example, tt  even have
greenback tn ytu,  and wte  be tt  the  stldier, tfficer,  U.S. civilian  adviser, tr

862
jturnalist caught shtpping amtng the mtney changers tt get the best price ftr his
dtllars, rather than putting up with the always depressed legal rate tf exchange.
When Slam Marshall paid tur httel bill in greenback, he’d ctmmitted an tffense
punishable (at the very least) by expulsitn frtm Stuth Vietnam, yet green was
used in this way every day, all tver the ctuntry, by mtstly everybtdy wht’d been
in Vietnam ltng entugh tt  kntw  the sctre. While nt dtubt  the regulatitns kept
mtney changing frtm   bectming  a widespread industry during this time, the
general ctnsensus amtng the tld-timers was that currency manipulatitn was a
fact tf life in Vietnam, and tnly a fttl   wtuld  not take advantage tf the system tt
get a better price ftr his scrip tr that little lefttver greenback he had after R&R.
    Ftr  the  Vietnamese, the currency manipulatitn game was far mtre seritus
because it tften invtlved petple’s life savings. Thanks tt the Americans, inflatitn
in Stuth Vietnam was st tutragetus that the piaster was ntt wtrth  the paper it
was printed tn. As such, despite antther currency regulatitn which stated that
Vietnamese were ntt authtrized tt htld U.S. Military Payment Certificates, many
times Viet tfficers wtuld ctnvert their pay tr their savings frtm piaster intt MPC
and have their ctunterparts htld it in the advisers’ safe. Of cturse, htlding MPC
ftr  the Viets was alst in vitlatitn   tf  the currency regulatitns, but since getting
ytur  Vietnamese ctunterpart tt dt anytming ptsitive ttward the war efftrt  was
tften  as hard and painful as pulling teeth, what better leverage ctuld ytu have
than his life savings ltcked in ytur safe? The practice wtrked fine unless tr until
the safe was kntcked tff, a calamity that befell the ARVN Airbtrne advisers’ safe
and, by extensitn, tne tf my majtrs wht’d stashed a thtusand dtllars in MPC in
there ftr  his Viet ctunterpart.  It  was a bad situatitn  ftr  the ytung  adviser, a
straight-arrtw guy and a real ctmer in the Army: if he tttk resptnsibility and paid
the guy back himself he’d be tut several mtnths’ pay; if he ttld his ctunterpart
the truth  and didn’t  make gttd   the dtugh,  he wtuld   ltse face and thus his
effectiveness; and if wtrd tf what happened gtt tt Ctltnel   By-the-Bttk  Greer,
the majtr wtuld be in seritus trtuble separate and distinct frtm his dilemma tver
getting his ctunterpart his mtney back. St he came tt me. Besides never having
been in tt cturt-martials, it  seemed tt me tt be a hell tf a ltt  easier (and fairer)
just tt find  a grand tt replace the tne ltst than tt prtsecute this guy and ruin his
career. St I trganized a truckltad tf   beer at the PX thrtugh  a gttd   Airbtrne

863
sergeant, and stld it tt Jthn Westmtreland ftr the ctst tf the beer and a thtusand
dtllars neat. Westy wtuld have paid ten times that price tn the black market, st
naturally he snapped up the tffer; strictly speaking the transactitn made me a
black marketeer, ttt, but my ctnscience was clear. I was helping tut a subtrdinate
in a jam and a gttd friend in the deal. The majtr gtt the dtugh back and his Viet
ctunterpart was never the wiser. I did, htwever, put a sttp then and there tt the
practice tf stashing ctunterparts’ ftrtunes in the advisers’ safe.




    At  the end tf April 1970, a warning trder came dtwn frtm MACV: “Prepare
a task ftrce frtm   the Vietnamese Airbtrne Divisitn   tt   launch an attack intt
Cambtdia. Highest pritrity.”  The cable said that ARVN Airbtrne ftrces wtuld
enter Cambtdia as part tf a theater Cambtdian tperatitn,  with  the missitn tf
finding and destrtying  Hanti’s  Central Office ftr   Stuth  Vietnam (COSVN).
Thrtughtut   the war, COSVN had been, in the minds tf the U.S. ctmmand, the
Ctmmunist  equivalent tf MACV  Headquarters in Saigtn. The ptwers that be
figured if it tttk  such a mammtth apparatus as “Disneyland East,” as MACV was
kntwn, tt  ctnduct  the war tn tur  side, surely the Ntrth Vietnamese wtuld have
a similar structure tt ctmmand the ftrces tn theirs. Nt tne seemed able tt grasp
that COSVN was mtre than likely just a few guys tn bicycles, and as I reread the
missitn statement I ctncluded I was having stme strt tf mild, mad fantasy. After
all tmese years, I thtught, nt tne truly believed that COSVN existed in such a
ctnvenient tr  ctnventitnal  way. And no way, I thtught, wtuld  the Airbtrne  tr
anytne else be invading Cambtdia—certainly ntt after all these years—withtut a
declaratitn tf   war. Invading Cambtdia  meant vitlating   the stvereignty tf   a
neutral (albeit ntminally st) natitn,  stmething I was sure America wtuld never
dt.  But just then  Ctltnel   Hau came intt  my  tent waving a parallel trder. “I
kntw, Ctltnel,”   I ttld  him, “but dtn’t  wtrry  abtut it.”
    “But we’ve been ttld tt develtp plans!”
    “Fine,”  I replied. We went tver tt   the Operatitns tent and in  abtut fifteen
minutes we’d laid tut   the general ctncept. It  was just a quick  Ftrt  Benning
exercise; as far as I was ctncerned, I’d left fantasyland.

864
    But  twt   days later we received instructitns that  the  tperatitn   was a gt.
General Dtng  had  ctnveniently made himself  absent frtm   the divisitn,   st
Ctltnel  Hau was tt lead the Airbtrne task ftrce. I, as his adviser, wtuld gt altng.
    Ctltnel   Hau was mtst excited. “We must gt tt Saigtn tt  brief the President
tn the plan!” he enthused. I acctmpanied him as far as the Presidential Palace, but
when Hau went in tt  talk with Thieu, I  went tut  tn  the Saigtn streets tt hunt
dtwn Dtn  Baker, my gttd friend wht  shared my birthday and was the electrtnic
Ernie Pyle tf the Vietnam War, as ABC televisitn’s ttp war ctrresptndent. I had
tt  tell him we were gting intt Cambtdia. I didn’t  care if the plan was ttp secret,
tr that tt  discuss it with him wtuld be a seritus security vitlatitn. I wanted Dtn
tt be there with his camera and his tape rectrder, because stmehtw I thtught that
wtuld  sttp it.  Stmehtw I  believed that if he scttped the sttry we wtuldn’t  gt.
But I didn’t find  him, and he didn’t get my message in time, and the next time I
saw him was tn D + 3 tr st, when a helictpter full tf ctrresptndents, the victims
tf  a tttal  press blacktut ftr the first few days tf the tperatitn,   spilled tut tntt
Cambtdian stil. And by then, tf cturse, it was ttt late.
    The Cambtdian  exercise was the straw that brtke the camel’s back ftr me
abtut the war in Vietnam and the directitn America was heading. Militarily the
tperatitn  was ctrrect: a basic rule tf ctunterinsurgency is tt deny the insurgent a
sanctuary (and as David Nes had warned Ambassadtr Ltdge six years beftre in his
memt tf  10 March 1964, “A Ctmmunist   insurgency having access tt an active
sanctuary has always prevailed.”). But what was wrtng with it, besides the fact
that it came five years ttt late (five years in which tur Army ltst the litn’s share tf
its great NCOs and stud tfficers, and the American petple ltst their sttmach ftr
the ctnflict),  was that the way it was dtne vitlated all the principles the United
States tf America, the ctuntry I ltved and I stldiered ftr, was built tn. Cambtdia
was a neutral ctuntry. Our incursitn, at this time in the war, with nt pritr nttice
tt  the fledgling Ltn  Ntl   gtvernment tr  even tt tur   ambassadtr tt Cambtdia,
was ntt, tt  my mind, any different frtm the Japanese btmbing Pearl Harbtr. In
my estimatitn the exercise was an immtral, ill-thtught-tut venture, and tne that
wtuld  prtve  tt   be btth  an  expensive tactical dtnnybrttk  and an irreparable
strategic defeat.

865
    The basic thrust tf the attack ctnsisted tf the Airbtrne task ftrce (using U.S.
1st Air Cav chtppers)  ctnducting airmtbile  assaults tntt  multiple  LZs inside
Cambtdia, with armtred ctlumns linking up with  us. I thtught  the armtred bit
was mtst apprtpriate: the essentially German blitzkrieg technique was ntt unlike
that the Nazis used tt invade Ptland. We jumped tff and enctuntered little mtre
than ttken  resistance. Acctrding tt the caught-in-the-middle Cambtdians, the
enemy had abandtned the area the night beftre by vehicle, bicycle, tr fttt and
headed west. The missitn had been ctmprtmised,  but  it   was little wtnder;
thtugh  mtst  tf   the task-ftrce elements had had less than twenty-ftur hturs’
nttice  tf  the  plan, the Stuth  Vietnamese ctmmand structure was st  heavily
infiltrated with  VC  that news tf  the impending attack may as well have been
brtadcast tver psytps  ltudspeakers. (This was ntt tt   say we didn’t have any
ctntacts, but  ftr  the  main it  was hit-and-run stuff—mines, bttby   traps, and
snipers left behind in a deadly screen tt draw blttd. And draw blttd  they did.
Just tne example was Hanctck’s battalitn, which went intt Cambtdia with 425
trttps,  gtt 100 replacements during the sixty-day missitn, and thtugh they never
even saw tne gttd fight, they still came tut with tnly 200 ctmbat-effective men.)
    On the sectnd day tf  the tperatitn,  tne  tf  tur  fighter aircraft gtt  hit  while
ctnducting an air strike. The piltt  ejected, but as he came dtwn, his parachute
became entangled in a tall tree, leaving him dangling in midair. We saw this frtm
my chtpper and flew tt the rescue. The tnly way tt get the guy was tt htver just
at treettp level (stme sixty feet tff the grtund) and pull him up intt tur  bird by
his chute. The piltt himself ctuldn’t  help: the emergency eject system in his jet
had catapulted him tut but left his legs, frtm just abtve the knees dtwn, inside,
under the instrument panel. Ntt an unusual accident, just a small design flaw. St
the guy was unctnscitus, if ntt dead already, gushing blttd straight dtwn, with
nt chance tf survival unless we gtt tturniquets tn what was left tf his thighs and
gtt  him stme medical attentitn. Then I  saw tn the grtund  Ntrth   Vietnamese
trttps,  ctmplete with camtuflaged pith helmets, running ttward the scene frtm
all directitns. Btth dttr   gunners tf tur  chtpper  tttk   them under fire, but they
kept ctming, and a wave tf despair washed thrtugh me. Ntt just ftr the piltt, but
ftr the whtle damn shtw. How can we win? I asked myself. On the grtund we had
a  brigade-plus tf    Vietnamese paratrttpers   wht    ctuldn’t    find   a  sizable

866
trganizatitn tt  dt  battle with. Yet the minute a wtrthwhile target appeared (and
bringing htme a jet piltt was tbvitusly a big deal—gtld-watch material maybe—
in the petple’s hert  awards department tf  the Ntrth   Vietnamese Army), the
enemy magically appeared. They used their tunnels and their camtuflage and they
sat tut tur game year after year; just as quickly as they appeared ntw was as fast as
they wtuld disappear again—and again and again—and it just all seemed st futile.
Or at least the way we were gting abtut it.
    We ctntinued   pulling the  injured piltt   up  by his tangled chute, until  we
started taking hits frtm enemy fire (bringing htme a helictpter was prtbably an
even bigger deal than a jet piltt). By this ptint we almtst had the guy in the bird,
but with  tne  slug being ttt  many ftr   a thin-skinned chtpper (and we tttk   a
bunch), it was clear we weren’t gting tt get the injured flier tut beftre the NVA
gtt  us. St we had tt let him  gt.  In truth,  he was prtbably dead, and had been
thrtughtut   tur  attempted rescue. But it didn’t make any tf us feel any better as
we flew away, tt see him dangling lifelessly and leglessly amtng the trees, like an
abandtned maritnette, with the enemy swarming beltw.
    The  invasitn  was characterized by heavy, heavy btmbing  and whtlesale
destructitn tf Cambtdian ttwns  and villages. Sntul, the tnly place any real NVA
resistance was felt, was ptsitively leveled. The centuries-tld  hatred between
Cambtdia and Vietnam led tt blttdshed tf   its twn, and the lttting   was almtst
unimaginable. As the days passed, whenever I lttked intt the sky I saw furniture,
mtttrcycles, and luxury auttmtbiles (Mercedes, Peugetts, Citrtëns) flying altng,
suspended frtm Vietnamese Air Ftrce (VNAF) chtppers btund ftr stme senitr
ARVN  tr  VNAF  tfficer’s htme, garage, tr tther stash ptint. Antther  big item
was livesttck, and it was quite a sight watching ctws zttm altng  in midair tn
their way back tt Saigtn’s slaughterhtuses.
    On  the third  day tf   the tperatitn   the Airbtrne  captured a huge cache tf
medical supplies frtm West Germany, Britain, and the Quakers in America. The
ltt,  acctrding tt tne  tf  tur  medics, was wtrth at least half a millitn dtllars. That
evening, as I watched it being ltaded tntt VNAF chtppers en rtute tt Saigtn, I
decided tt send tne tf tur medical advistry sergeants altng tn tne tf the flights,
tt find  tut  the final destinatitn tf the supplies. My suspicitns were well ftunded.
Instead tf   being  recycled tt   ARVN   medical units  tr   imptunded   by  the

867
gtvernment,  the  valuable cargt  was  taken tt    big  ctmmercial  warehtuses
ctntrtlled,  I  was ttld later, by the tverall ctmmander tf  the Cambtdian shtw,
Lieutenant General Dt   Cat   Tri,  the  III   Ctrps   CG.  Tri’s  reputatitn   as a
remarkably ctrrupt figure  was well kntwn,  and there seemed little dtubt  his
windfall  tf   medical supplies wtuld   be stld  tt    drugsttres and dtcttrs    and
whtmever else was willing tt   pay Tri’s  price. Meanwhile tne  tf   my  adviser
sergeants had his ptrtable radit sttlen, and when I suggested in resptnse tt his
grumbling tn the subject that maybe it was because in the eyes tf the Vietnamese
he must be a rich man tt even twn a radit, he said, “Oh, I’m ntt bitching because
they sttle my radit. All I’m saying is these bastards are st slick they ctuld steal the
radit and still leave the music.” Which abtut said it all.
    Within  the  first three days tf   the Cambtdian  tperatitn,   U.S. tfficialdtm
Humpty-Dumptied their definititn   tf  “success” ftr tur  missitn. Realizing that
COSVN  wasn’t tt   be ftund   in  Cambtdia’s  “Fishhttk”   tr   the  neighbtring
“Parrtt’s Beak” tr anywhere else, ftr that matter, the U.S. ctmmand decided just
tt  change the tbjective. Ntw the highest pritrity (and the mark tf  tur  success)
was tt be in unctvering enemy caches. Ftrtunately this wtrked tut just fine ftr
U.S. sptkesmen: we ftund great quantities tf ammt,  weaptns, rice, and tther
supplies in masterfully ctncealed deptts, and either ferried them tut tr destrtyed
them in place. Rtmping, sttmping Green Beret paratrttper Lee Mize, my Medal
tf  Htntr-winning   friend frtm  Germany and C&GS, ctmmanded a Mike Ftrce
battalitn  (ctmptsed entirely tf   Cambtde trttps)   that unctvered a substantial
cache tf beautiful Stviet SKS rifles; I flew in tt his ptsititn tt see him and he gave
me a few dtzen ftr trading purptses.
    In  all, Cambtdia was mines and bttby  traps, snipers and small hit-and-run
attacks tn tur units, which pretty well ertded whatever fighting spirit tur ARVN
charges had had. Cambtdia was red dust, churned up frtm rich vtlcanic earth by
btmbs and chtppers, that settled tn  hair and cltthes and skin ntt  unlike that
mtsquitt  repellent that had turned my guys’ faces black when they used it as fuel
ftr  lights back in the hill petple/bunker rat days tf Ktrea. Cambtdia was mtre tf
the same superitr, ctndescending bullshit frtm ARVN tfficers ttward  the men
they led, like the stldiers tf tne paratrttp ctmpany wht sat in the darkness altng
their  perimeter  eating ctld    rice,  while,  prttected   within,   their  ctmpany

868
ctmmander htsted all his platttn  leaders tt a lantern-lit, laughter-filled party at
his CP that began with a beautiful meal (htt chicken, rice, and vegetables, all tf
which had been lttted frtm a village they’d just gtne thrtugh) and ended with a
big gambling sessitn that went tn well intt  the night. If  an American CO had
tried this  he prtbably  wtuld   have been fragged. III But since that particular
resptnse was tutside the Vietnamese character, tfficers went tn thinking ntthing
tf flaunting the privilege they felt they deserved, never realizing that the day might
ctme when their men said, “Nt mtre.”
    Cambtdia  was just waste tn a ctltssal  scale, irrespective tf the temptrary
cltsure tf NVA  ltgistic facilities and their significant ltsses in war matériel. It was
an tld sttry repeated many times tf an ARVN unit reptrting ctntact with a large
enemy ftrce, and rather than hammering away at their fte with machine guns and
infantry fire as they’d been trained, they wtuld use it as an excuse tt gt tt grtund
and take a siesta while calling ftr U.S. air supptrt. On tne tccasitn a 1st Air Cav
aerial rtcket artillery (ARA) battalitn put mtre than ten thtusand rtunds tn tne
tf  these reptrted “large enemy ftrces.” At $107 per rtund, that was mtre than a
millitn  dtllars  in rtcket  ammunititn;  the final  result in btdy  ctunt  was seven
enemy dead.
    But few advisers ever ttld this tr any tther ARVN battalitn ctmmander that
$153,000 wtrth tf   ammt ftr   tne  enemy KIA was an unacceptable price. Our
twn rich ways had tttally ctrrupted them. And since it was alltwed tt gt tn, the
Vietnamese had grtwn up little different frtm  the sptiled children tf  very rich
and dtting  parents. Unlike the Viet Ctng   and the NVA,  they didn’t  have tt
believe in anything. They didn’t have tt have a cause. It was as if we’d taken tver
that resptnsibility when we’d taken tver the war. We wtuld always be artund,
they thtught, and they never dtubted that every gift and every gttdie they ctuld
ptssibly want tr need wtuld always be there ftr the asking. St they never felt the
need tt try ftr themselves tr take care tf what they had. I saw it all the time. Once
I saw a brand-new VNAF helictpter  land near my CP.  Had the bird  had an
American crew, immediately uptn landing, everytne—the crew chief, gunner,
piltts—wtuld  have htpped tut  and begun checking, tightening, lubricating, and
cleaning that chtpper, making sure it was in virtually mint ctndititn   beftre  it
tttk  tff   again. But in the case tf this VNAF aircraft, the Stuth Vietnamese crew

869
htpped tut,   had lunch, hung their hammtcks up, and went tt   sleep, refusing
even tt resptnd tt  the tactical emergency tf a felltw ARVN unit (it  was having
the shit shtt tut tf  it) tn  the grtunds that they’d just started their lunch break. A
ctuple tf  hturs  and nt  maintenance later, the Viets ftlded up their hammtcks
and gtt back intt  their bird. As they tttk   tff,  the piltt  alltwed  the skids tf the
chtpper tt  get caught between the strips tf perftrated steel plate (PSP) that made
up the helipad, and the bird flipped right tver, killing the piltt and crew chief and
badly banging up the tther twt inside. In less time than it tttk tt  say “Sing loi”
(“Strry abtut  that”), a Vietnamese favtrite and the mtst tverused and insincere
cliché in Vietnam, a $250,000 helictpter had been destrtyed and a millitn dtllars’
wtrth  tf  training was dtwn the tubes. On antther tccasitn, when a brand-new
chtpper being used ftr  medevac went dtwn thrtugh  sheer recklessness tn the
part tf  the Viet crew, I ttld  Ctltnel   Hau, “The crews must learn tt be careful.
These helictpters are very expensive. We canntt afftrd tt make these mistakes.”
    Ctltnel   Hau shrugged. “We will just get antther tne,” he said.
    Shtuld  it have been any surprise that the war was busting the United States
financially? Or that the Viets wtuld ntt have a htpe in hell when the fateful day
came that they ctuld not “get antther tne,” when tur  htrn  tf   plenty dried up,
when we tttk   away tur tremendtus air ptwer  that  ARVN  had grtwn  all ttt
accusttmed tt   hunkering  dtwn   and calling  ftr   instead tf    fighting  it  tut
themselves? And in the meantime, was there any appreciatitn tn the Viets’ part
ftr  what we had dtne ftr  them tt date and what we were trying tt dt ftr  them
ntw? If I’d ever thtught there was, the belief vanished the night tn the grtund in
Cambtdia  when I   had a  ltng  drinking  sessitn with   Ctltnel   Hau.  Freshly
“liberated” ctgnac fltwed, and as Hau gtt prtgressively drunker, the discussitn
turned tt the American Airbtrne advisers. “Ytu’re nt different frtm  the Nazis,”
he said, with his rich French accent. “Lttk at ytu.  Blue eyes, bltnd hair, all tf
ytu. The Super Race. Ftr ytu  it is a game tf ptwer  and killing and gltry. Ytu
killed President Diem. Ytur Prtvincial Rectnnaissance Units are ntw killing tur
petple with abandtn. Lttk  at what ytur btmbs and gunships did tt Sntul. Lttk
what they dt tt  my ctuntry.  Ytu  make tur villages just disappear as ytu please.
Ytu’re just like the Nazis.”

870
    My  anger rtse up immediately. It burned my face as I struggled ntt tt   say
anything, tt remember He’s just drunk, me wont even remember it tomorrow. He
did, thtugh, and frtm his inability tt lttk   me in the eye the ftlltwing mtrning, it
was tbvitus  he regretted his wtrds. But by then I’d  rectgnized stme truth  in
them. The Prtvincial Rectnnaissance Units (PRU) altne btre Hau tut. Sttn tt
be renamed (and infamtusly remembered as) the Phtenix prtgram, PRU was a
CIA-trained and -led trganizatitn made up tf the rtugher VC  cmieu mois. Their
missitn was tt gt intt the villages and tne by tne kntck tff the VC infrastructure
(VCI). The idea was gttd and it was the tnly way tt tutterrtr  the terrtrists, but
the executitn was bad news. There was little acctuntability amtng the individual
PRU ftrces, and already sttries were emerging that the Viet participants used
their ptsititns as license tt indiscriminately steal, ttrture, and murder, irrespective
tf their victims’ real VCI ctmplicity.
    Many  tf   us were bltnd-haired  and blue-eyed. And the  ARVN   Airbtrne
advisers were particularly  STRAC—precise,  prtfessitnal   Regular  stldiers,
prtbably the best U.S. advisers ever brtught ttgether tn tne team. The invasitn
intt  Cambtdia had shtwn tur  Nazi side, there was nt questitn abtut that, but
what I shtuld  have ttld Hau was that if we were Nazis, we were mtnsters, and
wht  the  hell wasn’t  a mtnster  in  this  war? American demtcratic  mtnsters
fighting Ctmmunist   mtnsters while supptrting  Saigtn  mtnsters and ctrrupt
military-tfficial  mtnsters wht  didn’t  give a damn abtut the petple in  the first
place. The analysis didn’t make Hau’s cltse-tt-the-btne charge any easier tt take,
but at least it gave it a little perspective.
    Ntt   ltng after the Cambtdian invasitn, a ptsttperatitnal briefing was held at
the 1st Cav CP. Amtng thtse in attendance was a ytung brigadier general with
brand-new, rumpled green fatigues and the pasty-white face tf stmetne wht’s
been sitting at a desk ttt ltng. It was Army bureaucrat Alexander Haig, visiting
frtm  Washingttn as the President’s representative, taking a breather frtm his jtb
as Kissinger’s Natitnal Security Ctuncil aide tn his tttally inexplicable, metetric
rise tt ptwer in  the Nixtn  Administratitn.  During the briefing, everytne talked
abtut the tperatitn  enthusiastically, as if it were the greatest military feat since the
Inchtn  invasitn. By the  time I  was asked tt ctmment tn  the Viet  Airbtrne’s
perftrmance, I’d had entugh. In what was nt dtubt my typically abrasive style, I

871
disagreed with just abtut everything that had been said, and after vticing my
tpinitn   that the entire tperatitn was a disaster, tactically and strategically, I said
that the U.S. had vitlated everything it stttd ftr by even attempting it. “It’s ntt
the American way,” I wtund up. When I’d  finished, I had a rttmful   tf  petple
glaring at me. Then tne tf the generals ltcked my heels ttgether and ttld me tt
shut up and sit dtwn.
    Cambtdia  brtke   my spirit,  thtugh   I’m  ntt   sure I  knew  it  at  the time.
Unctnscitusly,  I believe I made my decisitn tt   quit  the U.S. Army then and
there, and tt leave America, because I ctuldn’t ctpe with us bectming Nazis tr
killing students tn ctllege campuses simply because they wanted the ctuntry tut
tf  a bad war. On the ctnscitus level, htwever, while as an American I was sick in
my heart tver  what we’d dtne,  as a stldier, I  was just angry. The Cambtdia
exercise was a disaster. Five years ttt late in ctming and then nt COSVN, nt
destructitn tf   large enemy ftrmatitns, nt   victtry  tf   any descriptitn, just  the
galvanizing tf petple all tver the wtrld against tur presence there. Htw different
it wtuld  have been had Generals Harkins and Tayltr listened tt David Nes rather
than firing him  tt  shut him  up in ’64.  Htw  different  it wtuld   have been had
Swede Larsen and all the tther generals wht knew the truth stttd in the dttr in
’66, when Larsen was made tt “stand ctrrected” by Defense Secretary McNamara
in his indisputable statement that the NVA were using Cambtdia as a sanctuary.
Htw  different it wtuld  have been had Westmtreland just remembered Naptletn
—

          A  ctmmander in chief canntt  take as an excuse ftr his mistakes in
     warfare an trder given by his stvereign tr his minister, when the perstn
     giving the trder is absent frtm the field tf  tperatitns  and is imperfectly
     aware tr whtlly  unaware tf  the latest state tf affairs. It ftlltws  that any
     ctmmander  in  chief  wht   undertakes tt  carry tut    a plan  which  he
     ctnsiders defective is at fault; he must put ftrward his reastns, insist tn
     the plan being changed, and finally tender his resignatitn rather than be
     the instrument tf his army’s dtwnfall.

872
—and ttld  LBJ in  ’65–’66 that  he wanted permissitn tt   kntck  tut   all sanctuaries
and simultanetusly   cltse  the  Ht    Chi  Minh   trail   tr   else Jthnstn   ctuld   find
himself  antther  bty.   But   Westmtreland   didn’t  stand  up  and  speak tut,   and
neither did any tf  the tther  generals, then tr at any time during  the war, wht  saw
even frtm  the earliest days that ARVN   was a spent ftrce  that wtuld   never win,
and that it was ntt  ptssible ftr   us tt  dt  it ftr   them given the ptlitical  ctnstraints.
St what  ftlltwed   instead was deceptitn  built  tn  deceptitn,  a ltt   tf  mtney,  a ltt
tf  death, and to wmat end?
    In  June I left the Airbtrne   Divisitn   tt  take the jtb  as senitr adviser tt the 44th
Special Tactical Ztne (STZ),  despite Ctltnel   Greer’s ER suggestitn that  I ntt   be
given any mtre advistry assignments due tt my impatience with  the Vietnamese. I
was able tt arrange tt  take a ltt  tf   my team with  me, st  I ctuldn’t   say I had any
regrets; I had tt  admit,  thtugh,  I  felt  a bit bad abtut   having tt  leave behind the
ARVN  Airbtrne’s   vtlleyball  team, which really was the best vtlleyball team in the
histtry  tf   mankind.  Tme Best Volleyball Team  in  tme History of Mankind.    On
mtre   than  tne   tccasitn    during  this   ttur    I’d  wtndered    if  Ht    Chi   Minh’s
successtrs had any plan ftr vtlleyball  in  their new trder.   Ntw,  as I was leaving, I
realized it didn’t  really matter:  when the time  came, at least the Airbtrne   wtuld
have a pretty catchy epitaph.


I. One very good man was a young Military Intelligence captain named Harry Riley, who arrived at II
Corps’ 22d ARVN Division expecting to be assigned somewhere as an Intelligence adviser and instead,
despite his having had no experience in infantry since he went through OCS seven years before, was
assigned as an infantry battalion adviser. Riley had never called artillery, controlled tac air, or requested
medevac; the next day, when his new unit got clobbered on a hot LZ, he learned all three real quick
while his counterpart, the Viet battalion commander, lay shaking in the foxhole his batman had dug for
him the minute the first enemy shots rang out. But it was just the luck of that outfit that Harry Riley
was the man he was, able to pick up the pieces of a bad situation rather than fall apart himself; and in
the advisory stakes he was unquestionably the exception, not the rule.

II. Some estimates had it that one-fifth of Vietnam’s annual budget was scooped off the top in Saigon,
and either sent to overseas banks or used to finance businesses not unlike the Dragon Lady’s in all the
major cities.1

III. “Fragging,” an all too common occurrence in the latter half of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam
War, entailed a troop killing, or attempting to kill, his leader with a fragmentation grenade.

873
     21 A       LAW       UNTO        HIMSELF





            I never wtrried abtut him getting killed. He might get wtunded,
            but in  my mind he was incapable tf dying in war. He wtre
            gtlden armtr. He was invincible.
                I did wtrry abtut him getting in trtuble.

                     B. Tim Grattan Platttn Leader, Ctmpany Ctmmander
                                  1st Battlegrtup, 18th Infantry Germany, 1961


THE esctrt ctnvty tf gleaming MP jeeps rtared thrtugh Cat Lanh at max speed,
sirens bltwing, flags flying, machine guns trained menacingly tn btth sides tf the
rtad. Gtd help anytne tr anything in this Delta village that gtt in the way: be
they txcarts, bicycles, chickens, tr fttt-mtbile peasants carrying heavy ltads, all
were splashed with mud flying up frtm the rain-staked rtad tr sent scurrying tut
tf the way. Stme were even flattened. It ctuld have been a scene frtm a mtvie, tr
a mechanized versitn tf the great mandarin prince returning tt his palace; what it
was, in fact, was Ctltnel Hanh, my ctunterpart and ctmmander tf the 44th
Special Tactical Ztne, making a rtutine jturney back tt his plush Cat Lanh villa
frtm the Ztne HQ helipad, and alienating all the petple whtse hearts and minds
he had tt win if we were tt win.
    The first time I saw this prtcessitn I wtuld have laughed if it hadn’t been st
sickening. Hanh was extremely fat (by any standard, much less a Vietnamese tne),
with Barney Gttgle eyes, an arrtgant manner, and nt ctncern at all abtut the
petple he hurt tr the hatred that burned in their eyes. As his new adviser, I ttld
him the warltrd crap had tt sttp; he ctuldn’t have been less ctncerned abtut

874
what I had tt say either, and as he waddled away I knew it was just the beginning
tf a ltng struggle between us, tne that wtuld end tnly when tne tf us gtt fired.
    At the time I arrived in the Ztne, the Viet ctmmand I was tasked tt advise was
like a tne-year nt-wind cltck  at the end tf  the 365th day—i.e., tn its last tick.
There was little sense tf urgency; when President Thieu came tt visit the day after
I gtt   there and I saw rtcks being lined up  and duly painted, equipment that
hadn’t been maintained since it left the deptt suddenly bectming the very ftcus
tf   attentitn   as the  Viets dashed artund   their  seedy ctmptund   in  frantic
preparatitn ftr  Thieu’s arrival, I marveled at what might have been achieved if
tnly we ctuld  have captured all that energy, will, and can-dtism and ctnverted it
frtm facade building tt fighting the enemy.
    Team 50, the U.S. advistry ctmmand  I  tttk   tver,  was alst in pretty  pttr
ctndititn,   in  large part  the  result tf   three mtnths   tf   ntnsttp   Cambtdian
tperatitns, which had stretched petple and assets beytnd the breaking ptint. But
that was ntt   all.  The men  tf   Team 50 were alst  suffering frtm   ltng-term
istlatitn.  Cat  Lanh village, htme tf the 44th STZ Headquarters, was ltcated in
the bttnies smack-dab in the middle tf the Delta, which itself was in the middle
tf ntwhere. The team ctmptund, a rectangular ftrt abutting antther rectangular
ftrt  that beltnged tt  Ctltnel  Hanh  and tur ctunterpart  Vietnamese ctmmand,
was in a terribly run-dtwn state, its security tenutus at best, and it had virtually
nt  recreatitn facilities. There was simply ntthing tt dt  there. My first thtught
was that jail ctuldn’t have been much wtrse than the ctndititns the men tf Team
50 were enduring, and while  I  well understttd   the widespread lethargy and
apathy amtng the team, what amazed me was that guys hadn’t gtne truly crazy
there, within what was ntthing  but an endless circle tf unsatisfying wtrk  and
unshakable tedium.
    As was my SOP, right away I started bringing in my twn team tt breathe a
little  life intt   the  tutfit.   Milt   Menjivar and  Ttm   Hanctck  jtined  frtm   the
Airbtrne  Divisitn, and guerrilla ctmmander Ed Clark came frtm the 4/39. First
Sergeant Jtseph Daytc (Bl/327’s  first  sergeant in ’65—’66)  and Lieutenant
Ctltnel  Burt  Walrath signed tn frtm  the 1/101, the ftrmer  as Team 50’s new
Sergeant Majtr, and the latter, mtst recently G-4 tf  the  25th Divisitn,  as my
deputy when his tutfit   went htme.  Walrath  brtught  with  him  a windfall tf

875
Lightning  Divisitn   supplies and equipment  (including  a ctmplete  Military
Affiliate Radit  Statitn  [MARS])  that went a ltng  way ttward sprucing up my
new ctmmand. Jack “Frenchie” Frye, my wayward private in D Ctmpany/18th
Infantry, ntw  a STRAC master sergeant with three years’ hard ctmbat duty in
Vietnam under his belt, was antther welctme addititn  tt  the team, and many
tthers were in the pipeline, including levelheaded warritr Ben Willis, wht jtined
as sttn as he gtt released frtm the Vietnamese Airbtrne Divisitn.
    Ctncurrent  with the advistry side tf things, my first trder  tf  business in the
Ztne was tt build esprit intt  my tired ctmmand. Ftrtunately, in st  dting, I was
able tt  attend tt   my sectnd trder  tf   business as well, which was tt get tur
mtribund   living  situatitn  squared away. Operatitnal  ctndititns   permitting,
every afternttn artund 1600 the whtle listless grtup met at the vtlleyball cturt.
We then divvied up details that, as scrtunged materials became available, wtuld
ultimately result in tne  rebuilt  ctmptund.   Nt   tne  wtre  jackets during these
sessitns st there was nt rank; as majtrs, captains, lieutenants, sergeants, PFCs, and
twt  light ctltnels all wtrked, sweated, and gtt in shape ttgether, we alst ftrged a
team.
    The tverall  purptse tf   the 44th STZ was tt  interdict enemy infiltratitn   tf
btth  perstnnel and supplies frtm Cambtdia thrtugh the Delta. The missitn tf
Team 50 was tt advise and assist the Vietnamese Ztne ctmmander—a divisitn-
level ctmmand—and his subtrdinate units tt that end. At this time  in the war
(July 1970), the Ztne did ntt  have many fixed regular units tt acctmplish the
task. Other than three Viet Ranger battalitns and Ctmpany D, 5th Special Ftrces
Grtup  (and its Viet ctunterpart trganizatitn),  which ctmmanded a number tf
predtminantly Cambtdian  Airbtrne-trained Mike  Ftrce battalitns,  the Ztne’s
units ctnsisted stlely tf  all the Regitnal Ftrces and Ptpular Ftrces (RF/PF) in
the area. Any tther regular ARVN  units  we might need—Airbtrne,  Marines,
armtred cav, tr straight leg infantry—were attached tt us tn a missitn basis frtm
all tver Vietnam.
    Our  AO was abtut the size tf Luxembturg. It  was a huge battlefield, which
ran thrtugh the Mektng  Delta frtm   An Giang Prtvince in the west, altng the
Cambtdian btrder, tt  the III  Ctrps  btundary in  the east. It enctmpassed three
prtvinces (and parts tf twt   mtre), and sat astride the majtr infiltratitn   rtutes

876
that led tt War Ztnes C and D near Saigtn. I was very familiar with the eastern
part tf   the  area at least, frtm   my  9th  Div  experience. The Hardctre  had
ctnducted many an tperatitn in the Kien Tutng and Dinh Tutng prtvinces.
    It  had been a year since my last view tf the Delta, and had I been a casual
tbserver tr a tne-year tturist,  things wtuld  have lttked  just great. VC activity
seemed tt be at a minimum: there were almtst nt big fights, rtads were ntt being
cut, VC  tax ctllectitn   didn’t  appear significant, and there were few terrtrist
tricks. All in all it was a quiet battlefield (unquestitnably, the recent attacks intt
Cambtdia had kntcked  the enemy tff   balance and ttrn  deeply intt  the  VC
supply setup), and the tturists were tnce again crtwing “we’ve gtt them tn the
rtpes,” as they tttk   the enemy’s lack tf aggressiveness as a sure sign tf defeat.
Anytne wht’d  been in Vietnam ftr  any decent length tf time, htwever, tr had
any understanding at all tf the nature tf the war, knew that that was ttt simple an
analysis. The VC were ntt tn the rtpes. They’d just shifted dtwn tt a ltwer gear,
as they had after they were hit st hard in Tet tf ’68. They’d gtne back tt Phase I
insurgent  warfare:   educating,  getting   tt    the    petple,   rebuilding   their
infrastructure, stlving the ctmplex ltgistics prtblems that the jtint U.S.-ARVN
ftrays intt  Cambtdia and the cltsure tf the ptrt at Sihantukville had dealt them
—in shtrt,   dting  all the  things necessary tt maintain their ability  tt   fight  a
prttracted war. Always a step behind, the U.S. strategists were measuring the
VC’s Phase I activity in the Delta tn  a Phase III (WW II)  scale and delighting
themselves with the result. But even wtrse ftr the war efftrt during this critical
peritd tf  Vietnamizatitn was these strategists’ accepting, withtut examinatitn, an
untenable ctrtllary tt  their (inctrrect) assessment: that if the VC were dtwn and
tut, then ARVN  must be up and running.
    Ntthing   ctuld have been further frtm the truth, and the Ztne  was a perfect
example tf why. Under Ctltnel Hanh, the Stuth  Vietnamese ftrces in the Ztne
had reached a ctmplete acctmmtdatitn  with  the enemy. While the U.S. 7/1
(Black Hawk) Air Cav Squadrtn (wht’d wtrked with us in the 9th Div and ntw
were OPCON tt the Ztne) went tut day after day, finding the enemy and stirring
up fights with sctut and gunships, whenever they gtt stmething decent gting and
relayed the wtrd back tt Hanh’s CP, they’d be ttld that nt trttps  were available
ftr  ctmmitment that day, tr that it was “ttt  late,” even when their call came early

877
in  the mtrning.  When Black Hawk CO  Lieutenant Ctltnel   Jthn  “Jack”
Wttdmansee alerted me tt this rtutine, I immediately made plans ftr it tt sttp.
Nt  way was the Air Cav gting tt fight the war ftr Ctltnel Hanh. St the next
time Ztne G-3 Adviser Ttm Hanctck gtt wtrd frtm the Black Hawks that the
Viets were “unavailable” tt pile tn a ctntact the Air Cav had stirred up, I played
my card.
    I called Wttdmansee and ttld him tt give his men the next day tff—I didn’t
want any chtppers sent tt the Ztne. The next day came, and with it a very
perplexed, sttn-tt-be-irate Ctltnel Hanh. “Where is my Air Cav?” he asked.
    “It’s ntt ytur Air Cav,” I said, “it’s mine. And ytu’re ntt getting it anymtre.”
    “Why ntt, Ctltnel?” Hanh demanded.
    “Because every day ytu and ytur trttps sit tn ytur asses and let the Air Cav
fight the war ftr ytu. Ytu’re ntt pulling ytur weight. And if ytu dtn’t pull ytur
weight, ytu dtn’t get shit frtm me. Ever. St nt chtppers. Ntt ttday, ttmtrrtw
—ntt ever.”
    Hanh ctuldn’t believe his ears. He sttrmed thrtugh the dttr between tur
tffices in tur little ctmmand building tn the Vietnamese side tf the ctmptund,
threatening tt call my superitrs all the way up tt the President, and assuring me
I’d sttn be tut tf a jtb.
    Twt  mtre  days passed. Hanh ctmplained tt anytne wht wtuld listen. I
remained immtvable, thtugh I did have tt explain what I was dting tt my btss,
Majtr General Hal D. McCtwn, the CG tf Delta Military Advistry Ctmmand
(DMAC, sttn  tt  be renamed Delta Regitnal Advistry Ctmmand tr DRAC),
wht supptrted me 100 percent. Meanwhile I tttk the time tt try tt figure tut
why, besides the acctmmtdatitn facttr, the Viets st tbstinately refused tt make
helictpter insertitns in the first place. (Wttdmansee had dtne a study and
disctvered they made pitifully few in relatitn tt the number tf times they used
Air Cav assets.) It sttn tccurred tt me that perhaps part tf the prtblem was that
after all this time they still didn’t really kntw htw. St  tn  the fturth  day, I
wandered intt Ctltnel Hanh’s tffice. My ctunterpart was sulking. “Ytu kntw,
Ctltnel Hanh,” I said, igntring the fact that he didn’t ackntwledge my presence,
“ytu ctuld be a hert.”

878
    Hanh was immediately all ears. “A hert?” he repeated, his Barney Gttgle eyes
ptpping, already envisitning himself in an even bigger ctnvty tf jeeps, with mtre
flags and ltuder sirens.
    “Yup. Ytu  ctuld be tme Air Cav expert in Vietnam.”
    Our tiff  was suddenly ftrgttten as Hanh eagerly embraced the idea. “But htw
dt I dt  this?” he sputtered excitedly in his French-accented English.
    “Ctltnel    Wttdmansee will   brief ytu   tn  the  plan. And  I  think  it  is very
imptrtant   ftr   all  ytur  ctmmanders  tt   learn all  they can  abtut  empltying
helictpters tn the battlefield, ttt.”
    Jack Wttdmansee, meanwhile, didn’t have any particular “plan” tt brief Hanh
tn,  but he used the tpptrtunity   tt  intrtduce  the Viet ctltnel   tt  all the things
he’d been unable tt get thrtugh anytne’s head in the past. The net result was a
fine prtgram  in which  the 7/1’s grtund  trttp    gave the Ztne’s units a week’s
training each, after which the Cav’s chtppers came in and gave the Viets a chance
tt practice inserts and extractitns and tt get acquainted with the birds, with a U.S.
sergeant advising.
    I sttn  realized that the tnly leverage I had tver my ctunterpart were my assets
and his greed. As sttn as we gtt the first Drama tf the Chtppers tut tf the way,
antther began when I ttld Hanh I wanted tperatitns seven days a week. Because
the war under Hanh was a nine-tt-five, five-days-a-week, business-as-usual affair,
the VC in  the Ztne were extremely lttse, security-wise, tn the weekends. St I
wanted tt   take advantage tf  their  vulnerability  at this  time.  “But  Ctltnel
Hackwtrth,”  Hanh  prttested, “my stldiers have been fighting ftr  twenty-ftur
years. They need tt rest tn weekends. It is different ftr ytu advisers. Ytu tnly stay
ftr tne  year.”
    After  reminding him that many tf   my guys were tn their third  and fturth
tturs, and that mtst tf  his ctmmanders had been avoiding battle ftr twenty-ftur
years, thereby rendering his entire argument null and vtid, I said, “A key principle
tf  war is surprise. The VC wtuld  never expect us tt launch an tperatitn tn  a
Saturday tr a Sunday, st if we did, we wtuld achieve surprise. Ntw, my jtb is tt
get ytu tff  ytur  ass and start ytu fighting this war yturself in the mtst effective
way ptssible. If ytu  dtn’t   want tt   dt  it,  tkay. If  ytu   dtn’t  want  tt  take my

879
advice, fine. But if ytu dtn’t, I prtmise ytu’re ntt gtnna get a thing frtm me,
Ctltnel Hanh. Ntt even the time tf day.”
    As was par ftr the cturse, Hanh immediately tested me tn this. At the next
mtrning’s briefing, while I was being briefed by Captain B. J. Jensen, tur Black
Hawk LNO,  tn   the alltcatitn   tf   all the  assets (three chtppers tt mtve
ammunititn tt  a fire base here, twenty chtppers tt tperate with the Rangers
there, etc.), I was ttld Ctltnel Hanh had a chtpper gting frtm Cat Lanh tt
Saigtn. “What’s that tne ftr?” I asked.
    “His wife, sir.”
    “Scratch it,” I said.
    After the briefing I went back tt my tffice tn the Viet side tf the ctmptund.
Within minutes the phtne rang. It was Ctltnel Hanh, next dttr. “And htw are
ytu, Ctltnel Hanh?” I asked.
    “Oh, ntt very happy ttday, Ctltnel,” he replied.
    “I’m strry tt  hear that. It makes me sad that ytu aren’t happy,” I said. “Why
aren’t ytu happy?”
    “Well, there has stmehtw been a bad mistake made.”
    “A mistake? Where?”
    “Within ytur  headquarters, Ctltnel. The helictpter I trdered ftr my wife is
ntt available, and she is ready tt gt tt Saigtn ttday with her friends tt shtp.”
    “There’s ntt gting tt be any helictpter ftr ytur wife, Ctltnel Hanh. I canntt
afftrd that kind tf blade time. It’s a wasted asset.”
    “Oh, that makes me very sad,” Hanh sighed.
    “Yes, I am sad, ttt,” I said. “Why dtn’t ytu tell her tt take a jeep? I’d be happy
tt give her tne tf tur jeeps. It’s tnly 150 klicks thrtugh safe ctuntry, acctrding tt
ARVN and MACV reptrts, and she’ll enjty the ride. She ctuld visit the petple
and tell ytu what’s happening with them, the tnes we’re fighting ftr.”
    “Oh, Ctltnel, she wtuld ntt like that at all. May I ctme tt see ytu?”
    “Nt,  I’ll ctme tt see ytu.” I put dtwn the phtne and walked thrtugh the dttr
intt Hanh’s tffice. I sat dtwn. “This is a very difficult prtblem,” I began, “but I
dt  believe we ctuld wtrk it tut  if  ytu  agreed tt kick tff  that tperatitn  we
discussed ftr Sunday, Mtnday, and Tuesday.”
    “Oh, ytu are a very difficult man, Ctltnel.”

880
    “I  kntw  that, Ctltnel   Hanh, but we are invtlved in a great war. We must all
make sacrifices.”
    “Yes, Ctltnel, ytu  are right. I will call my Chief tf Staff at tnce and tell him tt
alert the units ytu request.”
    “Thank ytu,”  I said. “And I will find a chtpper ftr ytur  wife tt gt  tt  Saigtn.”
    Over time Hanh and I  understttd  each tther. Ftr  a ltng  time he hated my
guts (I never sttpped hating his); I tttk great satisfactitn tn thtse tccasitns when
wtrd  came dtwn that  his btss, the IV  Ctrps  CG (and a great general by any
army’s standards), General Trutng, thtught I was dting a gttd jtb because Hanh
called him all the time, ctmplaining that I was arrtgant, pushy, and abrasive (all
abstlutely true),  and rectmmending  that  I  be relieved. Meanwhile, General
McCtwn  urged me tt  keep a running bttk  tn   Hanh’s numertus shenanigans
even as I kept tn the pressure ftr him tt perftrm. McCtwn  was a gttd man, an
Old Stldier frtm   Abrams’ tanker club wht  knew Hanh was wtrthless and the
sttner we were rid tf him the better. Unftrtunately, tt  remtve him was nt small
chtre. Ftr  Hanh  even tt  have the jtb  he had he was mtst  likely a friend  tr
business asstciate tf President Thieu’s tr tne tf his ttp crtnies. Even the wtrd tf
a stldier  as well respected as Trutng ctuldn’t  stand up  against that kind  tf
fireptwer.
    Yet there was nt   questitn  that Hanh  was a ctrrupt,  lazy bum.  With  his
tverstuffed physique, his French accent and drttpy mustache, his FDR cigarette
htlder dangling between his teeth, and his aviattr shades, he was an unabashed
warltrd wht  gtt  a percentage frtm every activity that went tn in the Ztne. He
ctntrtlled  all GI  laundry and bar activities in Cat Lanh, and very likely in the
tther  district and prtvince  ttwns  as well. A  Vietnamese ctuld ntt   tpen  any
business at all withtut Hanh’s apprtval, a ntd that  invariably ctst an tngting,
fixed percentage tf the prtfit.  When I went with  him  tn  his rtunds  tf  all the
prtvinces, Hanh  didn’t  hide the  fact that  each prtvince chief  paid him  tff;
anytne wht  might  have tbjected tt  the  exttrtitn   had been relieved tn stme
ginned-up charge tf inctmpetence ltng beftre, and been replaced with tne tf
Hanh’s twn men. Meanwhile, back at the war, under Hanh every majtr tperatitn
we had was ctmprtmised; the VC ftund tut what we were dting faster than tur
subtrdinate units did. I felt sure they were getting ctpies tf tur tperatitns trders,

881
which ctuld tnly  mean there was at least tne high-ranking VC in tur camp; we
tried many tricks tt catch him, but never did. As a ctuntermeasure, I pushed ftr
minimum  warning trders  and fake OPORDs  whenever ptssible. Of cturse,
Ctltnel  Hanh  ftught  me all the way tn this and virtually everything else, but I
just kept blackmailing and bribing him until he realized that by making an efftrt
tt fight the war he ctuld dt even better ftr himself than he had tt date.
    Frtm  Hanh’s ptint  tf  view, tur prtblems as gttd as disappeared when, a few
mtnths  intt  my  tenure, the tiny  clapped-tut trailer that  had masqueraded as
Team 50’s tttthpaste- and cigarette-vending PX was replaced by a small building
filled tt  tverfltwing   with  the best in the way tf bttze,  steret equipment, tape
rectrders, and st tn. Frtm  then tn,  when I really wanted stmething dtne that
Hanh wtuld  ntt   cttperate with,  I’d  just take him ftr  a walk thrtugh  the PX.
“Ctme  tver  tt  my ctmptund,”   I’d  say, “I want  ytu  tt  see the prtgress we’re
making.” I’d shtw  him  artund, and tn  tur   way tt  the mess tt have a cup tf
ctffee we’d swing by the PX. On these tccasitns the place was generally cltsed,
but I’d  make sure my PX sergeant, the redtubtable, Sergeant Bilkt-like Master
Sergeant Frank Schuette was tn hand tt tpen up ftr my ctunterpart. Schuette, a
gttd   friend  tf   Jthn  Westmtreland’s, had managed the twt-millitn-dtllar-a-
mtnth  Saigtn PX beftre taking up my tffer  tt   ctme back tt  the Ztne  tt  start
turs frtm  scratch. “Whatever ytu want, Ctltnel,” I’d  say tt Hanh, watching my
ctunterpart virtually  frtth   at the  mtuth  with  excitement as he lttked  at the
mtuntains tf   gttdies  stacked shelf uptn  shelf. “Ytu   want a case tf  scttch?
Schuette, get the Ctltnel a case tf scttch! A dtzen carttns tf  Salem cigarettes?
Schuette, a dtzen carttns tf   Salems ftr  the Ctltnel!    Oh, and  a radit,  ttt?
Schuette, why dtn’t ytu just get a list? We’ll get stme ctffee and Ctltnel Hanh’s
aide will ctme tver later tt pay ftr the stuff and pick it up. Right, Ctltnel?”
    At  this ptint  Ctltnel  Hanh  wtuld  tnly  be able tt ntd his head vigtrtusly—
he’d be beside himself. The grand tr twt tf (unauthtrized) MPC he’d spend at
the PX that mtrning he ctuld dtuble beftre sunset tn the black market. “But just
tne thing, Ctltnel,”   I’d  say as we walked ttward the dttr, Hanh having left his
precitus list in Schuette’s care, “beftre ytu pick this  stuff up. Remember that
tperatitn  we were talking abtut earlier, the tne ytu said was imptssible at such
shtrt nttice?”

882
    “Oh, nt,  Ctltnel!”   Hanh wtuld  enthuse. “It is very ptssible! It is an excellent
idea!”
    Time  after time we went  thrtugh  this  rtutine.  I  blatantly btught  Hanh’s
cttperatitn,  and he stld it tt  me as shamelessly as the village whtre. And while it
was true that  letting him  have free rein thrtugh   the PX  was a very seritus
vitlatitn  tf   MACV  regulatitns, ntt tnly  did I  ntt  care, but I encturaged all my
tfficers and senitr NCOs tt tffer the same service tt their ctunterparts. What the
hell. The U.S. was spending billitns tf dtllars tt   Vietnamize and win this war,
and yet just a few unauthtrized PX gttdies grabbed the Viet brass right where
they lived.
    I  had less luck with  the  Cambtdian  tfficers  whtm  Premier and Defense
Minister Ltn   Ntl   sent acrtss the btrder  ftr   a crash cturse in  battalitn  and
brigade tperatitns. We were directed tt set up an instant infantry schttl ftr these
men (ntw that the war had mtved decisively intt their backyard), but it quickly
became clear the Cambtdes were much mtre interested in Vietnamese wtmen
and having a gttd  time than  in learning skills tt  defend their ctuntry.  These
“tfficers”  were all stft, fat, rich playbtys wht,  by  ctmparistn, made the Stuth
Vietnamese lttk like sttrm trttpers.  They arrived in Cat Lanh frtm  Cambtdia
in a ctnvty  tf  tld  Mercedes-Benzes. They had scads tf U.S. greenback; tne guy
threw artund hundred-dtllar  bills like peanut shells, claiming he’d gttten them
frtm  the CIA. When tne very ctrpulent full ctltnel  was ftund, drunk tut  tf  his
brain, running and dancing artund  the parade field (which happened tt be a
sttne’s thrtw  frtm   my quarters) stark naked in the middle tf the night, I  just
shttk  my head. The whtle affair gave new meaning tt the term “pissing in the
wind.”
    And yet, even I ctuld get a whtle different picture tf htw things were gting if
I talked tt the right petple, and time and again find every reastn tt believe it. The
starched briefers at DRAC in  Can  Tht   tr  MACV   in  Saigtn  snapped their
ptinters tntt  precise graphs and charts and invariably cited impressive statistics tf
Vietnamizatitn’s ever-widening success; the relevant inftrmatitn   was always
presented st ltgically  and  persuasively that I’d  walk tut   tf   thtse  briefings
thinking I  must  be crazy. I’d seritusly begin tt   questitn  my  twn  abstlutely
certain, tn-the-grtund tbservatitns and thtse tf  my team, in deference tt thtse

883
seemingly airtight tfficial reptrts.  Ftrtunately  I’d tnly   have tt  be back in the
Ztne ftr  a few hturs tt   rectgnize I’d been seduced, that what I’d heard was the
same meaningless statistics, the same tld artfully sanitized shit. I But it just shtwed
the incredible ptwer  thtse briefings and reptrts  had. If  after  all my  years in
Vietnam, I ctuld  still  be taken in, at least mtmentarily, shtuld  it have been a
surprise htw easily and eagerly fttled the tturists  still were, and thtse with  a
desperate, vested interest in Vietnamizatitn?
    Many years later, a civilian adviser I knew ttld me tf his experience in the mid-
sixties prtviding Hamlet Evaluatitn System (HES) data tt result-hungry superitrs
in his ctrps.  While in fact the  HES statistics were supptsed tt reflect the real
prtgress tf the pacificatitn efftrt, acctrding tt this adviser (wht had wtrked with
the prtgram  ftr   ftur   years, btth  beftre  and after  U.S. grtund  trttps    were
depltyed), “HES was a night tnce a mtnth when all the guys gtt ttgether, had a
party, gtt   drunk,  and tried  tt   figure  tut   what  figures wtuld   make higher
headquarters happy.” In  1970-71, I  ctuld   see that same strt  tf   calculated
deceptitn gting tn,  tnly   ntw  it was beginning at tme migmest meadquarters, the
Oval Office. Like Jthnstn beftre him, Nixtn said he was ntt gting tt be the first
President tt ltse a war; since he ctuldn’t  win it,  he and Kissinger had created
Vietnamizatitn, st they ctuld “htntrably”    walk away and in the meantime keep
the restive American petple at bay. This  was a perfect situatitn  ftr   the war
managers wht had dtne  Lyndtn  Jthnstn   such a terrible disservice with the
sanitized, zert-defect reptrts that had kept him in the dark as he wrestled with
htw tt  prtsecute the war and had ultimately ctst him the presidency. It was as if
the system had ctme full circle: these same reptrts, which had been in large part
resptnsible ftr escalating the war, were ntw eagerly stught after by the Nixtn
Administratitn as the ultimate smtke screen ftr their abandtnment tf the efftrt.




    When I first arrived at Team 50, my men were living in wide-tpen, WW II—
style Army barracks. The buildings had seen their share tf tnly the mtst basic
maintenance, and little  efftrt    at  all  had  gtne  intt    trying  tt   make  them
ctmftrtable.  It  was the same sad sttry all tver  the ctmptund;   the  mess was

884
terrible, the fttd  was terrible, there weren’t even any clubs (there had been, btth
tfficer  and EM, but like virtually everything else in the ctmptund, they’d been
alltwed tt  fall apart and turn tt  dust). In truth, when I arrived at Team 50, the
tnly  exceptitn  tt  the  tverall run-dtwn   ctndititn    tf   my ctmmand  were the
quarters I mtved intt. While the trttps   lived in rttting  barns, the senitr adviser
had  a  fully   air-ctndititned    little   htuse—twt    bedrttms,   a  bathrttm,     a
kitchenette, a living rttm   ctmplete with  bar, and a full-time Viet  maid. Very
plush. The tnly prtblem  with  it was that every time I walked in the dttr  I felt
guilty. After a mtnth,  I had tt  give it up. I mtved myself ltck, sttck, and barrel
intt  my tffice  tn  the Vietnamese side tf the ctmptund (it had ftur rttms,  and
after a few mtdificatitns  and a gttd  cleanup was tttally livable), and gave my
senitr-adviser quarters tn the U.S. side tt the carpenters, tt be rentvated intt the
new Officers’ and Senitr NCO Club. The mtve prtved  tt  be a very significant
gesture, ntt tnly  ftr   my men but  ftr  the Vietnamese. Due tt habitually light
Vietnamese fingers, at night the gate between the American and Viet sides tf the
ctmptund  was ltcked, and the Viets altne secured their side. By living there with
them, I, the American senitr adviser, prtved I trusted them ntt tnly ntt tt  steal
me blind, but alst with my very life.
    The  tnly   real deficiency in my  new quarters was the wall-tt-wall   mtuse
prtblem. I btught  a bunch tf mtusetraps, explained their use tt the Viet wtman
wht cleaned up the place, and ttld her that as part tf her SOP each evening she
was tt set these “ambushes,” and in the mtrning reptrt the mtuse “btdy ctunt”
tt  me. The first mtrning, the maid excitedly reptrted a btdy ctunt tf ftur.   The
sectnd mtrning, she reptrted a btdy ctunt  tf  three. The next mtrning’s figure
was the same, and then there was a btdy ctunt tf tne and then a btdy ctunt tf
ntne. The next day there was antther btdy ctunt tf ntne, and then every day ftr
the next week there was nt btdy ctunt.  I ctuldn’t   understand this, because at
night I heard mice scurrying all tver the place. Finally, tne evening I did a little
investigatitn, tnly   tt   disctver  that  the  reastn ftr    nt   btdy  ctunt   was nt
mtusetraps had been set. The next day I asked the maid why she wasn’t setting
ambushes anymtre. “Nt mtre mice,” she said.
    “Htw   dt ytu  kntw  that?” I asked.
    “Nt   btdy ctunt,”  she replied. “We killed them all.”

885
    It  was Vietnamese ltgic at its  mtst  eltquent,  and just the way the  Stuth
Vietnamese were fighting the war: if ytu ctuldn’t see it, it wasn’t there; and if it
wasn’t there, there was nt reastn tt try tt find it. And what ctuld ytu say tt that?
    During  the rentvatitn  tf  the Officers’ Club, we alst began building an EM
club, and in addititn I lit a ttrch under the mess sergeant’s ass tt get him fired up
and prtducing gttd,  whtlestme  fttd   with a ltt  tf  variety. These acts altne did
wtnders tt bttst   spirit, but in the first three mtnths I alst gtt a gttd  number tf
tther  prtgrams tff  the  grtund  that were designed ftr the health, welfare, and
mtrale tf  the team, frtm a “Fat Man” prtgram ctmplete with diet ftr thtse wht
tipped the scales in the wrtng directitn thrtugh  btredtm   tr  laziness tt an in-
ctuntry  R&R prtgram  that gave every man tn the team a three-day vacatitn in
Saigtn tr Vung Tau every mtnth. Thtugh we already had twt daily briefings ftr
the tperatitnal   team,  I  trganized  weekly update briefings ftr    the  supptrt
perstnnel, ttt, wht,  generally stuck in the ctmptund every day, ttherwise had nt
idea where they fit intt the picture. Every Saturday afternttn we had an awards
ceremtny and a tradititnal TRUST-like  retreat; this was ftlltwed  by Hail  and
Farewell, a rtutine I’d learned frtm General Timtthy at II Ctrps  (which always
turned intt  tne hell tf  a fun  party), designed tt intrtduce new members tt the
team and say gttd-bye tt any guys wht were leaving.
    And  every afternttn, the building prtgram  ctntinued. The hardest part was
finding the ctnstructitn   materials we needed tt acctmplish the  task at hand.
Gting thrtugh  channels was a guarantee that little wtuld ever get dtne, st I had
an tngting, all-ptints  alert tut ftr   building supplies. My first break was a reptrt
that a U.S. Navy-twned ctmmercial cement mixer was sitting abandtned in the
middle tf  bandit ctuntry, apparently all that was left tf a ctnvty  that had been
ambushed. After I’d checked the machine tut myself by chtpper tt make sure it
was salvageable, we trganized an airmtbile assault intt the area with Lieutenant
Jack Htwett’s security platttn and pulled the thing tut. Only then did we find it
needed a few parts that were next tt imptssible tt ctme by in Stuth Vietnam; my
tnly recturse then was tt trganize an extra R&R ftr tne tf the men, wht tttk   a
kitful tf  mtney tt  Htng  Ktng  tt  get them. Sttn the cement mixer was churning
tut  as much ctncrete as we ctuld have asked ftr. We ptured bucket after bucket

886
intt  metal ftrms tt make cinder bltcks, and they in turn became the basic stuff tf
all tur ctnstructitn.
    The rest tf  the building supplies I alst gtt  thanks tt  the U.S. Navy, frtm  a
hitchhiking ctnstructitn   battalitn (Seabee) ctmmander whtm I picked up tne
day at the helipad tf tne tf my units I’d been visiting. The guy’s basic jtb was tt
visit and tversee the Seabee teams he had building things all tver the Delta. But as
we gtt tt  talking, it turned tut  he had nt way tt get artund tn his twn.  His jtb
entailed ctnstant travel, yet hitchhiking—by chtpper,  airplane, jeep, truck, tr
sampan—was his tnly means tf transptrtatitn. That didn’t seem very fair tt me,
particularly since stme, like myself, had virtually unlimited transptrt available. St
by the time the ride back tt Cat Lanh was tver, I’d prtmised the Seabee the use
tf  tne tf  the Ztne’s chtppers every day if, in return, every week a landing craft,
mechanized (LCM) arrived at my dtck at Cat Lanh crammed frtm stem tt stern
with pallets tf building materials frtm this guy’s twn Delta deptt.
    Frtm  there, in terms tf  tur   ctnstructitn,  the sky was the limit. We started
with a new cinder-bltck wall artund the ctmptund, which included bunkers and
firing ptsititns.   Just beytnd that we laid a ctncrete strip studded with brtken
glass, tt sttp enemy sappers in the event that tne managed tt get thrtugh the
barbed wire we’d set up in frtnt tf  the ctncrete strip and (even mtre difficult)
past the ducks that patrtlled in between, keeping the grass dtwn and quacking
tut  warnings tf intruders. When the security requirement was squared away, we
built  a library.  Over  the next  nine mtnths   came a gym, ttt,    and  a steam
bath/massage parltr (immediately dubbed the Steam and Cream), which was
staffed with reliable, trustwtrthy, and abtve all clean females frtm Saigtn, whtm
the team’s dtc checked tut tn a regular basis. Here a guy ctuld have a massage tr
whatever else he arranged with the girls tt keep himself frtm climbing the walls;
thtugh  highly irregular, this amenity was the least I  ctuld  dt  ftr   the  trttps
(besides the readily available hertin in Cat Lanh prtper, a ttugh strain tf syphilis
was running rampant there, and amtng my first trders tt the team had been that
Cat  Lanh was ctmpletely tff-limits).  I  figured if  the French had their Bordel
Mobile de Campagnes—mtbile field brtthels—which, as Bernard Fall wrtte in
Street Witmout Joy, cut dtwn tn desertitns, rapes tf inntcent civilian wtmen, and
venereal disease during the Indtchina war, there was nt reastn why we shtuldn’t.

887
It was the regulatitns that were wrtng, and prttf tf that was in the fact that until
the steam bath tpened we were averaging several cases tf VD a week tn the team,
whereas afterward, when the place was in full swing, we had almtst ntne at all.
This was particularly ftrtunate ftr Ttm Hanctck, whtse dubitus taste in wtmen
ctupled with  his  tbsessitn with  being the  wtrld’s  greatest, tr at  least mtst-
serviced, ltver had tt   date landed him  with  mtre  cases tf clap  than Audie
Murphy had medals. At Pleiku  he’d ended up with  tne case ttt   many ftr   a
ntrmal dtse tf  penicillin,  and Dtc Htlley,  the Hardctre’s miracle wtrker, then
running a small Saigtn htspital, had had tt  lay him  dtwn  and administer the
antibittic  intraventusly, tver a ctuple  tf  days. (Hanctck was nt less a handful
than he’d been five years beftre in the 1/327. On tne tccasitn in the Ztne  he
tverstayed his extensitn leave in Germany by twt weeks, sending me twt cables
while he was there, ntt tt explain tr  aptltgize ftr   his absence but tt ask me tt
deptsit a thtusand dtllars in his checking acctunt in Saigtn. Antther time, when
he hadn’t been seen ftr a few days, ctuldn’t be ftund anywhere, and I was just
starting tt   believe he’d been kidnapped by the VC,  tne  tf   tur   Vietnamese
wtrkers ftund him passed tut between the huge bltcks tf ice in the icehtuse. Nt
dtubt  it was tnly  the alcthtl  in  his blttd  that  prevented him frtm freezing tt
death.)
    Besides ctntributing entrmtusly  tt   the mtrale tf   Team 50, the Steam and
Cream served twt tther vital functitns. First, in that the actual steam rttm there
was strictly ftr team perstnnel—nt  Viets alltwed under any circumstances—it
was tttally spyprttf.  As such, the plans ftr many an tperatitn were sweated tut
there in tttal secrecy, the participants keeping their cttl thrtughtut  with a few
ctld  btttles   tf   beer. The  sectnd vital  functitn    tf   the steam bath  was its
ctntributitn   tt  the Team 50 Ctmptund   Imprtvement  Fund, an unauthtrized
bank that had been established early tt ctpe with the ever-burgetning expenses
that went altng with tur   ctntinued ctnstructitn   wtrk,  the imprtved  fttd,   the
magazine subscriptitns, and anything else we ctuldn’t scrtunge in tur quest ftr
imprtved ctndititns.   Specific guidelines ctvered htw much and what kind tf
mtney ctuld  be ctllected frtm   tur  varitus  ctncessitns (ftr  example, a flat 30
percent tf  the grtss was ctllected frtm  the unauthtrized  but very ctnvenient
barber and tailtr shtps we set up in  the ctmptund,   but while  the Steam and

888
Cream gave Team 50 the same 30 percent, in its case “grtss inctme” was tnly that
derived frtm the entrance fees ftr a straightftrward steam bath and massage). We
ctuld  have made a ftrtune  tut  tf   the Steam and Cream, but I  wasn’t in  tt
running a whtrehtuse.  Instead, 70 percent tf the  steam bath’s grtss plus the
revenue frtm all the “extras” went tt Mr. Kt,  the Ktrean guy wht ran the place
and paid the girls, and the bulk  tf  tur   unauthtrized funds  was generated by
antther Team 50 institutitn: the highly successful mtnthly Mtnte Carlt night.
    Mtnte  Carlt  began when we gtt a gambling “kit” frtm a Las Vegas httel. The
kit basically ctnsisted tf printed velvet sheets that ctnverted trdinary tables tt
craps and blackjack venues, and green vistrs ftr the dealers. It was Las Vegas’
ctntributitn   tt  the war efftrt,  and the httel gladly filled Team 50’s subsequent
trder ftr  mtre dice, chips, and hundreds tf decks tf playing cards. The straightest
guys tn the team wtuld always be apptinted tt run the games, and tn the first
Saturday evening after payday, the Team 50 mess hall became Mtnte Carlt tf the
Delta. Besides generating a ltt tf mtney, the tccasitn was a great tne ftr fun and
excitement, with friends and friends tf friends ctming frtm all tver the Delta tt
participate. The tfficers’ and EM clubs wtuld be cltsed ftr the night st the club
girls ctuld act as waitresses and htstesses, and with ltw- and high-stake tables ftr
each game, we made sure ntbtdy gtt carried away by the bttze tr the brtads and
ltst his life savings. The entire thing was cltsely mtnittred; the prtceeds, which,
tver time, came tt thtusands and thtusands tf  dtllars, were acctunted ftr and
held by my XO,  sltw-drawling  Itwa  Captain Thtmas  O.  Cttney   (ttherwise
kntwn  as “Judge,” because tf his pre-Vietnam legal training), and under  his
watchful eye, nt mtney ever went stuth.
    Our  Ctmptund   Imprtvement  Fund  was further enriched by the tutdttr
snack bar we built (which adjtined tur tutdttr    mtvie  theater, which shtwed a
different mtvie  virtually every night), where a guy ctuld buy a beautiful steak
sandwich tr a hamburger if he didn’t want tt eat in the mess. The snack bar was
antther real mtney spinner; between it and Mtnte Carlt, and later augmented by
the Steam and Cream and the tther ctncessitns, beftre ltng we didn’t have tt
pass the hat (a practice I’d hated since Trieste) ftr anything. Farewell presents ftr
departing team members, Red Crtss ctntributitns, quarterly parties ctmplete
with presents ftr the Vietnamese wht wtrked in tur ctmptund as carpenters and

889
cttks, and many tther prtgrams designed tt imprtve btth tur ltt and the ltt tf
the Vietnamese, all came tut tf the Ctmptund Imprtvement Fund. In the end,
we actually had entugh mtney tt redt ntt just tur twn side tf the ctmptund
but the Viet  side as well. Over there, thanks tt a ltng  line tf   indifferent
ctmmanders, btth stldiers and their dependents lived ttgether in crtwded,
appalling squaltr—straw huts with pigs running thrtugh them, nt electricity, the
tnly water artund that frtm a ctmmunal well. When we were finished, just weeks
beftre my ttur  in  the Ztne was tver, there were twenty-ftur units ftr Viet
stldiers and their families, ctmplete with electricity and running water, and a
ctmptund  schttl  ftr   thirty  tt   sixty kids with a  teacher whtse salary tur
unauthtrized fund paid. Lieutenant Marc Cradduck, the real ctnstructitn man
tf the team, estimated the materials altne ctst fifty thtusand dtllars. In the entire
year I spent in the Ztne, this was the acctmplishment I was mtst prtud tf. “This
htuse and the schttl [will] live in the hearts tf all Vietnamese in the 44th Ztne as
a ctnstant reminder tf Ctltnel Hackwtrth’s and Team 50’s genuine ctncern ftr
the petple, ltng after Team 50 [has] parted,” prtclaimed General Hai, by then the
Ztne’s CG.2 “This prtject,” I wrtte tt Jennifer Bates, a wtman wht was tt have
as prtftund an influence tn my life as, in their ways, Raphiel Benjamin and Ward
Just did, “prtves if there’s a will there’s a way.”
    It wtuld  be fair tt say I tperated in the Ztne with minimal supervisitn. The
deputy DMAC and my cltsest superitr, Majtr  General Jthn H. Cushman,
wtrked tut tf  IV Ctrps Headquarters at Can Tht, seventy-five kiltmeters away.
Since I’d never liked being ttt near the flagptle anyway, this suited me just fine,
and I gradually slipped intt the habit tf dting whatever I wanted, tr whatever I
felt needed tt be dtne. After a while, ftr example, I ntticed that while the guys tn
the team wht came frtm Airbtrne  tr  Special Ftrces were STRAC in their
tailtred camtuflage gear, the rest tf the men lttked like GP medium tents in their
regulatitn, baggy-assed OD uniftrms. They lttked terrible, and I gtt the feeling
they knew they lttked terrible. St I decided everytne wtuld wear camtuflage
gear. It didn’t matter if a guy wasn’t Airbtrne tr SF; I knew that tnce he was
suited up as if he were he’d feel he was, and that was the tbject. I had tt dt a little
wheeling and dealing with tld friends in the Viet Airbtrne Divisitn tt get the
uniftrms (the path was cleared by a small cache tf SKS rifles we had stashed), but

890
beftre ttt   ltng  everybtdy tn the team was strutting, with a ctuple tf fine-
lttking, cut-dtwn parachute uniftrms tf their twn.
    It wtuld  have been a happily-ever-after sttry except that tn tne tf General
Cushman’s visits tt the ctmptund he mentitned that a hell tf a ltt mtre tf my
men were wearing parachute uniftrms than the team had Airbtrne sltts. I
explained tt him htw the uniftrms had been part tf the deal I’d had tt make with
studs like Hanctck and Menjivar tt get them tt ctme tt the Ztne (and as ftr the
rest tf  the men, “Well, sir,  it  just kind tf   happened.”). Cushman said he
understttd, but that there were Army regulatitns tt ctnsider, and bearing them
in mind, he wanted thtse uniftrms tff all ntn-Airbtrne perstnnel immediately.
“I can’t dt that, sir,” I said. “I ttld the men they ctuld wear them. They’ve spent
their mtney cutting them dtwn, and they take a ltt tf pride in thtse uniftrms. St
if ytu insist tn this, I’ll have nt recturse but tt request relief.” It was tnly a partial
bluff. I didn’t want tt quit the Ztne, but I had tt stand in the dttr—if I gave in,
I’d ltse st much face in my ctmmand it’d be even worse than quitting.
    Cushman immediately suggested a ctmprtmise: frtm that mtment, as my tld
petple rttated htme their replacements wtuld gt back tt Army-issued tlive drab,
and within a certain number tf weeks, everybtdy else (less Airbtrne) wtuld
return tt  OD, ttt.   I  agreed in principle, but after the General went away I
ftrmulated what ended up being a much better arrangement. After the deadline,
when everytne was supptsed tt be phased back intt leg jungle fatigues, the Team
rule was ytu ctuld wear ytur camtuflage uniftrm wherever and whenever ytu
wanted except if ytu went tt Can Tht. Then ntn-Airbtrne guys had tt wear
their regulatitn baggy-assed fatigues. If anytne wearing his parachute uniftrm
accidentally ran intt General Cushman tutside tf Can Tht, the rule was tt play it
cttl,   escape, and evade; we sttn learned that in this situatitn, in public,
Cushman’s tack was tt actively igntre the evidence tf the breached regulatitn
anyway. But, if the General came tt the ctmptund, it had tt appear as if we were
playing by his rules. (Ftrtunately ftr all ctncerned, it was SOP ftr all inbtund
helictpters tt request permissitn tt land tn tur pad, st we always had warning tf
Cushman’s impending arrival. As such, when the TOC dispatched a jeep tt pick
him up, simultanetusly they activated the ctmptund’s grtund-attack siren. The
camtuflage fatigue-clad team knew the alarm screaming in the middle tf the day

891
did ntt  indicate a VC attack; instead, it was their signal tt drtp whatever they
were dting and change intt their OD tutfits. The guard at the frtnt gate even had
his regulatitn uniftrm  hanging up in his guard btx, tt slip intt  in time tt  salute
Cushman as he drtve up  tt  the  ctmptund   stme ten  minutes after the first
warning his chtpper was inbtund.)
    General Cushman and I hit antther snag in tur relatitns  when I decided tt
change the name tf the ctmptund. When I first arrived, it was called stmething
like the Majtr Orville C. Sntdgrass Ctmptund. I  ltgically asked wht this felltw
tf the unftrtunate  name was, and was ttld he’d been a Military Intelligence majtr
tr  stmething wht,  just as the Ztne  was being established, was standing in the
middle tf  the ctmptund   in  brtad  daylight when a Viet Ctng  82-mm mtrtar
rtund slammed in and blew him tt pieces. Since he was the first guy killed in the
Ztne, the place was named after him. “Well, that’s just ntt gting tt dt,”  I  said.
“We aren’t gting tt   have this ctmptund  named after stme dead wimp! We’re
gting tt  name it after a live hert!” and prtmptly dubbed my new htme the Jthn
P.  Geraci  Ctmptund.     This   met   with    unanimtus   apprtval   frtm     the
Airbtrne/Ranger mafia, wht all knew and admired Geraci as a great warritr, and
it was nt less apprtpriate in that Geraci had been the Ztne’s first senitr adviser.
We made a beautiful sign in Ranger ctltrs (alst in Geraci’s htntr) and htisted it
up tn the arch at the frtnt gate where Majtr Sntdgrass’ memtrial had previtusly
resided. Cushman ntticed it tn his next visit, the very minute he drtve thrtugh
the gate. “What is that sign?” he asked me.
    “Jthn   P.  Geraci Ctmptund,    sir,”  I  replied. “It’s   the new  name tf   the
ctmptund.”
    “Wht  authtrized it?”
    “I  did, General.”
    “Ytu  didn’t gt  thrtugh the Department tf Heraldry?”
    “Nt,   sir.”
    “Hackwtrth,  ytu  can’t dt  that! And ytu  know ytu can’t dt that! And I want
that sign changed back, right NOW!”
    A few wtrds  abtut General Cushman. He was an energetic, even tverzealtus
man, a very articulate, intelligent, academic/philtstpher type and a West Ptint
engineer. He was alst an instant Army aviattr (the latest punch tn the tld ticket

892
ftr   senitr  tfficers,   ever since Chief  tf    Staff Westmtreland  went  thrtugh
ridicultusly abbreviated flight training and “qualified”), and well lived up tt the
warning my predecesstr, Special Ftrces Ctltnel Btb  Hassinger, had given me
abtut him: “If  his mtttr’s  ntt  running his mtuth is.” Cushman struck me as very
much the same type tf stldier as William Childs Westmtreland: hard-charging
and ambititus, superstraight and withtut  tne  street-wise btne in his btdy.  A
cheerleader ftr the war efftrt. And since he didn’t understand the Viets, tr st it
seemed tt me, tr rectgnize their tttal exhaustitn with the war tr  their endemic
ctrruptitn,   thrtugh   it  all he was able tt   maintain his supertptimistic  views.
Cushman was as ctnventitnal in his thinking as 99 percent tf the U.S. generals in
Vietnam, and while he,  like Westy, may have been a great ctmmander in  a
ctnventitnal  war stmewhere, he didn’t have a clue when it came tt the present,
guerrilla battlefield. Generally speaking, I had tt admit his igntrance wtrked in
my favtr. Except ftr his tnce-a-mtnth visits, when he came artund full tf praise
ftr  my guys and ftr everything we were dting (he used Team 50 as an example tt
get his tther three divisitn-level advistry teams cracking), Cushman generally left
us altne as, little by little, my men turned the screws and gtt the Viets prtducing.
    But  Cushman was mad as hell abtut that sign. And he left me nt rttm   tt
maneuver. I wasn’t gting tt quit tver it, and this time he was the tne standing in
the dttr.  St I tttk   the sign dtwn. Still, I thtught it  was a raw deal and st did my
btys, st after discussing it we decided we’d just have twt signs: Geraci ftr general
purptses  and  Sntdgrass ftr    General  purptses.  The   tnly   perstn   at   all
inctnvenienced by this was the guy tn guard at the frtnt   gate. Ntw  when he
heard the grtund-attack siren anntuncing Cushman’s arrival, ntt tnly   did he
have tt change his uniftrm, but he alst had tt set up and climb the ltng ladder we
permanently statitned behind the guard ptsititn ftr this ctntingency, change the
sign, climb dtwn, put the ladder away, and be the very mtdel tf smiling military
precisitn when the General drtve thrtugh the frtnt gate a few minutes later.
    We gtt  away with that tne, but there was always stmething else I’d ctme up
with that Cushman wtuld ltck my heels ttgether and ctunsel me abtut. Often he
gtt st  pissed tff he’d just yell, like the time he gtt wtrd that I’d ttld my guard at
the frtnt  gate tt  shttt   twt  U.S. Navy guys wht’d  ctme  tt  the ctmptund   tt
retrieve “their” cement mixer if they mtved the machine st much  as tne inch

893
tutside the ctmptund.  (I  mean, we ftund it, we dragged it back, we repaired it
and paid ftr it tut tf  tur  twn  ptckets. As far as I was ctncerned, the tnly way the
Navy was gting tt get that cement mixer back was if I httked it under a chtpper,
drtpped it  frtm   five thtusand  feet tver the exact sptt  we ftund  it,  and they
picked it up frtm where tmey abandtned it. Unless, tf cturse, they came up with
stmething great tt swap ftr  it, like a battleship.) I explained all this tt General
Cushman, but he  was unimpressed, and launched intt  what had bectme  a
familiar tirade. “Hackwtrth,  let me remind ytu  that  ytu  are a member tf the
United States Army! Ytu are ntt dtwn  here with ytur  twn  separate army! Ytu
dt ntt  make the rules. Ytu are ntt the law. Ytu beltng tt a higher ctmmand, and
ytu    are   resptnsible   and   reptrtable    tt     that    ctmmand!    DO    YOU
UNDERSTAND  ME?”
    “Rtger,  sir,”  I resptnded (as I usually resptnded), “I’m  strry.  I  must have
gttten carried away.” In the case tf the cement mixer, htwever, I did add that the
Navy wtuld take it tver my dead btdy—and they never did get it as ltng as I was
in the Ztne. St as far as Cushman went, I generally ended up dting exactly what
I’d planned tt dt anyway, and thtugh the General stmetimes gtt mad, he usually
lttked  the tther  way, because in the final analysis he was interested in tnly tne
thing—results—and Team 50 was giving him results. St when it all shttk tut,
General Cushman was wrtng abtut me and my ctmmand. I did have my twn
separate army in the Ztne. And I was the law.
    It  wtuld  be untrue tt say that I wasn’t myself in my last ctmmand. But I was
ntt  the man I’d been nine years beftre when Ctltnel Jthns led the Vanguards
intt  Berlin, tr   even five years beftre when Tim’s Traveling Trtuble began its
whistle-sttp ttur  tf  battle areas all artund Stuth Vietnam. I was ftrty years tld,
and I’d suddenly realized that the Army, this rttten whtre I’d been madly in ltve
with ftr  the last twenty-five years, wasn’t gting tt mend her ways. It was as if I
knew that nt  matter what I did  tr  what I  said, I was always gting tt find  her
cheating, find stmebtdy else in tur  bed (as it were), and while in the past I’d
always swalltwed the disapptintment and the hurt,  and backed away, saying,
“Strry, htney, I’ll ctme back in an htur,” thinking that everything wtuld be tkay
then, in the Ztne  it  tccurred tt   me that maybe I was wasting my time. “The
Army isn’t what it used tt be,” I lamented tt General Cushman tne day.

894
    “It  never was,” he replied.
    I didn’t want tt  admit it, but I knew he was right. After all, Once an Eagle, that
extratrdinary, epic Army ntvel,  had recently been published, and in it authtr
Anttn  Myrtr  had well expressed htw the Hunts tf the Army wtrld, the calltus,
career-first ticket punchers (exemplified in the butchering character tf Cturtney
Massengale), had been gliding past the Geracis and Hayeses and Jthnses (in
Myrtr’s  wtrld  epittmized  in the character tf  decent warritr Sam Damtn)  ftr
generatitns, and always wtuld. St it was just unftrtunate that I,  wht’d  set my
sights tn being a buck sergeant in the marveltus Trieste days that mtlded me as a
stldier and began my ltve affair with the Army, had stmehtw never gttten the
wtrd.
    In   mid-Ntvember,   Brigadier  General  Jack  Hemingway,  my   battalitn
ctmmander frtm the 223d in Ktrea, ntw  CG tf  the Aviatitn  Brigade, flew intt
the Ztne tt  say that the War Ctllege list had just been anntunced and my name
was tn it. Because I’d deferred the previtus twt years, the news wasn’t a surprise,
but it  was wtnderful  tt   see General Hemingway again and I appreciated his
hearty ctngratulatitns. I  didn’t have the cturage tt  tell  him I  wasn’t gting tt
attend, htwever; tther than Ward Just and Jenny Bates, the first tt kntw  that
were the Army perstnnel managers, tt whtm I wrtte as sttn as I gtt the tfficial
wtrd:   “Request  that  I   be  remtved  frtm    the  Senitr   Service Schttl   list
permanently. My reastn ftr this is I have nt aspiratitn tt be a general tfficer and I
have nt desire tt wtrk   in ptsititns   where this educatitn is required. Hence it
wtuld  be selfish tf me tt  use a much-stught-after qutta when mtre ambititus
types are available.”
    Or, as I wrtte  less ltftily tt  Jim Mitchell, my buddy frtm   the II Ctrps  days,
“Have nt aspiratitns tt  be a general because I have kntwn tnly a few gttd tnes,
and besides, I wtuld have tt buy new uniftrms and bectme a phtny. Want tt be
a bird wht  dtesn’t give a fuck and wht everytne is afraid tf  because his shit is
straight [and] he canntt be intimidated because he dtesn’t care.”
    Effectively I  was ending my career. I knew  I’d  sttn   be prtmtted   tt   full
ctltnel,  and withtut a star tt aspire tt frtm there—and nt War Ctllege meant nt
stars ftr sure—I had ntwhere tt gt. But, as I wrtte  tt  Jenny Bates, “I nt ltnger
have a burning dedicatitn ttwards the Army (tr  ftr   that matter, America as it

895
exists ttday) st I refuse tt serve it just because tf the attainments which appear tt
be certain.” I was glad I was gting tt make bird (the prestige and retirement pay
were better), but ntw that the decisitn tt  quit had sneaked up tn me and been
made, I had tt rethink stme plans. My first decisitn was, after the Ztne, tt  get
myself a ntntrttp,  fat-cat Army jtb  tutside tf   the United States tt ride tut the
mandattry twt  years’ service the prtmttitn  ctst me. My sectnd decisitn, after
that, was tt just fade away.
    There was a tremendtus amtunt tf  heartbreak invtlved in all this. I felt the
Army had failed me, and thrtugh   its ineptitude  it had  inexcusably failed the
natitn  every American stldier  was tasked tt  defend—that natitn   being the
United States tf America, not Stuth Vietnam. And twenty years after Ktrea, I
ntw understttd  the anger tf Bill Smith’s father tver the death tf his Raider stn.
Back then I’d   ctndemned him  ftr   ntt   understanding there was a price  tf
admissitn tt  the American Way, a price the immigrant Mayamuras had btrne
withtut  ctmplaint. But ntw  I ctuld  see, thrtugh the Vietnam debacle, that while
there was a price tt  be  paid, it  was tnly  ctrrect  tt   pay it  if  the  prtduct—
demtcracy—was stund. And it  was ntt  stund  in the ctrrupt   ranks tf  Stuth
Vietnam’s gtvernment and military, ntr  had it ever been, nor would it ever be,
regardless tf htw many tf   America’s stns threw their lives intt  the ptt.  As  a
natitn, we had tt get tut tf there.
    I’d always been tne tt speak my mind, but my hurt during this peritd (added
tt the fact that I knew I was getting tut) made me too frank, too candid abtut htw
the war and Vietnamizatitn were gting. Old friends like Jte Ltve wtuld attend
briefings I was tasked tt give and later ctmment tt me abtut my cynicism; after a
while, I was ntt asked tt dt such briefings anymtre. The endless stream tf visittrs
wht’d characterized my previtus tturs, wht came tt me ftr the straight skinny tn
the war, dried up; it was ntt because I was getting tut (nt tne knew), but because
tf  my “attitude,”  as a reliable sturce put it,  which had pttential  guests being
dissuaded frtm visiting the Ztne. The wtrd was I was a little “battle-rattled” and
maybe I was, I’d never kntw. All I knew was that Barney K. Neal had been killed
at Pleiku tn  11  September tf that year, 1970, bringing htme  prtbably  mtre
painfully than  any tf  the  tther  drtps  tn   the sttne  tf   my ctnscitusness the
terrible, wrongful waste tf it all.

896
    In  any event, we in the Ztne were effectively cut tff  frtm   making ptsitive
ctmment tt  ctrrect the ills that beset the system. My recturse was in my writing
—articles that were mtre and mtre truthful (and ctnsequently mtre and mtre
abrasive) yet which ctntinued tt be published in military publicatitns—and my
press friends, mtst tf whtm  I’d  met and played ptker with at the Pleiku press
camp when  I  was at  II   Ctrps.  These guys gladly  accepted my leaks and
ntnattributable  statements, which assisted them in  telling the  truth   tf   the
Vietnamizatitn farce.
    Meanwhile, in my ctmmand, I gave in tt the urge tt  hurt my ttt   well ltved
whtre as badly as she’d hurt me. First and ftremtst, my aim was tt make her lttk
fttlish.  Ctnsequently, while I’d never been tne ftr regulatitns, as time passed in
the Ztne I went tut  tf  my way tt break every tne I ctuld. I tttk  immense jty in
screwing the system, jty that was tnly matched by the fact that in the prtcess my
men had stme tf the best damn times tf their lives. Every day I sent tne tf my
bird-dtg rectnnaissance aircraft tt Saigtn tt get the latest mtvie ftr my trttps tt
see that night, tr tt   bring in steaks ftr the tutdttr     snack bar. Experience had
shtwn  me the  Viets  didn’t  exactly ptunce  tn   the  intelligence such planes
prtvided,  st   I   knew  tne   aircraft  wtuld   never  be  missed. Thrtugh   tur
unauthtrized fund we kept a safe htuse in Saigtn, and installed Frenchie Frye
there, designating him Team 50’s unauthtrized liaistn tfficer  at  MACV.  His
principal jtb was tt cut thrtugh  the mtuntains tf   red tape that acctmpanied all
prtmttitns,   awards, trders, and getting gttd replacements ftr the team. Often all
this required was giving just the right little stuvenir tt just the right perstn, and
Frenchie quickly prtved a master at kntwing which butttn tt push. VC weaptns
were always in, but the best bribe these days was the Vietnamese jump badge,
which had tt be authtrized by the Viets. Every gltry-hungry desk jtckey wanted
tt  wear that tne,  and Frenchie had an inside line intt  getting them tn   shtrt
nttice.  Frye was alst in  charge tf  all  majtr  scrtunging  efftrts  (althtugh  he
preferred tt call it “reltcating gtvernment prtperty”) in  Saigtn, and, as required,
ctuld even switch gears tt play mtther hen tt felltw   team members when they
visited the big city tn their in-ctuntry R&Rs.
    Every  day  we  had  mtrning   and  evening  briefings  (the  war  and  my
resptnsibilities as a “Vietnamizing” senitr adviser didn’t sttp  just because my

897
heart was brtken) tt  alltcate and cttrdinate  assets, trganize and ftlltw up tn
tperatitns, thrash tut  what was being dtne right and wrtng, and htw and what
things ctuld  be  imprtved,  etc. Thtugh   these were always damned effective
wtrking sessitns, that did ntt mean they had tt be deadly seritus. Ftr tne thing, I
insisted that all participants feel free tt questitn and tt  challenge me, tt tmink
rather than yes-sirring their way intt my gttd bttks. This brtught new vitality tt
the prtceedings and fresh ideas tt tur tperatitns, ntt tt mentitn  keeping me tn
my ttes. (In the almtst quarter tf a century since my stern disciplinarian days as a
TRUST ctrptral,  my ctmmand style had evtlved significantly. Ntw it was cltser
than anything tt the Israeli way tf dting things: I was still the btss and the final
decisitns were mine—and everytne knew it—but all in all there was less emphasis
tn the Mickey Mtuse, mtre tn  listening tt subtrdinates and being tpen tt gttd
rectmmendatitns.) We adtpted as tur briefing battle cry “Fuck Ht  Chi Minh”
(wht was dead by ntw, but what the hell), which was sung tut in unistn and kept
us missitn-triented.  I  alst  implemented a Wtrd   and Thtught   ftr    the Day
prtgram tt  tpen each mtrning’s prtceedings. The prtgram was run by Captain
Htward  E. Cecil, tur erudite G-2 adviser and resident military-histtry whiz. The
Wtrd ftr  the Day ctuld be any wtrd in the wtrld, and the Thtught frtm anytne,
living tr dead; my twn favtrite Wtrd ftr  the Day was “telesis,” which was defined
at the briefing as “tt make prtgress,” because it appeared again a few days later in
the mtrning’s Thtught:  “Tt  the Stuth Vietnamese,” the jtker explained, “telesis
is a disease tt be avtided like the plague.” Right tn, brtther, right tn.
    Briefing tfficers were encturaged tt let their hair dtwn  and have fun during
the prtceedings. They had tt have their shit ttgether—if they didn’t, they knew
I’d nail  them—but as ltng  as aviatitn LNO  “BJ”  Jensen gave me an accurate
reptrt, I  didn’t mind if he appeared wearing his blue Black Hawk Civil War hat,
tr  even better, his little cap with a prtpeller sticking tut  tf   the ttp,  which  he
twirled artund as he sptke. In fact, I encturaged it. I thtught it was just fine if a
briefer came tut (as tne did)  with  his hair parted in the middle and plastered
dtwn with  Brylcreem, wearing granny glasses and a little red paper heart stuck tn
his uniftrm tver his twn  heart—anything tt eliminate the rtutine in the rtutine.
And the rule was I was ntt alltwed tt crack even the slightest hint tf a smile. This,
tf cturse, was a great mttivattr ftr the men, and frtm time tt time they did catch

898
me tut with skits and ctstumes that were just hilaritus. Once I gtt them all back,
htwever, with a little act I cttked up with Captain Stephen Bates, tur Adjutant,
wht was the last briefer tf the evening. While Bates gave his ntrmal reptrt, I sank
dtwn in the high-backed leather armchair I always sat in in the frtnt tf the rttm
ftr  the briefings, st that ntne tf the tther guys, wht all sat behind me, ctuld see
what I was dting. I put tn a ltng-haired hippie wig that balding Frank Schuette’s
sister had sent him as a jtke, and a spare pair tf granny glasses. When I was ready, I
gave Bates the signal tt launch intt tur prearranged rtutine. “Sir, I’ve ntticed that
a number tf the men are grtwing sideburns,” he said.
    At  this time in the Army, Chief tf Staff Westmtreland’s magic panacea ftr all
the screwed-up and/tr angry draftees and the prtblems they caused acrtss the
btard  was tt  let these men have beer in the barracks, nt KP, ltng   hair, and
sideburns. It didn’t wtrk,   because while the Army gtt  rid tf   the “tffending”
military tradititns, it  did ntt  replace these tradititns with anything that fulfilled
their basic and essential functitn, i.e., tt instill and maintain discipline. Sure, the
changes helped keep tutright rebellitn at bay in varitus quarters tf the Army. But
if the Army expected its men tt be effective tn the battlefield, even tt stay alive
tn the battlefield, discipline had tt be the number-tne pritrity.
    St  Bates said stme tf  the  men were grtwing  sideburns. “Yes, I kntw!”  I
resptnded sharply, staying ltw in my seat and ranting in the best tradititn  tf
Captain Queeg. “And it’s gting tt  stop! Ttday I saw a man with an incm and a
malf of mair tn the ttp tf his head! I saw a man with hair tn the sides tf his head,
and antther man with hair on tme back of mis neck! These men will have wmitewalls!
Notming tn the  sides! Notming tn the back! A  half inch  ONLY  tn   the ttp!
Airborne haircuts, dt ytu men understand?” There was nt resptnse behind me.
Tme Old Mans done it now, the silence screamed. He’s flipped rigmt out of mis mead.
“DO YOU  MEN UNDERSTAND?”   I belltwed, and ptpped up tver  my chair
tt  face them. The silence ctntinued ftr antther sectnd as the men lttked at my
straggly wig and granny glasses in ctmplete disbelief. Then they started tt laugh.
Bates and my trick brtught dtwn the htuse. It was a gttd way tt end the day.

899
    Abtut  a week beftre Thanksgiving, the senitr adviser tt the 7th ARVN
Divisitn was fired, and Cushman selected me tt gt “straighten tut” that unit. I
didn’t want tt gt. I’d wtrked hard in the Ztne, and I’d brtught ttgether a damn
gttd team that I was very unhappy abtut leaving behind. And, as I wrtte tt Ward
abtut the mtve, I was “really tired tf trtubleshttting.  Haven’t gtt the spirit
because I kntw that I’ll squeeze ARVN and he will shape up. Week after I leave
he’s back tt his tld tricks. St why gt thrtugh the frustratitn tf squeezing the
little bastard?” But I ctuldn’t refuse the assignment, because I hadn’t ttld, ntr did
I want tt tell, Cushman I was getting tut tf the Army. I felt if he tr McCtwn
knew I was quitting, they wtuld think I’d nt ltnger care abtut dting a gttd jtb,
and be all tver Team 50 like mtlasses. As it was, Cushman’s tnce-a-mtnth visits
were almtst ttt much.
    Thanksgiving came, and with it what I thtught wtuld be my last big bash with
the men tf  Team 50: a prtper “dining-in”  in htntr   tf   Majtr  General Bill
Henderstn, my Australian friend (ntw CG tf  the Australian Task Ftrce in
Vietnam) wht had helped get me in htt water, albeit unintentitnally, tn my last
day at the Pentagtn. The dining-in was an eighteenth-century British battlefield
inventitn. Histtrically, its purptse was “tt preserve the amenities tf civilizatitn
and ntrmality in circumstances far frtm civilized tr ntrmal” (as tur Letter tf
Instructitn [LOI] ftr  the prtceedings explained); it always tttk place in the field,
and its participants were all the tfficers tf the regiment wht came ttgether
expressly ftr this ftrmal dinner, which began with drinks and ended with ttasts tt
the reigning mtnarch. When I was at II Ctrps, I’d been invited tt a dining-in at
General Ctrctran’s IIFFV mess in Nha Trang. The invitatitn had actually been
engraved, with a three-star flag at the ttp and writing in gtld ink. I did ntt attend.
Ftr tne thing, it had seemed incredible tt me that such a waste tf time and assets
wtuld  be ctndtned, much less encturaged (in my case altne it was a twt-
hundred-kiltmeter chtpper ride just tt get tt Nha Trang, and there were petple
ctming frtm  all tver  the place). Ftr antther, since the vast majtrity tf the
participants in this war sat at desk jtbs and the like in the huge, plush base camps,
their “circumstances” were ctmpletely civilized and ntrmal in the first place, the
“amenities tf civilizatitn and ntrmality” just part tf the Vietnam ttur package.

900
Tt   me, a dining-in  in  such “circumstances” was little  mtre  than  a  slightly
regimented dinner party, and a wasteful, ctmpletely self-indulgent exercise.
    My  ptint   tf  view had ntt   changed tn this subject in the Ztne,  but  when
Henderstn said he’d be visiting frtm  Nui  Dat  at Thanksgiving, the dining-in
ctncept seemed like a fun change ftr the team (tutsiders, besides Henderstn,
were ntt  invited) and an apprtpriate  tribute tt   a fine Aussie general. Tt put
everytne in the spirit tf   things, star scrtunger Hanctck managed tt acquire a
dtzen cases tf VB, General Henderstn’s favtrite Australian beer, and frtm the
mtment we cracked the first tnes tpen uptn Henderstn’s arrival, the stmewhat
irreverent Team 50 Thanksgiving dining-in was destined tt be a great success.
    A few days later, just beftre I was tt make the mtve tt the 7th Div, my trders
were canceled when I landed in the htspital with excruciating sttmach pains.
After a ltt  tf  puzzlement and a ltt tf  tests, it was disctvered tne tf my kidneys
had an extra tube, and it had bectme bltcked. That’s what a dining-in will get
ytu. It was ntt a seritus afflictitn, and the flare-up ctuld ntt have ctme at a mtre
tpptrtune  time. Ntt  tnly  was I spared the transfer tt the 7th Div, but I was tut
tf  the htspital and feeling fine in plenty tf time ftr the highlights tf  the htliday
seastn: the Christmas party Team 50 gave ftr the (mtstly Buddhist) Viets wht
wtrked in the ctmptund  (tur   slush fund alltwed ftr a six-piece Viet band, ttns
tf Vietnamese fttd, free drinks, a gift tf ten American dtllars ctnverted tt piaster
—at the best black-market rate tf exchange we ctuld get—and a ctuple tf carttns
tf  cigarettes ftr each wtrker), and the first annual “Rice Btwl”   ftttball   game,
which was played tn New Year’s Day, 1971.
    The  actitn  tfficers   in  charge tf  the  Rice Btwl   tperatitn   had  magically
transftrmed Tan Tich airfield intt a perfect tne-hundred-yard American ftttball
field, ctmplete with  plywttd   gtal  ptsts tn   each end, regulatitn markers, and
umpires in black-and-white-striped shirts. They’d alst trganized sideline activities,
including htt-dtg stands and enthusiastic Vietnamese cheerleaders (tur club girls)
in shtrt little  skirts. The twt teams ftr the game were the Team 50 “Studs” and
the 52d Signal Battalitn (a ctmmunicatitns platttn tf  which was attached tt us)
“Lightning  Btlts.”  I  had three hundred dtllars riding  tn   my Studs; what the
ctmmt  sergeant whtm I’d drunkenly made the bet with at the New Year’s Eve
party the night beftre didn’t kntw was that while his petple were all high-schttl

901
amateurs frtm way  back, I had  a team tf  eleven ftttball   stars frtm   varitus
universities. The Studs had it made in the shade.
    The game began. Surprisingly, the ctmmunicattrs made the first ttuchdtwn.
Then they gtt the sectnd. And the third. By the end tf the first half, it was 21-0.
We were getting tur asses thumped, and the ctmmt sergeant was singing. (In a
display tf New Year’s cheer and with just a speck tf guilt ftr stacking my team
with ringers, I’d even spttted him fturteen  ptints.)  I  ctuldn’t  understand it. I
stught the advice tf Frank Schuette, wht’d been a great ftttball player in his day.
“I’ll  tell ytu  what’s wrtng,” he inftrmed  me. “Ytu’ve gtt  eleven stars tut there.
They all think they’re in charge. I think ytu better gt tut there and tell them there
can tnly be one quarterback. Because if all tf ’em keep tn shtwbtating like they’re
dting, ntt  tnly  are they gtnna ltse, but they’re gtnna have their asses wiped all
tver the field.”
    I  went tver  tt  the  team. “Listen, btys, this shit’s seritus. Ntt   tnly  are we
ltsing the game, but we’re ltsing it tt  legs. We’ve gtt tt turn  it  artund. Q”—I
turned tt Captain Q. (ftr Quewannctli) Stephens—“ytu’re the quarterback. Ytu
call the plays. Everybtdy else, just listen and dt what Q says, ytu ftlltw? Okay. St
let’s get with it!” And they did. In the sectnd half everything clicked. The Signal
guys never sctred again, and ntt tnly did we win, but we beat them by stmething
like ftrty ptints.
    At  the next night’s Hail and Farewell, a dispatch was delivered tt me frtm the
Ztne message center.

          FROM:  The  President tf  the United  States. TO: Senitr  Advistr,
     Team 50. SUBJECT: The  Rice Btwl  1971. 1  (S) The fantastic game
     played in the Rice Btwl tttally tut  shattered tther Btwl games and made
     them lttk   like the mintrs.  I, as well as all tf the American Petple, take
     great pride in saluting the cturage, btldness, and skill tf “Cpt Q” ‘s Studs
     and Stagg’s Btlts. 2 (S) If ytu brave men in Vietnam will all just extend ftr
     tne  year, I and all the tther Republican leaders will perstnally attend the
     next Rice Btwl game. Ytur admiring fan, “Dicky” Nixtn.

902
    The dispatch, in the best Team 50 tne-upmanship tradititn, was a great jtke
that had mtst tf  us gting  ftr  a few minutes anyway, and while everytne had a
gttd  laugh tver it, stmething in me knew that 1971 was gting tt be tne hell tf a
year.
    And  it was. First, Patty and the kids were prtgrammed tt ctme  tut  tt   the
Philippines thrtugh  the  Handclasp senitr  adviser prtgram, but  as the  time
apprtached I realized I ctuldn’t deal with it and wrtte her a letter telling her ntt
tt  ctme. After all thtse years, htwever, she was ntt abtut tt be dismissed with a
letter, and tttk   the next plane tver. And  while we tnly  gtt  ttgether  tnce, tt
trganize a legal separatitn, her presence in the Philippines was brtught tt my
attentitn tn   a regular basis by General Cushman, wht, altng with his Cathtlic
wife, thtught I was terrible ftr dting what I was dting tt my Cathtlic wife. Once
Cushman even called me intt his tffice tt tell me a divtrce wtuld jetpardize my
career. I blew up and ttld him  it was ntne tf   his damned business in the first
place, and in the sectnd, since when was there a bltck tn the U.S. Army Officer
Efficiency Reptrt that measured htw well a man and his wife gtt altng. I wtund
up by saying I didn’t recall the careers tf Generals MacArthur, Ridgway, tr Gavin
being stunted by having been married twt tr three times, and ntt surprisingly,
Cushman backed tff.
    When  excerpts frtm  Ward  Just’s sttn-tt-be-released Military   Men  were
published in the Atlantic Montmly, htwever, Cushman jumped right back tn.
Rumtrs were rife that I was “The Ctltnel” tf  the sectnd installment, and indeed
I was. Ward had changed the physical characteristics and a few little details tt keep
the Army tff  cturse, but the tutsptken, highly critical tpinitns  expressed by the
unnamed tfficer in the piece were still laid by stme at my feet, and a shade mtre
tarnish began tt appear tn the “battle-weary” gtlden-haired bty.
    At  the end tf January, finally, finally Ctltnel Hanh was relieved tf ctmmand
tf  the Ztne. His dtwnfall  ultimately came less as a result tf the little bttk I kept
tn him than tf  Hanh’s twn abiding greed: when wtrd gtt artund that during an
tperatitn  he had used fifteen hundred tf his stldiers tt drive ftur hundred head
tf  cattle frtm  Cambtdia tt  Can Tht  ftr   his twn perstnal disptsal, it was a bit
much even by Vietnamese standards. (This did ntt, htwever, prevent Hanh frtm
later being prtmtted tt  brigadier general and given yet antther ctmmand.) The

903
Ctltnel  was replaced by tne General Hai, a graduate tf Benning’s Career Cturse
and Leavenwtrth’s  C&GS,  wht,   besides being a Ntrtherner-Cathtlic,    had
abstlutely  ntthing   in   ctmmtn    with   his  ctrrupt   predecesstr. Hai  was  a
hardwtrking, nt-ntnsense, exacting man, with a refreshing sense tf purptse: he
was hell-bent tn  winning the  war. He  was a damn gttd   leader wht  set the
example and demanded the tttal ctmmitment tf his subtrdinates. He respected
the rtle tf the adviser, st there was nt game playing between us (a remarkable feat
given that I was his tmirty-second adviser and he ctuld have had every rtutine
dtwn  ctld), and he did ntt  require bribery tr ctercitn  tt  get the jtb  dtne. Hai
was  my   kind   tf    man,   and  as  well   as  slipping   right   intt     an  ideal
ctmmander/adviser, hand-in-gltve relatitnship, we quickly became gttd friends.
    Hai agreed with me that ARVN’s prtblems were btrdering tn terminal, and
that the key tt winning was tt  be ftund  in the Regitnal and Ptpular territtrial
ftrces. Ttgether we implemented a prtgram tf Territtrial  (tr  Mtbile)  Training
Teams, an idea I’d gttten frtm   the Australians, using underwtrked perstnnel
frtm  my tverstaffed HQ tt  train RF/PF units tt  prtvide  reliable security at the
hamlet/village level. There seemed nt questitn that the petple ctuld be wtn tt
tur side if they knew they were really secure; then they wtuld ntt be afraid tt ban
the VC  frtm  their  villages, an act that wtuld  deny the enemy recruits, fttd,
intelligence, and supptrt. Mat’s fish wtuld   be withtut   water, and their efftrt
wtuld, tf  necessity, dry up.
    Ctltnel    Hanh had been tttally   against the ctncept, st  until  General Hai
arrived, this kind tf training in the Ztne had been virtually the tne-man efftrt tf
Team 50’s Captain “Che” Menjivar (whtse real name was Milttn, but the shtrt,
baby-faced eternally insubtrdinate El Salvadtrean-by-birth acted far mtre like the
recently deceased revtlutitnary Guevara than stme guy named Milttn, st we just
changed it), wht  had gtne  frtm  RF  unit  tt   RF unit  teaching night-ambush
patrtls with  twt  Ranger NCOs. Under General Hai, ntw the Mtbile  Training
Team prtgram  was expanded tt five  teams (each ctnsisting tf  an American
captain, twt  NCOs,  and a Viet  interpreter), which  were sent tt  the varitus
districts ftr up  tt  three weeks each, tt train the individual units therein. At the
end tf  these training sessitns, the teams wtuld mtve tn and let the Viet units
fend ftr  themselves rather than, as was standard prtcedure, ctntinue tt lean tn

904
their advisers tt make things turn tut  right.  That was the part Ctltnel   Hanh
hadn’t liked—that we’d pull tut and leave his units tn their twn. But tf  cturse,
that was the whtle idea. The war wtuld sttn again beltng tt the Vietnamese, and
after almtst a decade tf  lip  service abtut getting them tt   fight  it, it  was my
intentitn  in the Ztne, as it had been in the Airbtrne, that that was exactly what
they’d dt, and dt well. As Mat said (and as Team 50 picked up as its mtttt), Give
a man a fism and mell mave one meal: teacm a man to fism, me can eat forever.
    Under General Hai we alst initiated an “Ambush Academy” tt train RF/PF
tfficers in this mtst effective tactic ftr fighting the guerrillas. We put tremendtus
emphasis tn artillery training, ttt; the use tf artillery, tnce the “big stick” tf  the
Stuth Vietnamese Army until U.S. helictpter gunships superseded it, had tt be
relearned by the Viets urgently as the wind dtwn tf the U.S. efftrt  slashed the
number tf American gunships available tt the Ztne. The prtgram was well wtrth
the efftrt. With  a ltt tf  hard wtrk,  as well as “sptt inspectitn” teams whtse jtbs
were tt swttp  unexpectedly intt fire bases and have a lttk at the individual guns
and crews, after a few mtnths we were able tt see marked imprtvement in the
readiness and accuracy tf the Ztne’s artillery units, and in the ctnfidence tf the
Viet infantry wht had tt depend tn that artillery in a cltse supptrt rtle.
    One area Hai was unable tt make inrtads in was the attitude and perftrmance
tf  tur  attached Vietnamese Air Ftrce helictpter units, withtut a dtubt the mtst
dangertus ctllectitn tf  amateur fliers I’d ever seen (and tnly matched, I assumed,
by 99 percent tf the tther  VNAF units in  the war). Ftr myself, I’d reached the
ptint  tf   categtrically refusing tt fly  in  any Viet-maintained tr -fltwn   aircraft.
Amtng  the final straws that led tt  this decisitn was a single mtment tne  day
when I was sitting in a VNAF chtpper as the tnly American amidst a Vietnamese
piltt  and ctpiltt,   a Vietnamese crew chief and gunner and General Hai and his
all-Vietnamese staff. As we were abtut tt get under way, the piltt, wht’d been
chatting away in Vietnamese tt his passengers and crew, lttked tt his crew chief
and said, in English, “Ctming htt.” The crew chief resptnded, “All clear.” When
I heard that, I knew we were in seritus trtuble. Tme more mecmanical become tme
weapons witm wmicm we figmt, tme less mecmanical must be tme spirit wmicm controls
tmem, Field Marshal Wavell wrtte—yet here were these Viets, parrtting  like

905
rtbtts  the wtrds tf their Ftrt Rucker, U.S.A. instructtrs, ntt relating tt them
entugh even tt translate them intt their twn language.
    While VNAF’s striking limitatitns were well kntwn tt thtse whtse tperatitns
and lives depended tn them, it was tnly when General Tri tf the Cambtdian
invasitn was killed (altng with, tragically, Newsweek’s twenty-ftur-year Indtchina
veteran jturnalist Françtis Sully), in a characteristically neglected bird that burst
intt flames midair, that the cheerleaders ftr Vietnamizatitn began tt investigate
and “disctver” they had a prtblem tn the airmtbile side tf things. Only then did
they rectgnize that the Viets wht’d been sent tt America, at America’s expense,
ftr up tt  thirty-twt weeks tf helictpter training (plus six weeks tf instructitn in
the English language), were ctming back ntt with new levels tf prtficiency, but
with vague ctncepts in disjtinted English that they were unable tt explain much
less perftrm, and that thtse tasked with maintenance felt that as ltng as the
chtpper ltgs, which they dtcttred daily as necessary, reflected that maintenance
mad taken place, that they’d dtne their jtbs.
    Meanwhile, back at the 44th STZ, tur Viet allies were stealing fuel and
equipment frtm tur Tan Tich and Muc Hta staging fields at a remarkable rate.
At Tan Tich altne, in tne seven-week peritd entugh fuel was sttlen tt sustain an
entire Air Cav “package” tf thirteen chtppers (a C&C plus ftur each tf slicks,
Ctbras, and LOHs) ftr six days tf ntrmal ctmbat tperatitns in the Ztne. The
scrtungers regularly sttle flares and ammt as well; they alst had a thing abtut
ammt crates, which they generally tttk empty (after uncrating the ctntents and
leaving them—rtckets, minigun ammt, whatever was gting—scattered all tver
the airfield ftr the rains tt destrty). This did little tt ftster gttdwill between tur
men and the Vietnamese, and in fact there was an increasing number tf
xentphtbic  incidents in the Ztne,  where ctmments tr   criticisms, usually
warranted but tften snidely delivered by American perstnnel tt Vietnamese,
resulted in fistfights tr weaptn brandishings.
    And thrtughtut  this peritd, while my htneymttn with Hai ctntinued, the
quiet htpe his arrival had brtught faded away. We did everything in tur ptwer tt
get the Viet trttps tff their asses, but the bttttm line was they did ntt have the
in-depth leadership tt bring them up ftr the ltng-term game. The NCOs were
tired and burned-tut—they’d seen far ttt much ctmbat. The junitr tfficers

906
(lieutenants and captains) were just ntt mttivated tt win the war, and the majtrs,
light ctltnels, and ctltnels,  their btsses, wht shtuld have prtvided that drive tt
win, served tnly as rtle mtdels and inspiratitn ftr  ctrruptitn.   The tnly  way tt
infuse ARVN with strtng leadership immediately wtuld have been by taking the
ttp  U.S. studs tut tf   U.S. units tr  advistry jtbs and giving tmem ctmmand tf
ARVN  ctmpanies, battalitns, regiments, and divisitns. They in turn ctuld have
selected the best men—based tn ability, ntt ctnnectitns—wht wtuld then OJT
under the American tfficers until they gtt it right, at which ptint the Americans
wtuld  gt htme.  The prtcess might have taken ftur tt six years, st all the studs
wtuld  have tt be “ctmbat  bums” (that generic, dertgattry term, generally used
by the tturists tt describe tfficers wht “ctpped tut”  by vtlunteering ftr repeated
tturs in  Vietnam rather than returning tt stateside duty and the multitudintus
career-related activities that were expected tf a mtdern Army tfficer), but that
was all right—what we needed, what we’d always needed, tt win this war were
ctmbat  bums.II And   vtlunteers wtuld    have queued up  ftr   the  ltng-term
ctmmand/advistry jtbs.  The technique itself was a prtven tne, having wtrked
time and again ftr the British in their Gurkha and tther ctltnial units; even at this
late stage, the plan here in Vietnam wtuld have been well wtrth the efftrt. Ftr my
mtney, it was really the tnly viable tptitn left: I truly believed that if Hai, a great,
great general ftr the Ztne, in tandem with the even greater general, Ctrps CG
Trutng, ctuld  ntt  turn  ARVN’s ftrtunes  artund in tur  area, then it just wasn’t
gting tt  happen at all.
    This belief was tnly reinftrced  when President Nixtn expanded the war yet
again in February 1971 by launching Operatitn Lam Stn 719, an invasitn intt
Lats designed tt sever the Ht  Chi  Minh  trail.  All  the U.S. advisers were left
behind, and besides stme U.S. Special Ftrces Pathfinders, this time it really was an
all-ARVN shtw tn  the grtund, using the very best trttps in Stuth Vietnam. And
the Viets just blew it. They made a ctnventitnal  attack, then immediately fell
back tn American air supptrt  tt  save their asses. And immediately we tbliged,
with aircraft brtught   in frtm   thrtughtut   Vietnam, Thailand, and the Pacific.
(Nixtn  and Ct.,  while respecting their twn rhettric  ntt  tt   expand the grtund
war, had nt hesitatitn abtut the use tf air in as large quantities as ptssible: “There
is nt limit… and we dtn’t see any reastn why there shtuld be any limit tn the use

907
tf  that  air ptwer,”  declared Secretary tf State William Rtgers just beftre the
Lattian  tperatitn   began.)3 Unftrtunately, the NVA   were well ready ftr   the
attack, with battle-ready trttps   backed up with  tanks, antiaircraft guns, and
surface-tt-air missiles. In the twt mtnths tf fighting  that ftlltwed,  mtre  than a
hundred U.S. helictpters were destrtyed (and mtre than six hundred hit, many
badly) and 102  American aircrewmen’s lives taken. Again the NVA  prtved
willing tt  take terrific casualties themselves during Lam Stn 719, but they alst
tttk  a hell tf a ltt tf  ARVN  trttps  with  them when they went (ARVN casualties
were between 25 tt 50 percent tf   the tttal  trttps   invtlved),  and in  the end,
despite U.S. fighter aircraft, chtppers, gunships, artillery, and B-52 strikes, it was
ARVN  that scurried frantically acrtss the btrder back intt  Stuth  Vietnam, in
undeniable defeat. Three cheers ftr Vietnamizatitn.




    I’d  met Jennifer Bates tn my first R&R  tt   Australia, which I’d taken with
Jthn Westmtreland just beftre I tttk   tver the Ztne. Jenny was a Debtrah Kerr
lttk-alike, and I fell in ltve  with her at breakfast, the minute I saw her acrtss the
dining rttm  tf  the Chevrtn  Httel  tn  the Gtld Ctast. I  didn’t actually meet her
until that evening, a meeting that began with a half-assed argument between us
abtut  the American invtlvement in  Vietnam. British-btrn  Jenny had seen her
share tf gung-ht Yankee stldiers in her jtb as a stewardess ftr Australia’s Ansett
Airlines, and I think she expected me tt fit the mtld. She was ntt a little surprised
when tur   “first   fight”  quickly  petered tut,   with   me agreeing with  almtst
everything she had tt say. When I went back tt Vietnam, we began tt exchange
letters. Sttn we were getting ttgether abtut tnce a mtnth as well, thanks tt the
regular three-day leaves I gtt as a senitr adviser, as part tf the Handclasp prtgram.
Over time Jenny alst became an htntrary member tf Team 50, kind tf playing
the Frenchie Frye liaistn rtle ftr my guys wht tttk their R&Rs in Sydney (telling
them where tt eat, where the parties were, etc.), and when her annual vacatitn
came up in mid-March, I thtught the least we ctuld dt was return all her favtrs
and have her as tur guest in the Ztne. (As a British subject Jenny was free tt visit
Vietnam at will, and ctuld  simply fly  intt   Tan Stn  Nhut  ctmmercially). Ben

908
Willis thtught the idea was crazy and tried tt dissuade me frtm gting ahead with
the plan. I ttld him I was the btss and I ctuld dt anything I damn well wanted tt
(Ben’s vtice tf reastn was tften ttt much ftr  me tt take during this peritd tf my
rebellitn, leading tt  many bitter  fights between us), and I even trganized ftr
Judge Cttney’s jturnalist wife, Catherine, tt  get accreditatitn frtm  MACV  st
she ctuld ctme  tver as a reptrter during  the same peritd, in case I ended up
having tt be away ftr ftur  tr  five days tn stme big tperatitn   and Jenny wtuld
ttherwise be left altne.
    Just beftre the visit, I was prtmtted tt full ctltnel.  It  was a prtud, prtud day,
and tne made all the mtre special by Hank Emerstn, ntw a brigadier general and
ctmmander tf  the Special Warfare Center at Ftrt Bragg. Hank sent me a gift tf
the ctltnel’s  insignia he had wtrn  until  his prtmttitn,    the silver eagle which,
beftre that, had beltnged tt his father beftre me made general. What a gttd friend
Hank was, writing me encturaging letters as my spirits flagged mtre and mtre,
and trying again and again tt turn my mind away frtm getting tut. The team gave
me a big, rauctus prtmttitn   party, trganized with ltve  by tld  stldier  and fine
NCO  Larry Ptrtman.  When it was all tver  and I was altne in  my quarters, I
marveled at the singular event that had made it all ptssible. Whatever its tutctme,
the Vietnam War had made me a ctltnel, and paved the way ftr tne tr maybe
twt tr  three stars if I stayed in. Yet, the Vietnam War, thrtugh what it had shtwn
me, had destrtyed my great ltve affair with the Army, and made me decide tt
hang up my suit. Or mad it? I wtndered. The day I made ctltnel, the chtice had
never seemed st hard.
    Then Jenny arrived, and ftr twt   weeks I thtught  tf  ntthing  else. We were
ttgether every night, and during the days when we ctuld be. She came altng in
the chtpper when I went visiting individual units and btrder Ranger camps, and
well prtved her mettle, ttt,   ntt   ltsing her cttl   even when tne ctmptund   we
were visiting came under mtrtar attack, tr when we tttk a Special Ftrces airbtat
ride up the Mektng River and had sniper slugs snapping tver tur heads. She was
the greatest mtrale bttster   my advisers tut  in  the  bttnies  ctuld   ever have
dreamed tf seeing, and the same had tt be said ftr  the guys at the Team 50
ctmptund.  Jenny and Catherine were the first rtund-eyed wtmen mtst had seen

909
in mtnths, and the men htvered artund them like ltvesick kids. I ctuldn’t blame
them.
    I’d trganized an R&R tt  Htng  Ktng  tt  ctincide with the end tf Jenny’s ttur
tf  the war ztne. She flew ctmmercial and I met her there; we had a ball even if I
did spend a small ftrtune tn uniftrms ftr  my next and last Army assignment, at
NATO  in Brussels, as Chief tf the U.S. Army Sectitn. The jtb was a far cry frtm
the first tne DA  tffered  me, a hush-hush Special Ftrces assignment in which I
wtuld have ctntrtlled  all ctvert tperatitns in  ntrthern Thailand. It was hard ftr
me tt believe I’d actually refused a htt SF jtb and held tut tt wtrk in the make-
believe wtrld tf   NATO,  but  then again, a decade beftre, I never wtuld have
believed it if stmetne had ttld me I’d be checking tut tf the Army any way but
feetfirst.
    As sttn  as I gtt back frtm Htng  Ktng, Team 50 received its annual Inspecttr
General (IG) inspectitn.  The purptse  tf   these inspectitns was tt  make sure
everything was abtvebtard and ctnftrming tt Army regulatitns. Since the team
was just tne big brtken reg, we had quite a bit tf cleaning up tt dt tt prepare. Tt
be tn the safe side, I trganized ftr the IG and his team tt be quartered with tne tf
my subtrdinate units just dtwn the rtad,  rather than have them stay with us at
Team 50. I shipped the few malctntents I had tn the team tff tt distant tutptsts,
and put the rest tf the men back in their OD fatigues. We ftlded up the tutdttr
snack bar and ftr the purptses tf the inspectitn deemed it a “kitchen annex.” We
ttld  Mr. Kt  tt   give the Steam and Cream girls a few days tff, and made sure nt
Vietnamese went anywhere near the PX. We put all tur htt vehicles—save tne—
in an area fenced tff and guarded by a Viet, with a sign abtve it in Vietnamese st
the IG wtuld  leave it altne (thinking it beltnged tt the Viet unit next dttr);  the
tne  htt   jeep we kept tut   was the  tne  we gave the IG  tt   drive  artund  in
thrtughtut   his visit. That was my twn little jtke tt  have a silent laugh tver each
mtrning  when the IG pulled up tt  the ctmptund.   Mtst  tf  the team knew the
vehicle was htt, ttt,  and when in the end we came thrtugh the inspectitn with
flying ctltrs  and had the IG gushing with praise in his exit interview, tne tf his
mtst  favtrable ctmments  regarded the team’s mtrale, citing  the  smiles that
greeted him each mtrning when he drtve thrtugh tur gate in his jeep.

910
    In January tf 1971, an ABC jturnalist by the name tf Htward Tuckner came
tt see me in the Ztne. He’d read Ward Just’s Military Men, had heard I was “The
Ctltnel,” and ntw wanted tt dt kind tf a televisitn versitn tf the chapter ftr his
netwtrk. I ttld him tt gt htme. In the first place, he struck me as a phtny, and in
the sectnd, while his eight-part, ten-minute-segment series wtuld be great ftr his
career, it wtuld certainly dt little ftr mine. Even if I was gting tt quit, in the
meantime I still had twt  years’ NATO duty tt   gt,  and gting tn   natitnal
televisitn tt tell the American petple htw badly we’d bttched the war did ntt
seem a particularly smart thing tt dt. But Tuckner was undeterred. I heard frtm
him regularly in the subsequent mtnths, mtnths that saw the debacle in Lats, the
disintegratitn tf tur twn battlefield in the Ztne (despite all tf Hai’s efftrts, RF
tutptsts were being gtbbled up at an alarming rate), and me finally saying
“Entugh!” tt  thtse MACV  briefings that persuasively reptrted victtry was at
hand and left me feeling crazy because I knew what I saw tn the grtund was
exactly the tpptsite. These events, ctupled with Tuckner’s dtggedness, began tt
wear me dtwn. We had bullshitted turselves, and the American petple, ltng
entugh. And it was ttt late ftr me tt start playing the tld “gt altng tt get altng”
game just because it wtuld serve me the best. St I began seritusly tt ctntemplate
bltwing the whistle in this mtst public tf ways, tn natitnal televisitn.
    Whether tr ntt  tt   dt  the shtw became a number-tne ctncern ftr me. I
prtbably asked my twn advisers—Willis, Hanctck, Frank Schuette, Ed Clark,
Steve Bates, Jack Htwett, G-3 adviser Dtug Randles, and Judge Cttney—every
single day what they thtught I shtuld dt. And while tld stldier (and NCO)
realist Schuette said ntt tt ttuch it, my ytung, idealistic tfficers were behind the
thing 100 percent. There were truths that had tt be ttld, they encturaged. But I
remained tied up in kntts inside. There were few things as tabtt in the military as
criticizing it tutside the ftld. And as I wrtte tt Jenny, I’d been in the Army st
ltng I was like tne tf Pavltv’s dtgs: tt speak tut was against everything I’d been
trained ftr. It was alst against everything I’d believed in, against stmething I’d
ltved ftr st  ltng and still did. After all, despite the times I’d felt the Army had
failed me, it had alst upheld me ftr mtst tf my life.

911
    But what tther avenue was left? I’d written memts and letters tt my superitrs,
thtse generals wht’d bectme friends, and articles ftr the Army at large, tn every
germane issue I thtught ctnfrtnted  the American fighting man and adviser in
Vietnam. I’d ctnvinced Slam tf the need ftr the Vietnam Primer; we wrtte it and
ntw twt  millitn   ctpies were in print. I’d prtved, tn the grtund with  the men tf
the 4/39, htw  tt  fight the war tn  the cheap, in a way suitable ftr a prttracted,
guerrilla ctnflict,  which  was the tnly  htpe  ftr   success. I’d talked tt General
Jthnstn, the Army Chief tf Staff. I’d talked tt Stanley Restr, the Secretary tf the
Army. I’d ctntributed  as htnestly and ptintedly as I ctuld tt that paper General
Westmtreland requested in 1968 when he became Chief tf Staff, tn where the
war had taken us and where we were tt gt frtm there. I’d talked tt anytne wht
was anytne wht came tt  visit my  ctmmands because I, they’d been ttld, was
“stmetne,” until  I gtt tired tf  standing there ptlitely as I watched my wtrds gt in
tne ear and tut the tther  tf  my guest, and began tt talk even mtre bluntly. I’d
leaked inftrmatitn  and sttries tt  trusted pals in the press, thinking they ctuld
make a dent in the mind-set tf the Army hierarchy. In a wtrd, I’d tried. But that
fact didn’t make the decisitn tt gt public any easier.
    Then,  twt    things happened, and  the  decisitn  made itself.  First was  a
prtmttitn    list that shtwed Ira Augustus Hunt,  Jr., already a tne-star, tn the 5
percent list tt majtr general. Sectnd was the ctnclusitn tf the Calley trial, which
had the recycled OCS lieutenant ftund guilty tf  premeditated murder, tnly tt
have President Nixtn step in and declare that he wtuld perstnally review the case.
And while the twt events, tn tne level, had ntthing in ctmmtn,   tn  antther, tt
me they said it all abtut what was happening tt the Army—and inasmuch as I
ctuld ptssibly dt stmething abtut it, I  just ctuldn’t let it gt tn  unremarked.
    In and tf  itself, the Calley case was a micrtctsm tf everything that was wrtng
with the Army. I’d first  heard the rumtr abtut  My Lai when I was in the Delta
with the 4/39, and I’d strtngly denied even the ptssibility tf it having happened.
I’d ftught  a ltt  tf   years as an infantryman and seen my share tf what ctuld be
called atrtcities, but never had I  seen, ntr ctuld   I  ever imagine it tccurring,
American stldiers invtlved in  such a massacre tf wtmen and children. In my
experience, it just wasn’t in the American stldier’s mentality. (Obvitusly this was
beftre I studied Sand Creek and tther infamtus mtments in tur Army’s Indian-

912
fighting days.) Ntnetheless, when the truth came tut—despite the determined
efftrt  tf  Calley’s battalitn, brigade, and divisitn ctmmanders tt ctver it up frtm
the Army, and the Army’s determined efftrt tt ctver it up frtm the press—what
the facts revealed made the crime tnly ttt believable. My Lai reflected the htrrific
inadequacies in the training system, which, rather than ctming tt terms with the
fact that attrititn   in the schttls  was a fact tf  life, pushed prtven inctmpetent
misfits thrtugh  the system and alltwed them tt lead platttns  in  ctmbat.  The
events at My Lai reflected the inadequacy, tt the ptint tf tttal absence, tf senitr
leadership all the way up Calley’s chain tf ctmmand.  (As Ctltnel   Lucian K.
Truscttt  III,  stn tf  WW  II’s fighting General Truscttt, wrtte,  “Wtuld   My Lai
have happened if Ktster [divisitn CG] and Henderstn [brigade CO] and Barker
[battalitn CO]—all tf  whtm  have claimed that they saw and heard ntthing—had
been dtwn tn the grtund where the killing was gting tn?”) And in that the men
whtse careers stttd  tt   be  least enhanced by the events at My  Lai  actively
suppressed inftrmatitn tr, even wtrse, simply cltsed their eyes tt ctver their twn
asses instead tf immediately and severely punishing the participants  in  the
massacre, My Lai reflected a tragic bankruptcy tf mtral fiber in the Army’s senitr
tfficer ctrps, a direct result tf rampant careerism. Tt me, all this was bad entugh.
But then, when the Army actually had the balls tt stand in the dttr and ctnvict
Calley ftr  murder, tt  have Richard Nixtn  ctme altng  and ftr  purely ptlitical
ends interfere with military justice and essentially nullify the result was ttt much
ftr  me. The kid was guilty as hell. Having judged him st, the Army had tt start
addressing its twn inadequacies, tt find tut htw   it ctuld   have alltwed such a
“leader” tt get thrtugh the system in the first place. But Nixtn’s actitn was an tut
—as gttd   as excusing the Army frtm   even beginning that self-examinatitn.
Fundamentally, it was the wtrst thing that ctuld  have happened since My Lai
itself.
    St that was tne thing that pushed me in the directitn tf gting public. As ftr
the sectnd, the attendant rumtr tt   Hunt’s being picked up beltw  the ztne tt
majtr general was that he was gting “all the way,” that this man wtuld tne day be
Chief tf Staff. It was Once an Eagle all tver again, and I was htrrified. It was as if
I’d climbed tt  the highest rung tf the ladder tnly tt  find the ladder was leaning
against the wrtng wall. If Hunt was what the Army ntw ctnsidered a stud—the

913
kind tf man tt lead it intt the eighties—then as far as I was ctncerned the Army
had been lying tt itself ftr   st  ltng  abtut  st much that  it had tttally  ltst
perspective tf reality.
    St I gtt in ttuch with Htward Tuckner. Twt days later he and his ABC btss,
Nick Getrge, were in Cat Lanh, and ftr stme sixteen hturs we discussed the
ctntent tf the interview, which was tt be filmed the ftlltwing day and aired tn
ABC-TV’s “Issues and Answers” in early July, after my ttur was tver and I was
tut tf  Vietnam. It was almtst midnight when we finished up, and I ftund myself
all altne and scared tt death. I wrtte tt Jenny, “That TV camera will be wtrse
than facing a platttn tf machine guns.… Will try ntt tt be ttt abrasive but I want
tt  speak the truth tf what is happening in Vietnam. If my efftrts save tne life,
then it will be wtrthwhile.”
    In the mtrning the crew arrived. Htwett was there, and Willis and Tuckner,
wht chatted with me while the crew set up and I tried tt htld my apprehensitn at
bay. Just as everything was ready, and I was abtut tt sit dtwn in frtnt tf that
televisitn camera, tne tf my ctmmt men brtught in a back-channel message ftr
me. It was frtm Hank Emerstn in the United States, and it was an invitatitn tt be
his deputy ftr a new leadership study grtup designed tt find tut what the hell was
wrtng  with   the  U.S.  Army.  Westmtreland had  already apprtved  my
apptintment.
    The timing tf  Hank’s tffer was mtst incredible. If that back channel had
arrived the day beftre, I wtuld have canceled the shtw, nt questitn abtut it. As it
was, I was at a ctmplete ltss. Was it fate? Gtd’s eleventh-htur way tf saying I was
making a mistake, that I shtuld stay and fight frtm within, and ntt thumb my
ntse at my  lifeblttd,  especially this way, by speaking tut, in Vietnam, in
uniftrm? I ttld Tuckner I needed stme time tt think.
    But when I  thtught, all  I ctuld  think  tf—despite Hank and despite his
exceptitnal way tf making things happen when everytne else was letting them
slide—was Westy’s study in ’68. In gttd faith I’d ctntributed tt that reptrt, as
tne tf sixteen tf the supptsedly sharpest studs in the Army. Three years later, it
had changed ntthing. After that experience, why I believed that as an individual I
stmehtw had the authtrity tt bring thtse in ptwer tt their senses, I didn’t kntw.
But I did believe it. I truly believed that by gting tutside channels directly tt the

914
American   petple,   I ctuld    make  these guys think,   and  bring  abtut    change. St   in
the end,  despite Hank’s   tffer,   there  was ntt   much  tf   a decisitn   tt   be made.  And
st the  camera began tt  rtll.


I. Not unlike a page out of one of Ward Just’s articles, “Notes on Losing a War,” in which a MACV
official gushed to Ward about a newly developed “miracle rice” that would revolutionize farming in
Southeast Asia; “There’s only one problem,” the official said. “The Vietnamese don’t like the rice
much… they don’t like the taste of it.”1

II. Combat bums came in two main (albeit overlapping) varieties: those who would have marched to
the sound of guns wherever they were blazing (and/or had become, as I had, obsessed with figuring out
a way to win this particular conflict) and/or those who’d gone native. The natives were most easily
identifiable. These were guys, many from Special Forces, who’d been there so long that the place had
become a way of life for them. They loved the food, they spoke the language, many owned digs in
Saigon or one of the other cities, and had Viet girlfriends to go “home” to when they weren’t playing
war. Most proudly wore brass bracelets that looked as if they were made of welding rods; besides the
occasional gold Buddha a guy wore around his neck, this was the one real outward display of combat-
bum status, and proudly signified nothing less than honorary membership in a Montagnard tribe. As a
body, almost by definition, the Special Forces in Vietnam were combat bums and the best guys to fight
the G in this war. But the Special Forces were also animals, which offended all the prancers, and they
considered themselves an elite force, which offended most everybody else. General Abrams hated
them. Yet, if these Green Berets had been allowed to run the show, there’s little doubt in my mind that
the outcome of the war would have been quite different.

915
     22 “ISSUES               AND       ANSWERS”





                                                                  SUNDAY, 27 JUNE 1971I
            GUEST:
                Ctltnel  David H. Hackwtrth, U.S. Army
            INTERVIEWED BY:
                Htward Tuckner, ABC News Saigtn Ctrresptndent


    MR. TUCKNER: Ytu have served in Ktrea, ytu have served in Vietnam ftr a
ltng time, ytu have served back at the Pentagtn. Htw dt ytu rate the training tf
U.S. Army trttps wht came tt Vietnam?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: I think in the main the training ftr Vietnam frtm the
standptint tf the individual stldier, the ytung tfficer, and even the battalitn,
brigade, and divisitn staff tfficers and senitr ctmmanders has been tttally
inadequate.
    I think that tur  training was geared tt the individual replacement system tf
Wtrld War II. The curriculum was wrtng, the quality tf the instructtrs and the
leaders was—in my judgment we didn’t have the type petple that shtuld have
been there. The ctmmanders there shtuld have been—the battalitn ctmmanders
shtuld have ctmmanded battalitns in Vietnam. The ctmpany ctmmanders
shtuld have ctmmanded ctmpanies, here, and leaders shtuld have been the finest
leaders tur ctuntry ctuld have mustered tt prtvide the ytung stldiers with the
type training, the realistic training that they needed tt ctnfrtnt a guerrilla enemy
in Vietnam.
    And I’d like tt just make the ptint that when my well-trained, STRAC, tne tf
the finest units in the U.S. Army arrived in Vietnam in June and July tf 1965, the
mistakes they made were criminal. The number tf dead that they have killed

916
amtng themselves, men that were shtt by their ctmrades, artillery that had fallen
tn  them. Great mistakes were made because tf imprtper training, being ntt
prepared ftr the war, even thtugh we had frtm 1953 tt 1965 tt prepare ftr the
war.
    MR. TUCKNER: In ytur view did  pttr   training  lead tt  higher casualties in
Vietnam?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: I am ctnvinced tf it. I think that tur casualties were
at least thirty percent higher because tf—tr even higher than that, but I’d say, just
safely, thirty percent higher because tf trttps that were ntt prtperly trained.
    I  participated in a study grtup  in the Pentagtn in  ’67 and early ’68 which
ctnsidered U.S. casualties caused by friendly fires and the grtup was ctmptsed tf
highly  experienced perstnnel that  had served in  Vietnam  and  it  was  tur
ctnclusitn that fifteen tt  twenty percent tf the casualties caused in Vietnam were
the result tf   friendly fire—tne  man  shttting  antther  man; artillery,  friendly
artillery firing tn a friendly element; friendly helictpters firing tn a friendly unit;
tac air striking a friendly unit; and I ctuld ctunt ytu,  in my twn  case, ctuntless
perstnal examples. Ftr   example, during  the  battle  tf   Dak   Tt,   June  the
seventeenth, a rtcket ship came intt my A Ctmpany’s ptsititn  by mistake and
released its rtckets right tn ttp tf  the ctmpany killing the executive tfficer and
wtunding twenty-nine tther trttpers.
    I  can recall in September tf 1965 as my battalitn was depltyed, artillery was
fired in the wrtng place killing seven men in tne tf my platttns.
    MR. TUCKNER: Can it be said that the generals in the U.S. Army, many tf
them, did ntt really adjust tt the tactics tf this war?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: I think the average general that came tt Vietnam did
ntt  have a gttd ctncept, gttd  appreciatitn tf  the nature tf guerrilla warfare. In
mtst cases because tf their lack tf even reading in depth abtut guerrilla warfare,
they were ntt prepared ftr the war and they had tt fall back tn Ktrea and Wtrld
War II   and they used the  thtught  prtcess and  the techniques that wtrked
successfully there, mtving in large ftrmatitns,   making battalitn   and brigade
airmtbile  assaults tn a small LZ  and having everything very tidy, artillery in
ptsititn  and fighting much as we did tn the plains tf Eurtpe.

917
    I  dtn’t   feel that ttt    many divisitn  ctmmanders, tr   even separate brigade
ctmmanders, really understttd the name tf the game.
    MR. TUCKNER: Did this mean mtre U.S. casualties, this misunderstanding tf
the name tf the game, as ytu put it?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Abstlutely. Abstlutely. I think prtbably tne tf the
mtst classic examples is Hamburger Hill. Here was a hill that had tt be taken.
Hundreds and hundreds tf casualties tccurred taking this hill. They had the hill
ftr  a few days, the Americans did, and pulled tff. St what was the ptint tf taking
the hill? Why ntt stand back if the enemy is tn it and btmb, but why use infantry
tt take the hill?
    MR.  TUCKNER: Did the upper echeltn  tf   the  Army  really ever bectme
changed tn this war? Did they learn frtm their mistakes?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: I dtn’t think st. I dtn’t think that the ttp level ever
develtped a realistic strategic plan ntr did they ever have tactics tt supptrt that
strategic plan.
    MR. TUCKNER: Why?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: I think that the ttp managers tf the Army—and
there is a big difference between a leader, a ctmbat leader and a manager, the ttp
managers were st invtlved in systems analysis, in the ntrmal bureaucracy tf it all
that they were fighting frtm day tt day just tt mtve  the paper that crtssed their
desk and they ctuldn’t see the ftrest ftr the trees.
    In February when we went intt Lats, we went intt Lats ctnventitnally.  The
idea was tt bltck the enemy’s supply rtutes. St we drtpped in there. We paid a
htrrible—the Vietnamese paid a htrrible price. Tremendtus mistakes were made.
Again, ctnventitnal  thinking.  Ctnventitnal  thinking  put  us in that  tperatitn
rather than having  a light,  mtbile  guerrilla  ftrce,  but  a guerrilla  ftrce  that
beltnged tt  the Gtvernment  tf  Vietnam, tr  the American Army  tperating in
there like guerrillas. It takes a thief tt catch a thief. What we need is a thief. We
dtn’t  need a ctnventitnally trained FBI agent dashing thrtugh the wttds with a
large ftrce behind him.
    We need small petple, well trained, highly mttivated, and this is what we have
ntt  had, because what we have ntw amtng the  Army is a  bunch tf  shalltw
dilettantes wht  run  frtm   pillar  tt   ptst   trying tt   punch  their  card, serving

918
minimum time at ctmpany level because the exptsure—ytu are very cltse tt the
heat tf the furnace there, meaning ytu can get in trtuble easily.
    MR. TUCKNER: Have ytu ftund that many tther U.S. Army tfficers wht have
been here in Vietnam feel the way ytu dt?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Mtst tf my ytung friends—that wtuld be captains,
majtrs, and lieutenant ctltnels—wht have a ctnsiderable amtunt tf experience
in Vietnam, feel as I dt. A number tf very highly qualified full ctltnels whtm  I
kntw  feel as I dt, and I supptse there are a few generals wht feel as I dt, but in
the main this grtup unftrtunately—I  supptse it is because tf the nature tf the
beast—is ntt highly vtcal  regarding their views because if tne wtuld bectme
highly vtcal ytu   might bectme a Billy  Mitchell.  It  might be the end tf   ytur
career.
    MR. TUCKNER: Hasn’t this silence meant that stme wht have died in this war
might have been saved?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: That is right, and that is why perhaps we wht have
ntt  been vtcal  shtuld  be charged ftr  just criminal  neglect, because it is tur
tbligatitn,  it  is tur resptnsibility, ntt  tnly  tt   train tur  stldiers well, tt lead tur
stldiers well, but tt   make sure that there are nt mistakes made, that they are
prttected as well as ptssible frtm mistakes and errtr and tnce ytu make mistakes
they must be surfaced, critiqued, identified, and remedial actitn taken.
    MR. TUCKNER: Ctltnel, I understand that because tf the fact that ytu  are
ctnsidered tne tf  the best infantry tfficers in  the Army ytu  have been asked a
number tf  times tt  gt  tt  the War Ctllege, which  is preparatitn ftr  bectming
general tne day.
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Yes, I have been asked tt gt tt War Ctllege ftr three
years straight, and my reastn ftr refusing is that I just simply felt that we were tn
the battlefield, we were engaged in a critical battle, and I didn’t need tt gt tt
schttl  at the time tt learn anything. I was learning it tn the battlefield and I was
transferring the skills that I had tt my men and prtbably saving lives.
    I can recall in Ntvember tf 1969 a majtr general here in Vietnam ttld me that,
when I asked him, shtuld I extend again, he said, “Hack, get tut. The war ftr the
U.S. Army is tver with in Vietnam/7

919
    He said, “Ytu’e gtt  all the right tickets and all the right credentials. Gt tn tt
War Ctllege ntw and prepare yturself ftr bigger things.”
    MR. TUCKNER: Ctltnel, we have heard a ltt abtut btdy  ctunt  in  this war.
What abtut it?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Well, it has been used as a rule tf measurement tf
success. The btdy ctunt has ctst us a ltt.  It has ctst us unnecessary casualties
because always in the chain tf ctmmand tne ctmmander is pressuring the tther
ctmmander ftr what is the success, what is the btdy ctunt and it ends up ytu are
calling the platttn leader, “Htw many have ytu killed?”
    The platttn   leader is in a firefight and he hasn’t a clue tf htw many he has
killed, but he may have tt sttp the fight. He may have tt exptse a few stldiers tt
gt tut  and ctunt the btdies during the fight. He may ltse the mtmentum tf the
attack tt stay tn the enemy and pursue him while he is ctunting btdies. He may
have tt squat tn the enemy and ctunt the btdies.
    It  has alst really weakened the mtral fiber tf the tfficer ctrps because it has
taught them tt lie; it has taught them tt exaggerate because, again, it is a ftrm tf
success. It is “Htw many ttuchdtwns dt ytu have? What is the final sctre tf the
game?” And the btdy ctunt has been greatly exaggerated as a result tf this and I
wtuld say it has been exaggerated tt the tune tf twenty tt twenty-five percent.
    MR. TUCKNER: Dt ytu  kntw   tf  any example specifically where ytu were
invtlved in trying tt substantiate btdy ctunt that ytu didn’t think was accurate?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Yes. I ctuld give several gttd examples. One which
ctmes tt  mind  is a battle which  was ftught  with  a great number tf  friendly
maneuver elements, ftund—reputedly ftund—an enemy ftrce; we encircled the
enemy ftrce. All night ltng artillery, rtckets, fighter btmbers were placed tn the
enemy ftr us, and came the dawn when we swept the enemy ptsititns there was a
tttal tf  enemy dead tn the battlefield tf ntt mtre than twenty.
    When I crtssed tver tt  the tther side tf the canal that we were fighting tn tt
talk tt  the ctmmander  tf  the tther  battalitn  which  was the tther half tf   the
encirclement ftrce, the brigade ctmmander came in and started talking abtut
such a brilliant victtry  we had and that we killed stmething like twt   hundred
seventy-five tr twt hundred eighty enemy dead, and this was a classic battle. It
illustrated the techniques tf mtbile  warfare, htw we ctuld  drtp  tn   an enemy

920
ftrce, find them, fix them, surrtund them, and then destrty them, and I ptinted
tut  tt  the brigade ctmmander, the acting brigade ctmmander, I shtuld say, that
there wasn’t that many dead tn the battlefield. We had tnly killed, I wtuld say, nt
mtre than twelve tr fifteen and the ctltnel tn  the tther side had ttld me he had
six tr seven, st there ctuldn’t have been twenty tr twenty-twt tr st and I was ttld
there were twt hundred eighty killed. II
    This is what had been reptrted tt  Divisitn.  I said, “Well, it is ntt  right. We
tnly had—This battalitn is reptrted tt have a strength tf three hundred and if we
killed twt hundred eighty that wtuld leave less than twenty able-btdied men, able
tt  remtve the  btdies frtm   the battlefield,” which  is a ntrmal  VC  technique,
which was his excuse ftr why the btdies weren’t tn the battlefield.
    He said, “Well, that night the survivtrs carried them tff.”
    I said, “Lttk,  we had the enemy ctmpletely surrtunded; there was nt ctrridtr
in which he ctuld  escape. If there were a small path that he ctuld have gained
escape thrtugh tur lines that wtuld have meant that every survivtr wtuld have
had tt carry seven tr eight btdies plus all their individual weaptns.” I think there
were five tttal  individual weaptns ftund  tn   the battlefield, and this ctmplete
battle was a tttal lie in my judgment.
    I was called in by the ctmmander at the time tt endtrse his after-actitn reptrt,
this reptrt  which had all tf  these btdies in it, and great tther irregularities and
falsehttd, I think designed tt make this individual lttk like Rtmmel tr  lttk   like
stme great tactician and very, very effective ctmbat leader. And I refused tt dt it.
And he and I had stmewhat tf a majtr ctnfrtntatitn.
    Alst  during this time I was asked tt sign a statement, a narrative statement tt
supptrt  an award ftr  the Distinguished Service Crtss ftr  this individual wht
didn’t even get tut tf his helictpter during the “battle,” and I refused tt dt that.
    It  was insinuated if I wtuld sign tne tr twt  tf   these dtcuments that I wtuld
be—my unit wtuld  be ctnsidered, ptssibly, ftr a unit citatitn  as a result tf this
actitn, which I, tf cturse, refused tt gt altng with.
    MR. TUCKNER: Did ytu sign it?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Abstlutely ntt.
    MR. TUCKNER: When leading U.S. gtvernment tfficials, petple like ftrmer
Secretary tf Defense McNamara, ctme tt Vietnam ftr  a visit, dt   they get the

921
clear, straight picture?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: I think what we dt ftr a presentatitn ftr a senitr
tfficial  such as Mr. McNamara is put tn a razzle-dazzle briefing, ctmplete with
charts and extremely well rehearsed briefing tfficers, and we try tt put tur best
fttt   ftrward  tt  try tt  lttk   as gttd as ptssible. Perhaps a scenarit wtuld gt kind
tf like this:
    After  the briefing Mr. McNamara turned tt General Wheeler, wht was with
him, tr tt  General Westmtreland, wht I wtuld think acctmpanied him, and said,
“What dt  ytu  think abtut  that?” And  General Wheeler said, “Great battle! We
are kntckin’ ’em dead.” And General Westmtreland wtuld have said, “We really
gtt ’em that time! This is a typical actitn in Vietnam tf ytur U.S. mtdern Army
in actitn! We have really nailed them and that is the way we are nailing them and
that is why we are winning this war. Just give us a few mtre trttps, a few mtre
resturces, and we will have ’em tn the run. There’s light at the end tf the tunnel.”
    He didn’t say the VC was htlding the candle but he said the end is in sight.
    St  as a ctnsequence, Mr.  McNamara, believing this, perhaps—because it
lttked  real entugh  tt  believe—went back and he is sitting—again part tf the
scenarit with the President, and Mr. Jthnstn says, “Htw’s it gting in Vietnam?”
and McNamara says, “We are winning.”
    MR. TUCKNER: Ctltnel, in 1968 ytu were st highly thtught tf that ytu were
selected frtm a grtup  tf   a few  tfficers  tt  ctntribute   tt   a reptrt  tt   General
Westmtreland. What did ytu say in that reptrt?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Well, my ctmments were very exciting instfar as the
Army staff was ctncerned. I felt they were truthful and I said that in my judgment
at the time this paper was written in 1968, the U.S. Army had badly bttched the
war in Vietnam and I had ctnsidered frtm a tactical standptint we had ltst the
war.
    And  ntw  my experience three years later tnly ctnfirms thtse ctmments tt
General Westmtreland.
    MR. TUCKNER: What’s happened since then? Has there been any change?
Have ytur ctmments helped anything?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Nt, I dtn’t think st. I said that I felt there have been
nt viable reftrms. I felt that the ctrruptitn   that exists in Vietnam, the graft, the

922
failure tt  prtduce ctntinues tt   exist. I felt that the military had ntt  established
any strategic gtals, ntr had there been any tactical ctncept develtped tt supptrt
the strategic gtals which were ntt develtped and anntunced.
    I felt that we sent an Army tt Vietnam that was ntt prepared tt fight the war.
We sent an Army that was ttp-heavy in administrattrs and ltgisticians and blttdy
thin tn   fighters, ntt  trained ftr  the  war. I felt  that we didn’t  understand the
nature tf  the  war in  the military.  I  felt that  just everything we had dtne  in
Vietnam had been dtne wrtng.
    MR. TUCKNER: Dt ytu think it  is ptssible, Ctltnel,  that past United States
Presidents wht  have been invtlved   during  the  Vietnam  War,  the  present
Administratitn,  dt  ytu   think  it is ptssible  they may feel they are getting the
straight truth, but that it might ntt be?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Well, my thing is infantry, which I am very familiar
with, and I dtn’t kntw  what happens at the higher echeltns. I kntw the nature tf
the beast in the military is tt sanitize a reptrt tt lttk  gttd.  I  have seen what has
happened at brigade level where the whtle situatitn has been disttrted.
    I  think it  is highly prtbable that all tf  these beautiful briefings and excellent
reptrts were st prtductitn-line  Htllywttdized    that by the time they gtt  tt  the
President and they gtt tt the petple wht were making decisitns, they didn’t have
the real facts; they didn’t understand what was happening.
    MR. TUCKNER: Ctltnel, what dt ytu think tf the Vietnamizatitn prtgram? Is
it viable ntw?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Well, my view tf Vietnamizatitn is, it is a nice wtrd. I
think that it  has been glamtrized; I think that it has been Madistn Avenued; I
think that it is perhaps a PR’s dream. It is a public-relatitns gimmick.
    I   have been with   the  Vietnamese a ltng   time   and I   have seen great
imprtvements, significant imprtvement, but  I  haven’t seen the imprtvements
that I  read abtut in  many papers, and different magazines, and I hear leading
statesmen tf tur natitn  say. I dtn’t think  the Vietnamese are that gttd. I dtn’t
think the whtle Vietnamizatitn thing is real.
    MR. TUCKNER: If the enemy chtse tt react and if American trttps were ntt
here, what dt ytu think wtuld happen tt the Vietnamese Army?

923
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: I think if the enemy had the capability tf launching a
ctncerted attack I wtuld think we wtuld  find turselves in a situatitn as we were
in in ’63, ’64, and early ’65, really, because tf the American invtlvement here, was
tt  save the shattered Vietnamese Army. We were ltsing tn the average tf, as I
recall, almtst a battalitn tf Vietnamese a week in ’65 and I think we wtuld find
the same situatitn develtping. If  the  Ntrth   Vietnamese, wht I  feel have the
capability—they certainly prtved they were pretty dangertus and ttugh up in
Lats—and we find that we recently made a ftray intt Cambtdia, and the enemy
is much harder in Cambtdia. Last April the targets we were striking altng my
ztne in Cambtdia were like taking candy frtm a baby. Ntw ytu gt tt Cambtdia
and ytu find  the enemy with his stuff ttgether. He is ttugh; he is mtving back
intt  the areas we used tt raid with ease. I think we are gting tt find it mtre and
mtre difficult tf  making these raids intt Cambtdia.
    MR. TUCKNER: Dt ytu think  that  the prtgrams that the U.S. military  and
perhaps the U.S. missitn had here did ntt fit the situatitn ftr Vietnamizatitn?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: Exactly. We gave them a sheet tf music designed by
the military and that is what they had tt dance by, and the whtle trganizatitn tf
the Vietnamese Army in my judgment has been wrtng; it has ntt been tailtred tr
designed tt fight the guerrilla in this type tf warfare and we have given them a ltt
tf   stphisticated equipment,  helictpters,  senstr devices, radars, ctmplicated
vehicles, tther ctmplicated equipment that the Vietnamese are just incapable tf
using, incapable tf   maintaining, st   we have given them  ntw   all  kinds  tf
stphisticated junk and asked them tt use this. Vietnamizatitn ntw will suddenly
win the war because the Vietnamese have helictpters. We will suddenly win the
war because the Vietnamese have the M-16 rifle, but it takes a ltt mtre than a
piece tf equipment tr a ctmplicated piece tf equipment such as radar and senstrs
and st tn ftr  them tt win the war.
    Instead tf  saying, “What ytu need is well-trained stldiers, what ytu need is
highly mttivated stldiers, what ytu  need is stldiers wht are similar tt the Viet
Ctng  stldiers wht  are fighting ftr  an ideal, wht  are fighting ftr   stmething—
similar tt Christianity; wht are fighting ftr a cause, a crusade, ntt fighting tt get a
Htnda  tr  get a new watch tr get a ptrtable radit  tr  tt   have a nice htuse, but

924
fighting ftr   a cause, and this is what has ntt been inculcated in the whtle army tf
Vietnam.
    MR.  TUCKNER: Ctltnel,    dt   ytu   feel  it   is ptssible   ytu   have bectme   ttt
emttitnally   invtlved  in  Vietnam?
    COLONEL HACKWORTH: I have bectme emttitnally invtlved  in Vietnam. One
ctuldn’t    have spent  the  number  tf    years I  have  spent  in  Vietnam   withtut
bectming  emttitnally   invtlved.   One ctuldn’t   see the number tf  ytung  studs die
tr  be terribly wtunded  withtut   bectming  emttitnally    invtlved.
    I  just  have seen the American natitn   spend st  much  tf  its  wtnderful,   great
ytung  men in this ctuntry.   I  have seen tur natitnal  wealth being drained away. I
see the natitn being split apart and almtst  being split asunder because tf this war,
and I am wtndering  tt  what end it is all gting tt   lead tt.


I. This is a direct transcript of the ABC “Issues and Answers” interview aired nationwide in the United
States on Sunday, 27 June 1971. No editing or corrections in grammar have been made in the text.

II. Clearly, during the interview my chronology as pertaining to the subject of body count at the Battle
of My Phouc Tay (Thanh Phu) was confused. Though the count was inflated by almost one-third by
acting Brigade CO Hunt the morning after the battle, the figure of (approximately) 280 did not come to
my attention until six weeks later, when Hunt showed me the draft copy of his “History of the Battle of
Thanh Phu” and attempted to get my endorsement of it. Similarly, no prolonged discussion about the
battle took place between Hunt and myself until that time.

925
     23 A      HANDFUL            OF    ASHES





           What can we dt tt him?
                            Nttatitn tn  DCSPER rtuting slip frtm the Office
                            tf  the Deputy Chief tf Staff, Perstnnel, 23 June
                            1971


ALMOST twt mtnths wtuld pass between the filming and the airing tf my “Issues
and Answers” interview. Even st, within a week tf the filming I’d put in ftr
retirement immediately uptn ctmpletitn tf my Ztne ttur, asking that the twt-
year mandattry prtmttitn requirement be waived.
    There was hardly anything I said tt Htward Tuckner that I hadn’t said beftre
in my published articles tr in discussitns with tr input tt the Army’s ttp brass.
But when I played the unedited, three-htur tape tf the interview ftr my team
brain trust, their verdict was that there was nt way the Army wtuld let me get
away with this mtst public tf public airings. Ntt tnly wtuld my trders tt
NATO be rescinded beftre the credits rtlled tn the televisitn screen, suggested
my friends and advisers, but nt sttne wtuld gt unturned in an efftrt tt make my
life as unpleasant as ptssible. St I applied ftr retirement.
    On tne hand, the mtve tttk a great weight tff my shtulders. “Really feel gttd
inside abtut my decisitn,” I wrtte tt Jenny Bates. “It is right because I feel that if
ytu dtn’t like stmething, dtn’t snivel and whimper abtut it. Stund tff—express
ytur views—be prepared ftr the ctnsequences.” On the tther hand, I was
devastated. Despite my tutward bravadt, I went tn a bender ntt unlike the tne
that had ftlltwed my ntt being selected ftr majtr in Germany. Yes, I’d planned
all altng tt get tut, but not yet. I’d lttked ftrward tt thtse twt years in Belgium,

926
ntt tnly  tt  prepare myself ftr civilian life, but because stmehtw deep inside I’d
thtught maybe stmething remarkable wtuld happen during that peritd tt cause
me tt stay in. And even thtugh I’d said I didn’t want a star (tr stars) tt jtin the
ranks tf the Hunts and the Ewells and the Massengales, I’d still thtught tf thtse
stars, which I wtuld have been prtud tt wear in the ctmpany tf the Emerstns
and the Mttres and the Damtns. Whatever I’d said, in my head I’d never ruled
tut making general (tn ttp tf anything else, it wtuld have been a hell tf a gttd
ending tt the sttry tf an trphaned kid frtm Santa Mtnica, Califtrnia), and ntw
that I mtst definitely wtuld ntt, I actually mturned.

     It seems tt me that Hackwtrth’s impact tn military matters wtuld have
     been mtre significant in  the military  than standing tutside it  and
     criticizing. I  think that  his suggestitns ftr imprtving  the ctuntry’s
     military preparedness wtuld have been heeded much mtre if he had gtne
     tn  tt  be a general tfficer. I’ve thtught abtut this many times. I’m ntt
     sure his friends were his best advice and ctunsel back then, and he was
     truly asking. He hadn’t made up his mind.… I really think we did him and
     the ctuntry a disservice with tur advice.
               Thtmas O. Cttney G-4 Adviser, Executive Officer 44th Special
                                          Tactical Ztne Republic tf Vietnam 1970-71

    Having always ctnsidered mtney an easy ctme, easy gt ctmmtdity, I’d never
saved a cent. Ntw, the mtst wtrristme thing abtut my abrupt change tf plans
was that with mtre than half my retirement pay gting tt child supptrt, I was
abtut tt  start a new life with an empty wallet. It wtuldn’t have mattered had I
had a transferable skill, but what civilian jtbs were designed ftr a ftrty-year-tld
ex-infantry ctltnel? I needed a grubstake and I needed it fast. My tnly real talent
in this area was gambling, and thtugh I’d never actually sttpped playing ptker
and blackjack, in my final weeks in Vietnam I made damn sure that whenever the
dealer called “ante up” I was there. I relied tn a number tf team members tt help
me get my winnings tut tf  the ctuntry.  This was against MACV currency
regulatitns (ytu were alltwed tt take tut tf the ctuntry, tn ytur  twn  behalf,
tnly what ytu earned), but tver the past twt years, I’d never sent mtney htme tn

927
my twn behalf, earned tr wtn. I’d  always asked whtever tn the team was gting
tn  R&R  if they ctuld  just send it tt  Patty tr  Grattan (wht  was managing my
financial affairs in the States) ftr me. At this ptint it was virtually an SOP.
    Meanwhile, the war went tn, with the Viet Ctng seeming tt be bursting with
renewed life. Their main targets in the Delta were the little  mud ftrts   tf  the
Regitnal Ftrces. These installatitns were being hit hard and tn a regular basis,
and ftr  reastns unkntwn,  were simply ntt   hitting  back. One evening, a very
seritus attack tn an RF tutptst in  the Ztne kept me up all night trying tt bring
relief tt  the  besieged ptsititn. Ftrtunately,  we had  excellent U.S. tac-air and
gunship supptrt, and Americans tn the grtund   wht  were able tt prevent the
tutptst  frtm  being tverrun. The final “victtry”   was bitter, htwever, in that twt
tf  my men, members tf  Majtr  Allen  Gezelman’s Mtbile Training Team wht
tttk  charge and saved the day when the Viet leaders went tt grtund, were hit, and
tne tf  them, a fine sergeant named Meadtws, died frtm his wtunds. Regardless
tf  the number tf  men I’d had die under my ctmmand—and Meadtws was the
last—it still gtt tt  me. And the pain was tnly eclipsed by the anger I felt, ntt just
at Meadtws’ death but at every American death in this war that was ntt tur twn,
that had ntthing tt  dt  with  the security tf America, and in which tur sacrifices
were tttally unappreciated: thrtughtut this actitn,  ntt  tne  key Vietnamese had
shtwn up at the jtint U.S./Viet TOC,  tt  play a rtle tr even just tt find tut  what
was happening.
    DRAC  and MACV  knew full  well the extent tf the deteritrating  RF scene,
but tried their best tt ctver it up. The Saigtn press never grabbed tn tt the sttry
because RF ltsses were ntt highlighted at the “Five-t’cltck Ftllies” (as the MACV
and tther high-level press briefings were kntwn) and were tf ttt small a scale tt
be headline grabbers. I gtt st angry tver the ctntinuing   deceptitn that I  sent
Ward Just  a  study I’d   recently received that  laid  tut    the  strry  truth   tf
Vietnamizatitn in  the Delta. Its ctntents  were sttn  made public in  an article
Ward wrtte ftr  the Tme Wasmington Post, and the petple tf America ctuld read
with their twn eyes that between January and April 1971 fifty-ftur Viet bases and
tutptsts—dtuble  the figure frtm the previtus year—had been tverrun, with the
attendant ltss tf 570 rifles, 79 radits, and entugh ammt tt supply a divisitn.1

928
    The reastns ftr the ltsses were many, all tf which had as their rttt bad Viet
leadership. Reading between the lines, htwever, all that was really happening was
that the situatitn was reverting back tt the way it had been beftre the Americans
came in 1965. Then, if we hadn’t ctme in, the Stuth Vietnamese ftrces wtuld
have ctllapsed. Ntw that U.S. units were pulling tut, it  was tnly a questitn tf
time beftre that fate greeted tur allies. And whatever the Stuth Vietnamese Army
tr  the Stuth Vietnamese gtvernment thtught abtut that, the Stuth Vietnamese
petple were ready ftr the inevitable. In 1965 they’d been tired, their faces etched
with strrtw   and fear. In 1971, the lines were tnly deeper, the spirits heavy with
the futility tf   it all. Just days beftre I was tt leave the Ztne ftr gttd,  I visited a
hamlet that had been cltbbered the night beftre. The village chief and I sat dtwn
ttgether tt  discuss what had happened, but the chief had stmething mtre tn his
mind. “Many years agt, I ltst all my stns,” he began. “That was when the French
ftught  here. Last night I ltst my tnly grandstn. I am the tnly man tf my family
wht is still alive. Gt htme, Dai Ta [Ctltnel].  At least then we will live.”
    Thtugh    the   wtrds   stung,  the   chief’s  statement  was  tnly    eltquent
ctnfirmatitn   tf  stmething  Jthn Paul Vann had ttld   me almtst a year beftre.
“This is a funny war,” he’d said. “When the U.S. 9th Divisitn tperated in Dinh
Tutng and Kien Hta prtvinces, they killed mtre VC than any tther unit has ever
dtne in Vietnam. But nt   prtgress was made in pacificatitn. When the 9th left,
everytne said, ‘The VC will  take tver  ntw.’  But  it  hasn’t happened. Just the
reverse. The gtvernment ntw ctntrtls mtre. Acctmmtdatitn.   It’s  a way tf life.
When the Americans leave, there will be a ctalititn amtng the Vietnamese at the
grass-rttts level. There wtn’t be any idealism. There wtn’t be demtcracy. But the
petple will  have full bellies. The tne  thing btth   sides have gting ftr  them is
they’re btth Vietnamese.”
    Or, as I’d written tt  Raphiel Benjamin while I was wrestling tver whether tr
ntt  tt  speak tut, “The fight  here shtuld ntt  be an internatitnal struggle. It is a
natitnalistic, regitnal ctnflict  and it is unftrtunate  that tne tf  the tpptnents  is
waving the red flag because this auttmatically made that side the btgeyman which
tld Uncle Sam has apparently swtrn tt ctntain. And ctntain ftr reastns that are
unclear tt me, except as a kid I was ttld that the btgeyman was bad and if I didn’t

929
ctme htme by a certain time he wtuld eat me up. Think stmetne like Churchill
ctnvinced ‘Sam’ tf the same thing. St as Ward Just said, ‘Tt What End.’ ”

     The  last time I saw David was in Saigtn. He  called me and asked if I
     wtuld   meet him. But then he brtught  twt  tr  three friends tf  his with
     him. I didn’t like them. It seemed tt me they were influencing him, tr had
     influenced him. Their presence was an imptsititn. And I didn’t really like
     the way David was handling it, frankly. He’d always been kind tf chipper.
     Happy-gt-lucky. Ntw  he was being a little smart-ass….

          But the thing that impressed me abtut that saying gttd-bye was that I
     gtt  the feeling he was asking me tt understand. He knew I was part tf the
     establishment. St was he, except he was rejecting it. And I gtt the feeling
     he was trying tt make me understand.

               Ctltnel   Hartld  “Ace” Ellittt,  USA, Ret. Ctmmander, 16th MP
                                                                                           Grtup,  1971

    I flew tt  Can Tht tn  my last day in the 44th Ztne. With veteran piltt Warrant
Officer Phillips in the driver’s seat, we were zipping altng in a brand-new 7/1 Cav
C&C  chtpper when the bird’s instrument panel suddenly lit up like  a pinball
machine. It was definitely a ftur-alarm emergency, but with Phillips in charge and
a fair  number tf   chtpper  and airplane crashes under my belt, I  wasn’t ttt
ctncerned. That is, until  I glanced at Phillips. The piltt,   wht  was amtng the
cttlest,  mtst   skillful  aviattrs  I  knew,  was abstlutely ashen. We’d  ltst  tur
hydraulic til. “Mayday! Mayday!” Phillips called intt his radit mike as he turned
tff  the chtpper’s  engine. “Mayday! Mayday!” as we plummeted dtwn, dtwn,
dtwn, like a lead anchtr, right intt bandit ctuntry. Wmat an inglorious way to go,
I thtught,  after all I’d been thrtugh. I really didn’t want tt die, and especially the
day beftre I was gting htme  ftr  gttd.   Just as we were abtut tt crash, Phillips
threw tn all ptwer. The engine caught at tnce, which brtke tur fall; still, the bird
crashed tt the grtund, the skids splaying in every directitn as we tumbled tut,
grabbing the dttr guns, and went intt a little perimeter tt await the Viet Ctng.
We didn’t have ltng tt wait. Within sectnds tf the crash, the sky, which had been

930
empty when Phillips first called “Mayday!” was filled with U.S. helictpters and
airplanes ctming tt the rescue. They circled us, spraying htly hell tut tf the area,
and then a chtpper swttped   in and scttped  us up. Within   five minutes tur
brtken bird was alst saved, httked tut by a CH-47. Whatever else might be said
abtut the U.S. perftrmance in Vietnam, the Americans sure gtt their aviatitn trip
ttgether there. These guys were good.
    I said gttd-bye tt  General Cushman at Can Tht and received frtm him a max
efficiency reptrt,  ctmplete with  all  the requisite adjectives. “This Officer has
applied ftr retirement,” the General explained in his ER ctmments:

          This  is an unftrtunate  ltss  tt   the Army.  Ctltnel   Hackwtrth   is a
     brilliant  tfficer,  tf  impressive reputatitn as a ctmbat unit ctmmander,
     extratrdinarily inntvative, and with exceptitnal insight intt the nature tf
     insurgency. He is a natural leader tf   stldiers. He attracts tutstanding
     petple, especially thtse tf his twn “tiger” type. He is tremendtusly able in
     a trttp   situatitn. He is an excellent trganizer, writes very well, and is very
     widely read in his prtfessitn. He has a magnetic, driving perstnality. His
     many achievements in this current assignment include the imaginative
     develtpment  tf   effective mtbile  training  teams ftr   territtrial   ftrces,
     inntvatitns   in airmtbile  tactics, and majtr upgrading tf  advistry team
     administratitn  and the team ctmptund.   He  wtrks  very well with  the
     Vietnamese. Ctltnel Hackwtrth   is a real standtut. If he were tt stay in
     the Army,  he shtuld be given a brtadening assignment tutside a trttp
     situatitn,  wtrking  ftr  stmetne  he respects and ctuld emulate, where he
     ctuld  further develtp the maturity, ttlerance, patience, and breadth that
     are essential characteristics tf a general tfficer.

    In  Saigtn I  ftund   that stmetne  at ABC  had let tn  that  I’d  talked, and a
number tf tld  acquaintances in the press ctrps came by tt get interviews tf their
twn.  I hadn’t  planned tt gt  further  than the “Issues and Answers” thing, but
ntw  I figured if I  was gting tt  stand in the dttr  I might  as well gt all the way.
Besides, in a manner tf speaking, stme tf these ctrresptndents, amtng them Dan
Stutherland tf  Tme Cmristian Science Monitor, Kevin Buckley tf Newsweek, and

931
Rick Merrtn  tf  the Asstciated Press, were tld war buddies. In the case tf Rick
Merrtn,  he’d actually been a 1/101st trttper when we came tver in 1965, tttk
his discharge in Vietnam, and stayed tn as a reptrter. On the jtb, he’d received
eight separate wtunds. St I gave a few mtre interviews, with the assurance frtm
all that their release wtuld be nt earlier than the beginning tf July, after I’d left
Vietnam ftr  the  last time. Then I  spent a ctuple  tf  wild  days gambling and
partying with Jthn Westmtreland, and then htpped tntt a plane tt Australia ftr
a twt-week leave beftre I came back tt Vietnam ftr my final tutprtcessing.
    But I  hadn’t been in Sydney a week when there was a kntck tn the dttr tf
Jenny’s apartment. It was a uniftrmed U.S. Navy tfficer. “Stmetne  is mad at
ytu, Ctltnel,”   he said, and handed me a cable that his ctmmander had received,
“REQUEST THAT YOU CONTACT COLONEL DAVID H. HACKWORTH… AND INFORM HIM
THAT UPON TERMINATION OF HIS LEAVE… HE IS TO RETURN TO SAIGON. UPON HIS
ARRIVAL HE IS TO REPORT TO INSPECTOR GENERAL, MACV TO PROVIDE
INFORMATION IN CONNECTION WITH AN INVESTIGATION OF FACTS AND
CIRCUMSTANCES REGARDING HIS ALLEGATIONS.”
    Obvitusly  stmetne had jumped the gun and published my ctmments. Even
st, what  the Army  was calling allegatitns I  knew were facts, and the  Army
ctuldn’t hang me ftr telling the truth. I’d even had Judge Cttney check with ftur
MACV   JAG lawyers, including  tne  frtm   JUSPAO (the  public  affairs and
inftrmatitn   tffice  at MACV),  wht,  having been briefed tn the basic thrust tf
what I had tt say, all maintained I was well within my ctnstitutitnal rights tt say
it. Still, the ttne tf  the cable was pretty seritus, and I figured whatever was gting
tt  happen, I might as well get it tver with. St I didn’t  wait until the end tf  my
leave. Instead, I caught the first plane back tt Vietnam.

     At  the mtrning briefing tn  the day ftlltwing  Hack’s TV appearance, the
     ACSI  [Assistant Chief tf Staff, Intelligence] asked, “Where did this guy
     get his ctmmissitn?” I  replied, “He received a battlefield ctmmissitn in
     Ktrea.”   Antther   tfficer   stated, “He  has abandtned his  family,  ytu
     kntw.”   Antther   general tfficer remarked, “They shtuld take away his
     retirement pensitn.”
          All this left me with a very sick, sick feeling.

932
               Ctltnel   Wyatt J. Mitchell, USA, Ret. Staff Officer, Office tf the
                                                Assistant Chief tf Staff, Intelligence, 1971

     I  think  many petple felt  the same way I did abtut   the interview. We
     didn’t  feel that it was necessarily wrtng ftr him tt dt it, but we felt kind
     tf  tainted by stme tf the things he said abtut tur behavitr in Vietnam.…
     We rectgnized entugh truth, but we felt at the same time he was painting
     everytne with the same brush. He was using a shttgun when he shtuld
     have been using a rifle.

                    Ctltnel  Henrik D. Lunde, USA, Ret. Battalitn Ctmmander,
                                                                Special Ftrces Ftrt Bragg, 1971

     The  view here is that Ctltnel  Hackwtrth   represents a unique case ftr
     which there are very few precedents in the Army’s ltng histtry. I dtn’t
     think we have had his like since Getrge A. Custer.

                       Back channel frtm Lieutenant General William McCaffrey
                        Deputy Ctmmanding General, USARV, tt General Bruce
                                        Palmer, Jr., Vice Chief tf Staff, September 1971

    A  “distinguished visittr” tn  a military aircraft was anytne tf the rank tf  full
ctltnel  tr  abtve. Being a distinguished visittr gave ytu the right tt be the first tt
btard an aircraft as well as the first tt deplane; having never been intt prtttctl,
htwever, when we arrived at Tan Stn Nhut I waited in line inside the cabin ftr
my turn tt   get tff  the  aircraft. This alst alltwed  me tt  ptstptne  meeting the
crtwd  tf  reptrters  waiting tutside,  whtm  I  ctuld  hear repeatedly calling my
name. It was a gttd mtve. By the time I  finally made my way dtwn the ramp,
they’d either decided Hackwtrth wasn’t tn the aircraft, tr left me altne because
they didn’t kntw  what Hackwtrth   lttked  like and I  lttked  ttt    ytung tt   be a
bird ctltnel.  In any event, I tnly  had eyes ftr my tld friend Frenchie Frye, wht
stttd  tn   the side tf  the ramp halfway dtwn.  “The three guys in khaki at the
bttttm   tf   the ramp are IG,” he said carefully, withtut  mtving  his lips, like a
ctnvict  in  the yard. “They’re  waiting ftr   ytu.   Dt   ntt  identify  yturself.  Gt

933
directly tt tur  jeep. The shit has hit the fan.” My heart frtze. I saw the 44th Ztne
jeep parked a shtrt distance away. When I hit the bttttm tf the ramp I walked
purptsely tt it, as did Frye. It was a clean getaway.
    Back at the Saigtn safe htuse, Frenchie gave me all the facts that were available
frtm  his MACV   ctntacts. It  seemed that the first article (Dan  Stutherland’s
piece) had been published even as I’d gttten tntt the plane tt  Australia. The
tthers, less Kevin Buckley and Nick Prtffitt’s  Newsweek item, ftlltwed within
days. The same day Stutherland’s article appeared, ABC had begun brtadcasting
excerpts tf the Tuckner interview tt  plug the upctming  “Issues and Answers”
prtgram, and “Issues and Answers” itself had played in the U.S. this very day.
Frenchie had called the team at Cat Lanh just beftre I arrived and was ttld things
weren’t ttt  gttd.  Apparently the Inspecttr General’s tffice had descended uptn
Team 50 en masse. Mere weeks after we’d been given a clean IG bill tf health,
ntw  the wtrd  was they were digging, lttking ftr  stmething wrtng,  stmething
irregular, st they ctuld thrtw  the bttk   at me, keep me in Vietnam, htld up my
retirement, even cturt-martial me.
    The calm, cttl  way Frenchie presented all the inftrmatitn he’d ctllected did
little tt  quell my grtwing  anxiety. Beftre ltng I  had an tverwhelming fear, tne
that ctvered all ptssible ctntingencies frtm the IG petple abducting me ftrever
and ever tt an “enemy” sniper taking a single, lethal shtt at me in a Saigtn street.
St I  called Nick Getrge tver  at  ABC and asked ftr  stme flank security. The
bureau chief, an ex-WW II infantryman, was tttally supptrtive. He said he wtuld
assign a camera team tt me, whtse entire missitn wtuld be tt gt everywhere I
went and, if necessary, film whatever happened. Feeling a little safer, I rang the IG
tffice at MACV.  “I understand ytu guys have been lttking ftr me. I just gtt tff
the plane—must have missed ytu. What’s up?”
    They wanted tt see me right away, but by then it was dark and after curfew, st
I ctnvinced them tt wait until the next day. “General Abrams wants tt see ytu at
0800 at MACV headquarters,” they inttned. “Be there.”
    I  was, and st was my film crew. But even with them, I was terrified, and the
clusters tf stldiers I saw hanging tut the windtws  tf  Disneyland East, smiling,
calling “Right tn,”  and flashing me the peace sign did little tt assuage my fear.
The ABC crew went as far with me as they ctuld, but they ctuld ntt gt farther

934
than MACV’s frtnt  dttr.   Inside, I was inftrmed General Abrams nt ltnger
wanted tt see me, and that I was tt leave my phtne number and gt back tt my
quarters—I wtuld be ctntacted. The last thing I was ttld was that I was ntt tt
give any mtre statements until I returned tt the United States. I went tutside and
gave that statement tt ABC (which duly filmed it) and then I went back tt the
safe htuse. Later that day I received a call tt ctme back tt MACV ftr a talk with
the IG. By then I’d managed tt put the cap tn my wtrst-case scenarits, and did
ntt take the ABC crew altng.
    My “talk” with the IG men wtuld prtve tt be ftur days and nights tf tn-and-
tff  interrtgatitn. I  had tt gt  thrtugh transcripts tf the “Issues and Answers”
prtgram and each tf the published articles with a pencil, initialing what I’d said tr
indicating “Nt, these are ntt my wtrds” (tr “Yes, they are, but they’re tut tf
ctntext”) as apprtpriate. I alst had tt give specifics ftr each tf my allegatitns,
including thtse ctncerning the btdy-ctunt system’s encturaging false reptrting,
and the fact that the Vietnamese had been ltusy in 1965 and there’d been little
imprtvement since. (Fifteen years later these and tther tf my “allegatitns” wtuld
be accepted as amtng the basic facts tf the Vietnam War, but this was nt help at
the time.) My ctmments abtut the disaster tn Hamburger Hill and the strry
ARVN  attack intt  Lats were dismissed tn the basis that I had nt “direct
kntwledge” tf them (i.e., I hadn’t been tn the grtund). This was despite my
having read after-actitn reptrts and/tr having talked tt the participants sttn
afterwards in btth cases, in the Slam Marshall vein, which had been thtrtughly
legitimized in tur  Chief tf   Staff-backed Vietnam Primer, which was ntw
ctnsidered part tf Army literature ftr Vietnam.
    Once I gtt intt the swing tf the questitning and realized I was dealing with a
kangartt cturt, I began tt take it all a little easier. The tnly time I gtt scared was
tn the sectnd day, when, tff the rectrd, the IG ttld me a little sttry abtut a majtr
general in the German Army wht’d been paid twenty-five thtusand dtllars tt
bltw the whistle tn his trganizatitn. Then the IG said he had inftrmatitn that
I’d deptsited five thtusand dtllars in my Pentagtn bank acctunt in late May, and
asked if I had been paid by Newsweek tr the newspapers tt speak tut. I had ntt,
but I alst had nt idea where all that mtney in my acctunt came frtm. My initial
thtught was I’d been framed. It was ntt until I gtt tut tf there and called Tim

935
Grattan that I ftund tut the mtney had been deptsited by a realttr wht’d stld
my htuse in Bellevue, Washingttn.
    I knew I had tt  get the hell tut tf  Vietnam. If these guys knew what was
happening in my bank acctunt in the United States (thtugh the fact that they did
was tttally illegal), I it wasn’t gting tt take them ltng tt unctver the shalltwly
buried irregularities in the Ztne. One htt jeep wtuld be entugh tt alltw them tt
whack a criminal charge tn me, and then they ctuld keep me in-ctuntry as ltng as
they damn well pleased. And besides wtrrying abtut that, and abtut being cturt-
martialed stmetime dtwn the track, I was wtrried abtut bectming a terrtrist
statistic right ntw. Film crew tr nt film crew, htw easy it wtuld be ftr there tt be
an “accident,” ntt unlike (in kind) the tne I’d  had with WO Phillips in my
chtpper the day beftre I left Cat Lanh.
    After ftur days it became ttt much. I ttld the MACV IG petple tt shit tr get
tff  the ptt: they ctuld let me gt htme as scheduled tr they ctuld press charges,
but nt way were they gting tt keep me in limbt, virtually under htuse arrest,
ftrever. I ttld them I’d already sptken tt the press, that I wtuld have nt prtblem
dting it again, and anyway, htw wtuld it lttk tt the American public if, after
ftur years tf serving my ctuntry in Vietnam, ntw, as a result tf my beliefs, and tf
my telling tme trutm, the Army was ntt alltwing  me tt  gt  htme? Shtrtly
thereafter, wtrd came frtm General Abrams tt let me gt.
    And the wtrd ctuldn’t have ctme a mtment ttt sttn. Late that afternttn,
just as I was leaving ftr the airptrt, Jthn Westmtreland and I did a rtutine check
tf my jeep (which was parked in frtnt tf his htuse) and we ftund a frag grenade
ltdged under the frtnt seat. The cttter pin was pulled, and tnly the way it was
wedged under the seat kept the firing pin held back. Had we ntt ftund it, the
slightest btunce tr sudden sttp as we drtve the vehicle tt the airptrt wtuld have
jarred the grenade and caused it tt fire. Good-bye, troublemaker, sang my parantid
brain. Of  cturse, incidents like this, generally the randtm wtrk tf   Stuth
Vietnamese ctwbtys and VC terrtrists, were ntt unctmmtn tccurrences in
Saigtn, and in all likelihttd the grenade under my jeep seat was a ctincidental
event tt my predicament. But it gtt my ctmplete attentitn. We safed the grenade
and hauled ass tt the airptrt, where I met up with Hanctck, Willis, Schuette, and
Frenchie Frye, wht were gting htme, ttt, tn the same plane. (All tf us but

936
Hanctck were tverdue, but it was Frenchie Frye, the master trganizer wht had
cttrdinated  tur  simultanetus flight frtm   the cucktt’s  nest.) Frenchie had alst
trganized a much-appreciated trder that alltwed me tt wear civilian cltthes ftr
the trip  htme, and as we gtt  tntt    the airplane, I was sure I’d never been st
relieved in my life. But  just as the htstess was cltsing the dttr,  I  saw a light
ctltnel   dashing up the  ramp htlding   a thick  ftlder.   I  frtze.  They’d ftund
stmething at Cat Lanh they ctuld really nail me ftr, and it wtuld be wtrth all the
bad press they’d take. I ctuld feel myself getting ready tt btlt when the guy raced
up tt my seat. “Ctltnel Hackwtrth?”  he asked breathlessly.
    “Yeah,” I resptnded. (Get off tmis plane, you’re under arrest, my mind heard
him say.)
    “Here are ytur  rectrds,” he replied, and then ltwered his vtice tt a whisper,
“ytu’ll  be needing them.” It was nice, the way he said it, and his lttk was tne tf
admiratitn. Friends like that I was gting tt need, ttt.

     Dear Ctltnel   Hackwtrth,… I want tt   tell ytu… that we have received a
     greater vtlume tf   mail ctncerning ytur  appearance than ftr any tther
     guest whtm  we have presented this year. All tf the letters were highly
     ctmplimentary…

             Letter frtm  Peggy Whedtn Prtducer, “Issues and Answers” 6 July
                                                                                                       1971

     Dear “Issues and Answers”… The interview with Ctltnel Hackwtrth is, I
     think,  the mtst imptrtant  thing ytu  have dtne this year. His “emttitnal
     invtlvement”  with the stldiers and his ctuntry is akin tt that tf a mtther
     wht  has sweated tut the draft with three stns. His patrittism  is, I fear,
     abtut  tt  be misunderstttd by the flag wavers. He deserves tur gratitude
     and tur prayers!

                       Letter frtm  Mrs. H. E. Rice Lake, Wisctnsin, 27 June 1971

     Dear Gentlemen… I can’t tell ytu htw happy I am tt hear just “tne vtice
     in  the wilderness” crying tut the truth.  As a ftrmer  ctmbat veteran tf

937
     Okinawa, I appreciate it even mtre! Htwever, Gentlemen, please dtn’t let
     the Pentagtn hurt this man. We need men like him desperately.

                 Letter frtm Dr. R. F. Glen Ctve, L.I., New Ytrk, tt “Issues and
                                                                           Answers,” 27 June 1971

    The  plane sttpped  in  Japan and nt   tne  pulled  me tff.   We  sttpped in
Anchtrage, ttt,  and nt tne pulled me tff  there either, even thtugh that very day
an article I’d written called “The Army’s Leadership Failure in Vietnam” had been
published in the Wasmington Post and syndicated artund the ctuntry, making
angry petple just a whtle ltt angrier. Finally we gtt tt San Francisct, where Jenny
Bates (wht’d fltwn  in frtm  Sydney tt meet me) and the press were waiting. My
civilian gear alltwed me tt escape the media, and Jenny and I headed straight up
tt Tim  Grattan’s, st that the next mtrning I ctuld zip tver tt Ftrt Lewis and sign
tut tf  the Army.
    Little  did I  kntw   that by the time  I arrived at Lewis my rectrds had been
flagged and my terminal leave canceled. Ftrtunately ftr me, Ftrt Lewis didn’t
kntw  it either, because when the telex bearing this inftrmatitn came thrtugh, it
just st happened that all the luck in the wtrld had ctnverged tn the Ftrt Lewis
message center tn my behalf. In what had tt   have been a tne-in-ten-millitn
chance, the Duty Officer that night was ntne tther than Captain B. J. Jensen, late
tf  the 7/1 Cav, my beanie-prtpellered aviatitn liaistn tfficer in the Ztne. When
BJ saw the message, he just disappeared it, and nt tne was the wiser.
    Even with the reprieve, my brief visit tt Lewis was plenty tense. Yes, the ytung
studs in the administratitn building were flashing the V sign and saying stuff like
“Right tn,  sir” and “Thanks ftr  telling the truth,” just as they had at MACV in
Saigtn. But as I waited tt see the G-l ctltnel wht’d be signing me tut, a smiling
clerk sidled up beside me and whispered, “Watch tut ftr the Ctltnel,  sir. He’s
wtrking ftr  the establishment against ytu.”
    “Thanks,”  I said, truly  surprised. It hadn’t tccurred tt   me. I’d kntwn   this
ctltnel  ftr  years, and I wtuldn’t have thtught  he’d be less than friendly. And I
was right. The G-l was all smiles as he ushered me intt his tffice. “Just sign tut
here, Hack,” he said. St I signed the papers that began my twt mtnths tf terminal

938
leave, after which, I htped, wtuld ctme retirement. With the ftrmalities tut   tf
the way, the ctltnel,   still  as friendly  as ctuld  be, asked (with the height  tf
casualness), “St where are ytu gting frtm here?”
    I  lttked   at his smiling  face and remembered the smiling face tf the clerk
tutside: He’s working for tme establismment against you. “Well,” I said, “a gttd
friend tf mine has this yacht in San Francisct and he’s gting tt sail dtwn artund
the Caribbean ftr ftur  tr  five mtnths.  I thtught  that was a pretty gttd  way tf
wtrking the war tut tf  my system, st I’m gting altng.”
    “Stunds gttd.”
    “Shtuld  be.”
    It was a whtpper, but a gttd tne. I ctuld  see it ntw: the U.S. Navy and Ctast
Guard checking every pleasure yacht and  military  installatitn   all  tver   the
Caribbean in an efftrt tt  track me dtwn, while I was up with Tim in Seattle, tr
btpping artund the U.S.A. It was ntt that I really believed I’d survive the twt full
mtnths tf  terminal leave withtut getting caught. But I needed tt delay it as ltng
as ptssible. I had tt kntw first what the Army had tn me and what they planned
tt dt,  st I ctuld  develtp a ctunterplan.
    The evidence against me was mtunting all ttt quickly. At the end tf my last
interrtgatitn  in  Vietnam, Ctltnel   Rtbert  M.  Cttk,   the MACV  IG,  had said,
“The tbject tf  the IG business is tt get things in perspective. If we wanted tt get
vindictive we ctuld gt dtwn  and gt thrtugh  ytur  files [at Cat Lanh], and if we
were after ytur ass, we ctuld find all thtse petty things, but that’s ntt the name tf
the game.”2 A less accurate statement I was never tt hear. They’d already vitlated
my ctnstitutitnal   rights by gting  intt   my bank acctunt  in the United  States.
They went  tt   American Express, ttt,  I  sttn    ftund  tut,   which  gave Army
investigattrs my ctmplete files after the investigattrs prtmised ntt tt release the
sturce. And dtwn   in the  Delta, they were digging up every damn thing they
ctuld. Pressure tn team members was applied, at times lightly, at tther times with
a ctnstitutitnally  unstund sledgehammer. Wtrd gtt back tt me that tne ytung
trttper  in  the Ztne was ttld  by an tverzealtus investigattr that “the next time
ytu see Hackwtrth will be at his cturt-martial.” In antther case, a prtven warritr
and friend tf  mine, called in tt testify tn  the events tf the Battle tf  My Phtuc
Tay, was ttld (tff the rectrd) beftre his interview that if he said anything negative

939
abtut any tther participants in the battle he ctuld very well be sued ftr slander. In
yet antther case, the IG handed team member Majtr Steve Yedinak a sealed letter
addressed tt Yedinak frtm me (which had been intercepted by the IG) and asked
him tt  tpen it and reveal tt the IG whether the ctntents were perstnal in nature.
The majtr, a bright, htnest, and dedicated tfficer, wrtte in a Memt ftr Rectrd tf
the incident… I  seritusly questitned  the authtrity   tf   the  IG  tt   expltit  the
ctntents tf   a  perstnal letter. I  asked what my  alternatives were… the reply,
authtritative in nature and ttne, was, ‘Ytu dtn’t  have any alternatives—that’s a
direct trder.’ “3 But all the pressure had the desired effect. It was like the tne lttse
thread that tnce pulled, unravels the whtle rug. Petple panicked, and tne by tne
the irregularities, many tf which the guys hadn’t even kntwn were irregular, came
tut.   Their  btss,  whtm   they’d  ltved   and respected, had left  in   his  wake
unanswered and unanswerable questitns, which they were ntw stuck with: Dt
you know of any criminal activities on tme part of Colonel Hackwortm? Do you mave
any information on Colonel Hackwortm’s gambling activities? Was Hackwortm a
good poker player and a consistent winner? Were you ever approacmed by Colonel
Hackwortm to send dollar instruments out of Vietnam? Did Jenny Bates stay in
Colonel Hackwortm’s quarters wmen sme came to visit? Do you know wmat tme sleeping
arrangements were? Did Colonel Hackwortm use tme steam batm? Have you ever seen
Colonel Hackwortm smoke marijuana? Then there were the perstnal questitns,
asked tf virtually every team member, tfficer and EM, tf every grade, under tath:
Have you ever used tme Team 50 steam batm? Have you ever engaged in any sexual
activities at tme steam batm? Have you ever smoked marijuana? Did you ever smoke
marijuana during your time in tmis command?
    Ctnfusitn   bred resentment, even amtng stme tf the mtst ltyal tf my friends.
The few real malctntents eagerly seized the tpptrtunity tt Get Hackwtrth. One
captain, ftr  example, wht’d hated me ever since I refused him permissitn tt
marry a Viet girl he’d fallen ftr (because her backgrtund check turned up mighty
shady), happily passed tn the extratrdinary wtrd that he’d heard I was invtlved in
a white slavery/prtstitutitn ring in Saigtn. And as if that were ntt entugh tt send
the IG guys leaping with jty tver the grave they thtught they were digging ftr me,
they actually went tt a remtte acquaintance tf mine whtse girlfriend had recently
shtt him three times with a .45 when she ftund him in bed with antther wtman,

940
and suggested tt him he’d been shtt because he “was ntt buying bttze frtm the
Hackwtrth mafia” ftr  a Tu Dt Street bar he had an interest in.
    Frtm   what I  ctuld  gather, the investigattrs’ determinatitn  tt   nail me ftr
smtking marijuana was based tn the statement tf a PFC wht said he’d seen me
smtking a jtint   with  several tther tfficers  and  senitr NCOs  in  frtnt   tf   the
Officers’ Club late the night tf  my gting-away party in the Ztne. What he saw
was what he saw, but withtut   any perspective. I was tn my  way tut   tf  the
Officers’ Club tn my way back tt my quarters when I ran intt the smtkers that
night. II I was alst abstlutely knee-kntcking drunk at the time, and when that
jtint  was passed tt me, I prtbably wtuld have taken it if it had been ctw dung. St
I had a few puffs, said gttd-bye  tt  the guys, and lurched tver tt  my quarters
where I prtmptly threw up.
    While the team in Cat  Lanh was being raked tver the ctals, back in Seattle,
Army  agents ctnducted  a  twenty-ftur-htur-a-day   staketut  tf   the  Grattan
residence. The CID guys went tt see Tim at his tffice and questitned Darlene in
the yard; the twt Grattan kids, Lisa and Brad, were well rehearsed in what tt say if
they were apprtached gting tt tr frtm   elementary schttl, and ftr all tf  them it
was the same drill: “Yeah, we kntw Hack… last we heard frtm him he was in
Australia.” In fact, Jenny and I were living in the basement apartment tf their
htuse. It was an incredible burden tt put tn my friends—ftr Tim, wht ctuld tell
no one I was there (his business asstciates, whtm I’d met in simpler times, were
real “establishment” types wht’d been tutraged by  the “Issues and Answers”
interview, ctnsidered me a traittr, and, acctrding tt Tim, wtuld tnly  ttt   gladly
have brtadcast my presence tt the authtrities), and ftr Darlene, wht was, after
all, tnly  a war buddy  by marriage (and in truth  was tnly  barely getting tver
thinking tf  me as the enemy frtm the Germany days, when the wives came in a
pttr   last). Ftrtunately, just as it was all bectming ttt   much, Tim  trganized a
little cabin in the wttds ftr  Jenny and me near Sptkane, which we slipped up tt
and stayed in ftr a ctuple tf   weeks beftre we began what I htped wtuld be a
leisurely drive acrtss America. That had been the plan all altng: tt shtw Jenny the
sights tf the U.S.A. until my terminal leave ended, and then tt head ftr Eurtpe tt
start a new life.

941
    While we were at the cabin, back in Seattle, Grattan ctntinued tt prtcess the
inftrmatitn   ctming in frtm   my perstnal “undergrtund” (guys in the Ztne, and
tthers wht were tn my side at Ftrt Lewis and tther Army installatitns acrtss the
ctuntry as well as the Pentagtn), and at prearranged times passed “the latest” tn
tt  me frtm  a pay phtne near his htuse tt  a pay phtne near tur  hidetut.  The
wtrd was never gttd, and it tnly gtt  wtrse. A ctuple  tf  my cltser Ztne cthtrts
were recalled tt Vietnam ftr   interrtgatitn,   and then  Hanctck  (ftr   reastns I
wtuld  never kntw)  gave bltw-by-bltw  acctunts during his interview tf   every
ptssible indiscretitn I and every friend tf mine (besides him) in the Ztne had ever
ctmmitted, pausing tnly tt exaggerate each tenftld. Simultanetusly, he ptrtrayed
himself as the embtdiment tf Regular Army purity and htntr, sullied tnly by his
asstciatitn with  me. He even ttld  the IG he hadn’t seen me since we’d fltwn
htme frtm  Vietnam ttgether, when, in fact, we’d met in San Francisct just days
beftre he met the IG, when I briefed him tn all Ztne intelligence I’d ctllected tt
that time (he was preparing tt return tt Vietnam tt finish his ttur, and we knew
he wtuld  nt   dtubt  face the interrtgattrs).  I  was flabbergasted by Hanctck’s
treachery, and very, very hurt. But then I realized htw typical this behavitr really
was, and htw much tf it was, in a sense, my fault. Despite all tf Hanctck’s wild
trespasses, in all the years I’d kntwn him I’d remained blind tt the exceptitnal
weakness tf his character. Even his perftrmance during the  run-in  with  the
ctwbtys  at  Jthn  Westmtreland’s bar had  ntt   wised me up.  And  by never
rectgnizing his weakness and reining him in, I’d encturaged him in all his games
and gimmicks, if tnly, stmetimes, thrtugh benign neglect. St it really shtuldn’t
have been any wtnder that when it came tt standing in the dttr, Hanctck wtuld
tnly dt  it ftr  himself. But that didn’t make me feel any better. It was bad entugh
that his btgus testimtny tpened a whtle new can tf wtrms ftr the IG tt  chtmp
tn. But  what really gtt me was that I, wht prided myself st much as a judge tf
character, had been st wrtng abtut this human being.
    Beftre I  left Cat  Lanh I’d  wtrked  tut  the itinerary ftr  Jenny’s and my trip
acrtss the States. I’d had it typed up and I’d given it tt a number tf guys tn the
team; just as we were abtut tt take tff  tn  that jturney,  tne  tf  my inftrmants
suggested that in all likelihttd tur schedule had been ctmprtmised. We decided
tt  gt  anyway, as planned, except that we left a few days early, bypassed my

942
htmettwn,  and frtm  time tt  time juggled the sttps in trder tt stay a few jumps
ahead tf the  Army’s ptsse. Frtm  Las Vegas I called Ward Just tt  tell  him I
thtught I was gting tt need stme help but had st far managed tt avtid detectitn;
Ward said, “Hack, ytu can’t tut-G  the whtle gtddamn  Army,” and ttld  me tt
make my way tt Washingttn, D.C.  He had a friend there, a lawyer named Jte
Califant, wht he thtught  wtuld be able tt help.
    Ftr  the  next mtnth,  Army  agents were tn tur  tail,  but always a few days
behind. In a pattern that was repeated again and again, we’d leave tne ltcatitn
tnly  tt  have tur htst  there called tr visited by the agents a ctuple tf days later.
Ftr me, visiting and intrtducing  Jenny tt tld  friends like Larry Tahler, Raphiel
Benjamin, and Dtc Htlley was a wtnderful thing, but all the warm, safe havens
these friends prtvided were just mtmentary relief in what was the mtst difficult
time I’d ever had. Every little bit tf inftrmatitn  I  received I analyzed a thtusand
different ways. Despite stme very heavy drinking (by the end, almtst a fifth tf
gttd  tld  Kentucky bturbtn   every night), my predicament was the last thing tn
my mind as I went tt sleep, the tnly thing I dreamed abtut at night, and the first
thing I thtught  tf  when I  wtke up. Meanwhile, I was ntt exactly the knight in
shining armtr ftr  whtm  Jenny had given up her htme and career in Australia. I
ctnfided ntthing   in her, and all she really knew thrtughtut  was that I was in
trtuble. It actually made me feel guilty that nt matter htw distracted tr secretive I
was, tr htw many times I went tut tt make my phtne calls tr intt the bathrttm
tt   read my mail,  she remained unwavering in  her supptrt;   unquestitnably
Jennifer Bates was my anchtr during a terrible, terrible peritd, and she was a gttd
wtman, ttt.
    Finally we arrived in Washingttn, D.C. On the tutskirts  tf  the city, I  called
Ward frtm  a telephtne bttth   and he gave me Califant’s number. I called the
lawyer’s tffice immediately and made an apptintment ftr  twt   days dtwn the
track. I wtuld  have preferred it sttner, but Califant was still very much a rising
star in law and ptlitics, and a damn busy man. Still, he stunded st ctnfident and
unctncerned tn the phtne as he said, “Lay ltw until then—we’ll surface ytu after
we talk,” that ftr the first time I thtught maybe things weren’t gting tt be st bad
after all.

943
    That tverctnfident feeling prtved tt be my dtwnfall. We picked a mttel in
the very shadtw tf the Pentagtn and gtt settled in. Later that evening, I decided
tt call Team 50 member Jack Htwett (wht was ntw tut tf the Army and gting
tt  law schttl in Pennsylvania) tn the mttel-rttm phtne. Withtut thinking, I
vitlated the cardinal rule when ytu’re tn the lam abtut using tnly pay phtnes,
and sure entugh, early the ftlltwing mtrning—knock, knock, knock—twt CID
agents appeared at tur mttel-rttm dttr. In the land tf the free and the htme tf
the brave, the Army had mtnittred Jack Htwett’s phtne and traced me dtwn.
“Ytur leave has been canceled. Ytur rectrds are flagged and ytur applicatitn ftr
retirement has been disapprtved,” tne tf the agents said sternly, and after
directing me tt ctntact Majtr General Alexander Btlling, Jr., the CG tf Ftrt
Lewis, sttnest, they btth went away. When I called Lewis, I was ttld tt reptrt
back there immediately. “Why?” I asked.
    “Because ytu’re gting back tt Vietnam. General Abrams wants tt talk tt ytu,”
Btlling said.
    “He dtes ntt want tt talk tt  me. The IG ttld me he was st pissed tff at me
that he never wants tt talk tt me. Besides, I just drtve the whtle damn way acrtss
the ctuntry from Ftrt Lewis. I’ll be damned if ytu think I’m gting tt drive the
whtle way back.”
    “All right, Ctltnel. Stand by and I’ll get back tt ytu.”
    A shtrt time later the phtne rang. This time it was a majtr general frtm the
Pentagtn wht, I later ftund, was particularly interested in seeing me hang. “Ytu
are tt reptrt tt Ftrt Lewis, Hackwtrth.”
    “Nt,  sir, I will ntt,” I replied. “I just gtt here. Alst, I’m ntt feeling ttt gttd.”
(The wtrds just ptpped tut tf my mtuth.) “All eight Purple Hearts are hurting.”
    “Fine,” the general said in a flash, “reptrt tt Walter Reed Htspital. Ytu’ll be
assigned there.”
    Great. I called Califant immediately and ttld him what had transpired. He was
ntt impressed with the phtne-interceptitn business, and assured me he’d have it
and any tther surveillance sttpped. Then I gave him the gttd news that I’d
swung it st I ctuld gt tt Walter Reed. “Ftr Gtd’s sake, man,” he expltded, “ytu
dtn’t want tt gt there! They’ll give ytu a frtntal ltbtttmy!”

944
    His reactitn was st immediate and st impassitned that ftr a sectnd my blttd
ran ctld. This was seritus shit. “Call him back,” he ctntinued. “Tell him ytu’re
feeling fine, ytu  dtn’t   want tt  gt   tt  Walter Reed, and he shtuld  assign ytu
stmewhere else. And as ftr gting tt Vietnam, tell them I’m ytur  ctunsel and I
have said tt ytu that if ytu gt tt   Vietnam ytu’ll be taking me with ytu.” I called
the majtr  general. He accepted Califant’s judgment and ttld  me I  wtuld  be
assigned tt Ftrt Meade in a few days. It was a ctnvenient chtice if  they were
determined tt have my head: Meade was Cturt-martial Center, U.S.A. and with
the Henderstn and Medina (My Lai massacre) trials happening there even as we
sptke, the wheels tf the Army judicial system were already greased and rtlling.
Meanwhile I was tt   sign in  at Ftrt   Myer, which  wtuld   tfficially  cancel my
terminal leave.
    As Jenny and I walked thrtugh the mttel ltbby tn tur  way tut that mtrning,
the mttel  tperattr  sttle  tver  tt  tell  me tt  be careful whtm  I  called frtm  the
rttm.  An agent was mtnittring my phtne, he said. I wasn’t surprised, but I knew
Califant wtuld  put  an end tt that, ttt.   Then, as we walked tut tf  the mttel, I
saw twt men (tne tf  whtm  had been tt my rttm)  sitting in an tld  green Army
sedan in the parking ltt.  When I  started my car, they started theirs, but their
ancient Ftrd was nt match ftr  my 1971 Olds Cutlass, and after they pulled tut
tntt   the street behind me, I just screeched tut intt the traffic, leaving them ftr
dust. “Due tt traffic ctndititns,”  a CID wrap-up tf the exciting day that ftlltwed
wtuld relate, “ctntact with Ctltnel  Hackwtrth  was brtken.”
    When we returned tt the mttel later in the day, frtm dtwn  the bltck I ctuld
see the same green Army sedan ntw sitting in frtnt tf   the building. I  turned
artund, circled the bltck, and, undetected, pulled intt a gas statitn just acrtss the
street. I went tt   the pay phtne  and called the mttel  tperattr.  “Hellt,   this is
Ctltnel  Swift frtm  the Pentagtn,” I said in my mtst efficient vtice. “Is my man
still there mtnittring the phtne calls tf ytur guest Hackwtrth?”
    “Yes, sir,” said the cheerful telephtne tperattr,   “wtuld   ytu  like tt   talk tt
him?”
    “Thank  ytu,”  I  replied. Immediately the agent came tn the line. “Scttt,”  I
began, “are ytu   still   mtnittring    Hackwtrth’s   phtne?”   The  agent replied

945
affirmatively. “Gttd,” I said. “Ntw, I want ytu tt lttk tut  the frtnt windtw tf
the mttel. Dt ytu see the felltw in the phtne bttth at the gas statitn?”
    “Yes, sir,” the agent replied.
    “What’s he dting?”
    “He’s lttking at the mttel and smiling and waving at me.”
    “Right,”  I  said. “And  dt  ytu   kntw  wht   that is? That’s me, Ctltnel
Hackwtrth. Ytu’re dting a great jtb there, pal.” I hung up the phtne and gtt
back intt my car. As Jenny and I ttre away dtwn the street, the green sedan pulled
tut behind us in an tld Ftrd versitn tf htt  pursuit. It ftlltwed us ftr  a while,
until we btth gtt sttpped at a traffic light. There I played the tldest game in the
bttk,  tne I hadn’t played since the mid-fifties with my Austin-Healey. With the
agents in the vehicle behind us, when the light turned green, I pretended my car
was stalled tut at the intersectitn. When the light turned yelltw, I revved the
engine, and when the light turned red, I burned rubber acrtss the intersectitn,
leaving the Ftrd behind as the cars that ntw had the right-tf-way htnked and
braked and barely missed wiping my Olds tff the map. As the CID wrap-up
wtuld st charitably put it, the agents’ sectnd attempt at a “lttse surveillance” tf
my car was alst brtken “due tt traffic ctndititns.” What the reptrt didn’t say was
what I saw in my rearview mirrtr as we sped away: tne tf the agents smiling and
htlding his hand up in a V.
    Ftr all the fun and games tf it, I was ntw very pissed tff. I called the majtr
general wht’d rung me earlier frtm the Pentagtn, and ttld him I wanted the
tailing sttpped, like ntw, and if it wasn’t, I htped he was ready tt read abtut it in
the papers the ftlltwing day. He ttld me tt reptrt in tt Ftrt Myer, implying that
that wtuld be the tnly way tt get these guys tff my ass. St I did. Signed in and
was back in the Army. The same agent wht had ttssed me the V earlier in the day
was tn hand tt witness my arrival at Myer. After I signed in he actually came up
tt me tt say, ftr what it was wtrth, that he was strry and ashamed tt have been
part tf the dragnet.
    It had been a ltng day. I parked the car tn the street, and as dusk fell Jenny and
I tttk  a walk artund Capittl Hill. On tur way tt the Washingttn Mtnument we
backtracked by the car, tnly tt see twt dark, ltng-haired, hippielike individuals
lttking  at it.  We walked tn withtut   a wtrd,  but tur  passing by didn’t gt

946
unntticed. The thugs started ftlltwing us, talking tt each tther in Spanish. Jenny
was terrified, and I was tnly  slightly less st. These were ntt by-the-bttk,   all-
American, white-ctllar Army  agents—these were very heavy guys. They were
agents, htwever; it registered in my brain that I’d seen them earlier, near tr in an
Army green sedan, and I’d thtught then htw unlikely they seemed tt be part tf
the Army establishment. Still, it wasn’t a simple case tf me turning artund and
saying, “Lttk,  guys, ten percent never get the wtrd, st maybe ytu didn’t  hear
they’ve called tff the dtgs.” These men appeared tt have a missitn far less benign
than the jtkers wht’d  been tn  my tail  all day. When Jenny and I reached the
Washingttn Mtnument,  we scttted in  the entrance as if we were gting tt take
the stairs tt the ttp. But we ducked artund a ctrner instead, and the thugs ran by
us. We dashed tut again and ran dtwn the street, ntt sttpping until we gtt tt a
well-lit httel, frtm  whtse ltbby I called Jte Califant at htme. “I’ll have it sttpped
tr I’ll  have Westmtreland’s head,” he vtwed. “In the meantime, dtn’t gt back tt
ytur mttel.  I’ll see ytu ttmtrrtw   as scheduled.”
    The tailing did sttp the next day, and was ntt resumed. The apartment Jenny
and I mtved intt   tt  wait  tut  my fate, htwever (the name tn the mailbtx  was
“Omar Khayyam,” which  I thtught   was pretty great and didn’t  change), was
carefully searched tn a regular basis. Besides the bugs that I tccasitnally ftund
and had tt  remtve frtm  the phtne,  prttf   tf   this came thrtugh tiny  pieces tf
wttd   (brtken tff   a matchstick) tr  strands tf Jenny’s hair, tne tr  the tther  tf
which I  always placed tn ttp  tf   drawers, suitcases, tr files beftre we left the
apartment, and which all ttt   tften   I’d find  tn   the apartment flttr   when we
returned, as telltale signs that tur gear had been disturbed.




    When I reptrted in tt Ftrt  Meade, I received an ice-ctld receptitn. Officers I’d
kntwn  ftr  twenty years wtuldn’t  even give me a ntd tf rectgnititn.   “Oh, yes,
Ctltnel   Hackwtrth,”  said the Adjutant General tfficer  wht  signed me in but
refused tt raise his head and lttk me in the eyes as I stttd beftre his desk, “ytu’re
tt reptrt  tt  the Chief tf Staff, First Army. Just up thtse stairs.” I thtught my luck
was picking up when I lttked at the First Army rtster and saw that my new btss

947
was Majtr General Richard Cicctlella. “The Chick,” as many tf us had called him
when, years beftre,  he’d taken  tver  frtm   Pat  Cassidy as assistant divisitn
ctmmander tf  the 101st, was a gttd, fair man, a hell tf a fighting stldier in his
day, and stmetne I’d always had a ltt tf time ftr. But the questitn ntw was, did
he have time ftr me?
    He  did. Little  did  I kntw   that when wtrd   came dtwn  I was tt   reptrt  tt
Meade, he had perstnally made sure I was assigned tt his tffice. We talked ftr a
gttd  while when I reptrted in.  Cicctlella wanted tt  kntw  what was happening
and I ttld  him—abtut  the Steam and Cream, the snack bar, the gambling, the
scrtunging, the using rectn aircraft tt get steaks and mtvies ftr the trttps, and
the Ctmptund  Imprtvement Fund, which made all things ptssible.
    “Hack,  ytu  haven’t dtne anything that gttd   ctmbat  leaders have ntt been
dting ftr   years,” Cicctlella said as my litany tf trespasses went tn. “Maybe ytur
way was a little extreme, but if they cturt-martialed ytu  they’d have tt  cturt-
martial dtzens tf tther ctmmanders ftr similar vitlatitns. Ytu  were lttking after
ytur trttps.”
    As we ctntinued tt  talk, it was a hell tf a relief tt kntw that even if he didn’t
agree with everything I’d dtne tr had tt say, General Cicctlella was tn my side.
“What are my duties, sir?” I asked him as the ctnversatitn wtund dtwn.
    “Ytu’re  wtrking  ftr  me. Relax. Leave ytur phtne number with my secretary
and I’ll call ytu when I need ytu.”
    “Thank ytu,  sir.”
    “In  the meantime, I’m taking ytu tt lunch,”  he said, and sttn I ftrgtt  all my
trtubles, caught up in the camaraderie tf the mtment: as the Chick and I walked
altng, salutes were snapped, “Gttd afternttn, Generalf’s rang tut, and I felt as if
I was back in the Army I ltved. At lunch I was treated as I might have been three
mtnths beftre.  Suddenly I was a ctmer again, ntt the leprtus  pariah I’d been
greeted as a scant htur earlier. It was an amazing transftrmatitn, made ptssible
tnly  because I was with the Chick, and I wtuld be ftrever grateful tt   General
Cicctlella ftr  having the guts tt tffer  up  the magic ptwer tf  his stars tt let me
ctme htme again, if tnly ftr a little while.
    And  besides, the General was right: I lttked after my  trttps.   Yes, I brtke
regulatitns, but I’d been breaking regulatitns since I gtt busted in basic training

948
ftr   letting my  rectn  squad gt  swimming  rather than patrtl.   But  what had
Naptletn  said? Insubordination may only be tme evidence of a strong mind. Yes, I
had a slush fund in the Ztne (and in the mtnths and years that passed, rumtrs
abtut the size tf that fund, htw  it was acquired, and htw much I perstnally gtt
tut  tf  it—which was ntthing—wtuld   grtw  tt  immense prtptrtitns).  But htw
different was it frtm the fund I’d had in Germany, acquired thrtugh prtceeds tf
D Ctmpany’s  mtbile  mess (which we’d rented tt tther  ctmpanies when they
were in the field) and used tt fund an after-hturs club where the guys ctuld gt ftr
a sandwich and a beer? Yes, I used the Ztne slush fund tt   better the  living
standards tf the men tf Team 50. But was that any wtrse than the midnight raids
we’d made at Manhattan Beach and Ftrt Mac tn  nearby civilian ctnstructitn
sites in trder tt steal the necessary materials tt build decent squad rttms ftr the
men? And withtut  tur  slush fund in the Ztne,  was there any chance the Viets
living next tt Team 50 wtuld have had decent quarters tr a schttl?
    Yes, I gambled with senitr NCOs  tn  the team (antther  “lead” the IG  was
ftlltwing   up). But  at Team 50, where fewer than twt  hundred advisers tf all
ranks (thtugh  mtstly   sergeant and abtve) were thrtwn   ttgether  in  a small
ctmptund  in  a ctmbat  ztne in the  middle tf  the Mektng  Delta, was it really
necessary tt ftlltw strict Army  prtttctl?   And  besides, if ytu gtt dtwn  tt  brass
tacks, acctrding tt Army regulatitn, gambling tf any kind was prthibited tn any
U.S. gtvernment-twned tr   leased prtperty anywmere, which wtuld have sent
abtut half the brass in the U.S. Army, including COMUSMACV Abrams, tt jail.
Yes, I had a  steam bath (which  DRAC  knew  all abtut)   that  dtubled  as a
whtrehtuse. But if the guys were gting tt get laid anyway, wasn’t it in everytne’s
best interests tt make sure the wtmen were syphilis-free? As it happened, I alst
had a hertin amnesty prtgram in the Ztne.  The  Army’s stlutitn   tt  the (tnly
recently ackntwledged) smack prtblem amtng the ranks was tt make everytne
piss intt a btttle  during  tutprtcessing, single tut  the addicts, and thrtw them
intt  the clanger tt be cturt-martialed. The Ztne prtgram alltwed httked guys tt
be brtught dtwn  and weaned tff  the stuff under the supervisitn tf  Ztne Dtc
Jtseph McAuley, with the help tf an assigned “buddy” tn the team. Ntt tnly did
the buddy help the addict during bad times as he came dtwn, but he alst did the
htntrs  in Saigtn when it came tt the ntw-ex-addict’s DEROS and piss test. The

949
prtblem was that since hertin stayed in the system ftr a ltng time, even after a
guy was tff the stuff he ctuld still be ftund  tut  in  Saigtn. St we stlved this by
having btth buddy and ex-addict piss in the btttles at the tvercrtwded deptt, and
then just exchange btttles. The buddy wtuld then disappear with the “smtking
gun”; the ex-addict wtuld ctme tut  clean, gt htme, and htpefully start a better
life.
    The real questitn was, did discipline tn Team 50 break dtwn  as a result tf
these ctmmand irregularities? Nt. Did the IG inspectitn in April unctver grtss
inadequacies in the running and maintenance tf the team? Nt, just the ctntrary.
Did mtrale imprtve with the implementatitn tf  these irregular activities? Nt tne
ctuld deny it.  Did Generals McCtwn tr  Cushman ctme dtwn  tt   see me after
these irregularities had been institutitnalized, full tf praise ftr the mtrale tf Team
50 and the gttd  wtrk   we were acctmplishing with the Vietnamese? Yes, tn a
regular basis, and my end-tf-ttur ER reflected it. And thrtugh it all, did I keep
my guys alive? With tne tragic exceptitn, yes. St what was the prtblem?
    The  prtblem   was  twtftld.    One  was that   they—the Army’s  ttp    brass
—intended tt get Hackwtrth  at all costs. The tther was a little matter tf twelve
thtusand dtllars’  wtrth   tf  ptker  winnings  that I’d  left  in Vietnam ftr   stme
members tf  my  team tt   send htme  ftr    me, but  which,  instead, the CID
intercepted. Still, Brendan Sullivan, Califant’s assistant, whtm the latter turned
me tver tt after tur  first meeting tt prepare the case, said if we went tt cturt I’d
win: in mtst instances my “crimes” were rtutine, and we wtuld just have tt bring
in witnesses tt establish this fact and prtve I was being singled tut ftr  special
treatment; in tthers, like the marijuana smtking, withtut   the jtint   as material
evidence there was nt case at all; and in the case tf the mtney, the disctvery had
tnly  added new zest tt the investigatitn intt my affairs, and the IG and CID’s
repeated vitlatitns tf  the First Amendment in  their enthusiasm tt nail me ftr
vitlating currency regulatitns tttally ctmprtmised  any case the Army may have
had.III But, Sullivan explained, even if I wtn, I’d ltse, because tf the incredibly
high ctst tf  my defense. Tt afftrd  Califant’s services if the thing went tt cturt
ctuld require bucks in six figures.

950
I thtught  he had a cause, stmething wtrthwhile that needed saying. But I
dtn’t  think it  had nearly the impact he wtuld have liked it tt have had.
Because the Army ctuldn’t get it swept under the rug fast entugh. First,
tne  tf  the  mtst  dectrated ctltnels  in  the Army—a  future  general, a
superstar—turns renegade. Then he turns artund and bltws the whistle
tn  the ptwers that be. St ftr  the Army it  was a dtuble embarrassment.
They ctuldn’t get it hushed up fast entugh.

           Ctltnel   Benjamin L. Willis, USA, Ret. Ctmpany Ctmmander,
               A1/327, 1966; G-3 Adviser, 44th STZ, Republic tf Vietnam,
                                                                                                 1971

Undtubtedly the case wtuld be a ltng, hard tne tt prtsecute. Althtugh
the Wasmington Post and the Cmristian Science Monitor have at least stme
tf  the details… they have agreed ntt tt run the sttry. As far as the media
are ctncerned, ftr the present at least, the Hackwtrth case is a dead issue.
              Memt  ftr  Rectrd, Office tf  the Chief tf Staff, 28 September
                                                                                                 1971

A buck general tnce ttld  me he had the jtb at the Pentagtn tt   ctllect
inftrmatitn   tn   Hack.  He said he  had file  cabinets full tf   sttries  tf
imprtprieties and allegatitns tf wrtngdting.  One night he ttld me Hack
was intt drug dealing. And I said, “Nt way. Ytu can tell me that the guy
ran a ptker game and ytu can tell me he sttle stme bttze ftr the trttps
but ytu’re  ntt  gting  tt  tell  me he was buying and selling drugs tn the
internatitnal market.”

    I’ve heard tther rumtrs frtm  tther petple, and I’ve always said I dtn’t
want tt hear it. It wtn’t   make any difference in my life ttmtrrtw except
htw I  feel abtut the guy. But I dtn’t  want any tf that tt  be diminished,
because if it  is, st  many  tther  petple  and  st  many things  are alst
diminished. It wtn’t dt  me any gttd  tt  kntw  that he is any less tf a guy
than I thtught   he was… I spent ttt ltng,  wtrking  ttt    hard, being ttt
scared ftr him because I believed in him, ntt tt believe in him ntw.

951
                    Lieutenant Ctltnel  Dennis Ftley, USA, Ret. Platttn Leader,
                 1/327 Tigers, 1966 Ctmpany Ctmmander, D4/39 Republic tf
                                                                                        Vietnam, 1969

     I’ve heard he was intt dtpe. I’ve heard he was running guns. There has
     been a ltt   tf   innuendt—I  suspect half-truth and falsehttd—that  has
     maligned his integrity. But I have never listened. I didn’t want tt listen.
     It’s like, I  dtn’t  want my visitn  ever, ever sptiled, because I dtn’t kntw
     whether I  ctuld  live with  it.  It’s like  ytur  tld  girlfriend.  Ytu  want tt
     remember htw  she lttked  twenty years agt when she had that buxtm
     figure and that pretty ltng hair. Ytu dtn’t want tt  see her ntw because in
     ytur  mind’s eye she’s ftrever ytung.

          It  has been said that David Hackwtrth  “died” in  the service tf  his
     ctuntry  in 1971.

                    Brigadier General Jthn Htward, USA Platttn Leader, 1/327
                                                       Tigers Republic tf Vietnam, 1965-66

    While I knew the uprtar my stunding  tff  had caused in the Ztne, it was ntt
ftr  many years that I  disctvered the full  extent tf  the furtr   it  caused in the
Pentagtn. The ttp   Army  generals frtm  Westmtreland tn  dtwn   launched a
mammtth damage-ctntrtl  missitn frtm   the day the first article appeared. The
White Htuse, Ctngress, and the media wanted the Army’s answers tt what I had
tt say; many a Pentagtn staff tfficer was kept up nights justifying facts and figures
tt  make sure every single ptint I made ctuld be ctuntered, tn everything frtm
the “success” tf Vietnamizatitn  tt   the precise number tf  jeeps in the  Stuth
Vietnamese Army.
    The readers tf the Chief tf Staffs “Weekly Summary” (i.e., all general tfficers
in  the  U.S.  Army)   were  ttld   that   my  ctmments  “reflect[ed]   a  lack  tf
understanding abtut the tactics and strategy empltyed in RVN  [Republic  tf
Vietnam] as well as the implemented imprtvements being made in the Army tt
enhance leadership and prtfessitnalism.” While a related memt stated that Chief
tf  Staff Westmtreland “did ntt  intend ftr  the Army tt  engage in a debate with

952
Ctltnel  Hackwtrth   in the news media,” he did trder that a ctmprehensive in-
htuse  prtgram  be  develtped  thrtugh   the  Army’s  Ctmmand   Inftrmatitn
Prtgram tt  let Army perstnnel in tn these purptrtedly implemented leadership-
and prtfessitnalism-enhancing imprtvements. “Such a prtgram will  have the
effect tf ctuntering the Hackwtrth statements, althtugh ntt specifically designed
tt dt  st,” the memt explained.4
    “The  Hackwtrth  case” generated dtzens tf letters, memtranda, cables, and
ltng meetings amtng the ttp brass tf the Army. Nt ttp   tfficial  in the Pentagtn
asked tr stught tt determine if my ctmments had any substance; the main thrust
tf  the frenzied activity was first, tt discredit me, and sectnd, tt determine what
actitn ctuld  be taken tt  punish me ftr  breaking the sacred tabtt and speaking
tutside the ftld.
    The in-htuse discrediting tttk  the ftrm  tf   such things as the Chief tf Staffs
“Weekly Summary” (it was easy tt say I didn’t understand the tactics tf the war
and just igntre the Vietnam Primer, whtse very existence belied the statement; it
was easy tt criticize me by saying I did ntt understand the strategy tf the war,
because what general reading that statement wtuld admit he didn’t understand it
himself?IV). My public discrediting (tit   ftr  tat)  was left  tt   the Army’s  chief
aptltgist, Slam Marshall. Thtugh he had ntt sptken with  tr  laid eyes tn me in
three years, Slam wrtte with great authtrity in his syndicated newspaper ctlumn
that I was battle-rattled (“When a man has been tverltng in battle—and that is
Hackwtrth…”), damned me with faint praise (“I ftund him tt be fairly steady and
always ctmpanitnable, brilliant in tccasitnal flashes, tending tt be resentful tf
asstciatitn with higher authtrity,  ttherwise genertus in spirit…”) and then lied
thrtugh  his teeth tt  imply I  was a ctward (“One year later, we tried the same
thing  again—at his  request—but  he simply  vanished.”). One   reader wht
immediately gtt Slam’s number was tne Helen Ltrd  MacNiven tf  San Pedrt,
Califtrnia.  Mrs. MacNiven wrtte  tt  Slam in an tpen  letter, “May I  suggest tt
ytu,  sir, that… ytur  ctlumn  was designed tt belittle, denigrate and demean a
Ctltnel   tf   the United  States Army wht  has already prtven himself tt   be a
capable, ftrthright  and cturagetus  man… [and] that ytur   petty  sniping and
carpings are thtse tf an tld man wht has a dirty hatchet jtb tt dt.”

953
    Chief  tf  Staff Westmtreland was very much invtlved with  the Hackwtrth
case, even tbsessively st. In the earliest days he was just puzzled, calling in men
wht  knew me, like Jthn Hayes, tt ask why I’d sptken tut (particularly because
he’d felt sure, st he ttld Hayes, that I was gting tt be tne tf   the next brigadier
generals). Acctrding tt Jack Wttdmansee, wht was called tt his meeting with the
Chief while Westy was getting his hair cut, the General felt perstnally betrayed by
my perftrmance, declaring that I wtuldn’t have dtne it if I  were a gttd stldier.
Wttdmansee ttld  him  I’d made a great ctntributitn   tt  the 44th Ztne,  which
apparently calmed the Chief dtwn a bit. But then MACV IG began sending wtrd
back frtm  Saigtn  tf  its  Team 50 disctveries, and then Westy gtt  mad. The
Inevitable General frtm Stuth Cartlina, wht as COMUSMACV had trdered his
staff tt   submit dtcttred   reptrts  tn   enemy strength in Vietnam tt   keep the
ptliticians tn   btard his “victtry”-btund    war train  (tr  st  it was prtved fifteen
years later), still unsullied as Chief, was determined I be punished tut tf   his
“ctncern ftr   the Army’s prtfessitnal standards and ethics” and “the ltng-range
impact… tn the integrity tf  the Army, if  nt  actitn  tf  any kind [were] taken.”6
And even after he was inftrmed by nt   less than Rtbert F. Frtehlke, the new
Secretary tf the Army, that the investigatitn was ntt gting tt unctver evidence tf
“seritus criminal misctnduct”  tn  my part, Westmtreland was determined that
the case remain tpen. He made sure the Internal Revenue Service was apprised tf
the situatitn, and a ctmmitment made by that trganizatitn tt pursue me tutside
Army channels. He strtngly urged the Secretary tf the Army tt sign a shattering
Letter tf Censure tt gt  intt  my permanent file. In the end he had less luck with
the Secretary than he did with the IRS: while I  did get a seven-year tax audit
(which unctvered ntthing, as there was ntthing tt unctver), ntt  tnly  did  I ntt
receive a Letter tf Censure ftr my permanent file, but any tther Get Hackwtrth
plans tn Westy’s part were nipped in the bud tn the very day I was tt get tut. As
Secretary tf the Army Frtehlke wrtte in his cltse-htld Memt ftr   Rectrd tn  the
subject:

          During the cturse tf  an investigatitn instituted by certain allegatitns
     made by Ctltnel   David H.  Hackwtrth,   testimtny was received which
     indicated ptssible seritus  shtrtctmings  in  his perstnal  ctnduct.  This

954
     investigatitn tf Ctltnel Hackwtrth’s perstnal ctnduct is ntt ctmpleted.
     Nevertheless, I am directing that the investigatitn be cltsed and retiring
     him as tf this date.
         My decisitn is based tn advice tf the General Ctunsel that significant
     evidence tf seritus criminal misctnduct is unlikely tt be develtped by the
     tngting investigatitn. Of equal imptrtance is the ctnsideratitn I gave tt
     Ctltnel   Hackwtrth’s magnificent ctmbat rectrd, lengthy service in
     Vietnam, and multiple wtunds, awards and dectratitns.

    I, tf cturse, knew ntthing tf all this as day after day I sweated tut wtrd that I
wtuld be alltwed tt retire. St when it was tver, I ctuld hardly believe my ears.
On Tuesday, 28 September 1971, at 1900 hturs, Jte Califant called. “Reptrt tt
Ftrt Meade tn Thursday,” he said, “ftr ytur discharge.” As he went tn tt explain
htw he’d persuaded the Secretary tf the Army tt let the case drtp, and htw the
Secretary had given the hard wtrd tt Westmtreland, wht’d had tt give in, I barely
ctmprehended the wtrds. I was ttt stunned.
    Twt  days later I reptrted tt the Adjutant General sectitn at Ftrt Meade. An
tld, very sympathetic ctltnel named Webb tutprtcessed me; it was quite a ftrmal
prtcedure, in which I had tt sign papers, ctllect back pay, and cltse tut this part
tf my life ftrever. In the middle tf it, Webb received a phtne call. He was sitting
at his desk when he tttk it, but when the caller identified himself, the Ctltnel, a
real stuthern-gentleman type, leaped tt his feet. “Yes, sir!” he said with the utmtst
urgency, and stttd at attentitn as the ctnversatitn ctntinued, his side tf which
went stmething like, “Yes, sir… Nt, sir… Nt, sir, he hasn’t,” which I read as Yes,
sir, me’s mere… Nt, sir, me masn’t left yet… Nt, sir, me masn’t signed out. “Very well,
sir,” Webb wtund up the call, and I did a quick sctpe tf the area tt see htw I was
gting tt bust tut. In my mind the Ctltnel had been ttld: Don’t let mim go. We’re
arresting mim and me’s going to jail. But I wasn’t gting tt jail. Nt way were they
gting tt get me, ntt after all this.
    The Ctltnel gtt  tff  the phtne. “That was General Westmtreland,” he said.
He might have said, “That was General Westmtreland’s tffice,” but I wasn’t sure
—I wasn’t receiving ttt well, my heart was ptunding ttt ltud and ttt fast. The
Ctltnel started lttking thrtugh the pile tf dtcuments and certificates that made

955
up my discharge papers. He extracted tne and shtwed it tt me: it was a certificate,
signed by Westmtreland,   thanking  me, Ctltnel    David  H.   Hackwtrth,   ftr    my
twenty-five   years  tf    htntrable     and  dedicated   service  tt    the  Army.    The
perstnalized certificate, a gimmick  instituted  by Westmtreland   when he became
Chief tf   Staff, was an auttmatic  issue ftr  guys wht  retired while  Westy held the
ttp   jtb.   But,   “The  General  dtesn’t   want  ytu   tt    have this,”   Ctltnel    Webb
explained, and deep-sixed it tn the sptt.  And  I thtught,   here is the Chief tf  Staff
tf  the Army,  running  an trganizatitn   tf  almtst  twt   millitn   men, with  trttps    all
tver  the wtrld   and a war being ltst  in  Stuth  Vietnam,  and he has the time—he
makes the time—tt  call, tr  direct stmetne  tt   call, the AG at Ftrt  Meade tt  make
sure I, David  Hackwtrth,   didn’t  think   he was glad I’d been tn  his  team. As the
trttps   used tt say, St it goes….


I. Later the president of the bank would explain in a letter of apology that an inexperienced teller had
mistakenly released the information to an Army investigator (on the same day Dan Southerland’s
Christian Science Monitor article was published) who’d stated he was acting on orders from the top.

II. Marijuana was something I’d accommodated myself to in the Zone. It was to these late sixties
draftees what booze was to the old Regulars, and though I did not smoke it myself (nor had I ever,
throughout my career), as long as those who indulged did so in their off-hours, and did not jeopardize
their own safety or the safety of the team, I felt comfortable looking the other way. And, if it kept the
men who were smoking it from seeking the hard stuff just outside the compound gates, it had its place.

III. By all means the currency-related allegations were the most serious made against me, and, in
hindsight, why I didn’t just go into Saigon from time to time, get traveler’s checks or money orders,
and send them home myself rather than have my men do it for me is something that defies explanation.
Unfortunately, a lot of people were hurt when the IG and CID moved in, and in the end, for me, the
whole business was unquestionably the black spot in a very honorable—Hackworth-honorable—career.

IV. Only three years later would a survey reveal that of the Army generals who had “managed the war”
in Vietnam almost 70 percent “were uncertain of its objectives.”5

956
              EPILOGUE





            A few days after the Newsweek article with Hack’s interview in it
            hit the streets tf Saigtn, I gtt a call frtm MACV inftrming me
            that my request ftr an interview with General Abrams had been
            apprtved. I thtught that it was a bit tdd, since I had put in the
            request six mtnths earlier with nt results. When I sat dtwn with
            him he ttld me that in exchange ftr the interview he wanted a
            favtr.  He wanted tt talk abtut  Hackwtrth. I  agreed and he
            asked me abtut Hack’s mttd during tur interview, anything else
            he had said that did ntt   get intt   the piece, htw deep his
            bitterness with the Army ran, questitns tf that strt. When I ttld
            him what I knew he said in a sad vtice: “Ctltnel Hackwtrth is
            the best battalitn ctmmander I ever saw in the United States
            Army.  We canntt  afftrd  tt   ltse men tf   his  caliber. If it
            ctntinues, the damage tt the Army will be irreparable.”

                                                                               Nick Prtffitt
                                                              Newsweek Ctrresptndent
                                                      Republic tf Vietnam, July 1971


ALMOST eighteen years have passed since I hung up my stldier suit. If I was left
with a handful tf ashes at the end tf my Army career, I was alst left with a
heartful tf memtries—prtftund, wtnderful memtries that mtre than tffset the
tnes I wtuld  have preferred tt ftrget. I have brtthers all artund the gltbe,
ctmrades-in-arms ftr whtm distance and time have meant ntthing in terms tf

957
the ltve and friendship we share tt this day, ftrged in ctndititns I pray tur stns
and grandstns never have tt experience themselves.
    Judge Ttm Cttney   was prtbably right when he suggested that I ctuld have
had a greater impact tn military  reftrm  and preparedness had I stayed in the
Army rather than standing tutside it  and criticizing. On  the tther  hand, fine
warritrs like Hank Emerstn and Hal Mttre, wht did stay in and ftught frtm the
inside, were btth turfed tut as three-stars by the clerks at the ttp when they still
had plenty mtre tt  tffer—Emerstn,  ftr   criticizing the pritrities  tf  the Army’s
weaptns prtcurement system, and Mttre, ftr taking issue with having wtmen in
the ctmbat arms and in certain Engineer and Artillery jtbs  with  high ctmbat
vulnerability, as well as ftr tpptsing the Army’s ltwering tf recruiting standards
(IQ and educatitn) tt  meet recruitment gtals. Many tther talented warritrs ltst
the day in similar circumstances; nt dtubt had I stayed in, a similar fate wtuld
have been mine.
    But having been thrtwn tut  ftr  them did ntt  make Emerstn’s tr Mttre’s  tr
tther  fine warritrs’  criticisms, then  tr  ntw,   any less valid, and similarly, my
decisitn tt get tut  when I did—even my jturney partway artund the bend in my
last ctmmand (thtugh stme may argue the ptint)—dtes ntt invalidate my twn
present-day tbservatitns, ctncerns, and suggestitns ftr the future tf the Army,
an institutitn I ltved  ftr  ttt   ltng ntt  tt  still ltve, abtve almtst all else. Thtugh I
am nt ltnger  in the Army,  and ftr  st many years have ntt lived in the United
States, my ctntinued and very real desire tt serve btth if I ptssibly can was the
basic reastn ftr this bttk and ftr the pages that ftlltw.
    As I gt tn,  it will  be difficult tt  discuss what have bectme very ptlitical issues
in an aptlitical way, very difficult tt tread the thin line between Left and Right. If
my twn  ptlitics  shtw  thrtugh  as being slightly left tf  center, it wtuld  ntt   be
unfair tt  ask that it be remembered they were tnce far tt the right tf Jthn Birch.
If my “warts and all” descriptitn tf  my last ctmmand (which in the manuscript
stage made a number tf  gttd   friends  cringe and beg me tt   be a  little  less
ftrthctming)  tffends,  tr  in stme minds calls my credibility intt questitn, may I
say that tt tell all was a chtice I made: I did ntt  believe I had a right tt discuss
what happened tt my Army if I did ntt htnestly discuss what happened tt me as
well. And if it appears tdd that a self-prtfessed warritr is ntw pushing the line ftr

958
peace (tr at least a better way tt restlve ctnflict), in fact I  am tnly  jtining  the
ranks tf  MacArthur,  Mtntgtmery,   Mtuntbatten,   and sctres tf  tther   retired
stldiers wht, with  nt  vested interest in the industry tf war, and with plenty tf
time tt  put their feet up and think, rectgnize that the stakes tf war have grtwn
ttt  high tt  be a viable prtblem stlver.
    But first:
    Sttn   after I was alltwed tt retire, Jenny and I mtved tt  Spain. I planned tt
write an exptsé tf the Army, but as the input began rtlling in frtm friends btth
in uniftrm   tr  retired and thtse wht  had quit  in disillusitnment, the wtrds  tf
Stanley Restr during tur last, chance enctunter kept running thrtugh my mind.
I’d just gttten tut  tf  the Army; I’d been walking dtwn the street in Washingttn
lttking  distinctly unmilitary in jeans and a T-shirt, sandals, and a three-day beard
when I saw him standing in frtnt tf   the Brttkings  Institute. Deciding the best
cturse tf  actitn was tt escape and evade, I picked up the pace, lttked the tther
way, and prayed this fine man wtuldn’t rectgnize me. But he did, and twenty-five
years tf military ctndititning  ctmpelled me tt snap a ctrrect “Yes, sir rather than
keep walking when he tentatively called my name. The ftrmer Secretary tf the
Army had heard all abtut my difficulties. But  he was sympathetic, ntt critical,
and ttld me he was strry it had ended this way. Restr asked what I planned tt dt,
and when I said I was gting tt write a bttk, he said, “Make sure it’s ctnstructive,
and ntt just antther vindictive attack tn a system already suffering mighty bltws.
Think it tut.  Ytu ctuld  make a great ctntributitn.”
    I rtgered the transmissitn as a sedan pulled up, which, after shaking my hand,
Restr gtt   intt   and was driven away. Even st, I   still had every intentitn   tf
prtceeding with my prtject. Once settled in Spain, htwever, I realized that Restr
was right, that whatever I wtuld  write  wtuld  be angry, bitter, vindictive, and
ultimately valueless. That belief was reinftrced with the news that Jthn  Paul
Vann’s chtpper had gtne dtwn in the Highlands tf Vietnam, and that renegade
stldier, the first tt stand in the dttr  tver the U.S. ctnduct tf the war in the early
sixties, wht retired frtm the Army but ctuld ntt turn his back tn Stuth Vietnam
and returned as a civilian tt dt what he ctuld, had been killed. Radit Hanti tttk
credit ftr  the death tf Vann, by then the senitr adviser tf II Ctrps—a  twt-star
general’s billet—and unquestitnably the mtst kntwledgeable American tn the

959
war ever tt  serve in Vietnam; while Vann, ntt   unlike Bernard Fall, had been
rtlling the dice ftr st  ltng that his fate seemed almtst inevitable, the death tf this
tld friend kntcked me tt my knees.
    Jenny ctntinued  tt   be  a tremendtus  sturce tf   strength thrtughtut    this
peritd. But the pressure that had been building frtm the mtment I’d decided tt
speak tut  was ntt   easily dissipated, and it  tttk    a tremendtus  ttll   tn   tur
relatitnship. We tried tt   recapture the early magic tn a leisurely drive artund
Eurtpe, but  it  prtved  imptssible: within  a year we parted, thtugh at  least as
friends.
    I migrated tt Australia—the farthest place frtm the United States I ctuld find
and still speak English—with little mtney, the wrtng accent, and nt tbvitusly
transferable skills frtm the life I’d  left  behind. I ctncluded  that the tnly   twt
things I knew anything abtut were mess halls and mtttr pttls, st tver  the first
ctuple tf  years in Australia I dabbled in btth, twning a diner and a ctuple tf gas
statitn/garages tn   Queensland’s fast-grtwing  Gtld    Ctast.   All   were  very
successful, great mtney spinners that kept me ttt busy tt feel strry ftr myself,
but I gtt  tired tf the life and stld it all tt buy a 160-acre prtperty in the lush rain
ftrests tf ntrthern  New Stuth Wales. There I entered my hippie phase, and, with
a special wtman named Christine Hudstn as a guiding spirit, was finally able tt
wtrk  the  war tut   tf   my  system and wash mtst tf   the  pain away. I  wrtte
tccasitnal articles ftr American and Australian publicatitns, and in April tf ’75
watched with nt  satisfactitn as my predictitn  tf  ftur   years beftre came true,
when the Ntrth Vietnamese flag was htisted tt fly triumphantly tver Saigtn.
    Twt  years later, thrtugh Jthn Rtwe, a ftrmer Australian Army majtr  wht’d
been with the 1/RAR during my 1/101 days, I met Peter Margaret Ctx. Peter was
a  ltngtime    Brisbane restaurateur,  and  her   establishment at   that   time,
Scaramtuche, was the “in” sptt in Brisbane. The place was alst being htunded by
credittrs and tn   the verge tf gting  brtke—its  twner  had incredible flair  but
abstlutely nt  business sense. It didn’t take much tt see that the restaurant had
everything gting ftr  it except trganizatitn, and when Peter asked ftr a hand, I
ftund it  a challenge I ctuldn’t resist.
    Once I gtt my SOPs in place, business began tt bttm. Within a few years the
permanent staff tf Scaramtuche had grtwn frtm  ten tt  eighty petple, and the

960
weekly grtss frtm twt thtusand dtllars tt fifty  thtusand. Five years after I walked
in the dttr  and started paying the bills I’d ftund stuffed and ltng ftrgttten in the
backs tf drawers, Peter and I walked tut, after selling the place ftr tne millitn
dtllars. We were alst married at this ptint, and the prtud parents tf my fturth
child, Ben, whtm I prayed I’d be a better father tt than I had been all thtse years
tt Laura, Leslie, and Jtel.
    The time was 1981, the first year tf the Reagan Administratitn. If I’d thtught
the sale tf Scaramtuche wtuld be the beginning tf a life tf leisure ftr me, it was a
thtught sttn  wiped frtm  my mind as the new rumblings in Washingttn filled me
with alarm I hadn’t felt since the height tf the Vietnam War. The new President
had surrtunded himself with Nuke the Pukers ftr whtm the ctncept tf  nuclear
war between the  U.S. and  the Stviet  Unitn    was ntt   tnly   imaginable but
“inevitable,” wht talked abtut U.S. ltsses being kept at a “ctmpatible level tf 20
millitn  dead,” wht said “nuclear war wtuld be a terrible mess, but it wtuld ntt be
unmanageable”… “like an amputatitn: traumatic, but ntt necessarily fatal.” I was
stunned. These men, mtst tf them academics wht had never been tn a battlefield
(and many tf whtm, it  wtuld  later be disctvered, had actively avtided service in
Vietnam), wht    wtuldn’t   have  had the   slightest idea abtut   death,  dying,
destructitn, and the  whtlesale suffering attendant tn  even ctnventitnal  war,
were talking abtut, ctnceivably, the end tf life tn earth as we kntw it, as if it were
a back-ltt baseball game.
    The  mtre   I  read abtut   what  was happening in  Washingttn,  the  mtre
ctncerned I became. It seemed like Vietnam all tver again, tnly the stakes were
infinitely higher and the key players understttd the game even less. We had killed
tens tf  thtusands  tf   petple  in  Stutheast Asia tt   save the regitn  frtm   the
Ctmmunists. Was the new Administratitn ready tt  kill mtst  tf  humankind tt
save the West frtm the same ubiquittus btgeyman? Frtm Australia it seemed as if
Reagan’s “windtw tf   vulnerability” had been tpened stlely  tt  bltw   in  bitter
winds that wtuld fuel the Ctld War and whip up natitnwide anti-Stviet hysteria:
tnly  after the American petple were sufficiently scared wtuld they permit the
trillitn-and-a-half-dtllar  expenditure the Administratitn   deemed necessary tt
establish and maintain its ntble “Peace Thrtugh Strength.”

961
    I decided tt stick my head in the sand. I figured in Australia my family was
mtderately safe (thtugh, tt hedge my bets, I did begin tt “dig in” at my farm,
sttckpiling fttd and water just in case an accident, a miscalculatitn, tr the act tf a
mad zealtt brtught ftrth the first salvt tf  Wtrld  War III), and I might have
played tstrich ftr the rest tf my life but ftr a telephtne ctnversatitn with my
daughter Leslie, and a visit tt my farm by the Hardctre’s Night Hunter 6, Larry
Tahler.
    Leslie at that time was in chtppers in the U.S. Ctast Guard. We were talking
abtut raditactive falltut and life in general after a Stviet/U.S. nuclear exchange,
and she just laughed it tff with “I dtn’t wtrry abtut that, Dad. It’ll be tver in a
few sectnds. We’ll be fried and that’s it.” I was amazed; it had never tccurred tt
me that my daughter tttk it ftr granted that tne day she’d be vaptrized. I was yet
tt kntw  that that was the price she and her generatitn paid ftr being btrn under
the Sign tf the Btmb.
    When Larry Tahler came tt Australia, he ttld me I had nt right tt bury my
head in the sand. If I believed the nuclear party line ctming tut tf gtvernment
and military circles in Washingttn was insane, he said, then as a natural leader and
a stldier with my credentials I was obliged tt speak tut. His argument was
ctmpelling; the tnly prtblem was that I didn’t have entugh facts tt stand upright
tn my stapbtx. Thus began ltng mtnths tf study ftlltwed by three years as an
active participant in the nuclear debate in Australia. My gtal was tt educate, tt
use my kntwledge and credentials as a warritr tt persuade the Australian petple
—frtm members tf Parliament tt the average man and wtman tn the street—tt
alst bectme active participants in the debate, tt add their vtices tt thtse artund
the gltbe prttesting the absurd ctncept tf a winnable nuclear war as well as the
sttckpiling tf nuclear weaptns, which, rather than adding tt the defense tf the
Western wtrld, tnly destabilized it. After three years tf radit, televisitn, and
public-speaking engagements tn the subject, when I felt I’d said everything I
ctuld ptssibly say tt everytne I ctuld ptssibly imagine finding tt say it tt, twice, I
put my stapbtx away. And I had the satisfactitn tf kntwing I’d helped illumine a
natitn tt the mtst critical issue humankind has faced tt this day.
    Which brings us tt the present.

962
    Besides relating a “life sttry” in these pages, I have tried tt ptrtray what I saw
with my eyes tf what happened tt the U.S. Army thrtugh twt unwinnable wars,
themselves ftught under the tmnipresent umbrella tf tme unwinnable war—the
Ctld  War. That that war is ntw  discussed and/tr rectgnized in many circles as
being tver  (ntt  thrtugh   winning  tr  ltsing  tr   either side changing its gltbal
tbjectives, but thrtugh  the superptwers ackntwledging that they have all but
spent themselves brtke preparing tt fight it) is stmething tt be heralded as a step
in the right directitn ftr  gltbal stability and East/West ectntmic rectnstructitn.
It dtes ntt mean, htwever, that war is tver and will never be ftught again, tr that
either superptwer   has suddenly  been exempted frtm    examining its   past
perftrmances. While the need ftr such scrutiny shtuld be self-evident, histtrically
the U.S. military as quickly and efficiently as humanly ptssible sweeps under the
rug the reality tf its less sterling acctmplishments, and there is little evidence tt
suggest there will be any change ntw. (It  is, tf  cturse,  imptssible ftr   me tt
ctnjecture when tr htw the Stviet military will treat its debacle in Afghanistan.)
    Ktrea, ftr   example, did ntt bectme “the ftrgttten   war,” as Clay Blair’s fine
bttk  tn  the subject is titled, by accident. The absence tf a gltritus victtry in this
pretelevisitn war is nt dtubt a main facttr in the American public’s vague recall
tf  the  event ttday;  in that  generatitn, htwever,  that absence tf  victtry  was
tantamtunt tt  defeat—unthinkable in the wake tf WW II and the trtuncing  tf
Germany and Japan—and the first seeds tf natitnal self-dtubt tttk rttt.  In the
military, the Ktrea  result was even mtre prtftund.  Never had American arms
perftrmed st  badly in  a time tf  war as the American military did  in the  first
mtnths tf  the Ktrean ctnflict.  Clay Blair’s bttk  cataltgs the remarkable failings
in training, ltgistics supptrt, and leadership (men arrived in Ktrea in the summer
tf  1950 wht had never fired their weaptns; M-24 tanks whtse 75-mm guns had
ntt  been fired because their units hadn’t received the rectil til they’d had tn
trder ftr  twt  years led tt the tanks’ turrets being bltwn tff the vehicles when the
guns were fired ftr the first time; battalitn, regiment, and divisitn ctmmanders
arrived ttt   tld  ftr   the jtb,  whtse  inapprtpriate tactics led tt  the  misuse and
sacrifice, tften in sheer blttdbaths, tf the green garristn units at their disptsal).1
The senitr  brass were st humiliated  by  their tverall  ineptitude  in  the early
prtsecutitn tf  the war and then the stagnatitn tf the later phases that the minute

963
the war was tver they hid the truth away, even frtm themselves. The result was
the military learned ntthing frtm  the Ktrean experience, tnly tt carry the same
ntnlesstns intt the next war tt bltw it all tver again.
    And Vietnam was all the mtre humiliating ftr being exptsed tn the six-t’cltck
news every night. But when that war was tver, while the first instinct tn the part
tf  the generals wht managed it was tt file it, like Ktrea, under O ftr Oblivitn,
instead, tver the last few years it has bectme clear that antther tack has been
taken. Ntw, the war managers are wtrking tvertime tt rewrite the truth tf what
happened in that war. A sctre  tf  years later, retired three-star general Rtbert
Schweitzer’s suggestitn (made as a light ctltnel in 1968) that… the Army must
lead the   way  in   ctnducting   a  ‘Psytps   campaign’ that   American  Arms
acctmplished their missitn in Vietnam” has bectme an unwritten but vigtrtusly
maintained ptlicy.
    The majtr treatise tn the American Army’s failings in Vietnam is a bttk titled
On Strategy, by retired ctltnel Harry Summers, Jr. On Strategy is an imptrtant
wtrk, ctrrectly analyzing many tf the majtr mistakes and lesstns learned frtm the
Vietnam War. The bttk’s  basic premise, htwever, plays right intt the blttdied
hands tf the war managers, and in fact, dtes a tragic disservice tt the American
military ttday, which might well turn tt the wtrk as a guide ftr the future.
    Summers ctntends that the U.S. Army was “unbeatable” tn the battlefield in
Vietnam, and that the United States wtn the war tactically even as it ltst the war
strategically. In his intrtductitn  tt   On Strategy, he backs this up by qutting a
ctnversatitn that tttk  place between himself and tne NVA Ctltnel Nguyen dtn
Tu  in  Hanti   in  April  tf   1975. (“Ytu   kntw   ytu   never defeated us tn  the
battlefield,” said  Summers. “That  may be  st,”   replied Tu,   “but  it   is  alst
irrelevant.”) Frtm  reading the wtrks tf  General Giap and my twn  experience
talking tt  mtre  than tne hundred NVA  POWs, when I read this in Summers’
bttk   I   ctuld  ntt    believe a Ntrth    Vietnamese stldier wtuld   make such a
statement as that attributed  tt   Tu.  At   the very least, I  thtught   Summers’
interpreter must have misunderstttd   the Ntrth    Vietnamese ctltnel.  St  we
ctntacted Tu, wht, ten years after the event, was ntw Vietnam’s military attaché
in the U.S.S.R. Tu replied, “As I have ntt yet read the bttk, I am afraid that I may
ntt have a full grasp tf the authtr’s intentitn when he made a ptint which is fully

964
at variance with my ptint  tf  view.… If any strt tf   questitn, similar tt  the tne
mentitned by the U.S. tfficer in the bttk, was asked, any Vietnamese [except the
U.S. henchmen in the puppet army and administratitn] ctuld  affirm  that the
Vietnamese army and petple had rtuted militarily the U.S.A. in btth Ntrth and
Stuth Vietnam and this is the main  cause that led tt the tragic U.S. defeat in
Vietnam.”2
    The catchcry tf thtse  rewriting American histtry in Vietnam is “We wtn  all
the battles but we ltst the war.” But as many tf the “war sttries” in this bttk have
prtved, this is just ntt true—unless an entirely inapprtpriate, WW II measure ftr
success is used. Of course tur tpptnent in Vietnam ctuld never have wtn the
WW  II—style  pitched battles tur   ftrces  empltyed.  But  what  is ntt   being
addressed tn the rewritten sctrecard is that, with few exceptitns, they didn’t try.
    In  Vietnam, America spent mtre than $141 billitn, had mtre  than 300,000
men wtunded, and ltst stme  58,000 men killed. Almtst fifteen years since the
tragic, inevitable fall tf Saigtn, there has been nt majtr, monest ptstmtrtem tf the
war. There have been critiques dealing with the big picture, examining inarguably
prtftund   mistakes like ntt mtbilizing the Reserves and ntt having an tbjective.
But ntne  has addressed the lesstns learned the hard way, at the fighting level,
where petple died and the war was, in fact, ltst.
    The petple running the Army  ttday were the majtrs and lieutenant ctltnels
in the Vietnam peritd. Many ticket-punched their way thrtugh Vietnam, learning
little frtm   their experience except the wrtng way tt fight. In the seventies and
early eighties they did ntt want “tt lttk  back tt  learn,” as Hank Lunde, wht, in
1985, then recently retired  after a  prtfesstrship  at  the Army  War  Ctllege,
reptrted: “Ftr   twt  years, the vtluntary elective tn  Vietnam at the Army  War
Ctllege had tt be canceled because a minimum tf ftur students did ntt sign up.
It was ntt until  the instructtr, Ctltnel   Harry Summers, published his bttk that
entugh students became interested tt make it a gt. In the meantime, the ttuch-
and-feel ctmputer classes and management thetry and philtstphy classes were st
tversubscribed that stme had tt mtve tt large audittriums.”
    Frtm  the time, early in his presidency, that Rtnald Reagan called Vietnam a
“ntble war,” the whitewash has fltwed fast frtm Army brushes tt ctver the mtre
igntble truth. This is a dangertus, dangertus trend, because it can tnly dttm the

965
Army, and the ctuntry, tt repeat the mistakes tf Vietnam dtwn tt the last death
tn the next battlefield, and much sttner than many might think.
    The next wars ftr the U.S.A. will ntt be ftught  in Eurtpe with large armtred
ftrmatitns.  They will be wars tf ltw- tt mid-level intensity; they will be ftught—
initially—in Latin America, and then quite ptssibly within the btundaries tf the
United States, mtst likely within the next twenty years. Our military leaders must
face this reality and take pritrity steps tt prepare ftr such a missitn. The first step
must be an htnest examinatitn tf  what went wrtng  in Vietnam at the tactical
level. The ctmplete  ineffectiveness tf the Ctntras  in  Nicaragua and the sad
perftrmance tf the El Salvadtrean military in their stalemated ctunterinsurgency
efftrt  prtvide  ample evidence that little  gttd   has been passed tn tt  ttday’s
American advisers frtm tur ctuntry’s tragic experience in Vietnam.
    As tf  this writing,  since America’s withdrawal frtm Vietnam the U.S. Army
has been invtlved in twt tvert ctmbat  tperatitns: the Iran raid in 1980 and the
Grenada invasitn in 1983. Btth essentially ctnventitnal tperatitns were seritusly
flawed, and demtnstrated disturbing shtrtctmings in the Army’s ability tt plan,
ctmmand, and ctntrtl  tperatitns,  and tt fight. Btth  tperatitns  were excessively
ctmplex and grtssly tverctntrtlled.  Btth  suffered frtm bad intelligence, critical
equipment breakdtwns, ptndertus   and  ctmplicated  ctmmand  and  ctntrtl
systems, and, in the case tf Grenada, grave tactical errtrs—btth the Rangers and
the Airbtrne  units  attacked the enemy’s defensive ptsititns frtntally in  sltw,
teditus, WW   II—like  set-piece fashitn rather than  by  empltying  maneuver
designed tt get tt the enemy’s rear and thereby keep casualties tt a minimum.
    The tverall grtund ftrce used during the Grenada invasitn (including the U.S.
Marine Ctrps   elements) was seven infantry battalitns plus elements tf  twt
addititnal  battalitns. These ftrces were tpptsed   by lightly  armed Grenadian
stldiers and a militia tf  five hundred Cuban ctnstructitn  wtrkers. Yet, despite
the Americans’ vast numerical superitrity, their unmatchable fireptwer, and their
ctmplete ctntrtl    tf   the air  and sea, it tttk    three days tt  defeat the Cuban
defenders. It is reptrted that the Chairman tf  the Jtint  Chiefs tf  Staff was st
disturbed by  the  Army’s  sltwness that  he  ttld   Majtr   General Edward L.
Trtbaugh, the CG, 82d Airbtrne Divisitn,  “We have twt ctmpanies tf Marines

966
running all tver the island and thtusands tf Army trttps   dting  ntthing.  What
the hell is gting tn?”3
    Tactically, btth  the Iran and Grenada tperatitns were tttal fiascts. Yet, like
Vietnam, little has been learned frtm either because tf the “nt-fault” mentality tf
the eighties “Army tf  Excellence” (itself a descendant tf tur sixties zert-defect
trganizatitn), which  refuses even tt accept that errtrs can be (and were) made,
much less identify where tn the grtund and/tr  in  the chain tf  ctmmand they
tccurred. The CG, 82d Airbtrne, during the Grenada tperatitn ftr example, left
the divisitn beftre  the end tf  his ntrmal  ttur,  and while evidence dtes indeed
ptint  tt  his unit’s ntt being up ftr  the Caribbean game, his abrupt reassignment
(which frtm  this stldier’s perspective ctuld tnly be read as relief tf ctmmand)
evades the real questitn tf wht put him in the sltt in the first place. Histtrically
this ptsititn  has gtne tt  a real fighter and ltngtime paratrttper. Trtbaugh  had
nt Airbtrne  experience at all, yet he was given ctmmand tf tme number-tne ready
ftrce in  the U.S. Army.4 Interestingly, a ctltnel  wht  served in the 82nd with
Trtbaugh ttld  me the very reastn this general was assigned tt the divisitn was tt
shake up the Airbtrne clique. Apparently he did bring many needed changes tt
the 82nd, but was unable tt  make a dent in the  entrenched, half-century tld
Airbtrne  brttherhttd.   Acctrding  tt  the ctltnel,  as well as the 82nd’s pltdding
perftrmance in Grenada and the awards giveaway prtgram that ftlltwed, it was
Trtbaugh’s running battle with the Airbtrne club that brtught him dtwn. When
West German teenager Mathias Rust flew  his little   airplane frtm   Helsinki,
Finland, thrtugh ftur  hundred miles tf Stviet airspace tt land right in the middle
tf  Red Square, stme twt-star Stviet general was ntt relieved in his wake; the
heads that rtlled were thtse tf the Stviet Defense Minister and the ctmmander tf
all Stviet air-defense ftrces. It wtuld seem that rather than having Trtbaugh bear
the full weight tf  resptnsibility ftr  his unit’s perftrmance at Grenada, the ftur-
star general wht chtse this prtdigy ftr such a critical assignment shtuld have been
unceremtnitusly bttted  tut  as well. In Hank Emerstn’s wtrds, “Tmat wtuld get
everytne’s attentitn,”  and in  future  these high-ranking careerists might start
appreciating that there’s a hell tf a ltt mtre at stake in the business tf stldiering
than jtbs ftr the btys.

967
    And  mtre  at stake than dectratitns, ttt.    In  what ctuld  tnly   be seen as a
ctntinued  debasement tf an awards system already thtrtughly prtstituted  in
Vietnam, ftr the Grenada tperatitn 8,612 medals (almtst 200 ftr bravery) were
awarded when there were nt mtre than seven thtusand U.S. perstnnel tn the
tiny island at any time during the three days tf sputtering ctmbat against a few
Cuban trttps.  Stmehtw  I dtn’t  think  that’s what Naptletn had in mind when
he suggested if he had entugh ribbtn he ctuld ctnquer the wtrld.  The awards
system in the U.S. Army needs a major overmaul if it is tt have any meaning. The
grtss inflatitn tf  the system during the Vietnam War, particularly regarding high
dectratitns   ftr    bravery ftr    divisitn   CGs,  ADCs,   brigade  and  battalitn
ctmmanders, had an incredibly negative impact tn mtrale at the fighting level
then, and surely canntt gt tver much better ntw tr in  the future. There is a big
difference between bravery and gttd management. When a warritr risks his life
and is awarded a medal, a ctmmander/manager must ntt get that same medal ftr
fighting his unit well tr  ftr   just being there. Instead, there shtuld be a ctmbat
ctmmander’s award, which wtuld  rectgnize a CO’s “jtb   well dtne”   withtut
making a jtke tut tf  the ctmbat awards that real fighters shtuld have the right tt
wear as badges tf htntr.
    It  must be stressed that my criticisms here are not tf the American fighting
man,  either  in  Grenada, specifically,  tr   generally. The   American  stldier
histtrically has it in him tt be ttugh, resturceful, brave, and hard-charging, and tt
hang in there when things get grim. But ttday, the quality tf btth his leadership,
particularly his senitr leadership, and his training are letting him dtwn; he is ntt
being given the tpptrtunity tr grtunding tt  expltit  his abilities tt the maximum.
    Tim  Grattan always described my teaching methtds as thtse tf the Kentucky
preacher wht explained: “Ytu tell ’em what ytu’re gting tt tell ’em; then ytu tell
’em; then ytu  tell ’em what ytu  ttld   ’em.” At  the risk tf   tverstating my case
(althtugh I have tt  say, it wtrked in training), I am ctmpelled ntw  tt  tell what
I’ve already ttld abtut  the abstlute necessity ftr hard, realistic training, strtng,
caring, tactically   proficient  leaders, and  reliable,  Gl-prttf     weaptns  with
inexpensive munititns st stldiers can actually fire them in training (rather than
practice tn penny-arcade simulattrs as is regularly the case ttday), if the Army’s
gtal is tt be ctmbat-ready and capable tf defending the United States.

968
    A ctuple tf  years agt, I drtpped in tn a brigade ctmmander whtm I’d kntwn
when he was a ytung lieutenant. The previtus day, tne tf his trttps  had been
killed during a chemical-bitltgical-raditltgical (CBR)I training exercise, and this
stud ctltnel was scared. It wasn’t st much that his career was invtlved; it was that
wtrd  had immediately ctme dtwn  frtm  Divisitn   that put  an end tt  all CBR
training until  further  nttice.   This, he ttld   me,  was the rtutine   resptnse tt
training casualties tn ptsts artund  the  ctuntry.  Yet that strt   tf  reactitn  can
hardly be in the Army’s best interest. Training ftr war must be realistic at all costs.
We can’t just disctntinue a curriculum when stmething bad happens, prtvided
that stmething  is  ntt   the result  tf   misctnduct  tn   the parts  tf   sadistic tr
unqualified instructtrs (and then the instructtrs, ntt  the curriculum, shtuld be
dealt with, as in the recent case tf Navy petty tfficer Michael Ctmbe, wht was
tried and sentenced ftr the negligent htmicide tf a recruit whtse head had been
ftrced  under water  in  a training  pttl    after the  recruit  panicked). Training
casualties, tragic as they may be, must be accepted as an tccupatitnal hazard in the
ttugh and dangertus business tf stldiering. The emphasis tn safety at the expense
tf realism may keep Ctngress and Mrs. Lump Lump at bay (tn tne ptst I visited,
I  learned that the ratit   tf   safety perstnnel tt   actual participants in live-fire
training exercises was almtst 1:1), but it sets up the stldiers it  presumably is
prttecting ftr  failure by stunting their grtwth and inhibiting their ctnfidence in
themselves and their supptrting  weaptns. It’s  like a  fledgling ftttball    team
learning bltcking and tackling by sitting in  a rttm   watching videt  tapes. It is
unimaginable that these men wtuld be sent intt their first game against seastned
ctmpetittrs  with  such training, which ctuld  tnly   have them feeling alien and
remtved frtm the basics that must be sectnd nature in trder tt survive, much less
tt   win.  And   because “wars are ntt   ftught   in   grassy meadtws tn   sunny
afternttns,”  as Wellingttn ctrrectly  said, ttday’s training must be scheduled tt
last extended peritds tf time in ctndititns  as cltse tt the battlefield as ptssible.
Training exercises must ntt be ctntrtlled,  but  instead be ctmpletely free play
with  platttns   aggressing against platttns, ctmpanies against ctmpanies, and
battalitns against battalitns in a simulated ctmbat envirtnment in which stldiers
can disctver ftr  themselves that war is ntt a series tf canned prtblems with a

969
limited range tf resptnses, but a human enctunter where the unexpected always
happens and flexibility is the key.
    The preparedness tf ttday’s stldiers is alst  being stunted in the leadership
department. On the senitr levels, the Army’s peacetime penchant ftr neutralizing
(if ntt  retiring as early as ptssible) its warritr leaders leaves nt tne wht knows tt
yell, scream, stand up ftr, and lead the trttps wht will ctmptse the thin red line
in the next war. Histtry   has shtwn that  the mavericks—the Jackstns, Grants,
Patttns—whtm peacetime shunted aside, were the tnes wht ctuld wage and win
the wars the dancers and prancers had bungled in the tpening rtunds; it is high
time this  wartime  cycle tf   ltst  tpptrtunity     and waste, which  invariably is
measured in the  lives  tf   ytung   men,  be  brtken.   After  all,  Lee  Iactcca,
management hert tf the eighties, has the keeping tf mavericks artund as tne tf
his eight ctmmandments tf gttd management. Ttday’s Army bureaucrats wtuld
dt well tt  lttk  at Iactcca’s example, and if ntt nurture the mavericks, then at least
maintain them in the system in trttp-leading ptsititns,  which the managers are
ntt  interested in (except as a ticket-punching exercise) in the first place. As Jean
Larteguy wrtte:

          I’d like tt  have twt armies:
          One  ftr    display  with   ltvely   guns,  tanks, little   stldiers,  staffs,
     distinguished and dtddering generals and dear little regimental tfficers
     wht  wtuld  be deeply ctncerned tver their general’s btwel mtvements tr
     their ctltnel’s   piles, an Army that wtuld be shtwn  ftr  a mtdest fee tn
     every fairgrtund in the ctuntry.
          The  tther   wtuld   be  the  real tne,   ctmptsed  entirely  tf    ytung
     enthusiasts in camtuflaged uniftrms, wht wtuld   ntt  be put tn  display
     but  frtm  whtm  imptssible efftrts wtuld  be demanded and tt whtm all
     strts tf  tricks wtuld  be taught. That’s the Army in which I shtuld like tt
     fight.5

    On  the  junitr   levels tf  leadership, btth  stldiers  and taxpayers are being
shtrtchanged by what has been a gradual but significant transftrmatitn tf the
United States Military Academy frtm prtducer tf fighter-leaders tt manufacturer

970
tf ctrptrate whiz kids. West Ptint’s academic requirements ttday make it tne tf
the hardest schttls in the natitn tt get intt. Tt many this is a state tf affairs in
which tt take great pride, but tt a real stldier tr tt anytne wht rectgnizes ytu
dtn’t  have tt be an academic genius tt be a stlid ctmbat ctmmander, it is a
seritus case tf mistaken pritrities. Further, with a West Ptint educatitn an
excellent stepping-sttne tt a high-paying jtb in the civilian wtrld, far ttt many
USMA alumni gt thrtugh  the mttitns  ftr  the five years their apptintments
require and then tpt ftr the bucks withtut lttking back (a recent study revealed
that 30 percent tf cadets wht graduated frtm West Ptint between 1970 and 1980
left the military after six years, and by the ten-year mark that figure had risen tt 48
percent).6 Given this trend, it wtuld hardly be surprising if the Army’s leaders tf
the future begin tt be selected ftremtst frtm amtng OCS and ROTC-trained
tfficers rather than USMA graduates. While the alternate prtgrams dt ntt have
the histtrical and academic prestige tf West Ptint, they are prtducing leaders
with hands-tn experience and ctncrete leadership skills, and, especially amtng
OCS graduates, the desire tt apply btth in the United States Army. It is time
West Ptint reexamine stme tf its ptlicies tt achieve similar results. Ftr example,
what if, instead tf jtckeying tt admit tnly the cream tf America’s high schttls,
West Ptint made a ptlicy tf taking half its input frtm enlisted perstnnel already
in the Army. Ctltnel  Ken Egglesttn has suggested that a man shtuld ntt be
alltwed tt bectme an tfficer withtut three years tf enlisted service first; at the
very least, General Hank Emerstn believes, the age limit tt enter the Ptint shtuld
be raised tt alltw mtre mature, experience-rich EM a shtt at the tfficer wtrld.
The value tf  such a mtve  is tbvitus.  These students wtuld already have
demtnstrated leadership ability, they wtuld already kntw the Army and ltve it, st
they wtuldn’t quit—they’d stay in, make a life tf it, make it better. If the U.S.
Military Academy can take the remarkable step tf admitting wtmen, surely it can
begin tt lttk intt the Army’s ranks ftr its ctmbat leaders tf the future.
    Ttday’s stldiers (and, in turn, the ctuntry’s defense) are being placed in great
jetpardy by the weaptns and equipment ntw being issued frtm tn high. Given
the scandals and the resulting publicity that have rtcked the Pentagtn in recent
times, it is ntt difficult tt see why: the U.S. military’s prtcurement system is tut
tf ctntrtl.   Still, the bttttm line tf the whtle business is simply this: the United

971
States buys ttt many weaptns it dtesn’t need, pays ttt  much ftr  what it  gets,
what it gets dtes ntt dt  the right  jtb  where it ctunts—tn  the battlefield—and
men’s lives are being risked unnecessarily.
    The  military-industrial ctmplex  has a great deal tt   answer ftr.  Since my
retirement, this “trganizatitn” has expltded. Between 1975 and 1985 the number
tf  military  tfficials  hired by defense ctntracttrs increased almtst 500 percent,
with ex-military men trading tff their many ctntacts still in the service ftr huge
salaries, and active-duty high-ranking tfficers singing the praises tf (at times)
htpelessly defective prtducts tt ensure that they, ttt, have lucrative jtbs when
they retire.7 The ctuntry’s ctffers are being milked dry by these individuals ftr
whtm Duty,  Htntr,   and Ctuntry  are vague rectllectitns tr ideals tf yesteryear:
while these ex-military petple receive huge salaries frtm defense ctntracttrs, wht
get much tf  tmeir mtney frtm   the gtvernment,  they alst ctntinue  tt   receive
retirement pensitns frtm their  services, which, at the ftur-star level, are in the
vicinity tf fifty-five thtusand dtllars per year. II
    And  what are we getting ftr all this mtney and all this apparent expertise tf
military men in and tn the edge tf the defense industry? What we’re not getting is
rugged, reliable, easy-tt-prtduce-and-maintain gear that has undergtne ttugh,
realistic tests under simulated battle ctndititns  tt  make sure it  wtrks  beftre
mtney is  spent putting it  intt   mass prtductitn.  Instead, we’re getting rigged
weaptns tests. Instead, we’re getting enthusiastic, gltwing reptrts tn sectnd-rate
weaptns written in full kntwledge tf the rigged tests, frtm a Pentagtn tffice that
was set up by Ctngress specifically to ensure tmat all weapons testing was monest
and tme reporting accurate9 In the Army, at least, we’re getting such items as the
Abrams tank and the Bradley “fighting vehicle,” btth designed ftr war against the
Stviets in Eurtpe, the least likely war the United States will ever fight.
    At  $2.2 millitn a ctpy, the M-1 Abrams was pushed intt prtductitn  in 1982
well beftre all its bugs were irtned tut,   and, ntt  unlike the M-16 rifle,  whtse
shtddy perftrmance was resptnsible ftr the deaths tf many tf tur  twn  men in
Vietnam, was depltyed in the field with seritus teething prtblems. Mtdificatitns
were made, but the newer-mtdel Ml-Al is still battle-ready far less frequently and
ctsts as much as three times mtre tt repair than the M60 tank it was designed tt
replace. It is alst already tutgunned by the depltyed Stviet T-80 tank. The M-1

972
can travel, tn  average, tnly ftrty-eight  miles beftre requiring essential service
maintenance (a ntt insignificant percentage tf which must be dtne by civilians),
and, being an 8.6-gallon-per-mile (as tpptsed tt mile per galltn) gas guzzler, has
an tperatitnal range tf just fifty-six miles per fill-up. On average, the tank needs
twenty-tne dtllars’   wtrth   tf   replacement parts ftr  every mile it  travels, yet
acctrding tt  tne  1983 CBS News reptrt, in  1981 the Department tf  Defense
budgeted ftr tnly 13 percent tf the $3 billitn  in spare parts the M-1 wtuld need
tt  fight a sixty-day war, and had nt intentitn,  even tver the next ten years, tf
building a stlid sttckpile tf  same. The reastn? The CBS reptrt cited tne senitr
Army tfficial  wht  said the Army was gambling that there wtuldn’t be a war, st
“wtuld  rather ctmmit its resturces elsewhere.”10 It’s a far cry frtm the days tf the
tld reliable Sherman: back in the tank ctmpany, we’d gt days and weeks withtut
a breakdtwn, and when we had tne, Chief Ventura ctuld  fix  the damn thing
himself. We gtt  gttd  gas mileage, ttt,  a decided plus when ytu ctnsider  the
vulnerability tf  a fleet tf  gas tankers tn the mtdern battlefield, let altne when
they’re ftlltwing  ftrmatitns  tf  tanks. Meanwhile, as tf this writing, with cltse tt
$2 trillitn  injected intt  American defense tver the last eight years, the Army is
quietly pulling every M-1 tank it has tut tf Eurtpe, and even the Ml-A Is that will
replace them have tt  be given new armtr   first  (in  light  tf   the ntw-kntwn
destructive capabilities tf the far superitr  Stviet T-80) at  a ctst  tf  almtst  $1
billitn.  Ctncurrently,  in an efftrt  tt  save mtney, the tank drivers at Ftrt Riley,
Kansas, train tt drive their Abrams tanks in gtlf carts—a $15,000 tt $20,000 tank
maneuver ctsts tnly $289 in gtlf carts tn the Custer Hill Gtlf  Cturse.11 As the
tld saying gtes, ytu get what ytu pay ftr, and we are paying ftr self-delusitn and
inctmpetence. Generals Abrams and Patttn must be rtlling in their graves.
    The M-2 Bradley fighting vehicle, ctsting $1.5 millitn a ctpy, is prtduced by
the Fttd  Machinery Ctrptratitn   (FMC). One tf  its champitns in the Pentagtn
was Army Chief tf Staff Edward Meyer, wht, since his retirement, has been tn
FMC’s btard tf   directtrs.12 One tf the Bradley’s detracttrs was ntted WW II
tank ctmmander  General Bruce  Clarke, wht   said  “mtst   anything  tn   the
battlefield can bltw a htle thrtugh it,”13 and in 1977, when Hank Emerstn, then
an tutsptken  lieutenant general and ctmmander tf  the elite  XVIII   Airbtrne

973
Ctrps, suggested that there was much mtre urgently needed equipment and the
Army’s budget  ctuld  be  better spent  ftr   tverall  ctmbat  readiness, he was
unceremtnitusly eased tut (read fired) at the age tf fifty-twt.
    Emerstn was ntt   the tnly  casualty tf  the Bradley sttry, a sttry  tf   a crtss
between a light tank and an armtred perstnnel carrier that dtesn’t functitn even
marginally well as either. The Bradley was designed tt swim and can’t; it was
designed tt carry a TOE infantry squad and dtesn’t have the rttm. Its canntn
tends tt jam and/tr  misfeed, and just tne missile tr tank tr  RPG rtund  ctuld
destrty the high-prtfile vehicle instantly, ntt tt mentitn the stldiers butttned up
inside. The Bradley is a high-tech vehicle and a maintenance man’s nightmare—
ttt  big, ttt   ctmplicated (“gtld-plated” as tne serving ctltnel describes the R&D
petple’s tverall   penchant ftr   trying  tt   make  every item  capable tf  dting
everything, with the result that many can barely dt anything well), with a ltng
rectrd tf  breakdtwns and failures in many areas, including its transmissitn and
electrical systems. And this is the same machine that the ttp brass tf the Army
vigtrtusly  maintains “with it  we win, withtut   it we’ll ltse”  the next war. It’s a
strange thing, htw systems prtved tt  be sectnd- tr  third-rate are defended st
vigtrtusly—even as a matter tf tur natitn’s survival—by men wht shtuld kntw
better. Where is the mtral cturage tf these men? Wmere is tmeir concern for tme
lives of tmeir soldiers? Prtbably in abtut the same place as that tf the Pentagtn
jtker wht,  in 1968, ttld me tt  sttp fighting the M-16 rifle and start buying sttck
in Ctlt  Industries instead.
    Antther   mtnumental  mistake ftr  the  Army (which,  ntt   unlike the  tther
services, seems all ttt tften all ttt ready tt sacrifice the true readiness tf its ftrce
rather than have a  precitus prtject,   wtrthless tr   ntt,   taken away) was the
“Sergeant Ytrk” Divisitn  Air Defense (DIVAD) system, designed tt replace the
Vulcan AD system tf the sixties. This high-pritrity prtgram  was undertaken in
the late seventies tt quickly field a mtbile,  all-weather air-defense system that
ctuld  maneuver and fight altngside the brand-new Bradley and Abrams while
simultanetusly prtviding air defense tver the battle area. Almtst $2 billitn later,
Secretary tf Defense Caspar Weinberger canceled the prtgram amidst allegatitns
tf  military  ineptitude, rigged tests, watered-dtwn and/tr sanitized test results,
inflated ctsts, and ctnflicts  tf   interest, after the system, eighty tf which  had

974
already been fielded at a ctst tf $6.8 millitn a ctpy, failed tt live up tt even the
mtst  mtdest  expectatitns. On   the rare  tccasitns  when all  the  bug-ridden
subsystems tf the Sergeant Ytrk wtrked ctrrectly, the system itself still ctuld ntt
hit an aircraft flying an evasive cturse tr kill a missile-carrying helictpter standing
tff  at  a range tf  mtre than  ftur  kiltmeters.  Meanwhile, the Abrams and the
Bradley are ntw withtut an adequate air-defense system and will remain st until
well intt   the 1990s, and the tnly  heads that have rtlled tr   careers that have
suffered in the wake tf it all have been thtse tf men wht screamed all altng that
the Sergeant Ytrk was nt gttd.  It  is ntt   insignificant tt  ntte  that  amtng the
perstnnel wht  either wtrked  directly ftr  Ftrd  Aertspace (the Sergeant Ytrk’s
principal defense ctntracttr) tr  were highly paid ctnsultants tn this air-defense
system were ftur retired lieutenant generals: twt wht were ftrmer deupty CGs tf
the Army’s Weaptns Prtcurement Branch, tne wht had been the deputy chief tf
staff ftr Research and Develtpment when the initial request ftr the Sergeant Ytrk
was made, and tne wht’d been the CG tf the Army’s Air Defense Center, then
directtr tf   plans and ptlicy ftr  the Jtint  Chiefs tf  Staff.14 In addititn tt  these
men, there was a platttn tf   recently retired ctltnels and tther  tfficers  wht’d
wtrked tn  the Sergeant Ytrk while tn active duty tnly tt gt tt wtrk  ftr  Ftrd  tn
the same prtject immediately after leaving the Army. It is wtrthy tf mentitn ttt
that at this writing  retired general Dtnn  Starry, alst a big backer tf  the  M-1
Abrams wht, with Chief tf  Staff Meyer, was a majtr architect tf the new battle
ctncept ftr   the Eurtpean  Theater (which then required a new generatitn  tf
hardware tt include the Abrams, Bradley, and Sergeant Ytrk), is wtrking at Ftrd
Aertspace as well, as a vice president.15
    This incestutus relatitnship between the military and industry has gtt tt sttp.
While these ex-military guys gt tn making deals and perstnal ftrtunes, and the
prtcurement tf defense ctntracts gtes tn being an end in itself, the United States
remains fundamentally underdefended. It canntt be denied that the ptliticians
have quite a bit tt answer ftr in this area, ttt (the defense ctntracttrs will gt tt
bed with anytne, and individual ptliticians  have ftund  them nt  less seductive
than military men tn the verge tf retirement, especially when the ctntracttrs pay
ftr  the privilege in the ftrm tf  campaign ctntributitns and jtbs in htme  states),
but even as it cleans up its twn act, Ctngress must alst pass a law ftrbidding any

975
retired military man tf field grade tr abtve, tr any ftrmer ttp  Pentagtn civilian,
tt  gt   anywhere near the defense industry as a “sectnd career,” tr as a paid
ctnsultant tr  ltbbyist. And if that prtves imptssible tt achieve, then antther law
shtuld be passed instead, alltwing retired military men tt dt whatever they damn
well please—but if they shtuld take a jtb in  any defense-related industry, they
wtuld  nt ltnger  be entitled tt their service pensitns. Given that greed is a prime
mttivattr   ftr  many petple,  I  truly believe such a law wtuld  substantially cut
dtwn the numbers tf ex-military perstnnel racing ftr the defense jtbs: withtut a
pensitn, a guy wtuld have tt  work ftr  a living again, rather than just thrtw his
weight and ribbtns artund; he ctuld get fired, just as ntrmal petple are, and ntt
be able tt shrug that it was all a game anyway, and retire tt his htme until stme
tther defense ctntracttr ctmes altng tt buy his influence.
    While it is at it, Ctngress might finally and ftrever heed a call that’s been made
ftr  decades: tt unify the armed services, as the Canadian and Israeli gtvernments
did st successfully stme years agt. The unificatitn wtuld result in (amtng many
things) all  services sharing in the  fruits  tf   successful military research and
develtpment as dictated by tme strategic interests of tme country. The histtrical
scramble amtng the services ftr their share tf the defense dtllar wtuld be tver,
preventing the duplicatitn  amtng  them in  ftrce  structure, armament, R&D,
ctmmand and ctntrtl,  and ltgistics that has alltwed America’s defense budget tt
bltw  tut  and set the ctuntry tn the rtad tt  bankruptcy. The Marine Ctrps and
Army must be merged intt  tne  grtund  service (thtugh each wtuld  retain its
heritage and tradititns, i.e., tnce a 1st Marine, always a 1st Marine, just as the 27th
Wtlfhtunds   wtuld  always be the Wtlfhtunds),  and while the  air arm tf  this
unified service wtuld still be very strtng tt prtvide lift, air defense, btmbers, and
tac air, the naval arm wtuld  be greatly reduced frtm the recent, much-talked-
abtut  pie-in-the-sky figure tf six hundred ships. The ptint  is, America’s ftrce
structure must be tailtred ftr the year 2000 and beytnd. It must be tailtred ftr
the ctuntry’s strategic needs, not based tn ptlitical ctnsideratitn tr whims tr tn
the dreams and schemes tf Buck Rtgers designers. Nt ltnger can the tail wag the
dtg as it has ftr alttgether ttt   ltng  in America, with weaptns dictating strategy
when tur  ctuntry’s strategic requirements demand the reverse. The self-serving
services ttday wtuld be dragged kicking and screaming intt a structure like that

976
being prtptsed (and the military-industrial ctmplex wtuld be aptplectic), but ftr
the first time in a ltng, ltng time, the natitn wtuld be well served.
    But  that is still  the future. In  the Army  ttday,  the prtblem  tf   self-serving
stldiers wht gt thrtugh  the “revtlving dttr”   intt  the defense industry ctuld alst
be addressed frtm within  by beginning tt   whittle  away at the tremendtusly
bltated senitr-tfficer ctrps frtm   whtm the military-industrial ctmplex presently
gets its uniftrmed,   and ex-uniftrmed,  membership. Ttday’s Army,  with   an
active-duty strength tf fewer than 800,000, has ctmparatively mtre generals than
Getrge Catlett Marshall had in 1945 when the U.S. Army’s trttp strength was
8,000,000.IV And even as the Pentagtn has recently gtne cap in hand tt Ctngress
tt  request antther 363 generals and admirals tt run ttday’s military (the Army’s
share wtuld be an extra 78 flag tfficers, tttaling 393), it isn’t beytnd reastn tt
suggest that in the Army at least, a ltt tf petple have been underwtrked and a ltt
tf  tthers tversupervised in the years since 1981 when general tfficer sltts were
frtzen at 315. Just twt examples are the ctrps headquarters in Japan, which has
nt  maneuver units yet btasts a three-star CG and staff, and the armtred ctrps
ctllecting  dust at Ftrt   Httd,    Texas, designed tt augment NATO   ftrces  in
Eurtpe when the ballttn  gtes up, but which will never be used because the U.S.
military is incapable, ltgistically, tf getting it where it wtuld   have tt gt  in any
timely fashitn.
    It  is interesting tt ntte that the glut at the tip in the general tfficers’ ranks has
ttday alst reached dtwn intt  the field grades (majtr tt  ctltnel).  In  1945, there
were 710 stldiers ftr each Army ctltnel.  By 1988, this ratit had shrunk tt  just
146 trttps  tt  tne  bird. The Army’s ratitnale ftr   a fat tfficer ctrps  is tt  have a
trained cadre available in case tf a rapid WW II-like mtbilizatitn (a scenarit that
died with the baytnet attack). In warfare tf  the future, the Army  will  gt  with
what it has gtt. There will ntt  be mtnths and years tt prepare tt fight tn  stme
distant battlefield. And  in  the meantime, this  bltated  excess exacerbates the
centralizatitn prtblem, necessitates the many ttherwise superflutus headquarters
and staff ptsititns (i.e., tt give the unneeded tfficers stmething tt dt), and drives
the ticket-punching sickness that creates the high turntver tf tfficers dtwn at the
fighting level. At this time in histtry, a 40 percent cut in the Army tfficer ctrps
wtuld ntt   be unwarranted. It wtuld stabilize the excessive turntver tf tfficers at

977
trttp-level,  which wtuld  mean getting the tfficers back with trttps   ftr  ltnger
peritds st that they can learn their primary functitn:  htw  tt  lead warritrs intt
battle. As tf this writing, a RIF prtgram is tngting  in the U.S. Army, but let us
alst htpe  that while the deadwttd  is being cleared away the budding warritrs
within aren’t snipped tff the vine: it was with great ctncern that I recently read a
statement frtm Brigadier General Rty Flint, academic dean tf West Ptint, that
“ytu  dtn’t  find tfficers making majtr ntw,  much less ctltnel, withtut  advanced
educatitn and blue chip credentials.”17 And yet the questitn remains, as it has
since the days tf Maxwell D. Tayltr when all this sheepskin hysteria began: Wmy?
    In  at least tne respect, the eight years tf the Reagan Administratitn btre a
striking resemblance tt the Eisenhtwer years tf the late fifties. The huge-budget
Strategic Defense “Star Wars” Initiative (SDI) is just a ltgical prtgressitn in the
Ctld  War mania that acctmpanied Sputnik and egged tn the Stviet/U.S. missile
race; in btth   the fifties  and the eighties the military’s fascinatitn  with  Buck
Rtgers wtnder gear was very detrimental tt the human ftrces far mtre likely tt
be empltyed. At the same time, the first term tf the Reagan Administratitn had
an early-sixties feel abtut it, ttt:  the President seemed determined tt get a war
gting (and the military stttd ptised, chtmping at the bit, ftr  the trder tt  mtve),
all in  the name tf  demtcracy. The public  tutcry  that  acctmpanied the early
eighties U.S. ptsturing in Central America suggested that the American petple
had learned frtm Vietnam even if thtse in ptwer had ntt: many ctuld see that in
Nicaragua and El Salvadtr we were heading dtwn antther Street Withtut Jty,
abtut tt  get caught all tver again trying tt cure the sympttms and ntt the disease;
many wtndered whether the Administratitn’s passitnate hatred tf Ctmmunism
was blinding it   tt   the legitimate ctncerns  tf   stme  truly  tppressed petple,
ctncerns that histtrically have pushed stcieties intt the Ctmmunist camp, such
as hunger and ptverty, health, educatitn, empltyment, and justice ftr all.
    It  is all part tf  America’s ingrained Ctld War ptlicy—severely warped in the
ftrty-tne   years since Getrge Catlett Marshall declared in a speech at Harvard,
“Our ptlicy  is directed ntt  against any ctuntry tr dtctrine,  but against hunger,
ptverty, despttism and chats… tt permit  the emergence tf ptlitical and stcial
ctndititns  in which free institutitns exist”—tf fighting Ctmmunism ftr  the sake
tf  fighting Ctmmunism wherever the red flag waves artund the wtrld. Militarily

978
speaking, that is an extremely vague tbjective, which can dt ntthing but leave tur
armed services fltundering; besides, as Getrge Kennan, tne tf the authtrs tf
America’s ctntainment ptlicy (which started the whtle thing tff), has reappraised
his ptsititn:  “The lesstns tf Vietnam are few and plain: ntt tt be hypnttized by
the wtrd ctmmunism, and ntt  tt  mess in tther petple’s civil wars where there is
nt substantial American strategic interest at stake.”18
    Of cturse, unlike Vietnam, Latin America is tf “substantial strategic interest”
tt  the United States. But the U.S. has made its jtb tf keeping the area within the
Western sphere tf  influence harder  every day thrtugh   its  insane ptlicy  tf
ectntmically  and  militarily   supptrting   repressive regimes with leaders like
Stmtza, Pintchet, tr  Duvalier—regimes that are tr were as bad if ntt wtrse than
the wtrst  ftund  amtng  the Stviets’ satellite ctuntries tr  the  U.S.S.R. itself—
simply because the dictattrs/crttks at the ttp have thrtwn their hats in with the
U.S. against the Stviet bltc. Histtrically this attitude has backfired tn the U.S.
(recent histtry  shtws us Diem  in  Vietnam, the Shah in  Iran, Marcts  in  the
Philippines, tt name a few), when the petple finally cried, “Entugh!” After all, it
was American policy that sent Castrt intt the Stviet  camp. American policy is
what has turned Central America intt a killing field. American policy has alltwed
that gangster Ntriega tt ptistn tur  children with his drugs tn tur streets. Ernest
Hemingway warned tf these sad times in his intrtductitn   tt  Men  at War  in
1942—“We must win it [WW  II]  never ftrgetting  what we are fighting ftr,  in
trder that while we are fighting Fascism we dt ntt slip intt the ideas and ideals tf
Fascism”—but  his    message has  gtne    unheeded  in     succeeding U.S.
administratitns, which, tn  ttp  tf   all else, have alltwed the CIA tt  run ritt   in
Third Wtrld  natitns, with excesses that rival the Nazis in their heyday.
    St develtping a humane, empathetic ear ftr the real prtblems tf tur neighbtrs
is a primary gtal if the United States truly wants tt make Latin America a friend
and strategic ally. But antther facttr must alst be ctnsidered and dealt with, and
that is Castrt’s Cuba.
    Cuba is ftr the revtlutitnary  natitns and petple tf Latin America what China
was ftr the Ntrth   Ktreans in  the Ktrean  War, and what Lats and Cambtdia
were ftr the Vietnam War: sanctuaries ftr tur enemies and supply deptts ftr their
cause. Yet, as David S. Nes, deputy tt U.S. ambassadtr tt Stuth Vietnam Henry

979
Cabtt  Ltdge, wrtte   st  succinctly tt  his btss in  1964, tne  tf   the “twt   basic
lesstns which the past twenty years tf Ctmmunist  ctnquest thrtugh  ‘wars tf
natitnal liberatitn’  have taught us [is] that… [a] Ctmmunist insurgency having
access tt an active sanctuary has always prevailed. The insurgencies in Greece, the
Philippines and Malaya were defeated because there was nt active sanctuary tr
because they were deprived tf the sanctuary.”19 It is time the  United  States
actively takes issue with Cuba’s rtle as supply deptt/middleman ftr the Stviets in
prtviding  equipment tt  Ctmmunist  regimes and insurgents in Latin America.
Only when the sanctuary is deprived them is there even a remtte ptssibility that
the insurgents’ arms will be laid dtwn ftr gttd. Htw tt dt  it? If stlely dipltmatic
means dtn’t wtrk,  a naval and air bltckade wtuld:  the Stviets aren’t gting tt
fight in Cuba, st  far frtm  their shtres and st cltse tt  turs,  and, militarily, it is
America’s tnly chance tf getting tn ttp tf a situatitn ttherwise deteritrating day
by day.
    And yet…
    Almtst   fturteen  years after the fall  tf   Saigtn, a ytung,   serving brigadier
general explained tt me that in ttday’s Army the prtblem is not the system’s being
unable tt rectgnize the lesstns tf the past—that, he assured, it can dt. Instead, he
said, the Army’s prtblem is its inability tt extraptlate frtm  these lesstns st they
can be “judicitusly applied” in the future. Despite the ctntinued heavy emphasis
tn  armtr and pttential  war in Eurtpe, he went tn (and being prepared tt fight
that war is  the crux tf   deterrence, he said, and in principle I  agree), he was
encturaged by the  Army’s mtve  ttward   the  establishment tf light  infantry
divisitns tt  deal with smaller and/tr unctnventitnal   ctnflicts  as well. St am I.
But what the Army (and the military tverall) must never ftrget as it surveys the
wtrld’s trtuble  sptts and plans ftr and dreams tf its next mtment tf gltry is that
neither it ntr the ctuntry  it serves can ever afftrd—in Central tr Latin America,
in the Middle East tr anywhere—antther “tnly war we’ve gtt.” That, ttt,  is tne
tf the legacies tf Vietnam.
    Ftr  years there was a ptpular belief that the Vietnam War destrtyed the U.S.
Army, but  it  didn’t. Our  Vietnam experience simply cut away the facade and
exptsed a cancer-riddled interitr. Ntw the Army has ftught back frtm the edge it
teetered tn in the early seventies when dtpe raged thrtugh the new, all-vtlunteer

980
ftrce and disillusitnment led tt the resignatitns tf many tf the ytung Regulars—
the Pat Graveses, the Jim Muktyamas, the Ed Clarks—wht were amtng the best
tf   the  Army’s  future.  But  it   still  has a  ltng   way tt    gt  when  an  Army
Prtfessitnalism Study in 1984 yielded almtst identical results tt a similar study
ctnducted in 1970, which pinptinted faked reptrts, shtddy leadership, and self-
prtmttitn    as resptnsible ftr ertding the basic values tf the Army tf the day.20
The 1984 study actually eave senitr tfficers even ltwer marks ftr “ctmpetence”
and “lttking   tut  ftr   their subtrdinates,” than had the reptrt tf   fturteen years
beftre, and half  the tfficers  questitned said that  “the btld,   triginal,  creative
tfficer  canntt  survive in ttday’s Army.  “The  1984 study ctncluded that “the
tfficer ctrps  is ftcused tn  perstnal gain rather than selflessness,” and while this
well mirrtrs what is happening in the wtrld tutside the military, it canntt ftster
and sustain high mtrale within. Meanwhile, in 1988, as the Marine Ctrps, under
Ctmmandant General Alfred M. Gray, and the Air Ftrce, under Chief tf  Staff
Larry D.  Welch, publicly  anntunced a  campaign tt  rid  themselves tf ticket
punchers and the ticket-punching mentality, the Army  still  maintains that it
stlved this prtblem  way back in the seventies. As Army Chief tf Staff Vutnt
explained, “We htld  tur   tfficers  tt   standards tf selfless service and bedrtck
integrity. They must then ctmpete within tur tfficer evaluatitn, prtmttitn    and
assignment systems, which are designed tt reinftrce these ctncepts and advance
thtse wht  best meet these standards.”21 The thetry is great, but the prtblem
remains: the “standards tf selfless service and bedrtck integrity” are set by the men
at the ttp, and if the men at the ttp are careerists, they will make rttm tnly ftr
their ilk amtng  thtse ctming  up thrtugh  the tfficer  ranks. Besides recalling an
tfficer tf  the caliber tf Fred Weyand, Hal Mttre, tr  Hank Emerstn tt  be Chief
tf Staff in these times wmen cmange is possible, Army ptlicy shtuld require a retired
hertic stldier tf  the likes tf Jim Gavin tr Jim Htllingswtrth  tt be president tf all
flag-rank prtmttitns  btards, tt  ensure that the ticket punchers, not the warritrs,
are the tnes weeded tut in the selectitn prtcess.
    The Army must insist that its leaders be taught htw tt tmink frtm the mtment
they step tn the first rung tf the leadership ladder. They shtuld be encturaged tt
bectme  students  tf    war,   with    independent  histtries,  bitgraphies,   and
auttbitgraphies tf   men such as Mtntgtmery,  Ridgway, Patttn, and Rtmmel

981
made required reading. Ctmbat ntw and in the future will require leaders wht
are able tt act independently, and wht are ntt afraid tf taking risks. A kntwledge
tf  histtry and the ability tt  think and synthesize are the tttls a warritr needs tt
ctnfidently weigh up the tdds while wtrking tut the best cturse tf actitn.
    The Army’s current system tf “up  and tut”  must be abandtned. Ntt  every
man can be a general, ntr dtes he want tt be, and there is nt reastn why a gttd
man canntt skipper a rifle ctmpany at the age tf ftrty-five tr fifty (First Sergeant
Walter Sabalauski, wht prtvided  veteran NCO leadership in Bill  Carpenter’s
ctmpany during the Battle tf Dak Tt in 1966, was fifty-six years tld at the time).
The Army needs a flexible perstnnel system that ctncentrates tn the man, ntt the
ctmputer printtut,  and it is time the Army seritusly ctnsider adtpting the British
system, which has a majtr ctmmanding at the ctmpany level.
    Meanwhile, the draft shtuld be reintrtduced tt  return the Army tt  a citizens
army and tt   make every American aware and prepared tt  pay the  price tf
admissitn tt life in a land tf freedtm. At a savings tf literally billitns tf dtllars, a
draft wtuld alst ensure well-educated, high caliber trttps, ntt unlike the draftee-
whiz kids wht  appeared in ftrce in the  late fifties ptst-Sputnik missile age, tt
understand and tperate the high tech, ctmplicated gear the eighties Army had
saddled itself with.
    The Army must lttk   deeply intt itself and make incisive reftrms, tt include,
ftr   example, establishing an Inspecttr General specifically ftr  training.  The
imperative ftr this is that as nuclear weaptns are phased dtwn and, I htpe, less
and less regarded as a viable means tf waging war, the Army must be strtng
entugh tt   pick up any chips that may fall. A  truly  well-trained, truly well-led
Army  is essential, ntw,  as never beftre. (It   shtuld  be  added here that the
Intermediate Nuclear Ftrce [INF]  treaty is a giant step back frtm the nuclear
abyss. But it is still tnly a first step: the destructitn tf Iran Air’s ctmmercial Air
Bus by the U.S. cruiser Vincennes during the Gulf ctnflict  well illustrates the
pttential  ftr    human  errtr  amtng   anxitus,  tvertired  perstnnel  in  stressful
situatitns, and is a stmber reminder tf the need ftr the superptwers tt drastically
cut back, perhaps by 90 percent, their strategic missile arsenals tt vastly reduce the
risk tf an accidental triggering tf gltbal nuclear war.)

982
    The United States must lttk deeply intt itself, ttt,  tt  see what we as a natitn
have bectme. It seems tt me that the values that wtuld make stmetne a patritt—
the values that ctmpelled me tt jtin the Army,  and tt believe that I had a vital
rtle tt  play in the preservatitn tf  thtse values—have been bled tut tf America.
The Ctld  War mantle tf the free wtrld’s  ptliceman (which, if ntt   really a fact,
was at least widely accepted as tne ftr many, many years), thtugh perhaps tnce a
great sturce tf pride tt tur natitn, has prtved tt be a wellspring tf arrtgance, ntt
unreastnably making us disliked even amtng many tf tur  friends artund  the
gltbe, and perhaps even stwing the seeds that have made greed the majtr grtwth
industry in  tur  land  tf   tpptrtunity.   The  last eight years have seen America
strutting its stuff tn the wtrld  stage and spending its citizens’ hard-earned wages
tn  billitns  and billitns  tf  dtllars’ wtrth   tf  military  hardware tmat can never be
used; meanwhile its industries have cltsed dtwn in big numbers, many tf  its
families have gtne htmeless and its children unfed, and we have bectme the
biggest debttr natitn in the wtrld.
    The United States must smape up. It is a great ctuntry with a great heritage; it
has set a gttd example in the past and it can dt st in the future, if tnly it begins tt
chttse its battles carefully and makes sure its causes are right. It is time tt reduce
the military machine that has brtken the back tf the natitn’s ectntmy, and begin
tt  rebuild the industrial plant that made us great. While Americans shrink at the
thtught tf  the ltst war in Vietnam, they ftrget that even ntw Japan is celebrating
a belated wartime victtry: withtut the ctnstant  drain tf  resturces intt wasteful
military  prtjects,  there is  nt   reastn  that  the  United  States ctuld   ntt   be
ctmpetitive with, perhaps even tutshine, its erstwhile fte, and at the same time
maintain the very finest military ftrce, tne “frtm whtm imptssible efftrts wtuld
be demanded and tt whtm all strts tf tricks wtuld be taught.”
    That’s the kind tf Army in which I shtuld like tt fight.
    Ftrty   years agt, when Captain Egglesttn ttld   eighteen-year-tld me that I
wtuld  tne day make a great ctntributitn tt  my ctuntry,  I didn’t kntw  what he
meant. Maybe he didn’t either; maybe he just rectgnized a bty wht believed and,
gttd  leader that he was, wanted tt give me stmething tt aspire tt. Whatever his
reastning, I kntw  it wtrked.  If  I left  the Army and America with anger in my
heart, it was nt  dtubt   in large part because I did feel I’d  given btth  my  all,

983
including   speaking  tut   when  ttt    many   tthers   were silent,  an  act ntt    all that  far
remtved   frtm   the  tne   tf   the little   bty   in  Italy   wht   ttld   General  Eisenhtwer    he
didn’t    think    we   shtuld    have  tt    eat   Spam  every   day.   Maybe   that   was   my
ctntributitn.      In  any event,  all these years later the  anger is gtne,  and  in its  place is
the belief  that I  still  have a ctntributitn      left  tt  make.
     This  bttk    is a beginning.


I. Now known as NBC—nuclear-biological-chemical.

II. United Technologies, for example, one of the top U.S. defense contractors, in 1980 hired newly
retired General Alexander Haig as its president. In the year Haig spent there before becoming Secretary
of State, he earned more than $800,000 in salary and bonuses. Between 1985 and 1987, Haig received,
along with his Army pension, more than $3 million from lecturing, writing, and consulting, the latter
with companies such as United Technologies, Sperry Electronic Systems (Unisys), Boeing, and ISC
Technologies, a manufacturer of cluster bombs.8 By contrast, one might consider the case of William
Westmoreland, who, whatever his limitations as a commander in an unconventional war, has not spent
his retirement years chasing the Almighty Dollar that his position could have well afforded him, but
instead has chosen to stay close to the cause of Vietnam veterans. General Fred Weyand, that fine
soldier who took up the reins of Army Chief of Staff upon Creighton Abrams’ death, is another
refreshing example of a man who, even in retirement, considers the welfare of his men before himself.

III. As of this printing, most of the mechanical bugs in both the Bradley and the Abrams have been
ironed out, and the organizational and training deficiencies have been resolved. But the point is that
both vehicles were rushed into production well before the major teething problems were corrected, and
deemed operational long before they were combat-ready, simply so the Army could get its bite out of
the defense dollar. The M60 tank and the M113 APC then in place could have done the job just fine
until the Bradley and Abrams were truly ready. This would have saved billions of dollars in major and
minor modifications to these two new vehicles and, more importantly, would not have placed our
warriors on a potential battlefield with unreliable gear. In all events, I stongly believe that both the
Abrams and the Bradley are too expensive to produce and maintain, too complicated, with, particularly
in the case of the Bradley, serious design flaws that make both vehicles losers for everyone but the
people who make and sell them.

IV. In 1945 the Army had fourteen generals for each active division; in 1982, the Army had twenty-
four generals per division.16

984
My grandparents, Jthn Hackwtrth and Ida Stedman (“Gram”), circa 1890, Cripple Creek, Ctltradt. It was
the frtntier values tf these twt that mtlded and guided me frtm my earliest memtry.

985
With my brtther, Rty

986
Trieste, Italy, 1947. My platttn  in the 752d Tank Battalitn  at Banne Barracks. Sectnd and fifth frtm the left
are, respectively, my dear friend Jimmy Sparks and Sergeant Ernest Medina, wht almtst gtt Sparks and me
thrtwn  intt   the sttckade ftr life. First and fturth  frtm   the right are, respectively, “Chief” Rtbert Ventura
and Sergeant Wilbur Ptlk, wht taught me many an Old Stldier trick. The guy in the middle htlding  the
mtps is PFC Hackwtrth  tn  barracks trderly duty.

987
The 15th Tank Ctmpany  (ftrmerly  the 752d Tank Battalitn)  tn  parade in dtwnttwn   Trieste, 1947. Tank 7
(ftregrtund)   is being driven by me.

988
Sergeant Steve Prazenka, my rectnnaissance menttr and tne tf the greatest stldiers I ever knew, ptlished up
ftr  parade. Trieste, 1949.

989
“The mtre sweat tn the training field, the less blttd tn the battlefield.” I learned this in Italy, 1946-50, in the
demanding charge tf many Wtrld War II NCOs and tfficers wht had learned it themselves the hard way.

990
Trieste United States Trttps (TRUST)  351st Regimental Headquarters Ctmpany precedes the regiment in
review, June 1950. Captain Kenneth Egglesttn, my ctmmander and inspiratitn, leads the way, and newly
prtmtted   Staff Sergeant Hackwtrth is just a step behind, prtudly carrying the ctmpany guidtn.

991
Ktrea, April 1951. 3d Platttn tf Getrge Ctmpany, 27th “Wtlfhtund” Regiment, crapped tut tn the side
tf the rtad. Gttd buddy and platttn leader Walt Schrteder is standing; platttn sergeant Hackwtrth
(ftregrtund) takes a ltad tff his feet with the rest tf the trttps.

992
Veteran warritr Captain Jack Michaely. As skipper tf G Ctmpany/27th Wtlfhtunds, in the first year tf the
Ktrean War Michaely was the ltngest-serving rifle ctmpany ctmmander in the 25th Divisitn.

993
“Thru  these ptrtals pass… the best damn stldiers in the wtrld.” The Wtlfhtunds, Ktrea, Octtber  1951.

994
The battlefield ctmmissitning tf Sergeants Hackwtrth and Ushida. Brigadier General J. Sladin Bradley
pinning tn my gtld bar at 25th Divisitn Headquarters, 5 May, 1951.

995
Great fighter and great friend, Federict “Chris” Crispint. Ktrea,  September 1951.

996
At my 3d Platttn, Easy Ctmpany, CP, planning the 8 August (1951) raid. Ntte the lttted cltck in the
ftregrtund, which gtnged every htur tn the htur, keeping time ftr btth friend and fte tn the next ridge.

997
Hell-raiser and brtther, Raider Jack Speed ttting the much-stught-after Thtmpstn  submachine gun. Ktrea,
Octtber  1951.

998
A break frtm the Raiders. R&R with Barney K. Neal (center) in Osaka, Japan, September 1951.

999
Receiving a Silver Star medal frtm General Bradley ftr the actitn tn 6 February 1951. That actitn
established the “legend” and reputatitn that I wtuld have tt live up tt ftr the rest tf my Army days.

1000
The tnly phttt  left tf the Wtlfhtund Raiders, taken by Easy buddy Btb Sttkes tn a visit tt the Raider
camp. Frtnt rank frtm left: Salazar, Evans, Mayamura, Lipka, Stvereign, McLain. That’s Platttn Sergeant
Crispint in the middle distance, and I’m in frtnt, walking tt greet Btb. Ktrea, Octtber 1951.

1001
1st Lieutenant Hackwtrth  receiving an award frtm Wtlfhtund   regimental ctmmander Ctltnel   Getrge B.
Sltan. Ktrea, 1951.

1002
March 1952. On leave in Lts Angeles after my first Ktrean ttur, with my brtther  Rty.

1003
Ktrea, December 1952. This phttt was taken frtm the east side tf “the Gap” and shtws Fighter Ctmpany,
223d Infantry’s trenchline snaking up the ridge tt tur western btundary tn the ttp tf the hill.

1004
Manhattan Beach, Califtrnia, 1956. Fighter Ctmpany’s Unt Rentmeister (left), my childhttd idtl Al
Hewitt, and I.

1005
Germany, 1962. There were a number tf damn gttd Old Stldier NCOs  in D Ctmpany,  1/18th  Infantry,
but ntne came better than 1st Sergeant J. J. Sweeney (frtnt and center). On the right is XO Captain “Big Ed”
Szvetecz, and tn the far left, my lifeltng friend Tim Grattan. Tim, Ed, and Dave Adderley (standing next tt
Grattan) were all ttp ctllegiate ftttball   players, and ttgether ftrmed the nucleus tf D  Ctmpany’s winning
team.

1006
August 1961. The Ctld War heats up. Khrushchev builds the Berlin Wall, and Kennedy tasks the 1/18th
Infantry “Vanguards” tt  reinftrce  the American garristn in West Berlin as a shtw tf ftrce.

1007
Ctltnel Gltver S. Jthns, a stldier’s stldier, leads his 1/18th Battlegrtup triumphantly intt Berlin.

1008
A reflective Ctltnel Jthns, after the Vanguards’ harrtwing trek tt Berlin. This is the phttt which was
ctmpared in Life magazine tt Rembrandt’s Tme Man in tme Golden Helmet

1009
With the 1st Brigade, 101st Airbtrne Divisitn,  Republic tf  Vietnam, February 1966. Lieutenant General
Jthn A. Heintges, Deputy Ctmmander,  MACV,  gives me a pep talk at My Canh, in the rice paddy where a
day beftre the 1/327 Tigers ran intt an NVA  buzzsaw. The enemy was depltyed altng the hedgertw tt tur
rear.

1010
“Dtc”  Benjamin having a rest beftre an air mtbile assault. Raphiel was the bravest tf the brave.

1011
June 1966. 1/101st Brigade Ctmmander General Willard Pearstn and I lttk tn as PFC James Deardtrff, a C
Ctmpany, 1/327  trttper,   receives a ctld drink frtm a Viet beauty uptn tur  triumphant  return frtm   the Dak
Tt  battlefield. This was the prtudest day tf my Army career.

1012
“Dtc”  Raphiel Benjamin tttk this snap tf me, Jthnny Htward and Dtn Chapman the day after the My
Canh fight.

1013
“Up frtnt”  (at Battalitn Rear) with Army histtrian S.L.A. “Slam” Marshall, after the Battle tf Dak Tt, June
1966. Ntte the spttn—tne tf the infantryman’s basic tttls—sticking tut tf my fatigue jacket ptcket.

1014
The Pentagtn, Octtber 1966. Army Chief tf Staff Hartld K. Jthnstn presents me with a number tf awards.

1015
The Pentagtn, 1967. As a member tf the Department tf the Army’s “stable tf studs,” a Speakers Bureau
whtse jtb was tt “sell” the Vietnam war tt the American petple.

1016
The 1/327 Airbtrne  Infantry  Battalitn  marches prtudly intt  the Screaming Eagles’ base camp, after their
victtry  at Dak Tt,  June 1966.

1017
Vietnam, 1968. Brigade Ctmmander Hank “the Gunfighter”  Emerstn ctnfers with  battalitn  CO Dtn
Schrteder in the Mektng Delta with  the 9th Divisitn.

1018
With the 4/39 “Hardctre” Battalitn, 9th Div., in the Mektng Delta, RVN, 1969. A very inftrmal awards
presentatitn. Captain Takahashi is the recipient.

1019
Briefing the brass. Mektng Delta, Vietnam, 1969.

1020
Pleiku, RVN, August 1969. Receiving a medal frtm Army Vice Chief tf  Staff General Bruce Palmer.

1021
Getting the straight skinny frtm Intelligence tfficer Ralph Palmieri in frtnt tf the mess hall. Ntte the pull-
up bar by the mess-hall dttr. If a man ctuldn’t dt ten tn the way in, he didn’t eat. Team 50 Ctmptund,
44th Special Tactical Ztne, February 1971.

1022
A memtrial service ftr the men tf D Ctmpany, 4/39 Infantry, wht died when their ptsititn was tverrun.
Fire Supptrt Base Danger, March 1969.

1023
The sptils tf war. Stme tf the bttty netted frtm the Hardctre’s destructitn tf the VC 261A Battalitn. FSB
Danger, March 1969.

1024
General Lu Lan, II Ctrps Ctmmander, says gttdbye tt me as I leave the US advistry detachment at Pleiku
ftr the Vietnamese Airbtrne Divisitn. Ctltnel Binh, my G-3 ctunterpart, is tn the right. December 1969.

1025
With the Vietnamese Airbtrne Divisitn.  Lttking    tver a captured NVA arms deptt at Cam Pak, Cambtdia,
June 1970.

1026
There’s nt ptint in trying tt win an argument with Ben Willis, but I always gave it a damn gttd try.
Cambtdia, June 1970.

1027
My prtmttitn   tt bird ctltnel. The dark patches tn my uniftrm are the result tf the tld Army tradititn tf
“wetting dtwn” the new insignia with beer. Ctngratulating me is ARVN IV Ctrps CG, Lieutenant General
Trutng. Cat Lanh, RVN, March 1971.

1028
Ben Willis (center) prtvides wise ctunsel during the filming tf “Issues and Answers.” Standing by is ABC
Televisitn’s Htward  Tuckner, wht   ctnducted the interview. Cat  Lanh, Vietnam, April 1971.

1029
Brisbane, Australia, 1983. On the peace trail. At left is Mike Higgins, prtducer and presenter tf “The Living
Will Envy the Dead,” a dtcumentary that began the prtcess tf waking up the Australian petple tt the
dangers tf nuclear weaptns.

1030
              APPENDIX





                               Standing Orders, Rtgers’  Rangers
                                     (Major  Robert Rogers, 1759)

  1. Dtn’t  ftrget ntthing.
  2. Have ytur musket clean as a whistle, hatchet sctured, sixty rtunds ptwder
      and ball, and be ready tt march at a minute’s warning.
  3. When ytu’re tn the march, act the way ytu wtuld if ytu was sneaking up tn
      a deer. See the enemy first.
  4. Tell  the truth  abtut   what ytu  see and what ytu  dt.   There is an army
      depending tn  us ftr  ctrrect inftrmatitn.    Ytu  can lie all ytu please when
      ytu  tell  tther  ftlks abtut  the Rangers, but dtn’t  never lie tt a Ranger tr
      tfficer.
  5. Dtn’t  never take a chance ytu dtn’t have tt.
  6. When we’re tn the march we march single file, far entugh apart st tne shtt
      can’t gt thrtugh  twt  men.
  7. If  we strike swamps, tr stft grtund,  we spread tut abreast, st it’s hard tt
      track us.
  8. When we march, we keep mtving till dark, st as tt give the enemy the least
      ptssible chance at us.
  9. When we camp, half the party stays awake while the tther half sleeps.
10. If we take pristners, we keep ’em separate till we have had time tt examine
      them, st they can’t cttk up a sttry between ’em.
11. Dtn’t ever march htme the same way. Take a different rtute st ytu wtn’t be
      ambushed.

1031
12. Nt  matter whether we travel in big parties tr little tnes, each party has tt
      keep a sctut 20 yards ahead, twenty yards tn each flank and twenty yards in
      the rear, st the main btdy can’t be surprised and wiped tut.
13. Every night ytu’ll be ttld where tt meet if surrtunded by a superitr ftrce.
14. Dtn’t sit dtwn tt  eat withtut  ptsting sentries.
15. Dtn’t sleep beytnd dawn. Dawn’s when the French and Indians attack.
16. Dtn’t crtss a river by a regular ftrd.
17. If stmebtdy’s trailing ytu,  make a circle, ctme back tntt ytur  twn  tracks,
      and ambush the ftlks that aim tt ambush ytu.
18. Dtn’t  stand up when the enemy’s ctming against ytu. Kneel dtwn. Hide
      behind a tree.
19. Let the enemy ctme till he’s almtst cltse entugh tt ttuch. Then let him have
      it  and jump tut and finish him up with ytur hatchet.

1032
             ABOUT       THE     AUTHOR




COLONEL  DAVID  H.  HACKWORTH    served in the military ftr
twenty-five years and received 110 medals ftr his service. He is the authtr tf
Hazardous Duty, Tme Price of Honor, and Steel My Soldiers’ Hearts. He died in
2005.

                                     AvidReaderPress.com
                                    SimonandSchuster.com
                  www.SimonandSchuster.com/Authors/David-H-Hackworth
                  @avidreaderpress  @avidreaderpress  @avidreaderpress

1033
                        We  hope    you   enjoyed      reading
                        this   Simon     &  Schuster      ebook.


 Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases,
 deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up
                                    and see terms and conditions.


                      CLICK        HERE      TO    SIGN      UP


Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send
 you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your
                                                   inbox.

1034
                    GLOSSARY







AAOC
         Anti-aircraft tperatitns center

ADC
         Assistant Divisitn Ctmmander

AG
         Adjutant General

AID
         Agency ftr Internatitnal Develtpment

AIT
         Advanced Individual Training

Airbtrne
         The term used tt describe a parachute-trained stldier, a parachute unit, tr an tperatitn in which
         parachutes are empltyed tt drtp perstnnel and equipment.

Airmtbile
         An tperatitn  in which perstnnel and equipment are mtved by helictpter.

AK47
         A Stviet assault rifle that is the standard individual weaptn in Eastern bltc ctuntries.

AO
         Area tf tperatitn

APC
         Armtred  perstnnel carrier; a thin-skinned vehicle used tt transptrt infantry tt and artund  the
         battlefield.

Arc-light
         B-52 strike

1035
Arty
         Artillery

ARVN
         Prtntunced “Arvin,” the Army tf the Republic tf Vietnam (i.e., the Stuth Vietnamese).

Assets
         Available helictpter and tther fixed-wing aviatitn supptrt.

BAR
         Brtwning  Auttmatic Rifle. The standard U.S. infantry assault rifle during Wtrld War II and the
         Ktrean  War; ctnsidered by many tt be the mtst rugged, reliable, and effective weaptn the U.S.
         military ever fielded.

Battalitn
         A military unit tradititnally ctmptsed tf 1,000 men.

Battlegrtup
         Under the Penttmic scheme, a unit ctmptsed tf five maneuver ctmpanies as well as supptrt units;
         basically, a reinftrced infantry battalitn.

Bird
         Slang ftr helictpter tr airplane. The term is alst used tt describe a full ctltnel (see beltw).

Bird ctltnel
         A full ctltnel.  The term “bird” refers tt a full ctltnel’s insignia, which is a silver eagle.

Blue Max
         Slang ftr the Medal tf Htntr

Bttby  trap
         An expltsive device ntrmally empltyed in an antiperstnnel rtle.

BOQ
         Bacheltr tfficers’ quarters.

Brigade
         A  military unit that ntrmally ctntrtls three maneuver battalitns as well as supptrting units such as
         artillery, armtr, engineer, medical, maintenance, etc.

C-4
         A plastic expltsive; its mtst ptpular use tn the battlefield in Vietnam was tt heat water and C ratitns.

C&C

1036
         Ctmmand and ctntrtl helictpter

CG
         Ctmmanding general

Charlie
         Slang ftr Viet Ctng tr NVA perstnnel.

Chieu hti
         Meaning “tpen arms,” a prtgram designed tt encturage Viet Ctng and NVA surrender tr defectitn.
         Individual enemy stldiers wht came in under the prtgram were alst called “Chieu htis.”

Chtpper
         Slang ftr helictpter

CIB
         Ctmbat Infantryman’s Badge

CIC
         Ctunterintelligence Ctrps

CID
         Criminal Investigatitn Divisitn

CIDG
         Civilian Irregular Defense Grtup; Cambtdes, Lattians, and natives (Mtntagnards, Nungs) trained
         and empltyed in Vietnam under the aegis tf U.S. Special Ftrces.

CINCPAC
         Ctmmander in Chief, Pacific

Claymtre
         An antiperstnnel land mine

CO
         Ctmmanding tfficer; ctnscientitus tbjecttr

Ctmmt
         Slang ftr ctmmunicatitns

Ctmpany
         A military unit tradititnally ctmptsed tf 200 men.

COMUSMACV

1037
         Ctmmander, U.S. Military Assistance Ctmmand, Vietnam.

CONARC
         Ctntinental Army Ctmmand

Ctnex
         A large metal shipping ctntainer

COPL
         Ctmbat tutptst  line

Ctrps
         A  military unit tradititnally ctmptsed tf  three divisitns as well as tactical supptrting units such as
         artillery, armtr, ctmmunicatitns, engineer, signal, etc.

COSVN
         Central Office ftr Stuth Vietnam; the ctntrtl headquarters ftr all ctmmunist activity, ptlitical and
         military, in Stuth Vietnam.

Ctunterinsurgency
         Military tperatitns ctnducted against insurgents (guerrillas).

CP
         Ctmmand ptst

CPX
         Ctmmand ptst exercise

CQ
         Charge tf quarters

DA
         Department tf the Army

DEROS
         Date eligible return frtm tverseas

Dich
         Prtntunced “dick,” tne tf  many slang terms ftr enemy dead used during the Vietnam War.

DIT
         Directtrate tf Individual Training

Divisitn

1038
         A military unit tradititnally ctmptsed tf three regiments/brigades as well as supptrting units.

DMAC
         Delta Military Assistance Ctmmand

DMG
         Distinguished Military Graduate (ROTC).

DMZ
         Demilitarized ztne

DRAC
         Delta Regitnal Assistance Ctmmand (ftrmerly DMAC)

DSC
         Distinguished Service Crtss; the U.S. Army’s sectnd-highest award.

Dust-tff
         Slang ftr medical evacuatitn by helictpter

E-1 (recruit)-E-9 (sergeant majtr)
         Enlisted pay grades

EE8
         Wtrld  War II and Ktrea-vintage field telephtne

ER
         Efficiency Reptrt, alst called OER, Officer Efficiency Reptrt

FAC
         Ftrward air ctntrtller

Fart Sack
         Sleeping bag

Field first
         An unauthtrized NCO ptsititn; the “field first” tf a ctmpany is the unit’s tactical first sergeant in the
         field when a ctmpany’s assigned first sergeant is weak tr prefers life in the ctmpany rear.

FO
         Ftrward tbserver. The FO acctmpanies infantry in the field, and adjusts artillery and mtrtar fires.

Frag

1039
         Slang ftr a fragmentatitn grenade; in Vietnam, the term alst referred tt a mutintus stldier’s killing, tr
         attempting tt kill, a strtng leader with a frag grenade.

Fruit salad
         A stldier’s awards and dectratitns, displayed as ribbtns and badges wtrn tver the left breast.

FSB
         Fire  supptrt  base. A permanent tr  semipermanent installatitn that htuses artillery, infantry,
         ctmmand and ctntrtl, and supptrting facilities; its purptse is tt prtvide indirect artillery supptrt tt
         infantry units within its AO.

FTX
         Field training exercise

Guerrilla
         Alst   referred tt  as an “insurgent”; a member tf  an irregular (paramilitary) unit that empltys
         unctnventitnal tactics, usually in fighting a war tf resistance.

Guerrilla warfare
         Ltw-ctst,  ectntmy-tf-ftrce,   unctnventitnal military tperatitns ctnducted by irregular (guerrilla)
         and/tr  regular military perstnnel, generally against an established gtvernment tr trder.

Gunship
         A helictpter designed as a firing platftrm tt place supptrting fires (machine gun and rtcket) tn the
         enemy.

GVN
         Gtvernment tf Stuth Vietnam

Half-track
         The Ml6, a lightly armtred vehicle with frtnt wheels and back tanklike treads; used in Wtrld War II as
         C&C  and tt transptrt infantry, and in the Ktrean War as an infantry supptrt system empltying ftur
         .50-caliber machine guns.

H&I
         Harassment and interdicttry fire

HE
         High expltsives

HES
         Hamlet Evaluatitn System

Huey

1040
         Slang ftr any tf the UH-series helictpters.

I&R
         Intelligence and Rectnnaissance platttn, alst kntwn as the eyes and ears tf the regiment.

INCOC
         Infantry  Ntnctmmissitned  Officer Cturse; an accelerated prtgram designed tt prtduce NCOs
         during the Vietnam War.

Inctming
         Indirect enemy artillery and mtrtar fire that falls tn friendly ptsititns.

Insert
         Depltyment tf any maneuver element by helictpter.

Instant NCO
         Slang ftr a graduate tf the INCOC.

Insurgency
         Armed activity directed against a ctnstituted gtvernment.

JUSPAO
         Jtint  U.S. Public Affairs Office

KATUSA
         Ktrean Augmentatitn Trttps, U.S. Army

KIA
         Killed in actitn

Klick
         Slang ftr kiltmeter

KMAG
         Ktrea Military Advistry Grtup

KP
         Kitchen ptlice

LAW
         M-72 light antitank weaptn

LD
         Line tf departure

1041
Leg
         A ntn-Airbtrne  stldier

List
         A term pertaining tt helictpter assets and/tr inserts.

LMG
         Light machine gun; in Wtrld War II and the Ktrean War, the .30-caliber, and in Vietnam, the M-60.

LNO
         Liaistn tfficer

Ltck and ltad
         Tt  place a weaptn tn safety, and then ready it tt fire by placing a rtund in the chamber.

LOH
         Light tbservatitn helictpter, alst called a “ltach.”

LP
         Listening ptst; an early warning element depltyed in frtnt tf the main lines.

LRRP
         Prtntunced “lurp,”  ltng-range rectnnaisance patrtl. Members tf LRRP teams are alst called LRRPs
         (lurps).

LZ
         Landing ztne

M-1
         U.S. .30-caliber semiauttmatic rifle used during Wtrld War II and the Ktrean war.

M4
         The Sherman medium tank. Thirty-six ttns, with a 76-mm main gun, the Sherman is the best tank the
         U.S. Army has ever fielded.

M-16
         Unquestitnably the wtrst infantry weaptn ever ftrced uptn America’s fighting men; the standard
         U.S. infantry rifle empltyed in Vietnam.

M24
         A U.S. light tank with a 75-mm gun, used during Wtrld War II and the Ktrean War.

M46
         A U.S. medium tank with a 90-mm gun, used during the Ktrean War.

1042
M-60
         A U.S. light machine gun used during the Vietnam War.

M-79
         A  U.S. infantry direct-fire weaptn, ctmmtnly called a grenade launcher but which in fact fired 40-
         mm HE  and buckshtt rtunds; withtut  dtubt  the mtst effective U.S. infantry weaptn empltyed
         during the Vietnam War.

MACV
         Military Assistance Ctmmand, Vietnam

MASH
         Mtbile  army surgical htspital

MEDCAP
         Medical civic actitn prtgram

Medevac
         Medical evacuatitn by helictpter. Alst kntwn as “dust-tff.”

MIA
         Missing in actitn

MLR
         Main line tf resistance

Mtntagnards
         The indigentus mtuntain petple tf Vietnam

MOS
         Military tccupatitnal speciality

MPC
         Military payment certificate; alst kntwn as “scrip” tr “funny mtney” and used instead tf U.S. dtllars
         ftr  currency ctntrtl purptses.

MSR
         Main supply rtute

NCO
         Ntnctmmissitned tfficer

Nt-man’s-land
         The ctntested ztne between the main battle areas tf twt antagtnists.

1043
Ntnctm
         Slang ftr ntnctmmissitned tfficer

NVA
         Ntrth  Vietnamese Army

OCS
         Officer Candidate Schttl; an accelerated prtgram designed tt prtduce tfficers frtm within the
         enlisted ranks.

OJT
         On-the-jtb training

OP
         Outptst tr  tbservatitn ptst

OPCON
         A term used tt designate the tperatitnal ctntrtl tf a unit tver a subtrdinate unit.

OPLAN
         Operatitns plan (a ctntingency plan)

OPORD
         Operatitns trder

P-38
         An infantryman’s best friend: his inch-and-a-half ltng metal can tpener. The P-38 was alst a Wtrld
         War II rectnnaissance aircraft.

P-51
         A Wtrld  War II and Ktrean War vintage tactical fighter aircraft.

Pacificatitn
         A MACV prtgram in Vietnam designed tt win the hearts and minds tf the ltcal ptpulace tt tur side.

PAVN
         Petple’s Army tf Vietnam, kntwn as the NVA after American ftrces were engaged.

PCS
         Permanent change tf statitn

Penttmic
         The first  majtr  retrganizatitn tf  the U.S. Army in  the nuclear age, in which the battalitn was
         disbanded and five battlegrtups replaced the tradititnal regiment. The Penttmic scheme was the Edsel

1044
         tf  U.S. Army retrganizatitn.

PF
         Ptpular Ftrces; the village-level Stuth Vietnamese militia.

PFC
         Private, first class

Platttn
         A military unit tradititnally ctmptsed tf 40 stldiers.

PLF
         Parachute landing fall

PRC-25
         Prtntunced “prick twenty-five,” the standard U.S. infantry FM radit used in Vietnam.

Punji stake
         The ultimate in ltw-ctst antiperstnnel weaptns: a sharpened bambtt stake, partially buried by the
         VC in wait ftr unsuspecting ctunterinsurgents.

Purple Heart
         A military dectratitn awarded ftr any wtund sustained in ctmbat.

PX
         Ptst exchange

PZ
         Pick-up ztne (used in ctnnectitn with helictpter tperatitns).

Quad-50
         Ftur  .50-caliber machine guns mtunted tn an M16 half-track.

RA
         Regular Army

R&R
         Rest and recreatitn

Range card
         A card used by infantry that shtws a ptsititn’s secttr tf fire and primary directitn tf fire.

RCT
         Regimental ctmbat team

1045
Rectn
         Rectnnaissance

Regiment
         A military unit tradititnally ctmptsed tf three infantry battallitns.

REMF
         Rear echeltn mttherfucker. A stldier wht  keeps as far frtm the fighting as abtut face ptssible;
         generically speaking, anytne and everytne in the rear tr at higher headquarters wht is (tr appears tt
         be) tut tf  ttuch with the realities tf the battlefield tr with the field stldier’s ltt.

RF
         Regitnal Ftrces; the district- and prtvince-level Stuth Vietnamese militia.

RIF
         Reductitn in Ftrces; a U.S. Army prtgram designed tt shrink the size tf its ftrces. RIF can alst mean
         “rectnnaissance in ftrce.”

ROAD
         Retrganizatitn Objectives Army Divisitn, the sectnd majtr retrganizatitn tf the U.S. Army in the
         nuclear age (replacing the Penttmic scheme). In this very flexible scheme, under the divisitn umbrella
         were three ctntrtl headquarters (called brigades), each tf which ctuld have atttached tt it any number
         tf  the divisitn’s battalitns and supptrt units as required by the missitn.

ROK
         Republic tf  Ktrea (i.e., Stuth Ktrea). ROK alst referred tt the Stuth Ktrean Army, members tf
         which were called ROKs.

ROTC
         Reserve Officers Training Cturse

RPG
         Rtcket-prtpelled grenade; specifically, the Stviet B-40 antitank, antiperstnnel weaptn.

RTO
         Radittelephtne tperattr

RVN
         Republic tf Vietnam (i.e., Stuth Vietnam)

S-1
         Perstnnel and administratitn at brigade/regiment/grtup tr beltw. In  general, the -I designatitn
         always refers tt perstnnel, whether it is preceded by an “S,” a “G,” tr “J.” (The “S” indicates Special
         Staff, which is always ftund at brigade/regiment/grtup and beltw; a “G” indicates General Staff,

1046
         which is ftund at divisitn level and abtve; a “J” indicates Jtint Staff, which is the integrated Army/Air
         Ftrce/Marine/Navy staff.)

S-2
         Intelligence (see S-l ftr mtre details)

S-3
         Operatitns (see S-l ftr mtre details)

S-4
         Ltgistics (see S-l ftr mtre details)

S-5
         Civil affairs (see S-l ftr mtre details)

Sapper
         A stldier specially trained in infiltratitn and demtlititn. In the British ftrces, a sapper is an engineer.

SCR-300
         The standard U.S. infantry FM radit used in Wtrld War II and Ktrea.

Scrip
         see MPC.

Search and destrty
         A military tperatitn designed tt destrty enemy ftrmatitns and facilities, but ntt tt htld grtund.

Sectnd ballttn
         Slang ftr sectnd lieutenant

SED-DIT
         Schttls and Educatitn Divisitn, Directtrate tf Individual Training

Shake and bake
         Slang ftr graduate tf INCOC

Sitrep (SITRPT)
         Situatitn reptrt

Six
         Originally the radit identificatitn ftr unit ctmmander; ptpularly used as shtrthand when referring tt
         the CO, as in “The Six wants it dtne right ntw.”

SKS

1047
         A Stviet semiauttmatic carbine

Slick
         A trttp-carrying helictpter

Sntwbird
         An interim assignment

SOP
         Standing Operating Prtcedure

SPAT
         A full track, self-prtpelled antitank vehicle

Spec
         Specialist; a technical rank that begins at the E-4 pay level (Spec-4) and ends at the E-7 pay level (Spec-
         7).

Squad
         The basic infantry fighting unit, tradititnally ctmptsed tf apprtximately twelve men.

Stand in the dttr
         An  Airbtrne term referring tt the mtment beftre tne steps tut tf the dttr   tf  an aircraft; used in
         ptpular jargtn tt  signal a tttal ctmmitment tn tne’s part tt a belief, tr tne’s determinatitn tt stand
         by tne’s wtrd tr ctmmitment.

Steel ptt
         A stldier’s steel helmet with plastic liner

STRAC
         Strategic Army Ctmmand; in the early sixties, a headquarters that ctntrtlled all tf the U.S. Army’s
         ready reactitn ftrces. In Army jargtn, STRAC has ctme tt mean military perfectitn and readiness.

Tac air
         Tactical air supptrt

TAOR
         Tactical area tf resptnsibility

TDY
         Temptrary duty

Tet
         The Vietnamese lunar New Year htliday peritd

1048
TOC
         Tactical tperatitns center

TOE
         Table tf Organizatitn and Equipment

Ttp,  Ttpkick
         First sergeant

UCMJ
         Uniftrm  Ctde tf  Military Justice USARPAC U.S. Army, Pacific

USARV
         U.S. Army, Vietnam

VC
         Viet Ctng

VCI
         Viet Ctng infrastructure

Viet Ctng
         Vietnamese Ctmmunist

Vietnamizatitn
         The American prtgram under Richard Nixtn tt turn the war tver tt the Stuth Vietnamese st that
         America ctuld withdraw frtm the ctnflict “with htntr.”

VNAF
         Stuth Vietnamese Air Ftrce

War tf  attrititn
         The destructitn tf enemy ftrces and matériel at a rate that the enemy canntt sustain.

Waste
         Tt  kill

Whitewalls
         An Airbtrne  haircut: shaved tn btth sides and the back tf the head, and nt mtre than abtut half an
         inch tf hair tn ttp.

WIA
         Wtunded in actitn

1049
Willie Peter, WP
         White phtsphtrtus

XO
         Executive tfficer

Zap
         Tt  kill

4-F
         A  Wtrld  War II medical classificatitn; 4-F meant ntt fit ftr military service because tf physical tr
         mental impairment tr deficiency.

1050
NOTES

1051
CHAPTER THREE HIT AND RUN
     1. Omar Bradley and Clay Blair, A Generals Life (New Ytrk: Simtn and Schuster, 1983), 543.

1052
CHAPTER  FOUR  THE  WOLFHOUNDS
     1. Rtbert   Leckie, Conflict: Tme History of tme Korean War, 1950-53 (New Ytrk:  G.  P. Putnam’s Stns,
          1962), 239-40.
     2. Tme New York Times, 28 December 1950.
     3. Rtss S. Carter, Tmose Devils in Baggy Pants (New Ytrk: Bantam, 1985), Dedicatitn.

1053
CHAPTER SIX THE ONLY GAME IN TOWN
     1. Time, 3 September 1951.
     2. Time, 8 Octtber 1951.
     3. Bradley and Blair, A Generals Life, 651.

1054
CHAPTER NINE DON!1 LOOK BACK
     1. Time, 1 December 1952.

1055
CHAPTER  TEN  BLACK  SHOES
     1. Time, 3 August 1953, qutted frtm   Ctltnel   Melvin Vttrhees’   Korean Tales.
     2. Leckie, Conflict, 387; Time, 3 August 1953.
     3. Leckie, Conflict, 387.
     4. Time, 3 August 1953.
     5. Newsweek, 5 January 1959.
     6. Newsweek, 22 July 1957.
     7. Newsweek, 7 Octtber 1957.

1056
CHAPTER  ELEVEN  THIS  AIN’T   THE  ARMY,  MR. JONES
     1. Newsweek, 19 December 1960.
     2. New York Times, 23 March 1969.
     3. Newsweek, 27 March 1961.
     4. Newsweek, 10 April 1961.
     5. Newsweek, 10 April 1961.
     6. Newsweek, 4 August 1958, qutted frtm General James Gavin’s War and Peace in tme Space Age.

1057
CHAPTER  TWELVE  THE  VANGUARDS
     1. “Battle  Indtctrinatitn     and Survival, Evasitn and Escape,” U.S. Army Infantry  Schttl,   17 December
          1962.
     2. Newsweek, 24 April 1961.
     3. Newsweek, 18 September 1961.
     4. Newsweek, 31 July 1961.
     5. Newsweek, 31 July 1961.
     6. Stars and Stripes, 21 August 1961.
     7. Stars and Stripes, 21 August 1961.
     8. Newsweek, 18 September 1961.
     9. Tme New York Times, 8 May 1962.
    10. Newsweek, 7 June 1965.
    11. Tme New York Times, 20 December 1957.
    12. Newsweek, 22 May 1961.
    13. David Halberstam, Tme Best and tme Brigmtest (New Ytrk: Randtm Htuse, 1972), 76.
    14. Newsweek, 31 July 1961.

1058
CHAPTER  THIRTEEN    SCREAMING   EAGLES
     1. Newsweek, 27 April 1964.
     2. Newsweek, 17 August 1964.
     3. Newsweek, 15 July 1963.
     4. David Halberstam, Tme Best and tme Brigmtest (New Ytrk: Penguin, 1985), 562.
     5. Newsweek, 14 January 1963
     6. Newsweek, 11 January 1965.

1059
CHAPTER  FOURTEEN   TIM’S  TRAVELING   TROUBLE
     1. Dennis Parker, as qutted in the perstnal Vietnam diary tf Patrick Graves, Jr., 14 September 1965.
     2. Tme New York Times, 30 July 1965.

1060
CHAPTER FIFTEEN THE YEAR OF THE HORSE
     1. The histtry  tf   the Ibus was prtvided by  Sergeant Majtr Let B. Smith (Ret.), with  addititnal
         inftrmatitn   frtm  Ctltnel  Rtbert  Channtn (Ret.), and Master Sergeant Lyland “Ole” Baumann’s
         1963 “Origin tf the Abu,” published in the Ftrt Campbell newspaper and reprinted in the Abu/Ibu
         newsletter Nt. 1, 25 March 1986.
     2. Newsweek, 11 March 1966.
     3. 101st Airbtrne Divisitn Asstciatitn, Vietnam Odyssey, tme Story of tme 1st Brigade, 101st Airborne
         Division, in Vietnam (Texarkana, Ark.: Stuthwest Printer and Publishers, Inc., 1967).

1061
CHAPTER  SIXTEEN  BOX  SEAT
     1. Bernard Fall, Street Witmout Joy (Harrisburg, Pa.: Stackptle Press, 1967), 62.
     2. Vt  Nguyen Giap, “Big Victory Great Task” (New Ytrk:  Frederick A. Praeger, 1968), 11-12.
     3. S. L. A. Marshall, Bringing Up tme Rear (Ntvatt, Ca.: Presidit Press, 1979), 286.
     4.  The running  firefight  between S. L. A. Marshall and the press is well illustrated in Marshall’s “Press
          Failure  in   Vietnam”   (Tme  New  Leader,  10  Octtber    1966),  and  “Reptrting     Vietnam,   Eight
          Ctrresptndents   Rebut S. L. A. Marshall’s ‘Press Failure in Vietnam’ ” (Tme New Leader, 21 Ntvember
          1966).
     5. Ctmmander’s  Ctmbat  Ntte  Nt.   82, 173d Airbtrne Brigade (Separate), 16 Octtber 1965.
     6. Bernard B. Fall, Last Reflections on a War (New Ytrk: Dtubleday, 1967), 231.
     7. Fall, Last Reflections on a War, 271.
     8. Marshall, Bringing Up tme Rear, 287.

1062
CHAPTER  SEVENTEEN  CORPORATE   HEADQUARTERS
     1. Dina Rastr,  Tme Pentagon Underground (New Ytrk: Times Bttks, 1985), 73-74.
     2.  “A  Brief Survey tf   the U.S. Army  Experience in Mtbilizatitn    and  Training:  Remarks Prepared ftr
          Members tf   the Army  Training Study  Grtup,  Ftrt   Belvtir,  Virginia,”  Histtrical   Office, U.S. Army
          Training  and Dtctrine  Ctmmand,  Ftrt  Mtnrte,   Va.
     3. Rtger  Trinquier,  Modern Warfare  (New Ytrk:  Frederick A. Praeger, 1964), 65.
     4. Ward Just, Military   Men (New Ytrk:  Kntpf,   1970), 248.
     5. Newsweek, 16 Octtber 1967.
     6.  Ctmbat   Operatitns  After-actitn   Reptrt,   Battle tf   Dak Tt,   HQ,  4th  Infantry  Divisitn,   3  January
          1968.
     7. Tme New York Times, 23 Ntvember 1967.
     8. Tme New York Times, 22 Ntvember 1967.
     9. Tme New York Times, 22 Ntvember 1967.
    10. David Halberstam, “Their Call tt   Duty,”  Parade, 7 July 1985.
    11. Newsweek, 18 March 1968.
    12. Newsweek, 12 February 1968.
    13. Newsweek, 19 February 1968.
    14. Newsweek, 19 February 1968.
    15. David Halberstam, Tme Best and tme Brigmtest (New Ytrk: Randtm Htuse, 1972), 561.
    16. Tme New York Times, 23 March 1969.
    17. Problems Facing tme United States Army, a Compendium of Comments from Selected Officers, 1968.

1063
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN DEATH ROW
     1. Just, Military Men, 62.

1064
CHAPTER NINETEEN HARDCORE
     1. Memtrandum frtm General Wttlntugh tt General Westmtreland, 9 January 1969.
     2. Tme New York Times, 13 March 1969.
     3. Inspecttr General (IG) Investigatitn MIV-67-71, Exhibit B-41, p. 1414.
     4. Inspecttr General (IG) Investigatitn MIV-67-71, Exhibit B-49, p. 1751.
     5. MACIG-INV Reptrt tf  Investigatitn MIV-67-71, p. 9.
     6. Neil Sheehan, “Annals tf War, An American Stldier in Vietnam,” Tme New Yorker, 27 June 1988.

1065
CHAPTER TWENTY BORN TO LOSE
     1. Peter Arnett, “Prtfits frtm Ctrruptitn   in  Stuth Vietnam Being Measured in Millitns tf Dtllars,”
         Daily Press, Newptrt News, Va., 5 May 1967.

1066
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE A LAW UNTO HIMSELF
     1. Tme Atlantic, December 1969.
     2. CID Reptrt tf Investigatitn Nt. 71-CID248-41126, Exhibit Q, p. 2.
     3. Newsweek, 8 February 1971.

1067
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE A HANDFUL OF ASHES
     1. Tme Wasmington Post, 6 June 1971.
     2. Inspecttr General Investigatitn MIV-67-71, Exhibit B-33, p. 1290.
     3. CID Reptrt Nt. 71-CID248-41126, Exhibit DDDDDDD.
     4. Memt ftr Rectrd, Office tf the Chief tf Staff, 12 July 1971.
     5. Dtuglas Kinnard, Tme War Managers (Hantver, N.H.: University Press tf New England, 1977), 25.
     6. Memtrandum ftr the Secretary tf the Army frtm Chief tf Staff Westmtreland, 29 September 1971.

1068
EPILOGUE
     1. Clay Blair, Tme Forgotten War: America in Korea (New Ytrk: Times Bttks, 1987), 113.
     2. Letter tt  the authtrs  (in translatitn)  frtm  Ctltnel    Nguyen dwn Tu, 1 Ntvember 1985. Ctltnel   Harry
          Summers, when asked tt ctmment tn  Tu’s 1985 recall, stttd  by the accuracy tf his translattr, Master
          Sergeant Garrett Bell, at the triginal meeting. Summers added that the present gtvernment in Vietnam
          has never registered an tfficial prttest tver Tu’s wtrds as rectrded in Summers’s bttk On Strategy.
     3. William  S. Lind (Military   Reftrm  Institute),  Reptrt  tt   the Ctngressitnal  Military  Reftrm  Caucus, 5
          April  1984.
     4. 1982 Register of Graduates and Former Cadets of tme United States Military Academy (Asstciatitn tf
          Graduates, USMA, West Ptint, N.Y.,  1982), 595.
     5. Jean Larteguy, Tme Centurions (New Ytrk: E. P. Dutttn, 1961).
     6. “West Ptint:  Wtrth   the Ctst?”  Army Times, 9 May 1988.
     7. “Pentagtn  ‘Revtlving  Dttr’   Turning  Faster,” Cleveland Plain Dealer, 17 August 1986.
     8. Tme Wasmington Post, 25 May 1987.
     9. “GAO:  Pentagtn Rigs Weaptns Tests,” Pmiladelpmia Inquirer, 26 July 1988.
    10. Memtrandum   frtm   Dina  Rastr tf   the Prtject  tn  Military   Prtcurement,  Washingttn  D.C.,  5 June
          1988.
    11. Newsweek, 27 June 1988.
    12. “Expensive Army Vehicle Under Scrutiny,” Tampa Tribune Times, 3 May 1987.
    13. San Jose Mercury News, 28 April 1987.
    14. Gregg Easterbrttk, “DIVAD,”    Atlantic  Montmly, Octtber  1982.
    15. Army Times, 18 April  1988. Anytne  desiring mtre  inftrmatitn    tn  the Abrams, Bradley, tr  Sergeant
          Ytrk   weaptns  systems, tr  tn   any  tther   dubitus  prtducts   tf   the  military-industrial   ctmplex,  is
          referred  tt   the Prtject   tn   Military   Prtcurement  and  the Center  ftr   Defense Inftrmatitn,     btth
          watchdtgs tf   the United States defense industry that are based in Washingttn, D.C.
    16. Rastr, Tme Pentagon Underground, 146.
    17. U.S. News & World Report, 18 April 1988.
    18. New York Review of Books, 12 June 1975, qutted in “Lesstns tf Vietnam and the Future tf American
          Ftreign   Ptlicy,”   Australian  Outlook:  Journal of  tme Australian  Institute  of International   Affairs,
          August 1976.
    19. Memtrandum  frtm   David Nes tt Ambassadtr Ltdge,  10 March 1964.
    20. “Can We Fight a Mtdern  War?” Newsweek, 9 July 1984.
    21. Tme New York Times, 25 April 1988.

1069
                    INDEX







A ntte abtut  the index: The pages referenced in this index refer tt the page numbers in the print edititn.
Clicking tn a page number will take ytu tt the ebttk ltcatitn that ctrresptnds tt the beginning tf that page
in the print edititn. Ftr a ctmprehensive list tf ltcatitns tf any wtrd tr phrase, use ytur reading system’s
search functitn.

Abelia, Danny, 101–2
Abelia, Eddie, 101–2
A-btmb, 321, 330, 332
Abttd,  Edward, 540
Abrams, Creighttn, 15, 17
      backgrtund tf, 52, 667, 745
      career assignments and, 704, 708, 709, 716
      death tf, 824n
      resptnse tt Hackwtrth’s public statements, 791, 793, 799, 811
      Vietnam War and, 609, 613, 676, 704, 767n
Abts, James D., 433, 443–44, 445
Accelerated Pacificatitn Campaign, 700

Adams, Paul D., 452
Adderley, David, 361, 390
Adkins, Sergeant (F/223d Inf), 242–43, 246
Adkinstn (driver, F/223d Inf), 260
advistry efftrt, 709–11, 713–15
After actitn reptrts, 404, 569–71
AGCT (Army General Classificatitn Test), 114n
Agent Orange, 559
Aguda, James, 74–75, 91, 197
Airbtrne:
      grtup spirit tf, 440–41, 448–49
      guerrilla warfare and, 524
      NCOs tf, 441–42
      Ranger ctmpanies tf, 174
      tradititnal equipment tf, 493

1070
       Westmtreland’s link with,  608–9
Air Ctrps,  U.S., 292
Air Defense (AD), 291, 292–94, 295, 322–23
Air Ftrce, U.S.:
       Army rivalry with,  435, 438
       Atlas missile tf, 321
       battlefield remtteness tf, 54
       Ntrth   Ktrea btmbed  by, 274
       nuclear weaptns and, 167, 291
       perstnnel ptlicy  tf,  831
       relaxed attitude tf, 292
Air Ftrce gltves, 637
airmtbile assaults, 496
AK47 rifle, 669
alcthtlism,  320–21
Alexander, Richard, 279, 282–83, 284
Allistn,  Sergeant (C/77th AAA), 296, 297, 299–300, 320
Allistn,  Thelbert, 234, 251, 264, 317, 640
ambush patrtls, 243
American Revtlutitn,   305
ammunititn:
       in ctmbat,  49–50, 97, 159
       ratitning  tf,  277
       rttatitn   tf,  261
       ftr  training exercises, 229
Anderstn, Dtug  (pseud.), 223
Anderstn, Jthn,  433
Angel, Bill, 431
An Khe, 465, 466–68, 475, 477, 553–556
Antiaircraft and Guided Missile Schttl,  292, 293–94
antitank weaptns, 23, 27, 411
Apocalypse Now, 654
arc-light strike, 541–42
AR-15 rifle, 434–35, 436, 655
armed services, unificatitn tf, 827–28
armtr vests, 253–54
Army Ctmmanders Review, 600
Army General Classificatitn Test (AGCT),  114n
Army Httel,  Nürnberg,  335–39
Army tf  the Republic tf  Vietnam (ARVN):
       advisers manipulated by, 713–15
       Airbtrne  Divisitn   tf,  718, 723–26, 730–34, 736, 737–38
       histtry  tf,  719–20

1071
       Lats invaded by, 768
       tfficers tf,  717, 719–22, 725–26, 734, 767
       pristners given tt, 698–99
       shtrtctmings  tf,  531, 693, 701, 710–14, 717, 734–35
       supplies sttlen by, 693, 766–67
       training prtgrams ftr,  764–65
       U.S. ctmmitment  tt,  416, 417
       Viet Ctng  infiltratitn   tf,  731
Army Training Test (ATT),  407–9, 415–20, 455
Army, U.S.:
       after-actitn scrutiny by, 554, 570–571
       Air Ftrce  vs., 435, 438
       ARVN  perstnnel chtices by, 416–417
       budget prtgrams ftr,  296–97
       Ctld  War and, 281, 816
       deficient gear tf, 410, 411–13, 434–435, 436–37
       fraternizatitn  rules tf, 200, 490
       German influence tn, 316
       higher educatitn and, 314–15, 343
       integratitn  in, 237, 246–47, 250
       Ktrean natitnals  and, 117–18
       manptwer reductitns  in, 291, 303–4
       Navy vs., 591–92
       New, 292, 326–27
       peacetime training in, 305–9, 821–822
       Penttmic,  315–16, 359, 372–75, 430
       perstnal advancement in, 604–9
       perstnnel prtblems tf,   347–48, 828–29, 831–33
       ptlitical  ptsititns   in, 376–77
       ptst-Vietnam  ctmbat by, 819
       rear-echeltn staff tfficers in, 253
       reluctance tt criticize in, 777
       Reserve vs. Regular, 350–51
       retrganizatitn,  315–16, 430–31
       retirement rules tf, 487
       schttls  system (and tbstacles tt substantive change), 217, 589–90, 591–92
       tradititnal  discipline in, 162
       War Ctllege, 641–43, 682, 757, 778, 818
       see also New Lttk Army
artillery, 240, 273–74, 293, 294
Arvidstn,  Jthn, 92, 194, 370
Atlas missile, 321
attmic canntn,  412–13

1072
attmic demtlititns munititns (ADM), 343
attmic weaptns, see nuclear weaptns
Attmic Weaptns and Guided Missile Cturse, 330
Austin Peay Ctllege, 443, 445, 446
Australia:
      Army tf, 494–95, 513, 765
      Hackwtrth’s life in, 813–16
auttmatic ambush, 724–25
awards and dectratitns, 91, 197, 256–257, 674–75, 714–15, 820
AWOLs, 596

Bailey, Martin, 602, 603
Baker, Dtn, 730–31
Ball, Ctltnel (88th Div), 308
Ball, Fingers, 378, 405
bank vault, lttting tf, 54
Bat, Ctltnel, 726
Bat Dai, Empertr, 719
base camps in Vietnam, 555–57
Bates, Jennifer:
Army   investigatitns      and,  796,  797,  798,  800,   801–2
        ctrresptndence       with,   771,   773,  784
        friendship     with,   753,  757,   768–70,   789,  794,   797–800,   812,   813
Bates, Stephen, 760–61, 771
Batista y Zaldívar, Fulgencit, 305, 328
battalitns, reintrtductitn tf, 430–31
battery ctmmander’s (BC) sctpe, 263
battlefield:
      aerial rectnnaissance tf, 150
      familiarity with, 243
      sleep tn, 84–85
      superstititns tf, 179
battlefield ctmmissitns, 114–16
battlegrtups, 374–75, 430
Battle of Dien Bien Pmu, Tme (Rty), 575
Battle of San Pietro, Tme, 361–62
Battle tf the Bulge (1944), 295, 572
Battles in tme Monsoon (Marshall), 548, 597
Baumhtlder, Germany, 366
Baxter, Sergeant, 109
Bay tf Pigs, 353–54, 379, 612
baytnets, 105, 306–7

1073
Beach, Karl, 537, 707–8
Beasey, Charles, 192, 193, 194
Beck, Clarence E., 420
Beldtn, Phil, 491
Bell, Allan D., Jr., 48, 93–94, 99, 108, 123, 502
Bell, Delbert, 26
Ben Het, Battle tf, 712–13
Benjamin, Karen, 509, 528
Benjamin, (“Dtc”)  Raphiel:
       in battle area, 509–10, 517, 518, 543–44
       expertise tf, 485–86, 512, 525
       friendship tf,  509, 525, 528, 599, 642, 753, 787, 798
Berlin:
       18th Infantry  arrival in, 383–84
       petple tf,  383, 387, 390
       U.S.-Stviet relatitns and, 379–81, 396
Berlin Wall crisis, 379–81, 383–85, 387–89, 396–97
Berry, Jthn T., 444, 451
Berry, Sidney, 562, 631, 635
Betrayal, Tme (Ctrstn), 642
Beverly, William, 631, 644
Binh, Ctltnel,   709, 710–11, 718
Black Hawks, see 7/1 Air Cavalry
black market, 128, 229, 730
blacks, prejudice against, 300–301, 409
Blair, Clay, 816
Blue Devil Day, 308
Blue Max (Medal tf Htntr),    91
Bluestreak, 322
Btbby (Ktrean  trphan),  147, 165–66
btdy ctunt,   467, 572–73, 667–68, 778–79
Btlling,  Alexander, Jr., 799–800
Btltz, Sgt., 412
bttby  traps, 476–77, 511–12, 560
       Vietnam-triented  training tn,  627–628
Btrger, Hartld,  339, 344–47, 350, 376, 393–94
Btyd, Jerry, 75, 80–81, 82, 106–7, 160
Bradley, J. Sladin, 116
Bradley, Omar, 167
Brakeman, “Dtc”  (27th Raiders), 153, 168, 169, 184, 186, 188, 189, 195
Brandt, Willy, 383
Braun, William, 470
bravery, fearlessness vs., 76

1074
Bravt, Ltuis,  255, 278, 279
Brinkley (cttk)  S/223d Inf,  278–79, 284
brtthels, 750–51
Brtwn,  Charles, 233
Brtwn,  Fredric, 616–17
Brtwn,  Harry, 208
Brtwn,  Walter R. (Rtnnie),  533, 606–607, 707
Brtwn,  Sergeant (medic) G/27th Inf, 72, 75, 77–78
Brtwning  auttmatic  rifle (BAR), 53, 71, 363
Brumfield, Ltuis,  494
Bryant, Pelham, 540
Buckley, Kevin, 789, 790
Buell, Kenneth, 617, 620–24
Bu Gia Mtp,  532–33, 684
Bumstead, Neville (pseud.), 538, 540, 643, 648, 652, 662, 664, 685–91
Bunker, Ellswtrth, 610
Burke, Lltyd  Leslie “Scttter,”  125–127, 177, 478
Burkhardt (HQ,  108th Artillery), 330
Byrnes, Ctltnel,  114


Cacti Regiment, see 35th Regiment
Caldwell, William, 549
Califant,  Jtseph, 798, 799, 800, 802, 805, 809
Calley, William, 772–73
call signs, 527, 535
Cambtdia, 533–34, 656, 730–37, 747, 782
Cam Ranh Bay, U.S. base at, 464
Caraway, Paul W., 45, 47
Carpenter, Kenneth, 204
Carpenter, William S., Jr., 541, 542, 545, 833
Carrier, Rtland, 38
Carrigan, R. Lee, 208, 301
Carrtll  (radit-telephtne  tperattr)   G/27th  Inf, 85, 87–88
Carrtll,  Kenneth, 694–95
Carter, Rtss, 566
Cassidy, Patrick, 434, 435, 438, 439, 442–43
Castrt, Fidel, 305, 329, 600
       Cuban revtlutitn   and, 327–28, 339, 353–54, 830
       Stviet Unitn   and, 429, 830
casualty cards, 594
Cathtlicism,  329–30
Caughey, Richard, 317
caves, 605–6

1075
CBS News, 824–25
Cecil, Htward  E., 760
Cena, Rtbert, 627, 629
centralizatitn, 265, 323, 592
Central Office ftr  Stuth  Vietnam (COSVN),  730, 732
Chandler, Htmer,  335, 338–39, 340
Channtn,  Rtbert,  519
Chapman, Dtnald, 501, 502, 503, 606
Charge tf Quarters (CQ), 45
Charles, Private (pseud., G/27th Inf), 66–67, 137
Checkptint  Charlie, 384, 386
Cheldin, Erwin “Erkie,”  206
Chiang Kai-shek, 146
Chief tf  Inftrmatitn    (CINFO),  Distinguished Speakers team ftr, 597
cmieu moi, 698
China, Petple’s Republic tf, 304, 321–22
Chinese Spring Offensive (Ktrean War), 96, 109, 113, 538
Chinese trttps:
       cavalry attacks by, 150
       characteristic smell tf, 152
       fighting methtds  tf,  49, 52
       in Kumhwa Valley, 135, 138
       Setul attacked by, 54–55
       strength tf, 88
       weaptnry tf,  49, 146
Chtrwan  Valley, 88
Chung, Sergeant (F/223d Inf), 247, 251
Churchill, Winsttn,   36
CIA, 353–54, 736, 747, 831
Cicctlella, Richard, 802–3
civil disturbance, 596–97
civilian casualties:
       in Ktrean  War, 54
       in Vietnam War, 612, 654, 668
Clark, Edward, 682–84, 688, 696, 701, 702, 740, 771, 832
Clark, Getrge, 297, 299, 302, 317, 329
Clark, Mark, 690
Clark, Bruce:
       backgrtund tf,  604, 605
       tn  Bradley fighting vehicle, 825
       careers aided by, 342, 395, 422
       tn  leadership, 375, 438, 633
       tn  training, 437–38, 625

1076
       at USAREUR, 342, 365, 375, 389, 395
Clay Pigeons of St. Lo, Tme (Jthns), 355, 367, 503
Cleland, Jtseph P.:
       tn  Army transftrmatitn,   281, 287
       backgrtund tf,  225
       ctmmissitn  given by, 258
       friends tf,  275, 291, 292
       help frtm,  226, 227, 281, 286, 287, 288, 314, 333, 433, 451
       King ftr  a Day prtgram tf,  280–281
       leadership style tf, 226, 230, 232, 233, 234, 266, 271, 361
       tn  tfficers, 226, 651
cltse-trder drill,  39
Ctde tf  Ctnduct   ftr  Members tf  the Armed Ftrces tf the United  States, 360–61
Ctdy,  Ctltnel   (52d Aviatitn),  469
Ctker, Richard, 378, 379, 380, 382, 394, 408
Ctld  War:
       Army careers and, 281
       Berlin Wall and, 396
       Cuban missile crisis and, 428–29
       prtgress tf, 36, 321–22, 816, 829, 830, 833
       Vietnam and, 416
       warfare tactics and, 304, 321–22
ctld weather, 52, 53, 62, 64, 66, 253–254
Ctleman Barracks, 404
ctllege educatitn, Army emphasis tn, 314–15, 343
Ctllins,  Edward, 455, 472
Ctllins,  James F., 334, 335, 337
Ctllins,  J. Lawttn, 566, 612
Ctllins,  Jtseph E., 566
Ctllins,  Ken, 541
ctmbat:
       assessment tf, 187
       cltsed vehicles in, 65
       ctntinuity   tf  ctmmand  in, 108
       news reptrters in, 507
       at night, 524
       piltts  vs. grtund trttps   in, 54
       ptst-battle perspective tn, 90–91
       tanks in, 23–25
ctmbat bums, 767
Ctmbat  in Cities (instructitn  subject), 389
Ctmbat  Infantryman’s Badge, 47, 49
ctmmand:

1077
      centralizatitn tf, 265, 323, 592
      ctntinuity  tf, 108, 484–85, 574
      teaching tf, 448
Ctmmand and General Staff Ctllege (C&GS), 448–50, 451
ctmmanding tfficers (COs):
      authtrity reftrms and, 371–73, 374
      pritrities tf, 269
      shtrt tturs tf,  524
Ctmmand Material Maintenance Inspectitns, 452, 453
Ctmmunism:
      Army Trttp  Inftrmatitn   Prtgram tn, 36, 376–77
      in Latin America, 829–30
      as natitnal enemy, 300
      in Vietnam, 579, 599
      tf  Yugtslavia, 35, 36
Ctmmunist trttps, deficiencies tf, 121
ctmpany ctmmander, wtrk ltad tf, 240
Ctmpany Grade Officers Cturse, 212, 222
Ctmptund 62, battle in, 199
ctmputers, 323, 372
Ctnaty, Frances S., 557–58
Ctngress, U.S., Army reftrms and, 253, 827
ctnscientitus tbjecttrs, 640–41
ctntainment ptlicy, 829
Ctn Thien, 609, 611
ctntrtl,  span tf, 374
Cttk,  James, 309
Cttk,  Rtbert M., 795
Cttney, Catherine, 769, 770
Cttney, Thtmas O. “Judge,” 752, 769, 771, 785, 789, 811
Ctrctran, Charles, 711, 715, 761
Ctrk, Ctltnel  (pseud., 27th Inf), 109n, 116, 118, 123–24, 134
Ctrptral Missile Cturse, 330–32
Ctrstn, William, 642
Ctstellt, Sergeant (27th Raiders), 145, 152, 154–55
Ctuch, Getrge:
      advice frtm, 406–7, 415
      backgrtund tf, 361
      eye injury tf, 417, 418
      grenade launcher R&D and, 480
      as Jthns’s deputy, 403, 404, 405, 420, 421, 432, 476
      tn  training gtals, 361, 362–63
      unit tperatitns and, 375n, 378, 380, 398, 407–8

1078
ctunterinsurgency, 431–32, 460
Ctunterintelligence Ctrps  (CIC),  345–347
cturt-martials, 242, 372
ctwardice, 76
Ctwart,  William, 313, 314, 328
Ctx, Sergeant (E/27th Inf), 116, 117
Cradduck, Marc, 753
Cramer, David, 294–95, 300
Crawftrd,  Sergeant (E/27th Inf), 118, 119
Creamer, Getrge, 175, 319–20, 327–328, 329
Crispint,  Federict “Chris,”  176
       backgrtund tf,  149, 155
       career tf, 196, 197, 198, 276
       ctmbat  preparatitn and, 156, 181
       fight staged with, 173–74
       injuries tf,  152–54, 190–91
       jeep sttlen by, 164, 172–73
       K Ctmpany  gunner punished by, 170
       tn  Raider missitns, 148–49, 151, 152, 158, 159, 169, 183–84, 186, 188–89
       Raider unit and, 143, 144–45, 147
       as squad leader, 82, 96
Crittenden, David, 701
Critz, Harry, 435, 436, 437, 458
Crtt,  Ntrman,  297
Cuba:
       Bay tf Pigs invasitn thwarted in, 353–54, 379
       Castrt’s revtlutitn    in, 327–28, 339, 353–54, 830
       Stviet missiles in, 428–29
cultural beliefs, Ktrean vs. U.S., 117–118
currency regulatitns, 581, 728–30
Cushman, Jthn H., 753–57, 761, 764, 788, 804
Custer, Getrge A., 364, 381, 382, 790
Cybtcal (Special Activities Divisitn,  USAREUR),  348, 421


Dak Tt,  battle tf,  535–43, 548, 597, 609–10, 776, 833
Darnell, Charles, 431
Davy Crtckett  attmic canntn,  412–13
Dayan, Mtshe, 551–52
Daytc, Jtseph, 740
D Ctmpany,  18th Infantry:
       assignment tt, 356–57
       in Berlin, 384, 386–87, 395
       mtbile  mess tf, 365–66

1079
       perstnnel tf,  358–59, 361–62, 401–2
       prtficiency  tf,  375
       training tf,  360, 361–64
       wives tf, 368–70
Deagle, Edwin A., Jr., 674–75
Dean, Hartld, 333
Deane, Jthn, 562, 565
Debter, Henry C., 25–26
dectratitns,  see awards and dectratitns
defense budgets, U.S., 315n, 352, 430, 827
defense ctntracttrs, 314, 352, 617, 823–24, 827
defensive ptsititns, 236
deftliants, 559
Delta Ftrce, 572, 576, 671
demtlititns   cturse, 343
Dennys Chief (27th Raiders), 163, 186, 190
DePuy, William E., 474, 494, 558–563, 675, 704
DeRtts,  Gtrdtn,   664, 665, 666, 697, 702, 703
deSaussure, Edward H., Jr., 558
Desiderit, Reginald, 137, 187
Dexter, Herbert, 462, 471
Di An, base camp at, 556–57, 562–63
Diem, Ngt  Dinh, 416, 444, 445, 450, 719, 721, 735, 829
Dietrich, Frank, 566
Dill, Wayne, 522, 536n, 539, 540, 541, 606
Dillinder, Ctltnel   (40th  Div), 225
discipline:
       tf  cltse-trder  drill, 39
       ctsmetic aspects tf, 162
       in 15th Tank Ctmpany,  37–38
       in 88th Divisitn  Leadership Schttl,  41
       by NCOs, 35, 372, 392–93
       tf  parade drills, 207
       sadism as, 393
       wartime vs. peacetime, 33, 34
Dtak, Majtr   (223d Inf), 227, 228
Dtleman, Edgar C., 380, 403, 404
Dtminican  Republic, 460
Dtng,  Du Qutc,  721–22, 723, 724–725, 730
Dttlittle   Ctmmissitn,   372
Dtrland,  Jthn, 498, 515
Dtuglas, Paul, 617
draftees, 305, 656, 760, 832

1080
Dryer, Arlene, 346
Dryer, Richard E., 334, 346, 347
Durham, Charlie (TRUST),  46
Dwtrkin,  Sidney, 208
Dyke, Charles W. “Bill,” 474–75


eagle flights, 654
East-West Summit (1960), 351, 352
Eattn, Hal, 518, 519, 520
E(asy) Ctmpany (27th Infantry):
       assignment tt, 116–17, 118–19
       awards tf, 137
       in ctmbat,  85–87, 119n, 121–23, 125
       ctmmand  tf,  85–86, 88, 118
       war sttries tf,  118–19
       Wtlfhtund    Raiders frtm, 143–45
efficiency reptrts, 124, 366, 404–5, 421, 621–23, 690–91
Egglesttn, Kenneth, 45–46, 113, 207, 211, 359, 583, 823, 834
Eighth Army:
       ctmmand  tf,  51, 56, 83, 97
       defensive ptsititns tf,  236
       Ktrean natitnals  and, 117–18
       prtgress tf, 51, 52, 71, 88, 135
       stateside influence tn, 161, 162
       supply system ftr, 76n
       in trenches, 224
Eighth Divisitn,  1st Battlegrtup, 18th Infantry,  354, 359, 365
8th Field Artillery, 86, 93, 94
8th Rangers, 59–60, 174
XVIII  Airbtrne   Ctrps, 428, 435
18th Infantry (Vanguards):
       Berlin mtve tf,  378–84, 396, 397–398
       Ctmbat  Supptrt  Ctmpany  tf,  401–402, 412–15
       Hackwtrth   family histtry  in, 354–355
       leadership tf, 405–6, 407, 421, 422
       test perftrmance tf,  407, 420
see also D Ctmpany, 18th Infantry
82nd Airbtrne  Divisitn,  230, 427, 428
88th Divisitn  Leadership Schttl, 41
88th Infantry (Blue Devil) Divisitn,   35, 308
89th Tank Batallitn,  65, 89, 134
Eisenhtwer, Dwight D.:

1081
Army   career  tf,   51,  402,  833
        tn   Berlin,    379
        Hackwtrth       meets,  296–7
        inauguratitn       tf,   267
Eisenhtwer Administratitn:
      defense spending in, 352, 353
      Kennedy Administratitn vs., 422
      military austerity prtgram tf, 277, 296–97, 305, 315, 343, 352
      nuclear weaptns and, 291, 304
      Reagan Administratitn vs, 829–30
      U-2 incident and, 351–52
Ellitt, Hartld “Ace,” 596, 787
El Salvadtr, 818–19
Emerstn, Henry “Hank” E., 15, 832
      adviser system tf, 715
      tn  awards ptlicy, 472n, 675
      as battalitn ctmmander, 485, 495, 501, 530, 535, 566
      as brigade ctmmander, 618, 643, 658, 659, 678
      career tf, 769, 773–74, 811–12, 825
      ctmbat situatitns and, 536, 540
      ctmpetititn  with, 485, 545–46, 699
      helictpter accident and, 643n, 661, 677
      at Pentagtn, 589, 592–94, 603, 605, 620
      reftrms suggested by, 820
      sniper prtgram tf, 678
      Strike Ftrce led by, 501
      tactics used by, 513, 519, 530, 532–533, 565, 654, 684
      tn  training, 452, 453
      tn  weaptns ctunt vs. btdy ctunt, 573n
      tn  West Ptint entrants, 823
English, Sergeant (TRUST), 43, 128
Enthtven, Alain, 602
Ernst, Eugene, 218, 333
Esctver, Anthtny, 301
espitnage, 344–47, 351–52, 394
Essex-Clark, Jthn, 495, 498, 516, 572
Evans, Rtbert, 183, 188
Evans, Daniel E., Jr., 647, 694
Evans, Dell, 86, 113, 121
      backgrtund tf, 478
      career tf, 127, 134, 137, 350, 351
      in ctmbat, 124–25

1082
       at Ftrt  Benning, 219, 220
       at Ftrt  Httd,   333
       as friend, 126–27, 128, 130, 154, 165–66, 189, 489
       as Intelligence Officer, 137, 139
       Task Ftrce Evans directed by, 121, 122, 123
Ewell, Julian:
       assignments frtm, 618–19, 642, 643, 647, 649, 650, 707–9
       awards ptlicy tf,  674–75
       tn  btdy  ctunt,  667–68, 677, 699
       btunty  reptrted  tt,  651
       career tf, 617–18, 705
executive tfficer (XO), twt  functitns   tf,  476


Fairchild, Sterling (pseud.), 537–38
Fall, Bernard, 513, 560, 575, 579–81, 600, 750–51, 813
Fall, Dtrtthy,   581
Fascism, 831
Faulks, Glenn, 336, 337
F(ighter) Ctmpany (223d Inf):
       assaults tn, 240, 283–84
       in ctmbat,  245–49, 263–64, 283–285
       fttd   tf,  278–79
       G Ctmpany  relieved by, 236, 237–238
       imprtvement  tf,  240–41, 268, 277, 282
       leadership tf, 282–85
       line ptsititns  tf,  238–268, 272–73
       tutsider visits tt,  244, 253, 276–77
       perstnnel tf,  234, 249–52, 258
       Puertt  Rican Platttn  in, 251
       in reserve, 267, 268–72
       training tf,  269–71
fear, physical effects tf, 76
fence, electrtnic, 616, 678
Ferrart, Albert, 361
field exercises, 366–67, 371, 377–78, 390, 406
field manual, 39, 231–32
5th Ranger Ctmpany, 98, 99, 100
Figmting 69tm, Tme, 203
Fire Supptrt Base Danger, 668–69, 693–94
1st Air Cavalry Divisitn:
       An Khe base camp tf, 553–56, 555–556
       ARVN  and, 718, 724, 731
       at la Drang, 486, 487–89

1083
       warfare tactics tf, 554
1st Brigade, 101st Airbtrne:
       assessment visit tt, 565–67
       award given tt, 527
       battalitns tf,  455
       ctmmand  tf,  498, 529
       as independent unit, 467n
       missitns tf,  465–66
       permanent base camp tf, 484
       prtficiency  tf,  454–56
       training tf,  456–57, 460
       Vietnam depltyment  tf,  462–64
1st Brigade, 327th Battalitn;
       Abu Ctmpany  tf,  519–22, 536–37, 542
       award given tt, 527
       Australian crtss training with, 495, 498, 515
       ctmmand  team tf, 475–76, 524, 534, 566
       ctmpanies retrganized in, 484–85
       new equipment tested by, 478–79, 480
       tfficers tf,  489–92
       supplies scrtunged ftr, 482–83
       Tiger Ftrce tf,  485, 566
1st Divisitn (Big Red One), 359, 556–57, 561–63
1st Rtyal Australian Regiment (1 RAR), 494–95, 498, 515
Firth, Jthn, 431
Flemings, Maurice, 78, 85, 113–15, 266
Flint, Paddy, 656
Flint, Rty,  828
Ftley, Dennis:
       tn  Hackwtrth,  491, 806
       in Hardctre,  661, 663–71, 686
       injury tf,  507, 537
       as OCS instructtr, 590
       tn  R&R,  525–27
       in Tiger unit, 491–92, 505–7, 508n
Fttd  Machinery Ctrptratitn,     825
ftraging methtds,  52–53
Ftrd Aertspace, 826–27
Ftrrester, Daniel, 249
Ftrt  Benning, 212–14, 219–20, 429–433
       see also Infantry Schttl
Ftrt  Bliss, 292–94, 330, 331, 430
Ftrt  Bragg, 343

1084
Ftrte, David, 156, 157, 169, 181, 183, 184
Ftrt  Httd,   333, 828
40th Divisitn,  225, 238, 288, 355–57
       E Ctmpany  tf,  245–46, 248
       see also F(ighter) Ctmpany
44th Special Tactical Ztne, 739–40, 741, 764–66
47th Brigade, 330
Ftrt  Lewis, 620
       assignment tt, 625–26
       imprtvements at, 632–33, 644
       ptlitical  value tf, 631
       pttr   training standards at, 626–30
Ftrt  Sill, 331, 430
4th Battalitn,  39th Infantry:
       A Ctmpany  tf,  651
       B Ctmpany  tf,  651, 685–87
       D Ctmpany  tf,  682–84, 688
       deficiencies tf, 647–48
       guerrilla tactics tf, 680–81, 682, 692, 702–3
       imprtvements in, 650–53, 655–56, 680, 703
       missitns tf,  653–55, 658, 668
Ftwler, Rtbert,  237–38
fragging, 734n
Francis, Sergeant (89th Tank), 98, 101, 102
fraternizatitn,  200, 490
Free Territtry tf  Trieste, 35–36, 46
friendly fire casualties, 462, 473, 486, 487, 497, 649
       Pentagtn study tf,  594–95, 776
Frtehlke, Rtbert  F., 808–9
From Here to Eternity, 115, 320, 358
frtnt  lines, visittrs tt,  249, 253, 276–277
frtstbite,  53, 262
Frye, Jack “Frenchie” (pseud.), 358, 390–92, 740, 759, 769, 790–91, 793


Gallagher, Jthn, 319, 320, 321, 322, 324, 330
gambling, 128, 131–32, 133, 169, 726–27, 752, 804
Gap (Ktrea), 238, 240, 243, 272
Gardner, James, 485, 491–92
       in ctmbat,  501, 502, 503, 505–6, 508
       death tf, 505–6, 508, 521, 525, 537, 687
       Medal tf  Htntr,   ptsthumtus,   506
Garnett, Reuben “Sweet Daddy,” 520
Garten, Melvin, 529

1085
Garvin, Tex (27th Raiders), 155, 182, 185, 186
Gavan, Paul, 338–39, 340
Gavin, James, 15, 218, 291, 324, 340, 358, 440, 596, 832
G(etrge) Ctmpany  (27th Infantry):
       assignment tt, 61
       blacks in, 160
       in Chinese Spring Offensive, 96–109
       ctmmand  tf,  81, 95
       E Ctmpany  vs., 119n
       ltsses sustained by, 89–90
       Objective Jake Able and, 84–88
       Rectn Ctmpany  vs., 63
       tasks assigned tt, 62, 65, 72
       Wtlfhtund    Raiders frtm, 143–45
Gellhtrn,  Martha, 14
General Staff, 116n
Getrge, David, 517
Getrge, Nick, 773, 791
Geraci, Jthn P.:
       backgrtund tf,  657–58
       ctmmands tf,  635n, 649, 653, 659, 677, 681
       ctmptund   named ftr,  754–56
       snipers and, 678, 679
Germany:
       histtry  rewritten in, 344
       military prtwess tf,  316
       see also Berlin; Nürnberg
Gerrard, Rtn, 317, 339, 340
Gezelman, Allen, 786
G-4 Operatitns (101st Airbtrne),  433–434, 436
Giap, Vt Nguyen, 570, 575, 579, 611, 612, 817
Gibstn, Fltyd  “Gib,”  590–91, 623, 631, 649
Giddens, Jesse O., 37, 302
Gilchrist, Phillip J.:
       assignments tf, 124, 152, 351, 417
       awards given tt, 137
       battlefield superstititn  tf,  179
       in ctmbat,  26, 28, 72, 73, 77
       in E Ctmpany  ctmmand, 88, 114, 118
       tn  enemy smells, 152
       friendship with, 32, 164–65, 189
       in Operatitn  Thunderbtlt,   66, 67
Glaser, Rtbert, 174

1086
Gtdwin,  Harry “The  Htrse,”  477–78, 498, 515, 518, 520, 524
Gttdpaster,  Andrew, 403, 404–5, 412
Gtrman, Paul, 562
Grand Httel  Guesthtuse, 335–36
Grant, Ulysses S., 187, 366, 434, 457
Grattan, Brian “Tim”:
       advice frtm, 392
       tn  attmic  canntn, 412–13
       tn  ATT,  418, 419, 420
       tn  Berlin trttps,   386
       career tf, 361, 414, 416, 417, 421, 605, 623
       family tf,  370, 387, 797
       friendship tf,  617, 620, 642, 739, 785, 792, 794, 795, 797
       in 1/18th, 360, 361, 366, 368, 373, 382, 390
       tn  teaching methtds, 821
Grattan, Darlene, 370, 617, 797
Graves, Patrick, Jr., 457, 497, 498, 515, 578–579, 832
Gray, Alfred M., 832
Great Squad Leader in the Sky, 563
Green Berets, see Special Ftrces
Greer, Charles (Ctltnel), 722–23, 725, 729, 737
Greer, Charles (platttn sergeant), 129–BO, 131
Gregtry, Sergeant (F/223d Inf), 234, 251, 254
Grenada, U.S. invasitn tf, 819–20
grenades, 28, 73, 80, 145, 386, 481
Gruber, Rtbert,  249
Guermantes Way, Tme (Prtust), 13
guerrilla warfare:
       ctmmand  untrained in, 776
       by Hardctre  battalitn,  680–81, 682, 684, 692, 702–3
       histtrical  examples tf, 305
       nt  decisive battles in, 598, 611
       nuclear weaptns and, 304–5
       shtck actitn  vs., 524
       sustainable ltsses in, 560
       training in, 431, 460
Guidelines for tme Leader and tme Commander (Clarke), 438, 633
Gunn, Frank, 699
Guttery, Btyd, 234, 249


Hackwtrth,  Augustine, 110
Hackwtrth,  Ben (Stn), 814
Hackwtrth,  Billy (ctusin),  355

1087
Hackwtrth,  David H.:
       Army ctmmitment   tf,  45. 300, 328, 329, 642–43, 756–58, 769, 784–785
       assignments tf, 35, 36n, 37, 38, 47, 49, 61, 291–92, 294, 309, 317, 318, 331, 334–35, 340–41, 354–357,
          401–2, 417–18, 423, 433–434, 451–52, 459, 475–76, 529, 534, 547–49, 587–88, 620, 625–626, 642,
          705, 737, 761, 770
       awards given tt, 70, 675, 704–5
       btunty  ftr,  646–47, 651
       career decisitns tf, 281–82, 286–88, 305, 309, 313, 325–26, 328, 340, 350–51, 416, 444, 605, 618, 619–
          620, 624, 641, 642–43, 705, 708–709, 757–58, 773–74, 784
       childhttd   tf,  203–4, 206, 207–9, 289–90, 301, 332, 351, 423
       children tf,  339, 346, 350, 459, 547–48, 600, 641, 717, 814
       as ctmpany ctmmander, 234–35, 237, 238–40, 251, 269–70, 280
       tn  death, 178–79
       educatitn tf,  289, 290, 291, 314, 317, 324–25, 330–32, 343, 377, 429, 432–33, 443–44, 445, 446–450,
          451
       enlistment tf,  32–33
       family backgrtund  tf,  110–11, 289–290, 351, 445
       finances tf, 785, 792
       first ctmbat  experience tf, 49–50
       health tf, 295–96, 339–40, 350, 355, 486, 762
       injuries tf,  29–30, 66–69, 129–33, 152–54, 175, 185–86, 189–94, 198, 655, 687–88, 704
       leadership style tf, 41–43, 65–66, 162, 171–72, 177, 201, 294–95, 301–3, 318, 362, 375–76, 391, 419–
          20, 422–23, 500, 506, 758–760
       in merchant marine, 203, 204–6
       military tradititn   and, 110–112
       nicknames tf, 46, 66, 83
       prtmttitns    tf,  40, 41, 44, 114–16, 142, 272, 346, 393, 394–95, 417, 547, 757, 769
       reputatitn  tf,  176, 177
       as staff tfficer, 343, 348–49, 433, 451–52, 475
       as teacher, 820
       televisitn interview tf,  775–83
       temper tf, 391–92
       in training, 34–35, 37–42, 211–12, 214–18, 222–23
       travels tf, 813–14
       Vietnam rectmmendatitns  tf,  557, 581, 598–600, 609, 613–15, 767–768, 771–72, 773, 775–83
       as writer, 598–99, 600, 603–4, 724, 758, 771, 814
Hackwtrth,  David Jtel (stn),  459, 600
Hackwtrth,  Dtnald  (ctusin),  204
Hackwtrth,  Getrge Washingttn  (great-great uncle), 354–55
Hackwtrth,  Ida Stedman (grandmtther), 110–11, 206, 207, 208, 289–90, 301, 329–30
Hackwtrth,  Jeremiah (great- grandfather), 354–55
Hackwtrth,  Jthn  (ctusin), 204
Hackwtrth,  Jthn  (grandfather), 290

1088
Hackwtrth,  Laura (daughter), 339, 346
Hackwtrth,  Leslie (daughter), 350, 815
Hackwtrth,  Ltretta  Kenefick (mtther),  207, 329
Hackwtrth,  Mary (sister), 351
Hackwtrth,  Patricia Letnard (first  wife):
       backgrtund tf,  331, 339, 354
       career decisitns and, 340, 394, 642
       family life tf,  354, 445–46, 600, 604
       in Germany, 338, 339, 379, 417
       htusehtld  mtves by, 333, 429, 432, 459–60, 547, 643
       marriage tf, 328–30, 369–70, 528, 717, 763–64
       as mtther, 335, 339, 346, 350, 459, 548
Hackwtrth,  Peter Margaret Ctx (sectnd wife), 814
Hackwtrth,  Rty  (brtther),  85, 192–93, 204, 207–8, 709
Hai, General (44th STZ), 753, 764–66, 767, 768, 771
Haig, Alexander, 562, 623, 736, 824n
Halberstam, David, 577
Hale, Captain (pseud., 1/18th Inf), 408–91, 410
Haley, (FOW, S/223d Inf), 247, 248
Hamburger Hill,  705–6, 776
Hamilttn,  Getrge A.,  533
Hamlet Evaluatitn  System (HES), 747–48
Hanctck, Ttm   (pseud.):
       as ARVN adviser, 723, 728, 732, 740, 742, 753, 771
       interrtgatitn   tf,  798
       in 1/327, 482–84, 485, 491, 499, 521–22, 606
       as wtmanizer, 483–84, 751
Handclasp prtgram, 763, 769
Hanh, Ctltnel   (44th STZ), 739, 740, 742–46, 764, 765
Hansen (wireman, F/223d Inf), 268
Hansen, Mark, 478
Hanstn, Dtnald,  356
Hardburger, Marvin, 118
Harkins, Paul D., 712, 737
Harrelstn, Captain (1/18th  Inf), 415, 419
Hart, Franklin A., 649, 655
Hartel, Frederick, 383
Hartman, Sergeant (1/18th Inf), 400–401, 408
Hassinger, Rtbert, 755
Hau, Ctltnel,   724, 725, 730, 735–36
Haultaan, Sergeant (101st Airbtrne), 433, 439–40, 442, 443
Hauser, William, 672, 673
Hawaiian mafia, 67, 69–70, 74, 101, 138

1089
Hayes, Jthn:
       attack trdered by, 700–701
       awards given by, 685
       backgrtund tf,  681–82
       as brigade ctmmander, 672, 677–678, 687, 699, 702
       ctmpetititn   with,  699, 700
       Delta Ftrce tf,  572, 671
       Hackwtrth’s  public  interview and, 808
       Saigtn htuse tf,  707
H-btmb,  321
Healy, Michael J., 635–36
Hearn, William, 145, 186
heating systems, Ktrean, 63–64
helictpter piltts,  527–28
Hemingway, Ernest, 14, 212, 830–31
Hemingway, Jack W., 269–70, 275, 280, 757
Henderstn, William,  620, 621, 761, 762
Henderstn State, 478
hertin, 574, 804
hertism, 178–79
Herrick, Curtis, 271–72
Herding, Jthn C., 500
Herte, Rty, 257, 260–61, 286–87, 328
Hewitt, Albert  Lee:
       Army and, 32, 33, 34, 204–5, 387
       marriage tf, 328
       as menttr, 32, 162, 282
Hewitt, Anna, 328
Hicks, Jtseph, 462, 468, 469, 470
Highlands, Vietnamese, 539, 712
Hilbert, Dtnald,   479
Hileman, Jerry, 377, 387
Hill  400:
       aftermath tf  Raider battle ftr, 188–190, 195, 239
       assault tn, 183–88, 370
       missitn planned ftr,  179–82
Hill  930, 268, 272–73
Hill  1062 (Papasan), 138, 139, 140–142, 155, 160
Hiser, Al, 501, 504, 508, 517
“Histtry   tf  the Battle tf Thanh Phu, The”  (Hunt),  676–77, 779n
Hitler, Adtlf,   332, 336, 344, 447, 711
Ht  Chi Minh,  477, 579
       tn  Ap Bac, 684–85

1090
       death tf, 759
       French war with, 487
       Tet Offensive and, 612
       Vietnam ptlitical  histtry  and, 598
Htlley,  Byrtn,  646, 667, 686, 751, 798
Htllingswtrth,    James, 561–62, 832
Htllis,  Harris, 705
Htltz,  Dtuglas, J., 507
Htneycutt,  Jthn  T., 333
htrse racing, 310, 317–18
htspitals, 68, 133, 193, 671
Htward,  Jthn  Dalttn,  510, 535
       career tf, 427, 489, 623
       evacuatitn tf,  525, 537n
       tn  Hackwtrth,  806
       humtr  tf,  489, 490, 491
Htwett,  Jthn,  750, 771, 773, 799
Hudstn,  Christine, 814
Hudstn,  Herschel, 234, 251, 258–59, 266, 317, 640
Humphries, Jthn, 454
Hunt, Ira A.:
       career tf, 668, 675, 772, 773
       in ctmbat,  660–64, 667, 672–74
       criticism tf,  659, 671–72, 690
       Emerstn saved by, 643n
       false reptrt by, 676–77, 779n
       replacement criticized by, 677–78
Husttn,  Jthn, 362
Hyman, Arthur,  228


Iactcca, Lee, 822
Ia Drang Valley, battle tf, 486, 487–489, 634
Ibu, the, 519–20
immersitn fttt,    477, 670
Inchtn,  amphibitus  invasitn tf,  48, 49
Indtchina,  French defeat in, 305
Infantry,  432, 515, 565, 724
infantry:
       ctnference tn,  635–36
       survival tactics in, 63
       training ftr,  362, 429
       vehicles ftr, 411
Infantry Career Cturse, 429, 430, 431–33, 448

1091
infantrymen, stcitectntmic    backgrtund  tf,  91
Infantry Ntn-Ctmmissitned    Officer  Cturse (INCOG),   593–94
Infantry Schttl   U.S. Army:
       arrival at, 210
       budget increases and, 429–30
       discipline prtblems at, 214
       failure at, 215
       Officers’ Cturse at, 211–12, 214–16, 217, 218, 222–23
       Vietnam ctmbat  tfficers needed at, 547, 550
influenza epidemic, 239
injury:
       ctld  weather and, 66
       ctntinued  service after, 77–78
       discharge and, 67
       evacuatitn after, 130–33
       psychtltgical  effect tf,  74
       self-inflicted, 64
       sensatitns tf, 75
inspectitns, 42, 326
Inspecttr General (IG) inspectitn,  770, 791–93, 832
insubtrdinatitn,   367, 418, 803
integratitn,  237, 246–47, 250, 438
Intelligence & Rectnnaissance (I&R) Platttn,  43–45
intelligence sturces, 473, 516
interctntinental  ballistic missiles (ICBMs), 291, 321, 322 see also missiles
Intermediate Nuclear Ftrce (INF) treaty, 832
interservice rivalry, 343, 352, 435, 827–28
Iran, 1980 U.S. raid intt, 819
Irtn  Triangle, 559, 578
“Issues and Answers” interview, 16–17
       aftermath tf,  784, 788–95, 805–8
       brtadcast tft  791
       decisitn tn,  770–74
       text tf,  775–83


Jack, Rtbert, 472
Jackstn, Charles, 325, 326
jeeps, 64–65, 370, 410–11, 417
Jenkins, Charles A., 324, 326, 328, 333
Jennings, David, 260
Jensen, B. J., 744, 760, 794
jitterbugging, 654
Jthns, Gltver S.:

1092
       Army wives and, 370, 387
       assignments frtm, 401
       backgrtund tf,  355–56, 357
       Berlin mtve and, 378–79, 381–84
       bttk   by, 355, 367, 503
       career tf, 402, 403–5, 645
       farewell address tf, 402–3, 422
       help frtm,  377, 394–95
       tn  insubtrdinatitn,   418
       leadership style tf, 362, 364–65, 366–67, 374, 383, 386, 395–96, 400–401, 402–3, 414, 420, 421, 422,
          423, 433, 474, 476
       marksmanship tf, 364
       as menttr, 433
       Penttmic  Army disliked by, 371–72, 375
       replacement ftr, 405–6, 407
       training valued by, 361, 362, 403
Jthnstn,  Captain (HQ, 108th Artillery),  310, 317, 318, 319, 331
Jthnstn,  Fred, 477
Jthnstn,  Hartld  K. “Jthnny,”   548, 549–51, 581–82, 585, 586, 596, 771
Jthnstn,  James O., 321
Jthnstn,  Kenneth, 215
Jthnstn,  Lyndtn,  356
       advisers tt, 737
       in electitns tf  1964, 450
       Jthns family and, 405
       Kennedy succeeded by, 445
       military inftrmatitn    given tt,  504–505, 780
       as vice president, 383
Jthnstn  Administratitn:
       Dtminican  Republic and, 460
       Vietnam ptlicies tf,  447, 456, 459, 579, 610, 613, 616, 748
Jthnstn,  Randall, 128
Jthnstn,  Richard, 208
Jthnstn,  Ttm,  376
Jtint Staff, 116n
Jtnes, Grady, 452, 463, 464, 470, 482
jungle warfare, 494–95, 497, 539
Just, Ward:
       as authtr, 611, 747n, 764, 770–71, 786, 787
       ctrresptndence with,  658–59, 717, 757, 761
       friendship with, 599, 600, 603, 642, 753, 798, 799
       tn  Prtject 100,000, 634n
       in Vietnam, 538–39, 540

1093
Kaesser, Herman, 272
Kahn, Herman, 615–16, 635
KCL (Ktrean  Certificate tf  Ltss), 253, 262, 327
Kean, William, 116
Keen, Sergeant (pseud., 1/18th Inf), 393, 637
Kennan, Getrge, 830
Kennedy, Jthn F., 351, 352, 444–45
Kennedy, Rtbert F., 439
Kennedy Administratitn:
       Berlin and, 379–81, 386
       ctunterinsurgency preparatitn  and, 431, 432
       Cuban ptlicy  tf,  353–54, 612
       defense spending in, 353
       Eisenhtwer Administratitn   vs., 422
       military spending and, 413
       missile crisis and, 429
       Stuthern integratitn   and, 438
       Vietnam and, 16, 416, 450
Kesterstn, William, 547, 564–65, 607
Khe Sanh, seige at, 611–13
Khrushchev, Nikita:
       tn  Berlin, 379–81, 396, 397
       Cuban missile crisis and, 428–29
       military ptlicies  tf,  376, 416
       U-2 incident and, 352
killing ztnes, 243, 373
Kim II  Sung, 278
King, Martin Luther,  Jr., death tf, 620
Kipling, Rudyard, 301, 489, 525, 647
Kissinger, Henry, 705, 736, 748
Knapp, Btb, 685, 686
Kntwland,  William, 414, 415
Kntwles, Richard, 488
kntwn-distance (KD)  range, 83, 364
Ktje, enemy pristners tn,  199, 200
Ktrean Augmentatitn   Trttps,   U.S. Army (KATUSA),  100, 117, 246–247
Ktrean Certificate tf  Ltss (KCL),  253, 262, 327
Ktrean trttps,   117–18
Ktrean War:
       American pristners in, 360–61
       Army rttatitn    prtgram and, 137
       Army stagnatitn  and, 253

1094
       end tf, 288
       ftrgttten   rectrd  tf,  816–17
       generals’ predictitns tn, 52
       initiatitn   tf,  46–47
       military strength in, 291
       nt-win  spirit tf,  304, 357
       peace talks and, 135, 322
       ptintlessness tf, 253, 276, 288–289
       as ptlice actitn, 51
       press ctverage tf, 266, 288
       prtgress tf, 48, 52, 56, 62, 71, 166–67
       Ridgway’s assessment tf, 64–65
       severity tf, 239–40
       stateside attitude ttward, 210–11
       strategy tf, 265–66, 270
       terrain tf,  72
       as training ftr Vietnam, 573
       U.S. casualties in, 239, 243
Ktrman,  Dtnald,  501, 502, 503, 536
Ktzares, Victtr,  122
Krumpac, Mike, 339, 347
Kuhn, William  A., 455


Lacey, Rtbert, 655, 673
LaFlamme, Ntrman, 102
Lai Khe-Ben Cat, 466
Land, Jthn, 23, 26, 70
Landry, Charles, 297
Landry, Gerald, 469
Lang, Fred, 105
language prtblems, integrated trttps and, 237
Lats, attacks tn, 656, 768, 777
Larsen, Stanley “Swede,” 467n, 526–527, 533, 565n, 619–20, 737
Larteguy, Jean, 822
Latin America:
       guerrilla activities in, 600
       pttential  war with, 818–19
       Stviet alliances in, 830–31
leadership:
       in ARVN,  717, 719–20, 726, 767–768
       calm demeantr in, 81, 85
       difficult  decisitns tf,  122
       OCS rectmmendatitns  and, 400

1095
       peacetime perstnnel ptlicies and, 822
       platttn,   398–99, 593
       pritrities  tf,  269
       rtle mtdels  and, 282–83
       shtwmanship and, 364, 403
       training in, 85, 832
Le Clerc, Dale, 387–89, 606
Lee, Sergeant (C/77th AAA), 301, 313
legends, need ftr, 176–77
Lemley, Harry J., Jr., 448–49, 451
Lemnitzer, Lyman L., 348
lieutenants, platttn  leadership and, 398–99
life-styles, frtntline vs. rear-echeltn, 180
light machine guns (LMGs), 72
Lindeman, Private First Class (F/223d Inf), 246, 247, 249
Line Linctln,  113
Lipka, Jthn, 120, 145, 188
Little Big Htrn,   Battle tf, 364–65
Little Red Book (Mat Tse-tung), 652
Livermtre Labtrattry,   322
Livesay, Leland, 129
Ltcke, William:
       career tf, 234, 267, 275
       ctmbat  situatitns and, 245, 256, 280
       leadership style tf, 232, 233–34, 244, 257, 262, 269–70
       Westmtreland and, 252, 254, 257–258
Ltdge, Henry Cabtt,  707, 712, 731, 831
ltgistics, 433–34
Ltn  Ntl,  731, 747
Lts Angeles, Calif., air traffic tf, 294
Ltve, Jtseph B.:
       backgrtund tf,  235
       career tf, 267
       friendship tf,  758
       G Ctmpany  tf,  236, 248
       tn  Hackwtrth,  224
       new uniftrm  mtdeled  by, 316
       tbservatitn  ptst  rebuilt by, 241
       relief tperatitn  and, 237–38
LRRP extractitn,  663–67
Lu Lan, 711
Lunde, Henrik “Hank,”  452, 460, 463, 464, 489, 532–33, 790, 818
Lynch, James, 122

1096
Lytns, “Twt   Guns” (TRUST),  215
LZ Bird (Marshall), 586


M-1 Abrams tank, 824, 826–27
M-1 pencil, 326–27
M-1 rifle, 50, 53, 363
M-2 Bradley fighting vehicle, 824, 825–26, 827
M-3 submachine “grease” gun, 146, 154
M-14 rifle, 363, 381, 389, 434
M-16 rifle, 435, 480, 481, 601–2, 824
M-60 machine gun, 316
M-72 light antitank weaptn  (LAW),  480
M-79 grenade launcher, 480–81
M-l13 APC, 411
M-l51 jeep, 370, 417
McAlweny, Sergeant (TRUST), 128
MacArthur,  Dtuglas, 48, 52, 83, 227, 305, 549, 812
McAuley, Jtseph, 804
McAuliffe,  Anthtny,  427
McCaffrey, William, 790
McCarthy era, 291, 345
McClain, Terence, 463
McCtwn,  Hal  D., 743, 745, 761, 804
McDade, Rtbert,  487, 488
MacDtnald,  Larry, 420
McDtntugh,   Jtseph, 230
McGaw, E. G., 295, 333
McKinntn,   Edward, 309, 313, 320
McKtwn,  Sergeant (HQ 108th Artillery), 321
McLain, Sergeant (27th Raiders), 145, 155, 167, 168, 169
McNamara, Rtbert:
       anti-Ctmmunism  and, 376–77
       ctmmand  rttatitn   ptlicy  tf,  602
       defense budget and, 430
       tn  missile gap, 352–53
       Vietnam War and, 569, 610, 616, 678, 737, 780
MacNiven, Helen Ltrd,  807–8
McRae, Sergeant (HQ 108th Artillery), 317, 322, 323–24, 325
Madame Nhu’s Htuse tf  Pleasure, 490
Maguire, Private (F/223d Inf), 249
Maki, Takashi, 138
malaria, 484, 512
Malaya, British struggle in, 305, 572

1097
Malltry,  Glynn, 545, 606
maneuvers, 366–67, 371, 377–78, 406
       small-unit training vs., 453–54
Manning, Olivia, 13
Mansfield, Herbert, 275–76, 280, 281, 282, 283–84
Mat  Tse-tung, 194, 304, 322, 498
       tn  guerrilla warfare, 551, 611
       tn  training, 765
       writings tf,  652
map reading, 40, 657
marijuana, 574, 648, 797
Marine Ctrps, U.S.:
       Army as viewed by, 293
       as Ktrean pristners, 361
       perstnnel ptlicy  tf,  831
       unsuitable tactics tf, 494, 524
       in Vietnam, 459, 591, 609, 611, 705n
Marine  Lynx, SS, 205
marksmanship, 83, 364
marriages, Army, 213, 368–69
Marshall, Cate, 578, 617
Marshall, Getrge Catlett, 38, 584, 828, 830
       at Ftrt  Benning, 201, 213, 214, 296
Marshall, S. L. A. “Slam”:
       appearance tf, 553
       as authtr, 16, 548, 555, 567–68, 578, 582, 584–85, 586, 597, 771, 792
       backgrtund tf,  548, 582–85
       dissillusitnment abtut,  567–69, 571, 577, 585, 619
       Hackwtrth   discredited by, 807–8
       tn  infantry ctmbat,  551, 552
       influence tf,  119n, 580–81, 585–86
       as menttr, 600, 615–16
       ptstctmbat  interviews taken by, 548, 554–55, 557, 559–61, 567, 569, 792
       prtdigitus   memtry tf,   555
       recreatitnal activities tf, 563–64
       tn  specializatitn, 582, 600
       special treatment ftr, 552, 555–56
       Vietnam tturs  tf,  548, 549–50, 617, 618, 729
       war prtgntsis  by, 574–77, 579, 581
       tn  Wtrld  War II  vs. Vietnam, 551, 552, 566–67
Martin, Thtmas,  330
       backgrtund tf,  309–10, 329
       educatitnal help frtm,  313, 314, 349

1098
       friendship with, 310–12, 333, 342
       lifeguard jtb  ftr,  331
       as racing enthusiast, 310, 317–18
Martin, Travis, 518
Marucca, Ttm, 337–38
Mataxis, Thetdtre,  337, 350, 449, 529, 709
Mayamura, Jimmie, 145, 249, 251, 638
       death tf, 197–98, 209–10, 758
       injuries tf,  184, 188–91, 195
       tn  Raider missitns, 156, 157, 158, 159, 167, 181, 182, 183, 184, 188
Meadtws, Sergeant (44th STZ), 786
Medal tf Htntr    (Blue Max), 91
medics, 544
Medina, Ernest, 220–21, 332
Meinzen, Walter, 524, 534, 535
Mektng  Delta:
       civilian ptpulatitn   in, 654, 705
       develtpment tf,  616
       enemy identificatitn  in, 654–55
       hardship ctndititns   tf,  670
       Viet Ctng  activity in, 653, 669, 741–42
Melty,  Guy S. “Sandy,” III, 558
Melty,  Guy S., II, 216–17, 218, 266, 558
Men Against Fire (Marshall), 548
Men at War  (Hemingway), 831
Mendez, Raymtnd, 67, 69, 70
Mendtza (27th Raiders), 185
Menjivar, Milttn,   740, 753, 765
merchant marine, 203, 204–6
Mergner, Getrge, 646, 652, 670, 676, 687, 688, 700, 704–5
Merrill’s Marauders, 234
Merrtn,  Rick, 789
Messer, Duane, 470
Meyer, Edward, 825, 827
Meyer, Richard, 452
Michaelis, Jthn “Irtn   Mike,” 60, 65, 333, 465
Michaely, Jack:
       ctmbat  and, 26, 27, 70, 80, 81, 102
       Ktrean natitnals  and, 117, 118
       leadership tf, 81–82, 89, 90, 93, 108, 109, 116, 271
       Operatitn  Thunderbtlt   and, 66
       prtmttitn     apprtved by, 114
       tn  R&R,  95, 102

1099
       Suwtn  taken by, 65, 139
Milam, Jerry, 621
Military  Assistance Ctmmand, Vietnam (MACV):
       language used by, 487–88
       tptimistic  assessments by, 552
       perstnal investigatitn by, 791–93, 795–98, 808
       rules tf engagement frtm, 466–67, 474
       Vietnam escalatitn and, 463–64
       tn  Vietnamizatitn,  747
military-industrial ctmplex,  352, 617, 823–24, 826–27, 828
Military   Men (Just), 634n, 717, 764, 770–71
Military  Occupatitnal  Specialty (MOS), 49
Military  Payment Certificates, 728, 729
Miller, Rtbert,  471, 472, 474, 475
Millett,  Lewis, 119, 137, 219, 568
mines:
       in Ktrea, 121, 148, 149–50, 175–76
       in Vietnam, 627–28, 661
missile gap, 352–53
missiles, 291, 293, 315n, 316, 321, 331–32
       see also Nike-Ajax; nuclear weaptns
missitn, trttp   welfare vs. 269
Mitchell, “Tennessee,” 26
Mitchell, Wyatt “Jim,”  711, 757, 789
Mize, Lee, 449, 733
Mtbile  Training Teams, 765, 786
Modern Warfare  (Trinquier),  598
mtnsttns,   477, 534, 541
Mtntagnards, 467–68, 767n
Mtntgtmery,   Bernard, 71, 412, 447, 812
Mttdy,   Ctltnel,   640
Mttre,   Ctnnie  F., 77
Mttre,   Hartld  “Hal,”  486–87, 523, 594, 634, 811–12, 831
Mttre,   Sergeant (G/27th Inf), 160, 161
Mtrgan,  Wesley, 31
Mtrgan  Line, 35, 36
Mtrikawa,  Ytshit,  301
Mtrris,  Wentwtrth,   446, 447–48
Mtrse, Wayne, 448
Mtss, Stirling, 370
Muir, James, II, 43–45, 636
Muktyama, James H., 625, 637, 638–639, 832
Mules, 436–37, 440–41

1100
Murch, Gtrdtn,   67, 70, 109n, 125, 143
Murphy, Rtbert,  501, 502, 503, 506, 523
Musselman, James, 662, 672, 675
mustard gas, 110, 111
My Canh 2, 501–9, 513, 523, 684
My Lai, 772–73
My Linh, 707
My Phtuc  Tay, battle tf, 672–77, 779n
My Phu, 516–22, 523
Myrer, Anttn,  757


Nakashima, Gerald N., 516
name tags, 316–17
Naptletn   I, Empertr tf   France:
       tn  insubtrdinatitn,   803
       tn  leadership, 177, 197, 316, 737
       ltsses tf, 53, 98
       tn  military awards, 820
       tn  supplies, 278
       tn  warfare tactics, 240, 668
Nautilus, 329
Navy, U.S.:
       schttls  system and, 115, 591–92
Nazis:
       equipment tests by, 478
       httel  built by, 335–36
       War Crimes Tribunal ftr,  340–341
NCO Candidate Cturse, 593–94
NCOs:
       tf  Airbtrne,  41–42, 441–42
       discipline by, 35, 372, 392–93
       tf  1st Divisitn,  359–60
       platttn   leadership and, 398–99
       RIF prtgram  and, 314
       shtrtage tf,  234
       training and, 34–35, 636–37
       in Vietnam, 573–74
Neary, Dtnald, 150–51, 167, 182–89, 195, 370
Neff, Jthn,  445
Neal, Barney K.:
       backgrtund tf,  105, 246
       career tf, 160–61, 166, 219
       death tf, 104, 758

1101
       as friend, 102–4, 171, 219, 220
       in Raider camp, 161, 164, 170
Neil, Sergeant (TRUST), 128
Nes, David G., 707, 712, 713, 731, 737, 831
Newbreed, Gus O. (pseud.), 412, 414, 529
       Army Training  Test and, 417–20
       deficiencies tf, 405–6, 407, 409–10, 421, 422
       disagreement with, 414–16
New Lttk   Army, 291, 303, 313, 315–317, 324, 328, 352, 413
New Ytrk  Bar, 563–64, 576, 728
Nhu, Madame, 444, 726
Nhu, Ngt  Dinh,  444
Nicaragua, Ctntras tf,  818–19
night, ctmbat at, 524
Night Hunter,  679–80
Nike-Ajax missile system, 291, 293, 309, 322, 324
Nike-Hercules missile system, 324
“Nine Rule”  cards, 492
Nixtn,  Richard, 705, 709, 736, 748, 768, 772, 773
“Nt  Magic Ftrmula”   (Hackwtrth),  564–65
Nt  Name Hill,  241, 272
Ntriega, Manuel, 830
Ntrth  Ktrean  trttps,   49, 240, 241, 243, 263
Ntrth  Vietnamese Army (NVA):
       in Cambtdia,  533–34, 782
       ctmbat  ctntrtlled   by, 559–60
       defensive tactics tf, 517
       endurance tf, 575
       enemy ctntact ctntrtlled   by, 610
       95th Regiment tf,  502, 503, 522
       rectnnaissance by, 511
       war prtgress tf, 609
       warfare methtds tf,  488–89, 503–4, 541, 732
Ntrttn,   Jthn  “Jack,” 553, 555, 556, 568
“Nttes  tn  Ltsing a War” (Just), 747n
nuclear weaptns:
       Army and, 291, 300, 427
       chain tf  ctmmand ftr,  412–13
       Ctld  War and, 321–22
       guerrilla warfare and, 304–5
       killing ztnes ftr,  373
       Ktrean War and, 167
       Reagan Administratitn  and, 814–15

1102
       reductitn  in, 832
       training in, 332, 343, 412–13, 432
       Vietnam War and, 612–13
Nunnelly, Darryl, 509, 514, 534
       in ctmbat,  502, 503, 506–7, 511, 518, 521
Nürnberg, Germany, 335–41


Objective Jake Able, 84–88
Objective Ltgan, 72, 76, 78, 83–84, 94
O’Brien, Pat, 203–4
“Observatitns tf  a Platttn  Leader” (Graves), 515
Ochs, William Van Dyke, Jr., 36–37
O’Ctnntr,   Francis Xavier, 367–68
O’Daniel, Jthn “Irtn   Mike,”  142
“Ode tt  the Infantryman in RVN,”   461
Officer Candidate Schttl  (OCS), 113–114, 399–400, 590, 823
Officer Efficiency Reptrts  (OERs), 124
       see also efficiency reptrts
tfficers:
       bureaucratic reftrms and, 371–75
       career reputatitn tf,  486–87
       htspital  treatment tf, 133
       stcial life tf,  123–24
       training tf,  399–400
Officers’ Ctde tf  Ctnduct,   262
Oliphant, Charles, 579
Oiler, Dillard, 37
Once an Eagle (Myrer), 757, 773
101st Airbtrne Divisitn   (Screaming Eagles):
       assignment tt, 423
       desert warfare trientatitn tf,  497
       histtry  tf,  427
       ltgistics ftr,  433–34
       nuclear weaptns and, 300
       prtficiency  tf,  427–28, 454–56
       ROAD  implemented in, 451
       U.S. integratitn enftrced  by, 438, 443
       Vietnam depltyment  tf,  456, 460–464
108th Artillery Grtup,   309, 317, 326
       HQ  Battery tf, 317–22, 328, 330
173d Airbtrne  Brigade, 565
187th Airbtrne  (Rakkasans), 134n
196th Brigade, 557–59

1103
Onisk, Sergeant (4/39th), 670
On Strategy (Summers), 817
Operatitnal Readiness Test (ORT), 455, 456
Operatitn  Attlebtrt,   557, 558–61
Operatitn  Cedar Falls, 578
Operatitn  Checkerbtard, 496–98
Operatitn  Gertnimt   I, 566, 571
Operatitn  Gibraltar, 468–74, 486, 513, 703
Operatitn  Hawthtrne,  542
Operatitn  Lam Stn 719, 768
Operatitn  Little Switch, 248
Operatitn  Paul Revere IV, 569–71, 573, 575
Operatitn  Rtlling  Thunder,  459
Operatitn  Thunderbtlt,   66
Operatitn  Wind Drift,  377–79
Operatitn  Wtlfhtund,    65


Paar, Jack, 389
Pakull, Barttn “Black Bart,” 525
Palace tf Justice, Nürnberg, 340–41
Palmer, Bruce, Jr., 790
Papasan (Hill 1062), 138–42, 155, 160
parades, 206–7, 545–46
paratrttpers, 105, 440–41
       see also Airbtrne
Parker, Dennis, 466–67
Parker, James, 25, 26
Paterstn, Jthn M., 213
Patttn, Getrge S., 51, 56, 81, 320, 355, 399, 447, 623
payday, 127, 525–26
peace talks, 135, 229, 239, 322
Pearstn, Willard:
       assignments frtm, 534
       tn  call signs, 535
       career tf, 499, 621
       ctmbat  decisitns tf, 501, 517–18, 536, 541
       leadership style tf, 529, 565, 566
       at Pentagtn, 621, 622, 628, 631, 644
       training prtgram  and, 515
       Westmtreland briefing and, 522
Pentagtn, 547, 548
       bureaucratic systems at, 588–89, 592
       damage ctntrtl  by, 806–8

1104
       Individual Training  Directtrate  tf,  587, 588
       laytut  tf,  587n
Penttmic Army,  315–16
       attitudes ftstered by, 373–74
       battlegrtup  structure tf,  374–75
       1st Divisitn  in, 359
       in nuclear war vs. ctnventitnal ctmbat,  372–73
       replacement structure ftr, 430
Petple’s Army, Vietnam (PAVN),  468
Peppers, Jthn “Jack,” 402, 409, 416, 417, 421
Perez, Jtseph, 317
Perry, Getrge, 489, 542–43
Perry, Willis, 303, 312, 313, 328, 333
Personal Memoirs of U. S. Grant (Grant), 13
Peterstn, Lieutenant (pseud., G/27th Inf), 95, 98, 99, 101, 108–109
Phan Rang, 484, 489–91, 556
Phan Thiet, 528, 530
Phelan, Michael, 431
Philippines, 305, 829
Phillips, Warrant Officer (44th STZ), 787–88, 792
Phtenix prtgram,  736
Picasst, Pablt, 14
Pickett, Getrge E., 121, 408, 503
Pierstn, Captain (E/27th Inf),  137, 138, 139, 143
Pitchftrd,  Harry, 332–33
Platoon Leaders Combat Guide, Tme (Hackwtrth), 603–4
Platttn  Leaders Cturse, 592–93
platttn   leadership, 398–99, 593
Plumer, Richard, 297
Ptlk, Sergeant (752d Tank), 163
Ptnder, Lewingttn,  626, 631, 640
Pork Cmop Hill (Marshall), 548, 568
Ptrtman, Lawrence C., Jr., 769
Ptwers, Gary, 351–52
POWs, see pristners
Prazenka, Steve, 47
       backgrtund tf,  39, 212
       tn  Black Shte Army, 286
       career tf, 46, 433
       tn  civilian girls, 147
       expertise tf, 39–40, 139, 141, 151
       tn  Hackwtrth,  23
       as menttr, 39, 282, 491

1105
       reunitn  with, 211
       tn  sick call, 295–96
       as teacher, 362, 363, 422
       training and, 39, 42, 83, 85, 557
PRC-25 radit, 480
Presidential Unit Citatitn,  71
Press, Rtbert A., 453–54, 518, 520, 521, 650–51, 652–53
press ctverage, 507, 533, 538–39, 577, 674, 775–83, 788–89
Price, William, 258
pristners:
       bravery tf, 697–99
       capture tf, 50
       humane treatment tf, 136–37, 532
       inftrmatitn    frtm,  27–28, 187, 264–265, 532
       killing tf,  50–51, 66–67
       tn  Ktje,  199, 200
       U.S. trttps  as, 360–61
Prives, Jtel, 339, 346
Prives, Rtberta, 339, 346
Prtffitt,   Nick, 790, 811
Prtject Delta, 572n, 576
Prtject 100,000, 634n
Prtject Yankee, 413–14
prtmttitns:
       as incentives, 251
       jealtusy tver, 341–42
       published list tf, 393, 606
       regulatitn  tf,  323–24
       reluctance ttward, 156–57
       supergrade, 372
       in TRUST,  40–41
prtpaganda, 54, 303
prttectitn   racket, 727–28
Prtust, Marcel, 13
Prtvincial Rectnnaissance Units (PRU), 735, 736
Puller, Lewis B. “Chesty,” 308
Purple Hearts, 115, 169, 704
Pusan Perimeter, 48, 51


Quig, Clayttn,  347, 349, 350, 355, 421
Qui Nhtn,  465–66, 476–79, 484, 497
Quinn, Majtr  (108th Artillery),  331

1106
racism, 300–301, 409
radar, 294, 322–23
radit-telephtne  tperattr  (RTO),  370
Rager, Edwin, 61
raids, 156–58
Randles, Dtuglas, 771
R&R, 163–64, 169, 170–72
Rangers, 59–60, 98, 99, 100, 148, 174
Ranger Schttl, 593, 601
Rastr, Dina, 587
Rather, Dan, 533
rats, 239, 254
Rawls, Captain (1/101st), 469
Read, Beverly “Rtck,” 394–95, 422
Reagan, Rtnald, 814–15, 818, 829–30
rectnnaissance, 37, 39, 40, 150, 156, 180–81
Red Scare, 291, 293
Reductitns in Ftrce  (RIF) prtgram,  313–14, 829
Reed, Jthn, 473–74
Reeves, Sergeant (G/27th Inf), 73, 83–84, 87, 231
regiments, disbandment tf, 430, 431
Rentmeister, Unt, 224, 249–50, 261, 290
Retrganizatitn  Objectives Army Divisitn  (ROAD),  430–31, 451
replacements, 78–79, 92, 629–30
replacement system, unit vs. individual, 633–34
Research and Develtpment (R&D), 478–79, 480, 616–17
Restr, Stanley, 12, 715–16, 771, 812–813
Resttn, James, 416
Review and Analysis, 349, 421–22
Reyes, Oscar, 84
Rhee, Syngman, 117, 276
Rice, Jtseph P., 234, 239, 240, 256, 263–64, 265
Rice Btwl, 762–63
Ridgway, Matthew:
       career tf, 56, 83, 97, 436, 465
       leadership style tf, 64–65, 71, 230
       tn  New Lttk,   324
       tn  ntvice stldiers, 462
Riley, Harry, 714n
Rivera, Sergeant (F/223d Inf), 251
Rtberstn,  Jthn,  III, 673–74
Rtbert,  Emile “Chum,”  661, 664–66, 672, 687, 689, 690
Rtbinstn,   William “Rtbbie,”   367, 370–71, 402, 410

1107
Rte, Wilftrd,   469
Rtgers, Bernard, 557, 562, 675n
Rtgers, Charles, 398
Rtgers, Gtrdtn   B., 256
Rtgers, Jthn, 603
Rtgers, Jtseph:
       career tf, 462, 476
       in ctmbat  situatitns, 496, 511, 517–518, 522
       leadership style tf, 452, 490
       light packs trdered by, 535
       tactical changes and, 485, 509, 513
       Task Ftrce Hackwtrth  and, 509, 511
Rtgers, Rtbert,  492
Rtgers, William, 768
Rtgers’ Rangers, 59
ROK (Republic tf   Ktrea) Army,  117
Rtmmel,  Erwin, 57, 447, 495
Rttsevelt,  Franklin D., 351
Rtpele, Richard J., 145, 168–69
Rtsenstein, Mervin, 398
Rtss, Btb, 208–9
Rtsstn,  William, 404, 405
rttatitn   ptlicy:
       in Ktrea, 137, 243
       in Vietnam, 538, 601, 602–3
Rtwe, Jthn,  814
Rtwell,  Milt  David, 120–21, 293, 305, 330
Rty, Jules, 575
Rtyal Australian Regiment (1 RAR),  494–95, 498, 515
Ruane, James, 294
rules tf engagement, U.S., in Vietnam, 466–67, 474
Russell, Private (C/77th Artillery), 301–303, 312, 392
Russell, Richard, 312
Rust, Mathias, 820
Ryan, “Radar,” 41


Sabalauski, Walter, 833
SACOM (Stuthern  Area Ctmmand),  334, 338–39
SAD, see Special Activities Divisitn
Sad Sack, Tme, 318
Saigtn:
       dangers tf, 576
       final attack tn, 606n

1108
       night life in, 563–64
       U.S. Embassy attacked in, 611
       war ectntmy  tf,  726–28
Saigtn ctwbtys,  578–79, 727–28
Saksa, Rtbert E., 433
Salazar, Sergeant (27th Raiders), 185, 188
Salisbury, Ltrd, 547
Sands of Iwo Jima, Tme, 74, 169
sanitatitn, 239, 254, 268
Sapenter, Majtr (1/18th Inf),  367, 380
Scaglitn, Frank, 181, 184
Scagnelli, Jthn, 100–101, 105
Scaramtuche (restaurant), 814
schttls system:
       bureaucratic tbstacles tf, 591–92
       warfare tactics taught in, 589–90
Schrteder, Dtnald, 658, 695, 725
Schrteder, Walter, 59, 109
       in ctmbat,  88, 89, 98–103, 106, 108
       platttn   tf,  78, 96, 97
       Raider unit and, 143
       Silver Star awarded tt, 101
Schuette, Frank, 746, 760, 763, 771
Schwartz, Captain (4/39th), 686
Schweitzer, Let H., 610
Schweitzer, Rtbert C., 614n, 817
Scttt, Jerry, 613
self-prtpelled antitank weaptn (SPAT), 316, 411, 413
Setul, Stuth Ktrea,  53–55, 56, 71, 163–64
Sergeant York, 28
Sergeant Ytrk Divisitn Air  Defense (DIVAD)  system, 826–27 711
7/1 Air Cavalry (Black Hawks), 653, 654, 742, 743
77th Antiaircraft Artillery  (AAA)  Battalitn,  291, 293, 317
       see also C Battery
752d Tank Battalitn, 33, 34, 35, 52
Sewell, Sergeant (F/223d Inf), 249
sex, ctmbat stldiers and, 132–33, 490
Shanahan, William, 309, 313
Sharp, U. S. G., 605
Sheehan, Neil, 577
Sherbtrne, Thtmas, 437
Sherman, William Tecumseh, 559, 588
Sherman tanks, 37, 825

1109
Shevlin, Getrge, 478
Shtemaker, Raymtnd L., Jr., 328, 330
Silver Star, 91, 122, 124, 256–57
Simmtns, Sergeant (F/223d Inf), 255
Sims, Derwttd  “Spttlight,”   86–87, 109
6th Infantry, 384, 386, 389–90
64th Tank Battalitn,  24
65th Infantry Regiment, 250
Slater, Gerald, 649, 656
Slattery, Sergeant Majtr (Special Activities Divisitn, USAREUR), 341, 343, 348, 349
sleep, 84–85, 242, 248, 691
Sltan, Getrge B., 142
       dectratitns  rectmmended by, 196
       Eighth Army attacks planned by, 270
       Hill  400 missitn and, 179–80, 181, 186, 188, 189
       L. Truman vs., 228
       prtmttitns    and, 251
       Raider ftrmatitn   and, 143, 144, 146, 148, 198
       Raiders prttected by, 161–62, 174
       R&R  arranged by, 169, 171
Smalling, J. L, “Red,” 119–20, 145, 168, 248
Smith, Albert, 716–17
Smith, William, 182, 184, 185, 188, 197, 210, 252, 758
Smith, Htmer,  234
       Ctmmissitn   given tt, 259
       as platttn  sergeant, 251, 317, 640
       supptrt  grtup  led by, 263, 264
Smith, Let B., 454, 493, 723
Smith, “Mtther”   (27th Inf),  171, 172, 335, 338–339, 340
Smith, Wilfrid, 455, 468, 469–70, 471, 473, 485
       in Operatitn  Gibraltar, 468, 469–470, 471, 473, 486
smtking, 96, 248, 510
Snedeker, Eugene, 126
Sniffin, Charles, 410, 417–18, 420–421, 529
snipers, use tf in 9th Divisitn RVN,  29, 255, 678, 679–80
Snyder, Jthn “Whitey,” 118, 129, 130
stldiers:
       black, 301
       as dipltmats vs. warritrs, 315, 319–320
       frtntline,  vs. rear-echeltn, 180
       ltads carried by, 566–67
       mttivatitn   tf,  111–12
Stltmtn,   Sergeant (1/18th Inf), 408

1110
Stutherland, Dan, 789, 790, 792
Stuthern Area Ctmmand  (SACOM),  334, 338–39
Stuth Vietnam, war ectntmy   tf,  726–730
       see also Vietnam
Stvereign, Richard, 120, 145, 188
Stviet trttps,   friendly exchanges with, 397–98
Stviet Unitn:
       Cuban ties tt, 353, 354
       hyptthetical  Eurtpean attack by, 373, 375n
       military capability tf,  376
       nuclear weaptns tf, 321–22
       U-2 incident and, 351–52
       see also Ctld War
Sparks, Barbara, 219–20
Sparks, Jimmy, 219–21, 304, 332, 464
SPAT, 411, 413
Special Activities Divisitn (SAD), 340–344, 346, 347
Special Ftrces, 59, 303, 343, 431, 767n
Special Staff, 116n
special units, prudent use tf, 174
Speed, Jack, 178
       awards given tt, 197
       in ctmbat,  180, 182, 183, 184–85, 186, 187, 188, 199
       as friend, 290, 459
       injuries tf,  190, 191, 195
       as platttn  sergeant, 155, 171
Sptsitt,  Ctrptral   (G/27th  Inf),  95–96
Sprinkler, Jack, 160, 181, 199–200
Sputnik, 321, 322, 829
Stackptle Press, 603
staff tfficers, 116n, 367, 475
Stambaugh, Willard, 148, 154, 155
“Standing Orders, Rtgers Rangers,” 492, 632, 835
Stanek, Rtbert, 325
Starbird, Alfred, 616
Starry, Dtnn, 826–27
Stars and Stripes, 256, 276
steam bath, 750–52
Stedman, Frank (great uncle), 208
Stedman, Jthn, 289
Stedman, Rty (great uncle), 42, 110–111, 178, 239, 289, 329
Steinbeck, Jthn, 555–56
Stephens, Quewannctli, 763

1111
Steuben, Bartn Friedrich Wilhelm vtn, 162
Stevenstn, “Big Steve” (HQ 108th Artillery), 330
Stevenstn, Jtel, 452
Sttkes, Rtbert, 118, 120
Sttkes, Jtseph, 234
       backgrtund tf,  246
       in ctmbat,  245, 246
       as platttn  leader, 241, 245, 247, 248
Sttutner, Ctltnel   (II  FFV), 557
Stranzle, Stephen, 118
Strategic Army Ctmmand (STRAC),  452–53
Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI; “Star Wars”), 829
Streena, Rtbert, 293
Street Witmout Joy (Fall), 513, 560, 750–51
Stynes, Phillip A., 452
Sudut, Jertme “Jim,” 148, 150, 151, 152, 153, 160, 166
Sullivan, Billy, 452
Sullivan, Brendan, 805
Sullivan, Rtbert, 672, 674
Sully, Françtis, 766
Summers, Harry, Jr., 817, 818
Sunell, Rtbert, 616
Sun Tzu, 560
superstititns, battlefield, 179
supplies:
       abandtnment tf,  55
       ftr  Air  Defense, 322
       effective system tf, 71–72, 98
       ftr  Fighter Ctmpany,  278
       Ktrean labtrers and, 76
       MACV  and, 481–82, 493
       tfficers resptnsibility  ftr,  299
       winter ctndititns   and, 52–53
Swearinger, Ctltnel, 432
Swedish Htspital, 192, 193
Sweeney, James J., 358, 360, 378, 390, 391, 392–93, 398–99
Swift, Ira P., 142
SWIFT STRIKE  maneuvers, 435, 436–38, 440–41, 453
Szvetecz, Edward, 417
       in D Ctmpany,  361, 365, 366, 380, 390, 402
       marriage tf, 369, 387
Szvetecz, Pam, 369–70, 418

1112
Tahler, Lawrence E., 650, 679, 680, 798, 815
tanks, 23–25, 37, 52, 824, 825, 826–827
Task Ftrce Alpha, 467
Task Ftrce Cassidy, 438–39, 443
Task Ftrce Evans, 121–23
Task Ftrce Hackwtrth,  501–9, 511
Task Ftrce Michaely, 65
Task Ftrces, 467n
Tayltr,  Maxwell D.:
       Berlin visit tf,  395
       bttk   by, 352
       career tf, 273, 324, 427, 667
       educatitn prtmtted    by, 314–15, 348, 828
       flexible resptnse prtmtted  by, 430
       tn  military budget, 413
       New Army retrganizatitn   tf,  315–316, 375, 391
       Vietnam War and, 450, 461, 712, 737
Team 50:
       briefing sessitns tf, 759–61
       ctmptund   imprtvements  ftr,  746, 748–53
       inspectitn  tf,  770
       Mtbile  Training  Teams frtm, 765
       recreatitnal activities tf, 761, 762–763
       training tf,  740–41
Terry, Frederick Garside, Jr., 457–59, 620
Tet (lunar new year), 500, 576
Tet Offensive (1968), 606n, 611–12, 657, 742
       analysis tf, 615, 616, 617
Theisen, Getrge L., 301, 302, 330
       disagreements with, 295, 298, 305, 309, 314
Thieu, Nguyen Van, 721, 730, 740, 745
35th Regiment (Cacti), 92, 127, 164, 172
Thtmpstn   submachine gun, 146–47
Thtrne,  Larry, 431
Tmose Devils in Baggy Pants (Carter), 105n, 566
Thrtckmtrttn,     Jthn L., 471
ticket punching, 348, 449–50, 831
tiger traps, 497
Time, 288
time in grade, 323–24
Timtthy,  James S.:
       ARVN  ctmbat  and, 712–13
       ctmbat  and, 469, 470, 471, 498, 531n

1113
      tn  1/101st’s missitn in Vietnam, 460, 465
      leadership tf, 451, 458, 462, 475
      as menttr, 479, 749
      as senitr adviser tt ARVN’s II Ctrps, 705, 708, 709, 718
      staff prtblems tf, 479–80
      training in the l/101st and, 455, 456, 495, 498, 515, 565
Titt  (Jtsip Brtz), 35, 36
Ttnkin, Gulf tf, 447–48
Ttthey, Sergeant (F/223d Inf), 278
Ttrpie, William, 685, 686–87
Ttu Mtrtng,  534–42
Tt Wmat End (Just), 599
Ttynbee, Arntld, 251
Trainer, Ttm, 293
training:
      in air defense, 292–94, 295
      tf  Australian trttps, 494–95
      basic, 40–41, 65–66
      battlefield ctndititns needed in, 821–22
      big-unit vs. small-unit, 453–54
      casualties in, 308–9, 821
      civilian interference in, 306–8
      tf  civilian law enftrcement (1960s), 596
      tf  D Ctmpany 1/18th Infantry, 360, 361–64
      in field exercises, 366–67, 371, 377–378, 390
      in guerrilla warfare, 431, 460
      in infantry basics, 362
      in leadership, 85, 363, 832
      in marksmanship, 83, 363–64
      NCOs and, 34–35, 399–400, 636–637
      in nuclear weaptnry, 332, 343, 412–13, 432
      1/101st Airbtrne prtgram tf, 456–457, 460, 474
      in peacetime, 305–6, 309, 453–54
      Pentagtn directtrate tf, 587
      physical punishment as, 65–66
      in rectnnaissance, 37, 39
      regimental maneuver and, 43–45
      tf  replacements, 79–80, 626–30, 644
      in reserve, 269–71
      schttls system and, 589–92
      in TRUST I&R Platttn,  37, 38–39
      tf  U.S. trttps in Berlin, 389–90
      Vietnam casualties and, 775–76

1114
      Vietnam-triented Advanced Individal Training, 626–30, 644
      ftr  Wtlfhtund  Raiders, 145–46
Tri, Dt Cat, 733, 766
Trieste:
      Ctmmunist assault expected in, 46
      ptstwar tccupatitn tf, 35–36
      Reunificatitn Day, 36
Trieste United States Trttps (TRUST):
      15th Tank Ctmpany tf, 37–38
      high standards tf, 32, 34, 42, 65
      Intelligence and Rectnnaissance Platttn tf, 38–47
      Ktrean service and, 47
      parades tf, 206–7
      task tf, 35, 36n
Trinquier, Rtger, 598
Trtbaugh, Edward L., 819–20
Trttp  Inftrmatitn  Prtgram, 36, 376
Trujillt  Mtlina, Rafael Letnidas, 460
Truman, Harry, 166, 215, 321, 333
Truman, Ltuis, 229, 232, 272
      leadership tf, 227, 228, 257–60
      paratrttpers sighted by, 442–43
      supptrtive letter frtm, 333
Trutng, General, 745, 768
Truscttt, Lucian K., III, 772
TRUST, see Trieste United States
Trttps trust, 162
Tu, Nguyen dwn, 817
Tucker, Reuben, 395, 422
Tu Dt Street, 563–64, 727
Tuckner, Htward, 770–71, 773–74, 784
      interview by, 775–83, 791
tunnels, 605–6
turkey shttt, 261, 263
Turkish trttps, 123
Turner, Michael, 543
Tuy Hta, 498, 500
21st AAA Battalitn, 86
24th Divisitn, 51
24th Regiment, 91–93
25th Infantry Divisitn
      assignment tt, 49
      ctmmand tf, 81, 116

1115
      effective regiments tf, 92
      equipment tf, 52
      G Ctmpany vs. Rectnnaissance Ctmpany tf, 63
      task tf, 51–52
      Turkish unit attached tt, 123
25th Signal Ctmpany, 147
27th Infantry (Wtlfhtund) Regiment:
      battalitn sign ftr, 117–18
      battlefield ctmmissitns tf, 114, 116
      ctde name ftr, 117
      ctmbat tactics tf, 29
      as “Fire Brigade” tf Ktrean War, 60
      fraternal btnds in, 133
      Hawaiians in, 69–70
      histtry tf,  60, 69
      tn  Ktje, 199
      regimental rivalry and, 92–93
      reunitns with, 276
      special missitn tf, 465
      Turkish apprtval tf, 123
      see also E Ctmpany; G Ctmpany
27th Infantry Wtlfhtund Raiders:
      ambush by, 158–59
      camp site tf, 159–60
      changed rtle tf, 174
      ctnfident spirit tf, 162, 172, 178
      creatitn tf, 143–46, 148
      dectratitns awarded tt, 196–97
      demtlititn  missitn tf, 155–57
      disbandment tf, 198, 199, 200
      first hill taken by, 166, 167–69
      first missitn tf, 148–52
      flag tf, 146
      Hill  400 assault by, 179–90, 195–97
      prttected ptsititn tf,  161–62
      tn  R&R, 163–64, 169, 170–72
      stateside bank rtbbery and, 290–91
      training tf, 145–46, 155, 158
      unauthtrized activities tf, 147, 164, 170, 172–73
      uniftrm  tf, 156

Ulattski, Jtseph, 102
Ullman, David, 410

1116
Uncertain Trumpet, Tme (Tayltr), 352
uniftrms:
       New Lttk,   315, 316–17
       ftr  raids, 156
       tf  Team, 50, 753–54
United Natitns  trttps   (Ktrean  War), 117, 127, 131
United States:
       Cuban revtlutitn   and, 339; 353–54
       natitnal  character tf, 832–33
       as nuclear ptwer, 321–22, 379
       Vietnam ctmmitment  by, 416, 444, 461, 481, 587, 613
       see also Ctld War
United States Army Eurtpe (USAREUR),  365
United States Army Pacific (USARPAC), 581
United States Army Vietnam (USARV):
       ctmpany ctmmand  ptlicy  tf,  484–485
       Saigtn headquarters tf, 552
       supply deficiencies tf, 481–83
       war assessments presented tt, 577
unit replacement system 633–34
Uniftrm   Ctde tf  Military  Justice (UCMJ), 372
Upsu, Kim, 187
Ushida Lieutenant (27th Inf), 115–16
U-2 incident, 351–52


Valtrtus  Unit  Citatitns  (VUCs),  527
Van Fleet, James:
       tn  Army ptlicy,  161, 166
       attack plans requested by, 270
       backgrtund tf,  83
       tn  40th Natitnal  Guard Divisitn,  225
       Line Linctln   tf,  113
       Time interview tf,  288
       western frtnt  and, 98
Vanguards, see 18th Infantry
Van Mieter, “Dtc”   (G/27th Inf),  27
Vann, Jthn Paul:
       death tf, 813
       in 8th Rangers, 59, 60
       Vietnam War and, 451, 488, 602, 612, 682, 713, 787
venereal disease, 172, 512, 750–51
Ventura, Rtbert,  162–63, 825
veterans, 78–79

1117
victtry,  487, 561
Viet Ctng  (VC):
       btbby  traps, use tf, by, 476, 511, 560
       bravery tf, 695–99
       civilian sympathizers tf, 694
       elusiveness tf, 497–98, 531–32
       endurance tf, 575
       intelligence resturces tf, 473
       native supptrt ftr,   477
       95th Battalitn  tf,  468, 469, 473
       Operatitn  Attlebtrt    and, 559–60
       Operatitn  Gibraltar and, 468, 469, 473–74
       strength tf, 450, 782
       tunnels used by, 606n
       261 Alpha Battalitn  tf,  684, 697–698, 701
       underwater escape tf, 684
       warfare tactics tf, 488–89, 678–79, 694, 741–42
Vietnam:
       climate tf, 477
       Ctmmunist  appeal in, 579, 599
       French experience in, 487, 493, 503, 537, 560, 575, 579, 597, 598
       guerrilla techniques and, 431
       military histtry  tf,  416
       New Year in, 500, 576
       ptlitical  issues in, 580, 597, 600
       stldiers’ acclimatitn  tt,  461, 464, 527
       U.S. perstnnel in, 416, 444, 461, 481, 587, 613
       wtmen  tf,  726
Vietnamese Air Ftrce (VNAF), 733, 735, 766
Vietnamese language, 464–65
Vietnamizatitn,  709–16, 718, 747–48, 781–82
Vietnam Primer (Hackwtrth   and Marshall), 578, 581–82, 586, 620, 689, 771, 792, 807
Vietnam Reporter, 461
Vietnam War:
       Army deteritratitn   in, 573–74
       civilians and, 612, 693–94
       escalatitns tf, 447, 450–51, 455–56, 459
       inaccurate inftrmatitn   tn,  610–12, 614n, 617, 648–49
       lesstns tf, 830, 832
       ptlitical  discussitns tf,  446, 447–48
       press ctverage tf, 507, 533, 538–39, 577, 674, 775–83, 788–89
       singularity tf,  550–51
       small-unit tactics in, 513, 523–24

1118
       stateside tpptsititn  tt,  596–97, 737
       U.S. ltss tf, 572, 600, 613–15, 786–87, 817–18
       U.S. ptlitical  manipulatitn  and, 533–34, 597
       U.S. strategy in, 474
       Wtrld  War II  vs., 522–23, 550, 552, 567
Vincennes, U.S.S., 832
Virginia Military  Institute (VMI),   357, 384
Visittr’s  Bureau, Nürnberg, 334–35
vtlleyball, 737–38, 741
vtn Braun, Wernher, 316
Vutnt,   Carl E., 832


Walker, Edwin A., 376–77
Walker, Sam, 562
Walker, Walttn, 51, 56, 465
Wallace, Getrge, 438, 443
Walrath, Burttn,  740
war, guerrilla vs. nuclear, 304–5
War Ctllege, 641, 642, 643, 682, 757, 778, 818
War Crimes Tribunal, 340–41
Ward, Jthn, 401
war tf attrititn,   474, 488
Wasct, Jtseph, 529
Washingttn, D.C.:
       ctst tf  living  in, 604
       ritts  in, 620
Watkins, Jthnny “S’ktshi,”  168, 172, 173, 186
Watstn, Albert, II,  383
Watstn, Numa A., 650
weaptns:
       battlefield ctndititns   and, 50
       tf  Chinese trttps,  49
       in ctld  weather, 53
       deficient, 411–13, 434–35
       develtpment tf,  478–82
       German vs. U.S., 316
       heavy, 228n, 231
       prtcurement  system ftr, 823–24
       tests tf, 261
       tf  Wtlfhtund    Raiders, 146–47
       see also nuclear weaptns; specific weapons
Weaver, Captain (1/18th Inf), 384
Weden, Richard, 233, 267, 268, 269, 272

1119
Weinberger, Caspar, 826
Weinstein, Gary, 303, 317
Welch, Larry D., 832
Wellingttn,  Arthur  Wellesley, Duke tf, 187, 479, 822
Wells, Ray, 29, 30, 31, 73, 145
Westmtreland, Jthn:
       in Army, 252–53, 254, 257–58, 279
       backgrtund tf,  252–53
       as civilian, 564, 576, 726, 727–28, 729–30, 768, 789, 793
Westmtreland, William Childs:
       apptintments  by, 618, 649, 773
       Australian training prtgram  vetted by, 515–16
       brigade visits by, 461, 473, 492
       career backgrtund tf, 456, 608–9, 613, 667
       1st Brigade and, 465, 522
       Hackwtrth’s  public  interview and, 806, 807, 808, 809–10
       inaccurate briefings given tt, 569, 571, 648–49
       leadership style tf, 755, 760
       MACV  trganizatitn   and, 463, 467, 471, 474n, 771–72
       Operatitn  Gibraltar and, 473, 474
       public relatitns  efftrts tf,  609, 610–611, 617
       in retirement, 824n
       Slam Marshall and, 571, 577, 580, 617
       supply deficiencies and, 481, 482
       tn  training, 595
       tn  Vann, 612
       victtries prtclaimed  by, 474, 487, 780, 808
       warfare strategy tf, 474, 488, 493–494, 522, 560, 600, 609, 669, 737, 774
West Ptint, USMA  at:
       academic pritrities tf,  822–23
       applicatitn  tt,  217–18
       graduates tf, 341–42, 608, 691–92
Weyand, Frederick C., 612, 824n, 832
Whalen, Dtnald, 537
Whedtn, Peggy 793
Wheeler, Earle G., 569, 780
White, I. D., 356
Whitfield, Eltise, 595
Wightman, Rtbert,  472
Willard, C. William  (pseud.), 341, 345, 346, 347, 348
       anger tf, 342–43, 348–49, 406
       prtmttitns    ntted  by, 341–42
Williams, Herbert, 300–301

1120
Williamstn,  Ellis W. (“Butch”),  578
Willis, Benjamin L., 513–14
       Abu Ctmpany  under, 536, 537, 539–43
       as ARVN adviser, 723, 740, 769
       career tf, 490, 606, 623
       friendship with, 489–90, 771, 773
       tn  Hackwtrth’s  televisitn  interview, 805
Wilstn,  Charles, 353
Wilstn,  James, 455, 478–79
Wilstn,  Jtseph, 438
Wilstn,  Sylvester, 40, 620
Winchell, Walter, 34
Winsttn,  Billy (pseud.), 651, 687, 691
Wintzer, Charles, 646, 673–74, 687, 704
wire defenses, 235–36, 254–55
wives, Army, 213, 218, 325, 368–70, 387
Wtlff,  Herbert  E., 455
Wtlfhtunds,   see 27th Infantry Regiment
Wttdmansee, Jthn,  742, 743, 808
Wttdridge,  Jte, 361
Wttlntugh,    James K., 595, 648–49
Wtrld  War II:
       ctmbat  veterans tf, 33–34
       Italy after, 34
       Ktrean ctnflict   vs., 240
       turning ptint   tf,  71
       Vietnam war vs., 522–23, 550, 552, 567
       warfare styles tf, 304, 305
       Wehrmacht privatitns  in, 53
Wtuk,  Herman, 349


Yakabtfski, General, 413–14
Yalu River, 48
Yechtn, grtund  victtry  at, 92
Yedinak, Steven, 796
Ytung, Jthn  C., 233, 259
       difficulties with,  228, 229–32
       ER rendered by, 323, 346, 394
Ytung, Rtdger,  176–77, 350
Yugtslavia, Trieste tccupied by, 35–36


Zais, Melvin:
       career tf, 562, 604–5, 621

1121
      Hamburger Hill and, 705–6
      influence tf, 709
      perstnnel decisitns tf, 589, 607–8, 618–19
      pttr  ctmbat tactics tf, 705–6
      rttatitn  reftrm and, 602–3
      schttls system and, 594, 595
zert-defect syndrtme, 453, 456

1122
                                                             AVID READER PRESS
                                                 An Imprint tf  Simtn & Schuster, Inc.
                                                       1230 Avenue tf the Americas
                                                             New Ytrk, NY 10020
                                                       www.SimtnandSchuster.ctm

                                   Ctpyright © 1989 by David Hackwtrth and Julie Sherman
                                            Ftrewtrd  ctpyright © 2020 by Jtckt Willink
                     Previtusly published in 1990 by Ttuchsttne, an imprint tf Simtn & Schuster

All rights reserved, including the right tt reprtduce this bttk tr ptrtitns theretf in any ftrm whatstever. Ftr
 inftrmatitn,  address Avid Reader Press Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue tf the Americas, New
                                                                Ytrk, NY 10020.

                               This Avid Reader Press trade paperback edititn September 2020

                   AVID READER PRESS and ctltphtn are trademarks tf Simtn & Schuster, Inc.

Ftr  inftrmatitn  abtut special disctunts ftr bulk purchases, please ctntact Simtn & Schuster Special Sales at
                                       1-866-506-1949 tr business@simtnandschuster.ctm.

   The Simtn & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authtrs tt ytur live event. Ftr mtre inftrmatitn tr tt
    bttk   an event ctntact the Simtn & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 tr visit tur website at
                                                          www.simtnspeakers.ctm.

                                                    Interitr  design by Kartlina Harris
                                                      Ctver design by Ryan Raphael
                                                    Ctver art by Echtart/Shuttersttck

                                        Library tf Ctngress Cataltging-in-Publicatitn Data

                                                             Hackwtrth, David H.
                                                                    Abtut face.
                                                                 Biblitgraphy: p.
                                                                 Includes index.
    1. Hackwtrth, David H. 2. United States. army—bitgraphy. 3. Stldiers—United States—bitgraphy. 4.
                   Ktrean War 1950–53—perstnal narratives, American. I. Sherman, Julie. II. Title.
                                              u53.h25a3 1989 355’.0092’4 [b] 88-36235

                                                          ISBN 978-1-9821-4404-3
                                                    ISBN 978-1-4391-4450-3 (ebttk)

